This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimen-
sional materials

Riccardo Frisenda*1, Aday J. Molina-Mendoza2, Thomas Mueller2, Andres Castella-
nos-Gomez*3 and Herre S. J. van der Zant*1,4,5

1 Instituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados en Nanociencia (IMDEA-Nanociencia), Campus de Can-
toblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

2 Institute of Photonics, Vienna University of Technology, Guhausstrae 27-29, 1040 Vienna, Austria.

3 Materials Science Factory, Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid (ICMM-CSIC), E-28049, Madrid,
Spain.

4 Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, Lorentzweg 1, 2628 CJ Delft, The Nether-
lands.

5 Departamento de Fisica de la Materia Condensada, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid, Campus de Can-
toblanco, E-28049 Madrid, Spain.

*E-mail: riccardo.frisenda@imdea.org, andres.castellanos@csic.es, h.s.j.vanderzant@tudelft.nl

ABSTRACT: Recent research in two-dimensional (2D) materials has boosted a renovated interest in the p-
n junction, one of the oldest electrical components which can be used in electronics and optoelectronics. 2D 
materials offer remarkable flexibility to design novel p-n junction device architectures, not possible with 
conventional bulk semiconductors. In this Review we thoroughly describe the different 2D p-n junction ge-
ometries studied so far, focusing on vertical (out-of-plane) and lateral (in-plane) 2D junctions and on mixed-
dimensional junctions. We discuss the assembly methods developed to fabricate 2D p-n junctions making a
distinction between top-down and bottom-up approaches. We also revise the literature studying the different 
applications of these atomically thin p-n junctions in electronic and optoelectronic devices. We discuss ex-
periments on 2D p-n junctions used as current rectifiers, photodetectors, solar cells and light emitting de-
vices. The important electronics and optoelectronics parameters of the discussed devices are listed in a table 
to facilitate their comparison. We conclude the Review with a critical discussion about the future outlook and 
challenges of this incipient research field.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

1. Introduction
The p-n junction has become an important component in modern electronics since its serendipitous discov-
ery by Russel Ohl almost 80 years ago.1 This kind of device can be created by joining together two semicon-
ductors of different type: a p-type semiconductor containing an excess of holes and n-type one with an excess 
of electrons. As a result an intrinsic electric field at the interface between them is generated and it can be 
used to rectify currents or to separate photogenerated electron-hole pairs. In bulk semiconductors the typi-
cal way to create a p-n junction is to dope two different parts of a single crystal with different ions or dopants
forming a three-dimensional (3D) p-n junction. The resulting face to face arrangement constitutes the only 
possible device architecture considered for bulk semiconducting materials.
If one scales down the dimensions of the semiconductors involved, by passing from 3D to two-dimensional 
(2D) materials, new and exciting possibilities arise. The design of p-n junctions offers now more possibilities 
and freedom: p-n junctions in the 2D case can be constructed following two main architectures: a lateral 
junction, in which the two 2D materials are joined at the same plane (creating a one-dimensional interface 
between the two materials) and a vertical junction, in which the 2D materials are stacked face to face, thereby 
exhibiting a two-dimensional overlap. Moreover, the ultra-thin nature of 2D materials gives rise to novel 
properties compared to 3D semiconductors.2-8 An example is the thickness-dependency of the bandgap for 
some materials which enables even more possibilities to create different p-n junctions concepts.

Figure 1. Scheme of the different p-n junctions 
architectures based on 2D semiconductors. Us-
ing two-dimensional (2D) materials a large variety 
of p-n junctions can be produced. These can be junc-
tions based on a single 2D material (homostruc-
tures), on the junction between two different 2D 
materials (heterostructures) or junctions based on 
the combination of a 2D material with a material 
with higher or lower dimensionality (mixed-dimen-
sional structures). Different concepts of p-n junc-
tions within these categories are shown.

Figure 1 shows a schematic of eight kinds of p-n junctions based on 2D materials which one can encounter 
in the present literature. We separate homojunctions (based on a single 2D material), from heterojunctions 
(formed by joining two different 2D materials) and mixed dimensional junctions (based on the combination 
of a 2D material with 0D, 1D or 3D materials. More specifically, the eight kinds of p-n junctions are:


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

2D homostructures
1.
Thickness-based junctions, in which the p- and n-regions are formed by two regions of the same 
material with different thicknesses.

2.
Electrostatically doped junctions, in which the doping in different regions of the same 2D material is 
controlled by local electrostatic gates.

3.
Chemical doping, in which the doping of a region in a 2D material is modified by the adsorption of 
molecules, nanoparticles or quantum dots onto the surface of the material.

4.
Elemental doping, in which two flakes of the same 2D material with different doping are stacked one 
on top of the other, forming an out-of-plane junction.

2D heterostructures
5.
Vertical heterojunctions, in which two different 2D materials are stacked one on top of the other and 
the junction is formed in the out-of-plane direction.

6.
Lateral heterojunctions, in which two 2D materials are joined in the same plane along a one-dimen-
sional interface.

Mixed-dimensional
7.
2D-0D and 2D-1D p-n junctions, in which a molecular crystal or a nanotube film is in contact with a 
2D material.

8.
2D-3D p-n junctions, in which a 2D material is in contact with a bulk 3D semiconductor.

2. Semiconducting 2D materials building blocks and tools
The different p-n junction architectures introduced in Section 1 can be realized thanks to the discovery of 
2D materials. In this section we will describe the atomic and electronic structure of some of the main 2D 
materials which can be used to fabricate p-n junctions. We will then introduce the production and isolation 
methods for these materials discussing top-down approaches such as the deterministic transfer and bottom-
up methods such as CVD growth.

2.1. Atomic and electronic structure

2D materials can be extracted out of layered materials by mechanical or chemical exfoliation.9-12 The atoms 
in these materials are arranged in layers with strong in-plane bonds (typically covalent bonds) and weak 
bonds between the different layers (generally van der Waals interactions). The layers can be composed of a 
single atomic plane, like in the case of graphene or hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), or they can be made out 
of multiple atomic planes (e.g. in MoS2 each monolayer is composed of three atomic layers). Many families 
of layered materials are known and in the following we will discuss the properties of some important exam-
ples of 2D materials.10, 13-15

Figure 2a shows the crystal structure of a monolayer of graphene, MoS2 and h-BN. Graphene and h-BN share 
the same hexagonal crystal structure but differ strongly in their electronic structure. Graphene is a zero-gap 
semiconductor with a linear dispersion close to its neutrality point.16 The doping in graphene can be con-
trolled electrostatically and both n-type and p-type can be realized. Among the other methods used to dope 
graphene one can find chemical doping, substitutional doping and irradiation methods. Moreover many 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

groups dedicated efforts to open a bandgap in graphene using external electric fields, geometric confinement
or hydrogen adsorption.17-21 In contrast, h-BN is an insulator with a bandgap of ~6 eV that makes it highly 
transparent to visible light.22

Among the semiconducting 2D materials the most studied ones are probably MoS2 and other members of 
the transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) family that are composed of a layer with the transition metal 
atoms sandwiched between two layers of chalcogenides atoms.2, 23-29 MoS2 is a semiconductor with an indi-
rect bandgap of 1.2 eV in its bulk or multilayer form but it exhibits a direct bandgap of 1.9 eV when thinned 
down to a monolayer.30-32 Monolayer WS2, MoSe2 and WSe2 share similar electronic properties, having direct 
bandgaps of energy between 1 and 2 eV. While MoS2 and WS2 are typically n-doped, WSe2 is ambipolar. An-
other semiconducting 2D material largely used in p-n junctions is black phosphorous (BP). This layered al-
lotrope of phosphorous is a narrow-bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of 0.34 eV in bulk that increases 
to 1.5 eV when BP is thinned one monolayer thick.33-35 Among the materials described BP is by far the most 
unstable as it degrades quickly when exposed to air and thus it requires to work in a high-vacuum environ-
ment or to employ encapsulation protocols (i.e., sandwiching the 2D material in between two protecting 
insulating layers) to prevent its degradation.36-40 In addition to BP and graphene, the elemental (Xenes) fam-
ily comprises also other materials such as silicene, germanene and stanene.41, 42 Other important families of 
semiconducting layered materials are monochalcogenides such as SnS or GeSe,43, 44 trichalcogenides such as 
TiS3 or HfS345, 46 and metal halides such as PbI2 or CrI3.47, 48 Layered oxides, nitrides and carbides are also 
actively researched families of 2D materials.49-51 Table 1 reports some of the important material properties 
of selected 2D materials useful for the construction of p-n junctions.

Figure 2. Two dimensional materials employed as building blocks to fabricate p-n junctions. a) A 
large number of two-dimensional (2D) layered materials with varying chemical composition, atomic struc-
tures and electronic properties are available. Starting from the top a zero-gap semiconductor, graphene, a 
semiconductor, MoS2, and an insulator, h-BN are displayed. b) Schematic band diagram of important mate-
rials for 2D based p-n junctions showing the approximate band alignment between the different 2D materials 
according to the available literature values of the work function and band gap.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Material
Bandgap 

(eV)

Electron 
affinity 

(eV)

Doping 

type

1L-MoS2
1.89
4.3
n

ML-MoS2
1.2
4.0
n

1L-MoSe2
1.64
3.9
n

1L-WS2
1.96
3.9
n

1L-WSe2
1.6
3.6
Ambipolar

1L-BP
1.5
3.9
Ambipolar

ML-BP
0.35
4.1
Ambipolar

Table 1. Bandgap energy, electron affinity and dop-
ing type of some layered materials. Bandgap ener-
gies and electron affinities are taken from Refs. 52-55.

2.2. Isolation of 2D materials

While 2D materials supported on bulk substrates are known since at least 50 years, their isolation and inte-
gration in devices is more recent. In 2004 Geim and Novoselov 9 demonstrated the first electronic device
based on a 2D material, fabricated by isolating single-layer graphene from bulk graphite using mechanical 
cleaving. In this section we will discuss the different approaches developed to produce 2D materials and to 
integrate them in p-n junctions, including top-down approaches (which are very powerful in creating differ-
ent and novel p-n junctions) and bottom-up approaches suitable for large-scale integration.

2.2.1. Top-down approach: deterministic transfer

Atomically thin 2D materials can be isolated from bulk layered crystals by mechanical cleaving. The presence 
of strong bonds in the plane of the layers and weak bonds between them allows these materials to cleave 
perfectly along the atomic plane. As mentioned above, the first technique developed is mechanical cleavage, 
also known as the “Scotch tape method”. In this method a piece of tape is pressed against the surface of a 
natural or artificial bulk layered crystal and then it is peeled off, cleaving the crystal and leaving debris and 
flakes of the material onto the tape surface. The flakes can then be transferred to an arbitrary surface by 
pressing on it the tape containing the flakes and subsequently releasing the tape gently. 
The main drawback of the Scotch tape method is that it produces flakes with different sizes and thicknesses 
randomly distributed over the sample substrate and only a small fraction of these flakes are atomically thin. 
This limitation can partially be circumvented by the use of optical identification methods to find atomically 
thin crystals from the crowd of thicker, bulky flakes.56-58 Nevertheless, the combination of the Scotch tape 
method with optical identification methods alone cannot provide a reliable way to fabricate p-n junctions by 
artificial stacking of 2D crystals. Since 2010, the research on those artificial stacks of 2D materials has grown 
exponentially driven by the development of different transfer techniques that allow to place 2D materials on 
a desired location with an unprecedented degree of control and accuracy.59-63 A typical deterministic place-
ment setup used to transfer and artificially stack 2D crystals is schematically depicted in Fig. 3a. Such a setup 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

is usually based either on a zoom lens or on an optical microscope equipped with long working distance 
objectives. Two manually actuated micropositioners are used to move the target surface and the flake to be 
transferred. Fig. 3b shows the steps to fabricate a vertical heterojunction using the deterministic transfer 
method. Figure 3c shows an optical image of a vertical homojunction formed by a n-doped MoS2 flake stacked 
onto a p-doped MoS2 one. The top image shows an intermediate fabrication step and the bottom image is the 
final device.

Figure 3. Top-down and bottom-up approaches to fabricate p-n junctions. a) Schematic diagram of a
setup employed for the all-dry transfer of 2D crystals. b) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of a vertical 
heterojunction by a top-down approach. c) Sequential optical images of the fabrication of a p-n junction by 
vertical stacking of a p-type MoS2 flake onto a n-type MoS2 one. d) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process 
of MoS2/WS2 vertical or lateral heterostructures with a bottom-up method. e) Optical image of a vertically 
stacked WS2/MoS2 heterojunction synthesized at 850 °C. f) Optical image of a lateral WS2/MoS2 heterojunc-
tion grown at 650 °C. Panel (c) readapted from Ref. 64 with permission from John Wiley and Sons and panels 
(d), (e) and (f) readapted from Ref. 65 with permission from Springer Nature.

2.2.2. Bottom-up approach: CVD growth

Many 2D materials can be directly grown in the form of single- or few-layer nanosheets on various sub-
strates.66 The production process usually involves a thermal chemical vapour deposition (CVD) process, in 
which the vapour-phase reactants are generated by thermally evaporation of specific source materials.67-69

This growth method is very promising for the production and large-scale integration of CVD grown 2D p-n 
junctions and already many vertically stacked and lateral p-n junctions have been demonstrated. The family 
of TMDCs is particularly interesting for CVD growth because of the relatively small lattice mismatches be-
tween its various members and the availability of different doping types.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

In 2014 Gong et al.65 demonstrated a single-step vapour phase growth process for the creation of lateral or 
vertical monolayer MoS2/WS2 heterostructures controlled by the growth temperature. Figure 3d shows a 
schematic of the synthesis, which involves sulphur powder, MoO3 as a source of molybdenum and a mixed 
powder of W and Te for the tungsten. The difference in nucleation and growth rates between MoS2 and WS2
allows for the sequential growth of MoS2 and WS2 instead of the formation of a MoxW1-xS2 alloy. By carrying 
out the process at a temperature of ~850 ℃ the authors produced vertically stacked WS2-MoS2 bilayers, 
similar to the structure shown in Fig. 3e, whereas at ~650 ℃ in-plane lateral heterojunctions were created
shown in Fig. 3f. In another study Duan et al 70 demonstrated the growth of lateral MoS2-MoSe2 and WS2-
WSe2 heterojunctions by switching in situ the vapour-phase reactants to enable lateral epitaxial growth of 
single- or few-layer TMDC heterostructures. Finally, the growth of MoSe2-WSe2 lateral heterojunctions was 
demonstrated by Huang and coauthors.71 Recently a different approach was demonstrated by Zheng et al., 
which used pulsed laser deposition to achieve a single-step growth of a lateral p-n junction between layered 
In2Se3 and nonlayered CuInSe2.72 The biggest challenge in CVD process of heterojunctions is probably the 
interplay between the many degrees of freedom of the system (such as temperature, flow rate, substrate, 
lattice mismatch and others) which makes it difficult to ensure the reproducibility of the final process out-
come in different laboratories and therefore it requires the full optimization of the growth recipe in every 
new growth setup.

3. p-n junctions based on 2D materials
Using to the top-down and bottom-up approaches described in the previous section, a large number of p-n 
junction devices based on 2D materials has been demonstrated in literature. In this section, we will review 
these results by passing from homojunctions to heterojunctions and ending with the mixed-dimensional 
junctions.

3.1. Homostructures

Homojunctions devices are p-n junctions based on a single 2D material. Figure 4a-c show three examples of 
such junctions: (1) based on quantum-confinement effects, (2) electrostatic gating and (3) on chemical dop-
ing to obtain a spatial variation of the doping profile. A fourth kind of homojunction is based on elemental 
doping of 2D materials.

3.1.1. Thickness modulation

Figure 4a shows a 2D homojunction based on thickness modulation. In ultra-thin materials, the bandgap 
energy becomes a thickness-dependent quantity because of quantum-confinement effects. This permits the 
creation of a p-n junction in which the p and n regions are made of the same material, just with different 
thickness. One example shown in Fig. 4d is a p-n junction based on a single WSe2 flake.73 To fabricate this 
device Xu and coauthors started from a bilayer WSe2 flake and then partially thinned the flake to a monolayer 
with an Ar plasma. Metallic contacts to the monolayer and bilayer regions were subsequently defined. To 
fabricate this kind of homojunctions one can also take advantage of the exfoliation process itself as it gener-
ally produces flakes that are already composed of different thickness regions.74


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

3.1.2. Electrostatic doping

The reduced thickness of 2D materials usually comes along with a large electric field effect tunability. Figure 
4b shows a schematic diagram of an electrostatically defined 2D p-n junction and Fig. 4e shows the optical 
picture of the actual device. In this case WSe2 is used because of its ambipolar nature (by tuning the polarity 
of the gate voltage one can make it either n- or p-type). Several groups reported this kind of device.75-79 Here,
we will discuss the implementation by Pospischil and coauthors. In their work, two metallic gates separated 
by 460 nm are defined onto a SiO2/Si substrate and subsequently covered by a 100 nm thick Si3N4 gate die-
lectric. A flake of mechanically exfoliated WSe2 was then deterministically transferred, partly covering both 
prepatterned gates electrodes, and source and drain electrodes were defined afterwards. By independently 
controlling the two split gates the doping in the two regions of the WSe2 flake located above the local gates
can be controlled. Similar devices based on this split-gate geometry were fabricated with BP80 and gra-
phene.81, 82 A different geometry was recently used by Li et al.83 in which a single local graphene gate elec-
trode, insulated by a thin h-BN flake, is partly covered by a WSe2 flake forming the active channel connected 
to source and drain electrodes. A complementary approach is to use ionic gating of the 2D material instead 
of the solid state split gates.84-87

Figure 4. Different examples of p-n junctions based on 2D materials homojunctions. a-c) Schematic 
diagram of a p-n junction based on (a) MoS2 with different thickness, (b) ambipolar WSe2 with two split gate 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

electrodes and (c) local molecular doping of partially h-BN encapsulated MoS2. d) Optical image of a thick-
ness-modulated p-n junction based on single-layer and bilayer WSe2. e) Optical image of a split-gate homo-
junction as schematically drawn in panel (b). f) Optical image of a chemically doped MoS2 p-n junction as 
schematically illustrated in panel (c). The device is covered with molecules and part of the MoS2 is protected 
by a h-BN flake. Panel (d) readaptedfrom Ref. 73 with permission from IOP Publishing, panel (e) readapted
from Ref. 77 with permission from Springer Nature and panel (f) readapted from Ref. 88 with permission from 
American Chemical Society (copyright 2014).

3.1.3. Chemical doping

In addition to making 2D materials sensitive to external electric fields, the reduced thickness gives them a 
high sensitivity to the environment surrounding their surface. Molecules physisorbed or chemisorbed onto 
the surface can influence transport in the 2D material for example by introducing doping effects89-94 and a p-
n junction can thus be fabricated by locally doping the material. This principle has been used to fabricate 
chemically doped p-n junctions with graphene,95, 96 TMDCs and black phosphorous.97, 98 A chemically doped 
MoS2 p-n junction is shown in Fig. 4f reported by Choi and coauthors.88 In this work a solution of AuCl3 was 
deposited onto the surface of a MoS2 flake partially covered by an h-BN flake. AuCl3 is known to induce p-
type doping in MoS2 thereby creating a lateral p-n junction, where the n region is provided by the natural n-
doped MoS2. On the other hand, a common molecule used to induce strong n-doping in MoS2 is benzene 
viologen (BV). Li and coauthors99 used BV and AuCl3 to create an out-of-plane p-n junction (a device in which 
charge transport is out-of-plane) where one face of a few layer MoS2 flake was p-doped with AuCl3 and the 
other one with BV.

3.1.4. Elemental doping

A different approach to dope 2D materials is elemental doping, a technique that has proven to be successful 
for controlling carrier types in bulk materials. In bulk TMDCs elemental doping with Nb (five valence elec-
trons), Fe or Re (seven valence electrons) has been used as a substitutional p-type or n-type dopant to re-
place the metallic atoms such as Mo or W (six valence electrons).100 For 2D layered materials this technique
was initially demonstrated for MoS2 by Suh and coauthors.101 Substitutional doping with Nb was used to 
convert MoS2 from n-type to p-type and a vertical p-n homojunction was fabricated by stacking Nb doped 
MoS2 onto undoped MoS2. Similarly, Jin et al.102 demonstrated a p-n homojunction by stacking undoped 
MoSe2 onto doped MoSe2 with Nb atoms. Figure 3b shows an optical image of a similar device fabricated by 
stacking p-type MoS2 doped with Nb onto n-type MoS2 doped with Fe atoms.64, 103 Recently, in a different
approach phosphorous atoms were used to substitute the surficial sulfur atoms of MoS2, leading to a p-type 
doping of MoS2.104, 105

3.2. Heterostructures

The combination of two different 2D materials to form a heterostructure is one of the most promising strat-
egies because of the large variety of bandgap energies and doping types available among the different 2D 
materials. Figure 5a-b show schematic diagrams of a vertical and a lateral heterojunction.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

3.2.1. Vertical junctions

Vertical heterostructures represent a popular architecture in 2D materials. Due to a surface free of dangling-
bonds and interlayer van der Waals interactions it is possible to stack 2D materials on top of each other 
without constraint on the lattice constants.6, 106-108 The first example of a van der Waals heterostructure in 
literature was demonstrated by Dean et al.60 that stacked graphene on top of an h-BN flake. Soon thereafter 
it was realized that by stacking an n-type 2D material onto a p-type 2D material, using the deterministic 
transfer method, atomically thin p-n junctions could be created.109, 110 An example of an atomically thin ver-
tical p-n junction111 based on single-layer MoS2 and WSe2 is shown in Fig. 5c. The authors fabricated the 
heterojunction by deterministic placement of individual mechanically exfoliated monolayers of both mate-
rials on a SiO2/Si substrate and deposited Pd contacts to inject electrons and holes into the n-MoS2 and p-
WSe2 layers, respectively. In another work Lee and coauthors112 introduced graphene contacts for the MoS2
and WSe2 monolayers to improve the collection of charges, realizing a graphene sandwiched 2D p-n junction.
The freedom of stacking 2D materials on top of each other permitted the fabrication of many different verti-
cal stacks by this top-down approach. Among the different devices we find junctions between two TMDCs, 
such as WSe2-MoSe2 or MoTe2-MoS2, and junctions of a TMDC with a different 2D layered material, BP-MoS2, 
GaTe-MoS2 or with ultrathin membranes such as InAs-WSe2. Figure 5d shows a BP-MoS2 vertical p-n junc-
tion113 fabricated by transferring a flake of few-layer BP onto a monolayer MoS2 grown by CVD onto a SiO2/Si 
substrate. More recently vertical p-n junctions were directly fabricated by epitaxial growth without the need 
of mechanical assembly.

Figure 5. P-n junctions based on heterojunctions between two different 2D materials. a-b) Schematic 
diagram of a vertical (a) and lateral (b) p-n junction. c) Optical image of a vertical p-n junction formed by 
stacking a monolayer MoS2 flake onto a monolayer WSe2 flake. d) Optical image of a vertical MoS2-black 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

phosphorous device. The dark purple region is monolayer MoS2, while the blue flake is few-layer black phos-
phorus. The light purple region is SiO2. e) Optical image of a lateral WSe2-WS2 p-n junction. The white dashed 
contour highlights an insulating Al2O3 layer, which allows for each electrode to contact only the WSe2 or WS2
respectively. f) Optical image of a WSe2-MoS2 p-n junction device with different electrodes. Panel (c) rea-
dapted from Ref. 111 with permission from American Chemical Society (copyright 2014), panel (d) readapted
from Ref. 113 with permission from American Chemical Society (copyright 2014), panel (e) readapted from 
Ref. 70 with permission from Springer Nature and panel (f) readapted from Ref. 114 with permission from The 
American Association for the Advancement of Science.

3.2.2. Lateral junctions

While in literature one can find many examples of vertical 2D junctions, the same is not true for lateral het-
erojunctions. In this case a direct mechanical assembly is not possible and one has to rely on bottom-up 
fabrication methods, as discussed in section 2.2.2. Figure 5e shows a lateral junction device fabricated by 
Duan et al.70 in which separate contacts are made to WS2 and WSe2. The white dashed rectangle in the image 
outlines a 50 nm thick Al2O3 layer deposited onto the WSe2 to insulate the WS2 contact electrodes. Figure 5f 
shows a different device, fabricated by Li et al.,114 in which different metals respectively Ti and Pd are used 
to contact the MoS2 and WSe2 regions of the grown flake.

3.3. Hybrid and mixed-dimensional

Apart from a purely 2D architecture, many efforts were dedicated to produce hybrid p-n junctions where a 
2D material is in contact with a material of lower dimensionality, such as in the case of a molecular crystal 
or a nanotubes film, or higher dimensionality, like in the case of a bulk semiconductor such as Si. Figure 6a-
b show a schematic diagram of a 2D-0D and a 2D-3D p-n junction.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Figure 6. P-n junctions produced by heterostructures with mixed dimensionality. a-b) Schematic of 
mixed-dimensional 2D-0D (a) and 2D-3D (b) heterojunctions. c) False colour SEM image of single wall carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs) single layer MoS2 p-n junction. d) Optical image of a bilayer MoS2 flake on top of a SiO2/Si 
substrate to fabricate a 2D-0D heterojunction by depositing a CuPc molecular crystal through a shadow mask. 
e) Optical image of a 2D-3D device in an intermediate state of fabrication. A monolayer MoS2 is placed across 
the sidewall of a square window etched into a SiO2 layer exposing the underlying p-doped silicon. Panel (c)
readapted from Ref. 115 with permission from National Academy of Sciences, panel (d) readapted from Ref. 

116 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry and panel (e) readapted from Ref. 117 with permission 
from American Chemical Society.

Molecular organic crystals and nanotube films have surfaces with saturated bonds and are therefore free 
from dangling bonds. They typically interact via van der Waals forces and this allows the integration of these 
low-dimensional materials with 2D materials in van der Waals heterostructures.8, 118 Figure 3c shows a col-
ored scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of a 1D-2D junction created by transferring a layer of sorted 
single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) onto a single-layer MoS2 flake. A different kind of 1D-2D junctions 
have been demonstrated by joining a single nanowire and a 2D material. Among the works we find junctions 
between MoS2, WSe2 and BP and a ZnO nanowire.119-121 Figure 3d shows a microscope picture of a 0D-2D 
junction between a bilayer MoS2 flake and a 30 nm thick Cu-phthalocyanine (CuPC) thin film, thermally evap-
orated through a window opened in a PMMA layer.
Bulk materials such as Si or GaAs, which are largely used in conventional p-n junctions and electronics, can 
be used in conjunction with 2D materials to create novel p-n 2D-3D junctions. Lopez-Sanchez and coau-
thors117 realized a heterojunctions composed of n-type monolayer MoS2 and p-type silicon. Figure 6e shows 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

this MoS2-Si device fabricated by transferring a MoS2 monolayer flake onto a prepatterned highly doped p-
type Si substrate covered with SiO2 containing a window through which the underlying Si is exposed. Similar 
devices based on MoS2 and Si have been thoroughly studied in literature.122-124 A different geometry was 
shown by Wang et al. 125, who deposited vertically standing MoS2 onto a silicon substrate with a scalable 
sputtering method. Using different materials, Gehring et al.126 demonstrated a 2D-3D junction composed of 
a few tens of nm thick black phosphorus flake on top of a highly n-doped GaAs substrate. Multilayer

4. Electrical properties

4.1. The p-n junction as a rectifier

The first use of a p-n junction that we will discuss is that of a current rectifier. The built-in electric field at 
the p-n interface allows the flow of charge carriers in one direction (forward bias) while blocking the current 
in the other direction (backward bias). Many 2D based p-n junctions have been used as rectifiers, showing 
excellent performances and novel functionalities. One such example is the control of the rectification ratio 
with a gate field. Deng and coauthors reported gate-tunable rectifying current-voltage characteristics (IVs) 
in a monolayer MoS2-BP p-n junction (see Fig. 5d). Figure 7a shows IVs recorded at various gate voltages 
between -30 V and 50 V. At negative gate voltages they observe a reduction of both the forward current (p-
type connected to positive voltage and n-type to negative voltage) and of the reverse current (p-type con-
nected to negative voltage and n-type to positive voltage). Increasing the gate voltage leads to an increase of 
both the forward and the reverse current in the device. The rectification ratio, defined as the ratio of the 
forward/reverse current, increases as the back gate voltage decreases as can be seen in Fig. 7b. At a gate 
voltage of -30 V, a rectification ratio of 105 is obtained. This modulation can be achieved because the band 
alignment between MoS2 and black phosphorus at the p-n junction interface can be tuned by the gate voltage. 
Moreover, the gate voltage also modulates the sheet resistance and the contact resistance of the MoS2 and 
BP respectively.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Figure 7. Atomically thin diodes based on 2D p-n junctions. a) Gate tunable current-voltage (IV) charac-
teristics of a BP-MoS2 vertical heterojunction. b) Rectification ratio at VSD = ±2 V as a function of gate voltage 
of the device of panel (a). c) IV characteristics of a double-gated WSe2 homojunction device in different local 
gate configurations. d) Schematic diagram of the band structure and the state of the local gates of the device 
in panel (c) in PP, PN, NP and NN configuration. Panels (a) and (b) readapted from Ref. 113 with permission 
from American Chemical Society (copyright 2014) and panel (c) readapted from Ref. 79 with permission from 
American Chemical Society (copyright 2014).

A second kind of devices, that can be called “reconfigurable diode”, employs electrostatic doped p-n junctions 
based on a split gate configuration, which allows inducing locally hole- and electron-doping in different parts 
of the channel; a new feature introduced by the 2D nature of the devices.76-78 Figure 7c shows for example 
the IV characteristics of a double-gated monolayer WSe2 homojunction studied by Groenendijk and coau-
thors.79 By tuning the Fermi energy both hole- and electron-doping can be readily accessed due to the ambi-
polarity of WSe2. Two of the four IVs of Fig. 7c are linear (NN and PP configuration) while the other two are 
highly non-linear (PN and NP configuration) displaying rectifying behavior, whose direction can be con-
trolled by the gate bias polarity. The voltages applied to the local gates used to achieve these four configura-
tions are shown in Fig. 7d together with a simplified band diagram of the device.

4.2. Physical mechanism of the electrical transport

Although the shape and features of the IV characteristics of 2D p-n junctions are similar to those of a con-
ventional p-n junction, the underlying physical mechanism of rectification can be very different. When con-
sidering the two model junctions depicted in Fig. 8a one can see that reducing the thickness of the p- and n-


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

type materials modifies the interface between the two materials. In a bulk p-n junction, charge transfer at 
the interface between the two materials creates a depletion region from which all the free charges are re-
moved. In the case of atomically thin junctions (for example in a vertical junction between monolayer MoS2
and monolayer WSe2) such a depletion region cannot be formed because of the reduced thickness. Simplified 
diagrams of the band profiles for a multilayer and a monolayer junction, taken along the thickness direction,
are shown in Fig. 8a. While the bands of the p- and n-type materials bend in the depletion region in the bulk 
case (right panels), a sharp discontinuity of the bands is present at the monolayer interface (left panels).
The depletion region in a bulk p-n junction is modified by the application of a voltage as schematically de-
picted in Fig. 8b. While under forward voltage the size of the depletion region is reduced, under reverse bias 
its size increases. With increasing forward voltage, the depletion zone eventually becomes thin enough that 
the built-in electric field cannot counteract charge carrier motion across the p-n junction; this leads to an 
increase in current. In the case of an atomically thin junction under forward bias the current is governed by 
tunneling-mediated interlayer recombination between majority carriers at the bottom (top) of the conduc-
tion (valence) band of the n-type (p-type) material. This interlayer recombination (Fig. 8c) can be described 
by two physical mechanisms or a combination of both: Langevin recombination, which is mediated by Cou-
lomb interaction and describes the direct recombination of an electron and a hole, or Shockley–Read–Hall 
(SRH) recombination, which is mediated by inelastic tunnelling of majority carriers into trap states in the 
gap.127-130 These two processes can be present both at the same time in a 2D p-n junction and each of these 
processes predicts a different dependence of the electron-hole recombination ratio on the majority carriers
density. The rectifying IVs characteristics can then be explained by an increase of the interlayer recombina-
tion rate under forward bias and the photocurrent generated in a 2D junction and its dependence on a gate 
field can be modeled by the two recombination processes.112


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Figure 8. P-n junctions in bulk and ultra-thin 
materials. a) Schematic of the devices (top) and  
band profiles (bottom) in a multilayer-multilayer p-
n junction (right) and monolayer-monolayer (left). 
In the bottom panels, energy is depicted on the ver-
tical axis and the device thickness on the x-axis. b) 
Schematic of the bands in a bulk p-n junction under 
equilibrium (VSD=0 V) and under forward and re-
verse bias. c-d) Schematic diagrams of interlayer re-
combination (c) in a monolayer-monolayer p-n 
junction and of (d) the exciton dissociation process.

5. Optoelectronic properties

5.1. Response to illumination: photodetectors and solar cells

P-n junctions constitute the central building blocks of photodetectors, solar cells and light emitting diodes 
(LEDs). Their main application is thus in optoelectronics. Typically, there are two operating modes for p-n 
junctions: photovoltaic mode (PV), in which the p-n junction is not biased, and photoconductive mode (PC), 
where the p-n junction works under reverse external bias.131, 132 The PV effect forms the basis for the solar 
cells. The PC mode is used in photodetection applications and has the advantages of having a lower capaci-
tance that improves the response time and the presence of an external electric field facilitates the separation 
of electro-hole pairs improving the responsivity.
Some of the most studied vertical p-n junctions are heterostructures made from WSe2 and MoS2.109, 111, 112 In 
the work by Furchi et al.111 the authors transferred a mechanically exfoliated monolayer of WSe2 on top of a 
monolayer MoS2, both on a SiO2/Si substrate, with source and drain electrodes placed in contact with each 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

of the materials. Due to the ambipolar nature of WSe2, this device could be tuned into n-n junction or p-n 
junction regimes by means of the back gate voltage and, in the p-n configuration, a rectification ratio of ∼100 
was achieved. By illuminating the device in the p-n configuration with a white light source, a photovoltaic 
effect was observed, as shown in the IVs of Figure 9a measured at increasing optical powers, with an external 
quantum efficiency (EQE) of ∼ 1.5 % and a power conversion efficiency of ∼ 0.2 %.  In this vertical p-n junc-
tion, photons are absorbed in both materials generating electron-hole pairs followed by relaxation of the 
photogenerated carriers and charge transfer between the layers (see Fig. 8c-d). The carriers have to laterally 
diffuse to the electrodes and electron-hole recombination may occur reducing the efficiency of the solar cell. 
Lee et al.112 circumvented this issue by employing graphene electrodes, sandwiching the semiconducting 
monolayers, and enhancing the responsivity of the devices by a factor of ∼5. This increase in responsivity 
comes mainly from the smaller travel distance that the photoexcited carriers have to travel to reach the 
electrodes leading to a more efficient carrier extraction in the vertical direction as shown in Fig. 9b. In order 
to increase the EQE of the devices, solar cells involving materials with different thicknesses were investi-
gated, finding EQEs of 2.4 %, 12 % and 34 % for monolayer, bilayer and multilayer p-n junctions respectively. 
This improvement is due not only to the enhanced light absorption in the multilayer devices, but also due to 
the exponential suppression of direct electron tunnelling between the two graphene electrodes. In an opti-
mized (∼15 nm thick) MoS2-WSe2 multilayer heterostructure, Wong et al.133 demonstrated internal photo-
carrier collection efficiencies exceeding 70 % and power conversion efficiencies of up to 3.4 % at 633 nm 
wavelength.
Furthermore, other combinations of p- and n-doped materials have been explored to realize vertical solar 
cells, although p-doped 2D materials are less frequent than n-doped materials. Among the naturally p-doped 
2D semiconductors we list black phosphorus, franckeite and MoTe2. Deng et al. investigated a BP-MoS2 ver-
tical p-n heterojunction working in the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum with a peak EQE of 0.3 
%,113 a value lower than that of WSe2-MoS2 solar cells. Nevertheless, one of the most attractive features of 
BP is its low bandgap, allowing light absorption also in the near-infrared part of the electromagnetic spec-
trum. MoS2-BP junctions have shown EQEs up to ∼20 % under illumination with 1.55 µm wavelength light, 
employing few-layer flakes of both BP and MoS2.134 More recently, Molina-Mendoza et al. investigated the 
capability of franckeite as near-infrared solar cell in a p-n junction formed by multilayer franckeite-mono-
layer MoS2 able to generate an electrical power of ∼1 pW under infrared illumination with wavelength of 
940 nm as shown in Figure 9d.135 Also, few-layer MoTe2-few-layer MoS2 136 and monolayer MoTe2-MoS2 137

p-n junctions have shown promising results in light detection and energy harvesting in the near-infrared. 
The junction between monolayer MoTe2-MoS2 shows photoresponse at 1550 nm, due to interlayer transi-
tions between the two materials.137 However, for the individual device made of a pure MoS2 or MoTe2 mon-
olayer, no photoresponse is observed at 1550 nm.
Lateral 2D junctions are also very promising for optoelectronic applications. In the case of heterojunctions, 
several combinations of materials have already been achieved and studied as energy harvesting devices. CVD 
grown WSe2-MoS2 was used by Li et al. to build a p-n junction which showed an open-circuit voltage of 220 
meV under white light illumination.114 In another work, the authors found for the same system (Figure 9d) 
a power conversion efficiency of 2.6 % and an increased open-circuit voltage of 390 meV.138 Devices based 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

on laterally grown MoSe2-MoS2 and WS2-WSe2 heterostructures have also been studied by Duan et al, where 
the authors found that the WS2-WSe2 heterostructures show rectifying behaviour and a photovoltaic effect,  
yielding an open-circuit voltage of 470 meV and an EQE of ∼ 10%.70

With respect to homostructures, the most studied materials are WSe2 and BP due to their ambipolar nature 
that allows for electrostatic doping of different region of the semiconductor channel. Three different groups 
independently reported a solar cell built by inducing p and n doping in a single-layer WSe2 flake by means of 
local back-gate electrodes (see Fig. 4b).76-78 Figure 9e shows IVs of this device under illumination in different 
configurations of the local gates. The IVs shows that photogeneration in PV mode occurs only in the NP and 
PN configurations, with clear short-circuit current and open-circuit voltage. The inset of Fig. 9e shows the 
photovoltaic power that can be extracted in the PN configuration. Baugher et al. and Pospischil et al. reported 
an external quantum efficiency for their solar cells of 0.2 % and 0.5 %, respectively. Alternatively, Buscema 
et al. reported a similar device structure employing BP as the semiconductor channel,80 which permitted to 
extend the range of power generation for wavelengths up to 940 nm. On the other hand, the WSe2 devices 
are limited to the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Figure 9. Optoelectronic properties of 2D p-n junctions. a) Current-voltage (IV) characteristics of a WSe2-
MoS2 vertical heterojunction at different illumination powers. b) Photoresponsivity versus voltage traces of 
WSe2-MoS2 vertical heterojunctions sandwiched between two graphene electrodes for three devices with 
different thickness of the WSe2 and MoS2 flakes. The x-axis of each trace is normalized by the thickness of 
the corresponding heterojunction. c) Gate tunable IV characteristics of a WSe2-MoS2 vertical heterojunction 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

kept under illumination. d) IV characteristics of a franckeite-MoS2 vertical heterojunction in dark and under 
infrared illumination. e) IV characteristics of a double-gated WSe2 device under optical illumination. The 
biasing conditions are: PN (Vgl = -40 V, Vgr = 40 V), NP (Vgl = 40 V, Vgr = -40 V), NN (Vgl = Vgr = 40 V), PP (Vgl = Vgr
= -40 V). When operated as a diode (PN and NP), electrical power (Pel) can be extracted. Inset: Pel versus 
voltage in the PN configuration. Panel (a) readapted from Ref. 111 with permission from American Chemical 
Society, panels (b) and (c) readapted from Ref. 112 with permission from Springer Nature, panel (d) readapted
from Ref. 135, panel (e) readapted from Ref. 77 with permission from Springer Nature.

5.2. Scanning photocurrent studies

The experiments discussed above were performed under global illumination, that is by illuminating the de-
vice with a spot larger than its size. We will now turn to local illumination and specifically to scanning pho-
tocurrent (SPC) studies. By scanning a diffraction-limited light spot over a device while measuring the cur-
rent one can construct SPC maps that yield information on the spatial profile of the bands or the electric 
fields present in the device.139-144 This information is crucial to understand the underlying mechanisms rul-
ing the photocurrent generation. The ultrathin nature of 2D p-n junctions allows the light to easily reach the 
p-n interface both in lateral and in vertical architectures.64, 78, 145, 146 Figure 10a shows an optical image of a 
vertical p-n junction composed of elemental doped p-MoS2 and n-MoS2.64 By recording a SPC map at zero 
bias the authors studied the local generation of the short circuit current in the device arising from the PV 
effect. Figure 10b shows such a map recorded with a laser of 532 nm and with highlighted contours of the n-
and p-type flakes. A negative photocurrent (blue/red regions) is generated in the region where the two MoS2
flakes overlap as a result of the strong electric field in the depletion region that separates the photocarriers.
Compared to global illumination, the SPC map highlights that photocurrent generation can be non-homoge-
neous across the overlapping region. In Fig. 10b, a hotspot is clearly present, indicating that the interaction 
between the two flakes is not spatially homogenous, most likely due to the presence of interlayer adsorbates 
trapped between the layers during the assembly of the device.
SPC studies have also been conducted in lateral devices such as the one depicted in Fig. 10c. Ross et al. com-
bined SPC maps with photoluminescence (PL) maps to study an electrostatically gated WSe2 device.78 The 
zero bias SPC map, shown in Fig. 10d, has been recorded at 100 K with a 660 nm laser and shows that the 
photocurrent generation occurs at the interface between the p- and the n-doped regions. Figure 10e presents 
the corresponding map of the integrated PL intensity, which is homogenous across the whole WSe2 flake,
indicating that the luminescence is not quenched by the underlying gates. More revealingly, Fig. 10f shows a 
color map of the peak photoluminescence photon energy, exhibiting two distinct regions clearly correlated 
with the n-doped (blue) and p-doped (red) regions of the WSe2 flake. Above the gate held at Vgl = +8.0 V the 
presence of negatively charged X- trions (two electrons and one hole) dominates, while above the other gate, 
held at Vgr = -8.0 V, the higher-energy positively charged X+ trions (two holes and one electron) are more 
frequent, implying an excess of holes.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Figure 10. Scanning photocurrent studies of 2D p-n junctions. a) Optical image of the device. b) Photo-
current image of the MoS2 p-n junction from panel (a) with zero bias voltage applied (map of the short circuit 
current). c) Microscope image of a monolayer WSe2 electrostatic p-n junction device. The source and drain 
contacts are white and the two bottom gates are red. d) Corresponding scanning photocurrent image show-
ing pronounced photocurrent generation localized at the junction. The black dashed lines outline the back
gates whereas the white dashed line present the WSe2 flake. e) Integrated photoluminescence map. f) Pho-
toluminescence peak energy map showing p and n regions as a result of the different energies of oppositely 
charged excitons. X-(X+) represents the negatively (positively) charged exciton found in the n (p) region. Pan-
els (a) and (b) readapted from Ref. 64 with permission from John Wiley and Sons and panels (c), (d), (e) and 
(f) readapted from Ref. 78 with permission from Springer Nature.

5.3. Electroluminescence: light emitting diodes

Electroluminescence is the result of radiative recombination of electrons and holes in a material, usually a 
semiconductor, which release their energy as photons.  The most basic requirement for efficient light emis-
sion is a direct optical transition in the semiconductor, as in the case of monolayer semiconducting TMDCs. 
Electrically driven light emission produced by a unipolar current in single layer MoS2 FETs has been reported 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

to take place near the contact electrodes via impact excitation147 or in a suspended sheet by Joule heating.148

However, effective emission requires the injection of both electrons and holes, which is typically achieved 
using a p-n junction.
LEDs based on 2D materials have been realized in different ways, employing different materials and device 
architectures. For example, the ambipolar nature of single layer WSe2 has been exploited to generate light 
by employing local gates to electrostatically dope different regions in a semiconductor channel, forming a 
lateral p-n junction device.76-78 This kind of device (Figs. 4a and 4d) exhibited electroluminescence efficien-
cies (ratio between emitted optical power and electrical input power) ranging between 0.1 and 1%, with 
energy emission peaks at 752 nm (see Fig. 11a, Ref. 77) and 751 nm (Fig. 11b, Ref. 76) at room temperature. 
The difference between the energy of the emission peaks is attributed to different dielectric environments 
that can influence the exciton binding energy.
Zhang et al. have employed mono- and few-layer WSe2 in p-i-n (i, intrinsic) junctions with an electric double-
layer transistor (EDLT) architecture,149 where the doping of the semiconductor channel is modified by tun-
ing the voltage between the drain and source electrodes with respect to the gate electrode, enabling the 
accumulation of opposite charge carriers close to each of the electrodes. This device configuration circum-
vents the requirement of using monolayers for light emission due to the breakdown of the inversion sym-
metry in few-layer flakes under high-gate fields, and it also enables the emission of circularly polarized light 
as shown in Figure 11c. A similar device structure has been used to induce light emission by means of liquid-
gated transistors employing mono- and bilayer WS2,150 CVD-MoS2 151 or bulk ReS2.152

Concerning electroluminescent heterojunctions and mixed dimensional junctions many examples have been 
reported in literature. Lopez-Sanchez et al. demonstrated the light emission from a monolayer MoS2-highly 
p-doped Si hybrid junction (see Fig. 6e).117 Figure 11d shows a gray-scale optical picture of the electrolumi-
nescence generated from the device, which exhibits peak emission at ∼2 eV. This emission energy is blue-
shifted by almost 200 meV from the monolayer MoS2 exciton energy, which is due to the influence of the 
dielectric environment. The authors also reported that devices with unencapsulated MoS2 show a significant 
reduction of current and emitted light intensity after a few days in ambient conditions. On the other hand, 
by encapsulating the MoS2 monolayer with 30 nm thick HfO2 or Al2O3 the stability of the device can be greatly 
extended. In a different study Li et al. reported EL from a p-i-n junction between multilayer MoS2 and a GaN 
substrate, using Al2O3 as insulator.153

Furthermore, LEDs based on 2D heterostructures have been reported. Cheng et al. measured the light emis-
sion from a WSe2/MoS2 vertical heterojunction.154 In this case, both monolayer-WSe2/few-layer-MoS2 and 
bilayer-WSe2/few-layer-MoS2 were investigated (Fig. 11e), revealing different features in the emission spec-
trum related to excitonic peaks A (Fig. 11f) and B (not shown here), hot electron luminescence peaks A’ and 
B’ (Fig. 11f) and indirect bandgap emission (not shown here). Table 2 lists some photonic properties of elec-
troluminescent 2D p-n junctions.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Materials

p/n

Peak emis-
sion (nm)

Threshold cur-

rent (nA)
Notes
Refer-
ence

WSe2
752
4
-
77

WSe2
751
50
Estimated electroluminescence effi-

ciency ηEL ≈ 0.1%

76

WSe2
750
5
-
78

WSe2
740
1000
Emission of circularly polarized light
149

Si/MoS2
620
109
Stable after encapsulation with 30 

nm thick oxide

117

WSe2/MoS2
792
150000
-
154

WS2
630
-
-
150

MoS2
650
40000
Large-area MoS2 monolayer grown 

by chemical vapor deposition

151

Table 2. Photonic properties of on 2D p-n junctions. The threshold current is the lowest current able to 
produce light emission from the device.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Figure 11. Light emission from 2D p-n junctions. a) Electroluminescence (EL) emission spectra of a mon-
olayer WSe2 electrostatic p-n junction recorded for constant currents of 50, 100 and 200 nA. The curves are 
offset for clarity. The green curve demonstrates that no light emission is obtained under unipolar (n-type) 
conduction. b) Left axis: external quantum efficiency (EQE) as a function of wavelength at a constant laser 
power of 2 mW in a monolayer WSe2 device. Peaks in the EQE correspond to exciton transitions A, B and A’, 
as labelled. Right axis: electroluminescence intensity from a monolayer WSe2 electrostatic p-n junction. The 
traces are offset vertically for clarity. Inset: Diagram of the band structure around the K and Q points, with 
arrows indicating the lowest-energy exciton transitions for monolayer WSe2. c) Circularly polarized EL spec-
trum of a WSe2 electric double-layer transistor for different voltages. Inset: Diagram of the band structure 
around the K and K’ points. d) Intensity map showing the electroluminescent emission of a MoS2/Si hybrid 


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

p-n junction. The entire surface of the heterojunction is emitting light. e) False color EL image of a MoS2-WSe2
heterojunction device under an injection current of 100 μA. f) EL spectra of a monolayer WSe2/MoS2 hetero-
junction at different injection current. Panel (a) readapted from Ref. 77 with permission from Springer Nature, 
panel (b) readapted from Ref. 76 with permission from Springer Nature, panel (c) readapted from Ref. 149 with 
permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, panel (d) readapted from Ref.

117 with permission from American Chemical Society, and panels (e) and (f) readapted from Ref. 154 with 
permission from American Chemical Society.

6. Comparison between devices
In this section we show three tables that list the different p-n junctions based on 2D materials found in liter-
ature. Table 3 contains the 2D homojunctions, Table 4 the 2D heterojunctions and Table 5 the mixed-dimen-
sional junctions. For each device we report some of the relevant parameters such as the materials composing 
the device and the thickness. We also list figure of merits for electronic or optoelectronic applications such 
as the rectification ratio, the responsivity or the open circuit voltage. In the “Materials” column, in the case 
of heterojunctions and mixed-dimensional junctions the two materials used are listed with the p-type as first 
and the n-type as second material. In the “Thickness” column the thickness of the junction is given either in 
nm or in number of layers (indicated by the code nL where n is the number of layers, ML stays for multilayer).

Homo-
junc-
tions

Materials

p/n

Thickness 

(nm)

Rectification 

ratio
VOC (V)
Reference

Thickness

WSe2
2L/1L
10
-
73

MoS2
ML/1L
1000
0
74

MoSe2
4/28
100000
0.24
155

BP
11L/6L
600
0.21
156

Electrostatic

WSe2
5.0
10000
0.83
83

WSe2
1L
50
0.03
78

WSe2
1L
500
0.85
77

WSe2
1L
100000
0.72
76

BP
6.5
11
0.05
80

WSe2
1L
-
0.7
79


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

Chemical 

MoS2
3
100
0.6
99

MoS2
60
100
0.5
88

MoS2
7
10
-
88

BP
3
100000
0.45
98

BP
10
50
-
97

Elemental 

MoSe2
6
1000000
0.35
157

MoS2
15
-
0.45
103

BP
8.5
5600
0.14
158

MoS2
10
250
0.58
64

Table 3. p-n junctions based on 2D homojunctions.

Hetero-

junc-
tions

Materials

p/n

Thickness 

(nm)

Rectification 

ratio
VOC (V)
Reference

Vertical

WSe2/MoS2
1L/1L
50
0.55
111

WSe2/MoS2
1L/1L
50
0.5
112

WSe2/MoS2
2L/13L
15
0.27
154

BP/MoS2
11/1L
100000
0.3
113

WSe2/MoS2
5/10
50
0.28
159

WSe2/MoSe2
1L/1L
50
0.055
160

WS2/MoS2
ML/ML
10000
0.25
161

GaTe/MoS2
20
400000
0.22
162

InAs/WSe2
>20
1000000
-
163

BP/MoS2
15
>100
0.36
164

MoTe2/MoS2
1L/1L
10
0.15
137

MoTe2/MoS2
4L/4L
4000
0.3
136

WSe2/MoSe2
3L/3L
10000
0.46
165


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

WSe2/BP
12/20
2500
0.29
166

franckeite/MoS2
25/1.4
400
0.08
135

ReSe2/MoS2
60/7
60000
0.1
167

ReS2/ReSe2
64/48
3150
0.18
168

GaSe/InSe
19/13
200000
-
169

GeSe/MoS2
-
>100
-
170

WSe2/MoS2
9
1000
-
171

MoTe2/SnSe2
31
1000
-
171

SnSe/MoS2
28/7
100000
-
172

SnS/WS2
200/0.7
15
-
173

WSe2/SnS2
1L/1L
10000000
0.03
174

CuO/MoS2
150/1L
10
-
175

Lateral

WS2/MoS2
1L
100
0.12
65

WSe2/WS2
ML
-
0.47
70

In2Se3/CuInSe2
14
10
0.03
72

WSe2/MoS2
1L
10
0.22
114

Table 4. p-n junctions based on 2D heterojunctions.

Hetero-

junc-
tions

Materials

p/n

Thickness 

(nm)

Rectification 

ratio
VOC (V)
Reference

2D-0D, 2D-1D

SWCNT/MOS2
-/1L
10000
-
115

Rubrene/MoS2
300/5
100000
-
176

Pentacene/MoS2
40/2L
5
0.3
177

C8-BTBT/MoS2
5
100000
0.5
178

CuPC/MoS2
20/1L
10000
0.6
116


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

2D-3D

Si/MoS2
1L
-
0.41
122

Ge/MoS2
2L
2
-
179

Si/MoS2
1L
100
0.58
117

BP/GaAs
15
120
0.55
126

WS2/GaN
400
1000
-
180

Si/MoS2
12.5
20
-
181

Si/Bi2Se3
-
50
0.24
182

LSMO/MoS2
1L
1000
0.4
183

Table 5. p-n junctions based on mixed dimensional heterojunctions.

7. Future perspective and challenges
Despite the large number of experiments discussed in this Review, many challenges still need to be overcome 
for the integration of 2D p-n junctions in mass-produced electronic components. The two most important 
challenges are the large-scale fabrication of 2D p-n junctions and the environmental degradation of 2D ma-
terials.

7.1. Large-scale fabrication and environmental degradation

The first main challenge is related to the large-scale production of tailored van der Waals heterostructures 
with well-controlled interfaces. Even if the deterministic placement methods are very successful for labora-
tory-scale experiments, they are not suited for commercial applications. Growing methods like the CVD 
growth described in Section 2.2.2 have already proven to be capable of growing high-quality 2D materials 
including lateral and vertical heterostructures at a laboratory-scale. Van der Waals epitaxial methods hold 
even more promises to the synthesis of high-quality 2D heterostructures. Up-scaling of these growth meth-
ods is possible and in the years to come the realization of higher quality devices can be expected.184 A second, 
promising strategy to up-scale the production of 2D p-n junctions is to combine the growth of single 2D 
materials (such as MoS2) with various doping techniques (mostly chemical or electrostatic).
A second challenge is the environmental degradation of many of the known 2D materials. For example, when 
exposed to air, black phosphorous in its ultrathin form tends to uptake moisture which degrades the elec-
tronic properties of the material.37-40 In the case of BP the most accepted mechanism for the degradation 
involves the reaction of the material with oxygen which changes the material properties.185, 186 One way pre-
vent this degradation is by encapsulating the air-sensitive material between two flakes of h-BN under oxy-
gen- and moisture-free conditions.187-189 One active area of 2D materials research is therefore dedicated to 
up-scale the encapsulation methods. A different approach that is currently pursued is the active search for 
new 2D materials, which do not present degradation problems, that could come either from synthesis (for 
example TiS3) or from natural sources (e.g. franckeite).46, 135, 190, 191 This active search already helped to in-
crease the number of available 2D materials from just a handful to more than twenty in less than ten years.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

7.2. Future perspectives

Apart from conventional optoelectronic applications, 2D p-n junctions hold still many unexplored applica-
tions and fundamental questions. For example, thermoelectric applications of 2D p-n junctions have not been 
thoroughly investigated yet. The traditional Peltier device, a component largely used in electronics for cool-
ing (and less commonly for heating), is based on a p-type and a n-type semiconductor thermally connected 
in parallel and electrically in series. Van der Waals heterostructures could be used to fabricate atomically 
thin cooling (or heating) elements combined with the other attractive properties of 2D materials, such as the 
high transparence or the flexibility. Another interesting route is the study of novel p-n junction geometries 
(like for example circular p-n junctions recently demonstrated in graphene192, 193) or new devices based on 
2D p-n junctions, such as memories or logic gates.83, 194

The real possibilities still hidden in 2D materials are probably many more than the ones discussed and 2D 
p-n junctions hold many promises for commercial applications. These 2D junctions are especially interesting 
building blocks for flexible and transparent electronic components, such as solar cells or light emitting di-
odes.195, 196 Another application that can benefit from the ultrathin nature of 2D p-n junctions is in light sens-
ing and harvesting applications or for nanophotonics.14, 197 As we discussed in section 5, 2D p-n junctions can 
be used as photodetectors and many materials combinations are available that can be used to design devices 
sensible to wavelengths ranging from the infrared to the ultraviolet have already been demonstrated.134, 135, 

137

8. Conclusions
In recent years we have witnessed the production of novel p-n junctions that take advantage of the ultrathin 
nature of 2D materials. Both bottom-up and top-down production methods have proven capable of creating 
p-n junctions of high quality with exquisite optoelectronic properties. In this Review we have revised the 
recent progress on 2D p-n junctions, discussing the most used materials and fabrication methods and exam-
ples of 2D p-n junctions from literature belonging to eight different junction architectures. With these archi-
tectures different applications have been realized and we have discussed experiments that use 2D p-n junc-
tions respectively as rectifiers, as photodetectors/solar cells and as light emitting diodes. Finally a compari-
son between the important figures of merit of the various devices from literature is made. By no means, this 
field is closed. 2D materials continue to offer many opportunities to fabricate novel p-n junctions with out-
standing properties that open up exciting scientific routes both in terms of fundamental questions and in 
term of applications.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

AC-G acknowledges funding from the European Commission under the Graphene Flagship, contract 
CNECTICT-604391. RF acknowledges support from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research 
(NWO) through the research program Rubicon with project number 680-50-1515. This project further re-
ceived funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant 
agreement No. 696656 (Graphene Flagship).


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

REFERENCES

1.
M. Riordan and L. Hoddeson, IEEE spectrum, 1997, 34, 46-51.

2.
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nature Nanotechnology, 2012, 7, 699-712.

3.
S. J. Kim, K. Choi, B. Lee, Y. Kim and B. H. Hong, Annual Review of Materials Research, 2015, 45, 63-84.

4.
H. Schmidt, F. Giustiniano and G. Eda, Chemical Society Reviews, 2015, 44, 7715-7736.

5.
S. Das, J. A. Robinson, M. Dubey, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Annual Review of Materials Research, 2015, 45, 1-27.

6.
K. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. C. Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439.

7.
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature Reviews Materials, 2016, 1, 16042.

8.
D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nature materials, 2016, 16, 170-181.

9.
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 
2004, 306, 666-669.

10.
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419.

11.
K. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. Booth, V. Khotkevich, S. Morozov and A. Geim, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 2005, 102, 10451-10453.

12.
K. Novoselov and A. C. Neto, Physica Scripta, 2012, 2012, 014006.

13.
P. Miró, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chemical Society Reviews, 2014, 43, 6537-6554.

14.
A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nature Photonics, 2016, 10, 202-204.

15.
R. Roldan, L. Chirolli, E. Prada, J. A. Silva-Guillen, P. San-Jose and F. Guinea, Chemical Society Reviews, 2017, 46, 4387-4399.

16.
B. Partoens and F. Peeters, Physical Review B, 2006, 74, 075404.

17.
M. Y. Han, B. Özyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim, Physical review letters, 2007, 98, 206805.

18.
K. F. Mak, C. H. Lui, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Physical review letters, 2009, 102, 256405.

19.
D. C. Elias, R. R. Nair, T. Mohiuddin, S. Morozov, P. Blake, M. Halsall, A. Ferrari, D. Boukhvalov, M. Katsnelson and A. Geim, 
Science, 2009, 323, 610-613.

20.
F. Xia, D. B. Farmer, Y.-m. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano letters, 2010, 10, 715-718.

21.
R. Balog, B. Jørgensen, L. Nilsson, M. Andersen, E. Rienks, M. Bianchi, M. Fanetti, E. Lægsgaard, A. Baraldi and S. Lizzit, 
Nature materials, 2010, 9, 315-319.

22.
Y. Lin and J. W. Connell, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6908-6939.

23.
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nature chemistry, 2013, 5, 263.

24.
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, ACS nano, 2014, 8, 1102-1120.

25.
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chemical Society Reviews, 2015, 44, 8859-8876.

26.
O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Materials Today, 2015, 18, 20-30.

27.
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Materials Today, 2017.

28.
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nature Reviews Materials, 2017, 2, 17033.

29.
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Accounts of chemical research, 2014, 47, 1067-1075.

30.
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Physical Review Letters, 2010, 105, 136805.

31.
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Letters, 2010, 10, 1271-1275.

32.
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nature Nanotechnology, 2011, 6, 147-150.

33.
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nature communications, 2014, 5, 4458.

34.
J. Yang, R. Xu, J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, F. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. Yu and Y. Lu, Light: Science & Applications, 2015, 4, e312.

35.
R. Gusmao, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angewandte Chemie, 2017.

36.
A. Castellanos-Gomez, L. Vicarelli, E. Prada, J. O. Island, K. Narasimha-Acharya, S. I. Blanter, D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, 
G. A. Steele and J. Alvarez, 2D Materials, 2014, 1, 025001.

37.
J. O. Island, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, 2D Materials, 2015, 2, 011002.

38.
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K.-S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, 
Nano letters, 2014, 14, 6964-6970.

39.
J.-S. Kim, Y. Liu, W. Zhu, S. Kim, D. Wu, L. Tao, A. Dodabalapur, K. Lai and D. Akinwande, Scientific reports, 2015, 5.

40.
A. Favron, E. Gaufrès, F. Fossard, A.-L. Phaneuf-L’Heureux, N. Y. Tang, P. L. Lévesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur 
and R. Martel, Nature materials, 2015, 14, 826-832.

41.
A. Molle, J. Goldberger, M. Houssa, Y. Xu, S.-C. Zhang and D. Akinwande, Nature materials, 2017.

42.
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, small, 2015, 11, 640-652.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

43.
L.-D. Zhao, S.-H. Lo, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, G. Tan, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2014, 508, 
373-377.

44.
C. W. Li, J. Hong, A. F. May, D. Bansal, S. Chi, T. Hong, G. Ehlers and O. Delaire, Nature Physics, 2015, 11, 1063-1069.

45.
S. Srivastava and B. Avasthi, Journal of materials science, 1992, 27, 3693-3705.

46.
J. O. Island, A. J. Molina-Mendoza, M. Barawi, R. Biele, E. Flores, J. M. Clamagirand, J. R. Ares, C. Sánchez, H. S. van der Zant 
and R. D’Agosta, 2D Materials, 2017, 4, 022003.

47.
B. Huang, G. Clark, E. Navarro-Moratalla, D. R. Klein, R. Cheng, K. L. Seyler, D. Zhong, E. Schmidgall, M. A. McGuire, D. H. 
Cobden, W. Yao, D. Xiao, P. Jarillo-Herrero and X. Xu, Nature, 2017, 546, 270-273.

48.
M. A. McGuire, Crystals, 2017, 7, 121.

49.
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2009, 19, 2503-2511.

50.
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Accounts of chemical research, 2014, 48, 136-143.

51.
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nature Reviews Materials, 2017, 2, 16098.

52.
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Applied Physics Letters, 2013, 102, 012111.

53.
Y. Liu, P. Stradins and S.-H. Wei, Science advances, 2016, 2, e1600069.

54.
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Physical Review B, 2014, 89, 235319.

55.
Y. Cai, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Scientific reports, 2014, 4, 6677.

56.
P. Blake, E. Hill, A. Castro Neto, K. Novoselov, D. Jiang, R. Yang, T. Booth and A. Geim, Applied Physics Letters, 2007, 91, 
063124.

57.
Z. Ni, H. Wang, J. Kasim, H. Fan, T. Yu, Y. Wu, Y. Feng and Z. Shen, Nano letters, 2007, 7, 2758-2763.

58.
S. Roddaro, P. Pingue, V. Piazza, V. Pellegrini and F. Beltram, Nano letters, 2007, 7, 2707-2710.

59.
R. Frisenda, E. Navarro-Moratalla, P. Gant, D. P. De Lara, P. Jarillo-Herrero, R. V. Gorbachev and A. Castellanos-Gomez, 
Chemical Society Reviews, 2018, 47, 53-68.

60.
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim and K. L. Shepard, Nature 
nanotechnology, 2010, 5, 722-726.

61.
P. Zomer, S. Dash, N. Tombros and B. Van Wees, Applied Physics Letters, 2011, 99, 232104.

62.
A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Buscema, R. Molenaar, V. Singh, L. Janssen, H. S. van der Zant and G. A. Steele, 2D Materials, 2014, 
1, 011002.

63.
L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. Campos and D. Muller, Science, 2013, 342, 
614-617.

64.
C. Reuter, R. Frisenda, D. Y. Lin, T. S. Ko, D. Perez de Lara and A. Castellanos‐Gomez, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700119.

65.
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai and B. I. Yakobson, Nature materials, 2014, 13, 1135-
1142.

66.
J. Yu, J. Li, W. Zhang and H. Chang, Chemical Science, 2015, 6, 6705-6716.

67.
S. L. Wong, H. Liu and D. Chi, Progress in Crystal Growth and Characterization of Materials, 2016, 62, 9-28.

68.
R. Dong and I. Kuljanishvili, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and Microelectronics: Materials, 
Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena, 2017, 35, 030803.

69.
Y. Cui, B. Li, J. Li and Z. Wei, Science China Physics, Mechanics & Astronomy, 2018, 61, 016801.

70.
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang and A. Pan, Nature nanotechnology, 2014, 
9, 1024-1030.

71.
C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nature 
materials, 2014, 13, 1096-1101.

72.
Z. Zheng, J. Yao and G. Yang, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7288-7296.

73.
Z.-Q. Xu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Shen, W. Huang, X. Xia, W. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Sun and C. Zheng, 2D Materials, 2016, 3, 041001.

74.
M. Sun, D. Xie, Y. Sun, W. Li, C. Teng and J. Xu, Scientific Reports, 2017, 7, 4505.

75.
R. Bratschitsch, Nature nanotechnology, 2014, 9, 247-248.

76.
B. W. Baugher, H. O. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature nanotechnology, 2014, 9, 262-267.

77.
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nature nanotechnology, 2014, 9, 257-261.

78.
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura and W. Yao, 
Nature nanotechnology, 2014, 9, 268-272.

79.
D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, S. Michaelis de Vasconcellos, R. Bratschitsch, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-
Gomez, Nano letters, 2014, 14, 5846-5852.

80.
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nature Communications, 2014, 5, 
4651.

81.
N. M. Gabor, J. C. Song, Q. Ma, N. L. Nair, T. Taychatanapat, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. S. Levitov and P. Jarillo-Herrero, 
Science, 2011, 334, 648-652.

82.
H.-Y. Chiu, V. Perebeinos, Y.-M. Lin and P. Avouris, Nano letters, 2010, 10, 4634-4639.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

83.
D. Li, M. Chen, Z. Sun, P. Yu, Z. Liu, P. M. Ajayan and Z. Zhang, Nature Nanotechnology, 2017.

84.
J. Ye, S. Inoue, K. Kobayashi, Y. Kasahara, H. Yuan, H. Shimotani and Y. Iwasa, Nature materials, 2010, 9.

85.
Y. Zhang, J. Ye, Y. Matsuhashi and Y. Iwasa, Nano letters, 2012, 12, 1136-1140.

86.
Y. Zhang, J. Ye, Y. Yomogida, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Nano letters, 2013, 13, 3023-3028.

87.
A. A. El Yumin, J. Yang, Q. Chen, O. Zheliuk and J. Ye, physica status solidi (b), 2017, 254, 1700180.

88.
M. S. Choi, D. Qu, D. Lee, X. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and W. J. Yoo, ACS nano, 2014, 8, 9332-9340.

89.
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nano letters, 2013, 13, 5944-5948.

90.
J. D. Lin, C. Han, F. Wang, R. Wang, D. Xiang, S. Qin, X. A. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Zhang, A. T. Wee and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 
2014, 8, 5323-5329.

91.
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nature chemistry, 2016, 
8, 597-602.

92.
G. Abellán, V. Lloret, U. Mundloch, M. Marcia, C. Neiss, A. Görling, M. Varela, F. Hauke and A. Hirsch, Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition, 2016, 55, 14557-14562.

93.
A. J. Molina-Mendoza, L. Vaquero-Garzon, S. Leret, L. de Juan-Fernández, E. M. Pérez and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chemical 
Communications, 2016, 52, 14365-14368.

94.
X. He, W. Chow, F. Liu, B. Tay and Z. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1602558.

95.
E. C. Peters, E. J. Lee, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Applied Physics Letters, 2010, 97, 193102.

96.
D. B. Farmer, Y.-M. Lin, A. Afzali-Ardakani and P. Avouris, Applied Physics Letters, 2009, 94, 213106.

97.
X. Yu, S. Zhang, H. Zeng and Q. J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 34-41.

98.
G. Wang, L. Bao, T. Pei, R. Ma, Y.-Y. Zhang, L. Sun, G. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Li and C. Gu, Nano letters, 2016, 16, 6870-6878.

99.
H.-M. Li, D. Lee, D. Qu, X. Liu, J. Ryu, A. Seabaugh and W. J. Yoo, Nature communications, 2015, 6.

100.
J. Legma, G. Vacquier, H. Traore and A. Casalot, Materials Science and Engineering: B, 1991, 8, 167-174.

101.
J. Suh, T. E. Park, D. Y. Lin, D. Fu, J. Park, H. J. Jung, Y. Chen, C. Ko, C. Jang, Y. Sun, R. Sinclair, J. Chang, S. Tongay and J. 
Wu, Nano Lett, 2014, 14, 6976-6982.

102.
Y. Jin, D. H. Keum, S. J. An, J. Kim, H. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Adv Mater, 2015, 27, 5534-5540.

103.
S. A. Svatek, E. Antolín, D.-Y. Lin, R. Frisenda, C. Reuter, A. J. Molina-Mendoza, M. Muñoz, N. Agrait, T.-S. Ko, D. P. de Lara 
and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 2017, 5, 854-861.

104.
A. Nipane, D. Karmakar, N. Kaushik, S. Karande and S. Lodha, ACS nano, 2016, 10, 2128-2137.

105.
E. Kim, C. Ko, K. Kim, Y. Chen, J. Suh, S. G. Ryu, K. Wu, X. Meng, A. Suslu and S. Tongay, Advanced Materials, 2016, 28, 
341-346.

106.
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419-425.

107.
M.-Y. Li, C.-H. Chen, Y. Shi and L.-J. Li, Materials Today, 2016, 19, 322-335.

108.
A. Pant, Z. Mutlu, D. Wickramaratne, H. Cai, R. K. Lake, C. Ozkan and S. Tongay, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3870-3887.

109.
H. Fang, C. Battaglia, C. Carraro, S. Nemsak, B. Ozdol, J. S. Kang, H. A. Bechtel, S. B. Desai, F. Kronast and A. A. Unal, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2014, 111, 6198-6202.

110.
X. Hong, J. Kim, S.-F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nature nanotechnology, 2014, 9, 
682-686.

111.
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdörfer and T. Mueller, Nano letters, 2014, 14, 4785-4791.

112.
C. H. Lee, G. H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone 
and P. Kim, Nat Nanotechnol, 2014, 9, 676-681.

113.
Y. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS nano, 2014, 8, 8292-
8299.

114.
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei and J.-H. He, Science, 2015, 
349, 524-528.

115.
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, C.-C. Wu, P. L. Prabhumirashi, M. L. Geier, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 2013, 110, 18076-18080.

116.
S. Vélez, J. Island, M. Buscema, O. Txoperena, S. Parui, G. A. Steele, F. Casanova, H. S. van der Zant, A. Castellanos-Gomez and 
L. E. Hueso, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15442-15449.

117.
O. Lopez-Sanchez, E. Alarcon Llado, V. Koman, A. Fontcuberta i Morral, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Acs Nano, 2014, 8, 3042-
3048.

118.
H. Huang, Y. Huang, S. Wang, M. Zhu, H. Xie, L. Zhang, X. Zheng, Q. Xie, D. Niu and Y. Gao, Crystals, 2016, 6, 113.

119.
S. H. H. Shokouh, A. Pezeshki, A. Raza, S. Raza, H. S. Lee, S. W. Min, P. J. Jeon, J. M. Shin and S. Im, Advanced Materials, 
2015, 27, 150-156.

120.
P. J. Jeon, Y. T. Lee, J. Y. Lim, J. S. Kim, D. K. Hwang and S. Im, Nano letters, 2016, 16, 1293-1298.

121.
S. H. Hosseini Shokouh, A. Pezeshki, S. R. A. Raza, K. Choi, S.-W. Min, P. J. Jeon, H. S. Lee and S. Im, ACS nano, 2014, 8, 
5174-5181.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

122.
M.-L. Tsai, S.-H. Su, J.-K. Chang, D.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Chen, C.-I. Wu, L.-J. Li, L.-J. Chen and J.-H. He, ACS nano, 2014, 8, 8317-
8322.

123.
L. Hao, Y. Liu, W. Gao, Z. Han, Q. Xue, H. Zeng, Z. Wu, J. Zhu and W. Zhang, Journal of applied physics, 2015, 117, 114502.

124.
V. Dhyani and S. Das, Scientific Reports, 2017, 7.

125.
L. Wang, J. Jie, Z. Shao, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Sun and S. T. Lee, Advanced Functional Materials, 2015, 25, 2910-
2919.

126.
P. Gehring, R. Urcuyo, D. L. Duong, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Applied Physics Letters, 2015, 106, 233110.

127.
P. Langevin, Ann. Chim. Phys, 1903, 28, 122.

128.
W. Shockley and W. Read Jr, Physical review, 1952, 87, 835.

129.
R. N. Hall, Physical Review, 1952, 87, 387-387.

130.
N. Greenham and P. Bobbert, Physical Review B, 2003, 68, 245301.

131.
M. M. Furchi, D. K. Polyushkin, A. Pospischil and T. Mueller, Nano Lett, 2014, 14, 6165-6170.

132.
J. O. Island, S. I. Blanter, M. Buscema, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Letters, 2015, 15, 7853-7858.

133.
J. Wong, D. Jariwala, G. Tagliabue, K. Tat, A. R. Davoyan, M. C. Sherrott and H. A. Atwater, ACS nano, 2017, 11, 7230-7240.

134.
L. Ye, H. Li, Z. Chen and J. Xu, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 692-699.

135.
A. J. Molina-Mendoza, E. Giovanelli, W. S. Paz, M. A. Niño, J. O. Island, C. Evangeli, L. Aballe, M. Foerster, H. S. Van Der Zant 
and G. Rubio-Bollinger, Nature Communications, 2017, 8.

136.
A. Pezeshki, S. H. H. Shokouh, T. Nazari, K. Oh and S. Im, Advanced Materials, 2016, 28, 3216-3222.

137.
K. Zhang, T. Zhang, G. Cheng, T. Li, S. Wang, W. Wei, X. Zhou, W. Yu, Y. Sun and P. Wang, ACS nano, 2016, 10, 3852-3858.

138.
M. L. Tsai, M. Y. Li, J. R. D. Retamal, K. T. Lam, Y. C. Lin, K. Suenaga, L. J. Chen, G. Liang, L. J. Li and H. He Jr, Advanced 
Materials, 2017, 29, 1701168.

139.
Y. Ahn, A. Tsen, B. Kim, Y. W. Park and J. Park, Nano letters, 2007, 7, 3320-3323.

140.
F. Xia, T. Mueller, R. Golizadeh-Mojarad, M. Freitag, Y.-m. Lin, J. Tsang, V. Perebeinos and P. Avouris, Nano Letters, 2009, 9, 
1039-1044.

141.
H. Yuan, X. Liu, F. Afshinmanesh, W. Li, G. Xu, J. Sun, B. Lian, A. G. Curto, G. Ye and Y. Hikita, Nature nanotechnology, 2015, 
10, 707-713.

142.
G. Rao, M. Freitag, H.-Y. Chiu, R. S. Sundaram and P. Avouris, ACS nano, 2011, 5, 5848-5854.

143.
M. Tosun, D. Fu, S. B. Desai, C. Ko, J. S. Kang, D.-H. Lien, M. Najmzadeh, S. Tongay, J. Wu and A. Javey, Scientific reports, 
2015, 5, 10990.

144.
S. Kallatt, G. Umesh, N. Bhat and K. Majumdar, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15213-15222.

145.
M. C. Lemme, F. H. Koppens, A. L. Falk, M. S. Rudner, H. Park, L. S. Levitov and C. M. Marcus, Nano letters, 2011, 11, 4134-
4137.

146.
S. L. Howell, D. Jariwala, C.-C. Wu, K.-S. Chen, V. K. Sangwan, J. Kang, T. J. Marks, M. C. Hersam and L. J. Lauhon, Nano 
Letters, 2015, 15, 2278-2284.

147.
R. Sundaram, M. Engel, A. Lombardo, R. Krupke, A. Ferrari, P. Avouris and M. Steiner, Nano letters, 2013, 13, 1416-1421.

148.
L. Dobusch, S. Schuler, V. Perebeinos and T. Mueller, Advanced Materials, 2017, 29, 1701304.

149.
Y. Zhang, T. Oka, R. Suzuki, J. Ye and Y. Iwasa, Science, 2014, 344, 725-728.

150.
S. Jo, N. Ubrig, H. Berger, A. B. Kuzmenko and A. F. Morpurgo, Nano letters, 2014, 14, 2019-2025.

151.
E. Ponomarev, I. Gutiérrez-Lezama, N. Ubrig and A. F. Morpurgo, Nano letters, 2015, 15, 8289-8294.

152.
I. Gutiérrez-Lezama, B. A. Reddy, N. Ubrig and A. F. Morpurgo, 2D Materials, 2016, 3, 045016.

153.
D. Li, R. Cheng, H. Zhou, C. Wang, A. Yin, Y. Chen, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature communications, 2015, 6.

154.
R. Cheng, D. Li, H. Zhou, C. Wang, A. Yin, S. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano letters, 2014, 14, 5590-5597.

155.
Y. Yang, N. Huo and J. Li, Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 2017, 5, 7051-7056.

156.
L. Wang, L. Huang, W. C. Tan, X. Feng, L. Chen and K.-W. Ang, Advanced Electronic Materials, 2018, 4, 1700442.

157.
Y. Jin, D. H. Keum, S. J. An, J. Kim, H. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Advanced Materials, 2015, 27, 5534-5540.

158.
Y. Liu, Y. Cai, G. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang and K. W. Ang, Advanced Functional Materials, 2017, 27, 1604368.

159.
J. Ahn, P. J. Jeon, S. R. A. Raza, A. Pezeshki, S.-W. Min, D. K. Hwang and S. Im, 2D Materials, 2016, 3, 045011.

160.
Y. Gong, S. Lei, G. Ye, B. Li, Y. He, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Lou and Z. Liu, Nano letters, 2015, 15, 6135-6141.

161.
N. Huo, J. Kang, Z. Wei, S. S. Li, J. Li and S. H. Wei, Advanced Functional Materials, 2014, 24, 7025-7031.

162.
F. Wang, Z. Wang, K. Xu, F. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Yin and J. He, Nano letters, 2015, 15, 7558-7566.

163.
S. Chuang, R. Kapadia, H. Fang, T. Chia Chang, W.-C. Yen, Y.-L. Chueh and A. Javey, Applied Physics Letters, 2013, 102, 
242101.

164.
T. Hong, B. Chamlagain, T. Wang, H.-J. Chuang, Z. Zhou and Y.-Q. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18537-18541.

165.
N. Flöry, A. Jain, P. Bharadwaj, M. Parzefall, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and L. Novotny, Applied Physics Letters, 2015, 107, 
123106.

166.
P. Chen, T. T. Zhang, J. Xiang, H. Yu, S. Wu, X. Lu, G. Wang, F. Wen, Z. Liu and R. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3254-3258.


This is the post-peer reviewed version of the following article: 

R. Frisenda et al., “Atomically thin p-n junctions based on two-dimensional materials”

Chemical Society Reviews 47, 3339-3358 (2018) 

https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CS00880E

167.
X. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Peng, N. Huo, K. Wu, C. Xia, Z. Wei, S. Tongay and J. Li, Nano Research, 2016, 9, 507-516.

168.
A.-J. Cho, S. D. Namgung, H. Kim and J.-Y. Kwon, APL Materials, 2017, 5, 076101.

169.
F. Yan, L. Zhao, A. Patanè, P. a. Hu, X. Wei, D. Zhang, Q. Lv, Q. Feng, C. Shen and K. Chang, Nanotechnology, 2017.

170.
W. C. Yap, Z. Yang, M. Mehboudi, J.-A. Yan, S. Barraza-Lopez and W. Zhu, Nano Research, 2017, 11, 420-430.

171.
C. Li, X. Yan, X. Song, W. Bao, S. Ding, D. W. Zhang and P. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 415201.

172.
S. Yang, M. Wu, B. Wang, L.-D. Zhao, L. Huang, C. Jiang and S.-H. Wei, ACS applied materials & interfaces, 2017, 9, 42149-
42155.

173.
A. S. Aji, M. Izumoto, K. Suenaga, K. Yamamoto, H. Nakashima and H. Ago, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2018, 20, 
889-897.

174.
T. Yang, B. Zheng, Z. Wang, T. Xu, C. Pan, J. Zou, X. Zhang, Z. Qi, H. Liu and Y. Feng, Nature communications, 2017, 8, 1906.

175.
K. Zhang, M. Peng, W. Wu, J. Guo, G. Gao, Y. Liu, J. Kou, R. Wen, Y. Lei and A. Yu, Materials Horizons, 2017, 4, 274-280.

176.
F. Liu, W. L. Chow, X. He, P. Hu, S. Zheng, X. Wang, J. Zhou, Q. Fu, W. Fu and P. Yu, Advanced Functional Materials, 2015, 
25, 5865-5871.

177.
D. Jariwala, S. L. Howell, K.-S. Chen, J. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, S. A. Filippone, R. Turrisi, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. 
Hersam, Nano letters, 2015, 16, 497-503.

178.
D. He, Y. Pan, H. Nan, S. Gu, Z. Yang, B. Wu, X. Luo, B. Xu, Y. Zhang and Y. Li, Applied Physics Letters, 2015, 107, 183103.

179.
D. Sarkar, X. Xie, W. Liu, W. Cao, J. Kang, Y. Gong, S. Kraemer, P. M. Ajayan and K. Banerjee, Nature, 2015, 526, 91-95.

180.
Y. Yu, P. W. Fong, S. Wang and C. Surya, Scientific reports, 2016, 6.

181.
C. Yim, M. O'brien, N. McEvoy, S. Riazimehr, H. Schäfer-Eberwein, A. Bablich, R. Pawar, G. Iannaccone, C. Downing and G. 
Fiori, Scientific reports, 2014, 4, 5458.

182.
Z. Wang, M. Li, L. Yang, Z. Zhang and X. P. Gao, Nano Research, 2017, 10, 1872-1879.

183.
Y. Niu, R. Frisenda, S. A. Svatek, G. Orfila, F. Gallego, P. Gant, N. Agraït, C. Leon, A. Rivera-Calzada and D. P. De Lara, 2D 
Materials, 2017, 4, 034002.

184.
K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656.

185.
Y. Huang, J. Qiao, K. He, S. Bliznakov, E. Sutter, X. Chen, D. Luo, F. Meng, D. Su and J. Decker, Chemistry of Materials, 2016, 
28, 8330-8339.

186.
F. Alsaffar, S. Alodan, A. Alrasheed, A. Alhussain, N. Alrubaiq, A. Abbas and M. R. Amer, Scientific Reports, 2017, 7, 44540.

187.
R. A. Doganov, E. C. O’Farrell, S. P. Koenig, Y. Yeo, A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker, K. Watanabe and T. 
Taniguchi, Nature communications, 2015, 6.

188.
A. Avsar, I. J. Vera-Marun, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Ozyilmaz, ACS nano, 2015, 9, 4138-
4145.

189.
Y. Cao, A. Mishchenko, G. Yu, E. Khestanova, A. Rooney, E. Prestat, A. Kretinin, P. Blake, M. Shalom and C. Woods, Nano 
letters, 2015, 15, 4914-4921.

190.
M. Velický, P. S. Toth, A. M. Rakowski, A. P. Rooney, A. Kozikov, C. R. Woods, A. Mishchenko, L. Fumagalli, J. Yin and V. 
Zólyomi, Nature Communications, 2017, 8, 14410.

191.
G. Prando, Nature Nanotechnology, 2017, 12, 191-191.

192.
Y. Jiang, J. Mao, D. Moldovan, M. R. Masir, G. Li, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, F. M. Peeters and E. Y. Andrei, Nature 
Nanotechnology, 2017, 12, 1045.

193.
R. Heinisch, F. Bronold and H. Fehske, Physical Review B, 2013, 87, 155409.

194.
M. Huang, S. Li, Z. Zhang, X. Xiong, X. Li and Y. Wu, Nature nanotechnology, 2017, 12, 1148-1154.

195.
D. Akinwande, N. Petrone and J. Hone, Nature communications, 2014, 5, 5678.

196.
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nature 
Nanotechnology, 2014, 9, 768-779.

197.
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nature Photonics, 2014, 8, 899.


