1 

Unified theory of the direct or indirect bandgap nature of 

conventional semiconductors 

Lin-Ding Yuan1,2, Hui-Xiong Deng1,2, Shu-Shen Li1,2,3, Jun-Wei Luo1,2,3*, and Su-Huai Wei4* 

1State key laboratory of superlattices and microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, 

Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China 

2College of Materials Science and Opto-Electronic Technology, University of Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 

3Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China 

 4Beijing Computational Science Research Center, Beijing 100193, China 

 

*Email: jwluo@semi.ac.cn; suhuaiwei@csrc.ac.cn 
 
 

Abstract: 

Although the direct or indirect nature of the bandgap transition is an essential parameter 

of semiconductors for optoelectronic applications, the understanding why some of the 

conventional semiconductors have direct or indirect bandgaps remains ambiguous. In this 

Letter, we revealed that the existence of the occupied cation d bands is a prime element in 

determining the directness of the bandgap of semiconductors through the s-d and p-d 

couplings, which push the conduction band energy levels at the X- and L-valley up, but 

leaves the Γ-valley conduction state unchanged. This unified theory unambiguously explains 

why Diamond, Si, Ge, and Al-containing group III-V semiconductors, which do not have 

active occupied d bands, have indirect bandgaps and remaining common semiconductors, 

except GaP, have direct bandgaps. Besides s-d and p-d couplings, bond length and 

electronegativity of anions are two remaining factors regulating the energy ordering of the Γ-, 

X-, and L-valley of the conduction band, and are responsible for the anomalous bandgap 

behaviors in GaN, GaP, and GaAs that have direct, indirect, and direct bandgaps, respectively, 

despite the fact that N, P, and As are in ascending order of the atomic number. This 

understanding will shed light on the design of new direct bandgap light-emitting materials.  

 

 

 

 


2 

Whether a semiconductor has a direct or indirect bandgap is of fundamental importance 

to its optoelectronic applications [2, 3]. If the conduction band minimum (CBM) occurs at the 

same point in k-space as the valence band maximum (VBM), which is usually at the center 

(Γ-point) of the Brillouin zone for conventional semiconductors, then the energy gap is 

referred as direct bandgap, otherwise as indirect bandgap [3]. If a semiconductor has a direct 

bandgap and the electric dipole transition from VBM to CBM is allowed, the electron-hole 

pairs will recombine radiatively with a high probability. As a result, high-quality direct 

bandgap semiconductors, such as GaAs and InP, are used to make high efficient light emitters. 

They are essential materials for lasers, light emitting diodes (LEDs) and other photonic 

devices [4, 5]. Whereas, in indirect bandgap semiconductors, such as Si and Ge, optical 

transitions across an indirect bandgap are not allowed, and, thus, these materials are not 

efficient light emitters. Despite the paramount importance of the direct or indirect nature of 

the bandgap transition for conventional semiconductors, which have been extensively studied 

in past seven decades, the understanding of the formation of their direct or indirect bandgaps 

remains ambiguous.  

In spite of the extensive utilizing of semi-empirical and first-principles methods to 

correctly reproduce the experimentally measured band structures for semiconductors, the 

simple nearest-neighbor tight-binding (TB) theory is more straightforward to gain insight into 

the formation of the band structures because of its intuitive simplicity[6]. However, this 

simple TB model fails to reproduce some important band structure features, such as bandgap 

nature for indirect semiconductors[3, 7]. Although the introduction of additional unphysical 

parameters can cure the flaw of the simple sp3 TB model[8-11], it loses the advantage of its 

intuitive simplicity and thus is unlikely to uncover the origin of the direct and indirect 

bandgap natures of semiconductors. The poor understanding impedes the design of new direct 

bandgap light-emitting materials. Specifically, Si is ubiquitous in the electronics industry but 

is unsuitable for optoelectronic applications because it has an indirect bandgap. In the past 

five decades, numerous ideas have been offered but failed to transform Si into an efficient 

light emitter [12, 13] utilizing various modalities of symmetry reduction, including the use of 

porous silicon [14, 15], invoking alloy-induced luminescence [16, 17], the method of 

low-symmetry allotropes of silicon [18-20], and diamond-like (III−V)−(IV) alloys[21, 22]. 


3 

Lack of fundamental understanding of the mechanism controlling the indirect bandgap nature 

of Si might be the main reason for the difficulty of developing Si-based direct bandgap 

materials.  

Here, we reveal that the occupied cation d bands, which were neglected in previous 

models of the TB approach [6-11], play a prime role in forming the direct bandgap of 

semiconductors via the s-d and p-d couplings. These couplings repel the conduction band 

energy levels of X- and L-valley up but leave the Γ-valley intact. From group-IV through 

group III-V to group II-VI semiconductors, the occupied cation d orbitals become closer in 

energy to the anion s and p orbitals, leading the s-d and p-d coupling to be strongest in group 

II-VI semiconductors, and hence all their bandgaps being direct. The either lacking or 

low-lying of the occupied d orbitals in cations of Diamond, Si, Ge, and Al-containing group 

III-V semiconductors is responsible for their nature of indirect bandgap.  

    We at first examine the nature of bandgaps of all conventional group-IV elemental, and 

group III-V and group II-VI compound semiconductors, which are the semiconductors of 

practical interest for information technology[3, 5, 23]. Fig. 1 shows that all group II-VI 

compound semiconductors and the majority of group III-V compound semiconductors, except 

Al-containing compounds and GaP, have a direct bandgap, whereas all group-IV elemental 

materials, except grey-Sn, are indirect bandgap [23, 24]. We note that the cations of all 

group-II elements (Zn, Cd, and Hg), group-III elements Ga and In, and group-IV elements Ge 

and Sn contain occupied d orbitals, which, however, are absent in the remaining group-III 

element Al and group-IV elements C and Si. Because cation elements of all direct bandgap 

semiconductors encompassing occupied d orbitals, whereas all semiconductors made of 

cations without occupied d orbitals have indirect bandgaps, it strongly suggests that the 

occupied cationic d-orbitals play a central role in determining the directness of the bandgap 

for conventional semiconductors. However, the filled d shells, if they exist, are often treated 

as core or semi-core shells and are usually neglected in the description of the band structures 

for conventional semiconductors in early studies [6-11]. To uncover the role of the cationic d 

orbitals in the formation of bands, we carried out the theoretical analysis of the band 

structures of diamond elements and zinc-blende (ZB) compounds relying on the perturbation 

theory along with the symmetry analysis. For simplicity, here we study only the band 


4 

structures of compounds in the zinc-blende structure, GaN and ZnO, they prefer to be in the 

hexagonal wurtzite (WZ) structure under ambient conditions. The relationship between the 

bandgaps of ZB and WZ structures are well studied [25]. For example, if the band gap is 

direct in ZB structure such as for GaN and ZnO, it is also direct in WZ structure; if the band 

gap is indirect in ZB structure such as for AlN, it could still be direct in WZ structure due to 

the average of the X and L point wavefunctions.  

The relative energy positions between the Γ-valley, X-valley, and L-valley in the lowest 

conduction band determine the direct or indirect nature of bandgap in ZB semiconductors 

since the VBM occurs exclusively at the Γ point in all group II-VI, group III-V, and group IV 

semiconductors. As given in Table I [1], in the zinc-blende structure, the CB edge at the Γ 

point (Γ-valley) transforms according to the Γ1 irreducible representation, the VB edge 

transforms according to the Γ15 irreducible representation, and the atomic d orbitals belong to 

the Γ15 and Γ12, respectively. Since the d orbitals have the same Γ15 irreducible representation 

as the p-like VB edge state, the coupling between p and d orbitals at the Γ point could be quite 

significant. However, the s-d coupling is forbidden because the atomic d orbitals have no 

common irreducible representations with the s-like CB Γ-valley state. Therefore, the 

existence of the occupied d orbitals will have a significant influence on the formation of 

bandgap by pushing the VBM up and leaving the CB Γ-valley intact. The CB edge at the X 

point (X-valley) transforms according to the X1 (or X3) irreducible representation of the D2d 

wavevector group, and mainly derived from atomic s and p orbitals, whereas, five d orbitals 

belong to the X1, X2, X3, and X5 irreducible representations, respectively. Therefore, at the X 

point, the d orbital state can couple to the CB X-valley. The mostly s-like CB edge at the L 

point (L-valley) has the L1 representation of the C3v wavevector group, whereas, the five d 

orbitals belong to the L1 and two L3 representations, respectively. Same as the X point, the d 

orbital state can couple to the CB L-valley. Subsequently, the existence of the occupied d 

orbitals will repel the CB X-valley and L-valley up due to the symmetry allowed s-d coupling 

and p-d coupling at the X and L points, but will not affect the CB Γ-valley owing to its lack of 

atomic p orbitals plus symmetry forbidden s-d coupling at the Γ point (see supplementary for 

diamond structure). Such s-d coupling at the X and L points is evidenced by the fact that, due 

to the low-lying s orbital energy of nitrogen, the s-d coupling away from the Γ point is so 


5 

strong in GaN and InN that leads to two s-like peaks observed in their photoemission near the 

bottom of the valence band[26]. These s-d coupling not only makes significant influences on 

the band structure near the bottom of the valence band but should also largely affect the 

conduction band at both X and L points. Unfortunately, the latter has yet uncovered even 

though a remarkable amount of the d character was found thirty years ago in the CB X- and 

L-valley in conventional semiconductors [27].  

To illustrate the effect of the occupied d orbitals on the nature of bandgap, we examined 

the energy level shifting of the CB Γ-, X-, and L-valley caused by the s-d and p-d coupling 

due to the existence of the occupied d shells, which were neglected previously, as 

schematically shown in Fig. 2(a). We took GaAs as the prototype to demonstrate the 

suggested unique role of the occupied cation d orbitals (the anion d orbitals are so low in 

energy that is negligible compared with the cation d orbitals). Fig. 2(b) shows the 

first-principles calculated GaAs band structure using the density functional theory (DFT) 

based on the modified Becke-Johnson (mBJ) exchange potential in combination with the 

generalized gradient approximation (GGA) correlation (mBJ-GGA). One can see that the Ga 

3d bands with narrow bandwidths occurring about 15 eV below the VBM. The interaction 

between d bands and the p-like VBM via p-d coupling leads to a significant amount of the d 

character in the VBM (inset to Fig. 2(b)). Since the s-d and p-d couplings are allowed at X 

and L points, the Ga 3d bands repel the X- and L-valley up in a significant amount of energy 

as evidenced by the incorporation of finite d component in both X1c and L1c states, in addition 

to expected dominated s and p components. Whereas, inset to Fig. 2(b) shows the vanishing 

of the p and d characters in the Γ1c state, confirming it to be purely an anti-bonding state of Ga 

4s and As 4s and immune to the existence of the Ga 3d bands. 

To examine the effect of s-d and p-d coupling on the band edges, we artificially pull the 

Ga 3d bands down to modify the s-d and p-d hybridizations. An adjustable Coulomb-U acting 

on Ga 3d orbitals is used as an effective knob to tune the energy position of Ga d-levels by 

introducing Hubbard-type interactions into the DFT (DFT+U). This method has been widely 

used to correct the underestimated DFT bandgaps by pulling the VBM down in energy 

through a p-d coupling and leaving the CBM at G intact[28, 29]. Here, we applied this method 

to investigate the impact of the Ga 3d on the energies of the CB Γ-, X-, and L-valley. Fig. 2(b) 


6 

shows the change of the energy positions of X-, L-valley, and VBM as varying the energy 

position of the Ga 3d bands, regarding the Γ-valley as an ideal reference level since, to the 

lowest order, it is free from the change of the d bands. As we pull the Ga 3d bands down, the 

X- and L-valley also move down in energy but in different rates, and, finally, the GaAs 

bandgap becomes indirect, demonstrating the importance of the energy position of the 

occupied cation d bands in determining the nature of bandgap unambiguously.  

The energy position of the cation d bands relative to the (anion p dominated) VBM in 

conventional semiconductors depends mainly on the energy separation between the outermost 

anion p shell and the cation d shell, which decreases in the sequence of group-IV, III-V, II-VI 

semiconductors as shown in Fig. S1. Table SI gives energy positions of the cation d bands 

relative to the VBM predicted by the mBJ-GGA calculations in comparison with 

experimental data [30-33] for those conventional semiconductors possessing occupied cation 

d orbitals. They are about -10 eV for group II-VI compounds, -18 eV for group III-V 

compounds, and -25 eV for group-IV elemental semiconductors, respectively. Going from 

group-IV through group III-V to group II-VI semiconductors, the shallower cation d bands 

lead to stronger s-d and p-d couplings and hence larger repulsion of the X- and L-valley by 

the low-lying occupied cation d bands. In compared with GaAs, the enhanced s-d and p-d 

couplings in the group II-VI semiconductors repel the X- and L-valley more and lead to the 

bandgap more direct. Whereas, in group IV Ge, the low-lying Ge 4d bands result in weak s-d 

and p-d couplings so that its bandgap becomes indirect. In the group IV Diamond and Si and 

Al-based group III-V semiconductors, because the cation d orbitals are above the CB edges 

rather than in the occupied valence bands, the s-d and p-d couplings push CB X- and L-valley 

down instead of repelling them up, and subsequently make their bandgap indirect.  

Given that Ga possesses occupied 3d orbitals, the GaN and GaAs bandgaps are as 

expected direct. However, GaP sitting in the middle between them is an indirect gap 

semiconductor. This abnormal bandgap behavior indicates that besides the primary s-d and 

p-d couplings, other factors are also playing roles in determining the order of Γ-, X- and 

L-valley in the lowest CB. We notice that the lattice constants of zinc-blende GaN, GaP, and 

GaAs are 4.531, 5.451, and 5.653 Å, respectively[24]. The bond length of GaP is ~3.6% 

smaller than that of GaAs. Fig. 4 shows that, in both GaP and GaAs, increasing the lattice 


7 

constant (or expanding the volume) will raise the energy level of the X-valley and lower the 

Γ-valley energy substantially. The L-valley follows the Γ-valley but at a much smaller rate 

and, thus, often sits in between Γ- and X-valley in conventional semiconductors. This 

phenomenon is owing to that the X-valley has a positive deformation potential and Γ-valley 

has a more significant magnitude of deformation potential than that of the L-valley although 

both possess negative deformation potentials. If we stretch the lattice of GaP to equal to that 

of GaAs, the GaP bandgap would become direct. On the other hand, GaAs undergoes a 

direct-to-indirect bandgap transition as we compress the lattice of GaAs towards that of GaP. 

These demonstrate that besides s-d and s-p couplings, the bond length also play role  in 

determining the nature of bandgap. Semiconductors having larger lattice prefer to become 

more direct in the bandgap.  

Following the above discussion, we would expect the bandgap of GaN to be indirect 

since the bond length of GaN is much smaller than GaP and GaAs. However, GaN is a 

classical direct gap semiconductor. Fig. 4 shows that the deformation potentials of GaN are 

substantially different from that of GaP and GaAs; the energy level of the X-valley is 

insensitive to the varying of the lattice constant with an inconsiderable negative deformation 

potential and the Γ-valley drops at the same rate as that of the L-valley as increasing the 

lattice constant. AlN and InN share this exotic behavior as GaN [34]. This unusual behavior 

of the group-III nitrides is due to that Nitrogen is among the most electronegative elements 

and much more electronegative than P and As elements. Fig. S1 shows that the energy level 

of the N 2s is 5.94 and 5.71 eV lower than that of the P 3s and As 4s, respectively. The 

low-lying N 2s orbital is far away from the Ga 3s orbital leading to a weak s-s coupling in 

GaN according to the TB model [6] (see supplementary for details), although it has a much 

smaller bond length than that of GaP and GaAs. Weak s-s coupling results in the energy level 

of the Γ-valley, which is the anti-bonding state of cation s and anion s orbitals, being slightly 

above the Ga 3s level and is even lower than that of GaP and GaAs. Although the low-lying 

of the N 2s orbital also reduces the s-p coupling and thus lowers the energy level of the 

X-valley, the reduction in energy is much less than the Γ-valley due to the X-valley has the 

lower bound limited by the atomic Ga 3p level [6]. Consequently, GaN becomes a direct 

bandgap semiconductor (see Fig. 1(b)). Thus, more electronegativity in anions will also make 


8 

the bandgap of semiconductors more direct, which is most significant in semiconductors 

containing O or N. Our analysis above indicates that despite size of the atoms and 

electronegativity of the anions can play some roles in determining the directness of the band 

gap, especially for the boundary Ga compounds which has relatively deep 3d orbitals, the 

coupling of the occupied cation d bands and unoccupied s,p states plays the prime role in 

determining the bandgap nature as manifested by the indirect gap of ZB AlN. 

In summary, we have presented a unified theory for understanding the direct or indirect 

nature of bandgap in group II-VI, group III-V, and group IV semiconductors unambiguously. 

We found that the occupied cation d bands play a prime role in forming the direct or indirect 

bandgap of conventional semiconductors via the s-d and p-d coupling with the states of the 

CB X- and L-valley, which remarkably pushes their energy levels up, but leaves the Γ-valley 

unchanged. From group-IV through group III-V to group II-VI semiconductors, the occupied 

cation d orbitals become closer in energy to the anion s and p orbitals, leading the s-d and p-d 

coupling to be most active in group II-VI semiconductors, and hence all their bandgaps being 

direct. The either lacking or low-lying of the occupied d orbitals in cations of Diamond, Si, 

Ge, and Al-containing group III-V semiconductors explains their nature of indirect bandgap. 

This understanding will shed light on the design of new direct bandgap light-emitting 

materials. 

 

 

Acknowledgments 

J.W.L. was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under 

Grant No. 61474116 and the National Young 1000 Talents Plan. S.H.W. was supported by 

the NSFC under Grant No. 51672023, 11634003, and U1530401 and the National Key 

Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2016YFB0700700.  

 

References: 
1. 
Altmann, S.L. and P. Herzig, Point-group theory tables. 1994, Oxford : New 
York: Clarendon Press ; Oxford University Press. 704. 

2. 
Soref, R.A., Silicon-based optoelectronics. Proceedings of the IEEE, 1993. 
81(12): p. 1687-1706. 


9 

3. 
Yu, P.Y. and M. Cardona, Fundamentals of semiconductors: physics and 
materials properties ; with 52 tables and 116 problems. 3., rev. and enl. ed., 
3., corr. print ed. 2005, Berlin: Springer. 639. 

4. 
Chuang, S.L., Physics of photonic devices. 2nd ed ed. Wiley series in pure 
and applied optics. 2009, Hoboken, N.J: John Wiley & Sons. 821. 

5. 
Coldren, L.A., S.W. Corzine, and M. Mashanovitch, Diode lasers and 
photonic integrated circuits. 2nd ed ed. Wiley series in microwave and 
optical engineering. 2012, Hoboken, N.J: Wiley. 709. 

6. 
Harrison, W.A., Elementary electronic structure. Rev. ed., repr ed. 2005, 
hackensack, NJ: World Scientific. 838. 

7. 
Chadi, D.J. and M.L. Cohen, Tight-binding calculations of the valence bands 
of diamond and zincblende crystals. physica status solidi (b), 1975. 68(1): 
p. 405-419. 

8. 
Louie, S.G., New localized-orbital method for calculating the electronic 
structure of molecules and solids: Covalent semiconductors. Physical 
Review B, 1980. 22(4): p. 1933-1945. 

9. 
Vogl, P., H.P. Hjalmarson, and J.D. Dow, A Semi-empirical tight-binding 
theory of the electronic structure of semiconductors†. Journal of Physics 
and Chemistry of Solids, 1983. 44(5): p. 365-378. 

10. 
Jancu, J.-M., et al., Empirical spds * tight-binding calculation for cubic 
semiconductors: General method and material parameters. Physical Review 
B, 1998. 57(11): p. 6493-6507. 

11. 
Tan, Y., et al., Transferable tight-binding model for strained group IV and 
III-V materials and heterostructures. Physical Review B, 2016. 94(4). 

12. 
Liang, D. and J.E. Bowers, Recent progress in lasers on silicon. Nature 
Photonics, 2010. 4(8): p. 511-517. 

13. 
Tsybeskov, L., D.J. Lockwood, and M. Ichikawa, Silicon Photonics: CMOS 
Going Optical [Scanning the Issue]. Proceedings of the IEEE, 2009. 97(7): p. 
1161-1165. 

14. 
Furukawa, S. and T. Miyasato, Quantum size effects on the optical band gap 
of microcrystalline Si:H. Physical Review B, 1988. 38(8): p. 5726-5729. 

15. 
Canham, L.T., Silicon quantum wire array fabrication by electrochemical 
and chemical dissolution of wafers. Applied Physics Letters, 1990. 57(10): 
p. 1046-1048. 

16. 
Gallagher, J.D., et al., Fundamental band gap and direct-indirect crossover in 
Ge1-x-ySixSny alloys. Applied Physics Letters, 2013. 103(20): p. 202104. 

17. 
Wirths, S., et al., Lasing in direct-bandgap GeSn alloy grown on Si. Nature 
Photonics, 2015. 9(2): p. 88-92. 

18. 
Zhang, P., et al., Computational design of direct-bandgap semiconductors 
that lattice-match silicon. Nature, 2001. 409(6816): p. 69-71. 

19. 
Xiang, H.J., et al., Towards Direct-Gap Silicon Phases by the Inverse Band 
Structure Design Approach. Physical Review Letters, 2013. 110(11). 

20. 
Kim, D.Y., et al., Synthesis of an open-framework allotrope of silicon. Nature 
Materials, 2014. 14(2): p. 169-173. 


10 

21. 
Watkins, T., et al., Nanosynthesis Routes to New Tetrahedral Crystalline 
Solids: Silicon-like Si <sub>3</sub> AlP. Journal of the American Chemical 
Society, 2011. 133(40): p. 16212-16218. 

22. 
Kouvetakis, J., et al., Monocrystalline Al(As <sub> 1– <i>x</i> </sub> N 
<sub> <i>x</i> </sub> )Si <sub>3</sub> and Al(P <sub> 1– <i>x</i> </sub> 
N <sub> <i>x</i> </sub> ) <sub> <i>y</i> </sub> Si <sub> 5–2 <i>y</i> 
</sub> Alloys with Diamond-like Structures: New Chemical Approaches to 
Semiconductors Lattice Matched to Si. Chemistry of Materials, 2012. 
24(16): p. 3219-3230. 

23. 
Sze, S.M. and K.K. Ng, Physics of semiconductor devices. 3rd ed ed. 2007, 
Hoboken, N.J: Wiley-Interscience. 815. 

24. 
Paufler, P., Landolt-Börnstein. Numerical data and functional relationships 
in science and technology. New Series. Group III: Crystal and Solid State 
Physics. Vol. 22: Semiconductors. Subvolume a: Intrinsic Properties of Group 
IV Elements and III-V, II-VI and I-VII Compounds. Ed. by O, Madelung 
Springer-Verlag Berlin-Heidelberg-New York-London-Paris-Tokyo 1987. XII 
+ 451 pp. Hard cover DM 1120.—, ISBN 3–540–16609–2. Crystal Research 
and Technology, 1988. 23(10-11): p. 1360-1360. 

25. 
Yeh, C.-Y., S.-H. Wei, and A. Zunger, Relationships between the band gaps of 
the zinc-blende and wurtzite modifications of semiconductors. Physical 
Review B, 1994. 50(4): p. 2715-2718. 

26. 
Persson, C. and A. Zunger, s − d coupling in zinc-blende semiconductors. 
Physical Review B, 2003. 68(7). 

27. 
Richardson, S.L., et al., Electron charge densities at conduction-band edges 
of semiconductors. Physical Review B, 1986. 33(2): p. 1177-1182. 

28. 
Miyake, T., et al., Quasiparticle energy of semicore d electrons in ZnS : 
Combined LDA + U and G W approach. Physical Review B, 2006. 74(24). 

29. 
Lany, S. and A. Zunger, Assessment of correction methods for the band-gap 
problem and for finite-size effects in supercell defect calculations: Case 
studies for ZnO and GaAs. Physical Review B, 2008. 78(23): p. 235104. 

30. 
Vurgaftman, I., J. Meyer, and L. Ram-Mohan, Band parameters for III–V 
compound semiconductors and their alloys. Journal of applied physics, 
2001. 89(11): p. 5815-5875. 

31. 
Vurgaftman, I. and J.n. Meyer, Band parameters for nitrogen-containing 
semiconductors. Journal of Applied Physics, 2003. 94(6): p. 3675-3696. 

32. 
Fleszar, A. and W. Hanke, Electronic structure of II B− VI semiconductors in 
the GW approximation. Physical Review B, 2005. 71(4): p. 045207. 

33. 
Zakharov, O., et al., Quasiparticle band structures of six II-VI compounds: 
ZnS, ZnSe, ZnTe, CdS, CdSe, and CdTe. Physical Review B, 1994. 50(15): p. 
10780. 

34. 
Wei, S.-H. and A. Zunger, Predicted band-gap pressure coefficients of all 
diamond and zinc-blende semiconductors: Chemical trends. Physical 
Review B, 1999. 60(8): p. 5404. 

 


11 

 

 

 

 

TABLE I. The point group of the wave-vector at Γ, X, and L points in the zinc-blende 

structure and the corresponding irreducible representations of atomic s, p, and d orbitals as 

well as semiconductor conduction (CBE) and valence (VBE) band edges under these point 

groups [1].  

k-point 
G(k) 
CBE(k)
VBE(k)
s 
p 
d 

Γ 
Td 
Γ1 
Γ15 
Γ1 
Γ15 
Γ15⊕Γ12 

X 
D2d 
X1 or X3
X5 
X1 
X3⊕X5 
X1⊕X2⊕X3⊕X5 

L 
C3v 
L1 
L3 
L1 
L1⊕L3 
L1⊕L3⊕L3 

 


12 

 

   

FIG 1. (a) Fundamental bandgaps of group II-VI, group III-V, and group IV 

semiconductors as a function of their lattice constants a. Filled symbols represent direct 

bandgap semiconductors and open symbols for indirect bandgap semiconductors. On the 

other hand, the squares indicate the group IV semiconductors, the circles for group III-V 

semiconductors, and the triangles for group II-VI semiconductors. (b) The energy 

difference between levels of the CB X-valley and Γ-valley as a function of the energy of 

the cation d bands (relative to the VBM) for semiconductors consisting of cations having 

occupied d orbitals. 


13 

 

FIG 2. Band structure of GaAs and the varying of its band edge levels as a function of the 

energy position of the Ga 3d bands. (a) The band structure of GaAs calculated using the 

mBJ-GGA approach. (b) The varying of the band edge levels of the CB Γ-, X- and L-valley 

and VBM as pulling the Ga 3d bands down through increasing the applied on-site 

Coulomb U on the Ga 3d orbitals relying on the mBJ-GGA approach. The vertical arrow 

indicates the transition between direct and indirect bandgap because of the crossing 

between Γ-valley and L-valley. Inset to (b) summaries the atomic orbital components of 

GaAs band edges at U=0.  


14 

 

 

FIG 3. Band structure of (a) Ge, (b) GaAs, and (c) ZnSe predicted by the first-principles 

mBJ-GGA approach without considering the spin-orbit interaction. Yellow area indicates 

the bandgap. All energies are relative to the valence band maximum (VBM), which are set 

to zero. The lattice constants of Ge, GaAs, and ZnSe are very similar.  


15 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FIG 4. Energies of the CB Γ-, X-, L-valley relative to the VBM as a function of the change of 

the lattice constant in (a) GaN, (b) GaP, and (c) GaAs. Arrows indicate the experimentally 

measured lattice constant a0 for each compound. The yellow areas mark the bandgap become 

indirect.  


