Category: Photovoltaic’s and Energy Storage 

 

Development of Novel Cathode Materials based on MWCNT for Energy 

Storage/Conversion Devices 

 

Shruti Agnihotri, Anil Arya and Dr.A.L. Sharma* 

Centre for Physical Sciences, Central University of Punjab, Bathinda-151001, India 

*Corresponding Author E-mail: alsharmaiitkgp@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

Novel compound comprising of Li2FexMn(1-x)SiO4/MWCNT were prepared by using Sol-Gel technique. In this study, improved 

electrochemical properties are observed by substituting Fe to replace Mn. and further multiwalled carbon nano tubes are used to prepare 
composite with prepared cathode  material in Lithium ion battery and electrode materials in super capacitors. Various characterization 
techniques like: FESEM, EDX confirms the structure, morphology and texture of the material. Average particle size is found to be of order of 
20-30 nm. As particles with smaller size reveal better electrical conductivity/electrochemical properties, which are confirmed by A.C Impedence 
spectroscopy and cyclic voltammetery results.  
 
Index Terms Cathode material, Multi walled carbon nano tubes,Li ion battery, supercapacitors , electrical conductivity, Cyclic Voltametry. 

 

 

I. 
 INTRODUCTION 

 

Electrodes are one of the essential components of the device where charge transfer reaction occurs via redox (oxidation-reduction) 
process. Selection of electrode materials, therefore, plays a crucial role in determining the device performance parameters. 
Double-layer charge storage in a supercapacitor is a surface process and hence surface characteristics of the electrodes greatly 
influence the capacitance of a supercapacitor. Similarly, the open circuit voltage, energy density, power density, cyclability and 
self life of a lithium polymer cell also depend on electrode material properties. In general, electrode should have the following 
properties; (i) high electronic conductivity (ii) high surface area (iii) high temperature stability (iv) controlled pore structure (v) 
low equivalent series resistance (ESR) and (vi) relatively low cost (cost effective) (vii) High electronic conductivity. Out of the 
aforementioned properties, foremost properties for improving the performance of Li ion battery are the development of suitable 
low cost, safety and high energy density cathode materials [1]. Recently, a new group of polyanion material Li2MSiO4 has been 
demonstrated as a promising candidate of Li ion insertion cathode material. Especially Li2MnSiO4 shows high theoretical capacity 
of 334 mAhg-1. This is key feature of ortho silicate where two electron redox processes has been occurring. In Li2MSiO4 more 
than one Li ion per formula extraction is possible which significantly increases its experimental specific capacity and 
electrochemical performance.  
In the present report, Li2MnxFe1-xSiO4 is prepared using standard Sol Gel technique and the effect of iron (Fe) substitution on 
replacement of manganese (Mn) in Li2MnSiO4 of Fe for Mn [2] is seen. As polyanion materials Li2MSiO4 suffers from poor 
electronic conductivity. To improve the conductivity of oxide materials,further modification by making its composite with Carbon 
nano tube. As CNTs gained much attention due to their outstanding properties  because of their unique structure. Field Emission 
scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) reveals the homogeneous topology of the materials sample. Impedance spectroscopy has 
 been characterized for the estimation of electrical conductivity which is estimated of the order of ~ 10-6 S cm-1. 
 

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 

 

Sol-Gel technique is used to prepare Li2MnFeSiO4. Stoichiometric amount of Li2Co3, MnO2, Fe2O3, SiO2 are used as a starting 

materials. These precursors were hydrolyzed. Aqueous solution of above mentioned precursors were magnetically stirred. Further 
evaporation of solvent is done under continuous magnetic stirring at 80 ˚C. With continuous stirring and heating, a dry gel is 
formed. This dry gel is further ground to powder. Finally cathode material was sintered first heating at 350 ˚ C for 2 hrs and 
second heating 900˚ C for 12 hrs.  
 Synthesis of Li2MnxFe1-xSiO4/MWCNT 

Further to improve the particle –particle connectivity, composite of  Li2MnFeSiO4/Multi walled carbon nano tube (MWCNT) 

was prepared via solution method. Stoichiometric amount of MWCNT was well dispersed in solution containing 10 ml distilled 
water and 10 ml acetonitrile through sonication.Then the active material (above prepared Li2MnFeSiO4)was added in sequence 
and finaly 0.5 ml of hydrazine was added. As obtained solution was refluxed at 80˚c for two hrs with stirring to obtain 
Li2MnFeSiO4/MWCNT composite. This mentioned procedure was followed two times to prepare two samples with 6 wt percent 
of MWCNT and with 9wt. percent of MWCNT.These prepared samples are designated as LMFS-C6 and LMFS-C9 respectively.  
. Morphology and particle size was observed by FESEM (Card Zeiss Merlin Compact ). Electrical conductivity and cyclic 
voltametry were performed by electrochemical analyzer (model: CH-760).  

 

III.  RESULTS & DISCUSSIONS 


From XRD analysis it is confirmed that cathode material exhibits orthorhombic structure with space group pmn21 [3]. FESEM 

is very powerful tool in order to get the surface morphology/topology in a very fine way. The high magnifications attainable 
combined with a large depth of field makes FESEM an outstanding diagnostic system for micro fabrication.    
Figure 1 shows the Field emission electron microscopy (FESEM) image of the prepared cathode materials. The obtained image of 
the FESEM clearly depicts the homogeneous distribution of the matrials sample all over the sample.  
 

 

 
FIG.1 FESEM analysis of Li2MnFeSiO4 (LMFS). 
 

A small particle size could reduce the internal stress, because the binding force between particles may increase with the relative 
area of the grain boundaries. The particle size was measured from the software ‘ImageJ’ and the particle size was found to be of 
the order of ~27 nm (Fig. 1) for LMFS. This particle size is improved size as compared with Li2FeSiO4 and Li2MnSiO4. It is 
reported in literature that material with lesser particle size reveals better electrochemical properties due to reduction of path length 
of Li+ ions [4]. Further particle size also decreases on addition of MWCNT. 

The ac impedance measurement of the cathode material was carried out in the frequency range from 10 mHz to 1MHz at a 

input a.c. signal level of 10 mV. The impedance spectrum is comprised of a small semicircle at high frequency is followed by 

sharp spike at lower frequency (Fig 2). 
 

FIG.2 Nyquist plot of Li2MnFeSiO4 

 

FIG.3 Nyquist plot of LMFS-C6 
 

 The small semicircle contribution is due the bulk response of the cathode materials whereas the lower frequency spike is due 

to the electrode electrolyte interface. The bulk resistance of the cathode materials is estimated by extrapolating the semicircle and 
cut on real axis, which comes out of order of  ~2787ohm & ~2160ohm  for LMFS & LMFS-C6  respectively (Fig 2&3). The 


lower frequency spike clearly shows the capacitive behavior of the cathode materials. The specific capacitance has been calculated 
for different scan rates using the formula; C= - (ω Z″)-1 w+here ω (=2πf) is angular frequency and Z″ is the imaginary part of the 

total complex impedance.The electrical conductivity of the cathode material is estimated by the formula:
A
Rb

dc

 1 

 . where, 

symbols have their usual meanings.  The electrical conductivity has been calculated for LMFS &LMFS-C6 comes out to be of 
order of ~7.527× 10-6 & 9.712× 10-6 S cm-1 respectively.  
Cyclic Voltametery (CV) analysis was also done to study voltage stability window, energy density and specific capacityof the 
cathode materials. The recorded value of the electrochemical potential window is of the order of ~7 V. Specific capacity  of 
prepared sample comes out  of  order of ~7.332µF .              

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

In summary spherical Li2MnFeSiO4/MWCNT composite with excellent rate performance was successfully synthesized . Excellent 
electrochemical properties are caused by the unique composite structure. The nano sized Li2MnFeSiO4/MWCNT provide short 
path ways for Li+ diffusion and CNT’s network facilitates el- transport and avoids agglomeration of Li2MnFeSiO4. Our Results 
suggests that CNT play a profound part to increased efficiency of electrochemical properties. Prepared composite will have 
important application for energy storage and conversion in Li ion batteries.     . 
 

V. REFERENCES 

.[1] Xiaozhen wu , Xinjhang ,Qisheng huo, Youxiang Zhang , Electrochemica acta , 80, 50-55 (2012) 
[2] BinShao, Y. L. Taniguchi, Powder Technology ,235, 1-8 (2013). 
[3] Shivani Singh, Sagar mitra, Electrochemica acta 123, 378-386 (2014) 
[4] Zheng Zhang, Xingquan, Liping Wang, Electrochimica acta,168, 8-15, (2015). 
[5] A. Rai, A.L. Sharma and A K Thakur, Solid State Ionics, 262, 230-233 (2014). 
 
 
 
 

 


