Phosphorene as a nanoelectromechanical material

Zahra Nourbakhsh1 and Reza Asgari1, 2

1School of Nano Science, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran 19395-5531, Iran
2School of Physics, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran 19395-5531, Iran
(Dated: March 27, 2021)

Based on density functional simulations combined with the Landauer transport theory, the me-
chanical strain impacts on the chemical bonds of phosphorene and their effects on the electronic
properties are studied. Moreover, the effect of the tensile strain along the zigzag direction on the
charge transport properties of a two-terminal phosphorene device is evaluated. Enhancement of the
intra-planar interactions, in particular between the next-nearest-neighbors in strained phosphorene
is found to be essential in the band structure evolution. The charge transport analyzing shows that
phosphorene has a strong piezoconductance sensitivity, which makes this material highly desirable
for high-pressure nanoelectromechanical applications. The piezoconductance gauge factor increases
by strain from 46 in 5% tension to 220 in 12% tension which is comparable to state-of-the-art
silicon strain sensors. The transmission pathways monitor the current flowing in terms of the chem-
ical bonds and hopping, however, the transport mostly arises from the charge transferring through
the chemical bonds. The strong anisotropy in the transport properties along zigzag and armchair
directions is observed.

PACS numbers:

I.
INTRODUCTION

Strain is an old but alive concept in the semiconductor
technology [1]. Strain engineering is a well-known tech-
nique to boost the device performance. Electrical, opti-
cal, magnetic, thermal, and chemical properties could be
tuned and controlled by external forces [1]. Based on the
higher elasticity and larger holding strain limits of nano-
materials compared to their bulk structure [2, 3], they at-
tract much attention for strain engineering applications.
Furthermore, low dimensional materials are important in
application to reduce the size of the electronic devices in
a modern technology.
Among two-dimensional (2D) crystalline materials,
phosphorene, which is an elemental 2D material, shows
great potential for nanoelectronic applications. Phospho-
rene is a promising 2D material to utilize as an ideal
electronic device. It has an 1.4 eV direct band gap, high
carrier mobility and high on/off ratio for field-effect tran-
sistor applications [4–8]. Owing to sp3 hybridization be-
tween phosphorus atoms in phosphorene, it is a semi-
conductor with a puckered honeycomb structure and re-
markable in-plane anisotropic behavior between the arm-
chair (ac) and zigzag (zz) directions [5, 9–11]. Due to
its puckered structure, phosphorene shows superior flex-
ibility and mechanical properties compared to other 2D
materials in both the ac and zz directions. In addition,
phosphorene can withstand tensile strain up to 30% [12]
which is higher than reported values for graphene (∼ 15-
20% [13]) and MoS2 (∼ 11% [14]) which are suffering
from plasticity and low fracture limit.
The great mechanical properties of phosphorene make
strong motivation to study this system under various
types of strain and deformations [15–19]. The Infrared
spectroscopy as well as theoretical investigations reveal
the significant sensitivity and tuning the gap size of

phosphorene and its carriers effective masses by impos-
ing external strains.
In addition, strain can convert
the direct band gap to indirect one, and also induces a
semiconductor-metal transition in phosphorene [16]. The
stability of the strained phosphorene system has been in-
vestigated using the ab initio phonon dispersion calcula-
tions [20]. The results indicate that phosphorene struc-
ture is stable under the tensile strains, but it shows dy-
namical instability and softening against an even small
amount of the compression. Also, experimental and the-
oretical studies reveal that under an appropriate in-plane
uniaxial or biaxial tensile strain, the preferred conducting
direction is rotated from the ac to zz [9].

Based on the particular mechanical properties of phos-
phorene and the observed coupling between its mechani-
cal and electronic properties, phosphorene could be con-
sidered as a favorable novel material for nanoelectrome-
chanical systems applications.
Our aim in this arti-
cle is to investigate the piezoresistance/piezoconductance
characteristic of phosphorene under a uniaxial tension
strain along the zz direction.
Piezoresistance, which
means changing the electrical resistance of a system as a
result of pressure, was discovered by lord Kelvin in elon-
gated copper and iron systems in 1856 [21]. High piezore-
sistivity has been explored experimentally in silicon and
germanium bulk structures in 1954 [22]. These materi-
als are widely used as commercial piezoresistance devices
[21]. The magnitudes and signs of the piezoresistive co-
efficients strongly depend on the electron mobility, crys-
tallographic direction, stress and to the crystallographic
axes [21]. Piezoresistance has been shown experimentally
in graphene [13] and MoS2 [23] monolayers. The piezore-
sistance coefficient in MoS2 is two orders of magnitude
higher than that of reported for graphene, and it is in
the same order of the sensitivity of the best Si and Ge
piezoresistance devices. Also, piezoresistivity has been

arXiv:1809.10618v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  27 Sep 2018


2

measured for the bulk black phosphorous, first in 1964
[24] and very recently by Zhang et al. [19].
In this study, we consider a phosphorene device un-
der an applied external strain and calculate its electronic
structure and its I−V curve based on the ab initio Kohn-
Sham density functional theory (DFT) [25] together with
nonequilibrium Green’s function (NEGF) [26] methods
stemming from the successful Landauer formalism [27].
This method provides a good agreement between theo-
retical results and those measured in experiments [28]
and has been widely applied to evaluate the transport
properties of different mesoscopic systems.
Our calculations predict a strong piezoconductance
sensitivity in our proposed phosphorene based device.
This property could be important for a wide range of
applications in biological, environmental, medical, chem-
ical pressure sensors, and transducer devices [21]. Fur-
thermore, the modern piezoresistance/piezoconductance
materials could satisfy the technological desire for smaller
size and higher performance electronic devices.
In addition, using Bader’s “atoms in molecules”theory
[29], we present a novel description of the effect of bond-
ing in the band structure of strained phosphorene sys-
tems. Besides, on the basis of ab initio calculations, we
explain the reason for the changing of the preferred con-
ducting direction in the strained systems.
This paper is organized as follows. Having reviewed
the theoretical and technical methods in the next sec-
tion, we present our results in Sec. III. Analyzing and de-
scription of the band structure of phosphorene and doped
phosphorene under strain, calculating transport proper-
ties of different strained phosphorene-based systems un-
der an applied bias, the I − V characteristic, the trans-
mission spectrum, the carrier type, and the transmission
pathways are discussed in this section. Finally, we end
with a brief summary of our main results in Sec. IV.

II.
METHODOLOGY

We consider a phosphorene based system that con-
sists of three main parts involving semi-infinite left and
right electrodes, and a finite central scattering region.
Figure 1 shows the schematic representation of a two-
terminal phosphorene device. Under a bias voltage, the
electrodes are at two different electrochemical potentials.
Therefore, the charge carriers from the source electrode
are partially transmitted through the scattering region
and lastly absorbed in the drain electrode.
Moreover,
the reflected carriers come back to the source. The main
difficulty in the ab initio modeling of such a system is
the non-periodicity of the device. Due to the existence of
two electrodes and an externally applied bias, scattering
boundary conditions have to be considered at the bound-
ary between the electrodes and central scattering region.
This issue can be resolved using the combination of non-
equilibrium Green’s function techniques with DFT. This
method has been implemented in TranSIESTA software

FIG. 1:
(Color online) The darker area shows the compu-
tational setup for a two-terminal phosphorene device.
The
transport direction is along the zz direction and the periodic
boundary conditions where represent by the lighter color, are
available along the ac direction. The electrodes have a semi-
infinite nature and they repeat in the left and right sides.
The system includes three parts: semi-infinite left and right
electrodes, and the central scattering region. The balls in the
electrodes denote the dopant impurity atoms. The shaded ar-
eas show the left and right electrode supercells containing two
primitive unit cells with the length of ∼ 0.7 nm. This length
should be large enough which electrode orbitals only interact
with the nearest-neighbor cell in the repeating system.

[30], which uses a self-consistent solution of the Poisson
equation and it is able to calculate the electron density
of an open boundary system under an applied bias.
The key quantity to evaluate the transport proper-
ties is the transmission coefficient [31] which is a func-
tion of the energy of the incoming carriers from the
source electrode and bias voltage, T(E, VBias), and it
is calculated using the retarded Green’s function as
T(E, V ) = ΓL(E, V )G(E, V )ΓR(E, V )G†(E, V ), where
ΓL(R) is the level broadening determined by ΓL(R) =
i(ΣL(R) − Σ†
L(R)), and ΣL(R) is the self-energy which de-
fines the coupling between the semi-infinite left (right)
electrode and the finite central region.
The retarded
Green’s function of the central region is calculated as
G = [E + iη − H − ΣL − ΣR]−1, where H is the Hamilto-
nian matrix of the central region. Regarding the standard
Landauer formalism, current is evaluated by transmission
integration over the bias energy window. The relation at
bias voltage V is given by

I(V ) = G0

e

� µR

µL
T(E, V )dE
(1)

where the coefficient G0 = 2e2/h (h and e are the Planck
constant and electron charge, respectively.) is known as
the quantum of the conductance, and µL(R) = EF±eV/2
is the electrochemical potentials of the left (right) elec-
trode. The difference of the electrode potentials is equal
to the value of the bias voltage, eV = µL − µR.
The ab initio DFT calculations are performed using
SIESTA/TranSIESTA code [30, 32]. To simulate the ex-
ternal mechanical strain, the lattice constant in the di-
rection of the applied mechanical pressure is constrained,
and in other directions is fully relaxed. The atomic posi-
tions are also relaxed in order that all components of all
forces become less than 0.01 eV/˚A. Nonlocal Troullier-
Martins norm-conserving pseudopotentials are used to
express the core electrons and the valence electrons are


3

represented using the linear combinations of the atomic
orbitals. We use a double-ζ polarized basis set within the
generalized gradient approximation (GGA) in the scheme
of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE) [33]. The real
space Fourier expansion of the electron density is cut at
450 Ry. The Brillouin zone integrations are performed on
the Monkhorst-Pack [34] k-point grid of 16×1×14, for the
electronic structure calculations. It increases to 16×1×70
during the transport calculations; such a large number of
k points is necessary to reproduce the semi-infinite elec-
trodes. To simulate an isolated system, a vacuum gap of
20 ˚A is considered. The electron temperature is set at
300 K in the transport calculations. Our studied struc-
tures do not show any considerable magnetic moment.
Since our calculations are in the low biases, we ignore
the geometry optimization caused by the bias voltage.
In addition, we use AIMALL package [35] to describe
the bond properties of the system on the basis of Bader’s
“Atoms in Molecules”theory. In this scheme, the bond
points are defined as the saddle points of the electronic
charge density between two bound atoms.
At a bond
saddle point, the electron density displays a minimum
in the bond direction and two maximum in the per-
pendicular directions. Furthermore, we employ several
post-processing codes such as TBtrans (tight-binding
transport)[36] and the sisl utility [37], as well as some
home-made programming to extract different transport
features of the system.
The lattice parameters of 2D phosphorene are obtained
aac = 4.37 ˚A and azz = 3.25 ˚A. Furthermore, its band
gap is 0.96 eV which is close to one obtained using other
DFT-PBE simulations[12].

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

A.
Bands and bonds in strained phosphorene

Figure 2 shows how the tensile strain along the zz
direction modulates the band structure of phosphorene.
The gap size, as well as the gap position, are tuned by
the tension. Moreover, strain changes the curvature of
the band structure and consequently, it changes the car-
rier density and carrier effective masses especially for
the conduction bands. The results presented in Fig. 2
are consistent with the experiment [19] and other sim-
ulated literature findings [12]. As the figure indicates,
the band gap at the Γ point slightly increases with in-
creasing the tensile strain up to 5%, afterwards it de-
creases with the tension enhancement. However, by fur-
ther increasing of the strain, around the critical tensile
strain of ∼ 9%, the gap position moves from the Γ point
to the G point, located at kG ∼ 0.6ΓY along the ac
direction meaning that the band gap is highly strain-
tunable.
Shifting the gap position under strain is the
feature of multi-valley semiconductors like silicon, ger-
manium, and GaAs where strain could shift some valleys
against others [1]. In what follows, we explain the un-

derlying physics of this nonuniform band gap values in
phosphorene in the presence of the tensile strain. The
band gap at both Γ and G points remains direct and it
decreases monotonously at the G point with increasing
tension, however, the semiconductor-metal transition has
not been reported up to 14% tension [12]. Another point
in Fig. 2 is turning in the preferred conducting direction
from ac to zz for the tensions above ∼ 7%. Accordingly,
in the strained system, the conduction band in the ac
direction is no longer linear. The origin of this rotation
will be discussed in the following.
To explain the change of the preferred conducting di-
rection as well as the shift of the gap position in the
strained systems, we should note that the stretching of
phosphorene under tensile strain along the zz direction
is accompanied with its compression in the ac direction,
and the enhancement of the inter-planar distance which
reflects the negative Poisson ratio of phosphorene along
this direction [15, 16].
As a result, the intra- (inter-)
planar interactions in the stretched phosphorene system
will be slightly improved (weakened). Figure 3 and Ta-
ble I represent the projected density of states onto the
atomic orbitals for the energy area around the gap at
the Γ point in the strain-free and +7% strained phos-
phorene systems. As the band structure diagrams im-
ply, the effect of strain on the density of states close to
the valence band maximum (VBM) is negligible. On the
other hand, the conduction band minimum (CBM) of
the strain-free system is dominated by inter-planar (out
of plane) pz, dz2, and dzy orbitals, where the contribution
of all these inter-planar orbitals is strongly suppressed in
the strained system. Instead, by decreasing the energy of
the intra-planar orbitals, the CBM of the strained system
is dominated by intra-planar dx2−y2 orbital mixed with s,
and py orbitals. It reveals why the carrier effective mass
enhances along the ac direction which has out-of-plane
component and decreases along the zz direction which is
fully intra-planar.
We also perform a charge density analysis based on
the Bader’s theory to investigate the effect of strain on
the charge density distribution in real space, as well as
its possible correlation with the electronic band struc-
ture properties. This analysis has been successfully used
for many crystalline materials [38]. The charge density
analysis reveals that besides the strong covalent bond-
ing between each phosphorus atom and its three nearest
neighbors, the chemical bonds appear between the next-
nearest-neighbor (NNN) atoms which are in the same
plane. The charge density distribution around the gap
point of the phosphorene system under 10% tensile strain
along the zz direction is illustrated in Fig. 4. This plot
indicates that the VBM and CBM at the G point, re-
spectively, originate from the bonding and anti-bonding
states between the NNNs. The tension along the zz di-
rection leads to an increase (strongly decrease) of the
distance between the NNs (NNNs) and consequently en-
hances the bonding between the NNNs.
For instance,
the bond lengths between the NNs and NNNs in the


4

X
Γ
Wave vector (2π/a)

-1

0

1

Energy (eV)

X
X
Γ
Y
Γ
Y
Y
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Strain (%)

0

1

2

Band Gap (eV)

gap at Γ

gap at G 

(a) Strain-free system
(b) +7% - zz
(c) +10% - zz

G

(d)

FIG. 2:
(Color online) The electronic band structure of phosphorene in free conditions (a), and under two different tensile
strains applied along the zz direction (b) and (c). The evolution of the band gap as a function of tension is plotted in the last
panel.

TABLE I: The projected density of states (PDOS) around the gap area of phosphorene with no strain and when 7% tensile
strain is applied along the zz direction. The percent contribution from each atomic orbital is listed. VBM (CBM) denotes the
valence band maximum (the conduction band minimum). The phosphorene zz (ac) direction is along x (y) axis.

System
⃗k
states
s
px
py
pz
dx2−y2
dxy
dzx
dzy
dz2

Strain-free
Γ
VBM
2
0
4
73
11
0
0
10
0
CBM
0
0
15
50
2
0
0
10
23

7%-zz
Γ
VBM
7
0
6
70
10
0
0
7
0
CBM
13
0
19
7
55
0
0
2
4

0
1

DOS

pzpy
dz
2

dzy
d(x
2-y
2)

0
1
Energy (eV)

s
pzpy
dzy
d(x
2-y
2)

(a) Strain-free system
(b) +7% - zz

FIG. 3:
(Color online) The orbital projection of the near gap
electronic density of states of strain-free phosphorene (a), and
phosphorene under +7% tension in zz direction (b).

FIG. 4:
(Color online) The real-space charge density dis-
tribution of the VBM and CBM at the G point (shown in
Fig. 2(c)). Panel (c) displays a side view of phosphorene in
the ac direction. The dashed lines mark bonding between the
next-nearest-neighbors (NNN). The blue arrow in panel (c)
displays the inter-planar distance in phosphorene. d1 and d2
show the distance between intra-planar NN and NNN atoms.

X
Γ
Y
X
Γ
Y

-1

0

Energy (eV)

(a) Strain-free system
(b) +7% - zz

FIG. 5:
(Color online) The electronic band structure dia-
grams of the S-doped phosphorene system are shown in the
top panel of the figure, under free conditions and 7% tension
along zz direction. The dashed lines show the Fermi level,
which is set to be zero.

strain-free phosphorene are respectively d1 = 2.2 ˚A and
d2 = 3.3 ˚A, but they change to d1 = 2.3 ˚A
and
d2 = 3 ˚Aunder 10% tension.
The bond length reduc-
tion between NNNs improves the corresponding exchange
energy, based on the Heitler-London Hamiltonian model
[12, 39], and increases (decreases) the energy of the (anti-
) bonding states. Accordingly, when the tensile pressure
is imposed on phosphorene along the zz direction, the
band gap at the G point is gradually reduced and the
gap position shifts from Γ to G at the tension ∼ 9%.
The results of the band structure and density of states


5

indicate that the responses of the valence and conduction
bands to an applied strain are very different, and the con-
duction band states are more sensitive than the valence
band states against the tensile strain. Furthermore, as
the band structure curvature indicates the effective mass
of electrons is less than the hole one [12].
Therefore,
shifting the Fermi surface toward the conduction bands
enable us to improve the electromechanical response of
the device. This goal is achieved by adding n-type sub-
stitutional dopants in the phosphorene system. Figure 5
shows the configuration of a sulfur (S)-doped phospho-
rene, as well as the effect of strain on the band structure
of this system. Since the atomic sizes of S and P are close
to each other, the lattice distortion of the S-doped system
is negligible. As expected, the band structure around the
Fermi level is strongly affected by strain. Same as pris-
tine phosphorene, the band structure dispersion diagrams
imply the rotation of the preferred conducting direction
from the ac in the strain-free system to the zz in the
strained system. This metallic system is suitable for the
electrode part of the device.

B.
Piezoconductance in phosphorene

In this section, we consider the strain-free phospho-
rene device as well as different strained systems under an
applied bias voltage to the aim of investigating the elec-
tromechanical properties of phosphorene. Because of the
left-right symmetry of the proposed structures, we just
consider the positive biases in the range of 0−1.5 V. The
external tensile strain is applied along the zz direction on
the whole device, including the scattering region and elec-
trodes, and it is increased up to 12%. Having discussed
in the earlier section and shown in Fig. 1, the S-doped
phosphorene is used for the electrode parts which leads to
the formation of ohmic electrical barriers at the junctions
between electrodes and the central region.
The top panel of Fig. 6 displays the I − V character-
istics of different strained phosphorene devices as well
as a strain-free system under an applied bias along the
zz direction. This figure clearly exhibits the mechani-
cal source of the conductance modulation. Here similar
to the MoS2 device [23], for a tensile strain larger than
∼ 4−5%, the resistance will be reduced by increasing the
tension. This is in contrast to graphene, black phospho-
rous, Si and Ge [13, 19, 21] piezoresistance devices where
the resistance increases under tensile strain. Therefore,
it seems that for the former type of materials, piezocon-
ductance is a better label to describe the system.
The electrical resistance of a material depends on its
intrinsic properties and its geometry, and it is defined by
R =
l

σ0A where l (A) is the device length (cross-section
area) and σ0 is its conductivity. The geometry changes
under strain, but in piezoresistance (piezoconductance)
materials, the resistance modulation induced by conduc-
tivity is several orders of magnitude greater than the
geometrical effects.
The conductivity is inversely pro-

0.5
1
1.5
Voltage (V)

4

8

12

Current density (µΑ/uc width)

  0%
+3%
+5%
+7%
+8.5%
+10%
+12%

6
8
10
12
Strain(%)

0

10

20

30

∆G/G0

FIG. 6:
(Color online) Top panel: I−V characteristics of the
proposed phosphorene device (shown in Fig. 1) under different
tensile strains along zz; the applied bias is in zz direction. uc
denotes the unit cell. Bottom panel: The relative changes of
conductance (G) versus applied strain over the zz direction.
G0 is the conductance of the strain-free system. The triangles
show the ∆G/G0 ratio under the external strain of 7% for two
different devices with 0.75 times shorter and 1.5 times longer
scattering regions with respect to that of the reference system
(l0 ∼ 3.5 nm).

portional to the gap size and charge carrier’s effective
mass. Also, it depends on the density of the charge car-
riers [23]. When the tension is applied along the zz di-
rection of phosphorene, the gap size first increases and
then continuously decreases (see Fig. 2(d)). Moreover,
the electron effective mass in this direction is an inverse
function of tension [9]. Note that in the presented de-
vice, besides the change of the electronic structure of the
central scattering region under strain, the modulation of
the electronic structure of the electrodes contributes in
the piezoconductance characteristics of the system. Ac-
cording to the top panel of Fig. 6, for a tensile strain of
3%, the gap enhancement effect cancels the other effects,
and the I − V characteristic of the 3% strained system
is close to the strain-free one, however, the conductance
increases by increasing the tension for the higher values
of strain.


6

The sensitivity of the piezoresistance characteristic is
measured by a gauge factor which is determined as the
ratio of the relative change of resistance to strain value,
GF =
∆R/R0

ϵ
.
Here, similar to the GF defined for a
piezoresistance characteristic, we estimate the piezocon-
ductance sensitivity of our device as the ratio of the
relative change of conductance to strain value, GF =
∆G/G0

ϵ
= ∆I/I0

ϵ
, where G is the conductance, G = 1/R.
It is worth mentioning that the calculated GFs of the
usual well-known piezoresistance materials like carbon
nanotube, graphene, silicon and germanium [21], as well
as the reported GF for MoS2 [23, 41] and black phospho-
rous systems [19] are obtained for very low strains in the
range of ∼ 0.1% where R ≊ R0, so, we conclude that
∆R
R0 ≊ ∆R

R = − ∆G

G0 . Therefore, we can compare our GF
with the reported GFs for these materials.
To calculate the ∆G/G0 ratio, which is equal to ∆I/I0,
we use the linear part of the I − V diagrams namely
the bias range below 0.5 V. The lower panel of Fig. 6
shows the relative change of the conductance (current)
as a function of strain. The value of the GF shows the
pressure dependency, and it increases by strain from 46 in
5% tension to 220 in 12% tension. As discussed in Fig. 2,
the behavior of the gap evolution against strain changes
at ϵ = +5%. Fig. 6 indicates that the conductance is
enhanced more rapidly and almost linearly versus strain
after ϵ = +5%. In this region, the ∆G/G0 ratio rises with
the slope of ∼ 345 against the strain. The reproducibility
of the piezoconductance response is investigated by cal-
culating the ∆G/G0 ratio for two different devices with
smaller and larger lengths of the scattering region with
respect to that of the reference system (l0 ∼ 3.5 nm).
The calculations are performed under the applied strain
equal to 7%, and as shown in the lower panel of Fig. 6, the
relative change of the conductance is almost independent
of the device size.
The predicted gauge factor of our device is one or
two orders of magnitude higher than that of suspended
graphene membranes [13], and it is comparable with the
reported value in black phosphorus (122 [19]), MoS2 (148
[23, 41]), and state-of-the-art Si and Ge based piezoresis-
tance devices [21]. However, the sensitivity per unit area
of phosphorene is higher than that of Si and Ge piezore-
sistance sensors. Moreover, the holding strain of the cur-
rent commercial piezoresistance devices is less than 1%.
Based on the ultrasensitive piezoconductance behavior
of phosphorene, its high holding strain limit, and the fa-
cilities of the low-dimensional devices, phosphorene has
a higher tendency for a wide range of electromechani-
cal applications in high-pressure limits, like in biological
and soft matter deformable systems. In addition, the en-
hancement of the conductance and current density, as an
experimental observable quantity, in piezoconductance
devices has more beneficial effects compared to increas-
ing the resistance of the device which may induce some
measurement difficulty due to the current reduction.
Figure 7 shows the I − V characteristic of the studied
strained systems when the applied bias is perpendicu-

0.5
1
1.5
Voltage (V)

1

2

Current density (µΑ/uc width)

  0%
+7%
+10%

FIG. 7:
(Color online) I − V characteristics of the phospho-
rene device under tensile strain along the zz direction. The
applied bias is in the ac direction. uc denotes the unit cell.

lar to the tension and it is along the ac direction. The
negative differential resistance (NDR) behavior, where
the current decreases through the bias enhancement, is
predicted in the system. This phenomenon can be un-
derstood by looking at the individual multi-bands along
the ac direction of the band structure (see Figs. 2 and 5).
By shifting up and down the discrete and narrow density
of states of the left and right electrodes, the bias voltage
could provide the conditions that transmission reduces
under bias enhancement, leading to the resonant tunnel-
ing transport and observed NDR behavior [40, 42]. The
peak-to-valley ratio (PVR), which is defined as the ratio
of the current at the resonant tunneling peak energy to
that at the valley, is obtained around 2.5 - 3.8, which
is comparable to the reported values of 7-25 in the zz
phosphorene nanoribbons (zPNRs), or 5.5 in the z-MoS2
NRs [42], but very small in comparison with the observed
PVR value in CdSe quantum dots (∼ 1000), or a PVR
value of 50 − 200 in defected aGNRs [42].
The PVR
quantity is a measure of the strength of NDR character-
istic. By increasing the applied strain, due to the strong
gap reduction in both Γ and G points, the conductance
is strongly enhanced at the low biases. The influence of
the carrier effective mass enhancement on the conduct-
ing channels of the strained systems is clearly observed in
the comparison of the I − V characteristics of this figure
with the I − V behavior displayed in the upper panel of
Fig. 6 where the applied bias is along the zz direction.
The I − V characteristics of strain-free systems are com-
parable with each other, but in the strained systems, the
current intensity along the zz direction is stronger than
that in the ac direction.
The transmission spectra of the strain-free system un-
der applied biases along both the ac and zz directions,
as well as the transmission spectrum of the system un-
der 12% tensile strain along the zz direction, and applied
bias in the zz direction are illustrated in Fig. 8. The spec-
tra are functions of the carrier energy and bias voltage;


7

FIG. 8:
(Color online) The transmission spectra of strain-
free phosphorene system when the applied bias is along the
(a) ac and (b) zz. (c): Phosphorene under 12% tensile strain
when both tension and applied bias are along the zz direction.
The spectra are as functions of charge carrier energy and bias
voltage. Two solid red lines determine the bias window in the
given voltage. The dashed line shows the Fermi level which
is set to be zero.

FIG. 9:
(Color online) Visualization of the transmission
pathways (or bond current) which show how current flows
through the device.
The upper panel: both tensile strain
(+12%) and the applied bias (1.5 V) are along zz direction.
The lower panel: the strain-free system under an applied bias
of 1.5 V along the ac direction. The width of the arrows is
related to the magnitude of the local current density. The
local currents are totaled over the energy bias window.

the solid red line in the negative (positive) energies de-
termines the electrochemical potential of the left (right)
electrode, µL(R). The energy area between µl and µR
is called bias window. Based on the Landauer formula
presented in Eq. 1, the transmission integration over the
bias window is proportional to the current density at the
given bias. The transmission in the negative (positive)
energies shows the hole (electron) contribution in trans-
port. Therefore, here the dominant part of the conduc-
tance comes from electrons. The smaller effective mass of
electrons compared to holes in phosphorene [12] suggests
that electrons have more tendency to participate in the
conductivity.
In order to investigate more details of the charge trans-
port mechanism in our device, we calculate the trans-
mission pathways (also known as bond current) of the
strain-free system when the applied bias is along the ac
direction, and the transmission pathways of the system
under 12% tension when the electric bias is along the zz
direction. The applied bias is equal to 1.5 V, and the

results are displayed in Fig. 9.
The transmission pathway [31, 37, 42] is extracted from
the splitting of the transmission coefficients into the bond
directions and shows how carriers move through the sys-
tem. The transmission pathway illustrated in Fig. 9 is
summed up over the bias window. The directions and
width of the arrows are respectively, related to the di-
rection and magnitude of the local current density be-
tween the given pair of atoms. Regarding Fig. 9, the cur-
rent mainly passes through the chemical bonds, which is
called bonding current. In addition, hopping current be-
tween further neighboring atoms is observed. Since the
chemical bonds are not along the applied bias, the direc-
tions of local currents are not parallel to the applied bias,
and as the upper panel of Fig. 9 illustrates, they move
through the chemical bonds from the top on the left to
the bottom on the right. This figure is comparable with
the calculated transmission pathways in zz phosphorene
nanoribbons where the charge carriers pass through the
chemical bonds in the vicinity of the zz edges [42]. The
conductance of the system displayed in the lower panel
of Fig. 9 with the bias along the ac direction, is less than
that of the strained system presented in the top panel
of the figure; so, the arrows in the lower panel are very
narrow.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that the observed
piezoconductance behavior arises from the phosphorene
band structure properties in electrodes and scattering re-
gion. Therefore, changing the dopant concentration of
electrodes could be a way to control the current intensity
as well as piezoconductance properties of such a phos-
phorene base device.

IV.
SUMMARY

In this paper, on the basis of ab initio calculations,
we have studied a 2D phosphorene system under tensile
strain along the zigzag direction.
Due to its puckered
structure, phosphorene has remarkable mechanical prop-
erties and could sustain tensile strains up to 30%. In ad-
dition, the phosphorene band structure strongly changes
under tension, and the gap size as well as the carrier ef-
fective masses are tuned by the applied strain. Based on
all these properties, phosphorene has a strong potential
for application as a nanoelectromechanical material.
Our results presented in Sec. III, are divided into two
parts. First, we have employed charge density analysis
techniques based on Bader’s “Atoms in Molecules”theory
to explore the effect of strain in the real space proper-
ties of phosphorene, as well as finding the possible con-
nections between the real space and k-space behaviors.
Shifting the gap position as well as changing the gap size
in the strained phosphorene are understood by forming
bonds between the in-plane next-nearest-neighbor phos-
phorus atoms. Also, the rotation of the preferred con-
ducting direction in strained phosphorene is explained
by the enhancement of the intra-planar interactions to-


8

gether with the weakening the inter-planar contribution
of the charge density.
Finally, the transport properties of our proposed piezo-
conductance device have been studied under an applied
bias. A strong electromechanical response has been pre-
dicted in this system. Our focus of this study is on the
relatively high stresses in the range between 5%-12%.
Based on our results, phosphorene is a promising material
for nanoelectromechanical applications in high-pressure
limits. The transmission spectra reveal that transport
comes from electrons in the conduction bands. Moreover,
the transmission pathways show how electrons propagate
through the chemical bonds of the scattering region from

the source electrode toward the drain. The doping con-
centrations of electrodes are introduced as a tool to con-
trol and engineer the piezoconductance properties.

Acknowledgments

The numerical simulations are performed using the
computational facilities of the School of Nano Science
of IPM. Z.N. acknowledges P. Sasanpour for valuable
discussions. This work is supported by an Iran Science
Elites Federation grant.

[1] Y. Sun, S. E. Thompson, and T. Nishida, Strain Ef-
fect in Semiconductors: Theory and Device Applications
(Springer, New York, 2010).

[2] A. I. Hochbaum and P. Yang, Chem. Rev.110, 527
(2009).

[3] X. H. Peng and P. Logan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 143119
(2010).

[4] L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X.
H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nature Nanotech. 9, 372 (2014).

[5] H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tomanek,
and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano 8, 4033 (2014).

[6] S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, H. Schmidt, A. H. Castro
Neto, and O. Barbaros, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 103106
(2014)

[7] M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A.
Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant, and A. Castellanos-Gomez,
Nano Lett., 14, 3347 (2014).

[8] F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nature Commun. 5, 4458
(2014).

[9] R. Fei and L. Yang, Nano Lett. 14, 2884 (2014).

[10] X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia,
H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Nature
Nanotech. 10, 517 (2015)

[11] Z. Nourbakhsh and R. Asgari, Phys. Rev. B 94, 035437
(2016).

[12] X. Peng, Q. Wei, and A. Copple, Phys. Rev. B 90,
085402 (2014). Q. Wei and X. Peng, App. Phys. Lett.
104, 251915 (2014).

[13] A. D. Smith, F. Niklaus, A. Paussa, S. Schroder, A.
C. Fischer, M. Sterner, S. Wagner, S. Vaziri, F. Fors-
berg, D. Esseni, M. Ostling, and M. C. Lemme, ACS
Nano 10(11), 9879 (2016). A. D. Smith, F. Niklaus, A.
Paussa, S. Vaziri, A. C. Fischer, M. Sterner, F. Forsberg,
A. Delin, D. Esseni, P. Palestri, M. stling, and M. C.
Lemme, Nano Lett. 13(7), 3237 (2013).

[14] S. Bertolazzi, J. Brivio, A. Kis, ACS Nano, 5(12), 9703
(2011).

[15] M. Elahi, K. Khaliji, S.M. Tabatabaei, M. Pourfath, and
R. Asgari, Phys. Rev. B 91, 115412 (2015).

[16] A.S. Rodin, A. Carvalho, and A.H. Castro Neto, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 112, 176801 (2014).

[17] Y. Li, Sh. Yang, and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C 118 (41),
23970 (2014).

[18] L. Seixas, A. S. Rodin, A. Carvalho, and A. H. Castro
Neto, Phys. Rev. B 91, 115437 (2015).

[19] Z. Zhang, L. Li, J. Horng, N. Zhou Wang, F. Yang, Y.
Yu, Y. Zhang, G. Chen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, X.
Hui Chen, F. Wang, and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett. 17(10),
6097 (2017).

[20] B. Sa, Y.-L. Li, J. Qi, R. Ahuja, and Zh. Sun, J. Phys.
Chem. C 118 (46), 26560 (2014).

[21] A. A. Barlian, W.-T. Park, J. R. Mallon, A. J. Rastegar,
and B. L. Pruitt, Proc IEEE 97(3), 513 (2009).

[22] C. S. Smith, Phys Rev 94, 42 (1954).
[23] S. Manzeli, A. Allain, A. Ghadimi, and A. Kis, Nano.
Lett. 15(8), 5330 (2015).

[24] D. M. Warschauer, J. App. Phys. 35, 3516 (1964).
[25] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phy. Rev. 140, A1133 (1965).
[26] N. E. Dahlen, A. Stan, and R. van Leeuwen, J. Phys.:
Conference Series 35, 324 (2006).

[27] R. Landauer, Philos. Mag. 21, 863 (1970).
[28] T. Frederiksen, G. Foti, F. Scheurer, V. Speisser, and
G. Schull, Nat. Commun. 5, 3659 (2014). G. Schull, T.
Frederiksen, M. Brandbyge, and R. Berndt, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 103, 206803 (2009). M. L. N. Palsgaard, N. P. An-
dersen, and M. Brandbyge, Phys. Rev. B 91, 121403(R)
(2015). J. Lagoute, F. Joucken, V. Repain, Y. Tison, C.
Chacon, A. Bellec, Y. Girard, R. Sporken, E. H. Conrad,
F. Ducastelle, M. Palsgaard, N. P. Andersen, M. Brand-
byge, and S. Rousset, Phys. Rev. B 91, 125442 (2015).
N. L. Schneider, N. Neel, N. P. Andersen, J. T. Lu, M.
Brandbyge, J. Kroger, and R. Berndt, J. Phys.: Cond.
Mat 27, 015001 (2015).

[29] R. Bader, Atoms in Molecules: A Quantum Theory (Ox-
ford University Press, UK, 1994).

[30] M. Brandbyge, J.-L. Mozos, P. Ordejon, J. Taylor, and
K. Stokbro, Phys. Rev. B 65, 165401 (2002).

[31] J. E. Morris, K. Iniewski, Nanoelectronic Device Appli-
cations Handbook (CRC Press, Cleveland, OH, 2013).

[32] J.
M.
Soler,
E.
Artacho,
J.
D.
Gale,
A.
Gar-
cia,
J.
Junquera,
P.
Ordejon,
D.
Sanchez-
Portal,
J.
Phys.:
Cond.
Mat
14,
2745
(2002).
http://departments.icmab.es/leem/siesta/

[33] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).

[34] H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B. 13, 5188
(1976).

[35] http://aim.tkgristmill.com
[36] N. Papior, N. Lorente, T. Frederiksen, A. Garcia, and M.
Brandbyge, Comput. Phys. Commun. 212, 8 (2016).


9

[37] N. R. Papior, https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.597181;
https://github.com/zerothi/sisl. More information about
the
bond
and
atomic
current
and
their
math-
ematical
equations
could
be
find
in
sisl
docu-
mentation. http://zerothi.github.io/sisl/docs/latest/api-
generated/sisl.io.tbtrans.phtavncSileTBtrans.html

[38] Z. Nourbakhsh, S. J. Hashemifar, H. Akbarzadeh, J. Al-
loy. Compd. 579, 360 (2013). T. E. Jones, M. E. Eber-
hart, and D. P. Clougherty, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 017208
(2008).

[39] X. Peng and A. Copple, Phys. Rev. B 87, 115308 (2013).
[40] S. Datta, Quantum Transport: Atom to transistor (Cam-
bridge University Press, London, 2005).

[41] In Ref. [23], Manzeli et al. used the relative change of
resistance versus strain to show the piezoresistance sen-
sitivity of MoS2. They studied the transport behavior of
the system for tensile strains up to 7%. However, their
reported GF could be correct just for the strain range less
than 0.2% as they considered the resistance as a function
of strain by the formula R = R0exp(αϵ) ≊ R0(1 + αϵ)
where α = −148 and the expansion is acceptable just for
strains less than 0.2%.

[42] Z. Nourbakhsh and R. Asgari, Phys. Rev. B 97, 235406
(2018).


