1 

 

Combined effects of nonmetallic impurities and planned metallic dopants 

on grain boundary energy and strength 

 
Zhifeng Huang a, b, Fei Chen a, *, Qiang Shen a, Lianmeng Zhang a, Timothy J. Rupert b, c, * 
a State Key Lab of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan 
University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, China 
b Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA 
92697, USA 
c Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, 
USA 
* Corresponding author: chenfei027@whut.edu.cn (F. Chen), trupert@uci.edu (T.J. Rupert) 

Abstract: 

Most research on nanocrystalline alloys has been focused on planned doping of metals 

with other metallic elements, but nonmetallic impurities are also prevalent in the real world.  

In this work, we report on the combined effects of metallic dopants and nonmetallic impurities 

on grain boundary energy and strength using first-principles calculations, with a Σ5 (310) grain 

boundary in Cu chosen as a model system.  We find a clear correlation between the grain 

boundary energy and the change in excess free volume of doped grain boundaries.  A 

combination of a larger substitutional dopant and an interstitial impurity can fill the excess free 

volume more efficiently and further reduce the grain boundary energy.  We also find that the 

strengthening effects of dopants and impurities are dominated by the electronic interactions 

between the host Cu atoms and the two types of dopant elements.  For example, the significant 

competing effects of metal dopants such as Zr, Nb, and Mo with impurities on the grain 

boundary strength are uncovered from the density of states of the d electrons.  As a whole, 

this work deepens the field’s understanding of the interaction between metallic dopants and 

nonmetallic impurities on grain boundary properties, providing a guide for improving the 

thermal stability of materials while avoiding embrittling effects. 


2 

 

Keywords: Segregation; Grain boundary energy; Embrittlement; Impurities; First-principles 

calculations 

 

1. Introduction 

Grain boundaries play an important role in governing the mechanical, functional, and 

kinetic properties of a great many engineering materials, but these features are especially 

important for nanostructured materials [1-4].  Nanostructured materials exhibit many 

advantages compared to microcrystalline materials, including superior strength [5, 6] as well 

as increased resistance to wear [7] and fatigue [8].  However, one of the limitations of 

nanostructured materials is their lack of thermal stability, which is attributed to the high grain 

boundary fraction providing a large driving force for grain growth [9-11].  A number of 

experimental and theoretical research studies have shown that the thermal stability of 

nanostructured metals can be significantly improved by metallic dopant segregation at grain 

boundaries [12-17].  Murdoch and Schuh [15] built a grain boundary segregation enthalpy 

map for hundreds of binary alloys, which provides an important guide for both experimental 

and theoretical studies aimed at discovering thermally-stable nanocrystalline binary alloy 

combinations.  Liu and Kirchheim [16] showed that the grain boundary energy, the key 

driving force for coarsening, can be reduced by metallic dopants to improve the stability of 

nanostructured materials.  Most work on grain boundary segregation and stabilization has 

been focused on planned doping with metals [12-17], but such alloys will also likely contain 

common nonmetallic impurities incorporated during materials processing and service.  For 

example, H, C, and O are often introduced by process control agents during mechanical 


3 

 

alloying [17-20].  Nonmetallic impurities have also been found to play important role in grain 

size stabilization [20-25].  For example, He et al. [21] found that stress-driven grain boundary 

migration in nanocrystalline Al can be retarded by having an excess of O atoms at boundaries.  

Juárez et al. [20] showed that the dissolution of C has a positive effect on the thermal stability 

of an Fe–Zr nanocrystalline alloy.  However, while both planned metallic dopants and 

unplanned nonmetallic impurities will be present in the vast majority of nanostructured alloys, 

the combined effect of these dopants on thermal stability has not been studied in detail.   

Metallic dopants have also been reported to play an important role in altering the 

mechanical strength of grain boundaries [14, 26-31].  For instance, a nanocrystalline Al–Mg 

alloy was reported to exhibit a yield strength much greater than the upper limit reported for 

traditional age-hardened Al alloys, with this high strength resulting from Mg segregating to the 

grain boundaries [28].  Wu et al. [29] found that the strengthening effect of metallic dopants 

on W grain boundaries depended on the type of grain boundary structure and the atomic radius 

of the added dopant.  At the same time, the effect of impurities on similar properties has been 

an active area of research [22, 32-36].  For example, the incorporation of a small quantity of 

nonmetallic H impurities can cause embrittlement [32-34].  In contrast, impurities such as B 

[35, 37-39] and C [40] have been reported to improve the grain boundary strength in some 

alloys.  Unfortunately, there are only a few studies in the literature that have focused on 

understanding how these two types of solutes combine to affect grain boundary strength, with 

this work often limited to a specific combination of added metal and impurity.  Yang et al. [41] 

found that N would eliminate the Mn-induced detrimental effect on the strength of an Fe grain 

boundary, while Zhong et al. [42] reported that P would enhance Mn-induced embrittlement in 


4 

 

an Fe grain boundary.  Zhang et al. also [43] found that Si could weaken the Na-induced 

embrittlement of Al grain boundary by forming strong Al–Si bonds at the interface.  

Unfortunately, these limited number of studies do not provide a comprehensive picture of the 

combined effects of these two types of solutes on strengthening or embrittling effects.   

In this work, we report on the combined effect of a large variety of both metallic dopants 

(Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, and Bi) and nonmetallic impurities (H, B, C, N, O, Si, P, and S) 

on the grain boundary energy and strength of a Σ5 (310) grain boundary in Cu.  We employ 

first-principles simulations to study this issue at the atomic and electronic levels [44].  First, 

we calculate the grain boundary energies and strengthening energies of interfaces with the 

metallic dopants, to provide a baseline for comparison when impurities are added.  Next, we 

calculate the segregation energies of grain boundaries with both metallic dopants and 

nonmetallic impurities at various positions relative to one another.  We find that the preferred 

sites of dopants and impurities are related to both their atomic radius and electronegativity.  

Grain boundary energy decreases as the atomic radius of both the dopants and impurities 

increases, because these atoms can more efficiently fill the excess free volume at the grain 

boundary.  During our analysis of the mechanical effects, we divide the strengthening energy 

into mechanical and chemical contributions to provide a more nuanced picture of this effect.  

The mechanical contribution increases with increasing amounts of grain boundary expansion.  

However, for the majority of our samples, the main contribution of grain boundary 

strengthening or weakening comes from the chemical contribution, predominantly due to 

interactions between the d states of the dopants and the host Cu atoms.  For example, the d-

states interactions are weakened when the p and s states of impurities create hybrid orbitals 


5 

 

with the d states of the dopants, leading to competition between the two types of elements.  As 

a whole, this work deepens the field’s understanding of the combined effects of metallic 

dopants and nonmetallic impurities, which can provide a guide for tailoring the stability of a 

microstructure while avoiding embrittlement.  While this work is motivated by the need for 

better nanostructured materials, alterations to the grain boundary energy and strength will also 

be important for coarse-grained materials. 

 

2. Computational methods  

Fig. 1(a) shows the model of a Σ5 (310) grain boundary in Cu.  This type of grain 

boundary was chosen because there are four substitutional sites (marked as 1, 2, 3, and 4) and 

three interstitial sites (the pentagonal bipyramid (PBP), bitetrahedron (BTE), and cap trigonal 

prism (CTP) sites at the interface [32, 35]), making it an appropriate model for a systematic 

investigation.  Prior studies have shown that the substitutional sites are the preferred sites for 

the metallic dopants, while the interstitial sites are the preferred sites for nonmetal impurities 

[30, 35].  The grain boundary specimen has dimensions of 7.267 × 11.490 × 28.086 Å3 and 

contains 112 atoms.  Hereafter, we will refer to metallic atom additions as “dopants” and 

nonmetallic atoms as “impurities.”  Since the atomic radius and electronegativity of dopants 

and impurities might be key factors for alteration of grain boundary energy and strength [29, 

35, 45] and a range of these parameters is sought, we choose Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, and 

Bi as the metallic dopants while selecting H, B, C, N, O, Si, P, and S as the nonmetallic 

impurities.  The atomic radii [46] and electronegativities [47] of these choices are listed in 

Table 1, along with the values for Cu.  For the grain boundary model with both a dopant and 


6 

 

an impurity, the added atoms could have different relative spatial positions.  We define the 

“Near” configuration as being when the dopant and the impurity bond with each other in the 

same periodic unit, while the “Far” configuration occurs when the dopant and the impurity stay 

as far as possible within the interface, occupying the sites locating in different periodic units.  

These two possibilities are illustrated in Fig. 1(b).  First-principles calculations were 

performed with the Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) using the projector augmented 

wave approach [48] and the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchange-correlation generalized 

gradient approximation (GGA) functional [49].  A plane-wave cutoff energy of 350 eV, k-

point meshes of 3 × 2 × 1, convergence energy of 10-5 eV/atom, and convergence atomic force 

of 0.01 eV/Å were used for all calculations to balance the accuracy and efficiency of 

calculations [35].  The atoms in grain boundary model were fully relaxed during the process 

of structural optimizations, except that the z coordinate of atoms on the outermost layers were 

fixed.   

The propensity of a dopant X or an impurity Y to segregate to the grain boundary can be 

characterized by the segregation energy, 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑔

𝐺𝐵  [35, 50]: 

𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑔

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,𝑛] = (𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,𝑛] − 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝐺𝐵[0,0]) − (𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘[𝑚,𝑛] − 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘[0,0])          (1) 

where 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝐺𝐵 and 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘 are the total energies of the grain boundary and bulk models.  The [m, 

n] represents the model contains m dopant atoms and n impurity atoms, thus the [0, 0] indicates 

the pure Cu model without dopant or impurity.  The bulk model has the exact same dimension 

and number of atoms as the grain boundary model, but no grain boundary [35].  Near and Far 

configurations are also considered in the bulk models with both a dopant X and an impurity Y.  

𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘[𝑚,𝑛] is the total energy of the lowest energy bulk model.  A more negative segregation 


7 

 

energy indicates the model is more energetically stable [35, 50].  The grain boundary energy, 

γ, with X or Y can be calculated as [26, 35, 51]: 

𝛾[𝑚, 𝑛] =

𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,𝑛]−𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘[𝑚,𝑛]

𝑆
                         (2) 

where S is the cross-sectional area of the simulation cell (i.e., the grain boundary area).  Eq. 

(1) and (2) contain some of the same terms and are related, with a dopant X or an impurity Y 

with the strong ability to segregate to the grain boundary usually significantly reducing the 

grain boundary energy.   

The strength of the grain boundary can be represented by the separation energy, 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝, 

which is defined as the energy needed to separate the grain boundary into two free surfaces 

(the lower surface and the upper surface) [52]: 

𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝 = 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝐹𝑆_𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟 + 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝐹𝑆_𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟 − 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡

𝐺𝐵                    (3) 

where 𝐸𝐹𝑆_𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟

𝑡𝑜𝑡
 and 𝐸𝐹𝑆_𝑢𝑝𝑝𝑒𝑟

𝑡𝑜𝑡
 are the total energy of the lower surface and the upper surface, 

respectively.  For the grain boundary with just one dopant or impurity, we assign that the 

dopant or impurity stays on the lower surface, meaning the upper surface has the same atomic 

configuration as the clean Cu free surface.  For the grain boundary with both a dopant and an 

impurity, there are 48 relative positions for dopant-impurity pairs with the four substitutional 

sites of the dopant, the three interstitial sites of the impurity, the Near and Far configurations, 

and the lower and upper surface.  To allow for a reasonable number of calculations, we assume 

that the dopant and the impurity stay on the lower surface after the separation.  The free 

surface model was obtained using the exact same dimensions as the grain boundary model but 

with the upper half removed, as shown in Fig. 1(c).  Similar models and assumptions have 

also been used in previous work in the Σ5 (310) grain boundary in Cu with multi substitutional 


8 

 

and interstitial solutes [37, 52].  The strengthening energy, 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟 , can be defined as the 

difference between the separation energies of the clean grain boundary and the grain boundary 

with X or Y [35, 50]:  

𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

[𝑚,𝑛] = 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝

𝐺𝐵[0,0] − 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,𝑛]                      (4) 

Calculations of the free surface energies are important for these grain boundary strength 

calculations, so there are two important scenarios to consider.  One measure of the grain 

boundary strength would have the dopants and impurities on the free surface stay at the lowest 

energy sites calculated for the grain boundary, representing a fast fracture process where no 

diffusion along the crack surface is allowed (denoted as “Fast”).  Alternatively, one would 

allow the dopants and impurities to find the lowest energy sites along the free surface of the 

crack, which represents a slow fracture case where diffusion can and does occur (denoted as 

“Slow”).  Both calculations were carried out, providing upper and lower bounds for the 

strengthening effect.  A negative value of the strengthening energy means that the dopant or 

the impurity will enhance the grain boundary strength, while a positive value suggests a 

detrimental effect on strength.  In both the segregation energy and the strengthening energy, 

negative energies would be preferred to achieve a more stable grain structure and to strengthen 

the boundary against cracking.   

Furthermore, the strengthening energy can be divided into mechanical (Emech) and 

chemical (Echem) contributions, which reflect the effects resulting from the structural distortion 

of the boundary and the electronic interaction between the host Cu and solutes, respectively 

[29, 30, 37, 52].  Multiple essential scenarios are defined and shown in Fig. 2.  System A is 

the relaxed clean grain boundary and clean free surface, with only Cu atoms.  System B is the 


9 

 

grain boundary and free surface with a Cu vacancy, which is generated by removing a Cu atom 

from the corresponding models in the system A but with no further structural relaxation.  The 

site for the Cu vacancy is the same site as the site of a substitutional dopant in system D.  

System C is the grain boundary and free surface with the structural distortion caused by adding 

the substitutional dopant or the interstitial impurity, which is generated by removing the 

substitutional dopant or the interstitial impurity in system D but no further relaxation.  System 

D is the final relaxed grain boundary and free surface with a substitutional dopant or an 

interstitial impurity.  The path to introduce a substitutional dopant to the grain boundary can 

be thought of as removal of a Cu atom at the grain boundary (A → B), adjustment of the space 

at the grain boundary (B → C), and then finally addition of the substitutional dopant at the 

grain boundary (C → D).  The path for an interstitial impurity is A → C → D without 

removing a Cu at the grain boundary.  The path for adding both a substitutional dopant and 

an interstitial impurity is A → B → C → D.  The mechanical contribution to the strengthening 

energy will be the difference between the separation energies in the systems B and C for a grain 

boundary with a metallic dopant and a grain boundary with both a dopant plus an impurity: 

𝐸𝑚𝑒𝑐ℎ = 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝

(𝐵) − 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝

(𝐶)                           (5) 

Since there is no removal of a host Cu atom, the mechanical contribution for the grain boundary 

with an interstitial impurity is:  

𝐸𝑚𝑒𝑐ℎ = 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝

(𝐴) − 𝐸𝑠𝑒𝑝

(𝐶)                           (6) 

The chemical contribution is then the total strengthening effect with the mechanical 

contribution subtracted: 

𝐸𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑚 = 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟 − 𝐸𝑚𝑒𝑐ℎ                          (7) 


10 

 

 

3. Results and discussion 

3.1  Grain boundaries with only metallic dopants 

The segregation energies of different metallic dopants at the grain boundary are shown in 

Fig. 3, which demonstrates that the site 1 is the preferred site for all of the dopants.  Fig. 4(a) 

then shows the calculated grain boundary energies with dopants at the site 1.  All of the grain 

boundary energies are lower than the 880.37 mJ/m2 value of the clean grain boundary [35], 

meaning that all dopants studied here can increase the grain boundary stability.  Fig. 4(b) 

shows that the grain boundary energy decreases as the atomic radius of the dopant increases.  

In short, dopants with larger atomic radii have an increased ability to segregate to the grain 

boundary and stabilize it, which is consistent with prior findings in the literature [27, 53].  

The calculated strengthening energies of grain boundaries with dopants at site 1 under the 

Fast and Slow fracture processes are shown in Fig. 4(c).  We can see that strengthening 

energies under Fast fracture are always lower than those under Slow fracture.  This is expected, 

since the energy of the boundary will be the same in these two cases but the energy of the free 

surface with dopant is always lower if Slow fracture occurs (a lower energy free surface state 

is found by way).  In the end, the effect of each dopant on the grain boundary strength are 

similar under Fast and Slow fracture, with only the absolute value altered.  Addition of Zr, 

Nb, or Mo will significantly improve the grain boundary strength, while Pd, Ag, and Al 

increase the strength to a small degree.  In contrast, Zn and Bi weaken or embrittle the grain 

boundary.  Our simulated results are in good agreement with the experimental observations 

that Zr [6] and Nb [54] can strengthen while Bi [55] embrittles nanocrystalline Cu.  To avoid 


11 

 

overcomplicating the discussion of our results, for the remainder of this paper we only discuss 

the strengthening effects under the Fast fracture condition.  Fig. 4(d) presents the total 

strengthening energy into the host with the values broken down into mechanical and chemical 

contributions [37, 52].  The values of mechanical contributions of all dopants are positive, 

signifying weakening/embrittlement.  The values of chemical contributions are negative, with 

the lone exception being Bi, indicating that the chemical interactions between the host Cu and 

the dopants usually improve the strength of the boundary.  As a whole, the trend for the 

chemical contribution is similar to the trend for the total strengthening energies, indicating that 

the chemical contribution dictates the overall grain boundary strengthening behavior.   

To help understand the importance of chemical effects, the density of states [38, 39, 56] 

for dopants in site 1 and the closest Cu atom in site 2 are calculated to investigate the electronic 

interactions (Fig. 5).  The density of states data for the Cu atom appear as thin curves while 

the dopant data appears as thick curves.  For the main-group metallic dopants (Al and Bi), the 

electronic interactions between the dopants and Cu are mainly reflected in the hybridizations 

between the p states of the dopants and the d states of Cu.  For the transition metallic dopants 

except Zn, the main electronic interactions occur on the hybridization between the d states of 

both dopants and Cu.  Furthermore, for the transition metallic dopants with the d orbitals fully 

occupied (Zn, Pd, and Ag), the d states of dopants are very localized and form a sharp peak.  

The lack of overlap between the sharp d states peak of Zn and the d states peak of Cu indicates 

almost no interaction between Zn and Cu atoms in this system.  The sharp peaks of Ag 

localize at the edge of the d states peak of Cu, which means only a small fraction of the electrons 

in the d states of Ag interact with Cu.  The peaks of Pd are also sharply localized but in this 


12 

 

case the peaks overlap with the d states of Cu, indicating a stronger interaction of Pd with Cu 

and explaining why Pd had the strongest strengthening effect of the transition metal dopants 

with the d orbitals fully occupied.  In contrast, for the transition metallic dopants without the 

d orbitals fully occupied (Zr, Nb, and Mo), the d states of the dopants are more evenly 

distributed in the range of the d states of Cu, suggesting strong electronic interaction between 

the dopants and Cu.  Referring back to Fig. 4(d), the strengthening effect of metallic dopants 

is closely correlated to the electronic interaction between the dopants and Cu atoms.  The 

strengthening effect of dopants without d orbitals fully occupied is the highest, due to stronger 

interactions between the d states of the dopants and Cu.  In addition, with the exception of Zn, 

it is clear that the degree of the overlap between the d states of the transition metallic dopants 

and Cu is larger than the overlap between the p states of the main-group metallic dopants and 

the d states of Cu atom.  This indicates a stronger electronic interaction between the transition 

metallic dopants and Cu compared to the main-group metallic dopants.  The strengths of grain 

boundaries with Zr, Nb, and Mo are significantly better than Pd, Ag, and Al, with boundaries 

doped with Zn and Bi being the worst.   

 

3.2  Zr-segregated grain boundary with nonmetallic impurities 

Since there are four substitutional sites for metallic dopants and three interstitial sites for 

nonmetallic impurities as shown in Fig 1, there are 24 relative positions between a given set of 

dopant plus impurity when considering the Near and Far configurations.  In this work, eight 

dopants (Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, and Bi) and eight impurities (H, B, C, N, O, Si, P, and S) 

are considered, which means that 1536 grain boundary models would be needed to calculate 


13 

 

all possible relative sites between the metallic dopants and nonmetallic impurities.  In addition, 

a huge number of bulk models and free surface models would also need to be considered to 

calculate the segregation, grain boundary, and strengthening energies.  Therefore, to make the 

problem more tractable, we temporarily focus on segregation energies in models with the 

metallic dopant Zr and common impurities C and O at different relative positions, with the 

results shown in Figs. 6(a) and (b).  Zr by itself significantly reduces the grain boundary 

energy and improves the grain boundary strength, as shown in Fig. 4, so it is a good choice to 

provide a baseline.  The segregation energies are relative lower when Zr occupies site 1, 

regardless of where the C or O impurity is located, which suggests that nonmetallic impurities 

do not determine the preferred site of metallic dopants.  In Figs. 6(a) and (b), the lowest energy 

models contain C and O at the PBP site that is close to Zr (i.e., in the Near configuration).  

However, since the atomic radius of other impurities such as Si, P, and S are much larger, it is 

not possible to say that the Near configuration is always preferred.  To this end, the 

segregation energies of the grain boundaries with Zr fixed at site 1 and impurities at different 

interstitial sites were calculated, taking care to consider both the Near and Far configurations 

(Fig. 6(c)).  On this figure, if a data point does not appear, it means that the impurity moved 

from the chosen site when the system was relaxed, which means that the site in that case was 

not a possibility.  H, C, N, and O prefer the PBP site, while B, Si, P, and S choose to occupy 

the CTP site.  The relative smaller impurities H, B, C, N, and O prefer to bond with Zr in the 

Near configuration, while the larger impurities Si, P, and S prefer to stay far away from Zr in 

the Far arrangement.   

The lowest energy grain boundary models with Zr and various impurities were then used 


14 

 

to calculate the grain boundary energy.  The relationship between the grain boundary energy 

and the atomic radius of nonmetallic impurities is plotted in Fig. 7(a).  It is obvious that the 

grain boundary energy of the Zr-plus-impurity grain boundaries decreases as the atomic radius 

of the nonmetallic impurities increases.  All the grain boundary energies in this figure are 

below the 568.75 mJ/m2 grain boundary energy of the Zr-segregated interface, which is above 

the scale of the figure, meaning that adding impurities can further reduce the grain boundary 

energy.  The strengthening energies of the grain boundary with Zr and impurities are shown 

in Fig. 7(b), with the data plotted as a function of the electronegativity of the impurities.  B 

can further improve the strength of a Zr-segregated grain boundary while the other impurities 

weaken the interface.  The strengthening energy of a Zr-segregated grain boundary increases 

with increasing electronegativity of the impurities from a given period in the periodic table (the 

two lines show which elements are in the same period).  Furthermore, the strengthening 

energies are divided into mechanical and chemical contributions, as shown in Fig. 7(c).  The 

results show that the strengthening energy is again mainly dependent on the chemical effects, 

which means the electronic interactions between the host Cu atoms, Zr dopant, and the 

impurities determine the grain boundary strength.  The details of these electronic interactions 

will be discussed in more detail in Section 3.4. 

 

3.3  Synergistic reduction of grain boundary energy by dopants and impurities 

Next, we investigate the energetics of grain boundaries with a wider variety of dopants 

and impurities, no longer restricting our scope to Zr.  The dopants studied are Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, 

Mo, Pd, Ag, and Bi, while the impurities are B, C, O, and Si.  B, C, O and Si are chosen 


15 

 

because they differ greatly in the atomic radius and prefer different sites at the grain boundary.  

Since Fig. 6 showed that site preference does not change when combining dopants and 

impurities, we maintained this feature to allow for efficient computation.  Thus, dopants take 

site 1 in the boundary, while B and Si occupy the CTP site and C and O occupy the PBP site.  

The segregation energies of grain boundaries with both dopants and impurities at the Near and 

Far configurations are shown in Fig. 8.  The small impurities B, C, and O prefer to stay close 

to the dopants such as Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, and Mo, but prefer to be further away from dopants such 

as Pd, Ag, and Bi.  The large impurity Si prefers to remain far away from all of the metallic 

dopants.  The variation observed for the smaller impurities can be explained by combining 

the information about atomic radius and electronegativity.  Electronegativity is generally used 

to evaluate the ability of an atom to attract electrons towards itself [47, 57].  Therefore, one 

can hypothesize that an impurity will prefer to bond with a dopant when the electronegativity 

difference between the impurity and the dopant is bigger than the difference between the 

impurity and Cu.  Table 1 shows that this is in fact true for our calculations.  The dopants 

with electronegativity values lower than the value for Cu (1.8), such as Al (1.5), Zn (1.5), Zr 

(1.5), Nb (1.7), and Mo (1.6), prefer to bond with impurities.  In contrast, Pd (2.0), with a 

higher electronegativity than Cu, prefers to stay far away from the impurities.  Ag and Bi have 

similar electronegativity values as Cu, but the atomic radii of Ag (1.339 Å) and Bi (1.520 Å) 

are larger than Cu (1.173 Å) [46].  In this case, without an electronegativity to drive the 

preference, B, C, and O prefer to stay far away from Ag and Bi simply because there is more 

room in the interstitial site surrounded by only Cu atoms.  Similarly, the atomic radius of Si 

(1.173 Å) is by far the largest of the impurities, meaning it will have the most trouble fitting 


16 

 

into the interstitial sites due to this size.  As a result, Si prefers to remain far away from the 

metallic dopants since they are all larger than Cu and a Near configuration would result in large 

structural distortions.  

The relationship between the grain boundary energy and the atomic radius of each metallic 

dopant is plotted in Fig. 9(a), where the grain boundary energies are calculated from the lowest 

energy grain boundary models.  It is obvious that the grain boundary energy decreases with 

increasing the atomic radius of dopants, as shown previously in Fig. 4.  However, the addition 

of an impurity appears to shift this curve downwards by an amount that is element-dependent.  

For example, the grain boundary energies of a sample with dopants plus the large impurity Si 

are significantly lower than that of grain boundaries with dopants plus the smaller impurities 

B, C, and O.  Prior work has shown that the grain boundary energy increases with increasing 

excess free volume of grain boundaries in face centered cubic metals [58-60].  Therefore, we 

hypothesize that the reduction in grain boundary energy, which is greatest for large dopants and 

large impurities, occurs because this free volume is being filled and reduced.  The grain 

boundary excess free volume 𝛺[𝑚, 𝑛] can be calculated as [58, 59]: 

𝛺[𝑚, 𝑛] =

𝑉𝐺𝐵[𝑚,𝑛]−𝑉𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘[𝑚,𝑛]

𝑆
                     (8) 

where 𝑉𝐺𝐵  and 𝑉𝑏𝑢𝑙𝑘  are the total volumes of the grain boundary region and the 

corresponding bulk Cu, respectively.  The bulk model has the same cross-sectional area, S, 

and number of Cu atoms as the grain boundary model.  The relationship of the change of grain 

boundary energy (𝛾[𝑚, 𝑛] − 𝛾[0,0]) and the change of the excess free volume (𝛺[𝑚, 𝑛] −

𝛺[0, 0]) is plotted in Fig. 9(b), where grain boundaries with single dopants, single impurities, 

and both dopants and impurities are included.  A general trend is found where the grain 


17 

 

boundary energy decreases as the excess free volume decreasing, which confirms our 

hypothesis that reduction of excess free volume is a key component of reducing the grain 

boundary energy.  Herein, a combination of a larger metallic dopant and a larger interstitial 

impurity can further reduce the grain boundary energy since they can more efficiently fill the 

excess free volume of grain boundary.  For example, dopants plus the largest nonmetallic 

impurity Si have the greatest synergistic effect to reduce the grain boundary energy. 

Previous works on Cu have also shown that the grain boundary energy decreases when 

increasing the interfacial coverage of dopants [27, 53], which supports the scientific concept 

presented here.  In addition, a number of literature reports have shown that grain boundary 

energy increases with increasing excess free volume by comparing distinct grain boundaries in 

various face centered cubic metals, such as Cu [60, 61], Ni [60, 62], Al [58, 59, 62], and Au 

[61].  Considering the similar atomic structures of grain boundary in face centered cubic 

metals, one can predict that the nanocrystalline structural stability of these metals will be 

improved by introducing large dopants and interstitial impurities to fill the excess free volume 

of grain boundaries.  

 

3.4  Competition and synergy between dopants and impurities concerning strength 

Fig. 10 shows the strengthening energies of grain boundaries with both dopants and 

impurities.  A wide variety of behaviors are observed, with both overall strengthening and 

weakening being found.  For example, B addition shifts the curves downwards, having a 

positive effect on grain boundary strength, even if it cannot overcome the negative effect of the 

metal dopant in the case of Bi.  In contrast, O always has the worst embrittling effect and 


18 

 

always pushes the overall grain boundary strengthening effect into the positive values on Fig. 

10, suggesting that O incorporated during materials processing will have a large negative effect 

on mechanical properties.  The strengthening energies are again divided into mechanical and 

chemical contributions in Fig. 11.  The values of the mechanical contributions are 

positive/weakening, except for a few very small negative/strengthening values for B, indicating 

that the mechanical contribution of impurities is generally to embrittle the boundary.  As 

shown in Fig. 2, the mechanical contribution mainly originates from the local structural 

expansion at the interface [52].  The grain boundary expansion, ∆𝑉, can be defined as: 

∆𝑉 = 𝑉(𝐶) − 𝑉(𝐵)                            (9) 

where 𝑉(𝐶) and 𝑉(𝐵) are the total volume of the grain boundary regions in system C and B in 

Fig. 2, respectively.  Fig. 12 shows the relationship between the mechanical contribution and 

the grain boundary expansion, where it is clear that the mechanical contribution becomes more 

positive/embrittling as the grain boundary expansion becomes larger.  As was also observed 

for the samples with dopants only, the chemical contribution dominates the overall 

strengthening effect and the trends in the total effect tend to mimic the changes in the chemical 

contribution.  To understand these trends, we focus on discussing the electronic interactions 

between dopants and impurities in the following section, with an eye for uncovering combined 

effects between the two solute species. 

The combined effects, which can be either synergistic or competing, of metallic dopants 

and nonmetallic impurities on grain boundary strength are of great interest, in order to fulfill 

our original goal of providing a guide for finding potentially useful combinations of dopants 

and impurities to guide materials processing.  The combined effect (𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑏) can be studied by 


19 

 

taking the difference between the strengthening energy of the grain boundary with both dopants 

and impurities (𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,𝑛]) and the sum of the strengthening energies of the grain boundary with 

single dopants (𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,0]) and the grain boundary with single impurities (𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝐺𝐵[0,𝑛]): 

𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑏 = 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,𝑛] − 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝐺𝐵[𝑚,0] − 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝐺𝐵[0,𝑛]                  (10) 

A negative value of 𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟

𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑏 would signal that there is a synergistic effect of dopants and 

impurities, with the combined effect being stronger than the sum of its parts.  In contrast, a 

positive value would signal that the dopant and impurity compete, giving an effect that is 

weaker than the sum of its parts.  Finally, a value near zero will indicates that combined effect 

is very weak, meaning the total effect is simply the sum of the two contributions and there is 

no meaningful interaction between the two species that alters the boundary properties.   

First, we investigate the combined effects of Zr and impurities on the grain boundary 

strength in Fig. 13(a).  For all of the combinations, there is a competing effect between Zr and 

impurities, with this effect becoming worse as the atomic number of the impurities from a given 

period in the periodic table increases.  Fig. 13(b)-(e) show the combined effects of all of the 

different dopants and the impurities B, C, O, and Si.  For dopants and impurities where the 

Far configuration is preferred, the combined effect is near zero, indicating very little interaction.  

For dopants and impurities that are most stable in the Near configuration, only the dopants Al 

and Zn give values close to zero.  In contrast, the combined effect of the dopants Zr, Nb, and 

Mo with impurities result in significantly positive values, indicating a strong competing effect.  

Since the density of states data between the Nb/Mo and Cu are very similar to that of Zr 

and Cu, as shown in Fig. 5, we hypothesize that the origin of the competing effects between 

these dopants and impurities may be similar as well.  To understand the reasons behind 


20 

 

competing effects on grain boundary strength, we explore the details of the electronic 

interactions for the samples with Zr and various impurities.  The density of states data for the 

Zr atom, the impurity atom (Y), and the closest Cu atom in site 2 are shown in Fig. 14.  The 

density of states for Cu appear as thin curves, Zr appear as heavy curves, and the impurity Y 

appear as dashed curves.  For the grain boundary with Zr and H, the s states of H interact with 

the d states of Zr but not with the d states of Cu, suggesting that H has a stronger ability to bond 

with Zr.  As a result, the electronic interaction between the d states of Zr and Cu is weakened, 

which can be the cause behind the large embrittling chemical contribution shown in Fig. 13(a).  

For the grain boundaries with Zr and the second period impurities B, C, N, and O, the main 

electronic interactions occur in the p states of impurities and the d states of Zr and Cu.  The p 

states of impurities interact much more strongly with the d states of Zr than the d states of Cu, 

again indicating that Zr has the stronger ability to bond with these impurities.  In addition, the 

main peaks of the p states for the impurities move to the lower-energy regions as the atomic 

number of the impurities increase, further weakening the interaction with the d states of Cu.  

At the same time, the overlap between the p states of the impurities and the d states of Zr are 

becoming stronger as the atomic number increases.  In total, the interaction between the d 

states of Cu and Zr are weakened by the strong electronic interactions between Zr and 

impurities.  For the grain boundaries with Zr and the third periodic impurities Si, P, and S, 

although Zr stays away from these impurities in the Far configuration, the electronic interaction 

still occurs between the s states of impurities and the d states of Zr and Cu.  As the atomic 

number of these impurities increases, the main peaks of the s states of impurities move to the 

lower-energy regions and overlap more with the d states of Zr.  As a result, the electronic 


21 

 

interactions between the d states of Zr and Cu are weakened by the interactions between Zr and 

these impurities, again giving a weakening effect that increases with increasing atomic number.  

Looking back to Fig. 13, it is clear that the competing effect between the dopants such as Zr, 

Nb, and Mo and the impurities becomes more pronounced with increasing atomic number of 

the impurities within a given period. 

The results above, particularly Figures 9 and 10, can provide a guide for improving the 

stability of nanostructured materials while avoiding deleterious embrittlement.  For example, 

introducing transition metals without fully occupied d orbitals (such as Zr, Nb and Mo) into 

nanocrystalline Cu can significantly improve the thermal stability while also reducing the 

tendency for grain boundary fracture.  These stabilizing and strengthening effects can be 

further improved when combined with the nonmetallic impurity B.  Si may also be an 

acceptable impurity since the grain boundary energy can be dramatically reduced while the 

strength is only slightly decreased.  As mentioned in the introduction, C and O are common 

elements in process control agents for mechanical alloying and are often incorporated into Cu-

based nanocrystalline alloys [17-20].  Although both improve the grain boundary stability, O 

has a large detrimental effect on the grain boundary strength.  Therefore, avoiding O 

contamination is essential in the preparation process for Cu-based nanostructured alloys.  In 

contrast, C only has a small negative effect on strength and may be acceptable due to the 

compromise that is often required for real-world materials processing.  It is worth reiterating 

that the strengthening effect is determined by the chemical interactions in this work, meaning 

that the grain boundary strengthening trends reported here may be different for different base 

metals.  For example, prior experimental work showed that O can improve the grain boundary 


22 

 

strength in nanocrystalline Al [22].  The embrittling and strengthening effects of O in Cu and 

Al, respectively, originate from the different chemical interactions.  Moreover, these chemical 

effects will be sensitive to the electron band structure of the base metal.  For example, the d-

band is fully filled in Cu.  In contrast, W is a common structural metal with a very different 

electronic band structure, so the chemical interactions will likely be different and should be 

investigated if W-rich nanocrystalline alloys are of interest (see, e.g., [29]).  In summary, for 

the stability of nanocrystalline alloys, the finding that both large metallic dopants and 

nonmetallic impurities would be useful additives can be generalized to other face centered 

cubic metals.  When considering the mechanical properties of possible nanocrystalline alloys, 

one would need to pay additional attention to the chemical interactions between the solvent 

and solute, as these dominate in the Cu-rich alloys studied here. 

 

4 Summary and conclusions 

In conclusion, the combined effects of metallic dopants (Al, Zn, Zr, Nb, Mo, Pd, Ag, and 

Bi) and common nonmetallic impurities (H, B, C, N, O, Si, P, and S) on grain boundary energy 

and strength of a Σ5 (310) grain boundary is Cu was investigated using first-principles 

calculations.  The following specific conclusions can be drawn: 

 The relative spatial positions of dopants and impurities are related to the atomic radii and 

electronegativity values.  The dopants with less electronegativity than Cu prefer to bond 

with the impurities, as long as the atomic radii of the dopants and impurities are not 

extremely large. 

 The grain boundary energy decreases as the excess free volume of the grain boundary 


23 

 

decreases.  Therefore, a combination of a larger substitutional dopant and a larger 

interstitial impurity can more efficiently fill the free volume to further reduce the grain 

boundary energy. 

 The strengthening/weakening effects of dopants and impurities mainly originate from the 

electronic interactions with Cu.  Zr, Nb, and Mo can significantly enhance the grain 

boundary strength because of the strong interactions between the d states of the dopants 

and Cu.  In contrast, the strong interactions between the s/p states of the impurities and 

the d states of the dopants will dramatically reduce any strengthening effect. 

 

As a whole, this work deepens the understanding of the combined effects of metallic 

dopants and nonmetallic impurities from the atomic and electronic levels, which can provide a 

guide on improving the stability and avoiding embrittlement of nanostructured materials.  

Such considerations are extremely important, as real-world nanocrystalline alloys typically 

contain a combination of planned or intentional dopants and unplanned or unintentional 

impurities.   

 

Acknowledgement: 

This research was supported by the U.S. Army Research Office under Grant W911NF-16-

1-0369, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51472188, 51521001, and 

51872217), Natural Research Funds of Hubei Province (No. 2016CFB583), the Fundamental 

Research Funds for the Central Universities in China and the “111” project (B13035), and the 

National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFB0310400 and 


24 

 

2018YFB0905600). 

 

 
 


25 

 

References: 

[1] M.A. Meyers, A. Mishra, D.J. Benson, Mechanical properties of nanocrystalline materials, 
Progress in Materials Science 51(4) (2006) 427-556. 
[2] P.R. Cantwell, M. Tang, S.J. Dillon, J. Luo, G.S. Rohrer, M.P. Harmer, Grain boundary 
complexions, Acta Materialia 62 (2014) 1-48. 
[3] T.J. Rupert, The role of complexions in metallic nano-grain stability and deformation, 
Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science 20(5) (2016) 257-267. 
[4] J. Hu, Y.N. Shi, X. Sauvage, G. Sha, K. Lu, Grain boundary stability governs hardening 
and softening in extremely fine nanograined metals, Science 355(6331) (2017) 1292-1296. 
[5] Y.M. Wang, K. Wang, D. Pan, K. Lu, K.J. Hemker, E. Ma, Microsample tensile testing of 
nanocrystalline copper, Scripta Materialia 48(12) (2003) 1581-1586. 
[6] A. Khalajhedayati, Z. Pan, T.J. Rupert, Manipulating the interfacial structure of 
nanomaterials to achieve a unique combination of strength and ductility, Nature 
Communications 7 (2016) 10802. 
[7] T.J. Rupert, W. Cai, C.A. Schuh, Abrasive wear response of nanocrystalline Ni–W alloys 
across the Hall–Petchbreakdown, Wear 298-299 (2013) 120-126. 
[8] B.L. Boyce, H.A. Padilla, Anomalous Fatigue Behavior and Fatigue-Induced Grain Growth 
in Nanocrystalline Nickel Alloys, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 42(7) (2011) 
1793-1804. 
[9] R.A. Andrievski, Review of thermal stability of nanomaterials, Journal of Materials Science 
49(4) (2013) 1449-1460. 
[10] T. Chookajorn, H.A. Murdoch, C.A. Schuh, Design of stable nanocrystalline alloys, 
Science 337(6097) (2012) 951-954. 
[11] K. Pantleon, M.A.J. Somers, Interpretation of microstructure evolution during self-
annealing and thermal annealing of nanocrystalline electrodeposits—A comparative study, 
Materials Science and Engineering: A 528(1) (2010) 65-71. 
[12] J.R. Trelewicz, C.A. Schuh, Grain boundary segregation and thermodynamically stable 
binary nanocrystalline alloys, Physical Review B 79(9) (2009). 
[13] A. Detor, C. Schuh, Grain boundary segregation, chemical ordering and stability of 
nanocrystalline alloys: Atomistic computer simulations in the Ni–W system, Acta Materialia 
55(12) (2007) 4221-4232. 
[14] Y. Li, D. Raabe, M. Herbig, P.-P. Choi, S. Goto, A. Kostka, H. Yarita, C. Borchers, R. 
Kirchheim, Segregation stabilizes nanocrystalline bulk steel with near theoretical strength, 
Physical Review Letters 113(10) (2014) 106104. 
[15] H.A. Murdoch, C.A. Schuh, Estimation of grain boundary segregation enthalpy and its 
role in stable nanocrystalline alloy design, Journal of Materials Research 28(16) (2013) 2154-
2163. 
[16] F. Liu, R. Kirchheim, Nano-scale grain growth inhibited by reducing grain boundary 
energy through solute segregation, Journal of Crystal Growth 264(1-3) (2004) 385-391. 
[17] A. Khalajhedayati, T.J. Rupert, High-temperature stability and grain boundary complexion 
formation in a nanocrystalline Cu-Zr alloy, JOM 67(12) (2015) 2788-2801. 
[18] C. Suryanarayana, Mechanical alloying and milling, Progress in Materials Science 46(1) 
(2001) 1-184. 


26 

 

[19] P. Bhattacharya, P. Bellon, R.S. Averback, S.J. Hales, Nanocrystalline TiAl powders 
synthesized by high-energy ball milling: effects of milling parameters on yield and 
contamination, Journal of Alloys and Compounds 368(1) (2004) 187-196. 
[20] R. Juárez, J.J. Suñol, R. Berlanga, J. Bonastre, L. Escoda, The effects of process control 
agents on mechanical alloying behavior of a Fe–Zr based alloy, Journal of Alloys and 
Compounds 434-435 (2007) 472-476. 
[21] M.-R. He, S.K. Samudrala, G. Kim, P.J. Felfer, A.J. Breen, J.M. Cairney, D.S. Gianola, 
Linking stress-driven microstructural evolution in nanocrystalline aluminium with grain 
boundary doping of oxygen, Nature Communications 7 (2016) 11225. 
[22] F. Tang, D.S. Gianola, M.P. Moody, K.J. Hemker, J.M. Cairney, Observations of grain 
boundary impurities in nanocrystalline Al and their influence on microstructural stability and 
mechanical behaviour, Acta Materialia 60(3) (2012) 1038-1047. 
[23] D.A. Aksyonov, A.G. Lipnitskii, Y.R. Kolobov, Grain boundary segregation of C, N and 
O in hexagonal close-packed titanium from first principles, Modelling and Simulation in 
Materials Science and Engineering 21(7) (2013) 075009. 
[24] M.-R. He, P.J. Felfer, S. Dasgupta, S.K. Samudrala, P.J. Malone, G. Feng, K.J. Hemker, 
J.M. Cairney, D.S. Gianola, Understanding the mechanical behavior of nanocrystalline Al–O 
thin films with complex microstructures, Acta Materialia 77 (2014) 269-283. 
[25] C.J. Marvel, D. Yin, P.R. Cantwell, M.P. Harmer, The influence of oxygen contamination 
on the thermal stability and hardness of nanocrystalline Ni–W alloys, Materials Science and 
Engineering: A 664 (2016) 49-57. 
[26] S. Zhang, O.Y. Kontsevoi, A.J. Freeman, G.B. Olson, Sodium-induced embrittlement of 
an aluminum grain boundary, Physical Review B 82(22) (2010). 
[27] N.Q. Vo, J. Schäfer, R.S. Averback, K. Albe, Y. Ashkenazy, P. Bellon, Reaching theoretical 
strengths in nanocrystalline Cu by grain boundary doping, Scripta Materialia 65(8) (2011) 660-
663. 
[28] S.C. Pun, W. Wang, A. Khalajhedayati, J.D. Schuler, J.R. Trelewicz, T.J. Rupert, 
Nanocrystalline Al-Mg with extreme strength due to grain boundary doping, Materials Science 
and Engineering: A 696 (2017) 400-406. 
[29] X. Wu, Y.-W. You, X.-S. Kong, J.-L. Chen, G.N. Luo, G.-H. Lu, C.S. Liu, Z. Wang, First-
principles determination of grain boundary strengthening in tungsten: Dependence on grain 
boundary structure and metallic radius of solute, Acta Materialia 120 (2016) 315-326. 
[30] V.I. Razumovskiy, S.V. Divinski, L. Romaner, Solute segregation in Cu: DFT vs. 
Experiment, Acta Materialia 147 (2018) 122-132. 
[31] J.F. Nie, Y.M. Zhu, J.Z. Liu, X.Y. Fang, Periodic segregation of solute atoms in fully 
coherent twin boundaries, Science 340(6135) (2013) 957-60. 
[32] X. Zhou, D. Marchand, D.L. McDowell, T. Zhu, J. Song, Chemomechanical origin of 
hydrogen trapping at grain boundaries in fcc metals, Physical Review Letters 116(7) (2016) 
075502. 
[33] S. Bechtle, M. Kumar, B.P. Somerday, M.E. Launey, R.O. Ritchie, Grain-boundary 
engineering markedly reduces susceptibility to intergranular hydrogen embrittlement in 
metallic materials, Acta Materialia 57(14) (2009) 4148-4157. 
[34] W.H. Johnson, On some remarkable changes produced in iron and steel by the action of 
hydrogen and acids, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 23(156-163) (1874) 168-179. 


27 

 

[35] Z. Huang, F. Chen, Q. Shen, L. Zhang, T.J. Rupert, Uncovering the influence of common 
nonmetallic impurities on the stability and strength of a Σ5 (310) grain boundary in Cu, Acta 
Materialia 148 (2018) 110-122. 
[36] J. Wang, R. Janisch, G.K.H. Madsen, R. Drautz, First-principles study of carbon 
segregation in bcc iron symmetrical tilt grain boundaries, Acta Materialia 115 (2016) 259-268. 
[37] A.Y. Lozovoi, A.T. Paxton, Boron in copper: A perfect misfit in the bulk and cohesion 
enhancer at a grain boundary, Physical Review B 77(16) (2008). 
[38] R. Janisch, C. Elsässer, Segregated light elements at grain boundaries in niobium and 
molybdenum, Physical Review B 67(22) (2003). 
[39] J.S. Braithwaite, P. Rez, Grain boundary impurities in iron, Acta Materialia 53(9) (2005) 
2715-2726. 
[40] D. Zhang, Y. Shintaku, S. Suzuki, Y.-I. Komizo, In situ observation of phase 
transformation in low-carbon, boron-treated steels, Metallurgical and Materials Transactions A 
43(2) (2011) 447-458. 
[41] R. Yang, Y.M. Wang, R.Z. Huang, H.Q. Ye, C.Y. Wang, First-principles study on the effect 
of Mn and N on the cohesion of a γ-iron grain boundary, Physical Review B 65(9) (2002) 
094112. 
[42] L. Zhong, R. Wu, A.J. Freeman, G.B. Olson, Effects of Mn additions on the P 
embrittlement of the Fe grain boundary, Physical Review B 55(17) (1997) 11133-11137. 
[43] Y. Zhang, G.-H. Lu, X. Hu, T. Wang, M. Kohyama, R. Yamamoto, First-principles 
computational tensile test on a Na-segregated Al grain boundary with an Si additive and an 
intergranular embrittlement suppression mechanism, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 
19(45) (2007) 456225. 
[44] R. Reiter, A theory of diagnosis from first principles, Artificial Intelligence 32(1) (1987) 
57-95. 
[45] E. Wachowicz, A. Kiejna, Effect of impurities on structural, cohesive and magnetic 
properties of grain boundaries in α-Fe, Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and 
Engineering 19(2) (2011) 025001. 
[46] L. Pauling, Atomic Radii and Interatomic Distances in Metals, Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 69(3) (1947) 542-553. 
[47] W. Gordy, W.J.O. Thomas, Electronegativities of the Elements, The Journal of Chemical 
Physics 24(2) (1956) 439-444. 
[48] J. Hafner, Ab‐initio simulations of materials using VASP: Density‐functional theory 
and beyond, Journal of Computational Chemistry 29(13) (2008) 2044-2078. 
[49] M. Ropo, K. Kokko, L. Vitos, Assessing the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof exchange-
correlation density functional revised for metallic bulk and surface systems, Physical Review 
B 77(19) (2008) 195445. 
[50] R. Tran, Z. Xu, N. Zhou, B. Radhakrishnan, J. Luo, S.P. Ong, Computational study of 
metallic dopant segregation and embrittlement at molybdenum grain boundaries, Acta 
Materialia 117 (2016) 91-99. 
[51] E.L.T. Bentria, I.K. Lefkaier, B. Bentria, The effect of vanadium impurity on nickel 
Σ5(012) grain boundary, Materials Science and Engineering: A 577 (2013) 197-201. 
[52] A.Y. Lozovoi, A.T. Paxton, M.W. Finnis, Structural and chemical embrittlement of grain 
boundaries by impurities: A general theory and first-principles calculations for copper, Physical 


28 

 

Review B 74(15) (2006). 
[53] P.C. Millett, R.P. Selvam, A. Saxena, Stabilizing nanocrystalline materials with dopants, 
Acta Materialia 55(7) (2007) 2329-2336. 
[54] M. Kapoor, T. Kaub, K.A. Darling, B.L. Boyce, G.B. Thompson, An atom probe study on 
Nb solute partitioning and nanocrystalline grain stabilization in mechanically alloyed Cu-Nb, 
Acta Materialia 126 (2017) 564-575. 
[55] G. Duscher, M.F. Chisholm, U. Alber, M. Ruhle, Bismuth-induced embrittlement of 
copper grain boundaries, Nature Materials 3(9) (2004) 621-6. 
[56] T. Tsuru, H. Somekawa, D.C. Chrzan, Interfacial segregation and fracture in Mg-based 
binary alloys: Experimental and first-principles perspective, Acta Materialia 151 (2018) 78-86. 
[57] L. Pauling, The nature of the chemical bond. IV. The energy of single bonds and the 
relative electronegativity of atoms, Journal of the American Chemical Society 54(9) (1932) 
3570-3582. 
[58] T. Uesugi, K. Higashi, First-principles calculation of grain boundary energy and grain 
boundary excess free volume in aluminum: role of grain boundary elastic energy, Journal of 
Materials Science 46(12) (2011) 4199-4205. 
[59] F. Cao, Y. Jiang, T. Hu, D. Yin, Correlation of grain boundary extra free volume with 
vacancy and solute segregation at grain boundaries: a case study for Al, Philosophical 
Magazine 98(6) (2017) 464-483. 
[60] J.J. Bean, K.P. McKenna, Origin of differences in the excess volume of copper and nickel 
grain boundaries, Acta Materialia 110 (2016) 246-257. 
[61] D. Wolf, Structure-energy correlation for grain boundaries in F.C.C. metals—III. 
Symmetrical tilt boundaries, Acta Metallurgica et Materialia 38(5) (1990) 781-790. 
[62] D.L. Olmsted, S.M. Foiles, E.A. Holm, Survey of computed grain boundary properties in 
face-centered cubic metals: I. Grain boundary energy, Acta Materialia 57(13) (2009) 3694-
3703. 

 

 
 


29 

 

Table 1. The atomic radius (Å) [46] and electronegativity [47] of selected dopants and 

impurities, along with the values for Cu. 

Metallic dopant
Al
Zn
Zr
Nb
Mo
Pd
Ag
Bi
Cu

Atomic radius
1.248
1.249
1.454
1.342
1.291
1.278
1.339
1.520
1.173

Electronegativity
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.7
1.6
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.8

Nonmetallic impurity
H
B
C
N
O
Si
P
S

Atomic radius
0.320
0.800
0.771
0.700
0.660
1.173
1.100
1.040

Electronegativity
2.1
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
1.8
2.1
2.5

 

 
 


30 

 

 

Fig. 1. Schematic illustrations of (a) Cu Σ5 (310) grain boundary (GB), (b) the Near and Far 

configurations of the grain boundary with both a substitutional dopant and an interstitial 

impurity, and (c) Cu Σ5 (310) free surface (FS).  For the Near configuration, the dopant and 

impurity bond with each other and stay in the same periodic unit, while for the Far model, the 

dopant and impurity stay in different periodic units. 

 

 
 


31 

 

 

Fig. 2. Schematic illustrations for the calculations of the overall strengthening energy, as well 

as the mechanical and chemical contributions.  The chemical contribution is what remains of 

the strengthening energy once the mechanical contribution has been subtracted.   

 

 
 


32 

 

 

Fig. 3. The segregation energies of metallic dopants at different substitutional sites at the grain 

boundary. 

 

 
 


33 

 

 

Fig. 4. (a) The grain boundary energies of the lowest-energy grain boundaries with metallic 

dopants.  (b) The relationship between grain boundary energy and the atomic radius of 

dopants.  (c) The strengthening energies of the metallic dopants-segregated grain boundaries 

under the Fast and Slow fracture progresses.  (d) The mechanical and chemical contributions 

of the total strengthening energies. 

 

 
 


34 

 

 

Fig. 5. The density of states for the dopant X and the closest Cu atom in site 2.  The density 

of states data for Cu appear as thin lines, while the density of states data for each dopant X 

appear as thick lines. 

 
 


35 

 

 

Fig. 6. The segregation energies of grain boundaries with Zr at different substitutional sites and 

(a) C and (b) O at different interstitial sites with the Near and Far configurations.  (c) The 

segregation energies of grain boundaries with Zr at site 1 and impurities at different interstitial 

sites with the Near and Far configurations.   

 
 


36 

 

 

Fig. 7. Grain boundary energies and strengthening energies of the grain boundaries with Zr 

plus impurities.  (a) The relationship between the grain boundary energy and the atomic radii 

of the impurities.  (b) The relationship between the strengthening energy and the 

electronegativity of the impurities.  (c) The mechanical and chemical contributions to the 

strengthening energies.  The labels Near and Far denote the Near and Far configurations. 

 
 


37 

 

 

Fig. 8. The segregation energies of grain boundary with dopants and (a) impurities at the CTP 

sites and (b) impurities at the PBP sites with the Near and Far configurations. 

 

 
 


38 

 

 

Fig. 9. (a) The relationship between the grain boundary energy and the atomic radii of dopants 

for the grain boundaries with dopants plus impurities.  (b) The relationship of the change of 

grain boundary energy and the change of excess free volume. 

 

 
 


39 

 

 

Fig. 10. The strengthening energies of grain boundaries with dopants plus impurities. 

 
 


40 

 

 

Fig. 11. The mechanical and chemical contributions to the total strengthening energies for grain 

boundaries with dopants plus (a) B, (b) C, (c) O, and (d) Si.  The labels Near and Far denote 

the Near and Far configurations. 

 

 
 


41 

 

 

Fig. 12. The relationship between the mechanical contribution and the grain boundary 

expansion of grain boundaries with dopants plus impurities. 

 

 
 


42 

 

 

Fig. 13. The combined effects on grain boundary strength of (a) Zr and impurities, (b) dopants 

and B, (c) dopants and C, (d) dopants and O, and (e) dopants and Si.  The labels Near and Far 

denote the Near and Far configurations. 

 

 
 


43 

 

 

Fig. 14. The density of states data of the Zr atom, the impurity Y, and the closest Cu atom in 

site 2.  The density of states for Cu, Zr, and the impurity Y appear as thin curves, thick curves, 

and dashed curves, respectively. 

 

 


