Memory formation in matter

Nathan C. Keim,1, 2, ∗ Joseph D. Paulsen,3, 2, † Zorana Zeravcic,4, 2, ‡ Srikanth Sastry,5, 2, § and Sidney R.
Nagel6, 2, ¶

1Department of Physics,
California Polytechnic State University,
San Luis Obispo, CA 93407,
USA
2Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106,
USA
3Department of Physics and Soft and Living Matter Program,
Syracuse University,
Syracuse, NY 13244,
USA
4PCT, Gulliver Lab UMR 7083,
ESPCI PSL Research University, 75005 Paris,
France
5Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research,
Bengaluru 560074,
India
6The James Franck and Enrico Fermi Institutes and The Department of Physics,
The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637,
USA

(Dated: August 27, 2019)

Memory formation in matter is a theme of broad intellectual relevance; it sits at the in-
terdisciplinary crossroads of physics, biology, chemistry, and computer science. Memory
connotes the ability to encode, access, and erase signatures of past history in the state
of a system. Once the system has completely relaxed to thermal equilibrium, it is no
longer able to recall aspects of its evolution. Memory of initial conditions or previous
training protocols will be lost. Thus many forms of memory are intrinsically tied to
far-from-equilibrium behavior and to transient response to a perturbation. This general
behavior arises in diverse contexts in condensed matter physics and materials: phase
change memory, shape memory, echoes, memory effects in glasses, return-point memory
in disordered magnets, as well as related contexts in computer science. Yet, as opposed
to the situation in biology, there is currently no common categorization and description
of the memory behavior that appears to be prevalent throughout condensed-matter sys-
tems. Here we focus on material memories. We will describe the basic phenomenology
of a few of the known behaviors that can be understood as constituting a memory. We
hope that this will be a guide towards developing the unifying conceptual underpinnings
for a broad understanding of memory effects that appear in materials.

CONTENTS

I. Introduction
2

II. Simplest forms of memory: direction and magnitude
3
A. Memory of a direction
3
B. Memory of largest input: Kaiser and Mullins effects
4
C. Memory of a duration: Kovacs effect
6

III. Hysteresis and return-point memory
6
A. Single return-point memories
6
B. Multiple memories through nested hysteresis loops
7

∗ Equal contribution. nkeim@calpoly.edu
† Equal contribution. jdpaulse@syr.edu
‡ zorana.zeravcic@espci.fr
§ sastry@jncasr.ac.in
¶ srnagel@uchicago.edu

C. Generality
7

IV. Memories from cyclic driving
8
A. Memory of an amplitude
8
B. Multiple transient memories
9
C. Cyclic memory in jammed and glassy systems
10

V. Shape memory
11

VI. Aging and rejuvenation
12

VII. Memory through path reversal: echoes
14
A. Spin echoes
14
B. Apparent time reversal in viscous fluids
15
C. The Kovacs effect
16

VIII. Associative memory
17
A. Hopfield neural networks
17
B. Toward models of biological memory
18
C. Associative memory through self-assembly
18

arXiv:1810.08587v3  [cond-mat.soft]  23 Aug 2019


2

IX. Memory of initial conditions in dynamics
20

X. Conclusions
21
A. Some common threads and distinctions
21
B. Making materials functional
22

XI. Acknowledgements
23

References
23

“There are as many forms of memory as there are ways
of perceiving, and every one of them is worth mining for
inspiration” (Twyla Tharp, The Creative Habit).

I. INTRODUCTION

Memories come in many forms and strike us in odd
and seemingly unpredictable ways. We experience this
daily: we have long-term memories of our childhood, we
have short-term memory of where we left our overcoat,
we have muscle memory of how to walk or ride a bicy-
cle, we have memories of smell.
The list goes on and
is overwhelming in its variety. While memory is acutely
present in our consciousness, it is less well recognized as
an organizing principle for studying the properties and
dynamics of matter. However, once we acknowledge this
possibility, we realize that there are, as in our experience
of consciousness, many forms of memory that are stored
in untold numbers of ways in the matter surrounding us.
Some are obvious and mundane while others require a
much greater degree of sophistication and ingenuity to
encode or retrieve from a material. In contrast, mem-
ory loss seems to be less problematic and we often take
it for granted. However, these aspects of memory reten-
tion and loss are intrinsically linked; neither are simple
processes.
As Twyla Tharp, the dancer and choreographer, pro-
claimed in the epigraph above, each form of memory
should be an “inspiration” for asking new questions.
When we apply this dictum to memory in materials,
it gives us a chance to examine the nature of far-from-
equilibrium behavior in a new light. As we will show,
there are a great many ways in which materials can re-
tain an imprint of their previous history that can be read
out at a later time by following protocols that often are
specialized to the type of information encoded. While
undeniably we take inspiration from the idea of memory
in our world of consciousness, we will focus not on such
phenomena but rather on its counterpart in the material
world. Our aim in this review is to indicate the great
variety of issues that can be addressed in this context.
In the physical world, we find many different forms
of memory formation. We are taught early on to store
certain memories by making pencil marks on a sheet of
paper. In a more sophisticated fashion, media such as
compact discs store information as binary markings. In
one form of computer memory, digitized information is

stored in the form of magnetic bits. On paper or a com-
puter, one can store unlimited amounts of information
by increasing the system size. However, some forms of
memory can encode only small amounts of information.
For example, a common feature of glassy physics is that
a system can retain an imprint of what was the largest
strain that was applied to it either by compression or
shear in a specified direction.
Similarly, a system can
store the time over which it has been subjected to an
applied stress.
As these examples suggest, memory engages us in a
study that targets phenomena related to transient or far-
from-equilibrium behavior. A system that has not yet
fully relaxed to equilibrium may retain memories of its
creation while one that is in equilibrium has no memory
of its past; the very process of reaching equilibrium erases
memory of previous training. In the study of evolving
systems, such as in geophysics and on an even grander
scale, in cosmology and astrophysics, one uses informa-
tion from the local terrain or the current state of the
Universe to infer previous conditions.
Disordered, out-of-equilibrium systems are often de-
scribed by a vast rugged potential or free-energy land-
scape. This allows a memory to be formed by falling into
a recognizable state in this terrain. Some memories that
are encoded in this way include, among others, the Hop-
field paradigm of associative memory and the memories
caused by oscillatory shear of a jammed system. Simi-
lar considerations underlie the deep neural networks now
used in machine learning (Mehta et al., 2018), a subject
which is beyond the scope of this review.
Memories may be stored in a myriad of different sys-
tems: from solids to fluids; from paper to stone; from
atomic positions to spin orientations; from chemical-
reaction pathways to avalanches in transition dynamics.
Memories can be encoded in time, as in the spacing be-
tween pulses in a spin echo; in position, as in the spacing
of particles in a sheared suspension; in temperature as in
the rejuvenation, aging and memory of glassy systems; or
in chemical bonding, as in a chemically-controlled soup
of colloids with designed inter-particle interactions. For
each of these forms of information there are specific train-
ing protocols; some systems may need only a single train-
ing pulse while others may require repeated cyclic train-
ing before a signal can be read out reliably. This last
is reminiscent of training by rote that many of us have
experienced in school to learn the alphabet. Although
many materials exhibit memory of past conditions by
some form of history dependence, we will focus here on
examples where a readout method also exists that recov-
ers the encoded information with some fidelity; in the
examples we consider there is a protocol for recovering
as well as storing a specific input.
Each form of memory is a stimulus for asking new
questions and for examining the nature of far-from-
equilibrium materials in a new light.
The observation


3

(b)
(a)
(c)

 backlash

FIG. 1
Memory of a direction. (a) Two concentric cylinders that are rotated with respect to one another may be used
to measure the shear stresses in a suspension of neutrally-buoyant particles in a viscous liquid that fills the gap between the
cylinders. The top graph shows a series of rotations of the outer cylinder (counterclockwise, clockwise, clockwise, counterclock-
wise), with pauses between each rotation. The bottom graph shows a schematic curve of the torque felt on the stationary inner
cylinder; the presence (or absence) of a transient may be viewed as a memory of the previous shear direction. (b) Pulse-sign
memory in the traveling charge-density wave conductor K0.30MoO3.
If an applied current pulse has the same sign as the
previous one, the voltage response lacks a strong transient. (c) Backlash between two gears as a memory of a direction. If the
right gear is rotated clockwise, the left gear responds immediately. If the right gear is rotated counterclockwise, there is a small
lag. Plots in panel a reproduced from Gadala-Maria and Acrivos (1980) with permission; panel b reproduced from Fleming
and Schneemeyer (1983) with permission; and panel c adapted from David Richfield, Wikimedia Commons.

that memories can be stored in a seemingly countless
number of ways raises the question of whether differ-
ent kinds of memories share common principles. Other
questions can be asked: What constitutes a memory?
Are there different categories of memory and can they
be enumerated? How many memories can be stored in
a system—that is, what is the capacity of the memory
storage? How fast can a memory be stored or retrieved?
What is the entropy associated with a memory? What
gives rise to plasticity, that is, the ability of a system to
continue to store new memories? A study of these ques-
tions can be an entr´ee for understanding the nature of
the non-equilibrium world.

As an invitation into this study, this article outlines
a set of memory behaviors. We describe a collection of
distinct physical systems, and show how their responses
may be considered as memories.
The set of behaviors
and systems described here are not meant to be exhaus-
tive. In particular, we will not attempt to cover the vast
range of technology associated with memory storage in
computers, nor the fascinating array of memory effects in
biological function such as in the immune system (Barton
et al., 2015; Osterholm et al., 2012). Rather, we intend
to illustrate the breadth of memory phenomena in ma-
terials and, in the words of Twyla Tharp, to “inspire”
new questions about, and new ways of classifying, mate-
rial properties. We will outline recent advances and raise
open questions that may guide future work. These will
help to identify some of the issues that one must confront
when trying to build a broader understanding of memo-
ries in materials. We hope that our perspective will help
guide the beginnings of such a venture.

II. SIMPLEST FORMS OF MEMORY: DIRECTION AND
MAGNITUDE

A. Memory of a direction

One of the simplest memory phenomenologies is when
a material remembers the most recent direction in which
it was driven. A well known application of this behav-
ior is digital magnetic storage, where an external field
puts individual magnetic regions in one of two polarities
to represent a 1 or a 0. Yet, the same phenomenology
occurs in other materials where it is not commonly asso-
ciated with information storage, such as amorphous ma-
terials made of large particles, from suspensions of non-
Brownian particles in a liquid (e.g., cement) to packings
of dry grains.
For example, this behavior has been studied in a Cou-
ette cell holding a sample of neutrally-buoyant hard
spheres as illustrated in Fig. 1a. When the outer cylin-
der holding the sample is rotated azimuthally, there will
be a torque on the inner cylinder in the direction of
shear. There is a transient period where the torque grad-
ually evolves until it reaches a constant steady-state value
as shown in the first portion of the response curve of
Fig. 1a (Gadala-Maria and Acrivos, 1980). If the rotation
is stopped and then restarted in the same direction, the
torque immediately adopts the steady-state value with no
transient. This behavior occurs because the dynamics are
overdamped and inertia can be neglected completely, so
the particles immediately stop moving when the shear-
ing stops, and they immediately restart almost exactly
where they left off when the shearing resumes.
If the
shearing direction is reversed, however, the response once
again undergoes a transient. This shows that the particle


4

structure in the steady-state has become anisotropic due
to the previously applied shear. One can thus detect the
most recent shear direction by moving the inner cylinder
in one direction and looking for the presence or absence of
a transient in the torque response. Similar behavior has
been seen in dry granular material (Toiya et al., 2004).
The same gross phenomenology was discovered in the
electrical response of charge-density wave conductors
and has been called “pulse-sign memory” (Fleming and
Schneemeyer, 1983; Gill, 1981). Figure 1b shows the ob-
served voltage in a sample of K0.30MoO3 when several
current pulses were applied sequentially. The voltage has
a transient response to the first pulse; the transient dis-
appears for the second current pulse which is in the same
direction as the first. When the direction of the current
is reversed, the transient in the voltage reemerges. Thus,
the response of the voltage depends on the direction of
the last applied current pulse.
In materials science, the Bauschinger effect also dis-
plays a memory of the last direction of driving (Bannan-
tine et al., 1990).
This effect refers to a phenomenon
where the yield stress of a material decreases when the
direction of working is reversed, and it occurs in polycrys-
talline metals and also amorphous materials (Karmakar
et al., 2010). Although the details may certainly differ,
the basic idea is the same as for a sheared suspension or
granular material discussed above: shearing the material
introduces anisotropy in its microstructure. In this case,
plastic deformations encode a direction, which may be
detected in subsequent measurements of the stiffness.
The above examples deal with bulk materials that are
inherently disordered, but the same phenomenology can
be seen in an even simpler system: the coupling between
two gears. Suppose the left gear in Fig. 1c presents some
resistance when it is driven either clockwise or counter-
clockwise by the right gear. If the right gear is turned
in one direction, pauses, and then resumes in the same
direction, resistance will immediately be felt when the
driving resumes.
However, if the rotation is reversed,
there will be a small interval before contact is established
with the left gear, due to the small gap between the gear
teeth. This clearance, called “backlash,” is essential to
prevent jamming of the gears. Its existence means that
whenever we walk away from a simple gear box, we may
leave behind a bit of information that is stored in the
contacts between the gears.
Our discussion of this simple form of memory has
raised several themes that will appear again as we con-
sider more complicated memory behaviors. One theme
is that similar memory phenomena can occur in systems
that seem very different, such as a slurry or a charge-
density wave. Some memories also have a counterpart at
the macro-scale that is material independent, as in the
example of the gears given above. We will show several
more examples of such phenomena throughout the text.
These observations may prompt us to ask how deep the

connections are among such systems: when does similar
memory behavior imply similar underlying physics?
There is also a distinction that can be made:
in
some systems memories persist for extremely long times,
whereas in others the memories are constantly fading and
must be continually reinstated to preserve them. In a
colloidal suspension, the memory of the previous shear
direction is eventually lost as the particles diffuse, losing
their positional correlations. In contrast, in a granular
material, because the energy for any particle rearrange-
ment is much larger than thermal energy, the memory
will remain until the system is disturbed.
In comput-
ers too, there is so-called “volatile memory,” which refers
to a device that only retains data when provided with
power, in contrast to non-volatile memory such as mag-
netic storage, optical discs, or punched cards, which do
not change their state when left alone.
Finally, the ability of many disordered materials to re-
member a direction highlights another theme: memories
can have important practical consequences. When per-
forming rheological characterization, sample preparation
must be done carefully so as to avoid influencing the mea-
surements because of the material’s history. This mem-
ory is one facet of the complex history-dependence dis-
played by emulsions, slurries, and dry grains, which can
complicate their industrial handling and transport, since
their effective bulk properties may depend on what was
previously done to them (Jaeger et al., 1996; Kim and
Mason, 2017; Lasanta et al., 2018).

B. Memory of largest input: Kaiser and Mullins effects

We have just discussed how a material may remem-
ber one aspect of its most recent driving. Slightly more
complex is the ability of many physical systems to retain
a memory of the maximum value of any previously ap-
plied perturbation. For memories of this type, when the
system has been trained by application of an input of a
given magnitude, it shows reversible behavior as long as
the input is kept below that initial training magnitude; in
this range, varying the input leads to reproducible behav-
ior. However, if that input value is exceeded, the system
evolves to a new state so that the system now displays
a new response curve. This curve is itself reproducible
as long as the input does not exceed the new maximum
value.
One example, which is particularly easy to visualize, is
a very thin crumpled sheet confined by a piston of mass,
m, under gravity in a vertical cylindrical tube (Matan
et al., 2002). As the weight compresses the sheet, the
height of the piston, h, decreases logarithmically in time.
The training of the system is accomplished using a mass
m = M1. Because it is not feasible to wait until all re-
laxation has stopped, the training is done for a fixed ini-
tialization time. Once the training is finished, the mass


5

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

102
103
104

height (cm)

mass (g)

h

FIG. 2
Kaiser effect.
Height of a piston compressing a
mylar sheet following the protocol described in the text. The
inset shows the mylar sheet compressed within a cylindrical
tube by a piston of mass m. The piston height, h(m) is re-
producible (shown by blue circles for diminishing mass and
by red triangles for increasing mass) as long as the maxi-
mum mass does not exceed the previously applied maximum
value of m = M1 = 2.6 kg indicated by the dashed line.
When a larger mass (red triangles above 2.6 kg) is placed on
the piston, the curve changes; green square data points show
the reproducible curve after training with m = M2 = 5 kg.
Plot adapted from Matan et al. (2002) with permission; inset:
APS/Carin Cain.

m = M1 is removed, and the height h(m) is measured
for different values of mass m, where for each measure-
ment the fixed waiting time is much smaller than the
initialization time.
As long as m < M1, the measurements are repro-
ducible as shown for a Mylar sheet in Fig. 2; the same
values of h(m) are obtained both on increasing (red tri-
angles) and decreasing (blue disks) m.
However, once
the training mass has been exceeded so that the mass on
the piston is M2 > M1, the situation changes; the curve
h(m) is extended to higher values of m and appears to
have a different dependence above M1 than it did be-
low that value. This is shown by the red triangles above
m = 2.6 kg in the figure. Now, when the height is mea-
sured again starting at low values of m, h(m) no longer
follows the original curve but drops to a lower value.
If the crumpled sheet is now trained at M2 (either by
allowing it to sit under this mass for a long time or by
cycling the mass multiple times up to m = M2), then
a new reproducible curve is found for h(m < M2) as
shown by the green squares in the figure. The crumpled
sheet has a memory of the largest weight to which it has
been subjected. When the system is pushed into a new
regime into which it had never been previously exposed,
it changes irreversibly.

σ 

ε 

FIG. 3
Mullins effect. Schematic stress-strain curve for
the Mullins effect in rubber adapted from Cantournet et al.
(2009). The pristine loading curve (black full line) is smooth.
After partial loading, when the stress, σ, is removed the re-
sponse changes and the unloading curves (red dashed and
blue dash-dot curves) do not follow the original loading. On
reloading, the response is reversible up to where the previous
largest stress had been applied. At that point there is a kink
where the curve rejoins the original pristine loading curve.

The case of the crumpled sheet is not the earliest
example of this rather ubiquitous effect.
It has been
observed in many other systems and goes by different
names depending on the material and the measurement.
The Kaiser Effect was originally observed in the acous-
tic emission of a metal under strain (Kaiser, 1950); the
acoustic emission of the sample vanishes if the applied
stress is smaller than the previously applied maximum
value. The material thus retains a memory of the largest
strain to which it was subjected. Similar behavior is seen
in other materials such as rock (Kurita and Fujii, 1979)
where acoustic emission is a harbinger of material failure.
Another close analogy is the reversible and irreversible
compaction of soil, where reading out the memory of
maximum load (“overconsolidation”) can be crucial in
predicting how a new building will settle (Budhu, 2010).
Another example of this type of behavior is the
Mullins Effect, which occurs in rubber after it has been
stretched (Diani et al., 2009; Mullins, 1948). A schematic
stress-strain curve is shown in Fig. 3. The black (full) line
shows the pristine loading curve that occurs on the first
application of stress.
When the stress, σ, is removed,
the curve does not retrace the pristine loading curve but
drops more rapidly as shown by the red (dashed) curve.
This new response is reversible on reloading up to the
point where originally the stress was removed. At that
point there is a kink where it rejoins the pristine loading
curve. When the stress is increased further, the strain in-
creases as in the original pristine behavior. This unload-
ing/loading procedure can be repeated at different values
of the stress as shown by the blue (dash-dot) curve. The
Mullins effect, as in the Kaiser effect and in the crumpled
sheet, demonstrates a memory of the largest stress that


6

had been applied.

C. Memory of a duration: Kovacs effect

A different type of memory where a single input
value is remembered is the Kovacs effect (Bouchbinder
and Langer, 2010; Kovacs, 1963; Mossa and Sciortino,
2004). Originally observed in polymer glasses, the time-
dependent evolution of a glassy system is observed to
depend sensitively on its thermal history. In the conven-
tional protocol, a sample is cooled and allowed to relax
for some duration at a low temperature, and then warmed
up to a higher temperature. The subsequent evolution of
the sample, observed in quantities such as volume, can
be non-monotonic, exhibiting a peak at a time that de-
pends on the duration spent at the lower temperature
(Bertin et al., 2003; Cugliandolo et al., 2004; Volkert and
Spaepen, 1989). Although the relationship between the
waiting time and the peak time is not always emphasized,
one may view the response as a memory of the duration
of the aging at the low temperature.
This aspect of the Kovacs effect has a simple phe-
nomenology (i.e., a single value is remembered), but the
mechanism is more subtle than the memories presented
in sections II.A and II.B. Because it also has some fea-
tures in common with echoes, we wait until Sec. VII.C
to describe the Kovacs effect in more detail.

III. HYSTERESIS AND RETURN-POINT MEMORY

In Sec. II, we considered a system that remembers the
most recent direction of driving, and we modeled it as
being in one of two states. We can build on this simple
kind of hysteresis by considering a system that responds
to a scalar field H—perhaps from an electrical current
in a magnetic coil—and can be in a “+1” or “−1” state.
The two values H+ and H− are properties of the sys-
tem that specify when it switches states. Conventionally,
H+ > H− for a dissipative system; in this case the sys-
tem is always in the +1 state when H > H+, and always
in the −1 state when H < H−, but in between, the state
depends on the driving history. (We assume the driving is
quasistatic, meaning H is varied much more slowly than
the system’s response.) These systems are basic elements
of hysteresis, sometimes termed “hysterons.”
One conceptually simple and important application of
such hysterons is in digital memory storage. If H+ > 0
and H− < 0, the hysteron retains its state even after
the field is removed and in the presence of noise, thereby
storing a single bit of information indefinitely. In the case
of magnetism the state sets the direction of a magnetic
field made by the hysteron itself; a nearby probe can read
the bit. This models a building block of digital magnetic
memory—the hard disks and tapes that currently store

a

A

b

B

c

C

A

B

c
C

HC
HB

a)

b)

FIG. 4
Return-point memory. (a) Magnetization of a
simulated ferromagnet model (Preisach, 1935) as the applied
magnetic field H is varied. The sequence a → B → b creates
a memory at H = HB. As long as Ha ≤ H ≤ HB, returning
to HB will restore the system to the same state B every time,
regardless of intervening events (such as the excursion to b).
The sequence b → C → c creates a new sub-loop and encodes
a second memory at H = HC. (b) Detail of trajectory from
panel (a), showing signatures of the two nested memories as H
is swept from Hc to HA. Each time a sub-loop is exited (points
C and B), its history is erased and the slope of the curve
changes. Inset: Slope dM/dH during readout. The jumps
at HC and HB indicate memories.
For this figure 5 × 104

hysterons were simulated, with a Gaussian distribution of H+
i
and H−
i
with standard deviation 1.8, and selected so that
H+
i > H−
i .

most of the world’s data (Jiles, 2016).

A. Single return-point memories

When they make up a larger system, these hysterons
can give rise to a rich behavior called return-point mem-
ory, which describes the system’s ability to recall a previ-


7

ous state when H is returned to a previous value (Barker
et al., 1983; Sethna et al., 1993). To illustrate this be-
havior we use the model of a ferromagnet described by
Preisach (1935), in which each hysteron represents a mag-
netic domain that is coupled only to the applied mag-
netic field H, and there is a distribution of H+ and H−

to represent the material’s disorder.
Figure 4a shows
return-point memory in the model’s magnetization M
(the average state of the hysterons) versus H, where H
was varied in the directions shown by the arrows. The
switchbacks and loops on the plot reveal the hysteresis of
the system’s many components. As we follow the evolu-
tion along some trajectory, such as the one through the
labeled states a → B → b → B, we can define an interval
of time that starts when we first reach state B, and lasts
as long as Ha ≤ H ≤ HB, where Ha and HB are the
magnetic field for states a and B, respectively. Return-
point memory means that during this interval, returning
to H = HB will always restore the system to state B.
By contrast, when H < HB, the state depends on the
history of H since HB was last visited. Returning to HB
erases this history.
There is an important side effect of the erasure of his-
tory at H = HB: as we continue past HB toward HA
there is a transition from behavior that depended on re-
cent history (i.e. the excursion to b) to behavior that does
not. Here, we exit the sub-loop delimited by states (b, B)
and rejoin the older outer loop delimited by states (a, A).
There is a subtle change in slope at point B where we first
switched from increasing H to decreasing it. Analogous
to the Mullins effect, discussed in Sec. II and illustrated
in Fig. 3, we cannot see this signature of the memory
without overwriting it.

B. Multiple memories through nested hysteresis loops

Simple memories of one or two quantities, like the
Mullins and Kaiser effects, seem exceptional given the
disorder and many degrees of freedom within most non-
equilibrium matter. Return-point memory gives us our
first example of multiple memories.
We can see this
by applying the definition of return-point memory re-
cursively. In Fig. 4a, at point C we again change from
increasing H to increasing it. This begins a time inter-
val in which H is bounded by Hb and HC. We go on to
traverse a sub-loop delimited by (c, C) that is nested in-
side (b, B). This nested structure means that if we wish
to encode a given set of H values, there is only one or-
dering of the values that works (Middleton, 1992; Sethna
et al., 1993). To read out the memories, we sweep H con-
tinuously toward HA and look for changes in the slope
dM/dH. Figure 4b shows a close-up of the trajectory we
would follow, and its derivative, which reveal the memo-
ries of our reversals at HC and HB. (Note that we could
have instead chosen to sweep the field in the other direc-

tion toward Ha and observed memories of our reversals
at Hc and Hb.) While we are accustomed to the readout
of magnetic memory by observing only the present value
of the local magnetization (as in audio tape or a com-
puter hard disk), this method lets us recover the value
of the applied field that formed each memory in the first
place (Perkovi´c and Sethna, 1997).

C. Generality

Many types of matter can be modeled as collections
of subsystems that are individually hysteretic. It should
therefore come as no surprise that return-point memory is
observed in a wide range of systems beyond ferromagnets,
from spin ice (Deutsch et al., 2004) and high-temperature
superconductors (Panagopoulos et al., 2006), to adsorp-
tion of gases on surfaces (Emmett and Cines, 1947),
to solids with shape memory (Ort´ın, 1991) (not to be
confused with the shape-memory effect itself, discussed
in Sec. V). Interactions within these systems can give
rise to cooperative and even critical phenomena such
as avalanches, so that the actual dynamics are usually
dramatically different from the Preisach model we have
just examined (Sethna et al., 2001). Nonetheless, Sethna
et al. (1993) proved that these systems will have return-
point memory as long as the interactions are ferromag-
netic (i.e. a hysteron flipping to the +1 state encourages
others to do so). Even when this condition is violated,
return-point memory can still hold approximately or un-
der certain additional conditions (Deutsch et al., 2004;
Deutsch and Narayan, 2003; Gilbert et al., 2015; Hovorka
and Friedman, 2008); Mungan and Terzi (2018) have be-
gun work toward a general framework for describing these
behaviors. We will revisit these possibilities in Sec. IV.C.
We can also demonstrate the generality of return-point
memory by finding it in a perhaps unexpected context:
the backlash between gears from Sec. II (Fig. 1c). Con-
sider a long train of N gears, each one driving the next,
with a large amount of backlash between each pair. We
can turn only the first gear, and we neglect inertia so
that the nth gear moves only when turned by gear n − 1.
After a long period of forward rotation, we turn the first
gear backward, but only enough to overcome the back-
lash among the first n gears.
Those n gears begin to
reverse, but gear n+1 is left disengaged by some amount
— a fraction of the total available backlash. Finally, the
first gear is once again rotated forward. As it reaches the
position where it was originally reversed, the entire sys-
tem returns to its previous state, fulfilling return-point
memory.
Just as in the other systems we can encode multiple
memories by repeatedly reversing the direction of the
first gear. Each time we reverse, we rotate by a smaller
amount so that we progressively manipulate fewer and
fewer gears. For each reversal, a pair of gears is left dis-


8

engaged by some fractional amount we choose—we can
place a distinct memory in each of the N − 1 couplings.
This same principle is used in a single-dial combination
lock to store multiple values from the history of a single
input. We can then read out half the memories without
disassembling the gearbox using the same method as in
Fig. 4b: we turn the first gear unidirectionally and note
the positions at which the torque abruptly increases as
each gear is engaged in sequence—a sensation familiar to
anyone who has reset a combination lock dial after using
it.

IV. MEMORIES FROM CYCLIC DRIVING

The memories discussed so far may be written by ap-
plying a deformation or changing a field just once. But
repeated cyclic driving is also ubiquitous: buildings and
bridges are repeatedly loaded and unloaded, tempera-
tures change between day and night, and we practice a
skill repeatedly in the hope of learning it. These forms
of driving may create memories.
Driving that lasts for multiple cycles may also be used
to store multiple values, by varying its parameters (e.g.
strain amplitude) from cycle to cycle. In the previous sec-
tion we encountered one way that a system can remember
multiple values of a single variable. By considering the
case of cyclic driving, we will be able to talk about these
various behaviors using similar language.

A. Memory of an amplitude

When some systems are driven repeatedly, e.g., by
shear, electrical pulses or temperature, they eventually
reach a steady state in which the system is left virtually
unchanged by further repetitions. This behavior is as-
tonishingly common among non-equilibrium systems, in-
cluding granular matter (Mueggenburg, 2005; Ren et al.,
2013; Toiya et al., 2004); crystalline (Laurson and Alava,
2012) and amorphous solids made of colloids (Haw et al.,
1998; Petekidis et al., 2002), bubbles (Lundberg et al.,
2008), or molecules (Packard et al., 2010); colloidal sus-
pensions (Ackerson and Pusey, 1988; Cort´e et al., 2008)
and gels (Lee and Furst, 2008); liquid crystals (Sircar
and Wang, 2010); vortices in superconductors (Mangan
et al., 2008); charge-density wave conductors (Brown
et al., 1986; Fleming and Schneemeyer, 1986); and even
crumpled sheets of plastic (Lahini et al., 2017). Often
there is also an amplitude past which the system cannot
reach a steady state.
It is natural to suspect that the steady state contains
a memory of the driving that formed it over many cy-
cles. An early and important example is a charge-density
wave conductor (Thorne, 1996), which when subjected to
many identical voltage pulses, comes to “anticipate” the

0
0.5
1
1.5
2

0

0.005

0.01
(a)

Particle displacements

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

τ  [Pa]
dτ/dγ  [Pa]

γ

(b)

γ

0
1
2
–0.1

0

0.1

Fraction of particles colliding

(c)

γ

FIG. 5
Memories from cyclic driving. (a) To read out
memory in a sheared suspension, cycles are applied with suc-
cessively larger strain amplitude (horizontal axis). After each
cycle, each particle’s position along the direction of shear is
compared with its position at the start of the cycle (vertical
axis). An untrained system (black triangles) shows no mem-
ory, while a system trained for many cycles with amplitude
γ0 = 1.6 (red circles) shows a memory. (b) After 10 cycles
with γ0 = 1.44, measuring shear stress τ vs. strain γ, and
its derivative dτ/dγ, shows a clear memory in the mechanical
response. (c) Multiple transient memories: In a simulation of
the sheared suspension, memories are read out by monitoring
collisions as strain amplitude is increased, analogous to panel
a. Curves are labeled with the number of training cycles ap-
plied. Training with amplitudes 2.0 and 3.0 is evident after
just 100 cycles, but eventually a steady state is reached with
only one memory. The shaded curve shows the result after
many cycles when noise is added. Panels a and b adapted
from Paulsen et al. (2014) with permission; panel c adapted
from Keim and Nagel (2011) with permission.

end of each pulse with a rush of current (Brown et al.,
1986; Coppersmith and Littlewood, 1987; Fleming and
Schneemeyer, 1986).
An accessible recently-studied example is a suspension
of particles in a liquid when inertia and Brownian mo-
tion are negligible (Cort´e et al., 2008; Keim and Nagel,
2011; Paulsen et al., 2014). For pure Stokes flow, cycli-
cally shearing such a suspension back and forth will re-
turn each particle exactly to its starting point.
How-
ever, pairs of particles that come too close to each other
during shearing may touch and change their trajectories
irreversibly (Cort´e et al., 2008; Pham et al., 2015; Pine
et al., 2005; Popova et al., 2007). Over many cycles of
shearing between strain γ = 0 and a constant amplitude
γ0, the particles may move into new positions where they


9

no longer disturb each other. When viewed stroboscop-
ically (once per cycle), the system stops changing. But
this steady state persists only if strain stays between the
extrema encountered so far (0 and γ0). To read out the
memory of γ0, we begin with a cycle of smaller strain
amplitude, which does not change the system, and then
apply cycles with larger and larger amplitudes until a
change is first observed as shown in Fig. 5a (Keim and
Nagel, 2011; Paulsen et al., 2014). Just past γ0, many
pairs of particles that have been “swept out” of the in-
terval [0, γ0] promptly come into contact (Keim et al.,
2013). Experiments by Paulsen et al. (2014) also show
an immediate, sharp change in mechanical response at γ0
as shown in Fig. 5b, similar to how the Mullins effect is
read out.
Memories formed over many cycles of driving are some-
times termed “self-organized” (Coppersmith, 1987; Cop-
persmith et al., 1997; Coppersmith and Littlewood, 1987;
Tang et al., 1987). This refers to the somewhat efficient
way that the system evolves its many degrees of freedom
to conform to the driving. If a charge-density wave con-
ductor, suspension, or granular packing simply explored
new states at random each time it was driven, it might
never find a steady state. Instead, the evolution is regu-
lated and directed toward the “goal” of conforming to the
driving. For example, in suspensions, driving does not
change the entire system uniformly, but instead disrupts
only the regions where particle positions are inconsistent
with a steady state (Cort´e et al., 2008; Keim and Nagel,
2011), and leaves other regions untouched. Because the
driving regulates evolution, rather than just activating
it, such systems seem predisposed to form specific mem-
ories.

B. Multiple transient memories

When the driving is varied from one cycle to the next,
some of these systems are known to retain memories
of multiple values, but only before the transient self-
organization has finished. This behavior, called multi-
ple transient memories, was first seen in charge-density
waves when the duration of the pulses was varied (Cop-
persmith et al., 1997). The principles are easier to illus-
trate for non-Brownian suspensions. If successive cycles
of shear begin at strain γ = 0 and alternate between
amplitudes γ1 and γ2 > γ1, particle collisions will be re-
duced for strains in the interval from 0 to γ1 more rapidly
than from γ1 to γ2 — the system will respond differently
in each interval. This has been observed in simulations
and experiments (Keim and Nagel, 2011; Paulsen et al.,
2014), as illustrated in Fig. 5c.
In principle, for large
enough systems, we can store arbitrarily many memo-
ries in this way.
There is no restriction on the order
in which we apply these amplitudes; this is in contrast
to the case of return-point memories.
However, once

FIG. 6
Multiple transient memories in a row of
benches on a lawn. The schematic shows the park viewed
from above; the park entrance is at the left, and lighter colors
indicate worn grass. Even though there is only one path, the
grass heights encode the memory that benches 2 and 3 were
visited. If this pattern of visits continues without the grass
regrowing, eventually only the largest memory (bench 3) will
remain. See Paulsen and Keim (2018).

self-organization is completed for [0, γ2], the system’s re-
sponse is uniform (no collisions) in this interval. There is
no way to read or write the memory of γ1, and only the
memories at 0 and γ2 remain. Thus at long times and
without noise, systems with multiple transient memories
recover the Mullins- or Kaiser-effect memory of the ex-
trema of driving.
Remarkably,
this long-term memory loss can be
avoided. Adding noise to the charge-density wave and
suspension systems (Paulsen et al., 2014; Povinelli et al.,
1999) has the effect of prolonging the transient indefi-
nitely, preserving the ability to retain multiple memo-
ries and allowing the memory content to evolve as in-
puts change.
This is a concrete example of “memory
plasticity” whereby a system has the ability to continue
storing new memories. Non-Brownian suspensions also
have a critical strain amplitude above which complete
self-organization is impossible (Cort´e et al., 2008); driv-
ing the system just above this amplitude has the same
memory-enhancing effect (Keim et al., 2013).
The examples of charge-density waves and non-
Brownian suspensions show that two very different sys-
tems, one electronic and one fluid, can show this same
type of memory. It must therefore be a canonical form
of encoding inputs. We describe a third physical exam-
ple (albeit at a macroscopic scale) that drives this point
home. Consider the lawn of a small park, with several
benches arranged in a row as shown in Fig. 6. Visitors
can only enter the park at the left. Some weeks after the
park opens, there is a narrow path worn into the grass.
The heights of the grass along this path encode which
benches were visited, as illustrated by the shading in the
figure. If the grass does not regrow, eventually the path
to the farthest bench that receives visitors will be worn
bare, erasing the memory of all the other benches’ pop-
ularity. This is similar to the charge-density waves, or
the non-Brownian suspensions without noise. However,
if the grass does regrow at an appreciable rate, the sys-
tem can reach a steady state that encodes the full set
of memories — equivalent to the effect of noise in the
other systems (Paulsen and Keim, 2018). Thus all three


10

physical examples show the same form of memory.

C. Cyclic memory in jammed and glassy systems

Multiple transient memories in a suspension were asso-
ciated with particles moving to positions where they no
longer made any contact with their neighbors during a
shear cycle. As the particle density is increased, the sys-
tem may no longer be able to find such positions. Thus,
one might expect that a steady state with memory of a
shear-cycle amplitude could no longer be formed. How-
ever, even in this higher-density regime, one can still ob-
serve memory formation with a surprisingly similar phe-
nomenology to that of the sheared suspensions, but with
crucial differences.
At sufficiently high density, the system undergoes a
dramatic transition: it jams and becomes rigid (Cubuk
et al., 2017; van Hecke, 2010; Liu and Nagel, 2010). In the
jammed state, contacts endure throughout the oscillation
cycle, except for sporadic and abrupt contact changes;
the system traverses a rugged potential-energy landscape
and visits different distinct energy minima. Yet under
cyclic shear, athermal jammed systems can still reach a
steady state in which subsequent cycles leave the sys-
tem unchanged (H´ebraud et al., 1997; Petekidis et al.,
2002). As in dilute suspensions the steady state encodes
a memory, and a suitable readout protocol can recover
the strain amplitude (Fiocco et al., 2014). But the char-
acter of this memory is different—in dilute suspensions,
the steady-state quasi-static motion was fully reversible,
with particles following the same paths in forward and
reverse directions in each cycle; in jammed systems the
motion is periodic but not reversible, so that the parti-
cles trace different paths in the forward and return parts
of the cycle. Thus, each particle traverses a loop so that,
at the end of a cycle, it returns to the identical posi-
tion it had at the start of that cycle (Keim and Arra-
tia, 2014; Nagamanasa et al., 2014; Slotterback et al.,
2012).
In some cases periodic states are found where
it takes multiple cycles to return to a previous configu-
ration (Lavrentovich et al., 2017; Mungan and Witten,
2019; Regev et al., 2013; Royer and Chaikin, 2015).
Simulations of these systems (Adhikari and Sastry,
2018; Fiocco et al., 2014) and experiments (Keim et al.,
2018; Mukherji et al., 2018) show that multiple strain
amplitudes can be remembered from past shearing, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 7. But this memory seems distinctly dif-
ferent from the multiple transient memories in the dilute
case. These systems never lose their capacity for multi-
ple memories, but the order in which memories were en-
coded is important — traits reminiscent of return-point
memory (Sec. III.B). Indeed, microscopic observations
and further modeling show that the steady-state behav-
ior is approximately consistent with return-point memory
(Keim et al., 2018).

0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
γread

0

0.002

0.004

0.006

MSDO

Ncycles =30

Sequential read

    Multiple training 
γ1 = 0.06 &  γ2 = 0.04

0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
γread

0

0.001

0.002

0.003

0.004

MSD(i,i-1)

Ncycles  =  30
Sequential read

γ1 = 0.06 & γ2  = 0.04 

Multiple training

γ2

γ1

FIG. 7
Multiple memories in a jammed solid. Read-
out of memories of two strain amplitudes in a simulation of a
jammed, amorphous solid, adapted from Adhikari and Sastry
(2018) with permission. The system was trained by alternat-
ing between strain amplitudes γ1 = 0.06 and γ2 = 0.04, for
30 repetitions of the pattern. Readout involves applying cy-
cles of increasing strain amplitude γread, starting from zero,
and comparing the state of the system after each cycle to the
state after training. Here mean-squared displacement (MSD)
of particles is used to measure differences. The system returns
to the same state when γread = γ2, and shows a sharp change
in behavior past γread = γ1.

Systems at densities just below jamming can show sim-
ilar behavior (Adhikari and Sastry, 2018; Schreck et al.,
2013), but that behavior appears to be much less sta-
ble at finite temperature and strain rate than in jammed
systems. Continuing a theme of this review, some super-
ficially very different systems also share this behavior;
similar results were found in simulations of a system of
magnetic spins (Fiocco et al., 2014) and in an abstract
model of driven state transitions (Fiocco et al., 2015).
These examples, and a form of spin ice recently studied
in experiments (Gilbert et al., 2015), seem to represent
an extension of return-point memory in which a system’s
disorder must be “trained” for multiple cycles before it
exhibits the return-point behavior (Mungan and Terzi,
2018).

We note that in systems with “native” return-point
memory that need no training, the disorder is quenched:
the hysterons, their interactions, and their coupling to
an external field cannot ordinarily change. In contrast,
these properties are generally not as stable in systems
that require extended training to learn one or more in-
puts; there must be some mechanism by which quenched
disorder emerges (P´erez-Reche et al., 2016). Finally, the
systems we have just discussed are dominated by dis-
order, but the presence of limit cycles, avalanches, and
other nonequilibrium phenomena in crystals hints that
those solids may also harbor rich cyclic memory behav-
iors (Laurson and Alava, 2012; P´erez-Reche et al., 2016;
Sethna et al., 2017).


11

Martensite

(a)
(b)

Martensite

Austenite

cool

deform

heat
(d)

(c)

technology. Since their first clinical use in 2001 [12] and US
commercial availability in 2003, DES’s efficacy, demand,
and cost have been growing exponentially [13]. Current
DESs are polymer-coated metal stents with anti-prolifera-
tive agents embedded within the polymer matrix. Drugs
such as paclitaxel, sirolimus (rapamycin), and dexametha-
sone reduce restenosis by inhibiting proliferation, migra-
tion, and growth of smooth-muscle cells (SMC) [3,14,15].
This in turn reduces the SMC hyperplasia that forms a
layer on the intimal wall of the vessel [3,7].

Even though polymer-coated metallic DESs further

reduce the rate of in-stent restenosis, they do not represent
an optimal solution. Metal stents have limited flexibility
compared to the surrounding arterial wall, and thus induce
a significant compliance mismatch. Even when the overall
structural compliance of the metallic stent is matched to
the compliance of the artery, local stiffness mismatch can
cause the tiny stent ribs to exert significant localized stress
on the artery wall [10]. Furthermore, given the miniatur-
ized ribs required to lower overall stent compliance, only a
limited amount of drug loading can be achieved in the thin
polymer coating on a metallic stent [9].

Various researchers have proposed the use of pure

polymer stents in place of metal stents [9,16–18]. The
feasibility and biocompatibility of polymer stents has been
controversial especially after an early study showed an
inflammation response to polymer coatings on stents
[19,20]. More recently, the biocompatibility of polymers
has been demonstrated in cardiovascular applications
[16,21]. The Igaki-Tamai PLLA polymer stent was the
first to be implanted in humans in 1999 [17]. The obvious
advantages of polymer stents are the dramatic increase of
drug-loading and biodegradation capabilities [9,18,22].
Additional potential advantages include improved compli-
ance matching, ease and cost of fabrication, use of
stereolithography
for
patient
specific
devices
[23,24],

molecular surface engineering [18], and the use of the
shape-memory
effect
for
minimally
invasive
deploy-

ment [9,25].

Shape-memory polymers (SMP) have gained increased

attention over the last several years as a proposed
biomaterial
for
minimally
invasive
surgical
devices

[26–32]. SMPs are defined by their capacity to recover
large deformations from a stored packaged state in
response to an environmental stimulus [32–34]. Shape-
memory activation in polymers is most commonly induced

states [27,31,38]. A useful shape-memor
in thermoset polymers with a distinct gl
appropriate temperature.

Utilizing the shape-memory effect

reliable way to deliver a large polym
minimally
invasive
manner.
The
ste

programmed to activate at body tem
in natural deployment without need fo
(Fig. 1). Strains up to 400% can be reco
without the adverse strain hardening eff
metal stent expansion, facilitating delive
through smaller delivery vehicles. Ano
may prove useful is the realm of pediatri
metal stents cannot be sufficiently exp
the growth of the patient [40–42].
researchers have proposed the use of p
even suggested deployment using shap
ties, very little work has been published
performance of SMPs for cardiovascula
tions. The aim of this paper is to ex
deployment, and subsequent deformatio
several SMP stents with respect to the
crosslinking density, and mechanical de

2. Materials and methods

Tert-butyl acrylate (tBA), di(ethylene glycol) d

MA)
poly(ethylene glycol)
dimethacrylate (PE

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Fig. 1. Recovery of a 20 wt% crosslinked SMP
delivered via an 18 Fr. catheter into a 22 mm ID
body temperature water at 37 1C. Black rings w
deployment visualization.

C.M. Yakacki et al. / Biomaterials 28 (2007) 2255–2263
2256
eir first clinical use in 2001 [12] and US
lity in 2003, DES’s efficacy, demand,

growing exponentially [13]. Current

oated metal stents with anti-prolifera-
ed within the polymer matrix. Drugs
irolimus (rapamycin), and dexametha-
sis by inhibiting proliferation, migra-
smooth-muscle cells (SMC) [3,14,15].
s the SMC hyperplasia that forms a
wall of the vessel [3,7].
lymer-coated metallic DESs further
-stent restenosis, they do not represent
. Metal stents have limited flexibility
rounding arterial wall, and thus induce
ance mismatch. Even when the overall
ce of the metallic stent is matched to
he artery, local stiffness mismatch can
ribs to exert significant localized stress
10]. Furthermore, given the miniatur-
lower overall stent compliance, only a
rug loading can be achieved in the thin
a metallic stent [9].
ers have proposed the use of pure
place of metal stents [9,16–18]. The
mpatibility of polymer stents has been
ally after an early study showed an
nse to polymer coatings on stents
tly, the biocompatibility of polymers
rated in cardiovascular applications
Tamai PLLA polymer stent was the
d in humans in 1999 [17]. The obvious
mer stents are the dramatic increase of
biodegradation capabilities [9,18,22].
advantages include improved compli-

se and cost of fabrication, use of
or
patient
specific
devices
[23,24],

engineering [18], and the use of the
ct
for
minimally
invasive
deploy-

olymers (SMP) have gained increased

last several years as a proposed

minimally
invasive
surgical
devices

defined by their capacity to recover

from a stored packaged state in

vironmental stimulus [32–34]. Shape-
n polymers is most commonly induced
o be triggered by light [35,36] or local

states [27,31,38]. A useful shape-memory effect is observed
in thermoset polymers with a distinct glass transition at an
appropriate temperature.

Utilizing the shape-memory effect is an elegant and

reliable way to deliver a large polymer scaffold in a
minimally
invasive
manner.
The
stents
can
be
pre-

programmed to activate at body temperature, resulting
in natural deployment without need for auxiliary devices
(Fig. 1). Strains up to 400% can be recovered in SMPs [39]
without the adverse strain hardening effects encountered in
metal stent expansion, facilitating delivery of larger devices
through smaller delivery vehicles. Another area polymers
may prove useful is the realm of pediatric stenting, in which
metal stents cannot be sufficiently expanded throughout
the growth of the patient [40–42]. Although various
researchers have proposed the use of polymer stents, and
even suggested deployment using shape-memory proper-
ties, very little work has been published on the design and
performance of SMPs for cardiovascular stenting applica-
tions. The aim of this paper is to explore the storage,
deployment, and subsequent deformation characteristics of
several SMP stents with respect to their glass transition,
crosslinking density, and mechanical design.

2. Materials and methods

Tert-butyl acrylate (tBA), di(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate (DEGD-

MA), poly(ethylene glycol)n dimethacrylate (PEGDMA) with typical
molecular
weights
of
Mn ¼ 550
and
875, and
photoinitiator
2,2-

di
h
2
h
l
h
d
d f
Ald i h
d
d

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Fig. 1. Recovery of a 20 wt% crosslinked SMP stent with Tg ¼ 52 1C
delivered via an 18 Fr. catheter into a 22 mm ID glass tube containing
body temperature water at 37 1C. Black rings were drawn to facilitate
deployment visualization.

C.M. Yakacki et al. / Biomaterials 28 (2007) 2255–2263

e
f

Figure 3 | Microstructures in consecutive cycles. a, Po
surface of Au25 after 64 cycles. b, Austenite (inverse) mi
for three consecutive cycles immediately after taking the
a. c, Polished martensite surface of Au27 after 64 cycles. d
microstructure of Au27 for three consecutive cycles imm
the micrograph in b. e, Polished austenite surface of Au3
f, Martensite microstructure of Au30 for six consecutive
after taking the micrograph in e.

M
©2013

FIG. 8
Shape memory. (a) When this bent titanium-nickel wire (top) is submerged in hot water, it spontaneously re-
configures into a paperclip (bottom). (b) Simplified description of shape-memory alloys. Bottom row: When the sample is
cooled, it undergoes a phase transition to the martensite phase without changing its macroscopic shape. The material may
then be deformed to relatively large strains without changing the topology of the bond network (top). Heating up the sample
recovers the original shape by restoring the cubic lattice (bottom left). (c) Optical microscopy image of the shape-memory
alloy Au30Cu25Zn45. Colors (different shades) indicate different orientations of the martensitic phase. (d) A medical stent
made from a shape-memory polymer, shown expanding in a 22 mm glass tube. Black rings were drawn for visualization. Panel
a adapted from Peter Maerki, Wikimedia Commons; panel c adapted from Song et al. (2013) with permission; and panel d
adapted from Yakacki et al. (2007) with permission.

V. SHAPE MEMORY

Another dramatic instance of a material remembering
its past is the phenomenon of “shape memory.”
Fig-
ure 8a shows a nickel-titanium wire in a messy crum-
pled configuration. Note that the wire is in mechanical
equilibrium in this shape, and if kept at constant ambi-
ent conditions, it would stay in this shape indefinitely.
Remarkably, when the wire is heated, it spontaneously
reconfigures into a paperclip. Evidently, this shape was
somehow programmed into the material at a previous
time.
At the heart of the effect is a phase transforma-
tion (Bhattacharya, 2003).
For sufficiently high tem-
peratures the thermodynamically-stable phase is a sim-
ple cubic lattice called austenite, whereas at lower tem-
peratures the material transforms to a lower-symmetry
martensite phase. Crucially, when the paperclip is cooled
down, it can transition from austenite to martensite with-
out significantly changing its macroscopic shape, by form-
ing the martensite phase in alternating orientations (i.e.,
a “twinned martensite”). This solid-to-solid phase tran-
sition from one crystal structure to another is drawn
schematically in Fig. 8b. Then, when stress is applied

to the material, the orientation of any martensite region
may flip to its mirror-image version (i.e., its twin), al-
lowing large strains in the material while keeping the
bond network unchanged. Because the different twinned
microstructures are all mechanically stable, the material
will hold a new shape when the external stress is released.
Thus, despite the different macroscopic appearance of the
entire wire, the atoms in the two macroscopic configura-
tions in Fig. 8a have approximately the same network of
atomic bonds—this is the key to the recovery of a pre-
programmed shape. When the wire is heated, the mul-
titude of microscopic shear deformations are removed as
the microstructure returns to the austenite phase, and
the original macroscopic shape is recovered.
Shape memory alloys may also be reprogrammed to
learn a different shape.
This is done by forming the
austenite phase when the rod is in a new configuration
(typically by clamping the sample tightly, raising it to a
much higher temperature, and cooling rapidly). In this
way, the bond network in the austenite phase is re-wired
to prefer a different shape. Thus, these materials may
learn new memories while forgetting old ones.
This simplified picture gets at the essence of the “one-
way effect,” but it ignores other rich aspects of real shape


12

memory alloys. For instance, the samples generally re-
quire multiple thermal or mechanical training cycles to
learn a particular shape, in order to coax crystal defects
and grain boundaries into desirable configurations. Fig-
ure 8c shows one example of a complex arrangement of
the martensitic domains, from Song et al. (2013). Sur-
prisingly, these materials also show signs of critical be-
havior, even though the relevant phase transition is first
order (Gallardo et al., 2010). This criticality appears to
be a self-organized behavior that arises in the steady-
state of cyclic driving (P´erez-Reche et al., 2016, 2007).
Other surprising phenomena that we do not address here
are the ability to train two shapes into a single sam-
ple (the “two-way effect”), as well as superelasticity, in
which the austenite-martensite transition occurs at am-
bient temperature—here the sample is driven into the
martensite phase by an external stress, and the material
returns to the austenite phase when the stress is removed,
thereby allowing unusually large reversible deformations.
Recent efforts try to understand some of these behav-
iors by focusing on the constraints that arise from fitting
together separate phases of a material (James, 2019).
How does shape memory compare to the other mem-
ories we have considered? In this case, the memory is
stored in the network topology of the constituent atoms,
namely, the set of bonds between the atoms. If the ma-
terial is not deformed too far, the bonds remain intact,
which allows the atoms to return to their original posi-
tions upon heating. In this sense, the behavior is not so
different than the simple “memory” of an elastic solid—
the familiar and commonplace phenomenon that an elas-
tically deformed solid will return to its rest state when
loading is removed. What makes shape-memory materi-
als different from typical elastic solids is a mechanism for
temporarily arresting a deformed configuration. This is
achieved by mixing together different symmetry-broken
domains of the martensite phase to assume a different
macroscopic shape, as we described in Fig. 8b.
As a
result, the deformed configuration is mechanically sta-
ble, yet the material has retained its original network of
bonds.
A similar shape memory effect can occur in poly-
mers (Lendlein and Kelch, 2002) but by a different mi-
croscopic mechanism. Here the effect relies on polymer
chains that can be tuned from being flexible to being
rigid as a function of temperature, typically by vitrifi-
cation or crystallization (Mather et al., 2009). Starting
with a suitable polymer sample, a deformation is applied
and held while the sample is cooled below a transition
temperature where the polymer chains become rigid. As
a result, the sample holds the deformed shape when it
is released. Raising the temperature returns the poly-
mer chains to their flexible state, and the sample recov-
ers its original macroscopic shape. This shape recovery
is primarily entropic in nature—the original macroscopic
shape is preferred because it allows the largest number

of microscopic polymer conformations. As in the case of
shape memory alloys, the topology of the bond network
is maintained throughout the entire process.
Due in part to their relatively low cost, shape-memory
polymers are finding use in a wide range of applications.
Figure 8d shows a medical stent that is activated by body
temperature to expand inside a blood vessel. In addition
to medicine (Mano, 2008), shape-memory polymers are
starting to be used in textiles (Chan Vili, 2007), struc-
tural repairs such as self-peeling adhesives (Xie and Xiao,
2008), and self-deployable structures for space applica-
tions (Sokolowski and Tan, 2007). Alternative triggering
mechanisms such as light (Lendlein et al., 2005) further
expand the range of possible uses.
While more expensive, shape-memory alloys can with-
stand much larger loads than polymers, and they are used
as sensors and actuators in a variety of aerospace, auto-
motive, and biomedical settings (Lagoudas, 2008). There
are also important engineering challenges for improving
these materials, such as delaying their eventual failure
due to many cycles of actuation (Chluba et al., 2015).

VI. AGING AND REJUVENATION

A very different type of memory can form in spin
glasses, which are magnetic materials with quenched dis-
order, arising for instance due to a mixture of ferromag-
netic and antiferromagnetic bonds. One way of probing
these materials is by their response to an applied mag-
netic field via the magnetic susceptibility, χ. This quan-
tity may be measured continually to monitor the material
as a function of temperature and time. Figure 9a shows
the out-of-phase part of the ac magnetic susceptibility,
χ′′, in the spin glass CdCr1.7In0.3S4, measured at low
frequency and low applied field (Jonason et al., 1998).
The thick curve shows the measurements starting from
25 K and going down to 5 K at a constant cooling rate of
0.1 K per minute. If the experimenter repeats the same
cooling protocol but holds the sample at some intermedi-
ate temperature for an interval of time (e.g., at 12 K as
shown in the figure), the out-of-phase susceptibility grad-
ually drops to lower and lower values. This phenomenon
is called “aging,” wherein the sample relaxes through a
series of states with progressively lower energy. (The dy-
namics of aging is in general very slow and may proceed
logarithmically in time, as in the example of the piston
compressing a crumpled mylar sheet in Sec. II.B. Thus,
the lowest value of χ′′ that may be measured at any given
temperature is set by the amount of time available to the
experimenter—the lower open symbol at 12 K shows the
final value obtained after 7 hours of aging, which rep-
resents the lowest-energy state the system was able to
find.) Remarkably, as the temperature is lowered again,
χ′′ climbs up to where it “should have been”—the sys-
tem seems to have forgotten everything about the aging.


13

0
100
200
300
400

0

1

2

3

M

N = 30, f = 4 10-3

Tage = 150

age = 4 104

0
100
200
300
400

0

aged
M
M

T

Tage = 150

age = 4 104

Tage = 100

age = 105

T

0
5
10
15
20
25
0.00

0.01

0.02

aging at 
T1=12 K

χ" (a.u.)

  Decreasing T
  Increasing T
  Reference

T (K)

(a)
(b)

FIG. 9
Aging and rejuvenation. (a) Relaxation of the spin-glass CdCr1.7In0.3S4, measured by the imaginary part of the
magnetic susceptibility. The thick curve is obtained when cooling from 25 K down to 5 K at a constant rate. Solid symbols:
If the system is held at an intermediate temperature, here 12 K, the susceptibility slowly drops (“aging”), but upon further
cooling it returns to the curve it was previously following (“rejuvenation”). Remarkably, the same curve is traced out upon
reheating at a constant rate (open symbols). (b) Left: Similar behavior is observed in a simple number-sorting algorithm,
where nearest neighbors are swapped with a probability given by a Boltzmann factor. Right: Subtracting the reference curve
(obtained for a constant cooling rate) makes the trend more clear. Panel a adapted from Jonason et al. (1998) with permission,
and panel b reproduced from Zou and Nagel (2010) with permission.

Evidently, finding a lower-energy state at 12 K had little
effect on the properties of the system at 10 K.
This behavior, called “rejuvenation,” is certainly sur-
prising, but something even more remarkable happens as
the sample is subsequently heated up. The solid symbols
show that upon reheating at a constant rate, χ′′ dips at
12 K—there is a memory of the temperature where it was
aged! After that point in the experiment, all of these fea-
tures are erased; it is only on increasing the temperature
that one can retrace what happened on the way down.
Further experiments show that multiple memories
may be stored simultaneously within a single sam-
ple (Bouchaud et al., 2001; Jonason et al., 2000, 1998;
Vincent, 2007). Here the sample is aged at multiple tem-
peratures during the cool-down. When the temperature
is increased, a dip is observed at each temperature where
the system was aged.
The origin of this memory behavior is not yet fully
understood. In principle, numerical simulations of spin-
glass models could provide valuable insight into the relax-
ation processes and the relevant length-scales involved.
Unfortunately, reproducing the phenomenon on a com-
puter has proven difficult, and several studies have re-
ported different interpretations of the situation (Berthier
and Bouchaud, 2002; Komori et al., 2000; Picco et al.,
2001; Takayama and Hukushima, 2002).
In light of
this, Maiorano et al. focused on identifying the basic
phenomenology of finite-dimensional Edwards-Anderson
spin-glass models (Maiorano et al., 2005). They found
only simple cumulative aging, which is incompatible with
rejuvenation over the timescales they studied.
In the
same year, Jim´enez et al. reported deviations from cu-
mulative aging in these models (Jim´enez et al., 2005).
Whether rejuvenation and memory might be recovered
at longer timescales, or whether further physical effects

must be added to the Edwards-Anderson model to repro-
duce the experimental phenomenology, remains an open
question.

If this memory behavior only occurred in spin glasses,
while very interesting it might be just an isolated phe-
nomenon. However, one can also observe this behavior in
molecular glasses (Yardimci and Leheny, 2003) and poly-
mers (Bellon et al., 2002; Fukao and Sakamoto, 2005).
Remarkably, the same effect occurs in a simple model
where a list of numbers is sorted in a thermally-activated
manner (Zou and Nagel, 2010). Suppose you are given
the numbers 1 through 5 in a random order, and you
want to put them into increasing order. One way would
be to pick a random nearest-neighbor pair and swap them
with a probability given by a Boltzmann factor where
temperature is replaced by an effective temperature and
the energy is a function of the difference between adja-
cent pairs of numbers.
In addition there is an energy
term that couples the system to an external field that
favors sequences of numbers in ascending (or descend-
ing) order. This is actually a terrible algorithm in terms
of how many steps are required, but it has the flavor of
a physical annealing process. Interestingly, this sorting
algorithm turns out to show glassy behavior. To draw
an analogy with the spin-glass experiments above, one
may define a susceptibility in this system as its linear
response with respect to variations in the external field.
That susceptibility, χ′′
M, displays a logarithmically slow
relaxation to the fully-sorted state. Even more than this,
if you take just 30 numbers and do a similar cooling pro-
tocol, you can observe aging, rejuvenation, and memory,
as shown in Fig. 9b. The relevant features are somewhat
subtle in the raw curves, but they become clearly appar-
ent when the reference curve is subtracted, as shown in
the second panel of Fig. 9b.
This result is not trivial


14

at all—it is not easy to think about how this arises in
thermally-activated list sorting. What we can say is that
this looks like a generic kind of memory formation.
An eventual explanation of this memory behavior must
address how the memory is stored and survives so that
it can be read out at a later time. One promising view is
that aging coarsens the system, organizing it over larger
and larger lengthscales. This makes the memory robust
to any subsequent evolution over shorter times, which
would correspond to smaller lengthscales.
This phys-
ical picture has been exploited by a recent simulation
algorithm called “patchwork dynamics,” which accesses
the non-equilibrium behavior of spin glasses over a broad
range of timescales by directly equilibrating the model
glass on successively larger lengthscales (Thomas et al.,
2008; Yang and Middleton, 2017).

VII. MEMORY THROUGH PATH REVERSAL: ECHOES

A shout across a mountain valley often results in an
acoustic echo as the sound is returned to its source a few
moments later. The sound waves reflecting from the far
side of the valley follow in reverse the path along which
they propagated in the first half of their journey. This is
as close as one can get to time reversal—the velocities of
the wave packets are reversed and they follow the iden-
tical path both to and from the valley’s far side. The
sound waves that return to their source contain a mem-
ory of what was shouted including the timing between
different syllables.

A. Spin echoes

Perhaps due to our familiarity with this phenomenon,
such acoustic echoes are captivating but they no longer
challenge our intuition. However, they have counterparts
in various material systems which are not at all intu-
itive; they are subtle, challenging to understand, and ul-
timately very surprising. A well-known example is the
case of the spin echo first demonstrated by Edwin Hahn
(1950) and developed by Carr and Purcell (1954)—one
of their measurements is shown in Fig. 10a. Such echoes
are now an integral component of how MRI (Magnetic
Resonance Imaging) produces a three-dimensional repre-
sentation of water- or oil-containing samples. As with
the more familiar acoustic echo, these spin echoes like-
wise preserve a memory—they encode the precise timing
between discrete radio-frequency pulses applied to an en-
semble of spins.
In the spin echo, a large static magnetic field H0ˆz pro-
duces a small polarization of the spins in the sample;
slightly more of the spins point in the +ˆz than in the
−ˆz direction. Each spin precesses about the ˆz axis at
its Larmor frequency ω, determined both by the applied

static field H0ˆz, and the small magnetic inhomogeneities
in the sample. When a radio-frequency (RF) pulse tuned
to the average ⟨ω0⟩ is applied in a direction perpendicu-
lar to H0 the spins rotate away from +ˆz axis. The trick
with the spin echo is that the RF pulse can be applied for
only a short time so that when it is turned off, the spins
instantaneously point in an arbitrary direction—in the
simplest case for this explanation, a “π/2 pulse” rotates
spins into the x-y plane perpendicular to ˆz, where they
again precess about the static field H0ˆz. Because of the
local inhomogeneities of the magnetic field in the sample,
the Larmor frequency varies from one spin to another so
some spins will precess farther. This causes the spins to
dephase so that they will eventually fan out and point in
all directions in the x-y plane.
After the spins have been allowed to dephase for a
time τ, another RF pulse of twice the duration (called a
π pulse) is applied, flipping the spins in their orientation
in the x-y plane. The spins will once again precess about
the field with the same Larmor frequency that they had
originally. However, the fast and slow spins have been
switched. The fast spins (that had rotated farther during
the period between the pulses) will now be in a position
where they lag behind those that precess more slowly.
Now, because the fast spins rotate more rapidly, after
waiting an additional time τ they will catch up with the
slow ones that were in a lower field. This realignment
can be read out in a pulse. Such an echo is a memory of
the time delay, τ, between the two RF pulses. Multiple
RF pulses, with different durations, can also be applied;
these protocols have helped to make nuclear magnetic
resonance a useful tool for measuring and unscrambling
many different spin interactions in solids.
The spin echo is only one of many related effects.
Similar behavior is associated with other ensembles of
two-state systems. These include photon echoes (Kur-
nit et al., 1964) as well as phonon echoes (Golding and
Graebner, 1976), which have been interpreted as due to
quantum mechanical tunneling between two nearly de-
generate configurations in low-temperature glasses.
Other echoes— Other types of echoes do not require
a two-state system in order to return an imposed sig-
nal. An example is the temperature quench echo shown
in Fig. 10b, which only requires a set of classical normal
modes that share energy between kinetic and potential
energy contributions (Nagel et al., 1983). Another echo
is the anharmonic echo that appears in a set of anhar-
monic modes (Fig. 10c). This requires the frequency of
a mode to vary with its amplitude (Burton and Nagel,
2016; Gould, 1965; Hill and Kaplan, 1965; Kegel and
Gould, 1965).
In all these cases, the memory is encoded in the coher-
ence of the spins (or oscillators). The initial pulse sets
up a reference time when all the phases are in synchrony
with one another. The system then evolves according to
its dynamics and apparently de-phases so that the phase


15

(A)

Frc. 4. Effect 'of the homogeneity
of the field on the widths
of

tails and echoes. The tails and echoes associated
with a sample

(A) in a very
homogeneous
field
are wide
compared
to those

associated with a sample (8) in a less homogeneous
Geld.

i Bloembergen,
Purcell, and Pound, Phys. Rev. 73, 679 (1948).

of the molecules
through
the inhomogeneous
external

field II,. Therefore
if diffusion
is important,
a decay or

relaxation
time measured
by Method
A is "artificially"

determined
by the external magnet.

In the present
work a new method
for obtaining
an

echo envelope
which reveals the "natural" decay even

in the presence of diffusion
has been introduced.
This

method of measurement
will be referred to as Method B.

In Method
A a number
of 90' pulses must be applied

to the sample
in order to obtain sufhcient
data to plot

the envelope.
Each 90' pulse
is followed
by an 180'

pulse and the accompanying
echo. Between each 90'-

180' sequence
sufficient
time must elapse to allow the

sample
to return
to its thermal
equilibrium
condition.

In Method 8 a single 90' pulse
is used to obtain
an

entire
echo envelope
without
requiring
the sample
to

return to thermal
equilibrium.
This is accomplished
by

initiating
the measurement
with
the usual 90' pulse

at t=0. A 180' pulse is then applied at time t= r. The

s R. K. Wangsness
and F. Bloch, Phys. Rev. 89, 728 (1953).

(i A. Abragam
and R. V. Pound, Phys. Rev. 92, 943 (1953).

(a)

nonlinear way with the excitation pulses, as in temperature
quench echoes [42,43]. Another possible mechanism involves
anharmonic oscillators whose resonant frequency shifts with

FIG. 1. (a) Acoustic echo generated in jammed systems com-

posed of 1000 particles at φ = 0.70. The result is an average
over the response of 10000 independent systems. After a series of
excitation pulses separated by time τ, a spontaneous re-phasing of the
vibrational modes occurs at a time t = 2τ. (b) Visual representation
of one of the jammed systems used in generating the echo. The
red particles are 1.4 times larger than the blue particles. The acoustic
pulses are excited by a transverse standing wave along the x-direction.

The ma

dimensiona
with finite-r
binary mix
particles ha
particles is

V (

where rij is
j, and ϵ is
reported her
of m, and f
in the poten
mechanics
type of pot
interaction.
the harmon
the frequen
vibrational
for the gene
in Sec. III.

Individu

particles in
all sides, wh
is then quen
minimum u
algorithm [4
or unjamm
particles. F
here, jamm
reported he
the systems
at this volu
have no ov
contribute t

032905-2

(c)

(d)

(b)

⌧
⌧

FIG. 10
Echo phenomena. (a) Spin echo produced with the pulse sequence described in the text. The timing of the two
input pulses are indicated above a photograph of the oscilloscope trace; the subsequent peak is the echo. Note that there
is no signal coinciding with the “π” pulse, as this simply flips the (dephased) spins at that instant. (b) Quench echo in a
simulated Lennard-Jones glass of 500 particles. The two quenches consist of setting the kinetic energy of the particles equal to
zero instantaneously. Because they have potential energy, they will start to move again after each quench. Remarkably, this
leads to an echo at a later time. (c) Echo in a jammed amorphous solid due to anharmonic modes. The signal is an average
of 10,000 independent simulations, each composed of 1,000 soft spheres in three dimensions. (d) Echo in a system of capillary
waves. A dish of water is disturbed by a face-shaped template, creating surface waves that radiate outwards. The entire dish
is then accelerated downwards, causing the existing ripples to act as sources, sending a new set of “time-reversed” waves back
to the site of the initial disturbance. The face reappears as the waves reconvene. Panel a reproduced from Carr and Purcell
(1954) with permission; panel b reproduced from Nagel et al. (1983) with permission; panel c reproduced from Burton and
Nagel (2016) with permission; and panel d adapted from Bacot et al. (2016) with permission.

of each oscillator appears to be unrelated to that of all
the others. A snapshot at any instant of time would not
appear to have any special order within the sample. How-
ever, the second pulse allows all the phases to coalesce at
a later time.

Capillary waves present another arena where an echo
may be produced. Raindrops striking a puddle or pond
create surface waves that are easily observed with the
naked eye. Starting from an initially-localized wave front,
the different wavelength components radiate outwards at
different speeds, so the total energy is spread over a grow-
ing area and the waves become harder to see. If you were
to watch a video of this scene in reverse, it would look
awry: the waves would instead travel inwards towards
a single point and arrive there in concert, focusing all
their energy at that location. Remarkably, recent exper-
iments have shown that this reversal of dynamics may
be achieved in real time (Bacot et al., 2016). By impos-
ing a sudden downward acceleration to a bath of water
at some time τ after an initial surface perturbation, the
existing ripples act as sources that create two waves –
one continuing onward plus a “time-reversed” wave that

propagates in the opposite direction. As in other echo
phenomena, the refocusing occurs a time τ after the sec-
ond pulse (in this case the downward acceleration of the
bath). Moreover, this protocol even reproduces the shape
of the initial perturbation, as shown in Fig. 10d.
In the study of all these echo phenomena, the crucial
ingredient for creating a memory is the ability to retrace
the dynamics in the reverse order from how the initial
system evolved. That is, it relies on a form of time re-
versal in which the spins (or waves) are manipulated to
be in a configuration so that they effectively retrace their
previous dynamics. (For anharmonic echoes, the effect is
attributed to phase conjugation (Korpel and Chatterjee,
1981), which is closely related to time reversal.) This is
one distinctive way in which matter can retain a memory
of the inputs.

B. Apparent time reversal in viscous fluids

Such behavior is not only relegated to the case of an
echo. It is well known that a liquid of sufficiently high
viscosity (i.e., low Reynolds number) is reversible if the


16

boundaries are distorted and then returned to their orig-
inal positions along precisely the reverse sequence of mo-
tions as they were originally deformed. This phenomenon
is showcased in a video-recorded demonstration by G. I.
Taylor for the National Committee for Fluid Mechanics
Films (Taylor, 1985). He begins with a synopsis: “Low
Reynolds number flows are reversible when the direction
of motion of the boundaries which gave rise to the flow
is reversed. This may lead to some surprising situations,
which might almost make one believe that the fluid has
a memory of its own.”
In the demonstration, a blob of dye is introduced into
a viscous liquid occupying a narrow gap between two
cylindrical walls. When the inner cylinder is rotated, the
fluid is sheared and the spot of dye smears out into a
sheet. After the first shear, it appears as if the fluid is
completely mixed and that there is no way of regaining
the original conformation. But there is a subtle memory
in the fluid that “remembers” where it came from. When
the shear is then performed in the opposite direction, the
spot reappears.
This memory, like the spin echo, is surprising but is
based on the idea of time (or more precisely, path) re-
versal. If the system can be manipulated so that after a
first set of deformations, the dynamics can be made to
repeat itself but in the opposite direction then there is a
reversal of dynamics (if not in the time itself).

C. The Kovacs effect

Another situation in which this type of behavior shows
up is in a form of relaxation phenomenon. Consider a sys-
tem that has a set of modes by which relaxation can take
place.
Each of these modes has a specified relaxation
time (or spectrum of times). The origin of these relax-
ation times is a detail of the system that is often unclear,
though in some cases they are simply the relaxations of
a material’s subsystems individually (Chakraverty et al.,
2005).
Independent of where the system is started, it
will approach an equilibrium state via these relaxation
modes. The ones with short time constants will equili-
brate first and the ones with longer time constants will
equilibrate more slowly. It is important to specify that
the time constants themselves do not change due to a
perturbation of the system.
If the system is perturbed so that it relaxes toward a
new state, all the modes will relax. However, if the sys-
tem is only held in this new position for a waiting time
τtrain before it is returned closer to its starting configu-
ration, then only the modes that have relaxation times
smaller than τtrain will contribute appreciably to that re-
laxation. The modes with longer relaxation times will not
have had a chance to evolve much (Chakraverty et al.,
2005).
The memory may be seen in the behavior of
the system after the set of two perturbations has been

Control param.
Response

time

τtrain

τpeak

FIG. 11
Kovacs effect. Top curve shows the general ex-
perimental protocol, whereby a perturbation is applied to a
sample for a duration τtrain, and then the size of the pertur-
bation is reduced and held constant at a value closer to the
initial one. Bottom curve shows the response, which peaks at
a time τpeak that is proportional to τtrain, indicating a memory
of τtrain. Experiments show such a memory of waiting time
in a crumpled mylar sheet (Lahini et al., 2017), where the
control parameter is the volume controlled by a piston, and
the response is the force exerted by the sheet on the piston.
(See the image inset in Fig. 2.)

applied (shown by the response curve in the bottom of
Fig. 11). In particular, the initial relaxation appears to
be in the reverse direction of the first perturbation, but
then at a later time the system responds as if the in-
termediate perturbation had never happened. This non-
monotonic behavior contains a memory of the time the
system was forced to wait after the initial perturbation.

This effect is named after Andr´e J. Kovacs who dis-
covered it in amorphous polymers, as noted earlier (Ko-
vacs, 1963; Kovacs et al., 1979). An analogous example of
this behavior is in the physics of crumpled sheets (Lahini
et al., 2017). We note that the behavior of a crumpled
thin sheet was also used above in Section II.B to illustrate
the rudiments of another form of memory, the Kaiser ef-
fect. In these experiments, a sheet of plastic is prepared
by crumpling it many times, then confined in a cylin-
der. It is compressed into a smaller volume for a time
τtrain and then allowed to expand into an intermediate
volume.
Once the sheet expands it begins to exert a
force on the container. This force continues to grow for a
time comparable to τtrain, but then starts to decay as the
slower modes become involved—modes slow enough to
effectively ignore the time spent at the smallest volume.
The elapsed time until the peak force, τpeak, is propor-
tional to τtrain and is a memory of the waiting time. A
similar behavior has been observed in measurements of
the total area of microscopic contact between two solid
objects, where a large normal force is applied for a du-
ration τtrain and then reduced to a smaller value, thus
demonstrating that frictional interfaces exhibit a similar
type of memory of their loading history (Dillavou and
Rubinstein, 2018).


17

The model proposed for the Kovacs effect in com-
pressed crumpled sheets relied on having a set of relax-
ation pathways that could retrace their paths once the
driving compressive force is released (Amir et al., 2012).
This way of looking at the problem suggests that echo
phenomena and the Kovacs effect (seen in a myriad of
different examples) have a common underlying origin in
the reversal of path or relaxation dynamics.
Relation to aging and rejuvenation— Once thought of
in this context, the rejuvenation, aging, and memory ex-
periments in spin glasses might also be included as a form
of path reversal. In that much more complicated case,
when the spin glass is quenched and held for some time
at a temperature T0, it evolves most rapidly on short
length scales and more and more sluggishly as the sys-
tem tries to reach its ground state on longer scales. In
the model by Middleton (Thomas et al., 2008; Yang and
Middleton, 2017) for how spin glasses age under a tem-
perature quench, a small change in temperature creates
a drastic readjustment of all the inter-spin interactions.
Each time the temperature is changed, the system must
start to search once again for an adequate ground state.
In that model, the evolution can be thought of as a series
of relaxation events that have a time scale that is tied to
the spatial length over which the relaxation has taken
place. When the system is re-heated to the temperature
where it was first partially aged, the spin configuration
again goes through a sequence of relaxations that oc-
cur first on the smallest lengths (and therefore fastest
timescales) and proceed to larger and slower relaxation
modes. Through the states of these slower modes, the
spin glass remembers that it was aged at a certain tem-
perature as it passes through that temperature in the
heating cycle.
This model has a flavor of the physics
that was required for the Kovacs effect in the crumpled
sheet. In both cases, precisely how the ingredients for
memory might arise from the collective dynamics of the
system remains an open question.

VIII. ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY

A memory that we all have firsthand experience with
is associative memory. At one point or another you prob-
ably had a hard time remembering the name of a person
you knew or a place you once visited. Yet if you can con-
jure up some specific detail associated with it—a scene
or an event or even a smell or taste—suddenly the name
comes back to you. What makes this particular kind of
memory special is that you can use a partial or approxi-
mate version of the memory to recall much more.
This experience is by its very nature subjective,
and there may be many important biological factors
that affect this processing of information in our brains.
Nonetheless, the physics community was able to formu-
late model systems which also exhibit the phenomena of

associative memories. Some of this work has contributed
to the study of artificial neural networks with associa-
tive memory — systems that have growing applications
in technology and scientific research (Mehta et al., 2018).

A. Hopfield neural networks

Consider a network of identical nodes, each node de-
noting a neuron i, and each connection ij being assigned
a weight Jij.
Each neuron may be “on” (si = 1) or
“off” (si = −1).
The connection weights govern the
evolution of the system: starting from some initial state
(e.g., the top image in Fig. 12a), the neurons are up-
dated by turning si “on” if �
j Jijsj ≥ 0 and “off” oth-
erwise. A memory is one particular state of the system,
⃗smem = {smem
1
, smem
2
. . .}, defined by our choice of which
neurons are “on,” as represented for example by the pix-
els in Fig. 12a (lower panel). There is an appealing and
intuitive idea that you store a memory by making certain
connections stronger. Following this notion, we set the
weights Jij = 1 if smem
i
= smem
j
(strengthening the con-
nection between neurons which are both “on” or “off”
in the memory) and Jij = −1 if smem
i
̸= smem
j
.
The
model with such weights reproduces the desired associa-
tive memory behavior: if you are in a state ⃗s that is
merely close to the memory ⃗smem, then the evolution
will lead to the state ⃗s = ⃗smem which is a stable fixed
point unchanged by further evolution. In that sense, the
stored memory is successfully retrieved by the system.
Although this behavior might be unsurprising, con-
sider trying to store three different memories in the same
network in such a way that any of them can be retrieved.
Suppose the memory of your friend would be stored in a

(b)
(a)

FIG. 12
Associative memory. (a) Partial or corrupted
information may be used to retrieve a memory. (b) Schematic
of Hopfield model, showing three sets of connections (solid,
dashed, and dash-dotted edges) defined on the same set of
neurons (vertices). For simplicity, only the bonds between the
“on” neurons (si = 1) are drawn. Under the right conditions,
the single set of weighted connections Jij = J(1)
ij + J(2)
ij + J(3)
ij
may be used to store the three individual memories.


18

set of bond strengths, J(1)
ij , the memory of your boss is

given by another set, J(2)
ij , and the memory of your pet

fish is yet another, J(3)
ij
(Fig. 12b). A straightforward ap-
proach would be to take the sum of the weights for each
individual memory:

Jij = J(1)
ij + J(2)
ij + J(3)
ij .
(1)

You may expect the system to form three stable fixed
points; one for each of the memories.
But trouble is
right around the corner: Spurious stable fixed points also
arise. Some are mixtures of the desired states (e.g., a
combination of your boss and your pet fish) and others
look completely unrelated. So while you set out to write a
few memories in the system, you have unwittingly written
many more “false” memories—things that you can now
remember but have never experienced!
John Hopfield
and others showed in the 1980s that although this is true,
the idea can still work. Below some threshold number of
stored memories, each desired memory is indeed a stable
fixed point, while all spurious fixed points have a smaller
basin of attraction, i.e., only very nearby states converge
to them (Amit et al., 1985; Hertz et al., 1991; Hopfield,
1982). Thus, below the threshold (which is of the same
order as the number of nodes) multiple memories may
be simultaneously stored across many nodes without any
unintended consequences.
Many other aspects of the Hopfield model have been
studied vigorously.
As an illustration, the straightfor-
ward learning rule in Eq. (1), called Hebbian learning,
may be replaced by various others; further, different dy-
namics have been studied by allowing simultaneous or
sequential updates of neurons; and there are extensive
studies of time-dependences, stochasticity, and memory
correlations (Hertz et al., 1991).
Although the network model started as an abstraction
of neuronal behavior, its mathematical form is reminis-
cent of magnetic systems in condensed matter physics,
starting from the observation that each node could de-
scribe a spin state, si = 1 or −1. We refer the reader to
the excellent textbook by Hertz et al. (1991) for an intro-
duction to the study of neural networks using the theory
of magnetic systems and the tools of statistical physics.
This relationship points to the possibility of observing
associative memory in a host of settings, due to the per-
vasiveness of physical systems that may be modeled as
coupled spins.

B. Toward models of biological memory

The abstract mathematical model of a neural network
introduced by Hopfield (Hopfield, 1982) exhibits some re-
markable features, such as a large capacity and stability
of stored memories, which we also observe in very com-
plex biological systems such as the human brain. How-

ever, this performance of the abstract model comes from
a biologically and physically unsound assumption — that
the values of Jij may grow unboundedly as new memo-
ries are stored (Amit, 1989; Amit and Fusi, 1994; Fusi and
Abbott, 2007). Early work (Parisi, 1986) showed that by
limiting the magnitude of Jij, under certain conditions
new memories will erase old ones as they are stored in
the Jij. This behavior evokes a first-in-first-out type of
memory buffer in computing, where the storage of fixed
capacity is emptied by first removing the oldest item in
it. Intense research continues decades later in search of
toy models which capture more realistically the associa-
tive memory performance of biological neural networks;
we point the reader to reviews by Amit (1989) and Fusi
(2017).
One key insight from such models is the recognition of
an intrinsic balance in a biological neural network: either
new memories are easily accepted (plasticity of synapses),
or old memories are retained for a long time (stability of
synapses) (Fusi, 2017). The Hopfield model could max-
imize both as it had the freedom to store unbounded
information in its Jij values. To optimize the memory
performance of more realistic models, researchers have
taken inspiration from the complexity of components in
a biological neural network by considering multiple cou-
pled hidden degrees of freedom for each synapse. These
hidden variables can evolve on different timescales, and
with some tuning of their mutual couplings, can control
both the stability and plasticity of the modeled synapse.
As a result, such models can reach an impressive capacity
of ∼N/ log(N) memories in a network of N neurons, with
a relatively slow power-law decay of old memories (Benna
and Fusi, 2015). As opposed to the Hopfield model, these
models with dynamical coupled hidden variables are ex-
plicitly studied in a steady state, so their associative
memory behavior is an out-of-equilibrium phenomenon.

C. Associative memory through self-assembly

Associative memory may also arise in the seemingly
disparate context of self-assembly. The process of self-
assembly entails building blocks, driven only by ther-
mal or other random fluctuations, that aggregate into
a larger objects. Mutual interactions between different
constituents may be the only guide during this otherwise
mindless process of spontaneous assembly.
The build-
ing blocks can come from a wide variety of natural or
artificial nano- and meso-scale objects. Likewise the de-
sign for their mutual interactions can vary immensely in
their range, anisotropy, specificity and physical mecha-
nism. The emergent assembly may be quite distinct and
intricate — a specific crystal, macromolecule, biological
cell component, or meta-material.
While the behavior of particles attracting or repelling


19

21 6 11 7
3
1 17 13 2 22
10 12 4 15 8
19 24 16 25 23
14 5 20 9 18

7
9 15 5 24
10 22 11 2
3
14 13 4 20 25
6
8
1 12 19
18 21 23 17 16

2 20 24 22 8
4 14 19 21 3
25 11 5 23 18
12 1
7 15 10
17 13 6
9 16
2

7
1

21

13
5

20
2

19

24

4

3

1

11

6

24

4

Structure A

Structure B

Structure C

# stored structures

temperature

 (a)

(b)

FIG. 13 Self-assembling memories.
(a) Square build-
ing blocks may bind with up to 4 nearest neighbors on a
lattice. Three different assembled structures (A,B,C) repre-
sent three memories. The memories are simultaneously stored
by defining attractive interactions between blocks which are
neighbors in any of the structures. (b) Simplified diagram of
self-assembly regimes in simulations. Three behaviors (sep-
arated by heavy lines) are distinguished by the fate of an
introduced seed for a desired structure. Building blocks are
pixels in a given snapshot of the system (bordered by thin
square), each pixel being colored (shaded) according to the
structure whose part it is forming in that snapshot. Below a
critical number of stored structures, mc, and at low enough
temperatures (bottom-left regime), a seed for the B structure
(irregular shape in initial snapshot on the left) leads to its
self-assembly, i.e., the desired B memory is successfully re-
trieved. Above storage capacity the same seed leads to an
erroneous structure (bottom-right regime. When the thermal
energy sufficiently exceeds the binding energy, all assembly is
prevented. Panel b adapted from Murugan et al. (2015).

each other while moving around may seem far removed
from the artificial neural network or a synapse network
of a brain, one may intuit the phenomena of associative
memory here as well. We suggest that the desired assem-
bled structure may be viewed as a memory that is stored
in the building blocks through the design of their mu-
tual interactions. Correspondingly, when the structure is

self-assembled due to a willful trigger (say, by providing a
small substructure to act as a nucleation seed), one may
claim that the memory has been retrieved.
A simple associative memory for assembly then con-
tains a mixture of independent batches of building blocks,
with each batch designed to assemble into a particular
structure when the appropriate trigger is applied. This
construction is however quite wasteful. In contrast, biol-
ogy is much more economical and reuses the same build-
ing blocks (e.g., individual proteins) in many different
cellular assemblies (K¨uhner et al., 2009). We therefore
want to consider a potent mixture of building blocks,
which uses most of its blocks to assemble any of several
different stored structures. The choice of which assembly
will be constructed is determined by the trigger.
Some of this phenomenology was captured in a simple
physical model of self-assembly (Murugan et al., 2015).
This model considers many types of particles existing
on a square lattice, while the “memories” are specific
large contiguous arrangements of the particles as shown
in Fig. 13a. To encode any given structure in the mutual
interactions, one introduces a strong bonding between
any pair of particles that appear as a nearest-neighbor
pair in the structure; particles that are not neighbors
have no attractive interactions. To encode multiple struc-
tures, the bond strengths are simply added, in the spirit
of the Hebbian rule in neural networks given by Eq. (1).
A particle may thus bind with any one of several different
particles, each of which corresponds to a desired neighbor
in one of the multiple stored target structures.
One might imagine that this simple set of rules would
inevitably cause errors in the assembly of a chosen struc-
ture from among the encoded memories, analogous to the
part-fish-part-boss chimera that we sought to avoid in
the Hopfield model. However, it was shown that because
each particle has multiple neighbors (four in the case of
the square lattice), its bonds have enough specificity that
this confusion can be averted.
Consider for a moment the trivial construction where
each encoded structure uses a completely distinct set of
blocks — in this case only m = N/M different struc-
tures can be stored, where N is the number of block
types and M is the size of the structures. Using instead
the Hebbian-like scheme, one can safely encode up to
mc ∼
√

N(N/M) structures on a square lattice. The dif-
ferent memories can be retrieved by using various trig-
gers, such as introducing a seed, or increasing certain
concentrations or bond strengths so that a seed forms
spontaneously. A diagram showing the various possible
outcomes of such an assembly model is shown in Fig. 13b.
Some possible connections between the self-assembly sys-
tem and variants of the neural network model have been
carefully elaborated (Murugan et al., 2015; Zhong et al.,
2017).
The relatively simple theoretical model of self-assembly
described here suggests that one can design materials


20

that change states and transform at will, while using a
limited pool of constituents (Zeravcic et al., 2017). Re-
cent experimental advances suggest that such materials
will soon be achieved in the laboratory. In particular,
DNA is proving a most promising ingredient as it has
been used both as a building block and as a mediator of
interactions that are highly designable (Ong et al., 2017;
Rogers et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018).

IX. MEMORY OF INITIAL CONDITIONS IN DYNAMICS

We conclude our survey of different forms of memory
formation with a discussion of the memory of initial con-
ditions that occur in experiments on dynamical systems.
In Fig. 14 we show two situations where a fluid fissions
into two parts. On the left is an image of a viscous drop
of glycerol breaking apart inside a bath of silicone oil
of nearly equal viscosity. The three images on the right
show the rupture of an air bubble rising from an un-
derwater nozzle. The viscous liquid appears pristine —
symmetrical and smooth as the drop disconnects — while
the air bubble looks jagged as if it were being torn apart.
As we will indicate below, these examples demonstrate
dynamics in which initial conditions, which are irrele-
vant for some systems, can in other situations influence
the physical outcomes; they indicate a difference in terms
of what initial conditions have been remembered by the
fluids.
These are examples of a finite-time singularity in which
a fluid mass (viscous liquid or air) detaches from a sur-
face (Eggers, 1997; Eggers and Dupont, 1994; Goldstein
et al., 1993; Keller and Miksis, 1983; Shi et al., 1994).
First a fluid neck stretches from the drop to the remain-
ing fluid clinging to the surface. The neck radius becomes
progressively thinner until at some point it shrinks to
atomic dimensions at which point the liquid has sepa-
rated into two parts. The Laplace pressure between the
inside and the outside of the drop, P, is proportional to
the local curvature of the fluid, κ, and to the interfacial
tension of the liquid, σ, that is, P = κσ. As the neck
radius shrinks, κ diverges so that there is a singularity
in the pressure at the point of disconnection.
At this
point, other physical quantities, such as fluid velocities
or viscous stresses, may diverge as well.
This finite-time singularity is determined by a balance
of terms in the Navier-Stokes equations governing the
fluid flow. Depending on the properties of the internal
and external fluids (i.e., the fluid making up the drop
and the fluid into which the drop is falling), there will
be different similarity solutions for the singularity. For
the case of droplet snapoff, these situations fall into a
discrete set of “universality classes”; the singularities
within a given class share behavioral signatures with
other breakup events in the same class (Cohen and Nagel,
2001). The nature of the singularity depends on a few

a)
b)

FIG. 14 Forgetting and remembering initial condi-
tions.
(a) A drop of glycerol falls and pinches off from a
faucet submerged in silicone oil. Near the top of the spherical
drop, the dynamics become singular and have no dependence
on the drop’s initial conditions. Nozzle diameter is 0.48 cm.
(b) Detail of a bubble pinching off from an underwater nozzle
located just below the images. The black region is the rising
air bubble and the surrounding white and gray is the water.
The pinchoff is seen in the bottom frame where the black re-
gions become disconnected. The dynamics become singular,
but remember initial conditions strongly—in this case, the
bubble’s release from an asymmetrically-shaped nozzle. Scale
bar is 0.5 mm and the images are 122 µs apart. Panel a repro-
duced from Cohen et al. (1999) with permission, and panel b
reproduced from Keim et al. (2006) with permission.

physical dimensions of the apparatus and on the prop-
erties of the fluids, which for simple Newtonian fluids
are the inner and outer viscosities, the inner and outer
densities, and the interfacial tension.
The universality classes themselves can be divided up
into two qualitatively distinct kinds. In the first kind,
the singularity does not depend on the initial conditions
but only depends on the liquid properties. This is the
situation for the breakup in Fig. 14a. Because the pro-
cess spans several decades in length- and time-scales, we
do not expect initial conditions to influence the dynamics
just before disconnection. The shape of the nozzle, for
example, does not influence the behavior about the point
of breakup. This expectation of universality is borne out
in pinch-offs with a wide variety of inner and outer fluids


21

(Cohen and Nagel, 2001; Eggers, 1997), making these
non-equilibrium systems notable for their tendency to
forget their initial conditions.
The second kind of singularity is extremely sensitive
to the initial conditions as in the example of the air bub-
ble in Fig. 14b. The jagged and asymmetrical shape of
the connecting neck of air depends sensitively on how the
bubble was released from the nozzle. The initial shape
of the neck sets the amplitudes of a set of modes that
proceed to oscillate with constant amplitudes and diverg-
ing frequencies while the average size of the neck shrinks
(Schmidt et al., 2009). Near the singularity, the relative
amplitude of the oscillations with respect to the neck ra-
dius diverges. The uncertainty in a measurement of the
amplitudes grows but never overwhelms the signal, per-
mitting the memory to be read out.
By contrast, the
initial phase of each mode is preserved but because its
frequency diverges, the uncertainty in its measurements
quickly exceeds ±π. Thus effectively, only half the ini-
tial conditions are remembered (Schmidt et al., 2009).
This example illustrates an idea we have used implicitly
throughout this review: it is important not only to store
a memory but to be able to read it out as well.
The two classes of breakup behavior presented here
differ in their memory of initial conditions. The falling
liquid drop is insensitive to its evolution history and has
lost the memory of its initial conditions. In contrast, the
rising air bubble is highly sensitive to the forces present
during its lifetime and remembers a great deal about
how it was initiated. These examples present a clear di-
chotomy of how in some cases it is nature while in other
cases (that may naively appear similar) it is nurture that
determines the fate. Memory and its loss still surprise.
The type of memory that we have discussed in this
section deals with the dynamics of the system, such as
remembering initial conditions. The basic forms of this
memory are the conservation laws that we usually take
for granted. Remembering initial conditions may appear
to have a somewhat different character than some of the
memories mentioned in previous sections, in which the in-
put is embedded in a system’s steady-state configuration
and can be extracted at an arbitrary later time. However,
there are also similarities with some of those more con-
ventional material memories. In echoes, the memory also
appears in the dynamics as the spins return to their orig-
inal phases relative to one another; likewise in the Kovacs
effect, the memory appears only once in the relaxation
dynamics of the material. Note also that in the present
case of the dynamics of the disconnecting air bubble, the
memory is not as fleeting as it first seems. While the
memory of the amplitude is directly observable only in
the brief moments before the singularity, aspects of the
dynamics can still be reconstructed because of the lasting
effect that the initial conditions have on the size distri-
bution and trajectories of the satellite bubbles (Keim,
2011).

X. CONCLUSIONS

Focusing on memory storage and recall across the
entire range of material properties has not been a
widespread approach for studying matter. However, such
a study provides a common language for physicists to
discuss some of the most fascinating aspects of history-
dependence, dynamics, and information storage in far-
from-equilibrium systems.
As Twyla Tharp suggests,
each new memory can provide a novel way to perceive
material behavior and thus may lead to an alternate
framework for organizing our knowledge about matter
in general. This prompts us to seek behaviors, patterns,
and similarities that may have been overlooked. It can
also lead to new experimental and theoretical endeavors
because it compels us to ask questions of a somewhat un-
usual — and therefore novel — nature. This perspective
may lead to new insights and even the creation of new
forms of matter with unique functionality dictated by the
memories stored in their creation.
One lesson from a comparative study of memory is
that we should not assume that a memory behavior
is unique, because we can often find another system—
sometimes with no superficial similarities—that obeys
the same rules for storage and recall. Thus, among the
many memory behaviors we have encountered we per-
ceive a smaller number of generic types and principles.
The preceding sections have provided some examples of
how different memories are related. Here we summarize
some of the most relevant threads that connect or delin-
eate them, and that motivate a broader perspective on
memory formation.

A. Some common threads and distinctions

Hysteresis— We have tried to draw a few conclusions
about ways of uniting different phenomena under some
common principles. In Sec. II we noted several systems
that remember the direction or sign of the input that was
applied most recently.
This simple principle underlies
most of the world’s digital memory and is the building
block of the much richer return-point behavior (Sec. III).
Maximal input— In Sec. II, we grouped together an-
other set of memories that shared the somewhat obvious
property that they all remembered a maximal value of an
applied input. This form of memory is rather common
and has been found in many materials and with many
different probes.
Oscillatory training over multiple cycles— Less obvi-
ous are the memories encoded in physical systems sub-
jected to oscillatory perturbations. While these seem to
have rather different forms, some of these phenomena ap-
pear to be related. A good example is the observation of
multiple transient memories in charge-density-wave sys-
tems, in sheared non-Brownian suspensions, and in paths


22

worn by visitors in grass. These memories have the same
overall phenomenology despite one of them arising in a
hard-condensed matter system, another in a fluid, and
the third being a macroscopic human-scale phenomenon.
All three initially learn many inputs and then forget all
but one (or two) of them; however if noise is present they
can remember all inputs indefinitely.
Reversal of dynamics— More ambitious and less obvi-
ous was our attempt to group echo phenomena together
with examples of rejuvenation and aging in glasses and
with the Kovacs effect. The point of commonality was
taken to be that they each manipulate their respective
system as a way of “reversing paths.” This allows them
to retrace their dynamical evolution to the instant when
the phases were initially set to be coherent. We also sug-
gested that the Kovacs effect may likewise be conceived
as allowing a system’s relaxation dynamics to be reversed
in time.

Besides these common phenomenologies, we can dis-
cern common physical principles among some memory-
forming systems:
Memory as a marginal state or an energy minimum—
In the example of non-Brownian dilute suspensions, a
memory is encoded in a steady state with reversible parti-
cle motions, which is reached by shearing with a constant
training amplitude. Yet one reads out that memory not
by observing the steady state, but by observing the onset
of irreversible motion when the training amplitude is ex-
ceeded slightly (Fig. 5a). Thus the steady state encodes a
memory by being marginally stable at the training ampli-
tude. More generally, this memory is where many quies-
cent portions of the system promptly begin changing and
participating in the dynamics (e.g., as measured by the
shear stress in Fig. 5b). We can see this pattern in the
single- and multiple-memory behaviors of dilute suspen-
sions, but also in the Mullins and Kaiser effects, return-
point memory, and charge-density waves. Most of these
memories are indicated by a change in the first derivative
of an observable such as particle displacements, magne-
tization, or stress. We can contrast these examples with
the Hopfield model, in which a memory corresponds to
the bottom of a potential energy well.
Role of quenched or unquenched disorder— Disorder
can give a system the ability to distinguish among, and
remember, many possible input values. For example, a
system with return-point memory that can be modeled
with many identical hysterons (i.e., having identical hys-
teresis loops) would store no more information than a
single hysteron. Instead, because the transition thresh-
olds of the hysterons are distributed broadly (typically
due to defects), a sufficiently large system can make fine
distinctions among values of the applied field. Thus, in
some of the systems we have described, disorder plays a
beneficial role in providing a large ensemble of subsys-
tems that together allow a nearly continuous range of

input values to be stored. This principle also applies to
the case of the charge-density wave that exhibits multi-
ple transient memories, where the charge density evolves
to find a metastable state in the presence of disordered
pinning sites (Coppersmith and Littlewood, 1987).
In both these examples the disorder cannot evolve (i.e.,
it is quenched), and is encoded in the system’s Hamilto-
nian. However in other systems the disorder itself can
evolve.
To see this, one need only think about aging
and rejuvenation in molecular glasses, exemplified by the
thermal sorting algorithm with that behavior (Zou and
Nagel, 2010). There, every part of the system can change.
The disorder is the medium in which to encode memo-
ries, and yet in small systems it can be annealed away
entirely.
Training by following a path— In considering these ex-
amples there is another aspect that appears to lead to
different behaviors. In the case of the multiple transient
memories in suspensions, the path of the dynamics in
phase space is remembered; it is not only the marginal
final configuration that is trained. We observe the same
memory of a path in charge-density wave conductors and
jammed solids, and the notion of a path is even more ex-
plicit in the model of park benches on a lawn. In these
examples training must typically be repetitive as the sys-
tem learns the path. This is distinct from memories in
the Hopfield model or self-assembly where the memory
is stored (at least in some rules) by varying the inter-
action strengths between pairs of spins or particles. In
those associative memories, a well-chosen learning rule
deterministically sets the interactions to store a memory,
without the need for any dynamics in the training.

B. Making materials functional

That a material carries a memory of its formation sug-
gests that one may use that memory to create some spe-
cific functionality based on the stored information. Mem-
ory could inform the design and processing of new mate-
rials with a range of applications.
Amplitude variation— Oscillatory manipulation of a
solid is common and is, indeed, the essential ingredient of
most AC (linear and non-linear) susceptibility measure-
ments. By focusing on the particular aspect of memory,
one is motivated to concentrate not only on how the re-
sponse depends on the amplitude of the oscillation, but
on how it depends on changes to the amplitude during
the experiment — or, in more practical terms, during the
material’s preparation and use. In systems such as dilute
suspensions and jammed solids, amplitude variation is
the basis for reading out memories—and for recognizing
that memories are present in the first place.
Learned mechanical properties— In systems where
memory storage is in response to an external stress, as
in the examples of dilute suspensions or jammed solids,


23

memory can have mechanical consequences.
Memories
formed by cyclic training in these systems show that
one can tailor a material’s responses at specific ampli-
tudes or values of strain (Fig. 5b). An example of how
such a mechanism may be used to reduce viscous dissi-
pation in continuously-flowing suspensions or grains may
be found in the works of Lin et al. (2016); Ness et al.
(2018). Rigid disordered materials can become auxetic
(i.e., have a negative Poisson’s ratio), or even develop a
coordinated response at one location due to a stress ap-
plied elsewhere, when certain bonds are cut (Goodrich
et al., 2015; Hexner et al., 2018a,b; Rocks et al., 2017,
2019; Yan et al., 2017). A material that is aged under
an imposed stress can remember its history and respond
by altering the bonds that are stressed the most. This,
as in the case of cutting bonds, can lead to novel elas-
tic response (Pashine et al., 2019). Mechanical memory
of this sort may also be one way that living matter can
adapt to its environment (Bieling et al., 2016; Majumdar
et al., 2018).
Memory capacity— Another type of question that
leads to novel investigations is the memory capacity
in a system. For example, the pulse-duration memory
in charge-density wave solids or the approach to the
absorbing-state transition in non-Brownian suspensions,
have shown an even richer phenomenology when, in ad-
dition to addressing the creation of a single memory, one
asks how many different memories can be encoded in
these systems. In the case of self-assembly, the goal of en-
coding a greater variety of structures with fewer types of
particles motivates further development of theoretical de-
sign principles and experimental systems. Disorder and
diversity are especially relevant to the design of multiple-
memory systems because they can make various parts or
coarse-grained scales of the system susceptible to differ-
ent inputs.

Throughout this paper we have raised a number of
questions about memory that enrich our study of the
physics of matter.
We have indicated a few, but cer-
tainly not all, of the ways in which memories are similar
or dissimilar to one another and have suggested that ad-
dressing such questions can lead not only to interesting
questions about the variety and robustness of memory
formation but also to useful applications, once the sci-
ence of material memory is better understood.
In her novel Mansfield Park, Jane Austin’s protagonist
claimed: “If any one faculty of our nature may be called
more wonderful than the rest, I do think it is memory.
. . . our powers of recollecting and of forgetting do seem
peculiarly past finding out.” While in our lived experi-
ence this may indeed be true, in the world of materials,
the mysteries of memory formation have been yielding
to acute scientific examination. Thus the ideas of mem-
ory formation, and the mechanisms that nature uses to
implant information of different kinds into matter, can

be articulated into sets of coherent principles that seem
to bind them together. However, much work still needs
to be done to delineate the distinctions between different
types and provide a common framework for understand-
ing the interconnection between them.
We hope that
such questions strike a chord within the broader research
community and call attention to this novel and exciting
branch of inquiry.

XI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This article was inspired by a program at the Kavli In-
stitute for Theoretical Physics in Santa Barbara, CA that
was held during the Winter of 2018. We are grateful to
Greg Huber at the KITP who helped shepherd the pro-
gram in its early stages. Two of us (SRN and SS) would
like to thank the other co-organizers of this program: Su-
san Coppersmith and Alan Middleton. We had wonderful
discussions with the attendees of this program. In partic-
ular we would like to thank Itai Cohen, Leticia Cuglian-
dolo, Karin Dahmen, Karen Daniels, Chandan Dasgupta,
Greg Huber, Mehran Kardar, Yoav Lahini, Craig Mal-
oney, Enzo Marinari, Muhittin Mungan, Arvind Muru-
gan, Lev Truskinovsky and Tom Witten for very use-
ful and inspiring feedback on many of the ideas pre-
sented here. We are grateful to the KITP for its hos-
pitality during this program, supported in part by NSF
PHY-1748958. In addition this work was supported by
the NSF MRSEC Program DMR-1420709, NSF DMR-
1404841 and DOE DE-FG02-03ER46088 and the Simons
Foundation for the collaboration “Cracking the Glass
Problem” award #348125 at the University of Chicago
(SRN). JDP acknowledges the Donors of the American
Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund for partial
support of this work. NCK acknowledges support from
NSF DMR-1708870. SS acknowledges support through
the J C Bose Fellowship, SERB, DST, India.

REFERENCES

Ackerson, B., and P. Pusey (1988), Phys. Rev. Lett. 61 (8),
1033.

Adhikari, M.,
and S. Sastry (2018), Eur. Phys. J. E 41,
045504.

Amir, A., Y. Oreg,
and Y. Imry (2012), Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 109 (6), 1850.

Amit, D. J. (1989), Modeling Brain Function: The World of
Attractor Neural Networks (Cambridge University Press).

Amit, D. J., and S. Fusi (1994), Neural Computation 6 (5),
957.

Amit, D. J., H. Gutfreund, and H. Sompolinsky (1985), Phys.
Rev. Lett. 55 (14), 1530.

Bacot, V., M. Labousse, A. Eddi, M. Fink,
and E. Fort
(2016), Nature Physics 12 (10), 972.


24

Bannantine, J. A., J. J. Comer, and J. L. Handrock (1990),
Fundamentals of Metal Fatigue Analysis, Vol. 90 (Prentice
hall Englewood Cliffs, NJ).

Barker, J., D. Schreiber, B. Huth, and D. H. Everett (1983),
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 386, 251.

Barton, J. P., M. Kardar,
and A. K. Chakraborty (2015),
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (7),
1965.

Bellon, L., S. Ciliberto,
and C. Laroche (2002), The Euro-
pean Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex
Systems 25 (2), 223.

Benna, M. K., and S. Fusi (2015), arXiv.org 1507.07580.
Berthier, L., and J.-P. Bouchaud (2002), Physical Review B
66 (5), 054404.

Bertin, E. M., J. Bouchaud, J. Drouffe,
and C. Godreche
(2003), Journal of physics A: mathematical and general
36 (43), 10701.

Bhattacharya, K. (2003), Microstructure of martensite: why
it forms and how it gives rise to the shape-memory effect,
Vol. 2 (Oxford University Press).

Bieling, P., T.-D. Li, J. Weichsel, R. McGorty, P. Jreij,
B. Huang, D. A. Fletcher, and R. D. Mullins (2016), Cell
164 (1-2), 115.

Bouchaud, J.-P., V. Dupuis, J. Hammann,
and E. Vincent
(2001), Physical Review B 65 (2), 024439.

Bouchbinder, E., and J. S. Langer (2010), Soft Matter 6 (13),
3065.

Brown, S. E., G. Gr¨uner, and L. Mih´aly (1986), Solid State
Comm. 57, 165.

Budhu, M. (2010), Soil mechanics and foundations (Wiley).
Burton, J. C.,
and S. R. Nagel (2016), Physical Review E
93 (3), 032905.

Cantournet, S., R. Desmorat, and J. Besson (2009), Interna-
tional Journal of Solids and Structures 46 (11-12), 2255.

Carr, H. Y.,
and E. M. Purcell (1954), Physical Review
94 (3), 630.

Chakraverty,
S.,
M.
Bandyopadhyay,
S.
Chatterjee,
S. Dattagupta, A. Frydman, S. Sengupta,
and P. A.
Sreeram (2005), Phys. Rev. B 71 (5), 1205.

Chan Vili, Y. Y. (2007), Textile Research Journal 77 (5), 290.
Chluba, C., W. Ge, R. L. de Miranda, J. Strobel, L. Kienle,
E. Quandt,
and M. Wuttig (2015), Science 348 (6238),
1004.

Cohen, I., M. P. Brenner, J. Eggers, and S. R. Nagel (1999),
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 (6), 1147.

Cohen, I., and S. R. Nagel (2001), Phys. Fluids 13 (12), 3533.
Coppersmith, S. N. (1987), Phys. Rev. A 36, 3375.
Coppersmith, S. N., T. C. Jones, L. P. Kadanoff, A. Levine,
J. P. McCarten, S. R. Nagel, S. C. Venkataramani,
and
X. Wu (1997), Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (21), 3983.

Coppersmith, S. N., and P. B. Littlewood (1987), Phys. Rev.
B 36, 311.

Cort´e, L., P. M. Chaikin, J. P. Gollub, and D. J. Pine (2008),
Nat. Phys. 4, 420.

Cubuk, E. D., R. J. S. Ivancic, S. S. Schoenholz, D. J. Strick-
land, A. Basu, Z. S. Davidson, J. Fontaine, J. L. Hor,
Y. R. Huang, Y. Jiang, N. C. Keim, K. D. Koshigan,
J. A. Lefever, T. Liu, X. G. Ma, D. J. Magagnosc, E. Mor-
row, C. P. Ortiz, J. M. Rieser, A. Shavit, T. Still, Y. Xu,
Y. Zhang, K. N. Nordstrom, P. E. Arratia, R. W. Carpick,
D. J. Durian, Z. Fakhraai, D. J. Jerolmack, D. Lee, J. Li,
R. Riggleman, K. T. Turner, A. G. Yodh, D. S. Gianola,
and A. J. Liu (2017), Science 358 (6366), 1033.

Cugliandolo, L., G. Lozano, and H. Lozza (2004), The Euro-
pean Physical Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex
Systems 41 (1), 87.

Deutsch, J. M., A. Dhar, and O. Narayan (2004), Phys. Rev.
Lett. 92, 227203.

Deutsch, J. M.,
and O. Narayan (2003), Phys. Rev. Lett.
91 (20), 3.

Diani, J., B. Fayolle, and P. Gilormini (2009), European Poly-
mer Journal 45 (3), 601.

Dillavou, S., and S. M. Rubinstein (2018), Phys. Rev. Lett.
120 (22), 224101.

Eggers, J. (1997), Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 865.
Eggers, J.,
and T. F. Dupont (1994), Journal of Fluid Me-
chanics 262, 205.

Emmett, P. H., and M. Cines (1947), J. Phys. Chem. 51 (6),
1248.

Fiocco, D., G. Foffi, and S. Sastry (2014), Phys. Rev. Lett.
112, 025702.

Fiocco, D., G. Foffi,
and S. Sastry (2015), J. Phys: Cond.
Matter 27 (19), 194130.

Fleming, R., and L. Schneemeyer (1983), Physical Review B
28 (12), 6996.

Fleming, R. M., and L. F. Schneemeyer (1986), Phys. Rev.
B 33, 2930.

Fukao, K., and A. Sakamoto (2005), Phys. Rev. E 71, 041803.
Fusi, S. (2017), arXiv.org 1706.04946.
Fusi, S., and L. F. Abbott (2007), Nature Neuroscience 10,
https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1859.

Gadala-Maria, F., and A. Acrivos (1980), Journal of Rheol-
ogy 24 (6), 799.

Gallardo, M. C., J. Manchado, F. J. Romero, J. Del Cerro,
E. K. Salje, A. Planes, E. Vives, R. Romero, and M. Stip-
cich (2010), Physical Review B 81 (17), 174102.

Gilbert, I., G.-W. Chern, B. Fore, Y. Lao, S. Zhang, C. Nisoli,
and P. Schiffer (2015), Phys. Rev. B 92 (10), 104417.

Gill, J. (1981), Solid State Communications 39 (11), 1203.
Golding, B.,
and J. E. Graebner (1976), Phys. Rev. Lett.
37 (13), 852.

Goldstein, R. E., A. I. Pesci, and M. J. Shelley (1993), Phys.
Rev. Lett. 70 (20), 3043.

Goodrich, C. P., A. J. Liu,
and S. R. Nagel (2015), Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114 (22), 225501.

Gould, R. (1965), Physics Letters 19 (6), 477.
Hahn, E. L. (1950), Physical Review 80 (4), 580.
Haw, M. D., W. C. K. Poon, P. N. Pusey, P. Hebraud, and
F. Lequeux (1998), Phys. Rev. E 58 (4), 4673.

H´ebraud, P., F. Lequeux, J.-P. Munch, and D. J. Pine (1997),
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78 (24), 4657.

van Hecke, M. (2010), J. Phys: Cond. Matter 22 (3), 033101.
Hertz, J., A. Krogh, and R. G. Palmer (1991), Introduction to
the Theory of Neural Computation (Addison-Wesley Long-
man Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA).

Hexner, D., A. J. Liu,
and S. R. Nagel (2018a), Physical
Review E 97 (6), 063001.

Hexner, D., A. J. Liu, and S. R. Nagel (2018b), Soft matter
14 (2), 312.

Hill, R.,
and D. Kaplan (1965), Phys. Rev. Lett. 14 (26),
1062.

Hopfield, J. J. (1982), Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 79 (8), 2554.

Hovorka, O.,
and G. Friedman (2008), Phys. Rev. Lett.
100 (9), 097201.

Jaeger, H. M., S. R. Nagel, and R. P. Behringer (1996), Rev.
Mod. Phys. 68 (4), 1259.


25

James, R. D. (2019), Bulletin (New Series) of the American
Mathematical Society 26 (1).

Jiles, D. (2016), Introduction to magnetism and magnetic ma-
terials (CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton).

Jim´enez, S., V. Mart´ın-Mayor, and S. Perez-Gaviro (2005),
Physical Review B 72 (5), 054417.

Jonason, K., P. Nordblad, E. Vincent, J. Hammann,
and
J.-P. Bouchaud (2000), The European Physical Journal B-
Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 13 (1), 99.

Jonason, K., E. Vincent, J. Hammann, J. Bouchaud,
and
P. Nordblad (1998), Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (15), 3243.

Kaiser, J. (1950), An investigation into the occurrence of
noises in tensile tests or a study of acoustic phenomena,
Ph.D. thesis (PhD thesis, Technical University, Munich,
Germany).

Karmakar, S., E. Lerner,
and I. Procaccia (2010), Physical
Review E 82 (2), 026104.

Kegel, W., and R. Gould (1965), Physics Letters 19 (7), 531.
Keim, N. C. (2011), Phys. Rev. E 83 (5), 056325.
Keim, N. C.,
and P. E. Arratia (2014), Phys. Rev. Lett.
112 (2), 028302.

Keim, N. C., J. Hass, B. Kroger,
and D. Wieker (2018),
arXiv:1809.08505.

Keim, N. C., P. Møller, W. W. Zhang, and S. R. Nagel (2006),
Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (14), 144503.

Keim, N. C.,
and S. R. Nagel (2011), Phys. Rev. Lett.
107 (1), 010603.

Keim, N. C., J. D. Paulsen,
and S. R. Nagel (2013), Phys.
Rev. E 88 (3), 032306.

Keller, J. B.,
and M. J. Miksis (1983), SIAM Journal on
Applied Mathematics 43 (2), 268.

Kim, H. S., and T. G. Mason (2017), Advances in colloid and
interface science 247, 397.

Komori, T., H. Yoshino,
and H. Takayama (2000), Journal
of the Physical Society of Japan 69 (4), 1192.

Korpel, A.,
and M. Chatterjee (1981), Proceedings of the
IEEE 69 (12), 1539.

Kovacs, A. (1963), Adv. Polym. Sci 3 (3), 394.
Kovacs, A. J., J. J. Aklonis, J. M. Hutchinson,
and
A. R. Ramos (1979), Journal of Polymer Science: Polymer
Physics Edition 17 (7), 1097.

K¨uhner, S., V. van Noort, M. J. Betts, A. Leo-Macias,
C. Batisse, M. Rode, T. Yamada, T. Maier, S. Bader,
P. Beltran-Alvarez, D. Casta˜no-Diez, W.-H. Chen, D. De-
vos,
M.
G¨uell,
T.
Norambuena,
I.
Racke,
V.
Ry-
bin, A. Schmidt, E. Yus, R. Aebersold, R. Herrmann,
B. B¨ottcher, A. S. Frangakis, R. B. Russell, L. Serrano,
P. Bork, and A.-C. Gavin (2009), Science 326 (5957), 1235.

Kurita, K., and N. Fujii (1979), Geophysical Research Letters
6 (1), 9.

Kurnit, N., I. Abella,
and S. Hartmann (1964), Phys. Rev.
Lett. 13 (19), 567.

Lagoudas, D. C. (2008), Shape memory alloys: modeling and
engineering applications (Springer Science & Business Me-
dia).

Lahini, Y., O. Gottesman, A. Amir,
and S. M. Rubinstein
(2017), Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (8), 085501.

Lasanta, A., F. V. Reyes, A. Prados, and A. Santos (2018),
arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.08401.

Laurson, L.,
and M. J. Alava (2012), Phys. Rev. Lett.
109 (15), 155504.

Lavrentovich, M. O., A. J. Liu, and S. R. Nagel (2017), Phys.
Rev. E 96, 020101(R).

Lee, M. H.,
and E. M. Furst (2008), Phys. Rev. E 77 (4),
041408.

Lendlein, A., H. Jiang, O. J¨unger,
and R. Langer (2005),
Nature 434 (7035), 879.

Lendlein, A., and S. Kelch (2002), Angewandte Chemie In-
ternational Edition 41 (12), 2034.

Lin, N. Y., C. Ness, M. E. Cates, J. Sun, and I. Cohen (2016),
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 (39),
10774.

Liu, A. J., and S. R. Nagel (2010), Annual Reviews of Con-
densed Matter Physics 1, 347.

Lundberg, M., K. Krishan, N. Xu, C. S. O’Hern, and M. Den-
nin (2008), Phys. Rev. E 77 (4), 041505.

Maiorano, A., E. Marinari,
and F. Ricci-Tersenghi (2005),
Physical Review B 72 (10), 104411.

Majumdar, S., L. C. Foucard, A. J. Levine, and M. L. Gardel
(2018), Soft Matter 14 (11), 2052.

Mangan, N., C. Reichhardt, and C. J. O. Reichhardt (2008),
Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 (18), 187002.

Mano, J. F. (2008), Advanced Engineering Materials 10 (6),
515.

Matan, K., R. B. Williams, T. A. Witten,
and S. R. Nagel
(2002), Phys. Rev. Lett. 88 (7), 076101.

Mather, P. T., X. Luo,
and I. A. Rousseau (2009), Annual
Review of Materials Research 39, 445.

Mehta, P., M. Bukov, C.-H. Wang, A. G. Day, C. Richardson,
C. K. Fisher, and D. J. Schwab (2018), arXiv:1803.08823.

Middleton, A. A. (1992), Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 670.
Mossa, S., and F. Sciortino (2004), Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 (4),
4.

Mueggenburg, N. (2005), Phys. Rev. E 71 (3), 031301.
Mukherji, S., N. Kandula, A. K. Sood,
and R. Ganapathy
(2018), arXiv:1808.07701.

Mullins, L. (1948), Rubber Chemistry and Technology 21 (2),
281.

Mungan, M., and M. M. Terzi (2018), arXiv:1802.03096.
Mungan, M.,
and T. A. Witten (2019), arXiv preprint
arXiv:1902.08088.

Murugan, A., Z. Zeravcic, M. P. Brenner,
and S. Leibler
(2015), Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
112 (1), 54.

Nagamanasa, K. H., S. Gokhale, A. K. Sood, and R. Gana-
pathy (2014), Phys. Rev. E 89 (6), 062308.

Nagel, S. R., G. S. Grest,
and A. Rahman (1983), Physics
Today 36, 24.

Ness, C., R. Mari, and M. E. Cates (2018), Sci. Adv. 4 (3),
4.

Ong, L. L., N. Hanikel, C. Yaghi, Omar K.and Grun, M. T.
Strauss, P. Bron, J. Lai-Kee-Him, F. Schueder, B. Wang,
P. Wang, J. Y. Kishi, C. Myhrvold, A. Zhu, R. Jungmann,
G. Bellot, Y. Ke, and P. Yin (2017), Nature 552.

Ort´ın, J. (1991), J. Appl. Phys 71 (3), 1454.
Osterholm, M. T., N. S. Kelley, A. Sommer, and E. A. Be-
longia (2012), The Lancet infectious diseases 12 (1), 36.

Packard, C. E., E. R. Homer, N. Al-Aqeeli, and C. A. Schuh
(2010), Philos. Mag. 90 (10), 1373.

Panagopoulos, C., M. Majoros, T. Nishizaki, and H. Iwasaki
(2006), Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 (4), 047002.

Parisi, G. (1986), Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and
General 19 (10), L617.

Pashine, N., D. Hexner, A. J. Liu,
and S. R. Nagel (2019),
arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.05776.

Paulsen, J. D., and N. C. Keim (2018), arXiv:1809.09715.


26

Paulsen, J. D., N. C. Keim,
and S. R. Nagel (2014), Phys.
Rev. Lett. 113 (6), 068301.

P´erez-Reche, F.-J., C. Triguero, G. Zanzotto, and L. Truski-
novsky (2016), Physical Review B 94 (14), 144102.

P´erez-Reche, F.-J., L. Truskinovsky, and G. Zanzotto (2007),
Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 (7), 075501.

Perkovi´c, O.,
and J. P. Sethna (1997), J. Appl. Phys 81,
1590.

Petekidis, G., A. Moussa¨ıd,
and P. N. Pusey (2002), Phys.
Rev. E 66 (5), 051402.

Pham, P., B. Metzger, and J. E. Butler (2015), Phys. Fluids
27 (5), 051701.

Picco, M., F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and F. Ritort (2001), Physical
Review B 63 (17), 174412.

Pine, D. J., J. P. Gollub, J. F. Brady, and A. M. Leshansky
(2005), Nature 438 (7070), 997.

Popova, M., P. Vorobieff, M. S. Ingber,
and A. L. Graham
(2007), Physical Review E 75 (6), 066309.

Povinelli, M. L., S. N. Coppersmith, L. P. Kadanoff, S. R.
Nagel,
and S. C. Venkataramani (1999), Phys. Rev. E
59 (5), 4970.

Preisach, F. (1935), Z. Physik 94 (5-6), 277.
Regev, I., T. Lookman, and C. Reichhardt (2013), Phys. Rev.
E 88 (6), 062401.

Ren, J., J. A. Dijksman, and R. P. Behringer (2013), Phys.
Rev. Lett. 110 (1), 018302.

Rocks, J. W., N. Pashine, I. Bischofberger, C. P. Goodrich,
A. J. Liu, and S. R. Nagel (2017), Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences 114 (10), 2520.

Rocks, J. W., H. Ronellenfitsch, A. J. Liu, S. R. Nagel, and
E. Katifori (2019), Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences , 201806790.

Rogers, W. B., W. M. Shih,
and V. N. Manoharan (2016),
Nature Reviews Materials 1, 16008.

Royer, J. R.,
and P. M. Chaikin (2015), Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 112 (1), 49.

Schmidt, L. E., N. C. Keim, W. W. Zhang, and S. R. Nagel
(2009), Nat. Phys. 5 (5), 343.

Schreck, C. F., R. S. Hoy, M. D. Shattuck, and C. S. O’Hern
(2013), Phys. Rev. E 88, 052205.

Sethna, J. P., M. K. Bierbaum, K. A. Dahmen, C. P.
Goodrich, J. R. Greer, L. X. Hayden, J. P. Kent-Dobias,
E. D. Lee, D. B. Liarte, X. Ni, K. N. Quinn, A. Raju, D. Z.
Rocklin, A. Shekhawat, and S. Zapperi (2017), Annu. Rev.
Mater. Res. 47, 217.

Sethna, J. P., K. Dahmen, S. Kartha, J. A. Krumhansl, B. W.
Roberts, and J. D. Shore (1993), Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 3347.

Sethna, J. P., K. A. Dahmen, and C. R. Myers (2001), Nature
410 (6825), 242.

Shi, X., M. P. Brenner,
and S. R. Nagel (1994), Science
265 (5169), 219.

Sircar, S., and Q. Wang (2010), Rheol Acta 49 (7), 699.
Slotterback, S., M. Mailman, K. Ronaszegi, M. van Hecke,
M. Girvan,
and W. Losert (2012), Phys. Rev. E 85 (2),
021309.

Sokolowski, W. M., and S. C. Tan (2007), Journal of space-
craft and rockets 44 (4), 750.

Song, Y., X. Chen, V. Dabade, T. W. Shield,
and R. D.
James (2013), Nature 502 (7469), 85.

Takayama, H.,
and K. Hukushima (2002), Journal of the
Physical Society of Japan 71 (12), 3003.

Tang, C., K. Wiesenfeld, P. Bak, S. Coppersmith, and P. Lit-
tlewood (1987), Phys. Rev. Lett. 58 (12), 1161.

Taylor, G. I. (1985), Low Reynolds number flows, National
Committee for Fluid Mechanics Films (Released by Ency-
clopaedia Britannica Educational Corporation).

Thomas, C. K., O. L. White,
and A. A. Middleton (2008),
Physical Review B 77 (9), 092415.

Thorne, R. E. (1996), Phys. Today 59 (5), 42.
Toiya, M., J. Stambaugh, and W. Losert (2004), Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93 (8), 088001.

Vincent,
E. (2007), in Ageing and the glass transition
(Springer) pp. 7–60.

Volkert, C., and F. Spaepen (1989), Acta Metallurgica 37 (5),
1355.

Xie, T., and X. Xiao (2008), Chemistry of Materials 20 (9),
2866.

Yakacki, C. M., R. Shandas, C. Lanning, B. Rech, A. Eck-
stein, and K. Gall (2007), Biomaterials 28 (14), 2255.

Yan, L., R. Ravasio, C. Brito,
and M. Wyart (2017), Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114 (10),
2526.

Yang, J.,
and A. A. Middleton (2017), Physical Review B
96 (21), 214208.

Yardimci, H., and R. Leheny (2003), EPL (Europhysics Let-
ters) 62 (2), 203.

Zeravcic, Z., V. N. Manoharan,
and M. P. Brenner (2017),
Reviews of Modern Physics 89 (3), 031001.

Zhang, Y., X. He, R. Zhuo, R. Sha, J. Brujic, N. C. See-
man,
and P. M. Chaikin (2018), Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences 115 (37), 9086.

Zhong, W., D. J. Schwab, and A. Murugan (2017), Journal
of Statistical Physics 167 (3-4), 806.

Zou, L.-N., and S. R. Nagel (2010), Phys. Rev. Lett. 104 (25),
257201.


