Fractal-Based Electrolytic Capacitor Electrodes: Scaling Behavior with 

Respect to Fractal Order and Complexity 

Benjamin Barnes1,2, Othman Suleiman1, JeanPaul Badjo1 and Kausik S Das1 

1University of Maryland Eastern Shore, 

1, Backbone Road, Princess Anne, MD 21853 USA 

 2Department  of  Chemistry  and Biochemistry, 

University of Maryland College Park,  MD 20742  USA 

 

In past decades, the application of fractals to electrode design for enhanced signaling and 
electrochemical performance was a popular subject and enabled the growth of consumer micro-
electronics. Supercapacitors, which are energy storage devices with many promising 
characteristics, have largely grown alongside of such developments in electronics, but little work 
has been done to use fractal electrodes in supercapacitors. In this work, plane-filling and fractal 
patterns were used in designing laser scribed graphene supercapacitor electrodes, allowing the 
scaling laws of capacitance with respect to fractal order and complexity to be examined for the 
first time. An interesting exponential relationship between capacitance and fractal order for the 
more open structured fractals was observed, the exponent of which was proportional to the 
Hausdorff dimension. Additional non-linear relationships between capacitance and order were 
observed for other structures which was correlated with inter-plate repulsion and differences in 
path length. These findings provide the first step in maximizing the efficiency of fractal-based 
electrolytic devices by exploring the non-intuitive trends in capacitance with respect to fractal 
order and complexity. 

Due to their rapid charge/discharge rate, long operational lifetime1, and potentially flexible and 
environmentally benign designs2, electrolytic supercapacitors (ESCs) are poised to become an 
integral component of a range of electronic systems ranging from the acceleration boosters in 
electric cars to flexible cellular phones3. The primary focus of recent ESC research has been in 
developing new active materials, which include activated carbon,1 carbon nanotubes 4,5, carbon 
nano onions6, and carbide-derived carbons6. Graphene, however, received the greatest 
attention6,7,8,9,10 due to its high surface area and conductivity and chemical stability 9. A number 
of recent papers have propelled the method of fabricating ESCs from laser-reduced graphene 
oxide (GO) films into the realm of commercial feasibility11,12. This method is attractive as it 
serves to both exfoliate and reduce the GO resulting in the liberation of oxygen as CO, CO2, and 
H2O gas11,12. By tuning such parameters as laser intensity, scribing speed, and substrate 
temperature, the conductivity and overall quality of the laser scribed graphene (LSG) layer can 
be precisely controlled12,13,14,15, but by far, the greatest benefit of this technology is the 
unprecedented control over the detail of structures fabricated thanks to the high precision of 
modern laser scribing instruments16,17. This precision has not been fully exploited though, and 
most researchers continue to produce simple interdigitated, spiral, concentric, or parallel-bar 
ESC electrodes in their prototypes18,Error! Bookmark not defined.,19,19. The benefit of using more 
complex electrode designs, namely fractal patterns, remains largely a virgin field, with no work 
done to determine the relationship between fractal order and electrolytic capacitance. This is 


despite the success of applying fractal patterns to other fields in electronics20,21 and the strong 
theoretical case for fractal ESCs22 

In this work, we demonstrate the impact of using intricate LSG fractal patterns in ESC 
electrodes. We examine the scaling laws which govern the relationship between fractal order and 
capacitive performance for several different fractal and plane-filling curves.  

Results and Discussion 

Due to external pressures such as natural selection, nature is expert in fully exploiting available 
surfaces by the formation of intricate designs, for example by the repetition of similar patterns 
over a great range of length scales: such structure is described by fractal geometry. As a result, 
fractals, and related space-filling structures, can be found throughout nature in the patterns of 
clouds23, neuronal and vessel networks24, as well as coasts, trees, galaxy clusters, leaves, and the 
paths of particles undergoing Brownian motion, to name but a few of the diverse topics 
investigated and popularized by Mandelbrot25. Fractals are defined as objects possessing a 
Hausdorff dimension greater than that of their geometric dimension. The Hausdorff dimension of 
a fractal is calculated based on scalability and self-similarity using the following formula: 

𝐻𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑑𝑜𝑟𝑓𝑓 𝐷𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = log (𝑅)

log (𝑀) 

Where R is the repetition of self-similar patterns for each iteration of the fractal order, and M is 
the factor by which the self-similar pattern decreases in size for each iteration. The Hausdorff 
dimension, therefore, can be viewed as a rough measure of the compactness and complexity of 
the particular fractal structure under investigation. The Hausdorff dimension is shown in Figure 
1a for each fractal investigated in this work. It is also shown in Figure 1b that the Hausdorff 
dimension is directly proportional to the path-length function of the fractal pattern. 

 

Figure 1: a) Hausdorff dimension for a number of fractal and plane-filling curves; b) relationship between path length and 

fractal order for the same structures 


From Figure 1 it can be concluded that path length increases exponentially with order for all of 
the fractal structures investigated in this work, but does so more significantly for those structures 
with a larger Hausdorff dimension, namely the Sierpinski and Hilbert curves. Area should follow 
the same trend as it is simply the product of path length and the constant width of the line used to 
draw the fractal. Therefore, since electrolytic capacitance is related to area through the following 
formula: 

𝐶 = 𝑘𝑆

𝑑  

where C is capacitance, k is the dielectric constant for the electrolyte, S is surface area, and d is 
the electrolytic double layer (EDL) thickness, it would be expected that capacitance would also 
increase exponentially for capacitors made with fractal electrodes. This would be true in an ideal 
case, but in the real world, other factors are involved which are detrimental to capacitance, such 
as path resistance, and the effect of coulombic repulsion between adjacent portions of the like-
plates of the fractal pattern. These trends were investigated by fabricating electrolytic capacitors 
of different orders for the fractal and space-filling curves in Figure 1.  

The fractals chosen for this work are popular and representative structures in mathematics, and 
are shown below in Figure 2. These are the Hilbert curve, Koch curve, Sierpinski curve, 
Minkowski sausage, Koch snowflake, and the Sierpinski arrowhead.  

 

Figure 2: Fractal electrode designs and detail of the laser scribed fractal pattern. (L-R): detail of scribed pattern, Sierpinski 

arrowhead and Hilbert curves, Koch and Koch snowflake curves, Minkowski and Sierpinski curves.  

The fractal patterns were scribed in a ~30 µm film of graphene oxide which had been drop-
casted on a PET substrate. The scribing was accomplished using a 450 nm laser scribing system. 
The reduction of GO to LSG is evidenced by a dramatic reduction in resistance from 12 000 
Ω/mm2 for the GO sheet to 670 Ω/mm for the laser reduced graphene pattern. The scribing 
system is capable of great detail and continuity as seen in the inset above, making it an ideal 
means of fabricating fractal electrodes. The ESC was completed by depositing a film of solid 
state electrolyte over its surface. This process is summarized in Figure 3.  


 

Figure 3: Method of fabricating fractal electrodes for electrolytic supercapacitors. (Clockwise from top left): A PET film was 

cleaned with isopropanol and masked; GO solution was deposited on the PET film and allowed to dry; the desired fractal pattern 

was scribed into the GO film using a x-y plotting system; the electrode sheet was removed from the x-y plotter; a film of solid-
state PVA-phosphoric acid electrolyte was deposited on the electrode; the electrode was evaluated using an LCR meter and by 

analyzing its CV behavior.  

FTIR and Raman spectroscopy also showed the expected changes indicative of laser reduction of 
GO to RGO, namely a loss of the –OH band at 3150 cm-1 and the -O- band at 1045 cm-1 in the 
FTIR and a shift in the relative heights of the D and G bands in the Raman spectrum. Both 
spectra are shown below in Figure 4. 

 

Figure 4: (L-R): FTIR and Raman spectra showing evidence of GO reduction to conducting RGO. 

The first ESCs to be evaluated were the Sierpinski curve and Minkowski sausage. These fractals 
have a Hausdorff Dimension of 2.00 and 1.50, respectively, indicating that these two structures 


scale with similar complexity. It is also notable that for lower fractal orders (1st, and 2nd), the two 
structures are visually similar, with a large open space in the centers of the first order structure, 
which is divided into roughly a cross shape in the second order (Figure 5). The similarity of the 
two patterns then diverges for higher orders, with the Sierpinski curve becoming more complex 
overall and the Minkowski Sausage remaining roughly cross- or sauwastika-shaped with a more 
open center. These changes can be easily visualized in Figure 5. 

 

Figure 5: Relative geometry of the four orders of the Minkowski curve (top) and the Sierpinski curve (bottom) 

This drastic increase in the complexity of the Sierpinski curve is due to its space-filling nature, 
meaning that as the order tends to infinity, the curve tends to cross every point in the x-y plane. 
Figure 6 shows the respective relationships between capacitance and fractal order for the 
Sierpinski curve (top) and the Minkowski curve (bottom). 

 

Figure 6: Changes in capacitance with respect to changes in fractal order for a) the Sierpinski curve and c) the Minkowski curve. 
A log-log analysis of the exponential growth of capacitance of both curves in seen in b) and c) respectively.  

The exponential nature of the capacitance-order relationship for both of these fractals is seen in 
plots a) and c), and is further investigated by plotting the respective natural logs of the ordinate 
and abscissa shown in plots b) and d). Such near-exponential relationships are conveniently 
described by a power law such as follows: 

𝑦 = 𝑎𝑥𝑘 


Where, in this case, y is capacitance, x is fractal order, k is the scaling factor, and a is a constant. 
The slope of the log-log plot corresponds to k, while the x intercept is taken to be ln(a). From 
this information, a scaling law can be formed which describes the relationship between 
capacitance (y) and fractal order (x) for the Sierpinski curve, 

𝑦 = 6.11𝑥2.52 

And the Minkowski curve.  

𝑦 = 8.33𝑥1.40 

 

It is notable that the power in the scaling law in this case is proportional to the Hausdorff 
dimension, with the Sierpinski curve having a larger exponent and a larger Hausdorff dimension. 
It is tempting to assume that this relationship holds true in general, but there are likely many 
other factors involved in determining capacitance, such as repulsion due to the proximity of like-
charged plates, and the effect of increasing resistance with increasing path length.  

To determine how these two factors influence the capacitance-order relationship, two additional 
fractal structures were fabricated: the Koch curve and the Koch snowflake. The benefit of using 
these two structures is that he Hausdroff dimension and dimensional scaling law of these two are 
identical, and the path length differs by a constant factor of 3. The only change with increasing 
order then, is in the magnitude of repulsions between like plates; the Koch curve remains a 
highly open structure with minimal repulsion despite changes in order, whereas the Koch 
snowflake is cyclic, so additional increases in order result in increasingly close contact between 
any two points on the like plates of the capacitor and therefore increased coulombic repulsion.  

 

Figure 7: Comparison of the geometry of the first four iterations of the Koch curve (top) and the Koch snowflake (bottom). The 

Koch curve is clearly a more open structure with little repulsion, whereas the Koch snowflake’s cyclic structure is more 

repulsive.  

This repulsion would be expected to manifest itself in increased capacitance for changes in order 
for the Koch curve, but decreased capacitance for changes in order for the Koch snowflake.  


 

Figure 8: Comparison of the capacitance-order relationship for a) the Koch curve c) the Koch snowflake, b) the Sierpinski 
arrowhead, and d) the Hilbert curve 

As shown in Figure 8a, and c above, the predicted trend was generally observed, with 
capacitance increasing in a more linear fashion for the Koch curve (a) with each change in order. 
The results were much more variable for the Koch snowflake (b), as expected; there was a 
promising initial increase in capacitance between order 1 and 2 which then declined and 
plateaued for orders 3 and 4. This indicates that initially there was a similar relationship between 
capacitance and order as for the Koch curve, but as order increased, the repulsions between 
adjacent portions of the like plates overcame the growth in capacitance for the Koch snowflake.  

Next the effect of surface area was investigated in two intermediate fractal patterns: these were 
the Hilbert curve and the Sierpinski arrowhead. Both curves possess large Hausdorff dimensions 
(2.00 and 1.58, respectively), and are therefore relatively compact and complex structures. The 
primary difference between the two structures is the rate of change in path length, and therefore 
surface area, with increasing order. As seen in Figure 1b, Hilbert curve has a greater exponential 
growth in length than does the Sierpinski arrowhead.  

 

Figure 9: Comparison of the geometries of the first four orders of the Sierpinski arrowhead (top) and the Hilbert curve (bottom) 

The capacitance and order data Figure 8 (b and d) are again non-linear, and prima facie, non-
intuitive. In both cases, capacitance begins at a relatively large value for the first order structures. 
This is expected as both structures possess large surface area and in the first order, there is little 


repulsion due to the great distance between like plates. However, when the order is increased to 
2, there is a large decline in capacitance for both fractals due, presumably, to the increased 
repulsions as anticipated. However, the more interesting result for this set is the increase in 
capacitance following the initial slump. This is especially evident for the Hilbert curve, 
capacitance of which begins increasing again after the 2nd order. This is likely due to the large 
exponential increase in surface area with order Figure 1b which may be capable of overcoming 
the repulsions due the compact structure. This exponential increase in surface area with order is 
not as large for the Sierpinski arrowhead, and therefore there is a delay in the recovery of 
capacitance which doesn’t begin until the 3rd order.  

Taken together, these results illustrate an interesting circumstance: for some simple fractal 
structures with high surface area such as the Sierpinski curve, or with large open structures as in 
the Minkowski sausage, there exists a linear or exponential relationship between electrochemical 
capacitance and fractal order. This relationship is shown to be roughly proportional to the 
Hausdorff dimension of the particular fractal under investigation. As the structure becomes more 
complex, though, other forces seem to limit the increase in capacitance. This was shown by 
comparing the Koch curve and Koch snowflake, which share the same Hausdorff dimension and 
length scaling law, but differ in the magnitude of interaction between like plates. Thus the 
capacitance scales differently between these two structures. Additionally, by comparing the 
capacitance scaling of the Hilbert curve with the Sierpinski arrowhead, it was shown that in some 
cases at least, the repulsive effects can be overcome at higher orders by a structure which 
increases its surface area at a sufficient rate.  

Methods 

GO films were prepared on thin PET substrates by drop casting 6.7 mL of aqueous GO 
(Graphenea, 4 g/L) on a ~14 400 mm2 sheet (cleaned with isopropyl alcohol). The GO film and 
PET substrate was incubated at 50oC until dry, cut into sheets, and stored. The areal density of 
GO on the substrate was calculated to be ~2.7x10-6 g mm-2. The average thickness of these films 
was ~30 µm. The GO films appeared to be dark gray to ochre, depending on the thickness, and 
had a transmittance of ~45% of the solar spectrum. The GO film had a sheet resistance of ~12 
000 Ω/mm2. The adhesion between the GO film and the PET substrate was poor, but adhesion 
between the LSG and PET was much better, possibly due to GO being fused into the partially 
molten plastic during the laser scribing process. Resistance in the LSG path was ~670 Ω/mm. 
FTIR and Raman analysis of the GO film revealed the strong OH stretching band centered at 
3150, G and D bands at 1720 and 1615, respectively, and an ether peak at 1045. These bands and 
peaks were largely flattened when the GO film was laser scribed, indicating a successful 
reduction of the film as described in previous literature26; further evidence of the reduction 
process can be seen in the Raman spectrum as a shift in the relative heights of the D and G 
bands. 

Sierpinski, Minkowski, Koch, Koch snowflake, Hilbert and Sierpinski arrowhead curves of the 
1st through 4th order were plotted using Wolfram Mathematica’s built-in functions of the same 
name. The resulting graphics items was copied and opened in a drawing software (Microsoft 
Paint) where simple current collectors were added to the image. The electrode image was then 


opened in BenBox laser scribing software which was linked to an x-y plotter (MakeBlock x-y 
plotter V 2.0). A laser setting of 200 units of intensity, and a scribing speed of 6.7 mm/s was 
used. The laser used was supplied by MakeBlock and was a 450 nm blue-violet laser with a 
maximum power output of 450 mW – 500 mW. By using the “scan by outline” setting in 
BenBox, the inner and outer outline of the fractal image was scribed, resulting in a double fractal 
pattern which is parallel at each point. The inner and outer lines could then be attached to 
positive and negative current collectors to complete the capacitive circuit. Theoretically this 
design would enable both electrolytic capacitance between the LSG and electrolyte in addition to 
traditional capacitance by the storage of opposite charges on parallel LSG regions. The distance 
between the parallel lines was easily controlled by the Thickness function in Mathematica. The 
GO layer was scribed 4 times, as previous work has shown that multiple laser passes improve 
conductivity14.  

A polymer gel electrolyte (PVA-phosphoric acid) was prepared as described elsewhere27 by 
combining PVA powder, water, and concentrated phosphoric acid in a 10:100:8 mass ratio. The 
resulting thick solution was pipetted across the scribed electrode (excluding only the current 
collector region), which was then stored away from dust until the gel was dry, a process which 
took up to 24 hours depending on temperature, humidity, and airflow. The final resistance of the 
electrolyte (measured by 4-point probe) was ~80 Ω/mm2 and the thickness of the layer (measured 
by Keyence LK Laser Displacement Meter) was approximately 35 µm. The average volume of 
these devices was approximately 0.32 cm3 (measured by water displacement) and mass was 
about 0.32 g.  

The completed ESC was evaluated using a BK Precision 891 LCR Meter, and a Keithley 2450 
SourceMeter. Capacitance (C), Q factor (Q), equivalent series resistance (R), and dissipation 
factor (D) were determined at 200 Hz, 1 VRMS, in FAST mode using the LCR meter. The cyclic 
voltammetry (CV) behaviour of the capacitors was determined with the SourceMeter at different 
sweep frequencies between 0 and 1 V and 10 or 50 double sweeps.  

Acknowledgement 

KD and J.P. Badjo would like to thank Maryland Technology Enterprise Institute for their 
generous support through MIPS grant. 

1 Vangari, M.; Pryor, T.; Jiang, L. (2013). “Supercapacitors: Review of Materials and Fabrication 
Methods.” Journal of Energy and Engineering. (72 – 79). 
 
2 Lee, H-H.; et al. (2015). “Direct and environmentally benign synthesis of manganese 
oxide/graphene composites from graphite for electrochemical capacitors.” Journal of Power 
Sources. 281 (44 - 48). 
 
3 Simon, P.; Gogotsi, Y. (2011). “Capacitive Energy Storage in Nanostructured Carbon-
Electrolyte Systems.” Accounts of Chemical Research. 46 (1094 - 1103). 

4 Kaempgen, M.; Chan, C.K.; Ma, J.; Gruner, G. (2009). “Printable thin film supercapacitors 
using single-walled carbon nanotubes.” Nano Letters. 9 (1872 – 1876). 

 


 

5 Lu, W.; Qu, L.; Henry, K.; Dia, L. (2009). “High performance electrochemical capacitors from 
aligned carbon nanotube electrodes and ionic liquid electrolytes.” Journal of Power Sources. 189 
(1270 - 1277). 
 
6 Simon, P.; Gogotsi, Y. (2011). “Capacitive Energy Storage in Nanostructured Carbon-
Electrolyte Systems.” Accounts of Chemical Research. 46 (1094 - 1103). 

 
7 Liu, C.; Yu, Z.; Neff, D.; Zhamu, A.; Jang, B.Z. (2010). “Graphene-Based Supercapacitor with 
an Ultrahigh Energy Density.” Nano Letters. 10 (4863 – 4868). 

 
8 Zhu, Y.; el at. (2011). “Carbon-based supercapacitors produced by activated graphene.” 
Science. 332 (1537 - 1541). 

 
9 Shao, Y.; et al. (2015). “Graphene-based materials for flexible supercapacitors.” Chem Soc. 
Review. 44 (3639 – 3665).  

 
11 Trusovas, R.; et al. (2012). “Reduction of graphite oxide to graphene with laser irradiation.” 
Carbon. Get Info.  

12 Strong, V.; et al. (2012). “Patterning and Electronic Tuning of Laser Scribed Graphene for 
Flexible All-Carbon Devices.” ACS Nano. 6 (1395 – 1403). 

13 Guan, Y.C.; Fang, Y.W.; Lim, G.C.; Zheng, H.Y.; Hong, M.H. (2016). “Fabrication of laser 
reduced graphene oxide in liquid nitrogen environment.” Scientific Reports. 6 (get - numbers). 

14 El-Kady, M.F.; Kaner, R.B.; (2013). “Scalable fabrication of high-power graphene micro-
supercapacitors for flexible and on-chip energy storage.” Nature Communications. 4 (1 – 9). 

15 Evlashin, S.; et al. (2016). “Controllable laser reduction of graphene oxide films for 
photoelectric applications.” Applied Materials and Interfaces. 8 (28880 – 28887). 

16 “XY Plotter Robot Kit.” MakeBlock. http://store.makeblock.com/xy-plotter-robot-kit/ 
 
17 “LPKF ProtoMat E34/E44.” LPKF. http://www.lpkf.com/_mediafiles/3866-brochure-lpkf-
protomat-e34-44-en.pdf 

 
18 El-Kady, M.F.; Strong, V.; Dubin, S.; Kaner, R.B. (2012). “Laser scribing of high-
performance and flexible graphene-based electrochemical capacitors.” Science. 335 (1326 - 
1330). 

19 Gao, W.; et al. (2011). “Direct laser writing of micro-supercapacitors on hydrated graphene 
oxide films.” Nature Nanotechnology. 6 (496 – 500).  

20 Cohen, N. (1997). “Fractal antenna applications in wireless telecommunications.” IEEE. (43 – 
49). 
 


 

21 Puente, C.; Romeu, J.; Pous, R.; Ramis, J.; Hijazo, A. (1998). “Small but long Koch fractal 
monopole.” Electronics Letters. 34 (9 - 10). 
 
22 Park, B.; Zaouk, R.; Wang, C.; Madon, M.D. (2007). “A case for fractal electrodes in 
electrochemical systems.” Journal of the Electrochemical Society. 154 (1 - 5). 

23 Barnosky, A.D. (1982). “Area-perimeter relation for rain cloud areas.” Science. 216 (185 - 
187). 
 
24 Panico, J.; Sterling, P. (1995). “Retinal neurons and vessels are not fractal but space-filling.” 
The Journal of Comparative Neurology. 361 (479 - 490). 
 
25 Mandelbrot, B.B. (1977). The Fractal Geometry of Nature. W.H. Freeman and Company.  
 
26 Das, A.K.; et al. (2014). “Iodide-mediated room temperature reduction of graphene oxide: a 
rapid chemical route for the synthesis of a bifunctional electrocatalyst.” Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A. 5 (1332 - 1340). 
 
27 Kaempgen, M.; Chan, C.K.; Ma, J.; Gruner, G. (2009). “Printable thin film supercapacitors 
using single-walled carbon nanotubes.” Nano Letters. 9 (1872 – 1876). 

 


