 
1

Polarization control in Nitride Quantum Well Light Emitters Enabled by 
Bottom Tunnel-junctions 

Henryk Turski1,2, Shyam Bharadwaj1, Huili (Grace) Xing1,3,4, Debdeep Jena1,3,4 

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA,  

2Institute of High Pressure Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Sokołowska 29/37, PL-01-142 Warsaw, 

Poland  

3Department of Material Science and Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA, 

4Kavli Institute for Nanoscale Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA 

Abstract. 

The frozen internal polarization-induced electric fields due to broken inversion symmetry in all 

conventional blue and green nitride semiconductor light emitting semiconductor quantum well 

heterostructures point in a direction opposite to what is desired for efficient flow of electrons and holes. 

This state of affairs has persisted because of the desire to have p-type hole injectors on top of the quantum 

well active region.  Because of the internal polarization fields in nitride heterostructures, there exist four 

permutations of doping and polarization for the realization of such light emitters.  Which permutation is 

the most desirable for efficient light emission?   In this work, we answer this question by demonstrating a 

fundamentally new approach towards efficient light emission with bottom-tunnel junctions. The bottom-

tunnel junction design aligns the polarization fields in a desired direction in the quantum well, while 

simultaneously eliminating the need for p-type contacts, and allowing efficient current spreading. By 

preventing electron overshoot past quantum wells, it disables carrier recombination in undesired regions 

of the quantized heterostructures, and opens up the possibility for new geometries of integrating and 

stacking multiple light emitters. Due to the inherent advantages, the bottom-tunnel junction light emitting 

diode enables a 200-300% increase in the light emission efficiency over alternate heterostructure designs. 


 
2

Introduction 

Quantum well semiconductor heterostructures based on the Gallium Nitride (GaN) semiconductor system 

have made it possible to realize revolutionary photon emitters in the visible and ultraviolet wavelengths 

[1]. The development of GaN light emitting diodes (LEDs) has enabled semiconductor-based lighting for 

modern residential and industrial buildings, automobiles, and mobile electronic gadgets, and has also 

brought lighting to regions of the world that have no direct access to electricity. The high resistivity of p-

type layers arising from deep acceptor ionization energies, and undesirable electric field orientations due 

to the prevailing quantum heterostructure design of these semiconductor materials forces the LEDs to be 

operated under low current injection conditions to avoid a) losses arising from high-resistance p-type 

contacts and b) overshoot of hot electrons over the quantum wells causing undesired recombination. 

These effects become more severe at high current injection and determine the lower limit for threshold 

of laser diodes (LDs). Since laser-lighting is being investigated as an energy-efficient replacement of LEDs, 

fresh ideas rooted in the physics of the semiconductor heterostructures are needed to achieve high 

efficiency photon sources for the future. 

One of the most important distinguishing features of III-nitride semiconductor heterostructures is the 

presence of built-in electronic polarization due to the lack of inversion symmetry in the wurtzite crystal 

structure [2]. The difference in polarization manifests as the presence of fixed sheet charges of sheet 

density 𝜎" at heterojunctions, which by Gauss’ law produce internal electric fields 𝐹" = 𝑞𝜎"/𝜀(, where 𝑞 

is the electron charge and 𝜀( is the semiconductor dielectric constant. Typical polarization-induced fields 

are in the range of 𝐹"~1MV/cm.  Because the electrostatics of p-n junction diodes and the internal 

quantum efficiency (IQE) of the quantum well regions (due to the quantum-confined Stark effect) are 

highly sensitive to these electric fields, it is important to explore the various possible orientations and 

combinations of polarization-induced fields and junction fields that develop due to depletion of carriers.  


 
3

For vertical LEDs, spontaneous and piezoelectric fields can either enhance or weaken the emission 

performance of the final device [3].  The direction of the built-in field with respect to the direction of 

forward current flow in the diode is a critical parameter.  Due to the large asymmetry between 

conductivity of n-type and p-type GaN, almost all vertical p-n diodes are produced using n-type substrates. 

Lack of highly conductive p-type substrates requires n-type electron injection from the bottom n-type 

substrate into the quantum well active regions.  Being restricted to an n-type substrate, the choice of 

crystal growth direction – Ga vs N polar – determines whether the polarization field in the quantum wells 

points in the same or opposite direction to the p-n junction field, and to the direction of current flow. 

It has been long believed that higher energy efficiencies are possible in nitride light emitters if the 

quantum well heterostructures are grown in the N-polar rather than the Ga-polar orientation. The reasons 

for this are discussed later – but at first glance it may seem that the polarity of the crystal heterostructure 

should have no effect on the IQE of the quantum wells. After all, if one considers just photoluminescence 

from the quantum wells in undoped structures, a N-polar quantum well heterostructure is equivalent to 

a Ga-polar heterostructure physically turned upside down, and indeed there is no reason to expect a 

difference in the IQE between the two structures. However, when a quantum well heterostructure is 

grown along the N-polar (000-1) direction of the crystal, it is found to have a drastically lower IQE than a 

structurally identical Ga-polar (0001) counterpart [4]. The reason for this remains a mystery, and unsolved 

to date.  It is likely related to the difference in defect formation mechanics, e.g. higher layer contamination 

[5,6] for growths in the N-polar orientation by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) and by 

molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) [4,7-10], due to the drastically different growth dynamics and chemistry 

of the N-polar and Ga-polar structures. 


 
4

 

Fig. 1 Schematic image showing four different structures realizing all possible combinations of GaN crystal 

polarization direction, and the choices of p-n junction.  White arrows indicate electron and hole injection 

directions with respect to the built-in polarization fields and the doping-induced p-n junction fields. 

 

If the reason for the low IQE of N-polar quantum wells is discovered and solved, and the IQE is brought up 

to the level of Ga-polar heterostructures, constructing LEDs (or laser diodes) requires placing the quantum 

wells inside the depletion region of a p-n junction diode.  Now, the polarity of the diode (p-layer on the 

top or on the bottom) and the polarization of the crystal (Ga-polar or N-polar) combine to give four distinct 

possibilities, shown in Fig. 1.  A Ga-polar structure can be p-up (conventional LED, Fig. 1a) or p-down (Fig. 

1c), and a N-polar structure can be p-up (Fig. 1b) or p-down (Fig. 1d).  We will show that among these the 

Ga-polar p-down (Fig. 1c) and N-polar p-up (Fig. 1b) structures are ideal for LEDs and LDs because the p-n 

junction field and the polarization fields are aligned.  All of today’s LEDs and LDs use Ga-polar p-up (Fig. 

1a) which has some disadvantages.  Because of the low IQE of N-polar quantum wells today, we select the 

Ga-polar p-down geometry (Fig. 1c), and experimentally prove our hypothesis that this structure has a) 


 
5

much brighter light emission, b) no carrier overflow nor undesired photon emission, and c) excellent 

current spreading.  

To utilize the advantages of the higher perfection of growth along the Ga-polar [0001] direction along 

with the preferred polarization field orientation (available for p-up LEDs grown along the N-polar [000-1] 

direction), tunnel junctions (TJs) must be used on n-type substrates [11].  Growth of such structures is 

complicated due to the fact that the TJ must be grown below the quantum well active region.  This requires 

sustaining a high crystal quality and a smooth surface while growing highly doped p- and n-type layers.  

Additionally, growth of such structures by MOVPE is complicated, because success to effectively activate 

buried p-type layers is still limited [12,13] as the diffusion of hydrogen needed to activate the p-type Mg-

doped GaN is forbidden through n-type GaN layers [14,15].  That is why to realize the bottom-tunnel 

junction, we have chosen to use plasma-assisted MBE, a hydrogen-free growth technique which does not 

require activation of the buried p-type layer. This growth technique has been proven capable of growing 

high quality nitride blue laser diodes [16]. 

 

Fig. 2 Schematic energy band diagrams for forward biased single QW LEDs utilizing top-TJ (a) and bottom-

TJ (b) geometries, respectively. The growth is performed in the [0001] direction, proceeding from left to 

right.  Filled and empty circles with arrows denote carrier flow direction for electrons and holes, 

respectively.  Polarization in the vicinity of the quantum well is marked with respect to the current flow 


 
6

and crystallographic [0001] direction. (c) Experimentally measured current densities as a function of 

external bias obtained for 80 µm x 80 µm LEDs utilizing the top-tunnel junction (a) and the bottom-tunnel 

junction (b). 

 

In this paper, we analyze the impact of the direction of built-in electric field on the electrical and optical 

properties of MBE-grown LEDs.  The desired heterostructures are realized in two varieties: by placing the 

TJ above the active region (top-TJ – shown in the energy band diagram in Fig 2(a)) and below the active 

region (bottom-TJ – shown in the energy band diagram in Fig 2(b)).  Electron (filled circles) and hole (empty 

circles) flow directions are depicted inside the LEDs under forward bias conditions.  The experimentally 

measured current densities for such structures as a function of the external bias is shown in Fig 2(c).  As 

expected, the forward bias voltage direction for the bottom-TJ LEDs (as in Fig 2(b)) is inverted compared 

to that for the top-TJ LEDs (as in Fig 2(a)), indicating the first successful realization of a bottom-tunnel 

junction LED, which makes it possible to probe the questions raised earlier.  Before discussing the 

electroluminescence properties, we describe the details of the epitaxial growth of the heterostructures 

and their fabrication into LEDs. 

 

 
 


 
7

Experimental  

 

Fig. 3 Layer details of the quantum well heterostructures and doping of LEDs grown for comparison of the 

impact of built-in polarization-induced electric field direction. All substrates are Ga-polar. (a, b) have a 

~25% In content 3 nm thick InGaN quantum well for green light emission, and (c, d) have a 16% In content 

20 nm thick InGaN quantum well for blue light emission. (a, c) have top-TJs with an opposite junction field 

direction to (b, d), which have bottom-TJs.  Structures presented in (a), (b), (c) and (d) will be referred to 

as A, B, C and D, respectively.  TJ and LED region are marked for clarification.  

 

The samples shown in Fig. 3 were grown by plasma-assisted MBE on commercially available bulk n-type 

Ga-polar GaN substrates with threading dislocation density around 5 x 107 cm-2.  The composition of the 

active InGaN layers are chosen for two wavelengths: blue and green, and for each choice, a tunnel junction 

is inserted on the top and the bottom.  The top TJ structures are similar to those in prior studies [17,18] 

and serve as control samples, while the bottom-TJ structures are novel.  The InGaN layers were grown at 


 
8

650oC and the GaN layers at 740oC.  In each series, the samples were grown using exactly the same doping 

concentrations and the same alloy compositions.  Modulation of In and Mg concentration for layers grown 

at the same temperature was achieved by varying atomic fluxes of Ga [19] and Mg [20], respectively.  To 

assure the same growth temperature for all equivalent layers, metal-desorption time measurements of 

reference In and Ga fluxes were performed before the growth.  The surface roughness measured by 

atomic force microscopy for 5 µm x 5 µm regions for all structures after MBE growth was below 0.5 nm 

indicating a smooth morphology.  

 

Fig. 4 (a) X-ray diffraction 2q-w scans obtained for structures C and D on left and right axes, respectively.  

The placement of the doping-induced tunnel junction on the top or the bottom has no discernible effect 

on the X-ray diffraction pattern. In (b,c) AFM images obtained for samples C and D, respectively, are 

presented using the same scale. Root mean square roughness obtained for 2 µm x 3 µm scans for both 

structures was 0.15 nm and 0.2 nm for top-TJ (b) and bottom-TJ (c) LEDs, respectively. 

 


 
9

In Fig. 4, high-resolution X-ray diffraction 2q-w scans and AFM images measured for samples in Fig 3 (c, d) 

are shown. They indicate successful growth of essentially identical chemical and layer compositions and 

thicknesses for both the top-TJ and bottom-TJ heterostructures, and simultaneously prove that a) the 

doping sequence has no impact on the X-ray diffraction patterns and samples morphologies and b) the 

placement of the TJ at the bottom does not adversely affect the compositional control of the subsequently 

grown layers.  As shown in Fig 3 (a, b) (structures A and B) and (c, d) (structures C and D), the difference 

between the two series is in the active region thickness and composition of the quantum well (QW) and 

barriers, composition of the electron blocking layer (EBL), and slight difference in doping levels in the TJs.  

The InGaN layers surrounding the active regions are used to keep the structure similar to laser-diode 

heterostructure design used in our prior work [16].  Relatively thick QWs in structures C and D represent 

a new design of light emitters enabled by the TJs.  We also note that unlike polarization-induced 

heterostructure tunnel junctions [11,14,21-25], we have chosen to use GaN:Si/GaN:Mg homojunction TJs 

to avoid potential complications of growing active regions on top of buried heterostructures.  Single 

quantum well active regions were used to remove the effect of uneven carrier distribution between wells 

for both the blue and green LED structures to obtain a fair assessment of the impact of the built-in electric 

field on the intrinsic performance of LEDs for both polarities.  The bottom-TJ effectively flips the LED 

design upside down, mimicking a N-polar p-up configuration, but in the Ga-polar crystal growth 

orientation. 

The samples were processed using optical lithography into vertical diodes of different die sizes ranging 

from 20 µm x 20 µm to 300 µm x 300 µm.  Several higher aspect ratio dies were also fabricated in order 

to observe current spreading, with the largest aspect ratio device measuring 100 µm x 500 µm.  ICP-RIE 

mesa etching in Chlorine based chemistry was used to isolate individual devices.  Though not exploited in 

this work, we point out that the use of bottom-TJ structures offers a unique advantage of lowering the 

p+/n+ tunneling contact resistance by exploiting a much larger cross-section area than the LED mesa, 


 
10

something that is not possible in the top-TJ LED structure.  After mesa isolation, a top circular Ti/Al ohmic 

contact of radius 25 µm for the 80 µm x 80 µm and larger devices was deposited at the center of the top 

of the mesas.  Finally, a common bottom contact was deposited on the back of the n-type substrate.  Prior 

to metallization, a surface treatment consisting of O2 plasma ashing, HCl, and HF cleans were performed 

to remove undesired chemical residues.  The same 25 nm Ti/100 nm Al metal stack was deposited by e-

beam evaporation for both the top and bottom n-type contacts.  Such a contact stack has been shown to 

have very low contact resistance to n-type GaN [26]. 

From this point on, top and bottom TJ samples will be compared using opposite bias directions (as 

indicated in Fig 3) to enable quantitative comparison in their natural bias conditions.  The processed 

samples were measured on-chip by grounding the bottom contact and putting a probe on the top contact 

of the selected devices.  The electroluminescence (EL) spectrum was collected from the top using an 

optical setup utilizing a monochromator and a photodiode. 

 

Results 

The measured I-V characteristics of the four 80 µm x 80 µm devices are shown in Fig. 5.  As expected from 

the comparable doping levels, current values obtained for bottom- and top-TJs are at a similar level with 

higher values for bottom-TJ structures near the turn-on voltage (easily seen in the inset of the Fig 5(a)).  


 
11

 

Fig. 5 Measured current density versus voltage for 80 µm x 80 µm devices from green LED structures (a) 

with top TJ A and bottom TJ B, and blue LED structures with (b) top-TJ C and bottom-TJ D.  The insets show 

the same plot in linear scale in the forward bias.  The measurements show low leakage currents and the 

successful realization of bottom-TJ heterostructures for both the green and blue LEDs. 

 

The low observed leakage levels in the reverse bias for all LED structures seen in Fig 5 importantly indicates 

that the density of extended defects propagating through the LEDs in all cases is similar.  This confirms 

high epitaxial quality of bottom-TJ structures, and thereby enables a fair comparison between the top-TJ 

and bottom-TJ structures.  The lower turn-on voltages seen in the insets of Fig 5 for the blue LEDs whose 

structures are shown in Fig. 3 (c,d) are due to a slight increase in the doping level in the 20 nm thick GaN:Si 

TJ region from 5 x 1019 to 7 x 1019 cm-3.  It is important to point out that the on-resistances can be further 

reduced by increasing Si and Mg doping, and by potentially using polarization-induced TJs with 

introduction of InGaN or AlN layers in the TJ [21-24,27], but with a potential penalty of degraded crystal 

quality in the active region. 


 
12

 

Fig. 6 (a-d) Electroluminescence spectra in log scale measured on-chip for the indicated current densities 

for 80 µm x 80 µm devices of structures A, B, C and D, respectively.  A large energy emission shift is 

observed in (b), accompanied by real-color pictures of the whole 1 cm x 1 cm wafers next to the plot.  No 

visible peak shift was observed for structures C and D.  Above the real-color images are monochromatic 

images collected under a microscope for 100 µm x 500 µm bottom-TJ devices under 100 mA injection, 

showing excellent current spreading.  The bottom-TJ structures B and D show single peak emission, 

whereas both blue and green top TJ structures show parasitic peaks at a higher photon energy than the 

desired quantum well peaks.  

 

Fig. 6 (a-d) shows the measured electroluminescence spectra for the four tunnel-junction LEDs.  The 

dotted and dashed vertical lines indicate the peak emission wavelength emitted by the quantum wells at 

low and high excitation, respectively.  The solid vertical line indicates EL associated with parasitic radiative 

recombination in the lower indium content InGaN layers surrounding the quantum wells.  Rather 


 
13

interestingly, such a high energy emission peak (395-405 nm) appears for all top-TJ LEDs but never for the 

bottom-TJ LEDs.  Measurements performed on different devices on the same sample (for top-TJ) feature 

slight differences in relative intensities, but existence of the secondary peak and its dominant intensity at 

low current density is observed for all top-TJ LEDs.  It is important to point out that this extra high energy 

peak is not associated with emission or reemission from the p-type doped GaN layers, as it is also 

measured in photoluminescence measurements of similar InGaN/InGaN QWs [28] in the absence of Mg 

doped p-type GaN layers. 

Due to the limitations of on-chip measurements, an exact comparison of the intensity between the top- 

and bottom-TJ diodes is not straightforward due to differences in alignment of probes, etc.  Nonetheless, 

at an injection current density of at 20 A/cm2, the bottom-TJ LEDs showed ~2.5X higher peak intensity 

than the top-TJ for the green LEDs, and this enhancement was ~13X for the bottom-TJ blue LEDs.  The 

quantitative differences between the enhancement for green and blue emitters can be attributed to 

differences in active regions and electron blocking layer (EBL) design, but irrespective of the details, the 

bottom-TJ structures for both wavelengths demonstrate the important advantages offered by this 

conceptual change in the LED design.  For the higher In content LEDs (Fig 6(a,b)), the peak emission shifts 

from yellow (top-TJ: 565 nm, bottom-TJ: 580 nm) to green (top-TJ: 552 nm, bottom-TJ: 541 nm) with 

increasing current injection.  A higher blueshift for the bottom-TJ device is seen compared to the top-TJ: 

this is a fingerprint of higher injection efficiency at high currents, leading to more pronounced screening 

of the internal polarization field.  This is equivalent to say that at the same current level, the effective 

carrier concentration in the InGaN QW is higher in the bottom-TJ LEDs than the top-TJ LEDs, thus more 

screening and more light emission. 

Irrespective of the location of the TJ, all LED devices showed good current spreading: the small circular 

metal contact on the top was enough to spread the current throughout the entire device mesas far larger 


 
14

in area. Optical microscope images of the highest aspect ratio (100 µm x 500 µm) bottom-TJ LEDs under 

100 mA injection are shown next to the EL spectra measurements in Fig 6.  

 

Fig. 7 Energy band diagrams, mobile carrier concentrations, and radiative recombination as a function of 

position near the active region calculated by the SiLENSe package (a,b,c) at 20 A/cm2 for structures A and 

B and (d,e,f) at 20 A/cm2  for structures C and D.  The results for top-TJ and bottom-TJ structures are 

compared. (b,e) Electron and hole concentrations are denoted using solid and dotted lines, respectively. 

(c,f) Differences in the radiative recombination in the InGaN claddings surrounding the QW between top- 

and bottom-TJ structures are marked with arrows. 


 
15

 

To further analyze the origin of the high energy peak in the EL spectra for top-TJ structures, the 

heterostructure devices were modeled by self-consistently solving the energy band diagrams with current 

transport through the structure. The experimentally investigated structures utilizing top- and bottom-TJ 

were simulated by one-dimensional drift-diffusion model using SiLENSe: only the part of the structures 

marked `green LED’ or `blue LED’  in Fig 3 (excluding the part denoted “TJ”) were simulated, while setting 

the orientation as Ga- and N-polar, respectively.  This procedure works well for modeling physical 

differences between the top- and bottom-TJ LEDs as long as a) the TJ resistance is low in both cases, b) 

the TJ is not affected by the polarization field direction (e.g. by using a homojunction), and c) does not 

degrade the LED active region quality.   

 The calculated energy-band diagrams, carrier concentrations and radiative recombination profiles are 

shown in Fig 7.  These plots present results obtained at 20 A/cm2 for the green LED structures A (top TJ) 

and B (bottom TJ) and 20 A/cm2 for the blue LED structures C (top TJ) and D (bottom TJ).  As seen in the 

energy band diagrams, the top-TJ and bottom-TJ LEDs behave quite differently under forward bias.  In the 

top-TJ, the built-in polarization field in the QW lowers the effective band offset for electrons and holes, 

enabling the carriers to exit the QW and overshoot to the other side. This increases the escape of carriers 

from QWs, leading to higher carrier concentrations outside of the QW for the top-TJ structure, compared 

to the abrupt drop of carrier overshoot for the bottom TJ structure, as seen in Fig 7(b,e).  As a 

consequence, a significant amount of undesired radiative recombination occurs in the barriers 

surrounding the QW for the top TJ structures (Fig 7(c,f)).  For the bottom-TJ LEDs on the other hand, due 

to the inverted polarization field direction in vicinity of the QW, electrons and holes are retained in the 

QW and in the InGaN layer closer to the desired injection side, respectively, as seen in Fig 7(b,e).  Because 

of the reduction of the n*p product outside the QWs, the recombination in the barrier surrounding the 

QW is significantly reduced for the bottom-TJ LEDs compared to the top-TJ case (Fig 7(c,f)).  The parasitic 


 
16

emission peaks seen in Fig 6(a,c) in only the top-TJ LEDs are exactly due to this recombination in the low 

In-composition InGaN cladding regions, and are absent in the bottom-TJ LEDs.  

This change in the radiative recombination rate between top- and bottom-TJ LEDs depends on the 

composition and thickness of the QW, barriers, and the EBL, which can be inferred from comparing Fig 

7(c) and Fig 7(f).  The simulations suggest that the bottom-TJ construction always leads to significantly 

lower undesired radiative recombination rates in the barriers.  It is important to point out that in Fig 7(c,f), 

only the radiative part of recombination is plotted to relate those results with the experimentally obtained 

high energy peak in the EL.  An important consequence of the efficient electron and hole concentration 

separation in the vicinity of QW is the resulting lowering of nonradiative recombination, which is also 

proportional to the n*p product.  This fact significantly enhances the efficiency of the bottom-TJ LEDs. 

 

Fig. 8 Capacitance-Voltage (C-V) measurements corresponding to structures (a) A and B, and (b) C and D.  

The higher junction capacitances as well as the minimal hysteresis observed in the bottom-TJ LEDs arise 

from the polarization field in the QW pointing in the same direction with the p-n junction field, which are 

further illustrated in Fig. 9.  The CV measurements were taken at 5 MHz. 

 

The low leakage current in reverse bias seen in Fig 5 allows a direct measurement of the capacitance-

voltage (C-V) characteristics for all TJ LED samples.  In Fig 8(a,b), the capacitance values divided by device 


 
17

area (C/A) measured at a 5 MHz frequency as a function of forward bias of the LEDs are shown.  The plots 

in Fig 8(a) and (b) present data for the structures A, B and C, D, respectively.  The depletion width W 

corresponding to the measured C/A values, assuming 𝑊 =

*+*,-

.
, where 𝜀/ = 8.85 ∙ 1067𝜇𝐹/𝑐𝑚 and 𝜀; =

10 (the electrical permittivity of vacuum and the semiconductor dielectric constant) are shown on the 

right vertical axes.  For simplicity, 𝜀; is assumed to be constant for In0.15Ga0.85N and GaN – derived from a 

linear extrapolation proportional to the In content using values of 8.52 and 18.44 for GaN and InN, 

respectively [29]. Since the conductivity of the TJs is high, we assume that the entire measured 

capacitance is associated with the depletion in the LED active region.  Due to the opposite orientations of 

the polarization-induced electric field and the p-n junction electric fields of the p-up (top TJ) and p-down 

(bottom-TJ) LEDs, the chemically identical layer stacks result in remarkably different capacitances and 

depletion widths.  As expected, W obtained for the bottom-TJ structures is significantly lower than that 

for top-TJ structures, implying the polarization field is aligned with the junction field, and to maintain the 

same net built-in field, the junction shrinks the net depletion width (see Fig 1b).  This mimics a desired N-

polar p-up structure (see Fig 1c) in the alignment of the polarization and junction fields, but by virtue of 

the bottom-TJ, is effectively realized in the Ga-polar structure.  For the bottom-TJ LEDs, a characteristic 

steep increase in the capacitance is measured for positive voltages, associated with barrier-free carrier 

injection and ready shrinking of the depletion regions.  For example, in structure D at a forward bias 

voltage of ~1 V, the depletion width measured from the capacitance is essentially identical to the thickness 

of the QW, ~20 nm, meaning the depletion region has shrunk completely to the edges of the QW.  On the 

other hand, a noticeable hysteresis is observed between forward and reverse voltage sweeps for the top-

TJ LED, associated with charge trapping in the active region.  This effect is smaller for thinner QWs and for 

bottom-TJ structures compared to top-TJ structures.  For voltages higher than 1 to 2 V, the onset of current 

flow makes the conductance dominate over the capacitance, and the C-V measurement should not be 

trusted. 


 
18

 

Fig. 9 Energy band diagrams with carrier concentration at 0 V obtained using the SiLENSe package (a,b,c,d) 

comparing results obtained for structures A, B, and C, D.  The top-TJ blue LED has a triangular well at 140-

160 nm that can trap charges.  The bottom-TJ green and blue LEDs have smaller depletion regions.  

 

To benchmark the magnitude of the experimentally obtained depletion widths, energy band diagram 

simulations using SiLENSe at 0 V were performed.  The calculated energy band diagrams and mobile carrier 

concentrations in the vicinity of the active regions of structures A, B, C and D are shown in Fig 9(a-d), 

respectively.  It is seen clearly that the polarization-induced electric field results in the thinning of the net 

depletion width for the bottom-TJ structures vs top TJ structures (seen for B vs A and D vs C).  The peaks 

in the electron and hole concentrations near the active region that are present for the bottom-TJ LED 

structures are caused by the GaN/InGaN and InGaN/AlGaN heterojunction band offsets, and promote 


 
19

better carrier injection into QW.  The AlGaN/GaN interface that causes the peak in the hole concentration 

for structure C is on the other side of the EBL, leading to lower hole injection efficiency.  The energy band 

diagrams also provide insight into the origins of the hysteresis observed in C-V for sample C.  A deep 

triangular well is formed around 160 nm in the conduction band, with barriers on both sides.  The 

charging/discharging of this well formed around the InGaN QW due to polarization due to carriers injected 

or extracted from this region is responsible for hysteresis.  The same barrier is responsible for blocking 

carrier injection into the QW at low currents, leading to a dominant parasitic high energy peak associated 

with emission from InGaN cladding layers in the EL spectra of Fig 6(c).  In the case of structure D, which 

also has the thick QW, the barrier for carrier escape is significantly smaller, leading to significantly lower 

hysteresis as seen in Fig 8(b) for the BTJ vs the top TJ.  Such carrier trapping in the top TJ LEDs can be 

detrimental for fast electronic modulation of the LEDs or LDs, suggesting the bottom-TJ construction is 

superior for such high-speed applications as in visual light communications (VLC) or LiFi (Light-fidelity). 

 

Conclusions 

In this work, a fundamentally new approach of using bottom-tunnel junctions for polar GaN based light-

emitting diodes and lasers has been demonstrated.  A clear experimental assessment of the impact of the 

polarization-induced electric fields and their relative orientation with the p-n diode junction fields on LED 

performance was possible for the first time with the bottom-TJ approach.  Electroluminescence 

measurements on top-TJ and bottom-TJ LEDs emitting in blue as well as green-yellow spectrum indicate 

that the bottom-TJ LEDs achieve superior injection efficiency (in a Ga-polar p-down structure, which 

effectively mimics a desired N-polar p-up LED structure).  Corroborating device simulations explain the 

experimental trends observed in the EL spectra such as higher emission intensities at high injection 

currents for bottom-TJ over top-TJ structures: the polarization induced electric fields present in the 


 
20

bottom-TJ structures are in a direction that assists carrier injection, while effectively separating electrons 

and holes in the vicinity of the QW, suppressing parasitic carrier recombination.  Further supporting 

capacitance-voltage measurements confirm the experimental observation of significantly thinner 

depletion widths and better injection efficiency for the bottom-TJ LEDs compared to the top-TJ 

counterparts.  Based on the comparative study, we conclude that the bottom-TJ LEDs present an intriguing 

alternative to standard Ga-polar LEDs for achieving high efficiencies, monochromaticity, and for high 

frequency direct modulation of the photonic output.  Combining the above advantages with the excellent 

current spreading by using a thick n-type GaN layer on the top, the first realization of a bottom-tunnel 

junction GaN LED presented here paves a new unexplored path for GaN-based photonic devices.   

 

 
 


 
21

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported partially by the Polish National Centre for Research and Development grants 

LIDER/287/L-6/14/NCBR/2015 and PBS3/A3/23/2015 during the visit of the lead author at Cornell 

University.  The work at Cornell University was supported in part by the following National Science 

Foundation (NSF) grants: NSF DMREF award # 1534303 monitored by Dr. J. Schluter, NSF Award # 1710298 

monitored by Dr. T. Paskova, NSF CCMR MRSEC Award #1719875, and NSF RAISE TAQs Award #1839196 

monitored by Dr. D. Dagenais.  The cleanroom fabrication at the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility (CNF) 

was supported in part by the NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (Grant ECCS-

1542081). 

 

 


 
22

 

References: 

[1] 
S. Nakamura, Reviews of Modern Physics 87, 1139 (2015). 

[2] 
C. Wood and D. Jena, Polarization Effects in Semiconductors 2008). 

[3] 
D. Jena et al., physica status solidi (a) 208, 1511 (2011). 

[4] 
S. Fernández-Garrido, J. Lähnemann, C. Hauswald, M. Korytov, M. Albrecht, C. Chèze, C. 

Skierbiszewski, and O. Brandt, Physical Review Applied 6 (2016). 
[5] 
T. K. Zywietz, J. Neugebauer, and M. Scheffler, Applied Physics Letters 74, 1695 (1999). 

[6] 
C. Chèze, F. Feix, J. Lähnemann, T. Flissikowski, M. Kryśko, P. Wolny, H. Turski, C. Skierbiszewski, 

and O. Brandt, Applied Physics Letters 112 (2018). 
[7] 
C. Chèze et al., Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and 

Microelectronics: Materials, Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 31 (2013). 
[8] 
F. Feix, T. Flissikowski, K. K. Sabelfeld, V. M. Kaganer, M. Wolz, L. Geelhaar, H. T. Grahn, and O. 

Brandt, Physical Review Applied 8 (2017). 
[9] 
V. Kirilyuk, A. R. A. Zauner, P. C. M. Christianen, J. L. Weyher, P. R. Hageman, and P. K. Larsen, 

Journal of Crystal Growth 230, 477 (2001). 
[10] 
H. Masui, S. Keller, N. Fellows, N. A. Fichtenbaum, M. Furukawa, S. Nakamura, U. K. Mishra, and 

S. P. DenBaars, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 48 (2009). 
[11] 
M. J. Grundmann and U. K. Mishra, Phys Status Solidi C 4, 2830 (2007). 

[12] 
Y. Kuwano, M. Kaga, T. Morita, K. Yamashita, K. Yagi, M. Iwaya, T. Takeuchi, S. Kamiyama, and I. 

Akasaki, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 52 (2013). 
[13] 
W. Li et al., Applied Physics Letters 113 (2018). 

[14] 
C. Skierbiszewski, G. Muziol, K. Nowakowski-Szkudlarek, H. Turski, M. Siekacz, A. Feduniewicz-

Zmuda, A. Nowakowska-Szkudlarek, M. Sawicka, and P. Perlin, Applied Physics Express 11 (2018). 
[15] 
R. Czernecki et al., Journal of Alloys and Compounds  (2018). 

[16] 
C. Skierbiszewski, H. Turski, G. Muziol, M. Siekacz, M. Sawicka, G. Cywiński, Z. R. Wasilewski, and 

S. Porowski, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 47 (2014). 
[17] 
M. Malinverni, C. Tardy, M. Rossetti, A. Castiglia, M. Duelk, C. Vélez, D. Martin, and N. 

Grandjean, Applied Physics Express 9 (2016). 
[18] 
E. C. Young, B. P. Yonkee, F. Wu, S. H. Oh, S. P. DenBaars, S. Nakamura, and J. S. Speck, Applied 

Physics Express 9 (2016). 
[19] 
H. Turski, M. Siekacz, Z. R. Wasilewski, M. Sawicka, S. Porowski, and C. Skierbiszewski, Journal of 

Crystal Growth 367, 115 (2013). 
[20] 
H. Turski, G. Muzioł, M. Siekacz, P. Wolny, K. Szkudlarek, A. Feduniewicz-Żmuda, K. Dybko, and 

C. Skierbiszewski, Journal of Crystal Growth 482, 56 (2018). 
[21] 
J. Simon, Z. Zhang, K. Goodman, H. Xing, T. Kosel, P. Fay, and D. Jena, Phys Rev Lett 103, 026801 

(2009). 
[22] 
M. Kaga, T. Morita, Y. Kuwano, K. Yamashita, K. Yagi, M. Iwaya, T. Takeuchi, S. Kamiyama, and I. 

Akasaki, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 52 (2013). 
[23] 
S. Krishnamoorthy, F. Akyol, P. S. Park, and S. Rajan, Applied Physics Letters 102 (2013). 

[24] 
F. Akyol, S. Krishnamoorthy, Y. Zhang, J. Johnson, J. Hwang, and S. Rajan, Applied Physics Letters 

108 (2016). 
[25] 
X. Yan, W. Li, S. M. Islam, K. Pourang, H. Xing, P. Fay, and D. Jena, Applied Physics Letters 107 

(2015). 
[26] 
J. S. Kwak, S. E. Mohney, J.-Y. Lin, and R. S. Kern, Semiconductor Science and Technology 15, 756 

(2000). 


 
23

[27] 
J. Verma, J. Simon, V. Protasenko, T. Kosel, H. Grace Xing, and D. Jena, Applied Physics Letters 99 

(2011). 
[28] 
H. Turski et al., Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and 

Microelectronics: Materials, Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 29 (2011). 
[29] 
S. Y. Davydov, Physics of the Solid State 51, 1231 (2009). 

 


