Title: Lattice nano-ripples revealed in peptide microcrystals by scanning electron 

nanodiffraction

Authors: Marcus Gallagher-Jones1, Colin Ophus2, Karen C. Bustillo2, David R. Boyer1, 

Ouliana Panova2,3, Calina Glynn1, Chih-Te Zee1, Jim Ciston2, Kevin Canton Mancia1, 

Andrew M. Minor2,3, and Jose A. Rodriguez1

Affiliations:

1 Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA-DOE Institute for Genomics and 

Proteomics, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

2 National Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National 

Laboratory, CA, USA.

3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California Berkeley, CA, 

USA.

Abstract: Changes in lattice structure across sub-regions of protein crystals are challenging 

to assess when relying on whole crystal measurements. Because of this difficulty, 

macromolecular structure determination from protein micro and nano crystals requires

assumptions of bulk crystallinity and domain block substructure. To evaluate the fidelity of 

these assumptions in protein nanocrystals we map lattice structure across micron size areas 

of cryogenically preserved three-dimensional peptide crystals using a nano-focused electron 

beam. This approach produces diffraction from as few as 1,500 molecules in a crystal, is

sensitive to crystal thickness and three-dimensional lattice orientation. Real-space maps 

reconstructed from unsupervised classification of diffraction patterns across a crystal reveal 

regions of crystal order/disorder and three-dimensional lattice reorientation on a 20nm scale. 

The lattice nano-ripples observed in micron-sized macromolecular crystals provide a direct 

view of their plasticity. Knowledge of these features is a first step to understanding crystalline 

macromolecular self-assembly and improving the determination of structures from protein 

nano and microcrystals from single or serial crystal diffraction.

Introduction

The physical and chemical properties of a protein crystal depend in part on its underlying

lattice structure. Changes in the packing of macromolecules within crystals perturb this

structure as is exemplified by crystal polymorphism1. Packing rearrangements can also lead 

to deterioration of lattice order and limit the usability of a crystal for structural

determination2,3. Imperfections in protein crystals can in part be described by the mosaic 

block model2–4, in which monolithic crystal blocks or domains tile to form a macro-crystal but 


vary in size, orientation, and/or cell dimensions3. Because directly measuring mosaicity in 

protein crystals is inherently challenging2, crystallographic software must estimate disparities

in domain block size, shape, and orientation per crystal5–7, for full and partial Bragg 

reflections5,8. Mosaicity then varies by crystal and is affected by crystal size9, crystal 

manipulation10, and parameters for data collection11. The challenge in accurately assessing

these models in protein nanocrystals has been highlighted by analysis of diffraction 

measured using x-ray free electron lasers6,12. 

Direct views of a protein crystal lattice can be obtained by high resolution electron 

microscopy13,14; facilitated by advances in high-resolution imaging13–17 and cryogenic sample 

handling techniques13,18,19. Cryo electron microscopy (cryoEM) also reveals crystal self-

assembly20–24 and, for two-dimensional protein crystals21, shows natural variation between 

unit cells22,23. Domain blocks can be identified in cryoEM images of three dimensional 

lysozyme microcrystals20, where Fourier filtering helped estimate the location and span of 

multiple blocks across a single crystal20. 

Macromolecular structures can be obtained from similar nanocrystals by selected area

electron diffraction-based methods such as MicroED25 and rotation electron diffraction26. 

Structures determined by MicroED or similar approaches range in size from small molecules 

to proteins, including a variety of peptides27–34. In MicroED, frozen-hydrated nanocrystals are 

unidirectionally rotated while being illuminated by an electron beam to produce diffraction 

movies35. These movies are processed by standard crystallographic software36, and 

structures are determined and refined using electron scattering factors37,38. Structures

determined by MicroED are atomically accurate27,28,32 and mirror those obtained by 

microfocus x-ray crystallography33,39. These structures represent an average over entire 

crystals or large crystal areas. 

In electron microscopy, greater control over illuminated areas is achieved by scanning 

transmission electron microscopy (STEM), which scans a focused electron beam (typically 

<1nm) across a sample to produce images of relatively thick bio specimens40 over large 

fields of view41,42. A variety of sample properties can be probed by collecting electrons from 

different angular ranges, such as annular dark field detection with low and high scattering 

angle detectors (ADF, HAADF)43,44, annular bright field detection (ABF)45, and differential 

phase contrast detection46, providing access to different contrast mechanisms underlying 

these modalities. These approaches typically rely on monolithic detectors that integrate 

electrons over a specific angular range originating from the sample at each probe position 

and attribute the signal intensity to a point on sample44. These techniques have been 


successful in the 3D mapping of atomic features within imperfect crystals of radiation hard 

material47.

In contrast, a scanning nanobeam diffraction experiment records diffraction patterns on a

two-dimensional pixelated detector at each scan position across a sample. Each Scanx x

Scany position of the scan has a Kx x Ky dimension in reciprocal space (diffraction image) 

resulting in a four-dimensional data set (4DSTEM)48–50. This data can then be processed to 

reconstruct a real space image of the sample corresponding to specific features in the 

measured diffraction patterns from each scan point, resulting in a greater flexibility in the 

imaging contrasts obtainable from a single experiment. Cooling of sensitive semi-crystalline 

organic polymers allows their investigation by 4DSTEM to reveal lattice orientation within

nano-thin films41,42.

Here we analyse beam-sensitive three-dimensional peptide nanocrystals at liquid nitrogen 

temperatures by 4DSTEM. Our findings address a lack of direct estimates of nano-scale 

lattice variation in single protein crystals by other diffraction methodologies and their

relationship to diffraction data quality. Our measurements reveal effects that may influence

MicroED experiments and other nanocrystallography methods including those performed at

x-ray free electron lasers6,12,51–54, or synchrotron-based micro and nanocrystallography9,55,56.

Results

4DSTEM of three-dimensional beam sensitive peptide nanocrystals

To assess nanoscale lattice changes within single peptide crystals, we generated two-

dimensional maps of their lattice structure by 4DSTEM (Fig 1.). We evaluated nanocrystals

of a prion peptide segment with sequence QYNNQNNFV, whose structure has been 

previously determined (PDB ID 6AXZ) by MicroED to sub-Å resolution33. Crystals analysed

by 4DSTEM were equivalent in shape and size to those evaluated by MicroED; most were 

needle shaped and several microns in their longest dimension, but less than a micron thick 

and wide (Supplementary Figure 1.). Crystals that lay over holes on the quantifoil® grid were 

found to produce the highest contrast signal and were chosen for analysis by 4DSTEM.

During 4DSTEM data collection, an approximately six nanometre electron beam

(Supplementary Figure 2.) was scanned coarsely across a grid while regions of interest were 

identified by low-mag low-dose STEM imaging. Fine scans were performed on up to three

micrometre long regions of single nanocrystals while diffraction patterns were measured at 

each step using a direct electron detector (Fig 1c.). Beam parameters in 4DSTEM scans 


were comparable to those of prior studies (supplementary table 1), with an estimated fluence

of ~1 e-/Å2 in regions of the crystal exposed to the beam. For all 4DSTEM scan points we 

applied the lowest dose necessary to detect Bragg reflections (Fig. 1d,e, Supplementary 

Figure 1.). We confirmed that the dose was sufficiently low by measuring several 

overlapping scans from the same area of a single crystal and found that decay in the highest

resolution reflections occurred only after multiple scans of the same area (Supplementary 

Figure 3.). The probe dwell time and diffraction image exposure were synchronized and 

produced full-frame patterns at a rate of 400 per second (Supplementary Figure 4.).

These parameters yielded diffraction patterns whose resolution extended beyond 1.4 Å

(Supplementary Figure 1.), measured from only an estimated 1,000-15,000 diffracting 

molecules given an effective illumination area of 6 by 6 nm, a crystal thickness of 100-500

nm and unit cell constants of a=4.94, b=10.34, c=31.15, alpha=94.21, beta=92.36, 

gamma=102.2. Bragg diffraction was observed only from within the bounds of the crystals,

as identified by annular dark field STEM images (Fig. 1, Supplementary Figure 1, 3).

Diffraction patterns integrated over micron-sized regions of single crystals, matched MicroED 

patterns measured from a micron-sized selected area (Supplementary Figure 1). Diffraction 

in 4DSTEM patterns was minimally occluded by the angular dark field detector (Fig. 1a).

Diffraction pattern reconstruction by hybrid electron counting

Conventional electron counting in HRTEM is achieved by thresholding images acquired 

using a fast direct electron detector based on estimates of detector readout and Landau 

noise17. Coincidence loss is minimized by operating the detector at a sufficiently high frame 

rate and low electron dose17. This procedure limits the dynamic range in diffraction images 

because coincidence loss is difficult to escape at Bragg reflections, where signal is 

concentrated compared to background regions (Supplementary Figure 4). This phenomenon 

is exacerbated most by detection of the focused central beam, where coincidence loss is 

high (Supplementary Figure 5). To benefit from the improved signal to noise afforded by 

electron counting, whilst maintaining some of the dynamic range lost due to coincidence, we 

implemented a hybrid method for signal detection (Supplementary Figure 5). This procedure 

introduced little change in the signal observed at most Bragg reflections compared to 

standard counting, but improved estimates of central beam intensity (Supplementary Figure 

5).

Raw patterns collected on a K2 direct electron detector at 400 frames per second were 

processed using a workflow that involves background subtraction, normalization, 

thresholding, and pixel-level stepwise counting (Supplementary Figure 4).


The hybrid counting approach was implemented as follows: We used the distribution of pixel 

intensities within an entire 4DSTEM scan to estimate background signal and categorize 

measured pixel intensities into counting bins corresponding to single or multiple electron 

counts (Supplementary Figure 4e, 5a). Based on this criterion, the majority of pixels in a 

pattern were zero valued (Supplementary Figure 4e); a small fraction (< 1%) within the 

regions where Bragg reflections were expected received single counts and a lesser minority 

of pixels were assigned multiple counts corresponding to measurement of coincident 

electrons (Supplementary Figure 5a.). Of the latter group, most events occurred within the 

region illuminated by the central (000) focused beam disc (Supplementary Figure 5a

(insets)), particularly over thin sample regions or holes in the carbon support (Supplementary 

Figure 5b,c). The range of signal counts in processed patterns spanned values from 1-35 but 

very few pixels were assigned values greater than 10 (Supplementary Figure 5a). Whilst the 

true degree of coincidence cannot be measured by this method, comparison of these 

patterns to those processed with a binary threshold shows an increase in dynamic range 

achieved by hybrid counting protocols (Supplementary Figure 4f, 5b,c). 

Pixel-wise processing of data also allowed us to correct diffraction pattern shifts due to beam 

scanning using centre of mass alignment (Supplementary Figure 6.). The majority of scans 

presented minimal shifts; some scans showed preferential drift of the diffraction pattern

along a single orientation (Supplementary Figure 6c,d (inset)). The combined intensity of the 

central beam and Bragg reflections allowed us to estimate crystal thickness at each scan 

point (Supplementary Figure 7). This estimated thickness correlates well with features 

observed in annular dark field STEM images including empty regions within holes and the 

carbon support (Supplementary Figure 7).

Analysis of lattice structure in 4DSTEM scans across large areas of peptide crystals

To better understand changes in the pattern of Bragg reflections observed across different 

areas of a single crystal, we performed unsupervised classification of patterns in each scan

(Fig. 2.). Given the high sparsity of signal outside of the central disk in individual diffraction 

patterns (Supplementary Figure 4, 5), we masked out the central beam to limit its influence 

on pattern classification (Fig. 2.). This procedure revealed groups of patterns within a scan 

that shared a common lattice; patterns could be classified in this way for all measured 

crystals. The number of clusters identified varied between crystals and ranged from 4 to 20 

with an average size of 1.6x105 ±1.7x105 nm2 (Supplementary Figure 8.). In two of the thirty-

four datasets analysed, the number of clusters was manually assigned because fewer than 5 

clusters were reproducibly identified. The spatial distribution of clusters identified by this 


approach was consistent with changes in the pattern of Bragg reflections across a scan, 

rather than other background signal or other diffuse scattering (Supplementary Figure 9.). 

The number and intensity of Bragg reflections varied across classified patterns (Fig. 3c, 

Supplementary Figure 10). Bragg reflections were weak or attenuated in regions where 

crystals appeared thickest and in thin regions where the central beam showed high counts 

(Fig. 3c, Supplementary Figure 10). The overall pattern of Bragg reflections differed across a 

single crystal, changing in a coordinated fashion at all resolutions. Diffraction patterns in a 

cluster appeared spatially linked within a crystal (Fig. 3b). This effect was reinforced by the 

requirement that patterns be assigned to a particular class. When mapped onto crystals,

diffraction pattern clusters gave the appearance of nanodomains with definite boundaries

(Fig. 3a, Supplementary Figure 8b.). However, these boundaries were deceptive since in 

reality, the change in diffraction appeared more continuous (Supplementary Figure 10.). To 

assess the true extent of angular reorientation we performed a library-based indexing of 

patterns obtained by cluster averaging (Supplementary Figure 11). Library indexing of 

patterns showed that changes in diffraction across clusters could be attributed to a  3

rotation of the lattice away from a common zone (Figure 3c). 

Analysis of lattice structure in HRTEM images of peptide crystals

To obtain context for the spatial distribution of changes in lattice structure in peptide crystals 

we observed by 4DSTEM, we performed HRTEM of similar crystals in search of similar 

effects20. High resolution cryo-EM on crystals of QYNNQNNFV with a total dose of 27.8 e-/Å2

per image (Supplementary Figure 12a,c) allowed us to directly visualize the lattice in these 

crystals at approximately 2.3Å resolution (Supplementary Figure 12b,d). We processed 

these images by single particle cryo-EM protocols, identifying image sub-regions for 

unsupervised clustering, analogous to the procedure used for 4DSTEM pattern classification 

(Supplementary Figure 13.). 

Fourier Transforms of whole crystal images showed clear variation in Bragg reflections when 

different crystallites are imaged or when comparing crystalline features to empty regions 

within holes or regions of carbon support (Supplementary Figure 12, 13). Cluster averages 

also showed differing images (Figure 13c, f, Supplementary Figure 14a - d), but quantifiable 

differences between clusters were difficult to detect in either real or reciprocal space

(Supplementary Figure 14a - h). This is potentially due to the influence of crystal thickness 

and defocus across the image that make true changes in three-dimensional lattice character 

difficult to discern (Supplementary Figure 13).


Discussion

To reveal the lattice substructure within beam-sensitive three-dimensional crystals, we 

performed 4DSTEM on peptide nanocrystals at cryogenic temperatures. In contrast to the 

semi-crystalline polymers studied previously by 4DSTEM41,42, the prion peptide nanocrystals 

we evaluated are composed of highly ordered peptide arrays that diffract to sub-ångstrom 

resolution33. Taking advantage of the known lattice parameters for these crystals, their highly 

ordered structure, and the known atomic arrangement of their constituent molecules, we 

probed for nano-scale changes in diffraction across single crystals. The data we obtained 

add to previous studies on the lattice substructure and physical properties of nanometre to 

micrometre sized protein crystals investigated by a variety of methods6,20,25,26,57. 

Unlike other methods of protein crystal characterization20,58–60, 4DSTEM provides direct 

observation of lattice character through nanoscale mapping of changes in diffraction across 

micron scale areas41. Our measurement of 1.4Å resolution diffraction from sub-10nm regions 

of peptide crystals was facilitated by three key technological features of our experiment: (i)

fast readout direct electron counting detectors61, (ii) a hybrid counting protocol applied to 

sparse diffraction data captured by 4DSTEM, and (iii) low dose cryogenic techniques that 

lessen the evidence of radiation damage. Because of these key features, the resolution we 

achieve in 4DSTEM scans is comparable to that of diffraction patterns measured by 

MicroED using a selected area aperture. The fluence required to achieve this resolution by 

4DSTEM is higher than it is for MicroED, on the order of 1 e-/Å2 for the former compared to 

about 0.01 e-/Å2 for the latter 62. The dose chosen for these 4DSTEM experiments is 

necessary to achieve high resolution diffraction from a significantly lower number of 

molecules diffracted at each scan point (~1-10x103 molecules) compared to those diffracted 

by MicroED from similar crystals (~1x107 molecules), even for the smallest selected area 

apertures 27,35. The higher potential for damage by this dose at each scan position is 

mitigated by spacing scan steps by a distance larger than the probe size, ensuring an 

unprobed region of the crystal is illuminated with each scan step. While several step sizes 

were explored across scans, a step size of 20nm was sufficiently fine to allow pattern 

classification yet large enough to avoid perceptible pattern degradation due to damage from

neighbouring regions. 

The changes in diffraction we observe across micron-sized regions of peptide nanocrystals 

point to inhomogeneities across a single crystal. These differences are not only diagnostic of

regions with strong and weak diffraction within individual crystals, but also point to changes 

in the orientation of the lattice within a crystal. These lattice nano-ripples in sub-micron 


regions of a single nanocrystal are difficult to detect by methods that make use of selected 

area electron diffraction, as well as those that integrate diffraction from whole crystals. This 

is especially true after data from multiple crystals is merged63,64, a requirement for both serial 

crystallography and most MicroED experiments35. Lattice bending at this scale in 

macromolecular nanocrystals may explain the discrepancy in dynamical scattering observed 

from crystals of this thickness by MicroED, compared to what would be expected by 

simulation from perfect crystals65.

The lattice nano-ripples observed by 4DSTEM differ from conventional domain blocks. 

Whereas conventional mosaic blocks have discrete boundaries and a semi-random 

distribution of orientations, we observe a more gradual, progressive change in orientation as 

a function of spatial localization. Presently, our library-based orientation assignment acts on 

the average diffraction over clustered patterns and requires known cell constants, but 

improved interpretation of single sparse patterns and ab initio indexing of electron diffraction 

patterns may alleviate one or both of these limitations. Despite present limitations, nano-

scale lattice changes in our crystals are more readily identifiable from 4DSTEM scans than 

from HRTEM images of similar nanocrystals owing to the higher contrast of Bragg peaks 

captured by diffraction. Transforms of sub-regions within a 3D lysozyme nanocrystal have 

shown similar lattice differences across a single crystal20. However, in that case, the 

changes were also potentially attributable to differences in defocus across the crystal or to 

changes in the level of dynamical scattering across non uniformly thick areas of the crystal20. 

Interpretation of our own images of frozen-hydrated peptide nanocrystals presents similar 

challenges (Supplementary Figure 12, 13). 4DSTEM allows a quantitative classification of 

lattice orientations within a crystal and can reveal more subtle changes than those identified 

in HRTEM images of similar crystals. This difference may point to a greater sensitivity to

detection of lattice changes by 4DSTEM at even lower doses than those required for 

HRTEM.

Lastly, by allowing nanoscale (20nm) interrogation of lattice structure in macromolecular 

crystals, 4DSTEM offers a potential way to shrink the number of molecules required for 

structure determination by electron diffraction from single or serial crystal data.

Methods

Preparation of crystals

Crystals were grown as previously described33. Briefly, synthetic peptide (GenScript) with 

sequence QYNNQNNFV at a purity of 98% was dissolved in ultrapure water to a final 


concentration of 3.5mM. QYNNQNNFV crystals were formed in batch by mixing dissolved 

peptide solution 1:1 with a buffer solution composed of 10% MPD and 0.1M MES at pH 6.0. 

4DSTEM Data collection strategy

Crystal suspensions were diluted two-fold in water or crystallization buffer before being 

dispensed onto holey carbon grids (Quantifoil 2/4, #300 copper; Ted Pella Inc) and allowed 

to air dry. Samples were introduced into the TEAM I microscope (FEI Titan) with a Gatan 

636 Cryo holder, cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures throughout all data acquisition. The 

TEAM I microscope was operated at 300 keV in STEM mode with a convergence half-angle 

of 0.5 mrad resulting in a ~6nm convergent beam (Supplementary Figure 2). 

Crystals of interest were identified using annular dark-field STEM at low magnification (Fig 

1a (inset).). For this, the electron fluence (dose, e-/A2) was limited to a fluence of less than

0.01 e-/Å2 to minimize diffraction decay due to radiation damage, starting with parameters 

identified for other beam sensitive organic lattices41 (Supplementary Table 1.). The search 

for crystals was performed by scanning a focussed beam with a dwell time of 1 microsecond 

over a 512 x 512 scans across 14 x 14 m fields of view, corresponding to an electron 

fluence <0.01 e-/A2. We chose single crystals or crystal bundles visible at low magnification 

in annular dark field STEM images for further evaluation by 4DSTEM (Fig 1a-c.).

4DSTEM datasets were collected by scanning the 6nm probe over the sample in two-

dimensional scan using a 2.5 ms/step dwell time and a 20nm step size. The electrostatic 

lens above the probe forming aperture was adjusted such that the overall fluence per scan 

step was ~1 e-/Å2. Diffraction patterns were recorded using a Gatan K2-IS direct electron 

detector (GATAN), with a 1792 x 1920 pixel detection and an effective camera length of 575 

mm (Fig. 1a.). Typical scans consisted of 1,000 to 10,000 diffraction patterns captured at 

400 frames/second; datasets were ~ 5 - 30GB in size.

4DSTEM Dose estimation

The total dose imparted per 4DSTEM scan step was estimated as follows: The convergent 

probe was imaged in TEM mode at high magnification using a Gatan US1000 CCD detector 

with an exposure time of 10 seconds and all other beam settings the same as those used for 

data acquisition (Supplementary Figure 2). Using a nominal conversion rate of 3 counts per 

e- at 300 keV, we estimated the total number of electrons within the probe to be 1.5x106 e-/s. 

This number calculated from the image of the probe agrees with the screen current estimate 

for a similar gun lens setting. The diameter of the probe at FWHM was measured to be 6nm 

(Supplementary Figure 2) and, given an exposure time of 0.0025s, the final dose per scan 

step was estimated as ~1e-/Å2. The calculated dose above is different than that calculated 


from the field of view which would have been reported as an order of magnitude less due to 

the real space ‘pixel size’ of 15-20nm.

Image processing and hybrid counting of 4DSTEM data

All data processing was performed using custom scripts written in the MATLAB (MathWorks) 

programming language. Patterns belonging to a single area scan were jointly processed to 

achieve hybrid counting as follows. We computed an average pattern from all of the images 

within each dataset (Supplementary Figure 4). We estimated a differential dark current offset 

between detector strips as the median value of each strip of pixels in the vertical direction of 

the measured patterns (Supplementary Figure 4c). These values were subsequently 

subtracted from each diffraction pattern within the dataset (Supplementary Figure 4d). After 

dark current correction, a Gaussian background was fit to the distribution of background 

subtracted pixel values of all patterns within the dataset (Supplementary Figure 4e). This fit 

was used to estimate a threshold for the detector dark noise such that counts that were 

below 5 standard deviations of the Gaussian fit were considered background 

(Supplementary Figure 4e). This threshold would typically be used in standard electron 

counting algorithms16,17,66. 

To recover some of the dynamic range lost due to coincident electron events we 

implemented a ‘hybrid counting’ approach. Here we divided all pixel values by the calculated

threshold and the floor function of these values was taken to give an estimate of the degree 

of coincident electron events occurring at individual pixels on the detector. (Supplementary 

Figure 5). We found that correcting in this way resulted in the majority of events being either 

single or double counts and reduced the noise floor to close to zero, crucial for accurate 

clustering. However, in some cases where there was direct transmission of the electron 

beam, where the scan passed over vacuum, counts were much higher (Supplementary 

Figure 5 (inset)). Whilst the assumption of a linear relationship between the detector counts 

and electron coincidence is incorrect, this method better captured the true transmission of 

the central beam than considering all counts above the threshold as single electron events.

This was important for more accurately estimating crystal thickness. Finally, zero values 

were discarded and the 2D images were converted to coordinate lists and corresponding 

electron counts; a ~600-fold reduction in data size.

Correction of diffraction shift in 4DSTEM scans

The horizontal and vertical shift of diffraction patterns induced by beam tilt during these 

relatively low magnification scans was corrected by tracking the centre of mass of the 

transmitted beam. As the signal to noise in a single pattern was not sufficient to calculate 


this accurately we separated the problem into two steps, independently correcting shifts in 

the x-scan and y-scan directions. A strip wise average of patterns was taken along the 

direction to be corrected; for example, for a 72x50 scan we would first average patterns 

along the first dimension to give 1x50 strip wise averaged patterns. The centre of mass of 

the transmitted beam was used to give an estimate of the pixel shift for each strip and 

individual datasets within this strip were shifted to a common centre based on this. This 

process was repeated in the second dimension. For most datasets, just one round of shift 

correction was sufficient but in cases where the shift was particularly problematic several 

rounds were necessary (Supplementary Figure 6).

Estimation of crystal thickness

Crystal thickness was estimated using the log-ratio formula typically employed in EELS for 

inelastic scattering:

𝑍𝑥𝑦 = −𝜆 ∙ ln(𝐼𝑥𝑦

𝐼0

)

Where Zxy is the thickness of the crystal at scan location xy and  is the mean free path of 

electrons through the peptide crystals. A lambda value of 332nm was used based on 

estimates previously determined from equivalent crystals67. Ixy is the integrated transmitted 

beam at scan position xy (Supplementary Figure 7a.) plus the integrated intensity at all 

Bragg peak positions (Supplementary Figure 7b.). This sum represents intensity variation 

due to changes in inelastic scattering and was used for thickness estimates (Supplementary 

Figure 7g.). I0 is calculated as the mean of the integrated central beam at scan positions that 

were over vacuum minus two times the standard deviation of values in this region. This 

correction was to account for fluctuations observed in the central beam intensity.

HRTEM data collection and image processing

A monodisperse solution of QYNNQNNFV crystals was applied onto holey carbon grids 

(Quantifoil 1/4, #300 copper; Ted Pella Inc) and plunge-frozen using a Vitrobot Mark IV robot 

(ThermoFisher Scientific). Data was collected on a CS aberration corrected FEI Titan Krios 

(ThermoFisher Scientific) operated at 300 KeV. Super-resolution movies were recorded 

using a Gatan K2 Summit direct electron detector. The nominal physical pixel size was 1.04 

Å/pixel (0.52 Å/pixel in super-resolution movie frames) and dose per frame was 1.39 e-/Å2. A 

total of 20 frames were taken for each movie resulting in a final dose of 27.8 e-/Å2 per image.

Super-resolution movie stacks were corrected for gain and beam-induced motion using 

MotionCorr268. Initial estimates of anisotropic magnification were made using 10 

micrographs where crystalline ice was present using the program mag-distortion-estimate69. 

These parameters were used to correct for anisotropic magnification in MotionCorr2. Frames 


were subsequently aligned without using patches, dose-weighted, and down-sampled by 

two.

Lattice mapping in 4DSTEM and HRTEM

Before lattice mapping individual diffraction patterns were binned 8-fold to increase their 

SNR. The central beam was then masked out to remove the influence of transmission from 

the lattice mapping; we noticed that without this step the lattice maps produced matched 

variations in the thickness of the crystal too closely. We used k-means clustering to sort 

diffraction patterns from a single 4DSTEM dataset into different clusters based on their 

Euclidian distance from the average pattern within a particular cluster:

argmin

𝑠

∑ ∑‖𝑥 − µ𝑖‖2

𝑥∈𝑆𝑖

𝐾

𝑖=1

Where K is the number of clusters determined using an implementation of the G-means 

algorithm with a = 0.00170. Si is an individual cluster, µI is the current average of all patterns 

within the cluster Si and x is an individual diffraction pattern within the 4DSTEM dataset. The 

k-means ++ algorithm was used to initialize µi for each cluster71. The algorithm was stopped 

when either 100 iterations were performed or when the within-cluster sum of squares 

(WCSS) score stagnated. Clusters where the beam passed over vacuum showed little signal 

when the primary beam was excluded, preventing distances between patterns in this cluster 

from showing Gaussian behaviour; their Euclidean distances from the mean would be close 

to unity. To circumvent this, we included a break in our implementation of G-means that 

stopped assignment of clusters once at least 80% of the assigned clusters were found to be 

Gaussian by the Anderson-Darling statistic. This substantially improved convergence of the 

algorithm. 

For real space images collected by HRTEM a similar procedure was followed with the 

following modifications. First 128 by 128 sub-images were cropped from the larger HRTEM 

images with no overlapping regions. We estimated K by the elbow method72, which we found 

to be more stable than the Anderson-Darling statistic for the noisier imaging data. The 

clustering step was applied as above, with the inclusion of a 5 by 5 pixel-wise search to 

account for potential misalignments between the two images under consideration. 

Indexing of lattices in 4DSTEM cluster averages

To assess the underlying lattice reorganization that could account for the changes in 

diffraction observed from the clustering, we indexed the cluster averages via library matching

(Supplementary figure 11). A library of NBED patterns were simulated with PRISM73 using 

the known crystal structure of QYNNQNFV. We simulated expected NBED patterns arising 


from a 40 x 40nm region of a perfect crystal of varying thickness (10 – 600 nm). Probe size 

and convergence semi-angle were fixed to match experimental parameters and patterns 

were calculated at a range of xy tilts, ± 4 degrees in 0.25-degree increments, away from the 

hk0 zone or mean orientation in cases where the crystal was not sitting close to a zone axis.

To match the experimental patterns to the simulated library, the positions of all possible 

peaks that could arise within the bounds of the HAADF detector were identified, excluding 

the central disk. These peak locations were then used to create a list of intensities by 

integrating all pixel values within a 4-pixel radius centred around each peaks kxky position.

For each cluster average and simulated pattern, the listed intensities were scaled to be a 

ratio of the most intense peak within that pattern. Intensity lists were then compared by 

RMSD of intensity values at all peak positions within a given pair of patterns such that:

𝑅𝑀𝑆𝐷𝑖𝑗 = √∑
(µ𝑖𝑝 − 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑗𝑝)

2
𝑃
𝑝=1

𝑃

Where p represents an individual peak position from the set of peak positions P, µi is the ith 

averaged cluster pattern and Simj is the jth pattern within the simulated library. The 

orientation of the simulated pattern with the lowest RMSD to the current cluster average was 

then assigned to the orientation of the lattice within that region.

Fourier filtering of HRTEM images

To improve the contrast of the average lattice images captured by HRTEM Fourier filtering 

was performed in a similar manner to Erickson and Klug74. For each class average the 

Fourier transform was computed and the mean and standard deviation were calculated for

the magnitude of all pixel values, excluding the DC term. All pixels in the Fourier transform

with a magnitude lower than 2 standard deviations above the mean magnitude were set to 

zero and the final filtered image was calculated by inverse Fourier transform.

Data Avaliability

The MATLAB scripts for data pre-processing, clustering, orientation assignment as well as 

some of the pre-processed data used for clustering and orientation assignment can be found 

at: https://github.com/marcusgj13/4DSTEM_dataAnalysis. The raw .dm4 files will be 

available at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pdbe/emdb/empiar/

Acknowledgments: We thank Zhiheng Yu and Rick Huang (Janelia Research Campus) for 
their technical assistance in HR-TEM data collection; Peter Ercius (NCEM); David 
Eisenberg, Tamir Gonen, Johan Hattne, Michael Martynowycz, Michael Sawaya, Duilio 
Cascio (UCLA) and Wolfgang Kabsch (MPI) for insightful discussions. This work was 
supported in part by STROBE: A National Science Foundation Science and Technology 


Center under Grant No. DMR 1548924 and DOE Grant DE-FC02-02ER63421. 4DSTEM
was performed as a user project at the Molecular Foundry at Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, which is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract # DE-
AC02-05CH11231. M.G.J is supported by a QCB Collaboratory Postdoctoral Fellowship. 
J.A.R. is supported as a Beckman Young Investigator, a Searle Scholar and a Pew Scholar. 
O.P. is supported by the Electron Microscopy of Soft Matter Program from the Office of 
Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division of 
the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. J.C. 
acknowledges support from the U.S. Department of Energy Early Career Research Program. 
C.G. is supported by a Ruth L. Kirschstein National Research Service Award GM007185.
D.R.B is supported by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.

Author contributions: J.A.R. and A.M. conceived of the project. J.A.R. directed the work. 

C.G., M.G.J. and J.A.R. grew, evaluated and optimized crystals. M.G.J., D.R.B., C.G., 

K.C.B., O.P., J.C., C.Z. and J.A.R. collected data. M.G.J., C.O., K.C.B., K.C.M. D.R.B. and

J.A.R. analyzed the data. M.G.J. and J.A.R. wrote the article, with input from all authors. 

Correspondance : Jose A. Rodriguez; email: jrodriguez@mbi.ucla.edu

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Bibliography

1. Crick, F. X-Ray Diffraction of Protein Crystals. Crick, Francis. ‘X-Ray Diffraction of Protein 

Crystals.’ Methods in Enzymology 4, (1957): 127-146. Article. 11 Images. (1957). 

Available at: https://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/ps/retrieve/ResourceMetadata/SCBBZV. 

(Accessed: 12th April 2018)

2. Malkin, A. J., Kuznetsov, Y. G. & McPherson, A. Defect Structure of Macromolecular 

Crystals. Journal of Structural Biology 117, 124–137 (1996).

3. Nave, C. A Description of Imperfections in Protein Crystals. Acta Cryst D, 54, 848–853 

(1998).

4. Chernov, A. A. Crystals built of biological macromolecules. Physics Reports 288, 61–75 

(1997).

5. Kabsch, W. Integration, scaling, space-group assignment and post-refinement. Acta Cryst 

D, 66, 133–144 (2010).


6. Sauter, N. K. et al. Improved crystal orientation and physical properties from single-shot 

XFEL stills. Acta Cryst D, 70, 3299–3309 (2014).

7. Leslie, A. G. W. & Powell, H. R. Processing diffraction data with mosflm. in Evolving 

Methods for Macromolecular Crystallography (eds. Read, R. J. & Sussman, J. L.) 41–51 

(Springer Netherlands, 2007).

8. Bolotovsky, R. & Coppens, P. The ϕ Extent of the Reflection Range in the Oscillation 

Method According to the Mosaicity-Cap Model. J Appl Cryst, 30, 65–70 (1997).

9. Cusack, S. et al. Small is beautiful: protein micro-crystallography. Nat. Struct. Biol. 5,

634–637 (1998).

10.
Mitchell, E. P. & Garman, E. F. Flash freezing of protein crystals: investigation of 

mosaic spread and diffraction limit with variation of cryoprotectant concentration. J Appl 

Cryst, 27, 1070–1074 (1994).

11.
Bellamy, H. D., Snell, E. H., Lovelace, J., Pokross, M. & Borgstahl, G. E. O. The 

high-mosaicity illusion: revealing the true physical characteristics of macromolecular 

crystals. Acta Cryst D, 56, 986–995 (2000).

12.
Sauter, N. K. XFEL diffraction: developing processing methods to optimize data 

quality. J Synchrotron Radiat 22, 239–248 (2015).

13.
Taylor, K. A. & Glaeser, R. M. Electron microscopy of frozen hydrated biological 

specimens. Journal of Ultrastructure Research 55, 448–456 (1976).

14.
Henderson, R. & Unwin, P. N. T. Three-dimensional model of purple membrane 

obtained by electron microscopy. Nature 257, 28–32 (1975).

15.
Rosier, D. J. D. & Klug, A. Reconstruction of Three Dimensional Structures from 

Electron Micrographs. Nature 217, 130–134 (1968).

16.
McMullan, G., Clark, A. T., Turchetta, R. & Faruqi, A. R. Enhanced imaging in low 

dose electron microscopy using electron counting. Ultramicroscopy 109, 1411–1416 

(2009).

17.
Li, X. et al. Electron counting and beam-induced motion correction enable near-

atomic-resolution single-particle cryo-EM. Nat, Methods 10, 584–590 (2013).


18.
Taylor, K. A. & Glaeser, R. M. Electron diffraction of frozen, hydrated protein crystals. 

Science 186, 1036–1037 (1974).

19.
Knapek, E. & Dubochet, J. Beam damage to organic material is considerably 

reduced in cryo-electron microscopy. Journal of Molecular Biology 141, 147–161 (1980).

20.
Nederlof, I., Li, Y. W., van Heel, M. & Abrahams, J. P. Imaging protein three-

dimensional nanocrystals with cryo-EM. Acta Cryst D, 69, 852–859 (2013).

21.
Zeng, X., Stahlberg, H. & Grigorieff, N. A maximum likelihood approach to two-

dimensional crystals. J. Struct. Biol. 160, 362–374 (2007).

22.
Sherman, M. B., Soejima, T., Chiu, W. & van Heel, M. Multivariate analysis of single 

unit cells in electron crystallography. Ultramicroscopy 74, 179–199 (1998).

23.
Koeck, P. J. B., Purhonen, P., Alvang, R., Grundberg, B. & Hebert, H. Single particle 

refinement in electron crystallography: a pilot study. J. Struct. Biol. 160, 344–352 (2007).

24.
Driessche, A. E. S. V. et al. Molecular nucleation mechanisms and control strategies 

for crystal polymorph selection. Nature 556, 89–94 (2018).

25.
Shi, D., Nannenga, B. L., Iadanza, M. G. & Gonen, T. Three-dimensional electron 

crystallography of protein microcrystals. eLife 2, (2013).

26.
Nederlof, I., van Genderen, E., Li, Y.-W. & Abrahams, J. P. A Medipix quantum area 

detector allows rotation electron diffraction data collection from submicrometre three-

dimensional protein crystals. Acta Cryst D, 69, 1223–1230 (2013).

27.
Rodriguez, J. A., Eisenberg, D. S. & Gonen, T. Taking the measure of MicroED. Curr. 

Opin. Struct. Biol. 46, 79–86 (2017).

28.
Rodriguez, J. A. et al. Structure of the toxic core of α-synuclein from invisible crystals. 

Nature 525, 486–490 (2015).

29.
Nannenga, B. L., Shi, D., Hattne, J., Reyes, F. E. & Gonen, T. Structure of catalase 

determined by MicroED. eLife 3, e03600 (2014).

30.
Yonekura, K., Kato, K., Ogasawara, M., Tomita, M. & Toyoshima, C. Electron 

crystallography of ultrathin 3D protein crystals: Atomic model with charges. PNAS 112,

3368–3373 (2015).


31.
de la Cruz, M. J. et al. Atomic-resolution structures from fragmented protein crystals 

with the cryoEM method MicroED. Nat. Methods 14, 399–402 (2017).

32.
Sawaya, M. R. et al. Ab initio structure determination from prion nanocrystals at 

atomic resolution by MicroED. PNAS 201606287 (2016). doi:10.1073/pnas.1606287113

33.
Gallagher-Jones, M. et al. Sub-ångström cryo-EM structure of a prion protofibril 

reveals a polar clasp. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 25, 131–134 (2018).

34.
Hughes, M. P. et al. Atomic structures of low-complexity protein segments reveal 

kinked β sheets that assemble networks. Science 359, 698–701 (2018).

35.
Shi, D. et al. The collection of MicroED data for macromolecular crystallography. Nat. 

Protocols 11, 895–904 (2016).

36.
Kabsch, W. XDS. Acta Cryst D, 66, 125–132 (2010).

37.
Adams, P. D. et al. PHENIX: a comprehensive Python-based system for 

macromolecular structure solution. Acta Cryst D, 66, 213–221 (2010).

38.
Murshudov, G. N. et al. REFMAC 5 for the refinement of macromolecular crystal 

structures. Acta Cryst D, 67, 355–367 (2011).

39.
Sawaya, M. R. et al. Atomic structures of amyloid cross-beta spines reveal varied 

steric zippers. Nature 447, 453–457 (2007).

40.
Hohmann-Marriott, M. F. et al. Nanoscale 3D cellular imaging by axial scanning 

transmission electron tomography. Nat. Methods 6, 729–731 (2009).

41.
Panova, O. et al. Orientation mapping of semicrystalline polymers using scanning 

electron nanobeam diffraction. Micron 88, 30–36 (2016).

42.
Bustillo, K. C. et al. Nanobeam Scanning Diffraction for Orientation Mapping of 

Polymers. Microscopy and Microanalysis 23, 1782–1783 (2017).

43.
LeBeau, J. M. & Stemmer, S. Experimental quantification of annular dark-field 

images in scanning transmission electron microscopy. Ultramicroscopy 108, 1653–1658 

(2008).


44.
LeBeau, J. M., Findlay, S. D., Allen, L. J. & Stemmer, S. Quantitative Atomic 

Resolution Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 206101 

(2008).

45.
Ishikawa, R. et al. Direct imaging of hydrogen-atom columns in a crystal by annular 

bright-field electron microscopy. Nat. Materials 10, 278–281 (2011).

46.
Yücelen, E., Lazić, I. & Bosch, E. G. T. Phase contrast scanning transmission 

electron microscopy imaging of light and heavy atoms at the limit of contrast and 

resolution. Scientific Reports 8, 2676 (2018).

47.
Scott, M. C. et al. Electron tomography at 2.4-angstrom resolution. Nature 483, 444–

447 (2012).

48.
Midgley Paul A. & Thomas John Meurig. Multi‐Dimensional Electron Microscopy. 

Angewandte Chemie International Edition 53, 8614–8617 (2014).

49.
Ozdol, V. B. et al. Strain mapping at nanometer resolution using advanced nano-

beam electron diffraction. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 253107 (2015).

50.
Eggeman, A. S., Krakow, R. & Midgley, P. A. Scanning precession electron 

tomography for three-dimensional nanoscale orientation imaging and crystallographic 

analysis. Nat Commun 6, (2015).

51.
White, T. A. et al. Recent developments inCrystFEL. J Appl Crystallogr 49, 680–689 

(2016).

52.
Nakane, T. et al. Data processing pipeline for serial femtosecond crystallography at 

SACLA. J Appl Crystallogr 49, 1035–1041 (2016).

53.
Ginn, H. M., Evans, G., Sauter, N. K. & Stuart, D. I. On the release ofcppxfelfor 

processing X-ray free-electron laser images. J Appl Crystallogr 49, 1065–1072 (2016).

54.
Kabsch, W. Processing of X-ray snapshots from crystals in random orientations. Acta 

Cryst D, 70, 2204–2216 (2014).


55.
Otwinowski, Z. & Minor, W. [20] Processing of X-ray diffraction data collected in 

oscillation mode. in Methods in Enzymology (ed. Charles W. Carter, J.) Volume 276,

307–326 (Academic Press, 1997).

56.
Martin-Garcia, J. M. et al. Serial millisecond crystallography of membrane and 

soluble protein microcrystals using synchrotron radiation. IUCrJ 4, 439–454 (2017).

57.
Holton, J. M. & Frankel, K. A. The minimum crystal size needed for a complete 

diffraction data set. Acta Cryst D, 66, 393–408 (2010).

58.
Chapman, H. N. et al. Femtosecond X-ray protein nanocrystallography. Nature 470,

73–77 (2011).

59.
Palatinus, L. et al. Hydrogen positions in single nanocrystals revealed by electron 

diffraction. Science 355, 166–169 (2017).

60.
Stevenson, H. P. et al. Use of transmission electron microscopy to identify 

nanocrystals of challenging protein targets. PNAS 111, 8470–8475 (2014).

61.
Ophus, C. et al. Efficient linear phase contrast in scanning transmission electron 

microscopy with matched illumination and detector interferometry. Nat Commun 7, (2016).

62.
Hattne, J. et al. Analysis of Global and Site-Specific Radiation Damage in Cryo-EM. 

Structure 26, 759-766.e4 (2018).

63.
Hattne, J. et al. MicroED data collection and processing. Acta Crystallographica 

Section A Foundations and Advances 71, 353–360 (2015).

64.
Xu, H. et al. A Rare Lysozyme Crystal Form Solved Using Highly Redundant Multiple 

Electron Diffraction Datasets from Micron-Sized Crystals. Structure (2018). 

doi:10.1016/j.str.2018.02.015

65.
Subramanian, G., Basu, S., Liu, H., Zuo, J.-M. & Spence, J. C. H. Solving protein 

nanocrystals by cryo-EM diffraction: Multiple scattering artifacts. Ultramicroscopy 148,

87–93 (2015).

66.
McMullan, G., Faruqi, A. R., Clare, D. & Henderson, R. Comparison of optimal 

performance at 300keV of three direct electron detectors for use in low dose electron 

microscopy. Ultramicroscopy 147, 156–163 (2014).


67.
Martynowycz, M. et al. MicroED Structures from Micrometer Thick Protein Crystals. 

bioRxiv 152504 (2017). doi:10.1101/152504

68.
Zheng, S. Q. et al. MotionCor2: anisotropic correction of beam-induced motion for 

improved cryo-electron microscopy. Nat. Methods 14, 331–332 (2017).

69.
Grant, T. & Grigorieff, N. Automatic estimation and correction of anisotropic 

magnification distortion in electron microscopes. J. Struct. Biol. 192, 204–208 (2015).

70.
Hamerly, G. & Elkan, C. Learning the k in k-means. in Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems 16 (eds. Thrun, S., Saul, L. K. & Schölkopf, B.) 281–288 

(MIT Press, 2004).

71.
Arthur, D. & Vassilvitskii, S. K-means++: The Advantages of Careful Seeding. in 

Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms

1027–1035 (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2007).

72.
Thorndike, R. L. Who belongs in the family? Psychometrika 18, 267–276 (1953).

73.
Ophus, C. A fast image simulation algorithm for scanning transmission electron 

microscopy. Adv Struct Chem Imag 3, 13 (2017).

74.
Erickson, H. P., Klug, A. & S, F. R. Measurement and compensation of defocusing 

and aberrations by Fourier processing of electron micrographs. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 

B 261, 105–118 (1971).

Figures


Fig. 1. Measuring lattice structure in peptide nanocrystals by 4DSTEM. (a) Diagram of 

4DSTEM experiment shows key aspects and components of the procedure; inset shows a 

low dose and low magnification high angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM image. (b) A 

higher resolution STEM image shows the crystal in inset of (a) with greater detail. (c) Image 

montage shows all patterns collected in a 4DSTEM scan captured alongside the image in

(b); a single diffraction pattern is shown in (d), and an average of all diffraction patterns from 

the red region highlighted in (c) is shown in (e). Primary beam is masked by red circles, blue 

arrows indicate a subset of Bragg reflections.


Fig 2. Workflow of unsupervised clustering used to define nanoripples in peptide 

crystals. (step 1) Initial cluster “centres” are assigned within the 4DSTEM dataset (left white 

boxes) and all patterns are binned. (step 2) The primary beam is subsequently masked to 

prevent its influence on clustering. (step 3) Individual patterns are then compared to each

cluster centre sequentially via Euclidean distance and assigned to the cluster where this 

distance is smallest. (step 4) Average patterns are calculated for each cluster and (step 5) 

are used to reclassify individual patterns until convergence (step 6) where a final map 

illustrating spatial localization of similar diffraction patterns is produced.


Fig 3. Mapping of lattice nano-ripples within peptide nanocrystals by 4DSTEM. (a) 
HAADF image of a QYNNQNNFV nanocrystal. Unsupervised classification of diffraction 
patterns captured by the 4DSTEM scan acquired during the measurement of (a) are shown 
in (b); this is a map of diffraction clusters not obvious from (a). Colours in (b) illustrate the 
change in lattice orientation for each individual cluster with respect to the mean orientation 
across the scan area. The colour wheel (inset) demonstrates the relative orientation away 
from the mean in x and y-tilt, with a maximum deviation of 4 degrees. Average diffraction 
patterns from diffraction outlined in (b) are shown in (c), where the colour of the bounding 
box corresponds to the colour of the corresponding cluster in (b). C, X and V indicate carbon 
support, peptide crystal and vacuum respectively.


Supplementary Tables

Supplementary Table 1. Experimental parameters for measurement of electron 

diffraction of ordered molecular assemblies

Panova et al (2016)
This experiment
MicroED

Instrument
FEI Titan 
TEAM I
FEI Tecnai F20

Detector
Gatan Orius
Gatan K2 IS
TVIPS F416

Temperature (K)
77
77
77

Accelerating voltage (keV)
200
300
200

Flux (e-/s)
3.2x107
1.5x106
2.4x105

Probe size (nm at FWHM)
7
6
1000 (SA 

aperture)

Probe convergence angle (mrad)
0.51
0.5
near parallel

Estimated dose (e-/Å2)
600
1
0.01

Dwell time (ms)
70
2.5
3000

Step size (nm)
20 – 40
15 - 20
N/A


Supplementary Figures

Supplementary Figure 1. Comparison of diffraction patterns collected by MicroED and 

4DSTEM. (a) A diffraction photograph measured by continuous rotation MicroED from a 

frozen hydrated crystal of QYNNQNNFV (inset). (b) Diffraction pattern calculated by taking 

the average of all patterns within a single 4DSTEM dataset acquired from a QYNNQNNFV 

crystal (inset) from the same batch as (a). Scale bars are 300 nm in all images.


Supplementary Figure 2. Measure of probe properties used for 4DSTEM. (a) Image of the 

probe captured on a Gatan Ultra scan 1000 with an exposure time of 10s. (b) Vertical line 

scan across the probe (white dashed line in (a)) and Gaussian fit to the profile giving a 

diameter of ~6nm at FWHM. (c) Horizontal line scan across the probe (white dashed line in 

(a)) and Gaussian fit to the profile giving a diameter of ~6nm at FWHM.


Supplementary Figure 3. Changes in Bragg reflection brightness as a function of 

electron dose in 4DSTEM experiments. (left to right) Average diffraction patterns of 

4DSTEM datasets successively acquired from the same crystal (left: first pass, middle: third 

pass, right: fifth pass) with the total accumulated dose below. White arrow indicates high 

resolution Bragg reflections whose intensity decreases as a function of dose.


Supplementary Figure 4. Data processing pipeline for 4DSTEM data. (a) Raw diffraction 

patterns recorded at 400 frames per second are first combined to obtain a mean pattern (b). 

A dark current offset across the detector is estimated from the mean pattern using a median 

filter (c) and subsequently subtracted from all images (d). A Gaussian background is then fit 

to the distribution of all pixel values within the background corrected data and based on this 

a threshold is determined above which the incidence of electrons is considered true (e);

intensity values are then converted to electron counts (f).


Supplementary Figure 5. Use of hybrid pixel counts to improve estimates of beam 

transmission. (a) Histogram of the distribution of counts due to individual and multiple 

electron events recorded in a representative 4DSTEM dataset after hybrid counting. (inset) 

Image of the primary beam over vacuum using standard binary electron counting (left) and 

hybrid counting (right) from the green and purple square region in (b) and (c) respectively. 

Colours in insets match the colours in the histogram (images are truncated at 5 counts to 

improve visibility of low counts). The dashed line shows the best fit of the count histogram to 

a Poisson distribution. (b) Map of central beam intensity using standard electron counting. 

(c) Map of central beam intensity using hybrid counting. C, X and V represent areas over 

carbon support, peptide crystal and vacuum respectively. Scale bars represent integrated 

intensity at each pixel position. 


Supplementary Figure 6. Beam shift correction in 4DSTEM datasets. Mean diffraction of a 

4DSTEM datasets showing minimal beam shift due to tilting of the probe during low 

magnification scanning acquisition both before (a) and after (b) shift correction. The amount 

of drift in first and second scan directions is represented as blue and red circles (inset). (c) 

Dataset showing large beam shift before correction. (d) Reduction in beam shift visible after 

correction. The amount of drift in first and second scan directions is represented as blue and 

red circles (inset).


Supplementary Figure 7. Estimation of crystal thickness from 4DSTEM patterns. (a - c)

Images reconstructed by integrating (a) the central beam, (b) all Bragg reflections or (c) the 

diffuse scattering within each 4DSTEM pattern. Colourbars represent integrated intensity. 

(d) Plot of integrated Bragg peaks as a function of central beam intensity. (e) Plot of diffuse 

background intensity as a function of central beam intensity. (f) Reconstructed image of 

crystal thickness estimated by combining information in (a) and (b), colourbar represents 

thickness in nm. (g) Plot of focused, central beam transmission as a function of sample 

thickness in a 4DSTEM scan. Inset images show the primary beam at the positions indicated 

by correspondingly coloured squares on the thickness map (f). All images are on the same 

intensity scale where red indicates high transmission and blue, low. C, X and V represent 

areas over carbon support, peptide crystal and vacuum respectively.


Supplementary Figure 8. Representative HAADF images and orientation maps acquired 

from peptide nanocrystals by 4DSTEM. (a) HAADF images of QYNNQNNFV crystals. (b) 

Maps of diffraction localization reconstructed from 4DSTEM scans of the same crystals as 

(a). (c) Maps recoloured after orientation assignment. The colour wheel (inset) demonstrates 

the relative orientation away from the mean in x and y-tilt, with a maximum deviation of 4 

degrees. (d) Scatter plot of angular deviation from mean crystal orientation identified across

QYNNQNNFV crystals analysed by 4DSTEM. Axes represent angular offset in degrees for

the x and y-tilt directions respectively. 


Supplementary Figure 9. Influence of signal outside Bragg reflections on pattern 

classification and diffraction mapping. (a) Map of diffraction clusters obtained from the 

nanocrystal seen in Fig. 2 in which 20 clusters were identified using the complete diffraction

pattern (disregarding the primary beam). (b) Cluster map with 20 clusters calculated by 

excluding Bragg reflections - using only the diffuse scattering between Bragg peaks. (c) 

Cluster map calculated as in (b) but limited to 4 clusters. When the number of clusters is 

restricted, the map more closely follows the thickness map of the crystal. (d) Cluster 

averages for each of the 4 clusters shown in (c) with Bragg peaks removed.


Supplementary Figure 10. Smooth variation of diffraction as a function of spatial 

location within a nanocrystal. (Left) HAADF image of a QYNNQNFV nanocrystal with 

contour lines outlining the clusters presented in Fig. 2(b). The numbered boxes indicate the 

region of the crystal that diffraction patterns (right) were acquired from. These patterns 

represent a 3x3 spatial average of diffraction data within the boxed region.


Supplementary Figure 11. Orientation assignment of nanodiffraction cluster averages

by library matching. (a) Summed intensity of all patterns within a 4DSTEM scan. (b) 

Identification of all possible Bragg peaks that could be excited within the bounds of the 

HAADF detector. (c) Average patterns from individual crystalline regions. (d) Reduction of 

patterns to a list of intensities (represented by solid circles) and their respective kxky 

locations. (e) Library of simulated NBED patterns, best matches are highlighted by coloured 

boxes. (f) Results of library matching with best matched simulated patterns (left) and the 

corresponding cluster averages (right).


Supplementary Figure 12. Crystal lattices observed in HRTEM images of crystal 

clusters and single nanocrystals. (a) High resolution TEM image as shown in Fig. 3a. (b)

Fourier transform of (a) with resolution rings. Blue arrows indicate highest resolution Bragg 

peaks at just less than 2.3Å resolution (c) High resolution TEM image as shown in Fig. 3d. 

(d) Fourier transform of (c) with resolution rings. Blue arrows indicate highest resolution 

Bragg peaks at just less than 2.3Å resolution.


Supplementary Figure 13. Mapping of crystalline regions within peptide nanocrystals 

by HRTEM. (a) HRTEM image of a cluster of QYNNQNNFV nanocrystals. (b) Map of lattice 

changes present in the region imaged in (a). (c) Fourier filtered averages of regions within 

the dashed white box shown in (a) and (b). (d) HRTEM image of a single QYNNQNNFV 

nanocrystal. (e) Map of lattice changes present in the single crystal visible in (a). (f) Fourier 

filtered averages of regions in the dashed white box in (d) and (e).


Supplementary Figure 14. Fourier filtering of HRTEM cluster averages. (a - d) Raw 

cluster averages before filtering from the image in Fig. 3a. (e - h) Fourier transforms of (a -

d) showing the presence of Bragg peaks within the image transforms. (i - l) Cluster averages 

after Fourier filtering (as Fig. 3c).


