M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
∗Corresponding author.  
 E-mail addresses: shaat@nmsu.edu; shaatscience@yahoo.com (M. Shaat). 
 
 

Iterative Nonlocal Residual Elasticity 

Mohamed Shaat* 

Mechanical Engineering Department, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44511, Egypt 

 

Abstract 

Motivated by the existing complications of finding solutions of Eringen’s nonlocal 
model, an alternative model is developed here. The new formulation of the nonlocal 
elasticity is centered upon expressing the dynamic equilibrium requirements based on 
a nonlocal residual stress field. This new nonlocal elasticity is explained from the 
lattice mechanics and continuum mechanics points of view. Boundary value problems 
obtained based on the new nonlocal elasticity are solved following a proposed 
iterative procedure. This iterative procedure is centered upon correcting the solution 
of the classical field problem for the nonlocal residual field of the elastic domain. 
Convergence analyses are presented to show the convergence of the iterative 
procedure to the solution of the nonlocal field problem. The iterative procedure is an 
integrated part of the proposed nonlocal elasticity. Therefore, the newly developed 
nonlocal elasticity is give the name “iterative nonlocal residual elasticity”.  
 
Keywords: iterative nonlocal residual elasticity; constitutive modeling; paradoxes; 
ill-posedness; boundary value problem.  

 

1. Introduction 

In classical mechanics, a body consists of an infinite number of particles each of which is a mass point. 

Each particle undergoes interactions only with the nearest particles (neighbor particles). Whereas the 

interactions between non-neighbor particles are weaker than interactions between neighbor particles, these 

non-neighbor interactions are exist and may contribute to the continuum’s mechanics in certain occasions. 

Therefore, the nonlocal theory was developed to propose a generalized theory, which models the particle 

exhibits interactions with its neighbors and non-neighbors.  

According to Eringen [1,2], the dynamic equilibrium of a solid elastic body is conditional by the global 

balance of its body forces, external surface tractions, and inertia forces. The nonlocal theory, as early 

proposed by Eringen, postulates the condition of the global balance, thus [2]:  


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

2
 

 

𝑡𝑗𝑖,𝑗 + 𝐹𝑖 + ℱ𝑖 = 𝜌 𝜕2𝑢𝑖

𝜕𝑡2
(1)

where 𝜌 is the mass density, 𝑢𝑖 is the displacement field of a material particle, and 𝑡 is the time. 𝐹𝑖 is a 

local-type body force, which is conjugate to neighbor interactions. ℱ𝑖 is a nonlocal body force. The nonlocal 

body force (ℱ𝑖) is a residual field, which generates due to non-neighbor interactions. This nonlocal residual 

body force yields to the condition [1,2]:  

∫ ℱ𝑖

𝑉

𝑑𝑉 = 0
(2)

where 𝑉 is the volume of the elastic body. For a homogeneous-isotropic-linear elastic material, ℱ𝑖 = 0 

[1,2].  

The balance laws of nonlocal continua (equation (1)) depend on a total stress field (𝑡𝑖𝑗), which sums 

neighbor interactions and non-neighbor interactions at a specific point 𝒙 belongs to the elastic body. This 

total stress field (𝑡𝑖𝑗) was expressed as a functional of the deformation gradients of all points of the elastic 

body [1,2]. Thus, for a homogeneous-isotropic-linear elastic material, the constitutive equations were 

determined based on some invariance and thermodynamics requirements with the form [1,2]: 

𝑡𝑖𝑗(𝒙) = ∫ 𝜆′(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑟𝑟(𝒙′)𝛿𝑖𝑗 + 2𝜇′(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙′)

𝑉

𝑑𝑉(𝒙′)
(3)

where 𝜀𝑖𝑗 is the infinitesimal strain. 𝜆′ and 𝜇′ are Lame moduli, which are functionals of |𝒙′ − 𝒙|. The 

integration over the elastic domain, 𝑉, was involved to collect all non-neighbor interactions.  

With Eringen’s manipulation of the nonlocal theory, the balance laws are identical to those of the 

classical continuum mechanics [1,2]. However, the constitutive law is different where the total stress field 

(𝑡𝑖𝑗) was introduced to model neighbor and non-neighbor interactions via integral operators (equation (3)). 

This total stress field is commonly known as “nonlocal stress field”.  

Complications of finding solutions of nonlocal elasticity problems have been early discussed [3]. 

According to equation (3), the field equation of the nonlocal problem is an integropartial differential 

equation. Analytical solutions for integropartial differential equations are difficult to be determined, 

especially for mixed boundary value problems [3]. This motivated Eringen [3] to formulate the nonlocal 

elasticity in terms of singular differential equations. By assuming that (i) the Lame moduli exhibit the same 

attenuation with the distance |𝒙′ − 𝒙| according to (ii) a Green’s function of a differential operator with 

constant coefficients, the nonlocal field problem was formulated as a partial differential equation [3]: 

𝜎𝑗𝑖,𝑗 + ℒ (𝐹𝑖 − 𝜌 𝜕2𝑢𝑖

𝜕𝑡2 ) = 0
(4)


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

3
 

 

where ℒ is the differential operator as defined by Eringen [3], i.e. ℒ𝑡𝑖𝑗 = 𝜎𝑖𝑗. 𝜎𝑖𝑗 is the local stress of the 

classical elasticity.  

Whereas solutions can be easily obtained using the differential form of the nonlocal elasticity (equation 

(4)), the ability of this form to secret exact solutions, which are consistent with the original form that depend 

on the integral operator is controversial. Discrepancies were observed between solutions of the differential 

nonlocal field problems and integral nonlocal field problems [4-7]. Details on the paradoxes of the 

differential nonlocal elasticity can be found in [4-13].  

Moreover, the “ill-posedness” of Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity was discussed in [14]. It was revealed 

that the transformation of the integral constitutive law (equation (3)) into a differential nonlocal constitutive 

law secretes inconsistencies between the natural boundary conditions of the nonlocal equilibrium and the 

boundary conditions of the constitutive model generated upon the transformation [14].  

An example of the paradox and inconsistency of the differential nonlocal elasticity can be exhibited  by 

considering a nonlocal problem of an elastic body under a body force equals its inertia force, in particular 

𝐹𝑖 − 𝜌

𝜕2𝑢𝑖
𝜕𝑡2 = 0. An example of the latter case is a nonlocal static problem with a zero body force. For this 

case, equation (4) reduces to: 

𝜎𝑗𝑖,𝑗 = 0
(5)

which gives the stress field identical to that of the classical elasticity with no dependency on the nonlocal 

character of the body. This is a clear violation of the concept of the nonlocal mechanics.  

The illustrated example and the paradoxes and inconsistencies expressed in previous studies imply that 

the transformation of the integral nonlocal constitutive law (3) into a differential nonlocal constitutive law 

as proposed by Eringen [3] may be not convenient to express nonlocal boundary value problems. However, 

with the deep inspection of the situation, one can realize the fact that the transformation into the differential 

constitutive law proposed in [3] is mathematically consistent. So, the question is: what are the reasons 

behind the paradoxes of Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity?  

An attempt to provide an answer to this question was recently expressed in [14]. Whereas this study 

defined new insights on the ill-posedness of nonlocal field problems formed based on the “pure nonlocal 

elasticity”, it was claimed that a two-phase local/nonlocal mixture constitutive law overcomes the 

paradoxes and inconsistencies of Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity. However, a comment was represented in 

[15] on this false statement to demonstrate that the ill-posedness is an inherited trait of Eringen’s 

constitutive laws and there is no way to overcome it.  

Motivated by the aforementioned complications and debates regarding Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity 

presented in equations (1)-(4), an alternative form of the nonlocal theory is developed in this study. This 

new form of the nonlocal elasticity depends on splitting the total nonlocal stress field (𝑡𝑖𝑗) into a local stress 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

4
 

 

(𝜎𝑖𝑗) and a nonlocal residual stress (𝜏𝑖𝑗), i.e. 𝑡𝑖𝑗 = 𝜎𝑖𝑗 + 𝜏𝑖𝑗. The local stress (𝜎𝑖𝑗) is a stress field that models 

the material stiffness due to neighbor (local) interactions. The nonlocal residual stress (𝜏𝑖𝑗) models the 

material stiffness due to non-neighbor (nonlocal) interactions. In the context of the new nonlocal elasticity, 

the balance laws are similar to those of the classical elasticity of an elastic continuum with a residual stress 

field. The proposed nonlocal theory is centered upon modifying the classical elasticity for an inherited 

nonlocal residual field. At the boundary of the elastic body, the surface tractions depend on both the local 

stress and the nonlocal residual stress.  

The new manipulation of the nonlocal theory proposed here permits implementing an iterative procedure 

to extract solutions of nonlocal field problems. This iterative procedure is centered upon correcting the 

solution of the classical field problem for the nonlocal residual field of the elastic domain. In the context of 

the proposed approach, the classical field problem of an elastic domain with a pre-formed nonlocal residual 

stress is solved. Convergence analyses are presented to show the convergence of the iterative procedure to 

the solution of the nonlocal field problem formed based on the proposed nonlocal theory. It should be 

mentioned that the iterative procedure is an integrated part of the theory. Therefore, the newly developed 

form of the nonlocal theory will be give the name “iterative nonlocal residual elasticity”.  

 

2. Nonlocal Residual Elasticity  

In the classical mechanics, a balance law is valid not only for the entire elastic body but also for each 

point belongs to the elastic domain [2]. However, in the nonlocal mechanics, the balance is achieved 

globally for the entire body. Thus, a nonlocal balance law is violated at a local point while satisfied globally 

because of the nonlocal interactions [2]. The nonlocal mechanics distinguishes between a local-type field 

and a nonlocal-type field. A nonlocal field (e.g. nonlocal stress field) is the sum of a local field, which 

accounts for the direct-neighbor interactions, and a nonlocal residual field. The nonlocal residual field is 

the sum of all the nonlocal interactions at a point, as shown in Fig. 1.  

 

Figure 1: Nonlocal lattice mechanics. Dark interactions are direct-neighbor interactions while the green 

ones are non-neighbor interactions (only up to the next-nearest interaction).  


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

5
 

 

2.1.Nonlocal mechanics of particles 

To give more insights on the nonlocal elasticity developed here, the system of particles presented in Fig. 

1 is considered. As shown in the figure, a set of interaction forces is generated between a particle (𝑛) and 

its neighbor particles. In the classical mechanics, these direct interactions are exist. Each one of these 

interactions forms a local force between two neighbors. From lattice mechanics, the local force field, 𝑭, 

between two neighbor particles (n and m) can be defined as follows: 

𝑭𝑛𝑚 = 𝑲: (𝒖𝑛 − 𝒖𝑚)
(6)

where 𝑲 is an equivalent stiffness of an interaction between two neighbors. 𝒖 is the displacement field 

expressing the translational motion of the particle.   

In addition to the direct neighbor interactions, interactions are generated between a particle (n) and all 

other non-neighbor particles. A non-neighbor interaction, 𝓕, depends on the distance between the two 

particles. Thus, the non-neighbor interaction between two non-neighbors (n and j) is a functional of the 

distance between them |𝒙𝑛 − 𝒙𝑗|, as follows:  

𝓕𝑛𝑗 = 𝒌𝑟(|𝒙𝑛 − 𝒙𝑗|):(𝒖𝑛 − 𝒖𝑗)
(7)

where 𝒌𝑟(|𝒙𝑛 − 𝒙𝑗|) is a stiffness that is equivalent to the interaction between two non-neighbor particles.  

Under the influence of the neighbor and non-neighbor interactions, the condition of the dynamic 

equilibrium of a particle (n) secretes the following balance equations: 

∑ 𝑭𝑛𝑚

𝑁𝑚

𝑚=1

+ ∑ 𝓕𝑛𝑗

𝑁𝑗

𝑗=1

= 𝜕2

𝜕𝑡2 (𝑚̅𝒖)

∑ (𝐗 × 𝑭𝑛𝑚)

𝑁𝑚

𝑚=1

+ ∑(𝐗 × 𝓕𝑛𝑗)

𝑁𝑗

𝑗=1

= 𝜕2

𝜕𝑡2 (𝐗 × 𝑚̅𝒖)

(8)

where 𝐗 × 𝝃 denotes a moment field. 𝑁𝑚 is the number of neighbors of particle (n) while 𝑁𝑗 is the number 

of its non-neighbor particles. 𝑚̅ is the particle’s mass.  

We introduce in equations (6)-(8) a new form of the nonlocal theory in which the nonlocal model is 

formulated depending on the nonlocal residual field (∑
𝓕𝑛𝑗

𝑁𝑗
𝑗=1
), which is the sum of all the non-neighbor 

(nonlocal) interactions of the particle under consideration. As a crucial requirement of nonlocal mechanics, 

the balance equations (8) are obtained from the global statement of equilibrium.  

In Eringen’s form of the nonlocal theory, the balance equations were formed depending on a total field 

that merges the nonlocal residual field with the local field. However, in the context of the proposed nonlocal 

elasticity, the nonlocal residual field is formed separately, and it is not merged with the local field. In 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

6
 

 

addition, two types of constitutive equations are needed. In addition to the local-type constitutive equations 

(which are used to form the local field), constitutive equations are used to form the nonlocal residual field.  

 

2.2.Nonlocal continuum mechanics: Balance laws 

The global balance laws of a nonlocal continuum with a volume 𝑉 and bounded by a surface 𝑆 can be 

derived according to equation (8), as follows:  

∫ 𝑭

𝑉

𝑑𝑉 + ∫ 𝓕

𝑉

𝑑𝑉 + ∫ 𝑻

𝑆

𝑑𝑆 = ∫ 𝜌𝒖̈

𝑉

𝑑𝑉
(9)

∫(𝐗 × 𝑭)

𝑉

𝑑𝑉 + ∫(𝐗 × 𝓕)

𝑉

𝑑𝑉 + ∫(𝐗 × 𝑻)

𝑆

𝑑𝑆 = ∫(𝐗 × 𝜌𝒖̈ )

𝑉

𝑑𝑉
(10)

where 𝜌 is the mass density. 𝑭 denotes the local body force. 𝓕 is a nonlocal residual body force. 𝑻𝑑𝑆 

denotes a surface traction.  

Like the classical mechanics, the external surface traction (𝑻) is balanced with the body forces and the 

inertia of the elastic domain (equations (9) and (10)). However, in the proposed nonlocal elasticity, the 

surface traction 𝑻 is formed depending on two tractions:  

𝑻 = 𝒏 ∙ 𝝈 + 𝒏 ∙ 𝝉
(11)

where 𝒏 is the unit normal vector. 𝝈 is the local stress, and 𝝉 is a nonlocal residual stress. The local stress 

(𝝈) is conjugate to the direct neighbor interactions while the nonlocal residual stress (𝝉) is conjugate to the 

non-neighbor interactions. It should be observed that the stress tensors, 𝝈 and 𝝉, are general tensors which 

have symmetric and skew-symmetric parts. 

According to equation (11) and the divergence theorem, equations (9) and (10) can be rewritten as 

follows:  

𝑭 + 𝓕 + 𝛁 ∙ 𝝈 + 𝛁 ∙ 𝝉 = 𝜌𝒖̈
(12)

(𝝈 + 𝝉) × 𝑰 = 0
(13)

Equation (13) indicates that the skew-symmetric parts of the local stress tensor, 𝝈, and the nonlocal 

residual stress tensor, 𝝉, vanish. Therefore, the balance equations can be written in the form: 

𝑭 + 𝓕 + 𝛁 ∙ 𝝈𝑠𝑦𝑚 + 𝛁 ∙ 𝝉𝑠𝑦𝑚 = 𝜌𝒖̈
(14)

where the balance equations depend on the symmetric parts of the stress tensors, 𝝈𝑠𝑦𝑚 and 𝝉𝑠𝑦𝑚. In the 

rest of the paper, the superscript ‘𝑠𝑦𝑚’ is omitted for convenient writing.  

 

 

 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

7
 

 

2.3.Nonlocal continuum mechanics: Constitutive model 

The balance laws of Eringen’s model of the nonlocal linear elasticity depend on a total stress field that 

merges the local stress with the nonlocal residual stress. This total-nonlocal stress field was formed as a 

functional depending on the motions histories of all points of the body. However, the balance laws of the 

proposed nonlocal elasticity (equation (14)) depend on a nonlocal residual stress field, which is not merged 

with the local stress field. In this section, constitutive equations are derived for the nonlocal residual stress 

field.  

Eringen expressed a postulation [1] that states, “For the linear theory of nonlocal elastic materials, 

whose natural state is free of nonlocal effects, the nonlocal body force vanishes.”, i.e. 𝓕 = 0. In light of 

this postulation, the balance laws of a homogeneous-isotropic-linear elastic solid material can be written in 

the form: 

𝜎𝑗𝑖,𝑗 + 𝜏𝑗𝑖,𝑗 + 𝐹𝑖 = 𝜌𝑢̈ 𝑖
(15)

where 𝜎𝑗𝑖 = 𝜎𝑖𝑗 and 𝜏𝑗𝑖 = 𝜏𝑖𝑗, which are the components of the local stress tensor and the nonlocal residual 

stress tensor, respectively.  

For a linear elastic material, the infinitesimal strain is the fundamental measure of deformation: 

𝜀𝑖𝑗 = 1

2 (𝑢𝑖,𝑗 + 𝑢𝑗,𝑖)
(16)

The local stress, 𝜎𝑗𝑖, has the same form as the stress field of the classical mechanics: 

𝜎𝑗𝑖 = 𝜆0𝜀𝑟𝑟𝛿𝑖𝑗 − 2𝜇0𝜀𝑖𝑗
(17)

where 𝜆0 and 𝜇0 are the Lame constants as defined in the classical mechanics.  

Following Eringen’s definition of nonlocal fields, the following constitutive equation can be proposed 

for the nonlocal stress residual (𝜏𝑖𝑗): 

𝜏𝑖𝑗(𝒙) = ∫ 𝜆𝑟(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑟𝑟(𝒙′)𝛿𝑖𝑗 + 2𝜇𝑟(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙′)

𝑉

𝑑𝑉(𝒙′)
(18)

where 𝜆𝑟 and 𝜇𝑟 are Lame moduli, which model the stiffness of a non-neighbor interaction. The magnitudes 

of these Lame moduli depend of the distance between two non-neighbor particles within the elastic domain 

(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|).  

 

 

 

 

 

 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

8
 

 

3. Boundary Value Problem and Solution Procedure: Iterative Nonlocal Residual Elasticity   

The boundary value problem of the homogeneous-isotropic-linear elastic material formed based on the 

proposed nonlocal elasticity constitutes the following system of equations: 

1: 𝜎𝑗𝑖,𝑗(𝒙) + 𝜏𝑗𝑖,𝑗(𝒙) + 𝐹𝑖(𝒙) = 𝜌𝑢̈ 𝑖(𝒙)
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Equation of Motion)

2: 𝜎𝑗𝑖(𝒙)𝑛𝑗 + 𝜏𝑗𝑖(𝒙)𝑛𝑗 = 𝑇𝑖(𝒙) or  𝑢𝑖(𝒙) = 𝑈𝑖(𝒙)
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑆 (Boundary Conditions)

3: 𝜎𝑗𝑖(𝒙) = 𝜆0𝜀𝑟𝑟(𝒙)𝛿𝑖𝑗 + 2𝜇0𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙)
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Constitutive Equations)

4: 𝜏𝑖𝑗(𝒙) = ℛ (𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙))
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Constitutive Equations)

5: 𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙) =

1

2 (𝑢𝑖,𝑗(𝒙) + 𝑢𝑗,𝑖(𝒙))
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Kinematical Variables)

where 

ℛ (𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙)) = ∫ 𝜆𝑟(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑟𝑟(𝒙′)𝛿𝑖𝑗 + 2𝜇𝑟(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙′)

𝑉

𝑑𝑉(𝒙′)

(19)

where 𝑈𝑖(𝒙) is a prescribed displacement field at the boundary.  

It should be mentioned that the boundary value problem (equation (19)) is similar to the one represented 

based on Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity [1,2,16]. However, the new form of the nonlocal boundary value 

problem presented in equation (19) depends on splitting the total nonlocal stress field into a local stress 

field and a nonlocal residual stress field.  

In this section, an iterative procedure is proposed to solve the nonlocal boundary value problem 

(equation (19)). With the implementation of the iterative procedure proposed here, the nonlocal field 

equation is converted into a local-type field equation with an imposed nonlocal residual field. In each 

iteration, the nonlocal residual stress is known. This nonlocal residual stress is formed based on the stress 

field obtained in a previous iteration. Thus, the implementation of this iterative procedure gives the merit 

of forming the nonlocal residual stress iteratively based on a pre-determined local-type field. In the context 

of this iterative procedure, a local-type boundary value problem is corrected for the nonlocal field and then 

solved. 

The iterative procedure implemented in this study is pioneered from an iterative-finite element-based 

model of nonlocal elasticity proposed in [16] and implemented in [17,18] for beams and plates. In this 

study, a new iterative procedure is implemented to extract solutions of the proposed boundary value 

problem (equation (19)).  

In an iteration (𝑘), the nonlocal boundary value problem (19) is converted into a local boundary value 

problem of an elastic body exposed to a residual stress field, as follows: 

 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

9
 

 

1: 𝜎𝑗𝑖,𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙) + 𝜏𝑗𝑖,𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙) + 𝐹𝑖(𝒙) = 𝜌𝑢̈ 𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙)
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Equation of Motion)

2: 𝜎𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙)𝑛𝑗 = 𝑇𝑖(𝒙) − 𝜏𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙)𝑛𝑗 or 𝑢𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙) = 𝑈𝑖(𝒙) ∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑆 (Boundary Conditions)

3: 𝜎𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙) = 𝜆0𝜀𝑟𝑟

(𝑘)(𝒙)𝛿𝑖𝑗 + 2𝜇0𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙)
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Constitutive Equations)

4: 𝜏𝑖𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙) = ℛ (𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘−1)(𝒙))
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Constitutive Equations)

5: 𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙) =

1

2 (𝑢𝑖,𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙) + 𝑢𝑗,𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙))
∀𝒙 ∈ 𝑉 (Kinematical Variables)

where 

ℛ (𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘−1)(𝒙)) = ∫ 𝜆𝑟(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑟𝑟

(𝑘−1)(𝒙′)𝛿𝑖𝑗 + 2𝜇𝑟(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘−1)(𝒙′)

𝑉

𝑑𝑉(𝒙′)

(20)

 

Equations (20) form a local boundary value problem of an elastic domain exposed to a pre-defined 

residual stress field, 𝜏𝑖𝑗. A procedure to derive a solution of the nonlocal boundary value problem (equation 

(20)) is given as follows:  

 

1:
PROCEDURE: in iteration 𝑘, 

2:
(I) Nonlocal residual stress, 𝜏𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙), formation:

3:
→ Recall 𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘−1)(𝒙), the determined strain field of the previous iteration 𝑘 − 1. 

4:
→ Form 𝜏𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙) using equation (20)4. 

5:
→ Save 𝜏𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙).

6:
(II) Solving the local boundary value problem:

7:
→ Recall 𝜏𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙). 

8:
→ Form the local boundary value problem (equations (20)1 and (20)2).

9:
→ Solve the local boundary value problem for 𝜎𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙) and 𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙).

10:
→ Save 𝜎𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙) and 𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙).

11: End Procedure 

 

The proposed PROCEDURE presents a simple but effective approach to determine the solution of a 

nonlocal field problem formed based on the proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity. In an iteration 

𝑘, the determined fields of a previous iteration 𝑘 − 1 (𝜎𝑗𝑖

(𝑘−1)(𝒙) and 𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘−1)(𝒙)) are used to form the 

nonlocal residual stress, 𝜏𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙), according to equation (20)4. Then, the determined nonlocal residual stress 

is substituted into the local boundary value problem (22)1 and (22)2. This local boundary value problem is 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

10
 

 

then solved for the fields 𝜎𝑗𝑖

(𝑘)(𝒙) and 𝜀𝑖𝑗

(𝑘)(𝒙). The procedure is then repeated where the solution converges 

to the nonlocal solution with the iterations.   

It follows from the presented PROCEDURE that a solution is guaranteed in each iteration where the 

local boundary value problem is the one that is solved (a local boundary value problem is well-posed and 

admits a unique solution). The convergence of the obtained solution to the targeted nonlocal solution is 

constraint by the correct formation of the nonlocal residual stress. Indeed, with the new form of the nonlocal 

elasticity proposed here, the paradoxes and the inconsistencies associated with Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity 

are effectively resolved. Examples of different boundary value problems are considered in the next section 

to demonstrate this fact. 

 

4. Application to Euler-Bernoulli Beams  

In this section, a set of nonlocal elasticity problems of Euler-Bernoulli beams are solved using the 

proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity.  

Because the nonlocal residual stress only models non-neighbor interactions, its Lame moduli (𝜆𝑟 and 

𝜇𝑟) can be considered as follows: 

𝜆𝑟(|𝒙|) = 𝜆0(𝛽𝜆(|𝒙|) − 𝛿(|𝒙|))

𝜇𝑟(|𝒙|) = 𝜇0 (𝛽𝜇(|𝒙|) − 𝛿(|𝒙|))

with

𝛽𝜆(|𝒙|) =

1

2ℓ𝜆 exp (−

|𝒙|

ℓ𝜆) and   𝛽𝜇(|𝒙|) =

1

2ℓ𝜇 exp (−

|𝒙|

ℓ𝜇)

(21)

where 𝛿(|𝒙|) is a Dirac-delta function.  

The substitution of equation (21) into equation (18) yields: 

𝜏𝑖𝑗(𝒙) = ∫ (𝜆0𝛽𝜆(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑟𝑟(𝒙′)𝛿𝑖𝑗 + 2𝜇0𝛽𝜇(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|)𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙′))

𝑉

𝑑𝑉(𝒙′)

− 𝜆0𝜀𝑟𝑟(𝒙)𝛿𝑖𝑗 − 2𝜇0𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝒙)

(22)

which is an explicit form of the nonlocal residual stress (𝜏𝑖𝑗). This constitutive law depends on 𝛽𝜆(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|) 

and 𝛽𝜇(|𝒙′ − 𝒙|), which are two independent kernels that define nonlocal effects. These kernels depend on 

two independent nonlocal parameters ℓ𝜆 and ℓ𝜇. As previously demonstrated by the author, a general form 

of the nonlocal theory with expanded applicability is the one that considers different nonlocal kernels for 

the different material coefficients [19].  

According to equation (20) and equation (22), the boundary value problem of the elastostatic equilibrium 

of the bending of a beam subjected to a transverse load distribution 𝑞(𝑥) is derived as follows: 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

11
 

 

1:

𝑑2𝑀(𝑘)(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥2
+

𝑑2ℳ(𝑘)(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥2
= 𝑞(𝑥)
∀𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 (Equilibrium Equation)

2:

𝑑𝑀(𝑘)(0 or 𝐿)

𝑑𝑥
= 𝑉̅ −

𝑑ℳ(𝑘)(0 or 𝐿)

𝑑𝑥
or 𝑤(0 or 𝐿) = 𝑤̅

3: 𝑀(𝑘)(0 or 𝐿) = 𝑀̅ − ℳ(𝑘)(0 or 𝐿) or 

𝑑𝑤(0 or 𝐿)

𝑑𝑥
= 𝑤𝑥
̅̅̅̅

∀𝑥 ∈ 𝑆 (Boundary Conditions)

4: 𝑀(𝑘)(𝑥) = −(𝜆0 + 2𝜇0) 𝑏ℎ3

12

𝑑2𝑤(𝑘)(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥2

5: ℳ(𝑘)(𝑥) = ∫ (𝜉𝜆𝛽𝜆(|𝑥′ − 𝑥|) + 𝜉𝜇𝛽𝜇(|𝑥′ − 𝑥|)) 𝑀(𝑘−1)(𝑥′)
𝐿
0
𝑑𝑥′ − 𝑀(𝑘−1)(𝑥)

∀𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 (Constitutive Equations)

6: 𝜀𝑥𝑥

(𝑘)(𝑥) = −𝑧

𝑑2𝑤(𝑘)(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥2
∀𝑥 ∈ 𝑉 (Kinematical Variables)

where 

𝜉𝜆 =

𝜆0

𝜆0+2𝜇0
and   𝜉𝜇 =

2𝜇0

𝜆0+2𝜇0

𝛽𝜆(|𝑥′ − 𝑥|) =

1

2ℓ𝜆 exp (−

|𝑥′−𝑥|

ℓ𝜆 ) and   𝛽𝜇(|𝑥′ − 𝑥|) =

1

2ℓ𝜇 exp (−

|𝑥′−𝑥|

ℓ𝜇 )

(23)

 

where 𝑀(𝑥) is the local-type bending moment, and ℳ(𝑥) is the nonlocal residual bending moment. 𝑤(𝑥) 

is the beam deflection. 𝐿, 𝑏 and ℎ are the beam length, width and height, respectively. 𝑉̅, 𝑀̅, 𝑤̅, and 𝑤𝑥
̅̅̅̅ are, 

respectively, prescribed shear force, bending moment, deflection, and slope at the boundary.  

The proposed PROCEDURE is used to obtain the solution of the nonlocal boundary value problem 

(equation (23)). The procedure starts such that the nonlocal residual stress ℳ(𝑥) is zero. In this case, a 

solution of the boundary value problem (equations (23)1, (23)2, and (23)3) gives the local solution of the 

bending field 𝑀(𝑥). Then, the obtained bending field (𝑀(𝑥)) is substituted into the constitutive law (23)5 

to form the nonlocal residual stress (ℳ(𝑥)). Afterwards, ℳ(𝑥) is substituted into the boundary value 

problem (equations (23)1, (23)2, and (23)3), which is then solved for the bending field 𝑀(𝑥). This process, 

when repeated, secretes the bending field 𝑀(𝑥) updated in each iteration. After a few iterations, both, the 

bending field 𝑀(𝑥) and the nonlocal residual bending field ℳ(𝑥) converge to their targeted solutions.  

It should be mentioned that the bending field 𝑀(𝑥) is a local-type field, which accounts for the direct-

neighbor interactions. This local-type field is adapted for the inclusion of the nonlocal residual fields of the 

elastic domain. The bending field 𝑀(𝑥) when added to the nonlocal residual bending ℳ(𝑥) forms a total 

bending field, which forms the constitutive law of Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity, i.e.  

𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥) = 𝑀(𝑥) + ℳ(𝑥)
(24)


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

12
 

 

It should also be mentioned that the total bending field 𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥) formed by the sum of the bending 

fields 𝑀(𝑥) and ℳ(𝑥) is exactly the same as the one obtained from the equilibrium equation of Eringen’s 

nonlocal elasticity. This total bending satisfies the requirement of the global balance.  

Figures 2-4 show the nonlocal residual bending moment ℳ(𝑥), the curvature, and the deflection of 

cantilever, simply supported, and clamped-clamped beams. The boundary conditions for the different beam 

configurations are defined in each iteration (𝑘), as follows: 

Cantilever beam with a point load (𝑭) at its free-end:

𝑑𝑀(𝑘)(𝐿)

𝑑𝑥
= −𝐹 −

𝑑ℳ(𝑘)(𝐿)

𝑑𝑥

𝑀(𝑘)(𝐿) = −ℳ(𝑘)(𝐿)

𝑤(0) = 0

𝑑𝑤(0)

𝑑𝑥
= 0

Simply supported beam under a uniform load (𝒒):

𝑀(𝑘)(0) = −ℳ(𝑘)(0)

𝑀(𝑘)(𝐿) = −ℳ(𝑘)(𝐿)

𝑤(0) = 0

𝑤(𝐿) = 0

Clamped-clamped beam under a uniform load (𝒒):

𝑀(𝑘)(0) =

𝑞𝐿2

12 − ℳ(𝑘)(0)

𝑀(𝑘)(𝐿) =

𝑞𝐿2

12 − ℳ(𝑘)(𝐿)

𝑤(0) = 0

𝑤(𝐿) = 0

(25)

As one of the main drawbacks of Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity, it secretes stress fields identical to those 

of the classical elasticity. This is because it only forms the total stress field, which is always identical to the 

stress field of the classical elasticity due to the equilibrium requirements. Thus, Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity 

totally hides the role of the nonlocal residual field and gives no information about it. This leads to the 

paradoxes and inconsistencies previously discussed.  

The proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity outweighs Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity where it 

distinguishes between nonlocal residual fields, local-type fields, and total nonlocal fields. The proposed 

nonlocal elasticity can effectively form nonlocal residual fields (this is for the first time). In addition, it 

secretes a stress field dependent on the nonlocal character of the elastic domain. This stress field is the 

local-type stress field (𝑀(𝑥)).  


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

13
 

 

Figures 2-4 show the effectiveness of the proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity to model 

nonlocal problems. In the first iteration, a local solution is obtained (the local solution is represented by 

broken-blue curves in Figures 2-4). After a few iterations, the solution converges to the targeted solution. 

The convergence is evident in Figures 2-4.  

 

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 2: Cantilever beam under a point load (𝑭 = 𝟏): (a) The nonlocal residual moment (ℳ(𝑥)), (b) 

the curvature (

𝑑2𝑤(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥2
=

𝑀(𝑥)

(𝜆0+2𝜇0)𝑏ℎ3

12

), and (c) the deflection (𝑤(𝑥)) at each iteration (𝑘). The broken curves 

represent the local solutions. 𝜉𝜆 = 1/3, 𝜉𝜇 = 2/3, ℓ𝜆 = ℓ𝜇 = 0.5, 𝐿 = 1. 
 
 
 
(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 3: Simply supported beam under a uniform load (𝒒 = 𝟏): (a) The nonlocal residual moment 

(ℳ(𝑥)), (b) the curvature (

𝑑2𝑤(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥2
=

𝑀(𝑥)

(𝜆0+2𝜇0)𝑏ℎ3

12

), and (c) the deflection (𝑤(𝑥)) at each iteration (𝑘). The 

broken curves represent the local solutions. 𝜉𝜆 = 1/3, 𝜉𝜇 = 2/3, ℓ𝜆 = ℓ𝜇 = 0.4, 𝐿 = 1. 
 

 

 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

14
 

 

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 4: Clamped-clamped beam under a uniform load (𝒒 = 𝟏): (a) The nonlocal residual moment 

(ℳ(𝑥)), (b) the curvature (

𝑑2𝑤(𝑥)

𝑑𝑥2
=

𝑀(𝑥)

(𝜆0+2𝜇0)𝑏ℎ3

12

), and (c) the deflection (𝑤(𝑥)) at each iteration (𝑘). The 

broken curves represent the local solutions. 𝜉𝜆 = 1/3, 𝜉𝜇 = 2/3, ℓ𝜆 = ℓ𝜇 = 0.1, 𝐿 = 1.   
 

The nonlocal residual moment (ℳ(𝑥)) is zero in the first iteration to give the local solution. With the 

iterations, the nonlocal moment grows and converges to its complete value. This nonlocal residual moment 

adapt the boundary value problem to give updated solutions of the different fields of the beam. For the first 

time, nonlocal residual fields can be obtained by the proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity.  

The obtained results in Figures 2-4 are consistent. All fields represented in these figures for the different 

beam configurations reflect the inherited softness of the nonlocal elasticity. The nonlocal curvatures and 

deflections are obtained larger than those of the local elasticity. 

In addition, the obtained solutions fulfill the requirement of the global balance. The proposed iterative 

approach is operated based on fulfilling the equilibrium requirements globally in each iteration. This can 

be demonstrated by depicting the total nonlocal bending 𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥)  (equation (4)), shear force 

𝑑𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥)/𝑑𝑥, and loading 𝑑2𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥)/𝑑𝑥2 fields in Figure 5 for the different beam configurations. For 

a cantilever beam with a length 𝐿 and under a point load of 𝐹, the global elastostatic equilibrium requires 

the total moment 𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 is zero at the free-end and increases linearly to 𝐹𝐿 at the fixed end, and a constant 

shear force distribution over the beam. It is clear that the depicted results in Figure 5(a) perfectly match 

these requirements.  In addition to the cantilever beam, the equilibrium requirements of the other beams are 

effectively fulfilled, as shown in Figures 5(b) and 5(c). Furthermore, the external loading distribution is 

obtained when differentiating the total moment twice (𝑑2𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥)/𝑑𝑥2), as shown in Figure 5. These 

observations demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed iterative nonlocal residual elasticity.  

 

 

 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

15
 

 

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 5: Fulfillment of the global balance requirements: The total nonlocal bending 𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥) 
(equation (4)), the shear force 𝑑𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥)/𝑑𝑥, and the loading 𝑑2𝑀𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙(𝑥)/𝑑𝑥2 fields of (a) cantilever 
under a unit point load, (b) simply supported beam under a unit-uniform load, and (c) clamped-clamped 
beam under a unit-uniform load. (𝐿 = 1).     
 

Conclusions 

In this study, a new nonlocal elasticity, which completely forms the nonlocal residual fields, was 

developed. This formulation was motivated by the existing complications of finding solutions of the 

conventional model of the nonlocal elasticity early proposed by Eringen. The new nonlocal elasticity was 

given the name “iterative nonlocal residual elasticity”. This new nonlocal elasticity is centered upon 

expressing the dynamic equilibrium requirements based on a nonlocal residual stress field. The nonlocal 

residual stress was formulated to model the material stiffness due to non-neighbor interactions. Solutions 

of the boundary value problems formed based on the new nonlocal elasticity are determined using an 

iterative procedure. When the iterative procedure is implemented, the nonlocal boundary value problem is 

converted into a local boundary value problem of an elastic domain exposed to a residual field. This residual 

field is a nonlocal-type field, which grows with the iterations and is used to correct the local field problem 

for the nonlocal fields of the elastic domain. This iterative procedure is an integrated part of the new 

nonlocal elasticity.  

The iterative nonlocal residual elasticity was applied to Euler-Bernoulli beams to verify the convergence 

to the targeted nonlocal solution and the fulfillment of the global balance requirements. It was shown that 

the iterative nonlocal residual elasticity decomposes the total nonlocal stress field into a local-type stress 

field and a nonlocal residual stress field. Thus, for the first time, information about nonlocal residual stress 

fields can be obtained using the proposed nonlocal elasticity. Findings presented in this study came to 

demonstrate that the complications of Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity are effectively resolved when using the 

iterative nonlocal residual elasticity.  

 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

16
 

 

Compliance with ethical standards 

Conflict of interest The author declares that he has no conflicts of interest. 

 

References 

[1] Eringen, A.C., 1972. Linear theory of nonlocal elasticity and dispersion of plane waves. Int. J. Eng. 

Sci., 10, 425–435. 

[2] Eringen, A.C., Edelen, D.G.B., 1972. On nonlocal elasticity. Int J Eng Sci, 10(3), 233–48. 

[3] Eringen, A. C., 1983. On differential equations of nonlocal elasticity and solutions of screw dislocation 

and surface waves. J. Appl. Phys., 54 (9), 4703-4710. 

[4] Benvenuti E, Simone A. 2013. One-dimensional nonlocal and gradient elasticity: Closed-form 

solution and size effect. Mechanics Research Communications 48, 46–51. 

[5] Challamel, N. , & Wang, C. M., 2008. The small length scale effect for a non-local cantilever beam: 

A paradox solved. Nanotechnology 19 (34)), 345703. 

[6] Peddieson, J., Buchanan, G. R., McNitt, R. P., 2003. Application of nonlocal continuum models to 

nanotechnology. International Journal Engineering Science 41(3–5), 305–312. 

[7] Fernández-Sáez J, Zaera R, Loya JA, Reddy JN., 2016. Bending of Euler–Bernoulli beams using 

Eringen’s integral formulation: A paradox resolved. International Journal of Engineering Science 99, 

107–116. 

[8] Tuna M, Kirca M., 2016. Exact solution of Eringen’s nonlocal integral model for bending of Euler- 

Bernoulli and Timoshenko beams. International Journal of Engineering Science 105, 80–92. 

[9] Tuna M, Kirca M., 2016. Exact solution of Eringen’s nonlocal integral model for vibration and 

buckling of Euler-Bernoulli beam. International Journal of Engineering Science 107, 54-67. 

[10] Challamel N, Zhang Z,Wang CM, Reddy JN, Wang Q, Michelitsch T,Collet B., 2014. On 

nonconservativeness of Eringen’s nonlocal elasticity in beam mechanics: correction from a discrete-

based approach. Arch Applied Mechanic 84, 1275. 

[11] Wang C, Kitipornchai S, Lim C, Eisenberger M., 2008. Beam bending solutions based on nonlocal 

Timoshenko beam theory. Journal of Engineering Mechanics 134(6), 475–481. 

[12] Wang Q, Liew KM., 2007. Application of nonlocal continuum mechanics to static analysis of micro-

and nano-structures. Physics Letters A 363(3), 236–242. 

[13] Li, C., Yao, L., Chen, W., Li, S., 2015. Comments on nonlocal effects in nano-cantilever beams. 

International Journal of Engineering Science 87, 47–57. 

[14] Romano, G., Barretta, R., Diaco, M., de Sciarra, F. M., 2017. Constitutive boundary conditions and 

paradoxes in nonlocal elastic nanobeams. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 121, 151-156. 


M. Shaat, arXiv [physics.app-ph], October 11, 2018.  

17
 

 

[15] Shaat, M., 2018. Comment on the paper Constitutive boundary conditions and paradoxes in nonlocal 

elastic nanobeams. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 121, 2017, 151-156 by G. Romano, 

R. Barretta, M. Diaco, and F. Marotti de Sciarra. arXiv:1808.10778 [physics.class-ph]. 

[16] Polizzotto, C., 2017. Nonlocal elasticity and related variational principles. Int. J. Solids Struct. 38, 

7359–7380. 

[17] Shaat, M., 2018. Correction of local elasticity for nonlocal residuals: application to Euler–Bernoulli 

beams. Meccanica, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11012-018-0855-x. 

[18] Shaat, M., 2015. Iterative nonlocal elasticity for Kirchhoff plates. Int J Mech Sci, 90, 162–170. 

[19] Shaat, M., 2017. A general nonlocal theory and its approximations for slowly varying acoustic waves. 

International Journal of Mechanical Sciences 130, 52–63.  

 


