1 

Bond disproportionation, charge self-regulation and ligand holes in s-p 

and in d electron ABX3 perovskites by density functional theory  

 

G. M. Dalpian,1,2 Q. Liu,1§ J. Varignon,3 M. Bibes3 

and Alex Zunger1 

 

 1University of Colorado Boulder Colorado 80309, Boulder, CO, USA 

2Centro de Ciências Naturais e Humanas, Universidade Federal do ABC, 09210-580, 

Santo André, SP, Brazil 

3Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Université Paris Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 

91767, France 

 

Abstract 

Some ABX3 perovskites exhibit different local environments (DLE) for the same B atoms in the 

lattice, an effect referred to as disproportionation, distinguishing such compounds from common 

perovskites that have single local environments (SLE). The basic phenomenology associated with 

such disproportionation involves the absence of B-atom charge ordering, the creation of different 

B-X bond length (‘bond alternation’) for different local environments, the appearance of metal (in 

SLE) to insulator (in DLE) transition, and the formation of ligand holes. We point out that this 

phenomenology is common to a broad range of chemical bonding patterns in ABX3 compounds, 

either with s-p electron B-metal cations (BaBiO3, CsTlF3), or noble metal cation (CsAuCl3), as 

well as d-electron cations (SmNiO3, CaFeO3). We show that underlying much of this 

phenomenology is the ‘self-regulating response’, whereby in strongly bonded metal-ligand 

systems with high lying ligand orbitals, the system protects itself from creating highly charged 

cations by transferring ligand electrons to the metal, thus preserving a nearly constant metal 

charge in different local environments, while creating B-ligand bond alternation and ligand-like 

conduction band (‘ligand hole’ states). We are asking what are the minimal theory ingredients 

needed to explain the main features of this SLE-to-DLE phenomenology, such as its energetic 

driving force, bond length changes, possible modifications in charge density and density of state 

changes. Using as a guide the lowering of the total energy in DLE relative to SLE, we show that 

                                                
§   Current address:   Department of Physics, Southern University of Science and Technology, 
Shenzhen 518055, China   


2 

density functional calculations describe this phenomenology across the whole chemical bonding 

range without resort to special strong correlation effects, beyond what DFT naturally contains. In 

particular, lower total energy configurations (DLE) naturally develop bond alternation, gaping of 

the metallic SLE state, and absence of charge ordering with ligand hole formation. 

 

I. 
Introduction: Single vs multiple local bonding motifs for the 

same element in a crystal 

 

Single repeated structural motif — be that AX4 tetrahedron, or AX6 octahedron, or 

A3B3X trigonal prism – have established the basis of our understanding of structure and 

bonding in solids and molecules.1–3 Furthermore, the tradition of using in electronic 

structure calculations the economically smallest possible unit cell, naturally forced in 

simple models the situation where each bonded element was described via a single local 

environment (SLE) -- the so-called Monomorphous representation. Ionic solids were 

generally modeled by the NaCl structure; intermetallic compounds by the L10 CuAu–type 

structure; and ternary ABO3 oxides via the cubic perovskite (Pm3m) structure.  This view 

also underlies the description of disordered AxB1-x alloys via the popular single site 

coherent potential approximation approach (CPA)4,5 where all A atoms (and separately 

all B atoms) are assumed to see the same potential.  

At the same time, the existence of more than one inequivalent Wyckoff position for 

identical elements in a lattice is no foreigner to crystallography. Classic example of 

polymorphous structures manifesting different local environments for the same chemical 

element involves elements capable of existing in multiple valences. For example, column 

III elements with the configuration s2p1 have, at low atomic number (Z), and for the top 

of the periodic table column (B, Al, Ga) a formal oxidation state (FOS) of 3, whereas for 

high atomic numbers, at the bottom of the column, the FOS might be 1 (e.g., Tl). The 

reason is that the relativistic Mass-Darwin effect6 is sufficiently large to localize the s2 

electrons and make them quasi core–like orbitals, leaving a single p1 electron at the high 

Z bottom of the periodic table column as chemically active. The intermediate Z elements 

— In and in part Tl — have two stable valences. An analogous transition occurs in 

column IV elements, where the light elements (Si, Ge) utilize all their four (s2p2) valence 


3 

electrons, whereas the high Z elements (Pb) are mostly divalent (p2) with the intermediate 

one (Sn) having two stable valences. In such dual valence atoms a single valence would 

disproportionate into two different valences, as illustrated by the “negative U center” of 

In in PbTe,7  and by the dual valence of Sn in Cu2ZnSnS4.8 

A particularly interesting case of different local environments to the same element is 

the disproportionation of a pair of identical 2 𝐵𝑋  single local environments (SLE) in a 

ABX3 perovskite into a structure with two different local environments (DLE) associated 

with the same element B, i.e.,  𝐵𝑋 (!) + 𝐵𝑋 (!) observed in A2[B(1) B(2)]X6 perovskites 

(such as BaBiO3,9,10 YNiO3,11 CaFeO3

12,13). Whereas the appearance of two different 

local environments is ubiquitous in double perovskites, when the disproportionating sites 

are different chemical elements as in A2[BC]X6 (for example Sr2[FeMo]O6

14 and 

Cs2[AgIn]Cl6

15), in the current paper we discuss the unusual case of disproportionation 

with the same chemical element B.  

 

 

Fig 1: Schematic representation of a total energy of a fixed-composition compound ABX3 
appearing in a few hypothetical phases (α, β, γ, δ) of different local environments vs. the “local 
Environment Descriptor” which can, for example, be the formal oxidation state (FOS), or the 
coordination number, or the magnetic moment of the electronically active element. A phase 
below (a) or above (b) the tie line connecting the nearest neighbor phases (dashed blue line) will 
manifest in SLE and DLE behavior, respectively. 
 


4 

The existence of stable SLE or a stable DLE can be represented in a generalized 

‘Convex Hull’ plot of total (free) energy of different phases vs some descriptor of the 

local environment (such as FOS, or coordination number, etc), as shown in Figure 1. In 

the first case (Fig. 1a), atom B in either the β or the  γ state will not disproportionate 

because this would raise its energy relative to the ’tie line’ represented by the straight 

blue line and will stay as an SLE, whereas in the second case (Fig. 1b) atom B in the γ 

state will disproportionate into β + δ because this lowers its energy relative to the tie line. 

We will follow in the present work this total energy guide for the tendency of various 

systems to manifest SLE or DLE behavior. 

II. 
The main questions addressed with respect to SLE vs DLE in ABX3 

 

We phrase below a number of questions posed regarding disproportionation in 

ABX3 compounds, and will address them in this paper by considering six compounds 

showing DLE behavior, including BaBiO3,9,10,16–20 CsTlF3,21,22 SmNiO3,11,23–26 

CsAuCl3,27 CaFeO3

12,13,28–30 and CsTe2O6

31. Although the last compound is not a 

perovskite, we also studied it to show that the conclusions drawn here can also be 

expanded to other types of structures. This selection represents a rather broad range of 

perovskite compounds with the B atom being an s-p element (Bi, Tl, Te), or a transition 

metal (Ni, Fe) or a noble metal (Au). We will demonstrate common behavior for all such 

cases, highlighting the broad appeal of SLE vs DLE selectivity. 

 

(a) What level of electronic structure theory is sufficient to predict the energetic tendency 

(Fig. 1) of actual ABX3 compounds to be SLE or DLE? 

    Previous studies implied that disproportionation is a correlation effect that may require 
an explicitly dynamically correlated approach. For example, Park et al32 presented 
density functional plus dynamical mean field theory (DFT- DMFT) calculations “which 
show that the bond-length disproportionation and associated insulating behavior are 
signatures of a novel correlation effect”.  
    Cammarata et al33 proposed a ‘spin assisted covalent bond formation’ as a mechanism 
for DLE. However, this model cannot be general, since compounds like BaBiO3, CsTlF3, 
CsAuCl3, and CsTe2O6, are not spin-polarized yet they have a DLE phase.  Also, the 
spin-assisted mechanism cannot provide an understanding of the metal-insulator phase 
transition in CaFeO3 and SmNiO3 since (i) they transit from a paramagnetic metal to a 


5 

paramagnetic insulator not showing net spin polarization and (ii) the Néel temperature is 
well below the MIT. The magnetic interactions cannot therefore be accounted for the 
MIT for these two compounds. In our case, DFT was able to predict both phenomena: we 
always observe a decrease in energy when going from SLE to DLE, and we also 
concomitantly observe the opening of a band gap for both spin-polarized and non spin 
polarized configurations. We note another DFT explanation by Mercy et al26 who have 
recently provided a compelling evidence that  the octahedra rotations are triggering the 
MIT in nickelates and CaFeO3,29 reproducing the experimental observations. 
   In the present study we find that SLE-DLE selectivity exists in s-p as well as 3d 

electron compound alike, and that density functional theory (DFT) suffices to correctly 

describe the energetic selection between SLE and DLE in all such compounds. This 

establishes such single determinant, mean field band theory as adequate tool for 

describing the phenomenology related to bond disproportionation, including magnetism25 

and defects in disproportionated structures. 

 

(b) Is the FOS a physically meaningful ‘local environment descriptor’ for predicting 

within the convex hull construct of Fig. 1 the tendency of actual ABX3 to be SLE or DLE?  

      The most basic understanding of the disproportionation problem suggests that when 

DLE occurs, the elements located at the B site in ABX3 perovskites will have different 

FOS. In this view the meaningful descriptor of the local environment of the 

disproportionating B atom is the FOS. For BaBiO3, for instance, the Bi site was said10 to 

disproportionate to represent the two valences of the Bi atom, resulting in 

Ba2[Bi3+Bi5+]O6. The same view of charge ordering is often used for the other 

compounds, such as Cs2[Au+1Au+3]Cl6, Ca2[Fe3+Fe5+]O6, and Cs2[Te4+Te3

6+]O12.  

     In 1951, Frost34 proposed a way to determine if a specific FOS of a certain element is 

stable or not by plotting the free energy versus the FOS35,36 (a specific choice of a ‘Local 

Environment Descriptor’ in Fig.1), and learning what would be expected for this specific 

compound. These graphs were constructed by using solutions and electrode potential free 

energies. This view that integer oxidation states are physically realizable (as opposed to 

being formal labels) led to the picture equating such disproportionation to “charge 

ordering”19,37,38 whereby the formal oxidation states corresponds to physical charges, 

alternating on the different chemically identical elements throughout the lattice. 


6 

       To establish whether a structural change such as SLE-to-DLE is associated with a 
change in charge distribution we compute the quantity most directly related to our 
question, namely the variational charge density ρ(r) calculated self consistently by DFT 
for DLE and for SLE geometries. We therefore calculated the charge accumulation 
function i.e. the charge enclosed in a sphere of radius R around the B atom, as a function 
of R. Contrary to other methods of estimating the charge around an atom, such as Bader 
analysis, where a fixed boundary is chosen, the charge accumulation function is a direct 
measure of the charge density, providing direct evidence of the charge distribution 
around a certain atom. From these plots, it is also straightforward to clearly see the 
charge density difference around a certain atom.  We clearly see that the physical charge 
density is essentially unchanged around the B atom as a result of the structural change. If 
one considers instead an indirect measure such as formal oxidation states, one deduces 
that it changes very significantly by the SLE- to- DLE transformation. We conclude that 
the FOS has little or nothing to do with the physical charge density. The reason for this 
was discussed in detail in Ref 39 in terms of the ‘charge self regulating response’, 
whereby charge rearrangement on the cation is offset by opposite rearrangement on the 
ligands, resulting in a minimal net change in physical charge density. In contrast, the FOS 
concept focuses just on the atom whose charge is counted, (namely, the B cation in the 
present case), seeing therefore just a piece of the picture. Similar conclusion were 
reached for the case of transition metal impurities in semiconductors,39 LiCoO2 vs 
CoO2,40 and for Sn atoms in perovskites such as CsSnI3 and Cs2SnI6.41  
 
(c) Is the bond geometry a physically meaningful descriptor for predicting within the 
convex hull construct of Fig. 1 the tendency of actual ABX3 to be SLE or DLE?  
Once it is understood that the charge residing in a certain B atom is basically constant for 
different local environments, it is important to look for a more relevant descriptor for this 
disproportionation. X-ray techniques can precisely determine the difference in bond 
lengths between the B atoms and the ligands. They can clearly differentiate the large and 
small octahedra in perovskites such as those studied in this paper.10 While it is possible to 
assign different bond distances to different FOS,9 the fact that the physical charge 
residing on different B atoms is nearly identical suggests that this assignment does not 
reflect a causal mechanism. For example, PbCoO3 is said42 to have both A-site and B-site 
charge ordering, leading to a formal description as [Pb2+Pb3

4+][Co2

2+Co2

3+]O12. The 

characterization as a charge ordering compound in this case came from X-ray 
measurements that show two groups of Pb-O bonds and two groups of Co-O bonds and 
not the direct measurement of any quantity related to charge. Our analysis indicates that it 
is best to use the bond geometries to differentiate these DLE, since this is the property 
that is usually measured, and not the FOS. We will show that DFT can predict the 
observed bond disproportionation in all DLE compounds studied. Sawatzky and 
collaborators reached a similar conclusion for BaBiO3

17 and Varignon et al for rare earth 


7 

nickelates.25 We therefore use the term ‘bond disproportionation’ rather than ‘charge 
ordering/disproportionation’. 
 
(d) How is the SLE vs DLE selection related to metallic vs insulating character of the 
compound?  
It has been often observed that structural disproportionation comes with a simultaneous 
metal-insulator transition, e.g. in  rare earth nickelates11,26,32 and CaFeO3

29. For transition 

metal compounds, correlation effects have been used to explain the metal insulator 
transition.32 We find in standard DFT description for both s-p ABX3 systems and ABX3 
d-electron systems that whenever the SLE phase is metallic, the formation of the DLE 
configuration lowers the total energy (Viz. Fig 1b) and becomes automatically insulating. 
Specifically, in RNiO3, the metal-insulator transition is developed by lattice mode 
couplings between rotations in DLE rather than by pure correlation.26 Thus the metal-
insulator transition is an energetic consequence of disproportionation in these systems.  
 
(e) How is disproportionation related to Ligand Hole?  

   The basic electronic structure43,44 of metal oxides involves a valence band maximum 

(VBM) made either of oxygen p orbitals (in late transition metal oxides such as NiO) or 

from metal atom d orbitals (in early 3d oxide compounds such as VO2

45). The conduction 

band minimum (CBM) of such metal oxides is generally composed of transition metal d 

orbitals (in early transition atom oxides such as YTiO3) or metal s orbitals (in late 3d 

oxides, CdO). A special case is when the CBM is made of ligand orbitals, called “ligand 

hole” states.17,18,25,29,43 Ligand holes have been shown to exist in disproportionated 

systems46 but there seems to be significant lack of clarity if they are intimately related to 

d electron systems and if they are specific to disproportionated systems.  

We demonstrate by DFT calculations that the conduction band wavefunction of 

both s-p electron and d-electron disproportionated ABX3 compounds discussed here 

represent ligand hole states. As to the mechanism of LH formation, we note that this 

requires that the relevant metal states be deeper than ligand orbitals so electrons can be 

transferred to the metal (as in late but not early transition metal oxides, or Bi compounds 

with low s electron valence states) and that a sufficiently strong metal-to-ligand 

coupling exist so as to split the ligand VB into occupied and unoccupied parts, the latter 

being LH. Thus, LH does not require disproportionation, (indeed we find it to exist in 

SLE configurations) but in disproportionated states there exist a short enough B-Ligand 

bond that could facilitate splitting of the valence band and LH formation. The basic 


8 

driving force for LH formation is the self-regulating response:39 Total energy lowering 

favor the formation of LH when without such a LH, the charge on the metal would be 

very large (such as Ni4+ in RNiO3 or Bi5+ in BaBiO3), which is not favored energetically. 

Consequently, the ligand transfers electrons (thus, forming a hole) to the metal cation so 

as to self-regulate its charge (creating the [Ni2+ - O1-] complex in RNiO3 and the [Bi3+-O1-

] complex  in BaBiO3, where the hole is localized on the oxygen octahedra). In addition, 

ligand holes were recently discussed in organometallic systems when strong π−π 

interaction splits the ligand π band so the upper π

∗ band is unoccupied.47,48 

     We next provide a detailed discussion of the five questions above, leading to the 

conclusion that the phenomenology of disproportionation—absence of charge ordering, 

formation of bond length disproportionation, gap formation, as well as ligand hole 

formation— is derived and detected by total energy lowering within standard DFT, and is 

common to both s-p electron and d electron ABX3 compounds. 

 

III. 
Method 

 

Density functional description of the SLE to DLE transformation:  With the advent 

of accurate first principles exchange and correlation functionals49 and effective energy 

minimization strategies (local gradients,50 minima hopping,51 Global Space Group 

Optimization,52 etc.), the possibility of affording larger-than-minimal super cells, which 

provide an opportunity for chemically identical atoms to develop their own unique local 

environments has arisen. Consequently, it became possible to simulate this kind of 

SLE/DLE materials from a computational perspective, getting insights into the origin of 

these different configurations for the same atom. 


9 

 

Figure 2: Geometrical representations of ABX3 crystal structures with SLE and DLE. (a) is for 
an orthorhombic structure with SLE; (b) is a cubic structure with SLE; (c) is a monoclinic 
structure with DLE. In this case, the different colors of the octahedra indicate different local 
environments. 
       

Electronic Hamiltonian and its solver: Calculations were performed using the plane wave 

pseudopotential total energy DFT approach as implemented in the VASP53 code within 

the Projected Augmented Wave (PAW) approach and the Generalized Gradient 

Approximation (GGA-PBESol54 for CaFeO3 and SmNiO3 and GGA-PBE55 for the other 

materials). We have also performed hybrid functional calculations56 on GGA-converged 

structures, in order to obtain total energies and band gaps. An on-site self interaction 

correcting “DFT+U”57 term was added to d orbitals of Ni (U=2.0eV) and Fe (U=3.8 eV). 

These values of U were chosen based on extensive tests from previous studies.25 Basis set 

cutoff energies were set to 600eV for CaFeO3 and SmNiO3 and 400eV for the other 

compounds. The Brillouin zones were samples with k-point meshes up to 8x8x6 for 

orthorhombic phases (20 atoms) and 6x6x6 for cubic ones (5 atoms).  

Input crystal structures for relaxation: When available, we have used crystal 

structures reported in the ICSD58 for our calculations, and optimized both lattice vectors 

and internal atomic coordinates to minimize total energies until the forces on each atom 

for each Cartesian coordinate are smaller than 0.001eV/A. Such a relaxation scheme 

allows the system to change the symmetry of the trial structure. The most common 

structures observed in our SLE and DLE configurations are shown in Figure 2. In the 

SLE case (Figs 2a and 2b), all octahedra have the same shape and size. In the DLE 


10 

configuration (Fig 2c) there are two different octahedra, arranged in such a way that a 

large octahedra is surrounded by six small octahedra and vice versa. Table I reports the 

space group symmetries of our optimized structures for both SLE and DLE phases, 

together with the references for experimental papers reporting these structures. For 

CaFeO3, both SLE and DLE configurations have been observed experimentally (so the 

convex hull illustrated in Fig 1 must be rather shallow), the DLE being the low 

temperature structure.13 For this case we use as trial structure the experimental crystal 

structure, with a ferromagnetic configuration for the spin arrangement, then relax the 

structure. For SmNiO3 only the SLE configuration has been observed,23 although our 

theoretical calculations show that the DLE configuration should be more stable. In this 

case, the initial DLE structure was copied from CaFeO3, then fully relaxed. For other 

compounds (BaBiO3, CsTlF3 and CsAuCl3 and CsTe2O6) only the DLE configuration has 

been experimentally identified so the trial SLE configuration was built by using either a 

cubic or an orthorhombic phase, inspired in other perovskites, followed by full 

relaxation.59  

   

Table I: Calculated space group for the SLE and DLE compounds after DFT optimization. The 
experimentally observed configurations are marked in bold.  

Material 
Space Group SLE 
Space Group DLE 
Reference 

BaBiO3 
Pnma 
P21/c 
10 

CsTlF3 
Pm3m 
Fm𝟑m 
21 

CsAuCl3 
Pm3m 
I4/mmm 
27 

CsTe2O6 
Pnma 
R𝟑m 
31 

SmNiO3 
Pnma 
P21/c 
23 

CaFeO3 
Pnma 
P21/c 
13 

 

IV. 
Results 

A. Energy lowering due to disproportionation  

An interesting as well as pragmatic question is what is the minimum electronic 

structure theory framework needed to systematically predict spontaneous SLE/DLE 

symmetry breaking when it occurs? Although one can always go to the highest level 


11 

methods to study certain materials, (such as quantum Monte Carlo,60) a reasonable 

question is what is the minimal set of physical ingredients that provide such a prediction, 

Recent publications claimed that the band gap opening for the DLE phase, for instance, is 

a strongly correlated effect,32 and that methodologies such as Dynamic Mean Field 

Theory should be used to describe it. It turns out that, as Table II shows, the single 

determinant, mean field Bloch periodic DFT band theory with appropriately flexible unit 

cell that permits symmetry breaking if it lowers the energy, is essentially sufficient, at 

least for the (rather chemically broad) set of representative compounds used here. 

 

Table II:  Energy difference between DLE and SLE phases (ΔE(DLE-SLE)) for the studied 
materials. The band gaps have been calculated both within the GGA and HSE (in parenthesis) 
functionals for the DLE phase.  

Material 
ΔE(DLE-SLE) (meV/f.u.) 
DLE Band Gaps 

(GGA(HSE) eV) 

BaBiO3 
-107 
0.00 (0.63) 

CsTlF3 
-40 
0.91 (1.78) 

CsAuCl3 
-732 
0.70 (1.51) 

CsTe2O6 
-136 
0.38 (1.59) 

SmNiO3 
-82 
0.05 (1.50) 

CaFeO3 
-4 
0.09 (0.77) 

 

The energy lowering from SLE to DLE for all compounds in Table II indicate that the 

DLE phase is lower in energy than the SLE one. This is a clear indication that DFT can 

predict DLE configurations, and should be a good choice for studying this kind of 

phenomena. In the section D, we will show that DFT is also enough to describe band gap 

opening in these compounds, leading to a complete description of them.  

 

B. The physical charge density around the different disproportionated atoms is 

nearly constant thus no ‘Charge Ordering’  

It was once thought12,13,21,28,61 that disproportionation leads to different physical 

charges on the different B atoms in the lattice, an effect referred to as ‘charge ordering’. 

This kind of phenomena has been labeled in several different ways such as charge 


12 

ordering,62 charge disproportionation,13 valence-skipping,20 missing valence states63 or 

mixed valence compounds.22,64 This view resulted from confusing formal charges 

assigned on the basis of the extreme ionic view, with physical charge observed in the 

variational charge density ρ(r). A few recent works have challenged the existence of 

charge ordering,17,65 suggesting that bond disproportionation, or different local 

environments, should be a better description of the physical reality.  

We have analyzed the variational DFT calculated charge density profiles around 

the B atoms for six structurally relaxed compounds. In Fig 3 we plot the total valence 

charge density of these compounds in a few different ways. First, in the left panels, we 

present a 2D representation of the total charge density in a plane containing both B atoms 

(inside small (BS) and large (BL) octahedra) of the DLE phase. The figures in the center 

panel show the charge density along a line containing both B atoms, as indicated in the 

left panels, reporting a very small difference in the absolute values for the charge residing 

in both. The “charge accumulation function” 𝑄 𝑅 =
𝜌 𝒓 𝑑𝒓

!
!
 integrated in a sphere of 

radius R around each B atom is shown in the figures on the right panels as a function of 

the sphere radius R. We note again a minimal difference between 𝑄 𝑅  of SLE and DLE 

phases, and a larger difference is seen as R approaches the ligands, far from the B atom. 

For all the studied cases we find that the charge around the B atoms in different local 

environments, supposedly designated by widely different oxidation states, is rather 

similar.  

This principle of conservation of cation charge under different bonding conditions 

in strongly coupled metal-ligand compounds has been discussed in the context of the Self 

Regulating 
Response39–41,66 
for 
the 
case 
of 
transition 
metal 
impurities 
in 

semiconductors,39 for Co in LiCoO2 vs delithiated CoO2,40 and for Sn atoms in 

perovskites such as CsSnI3 and for its reduced form where 50 % of the Sn is removed as 

in  Cs2SnI6. The description above is a clear confirmation that the use of ‘valence’ or 

‘charge’ for differentiating both atoms in different local environments is not a good 

choice, since the charge in both is basically the same. Although there might exist a very 

small difference between the charge density on the two atoms, this difference is far from 

the two electrons argued by the valence skipping proposals.  Such behaviors were 

explained earlier25,39–41,66 by the cooperation of the ligand orbitals that rehybridize in 


13 

response to a change in total charge (reduction; de lithiation; charging a sample) so as to 

minimize the perturbation—a manifestation of the Le Chatellier principle. 

Given that the physical charge on the disproportionated atoms is rather similar, 

the next obvious question is: “What is a physically meaningful descriptor of the local 

environment of the disproportionating B atom?” This will explain, via Fig.1, which 

compound disproportionates and which stays as an SLE. The answer, as discussed next, 

is the bond geometry around each of the disproportionated atoms. 


14 

 

Figure 3: Charge density profiles for the DLE phase of (a) BaBiO3, (b) CsTlF3, (c) CsAuCl3, (d) 
CsTe2O6, (e) CaFeO3 and (f) SmNiO3. The images on the left represent a 2D plot of the total 
charge density in a plane containing the B atoms in the small (BS) and large (BL) octahedra (in 
units of e/Å3). The central figures show a 1D plot of the total charge density along the line shown 
in the figures in the left. The graphs in the right represent the total charge density integrated in a 
sphere of radius R centered in the BS and BL atoms, as a function of R (charge accumulation 
function). In all these figures, it is possible to observe that the charge around both B atoms (BS 
and BL) is basically the same. 
 


15 

C.  The Different B-X bond lengths in DLE and SLE octahedra form good markers 

for disproportionation 

A good way to differentiate the B atoms at different local environments in DLE 

compounds is through a directly measurable quantity such as the bond distance between 

the B and X atoms. Figure 4 shows the calculated B-X bond lengths in SLE and DLE 

phases of each of the studied materials, and a comparison with the available experimental 

results. For the SLE phase (red bars in Fig 4), the equal octahedra can either have six 

equal bonds, as in the case of BaBiO3, CsTlF3, CsAuCl3 and CsTe2O6, or be distorted 

with two different bond lengths, such as in the case of CaFeO3 and SmNiO3. For the DLE 

compounds, the small octahedra are represented by green bars, and the large octahedra 

are represented by blue bars. For the DLE cases, owing to the lower symmetry of the 

compounds, there can be different groupings of bond lengths in each octahedra. 

Experimental bond distances are shown in Fig 4 as white circles.  

Although there are claims stating that standard DFT “strongly underestimates the 

breathing distortion parameters” in DLE configurations,16 it is clear from Fig 4  that DFT 

provides a good description (see % deviation listed in Fig 4) of the trends on bond lengths 

upon disproportionation across the different bonding groups, whether the active B cation 

is  d-electron, or s-p electron or noble metals. An outlier is CsTlF3 with a deviation of 6% 

which might be related to sample stability/quality concerns reported in Ref. 21 . While 

future improved DFT functionals could hopefully improve the quantitative agreement 

with experiment, there is little doubt that even current DFT functionals provide already a 

reasonable picture of SLE-to-DLE spontaneous symmetry breaking. 

.  


16 

 

Figure 4: Bond lengths for the studied materials in both SLE and DLE configurations. For the 
DLE phase, distances are depicted for both the large (blue) and small (green) octahedra. For SLE, 
all octahedra are the same (red). White circles indicate experimental measurements. The 
calculated space groups and the average difference between experiment and theory are indicated. 
Note different scales on different graphs. 
 

 


17 

Besides the bond distance analysis shown in Fig 4, we have also performed a 

more detailed comparative analysis of the magnitude of the different symmetry-allowed 

normal modes67 including octahedral tilting (OT), Octahedral rotation (OR), breathing 

modes (BM) producing the rocksalt like pattern of compressed and extended oxygen cage 

octahedral, and oxygen anti polar (O-AP) displacements X5

- and R4

- for our compounds. 

The results presented in Table III correspond to the actual amplitude of each lattice 

distortion appearing in the ground state with respect to a high symmetry cubic phase. In 

other words, atomic displacements are decomposed on the basis of the eigenvectors of the 

Dynamical matrix (phonon modes) of the perfectly symmetric structure of perovskites 

(Pm3m) phase, therefore providing the amount of each pure lattice distortions appearing 

in the material. The total amount of atomic displacements is reported in Angstroms. This 

analysis shows that the DFT calculated structures are, in most cases, in very good 

agreement with experiment.  

 

Table III: Amplitudes of key distortions (in Å) appearing in the ground state of each 
materials (both SLE and DLE) obtained on the basis of a symmetry adapted mode 
analysis with respect to a high symmetry cubic phase. The analysis is performed with 
AMPLIMODES from the Bilbao Crystallographic Server. Only Octahedra rotations (OR 
and OT), the Breathing mode (BM) and anti-polar (O-AP) displacements are reported. 
 

DLE 
SLE 

BaBiO3 
P21/c 
  
 
 

Expt. 
Theory 

BM (R2

-) 
0.308 
0.245 

OR (R5

-) 
1.226 
1.370 

O-AP (X5

-) 
0.178 
0.229 

OT (M2

+) 
0.384 
0.414 

CsTlF3 
Fm3m 
P21/c 
 
 

Expt. 
Theory 
Theory 

BM (R2

-) 
0.648 
0.373 
0.441 

OR (R5

-) 
- 
- 
1.484 

O-AP (X5

-) 
- 
- 
0.615 

OT (M2

+) 
- 
- 
0.938 

CsAuCl3 
I4/mmm 
  
 
 

Expt. 
Theory 

BM (R2

-) 
0.256 
0.125 

O-AP (R3

-) 
0.949 
0.839 


18 

CaFeO3 
P21/c 
 
Pnma 

Expt. 
Theory 
Theory 

BM (R2

-) 
0.180 
0.081 
- 

OR (R5

-) 
1.078 
1.091 
1.084 

O-AP (X5

-) 
0.406 
0.461 
0.456 

OT (M2

+) 
0.833 
0.798 
0.938 

O-AP (R4

-) 
0.176 
0.081 
0.091 

SmNiO3 
P21/c 
 
Pnma 

Theory 
Expt. 
Theory 

BM (R2

-) 
0.166 
- 

OR(R5

-) 
1.277 
1.244 
1.175 

O-AP (X5

-) 
0.616 
0.525 
0.526 

OT (M2

+) 
0.914 
0.983 
0.802 

O-AP (R4

-) 
0.140 
0.188 
0.116 

 

 

 D. Energy lowering upon DLE formation is accompanied by gaping and metal to 

insulator transition  

In some compounds like CaFeO3

29 and in some rare earth nickelates such as YNiO3

26 the 

structural transformation from DLE (an insulator) to SLE (a metal) configuration with 
increasing temperature is accompanied by an insulator to metal transition. The 
fundamental origin of the band gap opening as well as for the transition from SLE to 
DLE are still a matter of debate.  

Table II shows the calculated band gaps both within the GGA approximation (or 

GGA+U for transition metal compounds) and also using HSE hybrid functionals for the 

studied compounds. HSE calculations consistently give larger band gaps for the 

compounds, as expected. For BaBiO3, as previously discussed in the literature, the GGA 

band gap is zero. As the VBM and CBM are in different points of the Brillouin zone,68 

and there are no levels crossing the Fermi energy, this zero gap should not be a major 

problem for the analysis reported below.  

Figures 5 and 6 show the density of states of the selected compounds in both SLE and 

DLE configurations. Figure 5 reports results for compounds that are not spin polarized, 

whereas in figure 6 we report the density of states for the magnetic compounds (only 

spin-up), where the ferromagnetic configuration was assumed. Other complex magnetic 

configurations might exist in these compounds,25 but they will not be discussed in the 


19 

present paper. Our test calculations with AFM configurations show that our main 

conclusions will not change with a different magnetic configuration.  

As can be observed on the left panels of figures 5 and 6, all the SLE configurations 

are metallic. The red curve represents the ligand (Oxygen, Fluorine or Chlorine) states, 

whereas the green curves represent the B atom orbitals. For the DLE configuration, right 

panels on Figs 5 and 6, we separate the contribution from the B atom inside the large 

octahedra (painted green) and from the B atom inside the small octahedra (painted 

purple). Red curves again represent the ligands. The levels related to the A atom do not 

appear in the selected energy range. We can clearly see a specific qualitative behavior in 

these compounds: the levels related to the B atom in the large octahedra are mostly 

localized in the valence band, whereas those related to the B atom on the small octahedra 

are in the conduction band. As the coupling between the B atom and the ligands is larger 

in the small octahedra, these levels are pushed to higher energies (purple curves), 

whereas those from the large octahedra are mostly filled in lower energies (green curves). 

The different coupling between large and small octahedra is a clear and straightforward 

explanation of why the DLE phase is insulating.  

The hybridization between B atom and ligands also leads to a large DOS contribution 

from ligand (oxygen, fluorine and chlorine) atoms around the Fermi energy. As shown in 

Fig. 5 and 6, for BaBiO3, CaFeO3 and SmNiO3, the ligand contribution to the CBM is 

much 
larger 
than 
that 
from 
the 
B 
atom, 
consistent 
with 
the 
previous 

observation/prediction17,29,43, while for CsTlF3 and CsAuCl3, the CBM has almost a 

similar contribution from the ligand and the B atom. We will further discuss such ligand 

hole states in Sec. F. 


20 

 

Figure 5 Projected density of states for (a)BaBiO3, (b) CsTlF3, (c)CsAuCl3 and (d) CsTe2O6. The 
figures in the left are for the metallic SLE configuration, where the green curve represents the B 
atom and red is related to the ligands (Oxygen or Fluorine or Chlorine). The figures in the right 
are for the insulating DLE configuration, where green refers to B atoms inside large octahedron, 
and purple to B atoms inside the small octahedron and the yellow region indicates the band gap. 
All these PDOS were calculated using GGA. The inset shows details of the region around the 
band gap.  
 

 


21 

 

Figure 6 Projected density of states for (a)CaFeO3 and (b)SmNiO3. The figures in the left are for 
the metallic SLE configuration, where the red curve represents the oxygen levels and green is for 
the B atom. Only spin-up components are plotted. The figures in the right are for the insulating 
DLE configuration, where green refers to the B atoms inside large octahedron, purple to the B 
atom inside the small octahedron and the yellow region indicates the band gap. The insets show 
details of the region around the band gap.  
 

E. Model for energy lowering and band gap opening in SLE- to-DLE conversion: 

The fact that for all studied compounds there is energy lowering and band gap 

opening when going from SLE to DLE is a clear indication that there is a universal 

behavior in these phenomena and, as such, it should be possible to develop a unified 

model to explain such properties. This can be done through an energy level diagram, as 

shown in Figure 7. In a first approximation, considering only the electronic contribution 

to the total energies, the energy lowering and band gap opening in DLE configurations 


22 

can be understood through the different strengths of coupling between the B and X atoms 

in the BX6 octahedra. In figure 7 we will use BaBiO3 as an example, although similar 

trends can be extended to all other compounds.  

SLE bonding: In Fig 7a, the coupling between oxygen 2p and bismuth 6s and 6p 

levels is depicted for the SLE configuration. As can be observed, this will lead to a 

metallic configuration, basically owing to electron counting. As all octahedra are similar, 

there will be only one strength for the coupling between the B atom and the X octahedra. 

DLE bonding: In Fig 7b we show the same diagram for the DLE case. As there 

are now two different octahedra, one large and one small, we have to separately consider 

both of them. The coupling between Bi and O levels in the small octahedra is stronger, 

owing to the shorter bond distance. This will push the hybrid levels of the small 

octahedra upwards, emptying one s-p hybrid orbital. This empty hybrid orbital is usually 

called a ligand hole orbital, as will be discussed in the next section. For the large 

octahedra the coupling is weaker, leading to weaker repulsion. By considering both large 

and small octahedra, the final effect is that holes are pushed to higher energies and 

electrons are pushed to lower energies, leading in first order to an electronic energy gain. 

If the difference in the strength of the coupling for small and large octahedra is large 

enough, this will also open a band gap in this material. 

 

 

 

 


23 

 

Figure 7: Schematic diagram showing the electronic coupling between B and X atoms in ABX3. 
Here we use BaBiO3 as example. (a) in the SLE configuration all octahedra have the same size. 
The coupling between Bi and O levels leads to a metallic configuration and the creation of a 
ligand hole ( L ). Filled (empty) boxes represent filled (empty) hybrid orbitals. (b) in the DLE 
configuration the octahedra have two different sizes leading to different strengths in the coupling 
between Bi and O. Small octahedra have a stronger coupling (green) and large octahedra have a 
weaker coupling (blue). This different coupling pushes the hybrid levels to higher energies, 
opening a band gap and lowering the total energy of the system. 
 

The coupling diagram described in Fig 7 can also be transported to all other compounds, 

as can be clearly observed in their projected density of states in figures 5 and 6: the VBM 

of the DLE phase is always localized in the large octahedra, whereas the CBM is related 

to the small octahedra. For compounds containing d electrons, each material can have a 

different order of e and t levels, and the coupling is slightly different, although it leads to 

similar conclusions of energy lowering and band gap opening. 

 
F. Ligand holes in DLE compounds with strong metal-ligand bonds signal a self 

regulating response 

 

The conduction band of metal oxides (e.g. Fig 8a for NiO) is generally composed 

of either transition metal d orbitals (in early transition atom oxides such as YTiO3) or 

from metal s orbitals (in late 3d oxides). A special case is when the CBM is made of 


24 

ligand orbitals, called “ligand hole” states.17,24,29 Ligand holes have been shown to exist 

in disproportionated systems46 but there seems to be significant lack of clarity if they are 

intimately related to d electron systems and if they are specific to disproportionated 

systems. The existence of ligand holes has been often associated with superconductivity 

in oxides,69–71 making its understanding even more interesting.  

DFT Evidence for Ligand holes in s-p and d electron ABX3 with strong metal-

ligand bonding: Fig 5 and 6 show the density of states of the empty conduction band 

indicating a clear ligand (oxygen) component. Figure 8 shows a 2D representation of the 

CBM charge density in a plane containing four X ligands and the B atom in the small 

octahedra for the studied compounds. For guiding the eye, we first show in Fig 8a the 

conduction band wavefunction square of the NiO system that lacks ligand holes. It is very 

clear from this figure that the charge is strongly localized on the Ni atom (center of the 

figure), with no contribution from the ligands (oxygen). This is a clear case of a positive 

charge transfer compound, i.e., charge is transferred from the metallic atom towards the 

ligand. The difference with respect to ligand hole systems is apparent. The existence of 

ligand holes can be verified in these compounds by looking at the figures shown in Fig 8 

b-g: we observe a strong signal on the ligand atoms, indicating a negative charge transfer 

compound, or the presence of ligand holes. In some cases, mainly for the compounds 

containing transition metal atoms, there is still a metal-atom component, but the picture is 

very different from NiO, where absolutely no contribution was observed on the ligands. 

This is true across different bonding patterns for both s-p electron and d-electron 

disproportionated ABX3 compounds. In fact, there is a LH state even in the SLE cases as 

well, as can be clearly observed by their projected density of states. 

 

Energy level model for Ligand hole formation: Figure 7 gives the essential 

features of ligand hole formation. LH formation requires that the relevant metal states 

should be deeper than ligand orbitals (so electrons can be transferred to the metal) and 

that a sufficiently strong metal-to-ligand coupling exists so as to create unoccupied 

hybrid levels with a large fraction of ligand character. Thus, LH does not require 

disproportionation, but in disproportionated states there exist a short enough B - ligand 

bond that increases hybridization and consequently increases the ligand character on 


25 

empty states. These empty levels will have strong oxygen-p (or Fluorine or Chlorine) 

character, showing that the holes are localized on the ligands. This character of the CBM 

is different from most semiconductor compounds, and is clearly increased by short 

cation-ligand bonds. 

The driving force for LH formation is the self regulating response:39 Total 

energy lowering favor the formation of LH when without such a LH, the charge on the 

metal would be highly positive (such as Ni3+ in RNiO3 or Bi4+ in BaBiO3). This is not 

favored energetically, so the ligand transfers electrons (thus, forming a hole) to the metal 

cation so as to self-regulate its charge, creating the [Ni2+ - O1-] complex in RNiO3 and the 

[Bi3+-O1-] complex in BaBiO3 where the hole is on the oxygen octahedra.  

.  

 
 


26 

 

Figure 8: Square of the wave function of the ligand hole levels (lowest unoccupied states) for 
(a) NiO, (b) BaBiO3, (c) CsTlF3, (d) CsAuCl3, (e) CsTe2O6, (f) CaFeO3 and (g) SmNiO3 in a 
plane containing four ligands and the central B atom in the small octahedra of the DLE phase. 
The white circles indicate the position of the B atom, and the black/yellow dots indicate the 
position of the ligands.  
 
 


27 

 
IV. Conclusions 

Quantum materials such as transition metal oxide perovskites present a wide 

range of interesting properties, such as metal insulator transitions, high temperature 

superconductivity, a variety of magnetic orders, and can exhibit different local 

environments (DLE) for the same atoms manifested by bond disproportionation. The 

basic phenomenology associated with such disproportionation involves the absence of B-

atom charge ordering, the creation of different B-X bond length (‘bond alternation’) for 

different local environments, the appearance of metal (in SLE) to insulator (in DLE) 

transition, and the formation of ligand holes. We point out that: 

(i) The broad phenomenology associated with disproportionation is common to a range of 

chemical bonding patterns in ABX3 compounds, either with s-p electron B-metal cations 

(BaBiO3, CsTlF3), or noble metal cation (CsAuCl3), as well as d-electron cations 

(SmNiO3, CaFeO3); 

(ii) Using as a guide the lowering of the total energy in DLE relative to SLE, we show 

that density functional calculations describe this phenomenology across the chemical 

bonding range without resort to special correlation effects. In particular, lower (DLE) 

total energy configurations naturally develop bond alternation, gaping of the metallic 

SLE state, and absence of charge ordering with ligand hole formation; 

(iii) Underlying much of this phenomenology is the ‘self-regulating response’ (SRR), 

whereby in strongly bonded metal-ligand systems with high lying ligand orbitals, the 

system protects itself from creating highly charged cations by transferring ligand 

electrons to the metal, thus preserving a nearly constant metal charge in different local 

environments, while creating B-ligand bond alternation and ligand-like conduction band 

(‘ligand hole’ states).  

We address the five questions posed in the Introduction as follows: 

(a) DFT provides an adequate level of theory of interelectronic interactions for predicting 

the tendency of actual ABX3 to be SLE or DLE. 

(b) The formal oxidation state is not a physically meaningful ‘local environment 

descriptor’ for predicting within the convex hull construct of Fig.1 the tendency of actual 

ABX3 to be SLE or DLE.  


28 

(c) Bond geometry is a physically meaningful descriptor for predicting within the convex 

hull construct of Fig.1 the tendency of actual ABX3 to be SLE or DLE.  

(d) The SLE vs DLE selection is directly related to metallic vs insulating character of the 

compound.  

(e) Disproportionation per se is not related to ligand hole formation which is a more 

general phenomena associated with strong metal-ligand bonding for the orbital order of 

ligand orbital energy being above metal orbital energies. However, in creating a 

compressed octahedron with short bond lengths, disproportionation provides a platform 

for ligand hole formation. 

 

 

Acknowledgment 

The work at the University of Colorado Boulder was supported by the U.S. Department 

of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering 

Division under Grant No. DE-SC0010467 to C.U.. G.M.D. also thanks financial support 

from Brazilian agencies FAPESP and CNPq. This work used resources of the National 

Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, which is supported by the Office of 

Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. 

The work at CNRS Thales was supported by the European Research Council grant MINT 

(contract #615759). Calculations took advantage of the OCCIGEN machines in France 

through the DARI project EPOC #A0020910084 and of the DECI resources FIONN in 

Ireland through the PRACE project FiPSCO.   

 

References 

1 A.F. Wells, Structural Inorganic Chemistry (Oxford university press, 2012). 
2 A.F. Cotton, G. Wilkinson, M. Bochmann, and C.A. Murillo, Advanced Inorganic 
Chemistry (Wiley, 1999). 
3 L. Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond... (Cornell university press Ithaca, NY, 
1960). 
4 R. Magri, S.-H. Wei, and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 42, 11388 (1990). 
5 J.S. Faulkner and G.M. Stocks, Phys. Rev. B 21, 3222 (1980). 
6 P. Pyykko, Chem. Rev. 88, 563 (1988). 
7 K. Weiser, Phys. Rev. B 25, 1408 (1982). 
8 K. Biswas, S. Lany, and A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 201902 (2010). 


29 

9 A.W. Sleight, Physica C: Superconductivity and Its Applications 514, 152 (2015). 
10 B.J. Kennedy, C.J. Howard, K.S. Knight, Z. Zhang, and Q. Zhou, Acta Cryst B, Acta 
Cryst Sect B, Acta Crystallogr B, Acta Crystallogr Sect B, Acta Crystallogr Struct Sci, 
Acta Crystallogr Sect B Struct Sci, Acta Crystallogr B Struct Sci Cryst Eng Mater 62, 
537 (2006). 
11 J.A. Alonso, M.J. Martínez-Lope, M.T. Casais, M.A.G. Aranda, and M.T. Fernández-
Díaz, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 4754 (1999). 
12 M. Takano, N. Nakanishi, Y. Takeda, S. Naka, and T. Takada, Materials Research 
Bulletin 12, 923 (1977). 
13 P.M. Woodward, D.E. Cox, E. Moshopoulou, A.W. Sleight, and S. Morimoto, Phys. 
Rev. B 62, 844 (2000). 
14 K.-I. Kobayashi, T. Kimura, H. Sawada, K. Terakura, and Y. Tokura, Nature 395, 677 
(1998). 
15 X.-G. Zhao, D. Yang, Y. Sun, T. Li, L. Zhang, L. Yu, and A. Zunger, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 139, 6718 (2017). 
16 D. Korotin, V. Kukolev, A.V. Kozhevnikov, D. Novoselov, and V.I. Anisimov, J. 
Phys.: Condens. Matter 24, 415603 (2012). 
17 A. Khazraie, K. Foyevtsova, I. Elfimov, and G.A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B 97, 075103 
(2018). 
18 K. Foyevtsova, A. Khazraie, I. Elfimov, and G.A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B 91, 121114 
(2015). 
19 C. Franchini, G. Kresse, and R. Podloucky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 256402 (2009). 
20 I. Hase and T. Yanagisawa, Phys. Rev. B 76, 174103 (2007). 
21 M. Retuerto, T. Emge, J. Hadermann, P.W. Stephens, M.R. Li, Z.P. Yin, M. Croft, A. 
Ignatov, S.J. Zhang, Z. Yuan, C. Jin, J.W. Simonson, M.C. Aronson, A. Pan, D.N. Basov, 
G. Kotliar, and M. Greenblatt, Chem. Mater. 25, 4071 (2013). 
22 Z.P. Yin and G. Kotliar, EPL 101, 27002 (2013). 
23 P.F. Henry, M.T. Weller, and C.C. Wilson, Chem. Mater. 14, 4104 (2002). 
24 S. Johnston, A. Mukherjee, I. Elfimov, M. Berciu, and G.A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
112, 106404 (2014). 
25 J. Varignon, M.N. Grisolia, J. Íñiguez, A. Barthélémy, and M. Bibes, Npj Quantum 
Materials 2, 21 (2017). 
26 A. Mercy, J. Bieder, J. Íñiguez, and P. Ghosez, Nature Communications 8, 1677 
(2017). 
27 N. Matsushita, H. Ahsbahs, S.S. Hafner, and N. Kojima, Journal of Solid State 
Chemistry 180, 1353 (2007). 
28 J. Matsuno, T. Mizokawa, A. Fujimori, Y. Takeda, S. Kawasaki, and M. Takano, Phys. 
Rev. B 66, 193103 (2002). 
29 P.C. Rogge, R.U. Chandrasena, A. Cammarata, R.J. Green, P. Shafer, B.M. Lefler, A. 
Huon, A. Arab, E. Arenholz, H.N. Lee, T.-L. Lee, S. Nemšák, J.M. Rondinelli, A.X. 
Gray, and S.J. May, Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 015002 (2018). 
30 F. Kanamaru, H. Miyamoto, Y. Mimura, M. Koizumi, M. Shimada, S. Kume, and S. 
Shin, Materials Research Bulletin 5, 257 (1970). 
31 T. Siritanon, J. Li, J.K. Stalick, R.T. Macaluso, A.W. Sleight, and M.A. Subramanian, 
Inorg. Chem. 50, 8494 (2011). 
32 H. Park, A.J. Millis, and C.A. Marianetti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 156402 (2012). 


30 

33 A. Cammarata and J.M. Rondinelli, Phys. Rev. B 86, 195144 (2012). 
34 A.A. Frost, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 73, 2680 (1951). 
35 D.F. Shriver, P.W. Atkins, and C.H. Langford, Inorganic Chemistry (Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 1994). 
36 J. Kotaś and Z. Stasicka, Environmental Pollution 107, 263 (2000). 
37 P.V. Balachandran and J.M. Rondinelli, Phys. Rev. B 88, 054101 (2013). 
38 T. Thonhauser and K.M. Rabe, Phys. Rev. B 73, 212106 (2006). 
39 H. Raebiger, S. Lany, and A. Zunger, Nature 453, 763 (2008). 
40 C. Wolverton and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 606 (1998). 
41 G.M. Dalpian, Q. Liu, C.C. Stoumpos, A.P. Douvalis, M. Balasubramanian, M.G. 
Kanatzidis, and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Materials 1, 025401 (2017). 
42 Y. Sakai, J. Yang, R. Yu, H. Hojo, I. Yamada, P. Miao, S. Lee, S. Torii, T. Kamiyama, 
M. Ležaić, G. Bihlmayer, M. Mizumaki, J. Komiyama, T. Mizokawa, H. Yamamoto, T. 
Nishikubo, Y. Hattori, K. Oka, Y. Yin, J. Dai, W. Li, S. Ueda, A. Aimi, D. Mori, Y. 
Inaguma, Z. Hu, T. Uozumi, C. Jin, Y. Long, and M. Azuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 
4574 (2017). 
43 G. Sawatzky, R. Green, E. Mall, and C. Vt, Quantum Materials: Experiments and 
Theory Modeling and Simulation 6, 1 (2016). 
44 J.B. Goodenough, Structure and Bonding, (Springer, 2001). 
45 Materials Design, http://www.materialsdesign.com/appnote/accurate-band-gaps-TMO, 
accessed on July/2018. 
46 V. Bisogni, S. Catalano, R.J. Green, M. Gibert, R. Scherwitzl, Y. Huang, V.N. Strocov, 
P. Zubko, S. Balandeh, and J.-M. Triscone, Nature Communications 7, 13017 (2016). 
47 P.J. Chirik, Inorg. Chem. 50, 9737 (2011). 
48 O. R. Luca and R. H. Crabtree, Chemical Society Reviews 42, 1440 (2013). 
49 M.G. Medvedev, I.S. Bushmarinov, J. Sun, J.P. Perdew, and K.A. Lyssenko, Science 
355, 49 (2017). 
50 M.P. Teter, M.C. Payne, and D.C. Allan, Phys. Rev. B 40, 12255 (1989). 
51 S. Goedecker, The Journal of Chemical Physics 120, 9911 (2004). 
52 G. Trimarchi and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 75, 104113 (2007). 
53 G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Computational Materials Science 6, 15 (1996). 
54 J.P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G.I. Csonka, O.A. Vydrov, G.E. Scuseria, L.A. 
Constantin, X. Zhou, and K. Burke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 136406 (2008). 
55 J.P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). 
56 A.V. Krukau, O.A. Vydrov, A.F. Izmaylov, and G.E. Scuseria, The Journal of 
Chemical Physics 125, 224106 (2006). 
57 S.L. Dudarev, G.A. Botton, S.Y. Savrasov, C.J. Humphreys, and A.P. Sutton, Phys. 
Rev. B 57, 1505 (1998). 
58 M. Hellenbrandt, Crystallography Reviews 10, 17 (2004). 
59 See supplemental material at WWW, where we provide the cif files, with atomic 
coordinates and lattice vectors, for all SLE and DLE structures studied here. 
60 H. Shin, Y. Luo, P. Ganesh, J. Balachandran, J.T. Krogel, P.R.C. Kent, A. Benali, and 
O. Heinonen, Phys. Rev. Materials 1, 073603 (2017). 
61 U. Staub, G.I. Meijer, F. Fauth, R. Allenspach, J.G. Bednorz, J. Karpinski, S.M. 
Kazakov, L. Paolasini, and F. d’Acapito, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 126402 (2002). 
62 S. Mori, C.H. Chen, and S.-W. Cheong, Nature 392, 473 (1998). 


31 

63 C.M. Varma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2713 (1988). 
64 C.M. Caskey, A. Holder, S. Shulda, S.T. Christensen, D. Diercks, C.P. Schwartz, D. 
Biagioni, D. Nordlund, A. Kukliansky, A. Natan, D. Prendergast, B. Orvananos, W. Sun, 
X. Zhang, G. Ceder, D.S. Ginley, W. Tumas, J.D. Perkins, V. Stevanovic, S. Pylypenko, 
S. Lany, R.M. Richards, and A. Zakutayev, The Journal of Chemical Physics 144, 
144201 (2016). 
65 W. Luo, A. Franceschetti, M. Varela, J. Tao, S.J. Pennycook, and S.T. Pantelides, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 036402 (2007). 
66 A. Zunger and U. Lindefelt, Solid State Communications 45, 343 (1983). 
67 J. Varignon, M.N. Grisolia, D. Preziosi, P. Ghosez, and M. Bibes, Physical Review B 
96, 235106 (2017). 
68 C. Franchini, A. Sanna, M. Marsman, and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B 81, 085213 (2010). 
69 P. Steiner, S. Hüfner, V. Kinsinger, I. Sander, B. Siegwart, H. Schmitt, R. Schulz, S. 
Junk, G. Schwitzgebel, A. Gold, C. Politis, H.P. Müller, R. Hoppe, S. Kemmler-Sack, 
and C. Kunz, Z. Physik B - Condensed Matter 69, 449 (1988). 
70 D.D. Sarma, O. Strebel, C.T. Simmons, U. Neukirch, G. Kaindl, R. Hoppe, and H.P. 
Müller, Phys. Rev. B 37, 9784 (1988). 
71 P. Abbamonte, G. Blumberg, A. Rusydi, A. Gozar, P.G. Evans, T. Siegrist, L. Venema, 
H. Eisaki, E.D. Isaacs, and G.A. Sawatzky, Nature 431, 1078 (2004). 
 


