Log-periodic quantum magneto-oscillations and discrete scale 

invariance in topological material HfTe5  

 

Huichao Wang,1,2 Yanzhao Liu,1 Yongjie Liu,3 Chuanying Xi,4 Junfeng Wang,3 Jun Liu,5 

Yong Wang,5 Liang Li,3 Shu Ping Lau,2 Mingliang Tian,4 Jiaqiang Yan,6 David Mandrus,6,7 

Ji-Yan Dai,2,* Haiwen Liu,8, ‡ X. C. Xie,1,9,10 and Jian Wang1,9,10,† 

 

1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 

100871, China 

2Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong 

Kong, China 

3Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center, Huazhong University of Science and 

Technology, Wuhan 430074, China 

4High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, Anhui, China 

5Center of Electron Microscopy, State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, School of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China 

6Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 

Tennessee 37831, USA 

7Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, 

Tennessee 37996, USA 

8Center for Advanced Quantum Studies, Department of Physics, Beijing Normal University, 

Beijing, 100875, China 

9Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China 

10CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 

 

Abstract 
Discrete scale invariance (DSI) is a phenomenon featuring intriguing log-periodicity which 

can be rarely observed in quantum systems. Here we report the log-periodic quantum 
oscillations in the magnetoresistance (MR) and the Hall traces of HfTe5 crystals, which 
reveals the appearance of DSI. The oscillations show the same logB-periodicity in the 
behavior of MR and Hall, indicating an overall effect of the DSI on the transport properties. 
Moreover, the DSI feature in the Hall resistance signals its close relation to the carriers. 
Combined with theoretical simulations, we further clarify the origin of the log-periodic 
oscillations and the DSI in the topological materials. Our work evidences the universality of 
the DSI in the Dirac materials and paves way for the full understanding of the novel 
phenomenon.  

 
Discrete scale invariance (DSI) is a partial breaking of continuous scale invariance where 

observables of the system obey the scale invariance only for a geometrical set of choices 
written as the form of n with  being the scaling ratio [1]. With the violation of the classical 
continuous scale symmetry, the DSI represents a scale anomaly, and the characteristic 
signature of DSI, the intriguing log-periodicity, exists in rupture, growth processes, 
turbulence, finance, and so on. The appearance of log-periodic structures indicates the 
characteristic length scales in a system, which is extremely interesting when it is 
fundamentally related to the underlying physical mechanism [1]. 

The scale anomaly DSI is of high general interest while it can be rarely observed in 

quantum systems experimentally [2]. For a long time, the DSI has only been confirmed in 
cold atom systems and generated tremendous interest [3-10]. Nowadays, the DSI behavior in 
Dirac materials has also attracted attention in several subfields of physics [11-16]. Especially, 
the magneto-transport measurements on topological material ZrTe5 reveal a new type of 


magnetoresistance (MR) oscillations with peculiar log-periodicity and thus manifest the 
appearance of DSI in a solid-state system [14]. Such peculiar DSI feature is considered to be 
universal in Dirac materials with Coulomb attraction [14], which may be closely related to the 
quasi-bound states formed by massless Dirac fermions and the long pursued atomic collapse 
phenomenon [14-15,17]. Thus, it is desirable to explore the log-periodic quantum oscillations 
and the DSI in other physical observables and in other Dirac systems to justify the 
universality and provide insights into the underlying mechanisms.  

HfTe5 is a sister compound of ZrTe5 [18-21]. In recent years, the theoretical prediction of 

topologically nontrivial nature of these two materials has triggered a new wave of research 
boom [22]. Lately, the electrical transport measurements have revealed that HfTe5 shows 
ultrahigh mobility [23], indicating great promise in electronic applications. In addition, the 
negative MR under parallel magnetic and electrical fields is observed in HfTe5 [23,24], which 
could be attributed to the chiral anomaly [25,26] or the nontrivial Berry curvature [27,28]. 
The pressure induced superconductivity in HfTe5 also illustrates interesting property of the 
system [29,30]. According to the first-principles calculations, the pentatelluride compound is 
extremely sensitive to the cell volume and can manifest as a Dirac semimetal or a topological 
insulator under variant crystal volumes [31], which depends on the sample quality [32]. Thus, 
the pentatelluride compound has become a promising topological material platform. 

In this work, we reveal the universality of the peculiar log-periodic quantum oscillations 

and DSI phenomenon in Dirac materials by the magneto-transport results of HfTe5 crystals. 
The oscillations with logB-periodicity are demonstrated in the MR behavior, independent on 
the minor differences of the sample quality. The logB-periodicity is also discovered in the 
Hall traces of the HfTe5 crystals. This indicates an overall effect of the DSI on the transport 
properties. Based on the experimental results, we elucidate the origin of the DSI, and 
elaborate on its relation to the log-periodic oscillations in both the longitudinal MR and the 
Hall resistance. We propose a theoretical model to quantitatively explain these features, 
analyze the influence of a small band gap on the DSI feature and clarify its relevance to 
various topological materials. This work provides new insights towards further understanding 
of the log-periodic quantum oscillations and the DSI in solid-state systems. 

Single crystals HfTe5 in our work were grown via a self-Te-flux method as in the previous 

report [23]. The crystals were chemically and structurally analyzed by powder X-ray 
diffraction, scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, and 
transmission electron microscopy. The atomically high-resolution transmission electron 
microscopy image of one typical sample is shown in the inset of Fig. 1(a), which manifests a 
high-quality nature. Electrical transport measurements in this work were conducted in three 
systems, a 16 T- PPMS (Physical Property Measurement System) from Quantum Design, a 
pulsed high magnetic field facility (58 T) at Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center and 
a static magnetic field up to 25 T in the High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Hefei. Results 
from different measurement systems and different samples are reproducible and consistent 
with each other. Standard four/six-electrode-method was used for the MR/Hall measurements 
with the excitation current flowing along the crystallographic a axis of HfTe5.  

The resistivity-temperature (T) characteristic of HfTe5 crystals down to 2 K is shown in 

Fig. 1(a). With decreasing temperatures, the samples show firstly the metallic behavior above 
approximate 200 K and then a semiconducting-like upturn. As the temperature is further 
decreased, a sample dependent resistivity peak is observed at temperatures Tp varying from 20 
K to 40 K. At even lower temperatures, the semiconducting-like upturn recovers in most 
samples. It is noted here that the resistivity peak in the crystals cannot be attributed to Lifshitz 
transition since the Hall remains positive up to room temperature with no sign change [23].  

Figure 1(b) shows the MR behavior at 2 K of different samples from the same batch when 

the magnetic field is perpendicular to the layer orientation (B//b axis). The MR follows a 


sharp cusp at around zero magnetic field and becomes saturated at high magnetic fields. The 
MR (R(H)/R(0)) values show sample dependence with a range of 1500 %-5500 % at 15 T. 
According to the nonlinear Hall data of HfTe5 crystals, we would attribute the various T 
behavior and MR effect to the competition of a semi-metallic Dirac band and a 
semiconducting band in the material [33]. For the sample 3 (s3), the Fermi level is very close 
to the Dirac point and thus the Fermi surface of the Dirac pocket is tiny. The dominated 
semiconducting band induces the upturn resistance at low temperatures and the MR effect is 
small. To the contrary, the Dirac band dominates in s4, which gives rise to the metallic T 
behavior at low temperatures down to 2 K and the larger MR effect in s4. For the other two 
samples s1 and s2, they exhibit the intermediate properties as shown in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b). 
Since the transition-metal pentatelluride system is extremely sensitive to the cell volume, the 
slight diversity of these transport properties could be attributed to the minor quality 
differences in the samples. Similar two-band model was ever proposed to interpret the 
mysterious peak in ZrTe5 considering either Te deficiency or Iodine contamination [34,35]. 
The model might give a unified explanation for the various observations of the Dirac or 
semiconducting property in ZrTe5.  

By performing the second derivative for the MR results in Fig. 1(b), oscillations can be 

distinguished from the large MR background. The characteristic magnetic fields Bn of 
oscillating peaks (marked with index n) and dips (n-0.5) in the oscillations is approximately 
consistent for different HfTe5 samples (Fig. 1(c)). By plotting logBn vs. n in Fig. 1(d), the 
index dependence for different samples can all be reproduced by a linear fitting, which 
reveals peaks and dips appear periodically as a function of logB in HfTe5. We identify that 
these specific magnetic fields satisfy the law of Bn=·Bn+1, where  is a characteristic scale 
factor for the material. From the index plot in Fig. 1(d), the dominant scale factor  is shown 
to be 2.5 or 3.0. 

The magneto-transport measurements at high magnetic fields up to 58 T further confirm the 

logB-periodic MR oscillations and DSI in HfTe5. For clarity, data curves in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) 
are shifted. The pink curve for s5 in Fig. 2(a) is measured at a static magnetic field. The MR 
oscillations observed at lower magnetic fields can be well reproduced by the pulsed magnetic 
field measurements on s5 and more oscillations are observed at higher magnetic fields 
(orange and red), as guided by the dashed lines. Besides, the oscillations are also observed in 
other samples s6 and s7, where the resistance peaks and dips in s5 can be replicated. The 
oscillations can be extracted by subtracting a smooth background from the raw data in Fig. 
2(a) and the results are shown in Fig. 2(b). The index plot for the oscillations are shown in Fig. 
2(c), which confirms the logB-periodicity of the MR oscillations with more experimental 
points at ultrahigh magnetic fields (green dots). By performing the Fast Fourier Transform 
(FFT) of the log-periodic oscillations in Fig. 2(b), a sharp FFT frequency peak is observed in 
various samples (Fig. 2(d)), which is consistent with the linear fitting results shown in Fig. 
2(c). It is worth noting that the factor  has a broadening with a width in experiments. Based 
on an error bar determined by the full width at half maximum (FWHF) of the FFT frequency 
peak and combining with the results of different samples, we obtain a factor range of about 
[2.5, 5.9] in the HfTe5 crystals.  

The temperature dependence of the logB-periodic oscillations in HfTe5 is shown in Fig. 3. 

Figures 3(a)-3(c) are results for s5 and Figs. 3(d)-3(f) are results for another sample s7. By 
subtracting background from the raw MR data in Figs. 3(a) and 3(d), we obtain the oscillating 
resistance shown in Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 3(e) respectively and then perform FFT of the 
oscillations. The FFT amplitudes in Figs. 3(c) and 3(f) are normalized divided by the peak 
amplitude at the base temperature. Based on the theoretical formula of A=A0(1-exp(-∆E/kBT)), 
the fitting of the FFT amplitude at varied temperatures gives a characteristic binding energy 


∆E of 7.0 meV for s5 and 7.5 meV for s7. The binding energies determine the disappearance 
temperatures Td of the oscillations, with the fitting value of Td equaling to 81 K and 87 K, 
respectively. The characteristic temperatures for both samples are consistent with our 
experimental observations.  

We finally investigated the influence of the DSI on the Hall traces of HfTe5. Since the 

noise at pulsed magnetic field is large, it is hard to obtain good Hall signals. Thus, the Hall 
data is measured in two different measurement systems with static magnetic fields, a 16 T-
PPMS and a facility in the High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Hefei. In Fig. 4(a), the Hall 
data of HfTe5 clearly shows a non-linear dependence on the magnetic field, which is 
consistent with the two-band model. Distinct and consistent oscillations are observed in the 
Hall resistance of different samples. The second derivate results are shown in Fig. 4(b). 
Similar to the property of oscillations on the MR, the characteristic logB-periodicity of the 
Hall resistance oscillations is confirmed by the linear index dependence (Fig. 4(c)). We also 
perform FFT of the oscillating Hall resistance in s8 and a range of [2.4, 5.9] can be obtained 
(Fig. 4(d)), which is in accordance with the result of the MR oscillations. Thus, the log-
periodic quantum magneto-oscillations in both the longitudinal MR and the Hall traces 
indicate the underlying DSI property of the topological material HfTe5 and its evolution under 
the magnetic field.  

As discussed previously [14], the log-periodic quantum magneto-oscillations cannot be 

attributed to the conventional quantum oscillations, such as the Shubnikov–de Haas 
oscillations even with the consideration of the Zeeman-effect. In addition, the peculiar 
phenomenon shows different feature compared with the field-induced Fermi surface 
deformation or reconstruction scenario, such as the density-wave transition. It is suggested 
that log-periodic oscillations are closely related to the Weyl particles from the hole band with 
long-range Coulomb attraction when the carrier density is so dilute, and the long-range 
Coulomb attraction is generated by the charge impurity or the opposite type of carriers [14].  

The Weyl equation with Coulomb attraction        

    

      obeys the scale invariance 

property [14,15]. Here Ze is the central charge, and the fine structure constant   

  

        is 

of order one due to the small Fermi velocity vF in Dirac materials. Thus, the so-called 
supercritical condition (Z  surpassing the angular momenta ) can be matched in the system, 
and further gives rise to quasi-bound states solution in the system. In the following, we only 
consider the lowest angular momentum channel with =1. The combination of scale 
invariance and quasi-bound state solution results in the DSI property, and the radius of the 
quasi-bound states satisfy the relation 

    

       
  with              [14].  

When a magnetic field is applied, the magnetic length         
 
 is included, and the 

binding energy spectrum of the quasi-bound states evolve with the magnetic field. Using the 
Wentzel-Kramers-Brillouin method, our numerical simulation shows that the energy of the n-
th quasi-bound states approaches the Fermi energy at the magnetic field Bn, which obeys the 
approximate DSI property [14]. Aside from the quasi-bound states near the Coulomb center, 
large number of mobile carriers also exist in the lowest Landau level under the magnetic field 
in the ultra-quantum limit. Thus, the resonant scattering between the mobile carriers and the 
quasi-bound states around the Fermi level determine the transport properties of the material, 
e.g. the longitudinal MR and the Hall traces [36].  

The oscillation term in xx andyx can be obtained by the T-matrix approximation, and both 

satisfy the log-periodic property [36]. The correction to xx is of the order nC/nS, while that to 
yx is of the order nC/N, here nC, nS and N denote the density of the quasi-bound states, the 
density of short-range impurity and the total carrier density, respectively. Thus, the log-


periodic magneto-oscillations only occupy small percentage of total resistance due to small 
ratio of nC/nS and nC/N. In HfTe5, the oscillating resistance is about 0.4-0.9% of the 
longitudinal MR for the n=2 peak as shown in Fig. 3, and the oscillations in the Hall 
resistance is more apparent (about 2%) as shown in Fig. 4. When comparing the results of 
HfTe5 with those of ZrTe5 [14], we find two differences. Firstly, the oscillating amplitude of 
the log-periodic quantum oscillations in xx of HfTe5 is relatively smaller. We attribute the 
phenomena to a large nS and relatively small nC/nS, thus the correction to xx is weak. 
Meanwhile, due to the relatively large impurity scattering from these short-range impurities, 
the broadening effect smears the log-periodic oscillations at small magnetic fields, ultimately 
leading to fewer observable oscillating cycles. Secondly, the log-periodicity in yx of HfTe5 is 
relatively more remarkable. This feature may be due to the relatively large value for the 
density of charge impurity and thus relatively large value for the density of quasi-bound states 
nC and the ratio nC/N, which gives rise to considerable correction for Hall trace yx in HfTe5.  

Besides the ideal consideration shown above, in real systems some other issues can 

influence the DSI property, which needs to be clarified. Firstly, both a small band gap and 
finite screening length S impose constraint on the DSI feature by introducing an effective low 
energy cut-off. But the quasi-bound states with binding energy much larger than the band 
gapand radius much smaller than S cannot be influenced. Direct estimation gives the 
largest value of radius RC and corresponding magnetic length lB,C satisfying RC ≈ lB,C ≈ min 
( F/S). If one set  = 10 meV and neglect the screening effect, RC ≈ 33 nm and the 
corresponding magnetic field BC ≈0.6 T. Secondly, in the system with ultralow carrier 
density, both the charge impurity and the carrier from the electron band can generate the 
Coulomb attraction [16]. Finally, although this background subtraction procedure is generally 
used and accepted for the analysis of magneto-oscillations, the previous analysis of DSI 
usually utilize the log-log plot. Here, out of the log-periodic quantum oscillations, other 
scattering mechanisms also contribute to the magneto-transport with a non-oscillating 
background. The theoretical formulas reveal similar results, in which only the oscillations 
obey the DSI feature [36]. Thus, the commonly used procedure of background subtraction for 
magneto-oscillations is utilized to demonstrate the DSI feature in our results [37]. The DSI 
feature has been clearly revealed in the MR and the Hall results of the HfTe5 crystals by the 
distinct log-periodicity and the theoretical comparison [36]. 

In summary, we report the intriguing log-periodic quantum magneto-oscillations in both 

the Hall and the MR results in the topological material HfTe5, which indicate the underlying 
DSI feature in the system. The observation of the log-periodicity in both physical observables 
xx and yx reveals that the DSI shows an overall effect on the transport properties for a Dirac 
system with the long-range Coulomb attraction. The origin of the DSI and its relation to the 
log-periodic magneto-oscillations are theoretically elucidated. This work paves the way for 
further research on the log-periodic oscillations and the DSI in quantum systems. 

 
We acknowledge Zhibo Dang for discussions on the data. This work was financially 

supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (Grants No. 2018YFA0305604, 
Grants No. 2017YFA0303300, No. 2015CB921102), the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Grants No.11774008, No. 11674028, No. 11534001, No. 11504008), 
the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. 
XDB28000000), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Hong Kong 
GRF grant (153094/16P), the Hong Kong Polytechnic University strategic plan (No: 1-ZE25 
and 1-ZVCG) and the Postdoctoral Fellowships Scheme (No. 1-YW0T). Work at ORNL was 
supported by the US Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, 
Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering. 


 
H.W. and Y. L. contributed equally to this work. 
 

*jiyan.dai@polyu.edu.hk; 
‡haiwen.liu@bnu.edu.cn;  
†jianwangphysics@pku.edu.cn  
 

[1] 
D. Sornette, Discrete-scale invariance and complex dimensions, Phys. Rep. 297, 239-270 
(1998). 

[2] 
L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics: Non-relativistic Theory, 3rd ed. 
(Perganon Press, Oxford, U.K., 1977).  

[3] 
V. Efimov, Energy levels arising from resonant two-body forces in a three-body system, Phys. 
Lett. B 33, 563 (1970). 

[4] 
E. Braaten and H. W. Hammer, Universality in few-body systems with large scattering length, 
Phys. Rep. 428, 259 (2006). 

[5] 
P. Naidon and S. Endo, Efimov physics: a review, Rep. Prog. Phys. 80, 056001 (2017). 

[6] 
T. Kraemer et al., Evidence for Efimov quantum states in an ultracold gas of caesium atoms, 
Nature 440, 315-318 (2006). 

[7] 
B. Huang, L. A. Sidorenkov, R. Grimm, and J. M. Hutson, Observation of the Second 
Triatomic Resonance in Efimov’s Scenario, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 190401 (2014). 

[8] 
R. Pires et al., Observation of Efimov Resonances in a Mixture with Extreme Mass Imbalance, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 250404 (2014). 

[9] 
S.-K. Tung, K. Jiménez-García, J. Johansen, C. V. Parker, and C. Chin, Geometric Scaling of 
Efimov States in a 6Li-133Cs Mixture, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 240402 (2014). 

[10] M. Kunitski et al., Observation of the Efimov state of the helium trimer, Science 348, 551-555 

(2015). 

[11] W. Greiner, B. Muller, and J. Rafelski, Quantum Electrodynamics of Strong Fields (Springer-

Verlag, Berlin, 1985).  

[12] A. V. Shytov, M. I. Katsnelson, and L. S. Levitov, Atomic Collapse and Quasi–Rydberg 

States in Graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 246802 (2007). 

[13] Y. Nishida, Vacuum polarization of graphene with a supercritical Coulomb impurity: Low-

energy universality and discrete scale invariance, Phys. Rev. B 90, 165414 (2014).  

[14] H. Wang et al., Discrete scale invariance and fermionic Efimov states in ultra-quantum ZrTe5, 

arXiv: 1704.00995. 

[15] O. Ovdat, Jinhai Mao, Yuhang Jiang, E. Y. Andrei and E. Akkermans, Observing a scale 

anomaly and a universal quantum phase transition in graphene, Nat. Commu. 8, 507 (2017). 

[16] P. Zhang and H. Zhai, Efimov Effect in the Dirac Semi-metals, Front. Phys. 13(5), 137204 

(2018). 

[17] Y. Wang et al., Observing atomic collapse resonances in artificial nuclei on graphene. 

Science 340, 734-737 (2013). 

[18] S. Furuseth, L. Brattas, and A. Kjekshus, Crystal Structure of HfTe5, Acta. Chem. Scand. 27, 

2367 (1973). 

[19] M. Izumi, K. Uchinokura, and E. Matsuura, Anomalous electrical resistivity in HfTe5, Solid 

State Commun. 37, 641 (1981). 

[20] G. N. Kamm, D. J. Gillespie, A. C. Ehrlich, D. L. Peebles, and F. Levy, Fermi surface, 

effective masses, and energy bands of HfTe5 as derived from the Shubnikov–de Haas effect, 
Phys. Rev. B 35, 1223 (1987). 

[21] T. M. Tritt, N. D. Lowhorn, R. T. Littleton, A. Pope, C. R. Feger, and J. W. Kolis, Large 

enhancement of the resistive anomaly in the pentatelluride materials HfTe5 and ZrTe5 with 
applied magnetic field, Phys. Rev. B 60, 7816 (1999). 


[22] H. Weng, X. Dai, and Z. Fang, Transition-metal pentatelluride ZrTe5 and HfTe5: a paradigm 

for large-gap quantum spin Hall insulators, Phys. Rev. X 4, 011002 (2014). 

[23] H. Wang et al., Chiral anomaly and ultrahigh mobility in crystalline HfTe5, Phys. Rev. B 93, 

165127 (2016). 

[24] L. Zhao et al., Anomalous Magneto-Transport Behavior in Transition Metal Pentatelluride 

HfTe5, Chin. Phys. Lett. 34 (2017). 

[25] D. T. Son and B. Z. Spivak, Chiral anomaly and classical negative magnetoresistance of 

Weyl metals, Phys. Rev. B 88, 104412 (2013). 

[26] A. A. Burkov, Chiral anomaly and transport in Weyl metals, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 27, 

113201 (2015). 

[27] J. Wang et al., Anomalous Anisotropic Magnetoresistance in Topological Insulator Films, 

Nano Res. 5, 739 (2012). 

[28] X. Dai, Z. Z. Du, and H. Z. Lu, Negative Magnetoresistance without Chiral Anomaly in 

Topological Insulators, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 166601 (2017). 

[29] Y. Qi et al., Pressure-driven superconductivity in the transition-metal pentatelluride HfTe5, 

Phys. Rev. B 94, 054517 (2016). 

[30] Y. Liu et al., Superconductivity in HfTe5 across weak to strong topological insulator 

transition induced via pressures, Sci. Rep. 7, 44367 (2017). 

[31] Z. Fan et al., Transition between strong and weak topological insulator in ZrTe5 and HfTe5, 

Sci. Rep. 7, 45667 (2017). 

[32] Y. Zhang et al., Temperature-induced Lifshitz transition in topological insulator candidate 

HfTe5, Sci. Bull. 62(13), 950-956 (2017). 

[33] J. Niu et al., Electrical transport in nanothick ZrTe5 sheets: From three to two dimensions, 

Phys. Rev. B 95, 035420 (2017). 

[34] P. Shahi et al., Bipolar Conduction is the Origin of the Electronic Transition in 

Pentatellurides: Metallic vs. Semiconducting Behavior, Phys. Rev. X 8, 021055 (2018) 

[35] S. A. Miller et al., Polycrystalline ZrTe5 Parametrized as a Narrow-Band-Gap 

Semiconductor for Thermoelectric Performance, Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 014025 (2018). 

[36] See Supplemental Material for more details.  
[37] D. Schoenberg, Magnetic Oscillations in Metals (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 

U.K., 1984). 

 
 


 

FIG. 1 (color online). Resistivity-temperature characteristic and MR behavior of HfTe5 single 
crystals. (a) Temperature dependence of the resistivity. Inset: the atomically high-resolution 
transmission electron microscopy image of HfTe5 manifesting a high-quality nature. (b) MR 
at 2 K for HfTe5 crystals in a perpendicular magnetic field. (c) The second derivative results 
of the MR behavior at 2 K (Fig. 1(b)). Data curves are shifted for clarity. (d) Linear 
dependence of logBn on the index n shows log-periodicity of the MR oscillations. Bn is the 
characteristic magnetic field for a peak or dip in the oscillations. 
 
 


 

FIG. 2 (color online). Log-periodic MR oscillations in HfTe5. (a) MR of HfTe5 vs. logB. The 
MR oscillations measured in PPMS (pink) is consistent with the results (orange and red) in 
the pulsed high magnetic field. MR oscillations are reproduced in different samples (s5, s6, 
s7). Dashed lines serve as guides to the eye. (b) Extracted MR oscillations from the raw data 
in (a) after subtracting a background. Data curves in (a) and (b) are shifted for clarity. (c) 
LogB-periodicity of the MR oscillations in HfTe5. (d) FFT results of the MR oscillations in 
(b). Combining the results of different samples, the scale factor shows a range of about [2.5, 
5.9] which is determined by the FWHM of the FFT frequency peak.  

 

 
 


 

FIG. 3 (color online). Temperature dependence of the logB-periodic oscillations. (a) MR of 
HfTe5 (s5) at selected temperatures. (b) LogB-periodic oscillations in s5 at selected 
temperatures. (c) FFT results for the MR oscillations in (b). Inset: theoretical fit on the 
normalized FFT amplitude at varying temperatures. The fitted value of the disappearance 
temperature Td of the oscillations is consistent with the experimental observations. (d)-(f) are 
results for another sample s7. The fitting parameter Td is also consistent with experiments. 
The characteristic temperature Td for HfTe5 crystal is about 80-90 K. Data curves in (b) and (e) 
are shifted for clarity. 
 
 


 

FIG. 4 (color online). Signals of logB-periodic oscillations in the Hall traces of HfTe5. (a) 
Hall traces of HfTe5 crystals at 6 K versus the magnetic field. (b) The second derivative 
results of the curves in (a). Data curves are shifted for clarity. (c) The log-periodicity of the 
oscillating Hall resistance. (d) FFT result of the oscillations in s8. Based on the FWHM of the 
FFT frequency peak, the scale factor shows an approximate range of [2.4, 5.9] consistent 
with the results of the MR behavior. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Supplemental Material for 

 

Log-periodic quantum magneto-oscillations and discrete scale 

invariance in topological material HfTe5 

 

Huichao Wang,1,2 Yanzhao Liu,1 Yongjie Liu,3 Chuanying Xi,4 Junfeng Wang,3 Jun Liu,5 

Yong Wang,5 Liang Li,3 Shu Ping Lau,2 Mingliang Tian,4 Jiaqiang Yan,6 David Mandrus,6,7 

Ji-Yan Dai,2,* Haiwen Liu,8, ‡ X. C. Xie,1,9,10 and Jian Wang1,9,10,† 

 

1International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 

100871, China 

2Department of Applied Physics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong 

Kong, China 

3Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center, Huazhong University of Science and 

Technology, Wuhan 430074, China 

4High Magnetic Field Laboratory, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, Anhui, China 

5Center of Electron Microscopy, State Key Laboratory of Silicon Materials, School of 
Materials Science and Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China 

6Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 

Tennessee 37831, USA 

7Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, 

Tennessee 37996, USA 

8Center for Advanced Quantum Studies, Department of Physics, Beijing Normal University, 

Beijing, 100875, China 

9Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China 

10CAS Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 

 

 
 
 


 

FIG. S1 (a), The magneto-resistance (MR) oscillations in s3 by subtracting a background. (b), 
The FFT result of (a) confirms the oscillations periodic in logB. Inset: the index plot also 
shows log-periodicity of the oscillations. From the FWHM of the FFT frequency peak, a 
range of [2.4, 5.9] is obtained for the scale factor . Thus, the results by subtracting 
background are consistent with results of the second derivative in Fig.1 in the main text and 
we demonstrate that the oscillations are intrinsic in HfTe5.  

 

 
 


 

FIG. S2 (a), Extracted MR oscillations in s8 at 4.2 K. (b), The log-periodicity of the MR 
oscillations. Inset: FFT result of the oscillations in (b). An approximate range for the scale 
factor is [2.1, 5.9], which is determined by the FWHM of the FFT frequency peak. 

 


 

FIG. S3. The fitting of experimental data based on the microscopic numerical calculation and 
the empirical formula for s7 at 4.2 K (a) and s5 at 3.0 K (b). 

 

 
 


Sample Information 

The samples s1-s4 were only measured in PPMS for magneto-resistance (MR) behavior. 

The MR of s5 was measured in both the PPMS and the pulsed high magnetic field up to 58 T. 
The MR of s6 and s7 were only measured in the pulsed high magnetic field. The sample s8 
was measured in the pulsed magnetic field up to 58 T to explore the MR oscillations while the 
Hall trace of s8 was only measured in the static high magnetic field up to 25 T in Hefei for 
better signal. The s9 and s10 was only measured in PPMS for detecting Hall traces. It is noted 
that the results for the sample from different measurement systems are consistent and the 
logB-periodic oscillations appear with similar scale factor range in these different samples. 

 

Theoretical Details 
Based on the t-matrix approximation, we derive the longitudinal conductivity beyond the 
quantum limit under large magnetic fields (the details are given in ref. 14 and the theoretical 
preprint [1]):  

         

   

   

       

  

                
     

          

       
 
          (SE1). 

Here ns is the density of short-range scatterers, nc is the density of Coulomb scatterers, l* is 
the effective length along the magnetic field, t is the coupling strength between the bound 
states with the continuum of the lowest Landau level, F is the Fermi energy, n(B) is the 
energy for the n-th bound state and (B)   is the width mainly determined by the 
broadening effect of the lowest Landau level with  depending on the microscopic scattering 
process and temperature [2]. The above microscopic formula can be further simplified into an 
empirical form which are more suitable for fitting the experimental data:  

    

   

   

       

  

               

  

       

     

                         (SE2), 

                

   

   

      

  

           
        

          

       
 
                    (SE3).                           

Here, N denotes the total carrier density, s0, B0 and  are fitting parameters. In equation (SE2), 
the first term denotes the Anderson impurity scattering of the mobile carriers, which leads to 
linear-B dependent MR previously obtained by A. A. Abrikosov [3]; and the second term 
denotes the resonant scattering between the mobile carriers and the quasi-bound states, which 
gives rise to log-periodic correction to the MR. The correction to xx is of the order nC/nS, 
while that to yx is of the order nC/N.  

The microscopic formula eq. (SE1) and the empirical formula eq. (SE2) can be used for 

fitting the experimental results. Figure S3 shows the fitting curves obtained with three fitting 
parameters s0, B0 and for SE1for SE2. Here, s0 and B0 determine the energy for the 
n-th bound state n(B) in the microscopic formula eq. (SE1). At different temperature, the 
thermal broadening effect changes the fitting parameters or . The fitting parameters are 
s0=4.8 (4.7) and B0=0.20 T (0.19 T) for sample s5 (s7). These parameters change slightly in 
different samples, which is consistent with the expectation that the DSI feature is mainly 
determined by fine structure constant in the material HfTe5.  

*jiyan.dai@polyu.edu.hk; 
‡haiwen.liu@bnu.edu.cn;  
†jianwangphysics@pku.edu.cn  
 


[1] H. Liu, H. Jiang, Z. Wang, R. Joynt, and X. C. Xie, Discrete scale invariance in 

topological semimetals, arXiv: 1807.02459.  

[2] T. Ando and Y. Uemura, Theory of quantum transport in a two-dimensional electron 

system under magnetic fields, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 36, 959 (1974).  

[3] A. A. Abrikosov, Quantum magnetoresistance, Phys. Rev. B 58, 2788 (1998). 

 
 


