Ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic coupling of

spin molecular interfaces with high thermal

stability

Giulia Avvisati,† Claudia Cardoso,‡ Daniele Varsano,‡ Andrea Ferretti,‡ Pierluigi

Gargiani,¶ and Maria Grazia Betti∗,†

†Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a di Roma “La Sapienza”, I-00185 Roma, Italy

‡Centro S3, CNR-Istituto Nanoscienze, I-41125 Modena, Italy

¶ALBA Synchrotron Light Source, E-08290 Cerdanyola del Valles, Barcelona, Spain

E-mail: maria.grazia.betti@roma1.infn.it

Abstract

We report an advanced organic spin-interface architecture with magnetic remanence

at room temperature, constituted by metal phthalocyanine molecules magnetically cou-

pled with Co layer(s), mediated by graphene. Fe- and Cu-phthalocyanines assembled

on graphene/Co have identical structural configurations, but FePc couples antiferro-

magnetically with Co, up to room temperature, while CuPc couples ferromagnetically,

with weaker coupling and thermal stability, as deduced by element-selective X-ray mag-

netic circular dichroic signals. The robust antiferromagnetic coupling is stabilized by a

super-exchange interaction, driven by the out-of-plane molecular orbitals responsible of

the magnetic ground state and electronically decoupled from the underlying metal via

the graphene layer, as confirmed by ab initio theoretical predictions. These archety-

pal spin interfaces can be prototypes to demonstrate how antiferromagnetic and/or

ferromagnetic coupling can be optimized by selecting the molecular orbital symmetry.

1

arXiv:1810.06317v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  15 Oct 2018


Keywords

spin interface; super-exchange interaction; X ray magnetic circular dichroism; density func-

tional theory

Paramagnetic molecules become potential building blocks in spintronics when their mag-

netic moments are stabilized against thermal fluctuations, e.g. by a controlled interaction

with a magnetic substrate. Spin molecular interfaces, with preserved magnetic activity and

exhibiting magnetic remanence at room temperature (RT) can open the route to engineer

highly spin-polarized, nanoscale current sources. The need to fully control the organic spin

interface and the tuning of ferromagnetic (FM) or antiferromagnetic (AFM) coupling to

achieve a stable conductance has motivated a vast experimental interest.1–5

In this work, we propose to optimize the thermal stability and the magnetic coupling

of molecular systems, while preserving their electronic properties,6,7 by exploiting interlayer

exchange coupling within an advanced organic spin-interface architecture: arrays of metal

phthalocyanine (MPc, M=Fe,Cu) arranged on Co layer(s) intercalated below graphene.8–10

Herewith we demonstrate how the super-exchange interaction can be mediated by the

organic ligands and the graphene layer, preserving the magnetic state of the molecule and

favoring a tunable FM or AFM coupling with Co layer(s), as deduced by X-ray magnetic

circular dichroism (XMCD) measurements and confirmed by state of the art theoretical pre-

dictions, unveiling the extreme sensitivity of the super-exchange interaction to the symmetry

of the orbitals responsible for the magnetic state.

Magnetic properties of molecular systems on metal surfaces can be readily modified by

the molecular packing or by the orbital intermixing with the metallic states,11 which lead to

the suppression of their local magnetic moment.4,12 Thanks to the electronic decoupling of

the graphene layer, the symmetry of the molecular orbitals carrying the magnetic moments

is preserved and can be selected to optimize and stabilize the magnetic configuration of the

MPcs. A major challenge is to stabilize these spin interface prototypes against thermal fluc-

tuations, in order to achieve RT remanence. We prove that the super-exchange mechanism

2


can induce a sizable magnetization of FePc coupled with Co layers, mediated by graphene,

with a residual coupling even at RT. On the other side, the hindered superexchange path,

as found for CuPc coupled with Co, results in a ferromagnetic order with reduced ther-

mal stability. Furthermore, the easy magnetization axis of a single layer of Co intercalated

under graphene is out-of-plane and switches in-plane when more than 4-5 layers are inter-

calated.13 Switching the Co magnetic moment by increasing the Co thickness amplifies the

magnetic response of the FePc with aligned magnetic axis, unveiling high thermal stability

and remanence at RT, while the coupling with magnetically unaligned CuPc molecules is

frustrated.14

The magnetic (and structural) configuration of Co layer(s) intercalated under graphene

can be tuned as a function of Co thickness.13 The structural evolution of the Gr sheet upon

intercalation from 1 to 6 ML of Co is consistent with what reported in Refs. 15, 16, giving

a picture confirmed by the theoretical predictions taking into account the complete moir´e

unit cell. When a single layer is intercalated, the Co atoms arrange pseudo-morphically to

the Ir(111) surface, without altering the periodicity and symmetry of the Gr moir´e super-

structure (Fig. 1a) while its corrugation is enhanced. Further Co intercalation induces the

relaxation of the lattice mismatch and the Co film recovers the bulk Co(0001) arrangement,

almost commensurate with the Gr lattice, as sketched in Fig. 1c. The 1 × 1 hexagonal

pattern confirms that the Gr is commensurate and flat on the Co film. Density functional

theory (DFT) simulations, taking into account the full moir´e unit cell, fully reproduce these

structural configurations. The geometry obtained for the IrCoGr 9×9/10×10 system shows,

at the LDA level, a 1.4 ˚A corrugation for the graphene moir´e superstructure with a mini-

mum graphene-Co distance of 1.90 ˚A,17 Fig. 1a. Similar findings have also been reported

in Ref. 15. At variance, the graphene-Co distance computed for the commensurate 1×1

interface is found to be 2.05 ˚A at the LDA level,17 Fig. 1c.

Turning to the magnetic properties, the XMCD spectra at the Co L2,3 edge for a single

Co layer and a Co film intercalated under the Gr sheet, obtained as the difference between

3


Figure 1: Moir´e superstructure of Gr on Ir(111) upon intercalation of 1 ML Co (a) and
flat and commensurate Gr/Ir upon 6 ML Co intercalation (c), as deduced by ab initio DFT
calculation at the LDA level and confirmed by the LEED patterns. XMCD spectra of Co
L2,3 absorption edges for Gr/1 ML Co and Gr/6 ML Co acquired in remanance at RT in
normal and grazing incidence geometries. Magnetic anisotropy switches from perpendicular
(Gr/1 ML Co, b) to parallel (Gr/6 ML Co, d) to the surface plane.

4


the absorption edges acquired with left- and right-circularly polarized radiation, are reported

in remanence condition, i.e. with no applied external field, at room temperature in the right

panels of Fig. 1. The higher dichroic response with photon impinging at normal incidence

(NI) unravels the out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy of the Co layer in the incommensurate

configuration with a stretched Co-Co distance, Fig. 1b, in agreement with Refs.15, 18. Con-

versely, the higher dichroic response for Co L2,3 XMCD at grazing incidence (GI) for the

thicker intercalated Co film, reveals a magnetic state with the Co bulk in-plane easy mag-

netization axis. The Gr/Co heterostructures, exhibiting a tunable easy magnetization axis

direction, are ideal templates to test the magnetic coupling of paramagnetic flat-lying FePc

and CuPc molecules.10

At the early deposition stages, MPcs adsorption on graphene can be driven by the corru-

gated moir´e superstructure.8,9,19 MPc molecules deposited on Gr/1ML Co/Ir are trapped in

the valley regions9 driven by the lateral electric dipole, caused by the local contraction and

expansion of the Gr lattice,20 and hence order in a Kagome lattice.8,19 The total energy land-

scape, as deduced by our DFT simulations, is almost identical for FePc and CuPc, displaying

similar distances with respect to the Gr layer (3.25 ˚A from LDA, 3.10 ˚A from PBE-D2) and

similar flat configurations upon adsorption. Since the adsorption geometries for FePc and

CuPc on Gr/Co/Ir are equivalent, the magnetic state can only be determined by the sym-

metry of the molecular orbitals involved in the magnetic coupling with the extended states

of Co-intercalated graphene.9,10

In this respect, FePc and CuPc are paradigmatic to unveil the role of the symmetry of the

active molecular orbitals in the magnetic coupling: FePc has a mostly in-plane (IP) intrinsic

easy magnetization axis, while CuPc shows an out-of-plane (OOP) magnetic anisotropy.21,22

The FePc molecule has a d6 electronic ground state with S=1 spin, due to the b2
2ge3
ga1
1gb0
1g

configuration with half-filled eg(dxz,yz) and a1g(dz2) orbitals.
On the other hand, CuPc

molecules, with a d9 ground state and S=1/2, only have a half-filled b1g(dx2−y2) orbital with

a strongly anisotropic magnetic state perpendicular to the molecular plane.21

5


Figure 2: XMCD from Fe and Cu L2,3 absorption edges (a,d), element-resolved hysteresis
loops of FePc (b) and CuPc (e) on Gr/1ML Co. The change in the sign of the XMCD (a,d)
and of the field-dependent magnetization (b,e) indicates an AFM alignment for FePc/Gr/Co
and a FM one for CuPc/Gr/Co.
Spin-density isosurfaces plots for FePc and CuPc on
Gr/Co/Ir (side and top view with hidden substrate), computed at the DFT-PBE+U level,
U=4 eV (c,f).
The geometry optimization included PBE-D2 van der Waals corrections.
Green (red) isosurfaces correspond to the up (down) spin density.

6


In Fig. 2 we report the XAS and XMCD spectra at the L2,3 absorption edges of Fe and

Cu, measured respectively at 1.7 and 2.0 K, for FePc and CuPc on Gr/1ML Co (Fig. 2a,d),

having an OOP easy magnetization axis. FePc molecules couple antiferromagnetically with

the intercalated Co layer, as revealed by the sign switching in the element-sensitive XMCD

signal (Fig. 2a,b) with respect to the bare Gr/OOP Co (Fig. 1b).
On the other hand,

CuPc molecules couple ferromagnetically when deposited on Gr/1ML Co (Fig. 2d,e). All

the XAS and XMCD spectra in presence (absence) of magnetic field are reported in the

Supporting Information to clearly describe the role of FePc and CuPc molecular orbitals in

the magnetic state. It is worth noting that the XAS and XMCD lineshapes are preserved,

except for a slight change in the relative intensities of the spectral features, for the FePc

and CuPc molecules upon adsorption on Gr/Co. Thus, the spin and orbital contribution to

the magnetic moments, as deduced applying the sum rules to the XMCD signals23,24 and

confirmed by theoretical predictions, are comparable with what reported for the free-standing

molecule and/or molecular films,7,12,25 confirming the decoupling role of the graphene layer.

Magnetism generally emerges from short-ranged interactions between molecular units

due to the localization of the atomic wave functions. To achieve a magnetic interaction

over a large distance, a super-exchange mechanism can be invoked, where the bridging over

non-magnetic organic ligands mediates higher-order virtual hopping processes. In metal ph-

thalocyanines, the organic ligands can mediate the coupling between the central transition

metal ions and a magnetic layer.11,14,26,27 In our spin interface architecture a Fe-N-Gr-Co

super-exchange path can be driven by a weak hybridization between the π orbitals of the

pyrrolic N atoms and the eg(dxz,yz) and a1g(dz2) orbitals of the central Fe ion. In the CuPc

molecule the orbitals protruding out of the molecular plane are completely filled and the

magnetic moment is mostly carried by a single planar orbital, therefore the proposed su-

perexchange interaction path is hindered and the interaction switches to FM.

The confirmation of the AFM and FM coupling found experimentally and the role of the

molecular orbitals involved in the magnetic response are clarified by DFT calculations. In

7


Fig. 2(c,f) we report the computed spin densities for FePc and CuPc on a Gr/1ML Co/Ir at

PBE+U level, with the spin up (down) iso-surfaces represented in green (red). The Fe-N-

Gr-Co super-exchange path is determined by a spin imbalance located at the central ion and

at the surrounding N and C atoms. The spin of the central ion is oriented opposite to the

one of N and C, and anti-ferromagnetically coupled with the underlying Co spin moment.

In the case of CuPc, the spin imbalance is located at the central ion and on the surrounding

N atoms, and coupled ferromagnetically with the Co spin moment. Top views of the spin

densities (panels c,f) better display the shape of the orbitals involved and the flips of the

local magnetic moments. Quantitative data (atom-resolved magnetic moments, as given by

L¨owdin charge analysis) are provided in the Supporting Information.

A detailed analysis of L¨owdin charges can also be used to further discriminate the sym-

metry of the molecular orbitals involved in the magnetic coupling. In the case of CuPc,

upon adsorption the magnetic moment of the molecule is mostly carried by the half-filled

dx2−y2 orbital of the Cu ion, corresponding to the b1g state of CuPc free molecule, highly

hybridized with the pyrrolic N atoms of the macrocycle,28 as evident in Fig. 2(f). The sit-

uation is slightly more complicated for FePc, where at least two or three Fe-d orbitals are

involved. In particular, as shown in Tab. S3 in Supporting Information, the magnetic mo-

ment is carried by dz2 and either one or both dxz and dyz (depending on the functional, see

Supporting Information for the detailed discussion), corresponding to the a1g and eg orbitals

of free standing FePc. The above picture is very robust against the use of different exchange

and correlation functionals (LDA, PBE, PBE+U, discussed in the Supporting Information),

and is in excellent agreement with the experimental data, fully supporting the picture where

the magnetic coupling of MPc with Gr/Co/Ir is mainly driven by a super-exchange channel,

selected by the symmetry of the involved molecular orbitals. Indeed, we herewith report

on two super-exchange paths, both actively mediated by the Gr sheet and the molecule

organic backbone, inducing either an AFM (180◦ super-exchange, FePc) or a FM (90◦ super-

exchange, CuPc) coupling at the spin interface. These mechanisms dominate the magnetic

8


interaction, as deduced by the increase of the magnetic moment projected on the C and N

atoms of the molecule macrocycle upon adsorption (see Tab. S2 in the Supporting Informa-

tion file). Nevertheless, a direct interaction between the Fe dz2 state and the Gr π orbitals,

AFM coupled with the intercalated Co layer15,18 and hence reinforcing the antiparallel spin

alignment, cannot be excluded.

Figure 3: XMCD from Fe and Cu L2,3 absorption edges for FePc (left) and CuPc (right)
molecules deposited on Gr/IP Co in the upper panels. Hysteresis loops are presented in the
lower panels, confirming that the coupling is AFM for FePc/Gr/6 ML Co, while the CuPc
has no remanence.

A further step forward in the optimization of this spin-interface is to enlighten the role of

the relative orientation of MPc/Co easy magnetization axes on the stability of the magnetic

coupling. FePc and CuPc molecules adsorb flat-lying on the commensurate Gr on the Co

film with in-plane magnetization. XMCD spectra for FePc and CuPc, respectively on Gr/6

ML Co and Gr/8 ML Co, are reported together with the field-dependence of the normalized

magnetization in Fig. 3. While an AFM coupling is confirmed for FePc/Gr/Co when the

easy magnetization axes are aligned (left panel), the CuPc molecules adsorbed on the flat

graphene layer on Co has a negligilble XMCD signal at zero magnetic field (right panel). The

magnetic coupling is more effective when the magnetization easy axis of the Gr-covered Co

9


layer(s) and the one of the molecules are aligned, i.e. when the FePc molecules are adsorbed

on the thick Gr/Co film and the CuPc on the single Gr/Co layer, regardless on the origin of

the magnetic interaction. More details on the field- and direction-dependence of the CuPc

and FePc magnetic state are reported in the Supporting Information.

Figure 4: Thermal evolution of the XMCD signal for FePc/Gr on IP (left) and OOP (middle)
Co and CuPc/Gr on OOP Co (right).

A fine tuning of these spin interface architectures requires to evaluate the robustness

of the magnetic response against thermal fluctuations, thanks to temperature-dependent

XMCD measurements (Fig. 4). It is worth to point out that all measurements were acquired

in absence of a magnetic field and over several hours, indicating a very long relaxation time

and a stable magnetic configuration of the coupled MPc-Gr-Co systems.

Indeed, the super-exchange path stabilizes the AFM coupling up to 200 K for FePc/Gr/OOP

Co, while for FePc/Gr/IP Co a residual XMCD signal is detectable even at RT. The FePc

magnetic state coupled to Gr/OOP Co and Gr/IP Co can be understood in terms of the rel-

ative orientation between the molecule and substrate easy magnetization axes, since an extra

amount of energy is needed to turn the FePc magnetization, from its intrinsic IP direction, to

adapt to the OOP Co easy magnetization axis. The magnetic-coupling for CuPc/Gr/OOP

10


Co is much weaker, being not driven by a 180◦ super-exchange mechanism, as reflected by

the disappearance of any XMCD remanent signal above 50 K. These differences can be quan-

titatively evaluated by performing a Brillouin fit over the thermal evolution of the XMCD

intensity, leading to a coupling energy of 2.8 ± 0.6 meV and 2.1 ± 0.5 meV for FePc ong

Gr/1 and 6 ML Co, respectively, while the less stable CuPc/Gr/1 ML Co system exhibits

a much lower coupling energy of 0.6 ± 0.2 meV (for detailed discussion see the Supporting

Information file).

A direct magnetic coupling has been also detected for FePc molecules adsorbed on Gr

grown on Ni(111), leading to a ferromagnetic alignment,29 while in-plane AFM coupling me-

diated by graphene was recently observed between a Ni thin-film and Co-porphyrin molecules

up to 200 K.27 Despite a comparable exchange energy, the magnetic stability against thermal

fluctuations up to room temperature is here observed for the first time. In these peculiar

spin interfaces the Gr layer plays a dual role, on one hand it acts as a buffer layer, inhibiting

the MPc-Co electronic interaction and preserving the magnetic properties of the adsorbed

molecules, while, on the other hand, it actively participate to the magnetic coupling, either

by a direct coupling29 or by opening an effective super-exchange channel.27

In conclusion, these graphene-spaced spin molecular interfaces present either AFM or

FM coupling driven by different super-exchange paths, as supported by the the ab-initio

theoretical calculations and the experimental XMCD results. Despite the almost identical

structural configurations and a large distance between the Fe(Cu) metal centers and the

magnetic Co substrate, the magnetic coupling is very robust against thermal fluctuations.

In particular, the Fe-N-Gr-Co super-exchange channel drives an AFM coupling, favored by

the presence of out-plane molecular orbitals, mediated by the organic ligands and graphene.

On the other side, in the Cu-N-Gr-Co the magnetic coupling is strongly weakened by 90◦

super-exchange interaction path leading to a FM coupling of the molecule to the Co layer.

This scenario, completely supported by the theoretical spin density calculated on the whole

moir´e cell, is robust against different exchange and correlation functionals. The choice of an

11


effective super-exchange path can ensure the stability against thermal fluctuations, even at

RT, and it can be further optimized with a fine control of the relative orientation of the easy

magnetization axes at the spin interface. In perspective, the magnetic remanence at RT of

these archetypal spin interfaces, once paired with a tunable magnetic substrate, opens the

possibility to produce future operational spintronic devices.

Experimental and computational methods

Sample preparation: The Ir(111) surface was prepared with several cycles of 2 keV Ar+

sputtering, followed by annealing above 1300 K. The Gr sheet was grown on the clean and

ordered Ir(111) surface by exposing the substrate to a partial pressure of 10−6 mbar of

ethylene (C2H4), and annealing the covered surface above 1500-1600 K. The completion of

a single domain Gr layer was confirmed by the presence of sharp and bright spots of the

moir´e superstructure in the LEED diffraction pattern. Metallic Co was then sublimated

with an e-beam evaporator and deposited on Gr/Ir(111) kept at room temperature. Finally,

the Co/Gr/Ir(111) sample was annealed at 600-800 K to favour Co intercalation, following

Refs. 15, 16, 18.
The quantity of intercalated Co was determined with a quartz crystal

microbalance and double-checked with an Auger-calibrated growth compared with the XAS

jump edge ratio (see supporting information of Ref.30), highlighting a layer-by-layer growth.

MPc powders (M=Fe,Cu) were sublimated with a home-made resistively heated quartz cru-

cible, at a constant rate of 0.3 ˚A/min, measured with a quartz crystal microbalance.

XAS and XMCD measurements: X-ray absorption spectroscopy and magnetic circular

dichroism (XAS and XMCD) measurements were performed at the BOREAS beamline of the

Alba synchrotron radiation facility31 in total electron yield (TEY), by measuring the sample

drain current normalized with respect to incident flux, measured as the drain current on a

clean gold grid. The measurements were performed in two different experimental geometries,

in order to probe the magnetic response along the easy as well as the hard magnetization

12


axis. The in-plane magnetic state was studied by impinging the sample at GI, namely at

70◦ incidence angle; while the out-of-plane magnetic response is determined at NI. The

hysteresis curves have been obtained by normalizing the field-dependent L3 XMCD intensity

at a pre-edge signal, in order to cancel-out any field-induced artifact.

Theoretical modeling: Plane wave density functional theory calculations were performed

using the Quantum ESPRESSO32,33 package at the LDA,34 GGA-PBE35 and PBE+U36 level

(with a value of U=4 eV for the d-orbitals of the MPc central ion). Structural relaxations

were carried out using LDA and PBE exchange-correlation potential, including van der Waals

interactions within the semi-empirical method of Grimme (DFT-D2).37 The IrCoGr system

was simulated with a super-cell consisting of a IrCo slab (three Ir and one Co layers) with a

9×9 lattice in-plane periodicity and an overlaying 10×10 graphene layer. The same system

was then relaxed with one FePc (CuPc) molecule adsorbed on graphene. Technical details

of the calculation are reported in the Supporting Information.

Acknowledgement

These experiments were performed at the BOREAS beamline at ALBA Synchrotron with

the collaboration of ALBA staff. The authors thank Pierluigi Mondelli for experimental

assistance during the beamtime. AF, DV, CC acknowledge financial support from the EU

Centre of Excellence “MaX - Materials Design at the Exascale” (Horizon 2020 EINFRA-5,

Grant No. 676598). Computational resources were partly provided by PRACE (Grant No.

Pra11 2921) on the Marconi machine at CINECA. GA and MGB acknowledge fundings from

Sapienza University of Rome. PG acknowledges funding from the Spanish MINECO (grant

No. FIS2013-45469-C4-3-R).

Supporting Information Available

The following files are available free of charge.
Detailed material related to the XAS

13


measurement at the Fe and Cu L2,3 edges, with and without magnetic field and in the two

experimental geometries, for the spin interface and to DFT modelling are available free of

charge in the Supporting Information file.

References

(1) Christou, G.; Gatteschi, D.; Hendrickson, D. N.; Sessoli, R. MRS Bull. 2000, 25, 6671.

(2) Wende, H.; Bernien, M.; Luo, J.; Sorg, C.; Ponpandian, N.; Kurde, J.; Miguel, J.;

Piantek, M.; Xu, X.; Eckhold, P. et al. Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 516–520.

(3) Annese, E.; Fujii, J.; Vobornik, I.; Panaccione, G.; Rossi, G. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84,

174443.

(4) Annese, E.; Casolari, F.; Fujii, J.; Rossi, G. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 054420.

(5) Brede, J.; Atodiresei, N.; Kuck, S.; Lazi´c, P.; Caciuc, V.; Morikawa, Y.; Hoffmann, G.;

Bl¨ugel, S.; Wiesendanger, R. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 105, 047204.

(6) Scardamaglia, M.; Lisi, S.; Lizzit, S.; Baraldi, A.; Larciprete, R.; Mariani, C.;

Betti, M. G. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 3019–3027.

(7) Lisi, S.; Gargiani, P.; Scardamaglia, M.; Brookes, N. B.; Sessi, V.; Mariani, C.;

Betti, M. G. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 1690–1695.

(8) Bazarnik, M.; Brede, J.; Decker, R.; Wiesendanger, R. ACS Nano 2013, 7, 11341–

11349.

(9) Avvisati, G.; Lisi, S.; Gargiani, P.; Della Pia, A.; De Luca, O.; Pacil´e, D.; Cardoso, C.;

Varsano, D.; Prezzi, D.; Ferretti, A. et al. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 1639–1647.

(10) Avvisati, G.; Mondelli, P.; Gargiani, P.; Betti, M. G. Appl. Surf. Sci. 2018, 432, 2–6.

14


(11) Klar, D.; Brena, B.; Herper, H. C.; Bhandary, S.; Weis, C.; Krumme, B.; Schmitz-

Antoniak, C.; Sanyal, B.; Eriksson, O.; Wende, H. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 88, 224424.

(12) Gargiani, P.; Rossi, G.; Biagi, R.; Corradini, V.; Pedio, M.; Fortuna, S.; Calzolari, A.;

Fabris, S.; Cezar, J. C.; Brookes, N. B. et al. Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 165407.

(13) Yang, H.; Vu, A. D.; Hallal, A.; Rougemaille, N.; Coraux, J.; Chen, G.; Schmid, A. K.;

Chshiev, M. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 145–151.

(14) Lodi Rizzini, A.; Krull, C.; Mugarza, A.; Balashov, T.; Nistor, C.; Piquerel, R.; Kly-

atskaya, S.; Ruben, M.; Sheverdyaeva, P. M.; Moras, P. et al. Surf. Sci. 2014, 630, 361

– 374.

(15) Decker, R.; Brede, J.; Atodiresei, N.; Caciuc, V.; Bl¨ugel, S.; Wiesendanger, R. Phys.

Rev. B 2013, 87, 041403(R).

(16) Pacil´e, D.; Lisi, S.; Di Bernardo, I.; Papagno, M.; Ferrari, L.; Pisarra, M.; Caputo, M.;

Mahatha, S. K.; Sheverdyaeva, P. M.; Moras, P. et al. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 195446.

(17) The inclusion of van der Waals interactions at the PBE-D2 level does not change

significantly the picture, with a graphene corrugation of 1.3 ˚A and a minimum graphene-

Co distance of 1.84 ˚A. At variance, the Gr-Co distance for the 1×1 commensurate

system is found to be 2.13 ˚A for PBE-D2.

(18) Vita, H.; B¨ottcher, S.; Leicht, P.; Horn, K.; Shick, A. B.; M´aca, F. Phys. Rev. B 2014,

90, 165432.

(19) Mao, J.; Zhang, H.; Jiang, Y.; Pan, Y.; Gao, M.; Xiao, W.; Gao, H.-J. J. Am. Chem.

Soc. 2009, 131, 14136–4137.

(20) Zhang, H. G.; Sun, J. T.; Low, T.; Zhang, L. Z.; Pan, Y.; Liu, Q.; Mao, J. H.;

Zhou, H. T.; Guo, H. M.; Du, S. X. et al. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, 245436.

15


(21) Bartolom´e, J.; Monton, C.; Schuller, I. K. In Molecular Magnets; Bartolom´e, J., Luis, F.,

Fern´andez, J. F., Eds.; Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2014; Chapter 9, pp 221–245.

(22) Stepanow, S.; Mugarza, A.; Ceballos, G.; Moras, P.; Cezar, J. C.; Carbone, C.; Gam-

bardella, P. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 82, 014405.

(23) Thole, B. T.; Carra, P.; Sette, F.; van der Laan, G. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 68, 1943–

1946.

(24) Carra, P.; Thole, B. T.; Altarelli, M.; Wang, X. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 70, 694–697.

(25) Bartolom´e, J.; Bartolom´e, F.; Garc´ıa, L. M.; Filoti, G.; Gredig, T.; Colesniuc, C. N.;

Schuller, I. K.; Cezar, J. C. Phys. Rev. B 2010, 81, 195405.

(26) Bernien, M.; Miguel, J.; Weis, C.; Ali, M. E.; Kurde, J.; B., K.; Panchmatia, P. M.;

Sanyal, B.; Piantek, M.; Srivastava, P. et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 047202.

(27) Hermanns, C. F.; Tarafder, K.; Bernien, M.; Kr¨uger, A.; Chang, Y.-M.; Oppe-

neer, P. M.; Kuch, W. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 3473–3477.

(28) Rosa, A.; Baerends, E. J. Inorg. Chem. 1994, 33, 584–595.

(29) Candini, A.; Bellini, V.; Klar, D.; Corradini, V.; Biagi, R.; De Renzi, V.; Kummer, K.;

Brookes, N. B.; del Pennino, U.; Wende, H. et al. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 17670–

17676.

(30) Gargiani, P.; Cuadrado, R.; Vasili, H. B.; Pruneda, M.; Valvidares, M. Nat. Comm.

2017, 8, 699.

(31) Barla, A.; Nicol´as, J.; Cocco, D.; Valvidares, S. M.; Herrero-Mart´ın, J.; Gargiani, P.;

Moldes, J.; Ruget, C.; Pellegrin, E.; Ferrer, S. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 2016, 23, 1507–

1517.

16


(32) Giannozzi, P.; Baroni, S.; Bonini, N.; Calandra, M.; Car, R.; Cavazzoni, C.; Ceresoli, D.;

Chiarotti, G. L.; Cococcioni, M.; Dabo, I. et al. J. Phys.: Condens. Mat. 2009, 21,

395502.

(33) Giannozzi, P.; Andreussi, O.; Brumme, T.; Bunau, O.; Buongiorno Nardelli, M.; Calan-

dra, M.; Car, R.; Cavazzoni, C.; Ceresoli, D.; Cococcioni, M. et al. J. Phys.: Condens.

Matter 2017, 29, 465901.

(34) Perdew, J. P.; Zunger, A. Phys. Rev. B 1981, 23, 5048–5079.

(35) Perdew, J. P.; Ernzerhof, M.; Burke, K. J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 105, 9982–9985.

(36) Cococcioni, M.; Gironcoli, S. D. Phys. Rev. B 2005, 71, 035105.

(37) Grimme, S. J. Comput. Chem. 2006, 27, 1787–1799.

17


