1 
 

Efficient Volumetric Absorption Solar Thermal Platforms Employing Thermally 
Stable - Solar Selective Nanofluids Engineered from Used Engine Oil 
   
Nirmal Singh, Vikrant Khullar* 
 
Mechanical Engineering Department, Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala-
147004, Punjab, India 
 
ABSTRACT 
We report a low cost and scalable method to synthesize solar selective nanofluids from 'used engine 
oil'. The as-prepared nanofluids exhibit excellent long-term stability and photo-thermal conversion 
efficiency. Moreover, these were found to retain their stability and functional characteristics even 
after extended periods of high temperature (300°C) heating, ultra violet light exposure and thermal 
cyclic loading. Building upon it, we have been able to successfully engineer an efficient volumetric 
absorption solar thermal platform that employs the as-prepared nanofluids and achieves higher 
steady state temperatures (approximately 5% higher) relative to the conventional surface absorption 
based solar thermal system under the sun. The developed volumetric absorption solar thermal 
platform could prove to be significant step in the evolution of efficient solar thermal systems which 
could potentially be deployed for host of applications ranging from solar driven heating, air-
conditioning, and desalination units to solar energy electricity generation systems. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Nature has carefully engineered itself to utilize solar energy to run the entire life cycle on the planet 
earth. Mimicking natural processes, we are continuously striving to build efficient solar energy 
conversion platforms which could convert solar energy to more usable forms such as electricity 
(photovoltaic), chemical energy of the fuel (artificial photosynthesis) and heat (solar thermal). 
Amongst these, the technology of electricity generation via solar to heat conversion is currently the 
most efficient (~30%) and cost effective one. In comparison, the fossil-fuel based counterparts 
operate at efficiencies on the order of ~60%. One of the key reasons for lower efficiency is that we 
have not been able to efficiently engineer the solar (photon) to thermal energy (heat) conversion 
process [1]. 
With the advent of nanotechnology, plasmonic nanostructures (particularly metallic nanoparticles) 
have evolved as potential candidates for efficient photo-thermal conversion at their resonant 
frequencies owing to predominant non-radiative decay of the absorbed energy in the form of heat [2-
4]. However, sunlight being broad spectrum necessitates plasmonic nanostructures (such as carbon-
based nanostructures) that could respond to the wide wavelength range of incident sunlight [5-7]. 
Building upon the idea of utilizing nanostructures for solar to thermal energy conversion process; 
volumetrically absorbing solar thermal systems employing nanoparticle dispersions (nanofluids) 
have been devised by various researchers. Theoretically (and on laboratory scale), particularly at 
high solar concentration ratios (solar flux), the nanofluid-based volumetrically absorbing solar 
thermal systems have been shown to have higher thermal efficiencies, lower embodied energies and 
lower carbon footprints relative to their surface absorption based counterparts [8-11]. However, these 
promising novel systems have not been able to outperform the incumbent solar thermal platforms 
under the sun owing to inefficient receiver designs [12] and instability of nanofluids in real world 
service conditions - nanoparticles tend to agglomerate and hence settle down; this drastically affects 
the optical efficiency and hence the overall performance of these systems [13]. 

 

* Corresponding author 
  Email address: vikrant.khullar@thapar.edu 


2 
 

Presently, a lot of efforts are underway to tailor solar selective, low cost, high temperature, and long 
term stable nanoparticle dispersions [14-28]. In this direction, we propose that 'used engine oil' 
(owing to the presence of carbon soot particles) could be employed to synthesize broad wavelength 
absorption nanoparticle dispersions (volumetrically absorbing solar selective heat transfer fluid). 
Annually, approximately 24 million metric tons of 'used engine oil' is discharged into the 
environment without any recycling or treatment [29]. Therefore, forming one of the most hazardous 
wastes; having irreversible environmental and health implications. Putting this otherwise hazardous 
waste to harness solar energy could prove to be a sustainable option. 
Pristine (or un-used) engine oil essentially consists of base oil (or blend of base oils) and an additive 
package to enhance its anti-oxidant, anti-wear, anti-foaming, and dispersancy characteristics. During 
its operation, the engine oil comes in contact with high temperature cylinder liners and washes away 
the carbon soot particles (left after combustion) from the cylinder circumference. Furthermore, a host 
of metallic particles (as a result of wearing action) enter the engine oil. The presence of dispersant 
molecules helps in dispersing the aforementioned foreign particles in the oil by forming an envelope 
around these particles. The polar part of the dispersant molecule attaches itself to the surface of the 
particle; whereas the oleophilic long chain hydrocarbon part helps in mobility of the particle. This 
ensures that the soot particles do not interact with each other and hence prevents agglomeration of 
the soot particles. The blowby gases also enter the crankcase which may tend to oxidize the engine 
oil; and here comes the role of anti oxidant which interupts the oxidation mechanism by reacting 
with the reaction intermediates [30-34]. 
After the end of the service life of the engine oil, in addition to resin, sludge etc.; it consists of large 
number of nano-sized soot particles which have undergone sort of 'functionalization' (as dispersant 
molecules envelope these soot particles). It is the essentially the presence of these 'functionalized 
carbon soot particles' in the used engine oil that qualifies it to be used as a precursor for synthesizing 
heat transfer fluid for direct absorption of solar energy. 
Rigorous testing (which simulate real world service conditions) of the as-prepared nanofluids reveals 
that these have remarkable photo-thermal conversion efficiency, favorable thermo-physical 
properties (thermal conductivity and viscosity), high temperature and long term stability, and can 
withstand thermal cyclic loads without any significant loss of optical and thermo-physical properties. 
Building on it; a hybrid volumetric receiver employing the as-prepared nanoparticle dispersions has 
been carefully designed to give higher steady state temperatures (and hence higher thermal 
efficiency) relative to the conventional surface absorption based receiver under real world outdoor 
conditions.  
In essence, the present work is a significant step in the evolution of solar thermal platforms; wherein 
we have been able to design a unique volumetric absorption based receiver that employs thermally 
stable and solar selective  nanoparticle dispersions engineered from 'used engine oil' and has higher 
efficiency relative to its surface absorption based counterpart under the sun. 
 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
Nanofluid synthesis philosophy and elemental-morphological analysis  
In the present work, small fractions of 'used engine oil' (after undergoing filtration process) have 
been mechanically mixed with compatible non polar base oil (paraffin oil light). The mixture was 
then ultra-sonicated to get the required nanoparticle dispersions (see Fig. 1). 
 


3 
 

 

Fig. 1 Schematic showing the steps involved in nanoparticle dispersion synthesis. 
 
Figure 2(a) shows the picture of as-prepared nanofluids of different concentrations (1.25, 2.5, 5, 10 
and 20 ml/L) of 'used engine oil' in pristine paraffin oil. As shown in Fig. 2(b), through EDS, the 
percentage of carbon soot particles in the as-prepared nanoparticle dispersion has been found to be 
on the order of ~85% by weight (other notable elements being O, Al, Ca, and Fe). TEM images show 
that the soot particles are present in the form of nano-clusters of irregular curvilinear geometry [see 
Fig. 2(c)]. Hydrodynamic particle size has been measured through DLS; particle size varies in the 
range of 15 nm to 68 nm, average particle size being 38 nm [see Fig. 2(d)].  
 
Photo-thermal conversion efficiency 
As a first step, optical signatures of various nanofluid concentrations have been measured in the UV-
VIS-NIR region (300 nm - 1100 nm). Figure 3(a) clearly shows that pure paraffin oil transmits 
nearly all the incident radiation whereas 20 ml/L nanofluid absorbs nearly in the entire wavelength 
band; thus giving us a fair idea about the absorption capability of the as-prepared nanofluids. This 
data was then employed to calculate the solar absorption fraction for different nanofluid 
concentrations as a function fluid layer thickness as 
 




1100

300

1100

300

1 exp

Solar absorption fraction

nm

a
nm

nm

nm

S
K
y
d

S d
















 



,  
 
 
 
       (1) 

 
where Sλ is the spectral solar irradiance (AM 1.5 spectra),  Kaλ is the spectral absorption coefficient, 
and y is the fluid layer thickness. Solar absorption fraction essentially gives the fraction of the 
incident solar energy that could be absorbed by a given thickness of the fluid layer. Clearly, solar 
absorption capability increases rapidly with increase in concentration. Moreover, to achieve the 
desired value of solar absorption fraction, we could either increase the concentration or increase the 
physical thickness of the nanofluid layer - in effect increasing the optical depth. 


4 
 

 

Fig. 2 (a) Photographs of the as-prepared nanofluids of different concentrations, (b) EDS of the 
residue left after evaporating 20 ml/liter nanofluid sample, (c) TEM images of the soot particles in 
the used engine oil, and (d) DLS measurements of the as-prepared nanofluid sample (5 ml/L). 
 
 
In order to clearly gauge the photo-thermal conversion efficiency of the as-prepared nanofluids, 
laboratory scale experiments have been carefully designed. Nanofluids (housed in a cylindrical 
column with reflective surface at the bottom) of different concentrations were illuminated with a 
broad spectrum white light source [see Fig. 3(c)]. Samples were illuminated until these reached 
steady state temperatures. These measured steady state temperatures (averaged across the entire 
depth of the nanofluid column) essentially represent the photo-thermal conversion efficiencies of 
various nanofluid concentrations under optical heating. Figure 3(d) clearly points out that nanofluids 
have higher steady state temperatures (on the order of ~31 higher) relative to the case of pure 
paraffin oil. Interestingly, the highest concentration nanofluid (20 ml/L) does not have the highest 
photo-thermal conversion efficiency; instead it is highest for the nanofluid with a moderate 
concentration (2.5 ml/L). This could be understood from the spatial temperature distribution across 
the depth of the nanofluid column for various nanofluid concentrations (see Fig. 4). Spatial 
temperature field gives us insights into the photo-thermal conversion process. For a fixed physical 
thickness of the fluid layer, with increase in nanoparticle concentration, the photo-thermal 
conversion process tends to be limited to only top layers; not allowing the light to reach the lower 
layers-hence resulting in lower average steady state temperatures at very high concentrations.  


5 
 

 

 
Fig. 3 (a) Spectral transmittance of the as-prepared nanofluids in the UV-VIS-NIR region, (b) Solar 
absorption fraction for various nanofluid concentrations as a function of fluid layer thickness, (c) 
schematic showing the experimental set-up for photo-thermal conversion experiments, and (d) steady 
state temperatures for various concentrations of nanofluids. Tavg = (T1 + T2 + T3 + T4) /4 
 

 

Fig. 4 Spatial temperature distribution, when the as-prepared nanofluids are illuminated under a 
white light source. (a) Pristine paraffin oil, (b) 1.25 ml/L, (c) 2.50 ml/L, (d) 5.00 ml/L, (e) 10.00 
ml/L, and (f) 20.00 ml/L. 


6 
 

Thermo-physical properties 
Thermal conductivity and viscosity are amongst the key thermo-physical properties that impact the 
redistribution of the absorbed energy within the fluid and pumping power requirements respectively. 
The as-prepared nanofluids show thermal conductivity enhancement [see Fig. 5(a)] of typically 2-4% 
(relative to pure paraffin oil); although not a significant enhancement, but could prove to be 
beneficial under high solar flux conditions. Viscosity measurements show linear increase in the 
viscosity with increase in concentration of the nanofluid, the increase being not greater than 2.5% 
[see Fig. 5(b)] even for the highest concentration (20 ml/L). Therefore, there shall not be requirement 
of additional pumping power when using these fluids in actual practice. 

 

Fig. 5 (a) Thermal conductivity ratio (knd/kbf), and (b) kinematic viscosity as a function of nanofluid 
concentration. Error bar represents the standard deviation. 
 
Stability of the as-prepared nanofluids 
Long-term stability 
As 'heat transfer fluids' in volumetric absorption platforms; nanofluids are expected to maintain their 
optical and thermo-physical properties under extended periods without any appreciable degradation 
for consistent and efficient photo-thermal conversion. Long-term stability of the as-prepared 
nanofluid dispersions has been assessed under natural and accelerated sedimentation (centrifugation) 
conditions. Furthermore, during centrifugation, the fluid experiences severe shear stresses [35-40]-
simulating real flow conditions which the heat transfer fluid may be subjected to in actual solar 
thermal systems. Figure 6 reveals that the as-prepared nanofluids exhibit remarkable long term 
stability and can withstand high shear stresses without any appreciable change in their optical 
characteristics, and nanoparticle hydrodynamic size distribution. 
  


7 
 

 

Fig. 6 (a) Spectral optical characteristics, and (b) hydrodynamic particle size distribution of the as-
prepared and six months old nanofluid samples; and (c) spectral optical characteristics, and (d) 
hydrodynamic particle size distribution of the as-prepared and after centrifugation nanofluid samples 
(5ml/L). 
   
High temperature stability 
In addition to high photo-thermal conversion efficiency, the nanofluids should maintain their desired 
characteristics under constant and cyclic thermal loads. In its service life, the nanofluids are expected 
to absorb high solar flux (particularly in high solar concentration solar thermal systems), which in 
turn shall result in rapid and significant temperature rise. Furthermore, the nanofluid shall transfer 
the absorbed energy to a secondary fluid (such as water) - thus experiencing rapid temperature drops. 
These rapid heating and cooling cycles form the integral part of any power cycle in general and solar 
electricity generation systems (SEGS) in particular. The as-prepared nanofluids were found to posses 
excellent stability and retain their functional characteristics under constant as well as cyclic thermal 
loads. During cyclic thermal loading, the nanofluid was rapidly heated to a particular fixed 
temperature and then was suddenly cooled by dipping it into the water bath maintained at room 
temperature (see Fig. 7). For the purpose of tracking the temperatures, K-type thermocouple 
remained dipped in the nanofluid during the entire testing period. This however allowed the ambient 
air (oxygen) to interact with the nanofluid which in effect resulted in the oxidation of the basefluid 
(paraffin oil, see Fig. 8) - proving to be detrimental to the stability of the nanofluids particularly at 
high temperatures (see Figs. 9 and 10). Similar phenomenon was discovered during constant thermal 


8 
 

loading (12 hour heating at constant temperature) prolonged heating as well (see Fig. 11) - indicating 
that it is not the thermal stresses but oxidation of the paraffin oil that renders the nanofluid unstable 
at high temperatures.  Instructively, when the constant heating tests were carried out by making the 
container housing the nanofluid 'airtight'; no agglomeration or settling of the nanoparticles was 
observed [see Figs. 12(a) and (b)]. Moreover, nanoparticle size distribution and optical 
characteristics were retained even after constant heating for 12 hours at 300°C [see Figs. 12(c) and 
(d)]. 
 
 

 

Fig. 7(a) Schematic showing the procedure followed for carrying out thermal cyclic tests, and (b) 
heating - cooling curves for the thermal cycling at different temperatures. 

 

 

Fig. 8 (a) Effect of oxidation on the (a) optical properties, and (b) Raman spectra of pristine paraffin 
oil. 

 


9 
 

 

Fig. 9 (a) Effect of cyclic thermal loads on the optical properties of the as-prepared nanofluids at (a) 
85°C, (b) 160°C, (c) 200°C, and 240°C. 

 

Fig. 10 (a) Effect of cyclic thermal loads on the hydrodynamic size distribution of the as-prepared 
nanofluids at (a) 85°C, (b) 160°C, (c) 200°C, and 240°C. 


10 
 

 

 

Fig. 11 (a) Effect of prolonged heating (for 12 hours) on the (a) optical properties, and (b) 
hydrodynamic size distribution of the as-prepared nanofluid (5 ml/L). 

 

 

Fig. 12 (a) Spectral optical characteristics, and (b) hydrodynamic particle size distribution of the as-
prepared and after heating (12 h at 240°C) nanofluid samples; and (c) spectral optical characteristics, 
and (d) hydrodynamic particle size distribution of the as-prepared and after heating ( for 12 hours at 
300°C) nanofluid samples (5ml/L). 
 


11 
 

Stability under ultra-violet light exposure 
Although ultraviolet radiations form only a small fraction of the incident solar energy; but given the 
fact that these are very high energy radiations, and may amount to significant values in case of 
concentrating solar thermal systems - the as-prepared nanofluids were tested exclusively under UV 
exposure. Interestingly, the nanofluids were found to be stable and retain their properties even after 
prolonged exposure to UV radiations (see Fig 13). This is a significant improvement, as exposure to 
UV radiations has been known to significantly impact the stability of the nanofluids, i.e., extensive 
agglomeration and settling of the nanoparticles occurs when exposed to UV radiations [28]. 
 

 

Fig. 13 (a) Effect of UV exposure (6 hours) on the (a) optical properties, and (b) hydrodynamic 
particle size distribution of the as-prepared nanofluid (5ml/L). 
 
Design and performance of the as-prepared nanofluid based volumetric absorption solar 
thermal platform 
Rigorous testing of the as-prepared nanofluids has revealed that indeed these could operate under 
real world service conditions without losing their functional properties. Building upon this, we have 
carefully designed a volumetrically absorbing solar thermal system, wherein a linear Fresnel lens is 
used to concentrate the incident normal solar irradiance onto the receiver lying along the focal line of 
the concentrator. The receiver is essential a closed rectangular conduit in which the fluid is made to 
flow. The conduit has been so designed that it could be employed both in surface as well as 
volumetric absorption modes - the internal three sides (bottom and sides) being 'state of the art' solar 
selective surfaces (having high solar weighted absorptivity, ~0.96; and low infrared emissivity, 
~0.12) and the top side being made of glass to allow the sunlight to pass through and reduce thermal 
losses. Furthermore, the outside three sides have been insulated to reduce thermal losses [see Fig. 
14(a)] 
In surface absorption mode, pure paraffin oil was made to flow in the receiver. Paraffin oil being 
nearly transparent in the solar wavelength region, allows the sunlight to interact with the solar 
selective surfaces. The absorbed solar energy is then transferred to the fluid through convection and 
conduction mechanisms. This configuration essentially simulates the heat transfer mechanisms 
involved in typical incumbent solar thermal systems. 
 


12 
 

 

Fig. 14 (a) Schematic showing the design of the volumetric absorption platform, and (b) Steady state 
temperatures under surface  and volumetric (at various nanofluid concentrations) absorption modes. 
 
On the other hand, in volumetric absorption mode, the as-prepared nanofluids (of different 
concentrations) were made to flow through the receiver. Herein, the nanofluid directly absorbs the 
solar energy - nanoparticles owing to their broad wavelength absorption characteristics; convert the 
solar energy into thermal energy through non-radiative decay of the absorbed photons. Subsequently, 
the absorbed energy is transferred to the surrounding medium at staggeringly rapid rate (owing to the 
extremely small size of the particles). This results in efficient photo-thermal conversion of the 
incident solar energy. 
Comparison between the two absorption modes (surface and volumetric) clearly points out that 
indeed higher steady state temperatures (~5% higher) could be achieved in case the sunlight is 
allowed to directly interact with the nanofluid i.e., volumetric absorption outperforms the surface 
absorption case under real world flow conditions and under the sun [see Fig. 14(b)] Furthermore, 
careful observation of the graphs tell us that it is imperative to choose the right concentration of the 
nanofluids (for a given fluid layer thickness) in order to maximize the resulting steady state 
temperatures and hence the performance characteristics.  
As a whole, the present work reports a simple, cost effective and scalable method to synthesize broad 
absorption nanofluids from 'used engine oil'. These as-prepared nanofluids have shown to possess 
remarkable properties in relation to its candidature as a potential working fluid in volumetric 
absorption solar thermal systems. Building on it, an efficient solar thermal platform has been devised 
which gives higher steady state temperatures in volumetric absorption mode. Thus we have been able 
to engineer efficient volumetric absorption solar thermal platforms which outperform their surface 
absorption counterparts (conventional solar thermal systems) under realistic conditions and under the 
sun. 
 
METHODS 
Nanofluid preparation. Used engine oil has been collected from a 15000 km run 4-stroke diesel 
engine. To filter out sludge, resin etc. a cotton cloth has been used. Subsequently, the filtered 'used 
engine oil' was furthered filtered with 0.7um filter paper.  Desired fractions of the resulting filtered 
used oil were then mixed into pure paraffin oil followed by 30 minutes of ultra-sonication in a bath 
type ultasonicator - thus forming nanofluids of different concentration. 


13 
 

Characterization and measurements 
EDS. Used engine oil cannot be directly analyzed by EDS because of the presence of oil which may 
contaminate the electron beam. So sample was prepared by evaporating 20ml/liter sample at 160°C 
and the leftover after evaporation was collected. The collected solid particles were then washed with 
the ethanol (5 times) in order to remove any traces of oil. Finally, the washed particles were loaded 
onto the copper grid for EDS analysis. 
Spectral analysis. Transmittance measurements in the UV-VIS-NIR region were done using 
spectrophotometer. Shimazdu UV-2600   
TEM. The sample for TEM analysis was prepared by solvent extraction method. The used oil was 
mixed with n-heptane (1:60) and ultra-sonicated for 30 minute. The prepared sample was then placed 
on the carbon grid and washed with n-heptane to remove any traces of oil on the surface of soot 
particles. Furthermore, to get the better image quality, sample was washed with diethyl ether (2 
times). TEM, FEI Tecnai G2 F20, Netherlands 
DLS. Hydrodynamic size distribution measurements were made using Malvern Zetasizer Nano S 
(ZEN 1600) 
Thermal conductivity of the as-prepared nanofluid was measured by KD2 pro which works on the 
transient hot wire method. 
Raman Spectra. Measured at 532 nm, Horiba Scientific   
Viscosity measurements were made using capillary action viscometer. 
White light source. Light guide connected to a 3200K Color temperature halogen lamp (250 W), 
Philips 
UV light source. 125 W lamp, Philips 
Temperature measurements. K type thermocouples and infrared camera, Keysight 
Data Acquisition (DAQ). DAQ card NI 9123, Chassis NI 9721 
Incident solar flux. Ring shaded Pyranometer, Kipp & Zonen 
Heating sources. Metal top and ceramic based hot plates 
Ultra-sonicator. Bath type - 250 W, Sarthak Scientific 
 
Constructional and operational parameters of the volumetric absorption solar thermal 
platform 
Linear Fresnel lens. 2 in number, each of length 500 mm, width 500 mm PMMA-3t, NTKJ, Japan 
Solar selective surface. Black chrome coated copper sheet, Solchrome 
Dimensions of the receiver (internal). length 1000 mm, width 29 mm, and height 22 mm 
Volume flow rate. 0.5 lpm 
 
Acknowledgements 
This work is supported by Department of Science and Technology - Science and Engineering 
Research Board (Sanction order no. ECR/ 2016/000462). Authors also acknowledge the support 
provided by Mechanical Engineering Department and the Department of Biotechnology at Thapar 
Institute of Engineering and Technology. Support provided by the Mechanical Engineering 
Department at IIT Ropar is also gratefully acknowledged. 
 
References 
1. 
Crabtree, G. W. & Lewis, N. S. Solar energy conversion. Phys.Today 60, 37–42 (2007). 

2. 
So¨nnichsen, C. et al. Drastic reduction of plasmon damping in gold nanorods. Phys. Review 
Letters 88, 077402 (2002). 

3. 
Jonsson, G. E., Miljkovic, V. & Dmitriev, A. Nanoplasmon-enabled macroscopic thermal 
management. Sci. Reports 4, 5111 (2014). 

4. 
Khullar, V., Tyagi, H., Otanicar, T. P., Hewakuruppu, Y. L. & Taylor, R. A. Solar selective 
volumetric receivers for harnessing solar thermal energy. J. Heat Transf. 140, 062702 (2018). 


14 
 

5. 
Sani, E. et al. Potential of carbon nanohorn-based suspensions for solar thermal collectors. Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 95, 2994–3000 (2011). 

6. 
Hordy, N., Rabilloud, D., Meunier, J.-L. & Coulombe, S. High temperature and long-term 
stability of carbon nanotube nanofluids for direct absorption solar thermal collectors. Sol. 
Energy 105, 82–90 (2014). 

7. 
Khullar, V., Bhalla, V. & Tyagi, H. Potential heat transfer fluids (nanofluids) for direct 
volumetric absorption-based solar thermal systems. J. Therm. Sci. Eng. Appl. 10, 011009 
(2018). 

8. 
Tyagi, H., Phelan, P. & Prasher, R. Predicted efficiency of a low-temperature nanofluid-based 
direct absorption solar collector. J. Sol. Energy Eng. 131, 041004 (2009). 

9. 
Otanicar, T. P. & Golden, J. S. Comparative environmental and economic analysis of 
conventional and nanofluid solar hot water technologies. Environ. Sci. Technol. 43, 6082–6087 
(2009). 

10. Otanicar, T. P., Phelan, P. E., Prasher, R. S., Rosengarten, G. & Taylor, R. A. Nanofluid-based 

direct absorption solar collector. J. Renew. Sustain. Energy 2, 033102 (2010). 

11. Khullar, V. et al. Harvesting solar thermal energy through nanofluid-based volumetric 

absorption systems. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 77, 377–384 (2014). 

12. Bortolato, M. et al. Investigation of a single wall carbon nanohorn-based nanofluid in a full-

scale direct absorption parabolic trough solar collector. Energy Convers. Manag. 150, 693–703 
(2017). 

13. Li, Q. et al. Experimental and numerical investigation of volumetric versus surface solar 

absorbers for a concentrated solar thermal collector. Sol. Energy 136, 349–364 (2016). 

14. Otanicar, T., Hoyt, J., Fahar, M., Jiang, X. & Taylor, R. A. Experimental and numerical study on 

the optical properties and agglomeration of nanoparticle suspensions. J. Nanopart. Res. 15, 2039 
(2013). 

15. Hordy, N., Rabilloud, D., Meunier, J.-L. & Coulombe, S. A stable carbon nanotube nanofluid 

for latent heat-driven volumetric absorption solar heating applications. J. Nanomater. 16, 248 
(2015). 

16. Mesgari, S., Coulombe, S., Hordy, N. & Taylor, R. Thermal stability of carbon nanotube-based 

nanofluids for solar thermal collectors. Mater. Res. Innov. 19, S5–650 (2015). 

17. Gorji, T. B., Ranjbar, A. & Mirzababaei, S. Optical properties of carboxyl functionalized carbon 

nanotube aqueous nanofluids as direct solar thermal energy absorbers. Sol. Energy 119, 332–
342 (2015). 

18. Mesgari, S. et al. An investigation of thermal stability of carbon nanofluids for solar thermal 

applications. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 157, 652–659 (2016). 

19. Chen, Y. et al. Stably dispersed high-temperature Fe3O4/silicone-oil nanofluids for direct solar 

thermal energy harvesting. J. Mater. Chem. A 4, 17503–17511 (2016). 

20. Mondrago´n, R. et al. Synthesis and characterization of gold/water nanofluids suitable for 

thermal applications produced by femtosecond laser radiation. J. Photonics for Energy 6, 
034001 (2016). 

21. Lavasani, A., Vakili, M. et al. Experimental study of photothermal specifications and stability of 

graphene oxide nanoplatelets nanofluid as working fluid for low-temperature direct absorption 
solar collectors (DASCS). Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 164, 32–39 (2017). 

22. Liu, J., Xu, C., Chen, L., Fang, X. & Zhang, Z. Preparation and photo-thermal conversion 

performance of modified graphene/ionic liquid nanofluids with excellent dispersion stability. 
Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 170, 219–232 (2017). 

23. Gimeno-Furio, A. et al. Stabilization and characterization of a nanofluid based on a eutectic 

mixture of diphenyl and diphenyl oxide and carbon nanoparticles under high temperature 
conditions. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 113, 908–913 (2017). 

24. Qu, J., Tian, M., Han, X., Zhang, R. & Wang, Q. Photo-thermal conversion characteristics of 


15 
 

MWCNT-H2O nanofluids for direct solar thermal energy absorption applications. Appl. Therm. 
Eng. 124, 486–493 (2017). 

25. Go´mez-Villarejo, R. et al. Preparation of Au nanoparticles in a non-polar medium: obtaining 

high-efficiency nanofluids for concentrating solar power. an experimental and theoretical 
perspective. J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 12483–12497 (2017). 

26. Wang, X., He, Y., Chen, M. & Hu, Y. ZnO-Au composite hierarchical particles dispersed oil-

based nanofluids for direct absorption solar collectors. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells (2017). 

27. Wang, H., Yang, W., Cheng, L., Guan, C. & Yan, H. Chinese ink: High performance nanofluids 

for solar energy. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 176, 374–380 (2018). 

28. Taylor, R. A., Hjerrild, N., Duhaini, N., Pickford, M. & Mesgari, S. Stability testing of silver 

nanodisc suspensions for solar applications. Appl. Surf. Sci. (2018). 

29. Zhang, K., Cao, Q., Jin, L., Li, P. & Zhang, X. A novel route to utilize waste engine oil by 

blending it with water and coal. J. hazardous materials 332, 51–58 (2017). 

30. Rizvi, S. Q. Additives and additive chemistry. Fuels Lubr. Handb. (2003). 
31. Won, Y.-Y. et al. Effect of temperature on carbon-black agglomeration in hydrocarbon liquid 

with adsorbed dispersant. Langmuir 21, 924–932 (2005). 

32. Esangbedo, C., Boehman, A. L. & Perez, J. M. Characteristics of diesel engine soot that lead to 

excessive oil thickening. Tribol. Int. 47, 194–203 (2012). 

33. La Rocca, A., Di Liberto, G., Shayler, P. & Fay, M. The nanostructure of soot-in-oil particles 

and agglomerates from an automotive diesel engine. Tribol. Int. 61, 80–87 (2013). 

34. Bagi, S., Sharma, V. & Aswath, P. B. Role of dispersant on soot-induced wear in Cummins ISB 

engine test. Carbon 136, 395–408 (2018). 

35. Lerche, D. Dispersion stability and particle characterization by sedimentation kinetics in a 

centrifugal field. J. Dispers. Sci. Technol. 23, 699–709 (2002). 

36. Krause, B., Petzold, G., Pegel, S. & Po¨ tschke, P.  Correlation of carbon nanotube dispersability 

in aqueous surfactant solutions and polymers. Carbon 47, 602–612 (2009). 

37. Lamas, B., Abreu, B., Fonseca, A., Martins, N. & Oliveira, M. Assessing colloidal stability of 

long term mwcnt based nanofluids. J. Colloid Interface Science 381, 17–23 (2012). 

38. Harel, Y., Azoubel, S., Magdassi, S. & Lellouche, J.-P. A dispersability study on poly (thiophen-3-

yl-acetic acid) and PEDOT multi-walled carbon nanotube composites using an analytical 
centrifuge. J. Colloid Interface Science 390, 62–69 (2013). 

39. Yang, P., Zhao, X., Liu, Y. & Lai, X. Preparation and tribological properties of dual-coated CuO 

nanoparticles as water based lubricant additives. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 16, 9683–9689 
(2016). 

40. Fang, Y. et al. Synthesis and thermo-physical properties of deep eutectic solvent-based graphene 

nanofluids. Nanotechnol.27, 075702 (2016). 

 

 

 


