Synthesis and systematic optical investigation 
of selective area droplet epitaxy of InAs/InP 
quantum dots assisted by block copolymer
lithography

ARTEM SHIKIN1, ELIZAVETA LEBEDKINA1, CZCIBOR CIOSTEK2, PAWEŁ 
HOLEWA2, SOKOL NDONI3, KRISTOFFER ALMDAL3, KRESTEN YVIND1,
MARCIN SYPEREK2 AND ELIZAVETA SEMENOVA1,*

1 DTU Fotonik, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby DK-2800, Denmark
2 Wroclaw University of Science and Technology, Wroclaw 50-370, Poland
3 DTU Nanotech, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby DK-2800, Denmark
*esem@fotonik.dtu.dk

Abstract: We report on the systematic investigation of the optical properties of a selectively 
grown quantum dot gain material assisted by block-copolymer lithography for potential 
applications in active optical devices operating in the wavelength range around 1.55 µm and 
above. We investigated a new type of diblock copolymer PS-b-PDMS (polystyrene-block-
polydimethylsiloxane) for the fabrication of silicon oxycarbide hard mask for selective area 
epitaxy of InAs/InP quantum dots. An array of InAs/InP quantum dots was selectively grown 
via droplet epitaxy. Our detailed investigation of the quantum dot carrier dynamics in the 10-
300 K temperature range indicates the presence of a density of states located within the InP 
bandgap in the vicinity of quantum dots. Those defects have a substantial impact on the optical 
properties of quantum dots.

© 2018 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement

1.
Introduction

For more than 30 years quantum dots (QDs) have attracted significant attention due to their 
distinctive delta-like carrier density of states and the carrier dynamics [1] which open unique 
possibilities for device realizations. Self-assembled In(Ga)As QDs on GaAs substrates have, 
after several decades of research, finally fulfilled some of the early predictions for low 
dimensional semiconductor gain media [2]. The lowest threshold current densities [3] and
lowest temperature dependence [4] have been demonstrated with QD lasers, making them 
superior to the more standard quantum well devices [5]. Furthermore, the dynamic properties 
of the QD gain medium [1,6] have allowed for notably improved temporal and noise [7]
performances of lasers [8] and amplifiers, something that was theoretically predicted prior to
the experimental demonstration [9]. Unfortunately, QD material on GaAs has a limited spectral 
coverage 0.9-1.31 µm. In order to achieve longer wavelength emission, the InP-based material 
system is mainly used. However, the QDs on this substrate have so far not been able to 
reproduce the superior properties of their short wavelength counterparts. Elongated “dash” 
like [10] QDs with a high in-plane aspect ratio and a broad size distribution are typically 
obtained [11]. Although laser devices based on InAs/InP QDs have been demonstrated [12,13]
the properties of QDs need to be significantly improved in order to achieve superior device 
performances. Improvements, in particular, have to be made on the wetting layer charge leak,
QD size uniformity, and shape control [14–16].

A promising alternative approach for the synthesis of QDs would be selective area growth 

(SAG), where the dots are formed in the mask openings, compared to when the formation 
process does rely on the lattice mismatch between the QD and matrix materials [17,18]. 


Diblock-copolymer lithography is a potentially scalable and very advantageous fabrication
technique of uniform nanopatterns. Great effort has been and continues to be made with the aim 
to understand the principles of thin film polymer self-assembly and how to control its properties 
on demand
[18–20]. The diblock-copolymer PS-b-PMMA
(polystyrene-b-polymethyl 

methacrylate), which can form patterns down to 20 nm feature-sizes, including patterns of
standing cylinders or spheres, was used for SAG of QDs [21,22]. Very recently, laser emission 
was demonstrated from a device based on this type of SAG QDs [23]. 

In this article, we report on the first realization of SAG QDs prepared with the assistance of 

a new diblock-copolymer, PS-b-PDMS (polystyrene-block-polydimethylsiloxane). Due to the
significantly greater Flory-Huggins interaction parameter χ, it is possible to form patterns with 
even smaller characteristic sizes compared to the previously used PS-b-PMMA. Additionally,
this copolymer has numerous other advantages, which would significantly simplify the BCP 
lithography process. Procedures have been developed allowing for direct deposition of the block 
copolymer film on the substrate, without any need for a brush layer to control the surface energy 
of the substrate; specific solvent vapor annealing promotes the self-assembly process and the 
pattern formation in the film [24,25]. Moreover, PDMS is transforming into a hard mask of 
silicon oxycarbide while PS cylinders are etched away by oxygen plasma, hence no deposition 
of additional dielectric layers is required [25,26]. Detailed optical characterization of resulting 
InAs/InP quantum dots grown by selective area droplet epitaxy allow evaluating dynamical 
carrier processes in the QD material in the 10-300K temperature range.

2.
Experiment

The fabrication process consisted of two distinct stages: fabrication of a dielectric mask by 
diblock-copolymer lithography and epitaxial growth of QDs by metal-organic vapor phase 
epitaxy (MOVPE). All the samples were prepared on 2” n-type InP substrates with (001)-
orientation. First, we epitaxially deposited 450 nm of InP. All the epitaxial processes were 
carried out using a low-pressure (60 Torr) Turbodisc® MOVPE system with trimethylindium
(TMIn), arsine (AsH3) and phosphine (PH3) as precursors, and hydrogen (H2) as carrier gas.

Mask fabrication: The mask fabrication process is schematically illustrated in Figure 1(a-

c). PS-b-PDMS powder (61-111 K) was dissolved in cyclohexane 1/400 mg/ml and spin-casted 
onto the wafer forming an ultrathin film of 30 nm (Fig. 1(a)). Ellipsometry measurements 
verified the film thickness. To stimulate the polymer pattern formation, the film was placed into 
a chamber with methylcyclohexane saturated vapor until the pattern of standing cylinders is 
formed (Fig. 1(b)). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was applied to investigate the pattern.

To transform PS-b-PDMS patterned films into a hard mask, an Inductively Coupled Plasma-

Reactive Ion Etching (ICP-RIE) process was carried out. A short step of sulfur hexafluoride 
plasma etch of 10 s was applied in the beginning to remove a thin PDMS skin layer on top of 
the polymer film and to open the PS cylinders [27]. The following oxygen plasma etch with a 
duration of 26 s removed the PS cylinders and oxidized the PDMS matrix. As a result, the PS-
b-PDMS patterned film was transformed into the silicon oxycarbide hard mask with openings 
of 20-30 nm in diameter (Fig. 1(c)). The masks were afterwards inspected with a SEM and an 
atomic force microscope (AFM).

Selective area epitaxy: Prior to the selective epitaxial growth step, the wafer with the mask

on top was cleaned by dipping it into concentrated sulfuric acid for 2 min with following rinsing 
in de-ionized water with nitrogen bubbles for 3 min. After drying with nitrogen gas, the wafer 
was loaded into the MOVPE chamber. Then, an annealing step was carried out under phosphine 
ambient at 550 - 650 °C for 15 min. The next step was in-situ InP etching by carbon 
tetrabromide (CBr4) in the mask openings to form an array of holes (Fig. 1(d)). Prior the QD 
deposition the temperature was lowered to 450 °C and the sample was exposed to AsH3 for 27 s. 
Indium droplets were deposited in the etched holes for 3 s with TMIn flow of 0.23 µmol/min in 


the absence of any Vth group precursor in the growth chamber. Annealing indium droplets under 
AsH3 for 60 s promotes their crystalization into InAs following the structure of the InP crystal 
lattice. InAs QDs were capped first by 3 nm, and next by 5 nm of InP deposited at 450 °C and 
550 °C, respectively (Fig. 1(e)). After this, a short annealing at 550 °C in PH3 ambient was done 
to promote an out diffusion of point defects formed because of the low growth 
temperature [28,29].

Fig. 1. Schematic illustration of the mask fabrication and QD growth process a-e.

Optical characterization. For the spectroscopic experiments, the structure with SAG 

InAs/InP QDs was held in a variable-temperature optical cryostat, with the temperature control 
within the range of 10-300 K. For time-integrated and time-resolved photoluminescence 
experiments, the sample was excited by a train of ~160 fs long pulses with ~13.2 ns pulse-to-
pulse distance. The pulse train either came from a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser (Coherent 
Mira-HP) operating at the wavelength of 832 nm (~1.48 eV), or a synchronously pumped optical
parametric oscillator (Coherent/APE OPO-HP), providing pulses with the wavelength of 1.4 μm 
(~0.89 eV). Emission from the structure was collected in a standard far-field optical setup and 
dispersed by monochromator with a focal length of 0.3 m (Princeton Instruments Acton 
SP2300i). The time-integrated photoluminescence (PL) spectra were measured with the lock-in 
technique (Signal Recovery 7560) at a carrier frequency of 2 kHz, with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled 
InSb photoconductive single channel detector (Hamamatsu P7751-02). Time-resolved 
photoluminescence (TRPL) is measured with a near-infrared streak camera system (Hamamatsu 
C112930-02) operating in the single-photon counting regime with a minimum time-resolution 
of ~20 ps.

3.
Results and discussion

3.1. Fabrication

Block-copolymer lithography. The process of polymer self-assembly depends on the surface 
energy of the wafer. Contact angle measurements showed the difference in surface energy 
between epitaxy grown InP and SiO2 surfaces. We discovered that the oxygen plasma treatment
allowed to change the surface energy of InP to be similar to Si. In this way, the desired pattern
of standing PS cylinders of 30 nm in diameter was achieved after annealing the PS-b-PDMS 
film with a thickness of 30 nm in methylcyclohexane saturated vapor for 55 min at 21 °C. The
presence of short-range hexagonal order indicates a standing cylinder pattern, while the absence 
of such order is typical for the spherical polymer phase [30]. The self-assembly process of DBC 
is susceptible to the annealing time. Already a 5-minute deviation induces significant defects of
a different polymer phase. Temperature and humidity also influence the self-assembly process,


and the film thickness should obey the commensurability condition. A deviation in film 
thickness leads to terracing, which results in a nonuniform pattern phase [31].

Fig. 2. SEM image of SiOxCy hard mask.

After the pattern formation a top PDMS layer covers the pattern [32] and hence it is essential

to remove this layer before the oxygen plasma step. Otherwise, the top layer will be oxidized 
and will not allow for etching of PS cylinders. To make sure that the mask openings are 
completely revealed after removing PS cylinders, the mask was investigated with an AFM 
equipped with ultrathin Bruker ScanAsyst-AIR tips.

Growth of quantum dots. The first step prior to an epitaxial growth is high-temperature 

annealing in phosphine overpressure to remove the native oxide from the semiconductor 
surface. However, annealing InP wafers covered by SiOxCy mask at the standard temperature 
of 650 °C in phosphine ambient resulted in the formation of InP surface defects while the mask 
in those areas got membranized. A typical SEM image of such defects is shown in Fig. 3(a). By 
lowering the annealing temperature down to 550 °C the formation of those under-etch defects
was avoided. A similar problem was described in [23], which in this case was attributed to CBr4

Fig. 3. (a) InP surface defects formed underneath of SiOxCy mask after 650 °C annealing. (b) The same sample 

after the mask is removed.

under-etching, while in our case the high temperature is responsible for InP etching. During the 
annealing step, not only the native oxide but also InP in the mask openings is desorbed, and 
those thermo-etched areas from neighboring openings merge forming surface defects. Since the 
etch rate is different for different crystallographic planes the etched pits have faceting by 
opening (111) family planes. Those defects are clearly seen on the SEM image presented in Fig. 
3(b), taken after the mask removal. Lower annealing temperatures can result in incomplete de-
oxidation, but an increase in annealing time can compensate for this. The efficiency of de-
oxidation was indirectly evaluated by measuring PL from the QD array. Comparison of the


room temperature PL signal for identical QD samples grown after 650 °C annealing and 550 °C
annealing indicates that the optical quality of the material is identical.

For in-situ etching in the MOVPE chamber in the mask openings we employ CBr4.There 

are two purposes for this. The first is to remove areas with a high density of point crystal defects 
after plasma etching and to improve the interface quality [33]. These point defects could act as
nonradiative recombination centers. The second purpose is to etch holes in InP to bury and to 
control the shape of QDs to be grown in those holes. The etch process is self-limited and 
strongly depends on the crystallographic orientation, dominantly opening the (111) plane 
family [34]. The etching time of 20 s was kept short to avoid possible under-etching of InP 
under the mask and merging of etched pits [23].

3.2. Optical characterization

Time-integrated photoluminescence studies. Photoluminescence (PL) spectra obtained in the 
temperature range of 10-300 K for the investigated structure are presented in Fig. 4(a). The 
spectra are measured under conditions of the above InP barrier excitation and with a relatively 
high optical pumping power density (Pexc ≈ 5.5 W/cm-2). The PL spectrum from SAG InAs/InP

Fig. 4. (a) Temperature dependence of PL emission from SAG InAs/InP QDs (Eexc = 1.48 eV, Pexc ≈ 5.5 W/cm-2). 

Inset: PL emission from the InP barrier and the laser spectrum at T = 10 K. (b) Temperature PL quench for QDs measured 
under high/low excitation power above InP barrier (red and blue squares) and below InP barrier excitation under low 
excitation power (green squares), and the PL quench for InP barrier under low excitation power (black squares). These 
dependences are arbitrary shifted on the intensity scale for better visibility. (c) Full-Width-at-Half-Maximum (FWHM) 
parameter for the QDs PL band under two optical pumping powers.

QDs is centered at ~0.8 eV (~0.76 eV) at T = 10 K (300 K) and covers the C- and L- telecom 
spectral windows. Each PL band was fitted to a Gaussian profile allowing for the extraction of 
the peak intensity (Fig. 4(b)) and its full width at half maximum - FWHM (Fig. 4(c)) in order 
to evaluate the carrier confinement in the dots. 


Since the band offset of the strained InAs/InP material system is expected to be ~300 meV 

for the conduction band, and ~500 meV for the valence band [35], the carrier confinement in 
InAs/InP QDs should be rather strong. It is relevant to investigate the temperature impact on 
the carrier distribution of the QD ground state (GS) and the efficiency of the QD emission 
process. The PL intensity for the SAG QDs plotted as a function of inverse temperature, T, is 
shown in Figure 4 (b). Different regimes of excitation were investigated: (i) excitation energy 
tuned above the InP barrier, Eexc= 1.48 eV, and high excitation power density Pexc≈ 5.5 W/cm2

(blue squares), (ii) Eexc= 1.48 eV, and low Pexc≈ 0.6 W/cm2 (red squares), and (iii) quasi-resonant 
excitation of the dots, Eexc= 0.89 eV, nearly 0.53 eV below the InP bandgap and low Pexc≈
0.6 W/cm2 (green squares). In addition, the PL thermal quench for InP is presented in Fig. 4(b) 
(black squares), obtained under Eex = 1.48 eV, and Pexc≈ 0.6 W/cm2. The PL quenches in 
Fig. 4(b) are arbitrarily shifted on the intensity scale for easier mutual comparison. Each 
experimental trend is fitted (solid black lines) by a widely-used steady-state solution for the 
thermal rate equation (Eq.1) expressed as:

I(T)= I0 (1+ ∑
CieEa,i/kBT
n
i=1
)
⁄
(1)

where Ci is a pre-exponential factor for the ith thermal activation process [36], Ea,i is the
activation energy related to the ith process, and kB is the Boltzmann constant. In all the cases, 
experimental data points and fitting curves well converged when two thermal activation 
processes are considered (i=1,2) in Eq. 1. The resulting best fitting parameters are summarized 
in Tab. I.

Table 1. Parameters of the PL quench

PL 

emission
Ea,1, (meV)
Ea,2, (meV)
C1
C2

Excitation,

(eV)

Pumping 

power

QDs
38±9
109±50
25
582
Above InP (1.48 eV)
High

QDs
56±10
7±3
34
2
Above InP (1.48 eV)
Low

InP
54±10
6±1
34
2
Above InP (1.48 eV)
Low

QDs
61±23
9±3
23
3
Quasi-resonantly in QDs
(0.89 eV)
Low

While the pre-exponential factors Ci cannot be easily compared due to the different 

excitation regimes, one can compare the activation energies. For the PL thermal quench 
measured for SAG QDs under high and low Pexc and Eexc= 1.48 eV, both Ea,1 activation energies 
can be considered as similar owing to the same activation mechanism that dominates the PL 
quench independently on the optical power density. In contrast, the Ea,2 energies are much 
different, indicating different activation processes. Their visibility in the overall PL quench 
depends on the occupation factor of the density of states (DOS) in the structure and the 
temperature range. On one side, the process with a higher activation energy Ea,2 = 109±50 meV
can be tracked only under high photo-excitation and at T > 200 K. On the other side, the process 
with a low activation energy Ea,2= 7±3 meV is already present in the low-temperature regime 
15 K< T < 100 K. Most likely, its visibility depends on the occupation factor of the DOS 
addressed during the photo-excitation. It is most intriguing to compare the PL quench 
parameters for the InP barrier and SAG QDs, since apparently, they are very similar within the
uncertainty of the fitting parameters. This observation suggests that the recorded PL quench of 
SAG QD emission is controlled by thermal processes occurring in the barrier DOS. This 
conclusion is strengthened by comparison to the PL quench for QDs excited quasi-resonantly. 


The respective activation energies are the same as those obtained for above-barrier excitation 
(see Tab. I). Therefore, the PL quench observed for SAG QDs cannot be discussed in terms of
typical thermal activation mechanisms like carrier re-excitation from the QD GS to higher-lying 
states within the confinement potential of a dot or to the wetting layer. To describe the observed
behavior, we suggest the following scenario: a population of photo-generated carriers is 
effectively trapped by an extensive DOS located within the InP bandgap, and subsequently, it 
is only partially transferred to QDs. With increasing temperature, a certain population of trapped 
carriers from their localized potentials releases in the barrier with the localization depth of 
roughly 7 and 60 meV (Tab. I). Thermally activated carriers, in their vast majority, are non-
radiatively lost in the barrier and the efficiency of the processes increases with T. It causes that 
less and less carriers feed the QD states with increasing T. The nature of carrier localized states 
in the InP bandgap is related to various lithography steps like impurity levels and defect states 
at the native oxide/InP interface as well as structural defects formed in the InP matrix during
ICP dry etch. Under the incomplete de-oxidation of InP, one can point to InP-1 [37] and OP0 that 
create trap states near the conduction band edge, where the former is localized ~60 meV below 
the conduction band edge of InP and the latter is located deep inside the InP bandgap, as 
suggested in [38]. The InP-1 defect level can be responsible for the observation of the ~60 meV 
activation energy causing the temperature-induced PL quench.

The temperature-induced quench investigation of SAG QD PL emission indicates that the 

barrier DOS has a significant impact on the optical characteristics of these dots and influences
the carrier redistribution process among the QD ensemble. Figure 4 (c) presents the FWHM of 
the peak emission of SAG QDs. In the temperature range of 10-300 K, the FWHM changes only 
slightly within 5% of the value. From 10 K up to ~200 K the changes are even smaller, and the 
FWHM is considered to be constant for a given Pexc. Carrier redistribution processes among 
dots can be visible in the PL quench characteristics at T>200 K, and high Pexc. For Pexc≈
0.6 W/cm2, the FWHM is decreasing with T, while for Pexc≈ 5.5 W/cm2, it increases. The former 
can be interpreted as a speedup of the carrier losses in the barrier owing to population of a 
smaller ensemble of QD states having a deeper confining potential. The latter can be related to 
population of a broader ensemble of QDs and their excited states, both in the vicinity of carrier 
migration in the barrier DOS.

Time-resolved photoluminescence studies. The results of the time-resolved (TR) PL

experiments are summarized in Fig. 5. The excitation is provided at Eexc = 1.48 eV, and Pexc≈
0.6 W/cm2. The examples of intensity-normalized TRPL traces obtained at the center-of-mass 
of the PL emission from SAG QDs are presented in Fig. 5(a). Similar TRPL traces have been 
measured for different emission energies around the PL peak energy to evaluate the possible 
effect of carrier redistribution among QDs.

Each TRPL trace is characterized by a substantial delay after the photo-excitation during

which the PL reaches its maximum amplitude, Fig. 5(b). The numerical fit to the experimental 
data, assuming a bi-exponential decay and single exponential rise, result in two decay times 
parameters: τPLdec,1, τPLdec,2 , and the rise time parameter: τrise, summarized in Fig. 5(c), and (d), 
respectively, plotted as a function of temperature and the emission energy. 


Fig. 5. (a) Time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) traces for selective-area growth InAs/InP QDs at various 
temperatures. (b) TRPL traces at their initial time-period after photo-excitation. (c) Dispersion of photoluminescence 
decay times at various temperatures, (d) dispersion of photoluminescence rise times as a function of temperature.

At T = 10 K, when the phonon population is negligible, one can assume that the PL dynamics 

are mostly determined by the confining potential of a QD. In this case, a TRPL trace is 
characterized by the PL rise time of ~200 ps, and a single PL decay time of ~1 ns. The second 
PL decay component cannot be resolved in this case due to its small amplitude. The PL rise 
time can be related to the sum of capture and the intra-band carrier relaxation times in the dot, 
after which the occupation of QD states reaches its quasi-equilibrium. Such an elongated τrise is 
quite unusual for QDs. For a self-assembled InAs/GaAs QD the intra-band relaxation time 
reaches several ps [39]. In a very recent study on intra-band carrier relaxation times in self-
assembled InAs/InP QDs it was shown that relaxation times can be as short as 8 ps at cryogenic 
temperatures, even including the capture time
[40]. For a comparable QD system like 

InAs/InAlAs/InP(001) [41] and InAs/InP(311B) [42], or InAs/InGaAsP/InP(001) quantum 
dashes [43], the intra-band relaxation time is reported within the range of 1-40 ps. However, in 
the SAG QDs, τrise can be dominated by the capture time, which further will be discussed by the 
temperature-induced trend presented in Fig. 5 (d). The PL decay is a more puzzling issue. On 
one hand, theoretical studies on an electron-hole (e-h) pair strongly confined in InAs/InP QDs 
have predicted the e-h radiative lifetime in the range of 1.6-2.4 ns depending on the dot 
size [44]. On the other hand, for large and strongly elongated InAs/InAlGaAs/InP QDs, where
the e-h pair is in the intermediate confinement regime, the e-h can radiate into two superimposed 
lifetime components of ~1 ns and ~2 ns [45]. Although the latter would match with the obtained
experimental results on SAG QDs, especially at higher temperatures, the estimated small size 
of the dots pushes the interpretation towards the e-h pair lifetime resulting from the strong 
confinement regime.

Figure 5(c) and (d) show temperature induced changes in the PL rise and decay times. One 

can clearly see that both components of the PL decay are barely changed with T, while the 
τPLdec,1 ≈1 ns, the τPLdec,2 is spread between 2.7 and 4.2 ns without any general trend. The spread 
is mostly generated by the accuracy of the fitting procedure. In general, each of the PL decay 
components is composed of radiative (τrad) and non-radiative (τnon-rad) recombination processes: 


τPLdec-1=τrad-1+τnon-rad-1(T). While the already discussed τrad is temperature independent, the τnon-

rad can strongly depend on T. Increasing the phonon population number with T leads to more 
efficient carrier-phonon scattering processes and thus shorter τnon-rad, resulting in a shorter τPLdec. 
This typically leads to the observation of the time-integrated temperature-induced PL quench in 
self-assembled QDs, which is not the case for the studied SAG QDs where non-radiative 
recombination occurs predominantly in the barrier DOS. A similar effect has been observed for 
self-assembled InAs/GaAs QDs [46].

Another interesting point is the lack of any spectral dispersion for the obtained τPLdec,1(T), 

τPLdec,2(T), and τrise(T) functions presented in Fig. 5 (c) and (d). Along with the lack of a 
significant change in the FWHM parameter presented in Fig. 4 (c), it suggests negligible carrier 
migration between QDs and thus a relatively strong e-h confinement in the dot modified by the 
presence of the barrier DOS. 

Finally, for the SAG QDs, the τrise is a strong function of T, as presented in Fig. 5 (d). With 

increasing T from 10 K to 300 K, the τrise increases from ~200 ps to ~560 ps. We previously 
argued that τrise is mainly dominated by the carrier capture time from the barrier to QDs. 
Additionally, we presented evidences for the existence of an extended DOS in the barrier that 
accumulate a significant portion of carriers after their photo-generation. These arguments lead 
to the conclusion that the elongated τrise is most likely related to charge migration within the 
barrier DOS before they are captured by QDs. A similar effect has been shown for self-
assembled (In,Ga)As/GaAs QDs placed on a wetting layer with a large zero-dimensional 
density of states in there [47]. If the spatially distributed DOS outside the QDs is larger than 
the dots density, the carrier capture time can be controlled by a time-consuming temperature-
induced hopping act among spatially distributed states in the barrier.   

4.
Conclusion

In conclusion, we present selective area growth of InAs/InP quantum dots assisted by block-
copolymer lithography. The fabrication method of silicon oxycarbide hard masks with 
cylindrical openings of 20-30 nm in diameter on top of an InP substrate was developed. The 
pattern parameters could be regulated by manipulating the self-assembly process in PS-b-PDMS 
block-copolymer. We carried out a systematic investigation of the carrier dynamics in an array 
of SAG QDs by time-integrated PL and temperature dependent TRPL. The SAG QDs 
demonstrate strong carrier localization, however, their emission properties are affected by the 
defect-related density of states located in the InP barrier in the close vicinity of the dots. It is 
found that these states act as a carrier reservoir for the dots and dominate temperature-induced 
carrier migration in the structure. The effect is seen although of a strong PL quench from QDs 
accompanied by negligible changes in the PL decay time in the whole temperature range. This 
scenario is additionally supported by a slow and elongated temperature carrier capture time by 
the dots ranging from 200-500 ps. The nature of those defects is likely related to the 
technological process, the contamination with foreign atoms during lithography steps as well as 
damage of the crystal lattice during the ICP dry etching process.

Funding

Villum Fonden. Young Investigator Programme. (VKR023442)

Polish budgetary funds for science in 2018-2020. "Diamond Grant" program (DI 2017 011747).

Acknowledgements.

Authors thank Alexander Huck for fruitful discussions.


References

1. 
A. Markus, J. X. Chen, C. Paranthoën, A. Fiore, C. Platz, and O. Gauthier-Lafaye, "Simultaneous two-state 
lasing in quantum-dot lasers," Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 1818–1820 (2003).

2. 
Y. Arakawa and H. Sakaki, "Multidimensional quantum well laser and temperature dependence of its 
threshold current," Appl. Phys. Lett. 40, 939–941 (1982).

3. 
Gyoungwon Park, O. B. Shchekin, D. L. Huffaker, and D. G. Deppe, "Low-threshold oxide-confined 1.3-
μm quantum-dot laser," IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 12, 230–232 (2000).

4. 
O. B. Shchekin, J. Ahn, and D. G. Deppe, "High temperature performance of self-organised quantum dot 
laser with stacked p-doped active region," Electron. Lett. 38, 712 (2002).

5. 
A. . Zhukov, A. . Kovsh, S. . Mikhrin, A. . Vasil’ev, E. . Semenova, N. . Maleev, V. . Ustinov, M. . 
Kulagina, E. . Nikitina, I. . Soshnikov, Y. . Shernyakov, D. . Livshits, N. . Kryjanovskaya, D. . Sizov, M. . 
Maximov, A. . Tsatsul’nikov, N. . Ledentsov, D. Bimberg, and Z. . Alferov, "High external differential 
efficiency and high optical gain of long-wavelength quantum dot diode laser," Phys. E Low-dimensional 
Syst. Nanostructures 17, 589–592 (2003).

6. 
T. Akiyama, M. Sugawara, and Y. Arakawa, "Quantum-Dot Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers," Proc. 
IEEE 95, 1757–1766 (2007).

7. 
A. Kovsh, A. Gubenko, I. Krestnikov, D. Livshits, S. Mikhrin, J. Weimert, L. West, G. Wojcik, D. Yin, C. 
Bornholdt, N. Grote, M. V. Maximov, and A. Zhukov, "Quantum dot comb-laser as efficient light source 
for silicon photonics," in G. C. Righini, S. K. Honkanen, L. Pavesi, and L. Vivien, eds. (International 
Society for Optics and Photonics, 2008), Vol. 6996, p. 69960V.

8. 
K. Yvind, D. Larsson, J. Mørk, J. M. Hvam, M. Thompson, R. Penty, and I. White, "Low-noise monolithic 
mode-locked semiconductor lasers through low-dimensional structures," in A. A. Belyanin and P. M. 
Smowton, eds. (2008), p. 69090A.

9. 
T. W. Berg and J. Mørk, "Theoretical analysis of quantum dot amplifiers with high saturation power and 
low noise figure," in ECOC 2002 Proceedings (IEEE, 2002), Vol. 2, pp. 1–2.

10. 
T. W. Berg and J. Mørk, "Quantum dot amplifiers with high output power and low noise," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 82, 3083–3085 (2003).

11. 
E. S. Semenova, I. V Kulkova, S. Kadkhodazadeh, M. Schubert, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, and K. Yvind, 
"InAs/InGaAsP quantum dots emitting at 1.5 µm for applications in lasers," in IPRM 2011 - 23rd 
International Conference on Indium Phosphide and Related Materials (2011), pp. 1–4.

12. 
Y. Yu, W. Xue, E. Semenova, K. Yvind, and J. Mork, "Demonstration of a self-pulsing photonic crystal 
Fano laser," Nat. Photonics 11, 81–84 (2017).

13. 
W. Xue, Y. Yu, L. Ottaviano, Y. Chen, E. Semenova, K. Yvind, and J. Mork, "Threshold Characteristics of 
Slow-Light Photonic Crystal Lasers," Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 063901 (2016).

14. 
D. Miller, "Device Requirements for Optical Interconnects to Silicon Chips," Proc. IEEE 97, 1166–1185 
(2009).

15. 
B. Ellis, M. A. Mayer, G. Shambat, T. Sarmiento, J. Harris, E. E. Haller, and J. Vučković, "Ultralow-
threshold electrically pumped quantum-dot photonic-crystal nanocavity laser," Nat. Photonics 5, 297–300 
(2011).

16. 
M. T. Hill and M. C. Gather, "Advances in small lasers," Nat. Publ. Gr. 8, (2014).

17. 
M. T. Hill and M. C. Gather, "Advances in small lasers," Nat. Photonics 8, 908–918 (2014).

18. 
I. W. Hamley, "Ordering in thin films of block copolymers: Fundamentals to potential applications," Prog. 
Polym. Sci. 34, 1161–1210 (2009).

19. 
R. A. Segalman, "Patterning with block copolymer thin films," Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 48, 191–226 
(2005).

20. 
H. Yoshida and M. Takenaka, "Physics of block copolymers from bulk to thin films," in Directed Self-
Assembly of Block Co-Polymers for Nano-Manufacturing (Elsevier, 2015), pp. 3–26.

21. 
C.-C. Liu, C.-C. Liu, M. K. Rathi, L. J. Mawst, P. F. Nealey, and T. F. Kuech, "Nanoscale selective growth 
and optical characteristics of quantum dots on III-V substrates prepared by diblock copolymer 
nanopatterning," J. Nanophotonics 3, 31604 (2009).

22. 
E. S. Semenova, I. V. Kulkova, S. Kadkhodazadeh, D. Barettin, O. Kopylov, A. Cagliani, K. Almdal, M. 
Willatzen, and K. Yvind, "Epitaxial growth of quantum dots on InP for device applications operating at the 
1.55 μm wavelength range," in D. L. Huffaker, F. Szmulowicz, and H. Eisele, eds. (International Society for 
Optics and Photonics, 2014), Vol. 8996, p. 899606.

23. 
H. Kim, J. Choi, Z. Lingley, M. Brodie, Y. Sin, T. F. Kuech, P. Gopalan, and L. J. Mawst, "Selective 
growth of strained (In)GaAs quantum dots on GaAs substrates employing diblock copolymer lithography 
nanopatterning," J. Cryst. Growth 465, 48–54 (2017).

24. 
Y. S. Jung and C. A. Ross, "Solvent-Vapor-Induced Tunability of Self-Assembled Block Copolymer 
Patterns," Adv. Mater. 21, 2540–2545 (2009).

25. 
K. W. Gotrik, A. F. Hannon, J. G. Son, B. Keller, A. Alexander-Katz, and C. A. Ross, "Morphology 
Control in Block Copolymer Films Using Mixed Solvent Vapors," ACS Nano 6, 8052–8059 (2012).

26. 
T. Li, Z. Wang, L. Schulte, and S. Ndoni, "Substrate tolerant direct block copolymer nanolithography," 
Nanoscale 8, 136–140 (2016).

27. 
Y. S. Jung and C. A. Ross, "Solvent-Vapor-Induced Tunability of Self-Assembled Block Copolymer 


Patterns," Adv. Mater. 21, 2540–2545 (2009).

28. 
J. F. Girard, C. Dion, P. Desjardins, C. N. Allen, P. J. Poole, and S. Raymond, "Tuning of the electronic 
properties of self-assembled InAs/InP(001) quantum dots by rapid thermal annealing," Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 
3382–3384 (2004).

29. 
C. Dion, P. Desjardins, N. Shtinkov, F. Schiettekatte, P. J. Poole, and S. Raymond, "Effects of grown-in 
defects on interdiffusion dynamics in InAs∕InP(001) quantum dots subjected to rapid thermal annealing," J. 
Appl. Phys. 103, 083526 (2008).

30. 
T. Li, Z. Wang, L. Schulte, O. Hansen, and S. Ndoni, "Fast &amp; scalable pattern transfer via block 
copolymer nanolithography," RSC Adv. 5, 102619–102624 (2015).

31. 
A. P. Smith, J. F. Douglas, J. C. Meredith, E. J. Amis, and A. Karim, "Combinatorial Study of Surface 
Pattern Formation in Thin Block Copolymer Films," Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 015503 (2001).

32. 
T. Li, S. Ndoni, and O. Hansen, "Functional materials derived from block copolymer self-assembly," DTU 
Nanotech (2015).

33. 
S. Arakawa, M. Ito, R. Nakasaki, and A. Kasukawa, "Improvement of MOCVD Growth Technique Using 
CBr4," Furukawa Rev. 76–81 (2003).

34. 
N. Kuznetsova, I. V. Kulkova, E. S. Semenova, S. Kadhodazadeh, N. V. Kryzhanovskaya, A. . Zhukov, 
and K. Yvind, "Crystallographic dependent in-situ CBr4 selective nano-area etching and local regrowth of 
InP/InGaAs by MOVPE," J. Cryst. Growth 406, 111–115 (2014).

35. 
M. Gong, K. Duan, C.-F. Li, R. Magri, G. A. Narvaez, and L. He, "Electronic structure of self-assembled 
InAs∕InP quantum dots: Comparison with self-assembled InAs∕GaAs quantum dots," Phys. Rev. B 77, 
045326 (2008).

36. 
M. A. Reshchikov, "Temperature dependence of defect-related photoluminescence in III-V and II-VI 
semiconductors," J. Appl. Phys. 115, 012010 (2014).

37. 
R. Mishra, O. D. Restrepo, A. Kumar, and W. Windl, "Native point defects in binary InP semiconductors," 
J. Mater. Sci. 47, 7482–7497 (2012).

38. 
D. Ko, X. W. Zhao, K. M. Reddy, O. D. Restrepo, R. Mishra, T. R. Lemberger, I. S. Beloborodov, N. 
Trivedi, N. P. Padture, W. Windl, F. Y. Yang, and E. Johnston-Halperin, "Defect states and disorder in 
charge transport in semiconductor nanowires," J. Appl. Phys. 114, 043711 (2013).

39. 
H. Kurtze, J. Seebeck, P. Gartner, D. R. Yakovlev, D. Reuter, A. D. Wieck, M. Bayer, and F. Jahnke, 
"Carrier relaxation dynamics in self-assembled semiconductor quantum dots," Phys. Rev. B 80, 235319 
(2009).

40. 
M. Syperek, J. Andrzejewski, E. Rogowicz, J. Misiewicz, S. Bauer, V. I. Sichkovskyi, J. P. Reithmaier, and 
G. Sȩk, "Carrier relaxation bottleneck in type-II InAs/InGaAlAs/InP(001) coupled quantum dots-quantum 
well structure emitting at 1.55 μ m," Appl. Phys. Lett. 112, 221901 (2018).

41. 
E. Péronne, F. Fossard, F. H. Julien, J. Brault, M. Gendry, B. Salem, G. Bremond, and A. Alexandrou, 
"Dynamic saturation of an intersublevel transition in self-organized InAs/InxAl1-xAs quantum dots," Phys. 
Rev. B 67, 205329 (2003).

42. 
P. Miska, J. Even, O. Dehaese, and X. Marie, "Carrier relaxation dynamics in InAs∕InP quantum dots," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 191103 (2008).

43. 
M. Syperek, Ł. Dusanowski, J. Andrzejewski, W. Rudno-Rudziński, G. Sȩk, J. Misiewicz, and F. Lelarge, 
"Carrier relaxation dynamics in InAs/GaInAsP/InP(001) quantum dashes emitting near 1.55  μ m," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 103, 083104 (2013).

44. 
M. Gong, W. Zhang, G. Can Guo, and L. He, "Atomistic pseudopotential theory of optical properties of 
exciton complexes in InAs/InP quantum dots," Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 231106 (2011).

45. 
M. Gawełczyk, M. Syperek, A. Maryński, P. Mrowiński, Ł. Dusanowski, K. Gawarecki, J. Misiewicz, A. 
Somers, J. P. Reithmaier, S. Höfling, and G. Sęk, "Exciton lifetime and emission polarization dispersion in 
strongly in-plane asymmetric nanostructures," Phys. Rev. B 96, 245425 (2017).

46. 
K. Mukai, N. Ohtsuka, and M. Sugawara, "High photoluminescence efficiency of InGaAs/GaAs quantum 
dots self-formed by atomic layer epitaxy technique," Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 2416 (1998).

47. 
M. Syperek, M. Baranowski, G. Sęk, J. Misiewicz, A. Löffler, S. Höfling, S. Reitzenstein, M. Kamp, and 
A. Forchel, "Impact of wetting-layer density of states on the carrier relaxation process in low indium
content self-assembled (In,Ga)As/GaAs quantum dots," Phys. Rev. B 87, 125305 (2013).


