Controlled integration of selected detectors

and emitters in photonic integrated circuits

Ronan Gourgues,∗,† Iman Esmaeil Zadeh,‡,† Ali W. Elshaari,¶ Gabriele Bulgarini,†

Johannes W. N. Los,† Julien Zichi,¶ Dan Dalacu,§ Philip J.Poole,§ Sander N.

Dorenbos,† and Val Zwiller¶,†

†Single Quantum B.V., 2628 CH Delft, The Netherlands.

‡Optics Research Group, ImPhys Department, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Delft University

of Technology, Lorentzweg 1, 2628 CJ Delft, The Netherlands.

¶Department of Applied Physics, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), SE-106 91

Stockholm, Sweden.

§National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada.

E-mail: ronan@singlequantum.com

Abstract

Integration of superconducting nanowire single photon detectors and quantum

sources with photonic waveguides is crucial for realizing advanced quantum integrated

circuits. However, scalability is hindered by stringent requirements on high performance

detectors. Here we overcome the yield limitation by controlled coupling of photonic

channels to pre-selected detectors based on measuring critical current, timing resolu-

tion, and detection efficiency. As a proof of concept of our approach, we demonstrate

a hybrid on-chip full-transceiver consisting of a deterministically integrated detector

coupled to a selected nanowire quantum dot through a filtering circuit made of a

silicon nitride waveguide and a ring resonator filter, delivering 100 dB suppression of

1

arXiv:1811.03979v2  [physics.app-ph]  16 Nov 2018


the excitation laser. In addition, we perform extensive testing of the detectors before

and after integration in the photonic circuit and show that the high performance of

the superconducting nanowire detectors, including timing jitter down to 23 ± 3 ps, is

maintained. Our approach is fully compatible with wafer level automated testing in a

cleanroom environment.

Introduction

From visible to mid-infrared, superconducting nanowire single photon detectors (SNSPDs)

have demonstrated excellent performances in terms of efficiency,1–3 temporal resolution,4,5

dark counts6 and detection rates.2 The fact that SNSPDs are compact and require only a

single lithographic step for their realization allows for building large scale optical circuits.

All these features make SNSPDs ideal candidates for photon detection in advanced quan-

tum7 and neuromorphic integrated optical circuits.8,9 Waveguide-integrated SNSPDs are

particularly interesting, because the evanescent coupling allows for close to unity detection

efficiencies,10,11 while still maintaining short detection length due to the strong coupling be-

tween the SNSPD and the guided optical mode. Several superconducting materials such as

NbN and NbTiN have been used to fabricate detectors in a wide variety of photonic plat-

forms: silicon-on-insulator,11 silicon nitride-on-insulator,12 diamond,13 and GaAs/AlGaAs.14

The scalability of complex quantum photonic integrated circuits is limited by the fabrica-

tion yield of each component.15 High performance single-photon detectors based on SNSPD

technology are demanding due to challenges in sputtering high quality superconducting films

and imperfections in the nanowire during lithography and etching steps. Constrictions along

the nanowire affect the performance of the detector by limiting the device switching current

well below its theoretical critical current.16 Due to these subtle non-determinisms in fab-

rication, without careful characterization, it is difficult to predict if all detectors meet the

required performances. In this work, we report on a deterministic approach for integrating

high performance SNSPDs with photonic circuits. Additionally, we demonstrate an on-chip

2


full transceiver consisting of a source, an optical link, and a detector on the same circuit. In

the following sections we discuss the fabrication process and present the results.

SNSPDs fabrication and characterization

Figure 1: (a) Schematics of the fabrication process. (b) Optical microscope image of a chip
with 16 SNSPDs. (c) SEM image of the SNSPD and the series inductor. (d) SEM image
of the U-shaped nanowire detector. (e) Normalized detection efficiency at 881 nm for two
detectors on the same chip VS bias current.

The process for fabricating the devices is shown in Figure 1a. We started with a silicon

wafer and thermally oxidized it to form 3.6 µm SiO2, which serves as the bottom cladding

for the photonic waveguide [Figure 1(a1)]. Next, we sputtered 9.5 nm thick NbTiN using

magnetron co-sputtering in an Ar and N2 atmosphere [Figure 1(a2)]. The film thickness and

composition were optimized to yield high critical current with saturated internal efficiency at

∼ 900 nm, close to the emission wavelength of selected nanowire quantum dots in the exper-

iment at 4.2 K. Subsequently, Cr/Au contacts were formed using e-beam-lithography, evap-

3


oration and lift-off [Figure 1(a3)]. The nanowires were patterned on hydrogen silsesquioxane

(HSQ) e-beam resist using 100 keV lithography system [Figure 1(a4)], then the pattern was

transferred to the NbTiN layer by dry etching using SF6 and O2 chemistry [Figure 1(a5)].

The sample was mounted on a printed circuit board to allow electrical bias and read out. For

the purpose of prototyping and due to the limited range of the translation stages, each chip

houses 16 devices fabricated on a sample of size 1.8 × 1 cm2 as shown in Figure 1b. Fig-

ure 1c presents a scanning electron microscope image of the detector. The active part of the

detector, partly shown in Figure 1d, forms a "U"-shape11–13,17 with 70 nm wide nanowires

separated by a 200 nm gap. Additionally, to avoid latching due to the small kinetic induc-

tance of the nanowire, we included a 2.5 mm long and 400 nm wide section serving as a

series inductor.18 To characterize the detectors, the samples were directly immersed in liquid

helium and illuminated from the top using attenuated CW laser at 881 nm. Detectors were

biased using a tunable source and the detection events were counted by a high-speed counter.

Figure 1e shows the normalized efficiency of two representative detectors on the same

chip as a function of the bias current, the observation of a plateau in the count rate for fixed

illumination indicates unity internal efficiency of the detector. We observe that the internal

efficiency of detector 11 (black curve) saturates at approximately 80 % of the critical current,

in sharp contrast with detector 4 (green curve). Detectors 11 and 4 have a critical current

of 11.6 µA and 6.9 µA respectively. The low critical current and low internal efficiency of

detector 4 demonstrate the necessity of selecting detectors when they are integrated with

complex photonic circuits.

Deterministic integration of the detectors

Silicon nitride was selected for the waveguide core in our photonic circuit. It offers a wide

optical transparency window from visible to mid-IR,19 which makes it a good candidate for a

range of photonic applications.20–22 Additionally, the relatively large refractive index-contrast

4


Figure 2: (a) Histograms of the critical current before (top) and after (bottom) deposition of
Si3N4. (b) Difference in critical current before and after deposition of Si3N4 for each detector,
the two dashed vertical lines indicate current variation of -1 µA and 1 µA, respectively.
(c) Timing jitter measurement after deposition of Si3N4. (d) Detector normalized internal
efficiency before and after deposition of Si3N4 as function of bias current.

with silicon oxide allows for single mode operation with high confinement of the optical

mode.23 Furthermore, Si3N4 is deposited by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition

(PECVD), the process has low thermal budget and CMOS compatible, making it suitable

for large-scale CMOS-backend integration. To study the compatibility of the detectors with

PECVD Si3N4, we initially characterized their critical current and internal optical detection

efficiency before deposition. Next, we deposited a 200 nm thick layer of Si3N4 on top of

the SNSPDs [Figure 2a6] and carefully re-measured each detector to study any deviation in

performance. We used the same experimental set-up for all measurements.

A histogram of the critical current spread for 64 devices before and after PECVD depo-

sition is shown in Figure 2a. The majority of devices have critical current in the range 7 µA

- 8 µA. We calculated an average critical current of 7.52 µA before deposition and 7.42 µA

after deposition. The standard deviation for the two distributions are 1.99 µA and 2.24 µA,

respectively. The extracted statistics of the fabricated devices match those of commercially

5


produced detectors for fiber-coupling, showing standard deviation of around one-fourth of

the average critical current. We conclude from the analysis that photonic layer deposition

has a negligible effect on the critical current of the detectors. We confirm this result by

plotting the difference in critical current before and after deposition as shown in Figure 2b.

The majority of detectors show a critical current variation of less than 1 µm. However, we

notice larger changes in the critical current for a few devices, for instance devices 3 and 6

show a change in critical current by more than 2 µA. Out of 64 fabricated devices only one

device shows open-circuit electrical response after deposition. Furthermore, we performed

timing-jitter measurements for the highest performing detectors after etching the circuit.

The experimental set-up used to perform the timing-jitter measurements is discussed in de-

tail in.2 Figure 2c presents the temporal resolution of a selected device biased at 90 % of

its critical current. The fitted data gives a full width half maximum (FWHM) timing-jitter

= 23 ± 3 ps. A better time resolution can be achieved by using a cryogenic amplifier and

by operating the SNSPD at a lower temperature which in turn increases the critical current

and hence the signal to noise ratio.4 Figure 2d shows the normalized efficiency versus bias

current for the same detector. The critical current is 11.6 µA and 11.5 µA before and after

deposition, respectively, the two curves overlap indicating a minimal influence of the depo-

sition of silicon nitride on the performance of the detector. Based on timing-jitter, internal

efficiency, and high critical current, we selected this detector for integration in a photonic cir-

cuit. The detector is coupled through a filtering circuit to a selected nanowire quantum dot

to measure the quantum dot lifetime. The waveguides were patterned using e-beam lithog-

raphy, the pattern was then transferred to Si3N4 by dry etching in a CHF3/Ar chemistry

[Figure 2a7]. To conclude this section, all extensive measurements reveal that testing the

SNSPDs performance is needed to select the detectors before etching the waveguide layer,

and the integrated circuit should be designed according to the selected SNSPDs.

6


Quantum dot nanowire integration with SNSPDs

Figure 3: (a) 3D FDTD simulation of near field intensity distribution (normalized) of the
fundamental quasi-TE mode along 5 µm of NbTiN superconducting nanowire. The light is
coupled to the waveguide from the left on the picture. (b) Simulated cross section of the
electric field (normalized) in the Si3N4 waveguide before reaching the nanowire detector. (c)
Simulated cross section of the electric field (normalized) in the Si3N4 waveguide with NbTiN
nanowires after 2.5 µm of propagation. (d) Left : An optical picture of a part of the photonic
circuit which includes quantum dots nanowires, a waveguide and a ring resonator. Right:
SEM image of the fabricated waveguide on top of the SNSPD. (e) Spectrum of a selected
quantum dot nanowire. (f) Lifetime measurement of the quantum dot nanowire performed
on chip.

Recent hybrid integration techniques20,24–27 allow for combining high quality single pho-

ton emitters with silicon based photonic circuits. Waveguide coupled detectors are central

elements in quantum photonic circuits to measure and analyse quantum states on chip. Ef-

ficient detection of the qubits is one of the main requirements for realizing the theoretical

7


proposal for linear optical quantum computing,28 other requirements include ancillary states,

post-selection, and feed-forward of the detection measurement. A key feature for waveguide

integrated detectors is the high detection efficiency due to the strong evanescent coupling

to the detector. To verify this, we perform three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain

(3D FDTD) simulations. Figure 3a shows the optical mode absorption for a waveguide-

coupled SNSPD. From the simulations we calculate an absorption coefficient of 3.1 dB/µm

at the wavelength of 890 nm. The simulated waveguide matches the design of the fabricated

chip with a height of 200 nm and width of 800 nm. The optical mode propagating in the

waveguide as shown in Figure 3b. The dimensions chosen for the waveguide provide a good

confinement of the fundamental TE mode. Additionally, the selected air cladding delocalizes

the optical mode into the substrate where the SNSPD is located, thus enhancing the SNSPD

absorption by 10 % compared to the oxide cladding case. Figure 3c shows the eigen mode

at the SNSPD region where the electric field intensity is maximum near the NbTiN wires.

As a result, 91.4 % of the light is absorbed after 25 µm of propagation.

Based on the simulation results, we fabricated a full-quantum transceiver on-chip. The

circuit consists of a ring resonator filter (Figure 3d left), the drop port of the filter is termi-

nated by a waveguide coupled superconducting detector (Figure 3d right), while the input

port is coupled to a nanowire quantum dot as shown in Figure 3d left. The quantum source

was deterministically transferred using a nano-manipulation technique20,24 from the growth

chip to the photonic circuit chip. The emission spectrum of the waveguide-coupled nanowire

quantum dot is shown in Figure 3e. We designed the ring resonator so that the resonances

have critical coupling around the emission wavelength of the quantum dot transition at 886.5

nm. The nanowire quantum dot was excited from the top using a femtosecond 515 nm pulsed

laser with a repetition rate of 20 MHz. The wavelength of the laser was chosen to be within

the absorption window of silicon nitride, thus the waveguide core acts as a natural high-pass

filter to eliminate the pump photons which can blind the SNSPDs from detecting the QD

signal. Additionally, the ring resonator is highly under-coupled for the pump laser photons,

8


which provides an additional stage of filtering of the high intensity pump. The total suppres-

sion of the laser is estimated to be 100 dB. After excitation of the QD, the emitted photons

are coupled to the silicon nitride waveguide, they are filtered by the ring resonator, and

finally detected by the superconducting detector. Figure 3f shows a time-resolved start-stop

correlation measurement with the laser signal, the SNSPD provides high time-resolution of

23 ps. We extracted the QD signal decay time of 0.62 ± 0.02 ns, in agreement with previous

measurements performed on similar quantum dot nanowires configuration.24,29

The presented measurement sets a standard for the level of determinism needed to realize

large scale quantum photonic circuits, where detectors, as well as sources, are selected in a

controlled process based on their individual characteristics.

Conclusion

In summary, we have shown a deterministic method to integrate high performance SNSPDs

with photonic circuits. We realized on-chip full-transceiver, completely deterministic from

source to detector and validated it by measuring the lifetime of a selected quantum dot.

The integration process demonstrated in this article is CMOS compatible, detectors can be

mass-produced and their characterization can be fully automated. Afterwards, only the best

detectors are integrated with the photonic circuit. We believe that our method provides the

needed accuracy and performance to realize future large scale quantum and neuromorphic

photonic circuits.

Funding

A.W.E acknowledges support from Vetenskapsrådet Starting Grant (Ref: 2016-03905) and

Marie-Sklodowska Curie Individual Fellowship under REA grant agreement No.
749971

(HyQuIP). I.E.Z acknowledges support from NWO LIFT-HTSM for Physics 2016-2017 under

the project number 680-91-202. R.G acknowledges support by the European Commission

9


via the Marie-Sklodowska Curie action Phonsi (H2020-MSCA-ITN-642656).

Acknowledgement

We would like to thank Single Quantum for technical supports and Dr. Silvania Pereira for

her contribution to this publication.

References

(1) Marsili, F.; Verma, V. B.; Stern, J. A.; Harrington, S.; Lita, A. E.; Gerrits, T.;

Vayshenker, I.; Baek, B.; Shaw, M. D.; Mirin, R. P.; Nam, S. W. Detecting single

infrared photons with 93% system efficiency. Nature Photonics 2013, 7, 210 EP –.

(2) Esmaeil Zadeh, I.; Los, J. W. N.; Gourgues, R. B. M.; Steinmetz, V.; Bulgarini, G.;

Dobrovolskiy, S. M.; Zwiller, V.; Dorenbos, S. N. Single-photon detectors combining

high efficiency, high detection rates, and ultra-high timing resolution. APL Photonics

2017, 2, 111301.

(3) Zhang, W.; You, L.; Li, H.; Huang, J.; Lv, C.; Zhang, L.; Liu, X.; Wu, J.; Wang, Z.;

Xie, X. NbN superconducting nanowire single photon detector with efficiency over 90%

at 1550 nm wavelength operational at compact cryocooler temperature. Science China

Physics, Mechanics & Astronomy 2017, 60, 120314.

(4) Esmaeil Zadeh, I.; Los, J. W. N.; Gourgues, R. B. M.; Bulgarini, G.; Dobrovolskiy, S. M.;

Zwiller, V.; Dorenbos, S. N. A single-photon detector with high efficiency and sub-10ps

time resolution. ArXiv e-prints 2018,

(5) Korzh, B. A., et al. Demonstrating sub-3 ps temporal resolution in a superconducting

nanowire single-photon detector. 2018,

10


(6) Schuck, C.; Pernice, W. H. P.; Tang, H. X. Waveguide integrated low noise NbTiN

nanowire single-photon detectors with milli-Hz dark count rate. Scientific Reports 2013,

3, 1893 EP –, Article.

(7) O’Brien, J. L.; Furusawa, A.; Vuckovic, J. Photonic quantum technologies. Nature

Photonics 2009, 3, 687 EP –, Review Article.

(8) Shen, Y.; Harris, N. C.; Skirlo, S.; Prabhu, M.; Baehr-Jones, T.; Hochberg, M.;

Sun, X.; Zhao, S.; Larochelle, H.; Englund, D.; Soljacic, M. Deep learning with co-

herent nanophotonic circuits. Nature Photonics 2017, 11, 441 EP –, Article.

(9) Shainline, J. M.; Buckley, S. M.; Mirin, R. P.; Nam, S. W. Superconducting Optoelec-

tronic Circuits for Neuromorphic Computing. Phys. Rev. Applied 2017, 7, 034013.

(10) Kovalyuk, V.; Hartmann, W.; Kahl, O.; Kaurova, N.; Korneev, A.; Goltsman, G.;

Pernice, W. H. P. Absorption engineering of NbN nanowires deposited on silicon nitride

nanophotonic circuits. Opt. Express 2013, 21, 22683–22692.

(11) Pernice, W. H. P.; Schuck, C.; Minaeva, O.; Li, M.; Goltsman, G. N.; Sergienko, A. V.;

Tang, H. X. High-speed and high-efficiency travelling wave single-photon detectors em-

bedded in nanophotonic circuits. Nature Communications 2012, 3, 1325 EP –, Article.

(12) Schuck, C.; Pernice, W. H. P.; Tang, H. X. NbTiN superconducting nanowire detectors

for visible and telecom wavelengths single photon counting on Si3N4 photonic circuits.

Applied Physics Letters 2013, 102, 051101.

(13) Rath, P.; Kahl, O.; Ferrari, S.; Sproll, F.; Lewes-Malandrakis, G.; Brink, D.; Ilin, K.;

Siegel, M.; Nebel, C.; Pernice, W. Superconducting single-photon detectors integrated

with diamond nanophotonic circuits. Light: Science &Amp; Applications 2015, 4, e338

EP –, Original Article.

11


(14) Reithmaier, G.; Lichtmannecker, S.; Reichert, T.; Hasch, P.; Müller, K.; Bichler, M.;

Gross, R.; Finley, J. J. On-chip time resolved detection of quantum dot emission using

integrated superconducting single photon detectors. Scientific Reports 2013, 3, 1901

EP –, Article.

(15) Metcalf, B. J.; Thomas-Peter, N.; Spring, J. B.; Kundys, D.; Broome, M. A.;

Humphreys, P. C.; Jin, X.-M.; Barbieri, M.; Steven Kolthammer, W.; Gates, J. C.;

Smith, B. J.; Langford, N. K.; Smith, P. G. R.; Walmsley, I. A. Multiphoton quantum

interference in a multiport integrated photonic device. Nature Communications 2013,

4, 1356 EP –, Article.

(16) Kerman, A. J.; Dauler, E. A.; Yang, J. K. W.; Rosfjord, K. M.; Anant, V.;

Berggren, K. K.; GolâĂŹtsman, G. N.; Voronov, B. M. Constriction-limited detec-

tion efficiency of superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors. Applied Physics

Letters 2007, 90, 101110.

(17) Khasminskaya, S.; Pyatkov, F.; Slowik, K.; Ferrari, S.; Kahl, O.; Kovalyuk, V.; Rath, P.;

Vetter, A.; Hennrich, F.; Kappes, M. M.; Gol’tsman, G.; Korneev, A.; Rockstuhl, C.;

Krupke, R.; Pernice, W. H. P. Fully integrated quantum photonic circuit with an elec-

trically driven light source. Nature Photonics 2016, 10, 727 EP –, Article.

(18) Ejrnaes, M.; Casaburi, A.; Quaranta, O.; Marchetti, S.; Gaggero, A.; Mattioli, F.;

Leoni, R.; Pagano, S.; Cristiano, R. Characterization of parallel superconducting

nanowire single photon detectors. Superconductor Science and Technology 2009, 22,

055006.

(19) Rahim, A. et al. Expanding the Silicon Photonics Portfolio With Silicon Nitride Pho-

tonic Integrated Circuits. J. Lightwave Technol. 2017, 35, 639–649.

(20) Elshaari, A. W.; Zadeh, I. E.; Fognini, A.; Reimer, M. E.; Dalacu, D.; Poole, P. J.;

12


Zwiller, V.; Jöns, K. D. On-chip single photon filtering and multiplexing in hybrid

quantum photonic circuits. Nature Communications 2017, 8, 379.

(21) Poot, M.; Tang, H. X. Characterization of optical quantum circuits using resonant

phase shifts. Applied Physics Letters 2016, 109, 131106.

(22) Elshaari, A. W.; Zadeh, I. E.; JÃűns, K. D.; Zwiller, V. Thermo-Optic Characterization

of Silicon Nitride Resonators for Cryogenic Photonic Circuits. IEEE Photonics Journal

2016, 8, 1–9.

(23) Subramanian, A. Z.; Neutens, P.; Dhakal, A.; Jansen, R.; Claes, T.; Rottenberg, X.;

Peyskens, F.; Selvaraja, S.; Helin, P.; Bois, B. D.; Leyssens, K.; Severi, S.; Desh-

pande, P.; Baets, R.; Dorpe, P. V. Low-Loss Singlemode PECVD Silicon Nitride Pho-

tonic Wire Waveguides for 532 âĂŞ 900 nm Wavelength Window Fabricated Within a

CMOS Pilot Line. IEEE Photonics Journal 2013, 5, 2202809–2202809.

(24) Zadeh, I. E.; Elshaari, A. W.; Jöns, K. D.; Fognini, A.; Dalacu, D.; Poole, P. J.;

Reimer, M. E.; Zwiller, V. Deterministic Integration of Single Photon Sources in Silicon

Based Photonic Circuits. Nano Letters 2016, 16, 2289–2294.

(25) Kim, J.-H.; Aghaeimeibodi, S.; Richardson, C. J. K.; Leavitt, R. P.; Englund, D.;

Waks, E. Hybrid Integration of Solid-State Quantum Emitters on a Silicon Photonic

Chip. Nano Letters 2017, 17, 7394–7400.

(26) Kim, J.-H.; Aghaeimeibodi, S.; Richardson, C. J. K.; Leavitt, R. P.; Waks, E. Super-

Radiant Emission from Quantum Dots in a Nanophotonic Waveguide. Nano Letters

2018, 18, 4734–4740.

(27) Davanco, M.; Liu, J.; Sapienza, L.; Zhang, C.-Z.; De Miranda Cardoso, J. V.; Verma, V.;

Mirin, R.; Nam, S. W.; Liu, L.; Srinivasan, K. Heterogeneous integration for on-chip

quantum photonic circuits with single quantum dot devices. Nature Communications

2017, 8, 889.

13


(28) Knill, E.; Laflamme, R.; Milburn, G. J. A scheme for efficient quantum computation

with linear optics. Nature 2001, 409, 46 EP –, Article.

(29) Chen, Y.; Zadeh, I. E.; JÃűns, K. D.; Fognini, A.; Reimer, M. E.; Zhang, J.; Dalacu, D.;

Poole, P. J.; Ding, F.; Zwiller, V.; Schmidt, O. G. Controlling the exciton energy of a

nanowire quantum dot by strain fields. Applied Physics Letters 2016, 108, 182103.

14


