Neuromorphic MoS2 memtransistors fabricated by

localised helium ion beam irradiation

Jakub Jadwiszczak†1 2 3 4, Darragh Keane†1 5, Pierce Maguire1 2, Conor P. Cullen1 5,

Yangbo Zhou4, Hua-Ding Song3, Clive Downing1 5, Daniel S. Fox1 2, Niall McEvoy1 5,

Rui Zhu6, Jun Xu6, Georg S. Duesberg1 5 7, Zhi-Min Liao3 8, John J. Boland1 5, and

Hongzhou Zhang1 2

1Centre for Research on Adaptive Nanostructures and Nanodevices (CRANN) and Advanced Materials and Bioengi-

neering Research (AMBER) Research Centers, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

2School of Physics, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland

3State Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Re-

public of China

4School of Material Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, Youxun W Rd, Xinjian Qu, Nanchang Shi, Jiangxi

Sheng, People’s Republic of China

5School of Chemistry, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland

6Electron Microscopy Laboratory, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China

7Institute of Physics, EIT 2, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Universität der Bundeswehr

München, Werner-Heisenberg-Weg 39, 85577 Neubiberg, Germany

8Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, People’s Republic of China

November 26, 2018

Two-dimensional layered semiconductors have recently emerged as attractive

building blocks for next-generation low-power non-volatile memories.
However,

Hongzhou Zhang: hozhang@tcd.ie

1

arXiv:1811.09545v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  23 Nov 2018


challenges remain in the controllable sub-micron fabrication of bipolar resistively

switching circuit components from these novel materials. Here we report on the

scalable experimental realisation of lateral on-dielectric memtransistors from mono-

layer single-crystal molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) utilising a focused helium ion

beam. Site-specific irradiation with the probe of a helium ion microscope (HIM)

allows for the creation of charged defects in the MoS2 lattice. The reversible drift

of these locally seeded defects in the applied electric field modulates the resistance

of the semiconducting channel, enabling versatile memristive functionality on the

nanoscale. We find the device can reliably retain its resistance ratios and set bi-

ases for hundreds of switching cycles at sweep frequencies of up to 2.9 V s−1 with

relatively low drain-source biases. We also demonstrate long term potentiation and

depression with sharp habituation that promises application in future neuromorphic

architectures. This work advances the down-scaling progress of memristive devices

without sacrificing key performance parameters such as power consumption or its

applicability for synaptic emulation.

In the ever-evolving field of nanoelectronics, new circuit design paradigms are constantly

sought-after to improve the performance of next-generation on-chip devices. To a large extent,

it is the materials used in these devices that govern their properties and potential applications.

Two-dimensional (2D) layered materials such as MoS2 have recently emerged as strong candi-

dates to usher in a new age of nanoscale memories [1]. Due to enhanced electrostatic control

and inter-layer van der Waals bonding, these materials could offer high-performing, flexible

and transparent alternatives to silicon-based memory components [2–9]. On-chip MoS2-based

vertical memory cells [10–18] and printed lateral devices with synaptic functionalities [19] have

been prototyped in recent years.

Single-layer polycrystalline MoS2 thin films have been demonstrated to operate as gate-

tunable, non-volatile and multi-terminal resistive switches; or so-called memtransistors [20, 21].

Switching of resistance states in these devices occurs when biasing over defect-rich grain bound-

aries, introduced into the material during the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) process by

2


Figure 1: Device fabrication and characterisation of the irradiated region. (a) Optical micrograph
of CVD MoS2 flakes grown on SiO2 substrates contacted with EBL-deposited Ti/Au electrodes.
(b) False-colour SEM image of the region marked with the green square in (a) showing a single-
crystal device contacted with multiple terminals. (c) Illustration of the irradiation strategy. (d)
AFM scan of an irradiated line cut on monolayer MoS2. At the delivered ion dose, the build-up
of hydrocarbon beam-induced deposition is observed to average out at ∼ 2.7 nm along the length
of the fissure. Inset: thickness profile taken from the green line marked on the AFM map. (e)
Cross-sectional TEM image of a fabricated bilayer device. Underneath the hydrocarbon build-up,
we observe a defect-rich region in the MoS2 laterally spanning ∼ 6 nm.

restricting the sulfur supply. These memristive elements hold promise in mimicking neurosy-

naptic signalling by altering the physical state of the transistor channel through application

of a large drain-source bias (> 20 V). Their unusual in-plane functionality and multi-input

features integrate easily with Si-based processes; but require the implementation of a location-

agnostic CVD growth process. Downscaling of this bottom-up process is ultimately limited by

the dimensions of the resulting grain boundaries. The ability to locally modify the structure

of transition metal dichalcogenides by scalable and industry-compatible top-down methods so

that resistive switching is induced in these materials has remained a challenge.

Herein, we report the first successful fabrication of a 2D memristive switch utilising a focused

helium ion beam. The structure of both CVD-grown and mechanically-exfoliated semiconduct-

ing MoS2 flakes is locally altered by focused ion probe irradiations at a critical dose of 1.6 pC

µm−1. When carried out in a bisecting geometry (parallel to electrodes) this modification of

3


the field effect transistor (FET) channel results in the creation of bipolar resistive switches. We

performed microscopic and spectroscopic analyses to determine the nature of the defective in-

terface at the irradiation site. We provide evidence that the field-driven drift of defects, believed

to be sulfur vacancies (VS) sourced from the damaged region, is the mechanism by which the

different resistance states of the device are realised. In addition, we demonstrate heterosynap-

tic conductance modulation in multi-terminal devices and sharp habituation during long-term

potentiation neural training. We highlight the pertinence of our method in producing new-

generation neuromorphic circuit components, which should prove crucial for the integration of

2D materials into future memory devices.

Device fabrication and defect seeding by helium ion beam

We employ a previously-published CVD method to grow large single-crystal triangles of mono-

layer MoS2, as described in the Methods section. Figure 1a is an optical micrograph of a typical

device. The area marked with the green frame is shown magnified in the false colour scanning

electron micrograph in Fig. 1b. We note that neither the CVD-grown nor the mechanically-

exfoliated MoS2 samples used as starting material in this study possess visible grain boundaries,

and thus their initial electrical performance is typical of pristine n-type MoS2 FETs, with no

hysteresis observed in the IV characteristics (see Supplementary Section 1). The irradiation

strategy for inducing memristive behaviour in MoS2 involves tracing out a unidirectional single

pixel-wide line scan of dose 1.6 pC µm−1 to bisect the whole FET channel, i.e. parallel to the

source and drain electrodes (see geometry in Fig. 1c and additional micrographs in Supplemen-

tary Section 1). This introduces a fissure region in the middle of the channel. The irradiation

is performed once a sub-3 nm probe size is obtained by focusing elsewhere close-by on the SiO2

chip (see Supplementary Section 1 for determination of probe size). Exposure to the MoS2

channel at this ion energy will introduce sulfur vacancies into the material and may also re-

move Mo atoms, as studied previously with electron energy dispersive spectroscopy [22] and

predicted by simulations [23]. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) scans of the fissure region reveal

a mound of hydrocarbons formed during beam-induced deposition (BID) capping the damaged

region of MoS2. For our optimal memristive dose, the height of this mound was usually found

4


to average below 3 nm (see Supplementary Section 1 for further AFM data and dependence of

height on dose). We prepared a lamella of an irradiated device by focused ion beam lift-out

for imaging in the transmission electron microscope (TEM). A cross-sectional TEM image of

a fabricated device is presented in Fig. 1e. We note that the extent of true lattice damage to

the MoS2 flake is obscured from top view by the hydrocarbon BID mound, and in actuality

extends to just under 10 nanometers, where it interfaces abruptly with the pristine lattice (see

plan-view TEM images in Supplementary Section 1). This is in agreement with the damage

range estimated from simulations for the beam energy of 30 keV employed in our experiments

[23]. The damaged region in this work functions as a rich source of charged mobile defects.

Their drift in the electric field modulates the carrier concentration in the MoS2 channel, which

ultimately governs the memristive behaviour of our device.

Gate-tunable lateral resistive switching

Upon the creation of our synthetic fissure with the helium beam, significant hysteresis opens up

in the output curve of the device as shown in Fig. 2a. This device sets into the high resistance

state (HRS) when first irradiated. As the drain-source bias (Vds) is swept from 0 V to 35 V (red

trace), we observe a sudden highly non-linear increase in the current, as the device switches

into the low resistance state (LRS). The memtransistor remains in LRS as the bias is decreased

back to 0 V (blue trace), until a change in bias polarity is introduced and the device is reset

into the high resistance state. HRS persists then as the bias is swept back up to 0 V (see full

sweep in inset of Fig. 2a). The zero-bias pinch-off of the loop, and the requirement of polarity

change for resetting are hallmarks of bipolar resistive switching.

Figure 2b shows the transfer curves of the device in the respective resistance states. Signif-

icant shifting of the threshold voltage (Vth) is observed from -19 V in HRS to -37 V in LRS,

with Vth remaining stable through alternating gate sweeps in each state (different shades of

blue and red respectively in Fig. 2b). High output current levels at Vg = -60 V suggest the

presence of surplus donors in the channel in LRS. The opening of this hysteresis is accompanied

by a drop in carrier field-effect mobility relative to the unirradiated device (6.2 cm2 V−1 s−1

before irradiation to < 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 afterwards). No major change in mobility at Vg = 0 V is

5


Figure 2: (a) Positive-bias sweep of an irradiated monolayer memtransistor device (L = 1 µm,
W = 6 µm) recorded at Vg = 0 V. Inset: full range of the sweep with labelled trace directions.
A sharp emergence of nonlinearity in the IV sweep marks the set point from the high resistance
state (HRS) to the low resistance state (LRS). The device stays in LRS until a reset bias of
negative polarity is reached on the reverse sweep. (b) Gate curves of the memtransistor taken
alternately at Vds = 1 V in both LRS (blue) and HRS (red). Sweeps in the same state are marked
by different shades of blue or red. Inset: same plot on the linear scale, with fits to the linear
FET region in black extending to the threshold gate bias, Vth. (c) Gate-modulated IV sweeps of
the same device. Each full cycle was repeated at the labelled Vg values. (d) Magnified look at
the zero-bias pinch-off region of the IV curve, demonstrating the conductances of the two states
as Vds is ramped up. (e) Set bias as a function of gate voltage. Increasing positive gate fields
bring about an earlier onset of resistive switching.

6


observed between states (0.14 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 0.16 cm2 V−1 s−1 in HRS and LRS respectively,

despite a tenfold difference in conductivity. This suggests a fundamentally similar transport

mechanism in both states, with the major differentiating factor between states being the level of

available donors in the channel. For gate curves of unirradiated devices and mobility extraction

see Supplementary Section 1.

Application of the field effect through the back gate oxide allows for the tuning of the onset

of switching, as well as the resistance ratio of the memtransistor. Figure 2c shows IV sweeps on

a semi log scale taken at multiple gate biases. The degree of hysteresis and the resistance ratios

can be manipulated by the gate bias, with values in the subthreshold regime of the transistor

resulting in greater quotients (see data from other devices in Supplementary Section 2). Figure

2d shows a magnified look at the zero-bias pinch-off region, with disparate conductance values

of both states shown on the plot. Figure 2e tracks the effect of the gate bias on the set voltage

of the device (defined here as the bias at which a sharp non-linearity emerges in the IV curve),

with increasing gate fields reducing the bias necessary to go from HRS to LRS. Our irradiation

strategy makes it possible to write multiple memristive circuit elements in specified locations

on a single chip. Their carrier concentrations can then be controlled at the same time by the

global back-gate, opening new possibilities for novel circuit design.

We note that some devices start in LRS, exhibit multiple crossovers during the sweep and

show negative differential resistance (Supplementary Section 2). However, the underlying mech-

anism of dopant drift, which we will discuss in detail in the spectroscopy section, remains con-

sistent. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the helium beam in inducing resistive switching

in layered materials, we repeated the experiments on mechanically-exfoliated bilayer MoS2 de-

vices and also observed similar gate-tunable memristive functionality (Supplementary Section

2); allowing our methodology to be extended to devices of larger layer thickness.

Evaluation of switching parameters

We evaluate the switching parameters of a well-performing monolayer device when gated in

the sub-threshold region (L = 8.5 µm, Vg = 5 V, measured at ∼ 10 mbar) as a function of

sweeping frequency, fs, in Fig. 3a. The device was cycled through its bipolar switching IV curve

7


Figure 3: (a) Current endurance (top) and resistance ratios (bottom) of resistance states read
at Vds = 4 V and Vg = 5 V across more than 600 consecutive switching cycles. Each colored
portion of the plot corresponds to the sweeping frequencies used to evaluate device performance
as labeled on the graph. (b) Histogram visualising the log-transformed distribution of resistance
ratios from (a).
(c) Set bias distribution over 100 sweeps at fs = 2.32 V s−1 of the L = 8.5
µm device.
(d) Readout of HRS and LRS currents of the device from Fig.
2 demonstrating
non-volatile retention of current levels. LRS traces were collected immediately after switching
(blue) and 1 hour after cutting off the power supply (green).

between ± 20 V and the state currents were read off at Vds = 4 V (see evolution of epochs

in Supplementary Section 3). Each colored portion of the plots indicates the fs at which the

IV characteristics were swept, with fs values marked on each portion. The black points in the

bottom part of the plot trace out the ILRS/IHRS ratio for each cycle. The HRS and LRS cur-

rents exhibit negligible temporal variation between cycles when tested in the optimal fs range

of 2.1-2.9 V s−1. Sub-optimal frequencies on either side of this range overdamp/underdamp

the ionic drift process resulting in loss of stability or no switching of resistance at all. Figure

3b visualises the distribution of these ratios across 616 cycles, with most of the recorded values

centred between 5 and 10, which is sufficient to achieve > 80% recognition accuracy in scaled-

8


up neuromorphic architectures [24]. Set/reset bias stability is a crucial parameter that governs

accurate learning in neuromorphic devices, with low stochastic variations between epochs nec-

essary for optimal performance of resistive random access memory hardware [25, 26]. In Fig.

3c, we plot the Vset distribution extracted from 100 consecutive cycles at fs = 2.32 V s−1. The

bias is extracted based on a reached current threshold and is seen to oscillate in the initial 20

cycles (Supplementary Section 3), but settles to a steady value as the device is stabilised by

more subsequent operations, with a Vset standard deviation of ± 0.41 V on a ± 20 V sweep

range. Figure 3d presents the retention characteristics of currents in both resistance states on

the device from Fig. 2. The memtransistor is switched from LRS (blue) to HRS (red) and back

to LRS. Power is then not supplied for 1 hour and the current in LRS is read off again (green),

explicitly demonstrating the non-volatile nature of states in the memtransistor. The variability

in the read current is less than 2.5% after 1 hour. For a comparison of other parameters with

the latest MoS2 resistive switches from the literature, see Table S1 in Supplementary Section

3.

Visualising defect drift by PL and Raman spectroscopy mapping

Figure 4 shows Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy of a contacted monolayer

CVD MoS2 memtransistor (optical and scanning electron images provided in Supplementary

Section 4). The channel length of the presented device is ≈ 1 µm, extending from 0.5 µm to 1.5

µm on the x-axes in the figures. Raman and PL maps were collected in each resistance state

(see Methods for details of mapping parameters). We remark that our devices were mapped

and electrically switched in ambient conditions. To visualise the mapping results, the E
′ Raman

mode at 386 cm−1 was summed over a spectral window of ± 5 cm−1 on either side of the peak

while the B exciton emission at 2.01 eV was summed over a spectral window of 0.1 eV. Figures

4a,b show line profile intensities of the E
′ Raman mode averaged across the device channel,

alternating between LRS (a) and HRS (b). The source and drain electrodes are shown in gold

on either side of the MoS2 channel, with the red arrows indicating direction of mobile defect

drift under the applied bias. We distinguish the drain and source sides of the device which

are separated by a He+-created fissure of our standard dose of 1.6 pC µm−1. For the effect

9


of different doses on Raman/PL see Supplementary Section 4. The location of the He+ cut is

indicated in the figures by the dotted black lines.

In LRS, the spatial distribution of the Raman intensity on either side of the black line is

roughly equal, as represented by the uniform blue color in (c). The red areas represent low

signal regions from the MoS2 hidden by the electrodes. In HRS (d), the intensity is observed

to drop off strongly on the drain side and is distributed non-uniformly in the material (for the

averaged Raman spectra on each side of the channel see Supplementary Section 4). Figures

4e-h show analogous PL profiles and maps. As noted in the Raman results, the emission on the

source side does not change significantly by switching from LRS to HRS. Once again, the drain

side emission declines in intensity; with particular quenching of the B exciton (factor of ∼7)

in the PL maps (for the averaged PL spectra on each side of the channel see Supplementary

Section 4). The spatial uniformity of the emission on the drain-side is disrupted in HRS, with

most of the signal from the top and bottom regions of the channel quenching drastically between

states.

We observe no significant shifts or broadening of the E
′ and A
′
1 Raman peaks on the drain-

side, despite a large drop in intensity. The separation of the in-plane E
′ (386 cm−1) and out-

of-plane A
′
1 (405 cm−1) first-order modes is ∼20 cm−1, consistent with single-layer MoS2 [27]

as we switch between states; maintaining good integrity of the crystal structure. The drop in

Raman intensity suggests a large decrease in electron-phonon coupling as defects migrate from

the fissure region into the unirradiated lattice. PL emission from the direct-recombination A

exciton and spin-orbit split B exciton is centred at 1.89 eV and 2.01 eV respectively throughout

the switching with no shifts. This range is usually reported for typical monolayer MoS2 [28, 29],

also confirming the relative structural integrity of the material in both LRS and HRS.

Based on our results, we propose that when switching the device into HRS, the defects

on the drain-side are forced to migrate towards the drain electrode from the fissure. Their

depletion from the channel attenuates B exciton intensity which is usually associated with

defect concentration [29, 30]. Helium ion irradiation above doses of > 1 pC µm−1 results in VS

concentrations [22] induced by beam sputtering that far exceed sub-stoichiometries achieved

naturally by CVD growth [31]. As sulfur vacancies are defects with the lowest formation energy

10


Figure 4:
Raman and PL spectroscopic characterisation of the device in different resistance
states (a,b) Line profiles of Raman intensities across the He+ ion cut. The red arrow marks the
direction of mobile dopant drift when the applied bias is as written on electrodes in the sketch
above (not to scale). (c,d) Spatially resolved Raman intensity maps of the E
′ mode, normalised
to the colour bar on the right. Severe quenching of signal is observed on the drain-side in HRS.
(e-h) Analogous B exciton photoluminescence data from the same device. PL data also shows
considerable loss of intensity on the drain-side of the fissure after switching into HRS.

in MoS2 [32], are stable on substrates when charged [33], and also have a lowered energy barrier

for diffusion when in clusters [34, 35] and when charged [36], we propose that they are the

majority species responsible for resistance switching in our devices. However, computational

works have challenged the role of VS in donating electrons to the MoS2 lattice [32, 37] so we

cannot rule out Mo interstitials or antisite defects, inevitably introduced by the helium beam,

as also contributing to the mechanism. The approximate concentration of helium-generated

VS in LRS on the drain-side of the fissure is at most ∼ 4.2 · 1014 VS cm−2 (see Supplementary

Section 4 for calculation). From our transfer curves in Fig. 2b, we can estimate the difference

in available carrier concentration at the same gate bias between LRS and HRS from the Vth

shift to be ∼1.6 · 1012 cm−2. This shows that the available amount of potential mobile donors

provided by the ion beam is comfortably sufficient to account for the difference detected by

gating between LRS and HRS. We note that a downshift of E
′ is expected if the VS concentration

is higher than 1% [38]. As the difference in VS concentration between LRS and HRS in our

case is less than 1%, we do not detect any peak shifts in the Raman spectra.

The electro-chemical metallisation process occurring at the MoS2/contact interface [21]

11


Figure 5: (a) Trace of post-synaptic current recorded during 5 sequential LTP/LTD training
cycles.
Trains of 16 pulses were applied past the reset voltage into LRS and set voltage into
HRS. (b) Closer look at the second potentiation/depression cycle from (a). Both the rise and
decay readouts are fitted well with simple exponentials and habituate to saturated resistance
values in each state within < 5 pulses. (c) Memtransistor cross-terminal modulation enabled by
lateral drift of defects sourced from the cut region. Inset is an optical micrograph of the device
with the particular terminals labeled and the cut region marked in blue.
(d) Dependence of
read current on the width of the pre-synaptic learning pulse. Shorter timescales inhibit complete
habituation to LRS below 0.1 s at the applied read voltage of 5 V.

effectively strips VS of their ability to donate free charge to the FET channel in HRS. The

optical properties of the source-side of our device in this experiment were not affected. We

propose that defects from the drain-side are not able to readily pass the beam-created barrier in

this monolayer device. Our spectroscopic observations are in line with transfer curves obtained

in HRS and LRS (Fig. 2b), showing a reduced degree of n-type doping in HRS, as donor defects

are depleted at the drain electrode interface.

12


Synaptic potentiation and cross-terminal conductance modulation

The success of two-dimensional materials in future neuromorphic architectures will largely de-

pend on their ease of implementation with on-dielectric integrated circuits, as well as their

ability to mimic synaptic processes with good accuracy. Training pulses which simulate neu-

ronal input activity were used to demonstrate the neuromorphic applicability of our devices.

Consecutive cycles of long term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD) were recorded (Fig.

5a) by stressing the device into HRS or LRS respectively with a train of 16 evenly-spaced action

potential pulses. The post-excitation current was read out at Vds = 6 V following each pulse,

and is fitted well with a sharp exponential rise/decay function (Fig. 5b). The memtransistor

was always back-gated at Vg = 5 V throughout this testing. We note that the lowest power

consumption (disregarding gating) in standby is P = IHRS · Vread = 16 nW, which compares

favourably at the same bias with the previously-reported polycrystalline films and multi-layer

devices (µW range in HRS for both [19, 21]). With optimisations, such as reduction of channel

length and contact area, our devices should start approaching sub-pW levels demonstrated by

some vertically-stacked 2D devices [16, 39].

As demonstrated recently by Sangwan et al. [21], planar MoS2 memtransistors enable emula-

tion of heterosynaptic plasticity through seamless incorporation of multi-terminal architectures.

Figure 5c presents low-bias IV traces recorded between terminals 3 and 4 of the device in the

inset image. By stressing the channel across the He+ ion fissure (between contacts 1 and 2),

defects can migrate between the cut region and electrode 2. This modulates the conductance of

the MoS2 channel on the right-hand side of the artificial defect source, significantly altering the

output current between perpendicular terminals 3 and 4. This also directly demonstrates that

the resistance of the channel is a function of mobile defect concentration. The output current of

the 3-4 junction is modulated multifold only by stressing the perpendicular 1-2 junction, even

below its Vset.

The logic and switching applications of any memristive device will ultimately be limited by

the frequency at which states can be accessed and read out. Functionalities such as pattern

recognition rely on effective thresholding of output currents [40, 41] and smearing of state

conductivities at high binary switching frequencies will lower the tolerance required for multi-

13


level operations [42]. Our devices maintain state distinguishability above switching rates of 10

Hz on an 8.5 µm channel containing a single sub-10 nm fissure. Figure 5d tracks the dependence

of read currents on the width of the applied 5-pulse train used to stress the device into the

different resistance states. HRS can be reliably accessed down below the millisecond range,

while LRS down to 0.1 s (for binary switching capabilities of the device see Supplementary

Section 5).

Conclusions

In summary, we have successfully demonstrated an experimental approach to locally creating

gate-tunable memristive circuit elements in atomically-thin materials. The advantages of em-

ploying a helium ion microscope include high material selectivity for sputtering, remarkable

nanoscale precision and scalability of fabrication. Additionally, the instrument is strongly com-

patible with established industrial lithographic processes. In contrast to growing polycrystalline

films, our strategy allows for site-specific inclusion of memristive elements in large-area mono-

layer circuits, as well as post-metallization alterations. With stable neuromorphic functionality

demonstrated, we advance the potential of two-dimensional semiconductors for inclusion in

future revolutionary nanoelectronic devices.

14


Methods

Device fabrication

In Trinity College Dublin: Monolayer MoS2 sheets were grown by proximate sulfurisation

of MoO3 precursors on marked 285 nm SiO2/Si chips inside a chemical vapour deposition fur-

nace using a technique described previously in ref [43]. Briefly; sulfur powder was heated at

120◦C and the resulting vapour carried downstream by Ar gas to a hot zone kept at 750◦C.

The vapour was flown through a microreactor containing MoO3 film on a seed substrate. The

film was sulfurised and deposited on target substrates facing the seed substrate for 20 minutes.

The samples were then annealed in Ar for 20 minutes at 750◦C. Suitable MoS2 triangles were

identified using an Olympus optical microscope (50× lens objective). Electrode patterns were

designed on Raith Nanopatterning software and defined by electron beam lithography (Zeiss

Supra SEM), utilising PMMA A3 resist exposed at a dose of 200 µC cm−2 followed by de-

velopment for 45 seconds in MIBK:IPA (1:3). Metallization was carried out in an electron

beam-evaporator (Temescal FC-2000) to deposit small-area Ti/Au (5/40 nm) pads, followed

by lift-off in acetone overnight at room temperature. Bilayer samples were mechanically exfo-

liated from bulk MoS2 (SPI Supplies) with adhesive tape and identified using optical contrast

and AFM.

In Peking University: Transported specimens grown in Trinity College were marked out

using a Nikon optical microscope (100× lens objective). Electrode patterns were designed on

Raith Nanopatterning software and defined by electron beam lithography (FEI Strata DB 235

SEM), utilising PMMA A9 resist exposed at a dose of 340 µC cm−2 followed by development for

30 seconds in MIBK:IPA (1:3). Metallization was carried out in an electron beam-evaporator

(Detech DE400) to deposit large-area Ti/Au (10/80 nm) pads, followed by lift-off in warm

acetone.

Helium ion microscope irradiations

In Trinity College Dublin and Peking University: The fabricated devices were inserted into

the Zeiss Nanofab helium ion microscope 24 hours before irradiation to allow for outgassing

at a base pressure of ∼ 10−7mbar. The milling patterns were designed on the NanoPattern-

ingVisualisationEngine software and consisted of a single-direction pixel-wide scan traced in a

15


single sweep with no retracing. The delivered ion linear dose to induce memristive switching

was ∼1.6 pC µm−1 at a beam current of 1.5 pA, aperture of 10 µm, with the probe size evalu-

ated at < 3 nm using the GaussFit module in ImageJ software (determination of probe size in

Supplementary Section 1).

Electrical Testing

In Trinity College Dublin: The samples were tested in the vacuum chamber of a customised

scanning electron microscope (Zeiss EVO), at a base pressure of ∼ 10−5 mbar. Imina miBot

piezoelectric tungsten probes were used to contact the EBL-deposited pads as source and drain

terminals. The data were obtained using a semiconductor analyzer (Agilent B2912A) interfaced

with Keysight software. The samples were back-gated with copper tape underneath the 285

nm SiO2/Si chip, and a third probe was used as the gate terminal.

In Peking University: The samples were wire-bonded using aluminium leads to large-area

Ti/Au pads, and globally back-gated through a silver paint-connected terminal underneath

the highly-doped Si substrate. Endurance and potentiation measurements were carried out

in an Oxford Instruments cryostat with no applied magnetic field, pressure of ≈ 10 mbar and

temperature of 280 K. The data were obtained using a semiconductor analyzer (Agilent B2912A)

interfaced with LabVIEW software.

Raman and photoluminescence spectroscopy

Spectroscopic mapping was done in a WITec Alpha 300R system in ambient conditions. The

device was switched between resistance states ex-situ between each map acquisition, and the

maps were acquired within minutes of switching states. The excitation wavelength was 532 nm,

with a diffraction grating of 1800 grooves mm−1 and a 100× objective lens (NA = 0.95, spot

size ∼ 0.3 µm). Mapping was carried out at low incident powers (< 100 µW) to avoid altering

the sample with the laser, with the beam refocused manually every time between each scan to

ensure accurate comparison. The 4 µm2 areas scanned in 60 lines in Fig. 4 were sampled at a

resolution of 60 px per line, with integration time of 0.6 s.

Focused ion beam lamella preparation, scanning electron microscopy, transmission

electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy

The helium-treated lamella was prepared from a mechanically-exfoliated bilayer MoS2 sam-

16


ple (SPI Supplies), cleaved onto a 285 nm-SiO2/Si substrate with adhesive tape. Once irradiated

in the HIM, the sample was transferred to a focused ion beam system (Zeiss Auriga), where a

platinum layer was deposited to protect the flake. A gallium beam (30 keV) was used to cut the

lamella for lift-out and welding to a TEM grid made of copper. The sample was then thinned

to an electron-transparent width with a 900 eV argon beam (Fischione 1040 Nanomill).

SEM images of the devices pre- and post-irradiation were taken in Zeiss Supra and Zeiss

Ultra systems, with chamber pressures at ∼ 2 · 10−6 mbar.

TEM was performed in an FEI Titan 80-300 microscope operated at a chamber pressure

of ∼ 4 · 10−7 mbar. The beam energy used for imaging was 300 keV. Irradiated samples for

plan-view imaging were transferred from the HIM to the TEM immediately after exposure.

Freestanding samples were obtained by covering the on-chip samples with PMMA, dissolving

the underlying SiO2 in NaOH at 80◦C and transferring onto copper TEM grids; followed by

dissolution and washing in acetone/IPA.

Devices were scanned in an Oxford Asylum atomic force microscope with 140 kHz cantilevers

operated in ambient conditions.

Acknowledgements

We thank Ms. Rongrong Li for assistance with the helium ion microscope at Peking Univer-

sity. We acknowledge members of staff at the Advanced Microscopy Laboratory and CRANN

clean room, Trinity College Dublin for their continued technical support. We thank Mr. Em-

met Sheerin for assistance with switching devices during the Raman and PL experiments. We

acknowledge support from the following funding bodies: National Natural Science Founda-

tion of China (Nos. 61825401 and 11774004), Thousand Young Talents Program of China,

Leverhulme Trust International Networks Grant (PicoFIB), Science Foundation Ireland (Nos:

11/PI/1105, 12/TIDA/I2433, 07/SK/I1220a and 08/CE/I1432), the Irish Research Council

(Nos: GOIPG/2014/972 and EPSPG/2011/239), European Research Council (No: Advanced

Grant 321160).

17


Author contributions

†J.J. and D.K. contributed equally to this project.

D.K. performed electrical measurements on samples of different layer thickness and irradi-

ation dose, as well as atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. CVD growth

of MoS2 monolayers was carried out by C.P.C. Mechanically-exfoliated devices were prepared

by J.J. and D.K. Raman and PL spectroscopy was carried out by C.P.C. and analysed by P.M..

J.J and D.K. carried out EBL to fabricate the FET devices. H.S. assisted with fabrication

and wirebonding of devices tested in Peking University (PKU). D.K., J.J. and P.M. carried

out the HIM irradiations in Trinity College Dublin (TCD) while J.J and Y.Z. conducted the

HIM exposures in PKU. J.J carried out the electrical tests (endurance and potentiation) with

assistance from H.S and Y.Z in PKU. P.M. performed FIB processing of irradiated devices and

carried out TEM of the cross-sectioned lamellae with assistance from C.D.. D.S.F. carried out

helium exposures and TEM imaging of the plan-view irradiated devices after J.J. transferred

the samples onto TEM grids. Z.L. oversaw the electrical characterisation work in PKU, while

R.Z. and J.X. facilitated microscopy experiments in PKU. N.M and G.S.D. oversaw the mate-

rial growth process and spectroscopic experiments in TCD. J.J.B. and H.Z. conceived the study

and supervised the project. The manuscript was written by J.J., D.K. and P.M. All authors

agreed with the final version of the paper.

Additional information

Supplementary information containing additional experimental data for each of the sections

discussed in this manuscript is attached at the end of this document.

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Hongzhou Zhang.

Competing financial interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

18


References

[1] Zidan, M.A., Strachan, J.P. and Lu, W.D. The future of electronics based on memristive

systems. Nat. Electron., 2018, 1(1), p.22.

[2] Chhowalla, M.; Jena, D.; Zhang, H. Two-dimensional semiconductors for transistors. Nat.

Rev. Mater., 2016, 1(11), p.16052.

[3] Li, S.-L.; Orgiu, E.; Samorì, P.; Tsukagoshi, K.; Samori, P. Charge Transport and Mobility

Engineering in Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Chalcogenide Semiconductors. Chem.

Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1–226.

[4] Jariwala, D.; Sangwan, V. K.; Lauhon, L.J.; Marks, T. J. and Hersam, M. C.Emerging

device applications for semiconducting two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides.

ACS Nano 8, no. 2 (2014): 1102-1120.

[5] Liu, Y.; Weiss, N. O.; Duan, X.; Cheng, H.-C.; Huang, Y.; Duan, X. Van Der Waals

Heterostructures and Devices. Nat. Rev. Mater, 2016, 1, 16042.

[6] Lembke, D.; Bertolazzi, S.; Kis, A. Single-Layer MoS2 Electronics. Acc. Chem. Res.,

2015, 48, 100–110

[7] Ferrari, A. C.; Bonaccorso, F.; Falko, V.; Novoselov, K. S.; Roche, S.; Bøggild, P.; Borini, S.;

Koppens, F.; Palermo, V.; Pugno, N.; et al. Science and Technology Roadmap for Graphene,

Related Two-Dimensional Crystals, and Hybrid Systems. Nanoscale, 2014, 7, 4598–4810

[8] Duong, D. L.; Yun, S. J.; Lee, Y. H. Van Der Waals Layered Materials: Opportunities and

Challenges. ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11803–11830.

[9] Zeng, M.; Xiao, Y.; Liu, J.; Yang, K. and Fu, L. Exploring Two-Dimensional Materials

toward the Next-Generation Circuits: From Monomer Design to Assembly Control., Chem.

Rev., 2018, 118, 6236-6296.

[10] Woo, M. H.; Jang, B. C.; Choi, J.; Lee, K. J.; Shin G. H.; Seong, H.; Im, S.G. and Choi, S.

Low-Power Nonvolatile Charge Storage Memory Based on MoS2 and an Ultrathin Polymer

Tunneling Dielectric. Adv. Funct. Mater. 27, 2017, no. 43: 1703545.

[11] Vu, Q. A.; Shin, Y. S.; Kim, Y. R.; Nguyen, V. L.; Kang, W. T.; Kim, H.; Luong, D. H.;

Lee, I. M.; Lee, K.; Ko, D.-S.; et al. Two-Terminal Floating-Gate Memory with van Der

Waals Heterostructures for Ultrahigh On/off Ratio. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 12725.

19


[12] Vu, Q.A., Kim, H., Nguyen, V.L., Won, U.Y., Adhikari, S., Kim, K., Lee, Y.H. and

Yu, W.J. A High-On/Off-Ratio Floating-Gate Memristor Array on a Flexible Substrate

via CVD-Grown Large-Area 2D Layer Stacking. Advanced Materials, 2017, 29(44),

p.1703363.

[13] Liu, C.; Yan, X.; Song, X.; Ding, S.; Zhang, D. W.; Zhou, P. A Semi-Floating Gate

Memory Based on van Der Waals Heterostructures for Quasi-Non-Volatile Applications.

Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 1–7.

[14] Wang, M.; Cai, S.; Pan, C.; Wang, C.; Lian, X.; Zhuo, Y.; Xu, K.; Cao, T.; Pan, X.;

Wang, B.; et al. Robust Memristors Based on Layered Two-Dimensional Materials. Nat.

Electron. 2018, 1, 130–136.

[15] Ge, R.; Wu, X.; Kim, M.; Shi, J.; Sonde, S.; Tao, L.; Zhang, Y.; Lee, J. C.; Akin-

wande, D. Atomristor: Nonvolatile Resistance Switching in Atomic Sheets of Transition

Metal Dichalcogenides. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 434–441.

[16] Kim, M., Ge, R., Wu, X., Lan, X., Tice, J., Lee, J. C., Akinwande, D. Zero-static power

radio-frequency switches based on MoS2 atomristors. Nat. Commun., 2018,9(1), 2524.

[17] Cheng, P.; Sun, K.; Hu, Y. H. Memristive Behavior and Ideal Memristor of 1T Phase

MoS2 Nanosheets. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 572–576.

[18] Huh, W.; Jang, S.; Lee, J. Y.; Lee, D.; Lee, D.; Lee, J. M.; Park, H. G.; Kim, J. C.; Jeong,

H. Y.; Wang, G.; et al. Synaptic Barristor Based on Phase-Engineered 2D Heterostructures.

Adv. Mater. 2018, 1801447, 1–7.

[19] Li, D., Wu, B., Zhu, X., Wang, J., Ryu, B., Lu, W.D., Lu, W. and Liang, X. MoS2

Memristors Exhibiting Variable Switching Characteristics towards Bio-Realistic Synaptic

Emulation., ACS Nano., 2018, 12 (9), pp 9240–9252.

[20] Sangwan, V. K.; Jariwala, D.; Kim, I. S.; Chen, K.-S.; Marks, T. J.; Lauhon, L. J.; Hersam,

M. C. Gate-Tunable Memristive Phenomena Mediated by Grain Boundaries in Single-Layer

MoS2. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 403–406.

[21] Sangwan, V. K.; Lee, H.-S.; Bergeron, H.; Balla, I.; Beck, M. E.; Chen, K.-S.; Hersam, M.

C. Multi-Terminal Memtransistors from Polycrystalline Monolayer Molybdenum Disulfide.

Nature 2018, 554, 500–504

20


[22] Fox, D. S.; Zhou, Y.; Maguire, P.; O’Neill, A.; Ó’Coileáin, C.; Gatensby, R.; Glushenkov,

A. M.; Tao, T.; Duesberg, G. S.; Shvets, I. V; et al. Nanopatterning and Electrical Tuning

of MoS2 Layers with a Subnanometer Helium Ion Beam. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 5307–5313.

[23] Kretschmer, S., Maslov, M., Ghaderzadeh, S., Ghorbani-Asl, M., Hlawacek, G. and

Krasheninnikov, A.V., Supported Two-Dimensional Materials under Ion Irradiation: the

Substrate Governs Defect Production. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(36),

pp.30827-30836.

[24] Yu, S., Chen, P.Y., Cao, Y., Xia, L., Wang, Y. and Wu, H. Scaling-up resistive synaptic ar-

rays for neuro-inspired architecture: Challenges and prospect. Electron Devices Meeting

(IEDM), December 2015, IEEE International (pp. 17-3).

[25] Gong, N., Idé, T., Kim, S., Boybat, I., Sebastian, A., Narayanan, V. and Ando, T. Sig-

nal and noise extraction from analog memory elements for neuromorphic computing. Nat.

Commun., 2018, 9(1), p.2102.

[26] Burr, G.W., Shelby, R.M., Sidler, S., Di Nolfo, C., Jang, J., Boybat, I., Shenoy, R.S.,

Narayanan, P., Virwani, K., Giacometti, E.U. and Kurdi, B.N. Experimental demonstra-

tion and tolerancing of a large-scale neural network (165 000 synapses) using phase-change

memory as the synaptic weight element. IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices, 2015,

62(11), pp.3498-3507.

[27] Lee, C., Yan, H., Brus, L.E., Heinz, T.F., Hone, J. and Ryu, S. Anomalous lattice vibrations

of single-and few-layer MoS2, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(5), pp.2695-2700.

[28] Splendiani, A., Sun, L., Zhang, Y., Li, T., Kim, J., Chim, C.Y., Galli, G. and Wang, F.

Emerging photoluminescence in monolayer MoS2. Nano Lett., 2010, 10(4), pp.1271-1275

[29] Chow, P.K., Jacobs-Gedrim, R.B., Gao, J., Lu, T.M., Yu, B., Terrones, H. and Ko-

ratkar, N. Defect-induced photoluminescence in monolayer semiconducting transition metal

dichalcogenides. ACS Nano, 2015, 9(2), pp.1520-1527.

[30] Kaupmees, R., Komsa, H.P. and Krustok, J. Photoluminescence Study of B-Trions in MoS2

Monolayers with High Density of Defects. Phys. Status Solidi B, 2018, 1800384.

[31] Kim, I. S.; Sangwan, V. K.; Jariwala, D.; Wood, J. D.; Park, S.; Chen, K.-S.; Shi, F.; Ruiz-

Zepeda, F.; Ponce, A.; Jose-Yacaman, M.; et al. Influence of Stoichiometry on the Optical

21


and Electrical Properties of Chemical Vapor Deposition Derived MoS2, ACS Nano, 2014,

8, 10551–10558.

[32] Komsa, H.P. and Krasheninnikov, A.V. Native defects in bulk and monolayer MoS2 from

first principles. Phys. Rev. B, 2015, 91(12), p.125304.

[33] Urasaki, S. and Kageshima, H. First-principles study on charged vacancies in MoS2. Jpn.

J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 57(12), p.125202.

[34] Komsa, H.P., Kurasch, S., Lehtinen, O., Kaiser, U. and Krasheninnikov, A.V. From point

to extended defects in two-dimensional MoS2: evolution of atomic structure under electron

irradiation. Phys. Rev. B, 2013, 88(3), p.035301.

[35] Le, D., Rawal, T.B. and Rahman, T.S. Single-layer MoS2 with sulfur vacancies: structure

and catalytic application. J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(10), pp.5346-5351.

[36] Sensoy, M.G., Vinichenko, D., Chen, W., Friend, C.M. and Kaxiras, E. Strain effects on

the behavior of isolated and paired sulfur vacancy defects in monolayer MoS2. Phys. Rev.

B, 2017, 95(1), p.014106.

[37] Shang, M.H., Hou, H., Zheng, J., Yang, Z., Zhang, J., Wei, S.H., Duan, X. and Yang,

W. Eliminate S-vacancy as the Cause for n-type Behavior of MoS2 from First-principles

Perspective. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.. 2018, 9, 20, 6032-6037.

[38] Parkin, W.M., Balan, A., Liang, L., Das, P.M., Lamparski, M., Naylor, C.H., Rodríguez-

Manzo, J.A., Johnson, A.C., Meunier, V. and Drndic, M. Raman shifts in electron-irradiated

monolayer MoS2. ACS Nano, 2016, 10(4), pp.4134-4142.

[39] Shi, Y., Liang, X., Yuan, B., Chen, V., Li, H., Hui, F., Yu, Z., Yuan, F., Pop, E., Wong,

H.S.P. and Lanza, M. Electronic synapses made of layered two-dimensional materials. Nat.

Electron., 2018, 1(8), p.458.

[40] Prezioso, M., Merrikh-Bayat, F., Hoskins, B.D., Adam, G.C., Likharev, K.K. and Strukov,

D.B. Training and operation of an integrated neuromorphic network based on metal-oxide

memristors. Nature, 2015, 521(7550), p.61.

[41] Sheridan, P.M., Cai, F., Du, C., Ma, W., Zhang, Z. and Lu, W.D. Sparse coding with

memristor networks. Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12(8), p.784.

[42] Bessonov, A.A., Kirikova, M.N., Petukhov, D.I., Allen, M., Ryhänen, T. and Bailey, M.J.,

22


Layered memristive and memcapacitive switches for printable electronics. Nat. Mater.,

2015, 14(2), p.199.

[43] O’Brien, M., McEvoy, N., Hallam, T., Kim, H.Y., Berner, N.C., Hanlon, D., Lee, K., Cole-

man, J.N. and Duesberg, G.S., Transition metal dichalcogenide growth via close proximity

precursor supply. Sci. Rep.,2014, 4, p.7374.

[44] Tongay, S., Zhou, J., Ataca, C., Liu, J., Kang, J.S., Matthews, T.S., You, L., Li, J.,

Grossman, J.C. and Wu, J. Broad-range modulation of light emission in two-dimensional

semiconductors by molecular physisorption gating. Nano Lett., 2013, 13(6), pp.2831-2836.

[45] Tongay, S., Suh, J., Ataca, C., Fan, W., Luce, A., Kang, J.S., Liu, J., Ko, C., Raghu-

nathanan, R., Zhou, J. and Ogletree, F. Defects activated photoluminescence in two-

dimensional semiconductors:
interplay between bound, charged, and free excitons. Sci.

Rep., 2013, 3, p.2657.

[46] Nan, H., Wang, Z., Wang, W., Liang, Z., Lu, Y., Chen, Q., He, D., Tan, P., Miao, F.,

Wang, X. and Wang, J. Strong photoluminescence enhancement of MoS2 through defect

engineering and oxygen bonding. ACS Nano, 2014, 8(6), pp.5738-5745.

[47] Lin, Y., Ling, X., Yu, L., Huang, S., Hsu, A.L., Lee, Y.H., Kong, J., Dresselhaus, M.S. and

Palacios, T. Dielectric screening of excitons and trions in single-layer MoS2. Nano Lett.,

2014, 14(10), pp.5569-5576.

[48] Maguire, P., Fox, D.S., Zhou, Y., Wang, Q., O’Brien, M., Jadwiszczak, J., Cullen, C.P.,

McManus, J., Bateman, S., McEvoy, N. and Duesberg, G.S. Defect sizing, separation, and

substrate effects in ion-irradiated monolayer two-dimensional materials. Phys. Rev. B,

2018, 98(13), p.134109.

23


Supplementary Information

Supplementary Section 1

Determination of He+ ion probe size

Figure 6: Evaluation of He+ probe size before irradiation on device presented in Fig. 3a. (a,b)
HIM images of the edges of deposited gold marks near an irradiation site.
(c,d) Probe size
estimation using the 25/75% profile method from line profiles seen on the HIM images in yellow.

Prior to exposure of the MoS2 channel, the probe size of the helium ion beam was established

from images of nearby gold marks elsewhere on the substrate (within tens of microns away from

the target device). As gold has a much higher secondary electron emission intensity than the

underlying oxide substrate, it is assumed that the edge of the gold mark is ideally sharp.

ImageJ software was used to fit the intensity drop-off over the edge of the gold mark on a

2048 pixel2 micrograph taken with a scan dwell time of 5 µs. The equivalent full-width-at-half-

maximum of the fit is taken to be the probe size as dictated by the Gaussian spatial distribution

of the ions in the impinging beam.

Extended AFM data

24


Figure 7: Dependence of hydrocarbon BID mound height on delivered ion dose (a,b) Optical
and SEM images of a monolayer device irradiated at different helium ion doses. The 1-5 labels
correspond to the AFM maps presented below. (c) Extracted mound heights from the regions

marked in AFM maps at each respective dose. The solid line is a saturating fit scaling as ∝
1

1 + dp
where d is the dose and p is a fitting exponent.

Figure 8:
SEM and HIM images of irradiated devices.
(a) High-magnification image of the
fissure region with minimal beam-induced deposition build-up on the surface. The ion-damaged
region is faintly seen running from top to bottom of the image; its right edge is marked by the
red arrows. (b) HIM image of an irradiated 1L CVD device, showing darker contrast of the cut
on the SiO2 substrate due to differing secondary electron yield.
Scale bar is 3 µm.
(c) HIM
image of a 2L MoS2 memtransistor, showing the fissure region extending out onto the substrate
on both sides of the device to ensure complete channel bisection. Scale bar is 5 µm.

25


Figure 9: Plan-view TEM images of cuts performed on suspended MoS2 at ion doses of 0.16
and 1.6 pC µm−1. (a) Line scans side-by-side on the same sample, showing visible difference in
phase contrast due to larger BID buildup on the higher dose cut. (b) Magnified look at the 1.6
pC µm−1 region in red. Areas immediately adjacent to the cut show different levels of defectivity
(blue higher, green lower), suggesting that the ion beam may preferentially induce switching to
one side of the cut if the probe is stigmated or the sample is not perfectly flat. (c) Closer look
at the interface between the green and red regions. The boundary between the irradiated region
and pristine MoS2 extends only a few atomic rows. (d) and (e) show Fast Fourier Transforms
from the marked regions revealing a more crystalline lattice in the unirradiated region.

26


Figure 10: Typical IV and gate curves of unirradiated CVD devices. (a,b,c) IV curves between
±5 V, ±35 V and gate curve respectively for the same device.
(d,e,f) IV curves between ±5
V, ±35 V and gate curve respectively for another device on the same chip. In both cases, no
significant hysteresis opens up in the output characteristics even at large drain-source biases.
Transfer curves are typical of n-type MoS2 with field-effect mobilities in the linear region not
exceeding 10 cm2 V−1 s−1.

The carrier field-effect mobility, µfe was extracted in the linear region of the transfer curve

(Vg = 0 V) using the expression:

µfe =
L

VdsCoxW · ∂Ids

∂Vg
(1)

where L, W are the length and width of the conducting channel, Vds is the drain-source bias,

Cox is the gate oxide capacitance evaluated at 13.9 nF cm−2, Ids is the drain-source current

evaluated at the gate bias, Vg.

This same formula was applied to evaluate the mobilities in Fig. 2b of the main text.

27


Supplementary Section 2

Figure 11: Examples of switching on another 1L CVD device. (a) Optical image of the device. (b)
IV curves showing distinct resistance states with an additional crossover in the positive section
of the hysteretic loop. (c) Resistance ratios fitted in the low bias regime. (d) Gate sweeps of the
device demonstrating LRS threshold bias shifting to negative gate voltages. Inset is the same
plot on the linear scale. (e) Gate-tunable looping behaviour of the device. The black arrow marks
the direction of increasing Vg. Inset: Dependence of resistance ratios on the applied gate bias.
The ratio increases with increasing negative polarity.

28


Figure 12: Switching behaviour in mechanically-exfoliated bilayer MoS2. (a) IV curve of bilayer
device, starting in LRS and demonstrating negative differential resistance before switching to
HRS. Inset is the full range curve, with an additional resistance crossover on the negative side
of the sweep.
(b) Gate field tunability of the hysteretic loop; higher positive biases reduce
the resistance ratio. (c) Resistance state read currents at different values of the back-gate bias
extracted at the largest discrepancy point between states in the IV loop. Inset shows the linear
scaling of this absolute largest resistance ratio with increasing gate bias; which follows from the
scaling of Vset with Vg. (d) Retention times of resistance states in the bilayer device, showing
current levels in each state after cutting off power supply for 15 hours.

29


Supplementary Section 3

Figure 13: Consecutive switching cycles of the device used to generate data in Fig.
3a.
The
graphs are organised in order of consecutive testing, with the sweep frequency and cycle numbers
labelled on each plot. Blue traces are the drain-source current recorded on sweeps of Vds = ±20
V. The red trace is the recorded gate leakage current for each cycle, showing negligible leakage
close to the noise floor of the sourcemeter.

Figure 14: Set bias stability over 100 switching cycles at fs = 2.32 V s−1 from Figs. 3a,c. The
shape of the hysteretic loop varies around the Vset as the device is stabilised by consecutive
switching cycles, and the maximum current level drops slightly.

30


Reference
Summary
Geometry
Reported Vset
Resistance ratio
Retention time
Endurance
Switching timeframe
Power consumption

This work
HIM-fabricated
Planar
3.5 V
∼ 10
>1 hr
>616 cycles
>0.1 s
∼ 16 nW

[15]
1L TMD between Cr/Au pads
Vertical
1 V
>104
>1 week
150 cycles
1 s
∼ 10 nW

[14]
Stacked graphene/MoS2−xOx/graphene
Vertical
3.5 V
∼ 10
∼ 1 week
>107 cycles
100 ns
>1 µW

[19]
Mechanically printed 15 nm MoS2 with Au/Ti pads
Planar
15 V
<10
>30 seconds
>5 cycles
2 ms
<0.05 W

[21]
Polycrystalline large-area monolayer CVD films with Ti/Au pads
Planar
80 V
∼ 100
24 hours
475 cycles
1 ms
50 pW - 1 mW

[17]
(92% 1T) MoS2 sandwiched between silver electrodes
Vertical
66 mV
∼ 1000
N/A
1000 cycles
N/A
0.1 mW

[20]
CVD-grown monolayers with individual grain boundary
Planar
3.5 - 8.4 V
1000
120 s
15 cycles
N/A
>1 µW

[42]
Annealed MoS2/MoOx matrix between silver electrodes
Vertical
150 mV
104
>1000 s
>104 cycles
5 ms
<1 µW

[16]
1L MoS2 between Cr/Au pads
Vertical
1 V
104
>104 s
20 cycles
<30 ns
<1 µW

Table S1: Summary of various device parameters from relevant MoS2 memory devices in

the literature. The presently-discussed work is highlighted in blue.

31


Supplementary Section 4

Figure 15: Raman and PL spectroscopic characterisation of helium ion fissures created at doses
of 1.6 pC µm−1 and 16 pC µm−1.
(a,b) Raman maps filtered for the E
′ and A
′
1 monolayer
modes, showing an effect of peak shifting (red-shift of 0.2 cm−1 and further 0.6 cm−1 after 1.6
pC µm−1 and 16 pC µm−1 respectively for E
′; and blue-shift of 0.6 cm−1 and further red-shift
of 0.6 cm−1 after 1.6 pC µm−1 and 16 pC µm−1 respectively for A
′
1). No obvious emergence of
defect-related peaks is observed in the spectra.
Raman quenching of the E
′ mode due to ion
irradiation of the material in the tested area is stronger than that of the A
′
1 mode, suggesting
possible exposed MoS2 edges in the region (see similarity between helium fissures and edges of
the as-grown flake in both the Raman and PL). Spectra in (c-e) are extracted from a pristine
middle region (0 pC µm−1) and the fissure regions from edge-to-edge of the flake parallel to the
fissure.
Different ion dose spectra are marked with arrows in the figure.
No significant peak
shifting is observed even at the high 16 pC µm−1 dose, but the intensity is reduced. (f) PL map
of the A exciton intensity, showing enhanced emission at the site of the memristive dose (h) due
to an increased concentration of available adsorption sites [44–46]. The higher dose destroys the
material significantly, however, quenching the PL emission relative to (g) and (h) and introducing
a defect-associated trion peak [47] as seen in yellow on the spectrum in (i).

32


Figure 16: Device used for Raman and PL mapping in Fig. 4. (a) Optical micrograph (100×
lens), showing the square area which was mapped outlined in red. (b) False-color SEM image of
the same device post-irradiation, with the helium ion fissures marked in red and the source and
drain electrodes labeled as used in the experiment.

33


Figure 17: Raman and PL spectra extracted from maps in Fig. 4. Each coloured square indicates
the fissure side from which the corresponding spectrum was averaged (900 spectra per each
average in the region spanning 0-0.5 µm or 1-1.5 µm on the x-axis, and 0-2 µm on the y-axis).
Quenching of both Raman and PL intensities is visible on the drain-side (right hand side) in
HRS, as seen on the spectra marked with the black and orange squares.

34


Resistance state
LRS
HRS

Area relative to fissure
Source
Drain
Source
Drain

ωA′
1 (cm−1)
405.8
405.4
405.6
405.8

IA′
1 (a.u.)
3.89
3.69
4.12
1.6

ΓA′
1 (cm−1)
5.1
5.3
5.3
5.1

ωE′ (cm−1)
386.2
386.2
386.1
385.8

ΓE′ (cm−1)
3.2
3.2
3.3
4

IE′ (a.u.)
2.67
2.72
2.78
0.65

A
′
1/E
′ intensity ratio
1.46
1.36
1.48
2.13

Table S2: Summary of fitting parameters to spectra presented in Fig. 4. No major peak

shifts are noted, but the intensity of both peaks decreases on the right side of the channel in

HRS. That region is also the only one where the E
′ peak is more intense than the A
′
1 peak,

suggesting reduced out-of-plane vibration intensities due to lattice rearrangement.

35


Estimation of available mobile vacancy concentration

Figure 18: Sketch of simulated dose delivery along a line scan of probe size 6 nm, as based on
the TEM cross-section from Fig. 1e.

The above figure is a simulated areal helium ion dose distribution for a line scan with

overlapping beam probes (spacing 1 nm). The Gaussian distribution of the ion dose is blurred

by a 6 nm probe size, as evaluated from the visibly damaged region in the TEM cross-section

in Fig. 1e. The centre of the fissure is assumed to be at 0 nm on the x-axis in the figure.

We assume that any ions delivered to the MoS2 lattice integrated under the blue region

cannot cross or leave the fissure, effectively not contributing to the creation of mobile VS

species. The region shaded in yellow marks the concentration of delivered ions that will be able

to sputter sulfur atoms and leave behind potential mobile vacancies on the drain-side of the

device.

The integrated areal dose in the yellow portion of the curve was calculated to be 6.4 ×

1016 ions cm−2.
As the sputter yield of S per helium ion is ≈ 0.007 [48], the final higher

bound for the available VS concentration sourced from the yellow strip is 4.2 × 1014 VS cm−2.

This is comfortably above the experimentally-detected carrier concentration difference between

LRS and HRS of 1.57 × 1012 cm−2, suggesting that even more vacancies get trapped in the

fissure region; possibly due to backscattered and secondary atom sputtering events extending

the fissure region beyond the assumed probe size confinement.

36


Supplementary Section 5

Figure 19: On-off switching between binary states as a function of pulse width.
Alternating
pulses of ±10 V were used to continually force the device into LRS or HRS with state readout
performed at Vds = 6 V. As the width of the pulses narrows, a frequency-dependent smearing
of states emerges above 1 Hz, where the on/off states are hard to distinguish (green & red
traces) and the readout currents are no longer consistent. Defect migration is hence rate-limited
and the operational frequency needs to be well-paired with device geometry to achieve optimal
performance.

37


