a) 
Electronic mail:  pbermel@purdue.edu. 

 

Tailoring Interdigitated Back Contacts for High-performance Bifacial 

Silicon Solar Cells 

 

Yubo Sun,1 Zhiguang Zhou,1,2 Reza Asadpour,1 Muhammad A. Alam1 and 
Peter Bermel1,2,a) 

 

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA 

2Birck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, 1205 W. State St., West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA 

Photovoltaic (PV) cells have become one of the most promising renewable energy technologies. To make 
PV more competitive with incumbent technologies, higher power output densities are needed. One 
promising approach is to add bifaciality to existing monofacial PV devices, allowing more output power 
from the additional reflection of sunlight from the ground (albedo 𝛼). For example, bifaciality can be added 
to Silicon Heterojunction (SHJ) solar cell with Interdigitated Back Contacts (IBC) by opening up the gaps 
between the back metal contacts, but the optimum gap (𝑤) that maximizes power output is unknown.  In 

this paper we show that   that the optimum gap (𝑤 = 1 − (1 + 𝛼)(𝛼(𝛼 + 𝑐))

−1

2)  maximizes IBC-SHJ 

bifacial power output (𝑃 ∝ (1 + 𝛼) (1 − 2√𝑎 𝑐
⁄ ), where 𝑐 is the ratio of output power density to power 

loss due to shadowing and Joule heating, The results are validated by self-consistent finite-element device 
modeling.  For a typical α = 0.3, an optimized bifacial IBC SHJ cell will produce 17% more power output 
than state-of-the-art monofacial IBC SHJ cells. The results encourage development of bifacial IBC solar 
cells as a next generation PV technology. 

The energy output of a solar cell depends on both the solar irradiance absorbed via the 

photovoltaic effect, as well as its efficiency in converting photo-generated carriers into electricity. 
Traditional monofacial cells accept light only from the front surface; therefore, reflection from 
index mismatch and/or a front-contact metallic grid reduces light coupling into cells. Texturing 
the front surface and/or including an anti-reflection coating addresses the challenge of index 
mismatch, while interdigitated back-contact cells (IBC) move both n- and p-type contacts to the 
back to minimize front-grid light reflection. This improved light coupling allows IBC cells to 
achieve particularly high power output under typical illumination. By inserting high bandgap (Eg) 
material between absorber and highly recombination active metal contacts, Silicon heterojunction 
solar cells (SHJ)1 can provide higher efficiency (η > 25%) and lower temperature coefficients2 
than traditional p-n junction solar cells. Today, despite the fact that recent market forecasts predict 
the rapid increase in monofacial Passivated Emitter and Rear Contact (PERC) cell production3,4, 
monofacial IBC SHJ cells ranks among the very best high-performance cells, with efficiencies 
exceeding 26% in experiments5.   

A new solar cell architecture, called bifacial PV, has recently emerged as a promising 

technological pathway to higher output yields and lower costs4,6–9. The bifacial design accepts 
light from both surfaces, therefore it allows absorption of ground reflected sunlight (albedo) at the 
rear side of solar cell. The sum of the direct sunlight and the albedo illumination increases photo-
current within the cell. Unfortunately, the benefits of bifacial operation of an IBC SHJ cell are not 
easily quantified – after all, the dense interdigitated grid in the back may only allow a fraction of 
the albedo (α) light to reach the cell and the excess photo-current may be lost as Joule heating in 
the fingers and busbars. Very little previous work has focused on assessing bifacial IBC SHJ cells, 
which are expected to be optically superior to bifacial front and back contact PERC cells at any α. 


2 

 

In this letter, we address the fundamental question of bifacial gain of an IBC SHJ cell with 
sophisticated numerical modeling plus a simple analytical formula capturing the essential physics, 
which agree closely. We show that IBC SHJ cells benefit from bifacial operation provided that: 
(a) the albedo exceeds a critical intensity, and (b) the gaps between the metal fingers are optimized. 

To tackle the back contact design of bifacial IBC SHJ cell, we begin by specifying the details 

of the device structure. As a reference, we consider a high-efficiency monofacial  IBC SHJ cell 
reported by Yoshikawa et al.5 with Aluminum (Al) metal grids. Although transparent conducting 
oxides (TCO) are a theoretically ideal replacement, they are not considered here, since there is not 
yet an ideal p-type TCO electrode for solar cells10. Fig. 1a shows that our device has a 165 μm n-
type c-Si absorber sandwiched between 10 & 20 nm thick intrinsic a-Si passivation layers at front 
and rear, respectively. Interdigitated p+ a-Si emitter and n+ a-Si back-surface field (BSF) layers are 
embedded in the rear a-Si passivation layer. The BSF width 𝑊𝐵𝑆𝐹 and emitter width 𝑊𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑡 are 
taken as 100 μm and 250 μm respectively for the following reasons: (a) monofacial IBC cells are 
typically optimized at 𝑊𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑡 ∼  2 − 3 × 𝑊𝐵𝑆𝐹

11–13; (b) the lateral transport path (center-to-center 

distance between p+ and n+ regions) must be comparable to the absorber thicknesses to avoid 
excessive bulk recombination. Their spacing is set to 𝑊𝑠 = 5 μm, because Nichiprouk et al.13 has 
emphasized that proximity between the emitter and BSF layers improves device efficiencies. 
Therefore, the half pitch width 𝑊𝑃 (the lateral distance between centers of adjacent metal grids), 
as labeled in Fig. 1b, is 180 μm. Finally, Al metal grids (thickness of 𝑡𝐴𝑙, width of 𝑊𝐴𝑙 and length 
of 𝐿𝐴𝑙 as labeled in Fig. 1a) are pasted to the p+ emitter and n+ BSF to form the electrodes.  

The spacing (gap) between Al metal grids (𝑊𝑔) is the key variable controlling efficiencies, see 

Fig. 1b. Once albedo photons transmit through the gap in the metallic back-contact, they generate 
electron-holes pairs within the device. These photo-generated carriers first transport through 
emitter/BSF layer to reach the metal contact (intrinsic resistance) and then have to travel through 
metal fingers and/or busbars to reach the electrode (extrinsic resistance).  As a result, thicker 
gridlines (i.e. narrower 𝑊𝑔) block albedo and reduce photo-current, but thinner lines (i.e. wider 
𝑊𝑔)  increase series resistance and reduce output power. Specifically, thinner grids (wider 𝑊𝑔) 
reduce the grid shadowing loss (𝑃𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑤), but increase the series resistance loss (𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡), since 
𝑊𝐴𝑙 = 𝑊𝑃 − 𝑊𝑔.  The resulting output power (𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡) of a bifacial IBC SHJ cell is given by:  

 

𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇(𝑤, 𝛼) = 𝑃𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙(α) − 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑖𝑠𝑡(𝑤, 𝛼) − 𝑃𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑑𝑜𝑤(𝑤, 𝛼);
(1)

 
Here, the idealized intrinsic power-output (𝑃𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙) of the IBC SHJ cell is reduced by the counter-
balancing resistive and shadowing losses defined by the normalized gap width: 𝑤 = 𝑊𝑔 𝑊𝑃
⁄
.  Our 

goal in this paper will be to calculate the normalized gap width 𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡 that maximizes 𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑤, 𝛼).  

Light absorption in a bifacial IBC SHJ cell involves a complex interplay of absorption in the 

bulk and multiple reflection by the randomly textured surface. Light absorption in a bifacial IBC 
SHJ cell is calculated first to determine the spatial profile of photo-generated carriers. With 
texturing on both sides of the cell, ray-tracing calculation may involve complicated 3D 
simulations14. Fortunately, the fact that carrier generation has only weak lateral spatial variation 
allows us to simplify the optical model to 1D. The effect of a Lambertian light trapping due to 
random textured surface15 can be quantified by modifying the spectral dependent optical constant 
of c-Si based on the empirical formula16. In this model, a perfect anti-reflection coating (ARC) 


3 

 

layer is assumed. Ray tracing is utilized to compute the absorption spectrum and spatial optical 
generation profile within the layered structure.   

Based on the spatially-resolved light absorption profile, the transport of the photo-generated 

electrons and holes are solved in a 2D coupled Poisson-drift-diffusion solver Sentaurus TCAD 17. 
The electrical properties of the interfaces and bulk layers are adapted from previous work18.  
Finally, Sentaurus automatically accounts for the intrinsic resistance related to current crowding 
between the metal and heavily doped regions as illustrated in Fig. 1b. For the extrinsic resistance, 
the schematic of the IBC back-contacts described by Desa et al. 19 can be used to calculate the 
corresponding finger and busbar resistances20,21: In practice, busbar resistance is negligible 
compared to finger resistance given by:  

 

𝑅𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 = 1

2 × 𝜌 × 𝐿𝐴𝑙

2

𝑊𝐴𝑙 × 𝑡𝐴𝑙

× 𝑊𝑃,
(2)

 
where 𝜌 is the Al resistivity. This extrinsic series resistance associated with Al back-contact is 
added to the 2D Sentaurus device model as an external series resistance. 

Our simulation framework is validated by benchmarking against experimental results of a 

state-of-the-art monofacial IBC SHJ cell5. Fig. 2 shows that it closely agrees with experimentally 
observed J-V curves and external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra. Two non-idealities explain 
the remaining, small deviations observed: our non-inclusion of the imperfect ARC explains 
slightly higher EQE between the wavelengths of 300-400 nm, and our neglect of the series 
resistance explains the slightly higher fill factor (FF). The corrections are small (especially because 
the back-contact grids can be much wider in their monofacial counterparts): the overall 
discrepancy (in terms of power production) is below 0.5%. 

Our simulation framework can now be used to optimize the design of the bifacial IBC SHJ cell 

shown in Fig. 1.  A number of IBC SHJ solar cells with different 𝑊𝑔 are created in Sentaurus and 
illuminated by various albedo 𝛼.  Next, following the optoelectronic procedure described above, 
the output power 𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡(𝑤, 𝛼) is calculated. Here, we assume typical finger parameters 𝑡𝐴𝑙 = 40 μm 
thick22,23 and 𝐿𝐴𝑙 = 10 cm  long5,19; 𝑊𝐴𝑙 = 𝑊𝑃 − 𝑊𝑔 = 𝑊𝑃 ∙ (1 − 𝑤)  is our parameter for 
performance optimization of bifacial IBC SHJ solar cells. To quantify shadowing and resistive 
losses, the results are post-processed, such that the resistive losses due to Al fingers can be 
extracted from the difference between power output with and without the extrinsic resistance.  

By definition24, the power output 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇 of solar cell is given by: 
 

𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇 = 𝑉𝑂𝐶 × 𝐽𝑆𝐶 × FF,
(3)

where 𝐽𝑆𝐶 is the short circuit current; 𝑉𝑂𝐶 is the open circuit voltage; and FF is the fill factor. These 
four key metrics (𝑉𝑂𝐶, 𝐽𝑆𝐶, FF and 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇) for assessing solar cell performance are plotted as a 
function of 𝑤 in Fig. 3.  𝐽𝑆𝐶 is dictated by total amount of sunlight received from front and rear 
side. It increases linearly with increasing w (see Fig. 3a), as the gap between the electrodes allows 
larger fraction of the albedo light to enter the cell and contribute to photo-generation. The loss of 
FF in Fig. 3b is a consequence of increasing series resistance with increment of 𝑤. Increasing 𝑤 
impacts the series resistance by (1) reducing the overlap region between metal and emitter/BSF 
layer to aggravate the current crowding effect; (2) narrowing 𝑊𝐴𝑙 to increase 𝑅𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑒𝑟 according to 
Eq. (1). Since 𝑉𝑂𝐶  scales logarithmically24 with 𝐽𝑆𝐶 , the increase in 𝑉𝑂𝐶  in Fig. 3c is easily 


4 

 

explained.  𝑉𝑂𝐶  is relatively insensitive to the variation of 𝑤, because 𝑉𝑂𝐶 , as a metric that 
measures how good carrier transport is within the absorber, is driven by the diffusion length of 
minority carriers, length of quasi-neutral region and surface defect density etc.25, none of which is 
directly correlated to 𝑤 between Al fingers. Since 𝐽𝑆𝐶 and 𝐹𝐹 respond inversely to 𝑤, 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇 as a 
function of 𝑤 shows a concave downward curve, as shown in Fig. 3d. For increased α, the 
optimum 𝑤 that delivers the maximum 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇 shifts to larger values, as summarized in Table I: 
 
Table I. Optimum 𝑤 to produce maximum power output with given α 

α
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9

𝑤
0.67
0.72
0.78
0.78
0.78

Max. 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇(mW/cm2)
27.7
31.3
35.0
38.8
42.3

 
At a practical albedo of α = 0.3, total resistive loss and the optical loss of shadowing limit the 
realistic maximum 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇  at 31.3 mW/cm2  with a 𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡  of 0.72 , which exceeds 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇  of 
monofacial IBC SHJ cell by 4.5 mW/cm2 (17% relative increase). Although the self-shading 
effect in the monolithic module26 has not been explicitly accounted for in this work, it can be 
captured by reducing α. In this case, the improvement of 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇 from monofacial IBC SHJ cell to 
bifacial IBC SHJ cells is still substantial. 

The numerical optimization above was performed for a particular IBC SHJ Al-interconnected 

cell. Different groups may design bifacial IBC cells variously, with different grid periodicity, 
contact and metal resistances, etc. Therefore a general solution for  𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝛼) is desired. To develop 
this generalization, we first carefully assess the performance of bifacial IBC SHJ cell with α = 0.3 
by breaking down the loss mechanisms as depicted in Fig. 4a. Optical loss of shadowing increased 
linearly with the decrease of 𝑤 as it reflects the fact that total amount of absorbed photons scaled 
linearly with unshaded area. The effective contact resistive loss due to current crowding effect 
outweighs the finger resistive loss, regardless of 𝑤 . Remarkably, a generalized analytical 
expression captures these essential features of power output by realizing 𝐽𝑠𝑐 (𝑤, 𝛼) ≅ 𝐽𝑠𝑐(𝛼 =
0) ∙ ( 1 + 𝛼 ∙ 𝑤). Therefore, Eq. (2) can be rewritten as:  

𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇(𝑤) ≅ 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜 ∙ (1 + 𝛼 ∙ 𝑤) − 1

2 ∙ (𝐿𝐴𝑙)2 ∙ 𝐽𝑀𝑃,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜

2 ∙ (1 + 𝛼 ∙ 𝑤)2 ∙
𝜌

(1 − 𝑤) ∙ 𝑡𝐴𝑙

− 𝐽𝑀𝑃,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜

2 ∙ (1 + 𝛼 ∙ 𝑤)2 ∙
𝜌𝑐

(1 − 𝑤) ;

(4)

in which 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜 is the standard output power of a monofacial IBC SHJ solar cell;  𝐽𝑀𝑃,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜 is 
the operating current of monofacial IBC SHJ cell at maximum power point; and 𝜌𝑐 is the contact 
resistivity between 𝐴𝑙 grids and heavily doped regions. To find the normalized gap width 𝑤 that 
maximizes 𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇, we set  

𝑑𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇

𝑑𝑤 |

𝑤=𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡

= 0; the result for 𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡 is given by: 

𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡 ≡ 𝑊𝑔

𝑊𝑃

= 1 − (1 + 𝛼)(𝛼(𝛼 + 𝑐))

−1

2
(5a)

𝑐 ≡
𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜

𝐽𝑀𝑃,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜

2 ∙ (1

2 × 𝐿𝐴𝑙

2 ∙ 𝜌
𝑡𝐴𝑙
+ 𝜌𝑐)

(5b)

 


5 

 

where 𝑐 captures the ratio of the output power density for the monofacial IBC SHJ cell to the total 
resistive power loss density. Typically, this should greatly exceed unity in a good cell. At 𝛼 = 0.3, 
the analytic solution is benchmarked against simulation results. Strong agreement is observed in 
Fig. 4b. For various α, the analytically-calculated 𝑤 matches with the numerical simulation within 
discretization error. By inserting Eq. 5a & 5b into Eq. 4, the benefit of bifacial cell over monofacial 
cell can be quantified as a function of α and 𝑐, and further simplified for (α ≪ c) as follows: 
 

𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇

𝑃𝑂𝑈𝑇,𝑚𝑜𝑛𝑜

= 1 + 𝛼

𝑐
∙ [𝑐 + 2𝛼 − 2√𝛼(𝛼 + 𝑐)] ≅ (1 + 𝛼) (1 − 2√𝛼

𝑐)
(6)

 
The optimum power scales linearly with albedo (i.e. 1 + 𝛼), although the geometric mean of 
albedo and the relative loss coefficient (i.e., √𝛼/𝑐)  suppresses some optical gain. The generalized 
analytic expression allows one to simply estimate the optimum 𝑤 and resulting benefit of a bifacial 
cell over a monofacial cell in the best case. 

Interestingly, Eq. (4) also offers an insight not immediately apparent from our numerical 

simulations. By definition, 𝑤 ≥  0, therefore Eq. (4) suggests that the  albedo must exceed a critical 
value (𝛼 > 𝛼𝑐  ) to ensure that bifacial operation actually produced more power than its 
monofacial counterpart. By replacing α by 𝛼𝑐, and setting 𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡 = 0, we find that 𝛼𝑐 =

1

𝑐−2. Recall 

that for high quality solar cells, resistive power loss is a small fraction of the total power output, 
therefore 𝑐 is much greater than 2 and 𝛼𝑐 turns out to be very close to zero. For this specific 
numerical example, 𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡 = 0 is reached when 𝛼𝑐 ≤ 0.01. 

In summary, we have explored the optimization of back contacted design for bifacial IBC SHJ 

solar cell which theoretically outperforms the fast growing PERC technique as a pathway towards 
low cost of PV technologies. By incorporating a realistic series resistance model that reflects both 
extrinsic and intrinsic resistive losses into our well-calibrated 2D electro-optically coupled device 
simulation framework, we have identified the 𝑤𝑜𝑝𝑡 between Al back contacts for bifacial IBC SHJ 
solar cell under various α. For a practical α of 0.3, we find that a bifacial IBC SHJ cell outperforms 
monofacial IBC SHJ cell by 4.5 mW/cm2 in the best case. Furthermore, a generalized analytical 
expression addressing the balance of resistive loss and optical loss of shadowing was also derived, 
which shows that bifacial IBC solar cells offer a significant advantage in power production across 
a broad range of albedos and materials. As a result, this study may serve as a general guideline for 
the design and optimization of future bifacial IBC SHJ solar cells.  

 

 
 


6 

 

REFERENCES 

1 S. De Wolf, A. Descoeudres, Z.C. Holman, and C. Ballif, Green 2, 7 (2012). 
2 M. Taguchi, A. Yano, S. Tohoda, K. Matsuyama, Y. Nakamura, T. Nishiwaki, K. Fujita, and E. 
Maruyama, IEEE J. Photovoltaics 4, 96 (2014). 
3 N. Edition, International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic ( ITRPV ) (2018). 
4 F. Colville, Mono Based PERC Modules to Drive Bifacial Market Entry in 2018 (2017). 
5 K. Yoshikawa, H. Kawasaki, W. Yoshida, T. Irie, K. Konishi, K. Nakano, T. Uto, D. Adachi, 
M. Kanematsu, H. Uzu, and K. Yamamoto, Nat. Energy 2, 17032 (2017). 
6 P. Zheng, X. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Yuan, L. Zha, W. Chen, and H. Jin, Photovolt. Int. 39, 59 
(2018). 
7 T.J. Silverman, M.G. Deceglie, and K.A. Horowitz, Internet: Http://Pvlcoe.Nrel.Gov (2018). 
8 J. Libal, D. Berrian, and R. Kopecek, Overview: Energy Yield Simulations and Calculation of 
LCOE for Bifacial PV Systems (2017). 
9 F. Fertig, S. Nold, N. Woehrle, J. Greulich, I. Haedrich, K. Karin, M. Mittag, D. Biro, S. Rein, 
and R. Preu, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl. 24, 800 (2016). 
10 M. Morales-Masis, S. De Wolf, R. Woods-Robinson, J.W. Ager, and C. Ballif, Adv. Electron. 
Mater. 3, 1600529 (2017). 
11 D. Diouf, J.-P. Kleider, T. Desrues, and P.-J. Ribeyron, Mater. Sci. Eng. B 159, 291 (2009). 
12 K.R. McIntosh, M.J. Cudzinovic, D.D. Smith, W.P. Mulligan, and R.M. Swanson, in 
Photovolt. Energy Conversion, 2003. Proc. 3rd World Conf. (2003), pp. 971–974. 
13 O. Nichiporuk, A. Kaminski, M. Lemiti, A. Fave, and V. Skryshevsky, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. 
Cells 86, 517 (2005). 
14 N. Tucher, J. Eisenlohr, P. Kiefel, O. Höhn, H. Hauser, M. Peters, C. Müller, J.C. 
Goldschmidt, and B. Bläsi, Opt. Express 23, A1720 (2015). 
15 P. Kowalczewski and L.C. Andreani, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 143, 260 (2015). 
16 M.A. Green, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl. 10, 235 (2002). 
17 I. Synopsys, Synopsys Sentaurus Device (2016). 
18 R.V.K. Chavali, S. Khatavkar, C. V Kannan, V. Kumar, P.R. Nair, J.L. Gray, and M.A. Alam, 
IEEE J. Photovoltaics 5, 725 (2015). 
19 M.K.M. Desa, S. Sapeai, A.W. Azhari, K. Sopian, M.Y. Sulaiman, N. Amin, and S.H. Zaidi, 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 60, 1516 (2016). 
20 D.L. Meier and D.K. Schroder, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 31, 647 (1984). 
21 D.L. Meier, E.A. Good, R.A. Garcia, B.L. Bingham, S. Yamanaka, V. Chandrasekaran, and C. 
Bucher, in Photovolt. Energy Conversion, Conf. Rec. 2006 IEEE 4th World Conf. (2006), pp. 
1315–1318. 
22 A. Reinders, P. Verlinden, and A. Freundlich, Photovoltaic Solar Energy: From Fundamentals 
to Applications, 1st ed. (John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2017). 
23 K. Masuko, M. Shigematsu, T. Hashiguchi, D. Fujishima, M. Kai, N. Yoshimura, T. 
Yamaguchi, Y. Ichihashi, T. Mishima, N. Matsubara, and others, IEEE J. Photovoltaics 4, 1433 
(2014). 
24 J. Nelson, The Physics of Solar Cells (Imperial College Press, n.d.). 
25 R.V.K. Chavali, J. V Li, C. Battaglia, S. De Wolf, J.L. Gray, and M.A. Alam, IEEE J. 
Photovoltaics 7, 169 (2017). 
26 T.J. Silverman, M.G. Deceglie, X. Sun, R.L. Garris, M.A. Alam, C. Deline, and S. Kurtz, 
IEEE J. Photovoltaics 5, 1742 (2015). 
 


7 

 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig 2. Our 2-D simulation framework for IBC SHJ 
cells incorporating analytic Lambertian light trapping
shows strong agreement with (a) spectral dependent 
EQE results (except for λ < 400 nm ) and
(b)

measured I-V characteristics adapted from Yoshikawa 
et al.3 (dots: experiment; line: simulation).

(a)

(b)

300
600
900
1200
0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

1

Wavelength (nm)

EQE

 Expt.
 Simulation

0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75
0

10

20

30

40

Voltage (V)

Current Density (mA/cm2)

Exp.
Sim.

𝑉𝑂𝐶
0.74
0.74

𝐽𝑆𝐶
42
42

FF
0.84
0.85

η
26.3
26.8

Fig 3. Performance of the bifacial SHJ cell structure as a 
function of reduced gap width w between Al metal 
contacts under various α. (a) short circuit current; (b) fill 
factor; (c) open circuit voltage; (d) cell power output. 
(dots: numerical results; dashed line: trend lines).

(c)
(d)

0
0.5
0.7
0.9
40

50

60

70

80

w

JSC (mA/cm2)

=0.1
=0.3
=0.5
=0.7
=0.9

0
0.5
0.7
0.9

0.74

0.75

w

VOC (V)

(a)

0
0.5
0.7
0.9
0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

0.8

0.85

w

Fill Factor

0.75 0.8 0.85

0.7

0.8

0
0.5
0.7
0.9
20

25

30

35

40

45

w

POUT (mW/cm2)

(b)

Fig 1. (a) 3D schematics of the bifacial IBC-HIT solar 
cell design studied in this work. Key length scales are
defined here. (b) Current crowding is induced near the 
contacts by the narrow overlap between the 
emitter/BSF and the Al metal grid.

c-Si

a-Si

p+
n+

Al
Al

(b)

Albedo

-
+

c-Si

a-Si

p+
n+

Al
Al

WBSF

WAl

tAl

AM1.5G

Wemit

(a)

LAl

a-Si

Wg

WP

WS

Front

Back

x

y

z


8 

 

 

Fig 4. (a) Illustration of different loss mechanisms 
(optical loss of shadowing, effective contact 
resistance loss, finger resistance loss) under various 
𝑤. (b) Our analytical model (lines) shows strong 
agreement with simulations (circles) for α = 0.3.

(b)

Pideal: 34.8 mW/cm2

Max. POUT: 31.3 mW/cm2

Shadowing Loss

Power Output

Contact Loss

Finger Loss

(a)


