Network of thermoelectric nanogenerators for low power energy

harvesting

Dimitri Tainoff,1, 2 Ana¨ıs Proudhom,1, 2 C´eline Tur,1, 2 Thierry Crozes,1, 2 S´ebastien

Dufresnes,1, 2 Sylvain Dumont,1, 2 Daniel Bourgault,1, 2 and Olivier Bourgeois1, 2

1Institut N´EEL, CNRS, 25 avenue des Martyrs, F-38042 Grenoble, France

2Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inst NEEL, F-38042 Grenoble, France

(Dated: November 22, 2018)

Abstract

We report the design, elaboration and measurements of an innovative planar thermoelectric (TE)

devices made of a large array of small mechanically suspended nanogenerators (nanoTEG). The

miniaturized TE generators based on SiN membranes are arranged in series and/or in parallel

depending on the expected final resistance adapted to the one of the load. The microstructuration

allows, at the same time, a high thermal insulation of the membrane from the silicon frame and

high thermal coupling to its environment (surrounding air, radiations). We show a ratio of 60%

between the measured effective temperature of the membrane, (and hence of the TE junctions),

and the available temperature of the heat source (air). The thermal gradient generated across the

TE junction reaches a value as high as 60 kelvin per mm. Energy harvesting with this planar TE

module is demonstrated through the collected voltage on the TE junctions when a temperature

gradient is applied, showing a harvested power on the order of 0.3 µWatt for a 1 cm2 chip for an

effective temperature gradient of 10 K. The optimization of nanoTEGs performances will increase

the power harvested significantly and permit to send a signal by a regular communication protocol

and feed basic functions like temperature measurement or airflow sensing.

1

arXiv:1811.08729v1  [physics.app-ph]  21 Nov 2018


Introduction

Wireless sensor network (WSN) are an association of various system being able to measure

and transfer information over a network without requiring human intervention. Focusing on

the sensor part, the major problem preventing the massive spread of WSN is their power

supply. Indeed depending on their location, sensors cannot be wired to the grid and/or the

maintenance costs induced by the battery change are not acceptable. The smartest solution

to get over this problem is to harvest energy from the environment of sensors in order to

make them autonomous.

Since the environment of sensors are changing drastically depending on their final use,

energy harvesting solutions that have been developed until now are devoted to one or very

few use cases. Each of these technologies has their own advantages and drawbacks which

have been reviewed recently [1, 2]. However, it is difficult to find a general solution which

could be sufficiently versatile to cover lots of WSN use cases [3]. In that context, ther-

moelectricity has a great potential because thermal gradients are present all around even

intermittently, being most of the time a byproduct of other energies coming from mechanical

motion, electromagnetic dissipation, or chemical reaction... Despite this advantage, the use

of thermoelectric generator (TEG), developed since more than fifty years, is still limited

to niche markets [4, 5]. This is due to numerous reasons among which one finds moderate

efficiency, the use of rare materials and, above all, the bulk nature of thermoelectric (TE)

module.

With the emergence of low power communication protocols dedicated to the WSN, there

is now a real demand for micro-sources of energy that can deliver power on the order of

100 µWatt. That range of power can be obtained from standard TE module with a tem-

perature gradient of few degrees under stationary operating conditions.
However, these

conditions of use are not necessarily adapted to small wireless sensors especially when the

energy source is intermittent and/or the available volume too limited. This has given a new

direction for research that is clearly oriented towards miniaturization of TE modules [6, 7].

One of the first miniaturized TEG was based on the structuration of micro-pillars of TE

materials, it allowed to strongly limit the volume of the modules [8]. However, the need to

2


evacuate the heat flow for preserving the thermal gradient has led to the use of large heat

sink making the whole device quite voluminous. The use of such a massive heat sink is

the direct consequence of the 3D architecture of the miniaturized TEG and particularly the

fact that the thermal coupling of the face in contact with ambient air is not optimized for

convection.

Consequently, a growing interest has emerged regarding new designs of nanoTEG using

planar and suspended configurations, essentially thanks to pioneering works using microfab-

rication technologies [9–15]. The major advantage of these suspended planar configurations

is that the free standing part is well coupled to the surrounding air by convection permit-

ting to the device to work without heat sink. However, at least one major issue remains

to be solved before using that kind of module as low power generator. Indeed, using TE

modules based on micropatterned membrane leads to designs involving very thin films of

TE materials and finally to a sizable internal electrical resistance. Since standard low power

electronic is optimized for low electrical impedance energy source, the actual solutions ex-

hibiting internal resistance of more than 10 kΩ are not well adapted. To summarize, the

major challenges for a planar microscaled TE module to be an efficient power source is to

create a significant thermal gradient upon small distance, to have low electrical impedance

and to collect thermal energy at the micro and nanoscale through a thermoelectric voltage.

Here we report the design, the elaboration and the measurement of innovative planar

thermoelectric devices made of a large array of suspended nano-thermoelectric generators

(single cell nanoTEG). These nanoTEGs are small enough to be duplicated per hundreds

upon centimeter square surface and arranged in series and/or in parallel depending on the

expected final resistance adapted to the load. The resistance of the measured devices is

on the order of 103 kΩ in the studied configuration, opening the door to massive parallel

wiring of nanoTEG which could lead to resistance of the order of few tens of ohms. We

demonstrates a harvested power on the order of 0.3 µWatt for a 1 cm2 chip for an effective

temperature gradient of 10 K. Under optimized performances, they can produce enough

power (below 100 µWatt) to send a signal using common communication protocols and feed

basic functions, for instance temperature sensing or air flow measurements.

3


Design and realization.

The concept at the basis of this work is twofold: first, to take advantage of the reduced

thermal coupling between the suspended thermoelectric junction on the membrane and the

heat bath (silicon frame) to favor heat exchange with the surroundings (air or radiation)

and second to decrease the electrical resistance of the final device in order to use it as

generator.
It is made possible thanks to the elaboration of small suspended nanoTEG

acting like individual nanosource of energy obtained by micro and nanostructuration (see

Fig. 1). These nanoTEGs can then be duplicated in series and/or parallel depending on the

expected internal resistance; the microstructuration favoring at the same time the thermal

insulation of the central part of the membrane and heat exchange through air or radiation.

To optimize the efficiency of the device, we have used bismuth telluride alloys as thermo-

electric materials for their high conversion efficiency close to room temperature [17, 18]. As

their mechanical properties do not allow to make self- suspended structure, silicon nitride

(widely used in MEMS industry) is used as a physical support taking profit of its mechanical

stability and its low thermal conductivity. The use of large membrane and planar config-

uration boost surface dependent heat transfers like convection or radiation. The sensitive

thermoelectric junctions are installed on the membrane and on the silicon frame to convert

temperature gradients in TE voltage.

As compared to a regular macroscopic TE modules that are quite massive, this technical

solution allows collecting energy from various small sources. In a regular TEG, the thermal

conductance is given by the n and p TE pillars themselves. In a macroscopic module, the

thermal conductance between the hot side and the cold side is given by the TE legs; it is of

10−4 W.K−1 for typical leg dimensions of 1 mm×1 mm×5 mm. Here, since the nanTEGs

are planar by construction, the thermal coupling of the sensitive part is only ensured by the

TE thin films and the SiN suspending arms. Indeed, first, the aspect ratio of the suspending

arms (small thickness, width and long length) is highly favorable for thermal insulation.

Second, by using low thermal conductivity materials like amorphous silicon nitride and

bismuth telluride, the thermal link to the heat bath is severely reduced as compared to the

use of polysilicon [11, 12, 14]. This leads to thermal conductance of the order of 10−7 W.K−1,

4


FIG. 1. Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) image and functioning scheme of a nanoTEG cell

composed of a single membrane (SiN membrane suspended by four SiN arms). Each SiN arm

supports a n or p-type Bi2XTe3 thin films: the p-type (orange) is Bi2−xSbxTe3 and the n-type

(blue) is Bi2−xTe3Sex. One cold (hot) thermoelectric junction is located on the membrane and the

other hot (cold) junction is on the bulk silicon frame. The temperature of the membrane is free to

vary under an external source of heat (circulating air or radiation). Under appropriate conditions,

the thermal gradient between the membrane and the silicon frame can reach 10 K over a distance

of 150 µm.
The thermoelectric voltage V generated by the temperature gradient between the

membrane and the silicon frame is collected by the two external contacts.

few orders of magnitude smaller than their macroscopic counterparts. In other words, this

very low thermal conductance and the very loss mass of the membrane allows to create

a thermal gradient of one degree when the membrane exchange a tenth of picojoule with

its environment. These characteristics and the very small mass of the thin silicon nitride

membrane lead to significantly enhanced thermal gradients when air convection is present

along with a very fast thermal time response.

Let us first described the fabrication of an individual single nanoTEG cell. It is built

by using two kinds of Bi2XTe3 thin TE films 300 nm thick (X being either antimony (Sb)

for the p-type Bi2−xSbxTe3 or selenium (Se) for the n-type is Bi2−xTe3Sex). The TE thin

films are deposited by reactive sputtering, structured by regular clean room processes and

5


FIG. 2. Sketch of the main steps of the elaboration process of the nanoTEG devices : a) Si substrate

with SiN top layer, b) structuration of the n-type Bi2−xTe3Sex thin film by lift-off process, c) idem

for the p-type Bi2−xSbxTe3 thin film, d) and the Ni metallic contact, e) etching of the SiN top

layer using SF6 RIE etching, the electrical contact being protected by photoresist f) Suspension of

the nanoTEGs with XeF2 dry etching process.

connected on-chip using a contact made of a metallic nickel thin film. As it can be seen in

Fig. 1, the membrane (100 nm thick) and the suspending arms (150 µm long, 6 µm wide)

are made of SiN. The suspending arms are the mechanical support on which the TE thin

films are deposited (150 µm long, 5 µm wide). After several microfabrication steps dedicated

to the structuration of the TE junctions, membrane and supporting arms, via are opened

into silicon nitride using SF6 RIE etching. Membrane and arms are finally suspended using

XeF2 dry etching process. The main microfabrication steps are described in Fig. 2. Then,

by construction, if the silicon chip is installed on a hot surface, a temperature gradient will

appear between the silicon frame and the suspended membrane, the temperature of the

latter remaining close to the on of air thanks to convection. A thermoelectric voltage will

then be generated across the TE junctions and collected on the two external contacts.

The final nanoTEG module is then made out of thousands of identical single cells [16].

They are assembled in such a way (series and parallel) that the total electrical impedance

can be significantly reduced if needed. Actually, this arrangement is very flexible and ver-

6


FIG. 3. SEM picture of a network of hundred of nanoTEG cells. The nanoTEGs are assembled in

series and parallel for adapting the internal electrical resistance to the impedance of the electrical

load. Ns is the number of nanoTEG in series and Np the number of nanoTEG in parallel. In inset,

a close-up view of three membranes of the network.

satile, it can be adjusted to fit the targeted electrical resistance of the load. As pointed

out by numerous works, the internal electrical resistance of the TE module is a point at

least as important as thermoelectric performances. Reducing the internal resistance helps

maximizing the power generated by the nanoTEG and permits its use with standard low

power electronic components [12]. An example of a large array of such nanoTEG cells is

shown in Fig. 3. Since the fabrication of these TE modules is made using microelectronic

technologies, it can be up-scaled easily to make large surface of planar nanoTEGs.

Measure, characterization and performance.

More than ten different nanoTEG networks were fabricated and tested going from single

cell TEG as shown in Fig. 1 to large array of membrane as shown in Fig. 3. Several different

physical properties are of great importance for a deep characterization of our nanoTEGs:

7


Materials
e (nm) Trec (◦C) ρ (mΩ.cm) S (µV.K−1) S2σ (Watt.m−1.K−2)

Bi2−xSbxTe3
300
275
5
137
3.89 × 10−4

Bi2−xTe3Sex
300
175
2
-54
1.43 × 10−4

Bi2−xSbxTe3 in [17]
300
275
3
250
2.1 × 10−3

Bi2−xTe3Sex in [17]
300
250
1
-200
4.0 × 10−3

TABLE I. Deposition parameters and thermoelectric properties of the two n and p-type bismuth

telluride thin films. e is the thickness of the TE materials, Trec is the temperature at which the

TE materials are annealed, ρ the resistivity of the TE film, S the Seebeck coefficient measured

at room temperature, and S2σ the power factor. The first two lines are related to parameters as

measured on TE thin films in this work. As a comparison, the last two bottom lines of the table

show the optimized parameters as obtained in previous studies made by Bourgault et al. [17]. The

Seebeck of the TE thin films used in this work are smaller than the accepted state-of-the-art value,

showing the room of improvement that still exists for the nanoTEGs.

the thermal conductance between the suspended structure and the heat bath, the resistance

of the electrical contact at the junction between the p and n types TE materials, the See-

beck coefficient of the bismuth telluride and finally, the overall performance of the TEG to

generate an electrical power harvested from its thermal environment.

First, the thermal properties of each constituting materials of the TEG have been mea-

sured independently. The thermal conductivity of SiN and Bi2XTe3 based TE materials has

been measured using on membrane 3ω measurements [19, 20]. At room temperature, SiN

exhibits a thermal conductivity below 3 W.m−1.K−1 and a value around 1 W.m−1.K−1 has

been found for thin films of Bi2Te3 based materials [19–21]. This gives a thermal conduc-

tance of 10−7 W.K−1 for the four suspended beams showing that the membrane is highly

thermally isolated from the frame. The electrical resistivity of each thermoelectric legs (ρp

and ρn) has been measured at room temperature at 5 mΩ.cm for p-type and 2 mΩ.cm for

n-type using standard four probe experiment carried out on dedicated samples. Finally, the

Seebeck coefficients have been measured using a home-made experimental setup for each

8


composition of the Bi2XTe3 films on separated samples having the same geometry and con-

tacts [17]. The TE thin films are not yet fully optimized because the Seebeck coefficient

and the electrical conductivity that are summarized in Table I are below the state-of-the-art

value (see Table I) [17, 18]. The internal resistance of the nanoTEG assembly Rsim can be

estimated from the relation:

Rsim = Ns(ρpL + ρnL)/(Npwe)
(1)

where L is the length of the n and p-type arms, w their width and e their thickness; Np

and Ns being respectively the number of nanoTEGs in parallel and series. The expected re-

sistance Rsim for the studied array composed of 35 membranes in parallel and 12 membranes

in series is 880 Ω (see Table II). The differences observed between the simulated values from

Eq. 1 and the measurements of the actual resistance of the four samples lies within 10%.

Intrinsic variation of resistance between samples can originate from inhomogeneity in the

layer geometry, broken membrane or could be due to contact resistance. Regarding the con-

tribution of the contact to the overall resistance, we can estimate that the contact resistance

between metallic contact and Bi2XTe3 thin film to be below 10−6 Ω.cm2, a value in fair

agreement with the state-of-the-art [22]. This estimated value leads to contact resistances

of several Ohms for a contact surface of few micrometer square; a resistance that will be

negligible as compared to the resistance of the TE films themselves. After XeF2 etching,

the resistance of the whole device is increased by a factor of two. This increase has been

observed for all the samples. If the true origin of that change is still under investigation, it

may be assigned to the slight deterioration of the electrical properties of the TE thin films

or the electrical contact to the nickel thin film.

The performance of the nanoTEG has been measured on single membranes, as shown

in Fig. 4, as well as on a large network of membranes. A temperature gradient is imposed

by the mean of a cold air flow blown on the chip carefully glued on a hot plate regulated

initially at a temperature of 320 K. The cold junction located on the membrane is cooled

down by the air flow while the silicon substrate coupled to the hot plate will serve as the hot

heat sink. The temperature difference between the membrane and the Si frame is probed

by measuring the voltage appearing across the TE junctions. When the air flow speed is

9


Samples
S1
S2
S3
S4

Rbf (Ω) 1050 970 1030 910

Raf (Ω) 1980 2160 2590 2110

TABLE II. Electrical characteristics of samples containing an array of 420 membranes over 0.5 cm2.

The resistance measurements have been performed before (bf) and after (af) the XeF2 etching of

Si for releasing the membranes. The XeF2 etching fabrication step is influencing the value of the

resistance of the Bi2XTe3 film or its contact resistance with the Ni.

FIG. 4. Power generated by a single nanoTEG cell as a function of the bias current when the

membrane is used in Peltier mode. Temperatures are determined from the thermoelectric voltage.

The temperature differences between the membrane and the silicon frame used in the experiment

are mentioned. In inset, the membrane on which the measurement has been done is shown.

increased the voltage measured at the end of the device increases. This shows that the

nanoTEG device is very sensitive to forced convection. Fig. 5 shows the variation of the

ratio between the effective temperature gradient as measured in the experiment and the

available temperature gradient (the gradient between the temperature of the hot plate and

10


FIG. 5. Ratio between the actual effective temperature gradient as measured on the membranes

and the temperature gradient available for different air-flow speeds. Results show that up to 60%

of the available temperature gradient is converted into a useful thermal gradient leading to the

appearance of a 10 K temperature difference between the membrane and the silicon frame.

the temperature of the air flow). It is worth noticing that this ratio reaches 60 percent for

airflow speed of 25 m.s−1.

These conditions of air flowing are frequently found in moving parts that necessitate on-

board sensor application. The power generated by the nanoTEGs has been measured for

different temperature gradients. Results are displayed in Fig. 6; it shows the expected linear

variation of the generated thermoelectric voltage as function of the effective temperature

gradient. The power output generated by an assembly of 420 membranes covering 0.5 cm2

surface subjected to a temperature gradient of 10 K has been measured to be of 0.15 µWatt,

giving for 1 cm2, a power of 0.3 µWatt.

This result is significant since it is obtained with not-fully optimized thermoelectric ma-

terials as shown in Table II. Indeed, by considering the standard TE properties of bismuth-

telluride alloys a power output of more than 10 times higher can be generated, meaning

3 µWatt for a 10 K temperature gradient over a 1 cm2 surface. Improvement in the techno-

11


FIG. 6. Variation of the thermoelectric voltage as a function of the effective thermal gradient for

three different samples. As expected, the variation is linear.

logical process will permit increasing the membrane density by a factor of, at least, three.

By working with larger surface (10 cm2) along with larger temperature gradient, the power

generated will be sufficient to feed a low energy communication protocol and exchange in-

formation on temperature or airflow speed.

As a concluding remarks, it can be mentioned that such miniaturized planar suspended

thermoelectric device could also be used for cooling applications, and not only for energy

harvesting. For example, small systems located at the center of the suspended membranes

can be cooled down by current injection in the nanoTEGs device, using such device in Peltier

mode.

Conclusion

Miniaturiazed planar suspended thermoelectric devices have been developed for low power

energy harvesting. This device is designed to convert small intermittent gradient of tem-

perature into electrical power by using thermally isolated membranes as heating or cooling

platform. The geometry of the device permits to adapt the resistance of the thermogen-

12


erator for each particular use case. The efficiency of the nanoTEG is sufficient to expect

its application in real wireless sensor network. By construction, the architecture of the de-

vice allows the appearance of high thermal gradients over very small distance (60 K.mm−1).

Using optimized TE materials, more than few tens of microWatt can be generated hence

permitting a wireless communication between the sensor and the network.

Regular microelectronic fabrication processes are used to elaborate such nanoTEG mod-

ules, meaning that the production can be easily upscaled at relatively low cost along with

a high integrability. Finally, it has to be stressed that better performances and evolution

of the technology are foreseen. Denser array of membranes, optimized new geometry and

higher Seebeck coefficients can be easily obtained boosting the performances of the nan-

oTEGs towards higher generated power. This shows that membrane based thermoelectric

energy harvesters are very promising building blocks for applications where hot or cold air

is present offering excellent perspectives for autonomous and connected physical sensing.

Acknowledgments

We thank the micro and nanofabrication facilities of Institut N´eel CNRS: the Pole Cap-

teurs Thermom´etriques et Calorim´etrie (E. Andr´e, G. Moiroux and J.-L. Garden) and

Nanofab (L. Abbassi, B. Fernandez, T. Fournier, G. Juli´e and J.-F. Motte) for their ad-

vices in the preparation of the samples. The authors acknowledge the financial support

from EU MERGING Grant No. 309150, the MODULO project Premat CNRS program in

2015-2016, and the SATT Linksium financial support for maturation of the Mo¨ız project in

2017 (https://moiz-eh.com/).

[1] A. Harb, Renewable Energy 36, (2011) 2461.

[2] R.J.M Vullers, R. van Schaijk, I. Doms, C. Van Hoof, R. Mertens, Solid-State Electronics 53,

(2009) 684.

[3] F. K. Shaikh and S. Zeadally, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 55, (2016) 1041.

13


[4] Sub-Watt Thermoelectric Energy Harvesting Industry and Market Report,
Infinergia,

http://www.infinergia.com/en/energy-harvesting (2016).

[5] S. LeBlanc, S.K. Yee, M.L. Scullin, C. Dames, and K.E. Goodson, Renew. Sustain. Energy

Rev. 32, (2014) 313.

[6] B. Kyun, J. Seung, W. Han, and J.-Y. Kim, Microelectronic Engineering 88, (2011) 775.

[7] L.W. da Silva and M. Kaviany, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 47, (2004)

2417.

[8] H. B¨ottner, J. Nurnus, A. Gavrikov, G. K¨uhner, M. J¨agle, C. K¨unzel, D. Eberhard, G.

Plescher, A. Schubert, K.-H. Schlereth, Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 13, (2004)

414-420.

[9] T. Huesgen, P. Woias, and N. Kockmann, Sensors and actuators A 145-146, (2008) 423.

[10] D. Davila, A. Tarancon, C. Calaza, M. Salleras, M. Fernandez-Regulez, A. San Paulo, and L.

Fonseca, Nano Energy 1 (2012) 812-819.

[11] A.P. Perez-Marin, A.F. Lopeandia, L. Abad, P. Ferrando-Villaba, G. Garcia, A.M. Lopez,

F.X. Munoz-Pascual, and J. Rodriguez-Viejo, Nano Energy 18 (2014) 73-80.

[12] Z. Yuan, K. Ziouche, Z. Bougrioua, P. Lejeune, T. Lasri and D. Leclercq, Sensors and Actua-

tors A 130221 (2015) 67-76.

[13] Y. Nakamura, M. Isogawa, T. Ueda, S. Yamasaka, H. Matsui, J. Kikkawa, S. Ikeuchi, T.

Oyake, T. Hori, J. Shiomi, A. Sakai, Nano Energy 12 (2015) 845-851.

[14] M. Sakata, T. Hori, T. Oyake, J. Maire, M. Nomura, J. Shiomi, Nano Energy 13 (2015)

601-608.

[15] G. Pennelli, J. Nanotechnol. 5, (2014) 1268.

[16] O. Bourgeois,
D. Tainoff,
D. Bourgault,
Thermoelectric device,
patent number WO

2017140975A1.

[17] D. Bourgault, C.G. Garampon, N. Caillault, L. Carbone, and J.A. Aymami, Thin Solid Films

516 (2008) 8579-8583.

[18] D. Bourgault, C.G. Garampon, N. Caillault, and L. Carbone, Sensors and Actuators A 273

(2018) 84-89.

14


[19] A. Sikora, H. Ftouni, J. Richard, C. H´ebert, D. Eon, F. Omn`es, and O. Bourgeois, Rev. Sci.

Instrum. 83 (2012) 054902.

[20] A. Sikora, H. Ftouni, J. Richard, C. H´ebert, D. Eon, F. Omn`es, and O. Bourgeois, Rev. Sci.

Instrum. 84 (2013) 029901.

[21] H. Ftouni, C. Blanc, D. Tainoff, A.D. Fefferman, K.J. Lulla, J. Richard, E. Collin, and O.

Bourgeois, Phys. Rev. B 92 (2015) 125439.

[22] R.P. Gupta, R. McCarty, and J. Sharp, Journal of Electronic Materials 43 (2014) 1608–1612.

15


