1 

 

Tunable magnetism of a single-carbon vacancy in graphene 

Yu Zhang1,§, Fei Gao2,§, Shiwu Gao2,*, and Lin He1,* 
1 Center for Advanced Quantum Studies, Department of Physics, Beijing Normal 
University, Beijing, 100875, People’s Republic of China. 
2 Beijing Computational Science Research Center, ZPark II, 100193, Beijing, China. 

§These authors contributed equally to this work. 
*Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.G. (e-mail: 
swgao@csrc.ac.cn) and L.H. (e-mail: helin@bnu.edu.cn). 
 

Removing a single-carbon vacancy introduces (quasi-)localized states for both  

and  electrons in graphene. Interactions between the localized  dangling bond 

and quasilocalized  electrons of a single-carbon vacancy in graphene are 

predicted to control its magnetism. However, experimentally confirming this 

prediction through manipulating the interactions between the  and  electrons 

remains an outstanding challenge. Here we report the manipulation of magnetism 

of individual single-carbon vacancy in graphene by using a scanning tunnelling 

microscopy (STM) tip. Our spin-polarized STM measurements, complemented by 

density functional theory calculations, indicate that interactions between the 

localized  and quasilocalized  electrons could split the  electrons into two states 

with opposite spins even when they are well above the Fermi level. Via the STM 

tip, we successfully manipulate both the magnitude and direction of magnetic 

moment of the  electrons with respect to that of the  electrons. Three different 

magnetic states of the single-carbon vacancy, exhibiting magnetic moments of 

about 1.6 B, 0.5 B, and 0 B respectively, are realized in our experiment.  

 

 

 

 

 

 


2 

 

The miniaturization of fabricating data storage devices with functional building 

blocks down to the atomic size is a major driving force of nanotechnology, and an 

outstanding challenge is to control the magnetism at the atomic scale1,2. Very recently, 

the successful introduction of local magnetic moments in graphene by creating atomic 

vacancies3 or adsorbing H atoms4 shows the ability to achieve such a goal. Different 

from the H adatoms on graphene, which only introduce local magnetic moment of  

electrons4, removing a single-carbon vacancy introduces local magnetic moments of 

both the  and  electrons5-18. Theoretically, the interactions between the  dangling 

bond and the quasilocalized  electrons of the single-carbon vacancy are predicted to 

control its magnetic states, either exhibiting local magnetic moments or not6,8,9,11,12,15,16. 

Therefore, such a system provides a unique platform to control the magnetism at the 

atomic scale. In this work, we experimentally studied how the interactions between the 

 dangling bond and the quasilocalized  electrons control the magnetism of the single-

carbon vacancy in graphene. Via a scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) tip, we could 

tune the interactions between the localized  electrons and the quasilocalized  electron 

around the single-carbon vacancies and realized three different magnetic states of the 

single-carbon vacancies in graphene. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations 

revealed the nature of these magnetic states and quantum phase transitions between the 

three coupling regimes. 

In our experiment, the single-carbon vacancies were generated in the synthesis 

process of graphene in a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method (see Methods and 

Fig. S1 of the Supplemental Material), as reported previously3,19. Figure 1a shows a 

representative atomic STM image of the single-carbon vacancy in graphene, exhibiting 

the characteristic Jahn-Teller distortion3,20. We can clearly observe the triangular √3 ×

√3𝑅30°  interference pattern in the STM image due to the induced intervalley 

scattering of the atomic defect (see Fig. S2 for more STM images). The single-carbon 

vacancy exhibits two pronounced peaks in the scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) 

spectrum (Fig. 1b, Fig. S3 and Fig. S4), attributing to two spin-polarized states of the 

quasilocalized  electron V induced by the single-carbon vacancy3,5.  


3 

 

Figure 1c shows a schematic diagram of electronic structure for a single-carbon 

vacancy in graphene. The crystal field and Jahn-Teller distortion split the localized  

electrons of the single-carbon vacancy into highly localized V1, V2, and V3 states. 

Both the V2 and V states are half occupied because of the electrostatic Coulomb 

repulsion U, i.e., when an electron occupies the state, a second electron with opposite 

spin must overcome an extra energy U. The strength of U, which depends on the spatial 

localization of the states, determines the spin splitting. The spatial extension of the V 

state is much larger than that of the V2 state, therefore, the V2 state has a much larger 

spin splitting than that of the V state (Fig. 1c). There is usually a single electron 

occupying the V2 state due to the large spin splitting, however, the two V states could 

be double occupied or unoccupied because of the existence of slight charge transfer 

from the substrate. Then the spin splitting of the V state should vanish and only one 

sharp peak is expected to be observed, as reported for the adsorbing H atoms in 

graphene4. However, in our experiment, two peaks are still observed for the single-

carbon vacancies even when they are well above the Fermi level, as shown in Fig. 1b 

and as also reported in a previous work3. Our spin-polarized STM measurements, as 

shown subsequently, demonstrate that the two peaks are the two spin-polarized states 

of the V state and we will show that the  magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy 

behaves quite different from that of the adsorbing H atom in graphene.              

The spin-polarized STM measurements, which can directly reflect the spatial 

distribution of spin-up and spin-down electrons21,22, provides us an unprecedented 

insight to identify the  magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy. In our experiment, we 

used electrochemically etched Ni tips (Fig. S5 and S6 of the Supplemental Material) as 

the spin-polarized tip. The magnetic polarization of the Ni tip is always along the STM 

tip due to the weak magnetocrystalline anisotropy of Ni and relatively large shape 

anisotropy of the STM tip23,24. Before the STM measurements, a magnetic field of 𝐵 =

3.0 T (𝐵 = −3.0 T) perpendicular to the surface of the sample was applied on and then 

removed gradually to obtain an up-polarized 𝑀⃗⃗ ↑ (down-polarized 𝑀⃗⃗ ↓) STM tip.  

As schematically shown in Fig. 2a, we can carry out atomic-resolved STS 


4 

 

measurements around the single-carbon vacancy by using spin-polarized STM tip (here 

the single-carbon vacancy is assumed on a carbon site of the B sublattice). Figure 2b 

summarizes four representative spin-resolved dI/dV spectra measured around the 

monovacancy (similar STS spectra measured via a nonmagnetic Pt/Ir tip are shown in 

Fig. S7 of the Supplemental Material for comparison). Because of the spin conservation 

during the elastic electron tunnelling, the significant differences among these STS 

spectra directly reflect distributions of spin-polarized density-of-states (DOS) on the A 

and B sublattices. Our experimental result indicates that the spin-up (spin-down) 

electrons of the V state are mainly located on the A (B) sublattice around the 

monovacancy. Such a result is further confirmed by our STS maps recorded at the 

energies of the two spin-polarized states (Fig. 2c), revealing the site-specific spin 

polarization around the single-carbon vacancy, as predicted theoretically5-18. The above 

results explicitly demonstrate that the observed two peaks in the spectra are the two 

spin-polarized states of the V state. We attribute the spin splitting of the V state even 

when the two spin-polarized states are well above the Fermi level to the interaction 

between the V state and the V2 state. The existence of local magnetic moment from 

the localized  electrons is the main difference between the magnetism introduced by 

the atomic vacancies3 and by the adsorbing H atoms4 on graphene. If the graphene is 

not the exact planar configuration around the single-carbon vacancy, the orthogonality 

between the  and  states is broken6,8,9,11,12,15,16. Then the coupling with the spin-

polarized V2 state may stabilize the spin splitting of the V state even when it is double 

occupied or unoccupied. Therefore, the two states of the V electrons induced by the 

atomic vacancies3 and by the adsorbing H atoms4 on graphene show quite different 

behaviors.  

The interaction between the localized  and  states, which depends on the local 

configuration of graphene, determines the magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy in 

graphene6,8,9,11,12,15,16. Previously, it was demonstrated that the STM tip can generate an 

out-of-plane displacement on graphene through a finite Van de Waals force25-28. Here 

we show that it is possible to generate out-of-plane lattice deformation around the 


5 

 

monovacancy and, consequently, tune interactions between the localized  and  states 

by using the STM tip. Figure 3 shows representative results measured on a single-

carbon vacancy with three different heights, which are tuned during the scanning 

process by changing the distance, i.e., the Van de Waals force, between the STM tip and 

the monovacancy (see Fig. S8 of the Supplemental Material for details). Since both the 

electronic states and topographic features contribute to the measured height, therefore 

we measured the relative profile height (apparent height) of the monovacancy under the 

same experimental condition for comparison. The single-carbon vacancy with different 

heights exhibits distinct tunnelling spectra, as shown in Fig. 3a-3c. For the case that the 

measured height of the protrusion around the vacancy is smaller than 50 pm, the energy 

separation of the two spin splitting states is ~30 meV (Fig. 3a). The relative intensity of 

the spin-up peak is obvious larger than the spin-down peak when recorded at A 

sublattice, whereas the relative intensity is inversed when recorded at B sublattice. 

Similar features are obtained in tens of the as-grown single-carbon vacancies in 

graphene by using different STM tips in our experiment. By decreasing the distance 

between the STM tip and the graphene to about 0.5 nm and scanning the studied 

monovacancy for about 30 minutes (see Fig S9 and S10 of the Supplemental Material), 

it is interesting to note that the height of the monovacancy could be increased to above 

50 pm. Then the energy difference between the two peaks in the spectrum decreases to 

~20 meV and, unexpectedly, the electronic states of the left peak (right peak) are 

predominantly located on the B (A) sublattice (Fig. 3b), which are exactly opposite to 

the result obtained in the as-grown monovacancy. It indicates that the left peak (right 

peak) of the spectra in Fig. 3b arises from the spin-down (spin-up) state according to 

the site-specific spin polarization of the quasilocalized  electron. By further decreasing 

the distance between the STM tip and the graphene to about 0.35 nm, it is possible to 

tune the height of the monovacancy to above 140 pm (Fig. 3c). In such a case, we only 

observe a pronounced peak in the tunnelling spectrum. In Fig. 4a, we summarized the 

energy separations of the two spin-polarized peaks in the STS spectra as a function of 

the height of the studied monovacancy (for the case that there is only one peak, the 


6 

 

energy separation is set as zero). The obtained three distinct spectra indicate that there 

are three different magnetic states of the monovacancy in graphene, depending on its 

out-of-plane lattice deformation. 

To further understand our experimental result, we carried out DFT calculations on 

the magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy in graphene as a function of its out-of-

plane lattice deformation. Our calculations reveal three different magnetic states of the 

single-carbon vacancy, which are classified as ferromagnetic (FM), quenched 

antiferromagnetic (QAFM), and nonmagnetic (NM) phases, as shown in Fig. 4b and 4c. 

Figures 4d-4f show the corresponding low-energy DOS of the three quantum phases. 

For the FM phase, the monovacancy exhibits about 1.6 B local magnetic moments with 

1 B from the localized  electron and about 0.6 B from the quasilocalized  electron. 

The low energy DOS shows two peaks with the spin-up (spin-down) state in the left 

(right), which is predominantly located on the A (B) sublattice. This agrees quite well 

with our experimental results obtained in the as-grown monovacancy (Figure 2 and Fig. 

3a). Theoretically, the splitting of the two spin-polarized states depends on the size of 

the graphene super cell. In our calculation, we used a finite size of the graphene super 

cell due to the limitation of the calculation ability. Therefore, the theoretical splitting is 

much larger than that observed in the experiment. By increasing the out-of-plane lattice 

deformation, the monovacancy will become the QAFM phase and its local magnetic 

moment will decrease to only about 0.5 B, which arises from the fact that the magnetic 

moments from the localized  electron and the quasilocalized  electron become 

antiparallel. In such a phase, the spin splitting is smaller than that of the FM phase by 

using the same graphene super cell in the calculation. More importantly, the spin-up 

(spin-down) state, which is predominantly located on the A (B) sublattice, changes to 

the right (left) peak of the low-energy DOS, as shown in Fig. 4e. These results are well 

accordant with our experimental results, as shown in Fig. 3a and 3b. By further 

increasing the out-of-plane lattice deformation of the monovacancy, the strong coupling 

between the localized σ orbital and electrons can completely remove the local 

magnetic moment of the single-carbon vacancy (the NM phase): the local magnetic 


7 

 

moments of the localized σ orbital and orbital exactly cancel with each other. Then, 

there is only one pronounced peak in the low-energy DOS (Fig. 4f), which is consistent 

well with our experimental result shown in Fig. 3c. Therefore, it is reasonable to 

conclude that the observed three distinct spectra of the monovacancy (Fig. 3) 

correspond to its three different magnetic states. 

Our STM measurements, complemented by first-principles calculations, show that 

the single-carbon vacancy in graphene can exhibit three different magnetic phases 

depending on the coupling between the localized σ orbital and electrons. This allows 

for a consistent interpretation of all current data about the magnetism of the single-

carbon vacancy. Previously, distinct tunnelling spectra of single-carbon vacancies in 

graphene are reported3,12,14,18. According to our result, the distinct spectra may arise 

from the different magnetic phases. The single-carbon vacancies generated in the 

synthesis process of graphene by the CVD method usually have small apparent height. 

Therefore, they are mainly in the FM phase and we usually observe two pronounced 

spin-split peaks in the tunnelling spectra. However, the monovacancy generated by 

irradiation of high-energy ions are predominantly in the NM phase because of the large 

apparent height. As a consequence, only a single peak is observed in the spectra12,14. In 

literature13, the average magnetic moment of the monovacancy generated by irradiation 

is measured to be about 0.1 B, which is much smaller than the expected valvue 1.6 B, 

indicating that most of the monovacancies generated by irradiation are in the NM state. 

In our experiment, we found that about 1/4 of the as-grown monovacancy can be tuned 

from the FM state to the QAFM state and about 80% of them can be further tuned from 

the QAFM state to the NM state. However, it is not possible to directly change the 

defects from FM state into the NM state. Our experiment also demonstrated that both 

the QAFM and the NM states are quite stable: they cannot relax to the FM state during 

our experiment and they also cannot be tuned to the FM state by using the STM tip. 

The substrate may help to stabilize the out-of-plane deformation around the single-

carbon vacancy when it was introduced by the STM tip.       

In summary, we demonstrated that the magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy is 


8 

 

determined by interactions between the localized σ orbital and electrons. Via an STM 

tip, we successfully tuned the interactions between the localized σ orbital and 

electrons and realized three different magnetic states of the single-carbon vacancy in 

graphene. Our theoretical calculations further revealed the nature of the three magnetic 

states. The realizing tunable magnetism at atomic scale may have potential application 

in graphene-based spintronics.  

 

 
References: 

1. Han, W., Kawakami, R. K., Gmitra, M., & Fabian, J. Graphene spintronics. Nature Nano. 

9, 794-807 (2014). 

2. Waser, R., Dittmann, R., Staikov, G., & Szot, K. Redox-Based Resistive Switching 

Memories-Nanoionic Mechanisms, Prospects, and Challenges. Adv. Mater. 21, 2632–2663 

(2009). 

3. Zhang, Y., Li, S., Huang, H., Li, W., Qiao, J. B., Wang, W. X., Yin, L. J., Bai, K. K., Duan, 

W. H., & He, L. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 166801 (2016). 

4. González-Herrero, H., Gómez-Rodríguez, J. M., Mallet, P., Moaied, M., Palacios, J. J., 

Salgado, C., Ugeda, M. M., Veuillen, J., Yndurain, F., & Brihuega, I. Atomic-scale control 

of graphene magnetism by using hydrogen atoms. Science 352, 437-441 (2016). 

5. Yazyev, O. V., & Helm, L. Defect-induced magnetism in graphene. Phys. Rev. B 75, 125408 

(2007). 

6. Uchoa, B., Kotov, V. N., Peres, N. M. R., & Neto, A. H. C. Localized Magnetic States in 

Graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 026805 (2008). 

7. Yazyev, O. V. Emergence of magnetism in graphene materials and nanostructures. Rep. 

Prog. Phys. 73, 056501 (2010). 

8. Palacios, J. J., & Yndurain, F. Critical analysis of vacancy-induced magnetism in 

monolayer and bilayer graphene. Phys. Rev. B 85, 245443 (2012). 

9. Chen, J. J., Wu, H. C., Yu, D. P., & Liao, Z. M. Magnetic moments in graphene with 

vacancies. Nanoscale 6, 8814-8821 (2014). 

10. Amara, H., Latil, S., Meunier, V., Lambin, P., & Charlier, J. C. Scanning tunneling 


9 

 

microscopy fingerprints of point defects in graphene: A theoretical prediction. Phys. Rev. B 

76, 115423 (2007). 

11. Nanda, B. R. K., Sherafati, M., Popovic, Z. S., & Satpathy, S. Electronic structure of the 

substitutional vacancy in graphene: density-functional and Green’s function studies. New 

J. Phys. 14, 083004 (2012). 

12. Ugeda, M. M., Brihuega, I., Guinea, F., & Gomez-Rodriguez, J. M. Missing Atom as a 

Source of Carbon Magnetism. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 096804 (2010). 

13. Nair, R. R., Sepioni, M., Tsai, I., Lehtinen, O., Keinonen, J., Krasheninnikov, A. V., 

Thomson, T., Geim, A. K., & Grigorieva, I. V. Spin-half paramagnetism in graphene 

induced by point defects. Nat. Phys. 8, 199-202 (2012). 

14. Ugeda, M. M., Fernandez-Torre, D., Brihuega, I., Pou, P., Martinez-Galera, A. J., Perez, R., 

& Gomez-Rodriguez, J. M. Point Defects on Graphene on Metals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 

116803 (2011). 

15. Padmanabhan, H., & Nanda, B. R. K. Intertwined lattice deformation and magnetism in 

monovacancy graphene. Phys. Rev. B 93, 165403 (2016). 

16. Lee, C. C., Takamura, Y. Y., & Ozaki, T., Competing magnetism in π-electrons in graphene 

with a single carbon vacancy. Phys. Rev. B 90, 014401 (2014). 

17. Chen, J. H., Li, L., Cullen, W. G., Williams, E. D., & Fuhrer, M. S. Tunable Kondo effect 

in graphene with defects. Nat. Phys. 7, 535-538 (2011). 

18. Jiang, Y., Lo, P., May, D., Li, G., Guo, G., Anders, F. B., Taniguchi, T., Watanabe, K., Mao, 

J., & Andrei, E. Y. Inducing Kondo screening of vacancy magnetic moments in graphene 

with gating and local curvature. Nat. Commun. 9, 2349 (2018). 

19. Yan, H., Liu, C. C., Bai, K. K., Wang, X. J., Liu, M . X., Yan, W., Meng, L., Zhang, Y. F., 

Liu, Z. F., Dou, R. F., Nie, J. C., Yao, Y. G., & He, L. Electronic structures of graphene 

layers on a metal foil: The effect of atomic-scale defects. Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 143120 

(2013). 

20. Popovic, Z. S., Nanda, B. R. K., & Satpathy, S. Nuclear tunneling and dynamical Jahn-

Teller effect in graphene with vacancy. Phys. Rev. B 86, 085458 (2012). 

21. Bode, M. Spin-polarized scanning tunnelling microscopy. Rep. Prog. Phys. 66, 523–582 


10 

 

(2003). 

22. Wiesendanger, R. Spin mapping at the nanoscale and atomic scale. Rev. Mod. Phys, 81, 

1495-1550 (2009). 

23. He, L., & Chen, C. Effect of temperature-dependent shape anisotropy on coercivity for 

aligned Stoner-Wohlfarth soft ferromagnets. Phys. Rev. B 75, 184424 (2007). 

24. Chen, H., Xiao, W., Wu, X., Yang, K., & Gao, H. J. Electrochemically etched Ni tips in a 

constant-current mode for spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy. J. Vac. Sci. 

Technol. B 32, 061801 (2014). 

25. Mashoff, T., Pratzer, M., Geringer, V., Echtermeyer, T. J., Lemme, M. C., Liebmann, M., 

& Morgenstern, M. Bistability and Oscillatory Motion of Natural Nanomembranes 

Appearing within Monolayer Graphene on Silicon Dioxide. Nano Lett. 10, 461-465 (2010). 

26. Klimov, N. N., Jung, S., Zhu, S., Li, T., Wright, C. A., Solares, S. D., Newell, D. B., 

Zhitenev, N. B., Stroscio, J. A. Electromechanical Properties of Graphene Drumheads. 

Science 336, 1557-1561 (2012). 

27. Yankowitz, M., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T., San-Jose, P., & LeRoy, B. J. Pressure-induced 

commensurate stacking of graphene on boron nitride. Nat. Commun. 7, 13168 (2016). 

28. Li, S.-Y., Bai, K.-K., Zuo, W.-J., Liu, Y.-W., Fu, Z.-Q., Wang, W.-X., Zhang, Y., Yin, L.-J., 

Qiao, J.-B., & He, L. Tunneling spectra of a quasifreestanding graphene monolayer. Phys. 

Rev. Appl. 9, 054031 (2018). 

 
 


11 

 

Methods 

Sample preparation of graphene multilayer on Ni foil.  

A traditional ambient pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) method was 

adopted to grow graphene multilayer on polycrystalline Ni foil. The Ni foil was first 

heated from room temperature to 1030℃ in 40 min under an argon (Ar) flow of 100 

SCCM and hydrogen (H2) flow of 50 SCCM, and keep this temperature and flow ratio 

for 20 min. Next methane (CH4) gas was introduced with a flow ratio of 20 SCCM to 

grow graphene for 20 min, and then cooled down to room temperature (see Figure S1).  

 

STM and STS measurements. The STM system was an ultrahigh vacuum scanning 

probe microscope (USM-1300 and USM-1500) from UNISOKU. All STM and STS 

measurements were performed in the ultrahigh vacuum chamber (~10-11 Torr), at liquid-

helium temperature (4.2 K) and the images were taken in a constant-current scanning 

mode. The nonmagnetic STM tips were obtained by chemical etching from a wire of 

Pt/Ir (80/20%) alloys, and the magnetic STM tips were obtained by electrochemically 

etching from a wire of Ni. Lateral dimensions observed in the STM images were 

calibrated using a standard graphene lattice and a Si (111)-(7×7) lattice and Ag (111) 

surface. The dI/dV measurements were taken with a standard lock-in technique by 

turning off the feedback circuit and using a 793-Hz 5mV A.C. modulation of the sample 

voltage. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 


12 

 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 

Nos. 11674029, 11422430, 11374035), the National Basic Research Program of China 

(Grants Nos. 2014CB920903, 2013CBA01603). L.H. also acknowledges support from 

the National Program for Support of Top-notch Young Professionals, support from “the 

Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities”, and support from “Chang 

Jiang Scholars Program”. 

 

Author contributions 

Y.Z. synthesized the samples, performed the STM experiments, and analyzed the data. 

F.G. and S.W.G. performed the theoretical calculations. L.H. conceived and provided 

advice on the experiment, analysis, and the theoretical calculation. L.H. and Y.Z. wrote 

the paper. All authors participated in the data discussion. 

 

Competing financial interests 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

 
 


13 

 

 

Figure 1. The spin splitting states induced by a single carbon vacancy in graphene. 

a, Atomic resolution STM topography of a single carbon vacancy in the topmost 

graphene sheet (sample bias: 200 mV, tunneling current: 200 pA). b, STS spectrum 

recorded at the single carbon vacancy. The two peaks reflect the DOS with opposite 

spin polarizations (sample bias: 200 mV, tunnelling current: 200 pA). c, Left panel: 

Schematic diagram of the electronic structure at a single carbon vacancy in graphene. 

The removal of a C atom will create three 𝑠𝑝2𝜎 dangling bonds adjacent to the new 

vacancy, and introduce a localized state 𝑉𝜎, which further splits into highly localized 

𝑉𝜎1, 𝑉𝜎2, and 𝑉𝜎3 states due to the crystal field and Jahn–Teller distortion. Meanwhile, 

a quasi-localized state 𝑉𝜋 is also introduced in the band structure. Both of the V2 and 

V states are further splitting because of the electrostatic Coulomb repulsion U at an 

isolated single carbon vacancy of graphene. Right panel: Illustration of the spin-split 

states of V2 and V. The strength of U depends strongly on the spatial localization of 

the states. The spatial extension of the V state is much larger than that of the V2 state, 

therefore, the V2 state has a much larger spin splitting than that of the V state. 


14 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. The spatial distribution of spin-polarized electrons at the single carbon 

vacancy. a, Schematic diagram of the spin-polarized STS. The black dashed circle 

shows the position of the missing C atom, and the arrows reflect the spin directions. 

The spin is conserved during the elastic electron tunnelling, and the spins of sample 

aligned perpendicular to the sample surface can be detected by the magnetic Ni tip 

along the tip axis. b, The spin-polarized dI/dV spectra of tip polarization 𝑀⃗⃗ ↑ (𝑀⃗⃗ ↓) 

on A (B) sublattice respectively. c, The spin-polarized differential conductance maps at 

the bias voltages of the spin up (low energy) and spin up (high energy) states 

respectively.  

 


15 

 

 

Figure 3. Tunable magnetism of the single-carbon vacancy in graphene. a-c, Up 

panel: Schematic side view of the configuration around the vacancy induced by the van 

der Waals attraction between the STM tip and the graphene. Middle panel: Typical 

heights of the single carbon vacancy (sample bias: 500 mV, tunneling current: 150 pA). 

The heights of the protrusion are ~52 pm, ~78 pm, and ~142 pm respectively. Bottom 

panel: the corresponding dI/dV spectra recorded at A and B sublattices of the single 

carbon vacancy. The relative intensities of two localized peaks recorded at A and B 

sublattice reflect the distributions of the DOS with opposite spin polarizations. 

 

 


16 

 

 

Figure 4. Quantum phase transition of FM, QAFM, and NM states. a, The energy 

separations of the two spin-polarized DOS peaks in STS spectra as a function of the 

height of the studied monovacancy in STM image. b, Theoretical calculations of the 

localized magnetic moments of the single-carbon vacancy in graphene as a function of 

its out-of-plane lattice deformation. The localized magnetic moments of ~1.6 𝜇𝐵, 

~0.5 𝜇𝐵, and ~0 𝜇𝐵 represent the FM, QAFM and NM states, respectively. The blue 

dots indicate the intrinsic magnetic moments of the defects with out-of-plane lattice 

deformation, and the red dots indicate the induced magnetic states by considering the 

interaction between the V state and STM tip. c, Schematic diagram of the spin 

alignment of V and V moments with the change of out-of-plane lattice deformation 

at  the single-carbon vacancy. d-f, The localized states of graphene with a single 

carbon vacancy in the 8 × 8 supercell are obtained from the extensive first-principles 

calculations, which represent the FM, QAFM, and NM states respectively. The states 

of spin up and spin down electrons are indicated by blue and red lines.  

 


