Interaction of Fluorescent Gold Nanoclusters with
Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Nanosheets: A
Spectroscopic Study
Arun Singh Patel
School of Computational & Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi-110067, India and
Department of Physics, Hindu College, University of Delhi,
New Delhi-110007a)

Anirban Chakraborti
School of Computational & Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi-110067, India and
Centro Internacional de Ciencias, Cuernavaca-62210, M´exicob)

Praveen Mishra
School of Computational & Integrative Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University,
New Delhi-110067, India

In this paper, the interaction of few tens of atoms containing gold nanoclusters with
two dimensional nanosheets of transition metal dichalcogenides nanosheets has been
explored. The gold nanoclusters have been synthesized using chemical reduction
method in presence of protein molecules as stabilizing agent. The transition metal
dichalcogenides nanosheets of molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has been chemically
exfoliated. Different microscopic and optical spectroscopic tools have been used for
characterizing the physical properties of the gold nanoclusters and the two dimen-
sional nanosheets of MoS2. The gold nanoclusters exhibit fluorescence emission at
690 nm. However, the interaction with transition metal dichalcogenides diminishes
drastically the fluorescence intensity of the nanoclusters. The spectroscopic meth-
ods used for understanding the interaction in the system reveals the absence of
energy transfer and dynamic nature of the fluorescence quenching.

I.
INTRODUCTION

In recent years, the metal nanoclusters (NCs) consisting of few tens of metal atoms have
been studied extensively due to their intriguing physical properties and excellent chemical
stability.1–5 The size of these nanoclusters lies in between individual atoms and nanoparti-
cles. These metal nanoclusters provide a bridge between atomic and nanoparticles behavior
of noble metals.6,7 At this length scale, the size of nanoclusters is comparable to the Fermi
wavelength of the free electrons of the metal, which results in quantum confinement of the
free electrons in the nanoclusters. The quantum confinement leads to widening of the en-
ergy gap between the discrete electronic energy levels. The discrete energy levels enable
these nanoclusters to act as highly optically active materials in the visible range, which is
generally absent in the case of nanoparticles and the bulk metal. Similar to the fluorescent
dye molecules, gold nanoclusters also show strong fluorescence at low temperature as com-
pared to high temperature. The relationship among the energy of emitted photons (Eg)
from metal nanoclusters and number of atoms (N) and the Fermi energy (EF ) of metal can
be represented in the following form8

Eg = EF

N 1/3 .
(1)

a)Electronic mail: arunspatel.jnu@gmail.com
b)Electronic mail: anirban@jnu.ac.in

arXiv:1811.06910v2  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  29 Jan 2020


2

Gold nanoclusters are less toxic as compared to other metal nanoclusters. Hence, gold
nanoclusters can be a good choice as fluorescent materials in comparison with available
fluorescent dye molecules. The dye molecules that are used as fluorescent tags in spec-
troscopic analysis have toxic nature; so, they have limitations in direct use in biological
studies. In recent years, there has been great interest among the researchers to understand
the interaction of fluorescent materials with different kinds of nanomaterials, starting from
dye molecules with quantum dots to quantum dots with 2D nanomaterials.9–14 These inter-
actions have been explored for different areas of application like sensing, solar cell, imaging,
etc. Since discovery of graphene, people started searching for other forms of 2D nanosheets
and in recent times different 2D nanomaterials, which have varying band gap from UV to
IR region, are being extensively studied. Among these 2D nanosheets, the nanosheets of
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), which have band gap in the visible wavelength
range found great interest.15–19 These TMDCs possess indirect band gap when they are in
bulk form and show direct band gap while in single layer form.20–22 Among these TMDCs
nanosheets, molybdenum disulfide MoS2 and tungsten disulfide WS2 have been studied ex-
tensively. The nanosheets of MoS2 have number of layers dependent bad gap and hence
the band gap can be tuned easily. This attracted tremendous attention due to its intrigu-
ing chemical, physical and mechanical properties. Good biocompatibility, flexible surface
and excellent fluorescence quenching capability have made MoS2 compatible for numerous
applications.23–25 Understanding the interaction between MoS2 and gold nanoclusters is the
key factor for the development of biosensors, drug delivery and therapeutic systems. In this
paper, the interaction of gold nanoclusters with MoS2 nanosheets has been investigated.
This work is important for exploring the possibilities of energy transfer in nanomaterials
where biomolecules are present at the interface of different nanomaterials, which can be
further explored for sensing applications.

II.
METHODS AND RESULTS

Synthesis of gold nanoclusters:
For synthesis of gold nanoclusters, chloroauric acid
(HAuCl4.3H2O, Sigma Aldrich) was used as precursor of gold nanoclusters. Gold nanoclus-
ters were synthesized using chemical reduction method. In typical synthesis procedure, 50
mg bovine serum albumin (BSA) was dissolved in 1 mL of distilled water. In the BSA
solution, 1 mL of 10−2 M gold salt aqueous solution was added, and the mixture was stirred
for 5 min. Further, 0.1 mL aqueous solution of 1M sodium hydroxide was injected into the
solution, and the mixture was allowed to be stirred for 10 min. As-prepared solution was
incubated at 37 0C for 24 h. The yellow colored solution turned to a reddish-brown after
formation of gold nanoclusters. The aqueous dispersion of gold nanoclusters was kept at 4
0C for further study.
Chemical exfoliation of MoS2 nanosheets: The MoS2 nanosheets were obtained by chem-
ical exfoliation of the bulk MoS2 powder using ultrasonication technique. For this purpose,
a stock solution of BSA was prepared (1 mg/mL). The solution was used as solvent for
dispersion of bulk MoS2 powder. 50 mg of MoS2 powder was dispersed in 10 mL of the
aqueous solution of BSA. The dispersion of MoS2 was ultrasonicated for 20 h. After ultra-
sonication, the precipitate was allowed to settle down and the supernatant was collected,
and a stock solution of MoS2 was made.
Characterization techniques: The gold nanoclusters and MoS2 nanosheets were charac-
terized by different spectroscopic and microscopic techniques. The absorption spectra of
these nanomaterials were recorded using UV-visible spectrophotometer (IMPLEN, Inkarp).
The Raman spectrometer from WITEC was used to investigate the Raman active vibra-
tional modes of MoS2. For this purpose, Raman spectrometer, with 532 nm laser excitation
source was used.
The shape and size of the nanosheets were analyzed by transmission
electron microscope (JEOL-2010) operated at 200 keV. The fluorescence spectra of gold
nanoclusters in absence and presence of MoS2 nanosheets were recorded using fluorimeter.
The fluorescence lifetime decay was monitored using time correlated single photon counting


3

FIG. 1. TEM images of (a) MoS2 nanosheets, and (b) the selective area electron diffraction pattern
of the nanosheets, scale bar equals to 20 nm.

set-up (FL920, Edinburgh Instruments, UK). The excitation source was 370 nm pulse laser
with operating frequency of 20 MHz.
The shape and morphology of MoS2 nanosheets were monitored by TEM analysis. The
TEM image of MoS2 nanosheets is shown in Figure 1, where sheet like structure of MoS2
is observed. A color contrast in the TEM image is observed in Figure 1(a), which arises
due to few layers of the nanosheets. Figure 1(b) is the selective electron diffraction (SAED)
pattern, where hexagonal spots are observed due to the hexagonal lattice structure of MoS2.
The Raman spectrum of MoS2 nanosheets is shown in Figure 2.
In case of MoS2
nanosheets, there are two distinct Raman peaks, which are observed at 385 and 409 cm−1

and these peaks are assigned as E1
2g and A1g vibrational modes, respectively. The E1
2g peak
originates due to in-plane vibration of the sulfur and molybdenum atoms in the lattice,
while the A1g peak is due to out-of-plane vibration of the sulfur atoms.
The optical absorption of gold nanoclusters and MoS2 nanosheets are recorded using
absorption spectrophotometer in the visible range. The absorption spectra of gold nan-
oclusters, MoS2 and mixture of both are shown in Figure 3. The gold nanoclusters have
continuously increasing absorbance towards the lower wavelength of the spectrum. The
absorption spectrum of MoS2 exhibits two distinct absorption peaks – one appearing at 613
nm and the other at 670 nm, which are known as B and A excitonic peaks, respectively.
In order to investigate the effect of the presence of MoS2 on the fluorescence property
of the gold nanoclusters, the fluorescence spectra of gold nanoclusters have been recorded,
both in absence and presence of different quantities of MoS2 nanosheets. The fluorescence
spectra of gold nanoclusters in the absence and presence of MoS2 are shown in Figure 4.
The fluorescence (Fl) emission of gold nanoclusters is observed at 690 nm. In presence
of MoS2 nanosheets the Fl intensity of gold nanoclusters diminishes drastically. The Fl
quenching may be due to either static or dynamic nature of quenching.26,27 Using equation
2, the Fl quenching efficiency was estimated

E = 1 − FDA

FD
,
(2)

where FDA and FD are fluorescence intensities of gold nanoclusters in presence and ab-
sence of MoS2 nanosheets. The Fl quenching efficiency was found to be 41 and 89 % for
MoS2 nanosheets with 0.1 mL and 0.7 mL of the acceptor quantities, respectively. Further,
the nature of the fluorescence quenching was investigated using time resolved fluorescence


4

FIG. 2. Raman spectrum of MoS2 nanosheets.

spectroscopic (TRFS) technique. The fluorescence lifetime of the gold nanoclusters was
estimated from the fluorescence lifetime decay curve of the gold nanoclusters. The fluores-
cence lifetime decay curves of gold nanoclusters in absence and presence of the nanosheets,
are shown in Figure 5. The fluorescence lifetime decay curves were fitted with exponential
decaying function of the following form28

I(t) =

m
�

j=1
αj exp(−t/τj),
(3)

where αj is the weighing factor, τj is the fluorescence lifetime associated with jth component.
For gold nanoclusters, the Fl decay curves were fitted with triple exponential decaying
functions. The three components are associated with three different environments of the
emitters.
In gold nanoclusters, it has been observed that there are few gold atoms in
Au(I) state, while the emission comes out due to Au(0) atoms, which are forming core of
the gold nanoclusters. The gold nanoclusters are formed with 25 gold atoms, which are
in conjugation with BSA molecules. Few gold atoms bind with sulfur atoms of the BSA
molecules and thus the inner gold atoms are in Au(0) state. Thus, one component is arising
due to core and the other due to outer interacting nanoclusters. The outer component is
responsible for high Fl lifetime value, while the inner one is responsible for small value of
the Fl lifetime. The average Fl lifetime of gold nanoclusters is found to be 1.1 µs. From
Figure 5, it is observed that the nature of the decaying curves remains the same in presence
of MoS2 nanosheets, even at very high concentrations of the MoS2 nanosheets. Thus, the
Fl lifetime remains unaltered in presence of MoS2 nanosheets.
The time resolved fluorescence study shows that there is no change in the fluorescence
lifetime of gold nanoclusters in presence of MoS2 nanosheets even at very high concentration


5

FIG. 3. Absorption spectra of gold nanoclusters, MoS2 nanosheets, and mixed dispersion of gold
nanoclusters and MoS2 nanosheets.

of the nanosheets. Previously, it had been reported that the energy transfer from adjacent
BSA molecules to the MoS2 nanosheets could possibly occur.29 In that case, the distance
between donor and acceptor must be within the range of resonance energy transfer phe-
nomenon. However in the present case, the gold nanoclusters are synthesized in conjugation
with the BSA molecules separately, and the BSA molecules are used for chemically exfolia-
tion of the MoS2 nanosheets. This causes the enlargement of the distance between the gold
nanoclusters and the MoS2 nanosheets, which limits the possibility of any kind of energy
transfer, even though there is a overlap of the emission spectrum of gold nanoclusters and
the absorption spectrum of the MoS2 nanosheets (see Figure 6). There is a complete overlap
of A excitonic peak of MoS2 with the Fl emission peak of the gold nanoclusters, and partial
overlap of the B excitonic peak. In the present case, the distance between the emitters and
the acceptors is beyond the limit of the fluorescence resonance energy transfer, which is
typically in the range of 1-10 nm. In case of gold nanoclusters and MoS2 nanosheets, the
intermediate layer of the BSA molecules helps to increase the distance between emitters and
acceptors beyond the permitted upper limit of the distance. This was further confirmed by
using fluorescent dye molecules, Rhodamine 6G (R6G) as donor molecules in place of Au
NCs. R6G molecules show Fl emission around 550 nm, which has an overlap with the ab-
sorption spectrum of MoS2 (shown in Figure 6). Figure 7 shows the Fl lifetime decay curves
of R6G molecules in absence and presence of MoS2 nanosheets. Here the MoS2 nanosheets
are same as the previous case, where BSA molecules are on surface of MoS2 and they act as
stabilizing agent for the nanosheets. The Fl lifetime of R6G molecules is approximately 4
ns in absence of acceptors. In presence of MoS2 (BSA), there is no significant change in the
Fl lifetime of R6G molecules, which is due to significant distance between R6G molecules
and MoS2 nanosheets. This distance is suppose to be of the order of BSA molecule, which is


6

FIG. 4. Fluorescence spectra of gold nanoclusters in absence as well as in the presence of different
quantity of MoS2 nanosheets.

acting as separator between R6G and MoS2. In order to shorten the distance between R6G
and MoS2, a new set of MoS2 nanosheets has been prepared using n-methyl-2-pyrrolidone
(NMP) as dispersion medium. In NMP solution, MoS2 powder was dispersed and the mix-
ture was sonicated for 20h. The supernatant was collected and used as acceptor for energy
transfer study. The Fl lifetime behaviors of R6G molecules in presence and absence of MoS2
nanosheets are shown in Figure 8. In Figure 8 a significant change in the Fl lifetime of R6G
molecule is observed. This indicates that there is energy transfer phenomenon taking place
from R6G molecules to the MoS2 nanosheets. In this case, the separation between R6G
and MoS2 nanosheets are within the limit of energy transfer distance (1-10 nm).

III.
SUMMARY

In summary, the interaction of gold nanoclusters with the molybdenum disulfide was
explored. It had been observed that the BSA, protein molecules, stabilized gold nanoclusters
had strong florescence emission around 700 nm and its emission intensity can be altered
in presence of MoS2 nanosheets. The florescence quenching was found to be static in the
nature. It was observed when distance between donor and acceptor was short in case of
R6G molecules and MoS2 nanosheets the energy transfer phenomenon took place.


7

FIG. 5. Fluorescence lifetime decay curves of gold nanoclusters in absence and presence of different
quantity of MoS2 nanosheets.

IV.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The authors are thankful to AIRF and SBT, JNU for characterization techniques.

1D. S. Yarramala, A. Baksi, T. Pradeep, and C. P. Rao, “Green synthesis of protein-protected fluorescent
gold nanoclusters (auncs): Reducing the size of auncs by partially occupying the ca2+ site by la3+ in
apo-α-lactalbumin,” ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 5, 6064–6069 (2017).

2J. Lian, Q. Liu, Y. Jin,
and B. Li, “Histone–dna interaction: an effective approach to improve the
fluorescence intensity and stability of dna-templated cu nanoclusters,” Chemical Communications 53,
12568–12571 (2017).

3X. Hu, Y. Zheng, J. Zhou, D. Fang, H. Jiang,
and X. Wang, “Silver-assisted thiolate ligand exchange
induced photoluminescent boost of gold nanoclusters for selective imaging of intracellular glutathione,”
Chemistry of Materials 30, 1947–1955 (2018).

4M. A. Abbas, P. V. Kamat, and J. H. Bang, “Thiolated gold nanoclusters for light energy conversion,”
ACS Energy Letters 3, 840–854 (2018).

5K. Pyo, V. D. Thanthirige, K. Kwak, P. Pandurangan, G. Ramakrishna,
and D. Lee, “Ultrabright
luminescence from gold nanoclusters:
rigidifying the au (i)–thiolate shell,” Journal of the American
Chemical Society 137, 8244–8250 (2015).

6A. S. Patel and T. Mohanty, “Silver nanoclusters in bsa template: a selective sensor for hydrogen perox-
ide,” Journal of materials science 49, 2136–2143 (2014).

7A. S. Patel, H. Sahoo,
and T. Mohanty, “Understanding the interactions involved in the formation of
fluorescent silver nanoclusters,” Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 16, 8246–8251 (2016).

8J. Zheng, P. R. Nicovich,
and R. M. Dickson, “Highly fluorescent noble-metal quantum dots,” Annu.
Rev. Phys. Chem. 58, 409–431 (2007).

9H. Dong, W. Gao, F. Yan, H. Ji, and H. Ju, “Fluorescence resonance energy transfer between quantum
dots and graphene oxide for sensing biomolecules,” Analytical chemistry 82, 5511–5517 (2010).

10A. R. Clapp, I. L. Medintz, J. M. Mauro, B. R. Fisher, M. G. Bawendi, and H. Mattoussi, “Fluorescence
resonance energy transfer between quantum dot donors and dye-labeled protein acceptors,” Journal of
the American Chemical Society 126, 301–310 (2004).


8

FIG. 6. Absorption spectrum of MoS2 nanosheets and emission spectra of gold nanoclusters and
R6G molecules showing the overlapping of absorption and emission spectra.

11S.
Hohng
and
T.
Ha,
“Single-molecule
quantum-dot
fluorescence
resonance
energy
transfer,”
ChemPhysChem 6, 956–960 (2005).

12D. Prasai, A. R. Klots, A. Newaz, J. S. Niezgoda, N. J. Orfield, C. A. Escobar, A. Wynn, A. Efimov,
G. K. Jennings, S. J. Rosenthal, et al., “Electrical control of near-field energy transfer between quantum
dots and two-dimensional semiconductors,” Nano letters 15, 4374–4380 (2015).

13K. M. Goodfellow, C. Chakraborty, K. Sowers, P. Waduge, M. Wanunu, T. Krauss, K. Driscoll, and A. N.
Vamivakas, “Distance-dependent energy transfer between cdse/cds quantum dots and a two-dimensional
semiconductor,” Applied Physics Letters 108, 021101 (2016).

14F. Prins, A. J. Goodman, and W. A. Tisdale, “Reduced dielectric screening and enhanced energy transfer
in single-and few-layer mos2,” Nano letters 14, 6087–6091 (2014).

15M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh, and H. Zhang, “The chemistry of two-dimensional
layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets,” Nature chemistry 5, 263 (2013).

16Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman, and M. S. Strano, “Electronics and optoelec-
tronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides,” Nature nanotechnology 7, 699 (2012).

17G. Guan, S. Zhang, S. Liu, Y. Cai, M. Low, C. P. Teng, I. Y. Phang, Y. Cheng, K. L. Duei, B. M.
Srinivasan, et al., “Protein induces layer-by-layer exfoliation of transition metal dichalcogenides,” Journal
of the American Chemical Society 137, 6152–6155 (2015).

18F. Wu, Y. Xia, M. Sun, and A. Xie, “Two-dimensional (2d) few-layers ws2 nanosheets: An ideal nano-
materials with tunable electromagnetic absorption performance,” Applied Physics Letters 113, 052906
(2018).

19S. Luo, S. Dong, C. Lu, C. Yu, Y. Ou, L. Luo, J. Sun,
and J. Sun, “Rational and green synthesis of
novel two-dimensional ws2/mos2 heterojunction via direct exfoliation in ethanol-water targeting advanced
visible-light-responsive photocatalytic performance,” Journal of colloid and interface science 513, 389–399
(2018).

20J. Shakya, A. S. Patel, F. Singh,
and T. Mohanty, “Composition dependent fermi level shifting of au
decorated mos2 nanosheets,” Applied Physics Letters 108, 013103 (2016).

21H. S. Lee, S.-W. Min, Y.-G. Chang, M. K. Park, T. Nam, H. Kim, J. H. Kim, S. Ryu, and S. Im, “Mos2
nanosheet phototransistors with thickness-modulated optical energy gap,” Nano letters 12, 3695–3700
(2012).


9

FIG. 7. Fluorescence lifetime decay curves of R6G molecules in absence and presence of MoS2
nanosheets, here MoS2 nanosheets are exfoliated using BSA molecules.

22A. Chakraborti, A. S. Patel, P. K. Kanaujia, P. Nath, G. V. Prakash, and D. Sanyal, “Resonance raman
scattering and ab initio calculation of electron energy loss spectra of mos2 nanosheets,” Physics Letters
A 380, 4057–4061 (2016).

23K. Srinivasan, K. Subramanian, K. Murugan, G. Benelli, and K. Dinakaran, “Fluorescence quenching of
mos 2 nanosheets/dna/silicon dot nanoassembly: effective and rapid detection of hg 2+ ions in aqueous
solution,” Environmental Science and Pollution Research , 1–10 (2018).

24J. I. Paredes, J. M. Munuera, S. Villar-Rodil, L. Guardia, M. Ayan-Varela, A. Pag´an, S. D. Aznar-
Cervantes, J. L. Cenis, A. Mart´ınez-Alonso, and J. M. Tascon, “Impact of covalent functionalization on the
aqueous processability, catalytic activity, and biocompatibility of chemically exfoliated mos2 nanosheets,”
ACS applied materials & interfaces 8, 27974–27986 (2016).

25G.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Yu, X. Cui, N. Petrone, C.-H. Lee, M. S. Choi, D.-Y. Lee, C. Lee, W. J. Yoo, K. Watan-
abe, et al., “Flexible and transparent mos2 field-effect transistors on hexagonal boron nitride-graphene
heterostructures,” ACS nano 7, 7931–7936 (2013).

26A. S. Patel, H. Sahoo,
and T. Mohanty, “Investigating the energy transfer from dye molecules to dna
stabilized au nanoparticles,” Journal of fluorescence 26, 1849–1855 (2016).

27P. P. H. Cheng, D. Silvester, G. Wang, G. Kalyuzhny, A. Douglas,
and R. W. Murray, “Dynamic and
static quenching of fluorescence by 1- 4 nm diameter gold monolayer-protected clusters,” The Journal of
Physical Chemistry B 110, 4637–4644 (2006).

28A. S. Patel, H. Sahoo, and T. Mohanty, “Probing the f¨orster resonance energy transfer between fluorescent
copper nanoclusters and cobalt complex,” Applied Physics Letters 105, 063112 (2014).

29A. S. Patel, P. Mishra, P. K. Kanaujia, S. S. Husain, G. V. Prakash, and A. Chakraborti, “Investigating
resonance energy transfer from protein molecules to van der waals nanosheets,” RSC Advances 7, 26250–
26255 (2017).


10

FIG. 8. Fluorescence lifetime decay curves of R6G molecules in absence and presence of MoS2
nanosheets, here MoS2 nanosheets are exfoliated in NMP solvent.


