 
 

Detection and spatial mapping of conductive filaments in metal/oxide/metal 

cross-point devices  

 

Shimul Kanti Nath1, Sanjoy Kumar Nandi1, Shuai Li, Robert Glen Elliman 

Department of Electronic Materials Engineering, Research School of Physics and Engineering 

The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia 

 

Abstract 

A simple means of detecting and spatially mapping volatile and nonvolatile conductive filaments in 
metal/oxide/metal cross-point devices is introduced and its application demonstrated.  The technique is based on 
thermal discolouration of a thin photoresist layer deposited on the top electrode of the cross-point device and 
relies on the increase in temperature produced by local Joule heating of an underlying conductive filament.  
Finite element modelling of the temperature distribution and its dependencies shows that the maximum 
temperature at the top-electrode/photoresist interface is particularly sensitive to the top-electrode thickness.  The 
technique is demonstrated on NbOx based metal-oxide-metal cross-point devices with a 25 nm thick top (Pt) 
electrode, where it is used to undertake a statistical analysis of the filament location as a function of device area.  
This shows that filament formation is heterogeneous. The majority of filaments form preferentially along the 
top-electrode edge and the fraction of these increases with decreasing device area.  Transmission electron 
microscopy of the top and bottom electrode edges is used to explain this observation and suggests that it is due 
to a reduction in the effective oxide thickness in this region.   

 

1. Introduction 

Characteristic resistance changes are observed in two-terminal metal-oxide-metal (MOM) 

structures subjected to large electric fields or current densities and are of interest as the basis 

of non-volatile memory and neuromorphic computing devices1 2, 3. The resistance changes are 

commonly mediated by filamentary conduction, either in the form of a semi-permanent 

filament created by compositional changes in the oxide or as a transient filament created by 

inhomogeneous current or field distributions (e.g. current bifurcation). Semi-permanent 

filaments are typically comprised of oxygen vacancies created by the generation, drift and 

diffusion of oxygen ions during an electroforming step4, while transient filaments can self-

assemble in materials that exhibit S-type negative differential resistance (NDR) due to current 

bifurcation, a process in which a uniform current divides into domains of high and low 

current-density 5.  In both cases, the filaments create low resistance paths through the oxide 

film and can result in significant temperature rises due to local Joule heating when carrying 

current6, 7. 

Knowledge about the structure, composition and spatial distribution of filaments is essential 

for a full understanding of filamentary resistive-switching and for effective modelling and 

optimisation of associated devices.  As a consequence, there is great interest in methods for 

 

1  Both authors contributed equally.  


 
 

detecting and characterising conductive filament.  The existence of filamentary conduction is 

often inferred from area-independent switching characteristics8 but has also been verified 

directly by conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) 9 and infrared (thermal) 

microscopy (IR-M)7.  Compositional analysis of filaments has been undertaken by 

transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 10 but this requires pre-knowledge of the filament 

location and is not suitable for large-scale statistical analysis.  Each of these techniques has 

its advantages and disadvantages but only IR-M is well suited to large-scale statistical 

analysis of filament distributions and to the detection of transient filaments.  

In this study, we introduce a simple alternative technique for locating volatile or nonvolatile 

filaments in MOM cross-point devices based on thermal discolouration of a thin photoresist 

layer deposited on the top electrode of the cross-point device.  The technique relies on the 

increase in temperature at the top-electrode/photoresist interface produced by local Joule 

heating of an underlying conductive filament and can be used to identify the number and 

position of filaments.  The efficacy of this approach is demonstrated by applying it to 

filament formation in MOM cross-point devices comprised of a Pt/Nb(Cr)/NbOx/Pt 

heterostructure.   

 

2. Experiments 

Pt/Nb(Cr)/NbOx/Pt cross-point test structures, as shown schematically in Fig. 1(a), were 

fabricated using standard photolithographic processing (supplementary information).  Both 

bottom and top electrodes were defined by a photolithographic lift-off process using negative 

photoresist (MaN 1420). The bottom electrode consisted of a 5 nm thick Ti wetting-layer and 

a 25 nm-thick Pt layer deposited subsequently by e-beam evaporation on a thermally oxidized 

Si (100) wafer with a 200 nm thick oxide layer.  A 45 nm NbOx dielectric layer was then 

deposited over the entire wafer, including the lithographically defined bottom electrode, 

using RF sputtering from an Nb2O5 target.  Top electrodes, consisting of a 10 nm-thick Nb 

(or Cr) layer and a 25 nm Pt protective layer, were then deposited by e-beam evaporation.  

The oxide layer covering the bottom contact pads was then removed by etching to provide 

direct electrical contact to the pad.  The test-devices had electrode dimensions ranging from 2 

μm × 2 μm to 20 μm × 20 μm.  

As-deposited NbOx films were analysed by grazing incident-angle X-ray diffraction 

(GIAXRD) and Rutherford backscattering spectroscopy (RBS) to determine their structure 


 
 

and composition.  To simplify the RBS analysis, NbOx films were simultaneously deposited 

on vitreous carbon substrates.  These analyses showed that the as-deposited films were 

amorphous, with a stoichiometry of NbOx, where x=2.60±0.5 (i.e. oxygen rich Nb2O5). 

Electrical measurements were performed using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor parameter 

analyser attached to a Signatone probe station (S-1160). All the measurements were executed 

at room temperature in atmospheric condition by applying voltage on the top electrode, while 

the bottom electrode was grounded.  

  
 

Fig. 1: (a) A schematic of the device structure, (b) a typical current-voltage (I-V) characteristic of the 

electroforming process for a 20 µm × 20 µm Pt/Cr/NbOx/Pt device. Inset is a semi-log plot of the I-V 

characteristic. (c-d) optical microscope images of the same device before (c) and after (d) the electroforming 

process. The dark spot on the device after forming indicates the location of a conducting filament. 

3. Results and Discussions 

As fabricated devices were in highly resistive state (>1010 Ω) and required a one-step 

electroforming process to initiate resistive switching characteristics. This was achieved by 

applying a positive voltage sweep from 0 V to +6 V to the top electrode while limiting the 

maximum current through the device (compliance current (ICC)) to ~2 mA to avoid 

permanent damage.  Fig. 1(b) shows typical electroforming characteristics for a 20 µm × 20 

µm Pt/Cr/NbOx/Pt device. The electroforming voltage, VF is defined as the point at which the 

current reaches the compliance limit and corresponds to an electric field of ~2 MV/cm for this 


 
 

devices, which is consistent with previous studies8.  Following the electroforming step the 

device resistance is ~10 kΩ, consistent with the formation of a permanent conductive 

filament.  

The high current density associated with filamentary conduction is known to cause a rapid 

increase in temperature due to local Joule heating.  Indeed, in-situ thermal mapping has 

shown that the surface temperature of the filament can increase by several hundred degrees7. 

Here we exploit this temperature increase to thermally denature a thin photoresist layer and 

record the location of the filament.  To achieve this, the cross-point devices are coated with a 

thin positive photoresist (AZ 1512HS) layer and a photolithographic step used to reopen 

access to the device contact pads. The photoresist was then baked for 2 minutes in air using a 

hot plate kept at a temperature of 358 K (85 oC).  Fig. 1(c) shows an image of a 20 µm x 20 

µm cross-point before electroforming and Fig. 1(d) shows an image of the same device after 

electroforming.  It is immediately evident that electroforming creates a dark spot in the 

photoresist, clearly identifying the filament location.  Analysis of more than 150 devices 

showed that forming produced a single filament in most cases; with only a few showing 

multiple filaments. This is in agreement with previous results indicating the dominance of 

single filament switching6, 11, 12.  

To determine the relationship between the temperature of the filament and that at the top-

electrode/photoresist interface a finite element model of the device structure and filamentary 

Joule heating was constructed using the COMSOL package.  Details of the model are 

presented in the Supplementary Information.  Suffice it to say that the simulation used a 2D-

axiosymetric model of the device structure and filamentary conduction process to calculate 

the steady-state temperature distribution in the device as a function of applied current.   

Fig. 2(a) shows the calculated temperature distribution in the active volume of the device for 

a current of 2.0 mA and clearly shows the temperature increase at the top electrode due to 

Joule heating of the filament in the underlying NbOx layer.  This is shown more 

quantitatively in Fig. 2(b) which plots the maximum temperature at the top-

electrode/photoresist interface as a function of device current and top (Pt) electrode thickness.  

This shows that the temperature is a strong function of both parameters and reaches a value of 

456 K for a current of 2.0 mA and electrode thickness of 25 nm, more than sufficient to 

modify the photoresist.  However, as shown in Fig. 2(c), the maximum temperature decreases 

rapidly with increasing top electrode thickness, decreasing from 456 K to 398 K as the 


 
 

electrode thickness increases from 25 nm to 100 nm.  Hence, these simulations confirm that 

the top-electrode/photoresist interface can reach temperatures sufficient to degrade the 

photoresist but highlight the importance of using thin top electrodes to maximise the 

sensitivity of the technique.  i.e. Filament detection would not be possible in the present case 

if the electrode thickness was increased significantly. 

 

Fig. 2: (a) Temperature distribution in the active volume of the device for a current of 2.0 mA.  The depicted 

structure represents a cross section of an axisymmetric model with the axis of rotation shown.  For reference, the 

thickness of the oxide layer is 45 nm and the width of the conductive filament is 250 nm.  (b) Maximum 

temperature at the top-electrode/photoresist interface as a function of device current and top electrode (Pt) 


 
 

thickness.  (c) Maximum temperature at the top-electrode/photoresist interface as a function of top electrode (Pt) 

thickness. 

The utility of the proposed filament detection method is demonstrated using it to study the 

influence of device structure on the stochastic nature of electroforming.  To this end, the 

spatial distribution of 60 filaments was recorded for 20 m x 20 m (400 m2) devices using 

images such as those shown in Fig. 1(d).  The results are plotted in Fig. 3(a) and show that a 

significant fraction of the filaments form at the electrode edges.  Moreover, there seems to be 

a preference for filament formation along the top-electrode edge rather than the bottom 

electrode edge.  To further investigate this point, a similar analysis was performed on devices 

of different area, and is summarised in Fig. 3(b).  This clearly shows that the fraction of 

filaments formed at the device edges is a strong function of device area, and that there is a 

stronger preference for filament nucleation at the top-electrode edge for smaller devices;  For 

the 20um x 20 um (400 um2) devices 40% of filaments formed at electrode edges, with ~30% 

forming at the top electrode (TE) edges and ~10% at the bottom electrode (BE) edges, while 

for 5 µm x 5 µm devices the edge fraction increases to 75%, with 50% at the top edge and 

25% at the bottom edge.  These results clearly show that device-related inhomogeneities can 

play an important role in filament formation.  Such effects need to be understood for a full 

interpretation of area-dependent scaling effects.   

For example, the forming voltage for randomly distributed filaments is expected to decrease 

with increasing device area and to have a dependence of the form13, 14: 

𝑉𝑓 = 𝐶1 − 𝐶2ln⁡( 𝐴

𝑎3) 

where 𝑉𝑓 is the forming voltage, 𝐶1,2 are constants associated with statistics of the forming 

process, 𝑎3 is a characteristic material volume, and A is the device area.  Fig. 3(c) shows the 

area dependence for the devices in this study, clearly demonstrating that the forming voltage   

and dispersion of the forming voltage increase with decreasing area, most likely due to 

heterogeneous nucleation of filaments at the electrode edges.  


 
 

 

Fig. 3. (a) Location of the filaments of 20 µm×20 µm cross-point, each red dot represents filament in a device. 

This map was done for 50 different devices. The overlaid dashed lines here show the position of the electrode 

edges in the cross-point structure. (b) Percentage of devices formed at the edge of the cross-point as a function 

of device area. (c) Variation of breakdown voltage as a function of device area. 

Given that defect formation depends exponentially on local electric field, the probability for 

forming is expected to increase at the electrode edges, and to be strongly influenced by 

variations in the oxide thickness, such as those that might be expected for deposition onto the 

non-planar bottom electrode structure15.  In this context, preferential forming at the top 


 
 

electrode edge seems counter-intuitive.  To better understand how this might arise, cross-

sectional TEM images were taken at the top and bottom edges as shown in Fig. 4. These 

show that the metal electrode layers extend beyond the nominal photolithographic mask 

edges and into the region where the photoresist is undercut to facilitate the lift-off process, an 

effect that is clearly evident in Fig. 4(a).  The extent of metal penetration increases with 

increasing metal thickness, so it is greater for the Pt layer than for the Ti, Nb(Cr) wetting 

layers, and as such produces a region at the edge of the electrodes where Pt is in direct 

contact with the NbOx layer, as show in Fig. 4(b).  This is significant because the top Nb(Cr) 

wetting layer is expected to react with the NbOx to extend the effective oxide thickness.  The 

oxide layer is therefore thinner at the top-electrode edge where it is in direct contact with Pt, 

possibly explaining why the majority of filaments form in this region.   

 

Fig. 4: Cross-sectional TEM of the cross-pint deviceat  (a) the bottom edge and (b) top edge. 

4. Conclusions  

In summary, we have demonstrated a simple technique to detect and spatially map volatile 

and nonvolatile conductive filaments in micron-scale metal/oxide/metal cross-point devices 

based on thermal discolouration of a thin photoresist layer.  Finite element modelling showed 

that the temperature of the top-electrode/photoresist interface can easily exceed that required 

to discolour photoresist but that the maximum temperature is a strong function of electrode 

thickness.  The application of this technique to metal-oxide-metal cross-point devices 

confirmed that electroforming generally created one dominant filament, and showed that 

filament formation was heterogeneous, with filaments preferentially forming along the edge 


 
 

of the top electrode.  TEM analysis of the top and bottom electrode edges suggested that this 

was due to a reduction of the effective oxide thickness in this region.  While further work is 

required to confirm this hypothesis, the study serves to illustrate the efficacy of the proposed 

filament mapping technique for understanding such effects.  We also note that the sensitivity 

and spatial resolution of the technique could be improved by using a more temperature-

sensitive polymer and further reducing the top electrode thickness.  

5. Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council (ARC) 

Discovery.  We would also like to acknowledge the ACT node of the Australian National 

Fabrication Facility (ANFF) for access to their research equipment and expertise. The authors 

also acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance, of the Australian 

Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre of Advanced Microscopy, The 

Australian National University. 

References 

1. 
C. Dias, J. Ventura and P. Aguiar, in Advances in Memristors, Memristive Devices and Systems 

(Springer, 2017), pp. 305-342. 
2. 
A. Beaumont, J. Leroy, J.-C. Orlianges and A. Crunteanu, Journal of Applied Physics 115 (15), 154502 

(2014). 
3. 
S. Li, X. Liu, S. K. Nandi, D. K. Venkatachalam and R. G. Elliman, Applied Physics Letters 106 (21), 

212902 (2015). 
4. 
S. K. Nandi, X. Liu, D. K. Venkatachalam and R. G. Elliman, Physical Review Applied 4 (6), 064010 

(2015). 
5. 
B. Ridley, Proceedings of the Physical Society 82 (6), 954 (1963). 

6. 
S. Kumar, Z. Wang, N. Davila, N. Kumari, K. J. Norris, X. Huang, J. P. Strachan, D. Vine, A. D. 

Kilcoyne and Y. Nishi, Nature communications 8 (1), 658 (2017). 
7. 
M. Uenuma, Y. Ishikawa and Y. Uraoka, Applied Physics Letters 107 (7), 073503 (2015). 

8. 
L. Shuai, L. Xinjun, N. Sanjoy Kumar and E. Robert Glen, Nanotechnology 29 (37), 375705 (2018). 

9. 
U. Celano, L. Goux, A. Belmonte, K. Opsomer, A. Franquet, A. Schulze, C. Detavernier, O. Richard, 

H. Bender and M. Jurczak, Nano letters 14 (5), 2401-2406 (2014). 
10. 
G. A. Gibson, S. Musunuru, J. Zhang, K. Vandenberghe, J. Lee, C.-C. Hsieh, W. Jackson, Y. Jeon, D. 

Henze and Z. Li, Applied Physics Letters 108 (2), 023505 (2016). 
11. 
J. P. Strachan, D. B. Strukov, J. Borghetti, J. J. Yang, G. Medeiros-Ribeiro and R. S. Williams, 

Nanotechnology 22 (25), 254015 (2011). 
12. 
J. P. Strachan, J. J. Yang, R. Münstermann, A. Scholl, G. Medeiros-Ribeiro, D. R. Stewart and R. S. 

Williams, Nanotechnology 20 (48), 485701 (2009). 
13. 
J. Wang and S. S. Nonnenmann, Journal of Materials Science 52 (11), 6469-6475 (2017). 

14. 
A. Chen, IEEE Electron Device Letters 35 (1), 57-59 (2014). 

15. 
J. Leroy, A. Crunteanu, A. Bessaudou, F. Cosset, C. Champeaux and J.-C. Orlianges, Applied Physics 

Letters 100 (21), 213507 (2012). 

 


Supplementary Material 

 
Detection and spatial mapping of conductive filaments in metal/oxide/metal 
cross-point devices  

 

Shimul Kanti Nath, Sanjoy Kumar Nandi, Shuai Li, Robert Glen Elliman 

Department of Electronic Materials Engineering, Research School of Physics and 
Engineering, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia 

 
 
 
1S. Device fabrication 
 
Cross-point test structures with dimensions in the range 2 x 2 m2 to 20 x 20 m2 were 

fabricated on a thermally oxidised silicon wafer.  Bottom and top electrodes were defined by 

a standard photolithographic lift-off process, with metal layers deposited by electron-beam 

evaporation.  The bottom electrode consisted of a 10 nm Ti adhesion layer and a 25 nm Pt 

contact layer , as shown for a 20 x 20 m2 device in Figure 1S(a).  A 45 nm NbOx layer was 

then deposited over the entire wafer using RF sputtering from a Nb2O5 target.  The cross-

point structure was completed by adding the top electrodes, which consisted of a 10 nm Nb 

(or Cr) adhesion layer and a 25 nm Pt contact layer, as shown in Figure 1S(b).  At this point 

the bottom contact pads remained covered with NbOx and an etching step was required to 

access the bottom electrode.  This was achieved by defining the area lithographically and 

chemical etching in buffered hydrofluoric acid to remove the NbOx layer.  Figure 1S(c) shows 

the cross-point devices after etching the NbOx layer.  The substrate was then ultrasonically 

cleaned in acetone and isopropanol to complete the device processing.  In order to detect 

filaments, the devices were additionally coated with a thin positive photoresist (AZ 1512HS) 

layer and a photolithographic step used to reopen access to the device contact pads as shown 

in Figure 1S(d).  Figure 2S(a) shows an SEM image of the cross-point devices and Figures 

2S(b-c) show TEM images of the deposited Metal-Oxide-Metal heterostructure. 

 

 


 

Figure 1S: Optical micrograph of different steps of device fabrication: (a) image of a bottom electrode (BE) 
after the lift-off process for the deposition of a Pt bottom electrode with a Ti adhesion layer. (b) Image of four 
cross-point devices formed with a common bottom electrode (BE) after oxide and bottom electrode deposition. 
(c) The same devices after etching the oxide layer to open the BE. (d) Image after the final step, here wafer is 
coated with photoresist everywhere except the contact pads (BE and TE). 
 

 

 

Figure 2S: (a) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of 20 µm × 20 µm cross-point devices with a common 
bottom electrode (BE).  Cross-sectional transmission micrograph of the device structure: (b) Pt/Nb/Nb2O5/Pt and 
(c) Pt/Cr/Nb2O5/Pt.  

 


2S. Filament distribution  

Figure 3S(a-b) show the images of a 10 µm x 10 µm and a 5 µm x 5 µm cross-point devices 
after electroforming process. The dark regions are showing the location of the filament. The 
spatial distribution of filaments in 10 µm× 10 µm  and 5 µm× 5 µm  devices plotted in Figure 
3S(c-d). 

 

Figure 3S: Filament region in (a) 10 µm × 10 µm and (b) 5 µm × 5 µm cross-point devices, and corresponding 
filament distribution in (c) 10 µm × 10 µm and (d) 5 µm × 5 µm cross-point devices.  

 

2S. COMSOL Modelling 

A finite-element model was constructed to estimate the temperature rise at the top-

electrode/photoresist interface during electroforming.  This was undertaken with the 

COMSOL program using the electric-current and heat-transfer modules to calculate the 

steady-state temperature distribution as a function of applied current.  The device was 

represented by a 2D axisymmetric model with a device radius of 2 μm and comprised of the 

following material layers (bottom-to-top): SiO2 (300nm)/Ti (10 nm)/Pt(25 nm)/Nb2O5 (45 

nm)/Cr (10 nm)/Pt (25nm)/PMMA (2000 nm).   

The Nb2O5 layer was assumed to contain a conductive filament of 250 nm radius.  

Conduction in the conductive filament and the surrounding Nb2O5 layer was assumed to be 


due to Poole-Frenkel conduction, as described by equation 1, with an activation energy of 

𝐸𝑎 = 0.215 [𝑒𝑉]1. The absolute conductivities of the two regions was assumed to be 

different, as determined by the choice of 𝜎0.  Here we used 𝜎0 = 2 × 104 [𝑆/𝑚] for the 

filament and 𝜎0 = 1 [𝑆/𝑚] for the surrounding oxide layer, so at 293 [K] the conductivity of 

the filamentary region is ~4.0 [S/m] while that of the surrounding Nb2O5 is 2x10-4 [S/m].  

The thermal conductivity of the filament and the surrounding Nb2O5 layer was assumed to be 

given by 𝑘𝑡ℎ = 1.0 + 𝐿𝜎𝑇 [W/(m.K)], where the first term is the lattice contribution and the 

second the electron contribution.  (NB: For the temperatures considered in this study 

𝑘𝑡ℎ~1.0 [𝑊/(𝑚. 𝐾)]) 2, 3. 

The physical properties of the other materials were taken from the COMSOL material library 

where available.  Exceptions were the thermal and electrical conductivities of SiO2 which 

were set to 1.3 [W/(m.K)] and 1x10-10 S/m, respectively, and the specific heat and electrical 

conductivity of PMMA which were set to 1.66 [J/(kg.K)] and 1x10-10 S/m, respectively. 

3S.1. Boundary conditions: 

The temperature at the top of the PMMA layer and the bottom of the SiO2 layer were set to 

T0=293 [K], and the lateral edge of the sample was assumed to be thermally insulating.  Since 

Si has a very high thermal conductivity compared to SiO2 its effect was modelled by setting 

the temperature at the bottom SiO2 layer to T0=293 [K].  However, the temperature 

distribution at the electrode/PMMA interface was found to depend on PMMA thickness.  

This dependence diminished with increasing layer thickness and was negligible for layers of 

1-2 μm thicknesses, which are typical of the actual layer thicknesses.  Simulations were 

performed for a PMMA thickness of 2 μm.   

𝜎 = 𝜎0. exp (− (𝐸𝑎 − 𝑞√

𝑞𝜀

𝜋𝜖0𝜖𝑟) 𝑘𝐵𝑇
⁄
)   - 
 
(1S) 


0
1
2
3
4
5

300

400

500

600

700

800
 Top electrode
 Filament

Temperature (K)

Current (mA)

PR Bake

 

Figure 4S:  Maximum temperature in Nb2O5 filament compared to maximum temperature at 
top-electrode/PMMA interface 

 

 0.0 mA
 0.5 mA
 1.0 mA
 1.5 mA
 2.0 mA
 2.5 mA
 3.0 mA
 3.5 mA
 4.0 mA
 4.5 mA
 5.0 mA

0
500
1000
1500
2000

300

400

500

600

700

Temperature (K)

Position (nm)
 

Figure 5S: Temperature distribution as a function of distance from the centre of the filament 
as a function of current.   

 

 

4S. Edge effect 

To further clarify the edge effect, additional cross-sectional TEM images of the bottom 
electrode of a Pt/HfO2/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si structure are demonstrated in Figure 6S.  This clearly 
shows that the bottom Pt layer extends beyond the Ti adhesion layer in the undercut region. 


 

Figure 6S: The undercut effect in Pt/HfO2/Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si str5ucture show left and right edges of 
bottom electrode.  

 

 

References: 

1. 
S. Li, X. Liu, S. K. Nandi, D. K. Venkatachalam and R. G. Elliman, presented at the 2014 

Conference on Optoelectronic and Microelectronic Materials & Devices, 2014 (unpublished). 
2. 
S. K. Nandi, X. Liu, D. K. Venkatachalam and R. G. Elliman, Journal of Physics D: Applied 

Physics 48 (19), 195105 (2015). 
3. 
X. Liu, S. K. Nandi, D. K. Venkatachalam, K. Belay, S. Song and R. G. Elliman, IEEE 

Electron Device Letters 35 (10), 1055-1057 (2014). 


