1

Realization of predicted exotic materials: The burden of proof

Oleksandr I. Malyi1,2, Gustavo M. Dalpian1,3, Xingang Zhao1, Zhi Wang1, and Alex Zunger1*

1Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309
2Centre for Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Department of Physics, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1048 
Blindern, NO-0316 Oslo, Norway
3Centro de Ciências Naturais e Humanas, Universidade Federal do ABC, 09210-580, Santo André, SP, Brazil

*Corresponding author

e-mail: Alex.Zunger@Colorado.edu

Abstract 

Trove of exotic topoloid structures has recently been predicted by searching for compounds whose calculated 
band structure crossing points fulfill specific symmetry requirements. Discovery of exciting physical phenomena 
by experimental studies of such predicted compounds is just around the corner. Yet, the examination of some 
of these assumed high-symmetry structures suggests that not always will assembly of atoms in a configuration 
that yields exotic topological properties be protected against energy-lowering symmetry breaking modes. 
Indeed, although bulk topological characteristics lead to protected surface/edge states, nothing protects bulk 
states from structural instability. The burden of proof for theoretical predictions of  exciting physical phenomena 
should include some compelling hints that such phenomena can live in thermodynamically stable (or near 
stable) compounds. Herein, we illustrate how the use of the calculated total (electron + ion) energies of 
candidate structures can remove false-positive predicted topoloids from the list of likely realizable compounds, 
to the benefit of the much-cherished iterative process of theory-experiment materials discovery.

Keywords: topological materials, stability, electronic structures, symmetry breaking, materials discovery. 


2

Introduction

One of the most exciting recent developments in condensed matter physics and solid-state chemistry is the 

discovery of topological behavior of matter[1-8] leading to unique transport properties at lower dimensions.
Laboratory examination and future technological applications of the fascinating predicted properties of such 
topological phases naturally require identifying synthesizable and stable, topology-bearing compounds
(“topoloids”). Searching for specific materials (characterized by Atomic identities, Composition and Structure, 
or ACS) that have required target property P (here, topological properties, but generally also novel photovoltaic 
semiconductors, transparent conductors, thermoelectric compounds or battery materials) generally follows an 
“Inverse Design” paradigm[9], illustrated for topological properties in Scheme 1. Given a compilation of
materials with their characteristic ACSs, one first establishes the requisite theoretical conditions (“design 
principles”) that would enable topological property P to exist in such crystal structures. Second, one examines
if the selected compound and its computed band structure have the stipulated topological property in the
assumed crystal structure. Finding a positive answer establishes potential candidates for topological properties. 
This approach has already provided thousands of specific predictions of topoloids[10-24] recently reviewed in 
Nature News[25])that should be topological insulators (TI’s), or topological crystalline insulators (TCI), Dirac and 
Weyl semimetals or unconventional quasiparticles. Experimental discovery of exciting new physical properties 
in these predicted compounds is a much-anticipated exciting prospect[25].

Yet, despite the recent predictions of thousands of topological compounds in the world, very few such 

compounds have been actually synthesized and proven to be topological. We note that the predicted topoloids 
were obtained by using just the upper part of the general flow in Scheme 1 denoted as “partial screening flow”.
The latter screening has been often based on the assumption that the crystal will take up the highest symmetry 
possible, not considering the possibility of energy-lowering symmetry breaking that obviates topological 
properties. Unfortunately, both experimental and theoretical databases of structures and properties of 
compounds sometimes omit information on magnetism, spontaneous defect formation, or how would the 
structure change when significant doping is required. Furthermore, in the case of polymorphous networks[26]
(structures having a distribution of different local motifs), experimental X-ray structure determination often 
approximates the structure by an artificial, high symmetry primitive unit cell describing the macroscopic average 
configuration. Such “virtual structures” should not be used as input to electronic structure calculations[26]. All 
these factors can affect the assumed symmetry of the crystal structure and therefore the ensuing calculated 
wavefunctions, thereby misrepresenting the correct topological class.

Undoubtedly, more of the projected topoloids from the published lists of candidates[10-24] will be 

confirmed with time. However, we hold that the required next steps before offering theoretically predicted 
topoloid compounds for experimental synthesis and evaluation should involve the theoretical projection of their 
stability towards the formation of alternative competing phases, as well as symmetry breaking perturbations, 
following the “whole screening flow” of Scheme 1. Searching for materials with more conventional properties 
than topology, such as good photovoltaic absorber[27] or battery materials[28], generally, do not involve such 
an extreme dependence on the precise symmetry of different electronic states. Stability tests with respect to 
decomposition into competing phases are generally applied in these simpler search problems[29]. They usually 
result in a robust set of materials that have the target property and are stable in the structure that harbors these 
specific properties.

However, assembling atoms in an assumed configuration that yields the topology-promoting band structure 

energies does not necessarily protect against symmetry-breaking modes that lower the total energy, signaling 
instability of the assumed structure. Although bulk topological characteristics lead to protected surface/edge
states, nothing protects bulk states from thermodynamic instability. These considerations were often ignored,
in part because topological science emerged from field theory and (quantum Hall) theories of electron gases. In 
these approaches, the structural stability does not play much of a role, as the electron or hole gases are
artificially confined by physical (kinetic energy) barriers rather than placed in the vicinity of ions as in molecules 


3

and solids. Often, hypothetical structures are assumed in such studies just to enquire what is possible “in 
principle”, and what are the emerging trends. However, when a predicted structure turns out to be a high-
energy phase, it is difficult to argue that the prediction is merely done to understand what could be possible, in 
principle, because the high energy by itself delivers a physics message. For example, the TI-ness property 
requires band inversion, i.e., occupation of previously empty anti-bonding bands and depopulation of previously 
occupied bonding states[23]. But this process cannot always be done with impunity because it has the potential 
of diminishing cohesion, resulting in a high-energy structure that might not exist, even in principle. The safe way 
for theoretical predictions should, therefore, involve verification of the instability of the potential candidates
with respect to competing structures by using feasible methods, e.g., phase diagram, phonon spectrum. One 
might argue that it is trivial that an intrinsically unstable material might be difficult, if not unwise to synthesize. 
What we describe here are a few nontrivial physical mechanisms that will render a seemingly stable compound 
to an unstable one, outlining how could such a change be detected theoretically.

Fortunately, this type of assessment can be readily accomplished by using the sister quantity that goes hand-

in-hand with the band structure calculation of such compounds – the total electron + ion energy of the said
competing compounds. This needed next step of inspecting the total energies, following the already remarkable 
search for single-particle (band) energies that promise topological properties[10-24] would complete the burden 
of proof (as far as theory is concerned) for recommending for experimentation not only exotic, but also 
potentially realizable materials that host with impunity exotic properties. 

Scheme 1: Workflow for screening the potential and stable candidates with topological properties. 

We illustrate a number of prototypical failure modes that can arise from restricting the predictions of topoloids 

to the examination of their band structures single-particle energies alone. We show how the use of the total 
energy[30] as an additional material selection filter might help avoid such false-positive predictions. The 
prototype modalities discussed are: 

(i) The hypothetical structure that host topology is unstable: The selected crystal structure that manifests 

topology may not be the lowest energy structure. This is illustrated for the first predicted Dirac semimetal in 
three dimensions BiO2 in assumed cristobalite SiO2 structure[19] which is shown here to be dynamically (phonon) 
unstable and disappears if its structure is allowed to relax to the energy-lowering stabler structure.


4

(ii) Symmetry lowering by spontaneous defect formation defeats topology: The newly predicted 

unconventional quasiparticle in Ba4Bi3[17] is destabilized by the spontaneous (energy lowering) formation of Bi 
vacancies that condense into ordered vacancy compounds whose low local symmetry defeats the specific 
degeneracy promoting topology. 

(iii) Symmetry lowering by magnetism (spin-polarization) removes the topology-promoting band degeneracy:

This is illustrated for the predicted 8-fold band degeneracy of metallic CuBi2O4[17] in assumed nonmagnetic 
configuration. Once magnetic spin-polarization is allowed, the total energy decreases, and the band degeneracy 
disappears.

(iv) The predicted topological property requires doping that inherently destabilizes the topological structure: 

This is illustrated for BaBiO3[18] that requires an upshift of the Fermi energy by ~2 eV to meet the inverting 
energy bands. This occupation of massively antibonding states leads to a destabilizing increase in total energy 
relieved by structural transformations that defeat topology.

(v) The topological property is caused by artificial band inversion due to systematic density functional theory 

(DFT) errors: The method used to assess the band structure—DFT—requires an exchange-correlation energy 
functional. But current approximated functionals suffer from the self-interaction error that lowers the 
unoccupied bands and raises the occupied bands, causing, at the extreme, unphysical band inversion. This 
occurs in InN and InAs[10-13], well known normal insulators predicted by DFT with current functionals to be 
topological metals. 

Avalible materials databases (e.g., ICSD[31]) contains hundreds of thousands entries. These are first 

pragmatically narrowed down by theorists[10-13] using filters such as avoid duplications, limit the maximum 
cell size to be examined, exclude theoretically difficult to calculate atoms (d or f electrons), exclude alloys and 
other structures with fractional occupation numbers, etc.  After this narrowing down, the band structures of the 
remaining compounds are computed by density functional. For instance, Vergniory et al.[10] calculated 26,938 
compounds from which 181 (34) were found to be topological insulators with DFT gap between occupied and 
unoccupied states of at least 0.001 (0.1) eV. The Swiss TOPOMAT database[13] uses different filters to narrow 
down the entries ending up with 13,628 directly inspected cases and found 50 (17) topological insulators with
DFT band gaps of >0.001 (0.1) eV. We note, however, that the number of compounds and the numerical results 
in these online databases are regularly changed by the authors.

We have studied only a few compounds from the published lists of predicted topological insulators with 

finite band gaps. These already illustrate possible failure modalities that can be detected by using simple, 
additional “search filters” from the same density functional theory used to establish the requisite target band 
structure. The current list of predicted topological insulators with real band gaps might then be a diminishing 
domain.

The approach 

Identifying actual realizations of topological compounds requires theories with a full atomic resolution that 

recognize site and space symmetries in crystals. The recent rebirth of density functional band theory of solids 
(and higher-order theories that use DFT to initialize the problem, such as DFT-DMFT[32], DFT-GW [33,34], DFT-
QMC[35]) as a tool for uncovering topological behavior hidden in the spaghetti-like energy band structure, lies 
in DFT’s ability to directly decode the consequences of an assumed ACS on the band structures. This affords a 
direct mapping of the theory onto the Periodic Table, via explicit incorporation of the electron-ion potential 
𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡 = ∑ −𝑍𝛼 |𝑟 − 𝑅𝜏|
⁄
in the single-particle problem, where {𝑍𝛼} are the atomic identities defined by atomic 

numbers or pseudopotentials, {𝑅𝜏} are the atomic positions with the appropriate periodic boundary conditions 


5

defined by the lattice vectors, and the sum extends over all atoms in the compound, thereby defining 
composition and stoichiometry.

This recent development of searching for ACS that host the conditions for topology[10-24] departs from the 

more traditional approaches to the search for compounds hosting other types of quantum behavior—unusual 
superconductivity, quantum spin liquids, or Kitaev unconventional magnetism. Such approaches[32,36,37]
provide general guidance, specifying ranges of effective interactions in “Scenario Hamiltonians” where the new 
effects might be found. Such effective interactions, however, are not generally not mappable onto the Periodic 
Table, and thus do not commit to the chemical identity (ACS) of the compound hosting such interactions. This 
approach makes the process of identification of the system that can host such predicted “new physics” one of 
the successive guesses. Experimental verification—the heart and soul of natural sciences—is not easily 
accomplished. 

To examine realizability of the predicted ACS that host topology, it may be wise to use not only the band 

single-particle energies as design filters but also the DFT total energy (Etotal) and its derivatives with respect to 
displacements  (forces, force constants)  of the given crystal[30]. This total energy is given by

.
(1)

Here, Ψi*(r) is (pseudo-)wavefunction of the valence electron where the index i denotes both the wavevector ki
and the band index n and runs over all occupied valence states. Rμ, Eee, Eion-ion, and Exc are the lattice vector,
electron-electron Coulomb energy, lattice (ion-ion) energy and exchange-correlation energy, respectively. 
𝑈𝑝𝑠

(𝑙)(𝑟 − 𝑅𝜇)𝑃̂𝑙 is the angular-momentum-dependent pseudopotentials, where 𝑃̂𝑙 is the projection operator on 

angular momentum.

The need to use the total energy as an additional filter for material selection arises both because some 

candidate topoloid has been assumed to take up a hypothetical structure or composition not known to exist. 
Also, even if the selected structure does exist nominally, it is possible that simple microscopic mechanisms can 
create structural changes that defeat topology. Such situations are easily diagnosed by co-evaluation band 
structure conditions for topology, along with the potential instability with respect to total energy lowering 
deformations that defeat topology. The details of the methods used are described in the supplementary section
S1.

What about metastable compounds: Certainly, metastable materials can be realized and are often used in 

functional applications today. Long-lived metastable structures protected by practically insurmountable 
activation barriers certainly exist in special structures. Compounds with the energy of roughly 50-100 meV/atom
above the convex hull could be sometimes synthesized in a metastable form[38]: Metastability with respect to
structural transformation is exemplified by diamond vs. graphite (diamond is 28 meV/atom less stable than 
graphite[39]); metastability with respect to a decomposition reaction is illustrated by Ba2YCu3O7 which is 23 
meV/atom above the convex hull and is predicted to decompose to BaCuO2, Ba(CuO)2, Ba2(CuO2)3, and Y2O3[40]; 
metastability with respect to recombination of constituent elements is exemplified by nitrides where two 
nitrogen atoms can recombine to yield the highly stable N2 molecule thus eliminating the parent 
compounds[38]. Indeed we and others generally consider theoretically compounds that are above the strict 
ground state (“Convex Hull”) by reasonably small amounts of, say, less than 20-50 meV.The examples given 
above are rather gentle forms of metastability energy (smaller than kT during growth) and give rise to long-lived 
metastable structures protected by much higher activation barriers towards bond breaking. The examples given 
in the current study, however, are not particularly gentle forms of metastability; one would like to avoid such 
cases if synthesis would be attempted, as the pertinent target compounds are not likely to exist. We believe 
that seeking stable topoloid compounds from ordinary three-dimensional inorganic compounds is a good idea: 
metastable compounds in given structures may be difficult to make, in the first place, and if made, may create 

*
2
3
*
( )
3

, ,

1
1
ˆ
( )(-
)
( )
( )
(
)
( )
2
2

l

total
i
i
i
ps
l
i
ee
ion ion
xc

i
i
l

E
r
r dr
r U
r
R
P
r dr
E
E
E








−
=

+
−
+
+
+




6

vulnerability towards decomposition during the inevitable perturbations (e.g., current, temperature) common 
in device applications

Difference with respect to layer-by-layer growth: Certain specialized growth techniques grow a material 

under artificial conditions when it is stable. Then it is quenched to low temperatures when it is no longer stable 
but can be long-lived because activation energies for structural transformation can be large at such low 
temperatures. The classic example is layer-by-layer artificial growth from the gas phase by Molecular Beam 
Epitaxy (MBE), by opening and closing shutters that release certain atomic species and then quenched to low 
temperatures at which atomic diffusion is prohibitive. Predictions of the sequence of layers that delivers a given 
property, such as the spatial configuration of AlAs-GaAs having largest possible band gap[41], or the Si-Ge 
sequence that has the long-sought direct band gap[42], can be done without considering global stability, 
because the local stability is assured by the kinetically forbidden atomic diffusion. However, this condition is not 
applicable to conventional near-equilibrium melt growth or hydrothermal growth of three-dimensional 
compounds such as the topoloids predicted recently where layer-by-layer growth or quenching are not involved.

Results and Discussion 

A. False-Positive type 1: The hypothetical structure that host topology is thermodynamically unstable

BiO2 in the assumed cubic (Fd-3m) SiO2 cristobalite crystal structure was predicted to be the first 3D Dirac 

semimetal (the special degeneracy point circled in Fig. 1a in red)[19]. However, Bi with its five s2p3 valence 
electrons may not have the type of bonding akin to fourfold valent Si (s2p2)even if Bi would disproportionate to 
Bi3+(s2p0) + Bi5+(s0p0). To examine this basic intuition, we calculated the Bi-O ground state (T=0) convex hull. This 
is done by evaluating the total energies of all conceivable known and hypothetical competing structures, 
examining the lowest energy structure at each composition and then identifying stable compositions that do 
not decompose into pairs of lower + higher compositions (Fig. 1b). Stable compounds lie on the convex hull 
whereas metastable compounds are located above it. Although a certain degree of metastability can be 
accepted as kinetically possible, the resulting ground state line shows that hypothetical BiO2 structure is a high 
energy phase. The cristobalite structure is significantly higher in energy (263 meV/atom above the convex hull) 
than numerous non-cristobalite structures at lower energies (circles in Fig. 1b), so there is no apparent reason 
that it will form in that structure rather than any of the many lower energy phases.  To evaluate the effect of 
finite temperature on the ground state diagram, we calculated the free energy at high temperature by using the 
machine learning model reported by Bartel et al.[43] (supplementary section S2), which includes the phonon 
entropy contribution. Our conclusion is that raising the temperature does not turn the cristobalite structure into 
a stable or near-stable structure.  

Another important stability criterion is related to dynamic phonon factors. Some crystal structures or atomic 

configurations are reported in a configuration that have negative second derivatives (e.g., a maximum of the 
potential energy surface), so phonon calculations will lead to negative branches–a clear indication of dynamic 
instability. One can then use the method of Stokes and Hatch[44] to judge from the symmetry of the unstable 
phonons which alternative structures could replace the unstable one. Indeed, examination of the harmonic 
phonon dispersion curves (Fig. 1c) shows that this SiO2 structure of BiO2 is dynamically unstable, and therefore 
cannot exist as such. In the band structure of the phase that replaces the SiO2-like polymorph (Fig. 1d), we 
observe that this material is, in fact, an insulator (see the gapped region in green) and so does not have the 
special degeneracy point akin to the predicted hypothetical cristobalite structure. We conclude that the 
cristobalite crystal structure of BiO2 is not a likely stable compound, and the structures that are stable are not 
3D Dirac semimetals.


7

Figure 1. Electronic and phonon structure of the predicted first 3D Dirac semimetal BiO2. (a) Band structure of the metallic 
cristobalite SiO2-type, Fd-3m assumed structure showing the Dirac point (red circle). (b) Total energy convex hull of all phases 
showing that SiO2-type BiO2 is significantly (263 meV/atom) above the ground state line. (c) Phonon dispersion of the cristobalite 
structure, showing dynamically unstable modes (yellow highlights) and (d) band structure of the lowest energy monoclinic C2/c
BiO2 phase (space group 15) that is no longer a metal (gap in green highlight). 

There are scores of other structures that were predicted to be topological in what was found to be chemically 

or thermodynamically unstable forms[20-22]. Among other channels, a structure can be unstable with respect 
to another structure type, or with respect to decomposition into its constituents. Both channels of instability as 
well as the effect of finite temperature (supplementary sections S1 and S2) can be examined[45]. One example 
is the prediction of new topological insulators with the highly desirable light elements (Z < 50) LiAgSe and NaAgSe
in the assumed honeycomb ZrBeSi-type lattice[20]. On examination, it turns out that the ZrBeSi-type structure
of LiAgSe and NaAgSe is not the ground-state structure[46]. According to total energy calculations performed 
on more than 50 potential crystal structures, LiAgSe should crystallize in a LiCaN structure while NaAgSe should 
crystallize in the PbCl2-type structure. Furthermore, LiAgSe in the ZrBeSi-type structure is calculated to be 
unstable with respect to dissociation into Li2Se and Ag2Se[46].

Lin et al.[22] predicted topological insulators among the ~2000 tested 18-electron half Heusler ABX 

compounds, assuming universally the cubic F-43m structure (α-type), finding exceptionally promising large 
inversion energies in 11 compounds, 8 based on I-Au-XVI (I= Li, Na, K, Rb and XVI= O,S) and 3 involving Pd and Pt: 
LiPdCl, SrPtS, and BaPtS. However, the same DFT calculations extended to standard stability check[45] find that 
these latter compounds are unstable with respect to decomposition into their constituent binary compounds. 
Moreover, the assumed α-type structure[47] for the former group (Li, Na, K, Rb)Au(O,S) is not the lowest energy 
structure.

Another example is the predicted wide gap oxide TI YBiO3[21]. Finding an oxide topological insulator that has 

a wide inversion gap has been sought for a long time, as it would overcome the inadvertent doping problem 


8

common in narrow gap TIs such as Bi2Se3 and could be integrated with the many oxide material functionalities 
such as ferroelectricity. Jin et al.[21] predicted through band structure calculations that YBiO3 in the assumed 
CaTiO3-type cubic perovskite structure (Pm-3m) with the Bi atoms located at the Oh (1a Wyckoff position) would 
be a TI with an indirect gap of 0.18 eV and a direct gap of 0.33 eV. However, relaxing the lattice constant of 
YBiO3[48] from the previously used 5.43 Å to the density-functional minimum energy equilibrium value for the 
same Pm-3m perovskite (a = 4.405 Å)[48] lowers the total energy by ∼1 eV. Relaxing the condition that the 
structure is of the Pm-3m perovskite-type lowers the total energy by another ∼1 eV. The resulting stable 
structure is not a TI.

B. False-Positive type 2: Symmetry lowering by spontaneous defect formation defeats topology

Ba4Bi3 in space group 220 is an example of a material with special band structure degeneracy that 

corresponds to recently predicted unconventional quasiparticle[17] that remarkably has no analogy in particle 
physics. Its characteristic feature is the 8-fold degeneracy at the H point and 3-fold degeneracy at the P point of 
Brillouin zone (Fig. 2a, red circled ellipse). These degeneracies are a consequence of specific non-symmorphic
symmetry existing in the space group 220. Fig. 2a constitutes the electronic structure description of the 
predicted unconventional quasiparticle.

Figure 2. Spontaneous vacancy formation destroying band degeneracy in Ba4Bi3. (a) Band structure of ideal Ba4Bi3 in space group 220, 
showing the special degeneracy points (red circles) creating the topological properties of this predicted unusual quasiparticle. (b) 
Defect formation energy of Bi vacancy in Ba4Bi3 as a function of the Bi chemical potential. The chemical potential stability zone is 
shown in light yellow color, demonstrating the negative (i.e., exothermic) formation of Bi vacancies over a broad chemical potential 
range. The unfolded band structures for Ba4Bi3-x containing about 2% of Bi vacancies is shown in (c) with a zoom-in shown in (d), 
indicating the disappearance of the special, topology-creating degeneracy. Supplementary section S3 shows the splitting of the Dirac 
cone as a function of the concentration of Bi vacancies.

The band structure of Ba4Bi3 (Fig. 2a) has a particularly unusual feature: a band gap (light-green shaded) 

above the Fermi level EF, the latter being deep inside the valence band, indicating plenty of hole states (blue 
shaded region) in the valence band. This particulate electronic configuration might be unstable with respect to 


9

the spontaneous formation of intrinsic structural defects that compensate holes, i.e., defects that form 
electrons (donors). Such donors, formed above the Fermi energy would then transfer their electrons to the 
lower energy unoccupied hole states, thereby lowering the total energy of this defected structure relative to 
the ideal, perfect lattice. The defects formation energy–the total energy change with respect to the 
manipulatable chemical potentials of elements–can be used to estimate how hard is it to form the defects. For 
instance, the negative value indicates the exothermic reaction of forming vacancies spontaneously in 
thermodynamics, vice versa. The formation of low-temperature stable defects is known in other degenerate 
systems with internal band gap near the Fermi level, e.g., in ScS, BaNbO3, Ca6Al7O16[49,50]. Note that 
spontaneously formed defects are different from conventional defects that require energy for their formation 
and therefore exist in small quantities and only at elevated temperatures. 

To examine this basic physical intuition, we calculated the total energy of the simplest donor defect namely Bi 
vacancy (see supplementary section S1 for details of defect calculations) in 16 formula units of Ba4Bi3 supercell
(112 atoms). Fig. 2b shows the DFT calculated formation enthalpy of dilute Bi vacancy in Ba4Bi3 as a function of 
the Bi chemical potential, indicating that such defects would indeed form exothermically. The existence of 
dilute, stable defects further suggests the possibility of condensation of vacancies into ordered arrays (as in 
Sc2S3[50]). To examine this possibility, we have calculated the T=0 K stable phases of such structures by 
considering a replica of 16 Ba4Bi3 units with p Bi vacancies, searching via total energy minimization for stable
and metastable configurations. The result detailed in supplementary section S3 shows that ideal Ba4Bi3 with 
holes in the valence band is a metastable structure with energy above the ground state convex hull, whereas 
Ba4Bi3-x with vacancies is the ground state, as donor electrons relax into the low energy hole states. 

The energy bands of the Ba4Bi3 structure with 2% of Bi vacancies are shown in Fig. 2c,d. To follow what 

happens to the special degeneracy points in the band structure of the ideal solid (ellipse in Fig. 2a) once 
vacancies are formed, we unfolded the 16-formula unit supercell band structure containing vacancies to the
band structure in the primitive Brillouin zone. We see that upon the formation of even low concentration of Bi 
vacancies, the special degeneracies at the H and P points are removed, as the defects lower the symmetry of 

the lattice, hence also breaks the symmetry operators that protect the degenerate points ({𝐶3,1̅1̅1|0

1

2

1

2}, 

{𝐶2𝑦|0

1

2

1

2}, {𝐶2𝑥|

3

2

3

2 0}, {𝐼𝐶4𝑥

− |

1

2 11}, {𝐶2𝑥|

1

2

1

2 0}, {𝐶2𝑦|0

1

2

3

2}, {𝐶3,111

−
|001}, {𝜎𝑥̅𝑦|

1

2

1

2

1

2}). Supplementary section

S3 shows the energy splitting of the two degenerate points as a function of vacancy concentration, 
demonstrating a sizeable splitting of over 100 meV is possible. We conclude that Ba4Bi3 in space group 220 
structure is unlikely to retain this local symmetry needed to sustain the special 3-fold and 8-fold degenerate 
points because intrinsic, symmetry breaking vacancies would form exothermically. The experimental literature 
on Ba4Bi3 is very limited. Synthesis of Ba4Bi3 was achieved by direct reaction of the corresponding elemental by 
Li, Mudring and Corbett[51], who noted 1/9 random anion vacancies in this family of materials, and resistivity 
characteristic of a moderately poor metal, consistent with an anticipated one electron deficiency per formula 
unit for Ba4Bi3. These observations are entirely consistent with our picture of a non-degenerate electronic 
structure that may defeat topology.

C. False-Positive type 3: Symmetry lowering by magnetism (spin-polarization) removes the topology-
promoting band degeneracy: CuBi2O4

CuBi2O4 in the tetragonal P4/ncc crystal structure (space group 130) was predicted[52] to be a realization of 

an exotic eightfold metallic Fermion (Fig. 3a) owing to its specific Bravais lattice, that requires this degeneracy 
at the time-reversal invariant A point. The band structure (Fig. 3a) and the density of states (Fig. 3b)
calculated[52] assuming a non-spin polarized configuration for the Cu atoms show a metallic behavior and an 
“intermediate band” where the degenerate Fermi energy resides. This constitutes the electronic description of 


10

the exotic eightfold metallic Fermion. However, the Cu2+ (d9) ion might be stabilized by developing a gap-
opening spin-polarized magnetic structure.

To examine this basic physical intuition, we allow for magnetism in the form of different spin arrangements 

among neighboring Cu atoms, still in the space group 130. This is done by starting the calculations with a specific 
arrangement for the spins on the Cu atoms that will mimic ferromagnetism (parallel spins) or different 
antiferromagnetic arrangements (antiparallel spins). We find that an antiferromagnetic arrangement of the Cu 
spins can lower the total energy by as much as 498 meV/formula units. Different spin configuration 
(antiferromagnetic or ferromagnetic) lead to very similar total energies within a few meV/atom (see 
supplementary section S4). Breaking time-reversal symmetry through the inclusion of magnetic moments on 
the Cu atoms opens a large energy gap in the Fermi energy (green shaded area in Fig. 3c), splitting the metallic 
intermediate band into a valence band and conduction band with a DFT gap of 1.63 eV. Indeed, literature
calculations and experiment[53] show that this material is an insulator with a large enough gap to be a potential 
photocatalyst. The paramagnetic phase is modeled using a supercell that allows moments to develop on 
individual Cu sites but keeps the total moment zero, as in the recent polymorphous approach to binary 
oxides[54]. Using a supercell with 756 atoms, with the same lattice parameters as the AFM phase (for simplicity),
we find a band gap of 1.62 eV and a distribution of local magnetic moments around 0.63 Bohr Magnetons. This 
polymorphous representation of the paramagnetic phase is significantly lower in energy (by ~0.5 eV/formula 
unit) than the naïve approximation to a paramagnet as a nonmagnetic structure. 
We conclude that 

development of insulation-promoting magnetism in this system has such a significant energy lowering potential 
that it might very likely defeat the intended metallic state of the predicted new Fermion.

Figure 3. Spontaneous magnetism destroying topology-enabling band degeneracy in CuBi2O4. (a) Band structure and (b) atom-resolved 
density of states of CuBi2O4 in the tetragonal P4/ncc crystal structure (space group 130), constraining it to be non-spin-polarized, 
leading to a metallic solution. (c) and (d) are the band structure and density of states for the antiferromagnetic configuration that 
leads to the opening of the band gap and significant energy lowering. In (c), the spin-up and spin-down bands are degenerate. 


11

D. False-Positive type 4: The predicted topological property requires doping that destabilizes the topological 
structure BaBiO3

Cubic (Fm-3m) BaBiO3 was predicted[18] to be an exciting large gap oxide topological insulator, if it could be 

doped so as to shift up its natural Fermi level (zero of energy in Fig. 2a) by about 2 eV, where band inversion is 
predicted to occur (ellipse in Fig. 4a). Such doping is equivalent to one added electron per formula unit or doping 
density of ≈1022 electrons/cm3. If one simulates doping by raising the Fermi level while disallowing the atoms to 
respond to such a perturbation, then indeed theory[18,55] would predict band inversion in the doped cubic 
solid (see supplementary section S5). However, doping is rarely a rigid-band event that does not provoke an 
electronic response[56]. Indeed, shifting EF to higher energy often leads at least to a self-regulating spontaneous 
formation of “killer defects”, or at the extreme, to the decomposition of the host compound into stabler 
structures involving the dopant atoms[57]. In oxides, this is particularly true because of the limited ability of the 
polar lattice to screen such instabilities[58]. This can be examined by calculating the respective convex hull.

Figure 4. n-type doping destroying excited state band inversion in BaBiO3. (a) Band structure of cubic BaBiO3 showing band inversion 
(Bi p states in green below Bi s in red) at about 2 eV above the Fermi level. However, this cubic structure is unstable with respect to 
disproportionation of two of its BiO6 octahedra into different (small vs large) octahedra, giving the known stable monoclinic structure 
(space group 14) that also has excited state (b) band inversion at about 2 eV above the Fermi level. This high energy band inversion is 
unstable with respect to n-type doping as shown for (c) electron-doped and (d) Li-doped monoclinic phases where a normal band 
order (Bi, s in red below Bi, p in green) is seen. Supplementary section S5 shows that the high energy band inversion is also not stable 
with respect to O-vacancy doping.

To examine this basic physical intuition, we calculated the equilibrium structure of the undoped as well as 

doped system by evaluating its total energy. Doping can result in the local asymmetric environment, lowering 
the thermal energy barrier for phase transition, leading to phase transition. We find first that the cubic (Fm-3m)
phase of BaBiO3 having a single BiO6 octahedron is unstable with respect to disproportionation into two 
octahedra with different volumes often loosely described as Ba2[Bi3+ Bi5+]O6, best described as the monoclinic 
structure (space group 14; P21/c), with metallic band structure shown in Fig. 4b. Once doped (by electron, by Li,
or by O vacancies), this structure responds to the occupation of its previously empty conduction bands, 


12

rearranging its bonds, and leading to a fundamentally new band structure (Figs. 4c, d and supplementary section 
S5 showing also doping of the cubic phase) that is a normal insulator, not a topological insulator. A similar 
situation applies to cubic RbTlCl3 and KBiO3[58].

A more extreme example of a destructive response to doping is the recent suggestion[55] of replacing 1/3 

of the O atoms by the nominal n-type dopant fluorine to shift EF to the point where a TI state is expected. This 
was attempted in a recent paper where following doping the band structure was monitored, but the total energy   
was not probed either with respect to nudging the atoms in BaBiO2F or with respect to decomposition reactions. 
We find hypothetical cubic BaBiO2F is highly unstable with respect to competing phases, specifically decomposes
to ground state Bi2O3, Ba2Bi2O5, and BaF2 compounds with exothermic decomposition energy of 285 meV/atom.
Recent experimental attempts to synthesize BaBiO2F were unsuccessful, a failure attributed to the formation of
different decomposition products[59]. We thus conclude that highly doped BaBiO3 is unstable in the 
hypothetical structure that would have made it a topological insulator.

In general, one should be aware that shifting the Fermi energy at will via doping of quantum materials, as 

required in numerous theoretically predicted would- be- topoloids, is higly unlikely[56]. Such doping levels often 
lead to competing reactions that are thermodynamically favored over doping, and lead to products that 
generally lack the originally designed topological property.

E. False Positive type 5: The electronic Hamiltonian underestimates the band gap producing false band 
inversion in trivial insulators:

Recent searches for topological phases[10-13] predicted that the Zinc blend (F-43m) form of InN and InAs are 

topological metals i.e., zero-gap topological insulators with inversion between the conduction s and valence p
bands. This occurs because the initially empty metal-s Γ6cconduction band is lowered in energy for high atomic 
number cations such as In and Hg (due to the scalar relativistic Mass-Darwin effect). If this state is lowered 
sufficiently to get bellow the fourfold degenerate occupied P-type Γ8v valence band, then we have not only band 
inversion but also a topological metal since the Fermi energy must lie inside the half occupied Γ8v band. This is 
the actual case in HgTe[60]. Indeed, the PBE band structures with projection of the s and p states (Fig. 5a, c) for 
InN and InAs demonstrate that both systems have 0 eV band gap energies and electronic structures similar to 
that for HgTe topological material – being topological metals. 


13

Figure 5. Self-interaction error resulting in artificial inverted band order. PBE band structures of (a) InN and (b) InAs showing band 
inversion in between In (s) (in red) and As/N (p) (in blue) states. This band inversion is caused by self-interaction error and disappears 
when a more accurate method to describe electronic structure is used. Band structures of (c) InN and (d) InAs computed using hybrid 
functional showing normal band order – valence band is defined by cation p states, while the conduction band is dominated by anion 
s states.

But DFT with current exchange-correlation functionals has the tendency to predict too low conductions bands 

and too high valence bands[61]. At the extreme, it could create an erroneous inversion of Γ6c and Γ8v if the initial 
band gaps are small. The question is therefore if the band inversion predicted in InAs and InN[10-13] is legitimate 
(as in HgTe), or false. To examine the effect of self-interaction error on the band order in the InN and InAs 
phases, we performed the hybrid functional calculations (see supplementary section 1) for both systems in 
comparison to the corresponding PBE calculations. Employing hybrid functional opens the band gaps for both 
compounds: the computed band gap energies for the InN and InAs phases are 0.62 and 0.43 eV, respectively.
The orbital projected band structures (Fig. 5b, d) demonstrate that both InN and InAs phases are trivial insulators 
with normal band order – the valence band is dominated by cation p states, while anion s orbitals define the 
conduction band. Indeed, the existing experimental literature on the InN and InAs phases does not reveal any 
topological properties predicted within the simplified DFT calculations[62]. One should note that InN and InAs 
are not only the systems exhibiting such behavior. Specifically, the fictitious band inversion is found in InSb, 
GaSb, and CdO. However, it is not seen using the highly accurate electronic structure methods[63,64]. We 
conclude that search of realizable topological materials requires not only using the thermodynamic criteria to 
ensure in the materials stability but also ensuring that level of applied theory is sufficient to reproduce the 
physically correct band order for the proposed materials. 

Conclusions

Looking at instability modes of highly symmetric structures that harbor exotic properties reveals a number of  
basic symmetry breaking channels that can obviate exotic behavior. These additional filters are related to the 
stability of the hypothetical materials with respect to (i) decomposition to ground state crystalline compounds, 
(ii) spin polarization, (iii) formation of spontaneous intrinsic defects, (iv) external doping and (v) DFT 


14

underestimation of the band gap. The steps to account the above principles is straight forward: (i) perform 
analysis of thermodynamic stability of proposed materials via exploring energy convex hulls finding ground state 
compounds and stability of hypothetical material with respect to competing phases; (ii) verify stability of 
topological properties with respect to different spin arrangements and atomic/spin “nudging”; (iii) ensure that 
formation of point defects does not lead to spontaneous non-stoichiometry affecting the properties of the 
original materials; (iv) verifying that required doping is thermodynamically realizable and resulted system still 
possess the topology-enabling symmetry of the originally assumed structure. In addition to the above materials 
realization criteria, to propose a new topological system theoretically, (v) it is vital to ensure that topological 
properties of a hypothetical material are not affected by self-interaction error and more generally by the 
method used to describe electronic structure. Such additional material selection filters will help to avoid false-
positive predictions and would complete the burden of proof for recommending to experimentalists not only 
exotic but also potentially realizable materials that host with structural impunity exotic properties. This would 
convert “theory of effects” to the theory of real structures that could harbor such effects with impunity. This 
would enhance the friendship (and credibility) between theorists with experimentalists.

Acknowledgment

Work at the University of Colorado Boulder was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, 
Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under Award No. DE-SC001046 and AFOSR, 
MURI program on material synthesis. AZ thanks Andrey Bernevig for a number of discussions on their results.

Data availability
All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and the Supplementary 
Materials. Additional data for this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.

Appendix A. Supplementary data are available

References 
[1] B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, S.-C. Zhang, Science 314 (2006), 1757
[2] C. L. Kane, E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95 (2005), 226801
[3] Z. K. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Z. J. Wang, H. M. Weng, D. Prabhakaran, S.-K. Mo, Z. X. Shen, Z. Fang, X. Dai, Z. 
Hussain, Y. L. Chen, Science 343 (2014), 864
[4] S.-Y. Xu, I. Belopolski, N. Alidoust, M. Neupane, G. Bian, C. Zhang, R. Sankar, G. Chang, Z. Yuan, C.-C. Lee, S.-
M. Huang, H. Zheng, J. Ma, D. S. Sanchez, B. Wang, A. Bansil, F. Chou, P. P. Shibayev, H. Lin, S. Jia, M. Z. Hasan, 
Science 349 (2015), 613
[5] X. L. Qi, S. C. Zhang, Physics Today 63 (2010), 33
[6] M. Z. Hasan, C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82 (2010), 3045
[7] X.-L. Qi, S.-C. Zhang, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83 (2011), 1057
[8] N. P. Armitage, E. J. Mele, A. Vishwanath, Rev. Mod. Phys. 90 (2018), 015001
[9] A. Zunger, Nat. Rev. Chem. 2 (2018), 0121
[10] M. G. Vergniory, L. Elcoro, C. Felser, N. Regnault, B. A. Bernevig, Z. Wang, Nature 566 (2019), 480
[11] T. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Song, H. Huang, Y. He, Z. Fang, H. Weng, C. Fang, Nature 566 (2019), 475
[12] F. Tang, H. C. Po, A. Vishwanath, X. Wan, Nature 566 (2019), 486
[13] G. Autes, Q. Wu, N. Mounet, O. V. Yazyev, TopoMat: a database of high-throughput first-principles 
calculations of topological materials, Materials Cloud Archive (2019), doi: 
10.24435/materialscloud:2019.0019/v2. 


15

[14] B. Bradlyn, L. Elcoro, J. Cano, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, C. Felser, M. I. Aroyo, B. A. Bernevig, Nature 547 
(2017), 298
[15] F. Schindler, A. M. Cook, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, S. S. P. Parkin, B. A. Bernevig, T. Neupert, Science 
Advances 4 (2018), eaat0346
[16] Z. Song, Z. Wang, W. Shi, G. Li, C. Fang, B. A. Bernevig, arXiv:1807.10676, (2018)
[17] B. Bradlyn, J. Cano, Z. Wang, M. G. Vergniory, C. Felser, R. J. Cava, B. A. Bernevig, Science 353 (2016), 
aaf5037
[18] B. Yan, M. Jansen, C. Felser, Nature Physics 9 (2013), 709
[19] S. M. Young, S. Zaheer, J. C. Y. Teo, C. L. Kane, E. J. Mele, A. M. Rappe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012), 140405
[20] H.-J. Zhang, S. Chadov, L. Müchler, B. Yan, X.-L. Qi, J. Kübler, S.-C. Zhang, C. Felser, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 
(2011), 156402
[21] H. Jin, S. H. Rhim, J. Im, A. J. Freeman, Sci. Rep. 3 (2013), 1651
[22] S.-Y. Lin, M. Chen, X.-B. Yang, Y.-J. Zhao, S.-C. Wu, C. Felser, B. Yan, Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015), 094107
[23] X. Zhang, Q. Liu, Q. Xu, X. Dai, A. Zunger, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140 (2018), 13687
[24] Q. Liu, A. Zunger, Physical Review X 7 (2017), 021019
[25] E. Gibney, Nature 560 (2018), 151
[26] X. Zhao, G. M. Dalpian, Z. Wang, A. Zunger, arXiv:1905.09141, (2019)
[27] X.-G. Zhao, D. Yang, Y. Sun, T. Li, L. Zhang, L. Yu, A. Zunger, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139 (2017), 6718
[28] S. Kirklin, B. Meredig, C. Wolverton, Adv. Energy Mater. 3 (2013), 252
[29] A. Zunger, Nature 566 (2019), 447
[30] P. Hohenberg, W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. B 136 (1964), B864
[31] A. Belsky, M. Hellenbrandt, V. L. Karen, P. Luksch, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci. 58 (2002), 364
[32] G. Kotliar, S. Y. Savrasov, K. Haule, V. S. Oudovenko, O. Parcollet, C. A. Marianetti, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78 
(2006), 865
[33] F. Giustino, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B 81 (2010), 115105
[34] M. Govoni, G. Galli, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 11 (2015), 2680
[35] V. Bach, L. Delle Site, Many-Electron Approaches in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics: A 
Multidisciplinary View. Springer: 2014
[36] E. Pavarini, E. Koch, A. Lichtenstein, D. Vollhardt, The LDA+DMFT approach to strongly correlated 
materials. 
[37] C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, H. Zhang, X. Dai, Z. Fang, S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010), 045122
[38] W. Sun, S. T. Dacek, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, A. Jain, W. D. Richards, A. C. Gamst, K. A. Persson, G. Ceder, 
Science Advances 2 (2016), e1600225
[39] H. Shin, S. Kang, J. Koo, H. Lee, J. Kim, Y. Kwon, J. Chem. Phys. 140 (2014), 114702
[40] A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, 
K. A. Persson, APL Mat. 1 (2013), 011002
[41] S. H. Wei, A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett. 53 (1988), 2077
[42] S. Froyen, D. M. Wood, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 36 (1987), 4547
[43] C. J. Bartel, S. L. Millican, A. M. Deml, J. R. Rumptz, W. Tumas, A. W. Weimer, S. Lany, V. Stevanović, C. B. 
Musgrave, A. M. Holder, Nat. Commun. 9 (2018), 4168
[44] H. T. Stokes, D. M. Hatch, Isotropy Subgroups of the 230 Crystallographic Space Groups. WORLD 
SCIENTIFIC: 1989, pp. 624
[45] R. Gautier, X. Zhang, L. Hu, L. Yu, Y. Lin, T. O. L. Sunde, D. Chon, K. R. Poeppelmeier, A. Zunger, Nat. Chem. 
7 (2015), 308
[46] J. Vidal, X. Zhang, L. Yu, J. W. Luo, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 84 (2011), 041109
[47] J. Vidal, X. Zhang, V. Stevanović, J.-W. Luo, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 86 (2012), 075316
[48] G. Trimarchi, X. Zhang, A. J. Freeman, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 90 (2014), 161111
[49] O. I. Malyi, M. T. Yeung, K. R. Poeppelmeier, C. Persson, A. Zunger, Matter 1 (2019), 280


16

[50] G. L. W. Hart, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001), 275508
[51] B. Li, A.-V. Mudring, J. D. Corbett, Inorg. Chem. 42 (2003), 6940
[52] D. Di Sante, A. Hausoel, P. Barone, J. M. Tomczak, G. Sangiovanni, R. Thomale, Phys. Rev. B 96 (2017), 
121106
[53] G. Sharma, Z. Zhao, P. Sarker, B. A. Nail, J. Wang, M. N. Huda, F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A 4 (2016), 
2936
[54] G. Trimarchi, Z. Wang, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 97 (2018), 035107
[55] B. Khamari, B. R. K. Nanda, Materials Research Express 6 (2019), 066309
[56] A. Walsh, A. Zunger, Nat. Mater. 16 (2017), 964
[57] Q. Liu, Q. Yao, Z. A. Kelly, C. M. Pasco, T. M. McQueen, S. Lany, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018), 
186402
[58] X. Zhang, L. B. Abdalla, Q. Liu, A. Zunger, Adv. Funct. Mater. 27 (2017), 1701266
[59] F. Hong, B. Saparov, W. Meng, Z. Xiao, D. B. Mitzi, Y. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C 120 (2016), 6435
[60] J.-W. Luo, A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010), 176805
[61] S. Lany, Phys. Rev. B 87 (2013), 085112
[62] O. Madelung, Semiconductors: group IV elements and III-V compounds. Springer Science & Business 
Media: 2012
[63] Y.-S. Kim, M. Marsman, G. Kresse, F. Tran, P. Blaha, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010), 205212
[64] J. Klimeš, M. Kaltak, G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B 90 (2014), 075125


