My, and others’, spiking memristors are true

memristors: a response to R.S. Williams’

question at the New Memory Paradigms:

Memristive Phenomena and Neuromorphic

Applications Faraday Discussion

Ella M. Gale∗,†,¶

†University of Bristol, Bristol, UK

‡A response to R. S. Williams at Faraday Discussion

E-mail: ella.gale@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract

At the Faraday Discussion, in the paper titled ‘Neuromorphic computation with

spiking memristors: habituation, experimental instantiation of logic gates and a novel

sequence-sensitive perceptron model’ it was demonstrated that a large amount of com-

putation could be done in a sequential way using memristor current spikes (d.c. re-

sponse). As these spikes are found in many memristors (possibly all), this novel ap-

proach could be highly useful for fast and reproducible memristor circuits. However,

questions were raised as to whether these spikes were actually due to memristance or

merely capacitance in the circuit. In this longer version of the Faraday Discussion

response, as much information as is available from both published and unpublished

data from my lab is marshalled together. We find that the devices are likely imperfect

1

arXiv:1812.05976v1  [cs.ET]  14 Dec 2018


memristors with some capacitance, and that the spikes are related to the frequency

effect seen in memristor hysteresis curves, thus are an integral part of memristance.

Introduction

At the New Memory Paradigms: Memristive Phenomena and Neuromorphic Applications

Faraday discussion on my paper1 the question of whether or not the devices that I have been

characterizing and using as memristors were, or were not, memristors came up. For years,

I have been suggesting that the spikes I first observed with the devices in my lab 20122

were a critical part of memristance, and, in fact, that these current spikes were in fact the

d.c. response of the memristor. This implies that memristors are capable of operating as a

d.c. device, something about which there had been doubt previously. As it is not only with

my memristors that one can observe this phenomenon, and, in fact others have seen similar

spikes, figuring out whether the spikes are largely to do with memristance or largely to do

with capacitance is critical. In this short letter, I will gather as much information that I

have to hand to try and answer this question, and I will use R.S. William’s question from

the Faraday discussion, as he phrased the issue well.

Comment

For the Faraday discussion, R. S. Williams wrote:

‘I’m afraid that the devices you show in your paper are not memristors at

all, but are in fact leaky capacitors. Just putting some form of titanium

dioxide between two electrodes does not meant that you will obtain memristive

behaviour if there is some type of ionic species, e.g. O vacancies, that acts as

a mobile electronic dopant, or some type of phase change. You have

neither in your system, as can be seen in Fig. 1 of your paper,1 which shows

2


a classical transient response of a capacitor after abruptly turning on a voltage.

Sometimes one can see a similar transient in a circuit containing a dielectric

between two electrodes - in that case, one needs to construct a model for the

physical device that has a memristor in parallel with a capacitor to model it

correctly. There is an effective parallel resistance in your system, either from

leakage through capacitor or from the measurement circuit. I have taken

for Fig 1. and show that you can compute the RC time constant from the 1/e

decay time of your capacitor, which is about 5 seconds (there appears to be a

second and somewhat longer time scale in your system, which probably comes

from electrons escaping from charge traps in your sol-gel oxide). You can then

calculate the resistance of the effective parallel resistor from R=V/I, where V is

the DC bias voltage (0.1 V? - it was not clear to me what the applied

voltage was for Fig. 1) and I is the asymptotic current (∼2.7nA). If you guess

for the voltage is correct, then I compute that the parallel resistance is 37Mω

and thus the capacitance would be ∼135nF. This is a fairly large number, but

I did not see the size of the devices in the paper so it is at least plausible.

In principle, you can now build a nearly identical equivalent circuit from a set of

standard linear capacitors and resistors, with no memristors involved.

R.S. Williams raises an interesting point: is this observed spike response of a memristor

to a voltage step merely explained by a capacitor and resistor in parallel (as he suggests) or is

it all explained by memristance, or is it explained by a memristor and capacitor in parallel?

As my memristor devices are physical devices, and not ideal circuit elements, and as they

are made of a-TiO2 3 spin-coated onto sputtered electrodes, they are highly unlikely to be

modelled by pure memristor theories. So the question really is, are these devices (and thus

the observed behaviour) due to a capacitor-resistor (RC) circuit, or a memristor-capacitor

(MC) circuit.

Since this is such an important point, I will attempt to marshal as much evidence as I

3


have to elucidate which of these possibilities is the correct one.

Response

Point 1.
Some of my devices are capacitors:
R. S. Williams is correct that it is

possible to make a capacitor with my set-up, and a capacitor V-I curve can be recorded, 3

were seen out of 64 devices.4 An example V-I curve is shown below and is taken from,4 fig

6d.

Figure 1: Capacitor V-I curve seen in one of my devices

Aside 1. The size of my devices:
R. S. Williams asked about the size of my devices,

they are relatively large. I should point out that at the time I was making these devices

4


(2010), very few people had memristors of any type, so the ones I made, although not the

smallest or best, were highly useful for testing out ideas, as that point, I believe the only

people making and testing memristors in the UK was myself and T. Prodromakis.
My

devices had electrodes of width 1-6mm, with most of them being 5mm wide, the electrodes

were sputtered aluminium onto plastic, Ti(OH)4 solution was then spin-coated on and the

devices left to dry either in clean room air (the work was done by Hewlett Packard in their

clean room) or under vacuum before a second set of electrodes were sputtered on at 90

degrees to the first. The TiO2 layer was 44nm thick, and often appeared slightly pinkish in

colour. There are many more details in.4

Figure 2: Memristor devices used in this work, shown in a petri dish for scale. These devices
were sputtered onto plastic, but mounted on glass slides for testing

5


Aside 2: There are there Oxygen vacancy dopants in my system:
R. S. Williams

said ‘Just putting some form of titanium dioxide between two electrodes does not meant

that you will obtain memristive behaviour if there is some type of ionic species, e.g.
O

vacancies, that acts as a mobile electronic dopant, or some type of phase change.

You have neither in your system,’ and I am slightly confused by this point. I do have oxygen

vacancies in my system, and given that they were sputter coated onto aluminium, I do not

think I needed to dope the material in order to get them, the methodology itself introduced

vacancies in the amorphous TiO2. Its worth pointing out that my memristors are based

on Gergel-Hacketts work.5 There might well be some type of phase change, in my work I

put the ‘curved’ type behaviour down to a phase change mechanism, but elucidating how

memristors/ReRAM work is difficult and not finished.6 I also demonstrated in4 that the

aluminium electrodes were an essential part of getting the devices to work as memristors, I

believe because the Al electrode is capable of making Al2O3 and thus acting as a source/sink

of oxygen ions (sputtered Au electrode devices did not work), which does suggest that I have

oxygen vacancies. My devices were always run the same way round, so the hysteresis was

bigger in the positive V part of the curve, I believe this is because the Al electrode that is

has Ti(OH)4 sputtered on top of it is a different structure (perhaps a larger Al2O3 layer)

than the electrode that was sputtered onto the TiO2(gel) layer.

Aside 3: My measurement kit has no leakage
R. S. Williams wrote: ‘There is an

effective parallel resistance in your system, either from leakage through capacitor or from

the measurement circuit.’ There is no leakage capacitance from the measurement circuit

as I used a Keithley electrometer set-up which was rated to very high accuracy and which

is designed to test devices, so of course, it will not have capacitance leakage.

Point 2.
Many of my devices exhibit the pinched hysteresis loop typical of

memristors:
As my devices (like, I suspect, many other peoples) were so variable in quality

and behaviour, I developed a system of classifying their behaviour over a very small voltage

6


Figure 3: Example V-I curve, showing the clockwise switching of a device, note that this is
for the much thicker hand assembled devices, not the thinner spin coated ones I published
in my spiking research, although I found much the same behaviour.

7


Figure 4: A pinched I-V curve from an Al-TiO2-Al memristor, taken from.3 Note that the
pinched hysteresis curve is pinched at zero but does not cross at zero

8


Figure 5: A ‘curved’ memristor (taken from4

9


Figure 6: Another ‘curved’ type memristor (taken from4)

10


Figure 7: A ‘triangular’ type memristor (taken from4)

11


range, so I could sort them into different types of memristors without accidentally forming

them.

I classified the behaviour of the devices that I had made into various responses seen on

a low voltage input (so as to avoid forming the devices). Those which displayed what I

called Ohmic behaviour (i.e .they were a resistor over the range) then displayed ‘triangular’

behaviour over a larger range (which at the time we called UPS or ReRAM-like behaviour,

as at the point the ReRAM community tended to measure their devices over a positive range

and see something they called (unipolar switching) UPS, this was also the point where the

memristor and ReRAM communities were separate and had not come together around the

idea that memristors and ReRAM were the same thing.) I suspect what I called ‘triangular’

behaviour was due to a filamentary fuse-antifuse type mechanism, but actually figuring out

the mechanism behind all of this was rather difficult and time consuming (and still not settled

in the field, see6). I called devices that did triangular switching ‘type B’ behaviour. These

devices tended to have a resistance change of an order of magnitude or more, and never

switched at the same point on repeated runs (there was a big problem of reproducibility),

which was (and still is, I believe) shared by many other workers in the field.

Curved, or type A behaviour, was what I called the devices that exhibited more ‘memris-

tor’ type curves (remembering that at the time, memristor scientists were trying to reproduce

L. O. Chuas ’figure of 8’ curves7 and ReRAM scientists were doing triangular V-I curves

which switched between resistance states), these were pinched hysteresis loops, and they

tended to be more reproducible and more likely to stay within the same current magnitude

over multiple V-I runs.

Point 3. My curved-type memristors do indeed have some capacitance, and these

devices produce pinched V-I curves over a larger voltage range
By classifying my

devices at low voltage, I saw the following V-I curves, which I named ‘jelly bean’ open curves

for the shape.

12


Figure 8: A ’curved’ memristor (taken from4

13


As these devices do not cross zero, there is obviously some capacitance in the devices.

However, these open curves are not circles, so this is not a pure capacitor. (And my mea-

surement system was a Keithley electrometer, so there is no source of capacitance elsewhere

in the system). These open curves exhibit the same asymmetry I see in my devices’ over

a larger voltage range (namely the positive polarity voltage has a larger magnitude current

response1). And, the crucial point: these jelly bean open curve devices exhibit the

pinched hysteresis loops (curved type switching) I showed above, and which are

widely agreed to be indicative memristance. This suggests to me that my devices are

memristors that also possess a little capacitance which prevents them from crossing at 0,

but which does not explain the memristance effects seen at higher voltages.

Point 4: Part of the ‘Jelly bean’ low-voltage V-I curves can be explained by a

memristor theory, but seems to be missing a capacitance
In order to do a test of

several different memristor theories, I made some memristors of different electrode sizes, and

characterised their hysteresis at low voltage. The hysteresis increases with electrode size.

Using the memory-conservation theory,8 with the expected electrode widths, we can

predict the V-I curves which would be expected in ideal memristors with these characteristics.

By adding in a contact resistance, which was measured from the actual devices at the start

of the experiment, we obtain these predicted curves, which have the expected asymmetry,

but are pinched.

In this paper9 (which I believe a draft version is up on arXiv), I then compared the

measured hysteresis of the devices with the predicted hysteresis above and found that they

were out by a constant ratio.

In that paper,9 I merely suggested that as this relation was known, the theory could be

used with a look up table to usefully predict device properties. From looking at the graphs

in this letter, and considering R. S. Williams point, I now believe that the missing hysteresis

is that of a capacitor, and that the capacitance increases with device size and I plan to add

1Note that, I always test my devices the same way round

14


Figure 9: Recorded jelly-bean V-I curves seen for different electrode widths: Black: 5mm;
blue dotted: 4mm; green-dashed 3mm; orange dot-dashed 2mm; red: 1mm.
Data from
actual device experiments.

15


Figure 10: Ideal memristor V-I curves as calculated from the memory-conservation theory.

16


Figure 11: Pinched memristor curves obtained using the memory-conservation theory fit to
the measured data (2 fitting parameters), with added measured contact resistance.

17


Figure 12: Comparison of the measured hysteresis from my devices with that predicted from
the memory-conservation memristor theory with added contact resistance.

18


the capacitance into the model in that paper before publication.

V-I curve summary

So, I have shown that my devices exhibit the pinched memristor curve at high voltages and

are thus accepted as being memristors, but that at low voltages, a capacitance can be seen

close to 0V which prevents the memristor curves from crossing at 0. A memristor theory

models the shape and asymmetry of the devices, but seems to require a capacitance in order

to not cross at zero, this demonstrates that memristance is involved in the low voltage V-I

curves, as well as in the high voltage V-I. These results suggest that my devices are non-ideal

memristors, best modelled as memristor-capacitor circuits, and that their behaviour requires

memristance to be properly explained. Now I shall turn to the description of my devices I-t

behaviour.

I-t curves under d.c. voltage

Point 5: the memristor spikes are well fit by a memristor theory
In10 I fitted both

positive and negative memristor spikes to the memory conservation theory of memristance.

For the positive spike, the summed square of residuals was 1.61x10−17. For the negative

spike, the summed square of residuals of 1.63x10−17. For the exponential fit (to the short

time spike), 2.43x10−15. I got similar results with Erokhin et als 3-terminal memristor11 (it

was fit better by the memory conservation theory than an exponential).

Point 6. The d.c. responses (spikes) are related to the frequency effect in mem-

ristor hysteresis curves, which is one of memristors defining features.
Finally,

and most importantly, I will now demonstrate that these spikes are part of the definitions

of memristance as they are behind the ‘frequency effect’ described by L. O. Chua as a ‘fin-

gerprint of the memristor’.12 Doing experiments with several recording time steps at each

19


Figure 13: Rt

20


Figure 14: Negative current memristor spike (d.c.
response) with memory conservation
model fit. Taken from10

21


voltage in a stepped triangular voltage waveform reveals spikes that decay, if one were to

join up the currents measured the same number of dwell time-steps after an input voltage

change, one draws a pinched I-V curve with shrinking hysteresis. As the third fingerprint of

the memristor is that the “pinched hysteresis loop should shrink to a single valued function

when the frequency tends to infinity”,12 the ‘frequency effect’, this demonstrates that the

frequency effect is directly related to the d.c. spikes, as I concluded in.13

The word ‘current transient’ only means that the current is short-lived and does not

actually define the cause (capacitance or memristance). When I first noticed these spikes I

asked many memristor researchers if they had seen them in their devices, they had (although

many ignored them), so I know that my devices are not unique in having this property (see

my papers for when I found published memristor I-t curves). So, it is either the case that

some previously observed ‘current transients’ are memristive in form, or that the frequency

effect is due to the capacitance found in non-ideal memristors (which does not fit with L.

O. Chuas equations, of course, as he modelled this effect in ideal memristors), or that R.

S. Williams is correct, and my devices, and many other, possibly all, ‘memristors’ are just

leaky capacitors.

22


Figure 15: The V-t waveform used to investigate dc response and hysteresis. Taken from13

23


Figure 16: V-I curves for the PEO-PANI memristor under the V-t. The crossing point is
offset in these devices. The first, 6th and 12th measurement points of each voltage have been
joined together with red dashed, green dotted and blue dot-dashed lines respectively. The
hysteresis loop shrinks with increased frequency. As each voltage step describes the d.c.
response of the memristor, this demonstrates that the hysteresis effect is related to the d.c.
spikes. Taken from13

24


Figure 17: V-I curves for the Al-TiO2-Al memristor under small voltage V-t. The crossing
point is offset in these devices. The first, 6th and 12th measurement points of each voltage have
been joined together with red dashed, green dotted and blue dot-dashed lines respectively.
The hysteresis loop shrinks with increased frequency. As each voltage step describes the d.c.
response of the memristor, this demonstrates that the hysteresis effect is related to the d.c.
spikes. Taken from13

25


Figure 18: Positive memristor current spike with memory conservation theory fit. Taken
from10

26


Acknowledgement

Attendance at the New memory paradigms Faraday Discussion was partially supported by

a Royal Society of Chemistry travel grant.

References

(1) Gale, E. M. Faraday discussions 2018,

(2) Gale, E.; Costello, B. D. L.; Adamatzky, A. Observation and characterization of memris-

tor current spikes and their application to neuromorphic computation. AIP Conference

Proceedings. 2012; pp 1898–1901.

(3) Gale, E.; Mayne, R.; Adamatzky, A.; de Lacy Costello, B. Materials Chemistry and

Physics 2014, 143, 524–529.

(4) Gale, E.; Pearson, D.; Kitson, S.; Adamatzky, A.; de Lacy Costello, B. Materials Chem-

istry and Physics 2015, 162, 20–30.

(5) Gergel-Hackett, N.; Hamadani, B.; Dunlap, B.; Suehle, J.; Richter, C.; Hacker, C.;

Gundlach, D. IEEE Electron Device Letters 2009, 30, 706–708.

(6) Gale, E. Semiconductor Science and Technology 2014, 29, 104004.

(7) Chua, L. IEEE Transactions on circuit theory 1971, 18, 507–519.

(8) Gale, E. The memory-conservation theory of memristance. Computer Modelling and

Simulation (UKSim), 2014 UKSim-AMSS 16th International Conference on. 2014; pp

599–604.

(9) Gale, E. M.; Costello, B. d. L.; Adamatzky, A. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.4422 2013,

(10) Gale, E.; Costello, B. d. L.; Adamatzky, A. arXiv preprint arXiv:1302.0771 2013,

27


(11) Berzina, T.; Smerieri, A.; Bernab`o, M.; Pucci, A.; Ruggeri, G.; Erokhin, V.; Fontana, M.

Journal of Applied Physics 2009, 105, 124515.

(12) Adhikari, S. P.; Sah, M. P.; Kim, H.; Chua, L. O. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and

Systems I: Regular Papers 2013, 60, 3008–3021.

(13) Gale, E.; de Lacy Costello, B.; Erokhin, V.; Adamatzky, A. The short-term memory

(dc response) of the memristor demonstrates the causes of the memristor frequency

effect. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2014 IEEE International Symposium on. 2014;

pp 2812–2815.

28


