1 

Gradient index phononic crystals and metamaterials

Yabin Jin1,*, Bahram Djafari-Rouhani2,*, Daniel Torrent3,*

1 School of Aerospace Engineering and Applied Mechanics, Tongji University, 200092, Shanghai, China

2 Institut d’Electronique, de Microélectonique et de Nanotechnologie, UMR CNRS 8520, Département de Physique, 

Université de Lille, 59650 Villeneuve d’Ascq, France

3 GROC-UJI, Institut de Noves Tecnologies de la Imatge, Universitat Jaume I, 12071, Castello, Spain

*Corresponding authors: 

083623jinyabin@tongji.edu.cn; 

bahram.djafari-rouhani@univ-lille.fr; 

dtorrent@uji.es

Abstract

Phononic crystals and acoustic metamaterials are periodic structures whose effective properties 

can be tailored at will to achieve extreme control on wave propagation. Their refractive index is 

obtained from the homogenization of the infinite periodic system, but it is possible to locally 

change the properties of a finite crystal in such a way that it results in an effective gradient of the 

refractive index (GRIN). In such case the propagation of waves can be accurately described by 

means of ray theory, and different refractive devices can be designed in the framework of wave 

propagation in inhomogeneous media. In this paper we review the different devices that have been 

studied for the control of both bulk or guided acoustic waves based on graded phononic crystals. 

Keywords: gradient index; phononic crystals; metamaterials; lenses; homogenization

1. Introduction

Phononic crystals and acoustic metamaterials enable to achieve innovative properties for the 

propagation of mechanical waves (air-borne sound waves, water-borne acoustic waves, water 

waves, elastic waves, surface acoustic waves, Lamb waves) inapproachable in natural materials. 

Phononic crystals consist of periodic arrangements of scatterers in a given matrix, and they were 

firstly proposed in 1993[1, 2]. The attention that phononic crystals received originally was due to 

the existence of a phononic Bragg band gap where the propagation of acoustic waves was forbidden. 


2 

In this regime the wavelength l of the acoustic field is comparable to the periodicity a of the lattice, 

l»a, and to be observable it is also required that the thickness D of the bulk phononic crystals be 

at least four or five periodicities, D>>a. In the subwavelength range, l>>a , it is possible to find 

local resonances in the scatterers and the designed structures exhibit hybridization band gaps which

give rise to novel effects such as negative mass density or negative elastic modulus. In this exotic 

regime the structure behaves as a special type of materials called “acoustic metamaterials”, which 

were firstly proposed in the seminal work[3] in 2000. Over the past two decades, dramatically 

increasing efforts have been devoted to the study of acoustic artificial structured materials driven 

by both fundamental scientific curiosities with properties not found previously and diverse 

potential applications with novel functionalities[4-16].

While interesting, most of the extraordinary properties of metamaterials are in general single-

frequency or narrow-band, since outside the resonant regime metamaterials behave as common 

composites. However, non-resonant phononic crystals in the low frequency regime behave as 

homogeneous non-dispersive materials whose effective parameters can be easily tailored, and in 

this regime gradient index (GRIN) acoustic materials, or GRIN devices, are easily doable. These 

devices were firstly proposed for acoustic waves by Torrent et al in 2007[17] and for elastic waves

by Lin et al in 2009[18], and they allow to manipulate acoustic waves to enforce them to follow 

curved trajectories. They are characterized by a spatial variation of acoustic refractive index, which 

is designed by locally changing the geometry of units. For instance, the effective index obviously 

depends on the filling ratio of scatterers, namely the size of scatterers, which is initially proposed 

for gradient index control of acoustic waves[17-19]; instead, the variation in the lattice spacing 

while keeping the size of scatterers is also achievable[20, 21]; for triangular shape of scatterers, 

rotating the angles of the triangular shape can also affect the effective acoustic velocity[22]; for 

lead-rubber pillared metamaterial plate, by changing the height of lead layer in pillars, the effective 

mass density is tuned, resulting in a change in effective phase velocity following a given law [23];

for phononic crystal plates, the effective velocity of antisymmetric Lamb wave is directly related 

with the thickness of plates, which can also further affect the effective velocity of symmetric mode 

[24-26]. In addition to the geometric parameters, the effective refractive index can also be tuned in 

relation to the elastic properties of the scatterers, for instance the choice of materials[18, 27], or 

to an external stimulus such as electric field[28], or temperature[29].

The attained effective refractive index of the GRIN device can be smaller or larger than that 

of the background medium, which corresponds to phase advance[20] or delay approaches in wave 

propagation. Nevertheless, the phase delay approach is mostly employed as higher refractive index 


3 

enables to design more advanced functionalities and reduce the entire width of the devices. 

Comparing to the wavelength, the thinner is the device, the larger will be the highest required index. 

If the width of the whole device is downscaled to the subwavelength regime, the GRIN device 

becomes a metasurface[30, 31]. However, to find a high enough effective refractive index to design 

GRIN metasurfaces is a big challenge that needs new technologies in material science. Recently, 

it has been reported that soft porous materials[32, 33] with soft-matter techniques can achieve a

relative refractive index higher than 20[34]. GRIN devices can also be designed with negative 

index of refraction at frequencies laying in the first negative slope of the acoustic band

structure[21]. However, these devices would be narrow band and it may limit potential applications. 

GRIN phononic crystals and metamaterials can be applied to various types of waves in a long 

frequency limit, such as surface water waves[35, 36] for a few Hz, air-borne sound waves[19, 37-

46] for 103Hz-105Hz, water-borne acoustic waves[20, 27, 47-49] for 104Hz-106Hz, Rayleigh

waves[50-54] for 10Hz-108Hz, Lamb waves[23-25, 28, 55-67] for 103-108Hz, among others, with 

functionalities like focusing[18, 19], waveguiding[65, 68], mirage[69], beam splitting or 

deflection[36, 57, 58], cloaking [50, 59] or energy harvesting[66, 67, 70]. It is in the domain of 

elastic waves in plates where the most interesting applications at the nanoscale are found, since 

from the technological point of view low-dimensional materials are more interesting than bulk 

materials. The excellent compatibility of phononic crystals and metamateials with the 

nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) has been
proven for applications in wireless 

telecommunications, sensing or thermal control, among others[71-76]. However, the propagation 

of elastic waves in plates is in general composed of three polarizations, which travel at different 

speeds and for which refractive devices designed for one of these polarizations will not work for 

the other two. Recently, the designs of GRIN devices based on phononic crystal plates have

demonstrated that it is possible the simultaenous control of all fundamental modes propagating in

thin elastic plates in a broadband frequency region[25, 26, 58].

The objective of this review is to provide a comprehensive picture of the evolution of the 

domain of GRIN devices for mechanical waves, to demonstrate the wide variety of applications at 

the nanoscale that these devices offer and to present the challenges to be accomplished to further 

develop this field. The paper is organized as follows: after this introduction, we will review the 

fundamental ideas of the homogenization of sonic and phononic crystals in Section II and of 

phononic crystal plates in Section III, which offers efficient tools to obtain the effective elastic 

properties and, consequently, their effective refractive index; Then we will review GRIN devices 

for bulk acoustic and elastic waves in Section IV and for flexural waves in Section V; the advanced 


4 

full control of polarizations in elastic plates with multimodal GRIN devices will be reviewed in 

Section VI. Last section will present some conclusions and future challenges.

2. Homogenization of sonic and phononic crystals

Graded materials with specific variations of the refractive index are obviously not found in 

nature, and they have to be artificially engineered. The inclusion of scatterers in a given matrix is 

an excellent way for the realization of artificially graded materials, since the average behavior of 

the scatterers is to modify the effective velocity of acoustic waves in the matrix, and this effective 

velocity can be tuned by means of the size of the inclusions. When these inclusions are arranged 

in a regular array we call the composite a sonic (fluid matrix) or phononic (solid matrix) crystal, 

and the computation of the effective sound velocity is made by a set of mathematical tools called 

homogenization theories. Roughly speaking, the homogenization region is the range of frequencies 

at which the propagating field cannot distinguish the individual scatterers of the composite and 

perceives the structure as a uniform material with some effective parameters (stiffness constant, 

mass density, viscosity, etc. are the parameters to be computed by means of the most adequate 

homogenization method).

Homogenization is an old problem and a great bibliography is available in this realm (see for 

instance[77]). Our aim here is not to review all these methods, but to present some examples of 

these methods applied to the specific case of sonic and phononic crystals.

2.1 Homogenization of sonic crystals by multiple scattering theory

As mentioned before, a sonic crystal consists of a periodic distribution of solid or fluid 

inclusions embedded in a fluid matrix. When the operating wavelength is larger than the typical 

distance between inclusions (lattice constant) the field cannot distinguish individual scatterers and 

perceives the structure as a homogeneous material with some effective parameters (mass density, 

compressibility, speed of sound, etc). There exists a vast literature about homogenization of 

periodic and random materials[77], but it has been shown that multiple scattering theory is a 

versatile method in the case of sonic crystals. For instance, for the simple case of a two-dimensional 

arrangement of fluid inclusions (parameters labeled with “a”) in a fluid background (parameters 

labeled “b”), the effective bulk modulus Beff and mass density reff are given by

!

"#$$ =

'

"( +

!*'

"+ ,

-#$$

-+ =

-( ∆/' /-+(∆*')

-( ∆*' /-+(∆/')
Eq.(1)

where f is the filling fraction of the crystal (area of the inclusions divided by the area of the unit 

cell) and D represents a modification of the filling fraction due to the multiple scattering 


5 

processes[78, 79]. 

For airborne propagation any solid material will have a much higher density than that of air, 

and the extreme impedance mismatch blocks the penetration of the acoustic wave into the solid 

inclusions. Therefore, those solids can be assumed to be “rigid” inclusions and their mass density 

and compressibility can be set as infinite. In this case, if the filling fraction is small and the multiple 

scattering interactions can be neglected( D can be regarded as 1) the effective mass density and 

velocity can be simplified as[78]

𝜌3'' =

-(45 !/'

!*'
, 𝑐3'' = 𝑐789/ 1 + 𝑓          
Eq.(2)

and we recover the effective mass density and effective sound velocity derived by Barryman[80]

and the heuristic model[81], respectively. 

As an example of application, a circular cluster of 151 wooden cylinders arranged in a

hexagonal lattice embedded in air was homogenized by multiple scattering, and the resulting 

effective parameters as a function of the filling fraction are shown in the left panel of Fig.1. We

can clearly observe, especially from the insets, that the simplified approach by Eq. (2) for effective 

mass density is valid when the filling fraction is no larger than 0.7, meanwhile the maximum limit 

of filling fraction is 0.6 for effective sound velocity. Experiments verified the homogenization 

method, and it was shown that for wavelengths larger than four times the lattice constant, the cluster 

could be considered as a homogeneous cylinder with fluid-like properties[78]. 

Figure 1. (a)Effective mass density and effective sound velocity for a circular cluster consists of 151 rigid cylinders 

embedded in air. The black dots stand for the results from the multiple scattering simulations Eq.(1) and the dashed 

lines are values obtained from Eq.(2)[78]; (b)Impedance-velocity diagram of sonic crystals consist of square lattice of 


6 

solids 1 and 2 cylinders in air. Insert shows the unit cell[82]. 

The theory can be generalized to more cylinders per unit cell. If we consider two types of 

cylinders, with materials labeled as 1 and 2, embedded in a square lattice, their fluid-like 

parameters being( ra1, Ba1 ) and ( ra2, Ba2) and the filling fractions being f1 and f2, respectively, the 

effective parameters can be obtained as

!

"#$$ =

!*'

"+ +

'=
"(= +

'>
"(> , 𝜌3'' =

!/'=?=/'>?>
!*'=?=*'>?> 𝜌@, 𝑐3'' =

"#$$
-#$$
Eq.(3)

where f = f1+f2, hi=(ri - rb)/( ri + rb).

The right panel of Fig.1 shows a “phase diagram” of the effective impedance and effective 

sound velocity for several selected pairs of materials under the low filling fraction condition

(neglecting multiple scattering interactions), for different pair of materials and backgrounds (Pb-

Fe, Pb-Al, Fe-Al in water and Aerogel-rigid cylinders in air). Any point on each curve is calculated 

sweeping over the total filling fraction. The overlapped corner point (1, 1) in this diagram 

corresponds to the case of f1=0 and f2=0. Notice that the effective impedance matches that of 

background when the sonic crystal is made of Aerogel and rigid cylinders embedded in air, making 

the sonic crystal transparent to air possessing a different refractive index. This interesting property 

was used in ref[17] to desin a completely transparent GRIN lens.

Multiple scattering allows the homogenization of finite clusters, therefore it is a versatile 

method to study the behavior of the effective parameters when disorder is introduced in the 

lattice[83] or even the effect of the cluster’s size, as it was done in ref[84], where it was found that 

small clusters with specific number of scatterers presented the same effective parameters than that 

of the infinite medium.

2.2 Homogenization of periodic phononic crystals

Metamaterials for acoustic or elastic waves have been mainly studied by means of sonic or 

phononic crystals. As said before, in the low frequency limit, an anisotropic phononic crystal 

behaves as a homogeneous material with some effective parameters. The plane wave expansion

(PWE) method is an alternative method to multiple scattering for the homogenization of periodic 

composites. This approach was firstly proposed by Krokhin[85] for sonic crystals and generalized 

for non-local phononic crystals in[86]. The equation of motion of an homogeneous elastic material

assuming harmonic time-dependence is given by[87]

ρ𝜔C𝑢8 = 𝑘C𝑛8G𝐶GI𝑛IJ𝑢J
Eq.(4)


7 

where r is the mass density, w is the angular frequency, ui is the displacement, k is the wavenumber, 

n is a unit vector, C is the stiffness tensor and we use Voigt notation for the sub indexes. 

In a phononic crystal the mass density and stiffness tensors are periodic functions of the spatial 

coordinates, and an inhomogeneous version of the above equation has to be used. The plane wave 

expansion method is applied and then we arrive to an eigenvalue equation[88]

𝜔C𝜌𝑮*𝑮L(𝑢𝑮M)8 = (𝒌 + 𝑮)8G𝐶GI

𝑮*𝑮L(𝒌 + 𝑮′)IJ(𝑢𝑮M)J
Eq.(5)

where 𝜌𝑮, 𝐶GI

𝑮 and (𝑢𝑮M)8 are the Fourier components of the mass density, stiffness tensor and      the 

displacement field, respectively. The summation over repeated indexes has been assumed. The 

above equation can be manipulated to solve for the average field (G=0 component), and this 

average field can be used to describe the effective behavior of the crystal. Then, after some complex 

mathematical manipulation we arrive to an expression for the dispersion relation of the average 

field, which consists in calculating the roots of the determinant of the matrix G as

Γ8J = 𝜔C𝜌8J

∗ − 𝑘C𝑛8G𝐶GI

∗ 𝑛IJ − 𝜔𝑘(𝑛8G𝑆GJ + 𝑆8I

T𝑛IJ)
Eq.(6)

where the effective mass density 𝜌8J

∗ , the effective stiffness 𝐶GI

∗ and the coupling tensor SIj are[88]

𝜌8J

∗ 𝜔, 𝑘 = 𝜌𝛿8J + 𝜔C𝜌*𝑮L𝜒8J

𝑮L𝑮 𝜔, 𝑘 𝜌𝑮
Eq.(7a)

𝐶GI

∗ 𝜔, 𝑘 = 𝐶GI − 𝐶GW

*𝑮‘(𝑘 + 𝑮′)WY𝜒Z[

𝑮L𝑮 𝜔, 𝑘 (𝑘 + 𝑮)\]𝐶]I

𝑮
Eq.(7b)

𝑆GJ 𝜔, 𝑘 = 𝜔𝐶GW

*𝑮‘(𝑘 + 𝑮′)WY𝜒Z^

𝑮L𝑮 𝜔, 𝑘 𝜌𝑮
Eq.(7c)

The above formulas offer a way to describe resonant (𝜒__M) and nonlocal (k) phononic crystals. 

In the low frequency (ω → 0) and local (𝑘 → 0) limit, from the Eq.(7), the coupling tensor SIj =0; 

the mass density is a scalar as the volume average value, the effective stiffness tensor is simplified 

as

𝜌8J

∗ = 𝜌𝛿8J, 𝐶GI

∗ = 𝐶GI − 𝐶GW

*𝑮‘𝑮′WY(𝑀𝑮M𝑮

*! )Z[

𝑮L𝑮𝑮\]𝐶]I

𝑮
Eq.(8)

where (𝑀𝑮M𝑮)8J = 𝐺8G𝐶GI

𝑮*𝑮‘𝐺′IJ . The information about the details of the phononic crystal 

structures is included in the stiffness tensor whose symmetry relates with the background matrix, 

inclusion, and lattice symmetry.

Periodic homogenization is therefore a versatile calculation method of the effective 

parameters, where once we know the shape of the scatterer or scatterers in the unit cell we can 

Fourier-transform their spatial distribution and obtain the effective parameters. The major 

drawback of this method is that it is not suitable for high-contrast of inclusions or fluid-elastic 

composites, since in this case convergence is poor. Also, due to periodicity, order-disorder effects 

are not easy to study. It is therefore a complementary technique to the multiple scattering method 

presented in the previous section.


8 

3. Homogenization of phononic crystal plates

In a homogeneous thin elastic plate, the propagation of flexural waves (antisymmetric Lamb 

mode wave) can be approximately described by the bi-Helmholtz equation (assuming time 

harmonic dependence of the field)

𝐷@∇g − 𝜌@ℎ@𝜔C 𝑊 𝑥, 𝑦 = 0
Eq.(9)

where 𝜌@, hb and 𝐷@ = 𝐸@ℎ@

m/12(1 − 𝑣@

C) are the mass density, the thickness and the rigidity of 

the plate, respectively, being Eb the Young’s modulus and vb the Poisson’s ratio. W is the out of 

plane displacement field. Multiple scattering can also be applied for the homogenization of 

distribution of scatterers in elastic plates, and frequency-dependent effective parameters were

obtained in[56]. The expressions derived there can also be applied in the low frequency limit to 

obtain the following effective parameters

𝜌3'' = 1 − 𝑓 𝜌@ + 𝑓𝜌7
Eq.(10a)

𝐷3'' 1 + 𝑣3'' =

!/p+
q+ !*p+ /q( !/p(
*' !*p+ [q+ !/p+ *q( !/p( ]

q+ !*p+ /q( !/p( *'[q+ !/p+ *q( !/p( ]
𝐷@
Eq.(10b)

𝐷3'' 1 − 𝑣3'' =

!*p+
q+ m/p+ /q( !*p(
*' m/p+ [q+ !*p+ *q( !*p( ]

q+ m/p+ /q( !*p( *'[q+ !*p+ *q( !*p( ]
𝐷@
Eq.(10c)

where the subscript “a”(“b”) means the parameters for inclusions (background). The effective 

phase velocity can be obtained by the ratio of the wavenumber between the effective medium and 

the background, giving

t#$$

t+ =

u+

u#$$ =

(q#$$/-#$$)=/v

(q+/-+)=/v
Eq.(11)

As an example, let us consider circular inclusions in a thin aluminum plate (hb=0.1a) and let the

inclusion’s material be chosen as hole (empty inclusion), lead and rubber, whose parameters can 

be found in Ref[56]. The effective parameters as given by Eqs.(10&11) as a function of the filling 

fraction are plotted in the left panel of Fig.2. The effective mass density is the volume average 

approach as for bulk waves. We see that the effective rigidity and the Poisson’s ratio for the case 

of rubber behaves like that of hole, since the ratio of the Young’s modulus between the rubber and 

the aluminum is very low. For the effective phase velocity, the difference between the rubber and 

the hole is more evident. In the right panel of Fig.2, it is shown the dispersion curves from finite 

element methods (red dots) and the effective parameters in Eq.(10)(blue lines) for a triangular 

lattice of hole/lead inclusions in a thin aluminum plate with the radius of inclusion being 0.3a. We

can clearly observe that the agreement between the numerical simulation and the effective theory 

is quite good for the antisymmetric (A0) and symmetric (S0) Lamb modes. This is remarkable since 


9 

we have developed the theory for the antisymmetric mode only, however there is a connection 

between the speed of these two modes[26] if a wave propagates from plate h1 to plate h2, 𝑛w

C =

𝑛x

y=
y>, which allow us to relate both, even if the propagation of the S mode has not been included 

in the theory.

Figure 2. (a) The effective mass density, rigidity, Poisson’s ratio and phase velocity with respect tot the filling fraction 

for different cylinder inclusions in an aluminum plate[56]; (b) Dispersion relations for a phononic crystal plate made 

of a triangular lattice of circular holes and lead inclusions with a radius of 0.3a. the red dots show the band structures 

obtained by the finite element method while the blue lines show the dispersion curves calculated with homogenized 

parameters from Eq.(10)[89].

Actually, there are three fundamental plate modes as it is seen in the right panel of Fig.2, with 

the third one named shear-horizontal mode (SH0), which needs an additional effective stiffness 

component 𝑐zz

3''to compute its dispersion relation. The theory developed for flexural waves allows 

the calculation of the velocity of the S0 mode only due to the special relationship between the

velocities of A0 and S0 modes, however a similar relationship is not found, or at least obvious, for 

the SH mode. However, the homogenization theory for bulk phononic crystals presented in Sec.2.2 

offers the full components of the effective stiffness matrix, and it can be used to compute the 

effective velocity of shear waves in a phononic crystal plate. This connection is not obvious in 

principle, however it can be explained by a two-step homogenization procedure.

In Fig.3, upper-left panel, shows a two dimensional phononic crystal made of cylinders 

embedded in a bulk matrix. The phononic crystal plate at the upper-right panel can be regarded as 

a finite ‘slice’taken from the bulk phononic crystal. In the low frequency limit, the phononic crystal 


10 

behaves as a homogeneous material with effective parameters and tetragonal anisotropy (square 

lattice) or transversal isotropy (triangular lattice), and this symmetry is maintained for the phononic 

crystal plate, as illustrated from the upper panel to the lower panel in Fig.3(a). Thus, the effective 

phononic crystal plate can also be considered as a finite ‘slice’ of the effective homogeneous 

material with the same symmetry. Such homogenization procedure has a non-trivial implication in 

accordance with symmetry.

As an example, a phononic crystal plate with the unit cell shown in Fig.3(b) is considered for 

three different thicknesses, consisting of hole-gold shell unit cell in triangular lattice. The inner 

radius is 0.2a while the outer radius is 0.4a. The dispersions obtained from homogenization method 

with effective parameters in Eq.(8) are compared to those from finite element methods, as 

displayed in Fig.3(b). In the low frequency limit, these effective phononic crystal plates behave 

like transversely isotropic plate. It is clear that the agreements between the finite element method 

and homogenization method are excellent for S0 and SH0 modes for all cases of thickness before 

the mode branches deviate, as their dispersions don’t depend on the plate’s thickness. However, 

the dispersion of A0 mode relates with the plate’s thickness. For thinner plates, the dispersion of 

fundamental A0 mode keeps the parabolic shape throughout the G-J direction of the first irreducible 

Brillouin zone, so that there is an excellent agreement in the whole range of G-J for plate’s thickness 

as 0.1a. For thicker thickness such as 0.5a and a, the agreement for A0 mode goes well before the 

A0 mode branch deviates. 

As a conclusion, the homogenization procedure for phononic crystal plates illustrated in 

Fig.3(a) works well for low frequency limit and thin plates.


11 

Figure 3. (a)Illustration of the homogenization relationship between phononic crystal and phononic crystal plate[26]; 

(b) Dispersion comparison of a phononic crystal plate between the finite element method (black dots) and the 

homogenization theory with effective parameters from Eq.(8) (red lines) for the plate thickness as 0.1a(left), 

0.5a(middle) and a (right). The phononic crystal plate consists of a triangular lattice of hole-gold shell unit cell whose 

inner radius is 0.2a and outer radius is 0.4a[25]. 

4. GRIN devices for bulk acoustic and elastic waves

This section is devoted to the review of GRIN devices for waves in bulk materials, therefore no 

interfaces are assumed and surface or guided waves are excluded in this section (they will be 

considered in the next one). In principle we could divide the devices in two types, depending on the 

nature of the matrix which can be fluid or solid. This division makes sense since in the former shear 

waves does not exist in the background and the field is described entirely by a scalar pressure field, 

while in the latter shear waves with different propagation velocities have to be as well considered. 

However, for the fluid matrix an additional division can be made, since the physics involved in the 

scattering process is different if the background is air or water. While in air almost all solid materials 

are acoustically rigid due to the impedance mismatch between air and any solid, in underwater 

acoustics this impedance mismatch is of the same order, so that we have to consider the elastic nature 

of the inclusions. For this reason, we divide this section in three subsections, corresponding to the 

study and design of GRIN devices for air, water and solid backgrounds.


12 

4.1. GRIN devices for bulk acoustic waves in air

In this section, we will discuss about the flat GRIN lens for focusing whose surface is flat 

instead of being curved as in traditional lens. 

The index profile of GRIN flat lens keeps constant along the propagating x axis while changes 

along the vertical y axis as[18]

n y = 𝑛} sech 𝛼𝑦 , 𝛼 =

!

y 𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ*!(

…†
…‡)
Eq.(12)

where h is the half-height in y axis of the lens, n0 is the refractive index at y=0, and nh is the index 

at the upper or lower edges y = ±h. Such index profile is designed with the aim of presenting low 

aberrations[18]. The position of focal point xf at the right side of the lens can be derived from the 

differential equation satisfied by the energy rays[19]. 

As shown in Fig.4(a), a GRIN lens was fabricated with 9 columns of metal rods whose radii are 

varied locally by an inverse design as follows: first make a sweep of the filling fraction for sonic 

crystals made of rigid cylinders to plot the diagram of effective index and the filling fraction; then 

calculate the required index at a given position along y axis of the GRIN lens; next, choose the 

corresponding filling fraction of the rigid cylinder from the diagram in the first step in accordance

with the required index in the second step; finally, calculate the required radius from the selected 

filling fraction in the third step. Figure 4(b) shows the pressure distribution fields after the GRIN 

sonic crystal at a frequency corresponding to a wavelength of about 3.8a numerically (upper panel)

and experimentally (lower panel). Similar focal spots and side-lobes are evidently seen. To 

quantitatively characterize the focusing effect, the pressure along the x and y axes are also plotted 

in Fig.4(c), showing very good agreements. In this approach with rigid cylinders in GRIN sonic 

lens, the effective impedance of the lens is not matched with the background, so that the maximum 

pressure at the focal spot is limited. As indicated in Fig.1(b) in Sec.2.1, the mixed lattice of aerogel 

and rigid can also tailor the effective index while keeping the effective impedance matched with 

the background, so that zero reflectance can be achieved to make the lens transparent. The first 

GRIN sonic Wood lens proposed in Ref.[82] has a higher pressure focalization at the focal spot. 


13 

Figure 4. (a) Schematic view of a GRIN lens with the ray trajectory. For the impinging plane sound wave, the rays 

will bend and focus at xf position at the right side of the lens. (b) Normalized sound amplitude at 4.5kHz mapped at 

the right side of the GRIN lens from the multiple scattering method (upper panel) and the experiment (lower panel). 

(c) Normalized sound amplitude along the x and y axis crossing the focusing point. Blue lines stand for simulation and 

black dots stand for experiment.[19]

4.2. GRIN devices for bulk acoustic waves in water

Different from the impedance mismatch between the air and solid scatters, the mass density 

and acoustic velocity are in the same order for most scatterers and water, so that the scatters can’t 

be regarded as rigid anymore. From Eq.(1) in Sec.2.1, one can also calculate the effective 

parameters of phononic crystals in water. 

For the same type of GRIN flat lens as in the last section, similar phononic crystals made of 

radius-varied steel cylinders are proposed in water[90]. In the upper-left panel in Fig.5, the profile 

of radius is calculated to meet the require index profile like Eq.(12), being the maximum index at 

the center and minimum at the edges in vertical axis. A plane wave with center frequency at 20kHz 

is excited, corresponding to wavelength as 4 times lattice constant around the cutoff frequency in 

the low frequency limit. A clear focusing spot is observed from the experimental pressure intensity 

field. From the MST simulation, a similar position focal spot is also obtained as shown the dot ‘+’. 

To be noted that this GRIN lens also supports the source off the central axis, which was 

demonstrated numerically and experimentally[90].


14 

Figure 5. Upper-left panel: schematic view of GRIN flat lens with radius-varied steel cylinders embedded in water. 

Upper-right panel: normalized pressure amplitude from the source (a), measured normalized pressure intensity after 

the GRIN lens (b) and the same pressure intensity map using MST (c)[90]; Lower-left panel: schematic view of GRIN 

flat lens made of the same hollow air-filled aluminum tubes with anisotropic lattice spacing. Lower-right panel: Sound 

pressure intensity at 13.05kHz from 2D MST (top), experiment (middle) and 3D Rayleigh-Sommerfeld approximation 

(down)[20].

Eq.(12) gives a picture of special index profile for focusing with low aberration, while it does 

not define the maximum index at the center should be larger than that of the background, in another 

word, Eq.(12) can also be achieved by phase advance approach. In the lower panel of Fig.5, 

phononic crystals made of air-filled aluminum tubes are arranged in water with anisotropic lattice 

spacing. The thickness of the aluminum shell is 1/10 of the radius that is designed to have 

impedance matching with respect to water[91], a higher velocity but lower mass density acting as 

metafluids. The required filling fraction profile to meet the index distribution are implemented by 

using anisotropic lattice spacing[92]. From the lower-left panel of Fig.5, the lattice space in vertical 

axis is large at the center while reaches minimum at the upper and lower edges. The minimum 

velocity at the center is still larger than that of background water, resulting in a phase advance 

GRIN lens. A good comparison is found in the lower-right panel of Fig.5 among the experimental 


15 

measurement and two predicted numerical simulations. It is worth mentioning that such GRIN flat 

lens is broadband, which allows to implement in water from experimental point of view as the 

short pulse from the transducer in water is normally broadband. 

4.3. GRIN devices for bulk elastic waves

The effective parameters for bulk elastic wave in 2D phononic crystals can be found from 

Eq.(8) in Sec.2.2. Here, another approach based on the analysis of the lowest band among the 

dispersion curves is introduced. Let us consider a phononic crystal made of square lattice solid 

inclusions embedded in an elastic matrix. For small anisotropic ratios, the effective index for a 

bulk elastic wave can be obtained as[18]

𝑛3'' =

…‰Š/…‰‹

C
, 𝑛Œ• =

t+
t‰Š =

t+

Ž•/Žu‰Š , 𝑛Œ] =

t+
t‰‹ =

t+

Ž•/Žu‰‹
Eq.(13)

where cb is the acoustic velocity in the background matrix, c is the group velocity of the bulk elastic 

wave mode, GX and GM are two orientations in the first Brillouin zone. For an epoxy matrix 

phononic crystal, the diagram of the first band of shear-vertical (SV) mode is plotted in two ways: 

i) steel inclusions with different filling fractions (different radii) as shown in the part (a) of the 

upper panel of Fig.6; ii) fixed filling fraction but with different material inclusions as shown in the 

part (b) of the upper panel of Fig.6. The elastic parameters for different solid materials can be found 

in Ref.[18]. Both approaches can change the slope of the first SV mode leading to a variation of 

effective index by Eq.(13).

From the dispersion curve variations, for a given band the effective index will change locally 

along the reduced frequency and for different bands the dispersive properties of the effective index 

are slightly different. Therefore, if a GRIN flat lens is designed based on a given frequency, it may 

have a small deviation in focal length as the effective or fitted gradient coefficient a in Eq.(12) 

changes, as seen in the lower panel of Fig.6. 


16 

Figure 6. Upper panel:(a) The first shear-vertical (SV) mode of bulk elastic wave along the GX for varying the filling 

fractions of steel cylinders embedded in epoxy. The arrow indicates the increasing of the filling fraction. (b) Same 

band diagram but for phononic crystals made of different solid material inclusions in epoxy with a fixed filling fraction 

as 0.126. The arrow indicates the decreasing of stiffness. Lower panel: the FDTD simulated SV wave propagations in 

a phononic crystal whose inclusions are made of different materials embedded in epoxy at two different frequencies. 

The calculated and simulated focal lengths as a function of frequency are also plotted as solid line and dotted line, 

respectively[18].

5. GRIN devices for flexural waves

The control of elastic waves in plates provides the most interesting applications such as on-

chip acoustic propagation, thermal conductivity control, opto-mechanic interactions in 

micro/nanoscale for GRIN devices, which can be attractive for the communities of physics, 

materials, and Nano science. For 2D thin plates, or membranes, the elastic waves propagate as 

surface waves due to the constrains of the plate’s two boundaries, resulting in antisymmetric, 

symmetric and shear-horizontal polarizations. Among those modes, the fundamental 

antisymmetric mode, in another word flexural mode, is widely studied since it is mainly 


17 

characterized by out-of-plane displacement component in plates that can be easily detected by 

means of optical methods. 

Fig.7(a) shows the foci of the GRIN flat lens connected to a linear phononic crystal waveguide

for flexural waves in a piezoelectric plate based on deep reactive ion etching. The well designed

GRIN lens focus a plane incident wave as a spot at the interface between the GRIN lens and the 

phononic waveguide so that waveguiding is demonstrated. This would have potential for 

developing active micro plate lenses[93]. In Fig.7(b), GRIN flat lens is fabricated with silicon 

pillars erected on top to behave as a metalens to demonstrate the focusing behind the lens in the 

near-field beyond the diffraction limit. The dipolar resonant pillars and the flexural waves can 

exhibit polarization coherency to enhance the evanescent waves in order to help focal spot include 

better information[63]. The conception of mix local resonance and GRIN lens can also be applied 

to other types of waves. At nanoscale, a gradient optomechanical/phoxonic crystal in one 

dimensional semiconductor slab is fabricated with the minimum radius of the hole as only 

100nm[73], as displayed in Fig.7(c). This phoxonic crystal demonstrate a full phononic bandgap 

at gigahertz domain. The optomechanical coupling originates from moving interfaces and the 

photoelastic effect. The acoustic mode inside the bandgap exhibits high mechanical quality factor 

making the optomechanical phonon coherent manipulation possible. Fig.7(d) illustrates the 

confinement of elastic waves in the GRIN devices can be used for energy harvesting[66, 67]. 

Piezoelectric energy harvester disks are deposited on a GRIN flat lens and a Luneburg lens at a 

position where the incident plane wave is focused as a spot. Comparing to the energy harvested in 

the background plate, the GRIN devices enable to generate output electrical power an order of 

magnitude higher. 


18 

Figure 7. (a) Acoustic waveguide by combining GRIN flat lens and phononic crystals in a 80 µm thick plate. SEM 

image shows samples in the rectangular dotted box with the radii of gradient holes vary from 15µm to 25µm[93]; (b) 

acoustic metalens by combining GRIN flat lens and pillars (30 µm radius) to exhibit the near-field subdiffraction 

focusing[63]; (c) 1D phoxonic crystal with varied unit cells (the minimum radius of holes is 100 nm) to exhibit the 

optomechanical interactions[73]; (d) GRIN flat rectangular lens and Luneburg circular lens for energy harvesting[66, 

67].

In Sec.3, Eq.(10) gives a useful tool to calculate the effective parameters of phononic crystal 

plates whose thickness is fixed as a constant. Therefore, GRIN devices can be designed by varying 

the filling ratio, in another word changing the radii of holes[57]. Now let us revisit the equation of 

motion (9) which describes flexural waves using Kirchoff-Love approximation. When a plane 

wave propagates in a thin plate with a wavenumber k, Eq.(9) gives the solutions for the dispersion 

relation and phase velocity as

𝑘g =

-y•>

q
, 𝑐g = (

•

u)g = 𝜔C
•y‘

!C(!*’>)-y
Eq.(14)

from where one can see that the phase velocity is not only related to the elastic parameters but also 

depends on plate’s thickness. This special property of flexural waves allows to design GRIN 

devices just by locally varying the plate’s thickness without any phononic crystal with holes. The 

refractive index for flexural wave can be easily derived when all elastic parameters remain fixed 

as in [55]


19 

𝑛3'' =

y+

y#$$
Eq.(15)

In the upper-left panel of Fig.8, a set of omnidirectional GRIN devices are displayed with their 

refractive index profiles, namely Luneburg, Maxwell Fish-eye, 90 degree rotating, Eaton, 

Concentrator lenses[94, 95], as shown by the different colors. Implementing the refractive formula 

Eq.(15), their corresponding thickness variations are also shown in the panel below. The higher 

index requires, the thinner thickness behaves. For 90 degree rotating, Eaton and concentrator lenses, 

the maximum index at the center of the circular lens is larger than 5, so that the relative thickness 

there is smaller than 1/25. The designed GRIN lenses based on thickness variation are performed 

with full wave simulations and their corresponding wave functionalities are displayed at the bottom 

of Fig.8[24]. 

Invisibility is always a challenging problem for wave control in physics. Acoustic cloaks in 

principle require inhomogeneous and anisotropic materials for their realization, which are quite 

complicated to fabricate in practice[96-98]. A special gradient refractive index profile for 

omnidirectional invisible lens is derived that requires an infinite index in the vicinity of the 

center[99, 100]. However, such singularity can be achievable for flexural wave by Eq.(15). 

Nevertheless, from a practical point of view, the central index can be chosen with a proper finite 

value in accordance with the step in design. A ray enters the lens and exits in the same direction by 

flowing a loop around the center inside the lens, thus producing an invisible effect. The multi-

frequency performance of the invisible lens is simulated with cylindrical waves from a point 

source[59]. To be noted that acoustic cloak for flexural wave based on nonlinear transformation 

acoustics method is proposed and realized also by varying the plate’s thickness locally to fulfill the 

required rigidity profile[101]. 


20 

Figure 8. Upper-left panel: refractive index profiles and corresponding plate’s thickness variations for Luneburg, 

Maxwell Fish-Eye, 90o rotating, Eaton, concentrator lenses. Wave performances of thoses lenses are displaced in the 

lower panel[24]. Upper-right panel: omnidirectional invisible lens for flexural waves based on thickness variation for 

two different frequencies[59].

6. Multimodal GRIN devices

From Fig.3(b), the fundamental Lamb modes have another two polarizations in addition to 

flexural mode. In fact, excitation in the thin plate from a given source will generate all kinds of 

modes, which means a design for only one mode may hinder the full functionalities of a GRIN 

device for applications such as absorption and energy harvesting. As discussed in the last section, 

the flexural wave can be independently controlled by thickness variation for given elastic 

parameters. The S0 and SH0 modes mainly depend on the elastic parameters (c11, c13, c33) and (c66), 

respectively, for transversely isotropic materials. Therefore, it needs a homogenization theory to 

obtain the full effective stiffness matrix. As illustrated in Fig.3 in Sec.3, the full homogenization 

method described in Sec.2.2 for bulk phononic crystal can be also applied to the thin phononic 

crystal plate by considering the latter as a finite thin ‘slice’ taken from the former. All the three 

polarizations of the Lamb waves are well described in the low frequency limit. Taking the same 

gold-shell-hole unit cell, we make a sweep for the outer radius meanwhile also varying the inner 

radius for a given outer radius. Figure 9(a) shows a full phase diagram of all possible pairs of (nS0, 

nSH0) domain with this sweeping approach, which exhibit several interesting properties: i) the 


21 

dotted red line cutting the blue domain indicates that the effective indexes for the S0 and SH0 

modes are identical, supporting the simultaneous control of these two modes; ii) the maximum 

effective index for S0 mode can reach up to almost 5 while it can be larger than 10 for SH0 mode; 

iii) the wide blue domain shows that it is possible to design a special (nS0, nSH0) trajectory that 

makes a GRIN device work as one type of lens for S0 mode and as another lens for SH0 mode. 

After defining the index profiles for SH0 and S0 modes, the index of A0 mode can be designed by 

means of an independent thickness variation, and such that it works similarly to the one or both of 

the SH0 and S0 modes or as another totally different lens. Thus, a full control of Lamb modes and 

advanced multimodal GRIN device become achievable.

In Fig.9(b), the red dotted circle shows the areas of Maxwell Fish-eye lens that is designed to 

work similarly for all the three fundamental modes. A point source is excited at the left border of 

the lens and a focused point image is formed at the right diametric border for a given frequency. It 

should be mentioned that the wavelengths of the three modes are different since their speeds are 

not the same due to the different dispersion property. The design of the full control means the 

positions of point focusing are the same, but not the wave field patterns. Finally, an advanced 

multimodal GRIN device is displayed in Fig.9(c): it works as Luneburg lens for the S0 and SH0 

modes meanwhile it behaves as Maxwell Fish-eye lens for the A0 mode. The full control method 

is also extended to GRIN flat lens and beam splitter[58].

Figure 9. (a) Diagram of all possible values for the effective indexes for (nS0, nSH0) by varying the inner and outer radii 

of the gold-shell-hole structure. (b) GRIN Maxwell Fish-eye lens designed for all three Lamb modes simultaneously. 

(c) An advanced multimodal GRIN device works as Luneburg lens for the S0 and SH0 modes while as Maxwell Fish-

eye lens for the flexural mode.[25]


22 

7. Summary

Over the past two decades, we witnessed the rapid growth of the development of phononic 

crystals and metamaterials as well we the recent emergence of metasurfaces to deepen the 

understanding of wave physics. Although the effective index is a homogenized result from infinite 

periodic structures, it is still proper to define a local index in a gradient structure, being a bridge 

between infinity and locality. The homogenization theories of phononic crystals/metamaterials and 

the design principles of GRIN devices are implemented in terms of wavelength, mainly in long 

wavelength limit l>3~4a. Therefore, the gradient index conception can be applied to structure’s 

size from nm to m and different wave natures propagating in solids, liquids and gases with free or 

constrained boundary conditions, among which the applications for elastic waves in thin plates at 

nanoscales show a promising potential in future for wireless telecommunications, heat conductivity, 

phonon sensor and so on. The complex properties of elastic waves in thin plates are also fully 

demonstrated to design more advanced and multimodal GRIN devices. Most applications of GRIN 

phononic crystals and metamaterials are dealing with lensing properties, while another big 

application is acoustic cloaking, which are studied among wide communities. Nevertheless, several 

challenges remain to be answered in future: 1) When wave propagates from one medium to another 

one, from a uniform surface point of view its behavior is governed by the Snell’s law that involves 

the ratio of the refractive index between the two media. However, the wave energy transfer rate is 

governed by the impedance ratio between the two media. Some GRIN devices such as flat lens and 

transmitted-type metasurface, the impedance matching condition is not always easily fulfilled, 

which will limit the focusing energy level and the corresponding energy harvesting efficiency. 2)

New refractive index profiles are needed to discover from mathematical methods that can help to 

design updated wave functionalities. 3) New physics such as thermal conductivity behaviors and 

nonlinear optical/acoustic responses in gradient phoxonic crystals at nanoscale. It is foreseeable 

that new breakthroughs will be reported by the united efforts in the communities of physics, 

material science, engineering, Nano science, mathematics among others.

Acknowledgments

Y.J. acknowledges a start-up fund from Tongji University. D.T. acknowledges financial support 

through the "Ramón y Cajal" fellowship and the U.S. Office of Naval Research under Grant No. 

N00014-17-1-2445.


23 

Reference

[1] M.S. Kushwaha, P. Halevi, L. Dobrzynski, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Acoustic band structure of periodic 

elastic composites, Physical Review Letters, 71 (1993) 2022-2025.

[2] M. Sigalas, E.N. Economou, Band structure of elastic waves in two dimensional systems, Solid 

State Communications, 86 (1993) 141-143.

[3] Z.Y. Liu, X.X. Zhang, Y.W. Mao, Y.Y. Zhu, Z.Y. Yang, C.T. Chan, P. Sheng, Locally resonant sonic 

materials, Science, 289 (2000) 1734-1736.

[4] M.-H. Lu, L. Feng, Y.-F. Chen, Phononic crystals and acoustic metamaterials, Materials Today, 12 

(2009) 34-42.

[5] Y. Pennec, J.O. Vasseur, B. Djafari-Rouhani, L. Dobrzyński, P.A. Deymier, Two-dimensional 

phononic crystals: Examples and applications, Surface Science Reports, 65 (2010) 229-291.

[6] M.I. Hussein, M.J. Leamy, M. Ruzzene, Dynamics of phononic materials and structures: Historical 

origins, recent progress, and future outlook, Applied Mechanics Reviews, 66 (2014) 040802.

[7] H. Ge, M. Yang, C. Ma, M.-H. Lu, Y.-F. Chen, N. Fang, P. Sheng, Breaking the barriers: advances 

in acoustic functional materials, National Science Review, 5 (2017) 159-182.

[8] P.A. Deymier, Acoustic metamaterials and phononic crystals, Springer Science & Business 

Media2013.

[9] A. Khelif, A. Adibi, Phononic Crystals: Fundamentals and Applications, Springer2015.

[10] L. Dobrzynski, A. Akjouj, Y. Pennec, H. Al-Wahsh, G. Lévêque, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Phononics: 

Interface Transmission Tutorial Book Series, Elsevier2017.

[11] R.V. Craster, S. Guenneau, Acoustic metamaterials: Negative refraction, imaging, lensing and 

cloaking, Springer Science & Business Media2012.

[12] S.A. Cummer, J. Christensen, A. Alù, Controlling sound with acoustic metamaterials, Nature 

Reviews Materials, 1 (2016) 16001.

[13] G. Ma, P. Sheng, Acoustic metamaterials: From local resonances to broad horizons, Science 

advances, 2 (2016) e1501595.

[14] Y. Jin, N. Fernez, Y. Pennec, B. Bonello, R.P. Moiseyenko, S. Hémon, Y. Pan, B. Djafari-Rouhani, 

Tunable waveguide and cavity in a phononic crystal plate by controlling whispering-gallery modes in 

hollow pillars, Physical Review B, 93 (2016) 054109.

[15] Y. Jin, D. Torrent, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Robustness of conventional and topologically protected 

edge states in phononic crystal plates, Physical Review B, 98 (2018) 054307.

[16] Y. Jin, B. Bonello, R.P. Moiseyenko, Y. Pennec, O. Boyko, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Pillar-type 


24 

acoustic metasurface, Physical Review B, 96 (2017) 104311.

[17] D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Acoustic metamaterials for new two-dimensional sonic devices, 

New journal of physics, 9 (2007) 323.

[18] S.-C.S. Lin, T.J. Huang, J.-H. Sun, T.-T. Wu, Gradient-index phononic crystals, Physical Review 

B, 79 (2009) 094302.

[19] A. Climente, D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Sound focusing by gradient index sonic lenses, 

Applied Physics Letters, 97 (2010) 104103.

[20] T.P. Martin, C.J. Naify, E.A. Skerritt, C.N. Layman, M. Nicholas, D.C. Calvo, G.J. Orris, D. 

Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Transparent Gradient-Index Lens for Underwater Sound Based on Phase 

Advance, Physical Review Applied, 4 (2015) 034003.

[21] S. Peng, Z. He, H. Jia, A. Zhang, C. Qiu, M. Ke, Z. Liu, Acoustic far-field focusing effect for two-

dimensional graded negative refractive-index sonic crystals, Applied Physics Letters, 96 (2010) 

263502.

[22] Y. Tian, Z. Tan, X. Han, W. Li, Phononic crystal lens with an asymmetric scatterer, Journal of 

Physics D: Applied Physics, 52 (2019) 025102.

[23] X. Yan, R. Zhu, G. Huang, F.-G. Yuan, Focusing guided waves using surface bonded elastic 

metamaterials, Applied Physics Letters, 103 (2013) 121901.

[24] A. Climente, D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Gradient index lenses for flexural waves based on 

thickness variations, Applied Physics Letters, 105 (2014) 064101.

[25] Y. Jin, D. Torrent, Y. Pennec, Y. Pan, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Gradient Index Devices for the Full 

Control of Elastic Waves in Plates, Scientific Reports, 6 (2016) 24437.

[26] Y. Jin, D. Torrent, Y. Pennec, Y. Pan, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Simultaneous control of the S 0 and A 

0 Lamb modes by graded phononic crystal plates, Journal of Applied Physics, 117 (2015) 244904.

[27] A.S. Titovich, A.N. Norris, M.R. Haberman, A high transmission broadband gradient index lens 

using elastic shell acoustic metamaterial elements, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 

139 (2016) 3357-3364.

[28] K. Yi, M. Collet, M. Ichchou, L. Li, Flexural waves focusing through shunted piezoelectric 

patches, Smart Materials and Structures, 25 (2016) 075007.

[29] G. Yong, S. Hong-xiang, L. Chen, Q. Jiao, Y. Shou-qi, X. Jian-ping, G. Yi-jun, Z. Shu-yi, Acoustic 

focusing by an array of heat sources in air, Applied Physics Express, 9 (2016) 066701.

[30] B. Assouar, B. Liang, Y. Wu, Y. Li, J.-C. Cheng, Y. Jing, Acoustic metasurfaces, Nature Reviews 

Materials, DOI 10.1038/s41578-018-0061-4(2018).

[31] Y. Xu, Y. Fu, H. Chen, Planar gradient metamaterials, Nature Reviews Materials, 1 (2016) 16067.


25 

[32] A. Kovalenko, M. Fauquignon, T. Brunet, O. Mondain-Monval, Tuning the sound speed in 

macroporous polymers with a hard or soft matrix, Soft Matter, 13 (2017) 4526-4532.

[33] A. Ba, A. Kovalenko, C. Aristégui, O. Mondain-Monval, T. Brunet, Soft porous silicone rubbers 

with ultra-low sound speeds in acoustic metamaterials, Scientific Reports, 7 (2017) 40106.

[34] Y. Jin, R. Kumar, O. Poncelet, O. Mondain-Monval, T. Brunet, Soft Metasurface with Gradient 

Acoustic Index,  11th International Conference of Electrical, Transport, and Optical Properties on 

Inhomogeneous Media, 2018, pp. 39.

[35] Z. Wang, P. Zhang, X. Nie, Y. Zhang, Focusing of liquid surface waves by gradient index lens, 

EPL (Europhysics Letters), 108 (2014) 24003.

[36] Z. Wang, P. Zhang, X. Nie, Y. Zhang, Manipulating water wave propagation via gradient index 

media, Scientific reports, 5 (2015) 16846.

[37] A. Climente, D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Omnidirectional broadband acoustic absorber based 

on metamaterials, Applied Physics Letters, 100 (2012) 144103.

[38] Y.-J. Liang, L.-W. Chen, C.-C. Wang, I.-L. Chang, An acoustic absorber implemented by graded 

index phononic crystals, Journal of Applied Physics, 115 (2014) 244513.

[39] L.-Y. Wu, L.-W. Chen, An acoustic bending waveguide designed by graded sonic crystals, Journal 

of Applied Physics, 110 (2011) 114507.

[40] Y. Bao-guo, T. Ye, C. Ying, L. Xiao-jun, An acoustic Maxwell’s fish-eye lens based on gradient-

index metamaterials, Chinese Physics B, 25 (2016) 104301.

[41] R. Zhu, C. Ma, B. Zheng, M.Y. Musa, L. Jing, Y. Yang, H. Wang, S. Dehdashti, N.X. Fang, H. 

Chen, Bifunctional acoustic metamaterial lens designed with coordinate transformation, Applied 

Physics Letters, 110 (2017) 113503.

[42] Z. Zhang, R.-Q. Li, B. Liang, X.-Y. Zou, J.-C. Cheng, Controlling an acoustic wave with a 

cylindrically-symmetric gradient-index system, Chinese Physics B, 24 (2015) 024301.

[43] L. Zigoneanu, B.-I. Popa, S.A. Cummer, Design and measurements of a broadband two-

dimensional acoustic lens, Physical Review B, 84 (2011) 024305.

[44] L.-Y. Wu, L.-W. Chen, Enhancing transmission efficiency of bending waveguide based on graded 

sonic crystals using antireflection structures, Applied Physics A, 107 (2012) 743-748.

[45] Y. Li, G. Yu, B. Liang, X. Zou, G. Li, S. Cheng, J. Cheng, Three-dimensional Ultrathin Planar 

Lenses by Acoustic Metamaterials, Scientific Reports, 4 (2014) 6830.

[46] V. Romero-García, A. Cebrecos, R. Picó, V.J. Sánchez-Morcillo, L.M. Garcia-Raffi, J.V. Sánchez-

Pérez, Wave focusing using symmetry matching in axisymmetric acoustic gradient index lenses, 

Applied Physics Letters, 103 (2013) 264106.


26 

[47] X. Su, A.N. Norris, C.W. Cushing, M.R. Haberman, P.S. Wilson, Broadband focusing of 

underwater sound using a transparent pentamode lens, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of 

America, 141 (2017) 4408-4417.

[48] R.A. Jahdali, Y. Wu, High transmission acoustic focusing by impedance-matched acoustic meta-

surfaces, Applied Physics Letters, 108 (2016) 031902.

[49] S.-D. Zhao, Y.-S. Wang, C. Zhang, High-transmission acoustic self-focusing and directional 

cloaking in a graded perforated metal slab, Scientific Reports, 7 (2017) 4368.

[50] A. Colombi, S. Guenneau, P. Roux, R.V. Craster, Transformation seismology: composite soil 

lenses for steering surface elastic Rayleigh waves, Scientific reports, 6 (2016) 25320.

[51] A. Colombi, D. Colquitt, P. Roux, S. Guenneau, R.V. Craster, A seismic metamaterial: The 

resonant metawedge, Scientific reports, 6 (2016) 27717.

[52] A. Colombi, V. Ageeva, R.J. Smith, A. Clare, R. Patel, M. Clark, D. Colquitt, P. Roux, S. 

Guenneau, R.V. Craster, Enhanced sensing and conversion of ultrasonic Rayleigh waves by elastic 

metasurfaces, Scientific Reports, 7 (2017) 6750.

[53] S. Jia-Hong, Y. Yuan-Hai, Beam focusing of surface acoustic wave using gradient-index phononic 

crystals,  2016 IEEE International Ultrasonics Symposium (IUS), 2016, pp. 1-3.

[54] J. Zhao, B. Bonello, L. Becerra, O. Boyko, R. Marchal, Focusing of Rayleigh waves with gradient-

index phononic crystals, Applied Physics Letters, 108 (2016) 221905.

[55] A. Climente, D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Omnidirectional broadband insulating device for 

flexural waves in thin plates, Journal of Applied Physics, 114 (2013) 214903.

[56] D. Torrent, Y. Pennec, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Effective medium theory for elastic metamaterials in 

thin elastic plates, Physical Review B, 90 (2014) 104110.

[57] D. Torrent, Y. Pennec, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Omnidirectional refractive devices for flexural waves 

based on graded phononic crystals, Journal of Applied Physics, 116 (2014) 224902.

[58] Y. Jin, D. Torrent, Y. Pennec, G. Lévêque, Y. Pan, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Multimodal and 

omnidirectional beam splitters for Lamb modes in elastic plates, AIP Advances, 6 (2016) 121602.

[59] Y. Jin, D. Torrent, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Invisible omnidirectional lens for flexural waves in thin 

elastic plates, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 50 (2017) 225301.

[60] J. Zhao, R. Marchal, B. Bonello, O. Boyko, Efficient focalization of antisymmetric Lamb waves 

in gradient-index phononic crystal plates, Applied Physics Letters, 101 (2012) 261905.

[61] A. Zareei, A. Darabi, M.J. Leamy, M.-R. Alam, Continuous profile flexural GRIN lens: Focusing 

and harvesting flexural waves, Applied Physics Letters, 112 (2018) 023901.

[62] J. Zhao, B. Bonello, O. Boyko, Beam paths of flexural Lamb waves at high frequency in the first 


27 

band within phononic crystal-based acoustic lenses, AIP Advances, 4 (2014) 124204.

[63] J. Zhao, B. Bonello, O. Boyko, Focusing of the lowest-order antisymmetric Lamb mode behind a 

gradient-index acoustic metalens with local resonators, Physical Review B, 93 (2016) 174306.

[64] J. Zhao, B. Bonello, R. Marchal, O. Boyko, Beam path and focusing of flexural Lamb waves 

within phononic crystal-based acoustic lenses, New Journal of Physics, 16 (2014) 063031.

[65] T.-T. Wu, Y.-T. Chen, J.-H. Sun, S.-C.S. Lin, T.J. Huang, Focusing of the lowest antisymmetric 

Lamb wave in a gradient-index phononic crystal plate, Applied Physics Letters, 98 (2011) 171911.

[66] S. Tol, F.L. Degertekin, A. Erturk, Gradient-index phononic crystal lens-based enhancement of 

elastic wave energy harvesting, Applied Physics Letters, 109 (2016) 063902.

[67] S. Tol, F.L. Degertekin, A. Erturk, Phononic crystal Luneburg lens for omnidirectional elastic 

wave focusing and energy harvesting, Applied Physics Letters, 111 (2017) 013503.

[68] S.-C.S. Lin, R.B. Tittmann, J.-H. Sun, T.-T. Wu, T.J. Huang, Acoustic beamwidth compressor 

using gradient-index phononic crystals, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 42 (2009) 185502.

[69] S.-C.S. Lin, T.J. Huang, Acoustic mirage in two-dimensional gradient-index phononic crystals, 

Journal of Applied Physics, 106 (2009) 053529.

[70] A. Darabi, M.J. Leamy, Analysis and Experimental Validation of an Optimized Gradient-Index 

Phononic-Crystal Lens, Physical Review Applied, 10 (2018) 024045.

[71] J. Cha, C. Daraio, Electrical tuning of elastic wave propagation in nanomechanical lattices at MHz 

frequencies, Nature Nanotechnology, DOI 10.1038/s41565-018-0252-6(2018).

[72] D. Hatanaka, I. Mahboob, K. Onomitsu, H. Yamaguchi, Phonon waveguides for 

electromechanical circuits, Nature Nanotechnology, 9 (2014) 520.

[73] J. Gomis-Bresco, D. Navarro-Urrios, M. Oudich, S. El-Jallal, A. Griol, D. Puerto, E. Chavez, Y. 

Pennec, B. Djafari-Rouhani, F. Alzina, A. Martínez, C.M.S. Torres, A one-dimensional optomechanical 

crystal with a complete phononic band gap, Nature Communications, 5 (2014) 4452.

[74] D. Navarro-Urrios, N.E. Capuj, M.F. Colombano, P.D. García, M. Sledzinska, F. Alzina, A. Griol, 

A. Martínez, C.M. Sotomayor-Torres, Nonlinear dynamics and chaos in an optomechanical beam, 

Nature Communications, 8 (2017) 14965.

[75] M.R. Wagner, B. Graczykowski, J.S. Reparaz, A. El Sachat, M. Sledzinska, F. Alzina, C.M. 

Sotomayor Torres, Two-Dimensional Phononic Crystals: Disorder Matters, Nano Letters, 16 (2016) 

5661-5668.

[76] J. Cha, K.W. Kim, C. Daraio, Experimental realization of on-chip topological 

nanoelectromechanical metamaterials, Nature, 564 (2018) 229.

[77] G.W. Milton, The Theory of Composites, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2002.


28 

[78] D. Torrent, A. Håkansson, F. Cervera, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Homogenization of Two-Dimensional 

Clusters of Rigid Rods in Air, Physical Review Letters, 96 (2006) 204302.

[79] D. Torrent, J. Sanchez-Dehesa, Effective parameters of clusters of cylinders embedded in a 

nonviscous fluid or gas, Physical Review B, 74 (2006).

[80] J.G. Berryman, Long-wavelength propagation in composite elastic media I. Spherical inclusions, 

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 68 (1980) 1809-1819.

[81] F. Cervera, L. Sanchis, J.V. Sánchez-Pérez, R. Martínez-Sala, C. Rubio, F. Meseguer, C. López, 

D. Caballero, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Refractive Acoustic Devices for Airborne Sound, Physical Review 

Letters, 88 (2001) 023902.

[82] D. Torrent, J. Sanchez-Dehesa, Acoustic metamaterials for new two-dimensional sonic devices, 

New Journal of Physics, 9 (2007).

[83] D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Effective parameters of clusters of cylinders embedded in a 

nonviscous fluid or gas, Physical Review B, 74 (2006) 224305.

[84] D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, F. Cervera, Evidence of two-dimensional magic clusters in the 

scattering of sound, Physical Review B, 75 (2007) 241404.

[85] A.A. Krokhin, J. Arriaga, L.N. Gumen, Speed of Sound in Periodic Elastic Composites, Physical 

Review Letters, 91 (2003) 264302.

[86] A.N. Norris, A.L. Shuvalov, A.A. Kutsenko, Analytical formulation of three-dimensional dynamic 

homogenization for periodic elastic systems, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, 

Physical and Engineering Sciences, 468 (2012) 1629-1651.

[87] D. ROYER, D.P. Morgan, E. Dieulesaint, Elastic Waves in Solids I: Free and Guided Propagation, 

Springer Berlin Heidelberg1999.

[88] D. Torrent, Y. Pennec, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Resonant and nonlocal properties of phononic 

metasolids, Physical Review B, 92 (2015) 174110.

[89] Y. Jin, D. Torrent, Y. Pennec, Y. Pan, B. Djafari-Rouhani, Simultaneous control of the S0 and A0 

Lamb modes by graded phononic crystal plates, Journal of Applied Physics, 117 (2015) 244904.

[90] T.P. Martin, M. Nicholas, G.J. Orris, L.-W. Cai, D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Sonic gradient 

index lens for aqueous applications, Applied Physics Letters, 97 (2010) 113503.

[91] T.P. Martin, C.N. Layman, K.M. Moore, G.J. Orris, Elastic shells with high-contrast material 

properties as acoustic metamaterial components, Physical Review B, 85 (2012) 161103.

[92] S.-C.S. Lin, B.R. Tittmann, T.J. Huang, Design of acoustic beam aperture modifier using gradient-

index phononic crystals, Journal of Applied Physics, 111 (2012) 123510.

[93] M.-J. Chiou, Y.-C. Lin, T. Ono, M. Esashi, S.-L. Yeh, T.-T. Wu, Focusing and waveguiding of 


29 

Lamb waves in micro-fabricated piezoelectric phononic plates, Ultrasonics, 54 (2014) 1984-1990.

[94] M. Šarbort, T. Tyc, Spherical media and geodesic lenses in geometrical optics, Journal of Optics, 

14 (2012) 075705.

[95] E.E. Narimanov, A.V. Kildishev, Optical black hole: Broadband omnidirectional light absorber, 

Applied Physics Letters, 95 (2009) 041106.

[96] A.C. Steven, S. David, One path to acoustic cloaking, New Journal of Physics, 9 (2007) 45.

[97] D. Torrent, J. Sánchez-Dehesa, Acoustic cloaking in two dimensions: a feasible approach, New 

Journal of Physics, 10 (2008) 063015.

[98] H. Chen, C.T. Chan, Acoustic cloaking and transformation acoustics, Journal of Physics D: 

Applied Physics, 43 (2010) 113001.

[99] J.C. Miñano, Perfect imaging in a homogeneous three-dimensional region, Optics Express, 14 

(2006) 9627-9635.

[100] T. Tyc, H. Chen, A. Danner, Y. Xu, Invisible lenses with positive isotropic refractive index, 

Physical Review A, 90 (2014) 053829.

[101] A. Darabi, A. Zareei, M.R. Alam, M.J. Leamy, Experimental Demonstration of an 

Ultrabroadband Nonlinear Cloak for Flexural Waves, Physical Review Letters, 121 (2018) 174301.


