Enhancement of Spintronic Terahertz Emission via 
Annealing in Ferromagnetic Heterostructures

YANG GAO1†, YANBIN HE1†, XIAOJUN WU1*, TIANXIAO NIE2,4*, CHUN WANG3,5,
DEYIN KONG1, CHANDAN PANDEY2, BO WANG3,5, LIANGGONG WEN2,4, CUNJUN 
RUAN1, JUNGANG MIAO1, LI WANG3, YUTONG LI3,5, AND WEISHENG ZHAO2,4

1 Beijing Key Laboratory for Microwave Sensing and Security Applications, School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang 
University, Beijing, 100191, China
2Fert Beijing Institute, BDBC, and School of Microelectronics, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China
3Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
4Beihang-Goertek Joint Microelectronics Institute, Qingdao Research Institute, Beihang University, Qingdao, 266000, China
5School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
*Corresponding author: xiaojunwu@buaa.edu.cn; nietianxiao@buaa.edu.cn;

†These authors contributed equally to this work.

Received XX Month XXXX; revised XX Month, XXXX; accepted XX Month XXXX; posted XX Month XXXX (Doc. ID XXXXX); published XX Month XXXX

We systematically investigate the influence of annealing effect on terahertz (THz) generation from CoFeB based 
magnetic nanofilms driven by femtosecond laser pulses. Three times enhancement of THz yields are achieved in 
W/CoFeB through annealing effect, and double boosting is obtained in Pt/CoFeB. The mechanism of annealing effect 
originates from the increase of hot electron mean free path induced by crystallization, which is experimentally 
corroborated by THz transmission measurement on time-domain spectroscopy.  Comparison studies of the 
thickness dependent THz efficiency after annealing are also implemented, and we eventually conclude that 
annealing and thickness optimization are of importance for scaling up THz intensity. Our observations not only 
deepen understanding of the spintronic THz radiation mechanism but also provide normal platform for high speed 
spintronic opto-electronic devices.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1364/AO.99.099999

1. INTRODUCTION

Extensive applications of terahertz (THz) technology call for superior 

emitters[1]. Femtosecond laser excited THz sources has been playing a 
critical role in the last three decades, stimulating various THz radiators
[2-5]. Among them, recently developed spintronic THz emitter are 
predicted as one of the best candidates for the next generation THz 
sources, having a virtue for low cost, broadband, robustness as well [6-
21]. Additionally, THz emission spectroscopy can be harnessed to 
deduce the femtosecond spin dynamics6. Consequently, more efficient 
THz sources can be realized. However, this new source is still in its 
infancy, and its mechanism needs to be explored thoroughly. 
Fundamentally, femtosecond laser pulse interaction with ferromagnetic 
hetero-structure excites electrons into sub-bands above Fermi level
[22]. Due to the different mobilities of spin-up and spin-down electrons, 
a spin polarized longitudinal current is generated. When reaching 
capping layers, this current is converted to an in-plane transverse 

charge current, because of inverse spin Hall effect [6,7], and then 
radiates THz waves. In this process, material types (especially for spin 
Hall angles of heavy metals) and geometry structures have significantly 
impact on emission performance [7], and they have attracted much 
attention. However, fabrication conditions may also influence THz 
radiation[11]. For instance, Y. Sasaki et al. demonstrated that annealing 
on Ta/CoFeB/MgO films did enhance the THz emission intensity [11]. 
They proposed two possible explanations. The first one is the increase 
in spin-Hall angle and reduced hot electron velocity relaxion length 
caused by Boron atom diffusion into the Ta layer and crystallization of 
CoFeB with the help of MgO layer[23]. The second one is the increase of 
the hot electrons mean free path [11]. We are curious whether 


annealing effect can be extended to W or Pt capped CoFeB systems 
whichhas been well proven to have highly efficient.

Here, in order to verify the assumption, we conduct comparison 

emission experiments on W/CoFeB, Pt/CoFeB and W/CoFeB/Pt 
samples with and without annealing, which are different sample 
systems from those used in previous work [7]. We observe the 
magnitude of the THz waves generated from the materials after 
annealing is larger than that without annealing, and this enlargement 
can be reached up to 3 times. The following THz time-domain 
spectroscopy experiments indicate that transmitted THz waves in 
annealed materials does have a larger magnitude than the unannealed 
ones, which can in turn help understand the physical mechanism of 
annealing effect. Our results are helpful for quarrying and exploring the 

physical process of spintronic THz emission, optimizing the generation 
efficiency, furthermore, contributing to the high speed spintronic opto-
electronic devices as well.

2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND SAMPLE PREPARATION

Our experiment setups are schematically illustrated in Figure 1. 

Figure 1a is utilized in the THz emission experiments. The driven laser 
is a commercial Ti:sapphire laser oscillator yielding ultrafast pulses with 
the central wavelength of 800nm, pulse duration of 70fs, and repetition 
rate of 80MHz. 90% of the laser power is used for generating THz 
waves while the rest for electro-optic sampling to record the generated 
THz temporal waveforms[24]. The generating beam is implemented to 

Figure 1. Schematic diagram of THz emission and transmission experiments and details of the sample structures. (a) Experimental setup of 

the THz emission system. BD: balanced detector; WP: Wollaston prism; λ/4: quarter wave plate; SW: silicon wafer for combining the probing beam 
together with the generated THz pulses; M: aluminum reflection mirror; P1-4: 90° off-axis parabolic mirrors; S: THz emitting samples. (b)and (c)
definitions of n+ and n-. When the laser pulses first illuminate the glass substrate, it is defined as n-, while the other case shown in Figure 1c is defined 
as n+. Here, HM means heavy metal, including W and Pt. FM is ferromagnetic metal, which is CoFeB. (d) THz time-domain spectroscopy used in 
the transmission measurements. (e)Structure of the W/CoFeB/Pt trilayer sample.


generate THz waves through the ferromagnetic heterostructure 
samples. The radiated THz signals are first collimated and then focused 
into a 1mm thick ZnTe detector. The THz electric field induces the 
variation of the refractive index in ZnTe which is indirectly recorded by 
the polarization rotation of the probing beam. Through combining a 
quarter waveplate, a Wollaston prism and a pair of balanced 
photodetectors, the generated THz temporal waveform is measured. 
Figure 1b and c are the enlarged arrangements of the femtosecond laser 
illumination onto the samples. The THz emitters as well as the THz 
optical paths are sealed in a vacuum to rule out the influence of water 
vapors. Figure 1d is the schematic diagram of the THz time-domain 
spectrometer, which is also driven by the same laser oscillator as the 
THz emission system. The THz pulses used to characterize the samples 
are generated from a photoconductive antenna and are probed by 
another 1mm thick ZnTe crystal. This system is purged by dry nitrogen 
gas.

We conducted the THz emission experiments on both CoFeB-based 

bilayers 
and 
trilayers
which 
includes 
W(2.2)/CoFeB(2.0), 

W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2), Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2), W(2.0)/CoFeB(2.2)/Pt(2.0). 
The numbers in the bracket indicates the layer thickness in nanometers. 
These heterostructures were fabricated on 1 mm thick glass substrate 
in a high-vacuum AJA sputtering system with a base pressure of 10-
9Torr. The deposition conditions were carefully optimized to ensure 
the best quality and reproducibility and the growth rate for W, CoFeB, 
and Pt was 0.21Å/s, 0.06Å/s and 0.77Å/s, respectively.We performed 
a sample rotation so as to ensure a good uniformity. In order to make 
comparison studies, all the samples are distributed into two groups, 
which are the as-deposited group and the as-annealed group. For the as-

annealed group, samples were annealed at 280 ℃ in vacuum for one 
hour, and during this process, the magnitude of 1 T was set by a static 

external magnetic field. When conducting THz emission experiments, 
the applied static magnetic field is 50mT. And for the THz transmission 
experiments, no external magnetic field is applied.

2. RESULTS AND DISSCUSSION

Figure 2a exhibit the THz signals from W(2.2)/CoFeB(2.0) nanofilms 

with and without annealing when the femtosecond laser pulses are 
incident on the positive side of the sample. The experiment results 
manifest that the annealing effect does improve the THz emission 
intensity. The ratio of the peak to peak values between the sample with 
and without annealing is P+Annealing/P=2.9. This enhancement behavior 
is also observed when the pump laser pulses are incident on the 
negative side of n-. In this case, as shown in Figure 2b, the THz intensity 
is as large as 3.2 times of the single from the unannealed sample. 
Furthermore, we also observe the THz emission polarity reversal 
behavior, which verify the directionality symmetry property of the 
inverse spin Hall effect mechanism. Likewise, the annealing effect 
induced 
THz 
emission 
enhancement 
is 
also 
detected 
in 

Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) nanofilms no matter the pumping laser pulses are 
incident onto the samples in the case of  n+and n-(see Figure 2c and d). 
The enhancement ratios are P+Annealing/P=2.3 and P-Annealing/P=2.1 forn+
andn-, respectively. The slightly differences betweenn+andn-in both W 
and Pt samples may be due to the various absorption of the glass 
substrate in optical frequency range and THz frequencies. If we ignore
this small influence, we can safely conclude that the THz emission 
intensities of W(2.2)/CoFeB(2.0) and Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) nanofilms are 
enhanced by ~3 times and ~2 times by annealing effect, respectively, 
which are much higher than the optimized results reported in the 

previous work using a Ta(5.0)/CoFeB(1.0)/MgO(2.0) heterostructure. 

Figure 2. Enhanced THz emission intensity from bilayer samples after annealing. THz temporal waveforms from the W(2.2)/CoFeB(2.0) 

sampleswith and without annealing, for the cases of a, n+and b, n-, respectively. c and d, Improved THzemission intensity are also observed inthe
Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) samples after annealing no matter the femtosecond laserpulses are incident from positive (n+) ornegative (n-) sides.


To eliminate the disturbance caused by the sample thickness, we 

select W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) and Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) films which are of 
the same thickness for the subsequent experiments. Figure 3a depicts 
the emitted THz signals from these two samples after annealing. From 
this figure, it can be seen that the THz emission phases are opposite 
which is attributed to the different polar of the spin Hall angles for W 
(negative) and Pt (positive) [7]. Additionally, the signal from W-based 
sample is ~1.9 time higher that that from Pt-based. This phenomenon 
may be due to the larger spin Hall angle of W than Pt[25]. This observed 
enhancement phenomenon is 5 times when the femtosecond laser 
pulses illuminate on the n- side. Likewise, in Figure 3c and 3d, the 
enhancement behavior is also observed and the ratio of peak-to-peak 
values of W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) and Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) nanofilms 
without annealing are PW(4.0)/PPt(4.0)=4.76 and PW(4.0)/PPt(4.0)=10.89, 
respectively. It is clearly manifested that the THz emission intensity of 
W-based emitters is always larger than the Pt-based ones, no matter 
they are annealed or not. Through these experiments, we can get rid of 
the thickness disturbance, and demonstrate that W is more appropriate 
than Pt as the HM layer of ferromagnetic heterostructures, which can 
bring greater THz emission intensity. Previously, Seifert et al. have 
already reported that W or Pt/CoFeB systems have the ability to achieve 
high emission efficiency due to their innate large spin Hall angles[7]. We 
achieve three times enhancement of THz emission intensity by 
extending the annealing effect to these efficient bilayer structures, 
according to the aforementioned results.

To gain a deep insight into the physics of annealing effect on THz 

emission enhancement, we will subsequently implement a 
comprehensive analysis on the possible mechanisms.Previously, one of 
the mechanisms was attributed to MgO contributed crystallization and 

enhancement of the spin Hall angle of Ta. In our case, as is shown in the 
sample preparation section, there is no MgO layer in our samples, but an 
intensity enhancement behavior is still observed. Therefore, this 
phenomenon may not be strongly correlated to this explanation. Then 
taking consideration into the other possibility, the crystallization of the 
ferromagnetic material layer leads to a reduction in atomic scale 
disorder caused by amorphous state, finally reducing spin-lattice 
scattering[26]. This effect can give rise to the increase of the mean free 
path for hot electrons, which has been verified annealing dependent 
THz emission experiments. Electrons carrying the majority spin state 
contribute more to the spin polarized current, the abovementioned 
change in the mean free path for hot electronsof majority spin will cause 
a reduction of spin current loss., thereby resulting in higher emission 
intensity. In order to corroborate this possible mechanism, verification 
experimentsof THz transmission measurement on W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) 
and Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) with and without annealing are conducted in 
the THz time-domain spectrometer. As is shown in Figure 4a, it is 
obvious that the THz transmission intensity of W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) 
sample with annealing effect shows a slight enhancement compared 
with that without annealing. The intensity of transmitted THz signal has 
increased by 1.36%. Similar behavior in Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) isincreased 
by 3.75%. These results corroborate the aforementioned second 
speculation. The increased transmitted THz wave may result from the 
decrease of energy dissipation which is caused by the scattering 
processes within a spin current induced by the incident THz wave. The 
decrease in spin-lattice scattering would have positive influence on this 
energy dissipation, namely, reservation of more energy. The 
crystallization of amorphous CoFeB caused by annealing effect reduces 
its lattice disorder, and then, depresses the spin-lattice scattering. 
Consequently, we can conclude that from this THz time-domain 
spectroscopy experiments, the improvement in THz transmission is a 

Figure 3. Eliminating the disturbance of the thickness dependent on THz emission intensity for verifying the annealing effect assisted THz 

enhancement.(a)and (b), Femtosecond laser pulses areincident onto the W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) and Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) nanofilms from the positive
(n+) and negative (n-) sides, respectively, when both samples are annealed, while (c) and (d) illustrate the results from the both samples without
annealing.


reasonable evidence for the decrease in energy-dissipating scattering 
process and increase in lattice order, thus may support the assumption 
that annealing effect promote the mean free path for hot electron, 
leading to a higher emission intensity. Although we detect a weak
increase in THztransmission intensity for 1.36% in W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) 
and 3.75% in Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2), respectively, which may due to the 
extremely thin thickness of CoFeB(2.2), the highest emission 
enhancement can be scaled up to 320%, demonstrating the 
considerably positive contribution of annealing to THz emission.
Besides, 
we 
also 
conduct 
emission 
experiments 
on

W(2.0)/CoFeB(2.2)/Pt(2.0) trilayer samples with and without 
annealing. However, we do not observe an obvious change of THz
emission signals. We speculate that annealing parameters used in the 
experiments of W or Pt/CoFeB bilayers may not be suitable for 
W/CoFeB/Pt trilayer ferromagnetic films. The trilayer system is more 
complex than bilayers. As is illustrated in Figure 1b, c and e, bilayer 
samplesare grown directly on the glass, but another HM layer is placed 
between FM layer and glass in this trilayer system. This may introduce 
extra interaction of annealing effects among FM layer, HM layer and 
glass substrate.Therefore, the proper annealing conditions required for 
trilayer samples may be different from the bilayers, but the annealing 
condition do not change in our sample preparation. To further clarify 
this issue, systematic studies on annealing conditions for trilayer 
samples need to be performed, which isbeyond the scope of this work.

3. CONCLUSION

In summary, we observe ~3 times enhanced THz emission intensity 

in W/CoFeB and Pt/CoFeBbilayers driven by femtosecond laser pulses. 
We narrowing the enhancement physics to annealing induced lattice 
disorder reduction which is reasonably supported by the THz time-
domain transmission measurements. Through these experimental 
observations and qualitative analyses, we extend the annealing effect 
for demonstrated optimal spintronic THz sources. We believe our 
investigations not only help further deeply understand the fundamental 
physics of femtosecond spin dynamics, but also provide an optimization 
procedure for the highly efficient THz sources.

Funding Information.This work is supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 11827807, 11520101003, 
11861121001, 61831001 and 61775233), the Strategic Priority 
Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. 
XDB16010200 and XDB07030300), the National Basic Research 
Program of China (Grant No. 2014CB339800), the International 
Collaboration Project (GrantNo. B16001), and the National Key 
Technology Program of China (Grant No. 2017ZX01032101). Dr. 
Xiaojun Wu thanks the “Zhuoyue” Program and “Qingba” Program of 
Beihang 
University 
(Grant 
No. 
GZ216S1807, 
ZG226S1832, 

KG12052501). Dr. Tianxiao Nie thanks the support from the 1000-
Young talent program of China.

References

1.X. C. Zhang, A. Shkurinov, and Y. Zhang, "Extreme terahertz science," Nat. 

Photonics 11, 16-18 (2017).

2.X.-j. Wu, J.-l. Ma, B.-l. Zhang, S.-s. Chai, Z.-j. Fang, C.-Y. Xia, D.-y. Kong, 

J.-g. Wang, H. Liu, and C.-Q. Zhu, "Highly efficient generation of 0.2 
mJ terahertz pulses in lithium niobate at room temperature with 
sub-50 fs chirped Ti: sapphire laser pulses," Opt. Express 26, 7107-
7116 (2018).

3.Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, S. Cui, F. He, M. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Yu, L. Chen, Z. 

Sheng, and J. Zhang, "Manipulation of polarizations for broadband 
terahertz waves emitted from laser plasma filaments," Nat.
Photonics 12, 554 (2018).

4.G. Liao, H. Liu, Y. Li, G. G. Scott, D. Neely, Y. Zhang, B. Zhu, Z. Zhang, C. 

Armstrong, and E. Zemaityte, "THz pulses over 50 millijoules 
generated from relativistic picosecond laser-plasma interactions," 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.04369 (2018).

5.H. Hafez, X. Chai, A. Ibrahim, S. Mondal, D. Férachou, X. Ropagnol, and 

T. Ozaki, "Intense terahertz radiation and their applications," J. Opt.
18, 093004 (2016).

6.T. Kampfrath, M. Battiato, P. Maldonado, G. Eilers, J. Nötzold, S. 

Mährlein, V. Zbarsky, F. Freimuth, Y. Mokrousov, and S. Blügel, 
"Terahertz 
spin 
current 
pulses 
controlled 
by 
magnetic 

heterostructures," Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 256 (2013).

7.T. Seifert, S. Jaiswal, U. Martens, J. Hannegan, L. Braun, P. Maldonado, 

F. Freimuth, A. Kronenberg, J. Henrizi, and I. Radu, "Efficient metallic 
spintronic emitters of ultrabroadband terahertz radiation," Nat.
Photonics 10, 483-488 (2016).

8.D. Yang, J. Liang, C. Zhou, L. Sun, R. Zheng, S. Luo, Y. Wu, and J. Qi, 

"Powerful and tunable THz emitters based on the Fe/Pt magnetic 
heterostructure," Adv. Optical Mater. 4, 1944-1949 (2016).

9.T. Huisman, R. Mikhaylovskiy, J. Costa, F. Freimuth, E. Paz, J. Ventura, 

P. Freitas, S. Blügel, Y. Mokrousov, and T. Rasing, "Femtosecond 
control 
of 
electric 
currents 
in 
metallic 
ferromagnetic 

heterostructures," Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 455 (2016).

10.Y. Wu, M. Elyasi, X. Qiu, M. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Ke, and H. Yang, "High-

Performance THz Emitters Based on Ferromagnetic/Nonmagnetic 
Heterostructures," Adv. Mater. 29, 1603031 (2017).

11.Y. Sasaki, K. Suzuki, and S. Mizukami, "Annealing effect on laser 

pulse-induced THz wave emission in Ta/CoFeB/MgO films," Appl.
Phys. Lett. 111, 102401 (2017).

12.T. Huisman, C. Ciccarelli, A. Tsukamoto, R. Mikhaylovskiy, T. Rasing, 

and A. Kimel, "Spin-photo-currents generated by femtosecond laser 
pulses in a ferrimagnetic GdFeCo/Pt bilayer," Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 
072402 (2017).

13.T. Seifert, S. Jaiswal, M. Sajadi, G. Jakob, S. Winnerl, M. Wolf, M. Kläui, 

and T. Kampfrath, "Ultrabroadband single-cycle terahertz pulses 
with peak fields of 300 kV cm− 1 from a metallic spintronic emitter," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 252402 (2017).

14. Z. Feng, R. Yu, Y. Zhou, H. Lu, W. Tan, H. Deng, Q. Liu, Z. Zhai, L. Zhu, 

and J. Cai, "Highly Efficient Spintronic Terahertz Emitter Enabled by 
Metal–Dielectric Photonic Crystal," Adv. Optical Mater., 1800965 
(2018).

15.G. Li, R. Mikhaylovskiy, K. Grishunin, J. Costa, T. Rasing, and A. Kimel, 

"Laser induced THz emission from femtosecond photocurrents in 
Co/ZnO/Pt and Co/Cu/Pt multilayers," J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 51, 
134001 (2018).

16.T. S. Seifert, S. Jaiswal, J. Barker, S. T. Weber, I. Razdolski, J. Cramer, 

O. Gueckstock, S. F. Maehrlein, L. Nadvornik, S. Watanabe, C. 
Ciccarelli, A. Melnikov, G. Jakob, M. Münzenberg, S. T. B. 
Goennenwein, G. Woltersdorf, B. Rethfeld, P. W. Brouwer, M. Wolf, 

Figure 4. Increased THz transmission observed from the

annealed samples. Transmitted THz time-domain signals in (a)
W(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2) and (b) Pt(4.0)/CoFeB(2.2), with and without 
annealing. Inset: enlarged peak values.


M. Kläui, and T. Kampfrath, "Femtosecond formation dynamics of 
the spin Seebeck effect revealed by terahertz spectroscopy," Nat. 
Commun. 9, 2899 (2018).

17.H. Qiu, K. Kato, K. Hirota, N. Sarukura, M. Yoshimura, and M. 

Nakajima, "Layer thickness dependence of the terahertz emission 
based on spin current in ferromagnetic heterostructures," Opt.
Express 26, 15247-15254 (2018).

18.C. Zhou, Y. P. Liu, Z. Wang, S. J. Ma, M. W. Jia, R. Q. Wu, L. Zhou, W. 

Zhang, M. K. Liu, Y. Z. Wu, and J. Qi, "Broadband Terahertz 
Generation via the Interface Inverse Rashba-Edelstein Effect," Phys.
Rev. Lett. 121, 086801 (2018).

19.G. Torosyan, S. Keller, L. Scheuer, R. Beigang, and E. T. Papaioannou, 

"Optimized spintronic terahertz emitters based on epitaxial grown 
Fe/Pt layer structures," Sci. Rep. 8, 1311 (2018).

20.S. Zhang, Z. Jin, Z. Zhu, W. Zhu, Z. Zhang, G. Ma, and J. Yao, "Bursts of 

efficient terahertz radiation with saturation effect from metal-based 
ferromagnetic heterostructures," J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 51, 034001 
(2017).

21.M. B. Jungfleisch, Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, J. E. Pearson, R. D. Schaller, H. 

Wen, and A. Hoffmann, "Control of Terahertz Emission by Ultrafast 
Spin-Charge Current Conversion at Rashba Interfaces," Phys. Rev.
Lett. 120, 207207 (2018).

22.M. Battiato, K. Carva, and P. M. Oppeneer, "Superdiffusive spin 

transport as a mechanism of ultrafast demagnetization," Phys. Rev.
Lett. 105, 027203 (2010).

23.S. Yuasa, Y. Suzuki, T. Katayama, and K. Ando, "Characterization of 

growth and crystallization processes in CoFeB∕MgO∕ CoFeB magnetic 
tunnel junction structure by reflective high-energy electron 
diffraction," Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 242503 (2005).

24.Q. Wu and X. C. Zhang, "Free‐space electro‐optic sampling of 

terahertz beams," Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 3523-3525 (1995).

25.J. Sinova, S. O. Valenzuela, J. Wunderlich, C. Back, and T. Jungwirth, 

"Spin hall effects," Rev. Mod. Phys. 87, 1213 (2015).

26.S. Bonetti, M. Hoffmann, M.-J. Sher, Z. Chen, S.-H. Yang, M. Samant, 

S. Parkin, and H. Dürr, "THz-driven ultrafast spin-lattice scattering in 
amorphous metallic ferromagnets," Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 087205 
(2016).


