1 
 

Room temperature infrared photodetectors with 

hybrid structure based on 2D materials 

Tiande Liu(刘天德)1,†, Lei Tong(童磊)1,†, Xinyu Huang(黄鑫宇) 1, Lei Ye(叶镭)1,* 

1 School of Optical and Electronic Information, Huazhong University of Science and 

Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China 

† These author contributed equally 

 

 

 

* Corresponding authors 

Lei Ye: leiye@hust.edu.cn 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


2 
 

Abstract: Two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, transition metal 

dichalcogenides (TMDs), black phosphorus (BP) and related derivatives, have attracted 

great attention due to their advantages of flexibility, strong light-matter interaction, 

broadband absorption and high carrier mobility, and have become a powerful contender 

for next-generation infrared photodetectors. However, since the thickness of two-

dimensional materials is on the order of nanometers, the absorption of two-dimensional 

materials is very weak, which limits the detection performance of 2D materials-based 

infrared photodetector. In order to solve this problem, scientific researchers have tried 

to use optimized device structures to combine with two-dimensional materials for 

improving the performance of infrared photodetector. In this review, we review the 

progress of room temperature infrared photodetectors with hybrid structure based on 

2D materials in recent years, focusing mainly on 2D-nD (n = 0, 1, 2) heterostructures, 

the integration between 2D materials and on-chip or plasmonic structure. Finally, we 

summarize the current challenges and point out the future development direction. 

Keywords: two dimensional materials; heterostructure; infrared photodetectors;  

PACS: 68.65.-k, 74.78.Fk, 85.60.Gz 

 

1. Introduction 

 
Infrared (IR) photodetectors can convert infrared light signals into easily detectable 

electrical signals, which are widely used in imaging, communications, medical and 

night vision applications at present.[1, 2] However, in order to obtain better detecting 

performance, the traditional infrared photodetectors based on the III-V or II-VI 


3 
 

semiconductors have to work at low temperatures to reduce dark currents.[3] Because 

of the necessity of large refrigeration equipment to realize low operating temperature, 

it leads to the greatly increase of the manufacturing cost and limitation of the 

application, making it difficult to achieve miniaturization, flexibility and portability. 

In order to circumvent this disadvantage, new type semiconductors are proposed 

to use in the application of IR photodetectors, which can achieve low current at room 

temperature and high photocurrent. In recent years, two-dimensional materials with an 

atomic layer thickness, are verified to overcome the shortcomings induced by 

traditional semiconductors used in traditional IR detection due to their excellent 

electrical, optical and mechanical properties.[4-13] For example, graphene is the most 

studied two-dimensional materials with semi-metal, high mobility, broad spectrum 

response, flexibility, and tunable Fermi level properties,[14, 15] suggesting that graphene 

can be fabricated into flexible infrared photodetectors with broad spectrum absorption, 

ultra-fast response.[16, 17] In addition, transition metal dichalcogenides materials MX2 

(M: transition metal atoms, X=S, Se, Te), which have the properties of strong light 

interactions and tunable bandgap varying with the number of layers, are also suitable 

as photosensitive materials for infrared photodetectors. Black phosphorus shows a 

direct bandgap property with the range of 0.3-1.3 eV, leading to its absorption spectrum 

covering the near-infrared, mid-infrared and far-infrared regions, even extending to the 

terahertz region.[18] Especially, wide spectral response range coupled with its unique 

anisotropic crystal structure, promises the potential of black phosphorus for infrared 

polarized photodetectors.[19] Although 2D materials have various excellent and unique 


4 
 

properties for the applications of photodetector, they cannot avoid such a problem that 

such thin thickness cannot absorb more light. For example, the thickness of monolayer 

graphene is 0.35 nm and absorbs only 2.3% of light.[20] Although the bandgap of 

monolayer TMDs is a direct bandgap, the whole absorption is also less than 10%.[21] 

In order to solve this problem, it is necessary to combine two-dimensional materials 

with other strong light absorbing materials, or to integrate with some structures that can 

enhance light absorption. For example, the band gap of quantum dots and nanoparticles 

with strong light absorption can be tuned by changing its size,[22, 23] which is very 

suitable as a photosensitive layer for infrared photodetectors. Carbon nanotubes have 

excellent broadband absorption characteristics,[24] which is also very suitable for 

forming heterostructures with two-dimensional materials. Integrating two-dimensional 

materials with waveguides or cavities can enhance the photon absorption of 2D 

materials to improve detection performance. In addition, this integration also reveals 

the compatibility of two-dimensional materials with existing optoelectronic 

technologies. The surface plasmon resonance effect not only enhances light absorption 

but also selectively absorbs light by designing different shapes and sizes,[25] therefore 

the spectral response of these designed photodetectors can be extended to infrared or 

terahertz region that cannot be absorbed by intrinsic two-dimensional material, due to 

the surface plasmon resonance effect. 

In this review, we review the development of infrared photodetectors with mixed-

dimensional structure between two-dimensional materials and other low-dimensional 

materials, focusing on quantum dots, single-wall carbon nanotubes, and 2D vertical or 


5 
 

lateral heterostructures composed of different two-dimensional materials. Moreover, 

we also discuss the integration of two-dimensional materials and on-chip structures, 

including waveguides and cavities.  We also introduce the application of surface 

plasmon resonance in infrared photodetectors based on two-dimensional materials. 

Finally, we summarize the faced challenges currently in infrared photodetectors with 

hybrid structures based on two-dimensional materials and point out the future directions 

for further development. 

 

2. Heterostuctures 

2.1 Quantum dots on 2D materials 

 
In order to meet the demand for high-speed response of infrared photodetectors, 

the materials used to fabricate the detectors is often required to have high carrier 

mobility to reduce the transit time of photogenerated carriers in conducting channel. 

The carrier mobility of graphene is as high as 60,000 cm2V-1s-1,[26] which can fully meet 

this demand. However, the optical response of photodetectors based on intrinsic 

graphene is only a few tens of mA/W,[27, 28] which is caused by weak light absorption 

due to its atomic-scale thickness. Compared with graphene, monolayer molybdenum 

disulfide (MoS2) has a direct band gap, so the absorption is stronger than that of 

graphene, but still not enough. Moreover, the band gap of molybdenum disulfide is 1.8 

eV, and the corresponding absorption wavelength range is in the visible light range, 

leading to the limitation of directly fabrication for an infrared photodetector.[21, 29] The 

problems of weak light absorption caused by the ultra-thin thickness and the 


6 
 

unsatisfactory photoresponse range due to broad band gap, have seriously hindered the 

development of infrared photodetectors based on two-dimensional materials. To solve 

this problem, scientific researchers have tried many methods. It is a good attempt to 

combine two-dimensional materials with quantum dots.[16, 30-39] Because quantum dots 

have stronger light absorption relative to 2D materials, and their absorption wavelength 

range can be tuned by changing its size,[22, 40] and it can efficiently and selectively 

absorb photons and convert them into photogenerated electron-hole pairs. Therefore, 

the hybrid 2D-QDs structure is promising in the field of infrared detection technology. 

 
Konstantatos et al. demonstrated a hybrid graphene-PbS quantum dots 

phototransistor with ultrahigh gain of 108 and responsivity of 5107 AW-1.[32] The 

schematic diagram of a hybrid graphene-PbS quantum dots phototransistor is shown in 

Figure 1a. Monolayer or bilayer graphene was exfoliated with tape on a Si/SiO2 

substrate, and then an 80-nm PbS quantum dots film was prepared by low-cost spin 

casting method. PbS QDs thin film acts as light-sensitive material due to the 

characteristics of strong and selective light absorption, while graphene acts as a 

conduction channel owing to its extremely high carrier mobility. The energy band 

diagram at the interface of graphene and PbS QDs is shown in Figure 1b. On account 

of the work function mismatch between graphene and PbS QDs, the band bending 

occurs at the interface. PbS QDs thin film absorbs light to create photogenerated 

electron-hole pairs, which are then separated by an built-in electric field at the interface 

that induced by band bending. The Dirac point (VD) will be drifted to higher backgate 

voltage due to illumination. For VBG<VD, holes are transferred from PbS QDs to 


7 
 

graphene channel, and electrons are still trapped in the PbS QDs. The resistance of 

graphene decreases and carrier transport in the channel is hole-dominated. For VBG>VD, 

holes are transferred to graphene and recombined with electrons induced by the 

backgate, so the resistance of graphene increases and carrier transport in the channel is 

electron-dominated.  

After the photogenerated holes are transferred to the graphene channel, they are 

driven by the source-drain voltage (VSD) to reach the drain. The linear dependence of 

the photocurrent on VSD is shown in Figure 1c. In order to achieve charge conservation 

in graphene, holes are continuously replenished from the source. Due to the long charge 

trapping time of the PbS QDs and the high mobility of the graphene,[26, 41] holes in the 

channel can circulate multiple times during quantum dots trapped photogenerated 

electrons, resulting in ultrahigh photoconductive gain. The relationship between the 

responsivity and the applied back-gate voltage is shown in Figure 1d, which shows that 

the photoconductive gain of the photodetector can be adjusted by VBG. For VBG<VD, 

the measured responsivity can reach up to 5107 A/W at VBG=-20 V; when VBG=4 V, 

the responsivity reduces to zero. This back-gate-tunable gain is significant so that the 

required gain can be adjusted based on the photosignal intensity that needs to be 

detected. 

Similarly, Zheng et al. demonstrated an ambipolar broadband photodetector based 

on N, S codecorated graphene-PbS quantum dot heterostructure.[42] N, S codecorated 

graphene greatly reduces the p-type doping of graphene in air. The gate voltage required 

to modulate the Dirac point and the carrier type is significantly reduced, thereby 


8 
 

achieving gate tuneable mutual transformation of positive and negative photoresponse. 

The device exhibits excellent detection performance with responsivity of 104 A/W and 

specific detectivity of 1012 Jones at 1550 nm. 

 

 

Figure 1 
(a) The schematic diagram of a hybrid graphene-PbS quantum dots 

phototransistor. (b) The energy band diagram at the graphene/PbS QDs interface. (c) 

The linear dependence of the photocurrent on the applied drain-source voltage for 

different optical powers (46, 336, 516 pW). VBG=0. Inset: The total current (I=Idark + 

Iphoto) as a function of the applied drain-source voltage for different optical powers. (d) 

The responsivity as a function of the applied back-gate voltage VBG. VSD=5 V. (a-d) are 

reproduced from Ref.[32] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 

 
Another important two-dimensional material, transition metal dichalcogenides 


9 
 

(TMDs), has also been extensively studied in recent years.[43-46] However, due to the 

bandgap limitation and ultrathin thickness, the response spectral range and responsivity 

of TMDs-based infrared photodetectors are limited. Similarly, in order to enhance light 

absorption and broaden the response spectral range, a strategy for integrating TMDs 

materials with quantum dots has also been exploited.[31, 35, 36] Huo et al. demonstrated 

MoS2-HgTe QDs hybrid photodetectors beyond 2m.[31] The infrared detection 

capability of this detector is mainly caused by HgTe QDs thin film, which acts as a 

sensitizing layer, and the response spectrum range can be further extended to the mid-

wave infrared and long-wave infrared ranges by adjusting the size of HgTe quantum 

dots.[47, 48] A TiO2 buffer layer between the MoS2 transistor channel and the HgTe QDs 

sensitizing layer was used as a protective layer of the MoS2 channel and as an n-type 

electron acceptor medium to form an efficient p–n junction with the HgTe QDs at the 

interface facilitating the charge transfer to MoS2 channel.[31, 49] Thus, the dark current 

can be adjusted by the gate voltage and the specific detectivity D* (~1012 Jones) at a 

wavelength of 2 m can be obtained. The detector can operate at room temperature and 

exhibit sub-milliseconds response and high responsivity of ~106 A/W, which 

demonstrates that the hybrid 2D-QDs structure is an effective method to improve the 

performance of photodetector based on 2D materials. 

 
In order to obtain high gain to make up for the weak light absorption of 2D 

materials, many infrared photodetectors based on hybrid 2D-QDs heterostructures are 

phototransistors that have an electronic passive sensitization layer composed of strong 

light absorbing material.[32, 50, 51] Thus, the external quantum efficiency (EQE), response 


10 
 

speed and linear dynamic range are limited by thin sensitizing layers thickness, long 

trapping times, and high density of the sensitizing centers trap-state, respectively.[32, 41, 

52] In order to solve these problems, Nikitskiy et al. proposed a photodetector that 

integrates an electrically active colloidal QD photodiode with a graphene transistor.[34] 

The device is composed of a bottom graphene channel, a 300-nm-thick PbS QDs layer 

and a top ITO electrode. The photodiode operation and phototransistor operation of the 

hybrid 2D-QDs photodetector are shown in Figure 2a and b, respectively. 

Photogenerated electron-hole pairs are created at the QDs layer, and then drifted by the 

built-in electric field at the interface and by the applied bias voltage to form 

photocurrent directly in photodiode operation. However, after the electron-hole pairs 

are separated, electrons remain in the QDs layer and holes are driven by depletion 

region on the graphene/PbS QD interface and transferred to graphene in phototransistor 

operation. For VTD>0, the width of the depletion region expands, increasing the 

efficient charge collection area, and thus the external quantum efficiency also increases. 

The graphene-QDs photodiode responsivity and EQE are shown in Figure 2c. With 

increasing VTD, EQE increased from 10% at VTD=0 V to 75% at VTD=1.2 V (limited by 

reflection), indicating the importance of VTD for improving EQE. Figure 2d shows the 

EQE and responsivity in phototransistor operation, agreeing with the dependence of 

EQETD on VTD in photodiode operation, which demonstrates that the EQE of this 

integrated configuration is determined by the photodiode. Moreover, the responsivity 

is 5106 V/W at VTD=1.2 V, indicating that the phototransistor still has a high gain of 

105 compared with the photodiode operation. With increasing VTD, the temporal 


11 
 

response accelerates and the linear dynamic range extends. The electrical 3 dB 

bandwidth of the detector reaches 1.5 kHz for the optimum VTD, and the linear dynamic 

range extends from 75 dB at VTD=0 V to 110 dB at VTD=1.2 V. The above results prove 

that the design and optimization of infrared photodetectors based on hybrid 2D-QDs 

heterostructures can effectively enhance the detection performance. 

 

Figure 2 
(a-b) Schematic of photodiode operation and phototransistor operation of 

the hybrid graphene-PbS QDs photodetector, respectively. (c) Responsivity and 

external quantum efficiency EQE of photodetector in photodiode operation as a 

function of VTD. Inset: energy band diagrams of device with and without VTD bias. (d) 

Responsivity and EQE of photodetector in phototransistor operation as a function of 

VTD. (e) Normalized photoresponse versus light modulation frequency. The specified 

VTD values are shown in the legend. Inset: The linear dependence of extracted 3 dB 

bandwidth values on applied VTD. (f) Responsivity of the detector as a function of 

incident irradiance in the range of 10-5 to 10 Wm-2, which shows a significant extension 


12 
 

of the linear dynamic range with increasing VTD. (a-f) are reproduced from Ref.[34] 

with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 

 

2.2 Nanowires combined with 2D materials 

 
One-dimensional nanomaterials, such as single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), 

have unique and excellent optical and electrical properties due to 1D quantum 

confinement effect.[53] Because of the type of tube chiralities, metallic or 

semiconducting properties are exhibited, and the carrier mobility of semiconducting 

SWNTs can reach up to 105 cm2V-1s-1 at room temperature.[54-56] SWNTs have 

broadband and tunable absorption, so it has great potential in the field of infrared 

detection. However, the photoresponsivity is limited by the small light-absorbing area, 

and the responsivity of single-tube photovoltaic devices is always <10-3 A/W.[57] Paulus 

et al. reported that the junction between a metallic SWNT and graphene can perform 

effective charge transfer.[58] This is because that the SWNT is able to dope the graphene 

in a spatially controlled way without affecting its sp2 lattice structure.[58] Liu et al. 

demonstrated a high-performance photodetector based on a planar atomically thin 

SWNT-graphene hybrid film across visible to near-infrared range (400-1,550 nm).[50] 

Schematic of the photodetector and atomic force microscope (AFM) characterization 

of SWNT-graphene hybrid film are shown in Figure 3a. SWNTs have a diameter in the 

range of 1.0-1.6 nm, and the S11 and S22 bands are found to be located at ~1,800 and 

~1,000 nm with higher SWNTs loadings. The photogenerated electron-hole pairs are 

generated at the SWNT/ graphene interface under optical illumination, and then 


13 
 

separated by the built-in electric field. Electrons are transferred from SWNTs to 

graphene, while holes are trapped in the SWNTs, forming a photogating effect. Figure 

3b shows that the source-drain current (ISD) as a function of the applied back-gate 

voltage (VG). The Dirac point shifts toward the lower VG as the light increases, 

indicating that the graphene resistance can be effectively modulated by the photogating 

effect. Unlike other photodetectors that use the photogating effect to increase the 

responsivity, which generally has slow response speed, the photodetector based on 

hybrid SWNTs-graphene exhibits a fast response time of ~100 s (Figure 3c). This is 

mainly due to the high mobility of graphene and SWNTs and fast charge transfer at the 

SWNTs-graphene interface, and the field-effect mobility of electrons and holes are 

measured as 3,920 and 3,663 cm2V-1s-1, respectively. The transit time of the hybrid 

SWNTs-graphene photodetector is estimated to be ~ 10-9s, so the photoconductive gain 

is ~ 105 and the gain-bandwidth product is ~109 Hz. Moreover, since SWNTs act as a 

sensitizing layer, the detector also exhibits the characteristics of a broadband 

photoresponse. The relationship between the responsivity and the incident optical 

power at different illumination wavelengths in the range of visible to near-infrared 

range (405, 532, 650, 980 and 1,550 nm) is shown in Figure 3d, which shows a high 

responsivity of >100 A/W. Further, Liu et al. fabricated a photodetector based on 

graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid films on a PET substrate and measured the 

performance under bending conditions.[59] It was found that this device has good 

robustness against repetitive bending, which fully demonstrated the huge application 

potential of this heterostructure in the field of flexible electronics. 


14 
 

 
Jariwala et al. demonstrated a gate-tunable carbon nanotube-MoS2 heterjunction p-

n diode.[60] Since both monolayer MoS2 and semiconducting SWNTs have direct 

bandgaps and tightly bound excitation states in absorption spectra,[61] the photodiode 

based on hybrid MoS2-SWNTs also exhibits excellent detection performance. The 

external quantum efficiency (EQE) and the response time are ~25% and <15 s, 

respectively. Figure 3e shows that photocurrent spectral response can be tuned by 

changing the gate voltage. The photocurrent in the near-infrared region continuously 

decreases as the gate voltage decreases. Furthermore, the performance of devices based 

on 1D-2D heterostructures can be further optimized by strain modulation. For example, 

the responsivity of the photodetector based on the graphene-ZnO nanowire 

heterostructure is improved by 26% under 0.44% tensile strain on the ZnO nanowire.[62] 

The above results show that it is significant to carry out the research of the hybrid 1D-

2D heterostructure in the field of infrared detection. 


15 
 

 

Figure 3 (a) Schematic of the photodetector and AFM characterization of SWNT–

graphene hybrid film (middle: scale bar, 200 nm; right: scale bar, 20 nm). (b) The ISD-

VG transfer curve of device with increasing 650 nm illumination powers. VSD=0.5 V. 

Inset: the optical image of the SWNT-graphene device (Scale bar, 10m). (c) Temporal 

response of the SWNT–graphene hybrid photodetector under 650 nm illumination. (d) 

The dependence of responsivities of photodetector on the optical power at different 

illumination wavelengths from visible to near-infrared range (405, 532, 650, 980 and 

1,550 nm). (e) Photocurrent spectral response can be tuned by varying the gate voltage. 

VD=-10 V. (a-d) are reproduced from Ref.[50] with permission from the Nature 


16 
 

Publishing Group. (e) are reproduced from Ref.[60] with permission from the National 

Academy of Sciences. 

 

2.3 2D vertical and lateral heterostructures 

2D vertical heterostructures 

 
Two-dimensional vertical heterostructure is fabricated by stacking different two-

dimensional materials in the vertical direction. This heterostructure is generally 

prepared by targeted transfer method or CVD growth technique.[63-68] 2D vertical 

heterostructures have many advantages, such as atomically sharp interface, no atomic 

diffusion between layers, and no strict lattice matching problems due to weak van der 

Waals interaction between 2D materials. Moreover, the strong interlayer coupling and 

ultrafast transfer of charge carriers make it have great potential in the field of 

optoelectronics and electronic devices.[68-73] 

 
In order to achieve infrared detecting, photodetectors must have a broad spectral 

response. However, the development of TMDs for infrared detection is hindered due to 

the lack of 2D materials with narrow bandgap. Monolayer -MoTe2 has a band gap of 

1.1 eV and can absorb light in the near-infrared range.[74, 75] The response spectral of 

the photodetectors based on the -MoTe2/MoS2 dichalcogenide heterojunction covers 

in the range from the visible to near-infrared (800 nm).[76] However, this is not enough 

for mid-infrared and far-infrared detection, and the response range of the photodetector 

should be further extended. Graphene can absorb light indiscriminately due to the 

gapless band structure and monolayer black phosphorene shows a direct optical band 


17 
 

gap of 1.3 eV,[77, 78] so they are effective absorption material in the infrared region.  

Long et al. demonstrated a broadband photodetector based on MoS2-graphene-

WSe2 heterostructure covering visible to short-wavelength infrared range at room 

temperature.[79] The schematic diagram and optical image of the photodetector based 

on a MoS2-graphene-WSe2 heterostructure are shown in Figure 4a. The p-doped WSe2 

is induced by large work-function metal Pd, whereas MoS2 flakes remain n-type due to 

Fermi level pinning,[80] and thus forming a p-n junction with a strong internal electric 

field of ~2108 V/m. Photogenerated electron-hole pairs can be effectively separated in 

the presence of the internal electric field. Therefore, the dark current of the device is 

effectively suppressed and the specific detectivity increases accordingly. Figure 4b 

shows the responsivity R and specific detectivity D* of the photodetector for 

wavelengths ranging from 400 to 2,400 nm with an interval of 100 nm. R and D* are 

as high as 104 A/W and 1015 Jones in the visible region, while they decrease sharply to 

100 mA/W and 109 Jones in the infrared wavelength of 2400 nm, respectively. Figure 

4c explains the reason for the sharp changes in responsivity and specific detectivity. 

The band gap of MoS2 (Eg1) and WSe2 (Eg2) are 1.88 eV and 1.65 eV, respectively, and 

the corresponding wavelengths are 660 nm and 750 nm.[21, 29, 81] When the incident 

photon energy h exceeds the bandgap of the material, the material can absorb photons 

to generate electron-hole pairs. Therefore, for h >Eg1>Eg2, MoS2, graphene and WSe2 

all can generate photoelectron electron-hole pairs, resulting in a higher responsivity. 

For h <Eg1<Eg2, only graphene can generate photoelectron electron-hole pairs, and 

thus the photocurrent is drastically reduced. Qiao et al. reported a broadband 


18 
 

photodetectors based on graphene-Bi2Te3 heterostructure (Figure 4d).[82] Bi2Te3 has 

only 2.7% lattice mismatch with graphene, so the graphene-Bi2Te3 heterostructure can 

be directly prepared on graphene by Van der Waals epitaxial growth method.[83] Figure 

4e plots photocurrent of devices based on pure graphene and graphene-Bi2Te3 

heterostructure as a function of source-drain voltage without applied gate bias, which 

shows that the latter is ten times higher than the former. Both graphene and Bi2Te3 

absorb light to generate photoelectron-hole pairs, which are subsequently separated by 

a built-in electric field. Then, photogenerated electrons in graphene are transferred into 

Bi2Te3, while the photogenerated holes in Bi2Te3 are transferred into graphene, which 

suppresses the recombination of carriers and generates a larger photocurrent. Figure 4f 

shows the dependence of photocurrent on wavelengths ranging from 400 nm to 1,550 

nm. Due to the gapless nature of graphene and a small bandgap (0.15-0.3 eV) of Bi-

2Te3,[84] both graphene and Bi2Te3 are effective absorbent materials for infrared light, 

and thus the detector exhibits broadband detection characteristics. The effective 

detection range can be extended to the near infrared (980 nm) and c-communication 

band (1,550nm). The responsivity is 35 A/W, 10 A/W and 0.22 A/W in the visible (532 

nm), infrared (980 nm) and c-communication band (1,550 nm) regions, respectively. 

 


19 
 

 

Figure 4 
(a) 
Top: 
optical 
image 
of 
the 
photodetector 
based 
on 
a 

MoS2−graphene−WSe2 heterostructure. Scale bar, 5 m. Bottom: Schematic diagram 

of the device. (b) Responsivity and specific detectivity of the photodetector for 

wavelengths ranging from 400 to 2,400 nm with an interval of 100 nm. (c) Top: Spectra 

from ultraviolet to infrared. The band gap of MoS2 (Eg1) and WSe2 (Eg2) as well as 

corresponding wavelengths are plotted on the graph, respectively. Bottom left: For 

h >Eg1>Eg2, MoS2, graphene and WSe2 all can generate photogenerated electron-hole 

pairs. Bottom right: For h <Eg1<Eg2, only graphene can generate photogenerated 

electron-hole pairs. (d) The schematic diagram of the device based on graphene-Bi2Te3 

heterostructure. (e) The dependence of photocurrent of devices based on pure graphene 

and graphene-Bi2Te3 heterostructure on source-drain voltage VSD. VG=0 V. (f) 

Dependence of photocurrent on wavelengths ranging from 400 nm to 1,550 nm. (a-c) 

are reproduced from Ref.[79] with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


20 
 

(d-f) are reproduced from Ref.[82] with permission from the American Chemical 

Society. 

 

 
So far, highly polarization sensitive infrared photodetector based on two-

dimensional materials working at room temperature are still lacking. Ye et al. first 

demonstrated a broadband photodetector based on a vertical photogate heterostructure 

of BP-on-WSe2 with highly polarization sensitive for infrared detection (Figure 5a).[85] 

WSe2 acts as a conductive channel, while BP with a small direct bandgap and highly 

anisotropic crystal structure acts as a photogate.[18, 19, 77] Both WSe2 and BP absorb light 

efficiently and generate photogenerated electron-hole pairs under visible illumination, 

which are then separated by the built-in electric field. The photo-generated electrons in 

BP are transferred to WSe2 and the photo-generated holes in WSe2 are transferred to 

BP, which effectively reduces the recombination efficiency. An increasing number of 

photo-generated electrons in WSe2 are driven by source-drain bias to form photocurrent, 

thereby enhancing the responsivity. However, due to the band gap limitation of WSe2, 

only BP with a small band gap is an effective absorption material to generate photo-

generated free carriers under infrared illumination. So the photoresponse in the infrared 

region will be smaller than in the visible region. The responsivity is ~103 A/W under 

visible illumination (637 nm), while the responsivity is ~0.5 A/W under infrared 

illumination (1,550 nm). Figure 5b shows the photoconductive gain G and detectivity 

D* of the photodetector for wavelengths ranging from 400 to 1,600 nm. The detectivity 

in the visible and infrared regions are 1014 and 1010 Jones, and the gain in the visible 


21 
 

and infrared regions are 106 and 102, respectively, demonstrating excellent broadband 

detection performance. The optical image of the BP-on-WSe2 photodetector and the 

relationship between the photocurrent image of the photodetector at 1,550 nm and the 

polarization angle are shown in Figure 5c. The advantage of this device structure is that 

it can eliminate the disturbance of two-fold polarization-dependent photocurrent 

resulted from the geometric edge effect at the metal-BP edge and fully collect the photo-

generated free carriers isotropically for highly polarization-sensitive infrared 

detection.[85] As can be seen from the photocurrent image, the polarization 

photoresponse originates from the overlap of BP and WSe2, and it changes obviously 

with the polarization angle changes. The polar plot in Figure 5d shows the relationship 

between the photocurrent and the polarization angle of the incident light. The maximum 

photocurrent, corresponding responsivity of ~40 mA/W, is taken along the horizontal 

axis (defined as 0o polarization), while the minimum photocurrent, corresponding 

responsivity of ~6.8 mA/W, is taken along the vertical axis (defined as 90o 

polarization).[85] The ratio of the maximum responsivity to the minimum responsivity 

is about 6, showing high polarization sensitive infrared detection performance. 

Similarly, the mid-wave infrared photodetector based on BP and MoS2 heterostructure 

designed by Bullock et al. also utilized the anisotropy of BP to achieve polarization 

detection, which is bias-selectable and operates without the need for external optics.[86] 

The device exhibits high EQE (35%) and D* (1.11010 cm Hz1/2 W-1) at room 

temperature. 

 
The above results show that the 2D vertical heterostructure can effectively extend 


22 
 

the response range of the photodetector to achieve infrared detection. In addition, CVD 

epitaxial growth technology provides a guarantee for the scaled preparation of vertical 

heterostructures. By combining 2D materials with different unique and excellent 

physical properties, a multifunctional infrared detector with excellent detection 

performance can be prepared. 

 

Figure 5 
(a) Schematic diagram of the photodetector with BP-on-WSe2 photogate 

structure. (b) The photoconductive gain G and detectivity D* of the photodetector for 

wavelengths ranging from 400 to 1,600 nm at 1 mW/cm2 incident light power density. 


23 
 

Vds=0.5 V. (c) Top: the photocurrent image of the photodetector under 1,550 nm 

illumination with different light polarizations (red arrows). Bottom left: the optical 

image of the photodetector with BP-on-WSe2 photogate structure. (d) The photocurrent 

as a function of light polarization at 100 mW/cm2 incident light power density. Vds=0.5 

V. (a-d) are reproduced from Ref.[85] with permission from Elsevier. 

 

2D lateral heterostructures 

 
The heterostructures mentioned above are basically vertical, and the built-in 

electric field at the interface promotes the separation of photogenerated electron-hole 

pairs and charge transfer, thereby reducing the recombination and accelerating the 

response speed. In addition, two-dimensional lateral heterostructures, a heterostructure 

composed of materials with different work functions or homojunction composed of the 

same material but different doping types in the lateral direction, form a built-in electric 

field at the interface and play a similar role. At present, the methods for forming lateral 

heterostructures generally include chemical doping,[87, 88] electrostatic doping,[89-91] and 

one-pot or two-step chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth methods.[64, 65, 92-96]  

 
Recently, Yu et al. demonstrated a lateral black phosphorene P–N junction formed 

via chemical doping for high performance near-infrared photodetector.[88] The n-type 

doping of few-layer black phosphorene is achieved by using benzyl viologen (BV) as 

an electron dopant, which can obtain a high electron concentration while still maintain 

the high carrier mobility of BP as the processes do not induce defects in the crystal 

lattices, and Al2O3 is used to selectively protect part of the area of a p-type BP at the 


24 
 

same time.[88] The electron doping concentration of BP can be adjusted by doping time, 

and the built-in electric field at the P-N junction can effectively separate photogenerated 

electron-hole pairs and reduce recombination efficiency. Photocurrent tests show that 

the off-current under 1.47 m illumination is 4 orders of magnitude higher than in dark 

condition, demonstrating that the photocurrent dominates over thermionic and 

tunneling currents in the photodiode operation.[88] The photodetector exhibits high 

responsivity of ~180 mA/W, fast response of tens of milliseconds and high detectivity 

in the range of 1011-1013 Jones under infrared light illumination (=1.47 m). 

 
However, the current methods for preparing lateral heterojunctions have their own 

limitations. Chemical doping has the characteristic that it is difficult to find suitable 

dopants. The density of the carrier modulated by the electrostatic gating is relatively 

low, so the modulation effect is limited.[19, 97] CVD technology is an effective method 

for large-scale preparation of lateral heterostructures, but the main focus is on epitaxial 

growth of TMDs with large band gap at present, and thus CVD technology has 

limitation in the field of infrared detection. The infrared light detection technology 

based on 2D lateral heterostructure needs further research and development. 

 

 

 

 

 

3. On-chip structure 

3.1 2D materials on waveguide 


25 
 

 
Two-dimensional materials show strong interaction with light, but the spectral 

response range and responsivity of the photodetector based on 2D materials are limited 

due to the reason of the atomically ultra-thin thickness and the limitation of the band 

gap. In order to obtain better infrared detection performance to achieve practical 

applications, it is necessary to enhance the infrared light absorption of two-dimensional 

materials. Integrating two-dimensional materials with waveguides is a good strategy to 

enhance light absorption.[91, 98-104] The propagation of light in the waveguide is 

accompanied by the evanescent field, which can be absorbed by the two-dimensional 

materials to generate photogenerated electron-hole pairs.[105-108] Different with the 

incident light perpendicularly incident on the two-dimensional materials, the in-plane 

absorption of two-dimensional materials makes its nanoscale thickness to be no longer 

a major limiting factor for light absorption. The length of the two-dimensional material 

in contact with the waveguide is on the order of micrometers, so the length of the 

interaction with the light is also on the order of micrometers and therefore can 

effectively enhance light absorption. 

 
Recently, a series of similar but independent waveguide integrated graphene 

photodetectors have been reported,[98, 101, 102] and the device structures are shown in 

Figures 6a, c and e, respectively. Figure 6a shows a scanning electron microscope (SEM) 

image of a waveguide-integrated graphene photodetector using a GND-S-GND 

configuration. It should be noted that in addition to the length L of graphene, the width 

W of central electrode S in this device also affects the light absorption of the graphene. 

The absorption coefficient of metal electrode M increases with increasing electrode 


26 
 

width W. For W>100 nm (W>160 nm), the light absorption of the metal electrode will 

exceed the absorption of monolayer (bilayer) graphene. However, the contact resistance 

between metal and graphene also increases with decreasing width of electrode, so the 

metal electrode absorption coefficient and contact resistance should be considered 

comprehensively to obtain the best device performance. Figure 6b shows the absorption 

of graphene as a function of graphene length L at different widths, indicating that as 

long as the appropriate W and L values are obtained, the light absorption of graphene 

can be greatly enhanced. For example, when W = 100 nm, more than 50% light 

absorption can be obtained with only 22 m length bilayer graphene. Figure 6d shows 

an SEM image of a waveguide-integrated graphene photodetector with high 

responsivity and photocurrent image at zero bias. A 53 m bilayer graphene was 

overlaid on the waveguide, and two electrodes with waveguide distances of 100 nm and 

3.5 m, respectively, were used to collect the photogenerated carriers. The lateral metal-

doped junction overlapping the waveguide is formed by doping of metal electrode 100 

nm away from the waveguide, and effectively promotes the separation of 

photogenerated electron-hole pairs. The photocurrent image shows that the built-in 

electric field between metal-doped graphene and graphene appears at the metal and 

graphene interface and leads to two narrow photocurrent regions. Moreover, the region 

of maximum photocurrent coincides with the position of waveguide. Wavelength 

transmission measurements show that the transmission loss are 0.1 dB and 4.8 dB 

before and after the graphene transfer, respectively, indicating that the optical 

absorption of the waveguide-integrated graphene is greatly increased. The 


27 
 

photodetectors demonstrated an ultrafast response rates exceeding 20 GHz at zero bias 

and a high response rate of 0.108 A/W at 1 V bias. Thanks to the gapless graphene, the 

spectral response of photodetector ranged from 1,450 nm to 1,590 nm, which can 

effectively detect the c-communication band of the near-infrared region. The response 

spectrum of the waveguide-integrated graphene photodetector can be further extended 

to the mid-infrared region. Xu and coworkers demonstrated a graphene/silicon 

heterostructure waveguide photodetector with a responsivity of up to 0.13 A/W at room 

temperature in the mid-IR region (2.75 m).[102] In addition, this photodetector exhibits 

a low dark current due to the presence of a graphene/silicon heterojunction potential 

barrier, and the on/off photocurrent ratio is 30 at a bias of -1.5 V for 2.75 m 

illumination at room temperature (Figure 6f). This work further explains the 

photocurrent generation mechanism of waveguide-integrated graphene in the visible 

light region, near infrared region and mid-infrared region. For the visible light region, 

since silicon has an indirect bandgap of 1.1 eV, photoresponse is mainly due to electron-

hole pairs generated after the silicon absorbs light and graphene acts as a 

photogenerated free carriers conduction channel in this process. For the near-infrared 

region (1.55 m), the photon energy is more than twice that of the graphene Fermi 

energy level and the infrared light cannot be absorbed by silicon. The photoexcitation 

of graphene takes place in a direct transition way that electrons are excited from the 

valence band to the conduction band. For the mid-infrared region (2.75 m), the photon 

energy is less than twice the energy difference between the Fermi level and the Dirac 

point, thus preventing direct transitions of graphene.[102] The excitation of graphene 


28 
 

follows the indirect transition processes, and electrons are excited from Fermi level in 

the valence band to the conduction band with a large momentum mismatch under mid-

infrared light illumination.  

 

 

 

Figure 6 
(a) SEM image of a waveguide-integrated graphene photodetector using a 

GND-S-GND configuration (false colour). Inset: An enlarged view of the inside of the 

black dashed line. (b) The absorption of graphene as a function of graphene length L at 

different widths W. Solid line: bilayer graphene. Dashed line: monolayer graphene. (c) 


29 
 

Schematic of the chip-integrated graphene photodetector. (d) The spatially resolved 

photocurrent image of the waveguide-integrated graphene photodetector at zero bias. 

The black solid line shows the relative potential distribution across the graphene 

channel along the white dashed line. Inset: corresponding SEM image. (e) Schematic 

of a graphene/silicon heterostructure waveguide photodetector. (f) Photocurrent as a 

function of applied bias voltage with 2.75 m laser illumination at different light power. 

(a-b) are reproduced from Ref.[101] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 

(c-d) are reproduced from Ref.[98] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 

(e-f) are reproduced from Ref.[102] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 

 
Similarly, Youngblood et al. demonstrated a waveguide-integrated few-layer black 

phosphorus photodetector with high responsivity and low dark current.[103] Figure 7a 

shows the structure of the photodetector, having a graphene top-gate, a BP channel and 

the waveguide patterned on the silicon-on-insulator substrate. Since the incident light 

propagates along the waveguide, the optical interaction length is equal to the width of 

the black phosphorus covering on the waveguide (6.5 m). The device can absorb 78.7% 

of the optical power in the waveguide, of which only 17.5% is absorbed by the black 

phosphorus and the rest is absorbed by the graphene top-gate.[103] Figure 7c shows that 

the photocurrent versus the gate voltage VG and the bias voltage VDS. VG can 

electrostatically tune the hole doping concentration of black phosphorus and the BP is 

nearly intrinsic at VG=-8 V. When black phosphorus is in a low doping state (-10 V < 

VG < -1 V), the photocurrent is larger and its sign is positive relative to VDS, which 

suggests photocurrent generation mechanism is photovoltaic effect at this time.[109-111] 


30 
 

For VG > 0 V, BP is tuned to be more heavily n-doped, the photocurrent is getting 

smaller and its sign changes to negative relative to VDS, and the photocurrent generation 

mechanism is bolometric effect at this time.[109, 112] The frequency response of the 

photocurrent shown in Figure 7b can also demonstrate the photocurrent generation 

mechanism at different gate voltages. The roll-off frequency is measured to be 2.8 GHz 

when BP is in a low doping state (VG=-8 V), showing a fast response due to 

photovoltaic effect. But the roll-off frequency is measured to be 0.2 MHz when BP is 

in a high doping state (VG=8 V), showing a slower response due to bolometric effect. 

Figure 7d shows the intrinsic responsivity R and internal quantum efficiency IQE as a 

function of bias for different thicknesses. The intrinsic responsivity and internal 

quantum efficiency of 11.5-nm-thick BP device with top-gate are 135 mA/W and 10% 

at Vbias=-0.4 V, respectively. For 100-nm-thick BP device without top-gate, a larger bias 

voltage can be applied because there is no need to consider the breakdown of the gate 

insulation layer. Therefore, this photodetector shows better detection performance with 

high intrinsic responsivity (657 mA/W) and high internal quantum efficiency (50%) at 

Vbias=-0.4 V. Unlike gapless graphene, BP has a finite direct band gap,[113] which make 

the dark current of waveguide-integrated BP photodetector extreme low (220 nA) at 

VG=-8 V and Vbias=-0.4 V. 

 


31 
 

 

Figure 7 
(a) Schematic of the waveguide-integrated few-layer BP photodetector. (b) 

The frequency response of the waveguide-integrated BP photodetector at low doping 

state (VG=-8 V) and high doping state (VG=8 V). (c) Two-dimensional contour plot of 

photocurrent versus the gate voltage VG and the bias voltage VDS. (d) The intrinsic 

responsivity R and internal quantum efficiency IQE as a function of applied bias for 

different thicknesses. tBP: the thickness of BP. (a-d) are reproduced from Ref.[103] with 

permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 

 

 
Recently, Bie et al. reported a silicon photonic-crystal (PhC) waveguide-integrated 

light source and photodetector based on a p–n junction of bilayer MoTe2.[91] Figure 8a 

shows the device schematic, and Figure 8b shows LED mode and photodetector mode 

of device, respectively. The MoTe2 p-n junction is composed of p-type and n-type 


32 
 

doping that are electrostatically induced by left and right graphite top gates above the 

hBN dielectric layer. The bilayer MoTe2 not only has stronger excitation and longer 

emission wavelength than the monolayer MoTe2, but also has excitation caused by 

direct bandgap optical transitions similar to that of the monolayer.[74, 114, 115] There is a 

grating coupler for excitation and collection at the far end of the waveguide. Excitation 

light is coupled into the waveguide and transmitted along the waveguide to the grating 

coupler in LED mode, while incident light is coupled into the waveguide at the grating 

coupler and detected by the MoTe2 p-n junction in the photodetector mode (Figure 8b). 

Figure 8c shows an EL emission intensity image at room temperature cover on top of a 

false-colour optical image of the device. Two extra emission spots are observed on the 

grating coupler on both sides, which coincides with the aforementioned LED mode 

(Figure 8b). The orange and green lines in Figure 8d represent the transmission spectra 

of the PhC waveguide before and after the bilayer MoTe2 transfer, respectively. The 

orange curve in Figure 8d shows that the PhC transmission peak is at 1,160 nm, but this 

peak disappears after MoTe2 transfer, which is mainly due to the interference of MoTe2 

absorption. The normalized EL emission spectrum collected at the grating coupler 

represented by the blue line in Figure 8d, showing a narrow peak centred at 1,160 nm 

on top of a broader peak centred at 1,175 nm.[91] The former coincides with the PhC 

transmission peak, and the latter matches the free-space emission of the bilayer MoTe2. 

The reason that the PhC transmission peak can be observed at the blue line is that the 

excited states of MoTe2 have been filled by the electrically excited carriers in the LED 

mode, so the absorption of MoTe2 will not cause interference. When the device is 


33 
 

operating in photodetector mode, the responsivity and external quantum efficiency of 

the photodetector at the wavelength of 1,160 nm are 4.8 mA/W and 0.5%, respectively. 

Figure 8e shows the temporal response in photodetector mode. The photocurrent 

response bandwidth is 200 MHz (limited by experimental set-up), which is much higher 

than other MoTe2 photodetectors based on photogating and photoconductive effect,[116, 

117] indicating the fast response of waveguide-integrated photodetector with bilayer 

MoTe2 p-n junction. As can be seen from Figure 8f, the response spectrum of 

photodetector in the range from 1040 nm to 1240 nm and the largest responsivity is at 

1,160 nm (the location of the PhC transmission peak), which shows the dependence of 

the responsivity on the wavelength. This dependence indicates that the photocurrent 

originates mainly from the light transmitted by the PhC waveguide, and thus the light 

beyond this spectral response range cannot be detected due to the bandgap of the bilayer 

MoTe2 and the transmission cut-off of the waveguide. This work shows that all active 

optical components for point-to-point interconnects are possible with 2D TMD devices 

transferred onto otherwise passive photonic integrated circuits.[91] 

 


34 
 

 

Figure 8 
(a) Schematic of the silicon photonic-crystal (PhC) waveguide-integrated 

light-emitting diode and photodetector based on bilayer MoTe2 p–n junction. (b) The 

schematic diagram of the device operating in LED mode and photodetector mode. The 

arrow indicates the direction of light propagation in the PhC waveguide. (c) EL 

emission intensity image at room temperature cover on top of a false-colour optical 

image of the device. (d) The orange and green lines represent the transmission spectra 

of the waveguide before and after the bilayer MoTe2 transfer, respectively. The 

normalized EL emission spectrum collected at the grating coupler represented by the 

blue line. (e) The temporal response of device in photodetector mode at zero bias. The 


35 
 

response bandwidth of the device is 200 MHz. (f) The response spectrum of 

photodetector in the range from 1,040 nm to 1,240 nm, which shows the dependence 

of the responsivity on the wavelength due to photonic-crystal waveguide. (a-f) are 

reproduced from Ref.[91] with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 

3.2 2D materials on cavity 

 
The integration of two-dimensional materials and cavities, including photonic 

crystal cavities,[118, 119] optical microcavities[120, 121] and optical ring resonators,[122] is 

also an effective method for enhancing the light absorption of 2D materials. The 

incident light at the resonant frequency of the cavity is absorbed many times by the 

atomically thin two-dimensional material in the cavity, thereby enhancing absorption. 

Furchi et al. achieved a 26-fold absorption enhancement of graphene (>60%) by 

monolithically integrating graphene with a Fabry-Pérot microcavity.[123] The schematic 

of the microcavity-integrated graphene photodetector and the corresponding electric 

field distribution are shown in Figure 9a. Two Bragg mirrors are alternately composed 

of quarter-wavelength thick materials with different refractive index, and graphene 

layer is sandwiched between these mirrors. The presence of the barrier layer ensures 

the position of resonance occur at the graphene. The incident light are reflected back 

and forth multiple times between two Bragg mirrors and absorbed by the graphene, 

getting a higher absorption, which agrees with the electric field distribution. The 

spectral response of the device is shown in Figure 9b, and it can be clearly seen that a 

significant photocurrent enhancement at the cavity resonance (855 nm). Atomic thin 

monolayer graphene (only 0.335 nm) can absorb more than 60% of light, indicating 


36 
 

that the integration of 2D materials with cavity has great potential in enhancing the light 

absorption of 2D materials. 

 
However, the enhancement of light absorption by the cavity occurs only at the 

resonant wavelength of the cavity. In other words, the enhancement of the cavity is at 

the expense of the broadband photodetection. The strategy of integrating cavity and 

two-dimensional materials cannot be used for broadband detectors, and thus it can only 

be used to enhance light absorption at specific wavelengths. For example, Casalino et 

al. demonstrated a vertically illuminated, resonant cavity enhanced, graphene−Si 

Schottky photodetector operating at communication band (1,550 nm).[124] Figure 9c 

shows the resonant cavity enhanced graphene/Si Schottky photodetector and the 

resonant structure consists of a λ/2 Si slab layer confined between SLG/Si top and Au 

bottom mirrors.[124] The response spectrum of the device with and without Au bottom 

mirror is shown in Figure 9d. A 3-fold external responsivity Rext enhancement as 

compared with no Au bottom mirror. The above result shows the integration of cavity 

with two-dimensional materials can achieve stronger and selective light absorption of 

2D materials, so this method is possible to be applied to specific wavelength detection. 

 


37 
 

 

Figure 9 
(a) The schematic of the resonant cavity enhanced graphene photodetector 

and the corresponding electric field distribution. Red arrow: the position of graphene. 

(b) The dashed lines indicates the calculation result: reflection R (red), transmission T 

(green) and absorption A (blue), while the solid lines indicates the measurement result: 

reflection (red) and photocurrent (blue). A 26-fold absorption enhancement at the cavity 

resonance wavelength (855 nm). Inset: calculated theoretical results. (c) Schematic 

diagram of the resonant cavity enhanced graphene/Si Schottky photodetector. (d) The 

response spectrum of the device with and without Au mirror. A 3-fold absorption 

enhancement can be observed in the presence of Au mirror. The blue shift of the 

resonance peak is caused by the difference between different devices. (a-b) are 

reproduced from Ref.[123] with permission from the American Chemical Society. (c-

d) are reproduced from Ref.[124] with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


38 
 

4. Plasmonic structure 

 
In order to further enhance the photoresponse of the photodetector and obtain a 

tunable response spectrum, plasmonic nanostructures can also be applied to the infrared 

photodetector based on two-dimensional materials.[125-133] Metal plasmonic 

nanostructures mainly enhance the response of the detector in two ways. First, the near-

field enhancement capability of the plasmonic nanostructures can focus the light field 

in a small area, effectively enhancing the light absorption of the two-dimensional 

material. Moreover, the plasmonic structure can generate plasma-induced hot electrons 

due to plasmon decay under light illumination, and then hot electrons are injected into 

the device across the Schottky barrier between the metal and the two-dimensional 

material to form photocurrent. 

 
Fang et al. demonstrated a graphene-antenna sandwich photodetector with 

response spectrum in the range of visible to near-infrared and explained the reasons for 

photocurrent enhancement.[131] The schematic of photodetector and optical image are 

shown in Figure 10a and b. The Fano resonance plasma clusters (dimers, heptamers, 

and nonamers) sandwiched between two layers of graphene are respectively located in 

the 1, 3 and 5 regions, while the 2 and 4 regions have no plasmonic structure (Figure 

10b). The Raman image in Figure 10b shows that the plasmonic antenna clusters of 

heptamers and nonamers significantly enhance Raman intensity due to resonance under 

785 nm laser illumination. The photocurrent response in different regions in Figure 10c 

shows that the metal plasmonic antenna clusters can effectively enhance the 

photocurrent. As heptamers can provide larger near-field enhancement and higher 


39 
 

thermal electron yield, the enhancement effect of heptamers is significantly better than 

that of the dimer. In addition, Figure 10d shows that the photocurrent enhancement of 

the dimer plasmonic clusters is related to the polarization of the incident light, 

indicating that this structure has potential in the field of infrared polarization detection. 

Figure 10e and f show the measured photocurrent and the corresponding band diagram 

for different applied gate voltages, respectively. The gate voltage VG can effectively 

adjust the Fermi level of the graphene channel, and then obtain different energy band 

bending between the Fermi level of graphene channel and the Ti electrode-doped 

graphene. The steeper band bending results in a correspondingly larger built-in electric 

field, which can obtain higher the separation efficiency of the photogenerated electron-

hole pairs and thus produces a greater photocurrent. The resonance wavelength of the 

plasmonic clusters can be controlled by varying the diameter of disks. For example, 

when the diameter of heptamer plasmonic clusters changes from 80 nm to 180 nm, the 

corresponding resonance wavelength changes from 650 nm to 950 nm. Figure 10g 

shows the experimentally measured photocurrent as a function of different resonant 

wavelength (i.e. different heptamer diameters). It can be clearly seen that the 

photocurrent consists of plasmon-induced hot electrons and photogenerated carriers of 

plasmon-enhanced direct carrier excitation. The mechanism of photocurrent 

enhancement by plasmonic nanostructures is as follows. When the incident light 

resonates with the transmission window of the plasmonic clusters, a near-field 

enhancement effect occurs.[134] The light absorption of graphene is effectively enhanced 

and more electron-hole pairs are generated by direct excitation (DE). Moreover, hot 


40 
 

electrons (HE) generated in metal nanostructures can transfer into the conduction band 

of graphene over the Schottky barrier between metal and graphene.[135] Both plasmon-

induced hot electrons and directly excited carriers can be driven by the source-drain 

bias into the circuit to from photocurrent. Because the contribution of absorption 

relative to scattering decreases as the size of the nanoparticles increases, the 

contribution of HE to photocurrent tends to saturate, while the contribution of DE plays 

a greater role with increasing the diameter of the heptamer.[131] 

Since hot electrons are generated by plasmon decay, the response spectra of 

photodetectors based on two-dimensional materials and metal plasmonic 

nanostructures are not limited by the bandgap of two-dimensional materials.[129, 130] For 

example, bilayer MoS2 has an indirect bandgap of 1.65 eV, corresponding to a 

wavelength of 750 nm.[136] The hot electron-based bilayer MoS2 photodetector has a 

high responsivity of 5.2 A/W at 1,070 nm (Figure 10h).[129] MoS2 field-effect 

phototransistors were also found to have negative infrared photoresponse, which is 

caused by bolometric effect, and exhibited responsivity of 2.3 A/W at 980 nm.[137] The 

above results show that plasma-induced hot electrons can achieve effective light 

detection with below bandgap photon illumination. 

Ni et al. reported a photodetector based on plasmonic Si QD/graphene 

heterostructure that enables effective detection from UV to mid-infrared.[138] B-doped 

Si QDs not only enhance the light absorption of graphene in the infrared region due to 

surface plasmon resonance but also form photogating effect, which greatly improves 

the performance of the detector. Thus, the device exhibits ultrahigh gain of ~1012 and 


41 
 

responsivity of ~109 A/W. 

 

 

 

Figure 10 
   (a) The schematic of graphene-antenna sandwich photodetector. (b) 


42 
 

The optical image of device before (left) and after (right) transfer of top layer graphene. 

Inset: Raman mapping of the device under 785 nm laser illumination. (c) Photocurrents 

measured in the photodetector with dimer array and heptamer array and without pattern 

exhibit antisymmetric properties. The results show that the metal plasmonic antenna 

clusters can effectively enhance the photocurrent. The line scan position is shown by 

the white arrows in the inset. (d) The polarization dependent properties of the 

photocurrent measured in dimer and heptamer devices. (e) Photocurrents measured at 

different gate voltages in a heptamer device. (f) Energy band diagram of devices with 

different gate voltages in a heptamer device. The purple dashed line indicates the Dirac 

point of graphene. (g) Photocurrent as a function of different resonant wavelength. 

Black triangles: the measured photocurrent (IEXP(λ)). Blue triangles: the calculated DE 

photocurrent (IDE(λ)). Solid red triangles: the estimated HE photocurrent contribution 

EDE(λ) = IEXP(λ) −IDE(λ). Hollow red triangles: the calculated IHE(λ). (h) Schematic of 

hot electron-based bilayer MoS2 with near-infrared laser illumination. (a-g) are 

reproduced from Ref.[131] with permission from the American Chemical Society. (h) 

is reproduced from Ref.[129] with permission from the American Chemical Society. 

 

Table 1. Performance of room temperature infrared photodetectors with hybrid 

structure based on 2D materials. (UV: Ultraviolet. NIR: Near infrared. MIR: Mid-

infrared. BP: Black phosphorus. Gr: Graphene. QD: Quantum dot. FET: Field effect 

transistor.) 

Device type
Device 
Spect
Responsi
Detectivi
Respon
EQE/I
gain
Ref.


43 
 

structure
ral 

range

vity

(A/W)

ty

(Jones)

se time 

(s)/f3dB

bandwi

dth

QE

Hybrid 2D-

0D 

structures

Gr-PbS QD
NIR
107
-
0.26
-
-

[16][16]

Gr-PbS QD 

hybrid

NIR
1.6104
8.61010
810-3
2.410

6%

-
[30]

MoS2-HgTe 

QD

Visib

le-

NIR

106
1012
10-3
-

10

6
[31]

Gr/PbS QD

Visib

le-

NIR

107
71013
0.01
25%
108
[32]

Gr/PbS 

QDs/Gr

Visib

le-

NIR

58
21011
0.03
-
-
[33]

ITO/PbS 

QD/Gr

Visib

le-

NIR

2106
1013
1.5 

KHz

70%-

80%

105
[34]

MoS2/PbS 

QD

Visib

le-

NIR

105-106
51011
0.3-0.4
-
-
[35]

MoS2/PbSe 

QD

NIR
1.910-6
-
0.25
-
-
[36]

Hybrid 2D-

1D 

structures

SWNT-Gr 

hybrid 

films

400-

1,550 

nm

>100 (650 

nm)

40 (1550 

nm)

-

110-4

(650 

nm)

34% 

(650 

nm)

105

(650 

nm)

[50]

SWNT-

MoS2

Visib

le-

NIR

>0.1 (650 

nm)

-

<1.51

0-5 (650 

nm)

25% 

(650 

nm)

-
[60]


44 
 

WSe2-In2O3

Visib

le-

NIR 

7.5105

(637 nm)

3.5104

(940 nm)

4.171017

(637 nm)

1.951016

(940 nm)

210-2

(940 

nm)

-
-
[139]

Hybrid 2D-

2D 

structures

Gr-WSe2-

Gr

NIR

0.1210-

3 (1500 

nm)

-
-
2% 
-
[140]

MoS2 PN 

homojuncti

on

Visib

le-

NIR

7104
3.51014
10-2
>10%
>105
[141]

Gr-Bi2Se3

Visib

le-

MIR

1.97 

(3500 

nm)

8.18 

(1300 

nm)

1.7109
410-6
2.3%
30
[142]

Few-Layer

-MoTe2

/MoS2

Visib

le-

NIR

0.322 

(470 nm)

0.037 

(800 nm)

-

2.510-

2 (620 

nm)

85% 

(470 

nm)

6% 

(800 

nm)

-
[76]

MoS2-Gr-

WSe2

Visib

le-

MIR

0.306 

(940 nm)

1011 (940 

nm)

3.0310

-5 (637 

nm)

106% 

(532 

nm)

-
[79]

Gr-Bi2Te3

UV-

NIR

10 (980 

nm)

-

9.310-

3

(1550n

m)

-

83 

(532 

nm)

[82]

BP/WSe2

Visib

le-

NIR

103 (637 

nm)

0.5 

1014 (637 

nm)

1010

810-4
-

106

(637 

nm)

[85]


45 
 

(1550 

nm)

(1550 

nm)

102

(1550 

nm)

BP p-n 

junction

NIR
0.18

1011-

1013
0.015
0.75%
-
[88]

Waveguide-

integrated 

structures

MoTe2 p-n 

junction

NIR 

(1110

-1200 

nm)

4.810-3

(1160 

nm)

-

200 

MHz

0.5% 

(1160 

nm)

-
[91]

metal-

doped Gr 

junction

NIR
0.1
-
20 GHz
3.8%
-
[98]

Metal-Gr-Si

1550 

nm

0.37
-
-
7%
2
[99]

Gr-MoTe2-

Au

NIR

0.023 

(19.5 

nm)

0.4 (60 

nm)

-
1 GHz

1.5% 

(19.5 

nm)

35% 

(60 

nm)

-
[100]

Gr
NIR
0.05
-

18 

GHz

10%
-
[101]

Gr/Si

Visib

le-

MIR

0.13 

(2750 

nm)

-
410-8
71.5%
-
[102]

BP FET
NIR

0.135 

(11.5-

nm-

thick)

0.657 

(100-nm-

thick)

-
>3 GHz

10% 

(11.5-

nm-

thick)

50%  

(100-

nm-

-
[103]


46 
 

 

5. Conclusion and prospects 

 
In this review, we have reviewed various infrared photodetectors operating at room 

thick)

Microcavity

-integrated 

structures

Gr

864.5 

nm

2.110-2
-
-
-
-
[123]

Gr-Si

1550

nm

210-2
5.1107
1.3510

-9
-
-
[124]

Plasmonic-

integrated 

structures

Pt 

nanostrips

-

MoS2

UV-

NIR

14 (325 

nm)

312.5 

(532 nm)

69.2 

(980 nm)

1.11310

10 (532 

nm)

0.707 

(532 

nm)

7.283104

(532 nm)

-
[126]

Gr-Au 

nanorods

UV-

NIR

4104

(1310 

nm)

-

0.7 s 

(1310 

nm)

-

1.8109

(1310 nm)

[128]

Bilayer 

MoS2-Au

Visib

le-

NIR

1.1105

(532 nm)

5.2 

(1070 

nm)

-

28.5 

(532 

nm)

44.5 

(1070 

nm)

-

1.05105

(532 nm)
[129]

Few-layer 

MoS2-metal 

junctions

Visib

le-

NIR

410-3

(650 nm)

0.510-

4 (850 

nm)

-
-
-
-
[130]

Gr-antenna

Visib

le-

NIR

1.251

0-2
-
-
22%
-
[131]


47 
 

temperature with hybrid structure based on two-dimensional materials. Hybrid 2D-QDs 

heterostructures possess two prominent advantages of strong light absorption 

contributed by quantum dots and high carrier mobility contributed by two-dimensional 

materials, and thus exhibiting extremely high gain and responsivity. The detection 

performance of photodetectors based on hybrid graphene-SWNTs structure is superior 

to that of photodetectors based on only graphene or SWNTs, showing high responsivity 

and fast response, in which the bandgap of SWNTs can be adjusted by the diameter of 

SWNTs to extend the spectral response range to infrared. The 2D-2D van der Waals 

heterostructure is also suitable for light detection in the infrared region because of 

ultrafast charge transfer at the interface, and the combination of two or more two-

dimensional materials with different optical and electrical properties not only 

compensates for the lack of both (eg. the combination of 2D materials with different 

bandgap structures can achieve broadband detection), but also exploits the 

characteristics of 2D materials to prepare a photodetector with specific function (such 

as high polarization sensitivity of a BP-on-WSe2 photogate structure). The integration 

of two-dimensional material on waveguide makes the light-matter interaction no longer 

limited by the ultrathin thickness of two-dimensional material, greatly increasing the 

light absorption of photodetectors to obtain a higher responsivity. In addition, this 

integration also shows that two-dimensional materials are compatible with the existing 

mature optical waveguide technology, providing a pathway for the commercialized 

practical application of two-dimensional materials. The integration of two-dimensional 

material with the cavity enhances the light absorption of the material at the resonant 


48 
 

wavelength of the cavity. This selective absorption method is very suitable for precise 

detection of specific wavelengths. Metal plasmonic nanostructures can also enhance 

light absorption and photocurrent through near-field enhancement effects and hot 

electrons. In addition, plasma-induced hot electrons can extend the spectral response 

range, which is useful for infrared detection based on some two-dimensional materials 

with wide bandgap.  

 
Infrared photodetectors with hybrid structure based on two-dimensional materials 

still face many challenges and need us to explore further.  

1) Low-cost, large-scale preparation  

Many of the currently reported hybrid structures based on two-dimensional 

materials are prepared just only through mechanical exfoliation and targeted transfer 

techniques, leading to poor reproducibility and relatively low yield of photodetectors. 

This method can only meet the needs of scientific research and cannot be used for 

commercial applications. Although the 2D vertical or lateral heterostructure can be 

prepared by the CVD method and 2D-QDs structure can be prepared by the solution-

processed method, which shows the potential of large-scale production, but they still 

have many limitations and need further improve.  

2) Device performance optimization  

The reported overall performance parameters of infrared photodetectors with 

hybrid structure based on two-dimensional materials are excellent, but they are still far 

from the theoretical value. The excellent optical and electrical properties of two-

dimensional materials have not been fully exploited. In order to obtain better detection 


49 
 

performance, it is necessary to further study the interfacial charge transfer and 

photocurrent generation mechanism in hybrid structure based on two-dimensional 

materials for designing or optimizing various hybrid structures.  

3) Research on novel and suitable two-dimensional materials  

There are various currently limitations for two-dimensional materials used in the 

field of infrared detection. For example, the band gap of graphene and many TMDs 

(such as MoS2, WSe2) are not conducive to the absorption of infrared light. The 

instability of MoTe2 and BP with an appropriately bandgap in the air also limits their 

use. In order to obtain better infrared detection performance, novel two-dimensional 

materials with suitable band gap and good stability have to be developed. 

4) Design of novel heterostructure with 2D materials  

Many existing heterostructures based on two-dimensional materials simply 

combine two materials that appear to be suitable. However, this combination may not 

be optimal, which may leads to the inability to maximize the advantages of 

heterostructure. It is a worthwhile research direction to further understand the properties 

of various two-dimensional materials through theoretical research and computational 

simulation methods, and to design a more rational and ingenious novel heterostructure. 

It has the potential to dramatically improve the performance of the photodetector and 

even discover new phenomena. 

5) Interface research of heterostructures  

Two-dimensional materials are particularly sensitive to interface problem due to 

their large specific surface area and atomic thickness. On the one hand, interface 


50 
 

pollution and the introduction of defects have a huge impact on the physical properties 

of two-dimensional materials. Therefore, how to obtain a clean and defect-free interface 

in the preparation process of heterostructure based on two-dimensional materials has 

always been a research hotspot. On the other hand, the study of charge transfer and 

interaction at the interface of two materials also helps to clarify the working mechanism 

of the photodetector and to improve performance of photodetector after the formation 

of the heterostructure. 

 

 

Declaration of conflicts of Interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

 

Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge funding by National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(No. 61704061) 

 

References 

[1] 
Norton P R, Campbell J B, Horn S B and Reago D A  International Symposium 

on Optical Science and Technology, p. 11 

[2] 
Rogalski A 2012 Opto-Electronics Review 20 279  

[3] 
Rogalski A, Antoszewski J and Faraone L 2009 Journal of Applied Physics 105 

091101  

[4] 
Xu M, Liang T, Shi M and Chen H 2013 Chemical Reviews 113 3766  

[5] 
Butler S Z, Hollen S M, Cao L, Cui Y, Gupta J A, Gutiérrez H R, Heinz T F, 

Hong S S, Huang J, Ismach A F, Johnston-Halperin E, Kuno M, Plashnitsa V V, 

Robinson R D, Ruoff R S, Salahuddin S, Shan J, Shi L, Spencer M G, Terrones 


51 
 

M, Windl W and Goldberger J E 2013 ACS Nano 7 2898  

[6] 
Wu Pei H X, Zhang Jian, Sun Lian-Feng 2017 Acta Physica Sinica 66 218102  

[7] 
Tan Wee C, Huang L, Ng Rui J, Wang L, Hasan Dihan Md N, Duffin Thorin J, 

Kumar Karuppannan S, Nijhuis Christian A, Lee C and Ang K W 2017 

Advanced Materials 30 1705039  

[8] 
Lai J, Liu X, Ma J, Wang Q, Zhang K, Ren X, Liu Y, Gu Q, Zhuo X, Lu W, Wu 

Y, Li Y, Feng J, Zhou S, Chen J-H and Sun D 2018 Advanced Materials 30 

1707152  

[9] 
Xuefei Li X X, Yanqing Wu 2017 Chin. Phys. B 26 37307  

[10] 
Jianlu Wang W H 2017 Chin. Phys. B 26 37106  

[11] 
Yuanfang Yu F M, Jun He, Zhenhua Ni 2017 Chin. Phys. B 26 36801  

[12] 
Zi-Wei Li Y-H H, Yu Li, Zhe-Yu Fang 2017 Chin. Phys. B 26 36802  

[13] 
Xiaomu Wang X G 2017 Chin. Phys. B 26 34203  

[14] 
Novoselov K S, Fal′ko V I, Colombo L, Gellert P R, Schwab M G and Kim 

K 2012 Nature 490 192  

[15] 
Allen M J, Tung V C and Kaner R B 2010 Chemical Reviews 110 132  

[16] 
Sun Z, Liu Z, Li J, Tai G a, Lau S P and Yan F 2012 Advanced Materials 24 

5878  

[17] 
Zhang B Y, Liu T, Meng B, Li X, Liang G, Hu X and Wang Q J 2013 Nature 

Communications 4 1811  

[18] 
Castellanos-Gomez A 2015 The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 6 4280  

[19] 
Xia F, Wang H and Jia Y 2014 Nature Communications 5 4458  

[20] 
Nair R R, Blake P, Grigorenko A N, Novoselov K S, Booth T J, Stauber T, Peres 

N M R and Geim A K 2008 Science 320 1308  

[21] 
Mak K F, Lee C, Hone J, Shan J and Heinz T F 2010 Physical Review Letters 

105 136805  

[22] 
Moreels I, Justo Y, De Geyter B, Haustraete K, Martins J C and Hens Z 2011 

ACS Nano 5 2004  

[23] 
Yu X, Li Y, Hu X, Zhang D, Tao Y, Liu Z, He Y, Haque M A, Liu Z, Wu T and 

Wang Q J 2018 Nature Communications 9 4299  

[24] 
Eatemadi A, Daraee H, Karimkhanloo H, Kouhi M, Zarghami N, Akbarzadeh 

A, Abasi M, Hanifehpour Y and Joo S W 2014 Nanoscale Research Letters 9 

393  


52 
 

[25] 
Brongersma M L, Halas N J and Nordlander P 2015 Nature Nanotechnology 10 

25  

[26] 
Dean C R, Young A F, Meric I, Lee C, Wang L, Sorgenfrei S, Watanabe K, 

Taniguchi T, Kim P, Shepard K L and Hone J 2010 Nature Nanotechnology 5 

722  

[27] 
Mueller T, Xia F and Avouris P 2010 Nature Photonics 4 297  

[28] 
Xia F, Mueller T, Lin Y-m, Valdes-Garcia A and Avouris P 2009 Nature 

Nanotechnology 4 839  

[29] 
Splendiani A, Sun L, Zhang Y, Li T, Kim J, Chim C-Y, Galli G and Wang F 

2010 Nano Letters 10 1271  

[30] 
Che Y, Zhang Y, Cao X, Zhang H, Song X, Cao M, Yu Y, Dai H, Yang J, Zhang 

G and Yao J 2017 ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9 32001  

[31] 
Huo N, Gupta S and Konstantatos G 2017 Advanced Materials 1606576  

[32] 
Konstantatos G, Badioli M, Gaudreau L, Osmond J, Bernechea M, Arquer F P 

G D, Gatti F and Koppens F H L 2012 Nature Nanotechnology 7 363  

[33] 
Nian Q, Gao L, Hu Y, Deng B, Tang J and Cheng G J 2017 ACS Applied 

Materials & Interfaces 9 44715  

[34] 
Nikitskiy I, Goossens S, Kufer D, Lasanta T, Navickaite G, Koppens F H and 

Konstantatos G 2016 Nature Communications 7 11954  

[35] 
Kufer D, Nikitskiy I, Lasanta T, Navickaite G, Koppens Frank H L and 

Konstantatos G 2015 Advanced Materials 27 176  

[36] 
Schornbaum J, Winter B, Schießl Stefan P, Gannott F, Katsukis G, Guldi Dirk 

M, Spiecker E and Zaumseil J 2014 Advanced Functional Materials 24 5798  

[37] 
Zhang Y, Cao M, Song X, Wang J, Che Y, Dai H, Ding X, Zhang G and Yao J 

2015 The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 119 21739  

[38] 
Zhang D, Gan L, Cao Y, Wang Q, Qi L and Guo X 2012 Advanced Materials 

24 2715  

[39] 
Sun M, Fang Q, Xie D, Sun Y, Qian L, Xu J, Xiao P, Teng C, Li W, Ren T and 

Zhang Y 2018 Nano Research 11 3233  

[40] 
Giansante C, Infante I, Fabiano E, Grisorio R, Suranna G P and Gigli G 2015 

Journal of the American Chemical Society 137 1875  

[41] 
Konstantatos G, Clifford J, Levina L and Sargent E H 2007 Nature Photonics 1 

531  


53 
 

[42] 
Zheng L, Zhou W, Ning Z, Wang G, Cheng X, Hu W, Zhou W, Liu Z, Yang S, 

Xu K, Luo M and Yu Y 2018 Advanced Optical Materials 0 1800985  

[43] 
Radisavljevic B, Radenovic A, Brivio J, Giacometti V and Kis A 2011 Nature 

Nanotechnology 6 147  

[44] 
Jin W, Yeh P-C, Zaki N, Zhang D, Sadowski J T, Al-Mahboob A, van der Zande 

A M, Chenet D A, Dadap J I, Herman I P, Sutter P, Hone J and Osgood R M 

2013 Physical Review Letters 111 106801  

[45] 
Eda G, Yamaguchi H, Voiry D, Fujita T, Chen M and Chhowalla M 2011 Nano 

Letters 11 5111  

[46] 
Wu D, Ma Y, Niu Y, Liu Q, Dong T, Zhang S, Niu J, Zhou H, Wei J, Wang Y, 

Zhao Z and Wang N 2018 Science Advances 4 

[47] 
Keuleyan S E, Guyot-Sionnest P, Delerue C and Allan G 2014 ACS Nano 8 

8676  

[48] 
Lhuillier E, Scarafagio M, Hease P, Nadal B, Aubin H, Xu X Z, Lequeux N, 

Patriarche G, Ithurria S and Dubertret B 2016 Nano Letters 16 1282  

[49] 
Kufer D, Lasanta T, Bernechea M, Koppens F H L and Konstantatos G 2016 

ACS Photonics 3 1324  

[50] 
Liu Y, Wang F, Wang X, Wang X, Flahaut E, Liu X, Li Y, Wang X, Xu Y, Shi Y 

and Zhang R 2015 Nature Communications 6 8589  

[51] 
Roy K, Padmanabhan M, Goswami S, Sai T P, Ramalingam G, Raghavan S and 

Ghosh A 2013 Nature Nanotechnology 8 826  

[52] 
Konstantatos G, Levina L, Fischer A and Sargent E H 2008 Nano Letters 8 1446  

[53] 
Avouris P, Freitag M and Perebeinos V 2008 Nature Photonics 2 341  

[54] 
Saito R, Fujita M, Dresselhaus G and Dresselhaus M S 1992 Applied Physics 

Letters 60 2204  

[55] 
Kataura H, Kumazawa Y, Maniwa Y, Umezu I, Suzuki S, Ohtsuka Y and Achiba 

Y 1999 Synthetic Metals 103 2555  

[56] 
Dürkop T, Getty S A, Cobas E and Fuhrer M S 2004 Nano Letters 4 35  

[57] 
Gabor N M, Zhong Z, Bosnick K, Park J and McEuen P L 2009 Science 325 

1367  

[58] 
Paulus Geraldine L C, Wang Qing H, Ulissi Zachary W, McNicholas Thomas P, 

Vijayaraghavan A, Shih C J, Jin Z and Strano Michael S 2012 Small 9 1954  

[59] 
Liu Y, Liu Y, Qin S, Xu Y, Zhang R and Wang F 2017 Nano Research 10 1880  


54 
 

[60] 
Jariwala D, Sangwan V K, Wu C-C, Prabhumirashi P L, Geier M L, Marks T J, 

Lauhon L J and Hersam M C 2013 Proceedings of the National Academy of 

Sciences 110 18076  

[61] 
Mak K F, He K, Lee C, Lee G H, Hone J, Heinz T F and Shan J 2012 Nature 

Materials 12 207  

[62] 
Liu S, Liao Q, Zhang Z, Zhang X, Lu S, Zhou L, Hong M, Kang Z and Zhang 

Y 2017 Nano Research 10 3476  

[63] 
Pizzocchero F, Gammelgaard L, Jessen B S, Caridad J M, Wang L, Hone J, 

Bøggild P and Booth T J 2016 Nature Communications 7 11894  

[64] 
Gong Y, Lin J, Wang X, Shi G, Lei S, Lin Z, Zou X, Ye G, Vajtai R, Yakobson 

B I, Terrones H, Terrones M, Tay Beng K, Lou J, Pantelides S T, Liu Z, Zhou 

W and Ajayan P M 2014 Nature Materials 13 1135  

[65] 
Gong Y, Lei S, Ye G, Li B, He Y, Keyshar K, Zhang X, Wang Q, Lou J, Liu Z, 

Vajtai R, Zhou W and Ajayan P M 2015 Nano Letters 15 6135  

[66] 
He Y, Yang Y, Zhang Z, Gong Y, Zhou W, Hu Z, Ye G, Zhang X, Bianco E, Lei 

S, Jin Z, Zou X, Yang Y, Zhang Y, Xie E, Lou J, Yakobson B, Vajtai R, Li B and 

Ajayan P 2016 Nano Letters 16 3314  

[67] 
Yu Y, Hu S, Su L, Huang L, Liu Y, Jin Z, Purezky A A, Geohegan D B, Kim K 

W, Zhang Y and Cao L 2015 Nano Letters 15 486  

[68] 
Wang Q, Wen Y, Cai K, Cheng R, Yin L, Zhang Y, Li J, Wang Z, Wang F, Wang 

F, Shifa T A, Jiang C, Yang H and He J 2018 Science Advances 4 

[69] 
Fang H, Battaglia C, Carraro C, Nemsak S, Ozdol B, Kang J S, Bechtel H A, 

Desai S B, Kronast F, Unal A A, Conti G, Conlon C, Palsson G K, Martin M C, 

Minor A M, Fadley C S, Yablonovitch E, Maboudian R and Javey A 2014 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 6198  

[70] 
Hong X, Kim J, Shi S-F, Zhang Y, Jin C, Sun Y, Tongay S, Wu J, Zhang Y and 

Wang F 2014 Nature Nanotechnology 9 682  

[71] 
Ceballos F, Bellus M Z, Chiu H-Y and Zhao H 2014 ACS Nano 8 12717  

[72] 
Long R and Prezhdo O V 2016 Nano Letters 16 1996  

[73] 
Xia Wei F-G Y, Chao Shen, Quan-Shan Lv, Kai-You Wang 2017 Chin. Phys. B 

26 38504  

[74] 
Lezama I G, Arora A, Ubaldini A, Barreteau C, Giannini E, Potemski M and 

Morpurgo A F 2015 Nano Letters 15 2336  


55 
 

[75] 
Ruppert C, Aslan O B and Heinz T F 2014 Nano Letters 14 6231  

[76] 
Pezeshki A, Shokouh Seyed Hossein H, Nazari T, Oh K and Im S 2016 

Advanced Materials 28 3216  

[77] 
Liu H, Neal A T, Zhu Z, Luo Z, Xu X, Tománek D and Ye P D 2014 ACS Nano 

8 4033  

[78] 
Tran V, Soklaski R, Liang Y and Yang L 2014 Physical Review B 89 235319  

[79] 
Long M, Liu E, Wang P, Gao A, Xia H, Luo W, Wang B, Zeng J, Fu Y, Xu K, 

Zhou W, Lv Y, Yao S, Lu M, Chen Y, Ni Z, You Y, Zhang X, Qin S, Shi Y, Hu 

W, Xing D and Miao F 2016 Nano Letters 16 2254  

[80] 
Das S, Chen H-Y, Penumatcha A V and Appenzeller J 2013 Nano Letters 13 

100  

[81] 
Ross J S, Wu S, Yu H, Ghimire N J, Jones A M, Aivazian G, Yan J, Mandrus D 

G, Xiao D, Yao W and Xu X 2013 Nature Communications 4 1474  

[82] 
Qiao H, Yuan J, Xu Z, Chen C, Lin S, Wang Y, Song J, Liu Y, Khan Q, Hoh H 

Y, Pan C-X, Li S and Bao Q 2015 ACS Nano 9 1886  

[83] 
Dang W, Peng H, Li H, Wang P and Liu Z 2010 Nano Letters 10 2870  

[84] 
Hasan M Z and Kane C L 2010 Reviews of Modern Physics 82 3045  

[85] 
Ye L, Wang P, Luo W, Gong F, Liao L, Liu T, Tong L, Zang J, Xu J and Hu W 

2017 Nano Energy 37 53  

[86] 
Bullock J, Amani M, Cho J, Chen Y-Z, Ahn G H, Adinolfi V, Shrestha V R, Gao 

Y, Crozier K B, Chueh Y-L and Javey A 2018 Nature Photonics 12 601  

[87] 
Choi M S, Qu D, Lee D, Liu X, Watanabe K, Taniguchi T and Yoo W J 2014 

ACS Nano 8 9332  

[88] 
Yu X, Zhang S, Zeng H and Wang Q J 2016 Nano Energy 25 34  

[89] 
Li L, Yu Y, Ye G J, Ge Q, Ou X, Wu H, Feng D, Chen X H and Zhang Y 2014 

Nature Nanotechnology 9 372  

[90] 
Pradhan N R, Rhodes D, Xin Y, Memaran S, Bhaskaran L, Siddiq M, Hill S, 

Ajayan P M and Balicas L 2014 ACS Nano 8 7923  

[91] 
Bie Y-Q, Grosso G, Heuck M, Furchi M M, Cao Y, Zheng J, Bunandar D, 

Navarro-Moratalla E, Zhou L, Efetov D K, Taniguchi T, Watanabe K, Kong J, 

Englund D and Jarillo-Herrero P 2017 Nature Nanotechnology 12 1124  

[92] 
Duan X, Wang C, Shaw J C, Cheng R, Chen Y, Li H, Wu X, Tang Y, Zhang Q, 

Pan A, Jiang J, Yu R, Huang Y and Duan X 2014 Nature Nanotechnology 9 


56 
 

1024  

[93] 
Huang C, Wu S, Sanchez A M, Peters J J P, Beanland R, Ross J S, Rivera P, Yao 

W, Cobden D H and Xu X 2014 Nature Materials 13 1096  

[94] 
Li M-Y, Shi Y, Cheng C-C, Lu L-S, Lin Y-C, Tang H-L, Tsai M-L, Chu C-W, 

Wei K-H, He J-H, Chang W-H, Suenaga K and Li L-J 2015 Science 349 524  

[95] 
Sahoo P K, Memaran S, Xin Y, Balicas L and Gutiérrez H R 2018 Nature 553 

63  

[96] 
Zhang Z, Chen P, Duan X, Zang K, Luo J and Duan X 2017 Science 357 788  

[97] 
Du Y, Liu H, Deng Y and Ye P D 2014 ACS Nano 8 10035  

[98] 
Gan X, Shiue R-J, Gao Y, Meric I, Heinz T F, Shepard K, Hone J, Assefa S and 

Englund D 2013 Nature Photonics 7 883  

[99] 
Goykhman I, Sassi U, Desiatov B, Mazurski N, Milana S, de Fazio D, Eiden A, 

Khurgin J, Shappir J, Levy U and Ferrari A C 2016 Nano Letters 16 3005  

[100] Ma P, Flöry N, Salamin Y, Baeuerle B, Emboras A, Josten A, Taniguchi T, 

Watanabe K, Novotny L and Leuthold J 2018 ACS Photonics 

[101] Pospischil A, Humer M, Furchi M M, Bachmann D, Guider R, Fromherz T and 

Mueller T 2013 Nature Photonics 7 892  

[102] Wang X, Cheng Z, Xu K, Tsang H K and Xu J-B 2013 Nature Photonics 7 888  

[103] Youngblood N, Chen C, Koester S J and Li M 2015 Nature Photonics 9 247  

[104] Yubing Wang W Y, Qin Han, Xiaohong Yang, Han Ye, Qianqian Lv, Dongdong 

Yin 2016 Chin. Phys. B 25 118103  

[105] Liu M, Yin X, Ulin-Avila E, Geng B, Zentgraf T, Ju L, Wang F and Zhang X 

2011 Nature 474 64  

[106] Echtermeyer T J, Britnell L, Jasnos P K, Lombardo A, Gorbachev R V, 

Grigorenko A N, Geim A K, Ferrari A C and Novoselov K S 2011 Nature 

Communications 2 458  

[107] Gu T, Petrone N, McMillan J F, van der Zande A, Yu M, Lo G Q, Kwong D L, 

Hone J and Wong C W 2012 Nature Photonics 6 554  

[108] Bao Q, Zhang H, Wang B, Ni Z, Lim C H Y X, Wang Y, Tang D Y and Loh K 

P 2011 Nature Photonics 5 411  

[109] Freitag M, Low T, Xia F and Avouris P 2012 Nature Photonics 7 53  

[110] Low T, Rodin A S, Carvalho A, Jiang Y, Wang H, Xia F and Castro Neto A H 

2014 Physical Review B 90 075434  


57 
 

[111] Hong T, Chamlagain B, Lin W Z, Chuang H J, Pan M H, Zhou Z X and Xu Y 

Q 2014 NANOSCALE 6 8978  

[112] Low T, Engel M, Steiner M and Avouris P 2014 Physical Review B 90 081408  

[113] Das S, Zhang W, Demarteau M, Hoffmann A, Dubey M and Roelofs A 2014 

Nano Letters 14 5733  

[114] Robert C, Picard R, Lagarde D, Wang G, Echeverry J P, Cadiz F, Renucci P, 

Högele A, Amand T, Marie X, Gerber I C and Urbaszek B 2016 Physical Review 

B 94 155425  

[115] Froehlicher G, Lorchat E and Berciaud S 2016 Physical Review B 94 085429  

[116] Yin L, Zhan X, Xu K, Wang F, Wang Z, Huang Y, Wang Q, Jiang C and He J 

2016 Applied Physics Letters 108 043503  

[117] Octon Tobias J, Nagareddy V K, Russo S, Craciun Monica F and Wright C D 

2016 Advanced Optical Materials 4 1750  

[118] Gan X, Gao Y, Fai Mak K, Yao X, Shiue R-J, van der Zande A, Trusheim M E, 

Hatami F, Heinz T F, Hone J and Englund D 2013 Applied Physics Letters 103 

181119  

[119] Wu S, Buckley S, Schaibley J R, Feng L, Yan J, Mandrus D G, Hatami F, Yao 

W, Vučković J, Majumdar A and Xu X 2015 Nature 520 69  

[120] Liu X, Galfsky T, Sun Z, Xia F, Lin E-c, Lee Y-H, Kéna-Cohen S and Menon V 

M 2014 Nature Photonics 9 30  

[121] Dufferwiel S, Schwarz S, Withers F, Trichet A A P, Li F, Sich M, Del Pozo-

Zamudio O, Clark C, Nalitov A, Solnyshkov D D, Malpuech G, Novoselov K 

S, Smith J M, Skolnick M S, Krizhanovskii D N and Tartakovskii A I 2015 

Nature Communications 6 8579  

[122] Ye Y, Wong Z J, Lu X, Ni X, Zhu H, Chen X, Wang Y and Zhang X 2015 Nature 

Photonics 9 733  

[123] Furchi M, Urich A, Pospischil A, Lilley G, Unterrainer K, Detz H, Klang P, 

Andrews A M, Schrenk W, Strasser G and Mueller T 2012 Nano Letters 12 2773  

[124] Casalino M, Sassi U, Goykhman I, Eiden A, Lidorikis E, Milana S, De Fazio D, 

Tomarchio F, Iodice M, Coppola G and Ferrari A C 2017 ACS Nano 11 10955  

[125] Guo Q, Li C, Deng B, Yuan S, Guinea F and Xia F 2017 ACS Photonics 4 2989  

[126] Kumar R, Sharma A, Kaur M and Husale S 2017 Advanced Optical Materials 

5 1700009  


58 
 

[127] Luxmoore I J, Liu P Q, Li P, Faist J and Nash G R 2016 ACS Photonics 3 936  

[128] Xia Z, Li P, Wang Y, Song T, Zhang Q and Sun B 2015 ACS Applied Materials 

& Interfaces 7 24136  

[129] Wang W, Klots A, Prasai D, Yang Y, Bolotin K I and Valentine J 2015 Nano 

Letters 15 7440  

[130] Hong T, Chamlagain B, Hu S, Weiss S M, Zhou Z and Xu Y-Q 2015 ACS Nano 

9 5357  

[131] Fang Z, Liu Z, Wang Y, Ajayan P M, Nordlander P and Halas N J 2012 Nano 

Letters 12 3808  

[132] Somayyeh Asgari H R, Nosrat Granpayeh, Homayoon Oraizi 2018 Chin. Phys. 

B 27 84212  

[133] Chen Z, Li X, Wang J, Tao L, Long M, Liang S-J, Ang L K, Shu C, Tsang H K 

and Xu J-B 2017 ACS Nano 11 430  

[134] Stockman M I 2010 Nature 467 541  

[135] Knight M W, Sobhani H, Nordlander P and Halas N J 2011 Science 332 702  

[136] Lee H S, Min S-W, Chang Y-G, Park M K, Nam T, Kim H, Kim J H, Ryu S and 

Im S 2012 Nano Letters 12 3695  

[137] Wu J-Y, Chun Y T, Li S, Zhang T, Wang J, Shrestha P K and Chu D 2018 

Advanced Materials 30 1705880  

[138] Ni Z, Ma L, Du S, Xu Y, Yuan M, Fang H, Wang Z, Xu M, Li D, Yang J, Hu W, 

Pi X and Yang D 2017 ACS Nano 11 9854  

[139] Guo N, Gong F, Liu J, Jia Y, Zhao S, Liao L, Su M, Fan Z, Chen X, Lu W, Xiao 

L and Hu W 2017 ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9 34489  

[140] Massicotte M, Schmidt P, Vialla F, Watanabe K, Taniguchi T, Tielrooij K J and 

Koppens F H L 2016 Nature Communications 7 12174  

[141] Huo N and Konstantatos G 2017 Nature Communications 8 572  

[142] Kim J, Park S, Jang H, Koirala N, Lee J-B, Kim U J, Lee H-S, Roh Y-G, Lee H, 

Sim S, Cha S, In C, Park J, Lee J, Noh M, Moon J, Salehi M, Sung J, Chee S-

S, Ham M-H, Jo M-H, Oh S, Ahn J-H, Hwang S W, Kim D and Choi H 2017 

ACS Photonics 4 482  

 


