1

Petahertz Spintronics

Florian Siegrist1,5, Julia A. Gessner1,5, Marcus Ossiander1, Christian Denker2, Yi-Ping Chang1, 
Malte C. Schröder1, Alexander Guggenmos1,5, Yang Cui5, Jakob Walowski2, Ulrike Martens2, J. 
K. Dewhurst4, Ulf Kleineberg1,5, Markus Münzenberg2, Sangeeta Sharma3, Martin Schultze1,5,*

1Max-Planck-Institute of Quantum Optics, Hans-Kopfermann-Straße 1, 85748 Garching
2Institut für Physik, Universität Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 6, 17489 Greifswald
3Max Born Institute for Nonlinear Optics and Short Pulse Spectroscopy, Max-Born-Straße 2A, 12489 Berlin 

4Max-Planck-Institute of Microstructure Physics, Weinberg 2, 06120 Halle (Saale)

5Fakultät für Physik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Am Coulombwall 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
*Correspondence to: martin.schultze@mpq.mpg.de

The enigmatic coupling between electronic and magnetic phenomena was one of the riddles 

propelling the development of modern electromagnetism1. Today, the fully controlled 

electric field evolution of ultrashort laser pulses permits the direct and ultrafast control of 

electronic properties of matter and is the cornerstone of light-wave electronics2–7. In sharp 

contrast, because there is no first order interaction between light and spins, the magnetic

properties of matter can only be affected indirectly on the much slower tens-of-femtosecond 

timescale in a sequence of optical excitation followed by the rearrangement of the spin 

structure8–16. 

Here we record an orders of magnitude faster magnetic switching with sub-femtosecond 

response time by initiating optical excitations with near-single-cycle laser pulses in a 

ferromagnetic layer stack. The unfolding dynamics are tracked in real-time by a novel 

attosecond time-resolved magnetic circular dichroism (atto-MCD) detection scheme 

revealing optically induced spin and orbital momentum transfer (OISTR) in synchrony with 

light field driven charge relocation17. In tandem with ab-initio quantum dynamical 

modelling, we show how this mechanism provides simultaneous control over electronic and 

magnetic properties that are at the heart of spintronic functionality. This first incarnation of 

attomagnetism observes light field coherent control of spin-dynamics in the initial non-

dissipative temporal regime and paves the way towards coherent spintronic applications 

with Petahertz clock rates.


2

While matter reacts to optical excitations by a virtually instantaneous and direct response of 

electrons to the electric field oscillations, ultrafast magnetic switching is intrinsically slower due 

to the need of mediating processes linking optical excitations to spin dynamics8,9,13,14. 

Femtosecond laser pulses can modify magnetic properties at response times of several tens of 

femtoseconds or longer (50 − 500 x 10−15s)15,16, the prospect of optical control of ferromagnetic 

bits has been discussed18 and circularly polarized attosecond light pulses are proposed to generate 

ultrafast magnetic field bursts as new tools for ultrafast magneto-optics19. However, direct 

experimental evidence of the ability to link the response of a spin system to the quasi-instantaneous 

opto-electronic response calls for attosecond temporal resolution and is missing to date.  

A route to the novel regime of attosecond magnetism has been worked out theoretically and 

proposes the use of ferromagnetic alloys or layer stacks where optical excitations result in the local 

displacement of charge carriers between different atomic species or across layer interfaces, in 

analogy to shift currents discussed in compound semiconductors20,21. In such a scenario, dubbed 

OISTR, the spatially dislodged electron wave carries its spin away from the atomic species at 

which its ground state resides17. Consequently, the resulting coherent spin transfer is linked 

directly to the temporal evolution of the optical excitation field and modifies the spin moment of 

the magnetic layers extended over macroscopic dimensions defined by the illuminated area.

Critical for advancing towards attosecond magnetism is an experimental scheme with the ability 

to control and detect the sub-optical-cycle evolution of electronic excitations driven by ultrafast 

electric fields, combined with simultaneous observation of modifications of the magnetic moment 

of individual sample constituents. Here we achieve this by linking attosecond transient absorption 

detection (atto-XAS), which is sensitive to the temporal evolution of electronic excitations2–7, with 

simultaneous atto-MCD sketched in Fig. 1, which is probing the local magnetic moment. 


3

In our experiment, ultrafast near-infrared (NIR) few-cycle laser pulses serve as temporally well 

confined trigger of electronic excitations in nickel. The metal exhibits broadband resonant 

absorption properties (see density of states DOS , Fig. 1 c) and the strong electric field of the laser 

pulse accelerates electrons around the Fermi energy in the band structure or promotes them to 

states in higher energy bands. Similarly, for nickel sandwiched between platinum layers the optical 

excitation is a virtually instantaneous response to the external electric field oscillations. However,

the adjacent heavy metal ad-layers open an additional excitation pathway where an electron is 

coherently driven across the material interface from states around the Fermi energy of nickel into

vacant platinum states (Fig. 1 c, d). 

The resulting depletion of majority spins oriented by placement of the samples in a static external 

B-field well beyond magnetic saturation (𝐵𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 50 mT) leads to a macroscopic reduction of the 

nickel layer magnetic moment. We employ atto-MCD as illustrated in Fig. 1 for the first real time 

study of this light field induced coherent modification of a materials’ magnetic moment. 

Linearly polarized attosecond pulses are generated by the same ultrafast laser pulses used to pump 

the electronic system of the samples via high-harmonic-generation and subsequent spectral 

selection22–24. To implement a time resolved variant of x-ray magnetic circular dichroism 

detection25, we developed a grazing incidence, multi reflection phase-retarder26,27 (Fig. 1 a) 

optimized for photon energies in the extreme ultraviolet (XUV) regime. Rotation of the phase-

retarder around the beam propagation axis allows either to transmit the initially linear polarized 

light or to create circularly polarized attosecond pulses (see Methods). 

In our experiment, the resulting circularly polarized attosecond pulses cover XUV photon energies 

around the Nickel M2,3-transition (Fig. 1) and last ~20% of the half-cycle duration of the optical 

pump field (𝜏𝑋𝑈𝑉 = 310 as) as confirmed by attosecond streak camera detection. 


4

In a transient absorption scheme, these pulses permit to measure the dynamics of photo-excited 

electrons and modifications of the spin structure. Final state interactions between electrons photo-

injected into conduction band (CB) states and electrons promoted into the CB by an XUV photon 

turn the energy resolved XUV absorption into a sensitive probe for pump laser induced population

transfer between electronic states around the Fermi edge of Nickel28.

Recording the transmitted XUV spectral intensities 𝐼+/− for two opposite magnetization directions 

oriented along the sample surface (or equivalently for two orthogonal helicities of the attosecond 

pulses) yields the magnetic dichroism contrast Δ𝑀 = 𝐼+ − 𝐼− (atto-MCD, see Fig. 1 b, and 

Methods). Detection of Δ𝑀 renders the method sensitive to element specific local magnetic 

moments and allows the simultaneous tracking of sub-femtosecond time-resolved modifications 

of both the electronic and magnetic implications of strong field induced optical pumping.

Fig. 2 shows the recorded atto-XAS and atto-MCD transients. Ultrashort NIR waveforms carried 

at a central wavelength of 𝜆𝑁𝐼𝑅 = 800 nm, set to a peak intensity of 𝐼𝑁𝐼𝑅 = 4 × 1012 W

⁄cm2
and 

full-width-at-half-intensity-maximum duration of 𝜏𝑁𝐼𝑅 = 4 fs are used to excite electrons in nickel 

(panel b, sample I, for details on sample preparation and static characterization see Methods). 

Owing to the attosecond temporal resolution of the measurement, in synchrony with the electric 

field oscillations (simulated waveform depicted as green line, top of panel a) a repetitive decrease 

of the XUV absorbance is observed (red line)3. The attosecond pulse experiences this increased

absorption (energy interval Δ𝐸 = 65.5 − 66.5 eV) as a result of reduced Pauli blocking in 

electronic states that gradually are liberated by the pump field induced promotion of carriers into 

states above the Fermi energy. The stepwise behavior is indicative of the transition rate peaking at 

the field crests of the light waveform and the number of excited carriers increasing in synchrony 


5

with the half-cycle oscillations of the NIR pump laser pulses, reminiscent of  interband 

tunneling3,5,29. 

Inspection of the simultaneously recorded atto-MCD contrast Δ𝑀 (blue line) yields no observable 

change within the sampled time interval, indicating the conservation of magnetic moment in the 

ferromagnetic nickel layer for the first ~10 fs during and after electronic excitation. 

In striking contrast, panel a shows the magnetic moment of nickel sandwiched between platinum 

layers (sample II, see Methods) under otherwise identical experimental conditions to respond as 

fast as the electronic system to the optical excitation. Platinum surrounding nickel acts as efficient 

spin absorber for optical excitations transferring charge across the interfaces. In these samples, 

ultrafast changes of Δ𝑀 (blue line) > 40% of the initial value are immediately discernible during 

the light field oscillations that cause optical excitation, attesting to the dominant role of OISTR in 

the loss of magnetic moment. The reduction acts out with a time constant of 𝜏𝑐𝑜ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 =

4.5 fs ( 1 𝑒
⁄ ), concurrent with the field induced excitation and identical to the response function 

computed from the laser pulse duration. This synchrony is direct evidence for coherent, sub-

femtosecond magnetization control extended over the macroscopic dimensions probed by the 

attosecond pulse spot size ∅𝑋𝑈𝑉 ≈ 40μm. 

To shed light on the coherent electronic processes in the presence of the oscillating light field and 

its influence on initial stages of ultrafast spin dynamics, we turn to theory. Fig. 3 compares the 

experimental data with the theoretical results obtained using a state-of-the-art, full quantum 

description of the dynamics of the non-equilibrium state of matter by means of time-dependent 

density functional theory (TD-DFT), which accounts for the coupled dynamics of both, charge and 

spins. The theory identifies the two major phenomena that contribute to the dynamics in the early 

times (during and immediately after pumping) to be the flow of charge and spin currents across 


6

the interface and spin-orbit-mediated spin-flips. The net result of which is coherent momentum 

transfer (CMT) in space and time across the interface by redistribution of the interlinked spin S(t) 

and orbital angular momentum L(t).

The combination of TD-DFT and atto-MCD, both capable of tracking ultrafast charge and spin 

migration that outpace the slower lattice dynamics, is therefore a powerful framework to 

investigate how different mechanisms conspire to turn the initially coherent optical excitation into 

a macroscopic loss of magnetic moment. Fig. 3a shows the results of atto-MCD recording the 

magnetization dynamics in Ni/Pt sandwich samples pumped at an intensity of 𝐼𝑁𝐼𝑅 = 2 ×

1012 W

⁄cm2
(green line w. circles) in comparison with the results of ab-initio computations with 

the sample geometry and experimental laser pulse parameters as input. Excellent quantitative 

agreement between experimentally observed ∆𝑀 and the results of the full calculation (including 

spin-orbit coupling) of the time evolution of the relative magnetic moment 𝑀(𝑡) 𝑀(0)
⁄
testifies

for the validity of the theoretical approach and confirms that the experimental observable is a direct 

measure of the layer magnetization. Interestingly, excluding spin-orbit coupling from the 

theoretical calculations (dark red line) causes a leveling off from the predicted magnetization 

dynamics at 20 fs, which is not mirrored in the experimental data. Since the only process that can 

cause a demagnetization of Ni apart from spin-orbit coupling is the flow of electrons (carrying 

their spins) across the interface, these first 20 fs mark the hitherto unexplored time interval in 

which OISTR-mediated CMT dictates the physics of spin-dynamics. 

Our data indicate the presence of a second time scale of slower demagnetization (20 fs < 𝑡 <

50 fs) where theory identifies spin-orbit-mediated spin-flips to dominate the evolution of the 

magnetic moment. Later after optical excitation, (𝑡 > 50 fs, panel b) the sample fully 

demagnetizes with a timescale of 𝜏𝑖𝑛𝑐𝑜ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡 = 112 ± 6fs
which represents the transition to 


7

stochastic dynamics rooted in magnetically correlated behavior and is in agreement with previous 

experiments reporting the decay of magnetic moment in the range of 80 – 400 fs depending on 

system dependent quench rates10,12.

We observed light-wave induced coherent transfer of spin and orbital angular momentum in space 

and time caused by the interplay of the few-cycle optical excitation and the spin-orbit interaction 

in magnetic/non-magnetic multilayers. This excursion into the unexplored territory of ultrafast

(𝑡 < 20 fs) all-optical control of spin dynamics and macroscopic magnetic moments by and in 

synchrony with the oscillations of ultrafast electric fields opens the door to the novel regime of 

attosecond magnetism and is a benchmark for the design of future coherent magnetic control 

protocols. Our ab initio theory predicts that in alloys or suitably chosen multilayer systems the 

same mechanism can be tailored to cause a local and ultrafast increase in magnetic moment to 

sustain reversible optical switching of magnetic moments bringing spintronics to the attosecond 

regime. Finally, the observed sub-femtosecond magnetization control via optically induced spin 

transfer, promises a new class of ultrafast spintronic applications, and suggests the feasibility of

light wave gated coherent spin transistors mimicking spintronic functionality orders of magnitude 

faster than applicable today. 

Methods:

Theory:

Computations rely on the Runge-Gross theorem30 establishing that the time-dependent external 

potential is a unique functional of the time dependent density, given the initial state. Based on this 

theorem, a system of non-interacting particles can be chosen such that the density of this non-


8

interacting system is equal to that of the interacting system for all times. The wave function is 

represented as a Slater determinant of single-particle Kohn-Sham (KS) orbitals. A fully non-

collinear spin-dependent version of this theorem entails that these KS orbitals are two-component 

Pauli spinors determined by the equations: 

𝑖 𝜕𝜓𝑗(𝒓, 𝑡)

𝜕𝑡
= [1

2 (−𝑖∇ + 1

𝑐 𝑨𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝑡))

2

+ 𝑣𝑠(𝒓, 𝑡) + 1

2𝑐 𝜎 ∙ 𝑩𝑠(𝒓, 𝑡) + 1

2𝑐 𝜎 ∙ (∇𝑣𝑠(𝒓, 𝑡) × −𝑖∇)] 𝜓𝑗(𝒓, 𝑡)
(1)

where the first term is the kinetic term and responsible for the flow of current across the interface31, 

𝑨𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝑡) is a vector potential representing the applied laser field, and 𝜎 are the Pauli matrices. The 

KS effective potential 𝑣𝑠(𝒓, 𝑡) = 𝑣𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝒓, 𝑡) + 𝑣𝐻(𝒓, 𝑡) + 𝑣𝑋𝐶(𝒓, 𝑡) is decomposed into the external 

potential 𝑣𝑠(𝒓, 𝑡), the classical electrostatic Hartree potential 𝑣𝐻(𝒓, 𝑡) and the exchange-correlation 

(XC) potential 𝑣𝑋𝐶(𝒓, 𝑡). Similarly, the KS magnetic field is written as 𝑩𝑠(𝒓, 𝑡) = 𝑩𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝒓, 𝑡) +

𝑩𝐻(𝒓, 𝑡) + 𝑩𝑋𝐶(𝒓, 𝑡) where 𝑩𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝒓, 𝑡) is the magnetic field of the applied laser pulse plus possibly an 

additional magnetic field and 𝑩𝑋𝐶(𝒓, 𝑡) is the XC magnetic field. The final term is the spin-orbit 

coupling term, presence of which ensures that the total spin angular momentum, S, is not a good 

quantum number and hence spin-flip excitations can lead to loss in S. Eq. 1 is solved for the 

electronic system alone in dipole approximation and by using adiabatic local spin density 

approximation32 for the XC fields.

Dynamics of the nuclear degrees of freedom and radiative effects described by simultaneously 

time-propagating Maxwell's equations, are not included in the present work limiting the predictive 

power of the method to the first ~100 fs during and after pumping. 

Calculations of a magneto-optical function for NiPt layer (see inset Fig. 3) were performed by a 3 

step process: (i) The ground-state of NiPt multilayers was determined using DFT, (ii) a fully spin-

polarized GW calculation33 was performed to determine the correct position and width of Ni 3p 

states and (iii) finally the response function was calculated on top of GW-corrected Kohn-sham 


9

ground-state.  This response function is calculated within linear response TD-DFT in which the 

excitonic effects34 and local field effects can be easily included. As a merit of this treatment, no 

experimental parameter was needed to determine the accurate magneto-optical functions. 

Computational details: 

A fully non-collinear version of TDDFT as implemented within the Elk code35 is used for all 

calculations. All the implementations are done using the state-of-the art full potential linearized 

augmented plane wave (LAPW) method.

A regular mesh in 𝒌-space of 8 × 8 × 1 is used and a time step of ∆𝑡 = 2 as is employed for the 

time-propagation algorithm. To mimic experimental resolution, a Gaussian energy broadening is 

applied with spectral width of 0.027 eV. The laser pulse used in the present work is linearly 

polarized (out of plane polarization) with central frequency of 1.55 eV, full-width-at-half-

maximum duration 8fs and fluence of 5.4 mJ/cm².

Experiment:

The experiments are carried out with a phase-stabilized few-cycle near-infrared laser as driver 

(FemtoPower). It delivers pulses with 4fs, 0.5mJ at a repetition rate of 4kHz. These pulses are 

focused into a neon-filled ceramics target, generating high-harmonic radiation with a cut-off 

energy around 70 eV. A Mach-Zehnder type interferometer is used to introduce a delay between 

the NIR and the XUV pulses. We use a 150nm Al filter to block the driving NIR laser pulse, while 

providing a constant transmission at the energies of interest. Isolated attosecond pulses are 

achieved by spectrally filtering the cut-off regime with a Si/B4C multilayer mirror with a reflection 

of 15% @66eV and a full-width-at-half-maximum bandwidth of 8eV under and angle of incidence 

of 45°. Subsequently, the multi reflection phase-shifter changes the polarization from linear to 


10

elliptical. Ellipticity of ε>0.75 is achieved with transmittance of >25% and without introducing 

significant wavelength dispersion,

Four Mo/B4C multilayer mirrors are mounted under an angle of 78° with respect to the surface 

normal, a setting optimized for high broadband transmission and maximized ellipticity. 

To maximize the atto-MCD contrast while maintaining sufficient XUV transmission the samples

are mounted under an angle of ~35° between the propagation direction of the laser and the surface 

normal. The surface normal and the magnetization direction of the sample span a plane parallel to 

the propagation direction of the laser field. We use a gold coated grating with 2105 lines/mm in 

reflection (Jobin-Yvon) with a 200 µm entrance slit as a spectrometer.  

For every delay step, we measured the transmitted spectrum for both magnetization directions of 

the sample and then scanned the delay over the region of interested. To check and compensate for 

long timescale drifts in the XUV spectrum we took spectra of the transmitted XUV in the absence 

of NIR laser light before and after every scan. to ensures that no irreversible changes were done

to the multilayer or the supporting polycrystalline Silicon substrate. Typical integration times were 

on the order of 10-15s for every spectrum, leading to a measurement duration of 30-60 minutes. 

We observe the OISTR effect for pump light intensities ranging between 𝐼𝑁𝐼𝑅 = 1.5 − 4 ×

1012 W

⁄cm2
. At lower intensities, only the slow demagnetization component depicted in Fig. 3, 

panel b is observed. At intensities 𝐼𝑁𝐼𝑅 > 5 × 1012 W

⁄cm2
the time span between laser pulses 

(250 µs) is found to be insufficient for the magnetic system to return to the unperturbed state.

Data Evaluation:

For the energy calibration of our spectrum we used the pronounced aluminum L2,3-edges at 72.7

eV and the Nickel M3-edge at 66.2 eV. The grating equation 𝑛 ∗ 𝜆 = 𝑑 ∗ (sin 𝜃𝑖 − sin 𝜃𝑓) gives a 


11

relation between the position of a spectral feature on the XUV sensitive camera (Princeton 

Instrument PIXIS) and the photon energy. We checked for the influence of the non-homogeneous 

diffraction and reflection efficiency of the grating and found it to be negligible within the range of

photon energies relevant in this study. We applied an equal weight sliding average to the 

spectrograms along the energy (ΔE = 50 meV) as well as along the delay dimension (Δt = 0.5 fs).

We determine the magnetic dichroism contrast according to Δ𝑀 = 𝐼+ − 𝐼−. Application of 

alternative definitions of the contrast or computing the magnetic dichroism asymmetry has no 

influence on the transient signals.

Sample preparation and magnetic characterization:

A number of Ni and Ni/Pt multilayer films were grown on Si membranes and optimized to grow 

in fcc structure. The 8.4 nm Ni film and Pt(2)/[Ni(4)/Pt(2)]×2/Ni(2nm) multilayer were deposited

on 200 nm thick polycrystalline Silicon membranes (Norcada) at room temperature by electron 

beam evaporation under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions with a base pressure less than 1x 

10−9 mbar with high purity source materials (99.95%). The individual layer thicknesses in the 

[Ni(4)/Pt(2)]×2 stack were optimized to increase the number of active interfaces for OISTR while 

maintaining sufficient XUV transmittance and providing maximized atto-MCD contrast. The 

sample was protected by an inert 2 nm Pt capping layer and an ultrathin Ni seed layer (nonmagnetic 

at room temperature) was grown on the substrate to provide identical surrounding to all Pt layers 

and ensure uniform growth of the layer stack. Both materials grow in fcc structure. The deposition 

rate was monitored by a calibrated standard quartz crystal microbalance and adjusted to 0.02 nm/s. 

Special care was taken for low tension mounting to protect the membranes from any mechanical 

stress. The in-plane magnetic properties were characterized by a standard longitudinal Magneto-


12

Optical Kerr Effect (MOKE) setup with a 3 mW HeNe cw-laser, a photoelastic modulator (PEM) 

and Glan-laser prisms in longitudinal geometry. Measurements on both, the frame and the samples 

membrane window, yield similar ferromagnetic properties. For both types of samples, we found 

coercive fields of a few mT and a remanence around 60-70% of the saturation magnetization.

MOKE measurements confirm that the Ni seed layer does not magnetize at room temperature and 

thus the layer does not affect the magnetic moment of the sample. The recorded MOKE signal also 

confirms that the ferromagnetic properties of the pure Ni layer does not suffer from an assumed 

oxidic passivation of the sample surface.


13

Fig. 1: Atto-MCD to study coherent ultrafast magnetism

A quarter wave phase retarder/band-pass filter optimized for photon energies covering the M-edge 

absorption of the most transition metals is used to turn incident linearly polarized attosecond pulse 


14

trains (APT) into isolated circular polarized attosecond pulses (panel a). These pulses are applied 

to record the magnetic circular dichroism contrast of nickel/platinum multilayer systems pumped 

by few-cycle near-infrared waveforms in an external magnetic field. Before the few-cycle near-

infrared excitation, the nickel/platinum multilayer and the bulk nickel are in the magnetically 

saturated state along the in-plane direction easy axis set by ± 𝑩.

Panel b displays the recorded absorption A+ and A- for the two orientations of the magnetic field 

applied to the sample and the resulting atto-MCD contrast: before the arrival of the NIR pulse (t1) 

which represents the unperturbed system, shortly after its arrival (t2) and hundreds of femtoseconds 

after excitation (t3).

In the multilayer (as opposed to bulk nickel) the optical excitation causes a coherent trans-interface 

charge current driven by the few-cycle light pulse, associated with which is the synchronous 

transfer of spin into the heavy metal (panel c), where the spin is subjected to the strong spin-orbit 

coupling of the heavy metal ad-layer (panel d).


15

Fig. 2: Attosecond-MCD of light-field induced coherent spin transfer

The strong electric field 𝐸(𝑡) (waveform fitted to an attosecond streak camera recording, green 

line top of panel a) of an ultrashort laser pulse excites electrons around the Fermi energy in Ni/Pt-

multilayer (panel a) samples and bulk nickel (panel b). The resulting transfer of electronic 

population in synchrony with the laser fields’ half cycle oscillations is tracked with atto-XAS and 

yields a stepwise modification of the XUV transmission evaluated at 66 ± 0.5 eV (red-dashed 

curve in panel a and b). The simultaneously recorded atto-MCD contrast evaluated in the energy 

interval of 66.5 − 68 eV, around the nickel M2,3-edge is a measure of the magnetization of the 

nickel layer (blue solid curve in panel a and b). The reduction of the magnetic moment of the 

multilayer system synchronously with the electronic response is clear experimental evidence for 

ultrafast coherent spin transfer and the OISTR effect. This is evidenced further by bulk nickel 

showing no noticeable change in magnetic moment in the first femtoseconds after excitation (panel 

b), while also exhibiting an electronic response linked to the electric field oscillations of the 

excitation pulse. 


16

Fig. 3: Optically induced spin-transfer, post-excitation spin dynamics and quantum 

dynamical modelling

Comparison between the experimentally recorded atto-MCD trace (green line w. circles) in Ni/Pt-

multilayers with the ab-initio simulation of light-field induced spin dynamics including spin-orbit 

coupling (dark-blue line, panel a) reveals that for the first 10 fs the demagnetization of Ni layers 

is entirely due to flow of majority spin current across the material interface. Theory without spin-

orbit interaction predicts a saturation of the demagnetization already 15 fs after optical excitation

(light-blue line). This is a clear indication that beyond this time all the demagnetization is caused 

by spin flips while at earlier times spin-dynamics are governed by OISTR – absent in the 

theoretical prediction for bulk nickel (dashed line and cp. Fig 2). Experimental data recorded for 

longer timescales (panel b) indicate the complete quenching of the magnetic moment due to 


17

stochastic processes with a characteristic timescale of 112 fs. The recorded Δ𝑀 exhibits additional 

modulations up to 300 fs after optical excitation, that are potentially due to coherent phonon modes 

affecting the coupling to the lattice. The inset compares the recorded MCD signal ∆= log

𝐼+

𝐼− of 

the Ni/Pt sandwich with the imaginary part of the computed magneto-optical function.

References

1.
Ørstedt, J. C. Experimenta circa effectum Conflictus electrici in Acum magneticam. J. für 
Chemie und Phys. 29, 275–281 (1820).

2.
Schiffrin, A. et al. Optical-field-induced current in dielectrics. Nature 493, 70–4 (2013).

3.
Schultze, M. et al. Attosecond band-gap dynamics in silicon. Science 346, 1348–1352 
(2014).

4.
Mashiko, H., Oguri, K., Yamaguchi, T., Suda, A. & Gotoh, H. Petahertz optical drive with 
wide-bandgap semiconductor. Nat. Phys. 12, 741–745 (2016).

5.
Lucchini, M. et al. Attosecond dynamical Franz-Keldysh effect in polycrystalline 
diamond. Science 353, 916–9 (2016).

6.
Garg, M. et al. Multi-petahertz electronic metrology. Nature 538, 359–363 (2016).

7.
Reimann, J. et al. Subcycle observation of lightwave-driven Dirac currents in a 
topological surface band. Nature 562, 396–400 (2018).

8.
Bigot, J.-Y., Vomir, M. & Beaurepaire, E. Coherent ultrafast magnetism induced by 
femtosecond laser pulses. Nat. Phys. 5, 515–520 (2009).

9.
Boeglin, C. et al. Distinguishing the ultrafast dynamics of spin and orbital moments in 
solids. Nature 465, 458–461 (2010).

10.
Walowski, J. & Münzenberg, M. Perspective: Ultrafast magnetism and THz spintronics. J. 
Appl. Phys. 120, 140901 (2016).

11.
Koopmans, B. et al. Explaining the paradoxical diversity of ultrafast laser-induced 
demagnetization. Nat. Mater. 9, 259–265 (2010).

12.
Hellman, F. et al. Interface-induced phenomena in magnetism. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89,
025006 (2017).

13.
Kirilyuk, A., Kimel, A. V. & Rasing, T. Ultrafast optical manipulation of magnetic order. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 2731–2784 (2010).

14.
Battiato, M., Carva, K. & Oppeneer, P. M. Superdiffusive Spin Transport as a Mechanism 
of Ultrafast Demagnetization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 027203 (2010).

15.
Stamm, C. et al. Femtosecond modification of electron localization and transfer of angular 
momentum in nickel. Nat. Mater. 6, 740–743 (2007).

16.
Rudolf, D. et al. Ultrafast magnetization enhancement in metallic multilayers driven by 
superdiffusive spin current. Nat. Commun. 3, 1037 (2012).


18

17.
Dewhurst, J. K., Elliott, P., Shallcross, S., Gross, E. K. U. & Sharma, S. Laser-Induced 
Intersite Spin Transfer. Nano Lett. 18, 1842–1848 (2018).

18.
Lambert, C.-H. et al. All-optical control of ferromagnetic thin films and nanostructures. 
Science 345, 1337–40 (2014).

19.
Bandrauk, A. D., Guo, J. & Yuan, K.-J. Circularly polarized attosecond pulse generation 
and applications to ultrafast magnetism. J. Opt. 19, 124016 (2017).

20.
Côté, D., Laman, N. & van Driel, H. M. Rectification and shift currents in GaAs. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 80, 905–907 (2002).

21.
Laman, N., Bieler, M. & van Driel, H. M. Ultrafast shift and injection currents observed in 
wurtzite semiconductors via emitted terahertz radiation. J. Appl. Phys. 98, 103507 (2005).

22.
Hentschel, M. et al. Attosecond metrology. Nature 414, 509–13 (2001).

23.
Schweinberger, W. et al. Waveform-controlled near-single-cycle milli-joule laser pulses 
generate sub-10 nm extreme ultraviolet continua. Opt. Lett. 37, 3573–5 (2012).

24.
Fiess, M. et al. Versatile apparatus for attosecond metrology and spectroscopy. Review of 
Scientific Instruments 81, 093103 (2010).

25.
Carra, P., Thole, B. T., Altarelli, M. & Wang, X. X-ray circular dichroism and local 
magnetic fields. Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 694–697 (1993).

26.
Höchst, H., Patel, R. & Middleton, F. Multiple-reflection λ4 phase shifter: A viable 
alternative to generate circular-polarized synchrotron radiation. Nucl. Instruments 
Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 347, 107–114 
(1994).

27.
Willems, F. et al. Probing ultrafast spin dynamics with high-harmonic magnetic circular 
dichroism spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. B 92, 220405 (2015).

28.
Kaindl, G., Brewer, W. D., Kalkowski, G. & Holtzberg, F. M  -Edge X-Ray Absorption 
Spectroscopy: A New Tool for Dilute Mixed-Valent Materials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 2056–
2059 (1983).

29.
Ghimire, S. et al. Strong-field and attosecond physics in solids. J. Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. 
Phys. 47, 204030 (2014).

30.
Runge, E. & Gross, E. K. U. Density-Functional Theory for Time-Dependent Systems. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 997–1000 (1984).

31.
Krieger, K. et al. Ultrafast demagnetization in bulk versus thin films: an ab initio study. J. 
Phys. Condens. Matter 29, 224001 (2017).

32.
Barth, U. von & Hedin, L. A local exchange-correlation potential for the spin polarized 
case. I. J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 5, 1629–1642 (1972).

33.
Hedin, L. New Method for Calculating the One-Particle Green’s Function with 
Application to the Electron-Gas Problem. Phys. Rev. 139, A796–A823 (1965).

34.
Sharma, S., Dewhurst, J. K., Sanna, A. & Gross, E. K. U. Bootstrap Approximation for the 
Exchange-Correlation Kernel of Time-Dependent Density-Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 107, 186401 (2011).

35.
Dewhurst, K. et al. The Elk FP-LAPW Code. Http://Elk.Sourceforge.Net/ (2018).


19

Extended Data

Extended Data Figure 1: Hysteresis curves of the samples recorded using the longitudinal 

magneto-optical Kerr effect. Both samples exhibit soft magnetic hysteresis and low saturation 

fields needed to orient the macroscopic magnetization in the sample plane.


