Broadband, Temperature Tolerant  

and Passively Biased  

Resonantly Enhanced Mach-Zehnder Modulators 

S. Romero-García, A. Moscoso-Mártir, J. Nojic, S. Sharif-Azadeh, J. Müller, B. Shen, F. Merget, J. Witzens 

Institute of Integrated Photonics 

RWTH Aachen University 

Aachen, Germany 

 
 

Abstract—We describe a resonantly enhanced Mach-Zehnder 

modulator (MZM) that can be operated over a wide temperature 
range of 55oC without being actively biased, while providing a 
significant resonant enhancement of 6.8 at the nominal wavelength 
/ temperature compared to a linear MZM driven with a 
distributed driver. More importantly, it enables a ~20X 
improvement in power consumption compared to a 50 W matched 
linear travelling wave modulator with comparable phase shifter 
technology, drive voltage and output optical modulation 
amplitude. Passive biasing of the Mach-Zehnder interferometer is 
further implemented by replacing a splitter element in the MZM 
with a novel device combining splitting and fiber coupling 
functionalities in a single, multi-modal structure, that converts 
permanent fiber placement into a phase correction. Both concepts 
are combined in a single modulator device, removing the need for 
any type of active control in a wide temperature operation range. 

Keywords—Electro-optic modulators; Datacom; Resonant ring 

modulators; Electro-optic transceivers. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Reducing the power consumption of electro-optic transceivers 
in data centers has become a key objective on par with the 
reduction of manufacturing cost: Since interconnects have been 
estimated to consume 23% of the total datacenter energy intake 
[1], their power consumption is a burden on both operating 
expenses (OpEx) and the required cooling infrastructure. 

Travelling wave (TW) modulators can make up a substantial 

portion of an electro-optic transmitter’s power consumption, 
which has motivated the investigation of alternative modulator 
and driver topologies enabling a significant reduction of the 
required power. Distributed drivers are one such alternative [2] 
that has already found its way into industrial practice [3]. This 
allows reducing the power consumption associated to 
dissipation of the high-speed signal delivered to the modulator 
(the RF power consumption) by a factor 6 to 8 [4]. Another 
approach consists in shrinking the size of the modulator to a 
fraction of the radio-frequency (RF) wavelength, to enable 
driving it as an electrical lumped element with a nearby low 
output impedance driver. In order to overcome the reduction of 
modulation efficiency resulting from shrinking of the phase 
shifter length, resonantly enhanced devices such as resonant ring 
modulators (RRMs) have attracted considerable attention in 
silicon photonics [5]. Discussions in the literature typically focus 
on the resonant enhancement itself, i.e., the increase in 
modulation efficiency as compared to a linear, non-resonant 

modulator with an equally long embedded phase shifter length. 
Equivalently, this essentially also corresponds to the power 
consumption reduction as compared to a linear modulator with 
a phase shifter length chosen to result in the same modulation 
contrast, assuming it can be driven as a lumped element. 
Another important improvement, however, arises from the 
much-reduced dimensions of resonantly enhanced modulators, 
which allow them to be driven as a lumped element in the first 
place. While longer linear devices can be driven with a similar 
RF power consumption, as associated to the signal delivered to 
the modulator, as a lumped element modulator by means of a 
distributed driver, a single lumped element load allows 
achieving this power consumption improvement without 
incurring the additional integration or packaging complexity 
associated to distributed drivers, i.e., the monolithic integration 
of a distributed driver via CMOS photonic process integration 
[3] or the more conventional route of co-packaging of the 
distributed driver via flip-chipping and a micro-bump array. A 
lumped element modulator, on the other hand, can be simply 
integrated with its driver via a pair of wire-bonds, provided the 
capacitive load of the modulator remains sufficiently small to 
tolerate the parasitic inductance of the wire-bonds [6]. While the 
RF power consumption inside the modulator itself only 
constitutes a portion of the power drawn by the modulator driver, 
at least the output stage of the driver needs to be sized according 
to the load, so that it remains an important quantity. 

In addition to the RF power consumption, additional power 

is associated to the stabilization of the modulators against 
temperature changes and process bias: Silicon possesses a 
relatively high thermo-optic coefficient of 1.87e-4 RIU/K at 
room temperature [7] and the effective index of silicon/SiO2 
single mode waveguides is particularly prone to roughness 
induced variations due to the high index contrast, so that index 
variations in interferometric and resonant devices have to be 
compensated for. This is a tractable problem in linear 
modulators, that are nominally balanced so that variations 
induced by temperature swings are relatively modest and can be 
straightforwardly compensated for. Self-referenced resonant 
devices on the other hand are very sensitive to temperature 
changes and process biases: The typical resonance wavelength 
non-uniformity across dies due to fabrication and layer thickness 
is on the order of ±1 nm [8]. Although advanced schemes have 
been developed to reduce phase tuning requirements, e.g. in 
multi-channel WDM transceivers [9], in a typical system 
configuration wavelength tuning by a full free spectral range 


(FSR) is required at start-up, followed by additional tuning 
during operation to compensate for environmental temperature 
swings. While thermally isolating resonant devices has resulted 
in very substantial improvements of the power efficiency of 
thermal tuners [10], this only partially alleviates the problem, as 
on the one hand process complexity is increased and on the other 
hand limitations to the maximum allowable device temperature 
as constrained by device reliability remain. Finally, athermal 
resonant devices have been realized by means of cladding 
materials, typically polymers, with opposite thermooptic 
coefficients [11]. Here too, process complexity is increased and 
long term reliability associated to the introduction of polymers 
needs to be ascertained.  

For the aforementioned reasons, a lumped element, 

resonantly enhanced device that does not require dynamic tuning 
and that can be fabricated in a standard silicon photonics 
fabrication line would be highly desirable. Here, we combine 
two techniques to achieve this objective: We have previously 
shown that multi-mode fiber/laser-to-chip couplers initially 
developed to relax alignment tolerances [12],[13] can also be 
used to passively and permanently bias a Mach-Zehnder 
interferometer [14]. Moreover, we have adapted a device 
architecture in which collectively driven RRMs are utilized as 
phase shifters [15] to obtain optically broadband operation while 
maintaining a sizeable resonant enhancement [16] and high-
speed, lumped element operation [6]. In the following, we will 
first review results pertaining to these two schemes and continue 
with a description of the combined device. 

II. PASSIVE BIASING OF MZMS BY MEANS OF MULTIMODE 

COUPLERS 

In [12],[13] we showed laser-to-chip edge couplers and fiber-to-
chip grating couplers that have in common their ability to relax 
required alignment tolerances in one direction (transverse 
relative to the main optical axis of the devices) and the fact that 
they both have two single mode output waveguides. The 
couplers were architectured in such a way that the power 
coupled to both single mode output waveguides is substantially 
equal, but that the phase of the light coupled to either waveguide 
varies as a function of the placement of the input fiber or input 
laser. Since we sought to improve alignment tolerances without 
reducing the peak insertion efficiency, this degree of freedom 
was required so as to not violate the reciprocity theorem. The 
devices are multi-mode in nature and essentially combine a 
coupler and a Y-junction without forcing the light through a 
unique single mode optical path in-between. The operation 
principle of the devices can be found in the references [12],[13]. 
In a parallel single mode optics (PSM) transceiver, this varying 
phase at the output of the coupler is irrelevant, since the light is 
never recombined: One seeks to guarantee a minimum power in 
any of the downstream parallel communication channels 
(obtained by further splitting of the light).  

In [14] we repurposed these devices in order to use the phase 

shift at their output as a feature: We implemented a Mach-
Zehnder interferometer (MZI), in which the input splitter was 
replaced by one such multi-mode grating coupler (MMGC). By 
moving the position of the input fiber across the MMGC, the 
relative phase at the two output waveguides is varied until the 
quadrature point (biasing at -3 dB MZI output power) is reached, 

after which the fiber is affixed in place by means of a UV-
curable epoxy. 

Adequacy of this technique is contingent on a few elements: 

The fiber position can be assumed to be reliably fixed in place 
since packaging based on UV curable epoxy is an established 
technology. Moreover, the couplers themselves can be designed 
to be sufficiently temperature tolerant so that their 
functionalities, 3 dB splitting and a fixed phase offset at the 
output, is maintained over a wide temperature range. However, 
one also has to assume that the mismatch of the interferometer 
is of a sufficiently low order for the static correction of a fixed 
phase term to rebalance it over all relevant temperatures and 
wavelengths (which is easy to verify or to invalidate for a given 
interferometer). Lastly, one has to assume that the phase 
mismatch occurring in the two arms of the interferometer does 
not drift over time due to additional effects, such as for example 
the diffusion of fixed charges in surrounding dielectrics, that can 
not only cause losses, but also effective index changes [17]. This 
is the subtlest assumption to verify as it relates to long term 
reliability and remains an open question. Lastly, this scheme 
requires that at least one fiber per interferometer can be freely 
positioned, which would for example prevent packaging of a 
modulator array with a single fiber array. This may be the 
primary limitation of this approach. An important strength lies 
however in the fact that the phase correcting mechanism itself 
should be very robust and compatible with long term reliability. 

The concept of the alignment tolerant grating coupler is 

shown in Fig. 1. As can be seen in the bottom panel, the power 
coupled in either waveguide is equal and remains within 1 dB of 
its nominal value (centered fiber) within a ±7.2 µm 
misalignment range in the transverse/lateral direction (red arrow 
in the micrograph), a tolerance almost 3X larger than a 
conventional grating coupler. In the longitudinal direction, the 

Fig. 1. (top) Micrograph of an alignment tolerant grating coupler (MMGC) 
as reported in [13] and (bottom) corresponding coupling efficiency into either 
of the two output waveguides (black and red curves) as well as the cumulative 
coupling efficiency (solid blue curve) as compared to a regular single mode 
grating coupler (SMGC) fabricated in the same technology (dash dotted blue 
curve). The transverse misalignment, as shown by the red arrow in the 
micrograph, is indicated on the x-axis. 


device behaves like a conventional grating coupler, i.e., the 
alignment tolerance is not enhanced. The total coupled power is 
only slightly worse to that of the conventional grating coupler, 
with the slight excess losses attributed in particular to the built-
in Y-junction (highlighted with a black rectangle in the 
micrograph). Importantly, as the fiber is moved transversely 
across the grating coupler, the relative phase of the light coupled 
into the two output waveguides is varied, which is utilized in the 
following (in which case the alignment tolerance is again lost, as 
now placement is constrained by other considerations than 
coupling efficiency). 

The concept of the entire MZI is illustrated in Fig. 2(a), 

experimental results are shown in Fig. 2(b). As the fiber is 
moved along the transverse direction above the grating coupler, 
the phase in the two branches of the MZI is varied until the 
power at the output of the MZI, after an additional 2 by 2 
multimode interferometer (MMI), is exactly balanced. The fiber 
is then epoxied in place and the temperature dependent 
characteristics of the interferometer are measured.  

As seen in figure 2(b), the initial imbalance of the device, as 

measured with the optical fiber centered on the optical axis of 
the grating coupler, was 13 dB as a consequence of fabrication 
induced mismatch between the two 1 mm long arms of the 
interferometer. After displacement and permanent attachment of 
the fiber this imbalance was maintained below 0.4 dB even 
while cycling the device temperature between 20oC and 80oC. 
This shows that in this case the imbalance order of the MZI was 
sufficiently low for the MZI to remain balanced over the entire 
temperature range and confirms that the temperature tolerance 
of the grating coupler, also in terms of its output phases, is 
sufficient for this purpose. For details on the devices, please 
refer to references [12]-[14]. 

A number of other techniques have been shown to modify 

the bias point of passive interferometers or resonant devices. 
These comprise local oxidation of the waveguide [18], optically 
induced modification of the refractive index of a thin 
chalcogenide film surrounding the waveguide by means of UV 
radiation [19], thermally induced refractive index change in the 
cladding [20], or thermally/current induced dopant diffusion 
[21]. While the method shown in [20] does not yet feature long 
term stability and the method shown in [21] was self-limiting 

and did not yet yield large phase shifts, they are interesting in 
that they target standard silicon photonics process flows without 
further modifications. The method shown in [18] in particular 
can be expected to feature long term stability. In all these cases, 
long term stability of the trimming mechanism itself and of other 
phase shifts within the device is a primary concern for the 
practicability of the trimming mechanism.   

III. TEMPERATURE TOLERANT, RESONANTLY ENHANCED 

MZMS 

The phase shifters in the MZM are implemented in the form of 
collectively driven, highly overcoupled RRMs loaded on a 
common bus waveguide [16]. In the highly overcoupled regime, 
when the optical carrier is tuned on resonance, the transfer 
function of a single ring resonator can be given as [22] 

!"#$ = !&'() *+,

-

-.
/ 0 

where !&', !"#$ are the field amplitudes in the bus waveguide, 
respectively before and after the ring, 1, 2 are respectively the 
average wave number and linear losses inside the ring, 3 is the 
finesse given as the ratio of the FSR to the full width at half 
maximum (FWHM) and 4 is the circumference of the ring. Thus, 
it can be seen that the ring behaves as a linear waveguide whose 
length 4 has been demultiplied by a factor 23 6, hence the 
resonant enhancement factor applied to an embedded phase 
shifter section. Importantly, in the absence of excess losses due 
to e.g. waveguide bends or excess losses in the ring to waveguide 
coupling junction, the 7/4 ∙ 2 figure of merit of the phase shifter 
remains unchanged, wherein 7/4 is the drive voltage required to 
achieve a phase shift of 6 in a phase shifter of length 4.  

In order to obtain a high optical bandwidth, an increased 

FWHM and thus a reduced resonator quality (Q-)factor are 
required. This also reduces the resonant enhancement factor 
23 6 (assuming the embedded phase shifter to cover the entire 
circumference) since the finesse scales as the opposite of the 
FWHM. This can be compensated by increasing the FSR, i.e., 
reducing the circumference 4 of the ring (this ought to make 
sense intuitively, as the capacitance of the embedded phase 
shifter, and thus its power consumption, scales with its length). 
While this is conceptually simple, its reduction to practice is 
quite tricky: As the circumference shrinks, the sensitivity of the 
device to increased coupling losses rises (since the excess losses 
are distributed over the waveguide length to convert them into 
effective waveguide losses). In addition, bending losses go up, 
also contributing to increase 7/42. Finally, it becomes 
increasingly difficult to obtain sufficiently high coupling 
strengths over shrinking distances in order to maintain the high 
overcoupling regime required to spoil the resonator Q-factor 
without incurring excess losses. The design problem can thus be 
formulated as shrinking the device, while minimizing excess 
losses to maintain the same 7/42 and sufficiently overcoupling 
the ring.  

A diagram and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image 

of the fabricated waveguides (prior to back-end-of-line 
fabrication) can be seen in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b). The overlay with 
implant regions and the position of the electrodes can be seen in 
Fig. 3(c) and a micrograph of the complete RRM in Fig. 3(d). 
Several tricks were applied to achieve the design goals: Away 
from the coupler region, the waveguide inside of the ring is 

Fig. 2. (a) MZI with multimode grating coupler as input splitter. (b) Measured 
MZI output power levels (relative to the maximum transmission) as a function 
of the input fiber position. (c) Imbalance between the two MZI output ports 
as a function of temperature after permanent fiber attachment.         


widened in order to reduce bending losses. This, however, 
results in too small a coupling parameter, so that the waveguide 
has to be narrowed again in the coupling region. In order to 
suppress resulting bending losses, the silicon is fully etched on 
the opposite side of the bus waveguide, which can be done while 
maintaining electrical connectivity of the embedded PIN diode. 
This does result, however, in the waveguide region inside the 
coupling region to have an increased series resistance to the 
electrodes and thus a reduced RC limited cutoff frequency. In 
order to prevent this from impacting the electro-optic S21 of the 
device, as well as to prevent insertion losses associated to this 
inefficiently modulated region, it is left unimplanted (Fig. 3(c)). 
The device reported in [16] was fabricated in the standard silicon 
photonics process of IME A*STAR with a 220 nm silicon device 
layer thickness and a shallow etch depth of 130 nm (90 nm 
slabs). The outer radius of the resonators was chosen as R = 5 
µm, the waveguide width varied between W1 = 425 nm (in the 
coupling section) and W2 = 1.575 µm. The bus waveguide width 
in the coupling regions was chosen as 370 nm and the bus 
waveguide to ring resonator gap as 200 nm to allow fabrication 
with 248 nm DUV lithography. p- and n-regions were doped 
with concentrations of respectively 2.5e18 cm-3 and 2e18 cm-3 
and were spaced by an intrinsic region of nominally 20 nm (same 
phase shifter design as the third category of devices in [23]) and 
cover ¾ of the ring’s circumference.    

As mentioned above, excess losses occurring at the 

waveguide to ring junction are critical in order to avoid spoiling 
the 7/42 of the phase shifter. In order to reduce these, a wiggle 
was introduced in the bus waveguide shape in order to smoothly 
taper the gap size [24]. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the bus waveguide 
follows a circular shape with the same center as the ring over a 
small angle q, outside of which it continues on a straight line 
prior to being bent back to the next resonator. Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) 
show simulated excess round trip losses and power coupling 
strengths for different resonator designs and q values, including 
for the nominal design described above with W1 = 425 nm, 
W2 = 1.575 µm, R = 5 µm and q = 5o. Figs. 4(c) and 4(d) show 
corresponding experimental data extracted from fitted 
resonances, also for W1 = 425 nm, W2 = 1.575 µm and R = 5 µm. 

The resulting FWHM and excess modulator insertion losses, 
with the optical carrier on resonance, are shown in Fig. 5(a) and 
5(b), wherein the resulting resonator excess insertion losses 
already contain the resonant enhancement factor (these 
correspond to the losses incurred at the bottom of the Lorentzian 
resonator transfer function multiplied by the number of 
resonators). 

The complete modulator was implemented in a subsequent 

fabrication run with 5 collectively driven resonant ring 
modulators loaded on each arm, resulting in a cumulative PIN 

Fig. 3. (a) Diagram of the waveguide in a single RRM layout from [16], (b) 
scanning electron micrograph after waveguide fabrication, (c) mask layout 
showing overlay with the PIN junction as well as electrode placement, and (d) 
micrograph of the complete RRM. 

Fig. 4. (a) Simulated bus to ring waveguide power coupling coefficient and 
(b) simulated round trip excess losses as a function of q. (c) and (d) show the 
corresponding experimental data overlaid with simulation data for the 
nominal ring design corresponding to W1 = 425 nm, W2 = 1.575 µm, and R = 
5 µm. 

Fig. 5. (a) FWHM of the measured ring resonators (W1 = 425 nm, W2 = 
1.575 µm, and R = 5 µm as in Fig. 4) as a function of q and (b) insertion 
losses as a function of the number of resonators N. 


junction length of 110 µm on each interferometer arm, total on-
resonance modulator insertion losses of 5.7 dB, only 1.2 dB of 
which were attributed to excess losses (the rest corresponding to 
the resonantly enhanced losses of the embedded phase shifters), 
total capacitance and resistance per modulator arm of 
respectively 72 fF and 48 W, and a resonator FWHM of ~2 nm. 
The reduction of the FWHM as compared to the 3.5 nm 
measured in the previous run is attributed to a reduction of the 
coupling coefficient k2 from ~0.6 to ~0.4 due to process biases. 
The actual optical bandwidth of the modulator, defined as the 
optical carrier wavelength range in which the modulation 
efficiency remains within a factor 2 of its maximum, was 
measured as 3.9 nm. The VpL for an on-resonance optical carrier 
was measured as 0.19 V�cm (as normalized relative to the 
cumulative PIN junction length), 6.8 times lower than a linear 
phase shifter with the same PIN junction design. This 
enhancement was actually slightly below the actual resonant 
enhancement of 8, due to a slight reduction in phase shifter 
efficiency associated to the reduced optical field confinement in 
the wider sections of the ring (compared to the reference 
modulator with a 400 nm waveguide width). The modulator 
could be operated with a cutoff frequency of 23.5 GHz in a 50 W 
environment, as limited by the RC time constant associated to 
the capacitance of the 5 parallel rings and the sum of the 48 W 
total phase shifter resistance with the 50 W of the driving 
circuitry. With a low output voltage lumped element driver one 
would expect the RC time constant to be significantly improved, 
up to the 46 GHz intrinsic phase shifter cutoff frequency. We 
showed co-operability of the device with a wire bonded 25 Gbps 
low output impedance lumped element driver, but increased data 
rates could not yet be shown due to the speed limitations of the 
utilized driver. With 2 Vpp and 4 Vpp drive signals, the modulator 
yielded modulation penalties associated to the finite drive 
voltages (as measured as a reduction in the optical modulation 
amplitude) of respectively -4.8 dB and -2.2 dB for an on-
resonance optical carrier.  

The factor 6.8 reported above essentially corresponds to the 

reduction in RF power consumption associated to the signal 
delivered to the modulator, as compared to a linear modulator 
with identical PIN junction design (embedded in high 
confinement, 400 nm wide waveguides) and sized to have 
identical modulation penalty. The insertion losses of the 
resonantly enhanced modulator, 1.2 dB higher than the 
equivalent linear modulator, however also have to be factored in 
to yield a fair comparison. Increasing the drive voltage from 
2 Vpp to 2.7 Vpp would for example compensate for these 
additional insertion losses, provided the driver technology is 
able to support such a voltage increase, resulting in a reduced 
effective power enhancement slightly below 4. From this 
perspective, the improvement of the device seems very modest, 
particularly in view of the remaining thermal sensitivity. This 
would however be missing the main improvement, as the 
comparison above is really between the resonantly enhanced 
modulator and an equivalent linear modular, assuming it can be 
driven as a lumped element, which, with a cumulative length of 
> 500 µm would not be the case at RF frequencies above a few 
GHz. Thus, in order for this comparison to hold, the linear 
modulator would need to be driven by a distributed driver. In 
other words, the resonantly enhanced device provides the 
benefits of lumped element driving without requiring a 

distributed driver. Compared to a TW wave device, the ~8.1 mW 
required by the resonantly enhanced device at 25 Gbps assuming 
a 3 Vpp drive voltage is a very substantial improvement (20X 
compared to a dual drive, 50 W, linear TW MZM driven with a 
2 Vpp signal taking into account the reduction of the drive signal 
due to lower insertion losses). 

The improved temperature tolerance should also be 

discussed: In [16] we showed that the optical modulation 
amplitude (OMA) at the output of the device remained within a 
factor two of its maximum in a 3.8 nm wavelength range at fixed 
temperature, or, equivalently, in a 55oC temperature range if the 
wavelength of the laser remains fixed. While this represents 
more than a factor 10 increase in wavelength / temperature 
tolerance compared to a typical high-speed RRM with a Q-factor 
of ~5000 [23], the question remains whether this is sufficient to 
operate a transceiver completely without tuning of the rings. The 
typical wavelength repeatability of off-the-shelf laser diodes is 
on the order of ±1 nm to ±2 nm. Since the repeatability of silicon 
photonics resonant devices across different dies and wafers is 
also on the order of ±1 nm, the initial wavelength tolerance can 
be seen to be largely eaten up by these sources of variabilities. 
While the remaining wavelength / temperature tolerance of 
below 1 nm / 14oC is too low on its own, a few elements may 
help: For one, since the laser and the modulator are operated in 
the same transmitter, temperatures can be assumed to largely co-
vary in both devices, so that wavelength drifts will also be 
comparable given the similar thermo-optic coefficients of Si and 
InGaAsP [25]. Moreover, one may envision implementing the 
laser as an external cavity laser with the resonance wavelength 
determined by the silicon photonics chip [26], in which case 
variation of the wavelength as caused e.g. by varying Si film 
thicknesses might be applied to both devices, in particular if the 
tunable reflector closing the laser cavity and the modulator are 
laid out close to each other. Nonetheless, increasing the optical 
bandwidth of the device appears desirable, not only to increase 
the robustness of the system, but also so as to not incur the full 
additional 3 dB modulation penalty associated to operating the 
device at the edges of its optical passband.  

Fortunately, this can be improved by increasing the number 

of rings loaded on each of the modulator arms, with the only 
penalty being, at moderate increase, a corresponding increase in 
power consumption, which, starting from ~8 mW is quite 
acceptable. Practical difficulties associated to increasing the 
number of rings are expected to be related to driving the 
increased capacitance, for example increasing the difficulty of 
designing a fitting low output impedance driver due to increase 
current sourcing requirements or worsening the detrimental 
effect of parasitic inductances associated to packaging. 

Figure 6 shows the modeled optical OMA at the output of 

the temperature tolerant MZM described above, under the 
assumption of a 2 Vpp drive voltage and further assuming that 
the number of collectively driven RRMs is varied between 3 and 

Fig. 6. OMA as a function of the number of collectively driven RRMs per 
MZM branch, assuming a drive voltage of 2 Vpp.  


7 per MZM arm (5 being the nominal value for the experimental 
results reported above). Importantly, as mentioned above, as the 
number of RRMs is increased, the optical bandwidth of the 
device widens. At the same time, the OMA at the center 
frequency drops, which is not problematic at first if it remains 
above the minimum specified in the definition of the passband.  

This can be understood with the following considerations: 

The OMA of a linear modulator with phase shifters of length L 

driven in dual drive configuration with a drive voltage swing Vd 
can be simply calculated as 

 
9:! ;< = 10?@ABC DEF 7G ∙ 4 ∙ 6 7/4
 
(2) 

 
− 10 ∙ 2 ∙ 4 ?@A 10  

where a is the linear loss term associated to the phase shifters. 
Even when ignoring the nonlinearity introduced by the sine 
function, one can straightforwardly see that this results in an 
optimum modulator length due to the different scaling of ?@A 4  
and 4. This is also what drives the trends in Fig. 6: As the number 
of rings is increased, and thus also the total effective phase 
shifter length at resonance 2I34JJK 6, where 4JJK is the 
circumference of a single RRM, the phase shifter length grows 
beyond it optimum for an on-resonance carrier frequency. For 
highly detuned carrier frequencies on the other hand the 
effective phase shifter length is lower, as the resonant 
enhancement is significantly reduced. Thus, for these 
frequencies the effective phase shifter length is still below 
optimum and the phase shifter efficiency continues to grow with 
the number of rings. The OMA is maximized for two 
intermediate frequencies at which the effective phase shifter 
length is exactly optimum, with these two frequencies moving 
away from the center frequency as the number of rings is 
increased. 

IV. COMBINED DEVICE 

As a final step, we combined the two concepts described in the 
following sections in a single device. A micrograph of the 
combined device can be seen in Fig. 7. Two fibers are mounted 
in a fiber array and are moved laterally, together with a fixed 
pitch, relative to underlying multi-mode grating couplers. The 
two branches of the interferometer are routed between the two 
multi-mode grating couplers in such a way that the resulting 
phase shifts in either MMGC add up rather than cancelling each 

Fig. 7. Micrograph of the passively biased, temperature tolerant resonantly 
enhanced Mach-Zehnder modulator. Two fibers with a fixed pitch constrained 
by a fiber array are positioned on top of multi-mode grating couplers also 
acting as splitter / combiner for the interferometer. One of the interferometer 
branches is routed around the first MMGC (red arrow) in order to maintain 
the phase sensitivity of the device [13]. 

Fig. 8. Recorded signal Q-factors and extinctions with an on-resonance optical carrier as a function of the transverse fiber array displacement. The maximum 
Q-factor / OMA are obtained for a fiber positioning corresponding to the quadrature point, at which the extinction is 3 dB above its minimum. Recorded eye 
diagrams are shown for selected fiber array positions. 


other out [13]. Note that this requires one waveguide to be routed 
around the first MMGC as indicated by a red arrow.  

The temperature tolerant MZM itself corresponds to exactly 

the same design as reported in the previous section, and has thus 
the same temperature and wavelength tolerance. Fig. 8 shows 
the signal Q-factor recorded at the output of the device, as well 
as the extinction of the in-coupled light occurring inside the 
MZM (grating coupler losses, as measured at the optimal lateral 
displacement, normalized out), as a function of the transverse 
fiber array displacement. The Q-factor was measured with a 13 
dBm laser power and a Finisar/U2T XPRV2021A 40 GHz 
bandwidth photoreceiver with an input referred transimpedance 
amplifier noise density specified to be below 40 N!
OP and 

a responsivity between 0.5 A/W and 0.75 A/W. It can be seen 
that the signal Q-factor is maximized at a fiber displacement at 
which the on-resonance optical carrier excess loss is exactly 3 
dB above its minimum, i.e., at a transverse displacement 
corresponding to the interferometer being biased at its 
quadrature point. Moreover, it can be seen that the sensitivity of 
the modulator bias point on fiber misalignment is approximately 
doubled relative to Fig. 2, by nature of two MMGCs being 
utilized in the device together with a fiber array and the incurred 
displacement induced phase shift thus being doubled. The signal 
Q-factor, and thus the OMA, remain within 3 dB of their 
maxima in a transverse fiber misalignment range of ±1.8 µm.  

V. CONCLUSIONS 

In conclusion, we have shown a resonantly enhanced Mach-
Zehnder modulator driven as a lumped element load with a 
~20X reduction of power consumption compared to a linear 
travelling wave device with identical output optical modulation 
amplitude. The optical modulation amplitude is maintained 
within 3 dB of its maximum in a 55oC temperature range, which 
can be further increased by increasing the number of collectively 
driven RRMs on each branch. The Mach-Zehnder modulator 
was passively biased at its quadrature point by selective 
placement of the input and output fibers on top of multi-mode 
grating couplers also used as the input and output splitters of the 
interferometer.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors gratefully acknowledge funding from the European 
Research Council under grant agreement 279770 and from the 
Excellence Initiative of the German State and Federal 
governments. 

REFERENCES 

[1] 
Where 
does 
power 
go? 
GreenDataProject, 
accessed 
at 

http://www.greendataproject.org (2008).  

[2] 
N. Qi, X. Li, H. Li, X. Xiao, L. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Gao, Y. Yu, M. Moyal, 
P. Chiang, “A 25Gb/s, 520mW, 6.4Vpp Silicon-Photonic Mach-Zehnder 
Modulator with Distributed Driver in CMOS,” in Proc. 2015 Opt. Fib. 
Comm. Conf. (OFC), Art. ID W1B.3. 

[3] 
A. Narasimha et al., “A 40-Gb/s QSFP optoelectronic transceiver in a 
0.13µm CMOS Silicon-on-insulator technology,” in Proc. 2008 Opt. Fib. 
Conf. (OFC), Art. ID OMK7. 

[4] 
S. Sharif-Azadeh et al., “Low Vp Silicon photonics modulators with 
highly linear epitaxially grown phase shifters,” Opt. Expr., vol. 23, no. 18, 
pp. 23526-23550, Sep. 2015. 

[5] 
Q. Xu, B. Schmidt, S. Pradhan, M. Lipson, “Micrometer-scale silicon 
photonics electro-optic modulator,” Nat., vol. 435, pp. 325-327 (2005). 

[6] 
A. Moscoso-Mártir et al., “Co-integration of a temperature tolerant low 
impedance resonantly enhanced silicon photonics modulator,” in Proc. 
2017 Conf. Group IV Photon. (GFP), pp. 101-102. 

[7] 
B. J. Frey, D. B. Leviton, T. J. Madison, “Temperature dependent 
refractive index of silicon and germanium,” arXiv:physics/0606168. 

[8] 
S. K. Selvaraja, W. Bogaerts, P. Dumon, D. Van Thourhout, R. Baets, 
“Subnanometer Linewidth Uniformity in Silicon Nanophotonics 
Waveguide Devices Using CMOS Fabrication Technology,” J. Sel. Top. 
Quant. Electron., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 316-324, Jan. 2010. 

[9] 
Y. Zheng et al., “Power-Efficient Calibration and Reconfiguration for 
Optical Network-on-Chip,” J. Opt. Commun. Netw., vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 
955-966, Dec. 2012. 

[10] P. Dong et al., “Thermally tunable silicon racetrack resonators with 

ultralow tuning power,” Opt. Expr., vol. 18, no. 19, pp. 20298-20304, Sep. 
2010. 

[11] V. Raghunathan, W. N. Ye, J. Hu, T. Izuhara, J. Michel, L. Kimerling, 

“Athermal operation of Silicon waveguides: spectral, second order and 
footprint dependencies,” Opt. Expr., vol. 18, no. 17, pp. 17631-17639 
(2010). 

[12] S. Romero-García, B. Marzban, F. Merget, B. Shen, J. Witzens, “Edge 

couplers with relaxed alignment tolerance for pick-and-place hybrid inte- 
gration of III–V lasers with SOI waveguides,” J. Sel. Topics Quantum 
Electron., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 369–379, Jul./Aug. 2014. 

[13] S. Romero-García, B. Shen, F. Merget, B. Marzban, J. Witzens, 

“Alignment Tolerant Couplers for Silicon Photonics,” J. Sel. Top. Quant. 
Electron., vol. 21, no. 6, Art. ID 8200214, Nov. 2015. 

[14] S. Romero-García, B. Shen, F. Merget, J. Witzens, “Packaged MZIs 

passively balanced by means of Multimode Grating Couplers,” Proc. 2016 
Photon. North Conf. 

[15] S. Akiyama, T. Kurahashi, K. Morito, T. Yamamoto, T. Usuki, S. 

Nomura, “,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 15, pp. 16321-16338, Apr. 2012. 

[16] S. Romero-García, A. Moscoso-Mártir, S. Sharif-Azadeh, J. Müller, B. 

Shen, F. Merget, J. Witzens, “High-speed resonantly enhanced silicon 
photonics modulator with a large operating temperature,” Opt. Lett., vol. 
42, no. 1, pp. 81-84, Jan. 2017. 

[17] S. Sharif-Azadeh, F. Merget, M. P. Nezhad, J. Witzens, “On the 

measurement of the Pockels effect in strained silicon,” Opt. Lett., vol. 40, 
no. 8, pp. 1877-1880, Apr. 2015.  

[18] Y. Shen, I. B. Divliansky, D. N. Basov, S. Mookherjea, “Perfect set-and-

forget alignment of silicon photonic resonators and inteferometers,” in 
Proc. 2011 Opt. Comm. Conf. (OFC), Art. ID PDPC3. 

[19] S. Grillanda et al., “Post-fabrication trimming of athermal silicon 

waveguides,” Opt. Lett., vol. 38, no. 24, pp. 5450-5453 (2013). 

[20] S. Spector, J. M. Knecht, P. W. Juodawlkis, “Localized in situ cladding 

annealing for post-fabrication trimming of silicon photonic integrated 
circuits,” Opt. Expr., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 5996-6003, Mar. 2016. 

[21] A. P. Knights, Z. Wang, D. Paez, L. Dow, “Electrical trimming of the 

resonance of a silicon micro-ring resonator,” in Proc. 2017 Conf. Group 
IV Photon., pp. 29-30. 

[22] S. Romero-García, A. Moscoso-Mártir, S. Sharif Azadeh, B. Shen, J. 

Nojic, F. Merget, J. Witzens, “Passively Biased Resonantly Enhanced 
Silicon Photonics Modulator with High Optical Bandwidth,” Proc. SPIE, 
vol. 10108, Art. ID 1010802-1, Jan. 2017. 

[23] J. Müller, J. Hauck, B. Shen, S. Romero-García, E. Islamova, S. S. 

Azadeh, S. Joshi, N. Chimot, A. Moscoso-Mártir, F. Merget, F. Lelarge, 
J. Witzens, “Silicon photonics WDM transmitter with single section 
semiconductor mode-locked laser,” Adv. Opt. Technol., vol. 4, pp. 119-
145, Mar. 2015. 

[24] D. T. Spencer, J. F. Bauters, M. J. Heck, and J. E. Bowers, “Integrated 

waveguide coupled Si3N4 resonators in the ultrahigh-Q regime,” Optica, 
vol. 1, pp. 153-157, Sep. 2014.  

[25] D. Melati et al., “Wavelength and composition dependence of the thermo-

optic coefficient for InGaAsP-based integrated waveguides,” J. Appl. 
Phys., vol. 120, Art. ID 213102, 2016. 

[26] S. Tanaka, S.-H. Jeong, S. Sekiguchi, T. Kurahashi, Y. Tanaka, K. Morito, 

“High-output-power, single-wavelength silicon hybrid laser using precise 
flip-chip bonding technology,” Opt. Expr., vol. 20, no. 27, pp. 28057-
28069, Dec. 2012.


