1 

 

The inherently absent 2-dimensional electron gas in 

ultra-pure GaN/AlGaN heterostructures 

S. Schmult1*, S. Wirth2, V.V. Solovyev3, R. Hentschel4, A. Wachowiak4, A. Großer4, I.V. 
Kukushkin3,5, and T. Mikolajick1,4 

1 TU Dresden, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Institute of Semiconductors and 
Microsystems, Nöthnitzer Str. 64, 01187 Dresden, Germany  

2 Max-Planck-Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, Nöthnitzer Str. 40, 01187 Dresden, 
Germany 

3 Institute of Solid State Physics RAS, 142432 Chernogolovka, Moscow district, Russia 

4 Namlab gGmbH, Nöthnitzer Str. 64, 01187 Dresden, Germany 

5 National Research University Higher School of Economics, 101000 Moscow, Russia 

* Corresponding author: stefan.schmult@tu-dresden.de 

 

Abstract 

Gallium nitride (GaN) has emerged as an essential semiconductor material for energy-
efficient lighting and electronic applications owing to its large direct bandgap of 3.4 eV. 
Present GaN/AlGaN heterostructures seemingly feature an inherently existing highly-mobile 
2-dimensional electron gas (2DEG), which results in normally-on transistor characteristics. 
Here we report on an ultra-pure GaN/AlGaN layer stack grown by molecular beam epitaxy, in 
which such a 2DEG is absent at 300 K in the dark, a property previously not demonstrated. 
Illumination with ultra-violet light however generates a 2DEG at the GaN/AlGaN interface 
and the heterostructure becomes electrically conductive. At temperatures below 150 K this 
photo-conductivity is persistent with an insignificant dependence of the 2D channel density 
on the optical excitation power. Residual donor impurity concentrations below 1017 cm-3 in 
the GaN/AlGaN layer stack are one necessity for our observations. Fabricated transistors 
manifest that these characteristics enable a future generation of normally-off as well as 
light-sensitive GaN-based device concepts. 

 

Main 

Group-III-Nitrides and their heterostructures have become key elements in energy-saving 
daily life applications, such as white solid-state lighting [1] and short wavelength lasers for 
data storage concepts [2]. Single-interface gallium nitride/aluminum gallium nitride 
(GaN/AlGaN) heterostructures feature a highly-mobile electron channel with mobilities 
exceeding 2000 cm2/Vs at room temperature [3]. Combined with the large bandgap of 3.4 
eV and the associated high critical breakdown field strength as well as thermal and chemical 
stability of this compound material, GaN-based devices increasingly emerge in power and 


2 

 

high-voltage applications [4,5]. On the other hand, GaN possesses intrinsic material 
properties like a large effective electron mass and a large electron g-factor, which allows for 
exploiting an extended regime of mesoscopic physics compared to its compound 
semiconductor counterpart gallium arsenide (GaAs) [6-8].  

The aforementioned mobile channel at the GaN/AlGaN interface is a 2-dimensional electron 
gas (2DEG) in close proximity to the surface (10 – 50 nm) with record low temperature 
electron mobility in excess of 100000 cm2/Vs [9]. Due to polarization changes at the 
GaN/AlGaN interface a confinement potential is formed [10] which is usually flooded with 
electrons (Fig. 1). One possible resource of these charges are surface states, from which the 
electrons are transferred into the confinement potential [11]. Following this view, in such 
structures the generation of the 2DEG does not require intentionally introduced donors 
which would also act as efficient Coulomb scattering centers. However, one disadvantageous 
consequence of this undeliberately existing 2DEG for use in lateral heterostructure field-
effect transistors (HFETs) is the associated normally-on switching characteristics, a drawback 
for fail-safe applications. Technologically this normally-on characteristics can be converted 
into the desired normally-off fashion, for example by an additional recess etch step, an extra 
p-type GaN or AlGaN layer beneath the gate electrode [4,5] or a hybrid GaN/Si cascode 
technology approach [12], but all of which require additional processing efforts and costs. 

When inspecting the band diagram of the underlying GaN/AlGaN heterostructure in more 
detail, impurities or defects in the GaN or AlGaN layers represent another possible source of 
the channel charges, as they will be transferred into the inherently existing polarization-
induced confinement potential to minimize their potential energy (Fig. 1). To exclude the 
GaN or AlGaN layers as a possible source of channel charges one must be able to synthesize 
ultra-pure material with an ionized impurity background significantly below 1017 cm-3, as will 
be discussed later. Here we demonstrate by using an ultra-pure GaN/AlGaN layer stack that 
the predominant source of the charges forming the 2DEG is represented by bulk impurities 
in the GaN/AlGaN layer stack rather than by surface states.  

 

Results: 

Under investigation is a GaN/AlGaN heterostructure with a low level of residual impurities 
(approximately 2 ∙ 1016 cm-3). The GaN/Al0.06Ga0.94N/GaN layer stack with respective 
thicknesses of 1 µm/16 nm/3 nm (inset Fig. 2) is grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on 
insulating hexagonal GaN. The only detectable impurity in the unintentionally doped (uid) 
MBE stack is oxygen, and its level of incorporation into GaN and AlGaN is defined by the 
sample temperature during epitaxial growth [13,14]. Comparable low background impurity 
levels are also found in MBE-grown GaN material from other laboratories [15].  

The discussed GaN/AlGaN heterostructure with ohmic contacts shows electrically insulating 
behavior in the dark at low temperatures as well as at 300 K, as discussed later. Under ultra-
violet (UV) illumination the sample turns conductive, which is explained by the formation of 
a 2DEG at the GaN/AlGaN interface. In addition, below 150 K the conductivity becomes 
persistent in the dark, i.e. several hours after blanking the UV light the electron density 


3 

 

reaches an equilibrium (persistence) value independent of the initial excitation power of ~ 2 
∙ 1012 cm-2 (Fig. 2), a density which is expected and demonstrated for this stack architecture 
[16] and previously repeatedly measured [13,14]. When illumination is repeated, the density 
rises instantly to a value depending on the excitation power. When UV light is blanked again, 
the density decreases abruptly, followed by a slow relaxation prior to reaching the 
equilibrium value again only after hours.  

Albeit the equilibrium channel density is power-independent, the value under steady UV 
illumination depends on the excitation power (Fig. 3). Magneto-transport measurements at 
0.5 K under steady illumination yield Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations with clear zero 
longitudinal resistance values around 10 T. These variations in the longitudinal conductivity 
not only confirm the 2D nature of the generated conductive channel, but also demonstrate 
the absence of other (parasitic) current paths except this 2D channel. Only for large 
excitation power the transport traces are deteriorated and clear zero longitudinal magneto-
resistance is absent for B < 15 T, which is explained by sample heating to well above 0.5 K 
(trace under 4 mW excitation in Fig. 3).  

The observed Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations also allow for the assignment of Landau level 
filling factors and the subsequent extraction of the 2D channel density. In the described 
experiment a change in steady UV excitation power over almost 5 orders in magnitude only 
accounts for a ~ 50 % increase of the 2D channel density up to 3.0 ∙ 1012 cm-2, compared to 
its equilibrium value of ~ 2 ∙ 1012 cm-2 (see values given in Fig. 3). 

The insulating behavior at 300 K in the dark combined with the possibility to generate a 
conductive channel under UV illumination will facilitate new routes for device application by 
exploiting the electrostatic population of the confinement potential at the GaN/AlGaN 
interface. This is equivalent to the technologically desired normally-off switching 
characteristics of lateral HFETs. A normally-off device processing scheme includes an overlap 
of the gate layer with the ohmic source and drain contacts. To achieve this, lithographically 
defined lateral HFET test structures were covered with a highly insulating aluminum oxide 
layer subsequent to ohmic contact formation (Fig. 4 (a) and (b)). This architecture allows for 
an electrostatic response of the entire region beneath the gate electrode, including the 
proximity of source and drain contacts.   

Lateral HFETs based on our GaN/AlGaN stack were processed with the described normally-
off scheme. As shown in Fig. 4 (d), they operate in enhancement mode (normally-off) at 300 
K in the dark, such as their GaAs–based counterparts [17] and inversion channel metal-
oxide-semiconductor (MOS) FETs based on silicon [18]. Under steady UV illumination 
normally-on behavior is restored, and fades away after blanking the light. In both cases the 
conducting 2D channel is located at the position of the confinement potential at the 
GaN/AlGaN interface (Fig. 5), as verified in capacitance vs. voltage measurements. The 
switching characteristics of our FETs establish a trend set by the unintentionally 
incorporated oxygen: For high concentrations (~1018 cm-3) in the MBE-grown GaN material 
FETs cannot be turned off due to parasitic current paths, at medium values (~1017 cm-3) they 
operate normally-on [13,14] and ultimately, at a low level as realized here, normally-off. 

 


4 

 

Discussion: 

The presented data strongly indicate that the confinement potential at the GaN/AlGaN 
interface is inherently not populated with charge carriers. Upon illumination with photon 
energies in the region of the GaN bandgap the channel is filled and a 2DEG - and only a 2DEG 
- as a conduction path is generated. This 2DEG persists at low temperature (i.e. after 
blanking the UV illumination) and exhibits an equilibrium electron density of ~2 ∙ 1012 cm-2. 
Further steady optical excitation will certainly add photo-generated electrons, though this 
only insignificantly impacts the channel density. The layer stack architecture and the 
resulting potential landscape set a limit for the number of electrons accommodating the 
2DEG. This channel density robustness is demonstrated under steady flooding with photo-
induced electrons over several magnitudes in excitation power. The low impurity level of ~2 ∙ 
1016 cm-3 (with an even lower value for ionized impurities below 1016cm-3) in the epitaxial 
GaN/AlGaN stack is the hitherto unidentified source of the channel charges. A back-on-the-
envelope calculation yields a number of 1013 cm-2 electrons, when 1017 cm-3 ionized 
impurities are distributed over the 1 µm thick MBE stack. In this case a 2DEG is present 
independent of illumination. 

The transistor transfer characteristics IDS(VGS) at 300 K at low drain-source voltage (VDS) with 
and without UV illumination support this interpretation (Fig. 4 (d)). In the dark, the HFET 
exhibits transfer characteristics typical for normally-off devices with a threshold voltage (Vth) 
around +1.8 V. With increasing gate bias the drain current first remains constant at the 
measurement resolution limit, and then increases exponentially in the subthreshold region 
towards the threshold voltage with a subthreshold swing of about 80 mV/decade, a value 
close to the thermal limit of about 60 mV/decade. Assuming a similar gate coupling in the 
entire subthreshold region, one can estimate from the ratio between the ideal subthreshold 
swing and the measured one that the confinement potential at the GaN/AlGaN interface is 
about 1.4 eV above the Fermi-energy at the potential of the source region for VGS = 0 V. 
When VGS is raised above Vth the drain current linearly increases with VGS since the 
confinement potential is lowered below the potential of the source region and the 2DEG 
charge density is linearly tuned with VGS - Vth given by the capacitive coupling of the series 
capacitances from gate dielectric, GaN cap and AlGaN barrier layer (Fig. 4 (c)). The drain 
current tends to saturate upon filling the confinement potential with a maximum level of 
charge carrier density, so electrons can easily overcome the AlGaN barrier towards the GaN 
cap / dielectric interface.  

Those transferred electrons could be captured in traps at the GaN cap / dielectric interface 
as observed in hysteresis phenomena with a shift towards positive VGS of transfer curves 
measured during back-sweeping to lower VGS again. However, negligible hysteresis (< 0.1 V) 
was observed in double sweep measurements of transfer characteristics with highest VGS 
values below overloading the 2DEG density. Moreover, once electron trapping occurred, the 
transfer characteristics could be shifted back to the original position on the VGS scale by 
stressing the device at high negative VGS values, e.g. -8 V, for several minutes for complete 
de-trapping. Additionally, double-pulsed measurements of transfer characteristics with a 
repetition rate of 20 Hz and pulse width 1 ms performed at quiescent gate-source voltages 
of -3 V, 0 V and 3 V always result in positive threshold voltages > 1.5 V. Therefore, we can 


5 

 

exclude trapped electrons in the dielectric or at the GaN cap / dielectric interface as the root 
cause of the positive threshold voltage in the dark case.  

The same scenario holds for photo-excited electrons. Once the channel is filled up to its 
equilibrium density, additional electrons will favorably overcome the AlGaN barrier and 
transfer into the GaN cap / surface by tunneling or thermal stimulation. This very likely 
explains the density robustness of the channel demonstrated in Fig. 3.  

 

Methods 

The discussed heterostructure was grown along the Ga-polar c-axis in a VG80H MBE system 
at a temperature slightly below the rapid Ga desorption point on an insulating 2 inch GaN 
bulk substrate prepared by ammonothermal synthesis with a density of threading and mixed 
dislocations < 105 cm-2. Ga and Al with nominal purity of 8N and 6N5, respectively, were 
evaporated from filament effusion sources, active Nitrogen (nominal purity 10N) was 
supplied by a radio-frequency plasma source. The growth rate for GaN amounts to 240 
nm/h. After decollating pieces of the 2 inch wafer, Hall bars and transistor test structures 
were lithographically defined and mesa structures patterned in a reactive ion etch step using 
a chlorine-based plasma. Ti/Al/Ni/Au stacks annealed at 800 °C in nitrogen atmosphere for 
30 s serve as ohmic contacts. For transistors the entire surface (including contacts, mesa and 
etched regions) was covered with 27 nm Al2O3 by atomic layer deposition. A 100 nm thick 
Ti/Au film serves as gate electrode. 

Background impurity levels have been verified by secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS), 
demonstrating an unintentional oxygen level of ~ 2 ∙ 1016 cm-3 in the grown GaN material. 

Temperature- and illumination-dependent magneto-transport measurements between 2 K 
and 300 K were performed in a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS) from 
Quantum Design with optical access. A low-frequency (17 Hz) lock-in technique with 
excitation current of 100 nA was employed.  

A 3He cryostat equipped with a superconducting magnet (up to 15 Tesla) was used for low 
temperature magneto-transport studies. The sample photoexcitation at 325 nm wavelength 
was realized with the fiber-coupled output of a He-Cd laser. The large distance of ~ 20 mm 
between the bare fiber end (numeric aperture = 0.22) and the sample surface enabled a 
good uniformity of both the illumination and the resulting 2DEG density as confirmed by the 
onset of SdH oscillations. The photoexcitation power was attenuated by optical filters and 
then measured at the fiber input, the fiber optical transmission amounts to ~ 80 %. 
Magneto-transport data were recorded using a low-frequency lock-in technique. 

The capacitance vs. voltage C(VGS) measurements were carried out by sweeping a quasi-
static DC bias modulated with an AC signal with a frequency of 20 kHz and with an amplitude 
of 30 mV using an Agilent B1505A Power Device Analyzer equipped with a capacitance 
measurement unit. The DC bias voltage at the gate electrode was swept in the direction 
from lower to higher voltages with a staircase-like sweep pattern and a rate of 
approximately 0.5 V/s. Depth profiles of the charge carrier density were extracted by 


6 

 

applying the data transformation according to reference [10] after subtracting a constant 
offset capacitance, which accounts for the direct overlap capacitance described in the text. 
Transfer ID(VGS) characteristics are obtained with the same device analyzer. Double-pulsed 
transfer characteristics measurements were performed with the same device analyzer at a 
repetition rate of 20 Hz and pulse width of 1 ms at quiescent gate-source voltage values 
between -3 and 3 V applied for 49 ms. 

 

References 

[1] 
The Nobel Prize in Physics 2014. Nobelprize.org. Nobel Media AB (2014) 

[2] 
Ikeda M., Uchida S. Blue–Violet Laser Diodes Suitable for Blu‐ray Disk. phys. stat. sol. 
(a) 194 (2), 407–413 (2002)  

[3] 
Gaska R., Shur M.S.,  Bykhovski A.D., Orlov A.O., Snider G.L. Electron mobility in 
modulation-doped AlGaN–GaN heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 287 (1999) 

[4] 
Chen Kevin J. et al. GaN-on-Si Power Technology: Devices and Applications. IEEE 
Trans. Electron Devices 64, 779 (2017) 

[5] 
Amano H. et al. The 2018 GaN power electronics roadmap. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 51, 
163001 (2018) 

[6] 
Chou H.T. et al. High-quality quantum point contacts in GaN∕AlGaN Heterostructures. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 073108 (2005) 

[7]  
Chou H.T., Goldhaber-Gordon D., Schmult S, Manfra M.J., Sergent A.M., Molnar R.J. 
Single-electron transistors in GaN∕AlGaN heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 
033104 (2006) 

[8]  
Shchepetilnikov A.V. et al. Electron spin resonance in a 2D system at a GaN/AlGaN 
heterojunction. Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 052102 (2018) 

[9] 
Manfra M.J., Baldwin. K.W., Sergent A.M., West K.W., Molnar, R.J., Caissie J. Electron 
mobility exceeding 160000cm2/Vs in AlGaN∕GaN heterostructures grown by 
molecular-beam epitaxy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 85, 5394 (2004) 

[10] 
Ambacher O. et al. Two-dimensional electron gases induced by spontaneous and 
piezoelectric polarization charges in N- and Ga-face AlGaN/GaN heterostructures. J. 
Appl. Phys. 85 (6), p. 3222 (1999) 

[11]  
Van de Walle, C.G., Segev D. Microscopic origins of surface states on nitride surfaces. 
J. Appl. Phys. 101, 081704 (2007) 

[12] 
Green B.M. et al. Cascode connected AlGaN/GaN HEMT's on SiC substrates. IEEE 
Microw. Guided Wave Lett. 10 (8), p. 316 (2000) 

[13] 
Schubert F., Wirth S., Zimmermann F., Heitmann J., Mikolajick T., Schmult S. Growth 
condition dependence of unintentional oxygen incorporation in epitaxial GaN. Sci. 
Technol. Adv. Mater. 17 (1), p. 239-243 (2016) 


7 

 

[14] 
Schmult S., Schubert F., Wirth S., Großer A., Mittmann T., Mikolajick T. Control of 
unintentional oxygen incorporation in GaN. J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B 35 (2), 02B104 
(2017) 

[15] 
Storm D.F. et al. Critical issues for homoepitaxial GaN growth by molecular beam 
epitaxy on hydride vapor-phase epitaxy-grown GaN substrates J. Cryst. Growth 456, 
p. 121-132 (2016)  

[16] 
Manfra M., Baldwin. K.W., Sergent A.M., Molnar, R.J., Caissie J. Electron mobility in 
very low density GaN/AlGaN/GaN heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 85 (10), p. 1722 
(2004) 

[17] 
Kane B.E., Pfeiffer L.N., West K.W. High mobility GaAs heterostructure field effect 
transistor for nanofabrication in which dopant-induced disorder is eliminated. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 67 (9), p. 1262 (1995) 

[18] 
Stern F., Howard W. E. Properties of Semiconductor Surface Inversion Layers in the 
Electric Quantum Limit. Phys. Rev. 163 (3), p. 816-835 (1967) 

[19] 
Noh Young-Kyun, Lee Sang-Tae, Kim Moon-Deock, Oh Jae-Eung. High electron 
mobility transistors with Fe-doped semi-insulating GaN buffers on (110) Si substrates 
grown by ammonia molecular beam epitaxy. Accepted J. Cryst. Growth, in press, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcrysgro.2018.07.016 

 

Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge support in device processing from K. Nieweglowsky, J. Gärtner and N. 
Szabo and appreciate constructive discussions with A. Ruf. The RAS part of the work was 
financially supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research. The NaMLab gGmbH 
portion of the work was financially supported by the German Federal Ministry for Economic 
Affairs and Energy - BMWi (project no.: 03ET1398B). 

 

Author contributions 

S.S. and A.G. executed sample growth. S.S., A.G., V.V.S. and R.H. processed devices. S.S. and 
S.W. designed and performed PPMS magneto-transport experiments, analyzed and 
processed data. V.V.S. and I.V.K. designed and performed 3He magneto-transport 
experiments and analyzed and processed data. A.W. and R.H. designed and performed 
electrical transistor characterization, analyzed and processed data. S.S., S.W. and A.W. 
prepared the manuscript. T.M. designed experiments, analyzed data and participated in 
manuscript preparation. All the authors have read the manuscript and agree with its 
content. 

 

 


8 

 

Figures 

 

Fig. 1: Schematic conduction band diagram of the discussed GaN/AlGaN heterostructure (not 
to scale). Due to polarization discontinuity a triangular confinement potential is formed at 
the GaN/AlGaN interface (marked by the vertical dashed line). Two scenarios for filling this 
potential with electrons, and thus forming a 2DEG, are shown. In scenario i, electrons 
originate from surface states and tunnel through the AlGaN barrier to fill the confinement 
potential. In scenario ii, electrons resulting from background donor impurities minimize their 
potential energy by moving towards the GaN/AlGaN interface and create the 2DEG at the 
same. In order to rule out the latter case the level of bulk impurities must be very low (< 1017 

cm-3).  

 

Fig. 2: Persistent equilibrium low temperature channel density of ~2 ∙ 1012 cm-2 (0 – 1 s) 
several hours after excitation with a UV laser at 10 mW of the discussed GaN/AlGaN 
heterostructure, in cross-section schematically displayed in the inset (not to scale). Further 
laser illumination (at t = 1 s) results in an instant rise of the channel density to a constant 
value of ~3.1 ∙ 1012 cm-2. After blanking the UV light the channel density shows initially a fast, 
followed by a slow relaxation trend, which restores after several hours the equilibrium value. 
The density is extracted from the time-dependent Hall voltage at 0.5 T in a laterally defined 
Hall bar. At 300 K the voltage-current characteristics shows ohmic behavior under steady UV 
illumination, as described in detail in the appendix, Fig. 6. 


9 

 

 

Fig. 3: Low temperature longitudinal magneto-resistance of a 400 µm wide Hall bar under 
steady photo-excitation with UV light at different excitation power. The observed 
Shubnikov-de Haas-oscillations and Zeroes in the longitudinal resistance clearly point at the 
2D channel character with no parasitic current paths. The identification of Landau level filling 
factors (e.g.  = 10, dashed line) allows for the extraction of the respective electron 
densities. An increase in the illumination power of almost 5 orders in magnitude only raises 
the channel density by 20 %. Only at the largest excitation power the sample is overheated 
and its temperature raised above 0.5 K, reflected by the non-vanishing resistance values of 
the minima. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


10 

 

(a)  
 

(b)  
 

(c)   
 

(d)   
 

Fig. 4: Top-view photograph (a) and device schematics (b) illustrating the overlap of the gate 
contact with source and drain (clearly visible for the source contact, barely for the drain in 
(a)). This overlap is essential since the 2DEG is only electrostatically generated below the 
gate electrode in the dark. At gate-source voltage VGS = 0 V the confinement potential in the 
conduction band is energetically located above the Fermi level ((c) left, not to scale). By 


11 

 

applying positive VGS the surface potential is lowered and finally the confinement potential 
can be populated by electrons originating from the source contact ((c) right). (d) Transfer 
characteristics of the drain current density scaled to gate width measured for a VGS bias 
sweep from low values in positive direction on a device with gate length of 15 µm and gate 
width of 100 µm in the dark and under UV illumination. Normally-off operation at 300 K in 
the dark is confirmed by the onset of the source-drain current IDrain (solid squares) at positive 

VGS ~ 1.3 V. In contrast, under UV illumination normally-on behavior is restored (solid circles), 
expressed by a source-drain current onset at negative VGS. In both cases the on/off current 
ratio exceeds 108 for a drain-source voltage VDS of 100 mV. The threshold voltages Vth under 
UV illumination and in the dark are marked by vertical dashed lines. Gate leakage currents 
(solid lines) for both measurements are within the resolution limit, pointing at excellent 
insulation properties of the gate dielectric. 

 

 

Fig. 5: Charge carrier profile of a Al2O3/GaN/AlGaN/GaN transistor layer stack (27 nm/3 
nm/16 nm/1 µm) calculated from capacitance vs. voltage C(VGS) data for both operation 
modes as shown in Fig. 4. The Al2O3/gate electrode (Ti/Au) interface is placed at 0 nm. The 
2DEG for both cases is located at the GaN/AlGaN interface 46 nm beneath the gate 
electrode. Illumination is realized with a fluorescent lamp featuring emission lines in the UV 
spectral region. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


12 

 

Appendix 

 

 

Fig. 6: Source-drain current vs. voltage characteristics in the dark and under ambient UV 
illumination of the processed and wired Hall bar without gate dielectric layer as sketched in 
Fig. 2. In the dark the resistance exceeds 100 M, whereas under illumination the value 
decreases by almost 3 orders of magnitude and demonstrates ohmic behavior. The inset 
shows a photograph of the Hall bar in comparison with a centimeter ruler with the source 
and drain contacts indicated. Ohmic contacts around the Hall bar and their leads are visible, 
the lateral mesa definition itself is not seen due to the transparent character of the material. 
The Hall bar is 100 µm wide and 2.4 mm long, the 14 symmetrically distributed voltage 
probes on both sides are separated by 300 µm.  

 

Further details on lateral HFETs and the comparison under UV illumination and in the dark:  

Under UV light illumination, the transfer curve of the mentioned FET shows the behavior of a 
normally-on device with threshold voltage in negative gate bias region around -1 V. 
Remarkably, the entire course of the transfer curve measured in the dark is nearly an exact 
copy, just shifted into the positive VGS direction (e.g. having the same subthreshold slope). 
Such a shift would be expected in case of a net positive fixed charge density with respect to 
the dark case either in the region from the confinement potential towards the gate 
electrode or in the direction of the GaN channel region towards the substrate. Such a charge 
density would cause an internal bias field that further energetically lowers the GaN/AlGaN 
confinement potential compared to the case in the dark at the same external VGS bias.  

Further evidence for the 2DEG at the GaN/AlGaN interface as the current carrying channel in 
transistor on-state operation for both cases with and without light illumination is obtained 
from capacitance-voltage measurements between gate electrode and ohmic source/drain 
contacts of the transistor structure. After subtracting from the measured capacitance trace a 


13 

 

constant capacitance value resulting from direct overlap of the gate electrode on the 
source/drain, charge carrier profiles as a function of the depth from the gate electrode were 
extracted (Fig. 5). In the dark and under steady UV-illumination, the peak maximum in 
charge carrier density at depth of 45 nm beneath the gate electrode reveals the 2DEG 
position. With increasing depth the charge carrier density quickly falls below 1 ∙ 1016 cm-3 in 
the deeper MBE-grown GaN channel layer supporting the low background impurity 
concentration. C(VGS) measurements done in this device configuration always seem to yield 
concentrations of free carriers in the thick GaN buffer layer below 1015 cm-3, independent of 
the background donor impurity concentration in the range 1016 cm-3 to 1017 cm-3. Pointing at 
[13,14], the in such manner extracted low free-carrier concentration is a necessary, but not 
sufficient proof for ultra-pure MBE GaN material with an active impurity background of <1016 

cm-3, as commonly stated [19].  

 


