1

GHz nanomechanical resonator in an ultraclean suspended graphene p-n junction

Minkyung Jung,1, 2, a) Peter Rickhaus,1,3 Simon Zihlmann,1 Alexander Eichler,3 Peter Makk,1,4

and Christian Schönenberger1, b)

1Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, 

Switzerland

2DGIST Research Institute, DGIST, Daegu 42988, Korea 

3Institute for Solid State Physics, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland

4Department of Physics, Budapest University of Technology and Economics and 

Nanoelectronics Momentum Research Group of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, 

Budafoki ut 8, 1111 Budapest, Hungary

Abstract

We demonstrate high-frequency mechanical resonators in ballistic graphene p–n junctions. 

Fully suspended graphene devices with two bottom gates exhibit ballistic bipolar behavior after 

current annealing. We determine the graphene mass density and built-in tension for different

current annealing steps by comparing the measured mechanical resonant response to a 

simplified membrane model. In a graphene membrane with high built-in tension, but still of 

macroscopic size with dimensions 3 × 1 m2, a record resonance frequency of 1.17 GHz is 

observed after the final current annealing step. We further compare the resonance response 

measured in the unipolar with the one in the bipolar regime. Remarkably, the resonant signals

are strongly enhanced in the bipolar regime.

a) minkyung.jung@dgist.ac.kr

b) Christian.Schoenenberger@unibas.ch


2

Introduction

Owing to the exceptional mechanical properties of graphene, such as high strength, graphene-

based nanoelectromechanical systems have stimulated intensive research activities in recent 

years.1-6 For example, extremely high quality factors7 as well as ultrasensitive mass and force 

sensors8 have been demonstrated. In addition, the low mass density and the high maximal 

tension allows for extremely high fundamental resonance frequencies. This makes graphene an 

excellent candidate for exploring quantum physics, since it is possible to cool the resonator to 

the quantum mechanical ground state. Recently, bilayer and multilayer of graphene have been 

successfully coupled to superconducting microwave resonators and optical cavities and the 

interaction between light and nanomechanical motion via radiation pressure has been 

observed.9-14 The coupling strength between cavities and graphene was sufficiently strong to 

observe cavity backaction cooling. Furthermore, owing to the large tunability of the resonance 

frequency, strong coupling to other resonators and parametric amplification have been 

demonstrated in recent works.15,16

In previous works, graphene mechanical resonators were operated in the megahertz (MHz)

range. A gigahertz (GHz) graphene mechanical resonator has not been demonstrated yet. 

However, such resonators are needed in order to reach the quantum regime without having to 

actively cool the resonator by opto-mechanical side-band cooling.17-18 Furthermore, graphene

mechanical resonators reported previously were operated in the unipolar regime where charge 

is transported by either electrons or holes (n or p regime). 

In this work, we demonstrate a GHz mechanical resonator in a ballistic graphene p–n junction. 

Fully suspended graphene resonators were fabricated with two bottom gates which are used to

control the carrier type and density. To increase the quality of the suspended graphene layer, it 

is current annealed in a vacuum chamber at low temperature.19,20 It is known that this procedure 

increases the electron mobility, yielding ballistic graphene devices.21 It has been suggested that 

residues that remained from the device fabrication and other potentially charged adsorbates are 

desorbed while current annealing.19 Using a frequency modulation (FM) technique, we 

measured the mechanical resonance response of the graphene p–n junction at different

annealing steps. We extract the graphene mass density and built-in tension and confirm that 

mass is desorbed. 


3

Results and discussion

A device schematic and measurement setup are shown in Fig. 1(a). Devices are fabricated by 

first defining an array of Ti/Au gates on an oxidized Si substrate. The gates are 45 nm thick, 

600 nm wide, and spaced at a pitch of 600 nm. A 20 nm layer of MgO is then deposited to 

prevent an accidental gate leak. After covering the gate array with a nominally 1 m thick resist 

layer (LOR 5A, MicroChem Corp.), an exfoliated graphene flake is transferred onto the LOR 

aligned to the bottom gate array by using a mechanical transfer technique. 50 nm of Pd source-

drain contacts are deposited to define ohmic contacts to the graphene layer. Finally, the LOR 

layer underneath the graphene flake is e-beam exposed and developed in order to suspend the 

graphene. The fabrication process is outlined in detail in ref. 20 and 22. The device is then 

mounted on a circuit board which provides integrated radio frequency (RF) and DC line 

connectors. 

FIG. 1: (a) Schematic of a suspended graphene device with two bottom gates at voltages VG1

and VG2 and a diagram of the measurement circuit. A frequency-modulated signal VFM with a 

carrier frequency in the MHz to GHz regime is applied to the source. We measure the mixed-

down current IMix through the graphene by a lock-in amplifier synchronized to the modulation 

frequency. (b) Differential electrical DC conductance in units of e2/h as a function of VG1 and 

VG2 at T = 8 K. Four regions are labeled according to carrier doping, p or n–type, in the left and 


4

right graphene regions, controlled by the respective bottom gates. (c) Mixing current IMix

measured as a function of carrier frequency and gate voltage (VG1 = VG2). Inset: Mixing current 

vs frequency taken along the dashed line at VG = 4.8 V, which shows the resonance signal peak. 

(d) Mechanical model for a graphene resonator simplified to a one-dimensional (1D) string 

under tension. L0 is the length between the source and drain contacts, F the electrostatic force

and T the longitudinal tension in the graphene. 𝛿𝑧 denotes a small time-varying displacement 

relative to the equilibrium position z.

All measurements in this work were carried out in a vacuum chamber with a pressure of 

typically < 10-5 mbar at T ~ 8 K. We first performed DC conductance measurements of an 

ultraclean graphene p–n junction using standard lock-in technique. Most as-fabricated devices 

exhibit a very weak dependence of the conductance on the gate voltage, not showing the 

suppressed conductance that is expected to arise at the charge-neutrality point (CNP). This is

due to strong doping by resist residues. To remove these residues, the device is current-annealed 

in a vacuum chamber at 8 K until the CNP peak is significantly pronounced.20 Figure 1(b) 

shows the differential conductance of device A in units of e2/h as a function of two bottom gates 

labeled VG1 and VG2 by applying a source-drain voltage of VSD = 400 μV after the final current 

annealing step. The device exhibits four different conductance regions p–p, n–n, p–n, and n–p 

according to carrier doping in the left and right regions depending on the two bottom gates. In 

the bipolar region (p–n and n–p) we observe conductance oscillations that can be attributed to 

Fabry–Pérot interference emerging due to electron waves that interfere with the reflected wave

scattered from the p-n junction. The Fabry–Pérot pattern supports that our graphene is in

ballistic regime. 21,23

The resonance of a vibrating graphene device at high-frequencies can be best detected by a 

mixing method.24 When applying a small time-varying bias voltage V(t)=VAC cos(ft) to the 

source, keeping the drain contact on ground, the current through the graphene device contains 

both a linear term 𝛿𝐼 = 𝐺𝛿𝑉 and a squared term 𝛿𝐼 ∝ 𝛿𝑉2, where G is the conductance of 

the graphene device. The squared term is due to the bias, which causes the total charge in the 

device to be modulated, modulating G too. Hence, one can write 𝛿𝐼 = (𝐺 + 𝛿𝐺)𝛿𝑉, where 

𝛿𝐺 ∝ 𝛿𝑉. The term proportional to V2 mixes a high-frequency signal down to a DC signal.

The applied AC signal also exerts a time-varying force to the graphene membrane, driving a 

displacement in position indicated in Fig. 1(d) by 𝛿𝑧 . This change in displacement leads


5

additionally to a change in gate charge, and hence to a change in conductance 𝛿𝐺. If the AC 

signal has a frequency f close to the resonance frequency of the membrane f0, z will increase 

as will 𝛿𝐺 . If a FM modulation technique is applied, in which the carrier frequency is 

modulated with frequency 𝑓𝐿, the mixing current can be detected with a conventional lock-in 

technique synchronized to 𝑓𝐿 .7,25 The modulation of the mixing current appears due to the 

dependence of the vibration amplitude on frequency. A circuit diagram of the measurement 

setup for the FM technique is shown in Fig. 1(a). The source electrode of the device is 

connected to a DC source (𝑉𝐷𝐶) and an RF generator (𝑉𝐴𝐶) via a bias tee. The drain contact is

directed to an I/V converter, whose signal is detected in a lock-in amplifier. The graphene 

resonator is actuated electrostatically by applying a frequency modulated signal with an 

amplitude VAC at the source electrode. The applied signal at the source electrode can be written

as, 

𝑉𝐹𝑀 (t) = 𝑉𝐴𝐶 cos(2𝜋𝑓𝑡 + (𝑓∆ /𝑓𝐿) sin(2𝜋𝑓𝐿 𝑡)) ,
(1)

where f is the carrier frequency, 𝑓∆ is the frequency deviation, t is time, and 𝑓𝐿 denotes the 

modulation frequency, which we have typically chosen to be 671 Hz. For a unipolar graphene 

doubly-clamped membrane, the amplitude of the mixing current can be expressed as,7,25

𝐼𝑚𝑖𝑥 =

1

2 |

𝜕𝐺

𝜕𝑉𝐺 𝑉𝐺

1

𝐶𝐺

𝜕𝐶𝐺
𝜕𝑧 𝑉𝐴𝐶𝑓∆

𝜕

𝜕𝑓 𝑅𝑒[𝑧(𝑓)] |,
(2)

where G is the conductance of the graphene device, 𝐶𝐺(𝑧) is the capacitance between the gate 

electrode and graphene, and 𝑅𝑒[𝑧(𝑓)] is the real part of the graphene oscillation amplitude.

Equation (2) can be traced back to the mechanical oscillation of the membrane generating an 

AC contribution in the gate capacitance, which in turn induces an AC gate charge 𝛿𝑄𝐴𝐶 that 

modulates the conductance. It is based on the assumption that 𝜕𝐺/𝜕𝑄𝐴𝐶 is proportional to the 

transconductance 𝜕𝐺/𝜕𝑉𝐺 .25 Since the dependence of 𝑅𝑒[𝑧(𝑓)] changes sign at the 

resonance frequency, the derivative 

𝜕

𝜕𝑓 𝑅𝑒[𝑧(𝑓)] has a peak at resonance as shown in the 

inset of Fig. 1(c). We note also, that 𝐼𝑚𝑖𝑥 = 0 for 𝑉𝐺 = 0, which again is nicely seen in Fig. 

1(c).

Figure 1(c) shows a typical resonant response measured after the final current annealing to 

remove resist residues. The mixing current IMix is measured as a function of the two bottom 

gates 𝑉𝐺1 = 𝑉𝐺2
and frequency f for a monolayer graphene resonator (Device A, 

Width/Length W/L = 4.1 μm/1.1 μm) at T = 8 K. The graphene resonant frequency shifts 


6

upwards as the gate voltage |VG1=G2| increases due to the tension induced by the gate voltage. 

The Inset shows a line trace taken along the dashed arrow at VG1=G2 = 4.8 V in Fig. 1(c). A line 

shape with a pronounced peak at the mechanical resonance frequency of approximately 405 

MHz is observed. We determine the mechanical quality factor Q to be 600 from the resonance 

line shape.7,25 As shown in Fig. 1(c), we observe an additional resonant response at a slightly 

lower frequency marked by the solid black arrow mostly pronounced in the n–regime. This 

could be another flexural mode of the resonator, something that we also see in other devices 

(see e.g. Fig. 2(c)). 

To interpret the experimental data, we model the behavior of the graphene resonators. We 

assume pure uniaxial strain which allows us to apply a simplified model, shown in Fig. 1(d). 

In this model the membrane is reduced to a 1D string with length L. We also assume that there 

is only a single homogenous gate instead of two gates like in our device. Furthermore, it is 

assumed that the force of the gate voltage is only acting at the middle of the string. As a result, 

the resonant frequency f of the graphene membrane can be approximated as (see ESI for the 

derivation of the equation), 

𝑓 =

1

2𝜋 √ 1

𝜌𝑤𝐿 (

4𝑇0
𝐿 +

3

16 𝐸 (

𝐶𝐺

′ 𝑉𝐺

2

𝑇0 )

2

−

1

2 𝐶𝐺

′′𝑉𝐺

2) ,
(3)

where L is the length of the suspended graphene membrane, w the width, ρ the 2D mass density, 

𝑇0 the built-in tension in units of Newton (N), and E the 1D Young’s modulus in units of 

force/meter (N/m). Note, that the built-in tension is defined as 𝑇0 = 𝑇(𝐹)|𝐹=0, see Fig. 1(d). 

The primes on 𝐶𝐺 denote derivatives with respect to z. From the argument in the root we see 

that the negative term ∝ 𝑉𝐺

2 dominates if 𝑇0 is large, resulting in a prominent negative 

dispersion of the resonant frequency. As the gate voltage increases, the 𝑉𝐺

4 term becomes 

dominant, leading to an upturn in the dispersion relation. On the other hands, if 𝑇0 is small,

the 𝑉𝐺

4 term dominates also for small values and the resonant frequency shows a positive 

dispersion with VG from the beginning. By fitting the experimental data to this model, we aim 

to determine both ρ and 𝑇0 of our devices. To do so, we use in the following 𝐸 = 335 𝑁/𝑚, 

for the 2D Young’s modulus.3 This value is deduced from the graphite 3D modulus of 1 TPa, 

using for the graphene interlayer distance the value 0.335 nm. Details on the fitting procedure 

are given in the ESI.

We here investigate the evolution of the resonant response as a function of current annealing 


7

steps. We could not observe the CNP and resonant responses in the as-fabricated devices due 

to strong chemical doping by resist residues. As shown in Fig. 2(a), after the initial current 

annealing the device shows multiple conductance minima, indicating that the graphene sheet 

is not sufficiently clean. After further current annealing, the device shows a clean CNP and 

Fabry-Pérot resonances appear in the conductance as shown in Fig. 2(b) (the full plot of 

conductance is shown in Fig. 1(b)), confirming that the graphene sheet is clean and in the

ballistic regime. The mechanical resonant responses 𝑓0 for each current annealing step are 

measured as a function of VG1=G2 and displayed in Fig. 2(c) and (d) for the initial and final 

annealing steps, respectively. 

FIG. 2: Differential conductance as a function of VG1 and VG2 for Device A (W/L = 4.1 μm /1.1 

μm) after (a) initial and (b) final current annealing steps. After the final current annealing, the 

Dirac peak is significantly narrower and pronounced at VG1 = VG2 ~ 0 V, indicating that resist 

residues are removed. Corresponding mechanical resonant responses for the initial and final 

current annealing steps are displayed in (c) and (d), respectively. The mechanical mixing 

current 𝐼𝑀𝑖𝑥 is measured as a function of frequency f and equal voltage of the two gates

(measured along the dashed lines in panel a and b). The applied RF power at the device is P = 

– 26 dBm. The solid red lines in (c) and (d) are fits to the equation of a membrane model with 

the effective graphene mass and built-in tension described in the text.


8

After the initial current annealing, the resonant frequency shifts downwards with increasing 

|VG1=G2|, as shown in Fig. 2(c). As mentioned above, this indicates that built-in tension is 

significant. By fitting the data to our membrane model, we estimate the mass density and the 

built-in tension of the actual membrane to be ρ = 9.1ρ0 and T0/W = 4.2 N/m, respectively, where 

ρ0 = 7.4×10-7 kg/m2 is the calculated mass density of monolayer graphene. The estimated mass 

density is by an order of magnitude larger compared to a clean single layer of graphene,

indicating that substantial resist residues still remained on the graphene surface. After the final 

current annealing, the resonant frequency increased significantly from 226 MHz for the initial 

annealing to 405 MHz for the final annealing and the frequency shifts upwards as a function 

of |VG1=G2|, indicating that the built-in tension and the mass density decreased significantly. By 

fitting to Eq. (3) we obtain for the built-in tension T0/W = 1.5 N/m, assuming that the mass 

density ρ equals the graphene mass density 𝜌0 when the sample is clean.

The built-in strain values converted from the tensions are estimated to be 1.2 % and 0.4 % after 

the initial and final current annealing, respectively, showing that the built-in strain significantly 

decreased after current annealing. This is probably due to the heat in the device generated 

during current annealing leading to a partial release of the built-in in tension.


9

FIG. 3: Differential conductance as a function of VG1 and VG2 for Device B (W/L = 3 μm /1.2 

μm) after (a) initial and (b) final current annealing steps. Corresponding resonant responses are 

shown in (c) and (d), respectively. The mechanical mixing current 𝐼𝑀𝑖𝑥 is measured as a 

function of f and VG2 at VG1 = 0 V (dashed lines in panels a and b). After the final current 

annealing step, the resonance frequency increased to ~ 1.17 GHz at VG1 = 0 V, which is the 

highest resonance frequency for a graphene mechanical resonator. The inset of (d) shows the 

quality factor Q as a function of incident RF power. 

Using the same method, we achieved a GHz graphene mechanical resonator in device B. 

Similar to Fig. 2, we display the conductance map as a function of VG1 and VG2 for the initial 

and final current annealing step for device B in Fig. 3(a) and (b), respectively. The 

corresponding mechanical resonant responses in 𝐼𝑀𝑖𝑥 as a function of f and VG2 at VG1 = 0 V

for each annealing step are displayed in Fig. 3(c) and (d), respectively. After the final annealing, 

we observe a remarkably large resonance frequency of f ~ 1.17 GHz. This is the highest

mechanical resonance in a fully suspended graphene membrane to our knowledge. Unlike for 

device A, the frequency as a function of VG2 shifts downwards for each annealing step, 

indicating that the built-in tension is significant, also after the last annealing step. The data

fitted to the membrane model confirms that the built-in tension T0 changes only slightly from 

T0/W = 16 N/m to T0/W = 15 N/m, while the mass density is reduced significantly from ρ = 

3.3ρ0 to ρ = 1ρ0, increasing the resonance frequency up into the GHz regime. The built-in 

tension converts to a built-in strain of 4.7 % and 4.4 % for the initial and final current annealing 

steps, respectively. The large built-in strain of ~ 4 % and the low graphene mass density allows 

for a mechanical resonance frequency of > 1 GHz for a suspended membrane with m 

dimensions. We think that this large built-in tension originates from the device fabrication. The 

LOR layer on which the graphene membranes is supported deforms as the device is cooled 

down. This creates a large built-in tension in the device. While the obtained strain of ~ 4 % 

appears large, comparable values of ~ 2–4 % have been reported before using Raman 

spectroscopy.26,27 It is also important to emphasize that the strain value is obtained using a 2D 

Young’s modulus of 340 N/m derived from a 3D Young’s modulus of 1 TPa. There have also 

been reports of larger values for the graphene modulus, which could lower our estimated strain 

values.3,28,29


10

The inset in Fig. 3(d) shows the extracted quality factor Q as a function of incident RF power. 

For the lowest power we obtain a 𝑄 ≈ 1500. We then obtain for the quality frequency product 

𝑄 ∙ 𝑓 the value 1.8 ×1012 s-1, which brings this resonator at the measurement temperature of 8

K well into the quantum regime with 𝑄𝑓 > 𝑘𝑇/ℎ , where optical side-band cooling could 

efficiently be applied to bring the resonator into the ground state.18 Without additional cooling 

there are only 150 phonons in this resonator. It is worth noting that a decrease of Q with RF 

power has been observed before in graphene resonators7 and might be due to nonlinear 

coupling between modes.30,31 It is thus possible that the intrinsic quality factor of our device is

significantly higher than what we measured. We further think that higher tension could increase 

Q through ‘dissipation dilution’, a technique that has recently enabled ground-breaking 

nanomechanical devices made from silicon nitride.32,33

FIG. 4: (a) Differential conductance as a function of VG1 and VG2 for Device C (W/L = 2 μm 

/1.5 μm) after final current annealing. (b, c) Resonant responses measured for unipolar (dashed 

line A) and bipolar gating (dashed line B). The red solid curve in (b) is a fit to the membrane 

model yielding ρ = 1ρ0 and T0/W = 2.8 N/m. This solid curve is superimposed also in (c) where 

a bipolar gate voltage is applied. It is seen that the actual frequency shift as a function of VDiag

in this experiment is lower. This can be explained by a weaker capacitive coupling due to the 

built-in p–n junction and indicated with the dashed curve and explained further in the text. (d) 


11

Amplitude of the mixing current 𝐼𝑀𝑖𝑥
determined
from the resonance
frequency 

measurements for each gate voltage. Blue dashed lines indicate the CNPs in the left and right 

regions and are taken from the conductance measurement in (a). The microwave power during 

the measurement is kept to P = – 17.5 dBm. The mixing signal is much stronger in the bipolar 

regime (n–p or p–n) as compared to the unipolar one (n–n or p–p).

Next, we investigate the amplitude of the mixing current depending on the gate voltage sweep 

direction in device C. Until now, we only have looked into the unipolar gating condition. Now, 

we will in addition look into the bipolar case where a p–n junction resides in the graphene 

device. The conductance as a function of VG1 and VG2 after the final annealing step is 

reproduced in Fig. 4(a) and shows distinct conductance values for the unipolar and bipolar 

condition, as explained in Fig. 1(b). In the bipolar regimes the conductance is markedly lower 

and Fabry-Pérot resonances are clearly visible, confirming that the graphene sheet is clean. The 

resonant response measured along the unipolar and bipolar regimes indicated by black dashed 

lines A and B are displayed in Fig. 4(b) and (c), respectively. The red curve is a fit to the 

unipolar case in (b) using the membrane model with values ρ = 1ρ0 and T0/W = 2.8 N/m. The 

frequency response in the bipolar case is markedly smaller. We see that for the same values of 

gate voltages, the frequency shift in Fig. 4(c) is approximately 50 % of that in (b). The most 

likely reason for the reduced response in the bipolar case is the charge distribution. Unlike in 

the unipolar case, where the charge is homogeneously distributed, there is a depletion zone for 

charge in the middle of the device in the bipolar case. The dynamically added and removed 

charge appears therefore closer to the source and drain contacts where the graphene membrane 

is clamped and where it is effectively stiffer. Consequently, the mechanical movement is 

reduced in the bipolar case, leading to a reduced response of the softening contribution in the 

frequency dispersion.

For comparison we present the obtained parameters of the three graphene mechanical 

resonators described in this work in Table 1. It is seen that the resonance frequency 𝑓0

systematically increased with annealing, while the built-in tension was reduced. This is only 

compatible with a reduction of mass. Hence, current annealing does, as anticipated, desorb 

material, likely resist residues, from the graphene memebrane.


12

Table 1. Summary of device geometry and parameters of three monolayer graphene mechanical 

resonators. W, L denote the length and width of the graphene membrane, respectively, f0 the 

zero-applied voltage resonance frequency, the mass density is given relative to the density of a 

clean monolayer graphene sheet, T0/W is the zero-voltage pre-tension. In the last column the 

strain is given obtained by dividing the pre-tension per width with the 2D Young’s modulus of 

graphene denoted by E2D.

Device
W [µm]
L [µm]
Annealing

f0

[MHz]

Mass density ratio

[ρ/ρ0] 

T0/W

[N/m]

Strain

[T0/E2DW, %]

A
4.1
1.1

Initial
230
9.1
4.2
1.2 

Final
405
1.0
1.5
0.4

B
3
1.2

Initial
674
3.3
16
4.7

Final
1170
1.0
15
4.4

C
2
1.5

Initial
Not measured

Final
413
1.0
2.8
0.8

Interestingly, the mixing signal amplitude scanned along the bipolar regime (dashed line B) is 

remarkably stronger than that scanned along the unipolar regime (Fig. 4(b) and (c)). A better

comparison is provided by Fig. 4(d), displaying the measured mixing amplitude IMix as a 2D 

map as a function of gate voltages 𝑉𝐺1 and 𝑉𝐺2. The dashed lines mark the CNPs in the left 

and right regions and are taken from the conductance map in Fig. 4(a). It is seen that the mixing 

signal in the bipolar region is by up to 10 times larger as compared to the unipolar one. As seen 

from Eq. (2), the mixing signal is proportional to both the transconductance dG/dVG and the 

oscillation amplitude d(Re[z(f)])/df of the resonator. If we assume the same oscillation 

amplitude at resonance for both the unipolar and bipolar regime, the mixing signal should 

follow the transconductance. This is what we observe qualitatively when we compare the 

experiment with numerically calculated transconductance plots (see ESI Fig. S3 for the 

comparison between the mixing current and calculated transconductance). As can be expected 

from Fig. 4(a), the transconductance in the bipolar regime is much larger than that in the 

unipolar one due to the large conductance oscillations induced by Fabry-Pérot interferences.

This results in a strong mixing current signal in the bipolar regime. As proven by the data in 

Fig. 4(d), the bipolar setting in graphene resonators is very convenient for the detection of small 

mechanical signals, due to the increased sensitivity in this regime.

However, there is also another reason why the mixing current could be substantially larger in 


13

the bipolar as compared to the unipolar regime. The photothermoelectric (PTE) effect can 

become very pronounced in systems with p–n junctions. In our previous work,34 we observed

a strong photocurrent in the bipolar regime of a p–n graphene device when applying a 

microwave signal, while the photocurrent almost vanished in the unipolar regime. Electron-

hole pairs around the CNP cause a temperature gradient in the p–n junction towards the source 

and drain contacts, generating a photocurrent. The device used in this work has the same 

structure, so that the microwave used for the mechanical actuation of the graphene sheet can 

generate a photocurrent as well. There is both an AC and DC (rectified) photocurrent. The 

former should behave similar to an electrically induced AC current and should therefore yield 

a mixing current contribution that depends on the mechanical oscillator amplitude. In order to 

distinguish the two effects, a refined model is needed with which the exact amplitude of the 

graphene resonator can be calculated, which is beyond the current work.

Conclusions

We have demonstrated graphene mechanical resonators with very high frequencies of several 

100 MHz to > 1 GHz. We have used ultraclean suspended and current-annealed graphene p–n 

junctions and determine the graphene mass density and built-in tension after different current 

annealing steps by fitting the measured resonance frequency dependence on gate voltage to a 

simplified resonator model. After the final current annealing step, the graphene mass density 

decreases and likely reaches the pure graphene mass density, indicating that virtually resist 

residues are removed. In a clean graphene membrane the fundamental mechanic resonance 

mode has been found to be 1.17 GHz at 𝑉𝐺 = 0 V. This large resonance frequency for a 

macroscopic membrane of size 3 × 1.2 m is only possible due to low mass density of graphene 

and the high tension that graphene can sustain. In this particular GHz case, the built-in tension 

is estimated to be T0/W ~ 15 N/m, corresponding to a strain of ~ 4 %. Furthermore, the graphene 

membrane with two electrically separated gates enables bipolar gating. In this bipolar regime 

(either p–n or n–p) we have found a strongly enhanced mixing current, while it is weak in the 

unipolar regime (either n–n or p–p). Our work shows that graphene p–n junctions could be 

useful for detecting mechanical resonance signals.


14

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts to declare.

Acknowledgements

CS acknowledges financial support from the ERC projects QUEST & TopSupra and the Swiss 

National Science Foundation (SNF) through various grants, including the NCCR-QSIT and the 

Swiss Nanoscience Institute. PM acknowledges funding through OTKA FK-123894 and MJ

acknowledges support by the Mid-career Researcher Program (NRF-2017R1A2B4007862) 

and DGIST R&D Program of the Ministry of Science, ICT, Future Planning (19-NT-01). MJ

thanks Hee Chul Park at IBS and Hyeon Jeong Lee, Hwan Soo Jang and Bong Ho Lee at CCRF 

of DGIST for helpful discussions. PM thanks the support from the Bolayi and Marie Curie 

Fellowship.

References

1A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530-1534. 

2J. S. Bunch, A. M. van der Zande, S. S. Verbridge, I. W. Frank, D. M. Tanenbaum, J. M. Parpia, 

H. G. Craighead, and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2007, 315, 490-493. 

3C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar, and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385-388.

4V. Singh, S. Sengupta, H. S. Solanki, R. Dhall, A. Allain, S. Dhara, P. Pant, and M. M. 

Deshmukh, Nanotechnol., 2010, 21, 165204-165211.

5D Garcia-Sanchez, A. M. van der Zande, A. San Paulo, B. Lassagne, P. L. McEuen, and A. 

Bachtold, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1399-1403.

6A. Castellanos-Gomez, V. Singh, H. S. J. van der Zant, and G. A. Steele, Ann. Phys. (Berlin), 

2015, 527, 27-44.

7A. Eichler, J. Moser, J. Chaste, M. Zdrojek, I. Wilson-Rae, and A. Bachtold, Nat. Nanotechnol., 

2011, 6, 339-342.

8C. Chen, S. Rosenblatt, K. I. Bolotin, W. Kalb, P. Kim, I. Kymissis, H. L. Stormer, T. F. Heinz, 

and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotech.,2009, 4, 861-867.

9X. Song, M. Oksanen, J. Li, P. J. Hakonen, and M. A. Sillanpaa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 

027404-027408.


15

10V. Singh, S. J. Bosman, B. H. Schneider, Y. M. Blanter, A. Castellanos-Gomez, and G. A. 

Steele, Nat. Nanotech., 2014, 9, 820-824.

11P. Weber, J. Guttinger, I. Tsioutsios, D. E. Chang, and A. Bachtold, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 

2854-2860.

12P. Weber, J. Guttinger, A. Noury, J. Vergara-Cruz, and A. Bachtold, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 

12496-12503.

13V. Singh, O. Shevchuk, Y. M. Blanter, and G. A. Steele, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 245407-

245411.

14R. A. Barton, I. R. Storch, V. P. Adiga, R. Sakakibara, B. R. Cipriany, B. Ilic, S. P. Wang, P. 

Ong, P. L. McEuen, J. M. Parpia, and H. G. Craighead, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4681-4686. 

15T. Miao, S. Yeom, P. Wang, B. Standley, and M. Bockrath, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2982-2987.

16J. P. Mathew, R. N. Patel, A. Borah, R. Vijay, and M. M. Deshmukh, Nat. Nanotech.,2016,

11, 747-751.

17D. Zhu, X.-H. Wang, W.-C. Kong, G.-W. Deng, J.-T. Wang, H.-O. Li, G. Cao, M. Xiao, K.-

L. Jiang, X.-C. Dai, G.-C. Guo, F. Nori, and G.-P. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 915-921.

18R. A. Norte, J. P. Moura, and S. Groblacher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 147202-147207.

19J. Moser, A. Barreiro, and A. Bachtold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 163513-163515.

20R. Maurand, P. Rickhaus, P. Makk, S. Hess, E. Tovari, C. Handschin, M. Weiss, and C. 

Schönenberger, Carbon, 2014, 79, 486-492.

21A. L. Grushina, D.-K. Ki, and A. Morpurgo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 223102-223105.

22N. Tombros, A. Veligura, J. Junesch, J. J. Van den Berg, P. J. Zomer, M. Wojtaszek, I. J. V. 

Marun, H. T. Jonkman, and B. J. Van Wees, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 093702-093706. 

23P. Rickhaus, R. Maurand, M. H. Liu, M. Weiss, K. Richter, and C. Schönenberger, Nat. 

Commun., 2013, 4, 2342-2347.

24B. Witkamp, M. Poot, and H. S. J. van der Zant, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2904-2908.

25V. Gouttenoire, T. Barois, S. Perisanu, J. -L. Leclercq, S. T. Purcell, P. Vincent, and A. Ayari, 

Small, 2010, 6, 1060-1065.


16

26M. Huang, H. Yan, C. Chen, D. Song, T. F. Heinz, and J. Hone, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2009, 

106, 7304-7308.

27T. M. G. Mohiuddin, A. Lombardo, R. R. Nair, A. Bonetti, G. Savini, R. Jalil, N. Bonini, D. 

M. Basko, C. Galiotis, N. Marzari, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, and A. C. Ferrari, Phys. Rev. 

B, 2009, 79, 205433-205440.

28F. Memarian, A. Fereidoon, M. D. Ganji, Superlattices Microstruct., 2015, 85, 348-356.

29I. R. Storch, R. De Alba, V. P. Adiga, T. S. Abhilash, R. A. Barton, H. G. Craighead, J. M. 

Parpia, and P. L. McEuen, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 085408-085415.

30J. Güttinger, A. Noury, P. Weber, A. M. Eriksson, C. Lagoin, J. Moser, C. Eichler, A. Wallraff, 

A. Isacsson, and A. Bachtold, Nat. Nanotech., 2017, 15, 631-636.

31D. Midtvedt, A. Croy, A. Isacsson, Z. Qi, and H. S. Park, Phy. Rev. Lett. 112, 145503 (2014).

32Y. Tsaturyan, A. Barg, E. S. Polzik, and A. Schliesser, Nat. Nanotech., 2017, 12, 776-783.

33A. H. Ghadimi, S. A. Fedorov, N. J. Engelsen, M. J. Bereyhi, R. Schilling, D. J. Wilson, T. J. 

Kippenberg, Science, 2018, 360, 764-768.

34M. Jung, P. Rickhaus, S. Zihlmann, P. Makk, and C. Schönenberger, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 

6988-6993. 


