1

Single-Multi-Single Fibre Optic Structure Based
Water Depth Sensor

Garima Bawa, Krishnendu Dandapat, Gyanendra Kumar, Indrajeet Kumar and Saurabh Mani Tripathi,
Senior Member, IEEE

AbstractŌĆöWe propose and demonstrate a technique easy to
fabricate and measure water depth based on selective mode
excitation using single-multi-single (SMS) mode structure. The
high extinction ratio has been achieved by equally exciting
preselected modes of the multi-mode fibre (MMF) by optimizing
the core offset at both the input/output splices of the SMS
structure, and a wavelength shifting has been achieved by varying
the ratio of major to minor axis of the MMF loop. A theoretical
analysis of the observed behaviour is also presented showing an
excellent agreement between the theoretical and experimental
results.

Index TermsŌĆöSingle-modemultimodesingle-mode (SMS) struc-
ture, graded index multimode fiber, modal interference, optical
fibre components.

I. INTRODUCTION
W
AVELENGTH division multiplexing (WDM) is widely
used to handle numerous data streams to increase the
transmission capacity of data communication network [1]. In
WDM, optical signals of various wavelengths are transmitted
through a single optical fiber, owing to which it offers in-
creased bandwidth without disturbing the globally embedded
fiber network. At the output end of such network, WDM
channel isolation filters with high loss between preselected ad-
jacent channels (to reduce cross talks between these channels)
are employed. Several schemes of WDM channel isolation
filters have been reported in literature using chirped long
period gratings [2], [3], Fibre Bragg gratings [4], and uniform
long period gratings [5] etc. These filters, apart from offering
their distinct advantages [3], [4], [5], [6], also suffer from
certain drawbacks including complex and costly fabrication
techniques and the necessity of perfectly aligned splicing at
both ends of the gratings to obtain well-shaped spectrum. To
overcome these, often costly and complex design of fibre optic
grating based WDM channel isolation filter, in this letter we
present a new technique based on multi-modal interference
(MMI) effect [7], [8] in optical fibres by using single mode-
multi mode-single mode (SMS) structure [7], [9].
Modal intereference effect in SMS structures has been
extensively used to develop several optical devices such as

G. Bawa, K. Dandapat and S. M. Tripathi are with the Physics Depart-
ment, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India (e-mail:
garimab@iitk.ac.in, krishnd@iitk.ac.in; tripathi.iit@gmail.com).
G. Kumar is with Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee 247667, India
(email: gyaniitk@gmail.com).
I. Kumar and S. M. Tripathi are with Center for Lasers and Photon-
ics, Indian Institute of technology Kanpur, Knapur 2018016, India(e-mail:
k.indrajeet@gmail.com; tripathi.iit@gmail.com)
Manuscript received xx, xxxx.

band pass/stop filters [10], [11], [12], sensors [13], [9], [14],
modulators, directional couplers [15], optical switches and
power splitters etc. It has been an active area of research due
to its low cost, ease of fabrication and possibility of easily
modifying the structure (their length/type of the fibres etc.) as
per the desired applications.
In a SMS structure, two identical single mode fibers (SMFs)
are axially spliced with a small section of multi mode fibre
(MMF) in between them. When both the splices are perfectly
aligned, only first few symmetric modes of MMF get excited,
with the fundamental mode carrying most of the power [6].
Owing to this, the extinction ratio of the transmission spectrum
is quite low. To increase the extinction ratio we axially
misaligned both of the SMF-MMF splices. As a result, a redis-
tribution of power carried by individual modes of MMF takes
place, with power coupled to the fundamental mode of MMF
becoming close to that carried by the higher order modes, due
to which the extinction ratio increases. To demonstrate the fast
tuning properties of this WDM isolation filter we varied the
ratio of major to minor axis of the MMF loop and recorded
the transmission spectra. Our experiment has been carried out
over the wavelength range of 1530-1570 nm, which is of
prime importance in fibre optic communication system due to
extremely low loss of the optical fibres over this wavelength
range.

II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental set-up. SMF - Single mode
fibre (SMF-28), MMF - Multi mode fibre (Corning). Insect shows the snapshot
of misaligned lead-in splice point.

The schematic diagram of our experimental configuration
is shown in Fig. 1. To built the filter, a long piece of MMF
(Corning-F01GI62NCG01) having length of 6.5 m, coiled
in a loop of diameter 8 cm, was spliced in between two
SMFs (Sterlite-6CH5492). Both splice points were slightly
misaligned to excite the higher order modes of MMF and the

arXiv:1812.03809v1  [physics.app-ph]  14 Oct 2018


2

core offset was optimized to obtain high extinction ratio.The
core and cladding diameters of the SMF and MMF used in our
experiment are 8/125 ┬Ąm (Sterlite) and 50/125 ┬Ąm (Corning),
respectively. The MMF was coiled to reduce the overall size
of the filter. The used MMF has parabolic refractive index
profile [9]. In our experiment, we adjusted the MMF length
to get a channel isolation of 2.5 nm, which can be further
increased/decreased by decreasing/increasing the MMF length
[6]. One end of this MMF was misaligned in x,y-directions
and spliced with lead-in SMF using fusion splicer (FUJIKURA
80S), as shown in Fig. 1. The other end of the MMF was
misaligned in the x-direction and spliced with lead-out SMF
to form SMS structure. Light was launched into the lead-in
SMF through the inbuilt broadband source (LEUKOS, SM-
30-450) and the transmission spectra were recorded using a
high precision optical spectrum analyser (OSA, YOKOGAWA,
AQ6370D). Except the loop region of the MMF, we fixed
the SMS structure to a platform such that the SMS structure
remains straight to avoid any other shifts in the transmission
spectrum due to strains of other regions of the SMS structure.

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Fig. 2.
Transmission spectrum of SMS structures when SMF-MMF are
perfectly aligned (black line) and misaligned (red line) of MMF loop.

The transmission spectrum of the SMS structure for axially
aligned and with axial misalignment (solid curve) have been
plotted in Fig. 2. When the SMFs and MMF are perfectly
aligned the extinction ratio is quite low, nearly 2 dB (shown
by black line). In contrast to that when an axial misalignment
of 2.7 ┬Ąm ((2, 5)-misalignment of 2 and 5 steps along x
and y-axis, respectively) at one splice point (lead-in) while
1.5 ┬Ąm ((3, 0)-misalignment of 3 steps along x-axis) at other
splice point (lead-out) is introduced, the extinction ratio of the
transmission spectrum is enhanced. This is due to nearly equal
excitation efficiency of various MMF modes as discussed later.
We fabricated several filters by first optimizing the offset at
individual splices and later on by simultaneously optimizing
the misalignments at both the splices. Fig. 2 (solid curve)
shows the transmission spectrum of optimized filter. Due to
misaligned splices, the fraction power coupled to the LP01
mode of the MMF decreased and becomes close to that carried
by other modes of the MMF. As a result, modal interference

occurs which leads to the enhancement in extinction ratio.
A second order of optimization was further carried out by
optimizing the major (a) to minor (b) axis ratio (a/b) to
achieve highest extinction ratio. By changing the a/b, the
extinction ratio was increased (shown by solid red line in Fig.
2).

Fig. 3.
(a)Transmission spectra of SMS structure and (b) Spectral shift of
transmission spectra corresponding to MMF loop axis ratio, a/b, for the
wavelength range 1550-1600 nm.

Next, to demonstrate the tuning capability of the filter we
recorded the transmission spectrum by changing the MMF
fibre loop major to minor axis ratio (a/b). The transmission
spectra for five different a/b values of 1.00, 1.28, 1.34, 1.41
and 1.48 are shown in Fig. 3(a). With increasing a/b we
observed a blue shift in transmission spectrum as shown in
Fig. 3(a). In contrast to heat based tuning of WDM channel
isolation filter as reported by Tiwari et al. [3], in the present
study tuning of the WDM isolation filter was achieved by the
major to minor axis ratio of the MMF loop.
In Fig. 3(b), we have plotted the experimentally observed
spectral shift (Ōłå╬╗) of the transmission minima with the ratio of
major to minor axis (a/b) of the MMF loop over a wavelength
range of 1550 nm 1600 nm. The spectral shift was obtained
by taking the spectra corresponding to a/b = 1 as reference.
Evidently the spectral shift shows a linear response throughout
a/b variation in range from 1.28 to 1.48. A little deviation
from linear tuning can be attributed to the errors associated
with minimal error in estimation of a/b.
In another arrangement, the SMS structure was mounted on
rigid point and force was applied vertically along the loop
axis. The length of loop axis was decreased along the applied
force direction and there is a change in the major to minor
axis of the MMF. The transmiaaion spectra were recorded for
change in axis length from 7.5 cm to 7.1 cm and shown in
Fig. 4(a). The loop experiences a pressure mgŌłåh/A, where,
m is mass the loop, g is acceleration due to gravity, Ōłåh is the
change in length of loop axis in vertical direction and A is the
contact area. The change in pressure on the loop is reflected
by the spectral shift in the transmission minima, as shown in
Fig. 4(b).


3

Fig. 4.
(a)Transmission spectra of SMS structure and (b) Spectral shift
corresponding to change in length of minor axis.

Fig. 5.
(a)Transmission spectra of SMS structure and (b) Spectral shift
corresponding to various weights.

Further we carried out an experiment by mounting the loop
vertically with a support and hanging some weight to it. Due to
weight, one of the loop axis was elongated which leads to the
increase in major to minor axis ratio. The transmission spectra
were recorded at different weights; 0.830, 0.1673, 0.2492 and
0.3330 g for a wavelength range 1550-1600 nm, shown in Fig.
5(a). The sensitivity of the SMS structure was studied by the
spectra shift of the transmission minima, Fig 5(b), and found
to be 0.31 nm/g .
The change in extinction ratio with the major to minor axis
ratio of proposed SMS structure can be used for water depth
sensor. To demonstrate this, we carried out an experiment by
placing the SMS structure vertically in a water container. The
SMS structure was dipped in and transmission spectra was
measured at water depth ranging 15-40 cm in the interval of 5
cm. The upper and lower portion of the MMF loop experiences
the different pressure and resulting into the change in major
to minor axis ratio of the loop. This effect was reflected in
transmission spectra as a spectral shift with the water depth,

plotted in Fig. 6(a). The spectral shift of the transmission
minima with the water depth is shown in Fig. 6(b) and the
sensitivity was found to be 0.09 nm/cm.

Fig. 6. (a) Transmission spectra of SMS structure and (b) Spectral shift at
various water depths.

We performed another experiment in order to study the
response of the proposed SMS structure with pressure when
it was kept horizontally on a flat surface. The pressure was
applied by placing weight onto structure. The transmission
spectra were recorded for the various weights; 98, 196, 490
and 1176 mN, shown in Fig. 7(a). We observed the spectral
shift of the transmission minima with weight but it is too
small for using the SMS structure as a pressure sensor in this
range. The vibration response of the SMS structure was also
studied. For this, the structure was kept on a vibration plate
and the transmission spectra were recorded. It can be observed
from Fig. 7(b) that there is hardly any spectral shift of the
transmission minima upto the 1200 rpm.

Fig. 7.
Transmission spectra of SMS structure (a) when weight are placed
on it and (b) when it was kept on vibration plate.

IV. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS
To understand the experimental results more clearly we
also carried out theoretical study with appropriate theoretical


4

model.
Let us represent the fundamental modal field of the SMF
as ŽłS(r) and the modal field for the MMF fibre as ŽłM(r)
(= ’┐Į

i aiŽłi), where ai and Žłi are the field amplitudes at
the splice points and field of the axially symmetric ith mode
of the MMF. The field amplitude (ai) is the overlap integral
between the fundamental mode of the SMF and ith mode of
the MMF, which basically governs the coupling efficiency of
various modes of MMF and SMF [16], [17] and it is expressed
as [18]:

ai = 2ŽĆ
’┐Į
ŽłS(r)Žłi
M(r)dr
(1)

In our analysis the transverse offset between the SMF-MMF
at the input and output splice points has been incorporated by
replacing Žłs(r) with Žłs(rŌłÆrin) and Žłs(rŌłÆrout), respectively.
Here, rin and rout are the transverse offsets at the input and
output splice, and in accordance with the experimental offset
their values are taken as 2.7 ┬Ąm and 1.5 ┬Ąm respectively. The
normalised modal fields of the SMF and MMF has been taken
as [18], [19]

ŽłS(r) =

’┐Į

2
ŽĆ
1
Ws
e
ŌłÆ r2

W 2
s
(2)

ŽłM(r) =

’┐Į

2
ŽĆ
1

Wm
Lm

’┐Į 2r2

W 2m

’┐Į
e
ŌłÆ
r2

W 2
m
(3)

The total power (PSM) carried by the lead out SMF is
expressed as

PSM = |ain
0 aout
0
+ain
1 aout
1
ei(╬▓0ŌłÆ╬▓1)L+ain
2 aout
2
ei(╬▓0ŌłÆ╬▓2)L+...|2

(4)
Here, ain/out
m
is the overlap integral (calculated using eqn.
1) of the LP01 mode of SMF with LP0m modes of the MMF at
the lead in/out splice of the SMS structure. In accordance with
the experimental refractive index profile of the MMF, in our
calculations also we considered a parabolic index distrubition
of the MMF. The propagation constants corresponding to
different modes in the MMF are given by [18]

╬▓lm = k0n0

’┐Į
1 ŌłÆ 2(2m + l ŌłÆ 1)╬▒m

k2
0n2
0

’┐Į 1

2
(5)

Here, k0 and n0 are the free space wave number and
the refractive index of the core of MMF, respectively. The
parameter ╬▒m = 2/W 2
m, with Wm being the spot size of the
mth mode of the MMF. For the symmetric modes l = 0 and m
has the values 0, 1, 2, etc. In our calculation, the core region
of both SMF and MMF are considered to be made of GeO2
doped silica with the dopant concentrations of 3.1 mol% and
13.5 mol%, respectively. The wavelength dependent refractive
indices of core and cladding regions of both the fibres are
calculated using the well-known Sellmeier relation [20]. In our
analysis, we considered only the excitation of the symmetric
modes of the MMF as our calculations show that the fractional
modal power of LP1m and other anti-symmetric modes is less
than 0.003. For the ease of calculation, the bending induced
phase variations among the guided modes of the MMF are
incorporated in terms of the axial strain between points ŌĆ£AŌĆØ

Fig. 8. Simulated transmission spectra of SMS structure for perfectly aligned
(black dotted line) and misaligned (blue solid line) cases.

and ŌĆ£BŌĆØ (see Fig. 1). Due to strain the refractive index of
core/cladding and core radius of the fibre are changed and the
corresponding changes can be expressed as: [12]

ni = n0i + Ōłéni

Ōłél Ōłål = n0iŌłÆ n3
i
2l [p12ŌłÆŽā(p11+p12)]Ōłål (6)

aM = a0M + ŌłéaM

Ōłél Ōłål
(7)

where, (ŌłéaM/Ōłél)Ōłål = (aMŽā/l)Ōłål = ŌłÆamŽā╬Ą, Žā is Poisson
ratio, ╬Ą is the axial strain, ni and n0i is the refractive indices
of core/cladding with and without strain, Ōłål is the elongation
in the fibre, p11 and p12 are the strain-optic coefficients of
the fused silica. The values of the parameters: p11 = 0.12,
p12 = 0.27, Žā = 0.17 [12] and l = 6 m are used in our
calculation. The theoretically calculated transmission spectrum
corresponding to the experimental parameters for the axially
aligned and misaligned cases (Fig. 2) are shown in Fig. 8. The
sinusoidal transmission spectrum suggest that the most of the
power is shared between two modes of the MMF. The little
deviation from a perfect sinusoidal transmission spectrum can
be attributed to the slight excitation of more than two modes
of the MMF.
Similar to the experimental results, for the aligned case the
extinction ratio of the transmission is quite low (nearly 1.2 dB)
while in the misaligned case the extinction ratio is enhanced.

Fig. 9.
Simulated transmission spectra of WDM filter for different strains
in the MMF loop.

To show the tuning behaviour, we increased the microstrain
(┬Ąs) from 100 to 400 with the step size of 100. The corre-
sponding transmission spectrum shown in Fig. 9 shows blue


5

Fig. 10.
Simulated spectral shift with the strain corresponding to the
transmission minima for the wavelength range 1540 nm-1560 nm and its
linear fit(black).

shift. In agreement with the experimental results, theoretical
spectrum also exhibits a linear blue shift with increasing axial
strain, which has been shown in Fig. 10. The rate of change
of the peak/dip position with respect to strain is nearly 0.006
nm/┬ĄŽĄ (green to black line in Fig. 9).

Fig. 11. Fractional modal power carried out through few modes of the MMF
connected between two SMFs for (a) aligned and (b) misaligned cases.

To theoretically demonstrate the underlying mechanism of
increased extinction ratio after inserting the misalignments,
the normalised fractional modal powers of different modes of
the MMF for aligned and misaligned cases are plotted in the
Fig. 11. Here we notice that for the aligned case most of the
power is carried by fundamental mode (a2
1) and the ratio of
fractional power in fundamental mode to all other higher order
modes of the MMF ( a2
2, a2
3, a2
4, etc) is nearly 10 ( Fig. 11(a)).
Hence the modal interference results a low extinction ratio (
dotted curve in Fig. 8). On the other hand for the misaligned
case, the fractional power shared in the fundamental mode is
reduced, bring it much closer to the fractional modal power
carried by LP02 and other higher order modes( Fig. 11(b)).
Hence the interfered output of the lead-out SMF exhibits an
enhancement in the extinction ratio( solid curve in Fig. 8).

V. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, we present a new technique for water pres-
sure measurement based on multi-modal interference effect in
optical fibers by using single mode-multimode-single mode
structure. This method is cost effective than other existing
methods and is very easy to fabricate. Theoretical calculations
are also carried out to explain the increased extinction ratio. A
fair agreement is found between the theory and experimental
results.

REFERENCES

[1] K. Okamoto, Fundamentals of Optical Waveguides (Academic, 2006).
[2] M. Das and K. Thaygrajan, Wavelength-division multiplexing isolation
filter using concatenated chirped long period gratings, Opt. Commun.
197, 67-71 (2001).
[3] U. Tiwari, S. M. Tripathi, K. Thyagarajan, M. R. Shenoy, V. Mishra,
Subhash C. Jain, N. Singh, and P. Kapur, Tunable wavelength division
multiplexing channel isolation filter based on dual chirped long-period
fiber gratings, Opt. Lett. 36, 3747-3749 (2011).
[4] S. S. Dixit, IP over WDM: building the next generation optical internet
(Wiley, 2003).
[5] X. J. Gu, Wavelength-division multiplexing isolation fiber filter and light
source using cascaded long-period fiber gratings,, Opt. Lett. 23, 509-510
(1998).
[6] S. R. C. Murthy and M. Guruswamy, WDM Optical Networks, Concepts,
Design, and Algorithms (Prentice Hall, 2002).
[7] A. Kumar, R. K. Varshney, S. Antony C. and P. Sharma, Transmission
characteristics of SMS fiber optic sensor structures, Opt. Communica.
219, 215219 (2003).
[8] X. Chen and P. R. Horche, Photoptics 2015,Chapter-3, Springer Proceed-
ings in Physics,81, (2016).
[9] S. M. Tripathi, A. Kumar, E. Marin, and J. P. Meunier, Strain and
Temperature Sensing Characteristics of Single-ModeMultimodeSingle-
Mode Structures, J. Lightwave Technol. 27, 2348-2356 (2009).
[10] W. S. Mohammed, P. W. E. Smith, and X. Gu, All-fiber multimode
interference bandpass filter, Opt. Lett. 31, 2547-2549 (2006).
[11] J. Lopez, A. C. Guzman, D. Arrioja, R. Aguilar, and P. Wa, Tunable
multimode-interference bandpass fiber filter, Opt. Lett. 35, 324-326
(2010).
[12] S. M. Tripathi, A. Kumar, E. Marin, and J. P. Meunier, Single-Multi-
Single Mode Structure Based Band Pass/Stop Fiber Optic Filter With
Tunable Bandwidth, J. Lightwave Technol. 28, 3535-3541 (2010).
[13] E. Li, X. Wang, and C. Zhang, Fiber-optic temperature sensor based on
interference of selective higher-order modes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 091119
(2006).
[14] S. M. Tripathi, A. Kumar, E. Marin, and J. P. Meunier, Critical Wave-
length in the Transmission Spectrum of SMS Fiber Structure Employing
GeO2 Doped Multimode Fiber, IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett. 22, 799-801
(2010).
[15] D. M. Mackie and A. W. Lee, Slotted multimode-interference devices,
Appl. Opt. 43, 6609-6619 (2004).
[16] H. Kogelnik, Coupling and conversion coefficients for optical modes,
Proc. Sympos. Quas. Opt., Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, 333347
(1964).
[17] J.P. Meunier and S.I. Hosain, An accurate splice loss analysis for single-
mode graded-index fibers with mismatched parameters, J. Lightwave
Technol. 10, 15211526 (1992).
[18] A. K. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, Introduction to Fiber Optics, Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998.
[19] D. Marcuse, Gaussian approximation of the fundamental modes of
graded-index fibers, J. Opt. Soc. Amer., 68, 103109 (1978).
[20] M. J. Adams, An Introduction to Optical Waveguides. New York: Wiley,
1981.


