1

Charge Density Wave Modulation in Superconducting

BaPbO3/BaBiO3 Superlattices

D. T. Harris,1 N. Cambell,2 C. Di,3 J.-M. Park,3 L. Luo,3 H. Zhou,4 G.-Y. Kim, 5 K.

Song,5 S.-Y. Choi,5 J. Wang,3 M. S. Rzchowski,2 and C. B. Eom1*

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,

Wisconsin 53706, USA.

2Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

3 Department of Physics and Astronomy and Ames Laboratory-U.S. DOE, Iowa State University,

Ames, Iowa 50011, USA

4Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA

5Department of Materials Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang 37673, South Korea.

The isotropic, non-magnetic doped BaBiO3 superconductors maintain some similarities to high-Tc

cuprates, while also providing a cleaner system for isolating charge density wave (CDW) physics

that commonly competes with superconductivity. Artificial layered superlattices offer the

possibility of engineering the interaction between superconductivity and CDW. Here we stabilize

a low temperature, fluctuating short range CDW order by using artificially layered epitaxial

(BaPbO3)3m/(BaBiO3)m (m = 1-10 unit cells) superlattices that is not present in the optimally doped

BaPb0.75Bi0.25O3 alloy with the same overall chemical formula. Charge transfer from BaBiO3 to

BaPbO3 effectively dopes the former and suppresses the long range CDW, however as the short

range CDW fluctuations strengthens at low temperatures charge appears to localize and

superconductivity is weakened. The monolayer structural control demonstrated here provides

compelling implications to access controllable, local density-wave orders absent in bulk alloys and

manipulate phase competition in unconventional superconductors.

*Correspondence to: eom@engr.wisc.edu

Keywords: Superconductivity, Charge density wave, Superlattice, Thin Films


2

The properties of quantum materials are often determined by multiple distinct order

parameters that represent the importance of coupled and competing phases. The high-Tc cuprates

exhibit a rich phase diagram with magnetic and electronic phases that are commonly thought to

compete with the emergence of superconductivity [1]. In addition to magnetic ordering, recently

discovered striped charge ordering in cuprates appears to compete with superconductivity in a

manner
reminiscent
of
the
emergent
charge
density
wave
(CDW)
seen
in
other

superconductors [2]. Doped BaBiO3 (BBO) superconductors possess a commensurate CDW in the

parent compound, stable to high temperatures, in an isotropic, nonmagnetic complex oxide. The

CDW manifests as bond disproportionation through a frozen breathing mode of the BiO6

octahedra, as pictured in Figure 1(a), with recent experimental and first principle work suggesting

hybridization of the BiO6 octahedra plays a dominate role [3–6]. Doping BBO with Pb in BaPb1-

xBiXO3 (BPBO, Tc=11 K) or K in Ba1-xKxBiO3 (BKBO, Tc=30 K) destroys the long range CDW [7–

9]. However, Raman and terahertz measurements of bulk single crystals suggest short range CDW

fluctuations persist on the Bi-rich, underdoped side of the superconducting dome of BPBO and

could influence both the normal state and superconducting properties [10,11].

The CDW and monoclinic distortion in BBO are similar to those found in the rare-earth

nickelates [12,13], a class of materials heavily explored for possible high-Tc superconductivity

analogous to the cuprates and predicted to display high-Tc superconductivity when grown in

artificial superlattices [14]. While these non-cuprate superconductors have not been demonstrated,

artificial superlattices of complex oxides can stabilize non-equilibrium phases that exhibit

enhanced properties or novel phases for a wide variety of functional systems not accessible by

their bulk counterparts [15]. For example, manganite-cuprate superlattices manipulate the charge-

ordering phase and control electron-phonon coupling between layers [16,17]. Similarly, here we

successfully
stabilize,
a
short-range
CDW
order
in
artificial
(BaPbO3)3m/(BaBiO3)m

superconducting superlattices with the same overall composition as the optimally doped

BaPb0.75Bi0.25O3 alloy that otherwise does not exhibit this same order. The superconducting

samples show a remarkably strong temperature and superlattice period dependent CDW signature

in Raman measurements due in part to charge transfer between BBO and BaPbO3 (BPO) layers.

This is distinct from conventional Raman modes in the BPBO alloy that show a very weak

temperature dependence [10, 20]. The enhancement of the short range CDW fluctuations at low

temperatures, exclusively in superlattices, is shown to increase the tendency of charge localization


3

and weaken the superconductivity.
The tuning method demonstrated here by monolayer

engineering provides a platform that the competing electronic order and its fluctuations at small

scales can be tailored for both elucidating the mechanisms of unconventional superconductivity

and access short range emergent orders. The compelling implications may impact the entire field

of emergent materials phase discovery and control.

We grew BPO3m/BBOm superlattices using 90° off-axis magnetron sputtering, with the

BPO:BBO fixed at 3:1, the optimal doping in the random alloy system. The total sample thickness

is fixed at ~85 nm
to avoid thickness
related disorder effects
when characterizing

superconductivity [18]. We characterized film quality using laboratory and synchrotron x-ray

diffraction (XRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and scanning transmission electron

microscopy (STEM) (see supplemental information for additional growth and characterization

details). Figure 1 shows characterization of our superlattice quality. Out-of-plane 2θ- θ scans

exhibit a single film peak and clear Kiessig fringes originating from the uniformity of the overall

film thickness. All superlattices show additional satellite reflections arising from the artificial

periodicity in our grown samples, and these superlattice reflections and thickness fringes are well

matched by simulations of our film (Fig. 1 (c)), which underscore the high structural quality of the

superlattice samples. The out-of-plane rocking curve shows a full width at half maximum of

0.020°, indicative of the high of crystalline quality of our samples. AFM, Fig. 1(d), reveals a

smooth surface with RMS of 0.5 nm and a step-terrace structure. Reciprocal space maps of the

103pc reflection reveal relaxation of the film with respect to the substrate, expected due to the large

lattice constants of BBO (~4.36 Å) and BPO (~4.25 Å), giving on the order of 10% lattice

mismatch with SrTiO3.

Due to the extreme electron beam sensitivity of BBO materials, atomic-resolution

transmission electron microscopy quickly degraded the films making reliable chemical mapping

challenging (see supplemental information and ref. [19]). We therefore performed STEM

characterization of BaBiO3/BaPbO3together with crystal truncation rod (CTR)/coherent Bragg rod

analysis (COBRA) to resolve the interfacial width between the BBO and BPO layers. Low-

resolution TEM, shown in Fig 2(a), reveals well-separated layers, however the similarity of the

two constituent materials limits atomic number contrast between the two layers. For this reason,

we carried out CTR measurements slightly beneath the Pb L3 absorption edge to enhance the


4

atomic-form-factor contrast between the Bi and Pb elements (supplementary Figure 1). The CTR

measurements were performed on thinner BPO/BBO/BPO trilayer samples to allow subsequent

COBRA analysis to determine the interfacial width. In Figs. 2(b) and 2(c), the COBRA-derived

total electron density profile and integrated electron number in the B-site atomic layer exhibit a

relatively sharp BPO/BBO interface (less than 2 unit cells in width) suggesting a limited

intermixing of Pb and Bi across the interface, which further confirms the superlattice quality that

gives rise to satellite peaks and places limits on the amount of interdiffusion that could lead to

extrinsic effects.

Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) plot temperature dependence of carrier densities extracted from Hall

measurements and transition temperatures extracted from resistivity measurements, respectively.

Specifically, superlattices with small period (m=1,2,3) show zero resistivity and onset of a

diamagnetic signal at low temperature, as shown in Figs. 3(c) and 3(d), confirming

superconductivity in our superlattices. The resistive transitions are broad and multistep, possible

evidence of a granular nature to the superconductivity. Samples with larger period (m=10, 17) do

not show superconductivity above 2K, the temperature dependent resistivity and Hall carrier

density remain nearly constant from room temperature to 2 K, and the behavior and the values for

n3D closely match a reference BPO film, indicating large period films with low interfacial density

behave as independent layers. In contrast, as the lattice modulation period m decreases, the

temperature dependent behavior of the superlattices reveals distinct differences from the bulk

alloyed reference sample and possible indication of trapping of mobile charge. This trapping is

seen in the more negative
and drop in Hall n3D at 40 K for m=1,2,3 samples, and could be

related to strengthening of a short range CDW that is discussed below. The room temperature n3D

increases smoothly as m is decreased and the number of interfaces increases, consistent with

approximately half an electron per formula unit transferred at each interface. This means that the

electron concentration in the BaBiO3 layer increases as the period of the superlattice decreases.

Further evidence for charge transfer between the layers can be found in optical reflectivity

spectra shown in Figs. 4(a) and 4(b). For a BBO control sample, a strong maximum appears in

optical reflectivity spectra which is a characteristic of a well-defined oscillator from the CDW

mode. For m=2 and 5, the optical reflectivity spectra with minima around 2 eV and sharp rise in

the low-energy region indicate a low-frequency spectral weight in the form of a carrier plasma.


5

This indicate that the charge transfer occurring in m=2 and m=5 films effectively dopes the BBO

layer and suppress the long range CDW order. A model calculation consisting of the dielectric

function of the CDW gap for BBO and a Drude carrier plasma term for the metallic film on

substrate (supplementary) reproduces the experimentally determined optical reflectivity, as shown

in Fig. 4(b). Lowering layer thickness m increases charge transfer between layers, i.e., the blueshift

of the plasma edge in Fig. 4(a), possibly due to interlayer proximity and coupling, leading to higher

carrier density, fully in agreement with the Hall measurements (Fig. 3(a).

To understand how charge transfer modulates the CDW, we next present temperature and

superlattice period dependent Raman scattering measurements which provide evidence for the

formation of a short range CDW order competing with superconductivity. The Raman spectra from

BPO3m/BBOm superlattices are presented in Figs. 4(c) and 4(d) for different m=1, 2, 3, and 10

together with control samples from BPBO and BBO films, and a STO substrate at 4.2K and 785

nm(Fig. 4(c)), A fully gapped, long-range CDW state in BBO (gray line) gives rise to a sharp

Raman active phonon breathing mode at 569 cm-1 [19], which in the m=10 superlattice shows a

smaller intensity and broader linewidth. Further decreases in m completely suppress the 569 cm-1

peak at room temperature, yet, most intriguingly, the spectral weight of the CDW appears to persist

at low temperatures as a broad spectral resonance near 550 cm-1, even for samples showing

superconductivity, e.g., as seen in m=3 (black line) and 2 (red line) traces. We emphasize three

key properties of the “residual” spectral mode seen in the Raman spectra:

(1) It exhibits remarkably strong temperature dependence. The m=3 sample (black line) in

Fig. 4(d) shows a featureless spectral profile near 550 cm-1 close to room temperature that

resembles the STO substrate (orange line). By removing the scattering contribution from the STO

substrate in the measured spectral range of 430-680 cm-1, normalized I(T)/I(300K) spectra, shown

Fig. 4(e) and its top panel, clearly demonstrate the strong suppression of the residual Raman mode

at elevated temperatures. Several broad resonances above 200 cm-1 were seen and assigned as two-

phonon scattering modes in the bulk single-crystal BPBO [20]. However, these modes only exhibit

a very weak temperature dependence with large scattering intensity at room temperature which

cannot account for the strikingly sensitive temperature tuning of the presently observed residual

Raman mode.


6

(2) The broad, Raman spectral shape in Fig. 4(e) is characteristic of two resonant modes at

598 cm-1 and 545 cm-1, marked by two dashed lines. The 598 cm-1 peak has been assigned to the

breathing mode of BiO6 octahedra [19], which has the same origin as the 569 cm-1 CDW mode in

BBO in Pb-doped metallic compounds. The energy increase and spectral lineshape change are

likely due to the decrease of the Bi-O bond length [20] and/or the electron-phonon renormalization.

Therefore, in the absence of the sharp CDW peak from the long-range order, these distinct

monolayer number m and temperature dependences of the residual resonances provide a

compelling evidence for the existence of short-range CDW correlations for samples showing

superconductivity. This local electronic order strongly renormalizes the breathing mode that gives

rise to the persisting spectral weight with a strong temperature dependence absent in bulk single

crystal BPBO [19, 20].

(3) The strong m dependence of the residual spectral weight further demonstrates the

monolayer thickness control of CDW fluctuations in our superlattice systems. This is clearly seen

in Fig. 4(c) where the residual Raman mode for m=3 (black) is significantly larger than both m=1

(blue) and BPBO bulk alloy (green) samples. Prior studies of bulk single crystals related optical

spectra and pseudogap formation with a spatially-temporally fluctuating short-range CDW order

of a few unit cells in BiO6 octahedra on the Bi-rich, underdoped side of the BPBO phase diagram

[10, 11], which is consistent with our proposed physical mechanism here. It is critical note,

however, that such short range CDW is not present in the optimally doped BaPb0.75Bi0.25O3 alloy

with the same overall chemical formula as our superlattice samples.

This work demonstrates structural and electronic engineering of a model system

BPO3m/BBOm at
the
monolayer
limit
for
understanding
CDW
that
competes
with

superconductivity. The design and discovery of previously-unestablished superlattices allow the

manipulation of the CDW and its fluctuations by controlling charge transfer. This hints additional

quantum control of hidden phases by combining with other complementary tuning methods [24,

25].

Acknowledgements


7

Synthesis, characterization, and analysis at UW-Madison were supported with funding

from the Department of Energy Office of Basic Energy Sciences under award number DE-FG02-

06ER46327. The work at Ames Laboratory and Iowa State University (Raman and optical

spectroscopy characterizations and analysis) was supported by the DOE Office of Science, Basic

Energy Sciences, Materials Science and Engineering Division. Ames Laboratory is operated for

the DOE by Iowa State University under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11358. This research used

resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science

User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under

Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.


8

References

[1]
M. Vojta, Adv. Phys. 58, 699 (2009).

[2]
J. Chang, E. Blackburn, A. T. Holmes, N. B. Christensen, J. Larsen, J. Mesot, R. Liang, D.
A. Bonn, W. N. Hardy, A. Watenphul, M. v. Zimmermann, E. M. Forgan, and S. M.
Hayden, Nat. Phys. 8, 871 (2012).

[3]
A. P. Menushenkov and K. V. Klementev, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 12, 3767 (2000).

[4]
K. Foyevtsova, A. Khazraie, I. Elfimov, and G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B 91, 121114
(2015).

[5]
S. Balandeh, R. J. Green, K. Foyevtsova, S. Chi, O. Foyevtsov, F. Li, and G. A. Sawatzky,
Phys. Rev. B 96, 165127 (2017).

[6]
A. Khazraie, K. Foyevtsova, I. Elfimov, and G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B 97, 075103
(2018).

[7]
A. W. Sleight, J. L. Gillson, and P. E. Bierstedt, Solid State Commun. 17, 27 (1975).

[8]
R. J. Cava, B. Batlogg, J. J. Krajewski, R. Farrow, L. W. Rupp, a. E. White, K. Short, W.
F. Peck, and T. Kometani, Nature 332, 814 (1988).

[9]
A. W. Sleight, Phys. C 514, 152 (2015).

[10] S. Tajima, S. Uchida, A. Masaki, H. Takagi, K. Kitazawa, S. Tanaka, and A. Katsui, Phys.

Rev. B 32, 6302 (1985).

[11] D. Nicoletti, E. Casandruc, D. Fu, P. Giraldo-Gallo, I. R. Fisher, and A. Cavalleri, Proc.

Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 9020 (2017).

[12] S. Johnston, A. Mukherjee, I. Elfimov, M. Berciu, and G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. Lett.

112, (2014).

[13] J. Shamblin, M. Heres, H. Zhou, J. Sangoro, M. Lang, J. Neuefeind, J. A. Alonso, and S.

Johnston, Nat. Commun. 9, 86 (2018).

[14] J. Chaloupka and G. Khaliullin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 016404 (2008).

[15] H. Y. Hwang, Y. Iwasa, M. Kawasaki, B. Keimer, N. Nagaosa, and Y. Tokura, Nat. Mater.

11, 103 (2012).

[16] N. Driza, S. Blanco-Canosa, M. Bakr, S. Soltan, M. Khalid, L. Mustafa, K. Kawashima, G.

Christiani, H.-U. Habermeier, G. Khaliullin, C. Ulrich, M. Le Tacon, and B. Keimer, Nat.
Mater. 11, 675 (2012).

[17] A. Frano, S. Blanco-Canosa, E. Schierle, Y. Lu, M. Wu, M. Bluschke, M. Minola, G.

Christiani, H. U. Habermeier, G. Logvenov, Y. Wang, P. A. van Aken, E. Benckiser, E.
Weschke, M. Le Tacon, and B. Keimer, Nat. Mater. 15, 831 (2016).

[18] D. T. Harris, N. Campbell, R. Uecker, M. Brützam, D. G. Schlom, A. Levchenko, M. S.

Rzchowski, and C.-B. Eom, Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 041801 (2018).

[19] H. G. Lee, R. Kim, J. Kim, M. Kim, T. H. Kim, S. Lee, and T. W. Noh, APL Mater. 6,

016107 (2018).


9

[20] S. Sugai, S. Uchida, K. Kitazawa, S. Tanaka, and A. Katsui, Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 426

(1985).

[21] E. D. Palik, Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids (Academic Press, London, 1997).

[22] O. S. Heavens, Optical Properties of Thin Solid Films (Dover Publications, Inc., New

York, 1991).

[23] G. Kim, M. Neumann, M. Kim, M. D. Le, T. D. Kang, and T. W. Noh, Phys. Rev. Lett.

115, 226402 (2015).

[24] G. Campi, A. Bianconi, N. Poccia, G. Bianconi, L. Barba, G. Arrighetti, D. Innocenti, J.

Karpinski, N. D. Zhigadlo, S. M. Kazakov, M. Burghammer, M. v Zimmermann, M.
Sprung, and A. Ricci, Nature 525, 359 (2015).

[25] X. Yang, C. Vaswani, C. Sundahl, M. Mootz, P. Gagel, L. Luo, J. H. Kang, P. P. Orth, I. E.

Perakis, C. B. Eom, and J. Wang, Nat. Mater. 17, 586 (2018).

[26] P. H. Tan, W. P. Han, W. J. Zhao, Z. H. Wu, K. Chang, H. Wang, Y.F. Wang, N. Bonini, N.

Marzari, N. Pugno, and G. Savini, Nat. Mater. 11, 294 (2012).


10

Figure 1. Superlattice characterization. (a) Schematic of BaBiO3, BaPbO3, and superlattice
structures. (b) Reciprocal space maps around the 103pc reflection for m=1, 2, 3, and 5 superlattices.
Satellite superlattice reflections are visible for all samples. (c) Out-of-plane 2θ-θ scan of an m=5
sample showing clear Kiessig fringes and superlattice reflections with excellent agreement with
the pattern simulation. The inset shows the out-of-plane rocking curve of the film reflection. (d)
Atomic force microscopy image of the surface topography. The white dashed lines highlight step
edges. (e) In-plane and out-of-plane pseudocubic lattice parameters extracted from reciprocal
space maps. The inset shows the unit cell volume.


11

Figure 2. TEM characterization of BaBiO3/BaPbO3 and chemical interfacial width and
intermixing at the interfaces resolved by the resonant coherent Bragg rod analysis method. (a) Low
and high resolution STEM images. (b) Resonant COBRA-derived electron density profile of a
BaPbO3/BaBiO3/BaPbO3 trilayer sample. (c) Resonant COBRA-derived integrated electron
number in each perovskite B-site atomic layer along the out-of-plane direction.


12

Figure 3. Transport characterization. (a) Room and low temperature 3D carrier densities extracted
from Hall measurements. (b) Transition temperatures extracted from resistivity measurements. (c)
Full temperature range resistivity vs. temperature. The inset of (c) overlays the transition probed
by resistive measurements (blue) with out-of-plane (black) and in-plane (grey) onset of
diamagnetism (red dashed line) for m=2. (d) Transition region of superconducting samples.


13

Figure 4. Optical and Raman spectroscopy characterizations. (a) Experimental reflectivity data
for BBO and for m=2 and 5 superlattices. (b) Simulation of the optical spectra [21-23].. (c) Low
temperature Raman measurements around the CDW peak (dashed line) for selected superlattices,
reference BBO and BPBO films, and STO substrate. The charge transfer (main text) suppresses
the sharp CDW peak to a broad cusp shape of spectrum (black arrow). (d) Room temperature
Raman measurements in an m=3 superlattice. (e) Normalized low temperature Raman spectra
(I(T)/I(300K)) around the CDW peaks for the m=3 sample. The traces are offset for clarity.


Supplementary Materials for

Charge Density Wave Modulation in Superconducting

BaPbO3/BaBiO3 Superlattices

D. T. Harris,1 N. Cambell,2 C. Di,3 J.-M. Park,3 L. Luo,3 H. Zhou,4 G.-Y. Kim, 5 K.

Song,5 S.-Y. Choi,5 J. Wang,3 M. S. Rzchowski,2 and C. B. Eom1*

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,

Wisconsin 53706, USA.

2Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

3 Department of Physics and Astronomy and Ames Laboratory-U.S. DOE, Iowa State University,

Ames, Iowa 50011, USA

4Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA

5Department of Materials Science and Engineering, POSTECH, Pohang 37673, South Korea.

*Correspondence to: eom@engr.wisc.edu

Thin Film Growth: Thin films were grown from BaBiO3 and BaPbO3 targets containing 13%

excess Bi or Pb in the initial powders to account for volatility during processing and growth.

Films were grown using 90° off-axis rf-magnetron sputtering with computer-controlled,

pneumatically actuated shutters to precisely control the layer thicknesses. Growth rates were

calibrated by measuring the growth rate using x-ray reflectivity prior to superlattice growth.

Complete details of the target and film preparation are given in the supplemental information

of [18].

Superconducting characterization: Magnetotransport measurements were performed using

sputtered Ag/Au electrodes in a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System

helium crystostat from 1.8 K to 300 K in a Van der Pauw geometry and the total superlattice

thickness. Magnetic susceptibility measurements were performed in a Quantum Design

Magnetic Properties Measurement System from 1.8K to 300K with applied in-plane and out-

of-plane fields of magnitude less than 100Oe.


Optical reflectivity: The reflectivity was measured with Spectrometer >1.3eV and FTIR <1.3eV

with Al reference. The measured reflectivity was corrected with Al reflectivity. Three phase

(air/BBO (or BPBO)/STO) thin film model was used to simulate reflectivity of different thickness

BBO thin films [22]. Optical constants were obtained by a single oscillator fitting from BBO

spectrum [23]. STO n, k were used from book value [21]. By using the corresponding film

thickness for superlattice samples, such a model provides good agreement with the experimental

behavior with salient features from the CDW peak (red line) and the plasma edge (black and gray

lines for m=5 and m=2 in Fig. 4(a), respectively). Note that the plasma edge changes in Figs. 4(a)-

4(b) corroborate the reduction of the residual spectral weight associated with the short-range CDW

order in smaller period samples, as discussed in Fig. 4(c)-4(e). This is consistent with the fact that

the amount of charge transfer increases with decreasing superlattice number m shown in the optical

reflectivity measurement in Fig. 4(a). This indicates that the monolayer control demonstrated

provides a new tuning knob for controlling density-wave fluctuations and phase competition

beyond bulk alloys.

Raman spectroscopy: Raman spectra were acquired using three Notch filters (BNF) in

combination with a single monochromator [26] equipped with a CCD detector. All

measurements were performed with samples placed in a liquid-helium-cooled cryostat in

backscattering configuration using a 784.5 nm continuous wave diode laser. The laser was

cleaned up by four band pass filters (BPF) and the excitation power on the sample was ~4

mw. The acquisition time was 150s for all measurements.

Crystal truncation rod (CTR) measurement and coherent Bragg rod analysis (COBRA):

The CTR measurement of the BaPbO3/BaBiO3/BaPbO3 trilayer sample was performed on a

five-circle diffractometer with χ-circle geometry at sector 12-ID-D of the Advanced Photon

Source, Argonne National Laboratory. The X-ray energy was tuned to just below the Pb L3

absorption edge (E = 13.032 keV) to enhance the contrast of the atomic form factors between

Bi and Pb elements. The X-ray beam at the beamline 12-ID-D has a total flux of 5 × 1012

photons/s and was vertically focused by beryllium compound refractive lenses down to a

beam profile of ~ 50 μm at this energy. In the COBRA analysis to make convergence on


satisfactory electron density profile, unbiased starting structural parameters with all bulk-like

settings were selected for subsequent iterations. The experimentally measured and COBRA

simulated specular CTR (00L) are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5. Experimentally measured and the COBRA simulated specular (00L) crystal truncation
rod with the X-ray energy tuned to just below the Pb L3 absorption edge.


Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM): The sample for STEM analysis was

prepared through mechanical flat polishing by using a precise polishing system (EM TXP,

Leica), and gently polishing down to a thickness of ~10 μm. To avoid the decomposition of

BBO/BPO by water, we used the water-free lubricant (Purple lubricant, Allied). The polished

specimen was ion-milled using Ar ion beam with voltage range of 1-3 keV (PIPS II, Gatan)

to make the hole for the STEM observation. To reduce damage during ion-milling, we used a

cold stage fixed at -100 ˚C to limit the fracture from thermal shock of the NdScO3 substrate.

After making an electron-transparent area, low energy milling was performed using 0.1 keV

Ar beam to minimize surface damage from the prior ion-milling process.

To avoid electron beam damage during the STEM observation, STEM analysis was

performed using a 30-200kV STEM (JEM-ARM200F, JEOL) at 60 kV equipped with an

aberration corrector (ASCOR, CEOS GmbH). The optimum size of the electron probe was ~

0.1 nm. The probe used for acquiring the HAADF and ABF images was 9C (23.2 pA). The

collection semi-angles of the HAADF detector were adjusted from 68 to 280 mrad in order to

collect a large-angle elastic scattering electrons for clear Z-sensitive images. The ABF images

were obtained using a 3 mm aperture and a collection angle from 12 to 24 mrad was used.

The obtained raw images were processed with a band-pass Wiener filter with a local window

to reduce a background noise (HREM research Inc.). STEM image simulation was performed

using Dr. Probe (free software, Ernst-Ruska Institute at Juliech). Figure 6 discusses observed

damage during imaging in detail.


Figure 6. Damage during STEM imaging. (a) The interface between BaBiO3 and BaPbO3 is
shown. Despite the insignificant difference in the atomic weights between Bi and Pb, the interface
is visible with a brighter BaBiO3 layer and a darker BaPbO3 layer. This contrast difference seems
to arise from crystallographic differences; the octahedral tilt in the less symmetric, monoclinic
BaBiO3 gives rise to stronger dechanneling effect of the electron probe. The image on the right
side is the simulated STEM HAADF image of the interface structure of monoclinic BaBiO3 and
orthorhombic BaPbO3. The brighter contrast in BaBiO3 is found using Dr probe simulator (Ernst-
Ruska Institute at Juliech). However, it should be noticed that other simulators such as JEMS
(Interdisciplinary center for electron microscopy) and QSTEM (Humboldt University) could not
realize the brighter contrast in BaBiO3. This unexpected contrast difference between BaBiO3 and
BaPbO3 requires the further investigation. (b), (c) and (d) images are the time-sequential series of
HAADF STEM images showing the BaBiO3 and BaPbO3 film being damaged by electron beam
during the STEM observation even under 60kV of the acceleration voltage. Arrows in (c) indicate
that the blurred, white contrast related with decomposition starts to grow from the BaBiO3 to the
BaPbO3 layer. Later on, the BaBiO3 - BaPbO3 superlattice film is fully damaged as shown in (d).
(e) Some regions in the sample was already damaged possibly by the Ar ion beam during ion-
milling. The left side of (e) shows a totally damaged film so that the BaBiO3 - BaPbO3 superlattice
cannot be observed at all. The right side of (e) shows the superlattice having the periodic white
layers (BaBiO3) and black layers (BaPbO3) still survive whilst some areas are degraded to the
amorphous phases by the electron beam, indicated by the blue arrows. The atomic scale
observation of BaBiO3 - BaPbO3 superlattice film in this study was only available at the somewhat
thick area and also the short exposure was essentially required to minimize the exposure time to
the electron beam.


