T-A homogenized and multi-scale models with real-time simulation 

capabilities for large-scale HTS systems

Edgar Berrospe-Juarez1, Víctor M R Zermeño, Frederic Trillaud3 and Francesco Grilli2

1Postgraduate School of Engineering, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico

2Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

3Institute of Engineering, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico

email: eberrospej@iingen.unam.mx

This work was supported in part by the Programa de Maestría y Doctorado en Ingeniería of the 
Universidad National Autónoma de México (UNAM) and the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y 
Tecnología (CONACYT) under CVU: 490544, and by DGAPA-UNAM grant, PAPIIT-2017 
#TA100617.

Abstract: The emergence of second-generation high temperature superconducting tapes has favored 
the development of large-scale superconductor systems. The mathematical models for 
superconductors have evolved from simple analytical models to complex numerical models. The 
available analytical models are just capable of estimating electromagnetic quantities in single wires 
or small arrays. The numerical models like the H formulation finite element models are useful for the 
analysis of more medium-size systems, but their application in large-scale systems is problematic due 
to the excessive cost in terms of memory and the computation time. Then it is necessary to devise new 
strategies to tackle this challenge. The homogenization and the multi-scale approach are 
methodologies that have successfully simplified the description of the systems allowing the study of 
large-scale systems. Recently, efficient calculations have been achieved using the T-A formulation.  
In this manuscript, we analyze the adequate order of the elements used in the T-A formulation. More 
importantly, we propose a series of adaptations to the homogenization and multi-scale methodologies 
in order to allow their implementation to the T-A formulation models. The proposed strategies are 
validated by means of comparing them with the H reference model of a racetrack coil. The 
computation time and memory demand are substantially reduced up to a point that makes it possible 
to perform real-time simulations for slow ramping cycles. At the same time the comparison 
demonstrates a very good agreement with respect to the reference model, both at a local and global 
level, is achieved. 

Keywords: large-scale superconductor systems, hysteresis losses, HTS magnets, T-A formulation.


1. Introduction

The high temperature superconductors (HTS) materials have experienced an important progress 
during the recent years. Nowadays, the high current capacity of second-generation (2G) HTS tapes 
has made possible the production and commercialization of superconducting fault current limiters 
and cables [1]. The community is also interested in developing other systems based on 2G HTS tapes 
like generators, motors, power transformers [2], and also high field scientific magnets [3-5]. These 
devises are called large-scale superconductor systems, because they are made from hundreds to 
thousands of turns of HTS tapes. The design and operation of large-scale superconductor systems 
requires the availability of mathematical models capable of estimating the hysteresis losses and other 
electromagnetic and thermal quantities. In particular, fast numerical simulations can propel the 
development of devises allowing parametric analysis.

The first available analytical models were limited to the analysis of one single conductor [6-8].  More 
complex models considering conductor stacks under not general conditions are presented in [9-12]. 
The reader can refer to [13] for a deep a review of available analytical models. The numerical models 
open the possibility of considering systems with larger number of tapes. Methods like the finite 
element method (FEM) are well documented in the literature [14-16]. Nevertheless, the 
superconductor systems have specific characteristics, that should be considered in order to 
successfully address the modelling task [17].  For a deeper review of numerical models for HTS, the 
reader can refer to [18] and [19].

The FEM models of HTS tapes use different formulations of the Maxwell’s equations. The 
differences between the formulations comes from the variety in the state variables. The first proposed
FEM model of an HTS tape uses the  T-φ formulation [20], a later model uses the A-V formulation 
[21]. Other formulations are compiled in [17] and [22]. During the last years the H formulation [22] 
has become a de facto standard in the community. In the recent publications [23] and [24] the T-A
formulation has been described, this formulation couples together the T and A formulations. The FEM 
models using the T-A formulation allows to address the analysis of large-scale systems. As a prelude 
for the strategies that are going to be proposed in this manuscript, we address the analysis of the order 
of the elements used in the T-A formulation. The analysis is conducted by means of performing 
different simulations using different order of elements.

The main concern when dealing with large-scale systems is the large number of turns. The 
homogenization and the multi-scale approaches can considerably reduce the description of the 
systems without compromising accuracy of the results. The homogenization process consists in the 
assumption that a tapes stack can be described by an anisotropic bulk. This approach was first 
proposed in [25] and later successfully improvements have been reported in [26-28]. The multi-scale 
approach is based on the idea to simulate a reduced number of tapes, the interaction between tapes is 
achieved by means of the boundary conditions containing the background magnetic field produced 
by the rest of the tapes. This method was proposed in [29], with later refinements in [30] and an 
iterative version proposed in [31]. Among the available methodologies suitable for the analysis of 
large-scale systems we should mention the Minimum Magnetic Energy Variation (MMEV) method 
proposed in [32] and [33]. The MMEV method evolved into the Minimum Electro-Magnetic Entropy 
Production (MEMEP) method [34], [35].


In this manuscript, we present two strategies to address the numerical modelling large-scale 
superconductor systems. These new strategies arose from the study of the implementation of 
homogenization and multi-scale methodologies together with the T-A formulation models. The 
application is not straightforward and some delicate adaptations are required. It is also demonstrated 
that the T-A homogenized and T-A multi-scale models are so efficient that it is possible to achieve 
real-time simulations of the case study using a desktop computer.

This manuscript is organized as follow. Section 2 starts with the description of the T-A formulation, 
then the T-A homogenized and T-A multi-scale strategies are presented. Section 3 contains the 
description of the case study racetrack coil as well as its T-A full model. This section ends with the 
study of the adequate choice for the order of the elements used in the T-A models. The description of 
new proposed T-A homogenized and multi-scale models of the case study is presented in section 4. 
Sections 5 contains the simulation results and the comparison of the different models. An important 
conclusion about the possibility of real-time simulations is reached in section 6. Finally, the 
conclusions are exposed in section 7.

2. Modelling Methodology

T-A Formulation
The T-A formulation was reported in [20] and [21]. The T-A formulation approach solves two state 
variables, the current vector potential 𝑻 along the HTS layer, and the magnetic vector potential 𝑨 all 
over the whole geometry. The T-A formulation assumes that the HTS layer of the tape have an 
infinitesimal thickness. In a 2D geometry this assumption means that the HTS layers are assumed to 
be 1D lines. Then, the 𝑻 and 𝑨 vectors have only one component. 

The magnetic vector potential 𝑨 is defined by 

𝑩 = ∇ × 𝑨
(1)

The governing equations of the A formulation is

𝛻 × ∇ × 𝑨 = 𝜇𝑱
(2)

where 𝜇 is the magnetic permeability.

The current vector potential 𝑻 is defined by 

𝑱 = ∇ × 𝑻
(3)

The governing equation of the T formulation is


∇ × 𝜌∇ × 𝑻 = − 𝜕𝑩

𝜕𝑡

(4)

where 𝜌 is the resistivity. 

In the 2D case depicted in figure 1, equations 3 and 4 are reduced to

𝐽𝑧 = 𝜕𝑇𝑦

𝜕𝑥

(5)

𝜕
𝜕𝑥 𝜌 𝜕𝑇𝑦

𝜕𝑥 = 𝜕𝐵𝑦

𝜕𝑡

(6)

The necessary boundary conditions can be found considering the transport current in the tape 

𝐼 = ∬ 𝑱

𝑆

𝑑𝑆 = ∬ ∇ × 𝑻

𝑆

𝑑𝑆 = ∮ 𝑻 𝑑𝑠
(7)

𝐼 = (𝑇1 − 𝑇2)𝛿
(8)

where 𝛿 is the thickness of the HTS layer. 𝑇1 and 𝑇2 are shown in figure 1.

Figure 1. Infinitesimal thickness HTS tape in a 2D geometry.

The time derivative of the magnetic field 𝑩, obtained by calculating 𝑨, is used by the T formulation. 
At the same time, the current density 𝑱, obtained by calculating 𝑻, is multiplied by the thickness of 
the HTS, and then forced into the A formulation as an external surface current density. 

The models that consider each tape inside the system, and applies the T-A formulation as proposed in 
[21] and briefly described here, are called T-A full models in the rest of this manuscript.

Homogenization
The homogenized models assume that an HTS tapes stack can be modeled as an anisotropic bulk, 
which is a simpler object to simulate. This simplification in the geometric description of the stack 
should not compromise its electromagnetic behavior, thus the model construction requires additional 
considerations. 


As well as in the T-A full models, when the T-A formulation is applied to a homogenized model, the 
influence of the component of 𝑩 parallel to the surface of the tape is neglected, and 𝑻 has only one 
component, the same as in the T-A formulation models, see equation (6). Figure 2 illustrates the 
homogenization process. The bulk brings together all the unit cells containing the HTS tapes. The 
governing equation of the bulk domain is also (6), and the only state variable is 𝑇𝑦. The same 
boundary conditions from equation (8) are applied to the edges instead to the extreme points. The 
bulk with these boundary conditions can be understood as the limiting case of a densely packed stack 
made up of tapes with infinitesimal thickness. The resistivity inside the bulk is considered to be the 
resistivity of the HTS material, thus the strategy proposed here does not consider the copper and other 
normal conductors that constitute the HTS tapes. The homogenization process is depicted in figure 2, 
together with the boundary conditions applied in the homogenized bulk.

Figure 2. Homogenization process and boundary conditions for the T-A homogenized
bulk. The stack is transformed in a bulk. The boundary conditions are applied to the 
edges corresponding with the extreme points of the tapes.

Conversely to the non-homogeneous T-A model, here the 𝑱, obtained by calculating 𝑻 inside the bulk, 
is multiplied by the ratio 𝛿 Λ
⁄ , and forced into the A formulation as an external current density. Where 

Λ is the thickness of the unit cell. It is important to emphasize that the A formulation is applied all 
over the full geometry including the air domains, while the T formulation is applied just in the 
domains inside the homogenized bulks. 

Multi-scale approach
The multi-scale and the iterative multi-scale method as described in [30] and [31], respectively use 
two different submodels. The single tape submodel is a H formulation model that computes the J
distribution in the analyzed tapes. The coil submodel is an A formulation model that computes the 
background magnetic field. The two submodels run separately, then the J distribution and the 
background field are not computed simultaneously. 

The multi-scale approach proposed here is also based in the T-A formulation. As in the T-A full 
models, there is only one model and the T and A formulations are coupled together.  Hence, these
new multi-scale models simultaneously compute the J distribution in the analyzed tapes and the 
background field produced by all the tapes. The multi-scale T-A models consider a reduced number 
of analyzed tapes, each analyzed tape is modeled in detail using the T-A formulation model. The 


remaining non-analyzed tapes and the surrounding air are modeled using just the A formulation. The 
J distributions in the non-analyzed tapes are approximated by linear interpolation of the J distributions 
in the analyzed tapes. The interpolated J distributions in the non-analyzed tapes are also multiplied 
by the thickness of the HTS layer, and forced into the A formulation as surface current densities.
Figure 3 shows the multi-scale approach applied in a small stack.

Figure 3. Multi-scale approach. In this example, there are 3 analyzed tapes and the J
distribution in the non-analyzed tapes is approximated by linear interpolation.

3. Case study, H reference and T-A models

Case study
The case study used in this manuscript is the same racetrack coil used in [30]. The coil has 10 
pancakes (stacks), each composed of 200 turns. The symmetry allows to model just one quarter of 
the system, this means it is possible to consider 5 pancakes each one with 100 tapes. 

The H reference model of this manuscript is also the same reference model used in [30]. This model 
uses the H formulation and consider each tape. The regions containing just one HTS layer and its
surrounding air are called unit cells. The mesh of the unit cells is structured, and considers 1 element 
along the tape’s thickness and 100 elements along the tape’s width. The 100 elements are distributed 
symmetrically with an increasing number of elements at the extremities of the tape. The HTS layers 
are considered to be surrounded with air, thus the copper and other normal conductors that constitute 
the HTS tapes are not considered. 

The electrical resistivity of the HTS material is modeled by the so-called E-J power-law [36],

𝜌𝐻𝑇𝑆 =
𝐸𝑐

𝐽𝑐(𝑩) |
𝑱

𝐽𝑐(𝑩)|

𝑛−1

.
(9)

The critical current density 𝐽𝑐 is defined by a modified Kim’s relation [37], this relation describes the 
anisotropic dependence of the on the magnetic field 


𝐽𝐶(𝑩) =
𝐽𝑐0

(

 1 +

√𝑘2𝐵∥

2 + 𝐵⊥

2

𝐵0

)

 

𝛼 ,

(10)

where 𝐵⊥ and 𝐵∥ are the magnetic field components perpendicular and parallel to the wide surface of 
the tape. Since there are no magnetic materials are considered, the permeability of the air and the HTS 
material is chosen to be the permeability of the vacuum 0. The parameters of racetrack coil are 
resumed in table 1.

Table 1. Racetrack coil parameters.

Parameter
Value

Pancakes
10

Turns per pancake
200

Unit cell width
4.45 mm

Unit cell thickness
293 m

HTS layer width
4 mm

HTS layer thickness
1 m

Ec
1e-4 Vm-1

n
38

Jc0
2.8e10 Am-2

B0
0.04265 T

k
0. 29515


0.7

Air resistivity
1 Ωm

T-A Full Models
The T-A full models consider in detail all the tapes. The mesh used in the tape’s region is a structured
mesh. To allow an assessment of the number of degrees of freedom (DOF) and the accuracy of the 
results, three models with different numbers of elements along the tape’s width were built. The first 
model uses 100 elements distributed as in the reference model. The other two models use 50 and 25 
elements along the tape’s width, respectively, both with a uniform distribution of elements. It is also 
important to note that the T-A full models use Lagrange elements.

The geometry and the mesh of the model with 100 elements along the tape’s width is shown in figure 
4. This figure also shows the numbering of the tapes and pancakes.


Figure 4. Geometry and mesh of the T-A full model. The analyzed section of the case 
study has 5 pancakes with 100 tapes per pancake. The mesh in the unit cells is 
structured.

Spurious oscillations in the J distributions
A comprehensive presentation of the simulations results of the T-A full models is going to be 
presented in section 5, in conjunction with the results of the homogenized and multiscale models. 
Here, we present in advance of the J distributions obtained with the T-A full model. These results will 
justify the election of the orders of the elements in the rest of the models. 

The references model and the T-A full model with 50 elements along the tape’s width were simulated
for one cycle of a 11 A, 50 Hz transport current. The T-A model was simulated three times using 
different order elements. The first simulation uses first order elements for both T and A formulations, 
the second simulation uses second order elements for both formulations, the last simulation uses first 
order elements for the T formulation and second order elements for the A formulation. The J
distribution of the tape 25 of pancake 5, at t=2 ms are shown in figure 5. 

Figure 5. J distribution of the tape 25 of pancake 5 at t=2 ms. The simulations were performed
with the H formulation reference model and with the T-A full model with 50 elements along the 
tape’s width. a) The T-A full model uses first order elements for both formulations. b)  The T-A
full model uses second order elements for both formulations. c)  The T-A full model uses first order 
elements for the T formulation and second order elements for the A formulation.


The J distributions of the T-A models look similar to the J distributions of the reference model. But,
the results show that the J distributions of the T-A models present spurious oscillations. Even though,
the reference [24] contains a discussion about the increment in the computation time due to the 
increment of the order of the elements, these oscillations are not discussed. The spurious oscillations
are present for subcritical current densities. It is possible to observe that the “frequency” of the 
oscillations when both formulations uses second order elements is twice the frequency when both 
formulations use first order elements. The T-A full model with 50 elements was chosen for this 
assessment because it is easier to appreciate the oscillations.

The oscillations disappear when the order of the elements is higher in the A formulation than in the T
formulation. Hence, throughout the rest of this manuscript it is assumed that the T-A full models are 
models using first order Lagrange elements in the T formulation and second order Lagrange elements 
in the A formulation, unless otherwise indicated. Similarly, the homogenized  and multiscale models, 
described in the next section, use this combination of order elements to avoid the oscillations.

The problem of spurious oscillations is known to appear in other fields of physics like the fluid 
mechanics. There are finite element spaces that are unstable for the Navier-Stokes equations. A stable 
pair of elements should be used when both the velocity and the pressure are required, otherwise 
unwanted oscillations may be present in the pressure solution. One simple solution is the use of the 
Taylor-Hood elements which use first order elements for the pressure and second order elements for 
the velocity, see [38].

4. T-A homogenized and multi-scale models

T-A homogenized models
The T-A homogenized model of the case study consider 5 bulks, each per pancake, and a structured 
mesh with 6 elements along the bulk’s width. In order to permit a fair comparation with the T-A full 
models, three models were built. The models use 100, 50 and 25 elements along the tape’s width, 
with the same symmetric and uniform distributions used in the T-A full models. The geometry and 
the mesh of the model with 100 elements along the tape’s width is shown in figure 6. The mesh has 
more elements in the upper part of the pancakes where higher losses and screening currents are 
expected. Contrarily, the central parts of the pancakes require less elements.

Considering the undesired ripples produced when first order elements are used for both formulations, 
the homogenized models use first order elements for the T formulation and second order elements for 
the A formulation.

The hysteresis losses are computed in the center of each of the 6 elements along the bulks. These 
losses, corresponding to the tapes located at the center of the 6 elements, are used to estimate the 
losses in the rest of the tapes. The interpolation method used in this manuscript is the Piecewise Cubic 
Hermite Interpolating Polynomial (PCHIP) method [39].


Figure 6. Geometry and mesh of the T-A homogenized model. The bulk’s mesh 
considers 6 elements along the bulks, with a denser distribution in the upper part of 
the pancakes 

T-A multi-scale models
The multi-scale models in this manuscript consider 30 analyzed tapes, the election of the analyzed 
tapes follows the same directives proposed in [31]. The set of analyzed tapes in each pancake is {25, 
66, 88, 96, 99, 100}. This distribution allows to reproduce the expected variations in the losses at the 
extreme parts of the pancakes.

For the purpose of avoiding the undesired oscillations, the unit cells of the analyzed tapes use first 
order elements for the T formulation and second order elements for the A formulation. The unit cells 
of tapes closest non-analyzed tapes also use second order elements for the A formulation, while the 
rest of the system first order elements are used for the A formulation. The domains using first order 
elements in the A formulation are connected with the domains using second order elements in the A
formulation by means of time dependent Dirichlet boundary conditions.

A structured mesh is used for the domains with the pancakes, and a triangular mesh is used for the 
surrounding air. The unit cells where the second order elements are used consider a mesh with more 
elements along the tape’s width than the regions where first order elements. The transition zones 
between unit cells with different number of elements use triangular meshes. The position of the 
analyzed tapes, the regions with second order elements and the mesh are shown in figure 7, this figure 
correspond to a model with 100 elements along the tape’s width in the regions with second order 
elements and 50 elements in the rest of the tapes. The second model uses a mesh with 50 and 25 
elements for the tapes with second and first order elements, respectively. The last model uses a mesh 
with 25 and 13 elements. The distribution of the elements in the last two models is uniform, while the 
distribution of the elements in the firs model is the same symmetric distribution used in the 
homogeneous and full models with 100 elements along the tape’s width.

In the multi-scale model, the PCHIP interpolation method is also used, to approximate the  hysteresis 
losses in the non-analyzed tapes based in the losses of the analyzed tapes. 


Figure 7. Analyzed tapes, regions with second order elements and the mesh of the T-
A multi-scale model. The increased number of analyzed tapes in the upper part of the 
pancakes allows an accurate estimation of losses and screening currents 

5. Results

The H reference model as well as the T-A full, T-A homogenized  and T-A multi-scale were simulated 
for a 11 A, 50 Hz sinusoidal transport current. The results of the reference model are considered as 
the best estimation for the different electromagnetic quantities. Figure 8 show the results models with 
100 elements along the tape’s width. This figure allows to make a qualitative comparison between 
the models. The normalized current density ( 𝐽𝑛 = 𝐽 𝐽𝑐
⁄
) and the magnetic flux density magnitude 

( |𝑩| ), both at the negative peak current (t=15 ms), are shown in the first and second row. The T-A
models can successfully reproduce the J distribution produced by the H reference model. The third 
𝐽𝑛 plot show the 𝐽𝑛 all across the bulks, we decided to present the plot in this way to stress that it 
corresponds to the T-A homogenized model, but if we had decided to present a plot with the 𝐽𝑛 only 
across the tape domains, the plot would be also indistinguishable. As a direct consequence of the 
similarity between the J distributions produced by the four models, the magnetic field plots in figure 
8 are identical at simple sight.

The third row in figure 8 show the average hysteresis losses in the coil. The x-axis in the plots 
represents the tapes inside every pancake. The average losses are calculated as the average of the 
losses in the tapes during the second half of the 50 Hz cycle. The losses in each pancake are plotted 
in different lines, one for each pancake. The losses in pancake 5 are almost three orders of magnitude 
larger than the losses in pancake 1. This difference is linked to the higher current penetration in the 
tapes across the pancakes, and to the difference in the field direction. The plots in the third row of 
figure 8 demonstrate that the three T-A models can achieve accurate estimations of hysteresis losses 
at local level.

The last row in figure 8 are the J distributions in tape 25 of pancake 5, at t=2ms. Thanks to the 
appropriate choice of the order of the elements, the J distribution estimated with the T-A models show 
no spurious oscillations. The J distribution of the T-A full model is more accurate than the one in 
figure 5 c), because it corresponds to the model with 100 elements along the tape’s width, and the 


one in figure 5 correspond to the T-A full model with 50 elements. The J distribution of the T-A
homogenized model shows two small peaks attached to the current fronts. These peaks are caused by 
the locally different 𝑩 distribution across the bulk, this feature is also present in the H formulation 
homogenized models. Finally, the J distribution of the T-A multi-scale model is, as accurate as the 
one of the T-A full model. It is important to emphasize that the tape 25 of pancake 5 is one of the 
analyzed tapes in the T-A multi-scale model.

H Reference
T-A Full
T-A Homogenized
T-A Multi-scale

𝐽𝑛

(1)

|𝑩|

(T)

𝑄𝐴𝑣

(W/m)

𝐽

(A/m2)

Figure 8. H reference and T-A models results with a 11 A, 50 Hz transport current. The first 
column shows the results of the reference model. The second, third and fourth row shows the results 
of T-A full, homogenized and multi-scale models, respectively. The plots for 𝐽𝑛 and |𝑩| show the 
results at peak transport current, t  =15 ms. The 𝐽 plots show the results of the tape 25 of pancake 
5, at t=2 ms.


Quantitative comparison and number of elements assessment 
Figure 9 present a quantitative comparison between the T-A models and the H reference model. The 
results are presented as function of the number of elements along the tape’s width. The figure 9 a) 
shows the relative error in the total losses incurred by the T-A models when compared with the H
reference model. Here the adjective total means that the losses in each tape are summed. It is 
remarkable that for 50 or more elements all the errors are less than 2 %. The total average losses of 
the H reference model are 127.24 W/m.

The coefficient of determination ( 𝑅2 ) is a widely used metric to evaluate the goodness of fit [40], 
here is used to evaluate the accuracy of the J distributions. 

𝑅2 = 1 −

∑
(𝐽𝐻 − 𝐽𝑇𝐴)

2
𝑚
𝑖=1

∑
(𝐽𝐻 − 𝐽𝐻
̅̅̅)

2
𝑚
𝑖=1

,
(11)

where 𝐽𝐻/𝑇𝐴 are vectors containing the uniformly sampled J distribution of all the tapes, at all time 
steps (including those of the first half of the cycle), computed with the H or T-A models. The figure 
9 b) shows the 𝑅2 of the different models. The T-A multi-scale models are more suitable for the 
estimation of J distributions. The lower achieved 𝑅2 value is the one of the T-A full model with first 
order elements for both T and A formulations. The origin of this low value is the presence of the 
spurious oscillations. Due to the same drawback, the 𝑅2 of the T-A full model with second order 
elements for both formulations is lower than the 𝑅2 of the T-A full (T-1º, A-2º). The spurious 
oscillations have no impact in the losses, because the oscillations occur for subcritical values of J, but 
correct orders should be chosen to achieve the best possible J distribution.

The DOF of the H reference model is 563893. Figure 9 c) shows the number of DOF of the T-A
models, expressed as a percentage of the DOF of the H reference model. The DOF of the T-A
homogenized models are approximately 20 times lower than those of the T-A full models, this is a 
clear picture of the reduction of the computational load achieved with the homogenization. Figure 9
d) shows the computation times expressed as a percentage of the computation time of the H reference 
model, which is 31 h 33 min. In the worst-case scenario, the T-A homogenized and multi-scale models 
require less than 10 % of the time required by the H reference model. The T-A full models are efficient 
[24], but the computation time of the T-A homogenized models are one order of magnitude lower. 
The computer used to perform the simulations is a MacBook (3 GHz Intel Core i7-4578U, 4 cores, 
16 GB of RAM). 

The DOF in the homogenized model can be further reduced by reducing the number of elements 
along the bulk. While, the DOF in the multi-scale model can be reduced, by reducing the number of 
analyzed tapes. It has been demonstrated in [31] that it is possible to reduce the number of analyzed 
tapes in the central pancakes without losing accuracy in the total losses, 


Figure 9. Comparison between the T-A models and the H reference model. The T-A models are 
tested for different number of elements along the tape’s width. a) Absolut relative total losses 
error. b) Coefficient of determination of J. c) DOF expressed as a percentage of the DOF of the 
H reference model. d) Computation time expressed as a percentage o the computation time of 
the H reference model.

Time required to build the models
All the models described in this manuscript, were implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.3. One 
important parameter is the time required to build the models. This is a quantity difficult to measure 
because it strongly depends on the expertise of the analyzer. The geometry and the mesh in the H
reference model are not so easy to build, it is necessary to build the unit cells and then generate an 
array. The definitions of the integral constraints that impose the transport current in each tape is a 
time-consuming process, fortunately this process can be programed using Matlab, then the time 
required to build the H reference model is around 1 h. The process to build the T-A full model is 
easier, once the unit cell is ready, it can be copied to produce and array that already includes the 
boundary conditions. The time required to build the T-A full model is less than 30 min. Similarly, the 
T-A homogenized model is easy to build, instead of a unit cell the analyzer needs to create a bulk and 
then copy the bulk. A smaller number of boundary conditions is required for the T-A homogenized 
model, anyway we consider that the T-A homogenized model requires less than 30 min for its 
construction. Finally, the process to build the T-A multi-scale model requires around 3 h. This large 
time is required to build the unit cell, create and array of unit cell, select the analyzed tapes, set the 
properties of the analyzed tapes as well as the properties of the non-analyzed tapes, and define the 
functions required to implement the interpolation of the current densities.

6. Real-time capabilities

The H reference model does not allow to simulate the coil under slow transport currents. For example, 
the charging/discharging cycles, with periods in the order of the hours, that are present in real 


operation of magnets [4].  When the frequency of the transport current in the H reference model is 
changed from 50 Hz to a 5e-4 Hz, the time steps of the simulation cannot be increased at the same 
rate, and the computation time required to simulate one single cycle become prohibitive. In contrast, 
the models based on the T-A formulation does not have this restriction.

The T-A models with 100 elements along the tape’s width were simulated for the ramping cycle show 
in blue line in figure 10, 1 h ramping up, plus 30 min plateau, plus 1 h ramping down, plus 30 min 
plateau. The losses as a function of time are also shown in the figure 10.  The total losses during the 
10800 s of the analyzed lapse and the computation time are summarized in table 2. As far as the H
reference model was not simulated under these conditions, the losses estimated with the T-A full 
model are considered to be the best approximation. The losses estimated the T-A multi-scale model 
are more accurate than those estimated with the homogenized model, nevertheless the error with the 
homogenized model is low with a value of 1.6 %. The most important result is the computation time 
achieved with the T-A homogenized and multi-scale models, both times are less than the actual 
physical time of the simulation. Thus, the T-A homogenized and multi-scale models are suitable for 
real-time similations, feature that is not shared with the T-A full model, nor with the H reference 
model.

Figure 10. Infinitesimal thickness tape in a 2D geometry.

Table 2. Ramping cycle simulations.

Model
Losses (J/m)
Computation 

Time

T-A full
0.8772
39h 15min 43s

T-A Homogenized
0.8916
1h 8min 20s

T-A Multi-scale
0.8708
2h 35min 18s

7. Conclusions

The T-A formulation reduces the geometric description of a 2D HTS tape with a large aspect ratio to 
a 1D line. The two new strategies proposed in this manuscript, the T-A homogenized and the T-A


multi-scale models, are based in the T-A formulation, and also successfully take benefit of the 
homogenization and multi-scale methods. The homogenization was previously used with H
formulation models, here we have investigated the necessary considerations to apply the 
homogenization together with the T-A formulation. This new strategy allows to build faster 
homogenized models.

The main limitation of the multi-scale method described in [30], is the absence of a clear definition
of the J distribution. The iterative multi-scale method [31] overcomes this limitation. The 
simultaneous multi-scale method described in this manuscript can be seen as enhanced version of the 
iterative multi-scale method. The simultaneous multi-scale models are easier to construct than the 
iterative ones, because there is only one model instead of two submodels. The T-A multi-scale models 
can run faster because just one dynamic simulation is required, instead of the iterative implementation 
of n simulations.

The analyzes conducted in this manuscript show that the assumptions considered in the T-A
homogenized and multi-scale models significantly reduce the DOF. These simplifications in the 
description of the systems does not compromise the accuracy of the results, and not only it is possible 
to accurately estimate the losses, but also the J distribution. The availability of the T-A homogenized 
and multi-scale models opens the possibility for the real-time simulation of large-scale 
superconductor systems. At the best of our knowledge, this last quality is new in the analysis of such 
complex systems. 


References 

[1]
Sirois, F. and Grilli, F. (2015). Potential and limits of numerical modelling for supporting the 
development of HTS devices. Superconductor Science and Technology, 28(4), p.043002.

[2] 
Melhem Z 2012 High temperature superconductors (HTS) for energy applications
(Cambridge, U.K.: Woodhead Publishing).

[3]
Markiewicz, W., Larbalestier, D., Weijers, H., Voran, A., Pickard, K., Sheppard, W., 
Jaroszynski, J., Aixia Xu, Walsh, R., Jun Lu, Gavrilin, A. and Noyes, P. (2012). Design of a 
Superconducting 32 T Magnet With REBCO High Field Coils. IEEE Transactions on 
Applied Superconductivity, 22(3), pp.4300704-4300704.

[4]
Weijers, H., Markiewicz, W., Gavrilin, A., Voran, A., Viouchkov, Y., Gundlach, S., Noyes, 
P., Abraimov, D., Bai, H., Hannahs, S. and Murphy, T. (2016). Progress in the Development 
and Construction of a 32-T Superconducting Magnet. IEEE Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity, 26(4), pp.1-7.

[5]
Xia, J., Bai, H., Lu, J., Gavrilin, A., Zhou, Y. and Weijers, H. (2015). Electromagnetic 
modeling of REBCO high field coils by the H-formulation. Superconductor Science and 
Technology, 28(12), p.125004.

[6]
Norris, W. (1970). Calculation of hysteresis losses in hard superconductors carrying ac: 
isolated conductors and edges of thin sheets. Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 3(4), 
pp.489-507.

[7]
Halse, M. (1970). AC face field losses in a type II superconductor. Journal of Physics D: 
Applied Physics, 3(5), pp.717-720.

[8]
Brandt, E. (1994). Thin superconductors in a perpendicular magnetic ac field: General 
formulation and strip geometry. Physical Review B, 49(13), pp.9024-9040.

[9]
Mawatari, Y. (1996). Critical state of periodically arranged superconducting-strip lines in 
perpendicular fields. Physical Review B, 54(18), pp.13215-13221.

[10] 
Müller, K. (1997). Self-field hysteresis loss in periodically arranged superconducting 
strips. Physica C: Superconductivity, 289(1-2), pp.123-130.

[11] 
Müller, K. (1999). AC losses in stacks and arrays of YBCO/hastelloy and monofilamentary 
Bi-2223/Ag tapes. Physica C: Superconductivity, 312(1-2), pp.149-167.

[12]
Clem, J. (2008). Field and current distributions and ac losses in a bifilar stack of 
superconducting strips. Physical Review B, 77(13).


[13]
Mikitik, G., Mawatari, Y., Wan, A. and Sirois, F. (2013). Analytical Methods and Formulas 
for Modeling High Temperature Superconductors. IEEE Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity, 23(2), pp.8001920-8001920.

[14]
Bastos, J. and Sadowski, N. (2003). Electromagnetic modeling by finite element methods.
New York: Marcel Dekker.

[15]
Jin, J. (n.d.). The Finite Element Method in Electromagnetics.

[16]
Jin, J. (2015). Theory and computation of electromagnetic fields. Hoboken: Wiley.

[17]
Grilli, F. (2016). Numerical modeling of HTS applications. IEEE Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity, pp.1-1.

[18]
Grilli, F., Pardo, E., Stenvall, A., Nguyen, D., Weijia Yuan and Gomory, F. (2014). 
Computation of Losses in HTS Under the Action of Varying Magnetic Fields and 
Currents. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 24(1), pp.78-110.

[19]
Quéval, L., Zermeño, V. and Grilli, F. (2016). Numerical models for ac loss calculation in 
large-scale applications of HTS coated conductors. Superconductor Science and Technology, 
29(2), p.024007.

[20]
Amemiya, N., Murasawa, S., Banno, N. and Miyamoto, K. (1998). Numerical modelings of 
superconducting wires for AC loss calculations. Physica C: Superconductivity, 310(1-4), 
pp.16-29.

[21]
Nibbio, N., Stavrev, S. and Dutoit, B. (2001). Finite element method simulation of AC loss 
in HTS tapes with B-dependent E-J power law. IEEE Transactions on Appiled 
Superconductivity, 11(1), pp.2631-2634.

[22]
Brambilla, R., Grilli, F. and Martini, L. (2006). Development of an edge-element model for 
AC loss computation of high-temperature superconductors. Superconductor Science and 
Technology, 20(1), pp.16-24.

[23]
Zhang, H., Zhang, M. and Yuan, W. (2016). An efficient 3D finite element method model 
based on the T–A formulation for superconducting coated conductors. Superconductor 
Science and Technology, 30(2), p.024005.

[24]
Liang, F., Venuturumilli, S., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Kvitkovic, J., Pamidi, S., Wang, Y. and 
Yuan, W. (2017). A finite element model for simulating second generation high temperature 
superconducting coils/stacks with large number of turns. Journal of Applied Physics, 122(4), 
p.043903.

[25]
Clem, J., Claassen, J. and Mawatari, Y. (2007). AC losses in a finiteZstack using an
anisotropic homogeneous-medium approximation. Superconductor Science and Technology, 
20(12), pp.1130-1139.


[26]
Yuan, W., Campbell, A. and Coombs, T. (2009). A model for calculating the AC losses of 
second-generation high temperature superconductor pancake coils. Superconductor Science 
and Technology, 22(7), p.075028.

[27]
Prigozhin, L. and Sokolovsky, V. (2011). Computing AC losses in stacks of high-temperature 
superconducting tapes. Superconductor Science and Technology, 24(7), p.075012.

[28]
Zermeno, V., Abrahamsen, A., Mijatovic, N., Jensen, B. and Sørensen, M. (2013). 
Calculation of alternating current losses in stacks and coils made of second generation high 
temperature superconducting tapes for large scale applications. Journal of Applied Physics, 
114(17), p.173901.

[29]
Queval, L. and Ohsaki, H. (2013). AC Losses of a Grid-Connected Superconducting Wind 
Turbine Generator. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 23(3), pp.5201905-
5201905.

[30]
Quéval, L., Zermeño, V. and Grilli, F. (2016). Numerical models for ac loss calculation in 
large-scale applications of HTS coated conductors. Superconductor Science and Technology, 
29(2), p.024007.

[31]
Berrospe-Juarez, E., Zermeño, V., Trillaud, F. and Grilli, F. (2018). Iterative multi-scale 
method for estimation of hysteresis losses and current density in large-scale HTS 
systems. Superconductor Science and Technology, 31(9), p.095002.

[32]
Pardo, E., Gömöry, F., Šouc, J. and Ceballos, J. (2007). Current distribution and ac loss for a 
superconducting rectangular strip with in-phase alternating current and applied 
field. Superconductor Science and Technology, 20(4), pp.351-364.

[33]
Pardo, E. (2013). Calculation of AC loss in coated conductor coils with a large number of 
turns. Superconductor Science and Technology, 26(10), p.105017.

[34]
Pardo, E., Šouc, J. and Frolek, L. (2015). Electromagnetic modelling of superconductors with 
a smooth current–voltage relation: variational principle and coils from a few turns to large 
magnets. Superconductor Science and Technology, 28(4), p.044003.

[35]
E. Pardo, M. Kapolka, and J. Souc, “3D and 2D electromagnetic modelling of
superconductors: Flux cutting effects in finite samples and coated conductor coils up to 10 
000 turns,” in Proc. 12th Eur. Conf. Appl. Supercond., Lyon, France, Sep. 6–10, 2015.

[36]
Rhyner, J. (1993). Magnetic properties and AC-losses of superconductors with power law 
current-voltage characteristics. Physica C: Superconductivity, 212(3-4), pp.292-300.

[37]
Kim, Y., Hempstead, C. and Strnad, A. (1962). Critical Persistent Currents in Hard 
Superconductors. Physical Review Letters, 9(7), pp.306-309.

[38]
Fenicsproject.org. (2018). Solving PDEs in Python - The FEniCS Tutorial Volume I. [online] 
Available at: https://fenicsproject.org/pub/tutorial/html/._ftut1009.html [Accessed 3 Oct. 
2018].


[39]
De.mathworks.com. (2018). Piecewise Cubic Hermite Interpolating Polynomial (PCHIP) -
MATLAB 
pchip-
MathWorks 
Deutschland. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 

https://de.mathworks.com/help/matlab/ref/pchip.html [Accessed 28 Jul. 2018].

[40]
Chapra, S. and Canale, R. (2010). Numerical methods for engineers. Boston, Mass.: 
McGraw-Hill Higher Education.


