1

Visualizing the Nonlinear Coupling between Strain and Electronic Nematicity in the Iron 

Pnictides by Elasto-Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy 

 
Authors: Erick F. Andrade1*, Ayelet Notis Berger1*, Ethan P. Rosenthal1, Xiaoyu Wang2, Lingyi Xing3, 

Xiancheng Wang3, Changqing Jin3, Rafael M. Fernandes2, Andrew J. Millis1, Abhay N. Pasupathy1 

 

Affiliations: 1Department of Physics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. 2School of Physics and 

Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA3 Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences; 

School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences; Collaborative 

Innovation Center  of  Quantum Matter, Beijing 100190, China. 

* These authors contributed equally to this work 

 

Abstract: 

Mechanical strain is a powerful technique for tuning electronic structure and interactions in 
quantum materials. In a system with tetragonal symmetry, a tunable uniaxial in-plane strain can 
be used to probe nematic correlations in the same way that a tunable magnetic field is used to 
probe magnetic correlations. Here, we present a new spectroscopic scanned probe technique 
that provides atomic-resolution insight into the effect of anisotropic strain on the electronic 
structure. We use this technique to study nematic fluctuations and nematic order across the 
phase diagram of a prototypical iron-based superconductor. By extracting quantitatively the 
electronic anisotropy as function of applied strain, we show that while true long range nematic 
order is established at the tetragonal to orthorhombic structural transition temperature, sizable 
nematic fluctuations persist to high temperatures and also to the overdoped end of the 
superconducting dome. Remarkably, we find that uniaxial strain in the pnictides significantly 
enhances the amplitude of the nematic fluctuations, indicating a strong nonlinear coupling 
between structure and electronic nematicity. 

 
 

Due to its strong effect on energy gaps, effective masses and scattering rates, strain has been used 

extensively to tune the electronic properties of semiconductors. Less explored but equally interesting is 
the effect of strain on metallic or semimetallic materials with strong electronic interactions. Such 
materials often exhibit electronic nematic phases that spontaneously break a discrete rotational symmetry 
of the lattice[1] and as a consequence couple linearly to uniaxial strain. Strain thus offers a unique tuning 
knob to study nematic correlations in materials, analogous to the effect of magnetic fields on a 
ferromagnet. Recently, elegant measurements of the strain dependence of dc transport [2-4] and 
optical[5, 6] conductivity have provided new fundamental insights into electronic nematicity. However, 
it is desirable to move beyond the spatially averaged information provided by dc transport and optical 
spectroscopy and obtain local, spectroscopic insight into the effects of strain on quantum materials. In 
this work we present a new technique in which atomic resolution scanning tunneling microscopy and 
spectroscopy measurements are performed on samples subject to in-situ and continuously variable 
mechanical uniaxial strain. This opens a new experimental window for understanding and manipulating 
electronic nematic phenomena in quantum materials at the microscopic level.  

 

Electronic nematicity is the spontaneous breaking of a rotational symmetry of an electron gas. 

Although not necessarily driven by the lattice, electronic nematic order couples linearly to certain elastic 
modes and, consequently, triggers a simultaneous structural transition. Nematic effects are observed in 
many quantum materials including 2D quantum hall states[7, 8], ruthenates[9], cuprates[10-15] and the 
iron-based superconductors[2, 3, 16-23], which we focus on here. Strong electronic nematicity is seen 


2

across the 122[2, 3, 5, 16, 18, 21, 24-27], 111[19, 22, 28], 1111[26] and 11[29-31] families of iron-
pnictide superconductors. The nematic electronic order is accompanied by a lowering of lattice symmetry 
from tetragonal to orthorhombic where the lattice elongates along one nearest-neighbor Fe-Fe bond (a 
axis) and compresses along the orthogonal direction (b axis)[32]. This transition occurs at a temperature 
TS and is followed by a transition to “stripe’’ uniaxial antiferromagnetic order at a lower temperature 
TSDW. In transport, nematicity is manifested as a temperature and strain dependent resistivity 
anisotropy[2, 3]. In scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements, electronic nematicity is 
visualized as two-fold (C2) symmetric patterns in the local electronic density of states (LDOS) [16, 19, 
20, 25, 31, 33, 34]. These patterns in the LDOS have length scales of several lattice constants, and are 
observed for energies within ~100meV of the Fermi level in several different families of iron-based 
superconductors.  

 

While the existence of nematic order in the iron-arsenide materials has been convincingly 

demonstrated, key physics issues remain widely debated.  A central question is about the origin of the 
nematicity, and its relevance to superconductivity and other phenomena.[35]. The absence of magnetic 
ordering in the nematic compound FeSe has been invoked as an argument against magnetically-driven 
nematic order[30, 36] and in favor of orbital-driven nematicity[37-39]. On the other hand, the 
disappearance of nematic order in several hole-doped BaFe2As2 compounds as the magnetic ground state 
changes from stripe to double-Q[40-42] has been interpreted as evidence that magnetism is essential to 
promote nematic order[35, 43-47] . However, because the vast majority of pnictide superconductor 
families display both an orthorhombic phase and stripe magnetism, direct experimental evidence as to 
whether orbital or spin fluctuations drive the transition remains scarce. Given that the energy scales 
associated with nematicity are close to, but several times larger than the superconducting gap[5, 18, 19], 
settling this question is of great importance to the physics of the pnictides.  

 

The second major issue is on the role of the lattice to nematicity. While symmetry arguments 

prescribe the form of the coupling of nematic order and fluctuations to applied strain, the magnitude and 
impact of the nematic-strain coupling remains unknown. This coupling is particularly important to 
elucidate unusual effects observed in the “para-nematic” state existing above the nematic transition 
temperature TS, which vanishes near optimal doping. Transport measurements[2, 3, 27, 48], nuclear 
magnetic resonance [49], optical data [50], and our previous STM measurements[19] reveal evidence of 
electronic nematicity at temperatures well above TS. Two compelling scenarios, with very different 
implications for the nature of the normal state from which superconductivity arises, have been advanced: 
in the first, true electronic nematic order is established at a temperature T*>TS[48]. In this scenario, the 
transition at TS is not a true nematic phase transition, but rather, a meta-nematic transition at which the 
nematic order parameter increases from a small to a larger value and the associated lattice distortion 
becomes observable. An alternative explanation supported by elasto-resistance measurements[2, 3] is 
that true long-range nematic order is only established at TS, but that strong nematic fluctuations persist 
up to much higher temperatures. In this scenario, the nematicity seen in STM experiments at high 
temperature arises from nematic fluctuations coupled to a symmetry-breaking field. The symmetry 
breaking would most likely be due to anisotropic strain arising from defects in the crystal structure and/or 
anisotropic differential thermal expansion with respect to the substrate to which the crystal is glued 
during measurement [51]. Systematic studies of local spectroscopic properties as a function of applied 
strain can help us answer these questions and gain invaluable information about the nature and impact of 
the nematic degrees of freedom and their coupling to strain.  

 

In order to probe the relationship between mechanical strain and microscopic electronic nematicity, 

we designed an apparatus by which anisotropic mechanical strain can be continuously applied to a sample 
while atomically-resolved STM and STS (scanning tunneling spectroscopy) measurements are 


3

performed on the same area. We term the new technique Elasto-Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy (or 
E-STS). The chief technical problems to overcome are the incorporation of the strain-producing 
apparatus within the available sample space of a few millimeters typical for high-resolution cryogenic 
STMs; the design of the experiment to allow the same nanoscopic area of the sample to be traced while 
varying the strain; and the typical issues associated with multilayer piezoelectrics including drift, creep 
and noise, especially at high temperature. Our design is shown in figure 1f and consists of a multilayer 
piezo actuator that expands/contracts along one axis by up to ±0.1% (which is the typical orthorhombic 
distortion of parent pnictide compounds) upon application of voltages (Vstrain) of ±250 V. The single 
crystal sample is glued to the top face of the piezo actuator, which also serves as one of the electrical 
contacts to the piezo. The crystal sample is maintained at the sample bias voltage Vbias, while the other 
end of the piezo actuator is maintained at the voltage Vbias+Vstrain via a low-noise floating voltage supply. 
STM imaging is performed on an in-situ cleaved crystal, where the tunneling current is measured from 
the tip as usual. The strain is independently measured using a resistive strain gauge as well by 
interferometry. E-STS as implemented is broadly applicable to crystal as well as film samples. 
 

We perform E-STS on the iron-pnictide parent compound NaFeAs[52]. This material has two known 

phase transitions – a transition from the high temperature tetragonal state to an orthorhombic state at 
TS=52K, and a transition to a long-range ordered spin-density wave (SDW) phase at TSDW=41K [53]. 
Electronic nematicity can be visualized in STS images as anisotropic patterns in the vicinity of defects 
that reduce the rotational symmetry from four-fold (C4) to two-fold (C2)[19, 20, 25]. In NaFeAs[19], and 
also in the related materials CaFe2As2[16] and FeSe[20], the reduction from C4 to C2 symmetry is 
primarily seen in electronic states close to the Fermi level suggesting that it originates from a low-energy 
instability of the electron gas.   
 

We first discuss E-STS measurements performed on NaFeAs at low temperature (T=6K). In this 

regime the material has both long-range magnetic (stripe SDW) and structural (orthorhombic) order. 
Global constraints on the strain state, presumably arising from the details of sample mounting, mean that 
the orthorhombic order is not uniform across the sample. Instead, micron sized domains with near 
atomically sharp domain boundaries appear. The domain size presumably is set by the competition of 
domain wall and strain energies, and boundaries between domains have been previously visualized in 
STS imaging measurements[16, 19, 20].   
 

In panels a-e of Fig. 1 we show images of the exact same region of our NaFeAs sample taken at a 

temperature of 6K for different values of the external strain, as indicated by the piezo voltage Vstrain (a 
larger set of images is shown as a movie in the supporting information, section SII). We tune the strain 
by changing the voltage applied to the strain piezo from +250V (maximal compression, panel a) to -
250V (maximum tension, panel e), and measure the response of the material via STM. Imaging is 
performed at identical conditions at the same energy for each value of applied strain. For each new value 
of strain, the crystal undergoes a translational shift under the STM tip, providing an independent, in-situ 
measurement of applied strain. To zero out this shift we re-center the tip at each value of strain. In Fig. 
1a two sharp domain walls are seen separating domains in which the direction of the longer (a) axis 
changes by ~90 degrees. On either side of the domain boundary, LDOS patterns that have C2 symmetry 
can be seen in the vicinity of defects. These patterns also rotate by ~90 degrees across the domain 
boundary in accord with the structural distortion. Comparison to Fig. 1b-e shows that the domain walls 
move as a function of applied strain so that as the magnitude of the compressive strain is decreased, the 
area of the domains with long axis aligned parallel to the strain direction increases and the area of the 
domains with long axis perpendicular to the strain direction decreases. For each value of strain, we can 
calculate the ratio of the domain areas of the two orientations. We plot this ratio as a function of strain in 


4

Fig. 1g. This figure shows the presence of significant hysteresis as well as irregular motion as a function 
of strain, reminiscent of Barkhausen noise[54] in the motion of domain boundaries at the atomic scale.  
 

We can directly quantify the magnitude of electronic C4 symmetry breaking as a function of strain 

from Fig. 1a-e. To do this, we take advantage of the fact that individual defect signatures can be easily 
identified in these images. We proceed by cropping a region centered on each defect and averaging all 
these cropped images together, thus generating an average spectroscopic signature for each value of strain 
(see supplementary info section SIII for more details of this procedure). This average defect structure is 
then subtracted from the same image rotated by 90 degrees. Any intensity in the resultant subtracted 
image is due to breaking of C4 symmetry in the local electronic structure, and we can sum up all the 
intensity in the subtracted image to obtain a measure of the uniaxial electronic anisotropy at each value 
of strain. Since the images at different values of strain are obtained under the same tunneling conditions, 
we can directly compare the magnitudes of the anisotropy obtained by this process at different strain 
values. The resultant anisotropy is plotted as a function of strain in figure 1h. We see that within 
experimental error, the magnitude of the anisotropy is independent of applied strain at the low 
temperature at which this measurement was performed.  
 

The data in Fig. 1 demonstrate the power of the E-STS technique to reveal the interplay between 

strain and electronic anisotropy. For an Ising-nematic (C4-C2 symmetry breaking),[54] the ground state 
contains domains of differently oriented orders.  In the presence of uniaxial strain, one orthorhombic 
domain is favored over the other[55]. Our measurements of domain wall motion and anisotropy strength 
visualized in Fig. 1 rule out several competing scenarios for how electronic anisotropy and domain walls 
could evolve under strain. For instance, a competing scenario to that seen in experiment would be one 
where the domain walls are pinned (by disorder or collectively) while the magnitude of the electronic 
anisotropy is modified within each domain as a function of strain. Instead, our experiments indicate that 
nematic domains behave similarly to Ising ferromagnets, where an applied magnetic field changes the 
domain structure but does not affect the saturation magnitude of the magnetization within a domain.  
 

We now turn to E-STS measurements at 54K, above TS. Figs. 2a and 2b compare the STS images 

for our most negative (Fig. 2a) and most positive (Fig. 2b) strain voltages. Both images are obtained at 
the same tunneling conditions. A strong anisotropy (identified by vertical yellow streaks) is visible in the 
+200V image (Fig. 2b) while in the -200V image (Fig. 2a) the anisotropy has completely disappeared 
from the entire field of view. This behavior is also confirmed in the Fourier transforms (FT) of the STS 
data presented in Fig 2c and 2d. The FT of the +200V data shows strong C4 symmetry breaking, with a 
pronounced three-peak structure. As previously reported16, the three-peak structure is a signature of 
Fermi surface reconstruction, whose presence at temperatures T>TSDW we interpret as evidence for large-
amplitude SDW fluctuations [56, 57].  In contrast, the FT for the -200V data shows a strongly diminished 
intensity overall along with weak (if any) C4 symmetry breaking.  
 

To interpret the high temperature E-STS data we first observe that experimental samples 

experience built-in strain, arising from sample growth, from the process of incorporation into the device, 
and from differential thermal contraction when cooled to low temperature. To reach a zero strain 
situation, external strain must be applied to counteract the built-in strain[3]. The fact that the electronic 
anisotropy is nearly destroyed at Vstrain = -200 V indicates that at this voltage the built-in strain is 
cancelled by the externally applied strain. In general, we find that different samples require different 
applied voltages Vstrain to eliminate the anisotropy, indicating differing values of built-in strain. We have 
thus established that at temperatures T>TS the physics is strongly affected by local strain, which in our 
apparatus can be continuously dialed to zero. 

 


5

 

At high temperature we observe neither the hysteresis nor the nematic domains (see below for the 

temperature evolution of domain walls, and supplementary section SVI) that were characteristic of the 
response in the long-range ordered state for T<TSDW. In the low T state, strain only affects the relative 
areas of the different domains, but not the locally determined magnitude of the anisotropy. In sharp 
contrast, at high T above TS there is no evidence of domains and the local value of the anisotropy depends 
on the applied strain.  The fact that for a certain value of applied strain the electronic anisotropy can be 
reduced to a nearly vanishing value at every point in a wide field of view is conclusive evidence that the 
electronic structure above TS does not exhibit long-range nematic order. This implies that the anisotropic 
data shown in Fig. 2 can be interpreted as a para-nematic response of the electronic structure to applied 
strain: the strength of the electronic anisotropy observed is dependent on the net strain applied to the field 
of view studied in the experiment. 
 

Our observation that the magnitude of the anisotropy can be controlled by strain at high 

temperature is a key new insight that E-STS provides. We will show below that the intensity of the 
electronic anisotropy seen in STM is directly related to the amplitude of the nematic fluctuations. Thus 
our data show that the amplitude of the nematic fluctuations themselves are set by the strain applied to 
the system. Such a strong nonlinear coupling between the structure and electronic nematicity has not 
previously been anticipated, and indicates the importance of properly accounting for the structural 
degrees of freedom in any description of the electronic properties of the pnictides.  
 

To present the anisotropy in a form that can be compared more directly to theory we subtracted 

the FT image from its rotation by 90 degrees (see supplementary material section SIII and SV for details) 
to create difference plots (Fig 2e and 2f). In a C4 symmetric situation the result would be zero up to noise, 
and indeed for the most negative strain voltage (2e) little anisotropy is visible; however for the highly 
strained case (2f) a strong C4 symmetry breaking is visible. We have modeled the STS data theoretically 
along the lines of our previous work[19] by computing the density of states modifications arising from 
unidirectional (stripe) SDW fluctuations at T>TSDW (see the supplementary material section SIV for 
details). The calculations depend on three parameters: the amplitude of the incoherent SDW fluctuations 
denoted DLRA, the correlation length x  and the size of the Fermi pockets. Comparisons of Figs 2g-h to 
2e-f reveal a nice qualitative and quantitative agreement. Modelling the change from Fig. 2f to 2e (or 
Fig. 2h to 2g) requires a substantial change in DLRA, as a decrease in the correlation length is not enough. 
In other words the amplitude of the incoherent SDW fluctuations in the paramagnetic/para-nematic state 
is itself a strong function of strain. 
 

Having established the role of strain in the electronic anisotropy observed in STS, we present a 

quantitative measure of the electronic anisotropy as a function of temperature. To do this, we track a 
constant area of the sample as a function of temperature while keeping the externally applied strain to 
zero. Shown in Fig. 3a-f are a sequence of STS images taken over the same area of the sample as a 
function of temperature starting from T=28K < TSDW, through T=52K > TS. These images are all taken 
under identical tunneling conditions, and each temperature is stabilized for approximately a day before 
the measurement is performed. The differential thermal expansion between the sample and substrate over 
this range of temperature is estimated to be <0.01% and can thus be neglected. The images show several 
interesting features. First, we note the presence of domain boundaries (visible as light stripes, marked 
with arrows for clarity) in Fig. 3a-e[16, 19, 20] (there is no domain wall visible in panel f). It is seen that 
as the temperature is raised, the position of the domain walls changes in such a way that the area of the 
minority domain decreases and the image contrast that defines the domain wall decreases.  Exactly at TS, 
domain walls completely disappear from the image (figure 3f). To confirm that domains disappear in a 
much larger field of view than that presented in figure 3, we have tracked ~ 500 nm x 500 nm areas of 


6

the sample across the structural transition temperature and have confirmed that the domain walls 
disappear at TS (see supplementary section VII for these images). Further, we have extensively scanned 
over 80 !"# of sample area both below and above TS and have never observed domain walls above TS. 
Our temperature dependent data for domain walls together with the strain dependence of the anisotropy 
provide definitive microscopic evidence that the true nematic transition is at the structural transition 
temperature TS and that there is a strong nematic susceptibility above TS. While a similar conclusion has 
previously been reached by transport measurements and has been conjectured by some of us, the new 
data provide microscopic and spectroscopic evidence that rules out scenarios where a true nematic 
transition occurs above TS.    
 

We next use the temperature-dependent dataset in Fig. 3 to quantify the anisotropy seen in STM 

as a function of temperature. For each temperature, we determine the magnitude of C4 symmetry breaking 
as in the analysis of Fig. 1 (see supplementary information section SIII) for the domain that survives 
across TS. We plot the resultant magnitude of the anisotropy as a function of temperature as the red dots 
in Fig. 3g. In NaFeAs the spin density wave transition temperature TSDW (41K) is clearly separated from 
the structural transition temperature TS (52K) allowing us to distinguish the effects of the different 
orderings on the nematic order parameter.  The most significant feature of this plot is the presence of a 
clear kink in the data just below the bulk TSDW. Several measures have been taken to minimize statistical 
and systematic sources of error in this plot. While the number of points on the curve is limited by the 
total data acquisition time (several months), each data point represents an average over several hundred 
defects in the field of view and thus has virtually no statistical error. Independent data sets have also been 
obtained during heating and cooling experiments with identical results, and additional data that shows 
the same result for the orthogonally oriented domain is shown in supplementary section VIII. The number 
of temperature data points we are able to obtain is constrained by the probability of tip changes at the 
elevated temperatures, and we optimize the experimental run time to keep the tip and sample conditions 
identical in the important temperature range of 25-55 K, eliminating matrix element changes as a source 
of error. Thus, the observed kink is a true feature of the data set. The observed sharp decrease near TSDW 
rather than TS is direct evidence that the electronic nematicity observed in the electronic structure is 
primarily driven by spin fluctuations in this iron-based compound. We note that a close examination of 
the experimentally determined anisotropy parameter shows that the kink occurs a few Kelvin below the 
bulk TSDW. Potential reasons for this include a slightly different surface TSDW and disorder-induced 
inhomogeneity in the locally measured TSDW.  
 

To understand the consequences of these measurements, we have developed a theoretical model 

to compute the QPI signal resulting from a Fermi surface reconstruction arising from either long-ranged 
stripe SDW order (at T<TSDW) or stripe SDW fluctuations (at T>TSDW) or a combination of the two. The 
model (see the supplementary material section SIV for details) involves a gap parameter DSDW 
parametrizing the amplitude of the fully coherent SDW order that sets in below TSDW, a gap parameter 
DLRA parametrizing incoherent SDW amplitude fluctuations (nematic fluctuations) at T>TSDW and the 
correlation length x introduced above. The results, shown in Fig 3g, confirm that a single model based 
on unidirectional SDW order and fluctuations can fully account for the experimentally observed 
anisotropy across different temperatures. To pinpoint whether the change observed at TSDW arises from 
the onset of coherent long ranged order or from a change in the amplitude of the (fluctuating plus 
coherent) gap we show two alternative calculations. In the first scenario, which highlights the impact of 
coherence factors, the magnitude of the total gap D2=D2SDW+D2LRA remains constant below TSDW but there 
is a transfer of incoherent spectral weight to coherent spectral weight as temperature is lowered, i.e. DSDW 
increases at the same rate as DLRA decreases. Then, the only change below TSDW is the appearance of 
coherence factors (via the anomalous, momentum off-diagonal Green’s function). In the second scenario, 


7

which highlights the effects of fluctuations, the fluctuating gap D2 increases as temperature is lowered 
due to an increasing DSDW and a constant DLRA. The modeling clearly demonstrates that the main cause 
of the rapid increase in the anisotropy parameter below TSDW is an increase in the magnitude of the total 
fluctuating gap D2=D2SDW+D2LRA, whereas the coherence factor effects arising from long-range SDW 
order play a minor role.  We have also modeled the strain dependence at T>TSDW by varying the 
fluctuating gap and the correlation length (see Supplementary Material section IV for details).  
 
 

We now study the entire doping and temperature phase diagram of the system NaFe1-xCoxAs. Fig. 

4a shows a real space STS scan of NaFe(1-x)Co(x<0.01)As at 6K, well within the long-ranged magnetically 
ordered phase (T<TSDW), showing several domain boundaries like those seen in the parent compound. 
Domain boundaries are observed only for dopings x < 0.02 in agreement with previous [53] specific heat 
and resistivity measurements that establish bulk long-range structural order. At higher doping, it becomes 
difficult to directly visualize the electronic anisotropy in real space due to the large number of dopants. 
However, we can study the prevalence of anisotropy in the images by studying their Fourier 
Transforms[19, 25] and observing their C2 or C4 symmetry. For regions of the phase diagram that display 
domains, measurements are conducted within a single domain. Figure 4c-i shows the evolution of the FT 
of STS images near the Fermi energy (cropped to one-half of the first Brillouin Zone) for different doping 
concentrations and temperatures. While we clearly observe C2 symmetry in most of the phase diagram, 
we have never observed domains or domain boundaries at dopings and temperatures outside the regime 
of long ranged SDW order (i.e. Fig. 4e-g). This indicates the disappearance of long-range order but the 
persistence of nematic fluctuations as doping is increased beyond the critical doping for the SDW order, 
similar to the phenomena we observed in the parent compound as temperature is increased above TS. A 
close examination of the FTs in Fig 4c-i shows that while the details of the patterns continuously evolve 
with doping, the wavevectors at which anisotropy is observed are fairly similar in magnitude across the 
phase diagram. ARPES measurements[58, 59] of the doping-dependent bandstructure in NaFe(1-x)Co(x)As 
show fairly small changes in the dispersions of the bands and the chemical potential from the parent 
compound to the overdoped side of the phase diagram. Our work on the parent compound described 
above shows that in order to get QPI features at wavevectors similar to experiment, it is essential to 
include band folding due to spin density wave order or fluctuations. This indicates that the anisotropy 
observed in our STS data comes primarily from spin order and fluctuations even for doped samples.  

 
Our doping dependent measurements show that electronic anisotropy exists both inside (Figure 

4e-g) and outside (Figure 4h) the superconducting dome. We do see changes in the strength and 
wavevectors of the anisotropy across TC (for example, comparing figure 4g and 4h), and detailed future 
measurements that track the same area of the sample across TC can help address the interplay between 
the superconducting gap and nematic fluctuations. For the highly overdoped, non-superconducting 
sample we see C4 symmetry in the FT, indicating the absence of any long-range nematic order or nematic 
fluctuations (Fig. 4i).  A detailed exploration of the phase diagram in this region can help in 
understanding the interplay between nematicity and superconductivity in these compounds[1, 10]. The 
co-existence of these two phenomena and how each of them responds to strain provides an interesting 
dynamic for further study, especially given the evidence for a nematic quantum critical point in the 
superconducting dome in some families of the pnictides[60]. 
 

In summary, we have introduced a new E-STS technique that enables investigation of the strain 

dependence of electronic properties with real-space atomic resolution. With this method we are able to 
experimentally distinguish between long-range electronic plus lattice nematic order (marked by the 
presence of domain walls and hysteresis under switching of strain) and purely electronic asymmetry due 


8

to fluctuations in the presence of strain (marked by C2 symmetry in the response to defects).  We showed 
that the dominant source of electronic nematic response is antiferromagnetic (stripe) spin fluctuations 
and found that the amplitude of the slow stripe fluctuations in the paramagnetic phase depends strongly 
on the magnitude of the actual strain felt by the electrons. We note that the energy scale associated with 
nematicity observed in STM remains several tens of meV even on the overdoped side, indicating that 
there is not a direct proportionality between superconducting TC and the energy scale associated with 
nematicity. At the same time, our STM measurements show a clear decrease in the intensity of the 
nematicity as a function of increasing doping, pointing to an interesting intertwining with 
superconducting order. By extending our E-STS measurements to the optimal and overdoped range iron-
based compounds, we can gain insight into the relationship between nematicity order, fluctuations and 
superconductivity.  
   
This work is supported by the National Science Foundation via grant DMR- 1610110 (E.F.A., A.N.). 
Salary and materials support is also provided by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research via grant 
number FA9550-16-1-0601 (E.R., A.N.P.). R.M.F. and X.W. are supported by the Office of Basic 
Energy Sciences, U.S. Department of Energy, under award DE-SC001233 6. X.W. is also supported by 
a Doctoral Dissertation Fellowship in University of Minnesota. and A.J.M. by the National Science 
Foundation under grant DMR-1308236. Work at IOPCAS is supported by NSF & MOST of China 
through Research Projects, as well as by the CAS External Cooperation Program of BIC 
(112111KYS820150017). 
 
 
 
 
 
 


9

 
 
Figure Captions: 
 
Figure 1: Elasto-STM in the nematic ordered state 
(a-e) STM images of NaFeAs at T=6K at various values of applied strain, obtained on the exact same 
area of the sample (white bar represents 10nm). Nematic order can be visualized as yellow, 
unidirectional streaks in the image. At this temperature, nematic domains exist, with the domain 
boundaries showing up as dark lines in the image. As the applied strain (proportional to the voltage 
Vstrain shown in the bottom of the panels) is changed in the sample, the domain walls move and reduce 
the area of one of the domains at the expense of the other. Imaging conditions V=+10 mV, I=100 pA. 
(f) Apparatus used to strain samples while STM is being performed on them.  (g) Plot of the ratio of the 
size of each of the domains in the field of view in images (a-e) as a function of applied strain. It is 
clearly seen that the motion of the domains exhibit hysteresis and domain pinning. (h) Intensity of the 
nematic anisotropy parameter as a function of the applied strain. Within experimental error the 
intensity is independent of strain. 
 
Figure 2: Elasto-STM in the para-nematic state 
(a-b) STM spectroscopy images of NaFeAs at T=54K > Ts over the same area of the sample at two 
values of applied strain, -200 V and +200 V respectively (white bar represents 20nm). Spectroscopy is 
performed at V=+20 mV and I=100 pA. It is seen that the rotational anisotropy is small at -200 V and 
largest at +200 V. (c-d) Absolute value of smoothed Fourier transform of the STS images with applied 
strain, -200V and +200V. While (c) is nearly C4 symmetric, (d) shows clear anisotropy. The overall 
magnitude of the response is also clearly smaller in (c). (e-f) Show difference plots obtained by rotating 
the FT in (c-d) by 90 degrees and subtracting them from the un-rotated FT (c-d), respectively. Non-zero 
values indicate C4 symmetry breaking. (g-h) Difference plots obtained from theoretical modeling of the 
QPI arising from unidirectional SDW fluctuations, with (g) having smaller incoherent fluctuation 
amplitude than (h).  
 
Figure 3: Nematic domains and the driving force behind electronic nematicity 
(a-f) STM spectroscopy images of NaFeAs at various temperatures over the same area of the sample 
(white bar represents 20nm). Spectroscopy is performed at V=+10 mV and I=100 pA. At low 
temperature, nematic domains are seen in the sample as straight lines, and the orientation of the 
nematic order rotates by ~ 90 degrees across the domain boundary as is also seen in the Fourier images 
of each side of the domain (inset to (a)). As the temperature is raised, the domains move and eventually 
vanish at the structural phase transition TS=52 K. (g) Nematic anisotropy measured as a function of 
temperature (red dots, note that the data are averaged over defects as described in supplementary 
material section SIII) and calculated from theory as described in text (solid curves). It is seen that a 
sharp kink exists at the magnetic transition temperature TSDW=41 K, and most of the intensity in the 
nematic signal picks up only below the magnetic transition temperature. The key ingredient in the 
optimum theoretical fit (blue line) is the increase in the total SDW gap (i.e. both coherent and 
incoherent contributions) below TSDW, as opposed to the appearance of coherent factors only (green 
curve). Note that removing the coherence factors (orange curve) barely changes the behavior of the 
blue curve. 
 
Figure 4: Doping dependence of nematic order and fluctuations in NaFe1-xCoxAs 
(a) STM spectroscopy images of NaFe1.99Co0.01As showing the presence of domain structures (white 
bar represents 40nm). A superconducting gap (not shown) is also observed at this temperature. (b) 
Phase diagram of observed nematic domains and nematic anisotropy from STM measurements, 


10

superposed with bulk measurements of the phase diagram. We note that domains are only observed in 
STM where bulk orthorhombic order is known to exist (orange shaded region). In the striped region, 
domains and superconducting gaps are observed to coexist in space by STM. Nematic anisotropy is 
observed across the phase diagram and only disappears for samples that are not superconducting. (c-i) 
Nematic anisotropy as a function of doping in Fourier space. Shown are a sequence of Fourier 
transforms of spectroscopy images obtained on NaFe1-xCoxAs for various values of x. All images are 
obtained at V=+10 mV. It is seen that the shape of the nematic structure in Fourier space evolves with 
doping, but the anisotropy itself persists across the superconducting dome and only disappears for 
x=0.12 which is beyond the superconducting dome. 
 
 
 
 
 


11

 
References 
 
 
 
 
1. 
Fradkin, E., et al., Nematic Fermi Fluids in Condensed Matter Physics. Annual Review of 
Condensed Matter Physics, 2010. 1(1): p. 153-178. 

2. 
Chu, J.H., et al., In-Plane Resistivity Anisotropy in an Underdoped Iron Arsenide 
Superconductor. Science, 2010. 329(5993): p. 824-826. 

3. 
Chu, J.H., et al., Divergent Nematic Susceptibility in an Iron Arsenide Superconductor. Science, 
2012. 337(6095): p. 710-712. 

4. 
Kuo, H.-H., et al., Ubiquitous signatures of nematic quantum criticality in optimally doped Fe-
based superconductors. Science, 2016. 352(6288): p. 958-962. 

5. 
Mirri, C., et al., Hysteretic behavior in the optical response of the underdoped Fe-arsenide 
Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 in the electronic nematic phase. Physical Review B, 2014. 89(6): p. 060501. 

6. 
Mirri, C., et al., Nematic-driven anisotropic electronic properties of underdoped detwinned 
Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 revealed by optical spectroscopy. Physical Review B, 2014. 90(15): p. 
155125. 

7. 
Du, R.R., et al., Strongly anisotropic transport in higher two-dimensional Landau levels. Solid 
State Communications, 1999. 109(6): p. 389-394. 

8. 
Xia, J., et al., Evidence for a fractionally quantized Hall state with anisotropic longitudinal 
transport. Nat Phys, 2011. 7(11): p. 845-848. 

9. 
Borzi, R.A., et al., Formation of a Nematic Fluid at High Fields in Sr3Ru2O7. Science, 2007. 
315(5809): p. 214-217. 

10. 
Vojta, M., Lattice symmetry breaking in cuprate superconductors: stripes, nematics, and 
superconductivity. Advances in Physics, 2009. 58(6): p. 699-820. 

11. 
Daou, R., et al., Broken rotational symmetry in the pseudogap phase of a high-Tc 
superconductor. Nature, 2010. 463(7280): p. 519-522. 

12. 
Mesaros, A., et al., Topological Defects Coupling Smectic Modulations to Intra-Unit-Cell 
Nematicity in Cuprates. Science, 2011. 333(6041): p. 426-430. 

13. 
Li, Q., et al., Two-Dimensional Superconducting Fluctuations in Stripe-Ordered 
La1.875Ba0.125CuO4. Physical Review Letters, 2007. 99(6): p. 067001. 

14. 
Tranquada, J.M., et al., Evidence for Stripe Correlations of Spins and Holes in Copper-Oxide 
Superconductors. Nature, 1995. 375(6532): p. 561-563. 

15. 
Xia, J., et al., Polar Kerr-Effect Measurements of the High-Temperature YBa2Cu3O6+x 
Superconductor: Evidence for Broken Symmetry near the Pseudogap Temperature. Physical 
Review Letters, 2008. 100(12): p. 127002. 

16. 
Chuang, T.M., et al., Nematic Electronic Structure in the "Parent" State of the Iron-Based 
Superconductor Ca(Fe1-xCox)2As2. Science, 2010. 327(5962): p. 181-184. 

17. 
Gallais, Y., et al., Observation of Incipient Charge Nematicity in Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 Physical 
Review Letters, 2013. 111(26): p. 267001. 

18. 
Nakajima, M., et al., Unprecedented anisotropic metallic state in undoped iron arsenide 
BaFe2As2 revealed by optical spectroscopy. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2011. 108(30): p. 
12238-42. 

19. 
Rosenthal, E.P., et al., Visualization of electron nematicity and unidirectional antiferroic 
fluctuations at high temperatures in NaFeAs. Nature Physics, 2014. 10(3): p. 225-232. 

20. 
Song, C.L., et al., Direct Observation of Nodes and Twofold Symmetry in FeSe Superconductor. 
Science, 2011. 332(6036): p. 1410-1413. 


12

21. 
Yi, M., et al., Symmetry-breaking orbital anisotropy observed for detwinned Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2 
above the spin density wave transition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 2011. 108(17): p. 6878-6883. 

22. 
Yi, M., et al., Electronic reconstruction through the structural and magnetic transitions in 
detwinned NaFeAs. New Journal of Physics, 2012. 14(7): p. 073019. 

23. 
Lu, X., et al., Nematic spin correlations in the tetragonal state of uniaxial-strained 
BaFe2−xNixAs2. Science, 2014. 345(6197): p. 657-660. 

24. 
Dusza, A., et al., Anisotropic charge dynamics in detwinned Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2. Epl, 2011. 93(3): 
p. 37002. 

25. 
Allan, M.P., et al., Anisotropic impurity states, quasiparticle scattering and nematic transport 
in underdoped Ca(Fe1-xCox)(2)As-2. Nature Physics, 2013. 9(4): p. 220-224. 

26. 
Zhang, Q., et al., Neutron-Scattering Measurements of Spin Excitations in LaFeAsO and 
(BaFe0.953Co0.047)2As2: Evidence for a Sharp Enhancement of Spin Fluctuations by Nematic 
Order. Physical Review Letters, 2015. 114(5): p. 057001. 

27. 
Tanatar, M.A., et al., Uniaxial-strain mechanical detwinning of CaFe2As2 and BaFe2As2 
crystals: Optical and transport study. Physical Review B, 2010. 81(18): p. 184508. 

28. 
Wang, A.F., et al., A crossover in the phase diagram of NaFe1-xCoxAs determined by electronic 
transport measurements. New Journal of Physics, 2013. 15: p. 043048. 

29. 
Watson, M.D., et al., Emergence of the nematic electronic state in FeSe. Physical Review B, 
2015. 91(15): p. 155106. 

30. 
Baek, S.H., et al., Orbital-driven nematicity in FeSe. Nat Mater, 2015. 14(2): p. 210-214. 

31. 
Li, W., et al., Electronically driven nematicity in FeSe Films on SrTiO3. ArXiv:1509.01892, 
2015. 

32. 
Johnston, D.C., The puzzle of high temperature superconductivity in layered iron pnictides and 
chalcogenides. Advances in Physics, 2010. 59(6): p. 803-1061. 

33. 
Cai, P., et al., Doping Dependence of the Anisotropic Quasiparticle Interference in NaFe1-

xCoxAs Iron-Based Superconductors. Physical Review Letters, 2014. 112(12): p. 127001. 

34. 
Song, C.-L., et al., Suppression of Superconductivity by Twin Boundaries in FeSe. Physical 
Review Letters, 2012. 109(13): p. 137004. 

35. 
Fernandes, R.M., A.V. Chubukov, and J. Schmalian, What drives nematic order in iron-based 
superconductors? Nat Phys, 2014. 10(2): p. 97-104. 

36. 
Böhmer, A.E., et al., Origin of the Tetragonal-to-Orthorhombic Phase Transition in FeSe: A 
Combined Thermodynamic and NMR Study of Nematicity. Physical Review Letters, 2015. 
114(2): p. 027001. 

37. 
Chen, C.C., et al., Orbital order and spontaneous orthorhombicity in iron pnictides. Physical 
Review B, 2010. 82(10): p. 100504(R). 

38. 
Kontani, H., T. Saito, and S. Onari, Origin of orthorhombic transition, magnetic transition, and 
shear-modulus softening in iron pnictide superconductors: Analysis based on the orbital 
fluctuations theory. Physical Review B, 2011. 84(2): p. 024528. 

39. 
Lv, W.C. and P. Phillips, Orbitally and magnetically induced anisotropy in iron-based 
superconductors. Physical Review B, 2011. 84(17): p. 174512. 

40. 
Avci, S., et al., Magnetically driven suppression of nematic order in an iron-based 
superconductor. Nat Commun, 2014. 5. 

41. 
Bohmer, A.E., et al., Superconductivity-induced re-entrance of the orthorhombic distortion in 
Ba1-xKxFe2As2. Nat Commun, 2015. 6. 

42. 
Allred, J.M., et al., Double-Q spin-density wave in iron arsenide superconductors. Nat Phys, 
2016. 12(5): p. 493-498. 

43. 
Fang, C., et al., Theory of electron nematic order in LaFeAsO. Physical Review B, 2008. 
77(22): p. 224509. 


13

44. 
Fernandes, R.M., et al., Preemptive nematic order, pseudogap, and orbital order in the iron 
pnictides. Physical Review B, 2012. 85(2): p. 024534. 

45. 
Mazin, I.I. and M.D. Johannes, A key role for unusual spin dynamics in ferropnictides. Nature 
Physics, 2009. 5(2): p. 141-145. 

46. 
Xu, C., M. Muller, and S. Sachdev, Ising and spin orders in the iron-based superconductors. 
Physical Review B, 2008. 78(2): p. 020501(R). 

47. 
Liang, S., A. Moreo, and E. Dagotto, Nematic State of Pnictides Stabilized by Interplay between 
Spin, Orbital, and Lattice Degrees of Freedom. Physical Review Letters, 2013. 111(4): p. 
047004. 

48. 
Kasahara, S., et al., Electronic nematicity above the structural and superconducting transition 
in BaFe2(As1-xPx)2. Nature, 2012. 486(7403): p. 382-385. 

49. 
Iye, T., et al., Emergence of Orbital Nematicity in the Tetragonal Phase of BaFe2(As1−xPx)2. 
Journal of the Physical Society of Japan, 2015. 84(4): p. 043705. 

50. 
E., T., et al., Optical evidence of broken C4 symmetry across optimal doping in 
BaFe2(As1−xPx) 2. arXiv:1507.03981v2, 2015. 

51. 
Baek, S.H., et al., Nematicity and in-plane anisotropy of superconductivity in beta-FeSe 
detected by 77Se nuclear magnetic resonance. Physical Review B, 2016. 93(18): p. 180502. 

52. 
Wang, X.C., et al., The superconductivity at 18 K in LiFeAs system. Solid State 
Communications, 2008. 148(11-12): p. 538-540. 

53. 
Wang, A.F., et al., Phase diagram and calorimetric properties of NaFe1-xCoxAs. Physical 
Review B, 2012. 85(22): p. 224521. 

54. 
Carlson, E.W., et al., Hysteresis and Noise from Electronic Nematicity in High-Temperature 
Superconductors. Physical Review Letters, 2006. 96(9): p. 097003. 

55. 
Tomić, M., et al., In-plane uniaxial stress effects on the structural and electronic properties of 
BaFe2As2 and CaFe2As2. Physical Review B, 2013. 87(17): p. 174503. 

56. 
Gastiasoro, M.N., P.J. Hirschfeld, and B.M. Andersen, Origin of electronic dimers in the spin-
density wave phase of Fe-based superconductors. Physical Review B, 2014. 89(10): p. 100502. 

57. 
Knolle, J., et al., Quasiparticle Interference in the Spin-Density Wave Phase of Iron-Based 
Superconductors. Physical Review Letters, 2010. 104(25): p. 257001. 

58. 
Cui, S.T., et al., Evolution of the band structure of superconducting NaFeAs from optimally 
doped to heavily overdoped Co substitution using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy. 
Physical Review B, 2012. 86(15): p. 155143. 

59. 
Ye, Z.R., et al., Extraordinary Doping Effects on Quasiparticle Scattering and Bandwidth in 
Iron-Based Superconductors. Physical Review X, 2014. 4(3): p. 031041. 

60. 
Analytis, J.G., et al., Transport near a quantum critical point in BaFe2(As1-xPx)2. Nat Phys, 
2014. 10(3): p. 194-197. 

 


+120V
0V
-120V

.2
.4
.6
.8

-200

-100

0

+100

+200

Domain Area Ratio

-200

-100

0

+100

+200

Anisotropy Parameter

Strain (V)
Strain (V)

+250V

a b

a
b

Low
High

0

.15

-250V

B
 

A
C
D
E

F
G
H

Figure 1


-200V

Low
High
Low
High
Low
High
Low
High

+200V

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

Figure 2


10
20
30
40
50
60
70

.2

.4

.6

.8

1

Anisotropy Parameter

Temperature (K)

34K
38K
42K

48K
52K

28K

80

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

No Coherence Factor

With Coherence Factor

Experiment

Only Coherence Factor

●

B
A
C
D

E
F
G

Figure 3


50K
30K
10K

Increasing Co Content

c
d
e
g
f

TSC

TSDW

Ts

h
i

Long-range Nematic Order With Domains

Nematic Fluctuation, No Domains

No Nematicity, No Domains

No Domains

Domains

Superconductivity

6.4K

x<0.010

Domain

Boundary

Figure 4

x=0.018
x=0.020
x=0.050
x=0.000

x=0.120

x=0.050

x<0.010

B
A

C
D
E
F
G

I

H


Supplementary Material 
 
Authors: Erick F. Andrade1, Ayelet D. Notis1, Ethan P. Rosenthal1, Xiaoyu Wang2, Lingyi Xing3, 
Xiancheng Wang3, Changqing Jin3, Rafael M. Fernandes2, Andy J. Millis1, Abhay N. Pasupathy1 

 

Affiliations: 1Department of Physics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. 2School of Physics and 
Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. 3Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed 
Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. 
 
I. STM Data acquisition and image processing 
 
STM "#/"% maps were obtained using standard lock-in techniques with oscillation frequencies 
between 1.5 and 1.8 kHz. To generate Fourier space images shown in the main text, the following 
procedures are performed: 

(a) The real space image is affine transformed to remove any scan drift in the image 
(b) A two-dimensional magnitude FFT is computed from the transformed real space image in 

MATLAB which assumes periodic boundaries. 

(c) The FFT image in (b) contains a spike at & = ( due to the nonzero average value of the 

"#/"% over the entire image. Since this value plays no role in our analysis of QPI or 
anisotropy, it is removed by setting the & = ( pixel to the average of its nearest 
neighbors. 

(d) The FT in (c) is rotated to make the  &) axis horizontal 
(e) The FT in (d) suffers from a noise that arises from the random positions of defects that 

give rise to QPI signals. Taking the magnitude of the FT provides some improvement, 
however, significant amplitude noise exists in the FT even after taking the magnitude. 
Two operations are performed to improve the signal to noise. First the FT is mirror 
symmetrized along the principal axes. If *+(&, .) represents the magnitude of the FT 
after (d), the mirror symmetrization generates the FT 

*+0(&, .) = 1*+(&, .) + *+34&)&, .5 + *+ 64&7&, .8 + *+ 64&)4&7&, .89 /4 

with 4; denoting a mirror reflection along axis <. Second, a Gaussian filter is applied to 
generate the final FT: *+=(&) = ∫ *+0(&?)@(& − &?)B&′ where @(&) = DEFG/HIG, J is .7% 
of the 1 Fe first Brillion zone, and the filter size is 2% of the 1 Fe first Brillion zone. 

 
 
II. Low Temperature E-STM Movie 
 
We acquired a total of 68 LDOS images at a bias of +10 mV while varying the strain from -250V 
to +250V and back down to -250V. We manually line up the images with each other using the 
defect positions (which do not change with strain) and compile them to produce a movie. 
 
 
III. Quantifying Anisotropy in STS images 
 


We outline below the procedures used to calculate the C4 anisotropy in STS images in Fig. 1-3 of 
the main text. In STS scans where the defect density is low (such as those in Fig. 1 and 3 of the 
main text) and the real space positions of the defects can be clearly identified, it is easy to directly 
identify the real space QPI signal corresponding to a single defect. To do this, we first identify 
manually the positions of each one of the defects in real space. We crop a small <10nm square  
region around each identified defect and average all of the cropped regions together to produce 
an average real space QPI signal associated with a single defect. To quantify the anisotropy in this 
average image, we rotate the image by 90 degrees (r→r̃) and subtract it from itself, to generate 
a real space “difference plot”. Any non-zero value in the difference plot comes from C4 symmetry 
breaking in the original image. We then obtain the anisotropy parameter η by summing the 
absolute value of each pixel in the difference plot and normalizing by the sum of absolute values 
in the original image before rotation and subtraction. Mathematically, 
 

M(.) =

∑ |*+(r, .) − *+(r̃, .)|
?
r

∑ |*+(r, .) + *+(r̃, .)|
?r

 

 
where r̃ is the 90 degree rotation of r about the P direction and the prime indicates the sum over 
the smaller region of the average defect.  
 
In the presence of large numbers of defects where individual defects cannot be identified with 
certainty, as well as cases where the QPI signal is weak relative to other spectroscopic features 
present in the sample, we cannot directly identify the anisotropic signature due to a single defect 
experimentally without additional modeling. This is the case in NaFeAs at high temperature in 
the presence of strain (Fig. 2 of the main text). In this situation, we work in Fourier space and 
consider the FT of an entire STS image *+=(q,.). To calculate the anisotropy in such an image, 
we rotate the image by 90 degrees (q→q0) and subtract it from itself to generate a Fourier space 
difference plot. We discuss the relationship between these experimentally calculated measures 
of anisotropy and theory in section V below. 
 
IV. Theoretical Overview 
 
The relevant experimental quantity is the derivative with respect to bias voltage Vbias of the 
sample-tip tunneling current I (dI/dV), measured as a function of position r on the surface of the 
sample. In an ideal sample the measured quantity would have the full translational and rotational 
symmetry of the lattice, but in the presence of defects at positions Ri the measured quantity 
varies with position in a manner which is believed to be proportional to the defect-induced 
change *n(r,.) in the local electronic density of states (LDOS) at position r and energy .=eVbias. 
The LDOS in turn is related to the defect scattering potentials Vi by an electronic susceptibility R 
that encodes information about the electronic physics and is discussed in more detail below: 
 

*+(S, T) = ∑ R(S − 4U, .)
V
%(4U)               (S1) 

 
Here we have assumed (as is the case in the experiment) that the resolution is on the scale of the 
unit cell size or greater so we may take the susceptibility to be translation-invariant and neglect 


local field corrections.  For simplicity we also assume, following standard practice in the STS field, 
that each defect is point-like and gives rise to the same scattering potential and that the 
scattering is weak enough that a linear-response ansatz for the electronic response suffices.  
 
The physical information is carried by the response function R, which describes the electronic 
standing waves created around each defect. The interference of the standing waves from 
different randomly positioned defects creates complicated patterns. We have found by modeling 
situations with different densities that if the pattern associated with an individual defect cannot 
be isolated, the procedure of smoothing as described in section I above and then computing the 
difference of the image and its 90 degree rotation provides the best way to extract information 
about R.   
 
Model:  We use a four-band model of the pnictide Fermi surface with two zone-center hole-like 
Fermi pockets, labeled by WX and WH, and two elliptical electron pockets, labeled by Y and Y. In 
the Brillouin zone appropriate to the single-Fe unit cell, the two electron pockets are centered at 
the QZ = ([, 0) and  Q] = (0, [) points.  
 
The band dispersions of the two hole pockets are given in terms of a function ℎ3_`5 = −a` +

b c2_`(1 − cos iZ) +

H

jk (1 − cos i])l as  

 

m`nk = 1

2 oℎ3_`5 + ℎ( 1

_`

)p + 1

2 qoℎ3_`5 − ℎ( 1

_`

)p

H

+ rH 

m`Gk = 1

2 oℎ3_`5 + ℎ( 1

_`

)p − 1

2 qoℎ3_`5 − ℎ( 1

_`

)p

H

+ rH 

while the band dispersions of the electron pockets are  

msktQ) = −au + b c2_u(1 − cos iZ) + 2

_u

(1 − cos i])l 

mvktQ7 = −au + b c 2

_u

(1 − cos iZ) + 2_u(1 − cos i])l 

The parameters b = 4, a` = −0.17,_` = −2, r = 0.12, au = 0.32,  and _u = 0.4 are chosen 
so that the resulting Fermi surface resembles the Fermi surface of NaFeAs measured by ARPES 
[3]. The Fermi surface is shown in Fig. S1. Here, all energy scales are measured in units of my ≈
1/3 eV, such that the bottom of the electron band is about 100 meV below the Fermi level. 
 
To compute the effect of SDW order and fluctuations on this Fermi surface we follow Refs. [1,2]. 
We allow for the possibility of long-range stripe-like spin density wave order with a single 
ordering vector. For definiteness we choose the ordering wave-vector to be Qx = ([, 0). SDW 
order is characterized by an order parameter 〈|(r)〉 = |~•Ä. A non-zero  |~•Ä couples the wave-
vector k to k+Qx,  in particular mixing the  X electron band to the two hole bands  (for simplicity 
we include only the coupling to the band WX with the larger Fermi surface) and opening a gap, 
thereby changing the dispersion. We also allow for the possibility that long-range order is 


destroyed by phase fluctuations, 〈|(r)〉 → 0, so that there is no coherent coupling between k 
and k+Qx while fluctuations in the amplitude 〈|(r)H〉 ≡ |ÇÉÑ

H
 remain non-vanishing, so that a 

“pseudogap” is opened. We represent this situation mathematically via an 8x8 matrix electron 
propagator ÖI including both k and k+Qx terms as 
 
 

ÖI =

⎝

⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎛

â`n
0
0
0
0
Jä
0
0

0
â0`n
0
0
Jäã
0
0
0

0
0
â`G
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
â0`G
0
0
0
0

0
Jäã
0
0
âs
0
0
0

Jä
0
0
0
0
â0s
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
âv
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
â0v⎠

⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎞

 

where the normal (g) and anomalous (f) parts of ÖI are: 

â`n(k, .) = o. − m`nk − |~•Ä

H
+ |ÇÉÑ

H

. − m̃sk + èêEXp

EX

â0s(k, .) = o. − m̃sk − |~•Ä

H
+ |ÇÉÑ

H

. − m`nk + èêEXp

EX

âv(k, .) = (. − mvk)EX

â`G(k, .) = 3. − m`Gk5

EX 

 

ä(k, .) =
|~•Ä

3. − m`nk5(. − m̃sk) − (|~•Ä

H
+ |ÇÉÑ

H
) 

J denotes the electron spin and a tilde denotes the same function evaluated at k+Qx. 
 
Following Ref. [2], we have also included a phenomenological broadening parameter ê measured 
in units of the lattice spacing < and related to the correlation length of the phase fluctuations. 
 
The extra terms in âs,`n express the effect of coherent and incoherent spin fluctuations in 
opening up a gap, while f expresses the effect of coherent backscattering associated with long 
ranged order. We distinguish the fully normal phase (|~•Ä = |ÇÉÑ = 0), the fluctuating nematic 
phase (|~•Ä = 0, |ÇÉÑ ≠ 0) and the ordered phase (|~•Ä ≠ 0, |ÇÉÑ ≠ 0). 
 
QPI calculation, real space: we now use standard formulas to compute the change in density of 
states, *+(r, .),  due to a non-magnetic  impurity located at the origin.  In the first Born 
approximation we have *+(r, .) = íì[ïñ(r, . + è*)óñ(-r,. + è*)] with G(r) the Fourier 
transform of the G defined above, M the square of the matrix element linking the STM tip to the 
band states, and V the impurity scattering (all bold faced quantities are 8x8 matrices in the 
reduced zone defined above). We make the simplifying assumptions that the impurity scattering 
potential and STM matrix elements are momentum and band independent (connecting all 


momenta to all momenta and all bands to all bands, with equal amplitudes). Carrying out the 
sum one finds 
 

 

 

 

Figure S1: Fermi surface for the four-band model, paramagnetic phase. 

 

*+(r, .) = − %ô

[
lim
ù→yû ( ü †ü ÖV°I(r, . + è*)

V°

¢ £ü Ö§•I(−r, . + è*)

§•

¶ − * ↔ −*)

I

 

where the Roman indices denote elements of the Ö matrix defined above.  Carrying out the sum 
over elements and spin degrees of freedom we find (the 2 is from the spin sum) 
 

*+(r, .) = − 2%ô

[
lim
ù→yû (*+X(r, . + è*) + *+H(r, . + è*) − * ↔ −*) 

 
 

*+X(r, .) = ü3âV(r, . + è*) + â0V (r, . + è*)DVQ®⋅r53â°(-r, . + è*) + â0°(-r, . + è*) DEVQ®⋅r5

V°

 

 
 

*+H(r, .) = 2(1 + ™´¨3≠Z ∙ S))(ä(r, . + è*) + äã(r, . + è*) 5 6ä(-r, . + è*) + äã(-r, . + è*)8 
 
 
*+(r, .) defined in this way may be directly compared to the experimentally determined 
“cropped” QPI associated with a single impurity. In Fig. 2 we used êEX = 0, |ÇÉÑ = 0.05, (panel 
g) and |ÇÉÑ = 0.1 (panel h). 
 

-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

γ1

γ2

x

y


The temperature dependence of anisotropy parameter results shown in Fig. 3g were obtained 
using a mean-field like ansatz for the magnetic correlation length and the mean-field order 
parameter: 

êEX = êy

EXqí − í∞

í~ − í∞

; |~•Ä = |yq1 − í

í∞

 

 
with í∞ = 40≤, í~ = 52≤, êy = 20, |y = 0.14 and |ÇÉÑ = 0.052. 
 
To model the momentum space data we Fourier transform the real-space calculations and take 
the absolute value.  
 
V. Measuring experimental QPI and comparison with theory 
 
The experimental QPI signal can be determined in one of two ways – it can either be determined 
from the FT of a single defect, or from the FT of a large area map that includes many defects. 
While the two procedures give similar results, they differ in some important respects. Figure S2 
illustrates this difference. Shown in area map of NaFeAs at taken at 10meV conditions at 26K. 
This image is chosen since individual defects can be clearly distinguished from each other. Thus, 
it is relatively simple to crop around each defect and average together the QPI signal from all the 
cropped areas to generate the QPI signal associated with a single defect. The result of this 
procedure is shown in the inset of Fig. S2a. The corresponding Fourier transforms (FT) of Fig. S2a 
and inset S2a are shown in panels S2b and S2c respectively. The FTs have been cropped to half 
of the 1 Fe BZ of NaFeAs. As can be seen, the FTs have many similarities, but there are also several 
differences in the two FTs. In particular, the central “stripe” seen in the FT of the full real space 
image looks different in the FT of the average defect, where it shows up as two separated regions 
of intensity. The difference in the two procedures is largely due to the fact that when the FT is 
taken of an entire image with several defects, one is in effect adding together signals from defects 
that are distributed in space, each of which gives rise to a phase factor from the location of the 
defect. The sum of these phases is in general a strong k-dependent function that depends on the 
distribution of defects in space. In practice, this factor is mostly (but not fully) spherically 
symmetric. Thus, Fourier space difference plots of the QPI signal extracted in these two different 
ways are quite similar to each other (but not identical) as shown in inset S2b and inset S2c. 
 

 


Figure S2: a, ~100nm real space spectroscopic image take at 10meV and at 26K. Inset 8.3nm image showing the average of all 
the defects in image a. b, Fourier transform of real space image a from –π/2a0 to π/2a0 with inset showing the resulting 
difference plot. c, Fourier transform of average defect image in inset a from –π/2a0 to π/2a0 with inset showing the resulting 
difference plot. 
 
 
 
 
The theory for QPI that we (and others) use refers to the scattering pattern in k-space (or real 
space) generated by a single impurity, and thus the true comparison should be made to the 
average defect FT. Indeed, the low temperature QPI from theory (Fig. S3a) matches quite well 
with the single-defect experimental QPI pattern (Fig. S3b). The theory calculation is performed 
for a model as described above with parameters êEX = 0 and |ÇÉÑ = 0.1. The bright points 
along the qy directions (green arrows in Fig. S3a-b) as well as the outer features that run parallel 
to the center bright points (purple arrow in Fig. S3a-b) are both reproduced in theory. The center 
bright points along the qy direction (green arrow Fig. S3a-b) have a slightly different scattering 
vectors lengths with the experiment having a smaller vector length when compared to theory, 
falling within a .03π/a0 range of each other. The outer features (purple arrow Fig. S3a-b) are 
father from the center in qx then what is seen in experiment, falling within a .1π/a0 range. While 
theory doesn’t capture all the details seen in experimental QPI, it indeed captures the import 
scattering vectors from the band structure near the Fermi level as discussed in greater detail in 
ref. [1]. 
 

 

Figure S3: a, Theoretical QPI calculation from –π/2a0 to π/2a0 with inset showing the resulting difference plot. 
b, Fourier transform of average defect image in inset a from –π/2a0 to π/2a0 with inset showing the resulting difference plot.   
 
VI. Nematic Anisotropy Coupled to Induced Strain 
 
Shown in Fig. S4 is a sequence of STS images taken over the same region of the parent NaFeAs 
sample at different values of the applied strain at 54K. The strain is varied starting from -200V 
going up to +200V and then reversing back to -200V. STS images are shown at three biases: 


+10mV, +20mV, and +30mV. All images are obtained under the same tunneling conditions (Vset=-
50mV, I=-100pA). Anisotropy in the images shows up as white streaks in the images that are 
oriented nearly vertically. The overall magnitude of the anisotropy is strongly reduced from its 
low temperature value in all the images. Considering figures S4a-e taken at a bias voltage of +10 
mV, it is seen that the anisotropy is maximal at a strain voltage of +200V (Fig. S4c) while it is 
nearly absent at -200V (Fig S4a and e). The anisotropy is seen to be a continuous function of strain 
with no domains appearing at any strain value. The images also show no evidence for hysteresis. 
Similar behavior is seen in the +20mV STS scans (Fig. S4f-j) and +30mV STS scans (Fig. S4k-o). The 
overall magnitude of the anisotropy is small below -10mV and above +30 mV.  
 

 

Figure S4: a-e, Real space, 10mV E-STS scans at 54K progressing from maximal applied compressive strain at -200V to maximal 
applied tensile strain at +200V and back to maximum applied compressive strain at -200V. f-j, 20 mV E-STS scans for same 
conditions as a-e. k-o, 30mV E-STS scans for same conditions as a-e.  

 
VII. Domain Wall Disappearance at TS 
 
In our temperature-dependent measurements shown in figure 3, we have displayed areas that 
are about 100 nm x 100 nm, and have observed that domain walls disappear precisely at Ts in 
this region. To address whether this disappearance of the domain walls is true across the entire 
sample, we have performed the following additional measurements: 
(a) To look at larger areas, we have scanned areas > 500 nm x 500 nm across the structural 
transition, which is at the limit of our STM scan range while keeping atomic registry with 
temperature. A subset of these images is shown in figure S5. The images in Fig. S5a-b show 
effectively the same area of the sample at 45K and 49K (below TS). We can clearly see domain 


boundaries (>20) appear as lines on these images, and we also see interesting domain wall 
motion as a function of temperature just below TS (which is not seen at very low temperature). 
The image shown in figure S5c is taken above TS and it is clear that there are no domain walls in 
the figure. This extends the statistics of figure 3 to a much larger number of domain walls, and 
we indeed see that all the domain walls are absent above TS. 
 
(b) To get even better statistics on the presence of domain walls, we scan multiple areas of the 
sample at each temperature.  The fine scan limit of our STM is between 1-1.5 µm (depending on 
temperature) and we can futher move around macroscopically on the sample to different 
locations with coarse motors. We have scanned  (conservative estimate) about 80 µm2 on the 
parent compound of NaFeAs across tens of samples at temperatures just below (temperatures 
that range from 3-7 K below TS) and above (temperatures that range from 1-7 K above TS) TS. 
From our measurements just below TS we find that the average size of the domain is about 0.05 
square microns. On the other hand, we have never seen any domains above TS in all of our 
measurements. If we assume a Poisson distribution of the density of domain walls, our 
observation of no domain walls implies that the probability that domain walls exist above TS (but 
we have missed them in all our measurements so far) is < 10-6.  
 

 

 
Figure S5: a-c, STM images at below (a,b) and above (c) TS showing the evolution of domain walls with temperature. Below TS, 
numerous (>20) domain walls are observed, which are visualized as curved lines on these images. Domains are observed to 
shrink or grow depending on the orientation of their anisotropy. No domain walls are observed above TS. 

 
VIII. Temperature dependence of anisotropy parameter 
 
The temperature dependence of the anisotropy parameter in figure 3g is based on the STS maps 
in figures 3a-f. For temperatures below TS, two domains are seen in the STS maps, and the data 
points shown in figure 3g are based on the domain that survives above TS as shown in figure S6a. 
 
For the domain that disappears at TS, we can analyze the anisotropy parameter as a function of 
temperature up to the highest temperature at which the domain is observed.  The results of this 
analysis are shown in figure S6b as red crosses, together with the existing data points from figure 
3g of the main text (open circles). We can see that the data for both domains lie almost identically 


on each other, indicating that the sharp drop in intensity is seen for both domain orientations 
near the magnetic transition. Additionally, the analysis of domains in both directions also 
removes any uncertainty due to anisotropic tip shape. 
 
 

 

 
Figure S6: a STM images below (left) and above (right) TS (identical to figure 3a and 3f of the main text respectively) showing 
that one of the domains survives above TS. b Plot of the anisotropy parameter extracted from each of the domains. The blue 
crosses correspond to the domain that survives above TS while the red dots correspond to the domain that disappears at TS. 
Both data sets show a sharp drop in intensity near the magnetic transition temperature (~40 K) rather than the structural 
transition temperature (~ 51 K). 

 
 
 
References 
 
[1] E.P. Rosenthal et al, Visualization of electron nematicity and unidirectional antiferroic 
fluctuations at high temperatures in NaFeAs, Nature Physics 10, 225-232 (2014) 
[2] P.A. Lee, T.M. Rice, and P.W. Anderson, Fluctuation Effects at a Peierls Transition, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 31, 462 (1973) 
[3] Y. Zhang et al, Symmetry breaking via orbital-dependent reconstruction of electronic structure 
in detwinned NaFeAs, Phys. Rev. B 85, 085121 (2012) 
 
 


