1

Complementary Quantum Logic Family Using
Josephson Junctions and Quantum Phase-Slip
Junctions

Uday S. Goteti, Student Member, IEEE Michael C. Hamilton, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this article, we explore a new set of circuits,
that incorporate both single-flux-quantum and quantized charge-
based complementary quantum logic circuits. Circuits that con-
vert single-flux quantum voltage pulses to quantized charge
pulses and vice versa are introduced that lead to circuits that
simplify logic and integration operations of individual flux and
charge based logic circuits. These include fan-out circuits that
enable single flux input to several charge outputs and control gate
circuit with charge input controlling flux output. The operation of
these circuits is demonstrated in simulations using WRSPICE. An
XOR gate implementation is presented as an example to illustrate
the operation of these circuits. The developed complementary
quantum logic circuits show promise for higher power efficiency
and simpler design in the form of fewer junctions for a given logic
implementation, leading to the possibility of higher integration
density.

Index Terms—Charge-based logic, Josephson junctions, Quan-
tum phase-slips, Single-flux-quantum logic, Superconducting
nanowires.

I. INTRODUCTION
D
IGITAL computing based on superconducting circuits
is re-gaining interest for high-performance and energy
efficient computation due to potential for high clock rates and
low energy operation [1], [2], [3] as concerns about scaling
to exa-scale computing grow with traditional CMOS based
electronic circuits [4], [5]. These superconducting circuits
are predominantly based on Josephson junctions (JJs) in the
form of single-flux-quantum (SFQ) logic and related variants.
Several challenges have been observed in SFQ circuits and
attempts have been made to overcome challenges such as
increasing power efficiency, reducing static power dissipation,
accumulation of jitter, etc. [6], [7]. Nonetheless, issues corre-
sponding to scalability still exist with SFQ based technologies
that require large area cells to accommodate magnetic flux [3].
Quantum phase-slip phenomenon has been identified as
an exact dual to Josephson tunneling based on charge-flux
duality [8]. Several applications of quantum phase-slip junc-
tions (QPSJs) were proposed based on this duality, such as
in qubits [9], [10], current standards [11] and other similar
applications [12], [13], [14]. We have explored the use of
QPSJs in circuits by establishing their operation in producing
a quantized charge of 2e in the form of a current pulse with

Uday S. Goteti and Michael C. Hamilton are with the Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36830
USA e-mail: mch0021@auburn.edu
Manuscript received October 30, 2018

constant area during a single switching event, akin to single-
flux quantum generation in a JJ [15], [16]. This operation was
used to develop digital logic circuits [15], [17] and neuron
circuits [16], [18], which may have potential advantages over
JJ-based circuits in realizing higher density circuits, and with
possibility of higher power efficiency, albeit with multiple
challenges that must be addressed. These challenges corre-
spond to practical realization of controlled quantum phase-slip
effects in superconducting nanowires. The effects of phase-
slips are susceptible to charge and thermal noise and may
require lower temperature operation compared to JJ-based
circuits.
In this paper, we introduce complementary quantum logic
(CQL) circuits that accommodate both charge-based logic
circuits using QPSJs [15] and flux-based circuits using JJs
[19]. We demonstrate these circuits through simulations in
WRSPICE using a SPICE model developed for QPSJs [20].
CQL circuits are intended to combine both flux-based and
charge-based circuits in providing an alternative way to per-
form logic operations with superconducting circuits. In section
II, the basic building blocks of CQL circuits are introduced
that utilize charge island [15], [17], [16] together with the
SFQ loop [19]. Circuits that convert quantized flux from
SFQ loop to quantized charge from charge island and vice
versa are discussed. The conversion circuits together with
an additional QPSJ are used to introduce a simple control
circuit. Furthermore, fan-out circuits are introduced to use a
flux quantum input to drive multiple quantized charge outputs
and to use a flux quantum signal to produce a flux and a charge
output. In the section III, an example circuit implementing
XOR gate logic that employs several of the basic circuit
operations implemented in simulation to demonstrate their
application. This is followed by a short discussion of potential
advantages and challenges of this technology in section IV and
conclusion in section V.

II. COMPLEMENTARY QUANTUM LOGIC CIRCUITS

Complementary quantum logic circuits comprise of both
the SFQ pulses encoded in a superconducting loop formed
by two JJs and an inductor, as well as the quantized charge
pulses encoded on a charge island formed by two QPSJs and a
capacitor, as their basic building blocks. The following circuits
employ these blocks and the corresponding signals generated,
in achieving various operations that are essential in a digital
logic family.

arXiv:1901.06606v1  [physics.app-ph]  20 Jan 2019


2

Fig. 1. SFQ voltage pulse to quantized charge current pulse conversion circuit
designed with an SFQ cell and a QPSJ charge island cell. IC(J1) = IC(J2),
VC(Q1) = VC(Q2). DC bias Vbias = 1.4VC. Ibias1 = Ibias2 = 0.7IC.

Fig. 2. Simulation results of flux to charge conversion circuit shown in Fig. 1.
IC(J1, J2) = 100µA, VC(Q1, Q2) = 0.7mV, L = 10.4pH, C = 0.23pF.
Vbias = 1mV. Magnitude of pulse input Iin = 150µA. (a) Input current
pulses to J1 from Iin. (b) SFQ pulse output from SFQ loop formed by J1,
J2 and L measured at node 1 of Fig. 1. (c) Quantized charge output from
the charge island formed by Q1, Q2 and C measured at node 2 of Fig. 1.

A. Flux to charge conversion circuit

The cells corresponding to SFQ loop and charge island can
be used in a single circuit to realize flux to charge conversion.
The resulting circuit is shown in Fig. 1. The two identical JJs
in the circuit are biased with currents that are 70% of their
critical currents IC and the two identical QPSJs are biased
using a DC source Vbias with a value of 1.4 x critical voltage
VC of the junction. An input pulse current drives junction J1
to its resistive state generating a voltage pulse corresponding
to a flux quantum in the loop formed by J1, L and J2,
that subsequently switches J2. The critical voltage of the
QPSJs are chosen such that the voltage pulse corresponding
to flux quantum at J2 can sufficiently drive the QPSJ from
its Coulomb blockade state to the conducting state, thereby
generating a current pulse of constant area 2e at the output.
Simulation results of this circuit showing input current pulse,
voltage from SFQ loop and the output current pulse from Q2
are shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 3. Quantized charge current pulse to SFQ voltage pulse conversion circuit
designed with an SFQ cell and a QPSJ charge island cell. IC(J1) = IC(J2),
VC(Q1) = VC(Q2). Ibias1 = Ibias2 = 0.7IC.

Fig. 4. Simulation results of charge to flux conversion circuit shown in Fig. 3.
IC(J1, J2) = 100µA, VC(Q1, Q2) = 0.7mV, L = 10.4pH, C = 0.23pF.
Magnitude of pulse input Vin = 2.8V. (a) Voltage pulse input to Q1 with
high voltage amplitude from Vin. (b) Current pulse output from charge island
formed by Q1, Q2 and C measured at node 1 of Fig. 3. (c) Flux output from
the SFQ loop formed by J1, J2 and L measured at node 2 of Fig. 3.

Fig. 5.
Control circuit formed by including an additional QPSJ Q1 at
the output of SFQ loop with a pulse voltage input. IC(J1) = IC(J2),
VC(Q2) = VC(Q3) > VC(Q1). DC bias Vbias = 1.4VC. Ibias1 = Ibias2
= 0.7IC.

B. Charge to flux conversion circuit

The reciprocal circuit of flux to charge conversion circuit
shown in Fig. 1 can be used for charge to flux conversion. The
circuit schematic that can achieve such operation is shown in


3

Fig. 6.
Simulation results of the control circuit shown in Fig. 5.
IC(J1, J2)
=
100µA, VC(Q2, Q3)
=
1mV, VC(Q1)
=
0.5mV,
L = 10.4pH, C = 0.23pF. Vbias = 1mV. Magnitude of pulse input
Iin = 200nA. (a) Current input to the SFQ loop formed by J1, J2 and
L from Iin. (b) SFQ voltage pulse output from the loop formed by J1, J2
and L measured at node 1 of Fig. 5. (c) Output at the charge island formed
by Q2, Q3 and C measured at node 3 of Fig. 5. (d) Voltage input Vin that
controls the output current. (e) Current pulse through the QPSJ Q1 when Vin
is high measured at node 2 of Fig. 5.

Fig. 3, with the parameters identical to the circuit in Fig. 1. The
simulation results are shown in Fig. 4. We note that the shape
of the SFQ pulse output presented in Fig. 4(c) is different
from the shape of the SFQ pulse observed in Fig. 2(b), but
with equal areas (under the curve), each corresponding to
single flux quantum. The difference in shape occurs due to
the differences in the current pulses (magnitude and duration)
applied to the junctions J1 in each circuit. This also explains
the different SFQ pulse shapes that will be shown in the
various other circuits discussed in this paper. Furthermore, the
current pulse output from the charge island corresponding to
quantized charge of 2e is not sufficient to switch large JJs
of critical current of 100µA. Therefore, an input pulse of
higher voltage amplitude is used to generate a charge pulse
corresponding to ∼1000 Cooper pairs, which is sufficient to
induce an SFQ pulse at the output for circuit components with
the specified parameters. Preliminary simulation results show
that, in order to generate a single SFQ pulse output with only a
single Cooper pair pulse input, a JJ with a considerably smaller
critical current (i.e. up to a few micro-amperes) and a QPSJ
with a larger critical voltage (i.e. several hundred milli-volts)
are necessary. Practical realization of similar circuits may be
challenging with existing technologies, but may be possible
with the development of suitable devices or circuits (i.e., with
QPSJ-based current amplification). We note that circuits such
as these can assist with moving information forward in digital
circuits.

Fig. 7.
A single SFQ input to three quantized charge outputs with loop
and island circuit parameters identical to that of Fig. 1. IC(J1) = IC(J2),
VC(Q1) = VC(Q2) = VC(Q3) = VC(Q4) = VC(Q5) = VC(Q6). DC
bias Vbias1 = Vbias2 = Vbias3 = 1.4VC. Ibias1 = Ibias2 = 0.7IC.

Fig. 8. Simulation results of fan-out circuit shown in Fig. 7. IC(J1, J2) =
100µA, VC(Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4, Q5, Q6) = 1mV, L = 10.4pH, C = 0.23pF.
Vbias1 = Vbias2 = Vbias3 = 0.7mV. (a) Current input to the SFQ loop
formed by J1, J2 and L from Iin. (b) SFQ voltage pulse output from the
loop formed by J1, J2 and L measured at node 1 of Fig. 7. (c) Output at
the charge island formed by Q1, Q2 and C measured at node 2 of Fig. 5. (d)
Output at the charge island formed by Q3, Q4 and C measured at node 3 of
Fig. 5. (e) Output at the charge island formed by Q5, Q6 and C measured
at node 4 of Fig. 5.

C. Control gate

The signal flow to the output of the conversion circuits can
be controlled using a signal input through a QPSJ similar to
control/buffer circuit from [15] resulting in a similar operation.
An example control circuit is shown in Fig. 5. The JJs J1, J2,
QPSJs Q2, Q3, along with the inductor L and capacitor C
together form the flux to charge conversion circuit shown in
Fig. 1. An additional QPSJ Q1 is included along with a step


4

Fig. 9.
A fan-out circuit with single SFQ pulse input with two out-
puts corresponding to SFQ pulse and quantized charge pulse respectively.
IC(J1) = IC(J2) = IC(J3) = IC(J4), VC(Q1) = VC(Q2). DC bias
Vbias1 = 1.4VC. Ibias1 = Ibias2 = Ibias3 = Ibias4 = 0.7IC.

Fig.
10.
Simulation
results
of
fan-out
circuit
shown
in
Fig.
9.
IC(J1, J2, J3, J4) = 100µA, VC(Q1, Q2) = 0.7mV, L = 10.4pH,
C = 0.23pF. Vbias1 = 1mV. (a) Current input to the SFQ loop formed
by J1, J2 and L from Iin. (b) SFQ voltage pulse output from the loop
formed by J1, J2 and L measured at node 1 of Fig. 9. (c) Output at the
charge island formed by Q1, Q2 and C measured at node 2 of Fig. 9. (d)
Output at the SFQ loop formed by J3, J4 and L measured at node 3 of Fig.
9.

input for switch operation. The critical voltage of Q1 is lower
than that of Q2 and Q3, with all other parameters used in the
circuit identical to that of Fig. 1. When the input Vin is high,
the SFQ pulse from J2 switches junction Q1 before junction
Q2, resulting in no current pulse at the output. When the input
Vin is low, the SFQ pulse from J2 switches Q2, resulting
in flux to charge conversion. Simulation results illustrating
this operation are shown in Fig. 6. Similar operation can be
implemented with charge to flux conversion circuit.

D. Fan-out circuits

Fan-out circuit schematic is useful to drive several gates
with charge/flux input connected to a flux/charge outputs.
Conversion from flux to charge and vice versa enables using
a single input to drive several outputs without decrease in the
pulse amplitudes. Furthermore, it is possible to split the input
to either charge or flux output in the same circuit. These two
operations are demonstrated in the circuits below.
1) SFQ input splitter to multiple quantized charge outputs:
The circuit shown in Fig. 7 can be used to split an SFQ pulse
input to three quantized charge outputs. This operation can be
extended to a higher number outputs by including more charge
islands at the output of SFQ loop. Furthermore, there are
no restrictions on the junction parameters irrespective of the
number of outputs when the islands are biased with sufficient
voltage. This is because the voltage drop at node 1 of Fig.
7 due to leakage current through connected charge islands is
negligible. The simulation results of the circuit shown in Fig.
7 are shown in Fig. 8. The reciprocal circuit operation, i.e.
from charge input to several flux outputs is possible provided
the critical currents of JJs are significantly lower (i.e. on the
order of a few micro-amperes). Practical realization may be
challenging with present technologies, as mentioned in Section
II.B., without internally amplifying the charge input.
2) SFQ input splitter to SFQ and charge quantum output
splitter: The circuit shown in Fig. 9 can be used to split
a single SFQ pulse input to an SFQ pulse output and a
quantized charge pulse output. Simulations results illustrating
this operation are shown in Fig. 10.

III. LOGIC CIRCUIT EXAMPLE

A two input XOR gate can be implemented using two flux
to charge conversion circuits combined with control gates in
parallel. Four inputs are applied to the SFQ cells at junctions
J1 and J3, and at the junctions Q1 and Q4. The input 1 at
junction J1 and the input at Q4 are high at the same time,
and the input 2 at J3 and the input at Q1 are high at the
same time. This is illustrated in the circuit shown in Fig. 11,
and the corresponding simulation results are shown in Fig.
12. During practical implementation, same input signals can
be used in these cases with appropriate charge/flux conversion
circuits. When both the inputs are ’1’, QPSJs Q1 and Q4 are
switched, therefore the signals generated in both SFQ cells
do not travel into the QPSJ charge islands. This results in the
output ’0’. When only one of the inputs is ’1’, the SFQ pulse
generated in the JJ corresponding to that input is converted to
quantized charge at the corresponding island, generating the
output ’1’. The output is ’0’ when both the inputs are ’0’, as
none of the junctions are switched, resulting in no SFQ pulses.

IV. DISCUSSION

CQL circuits provide an a new way to perform digital logic
operations in superconducting electronics that are predomi-
nantly based on JJs alone, by utilizing QPSJs, with some
potential advantages. The charge islands formed by QPSJs
can generate quantized charge pulses that are similar to SFQ


5

Fig. 11. XOR gate operation achieved by introducing additional QPSJs Q1
and Q4 at the output of SFQ loops, with a pulse voltage input.

Fig. 12. Simulation results of XOR gate shown in Fig. 5. (a) Input current
pulses Iin1 to generate SFQ pulses in loop J1, L and J2. (b) Input 1 of
XOR gate from SFQ loop J1, L and J2 measured at node 1 of Fig. 11. (c)
Input voltage pulse from Vin2 to generate quantized charge pulses at Q1. (d)
Input 2 of XOR gate from SFQ loop J3, L and J4 measured at node 2 of
Fig. 11. (e) Output of XOR gate as quantized charge current pulses from Q3
and Q6 measured at node 3 of Fig. 11.

pulses, but the switching energy of QPSJs to generate a current
pulse is estimated to be order of 1-5 zJ. This is considerably
smaller than that of currently available JJ technologies which
dissipate energy in the order of several aJ. Using JJs and QPSJs
together enables convenient fan-out to multiple outputs with-
out a loss of output signal amplitude, in addition to requiring
fewer junctions to implement a logic operation compared to
JJ-based circuits.
Although CQL circuits may provide significant advantages,
challenges exist in practical realization of these circuits, per-
taining to the material and design of QPSJs for controlled
generation of quantum-phase slips in nanowires, along with a
possible need for lower operating temperatures (perhaps below
1 K). Other potential issues exist such as interference of charge
noise with the charge on islands. The extent of these issues

and possible solutions may only be evident after sufficient
investigation through experiments.

V. CONCLUSION

A new family of circuits is introduced that combines the
SFQ operation of JJs and quantized charge operation of
QPSJ based circuits to perform digital logic. These circuits
provide an alternative way to perform logic operations that
may significantly simplify the design when compared to JJ-
based logic families, therefore may improve flexibility when
these circuits are scaled to peta and exa-scale computers. Flux
to charge conversion circuits and vice versa are presented that
can be interfacing circuits between JJ and QPSJ based logic
circuits. Logic operations such as an inverter and fan-out to
multiple outputs are demonstrated as examples to illustrate the
applications of these logic circuits. However, substantial de-
velopments in technology are required for physical realization
of single QPSJs that exhibit these properties, as well as in
testing the circuits discussed in this paper.

REFERENCES

[1] M. A. Manheimer, “Cryogenic Computing Complexity Program: Phase 1
introduction,” IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 25,
no. 3, pp. 1–4, 2015.
[2] D. S. Holmes, A. L. Ripple, and M. A. Manheimer, “Energy-efficient
superconducting computing: Power budgets and requirements,” IEEE
Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1 701 610–
1 701 610, 2013.
[3] S. K. Tolpygo, “Superconductor digital electronics: Scalability and energy
efficiency issues,” Low Temperature Physics, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 361–379,
2016.
[4] R. Service, “What itll take to go to exascale,” Science, vol. 335, no. 6067,
pp. 394–396, 2012.
[5] P. Kogge and J. Shalf, “Exascale computing trends: Adjusting to the new
normal for Computer Architecture,” Computing in Science & Engineer-
ing, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 16–26, 2013.
[6] Q. P. Herr, A. Y. Herr, O. T. Oberg, and A. G. Ioannidis, “Ultra-low-
power superconductor logic,” Journal of applied physics, vol. 109, no. 10,
p. 103903, 2011.
[7] O. A. Mukhanov, “Energy-efficient single flux quantum technology,”
IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 760–
769, 2011.
[8] J. Mooij and Y. V. Nazarov, “Superconducting nanowires as quantum
phase-slip junctions,” Nature Physics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 169–172, 2006.
[9] J. Mooij and C. Harmans, “Phase-slip flux qubits,” New Journal of
Physics, vol. 7, no. 1, p. 219, 2005.
[10] O. Astafiev, L. Ioffe, S. Kafanov, Y. A. Pashkin, K. Y. Arutyunov,
D. Shahar, O. Cohen, and J. Tsai, “Coherent quantum phase slip,” Nature,
vol. 484, no. 7394, pp. 355–358, 2012.
[11] C. Webster, J. Fenton, T. Hongisto, S. Giblin, A. Zorin, and P. Warburton,
“NbSi nanowire quantum phase-slip circuits: dc supercurrent blockade,
microwave measurements, and thermal analysis,” Physical Review B,
vol. 87, no. 14, p. 144510, 2013.
[12] S. Graaf, S. Skacel, T. H¨onigl-Decrinis, R. Shaikhaidarov, H. Rotzinger,
S. Linzen, M. Ziegler, U. H¨ubner, H.-G. Meyer, V. Antonov et al.,
“Charge quantum interference device,” Nature Physics, p. 1, 2018.
[13] A. Hriscu and Y. V. Nazarov, “Coulomb blockade due to quantum phase
slips illustrated with devices,” Physical Review B, vol. 83, no. 17, p.
174511, 2011.
[14] A. Hriscu, “Theoretical proposals of quantum phase-slip devices,” Ph.D.
dissertation, TU Delft, Delft University of Technology, 2012.
[15] U. S. Goteti and M. C. Hamilton, “Charge-based superconducting digital
logic family using quantum phase-slip junctions,” IEEE Transactions on
Applied Superconductivity, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 1–4, 2018.
[16] R. Cheng, U. S. Goteti, and M. C. Hamilton, “Spiking neuron circuits
using superconducting quantum phase-slip junctions,” Journal of Applied
Physics, vol. 124, no. 15, p. 152126, 2018.
[17] M. C. Hamilton and U. S. Goteti, “Superconducting quantum logic and
applications of same,” Jun. 12 2018, uS Patent 9,998,122.


6

[18] R. Cheng, U. S. Goteti, and M. C. Hamilton, “Superconducting neu-
romorphic computing using quantum phase-slip junctions,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Applied Superconductivity, 2018,submitted to special issue of
IEEE-TAS.
[19] K. K. Likharev and V. K. Semenov, “RSFQ logic/memory family: A new
josephson-junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-frequency digital
systems,” Applied Superconductivity, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 3–28, 1991.
[20] U. S. Goteti and M. C. Hamilton, “SPICE model implementation of
quantum phase-slip junctions,” Electronics Letters, vol. 51, no. 13, pp.
979–981, 2015.


