 

1

Thermal transport at a nanoparticle-water interface:  A molecular 

dynamics and continuum modeling study 

Ali Rajabpoura,* , Roham Seifa,b , Saeed Arabhaa, Mohammad Mahdi Heyhatc, Samy Merabiad 

and Ali Hassanalie,*  

a Advanced Simulation and Computing Laboratory, Imam Khomeini International University, Qazvin, Iran.  

b Dipartimento di Energia, Politecnico di Milano, Via Lambruschini 4, 20156, Milano, Italy 

c Faculty of Mechanical Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, 1411713116, Iran. 

d Institut Lumière Matière UMR 5306 CNRS Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France.  

 e International Centre for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), Trieste, Italy.  

*E-mail: rajabpour@eng.ikiu.ac.ir, ahassana@ictp.it 

Abstract 

Heat transfer between a silver nanoparticle and surrounding water has been studied using molecular dynamics (MD) 

simulations. The thermal conductance (Kapitza conductance) at the interface between a nanoparticle and 

surrounding water has been calculated using four different approaches: transient with/without temperature 

gradient (internal thermal resistance) in the nanoparticle, steady-state non-equilibrium and finally equilibrium 

simulations. The results of steady-state non-equilibrium and equilibrium are in agreement but differ from the 

transient approach results. MD simulations results also reveal that in the quenching process of a hot silver 

nanoparticle, heat dissipates into the solvent over a length-scale of ~ 2nm and over a timescale of less than 5ps. By 

introducing a continuum solid-like model and considering a heat conduction mechanism in water, it is observed that 

the results of the temperature distribution for water shells around the nanoparticle agree well with MD results. It is 

also found that the local water thermal conductivity around the nanoparticle is greater by about 50 percent than 

that of bulk water. These results have important implications for understanding heat transfer mechanisms in 

nanofluids systems and also for cancer photothermal therapy, wherein an accurate local description of heat transfer 

in an aqueous environment is crucial.  

Keywords: Nanoparticle; heat transfer; Molecular dynamics simulation; Interfacial Thermal conductance 


 

2

1.Introduction 

Today, investigating heat transfer in the vicinity of colloidal nanoparticles, i.e nanoparticles 

surrounded by water, is of great importance for various applications [1-4].  These applications 

include on one hand nanoparticle based cancer treatments, and on the other hand,  the thermal 

transport properties of nanofluids, which are suspensions of metallic nanoparticles in water and 

are known to display enhanced thermal conductivity [5-8].  

 Additionally, in biological systems, the required time and the quenching condition of heated 

proteins is essential in order to keep their proper function, and this raises some interesting 

questions regarding the measurement and calculation of interfacial heat transfer between 

protein and water[1][2][3]. There is also a growing interest in understanding the interactions 

between inorganic interfaces and biological systems and heat transfer within this context 

becomes an important factor[4]–[6].  

In the studies of interfacial heat transfer between a nanoparticle as a solid and water as a fluid, 

a discontinuity (jump) between the temperatures of two bodies has been observed. This 

temperature discontinuity plays a significant role in thermal resistance between the particle and 

water at the nanoscale. The temperature jump has been observed by Kapitza at first in 1941 in 

the study of heat transfer between a metal and liquid Helium[7]. The reason of the existence of 

a temperature jump is related to the difference in acoustic impedance (sound velocity × density) 

at two sides of the interface [8]. Many studies on thermal resistance have been performed 

involving both experiments as well as computational simulations at the atomic-scale. Although 

performing experiments at these small length scales is challenging, some worthwhile works have 

been recently conducted such as the measurement of Kapitza resistance between silicon and 

superfluid helium by Ramiere et al.[9]. In another experiment, Zhenbin et al. utilized the thermo-

reflectance method to measure the thermal resistance in both hydrophobic and hydrophilic 

interfaces and estimated the thickness of a possible vapor layer around the hydrophobic 

nanoparticle [10].  

One of the well-known standard methods for investigating the Kapitza resistance or the  inverse 

of that, the interfacial thermal conductance, are molecular dynamics simulations. Note that there 


 

3

are four main different MD simulations techniques that allow us to calculating the interfacial 

thermal conductance (i), (ii): Transient non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (TNEMD) methods 

for obtaining interfacial thermal conductance with/without considering a temperature gradient 

(internal thermal resistance) in a nanoparticle, (iii): Steady-state non-equilibrium method 

(SNEMD) and finally, (iv): Equilibrium (EMD) method. Regarding the advantages and 

disadvantages of each of these methods, TNEMD methods are inspired by experimental 

measurements of interfacial thermal conductance. But as in these latter methods, the 

nanoparticle temperature changes with time, and hence determining an exact value of 

temperature for which the interfacial thermal conductance is measured, is quite challenging. In 

the SNEMD method, nonlinear temperature effects from hot and cold thermostat regions can 

cause artificial effects in the simulation. On the other hand, in the EMD method an equilibrium 

temperature is considered for the whole system thus removing any spurious effect related to the 

use of two thermostats. 

There have been several theoretical studies aimed at studying heat transfer at interfaces, and we 

briefly review some of these works. Lervik et al. studied interfacial thermal conductance between 

an alkane nanodroplet and water based on TNEMD with/without considering internal thermal 

resistance in the nanoparticle. They revealed that the interfacial thermal conductance increases 

with decreased particle diameter[11]. The TNEMD method has been used to study heat transport 

between a protein and water and thus permitting in elucidating the key role of the interfacial 

thermal conductance in the thermal relaxation of biomolecules [12]. Barrat and Chiaruttini 

studied the interfacial thermal conductance between a solid and liquid and investigated the 

influence of surface wetting by employing the SNEMD and EMD methods[13]. The functional 

dependence of the Kapitza resistance on the strength of solid-liquid interactions have been 

rationalized  as exponential and power law forms, respectively for non-wetting and wetting 

liquids[14]. Based on a work by Tascini et al. an investigation on the influence of the wetting 

characteristics and the nanoparticle size on the interfacial thermal transport between a 

nanoparticle and fluid, it was found that optimum interfacial heat transport can be realized by 

combining strong interfacial interactions and large interfacial curvatures. Xu et al. studied the 

role of liquid layering on the liquid–solid interface on the interfacial thermal resistance. Their 


 

4

findings showed that a layering phenomenon is not an effective factor in the thermal transport 

of nanofluids [15]. The heat transfer mechanism of a gold nanoparticle suspended in water or in 

octane has been investigated by Merabia et al. employing SNEMD method with very high heat 

fluxes and the interfacial thermal resistance between gold nanoparticle and water/octane has 

been analyzed[16]. Investigating the surrounding fluid for two cases of a nanoparticle and a 

planar wall utilizing SNEMD method, Merabia et al. showed that the water around the heated 

nanoparticle can be enhanced above boiling point without any phase change. On the other hand, 

when the planar wall was heated, the surrounding water converted into vapor and this vapor 

layer causes a drop in the heat flux value[17]. Wang et al. using SNEMD approach examined the 

influence of nanoscale roughness and wetting on Kapitza resistance at the liquid-solid interface. 

They showed that the most effective factor on Kapitza resistance is the strength of liquid- solid 

atomic bonding. As expected, they illustrated that Kapitza resistance decreases with roughness 

and wetting [18]. 

Hu and Sun by performing SNEMD simulations, investigated the effect of nanopatterning the 

interface  on the value of the Kapitza resistance between water and gold during boiling. They 

observed that water boiling has no great effect on the interfacial Kapitza resistance[19]. Pham et 

al. studied the role of pressure on Kapitza resistance of water/gold and water/silicon interfaces 

via SNEMD method. They found that pressure plays a key role in interfacial thermal conductance 

at hydrophobic solid surfaces[20]. Vo and Kim calculated the dependence of Kapitza resistance 

between a variety of metallic surfaces and water with SNEMD approach. They revealed that using 

a realistic description of liquid water instead of a simple Lennard-Jones (LJ) liquid, noticeable 

effects on the results of interfacial thermal resistance were found[21]. The effects of wetting and 

nanoparticle diameter on the thermal transport considering temperature gradient in the particle 

have been analyzed utilizing SNEMD by Tascini et al. It was found that due to very large curvature 

displayed by the studied nanoparticles, this factor is important in nanoparticle and fluid 

interactions[22]. The influence of Kapitza resistance on the droplet evaporation rate from a 

heated surface using a multiscale combination of SNEMD and continuum theory has been 

investigated by Han et al. [23], [24].  


 

5

Wu et al. using EMD approach and ultrafast transient absorption experiments observed the 

mechanism of thermal transport across surfactant layers of gold nano-rods in aqueous solution 

[31]. Their MD results showed that the interface between surfactant layers and gold nano-rods 

noticeably hinders heat flow [25]. Moreover, Soussi et al. performed EMD simulations   to 

investigate the role of polymer coating on the gold-water interfacial thermal conductance. 

According to their results, the coating polymer caused an increase in the interfacial thermal 

conductance[26].  

With respect to the above mentioned studies, all of the four MD approaches have been 

widely used for calculating the interfacial thermal conductance in different physical situations. 

So far, and despite their wide use, no comparison has been made among all these methods in a 

specific case in order to compare and contrast the predictions of each method. The purpose of 

this article is threefold: First, in this work, we compare TNEMD, SNEMD and EMD methods for 

calculating the Kapitza resistance at the interface of a silver nanoparticle and water. Second, in 

the aim of investigating the temperature of different water shells around the nanoparticle when 

it cools down, the length and timescales associated with heat dissipation are determined. Finally, 

in an attempt to explore the relevant heat transport mechanisms, a finite element method is 

used to solve the heat conduction equation for the nanoparticle and its surrounding water and 

the results are compared to molecular dynamics results.  

2. Molecular Dynamics Details 

Our model system consists of a silver nanoparticle immersed in water. Water has been modeled 

using the empirical potential TIP4P/2005 [27]. The silver nanoparticles have a spherical shape 

with a diameter of 1.7nm (225 Ag atoms). Water molecules have been first placed around the 

nanoparticle and randomly distributed around it. In this study, a simulation box including 6254 

water molecules with dimensions of 6nm×6nm×6nm is considered. Periodic boundary conditions 

are applied in all three spatial directions. The nanoparticle was constrained in the center of the 

simulation box using a spring with a constant of 100 𝑘𝑐𝑎𝑙 '𝑚𝑜𝑙. Å,-
⁄
. Interatomic forces in silver 

nanoparticle are modeled using the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential parametrization  taken from Ref. 

[28]. Water-Ag interactions are calculated according to combination rules of Lorentz-Berthelot. 

Table 1 presents the LJ parameters, i.e., ε and σ for different atomic interactions.  


 

6

 

Table 1. LJ parameters for non-bonding interactions[28] 

Interaction Type 
ε (kcal/mol) 
σ(Å) 

Ag-Ag 

H2O - H2O 

Ag - H2O 

7.95 

0.182 

1.21 

2.64 

3.16 

2.9 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1: Atomistic structure of a silver nanoparticle surrounded by water. The nanoparticle diameter is 

about 1.7nm and the box length  is about 6nm with periodic boundary conditions in all three 

dimensions.  

The geometry of a silver nanoparticle surrounded by the base fluid of water is illustrated in Figure 

1. Molecular dynamics simulation were performed first in the NPT ensemble in order to reach to 

desired pressure (i.e. 1 bar) and temperature (i.e. 300 K) using a time step of 1 fs. Then the system 

was run in NVT ensemble for 0.1 ns. After reaching equilibrium, interfacial thermal conductance 

is obtained using different approaches as alluded to earlier such as TNEMD, SNEMD and EMD, 


 

7

which will be discussed in detail in the following sections. All MD simulations were performed 

using the open-source Large-scale Atomic-molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) 

Package [29]. 

 

3. Results 

3.1. TNEMD simulations  

In this approach, the temperature of the nanoparticle is initially maintained at 400 K, while the 

water temperature is maintained at 300 K by using Nose-Hoover thermostats for 50 ps. Then, by 

switching off the nanoparticle thermostat while maintaining the water thermostat, the 

equilibration of the nanoparticle temperature is recorded over the course of the simulation. 

Considering the small size of the silver nanoparticle and the large statistical fluctuations of the 

temperature, the MD results are averaged over 400 independent trajectories each corresponding 

to a simulation time of 25 ps. This simulation set up is analogous in spirit to experiments that use 

laser pulses for heating of a nanoparticle[30]. In order to calculate the interfacial thermal 

conductance in this approach, we will use two heat transfer models which will be discussed in 

the following sections. 

3.1.1. Negligible internal resistance in nanoparticle (Lumped model)  

In this model, the temperature distribution within the nanoparticle is assumed to be uniform 

during the cooling process, this model being known as the lumped capacitance model. Hence, 

the energy balance equation is written for the nanoparticle as follows: 

(6) 
𝑚𝑐/

𝑑𝑇2/

𝑑𝑡
= −𝐴𝐺8𝑇2/ − 𝑇9:; 𝑇2/(𝑡 = 0) = 𝑇> 

 

where 𝑇2/, 𝑐/, m and A are the temperature, specific heat capacity, mass and surface area of the 

nanoparticle, respectively. G denotes the interfacial thermal conductance between surrounding 

water and the nanoparticle. Ti is the initial temperature of the nanoparticle and TW is considered 

to be the surrounding water temperature which is assumed to be constant as a consequence of 

the use of the applied thermostat. By solving Eq.6, we have: 

( 7)
𝑇2/(𝑡) − 𝑇?

𝑇> − 𝑇?

= 𝑒𝑥𝑝 C−𝑡

𝜏 E ; 𝜏 = 𝑚𝑐/ (𝐴𝐺)
⁄
 


 

8

where 𝜏 is the nanoparticle relaxation time. Figure 2 presents the simulation results of 

nanoparticle and water temperatures during the transient cooling process. In order to determine 

whether there is a significant temperature gradient or an internal thermal resistance in the 

nanoparticle or not, the nanoparticle is divided  in two parts: a core and a shell. The core and the 

shell are here defined according to the positions of the atoms: 0<r<0.6 nm and r >0.6 nm, 

respectively. It is evident from Figure 2 that the shell temperature and the whole particle 

temperature essentially coincide. Hence, it is clear that there is no significant internal thermal 

resistance within the nanoparticle. Based on fitting the simulation results to the exponential 

function in Eq.7, G is obtained as 3.55×108 W/m2K and 𝜏 is computed to be 2.31 ps.  

 

Figure 2: Transient thermal relaxation of hot nanoparticle surrounded by water. The initial temperature 

of the nanoparticle was set to 400 K and the water temperature was kept at 300 K during relaxation.  

The temperatures were measured for the whole nanoparticle (0 < r ≤ R) and also for a nanoparticle shell 

(0.6 nm ≤ r ≤ R) during relaxation.  The black dash-line is an exponential curve fitted to nanoparticle 

temperature.  

 

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
280

300

320

340

360

380

400

420

t(ps)

T(K)

 

 

Nanoparticle

Nanoparticle shell

Water

Fitted exponential curve


 

9

3.1.2. Finite internal resistance in the nanoparticle 

According to the lumped model in the previous section, it has been shown that the temperature 

gradient or the internal thermal resistance in the nanoparticle is small enough to be neglected. 

In order to reinforce this observation, we consider another model.  In some studies [12] [11], a 

model has been used that considers the temperature gradient in the nanoparticle especially in 

the outer shell region. In this model, to calculate the interfacial thermal conductance between 

water and the nanoparticle, the equation of heat diffusion is defined as follows[11]: 

(8) 
𝜕,'𝑟𝑇2/-

𝜕𝑟,
= 1

𝛼2/

𝜕'𝑟𝑇2/-

𝜕𝑡
 

(9) 
𝑇2/(𝑟, 𝑡 = 0) = 𝑇>

(10)
−𝑘2/

𝜕𝑇2/
𝜕𝑟 |KLM = 𝐺'𝑇2/(𝑅, 𝑡) − 𝑇9- 

(11)
𝜕𝑇2/(𝑟, 𝑡)

𝜕𝑟
|KLO = 0

where 𝛼2/ is the nanoparticle thermal diffusivity that is equal to 

PQR
STR . The boundary condition in 

Eq.10, shows the equality of heat conduction in the nanoparticle and interfacial thermal 

transport at the surface of nanoparticle which has a critical role in this model. From the analytical 

solution of equations 8 to 11, the nanoparticle temperature can be obtained as follows [11], [31]:  

(12)
𝑇2/(𝑟, 𝑡) − 𝑇9

𝑇> − 𝑇9

= 4 V 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜆2) − 𝜆2𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜆2)

2𝜆2 − 𝑠𝑖𝑛(2𝜆2)

\

2L]

𝑒𝑥𝑝 _−𝜆2

,𝑡

𝜏
` 𝑅

𝜆2𝑟 𝑠𝑖𝑛 C𝜆2

𝑅 𝑟E 

(13)
1 − 𝜆2𝑐𝑜𝑡(𝜆2) =

aM

P = 𝐵𝑖     ; n=1,2,3,… 

(14)
𝜏 = 𝑅,

𝛼  

The Bi number in Eq.13 is a dimensionless parameter that indicates the ratio of transferred heat 

between water and the nanoparticle and heat conduction within the nanoparticle. By fitting MD 

simulations results to Eq.12, the value of the interfacial thermal conductance is calculated as 

5.74×108 W/m2K. In addition, the Bi number and the silver nanoparticle thermal conductivity are 

found to be 2.68 and 0.18 W/mK, respectively. The resulting value of  thermal conductivity for 

the silver nanoparticle is low in comparison to what has been recently reported for phonon 

thermal conductivity of bulk silver (4 W/mK [32]) and these results suggest that the finite thermal 


 

10

resistance model is not suitable for analyzing the cooling process of silver nanoparticle.  As a 

consequence of small nanoparticle dimension as compared to the long phonon free path in silver 

(2 nm to 62 nm [32]), heat conduction within the nanoparticle is likely in the ballistic regime, so 

assuming a diffusive heat transfer inside the nanoparticle and therefore considering a local 

equilibrium for defining local temperature gradients is certainly not appropriate.  

3.2. SNEMD simulations  

In this approach, the nanoparticle and the water molecules around the simulation box 

boundaries are steadily maintained at a temperature of 395 K using a hot thermostat and 300 K 

using a cold thermostat, respectively, as shown in Figure 3a. The required heat fluxes for 

maintaining these two heat baths at those steady-state temperature values are shown in Figure 

3b. Then, by defining concentric shells having a thickness of 0.2nm around the nanoparticle, the 

temperature profile in water may be resolved as shown in Figure 3a. In order to calculate the 

interfacial thermal conductance between the nanoparticle and the first water shell around it the 

following equation is used: 

(15)
𝐺 =

|𝑑𝐸 𝑑𝑡
⁄
|

𝐴∆𝑇  

 

where, dE/dt, A and ΔT are the heat flux, surface area of the nanoparticle and the temperature 

drop between the nanoparticle and the closest water shell around it, respectively. Figure 3b. 

shows the accumulative energy added to the nanoparticle and subtracted from the water versus 

simulation time. The equality between the slopes of these energy diagrams shows the 

conservation of energy in our system.  It is noticeable that the temperature profile in Fig 3a was 

averaged over one million time steps (1 ns) in the course of four different MD runs (four million 

time steps in total). The interfacial thermal conductance based on this model is obtained as 

G=4.24×108 W/m2K. 


 

11

 

Figure 3: SNEMD simulation setup: (a) Temperature profile between hot thermostat (nanoparticle) and 

cold thermostat (water molecules at the edges of the simulation box). (b) Accumulative energy added to 

the nanoparticle and subtracted from water. The slopes of the accumulated energy as a function of time  

are considered as the stationary heat flux. 

 

 

3.3. EMD simulations  

In this approach, the interfacial thermal conductance is obtained based on fluctuations of the 

temperature difference between the nanoparticle and surrounding water (at cut-off distance of 

the nanoparticle and water atomic interactions). Rajabpour and Volz have shown that the 

interfacial thermal conductance (or the inverse of that, Kapitza resistance RK) in the linear 

response regime can be calculated from the following equation[33]–[35]: 

(16)
𝐺h] = 𝑅i =
𝐴

𝑘j𝑇O

, k ⟨∆𝑇(𝑡)∆𝑇(0)⟩𝑑𝑡

\

O

where kB is the Boltzmann constant, ⟨
⟩  denotes the phase ensemble average and ∆T(t) is the 

instantaneous temperature difference between the nanoparticle and the first water shell around 

the nanoparticle with thickness of 1 nm (corresponding to the cut-off distance of LJ potential for 

silver-water atomic interactions). A is the surface area of the nanoparticle. The temperatures of 

the nanoparticle and that of water are recorded during one million time steps in order to 

calculate the auto-correlation function ⟨∆𝑇(𝑡)∆𝑇(0)⟩. Figure 4 shows an example of auto-


 

12

correlation function of the temperature difference between the nanoparticle and water 

calculated at equilibrium, and that which is averaged over four different MD runs. It is evident 

from Figure 4, that this function has decayed to zero in approximately under 10 ps. The integral 

of this function gives the interfacial thermal resistance value (green curve). 

The resulting interfacial thermal conductance based on this approach is equal to G = 4.6×108 

W/m2K. In this model, it is not necessary to apply a temperature difference to the system in 

comparison to other approaches which is an advantage of EMD method as the interfacial thermal 

conductance value can be determined from equilibrium fluctuations. In addition, there is no need 

to calculate the complicated expression of the microscopic heat flux formula in this approach, 

considering the fact that in Eq.16, only the computation of the temperature difference between 

the two bodies across the interface is required. 

 

Figure 4: Equilibrium MD simulation results wherein left Y-axis: Temperature difference auto-correlation 

function versus time. Right Y-axis: Inverse of the interfacial thermal conductance (i.e. interfacial thermal 

resistance), which is proportional to the integral of temperature difference auto-correlation function. 

 

3.4. Comparing the MD approaches  

The results of the different MD techniques to calculate the interfacial thermal conductance with 

the corresponding statistical uncertainties are summarized in Table 2. It is clear that for all the 


 

13

four different methods employed, the values of the interfacial thermal conductance predictions 

are in the same order of magnitude. However, the results of SNEMD and EMD methods are in 

better agreement with each other (their difference being less than 10%), compared to what is 

obtained with the transient methods. More specifically, TNEMD with the lumped approximation 

technique predicts a value of the conductance 25% lower than that calculated in EMD while 

TNEMD with finite internal resistance predicts a value of the conductance 25% higher than that 

of the EMD approaches. The reason for the discrepancy between EMD and TNEMD results may 

be related to the methodology of TNEMD techniques wherein the nanoparticle is firstly heated 

and then allowed to cool down, and therefore determining an exact value of the temperature for 

interfacial thermal conductance measured is not possible. The difference between the results 

predicted by the two TNEMD techniques (lumped and finite internal resistance) was also 

previously reported by Lervik et al. for the interfacial thermal conductance between an alkane 

nanodroplet and water [11].    

 

Table 2: Interfacial thermal conductance G, calculated from the four different MD methods discussed in 

the text 

Method 
G (W/m2K) ×108 

TNEMD (lumped method) 
3.55 ± 0.06 

TNEMD (Finite internal resistance) 
5.74 ± 0.09 

SNEMD 
4.24 ± 0.32 

EMD 
4.6 ± 0.15 

 

3.5. Heat dissipation in surrounding water    

Now that we have discussed and compared the different possible methods to extract the value 

of the Kapitza resistance, we analyze in detail the local temperature profile in water. In the 

TNEMD technique presented in section 3.1, the water temperature was maintained at 300 K 

using a cold thermostat during the cooling process of the heated nanoparticle. The assumption 

of a uniform temperature profile for the whole surrounding water is questionable. Stoll et al. 


 

14

using an ultra-probe experiment showed the existence of a temperature gradient taking place in 

the surrounding water shells. In this section, for determining the amount of temperature increase 

in the surrounding water around the nanoparticle during the cooling process, the water 

thermostat is switched off and the local temperature field in water shells around the 

nanoparticle, are recorded. This allows us to understand the mechanism of dissipation of 

nanoparticle energy into the solvent in order to ascertain the spatial and temporal scales 

associated with the cooling process. 

The initial temperature of the nanoparticle was set to 400K, while the initial water temperature 

was 300K. This temperature jump of the nanoparticle is typical of what can be reached in 

thermoreflectance experiments, when the nanoparticle is heated up by a laser working in the 

vicinity of the plasmon resonance frequency. The surrounding water was divided into concentric 

shells with a thickness of 0.2nm. The temperature distribution of water shells versus time is 

shown in Figure 5a. The presented temperatures are averaged over 2000 MD trajectories. It is 

clear from the Figure that, the temperature of the first water shell experiences an increase of 

about 5 K and this gradually drops to below 1 K at a distance  r ~ 2 nm.  The temperature increase 

for further water shells is on the order of temperature fluctuations and can be thus neglected. 

These small increases in temperatures of surrounding water shells may be understood based on 

the high heat capacity of water that acts like a natural temperature damper (small temperature 

response to the incoming heat). The peak time of the temperature for the different water shells 

are shown in Figure 5b. It is seen that this timescale linearly shifts from short to longer time with 

increasing the shell radius.  

 


 

15

 

Figure 5: (a) Temperature of the different water shells around the nanoparticles with respect to the 

simulation time during the thermal relaxation of the nanoparticle. The first shell experiences an increase 
in the temperature of about 5K, while for shell with radius of about 2nm, there is no clear temperature 

increase. (b) The corresponding time for the temperature peak in each shell versus the radius of the 

shell. 

 

3.6 Heat transport mechanism in surrounding water  

In the previous section, we observed a small increase in water temperature, which persists up to 

a distance about 2nm away from the nanoparticle. In order to understand this, a simple 

continuum heat equation model is considered to understand an effective mechanism that 

describes heat transport within surrounding water well. It is well established from numerous 

other studies that both hydrophobic and hydrophilic interfaces introduce structuring in the water 

in close vicinity to them [36]. Indeed, in the case of the silver-water interface, we also see some 

structuring. The density of water shells directly obtained from molecular dynamics simulation 

(Figure 6 a and b) clearly shows that the density of the first water shell (r=1.1 nm) is different 

from the other shells [37] [38]. The thermal behavior of water shells adjacent to the nanoparticle 

can be described by a solid-like model and a thermal conduction mechanism could be considered 

for describing the heat transfer within those shells [39]. The solid-like model does not imply that 

there is an ice-like layer of water near the interface. It just implies more structured water near 

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

0
5
10
15
20
25

Temperature (K)

Time (ps)

Water box

r = 1.1 nm 

r

Shell thickness

= 0.2 nm

r = 1.5 nm 

r = 1.7 nm 

r = 1.9 nm 

r = 2.1 nm 

r = 1.3 nm 

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9

Peak time (ps)

Shell radius r (nm) 

NP


 

16

the silver surface. In this context, the transient heat conduction equations for the nanoparticle 

and surrounding water should be written as coupled equations: 

(17)
Nanoparticle: 

no'KpQR-

nKo
=

]

qQR

n'KpQR-

nr                    0 < 𝑟 < 𝑅

𝜕𝑇2/(𝑟, 𝑡)

𝜕𝑟
|KLO = 0

𝜅2/

npQR(K,r)

nK
|KLM = G(𝑇𝑛𝑝 − 𝑇𝑊(𝑅, 𝑡))

𝑇2/(𝑟, 0) = 𝑇> 

 

(18)
Water around the nanoparticle:  

𝜕,(𝑟𝑇9)

𝜕𝑟,
= 1

𝛼9

𝜕(𝑟𝑇9)

𝜕𝑡
 

−𝜅9

npw(K,r)

nK
|KLM =G(𝑇2/ − 𝑇9(𝑅, 𝑡) 

𝑇9(𝑟 → ∞, 𝑡) = 𝑇9O

𝑇9(𝑅, 0) = 𝑇9O

where 𝑇2/ is the nanoparticle temperature, 𝛼2/ is thermal diffusivity of the nanoparticle and R 

its radius, 𝑇9(𝑟, 𝑡)  is surrounding water temperature at radius r and time t, 𝜅9 is thermal 

conductivity of water and 𝛼9 represents the thermal diffusivity of water equals to  

zw

SwTR. 

𝑇> is the initial temperature of the nanoparticle that equals to 400 K. 𝑇9O is the temperature of 

water far from the nanoparticle which is assumed to be 300 K based on  MD results which show  

that water shells at a distance  greater than 𝑟 =2 nm, have temperatures approximately around  

300 K. In order to solve the coupled equations of 17 and 18, the thermo-physical properties of 

the nanoparticle and the surrounding water around it are needed. To this aim, we assume that 

the nanoparticle shares the characteristics of bulk silver. Therefore, the high thermal conductivity 

of silver result in Eq.18 resulting like a lumped model. The specific heat capacity and thermal 

conductivity of bulk water are assumed to be 4.2 kJ/kgK and 0.8 W/mK, respectively, obtained 

from an MD simulation based on TIP4P/2005[40]. The interfacial thermal conductance between 

the water and the nanoparticle is set to G = 4.6×108 W/m2K as obtained from EMD calculations. 

The density of water shells is directly obtained from molecular dynamics simulation as shown in 


 

17

Figure 6. It can be seen that the density of the first water shell (r=1.1 nm) is different from the 

other shells. Thus, the thermal conductivity of this water shell may not equal to the bulk water 

thermal conductivity, but as an initial estimation, the thermal conductivity of bulk water is 

assumed for this water shell. The temperatures of solid-like model resulted from numerical 

solution of equations 17 and 18 through a finite element method (FEM) are plotted in Figure 6c. 

It is evident that there is a qualitative  agreement between temperature distribution of water 

shells around the nanoparticle from MD simulations and FEM results. This can confirm that the 

continuum solid-like heat diffusion model captures the important physics associated with the 

length and time-scale  associated with the evolution of the water temperature in close vicinity of 

the nanoparticle, despite the nanoscale structural changes in water induced by the presence of 

the nanoparticle.   

One of the assumptions of the previous analysis was that the thermal conductivity of water at 

the interface is the same as that of the bulk. In order to assess the sensitivity of our analysis to 

the choice of the water thermal conductivity, the difference between MD and FEM results for the 

temperature of the first water shell in various thermal conductivities is computed as follows: 

19)
( 

𝑆, = 1

𝑁 V '𝑇}~•(𝑡) − 𝑇•€(𝑡)-

,

,• /‚

rLO

where N is the number of recorded data in the quenching process. As shown in Figure 7, the 

minimum of S is obtained using a thermal conductivity of k = 1.4 W/mK for the first water shell. 

Hence, it can be revealed that the thermal conductivity of first water shell around the 

nanoparticle is likely higher than thermal conductivity of bulk water by about 50%. Qualitatively, 

this result is not surprising, as the first water shell due to its enhanced structuring should be a 

better thermal conductor as bulk liquid water. However, the qualitative features of the 

dissipation mechanism are also well predicted using the bulk thermal conductivity of water. 

 

 


 

18

 

Figure 6: (a): Temperature distribution of water around the nanoparticle at t = 4ps calculated from the 

continuum model (FEM) (b): Density of surrounding water directly obtained from MD simulation. (c): 

Temperature of different water shells around the nanoparticle during the thermal relaxation of the 

nanoparticle. Colored lines are MD results and black dashed lines are continuum model (FEM) calculated 

with different values of the thermal conductivities for the first water shell.  

 

950

1000

1050

1100

1150

1200

1250

1300

r (nm)

t=4 ps

(b)

(a)

T(K)

Water density (kg/m3)

(c)
MD (r= 1.1 nm)
MD (r= 1.3 nm)

MD (r= 1.5 nm)

Model (k=2.5 W/mK )

Model (k=1.4 W/mK )

Model (k=0.8 W/mK )


 

19

 

Figure 7: The difference between MD and FEM temperature values (Eq.19) for various thermal 

conductivities of the first water shell. 

4. Conclusion 

In this paper, the thermal transport mechanisms between a nanoparticle and surrounding water 

was investigated using molecular dynamics simulations and compared with continuum modeling. 

At first, the interfacial thermal conductance based on four different MD approaches was 

calculated. The results from all of four approaches were within the same order of magnitude. 

SNEMD and EMD approaches showed good agreement (under 10% difference) with each other 

while transient techniques displayed slightly greater difference (about 25%) with SNEMD and 

EMD values. MD results also reveal that in the cooling process of a hot silver nanoparticle, the 

heat dissipates into the solvent over a length-scale of ~ 2nm and over a timescale of less than 

5ps.  

By introducing a continuum solid-like model and considering a heat conduction mechanism in 

water, it is observed that the results of the temperature distribution for water shells around the 

nanoparticle agree with the MD results. Moreover, with introducing a solid-like continuum model 

and comparing the results with the MD simulations, it is shown that the dominant mechanism in 

heat transfer in water near the nanoparticle on these timescales involves only conduction and 

not convection. It is also revealed that the local thermal conductivity of water shell adjacent to 

the nanoparticle is higher than that of bulk water by about 50%.  

0.112

0.114

0.116

0.118

0.12

0.122

0.124

0.126

0.7
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5

S (k)

k (W/mK)


 

20

Our results have important implications in the understanding and development of engineering 

devices relevant for heat transport as well as in medical applications for thermal therapy cancer 

treatment methods. In the future, it will be interesting to examine how the heat dissipation 

mechanism is sensitive to both the chemical details of the interface being considered as well as 

the type of solvent. 

 

References 

[1] 
D. M. Leitner, “Energy flow in proteins.,” Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., vol. 59, pp. 233–59, 
2008. 

[2] 
D. M. Leitner and J. E. Straub, Proteins: Energy, Heat and Signal Flow. London: Taylor and 
Francis/CRC, 2009. 

[3] 
S.-M. Park, P. H. Nguyen, and G. Stock, “Molecular dynamics simulation of cooling: Heat 
transfer from a photoexcited peptide to the solvent,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 131, no. 18, p. 
184503, Nov. 2009. 

[4] 
B. Shi, Y. K. Shin, A. A. Hassanali, and S. J. Singer, “DNA Binding to the Silica Surface.,” J. 
Phys. Chem. B, vol. 119, no. 34, pp. 11030–40, 2015. 

[5] 
B. Shi, Y. K. Shin, A. A. Hassanali, and S. J. Singer, “Biomolecules at the amorphous 
silica/water interface: Binding and fluorescence anisotropy of peptides,” Colloids 
Surfaces B Biointerfaces, vol. 157, pp. 83–92, 2017. 

[6] 
A. Vallee, V. Humblot, and C.-M. Pradier, “Peptide Interactions with Metal and Oxide 
Surfaces,” Acc. Chem. Res., vol. 43, no. 10, pp. 1297–1306, 2010. 

[7] 
P. L. Kapitza, “Heat transfer and superfluidity of helium II,” Phys. Rev., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 
354–355, 1941. 

[8] 
I. Khalatnikov, An introduction to the theory of superfluidity. Perseus Books, 1989. 

[9] 
A. Ramiere, S. Volz, and J. Amrit, “Thermal resistance at a solid/superfluid helium 
interface,” Nat. Mater., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 512–516, 2016. 

[10] 
Z. Ge, D. G. Cahill, and P. V Braun, “Thermal conductance of hydrophilic and hydrophobic 
interfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 96, no. 18, pp. 1–4, 2006. 

[11] 
A. Lervik, F. Bresme, and S. Kjelstrup, “Heat transfer in soft nanoscale interfaces: the 
influence of interface curvature,” Soft Matter, vol. 5, no. 12, p. 2407, 2009. 

[12] 
A. Lervik, F. Bresme, S. Kjelstrup, D. Bedeaux, and J. Miguel Rubi, “Heat transfer in 
protein–water interfaces,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., vol. 12, no. 7, p. 1610, 2010. 


 

21

[13] 
J.-L. BARRAT and F. CHIARUTTINI, “Kapitza resistance at the liquid—solid interface,” Mol. 
Phys., vol. 101, no. 11, pp. 1605–1610, Jun. 2003. 

[14] 
L. Xue, P. Keblinski, S. R. Phillpot, S. U. S. Choi, and J. A. Eastman, “Two regimes of 
thermal resistance at a liquid-solid interface,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 118, no. 1, pp. 337–
339, 2003. 

[15] 
L. Xue, P. Keblinski, S. R. Phillpot, S. U. S. Choi, and J. A. Eastman, “Effect of liquid layering 
at the liquid-solid interface on thermal transport,” Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., vol. 47, no. 
19–20, pp. 4277–4284, 2004. 

[16] 
S. Merabia, S. Shenogin, L. Joly, P. Keblinski, and J.-L. Barrat, “Heat transfer from 
nanoparticles: A corresponding state analysis,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 106, no. 36, pp. 
15113–15118, 2009. 

[17] 
S. Merabia, P. Keblinski, L. Joly, L. J. Lewis, and J. L. Barrat, “Critical heat flux around 
strongly heated nanoparticles,” Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., vol. 79, 
no. 2, pp. 1–4, 2009. 

[18] 
Y. Wang and P. Keblinski, “Role of wetting and nanoscale roughness on thermal 
conductance at liquid-solid interface,” vol. 073112, pp. 1–3, 2011. 

[19] 
H. Hu and Y. Sun, “Effect of nanopatterns on Kapitza resistance at a water-gold interface 
during boiling: A molecular dynamics study,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 112, no. 5, 2012. 

[20] 
A. Pham, M. Barisik, and B. Kim, “Pressure dependence of Kapitza resistance at 
gold/water and silicon/water interfaces,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 139, no. 24, pp. 0–10, 2013. 

[21] 
T. Q. Vo and B. H. Kim, “Interface thermal resistance between liquid water and various 
metallic surfaces,” Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1341–1346, 2015. 

[22] 
A. S. Tascini, J. Armstrong, E. Chiavazzo, M. Fasano, P. Asinari, and F. Bresme, “Thermal 
transport across nanoparticle–fluid interfaces: the interplay of interfacial curvature and 
nanoparticle–fluid interactions,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 3244–3253, 
2017. 

[23] 
H. Han et al., “Solid-Liquid Interface Thermal Resistance Affects the Evaporation Rate of 
Droplets from a Surface: A Study of Perfluorohexane on Chromium Using Molecular 
Dynamics and Continuum Theory,” Langmuir, vol. 33, no. 21, pp. 5336–5343, 2017. 

[24] 
H. Han, S. Mérabia, and F. Müller-Plathe, “Thermal Transport at Solid–Liquid Interfaces: 
High Pressure Facilitates Heat Flow through Nonlocal Liquid Structuring,” J. Phys. Chem. 
Lett., vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 1946–1951, May 2017. 

[25] 
X. Wu et al., “Thermal Transport across Surfactant Layers on Gold Nanorods in Aqueous 
Solution,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, vol. 8, no. 16, pp. 10581–10589, 2016. 

[26] 
J. Soussi, S. Volz, B. Palpant, and Y. Chalopin, “A detailed microscopic study of the heat 
transfer at a water gold interface coated with a polymer,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 106, no. 
9, p. 93113, 2015. 


 

22

[27] 
J. L. Abascal and C. Vega, “A general purpose model for the condensed phases of water: 
TIP4P/2005.,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 123, no. 23, p. 234505, 2005. 

[28] 
T. Halicio??lu and G. M. Pound, “Calculation of potential energy parameters form 
crystalline state properties,” Phys. Status Solidi, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 619–623, Aug. 1975. 

[29] 
S. Plimpton, “Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics,” J. Comput. 
Phys., vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 1–19, Mar. 1995. 

[30] 
N. N. Nedyalkov et al., “Interaction of gold nanoparticles with nanosecond laser pulses: 
Nanoparticle heating,” Appl. Surf. Sci., vol. 257, no. 12, pp. 5456–5459, 2011. 

[31] 
F. P. Incropera and D. P. DeWitt, Introduction to Heat Transfer. New York: Wiley, 1985. 

[32] 
A. Jain and A. J. H. McGaughey, “Thermal transport by phonons and electrons in 
aluminum, silver, and gold from first principles,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 93, no. 8, pp. 1–5, 
2016. 

[33] 
A. Rajabpour and S. Volz, “Thermal boundary resistance from mode energy relaxation 
times: Case study of argon-like crystals by molecular dynamics,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 108, 
no. 9, 2010. 

[34] 
A. Rajabpour and S. Volz, “Universal interfacial thermal resistance at high frequencies,” 
vol. 195444, pp. 2–5, 2014. 

[35] 
Y. Chalopin, A. Rajabpour, H. Han, Y. Ni, and S. Volz, “Equilibrium Molecular Dynamics 
Simulations on Interfacial Phonon Transport,” Annu. Rev. Heat Transf., vol. 17, no. Dmm, 
pp. xx–xx, 2014. 

[36] 
N. Agmon et al., “Protons and Hydroxide Ions in Aqueous Systems,” Chem. Rev., vol. 116, 
no. 13, pp. 7642–7672, Jul. 2016. 

[37] 
Mohammad Mahdi Heyhat, Ali Rajabpour, Mohsen Abbasi and Saeed Arabha 
“Importance of Nanolayer Formation in Nanofluid Properties: Equilibrium Molecular 
Dynamic Simulations for Ag-Water Nanofluid,” J. Mol. Liq., 2018. 

[38] 
Y. Ma, Z. Zhang, J. Chen, K. Sääskilahti, S. Volz, and J. Chen, “Ordered water layer induced 
by interfacial charge decoration leads to an ultra-low Kapitza resistance between 
graphene and water,” Carbon N. Y., vol. 135, pp. 263–269, Aug. 2018. 

[39] 
M. Frank and D. Drikakis, “Solid-like heat transfer in confined liquids,” Microfluid. 
Nanofluidics, vol. 21, no. 9, p. 148, Sep. 2017. 

[40] 
F. Römer, A. Lervik, and F. Bresme, “Nonequilibrium molecular dynamics simulations of 
the thermal conductivity of water: A systematic investigation of the SPC/E and 
TIP4P/2005 models,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 137, 2012. 

 

 


