1
Das et al.

Electrochemical kinetics of SEI growth on carbon black

II: Modeling

Supratim Das1, Peter M. Attia2, William C. Chueh2 Martin Z. Bazant1*

*Corresponding author: bazant@mit.edu

1. Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 

MA 02139

2. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract

Mathematical models of capacity fade can reduce the time and cost of lithium-ion battery 

development and deployment, and growth of the solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) is a major 

source of capacity fade. Experiments in Part I reveal nonlinear voltage dependence and strong 

charge-discharge asymmetry in SEI growth on carbon black negative electrodes, which is not 

captured by previous models. Here, we present a theoretical model for the electrochemical 

kinetics of SEI growth coupled to lithium intercalation, which accurately predicts experimental

results with few adjustable parameters. The key hypothesis is that the initial SEI is a mixed ion-

electron conductor, and its electronic conductivity varies approximately with the square of the 

local lithium concentration, consistent with hopping conduction of electrons along percolating 

networks. By including a lithium-ion concentration dependence for the electronic conductivity in 

the SEI, the bulk SEI thus modulates the overpotential and exchange current of the electrolyte 

reduction reaction. As a result, SEI growth is promoted during lithiation but suppressed during 

delithiation. This new insight establishes the fundamental electrochemistry of SEI growth 

kinetics. Our model improves upon existing models by introducing the effects of electrochemical 


2
Das et al.

SEI growth and its dependence on potential, current magnitude, and current direction in 

predicting capacity fade.

Main

To operate a lithium-ion battery in the thermodynamically stable regime, the 

electrochemical potential of its electrodes must lie within the stability window of the electrolyte, 

constraining the open circuit voltage of the full cell. If the negative electrode potential falls 

below this stability window, a passivating SEI layer will grow on the electrode surface. The SEI 

layer forms on top of the active negative electrode material, typically graphitic carbon, resulting 

in depletion of the lithium ion inventory inside the battery1. Although the SEI layer is imperative 

to the stable operation of lithium ion batteries with organic electrolytes in the low potential 

regime, its continued formation during battery operation is detrimental to all performance 

metrics of a battery. The growth of this layer presents an additional barrier for ionic and 

electronic transport within the battery, resulting in resistive heating2 under high current 

operations3 and other unwanted side reactions due to localized thermal effects4,5. Furthermore, 

the increased overpotential for lithium transport can induce lithium plating6. Since SEI growth is 

closely related to the overall degradation of a typical lithium ion battery with a graphitic negative 

electrode, accurate modeling of this phenomenon is critical for understanding and improving 

lithium-ion battery lifetime.

Continuum modeling of SEI growth: Continuum modeling of SEI growth involves the interplay 

of multiple phenomena, any of which could be rate-limiting: (a) electron conduction through the 

SEI, (b) lithium ion conduction through the SEI, (c) solvent/electrolyte diffusion through pores

in the SEI, (d) chemical and mechanical dissolution of the SEI to expose more fresh surface to 


3
Das et al.

electrolyte, and (e) charge transfer in SEI growth reaction and its coupling with (de)intercalation

and capacitive charge storage. To further complicate this system, the many electrolyte reduction 

mechanisms result in a variety of products7 which have different transport properties for ions and 

electrons. Most modeling work assumes one or two dominant species like LiF (8), Li2EDC (9)

and Li2CO3 (9,10). This level of detail is usually sufficient to explain the observed trends in 

capacity fade. However, other factors like electrolyte salt composition and concentration can also 

influence the composition and performance of the SEI by shifting the equilibrium potential of the

formation reactions and influencing the total irreversible capacity during the first few cycles11,12.

Many models are able to reproduce the experimental ‘square-root of time’ dependence of 

capacity fade in the long-term13–15, but this success does not necessarily translate to the 

correctness of the rate-limiting step assumed in the SEI growth model. Generally, models of SEI 

growth assume either electron or solvent transport is rate-limiting; both of these assumptions for 

the rate-limiting step yield the thickness to be proportional to the square root of time for a system 

at fixed potential. Early continuum-scale parabolic SEI growth models, such as those by Peled16

and Broussely et al.17, assumed electron transport through a homogenous SEI layer is the rate-

limiting step. Other authors such as Ploehn et al.18 have modeled solvent diffusion through the 

SEI as the rate-limiting step, meaning solvent is consumed at the carbon/SEI interface (i.e. SEI 

growth takes place at the base). Christensen and Newman19 considered both lithium and electron 

transport through the SEI and developed continuum equations in a dilute medium approximation 

for a single-particle system. Their work was the first to use the notion of a double layer in the 

SEI/electrolyte interface where the growth reactions were assumed to occur.

More recent modeling work has yet to resolve the controversy over the rate-limiting step. 

In 2013, Pinson and Bazant20 developed a single particle growth law of SEI assuming solvent 


4
Das et al.

diffusion-limited SEI growing from its base. Notably, the model was integrated into a porous 

electrode framework to account for spatial inhomogeneities in the lithium ion concentration in 

the direction of its propagation (i.e. the depth of the electrode). The work demonstrated that 

substantial variations in SEI thickness as a function of electrode depth arise only under high

current operation, and the SEI is otherwise fairly homogeneous in this direction. The base-

growth assumption was questioned by Peled and Menkin in a recent review21, citing physical 

characterization performed by Edstrom and others22–26. These works found that a porous organic 

layer covers most of the surface of the inorganic, compact SEI, which suggests that solvent 

molecules do not react at the electrode/SEI interface. An underlying assumption in this argument 

is that the porous organic layer grows after the initial layer solely because it appears to cover the 

compact layer. This assumption contradicts experimental mass spectrometry observations

showing that the porous layer actually grows prior to the underlying non-porous layer27. In any 

case, the question of the location of the growth plane of SEI remains unclear, since the 

reproduction of the square root of time scaling arises for many standard transport models where 

the growth rate is limited by the rate at which SEI precursors transport across the SEI.

All of the aforementioned models assume a uniform spatial thickness of the growing 

passivation layer and a single rate-limiting species. Single particle level inhomogeneities were 

modeled by Roder et al.28, using a multi-scale model to capture the spatial non-uniformities of 

SEI growth. The SEI reaction rates were calculated using atomistic scale simulations of 

adsorption in a 2D lattice using a kinetic Monte-Carlo (kMC) algorithm described by Burghaus29

on a selected set of SEI-forming chemical reactions (given in Table 1 of Ref 28). Single et al.30

published a coupled electrochemical SEI model that predicts transitions from electron transport 

limited to solvent-diffusion limited growth after a certain thickness. An explicit porosity variable


5
Das et al.

is used in the model, allowing for a transition in the rate-limiting step as the porosity crosses a 

critical value. In a subsequent paper31, the same authors explored the rate-limiting species by 

studying the limiting long-term growth mechanism (or LTGM). Using experimental data of the 

potential dependence of SEI growth, they concluded that the diffusion of neutral lithium 

interstitials, instead of ions or electrons, is the limiting LTGM. This work estimated that the 

diffusion of neutral lithium occurs at a timescale much larger than the diffusion of lithium ions, 

since they calculated the ion concentration is higher than that of neutral lithium in SEI 

interstices32. As a result, they concluded that neutral lithium diffusion is important in long-term 

capacity fade. Thus, different modes of transport (e.g. solvent, ions, electrons or neutral lithium) 

become important in different timescales for governing SEI growth dynamics.

Summary of key observations in Part I: In Part I of this work, we demonstrated that the post-

first cycle growth of the SEI layer shows a strong dependence on voltage, carbon black 

intercalation current and current direction. Carbon black is used as the model active material for 

this study due to its high surface area and solid solution behavior during lithium intercalation 

(see Part I).The SEI layer grows substantially at low potential, consistent with previous 

work7,21,25,33, and the irreversible capacity increases with decreasing C rate. While this 

observation has been attributed to decreasing time per cycle with decreasing C rate20, the 

dependence of time-averaged SEI growth on the current (Figure 6b in Part I) shows that cycle 

time is not the only factor determining SEI growth. We explore the interplay of current and cycle 

time in our Results and Discussion.

The most intriguing observation stated in Part I is the strong dependence of irreversible 

SEI growth on the direction of the carbon intercalation current. SEI growth is considerable


6
Das et al.

during lithiation of the carbon black electrode, but the growth ceases nearly instantaneously upon 

reversal of the current. This question of directional asymmetry in intercalation direction at 

identical potentials is distinct from that of the reversibility of SEI reactions at high potential, 

which has been previously studied in literature34–36. One factor to consider is that the SEI growth 

process competes for current with the (de)intercalation reaction under constant current 

conditions, which increases the time per cycle for lithiation and decreases the time per cycle for 

delithiation. This effect, the time difference in the lithiation and delithiation half-cycles, 

contributes to the observed ‘constant current asymmetry’. However, the stark directional 

asymmetry in the SEI growth persists even for potentiostatic conditions (Figure 7 of Part I), 

suggesting another effect is at play. This observation is not captured by the commonly accepted 

models of electrochemical SEI growth published to date.

In Part II, we investigate the hypotheses proposed in Part I to explain the observed

directional asymmetry. We mainly explore the third hypothesis, which treats the SEI as a mixed 

ion-electron conductor (MIEC). In this model, the exchange current and overpotential of the 

electrolyte reduction reaction are functions of the lithium ion and electron concentrations in the 

SEI. Specifically, the electronic conductivity of the SEI is a dynamic parameter dependent on

both current rate and direction through its coupling to the lithium-ion concentration. We explore 

different dependencies of the electron conductivity 
on the absorbed Li+ ion concentration 

to understand the electron-ion coupling that drives the kinetics of SEI growth. Parametric 

analyses are used to study the rate-limiting step for outer SEI growth, which highlights the

importance of the electron conduction mechanism in the SEI. This work presents a new 

framework for modeling the SEI that captures the experimental observations of Part I, 

specifically the directional asymmetry.


7
Das et al.

Model Description

The SEI layer growth process in the post-first-cycle regime depends upon numerous 

coupled electrode and particle scale phenomena, all of which depend on the potential and the 

concentrations of lithium ions, solvent molecules, and electrons at a particular point in the 

domain. A schematic of the dominant factors influencing post-first-cycle SEI growth on a carbon 

electrode is shown in Figure 1. The one-dimensional SEI domain originates at the carbon 

black/SEI interface and increases rightward in the schematic. The base of the SEI represents 

and the SEI/electrolyte interface represents the 
boundary, where 
is the 

dimensionless SEI thickness at any point in time.

Some key features of this model framework are as follows:

i.
This work endeavors to understand the electrochemistry of SEI growth in a small, well-

defined time scale: the second cycle to the first few cycles, dubbed ‘post-first-cycle’ 

regime, an important regime in lithium ion battery degradation. The SEI formation process 

on the first cycle is distinct and not considered in this study.

ii.
The model is agnostic to the details of individual reactions leading to SEI growth; the 

equilibrium potential of SEI growth is obtained using data from experimental 

measurements. This “effective” equilibrium potential is a lumped value that incorporates

the multitude of solvent/electrolyte reduction reactions, each with their own distinct 

equilibrium potentials8–10. 

iii.
Experimental work reported in Part I of this communication uses an electroanalytical 

technique to isolate the electrochemical signature of SEI growth on carbon black during 

galvanostatic cycling using 
as the measurement output. We compare our model 

results to the experimentally-measured values of 
and use this comparison as the 


8
Das et al.

error metric to evaluate model performance, instead of an integrative property like 

capacity.

iv.
All electrochemical reactions described in the model consider the effect of changing 

species concentrations (specifically, electrons and ions) at the interfaces in which they 

occur. This allows us to study the effect of ion and electron concentrations on fluxes at the 

reaction interfaces.

Model formulation: Since the model is motivated by the key experimental results discussed in 

Part I, we make use of these insights to simplify the picture. The diffusion and transport of 

lithium ions through the porous and non-porous SEI layers (process 2b in Figure 1) is generally

accepted to be a fast process during early cycles, as evidenced by the low interfacial impedance 

attributed to the SEI layer. Proposed mechanisms of lithium ion transport through the SEI 

include transport through interstices and grain boundaries by a ‘knock-off’ mechanism32,37,38. 

Based on the experimental observation of strong voltage dependence for SEI growth, we assume

that electron transport is rate limiting as opposed to solvent diffusion (process 3 a-b in Figure 1)

for ‘post-first-cycle’ early stage SEI, since the former is expected to exhibit stronger voltage 

dependence. 

In this picture, the (de)intercalation reaction takes place at the electrode/SEI interface 

where an electron supplied from the electrode reacts with a lithium ion diffusing through the SEI

from the electrolyte. Electrons also move across the SEI layer to reach the outer electrolyte

interface, where they react with lithium ions and electrolyte (solvent and/or salt) to form more 

SEI as a parasitic reaction that passivates the surface. We model the SEI-forming Faradaic 

reaction using the classical Butler-Volmer equation,


9
Das et al.

(1)

where the (dimensionless) overpotential
is the potential drop
across the 

compact Stern layer at the SEI/electrolyte interface, relative to its equilibrium value
given 

by the Nernst equation. We set the charge-transfer coefficient 
to 0.5, consistent with most 

models and Marcus theory for outer-sphere electron transfer39, although we explore the 

possibility of Butler-Volmer kinetics that is asymmetric between cathodic and anodic SEI 

growth/stripping reactions (not be confused with asymmetry upon carbon lithiation and 

delithiation). 

We neglect the diffuse part of the electric double layer in the electrolyte by taking the

Helmholtz limit40,41, where the Debye screening length is much smaller than the effective Stern 

layer thickness, which is reasonable for concentrated battery electrolytes. In this limit, the Stern 

layer 
voltage 
drop
that
drives 
the 
SEI 
formation 
reaction 
is 
given 
by

, where
is the potential on the outer surface of the SEI 

layer and
is that of the electrolyte just outside the double layer, which is assumed constant

in this study due to the low applied currents (<C/5). More generally, our equations could be 

coupled with electrode and cell models that includes concentration polarization in the electrolyte 

to account for large applied currents42,43 following Pinson and Bazant20.

A critical aspect of our model is to view the SEI layer as a MIEC with time-varying

concentrations of both mobile electrons
and inserted ions
. Accounting for all 

species involved in the SEI growth reaction, the Nernst equation for the equilibrium Stern layer 

voltage drop then reads,

(2)


10
Das et al.

where the reference value 
is related below to the electrode potential for the onset of the SEI 

reaction relative to lithium metal reference (see Table 1). In principle, the dimensionless SEI 

concentration (a measure of SEI product fraction per unit thickness)
could vary as the 

composition or porosity of the layer changes, but here we set 
as a first approximation.

In Equation (2), all activities have been replaced by dimensionless concentrations (for a dilute 

solution within the SEI), scaled to a common reference value consistent with the definition of 

In the same spirit, we must also account for both ion and electron concentrations in the 

derivation of the Butler-Volmer equation (1), leading to a consistent definition of the exchange 

current density for the SEI reaction that also includes the local concentration of mobile 

electrons44,

(3) 

where 
is a dimensionless rate constant. Although we neglect the dependence of the SEI 

growth reaction on the specific composition of the SEI matrix, we do account for its dependence 

on the concentrations of mobile electrons and inserted lithium ions, which are strongly coupled 

to carbon black intercalation and SEI growth kinetics.

We recognize that space charge may play a role, resulting from imbalances in the 

concentrations of electrons, ions, and fixed charges in the SEI matrix, which are governed 

additionally by Poisson’s equation. Here, as a first approximation, we assume local

electroneutrality. Moreover, we also assume intrinsic defect chemistry. Together, these 

assumptions result in equal electron and ion concentrations, i.e.
, everywhere 

within the SEI. 

Although we do not explicitly model charge as a first approximation, our model can be 

derived as the self-consistent thin double-layer limit of more general “Frumkin-Butler-Volmer” 


11
Das et al.

models of electrochemical kinetics coupled with diffuse interfacial charge41,45–48. Even with our 

level of description, the implied charge stored capacitively across each layer in the model could 

be calculated a posteriori by multiplying each voltage drop by the capacitance of that layer. 

Assuming all charge resides in thin interfaces between charge-free dielectric layers, the 

capacitance of each layer could be estimated as its dielectric constant divided by thickness. In 

this way, the implied surface charge density at the SEI/electrolyte interface could be calculated 

from the Stern layer voltage drop as
, where 
is the dielectric constant and 
the 

thickness of the Stern layer, although this is not required for the SEI growth model. Finally, 

although the mobile ions and electrons are strongly coupled by Coulomb forces and exhibit 

ambipolar diffusion while maintaining electroneutrality49, we neglect the associated 

concentration polarization by assuming that the currents are far below the diffusion-limited 

current in the SEI layer.

Since electrons do not cross into the electrolyte, the Faradaic reaction current for SEI 

growth must be equal to the electronic “leakage current” across the SEI layer. Consistent with 

the assumptions above, the latter is given by Ohm’s law,

(4) 

where
is the electronic resistance of the SEI per unit area of active electrode material and 

is the voltage drop across the SEI layer. To capture trends 

over many cycles, the SEI resistance may depend nonlinearly on the dimensionless thickness 

as a power law to indirectly account for changing porosity or fractal dimension,

(5) 


12
Das et al.

where
is a reference electronic resistance for the initial SEI layer
and

is the dimensionless mean electronic conductivity, assumed to be approximately uniform 

across the SEI layer but varying in time with the mobile electron concentration
, or the ion 

concentration 
by electroneutrality.

Electronic conductivity: The SEI electronic conductivity depends on the mobile electron 

concentration, which is equal to the inserted ion concentration by the assumption of 

electroneutrality in the intrinsic limit discussed above. For simplicity, we postulate that the 

electronic conductivity exhibits a power-law dependence on the lithium ion concentration:

(6)

The exponent 
allows us to explore different modes of electron conduction, including three 

limiting cases from semiconductor physics:

1) Constant conductivity (
): In this case, the SEI layer has a constant electronic 

conductivity irrespective of lithium-ion concentration and potential. Physically, this 

corresponds to the situation where the SEI cannot insert lithium ions, or that the electron 

concentration is fixed by impurities.

2) Ideal mixed ion-electron conductor (
): In this case, each inserted ion adjusts the 

Fermi level so as to enable another mobile electron to enter the material and carry 

electronic current, in proportion to the local ion concentration. The SEI electronic 

conductivity is thus linear with lithium-ion concentration. Physically, this corresponds to 

a semi-metal, where the additional mobile electrons associated with ion insertion are 

sufficiently delocalized and concentrated that each contributes equally to the total 

conductivity. 


13
Das et al.

3) Non-ideal mixed ion-electron conductor
: In this case, the electronic conductivity 

increases nonlinearly with inserted ion concentration, as in an semiconductor with 

hopping conduction of electrons across percolating clusters of localized states50–52. As the 

concentration of ions is increased, a long-range conductive pathway throughout the 

material is established beyond a certain critical fraction53 of occupied sites, where the 

largest cluster size becomes comparable to the thickness65. For an infinite system near the 

critical point, the effective conductivity
as a function of the inserted ion fraction

scales as,
, where 
is the critical threshold filling fraction. The scaling 

exponent 
is universal (depending only on the embedding dimension) and close to 2 in 

three dimensions50,54,55. For small, finite systems, such as the early SEI layer, the

percolation transition is smoothed, and the conductivity may be approximated by a 

simple quadratic function across the full concentration range, as shown in Figure 2.

In the absence of any direct measurement or predictive simulations of electronic conductivity, we 

fit the prefactor in each case to the experimental 
data as a function of voltage (and 

indirectly to state of charge). By combining Equations (1) - (6), the voltage drops across the SEI 

and Stern layers are connected by the conservation of electronic current, which leaks through the 

SEI layer to cause electrolyte reduction that further grows the SEI, in a way that depends on the

concentration of inserted lithium ions.

Lithium ion insertion and transport in the SEI and carbon electrode: To complete the model, 

we postulate mechanisms for lithium ion insertion into and transport through the SEI layer, 

followed by Faradaic reaction and intercalation into the active carbon material. To determine the

lithium concentration in SEI, we adopt the standard model of surface charge regulation by quasi-


14
Das et al.

equilibrium ion absorption from the electrolyte, which has been successful in diverse 

applications47,56–60. By equating the electrochemical potential of ions in the SEI layer and the 

electrolyte, assuming each is a dilute solution, we arrive at the absorption isotherm,

(7)

where 
is the specific energy of absorption of lithium ions from the electrolyte into the SEI.

The modulation of the ion concentration in SEI, and thus its electronic conductivity, by the Stern 

layer voltage is an important source of asymmetry in the model.

Inserted lithium ions migrate through the SEI from the electrolyte until they reach the 

SEI/electrode interface, where they participate in the dominant, reversible Faradaic reduction 

reaction. Although our SEI model could be applied to any electrode reduction, such as lithium 

metal electrodeposition instead of lithium ion intercalation, we focus here on the experiments of 

Part I for Li-ion insertion in carbon black as a model electrode for SEI growth in Li-ion batteries. 

The first step in modeling the electrode is to describe the open circuit voltage via the activity 

of the reduced state, or, in this case, the electrochemical potential of intercalated lithium ions 

, which depends on their concentration 
according to an appropriate 

thermodynamic model of the solid44. Neglecting any variable polarization of the counter-

electrode, the open-circuit potential can be modeled using the Nernst equation for the half 

reaction of one-electron reduction, 
, as, 

(8)

where 
is the standard redox potential for intercalation, relative to the ideal counter-

electrode (e.g. lithium metal), and 
is the activity of the oxidized state of the reaction (the 

lithium ion in SEI), which we set equal to the dimensionless ion concentration, consistent with

the dilute solution approximation above.


15
Das et al.

Lithiated carbon black exhibits solid solution behavior and a suppression of graphitic 

phase separation61, as confirmed by in-situ X-ray diffraction62. Therefore, we assume a semi-

empirical chemical potential of the form,

(9)

where the first term is the (dimensionless) configurational entropy of an ideal solid solution of 

intercalated ions and vacancies and the second term is an empirical approximation for the 

dimensionless enthalpy of intercalation. Fitted values of the parameters , 
and 
are given in 

Table 1 for the open circuit potential of lithium in carbon black relative to lithium metal.

The Faradaic intercalation reaction is again described using Butler-Volmer kinetics, 

(10)

where the intercalation overpotential 
is given by 
and the intercalation 

exchange current is given by, 

(11)

where 
is another rate constant, and 
captures the asymmetry between carbon lithiation 

and delithiation reactions.
The carbon black intercalation kinetics is assumed to be reaction 

limited. 

The model is completed by the conservation of ionic current. We operate our simulations 

in galvanostatic mode. The sum of the intercalation and SEI electronic currents is constrained to 

be equal to the total driving current in the cell as,

(12)

While the SEI growth “leakage” current 
is carried by electrons across the SEI layer, the 

intercalation current is carried by the ions, 


16
Das et al.

(13)     

which encounter their own ohmic resistance across the SEI layer, 
in 

parallel with that of the electrons. For typical situations where 
, we expect the SEI 

layer to be much more resistive to electrons than to ions, 
, although these are 

left as fitting parameters. Since ions encounter much less resistance than electrons, the transport 

mechanism is not expected to affect the overall simulation. Thus, we take ionic conductivity in 

the SEI to be linearly proportional to the carrier concentration, 
.  Finally, we consider the 

mass balance of SEI growth driven by the electronic leakage current, 

(14)

where 
is the specific surface area of the typical SEI reaction product in contact with the 

electrolyte. In our simulation, it is assumed that SEI grows uniformly on the active material, and 

thus 
is assumed equal to the specific surface area of active material. Values of all tunable 

parameters used in this model are tabulated in Table 1.

Numerical method and validation: We solve all the equations on a static equidistant one-

dimensional grid within the SEI layer. The 
of the grid is located at the base of the SEI 

layer on the carbon black/SEI interface, while 
is the moving outer boundary of the SEI

(the SEI/electrolyte interface). To solve this system of equations, we take the general approach of 

discretizing each in space using a finite difference method to obtain a system of differential 

algebraic equations (DAEs), and then stepping in time using a variable-order adaptive time 

stepper (MATLAB’s ode15s function). All equations are solved for the six primary variables -

, 
- simultaneously in the whole domain at all times. The 


17
Das et al.

stopping criteria on lithiation and delithiation are the upper and lower cutoff potentials of 1.2 V 

and 0.01 V, respectively; the upper cutoff potential is taken to be 1.2 V for model analyses since 

all SEI growth occurs at potentials below this value (see Figure 4 in Part I). The parameters in 

Table 1 are obtained from differential capacity (
) data of single cells for lithiation and 

delithiation across a variety of galvanostatic current values ranging from C/100 to C/5. The 

goodness of fit for each iteration is determined using partial least squares, and MATLAB’s 

fmincon function used to obtain the optimal values.

Summary of conventions: In this work, reduction (or intercalating) current is assumed to be 

negative, consistent with the IUPAC convention. Negative current corresponds to discharging of 

the carbon black/lithium half cell. All concentration terms in this model are non-dimensionalized 

using the electrolyte bulk lithium ion concentration 
(assumed 1 M in our electrolyte, 1.0 M 

LiPF6 in 1:1 wt% EC:DEC), and potentials with the thermal voltage, 
. All battery 

operations are considered isothermal, operating at T = 298K. All currents and exchange current 

prefactors are defined per unit area of active material. All potentials are defined with respect to 

the standard potential of lithium metal as the reference.

Summary of model framework: In this model, intercalation is coupled to SEI growth via the 

species concentrations which appear in the overpotentials (
) and the exchange currents 

(
) and via the constraints in Equations (4) and (13). Importantly, this coupling exists 

even for thin SEI where the ionic resistance is negligible. The direction of the current determines 

the sign of the polarization of the SEI and outer film, thereby controlling the lithium ion 

concentration in the SEI via Equation (7). This concentration term affects the exchange currents 


18
Das et al.

and overpotentials of both reactions and makes the reaction kinetics sensitive to current direction 

and magnitude. The resistance of the SEI to electrons (
), a measure of the degree of 

passivation, is dependent on the potential, current magnitude, and current direction, as the 

mechanism of electron transfer depends upon those factors. Since the SEI electronic resistance 

determines the electron flux to the outer film that participates in electrolyte decomposition, it 

effectively controls the available overpotential of the SEI growth reaction.

Summary of assumptions/simplifications: This modeling endeavor is inspired by the 

experimental findings outlined in Part I and undertakes an approach that uses only the level of 

detail that can be supported directly using the experimental data, minimizing the number of 

parameters. We briefly summarize some key assumptions here:

Outer surface growth of SEI: One of the biggest challenges in SEI growth modeling is 

obtaining conclusive evidence of the location of its growth plane. Motivated by the strong 

voltage dependence observed experimentally, we assume that the SEI layer grows from its outer 

surface (i.e. electron-transport limited) and formulate our rate-limiting step hypotheses 

accordingly. This allows us to effectively model the potential dependence and coupling between 

intercalation and SEI growth.

Uniform SEI on single particle: The model is area-averaged (i.e. 1-dimensional) and 

assumes SEI of uniform thickness to be growing on top of a single particle of carbon black, 

which is a simplification of the actual scenario of SEI growth in porous electrodes.

Intercalative charge storage in carbon black: Carbon nanomaterials such as carbon black 

typically have high specific capacitance due to the high specific surface area63. While both 


19
Das et al.

intercalation and capacitance contribute significantly to charge storage in carbon black 

(elucidated in Part I), for simplicity we assume the carbon black capacity is purely intercalative.

Electrolyte sourced lithium ions: In this work, we assume the only source of lithium ions 

participating in SEI growth is the electrolyte, as opposed to the intercalated lithium in the 

lithiated electrode. The latter source can be expected to become important under long periods of 

storage, where chemical SEI growth reactions may occur under open circuit conditions (affecting 

“calendar life”).

Butler-Volmer kinetics: As in most electrochemical engineering models, we use the 

empirical Butler-Volmer equation to model the faradaic reaction kinetics of intercalation and SEI 

formation, which can be justified at low overpotentials but may over-estimate the reaction rate at 

high overpotentials, compared to quantum mechanical models of electron transfer, such as 

Marcus kinetics64,65.

Uniform lithium ion concentration profile in SEI: We assume a spatially uniform

concentration profile of lithium ions in the SEI layer in this time regime, where the thickness of 

the layer is small. Effects due to diffusion driven concentration gradients usually occur over 

longer timescales than that of the system under study. Therefore, this assumption is unlikely to 

produce significant errors in the model predictions. However, the errors in prediction may 

increase at larger SEI thicknesses or evolution of sufficiently porous SEI30.

Moderately dilute solution approximation: While we do account for concentration 

dependencies of the exchange current and the overpotential for both intercalation and SEI 

formation, we set the activity coefficients to unity for all species, as in a dilute solution. On the 

other hand, we assume the solution is concentrated enough (as in typical battery electrolytes) to 

neglect diffuse double layers and associated Frumkin corrections40,45 to Butler Volmer kinetics.


20
Das et al.

Results and Discussion

In Part I, we isolate the contribution of the SEI to the differential capacity,
, by 

subtracting the differential capacity in an early cycle from the differential capacity at a later 

“baseline” cycle. The differential capacity in an early cycle (e.g. cycle 2) has contributions from 

both carbon black and SEI, while the differential capacity in the baseline cycle primarily 

measures carbon black. Thus, the resultant difference, 
, measures the voltage 

dependence of SEI growth within the early cycle. We use 
as the experimental quantity 

to evaluate goodness of fits with model predictions. In this section, we evaluate the second and 

third hypotheses described in Part I to understand the nature of the rate-limiting step of post-first-

cycle SEI growth. Briefly, the second hypothesis states that directional asymmetry of SEI growth 

on carbon lithiation vs. delithiation could arise from the intrinsic differences between lithiation 

and delithiation into carbon, phenomenologically captured through deviations of 
from 0.5 in 

our model. The third hypothesis states that the SEI behaves as a MIEC, and a concentration-

dependent electron conductivity is the cause of directional asymmetry in SEI growth. The 

outcome guides our understanding of the rate-limiting process that governs the kinetics of SEI 

growth.

Constant current asymmetry: Figure 3 shows the current and dimensionless SEI thickness as a 

function of time for the case of the SEI behaving as a simple resistor with constant electronic 

conductivity, i.e. the exponent 
in Equation (6). From Figure 3b, post-first cycle SEI 

clearly does not follow a 
growth, as is widely observed for long term SEI growth. SEI growth 

is low in the high potential region (i.e. beginning of lithiation and end of delithiation in Figure 3)

and rapidly accelerates as the potential decreases below 
0.3 V. The constant conductivity SEI 


21
Das et al.

model, though not in quantitative agreement with experiments, does demonstrate some degree of 

directional asymmetry – in this case, the growth in the delithiation step is 27% of that in the 

lithiation step. During lithiation, as the SEI current reduces the total current available for 

intercalation (Figure 3a) under a constant current constraint (Equation (12)), the time required to 

reach the lower cutoff potential of 10 mV is longer than what would be expected for a nominal 

driving current of C/10 (i.e. 10 hours). Upon switching of the current direction, the 

deintercalation current becomes larger in magnitude than the total current because the SEI 

current remains negative at the switching potential of 10 mV. Higher deintercalation current 

leads to the system reaching the upper voltage cutoff of 1.2 V more quickly than the expected 10 

hours for a C/10 nominal driving current. Less delithiation cycle time leads to reduced growth of 

SEI, and this effect can be thought of as ‘constant current asymmetry’. A large SEI current, 

which is directly proportional to the specific surface area of active material, results in a more 

pronounced ‘constant current asymmetry’. For active materials with micron-scale particle sizes 

like graphite, this effect will be less significant compared to nanostructured negative electrode 

materials. This effect causes slower charging and faster discharging during galvanostatic cycling 

for any system with non-negligible SEI growth.

Determination of rate-limiting mechanism of post-first-cycle SEI growth: However, we 

observed experimentally that the directional asymmetry of SEI growth persists under 

potentiostatic conditions as well (see Figure 7 in Part I). Thus, this directional asymmetry has a 

deeper physical origin than the trivial coupling discussed in the previous section. To

quantitatively capture the directional asymmetry, we explore other modes electronic conduction

in SEI (i.e., 
and 2 given in Equation (6)). The colormap plots in Figure 4 show the degree 


22
Das et al.

of asymmetry, defined as difference between the lithiation and delithiation SEI capacities 

(
), as a function of four parameters: SEI resistance to electrons
, the SEI reaction 

prefactor
, the correlation exponent 
and the transfer coefficient
of (de)intercalation. 

The upper bound of 
is the value at which the SEI current approaches the total current. The 

SEI capacities 
and 
are calculated by integrating the 2nd-cycle 
with respect 

to voltage from 0.01 V to 0.7 V. The shaded regions describe the range of parameter values that 

reproduce the 
values for experimentally observed average 
and 
values given in 

Figure 7. Some features common to all three columns are worth pointing out as they lead to 

important insights:

First,
is very sensitive to
since a more insulating SEI results in a higher 

degree of ‘constant current asymmetry’. As described earlier, constant current asymmetry

increases the time spent in lithiation and reduces the time spent in delithiation. 

Second, the gradient of the change in color is almost always parallel to the SEI current

prefactor (
) axis for the range of explored values, indicating that
is a weak function of 

. From the Butler-Volmer equation, the SEI current is identical for a given overpotential,

irrespective of the current direction. We note that the fitted SEI equilibrium potential is 0.73V, 

which means that we are always on the cathodic branch of the Butler-Volmer equation.

Third, the impact of the carbon (de)intercalation charge-transfer coefficient,
, on 

directional asymmetry is fairly small. A deviation of 
from 0.5 physically could correspond 

to a difference in the free energy landscape of intercalation and de-intercalation pathways (the 

second hypothesis given in Part I), or in the context of asymmetric Marcus-Hush kinetics of 

electron transfer, a difference in the solvent reorganization free-energy curvatures for the 


23
Das et al.

reduced and oxidized states66–68. However, under the assumptions given in this paper, this 

hypothesis cannot quantitatively explain the experimental observations. 

The colormap plots in column 1 of Figure 4 depict that the constant electronic 

conductivity (
) model displays very low directional asymmetry across a range of different 

parameters, which is inconsistent with experimental observations. Thus other modes of electron 

conduction need to be explored. Column 2 of Figure 4 shows a parametric study of directional 

asymmetry using the ideal MIEC model (
). This model manages to partially reproduce the 

observed directional asymmetry, though for a narrow range of parameters in the case of 

0.7 for nominal C rates of C/100 and C/50. Importantly, these ‘agreements’ (refer to Figure 7 for 

experimental data of SEI capacities) are only obtained when using different parameters for 

different C rates in this parametric analysis, and thus cannot be used to develop a consistent 

theory explaining directional asymmetry in SEI. In addition, the microscopic Marcus theory66

predicts a symmetric charge transfer coefficient 
equal to 0.5 for a Butler-Volmer 

formulation69–71 of ion intercalation kinetics for moderate overpotentials of less than 1 V (< , the 

reorganization energy)72. A value of 
not equal to 0.5 (such as 
0.7 shown in Figure 4, 

which physically implies a greater bias for reduction current) may often mask some diode-like 

physics related to space charge at the interface44,64–66,68, which causes the intercalation current, 

and consequently the electrolyte/solvent reduction current, to be higher for one polarization over 

the reverse. We suspect may be the case in our system since the 
for 
0.7 matches 

with experimental values for a narrow range of 
for the
case (see middle subplot of 

bottom row in Figure 4).

We account for this diode-like behavior explicitly by considering a non-ideal MIEC 

model (
), and set 
equal to 0.5. A parabolic dependence physically corresponds to the 


24
Das et al.

effect of percolation for hopping conduction of electrons across the SEI, as described earlier. The 

asymmetric nature of the functional form of Equation (7) describing the absorbed lithium ion 

concentration implies that the concentration is enhanced in one direction of the polarization. This

effect results in an electron conductivity that is directional in nature. Column 3 of Figure 4 shows 

the colormap plots for the percolation-based non-ideal mixed ion-electron conduction effect. In 

this case, we obtain quantitative agreement (within error) using a symmetric (de)intercalation 

charge transfer coefficient 
0.5 for a value of 
. The best fit with 

experiments across all nominal C rates is obtained for a reference electron conductivity of 

S m-1 which gives an SEI resistance 
= 14 
for a measured specific surface 

area of 62 m2 g-1 for the carbon black electrode. Figure 5 demonstrates the good agreement of 

the theoretical
predictions with experiments for a range of currents from C/100 to C/5.

The simulation results in Figures 5 and 6 are generated using the parameters mentioned in Table 

1 and assuming a charge transfer coefficient of 0.5 for both carbon (de)intercalation and SEI 

electrolyte reduction reactions. The strong goodness-of-fits suggest that the inclusion of this 

nonlinear dependence of electron conductivity on the lithium ion concentration is the most 

important factor in our model determining the rate of post-first-cycle outer SEI growth for 

moderate driving currents. This result adds support to our main hypothesis that the post-first 

cycle SEI growth is limited by the flux of electrons across the layer, which affects the electron

availability in the outer reaction film.

Mechanism of electron conduction across the SEI layer: The SEI, often considered an 

electronic insulator, may behave like a non-ideal MIEC if the concentration of inserted ions 

increases beyond a certain threshold to facilitate hopping conduction among the localized nearby 


25
Das et al.

electronic states73. From Figure S1 in the Supplementary Material, we find that the Tafel slope is 

best reproduced for the quadratic dependence of conductivity on the lithium concentration. We 

draw from this and the results obtained in Figures 4 and 5, to develop a theory that considers 

how both an asymmetry in the lithium ion concentration in the SEI and the nonlinear dependence 

of electron conductivity on the lithium ion concentration lead to the observed directional 

asymmetry in SEI capacity on lithiation vs. delithiation of carbon black. The relation 

approximates the effect of hopping conduction of electrons across percolating 

networks of inserted lithium ions in the SEI74. To visualize this phenomenon, the SEI layer can 

be thought of as a porous 3D isotropic lattice with some lattice sites (or defects) with the ability 

to accommodate absorbed lithium ions from the electrolyte. We use the term lattice loosely here 

since SEI contains amorphous phases. 

Figure 6 presents the time profiles of current (6a), electronic conductivity of the SEI (6b), 

SEI thickness (6c), and lithium-ion concentration in the SEI (7d) for a simulation incorporating 

percolated hopping conduction (
) for a nominal rate of C/10. During lithiation, the 

concentration of lithium ions increases in the SEI (6d), which randomly occupy a fraction of the 

lattice sites. Electrons hop across the layer to reach the outer surface of the SEI, at which point 

they react to form SEI. As the inserted ion (and mobile electron) concentration increases beyond 

a threshold value, the occupied sites form a ‘spanning’ cluster53, which establishes long-range 

connectivity of the ions. This network allows the electrons to complete a hopping conduction 

event across the entire domain (illustrated as process 2 in Figure 1). According to standard 

percolation theory75, the probability of obtaining long-range connectivity of hopping sites scales 

roughly as the square of the electron/ion concentration beyond a critical filling fraction of 

inserted ions. 


26
Das et al.

Upon reversal of the direction of the electric field in the SEI (i.e. reversal of the driving 

current), the outer film is depleted of lithium ions, and the concentration of ions drops 

instantaneously in the SEI as the effect of this depletion is felt throughout the layer (assuming 

fast transport of lithium ions in the SEI). This event causes the long-range connectivity of the 

percolating network of localized electronic states to be disrupted, leading to a large and 

instantaneous drop in electron conductivity (6b) per Equation (6) and breaking the symmetry of 

electron availability in the outer reaction film. This affects the exchange current and the 

overpotential of the solvent/electrolyte reduction reaction. The mixed-conducting SEI, acting like 

a diode, becomes highly passivating and shuts down the SEI current almost completely (6a) in 

the delithiation step, resulting in near-zero growth of the layer (6c).

Given the rapid change in SEI growth rate upon reversal of the sign of the current, we 

mention that an interfacial electron transfer effect, as proposed here, is a more plausible 

mechanism of directional asymmetry in SEI growth than a mechanism involving bulk transport 

by solid diffusion (i.e. within a carbon black particle). Although solid diffusion is also affected 

by the sign of current and can exhibit history dependence, solid diffusion is slow and cannot 

respond so quickly to current reversal.

The idea of a dependence of SEI conductivity on concentration and potential is not new. 

Many authors have considered ion diffusion through defects in the SEI to be the rate determining 

step for SEI growth by performing atomistic calculations76–78 based on model compounds like 

Li2CO3 and LiF. However, experimental results such as the ones by Zhuang et al.79 and 

Kobayashi et al.80 suggested that growth kinetics are not just a function of ion diffusion but also 

electron conduction81. Shi et al.76 speculated upon an electron leakage mechanism, which

depends upon neutral lithium diffusion (i.e. ambipolar diffusion of Li+/e- polarons) through 


27
Das et al.

defects in the SEI. In this study, we claim that the coupling between ionic concentration and 

electronic conduction across the SEI is what governs the post-first-cycle growth kinetics. To the 

best of the authors’ knowledge, this paper presents the first experimentally validated electron 

conduction mechanism for post-first cycle SEI growth that is coupled to the inserted ion 

concentration within the layer.

As the SEI layer gets thicker with increasing cycle number, electron diffusion across the 

SEI layer may eventually become more difficult, as finite clusters of hopping sites no longer 

percolate across the layer. This picture for thicker SEI layers would be consistent with Peled’s 

original theory of electron transport limited growth82. The SEI may also become porous with the 

growth reaction distributed over an internal surface area, influenced by the competing diffusion 

of electrons, ions, and solvent molecules in a heterogeneous composite31-32. 

Interdependence of cycle time and driving current in SEI growth: Figure 7a describes the 

dependence of the second cycle SEI capacity during lithiation and delithiation as a function of 

the nominal C rate. The second-cycle SEI capacity decreases with C rate during lithiation and is 

independent of C rate during delithiation. This behavior has been primarily attributed to the 

higher cycle time spent for lower driving currents, allowing more time for SEI to grow20. 

However, if time was the only dominant factor, then the time-normalized SEI capacity should be 

independent of C rate, as the SEI reaction roughly goes through the same overpotential profile 

for different driving currents. However, Figure 7b depicts the average SEI current (i.e. the SEI 

capacity divided by the time per cycle) for lithiation increasing with total current with an average 

dimensionless slope of ~0.1. This theoretical result is consistent with experiment. This 


28
Das et al.

relationship signifies a nontrivial interdependence between cycle time and C rate in governing 

SEI growth kinetics.

We explore this interdependence further using parametric simulations for a range of 

values of electronic resistance (
), SEI kinetic rate constant (
) and intercalation charge-

transfer coefficient (
). The colormap plots in Figure S2 in Supplementary Material show the 

dependence of the average SEI growth rate on C rate for
= 0, 1, and 2. The
case

(constant electronic conductivity) gives us the expected zero dependence on C rate; in other 

words, SEI growth is only dependent on time. For the 
and 
cases (ideal and non-

ideal MIECs), the dependence is non-zero for most values in the parameter space. This result 

suggests that the model captures the time-current interdependence that persists for a range of 

current rates below C/5. For a fixed total current 
, an increase in the kinetic rate constant 

results in an increase in the SEI current 
and a decrease in the intercalation current 
. A 

higher 
translates to a higher slope (a measure of time-current interdependence), which 

causes the color gradient to be primarily vertical and increasing with 
. Since the average 

conductivity is higher for 
than for 
, the time-current interdependence for the former

is higher. We conclude that SEI capacity is a function of both the SEI current and the total cycle 

time, and the former increases with the nominal C rate.

Conclusions

This modeling work is based on the experimental observations of Part I, which identifies 

strong dependencies of SEI growth to voltage, current magnitude, and current direction. In Part 

II, we develop a model of post-first-cycle SEI growth that is extensively validated across a range 

of low (C/100) to moderate (C/5) current rates. To explain the observed stark directional 


29
Das et al.

asymmetry in SEI growth between lithiation and delithiation, we develop a model that assumes a 

non-linear coupling of ion concentration and electron transfer. In this framework, the SEI 

behaves as a mixed ion-electron conductor, with the electron conductivity varying approximately 

as the square of lithium ion concentration in the SEI. This mechanism is consistent with hopping 

conduction of electrons across a percolating cluster of inserted lithium ions. We find that SEI 

growth is limited by electron availability in the outer reaction film. Delithiation of the electrode

results in an instantaneous depletion of the lithium ion concentration in the SEI, breaking the 

symmetry of electron availability for SEI and leading to low growth on delithiation.

We have explored how the coupling between the concentration of lithium ions and 

electrons in the SEI can influence the electron conductivity, the exchange current, and 

overpotential of the electrolyte reduction reaction. From the results in Figures 4 and 5, 
is 

an important parameter determining the degree of directional asymmetry. Using the model, we 

find that 
influences the overpotential available for the electrolyte/solvent reduction 

reaction and acts to reduce the available overpotential as the resistance is increased. Most SEI 

models typically consider the resistance to be solely a function of the SEI thickness, but here we 

show that SEI thickness may be a much more complex function of transient variables such as the 

cell potential, electron concentration, current direction, current magnitude, and the ion absorption 

energy.

Our model has seven fitted parameters that influence the electrochemical kinetics of SEI 

growth. We have presented one set of parameter values in Table 1 that leads to the reproduction 

of the experimental outcome through coupling of the intercalation and electrolyte reduction 

reactions. Modifications to this framework include specifying electrolyte reduction/intercalation

charge transfer coefficients that deviate from 0.5, changing the plane of growth (which would 


30
Das et al.

change the effect of concentration variables on the electrolyte/solvent reduction), assuming a 

different rate limiting step, changing the magnitude of the ion absorption energy, and assuming 

non-integer values of the scaling exponent . However, considerable covariance exists between 

the parameters, making distinguishing between sets of parameter values difficult.

These results warrant a fresh look at the nature of the SEI layer in early-stage (i.e. post-

first-cycle) capacity fade modeling efforts, accounting for the voltage and current dependencies 

within the span of a cycle. In this time regime, our results suggest a crucial coupling between ion 

and election transfer through SEI. This interaction also affects the interplay of cycle time and C 

rate in determining the overall average SEI capacity under different conditions, and model results 

predict the shift in the trend of C rate dependence of SEI capacity as the driving current is 

increased beyond C/5. This observation may have interesting implications for lithium-ion 

batteries operated at high charging rates, which is a major focus of research efforts in the field. 

Lastly, this model provides important insights into the fundamental nature of electrochemical 

SEI and could be incorporated into the degradation modules of battery modeling software such 

as MPET83. 

Acknowledgements

We thank Prof. Richard D. Braatz and Dr. Stephen J. Harris for insightful discussions. 

This work was supported by the Toyota Research Institute through D3BATT: Center for Data-

Driven Design of Li-Ion Batteries (S. D.) and by the Thomas V. Jones Stanford Graduate 

Fellowship, and the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant 

No. DGE-114747 (P. M. A.).


31
Das et al.

Table A1: Appendix

Symbol
Description
Unit

Differential capacity during cycling
mAh g-1 V-1

Differential capacity due to isolated SEI growth
mAh g-1 V-1

Dimensionless potential drop (scaled to thermal voltage 

kT/e) at carbon/SEI interface due to (de)intercalation

-

Intercalation open circuit potential, dependent on SoC
-

Dimensionless potential drop driving electronic conduction 

across SEI; 

-

Dimensionless potential drop across the compact Stern layer 

at the SEI/electrolyte interface;

-

SEI growth / Electrolyte reduction overpotential; 
-

Intercalation overpotential; 
-

Current density per electrode area of (de)intercalation
A m-2

Areal current of SEI growth
A m-2

Total areal current 
A m-2

Dimensionless lithium ion concentration in SEI
-

Dimensionless electron concentration in SEI
-

Intercalated lithium filling fraction, measure of SoC
-

Electronic resistance of SEI

Dimensionless SEI thickness
-


32
Das et al.

Dimensionless electronic conductivity in SEI
S m-1

Scaling of e- conductivity to Li+ concentration in SEI
-

References

(1) 
Hayashi, K.; Nemoto, Y.; Tobishima, S. I.; Yamaki, J. I. Mixed Solvent Electrolyte for 
High Voltage Lithium Metal Secondary Cells. Electrochim. Acta 1999, 44 (14), 2337–
2344.

(2) 
Joho, F.; Novák, P.; Spahr, M. E. Safety Aspects of Graphite Negative Electrode Materials 
for Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2002, 149 (8), A1020.

(3) 
Zhang, Z.; Fouchard, D.; Rea, J. R. Differential Scanning Calorimetry Material Studies: 
Implications for the Safety of Lithium-Ion Cells. J. Power Sources 1998, 70 (1), 16–20.

(4) 
Dahn, J. R.; Fuller, E. W.; Obrovac, M.; Vonsacken, U. Thermal-Stability of LixCoO2, 
LixNiO2 and Lambda-MnO2 and Consequences for the Safety of Li-Ion Cells. Solid State 
Ionics 1994, 69 (3–4), 265–270.

(5) 
Lux, S. F.; Chevalier, J.; Lucas, I. T.; Kostecki, R. HF Formation in LiPF6-Based Organic 
Carbonate Electrolytes. ECS Electrochem. Lett. 2013, 2 (12), A121–A123.

(6) 
Winter, M.; Besenhard, J. O. Electrochemical Intercalation of Lithium into Carbonaceous 
Materials. In Lithium Ion Batteries : Fundamentals and Perhrmance; 1998; pp 127–156.

(7) 
Aurbach, D.; Markovsky, B.; Weissman, I.; Levi, E.; Ein-Eli, Y. On the Correlation 
between Surface Chemistry and Performance of Graphite Negative Electrodes for Li Ion 
Batteries. Electrochim. Acta 1999, 45 (1), 67–86.

(8) 
Nie, M.; Abraham, D. P.; Chen, Y.; Bose, A.; Lucht, B. L. Silicon Solid Electrolyte 
Interphase (SEI) of Lithium Ion Battery Characterized by Microscopy and Spectroscopy. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117 (26), 13403–13412.

(9) 
Nie, M.; Chalasani, D.; Abraham, D. P.; Chen, Y.; Bose, A.; Lucht, B. L. Lithium Ion 
Battery Graphite Solid Electrolyte Interphase Revealed by Microscopy and Spectroscopy. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117 (3), 1257–1267.

(10) Michan, A. L.; Leskes, M.; Grey, C. P. Voltage Dependent Solid Electrolyte Interphase 

Formation in Silicon Electrodes: Monitoring the Formation of Organic Decomposition 
Products. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28 (1), 385–398.

(11) Xiao, A.; Yang, L.; Lucht, B. L.; Kang, S.-H.; Abraham, D. P. Examining the Solid 

Electrolyte Interphase on Binder-Free Graphite Electrodes. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2009, 156
(4), A318.

(12) Nie, M.; Abraham, D. P.; Seo, D. M.; Chen, Y.; Bose, A.; Lucht, B. L. Role of Solution 

Structure in Solid Electrolyte Interphase Formation on Graphite with LiPF6 in Propylene 
Carbonate. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117 (48), 25381–25389.


33
Das et al.

(13) Smith, A. J.; Burns, J. C.; Zhao, X.; Xiong, D.; Dahn, J. R. A High Precision Coulometry 

Study of the SEI Growth in Li/Graphite Cells. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2011, 158 (9), A447–
A452.

(14) Smith, A. J.; Dahn, J. R. Delta Differential Capacity Analysis. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2012, 

159 (3), A290.

(15) Bloom, I.; Cole, B. W.; Sohn, J. J.; Jones, S. A.; Polzin, E. G.; Battaglia, V. S.; Henriksen, 

G. L.; Motloch, C.; Richardson, R.; Unkelhaeuser, T.; et al. An Accelerated Calendar and 
Cycle Life Study of Li-Ion Cells. J. Power Sources 2001, 101 (2), 238–247.

(16) Peled, E. The Electrochemical Behavior of Alkali and Alkaline Earth Metals in 

Nonaqueous Battery Systems—The Solid Electrolyte Interphase Model. J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 1979, 126 (12), 2047.

(17) Broussely, M.; Herreyre, S.; Biensan, P.; Kasztejna, P.; Nechev, K.; Staniewicz, R. J. 

Aging Mechanism in Li Ion Cells and Calendar Life Predictions. J. Power Sources 2001, 
97–98, 13–21.

(18) Ploehn, H. J.; Ramadass, P.; White, R. E. Solvent Diffusion Model for Aging of Lithium-

Ion Battery Cells. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2004, 151 (3), A456.

(19) Christensen, J.; Newman, J. A Mathematical Model for the Lithium-Ion Negative 

Electrode Solid Electrolyte Interphase. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2004, 151 (11), A1977.

(20) Pinson, M. B.; Bazant, M. Z. Theory of SEI Formation in Rechargeable Batteries: 

Capacity Fade, Accelerated Aging and Lifetime Prediction. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2013, 
160 (2), A243–A250.

(21) Peled, E.; Menkin, S. Review—SEI: Past, Present and Future. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 

164 (7), A1703–A1719.

(22) Edstrom, K.; Herstedt, M.; Abraham, D. P. A New Look at the Solid Electrolyte 

Interphase on Graphite Anodes in Li-Ion Batteries. J. Power Sources 2006, 153 (2), 380–
384.

(23) Broussely, M.; Biensan, P.; Bonhomme, F.; Blanchard, P.; Herreyre, S.; Nechev, K.; 

Staniewicz, R. J. Main Aging Mechanisms in Li Ion Batteries. J. Power Sources 2005, 
146, 90–96.

(24) Vetter, J.; Novák, P.; Wagner, M. R.; Veit, C.; Möller, K. C.; Besenhard, J. O.; Winter, 

M.; Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, M.; Vogler, C.; Hammouche, A. Ageing Mechanisms in 
Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Power Sources 2005, 147 (1–2), 269–281.

(25) Verma, P.; Maire, P.; Novák, P. A Review of the Features and Analyses of the Solid 

Electrolyte Interphase in Li-Ion Batteries. Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55 (22), 6332–6341.

(26) Zhang, H. L.; Li, F.; Liu, C.; Tan, J.; Cheng, H. M. New Insight into the Solid Electrolyte 

Interphase with Use of a Focused Ion Beam. J. Phys. Chem. B 2005, 109 (47), 22205–
22211.

(27) Lu, P.; Li, C.; Schneider, E. W.; Harris, S. J. Chemistry, Impedance, and Morphology 


34
Das et al.

Evolution in Solid Electrolyte Interphase Films during Formation in Lithium Ion Batteries. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118 (2), 896–903.

(28) Roder, F.; Braatz, R. D.; Krewer, U. Multi-Scale Simulation of Heterogeneous Surface 

Film Growth Mechanisms in Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164 (11), 
E3335–E3344.

(29) Burghaus, U.; Stephan, J.; Vattuone, L.; Rogowska, J. M. A Practical Guide to Kinetic 

Monte Carlo Simulations and Classical Molecular Dynamics Simulations: An Example 
Book; 2006.

(30) Single, F.; Horstmann, B.; Latz, A. Revealing SEI Morphology: In-Depth Analysis of a 

Modeling Approach. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164 (11), E3132–E3145.

(31) Single, F.; Latz, A.; Horstmann, B. Identifying the Mechanism of Continued SEI Growth. 

ChemSusChem 2018.

(32) Shi, S.; Lu, P.; Liu, Z.; Qi, Y.; Hector, L. G.; Li, H.; Harris, S. J. Direct Calculation of Li-

Ion Transport in the Solid Electrolyte Interphase. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 (37), 
15476–15487.

(33) Arora, P.; White, R. E.; Doyle, M. Capacity Fade Mechanisms and Side Reactions in 

Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 1998, 145 (10), 3647.

(34) See, K. A.; Lumley, M. A.; Stucky, G. D.; Grey, C. P.; Seshadri, R. Reversible Capacity 

of Conductive Carbon Additives at Low Potentials: Caveats for Testing Alternative Anode 
Materials for Li-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164 (2), A327–A333.

(35) Chan, C. K.; Ruffo, R.; Hong, S. S.; Cui, Y. Surface Chemistry and Morphology of the 

Solid Electrolyte Interphase on Silicon Nanowire Lithium-Ion Battery Anodes. J. Power 
Sources 2009, 189, 1132–1140.

(36) Tasaki, K.; Goldberg, A.; Lian, J.-J.; Walker, M.; Timmons, A.; Harris, S. J. Solubility of 

Lithium Salts Formed on the Lithium-Ion Battery Negative Electrode Surface in Organic 
Solvents. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2009, 156, A1019.

(37) Pan, J.; Cheng, Y. T.; Qi, Y. General Method to Predict Voltage-Dependent Ionic 

Conduction in a Solid Electrolyte Coating on Electrodes. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter 
Mater. Phys. 2015, 91 (13).

(38) Benitez, L.; Seminario, J. M. Ion Diffusivity through the Solid Electrolyte Interphase in 

Lithium-Ion Batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2017, 164 (11), E3159–E3170.

(39) Bard, A. J.; Faulkner, L. R.; York, N.; @bullet, C.; Brisbane, W.; Toronto, S. E. 

ELECTROCHEMICAL METHODS Fundamentals and Applications; 1944.

(40) Biesheuvel, P. M.; Franco, A. A.; Bazant, M. Z. Diffuse Charge Effects in Fuel Cell 

Membranes. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2009, 156 (2), B225.

(41) Bazant, M. Z.; Chu, K. T.; Bayly, B. J. Current-Voltage Relations for Electrochemical 

Thin Films. 2005, 65 (5), 1463–1484.

(42) Newman, J.; Thomas-Alyea, K. Electrochemical Systems, Third Edit.; 2004; Vol. 7.


35
Das et al.

(43) Smith, R. B.; Bazant, M. Z. Multiphase Porous Electrode Theory. J. Electrochem. Soc.

2017, 164 (11), E3291–E3310.

(44) Bazant, M. Z. Theory of Chemical Kinetics and Charge Transfer Based on 

Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics. Acc. Chem. Res. 2013, 46 (5), 1144–1160.

(45) Biesheuvel, P. M.; van Soestbergen, M.; Bazant, M. Z. Imposed Currents in Galvanic 

Cells. Electrochim. Acta 2009, 54 (21), 4857–4871.

(46) Biesheuvel, P. M.; Fu, Y.; Bazant, M. Z. Diffuse Charge and Faradaic Reactions in Porous 

Electrodes. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys. 2011, 83 (6).

(47) Andersen, M. B.; Van Soestbergen, M.; Mani, A.; Bruus, H.; Biesheuvel, P. M.; Bazant, 

M. Z. Current-Induced Membrane Discharge. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109 (10), 1–5.

(48) Moran, J. H.; Wheat, P. M.; Posner, J. D. Locomotion of Electrocatalytic Nanomotors Due 

to Reaction Induced Charge Autoelectrophoresis. Phys. Rev. E 2010, 81, 065302.

(49) Riess, I. Mixed Ionic–electronic Conductors—material Properties and Applications. Solid 

State Ionics 2003, 157 (1–4), 1–17.

(50) Bergman, D. J.; Stroud, D. Physical Properties of Macroscopically Inhomogeneous Media. 

Solid State Phys. - Adv. Res. Appl. 1992, 46 (C), 147–269.

(51) Stauffer, D.; Aharony,  a. Introduction to Percolation Theory. Computer. 1994, p 192.

(52) Torquato, S. Random Heterogeneous Materials: Microstructure and Macroscopic 

Properties; 2012; Vol. XXXIII.

(53) Rintoul, M. D.; Torquato, S. Precise Determination of the Critical Threshold and 

Exponents in a Three-Dimensional Continuum Percolation Model. J. Phys. A. Math. Gen.
1997, 30 (16).

(54) Clerc, J. P.; Giraud, G.; Laugier, J. M.; Luck, J. M. The Electrical Conductivity of Binary 

Disordered Systems, Percolation Clusters, Fractals and Related Models. Adv. Phys. 1990, 
39 (3), 191–309.

(55) Kozlov, B.; Lagus, M. Universality of 3D Percolation Exponents and First-Order 

Corrections to Scaling for Conductivity Exponents. Phys. A Stat. Mech. its Appl. 2010, 
389 (23), 5339–5346.

(56) Behrens, S. H.; Grier, D. G. The Charge of Glass and Silica Surfaces. J. Chem. Phys.

2001, 115 (14), 6716–6721.

(57) Deng, D.; Dydek, E. V.; Han, J. H.; Schlumpberger, S.; Mani, A.; Zaltzman, B.; Bazant, 

M. Z. Overlimiting Current and Shock Electrodialysis in Porous Media. Langmuir 2013, 
29 (52), 16167–16177.

(58) Bazant, M. Z.; Kilic, M. S.; Storey, B. D.; Ajdari, A. Towards an Understanding of 

Induced-Charge Electrokinetics at Large Applied Voltages in Concentrated Solutions. 
Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2009, 152 (1–2), 48–88.

(59) Lyklema, J.; Duval, J. F. L. Hetero-Interaction between Gouy-Stern Double Layers: 


36
Das et al.

Charge and Potential Regulation. Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2005, 114–115, 27–45.

(60) Duval, J. F. L.; Leermakers, F. A. M.; Van Leeuwen, H. P. Electrostatic Interactions 

between Double Layers: Influence of Surface Roughness, Regulation, and Chemical 
Heterogeneities. Langmuir 2004, 20 (12), 5052–5065.

(61) Bai, P.; Cogswell, D. A.; Bazant, M. Z. Suppression of Phase Separation in LiFePO4 

Nanoparticles during Battery Discharge. Nano Lett. 2011, 11 (11), 4890–4896.

(62) Dahn, J. R.; Fong, R.; Spoon, M. J. Suppression of Staging in Lithium-Intercalated 

Carbon by Disorder in the Host. Phys. Rev. B 1990, 42 (10), 6424–6432.

(63) Lukatskaya, M. R.; Dunn, B.; Gogotsi, Y. Multidimensional Materials and Device 

Architectures for Future Hybrid Energy Storage. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 1–13.

(64) Zeng, Y.; Smith, R. B.; Bai, P.; Bazant, M. Z. Simple Formula for Marcus-Hush-Chidsey 

Kinetics. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2014, 735, 77–83.

(65) Henstridge, M. C.; Laborda, E.; Wang, Y.; Suwatchara, D.; Rees, N.; Molina, Á.; 

Martínez-Ortiz, F.; Compton, R. G. Giving Physical Insight into the Butler-Volmer Model 
of Electrode Kinetics: Application of Asymmetric Marcus-Hush Theory to the Study of 
the Electroreductions of 2-Methyl-2-Nitropropane, Cyclooctatetraene and Europium(III) 
on Mercury Microelectrodes. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2012, 672, 45–52.

(66) Marcus, R. A. On the Theory of Oxidation-Reduction Reactions Involving Electron 

Transfer. I. J. Chem. Phys. 1956, 24 (5), 966–978.

(67) Henstridge, M. C.; Laborda, E.; Compton, R. G. Asymmetric Marcus-Hush Model of 

Electron Transfer Kinetics: Application to the Voltammetry of Surface-Bound Redox 
Systems. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2012, 674, 90–96.

(68) Zeng, Y.; Bai, P.; Smith, R. B.; Bazant, M. Z. Simple Formula for Asymmetric Marcus-

Hush Kinetics. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2015, 748, 52–57.

(69) Newman, J.; Thomas, K. E.; Hafezi, H.; Wheeler, D. R. Modeling of Lithium-Ion 

Batteries. J. Power Sources 2003, 119–121, 838–843.

(70) Botte, G. G.; Subramanian, V. R.; White, R. E. Mathematical Modeling of Secondary 

Lithium Batteries. Electrochim. Acta 2000, 45 (15–16), 2595–2609.

(71) Doyle, M.; Fuller, T.; Newman, J. Modeling of Galvanostatic Charge and Discharge of the 

Lithium/Polymer/Insertion Cell. J. Electrochem. Soc. 1993, 140 (6), 1526–1533.

(72) Chidsey, C. E. Free Energy and Temperature Dependence of Electron Transfer at the 

Metal-Electrolyte Interface. Science 1991, 251 (4996), 919–922.

(73) Mott, N. F. The Metal-Insulator Transition in Extrinsic Semiconductors. Adv. Phys. 1972, 

21 (94), 785–823.

(74) Bazant, M. Z. Largest Cluster in Subcritical Percolation. Phys. Rev. E - Stat. Physics, 

Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top. 2000, 62 (2), 1660–1669.

(75) Christensen, K. Percolation Theory. Thesis 2002, 1–40.


37
Das et al.

(76) Shi, S.; Qi, Y.; Li, H.; Hector, L. G. Defect Thermodynamics and Diffusion Mechanisms 

in Li 2 CO 3 and Implications for the Solid Electrolyte Interphase in Li-Ion Batteries. J. 
Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117 (17), 8579–8593.

(77) Li, Y.; Leung, K.; Qi, Y. Computational Exploration of the Li-Electrode | Electrolyte 

Interface in the Presence of a Nanometer Thick Solid-Electrolyte Interphase Layer 
Published as Part of the Accounts of Chemical Research Special Issue “ 
Nanoelectrochemistry ” . Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 2363–2370.

(78) Mizusaki, J.; Tagawa, H.; Saito, K.; Uchida, K.; Tezuka, M. Lithium Carbonate as a Solid 

Electrolyte. Solid State Ionics 1992, 53–56 (PART 2), 791–797.

(79) Zhuang, G. V.; Chen, G.; Shim, J.; Song, X.; Ross, P. N.; Richardson, T. J. Li2CO3in 

LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2cathodes and Its Effects on Capacity and Power. J. Power 
Sources 2004, 134 (2), 293–297.

(80) Kobayashi, H.; Shikano, M.; Koike, S.; Sakaebe, H.; Tatsumi, K. Investigation of Positive 

Electrodes after Cycle Testing of High-Power Li-Ion Battery Cells. I. An Approach to the 
Power Fading Mechanism Using XANES. J. Power Sources 2007, 174 (2), 380–386.

(81) Winter, M. The Solid Electrolyte Interphase-The Most Important and the Least 

Understood Solid Electrolyte in Rechargeable Li Batteries. Zeitschrift für Phys. Chemie
2009, 223 (10–11), 1395–1406.

(82) Peled, E. The Electrochemical Behavior of Alkali and Alkaline Earth Metals in 

Nonaqueous Battery Systems—The Solid Electrolyte Interphase Model. J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 1979, 126 (1), 2047.

(83) Smith, R. B.; Bazant, M. Z. MPET : Multiphase Porous Electrode Theory Software. J. 

Electrochem. Soc. 2017.

(84) Nie, M.; Abraham, D. P.; Seo, D. M.; Chen, Y.; Bose, A.; Lucht, B. L. Role of Solution 

Structure in Solid Electrolyte Interphase Formation on Graphite with LiPF 6 in Propylene 
Carbonate. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117 (48), 25381–25389.


38
Das et al.

Symbol
Description
Value/Unit
Determination

kSEI
Exchange current prefactor for SEI
A m-2
Fitted

kint
Exchange current prefactor for 

(de)intercalation

A m-2
Fitted

Equilibrium redox potential of SEI
0.73 V (vs. Li/Li+)
Fitted

Initial SEI electronic resistance
Fitted

Initial SEI ionic resistance
Fitted

Thickness scaling for changing 

porosity

1.21
Fitted

Li+ ion absorption energy in SEI
3.6 eV
Fitted

A
Parameter in open circuit potential 

expression for carbon black in Eq. 9

-0.17
Fitted

B
Parameter in open circuit potential 

expression for carbon black in Eq. 9

-0.42
Fitted

C
Parameter in open circuit potential 

expression for carbon black in Eq. 9

-0.48
Fitted

L0 
Initial post-first cycle SEI thickness
30 nm84
Assumed

Butler Volmer charge transfer 

coefficient for (de)intercalation

0.50
Assumed

Butler Volmer charge transfer 

coefficient for SEI growth

0.50
Assumed

Specific surface area of SEI (assumed 

equal to that of super P carbon black 

electrode)

~62 m2 g-1
Supplier spec

Table 1: List of all model parameters


39
Das et al.

Figure Captions

Figure 1: Schematic of 1D uniform SEI layer on a carbon negative electrode depicting dominant 

phenomena that can affect outer SEI growth kinetics. Process 1: (a) electron incorporation into 

SEI from carbon (b) electron conduction across SEI (c) electron reaction to form new SEI. 

Process 2: (a) Absorption and desolvation of lithium ion from electrolyte (b) diffusion of lithium 

ion across SEI (c) intercalation of lithium into carbon. Process 3: (a) Solvent incorporation in 

SEI (b) Solvent diffusion across SEI. Image not to scale, SEI thickness is exaggerated to 

highlight relevant physical processes.

Figure 2: Theoretical dependence of conductivity as a function of the fraction of occupied sites 

(analogous to bond concentration) for random bond-diluted networks (filled circles) and 

correlated addition to uniform spanning tree model (hollow circles) on the square lattice 

averaged over 25 realizations on the 50x50x50 lattice. This behavior can be approximated by 

assuming the conductivity to vary roughly as the square of the fraction of occupied sites 

(superimposed dashed line). Base figure reproduced from Chubynsky M. V., Thorpe M. F., Phys. 

Rev. E 71, 056105 (2005).

Figure 3: Characteristics of SEI with constant electronic conductivity under constant current 

C/10 (a) SEI and intercalation current distribution. (b) Evolution of dimensionless SEI thickness 

as a function of cycle time during lithiation and delithiation.

Figure 4: Parametric analysis of the degree of directional asymmetry of SEI growth for various 

models, SEI reaction rate constants, SEI resistances and intercalation charge-transfer coefficients 


40
Das et al.

for percolation conduction model of SEI. The nominal C rate plotted here is C/50. The dotted 

regions include experimental range of values within 95% CI.

Figure 5: ∆dQ/dV comparisons of theoretical predictions with experiments between cycle 2 and 

the baseline cycle for five different nominal C rates: (a) C/100, (b) C/50, (c) C/20, (d) C/10, and 

(e) C/5. The orange and blue set of lines in each subplot represent delithiation and lithiation, 

respectively. Dotted lines are theoretical predictions, and cell-averaged experimental values are 

represented using solid lines.

Figure 6: Characteristics of percolation model of electron conduction in SEI layer under 

constant nominal C rate of C/10 (a) SEI and intercalation currents distribution (b) Dynamic 

behavior of SEI conductivity (c) Evolution of dimensionless SEI thickness (normalized to 

thickness after first cycle) (d) concentration of lithium ions in SEI during lithiation and 

delithiation (normalized to electrolyte ion concentration). 

Figure 7: Comparison of theoretical predictions to experimental values of second-cycle SEI 

growth as a function of current and current direction (a) Dependence of second-cycle SEI growth 

on nominal C rate. These capacities are calculated from the integral of the ∆dQ/dV curves in 

Figure 6. (b) Dependence of second-cycle time-normalized ‘average’ SEI growth rate on 

nominal C rate. The average SEI growth rate is calculated by dividing SEI growth by the actual 

time per cycle. In both subplots, the error bars in experimental data represent 95% confidence 

intervals (CI) of the mean.


41
Das et al.

Supplementary Material Figure Captions

Figure S1: Potential dependence of dQ/dV compared with experiments between cycle 2 and 

the baseline cycle for SEI exhibiting (a) non-ideal, percolating MIEC (b) ideal MIEC, and (c) 

constant electronic conductivity, for a nominal total current C/10.

Figure S2: Parametric analysis of the slope of the average SEI growth rate when plotted against 

the nominal C rate, as predicted by the theory for a wide range of SEI resistances and models 

with different correlations of ion-electron conduction in SEI. White dotted regions include 

experimental values within 95% CI.


42
Das et al.


43
Das et al.


44
Das et al.

Lithiation

Delithiation

(a)

(b)

Itot = C/10
ISEI
Iint
Itot


45
Das et al.

0.3

0.5

0.7

(A m

-2)

Model

Qdiff (mAh/g)


46
Das et al.

x10

3

(a) C/100
(b) C/50
(c) C/20

(e) C/5
(d) C/10

R

2=0.67
R

2=0.7
R

2=0.81

R

2=0.84
R

2=0.88

Lithiation

Delithiation

Experiments
Theory


47
Das et al.

Itot = C/10

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

x 10

-11

ISEI
Iint
Itot

Lithiation

Delithiation

Lithiation

Delithiation

Lithiation

Delithiation

Lithiation

Delithiation


48
Das et al.

(a)

(b)


49
Das et al.

Lithiation

Delithiation

Experiments
Theory

(a)
(b)
(c)

Itot=C/10


50
Das et al.

0.3

0.5

0.7

(A m

-2)

Model

slope


