Efficient Er/O Doped Silicon Light-Emitting Diodes at 

Communication Wavelength by Deep Cooling 

Huimin Wen1,#, Jiajing He1,#, Jin Hong2,#, Fangyu Yue2* & Yaping Dan1* 

1University of Michigan-Shanghai Jiao Tong University Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong 

University, Shanghai, 200240, China. 

2Key Laboratory of Polar Materials and Devices, Ministry of Education, East China Normal 

University, Shanghai, 200241, China. 

#These authors contributed equally 

* To whom correspondence should be addressed: Yaping.dan@sjtu.edu.cn, fyyue@ee.ecnu.edu.cn 

 

Abstract  

A silicon light source at communication wavelength is the bottleneck for developing 

monolithically integrated silicon photonics. Doping silicon with erbium ions was 

believed to be one of the most promising approaches but suffers from the aggregation 

of erbium ions that are efficient non-radiative centers, formed during the standard rapid 

thermal treatment. Here, we apply a deep cooling process following the high-

temperature annealing to suppress the aggregation of erbium ions by flushing with 

Helium gas cooled in liquid nitrogen. The resultant light emitting efficiency is increased 

to a record 14% at room temperature, two orders of magnitude higher than the sample 

treated by the standard rapid thermal annealing. The deep-cooling-processed Si samples 

were further made into light-emitting diodes. Bright electroluminescence with a 

spectral peak at 1.54 µm from the silicon-based diodes was also observed at room 

temperature. With these results, it is promising to develop efficient silicon lasers at 

communication wavelength for the monolithically integrated silicon photonics. 

 


 

The monolithic integration of fiber optics with complementary metal-oxide-

semiconductor (CMOS) integrated circuits will significantly speed up the computing 

and data transmission of current communication networks.1-3 This technology requires 

efficient silicon-based lasers at communication wavelengths.4, 5 Unfortunately, silicon 

is an indirect bandgap semiconductor and cannot emit light at communication 

wavelengths. Erbium ions (Er3+) have radiative emissions at 1.54 µm which is in the 

telecommunication wavelength band for long haul optic fibers.5-8 Introducing erbium 

ions (often with oxygen) into silicon by ion implantation was believed to be one of most 

promising approaches8-10 among others11-16 to create silicon-based lasers. However, 

during the standard rapid thermal treatment, erbium dopants aggregate to form clusters 

that are efficient nonradiative recombination centers.17, 18 As a result, the emission from 

erbium doped silicon is extremely weak at room temperature.5-10, 17, 18 Here, we applied 

a deep cooling (DC) process following the high-temperature thermal annealing on the 

erbium and oxygen co-doped silicon wafer at a cooling rate up to 1000 °C/s by flushing 

with Helium gas cooled in liquid nitrogen (77 K). The dramatic cooling process 

suppresses the aggregation of Er dopants that occurs during the slow cooling process 

of the high-temperature thermal annealing, allowing for a strong room-temperature 

emission at 1.54 µm from the Er/O co-doped silicon wafer. The internal quantum 

efficiency of the emission reaches a record of 14%, approximately 2 orders of 

magnitude higher than the samples treated by the standard rapid thermal annealing 

(RTA). The DC-processed Si samples were further made into light-emitting diodes 


(LED). Bright electroluminescence with a spectral peak at 1.54 µm from the silicon-

based diodes was also observed at room temperature. Given the single crystalline nature 

of the silicon substrate, efficient silicon lasers may be readily developed for the full 

integration of fiber optics with CMOS circuitry. 

 

Figure 1 │ Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the Er/O-Si samples. a, PL spectra of the deep 

cooling (DC) processed samples measured at different temperatures. b, Peak intensity as a function 

of temperature for the DC- (red squares) and RTA- processed (blue dots) samples, respectively. c, 

Ambient room-temperature PL spectrum for the DC- (red line) and RTA-processed (blue line) 

samples. d, Quantum efficiency of the DC-processed sample as a function of the excitation laser 

power at 300 K (black dots) and 4 K (red squares), respectively. 

The intrinsic single-crystalline silicon wafer was first doped with erbium and oxygen 

by ion implantation. The Er/O-implanted silicon wafer was cut into two sets of samples 


that separately went through the DC and RTA procedure (see Methods). The secondary 

ion mass spectrometric (SIMS) measurements in Supplementary Fig. 1a show that the 

Er and O dopants are mostly located at ~80 nm below the surface with a maximum 

concentration of 2.8 × 1020 cm-3 and 1.4 × 1021 cm-3, respectively. Fig.1a shows the 

temperature-dependent photoluminescence (PL) of the DC-processed samples. The 

sharp luminescence at 1.54 μm with a narrow full width at half maximum (FWHM, ~25 

nm) represents the characteristic 4f transition of Er3+.5-10 The temperature-dependent 

PL of the RTA-processed samples is shown in Supplementary Fig. 2a. For better 

comparison, the normalized peak amplitude as a function of temperature for these two 

sets of samples is plotted in Fig. 1b. As the temperature increases from 4 K to 300 K, 

the radiative emission is thermally quenched by nearly 3 orders of magnitude for the 

samples that were treated by the standard RTA method. In contrast, the radiative 

emission is only quenched by less than 1 order of magnitude for the samples that went 

through the DC process. This results in a two-orders-of-magnitude increase of PL at 

room temperature for the DC-processed samples in comparison with the RTA-

processed ones, as shown in Fig. 1c. 

It is known that the photoexcited electron-hole pairs in silicon can recombine through 

three competing paths. The first path is radiative recombination and the other two paths 

are the nonradiative Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) and Auger recombination.19 The SRH 

recombination can be suppressed by lowering the operating temperature. The Auger 

recombination is highly dependent on the concentration of photogenerated electron-

hole pairs. As the excitation laser power is reduced, the Auger recombination will be 


minimized. In Fig. 1d, we recorded the relative quantum efficiency (QE) of the DC-

processed sample at 4 K to suppress the SRH recombination (PL shown in the 

Supplementary Fig. 2b). When the excitation laser power is reduced to < 1 mW, the 

Auger recombination is minimized and the excited electron-hole pairs can only 

recombine radiatively via the 4f transition of the Er ions. In this case, the internal 

quantum efficiency (IQE) must saturate to 100% (red squares in Fig. 1d).20 At 300 K, 

the IQE also saturates as the excitation laser power is reduced (PL shown in the 

Supplementary Fig. 2c). But the saturated IQE is ~7 times smaller than the value at 4 

K. It indicates that the IQE of our DC-processed samples can reach a record of ~14% 

at room temperature, approximately 2 orders of magnitude higher than the samples 

treated by the standard RTA process. It is expected that the IQE will be further improved 

by tuning the Er and O concentration and their ratio. 

Since the Er/O impurities are donor-type dopants in silicon, a PN junction diode can 

be formed simply by doping the sample with boron via ion implantation. The peak 

concentration of boron dopants is ~1019 cm-3 and the peak center is located at ~240 nm 

below the surface, approximately ~160 nm below the Er/O distribution peak (see 

Supplementary Fig. 1b). The DC process was applied to activate the Er/O and B dopants 

at the same time. A vertical PN junction diode was formed when a metal electrode was 

in contact with the underneath p-type silicon layer after the Er/O doped silicon layer is 

removed. The three-dimensional schematic and the cross-section of the device are 

depicted in Fig. 2a and b. An optical microscopic top view of the device is shown in the 

inset of Fig. 2c. The diode exhibits a rectifying current density v.s. voltage (J-V) curve 


(Fig. 2c). When it is forward biased, the diode has a strong emission at room 

temperature with the spectral characteristics of Er ions (Fig. 2d). As the injecting 

current ramps up, the emission peak at 1.54 μm increases rapidly. A near-infrared 

optical microscope (0.9 - 1.7 μm) was employed to record the device lightening-up 

process (see the setup in Supplementary Fig. 3 and the video in the Supplementary 

Video). The emission images of the device at the driving current of ~35 mA, ~50 mA 

and ~65 mA are shown in Fig. 2e, f and g, respectively. 

 

Figure 2 │ Optoelectronic properties of Er/O-Si LED devices treated by the deep cooling (DC) 

process. Three-dimensional schematic (a) and cross-sectional illustration (b) of the 

device. c, J-V curve and optical microscope image (inset) of the device. Room-temperature EL 

spectra (d) and near infrared microscopic images (e-g) of the device emission under electrical 

pumping. 

To understand the mechanism of the strong emission from the DC-processed sample, 

we used the high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) to examine 


the microstructure of the Er/O co-doped layer as shown in Fig. 3. It was previously 

reported that Er ions tend to aggregate during the slow cooling process of the standard 

RTA treatment.17, 18 The aggregation of Er ions forms efficient nonradiative clusters that 

strongly suppress the emission of Er ions at room temperature.5-10 The dramatic cooling 

of the DC process can freeze the dispersed Er dopants at high temperature (950 ℃) in 

an ultrashort time (possibly micro seconds), which helps prohibit the aggregation of Er 

ions. The cross-sectional TEM images show that Er nanocrystals as large as ~5 nm in 

diameter are clearly visible in the RTA-treated samples (Fig. 3a). The nanocrystals are 

more interconnected and aggregated. In the DC processed sample, Er nanocrystals are 

clearly smaller (< 1 nm) and more sparsely distributed as shown in Fig. 3b. The TEM 

image of a DC-processed intrinsic Si sample is shown in Fig. 3c for reference. This 

contrast is consistent with our expectation that the aggregation of Er ions is suppressed 

by the DC process, as a result of which the emission efficiency of Er/O co-doped Si 

samples is significantly increased at room temperature. The side effect of the DC 

process is that the thermal shock may create dislocations and cracks in the wafer 

surface.21 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern (Supplementary Fig. 4) shows that the 

silicon wafer remains a nearly perfect crystalline structure after the wafer is treated with 

the DC process. No cracks were observed by visual inspection. Indeed, TEM images 

show that some dislocations were formed in the silicon substrate 150 nm below the 

surface (Supplementary Fig. 5). The impact of these dislocations on CMOS transistors 

and the Si LED will be further evaluated. If needed, new measures, for example, a long 

time of thermal treatment at relatively low temperature may be able to remove these 


dislocations. 

 

Figure 3 │ Microstructure characterization of the fabricated Er/O-Si samples. Cross-sectional 

HRTEM micrographs of (a) RTA- and (b) DC-processed Er/O-Si samples. The Er/O nanocrystal 

sizes distributed in a silicon matrix after RTA and DC treatments are approximately 5 nm (a) and 1 

nm (b), respectively. c, Cross-sectional HRTEM micrograph of intrinsic single-crystalline silicon 

sample by the DC treatment was also manifest for comparison. Inset: Selected area electron 

diffraction (SAED) pattern of the intrinsic Si sample. 

In short, we presented a DC process to treat the Er/O co-doped single crystalline 

silicon wafers. After the treatment, the aggregation of Er ions is suppressed, as a result 

of which strong room-temperature photoluminescence at telecommunication 

wavelength was observed from the silicon samples. We further doped the samples with 

boron dopants and eventually realized an efficient room-temperature silicon LED 

device at 1.54 μm. Given the fact that these results were realized on single-crystalline 

silicon, it is promising to develop room-temperature silicon lasers for fully integrated 

silicon photonics in future.22 

 

METHODS 

Preparation and characterization. FZ intrinsic Si (100) wafers (Resistivity: ≥ 10 kΩ·cm; 


Thickness: 500 ± 20 μm) were purchased from Suzhou Resemi Semiconductor Co., Ltd, China. The 

silicon wafers were first cleaned with ethanol, deionized water and then immersed in Piranha 

solution (Sulfuric acid : 30% Hydrogen peroxide = 3 : 1) for 30 min at 90 °C, followed by 2.5% HF 

etching. Erbium and Oxygen ions were implanted at the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese 

Academy of Sciences in Beijing, China. The injection energy and dose of Er and O ions were 200 

keV, 4 × 1015 cm-2, and 32 keV and 1016 cm-2, respectively. After the implantation, the Er/O-

implanted silicon samples went through the aforementioned cleaning procedure again before the 

deposition of a 200-nm-thick SiO2 films by reactive magnetron sputtering (Delton multi-target 

magnetic control sputtering system, AEMD, SJTU). The deep cooling and standard RTA processes 

were applied to two Er/O co-doped silicon samples separately. After the capping SiO2 film was 

removed in buffered oxide etchant (BOE), PL characterizations were firstly performed.  

As shown in Supplementary Fig. 1a, SIMS technique (Evans Analytical Group, NJ, USA) was 

subsequently utilized to characterize Er and O dopant distribution profiles at the top 300 nm of 

silicon substrate. For Er element, the SIMS data are the summation of three Er isotopes (166, 167, 

and 168). For O element, no other isotopes were detected. The bump near the surface (blue line) 

likely comes from the contamination of native silicon oxide. To form a PN junction, boron dopants 

were later implanted into the Si substrate (see the section of LED fabrication and imaging). The 

SIMS profile of boron dopants is shown in Supplementary Fig. 1b. 

Deep cooling and RTA processes. The deep cooling process was performed on the Er/O-Si samples 

in an upgraded dilatometer (DIL 805A, TA Instruments) in which the samples were annealed at 

950 °C for 5 min by means of copper coil-based electromagnetic heating, followed by a flush of 

high purity He (99.999%) gas cooled in liquid N2 (77 K). The RTA procedure for Er/O-Si samples 

was firstly conducted in a rapid thermal processing furnace (RTP-300) at 1050 ℃ for 5 min. After 

the high temperature treatment, the silicon samples were gradually cooled to room temperature with 

a high purity N2 gas. 

PL measurements. The PL measurements were performed using a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) 

spectrometer (Vertex 80V, Bruker) equipped with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled Ge detector. A CW diode 

laser of λ = 405 nm (MLL-III-405, CNI, Changchun, China) providing a maximum excitation power 

of ~150 mW was employed as the excitation source. During the measurements, the Er/O-Si samples 

were mounted on the cold head of a Helium closed cycle cryostat (DE-202S, ARS), which allows 


for temperature adjustment from 4 K to ambient. (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 2a). For the 

excitation power dependent PL measurements, different optical filters including Notch filters, 

neutral density filters, and long-pass filters were utilized for avoiding the influence of the excitation 

source. The results are shown in Supplementary Fig. 2b and c. 

LED fabrication and imaging. To form a PN junction on the Er/O co-doped silicon wafers, boron 

ions were implanted (80 keV and 5.2 × 1014 cm-2) into the silicon wafer with a peak concentration 

located ~240 nm below the surface (Supplementary Fig. 1b). All dopants were simultaneously 

activated in the subsequent deep cooling process. Since the Er/O dopants (donors) are located in a 

shallower layer, a vertical PN junction is formed between the n-type Er/O layer and the p-type B 

doping layer. A pair of co-axial electrodes was formed by UV photolithography (MDA-400M, 

MIDAS), deep silicon etching (SPTS ICP), and metal film deposition (Nexdep, Angstrom 

Engineering Inc.). As shown in Fig.2a and b, the internal electrode is in contact with n-type Er/O 

doping region and the external electrode in contact with the p-type region after the top Er/O layer is 

removed by deep silicon etching. All the microfabrication processes were performed at the Center 

for Advanced Electronic Materials and Devices, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 

After Al metal wire bonding (7476D, West Bond), the devices were integrated on a PCB board. 

The J-V curves of the Er/O-Si LED devices were measured using a digital sourcemeter (Keithley 

2400) controlled by a Labview script. For EL measurements, the devices were electrically pumped 

by the sourcemeter and the emission spectra were collected using the same FTIR system for PL 

measurements. 

Near Infrared imaging of the emission from the Er/O-Si LED devices was obtained at room 

temperature under optical microscope (BX53M, Olympus) equipped with a NIR camera (C12471-

03, Hamamatsu). The setup is shown in the Supplementary Fig. 3. The recorded photographs and 

videos are shown in Fig. 2e, f, and g and Supplementary Video. 

Microstructure characterization. The microstructure of Er/O-Si samples were extensively 

investigated with TEM and XRD techniques. XRD patterns were acquired with a poly-functional 

X-ray diffractometer (D8 advance, Bruker) shown in Supplementary Fig. 4. In comparison, XRD 

patterns of the intrinsic and Er/O-implanted Si samples without any thermal treatment were also 

collected. Talos F200X field-emission TEM was employed to take the EDX and TEM images 

(Supplementary Fig. 5) of a sample slide that was cut from the samples using focused ion beam 


(FIB, GAIA3 GMU Model 2016). For EDX mapping measurements, the acceleration voltage was 

200 kV, and other parameters were set as default. High resolution TEM images were further 

performed with JEOL JEM-ARM200F, as shown in Fig. 3.  

Data availability. The data that support the findings of this study are available from the authors on 

reasonable requests, see author contribution for specific data sets.  

 

1. Atabaki, A. H. et al. Integrating photonics with silicon nanoelectronics for the next generation of 

systems on a chip. Nature 556, 349−354 (2018). 

2. Subbaraman, H. et al. Recent advances in silicon-based passive and active optical interconncets. 

Opt. Express 23, 2487−2510 (2015). 

3. Miller, D. A. B. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips. Proc. IEEE 97, 

1166−1185 (2009). 

4. Liang, D. & Bowers, J. E. Recent progress in lasers on silicon. Nat. Photonics 4, 511−517 (2010). 

5. Ennen, H., Schneider, J., Pomrenke, G. & Axmann, A., 1.54-μm luminescence of erbium-

implanted III-V semiconductors and silicon. Appl. Phys. Lett. 43, 943-945 (1983). 

6. Lourenço, M. A., Milošević, M. M., Gorin, A., Gwilliam, R. M. & Homewood, K. P. Super-

enhancement of 1.54 μm emission from erbium codoped with oxygen in silicon-on-insulator. 

Sci. Rep. 6, 37501 (2016). 

7. Feklistov, K. V., Abramkin, D. S., Obodnikov, V. I. & Popov, V. P. Doping silicon with erbium by 

recoil implantation. Tech. Phys. Lett. 41, 788792 (2015). 

8. Zhou, Z., Yin, B. & Michel, J. On-chip sources for silicon photonics. Light-Sci. Appl. 4, e358 

(2015) 

9. Kenyon, A. J. Erbium in silicon. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 20, R65−R84 (2005). 


10. Polman, A. Erbium implanted thin film photonic materials. J. Appl. Phys. 82, 1−39 (1997). 

11. Takahashi, Y. et al. A micrometre-scale Raman silicon laser with a microwatt threshold. Nature 

498, 470−474 (2013). 

12. Rong, H. et al. An all-silicon Raman laser. Nature 433, 292−294 (2005). 

13. Sun, Y. et al. Room-temperature continuous-wave electrically injected InGaN-based laser 

directly grown on Si. Nat. Photonics 10, 595−599 (2016). 

14. Chen, S. et al. Electrically pumped continuous-wave III-V quantum dot lasers on silicon. Nat. 

Photonics 10, 307−311 (2016). 

15 Liu, J., Sun, X., Camacho-Aguilera, R., Kimerling, L. C. & Michel, J. Ge-on-Si laser operating 

at room temperature. Opt. Lett. 35, 679−681 (2010). 

16. Wang, D.-C. et al. An all-silicon laser based on silicon nanocrystals with high optical gains. Sci. 

Bull. 63, 75−77 (2018). 

17. Kuznetsov, V. P. et al. Crystal lattice defects and hall mobility of electrons in Si:Er/Si layers 

grown by sublimation molecular-beam epitaxy. Phys. Solid State 47, 102−105 (2005). 

18. Scalese, S. et al. Effect of O:Er concentration ratio on the structural, electrical, and optical 

properties of Si:Er:O layers grown by molecular beam epitaxy. J. Appl. Phys. 88, 4091−4096 

(2000). 

19. Schroder, D. K. Carrier lifetimes in silicon. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 44, 160−170 (1997). 

20. Watanabe, S. et al. Internal quantum efficiency of highly-efficient InXGa1-XN-based near-

ultraviolet light-emitting diodes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 4906−4908 (2003). 

21．Ng, W. L. et al. An efficient room-temperature silicon-based light-emitting diode. Nature 410, 

192−194 (2001). 


22. Thomson, D. et al. Roadmap on silicon photonics. J. Opt. 18, 073003 (2016). 

 

Acknowledgements This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China 

(61376001, 21703140 and 61874072), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2016M601582), 

and the special-key project of the “Innovative Research Plan”, Shanghai Municipality Bureau of 

Education. We thank Jianming Li (Institute of Semiconductors, CAS) for the ion implantation 

processing and Yihua Chen (Shanghai Jiao Tong Univ.) for the deep cooling treatment. We also 

thank Xuecheng Fu (Shanghai Jiao Tong Univ.) for the SiO2 film deposition, Weiwei Wang (Spark 

Electro-Optics Co., Ltd.) and Lin Zhu (Cinv Co., Ltd) for the support in quantum efficiency and 

NIR imaging measurements. 

Author Contributions Y.D. conceived the deep cooling idea and designed the experiments. H.W., 

J.J.H., J.H., and F.Y. conducted the experiments. H.W. and Y.D. analysed the data and wrote the 

manuscript. All authors reviewed and commented on the manuscript. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

Corresponding authors 

Correspondence 
and 
requests 
for 
materials 
should 
be 
addressed 
to 
Yaping Dan 

(yaping.dan@sjtu.edu.cn) and Fangyu Ye (fyyue@ee.ecnu.edu.cn). 

 

Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. Readers are welcome to comment on the 

online version of the paper. Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 


jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.  

 


Supplementary Figures 

 

Supplementary Figure 1 | SIMS characterizations of Er/O-Si samples. a, Erbium (red line) and 

Oxygen (blue line) ion distribution profiles of the DC-processed Er/O-Si samples (to 300 nm below 

surface) by SIMS measurements. b, Boron ion (black line) distribution profile of Er/O-Si LED 

devices. 

 

 


 

 

Supplementary Figure 2 | Temperature- and excitation power-dependent PL spectra of Er/O-

Si samples. a, Temperature-dependent PL spectra of the RTA-processed samples, which were 

measured as a comparison with the results in Fig. 1a. b, Cryogenic- (4 K), and c, room-temperature 

(300 K) PL spectra as a function of excitation power for the DC-processed samples. The insets show 

the corresponding relationships between peak intensity (black squares) or integral area (red dots) 

and the excitation power, derived from b and c, respectively. 


 

Supplementary Figure 3 | Room-temperature NIR imaging setup. A NIR Olympus optical 

microscope equipped with a Hamamatsu InGaAs camera (0.9 - 1.7µm) was used to image the 

electrically-pumped emission (Keithley sourcemeter) from the Er/O-Si LED device that is treated 

with the deep cooling process. The optical image of PCB-integrated Er/O-Si LED devices was also 

displayed. 

 

Supplementary Figure 4 | XRD characterization. XRD patterns of DC- (pink line) and RTA-

processed (blue line) Er/O-Si samples. As comparison, the XRD results of intrinsic (red line) and 

Er/O-implanted (black line) silicon samples were also included in this figure. 


 

Supplementary Figure 5 | TEM characterization. a, Er EDX mapping, and b, cross-sectional 

TEM image of the RTA-processed samples. c, Er EDX mapping, and d, cross-sectional TEM image 

of the DC-processed samples.  

 


