   

High Performance Direct-Current Generator Based on Dynamic 

PN Junctions 

Yanghua Lu1, Sirui Feng1, Zhenzhen Hao1, Runjiang Shen1 and Shisheng Lin1,2,* 

1: College of Microelectronics, College of Information Science and Electronic 

Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310027, China 

2: State Key Laboratory of Modern Optical Instrumentation, Zhejiang University, 

Hangzhou, 310027, China 

*Corresponding author. Tel: +86-0571-87951555 

Email: shishenglin@zju.edu.cn. 

Abstract 

After the electromagnetic generator, searching for novel electric generators without 

strong magnetic field is highly demanded. The generator without strong magnetic 

field calls for a physical picture distinct from the traditional generators. As the 

counterpart of the static PN junction has been widely used in the integrated circuits, 

we develop an electric generator named “dynamic PN generator” with a high current 

density and voltage output, which converts mechanical energy into electricity by 

sliding two semiconductors with different Fermi level. A dynamic N-GaAs/SiO2/P-Si 

generator with the open-circuit voltage of 3.1 V and short-circuit density of 1.0 A/m2 

have been achieved. The physical mechanism of the dynamic PN generator is 

proposed based on the built-in electric field bounding back diffusing carriers in 

dynamic PN junctions, which breaks the equilibrium between drift and diffusion 

current in the PN junction. Moreover, the dynamic MoS2/AlN/Si generator with the 


   

open-circuit voltage of 5.1 V and short-circuit density of 112 A/m2 (11.2 mA/cm2) 

have also been achieved, which can effectively output a direct-current and light up a 

blue light-emitting diode directly. This dynamic MoS2/AlN/Si generator can 

continuously work for hours without obvious degradation, demonstrating its unique 

mechanism and potential applications in many fields where the mechanical energy is 

available.  

Main 

The understanding of electron movements advances the information society and 

satisfying the requirements of electrical energy for human society. Michael Faraday is 

well known for the discovery of electromagnetic induction, who revealed the 

connection between magnetism and electricity in the year of 18311. In 

electromagnetic generator, the electricity was generated when an electrical conductor 

passes through a magnetic field. Before that, electric generators were mainly referred 

to electrostatic generators under the operation principles of electrostatic induction and 

triboelectric effect2. Recently, the piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators3,4 

attract many attentions, which could get electricity from the blue environmental 

energy such as mechanical and vibrating energy5,6. According to the proposed 

mechanism, the triboelectricity utilizes the displacement current in the Maxwell 

equation, which cannot flow freely through the insulating dielectric materials, may 

limiting its current output density7. On the other hand, solar cell works under the light 

illumination environments has although developed many novel structures8-10. It is 

imperative to search for a novel electric generator with high current density, which is 


   

the bottleneck of the current generators without high magnetic field under dark 

environments11-16.  

Since the invention of PN junction in 1940s17, many applications have been 

explored such as the integrated circuits18. However, the dynamic PN junction has been 

rarely explored because most applications are focused on the static PN structure for 

the development of information society19. Recently, we have independently reported 

the dynamic Schottky diode as a direct current generator20, and proposed the physical 

picture different from the triboelectricity21,22. However, as the Fermi level difference 

between metal and semiconductor is rather limited, which leads to a voltage output 

less than 1.0 V. The PN junction is totally different from Schottky diode as PN 

junction is minority carrier device while Schottky diode is majority carrier device, and 

the built-in voltage of the PN junction can be much larger than the Schottky diode as 

the Fermi level difference between N-type and P-type semiconductor can be several 

times of that of metal and semiconductor. Herein, we have demonstrated a high 

current density novel direct-current (d.c.) generator based on the dynamic PN junction, 

named as “dynamic PN generator”, through sliding one semiconductor over another 

semiconductor with different Femi level, which can light up the light emitting diodes 

(LEDs) without any external rectifying circuits. The connected dynamic PN junction 

in series can output voltage larger than 9.0 V. The work mechanism is based on the 

built-in electric field separation of the otherwise diffused carriers as a result of the 

destruction and establishment of the depletion layer in dynamic PN junctions, which 

breaks the equilibrium between the drift and diffusion current, leading to an electricity 


   

output whose mechanism is different from other types of electric generators1-4.  

Typically, a dynamic GaAs/Si junction can convert the mechanical energy into 

electricity, whose open-circuit voltage (Voc) reaches 0.7 V and short-circuit density 

(Jsc) reaches 1.8 A/m2. Both the Voc and Jsc are the peak value of voltage and current 

output. Furthermore, compared with the semiconductor-semiconductor dynamic PN 

generator, the semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor structure based dynamic PN 

generator outputs higher voltage attributed to the interface passivation and insulator 

bounding effect under the localized built-in electric field23,24, whose Voc can reach 3.1 

V and Jsc can reach 1.0 A/m2 for the case of GaAs/SiO2/Si heterojunction. Moreover, 

a dynamic MoS2/AlN/Si generator with Jsc of 112 A/m2 and Voc of 5.1 V has been 

achieved. The current density of 112 A/m2 is orders of magnitude higher than 

triboelectric nanogenerators (~103 times)7,25,26 and piezoelectric nanogenerators (~104 

times)7,27,28, which can be further enhanced through optimizing the PN junction 

interface and structure26,29. Without external rectifying circuit, this dynamic PN 

generator has the unique advantage of ultrahigh current density and direct-current 

output ability20-22. This dynamic PN generator can be connected in series or in parallel, 

which can effectively increase the output voltage or current. Two and three dynamic 

P-Si/N-GaAs generators in series can effectively output a voltage of 6.1 V and 9.0 V, 

which can light up a blue light-emitting diode (LED) directly. Especially, the dynamic 

P-Si/AlN/MoS2 generator does not show obvious degradation after 60 min of running, 

confirming its mechanism is different from the triboelectricity and proving the 

potential applications of the dynamic PN generator30,31 .  


   

As a representative dynamic PN generator, the schematic structure of the 

dynamic GaAs/Si generator is illustrated in Figure 1a. The N-type GaAs wafer was 

pressed on the P-type Si substrate compactly with a 6N force, which showed typical 

rectification behavior with a low leakage current density of 1.5 µA/cm2 under the bias 

voltage of -3 V (Figure 1b). The work function of N-type GaAs and P-type Si used 

here is 4.10 eV and 5.12 eV (as shown in the Supplementary Note 1), respectively. 

Accordingly, the work function of N-GaAs is smaller than P-Si, thus a built-in electric 

field will be formed between the N-GaAs and P-Si substrate. Primarily, the N-type 

GaAs was dragged along the surface of the P-type Si and a maximal Voc up to 0.7 V 

was observed, which is independent on the working area. The dynamic P-Si/N-Si and 

P-Si/N-GaN junction can also output voltage signal as well as P-Si/N-GaAs junction, 

among which the Voc of P-Si/N-GaAs junction is the highest, which is 7 times of 

dynamic P-Si/N-Si generator (Figure 1c). The Fermi level of N-Si and N-GaN are 

about 4.28 eV and 4.35 eV (as shown in the Supplementary Note 1), so the generated 

voltage direction of P-Si/N-Si and P-Si/N-GaN generator is same as the P-Si/N-GaAs 

generator，confirming the importance of Fermi level (some other semiconductors are 

also explored in the Supplementary Figure 1). It is noteworthy that only noise 

electricity can be produced when sliding one piece of P-type Si over another P-type Si 

with same Fermi level (Supplementary Figure 2), indicating the important role of 

Fermi level difference and the built-in field. Figure 1d shows that the current output is 

positively proportional to the work area, indicating the current output can be 

improved by enlarging the work area. For a GaAs/Si dynamic PN generator with a 


   

working area of 1.0 mm2 (2cm × 0.05mm), a maximal peak short-circuit current (Isc) 

up to 1.8 µA was observed   primitively, which was positive related to the movement 

speed within limits (Supplementary Figure 3). The Jsc up to 1.8 A/m2 can be achieved, 

which is orders of magnitudes higher than the reported polymer-based triboelectric 

nanogenerators (in the order of 10-1 A/m2)7,25,26 and piezoelectric generators (in the 

order of 10-2 A/m2)7,27,28. Furthermore, the relationship between the Voc/Isc and the 

force exerted on device is explored and it is found that the force of 6N is the optimal 

choice (Figure 1e), where the N-GaAs and P-Si can have the best rectification 

characteristic (as shown in J-V curves of the P-Si/N-GaAs junction under different 

forces in Supplementary Figure 4 and NIF in Supplementary Note 2). The 3D diagram 

for converting mechanical energy into electrical energy by the dynamic PN junction is 

shown in Figure 1f, which can work in the linearly reciprocating mode or circularly 

rotating mode. Figure 1g and Figure 1h show the Isc of the generator in linearly 

reciprocating mode and circularly rotating mode, respectively. It can be seen that the 

linear reciprocating mode outputs a pulsed current, which is caused by the inevitable 

acceleration and deceleration of the GaAs wafer motion. In contrast, when the GaAs 

wafer is continuously and evenly slide under the circularly rotating mode, it outputs a 

sustained direct current. The continuous d.c. output of our dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs 

generator indicates its unique physical mechanism different from the contact mode 

generator of PN generator or triboelectric generators.  


   

   

Figure 1. Experimental designs and results of the dynamic PN generator. a) The 

schematic illustration of the dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator. b) The J-V curve 

of the static P-Si/N-GaAs junction with a 6N force. The contact area is 1.0 mm2. c) 

The Voc of dynamic P-Si/N-Si, P-Si/N-GaN, P-Si/N-GaAs generator with a speed 

of 6cm/s and a 6N force. d) The Isc of dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator with a 6N 

force, a speed of 6 cm/s and the work area of 0.15, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0 mm2. e) The 

Voc and Isc of dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator with different force exerted on the 

junction in a speed of 6 cm/s. f) Experimental design and 3D diagram for 

converting mechanical energy into electrical energy by a dynamic PN junction. 

The inset shows the linearly reciprocating and circularly rotating modes of the 

generator, respectively. g) and h) show the Isc of dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator 

under the linearly reciprocating mode and circularly rotating mode with a 6N 

force and a speed of 6 cm/s, respectively. 

 


   

As schematically shown in Figure 2, when we move the PN junction in time 

pieces, the destruction of the PN junction at the rear part and establishment at the 

front part will happen subsequently. We name this junction ‘the dynamic PN junction’. 

The destruction of the PN junction at the rear part inhibits the diffusion paths for the 

diffusing electrons and holes, which is necessary for balancing the drift current. Those 

otherwise diffused carriers are bound back and accelerated by the built-in field. As the 

P-type side contacts with N-type side at the front part, the drift current will balance 

with the diffusion current very soon. As time passes in a series of pieces, more 

electrons and holes are bound back the N-type side and P-type side, respectively, 

leading a net current output and building a voltage output. Figure 2a shows the 

schematic illustration of the P-Si/N-GaAs interface. Actually, for the P-Si/N-GaAs 

junction, the drift-diffusion current equation can be described as below32: 

𝐽! = 𝐽!

!"#$% + 𝐽!

!"## = 𝑞𝑛𝑢!E + 𝑞𝐷!∇𝑛                                            (1) 

 𝐽! = 𝐽!

!"#$% + 𝐽!

!"## = 𝑞𝑝𝑢!E − 𝑞𝐷!∇𝑝                                                  (2) 

where Jn, Jp, µn, µp, Dn, Dp are the electron/hole current density, the electron/hole 

mobility and the electron/hole diffusion coefficient of GaAs and Si, respectively. E is 

the built-in field, q is the elementary charge, n and p are the position dependent 

electron/hole density in GaAs and Si, respectively. When the GaAs wafer moves 

along the Si substrate, there is a dynamic process of disappearance of the depletion 

layer in the rear end and the re-establishment of the depletion layer in the front end. In 

macro scale, the effective working area of the dynamic PN junction is assumed as the 

contact area of the GaAs wafer and Si substrate during the movement. According to 


   

equation (1) and (2), the current density of GaAs/Si junction is consisted of Jdiff and 

Jdrift. However, the dynamic process of the generation and disappearance of the 

depletion layer in dynamic GaAs/Si junction will break up the static carrier 

distribution equilibrium and bound back the electrons or holes which are diffusing 

across the depletion layer. The bounding back electrons and holes under the built-in 

field lead to increase of Jdrift and decrease of Jdiff, breaking up the equilibrium of 

drift-diffusion current in the static PN junction, which is the origin of the output 

current generated in dynamic PN junction. The rectification characteristic of the 

dynamic N-GaAs/P-Si junction from -5V to 5V was measured and shown in Figure 

2b, where the oscillation of the J-V curve as voltage increases. The oscillation of the 

current value indicates there are destruction and re-establishment of the depletion 

layer in the dynamic PN junction, which is in agreement with the previous proposed 

physical picture. The detailed transportation of the bound back electron and hole are 

shown in Figure 2c, where also includes the band gap alignment between P-Si and 

N-GaAs. The built-in field point to P-Si as a result of electron diffusion from N-GaAs 

to P-Si. When the N-GaAs wafer is dragged on P-Si, the diffusing electrons and holes 

in the rear part has no way to diffuse into P-Si and N-GaAs, respectively. Thus, under 

the effect of built-in field, the otherwise diffused electron and holes in the rear part are 

bound back to the N-GaAs and P-Si, respectively, breaking up the equilibrium of 

drift-diffusion current and forming electrical output. So the built-in electric field and 

the barrier height of the PN junction must play a crucial role. The temperature 

difference of semiconductors before and after the friction is very limited 


   

(Supplementary Figure 5), which indicates that the heat effect is ignorable for 

outputting electrical signal. 

    To reveal this distinctive current generation mechanism and prove the barrier 

height of the PN junction plays a crucial role in our generator, P-type silicon wafers 

with different thickness (d) of silicon oxide are used here for further experiments. We 

find this dynamic semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor structure generator has 

higher voltage output because of the increased barrier height23. As shown in band 

diagram of the dynamic N-GaAs/SiO2/P-Si junction (Figure 2d), the barrier height for 

bounding back electrons and holes are largely increased as the conduction/valence 

bands of SiO2 are much higher/lower than that of GaAs and Si. When we move the 

N-GaAs wafer along the SiO2/P-Si substrate, the diffusing electrons and holes can 

also be switched back and accelerated by the localized built-in electric field, moving 

toward the ohmic contact of N-GaAs and P-Si, respectively. The inserted SiO2 layer 

can largely suppress the transfer of electrons and holes, stimulating the bounding back 

of diffusing electrons and holes. With the increase of barrier height, more bounding 

back electrons and holes accumulate in two semiconductors, increasing the potential 

difference as well as the voltage output. Figure 2e indicates that the rectification 

characteristic can be largely optimized after inserting the insulating layer, indicating 

the increase of the barrier height of the GaAs/Si junction. As shown in Figure 2f, the 

Voc and Jsc of the dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs junction with the SiO2 thickness of 

0/9/13/20/50/100/200 
nm 
are 
0.7/0.9/1.2/1.6/2.2/3.1/4.0 
V 
and 

1.8/1.6/1.5/1.4/1.2/1.0/0 A/m2, respectively. With the increase of the thickness of SiO2, 


   

the Jsc decreases faintly to zero for 200 nm thick of SiO2 but the Voc increases 

continuously. It is proved that the 200 nm SiO2 is too thick for carriers crossing over 

it (Supplementary Figure 6), which lead to a nearly zero current output. The voltage 

output can be larger than the Fermi level differences for the cases of thick SiO2, which 

should be ascribed to pumped electrons and holes in the N-type and P-type 

semiconductor, as the thick SiO2 provides a high and safe barrier for bounding back 

the otherwise diffused electrons and holes compared with the case of thin SiO2. 

   

Figure 2. a) The schematic diagram of the dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator. b) 

The J-V curve of the dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs junction with a 6N force. The contact 

area is 1.0 mm2. c) The band diagram and carrier dynamic process of the 

dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator and d) the dynamic P-Si/SiO2/N-GaAs 

generator. e) J-V curves of the dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator without SiO2 and 

with 20/100 nm SiO2. f) The Voc and Jsc of the dynamic P-Si/N-GaAs generator 

with a 6N force, a speed of 6 cm/s and SiO2 thickness of 0/9/13/20/50/100/200 nm. 


   

The work area of the P-Si/N-GaAs junction is 1.0 mm2. Both the Voc and Jsc are 

the peak value of voltage and current output. 

 

To explore the potential practical applications, we charged a capacitor C (0.1 µF) 

by manually sliding a GaAs wafer on the SiO2/Si substrate. Figure 3a and Figure 3b 

show the voltage of charging capacitor in the linearly reciprocating mode and 

circularly rotating mode, respectively. It can be seen that the linear reciprocating 

mode outputs a pulsed voltage and the circularly rotating mode outputs a continual 

voltage as high as 3.1 V under the consistent charging. In addition, the Voc outputs of 

the generator in parallel, 2-series and 3-series are 3.1/6.1/9.0 V, indicating the linear 

superposition effect of our devices, which can expand its applications (Figure 3c). The 

captured optical pictures of this capacitor charging experiment is shown in Figure 3d, 

which is consist of a capacitor (0.1 µF), a resistance (47 kΩ), a Keithley 2010 system 

and a reset switch. The detailed circuit diagram of the capacitor charging system and 

partial enlarged image of this dynamic P-Si/SiO2/N-GaAs generator are shown in 

Figure 3e and 3f. It can be seen that no additional rectification was used. Therefore, 

this simple dynamic P-Si/SiO2/N-GaAs generator has huge possibility for practical 

applications, which can transfer the mechanical energy into direct current output 

directly.  

On this basis, we use the electricity of our devices to light up a blue LED (the 

picture of experimental model is shown in Supplementary Figure 7). This LED can 

only be light up under the drive voltage more than 2.7 V. Each of generators can 


   

stably provide nearly 3.1 V open-circuit voltage and 1.0 µA short-circuit current 

output. This dynamic PN generator can be connected in series or in parallel, which 

can effectively increase the output voltage or current. So two or three generators can 

ensure to light up the blue LED here (the circuit diagram of the LED lighting 

experiment is shown in figure 3g). Two generators in series can effectively output a 

voltage of 6.1 V, which can be used to provide enough voltage output for lighting a 

blue LED. Figure 3h shows the picture of the LED powered by our dynamic PN 

generator. It can be observed the blue light LED is lighted simultaneously with the 

lateral movement of PN junctions, indicating the output of a continuous direct current 

(the right inset).  

 

Figure 3. The Voc of dynamic P-Si/100nm-SiO2/N-GaAs generator under a) the 

linearly reciprocating mode and b) the circularly rotating mode. c) The Voc of the 

dynamic P-Si/100nm-SiO2/N-GaAs generator in 1-series, 2-series and 3-series 


   

with a 6N force, a speed of 6 cm/s. Inset: The schematic image of series 

connection of the dynamic PN junctions. d) The captured optical picture of the 

capacitor charging experiment, which is measured with Keithley 2010 system. e) 

The circuit diagram of charging a capacitor C (0.1µF) with the dynamic 

P-Si/SiO2/N-GaAs generator. No additional rectification circuit has been used. f) 

The partial enlarged image of the dynamic P-Si/SiO2/N-GaAs generator. g) The 

circuit diagram of the LED lighting experiment. h) Pictures taken from video to 

show the luminance of a LED powered by our dynamic PN generator. Right 

inset: The lighting blue LED powered by the dynamic PN junctions.  

 

As the friction strength between P-Si and N-GaAs is high, which may destroy the 

surface of the semiconductor, we have used the layered semiconductors such as 

MoS2

21,33.The diffusing electrons and holes in dynamic P-Si/10nm-AlN/MoS2 

junction can also be directionally bound back by the built-in electronic field at the 

interface, generating the electricity. As shown in the band diagram of dynamic 

P-Si/AlN/MoS2 junction (Figure 4a), under the localized built-in electric field from 

MoS2 to P-Si substrate, the diffusing electrons will bound back to the MoS2 and 

diffusing holes will bound back to the P-type Si, breaking up the equilibrium of 

drift-diffusion current and forming electrical output. The rectification characteristic of 

the dynamic P-Si/AlN/MoS2 junction from -5V to 5V is also measured. As shown in 

Figure 4b, the interfacial PN junction varies when the P-Si/AlN/MoS2 contact is under 

the friction process, which helps testifying the theory proposed above. The fluctuation 


   

of the J-V curve of the P-Si/AlN/MoS2 junction under friction condition is caused by 

the destruction and re-establishment of the depletion layer in the dynamic PN junction, 

which indicates the generation of the voltage output. Normally, the Jsc as high as 112 

A/m2 can be achieved, with the work area of 0.05 mm2, which is about three orders of 

magnitude higher than the reported triboelectric nanogenerators25-28. To demonstrate 

the power output of our generator, the voltage and current output as a function of 

electrical load R have been investigated and shown in Figure 4c. An increasing 

voltage and decreasing current density can be measured with the increase of load 

resistance. Accordingly, the power density output as a function of electrical load R 

have also been investigated and shown in Figure 4d. The peak power density about 

130 W/m2 can be found around R equals to 360 kΩ, which is close to the internal 

resistance of the PN junction. And the energy-conversion efficiency of the moving 

Si/MoS2 junction generator can be calculated to be about 27.1% (as shown in the 

Supplementary Note 3). As MoS2 is a lubricating material, dynamic P-Si/AlN/MoS2 

PN junction generator shows excellent stability. Notably, as shown in the direct and 

continuous voltage and current output of the dynamic P-Si/AlN/MoS2 (Figure 4e and 

4f), this dynamic P-Si/AlN/MoS2 generator does not show any obvious degradation 

after 60 min of running, demonstrating the potential applications of the dynamic PN 

generator. The fluctuation of the continuous voltage and current output is caused by 

the vibration of the pressure and moving speed. 


   

 

Figure 4. a) The band diagram and carrier dynamic process of the dynamic 

P-Si/AlN/MoS2 generator. b) The J-V curve of the dynamic P-Si/AlN/MoS2 

junction with a 6N force. The contact area is 0.05 mm2. c) Voc and Jsc output as a 

function of electrical load R. Both the Voc and Jsc are the peak value of voltage 

and current output. Insert: equivalent circuit. d) The power density output as a 

function of electrical load R. e) The direct and continuous voltage and f) current 

output of the dynamic P-Si/AlN/MoS2 generator for 60 min continuously, with an 

electrical load R of 680 kΩ.  

 

We have demonstrated a novel direct-current generator based on the dynamic PN 

junction, where two semiconductors with different Fermi level slide with each other. 

The mechanism is proposed based on the built-in electric field bounding back 

diffusing carriers emitted by the destruction and re-establishment of the depletion 

layer in dynamic PN junctions, which breaks the equilibrium between the drift current 

and diffusion current. The voltage, current and output power of the dynamic PN 


   

generator can be further enhanced through optimizing the PN junction interface and 

designing the semiconductor-insulator-semiconductor structure. Notably, the dynamic 

PN generators with high voltage of 5.1V and high current density of 112 A/m2 have 

been realized based on MoS2/AlN/Si structure. Especially, this dynamic 

P-Si/AlN/MoS2 generator does not show obvious degradation after 60 min of running, 

demonstrating the unique mechanism and stability of the dynamic PN generator. This 

novel dynamic PN generator with sufficient current density has many promising 

applications in many fields where the mechanical energy is available. 

METHODS 

Devices fabrication. Firstly, the double side polished N-type GaAs wafer was 

dipping into 10 wt% HCl for 10 min to remove the native oxide layer in the surface 

and washed by deionized water. Then Au (100 nm) electrode was fabricated with 

magnetron sputtering on one side of GaAs wafer. Similarly, the single side polished 

P-type and N-type Si substrate were dipping into 10 wt% HF for 10 min to remove the 

native oxide layer in the interface and then washed by deionized water. Ti/Au (20 

nm/50 nm) electrode was fabricated with magnetron sputtering on the unpolished side 

of Si substrate and MoS2 flake. The N-type GaAs or MoS2 was pressed closely on the 

P-type Si substrate by the hand, making sure a solid electrical contact between N-type 

GaAs/MoS2 and P-type Si substrate can be achieved. The AlN layer on P-type Si is 

fabricated with Physical Vapor Deposition method. And the SiO2 layer on P-type Si is 

fabricated with thermal oxidation method in 1100℃. 

Physical characterization methods. The microscopic image of the generator was 


   

characterized with ZEISS optical microscopy. The current-voltage (I-V) curve of the 

PN junction was measured with Keithley 2400 system. The real-time voltage and 

current output were recorded in real time by a Keithley 2010 system, which was 

controlled by a LabView-based data acquisition system with a sampling rate of 25 s-1. 

The Keithley 6485 picoammeter was also used to verify accuracy of current output, 

which was controlled by a LabView-based data acquisition system with a sampling 

rate of 100 s-1. The force was measured with the pressure meter.  

Data availability 

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding 

author upon reasonable request. 

References 

1.   
Faraday,   M.   XVII.   On   a   peculiar   class   of   acoustical   figures;   and   on   certain   forms   assumed   by   

groups   of   particles   upon   vibrating   elastic   surfaces.   Philos.   Trans.   R.   Soc.   London   121,   299-­‐340   

(1831).   

2.   
Van,   Atta,   L.   C.,   Northrup,   D.   L.,   Van,   Atta,   C.   M.   &   Van,   De,   Graaff,   R.   J.   The   Design,   

Operation,   and   Performance   of   the   Round   Hill   Electrostatic   Generator.   Phys.   Rev.   49,   

761-­‐776   (1936).   

3.   
Wang,   Z.   L.   &   Song,   J.   Piezoelectric   Nanogenerators   Based   on   Zinc   Oxide   Nanowire   Arrays.   

Science   312,   242-­‐246   (2006).   

4.   
Fan,   F.   R.,   Tian,   Z.   Q.   &   Wang,   Z.   L.   Flexible   triboelectric   generator.   Nano   Energy   1,   328-­‐334   

(2012).   

5.   
Zhong,   H.   et   al.   Graphene-­‐Piezoelectric   Material   Heterostructure   for   Harvesting   Energy   from   

Water   Flow.   Adv.   Func.   Mater.   27,   1604226   (2017).   

6.   
Park,   K.   I.   et   al.   Piezoelectric   BaTiO3   thin   film   nanogenerator   on   plastic   substrates.   Nano   lett.   

10,   4939-­‐4943   (2010).   

7.   
Wang,   Z.   L.   On   Maxwell's   displacement   current   for   energy   and   sensors:   the   origin   of   

nanogenerators.   Mater.   Today   20,   74-­‐82   (2017).   

8.   
Li,   X.   Q.   et   al.   18.5%   efficient   graphene/GaAs   van   der   Waals   heterostructure   solar   cell.   Nano   

Energy   16,   310-­‐319   (2015).   

9.   
Green,   M.   A.,   Ho-­‐Baillie,   A.   &   Snaith,   H.   J.   The   emergence   of   perovskite   solar   cells.   Nat.   

Photonics   8,   506   (2014).   

10.   
Zhao,   D.   et   al.   Low-­‐bandgap   mixed   tin–lead   iodide   perovskite   absorbers   with   long   carrier   


   

lifetimes   for   all-­‐perovskite   tandem   solar   cells.   Nat.   Energy   2,   17018   (2017).   

11.   
Henniker,   J.   Triboelectricity   in   Polymers.   Nature   196,   474   (1962).   

12.   
Peng,   J.,   Kang,   S.   D.   &   Snyder,   G.   J.   Optimization   principles   and   the   figure   of   merit   for   

triboelectric   generators.   Sci.   Adv.   3,   8576   (2017).   

13.   
Baytekin,   H.   T.,   Baytekin,   B.,   Hermans,   T.   M.,   Kowalczyk.   B.   &   Grzybowski,   B.   A.   Control   of   

surface   charges   by   radicals   as   a   principle   of   antistatic   polymers   protecting   electronic   circuitry.   

Science   341,   1368-­‐1371   (2013).   

14.   
Wang,   Z.   L.   Triboelectric   nanogenerators   as   new   energy   technology   for   self-­‐powered   systems   

and   as   active   mechanical   and   chemical   sensors.   ACS   nano   7,   9533-­‐9557   (2013).   

15.   
Park,   J.   Y.   &   Salmeron,   M.   Fundamental   aspects   of   energy   dissipation   in   friction.   Chem.   rev.   

114,   677-­‐711   (2013).   

16.   
Zhang,   Q.,   Xu,   R.   &   Cai,   W.   Pumping   electrons   from   chemical   potential   difference.   Nano   

Energy   51,   698-­‐703   (2018).   

17.   
Schottky,   W.   The   Theory   of   p-­‐n   Junctions   in   Semiconductors   and   p-­‐n   Junction   Transistors.   

Bell   Syst.   Tech.   J.   28,   435-­‐489   (1949).   

18.   
Chapin,   D.   M.,   Fuller,   C.   &   Pearson,   G.   A   new   silicon   p‐n   junction   photocell   for   converting   

solar   radiation   into   electrical   power.   J.   Appl.   Phys.   25,   676-­‐677   (1954).   

19.   
Sah,   C.   T.,   Noyce,   R.   N.   &   Shockley,   W.   Carrier   generation   and   recombination   in   pn   junctions   

and   pn   junction   characteristics.   P.   IRE   45,   1228-­‐1243   (1957).   

20.   
Lin,   S.,   Lu,   Y.,   Feng,   S.,   Hao,   Z.   &   Yan,   Y.   A   High   Current   Density   Direct-­‐Current   Generator   

Based   on   a   Moving   van   der   Waals   Schottky   Diode.   Adv.   Mater.   0,   e1804398   (2018).   

21.   
Liu,   J.   et   al.   Direct-­‐current   triboelectricity   generation   by   a   sliding   Schottky   nanocontact   on   

MoS2   multilayers.   Nat.   Nanotechnol.   13,   112-­‐116   (2018).   

22.   
Liu,   J.   et   al.   Sustained   electron   tunneling   at   unbiased   metal-­‐insulator-­‐semiconductor   

triboelectric   contacts.   Nano   Energy   48,   320-­‐326   (2018).   

23.   
Li,   X.   et   al.   Graphene/h-­‐BN/GaAs   sandwich   diode   as   solar   cell   and   photodetector.   Opt.   

Express   24,   134-­‐145   (2016).   

24.   
Miyazaki,   T.   &   Tezuka,   N.   Giant   magnetic   tunneling   effect   in   Fe/Al2O3/Fe   junction.   J.   Magn.   

Magn.   Mater.   139,   L231-­‐L234   (1995).   

25.   
Wang,   Z.   L.,   Chen,   J.   &   Lin,   L.   Progress   in   triboelectric   nanogenerators   as   a   new   energy   

technology   and   self-­‐powered   sensors.   Energ.   Environ.   Sci.   8,   2250-­‐2282   (2015).   

26.   
Zhu,   G.   et   al.   Toward   large-­‐scale   energy   harvesting   by   a   nanoparticle-­‐enhanced   triboelectric   

nanogenerator.   Nano   lett.   13,   847-­‐853   (2013).   

27.   
Xu,   S.   et   al.   Self-­‐powered   nanowire   devices.   Nat.   Nanotechnol.   5,   366   (2010).   

28.   
Hu,   Y.   &   Wang,   Z.   L.   Recent   progress   in   piezoelectric   nanogenerators   as   a   sustainable   power   

source   in   self-­‐powered   systems   and   active   sensors.   Nano   Energy   14,   3-­‐14   (2015).   

29.   
Chen,   X.,   Xu,   S.,   Yao,   N.   &   Shi,   Y.   1.6   V   nanogenerator   for   mechanical   energy   harvesting   using   

PZT   nanofibers.   Nano   lett.   10,   2133-­‐2137   (2010).   

30.   
Wang,   X.,   Song,   J.,   Liu,   J.   &   Wang,   Z.   L.   Direct-­‐Current   Nanogenerator   Driven   by   Ultrasonic   

Waves.   Science   316,   102-­‐105   (2007).   

31.   
Yang,   R.,   Qin,   Y.,   Li,   C.,   Zhu,   G.   &   Wang,   Z.   L.   Converting   biomechanical   energy   into   electricity   

by   a   muscle-­‐movement-­‐driven   nanogenerator.   Nano   Lett.   9,   1201-­‐1205   (2009).   

32.   
Zhang,   Y.,   Liu,   Y.   &   Wang,   Z.   L.   Fundamental   Theory   of   Piezotronics.   Adv.   Mater.   23,   

3004-­‐3013   (2011).   


   

33.   
Lin,   S.   et   al.   Interface   designed   MoS2/GaAs   heterostructure   solar   cell   with   sandwich   stacked   

hexagonal   boron   nitride.   Sci.   Rep.   5,   15103   (2015).   

 

Acknowledgements: S. S. Lin thanks the support from the National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (No. 51202216, 51502264 and 61774135) and Special 

Foundation of Young Professor of Zhejiang University (Grant No. 2013QNA5007). 

Author Contributions: S. S. Lin designed the experiments, analyzed the data and 

conceived all the works. Y. H. Lu carried out the experiments, discussed the results 

and wrote the paper. S. R. Feng, Z. Z. Hao and R. J. Shen discussed the results and 

assisted with experiments. All authors contributed to the writing of the paper. 

Author Information: Reprints and permission information is available online. The 

authors declare no competing financial interest. Readers are welcome to comment on 

the online version of the paper. 

Supplementary Information is Available in the online website. 


