Nano-scale magnetic skyrmions and target states in confined geometries

David Cort´es-Ortu˜no,1, ∗ Niklas Romming,2 Marijan Beg,3 Kirsten von Bergmann,2

Andr´e Kubetzka,2 Ondrej Hovorka,1 Hans Fangohr,1, 3 and Roland Wiesendanger2

1Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, United Kingdom
2Institute of Applied Physics, University of Hamburg, Jungiusstrasse 11, D-20355 Hamburg, Germany
3European XFEL GmbH, Holzkoppel 4, 22869 Schenefeld, Germany

Research on magnetic systems with broken inversion symmetry has been stimulated by the ex-
perimental proof of particle-like configurations known as skyrmions, whose non-trivial topologi-
cal properties make them ideal candidates for spintronic technology.
In this class of materials,
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions (DMI) are present, which favor the stabilization of chiral con-
figurations. Recent advances in material engineering have shown that in confined geometries it is
possible to stabilize skyrmionic configurations at zero field. Moreover, it has been shown that in
systems based on Pd/Fe bilayers on top of Ir(111) surfaces skyrmions can be as small as a few
nanometres in diameter. In this work we present scanning tunneling microscopy measurements of
small Pd/Fe and Pd2/Fe islands on Ir(111) that exhibit a variety of different spin textures, which
can be reproduced using discrete spin simulations.
These configurations include skyrmions and
skyrmion-like states with extra spin rotations such as the target state, which have been of interest
due to their promising dynamic properties. Furthermore, using simulations we analyze the stability
of these skyrmionic textures as a function of island size, applied field and boundary conditions of
the system.
An understanding of the parameters and conditions affecting the stability of these
magnetic structures in confined geometries is crucial for the development of energetically efficient
and optimally sized skyrmion-based devices.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Recent advances on the study and fabrication of ferro-
magnetic systems with broken inversion symmetry have
been highly motivated by the experimental observation of
topologically non-trivial and spatially localized particle-
like magnetic configurations known as skyrmions. The
theoretical predictions of skyrmions and skyrmion lat-
tices in ferromagnetic materials with Dzyaloshinskii-
Moriya interactions (DMI)1–3 were first confirmed by
M¨uhlbauer et al.4 and later in numerous experimental
studies where non-collinear structures were observed by
imaging the magnetic texture of a sample. In particu-
lar, scanning tunneling microscopy with a spin-polarized
tip5–8 (SP-STM) has been effective for sampling, with
atomic-scale resolution, the presence and structure of in-
dividual skyrmions in interfacial systems. Studies based
on the SP-STM technique applied to Pd/Fe films on
an Ir(111) surface, where skyrmions need to be sta-
bilized using an external magnetic field, have shown
that individual skyrmions can be created and annihi-
lated6 and how their size and shape depends on the field
strength.7 Besides skyrmions, other non-collinear struc-
tures have been experimentally observed as equilibrium
states. For example, spin spirals arise as the ground state
in Pd/Fe bilayers at zero field6 and experiments show
phases where skyrmions coexist with spin spiral configu-
rations. Furthermore, the theory predicts different sym-
metrical configurations similar to skyrmions with addi-
tional rotations9,10, which are known in the literature as
kπ-skyrmions, with k ∈ N according to the number of
rotations.
A 2π-skyrmion corresponds to a particle-like configu-
ration with two radially symmetric spin windings and is

also known in the literature as the target state.
Target states have been predicted by theory9,10 and
observed in micromagnetic11–17 and atomistic18 simula-
tions. It has been claimed that the dynamics of target
states caused by spin waves19,20, field gradients21 or spin-
polarized currents14,17,22,23 present some differences with
that of skyrmions, such as keeping a steady motion af-
ter switching off the current. Other effects make evident
their advantage over skyrmions for their manipulation in
two dimensional systems, such as racetrack geometries.
These include not being affected by the skyrmion Hall ef-
fect,24 because their net topological charge is zero, reach-
ing larger velocities under currents applied perpendicular
to the hosting material,17,23 and not exhibiting distor-
tion under certain conditions during their motion.21,23

Although recent experiments have reported the observa-
tion of target states in the ferrimagnetic25 Tb22Fe69Co9,
the Ni80Fe20 ferromagnet next to a topological insula-
tor,26 and the chiral magnet27 FeGe, thus far no evidence
has been provided for thin ferromagnetic layers next to
a heavy metal, where interfacial DMI is present.
Experimental studies of chiral materials have recently
focused on the analysis of skyrmionic textures in confined
geometries.23,27–29 Theoretical investigations have shown
that in confined geometries skyrmions and target states
can be stabilized at zero field,13,16 which is of significant
importance for the potential design of skyrmion-based
spintronic devices.8,30

A notable feature of skyrmions in interfacial Pd/Fe
samples is their small size of only a few nanometers in
radius, which can be an important step forward towards
the miniaturization of magnetic technology. This is in
contrast with skyrmions in bulk materials such as FeGe,
where the helical length is about 70 nm. The same holds

arXiv:1901.06999v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  17 May 2019


2

for target states, which were observed in 160 nm diame-
ter cylinders.27 Although the stabilization of skyrmionic
textures in extended Pd/Fe bilayer samples requires the
application of a magnetic field, confined geometries offer
an alternative for observing these structures at zero or
weak field strengths. It is important to notice that at
this low field regime, spiral structures are energetically
favored over skyrmions since the DMI and exchange en-
ergies dominate over the Zeeman energy.
Hence, it is
important to gain an understanding of ranges of param-
eters where spin spirals, skyrmions and target states are
stable for their potential observation in small confined
interfacial systems.
In this work we show through SP-STM measurements
and numerical simulations, that a variety of chiral config-
urations can be stabilized in small Pd/Fe/Ir(111) islands
of about 20 nm in diameter. We reproduce the experi-
mental images using simulations based on a discrete spin
model.
We validate the simulations of the islands by
comparing the tilting of spins at the boundary with the
experimental findings. Simulations show that a variety
of the experimentally observed chiral configurations are
accessible through a magnetic field sweep and we charac-
terize them through their topological number. Further-
more, we show that the confinement within the islands
allows the stabilization of skyrmion-like configurations,
such as a target state or a 3π-skyrmion, from zero field
up to a wide range of magnetic fields below 1 T.
In addition to the analysis of Pd monolayer islands on
Fe/Ir(111), we show STM images of Pd double layer is-
lands on Fe/Ir(111) with the presence of a configuration
resembling a target state. In this system the environment
of the islands in applied field is ferromagnetic owing to
the surrounding field-polarized Pd/Fe layer. To under-
stand the stability of skyrmions and target states under
different boundary conditions we perform a systematic
study of these configurations in perfectly shaped hexago-
nal islands under different conditions. In this context, we
compute the skyrmion and target state size and energy as
a function of island size, applied field, and boundary con-
dition. Moreover, we vary these parameters to calculate
the ground states of the system, which reveals conditions
for the stability of different kπ-skyrmion states.
As an additional proof for the stability of skyrmions
and target states, we calculate the energy barrier separat-
ing a skyrmion from the uniform ordering and the barrier
between a target state and a skyrmion. We compute the
barriers using the Geodesic Nudged Elastic Band Method
(GNEBM)31 which has been previously used to compute
transitions with the least energy cost between equilib-
rium configurations in finite chiral systems.18,32–34 Our
results show that the stability of target states benefits
from ferromagnetic boundaries, in agreement with our
experimental findings.
We start this paper by introducing in Sec. II results
obtained with SP-STM measurements on the Pd mono-
layer islands on Fe/Ir(111) together with the theoretical
basis for the simulation of these systems. Consequently,

in Sec. II B we show discrete spin simulations of the ex-
perimentally fabricated quasi-hexagonal hcp Pd islands
on fcc Fe. Using different initial states we reproduce the
field sweep experiment in these islands in Sec. II C. In
Sec. III we discuss additional experiments performed on
Pd islands on an extended Pd/Fe film on Ir(111) and
simulations of these samples with ferromagnetic bound-
ary conditions. To obtain an understanding of the ex-
perimental observation of magnetic orderings resembling
a target state in the Pd2/Fe islands, in Sec. IV we model
perfectly hexagonal islands and study the energy and size
of skyrmions and target states as a function of hexagon
size, applied field and boundary conditions. In addition,
we characterize the lowest energy states with a full phase
diagram of the hexagon system in Sec. IV B. Finally, in
Sec. IV C we study the stability of skyrmions and tar-
get states by means of energy barrier and energy path
calculations with the GNEBM.

II.
MAGNETIC STATES IN PD/FE/IR(111)
ISLANDS

A.
Experimentally observed magnetic states

Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SP-
STM) is a valuable tool to study nano-scale magnetism
in model-type systems.35 Figure 1 shows spin-resolved
maps of the differential conductance (left columns) of a
monolayer thick hcp-stacked Pd island on an extended
fcc-Fe monolayer on Ir(111) at different applied out-of-
plane magnetic fields as indicated (cf. Supplemental Ma-
terial, Sec. S1, for sample preparation36). The presented
data is obtained at a bias voltage of U = +610 mV and
the observed signal changes within the roughly hexag-
onal island are due to a combination of tunnel magne-
toresistance and non-collinear magnetoresistance35,37 (cf.
Supplemental Material Sec. S2 for more details36).
In
this case the tip is predominantly sensitive to the out-
of-plane magnetization component of the sample. The
Pd-covered Fe (Pd/Fe bilayer) behaves as one magnetic
entity: the magnetic state of the Fe is changed by the
hybridization with the Pd layer and the Pd becomes
spin-polarized.
The Pd/Fe bilayer exhibits a spin spi-
ral ground state at zero magnetic field, as evident from
the stripes observed in the differential conductance map
in (a).6 Furthermore, a Pd/Fe island is surrounded by
the Fe monolayer, where a highly non-collinear nano-
skyrmion lattice5 is present. This nano-skyrmion lattice
does not change its state upon the application of an ex-
ternal magnetic field and has a magnetic period of about
1 nm. As this is small compared to the characteristic spin
spiral wavelength of 6 − 7 nm in Pd/Fe/Ir(111), we have
neglected a possible weak coupling between these layers
in the theoretical model, that we describe later, treating
the island edges as free boundaries.
The investigated hexagonal island has a circumradius
of about 9.7 nm (see (p)) and the zero magnetic field spin


3

FIG. 1. Magnetic states of a roughly hexagonal hcp-Pd island on fcc-Fe/Ir(111) during a magnetic field sweep. (a)-(o) Left
images: spin-resolved differential conductance maps of a hexagonal Pd/Fe island measured with a Cr-bulk tip, bias voltage
U = +610 mV, the applied out-of-plane magnetic field B is indicated; the image is composed of the differential conductance
of the island together with the surrounding topography data.
The magnetic tip is predominantly sensitive to the out-of-
plane magnetization component. Right images: corresponding discrete spin simulations, which are obtained by relaxation of
the experimentally found magnetic state using the experimentally determined material parameters, see text; the calculated
topological charge Q is indicated. (p) Island shape used in the simulation. (q) Out-of-plane component of the magnetization
of the zero field spin spiral from the simulation in (a), and a line profile taken as indicated by the dashed line.


4

spiral period is about 6 nm. This spiral adjusts to the
shape of the island by bending the stripes to be more per-
pendicular to the island edges, see (a). When a magnetic
field is applied, the sample magnetization changes and at
intermediate magnetic fields we observe a skyrmion next
to a 360◦ wall, whereas at larger magnetic fields only
skyrmions are observed, see Fig. 1(b)-(h). Because of the
injection of higher energy electrons at the used bias volt-
age the tunnel current can induce changes in the sample
magnetization, compare (f) and (g), which are measured
at the same applied magnetic field but one skyrmion has
appeared between the two measurements.
At 4 T the
sample reaches a uniform magnetization, see Fig. 1(i).
When the applied magnetic field is reduced again similar
magnetic states reappear, i.e. at B = 1.6 T one or two
skyrmions are found in the island, see (j) and (k).
However, when the applied magnetic field is then in-
creased in the opposite direction the magnetic configu-
ration of the island is dominated by a network of 360◦

domain walls and their junctions, see Fig. 1(l)-(n). These
states are unusual magnetic configurations and we think
they arise when a magnetic field is applied to a zero-field
state that is not the virgin state but a metastable rema-
nent state. We would like to point out the central region
of (l), which resembles a magnetic skyrmion with the cen-
ter (dark) parallel to the applied magnetic field and the
surrounding (bright ring) magnetized opposite to the ap-
plied magnetic field; this means that this skyrmion has
an equivalent spin texture as the one observed in (f), but
it exists here in the opposite magnetic field. When the
absolute value of the applied magnetic field is increased,
more and more junctions of 360◦ walls disappear until
B = −1.6 T when only one 360◦ domain wall remains;
this is a state similar to the one found when the magnetic
field is applied to the virgin state, see Fig. 1(d), which
shows a similar 360◦ domain wall next to a skyrmion.
To obtain a better understanding of the magnetic field
dependent stability and topological properties of the ob-
served magnetic states in this particular Pd/Fe island,
we performed discrete spin simulations of each mag-
netic state at the given applied magnetic field using the
Fidimag38 code. We translate the quasi hexagonal ex-
perimental Pd/Fe/Ir(111) island into a spin lattice, as
illustrated in Fig. 1(p). We treat the Pd/Fe bilayer as
a single entity and consequently simulate a monolayer of
spins in a two-dimensional triangular lattice. The islands
are simulated with open boundaries because of the Fe/Ir
environment of the island explained earlier in this Sec-
tion. By setting the island in the xy-plane we use the
following Heisenberg-like Hamiltonian,

H = − J

P
�

⟨i,j⟩
si · sj + D

P
�

⟨i,j⟩
(rij × ˆz) · [si × sj]

− K

P
�

i
(si · ˆz)2 −

P
�

i
Bzµ(z)
i
.
(1)

In Eq. 1 µi = µisi is the magnetic moment of the spin
at the lattice site i, si is the corresponding spin orien-
tation with |si| = 1, P is the number of spins, which
depends on the lattice constant and the size of the is-
land, K is an effective anisotropy taking into account the
uniaxial anisotropy and the approximation of the dipolar
interactions, D is the DMI constant that describes the
interfacial DMI for this material and the last term is the
Zeeman interaction for the field applied perpendicular to
the sample plane.
For the hcp stacking of Pd on fcc-Fe, as in this island,
the continuum magnetic parameters A, Dc, and Keff (ex-
change stiffness, DMI, and effective uniaxial anisotropy)
have been obtained from previous experiments7, hence
we convert these values into the equivalent discrete mag-
nitudes (see Sec. S5 in the Supplemental Material for
details36). These parameters define a characteristic he-
lical length39 at zero field and zero anisotropy of LD =
4πA/Dc = 2πaJ/D ≈ 6.4 nm, where a is the in-plane
atomic spacing of PdFe. As in the previous work7 we ap-
proximate dipolar interactions into the anisotropy since,
in the ultrathin film limit, their energy contribution be-
come significantly small39–41 and it is possible to approxi-
mate them as a uniaxial anisotropy,42 in particular for ax-
isymmetric solutions (which can be proved analytically9).
Note that if the stray field is taken explicitly as in Ref. 43
the anisotropy constant is likely to have a smaller mag-
nitude.
The results of relaxing a particular experimentally
found magnetic state at the applied magnetic field are
shown in the right columns of Fig. 1. In general, the sim-
ulations are highly accurate in reproducing the magnetic
configurations from the experiments at the correspond-
ing applied fields. In particular, from Fig. 1(q) the period
of the spiral at zero field of (a) is estimated as 6.2 nm,
in agreement with the characteristic helical length pe-
riod. Discrepancies arise for the magnetic states shown
in Fig. 1(d), (e) and (n). In these cases, different factors
that are not considered in the theoretical model, such
as the presence of defects, might be contributing to the
stabilization of the experimentally observed 360◦ domain
walls and branches.
The topological charge Q of each of the simulated spin
textures in the Pd/Fe island can be calculated according
to the method presented in Refs. 32, 44, and 45. This
quantity is a mathematical measure of the number of
times that the spin orientations, on a two dimensional
plane, wrap a unit sphere. It is useful, for example, for
quantifying the number of skyrmions in a system as the
spin configuration of each skyrmion in an infinite sample
contributes with Q = 1. For magnetic states in a con-
fined geometry, such as this Pd/Fe island, the topological
charge is usually not an integer due to the edge tilt of the
spin texture at the boundary of the structure.
Figure 2(a) shows the line profiles of the differential
conductance near the edge of a larger Pd/Fe island at
four different applied magnetic fields, using a bias volt-
age of U = +20 mV. The tip magnetization axis mT


5

FIG. 2. Investigation of the edge tilt in a Pd/Fe island. (a)
Line profiles of dI/dU near the boundary of a Pd/Fe island,
see dotted red rectangle in the STM image, measured at pos-
itive (solid lines) and negative (dashed lines) magnetic fields
(see Supplemental Material36). The tip magnetization direc-
tion mT is dominantly in-plane and was obtained from 2-
dimensional fits to the skyrmions (see Supplemental Mate-
rial36). Dotted lines refer to the respective difference between
the line profiles taken at positive and negative fields (scale
on the right axis). (b) The experimentally derived in-plane
mx components at the boundary for the two magnetic field
values are shown as dotted lines together with the ones from
the simulations as solid lines.

was derived from the appearance of the skyrmions in
this measurement and was found to be dominantly in
the surface plane (see inset to Fig. 2(a) and Sec. S3 in
the Supplemental Material36). The in-plane component
of the sample magnetization can be calculated from the
data presented in (a) and is plotted as dotted lines for
the two different absolute applied magnetic fields in (b).
The solid lines in Fig. 2(b) represent the mx-component
of the respective simulated data. Although the simula-
tions do not include a possible change of the magnetic
material close to the edge due to changes of the elec-
tronic structure, the agreement with the experimental
profiles is remarkable. As evident from the experimen-
tal profiles and the calculated magnetization component
mx, the DMI indeed leads to a considerable tilting of
spins at open boundaries of up to ⪆ 30◦ with respect to

the surface normal. The negligible difference between the
profiles at B = 1.2 T and B = 2.4 T shows the compara-
bly small influence of the external magnetic field on the
edge tilt.
Comparison between Fig. 1(c) and (d) demonstrates
that a 360◦ domain wall does not have a topological
charge.
Because the absolute value of the topological
charge of a skyrmion is 1, and depending on the applied
magnetic field, we can conclude that for the island shown
here the edge tilt contributes to the total topological
charge in a small range of 0.13−0.09, which confirms the
weak influence of the field. Analyzing the unusual mag-
netic configurations found in the experiments, Fig. 1(l),
(m), we find that they have a topological charge with the
same sign as the external magnetic field, in contrast to
the typical skyrmion states (e.g. (f)) where the topolog-
ical charge and magnetic field have opposite signs.

B.
Simulations of magnetic states in the island

To compare the experimentally observed magnetic
states with other possible equilibrium states we analyze
the energy and the topological charge of different sim-
ulated magnetic structures.
For these simulations we
define five different initial states and relax them using
the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation at different mag-
netic fields, see Fig. 3: a uniform ordering (•) with edge
tilt, a single skyrmion (▲), three skyrmions (

▲

), a target
state (■), or 2π-skyrmion, and a 3π-skyrmion (×), which
is a target state with an extra rotation of the spins. At
the bottom of Fig. 3 we show relaxed states of the five
configurations at applied fields of Bz = 0.5 T and 1.5 T.
They do not look the same for both fields because lower
energy states can be found during relaxation or some
of the configurations are unstable in specific ranges of
the applied magnetic field. Note that at weak magnetic
fields the skyrmions tend to occupy a larger area and
are deformed because of the inter-skyrmion force and the
boundary repulsion.
The energies of the magnetic states (Fig. 3(a)) are cal-
culated with respect to the energy of a completely uni-
form configuration where spins point in the +z direction
and that we denote by ↑. Therefore, the energy curve la-
belled as “Fm Up” resembles the energy gain of the edge
tilt. The ground state of the system for magnetic fields
close to zero is likely to be a spiral with multiple rota-
tions, since after analyzing the energy of different varia-
tions of spirals obtained from the simulations we found
that they usually have lower energy than the five config-
urations shown. We do not show the spirals here since
they are not easily classifiable.
With increasing fields
the Zeeman interaction becomes predominant and these
spirals are not energetically favored anymore.
We can distinguish some of the configurations by their
topological charge, which we show in Fig. 3(b). These
values are not integers due to the tilting of the spins
at the boundaries. For domains magnetized out-of-plane


6

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

E
E
(eV)

a

Fm Up
1 Sk Down

3 Sk Down
2
skyrmion

3
skyrmion

Field sweep

a

b
c
k
j
d
e

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

Bz (T)

1

0

1

2

3

Q

b

Bz = 0.5 T

c

Bz = 1.5 T

d

1

0

1
sz

FIG. 3. Total magnetic energy and topological charge of five
different magnetic configurations:
ferromagnetic ordering,
(FM up), a single skyrmion (1 Sk Down), three skyrmions (3
Sk Down), a target state or 2π-skyrmion, and a 3π-skyrmion.
Snapshots of these states under a field of Bz = 0.5 T and
Bz = 1.5 T are shown at the two bottom rows of the figure,
where the color scale refers to the out-of-plane spin component
sz. Every plot is shown as a function of the applied magnetic
field, which points in the z direction of the sample. (a) To-
tal energy computed with respect to a fully saturated state
(denoted by ↑) at corresponding magnetic field strengths. (b)
Topological charge. (c)-(d) Snapshots of the configurations
at two different field values indicated at the left of every row.

and enclosed by a 180◦ domain wall, such as a skyrmion,
there is associated a topological charge of one.
We
find that the FM state, the single skyrmion, and three
skyrmions do not change their topological number in the
entire magnetic field range, whereas the 2π-skyrmion and
the 3π-skyrmion have a smaller stability range and de-
cay into other magnetic states: the 3π-skyrmion state
changes at Bz = 0.6 T to a 2π-skyrmion state, and the
2π-skyrmion state changes at Bz = 1.2 T to a single
skyrmion state.

At weak fields, below 0.7 T, a single skyrmion be-
comes a worm-like domain, as shown in the second image

from the left in Fig. 3(c). This transformation is known
in the literature as strip-out or elliptic instability.39,46

We mark the worm domains by filled data symbols in
Fig. 3(a) and (b) (i.e. a filled black triangle, instead of
a hollow black triangle). A transition of such a worm-
like domain into a circular domain exists for Bz ≥ 0.5 T
and Bz ≤ 0.7 T (Fig. S5 in the Supplemental Material36

shows both configurations). This is confirmed by ana-
lyzing the energy of the magnetic interactions involved,
which are shown in Sec. S6 of the Supplemental Mate-
rial36. The worm domain has lower energy than a circular
domain at weak fields because of the DMI energy, which
dominates over the Zeeman energy, and favors larger ar-
eas of non-collinear spin ordering. Similar horseshoe-like
states have been observed previously in disk samples with
DMI13,29 for sufficiently large system sizes. As the mag-
netic field increases, both the DMI and Zeeman ener-
gies of a worm domain increase up to a point where the
structure is not energetically stable anymore and a tran-
sition into the circular domain occurs, which sets the
skyrmion strip-out field. Here, the DMI energy abruptly
increases but is followed by a steep decrease of the ener-
gies of the three other interactions. In simulations, the
worm domain is only found by relaxing the system with
a very strict (i.e. small) numerical tolerance of the algo-
rithm (see simulation details in Supplemental Material,
Sec. S736). For weaker (i.e. numerically greater) toler-
ances we observe that the skyrmion relaxes to a circular
bubble-like domain.
We see in Fig. 3(a) that close to a field of Bz = 0.8 T
a single skyrmion (which is observed above Bz = 0.5 T)
has lower energy than three skyrmions in the sample,
partially due to the Zeeman energy which is smaller for a
larger ferromagnetic environment in the direction of the
applied field. Furthermore, above a field of Bz = 0.8 T a
single skyrmion and three skyrmions start having larger
energy than the uniform configuration.
In the case of
three skyrmions, it is still possible to observe worm do-
mains, however their presence depends on the available
space in the island.
This can be seen from Fig. 3(c),
where only one of the skyrmions is deformed into an elon-
gated domain at weak fields. Three skyrmion states with
a worm domain are also indicated with filled data points
in Fig. 3(a) and (b). The presence of a small elongated
domain also affects the energy of the system, where the
transition occurs at fields from 0.5 T up to 0.6 T, but not
as abruptly as in the case of a single skyrmion because
of the smaller skyrmion size. As indicated in Fig. S4 of
the Supplemental Material,36 although the DMI energy
behaves similarly as in the single skyrmion case, the Zee-
man energy does not change significantly when the small
worm domain turns into a circular skyrmion, hence other
effects such as the skyrmion-skyrmion interaction, the is-
land confinement and the repulsion from the boundary,
become more important in hindering the formation of
spiral domains.
Two other physically interesting states are the 2π and
3π skyrmions. For the latter there is still no experimen-


7

tal evidence in the literature. In the hexagonal islands
we obtained these multiple-rotation states defining the
direction of their inner core in the +z direction, which
follows the applied field orientation.
Referring to Fig. 3(a), the 2π and 3π-skyrmion states
are only stable in a small range of field magnitudes.
Specifically, starting from zero applied field, the 2π-
skyrmion is observed up to a field of Bz = 1.1 T and
then the system relaxes to a skyrmion for larger field
magnitudes, which is evident from the topological charge
in Fig. 3(b). For the case of the 3π-skyrmion, it is visi-
ble even in a smaller range, only up to Bz = 0.5 T, and
afterwards it relaxes to the target and skyrmion states
(this value slightly depends on the tolerance of the re-
laxation, weak tolerance allows to stabilize a metastable
target state in a small range above 0.5 T). It is notewor-
thy that, for low fields, the multiple spin rotations of the
2π-skyrmion together with a large enough ferromagnetic
background make this configuration the lowest energy
state between the five states we are analyzing. The uni-
formly oriented background of spins is important because
it decreases the overall exchange energy. We can explain
the higher energy of the 3π-skyrmion compared to the 2π-
skyrmion at fields below 0.5 T (where the 3π-skyrmion
exists), by referring to the exchange and DMI energies
(see Supplemental Fig. S4(c) and (d)36), which are the
main energy contributions. The DMI energy of the 3π-
skyrmion is significantly smaller than the 2π-skyrmion,
which is caused by the extra rotation of the magnetic
moments, however the effect of both the exchange and
Zeeman interactions is sufficiently large to make the to-
tal energy of the 3π-skyrmion larger. This phenomenon
is enhanced by the anisotropy energy (see Fig. S4(e) in
the Supplemental Material36).
In
Fig.
3(a)
we
observe
that
target
states
in
Pd/Fe/Ir(111) islands cannot be stabilized above a field
of Bz = 1.1 T since the system relaxes to an isolated
skyrmion. One possible reason for this instability is that
the energy barrier separating these two configurations
is reduced as the magnetic field increases, thus a tar-
get state would decay above a critical field.
We con-
firmed this hypothesis by performing a stability simula-
tion between a target state and a skyrmion by means
of the GNEBM.31,32 We show these results in Sec. S8
of the Supplemental Material,36 where we find that the
critical field where the barrier goes to zero, lies between
Bz = 1.1 T and 1.2 T.
To compare the energy of the experimentally observed
configurations with the energy of the skyrmionic config-
urations, we show the energies of the corresponding sim-
ulated magnetic states (Fig. 1) in Fig. 3(a) as hexagonal
markers and annotated with their corresponding letter
from Fig. 1. At zero field we observe that the spin spi-
ral (Fig. 1(a)) has the lowest energy, slightly below the
energy of the target state. At larger fields a skyrmion co-
existing with a 360◦ wall (Fig. 1(b) and (c)) has a higher
energy compared to the other states, the single skyrmion
states confirm our simulation results by lying on the cor-

responding curve, and, as expected, the double skyrmion
energy lies between the single and triple skyrmion curves
at 1.6 T.

C.
Simulations of a magnetic field sweep

With the aim of devising a reproducible method to ob-
tain the magnetic configurations observed during the field
sweep experiment, we replicated this process in our sim-
ulations by starting with different initial configurations
at strong fields. An adequate choice of initial states is
not straightforward since it is often not possible to know
every possible equilibrium state. In particular, spin spi-
rals are difficult to specify in simulations because they
can manifest as branches, i.e. long domains oriented in
the +z or −z direction, that bend and extend in any
possible direction in the island. Hence, we selected five
magnetic states based on a different number of skyrmions
and the configuration from experiment of Fig. 1(b) where
a skyrmion and a 360◦ wall coexist next to each other.
We do not show results starting from the spiral state
of Fig. 1(a) since at sufficiently large fields it turns into
a single skyrmion before saturating, and reversing the
field it is not possible to obtain the spiral states from
the experiments. The reason is that our simulations are
performed at zero temperature and we do not consider
the tunnel current from the STM tip, which can excite
some of the observed states. Nevertheless, simulations
show that these spiral configurations are still accessible
when choosing an appropriate initial condition, as shown
by the simulation of different states (Fig. 1) of the field
sweep experiment discussed in Sec. II.
We set our starting point in the field sweep by relax-
ing these configurations at a magnetic field of Bz = 2.5 T,
which are the states in the first row of Fig. 4. We charac-
terize them by their topological number Q, whose abso-
lute value effectively indicates the number of skyrmions
in every snapshot. For a spin spiral Q ≈ 0 because it
only has spins rotating in a single direction. We then de-
crease the magnetic field in steps of −100 mT for every
initial state and relax them again, repeating the process
down to a field of Bz = −2.5 T and registering the re-
sulting configurations under equilibrium for every step.
As a result, we obtain the evolution of every initial state
given by the columns of Fig. 4 and 5, where we only show
snapshots of the relaxed states in steps of 500 mT. We
observe that as we reach zero field, skyrmions expand
and occupy a larger area in the sample. When there is
a large number of them, as seen in the case of column A
of Fig. 4 at zero field, these configurations become more
symmetrical in shape because of the restricted available
space given by the ferromagnetic background. The topo-
logical number of the different magnetic configurations
changes only slightly during the magnetic field sweep to
0 T.
When the zero field is crossed, however, we observe
interesting magnetic configurations which critically de-


8

FIG. 4. Field sweep of magnetic orderings in a hexagonal island. Snapshots of magnetic configurations obtained after relaxation
during a field sweep, as in a hysteresis process, with a starting field of Bz = 2.5 T. Columns indicate the field variation process
for different initial states. The field sweep was computed in steps of 0.1 T, with this figure only showing the resulting orderings
in steps of 0.5 T. The field magnitude is depicted at the left side of every row, where all the snapshots are shown at the same
field value. The top left number at every snapshot plot refers to the topological charge of the system. The color scale indicates
the out-of-plane component of spins which is the color scale of the snapshots in Fig. 3.

pend on the initial state, see Fig. 5. When we start with
different numbers of skyrmions we notice that domains
oriented in the −z direction appear surrounded by elon-
gated domains pointing in the +z direction in the form
of branches whose ends tend to finish perpendicular to
the hexagon sides rather than the corners, reminiscent of
the magnetic states found experimentally. Indeed, they
also show a topological number with the same sign as

the applied field, as observed in the experimental data.
A plausible explanation for the spirals avoiding the is-
land corners is that, firstly, compared to a straight edge,
a corner covers a larger area (about an extra 15% surface
if we assume a perfect hexagon) and thus surface effects
are stronger and involve an energy cost. Secondly, a spi-
ral sitting at the corner is not optimum as the cycloid
needs to rotate 360◦ and the corner reduces the available


9

FIG. 5. Field sweep of magnetic orderings in a hexagonal island. Continuation of the field sweep process explained in Fig. 4.
Field magnitudes for this case are negative and smaller than zero field, thus the field is oriented out-of-plane in the −z direction.

space to do this. Finally, the DMI imposes a boundary
condition where spins are tilted and orient perpendicular
to the island edge surface, making it energetically inef-
ficient to form a spiral at the corner rather than in a
smoother surface.

Whereas the phenomenological counting of the topo-
logical charge is rather trivial for the magnetic states
shown in Fig. 4 where each skyrmion contributes a charge
of one, the topological charge of the states in Fig. 5 ap-
pears less obvious at first sight. However, by carefully an-
alyzing the magnetic states, we propose a phenomenolog-
ical model to also estimate the topological charge of such
unusual magnetic states. The observed enclosed domains
carry a topological charge of +1 since their surrounding
domain wall are equivalent to the skyrmion boundary.
While some of the skyrmionic structures are partially de-
stroyed at the boundary of the island, the total number
of domains in the −z direction is the same as the ini-

tial number of skyrmions, which is evident from columns
A-C of Fig. 5 at fields of -0.5 and −1.0 T. As expected,
these incomplete skyrmionic domains do not have an in-
teger topological charge and it is possible to roughly es-
timate this magnitude depending on the domain shape.
Incomplete skyrmionic domains sitting in a corner at the
boundary of the hexagonal island, which forms a 2π/3 an-
gle, can be identified with |Q| ≈ 1/3 because they make
a third of a full skyrmionic texture. However, when the
domains are more elongated their surrounding domain
walls are likely to give a small |Q| value. Depending on
the flatness of the domain walls, some of these domains
can be associated with a charge of |Q| ≈ 1/6.

For example, referring to column A of Fig. 5, at
Bz = −0.5 T we have three skyrmionic domains which
each contribute |Q| = 1 and four incomplete domains
that can be identified with |Q| ≈ 1/3, approximately
summing up the total charge |Q| of 4.32. Furthermore,


10

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00

0.25

0.50

E
E
(eV)

a
b
c
j
d
k
e
g
f

A
B
C
D
Experimental

2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

Bz (T)

E
E
(eV)

l
m
n
o

FIG. 6. Energy of the configurations in the field sweep process. At positive fields (left panel) the energy is computed relative
to the energy of the fully saturated state in the z-direction, E↑, whereas at negative fields (right panel) the reference is the
saturated state in the opposite direction E↓.

if we now refer to the state of column C at the same
field, we observe elongated boundary domains at the up-
per sides of the sample with a more straight profile of
their surrounding domain walls, but not completely flat.
Hence, by only considering the domain at the bottom
right of the island as a third of a skyrmion, we obtain a
total charge of |Q| ≈ 2 + 1/3 + 2 × 1/6 = 2.66, being the
actual total charge |Q| = 2.63. Similarly, the state from
column B at −1.0 T is estimated with |Q| ≈ 2.5. In con-
trast, the flat profile of the domain wall from the bottom
domain of the state of column B, at Bz = −0.5 T, makes
the contribution of this domain to be zero and hence we
estimate a |Q| of 3.66 for the whole configuration in the
island.
Another way to estimate the |Q| magnitudes, is as-
sociating the triple junctions from the 360◦ walls with
a charge of |Q| ≈ 0.5.
Hence, discarding the bound-
ary contribution, states from the row at −1.0 T in Fig. 5
agree well with this estimation. The slight difference from
the spin tilting at the boundaries can contribute up to
|Q| ≈ 0.13, as seen in column D at −1.5 T for a uniform
ordering in the −z direction.
To compare the energy of the states from the experi-
mental field sweep with the configurations obtained from
the simulations, we plot the energies of all the configu-
rations as a function of the applied field in Fig. 6, where
the field axis follows the order of the sweep process from
left to right. Since the field orientation changes in the
field sweep process, in the positive field region, shown at
the left panel of Fig. 6, the energies are computed with
respect to the fully saturated state energy in the +z di-
rection, E↑.
Similarly, at negative fields, we show the
energy as a function of the saturated state in the oppo-
site direction, E↓, in the right side of Fig. 6. Energies of

the states from the experiment are shown as annotated
data points with the labels according to Fig. 1. The four
simulated field sweep processes are distinguished in the
top legend by the column letter of Fig. 4 and 5. At the
center of Fig. 6 we can see that the energy of the zero
field spin spiral (data point a) is closest to the zero field
state of curve D. This is consistent with the experimen-
tal results, where the spin spiral evolves into a skyrmion
next to a 360◦ wall as in Fig. 1(b) and (c), and the en-
ergies of these configurations are close to the energies
given by curve D of Fig. 6. We can notice a somewhat
larger energy in the experimental configurations because
the orientation of the spin spiral is different in the ex-
periment. This indicates that the spin spiral prefers to
orient perpendicular to a longer or smoother edge of the
island. At higher fields the experimental states, which
are mainly isolated skyrmions, have a significant lower
energy because the simulated configurations have larger
regions of spins opposite to the field, which translates
into a larger Zeeman energy cost.
At negative fields,
similar energies are found from the complex spiral con-
figurations of Fig. 1(l) and (m), with the energies of the
states in curves C and D at -0.5 T. In particular, the
configuration from curve D (Fig. 5 at -0.5 T) resembles
Fig. 1m but with the left side of the domain shifted to
the right side.

We find that the unusual magnetic states (right plot of
Fig. 6) have higher energy than the skyrmion configura-
tions (left plot of Fig. 6), i.e. they are metastable states,
which are accessible only at sufficiently low temperatures.
In particular, such magnetic field sweeps at low temper-
ature provide access to novel exotic spin textures with
non-trivial topological charge. However, while the target
state is not a high energy state, it was not observed dur-


11

FIG. 7. Magnetic states of Pd islands on an extended Pd/Fe film on Ir(111) imaged at B = +3 T. STM constant-current images
with the NCMR contrast on the islands adjusted locally to ±10 pm after applying a Gauß-filter with σ = 1.2 ˚A in the slow scan
direction, measurement parameters for all images: U = +50 mV, I = 1 nA, T = 4.2 K, Cr-bulk tip. (a) Image obtained after
a magnetic field sweep from B = 0 T up to +3 T. (b) Image obtained after a magnetic field sweep from B = +7 T down to
+3 T. Images (c) and (d) were taken after (a) and (b), respectively, using the same bias voltage and tunnel current, showing
only minor changes. The areas (c) and (d) were subsequently scanned with U = +1 V and I = 3 nA (these STM images are
not shown). Finally, images (e) and (f) were obtained with the initial parameters U = +50 mV and I = 1 nA, demonstrating
the changes in the magnetic state due to the larger bias voltage and tunnel current.

ing neither the experimental nor the simulated magnetic
field sweep experiments. Analyzing the resulting mag-
netic states one can speculate that the edge tilt and the
resulting preference of 360◦ domain walls to be perpen-
dicular to the edges, hinders the formation of a target
state.

III.
MAGNETIC STATES IN PD2/FE/IR(111)
ISLANDS

From simulations we will show that, in general, con-
finement can stabilize target skyrmions at weak fields
(roughly below 0.9 T) in comparison to extended films.
However, both the experiments and field sweep simula-
tions for a nanometer-sized island of Pd/Fe on Ir(111)
have not been able to produce a target state and analyz-
ing the observed magnetic states suggests that the edge
tilt at the boundary might be responsible.
We now turn to a different system, namely a Pd island
on a Pd/Fe extended film. Our STM measurements, see
Fig. 7, show that the Pd2/Fe island also exhibits a spin
spiral state which is modified upon the application of
external magnetic fields. The observed modulations on
the islands are of magnetic origin, to be precise we at-
tribute them to the non-collinear magnetoresistance ef-
fect (NCMR),37 which is sensitive to changes of the lo-
cal spin texture: in this case a higher signal (brighter)
is observed for smaller angles between nearest neighbor
spins, and a lower (darker) signal indicates larger angles
between nearest neighbor spins. This means that the in-
plane rotations of the spin spiral or the skyrmions appear
darker, leading to two dark lines for one spin spiral pe-

riod and a ring-like feature for each skyrmion (see also
Supplemental Material Sec. S236).
The spin spiral wavelength is about 4.6 nm and thus
slightly shorter than that of the surrounding Pd/Fe. Im-
portantly, the transition fields to other magnetic states
are much higher in the Pd2/Fe, resulting in a situation
where at about 3 T the Pd2/Fe islands still show com-
plex magnetic order but are surrounded by a fully field-
polarized Pd/Fe film.
This means that in contrast to
the effectively non-magnetic environment of a Pd/Fe is-
land, as in Fig. 1, the boundary condition in the case of
a Pd island on a Pd/Fe extended film under the applied
magnetic field of 3 T is ferromagnetic.
Figures 7(a) and (b) show the same sample area at a
magnetic field of B = +3 T, but with a different mag-
netic field sweep history. Before the measurement shown
in Fig. 7(a), the magnetic field was swept up from the
virgin state at B = 0 T (see also Supplemental Mate-
rial Sec. S436).
Figure 7(b), on the contrary, is mea-
sured directly after sweeping down the magnetic field
from B = +7 T. We observe a hysteretic behavior: dur-
ing the up-sweep of the external magnetic field we find
remainders of the zero-field spin spiral state (a), whereas
in the down-sweep the two small islands on the right side
of (b) are still in the field-polarized state and the larger
islands are dominantly in the skyrmion lattice phase. In
both cases small changes can be observed when the area is
imaged again, see (c) and (d). We attribute the changes
to either a delayed relaxation of the magnetic state to-
wards its thermodynamic equilibrium or a non-negligible
influence of the tunnel current of 1 nA with a bias voltage
of U = +50 mV.
More significant changes are observed, after the area


12

has been scanned with tunnel parameters of 1 nA and
U = +1 V, see (e) and (f). The application of higher
energy tunnel electrons is known to affect the magnetic
state of a sample,6,47 which is also evident here by a
comparison from Fig. 7(c) to (e), and (d) to (f). Now
the large island dominantly exhibits a skyrmion lattice
in both cases. In the upper right island the larger bias
voltage has induced a change of the spin spiral propaga-
tion direction from (c) to (e). In the lower right island in
(c) and in the case where the same two small islands on
the right were in the field-polarized state (d), the tunnel
electrons induced target-like states, see (e),(f).

To interpret the target-like states of the small islands
in (f) we can start with the outer rim, which we assume to
be dominantly parallel to the surrounding field-polarized
state of the Pd/Fe extended layer, i.e. the boundary of
the island is parallel to the external field. The first dark
ring marks the rotation of the spins through the in-plane
magnetization to the region where the spins are opposite
to the applied field; note that in the upper island this
dark ring is not entirely within the island but appears to
be pinned to a defect at the island boundary. The sec-
ond dark ring is another spin rotation through in-plane,
meaning that in the center the observed target skyrmion
is again parallel to the applied external magnetic field.
Comparison with the magnetic states observed in the
Pd/Fe island of Fig. 1 with effectively open boundary
conditions suggests that the ferromagnetic surrounding
is responsible for the generation and stabilization of the
target state in the Pd2/Fe islands.

IV.
SKYRMION AND TARGET STATE
STABILITY ANALYSIS

To enhance the general understanding on the occur-
rence of skyrmions and target states in the Pd/Fe and
Pd2/Fe islands we perform a systematic simulation based
study of hexagons, characterized by their circumradius
R, where we vary the hexagon size and the out-of-plane
applied field Bz. We simulate the Pd2/Fe islands using
the same magnetic parameters as the Pd/Fe islands, but
changing the boundary conditions to a ferromagnetic rim,
according to the discussion in Sec. III. Although a more
complete model should account for the phase changes of
the Pd/Fe surrounding a Pd2/Fe island at weak fields,
a simplified model allows to analyze the effects of mod-
ifying the edge condition.
This picture is nonetheless
accurate enough at stronger fields, where it was shown
that the island surrounding is field-polarized. The strat-
egy we employ in the simulations is to start with either a
skyrmion or a target state and relax the system with
the LLG equation without the precession term, as in
Sec. II B.

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

EFM
E
(eV)

a

R = 20 nm
R = 10 nm

R = 8 nm
R = 6 nm

0.4

0.2

0.0

E
EFM (eV)

b
Free boundaries

Skyrmion

Target state

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

Bz (T)

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

E
E
(eV)

c
Ferromagnetic Rim

FIG. 8. Energy of the ferromagnetic boundary, skyrmion and
target state in Pd/Fe/Ir(111) hexagons, as a function of the
applied field for different hexagon sizes and boundary condi-
tions. The hexagon size is defined by its circumradius R. (a)
The curve refers to the energy of the ferromagnetic state EFM
with respect to the energy of the fully aligned configuration
(in the +z direction) E↑, as a function of the applied field. (b)
Energy E of the skyrmion (circles) and target states (squares)
with respect to the energy of the ferromagnetic state, as a
function of the applied field. In all configurations (skyrmion,
target state and ferromagnetic state), spins are tilted at the
boundary. (c) Energy of the skyrmion and the target state
with respect to the fully uniform configuration in an island
with a ferromagnetic rim (the ferromagnetic state in this case
corresponds to the fully aligned configuration).

A.
Size dependence and boundary conditions

We define islands of sizes from R = 4 nm up to 20 nm
in steps of 0.5 nm and initialize three magnetic configu-


13

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

Bz (T)

1

2

3

4

5

Skyrmion radius (nm)

a

Free boundaries

20 nm
10 nm

(Semi-analytic)

8 nm
6 nm

4 nm
3 nm

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

Bz (T)

b

Ferromagnetic rim

0.0
0.5
1.0

Bz (T)

5

10

15

20

Target state radius (nm)

c

28 nm
24 nm
20 nm

18 nm
16 nm
14 nm

12 nm
10 nm

8 nm
6 nm

0.0
0.5
1.0

Bz (T)

d

FIG. 9. Skyrmion and target state size as a function of the
magnetic field and hexagon size.
Hexagons are measured
by their circumradius R. Skyrmion sizes are computed for
hexagons with free (a) and ferromagnetic (b) boundaries. No
data points are shown for R ≥ 10 nm and weak fields since
the system relaxes into a domain resembling an elongated
skyrmion or into a multi-spiral state. A semi-analytical the-
oretical curve for skyrmion size as a function of applied field
in an infinite film (no confinement), from Ref. 41, is shown
and denoted by ∞. Target state sizes in hexagons with free
boundaries or a ferromagnetic rim are depicted in (c) and (d),
respectively. No data points are shown for R ≤ 6 nm and suf-
ficiently strong fields when using free boundaries because the
system relaxes into a skyrmion.

rations: a skyrmion profile of a radius about 1/4 of the
hexagon circumradius, a target state profile of about the
size of the island and a ferromagnetic configuration. We
firstly compute the energy contribution from the tilted

spins at the boundary of the hexagons by subtracting
the energy of the fully saturated configuration (in the
+z direction) from the energy of the ferromagnetic state.
The former is denoted by E↑ and the latter by EFM. We
show this result in Fig. 8(a) with the energy differences
as a function of the applied field. Results are shown for
islands from R = 6 nm up to 20 nm since target states are
not stable at R = 4 nm. We notice that the boundary
energy gain with increasing fields is more pronounced for
larger islands.
In Fig. 8(b) we calculate the energy of the skyrmion
(circle markers) and target state (square markers) con-
figurations with respect to the ferromagnetic state in is-
lands with free boundaries. We compare this result with
Fig. 8(c), where we depict the energy of the two states
with respect to the ferromagnetic configuration in islands
with a ferromagnetic rim.
In this case of pinned-spin
boundaries, the ferromagnetic state corresponds to the
fully saturated state.
From the plots we observe that when ferromagnetic
boundaries are present (Fig. 8(c)) the skyrmion has, in
general, lower energy than the ferromagnetic state for
fields weaker than 1.0 T. In the case of free boundaries
(Fig. 8(b)), where the boundary spins decrease the over-
all energy of the system, for R = 6 nm there is a slight
shift of the field value below which the skyrmion has
lower energy than the uniform state. This effect is more
pronounced for smaller R (see Supplemental Material,
Sec. S1036), where the skyrmion always has larger energy.
We also see from Figs. 8(b) and (c) that for R ≥ 6 nm
and above Bz = 0.6 T, the energies of the skyrmion for
different R start to get closer as the field increases. With
free boundaries a small energy difference is present, how-
ever with a ferromagnetic rim this difference is unnotice-
able, which means skyrmions are not influenced by the
spins at the boundary. In the case of free boundaries, the
influence of boundary spins vanish for sufficiently strong
fields, where the skyrmion size becomes sufficiently small.
In Figs. 8(b) and (c) we do not show skyrmion energies
for R ≥ 10 nm and Bz ≤ 0.6 T because skyrmions could
not be stabilized and stripe or worm domains appear as
the final stable configuration. In this context, the DMI
dominates over the Zeeman interaction, and a larger is-
land size means confinement effects on the magnetic con-
figuration are weaker.
Regarding target states, the critical field below which
target states have smaller energy than the ferromagnetic
state, depends more critically (steeper energy curves) on
the hexagon size R than in the skyrmion case, owing
to the larger number of non-collinear spins and thus, a
larger influence of the DMI energy. The range of fields
where boundary spins do not have an influence is sub-
stantially smaller than in the skyrmion case, which is
only noticed for the case of a ferromagnetic rim close to
a field of 1 T. Furthermore, target states are more af-
fected by the available space in the island since for free
boundaries, at small hexagon sizes, R ≈ 6 nm, a target
state is observed up to a field of 0.5 T, whereas this crit-


14

ical field is close to the field where target states cannot
be stabilized, which is around 1.2 T, when ferromagnetic
boundaries are present.
A comparison of the energy of skyrmions and target
states reveals that with free boundaries target states have
always larger energy than skyrmions up to sizes of around
R = 8 nm. In contrast, with a ferromagnetic rim target
states have lower energy than skyrmions at R = 8 nm
and possibly become the ground state of the system at a
critical field. This supports the hypothesis that confine-
ment has a larger influence on target states, most likely
because of the DMI energy and the repulsion from the
boundary spins, which is weaker for a ferromagnetic rim.
Additionally, we see that at R ≥ 10 nm skyrmions turn
into worm or stripe domains below Bz = 0.7 T, however
target states are stable down to zero field since their dou-
ble 360◦ spin rotation allows them to cover a larger area
without distortion.
Similar to the behaviour of isolated skyrmions in ex-
tended systems, by increasing the magnetic field strength
the skyrmion size decreases. To quantify this change we
calculated the skyrmion radius as a function of the mag-
netic field for hexagon sizes between 3 and 20 nm and
different boundary conditions.
This result is depicted
in Fig. 9(a) and (b). We define the skyrmion radius as
the distance from the skyrmion center to the ring where
mz = 0.
In the case of R ≥ 10 nm, the curve is not
shown below certain field magnitudes since the system
relaxed into elongated domains or spiral domains.
To
compare the effect of the confinement on the skyrmions
with the skyrmion size in extended samples, we addi-
tionally plot in Fig. 9(a) and (b), as a dashed line, an
estimation of the skyrmion radius as a function of the
magnetic field, based on the continuum theory proposed
in Ref. 41, which depends on the skyrmion radius and the
width of the wall separating the skyrmion core from the
ferromagnetic background.
This semi-analytical result
(from equations 11 and 12 in Ref. 41) slightly underesti-
mates the skyrmion radius41, in part because it assumes
the skyrmion radius is much larger than the width of its
enclosing wall, nevertheless it correctly reproduces the
skyrmion size dependence with Bz and agrees reason-
ably well with the skyrmion sizes shown in Ref. 7. For
hexagon sizes below 8 nm and sufficiently small fields, we
notice that skyrmions in the system with a ferromagnetic
rim (Fig. 9(a)) are larger in size than the skyrmions in
the sample with free boundaries (Fig. 9(b)) at equiva-
lent field strengths and R. The reason is that for suffi-
ciently weak applied fields the skyrmion tries to occupy
the largest possible area in the island and when the island
has free boundaries the tilted spins at the hexagon edges
restrict the skyrmion size (see Supplemental Sec. S1136),
as shown in Fig. 9(a). This is in contrast to the system
of Fig. 9(b), where pinned spins at the boundary do not
limit the skyrmion and allow it to expand further towards
the sample edges.
When increasing the field strength
skyrmions shrink, hence for sufficiently large sample size
and applied field the boundary spins no longer have an

influence on the skyrmion and their sizes converge to sim-
ilar values regardless of the edge condition, as shown by
a comparison with the theoretical curve. Moreover, we
observe that with a ferromagnetic rim the skyrmion size
behaves as in an extended film in a larger range of mag-
netic fields for hexagon sizes as small as 4 nm and, in
particular, for islands with R around 8 nm. The influ-
ence of the boundary on the skyrmion size is in agree-
ment with the skyrmion energies of Fig. 8, thus we can
say that confinement effects on a single skyrmion are im-
portant at sufficiently weak fields for hexagonal islands of
R ≤ 10 nm, and are stronger in islands with free bound-
aries.
We define the target state radius as the outermost dis-
tance where mz = 0 and we plot it as a function of
hexagon size and magnetic field in Fig. 9(c) and (d). An
analysis of the radius of target states in hexagons with
different boundary conditions results in the same ten-
dency exhibited by skyrmions, i.e. target states become
smaller with increasing field magnitudes and are larger in
size when spins are not tilted at the sample edges. How-
ever, target states are, overall, noticeable bigger than
skyrmions for hexagon radii up to 28 nm and below the
critical field of 1.2 T where they become unstable. Target
states can be stabilized in hexagons as small as R = 6 nm,
where they are stable in a larger range of field magnitudes
when a ferromagnetic rim is present (Fig. 9(d)). Below
this circumradius the system relaxes to a skyrmion for the
two boundary conditions. Furthermore, a critical mag-
netic field is observed at 0.8 T, where the size of target
states in islands larger than R > 8 nm converges to a ra-
dius around 5 nm, and the configuration becomes small
and well confined within the island. By increasing the
field, the radius of target states tend to a similar value,
smaller than 3 nm, independent of the system size.

B.
Phase diagram

As observed in experimentally measured islands, spin
spiral configurations are the most probable ground state
of the system at weak fields. This is illustrated, in part, in
Fig. 3, where the data point for the state from Fig. 1(a)
has the lowest energy at zero field.
Furthermore, the
favored formation of spirals at weak fields is expected
from the material parameters (see Sec. II A), which spec-
ify a critical DMI value11,48 of Dcrit = 4√AKeff/π =
2.85 mJ m−2, thus Dc/Dcrit ≈ 1.37. Since the DMI mag-
nitude is well above the critical value, spiral solutions are
energetically favored, as can be seen in Figs. 1 and 10(a).
At larger field values, spin spirals are no longer fa-
vored and skyrmionic textures are candidates for being
the ground state. In Fig. 10 we show full phase diagrams
depicting the lowest energy state of hexagons as a func-
tion of the circumradius R, the applied field and the two
different boundary conditions. The lowest energy con-
figurations were found by simulating 27 different initial
states per (R, B) point in the diagram, which correspond


15

FIG. 10. Lowest energy state phase diagram of the Pd/Fe/Ir(111) and Pd2/Fe/Ir(111) hexagon systems. The figure shows the
lowest energy states of hexagon islands as a function of their circumradius R and the applied out-of-plane magnetic field Bz.
Phases are marked by enclosed regions in thick lines. (a) Diagram of hexagons with open boundaries. (b) Diagram of hexagons
with a ferromagnetic rim.


16

to multiple skyrmion states up to a number of seven,
kπ-skyrmion states from 2π up to 5π, random configura-
tions, 360◦ domain walls and skyrmions next to a 360◦

wall.
The results illustrated in Fig. 10(a) at zero field, for
hexagons with free boundaries, confirm our observations
of spin spirals as ground states. The number of cycloids
of these lowest energy spirals, fitting within an island, de-
pends on the island size, which is consistent with Ref. 48,
and their period remains constant since, for example,
islands with R = 8 and 12 nm have twice and three
times, respectively, the number of cycloids than the case
R = 4 nm. Additionally, they do not seem affected by the
applied field. By increasing the field, between R = 5 nm
and 12 nm, at the top left enclosed region we distinguish
a single skyrmion phase. The transition from spirals into
single skyrmion states is clearly dependent on the Zee-
man interaction which starts to dominate over the DMI.
Next to the single skyrmion region, at sufficiently large
magnetic fields, we marked the area where worm domains
or up to 6 multiple skyrmions become the lowest energy
state.
At the right of this region, a larger number of
skyrmions are the lowest energy configurations.
Since
we specified up to seven skyrmions as initial states, it
is likely that a slightly larger number of skyrmions have
lower energy in this region. For example, at R = 19 nm
and Bz = 0.7 T we notice a state with 12 skyrmions
and 2 half-skyrmions, whose topological charge is about
-12.6. Multiple skyrmion states are favored as the island
size and applied field increase because there is enough
distance to avoid the inter-skyrmion repulsion that can
overcome the energy barrier from the boundary.
The
optimal arrangement of skyrmions fitting within an is-
land clearly follows a close packing ordering of congruent
circles, as has been discussed in Ref. 49 for the case of
disks, and the system size affects the number of con-
fined skyrmions,13,16,29,49 which can be characterized by
the total topological charge. Furthermore, the shape of
the magnetic structures usually become distorted at the
phase boundaries, in particular skyrmions, which appear
as worm domains. These phase transitions are driven by
(i) the hexagonal shape of the island, (ii) the interplay
of the DMI and the Zeeman interaction when the field
changes (i.e. along the vertical axis of Fig. 10), as in the
case of a skyrmion in Fig. 3, and (iii) by the size of the
island.
Below the skyrmion regions, at lower magnetic fields
and with increasing hexagon radii, target states, 3π-
skyrmion and 4π-skyrmion states have the lowest energy
as the DMI energy is more dominant than the Zeeman en-
ergy and there is enough available space for these states.
In this context, for sufficiently large island sizes there is
a possibility that more complex configurations such as
multiple target states and so-called skyrmion bags50,51

have lower energy. Interestingly, we observed a few of
these states during our energy minimization process and
none of them had lower energy than the states obtained
from our set of initial states.

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0

Bz (T)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Eboundary (meV)

R
10 nm
8 nm
6 nm
4 nm
3 nm

R = 6 nm      Bz = 1.0T
1

0

1

sz

FIG. 11. Energy barrier for the skyrmion escape through the
boundary of hexagons of different size.
Barriers are calcu-
lated for free boundary hexagons of variable circumradius R
and magnetic field strength. For R ≥ 6 nm and weak fields the
change in the tendency of the curves is because the skyrmion
(which has a large size at weak fields) elongates until reach-
ing the boundary instead of being displaced while keeping its
symmetrical shape. Snapshots with the escape transition are
shown below the figure for the parameters of the data point
marked with an open square in the energy barrier curves.

At fields above 0.9 T the ferromagnetic state is always
the ground state. At weaker fields and when the hexagon
radii are smaller than 8 nm, a region is observed where
the uniform state is the lowest energy configuration be-
cause boundary spins inhibit the formation of skyrmions.

When ferromagnetic boundaries are present spin spi-
rals are suppressed and the phases of skyrmionic textures
significantly expand and are observed down to zero field,
as shown in Fig. 10(b). In particular, a single skyrmion
becomes the ground state for islands down to 4 nm radius
in size. Furthermore, because of the lack of tilted bound-
ary spins, close to R = 20 nm, a phase emerges with
5π-skyrmion configurations. In agreement with the case
of open boundaries, the saturation field remains 0.9 T.
In this case, the region where the uniform state is the
ground state, for fields below 0.9 T, is smaller than in
the case of open boundaries and confirms that the tilted
spins at the edge hinder the formation of skyrmions in


17

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0

Bz (T)

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Ecollapse (meV)

a

Free boundaries

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0

Bz (T)

b

Ferromagnetic rim

R
10 nm
8 nm
6 nm
4 nm
3 nm

R = 6 nm      Bz = 0.8T
R = 6 nm      Bz = 0.8T
1

0

1

sz

FIG. 12. Energy barrier for the skyrmion collapse in hexagons of different size. Barriers are calculated for hexagons with
either free (a) or ferromagnetic (b) boundaries, and variable circumradius R and magnetic field strength. For R = 6 nm and
weak fields, the change in the curve tendency is because the GNEBM finds a boundary mediated transition rather than a
collapse. For R ≤ 8 nm and weak fields, the change in the curve is because the GNEBM finds a skyrmion collapse mediated by
a singularity. Snapshots with the collapse transition (below (a)) and the collapse via a singularity (below (b)) are shown below
the corresponding plots with different boundary conditions and for the data points marked with open squares in the energy
barrier curves.

sufficiently small hexagons.

In Fig. 8 we saw that for hexagons with a radius around
8 nm, a ferromagnetic rim causes target states to have
smaller energy than skyrmions for fields below 0.6 T.
From Fig. 10(b) we notice that in islands with a ferro-
magnetic rim the target state becomes the lowest energy
state in a region of hexagon radii from approximately
7.5 nm up to 11 nm and below fields of 0.5 T, and hence
it is energetically favored in this region of phase space.
Furthermore, since the islands measured experimentally
have a radius of about 9 nm we can infer that target
states in Pd2/Fe islands have a larger probability of being
observed if the system overcomes energy barriers towards
lowest energy configurations.

C.
Stability of skyrmions and target states

A method for the estimation of the stability of
skyrmions is the calculation of energy barriers separating
them from other equilibrium states, in particular from
the uniform state. Two known mechanisms31–34 for the
skyrmion annihilation (creation) are the skyrmion col-
lapse (emergence) and the skyrmion escape (nucleation)
mediated by the boundary. The latter is only possible
when free boundaries are present.
In Fig. 11 we show the energy barriers between the
skyrmion and the uniform state via the escape mech-
anism for the system with open boundaries. To obtain
this transition, we initialized the algorithm by moving the
skyrmion towards the upper boundary of the hexagon.
In the figure we observe that for R < 6 nm the height of
the barrier increases with larger field strengths, and for
R ≥ 6 nm we see the opposite tendency. Furthermore,


18

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2

Bz (T)

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Etarget state → skyrmion (meV)

a

Free boundaries

R
14 nm
12 nm
10 nm
8 nm
6 nm

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2

Bz (T)

b

Ferromagnetic rim

R = 8 nm      Bz = 0.6T
R = 8 nm      Bz = 0.6T
1

0

1

sz

FIG. 13. Energy barrier for the transition of a target state into a skyrmion in hexagons of different size. Barriers are calculated
for hexagons with either free (a) or ferromagnetic (b) boundaries, and variable circumradius R and magnetic field strength.
For sufficiently large hexagon sizes the algorithm was not able to converge since transitions are mediated by singularities and
the initial state used is not optimal to find a different path. Snapshots with an internal collapse of the target state (below (a))
and the transition via a singularity (below (b)) are shown below the corresponding plots with different boundary conditions,
and for the data points marked with open squares in the energy barrier curves.

for R ≥ 6 nm and fields 0.6 T there is a drastic change in
the slope of the curve because the skyrmion elongates to-
wards a boundary until reaching the sample border and
starts escaping, instead of displacing without deforma-
tion towards the sample edge, as occurs for sufficiently
large fields. In small samples the effect is unnoticed since
the skyrmion is directly touching the sample boundaries,
thus it can easily transition towards the uniform state.
Snapshots of these transitions for an R = 8 nm hexagon
and energy bands from the simulations are shown in
Sec. S12 of the Supplemental Material.36

Regarding the collapse mechanism, we summarize the
energy barrier calculations in Fig. 12, for the two bound-
ary conditions.
In this case we notice the barriers of
hexagons with free boundaries Fig. 12(a)) are smaller in
magnitude than the corresponding barriers from the sys-
tem with ferromagnetic boundaries (Fig. 12(b)). Addi-
tionally, in Fig. 12(a) at R = 6 nm and below Bz = 0.5 T

the algorithm finds a different energy path, which is me-
diated by the boundary and is not allowed when the
system has fixed spins at the boundary.
The change
in the curve around 0.8 T for circumradius above 6 nm
indicate the collapse of the skyrmion through a singu-
larity,32 which is not present at larger magnetic fields or
in small sample sizes since the singularity is defined in a
few atomic spaces. For the hexagon with the ferromag-
netic rim there are no effects from the boundary, however
singularities still appear at sufficiently large samples or
skyrmion sizes, which can be seen from the small jumps
in the curves of Fig. 12(b). According to these results,
it is possible that the boundary has an influence on the
formation of a singularity for large enough hexagons. For
fields below 0.8 T and circumradius of 10 nm and above,
we do not show data points since the system relaxes into
an elongated skyrmionic domain or spiral domain.

An investigation of the transition energies of tar-


19

get states into skyrmions can provide us an alterna-
tive answer for the problem of stability of target states.
We computed this transition for different hexagon sizes
and boundary conditions and summarize the results in
Fig. 13. From the simulations with R ≤ 8 nm we observe
that the minimum energy path is given by the collapse
of the inner core of the target state, which is oriented
along the field direction +z, making the ring of spins
in the −z direction to expand into the skyrmion centre
(see Supplemental Fig. S1336). The same mechanism has
been reported by Hagemeister et al.18 in infinite samples.
When the system has free boundaries, other possible en-
ergy paths for the target state involve the boundaries of
the hexagon and during this process complex spiral order-
ings mediate the transition. Unfortunately, our attempts
to calculate transitions from target states to either a fer-
romagnetic state or a skyrmion, via the boundary of the
system, were not successful owing to the lack of conver-
gence of the algorithm to a consistent result, thus a study
of these paths requires a more careful analysis.
The inner collapse transitions are given by the smooth
curves of Fig. 13. An exception occurs for R ≥ 8 nm,
B ⪅ 1.0 T and ferromagnetic boundaries (Fig. 13(b)),
since the transition in those cases is given by the emer-
gence of a singularity at the ring of −z spins (see Supple-
mental Fig. S1436). The reason is that the target state is
larger in size when a ferromagnetic rim is present, as we
saw in Fig. 9, which must be around a critical size for sin-
gularities to mediate the transition, as in the case of the
skyrmion collapse. The same effect occurs for R > 8 nm
and weak fields for the two boundary conditions, hence
the algorithm did not converge to an optimal path for
fields below 0.9 T. The energy barrier calculations indi-
cate that target states have associated larger barriers to
decay into the skyrmion state in hexagons with a ferro-
magnetic rim. Moreover, the most evident mechanism for
the annihilation of the target state is through a collapse
or a disruption mediated by a singularity, since boundary
effects are forbidden. Although there are possibly mul-
tiple other energy paths for the annihilation of a target
state, for example the transition of a target state into
more than one skyrmion, they are likely to have associ-
ated larger energy barriers because multiple singularities
would be necessary to mediate these transitions. These
results suggest that the transition path of a target state
into a single skyrmion is the shortest in energy landscape
and with the highest probability to occur.

V.
DISCUSSION

Using (spin-polarized) scanning tunneling microscopy
we have studied the magnetic properties of two differ-
ent systems, namely Pd/Fe and Pd2/Fe on Ir(111), in
a confined geometry. We find that the investigated is-
lands host a variety of spin textures, including different
metastable states.
In islands with an effectively non-
magnetic surrounding the spin texture exhibits a tilt at

the edges. A strong hysteresis is observed in magnetic
field dependent measurements, where the virgin curve
magnetic states are qualitatively different from the ones
obtained when the magnetic field is subsequently applied
in the opposite direction: whereas in the first case mag-
netic skyrmions are found, in the latter case the magnetic
states are characterized by branched 360◦ walls which end
at island boundaries. When the surrounding of an island
is ferromagnetic, such 360◦ walls perpendicular to island
edges are avoided and target-like configurations can be
found.
Using discrete spin simulations we can reproduce our
experimental observations of multiple chiral configura-
tions in small Pd/Fe islands. An analysis of the energy
of chiral textures, which include the skyrmion, the target
state and the 3π-skyrmion, indicates that these config-
urations can be stabilized from zero field up to differ-
ent critical field magnitudes. Moreover, from the energy
curves of these configurations as a function of the applied
field, it can be inferred that the stability of some configu-
rations can be explained by measuring the energy barriers
separating them from energetically close configurations,
for example a target state with a skyrmion. These re-
sults can be used as a reference for the observation of
these magnetic states in future experiments. In particu-
lar, there is still a lack of experimental evidence of the
3π-skyrmion in a small confined system with interfacial
DMI.
In order to reproduce different magnetic textures from
SP-STM images of a field sweep experiment on Pd/Fe is-
lands, we performed field sweep simulations in a range of
field magnitudes smaller than the one used in the exper-
iment and using specific initial states based on different
numbers of skyrmions.
Our simulation results showed
multiple skyrmion-like domains trapped within branched
spiral states that appear when the direction of the field
is inverted after crossing the zero field point, and we pro-
vided arguments to identify them by their topological
number. The field magnitudes for the observation of chi-
ral structures in our simulations differ from the ones in
experiments because simulations are performed at zero
temperature without any other external excitations such
as the ones generated by the tunnel electrons in SP-STM.
Accordingly, we did not exactly reproduce the results
from the experiment, nonetheless it was still possible to
stabilize most of the observed magnetic structures from
the different field stages. Our simulations show that all
the observed magnetic configurations should be accessi-
ble through an appropriate excitation of the system, thus
further evidence of target states or 3π-skyrmions could
be obtained in future experimental studies.
Using our simulations of a field sweep process it was
not possible to obtain a target state from spiral configu-
rations but mostly skyrmions from 360◦ domain walls at
increasing strong field magnitudes (above 2 T) or large
abrupt field changes. A possible solution to obtain these
axially symmetric configurations with the field sweep
method is specifying a suitable initial state, however this


20

might be difficult in practice.
We performed a thorough analysis of skyrmions and
target states under different conditions, by varying the
size, applied field and boundary conditions of perfectly
shaped hexagons. The main motivation for the modifica-
tion of the boundary condition was the observation of a
target-like state in the Pd2/Fe islands on Ir(111), where
the surrounding of the islands is ferromagnetic. Simula-
tions of hexagonal islands of this material showed that for
sufficiently small systems, skyrmions and target states in
islands with a ferromagnetic rim have lower energy than
the uniform state in a broader range of magnetic fields.
In particular, for islands with radii around 8 nm, target
states have lower energy than skyrmions when a ferro-
magnetic boundary is present.
In hexagons with free boundaries, we found that for
radii up to approximately 8 nm and fields below 1.5 T,
the tilting of spins at the island rim decreases the DMI
energy and affects the skyrmion structure, by decreas-
ing the skyrmion size in comparison to hexagons with a
ferromagnetic rim.
In contrast, due to the lack of canted spins at the
island rim when ferromagnetic boundaries are present,
skyrmions and target states are, in general, larger in size
compared to hexagons with open boundaries.
We ob-
serve that this larger size had an influence on the energy
barriers separating the skyrmion from the ferromagnetic
ordering and the target state from the skyrmion, making
the barriers larger in systems with a ferromagnetic rim.
To gain an understanding of the lowest energy states
of the hexagon systems we computed a full phase dia-
gram illustrating regions in hexagon radius and applied
field space with the possibly lowest energy configurations;
there is no guarantee that other complex magnetic states
that could not be mapped with our method can have
lower energy. On the other hand, our random set of states
showed that other configurations beyond kπ-skyrmions
are usually highly energetic, thus finding the true ground
states requires a dedicated analysis that goes beyond the
scope of this work. We confirmed that spin spiral config-
urations are the lowest energy states at weak fields and
we identified regions where multiple kπ-skyrmion states
are the lowest energy states at sufficiently large island
sizes and applied fields. From the comparison of the en-
ergies of target states and skyrmions at hexagon sizes
around 9 nm, we confirm that target states become the
lowest energy states when a ferromagnetic rim is present,
supporting our experimental observations of the favored
stabilization of target states in Pd2/Fe islands.
Furthermore, by analyzing minimum energy paths we
found that in hexagons with free boundaries, up to
fields of approximately 1.6 T and for hexagon circum-
radii above 4 nm, the minimum energy path between
skyrmions and the uniform ordering is via the bound-
ary, which is consistent with recent studies.32–34 A fer-
romagnetic rim inhibits a skyrmion and a target state
to escape through the boundary, hence forcing them to
transition by a collapse or by a singularity.
At weak

fields and sufficiently large sizes these transitions have
an energy barrier significantly larger than an escape me-
diated by the boundary when spins are not pinned at the
island edges.
Moreover, early results have shown that
with free boundaries a target state can also transition
at the boundary through spiral configurations. For in-
stance, a lollipop-like state is formed when a target state
reaches the sample edge and a single 360◦ wall emerges
when half of the target state has escaped. These con-
figurations are energetically favored at weak magnetic
fields and as we saw in the simulated field sweep process,
they tend to stabilize with branches perpendicular to the
sample edges. These arguments indicate that skyrmions
and target states should be more stable in islands with
ferromagnetic boundaries since there is a larger energy
cost for these structures to transition into other acces-
sible states in the energy landscape. In this context, a
more detailed insight into the lifetime of the observed
configurations would require the calculation of transition
rates, as in Ref. 52.
Furthermore, an accurate model
of these solutions could be obtained in the future us-
ing effective magnitudes for the material parameters of
Pd2/Fe/Ir(111). For example, recently Refs. 53 and 54
have reported magnitudes from ab initio calculations.

VI.
CONCLUSIONS

In summary, in this work we have performed SP-
STM measurements of skyrmionic textures in Pd/Fe and
Pd2/Fe islands on Ir(111) and we have employed dis-
crete spin simulations to analyze our experimental ob-
servations. Our results show that discrete spin simula-
tions can accurately explain our experimental findings.
Furthermore, by modelling hexagonally shaped islands
we provide a more general understanding of how the
applied field, system size and boundary conditions af-
fect the stability of skyrmions and target states in con-
fined geometries with interfacial DMI. In particular, we
found that the presence of ferromagnetic boundaries fa-
vor the stability of target states in a region of applied field
and island size that explains the experimental observa-
tion of a target-like state in Pd2/Fe/Ir(111) islands. In
addition, simulations predict conditions for the stability
of novel magnetic configurations, such as kπ-skyrmions,
that could be experimentally observed in the future.
We believe that the ease to carry out multiple com-
puter simulated experiments can help for the future de-
sign of energy efficient spintronic devices based on small
confined DMI systems, such as bit patterned recording
media, where skyrmions or target states would encode
the memory bits.

VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We
acknowledge
financial
support
from
CONI-
CYT
Chilean
scholarship
programme
Becas
Chile


21

(72140061), the EPSRC Complex Systems Simulations
DTC (EP/G03690X/1), the EPSRC Programme grant
on Skyrmionics (EP/N032128/1), the Horizon 2020 Eu-
ropean Research Infrastructure project OpenDreamKit
(67 6541),
and by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-

schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - 402843438;
SFB668-A8.

The simulation data for a complete reproduction of
this work can be found in Ref. 55.

∗ d.cortes@soton.ac.uk
1 A. N. Bogdanov, M. V. Kudinov,
and D. A. Yablonskii,
Sov. Phys. Solid State 31, 1707 (1989).

2 A. Bogdanov and D. Yablonskii, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz 95,
178 (1989).

3 U. K. R¨oßler, A. N. Bogdanov, and C. Pfleiderer, Nature
442, 797 (2006).

4 S. M¨uhlbauer, B. Binz, F. Jonietz, C. Pfleiderer, A. Rosch,
A. Neubauer, R. Georgii,
and P. B¨oni, Science 323, 915
(2009).

5 S. Heinze, K. von Bergmann, M. Menzel, J. Brede, A. Ku-
betzka, R. Wiesendanger,
and G. B. S. Bl¨ugel, Nature
Physics 7, 713 (2011).

6 N. Romming, C. Hanneken, M. Menzel, J. E. Bickel,
B.
Wolter,
K.
von
Bergmann,
A.
Kubetzka,
and
R. Wiesendanger, Science 341, 636 (2013).

7 N.
Romming,
A.
Kubetzka,
C.
Hanneken,
K.
von
Bergmann, and R. Wiesendanger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
177203 (2015).

8 R. Wiesendanger, Nature Reviews Materials 1, 16044
(2016).

9 A. Bogdanov and A. Hubert, Journal of magnetism and
magnetic materials 138, 255 (1994).

10 A. Bogdanov and A. Hubert, Journal of Magnetism and
Magnetic Materials 195, 182 (1999).

11 S. Rohart and A. Thiaville, Physical Review B 88, 184422
(2013).

12 A. O. Leonov, U. K. R¨oßler, and M. Mostovoy, in EPJ Web
of Conferences, Vol. 75 (EDP Sciences, 2014) p. 05002.

13 M. Beg, R. Carey, W. Wang, D. Cort´es-Ortu˜no, M. Vous-
den, M.-A. Bisotti, M. Albert, D. Chernyshenko, O. Hov-
orka, R. L. Stamps, and H. Fangohr, Scientific Reports 5,
17137 (2015).

14 Y. Liu, H. Du, M. Jia, and A. Du, Physical Review B 91,
094425 (2015).

15 R. Carey, M. Beg, M. Albert, M.-A. Bisotti, D. Cort´es-
Ortu˜no, M. Vousden, W. Wang, O. Hovorka, and H. Fan-
gohr, Applied Physics Letters 109, 122401 (2016).

16 R. A. Pepper, M. Beg, D. Cort´es-Ortu˜no, T. Kluyver, M.-
A. Bisotti, R. Carey, M. Vousden, M. Albert, W. Wang,
O. Hovorka, and H. Fangohr, Journal of Applied Physics
123, 093903 (2018).

17 A. G. Kolesnikov, M. E. Stebliy, A. S. Samardak,
and
A. V. Ognev, Scientific Reports 8, 16966 (2018).

18 J. Hagemeister, A. Siemens, L. R´ozsa, E. Y. Vedme-
denko,
and R. Wiesendanger, Physical Review B 97,
174436 (2018).

19 M. Shen, Y. Zhang, J. Ou-Yang, X. Yang,
and L. You,
Applied Physics Letters 112, 062403 (2018).

20 S. Li, J. Xia, X. Zhang, M. Ezawa, W. Kang, X. Liu,
Y. Zhou,
and W. Zhao, Applied Physics Letters 112,
142404 (2018).

21 S. Komineas and N. Papanicolaou, Physical Review B 92,
064412 (2015).

22 S. Komineas and N. Papanicolaou, Physical Review B 92,
174405 (2015).

23 X. Zhang, J. Xia, Y. Zhou, D. Wang, X. Liu, W. Zhao,
and M. Ezawa, Physical Review B 94, 094420 (2016).

24 N. Nagaosa and Y. Tokura, Nature nanotechnology 8, 899
(2013).

25 M. Finazzi, M. Savoini, A. R. Khorsand, A. Tsukamoto,
A. Itoh, L. Du`o, A. Kirilyuk, T. Rasing, and M. Ezawa,
Physical Review Letters 110, 177205 (2013).

26 S. Zhang, F. Kronast, G. van der Laan, and T. Hesjedal,
Nano Letters 18, 1057 (2018).

27 F. Zheng, H. Li, S. Wang, D. Song, C. Jin, W. Wei,
A. Kov´acs, J. Zang, M. Tian, Y. Zhang, H. Du, and R. E.
Dunin-Borkowski, Physical Review Letters 119, 197205
(2017).

28 C. Jin,
Z.-A. Li,
A. Kov´acs,
J. Caron,
F. Zheng,
F.
N.
Rybakov,
N.
S.
Kiselev,
H.
Du,
S.
Bl¨ugel,
M.
Tian,
et
al.,
Nature
Communications
8
(2017),
doi:10.1038/ncomms15569.

29 P. Ho, A. K. Tan, S. Goolaup, A. G. Oyarce, M. Raju,
L. Huang, A. Soumyanarayanan,
and C. Panagopoulos,
Phys. Rev. Applied 11, 024064 (2019).

30 A. Fert, N. Reyren, and V. Cros, Nature Reviews Mate-
rials 2, 1 (2017).

31 P. F. Bessarab, V. M. Uzdin, and H. J´onsson, Computer
Physics Communications 196, 1 (2015).

32 D. Cort´es-Ortu˜no, W. Wang, M. Beg, R. A. Pepper, M.-
A. Bisotti, R. Carey, M. Vousden, T. Kluyver, O. Hovorka,
and H. Fangohr, Scientific Reports 7, 4060 (2017).

33 D. Stosic, J. Mulkers, B. Van Waeyenberge, T. B. Luder-
mir, and M. V. Miloˇsevi´c, Physical Review B 95, 214418
(2017).

34 P. F. Bessarab, G. P. M¨uller, I. S. Lobanov, F. N. Ry-
bakov, N. S. Kiselev, H. J´onsson, V. M. Uzdin, S. Bl¨ugel,
L. Bergqvist,
and A. Delin, Scientific Reports 8, 3433
(2018).

35 R. Wiesendanger, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 1495 (2009).
36 See Supplemental Material.
37 C. Hanneken, F. Otte, A. Kubetzka, B. Dup´e, N. Rom-
ming, K. von Bergmann, R. Wiesendanger, and S. Heinze,
Nature Nanotechnology 10, 1039 (2015).

38 M.-A. Bisotti, D. Cort´es-Ortu˜no, R. Pepper, W. Wang,
M. Beg, T. Kluyver,
and H. Fangohr, Journal of Open
Research Software 6, 22 (2018).

39 A. O. Leonov, T. L. Monchesky, N. Romming, A. Kubet-
zka, A. N. Bogdanov, and R. Wiesendanger, New Journal
of Physics 18, 065003 (2016).

40 I. S. Lobanov, H. J´onsson,
and V. M. Uzdin, Physical
Review B 94, 174418 (2016).

41 X. S. Wang, H. Y. Yuan, and X. R. Wang, Communica-
tions Physics 1, 31 (2018).

42 S. von Malottki, B. Dup´e, P. F. Bessarab, A. Delin, and
S. Heinze, Scientific Reports 7, 12299 (2017).

43 N. S. Kiselev, A. N. Bogdanov, R. Sch¨afer,
and U. K.


22

R¨oßler, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 44, 392001
(2011).

44 B. Berg and M. L¨uscher, Nuclear Physics, Section B 190,
412 (1981).

45 G. Yin, Y. Li, L. Kong, R. K. Lake, C. L. Chien,
and
J. Zang, Physical Review B 93, 174403 (2016).

46 A. Bogdanov and A. Hubert, physica status solidi (b) 186,
527 (1994).

47 P.-J. Hsu, A. Kubetzka, A. Finco, N. Romming, K. von
Bergmann, and R. Wiesendanger, Nature Nanotechnology
12, 123 (2016).

48 J. Mulkers, M. V. Miloˇsevi´c,
and B. Van Waeyenberge,
Phys. Rev. B 93, 214405 (2016).

49 X. Zhao, C. Jin, C. Wang, H. Du, J. Zang, M. Tian, R. Che,
and Y. Zhang, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 113, 4918 (2016).

50 D. Foster, C. Kind, P. J. Ackerman, J.-S. B. Tai, M. R.

Dennis,
and I. I. Smalyukh, Nature Physics
(2019),
10.1038/s41567-019-0476-x.

51 F. N. Rybakov and N. S. Kiselev, Phys. Rev. B 99, 064437
(2019).

52 S. von Malottki, P. F. Bessarab, S. Haldar, A. Delin, and
S. Heinze, Phys. Rev. B 99, 060409(R) (2019).

53 B. Dup´e, M. Hoffmann, C. Paillard, and S. Heinze, Nature
Communications 5, 4030 (2014).

54 M. Bouhassoune, I. L. Fernandes, S. Bl¨ugel, and S. Lounis,
arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1901.07029 (2019).

55 D.
Cort´es-Ortu˜no,
N.
Romming,
M.
Beg,
K.
von
Bergmann,
A.
Kubetzka,
O.
Hovorka,
H.
Fangohr,
and
R.
Wiesendanger,
“Data
set
for:
Nano-scale
magnetic
skyrmions
and
target
states
in
confined
geometries,”
Zenodo
doi:10.5281/zenodo.1438396.
Github:
https://github.com/davidcortesortuno/
paper-2019_nanoscale_skyrmions_target_states_
confined_geometries (2019).


