1

Chapter Springer SPM Series “Applied Scanning Probe Methods XI”, Scanning 

Probe Microscopy Techniques (pg. 39-71)

The final publication is available at 
https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-540-85037-3_3

Title: Mechanical-Diode based Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopies

Abstract

Recent advances in mechanical-diode based ultrasonic force microscopy techniques are 

reviewed. The potential of Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM) for the study of 

material elastic properties is explained in detail. Advantages of the application of UFM 

in nanofabrication are discussed. Mechanical-Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force 

Microscopy (MD-UFFM) is introduced, and compared with Lateral Acoustic Force 

Microscopy (LAFM) and Torsional Resonance (TR) - Atomic Force Microscopy 

(AFM). MD-UFFM provides a new method for the study of shear elasticity, 

viscoelasticity and tribological properties on the nanoscale. The excitation of beats at 

nanocontacs and the implementation of Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM) are

described. HFM introduces a very interesting procedure to take advantage of the time 

resolution inherent in high-frequency actuation.

Keywords

Ultrasonic Force Microscopy; Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy; Heterodyne Force 

Microscopy;
nanomechanics;
nanofriction;
mechanical-diode effect; nanoscale 

ultrasonics; beat effect.


2

Table of contents

1. Introduction: Acoustic Microscopy in the Near Field. 

1.1 Acoustic Microscopy: possibilities and limitations  

1.2 Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopies. 

2. Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM): The Mechanical Diode Effect. 

2.1 The mechanical diode effect. 

2.2 Experimental implementation of UFM. 

2.3 Information from UFM data.

2.4 Applications of UFM in nanofabrication. 

3. Mechanical Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy (MD-UFFM)

3.1 The lateral mechanical diode effect.

3.2 Experimental implementation of MD-UFFM. 

3.3 Comparison of MD-UFFM with UFFM and TRmode AFM.

3.4 Information from MD-UFFM data.

4. Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM): Beats at Nanocontacts. 

4.1 Beats at nanocontacts.

4.2 Experimental implementation of HFM. 

4.3 Comparison of HFM with UFM.

4.4 Information from HFM: time resolution. 

5. References 

Author: M. Teresa Cuberes

Mailing Address:

Laboratorio de Nanotécnicas, UCLM

Plaza Manuel de Meca 1, 13400 Almadén, Spain

Tfn. 34 902204100 ext. 6045 (office) 6038 (lab)

Fax. 34 926264401

Email: teresa.cuberes@uclm.es


3

1. Introduction: Acoustic Microscopy in the Near Field. 

1.1 Acoustic Microscopy: possibilities and limitations  

Acoustic microscopy uses acoustic waves for observation in a similar way as optical 

microscopy uses light waves. In acoustic microscopy, a sample is imaged by ultrasound, 

and the contrast is related to the spatial distribution of the mechanical properties. The 

procedure can be implemented in transmission as well as in reflection. The first 

Scanning Acoustic Microscope (SAM) was introduced in 1974 [1], and was 

mechanically driven and operated in the transmission mode. Nowadays most 

commercial acoustic microscopes work in the reflection mode; by using pulsed acoustic 

systems the reflections of the acoustic beam from the specimen may be separated from 

spurious reflections. Applications of Acoustic Microscopy [1-10] include mapping of 

inhomogeneities in density and stiffness in materials, measurement of coating 

thicknesses, detection of delaminations in electronic integrated circuit chips, detection 

of microcracks and microporosity in ceramics, identification of the grain structure and 

anisotropy in metals and composites, and evaluation of elastic properties of living cells, 

etc. 

A schema of a SAM operating in reflexion mode is shown in Fig. 1. The acoustic 

microscope works on the principle of propagation and reflexion of acoustic waves at 

interfaces where there is a change of acoustic impedance (
).

Acoustic waves initiated at the piezoelectric transducer refract at the lens/coupling 

medium interface and focus to a diffraction limited spot. The sound wave is propagated 

to the sample through a couplant, usually water. When a sudden change in acoustic 

impedance is encountered, like at a material boundary, a portion of the sound energy is 

reflected, and the remainder propagates through the boundary. The transducer detects 

and converts the reflected acoustic waves into an electrical signal, which is digitized and 

stored at appropriate points during scanning of the lens. The amplitude and phase of the 

reflected acoustic signal determine the contrast in the acoustic images.

SAM also permits the implementation of time of flight (TOF) measurements. In time-

resolved acoustic microscopy a short sound pulse is sent towards a sample. The time-of-

flight method monitors the time required for the pulse sent into the sample to return 

velocity
density
Z

=


4

back to the acoustic lens. TOF images provide a means to determine relative depth 

variations in the location of inhomogeneous or defective sites within a sample. 

The spatial resolution and depth of penetration in SAM are inter-related, and dependent 

on the operating frequency. When using acoustic waves of frequencies around 1-2 GHz, 

SAM images with conventional optical resolution of the order of microns can be 

obtained. Nevertheless, when using low frequency ultrasound, in the 2-10 MHz range, 

the spatial resolution is typically limited to the millimetre range. On the contrary, the 

depth of penetration decreases as the frequency increases. In technical materials, the 

attenuation of pressure waves is given by the microstructure, and increases at least with 

the square of frequency. In fine-grained or fine-structured materials, the absorption, 

which increases linearly with frequency, limits the penetration. For GHz frequencies, 

the penetration depth may be of the order of microns. When the frequencies are in the 

MHz range the penetration may be in the millimetre range. The pressure waves, 

regardless of frequency, are more heavily attenuated in air than in liquids, so water is 

usually used as a convenient couplant between the transmitter/receiver of acoustic 

waves and the specimen. 

Many advanced techniques based on SAM have emerged. In phase sensitive acoustic 

microscopy (PSAM) [7-9], phase and amplitude SAM images are simultaneously 

obtained. The phase detection mode can be implemented in transmission, and it permits 

the observation of propagating waves emitted from an acoustic lens in a holographic

manner, as shown in Fig. 2. Hybrid SAM-based technologies, such as photoacustic 

microscopy (PAM) have proved to be of extreme value (see for instance [10]).  

In spite of the advantages of the aforementioned acoustic techniques, the resolution 

achievable when using acoustic waves for observation at its best is still poor for 

applications in nanotechnology. Acoustic imaging with nanometer scale resolution can 

be realized using Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopy techniques, as described in this 

chapter. 

1.2 Ultrasonic Atomic Force Microscopies

The main motivation for the initial development of Ultrasonic Atomic Force 

Microscopies was to implement a near-field approach that provided information such as 

that obtained with the Acoustic Microscope, but with a lateral resolution on the 

nanometer scale. The area of mechanical contact between the tip of an atomic force 


5

microscope (AFM) cantilever and a sample surface is typically of the order of 

nanometers in diameter. An AFM cantilever with the tip in contact with a sample 

surface follows small-amplitude out-of-plane surface vibration linearly, provided its 

frequency is below the cantilever resonance frequency. One might expect that the 

cantilever would react the same to the pressure exerted at the tip-sample contact by an 

acoustic wave of millimetre wavelength, realizing ultrasound detection in the near-field. 

However, due to the inertia of the cantilever, the linear behaviour is not evident in the 

limit of high-frequency signals. As a matter of fact, if the cantilever is regarded as a 

simple point mass, the amplitude of vibration at the driving frequency vanishes in the 

limit of very high frequencies. 

Basically, we may distinguish two different procedures for the detection of high-

frequency surface mechanical vibration with the tip of an AFM cantilever. The first is 

based on the fact that actually the cantilever is not a point mass, but a tiny elastic beam 

that can support high-frequency resonant modes [11, 12]. When a cantilever tip is in 

contact with the sample surface and high-frequency surface vibration is excited at the 

tip-sample contact, the so-called contact resonances of the cantilever are excited at 

certain characteristic frequencies.  Those depend on both the cantilever and the sample 

elastic properties [11-14]. Techniques such as Acoustic Atomic Force Microscopy 

(AFAM) [11] and Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy (UFFM) [15-17] are based on 

the study of cantilever contact resonances. Scanning Microdeformation Microscopy 

(SMM) [18, 19] and Scanning Local Acceleration Microscopy (SLAM) [20] also 

monitor the vibration of an AFM cantilever with the tip in contact with the sample 

surface at the ultrasonic excitation frequency. A second approach is based on the so-

called mechanical-diode effect [21, 22], which will be explained in more detail in 

section 2.1. In this case, the operating ultrasonic frequency is extremely high, or so that 

the contact resonances of the cantilever are not excited. Then, the cantilever does not 

follow the high-frequency surface vibration due to its inertia. Nevertheless, if the 

surface ultrasonic vibration amplitude is sufficiently high that the tip-sample distance is 

varied over the non-linear regime of the tip-sample interaction force, the cantilever 

experiences an additional force, or ultrasonic force. This can be understood as the 

averaged force acting upon the tip in each ultrasonic cycle. As a result of the ultrasonic 

force, the tip experiences a displacement –ultrasonic displacement, or mechanical-diode 

response - that can be monitored, and which carries information about the elastic 

properties of the sample, and the adhesive properties of the tip-sample contact [22].  


6

Techniques such as Scanning Acoustic Force Microscopy (SAFM) [23, 24], Ultrasonic 

Force Microscopy (UFM) [25], Mechanical-Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force 

Microscopy (MD-UFFM) [26], and Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM) [27] utilize

mechanical-diode type responses. 

Up-to-now, most ultrasonic-AFM studies have been performed with the tip in contact 

with the sample surface, although in principle  non-contact ultrasonic-AFM techniques 

can be implemented using either the high-order cantilever resonance frequencies, or the

mechanical diode effect, as long as  the distance between the tip of an inertial cantilever 

and a sample surface is swept over a non-linear interaction regime. Recently, the 

possibility to detect high-frequency vibration using dynamic force microscopy has been 

demonstrated [28]; the detection of acoustic vibration in this case is apparently also 

facilitated because of the activation of the mechanical diode effect (see section 2.1 for 

further discussions). 

This chapter is mostly devoted to review the fundamentals and recent advances in 

mechanical-diode based ultrasonic force microscopy techniques implemented in contact 

mode. In section 2, Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM) will be explained in detail.  

The use of UFM in nanofabrication provides unique advantages [29].  In section 3, 

Mechanical-Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy (MD-UFFM) [26] will be 

introduced. MD-UFFM is based on the detection of shear ultrasonic vibration at a 

sample surface via the lateral mechanical-diode effect. This is a new method for the 

study of shear elasticity, viscoelasticity and tribological properties on the nanoscale. 

Section 4 discusses the technique of Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM) [28].  HFM 

provides a novel and very interesting procedure to take advantage of the time resolution 

inherent in high-frequency actuation. In HFM, mechanical vibration in the form of beats 

is induced at the tip-sample contact by simultaneously launching ultrasonic waves 

towards the tip-sample contact region from the cantilever base and from the back of the 

sample, at slightly different frequencies. If the launched cantilever and sample vibration 

amplitudes are such that the tip-sample distance is varied over the non-linear tip-sample 

force regime, the cantilever vibrates additionally at the beat frequency due to the 

mechanical-diode effect (beat effect). HFM monitors the cantilever vibration at the beat 

frequency in amplitude and phase.  As has been demonstrated, Phase-HFM provides 

information about dynamic relaxation processes related to adhesion hysteresis at 

nanoscale contacts with high time sensitivity [28]. Recently, Scanning Near-Field 

Ultrasound Holography (SNFUH) [30] has been introduced.  The principle of operation 


7

is very similar to that of HFM. The experimental data reported by SNFUH demonstrate 

its capability to provide elastic information of buried features with great sensitivity. 

Also, the technique of Resonant Difference-Frequency Atomic Force Ultrasonic 

Microscopy (RDF-AFUM) [31] has been proposed, based on the beat effect.

Discussions of the beat effect and HFM will be included in section 4.

2. Ultrasonic Force Microscopy (UFM): The Mechanical Diode Effect. 

2.1 The mechanical diode effect

The first observation that the tip of an AFM cantilever can be used to detect out-of-

plane high frequency vibration of a sample surface was reported in [21]. In these 

experiments, Surface Acoustic Waves (SAWs) were excited at (slightly) different 

frequencies by means of interdigital transducers (IDTs) and the frequency of surface 

vibration was detected using a cantilever tip in contact with the sample surface. The 

technique of Scanning Acoustic Force Microscopy (SAFM) has been demonstrated for 

the characterization of SAWs field amplitudes [24] and phase velocities [32]. Acoustic 

fields in bulk acoustic-wave thin-film resonators have also been imaged with this 

method [33]. 

The physical mechanism that allows a cantilever to detect out-of-plane surface 

ultrasonic vibration excited at the tip-sample contact is based on the nonlinearity of the 

tip-sample interaction force [22]. Even though it is expected that inertia prevents a 

cantilever tip in contact with a sample surface to move fast enough to keep up with 

surface atomic vibrations at ultrasonic frequencies, the displacement of the surface leads 

to modification of the tip-sample force Ft-s provided the ultrasonic vibration amplitude 

is sufficiently high and the tip-sample distance d is varied over the nonlinear tip-sample 

force regime. In Fig. 3, it is assumed that the tip is in contact with a sample surface, in 

the repulsive force regime. When out-of-plane surface ultrasonic vibration is switched 

on the tip-sample distance d is varied at ultrasonic frequencies between some minimum 

and maximum values, corresponding to the amplitude of ultrasound excitation. If the 

ultrasonic amplitude of is small, the tip-sample distance sweeps a linear part of the tip-

sample interaction force curve. In this case, the net averaged force that acts upon the 

cantilever during an ultrasonic time period is equal to the initial set-point force, and 

hence the deflection of the cantilever remains the same as in the absence of ultrasound. 


8

However, if the amplitude of ultrasonic vibration is increased, the tip-sample distance 

sweeps over the nonlinear part of the force curve, and the averaged force includes an 

additional force Fult given by

𝐹𝑢𝑙𝑡(𝑑) = 1

𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑡

∫
𝐹𝑡−𝑠 (𝑑 − 𝑎 ∙ cos ( 2𝜋

𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑡

𝑡)) 𝑑𝑡

𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑡

0

(𝑒𝑞. 1)

where d the tip-sample distance, a is the amplitude of ultrasonic vibration, and Tult the 

ultrasonic period.

Due to this additional force, named hereafter the ultrasonic force, the cantilever 

experiences an additional deflection which can be easily detected by means of the 

optical lever technique, and is the physical parameter which is monitored in Ultrasonic 

Force Microscopy (UFM) [25]. The UFM deflection is a quasi-static cantilever 

deflection that occurs as long as out-of-plane ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high 

amplitude is present at the tip-sample contact. The quasi-static equilibrium deflection is 

given by:

𝑘𝑐𝑧𝑒𝑞 = 𝐹𝑢𝑙𝑡(𝑑𝑒𝑞, 𝑎)
(𝑒𝑞. 2)

where kc is the cantilever stiffness, and zeq and deq are the new cantilever deflection and 

tip indentation depth respectively. As the surface ultrasonic vibration amplitude is 

further increased, Fult increases due to the nonlinearity of the tip-sample force curve, 

and hence the cantilever deflection increases too until a new equilibrium position is 

reached. In this sense, the cantilever behaves as a "mechanical diode" [20], and deflects 

when the tip-sample contact vibrates at ultrasonic frequencies of sufficiently high 

amplitude. 

To perform UFM, the ultrasonic excitation signal is typically modulated in amplitude 

with a triangular or trapezoidal shape (see Fig. 4). In UFM, the ultrasonic amplitude 

modulation frequency is chosen to be much lower than the first cantilever resonance, 

but higher than the AFM feedback response frequency to avoid that the feedback 

compensates for the ultrasonic deflection of the cantilever. Hence, contact-mode AFM 

can be performed to obtain a surface topographic image, in spite of the presence of 

ultrasound. To record an UFM image, the ultrasonic deflection of the cantilever is 

tracked at the amplitude modulation frequency using a lock-in amplifier.  


9

To detect surface ultrasonic vibration with dynamic force microscopy in ref. [28], a 

resonator is used as a sample, and its acoustic vibration (at about 1.5 GHz) is modulated 

in amplitude with a sinusoidal shape. The ultrasonic amplitude modulation frequency is 

chosen to be coincident with the second eigenmode of the cantilever. Typical Dynamic 

Force Microscopy is performed using the first eigenmode of the AFM cantilever (at 

about 72 KHz) in order to obtain a surface topographic image, which can be properly 

done in spite of the presence of acoustic vibration. To obtain acoustic information, the 

cantilever vibration in the second eigenmode (at about 478 KHz) is monitored with a 

lock-in amplifier. The surface acoustic vibration occurs in the GHz range, and the 

cantilever tip oscillates in the 102 KHz range. Hence, it can be considered that at each 

point of the cantilever tip vibration cycle at the ultrasonic amplitude modulation 

frequency in the 102 KHz range, the tip-sample distance varies many times, due to the 

sample vibration in the GHz range. The cantilever cannot vibrate at the resonator GHz 

frequencies due to its inertia. This results in a periodic ultrasonic force acting upon the 

cantilever, with a period corresponding to the ultrasonic amplitude modulation 

frequency, i.e. the second cantilever eigenmode. 

2.2 Experimental implementation of UFM 

The experimental set-up for UFM can be implemented by appropriately modifying a 

commercial AFM [25, 34]. A schema of an UFM apparatus is shown in Fig. 4. 

An ultrasonic piezoelement is located on the sample stage and the sample is directly 

bonded to the piezo using a thin layer of crystalline salol, or just honey, to ensure good 

acoustic transmission. In this way, longitudinal acoustic waves may be launched from 

the back of the sample to the sample surface. A function generator is needed to excite 

the piezo and generate the acoustic signal (Fig 4). The ultrasonic deflection of the 

cantilever is monitored using the standard four-segment photodiode. As mentioned in 

section 2.1, the ultrasonic signal is modulated in amplitude with a triangular or 

trapezoidal shape, with a modulation frequency above the AFM feedback response 

frequency. The UFM response (ultrasonic deflection) can be monitored with a lock-in 

amplifier using the synchronous signal provided by the function generator at the 

ultrasonic modulation frequency. In this way, contact-mode AFM topographic images 

and UFM images can be simultaneously recorded over the same surface region.  


10

In addition to the described configuration, it is also possible to perform UFM by 

exciting the ultrasonic vibration at the tip-sample contact using a piezotransducer 

located at the cantilever base [35, 36]. This latter procedure has been named 

Waveguide-UFM. In this case, the ultrasonic vibration is propagated through the 

cantilever to the sample surface. Here, the cantilever tip which should necessarily

vibrate at the ultrasonic excitation frequency. However, if the ultrasonic frequency is 

sufficiently high, the amplitude of high-frequency cantilever vibration can be very 

small, and it has been experimentally demonstrated that a mechanical-diode cantilever 

response (i.e. an ultrasonic deflection of the cantilever) is activated well under these 

conditions [35, 36]. 

UFM responses are also detected in liquid environments [37]. To perform UFM in 

liquid, the ultrasonic piezoelectric transducer is simply attached with honey to the back 

of the sample-holder stage of the AFM liquid cell [37]. 

2.3 Information from UFM data 

UFM curves 

In order to study the UFM response, UFM data are typically collected in the form of 

ultrasonic curves, obtained at each surface point by monitoring the cantilever ultrasonic 

deflection or mechanical-diode response as a function of the ultrasonic excitation 

amplitude. In the following, a description of the current understanding of those curves is 

provided. 

As discussed in section 2.1, the UFM signal stems from the time-averaged force exerted 

upon a cantilever tip in contact with a sample surface when ultrasonic vibration of 

sufficiently high amplitude is excited at the tip-sample contact, in such a way that the 

tip-sample distance is varied over the nonlinear tip-sample force regime at each 

ultrasonic period.  The forces acting at a cantilever tip in contact with a sample surface 

are often described in the context of continuum mechanics. In particular, a tip-sample 

force – indentation curve with shape as depicted in Fig. 5 (a) can be derived from the 

Johnson-Kendall-Roberts (JKR) model that describes a sphere pressed against a flat 

surface. The pull-off distance is defined as the tip-sample distance at which the tip-

sample contact breaks when the tip is withdrawn from the sample surface. If the tip-

sample indentation is varied over the linear tip-sample force regime, as it is the case for 


11

the amplitude ao in Fig. 5 (a), the average force is Fi. If the vibration amplitude is a1, 

the pull-off point is reached and the tip-sample contact is broken for a part of the 

ultrasonic cycle; the ultrasonic curve -cantilever deflection versus ultrasonic amplitude-

shows a discontinuity at this amplitude value. Fig. 5 (b) schematically shows the 

ultrasonic deflection (UFM signal) that will be received as the surface ultrasonic 

vibration amplitude is linearly increased. The mechanical diode response or ultrasonic 

cantilever deflection experiences a discontinuity attributed to an ultrasonic force jump

when the vibration amplitude reaches the so-called threshold amplitude a1 . 

Fig. 6 displayes experimental UFM curves recorded on highly oriented pyrolitic 

graphite (HOPG) when the surface ultrasonic vibration amplitude is varied with a 

trapezoidal shape as indicated, lowest curve in the figure, for various initial loads. 

Notice that, as expected, when the initial tip-sample force is increased the ultrasonic 

thresholds occur at higher vibration amplitudes. The ultrasonic deflection of the 

cantilever is dependent on both the initial set-point force and the ultrasonic excitation 

amplitude. For a given set-point force, the threshold amplitude is needed to reach the 

pull-off point and induce the jump of the ultrasonic cantilever deflection. Consistently, 

the threshold amplitude increases as the set-point force is increased. From the analysis 

of the ultrasonic curves, information about the tip-sample interaction force can be 

obtained, and the elastic and adhesive properties of the tip-sample contact can be 

derived. 

The procedure of differential UFM has been proposed to extract quantitative 

information about the sample stiffness with nanoscale resolution [38], based on the 

measurement of the threshold amplitudes ai of the ultrasonic curves for two different 

initial tip-sample normal forces Fi. If the normal forces do not differ much, the 

effective contact stiffness Seff can be obtained as follows

𝑆𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝐹𝑎𝑣) = 𝐹2 − 𝐹1

𝑎2 − 𝑎1

(𝑒𝑞. 3)

𝐹𝑎𝑣 = 𝐹2 + 𝐹1

2
(𝑒𝑞. 4)


12

This method has the advantage that for the derivation of the contact stiffness it is not 

necessary to consider the details of a specific contact-mechanics model for the tip-

sample interaction.  

Simulations of the UFM curves have been done introducing the concept of modified tip-

sample force curves [38] (see Fig. 7). When the tip-sample distance is varied because of 

the excitation of ultrasound, the tip-sample interaction forces are modified because of 

the mechanical-diode effect. In order to simulate the UFM curves, a series of modified 

tip-sample force curves are generated, each of them corresponding to a specific value of 

the ultrasonic amplitude. In Fig. 7, force curves obtained for ultrasonic vibration 

amplitudes ao and a1 (ao<a1) have been plotted together with the original force curve in 

the absence of ultrasonic vibration, derived from the JKR model. The straight line in 

Fig. 7 represents the Hooke law, which relates the force acting on the tip to the 

cantilever normal deflection. Here, the cantilever tip is modelled as a point mass on a 

spring. The equilibrium positions of the tip in contact with the surface are obtained from 

the intersection of the line with the corresponding force curve, which varies depending 

on the ultrasonic excitation amplitude. It can be noticed that the pull-off forces and the 

indentation values are modified at the new modified force curves; for a given 

indentation value, the new force value is generally higher than the one obtained for zero 

ultrasonic amplitude. It may also be noted that for the amplitude a1, which corresponds 

to the threshold amplitude, there are two solutions for the new equilibrium position of 

the tip, which accounts for the discontinuity in the cantilever displacement or force 

jump at this amplitude value. 

The stiffness values chosen to generate the original JKR curve can be derived from the 

application of differential UFM to the simulated ultrasonic curves, giving confidence in 

the reliability of this method [38]. From the analysis of the dependence of the simulated 

UFM curves on the sample Young modulus and adhesion, it can be concluded that (i) 

the threshold amplitude increases when the normal force is increased, the Young 

modulus is low or the work of adhesion is high, and (ii) the force jump increases when 

the Young modulus is low and the work of adhesion is high [34]. Analysis of the 

ultrasonic curves with other contact models for the tip-sample interaction yield similar 

conclusions [39]. 

Fig. 6 shows that when the ultrasonic amplitude at the tip-sample contact is linearly 

decreased, the cantilever returns to its original equilibrium position, experiencing a 

sudden jump-in in the force. The ultrasonic amplitude at which the jump-off in the UFM 


13

response is observed when increasing the excitation amplitudes, i.e. the threshold 

amplitude, is different from that at which the jump-in occurs when the amplitude is 

decreased A method has been proposed [40] to determine both the sample elastic 

modulus and the work of adhesion from such force jumps in the ultrasonic curves. In 

[41, 42] the area between experimental ultrasonic curves obtained increasing and 

decreasing the ultrasonic amplitude - due to the different jump–off and jump-in 

threshold amplitudes- is defined as the UFM hysteresis area (UH), and related to the 

local adhesion hysteresis. Correlations between the adhesion hysteresis and the local 

friction were theoretically and experimentally investigated [43, 44]. Using the ability of 

UFM to provide information about local adhesion hysteresis, the protein-water binding 

capacity was investigated in protein films at different relative humidities, with the 

proteins in hydrated and dehydrated states [45]. 

The transfer of ultrasound to an AFM cantilever in contact with a sample surface has

also been evaluated by numerically solving the equation of motion, taking into account 

the full nonlinear force curve and considering that the cantilever is a rectangular beam 

that supports flexural vibrations. By this procedure, the change in the mean cantilever 

position that results from the nonlinear tip-sample interactions is also demonstrated

[46].

UFM images

The ability of UFM to map material properties simultaneously with the acquisition of 

contact-mode AFM topographic images over the same surface area has been extensively 

demonstrated. Given the set-point force and the maximum ultrasonic amplitude, if 

assumed that the tip-sample adhesion is invariant, the UFM signal corresponding to a 

locally stiff region is large in magnitude, and gives rise to a bright contrast in the UFM 

image. So far the UFM signal depends on both adhesion and elasticity, the contrast in 

the UFM images must be carefully analyzed. The UFM brings advantages for the study 

of both soft and hard materials. In the presence of surface out-of-plane ultrasonic 

vibration of sufficiently high amplitude, nanoscale friction reduces or vanishes [47, 48], 

which facilitates the inspection of soft samples without damage. The elastic properties 

of hard materials can also be investigated by UFM. Due to the inertia of the cantilever, 

in the presence of surface ultrasonic vibration a cantilever tip effectively indents hard

samples [25, 20].


14

Important applications of UFM rely on its capability to provide subsurface information.   

The subsurface sensitivity of the UFM has been experimentally demonstrated [25, 20]. 

Subsurface dislocations in HOPG have been observed and manipulated (see Fig. 8) 

using the ultrasonic AFM  [25, 49, 50].

The penetration depth in AFM with ultrasound excitation is determined by the contact-

stress field, which increases when the set-point force and the ultrasonic amplitude are 

increased. The penetration depth and the minimum detectable overlayer thickness in 

Atomic Force Acoustic Microscopy (AFAM) are defined in [51], on the basis of the 

detectable minimum contact stiffness change. In [52] it is concluded from the change in 

contact stiffness of SiO2/Cu, that buried void defects (  500 nm) at nm distance from 

the dielectric surface can be detected using the UFM. In [20], a GaAs grating buried 

under a polymeric layer is clearly imaged using Scanning Local Acceleration 

Microscopy (SLAM). Changes in contact stiffness of cavities in Si within about 200 nm 

from the Si(100) surfaces have been detected using UFM [53]. In [30], Au particles 

with a diameter of 15-20 nm buried under a 500 nm polymeric film have been observed 

using Scanning Near-Field Ultrasound Holography (SNFUH). UFM has been applied to 

characterise defects such as debonding, delaminations, and material inhomogeneities 

[54-56]. Subsurface information is also apparent in Resonant Difference-Frequency 

Atomic Force Ultrasonic Microscopy (RDF-AFUM) [31]. The UFM has been used to 

map stiffness variations within individual nanostructures such as quantum dots [57] or 

nanoparticles [58]. 

2.4 Applications of UFM in nanofabrication 

Ultrasonic AFM techniques provide a means to monitor ultrasonic vibration at the

nanoscale, and open up novel opportunities to improve nanofabrication technologies 

[49, 59]. As discussed above, in the presence of ultrasonic vibration, the tip of a soft 

cantilever can dynamically indent hard samples due to its inertia. In addition, ultrasound 

reduces or even eliminates nanoscale friction [47, 48]. Typical top-down approaches 

that rely on the AFM are based on the use of a cantilever tip that acts as a plow or as an 

engraving tool. The ability of the AFM tip to respond inertially to ultrasonic vibration 

excited perpendicular to the sample surface and to indent hard samples may facilitate 

nanoscale machining of semiconductors or engineering ceramics in a reduced time.  


15

Fig. 8 demonstrates the machining of nanotrenches and holes on a silicon sample in the 

presence of ultrasonic vibration. Interestingly, no debris is found in the proximity of 

lithographed areas. Fig. 8 (a) refers to results performed using a cantilever with nominal 

stiffness in the 28-91 N m-1 range and a diamond-coated tip. Fig. 9 (b) refers to results 

achieved using a cantilever with nominal stiffness 0.11 Nm-1 and a Si3N4 tip; in the 

absence of ultrasound, it was not possible to scratch the Si surface using such a soft 

cantilever. In the machining of soft materials, as for instance plastic coatings, the 

ultrasonic-induced reduction of nanoscale friction may permit eventual finer features 

and improved surface quality in quasi-static approaches. 

In bottom-up approaches, ultrasound may assist in self-assembly or AFM manipulation 

of nanostructures [49]. Effects such as sonolubrication and acoustic levitation have 

been studied at the microscale. These phenomena may facilitate a tip-induced motion of 

nano-objects. In the manipulation of nanoparticles (NPs) on ultrasonically excited 

surfaces with the tip of an AFM cantilever, both the tip-particle and particle-surface 

frictional properties change [59-61]. Moreover, the excitation of NP high-frequency 

internal vibration modes may also modify the NP dynamic response, and introduce 

novel mechanisms of particle motion. Using the UFM mode for manipulation allows us 

to monitor the mechanical diode response of the cantilever while individual 

nanoparticles are being laterally displaced over a surface by tip actuation, and receive 

information about the lateral forces exerted by the tip. 

Eventually, it should be pointed out that the sensitivity of ultrasonic-AFM to subsurface 

features makes it feasible to monitor subsurface modifications [49]. We have recently 

demonstrated that actuation with an AFM tip, in the presence of ultrasonic vibration can 

produce stacking changes of extended grapheme layers, and induce permanent 

displacements of buried dislocations in Highly Oriented Pyrolytic Graphite (HOPG). 

This effect is illustrated in Fig. 10. In the presence of normal surface ultrasonic 

vibration, both AFM and lateral force microscopy (LFM) images reveal subsurface 

features [49, 59]. Subsurface modification was brought about in this case by scanning in 

contact mode, with high set-point forces, and high surface ultrasonic excitation 

amplitudes [49].


16

3. Mechanical Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy (MD-UFFM) 

3.1 The lateral mechanical diode effect 

A lateral MD effect has also been experimentally observed. Similar to the UFM 

cantilever deflection that switches on in the presence of out-of-plane surface ultrasonic 

vibration of sufficiently high amplitude, an additional torsion of the cantilever is 

activated when the cantilever tip is in contact with a sample surface and scans laterally 

over the surface at low frequency. This is done in the presence of shear surface 

ultrasonic vibration of sufficiently high amplitude [24, 26]. 

The lateral MD-effect is exploited in Lateral Scanning Acoustic Force Microscopy 

(LFM-SAFM) [24] to obtain information about the amplitude and phase velocity of in-

plane polarized SAWs. Recently, the technique of MD-UFFM has been proposed [26] 

to study the shear contact stiffness and frictional response of materials on the nanoscale. 

In MD-UFFM, shear ultrasonic vibration is excited at a tip-sample contact using a shear 

piezoelectric element attached to the back of the sample. Shear acoustic waves 

originated at the piezo propagate through the sample to reach the tip-surface contact 

area. An ultrasonic-induced additional torsion of the cantilever or MD-UFFM cantilever 

torsion is observed while the cantilever tip in contact with the surface is laterally

scanning at low frequencies [26]. Experimental evidence of the lateral MD effect is 

provided in Fig. 10.  

Fig. 10 (a) and (b) show typical MD-UFFM cantilever responses recorded on a Si 

sample in forward and backward scans respectively, in the presence of shear ultrasonic 

vibration at the tip sample-contact modulated in amplitude with a triangular shape. In 

both scanning directions, the ultrasound-induced torsion of the cantilever diminishes 

initially due to friction. As the shear ultrasonic excitation amplitude is increased, the 

MD-UFFM cantilever torsion increases in magnitude until a critical shear ultrasonic 

amplitude is reached, after which it remains  invariant or decreases.  

The lateral MD effect can be understood by considering the lateral ultrasonic force 

emerging from interaction of the tip with the lateral surface sample potential [26].

Fig. 11 illustrates a physical explanation for the MD effect, in agreement with 

experimental results [26]. In the absence of ultrasound, when scanning at low velocity 

on a flat surface, the cantilever is subjected to an initial torsion due to friction. At the 

typical low AFM scanning velocities, nanoscale friction proceeds by the so-called stick-


17

slip mechanism [62]. At a sticking point, the tip is located at a minimum of the sum of 

the periodic surface potential and the elastic potential of the cantilever; the lateral 

displacement of the cantilever support relative to the sample introduces an asymmetry in 

the total potential that facilitates the jumping of the tip to the next energy minimum site. 

Most of the time, the tip sticks to a surface point, and then slips to a next sticking point 

with some energy dissipation. In Fig. 11, E corresponds to the total potential acting 

upon the tip when scanning forward at low velocity. Due to this potential, the tip is 

subjected to the force given by the derivative curve. When the tip lies in the minimum 

energy site crossed by the dashed line, the corresponding force is zero. Due to the 

different time-scales, we may consider that the tip-sample potential brought about by 

scanning at low velocity is frozen during a shear ultrasonic vibration period. The shear 

ultrasonic wave transmitted through the sample introduces in-plane oscillations at the 

sample surface, in the direction perpendicular to the long cantilever axis. Atomic 

species within the tip-sample contact area is subjected to shear ultrasonic vibration, but 

the inertia of the cantilever hinders its out-of-resonance rotation. The lateral 

displacement of the surface atoms relative to the tip leads to a time-dependent variation 

of the total potential acting upon the tip at ultrasonic time scales. We define the lateral 

ultrasonic force as the average force that acts upon the cantilever during each ultrasonic 

cycle in the presence of shear ultrasonic vibration,

𝐹𝑢𝑙𝑡

𝑙 (𝑥𝑙, 𝐴) = 1

𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑡

∫
𝐹 (𝑥𝑙 − 𝐴 ∗ cos ( 2𝜋

𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑡

𝑡)) 𝑑𝑡

𝑇𝑢𝑙𝑡

0

(𝑒𝑞. 5)

where xl is the lateral equilibrium location of the tip in the presence of lateral ultrasonic 

vibration of amplitude A, which defines the new equilibrium torsion of the cantilever, A

is the amplitude of shear ultrasonic vibration and Tult refers to the ultrasonic time period. 

Once a critical lateral vibration amplitude is reached, sliding sets in, and the MD-UFFM 

signal does not increase further. A study of the MD-UFFM cantilever torsion may 

provide information about the sample shear stiffness and frictional response. 

In Fig. 10, a vertical lift-off of the cantilever or MD-UFFM cantilever deflection is 

observed as a result of the shear surface ultrasonic vibration. Samples such as silicon are 

known to be covered by a liquid layer under ambient conditions. In such samples, the 

observed lift-off may originate from an elastohydrodynamic response of an ultrathin 

viscous layer sheared at the tip-sample contact at ultrasonic velocities [15]. The study of 


18

the 
MD-UFFM 
cantilever 
deflection
may 
provide 
information 
about 
the 

elastohydrodynamic properties of thin confined lubricant layers. 

3.2 Experimental implementation of MD-UFFM

The experimental set-up for Mechanical Diode - Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy 

(MD-UFFM) measurements can be implemented by appropriately modifying a 

commercial AFM [26]. The set-up required for MD-UFFM is similar to that required 

for the UFM substituting the longitudinal ultrasonic piezoelectric transducer with a 

shear-wave type. The shear-wave piezotransducer is mounted below the sample with its 

polarization perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the cantilever. The sample should 

be attached to the sample with an appropriate couplant, as for instance crystalline salol. 

The changes in the cantilever torsion due to the lateral MD effect can be monitored in 

both forward and backward scans using the laser deflection method with a standard 

four-segment photodiode, simultaneously with the acquisition of contact-mode 

topographic images. MD-UFFM images can be collected by modulating the amplitude 

of  the shear ultrasonic excitation and using a lock-in amplifier to detect the MD-UFFM 

signal.  We distinguish torsion and deflection MD-UFFM modes, depending on whether 

the shear-ultrasonic-vibration-induced cantilever torsion or deflection response is 

studied. 

In shear-wave piezoelectric transducer, parasitic out-of-plane vibration may arise due to 

the existence of bounderies, etc. In the presence of out-of-plane ultrasonic vibration of 

sufficiently high amplitude, the normal mechanical diode effect described in section 2.1 

would lead to the excitation of an additional out-of-place cantilever deflection related to 

the sample elastic properties. In the absence of out-of-plane ultrasonic vibration, but 

with shear ultrasonic vibration excited on the sample surface, a lift-off or deflection of 

the cantilever is expected as a result of elastohydrodynamic lubrication effects of 

ultrathin viscous layers compressed at the tip-sample contact [15, 26]. In order to 

distinguish between those two effects, the UFM response of the sample under study and 

the used shear-wave piezotransducer should be very well characterized before 

establishing definitive conclusions from MD-UFFM measurements.   


19

3.3 Comparison of MD-UFFM with UFFM and TRmode AFM 

In UFFM, also named Lateral-Acoustic Friction Force Microscopy (L-AFAM) or 

Resonant Friction Force Microscopy (R-FFM)) [15-17, 64, 65] surface in-plane 

vibration polarized perpendicular to the long axis of the cantilever is excited with a 

shear-wave piezotransducer bonded to the back of the sample, as in MD-UFFM. UFFM 

monitors the torsional vibration of the cantilever at the sample shear ultrasonic 

excitation frequency, being the cantilever tip in contact with the sample surface. At 

shear ultrasonic frequencies, the torsional cantilever vibration is only significant near 

the cantilever torsional contact resonances. Fig. 12 shows UFFM measurements at a 

torsional contact resonance, cantilever torsional vibration amplitude versus surface 

shear ultrasonic excitation frequency, for different shear ultrasonic excitation 

amplitudes. At low shear excitation voltages, the resonance curve has a Lorentzian 

shape with a well-defined maximum [17]. The cantilever behaves like a linear oscillator 

with viscous damping, with the AFM tip stuck to the sample surface and following the 

surface motion. Above a critical surface shear ultrasonic vibration amplitude, typically 

0.2 nm, the amplitude maximum of the resonance curves does not increase further, and 

the shape of the resonance curves change indicating the onset of sliding friction [17]. 

The information obtained from the analysis of the resonance curves in Fig. 12 supports 

the interpretation of torsional MD-UFFM curves discussed in section 3.1. In the MD-

UFFM responses in Fig. 10, two different regimes are also distinguished. At low shear 

excitation voltages, the lateral mechanical diode effect leads to an increasing lateral 

ultrasonic force due to increasing shear vibration amplitude. Above a critical surface 

shear ultrasonic vibration amplitude, a maximum ultrasonic force is reached, and sliding 

begins. 

In TR-AFM [66-71] torsional vibrations of the cantilever are excited via two 

piezoelectric elements mounted beneath the holder of the chip, which vibrate out-of-

phase, in such a way that they generate a rotation at the long axis of the cantilever. The 

TR-mode can be implemented in contact, near-contact and non-contact modes, and 

provides information about surface shear elasticity, viscoelasticity and friction. When 

operating in contact, torsional cantilever resonance curves such as those in Fig. 12 have 

also been observed [68]. In the TR mode, the torsional resonance amplitude (or phase) 

can be used to control the feedback loop and maintain the tip/sample relative position 


20

through lateral interaction. Frequency modulation procedures have also been 

implemented for TR-AFM measurements [72]. 

3.4 Information from MD-UFFM data 

MD-UFFM curves:

As in UFM, in MD-UFFM the data are typically collected in the form of ultrasonic 

curves, obtained by monitoring the mechanical-diode cantilever responses as a function 

of the shear ultrasonic excitation amplitude. 

As discussed in section 3.1, the torsional MD-UFFM response stems from the lateral 

time-averaged force exerted upon a cantilever tip in contact with a sample surface, and 

scanning laterally over the surface at low typical AFM velocities when shear ultrasonic 

vibration of sufficiently high amplitude is excited at the tip-sample contact. Properties 

such as shear contact stiffness, shear strength and friction of surfaces at a nanometer 

scale are obtained in lateral force microscopy (LFM), also named Friction Force 

Microscopy (FFM) [62, 73]. In MD-UFFM, the excitation of shear ultrasonic vibration 

at the tip-sample contact leads to relative tip-surface velocities of mm s-1 or larger, and 

the evaluation of these properties in these different experimental conditions may bring 

additional light to the understanding and control of nanoscale friction. Also, it is 

expected that MD-UFFM will provide subsurface information related to subsurface 

inhomogeities.    

In the realm of continuum mechanics, for a sphere-plane geometry, the lateral stiffness 

of a contact is given by [74]: 

𝐾𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡 = 8𝑎𝑐𝐺∗
(𝑒𝑞. 6)

where ac is the contact radius, and G* is the reduced shear modulus, defined as: 

1
𝐺∗ = 2 − 𝜈𝑡

𝐺𝑡

+ 2 − 𝜈𝑠

𝐺𝑠

(𝑒𝑞. 7)

being Gt, Gs, t, s the shear moduli and the Poisson´s ratios of the tip and the sample, 

respectively. This equation is valid for various continuum elasticity models and does not 


21

depend on the interaction forces. For small displacements it is reasonable to assume that 

there is no change in the contact area. 

The elastic response of the tip-sample contact in shear can be described by a series of 

springs. A lateral displacement of the sample z is distributed between three springs: 

∆𝑥 = ∆𝑥𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡 + ∆𝑥𝑡𝑖𝑝 + ∆𝑥𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟
(𝑒𝑞. 8)

And the lateral force Flat at the contact is given by 

𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑡 = 𝑘𝑒𝑓𝑓∆𝑥
(𝑒𝑞. 9)

being Keff an effective contact stiffness 

1

𝐾𝑒𝑓𝑓

=
1

𝐾𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡

+ 1

𝐾𝑡𝑖𝑝

+ 1

𝑐𝐿

(𝑒𝑞. 10)

where Kcontact is the lateral contact stiffness, Ktip is the lateral elastic stiffness of the tip, 

and cL is the lateral spring constant of the cantilever, considered as a point mass. For 

most commercial cantilevers, only the torsional spring constant is relevant for the 

estimation of cL.  In FFM experiments, the lateral stiffness of the tip is comparable or 

even smaller than the lateral stiffness of the cantilever [75]. 

For larger displacements at the contact, the threshold force to overcome the static 

friction is reached, and the tip starts to move. In FFM, Keff can be measured from the so-

called friction force loops, lateral force vs. lateral position, in which a sticking part 

where the tip essentially stays at the same position and a sliding part can be easily 

distinguished. Keff is given by the slope of the sticking part. 

The shear strength can be defined as:  

𝐹𝑓 = 𝜏𝐴 = 𝜏𝜋𝑎𝑐

2
(𝑒𝑞. 11)

where Ff is the friction force, and A is the contact area. From eq. 11, eq. 6 and eq. 7 we 

obtain an expresion for the shear strength, independent on the contact diameter ac.


22

𝜏 =
64𝐺∗2𝐹𝑓

𝜋(𝐾𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑡)2
(𝑒𝑞. 12)

It is well known from FFM studies that at typical low AFM scanning velocities, 

nanoscale friction proceeds by stick-slip.  Once static friction at the tip-sample contact 

is overcome, the tip “slips” to a next static position and “sticks” there until the surface 

displacement is again large enough so that a threshold force needed for it to slip is 

reached again. Stick-slip also occurs at the micro and macro scales and can be observed 

whatever the chemical nature of the solids in contacts, and the state of their surfaces 

provided that the loading system is soft enough. Stick-slip friction with atomic 

periodicity has been demonstrated in numerous LFM experiments with atomic 

resolution, in which the lateral force exhibits a periodic, sawtoothlike behaviour [62]. 

According to the Tomlinson model, the tip is considered to move in the periodic 

potential field formed by the subtrate lattice while being dragged along the surface by 

means of spring-type interactions. Atomic-scale stick-slip is usually limited to low load 

regime, and sharp tips, although, atomic-scale stick slip at high loads have also been 

observed. The latter may be restricted to layered materials or to the presence of some 

lubricating contamination films. In the Prandtl-Tomlinson model, the total potential 

experienced by the tip is given by: 

𝑉𝑡𝑜𝑡(𝑥, 𝑡) = − 𝐸𝑜

2 𝑐𝑜𝑠 2𝜋𝑥

𝑎
+ 1

2 𝐾𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝑥 − 𝑣𝑡)2
(𝑒𝑞. 13)

where Eo is the peak-to-eak amplitude of the surface potential, a is the lattice constant of 

the surface, Keff is the effective lateral spring constant and v is the velocity of the 

sample. 

The model for MD-UFFM described in section 3.2 is based on the Tomlinson model 

This accounts qualitatively quite well for the experimental results (see Fig. 11 and 

related text). In principle, the application of this model allows us to obtain Keff, Ff and 𝝉

from MD-UFFM data, and also learn about the relationship of these magnitudes with 

the surface lateral potential, its amplitude Eo and periodicity a, and the mechanisms of 

friction in the presence of shear ultrasonic vibration at the tip-sample contact.  In FFM 

atomic-scale stick-slip friction experiments performed at low loads, the values obtained 


23

for Keff suggest that the area of contact consists of just a few atoms, precluding the 

application of continuum mechanical models in those cases. 

Fig. 13 shows MD-UFFM responses on Si(111) recorded at different normal set-point 

forces, including the torsion curves recorded in both forward and backward scans.     

For higher normal loads, the magnitude of torsional MD signal increases, and a higher 

critical shear ultrasonic amplitude is required to reach the flat torsion regime attributed 

to sliding. These results are also in agreement with the model sketched in Fig. 11. For 

higher loads, the magnitude of the surface interatomic potential is expected to be larger 

[76]. 

In Fig. 13, the distance between the torsion curves recorded in forward and backward 

scans is proportional to the magnitude of the friction force. The results indicate that 

friction reduces as a result of the excitation of shear ultrasonic vibration at the tip-

sample contact, and that in this case friction vanishes in the flat MD torsional response 

regime. Physically, the onset of a lateral ultrasonic force is necessarily related to a 

reduction of friction (see Fig. 11). The effect might be related to the observations in ref. 

[77]. There it was concluded that a cantilever may exhibit apparent stick-slip motion, 

and hence reveal a nonzero mean friction force, even when the tip-surface contact is 

completely thermally lubricated by fast activated jumps of the tip apex, back and forth 

between the surface potential wells. Even though, as mentioned before, in MD-UFFM, 

the excitation of shear ultrasonic vibration at the tip-sample contact leads there to 

relative tip-surface velocities of the order of mm·s-1 or larger within the contact, it is 

still the displacement of the position of the cantilever center of mass relative to the 

surface which determines the contact velocity. 

The lift-off (deflection) signals that accompany the MD torsional response in Fig. 13

has been attributed to the presence of an ultrathin viscous liquid layer at the tip-sample 

contact which develops hydrodynamic pressure when sheared at ultrasonic velocities 

[15]. The shape of those lift-off curves is essentially different from the typical UFM 

MD deflection response that results from the excitation of normal ultrasonic vibration 

[38]. In the MD-UFFM case, the cantilever deflection increases linearly as the shear 

ultrasonic vibration amplitude is increased, and no apparent jump-off is noticeable. 

Slight deviations of the linear shape of the deflection curve when the maximum 

deviation of the initial cantilever torsion is reached may be related to a coupling of the 

cantilever lateral and vertical motions at the onset of the sliding regime. The presence of 

a squeezed liquid layer at the Si surface - Si tip contact has been previously considered 


24

to explain a reduction of friction in ambient conditions as a result of the excitation of 

normal ultrasonic vibration at amplitudes not sufficiently large to break the tip-sample 

contact during the ultrasonic period [47]. However, such a lift-off has not been observed 

when performing MD-UFFM experiments on Si in liquid environment [37]. Fig. 14 (a) 

(b) shows lateral mechanical diode responses – MD-UFFM signals – measured on 

silicon, in milliQ water. The torsion MD-UFFM curves in liquid are similar as in air, 

although in liquid environment they appear considerably noisier [37]. Any lift-off MD-

UFFM deflexion signal has been observed in MD-UFFM experiments performed on 

highly oriented pyrolitic graphite (HOPG) in air, either [78].

MD-UFFM images

As demonstrated in Fig. 15, MD-UFFM can also be implemented in an imaging mode, 

using a lock-in amplifier to monitor the signal at the amplitude modulation frequency. 

Fig. 15 shows FFM images in forward (a), and backward (b) scans, an ultrasonic MD-

UFFM torsion image (c) and ultrasonic MD-UFFM curves recorded at different points 

on the same surface region. As in UFFM [15], MD-UFFM images are independent of 

the scanning direction, i.e. not influenced by topography-induced lateral forces. 

Whereas Fig. 15 evidences the possibility to map surface properties in MD-UFFM, a 

precise interpretation of the MD-UFFM contrast in Fig. 15 is nevertheless, not 

straightforward, and deserves further investigations. 

Summarizing, MD-UFFM appears as an interesting new technique, based in the study 

of the lateral mechanical diode cantilever response in the presence of shear surface 

ultrasonic vibration. Although in a very incipient state of development, the technique 

show promise of being useful for the measurement of shear elasticity, shear strength and 

friction at the nanometer scale, to probe the surface interatomic potential, for 

investigation of the atomistic mechanisms involved in nanoscale tribology, the study of 

elastohydrodynamic lubrication effects in confined layers at nanogaps, for the 

characterization of boundary lubricants, etc. 


25

4. Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM): Beats at Nanocontacts. 

4.1 Beats at nanocontacts. 

If at a nanocontact, we excite vibration of frequency ω1 at one end, and vibration of 

frequency ω2 at the other end, being the excitation frequencies different but close to 

each other (𝜔1 ≠ 𝜔2; 𝜔1 ≈ 𝜔2), the separation between both ends d will vary 

periodically with time, one cycle of this variation including many cycles of the basic 

vibrations at both ends, and with a frequency equal to the average of the two combining 

frequencies. The phenomena is actually the description of a beating effect [71] applied 

to the nanocontact. If y1 and y2 are the positions of each nanocontact end, 

𝑦1(𝑡) = 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜔1𝑡
(𝑒𝑞. 14)

𝑦2(𝑡) = 𝑑𝑜 + 𝐴𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜔2𝑡
(𝑒𝑞. 15)

do its separation in the absence of vibration, and A the vibration amplitude of each end, 

then, the separation of both ends will vary with time according to: 

𝑑(𝑡) = 𝑦2(𝑡) − 𝑦1(𝑡) = 𝑑𝑜 + 2𝐴 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (𝜔2 − 𝜔1

2
𝑡) 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (𝜔2 + 𝜔1

2
𝑡)
(𝑒𝑞. 16)

Eq. 16 holds in fact for any values of ω1 and ω2, but the description of the beat 

phenomenon is physically meaningful only if |𝜔2 − 𝜔1| ≪ 𝜔2 + 𝜔1. Then, over a 

substantial number of cycles, the vibration approximates to sinusoidal vibration with 

constant amplitude and with frequency (ω2+ω1)/2.

The term 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (

𝜔2+𝜔1

2
𝑡) describes the rapidly oscillating factor in eq. 16, and will 

always lie between the limits ±1. The distance between the two ends in the nanocontact 

will vary between minimum do-2A and maximum do+2A values at a frequency given by 

|𝜔2 − 𝜔1|, i.e. at the beat frequency. 

If we consider now that the nanocontact is this formed by the tip of an AFM cantilever 

and a sample surface (see Fig. 16), the beat effect implies that the tip-sample distance 

varies between a minimum value and a maximum value at the beat frequency in the case 

we simultaneously excite ultrasonic vibration at the tip and the sample surface at 


26

slightly different frequencies. Notice that the beat frequency is in fact much smaller than 

the actual tip and sample vibration frequencies. Hence, if the tip-sample distance 

variation in the beats is such that the tip-sample force remains in the linear regime, if we 

try to detect the force that acts upon the cantilever at the beat frequency, we will find 

that the tip-sample distance, and hence the force upon the cantilever, is varying from the 

minimum value to the maximum value many times in the time scale that we will use to 

track the beat frequency, and we will only be able to detect the averaged value of this 

force, which will be null in the linear case. However, if the variation of tip-sample 

distance during a beat cycle is such that sweeps the nonlinear tip-sample force regime, 

when trying to measure the force acting upon the cantilever at the beat frequency, we 

will detect the averaged force, which will change following the periodicity of the beats.   

In Heterodyne Force Microscopy (HFM) [27], ultrasound is excited both at the tip (from 

a transducer at the cantilever base) and at the sample surface (from a transducer at the 

back of the sample) at adjacent frequencies, and mixed at the tip-sample gap. If do is the 

initial tip-sample indentation, and the vibration amplitude A of the tip and the surface is 

the same, the tip-sample force will vary according to eq. 16, assuming that for instance 

ω1 corresponds to the frequency vibration of the sample, and ω2 to the frequency 

vibration of the tip. In HFM, the modulation frequency is usually chosen much lower 

than the first cantilever resonance frequency. The cantilever will not be able to follow 

the force exerted at the frequency (ω1+ω2)/2 due to its inertia. However, provided that 

the low-frequency varying tip-sample separation is large enough to cover the nonlinear 

range of the tip-sample interaction force, an ultrasonic force (stronger for larger 

amplitudes) will act upon the cantilever and displace it from its initial position. Owing 

to the varying ultrasonic force, the cantilever vibrates at the difference mixed frequency. 

In principle, even if the modulation frequency is chosen higher than the first cantilever 

resonance [30] or coincident with a cantilever contact resonance [31] the beat effect 

should also lead to the activation of an ultrasonic force at the beat frequency, provided 

that the tip-sample distance is varied over the nonlinear tip-sample force regime as a 

result of the tip and sample high frequency vibration. Also, the effect should similarly 

work if the cantilever is operated in a dynamic AFM mode. 

An important feature of the beat effect is that it facilitates the monitoring of phase shifts 

between tip and sample ultrasonic vibrations with an extremely high temporal 

sensitivity. In HFM, it has been demonstrated that small differences in the sample 

dynamic viscoelastic and/or adhesion response to the tip interaction result in a shift in 


27

phase of the beat signal that is easily monitored. In this way, HFM makes possible to 

study dynamic relaxation processes in nanometre volumes with a time-sensitivity of 

nanoseconds or even better.  

4.2 Experimental implementation of HFM 

The experimental set-up for HFM is shown in Fig. 17. The technique can be 

implemented by appropriately modifying a commercial AFM equipment [27]. For 

HFM, PZT ceramic piezos are attached to the sample and the tip holder. Both the 

samlple and the cantilever are bonded to the corresponding piezos using a thin layer of 

crystalline salol (phenyl salicilate). Two function generators are needed to 

simultaneously excite sinusoidal vibration of the sample surface and the cantilever tip at 

two adjacent ultrasonic frequencies. In [27], sample and tip vibrations were excited at 

frequencies in the MHz range, differing in some KHz. The synchronous signals from 

both generators at the high-frequency excitation can be electronically mixed using a 

simple electronic mixer, which provide as an output a reference signal at the difference 

frequency. By means of the lock-in amplifier, the vibration of the cantilever at the beat 

frequency, i.e. the HFM signal in this case, can be easily monitored in amplitude and 

phase. 

The recently proposed technique of Scanning Near-Field Ultrasound Holography 

(SNFUH) [30] is implemented in a similar way as HFM, choosing a difference 

frequency (beat frequency) in the range of hundreds of KHz, above the first cantilever 

resonance frequency. In Resonant Difference Frequency Atomic Force Ultrasonic 

Microscopy (RDF-AFUM) [31], the difference frequency (beat frequency) is chosen to 

be coincident with a high-order cantilever contact resonance.   

4.3 Comparison of HFM with UFM 

If in UFM the surface ultrasonic vibration excited from a piezo located at the back of 

the sample is modulated in amplitude using a sinusoidal shape instead of the customary 

triangular or trapezoidal modulation shape, the tip-sample distance will vary similarly is 

it does in the case of HFM (see Fig. 16). Actually, in UFM we could also collect an 

Amplitude-UFM and a Phase-UFM signals using the lock-in amplifier, although up-to-

now usually only the Amplitude-UFM response has been considered. The main 


28

important difference between UFM and HFM lies in the fact that in UFM the ultrasonic 

vibration is input into the system only from one end of the tip-sample nanocontact, 

while in HFM, both nanocontact ends are independently excited. 

So far the excitation from one end of the nanocontact will be transmitted through the 

contact to the other end, i.e. ultrasonic vibration from the sample surface will propagate 

to the AFM cantilever tip, Amplitude-HFM and UFM signals are expected to be quite 

similar. In fact, as we mentioned in section 2.2, UFM can also be implemented in the 

so-called Waveguide UFM mode, in which the ultrasonic vibration at the tip-sample 

contact is excited from a piezo located the cantilever base, and no significant qualitative 

differences in the UFM response have been encountered when comparing ultrasonic 

curves received in either case [36]. The comparison of UFM and waveguide UFM 

studies on a same sample is interesting in order to differentiate surface from subsurface 

effects. In HFM, this same kind of information may be available by appropriate 

modification of the sample or tip ultrasonic vibration amplitudes. In any case, for some 

studies, the use of a triangular or trapezoidal shape for ultrasonic amplitude modulation 

may be preferred, and UFM may still be the technique of choice. 

The great strength of HFM versus UFM relies on the phase measurements. By 

monitoring the phase of the cantilever vibration at the beat frequency, HFM allow us to 

detect slight changes in phase of the sample vibration with time resolution of fractions 

of the sample and cantilever ultrasonic periods. If the excitation frequencies are in the 

MHz regime, and the difference frequency is of some KHz, phase delays between tip 

and sample vibrations of the order of nanoseconds are easily detectable [27]. Notice that 

even though it is possible to perform phase-UFM by monitoring the phase of the 

cantilever vibration at the ultrasonic modulation frequency because of the mechanical 

diode response, in the absence of forced ultrasonic excitation of the tip, the phase 

differences between sample and tip ultrasonic vibrations cannot be straightforwardly 

measured, and the time-sensitivity to phase-delay-related processes is in the best of 

cases limited to the ultrasonic period, at least easily three orders of magnitude smaller 

than in the HFM case. 

4.4 Information from HFM: time resolution 

As discussed in section 4.3, the big potential of HFM is based on its capability to 

perform phase-delay measurements with an extremely high sensitivity. Phase delays 


29

may originate from different elastic or viscoelastic properties, from different in-depth 

locations of a same-type of elastic inhomogeneity, and in general from any local 

dissipative process activated by mechanical vibration. So far ph-HFM provides a means 

to probe a local response in an extremely short time, the technique may reveal 

dissipation due to extremely quick transitions, otherwise unresolved from other 

dissipative effects occurring at larger time scales. Phase-HFN has been applied to 

PMMA/rubber nanocomposites that consist in an acrylic matrix, a copolymer based 

upon PMMA, and toughening particles, composed of a core of acrylic enclosed with 

rubber with a bonded acrylic outer shell to ensure good bonding to the matrix [27] (see 

Fig. 18). Using Phase-HFM, it has been possible to distinguish differences in contrast at 

identical thin polymer layers with different boundary constraints on the nanometer

scale. In the Ph-HFM images a different viscoelastic and/or adhesion hysteresis 

response time of the PMMA on top of the rubber that is not linked to the PMMA rubber 

matrix is clearly distinguish. Such different PMMA responses cannot however be 

appreciated from the Amplitude-HFM images. 

Using the recently proposed SNFUH mode [30], perform similarly as phase-HFM, 

elastic information of buried features have been obtained from phase measurements 

with great sensitivity. In the RDF-AFUM procedure, subsurface nanoscale elastic 

variation have also been observed [31]. In RDF-AFUM the beat effect is used as in 

HFM, but the beat frequency is chosen to be coincident with a cantilever contact 

resonance. In ref. [31], an analytical model is proposed to account for the RDF-AFUM 

response, considering the interaction of the ultrasonic wave generated at the bottom of 

the sample with nano-/microstructural features within the sample bulk material, and the 

nonlinear cantilever tip-sample surface interactions. 

Nevertheless, up-to-date, the data reported with beat-effect related AFM techniques is 

still very limited. The beat effect may facilitate opportunities ranging from the precise 

evaluation of elastic or viscoelastic response of nanostructures, the analysis of snap 

shots or transient states in the mechanical response of nanoobjects, the implementation 

of nanoscale time-of-flight experiments with high temporal resolution, or the quick 

transmission of information through nanocontacts by mechanical means. The use of 

higher beat frequencies opens up the possibility to scan at higher lateral scanning speeds 

while recording material information. Phase-HFM facilitates straightforward 

measurements of phase-delays between tip and sample vibrations, with extremely high 

sensitivity. The opportunities bring about by this technique are still to explore.


30

Acknowledgments

M. T. C. thanks S. K. Biswas and W. Arnold for carefully reviewing this chapter.

Financial support from the Junta de Comunidades de Castilla-La Mancha (JCCM) under 

project PBI-08-092 is gratefully acknowledged. 


31

REFERENCES

[1] 
Acoustic Microscope-scanning version, R. A. Lemons and C. E. Quate, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 24 (1974) 163.

[2]
Scanning Acoustic Microscopy, C. F. Quate, Physics Today, August (1985) 34.  

[3] 
Acoustic Microscopy, A. Briggs, Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK (1992).

[4] 
Advances in Acoustic Microscopy vol. I, A. Briggs and W. Arnold,  Plenum Press, 

New York (1995).

[5] 
Advances in Acoustic Microscopy vol. II, A. Briggs and W. Arnold,  New York 

(1996).

[6] 
Measurement of elastic impedance with high spatial resolution using acoustic 

microscopy, S. Hirsekorn, S. Pangraz, G. Weides, and W. Arnold, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 67 (1995) 745.

[7] 
Characterization of polymer thin films by phase-sensitive acoustic microscopy 

and atomic force microscopy: a comparative review, W. Ngwa, W. Luo, A. 

Kamanyi, K. W. Fomba, and W. Grill, J. of Microscopy 218 (2005) 208.  

[8] 
Scanning ultrasonic microscopy with phase contrast, W. Grill, K. Hillmann, K. U. 

Würz, and J. Wesner,  in: Advances in Acoustic Microscopy, Vol. 2, A. Briggs 

and W. Arnold (Eds.),  Plenum Press, 1996.   

[9]
Combined surface-focused acoustic microscopy in transmission and scanning 

ultrasonic holography, E. Twerdowski, M. Von Buttlar, N. Razek, R. 

Wannemacher, A. Schindler, W. Grill, Ultrasonics 44 (2006) el301, and ref. 

therein. 

[10] Photoacoustic imaging in biomedicine, M. Xu and L. V. Wang, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 

77 (2006) 041101, and ref. therein. 

[11] Acoustic Microscopy by Atomic Force Microscopy, U. Rabe and W. Arnold, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 64 (1994) 1493.

[12] Vibrations of free and surface-coupled atomic force microscope cantilevers: 

theory and experiments, U. Rabe, K. Janser, and W. Arnold, Rev. Sci. Instr. 67 

(1996) 3281.

[13] Contact imaging in the AFM using a high order flexural mode combined with a 

new sensor, S. C. Minne, S. R. Manalis, A. Atalar and C. F. Quate, Applied 

Physics Letters 68 (1996) 1427.


32

[14] Quantitative elasticity evaluation by contact resonance in an atomic force 

microscope, K. Yamanaka and S. Nakano, Appl. Phys. A 66 (1998) S313

[15] Lateral Force Microscopy Using Acoustic Force Microscopy, V. Scherer, W. 

Arnold, and B. Bhushan, Surf. Interface Anal. 27 (1999) 578. 

[16] Imaging of flexural and torsional resonance modes of atomic force microscopy 

cantilevers using optical interferometry, M. Reinstädtler, U. Rabe, V. Scherer, J. 

A. Turner, and W. Arnold, Surf. Sci. 532 (2003) 1152. 

[17] On the nanoscale measurement of friction using atomic-force microscopy 

cantilever torsional resonances, M. Reinstädtler, U. Rabe, V. Scherer, U. 

Hartnann, A. Goldade, B. Bhushan and W. Arnold, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82 (2003) 

2604.

[18] Scanning microdeformation microscopy, B. Cretin and F. Sthal, Appl. Phys. Lett. 

62 (1993) 829. 

[19] Scanning microdeformation microscopy in reflexion mode, P. Variac and B. 

Cretin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 68 (1996) 461.

[20] Scanning local-acceleration microscopy, N. A. Burnham, A. J. Kulik, G. 

Gremaud, P. J. Gallo, and F. Oulevey, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 14 (1996) 794.

[21] Detection of Surface Acoustic Waves by Scanning Force Microscopy, W. 

Rohrbeck and E. Chilla, Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 131 (1992) 69. 

[22] Nonlinear detection of ultrasonic vibrations in an Atomic Force Microscope, O. 

Kolosov and K. Yamanaka Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 32 (1993) L1095.

[23] Scanning acoustic force microscopy measurements in grating-like electrodes, T. 

Hesjedal, E. Chilla and H. –J. Froehlich, Appl. Phys. A 61 (1995) 237. 

[24] Transverse surface acoustic wave detection by scanning acoustic force 

microscopy, G. Bheme, T. Hesjedal, E. Chilla, and H.-J. Fröhlich,  Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 73 (1998) 882. 

[25] Ultrasonic Force Microscopy for nanometer resolution subsurface imaging, K. 

Yamanaka, H. Ogiso, and O. Kolosov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64 (2) 1994.

[26] Mechanical Diode Ultrasonic Friction Force Microscopy, M. T. Cuberes and J. 

J. Martínez, J. of Phys.: Conf. Ser. 61 (2007) 224. 

[27] Heterodyne force microscopy of PMMA/rubber nanocomposites: nanomapping of 

viscoelastic response at ultrasonic frequencies, M. T. Cuberes, H. E. Assender, G. 

A. D. Briggs, and O. V. Kolosov, J. Phys. D.: Appl. Phys. 33 (2000) 2347. 


33

[28] Detection of nanomechanical vibrations by dynamic force microscopy in higher 

cantilever eigenmodes, A. San Paulo, J. P. Black, R. M. White, and J. Bokor, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 91 (2007) 053116.

[29] Ultrasonic Machining at the Nanometer Scale, M. T. Cuberes, J. of Phys: Conf. 

Ser. 61 (2007) 219. 

[30] Nanoscale imaging of buried structures via Scanning Near-Field Ultrasound 

Holography, G. S. Shekhawat and V. P. Dravid, Science 310 (2005) 89. 

[31] Nanoscale subsurface imaging via resonant difference-frequency atomic force 

ultrasonic microscopy, S. A. Cantrell, J. H. Cantrell, and P. T. Lillehei, J. Appl. 

Phys. (2007) 114324m.

[32] Nanoscale determination of phase velocity by scanning acoustic force microscopy, 

E. Chilla, T. Hesjedal, and H. –J. Fröhlich, Phys. Rev. B 55 (1997) 15852.

[33] Imaging of acoustic fields in bulk acoustic-wave thin-film resonators, H. Safar, R. 

N. Keliman, B. P. Barber, P. L. Gammel, J. Pastalan, H. Huggins, L. Fetter, and 

R. Miller, Appl. Phys. Lett. 77 (2000) 136.

[34] Mapping surface elastic properties of stiff and compliant materials on the 

nanoscale using ultrasonic force microscopy, F. Dinelli, M. R. Castell, D. A. 

Ritchie, N. J. Mason, G. A. D. Briggs, and O. V. Kolosov, Philosophical Mag. A 

80 (2000) 2299. 

[35] Waveguide ultrasonic force microscopy at 60 MHz, K. Inagaki, O. Kolosov, A. 

Briggs, and O. Wright, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76 (2000) 1836. 

[36] Nonlinear detection of ultrasonic vibration of AFM cantilevers in and out of 

contact with the sample, M. T. Cuberes, G. A. D. Briggs, and O. Kolosov, 

Nanotechnology 12 (2001) 53.  

[37] Nanoscale ultrasonics in liquid environments, M. T. Cuberes, J. of Physics: Conf. 

Ser. (in press). 

[38] Measurements of stiff-material compliance on the nanoscale using ultrasonic 

force microscopy, F. Dinelli, S. K. Biswas, G. A. D. Briggs, and O. V. Kolosov, 

Phys. Rev. B 61 (2000) 13995.

[39] AFM and Acoustics: Fast, Quantitative Nanomechanical Mapping, B. D. Huey, 

Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 37 (2007) 351. 

[40] Hysteresis of the cantilever shift in ultrasonic force microscopy, K. Inagaki, O. 

Matsuda, and O. B. Wright, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80 (2002) 2386.


34

[41] Tribology and ultrasonic hysteresis at local scales, R. Szoszkiewicz, B. D. Huey, 

O. V. Kolosov, G. A. D. Briggs, G. Gremaud, A. J. Kulik, Appl. Surf. Sci. 219 

(2003) 54

[42] Quantitative measure of nanoscale adhesion hysteresis by ultrasonic force 

microscopy, R. Szoszkiewicz, A. J. Kulik, and G. Gremaud, J. of Chem. Phys. 122 

(2005) 134706. 

[43] Correlations between adhesion hysteresis and friction at molecular scales, R. 

Szoszkiewicz, B. Bhushan, B. D. Huey, A. J. Kulik, and G. Gremaud, J. of Chem. 

Phys. 122 (2005) 144708.

[44] Adhesion hysteresis and friction at nanometer and micrometer lengths, R. 

Szoszkiewicz, B. Bhushan, B. D. Huey, A. J. Kulik, and G. Gremaud, J. Appl. 

Phys. 99 (2006) 014310.

[45]  Probing local water contents of in vitro protein films by ultrasonic force 

microscopy, R. Szoszkiewicz, A. J. Kulik, G. Gremaud and M. Lekka, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 86 (2005) 123901.

[46]  Theoretical description of the transfer of vibrations from a sample to the 

cantilever of an atomic force microscope, S. Hirsekorn, U. Rabe and W. Arnold, 

Nanotechnology 8 (1997) 57.

[47] Ultrasound induced lubricity in microscopic contact, F. Dinelli, S. K. Biswas, G. 

A. D. Briggs, and O. V. Kolosov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71 (1997) 1177. 

[48] Nanoscale Friction and Ultrasonics, M. T. Cuberes, chapter 4 in "Fundamentals 

of Friction and Wear on the nanometer scale", ed. E. Gnecco and E. Meyer ( 

Springer) 2007 pp 49-71, and ref. therein. 

[49] Ultrasonic machining at the nanometer scale, M. T. Cuberes, J. of Phys.: Conf. 

Ser. 61 (2007) 219.

[50] Observation by ultrasonic atomic force microscopy of reversible displacement of 

subsurface dislocations in highly oriented pyrolitic graphite, T. Tsuji and K. 

Yamanaka, Nanotechnology 12 (2001) 301. 

[51] Thin film characterization by atomic force microscopy at ultrasonic frequencies

G. G. Yaralioglu, F. L. Deggertekin, K. B. Crozier, and C. F. Quate. J. of Appl. 

Phys. 87 (2000) 7491. 

[52] Modeling the effect of subsurface interface defects on contact stiffness for 

ultrasonic atomic force microscopy, A. F. Sarioglu, A. Atalar, and F. L. 

Degertekin. Appl. Phys. Lett. 84 (2004) 5368. 


35

[53] Elastic mapping of sub-surface defects by ultrasonic force microscopy: limits of 

depth sensitivity, H. Geisler, M. Hoehn, M. Rambach, M. A. Meyer, E. Zschech, 

M. Mertig, A. Romanov, M. Bobeth, W. Pompe, and R. E. Geer, Inst. Phys. Conf. 

Ser. 169 (2001) 527.

[54] Measurement of debonding in cracked nanocomposite films by ultrasonic force 

microscopy, A. P. McGuigan, B. D. Huey, G. A. D. Briggs, and O. V. Kolosov, Y. 

Tsukahara, and M. Yanaka, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80 (2002) 1180.

[55] Nondestructive evaluation of submicron delaminations at polymer/metal interface 

in flex circuits, V. Nalladega, S. Sathish, A. S. Brar, AIP Conference Proceedings, 

820 II (2006) 1562.

[56] Nanometer-scale mechanical imaging of aluminium damascene interconnect 

structures in a low-dielectric-constant polymer, R. E. Geer, O. V. Kolosov, G. A. 

D. Briggs, and G. S. Shekhawat, J. Appl. Phys. 91 (2002) 4549.

[57] Imaging the elastic nanostructure of Ge islands by ultrasonic force microscopy, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 1046.

[58] Ultrasonic Force Microscopy on strained antimony nanoparticles, M. T. Cuberes, 

B. Stegemann, B. Kaiser, and K. Rademann, Ultramicroscopy 107 (2007) 1053.

[59] Ultrasonic nanofabrication with an atomic force microscope, M. T. Cuberes 

Imaging & Microscopy 9 (2007) 36.

[60] Sonolubrication and AFM nanoparticle manipulation, M. T. Cuberes, Proc. of the 

30th Annual Meeting of the Adhesion Society (2007) 430.

[61] Manipulation of nanoparticles using ultrasonic AFM, M. T. Cuberes J. of Phys.: 

Conf. Ser. (in press))

[62] Friction experiments on the nanometer scale, E. Gnecco, R. Bennewitz, T. 

Gyalog, and E. Meyer, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 13 (2001) R619.

[63] Friction control in thin-film lubrication, J. Gao, W. D. Luedtke, and U. Landman, 

J. Phys. Chem. B 102 (1998) 5033. 

[64]  Local Elasticity and Lubrication Measurements Using Atomic Force and Friction 

Force Microscopy at Ultrasonic Frequencies, V. Scherer, B. Bhushan, U. Rabe, 

and W. Arnold, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 33 (1997) 4077.

[65] Investigating ultra-thin lubricant layers using resonant friction force microscopy, 

M. Reinstädtler, U. Rabe, A. Goldade, B. Bhushan and W. Arnold, Tribol. 

International 38 (2005) 533.


36

[66] A torsional resonance mode AFM for in-plane tip surface interactions, L. Huang 

and C. Su, Ultramicroscoy 100 (2004) 277.

[67] Topography and phase imaging using the torsional resonance mode, T. Kasai, B. 

Bhushan, L. Huang, and C. Su, Nanotechnology 15 (2004) 731.

[68] Imaging and measurement of elasticity and friction using the TRmode, M. 

Reinstädtler, T. Kasai, U. Rabe, B. Bhushan, and W. Arnold, J. Phys. D: Appl. 

Phys. 38 (2005) R269

[69] Quantitative extraction of in-plane surface properties using torsional resonance 

mode of atomic force microscopy, Y. Song and B. Bhushan, J. Appl. Phys. 97 

(2005) 083533. 

[70] Simulation of dynamic modes of atomic force microscopy using a 3D finite 

element model, Y. Song, and B. Bhushan, Ultramicroscopy 106 (2006) 847. 

[71] Nanotribology with torsional resonance operation, M. Misawa, and M. Ono, Jap. 

J. Appl. Phys. 45 (2006) 1978.

[72] Dynamic lateral force microscopy with true atomic resolution, S. Kawai, S. 

Kitamura, D. Kobayashi, and H. Kawakatsu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87 (2005) 173195.

[73] Lateral stiffness: a new nanomechanical measurement for the determination of 

shear strengths with friction force microscopy, R. W. Carpick, D. F. Ogletree, and 

M. Salmeron, Appl. Phys. Lett. 70 (1997) 1548. 

[74] Contact Mechanics, K. L Johnson, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK 

(1985)

[75] Lateral stiffness of the tip and tip-sample contact in frictional force microscopy, 

M. A. Lantz, S. J. O´Shea, A. C. F. Hoole, and M. E. Welland, Appl. Phys. Lett. 

70 (1997) 970

[76] Interaction potential and hopping dynamics governing sliding friction, E. Riedo, 

E. Gnecco, R. Bennewitz, E. Meyer, and H. Brune, Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003) 

084502-1

[77] Stick-slip motion in spite of a slippery contact: do we get what we see in atomic 

friction? S. Yu. Krylov, J. A. Kijksman, W. A. Van Loo, and J. W. M. Frenken, 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (2006) 166103. 

[78] M. T. Cuberes 

[79] Vibration and waves, A. P. French, Chapman and Hall (1998). 


37

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Fig. 1
SAM operating in reflexion mode (from ref. [7])

Fig. 2
Set-up for (a) Scanning Transmision Acoustic Microscopy and (b) Scanning 

Acoustic Holography (from ref. [9])

Fig. 3
Detection of surface out-of-plane ultrasonic vibration with the tip of an AFM 

cantilever via the mechanical-diode effect (a) When the surface vibration 

amplitude is sufficiently high, tip experiences an ultrasonic force Fus. (b) Tip-

sample force Ft-s versus tip-sample distance d curve. 

Fig. 4
Set-up for UFM measurements

Fig. 5
(a) Schematic plot of a force-indentation curve (b) Schematic ultrasonic 

cantilever deflection (mechanical-diode signal) induced by out-of-plane sample 

vibration of increasing amplitude (from ref. [38])

Fig. 6 
Experimental UFM curves. Cantilever deflexion zc recorded for different tip-

sample forces Fn on highly oriented pyrolitic graphite (HOPG). 

Fig. 7
Modified force-indentation curves (retraction branches) for a JKR solid-solid 

(tip-sample) contact in the presence of normal ultrasonic vibration of different 

amplitudes ai. The black line is the force exerted by the cantilever considered 

as a point mass (from ref. [38])

Fig. 8
Machining of nanotrenches and holes on silicon using a UFM (from [59])

Fig. 9
(a) Topography on the HOPG surface (700  700) nm (b) (c) Ultrasonic-AFM 

images recorded in sequence over nearly the same surface region as in (a). A 

subsurface dislocation not noticeable in the topographic image is enclosed by 

the ellipse in (b) and (c). In (c) the dislocation is laterally displaced. (From ref. 

[49]) 


38

Fig. 10 Experimental evidence of the lateral MD effect (see text) (from ref. [26])

Fig. 11 Physical model for MD-UFFM The surface atoms are laterally displaced due to 

the shear surface vibration, but due to its inertia, the cantilever cannot follow 

the surface lateral displacements at ultrasonic frequencies not coincident with a 

torsional cantilever resonance (from ref. [27])

Fig. 12 Torsional vibration amplitude of the cantilever as a function of the excitation 

frequency. Measurements on bare silicon. The different curves correspond to 

increasing excitation voltages applied to the shear-wave piezotransducer (from 

ref. [17])

Fig. 13 MD-UFFM reponses on Si(111) for different normal loads (from ref. [26])

Fig. 14 MD-UFFM on Si, in milliQ water (from ref. [37]) 

Fig. 15 Octadecylamine on mica. (a) (b) FFM images in the absence of ultrasound. (c)

MD-UFFM image on the same surface region. (d) Torsional MD-UFFM curves 

on different surface points measured while recording (c). 

Fig. 16 Beats at the tip-sample contact 

Fig. 17 Set-up for HFM (from ref. [27])

Fig. 18 HFM on PMMA/rubber nanocomposites (from ref. [27])


39

Fig. 1 


40

Fig. 2


41

Fig. 3


42

Fig. 4


43

Fig. 5


44

Fig. 6


45

Fig. 7


46

Fig. 8


47

Fig. 9


48

Fig. 10


49

Fig. 11


50

Fig. 12


51

Fig. 13


52

Fig. 14


53

Fig. 15


54

Fig. 16


55

Fig. 17


56

Fig. 18


