1

Quantum interference of electromechanically stabilized emitters in 
nanophotonic devices

B. Machielse1*, S. Bogdanovic2*, S. Meesala2*, S. Gauthier3, M. J. Burek2, G. Joe2, M. Chalupnik1, 
Y. I. Sohn2, J. Holzgrafe2, R. E. Evans1, C. Chia2, H. Atikian2, M. K. Bhaskar1, D. D. Sukachev1,4, L. 
Shao2, S. Maity2, M. D. Lukin1, M. Loncar2†

1 Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2 John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada

4 P. N. Lebedev Physical Institute of the RAS, Moscow 119991, Russia
* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author. Email: loncar@seas.harvard.edu

Photon-mediated coupling between distant matter qubits [1,2] may enable secure 
communication over long distances, the implementation of distributed quantum computing 
schemes, and the exploration of new regimes of many-body quantum dynamics [3,4]. Solid-
state quantum emitters coupled to nanophotonic devices represent a promising approach 
towards these goals, as they combine strong light-matter interaction and high photon 
collection efficiencies [5-7]. However, nanostructured environments introduce mismatch and 
diffusion in optical transition frequencies of emitters, making reliable photon-mediated 
entanglement generation infeasible [7]. Here we address this long-standing challenge by 
employing silicon-vacancy (SiV) color centers embedded in electromechanically deflectable 
nanophotonic waveguides. This electromechanical strain control enables control and 
stabilization of optical resonance between two SiV centers on the hour timescale. Using this 
platform, we observe the signature of an entangled, superradiant state arising from quantum 
interference between two spatially separated emitters in a waveguide. This demonstration
and the developed platform constitute a crucial step towards a scalable quantum network 
with solid state quantum emitters.

Solid-state emitters with inversion symmetry [8] are promising for use in optical quantum
networks due to their ability to be integrated into nanophotonic devices [9-11]. These emitters 
have suppressed static electric dipole moments, increasing the stability of their optical transition 
frequencies to fluctuations of electric fields that occur near device surfaces [8,12]. This 
fundamental property has been leveraged most notably with the negatively charged silicon-
vacancy center in diamond (SiV) to achieve emitter-photon interaction with cooperativity greater 
than 20 in nanophotonic cavities [11]. The platform developed around this color center also 
provides other essential components for quantum networking, such as a long-lived quantum 
memory [10] and efficient photon collection [13].

Nevertheless, in terms of advancing towards multi-qubit networks, even inversion-symmetric 
emitters present challenges when incorporated into nanophotonic devices. They exhibit a 
significant inhomogeneous distribution of their optical transition frequencies as well as residual 


2

instability in the form of spectral diffusion [8,12]. Demonstrating full control of their spectral 
behavior is necessary to generate mutually indistinguishable photons, the key ingredient for long 
distance entanglement [14]. Because these emitters cannot be spectrally tuned using electric 
fields—the established tuning mechanism for solid-state emitters [7, 15]—previous experiments 
involving indistinguishable photon generation from such defects have relied on Raman [9, 16] 
and magnetic field [11] tuning. However, these techniques constrain either the spin or optical 
degree of freedom of the color center and are challenging to implement in the multi-qubit 
regime. 

Inspired by experiments involving semiconductor quantum dots [17,18], initial experiments with 
diamond cantilevers have demonstrated the capacity to tune single SiV centers using strain [19, 
20]. However, the suitability of this approach for photon mediated entanglement of multiple 
emitters remains an open question. In this work, we show that strain control can be used to 
manipulate the optical resonances of solid-state emitters and generate quantum interference 
between them. The demonstrated integration of strain control with nanophotonic devices 
represents a key step towards the realization of scalable quantum networks.

Our devices, presented in Figure 1, consist of triangular cross-section waveguides fabricated from 
single crystal diamond [21, 22]. Each of these waveguides is connected to a support structure on 
one end (Figure 1b). The other end is tapered to allow for collection of photons from the 
waveguide into an optical fiber with better than 85% efficiency [13] (Figure 1c). In order to embed 
SiV centers within diamond nanophotonic devices, we adapt a masked implantation technique 
previously used for bulk substrates [23, SI]. After the creation of SiV centers, gold electrodes are 
patterned onto the devices such that metallized parts of the waveguide act as one plate of a 
capacitor, with the other plate located on the diamond substrate (Figure 1b). Applying a voltage 
difference to these plates generates a force that deflects a portion of the waveguide, applying 
electrically controllable strain to the embedded SiV centers. This strain field perturbs the 
diamond lattice around the SiV which shifts the Coulomb energy of the orbitals and tunes the 
frequency of the optical transitions [8].

We measure the strain response of two SiV centers 30 µm apart within the same diamond device 
by resonantly exciting their optical transitions and collecting their phonon sideband emission at 
4 K (Figure 2). The difference in the position of SiV centers in the device accounts for the 
difference in their response to the applied voltage [20], allowing us to overlap their optical 
transitions (Figure 2, red inset). We observe a tuning range of over 80 GHz, a factor of 3 larger 
than the total inhomogeneous distribution of the SiV optical transitions measured in these 
devices (Figure 2, blue shaded region). This is sufficient range to completely eliminate the effects 
of static strain variations on SiV optical transitions.  

To determine the bandwidth of our electromechanical actuation scheme, we investigate an SiV 
color center’s spectral response to AC mechanical driving of the nanophotonic structure (Figure 
2, blue inset). We apply a DC bias combined with a variable-frequency RF signal to the gold 
electrodes and monitor the SiV optical transition. When the RF drive frequency matches one of 


3

the nanobeam’s mechanical modes, we observe linewidth broadening of the SiV coupled to this 
mechanical mode due to the resonant amplification of the driving signal [25]. Using this 
technique, we observe and drive modes with mechanical frequencies of up to 100 MHz. 
Optimizing the device design could enable the electromechanical driving of vibrational modes 
with GHz frequencies which are resonant with SiV spin transitions. This could open new 
possibilities for engineering coherent spin-phonon interactions [19]. 

The high bandwidth of our electromechanical actuation scheme is sufficient to suppress spectral 
diffusion exhibited by the SiV center [12]. Monitoring an SiV center’s optical transition over the 
course of five hours, we observe spectral diffusion that is an order of magnitude larger than its 
single-scan linewidth of around 300 MHz (Figure 3a). Using a pulsed feedback scheme that 
applies a voltage adjustment every 20 seconds we reduce the total summed linewidth by almost 
an order of magnitude on a timescale of several hours (Figure 3b). The efficacy of this feedback 
scheme is limited by the long duration of the laser scan used to capture the full extent of the 
spectral diffusion. This results in imperfect locking of the SiV optical transition to the target 
frequency (see SI).

The bandwidth of this spectral stabilization technique is improved by performing a faster 5 Hz 
sweep around a narrower region around the position of the SiV center optical transition.  We 
monitor the noise spectrum of the SiV center emission with and without a lock-in feedback 
scheme applied to the device voltage (Figure 3c). The application of feedback results in an 
intensity noise reduction by approximately 8 dB, consistent with the stabilization achieved in 
Figure 3b. We attribute the frequency component dominated by the 1/f noise to slow strain 
fluctuations and second order susceptibility to electric field fluctuations in the SiV environment. 
Beyond this regime, our feedback scheme is limited by photon shot noise (Figure 3c). Further 
improving the SiV count rate through Purcell enhancement using a cavity could enable higher 
frequency feedback, as the existing scheme uses only a small share of the available actuation 
bandwidth. 

With the optical transitions of the SiV centers tuned and stabilized, we proceed to generate 
probabilistic entanglement between two color centers. We begin by using strain control to set 
the optical transition frequencies between the lower branch of the ground state (|c>) and the 
excited state (|e>) of two emitters at the target detuning (Δ) by applying the appropriate voltage 
(Figure 4a). The transitions between the upper branch of the ground state (|u>) and the excited 
state (|e>) of the two emitters are then continuously excited using two separate lasers (Figure 
4a). Finally, the photons emitted into the diamond waveguide are collected through a tapered 
fiber interface and filtered using a high finesse Fabry-Perot filter (see SI) in order to separate the 
desired optical transition from the excitation laser [9].

We characterize our setup by measuring the second order correlation function between photons 
from a single excited SiV center (Figure 4c, left panel). We observe the suppression of photon 
coincidences with g(2)single(0) = 0.13(4), a quantity raised above its ideal value of 0 by dark counts 
of the photon detectors. Next, we simultaneously excite both SiV centers and measure their 


4

photon correlation function. When two excited SiV centers are spectrally detuned (Δ ≠ 0), their 
emitted photons are distinguishable and the detection of the first photon projects the system 
into the statistical mixture of the |ce> and |ec> states (Figure 4b, blue path) [9]. In this case, the 
zero-time-delay photon correlation function reaches g(2)dist(0) = 0.50(7) (Figure 4c, left panel).

When the two SiV optical transitions are tuned into resonance (Δ = 0), detection of the first 
emitted photon from a pair of excited SiV color centers projects the system into an entangled, 
bright state (Figure 4b, red path). This state is identified by the superradiant emission of a second 
photon at twice the rate expected from the distinguishable case [9, 26]. We confirm the 
generation of an entangled state by observing a superradiant peak in the photon correlation 
function (Figure 4c, right panel) with g(2)ind(0) = 0.88(8). Experimental results are in good 
agreement with a simulated model of our system (Figure 4c, red curve) which uses only a single 
fitting parameter, the phonon-induced mixing rate between the |u> and |c> ground states [27, 
SI]. Using the height of the superradiant peak and the value of the g(2)single, we calculate a lower 
bound on the conditional bright state fidelity to be 0.8(1), indicating the observation of an 
entangled state [9].

In conclusion, we show a scalable approach to generating quantum interference between solid 
state emitters in nanophotonic devices using strain. This approach can be directly adapted to
other quantum emitters such as quantum dots, as well as other inversion-symmetric color 
centers in diamond [28]. Furthermore, high frequency strain control inside a nanophotonic 
cavity can lead to a photon or phonon mediated gate between quantum memories [11, 29, 30]. 
Our platform fulfills the requirements for an ideal quantum network node and paves the way 
for realization of large-scale quantum networks.


5

Figure 1: Schematic of diamond nanophotonics device. a) Diamond waveguides (gray) are implanted with 
color centers (purple and orange) at desired locations on the device. Electrodes (gold) are used to define a 
capacitor between plates located on the device (negative terminal) and below the device (positive 
terminal). Applying bias voltage between the plates causes the deflection of the doubly clamped cantilever. 
This tunes color centers between the plates and the first clamp (orange spot) without perturbing color 
centers beyond the clamp (purple spot). b) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the photonic devices. c)
Capacitor plates located on and below the devices. d) Diamond tapers used to extract photons from 
waveguides. This enables the extraction efficiency of more than 85% from the diamond waveguide into the 
fiber.


6

Figure 2: Characterization of DC and AC voltage response of the devices. Voltage bias is applied to 
the capacitor plates, resulting in strain fields that tune the optical transitions of SiV1 in the 
deflected portion of the device (orange) compared to the optical transitions of SiV2 in the 
stationary regions (purple). The tuning range of the SiV color center greatly exceeds the 
inhomogeneous distribution for 50% (75%) of SiV color centers observed in this experiment shown 
in dark (light) blue shading. The red inset shows the photoluminescence excitation spectra of two 
color centers at a voltage near the overlap. The blue inset shows the AC response of the cantilever 
system, measured by observing SiV optical transitions while modulating the AC driving frequency. 
Driving the cantilever resonance with its mechanical mode results in linewidth broadening of the 
color center optical transitions.


7

Figure 3: Reduction of spectral diffusion using nanomechanical strain. a) Top: Spectral diffusion of SiV center 
optical transition, measured over a 5-hour period. Bottom: Time-averaged spectrum over the same period. b)
Top: Measurement of the SiV spectral diffusion with 20 second pulsed feedback over a 5-hour period. 
Bottom: Time-averaged spectra over a 5-hour period (blue dots) show the reduction of total linewidth down 
to 500 MHz. The average of single-scan SiV linewidths is 350 MHz (green line). c) PSD of measured SiV count 
fluctuations with (without) feedback is presented by the green (orange) line, showing reduction of noise by 
an average of 8 dB. Blue line indicates statistical noise limit set by finite photon emission and collection rate.


8

Figure 4: Generation of the superradiant entangled state using strain control. a) Level structure for two SiV 
centers. Strain tuning of one SiV color center changes the detuning (Δ) between their |e> to |c> transitions. 
Separate lasers are applied to excite the |u> to |e> transition of each emitter. b) A single photon emitted 
from the two excited emitters with distinguishable transitions (Δ ≠ 0) projects the system to a statistical 
mixture of |ec> and |ce> states (blue decay path). When the emitters are indistinguishable (Δ = 0), the 
emission of one photon projects the system into a superradiant bright state (purple decay path) that decays 
at a rate two times faster than that of the statistical mixture. c) The second order photon correlation function 
is measured for a single emitter (left panel, gray data points) and for two spectrally distinguishable emitters 
(left panel, blue data points). Measured g(2)(0) is 0.13(4) and 0.50(7) for the single emitter and distinguishable 
cases, respectively. Exponential curves fit to the data are plotted and mirrored onto the right half of plot 
(gray and blue lines). For two emitters tuned into resonance, we observe the generation of a superradiant 
entangled state, signified by the peak in the photon correlation (right panel, purple data points). Data is 
overlaid with a simulated model with a single fit parameter (see SI). For indistinguishable emitters, we 
measure g(2) (0)=0.88(8), limited primarily by detector jitter. 


9

1.
Briegel, H. J., et al. (1998). "Quantum Repeaters: The Role of Imperfect Local Operations in 
Quantum Communication." Physical Review Letters 81(26): 5932-5935.

2.
Duan, L. M., et al. (2001). "Long-distance quantum communication with atomic ensembles and 
linear optics." Nature 414: 413.

3.
Kimble, H. J. (2008). "The quantum internet." Nature 453(7198): 1023-1030.

4.
Wehner, S., et al. (2018). "Quantum internet: A vision for the road ahead." Science 362(6412): 
eaam9288. 

5.
Zhong, T., et al. (2018). “Optically Addressing Single Rare-Earth Ions in a Nanophotonic Cavity” 
Physical Review Letters 121, 183603

6.
Welte, S., et al. (2018). "Photon-Mediated Quantum Gate between Two Neutral Atoms in an 
Optical Cavity." Physical Review X 8, 011018

7.
Gao, W. B., et al. (2015). "Coherent manipulation, measurement and entanglement of individual 
solid-state spins using optical fields." Nature Photonics 9: 363. 

8.
Hepp, C., et al. (2014). "Electronic Structure of the Silicon Vacancy Color Center in Diamond." 
Physical Review Letters 112(3): 036405 

9.
Sipahigil, A., et al. (2016). "An integrated diamond nanophotonics platform for quantum-optical 
networks." Science 354(6314): 847-850.

10. Sukachev, D. D., et al. (2017). "Silicon-Vacancy Spin Qubit in Diamond: A Quantum Memory 

Exceeding 10 ms with Single-Shot State Readout." Physical Review Letters 119(22): 223602.

11. Evans, R. E., et al. (2018). "Photon-mediated interactions between quantum emitters in a 

diamond nanocavity." Science 362(6415): 662-665.

12. Evans, R.E., et al (2016) “Narrow-Linewidth Homogeneous Optical Emitters in Diamond 

Nanostructures via Silicon Ion Implantation” Physical Review Applied 5, 044010

13. Burek, M. J., et al. (2017). "Fiber-Coupled Diamond Quantum Nanophotonic Interface." Physical

Review Applied 8(2): 024026.

14. Lodahl, P. (2018). "Scaling up solid-state quantum photonics." Science 362(6415): 646.
15. Tamarat, P., et al. (2006). "Stark Shift Control of Single Optical Centers in Diamond." Physical 

Review Letters 97(8): 083002.

16. Sun, S., et al. (2018). "Cavity-Enhanced Raman Emission from a Single Color Center in a Solid." 

Physical Review Letters 121(8): 083601.

17. Sun, S., et al. (2013). "Strain tuning of a quantum dot strongly coupled to a photonic crystal 

cavity." Applied Physics Letters 103(15): 151102.

18. Zopf, M., et al. (2018). "Frequency feedback for two-photon interference from separate 

quantum dots." Physical Review B 98(16): 161302.

19. Meesala, S., et al. (2018). "Strain engineering of the silicon-vacancy center in diamond." Physical 

Review B 97(20): 205444.

20. Sohn, Y. I., et al. (2018). "Controlling the coherence of a diamond spin qubit through its strain 

environment." Nat Commun 9(1): 2012.

21. Burek, M. J., et al. (2014). "High quality-factor optical nanocavities in bulk single-crystal 

diamond." Nat Commun 5: 5718.

22. Atikian, H. A., et al. (2017). "Freestanding nanostructures via reactive ion beam angled etching." 

APL Photonics 2(5): 051301.

23. Toyli, D. M., et al. (2010). "Chip-Scale Nanofabrication of Single Spins and Spin Arrays in 

Diamond." Nano Letters 10(8): 3168-3172.

24. Schroder, T., et al. (2017). "Scalable focused ion beam creation of nearly lifetime-limited single 

quantum emitters in diamond nanostructures." Nat Commun 8: 15376.


10

25. P. Ovartchaiyapong, et al. (2014). "Dynamic strain-mediated coupling of a single diamond spin to 

a mechanical resonator.” Nat Commun 5: 4429 (2014).

26. Gross, M. and Haroche, S. (1982). “Superradiance: An essay on the theory of collective 

spontaneous emission” Phys. Reports, 93(5) 301-396

27. Johansson, J. R., et al. (2013). "QuTiP 2: A Python framework for the dynamics of open quantum 

systems.", Comp. Phys. Comm. 184, 1234 

28. Maity, S., et al. (2018). "Spectral Alignment of Single-Photon Emitters in Diamond using Strain 

Gradient." Physical Review Applied 10(2): 024050.

29. Majer, J., et al. (2007) “Coupling superconducting qubits via a cavity bus” Nature 449, 443–447
30. Lemonde, M.A. et al. (2018) “Phonon Networks with Silicon-Vacancy Centers in Diamond 

Waveguides” Physical Review Letters 120, 213603


