 
1

Wide-field spectral super-resolution mapping of 

optically active defects in hBN 

 

Jean Comtet1,*, Evgenii Glushkov1, Vytautas Navikas1, Jiandong Feng2,*, Vitaliy Babenko3, 

Stephan Hofmann3, Kenji Watanabe4, Takashi Taniguchi4, Aleksandra Radenovic1,* 

 

1Laboratory of Nanoscale Biology, Institute of Bioengineering, School of Engineering, École 

Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 

2 Zhejiang University, Tianmushan Road 148, Xixi Campus, Xi-6, 201, Hangzhou, 310027, 

China 

3Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, JJ Thomson Avenue, CB3 0FA 

Cambridge, United Kingdom 

4National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 306-0044, Japan 

 

Keywords: Super-resolution microscopy, spectral characterization, hexagonal boron nitride, 

2D materials, defects 
 


 
2

Point defects can have significant impacts on the mechanical, electronic and optical 

properties of materials. The development of robust, multidimensional, high-throughput 

and large-scale characterization techniques of defects is thus crucial, from the 

establishment of integrated nanophotonic technologies to material growth optimization. 

Here, we demonstrate the potential of wide-field spectral single-molecule localization 

microscopy (spectral SMLM) for the determination of ensemble spectral properties, as 

well as characterization of spatial, spectral and temporal dynamics of single defects in 

CVD-grown and irradiated exfoliated hexagonal boron-nitride (hBN) materials. We 

characterize the heterogeneous spectral response of our samples, and identify at least two 

types of defects in CVD-grown materials, while irradiated exfoliated flakes show 

predominantly only one type of defect. We analyze the blinking kinetics and spectral 

emission for each type of defects, and discuss their implications with respect to the 

observed spectral heterogeneity of our samples. Our study shows the potential of wide-

field spectral SMLM techniques in material science and paves the way towards 

quantitative multidimensional mapping of defect properties. 

 
 


 
3

Introduction 

Defects in wide-band gap semiconductor materials lead to the creation of energy states well 

within the band gap, conferring these materials with new and exciting properties due to quantum 

confinement. A popular and well-studied example of point defects are nitrogen-vacancy (NV) 

centers in diamond, which can act as single-photon emitters1, ultrasensitive magnetometers2 

and biological sensors3. 

In recent years, 2D semiconductors and insulators have emerged as new classes of materials 

able to host functional defects. Single-photon emission from such defects has been 

demonstrated in 2D Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides at cryogenic temperatures4–7 and in 

hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) at room temperature8. Defects in 2D materials show great 

promise for many applications in integrated photonics9,10. The 2D nature of the material favors 

integration in photonic circuits, while allowing high light-extraction efficiency10. Defects in 2D 

materials also exhibit high sensitivity to their environment, leading to tunable properties11 and 

allowing deterministic positioning of emitters through strain engineering12–14. 

However, defects can also be detrimental, leading to a decrease in the electrical and mechanical 

properties of materials. For example, the use of hBN as an encapsulation layer in 

nanoelectronics15 can be dramatically affected by the presence of defects, causing increased 

scattering or facilitated dielectric breakdown16, and precluding for now the use of CVD-grown 

hBN materials as efficient insulating layers in nanoelectronics17. 

Due to their atomic-scale nature, characterizing defects can be very difficult. Defects can be 

imaged with high spatial resolution in a transmission electron microscope (TEM)18, but TEM 

imaging by itself tends to induce more defects in the sample, and is restricted to very small (~10 

nm2) areas. High-resolution Scanning Probe Microscopy techniques have allowed 

characterization of 2D materials at the single-defect level19, and 2D material systems have also 

been investigated using near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM)20. Unfortunately, all 


 
4

these scanning techniques share similar limitation as TEM concerning time-consuming sample 

preparation and small imaging areas. Finally, confocal techniques8 have been successful at 

characterizing the optical properties of single defects, but require very sparse samples due to 

diffraction-limited imaging. There is thus a clear demand in the development of new strategies 

allowing large-area characterization of defects in 2D materials. 

With this goal in mind, we recently established single-molecule localization microscopy 

(SMLM) as a viable strategy for wide-field mapping of optically active defects in hBN18. Using 

the transient emission properties of individual emitters, we could separate emitters spatially 

down to 10 nm18. However, purely spatial SMLM techniques are still hampered by their lack 

of contrast, which can lead to substantial overcounting or undercounting of defects densities 

and precludes multidimensional measurement of defects properties, such as polarization, and 

spectra. 

In this work, we focus on prototypical optically-active defects in hBN, and demonstrate that the 

implementation of spectral information concomitant to spatial SMLM (obtained by placing a 

prism in the detection path) is a valuable step forward in the large-area, nondestructive 

characterization of 2D materials and beyond. Our combined wide-field spectral and spatial 

super-resolved technique allows the determination of statistical ensemble spectral properties, 

as well as extraction of spatial, spectral and temporal dynamics of single defects. We 

demonstrate our approach on both monolayers of CVD-grown hBN materials, as well as 

irradiation induced surface defects in bulk exfoliated hBN materials. Similar operational 

principles could be applied to transition metal dichalcogenides at cryogenic temperatures4–7 or 

other wide-band gap materials at room temperature such as aluminum nitride, silicon carbide 

and perovskites21,22. Our approach opens up broad perspectives in the use of SMLM techniques 

for wide field characterization of defects in a variety of materials, and paves the way for wide-

field quantitative multidimensional imaging of optically-active defects23. 


 
5

Experimental set-up 

Our set-up is based on a wide-field spectral super-resolution imaging scheme, using a 

prism in the detection path, previously developed in a biological context24–26, and with recent 

extension in physical science fields such as chemistry27. As shown schematically in Figs. 1a-b, 

we excite the hBN samples using a 561 nm laser. The energy of the excitation laser (2.21 eV) 

is well below the band-gap of the hBN material (~ 6 eV), leading to the selective excitation of 

defects with energies well within the band-gap of the material. Excitation beam from the laser 

is focused onto the back focal plane of a high numerical aperture oil-immersion microscope 

objective, leading to the widefield illumination of the sample. hBN samples are deposited on 

silicon chips and immersed in water to prevent changes of refractive index in the optical path. 

Wide-field photoluminescence emission from the sample is collected by the same objective and 

separated from the excitation laser using dichroic and emission filters. Emission light is then 

split through two paths using a beam-splitter (Fig. 1b). Part of the emission going through Path 

1 is directly projected onto one half of an EM-CCD chip, with a back-projected pixel size of 

100 nm (Fig. 1d, Path 1). Emission from individual defects leads to the appearance of 

diffraction-limited spots on the camera chip (Fig. 1d, red boxes), which can then be localized 

with sub-nanometer accuracy, with a localization uncertainty 𝜎",$ ∼

&'()
√+ , where 𝜎,-. ≈

150 nm is the standard deviation of the gaussian fit of emitter’s intensity (corresponding to a 

diffraction-limited spot fixed by the Point Spread Function with FWHM of ≈ 350 nm) and N 

is the number of photons emitted by the defect during the acquisition of one frame. The second 

path consists of an equilateral calcium fluoride (CaF2) prism. This dispersive element leads to 

an approximately linear shift Δ𝑦-,78 [px] in the photoluminescence signal of each emitters 

relative to their emission wavelength 𝜆, such that Δ𝑦-,78~𝑎 × 𝜆, with 𝑎 ≈ 0.25 px/nm (see SI 

Fig. 1). As shown in Fig. 1e, the one-to-one correspondence between the simultaneous images 

of emitters in the spatial and spectral channels allows mapping of the spectrum of each 


 
6

individual emitter. The sample is further mounted on a piezoelectric scanner, and vertical drift 

is compensated using an IR-based feedback loop28. Residual lateral subpixel drift is 

compensated through postprocessing using cross-correlations between reconstructed super-

resolved images (see Methods for further experimental and computational details). 

 

Results and Discussion 

Continuous green laser illumination of the flakes leads to photoswitching (blinking) of 

the emitters between bright and dark states18. As shown in Fig. 1d, due to this blinking behavior, 

only a small subset of emitters is active between each frame. This sparse activation allows for 

spatial localization of individual emitters between each camera frame, and subsequent 

reconstruction of a spatial and spectral map by summing up successive images, as presented in 

Fig. 1e. 

As shown in Fig. 2, our wide-field spectral SMLM scheme allows us to map the spectral 

properties of emitters present in the hBN flakes. We first plot in Fig. 2a the distribution of center 

spectrum for a CVD-grown flake. As can be seen in this distribution, two families of emitters 

stand out clearly and are characterized by emission spectra centered approximately around λ1 ≈ 

585 nm (“green emitters”) and λ2 ≈ 640 nm (“red emitters”). We can further map the spatial 

position of each type of emitters in the reconstructed spatial maps of Fig. 2b, by summing up 

individual localization events (as depicted schematically in Fig. 1e). The brighter dots on the 

map thus represent the most active defects, which are emitting through most of the acquired 

frames. This spectral map allows for a direct estimation of the spatial localization of each defect 

type. Despite the presence of areas with varying densities of defects in each flakes, no clear 

spatial segregation is observed between red and green emitters, as they are homogeneously 

represented throughout the sample.  


 
7

This type of multimodal spectral distribution is observed throughout our samples. We 

report in Fig. 2c the values of center wavelength for 5 distinct flakes, obtained using similar 

growth conditions and transfer procedures. Note that several modes can occasionally be 

observed for the red emitters (Flakes 2 and 4 in Fig. 2c, see Fig. S2 for details). Overall, emitters 

centered around 585 nm have relatively narrow spectral linewidth (FWMH ≈ 15 nm), consistent 

with recent report on similar CVD-grown materials29, while the second group of emitters (with 

wavelength between approximately 610 nm and 650 nm) have larger spectral linewidth and 

show a relatively large sample-to-sample variation, which can be attributed to a variation in the 

local mechanical30,31 and electrostatic29 environment associated with each flake (e.g. due to 

residual strains developed during the transfer process). Finally, we show in Figs. 2d-e the 

evolution of the number of localizations per frames and the spectral distribution over more than 

30 minutes. As is depicted in Figs. 2d-e, the number of localizations per frames decreases 

exponentially, with a characteristic time τ ≈ 10 s due to bleaching of the emitters, while spectral 

emission remains stable, with progressive reduction of the FWMH of red emitters probably due 

to bleaching. Importantly, localizations and wavelength matching can be performed as fast as 

20 per frames, showing the potential of the technique for large-area and high-throughput 

mapping in dense samples. Bleaching in turn can happen due to irreversible photo-oxidation of 

defects, exposed to the external environment due to the 2D nature of the flakes. 

 

We now proceed in Fig. 3, to the characterization of the spatial, spectral and temporal dynamics 

of individual emitters in hBN, using our wide-field SMLM spectral and spatial super-resolution 

scheme. We show that at least two types of defects are responsible for the observed emission 

lines in CVD-grown flakes (Figs. 2a-c). In Fig. 3a we first report super-resolved images of 

individual emitters, rendered as spatial histograms of localizations, using a pixel size of 5 nm. 

As shown in Fig. 3b, we obtain approximately gaussian distributions, corresponding to spatial 


 
8

uncertainty σX between 15 and 20 nm. This value is slightly larger than the estimated spatial 

uncertainty of each localization, based on photon counts (of the order of 7 nm), which is 

probably due to residual drift. Remarkably, over the entire number N ≈ 1000 of localizations, 

this leads to a corresponding final uncertainty for the individual defect center position as low 

as 

&?
√+ < 1 nm for the most active defects. The central emission wavelength of individual defects 

(Fig. 3c) and full emission spectrum (Fig. 3d) can then be measured using the procedure 

described in Fig. 1d. As shown in Fig. 3c, for the two representative types of emitters, relatively 

constant spectral emission is observed over 600 successive localization frames, with 

distribution width Δλ ≈ 5 nm. 

Representative spectra for the first defect type (“type A”) are shown in green in Fig. 3d. These 

defects have a mean emission wavelength centered along the first peak λ1 ~ 585 nm in the 

spectral histogram of Figs. 2a and 2c. Emission spectrum is asymmetric and a phonon sideband 

can be occasionaly resolved on some spectra (Fig. 3d, green arrow). The second type of defect 

(“type B”) is characterized by a mean emission wavelength centered along the second peak λ2 

~ 610 – 650 nm of the spectral histogram. The spectrum shows a clear Zero Phonon Line and 

Phonon Sideband, leading to an energy detuning of ~ 140 meV, consistent with previously 

published work32–34. Remarkably, this phonon sideband is also visible on the ensemble 

histograms, in the form of a third local maximum in the spectral distribution (Fig. 2a, red arrow). 

A representative time trace for the emission of each individual emitter is shown in Fig. 3e. All 

defects systematically exhibit a blinking behavior, characterized by emission intermittency, and 

successive ON and OFF events.  

 

To verify the generality of our approach, we characterized defects in a second class of hBN 

materials. We started from high-quality bulk hBN crystals35, which were exfoliated and 

deposited on Si/SiO2 substrate (see Fig. S3). Few emitters, corresponding to both type A and 


 
9

type B, were observed on the as-exfoliated flakes, traducing the high quality of the bulk hBN 

material (see Fig. S4). In order to deterministically induce defects in the structure, we exposed 

the exfoliated crystals to 30 s of oxygen plasma treatment36 (see Materials and Methods). As 

shown in Fig. 4a, this leads to creation of emitters at the surface of the flakes, with similar 

blinking behavior as in CVD-grown materials, allowing straightforward localization using 

SMLM-based spectral super-resolution mapping (representative time trace shown in Fig. S5). 

Interestingly, as illustrated in Figs. 4b-c, the spectral distribution in most of the investigated 

samples is characterized by a single emission wavelength, showing preferential creation of type 

A emitters by plasma treatment. Surprisingly, some of the investigated flakes also showed a 

significant population of type B emitters (Fig. 4c, flakes number 2 and 6 and Fig. S6) although 

most of these emitters are unstable and bleach irreversibly after a few tens of seconds. This 

differential bleaching could be attributed to distinct chemical reactivity of the two populations 

of defects. 

 

Focusing on CVD-grown hBN, we now turn in Fig. 5 to the photophysical properties of emitters 

and specifically their intensity and blinking kinetics. We show in Fig. 5a a 2D histogram of 

photon counts as a function of the emission wavelength for the flake investigated in Fig. 2. Two 

clusters (green and red dashed circles) corresponding to type A and type B defects identified in 

Figs. 2a and 3 stand out clearly, with high brightness of the order of ~5.104 photons/second.  As 

evidenced on the map, no clear difference of brightness can be made between each type of 

defects. Phonon Sideband for type A and type B emitters can be identified in this histogram 

(black circled clusters). To obtain more insight into the properties of the defects in terms of 

photon emission, we show in Fig. 5b the full distribution of emission intensity by grouping the 

defects according to their wavelength. Interestingly, we observe a long tail in the intensity 


 
10

distribution, in strong contrast to the poissonian distribution classically expected for non-

blinking emitters37.  

Another interesting feature of the emitters investigated here is their blinking kinetics, also 

observed in several other studies18,34,37, but contrasting with other reports of long-term emission 

stability for the emitters in hBN10,36. To gather more insight into this blinking behavior, we plot 

in Figs. 5c-d the distributions of ON and OFF time for defect types A and B (see Materials and 

Methods). We observe clear power-law distributions, with  𝑃BC/BEE(𝑡)~𝑡IJK/JLL, and 𝛼BC ≈

𝛼BEE ≈ 1.9 ± 0.2 (red and green lines, Figs. 5c-d). Remarkably, these power-law distributions 

and the associated exponents are consistent with previously observed blinking kinetics on 

quantum dots38,39, where blinking is attributed to ionization of the quantum dots and escape of 

photoexcited carriers towards surrounding charge traps in the material. Importantly, the power-

law scaling characterizes the absence of intrinsic time-scales in the blinking behavior and can 

be interpreted as being due to heterogeneity of charge traps at the material’s surface. Similar 

mechanisms due to photoinduced ionization and change of the charge state of the defects were 

proposed to explain blinking in NV centers in diamond40. The blinking behavior observed in 

our samples might thus take its origin from charge separation or ionization of the defects, as 

the monolayer nature of the CVD-grown hBN flakes, and the creation of surface traps in 

plasma-treated hBN crystals, might allow in both cases for a facilitated escape of photoexcited 

charge carriers towards surrounding charge traps. This observation suggests a rationale behind 

the increased photostability observed in annealed samples, as a way to desorb impurities acting 

as charge traps. Remarkably, the observed similarity in blinking kinetics suggests similar 

charge affinities for each types of defects (red and green dots, Figs. 5c-d). Finally, the long tail 

in the distribution of emission intensity, shown in Fig. 5b, could be related to the observed 

power-law distribution of blinking times. 

 


 
11

An important question remains to understand the reasons for the spectral heterogeneity 

evidenced in our study and the presence of different emission lines and defects states in CVD 

grown hBN and irradiated bulk hBN crystals.  In the quest towards the assignment of a precise 

chemical structure to optically active defects in hBN materials, recent works have shown a 

widely heterogeneous spectral response of defects in hBN32,41, which was attributed to different 

chemical structures42,43, but also differences in the charge states34,44, local dielectric33, 

electrostatic29 and strain environment30, as well as temperature41. Multimodal emission lines 

with modes around 585 and 630 nm were also observed in several studies34,43. While the 

blinking behavior observed for each types of defects (Fig. 3e) is probably due to reversible 

ionization or charge trapping, it is also concurent with clear spectral stability for the emission 

in the ON state (Fig. 3c). Furthermore, the observation of similar blinking characteristics for 

types A and B defects (Figs. 5c, d) suggests similar charge affinities for these two populations. 

The differences in the spectral shape and zero phonon line distribution of type A and B defects 

(Figs. 2c and 3d) could thus point to distinct chemical structures for these two populations, 

variations in their local dielectric environment or distinct charge states. Furthermore, the large 

variation in spectral emission amonst type B defects within different CVD-grown flakes might 

be attributed to residual strain developped during the transfer process. Despite their relatively 

large uncertainty, we can expect theoretical predictions from Density Functional Theory to 

further guide the identification of the exact chemical structure of each type of defects45, based 

on their emission wavelength and spectra. Noteworthy, Adbi and coworkers46 reported Zero 

Phonon Line for NBVN and VB- defects of 2.05 eV and 1.92 eV, respectively, corresponding to 

605 nm and 647 nm emission wavelength, which is in relatively fair agreement with our 

experimental results. However, the fact that we find predominantly one defect type in plasma 

treated exfoliated flakes might also suggest that type A correspond to intrinsic defects, while 

type B might occur due to substitutional doping with various impurities, such as CBVN47, or to 


 
12

various oxygen or hydrogen complexes or interstitial defects48. Critically, the ability to assign 

defined chemical structures to optically-active defects in hBN will only be possible through 

studies of the statistical properties of the spectral response of defects submitted to various 

growth conditions and post-growth treatments. 

 

Conclusion 

We have shown the potential of spectral SMLM techniques for wide-field and high-throughput 

spectral mapping and characterization of defects in hBN materials. Our methodology allows 

the determination of statistical ensemble spectral properties, as well as extraction of spatial, 

spectral and temporal dynamics of single defects. We identify at least two types of defects in 

CVD grown materials, while irradiated exfoliated flakes show predominantly one type of 

defect. Further analysis of the blinking kinetics of optical emitters suggests that blinking is due 

to transient trapping of photoexcited charge carriers at the material’s surface, similar to what is 

observed in quantum dots. This behavior provides strategies for blinking reduction and increase 

of photostability through encapsulation of defects and reduction of charge traps via thermal 

annealing. Our study demonstrates the potential of spectral SMLM as a wide field and high-

throughput characterization technique in material science and paves the way towards 

multidimensional mapping of defects’ properties. 

 

Materials and Methods 

Optical set-up 

The sample is excited using a 561 nm laser (Monolitic Laser Combiner 400B, Agilent 

Technologies). Excitation power during imaging, measured at the back focal plane of the 

microscope objective varies from 20 to 65 mW, corresponding to power densities ranging from 

250-800 kW/m2. We used a high numerical aperture oil-immersion microscope objective 


 
13

(Olympus TIRFM 100X, NA = 1.45). Wide-field photoluminescence emission from the sample 

is collected by the same objective and separated from the excitation laser using dichroic and 

emission filters (ZT488/561rpc-UF1 and ZET488/561m, Chroma). Paths 1 and 2 consist of two 

telescopes26, sharing the same lens L1, with a respective magnification factor 1.6 (Path 1, 

telescope L1-L2) and 1.4 (Path 2, telescope L1-L3). Lenses are achromatic doublet lenses 

(Qioptic, L1: f/100, L2: f/160, L3: f/140). The prism (PS863, Thorlabs) is placed at the Fourier 

plane between L1 and L3, at the angle of minimum deviation. The sample is mounted on a 

piezoelectric scanner (Nano-Drive, MadCityLabs) to compensate for vertical drift using an IR-

based feedback loop28. EM-CCD camera (Andor iXon Life 897) is used with an EM gain of 

150. 

 

Fitting and spectral assignment and SMLM images 

Localization: Emitters in the spatial and spectral channels are localized using the imageJ plugin, 

Thunderstorm49. Briefly, a wavelet filter is applied to each frame. Peaks are then fitted by 2D 

integrated Gaussians. In the spatial channel, only emitters with intensity at least twice of the 

background are considered. 

Spectral calibration: Calibration between spatial and spectral channels is conducted using red 

fluorescent beads (20 nm FluoSpheres carboxylated-modified, 580/605). First, we calibrate the 

field-of-view transformation between spatial and spectral channels. For an emitter with a given 

wavelength, the relation between its position in the spatial and spectral channel is well 

approximated by a relation of the form (xSPEC,ySPEC) = A.(xLOC,yLOC) + B, where (xSPEC,ySPEC) 

and (xLOC,yLOC) corresponds to the position vector of the emitter in the spectral and spatial 

channels, respectively, A is a 2x2 matrix and B is a vector. Coefficients for A and B are 

calibrated by raster scanning a fiducial marker of controlled emission wavelength and mapping 

its position in both channels. In a second step, bandpass filters with a central wavelength of 600 


 
14

nm, 630 nm and 650 nm, respectively, and FWHM of 10 nm (Thorlabs, FB600-10) are used to 

calibrate the relation between the emission spectrum and the vertical shift in the spectral 

channel. The relation between the vertical shift Δ𝑦-,78 [px] of the emission spectra and the 

emission wavelength 𝜆, is well approximated by a linear relation such that Δ𝑦-,78~𝑎 × 𝜆, with 

𝑎 ≈ 0.25 px/nm (See Fig. S1). 

Spectral assignment: In order to assign a spectra to an emitter, localized in the spatial channel 

at (xLOC,yLOC), we compute its projected position (xSPEC(λ0), ySPEC(λ0)) in the spectral channel 

for a fixed emission wavelength λ0=650 nm. A pair-search algorithm finds the closest 

localizations (x’SPEC, y’SPEC) in a vertically-elongated rectangular zone around (xSPEC(λ0), 

ySPEC(λ0)). The corresponding central emission wavelength λ is then estimated as λ= 

λ0+1/a.(ySPEC(λ0)-y’SPEC). 

Spectra generation: Measured spectra in Fig. 3d are obtained by averaging the spectrum of 

single emitters over all frames for which spectral assignment is successful.   

Image generation: SMLM images (Fig. 2b and 4a) are generated as probability maps by plotting 

2D Gaussian centered on each position with a standard deviation equal to 20 nm.  

Drift correction: Lateral drift is corrected using cross-correlation between reconstructed super-

resolved images on CVD-grown materials. No lateral drift correction is applied on exfoliated 

hBN flakes, as the lower density of defects leads to weak cross-correlations between 

reconstructed images. 

Blinking kinetics: We obtain the blinking kinetics of type A and type B defects (Fig. 5c-d) by 

following the time-trace of 9 type A defects and 14 type B defects (histogram of mean emission 

wavelength shown in Fig. S7). OFF state is clearly defined by the absence of localization 

(Fig. 3e). 

 

Sample preparation 


 
15

CVD-grown materials: CVD-grown materials are produced under similar conditions as 

described elsewhere50 (see Fig. S8 for SEM images of flakes on Fe foil). Briefly, as-received 

Fe foil (100 µm thick, Goodfellow, 99.8% purity) is loaded in a customized CVD reactor (base 

pressure 1x10-6 mbar) and heated to ~940 °C in Ar (4 mbar), followed by annealing in NH3 (4 

mbar). For the growth, 1x10-2 mbar NH3 is used as a carrier gas and 6x10-4 mbar borazine 

(HBNH)3 is introduced into the chamber for 30 minutes. The growth is quenched by turning 

off the heater allowing a cooling rate of about 200 °C/min. 

The h-BN domains are transferred onto SiNx chips using the electrochemical bubbling method51 

with PMMA as support layer. After transfer, PMMA is removed by successive 1-hour rinses in 

hot acetone (3 rinses), hot IPA (1 rinse) and hot DI water (1 rinse). Remaining PMMA 

contamination is further removed through overnight annealing at 400°C in an Argon 

atmosphere. 

Exfoliated flakes: hBN multi-layer flakes are exfoliated from high quality bulk crystals35 and 

deposited onto SiO2 chips (Fig. S3).  Type A and type B defects are detected at low 

concentrations in just-exfoliated flakes (Fig. S4). In order to deterministically create defects, 

hBN crystals are further exposed to a 30 s oxygen plasma at 100 mW under 30 sccm O2 flow. 

No annealing was performed. 

Sample imaging: Chips with deposited hBN flakes and CVD-grown materials are placed upside 

down on round coverslips (#1.5 Micro Coverglass, Electron Microscopy Sciences, 25 mm in 

diameter), previously cleaned in oxygen plasma for 5 minutes. Imaging is further performed in 

water at room temperature, in order to improve the optical contrast and prevent a discontinuous 

change in the refractive index. Performing experiments in air by transferring CVD-grown hBN 

flakes directly on a glass coverslip, we observed a similar spectral signature as that shown in 

Fig. 2, showing that water has little effect on the observed spectral response of this material. 

 


 
16

Supporting Information.  

Supplementary Figures S1-S8 (PDF). 

 

Corresponding Author 

*jean.comtet@gmail.com, jiandong.feng@zju.edu.cn,  aleksandra.radenovic@epfl.ch 

 

Author Contribution 

AR and JF conceived the project and designed experiments. JC developed the experimental set-

up for spectral imaging and performed the experiments, with help from EG, NV. VB and SH 

produced the CVD-grown hBN samples. KW and TT produced the bulk hBN crystals. JC wrote 

the paper, with input from all authors. AR supervised the project. 

 

Funding Sources 

This work was financially supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) 

Consolidator grant (BIONIC BSCGI0_157802) and CCMX project (”Large Area Growth of 

2D Materials for device integration”). K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the Elemental 

Strategy Initiative conducted by the MEXT, Japan and the CREST (JPMJCR15F3), JST. 

V.B. and S.H. acknowledge funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and 

innovation program under grant agreement No number 785219. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We would like to thank Jean-Baptiste Sibarita and Corey Butler for the initial help and 

experiments on spectral SMLM. We also acknowledge valuable discussions with Adrien 

Descloux and Kristin Grussmayer. We thank Ahmet Avsar for his help with the transfer of 


 
17

exfoliated hBN, Michael Graf for fabricating marked silicon substrates, and Ivor Lončarić for 

the discussion on the interpretation of our results. 
 


 
18

FIGURES 

 

Figure 1: Ultrahigh-throughput prism-based wide field spectral characterization of 

optical emitters in hBN. (a) Principle of the experimental set-up, allowing spatial and spectral 

Single Molecule Localization Microscopy (SMLM) of emitters in hexagonal boron nitride 

(hBN) materials deposited on various substrates (glass, SiO2 and SiNx chips). (b) Schematic of 

the experimental set-up. Upon laser excitation, fluorescence signal emanating from single 

defects is collected by a high NA objective and split towards two distinct paths for spatial (path 

1) and spectral (path 2) characterization. Spatial Path 1 leads to diffraction-limited spots for 

individual emitters, which can be localized with sub-pixel accuracy. Spectral path 2 is 


 
19

composed of a dispersive prism element, shifting the fluorescence of individual emitters 

according to their emission wavelength. Images from both paths are then projected on the same 

chip of an EMCCD camera (see d). (c) Wide field image of CVD grown hBN flakes transferred 

on Si/SiNx chips. (d) Simultaneously recorded wide field image (path 1; x,y,t) and spectral 

image (path 2; λ,t) of emitters in exfoliated hBN flakes between successive frames at t and t+Δt. 

Red boxes in Path 1 indicate spatial position of individual emitters, corresponding to 

diffraction-limited spots, localized with subpixel accuracy. Multicolor boxes in Path 2 show the 

corresponding images of individual emitters after vertical dispersion by the prism element. Red 

dots in spectral channel indicate the mapped spectral position of 650 nm for each emitter in the 

spatial channel. The one to one correspondence between spatial and spectral path allows to 

obtain the full spectra of each individual emitters, through measurement of the vertical shift in 

the spectral channel (see zoom, Fig. d). Images are averaged over 5 frames for clarity (with 20 

ms exposure). (e) Principle of the reconstructed spectral super-resolved image. Spatial positions 

of emitters, along with their attributed spectra are summed up over successive frames, allowing 

the reconstruction of a super-resolved map. 
 


 
20

 

 

Figure 2: Wide field super-resolved spectral and spatial map of single emitters in CVD-

grown hBN flakes. (a) The spectral distribution of center emission wavelengths for a CVD-

grown hBN flake. A dual distribution is observed, corresponding to green and red emitters of 

respective center emission wavelength λ1 and λ2. Smaller emission peak indicated by red arrow 

corresponds to a phonon side-band (see text for details). Bin size is 1 nm. (b) Corresponding 

spatial map with spectral contrast, showing the position of the two types of emitters throughout 

the flakes. Localization events are rendered as gaussian spots (see Methods). Spatial maps are 

rendered from 10,000 successive frames. (c) Sample to sample variation of center wavelengths. 

Error bars are FHWM. (d) Temporal evolution of the number of localizations per frames 

(acquisition with 50 ms sampling and 20 ms exposure time). (e) Temporal evolution of the 

spectral distribution. Blue zone indicates the region used for reconstructing the spatial images 

in (b) and the distribution in (a). 


 
21

-

Figure 3: Spatial, Spectral and Temporal dynamics for the two types of defects. (a) Super-

resolved image of individual emitters, rendered as spatial (2D) histogram of localization 

coordinates, with 5 nm pixel size. (b) Projected distribution along the x axis along with gaussian 

fit (dotted line), allowing the determination of localization uncertainty σx. (c) Variation of the 

mean emission wavelength over successive localizations, and histogram of emission 

wavelength. (d) Representative spectra of emitters. The vertical dashed line represents mean 

emission wavelength. Green and red arrows show respectively phonon sideband in type A and 

type B emitters. (e) Time trace of emission intensity, showing intermittency in the emission, 

leading to successive ON and OFF states. All measurements presented here are acquired with 

50 ms sampling and 20 ms exposure time.  
 


 
22

 
 

Figure 4: Spatial and spectral characterization of plasma treated exfoliated hBN flakes. 

(a) Reconstructed map of individual emitters in exfoliated hBN flake, submitted to oxygen 

plasma for 30 s (see Methods). (b) Distribution of emission wavelength. (c) Sample to sample 

variation of the emission wavelength. Bin size is 4 nm. 

 
 


 
23

 

 

Figure 5: Photo physical properties of emitters in CVD hBN. (a) 2D histogram of photon 

counts as a function of emission wavelength. The two main clustered distributions are circled 

in green and red. Phonon Sideband of type A and type B emitters are circled in black. (b) 

Histogram of emission intensity. Red and green dots correspond to each circled distribution in 

(a). Normalized histograms of on (c) and off (d) times for type A and type B emitters (see 

Supplementary and Methods). Straight lines indicate power-law scaling of each distribution. 


 
24

REFERENCES 

(1)  
Mizuochi, N.; Makino, T.; Kato, H.; Takeuchi, D.; Ogura, M.; Okushi, H.; Nothaft, M.; 

Neumann, P.; Gali, A.; Jelezko, F.; et al. Nat. Photonics 2012, 6 (5), 299–303.  

(2)  
Hong, S.; Grinolds, M. S.; Pham, L. M.; Le Sage, D.; Luan, L.; Walsworth, R. L.; 

Yacoby, A. MRS Bull. 2013, 38 (2), 155–161.  

(3)  
Schirhagl, R.; Chang, K.; Loretz, M.; Degen, C. L. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2014, 65 

(1), 83–105.  

(4)  
Koperski, M.; Nogajewski, K.; Arora, A.; Cherkez, V.; Mallet, P.; Veuillen, J. Y.; 

Marcus, J.; Kossacki, P.; Potemski, M. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10 (6), 503–506.  

(5)  
He, Y. M.; Clark, G.; Schaibley, J. R.; He, Y.; Chen, M. C.; Wei, Y. J.; Ding, X.; 

Zhang, Q.; Yao, W.; Xu, X.; et al. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10 (6), 497–502.  

(6)  
Srivastava, A.; Sidler, M.; Allain, A. V.; Lembke, D. S.; Kis, A.; Imamoglu, A. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2015, 10 (6), 491–496.  

(7)  
Chakraborty, C.; Kinnischtzke, L.; Goodfellow, K. M.; Beams, R.; Vamivakas, A. N. 

Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10 (6), 507–511.  

(8)  
Tran, T. T.; Bray, K.; Ford, M. J.; Toth, M.; Aharonovich, I. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 

11 (1), 37–41.  

(9)  
Mak, K. F.; Shan, J. Nat. Photonics 2016, 10 (4), 216–226.  

(10)  Aharonovich, I.; Englund, D.; Toth, M. Nat. Photonics. 2016, 10 (10), 631–641.  

(11)  Nikolay, N.; Mendelson, N.; Sadzak, N.; Böhm, F.; Tran, T. T.; Sontheimer, B.; 

Aharonovich, I.; Benson, O. arXiv preprint 2018, arXiv:1812.02530.  

(12)  Branny, A.; Kumar, S.; Proux, R.; Gerardot, B. D. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 15053.  

(13)  Palacios-Berraquero, C.; Kara, D. M.; Montblanch, A. R. P.; Barbone, M.; Latawiec, 

P.; Yoon, D.; Ott, A. K.; Loncar, M.; Ferrari, A. C.; Atatüre, M. Nat. Commun. 2017, 

8, 15093.  


 
25

(14)  Proscia, N. V.; Shotan, Z.; Jayakumar, H.; Reddy, P.; Dollar, M.; Alkauskas, A.; 

Doherty, M.; Meriles, C. A.; Menon, V. M. 2018, Optica, 5(9), 1128-1134.  

(15)  Dean, C. R.; Young, A. F.; Meric, I.; Lee, C.; Wang, L.; Sorgenfrei, S.; Watanabe, K.; 

Taniguchi, T.; Kim, P.; Shepard, K. L.; et al. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5 (10), 722–726.  

(16)  Ranjan, A.; Raghavan, N.; O’Shea, S. J.; Mei, S.; Bosman, M.; Shubhakar, K.; Pey, K. 

L. IEEE Int. Reliab. Phys. Symp. Proc. 2018, 2018–March, 4A.11-4A.16.  

(17)  Li, L. H.; Chen, Y. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2016, 26 (16), 2594–2608.  

(18)  Feng, J.; Deschout, H.; Caneva, S.; Hofmann, S.; Lončarić, I.; Lazić, P.; Radenovic, A. 

Nano Lett. 2018, 18 (3), 1739–1744.  

(19)  Wong, D.; Velasco, J.; Ju, L.; Lee, J.; Kahn, S.; Tsai, H. Z.; Germany, C.; Taniguchi, 

T.; Watanabe, K.; Zettl, A.; et al. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10 (11), 949–953.  

(20)  Fei, Z.; Rodin, A. S.; Gannett, W.; Dai, S.; Regan, W.; Wagner, M.; Liu, M. K.; 

McLeod, A. S.; Dominguez, G.; Thiemens, M.; et al. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2013, 8 (11), 

821–825.  

(21)  Merdasa, A.; Tian, Y.; Camacho, R.; Dobrovolsky, A.; Debroye, E.; Unger, E. L.; 

Hofkens, J.; Sundström, V.; Scheblykin, I. G. ACS Nano 2017, 11 (6), 5391–5404.  

(22)  Ponseca, C. S.; Pullerits, T.; Yartsev, A.; Sundstro, V.; Scheblykin, I. G. Nano Lett. 

2015, 15(3), 1603-1608. 

(23)  Nicovich, P. R.; Owen, D. M.; Gaus, K. 2017, Nature protocols, 12(3), 453. 

(24)  Moon, S.; Yan, R.; Kenny, S. J.; Shyu, Y.; Xiang, L.; Li, W.; Xu, K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

2017, 139 (32), 10944–10947.  

(25)  Zhang, Z.; Kenny, S. J.; Hauser, M.; Li, W.; Xu, K. Nat. Methods 2015, 12 (10), 935–

938.  

(26)  Yan, R.; Moon, S.; Kenny, S. J.; Xu, K. Acc. Chem. Res. 2018, 51 (3), 697–705.  

(27)  Kim, D.; Zhang, Z.; Xu, K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139 (28), 9447–9450.  


 
26

(28)  Deschout, H.; Lukes, T.; Sharipov, A.; Szlag, D.; Feletti, L.; Vandenberg, W.; 

Dedecker, P.; Hofkens, J.; Leutenegger, M.; Lasser, T.; et al. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 

13693.  

(29)  Mendelson, N.; Xu, Z.-Q.; Tran, T. T.; Kianinia, M.; Scott, J.; Bradac, C.; 

Aharonovich, I.; Toth, M. ACS Nano 2019.  

(30)  Grosso, G.; Moon, H.; Lienhard, B.; Ali, S.; Efetov, D. K.; Furchi, M. M.; Jarillo-

Herrero, P.; Ford, M. J.; Aharonovich, I.; Englund, D. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8 (1), 705.  

(31)  Xue, Y.; Wang, H.; Tan, Q.; Zhang, J.; Yu, T.; Ding, K.; Jiang, D.; Dou, X.; Shi, J. J.; 

Sun, B. Q. ACS Nano 2018, 12 (7), 7127–7133.  

(32)  Choi, S.; Tran, T. T.; Elbadawi, C.; Lobo, C.; Wang, X.; Juodkazis, S.; Seniutinas, G.; 

Toth, M.; Aharonovich, I. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8 (43), 29642–29648.  

(33)  Tran, T. T.; Elbadawi, C.; Totonjian, D.; Lobo, C. J.; Grosso, G.; Moon, H.; Englund, 

D. R.; Ford, M. J.; Aharonovich, I.; Toth, M. ACS Nano 2016, 10 (8), 7331–7338.  

(34)  Martínez, L. J.; Pelini, T.; Waselowski, V.; Maze, J. R.; Gil, B.; Cassabois, G.; 

Jacques, V. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 94 (12), 1–5.  

(35)  Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K. J. Cryst. Growth 2007, 303 (2), 525–529.  

(36)  Xu, Z. Q.; Elbadawi, C.; Tran, T. T.; Kianinia, M.; Li, X.; Liu, D.; Hoffman, T. B.; 

Nguyen, M.; Kim, S.; Edgar, J. H.; et al. Nanoscale 2018, 10 (17), 7957–7965.  

(37)  Tran, T. T.; Zachreson, C.; Berhane, A. M.; Bray, K.; Sandstrom, R. G.; Li, L. H.; 

Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; Aharonovich, I.; Toth, M. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2016, 5 (3), 

463–466. 

(38)  Frantsuzov, P.; Kuno, M.; Jankó, B.; Marcus, R. A. Nat. Phys. 2008, 4 (7), 519–522.  

(39)  Efros, A. L.; Nesbitt, D. J. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 11 (8), 661–671.  

(40)  Wrachtrup, J.; Neumann, P.; Jelezko, F.; Aslam, N.; Waldherr, G. New J. Phys. 2013, 

15 (1), 013064. 


 
27

(41)  Jungwirth, N. R.; Calderon, B.; Ji, Y.; Spencer, M. G.; Flatté, M. E.; Fuchs, G. D. 

Nano Lett. 2016, 16 (10), 6052–6057.  

(42)  Chejanovsky, N.; Rezai, M.; Paolucci, F.; Kim, Y.; Rendler, T.; Rouabeh, W.; Fávaro 

De Oliveira, F.; Herlinger, P.; Denisenko, A.; Yang, S.; et al. Nano Lett. 2016, 16 (11), 

7037–7045. 

(43)  Dietrich, A.; Bürk, M.; Steiger, E. S.; Antoniuk, L.; Tran, T. T.; Nguyen, M.; 

Aharonovich, I.; Jelezko, F.; Kubanek, A. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 98 (8), 2–6.  

(44)  Shotan, Z.; Jayakumar, H.; Considine, C. R.; Mackoit, M.; Fedder, H.; Wrachtrup, J.; 

Alkauskas, A.; Doherty, M. W.; Menon, V. M.; Meriles, C. A.  ACS Photonics 2016, 3 

(12), 2490–2496. 

(45)  Reimers, J. R.; Sajid, A.; Kobayashi, R.; Ford, M. J. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 2018, 

14 (3), 1602–1613.  

(46)  Abdi, M.; Chou, J. P.; Gali, A.; Plenio, M. B. 2018, ACS Photonics, 5(5), 1967-1976.  

(47)  Tawfik, S. A.; Ali, S.; Fronzi, M.; Kianinia, M.; Tran, T. T.; Stampfl, C.; Aharonovich, 

I.; Toth, M.; Ford, M. J. Nanoscale 2017, 9 (36), 13575–13582.  

(48)  Weston, L.; Wickramaratne, D.; Mackoit, M.; Alkauskas, A.; Van De Walle, C. G. 

Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97 (21), 1–13. 

(49)  Ovesný, M.; Křížek, P.; Borkovec, J.; Švindrych, Z.; Hagen, G. M. Bioinformatics 

2014, 30 (16), 2389–2390.  

(50)  Caneva, S.; Weatherup, R. S.; Bayer, B. C.; Blume, R.; Cabrero-Vilatela, A.; 

Braeuninger-Weimer, P.; Martin, M. B.; Wang, R.; Baehtz, C.; Schloegl, R.; et al. 

Nano Lett. 2016, 16 (2), 1250–1261.  

(51)  Gao, L.; Ren, W.; Xu, H.; Jin, L.; Wang, Z.; Ma, T.; Ma, L. P.; Zhang, Z.; Fu, Q.; 

Peng, L. M.; et al. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 697–699. 

 


