1

Crystallisation From Volatile Deep Eutectic Solvents

Jason Potticary1, Charlie Hall1,2, Victoria Hamilton1,3, James F. McCabe4, Simon R. Hall1*

1Complex Functional Materials Group, School of Chemistry, University of Bristol, Bristol 
BS8 1TS, UK.

2Centre for Doctoral Training in Condensed Matter Physics, HH Wills Physics Laboratory, 
Tyndall Avenue, Bristol, BS8 1TL, UK.

3Bristol Centre for Functional Nanomaterials, Centre for Nanoscience and Quantum 
Information, Tyndall Avenue, Bristol BS8 1FD, UK.

4Early Product Development, Pharmaceutical Sciences, IMED Biotech Unit, AstraZeneca, 
Silk Road Business Park, Macclesfield, Cheshire SK10 2NA, UK.

Keywords: (crystallisation, pharmaceuticals, polymorphism, deep eutectic solvent)

A new class of deep eutectic solvents are presented which exhibit all of the physical 

characteristics of classical deep eutectic solvents, with the exception that one of the components 

is volatile when exposed to the atmosphere at room temperature. This enables a premeditated, 

auto-destructive capability which can lead to novel crystalline identities. We demonstrate the 

effectiveness of this concept through the room-temperature crystallisation of a broad range of 

organic molecules, with a particular focus on pharmaceuticals, that possess a variety of 

functional groups and molecular complexity. Furthermore, we show how, through the simple 

altering of the eutectic composition, polymorphism in paracetamol can be controlled, enabling 

the elusive metastable form II to spontaneously crystallise at room temperature.

Born from the class of solvents known as ionic liquids, the deep eutectic solvents (DES), named 

from the Greek “εu” (eu = easy) and “τήξις” (teksis = melting), have been an increasingly well-

researched class of solvents for the last two decades. They have been a boon to catalysis, 

extraction processes, electrochemistry, organic synthesis and in the creation of more efficient 

batteries and dye-sensitized solar cells.[1-7] Originally conceived as a greener and cheaper 

alternative to the more toxic and less environmentally friendly ionic liquids,[8,9] DESs are 


2

normally composed of two or three molecular species which are able to associate through 

extensive hydrogen bonding[10] bringing about their inherent stability. The judicious admixture 

of two solid crystalline components forms a liquid with a melting point significantly lower than 

each of the constituents giving rise to their ubiquity. One of the first examples of a deep eutectic 

solvent was formed by the mixture of solid choline chloride and urea in a molar ratio of 1:2. 

This eutectic mixture is a liquid at 12 °C, whilst the component parts have melting points of 

302 °C and 133 °C respectively. Although the first DESs were formed by the mixing of a 

quaternary ammonium salt with a hydrogen bond donor (HBD),[11] a number of suitable 

alternative formulations have subsequently been conceived, the majority utilising an amide 

moiety as a hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA). DESs are being investigated within the 

pharmaceutical industry to tackle one of its biggest issues, that of poor solubility. Currently, 

more than 50% of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) are known to exhibit polymorphism 

and up to 90% of new chemical entities considered for bringing to market are classed as poorly 

soluble.[12] DESs have been explored both as a vector for enhancing the solubility of an API 

and the incorporation of an API as one of the eutectic components, forming “therapeutic 

DESs”,[13-16] although the bioavailability of APIs delivered in this form has been shown to be 

lower than standard oral solids.

When developing an API, one of the primary considerations for bringing a new chemical 

entity to market is the complete understanding of its polymorphic landscape. A sudden change 

in polymorphic form can result in radical changes to intermolecular interactions and the crystal 

surface chemistry which can detrimentally affect solubility, dissolution rate and intestinal 

permeability.[17] On a larger scale, different polymorphs often have different crystal habits 

which can have a significant impact on the processability of the API. Greater cohesion between 

crystals from the increased amount of exposed polar surfaces, leads to clogging of processing 

hardware. Typically, additional mechanical processes such as milling are used to reduce particle 

size. However, milling is accompanied by concerns over mechanically induced solid-state 


3

transformations of the API and agglomeration of the produced particles.[18,19] For these reasons, 

identification of new polymorphs alongside control over polymorphism, crystal habit and 

micromorphology remain major resource sinks within the pharmaceutical industry. The 

socioeconomic and research impact of directing crystal growth in pharmaceutical compounds 

cannot be overstated; existing drugs which have no scalable route to a soluble form with a 

desirable crystal habit encounter delays in development, because they are not easily processable 

into tablets with a suitable dissolution profile. Unfortunately, the most thermodynamically 

stable polymorph of an API is the least soluble when compared to higher energy metastable 

forms. However, these higher energy polymorphs often require relative extremes of 

crystallisation conditions or complex synthetic routes such as desolvation or epitaxial growth 

to isolate. This is the case with one of the most widely produced APIs, paracetamol,[20] which 

has three known polymorphs, form I, II and III, named in order of discovery. Paracetamol is 

manufactured and distributed as form I (Figure S7a), a less efficacious form, due to its ease of 

production and crystalline stability. Form II (Figure S7b) is more soluble and is more readily 

compressed into tablets, however it is more challenging to crystallise, requiring the addition of 

additives[21,22] controlled cooling from a melt[23] or bespoke solvent mixtures.[24] Using existing 

methods, obtaining higher energy polymorphs of any API is not a cost-effective strategy when 

having to scale up and therefore what is required is a simple method of API crystallisation and 

polymorph control which is scalable and works at room temperature and pressure.

Here we introduce a new class of deep eutectic solvent which, through spontaneous 

reversal of the eutectic liquidation, affords the potential for either (i) polymorphic control, (ii) 

macromorphological control (iii) or the creation of a novel solvate of an API, depending on the 

API’s molecular structure. This concept of a self-destructing deep eutectic solvent has not been 

previously explored. We show the efficacy of these volatile deep eutectic solvents (VODES)

by crystallisation of APIs via a liquid-based method which is scalable and works at room 

temperature and pressure. Furthermore, we discuss the molecular features of the API that give 


4

rise to either polymorph control, macromorphological control or solvate formation and suggest 

general features that should make our method applicable to the controlled crystallisation of all 

small organic molecules.

Volatile deep eutectic solvent synthesis and polymorphic control in paracetamol

The creation of a VODES involves a volatile HBD and stable HBA component (in this work 

the ratios 1:1-10:1 - HBD:HBA, respectively were used) which, when simply mixed together 

as solids, produces a liquid (Figure 1(a)) which remains stable in a sealed container at or near 

room temperature. This admixture is subsequently left to ‘self-destruct’ at room temperature 

and pressure for a time, Tx (typically ~36 hr), resulting in the spontaneous crystallisation of the 

non-volatile component. In this work, we use a pharmaceutical as the HBA component, which 

means that in lieu of dissolution of and concentrations in a solvent, the liquid produced, is itself, 

part API which in some cases comprises 20% of the liquid. In addition, given that we are 

applying our method to pharmaceuticals, it is of the utmost importance that the amount of 

phenol present in the crystalline product is within FDA allowed limits for use in humans. In 

this work we therefore undertook solution 1H-NMR of each as-crystallised product and in every 

case, there was < 0.25% w/v residual phenol present (Figures S2 - S6). This is below the FDA 

allowed limit for oral ingestion, topical application and by injection (intradermal, intralesional, 

intramuscular, intrasynovial, intravenous, or subcutaneous).[25]

In order to demonstrate the viability of the VODES method, we use a simple system 

consisting of phenol as the HBD and paracetamol as the HBA. Phenol and paracetamol were 

chosen as simple molecules containing functional groups which are typical in DES formation. 

In particular, phenol and phenolic compounds have been widely explored as the hydrogen bond 

donating component in eutectic systems for both extraction processes and pharmaceutical 

applications.[13] With this system, we are able to actively control polymorphism in paracetamol 

by varying the HBD:HBA ratio. Regioisomers of paracetamol, where the acetamide group can 


5

be on three possible ring positions, para-, meta- and ortho- (PAP, MAP, OAP respectively) 

(Figure S1) were investigated. Of the two other regioisomers, MAP is considered a potential 

less-toxic alternative to PAP and has two known polymorphs. One, a catemeric orthorhombic 

from and the second, a dimer-based, monoclinic form reported recently.[26] OAP is the least 

studied of the ‘-cetamol’ family, with only a single crystal structure recently solved via electron 

diffraction.[27] OAP has no current industrial or pharmaceutical applications but has shown 

potential as an anti-tuberculosis therapeutic[28] and as a highly promising candidate in the 

treatment of arthritis.[29] Using the VODES method, PAP, MAP and OAP were made into 

homogeneous liquid VODESs using phenol as the HBD. PAP and MAP were found to produce 

a stable VODES between the ratios of 4:1 - 9:1 and 5:1 - 10:1 (HBD:HBA), respectively. OAP 

formed no stable deep eutectic up to a ratio of 10:1. This shows clearly that the position of the 

acetamide relative to the hydroxyl group is playing a pivotal role in how the VODES forms. 

When in the para position there are a wider range of approach angles available for the phenol 

to hydrogen-bond with the API, thereby enabling the formation of a stable VODES at lower 

HBD:HBA ratios. In contrast to this, when in the ortho position in OAP, the proximity of the 

hydroxyl group to the amine precludes hydrogen bonding around the molecule in numbers 

sufficient to make a stable liquid. VODES systems created from PAP and MAP however are so 

easily formed that they allow crystals to be grown from a solution with API concentrations 

inaccessible by many common organic solvents. We demonstrate that in the case of PAP, the 

most efficacious polymorph (form II) currently considered commercially unsuitable for 

production due to difficulties discussed above, will emerge from a VODES spontaneously at 

room temperature and pressure. Evaporation of the volatile phenol component from all 

HBD:HBA ratios, leads to the formation of PAP polymorphs over a 2-day period. Analysis of 

resultant crystals from phenol:PAP ratios from 4:1 - 9:1 show a stark difference in crystal habit, 

usually between the ratios 6:1 and 7:1.  Powder X-ray diffraction analysis shows that this 

difference is due to different polymorphs being formed, namely form I (4:1 - 6:1) and form II 


6

(7:1 - 9:1) of which each crystal habit observed is characteristic; diamonds in the case of form 

I and feather-like needles in form II (Figure 2).  The selection of form I or form II paracetamol 

as a simple function of a change in VODES composition at room temperature is a completely 

reproducible and non-stochastic method of polymorph control.  We discuss potential 

mechanisms underlying this control in the section below.

In contrast to PAP, MAP retains a single crystal structure throughout all VODES

composition ratios tested however there is still a stark division between two crystalline 

morphologies upon VODES destruction. There is a statistically clear divide between the ratios 

of 7:1 and 8:1 (phenol:MAP) at which the morphology changes from rods to silky needles.  

Regardless of morphology however, in all experiments, only a single polymorph of MAP, form 

I, is observed (Figure 3). The final regioisomer, OAP, formed no deep eutectic solution and so 

no crystals were generated.

What is deeply intriguing is that there is a VODES ratio in PAP where one polymorph 

consistently forms and not the other, despite the fact that as the phenol evaporates, a VODES

of higher concentration must presumably pass through the same phenol:API ratio as one of a 

lower ratio that gives a different polymorph.  For example, phenol:paracetamol of a ratio of 8:1 

consistently produces form II, despite passing through an (e.g.) 5:1 ratio as the phenol 

evaporates, before crystallising. Starting with a phenol:paracetamol ratio of 5:1 however 

consistently produces form I.  This phenomenon can be understood to be indicative of the fact 

that for each starting ratio, the HBD:HBA interaction that is established from the start is likely 

to be subtly different from each other. It follows therefore, that from the start of the evaporation 

of the phenol, both systems contain distinct molecular environments and would therefore not 

be expected to undergo crystallisation in the same way. Each system may possess characteristic 

pre-nucleation clusters from the start, which persist until crystallisation occurs; indeed, such 

clusters have recently been observed in APIs.[30]


7

Understanding the eutectic behavior of benzamides

With the knowledge that the number and propensity of HBD:HBA interactions are critical to 

the successful formation of a VODES, the benzamides are appropriate pharmaceuticals to serve 

as model  systems, as this structural motif is common to many drugs.[31] Benzamide itself 

currently has three known forms (I, II and III) with the highly metastable form II and the less 

metastable form III has, to date, only been reported to crystallise concomitantly at higher 

supersaturations from standard solvents, either with one another, alongside the stable form I or 

as a trimorphic system. Form III has, however, recently been obtained through solvent-assisted 

grinding of form I benzamide and form I nicotinamide.[32] The effect of altering functional

groups on the eutectic behavior was examined using 2-methoxybenzamide (2MB) and 2-

ethoxybenzamide (2EB), as simple variations on the underlying benzamide structure. Both 

2MB and 2EB have only a single known polymorph, but it is of note that while 2MB possesses 

a catameric bonding motif, 2EB has a dimeric motif between the amide substituents. A dimer-

motif is also present in the two room-temperature stable polymorphs of benzamide, forms I and 

III. 

Phenol:benzamide mixtures within the range 3:1 - 10:1 all resulted in a homogeneous, clear 

liquid being produced at room temperature. Thermal analysis determined the lowest recorded 

melting points of benzamide, 2MB and 2EB phenol-VODESs to be -32.89 °C (5:1), < -70.00 °C 

(4:1) and < -70.00 °C (4:1), respectively (Table S1). On the destruction of the benzamide 

VODES, crystals either large, clear, plates of form III or a mixture of form III interspersed with 

form I benzamide were formed. The polycrystalline nature of the form I benzamide crystals 

implies that the sporadic formation is due to the formation of a metastable phase (Figure S8) 

which then rapidly transforms to form I benzamide. 2MB exhibits no unusual behaviours, 

easily forming a VODES within the standard range of ratios and subsequently undergoing a 

complete separation to recrystallise as its sole known polymorph. Similarly, 2EB generally 


8

undergoes a crystallisation to the known crystalline form, however, the formation of a stable 

2EB-phenol co-crystal is observed in a small number of crystallisations. This novel co-crystal 

comprises a 1:2 (Phenol:2EB) stoichiometry of the two co-formers with the 2EB molecules 

arranged in a carboxamide dimer with the phenol interacting peripherally (Figure S17) (CCDC 

deposit number 1879336).

An understanding of the root cause in the variation in eutectic behaviours can be gleaned 

from thermal analysis of the three related benzamides. Thermograms of higher ratios of VODES

containing benzamide show complex features with multiple thermal events on warming that 

suggest the benzamide-phenol mixture has at least one hitherto unisolated metastable phase 

(Fig S11). This complex behaviour is reflected in the thermograms of 2EB, in which case the 

metastable phase is known to be the 2EB-phenol co-crystal (Figure S13), allowing it to be 

inferred that the transient phase present in benzamide is a benzamide-phenol co-crystal phase 

of unknown stoichiometry. The thermograms of benzamide and 2EB are in stark contrast to the 

comparatively featureless thermograms of 2MB which have only a single crystallisation phase 

change (Figure S12). This suggests that the crystallisation behaviour observed from the 

benzamide and 2EB eutectic systems is related to the ease of incorporation of phenol molecules 

within their dimeric structural motifs, which differ from the catemeric motifs present in 2MB. 

It is likely that the formation of the difficult to obtain pure form III benzamide results from 

cases where the transient phenol structural motifs lead to the inclusion of phenol molecules into 

the lattice, as has been reported for seeded growth utilising nicotinamide molecules,[32] but in 

this work, the ‘seeds’ (in the form of phenol molecules) are able to escape the system due to 

their volatility. These results indicate that in the absence of an interim phase, traditional 

supersaturated crystallisation will take place as the phenol leaves the system, which is what we 

observe for 2MB. 

Thermal analysis and applicability


9

To understand the extent of melting point depression in these deep eutectic solvents and to 

determine  the presence of intermediate phases, DSC was performed on all compositions and 

ratios of phenol:API between 1:1 – 10:1 that produced a stable liquid (Figs. S9 – S16).  These 

data appear system specific with regards to the extent of melting point depression and overall 

physical behavior of the mixture. Although distinct endotherms, exotherms or glass-transitions 

were not always present, all VODES systems show large melting point depression for all molar 

ratios studied (Table S1). When present, melting endotherms are typically broad and often occur 

at or just after the crystallisation exotherm, particularly at lower phenol:API ratios, leading to 

a ± 5 °C uncertainty in melting point depression. 

In the case of PAP there is no indication of a difference in thermal behaviour as the 

phenol:API ratio is changed, highlighting that the intermediate phases that lead to the resultant 

polymorph are not necessarily crystalline in nature and are forming in the liquid state. To 

evaluate how the differences in pre-nucleation dynamics may change with phenol:API ratio, 

molecular optimisation calculations were carried out in ORIENT,[33] which suggests how the 

change to the more planar form II paracetamol allows for more phenol molecules to solvate the 

crystal as it grows (Figure 4). Conversely however, in MAP, where a difference in morphology 

could be seen between ratios of 7:1 and 8:1 phenol:MAP, an additional crystallisation and 

melting event can be seen occurring for solutions above 7:1. This may be an indication that the 

change in morphology is again due to a short-lived intermediate metastable phase and certainly 

suggests that the bonding motifs within the solution are a function of the phenol:API ratio. 

The successful formation of a VODES was observed in a range of pharmaceuticals. 

Table S1 describes a list of all APIs used as HBAs during this study. Upon attempting VODES

creation with some of these molecules, it is clear that it is not simply a question of propensity 

to hydrogen-bond which determines the eventual crystalline form. In some cases, formation of 

a stable novel co-crystal of API and phenol occurs, with the phenol effectively playing the role 


10

of ‘solvate’ in the crystal. In the case of harmine, a reversible monoamine oxidase inhibitor, the 

phenolate is a precursor to the only know native crystalline form. The harmine phenolate has a 

stoichiometry of 1:1 (HBD:HBA), with the hydroxyl group on the phenol hydrogen-bonding 

with the amine on the harmine molecule and has been solved by us (Figure S18 - CCDC deposit 

number 1879689). Upon gentle heating or vacuum drying of the harmine phenolate, the 

macromorphology of the crystal is preserved (Figure 5(a, b)), but the large single crystals have 

been transformed into a porous, polycrystalline matrix through loss of phenol (Figure 5(c)). The 

production of a porous API through the evaporation of solvent has been demonstrated 

previously for clozapine to which the porous structure increased the dissolution rate 5-fold.[34]

Both carbamazepine and verapamil hydrochloride show no crystallisation or melting events at 

any ratio except an exotherm followed directly by and endotherm in the carbamazepine system 

at 10:1. Both systems display a Tg on both cooling and warming, which moves systematically 

towards lower temperatures with higher ratios. Metaxalone (Figure S16) only has distinct 

crystallisation and melting events with higher ratios of phenol, implying the formation of a co-

crystal with a large excess of the HBD. Glass transitions are seen in all ratios tested, including 

those with crystallisation/melting events.

Overall, thermal analyses of each VODES reveals varying levels of complexity from 

system to system. Where carbamazepine and verapamil hydrochloride appear as simple glasses, 

other systems like benzamide show multiple crystallisation and melting events, implying the 

formation of unknown crystalline forms of either each component or co-crystals of varying 

stoichiometries and transitions from form to form. This is suggestive that the effects seen, 

polymorphlogical or morphological, are a function of the strong interactions with volatile 

component of the VODES. Systems that have had transient co-crystals isolated and solved 

appear to demonstrate this and others that have had metastable crystals observed during 

crystallisation do indeed appear to transform in situ leaving the ultimate polymorph. 


11

Interactions between components in a VODES are dynamic and are facilitated by an 

array of possible bonding motifs. For example, the inception of crystallisation of a 1:1 co-crystal 

dramatically changes the concentrations of the liquid in the system, which must lead to a change 

in the nature and number of molecular interactions throughout the whole system. This 

complexity will be manifest in systems even where no co-crystal has been detected at ratios 

beyond 1:1. The mere fact that some co-crystals have been isolated and solved, provides a likely 

route for the structural control exhibited by some of these systems, both polymorphological and 

morphological when grown out of a VODES. 

Outlook

In this study, we prepared a range of volatile deep eutectic solvents as binary mixtures of an 

API and a hydrogen bond donor. The deep eutectic solvent is then left to self-destruct through 

diffusion of the more volatile component out of the system leaving the less volatile 

pharmaceutical to crystallise. As we have demonstrated, suppression of the melting point in the 

optimum deep eutectic ratio leads to a crystallisation temperature typically 40 ˚C below room 

temperature (60 ˚C below that of phenol) and often greater than 100 ˚C below room temperature. 

It is clear that the mechanisms of crystallisation from a deep eutectic solution are inexorably 

linked to both the molecular structure of the API and the packing within the resultant crystals. 

The propensity for potential hydrogen-bonding in each system appears to be pivotal in 

determining how likely an API is to form a VODES and at what ratios, before there is 

crystallisation of either the API at one extreme or the co-former at the other. This is exemplified 

in the case of PAP, MAP and OAP; as the available locations for hydrogen-bond interactions 

decreases, so do the concentrations of API in the solvent. In the benzamide based systems, 

spontaneous formation of a stable liquid is again facile with 2-methoxybenzamide, where there 

are both a carboxamide and ester moieties present, in contrast to benzamide and 2-


12

ethoxybenzamide, whose ester is more sterically hindered. The resultant crystals show that there 

is a rich and complex interaction between the API and HBD which is system specific.

We have shown here that volatile deep eutectic solvents afford a novel route of 

crystallisation from liquids of APIs at high concentrations at room temperature. This new 

crystallisation route provides a potential vector for polymorph selectivity in APIs simply 

through a change in concentration. When this route is achieved via accessing intermediate 

solvates, it may also lead to the creation of new porous macromorphologies, thereby enabling 

the kinetics of dissolution to be altered. These volatile deep eutectic solvents have opened the 

door to the possibility of controlling organic crystal growth in a scalable way at room 

temperature, with the additional possibility of creating previously unforeseen polymorphs and 

solvates. The control over polymorphism and/or the creation of novel polymorphs and solvates 

in this way has immediate and far-reaching implications for the pharmaceutical industry, where 

the successful granting and defending of patents relies on having full knowledge of the 

crystallisation landscape of any given API.

Experimental Section

All VODESs in this work were made using ratios - HBD:HBA, which when mixed together as 

solids, spontaneously produce a liquid (Figure 1(a)) up to 10:1. Notably low ratios (typically 

1:1 – 2:1), although becoming paste-like, did not form a homogenous liquid. Once completely 

liquid, droplets of the VODES were left under ambient conditions for the HBD to evaporate 

resulting in destruction of the VODES and spontaneous crystallisation of the pharmaceutical 

HBA. The range of ratios at which a stable VODES is formed affords an easily tunable array 

of concentrations with regards to the API in the solvent and it is a feature of the VODES system 

that all eutectic mixtures formed exhibited deep eutectic behavior with melting point 


13

depressions or glass transitions significantly lower than the component parts ranging from ~ 29 

˚C to sub -70 ˚C (Table S1).

Methanol and ethanol were supplied by Fisher Scientific (UK). All other chemicals were 

purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received.

Characterisation

DSC analyses was performed using a TA Instruments Q2000 and Discovery 25 both with 

refrigerated cooling systems.  The DSC cell was purged with nitrogen. Samples were analyzed 

in hermetically sealed aluminum pans.  A small volume of liquid (~ 2-5 uL) was added to the 

hermetic pan and sealed.  All liquid samples were cooled from 25 °C to -70 °C and then cycled 

to 70 °C all at 10 °C/min.  The instruments were calibrated using a pure indium standard.

Novel crystal structures were solved using single crystal X-ray diffraction. Crystals that were 

of sufficient size (> 0.2 x 0.2 x 0.2 mm) were isolated during VODES destruction and mounted 

on a glass fibre. Intensity data for crystal structures were collected at 100 K on a Bruker Kappa 

Apex II diffractometer, using molybdenum Kα radiation (λ = 0.7136 Å). Data were processed 

using Bruker APEX2 v2.0 and Olex2 v1.2.7 software. For all structures a symmetry-related 

(multi-scan) absorption correction was applied. Structure solution followed by full-matrix least 

squares refinement was performed using the WINGXv2014.1 suite of programs throughout. 


14

Specific information about data collection and reflections can be found embedded in the 

associated cif files.

Powder X-Ray diffraction data were acquired using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with 

a PSD LynxEye Detector (Cu-Kα radiation wavelength of 1.5418 Å). Step size was 0.0171°/2θ 

and step hold time was 1.5 s.

Samples for NMR were prepared by dissolving 50 mg of sample in 0.7 cm3 of deuterated solvent 

with a tetramethylsilane reference standard and filtered. All NMR measurements were carried 

out on a JEOL ECS-400.

[CCDC 1879336 and CCDC 1879689 contain the supplementary crystallographic data for this 

paper. These data can be obtained free of charge from The Cambridge Crystallographic Data 

Centre via www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/data_request/cif.]

Acknowledgements

S.R.H., J.P., C.H. and V.H. acknowledge the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 

Council UK (grants EP/L016648/1 and EP/L015544/1), MagnaPharm, a collaborative 

research project funded by the European Union's Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation 

programme (grant No. 736899) and the Bristol Centre for Functional Nanomaterials and the 

Centre for Doctoral Training in Condensed Matter Physics for project funding. S.R.H., J.P., 

C.H. and V.H. would also like to acknowledge Drs. Hazel Sparkes and Natalie Pridmore for 

their assistance with single crystal XRD and Dr. Asma Buanz for useful discussions on DSC.


15

References

[1]
Q. Zhang, K. De Oliveira Vigier, S. Royer, F. Jérôme, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 

7108.

[2]
F. Hao, H. Lin, J. Zhang, J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 1645.

[3]
J. Chen, T. Peng, W. Shi, R. Li, J. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 231.

[4]
M. S. Miran, T. Yasuda, M. A. B. H. Susan, K. Dokko, M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. 

C, 2014, 118, 27631.

[5]
T. Kakibe, J. Y. Hishii, N. Yoshimoto, M. Egashira, M. Morita, J. Power Sources, 

2012, 203, 195.

[6]
W. Xiao, Q. Chen, Y. Wu, T. Wu, L. Dai, Carbohydr. Polym., 2011, 83, 233.

[7]
F. Hao, H. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6416.

[8]
M. Deetlefs, K. R. Seddon, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 17.

[9]
N. V. Plechkova, K. R. Seddon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 123.

[10]
C. R. Ashworth, R. P. Matthews, T. Welton, P. A. Hunt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 

2016, 18, 18145.

[11]
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed, V. Tambyrajah, Chem. 

Commun., 2003, 9, 70.

[12]
L. Z. Benet, F. Broccatelli, T. I. Oprea, AAPS J., 2011, 13, 519.

[13]
A. R. C. Duarte, A. S. D. Ferreira, S. Barreiros, E. Cabrita, R. L. Reis, A. Paiva, Eur. J. 

Pharm. Biopharm., 2017, 114, 296.

[14]
I. M. Aroso, R. Craveiro, Â. Rocha, M. Dionísio, S. Barreiros, R. L. Reis, A. Paiva, A. 

R. C. Duarte, Int. J. Pharm., 2015, 492, 73.


16

[15]
C. W. Park, J. Y. Kim, Y. S. Rhee, T. O. Oh, J. M. Ha, N. Y. Choi, S. C. Chi, E. S. 

Park, Arch. Pharm. Res., 2012, 35, 1935.

[16]
A. P. Abbott, E. I. Ahmed, K. Prasad, I. B. Qader, K. S. Ryder, Fluid Phase Equilib., 

2017, 448, 2.

[17]
K. Raza, S. Ratan, M. Kumar, P. Kumar, S. Chaturvedi, O. P. Katare, J. Drug Deliv. 

Sci. Technol., 2017, 39, 69.

[18]
N. S. Trasi, S. R. Byrn, AAPS PharmSciTech, 2012, 13, 772.

[19]
Z. H. Loh, A. K. Samanta, P. W. Sia Heng, Asian J. Pharm. Sci., 2014, 10, 255.

[20]
S. E. Gulmez, D. Larrey, G. P. Pageaux, S. Lignot, R. Lassalle, J. Jové, A. Gatta, P. A. 

McCormick, H. J. Metselaar, E. Monteiro, D. Thorburn, W. Bernal, I. Zouboulis-

Vafiadis, C. De Vries, S. Perez-Gutthann, M. Sturkenboom, J. Bénichou, J. L. 

Montastruc, Y. Horsmans, F. Salvo, F. Hamoud, S. Micon, C. Droz-Perroteau, P. Blin, 

N. Moore, Drug Saf., 2013, 36, 135.

[21]
J. S. Capes, R. E. Cameron, CrystEngComm, 2007, 9, 84.

[22]
M. Lang, A. L. Grzesiak, A. J. Matzger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14834.

[23]
L. R. Agnew, D. L. Cruickshank, T. McGlone, C. C. Wilson, Chem. Commun., 2016, 

52, 7368.

[24]
M. L. Peterson, S. L. Morissette, C. McNulty, A. Goldsweig, P. Shaw, M. LeQuesne, J. 

Monagle, N. Encina, J. Marchionna, A. Johnson, J. Gonzalez-Zugasti, A. V. Lemmo, S. 

J. Ellis, M. J. Cima, Ö. Almarsson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 10958.

[25]
“FDA Inactive Ingredient Search for Approved Drug Products,” can be found under 

https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/iig/index.cfm. Accessed 20/02/2020.

[26]
L. McGregor, D. A. Rychkov, P. L. Coster, S. Day, V. A. Drebushchak, A. F. 


17

Achkasov, G. S. Nichol, C. R. Pulham, E. V. Boldyreva, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 

6183.

[27]
I. Andrusenko, V. Hamilton, E. Mugnaioli, A. Lanza, C. Hall, J. Potticary, S. R. Hall, 

M. Gemmi, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 11035.

[28]
J. D. Guzman, P. N. Mortazavi, T. Munshi, D. Evangelopoulos, T. D. McHugh, S. 

Gibbons, J. Malkinson, S. Bhakta, Medchemcomm, 2014, 5, 47.

[29]
H. Jawed, S. U. A. Shah, S. Jamall, S. U. Simjee, Int. Immunopharmacol., 2010, 10, 

900.

[30]
M. Warzecha, M. S. Safari, A. J. Florence, P. G. Vekilov, Cryst. Growth Des., 2017, .

[31]
F. Fiorino, M. Eiden, A. Giese, B. Severino, A. Esposito, M. H. Groschup, E. 

Perissutti, E. Magli, G. M. Incisivo, A. Ciano, F. Frecentese, H. A. Kretzschmar, J. 

Wagner, V. Santagada, G. Caliendo, Bioorganic Med. Chem., 2012, 20, 5001.

[32]
F. Fischer, S. Greiser, D. Pfeifer, C. Jäger, K. Rademann, F. Emmerling, Angew. 

Chemie, 2016, 128, 14493.

[33]
A. J. Stone, A. Dullweber, O. Engkvist, E. Fraschini, M. P. Hodges, A. W. Meredith, 

D. R. Nutt, P. L. A. Popelier, D. J. Wales, Orient: a program for studying interactions 

between molecules 2018.

[34]
V. Verma, P. Bannigan, M. Lusi, C. M. Crowley, S. Hudson, B. K. Hodnett, P. Davern, 

CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 4370.


18

Figure 1. Properties of a 2MB-phenol VODES (a) Spontaeneous formation of the VODES at room 

temperature and pressure. (b) Time-lapse of VODES after onset of crystallisation, (Tx ~24 hr). Thermal 

analysis of (c) cooling and (d) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of blue 

green and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.


19

Figure 2. Crystalline identity of PAP as a function HBD:HBA ratio. Green and purple squares indicate 

forms I and II of paracetamol, respectively. Morphology and crystal structures are displayed of form I 

(left) and form II (right).


20

Figure 3. Crystalline identity of MAP as a function HBD:HBA ratio. Green and purple squares indicate 

forms I and II of paracetamol, respectively. Morphology and crystal structures are displayed of form I 

(left) and form II (right).


21

Figure 4. Hydrogen-bonding motifs in crystalline forms of PAP. (a) A chair-like cycle of interacting 

PAP molecules in form I. Orange arrows and taupe cornered lines indicate the angles and sterically 

obstructed approach vectors. (b) The cycle of interacting PAP molecules in form II showing a more 

‘planar’ structure. Individual molecules are coloured for ease of visualisation. Black lines indicate 

hydrogen-bonds of lengths (a) 1 = 2.049 Å and 2 = 1.796 Å and (b) 1 = 2.118 Å and 2 = 1.835 Å.

 

 
 

 

(a)
(b)


22

Figure 5. Different crystalline forms of harmine. (a) Optical image of crystals of harmine phenolate and 

(b) an optical image of same crystals after vacuum drying to remove the phenol leaving the standard 

harmine crystal structure. (c) SEM micrograph of the surface of the dried harmine in (b) revealing a 

porous micromorphology with an average pore size of 0.22 μm.


23

Toc Entry
Deep eutectic solvents are ubiquitous in the fields of synthetic and materials chemistry owing 
to their stability, non-volatility and environmentally friendly nature.  In this work a new class 
of them is presented, where one of the two components is volatile when exposed to the 
atmosphere.  Whilst seemingly oxymoronic, the effect of one component leaving the system 
forces crystallisation with novel results.

Keyword: Crystallisation

Jason Potticary1, Charlie Hall1,2, Victoria Hamilton1,3, James F. McCabe4, Simon R. Hall1*

Title: Crystallisation From Volatile Deep Eutectic Solvents

ToC figure


24

Supporting Information

Crystallisation From Volatile Deep Eutectic Solvents

Jason Potticary1, Charlie Hall1,2, Victoria Hamilton1,3, James F. McCabe4, Simon R. Hall1*

*Correspondence to: simon.hall@bristol.ac.uk

Compound
(m.p. (°C))

Designation in 

this study (Figure 

S1)

HBD

(m.p. (°C))

Lowest 
VODES
m.p. / Tg 

(°C)

Lowest m.p. 

ratio

(HBD:HBA)

Phenol (40.5)
n/a (1)
-
-
-

Paracetamol (169)
PAP (2)

Phenol 

(40.5)

< -70
7:1-10:1

Metacetamol (149)
MAP (3)

Phenol 

(40.5)

-58
4:1

Orthocetamol (210)
OAP (4)
n/a
n/a
n/a

Benzamide (130)
n/a (5)

Phenol 

(40.5)

-19
10:1

2-methoxybenzamide 

(128)

2MB (6)

Phenol 

(40.5)

< -70
4:1

2-ethoxybenzamide (134)
2EB (7)

Phenol 

(40.5)

< -70
4:1

Carbamazepine (192)
n/a (8)

Phenol 

(40.5)

< -64
9:1

Harmine (321)
n/a (9)

Phenol 

(40.5)

n/a
n/a

Metaxalone (122)
n/a (10)

Phenol 

(40.5)

-58
4:1

Verapamil hydrochloride 

(139)

n/a (11)

Phenol 

(40.5)

< -70
10:1

Table S1. Summary of melting points of the compounds considered in this study and that of their 

respective VODES.


25

Figure S1. The compounds considered in this study. Numbers are identified in table S1.

1                             2                             
3                     
4

5            
6                             
7

8

9

10

11


26

Figure S2. 1H NMR of paracetamol after crystallisation from a 6:1 VODES with phenol. All peaks can 

be assigned to paracetamol and are correctly integrated. There is no proton peak from phenol present 

(c.a. 9.28 ppm in DMSO-d6), indicating an absence of residual phenol in the product.


27

Figure S3. 1H NMR of metacetamol after crystallisation from a 6:1 VODES with phenol. All peaks can 

be assigned to metacetamol and are correctly integrated. There is no proton peak from phenol present 

(c.a. 9.28 ppm in DMSO-d6), indicating an absence of residual phenol in the product.


28

Figure S4. 1H NMR of benzamide after crystallisation from a 6:1 VODES with phenol. All peaks can 

be assigned to benzamide and are correctly integrated. There is no proton peak from phenol present (c.a. 

9.28 ppm in DMSO-d6), indicating an absence of residual phenol in the product.


29

Figure S5. 1H NMR of 2EB after crystallisation from a 6:1 VODES with phenol.  All peaks can be 

assigned to 2EB and are correctly integrated. There is no proton peak from phenol present (c.a. 9.28 

ppm in DMSO-d6), indicating an absence of residual phenol in the product.


30

Figure S6. 1H NMR of 2MB after crystallisation from a 6:1 VODES with phenol. All peaks can be 

assigned to 2MB and are correctly integrated. There is no proton peak from phenol present (c.a. 9.28 

ppm in DMSO-d6), indicating an absence of residual phenol in the product.


31

Figure S7 Powder X-ray diffraction patterns of (a) paracetamol form I (deep eutectic ratios 4:1 - 6:1) 

and (b) paracetamol form II (deep eutectic ratios 7:1 - 9:1). All peaks can be indexed to their respective 

polymorph (form I CCDC Identifier – HXACAN01; form II CCDC Identifier - HXACAN).

(b)

(a)


32

Figure S8. VODES crystallisation of benzamide showing (a) both form I (bottom, opaque needles) and 

form III (top, clear plates) and (b) form III exclusively.

(a)
(b)


33

Figure S9. Thermal behaviour of paracetamol as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of each VODES

ratio for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of blue 

green and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.

(a)

(b)


34

Figure S10. Thermal behaviour of metacetamol as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of each 

VODES ratio for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of 

blue green and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.

(a)

(b)


35

Figure S11. Thermal behaviour of benzamide as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of each VODES

ratio for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of blue 

green and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.

(a)

(b)


36

Figure S12. Thermal behaviour of 2MB as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of each VODES ratio 

for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of blue green 

and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.

(a)

(b)


37

Figure S13. Thermal behaviour of 2EB as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of each VODES ratio 

for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of blue green 

and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.

(a)

(b)


38

Figure S14. Thermal behaviour of carbamazepine as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of each 

VODES ratio for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of 

blue green and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.

(a)

(b)


39

Figure S15. Thermal behaviour of verapamil hydrochloride as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of 

each VODES ratio for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured 

arrows of blue green and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, 

respectively.

(a)

(b)


40

Figure S16. Thermal behaviour of metaxalone as a VODES with phenol. Thermograms of each VODES

ratio for (a) cooling and (b) warming, truncated to remove featureless data. Coloured arrows of blue 

green and red indicate the positions of a Tg, a crystallisation event and a melt event, respectively.

(a)

(b)


41

Figure S17. Crystal structure of a co-crystal of 2-ethoxybenzamide and phenol at a 1:2 ratio. (CCDC 

deposit number 1879336).

 

 
 

(a)

(b)


42

Figure S18. Crystal structure of a co-crystal of harmine and phenol at a 1:1 ratio. (CCDC deposit number 

1879689).

 

 
 

(a)

(b)


