Giant Conductivity Modulation of Aluminum
Oxide using Focused Ion Beam

Simone Bianconi1, Min-Su Park1,2, and Hooman Mohseni1 �

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 60208, USA

2Nano Convergence Research Center Korea Electronics Technology Institute 111 Ballyong-ro, Deokjin-gu, Jeonju 54853, South Korea

Precise control of the conductivity of semiconductors through
doping has enabled the creation of advanced electronic devices,
similarly, the ability to control the conductivity in oxides can
enable novel advanced electronic and optoelectronic functional-
ities. While this was successfully shown for moderately insulat-
ing oxides, such as In2O3, a reliable method for increasing the
conductivity of highly insulating, wide bandgap dielectrics, such
as aluminum oxide (Al2O3), has not been reported yet. Al2O3
is a material of significant technological interest, permeating di-
verse fields of application, thanks to its exceptional mechanical
strength and dielectric properties.
Here we present a versatile method for precisely changing the
conductivity of Al2O3. Our approach greatly exceeds the mag-
nitude of the best previously reported change of conductivity in
an oxide (In2O3). With an increase in conductivity of about 14
orders of magnitude, our method presents about 10 orders of
magnitude higher change in conductivity than the best previ-
ously reported result. Our method can use focused ion beam to
produce conductive zones with nanoscale resolution within the
insulating Al2O3 matrix. We investigated the source of conduc-
tivity modulation and identified trap-assisted conduction in the
ion damage-induced defects as the main charge transport mech-
anism. Temperature-dependency of the conductivity and optical
characterization of the patterned areas offer further insight into
the nature of the conduction mechanism. We also show that the
process is extremely reproducible and robust against moderate
annealing temperatures and chemical environment.
The record conductivity modulation,
combined with the
nanoscale patterning precision allows the creation of conductive
zones within a highly insulating, mechanically hard, chemically
inert, and bio-compatible matrix, which could find broad appli-
cations in electronics, optoelectronics, and medical implants.

Thin Films | Alumina | Dielectrics | Defect Engineering | Conducting Oxides

Correspondence: hmohseni@northwestern.edu

Aluminum oxide (Al2O3) is one of the most widely em-
ployed dielectric materials, thanks to its excellent insulat-
ing properties1, mechanical hardness and resistance2, and
biocompatibility2,3, with applications ranging from device
passivation1,4–8, MOSFET gate9–13, to biomedical implants
and antifouling passivation2,3,14,15. Electrical functionaliza-
tion of Al2O3 via reliable and spatially-accurate control of
its conductivity could enable novel sensing technologies en-
compassing electrical contacts embedded in a mechanically
hard, chemically inert, and electrically insulating dielectric
matrix.
Examples of such technological applications in-
clude photon emission and detection7,16–19, low-energy in-

terconnects20–22, energy conversion1,23,24, and implantable
devices25–27.
We here present an effective method for the non-subtractive
nanopatterning of electrically conductive wires and other fea-
tures embedded in a dielectric Al2O3 substrate, using focused
ion beam (FIB). While patterning of nanowires in transpar-
ent conductive In2O3 has been demonstrated using FIB, the
conductivity modulation was limited to 4 orders of magni-
tude28,29. Here, we show nanopatterning of conductive zones
in highly insulating Al2O3, achieving a conductivity modu-
lation of 14 orders of magnitude (see Supporting Informa-
tion)30. To the best of our knowledge, this is the highest
reported change in conductivity using FIB.
FIB has proven to be an extremely effective tool for the
nanopatterning of transparent conducting oxides (TCO) via
lithographically controlled dopant implantation28,29, as well
as for structural modification and non-subtractive patterning
of dielectric substrates17,31. Despite being an inherently se-
rial processing tool, FIB has shown very attractive potential
in large-area milling and implantation, in particular when in-
tegrated with pattern generator lithography capabilities32–34.
Furthermore, thanks to the higher beam deflection speed and
lower settling time compared to electron beams, milling-
based ion beam lithography (IBL) has demonstrated expo-
sure times for large patterns that are comparable to those of
EBL, and even faster patterning times can be achieved for ion
implantation at lower dosage35.

Methods

The process schematic of our method is presented in Figure
1: the fabrication process is fairly simple, highly tunable, ex-
tremely versatile, and can be applied to both bulk Al2O3 (i.e.
sapphire) and thin film Al2O3 (e.g. ALD). In order to limit
the effects of charging, inherent to FIB processing of insu-
lating substrates, a metallic alignment pattern is deposited
on the sample before implantation using lithographic tech-
niques (Figure 1a). This metallic film serves a dual purpose:
it is connected to ground during implantation, allowing to
avoid excessive charging of the substrate, and facilitates the
focusing and alignment of the ion beam, crucial for the sub-
sequent processing steps. Alternatively, in order to further
improve the spatial resolution of the patterned nanowires, an
anticharging thin layer of Au can be deposited over the whole
area of the sample before implantation, and subsequently re-
moved, as proposed by Sosa et al28,29.
All the implanted wire-like structures exhibit ohmic behav-

Bianconi et al.
|
Arχiv
|
February 20, 2019
|
1–8

arXiv:1902.06821v1  [physics.app-ph]  18 Feb 2019


Fig. 1. Method for patterning of conductive wires in Al2O3. a) Schematic of the patterning and fabrication of the wires in Al2O3 matrix. b) Microscope image of the
fabricated devices including the contact pads, and both implanted (left) and non-implanted devices (right). c) Ohmic current-voltage characteristics of patterned wires of
varying widths implanted in bulk sapphire and ALD Al2O3.

ior (Figure 1c). We argue that the mechanism behind this
linear resistance is similar to the previously reported results
from Ga-implanted TCO layers29. Ohmic conduction in di-
electrics has been observed at low field for a variety of oxides
and is related to weak carrier injection from the contacts36,37.
We tested our method for patterning wires both in bulk sap-
phire substrates and ALD-deposited Al2O3 films. As shown
in Figure 1c, both matrices yield similar results in terms of
the electrical conductivity, hence the rest of this paper fo-
cuses on the results from bulk sapphire for brevity.
The electrical conductivity of the patterned nanowires is
mainly determined by two factors: the geometrical size of
the wires, and the ion dose. As shown in Figure 2a, the elec-
trical conductivity scales linearly with the wire length. Fur-
thermore, the high fidelity of the measurements over the large
number of fabricated devices proves the reproducibility and
robustness of this method (see Table S2 in the Supporting
Information). The effect of implantation dose on the elec-
trical characteristics of the wires is reported in Figure 2b:
the conductivity of the nanowires varies by a few orders of
magnitude within the range of doses explored. Notably, the
conductivity reaches its maximum at a certain dose, and then
plateaus and falls off at higher doses. Moreover, such peaks
occur at higher doses for thinner wires, possibly due to the
raster scanning of the patterning ion beam, that allows for
a better mitigation of the charging effect in larger-area pat-
terns. Nanopatterning of smaller wires is characterized by
a more localized charging, which could deflect the incident
ion beam and result in a lower effective dose delivered to the
substrate29.

Device Characterization

Defect-assisted conduction. Several theoretical and ex-
perimental studies have advanced the hypothesis that
damage-induced defects in electronic materials can create
deep trap states in the bandgap, which intrinsically act as
dopants, enabling electrical conduction in otherwise highly
insulating materials29,38–43. These studies suggest that the

electrical conductivity we observe in Al2O3 could be due to
the formation of oxygen vacancies caused by the ion colli-
sion cascade. To evaluate this hypothesis, we performed an
annealing study as it was proved to be an effective tool for
investigating the nature of the electrical conductivity in im-
planted wires in TCO29.
The results of rapid thermal annealing (RTA) treatment is pre-
sented in Figure 2c. Annealing at 750◦C in an oxidizing en-
vironment effectively erases the implanted wire, reducing the
electrical conductivity to negligible levels, while annealing
in a reducing environment (N2) induces a higher conductiv-
ity in both the implanted wires and the non-implanted Al2O3
matrix. RTA treatments performed at 500◦C result in a slight
decrease in conductivity in both chemical environments, pre-
sumably due to incomplete activation of the defect annealing
at such temperature. These results are consistent with pub-
lished results for RTA treatment of implanted Ga nanowires
in In2O3 29, and suggest that the electrical conductivity of the
patterned wires is related to ion damage-induced chemical
and structural modification of the Al2O3 matrix, rather than
to the implanted Ga ions.

Charge transport. To further evaluate the nature of the
charge transport mechanism, we performed temperature-
dependent conductivity characterization of the implanted de-
vices. Figure 2d reveals a decrease in conductivity with the
inverse of temperature.
Transport in a wide bandgap di-
electric such as Al2O3 is governed by hopping conduction
mechanisms of two types: direct trap-to-trap tunneling, and
phonon-assisted elastic and inelastic tunneling44–46. For both
conduction mechanisms, temperature affects the density of
free carriers, due to the thermal excitation of electrons at the
trap sites36, and the carrier mobility, due to the thermally
activated phonon scattering37.
Therefore, the temperature
dependency of the conductivity σ = nqµ can be modeled
as36,37:

σ = αT −3/2e

−EACT

kBT
(1)

where α is a fitting parameter, kB is Boltzmann’s constant
and EACT is the activation energy in units of electron-Volt.

2
|
Arχiv
Bianconi et al.
|
Giant conductivity modulation


Fig. 2. Electrical characterization of the patterned wires. a) Resistance scales with the wire length and width. b) Effect of ion dose on the wire conductivity. Error bars are
calculated from a minimum of 5 devices per data point. c) Effect of RTA treatment on the conductivity of patterned Al2O3 wires. Four different samples were treated with 15
s RTA in different environment and temperatures: the error bars are calculated from a minimum of 3 devices per data point. d) Arrhenius plot of the conductivity of patterned
wires. The solid lines represent the fit used to estimate the activation energies, according to the model in eq. 1.

Within the range of temperatures investigated, two conduc-
tion regimes are observed: one dominated by thermally ac-
tivated phonons, at higher temperatures (T > 200K), and
one by direct hopping at lower temperatures; hence a good
fit to the experimental data (R2 = 0.994) is only possible by
adding two functions of the form of eq. 1, with estimated ac-
tivation energies of 96 meV and 50 meV.

Optical characterization. We also evaluated the effect of
the implantation on the optical properties of the sapphire sub-
strate. Figure 3 shows a significant change in the photolumi-
nescence (PL) and transmission spectra of implanted sam-
ples compared to the pristine sapphire. These measurements
supporting the argument for the ion damage-induced forma-
tion of trap states within the oxide bandgap47,48. While the
change in both PL and transmission due to implantation spans
over a large range of wavelengths, interestingly, the charac-
teristic Cr3+ impurity peak shown in Figure 3b is unaffected
by the implantation process, hence suggesting a wider en-
ergy distribution of trap states in the bandgap, as compared
to atomic transition levels49,50.

Conclusion

We reported a novel method for nanopatterning of conductive
zones in Al2O3 matrix using focused ion beam irradiation.
The implanted wires exhibit ohmic conduction with an aver-
age conductivity of 10−2 Scm−1. Based on a large number

of measured devices, we showed that the presented nanopat-
terning process has excellent uniformity and nanoscale spa-
tial resolution, while allowing for modulation of the electri-
cal conductivity through control of the ion dose. The elec-
trical, optical, and chemical characterizations provide strong
evidence that the conduction mechanism is due to the forma-
tion of trap states within the oxide bandgap. All processed
devices showed stable performance during several months,
and after heating to 100◦C and immersion in liquid solvents.
The present method shows great potential for application in
sensing technologies that require electrical contacts embed-
ded in a mechanically hard, chemically inert, and electri-
cally insulating dielectric matrix. Examples of such applica-
tions include photon sensors, low-energy interconnects, and
micro/nano-implantable medical devices.

Experimental

The majority of the devices presented were implanted in a
300 µm thick, double-side polished < 0001 > crystalline sap-
phire substrates. Some of the devices were implanted in an
Al2O3 film deposited on both silicon and sapphire substrate
using a Cambridge NanoTech Savannah S100 atomic layer
deposition from Trimethylaluminum and water vapor precur-
sors at 150◦C. An 80 nm Cu layer with alignment mark pat-
tern was deposited on the sample before implantation using
photolithographic lift-off techniques. The metallic layer was
connected to ground during implantation. A FEI Nova 600

Bianconi et al.
|
Giant conductivity modulation
Arχiv
|
3


Fig. 3. Optical and chemical characterization of the patterned wires. a) PL maps of implanted wire and pristine sapphire for different excitation wavelengths; b) Particular
of the photoluminescence spectrum for 532 nm excitation wavelength, showing the Cr3+ peaks for both implanted wire and pristine sapphire; c) Optical transmission as a
function of wavelength for implanted wire and pristine sapphire.

NanoLab dual-beam microscope with a Sidewinder Ga+ ion
column and a 100 nm resolution piezomotor X-Y stage was
employed for the wire implantation at ion beam energies of 5
and 30 keV and currents of 100 pA, 3.2 and 6.3 nA, yielding
estimated spot sizes ranging 20 to 60 nm. The instrument was
combined with a RAITH Elphy 4.0 interface with integrated
16-bit DAC pattern generator, which enables large area pat-
terning and write-field alignment, accounting for stitching
and drift, and allows for precise dose control via beam blank
and deflection. The Elphy interface allows for a multi-pass
patterning technique, which help contrast the strong charging
in dielectrics. Nevertheless, we estimate the effective dose to
be lower than the nominal value, due to sputtering and local-
ized charging deflecting the incident ions. The Ti/Au contacts
were subsequently deposited with photolithographic lift-off
techniques, and electrical testing was performed with a 4-
point probe station equipped with Agilent 4285A LCR meter.
Photoluminescence spectra were acquired using a HORIBA
LabRAM HR Evolution confocal Raman, equipped with 473
nm, 532 nm, 633 nm and 785 nm lasers for excitation.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors acknowledge partial support from ARO award #W911NF-18-1-0429.
This work was performed, in part, at the Center for Nanoscale Materials of Argonne
National Laboratory. Use of the Center for Nanoscale Materials, an Office of Sci-
ence user facility, was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Sci-
ence, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.

S.B. gratefully acknowledges support from the Ryan Fellowship and the Interna-
tional Institute for Nanotechnology at Northwestern University.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have
given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

SUPPORTING INFORMATION
The following supporting information is available from the author:
Table S1: Calculations of magnitude conductivity modulation in Al2O3 reported in
this paper compared to that previously reported for In2O3

28,29,38.
Figure S1: Additional proof for uniformity of the implanted conductive regions
Figure S2: Additional graphic visualization of current-voltage characteristics after
RTA treatments
Table S2: Complete set of current-voltage measurements performed on all the fab-
ricated devices

Bibliography

1.
A. Belkin, A. Bezryadin, L. Hendren, and A. Hubler. Recovery of alumina nanocapacitors
after high voltage breakdown. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 2017.

2.
T. V. Thamaraiselvi and S. Rajewari. Biological evaluation of bioceramic materials - a review.
Trends Biomater. Artif. Organs, 81(1):9–17, 2004.

3.
Elisabet Xifre-Perez, Josep Ferre-Borull, Josep Pallares, and Lluis F. Marsal. Mesoporous
alumina as a biomaterial for biomedical applications. Open Material Sciences, 2(1), 2015.

4.
D. Gaboriau, M. Boniface, A. Valero, D. Aldakov, T. Brousse, P. Gentile, and S. Sadki.
Atomic layer deposition alumina-passivated silicon nanowires: Probing the transition from
electrochemical double-layer capacitor to electrolytic capacitor. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces,
9(15):13761–13769, 2017.

5.
G. Dingemans, P. Engelhart, R. Seguin, M. M. Mandoc, M. C. M. van de Sanden, and
W. M. M. Kessels. Comparison between aluminum oxide surface passivation films deposited
with thermal ald, plasma ald and pecvd. In 35th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference,
Honolulu, HI, USA, 2010. IEEE.

4
|
Arχiv
Bianconi et al.
|
Giant conductivity modulation


6.
Shinsuke Miyajima, Junpei Irikawa, Akira Yamada, and Makoto Konagai. High quality alu-
minum oxide passivation layer for crystalline silicon solar cells deposited by parallel-plate
plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition. Applied Physics Express, 3(1), 2010.

7.
Min-Su Park, Mohsen Rezaei, Katie Barnhart, Chee Leong Tan, and Hooman Mohseni.
Surface passivation and aging of ingaas/inp heterojunction phototransistors.
Journal of
Applied Physics, 121(233105), 2017.

8.
Zheng Xin, Zhi Peng Ling, Naomi Nandakumar, Gurleen Kaur, Cangming Ke, Baochen Liao,
Armin G. Aberle, and Rolf Stangl. Surface passivation investigation on ultra-thin atomic
layer deposited aluminum oxide layers for their potential application to form tunnel layer
passivated contacts. Japanese Journal of Applied Physics, 56(8S2), 2017.

9.
Kazuyuki Hirama, Hidenori Takayanagi, Shintaro Yamauchi, Yoshikatsu Jingu, Hitoshi
Umezawa, and Hiroshi Kawarada. High-performance p-channel diamond mosfets with alu-
mina gate insulator. In IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting, Washington, DC, USA,
2007. IEEE.

10.
M. Gutierrez, F. Lloret, T. T. Pham, J. Canas, D. F. Reyes, D. Eon, J. Pernot, and D. Araujo.
Control of the alumina microstructure to reduce gate leaks in diamond mosfets. Nanomate-
rials (Basel), 8(8), 2018.

11.
L. Zhang, Y. Guo, V. V. Hassan, K. Tang, M. A. Foad, J. C. Woicik, P. Pianetta, J. Robertson,
and P. C. McIntyre. Interface engineering for atomic layer deposited alumina gate dielectric
on sige substrates. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, 8(29):19110–8, 2016.

12.
M. Si, C. J. Su, C. Jiang, N. J. Conrad, H. Zhou, K. D. Maize, G. Qiu, C. T. Wu, A. Shak-
ouri, M. A. Alam, and P. D. Ye. Steep-slope hysteresis-free negative capacitance mos2
transistors. Nat Nanotechnol, 13(1):24–28, 2018.

13.
Jun Peng, Qijun Sun, Suidong Wang, Hai-Qiao Wang, and Wanli Ma. Low-temperature
solution-processed alumina as gate dielectric for reducing the operating-voltage of organic
field-effect transistors. Applied Physics Letters, 103(6), 2013.

14.
Lei-xi Dong, Hong-wei Yang, Shi-ting Liu, Xiao-mao Wang, and Yuefeng F. Xie. Fabrication
and anti-biofouling properties of alumina and zeolite nanoparticle embedded ultrafiltration
membranes. Desalination, 365:70–78, 2015.

15.
Guoping Feng, Yifan Cheng, Shu-Yi Wang, Lillian C. Hsu, Yazmin Feliz, Diana A. Borca-
Tasciuc, Randy W. Worobo, and Carmen I. Moraru. Alumina surfaces with nanoscale topog-
raphy reduce attachment and biofilm formation by escherichia coli and listeria spp. Journal
of Bioadhesion and Biofilm Research, 30(10):1253–1268, 2014.

16.
V. Mikhelashvili, D. Cristea, B. Meyler, S. Yofis, Y. Shneider, G. Atiya, T. Cohen-Hyams,
Y. Kauffmann, W. D. Kaplan, and G. Eisenstein. A highly sensitive broadband planar metal-
oxide-semiconductor photo detector fabricated on a silicon-on-insulator substrate. Journal
of Applied Physics, 116(7), 2014.

17.
Junfeng Wang, Xiaoming Zhang, Yu Zhou, Ke Li, Ziyu Wang, Phani Peddibhotla, Fucai Liu,
Sven Bauerdick, Axel Rudzinski, Zheng Liu, and Weibo Gao. Scalable fabrication of single
silicon vacancy defect arrays in silicon carbide using focused ion beam. ACS Photonics,
4(5):1054–1059, 2017.

18.
J. Jeske, D. W. Lau, X. Vidal, L. P. McGuinness, P. Reineck, B. C. Johnson, M. W. Doherty,
J. C. McCallum, S. Onoda, F. Jelezko, T. Ohshima, T. Volz, J. H. Cole, B. C. Gibson, and A. D.
Greentree. Stimulated emission from nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond. Nat Commun,
8:14000, 2017.

19.
Mohsen Rezaei, Min-Su Park, Chee Leong Tan, and Hooman Mohseni. Sensitivity limit of
nanoscale phototransistors. IEEE Electron Device Letters, 38(8):1051–1054, 2017.

20.
Nasir Alimardani and John F. Conley.
Enhancing metal-insulator-insulator-metal tunnel
diodes via defect enhanced direct tunneling. Applied Physics Letters, 105(8), 2014.

21.
David A. B. Miller. Physical reasons for optical interconnections. International Journal of
Optoelectronics, 11:155–168, 1997.

22.
D. Miller. Device requirements for optical interconnects to silicon chips. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 97(7):1166–1185, 2009.

23.
Shu Hu, Matthew R. Shaner, Joseph A. Breadslee, Michael Lichterman, Bruce S. Brun-
schwig, and Nathan S. Lewis. Amorphous tio2 coatings stabilize si, gaas, and gap photoan-
odes for efficient water oxidation. Science, 344(6187), 2014.

24.
Yuanyue Liu, Paul Stradins, Huixiong Deng, Junwei Luo, and Su-Huai Wei. Suppress carrier
recombination by introducing defects: the case of si solar cell. Applied Physics Letters,
108(2), 2016.

25.
Seung-Kyun Kang, Suk-Won Hwang, Huanyu Cheng, Sooyoun Yu, Bong Hoon Kim, Jae-
Hwan Kim, Yonggang Huang, and John A. Rogers.
Dissolution behaviors and applica-
tions of silicon oxides and nitrides in transient electronics. Advanced Functional Materials,
24(28):4427–4434, 2014.

26.
H. Fang, J. Zhao, K. J. Yu, E. Song, A. B. Farimani, C. H. Chiang, X. Jin, Y. Xue, D. Xu,
W. Du, K. J. Seo, Y. Zhong, Z. Yang, S. M. Won, G. Fang, S. W. Choi, S. Chaudhuri,
Y. Huang, M. A. Alam, J. Viventi, N. R. Aluru, and J. A. Rogers. Ultrathin, transferred layers
of thermally grown silicon dioxide as biofluid barriers for biointegrated flexible electronic
systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 113(42):11682–11687, 2016.

27.
C. A. Diaz-Botia, L. E. Luna, R. M. Neely, M. Chamanzar, C. Carraro, J. M. Carmena, P. N.
Sabes, R. Maboudian, and M. M. Maharbiz. A silicon carbide array for electrocorticography
and peripheral nerve recording. J Neural Eng, 14(5):056006, 2017.

28.
Norma E. Sosa, Jun Liu, Christopher Chen, Tobin J. Marks, and Mark C. Hersam.
Nanoscale writing of transparent conducting oxide features with a focused ion beam. Ad-
vanced Materials, 21(6):721–725, 2009.

29.
Norma E. Sosa, Christopher Chen, Jun Liu, Sujing Xie, Tobin J. Marks, and Mark C. Her-
sam. Nanoscale structure, composition and charge transport analysis of transparent con-
ducting oxide nanowires written by focused ion beam implantation. Journal of American
Chemical Society, 132:7347–7354, 2010.

30.
Elena R. Dobrovinskaya, Leonid A. Lytvynov, and Valerian Pishchik. Properties of Sapphire.
Springer US, 2009.

31.
Benjamin D. Myers, Blake L. Stevens, Dorota I. Ro˙zkiewicz, Scott A. Barnett, and Vinayak P.
Dravid. Directed assembly in epitaxial zinc oxide films on focused ion beam modified sap-
phire substrates. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and Micro-
electronics: Materials, Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena, 30(1), 2012.

32.
E. Palacios, L. E. Ocola, A. Joshi-Imre, S. Bauerdick, M. Berse, and L. Peto.
Three-
dimensional microfluidic mixers using ion beam lithography and micromachining. Journal

of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and Microelectronics: Materials, Pro-
cessing, Measurement, and Phenomena, 28(6):C6I1–C6I6, 2010.

33.
Leonidas E. Ocola and Edgar Palacios. Advances in ion beam micromachining for com-
plex 3d microfluidics. Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and
Microelectronics: Materials, Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena, 31(6), 2013.

34.
Leonidas E. Ocola, Chad Rue, and Diederik Maas. High-resolution direct-write patterning
using focused ion beams. MRS Bulletin, 39(04):336–341, 2014.

35.
Alexandra Imre, Leonidas E. Ocola, Lauren Rich, and Joseph Klingfus. Large area direct-
write focused ion-beam lithography with a dual-beam microscope. Journal of Vacuum Sci-
ence & Technology B, Nanotechnology and Microelectronics: Materials, Processing, Mea-
surement, and Phenomena, 28(2):304–309, 2010.

36.
Fu-Chien Chiu. A review on conduction mechanisms in dielectric films. Advances in Mate-
rials Science and Engineering, 2014:1–18, 2014.

37.
Junnan Wu, Bo Yin, Fei Wu, Yoon Myung, and Parag Banerjee. Charge transport in single
cuo nanowires. Applied Physics Letters, 105(18), 2014.

38.
Norma E. Sosa, Christopher Chen, Jun Liu, Tobin J. Marks, and Mark C. Hersam. Large-
scale, nonsubtractive patterning of transparent conducting oxides by ion bombardment. Ap-
plied Physics Letters, 99(2), 2011.

39.
Minseok Choi, John L. Lyons, Anderson Janotti, and Chris G. Van de Walle. Impact of
carbon and nitrogen impurities in high-κ dielectrics on metal-oxide-semiconductor devices.
Applied Physics Letters, 102(14), 2013.

40.
Minseok Choi, Anderson Janotti, and Chris G. Van de Walle.
Native point defects and
dangling bonds in α-al2o3. Journal of Applied Physics, 113(4), 2013.

41.
V. Iberi, L. Liang, A. V. Ievlev, M. G. Stanford, M. W. Lin, X. Li, M. Mahjouri-Samani, S. Jesse,
B. G. Sumpter, S. V. Kalinin, D. C. Joy, K. Xiao, A. Belianinov, and O. S. Ovchinnikova.
Nanoforging single layer mose2 through defect engineering with focused helium ion beams.
Sci Rep, 6:30481, 2016.

42.
Lukas Madauß, Oliver Ochedowski, Henning Lebius, Brigitte Ban-d’Etat, Carl H. Naylor,
A. T. Charlie Johnson, Jani Kotakoski, and Marika Schleberger.
Defect engineering of
single- and few-layer mos2 by swift heavy ion irradiation. 2D Materials, 4(1), 2016.

43.
G. Nanda, S. Goswami, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and P. F. Alkemade. Defect control and
n-doping of encapsulated graphene by helium-ion-beam irradiation. Nano Lett, 15(6):4006–
12, 2015.

44.
Gunther Jegert, Dan Popescu, Paolo Lugli, Martin Johannes Häufel, Wenke Weinreich, and
Alfred Kersch. Role of defect relaxation for trap-assisted tunneling in high-κ thin films: a
first-principles kinetic monte carlo study. Physical Review B, 85(4), 2012.

45.
F. Callewaert, A. M. Hoang, and M. Razeghi. Generation-recombination and trap-assisted
tunneling in long wavelength infrared minority electron unipolar photodetectors based on
inas/gasb superlattice. Applied Physics Letters, 104(5), 2014.

46.
N. Senthil Kumar, J. Chandrasekaran, R. Mariappan, M. Sethuraman, and Murthy Chavali.
V2o5 nano-rods using low temperature chemical pyrophoric reaction technique: the effect of
post annealing treatments on the structural, morphological, optical and electrical properties.
Superlattices and Microstructures, 65:353–364, 2014.

47.
P. D. Townsend, P. J. Chandler, and L. Zhang. Optical Effects of Ion Implantation. Cambridge
University Press, 1994.

48.
Z. Wu, A. Türkler, R. Brooks, D. E. Hole, P. D. Townsend, S. F. Köster, K. Kurt, J. Gonzalo,
and A. Suarez-Garcia. Luminescence characterisation of defects in pld alumina and cu-
implanted silica. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research B, 191:121–126,
2002.

49.
Anton Kostyukov, Mark Baronskiy, Alexander Rastorguev, Valeriy Snytnikov, Vladimir Snyt-
nikov, Aleksey Zhuzhgov, and Arcady Ishchenko. Photoluminescence of cr3+ in nanostruc-
tured al2o3 synthesized by evaporation using a continuous wave co2 laser. RSC Advances,
6(3):2072–2078, 2016.

50.
C. C. Huang, F. Al-Saab, Y. Wang, J. Y. Ou, J. C. Walker, S. Wang, B. Gholipour, R. E.
Simpson, and D. W. Hewak. Scalable high-mobility mos2 thin films fabricated by an atmo-
spheric pressure chemical vapor deposition process at ambient temperature. Nanoscale,
6(21):12792–7, 2014.

Bianconi et al.
|
Giant conductivity modulation
Arχiv
|
5


