1

Temperature-independent thermal radiation

Alireza Shahsafi1*, Patrick Roney1*, You Zhou2, Zhen Zhang3, Yuzhe Xiao1, Chenghao Wan1,4, Raymond 

Wambold1, Jad Salman1, Zhaoning Yu1,5, Jiarui Li6, Jerzy T. Sadowski7, Riccardo Comin6, Shriram 

Ramanathan3, and Mikhail A. Kats1,4,5†

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 

2School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

3School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana

4Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 

5Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 
6Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA

7Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York

* These authors contributed equally
† Correspondence to mkats@wisc.edu

Abstract:

Thermal emission is the process by which all objects at non-zero temperatures emit light, and is well-
described by the classic Planck, Kirchhoff, and Stefan-Boltzmann laws. For most solids, the thermally 
emitted power increases monotonically with temperature in a one-to-one relationship that enables 
applications such as infrared imaging and non-contact thermometry. Here, we demonstrate ultrathin thermal 
emitters that violate this one-to-one relationship via the use of samarium nickel oxide (SmNiO3), a strongly
correlated quantum material that undergoes a fully reversible, temperature-driven solid-state phase 
transition. The smooth and hysteresis-free nature of this unique insulator-to-metal (IMT) phase transition 
allows us to engineer the temperature dependence of emissivity to precisely cancel out the intrinsic 
blackbody profile described by the Stefan-Boltzmann law, for both heating and cooling. Our design results 
in temperature-independent thermally emitted power within the long-wave atmospheric transparency 
window (wavelengths of 8 – 14 µm), across a broad temperature range of ~30 °C, centered around ~120 
°C. The ability to decouple temperature and thermal emission opens a new gateway for controlling the 
visibility of objects to infrared cameras and, more broadly, new opportunities for quantum materials in 
controlling heat transfer.

Main text:

The total amount of power thermally emitted by a surface in free space can be obtained by integrating its 
spectral radiance—given by Planck’s law and an emissivity—over all wavelengths and hemispherical 
angles 1 2. Assuming negligible angular dependence of the emissivity and wrapping the angular integral 
into the blackbody distribution, 𝐼𝐵𝐵(𝜆, 𝑇), this relationship can be expressed as: 

𝐴 ∫
𝜆 𝑑𝜆 𝜀(𝜆, 𝑇)𝐼𝐵𝐵(𝜆, 𝑇)
= 𝐴𝜀𝑡𝑜𝑡(𝑇)𝜎𝑇4,
Eqn. (1)

where 𝐴 is the surface area, 𝜀(𝜆, 𝑇) is the spectral emissivity, 𝜆 is the free-space wavelength, 𝑇 is the 
temperature, and 𝜎 is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. The total emissivity, 𝜀𝑡𝑜𝑡(𝑇), can have a gradual 
temperature dependence even if the spectral emissivity has no such dependence, due to the integration of 
𝜀(𝜆)𝐼𝐵𝐵(𝜆, 𝑇) 3; nevertheless, this dependence is usually dwarfed by the 𝑇4 term, and so 𝜀𝑡𝑜𝑡 can often be 
considered to be approximately constant. Thus, the Stefan-Boltzmann law yields a one-to-one mapping 


2

between the temperature of an object and the emitted power, resulting in the conventional wisdom that 
hotter objects emit more light [Fig. 1(a, c)], and enabling applications such as infrared imaging and non-
contact thermometry 4 5.

This assumption of a near-constant emissivity must be re-examined for thermal emitters comprising 
materials whose optical properties can be widely tunable with temperature (i.e., thermochromics). For 
example, an emissivity that increases with temperature can result in emitted power growing faster than 𝑇4

6 7, and an emissivity that rapidly decreases with temperature can overwhelm and reverse the slope of the 
typical Stefan-Boltzmann curve 8 9. 

Here, we show that it is possible to achieve a complete breakdown of the conventional one-to-one mapping 
between the temperature and the thermally emitted power, 𝑃. A thermal-emission coating with this unique 
property can serve as a radiator that outputs a fixed amount of heat irrespective of its temperature, and can 
conceal differences in temperature across an object from infrared imagers. This condition can be written as 
𝜕𝑃/𝜕𝑇 = 0, and occurs when 𝜀𝑡𝑜𝑡 = 𝛾𝑇−4, where 𝛾 is a constant with units of K4. A surface with 𝜀𝑡𝑜𝑡 that 
fits this form over some temperature range is henceforth referred to as a zero-differential thermal emitter 
(ZDTE). Achieving ZDTE behavior using real materials is extremely challenging: the necessary rate of 
change of the emissivity with temperature is much larger than what can be attained using conventional 
materials [e.g., with band semiconductors such as silicon, via temperature-dependent population of 
electrons to the conduction band, Fig. 1(b)], but is smaller than that of materials with abrupt phase 
transitions (e.g., vanadium dioxide 8 10). Furthermore, this condition is only possible for a hysteresis-free
temperature dependence of the emissivity, otherwise the ZDTE condition may only be satisfied during
either heating or cooling, but not both.

Figure 1. Comparison between a typical thermal emitter and a zero-differential thermal emitter (ZDTE). (a, 
b) For a typical emitter, for example comprising a semiconductor or insulator (cartoon band diagram in (b), 
top), any change in emission from a temperature-dependent change in materials properties is dwarfed by 
the 𝑇4 dependence in the Stefan-Boltzmann law. Conversely, a ZDTE decouples temperature and thermal 
radiation over some temperature range, and thus can only be made from a material with a very strong 
temperature dependence. In our implementation, we use the hysteresis-free insulator-to-metal phase 
transition in samarium nickelate (SmNiO3) to achieve this behavior (b, bottom). (c, d) Long-wave infrared 
images of samples mounted to hang off the edge of a heater stage, such that a temperature gradient is 
established from hot (top) to cold (bottom). (c) a reference sample with a constant emissivity—in this case, 
a sapphire wafer—and (d) a ZDTE based on SmNiO3.The color bar encodes the apparent temperature, 


3

obtained by assuming a particular set emissivity, 𝜀𝑠𝑒𝑡, which was chosen such that the sample region just 
below the heat stage appeared to be at 130 °C, which is the actual temperature at that point (see more 
discussion in Methods). For sapphire, there is a one-to-one relationship between temperature and thermally 
emitted power. Conversely, the ZDTE exhibits a constant emitted power over a range of temperatures, here 
approximately 100 – 135 °C.

Here, we demonstrate ZDTE in the 8 – 14 µm atmospheric-transparency window 11 using samarium nickel 
oxide (SmNiO3), a correlated perovskite that features strong yet relatively gradual evolution of its optical 
properties over the temperature range of ~40 to ~140 °C, resulting from a fully reversible and hysteresis-
free thermally driven IMT 12 13 14 15 16. The thermal IMT in SmNiO3 is due to charge disproportionation in 
the Ni site and involves subtle changes in the Ni-O-Ni bond angle 12,16. In our SmNiO3 films (see Methods), 
this thermally driven transition is reversible over many cycles, and has essentially no hysteresis in both 
electrical [Fig. 2(a)] and optical measurements [Fig. 2(b)], in stark contrast to many other materials with 
strong IMTs, e.g., vanadium dioxide 17. Hysteresis-free IMTs can be found in rare-earth nickelates with 
high phase transition temperatures, where negligible or complete absence of hysteresis may be due to the 
decoupling of the IMT with antiferromagnetic ordering, and faster phase-transformation kinetics at higher 
temperatures 18 19. The unique nature of this IMT is also directly observed in our spatially-resolved X-ray 
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) maps across the thermal transition [inset of Fig. 2(a)], which demonstrate 
smooth variation with temperature (i.e., the absence of any metallic/insulating domain texture at any 
temperature) down to a ~20 nm length scale, including for temperatures deep within the IMT; see Methods
and Supplementary 4 for details. No spatial features other than detector noise were observed. The trend in 
these spatial maps (including additional data in Supplementary 4) suggests a smooth crossover from the 
insulating limit to the metallic one, which is accompanied by a homogeneous phase landscape. The 
Supplementary Information includes experimental data showing the stability over many cycles 
(Supplementary 1) and x-ray diffraction measurements that further help explain the transition behavior
(Supplementary 2). 

To enable design of thermal emitters using SmNiO3, we performed temperature-dependent variable-angle 
spectroscopic ellipsometry over the 2 – 16 µm wavelength range, through the entire range of the phase 
transition [Fig. 2 (c, d)]. The resulting complex refractive-index data is consistent with the film becoming 
gradually more metallic from room temperature to ~140 °C. We note that while gradual transitions are 
generally considered to be less useful than abrupt transitions for electronic and optical switching
technologies, here the gradual and hysteresis-free nature of the IMT in SmNiO3 is essential for the 
realization of ZDTEs.

To minimize fabrication complexity and cost and thus realize robust and large-area ZDTEs, we explored 
designs based on un-patterned thin films of SmNiO3. We used the temperature-dependent optical properties 
in Fig. 2(c, d) and well-established optical thin-film calculations 20 to find the necessary combination of 
thickness of a SmNiO3 film and a substrate that supports SmNiO3 synthesis (Fig. 3(a) and Supplementary 
3) to achieve ZDTE over the 8 – 14 µm atmospheric transparency window. In Fig. 3(a), we plotted the 
calculated temperature derivative of the emitted integrated radiance for several thicknesses of SmNiO3 on 
sapphire, which indicates that ZDTE can be achieved for SmNiO3 thickness of ~150 nm or greater. The 
result does not change much for SmNiO3 films thicker than ~250 nm, indicating that the optical properties 
of the substrate do not affect the emissivity, making SmNiO3 a versatile surface coating that can be utilized 
for scalable technologies.


4

Figure 2: Hysteresis-free insulator-to-metal phase transition in SmNiO3. (a) Normalized temperature-
dependent electrical resistance of our SmNiO3 thin film grown on a sapphire substrate and (b) mid-infrared 
reflectance at several representative wavelengths, during both heating and cooling, showing the hysteresis-
free nature of the IMT in SmNiO3. The insets in (a) are nanoscale x-ray absorption (XAS) maps at 105 and 
120 °C, where the ratio of x-ray absorption at 848 eV to that at 849 eV is plotted as an indication of the 
metallic/insulating properties; no features other than detector noise are observed, indicating a gradual 
transition with no observable domain texture. (c, d) Temperature-dependent (c) real and (d) imaginary parts 
of the complex refractive index of the SmNiO3 film, as a function of wavelength across the mid infrared, 
extracted using spectroscopic ellipsometry.

Our fabricated planar device consists of a ~220-nm SmNiO3 film grown on a c-plane sapphire substrate 
(Fig. 3(a) inset; see Methods for details), from which we measured the emissivity and the resulting thermally 
emitted spectral radiance. Because the resulting structure is opaque in our wavelength region of interest 
(due to the optical losses in SmNiO3 as well as in sapphire 21) and flat on the scale of the wavelength, 
Kirchhoff’s law can be used to calculate the normal-direction emissivity 𝜀𝑁(𝜆, 𝑇) from normal-incidence 
reflection measurements: 𝜀𝑁(𝜆, 𝑇) = 1 − 𝑅𝑁(𝜆, 𝑇) (see Methods for details). We confirmed this result by 
measuring the thermal emission directly, normalizing to a laboratory blackbody consisting of a vertically-
oriented 0.1-mm-tall carbon nanotube forest (see Methods). Care was taken to isolate the sample thermal 
emission from the thermal background radiated by the various components of our instrument 22
(see 

Supplementary 5). The results obtained from these two measurements are in excellent agreement [Fig. 3(b)].


5

Figure 3: Zero-differential thermal emission. (a) Calculated temperature derivative of the emitted radiance, 
integrated over the 8-14 µm atmospheric transparency window, of an SmNiO3 film with thicknesses 𝑑 from 
50 nm to infinity, on a semi-infinite sapphire substrate. (b) Measured wavelength- and temperature-
dependent emissivity of our ZDTE, comprising a ~220-nm film of SmNiO3 on a sapphire substrate, via direct 
emission (dotted) and Kirchhoff’s law using reflection measurements (solid). (c) The temperature-
dependent spectral radiance of the ZDTE, which is the product of the spectral emissivity in (b) and the 
Planck distribution. (d) Thermally emitted radiance of our ZDTE, integrated over 8-14 µm, compared to that 
of a black body. 

We integrated the measured spectral radiance [Fig. 3(c)] over the 8–14 μm window to obtain the total 
thermally emitted integrated radiance as a function of temperature, which showed the desired ZDTE effect 
within a ~30 °C temperature window centered around ~120 °C [Fig. 3(d)]. Away from the center of the 
phase transition of SmNiO3, i.e., below ~80 and above ~140 °C, the radiance vs. temperature profile 
becomes monotonic, as expected for a typical non-thermochromic thermal emitter. We note that the ZDTE 
effect is quite robust for different angles of emission (Supplementary 6).

The presence of the zero-differential region has profound implications for infrared imaging and control of 
infrared visibility. To demonstrate this, we performed a model experiment where two samples—our ZDTE, 
and a reference sapphire wafer—were mounted on a temperature-controlled chuck such that only a corner 
was touching the chuck and most of the sample was suspended in air, resulting in a temperature gradient 
from ~140 directly on top of the chuck to ~105 °C at the corner of the suspended area. When imaged with 
a long-wave infrared (LWIR) camera, the gradient is readily observable on the sapphire reference [Fig. 
1(b)], but almost completely disappears on our SmNiO3-based ZDTE [Fig. 1(d)]. Note that the bright spot 


6

in the bottom side of the ZDTE sample corresponds to a region with no SmNiO3 (i.e., it is simply 
sapphire). This is the area covered by the clip used to mount the sample in the sputtering chamber. The 
apparent temperature difference across the samples based on the camera image was ~34 °C for the sapphire, 
and ~9 °C for the ZDTE. The same phenomenon is observed in Fig. 4, where we show the temperature
evolution of the infrared appearance of SmNiO3-based ZDTEs compared to our laboratory blackbody 
reference (carbon nanotube forest), and sapphire and fused-silica wafers. Note that we numerically 
analyzed the temperature drop across the thickness of the sapphire wafer (i.e., from the heat stage to 
the surface of the sample) and found that it is less than 0.1 °C (Supplementary 7).

Figure 4: Long-wave infrared images of samples held at temperatures from 100 to 140 °C. The emissivities 
of the laboratory blackbody (carbon nanotube forest), sapphire wafer, and fused SiO2 wafer do not change 
appreciably over this temperature range. The emissivities of our SmNiO3-based ZDTEs change as a 
function of temperature, and thus effectively mask the temperature differences from the camera. The 
apparent temperature is plotted [like in Fig. 1(c, d)], with 𝜀𝑠𝑒𝑡 for each sample selected such that for a stage 
temperature of 100 °C , the infrared camera returned this value as the temperature reading. The dark 
squares on the bottom row are metal electrodes that were used for the resistance measurements in Fig. 
2(a).

We note that the presence of zero-differential emission does not necessarily guarantee completely 
temperature-independent infrared signatures. For example, slight differences can still be observed in the 
emission from our ZDTEs at 110 °C vs. 140 °C in Fig. 4, resulting from a combination of effects that 
include imperfect cancelation of the blackbody curve and the change of the reflected light from the 
environment, since a change in emissivity coincides with a change in reflectance. The latter can be 
compensated during the design of ZDTEs by considering both the emitted and reflected light, assuming a 
particular background temperature. 


7

In conclusion, we demonstrated that the typical one-to-one relationship between temperature and thermal 
radiation can be severed using zero-differential thermal emitter (ZDTE) coatings based on SmNiO3, a 
quantum material featuring a hysteresis-free thermally driven insulator-to-metal transition. The temperature 
range of the zero-differential emission effect can be widely tuned by strain, doping, or tilt control of 
SmNiO3, which can shift the transition range to room temperature and even below 15 23 24 25. For example, 
alloys of samarium and neodymium nickelates can have IMT temperatures roughly between -100 °C 
and 100 °C depending on the specific composition 26, which may enable ZDTE design over a wide 
range of temperatures (see Supplementary 8). The ability to decouple temperature and thermal radiation 
with our simple design enables new approaches to conceal heat signatures over large areas, for example for 
wearable personal privacy technologies, and also has implications for thermal management in space. More 
broadly, this demonstration can motivate new areas of inquiry for quantum materials that possess highly 
tunable electronic structures.

Methods

Materials synthesis: The SmNiO3 films were grown using magnetron sputtering. The sputtering power was 
set to 90 W DC for the Ni target and 170 W RF for the Sm target. The total pressure during deposition was 
kept at 5 mTorr under a constant gas flow of 40 sccm for Ar and 10 sccm for O2. The as-deposited films 
were subsequently transferred into a home-built high-pressure chamber and annealed in 1400-psi oxygen 
gas at 500 °C for 24 hours to form the perovskite phase. The electrical resistance of SmNiO3 films [Fig. 
2(a)] was measured on a temperature-controlled probe station by sweeping the voltage from −0.1 V to 0.1 
V with a Keithley 2635A source meter, with Pt electrodes on top of the SmNiO3 films. The electrodes can 
be seen in the bottom row of Fig. 4.

Nanoscale X-ray absorption spectroscopy: The x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) / x-ray photoemission 
electron microscopy (XPEEM) experiments were performed at the XPEEM end station of the Electron 
Spectro-Microscopy beamline (21-ID-2) at the National Synchrotron Light Source II. The sample was 
illuminated with a focused monochromatic soft x-ray beam with a photon energy tuned around the Ni-L3
resonance (840 – 850 eV). The temperature was controlled to within 0.1 °C of the target setpoint. All images 
are drift corrected and the same field of view was recovered at each temperature. All measurements were 
taken with linear-horizontal polarized light at an incident angle of 73° to the surface normal. The SmNiO3 
film used for XAS/XPEEM measurements was deposited epitaxially on an LaAlO3 (001) substrate. The 
XAS/XPEEM is a spatially resolved probe to measure the Ni valence electronic states during the IMT. The 
metallic/insulating phases can be distinguished by different XAS spectral shapes. The maps in the inset of 
Fig. 2(a) are ratios of the absorption coefficients at 848 and 849 eV, which can be used as a proxy for spatial 
identification of the metallic/insulating phases. This ratio is 1.02 in the insulating phase of SmNiO3 and 
0.98 in the metallic phase (see Supplementary 4).

Optics measurements: The temperature-dependent complex refractive index of SmNiO3 was measured 
using a Woollam IR VASE MARK II spectroscopic ellipsometer with a temperature-controlled stage, 
assuming the film thickness obtained from SEM imaging of the cross section. The fitting was performed 
using WVASE software. The SmNiO3 film was assumed to be isotropic, whereas anisotropy in the sapphire 
was included in the fitting model. The reflection measurements were obtained with a Bruker Vertex 70 
FTIR and a Hyperion 2000 microscope with a reflective objective (numerical aperture (NA) = 0.4), and a 
Linkam THMS600 temperature-controlled stage. The direct-emission measurements were obtained with
the temperature stage and sample in the FTIR sample compartment, using a parabolic mirror for collection 


8

(NA = 0.05). In both direct-emission and Kirchhoff’s-law measurements, we used a liquid-nitrogen-cooled 
mercury-cadmium-telluride (MCT) detector and a potassium bromide (KBr) beam splitter. A gold mirror 
was used as the reflection reference, whereas a vertically aligned carbon nanotube (CNT) forest on a silicon 
substrate was used as the emission reference (see Supplementary 5 for details about reference calibration 
and the accounting for background thermal radiation). LWIR imaging was carried out using a FLIR A325sc 
camera, sensitive to the 7.5 – 13 𝜇m range. 

The color bars of the infrared images in Fig. 1(c, d) and Fig. 4 report the apparent temperature, given some 
emissivity setting, 𝜀𝑠𝑒𝑡, in the FLIR camera software. The value of 𝜀𝑠𝑒𝑡 used for each image is provided 
directly on the image. In Fig. 1(c, d) and Fig. 4, we selected 𝜀𝑠𝑒𝑡 such that the apparent temperature 
corresponded to the actual temperature at some particular point. In Fig. 1(c, d), this point is at the very top 
of the sample where it just touches the temperature stage; in Fig. 4, this is done for each sample at 100 °C.

Optics calculations: For the calculation of emissivity, we used the transfer-matrix method together with the 
optical properties from ellipsometry to obtain the absorptivity, which we converted to emissivity using 
Kirchhoff’s law. The emitted spectrum was then calculated by multiplying the spectral emissivity by the 
Planck distribution at the appropriate temperature, which could then be integrated over the mid-infrared 
transparent window of 8 to 14 𝜇𝑚 to obtain the emitted power. 

Data Availability: The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available 
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Acknowledgements

MK acknowledges financial support from the Office of Scientific Research (N00014-16-1-2556) and the 
National Science Foundation (ECCS-1750341). SR acknowledges financial support from the AFOSR 
(FA9550-16-1-0159). PR was supported by a Critical Skills Master's Fellowship from Sandia National 
Labs. This research used resources of the Center for Functional Nanomaterials and National Synchrotron 
Light Source II, which are U.S. DOE Office of Science Facilities, at Brookhaven National Laboratory under 
Contract No. DE-SC0012704.

Author Contributions

MAK conceived of the research. PR and AS carried out the majority of the experiments and data analysis, 
and are co-equal lead contributors. YZ and ZZ synthesized the SmNiO3 samples, and carried out materials 
analysis. YX, CW, RW, JS, and ZY contributed to the optical experiments and data analysis, especially 
with instrument characterization (YX, CW, JS), and custom equipment design (RW). JL, JTS, and RC 
carried out the XAS/XPEEM measurements. PR, AS, SR, and MAK wrote the manuscript, with input and 
editing from all co-authors. MAK and SR supervised the project. 

References

1.
Boyd, R. Radiometry and the detection of optical radiation. (1983).

2.
Mink, J. Handbook of Vibrational Spectroscopy. (Wiley, 2006).

3.
Saunders, P. On the effects of temperature dependence of spectral emissivity in industrial radiation 
thermometry. High Temp. -- High Press. 33, 599–610 (2001).

4.
Kaplan, H. Practical Applications of Infrared Thermal Sensing and Imaging Equipment. (SPIE, 
2007).


9

5.
Vollmer, M. & Möllmann, K.-P. Infrared Thermal Imaging. (Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
KGaA, 2017). doi:10.1002/9783527693306

6.
Benkahoul, M. et al. Thermochromic VO2 film deposited on Al with tunable thermal emissivity 
for space applications. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 95, 3504–3508 (2011).

7.
Wu, S.-H. et al. Thermal homeostasis using microstructured phase-change materials. Optica 4,
1390 (2017).

8.
Kats, M. A. et al. Vanadium Dioxide as a Natural Disordered Metamaterial: Perfect Thermal 
Emission and Large Broadband Negative Differential Thermal Emittance. Phys. Rev. X 3, 041004 
(2013).

9.
Bierman, D. M. et al. Radiative Thermal Runaway Due to Negative-Differential Thermal 
Emission Across a Solid-Solid Phase Transition. Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 021001 (2018).

10.
Joulain, K., Ezzahri, Y., Drevillon, J. & Ben-Abdallah, P. Modulation and amplification of 
radiative far field heat transfer: Towards a simple radiative thermal transistor. Appl. Phys. Lett.
106, 133505 (2015).

11.
Salisbury, J. W. & D’Aria, D. M. Emissivity of terrestrial materials in the 8–14 μm atmospheric 
window. Remote Sens. Environ. 42, 83–106 (1992).

12.
Pérez-Cacho, J., Blasco, J., García, J., Castro, M. & Stankiewicz, J. Study of the phase transitions 
in SmNiO3. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 11, 405–415 (1999).

13.
Jaramillo, R., Ha, S. D., Silevitch, D. M. & Ramanathan, S. Origins of bad-metal conductivity and 
the insulator–metal transition in the rare-earth nickelates. Nat. Phys. 10, 304–307 (2014).

14.
Catalano, S. et al. Rare-earth nickelates R NiO 3 : thin films and heterostructures. Reports Prog. 
Phys. 81, 046501 (2018).

15.
Ha, S. D., Otaki, M., Jaramillo, R., Podpirka, A. & Ramanathan, S. Stable metal–insulator 
transition in epitaxial SmNiO3 thin films. J. Solid State Chem. 190, 233–237 (2012).

16.
Catalano, S. et al. Electronic transitions in strained SmNiO 3 thin films. APL Mater. 2, 116110 
(2014).

17.
Klimov, V. A. et al. Hysteresis loop construction for the metal-semiconductor phase transition in 
vanadium dioxide films. Tech. Phys. 47, 1134–1139 (2002).

18.
Catalan, G. Progress in perovskite nickelate research. Phase Transitions 81, 729–749 (2008).

19.
Ruppen, J. et al. Impact of antiferromagnetism on the optical properties of rare-earth nickelates. 
Phys. Rev. B 96, 045120 (2017).

20.
Kats, M. A. & Capasso, F. Optical absorbers based on strong interference in ultra‐thin films. Laser 
Photon. Rev. 10, 735–749 (2016).

21.
Schubert, M., Tiwald, T. E. & Herzinger, C. M. Infrared dielectric anisotropy and phonon modes 
of sapphire. Phys. Rev. B 61, 8187–8201 (2000).

22.
Xiao, Y. et al. Measuring Thermal Emission Near Room Temperature Using Fourier-Transform 
Infrared Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 1 (2019).

23.
Xiang, P.-H. et al. Room temperature Mott metal-insulator transition and its systematic control in 
Sm1−xCaxNiO3 thin films. Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 032114 (2010).

24.
Middey, S. et al. Physics of Ultrathin Films and Heterostructures of Rare-Earth Nickelates. Annu. 
Rev. Mater. Res. 46, 305–334 (2016).

25.
Liao, Z. et al. Metal-insulator-transition engineering by modulation tilt-control in perovskite 
nickelates for room temperature optical switching. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 201807457 
(2018). doi:10.1073/pnas.1807457115

26.
Girardot, C., Kreisel, J., Pignard, S., Caillault, N. & Weiss, F. Raman scattering investigation 
across the magnetic and metal-insulator transition in rare earth nickelate R NiO 3 ( R = Sm , Nd ) 
thin films. Phys. Rev. B 3, 1–7 (2008).


1 
 

Supplementary information: 

 

Temperature-independent thermal radiation 

 

Alireza Shahsafi1*, Patrick Roney1*, You Zhou2, Zhen Zhang3, Yuzhe Xiao1, Chenghao Wan1,4, Raymond 
Wambold1, Jad Salman1, Zhaoning Yu1,5, Jiarui Li6, Jerzy T. Sadowski7, Riccardo Comin6, Shriram 
Ramanathan3, and Mikhail A. Kats1,4,5† 

1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, Wisconsin  

2School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 

3School of Materials Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 

4Materials Science and Engineering, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, Wisconsin  

5Department of Physics, University of Wisconsin – Madison, Madison, Wisconsin  
6Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 

7Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 

 

* These authors contributed equally 
† Correspondence to mkats@wisc.edu  
 

1. Temperature-dependent reflectance characterization and cycling tests 

To ensure that the optical response of SmNiO3 has no hysteresis, we performed temperature-dependent 
reflection measurements for a full cycle of heating and cooling [Fig. S1(a-b)] on the same SmNiO3/sapphire 
sample used for the main text. Various temperature-dependent optical measurements have been performed 
several times over a period of approximately two years, with no apparent degradation of the samples. 

 

Figure S1. Reflection measurements on the sample used for the main text taken under both (a) cooling 
and (b) heating. We observe no hysteresis (see also Fig. 2(a, b) in the main text).  

To further investigate the stability of our SmNiO3 films, we also analyzed a different sample grown under 
the same conditions, consisting of a ~200-nm film of SmNiO3 on an LaAlO3 substrate [inset of Fig. S2(a)]. 
No substantial differences in SmNiO3 quality or degradation was observed between the two substrates 
(LaAlO3 vs. sapphire). We performed temperature-dependent reflection measurements on this sample and 
thermally drove it between the two phases every few minutes. The reflectances at different wavelengths 
[Fig. S2(c-f)] shows that the optical response of the film is stable and has no memory over many cycles, as 
was expected from the literature [S1-S2]. 


2 
 

Figure S2. Reflectance of ~200-nm SmNiO3 on LaAlO3 across its phase-transition during both of (a) heating 
and (b) cooling. The inset shows a cross-sectional image of the sample. We thermally cycled the sample 
between 25 and 135 °C many times every two minutes for 150 minutes. The sharp peak is a result of 
atmospheric (CO2) absorption. (c-f) show the reflectance at several different wavelengths (𝜆𝜆 = 8, 10, 12, 
and 14 μm). 

2. Temperature-dependent X-ray diffraction 

X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out on an SmNiO3 thin film deposited on a sapphire 
substrate, shown in Fig. 1. A wide-range XRD profile [Fig. S3(a)] shows clear diffraction peaks from 
orthorhombic SmNiO3. Diffraction peaks from various planes are observed from SmNiO3, indicating that 
this SmNiO3 film possesses polycrystal structure, as expected. To investigate the structural evolution of 
SmNiO3 across the IMT, the diffraction peak from the (110)/(002) planes of SmNiO3 was measured in-situ 
upon heating [Fig. S3(b)]. No obvious shift of the diffraction peak from SmNiO3 appears upon heating to 
200 oC, which is consistent with the high-resolution neutron diffraction measurements reported previously 
[S3]. As expected, the IMT of SmNiO3 is not driven by large lattice distortions but rather very subtle bond 
distortions [S3], which may contribute to its hysteresis-free and gradual phase change features observed in 
optical and electrical measurements. The lattice parameter change due to thermal expansion is within the 
resolution of the laboratory XRD and hence is a very subtle change.  


3 
 

 

Fig. S3. In-situ XRD measurement of SmNiO3 thin film deposited on sapphire substrate. (a)  XRD 
profile of SmNiO3 thin film measured at room temperature, where the diffraction peaks from SmNiO3 and 
Al2O3 substrate are indicated. (b) In-situ XRD profile on (110)/(002) diffraction peak of SmNiO3 upon 
heating. The red dashed line indicates the extracted 2θ value of SmNiO3 from neutron powder diffraction 
reported in Ref [S3]. 

3.  Comparison of ZDTE performance for SmNiO3 on sapphire and LaAlO3 

Based on the characterized complex refractive index of SmNiO3 and the optical properties of sapphire and 
LaAlO3 from literature [S4], we estimated the ZDTE performance of SmNiO3 films of different thickness 
on these two substrates. Our calculations show that both substrates work well, but superior performance is 
achieved with the sapphire substrate (Fig. S4). 

 

Figure S4) Calculated temperature derivative of the emitted radiance of an SmNiO3 film with thickness 𝑑𝑑  
from 50 nm to 300 nm on a (a) sapphire and (b) LaAlO3 substrate. The dashed line yields the calculated 
radiance from a temperature-independent reference with a constant emissivity of 0.6. 

 

 


4 
 

4. X-ray absorption spectroscopy and x-ray photoemission electron microscopy 

Nanoscale x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and x-ray photoemission electron microscopy (XPEEM) 
has been successfully used to image the metallic and insulating phase co-existence in the nickelate family 
[S5]. We performed XAS and XPEEM measurements on an epitaxial SmNiO3 (001) thin film grown on a 
LaAlO3 substrate, and observed no spatial features above the detector noise level. The spatially averaged 
XAS shows a disappearance of the double-peak structure near the Ni-L3 absorption edge across the IMT, 
corresponding to the melting of charge disproportionation (Fig. S5). The ratio of the absorption coefficients 
at 848 and 849 eV [𝑟𝑟 =  𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋 (848 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒) / 𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋 (849 𝑒𝑒𝑒𝑒)] is 1.02 in the insulating phase and 0.98 in the 
metallic phase. This value can therefore be used as a proxy for spatial identification of the local electronic 
state. The spatial mapping of the parameter r can be obtained from the pixel-by-pixel ratio of two XPEEM 
images taken at 848 and 849 eV. Spatial maps of 𝑟𝑟(𝑥𝑥, 𝑦𝑦) over a field of view of 15 µm diameter are shown 
in Fig. S6, underscoring the absence of any domain texture or phase coexistence beyond the noise level, 
even for a temperature (120 °C) deep within the IMT.  

 

Figure S5. Spatially-averaged X-ray absorption spectra of SmNiO3 (001) on an LaAlO3 substrate at 
temperatures below and above the IMT. The XAS near the Ni L3 edge changes peak shape across the MIT 
transition. The ratio of the values at the two energies identified in the diagram is XAS(848)/XAS(849) = 1.02 
at 30 °C and 0.98 at 150 °C. 

 

 


5 
 

 

Figure S6. Left: XPEEM images of the same sample as in Fig. S4, at 848 eV and 849 eV. Images were 
taken with the same field of view, by positioning to surface defects and scratches. The color scale is 
normalized to the min and max of each map. Right: ratio between the 848 and 849 eV absorption maps. 
Data was acquired for three different temperatures throughout the IMT. The field of view (i.e., diameter of 
the circular aperture) is 15 µm. The maps have no recognizable spatial features other than a surface scratch 
on the detector (visible on the right), and detector noise.  

 

5.   Algorithm for extracting emissivity from direct-emission measurements 

In general, one can describe the detected emission signal from an FTIR system as [S6]:  

𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇) = 𝑚𝑚(𝜆𝜆)[𝐿𝐿𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇)𝜀𝜀𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇) + 𝐵𝐵𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇)]      
 
 
  (S3-1) 

where 𝑋𝑋𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇) is the measured Fourier-transformed emission spectrum, 𝑚𝑚(𝜆𝜆) is the system response, 
𝜀𝜀𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇)  is the temperature-dependent sample emissivity, 𝐿𝐿𝐵𝐵𝐵𝐵(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇)  is the blackbody radiance, and 
𝐵𝐵𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇) is the background, which can also be sample dependent. To calibrate our FTIR, we performed 
temperature-dependent thermal-emission measurements using three samples: a vertically-aligned carbon 
nanotube forest (CNT) [S7] “blackbody” (with constant 𝜀𝜀 ~ 0.95 across the infrared spectral range), a 
fused-silica wafer, and a sapphire wafer.   

Using Eq. (S3-1) and further analysis of our FTIR instrument [S8], we can obtain the emissivity of an 
unknown sample from a known reference 𝛼𝛼 via: 

𝜀𝜀𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇) = 𝜀𝜀𝛼𝛼(𝜆𝜆, 𝑇𝑇) 
𝑆𝑆𝑋𝑋(𝜆𝜆,𝑇𝑇)

𝑆𝑆𝛼𝛼(𝜆𝜆,𝑇𝑇)     
 
 
 
  (S3-2) 


6 
 

Note that S3-2 does not work for all situations and systems; careful analysis is necessary to make sure that 
the emissivity is being extracted correctly. We measured the emissivity of our test samples (polished fused 
silica and sapphire wafers) by using this formula, and further confirmed that the extracted emissivity 
matches well with the value obtained by spectroscopic ellipsometry, Fresnel equations, and an application 
of Kirchhoff’s law (Fig. 3(a) in ref. [S8]).  

6. Angular response of our ZDTE 

We numerically studied the angular dependence of the thermal radiance of our SmNiO3/sapphire ZDTE. 
Based on our numerical analysis [Fig. S7(a-b)], the ZDTE effect persists for p-polarized emission up 
to an emission angle of about 40°, and for s-polarized emission for essentially every angle. Averaging 
the polarizations, the effect persists up to about 60° [Fig. S7(c)]. In our calculations, we incorporated the 
optical anisotropy in the sapphire substrate [S9] by using the transfer matrix method [S10], with the Fresnel 
coefficients generalized for birefringent media [S11]. The refractive indices of SmNiO3 that we used were 
extracted by ellipsometry analysis, assuming that they were isotropic [Fig. 2(c, d)].  

 

Figure S7. Calculated radiance versus temperature and angle for the structure characterized in Fig. 3(a) 
of the main text for (a) p-polarized, (b) s-polarized, and (c) polarization-averaged emissivity. 

7. Temperature drop between the bottom and top surfaces of the substrate 

Here, we provide our numerical analysis of the temperature drop due to the non-zero thermal conductivity 
and thickness of our emitter. We calculated the temperature distribution for a 0.5-mm-thick sapphire sitting 
on top of a 100 °C heater surface [Fig. S8(a)]. For this calculation, we solved one-dimensional heat equation 

(
𝜕𝜕𝑇𝑇(𝑡𝑡,𝑧𝑧)

𝜕𝜕𝑡𝑡
=
𝑘𝑘

𝜌𝜌𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝

𝜕𝜕2𝑇𝑇(𝑡𝑡,𝑧𝑧)

𝜕𝜕𝑧𝑧2
) along the sapphire wafer using the heat transfer parameters for sapphire from Table 

1. From this calculation, we find out that the temperature drop is 0.02 °C. 

 


7 
 

Figure S8. (a): schematic of the heat-transfer simulation. (b) calculated steady state temperature profile for 
a 1-mm-thick sapphire on top of a 100 ℃ heater surface. 

Table 1. Heat-transfer parameters for sapphire 

𝑘𝑘 ( W/(m∙ ℃) ) 
𝜌𝜌 (g/cm3)
𝐶𝐶𝑝𝑝 ( J/(kg∙ ℃) )

24*
3.98
760

*The thermal conductivity is chosen to be the average value of perpendicular and parallel to the c-axis, 
though we note that the values are very close to each other.  

 

8. Extending the temperature range of ZDTE 

In this section, we show that it may be possible to achieve ZDTE over a different temperature range 
than what we demonstrated in the paper by leveraging other rare-earth nickelates with lower transition 
temperatures. As shown in Ref. [2], while the transition temperatures of SmNiO3 and neodymium 
nickelate (NdNiO3) are roughly 100 and −100 °C, respectively,  Sm0.75Nd0.25NiO3 has a transition 
temperature between these extremes [Fig. S9(a)]. While the optical properties of this or similar 
quaternary alloys have not yet been reported in the literature, the similarity in electrical behavior 
demonstrated in Fig. 1 of ref. [S2] suggests that the optical properties show some parallels to that of 
SmNiO3. Therefore, we designed and simulated a zero-differential emitter for the temperature range 
of 45 to 80 °C using a 250-nm-thick Sm0.75Nd0.25NiO3 thin film on a sapphire substrate, making the 
assumption that this alloy has the same spectral optical properties as SmNiO3, but with a transition 
temperature 50 °C smaller than that of SmNiO3. The calculated ZDTE effect is shifted to a temperature 
range centered at 60 °C [Fig. S9(b)]. 

 

 

Figure S9) (a) Resistivity versus temperature for different rare-earth nickelates, including one quaternary 
alloy. This panel is reprinted from ref. [S2] with permission from APS. (b) Calculated emitted radiance for a 
250-nm-thick Sm0.75Nd0.25NiO3 thin film on sapphire, assuming that the Sm0.75Nd0.25NiO3 film has the same 
optical properties as SmNiO3 but with the transition temperature 50° lower than that of SmNiO3. 

 


8 
 

Supplementary references 
 

[S1] 
Ha, S. D., Otaki, M., Jaramillo, R., Podpirka, A., & Ramanathan, S. (2012). Stable metal–

insulator transition in epitaxial SmNiO3 thin films. Journal of Solid State Chemistry, 190, 233-237. 

[S2] 
Girardot, C., Kreisel, J., Pignard, S., Caillault, N., & Weiss, F. (2008). Raman scattering 

investigation across the magnetic and metal-insulator transition in rare earth nickelate R NiO3 (R= Sm, 
Nd) thin films. Physical Review B, 78(10), 104101. 

[S3] 
 Garcia-Munoz, J. L., Rodriguez-Carvajal, J., Lacorre, P., & Torrance, J. B. (1992). Neutron-

diffraction study of R NiO 3 (R= La, Pr, Nd, Sm): Electronically induced structural changes across the 
metal-insulator transition. Physical review B, 46(8), 4414. 

[S4] 
Lindermeir, E., Haschberger, P., Tank, V., & Dietl, H. (1992). Calibration of a Fourier transform 

spectrometer using three blackbody sources. Applied optics, 31(22), 4527-4533. 

[S5]      Mattoni, G., Zubko, P., Maccherozzi, F., van der Torren, A. J., Boltje, D. B., Hadjimichael, M., ... 
& Aarts, J. (2016). Striped nanoscale phase separation at the metal–insulator transition of heteroepitaxial 
nickelates. Nature communications, 7, 13141. 

[S6]  
Zhang ZM, Choi BI, Flik MI, Anderson AC (1994). Infrared refractive indices of LaAlO3, 

LaGaO3, and NdGaO3. Journal of the Optical Society of America B.,11(11),2252-7. 

[S7] 
Mizuno, K., Ishii, J., Kishida, H., Hayamizu, Y., Yasuda, S., Futaba, D. N., ... & Hata, K. (2009). 
A black body absorber from vertically aligned single-walled carbon nanotubes. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 106(15), 0900155106. 

[S8] 
Xiao, Y., Shahsafi, A., Roney, P.J., Wan, C., Joe, G., Yu, Z., Salman, J. and Kats, M.A. (2019). 

Measuring Thermal Emission Near Room Temperature Using Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy. 
Physical Review Applied, 11(1),014026.   

[S9]  
Schubert, M., Tiwald, T. E., & Herzinger, C. M. (2000). Infrared dielectric anisotropy and 

phonon modes of sapphire. Physical Review B, 61(12), 8187. 

[S10]  S. J. Byrnes, Multilayer optical calculations, arXiv:1603.02720. 

[S11]  Weber, M. F., Stover, C. A., Gilbert, L. R., Nevitt, T. J., & Ouderkirk, A. J. (2000). Giant 
birefringent optics in multilayer polymer mirrors. Science, 287(5462), 2451-2456. 

 


