The maximum a posteriori probability rule for atom column detection from HAADF
STEM images

J. Fatermansa,b, S. Van Aerta,вҲ—, A.J. den Dekkerb,c

aElectron Microsopy for Materials Science (EMAT), University of Antwerp, Groenenborgerlaan 171, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium
bimec-Vision Lab, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1, 2610 Wilrijk, Belgium
cDelft Center for Systems and Control (DCSC), Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, 2628 CD Delft, Netherlands

Abstract

Recently, the maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability rule has been proposed as an objective and quantitative method to detect
atom columns and even single atoms from high-resolution high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) images. The method combines statistical parameter estimation and model-order selection using a Bayesian
framework and has been shown to be especially useful for the analysis of the structure of beam-sensitive nanomaterials. In order
to avoid beam damage, images of such materials are usually acquired using a limited incoming electron dose resulting in a low
contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR) which makes visual inspection unreliable. This creates a need for an objective and quantitative ap-
proach. The present paper describes the methodology of the MAP probability rule, gives its step-by-step derivation and discusses
its algorithmic implementation for atom column detection. In addition, simulation results are presented showing that the perfor-
mance of the MAP probability rule to detect the correct number of atomic columns from HAADF STEM images is superior to that
of other model-order selection criteria, including the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and the Bayesian Information Criterion
(BIC). Moreover, the MAP probability rule is used as a tool to evaluate the relation between STEM image quality measures and
atom detectability resulting in the introduction of the so-called integrated CNR (ICNR) as a new image quality measure that better
correlates with atom detectability than conventional measures such as signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and CNR.

Keywords: Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), Atom detection, Atom detectability, Model selection

1. Introduction

The physical properties of nanomaterials are strongly re-
lated to their exact structural and chemical composition. Small
changes in the local atomic structure may induce significant
changes in their properties [1вҖ“4]. Therefore, precisely mea-
suring the atomic arrangement of projected atomic columns or
individual atoms is important in order to fully understand the
structure-properties relation of nanomaterials. Scanning trans-
mission electron microscopy (STEM) has become a widely
used technique to visualize nanomaterials with sub-angstrom
resolution due to improvements in aberration correction tech-
nology [5, 6].
The high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF)
regime is considered predominantly incoherent [7вҖ“9], allowing
for directly interpretable images due to the lack of contrast re-
versals. However, a merely visual interpretation of HAADF
STEM images is inadequate to obtain precise structure infor-
mation. A quantitative approach is required which can be pro-
vided by statistical parameter estimation [10вҖ“15], enabling one
to determine the atomic column positions [3, 16вҖ“18], chemi-
cal composition [19, 20] or the number of atoms in an atomic

$ cвғқ 2019. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-
ND 4.0 license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
вҲ—Corresponding author
Email address: Sandra.VanAert@uantwerpen.be (S. Van Aert)

column [21, 22]. When atom counting results, obtained from
two-dimensional (2D) STEM images, are combined from dif-
ferent viewing directions, a three-dimensional (3D) reconstruc-
tion of the material at the atomic level is achievable [23вҖ“25].
Even from a single projection image, 3D atomic models can be
obtained [26].
In statistical parameter estimation theory, STEM images are
considered as data planes from which unknown structure pa-
rameters are estimated. For this, a parametric model is needed
describing the expectations of the experimental measurements.
Quantitative structure information is obtained by fitting the
model to the experimental images using a criterion of good-
ness of fit. For atomic resolution STEM images, the projected
atomic columns can be described as Gaussian functions super-
imposed on a constant background [15, 27, 28]. An impor-
tant assumption in this quantitative approach is that the number
of atomic columns is known. Usually, this number is deter-
mined visually, which is possible for atomic resolution images
of beam-stable materials where a high incoming electron dose
can be used resulting in images exhibiting high signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). However, beam-sensitive materials should be im-
aged with a sufficiently low electron dose to avoid beam dam-
age [29]. As a consequence, these images exhibit low SNR
and low contrast and hence low contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR).
This causes poor visual determination of the number of atomic
columns in the image leading to biased structure information.

Preprint submitted to Ultramicroscopy. Available online, 4 Feb 2019, doi:10.1016/j.ultramic.2019.02.003
February 18, 2019

arXiv:1902.05809v1  [physics.data-an]  15 Feb 2019


To overcome this problem, an alternative, quantitative method
has been proposed in a recent study to determine the number of
atomic columns for which there is most evidence in the image
data [30]. The method, which is referred to as the maximum
a posteriori (MAP) probability rule, is based on a combination
of statistical parameter estimation and model-order selection.
It has been shown to be able to automatically and objectively
determine the most probable structure of unknown nanomateri-
als and to detect single atoms with high reliability. Moreover,
it quantifies how more likely an obtained atomic structure is
as compared to other structures. The present paper covers a
detailed derivation of an approximate analytical expression for
the MAP probability using a Bayesian approach. In addition,
it is shown that the proposed MAP probability rule is a model-
order selection criterion and its relation to other criteria is dis-
cussed together with a comparison of the performance in detect-
ing atoms from HAADF STEM images. Moreover, since atom
detectability is related to image quality, the MAP probability
rule can be used as a tool to investigate the relation between
image quality measures and atom detectability. As such, in this
work, a new image quality measure is proposed that better cor-
relates with atom detectability than conventional image quality
measures.
The remainder of this article will be organised as follows.
In section 2, the methodology of the MAP probability rule to
determine the most probable number of atomic columns from
HAADF STEM images is described in detail. This is followed
in section 3 by an explanation of how the MAP probability rule
can be used to evaluate the connection between measures of
image quality and atom detectability. In section 4, the relation
of the MAP probability rule to model selection is investigated.
Finally, in section 5, conclusions are drawn.

2. Methodology

2.1. Model-based parameter estimation

Quantitative measurements of the unknown structure param-
eters, such as atomic column positions and their widths, peak
intensities and background, are not directly provided by high-
resolution STEM images, but can be obtained from these im-
ages using statistical parameter estimation theory [10вҖ“15]. The
starting point of this procedure is the construction of a paramet-
ric physics-based model that describes the expectations of the
image pixel values as a function of the unknown structure pa-
rameters. This model is then fitted to the observed image pixel
values with respect to the unknown structure parameters using
a criterion of goodness of fit. Ideally, the model accurately
describes the image formation process required for a STEM
computer simulation, including dynamical electron diffraction
effects, thermal diffuse scattering, electron-sample interaction,
microscope transfer function and detector efficiency. However,
since model parameters are estimated by an iterative optimisa-
tion scheme, using this type of complex models becomes very
time consuming. For this reason, often a simplified empiri-
cal model is used. For STEM images, the intensity is sharply
peaked at the atomic column positions [27, 28]. Therefore, the

observed STEM pixel values of images of KГ—L pixels, w =
(w11, ..., wKL)T, can be modelled as a superposition of Gaus-
sian peaks [15]. When a different width is assumed for each
estimated Gaussian peak, the expectation model fkl(Оё), with Оё
the vector of unknown structure parameters, describes the ex-
pectation of the observed pixel value wkl at position (xk,yl):

fkl(Оё) = О¶ +

N
пҝҪ

n=1
О·nexp
пҝҪ
вҲ’ (xk вҲ’ ОІxn)2 + (yl вҲ’ ОІyn)2

2ПҒ2n

пҝҪ
(1)

where О¶ is a constant background, ПҒn, О·n, ОІxn and ОІyn are the
width, the height and x- and y-coordinates of the nth atomic
column described by a Gaussian peak, respectively, and N is the
total number of atomic columns. The unknown parameters of
the expectation model are represented by the parameter vector:

Оё = (ОІx1, ..., ОІxN, ОІy1, ..., ОІyN, ПҒ1, ..., ПҒN, О·1, ..., О·N, О¶)T
(2)

containing M = 4N+1 parameters.

2.2. Bayesian approach
In order to extract reliable structure information of nanoma-
terials from HAADF STEM images using a model such as in
Eq. (1), the number of atomic columns N present in the im-
age should be known. Usually, for beam-stable materials this
number can be determined visually due to the high incoming
electron dose that can be used to image these materials, leading
to images with high SNR. For beam-sensitive nanostructures,
though, the incoming electron dose is limited in order to avoid
beam damage and the images exhibit low SNR and low con-
trast and hence low CNR. Visual inspection of such images may
lead to biased results. To overcome this problem, the number
of atomic columns N can be reliably quantified by the recently
proposed MAP probability rule, which is a combination of sta-
tistical parameter estimation and model-order selection [30]. It
selects the number of columns N of which the posterior proba-
bility given the observed image pixel values w, p(N|w), is max-
imised. By using BayesвҖҷ theorem [31], p(N|w) can be written
as
p(N|w) = p(w|N)p(N)

p(w)
.
(3)

The term p(w|N) reflects the evidence that the image data w
is generated by N atomic columns. The probability p(N) ex-
presses prior knowledge of the number of atomic columns N in
the image, which has been chosen to be a uniform distribution,
reflecting no a priori preference for any number of columns.
The denominator is a normalization constant, which is inde-
pendent of the number of columns N, and therefore cancels out
when comparing posterior probabilities as a function of N. As
such, Eq. (3) reduces to

p(N|w) вҲқ p(w|N).
(4)

By making use of so-called marginalisation [32], which can be
considered as integrating out certain variables, the right-hand
side of Eq. (4) can be written as

p(w|N) =
пҝҪ
p(w|Оё, N)p(Оё|N)dMОё
(5)

2


where the marginalised variables are the parameters Оё of the
expectation model. The first term in the integral, p(w|Оё,N), is
the likelihood function which describes the probability of the
observed image pixel values w for particular values of the pa-
rameters Оё of a model with N atomic columns. Therefore, it is
an explicit function of the parameters Оё. In essence, the likeli-
hood function is a measure of the goodness of fit of the model
with the experimental measurements or image pixel values. The
other term in the integral, p(Оё|N), is the prior density of the pa-
rameters Оё for a model with N columns. In practice, evaluation
of the MAP probability rule can be reduced to calculating the
marginal likelihood p(w|N) described by Eq. (5) and determin-
ing for what number of columns N it is maximised. In order to
do so, explicit expressions for the likelihood function p(w|Оё,N)
and the prior density p(Оё|N) are required.
An expression for the likelihood function p(w|Оё,N) can be
derived by taking into account knowledge about the statisti-
cal properties of the errors in the experimental measurements.
Since a STEM image of KГ—L pixels is formed by counting elec-
trons scattered to the detector, the pixel values are inevitably
subject to Poisson noise [33] causing each observed image pixel
value wkl at position (xk,yl) to be Poisson distributed [34, 35].
For an increasing expectation value fkl(Оё) of wkl, the Poisson
distribution tends to be a normal distribution with mean Вөkl =
fkl(Оё) and standard deviation Пғkl = [fkl(Оё)]1/2 [36]. Under the
assumption that the pixel values are statistically independent,
the likelihood function can be expressed as

p(w|Оё, N) =
eвҲ’ПҮ2(Оё)/2

пҝҪK
k=1
пҝҪL
l=1[2ПҖПғ2
kl]1/2 ,
(6)

where

ПҮ2(Оё) =

K
пҝҪ

k=1

L
пҝҪ

l=1

[wkl вҲ’ Вөkl]2

Пғ2
kl
.
(7)

For simplicity, it can be assumed that Пғkl вүҲ [wkl]1/2, so that
Пғkl is independent of the parameters Оё. The likelihood function
then becomes

p(w|Оё, N) =
eвҲ’ПҮ2(Оё)/2

пҝҪK
k=1
пҝҪL
l=1[2ПҖwkl]1/2 ,
(8)

where

ПҮ2(Оё) =

K
пҝҪ

k=1

L
пҝҪ

l=1

[wkl вҲ’ fkl(Оё)]2

wkl
(9)

is a weighted sum-of-squared-residuals misfit between the data
and the parametric model.
Different prior density functions p(Оё|N) can be constructed
reflecting different types of prior knowledge.
In this paper,
p(Оё|N) is expressed as a product of uniform distributions over a
predefined range for each parameter Оёm:

p(Оё|N) =

пЈұпЈҙпЈҙпЈІпЈҙпЈҙпЈі

пҝҪM
m=1
1

ОёmmaxвҲ’Оёmmin
for m = 1, ..., M: Оёmmin в©Ҫ Оёm в©Ҫ Оёmmax
0
otherwise
(10)
where the subscripts max and min refer to a predefined max-
imum and minimum value, respectively. The choice for this

form of prior simplifies the subsequent algebra significantly.
More importantly, by using this uniform prior combined with
a conservative choice of the predefined parameter ranges, the
amount of prior knowledge that is introduced can be kept min-
imal, thus avoiding biased results due to the incorporation of
possibly invalid prior knowledge. Moreover, this form of prior
can also be used in a flexible way since the predefined param-
eter ranges can easily be adapted depending on the available
prior knowledge.
Finally, it can be shown that by substituting Eq. (8) and Eq.
(10) in Eq. (5) an approximate analytical result for the posterior
probability of the presence of N atomic columns in the image,
given the observed image pixel values w, is available. For the
model described by Eq. (1), this expression is given by

p(N|w) вҲқ
N!(4ПҖ)2NeвҲ’ПҮ2
min/2[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]вҲ’1/2

[(ОІxmax вҲ’ ОІxmin)(ОІymax вҲ’ ОІymin)(О·max вҲ’ О·min)(ПҒmax вҲ’ ПҒmin)]N
(11)
in which ПҮ2
min = ПҮ2(ЛҶОё), with ЛҶОё the parameter vector that maxi-
mizes the likelihood function described by Eq. (8). The term
det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2) = det( вҲӮ2ПҮ2(Оё)

вҲӮОёвҲӮОёT
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪОё=ЛҶОё) represents the determinant of the
Hessian matrix of ПҮ2(Оё) evaluated at ЛҶОё. It should be noted that
the expression in Eq. (11) is only valid if ЛҶОё lies well within the
support of the prior density function. In Appendix A, a more
detailed explanation of its derivation and underlying assump-
tions is presented. The importance of Eq. (11) is that it allows
one to compute the posterior probability of a certain number
of atomic columns present in a HAADF STEM image, for a
model where the columns are assumed to be Gaussian shaped
and to have different widths. The MAP probability rule com-
pares the calculated posterior probabilities and selects the num-
ber of columns N with the highest probability. Similar expres-
sions can be derived for other types of models. For example, for
a model where the atomic columns are assumed to be Gaussian
shaped and to have equal widths [15], the expectation model
fkl(Оё) of pixel (k,l) at position (xk,yl) is given by

fkl(Оё) = О¶ +

N
пҝҪ

n=1
О·nexp
пҝҪ
вҲ’ (xk вҲ’ ОІxn)2 + (yl вҲ’ ОІyn)2

2ПҒ2

пҝҪ
(12)

where the unknown parameter vector can be written as

Оё = (ОІx1, ..., ОІxN, ОІy1, ..., ОІyN, О·1, ..., О·N, ПҒ, О¶)T
(13)

containing M = 3N+2 parameters. For such a model, the poste-
rior probability becomes

p(N|w) вҲқ
N!(4ПҖ)1.5NeвҲ’ПҮ2
min/2[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]вҲ’1/2

[(ОІxmax вҲ’ ОІxmin)(ОІymax вҲ’ ОІymin)(О·max вҲ’ О·min)]N .
(14)

As another example, for an expectation model given by

fkl(Оё) = О¶ +

N
пҝҪ

n=1
О·exp
пҝҪ
вҲ’ (xk вҲ’ ОІxn)2 + (yl вҲ’ ОІyn)2

2ПҒ2

пҝҪ
,
(15)

where the columns are assumed to be Gaussian shaped with
equal widths and equal heights, with unknown parameter vector

Оё = (ОІx1, ..., ОІxN, ОІy1, ..., ОІyN, О·, ПҒ, О¶)T
(16)

3


Figure 1: (a) Simulated STEM image of graphene disturbed by Poisson noise with an incoming electron dose of 3В·105 eвҲ’/Г…2. (b) MAP probability rule evaluated
for the data shown in (a). (c) Most probable parametric model of the data in (a) as indicated by the MAP probability rule in (b).

containing M = 2N+3 parameters, the posterior probability be-
comes

p(N|w) вҲқ N!(4ПҖ)NeвҲ’ПҮ2
min/2[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]вҲ’1/2

[(ОІxmax вҲ’ ОІxmin)(ОІymax вҲ’ ОІymin)]N .
(17)

Also for models where other shapes of atomic columns are as-
sumed, such as Lorentzian shapes or a mixture of Lorentzian
and Gaussian shapes [37], an expression for the posterior prob-
ability as a function of the number of atomic columns can be
derived in a similar way. It should be noted that the analytical
expression for p(N|w) was derived under the assumption that
the Poisson distribution that governs the image pixel values can
be approximated by a normal distribution. The accuracy of this
approximation, and therefore the accuracy of the expressions
given by Eqs. (11), (14) and (17), increases with an increas-
ing amount of detected electrons. The expressions will be most
accurate if all image pixel values fully satisfy the normality as-
sumption, but have shown to be robust to small violations of
this assumption. Therefore, the MAP probability rule is an ade-
quate method allowing to decide the number of atomic columns
present in a STEM image.

2.3. Algorithm
As stated above, the MAP probability rule selects the most
probable number of atomic columns by comparing posterior
probabilities as a function of N, i.e. for different numbers of
Gaussian peaks in the model describing the atomic columns in
the image, starting from an initial model containing N0 peaks
up to and including a model containing a value of Nmax peaks.
The parameters Оё of the initial model are optimized by minimiz-
ing the weighted sum-of-squared-residuals misfit ПҮ2(Оё), given
by Eq. (9), subject to the constraint that Оё should belong to
the support of the prior density function described by Eq. (10).
Next, an extra peak is added to the initial configuration, so a
model is constructed containing N0+1 peaks. Again, the param-
eters of this model are optimized by minimizing ПҮ2(Оё) subject to
the constraint that Оё belongs to the support of the prior density
function. To avoid ending up in a local minimum, many differ-
ent starting positions for the extra added peak need to be tested.

To optimize the parameters associated with the other peaks, the
estimated parameter values of the previous optimization, in this
case of a model with N0 peaks, are used as starting values. Next,
another peak is added, in the same way as described above, in
order to obtain the optimal parameter values of a model con-
taining N0+2 peaks. This procedure continues until the param-
eters of a model with Nmax peaks are optimized. In order to de-
termine the most probable number of atomic columns present
in a STEM image, the posterior probability of N = N0,...,Nmax
columns is computed relatively to the posterior probability of
Nmax columns as follows

prel(N|w) =
p(N|w)/p(Nmax|w)

maxN
пҝҪ
p(N|w)/p(Nmax|w)
пҝҪ
(18)

where the denominator is a normalization constant so that the
maximum value of prel(N|w) corresponds to one.
The most
probable number of atomic columns is then given by the value
N that maximizes Eq. (18). Direct visualization of the probabil-
ity of the number of columns in the image is possible by plot-
ting prel(N|w) on a logarithmic scale as a function of N resulting
in a relative probability curve. This procedure has been illus-
trated in Fig. 1 where the MAP probability rule has been applied
to detect the C atoms of graphene from a Poisson disturbed
simulated STEM image shown in Fig. 1(a), using a paramet-
ric model described by a superposition of Gaussian peaks with
equal widths and equal intensities given by Eq. (15). The im-

Parameter
Symbol
Value

Acceleration voltage
V0 (kV)
80
Defocus
Пө (Г…)
-20.0
Spherical aberration
Cs (mm)
0.0037
Spherical aberration of 5th order
C5 (mm)
0
Semiconvergence angle
Оұ (mrad)
24.8
Detector inner radius
ОІ1 (mrad)
26
Detector outer radius
ОІ2 (mrad)
50
Pixel size
вҲҶx=вҲҶy (Г…)
0.20
FWHM of the source image
FWHM (Г…)
0.7

Table 1: Microscope parameter values for simulation of a STEM image of
graphene using MULTEM.

4


age has been simulated using the MULTEM software [38, 39]
and the simulation parameters are listed in Table 1. Fig. 1(b)
shows the relative probability curve as a function of the number
of columns N calculated by the decimal logarithm of Eq. (18).
For certain values of N, the corresponding optimized models are
shown. The most probable structure found by the MAP prob-
ability rule applied to the image shown in Fig. 1(a) is shown
in Fig. 1(c), corresponding to the expected hexagonal lattice of
graphene. The procedure described in this section has also been
applied successfully to determine the structure of SrTiO3, a Au
nanorod and ultrasmall Ge clusters from both simulated and ex-
perimental STEM images exhibiting low CNR [30]. The ap-
proach has been implemented in the freely available StatSTEM
software [15].

3. Atom detectability

Besides detecting atomic columns from HAADF STEM im-
ages, the MAP probability rule also offers a way to evaluate the
relation between image quality measures and atom detectabil-
ity. A common HAADF STEM image quality measure is the
SNR. In general, one expects that the detectability of the atomic
columns in the image will increase with increasing SNR. Note
that, as local fluctuations of the background or differences in
column thickness or composition can occur, each column can
possess a different SNR value. The SNR of a column located at
pixel (k,l) can be defined as

S NR = О»kl

Пғkl
(19)

where О»kl and Пғkl denote the expected value of the observed im-
age pixel value wkl at position (xk,yl) and its standard deviation,
respectively. As wkl is Poisson distributed, Пғkl = [О»kl]1/2. When
the background in the image can be considered to be constant,
Eq. (19) can be written as

S NR =
О· + О¶

[О· + О¶]1/2
(20)

where О· and О¶ denote the height of the atomic column and the
background of the image, respectively, for a parametric model
based on a superposition of Gaussian peaks, such as in Eqs. (1),
(12) or (15). An alternative measure to describe the quality of
an image is given by the CNR [40]. When a parametric model
is used to describe the background and atomic columns in a
HAADF STEM image, the CNR of a column can be defined as

CNR =
О·

[О· + О¶]1/2 .
(21)

Note that the definition of CNR in Eq. (21) is closely related
to SNR in Eq. (20), but in case of CNR the background О¶ is
subtracted before taking the ratio. As such, the CNR also takes
image contrast into account.

3.1. Comparison of SNR to CNR
In this section, the MAP probability rule has been used as a
tool to compare SNR and CNR in relation with atom detectabil-
ity. First, SNR is investigated. For this, a set of simulated

HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with a pixel size
of 0.25 Г… has been simulated of an individual Au atom using
MULTEM to which an arbitrary constant background has been
added accounting for the contribution of electrons scattered by
an amorphous substrate. The remaining simulation parameters
are listed in Table 2. Each simulated image has been generated
1000 times containing random Poisson noise. The SNR of the
atom in the image has been altered by changing the incoming
electron dose ranging from 103 eвҲ’/Г…2 to 105 eвҲ’/Г…2 resulting in
a higher SNR value for a higher incoming electron dose. For
detecting the Au atom from the noise disturbed images by the
proposed MAP probability rule, a model assuming the image of
the atom to be Gaussian shaped has been used, where a constant
background О¶ and width ПҒ, height О· and x- and y-coordinate
ОІx and ОІy of the atom need to be estimated. The prior density
p(Оё|N) has been chosen according to Eq. (10), where the param-
eters О¶ and О· range from 0 up to the maximum pixel intensity in
the simulated image, whereas the parameters ПҒ, ОІx and ОІy range
according to the field of view of the image, i.e. from 0 Г… up to
12.5 Г…. Fig 2(a) shows the observed detection rates of the MAP
probability rule as a function of SNR. The error bars show the
95 % confidence Wilson score intervals of a binomial distribu-
tion [41]. The inset shows simulated STEM images containing
Poisson noise for different SNR values. Alternatively, the SNR
value of the Au atom in the simulated image can be altered
by changing the added constant background independently of
the incoming electron dose, simulating the effect of the atom
to be positioned on a substrate with varying thickness. By al-
tering the SNR by this procedure for a fixed incoming electron
dose of 104 eвҲ’/Г…2 and by using the same approach for the MAP
probability rule as for Fig. 2(a), Fig. 2(b) shows that the de-
tection rate decreases with increasing SNR value, as opposed
to Fig. 2(a). Apparently, a high SNR value does not guaran-
tee high atom detectability, as is also visually perceived by the
inset of Fig. 2(b) showing Poisson disturbed simulated STEM
images for different SNR values. The reason for this behaviour
lies in the fact that the SNR measure given by Eq. (20) only
considers the total sum of the height of the atomic column О·
and the background of the image О¶. Therefore, SNR does not
take image contrast into account and it is possible that the SNR
of an image is high while contrast is low. Contrast, however,
also affects the visual perception and detectability of objects in
an image. The CNR measure given by Eq. (21) provides infor-
mation about image contrast as the background О¶ is explicitly
subtracted. Therefore, CNR relates better to atom detectability

Parameter
Symbol
Value

Acceleration voltage
V0 (kV)
120
Defocus
Пө (Г…)
0
Spherical aberration
Cs (mm)
0.001
Spherical aberration of 5th order
C5 (mm)
0
Semiconvergence angle
Оұ (mrad)
21.3
Detector inner radius
ОІ1 (mrad)
28
Detector outer radius
ОІ2 (mrad)
172
FWHM of the source image
FWHM (Г…)
0.7

Table 2: Microscope parameter values for simulation of a set of HAADF STEM
images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… using MULTEM.

5


Figure 2: (a) Observed detection rate of a Au atom by the MAP probability rule from simulated HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with a pixel size of
0.25 Г… as a function of SNR where the SNR has been altered by changing the incoming electron dose ranging from 103 eвҲ’/Г…2 to 105 eвҲ’/Г…2 and (b) by changing
the constant background for a fixed incoming electron dose of 104 eвҲ’/Г…2. (c) Detection rate from the same set of images as in (b) as a function of CNR. The insets
show simulated images disturbed by Poisson noise for different values of SNR and CNR.

than SNR. This is confirmed by Fig. 2(c) where the observed
detection rate is shown as a function of the CNR for the same
set of images as of Fig. 2(b). From this, it is seen that the de-
tection rate increases with increasing CNR. It is noted that the
same behaviour is observed for the set of images of Fig. 2(a).

3.2. Integrated CNR (ICNR)

As followed from the previous section, CNR is a more in-
tuitive image quality measure than SNR when it comes to de-
tecting atoms from HAADF STEM images. In this section, the
relation between the CNR measure and atom detectability is in-
vestigated for variations of atom type, incoming electron dose
and image pixel size. First, the detection rate of the MAP prob-
ability rule for different types of individual atoms as a function
of CNR is shown in Fig. 3(a) for simulated HAADF STEM im-
ages of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with a pixel size of 0.25 Г…, using
MULTEM with an incoming electron dose of 106 eвҲ’/Г…2, where
each simulated image has been generated 1000 times contain-
ing Poisson noise. The remaining simulation parameters can
be found in Table 2. The CNR of the atom in the image has
been altered by adding a constant background. For detecting
the atom from the noise disturbed images by the MAP prob-
ability rule, the same approach as in Fig. 2 has been followed
with an equivalent choice for the prior density p(Оё|N). It follows
from Fig. 3(a) that the relation between CNR and detection rate
depends hardly, yet slightly, on the atom type. Next, the relation
between CNR and detection rate to varying incoming electron
dose is investigated. For this, images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with
a pixel size of 0.25 Г… of an individual Au atom have been sim-
ulated with different incoming electron doses. Fig. 3(b) shows
that the relation between CNR and the atom detection rate is
rather robust to a different incoming electron dose.
On the
other hand, a different pixel size influences the detection rate
as a function of CNR significantly, as shown in Fig. 3(c) for
images of a Au atom with an incoming electron dose of 105

eвҲ’/Г…2 and varying pixel size. This is due to the fact that, for a
fixed incoming electron dose/Г…2, an increased pixel size leads
to an increased electron dose/pixel resulting into a higher value

for the background О¶ and height О· of the Au atom, as both О¶ and
О· scale with electron dose/pixel, and hence into a higher CNR
given by Eq. (21) and vice versa. For this reason, the inte-
grated CNR (ICNR) is proposed whose relationship with atom
detectability is independent of atom type, incoming electron
dose and, in particular, the pixel size of the image. The ICNR
of an atomic column in HAADF STEM images is defined as the
ratio of the total intensity of electrons scattered by the column,
the so-called scattering cross section [15],[19],[22],[42], to the
square root of the sum of the scattering cross section and the
integrated background under the column. When a parametric
model based on a superposition of Gaussian peaks is used to
describe the background and atomic columns, the ICNR of a
column can be calculated as

ICNR =
2ПҖО·ПҒ2

[2ПҖО·ПҒ2 + ПҖ(3ПҒ)2О¶]1/2 ,
(22)

where ПҒ denotes the estimated width of the atomic column. In
this work, ICNR values are calculated by expressing ПҒ in units
of pixels. In order to estimate the integrated background un-
der the column, the area under the column has been consid-
ered to be a circle with a radius of 3ПҒ, since 99.46 % of the
volume under the Gaussian peak describing the column is con-
tained within this distance. It should be noted that Eq. (22)
is only valid for individual atomic columns that are well sepa-
rated in the image. For denser crystallographic structures, the
contrast of a column depends, not only on the height of the col-
umn О· and on the background in the image О¶, but also on the
heights of and the distances from the surrounding columns. For
the investigation of the relation between ICNR and atom de-
tectability to varying atom type, incoming electron dose and
pixel size, the same procedure for the simulated images has
been followed as for the investigation of CNR. It is shown in
Fig. 3(d) and 3(e) that the detection rate does not change with
atom type or incoming electron dose, respectively, as long as
the ICNR value remains unchanged. The functional relation-
ship between detection rate and ICNR is also independent of
pixel size, as shown in Fig. 3(f), as opposed to the relationship
between detection rate and CNR, as shown in Fig. 3(c). The

6


Figure 3: Observed detection rate of an individual atom by the MAP probability rule from simulated HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with a pixel size
of 0.25 Г… for varying atom types with an incoming electron dose of 106 eвҲ’/Г…2 as a function of (a) CNR and (d) ICNR. Detection rate of a Au atom from simulated
HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with a pixel size of 0.25 Г… for varying incoming electron dose as a function of (b) CNR and (d) ICNR and from images
with an incoming electron dose of 105 eвҲ’/Г…2 for varying pixel size as a function of (c) CNR and (f) ICNR.

results indicate that ICNR is a more robust measure for atom
detectability from high-resolution HAADF STEM images than
CNR.

4. Relation to model selection

In this section, it is explained how the MAP probability rule
is related to the concept of model selection, where one aims
to select the best model from a set of candidate models given
experimental data. For this, the working principle of model
selection is described in detail. Hereby, different model-order
selection criteria are introduced in order to compare their per-
formances to detect the correct number of atomic columns from
HAADF STEM images to that of the MAP probability rule.

4.1. Model complexity

The heart of model selection consists of selecting one model
from a set of competing models that represents most closely the
underlying process that generated the experimental data. For
this purpose, a criterion measuring how well the model fits the
data is required. Such a criterion of goodness of fit quantifies
the descriptive adequacy of a model, which is possible by, for
example, a maximum likelihood evaluation. However, a model-
selection criterion based solely on goodness of fit automatically
selects the model which fits best to the data. This is undesired,

since model fit can be easily improved by increased model com-
plexity, referring to the flexibility of a model to fit the observed
data. In this way, a model might be selected without necessar-
ily bearing any interpretable relationship with the underlying
data-generating process. For this reason, typical model selec-
tion methods take into account both the goodness of fit and the
complexity of the models under investigation [43].
There are at least three important factors that contribute to
the complexity of a model [44]. The first one is the number
of parameters. In general, a model with many parameters de-
scribes data better than a model with few parameters due to its
higher flexibility, and hence complexity. Next, model complex-
ity is also related to functional form, which is described as the
way in which the parameters are combined in the model. A
model with a more complex functional form is able to describe
a wider range of data and can be considered to be more flexible
than a model with a less complex functional form. The last di-
mension of model complexity is covered by the extension of the
parameter space. A model of which the parameters can fluctu-
ate over a wide range of values can describe a wider range of
data. Therefore, such a model is considered to be more com-
plex than a model of which the parameters can fluctuate over
only a small range. All of these three aspects can significantly
and independently influence model fit.
Typically, model-selection criteria are written as twice the
negative log likelihood, accounting for the goodness of fit, plus

7


a penalty term that accounts for model complexity [45]:

вҲ’ 2log( ЛҶL) + 2C.
(23)

Different criteria have been proposed in the literature and de-
scribe the complexity of the model in a different way, often tak-
ing only one dimension of model complexity into account, i.e.
the number of parameters [46]. The Akaike Information Crite-
rion (AIC) [47] can be written as

AIC = вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + 2M
(24)

with M the number of parameters in the model. A very similar
criterion is the Generalized Information Criterion (GIC) [48],
where the contribution of the penalty term can be modified by
the parameter d:

GIC = вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + dM.
(25)

A clear guideline on how to choose the value of d is lacking.
Different choices of d = 3 [49] and d = 4 [46] are reported in the
literature, which are referred to, in what follows, as GIC3 and
GIC4, respectively. These choices cause the GIC to penalise
more heavily for the complexity of the model as compared to
the AIC. Another common criterion is the Bayesian Informa-
tion Criterion (BIC) [50]:

BIC = вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + Mlog(W)
(26)

with W the sample size (i.e. the number of datapoints). For
a STEM image, W is equal to KГ—L pixels.
As opposed to
the AIC and GIC, the penalty term is dependent on the sam-
ple size. When W > 8, the BIC accounts more for the com-
plexity of the model than the AIC. An alternative criterion is
the Hannan-Quinn Information Criterion (HQC) [51] which re-
places the log(W) factor in the BIC by the slower diverging
quantity log[log(W)]:

HQC = вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + Mlog[log(W)].
(27)

Thus, a model selection method performs a tradeoff between
high goodness of fit and low model complexity. In essence, the
MAP probability rule is also a model selection method where
the posterior probability of the presence of N atomic columns
in the STEM image can be written in general terms as

p(N|w) вҲқ
goodness of fit

model complexity
(28)

where the numerator, goodness of fit, is the likelihood given by
Eq. (8) evaluated at ЛҶОё. The denominator describes the model
complexity and is given by

model complexity =
[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]1/2

N!(4ПҖ)M/2p(Оё|N)
(29)

when the approximations of the analytical expression of p(N|w)
are valid. A more detailed explanation of Eq. (29) can be found
in Appendix B. The term вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2 is a MГ—M dimensional ma-
trix and therefore it depends on the number of parameters. In

addition, it explicitly contains the expectation model fkl(Оё), de-
scribing the intensity of pixel (k,l) at position (xk,yl), as follows
from Eq. (9). Therefore, the term вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2 in Eq. (29) takes into
account two dimensions of model complexity, which are the
number of parameters on the one hand and the functional form
of the model on the other hand. The third dimension of model
complexity, which is the extension of the parameter space, is
described by the prior density p(Оё|N). By choosing p(Оё|N) as a
product of uniform distributions for each parameter Оёm individ-
ually, as given by Eq. (10), large ranges for the possible val-
ues of Оёm correspond with a small value for p(Оё|N). As model
complexity is inversely proportional to p(Оё|N), model complex-
ity increases as the extension of the parameter space increases.
As a result, the complexity term of the MAP probability rule
depends on three dimensions of model complexity as opposed
to the aforementioned AIC, GIC, BIC and HQC whose com-
plexity terms only depend on the number of parameters M. By
taking the logarithm of Eq. (28) multiplied by -2 and taking
into account the expression of model complexity of Eq. (29),
Eq. (28) can be written in the same form as Eq. (23):

вҲ’2log[p(N|w)] = вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + log[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)] вҲ’ 2log(N!)

вҲ’ Mlog(4ПҖ) вҲ’ 2log[p(Оё|N)] + cst
(30)

where the term cst refers to a constant coming from the propor-
tionality of Eq. (28). The second term at the right-hand side of
Eq. (30) can be written as

log[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)] = log[det(W В· 1

W вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]

= Mlog(W) + log[det( 1

W вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)],
(31)

where use is made of the fact that det(cA) = cMdet(A) for a
scalar c and MГ—M matrix A. As such, Eq. (30) can be rewritten
as

вҲ’2log[p(N|w)] = вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + Mlog(W) + log[det( 1

W вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]

вҲ’ 2log(N!) вҲ’ Mlog(4ПҖ) вҲ’ 2log[p(Оё|N)] + cst.
(32)

Interestingly, the first two terms of Eq. (32) correspond to the
BIC described by Eq. (26). This indicates a relation between
the MAP probability rule and the BIC, which is not surpising
as both techniques are based on a Bayesian approach.

4.2. Performance
In this section, the performance of the MAP probability rule
in detecting atoms from STEM images is compared to the AIC,
GIC, BIC and HQC, which were introduced in the previous sec-
tion. For this, a set of 1000 images of Au atoms has been simu-
lated by MULTEM with dimensions of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… and a
pixel size of 0.25 Г…. The remaining simulation parameters are
listed in Table 2. Hereby, the number of Au atoms in an indi-
vidual image is uniformly distributed between 1 and 5 atoms.
The atoms are randomly positioned within the field of view of

8


Figure 4: Average frequency of various selected orders for different model selection-criteria for detecting the number of Au atoms from a set of simulated HAADF
STEM images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with a pixel size of 0.25 Г… and with (a) an ICNR value of 3.0, (b) an ICNR value of 4.0, and (c) an ICNR value of 5.0. The insets
show randomly generated simulated images of 5 atoms disturbed by Poisson noise with the noise-free images as references.

the image according to a uniform distribution and the incom-
ing electron dose of the image can uniformly fluctuate between
5В·103 eвҲ’/Г…2 and 105 eвҲ’/Г…2, affecting the peak intensities of the
atoms. Depending on the incoming electron dose, a constant
background has been added to an individual image such that
all 1000 simulated images have the same ICNR value. Hereby,
each simulated image has been disturbed by Poisson noise. The
performances of the model-selection criteria are evaluated by
comparing the detected number of atoms in the image with the
true number of atoms by calculating the average frequency of
various selected orders [52]. For the analysis, a superposition
of Gaussian peaks with equal widths and equal intensities has
been used to model the Au atoms in the image. This model is
described by Eq. (15). Since the width ПҒ has been considered to
be a fixed value, the model consists of 2N+2 parameters: back-
ground О¶, height О· and x- and y-coordinates ОІxn and ОІyn. For the
MAP probability rule, the prior density p(Оё|N) was chosen ac-
cording to Eq. (10) where the background О¶ ranges from 0 up to
the maximum pixel intensity in the simulated image and where
the distributions for the height О· and x- and y-coordinates ОІxn
and ОІyn exactly correspond with the uniform distributions that
were used to generate these parameters. The performances of
the model-selection criteria are shown in Fig. 4 for three dif-
ferent ICNR values. A positive value of the detection error
refers to the detection of too many atoms, whereas a negative
value refers to the detection of too few atoms. The insets show
randomly generated simulated images of 5 atoms disturbed by
Poisson noise with the noise-free images as references. From
Fig. 4(a), it can be seen that the MAP probability rule outper-
forms the other criteria for an ICNR value of 3.0. The AIC,
GIC3, GIC4 and HQC have a tendency to detect too many
atoms, whereas the BIC often detects too few atoms. This be-
haviour is related to the different ways the model-selection cri-
teria penalize the complexity of the model. From Fig. 3, show-
ing that the detection rate increases when the ICNR of an image
increases, it is expected that the frequency of detecting the cor-
rect number of atoms increases for increasing ICNR. This is
confirmed in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c) for an ICNR value of 4.0 and

5.0, respectively. Moreover, in these cases, the performances of
the different criteria tend to become more equal.

4.3. Relation between MAP and BIC
As mentioned earlier, Eq. (32) indicates a relation between
the MAP probability rule and the BIC. In order to understand
this relation, the behaviour of the terms in Eq. (32) has been
investigated as a function of the sample size by simulating a
set of HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… of a sin-
gle Au atom. The STEM simulations have been obtained from
MULTEM and the simulation parameters are listed in Table 2.
In order to acquire a set of simulated images containing an in-
creasing number of pixels W, the pixel size has been decreased
starting from 0.5 Г… up to and including 0.05 Г…. As such, 50
images have been simulated where for each image 20 random
Poisson noise configurations have been applied. Hereby, the in-
coming electron dose has been set to 625 eвҲ’/pixel to keep the
amount of detected electrons per pixel constant, irrespective of
the pixel size, so that the behaviour of the terms of the MAP
probability rule is only dependent on the number of pixels W.
Note that this means that the electron dose/Г…2 increases as the
pixel size decreases. For the analysis of the MAP probability
rule, a model where the atom is assumed to be Gaussian shaped
has been used consisting of M = 5 parameters: a constant back-
ground О¶, width ПҒ, height О· and x- and y-coordinate ОІx and ОІy.
The prior density p(Оё|N) has been chosen according to Eq. (10)
where the parameters О¶ and О· range from 0 up to the maximum
pixel intensity in the simulated image, whereas the parameters
ПҒ, ОІx and ОІy range according to the field of view of the image,
i.e. from 0 Г… up to 12.5 Г…. The different terms contributing
to the MAP probability rule given by Eq. (32) are shown in
Fig.
5. The term -2log( ЛҶL) depends on W and increases with
an increasing number of pixels, but, for clarity, it has not been
visualized since it would dominate the graphs as it has values
up to three orders of magnitude larger than the other terms. It
can be seen from Fig. 5(a) that the term Mlog(W) increases
as the number of pixels W increases, as expected. The terms
log[det( 1

W вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)], -2log(N!), -Mlog(4ПҖ) and -2log[p(Оё|N)] re-
main constant as W increases. As such, also the sum of these

9


Figure 5: Behaviour of the individual terms of the MAP probability rule in function of the number of pixels W for a set of simulated HAADF STEM images of 12.5
Г… by 12.5 Г… of a single Au atom with a pixel size ranging from 0.5 Г… until 0.05 Г… and an incoming electron dose of 625 eвҲ’/pixel. For clarity, the term -2log( ЛҶL) has
not been visualized. Three different parametrizations of the model describing the STEM images have been used. In (a) the background О¶ and height О· have been
fitted in electron counts and the width ПҒ and x- and y-coordinate ОІx and ОІy in Г…, in (b) the parameters have been normalized between 0 and 1 and in (c) О¶ and О· have
been fitted in electron counts and ПҒ, ОІx and ОІy in pixels.

terms remains constant for more pixels. This sum has been de-
picted as O(1) in Fig. 5, denoting a term that tends to a constant
as W вҶ’ вҲһ. In this way, Eq. (32) can be written for W вҶ’ вҲһ as

вҲ’2log[p(N|w)] = вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + Mlog(W) + O(1)

вүҲ вҲ’2log( ЛҶL) + Mlog(W)
(33)

implying that the MAP probability rule is asymptotically equiv-
alent with the BIC in Eq. (26) as -2log( ЛҶL) and Mlog(W) are the
dominant terms when W вҶ’ вҲһ. Interestingly, the behaviour of
the Hessian matrix of ПҮ2(Оё) evaluated at ЛҶОё, вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2, and of the
prior density, p(Оё|N), chosen as a product of uniform distribu-
tions for each parameter Оёm, is dependent on the parametriza-
tion of the model. Fig. 5(a) results from fitting the parameters
О¶ and О· in pixel intensities, depicted in electron counts, and ПҒ,
ОІx and ОІy in Г…. A different parametrization might be to use a
normalized model where the parameters can fluctuate between
0 and 1. Fig. 5(b) shows the behaviour of the various terms of
Eq. (32) of such a model. Here, the terms log[det( 1

W вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]
and -2log[p(Оё|N)] have been shifted as compared to Fig. 5(a).
Yet, they show the same constant behaviour as a function of
the number of pixels W. The behaviour of these terms does
not necessarily remain constant as a function of W under all
parametrizations as shown in Fig. 5(c). Here, the parameters
О¶ and О· have been fitted in electron counts and ПҒ, ОІx and ОІy in
pixels. From Fig. 5(c), it is apparent that both log[det( 1

W вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]
and -2log[p(Оё|N)] depend on the number of pixels W. Although
вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2 and p(Оё|N) are not invariant under reparametrization,
yet the term O(1), which is the sum of log[det( 1

W вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)], -
2log(N!), -Mlog(4ПҖ) and -2log[p(Оё|N)], remains invariant under
all parametrizations, as shown in Fig. 5. Therefore, the model
complexity of Eq. (29) as described by the MAP probability
rule remains unchanged under different parametrizations of the
model. Moreover, as the goodness of fit is also independent
of the model description, the MAP probability rule is invariant
under reparametrization.

4.4. Influence of prior density

As the prior density p(Оё|N) is part of how the MAP proba-
bility rule determines model complexity, as shown in Eq. (29),
atom detection in HAADF STEM images depends on the pre-
defined parameter ranges when p(Оё|N) is defined as a product
of uniform distributions for each parameter Оёm individually, as
given by Eq. (10). Ideally, the result of a robust detection
method should not depend strongly on the prior. In this sec-
tion, the influence of different a priori chosen parameter ranges
to atom detection is investigated as a function of ICNR since
the prior might influence atom detection differently for differ-
ent ICNR values. For this, HAADF STEM images of 12.5 Г… by
12.5 Г… with a pixel size of 0.25 Г… with different ICNR values
have been simulated of an individual Au atom using MULTEM,
where the atom is located in the middle of each simulated im-
age, i.e. ОІx = ОІy = 6.25 Г…. The remaining simulation parameters
can be found in Table 2. Each image has been generated 1000
times containing random Poisson noise and the ICNR of the
atom in the image has been altered by adding a constant back-
ground while keeping the incoming electron dose fixed to 104

eвҲ’/Г…2. For detecting the Au atom from the noise disturbed im-
ages by the MAP probability rule, a model assuming the atom
to be Gaussian shaped has been used, where a constant back-
ground О¶ and width ПҒ, height О· and x- and y-coordinate ОІx and
ОІy of the atom need to be estimated. First, the parameters О¶
and О· have been chosen to range from 0 up to the maximum
pixel intensity in the simulated images, whereas the parameters
ПҒ, ОІx and ОІy range according to the field of view of the image,
i.e. from 0 Г… up to 12.5 Г…. In order to investigate the effect
of a different choice of the predefined parameter ranges, the
ranges of ОІx and ОІy have been reduced, corresponding to tak-
ing into account more and more informative prior knowledge
about the location of the Au atom. Fig. 6 shows that, in gen-
eral, the detection rate as a function of ICNR is not influenced
by different predefined ranges on ОІx and ОІy when the ICNR
is high. For lower ICNR values, though, the detection rate of
the Au atom increases for smaller predefined ranges on ОІx and

10


Figure 6: Detection rate of a Au atom from simulated HAADF STEM images
of 12.5 Г… by 12.5 Г… with a pixel size of 0.25 Г… and an incoming electron dose
of 104 eвҲ’/Г…2 as a function of ICNR for different predefined ranges of ОІx and
ОІy.

ОІy. This shows that when more correct prior knowledge can be
taken into account, it is beneficial to do so since it increases
the chance of detecting atoms from low ICNR STEM images.
As compared to the other model-selection criteria considered in
this paper, the MAP probability rule offers a more flexible way
to detect atoms from HAADF STEM images due to the fact
that the prior can be tuned, resulting into a different value for
the complexity of the model under consideration. Moreover, by
using the MAP probability rule, it is clear what prior knowl-
edge has been taken into account during the analysis, which is
not always straightforward for other model-selection criteria.

5. Conclusions

In the present paper, the methodology of the recently pro-
posed MAP probability rule to detect single atoms from high-
resolution HAADF STEM images [30] has been explained in
detail. The method is built upon model-based parameter es-
timation and by making use of a Bayesian approach it allows
for automatic and objective structure quantification. The MAP
probability rule is especially useful for the analysis of the struc-
ture of beam-sensitive nanomaterials. Typically, images of such
materials exhibit low CNR due to the use of a limited incoming
electron dose in order to avoid beam damage. Visual inspection
of such images is unreliable and might lead to biased results. It
has been shown that approximate analytical expressions can be
derived for the probability of the presence of a certain number
of atomic columns in the image data. The MAP probability rule
selects the number of columns that maximizes this probability.
Moreover, it has been shown that the MAP probability rule
can be effectively used as a tool to evaluate the relation between
STEM image quality measures and atom detectability. This has
resulted into the introduction of the ICNR as a new image qual-
ity measure that better correlates with atom detectability than

conventional measures such as SNR and CNR. Atomic columns
resulting from images with ICNR values of less than around 5.0
become challenging to accurately detect as typically the detec-
tion rate of 100 % drops rapidly starting from this value.
In addition, the relation of the MAP probability rule with
model selection has been thoroughly investigated. It has been
explained that model-selection criteria are based on a tradeoff
between high goodness of fit and low model complexity. In-
terestingly, the complexity term of the MAP probability rule
depends on three dimensions of model complexity, namely the
number of parameters, functional form and extension of the
parameter space, as opposed to other model-selection criteria,
which has been shown to allow for more accurate atom detec-
tion from STEM images. Furthermore, the MAP probability
rule allows for a clear and flexible incorporation of prior knowl-
edge, which is often not the case for other model-selection
methods.

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge financial support from the Re-
search Foundation Flanders (FWO, Belgium) through project
fundings (No.
W.O.010.16N, No.
G.0368.15N, No.
G.0502.18N). This project has received funding from the Eu-
ropean Research Council (ERC) under the European Unions
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant
Agreement No. 770887).

Appendix A. Analytical derivation of posterior probability

Given the assumption of an a priori equiprobable number of
atomic columns N, the evaluation of the MAP probability rule
comes down to calculating the marginal likelihood p(w|N) in
Eq. (5) and determining the number of columns N with the
highest posterior probability p(N|w). If an analytical calcula-
tion of the M-dimensional integral in Eq. (5) is possible, the cal-
culation of the marginal likelihood is significantly facilitated.
Approximating the likelihood function p(w|Оё,N) by a normal
distribution, given by Eq. (8), in combination with the choice
of a uniformly distributed prior density function p(Оё|N), given
by Eq. (10), allows for an approximate analytical result. Sub-
stituting Eq. (8) and Eq. (10) in Eq. (5) results into

p(N|w) вҲқ N!В·
пҝҪ M
пҝҪ

m=1

1

Оёmmax вҲ’ Оёmmin

пҝҪ пҝҪ

D

eвҲ’ПҮ2(Оё)/2

пҝҪK
k=1
пҝҪL
l=1[2ПҖwkl]1/2 dMОё,

(A.1)
where

D = {(Оё1, ..., ОёM) вҲҲ RM for m = 1, ..., M: Оёmmin в©Ҫ Оёm в©Ҫ Оёmmax}.
(A.2)
The factor N! arises from the number of ways the parameters
of the Gaussian peaks can be permuted, as labelling of the N
peaks is arbitrary. Therefore, there are N! equivalent maxima
of the likelihood function [31]. The expression in Eq. (A.1) can
be calculated by expanding the likelihood function by a second

11


order Taylor series around the parameter vector ЛҶОё that maxi-
mizes the likelihood function, which is known as the maximum
likelihood estimate:

eвҲ’ПҮ2(Оё)/2 вүҲ eвҲ’ПҮ2(ЛҶОё)/2 Г— e
вҲ’(ОёвҲ’ЛҶОё)T
пҝҪ

вҲӮПҮ2(Оё)

вҲӮОё
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ
Оё=ЛҶОё

пҝҪ

/2
Г— e
вҲ’(ОёвҲ’ЛҶОё)T
пҝҪ

вҲӮ2ПҮ2(Оё)
вҲӮОёвҲӮОёT
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ
Оё=ЛҶОё

пҝҪ

(ОёвҲ’ЛҶОё)/4
.
(A.3)

Since вҲӮПҮ2(Оё)

вҲӮОё
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪОё=ЛҶОё = 0, the second term in Eq. (A.3) is equal to

one. Then, by writing ПҮ2(ЛҶОё) as ПҮ2
min and вҲӮ2ПҮ2(Оё)

вҲӮОёвҲӮОёT
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪОё=ЛҶОё as вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2, Eq.
(A.3) becomes

eвҲ’ПҮ2(Оё)/2 вүҲ eвҲ’ПҮ2
min/2 Г— eвҲ’(ОёвҲ’ЛҶОё)T вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2(ОёвҲ’ЛҶОё)/4,
(A.4)

which means that Eq. (A.1) is given by

p(N|w) вҲқ N!В·eвҲ’ПҮ2
min/2В·
пҝҪ M
пҝҪ

m=1

1

Оёmmax вҲ’ Оёmmin

пҝҪ пҝҪ

D

eвҲ’(ОёвҲ’ЛҶОё)T вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2(ОёвҲ’ЛҶОё)/4

пҝҪK
k=1
пҝҪL
l=1[2ПҖwkl]1/2 dMОё.

(A.5)
This expression contains a Gaussian multiple integral which
can be solved analytically under the assumptions that i) the
maximum likelihood estimate ЛҶОё lies well within the support
of the prior density function, described by Eq. (10), and ii)
the likelihood function has only one significant maximum [53].
Then, the integral in Eq. (A.5) is well approximated by an inte-
gral over RM, resulting in the following expression for the pos-
terior probability of the presence of N atomic columns in the
image, given the observed image pixel values w, for the model
described by Eq. (1):

p(N|w) вҲқ
N!

[(ОІxmax вҲ’ ОІxmin)(ОІymax вҲ’ ОІymin)(ПҒmax вҲ’ ПҒmin)]N

Г—
eвҲ’ПҮ2
min/2

(О·max вҲ’ О·min)N(О¶max вҲ’ О¶min) Г— (4ПҖ)M/2[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]вҲ’1/2

пҝҪK
k=1
пҝҪL
l=1[2ПҖwkl]1/2 .

(A.6)

This expression is equivalent to Eq.
(11), where the terms
which are independent of N have been dropped.

Appendix B. Model complexity of posterior probability

Model selection methods consider a tradeoff between high
goodness of fit and low model complexity in order to select
the model which most closely describes the underlying process
that generated the experimental data. As a model selection cri-
terion, the MAP probability rule is not different. The model
complexity can be quantified by writing the analytical expres-
sion of p(N|w) in the form of Eq. (28), hereby describing the
goodness of fit by p(w|ЛҶОё,N) which is given by Eq. (8) and using
the prior density p(Оё|N) of Eq. (10). This results into

p(N|w) вҲқ
p(w|ЛҶОё, N)

[det(вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2)]1/2/[N!(4ПҖ)M/2p(Оё|N)]
(B.1)

where the denominator reflects the model complexity as given
by Eq. (29). The term вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2 is related to the observed Fisher
information matrix ЛҶJ [54], which holds the information that is

contained by the observed data about the unknown parameters
Оё. It is described by the Hessian matrix of minus the logarithm
of the likelihood function p(w|Оё,N), given by Eq. (8), evaluated
at the maximum likelihood estimate ЛҶОё. As such,

ЛҶJ = вҲ’вҲӮ2log[p(w|Оё, N)]

вҲӮОёвҲӮОёT

пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪОё=ЛҶОё
= вҲӮ2[ПҮ2(Оё)/2]

вҲӮОёвҲӮОёT

пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪОё=ЛҶОё
(B.2)

where вҲӮ2ПҮ2(Оё)

вҲӮОёвҲӮОёT
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪОё=ЛҶОё can be written in short as вҲҮвҲҮПҮ2.

References

[1] T. Qi, I. Grinberg, A.M. Rappe, Correlations between tetragonality, po-
larization, and ionic displacement in PbTiO3-derived ferroelectric per-
ovskite solid solutions, Phys. Rev. B 82 (2010) 134113.

[2] N. Alem, O.V. Yazyev, C. Kisielowski, P. Denes, U. Dahmen, P. Hartel,
M. Haider, M. Bischoff, B. Jiang, S.G. Louie, A. Zettl, Probing the out-
of-plane distortion of single point defects in atomically thin hexagonal
boron nitride at the picometer scale, Phys. Rev. Lett 106 (2011) 126102.

[3] S. Van Aert, S. Turner, R. Delville, D. Schryvers, G. Van Tendeloo,
E.K.H. Salje, Direct observation of ferrielectricity at ferroelastic domain
boundaries in CaTiO3 by electron microscopy, Adv. Mat. 24 (2012) 523-
527.

[4] Y.L. Tang, Y.L. Zhu, Y.J. Wang, W.Y. Wang, Y.B. Xu, W.J. Ren, Z.D.
Zhang, X.L. Ma, Atomic-scale mapping of dipole frustration at 90в—Ұ

charged domain walls in ferroelectric PbTiO3 films, Sci. Rep. 4 (2014)
4115.

[5] H.H. Rose, Historical aspects of aberration correction, J. Elect. Microsc.
58 (2009) 77-85.

[6] P.W. Hawkes, The correction of electron lens aberrations,
Ultrami-
croscopy 156 (2015) A1-A64.

[7] R.F. Loane, P. Xu, J. Silcox, Incoherent imaging of zone axis crystals with
ADF STEM, Ultramicroscopy 40 (1992) 121-138.

[8] P. Hartel, H. Rose, C. Dinges, Conditions and reasons for incoherent
imaging in STEM, Ultramicroscopy 63 (1996) 93-114.

[9] P.D. Nellist, S.J. Pennycook, Incoherent imaging using dynamically scat-
tered coherent electrons, Ultramicroscopy 78 (1999) 111-124.

[10] A.J. den Dekker, S. Van Aert, A. van den Bos, D. Van Dyck, Maxi-
mum likelihood estimation of structure parameters from high resolution
electron microscopy images. Part I: A theoretical framework, Ultrami-
croscopy 104 (2005) 83-106.

[11] S. Van Aert, A.J. den Dekker, A. van den Bos, D. Van Dyck, J.H. Chen,
Maximum likelihood estimation of structure parameters from high reso-
lution electron microscopy images. Part II: A practical example, Ultrami-
croscopy 104 (2005) 107-125.

[12] A. van den Bos, Parameter estimation for scientists and engineers, Wiley,
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2007.

[13] S. Van Aert, W. Van den Broek, P. Goos, D. Van Dyck, Model-based
electron microscopy: from images toward precise numbers for unknown
structure parameters, Micron 43 (2012) 509-515.

[14] A.J den Dekker, J. Gonnissen, A. De Backer, J. Sijbers, S. Van Aert, Es-
timation of unknown structure parameters from high-resolution (S)TEM
images: What are the limits?, Ultramicroscopy 134 (2013) 34-43.

[15] A. De Backer, K.H.W. van den Bos, W. Van den Broek, J. Sijbers, S. Van
Aert, StatSTEM: An efficient approach for accurate and precise model-
based quantification of atomic resolution electron microscopy images,
Ultramicroscopy 171 (2016) 104-116.

[16] P. Kundu, S. Turner, S. Van Aert, N. Ravishankar, G. Van Tendeloo,
Atomic structure of quantum gold nanowires: quantification of the lat-
tice strain. ACS Nano, 8, 599-606.

[17] H. Akamine, K.H.W. van den Bos, N. Gauquelin, S. Farjami, S. Van Aert,
D. Schryvers, M. Nishidi, Determination of the atomic width of an APB
In ordered CoPt using quantified HAADF STEM, J. Alloys and Compd.
644 (2015) 570-574.

[18] J. Gonnissen, D. Batuk, G.F. Nataf, L. Jones, A.M. Abakumov, S. Van
Aert, D. Schryvers, E.K.H. Salje, Direct observation of ferroelectric do-
main walls in LiNbO3: Wall-meanders, kinks, and local electric charges,
Adv. Func. Mat. 26 (2016) 7599-7604.

12


[19] S. Van Aert, J. Verbeeck, R. Erni, S. Bals, M. Luysberg, D. Van Dyck, G.
Van Tendeloo, Quantitative atomic resolution mapping using high-angle
annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy, Ultrami-
croscopy 109 (2009) 1236-1244.

[20] G.T. Martinez, A. Rosenauer, A. De Backer, J. Verbeeck, S. Van Aert,
Quantitative composition determination at the atomic level using model-
based high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron mi-
croscopy, Ultramicroscopy 137 (2014) 12-19.

[21] S. Bals, S. Van Aert, C.P. Romero, K. Lauwaet, M.J. Van Bael, B.
Schoeters, B. Partoens, E. YВЁucelen, P. Lievens, G. Van Tendeloo, Atomic
scale dynamics of ultrasmall germanium clusters, Nat. Comm. 3 (2012)
897.

[22] S. Van Aert, A. De Backer, G.T. Martinez, B. Goris, S. Bals, G. Van Ten-
deloo, A. Rosenauer, Procedure to count atoms with trustworthy single-
atom sensitivity, Phys. Rev. B 87 (2013) 064107.

[23] S. Van Aert, K.J. Batenburg, M.D. Rossell, R. Erni, G. Van Tendeloo,
Three-dimensional atomic imaging of crystalline nanoparticles, Nature
470 (2011) 374-377.

[24] S. Bals, M. Casavola, M.A. Van Huis, S. Van Aert, K.J. Batenburg, G.
Van Tendeloo, D. Vanmaekelbergh, Three-dimensional atomic imaging
of colloidal core-shell nanocrystals, NanoLetters 11 (2011) 3420-3424.

[25] K.H.W. van den Bos, A. De Backer, G.T. Martinez, N. Winckelmans,
S.Bals, P.D. Nellist, S. Van Aert, Unscrambling mixed elements using
high angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 (2016) 246101.

[26] A. De Backer, L. Jones, I. Lobato, T. Altantzis, B. Goris, P.D. Nellist,
S. Bals, S. Van Aert, Three-dimensional atomic models from a single
projection using Z-contrast imaging: verification by electron tomography
and opportunities. Nanoscale 9 (2017) 8791-8798.

[27] D. Van Dyck, High-resolution electron microscopy, Adv. Imaging Elec-
tron Phys. 123 (2002) 105-171.

[28] P.D. Nellist, Scanning transmission electron microscopy, in:
P.W.
Hawkes, J.H.C. Spence (Eds.), Science of Microscopy vol 1, Springer,
New York, 2007, pp. 65-132, Ch. 2.

[29] D.B. Williams, C.B. Carter, Transmission Electron Microscopy, Plenum
Press, New York, 1996, pp. 63-65.

[30] J. Fatermans, A.J. den Dekker, K. MВЁuller-Caspary, I. Lobato, C.M.
OвҖҷLeary, P.D. Nellist, S. Van Aert, Single atom detection from low
contrast-to-noise ratio electron microscopy images, Phys. Rev. Lett 121
(2018) 056101.

[31] D.S. Sivia, J. Skilling, A Bayesian tutorial, Oxford University Press, New
York, 2006.

[32] E.T. Jaynes, Probability theory: The logic of science Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, England, 2003.

[33] F.A. Haight, Handbook of the Poisson Distribution, John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1967.

[34] A. Mood, F. Graybill, D. Boes, Introduction to the theory of statistics, 3rd
edition, McGraw-Hill, Tokyo, Japan, 1974.

[35] A. van den Bos, A.J. den Dekker, Resolution considered - conventional
approaches and an alternative, in: P.W. Hawkes (Ed.), Advances in imag-
ing and electron physics, vol. 117, Academic Press, San Diego, 2001.

[36] A. Papoulis, S.U. Pillai, Probability, random variables, and stochastic pro-
cesses, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2002.

[37] J. Verbeeck, A. BВҙechВҙe, W. Van den Broek, A holographic method to mea-
sure the source size broadening in STEM, Ultramicroscopy 120 (2012)
35-40.

[38] I. Lobato, D. Van Dyck, MULTEM: A new multislice program to per-
form accurate and fast electron diffraction and imaging simulations using
Graphics Processing Units with CUDA, Ultramicroscopy 156 (2015) 9-
17.

[39] I. Lobato, S. Van Aert, J. Verbeeck, Progress and new advances in simu-
lating electron micrscopy datasets using MULTEM, Ultramicroscopy 168
(2016) 17-27.

[40] M. Welvaert, Y. Rosseel, On the definition of signal-to-noise ratio and
contrast-to-noise ratio for fMRI data, PLoS ONE 8 (2013) e77089.

[41] E.B. Wilson, Probable inference, the law of succession, and statistical
inference, Journal of the Statistical American Association 22 (1927) 209-
212.

[42] H. E, K.E. MacArthur, T.J. Pennycook, E. Okunishi, A.J. DвҖҷAlfonso, N.R.
Lugg, L.J. Allen, P.D. Nellist, Probe integrated scattering cross sections
in the analysis of atomic resolution HAADF STEM images, Ultrami-

croscopy 133, 109-119 (2013).

[43] I.J. Myung, The importance of complexity in model selection, J. Math.
Psychol. 44 (2000) 190-204.

[44] I.J. Myung, M.A. Pitt, Applying OccamвҖҷs razor in modeling cognition: A
Bayesian approach, Psychon. Bull. Rev. 4 (1997) 79-95.

[45] G. Claeskens, N.L. Hjort, Model selection and model averaging, Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008.

[46] P. Stoica, Y. SelВҙen, Model-order selection: A review of information crite-
rion rules, IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 21 (2004) 36-47.

[47] H. Akaike, A new look at the statistical model identification, IEEE Trans-
actions on Automatic Control 19 (1974) 716-723.

[48] P.M.T. Broersen, H.E. Wensink, On finite sample theory for autoregres-
sive model order selection, IEEE Transactions on Signal processing 41
(1993) 194-204.

[49] P.M.T. Broersen, H.E. Wensink, On the penalty factor for autoregressive
order selection in finite samples, IEEE Transactions on Signal processing
44 (1996) 748-752.

[50] G. Schwarz, Estimating the dimension of a model, Annals of Statistics 6
(1978) 461-464.

[51] E.J. Hannan, B.G. Quinn, The determination of the order of an autore-
gression, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 41 (1979) 190-195.

[52] P. Stoica, Y. SelВҙen, J. Li, Multi-modal approach to model selection, Digi-
tal Signal Processing 14 (2004) 399-412.

[53] D.S. Sivia, C.J. Carlile, Molecular spectroscopy and Bayesian spectral
analysis-how many lines are there?, J. Chem. Phys. 96 (1992) 170-178.

[54] Y. Dodge, The Oxford dictionary of statistical terms, Oxford University
Press, New York, 2003.

13


