 

Software-Defined Metasurface Paradigm: Concept, Challenges, Prospects 

 

A. Pitilakis 1,2, A.C. Tasolamprou 1, C. Liaskos 1, F. Liu 3, O. Tsilipakos 1, X. Wang 3,  

M.S. Mirmoosa 3, K. Kossifos 4, J. Georgiou 4, A. Pitsilides 5, N.V. Kantartzis 1,2, S. Ioannidis 1, 

 E.N. Economou 1, M. Kafesaki 1,6, S.A. Tretyakov 3 and C.M. Soukoulis 1,7  

 

1 Foundation for Research and Technology Hellas, 71110, Heraklion, Crete, Greece 

2 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece 

3 Department of Electronics and Nanoengineering, Aalto University, P.O. Box 15500, Espoo, Finland 
4 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Cyprus, 20537, Nicosia, Cyprus 

4 Department of Computer Science, University of Cyprus, 20537, Nicosia, Cyprus 

6 Department of Materials Science and Technology, University of Crete, 71003, Heraklion, Crete, Greece 

7 Ames Laboratory and Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA 

Email: alexpiti@ece.auth.gr; atasolam@iesl.forth.gr  

Abstract  –  HyperSurfaces (HSFs) are devices whose electromagnetic (EM) behavior is software-
driven, i.e., it can be defined programmatically. The key components of this emerging technology 
are the metasurfaces, artificial layered materials whose EM properties depend on their internal 
subwavelength structuring. HSFs merge metasurfaces with a network of miniaturized custom 
electronic controllers, the nanonetwork, in an integrated scalable hardware platform. The 
nanonetwork receives external programmatic commands expressing the desired end-functionality 
and appropriately alters the metasurface configuration thus yielding the respective EM behavior 
for the HSF. In this work, we will present all the components of the HSF paradigm, as well as 
highlight the underlying challenges and future prospects. 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 

 

Metasurfaces, thin planar artificial structures, have enabled the realization of novel components with 

engineered and even unnatural functionalities for the RF, THz and optical spectrum; applications include EM 
invisibility, total radiation absorption, filtering and steering of impinging waves, as well as ultra-efficient, 
miniaturized antennas for sensors and implantable communication devices [1,2]. Despite these impressive 
capabilities, incorporation of metasurfaces to real-world systems is not straightforward: Firstly, they are typically 
non-adaptive and non-reusable, restricting their applicability to a single functionality per structure; secondly, for 
flexibility, accessibility and reusability there is a need for a clear hardware and software stack; thirdly, their 
design remains an interdisciplinary task for specialized researchers. The mission of the HSF platform is to tackle 
all the aforementioned issues by: hosting multiple concurrent tunable EM functionalities described in a clean and 
simple application programming interface (API); integrating reconfigurable metasurfaces with electronics 
enabled by adaptive switch nanonetworks (allowing for global and local control) in a well-packaged, truly smart 
metamaterial; deploying simple reusable software modules that expose the desired end-functionality to users 
without specialized metasurface competences. Apart from the development of a working HSF prototype, it is 
necessary to highlight the challenges and perspectives of this new technology. To this end, we explore the scaling 
of these smart materials in order to estimate fundamental limitations, stemming from forthcoming nano-electronic 
and fabrication technologies. Extending the applicability spectrum, we identify the optimum metasurface types 
for a given need, selecting prime candidates from the large metamaterials family. Overall, the HSF paradigm 
comes as a timely step towards the introduction of the Internet of Materials concept, underpinning the global 
adaptation of IoT (Internet of Things) systems. The structure of this paper is as follows: Section II presents the 
HSF architecture and details its three layers (metasurface, intra-tile control, tile gateway). Section III contains the 
conclusions and a brief discussion on the challenges and prospects of this emerging technological paradigm. 

 

II. THE HYPERSURFACE ARCHITECTURE AND FUNCTIONALITY 

|HSF tiles are envisioned as planar structures that can host metasurface functions with programmatic control. 

Each tile comprises a stack of virtual and physical components, shown in Fig. 1, the metasurface layer, the intra-
tile control layer and the tile gateway layer. The HSF tile supports software descriptions of the metasurface 


 

functions and allows the programmer to customize, deploy or retract them on demand via a programming 
interface with appropriate callbacks with the general form: outcome ← callback(action_type, parameters). The 
action_type is an identifier denoting the intended function to be applied to the impinging waves, e.g., STEER or 
ABSORB. Each action type is associated with a set of parameters. For instance, each function can be defined for 
specific: (i) incidence direction, (ii) steering direction, (iii) applicable frequency band, and (iv) polarization. The 
metasurface end-functionality is exposed to programmers via an API that serves as a strong layer of abstraction. 
It hides the internal complexity of the HSF and offers general purpose access to metasurface functions without 
requiring knowledge of the underlying hardware and physics. Thus, the reconfiguration matching the intended 
function is derived automatically without the programmer’s intervention.  

 

Fig. 1. (a) The functional and physical architecture of a single HyperSurface tile. The desired EM function is attained by a 
switch state configuration setup. The configuration commands are propagated within the tile via the controller intra-network. 
Inter-tile and external communication are handled by standard gateway hardware. Unit cell (b) front and (c) back depiction. 

The Metasurface Layer: Two different EM implementations are examined for the HSF: (i) the switch-fabric 
approach based on a metallic-patch array and (ii) the graphene-based approach exploiting the tunable properties 
of graphene. The metasurface layer in the switch-fabric design consists of ultrathin copper patches periodically 
arranged in a dielectric, low-loss substrate (Rogers RT/Duroid 5880), back-plated by copper. The unit cell is 
small enough compared to the wavelength, in the order of a few mm, which ensures metasurface operation at the 
microwave regime, f=5 GHz. In the graphene-based approach we use periodically aligned square patches of Au 
placed on an Au-backed dielectric substrate. A graphene sheet is placed on the patches which effectively creates 
a patterning of the sheet conductivity. The size of the structure is in the μm scale and the operation frequency lies 
in the low THz spectrum, i.e., 2-15 THz, [3]. The response of the metasurface to the impinging plane wave is 
described by the complex-valued surface impedance, which consists of resistance (real part) and reactance 
(imaginary part) and it is a function of frequency and the geometrical and material parameters. The properties of 
the metasurface can be dynamically adjusted by making the complex-valued surface impedance tunable. The best 
option to achieve tunability is to use voltage-driven elements that control both the resistance and the reactance of 
the metasurface. To this end we implement a customized chip, the controller node, that hosts integrated circuitry 
capable of providing both variable resistance R and capacitance C. Appropriate values, as required for each 
functionality, are propagated from the gateway via a network to the controllers, discussed below. Throughout our 
study we conduct analytical investigations and full-wave electromagnetic simulations utilizing established 
commercial software focusing on optimizing the designs with respect to the capabilities and restrictions of a 
realistic physical/circuit implementation of the controller nodes. By controlling the chip RC values within the 
specified lumped electronic components, we demonstrate an angle-tunable absorber and advance towards more 
general scenarios of programmable wave control, including full-power reflection into any desired direction or 
directions (for instance, to create lenses with a tunable focus) [4,5] and environment-adaptive operation.  
The Intra-tile Control Layer: The intra-tile control layer is composed of the electronic hardware component that 
enables the programmatic control over the HSF. It comprises a network of controllers, each with responsibility 
over one active meta-atom element. The control over a switching element is achieved via the control wiring 


 

shown in red, Fig. 1(a). Additionally, the controllers are able to exchange information in order to propagate 
switch configuration information within the tile. For example, a grid topology using separate wiring, e.g., shown 
as blue rhomb-pattern wires in Fig. 1(a), can be employed for the control tasks. The networked controller 
approach minimizes the required control wiring which benefits the manufacturing cost and the cross-talk 
minimization with the intended EM functionality. Furthermore, a fully wireless design for the interconnection of 
the controllers that employs energy harvesting can be envisaged. 
The Tile Gateway Layer: The tile gateway layer specifies the hardware (Gateway) and protocols that enable the 
bidirectional communication between the controller network and the external world (such as the Internet) as well 
as the communication between the tiles. The interface and mapping between high level functionality and 
controller directives can also be handled by the Gateway. This provides flexibility and scalability in the HSF 
operation workflow. In general, multiple tiles are expected to be used as coating of large areas, operating as an 
EM “skin” that can be tuned locally and globally. Moreover, the tile hardware is intended to be inexpensive, 
favoring massive deployment. The networked tile architecture allows for offloading demanding tasks to powerful, 
external servers. A basic external service is responsible of deducing and returning the optimal tile configurations 
to be deployed after taking into consideration the status of other HSFs and their environment. Based on these 
specifications, existing IoT platforms can constitute exemplary choices for tile gateways [6].  
 

IV. CONCLUSION: CHALLENGES AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 
 

|The HyperSurface (HSF) is scalable planar metamaterial platform that bridges the gap between hardware and 

software, enabling programmatic control of the EM scattering properties over its surface. Meta-atoms are 
designed with specific metasurface functionalities in mind, which are tunable over a parameter range (e.g. 
operating frequency, incidence direction, polarization) and controllable by custom mm-sized chips constituting a 
nano-network. Each HSF tile is composed of a set of such tunable meta-atoms, e.g. 2525, controlled by a single 
Gateway which serves as the interface between the software and hardware components of the platform, and 
handles the communication between other tiles and with the end-user (e.g. a computer). The HSF paradigm is a 
step towards the Internet of Materials, extending the metasurface concept, making it accessible to a wider 
audience and infusing it with novel functionality. 

The ambition of the HSF paradigm comes with interesting challenges. From an EM design perspective, the 

tunability range of metasurfaces needs to be maximized following a co-design approach that takes into account 
the requirements of all the layers of the HSF. Another challenge the HSF design has to deal with is the intra- and 
inter-tile networking as the frequency increases. Various powering and communication schemes for the nodes 
(gateways or chips) are currently being researched [7], including network-on-chip architectures and wireless 
approaches, with the aim of quantifying the bitrate, latency/router delay, footprint, and consumption. 
Nevertheless the prospects of this new technology are manifold, ranging from adaptive “smart” metasurfaces & 
sensors to remotely-powered interactive EM mantles for IoT systems. 
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 

This work was supported by the European Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme-Future 

Emerging Topics (FETOPEN) under grant agreement No. 736876 (VISORSURF).  
 

REFERENCES 
 

[1] C. M. Soukoulis and M. Wegener, “Past achievements and future challenges in the development of three-dimensional 

photonic metamaterials,” Nat. Photonics, vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 523–530, 2011 

[2] S. B. Glybovski, S. A. Tretyakov, P. A. Belov, Y. S. Kivshar and C. R. Simovski, “Metasurfaces: form microwave to 

visible,” Phys. Rep., vol. 634, pp. 1 – 72, 2016. 

[3] P. Tassin, Th. Koschny, M. Kafesaki and C. M. Soukoulis, “A comparison of graphene, superconductors and metals as 

conductors for metamaterials and plasmonics,” Nat. Photonics 6, 259, 2012. 

[4] C. M. Watts, X. Liu and W. J. Padilla, “Metamaterial Electromagnetic wave absorbers,” Adv. Opt. Mater., 24, 98-120, 

2012. 

[5] V. S. Asadchy, A. A. Díaz-Rubio, S. N. Tcvetkova, D.-H. Kwon, A. Elsakka, M. Albooyeh and S. A. Tretyakov, “Flat 

engineered multichannel reflectors,” Phys. Rev. X, 7, 03104, 2017. 

[6] A. Mihovska and M. Sarkar, “Smart Connectivity for Internet of Things (IoT) Applications,” in New Advances in the 

Internet of Things, Springer, pp. 105–118, 2018. 

[7] S. Abadal, C. Liaskos, A. Tsioliaridou, S. Ioannidis, A. Pitsillides, J. Solé-Pareta, E. Alarcón and A. Cabellos-Aparicio, 

“Computing and Communications for the Software-Defined Metamaterial Paradigm: A Context Analysis,” IEEE 
Access, pp. 6225–6235, 2017. 


