Removing Leakage and Surface
Recombination in Planar Perovskite Solar Cells

Kristofer Tvingstedt,*,†
Lidón Gil-Escrig,‡ Cristina Momblona,‡ Philipp Rieder,† David Kiermasch,†

Michele Sessolo,‡ Andreas Baumann,§ Henk J. Bolink,‡ and Vladimir Dyakonov†,§

†Experimental Physics VI, Julius Maximillian University of Würzburg, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
‡Instituto de Ciencia Molecular, Universidad de Valencia, C/Catedrático J. Beltrán 2, 46980 Paterna, Spain
§Bavarian Center for Applied Energy Research, 97074 Würzburg, Germany

*
S Supporting Information

ABSTRACT: Thin-film solar cells suffer from various types of recombination, of
which leakage current usually dominates at lower voltages. Herein, we
demonstrate first a three-order reduction of the shunt loss mechanism in planar
methylammonium lead iodide perovskite solar cells by replacing the commonly
used
hole
transport
layer
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-
(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with a better hole-selective polyarylamine. As
a result, these cells exhibit superior operation under reduced light conditions,
which we demonstrate for the extreme case of moonlight irradiance, at which
open-circuit voltages of 530 mV can still be obtained. By the shunt removal we
also observe the VOC to drop to zero after as long as 2 h after the light has been
switched off. Second, at higher illumination intensities the dominant losses in the
PEDOT:PSS-based cell are ascribed to surface recombination and are also proven
to be substantially minimized by instead employing the polyarylamine. We
attribute the reduced shunt and surface recombination to the far better suited
semiconductor character of the polyarylamine, compared to that of PEDOT:PSS, efficiently blocking electrons from
recombining at this electrode.
S

olar cells are generally developed for operation under
intense illumination such as direct sunlight or even using
light concentrators. There are, however, numerous
conditions in which the light intensity is lower because of
nonideal orientation, sunrise or sunset, cloudy days, or indoor
conditions. Importantly, to fully understand recombination
mechanisms in solar cells, it is essential to also evaluate them
under as large a range of illumination intensities as possible to
assess which recombination pathway becomes dominant under
each corresponding carrier concentration. Because recombina-
tion of excited charge carriers in photovoltaic devices are to
various extents dependent on the charge carrier concentration,
the rates accordingly depend on the illumination intensity itself.
The general Shockley diode equation is of vital importance for
solar cells because it defines how the total recombination
processes depend on the internal voltage in a device. The
relation between recombination current and voltage is usually
described more accurately by the inclusion of an ideality factor
(n), which varies depending on the dominant recombination
mechanism. However, the Shockley diode equation is, even
with the inclusion of an ideality factor, usually not sufficient to
describe all processes that contribute to the overall recombi-
nation current dependency on the actual external voltage, V.
Therefore, a more generalized Shockley equation (eq 1)

accounting for both series and shunt resistances (RSeries and
RShunt, respectively) is required:

=
−
−
+
−
−
J
J
q V
JR
nkT
V
JR
R
J
(exp[ (
)/
]
1)
0
Series
Series

Shunt
Photo

(1)

where q is the electronic charge, k the Boltzmann constant, and
J0 the dark saturation current. To identify the internal voltage
drop over a diode it is important1 to identify the influence of
these resistive losses, which for high voltages are governed by
the series resistance2 and for low voltages by the shunt
resistance.3 The loss mechanism over shunt paths is generally
referred to as “leakage current” because it profoundly increases
the recombination current to values considerably larger than
expected from the ideal diode. However, these losses are not
associated with the material itself, but rather with the entire
device configuration. Unfortunately, most thin-film solar cells
today suffer from such leakage losses.3−5 For cells operating
under stronger lighting conditions, such as solar intensities,
other recombination loss mechanisms become dominant, and

Received:
December 22, 2016

Accepted:
January 19, 2017

Letter

http://pubs.acs.org/journal/aelccp

© XXXX American Chemical Society
424
DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719

ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424−430


shunt paths do not usually have a noticeable effect on the
device performance, except if the shunt loss is extraordinary
high. For cells that operate under weaker illumination
conditions,6−8 or when used as sensitive photodetectors, it is
however decisive that the recombination over the shunt is very
low. More important from a scientific perspective is that the
presence of shunt resistance frequently hinders the correct
assignment of material representative carrier recombination
dynamics, for example, as determined from electrical transient
behavior of solar cells.9 It is important to note that the
dependency of the open-circuit voltage (VOC) on light intensity
(PL) is also heavily affected by shunt recombination losses.1

Such mechanisms have in fact earlier very often been
misinterpreted and led to erroneous assignments of unrealisti-
cally high ideality factors from the VOC(PL) relation. Recent
studies have shown that similar shunt formation statistics are
found for rather different photovoltaic technologies.4

Lead halide perovskites have attracted widespread attention
because of their outstanding suitability as photovoltaic energy
converters10−13 and photodetectors14−17 with power con-
version efficiencies exceeding 22%. Currently, perovskite solar
cells are manufactured in two main configuration categories,
mesoporous or planar.10 Whereas mesoporous cells employ
scaffolds of (usually TiOx) nanoparticles as electron selective
layer, the choice of selective layers for the planar configuration
is more open. Poly[N,N′-bis(4-butylphenyl)-N,N′-bis(phenyl)-
benzidine (polyTPD) is a poly(triaryl)amine, which because of
its transport property and thermal stability has been used as a
hole-selective material in mainly organic light-emitting diodes18

and lately in photovoltaics. While the benefits of this material
have been demonstrated by Malinkiewicz et al.19 and Zhao et
al.20 for planar perovskite cells at solar illumination intensities,
the reason for the better performance has not been clarified,
and the connection to the herein observed reduced leakage
current has not yet been widely noted. However, Fang and
Huang did recently observe a reduction in the leakage current
of perovskite photodetectors with a cross-linkable arylamine as
hole transporter.14 The earlier work clearly proved that
polyTPD on top of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly-
(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) substantially improves the
performance at sun intensities, and the differences were mostly
ascribed to crystal grain size alterations affecting trap
concentration.20 Recent work by El Labban et al.21 and Hou

et al.22 proposed instead that electrons in the perovskite are
parasitically lost at the PEDOT:PSS interface. Herein, we
simply remove one layer in a well-known19 planar methyl-
ammonium lead iodide perovskite stack and demonstrate first
an unprecedented reduction of the parasitic shunt losses,
rendering the perovskite cell suitable for operation also under
extremely low irradiance conditions. Second, we confirm that
the dominant loss mechanism in the PEDOT:PSS-based solar
cells can be ascribed to surface recombination, preventing the
voltage from increasing with increased illumination intensities,
as opposed to the superior polyTPD-based devices. Finally, we
propose an explanation for why the latter devices do not suffer
from such shortcomings.
We manufactured 16 planar perovskite solar cells for each of
the three device configurations presented in Figure 1, according
to methods detailed in the Supporting Information. The first
set of devices (type A) comprised a PEDOT:PSS film spin-
coated on top of indium tin oxide (ITO). Our second set (type
B) comprised a thin film of polyTPD deposited on top of the
PEDOT:PSS layer, whereas our third set (type C) used a
polyTPD film alone, deposited directly on ITO. The
representative devices reported in the Letter, with active area
of 6.5 mm2, were manufactured in one run in the evaporation
chamber, rendering identical uniform perovskite films as
confirmed via scanning electron and optical microscopy
(Figures S1 and S2). Figure 2 displays the dark J−V
measurements of the cells and of a reference Si photodetector,
S1787-04, from Hamamatsu. This Si photodetector,23 with a
shunt resistance of typically 100 GΩ, is highly suited for
photodetection over several orders of light intensities. The
general influence of shunt resistances on dark diode J−V curves
is also demonstrated by placing a 1 MΩ resistor in parallel with
the Si photodetector, essentially removing the five lowest
orders in photosensitivity.
The PEDOT:PSS/polyTPD-based cells (device B) shows a
very commonly observed shunt resistance of ∼70 MΩ
providing a leakage current of around 0.45 mA m−2 at 0.2 V.
A 70 MΩ resistor well describes the entire voltage range of the
losses due to the shunt path. Such values are also representative
for organic solar cells likewise employing PEDOT:PSS.1 The
perovskite solar cells with a bare PEDOT:PSS layer (device A)
displayed a slightly lower shunt resistance of ∼15 MΩ. Device
C (with only polyTPD) shows on the other hand a remarkably

Figure 1. Device layouts of the studied planar methylammonium lead iodide cells employing three different hole transport layers: device A, 80
nm of PEDOT:PSS; device B, with 80 nm of PEDOT:PSS and 20 nm of polyTPD; and device C, with 20 nm of polyTPD only. The perovskite
layers and top electron-selective layers are identical as they were prepared in the same run. The chemical structure of the charge transport
materials is outlined in panel D.

ACS Energy Letters
Letter

DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719

ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424−430
425


reduced leakage current and a corresponding shunt resistance
as high as 15 GΩ, comparable with the Si photodetector.
However, the assumption of the shunt being solely described by
an ohmic resistor might not fully apply for device C, as we note
minor deviations from linear behavior in the forward sweep.
While it is indeed possible to better fit a larger voltage range
with a proposed4,5 power law expression, we prefer here to stay
with the linear approximation to enhance clarity. We note that
the effective leakage current of this device amounts to merely
2.1 μA m−2 at ±0.2 V. It is important to point out that the
shunt value extracted from the polyTPD-based cells was very
reproducible, with not one of the 16 manufactured devices
showing deviations larger than 16% from the 15 GΩ resistance
presented in Figure 2.
Evaluating the double-sweep J−V curves of Figure 2, we note
the almost complete lack of hysteresis in the exponential part of
the curve for the polyTPD-based cells (devices B and C).
Current voltage hysteresis is otherwise an unfortunate and
common feature24 of perovskite solar cells, and its exact origin
remains to be determined. The graphs presented here are
logarithmic J−V curves, substantially raising the bar for
claiming the property of being “hysteresis-free”. In the ultralow
current regime of device C, with only polyTPD, some form of
hysteresis can however be clearly identified. We attribute this
difference to charging of the cells during or after the reverse
sweep. As a result of this, an “open-circuit voltage in the dark”
can be detected, albeit only in the reverse sweep. This at a first
glance highly anomalous solar cell behavior may however not
be so unexpected considering that the fast leakage path is so
effectively removed, and it is plausible that some charges, stored
somewhere in the device, have simply not recombined in the

studied time frame. We therefore chose to conduct a study of
the time decay of the open-circuit voltage (OCVD). As noted
earlier,9,25 it is then crucial to employ as high as possible input
impedance to correctly measure the solar cell, as opposed to
unintentionally measuring the voltage decay over the utilized
measurement instrumentation itself (see the Supporting
Information for further details). We illuminate the three
perovskite solar cells and the Si photodiode with light
intensities corresponding to room light for 5 s, because this
was sufficient to ensure a steady-state starting condition where
the generation rate equals the recombination rate, and then
switch off the light (t = 10−6 s) and monitor the decay as
presented with a lin.−log scale in Figure 3.

As comparison, we also include the OCVD traces for the Si
photodiode obtained when employing either the built-in
megaohm of the oscilloscope or the gigaohm load for the
longer time scales and lower voltages. The rapid voltage drops
observed in those cases are occurring over the employed
measurement instrumentation and not inside the Si diode itself.
All perovskite cells are instead evaluated with a high load
resistance, and the voltage drop occurring after around 1 s is
therefore due to the shunt resistance of the cell itself. Device C,
using only polyTPD as the hole-selective layer, does not display
such a drop at all but decays instead over at least three more
decades in time compared to the PEDOT:PSS-based cells.
Device C retains a VOC of 0.25 V even 3 min after the light has
been switched off and does not reach 0 V until after 2 h. The
large differences in time it takes for the voltage to reach zero
clearly highlight the influence that the often observed “leakage
current” generally has on the behavior of solar cells. The
equivalent circuit of the solar cell is described in the inset of
Figure 3 and includes a diode, capacitor, and shunt resistor in
parallel. As we study only open-circuit conditions, the value of
the also present series resistance becomes unimportant here.
With this circuit in mind, we can assign the long and rather
uniform decay of voltage with the logarithm of time as a
capacitive contribution from charges probably stored on some
of the electrode layers of the device. These charge carriers,
contributing to the overall voltage, do not disappear as fast as
carriers in the bulk of the device because they are separated
from each other by the perovskite layer. They instead represent

Figure 2. (A) Dark J−V curves of the three studied photovoltaic
diodes. The device employing only polyTPD (device C) is
characterized by a leakage current 3 orders of magnitude lower
than device A employing only PEDOT:PSS. (B) A reference 6.2
mm2 Hamamatsu photodetector with nominal ∼100 GΩ built-in
shunt resistor was deliberately shunted by placing a 1 MΩ resistor
in parallel with the device.

Figure 3. Open-circuit voltage decay for the three perovskite cells
and the Si reference photodetector, the latter with different
measurement resistances in parallel. The shunt-free perovskite
device C displays charge carriers remaining at the electrodes of the
device even after up to as much as 2 h. Inset shows the equivalent
circuit used in the corresponding fitting (Figure S3).

ACS Energy Letters
Letter

DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719

ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424−430
426


capacitive charges that can decay via either the parasitic
pathway that the shunt represents, that is, over an RC
component with a traditional monoexponential decay charac-
teristic, or via the wide bandgap semiconductor diode that the
bulk of the perovskite itself represents. Depending on the value
of the shunt resistance, the full voltage decay of Figure 3 can be
quite accurately described by one of the two routes obtained by
simply equating the time derivative of charges on the capacitor
with either the current through a resistor or through a diode.
Equation 2 represents the well-known RC identity and its
solution, whereas eq 3 represents instead the diode−capacitor26

identity and its solution:

−
=
=
=
−
C V
t
V
R
V t
V
d
d
with solution
( )
e
t
t RC

Shunt
0
/

(2)

−
=
−

= −
−
−
−
−
·
=

C V
t
I

V t
nkT

d
d
(e
1) with solution

( )
ln(1
(1
e
)e
)

V nkT

V
nkT
I
nkT C t

0
/

/
( /
)
t
0
0
(3)

where Vt=0 is the starting steady-state voltage value; n and I0 are
the ideality factor and dark saturation current of the diode,
respectively. We emphasize here that this diode−capacitor
decay is very different from a RC decay, because it follows a
linear behavior with the logarithm of time for the larger part of
the time axis. Accordingly, we have chosen to plot the OCVD
decay in Figure 3 on a linear voltage axis and a logarithmic time
axis. Fits of the measured OCVD traces to eqs 2 and 3 are
included in the Supporting Information (Figure S3) where
corresponding capacitance values are also provided. The end
time of such diode−capacitor decays, that is, when the voltage
reaches zero and the capacitor is discharged, is from eq 3 ruled
by the simple ratio of the capacitance and the dark saturation
current according to26

=
t
nkTC
I
End
0
(4)

Very long decay end times can therefore be reached only by
shunt-free devices such as device C and the Si reference cell,
whereas the other perovskite devices enter a faster RC regime
at much earlier times, when the shunt starts to rule the
dynamics. Ions have earlier been assigned to be responsible for
the hysteresis, but recently also to anomalously long-lived
charges.27 Ionic displacement would possibly be more
consistent with the voltage persistency also recently observed9

but not seen in the low-intensity decay trace of Figure 3.
Acknowledging the possibility of ionic displacement affecting
the voltage decay, we would however expect more similar
behavior in the OCVD decay for all three device structures,
because they comprise identical perovskite layers. The Si cell
also requires 115 s to reach zero volts, which obviously should
not be associated with any ionic effect. We therefore note that
long decays do not necessarily have to do with the presence of
ions, although the magnitude of the capacitance may indeed be
partly related to their presence.
Having confirmed that the voltage decay is indeed extremely
slow at lower voltages, when the leakage recombination path
has been so effectively removed, we can justify the observed
“VOC in the dark”, in the low-voltage reverse sweep of Figure
2A, considering that the J−V measurement is just sweeping the
voltage faster here than the capacitive decay rate itself. Hence,
even if our sweep rate is as low as 9 mV s−1, a substantial
amount of the charges at 0.4 V is still remaining at the

electrodes of the device when we, in our reverse sweep 11 s
later, are measuring 0.3 V. Figure S6 reveals further the impact
of different sweep end voltage values and sweep rates for the
polyTPD-based cell.
The labeling “leakage current” can also be somewhat
misleading as it may be interpreted as an extra current flow
originating purely from the applied voltage of an external
electrical power source. To emphasize that leakage current over
shunt paths, irrespective of their origin, indeed represents a true
low-light intensity recombination mechanism, the steady-state
open-circuit voltage under a large set of illumination intensities
is presented in Figure 4A. The recombination over the shunt

path can here clearly be identified as the rapid voltage drop at
lower light intensity conditions (for the PEDOT:PSS-based
cells around 10−4 suns). In these devices, the quasi-Fermi levels
cannot split properly according to what is expected from the
Shockley equation, because an additional faster loss mechanism
prevents a sufficient carrier density to be sustained. However,
this is clearly not the case for the polyTPD-based cell, which
shows no voltage drop even at the lowest intensities available in
our setup (∼10−7 suns). The whole relationship between VOC
and intensity is instead well-explained without the extra shunt
term, such that the position of the quasi-Fermi levels can be
fully assigned to bulk carrier recombination even at low
voltages for the polyTPD-based cell. The overall similarity
among Figures 2−4 in fact elucidates that the steady-state
(Figure 4), quasi steady-state (Figure 2), and the full voltage

Figure 4. (A) Steady-state VOC vs illumination intensity (PL,
expressed in sun equivalent units). Devices A and B, containing
PEDOT:PSS, display a rapid voltage drop at low light intensity due
to the presence of the additional shunt recombination pathway. (B)
Ideality factors as determined from the inset equation and the
relationship in panel A clearly revealing the different loss
mechanisms ruling the devices at higher light intensities.

ACS Energy Letters
Letter

DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719

ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424−430
427


decay measurements (Figure 3) indeed are probing identical
features.
For the higher-intensity regime in Figure 4A, we clearly also
note a large difference in the overall slope of the VOC(PL)
relation for device A and accordingly that this device is not able
to reach the VOC values of the polyTPD-based cells at any light
intensity. The slope represents the series resistance-free ideality
factor and is a strong indicator of what type of recombination is
ruling the cells.1 The ideality factor plotted as a function of light
intensity in Figure 4B reveals exceptionally low values for the
PEDOT:PSS-based cell. Similar notes of low ideality factors for
such cells were also made recently by Zhao et al.,20 but the
reason behind it was not assigned. Low values of ideality factors
in conjunction with overall very high values of dark saturation
currents are actually a strong indicator of a pronounced surface
recombination.1 The polyTPD-based cells are not limited by
this but are instead, as generally often stated for higher
efficiency perovskites, limited by trap assisted recombination.
Strong surface recombination in PEDOT:PSS-based perov-
skites was also very recently proposed by Hou et al.,22 whereas
the origin of the surface recombination was not proposed. We
herein assign the reduced surface recombination and lower
leakage of device C primarily to the superior semiconducting
character of polyTPD with respect to that of PEDOT:PSS.
Electrons present in the perovskite conduction band cannot
make the transition into polyTPD, because of its very high
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital level of approximately
−2.4 eV.19 On the other hand, PEDOT:PSS displays instead
characteristics analogous to semimetals28 and does not qualify
as an efficient electron-blocking material. To distinguish the
clear difference in energetic distribution of states in the two
studied materials, Figure 5 displays their absorption coefficient
on a logarithmic scale together with the external quantum
efficiency (EQE) of a perovskite (device C) cell.

The clear presence of low energetic transitions allowed in
PEDOT:PSS cannot be identified in polyTPD. This short-
coming of PEDOT:PSS allows a non-negligible part of the
perovskite electrons to be parasitically extracted via midgap
states,29 such as polaron or bipolaron states, very abundant
therein.28 A similar proposal was made recently when replacing
PEDOT:PSS with CuSCN in organic solar cells.30 In contrast,
the very steep absorption edge of polyTPD indicates instead
that no such gap states mediating electrode recombination are
present in this material. We therefore herein propose that not

only the main absorbing material should possess as steep a
band-edge31 as possible, but necessarily also the employed
charge-selective electrodes, in order to ensure that the density
of midgap states is minimized also in these layers. PolyTPD is
an example of one material that features these properties.
We note also that device B, with the PEDOT:PSS
underneath the polyTPD, apparently partly removes the
excellent low leakage current of device C. Optical microscopy
(see the Supporting Information) reveals micrometer-sized
spots located underneath the uniform perovskite film of device
B. We attribute these to limited wetting of polyTPD on
PEDOT:PSS, and we propose these sites, not visible in
scanning electron microscopy images (see the Supporting
Information) of the perovskite surface itself, also act as possible
shunt formations. Similar features were recently32 observed
using hyperspectral imaging and indeed were associated with a
reduced local quasi Fermi-level splitting. These features are not
present in devices A and C. The Supporting Information
further displays J−V curves under a set of selected familiar light
intensities for the three evaluated devices. We show for example
that only the shunt-free device C is able to retain an
unprecedented open-circuit voltage of 530 mV under moon-
light intensities.
In conclusion, our message with this contribution is
threefold: We first suggest to exclude PEDOT:PSS as a hole
transport material because of its semimetallic nature and
corresponding abundancy of intergap states that increases
recombination at this interface and further leads to large
leakage currents. We conclude that this loss mechanism
prevents the difference of the two perovskite quasi-Fermi
levels from maintaining a high value at both high and low
irradiance levels, but for rather different reasons. At low voltage
values, the shunt loss rules, while at higher values, a
pronounced contribution of surface recombination instead
becomes dominant. PolyTPD does not show any of these
features but acts instead as an almost perfect hole-selective layer
that excellently inhibits electron recombination at this side of
the device, independent of voltage. Second, from our OCVD
measurements, we conclude that the shunt-free devices show a
capacitive contribution to voltage that remains for up to 2 h
after the light has been switched off and that can be fully
described with a capacitor discharging over a diode. Third, we
propose the steepness of band edges as determined from
sensitive absorption profiles as a figure of merit for a good
charge-selective layer.
■ ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
S
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the
ACS Publications website at DOI: 10.1021/acsenergy-
lett.6b00719.
Experimental details of the manufacturing procedures,
device statistics, and measurement methodology details;
SEM and optical images of the manufactured devices
taken after the top electrode has been delaminated;
equivalent circuit fitting of the OCVD; J−V sweep
alterations; J−V characteristics of the four devices
evaluated under a set of selected familiar light intensities.
(PDF)

Figure 5. Absorption coefficient of the two studied hole-transport
materials highlighting that only polyTPD has a real band edge. The
EQE of device C is included as a textbook example of a clear band
edge semiconductor material.

ACS Energy Letters
Letter

DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719

ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424−430
428


■ AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
*E-mail: ktvingstedt@physik.uni-wuerzburg.de.
ORCID
Kristofer Tvingstedt: 0000-0003-0516-9326
Vladimir Dyakonov: 0000-0001-8725-9573
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
K.T., D.K., P.R., A.B., and V.D. acknowledge the BMBF for
funding through the grant HYPER with Grant Agreement
Number 03SF0514. L.G.-E., C.M., M.S., and H.J.B acknowledge
financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Economy and
Competitiveness (MINECO) via the Unidad de Excelencia
María de Maeztu MDM-2015-0538, MAT2014-55200, and
PCIN-2015-255 and the Generalitat Valenciana (Prometeo/
2012/053). C.M. and M.S. thank the MINECO for pre- and
postdoctoral (JdC) contract. The authors also acknowledge
constructive criticism from the reviewers on the first version of
the manuscript.
■ REFERENCES
(1) Tvingstedt, K.; Deibel, C. Temperature Dependence of Ideality
Factors in Organic Solar Cells and the Relation to Radiative Efficiency.
Adv. Ener. Mater. 2016, 6, 1502230.
(2) Fong, K. C.; McIntosh, K. R.; Blakers, A. W. Accurate Series
Resistance Measurement of Solar Cells. Prog. Photovoltaics 2013, 21,
490−499.
(3) Dongaonkar, S.; Servaites, J. D.; Ford, G. M.; Loser, S.; Moore, J.;
Gelfand, R. M.; Mohseni, H.; Hillhouse, H. W.; Agrawal, R.; Ratner,
M. A.; Marks, T. J.; Lundstrom, M. S.; Alam, M. A. Universality of
Non-Ohmic Shunt Leakage in Thin-Film Solar Cells. J. Appl. Phys.
2010, 108, 124509.
(4) Dongaonkar, S.; Loser, S.; Sheets, E. J.; Zaunbrecher, K.; Agrawal,
R.; Marks, T. J.; Alam, M. A. Universal Statistics of Parasitic Shunt
Formation in Solar Cells, and Its Implications for Cell to Module
Efficiency Gap. Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6, 782−787.
(5) Liao, Y. K.; Kuo, S. Y.; Hsieh, M. Y.; Lai, F. I.; Kao, M. H.; Cheng,
S. J.; Chiou, D. W.; Hsieh, T. P.; Kuo, H. C. A Look into The Origin of
Shunt Leakage Current of Cu(In,Ga)Se-2 Solar Cells via Experimental
and Simulation Methods. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2013, 117, 145−
151.
(6) Steim, R.; Ameri, T.; Schilinsky, P.; Waldauf, C.; Dennler, G.;
Scharber, M.; Brabec, C. J. Organic Photovoltaics for Low Light
Applications. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2011, 95, 3256−3261.
(7) Kawata, K.; Tamaki, K.; Kawaraya, M. Dye-Sensitised and
Perovskite Solar Cells as Indoor Energy Harvestors. J. Photopolym. Sci.
Technol. 2015, 28, 415−417.
(8) Mathews, I.; King, P. J.; Stafford, F.; Frizzell, R. Performance of
III-V Solar Cells as Indoor Light Energy Harvesters. Ieee J. Photovolt.
2016, 6, 230−235.
(9) Baumann, A.; Tvingstedt, K.; Heiber, M. C.; Vath, S.; Momblona,
C.; Bolink, H. J.; Dyakonov, V. Persistent Photovoltage in
Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells. APL Mater.
2014, 2, 081501.
(10) Grätzel, M. The Light and Shade of Perovskite Solar Cells. Nat.
Mater. 2014, 13, 838−842.
(11) Lee, M. M.; Teuscher, J.; Miyasaka, T.; Murakami, T. N.; Snaith,
H. J. Efficient Hybrid Solar Cells Based on Meso-Superstructured
Organometal Halide Perovskites. Science 2012, 338, 643−647.
(12) Jeon, N. J.; Noh, J. H.; Yang, W. S.; Kim, Y. C.; Ryu, S.; Seo, J.;
Seok, S. I. Compositional Engineering of Perovskite Materials for
High-Performance Solar Cells. Nature 2015, 517, 476−480.
(13) Zuo, C.; Bolink, H. J.; Han, H.; Huang, J.; Cahen, D.; Ding, L.
Advances in Perovskite Solar Cells. Adv. Sci. 2016, 3, 1500324.

(14) Fang, Y.; Huang, J. Resolving Weak Light of Sub-Picowatt per
Square Centimeter by Hybrid Perovskite Photodetectors Enabled by
Noise Reduction. Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 2804−2810.
(15) Saidaminov, M. I.; Adinolfi, V.; Comin, R.; Abdelhady, A. L.;
Peng, W.; Dursun, I.; Yuan, M.; Hoogland, S.; Sargent, E. H.; Bakr, O.
M. Planar-Integrated Single-Crystalline Perovskite Photodetectors.
Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8724.
(16) Fang, Y.; Dong, Q.; Shao, Y.; Yuan, Y.; Huang, J. Highly
Narrowband Perovskite Single-Crystal Photodetectors Enabled by
Surface-Charge Recombination. Nat. Photonics 2015, 9, 679−686.
(17) Dong, R.; Fang, Y.; Chae, J.; Dai, J.; Xiao, Z.; Dong, Q.; Yuan,
Y.; Centrone, A.; Zeng, X. C.; Huang, J. High-Gain and Low-Driving-
Voltage Photodetectors Based on Organolead Triiodide Perovskites.
Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 1912−1918.
(18) Sun, Q. J.; Hou, J. H.; Yang, C. H.; Li, Y. F.; Yang, Y. Enhanced
Performance of White Polymer Light-Emitting Diodes Using Polymer
Blends as Hole-Transporting Layers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 89,
153501.
(19) Malinkiewicz, O.; Yella, A.; Lee, Y. H.; Espallargas, G. M.;
Graetzel, M.; Nazeeruddin, M. K.; Bolink, H. J. Perovskite Solar Cells
Employing Organic Charge-Transport Layers. Nat. Photonics 2013, 8,
128−132.
(20) Zhao, D.; Sexton, M.; Park, H.-Y.; Liu, S.; Baure, G.; Nino, J. C.;
So, F. High-Efficiency Solution-Processed Planar Perovskite Solar
Cells with a Polymer Hole Transport Layer. Adv. Ener. Mater. 2015, 5,
1401855.
(21) El Labban, A.; Chen, H.; Kirkus, M.; Barbe, J.; Del Gobbo, S.;
Neophytou, M.; McCulloch, I.; Eid, J. Improved Efficiency in Inverted
Perovskite Solar Cells Employing a Novel Diarylamino-Substituted
Molecule as PEDOT:PSS Replacement. Adv. Ener. Mater. 2016, 6,
1502101.
(22) Hou, Y.; Chen, W.; Baran, D.; Stubhan, T.; Luechinger, N. A.;
Hartmeier, B.; Richter, M.; Min, J.; Chen, S.; Quiroz, C. O. M.; et al.
Overcoming the Interface Losses in Planar Heterojunction Perovskite-
Based Solar Cells. Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 5112.
(23) SI Photodiode S1787-04. http://www.hamamatsu.com/eu/en/
product/alpha/P/4103/S1787-04/index.html.
(24) Snaith, H. J.; Abate, A.; Ball, J. M.; Eperon, G. E.; Leijtens, T.;
Noel, N. K.; Stranks, S. D.; Wang, J. T.-W.; Wojciechowski, K.; Zhang,
W. Anomalous Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2014, 5, 1511−1515.
(25) Sudheendra Rao, K.; Mohapatra, Y. N. Open Circuit Voltage
Decay Transients and Recombination in Bulk-Heterojunction Solar
Cells. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 104, 203303.
(26) Hellen, E. H. Verifying the Diode-Capacitor Voltage Decay. Am.
J. Phys. 2003, 71, 797.
(27) O’Regan, B. C.; Barnes, P. R. F.; Li, X. E.; Law, C.; Palomares,
E.; Marin-Beloqui, J. M. Optoelectronic Studies of Methylammonium
Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells with Mesoporous TiO2: Separation
of Electronic and Chemical Charge Storage, Understanding Two
Recombination Lifetimes, and the Evolution of Band Offsets during J-
V Hysteresis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 5087−5099.
(28) Bubnova, O.; Khan, Z. U.; Wang, H.; Braun, S.; Evans, D. R.;
Fabretto, M.; Hojati-Talemi, P.; Dagnelund, D.; Arlin, J. B.; Geerts, Y.
H.; et al. Semi-Metallic Polymers. Nat. Mater. 2014, 13, 190−194.
(29) Ratcliff, E. L.; Zacher, B.; Armstrong, N. R. Selective Interlayers
and Contacts in Organic Photovoltaic Cells. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2011,
2, 1337.
(30) Treat, N. D.; Yaacobi-Gross, N.; Faber, H.; Perumal, A. K.;
Bradley, D. D. C.; Stingelin, N.; Anthopoulos, T. D. Copper
thiocyanate: An Attractive Hole Transport/Extraction Layer for Use
in Organic Photovoltaic Cells. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 107, 013301.
(31) Tvingstedt, K.; Malinkiewicz, O.; Baumann, A.; Deibel, C.;
Snaith, H. J.; Dyakonov, V.; Bolink, H. J. Radiative Efficiency of Lead
Iodide Based Perovskite Solar Cells. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 6071.
(32) El-Hajje, G.; Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Ávila, J.; Guillemot,
T.; Guillemoles, J.-F.; Sessolo, M.; Bolink, H. J.; Lombez, L.
Quantification of Spatial Inhomogeneity in Perovskite Solar Cells by

ACS Energy Letters
Letter

DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719

ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424−430
429


Hyperspectral Luminescence Imaging. Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9,
2286−2294.

ACS Energy Letters
Letter

DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00719

ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 424−430
430


