Features of low-to-high cycle fatigue fracture transition 
 

Leonid Kremnev1
, Vyacheslav Matyunin2, Artem Marchenkov2 and Larisa Vinogradova 3  

 

1MSTU «STANKIN», Russia 

2NRU «MPEI», Russia 

3 Gubkin Russian State University of Oil and Gas (NRU), Russia 

 

Email: kremnevls@yandex.ru 

 

Abstract: It was experimentally confirmed that if steel cyclic stress reduces to less than tensile yield stress values, i.e. in 
case of high-cycle fatigue, the mechanism of fracture changes from dislocation to vacancy one. This conclusion was 
based on the fact that steel density determined by the method of liquid displacement is less than that of steel in both 
initial condition and after fracture under the cyclic loads exceeding tensile yield stress values. In the latter case steel 
hardness increases, whereas the steels fractured under the cyclic stresses less than their tensile yield stress values show 
no change in hardness. It means that in such a case metal fractures without strain hardening, i.e. undergoes brittle 
fracturing developing by vacancy mechanism rather than by dislocation one. As a result such steel obtains the structure 
and properties similar to those appearing after its exposure to radiation, i.e. friability and brittleness. The results obtained 
allow us to explain the presence of a horizontal section in the Wöhler fatigue failure diagram. 
 

Keywords: fatigue fracture, dislocation fracture, vacancy fracture, low-cycle fatigue, high-cycle fatigue. 
 

1 
Introduction 

The hypothesis on changing the mechanism of fracture from dislocation to vacancy one under the cyclic 
stresses less than tensile yield strength has been experimentally confirmed by means of steel density 
estimation. It is demonstrated that the values of density can be used to determine and forecast the residual life 
period. To estimate the rate of a fatigue crack growth the author of [1] proposed to use  1cs as the number of 
interatomic bonds' breakdowns at the crack tip within a single cycle of maximal variable stress σmax. It was 
found that under σmax > σ0,2  the value of  1cs is greater than one and amounts to several hundred of broken 
bonds per cycle (low-cycle fatigue); under σmax= σ0,2  we have 1cs =1 and under σmax< σ0,2  we have 1cs <1 
(high-cycle fatigue). Since an interatomic bond can be broken only as a whole and not part by part, in the 
latter case it is destroyed within several (multitude of) cycles instead of a single one. In this context the 
mechanism of fracture may change from dislocation to vacancy one. The purpose of this work is to 
experimentally confirm or deny the abovementioned hypothesis. In case the density reduces in comparison 
with the initial value the hypothesis can be accepted; otherwise it is to be rejected.  

2 
Experimental results  
To test the above assumptions a set of 3 mm thick flat  "corset" specimens of 09Г2С (AISI A 516 55) and 
20Х13НЛ (AISI 420) steel grades were subjected to cyclic testing. Instron 8801 testing machine was used to 
conduct these tests at zero-to-tension stress cycle (stress ratio R = 0) and cycling frequency of 20 hz. A part of 
the specimens was tested under maximum cyclic stress  σmax less than  tensile yield strength, others -  at σmax 
higher than tensile yield strength.  The cyclic tests were preceded by  tensile tests to determine the tensile 
yield strength σт = 360 MPa  for 09Г2С and the offset tensile yield strength σ0.2 = 255 MPa  for 20Х13НЛ. 
After fracturing the specimens were used to cut out 35mm×30mm square blocks from their near fracture 
zones in order to determine their density and hardness. The density was determined by the liquid (distilled 
water) displacement method. The density assessment error was  ± 1%. The hardness was taken as  a mean 


value of five tests conducted on Instron Tukon 2500 machine under 1 kgf load. The error in the hardness 
assessment was ± 2.5%. The Table below presents the results of the experiments conducted. 

Table. Cyclic fatigue tests results and fracture zone metal hardness 

Material 
Maximum cycle stress σmax, MPa 
Up-to-fracture 
cycles number N 

Density ρ, 
g/cm3 

Hardness HV1, 
kgf/mm2                     

09Г2С 

330 (σmax < σт) 
911×103 
6.90 
165 

420 (σmax > σт) 
60×103 
7.40 
213 

Metal in initial condition 
7.18 
170 

20Х13НЛ 

180 (σmax < σ0.2) 
98×103 
5.70 
188 

300 (σmax > σ0.2) 
17×103 
7.60 
210 

Metal in initial condition 
7.27 
190 

The Table shows that after the cyclic tests the density of both steels has substantially changed in comparison 
with their initial condition. The density of 09Г2С reduced by 3,9% after testing under σmax < σт and increased 
by 3% after σmax > σт testing. The density of cast steel 20Х13НЛ reduced by 21.6% after testing under σmax < 
σ0.2 in comparison with the initial value, and increased by  4.5% after testing under σmax > σ0.2. The data 
presented can be referred to as an experimental validation of the hypothesis concerned. It should be noted that 
cast steel 20Х13НЛ shows higher spread of density values than that of wrought steel 09Г2С. This may be 
caused by increased amount of defects, e.g. pores and other imperfections of cast steel structure. At the same 
time, the values of density increase in cast and wrought steels observed after cyclic loading under maximum 
cycle stresses exceeding tensile yield strength are quite close to each other and  as large as 3% and 4.5% 
respectively. When comparing the values of HV1 hardness taken before and after the cyclic tests one can see 
that the increase in 09Г2С hardness under σmax > σт was as high as 25.3%, whereas the same value for  
20Х13НЛ under σmax > σ0.2 amounted to 10.5%. This increase of both steels hardness and density can be 
accounted for by their work-hardenability, or strain-hardening. In comparison with their initial values the 
changes in both steels hardness observed after their cyclic tests under σmax less than tensile yield strength 
appeared to be insufficient (by 1…3%) and within the limits of experimental error. This result can be 
deemed the second experimental evidence of the fact that strain-hardening known for its dislocation nature is 
absent and was replaced by  vacancy mechanism of steel fracturing. It should be noted that the absence of 
strain-hardening signs to be observed during metallic materials fracturing speaks for its brittle nature. It 
should be reminded that metals and alloys are prone to increasing their vacancy amount when exposed to 
aggressive radioactive environments. This increase results is substantial density reduction, friability and 
embrittlement known as radiation friability and  embrittlement. The results obtained make it possible to 
determine the cause for the appearance of Wöhler fatigue fracture diagram discontinuity [1]. During the 
vacancy fracturing a fatigue crack growth is dependent on the amount of vacancies at its tip required for this 
crack growth. In the period of vacancy accumulation the crack doesn't grow as the number of stress cycles 
increases, which results in a fatigue diagram horizontal plateau (step). 

3 
Conclusions  

 
In order to substantiate the hypothesis proposed it was experimentally confirmed that the mechanism 
of fracture changes form dislocation to vacancy one under the cyclic stresses less than  tensile yield 
strength, i.e. under high-cycle fatigue conditions. 
 
It was found expedient to use metal density as a test parameter for metal parts and structures on-line 
inspection conducted to estimate their residual operation life. 

4 
References  

[1] 
Kremnev L.S. Nature of material fatigue fracture diagram.  2015. Proc. VI Int. Conf. on Deformation 
and fracture of materials and nanomaterials. (Moscow). Vol.1. (Baikov Institute of Metallurgy and 
Materials Science RAS).  Pp. 155-156. 


