(a)E-mail: paipeng@cug.edu.cn
China University of Geosciences - Wuhan China.

Reflected wavefront manipulation by acoustic metasurface with 
anisotropic local resonant units

MEIYU LIU, PAN LI, and PAI PENG(a)

School of Mathematics and Physics, China University of Geosciences- Wuhan, China

PACS 43.20.El –Reflection,refraction,diffraction of acoustic wave
PACS 43.40.+s –Structural acoustics and viberation

Abstract –In this work, we develop the gradient metasurface is constructed of a locally 
anisotropic resonant structure, comprising a steel cylinder with an elliptical rubber 
coating embedded in epoxy. The deflective angles of rubber ellipses in the locally 
anisotropic resonant unit provide a method of controlling the reflected phase. Phase 
shifts of the reflected wave can cover the 2π range. With an appropriate design of the 
phase profiles along the acoustic metasurface, we can achieve anomalous reflection and 
Bessel beam. The locally anisotropic resonant units have significant potential for 
engineering and manipulating acoustic wavefronts.

Metamaterials are a class of subwavelength 

artificial composite structures with exotic properties 
that cannot be found in natural materials. However, 
these metamaterials have large thickness to lead to 
the bulky size and they go against miniaturization 
and integration of acoustic devices. A new type of 
metamaterials −metasurfaces − has emerged. Not 
only do acoustic metasurfaces exhibit the excellent 
ability of governing the acoustic wave, but also they 
provide a new method to accomplish the integration 
of acoustic devices. Inspired by optical wave 
manipulation, metasurfaces can be useful for 
manipulating acoustic wavefronts. The general 
Snell’s law [1] is presented to rich the anomalous 
reflection and refraction phenomenon with phase 
discontinuities. Acoustic metasurfaces can freely 
tailor the wave field across a single layer and display 
many novel acoustic wave front control phenomena.

The acoustic metasurface is based on arrays of 

subwavelength units, including (but not limited to) 
Helmholtz resonators [2-6], membranes [7-11], 
coiling-up space [12-16] and locally anisotropic 
resonant structures [17]. Liu et al. [4] utilized 
Helmholtz resonators to theoretically demonstrate the 
apparent negative reflection when the incident angle 
is beyond the critical angle. Chen [11] also designed 
an acoustic composite structure of cavity and 
membrane to manipulate the phase profile in a 
controllable manner at low frequency. Li et al. [15]

designed a coiling-up metasurface with discrete 
phase shift covering the full 2π span to realize the 
arbitrary adjustment of phase profiles. Liu et al. [17] 
designed a new acoustic metasurface based on 
locally anisotropic resonant units to realize the 
arbitrary control of the reflected wave in the water 
medium. 

Similar the monopolar resonant mechanism of 

Helmholtz 
resonators, 
the 
locally 
anisotropic 

resonant units also have outstanding resonant 
performance. The three-component composites have 
a 
matrix 
of
silicone-coated 
metallic 
spheres 

embedded in epoxy and were first proposed by Liu et 
al. [18]. They can generate a negative dynamic mass 
density at resonant frequencies. Then, the elliptical 
inclusions exhibit the anisotropic features. The 
elastic metamaterial built from lead cylinders with an 
elliptical rubber coating embedded in an epoxy 
matrix had an anisotropic effective mass density, 
based on 
a 
multi-displacement 
microstructure 

continuum model [19]. Following theoretical studies, 
microstructural designs with an anisotropic mass 
density have been experimentally validated [20].

In this work, we propose a resonant-based acoustic 

metasurface. Each of its anisotropic resonant units 
contains a steel cylinder with an elliptical rubber 
coating embedded in epoxy. It is an interesting 
phenomenon that the rubber ellipses in the locally 
anisotropic resonant unit provide another adjustable 


.

phase for the metasurface. The commercial software 
“COMSOL Multiphysics” (based on the Finite 
Element Method) was employed to numerically 
calculate. The dipolar resonant mechanism can be 
used to create adjustable phase shifts. Only one mode 
can be excited in the work frequency. These acoustic 
metasurfaces constructed by anisotropic resonant 
units with the deflective elliptic inclusion have an 
extraordinary reflected phase modulation and can be 
used to arbitrarily manipulate low-frequency acoustic 
waves in a water matrix.

The anisotropic resonant units with the deflective 

elliptic inclusion
contain
the three accessible 

materials, which demonstrate remarkable phase 
change and novel acoustic property. Anomalous 
reflection and Bessel beam are exhibited by imposing 
suitable phase delay profiles of the metasufaces. The 
designed metasurfaces extend new degrees of 
freedom and paves the way for thin planar reflective 
structures for acoustic wave front manipulation.

Fig. 1(a) shows that when an acoustic wave is 

normally incident, the locally anisotropic resonant 
unit with deflective angles of the rubber ellipses 
reflects it completely. The dark purple and orange 
arrows indicate the propagation directions of the 
incident wave and reflected wave, respectively. Fig. 
1(b) is a schematic of a locally anisotropic resonant 
unit. Each unit is composed of a steel cylinder with 
an elliptical rubber coating embedded in epoxy. The 
deflective angles of the rubber ellipses can be 
adjusted. The parameters of the materials used are: 
𝜌 = 1000𝑘𝑔/𝑚3
, 
𝑐
= 1490𝑚/𝑠
for 

water; 𝜌𝑒 = 1180𝑘𝑔/𝑚3 , 𝜆𝑒 = 4.4 × 109𝑁/𝑚2
and 
𝜇𝑒 = 1.6 × 109𝑁/𝑚2
for 
epoxy;
𝜌𝑟 =

980𝑘𝑔/𝑚3 , 𝜆𝑟 = 1.6 × 109𝑁/𝑚2
and 𝜇𝑒 =

5.5 × 105𝑁/𝑚2
for rubber; 𝜌𝑠 = 7900𝑘𝑔/𝑚3 , 

𝜆𝑟 = 1 × 1011𝑁/𝑚2
and 
𝜇𝑒 = 8.1 × 1010𝑁/

𝑚2for steel, where 𝜌 is the mass density, 𝑐 is the 
speed of sound, and 𝜆 and µ are the Lame 
constants.

We designed and optimized 16 types of 

anisotropic resonant units with trihedral rigidness, to 
produce phase delay profiles with a relatively high 
resolution. The units have a square cross section of 
length w. The semimajor and semi-minor axes of the 
rubber ellipses are fixed as 0.3w and 0.25w, 
respectively. The reflected phase can cover 2𝜋
phase span along with the gradually deflective angles 
of the rubber ellipses. In the planar acoustic 
metasurfaces, for simplicity, the radii of the steel 
cylinders are tailored to yield the desired phase shifts. 
The phase of the reflected waves as a function of 
deflective angles of the rubber ellipses is plotted in 
Fig. 1(c). The three selected vibration modes are 
shown in Fig. 1(c). The wavelength of incident 
acoustic wave is 8.8w, which is constant in the 

following text. Note that the 16 units designed can 
realize a phase span of 2π with an interval of π/8 
between adjacent units, as denoted by the red dots. 
By applying the condition of prescribed velocity, it is 
possible to keep adjacent units independent of each 
other. When appropriate reflected phases are selected, 
each unit can be simulated individually. Thus, these 
locally anisotropic resonant units have potential as 
building blocks for wavefront-shaping metasurfaces.

Fig. 1: (a) Schematic diagram of the numerical 
simulation of the reflective coefficient of the locally 
anisotropic resonant unit with the deflective elliptic 
inclusion. The dark purple and orange arrows refer to 
the propagation directions of the incident wave and 
reflected wave, respectively. The left and right 
boundaries (marked by blue lines) of water have been 
defined as the periodic boundary conditions and the 
bottom (marked by black line) is the absorbing 
boundary. The three boundaries of the anisotropic 
resonant unit (marked by red lines) have been set as 
acoustic rigid boundaries. (b) Schematic of the 
proposed anisotropic resonant unit, which comprises 
a steel cylinder with an elliptical rubber coating 
embedded in epoxy. The deflective angles of the 
rubber ellipses can be adjusted, whereas the semi-
major and semi-minor axes of the rubber ellipses are 
fixed as 𝑟𝑏 = 0.3𝑤 and 𝑟𝑎 = 0.25𝑤, respectively. 
The units have a square cross section of length w. 
The deflective angles of the rubber ellipse θ are set 


as an adjustable parameter. (c) Phase of the reflected 
wave as a function of deflective angles of the rubber 
ellipses for incident wavelength λ = 8.8w. 

To design an acoustic metasurface with nearly 

arbitrary wave front modulation and planar profile, 
some locally anisotropic resonant units should be 
selected under the guidance of the general Snell's law. 
The general Snell’s law can predict the anomalous
propagation of the incident acoustic wave. Both the 
reflected wave and refracted wave are suitable. The 
direction of abnormal reflection is related to the 
direction of incident acoustic waves. The formula is 
as follows [1]: 

sin(𝜃𝑟) − sin(𝜃𝑖) =

𝑑𝜑(𝑥)

𝑘0𝑑𝑥
(1)

Where 𝜃𝑟 , 𝜃𝑖 are the reflected and incident 

angles, respectively; 𝜑(𝑥) , 𝑑𝑥
are the phase 

discontinuities and the distant between the crossing 
points along the x direction, respectively; 𝑘0 =
2𝜋 𝜆
⁄
is the wave vector in water. Equation (1) 

shows the direction of reflected wave can be 
controlled freely through a suitable gradient phase 
profile.

Fig. 2: The wavelength of incident acoustic wave is 
8.8w. Acoustic reflected pressure field pattern for 
gradient phase profile is shown, when the acoustic 
wave impinge the metasurface from the bottom to the 
top. The phase gradient of the designed acoustic 
metasurface is set as 𝑑𝜑(𝑥)/𝑑𝑥 = 𝜋/8𝑤.

The numerical simulation of acoustic metasurfaces 

based on the deflective elliptic inclusion units is 
introduced. When an acoustic wave from the bottom 
is 
normally 
incident 
toward 
the 
designed 

metasurfaces, the reflected pressure fields show that 
the acoustic wave is oblique. The angle of reflected 
wave is calculated as 33.4° utilizing the general 
Snell's law. From the reflected pressure distribution, 
it is noted that the simulated results agree well with 
the theoretical ones. And the locally anisotropic 
resonant units with the deflective elliptic inclusion
are also capable of controlling reflected acoustic 
waves arbitrarily and open up a new avenue for 
acoustic wave front engineering and manipulations.

In the following, we show the different wave ma-

nipulation effect based on the different combinations 
of fundamental units. A planar acoustic axcion is 
exhibited. In order to the design the planar acoustic 
axcion, the reflected angle of sound wave is set as 10.
When an acoustic wave from the bottom is normally 
incident, the reflected phase gradient of the metasur-
face along any x position should satisfy the next equa-
tion:

𝜑(𝑥) = 𝑘0|𝑥|𝑠𝑖𝑛𝛽
(2)

Fig. 3: (a) A desire hyperboloidal phase profile along x 
direction of reflected wave for the designed lens. (b) The 
transverse distribution of acoustic pressure intensity profile at 
y=20.5m. (c) The pressure field distribution of reflected wave 
for the designed metasurface with 𝑓 = 3𝜆, as the incident 
acoustic waves propagate from the bottom.

Applying the aforementioned condition, when the 
focal length is set as 3𝜆, the structure of three-
component composites along any x position is certain. 
Fig. 3(a) illustrates the continuous phase shifts along 
the x axis of reflected wave. The spatial reflected 
pressure intensity distribution is shown in Fig. 3(c). 
To better exhibit the performance of the acoustic lens, 
the 
transverse 
cross-section 
pressure 
intensity 

distribution at y=20.5 m is plotted in Fig. 3(b).

In this work, we present an acoustic metasurface 

based on anisotropic resonant units with deflective 
angles of the rubber ellipses, which have sufficient 
degrees of freedom for wavefront modulation. By 
selecting an appropriate gradient phase profile, the 
acoustic 
metasurface 
can 
realize 
anomalous 

reflection. It illustrates the remarkable ability of 
controlling 
the 
acoustic 
wave. 
The 
acoustic 

metasurfaces built from our anisotropic resonant 
units are a new approach for engineering and 
manipulating wavefronts.


.

***

This work was supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Grant No: 11604307)

REFERENCES

[1] YU N. –F., GENEVET P., LATS A., AIETA F., TETIENNE J. P,

CAPASSO F., GABURRO Z., Science, 334(2011)333.

[2] LI Y., JIANG X., LIANG B., CHEN J. -C., ZHANG L. -K, KIM 

C. -K., Phy. Rev. A, 4(2015) 024003

[3] LI Y., QI S., ASSOUAR M. -B, New J. phys., 18(2016) 

043024.

[4] LIU B.-Y., ZHAO W. -Y, JIANG Y. -Y, Sci.Rep., 6(2016) 

39314.

[5] DING C. L., WANG Z. R., SHEN F. L., CHEN H. L., ZHAI S.

L., ZHAO X. P., SOLID STATE COMMU., 229 (2016) 28.

[6] ZHAO X., CAI L., YU D. L., LU Z. M., WEN J. H., AIP 275

ADVANCES, 7 (2017) 065211.

[7] LAN J., ZHANG X. W., LIU X. Z., LI Y. F., SCI. REP. , 8

(2018) 14171.

[8] CHEN X., LIU P., HOU Z. W., PEI Y. M., SCI. REP., 7 (2017)

9050.

[9] ZHAI S. L, CHEN H. J, DING C., LI L., SHEN F., LUO C.,

ZHAO X., J. PHYS. D, 49 (2016) 225302.

[10] MA, G. C., YANG, M., XIAO, S. W., YANG, Z. Y., SHENG,

P., NAT. MATER. , 13 (2014) 873.

[11] CHEN H., ADVANCES IN CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS, 7

(2018) 5452071.

[12] XIE Y.-B., WANG W., XIE Y.-B., KONNEKER A.,

POPA B. –I.,CUMMER S.A, Appl. Phys. Lett., 105
(2014) 101904.

[13] TANG K, QIU C. -Y, LU J. -Y, KE M. -Z, LIU Z.,

Sci.Rep., 117(2015) 024503.

[14] LI Y., LIANG B., ZOU X. -Y, CHEN J. -C., Appl. 

Phys. Lett., 103(2013) 063509.

[15] LI Y., LIANG B., GU Z. -M, ZOU X. –Y., CHEN J. -C.,

Sci.Rep. , 3(2013) 02546.

[16] YUAN B., CHENG Y, LIU X., Appl. Phys. Lett., 

8(2015) 027301.

[17] 刘美玉
[18] LIU Z., ZHANG X., ZHU Y., YANG Z., CHEN C.,

SHENG P., Science, 289 (2000) 1734.

[19] LIU A. P., ZHU R., LIU X. N., HU G. K., HUANG G

L., Y., LAI Y., WAVE MOTION, 49 (2012) 411.

[20] ZHU R., LIU X. N., HUANG G. L., HUANG H. H.,

SUN C. T., PHYS. REV. B., 86 (2012) 144307.


