Electric Polarization in YCrO3 Induced by Restricted Polar Domains

of Magnetic and Structural Natures

V.A. Sanina a,*, B.Kh. Khannanov a, E.I. Golovenchits a, and M. P. Shcheglov a

a Ioffe Institute, St. Petersburg, 194021 Russia

*e-mail: sanina@mail.ioffe.ru

Abstract—The electric polarization induced by local polar domains of two types 

(phase separation domains of magnetic nature and structure-distorted domains) has 

been observed in YCrO3 single crystals. These domains form a superparaelectric 

state. Below some temperatures, in the frozen superparaelectric state, the

pyrocurrent maxima and the hysteresis loops with remanent polarization are 

observed as along axis c so in directions [110]. The polarization exists to the 

temperatures depending on the orientation of electric field with respect to the 

crystal axes. The sources of formation of such local domains are analyzed and their 

properties are studied.

1. INTRODUCTION

In [1], it was reported that orthochromites RCrO3 with magnetic rare-earth R 

ions are multiferroics of the second type. The polar order in them was observed

below Neel temperature TN of magnetic ordering. Temperatures TN of 

orthochromites are quite high (130–250 K) and are substantially higher than the

Curie temperatures TC of the ferroelectric ordering for the multiferroics of II-type 

studied before, in which the ferroelectric ordering is induced by the special type

magnetic ordering [2–7]. Slightly later the polar order was detected in LuCrO3 with 

a nonmagnetic R ion [8]. In this case, the polar ordering temperature TC was 

significantly higher than TN.

RCrO3 orthochromites have the structure of a rhombically distorted perovskite 

with centrosymmetrical space group Pbnm [9, 10] forbidding the ferroelectric

ordering. The unit cell contains four formula units. Cr3+ ions are located in the 

oxygen octahedra. However, the axes of the octahedra are deviated from the axis c 

along which they are oriented in undistorted cubic perovskites. Ions R3+ are located 


in strongly distorted polyhedra with 8 nearest oxygen ions. The symmetry of local 

positions of R3+ (Cs) is noncentral and, therefore, RO8 quasi-molecules have 

electric dipole moments located in (001) planes. However, these dipole moments in 

the unit cell are deflected in different directions compensating each other. In this 

case, the antiferroelectric ordering arises that agrees with space group Pbnm.

The magnetic properties and the magnetic phase transitions in RCrO3 were 

studied in detail before [9,10]. In YCrO3 (YCO), at all temperatures T ≤ TN, the

Γ4 (GxFz) structure is realized (following to the Bertaut denotations [9]), i.e., there 

are antiferromagnetic ordering of Cr3+ ion spins along axis x(a) and the weak 

ferromagnetic moment Fz along axis z(c). Figure 1 shows the temperature 

dependence of the magnetization Fz in a magnetic field H = 5 kOe, H || c. It is seen 

that there is a well-defined magnetic phase transition near TN = 142 K.

Fig. 1. Temperature dependence of magnetization Fz in YCO in magnetic field 
H = 5 kOe, H || c.

Because it was stated in [1, 8] that the ferroelectric ordering forms in RCrO3 

below temperature TC, then, near TC, the structural phase transition to the non-

centric symmetry accompanied by free dispersion maxima of the dielectric 


permittivity ε' and the dielectric losses ε'' must take place. However, no structural 

transition was observed near TC in RCrO3. Note that the problems with the 

structural eccentricity appeared also before during studies of the low-temperature 

multiferroics of II-type. They had a low polarization, which was due to a small 

distortion of the lattice centrality that is difficult to be fixed experimentally. 

However, in this case, the well-defined free dispersion maxima of the dielectric 

permittivity were observed near TC, indicating the formation of the ferroelectric

ordering. In [5, 6, 11, 12], the microscopic theoretical models were developed; they 

described the formation of the structural eccentricity induced by the features of

the magnetic structure in such multiferroics. In [1, 8], it was shown that RCrO3 had 

a significantly larger electric polarization as compared to the multiferroics

of II-type studied before, but, in this case, the dielectric permittivity anomalies near 

TC were significantly less intense. Note, that, in [1, 8], ceramic RCrO3 samples

were studied, and the verification of the obtained results on the single crystals was 

required.

In this work, the polar properties of YCrO3 (YCO) single crystals with 

nonmagnetic R ion are comprehensively studied for the first time. The main 

objectives were a search for a possible electric polarization and establishment of its 

nature. Based on the studies of the dielectric permittivity, the conductivity, and the

electric polarization by the pyrocurrent and hysteresis loop methods, the electric 

polarization in YCO was detected both along axis c and in direction [110]. The

polarization existed up to temperatures depending on the directions of applying 

electric field with respect to the crystal axes. These temperatures do not coincide 

with TN. The observed electric polarization is found to be induced by the restricted 

polar domains of two types (of magnetic and structural nature), and it is not 

provided by homogeneous ferroelectric ordering. We analyze the sources of 

formation and the properties of such restricted domains.

In [13–15], the electric polarization was observed in multiferroics–

manganites RMn2O5 (R = Gd, Bi) and Gd0.8Ce0.2Mn2O5. At temperatures T ≤ TC ≈ 

TN, the ferroelectric ordering was observed along axis b. In parallel with this, the 


hysteresis loops and maxima of pyrocurrent induced by the restricted polar phase 

separation domains in the frozen superparaelectric state were observed in these 

multiferroics over the wide temperature range 5 K < T ≤ Tfr (this state was 

considered theoretically in [16]). The values of Tfr were significantly higher than 

TC and were dependent on the orientation of the crystal axes. As a result, it was

demonstrated in [13–15] that the existence of the pyrocurrent maxima and the 

electric polarization loops are necessary but not sufficient conditions of the

formation of the ferroelectric ordering.

2. EXPERIMENTAL

The YCO single crystals were grown by the method of spontaneous crystallization 

in a solution–melt and were characterized by symmetry Pbnm with lattice

parameters a = 5.243 Å, b = 5.524 Å, c = 7.536 Å. They were 2–3-mm-thick plates 

with the area of 3–5 mm2. The developed planes were perpendicular to either axis c 

or direction [110]. To measure the dielectric permittivity, the conductivity, and the 

electric polarization, the ~0.5–1.5-mm-thick flat capacitors with the area of 3–4 

mm2 was used. The conductivity and the capacity were measured using a Good 

Will LCR-819 impedance meter in the frequency range 0.5–50 kHz in the 

temperature range 5–450 K. The electric polarization was measured by two 

methods: the pyrocurrent method and the PUND (Positive Up Negative Down) 

method of measuring the hysteresis loops [17]. In the first case, the polarization 

was measured by a Keithly 6514 electrometer during sample heating at a constant 

rate of varying temperature after previous cooling a sample in the polarizing 

electric field E. The PUND method was used to measure the dynamic polarization 

of the restricted polar domains as a response to a series two positive and two 

negative electric field pulses applied successively. We used the PUND method 

adapted for the measurement of the restricted polar regions that was used before in 

[13–15]. The comparative analysis of the property of the polarizations provided by 

the restricted polar domains measured by these two methods in GdMn2O5 and

Gd0.8Ce0.2Mn2O5 was given in [15]. To study the properties of the restricted 

domains at temperatures 5–40 K, we also studied the microwave magnetic 


dynamics of YCO on the transmission type magnetic resonance spectrometer in the 

frequency range 28–40 GHz with low-frequency magnetic modulation described in 

[18–20]. The fine structure of the Bragg peaks was studied on the 3-crystal X-ray 

high-resolution diffractometer described in [21]. The magnetization was measured 

on a Quantum Design PPMS magnetometer. To study the influence of a magnetic 

field on the electric polarization, a superconducting magnet with H ≤ 8 T was used.

3. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

3.1. Dielectric Permittivity and the Conductivity of YCO

The temperature dependences of the dielectric permittivity ε' in YCO along axis c 

and in transverse plane (110) for a number of frequencies are shown in Figs. 2a

and 2b, respectively. The insets in the Figs. 2a and 2b show the temperature 

dependences for the corresponding components of conductivity σ. No free 

dispersion maxima of ε' and σ are observed over entire temperature range for both 

the crystal orientations, which demonstrates the absence of ferroelectric phase

transitions in YCO up to temperatures of 350–400 K. As is seen, there are strong 

anisotropies of ε' and σ. Along axis c, values of ε' are four times higher and

σ are two orders of magnitude higher than these values in direction [110]. 

We are dealing with the real part of the conductivity σ1 = ωε''ε0 [22] (that was 

measured by tanδ = ε''/ε'). Here, ω is the angular frequency and ε0 is ε' in vacuum. 

Conductivity σ1 (denoted σ) is dependent both on frequency and temperature. The 

low-frequency part of the conductivity is free dispersion and is referred to 

percolation conductivity σdc. In our case, conductivity σac in both directions 

exhibits a frequency dispersion (the insets in Figs. 2a, 2b). At temperatures

T > 180 K, the higher the frequency, the higher is the conductivity. This frequency 

dispersion is characteristic of the local conductivity inside restricted domains

with a barrier at their boundaries [22]. The percolation conductivity belongs to the 

crystal matrix. As is seen from the insets in Figs. 2a, 2b, the low-frequency 

conductivities (percolation conductivity) coincide in both directions 

(~10–7(Ω cm)–1) and are slightly changed with temperature at T < 350 K, which 

characterizes quite high dielectric characteristics of the matrix of the YCO single 


crystals. On the other hand, the existence of the local conductivity and the increase 

in ε' in YCO demonstrates the existence of the restricted polar domains. To analyze 

the properties of the local conductivity, it is convenient to introduce the relative

quantity σloc= (σac – σdc)/σdc that characterizes the relationship of the local and 

percolation conductivities [22]. Figures 2c and 2d show the temperature 

dependences of σloc at fixed frequencies along axis c and in directions [110], 

respectively. In direction [110], σloc appears at T > 200 K and exists up to 

temperatures higher than 400 K (Fig. 2d). There are comparatively low maxima of 

σloc at temperatures that are only slightly dependent on frequency. This indicates 

that there is a high activation barrier at the boundaries of such polar domains 

(higher than 1.5 eV). At T < 200 K, the frequency dispersion has the opposite sign: 

the higher frequency the lower is the conductivity; i.e., the percolation conductivity 

prevails (Fig. 2d). Along axis c, at T < 180 K, the domains of the local conductivity

with a low activation barrier EA ≈ 0.2 eV (Fig. 2c) are observed. At T > 180 K, the 

kinetic energy of charge carriers in these regions becomes sufficient to overcome

such barriers. As a result, in the temperature range 180–220 K, the almost free 

dispersion percolation conductivity appears; in this case, the carriers, spreading 

over the crystal matrix at T > 220 K will overcome higher barriers at the 

boundaries of the restricted polar domains of different nature. They are the 

domains with the activation barrier of 0.49 eV along the same axis c (Fig. 2c) and 

the domains with barriers of 1.5 eV in the direction perpendicular to axis c (Fig. 

2d). In this case, the significant increase in the local conductivity is observed along 

axis c (Fig. 2c).


Fig. 2. Temperature dependences for a number of frequencies of the following 
values in YCO: ε' (a) along axis c, ε' (b) in the transverse plane (110); local 
conductivity σloc (c) along axis c, σloc (d) in the transverse plane (110). The insets 
to (a, b) show the temperature–frequency dependences of σ along axis c and in the 
transverse plane (110).


We call our attention to the similarity of the properties of the restricted 

domains in YCO along axis c at temperatures T < 180 K with the properties of the

restricted phase separation domains in multiferroics–manganites RMn2O5 (Gd, Bi) 

and Gd0.8Ce0.2Mn2O5 containing ions of different valences Mn3+ and Mn4+ [13–15]. 

In those works, it was shown that the formation of the phase separation domains is 

energetically preferable and is provided by the existence of the nearest pairs of 

Mn3+–Mn4+ ions and finite probability of tunneling of eg electrons of Mn3+ ions to

unfilled levels of the orbital doublet of Mn4+ ions. However, the RMn2O5 single 

crystals contain the same numbers of Mn3+ and Mn4+ ions. At the same time, the 

ideal YCO crystals contain only ions Cr3+. The abovementioned similarity of the 

properties of the local domains suggests that the real YCO crystals also contain 

neighboring pairs of Cr3+ and Cr2+ ions that lead to the formation of the restricted 

phase separation domains. Note that ions Cr3+ are analogs of ions Mn4+ (their 3d 

shells contain three t2g electrons in the triplet state and an unfilled orbital doublet). 

On the other hand, ions Cr2+ are analogs of ions Mn3+ and they contain, in addition

to three t2g electrons in the triplet state, one eg electron at the degenerate orbital 

doublet. It would be reasonable to assume that ions Cr2+ appear in YCO during

growing the single crystal. To grow YCO single crystals, we used the PbO–

0.005PbO2 solvent. The important fact is that the growth of the single crystals was 

carried out at a constant high temperature 1350°C of the solution–melt. In this 

case, in addition to initial oxides Y2O3 and Cr2O3, free ions Pb2+ and Pb4+ and also 

active oxygen ions O2– that recharge Pb2+ and Pb4+ ions emerge in the solution-

melt. This leads to the change in the initial proportion of the Pb2+ and Pb4+ ions in

the melt and the increase in the concentration of ions Pb4+. Oxide PbO2 is 

introduced to the solution–melt to bond active oxygen during recharging Pb2+ and 

Pb4+ ions and prevent the damage of the platinum crucible, in which the single 

crystals are grown. We associate the formation of the restricted polar domains in 

YCO with the introduction of impurity Pb2+ and Pb4+ ions in the position of Y3+

ions. The ionic radii of the initial and substituting ions in positions with the eight-


fold oxygen surrounding (according [23]) are as follows: 1.02 Å for Y3+, 0.94 Å 

for Pb4+, and 1.29 Å for Pb2+. The substitution of ions Y3+ by ions Pb4+ leads to the 

appearance of ions Cr2+ as a result of reactions Y3+ = Pb4+ + e, Cr3+ + e = Cr2+.

Thus, in YCO, in addition to Cr3+ ions, Jahn–Teller Cr2+ ions appear in the 

octahedral surrounding leading to local deformations of these octahedra. The

appearance of neighboring Cr3+ and Cr2+ ion pairs and a finite probability of 

tunneling eg electrons between these ions (double exchange [24]) stimulate the 

energetically beneficial process of the formation of dynamically equilibrated 

restricted phase separation domains. These domains accumulate ferromagnetic

Cr3+–Cr2+ ion pairs and the charge carriers (the eg electrons recharging these pairs) 

by analogy with that how it takes place in LaAMnO3 (A = Sr, Ca, and Ba)

[25, 26] and in RMn2O5 [21, 27]. The double exchange requires the existence of 

ferromagnetic moments Fz of Cr3+–Cr2+ ion pair spins, which is realized at T < TN

along axis c. In this connection, it is reasonable to refer the low-temperature 

regions of the local conductivity along axis c to the phase separation domains that 

form near Pb4+ ions (Fig. 2c). These domains with deformed oxygen octahedra 

violate the compensation of electric dipoles in the antiferroelectric YCO matrix,

leading to the formation of the restricted polar domains of the magnetic nature. In 

parallel with this, there is a finite probability of incorporation of larger Pb2+ ions 

with alone pairs of 6s2 electrons in positions of Y3+ ions. The existence of such 

electron pairs is known to lead to a noncentrosymmetric distortion of the Pb2+ ion 

environment [28]. As a result, the Pb2+ impurity ions in YCO also cause the 

violation of compensation of the polarizations in the strongly-correlated

antiferroelectric matrix and the formation of electric-dipole polarons of the 

structural origin. Note that ions Pb4+ (with absenting 6s2 electrons) only slightly 

distort the structural local environment but form the phase separation domains with 

low barriers of 0.2 eV along axis c at T < 175 K (Fig. 2c). We believe that the 

restricted structural domains forming near Pb2+ ions are responsible for the local 

conductivity along axis c in the domains with barriers of 0.49 eV at temperatures 


higher than 220 K (Fig. 2c) and the local conductivity in direction [110] in 

domains with the activation barrier of ~1.5 eV (Fig. 2d). Thus, in YCO,

there are two types qualitatively different in their properties of the restricted polar 

domains that determine the properties of YCO at various orientations of the

crystal and various temperatures. To determine the concentration of the impurity 

Pb ions, we used the X-ray fluorescence method. It turned that the Pb ion

concentration in YCO was low (not higher than 1.5%), but it was sufficient to form 

the observed restricted polar domains.

3.2. Electric Polarization in YCO

Consider the measurement of the polarization by the pyrocurrent method. Figure 

3a shows the temperature dependence of the electric polarization Pc in YCO along 

axis c. The inset shows the corresponding dependences for the pyrocurrents. We 

call attention to the existence of two not split pyrocurrent maxima along axis c at 

T < 180 K in the first measurement cycle in field +E || c (the inset in Fig. 3a). 

During the second cycle, in the oppositely oriented field –E || c, the alone

pyrocurrent maximum is seen. In this case, the values of Pc measured during these 

two cycles, are not completely symmetric. This situation is reproduced during

the measurement on another initial sample of YCO, when, during the first cycle, 

after applying field –E || c, the negative pyrocurrent maximum becomes split, and 

the secondary positive peaks is alone. We associate the splitting of the pyrocurrent 

peaks with the fact that the restricted phase separation domains of magnetic nature 

with small barriers forming near Pb4+ ions are observed in YCO along the c

axis at T ≤ TN. In the temperature range TN < T < 180 K, the high-temperature 

slopes of the phase separation domains and the low-temperature slopes of

the structural domains containing ions Pb2+ coexist (Figs. 2c and 3a). In this case, 

the barriers at the boundaries of such coexisting restricted domains increase, which 

leads to an increase in the temperature of disappearance of the polarization as 

compared to TN. The structural domains are longer term as compared to the phase 

separation magnetic domains, and they delay the decrease in the pyrocurrent. 

Figure 3b demonstrates the temperature dependences of the pyrocurrents in YCO 


in direction [110]. As is seen, the pyrocurrent maxima appeared at T > 250 K do 

not disappear up to T ≈ 375 K, which does not allow us to correctly calculate the 

polarization in this direction by the pyrocurrent method. However, the non-

symmetry of the values of the pyrocurrents during the measurements in two 

sequential cycles of applying positive and negative electric fields E shows that 

there is the long lived polarization appearing in the first cycle that was only 

partially repolarized in the oppositely oriented field. This implies that the restricted 

polar domains of the structural nature are preferably observed in direction

[110].

Fig. 3. Temperature dependences of the electric polarization and (in the inset) 
pyrocurrents for YCO along (a) axis c and (b) pyrocurrents along direction [110].

Now we consider the measurements of the hysteresis loops of the electric 

polarization by the PUND method. This method, unlike the pyrocurrent method, 

enables one to subtract the conductivity contribution from the measured 

polarization. Figures 4a, 4b show the hysteresis loops of the electric polarization

along axis c for the most characteristic temperatures and the temperature 

dependence of the remanent polarization, respectively. As is seen from


Fig. 4. (a) Electric polarization loops for the characteristic fixed temperatures and (b) the 

temperature dependence of the remanent polarization along axis c. Similar dependences for 

transverse plane (110) are shown in panels (c) and (d), respectively.


Figs. 4a, 4b, the temperature-independent saturation hysteresis loops with the 

remanent polarization ~0.02 μC/cm2 that is two times less than that measured

by the pyrotechnic method (Fig. 3a) are observed along axis c in the temperature 

range 5– 150 K. The polarization measured by the pyrocurrent method is enhanced 

with the conductivity. We associate this temperature-independent polarization with

the phase separation domains of the magnetic origin. As was noted when analyzing 

the polarization along axis c measured by the pyrocurrent method, the phase

separation domain and the structural domains coexist in the temperature range 

175 K > T > TN, which slightly increases the summary polarization. At T >175 K, 

the local conductivity of the phase separation domains disappears, and the 

localized eg electrons of the phase separation domains are transformed to the

percolation conductivity spreading over the crystal that contains Pb4+ and Pb2+ ions 

as before. These free electrons can be absorbed by Pb4+ ions, transforming

them to Pb2+ ions. As a result, the concentration of the structural polar domains and 

the measured polarization increase. However, simultaneously, a competing process 

decreasing polarization Pc takes place. As temperature increases, the free electron 

kinetic energy increases, and the probability of overcoming the barriers of 0.49 eV 

at the boundaries of the domains of the structural origin becomes finite, and the 

conductivity localized under these barriers becomes to form (Fig. 2c). It screens 

the internal electric field inside the structural polar domains, which decreases the

polarization. The process of the transition from the increase in the polarization to 

the beginning of its screening occurs quite sharply in the temperature range 2–3 K 

(jumps in Figs. 4a, 4b). As the screening of the structural domains increases, at T > 

250 K, the loops become more characteristic of a nonlinear dielectric and they are 

completely screened at 270 K (Fig. 4b).

Magnetic field H || c influences the magnetic phase separation domains in 

YCO. Field H || c increases moments Fz of Cr3+-Cr2+ ion pairs and the double

exchange and, thus, increases the barrier height at the boundaries of these domains, 

which leads to an increase in the temperature of the beginning of increasing the 


values of ε׳ and σ (Fig. 5). Such a situation was also observed in RMn2O5 (R = Gd, 

Eu), leading to the increase in the polarization due to the phase separation and also 

to the increase in the temperature of its existence [13, 14, 21]. However, applying a 

magnetic field decreases the polarization in YCO (Fig. 6).

Fig. 5. Effect of magnetic field H || c, H = 6 T on the temperature
dependences of ε' and σ for YCO

Fig. 6. Effect of magnetic field H || c on the polarization Pc for YCO.


It was shown above that, in field H = 0 and temperature range 180 K > T ≥ TN, eg

electrons in YCO related by the recharging process of Cr3+–Cr2+ ions inside the

phase separation domains overcome the barriers of 0.2 eV at the boundaries of 

these domains, leading to an increase in the percolation conductivity of free

electrons (Fig. 2c). These electrons transform Pb4+ ions to Pb2+ ions, accelerating 

damage of the polarization of the phase separation domains and, at the time,

increasing the polarization of the structural domains, which leads to an increase in 

the summary polarization (Figs. 4a, 4b). On the other hand, the application

of the magnetic field shifts the process of damaging the phase separation domains 

and increasing the polarization due to the structural domains. However, because

the polarization of the structural domains near Pb2+ ions is higher than that of the 

phase separation domains, the summary polarization decreases when

applying magnetic field. Note that the process of redistribution of impurity ions 

Pb4+ and Pb2+ in magnetic fields leads to long-lived changes in the restricted

polar domains and, therefore, the polarization (Fig. 6).

In the transverse direction [110], the structural restricted polar domains 

forming around individual Pb2+ ions give the largest contribution to the electric

polarization. In this direction, the formation of the phase separation domains at low 

temperatures is impossible because of the antiferromagnetic orientation of Cr ion 

spins (the double exchange is forbidden). However, at low temperatures T < 130 K, 

YCO has a low percolation conductivity (~10–7 (Ohmcm)–1) (Fig. 2d) that slightly 

screens the polarization (Figs. 4c, 4d). At T > 130 K, the polarization slightly

increases with temperature and exists to temperatures higher than room

temperature. Note that the polarization formed by the polar structural domains 

around Pb2+ ions is one order of magnitude higher than the polarization formed by 

the magnetic phase separation domains that exists only along axis c to a

temperature that 40 K higher than TN. This fact demonstrates that the violation of 

the compensation of the polarization in strongly-correlated antiferroelectric matrix 

by the structural polar domains is significantly stronger.


Note that the polarization in YCO formed predominantly by the structural 

domains around Pb2+ ions (along axis c at T ≈ 216 K (Fig. 4b) and in direction

[110] (Fig. 4d) are close in the value. The anisotropy of the polarization observed 

is really due to the existence of the phase separation formed near Pb4+ near axis c.

In [18–20], it was observed in RMn2O5 that the magnetic phase separation 

domains at temperatures T < 30 K have the shape of 1D superlattices consisting

of the ferromagnetic layers containing ions Mn3+ and Mn4+ in various proportions. 

In these works, we observed a characteristic set of ferromagnetic resonances from 

individual layers of the superlattices for all RMn2O5 independent of the type of 

ions R. Figure 7 shows a similar set of the ferromagnetic resonances observed in 

YCO that is due to the existence of the magnetic restricted phase separation 

domains. This confirms the fact of the existence of such domains in YCO. 

Fig. 7. Set of ferromagnetic resonances of the set of layers of 1D superlattices of the phase 
separation domain layers for YCO for axis c at T = 5 K. The g-factor of the most intense 
ferromagnetic resonance line is 2.05.


On the other hand, the study of the fine structure of the Bragg peak (008) in YCO 

at room temperature on the 3-crystal high-resolution X-ray diffractometer showed 

the presence of well-defined additional peaks non-split with the main narrow YCO

crystal matrix peak. We attribute them to well-structured local polar domains with 

other, but very close, inter-planar distances (Fig. 8). These domains have enough

sizes and electric-dipole correlation radii for the formation of well-formed 

structures. Random isolated structural defects would lead to a total broadening of 

the main Bragg peak.

Fig. 8. Distribution of the Bragg reflection (008) intensities in YCO at room temperature. The 
lower axis shows the shift of inter-planar distances with respect to the reflection center (in 
angstroms). The upper axis is the crystal rotation arc in the transverse plane to the chosen 
direction of the reflection (in angular seconds).

We believe that the local polar domains of magnetic and also structural 

natures in YCO form superparaelectric state. At quite low temperatures, when kT < 

EA of activation barriers at the boundaries of these domains, an electric polarization 

(local ferroelectric state) exists and the frozen superparaelectric state, at which 


polarizations of these domains are not repolarized spontaneously, form in them. In 

this state that was considered theoretically in [16] the hysteresis loops with the 

remanent polarization must be observed. At temperatures kTfr ≈ EA, the 

spontaneous repolarization of the domains appears and the common

superparaelectric state appears; in this state, the remanent polarization in the 

hysteresis loops disappears. The analysis of the experimental results performed

above shows that the conditions of formation of the frozen superparaelectric state 

are fulfilled for the local polar domains observed in this work. The values of 

temperatures Tfr are significantly different for the magnetic and structural domains 

and are dependent on the direction of the crystal axes.

4. CONCLUSIONS

Thus, homogeneous ferroelectric ordering in YCO single crystals in the

temperature range 5–350 K was not detected in any crystal directions. However, 

we observed the electric polarization induced by the local polar domains that were 

formed near impurity ions Pb4+ and Pb2+ substituting for Y3+ ions when growing

the single crystals. These impurity ions lead to the energetically beneficial 

processes of the formation of the local ferroelectric ordering in the isolated 

domains of two types in the YCO crystal matrix. They are the magnetic phase 

separation domains forming near Pb4+ ions and the domains with the structural 

distortions forming near ions Pb2+. The polarity of the regions is due to the 

violation of the compensation of the antiferroelectric state inside the domains. The 

polar domains form the superparaelectric state in the centrosymmetrical

YCO matrix. At temperatures T ≤Tfr, at which kTfr ≤EA that is the activation barrier 

at the polar domain boundaries, the frozen superparaelectric state forms. This state 

is characterized by the observation of the pyrocurrent maxima and the hysteresis 

loops. The electric polarization anisotropy is due to the fact that the 

antiferroelectric state exists in plane (001) perpendicular to axis c. While the phase 

separation domains of magnetic nature can occur only with polarization along the c 

axis. The local polarization of the structural domains is significantly higher than 

similar polarization of the phase separation domains.


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported in part by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research 

(project no. 18-32-00241) and the program of the Presidium of the RAS No. 1.4

“Actual problems of the low-temperature physics.”

REFERENCES

1. B. Rajeswaran, D. I. Khomskii, A. K. Zvezdin, C. N. R. Rao, and A. 

Sundaresam, Phys. Rev. B 86, 214409 (2012).

2. T. Kimura, T. Goto, H. Shintani, K. Ishizaka, and Y. Tokura, Nature (London, 

U.K.) 426, 55 (2004).

3. N. Hur, S. Park, P. A. Sharma, J. S. Ahn, S. Guba, and S.-W. Cheong, Nature 

(London, U.K.) 429, 392 (2004).

4. E. I. Golovenchits, N. V. Morozov, V. A. Sanina, and L. M. Sapozhnikova, Sov. 

Phys. Solid State 34, 56 (1992).

5. J. van den Brink and D. I. Khomskii, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 20, 434217 

(2008).

6. Y. Noda, H. Kimura, M. Fukunaga, S. Kobayashi, I. Kagomiya, and K. Kohn, 

J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 20, 434206 (2008).

7. W. Eerenstein, N. D. Mathur, and J. F. Scott, Nature (London, U.K.) 442, 759 

(2006).

8. K. R. S. Preethi Meher, A. Wahl, A. Maignan, C. Martin, and O. I. Lebedev, 

Phys. Rev. B 89, 144401 (2014).

9. E. F. Bertaut, in Magnetism III, Ed. by G. T. Rado and H. Suhl (Academic, New 

York, 1968), p. 149.

10. K. P. Belov, A. K. Zvezdin, A. M. Kadomtseva, and R. Z. Levitin, Orientation 

Transitions in Rare-Earth Magnetics (Nauka, Moscow, 1979) [in Russian].

11. H. Katsura, N. Nagaosa, and A. V. Balatsky, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 057205 

(2005).

12. M. Mostovoy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 067601 (2006).

13. B. Kh. Khannanov, V. A. Sanina, E. I. Golovenchits, and M. P. Scheglov, 

JETP Lett. 103, 248 (2016).


14. B. Kh. Khannanov, V. A. Sanina, E. I. Golovenchits, and M. P. Scheglov, J. 

Magn. Magn. Mater. 421, 326 (2017).

15. V. A. Sanina, B. Kh. Khannanov, E. I. Golovenchits, and M. P. Shcheglov, 

Phys. Solid State 60, 537 (2018).

16. M. D. Glinchuk, E. A. Eliseev, and A. N. Morozovska, Phys. Rev. B 78, 

134107 (2008).

17. S. M. Feng, Y. S. Chai, J. L. Zhu, N. Manivannan, Y. S. Oh, L. J. Wang, J. S. 

Wang, C. Q. Jin, and Kee Hoon Kim, New J. Phys. 12, 073006 (2010).

18. V. A. Sanina, E. I. Golovenchits, and V. G. Zalesskii, JETP Lett. 95, 386 

(2012).

19. V. A. Sanina, E. I. Golovenchits, and V. G. Zalesskii, J. Phys.: Condens. 

Matter 24, 346002 (2012).

20. B. Kh. Khannanov, V. A. Sanina, and E. I. Golovenchits, Phys. Solid State 59, 

1952 (2017).

21. V. A. Sanina, E. I. Golovenchits, V. G. Zalesskii, S. G. Lushnikov, M. P. 

Scheglov, S. N. Gvasaliya, A. Savvinov, R. S. Katiyar, H. Kawaji, and T. Atake,

Phys. Rev. B 80, 224401 (2009).

22. A. R. Long, Adv. Phys. 31, 587 (1982).

23. R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr. A 32, 751 (1976).

24. P. G. de Gennes, Phys. Rev. 118, 141 (1960).

25. L. P. Gor’kov, Phys. Usp. 41, 581 (1998).

26. M. Yu. Kagan and K. I. Kugel’, Phys. Usp. 44, 553 (2001).

27. V. A. Sanina, E. I. Golovenchits, V. G. Zalesskii, and M. P. Scheglov, J. Phys.: 

Condens. Matter 23, 456003 (2011).

28. N. A. Hill and K. M. Rabe, Phys. Rev. B 59, 8759 (1999).


