4EPo1D 

  
Template version 8.0d, 22 August 2017. IEEE will put copyright information in this area 
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. 

1

Very Large Scale Integration of Josephson-Junction-
Based Superconductor Random Access Memories 

 

Vasili K. Semenov, Yuri A. Polyakov, and Sergey K. Tolpygo, Senior Member, IEEE 

 
 
 

Abstract—Arrays of Vortex Transitional (VT) memory cells 
with functional density up to 1 Mbit/cm2 have been designed, fab-
ricated, and successfully demonstrated. This progress is due to re-
cent advances in design optimization and in superconductor elec-
tronics fabrication achieved at MIT Lincoln Laboratory.  

As a starting point, we developed a demo array of VT cells for 
the 100-μA/μm2 MIT LL fabrication process SFQ5ee with 8 nio-
bium layers. The studied two-junction memory cell with a two-
junction nondestructive readout occupied 168 μm2, resulting in an 
over 0.5 Mbit/cm2 functional density. Then, we reduced the cell 
area down to 99 μm2 (corresponding to over 0.9 Mbit/cm2 func-
tional density) by utilizing self-shunted Josephson Junctions (JJs) 
with critical current density, Jc of 600 µA/μm2 and eliminating 
shunt resistors. The fabricated high-Jc memory cells were fully op-
erational and possessed wide Read/Write current margins, quite 
close to the theoretically predicted values. We discuss approaches 
to further increasing the integration scale of superconductor 
memory and logic circuits: a) miniaturization of superconducting 
transformers by using soft magnetic materials; b) reduction of JJ 
area by using planar high-Jc junctions similar to variable thickness 
bridges.  

 
Index Terms—Josephson junctions, RAM, SFQ digital circuits, 
SFQ electronics, superconducting electronics, superconductor 
electronics fabrication, superconducting memory, SFQ VLSI. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

ECADES ago, development of superconducting latching 
logic circuits was considered as a more challenging task 
than development of Josephson junction memories utilizing the 
natural ability of superconductors to store data as persistent cur-
rents [1]. Since then, there has been a spectacular advance of 
superconductor digital electronics based on novel logic families 
[2], [3], [4]. Unfortunately, it has not been complemented by a 
similar revolution in JJ-based random access memories (RAM). 
The development of superconductor RAMs slowed down after 
the demonstration of a Vortex Transitional (VT) memory cell 
[5], [6] and VT-based RAM circuits in 1990s [7], [8].  The 4-
Kbit level of RAM integration achieved at that time was in line 
with available fabrication technologies. 

The reported performance of superconductor RAM also 
matched the expectations set by the speed of light. For instance, 

 

This research is based upon work supported by the Office of the Director of 
National Intelligence, Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity, via Air 
Force Contract FA872105C0002.  (Corresponding author: Vasili Semenov.) 

V. K. Semenov and Yu. A. Polyakov are with the Department of Physics and 
Astronomy, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3800, USA (e-
mail: Vasili.Semenov@StonyBrook.edu).  

a 380-ps RAM access time reported in [7] matched the propa-
gation delay in the superconducting transmission lines used for 
the cell selection and indicated negligible contributions of JJ 
switching time to the memory operation. Indeed, the speed of 
light in superconducting passive transmission lines (PTLs) is 
about c/3 ~ 100 μm/ps. Therefore, the minimum time required 
to address a memory cell in the middle of a 1-cm chip from a 
control circuitry at the chip edge and fetch the data is ~ 0.3 ns. 
This is equivalent to about 3 GHz effective clock rate of RAM. 

The latter figure appears to be in a shocking mismatch with 
extremely high clock frequencies, tens of GHz, reported for 
complex RSFQ digital circuits, and reaching up to 750 GHz for 
the simplest ones [9]. Deep pipelining and other memory archi-
tectural solutions have been suggested to mitigate the propaga-
tion delays between logic and memory circuits [10]. 

In addition to the VT-based RAMs, it is appropriate to men-
tion some other, less successful, solutions [11], [12], [13], re-
view [14], and declared “intentions” to develop a superconduc-
tor RAM [15]. We will not discuss here many existing original 
proposals of single memory cells, which are either not ready yet 
for integration into RAM, e.g., [16], or such an integration ap-
pears to be very complicated to the authors, e.g., [17, 18], [19], 
etc. 

The first [6] and the last [20] of the demonstrated VT cells 
occupied areas of 49 µm x 49 µm and 25 µm x 25 µm, respec-
tively. The smallest VT cell was fabricated using e-beam lithog-
raphy and had area of 9.5 µm x 12 µm [21]. However, this was 
only a standalone cell and no further development was reported. 

In order to develop large-scale integration of superconduc-
tive RAMs, we started with the original VT memory cell and 
performed its miniaturization and optimization using the mod-
ern design tools for the now-available advanced fabrication 
technologies. These results are presented in Sec. II. In the fol-
lowing sections III and IV, we discuss approaches to further 
miniaturization of superconductor memory cells in order to 
achieve very large scale integration (VLSI) of superconductor 
memory required, e.g., for applications of superconducting pro-
cessors in high performance computing. We mainly address 

S. K. Tolpygo is with the Lincoln Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology, Lexington, MA 02421, USA (e-mail: Sergey.Tolpygo@ll.mit.edu). 

Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. 

Digital Object Identifier will be inserted here upon acceptance. 

D


 

 

2

reduction of the area occupied by superconducting flux trans-
formers and potential use of the planar junction technology for 
VLSI.  

II. CIRCUIT DESIGN AND TEST RESULTS 

The circuit diagram of a generic VT memory cell is shown in 
Fig. 1. To better understand superconductor RAM scaling, we 
implemented VT cells in two fabrication technologies devel-
oped recently at MIT Lincoln Laboratory. The first, a more con-
ventional, implementation VT1 was done in the SFQ5ee fabri-
cation process [22], [23] and based on externally shunted Jo-
sephson junctions with Jc = 100 μA/μm2.  

The microphotograph of the fabricated VT1 memory cell is 
shown in Fig. 2a. We reduced the cell dimensions by a factor of 

two in comparison to the earlier implementations [6]-[8], [17], 
down to 12 µm x 14 µm, despite the evident similarity of the 
cell topology. This four-fold reduction in the cell area was 

achieved due to three factors: a) reduction of dimensional re-
strictions in our fabrication technology; b) reduction of shunt 
resistors; c) improvement of design optimization procedure. 
Specifically, we intentionally reduced the characteristic volt-
ages, IcRsh products, of the shunted junctions in order to reduce 
the area of the shunt resistors; here Ic is the critical current and 
Rsh is the shunt resistance. We used InductEx package [24]-[27] 
to accurately extract all mutual inductances, including parasitic, 
between submicron wires. Also, the recently developed 
PSCAN2 package [28] allowed us to conveniently include the 
mutual inductances into the numerical optimization of the cell 
parameters.  

Design parameters of the VT1 memory cell are given in Ta-
ble I. In order to reduce the size of two transformers used in the 
VT cells, we implemented them as coupled (overlapping) mi-
crostrips on two adjacent wiring layers. The mutual coupling 
between the microstrip lines was increased by making perfora-
tions (openings) in the ground plane under a large part of their 
length; see Sec. III. The resultant values of the most important 
mutual inductances, Mij between pairs of inductors Li and Lj, 

    

 
Fig. 1.   Generic equivalent circuit of a VT cell. Three open squares 
shown in the equivalent circuit mark vias between superconductor lay-
ers. Mutual inductances between pairs of inductors (L1, L7), (L2, L7), 
(L3, L6), (L3, L5), and (L5, L8) were taken into account in numerical 
simulations. Design parameters of VT cells demonstrated in this work 
are given in Table I. 

IY

IX

IS

TABLE I

DESIGN PARAMETERS OF FABRICATED MEMORY CELLS 

 

Design parameter / Implementation 
 
VT1 
VT2 

Jc (μA/μm2)
100
600

Memory cell size (μm)
12 x 14
9 x 11

Memory array pitch (μm)
12 x 15
9 x 12

Minimum linewidth used (μm)
0.7
0.4

Minimum via size / surround (μm)
0.7 / 0.35
0.35 / 0.1

J1 (μA) / Shunt resistor (Ω)
193 / 2.5
213 / none

J2 (μA) /Shunt resistor (Ω) 
94 / 2.6
125 / none

J3 and J4 (μA)
60
80

AXf (μA)
820
672

AYf(μA)
225
300

ASf (μA)
100
119

DC (μA)
462
525

L1 (pH)
7.42
6.10

L2 (pH)
3.17
1.80

L3 (pH)
7.92
4.33

L4 (pH)
4.75
2.48

L5 (pH)
3.17
2.77

L6 (pH)
4.75
2.59

L8 (pH)
1.32
0.98

M17 (L1, L7) (pH)
0.95
1.29

M27 (L2, L7 (pH))
0.95
0.58

M53 (L5, L3) (pH)
1.32
0.53

M63 (L6, L3) (pH)
1.32
0.90

M85 (L8, L5) (pH)
none
0.42

Write/Read transformer area (μm2)a
6.7
5.4

Area of ground plane perforation un-
der Write/Read transformer (μm2)b
18.7
12.4

NDRO transformer wire area (μm2)
7
7.2

Area of ground plane perforation un-

der NDRO transformer (μm2)
24
10.5

Area of ground plane moat between 

cells in the memory array (μm2)d
5.6
4

Memory density (Mbit/cm2)
0.53
0.88

Circuit density (106 JJ/cm2)
2.2
3.7

aOverlap area of two wires forming the transformer for Write/Read current IX.
 bArea of an opening (moat) in the ground plane under the cell Write/Read trans-

former formed between inductors L1+L2 and L7.  

cArea of a perforation in the ground plane under the  nondestructive readout 

(NDRO) coupling transformer formed between inductors L3+L5 and  L6+L8. 

dMoat area per memory cell. These moats are used to mitigate flux trapping. 
fAX, AY and AS are amplitudes of IX, IY and IS currents. 

 

(a)
(b)

 
Fig. 2.  Microphotographs of the fabricated memory cells. (a) Fabrication 
process using shunted JJs with Jc = 100 μA/μm2; the cell dimensions are 
12  μm x 14 μm. R1 and R2 are resistor shunting junctions J1 and J2 re-
spectively. (b) Fabrication process using self-shunted JJ with Jc = 600 
μA/μm2; the cell dimensions are 9 µm x 12 µm. The cell layout topology 
in (b) corresponds to the equivalent circuit in Fig. 1. 

J1
J2

R1
R2

J3

IS

IX

IY


 

 

3

(Li, Lj) are given in Table I; they were taken into account in 
numerical optimization of the VT cells. 

The designed VT1 cells were arranged into 12 x 6 arrays with 
12-μm pitch in the x-direction (along the rows) and 15-μm pitch 
in the y-direction. A larger pitch in the y-direction was used to 
place a 1-μm wide and 45-μm long moats in the ground plane 
between the adjacent rows of memory cells to mitigate mag-
netic flux trapping. The resultant functional density of the RAM 
is about 0.56 Mbit/cm2.  

The cells in each column of the array are connected galvani-
cally by a bit selection line marked IY in Fig. 1. The cells in 
each row are coupled inductively to a common word selection 
line marked IX in Fig. 1. Memory Readout SQUIDs J3-J4 of all 
cells in each row are biased in series using a common bias line 
marked IS in Fig. 1. The resultant 24 independent leads are con-
nected to contact pads. All currents are returned to the common 
ground plane. 

The IX and IY current patterns required to perform Write and 
Read operations on a selected VT cell were generated and meas-

ured by an automated, multichannel data acquisition setup, Oc-
topus [31] that also measured readout voltage on the IS leads. 
The test patterns used are functionally similar to the patterns 
discussed in [6]; they are shown in Fig. 3. 

These 72-bit memory arrays were fabricated and tested to de-
termine the operating margins of the individual cells. All meas-
ured cells were fully operational but demonstrated relatively 
narrow margins of operation shown in Fig. 4 for a few randomly 
selected cells. We omit further details on VT1-based memory 
arrays in favor of the second, more advanced implementation, 
VT2. 

VT2 implementation is based on self-shunted JJs with 
600 μA/μm2 critical current density [29], [30]. Due to elimina-
tion of external shunt resistors (see, right photo in Fig. 2) and 
better design optimization, the cell dimensions have been re-
duced to 9 μm x 11 μm, giving about 41% reduction in the cell 
area. The cells were organized into 12 x 6 array using x and y 
pitches of, respectively, 9 µm and 12 µm, as shown in Fig. 5.  

Fig. 6 shows test results for three randomly selected memory 
cells. Black circles in the Fig. 6 mark amplitudes of the IX and 
IY currents at successful operation cycles of the tested cells, 
while green crosses mark incorrect operation. The measured 
margins are similar to the ones projected in [5], demonstrating 
that performance of the fabricated circuits is in a good agree-
ment with the theoretical model. We attribute wider margins of 
the VT2 cells in comparison to the ones observed on VT1 cells 
to a better layout optimization and parameter extraction, mainly 
to a better account for the mutual inductances between all the 
cell inductors, including parasitics – the experience gained as a 
result of our work on the VT1 cells. 

 

 

Fig. 3.  Numerically simulated operation of a VT cell in Fig. 1. Three external 
currents shown in the upper plot initiate cell operations. Write “0” and Write 
“1” operations are activated by applying, respectively, positive IX (black trace)
and IY (green trace) currents and negative currents IX and IY. Read operations 
are activated by negative IY and positive IS (red trace) currents. Superconduct-
ing currents flowing through the Josephson junctions J1 and J2 are shown in 
the middle panel, and voltage drops on the junctions are shown in the lower 
panel. The output voltage across the readout SQUID junction J3 shows Joseph-
son oscillations in the Read “1” state.  

All the traces are shown in normalized units. In order to present the test pat-

terns in the same plot, currents IX and IS are individually rescaled, and a con-
stant DC offset of the IX current is not shown. A substantial fraction of cell 
testing time is devoted to half selections when we check that applying only one 
and anyone current does not activate any operation. The amplitudes of IX and 
IY currents were varied to determine boundaries (margins) of the region of cor-
rect operation of each memory cell as shown in Fig. 4. 

Fig. 4. Operating margins of two randomly selected VT1 cells fabricated us-
ing the 100-µA/µm2 fabrication process SFQ5ee [23]. The cells are identified 
by their column (x) and row (y) positions in the 6x12 array. Each point in the 
2D margin plots corresponds to a pair of current amplitudes |IX| and |IY| used 
to perform Write “0”, both currents are positive, and Write “1”, both currents 
are negative, operations. Successful operations are shown by black dots and 
failed operations are shown by green crosses. 


 

 

4

 
We also performed a random pattern test on the whole array. 
In this test a random pattern of the size 6 x 12 was written into 
the array and then was read out and compared. The test was run 
for 100 times and showed zero errors. 

To demonstrate low interference between the cells, we ran a 
more comprehensive, although time consuming, checkerboard 
test, which is used in semiconductor memory testing to detect 
bridging faults. The test consists of: a) writing a checkerboard 
pattern of “1”s and “0”s in the whole array; b) reading the con-
tent of all cells; c) writing a complementary checkerboard pat-
tern consisting of “0”s and “1”s; d) reading the content of all 
cells. This test failed when applied to the whole array. However, 
it passed through when two particular cells were excluded from 
the test. The extracted cumulative margins for the checkerboard 
test are shown in Fig. 7. As expected, they are significantly nar-
rower than the discussed earlier margins of individual cells.  

The achieved functional density of our JJ RAM is about one 
million cells per cm2, and the circuit density is about 4 million 
JJs per cm2. We believe that this functional density exceeds the 
density of any state-of-the-art superconducting circuits reported 
up to date. However, the achieved density is still a few orders 
of magnitude below the density of SRAM and DRAM in 
CMOS. In the following sections, we discuss our proposals for 
a) doubling the functional density by incremental improve-
ments of the existing fabrication technology; and b) more radi-
cal but still feasible technology developments required for dra-
matic improvements in functional density of superconductor 
electronics. 

 

 
Fig. 5. A ten by four fragment of the 12 x 6 memory cell array fabricated using 600 μA/μm2 technology. The word selection and bit selection lines IX and 
IY are marked in the picture along with the readout line IS. The chip was rotated about 90o for electrical testing, giving a difference in cell labeling in Fig. 6. 

 

 

Fig. 6. Operating margins of three randomly selected VT2 cells fabricated us-
ing the 600-µA/µm2 fabrication process with self-shunted junctions [29], [30]. 
The cells are identified by their row (y) and column (x) positions in the array 
consisting of 6 columns and 12 rows. Each point in the 2D margin plots corre-
sponds to a pair of current amplitudes |IX| and |IY| used to perform Write “0”, 
both currents are positive, and Write “1”, both currents are negative, operations. 
Regions occupied by blue dots correspond to correct Write/Read operations.

IX

IY

IS→


 

 

5

III. MINIATURIZATION OF TRANSFORMERS 

A. Superconducting Flux Transformers 

About 25% of the Josephson junction-based memory cell 
area is occupied by two flux transformers; see Table I. The sim-
plest superconducting transformers usually utilize a mutual in-
ductance, M = k(L1L2)1/2 between two parallel stripline or mi-
crostrip inductors with self-inductances L1 and L2 located either 
in the same plane or stacked vertically. Spacing between the 
inductors and vertical separation determine the coupling coef-
ficient, k. Self-inductance, L and mutual inductance, M of vari-
ous combinations of microstrip (over one ground plane) and 
stripline (sandwiched between two ground planes) inductors on 
various layers of the MIT LL fabrication process was measured 
in [32] and modeled using 3D inductance extractors [24].   

Since two inductors in the same plane occupy at least twice 
as much area as vertically stacked inductors, we used vertically 

stacked microstrip inductors formed by layers M5 and M6 
above M4 ground plane in our memory design. For the layer 
stack description, Nb and interlayer dielectric thicknesses, and 
other parameters, see [23].  

The mutual inductance between the stacked M5 and M6 mi-
crostrip inductors is shown in Fig. 8. The mutual inductance per 
unit length increases with the inductors linewidth w decreasing, 
but saturates and becomes practically independent of w below 
about 0.7 μm. At the same time, the self-inductance per unit 
length steadily increases with w decreasing due to increasing of 
both the magnetic (geometrical) inductance and especially ki-
netic inductance of the film. However, the coupling coefficient 
k strongly decreases with decreasing w because more and more 
energy is stored as a kinetic energy of the supercurrent while 
magnetic flux coupling diminishes with diminishing geomet-
rical size of the inductors. 

If we want to keep IX and IY currents below 1 mA, the mu-
tual inductance of the transformers should be about 2 pH. Ac-
cording to Fig. 8, this requires transformer length to be about 
10 μm, independently of the width of inductors if w < 0.5 μm. 
This scale sets the dimensions of the memory cell.  

It may appear that some reduction in the area of the trans-
formers could be achieved by meandering the inductors. How-
ever, this is not possible because meander’s turns need to be 
spaced by some nonzero amount, s. Therefore, the area occu-
pied by a meander [lw + ls(n−1) − sw(n−1) − s2(n−1)2/n] is al-
ways larger than the area lw of a straight-line inductor with the 
same inductance, where l is the straight-line inductor length and 
n is the number of turns in the meander.  

In order to increase the mutual coupling, both flux transform-
ers in the VT cells were implemented as stacked superconductor 
strips crossing ground plane perforations (holes), as shown 
schematically in Fig. 9(a). These perforations could be seen as 
dark rectangles in the upper and left parts in Fig. 2 and as dark 
rectangles under lines IX and IS in Fig. 5.  

0.01
0.1
1
10
0.01

0.1

1

0.01

0.1

1

M6

M5

 Coupling coefficient, k

 

Mutual inductance, M (pH/µm)

Width of microstrips, w (µm)

 stacked microstrips M5 and M6 
        above M4 ground plane

k

M

M4

w

 

Fig. 8. Mutual inductance, M per unit length (left axis) and the coupling 
coefficient k = M/(L1L2)1/2 (right axis) between the vertically stacked M5 
and M6 inductors with the common ground plane M4. The thickness of 
Nb layers M4 and M6 is 200 nm and of M5 is 135 nm. The interlayer die-
lectric thickness between M4 and M5 is 200 nm and between M5 and M6 
is 280 nm. 

Fig. 9. (a) Cross sections of a conventional flux transformer used in our design 
of VT memory cells; local increase of self- and mutual inductance is achieved 
due to a ground plane hole. (b) A proposed transformers utilizing soft magnetic 
non-conducting films to increase coupling between the superconductor films. 
Adding vertical magnetic vias, shown in light green color, magnetically con-
necting the films and forming a closed magnetic core, would dramatically in-
crease the overall transformer performance.

Ground plane

Ground plane
hole

Nonconducting  
soft magnetic films

Superconductor
films

Superconductor
films

(a)

(b)

 
Fig. 7. Results of the checkerboard test algorithm. Cumulative margins of 
70 cells in the 12 x 6 array are shown. Cells (5,2) and (5,6) failed and 
were excluded from the test. 


 

 

6

A ground plane perforation under a strip increases its induct-
ance because it lengthens the ground current path and also in-
duces a circulating superconducting current around the perfora-
tion. The self-inductance in this case can be estimated as a sum 
of the strip inductance and the inductance of the ground plane 
perforation. The latter is very well known from the design of 
washer-type SQUIDs [37] and, for a sufficiently large ground 
plane, can be estimated as γµ0a, where a is the size of the per-
foration and γ is the perforation shape-dependent factor, e.g., γ 
= 1.25 for a square washer; see [26] for detailed numerical sim-
ulations for a variety of shapes. For strips with w > (2λ + d)/γ, 
where λ is the magnetic field penetration depth and d is the dis-
tance to the ground plane, the strip magnetic inductance is 
mainly determined by the size of the perforation. 

Similarly, the mutual inductance between two microstrip in-
ductors over the perforation is defined mostly by dimensions of 
the perforation rather than by the shapes of the inductors, while 
the coupling coefficient k remains relatively low. Hence, the 
available design techniques do not allow for a significant 
downscaling of transformer dimensions. 

B. Transformers with Thin Magnetic Films 

The use of soft magnetic materials is a well-known remedy 
for a drastic reduction of transformer dimensions in electronics. 
However, it is also known that magnetic impurities can spoil or 
even destroy superconductivity. This is why magnetic materials 
have been avoided in superconductor electronics. Fortunately 
the prejudice against magnetic materials has been reduced due 
to very promising investigations of Josephson junctions with 
barriers made of magnetic metals; see [38], [39] for a review.  

We suggest to use thin-film soft magnetic materials to reduce 
transformer dimensions, as illustrated in Fig. 9b. Magnetic 
films are located below the lower and above the upper trans-
former strips. Numerical simulations of the transformer using 
the latest InductEx package showed that a relative permeability, 
µ of magnetic strips of 10, or even 5, is sufficient to signifi-
cantly enhance mutual inductance of the transformer in Fig. 8b.  
In simulations, the widths of magnetic films in Fig. 9b were 
taken to be equal to width of the perforation in Fig. 9a. With 
optional magnetic vias connecting magnetic films to form a 
continuous magnetic path, the size of the transformer decreases 
proportionally to roughly 1/µ. Optimization of the suggested 
magnetic-core transformer is still in progress and requires more 
details on magnetic properties of the films; the results will be 
reported later. 

To operate at very high frequencies expected from supercon-
ductor electronics, magnetic films in the suggested transformers 
need to be nonconductive and possess a low imaginary part µ” 
of complex magnetic permeability µ = µ’+iµ” in order to have 
low RF losses in the transformer. At the same time, the real part 
µ’ should be sufficiently high at the frequencies of operation in 
order to provide for a desired reduction in the transformer size. 
Preferably, it should also weekly depend on frequency. 

 There are many advanced materials, e.g., conventional fer-
rites, spinels, hexaferrites, etc., capable of working at up to ~ 
100 GHz; see [40] for a review. Development of thin-film mag-
netic materials for RF applications in microelectronic integrated 

circuits is a very active area of industrial and academic research 
and subject of numerous publications, which simply could not 
be listed here; see [43],[44] and references therein as an exam-
ple. Despite the wide use of various magnetic materials in con-
ventional electronics, the authors have no doubts that integra-
tion of magnetic dielectrics into superconductor electronics fab-
rication processes is a very challenging undertaking.  

We should note that other areas of superconductor electron-
ics, namely various ac-biased logic circuits, would significantly 
benefit from the development of compact transformers. For in-
stance, all Reciprocal Quantum Logic (RQL) [4], Quantum 
Flux Parametron (QFP) [40], and Adiabatic QFP (AQFP) [41] 
digital circuits use multiphase ac biasing schemes and flux 
transformers which significantly limit the achievable scale of 
integration.   

IV. MINIATURIZATION OF JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS 

The smallest Josephson junctions used in our VT2 cell are 
about 400 nm in diameter, and all four JJs occupy less than 4% 
of the memory cell area. Therefore, further miniaturization of 
the JJs does not seem to provide significant benefits to the 
memory density.  However, the presently utilized Josephson 
tunnel junctions have two significant drawbacks which may 
complicate miniaturization of other components and integration 
with magnetic dielectrics. First of all, AlOx tunnel barriers used 
degrade above ~ 200 oC. This makes it difficult to apply modern 
miniaturization technologies to superconductor electronics. For 
instance, the widely used in CMOS industry damascene pro-
cessing requires filling of high aspect ratio vias and narrow 
trenches by chemical vapor deposition of superconducting ma-
terials, which usually requires processing temperatures above 

 

Fig. 10. A sketches of sandwich-type tunnel JJs (a), a constant-thickness (b) 
and variable-thickness (c) bridges consisting of a conductive material connect-
ing two superconducting banks. For the required geometrical dimensions of Jo-
sephson bridges, see text and [34], [35]. 

Superconductor (Nb)
banks

Superconductor electrodes

Conductive bridge

d

d

w

w

Substrate
(b)

(c)

D
Tunnel barrier

(a)


 

 

7

300 oC. Secondly, miniaturization of sandwich-type JJs shown 
in Fig. 10a below ~ 300 nm is difficult because it requires bar-
riers with very high critical current density and also because JJs 
need a top via. Therefore, it is possible that, with progress in 
fabrication technology, planar bridge-type Josephson devices 
reviewed in [34,[35] will become competitive with sandwich-
type JJs. 

Among the bridge-type Josephson devices, a Variable Thick-
ness Bridge (VTB) schematically shown in Fig. 10c looks more 
attractive for applications and from theoretical perspectives 
[34], [35] than a constant-thickness bridge (CTB) shown in 
Fig. 10b. Nevertheless, in some rare cases, CTBs were the only 
available type of devices, despite their impractical appearance; 
see, e.g., [47]. 

Basically, all theories tell that the bridge length, d should be 
smaller than the coherence length in the bridge material, ξ in 
order to minimize the dependence of the bridge critical current 
Ic on d, which in this regime changes as 1/d; and the shorter the 
bridge the better. The material-depend coherent length in thin 
films is typically ~ 50 nm. This sets the scale of the required 
bridge length.  

Patterning at these dimensions is quite comfortable for the 
modern tools used in CMOS industry. However, if the required 
spread (one standard deviation, σ) of Ic is, say, 2%, the 1σ 
spread in d should be less than 1 nm, which is beyond the cur-
rent capabilities even of the most expensive CMOS technolo-
gies.  

The other unpleasant limitation is related to the required 
range of bridge resistances, Rn which should be from ~ 2 Ω to ~ 
8 Ω. It comes from the desired IcRn product of ~ 0.8 mV and the 
typical range of Ic used in digital circuits, from ~ 0.1 mA to ~ 
0.4 mA. This range of Ic could only be covered by changing the 
bridge width, w since the bridge length d is fixed. For the bridge 
material with sheet resistance, Rs of 10 Ω per square, the re-
quired width is from ~ 40 nm to ~ 250 nm. If the width  is de-
fined with the same 1σ spread as the one required for d, the re-
sultant spread in Ic would be √2σ ~ 2.8%. 

These well-known estimates were given again to emphasize 
that implementation of the bridge-type planar technologies for 
superconducting VLSI circuits would require fabrication tech-
nologies as sophisticated and expensive as used in the very ad-
vanced CMOS nodes. About 35 years ago bridges and other 
weak links lost their competition with sandwich-like tunnel 
structures mainly because of the above requirements. It would 
be interesting to see if advantages of the planar devices for 
VLSI could be realized when a 50-nm patterning scale becomes 
standard in superconductor electronics. We note, however, that 
such dimensions are quite usual at a low scale of integration 
where such techniques as e-beam lithography and focused ion 
beam etching are practical, and junction parameter spreads are 
not important. For instance, very small Josephson junctions are 
mandatory components of nano-SQUIDs; see, for example, 
[48]. 

V. DISCUSSION 

One of the goals of this presentation was to demonstrate ad-
vantages of the recently developed fabrication technologies 
[22], [23], [29], [30] for increasing the integration scale of su-
perconductive circuits. The circuit selection was driven by the 
lack of JJ memories and RAMs in particular, as mentioned in 
Sec. I. We thought that by designing a memory circuit we could 
find reasons for a misfortune of conventional JJ-based memo-
ries in superconductor electronics and justify current efforts in 
developing various magnetic junction based cryogenic memo-
ries; see, e.g., [36], [45], and references therein. No reasons 
have been found. All miniaturized memory cells were fully op-
erational and set new records for the functional density and for 
Josephson junction density, respectively of about 1 Mbit/cm2 
and 4×106 JJ/cm2.  

The other goal was to assess if superconductor electronics 
can reach integration scales and functionalities comparable to 
the modern CMOS circuits, a question posed in [46]. One of us 
(SKT) provided a negative answer in [46], based on a very gen-
eral argument that superconductor electronics manipulating 
with circulating currents, i.e., encoding information by fluxons, 
cannot be miniaturized to the scale of CMOS electronics encod-
ing information by static charge, because a localized charge 
would always need less space than a moving charge, especially 
charge moving in a loop, i.e., the circulating current. However, 
how far the scaling of superconductor electronics could go and 
at what integration scale superconducting circuits would out-
perform CMOS circuits remain to be answered.  

By investigating the compact memory cells, we confirmed 
that miniaturization by linewidth reduction is the best natural 
remedy against parasitic flux trapping. Not only because 
Abrikosov vortices cannot be trapped in narrow superconduct-
ing traces, but also because effects of a magnetic flux trapped 
in any of the flux-trapping moats (seen as long dark horizontal 
rectangles in Fig. 5) become distributed between multiple cells 
(between eight cells in our RAM array), minimizing impact on 
any particular cell. 

It was commonly accepted that the spacing between super-
conductor wires should be kept sufficiently wide to avoid their 
parasitic coupling. Indeed, two stripline or microstrip inductors 
located in the same plane couple mainly through fringing fields 
between them, and the k nearly exponentially decreases with 
increasing the spacing between the inductor edges, a so-called 
edge coupling; see Fig. 3 in [33]. The maximum coupling k ~ 
0.3 is reached at zero spacing between the inductors; and k 
weakly depends on the width of signal strips. We found that the 
coupling factors between wires of miniature cells remain quite 
low even if the wires are placed above a perforated ground 
plane and the wires are vertically stacked. This means that the 
minimum spacing is really set by the fabrication process rather 
than by the design. 

Of course, numerous, but relatively low, parasitic couplings 
should be taken into account. The used tandem of InductEx and 
PSCAN2 perfectly executed this task. The miniaturization pro-
cedure was quite labor intensive in comparison with the past 
practice. This is because the stretching or narrowing of one wire 
affects values of all other self- and mutual inductances, i.e., the 


 

 

8

effective inductances are mutually dependent. Therefore, a 
known recommendation, e.g., in PSCAN2, to adjust just one in-
ductance during circuit optimization cannot be implemented. 
Instead, it was necessary to run numerous optimization cycles 
and make a tradeoff between PSCAN2 recommendations and 
the real set of inductive parameters extracted by InductEx after 
each optimization cycle.  

We hope that the proposed transformer miniaturization could 
be realized if technology integrating soft magnetic dielectrics 
with high permeability and superconductor electronics will be 
developed. Miniaturization of Josephson junctions is a chal-
lenging task and without the guaranteed success. Many bridge 
techniques have been tested with disappointing results for 
large-scale applications. However, bridge junctions firmly keep 
niche positions due to a set of unique advantages. First of all, 
the discussed earlier small dimensions. Secondly, being planar 
devices, they are better suited for vertical integrations with sev-
eral stacked Josephson junction layers. Bridges could be useful 
even if they are formed as a narrowing in a superconductor film. 
For example, superconductive constrictions are used as heaters 
locally destroying superconductivity of thin films [16].  

Our interest in Josephson junction memories was inspired in 
part by a recent burst of interest to programmable magnetic π-
junctions and their use in “magnetic” junction memories; see, 
for example, MJRAM [36] and references therein. It could be 
noted that the equivalent circuit of a MJRAM cell in [36] is 
somehow similar to the schematics of a VT cell shown in 
Fig. 1a. In particular, the MJRAM cell explicitly contains two 
transformers (see Fig. 1b in [36] that shows one extra trans-
former hidden in Fig. 1a in [36]) and two conventional JJs. It is 
easy to conclude then that the area occupied by these conven-
tional components of the MJRAM cell should be about 2/3 of 
the area occupied by the VT cell, if both cells are fabricated 
using similar technologies.  

Hence, even if the magnetic JJ and its wiring does not occupy 
any space, the maximum expected reduction in area of the 
MJRAM cell with respect to the VT cell is only 30%. We be-
lieve that this would not be sufficient to justify implementation 
of MJRAMs, given all the technological complexities with fab-
rication of highly uniform programmable MJJs and high mag-
netic fields required for their initialization and control. Note 
also that these fields could be incompatible with superconduc-
tor logic circuits because of high sensitivity of the latter to mag-
netic field capable to induce undesirable Abrikosov or Joseph-
son vortices. Nevertheless, we recognize that initial demonstra-
tions may not necessarily illustrate all advantages of a new tech-
nology. 

We did not attempt to implement existing or develop new 
drivers and decoders for JJ RAM because of a small scale of 
our effort. We are counting on the known solutions such as pre-
sented in [8] and potentially on a larger effort in the future. 

Finally, let us note that memory cells could be also made of 
logic cells and, whereas transformers are highly desirable, they 
are not mandatory components of JJ-based memory. The key 
function of the transformers is to “calculate” AND functions of 
half-selection input data. For instance, in the VT cell, the input 
data are presented by DC currents IX and IY. In general, these 

data could arrive within a large, say, 200 ps time interval, which 
is too long for the RSFQ-like logic circuitry. However, S. Rylov 
in [49] presented an SFQ AND gate with a predefined range of 
time delays between input SFQ pulses, which could be utilized 
in a logic-cell-based JJ memories.  

VI. CONCLUSION 

We have demonstrated JJ-based memory cells and RAM ar-
rays with record functional density of about 1 Mbit/cm2 and rec-
ord density of Josephson junctions of 4×106 JJ/cm2. We 
searched for new solutions to end the existing skepticism about 
very large scale integration of superconductor RAMs and other 
digital circuits. We illustrated that advancing patterning tech-
nique to 50 nm along with thin-film transformers using soft 
magnetic dielectrics would be sufficient to increase the func-
tional density of RAM to 10 Mbit or even to 20 Mbit per square 
centimeter. Compact transformers with soft magnetic materials 
operating up to tens of GHz would also be highly beneficial to 
superconductor logic circuits such, e.g., QFP, AQFP, RQL, and 
others, which need transformers in their multi-phase ac-biasing 
networks, in signal invertors, and in logic gates. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We thank Coenrad Fourie and Kyle Jackman for suggesting 
examples for numerical simulation of circuits with soft mag-
netic materials using InductEx software. We thank Pavel 
Shevchenko and Alex Kirichenko for the assistance with 
PSCAN2 software. We thank Anatoly Borodin for his assis-
tance in measurements. We are grateful to Vladimir Bolkhov-
sky and Scott Zarr for their part in high-Jc process development 
and running the process used in this work. Finally, we are 
thankful to Leonard Johnson, Eric Dauler, Gerald Gibson, Scott 
Holmes, and Marc Manheimer for their interest in and support 
of this work. This work was supported in part by the IARPA C3 
Program. The views and conclusions contained herein are those 
of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily rep-
resenting the official policies or endorsements of the U.S. Gov-
ernment. 

REFERENCES 

[1] H. H. Zappe, "Single flux quantum Josephson junction memory cell," 
Appl. Phys. Letters, vol. 25, pp. 424-426, 1974. 

[2] K. K. Likharev and V. K. Semenov, "RSFQ logic/memory family: A new 
Josephson-junction technology for sub-terahertz-clock-frequency digital 
systems," IEEE Trans. on Appl. Supercond., vol. 1, pp. 3-28, Mar. 1991. 

[3] D. E. Kirichenko, S. Sarwana, and A. F. Kirichenko, "Zero static power 
dissipation biasing of RSFQ circuits," IEEE Trans. on Appl. Supercond., 
vol. 21, pp. 776-779, Jun. 2011. 

[4] [4] 
Q. P. Herr, A. Y. Herr, O. T. Oberg, and A. G. Ioannidis, "Ultra-
low-power superconductor logic," J Appl. Phys., vol. 109, p. 8, 103903, 
May. 2011. 

[5] S. Tahara and Y. Wada, "A vortex transitional NDRO Josephson memory 
cell," Jap. J. Appl. Phys. Part 1, vol. 26, pp. 1463-1466, Sep. 1987. 

[6] S. Tahara, I. Ishida, Y. Ajisawa, and Y. Wada, "Experimental vortex tran-
sitional nondestructive read-out Josephson memory cell," J. Appl. Phys., 
vol. 65, pp. 851-856, Jan. 1989. 


 

 

9

[7] S. Nagasawa, Y. Hashimoto, H. Numata, and S. Tahara, "A 380 ps, 
9.5 mW Josephson 4-kbit RAM operated at a high bit yield," IEEE Trans. 
on Appl. Supercond., vol. 5, pp. 2447-2452, Jun. 1995. 

[8] S. Nagasawa, H. Hasegawa, T. Hashimoto, H. Suzuki, K. Miyahara, and 
Y. Enomoto, "Design of a 16 kbit superconducting latching/SFQ hybrid 
RAM," Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 12, pp. 933-936, Nov. 1999. 

[9] W. Chen, A. V. Rylyakov, V. Patel, J. E. Lukens, and K. K. Likharev, 
"Superconductor digital frequency divider operating up to 750 GHz," 
Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 73, pp. 2817-2819, Nov. 1998. 

[10] R. Sato, Y. Hatanaka, Y. Ando, M. Tanaka, A. Fujimaki, K. Takagi, and 
N. Takagi, "High-speed operation of random-access-memory-embedded 
microprocessor with minimal instruction set architecture based on Rapid 
Single-Flux-Quantum Logic," IEEE Trans. on Appl. Supercond., vol. 27, 
1300505, Jun. 2017. 

[11] S. Nagasawa, Y. Wada, M. Hidaka, H. Tsuge, I. Ishida, and S. Tahara, 
"570-ps 13-mv Josephson 1-kbit NDRO RAM," IEEE J. of Solid-State 
Circ., vol. 24, pp. 1363-1371, Oct. 1989. 

[12] S. V. Polonsky, A. F. Kirichenko, V. K. Semenov, and K. K. Likharev, 
"Rapid single flux quantum random-access memory," IEEE Trans. on 
Appl. Supercond., vol. 5, pp. 3000-3005, Jun. 1995. 

[13] A. F. Kirichenko, S. Sarwana, D. K. Brock, and M. Radpavar, "Pipelined 
DC-powered SFQ RAM," IEEE Trans. on Appl. Supercond., vol. 11, pp. 
537-540, Mar. 2001. 

[14] S. Tahara and S. Nagasawa, "Large-scale integration for high-speed Jo-
sephson random-access memory," Appl. Supercond., vol. 1, pp. 1879-
1891, Oct-Dec. 1993. 

[15] Q. P. Herr and L. Eaton, "Towards a 16 kilobit, subnanosecond Josephson 
RAM," Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 12, pp. 929-932, Nov. 1999. 

[16] Q. Y. Zhao, E. A. Toomey, B. A. Butters, A. N. McCaughan, A. E. Dane, 
S. W. Nam, and K. K. Berggren, "A compact superconducting nanowire 
memory element operated by nanowire cryotrons," Supercond. Sci. Tech-
nol., vol. 31, 035009, Mar. 2018. 

[17] Y. Braiman, N. Nair, J. Rezac, and N. Imam, "Memory cell operation 
based on small Josephson junctions arrays," Supercond. Sci. Technol., 
vol. 29, 124003, Dec. 2016. 

[18] Y. Braiman, B. Neschke, N. Nair, N. Imam, and R. Glowinski, "Memory 
states in small arrays of Josephson junctions," Phys. Rev. E, vol. 94, 
052223, Nov. 2016. 

[19] A. Murphy, D. V. Averin, and A. Bezryadin, "Nanoscale superconducting 
memory based on the kinetic inductance of asymmetric nanowire loops," 
New J. Phys., vol. 19, 063015, Jun. 2017. 

[20] Y. Komura, M. Tanaka, S. Nagasawa, A. Bozbey, and A. Fujimaki,  “Vor-
tex Transitional Memory Developed with Nb 4-Layer, 10-kA/cm2 fabri-
cation process, 2015 15th International Superconductive Electronics Con-
ference (ISEC), paper DS-O05. DOI: 10.1109/ISDEC.2015.7383489 

[21] H. Numata, S. Nagasawa, and S. Tahara, "A vortex transitional memory 
cell for 1-Mbit/cm2 density Josephson RAMs," IEEE Trans. Appl. Super-
cond., vol. 7, pp. 2282-2287, Jun. 1997. 

[22] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, T. J. Weir, L. M. Johnson, M. A. Gouker, 
and W. D. Oliver, "Fabrication process and properties of fully-planarized 
deep-submicron Nb/Al-AlOx/Nb Josephson junctions for VLSI circuits," 
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 25, 1101312, Jun. 2015. 

[23] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, T. J. Weir, A. Wynn, D. E. Oates, L. M. 
Johnson, and M. A. Gouker, "Advanced fabrication processes for super-
conducting very large-scale integrated circuits," IEEE Trans. on Appl. Su-
percond., vol. 26, 1100110, Apr. 2016. 

[24] C. J. Fourie, O. Wetzstein, T. Ortlepp, and J. Kunert, "Three-dimensional 
multi-terminal superconductive integrated circuit inductance extraction," 
Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 24, 125015, Dec. 2011. 

[25] C. J. Fourie, O. Wetzstein, J. Kunert, H. Toepfer, and H. G. Meyer, "Ex-
perimentally verified inductance extraction and parameter study for su-
perconductive integrated circuit wires crossing ground plane holes," Su-
percond. Sci. Technol., vol. 26, 015016, Jan. 2013. 

[26] C. J. Fourie, A. Takahashi, and N. Yoshikawa, "Fast and accurate induct-
ance and coupling calculation for a multi-layer Nb process," Supercond. 
Sci. Technol., vol. 28, 035013, Mar. 2015. 

[27] C. J. Fourie, "Calibration of inductance calculations to measurement data 
for superconductive integrated circuit processes," IEEE Trans. on Appl. 
Supercond., vol. 23, 1301305, Jun. 2013. 

[28] P. Shevchenko. (2015). PSCAN2 Superconductor Circuit Simulator. 
Available: http://www.pscan2sim.org/ 

[29] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, S. Zarr, T. J. Weir, A. Wynn, A. L. Day, 
L. M. Johnson, and M. A. Gouker, "Properties of unshunted and resis-
tively shunted Nb/AlOx/Al/Nb Josephson junctions with critical current 

densities from 0.1 mA/μm2 to 1 mA/μm2," IEEE Trans. on Appl. Super-
cond., vol. 27, no. 4, 110815, Jun. 2017. 

[30] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, D. E. Oates, R. Rastogi, S. Zarr, A. L. 
Day, T. J. Weir, A. Wynn, and L. M. Johnson, "Superconductor electron-
ics fabrication process with MoNx kinetic inductors and self-shunted Jo-
sephson junctions," IEEE Trans. on Appl. Supercond., vol. 28, 1100212, 
Jun. 2018. 

[31] D. Y. Zinoviev and Y. A. Polyakov, "Octopux: An advanced automated 
setup for testing superconductor circuits," IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 
vol. 7, pp. 3240-3243, Jun. 1997. 

[32] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, T. J. Weir, C. J. Galbraith, L. M. Johnson, 
M. A. Gouker, and V. K. Semenov, "Inductance of circuit structures for 
MIT LL superconductor electronics fabrication process with 8 niobium 
layers," IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., vol. 25, 1100905, Jun. 2015. 

[33] S. K. Tolpygo, V. Bolkhovsky, R. Rastogi, S. Zarr, A. L. Day, T. J. Weir, 
A. Wynn, and L. M. Johnson, "Developments toward a 250-nm, fully pla-
narized fabrication process with ten superconducting layers and self-
shunted Josephson junctions," in IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 2017 16th 
International Superconductive Electronics Conference, 2017. 

[34] K. K. Likharev, "Superconducting weak links," Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 51, 
pp. 101-159, 1979. 

[35] A. A. Golubov, M. Y. Kupriyanov, and E. Il'ichev, "The current-phase 
relation in Josephson junctions," Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 76, pp. 411-469, 
Apr. 2004. 

[36] I. M. Dayton, T. Sage, E. C. Gingrich, M. G. Loving, T. F. Ambrose, N. 
P. Siwak, S. Keebaugh, C. Kirby, D. L. Miller, A. Y. Herr, Q. P. Herr, and 
O. Naaman, "Experimental demonstration of a Josephson magnetic 
memory cell with a programmable pi-junction," IEEE Magn. Lett., vol. 9, 
3301905, 2018. 

[37] J.M. Jaycox and M.B. Ketchen, “Planar coupling scheme for ultra low 
noise dc SQUIDs,” IEEE Trans. Mag., vol. MAF-17, no. 1 pp. 400-403, 
Jan. 1981. 

[38] A.I. Buzdin, “Proximity effects in superconductor-ferromagnet hetero-
structures,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 77, p. 935, 2005. 

[39] V.V. Ryazanov, “Physics and application of superconducting phase in-
verters based on superconductor-ferromagnet-superconductor Josephson 
junctions,” in Fundamentals of Superconducting Nanoelectronics: A. Si-
dorenko (eds), Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2011, pp. 219-248. 

[40] M. Pardavi-Horvath, “Microwave applications of soft ferrites,” J. Mag-
netism & Magnet. Mater., vol. 215-216, pp. 171-183, 2000. 

[41] M. Hosoya, W. Hioe, J. Casas, “Quantum flux parametron: a single quan-
tum flux device for Josephson supercomputer,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Super-
cond., vol. 1, No. 2, pp. 77–89, Jun. 1991. 

[42] N. Takeuchi, D. Ozawa, Y. Tamanashi, and N. Yoshikawa, “An adiabatic 
quantum flux parametron as an ultra-low-power logic device,” Super-
cond. Sci. Technol., vol. 26, No. 3, Mar. 2013, Art. no. 035010. 

[43] A. El-Chazaly, R.M. White, S. X. Wang, “Gigahertz-band integrated 
magnetic inductors,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theor. Technol., vol. 65, 
no. 12, pp. 4893-4900, Dec. 2017. 

[44] P. K. Amiri, B. Rejaei, Y. Zhuang, M. Vroubel, D.W. Lee, S.X. Wang, 
and J.N. Burghartz, “Integrated microstrip lines with Co-Ta-Zr magnetic 
films,” IEEE Trans. Mag., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 3103-3106, Nov. 2008. 

[45] I.P. Nevirkovets and O.A. Mukhanov, “Memory cell for high-density ar-
rays based on a multiterminal superconducting-ferromagnetic device,” 
Phys. Rev. Appl., vol. 10, 034013, Sep. 2018. 

[46] S.K. Tolpygo, “Superconductor digital electronics: Scalability and energy 
efficiency issues (Review Article),” Low Temp. Phys., vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 
361-379, May 2016. 

[47] S. Shokhor, B. Nadgorny, M. Gurvitch, V. Semenov, Y. Polyakov, K. 
Likharev, S. Y. Hou, and J. M. Phillips, "All-high-Tc superconductor 
rapid-single-flux-quantum circuit operating at similar-to-30-K," Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 67, pp. 2869-2871, Nov. 1995. 

[48] W. Wernsdorfer, “From micro- to nano-SQUIDs: applications to nano-
magnetism,” Supercond. Sci. Technol., vol. 22, 064013, 2009. 

[49] S. Rylov, “Clockless dynamic SFQ (DSFQ) AND gate with high input 
skew tolerance,” IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. (Early Access). DOI: 
10.1109/TASC.2019.2896137 


