Scattering mechanisms and electrical transport near an Ising nematic quantum
critical point

Xiaoyu Wang1 and Erez Berg1, 2

1James Frank Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637
2Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel

Electrical transport properties near an electronic Ising-nematic quantum critical point in two di-
mensions are of both theoretical and experimental interest. In this work, we derive a kinetic equation
valid in a broad regime near the quantum critical point using the memory matrix approach. The
formalism is applied to study the effect of the critical fluctuations on the dc resistivity through dif-
ferent scattering mechanisms, including umklapp, impurity scattering, and electron-hole scattering
in a compensated metal. We show that electrical transport in the quantum critical regime exhibits
a rich behavior that depends sensitively on the scattering mechanism and the band structure. In
the case of a single large Fermi surface, the resistivity due to umklapp scattering crosses over from
ПҒ вҲј T 2 at low temperature to sublinear at high temperature. The crossover temperature scales
as q3
0, where q0 is the minimal wavevector for umklapp scattering. Impurity scattering leads to
ПҒвҲ’ПҒ0 вҲј T Оұ (ПҒ0 being the residual resistivity), where Оұ is either larger than 2 if there is only a single
Fermi sheet present, or 4/3 in the case of multiple Fermi sheets. Finally, in a perfectly compensated
metal with an equal density of electrons and holes, the low temperature behavior depends strongly
on the structure of вҖңcold spotsвҖқ on the Fermi surface, where the coupling between the quasiparticles
and order parameter fluctuations vanishes by symmetry. In particular, for a system where cold spots
are present on some (but not all) Fermi sheets, ПҒ вҲј T 5/3. At higher temperatures there is a broad
crossover regime where ПҒ either saturates or ПҒ вҲј T, depending on microscopic details. We discuss
these results in the context of recent quantum Monte Carlo simulations of a metallic Ising nematic
critical point, and experiments in certain iron-based superconductors.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Many strongly correlated materials, such as high tem-
perature superconductors, exhibit electrical transport
properties that are markedly different from those ex-
pected in a Fermi liquid. Most famously, in many sys-
tems, the electrical resistivity is a linear function of tem-
perature. Interestingly, it is often in this regime where
the highest superconducting transition temperature is
observed.
Understanding the role of strong electronic
correlations in such systems is of utmost importance. A
natural way to explain these properties is to consider
a metallic system tuned near a quantum critical point
(QCP), i.e., a вҖңquantum critical metalвҖқ. This is further
motivated by the observation that superconductivity is
typically found near another electronically ordered phase
[1]. The electronic order is suppressed by varying an ex-
ternal parameter such as electron concentration or pres-
sure, leading to a putative QCP. The critical fluctuations
of the order parameter mediate long-range, dynamical in-
teractions between electrons. These interactions can lead
to a breakdown of Fermi liquid behavior at the longest
length and timescales.
Of particular interest is the electrical transport prop-
erties near an Ising-nematic QCP in two spatial dimen-
sions [2вҖ“5]. An Ising nematic phase refers to a rotation-
symmetry-breaking electronic order where the square lat-
tice tetragonal symmetry is spontaneously broken down
to orthorhombic. It has been observed in various con-
densed matter systems [6], notably in various high Tc
superconductors, including iron pnictides [7, 8] and iron
chalcogenides [9, 10]. Evidence for nematic fluctuations

has been found in the cuprate superconductors, as well
[11, 12]. Recent experiments [13вҖ“16] reported non-Fermi
liquid transport in the vicinity of the nematic QCP.

On the theoretical front, several works have studied
trasport near a nematic QCP [2вҖ“5], along with many
other investigations of transport in different types of
quantum critical metals [17вҖ“25]. However, the general
picture remains unclear. Naively, since the singular fluc-
tuations of the nematic order parameter occur at small
wavevectors, one may expect them not to strongly mod-
ify transport properties. Treating the order parameter
fluctuations as an external вҖңbathвҖқ, Ref. [2] found a resis-
tivity that varies as T 3/2 near the QCP. However, in an
electronic nematic transition, the order parameter fluc-
tuations are a collective mode of the same electrons that
carry the current. This issue was addressed in Ref. [5],
and the resistivity was found to vary as T 2 in the clean
case, due to the long-wavelength nature of the nematic
fluctuations. Ref. [3] treated the case where the main
source of momentum relaxation is long-wavelength dis-
order that couples to the order parameter as a random
field; a variety of behaviors was found depending on the
dynamical critical exponent assumed for the QCP. Indi-
cations for non-Fermi liquid transport due to quantum
critical nematic fluctuations were found in recent numer-
ical simulations [4]; however, these result suffer from the
usual uncertainties associated with analytical continua-
tion of numerical data, and need to be backed by ana-
lytical calculations. Clearly, a uniform theoretical frame-
work to treat transport near an Ising-nematic QCP is
highly desireable.

The situation is complicated by the fact that despite

arXiv:1902.04590v1  [cond-mat.str-el]  12 Feb 2019


2

the substantial progress made
[26вҖ“38], the theory of
Ising-nematic quantum criticality at asymptotically low
energies is not well understood. However, as we argue
below, there is a broad range of energy scales where
the theory can be controlled; this вҖңHertzвҖ“MillisвҖ“MoriyaвҖқ
regime is described in terms of coherent electrons inter-
acting with strongly renormalized, overdamped collective
fluctuations of the order parameter [39вҖ“41].
Evidence
for the existence of such a regime has been found in re-
cent quantum Monte Carlo simulations [4, 42, 43]. At
lower temperatures, the theory becomes strongly cou-
pled, with nematic-mediated superconducting fluctua-
tions and strong non-Fermi liquid behavior onsetting at
the same energy scale.
In this work, we develop a memory matrix approach for
transport in the intermediate coherent electron regime.
Transport in this regime can be described by a kinetic
equation, where the effects of the quantum critical fluc-
tuations are incorporated in the collision integral.
At
low temperatures (in the absence of a superconducting
phase), the electrons become incoherent, and our ap-
proach breaks down; however, in the absence of a mag-
netic field, in this regime the system generically becomes
a high Tc superconductor mediated by the nematic fluc-
tuations. Our theory is expected to hold down to tem-
peratures of the order of Tc.
We apply our technique to study situations where dif-
ferent scattering mechanisms dominate the transport be-
havior, including umklapp scattering, impurity scatter-
ing, and momentum-conserving electron-hole scattering
in a compensated metal. We find that depending on the
relaxation mechanism, the electrical resistivity exhibits
rich features, including several regimes beyond the ones
discussed in Refs. [2, 5]. Our main results are summa-
rized as follows:

1. In a clean system with a large, generic Fermi
surface, umklapp scattering has a low-momentum
threshold q0 determined by the smallest distance
between Fermi surfaces in different Brillouin zones.
At low temperatures, T вүӘ T0 вҲј q3
0, the typical
momentum of the quantum critical fluctuations is
smaller than q0.
As a result, ПҒ(T) вҲј T 2, as in
a Fermi liquid, despite the proximity to the QCP
[5]. At higher temperatures, umklapp scattering is
governed by critical fluctuations.
In this regime,
ПҒ(T) is strongly enhanced, and the dynamics of
the critical fluctuations is qualitatively modified by
the umklapp processes, and deviates from the naive
low-temperature scaling behavior (characterized by
a z = 3 dynamical critical exponent).
As a re-
sult, ПҒ(T) exhibits a smooth crossover from T 2 at
T вүӘ T0 to sublinear at higher temperatures.

2. In the presence of weak impurity scattering in a sin-
gle electronic band and in the absence of umklapp
scattering, the critical nematic fluctuations decou-
ple from the transport properties to lowest order
in temperature. This is since for a single convex

Fermi surface, electron-electron scattering near the
Fermi surface conserves the odd moments of the
quasiparticle distribution function [5, 44]. There-
fore, to lowest order, ПҒ(T) = ПҒ0, and the correction
scales as T ОІ with ОІ > 2. However, for a generic
multiband system, we find ПҒ(T)вҲ’ПҒ0 вҲқ T 4/3 due to
quantum critical fluctuations.

3. For a clean compensated metal with an equal den-
sity of electrons and holes, the low-tempearture
properties are strongly sensitive to the presence of
вҖңcold spotsвҖқ on the Fermi sheets. At these points,
the lowest-order coupling between the quasiparti-
cles and the nematic fluctuations vanishes by sym-
metry.
For instance, in the case of a B1g ne-
matic order parameter (of x2 вҲ’ y2 symmetry), the
cold spots occur at the intersection between the
diagonals kx = Вұky and the Fermi surfaces. We
show that the non-equilibrium distribution func-
tion displays a strongly non-harmonic form, chang-
ing abruptly at the cold spots. In the case where all
the Fermi surfaces have cold spots, ПҒ вҲј T 2; if only
some of the Fermi surfaces have cold spots and oth-
ers do not [45], then ПҒ вҲј T 5/3. If none of the Fermi
surfaces have cold spots, then ПҒ вҲј T 4/3. At inter-
mediate to strong coupling strengths [46], there is a
broad crossover regime where the resistivity either
saturates or is linear in temperatrure, depending on
microscopic details. The crossover behavior is due
to near elastic scattering of electrons by thermal
nematic fluctuations.

The outline of the paper is given as follows.
In Sec-
tion II, we introduce a model Hamiltonian that realizes
a metallic Ising-nematic QCP, and argue that there is a
parametrically broad temperature regime where electri-
cal transport can be described by kinetic theory. In Sec-
tion III, we derive a memory matrix formalism for calcu-
lating the linearized collision integral, and discuss various
conservation laws. In Section IV, we study the tempera-
ture dependence of dc electrical resistivity near the QCP
originating from various current-relaxation mechanisms,
including impurity scattering, umklapp scattering, and
momentum conserving electron-hole scattering in a com-
pensated metal. We conclude in Section V.

II.
MODEL

We consider a simple model on a two-dimensional
square lattice that realizes a metallic Ising-nematic QCP.
The Hamiltonian is given by

H =

N
пҝҪ

k,Оұ=1
(Оөk вҲ’ Вө) cвҖ 
ОұkcОұk вҲ’ 1

2

пҝҪ

q
UqQqQвҲ’q
(1)

where

Qq =
пҝҪ

k,Оұ
fk,k+qcвҖ 
Оұk+qcОұk.
(2)


3

Here, cОұk annihilates an electron of flavor Оұ = 1, . . . , N
with momentum k. Оөk is the electronвҖҷs energy disper-
sion, and Вө is the chemical potential. Physically, N = 2
(for the two spin flavors), but we will keep N general
вҖ“ for some purposes it will be useful to consider the
limit of large N. The nematic form factor fk,k+q sat-
isfies fk,k+q = вҲ’fRПҖ/2k,RПҖ/2(k+q), where RПҖ/2 is a rota-
tion by ПҖ/2 around the axis perpendicular to the plane.
The interaction is written as Uq = О»2D0,q/N, where О»
is the coupling constant (the normalization by N en-
ables us to define the large-N limit), and we choose
D0,q = 1/[r0 + 2(2 вҲ’ cos qx вҲ’ cos qy)] (the lattice con-
stant is set to unity) [47]. r0 is a tuning parameter used
to approach the QCP.
Following the standard procedure, we use a Hubbard-
Stratonovich transformation with a real scalar field ПҶ to
decouple the interaction term, obtaining the Lagrangian

L = L0 + 1

2

пҝҪ

q
DвҲ’1
0,q|ПҶq|2 +
О»
вҲҡ

N

пҝҪ

q
ПҶвҲ’qQq,
(3)

where L0 is a free fermion Lagrangian corresponding to
the first term in Eq. (1). The field ПҶ can be thought of
as describing the spatial and temporal fluctuations of the
nematic order parameter; in the nematic phase, вҹЁПҶвҹ© Мё= 0.
The low-energy continuum field theory governing the
critical behavior has been studied extensively [34]. Here
we briefly summarize the physical picture in the vicinity
of the QCP:

1. The nematic fluctuations become overdamped as a
result of their coupling to electrons near the Fermi
surface. To leading order in О», ПҶ acquires a self-
energy of the form: О (q, iОҪn) вҲқ f 2
q,q
Оі|ОҪn|

|q| , where
ОҪn = 2ПҖTn is the bosonic Matsubara frequency and
Оі вҲқ О»2ОөвҲ’2
F
is the Landau-damping coefficient (ОөF is
the Fermi energy). This leads to a quantum critical
scaling with a dynamical critical exponent z = 3.

2. The feedback of the Landau-damped critical fluc-
tuations on the electrons near the Fermi surface
leads, to one-loop order, to an electronic self-
energy ОЈ(k, iПүn)
вҲқ
f 2
k,kОөF N вҲ’1|ОіПүn|2/3, where
Пүn = 2ПҖT
пҝҪ
n + 1

2
пҝҪ
is the fermionic Matsubara fre-
quency. Below an energy scale в„ҰNFL вҲқ О»4ОөвҲ’1
F N вҲ’3,
the self-energy becomes dominant over the bare iПүn
term in the electron propagator, and the electrons
become strongly incoherent.
This regime is cur-
rently not well understood theoretically. Within a
largeвҖ“N expansion, terms which are naively of ar-
bitrarily high order in 1/N turn out to be equally
important as the leading ones in this regime. Su-
perconducting fluctuations are also expected to be-
come strong at the same energy scale, implying a
nematic-mediated superconducting transition tem-
perature Tc вҲј в„ҰNFL.
A dome-shaped supercon-
ducting phase with a maximum Tc near the ne-
matic QCP was indeed found in quantum Monte
Carlo simulations [4, 43].

These considerations suggest that in the weak coupling
limit О»2 вүӘ ОөF or in the largeвҖ“N limit, there is a broad
regime of temperatures в„ҰNFL вүӘ T вүӘ ОөF above the QCP
where the system can be described in terms of Landau-
damped nematic fluctuations coupled to coherent elec-
trons. Evidence for the existence of such a regime, even
at moderate values of the coupling constant, has been
found in numerical simulations [42]. In this regime, the
use of a kinetic equation approach for computing trans-
port properties is justified, with the effects of the scatter-
ing off critical fluctuations incorporated in the collision
integral.

III.
METHOD

In the previous section, we argued that above an en-
ergy scale в„ҰNFL, the normal state transport is governed
by a kinetic (Boltzmann) equation. Deriving the kinetic
equation requires special care: while the Lagrangian in
Eq. (3) describes electrons coupled to a fluctuating bo-
son ПҶq, it is important to keep track of the fact that the
bosonic degrees of freedom do not act as a вҖңbathвҖқ for the
electrons; rather, they are collective modes of the same
electron fluid [as is manifest in the original Hamiltonian
in Eq.
(1)].
Therefore, in the absence of an external
momentum relaxation mechanism (such as umklapp or
impurity scattering), the total electronic momentum is
conserved.
In this section, we derive the kinetic equation based on
the memory matrix method. This method has been ap-
plied widely for studying transport phenomena; see, e.g.,
Refs. [48вҖ“56]. It has the advantage that the вҖңcollision
termвҖқ in the kinetic equation is formulated as a correla-
tion function at equilibrium, that can be computed using
standard perturbative techniques.
The dc resistivity can be calculated by taking the
zero-frequency limit of the real part of optical con-
ductivity, i.e., ПҒвҲ’1 = limв„ҰвҶ’0 ReПғ(в„Ұ).
Within linear
response, the optical conductivity is given by the re-
tarded current-current correlation function:
Пғ(в„Ұ) =
1
iв„Ұ
пҝҪ
GR
JxJx (в„Ұ) вҲ’ GR
JxJx (0)
пҝҪ
, where J is the electrical cur-
rent operator corresponding to Eq. (1), obtained through
replacing cОұk вҶ’ cОұk+eA and taking J = вҲӮH/вҲӮA. To
lowest order in О» or in 1/N, J вүҲ пҝҪ

k,Оұ vkcвҖ 
ОұkcОұk [57].
Within the memory matrix method, the dynamics is
projected onto a set of вҖңslow operatorsвҖқ that are nearly
conserved by the Hamiltonian.
We briefly review the
method in Appendix A 1. In our model, the operators
nОұk = cвҖ 
ОұkcОұk are nearly-conserved in the limit of either
small О» or large N [58]. The optical conductivity can
then be cast in the form:

Пғ(в„Ұ) =
пҝҪ

Оұ,ОІ,k,kвҖІ
ПҮJx,Оұk

пҝҪ
1

M(в„Ұ) вҲ’ iв„ҰПҮ

пҝҪ

Оұk,ОІkвҖІ
ПҮОІkвҖІ,Jx

(4)
where ПҮJx,Оұk
вүЎ
Вҙ ОІ
0 dП„вҹЁJx(П„)nОұk(0)вҹ© and ПҮОұk,ОІkвҖІ
вүЎ


4

Вҙ ОІ
0 dП„ [вҹЁnОұk(П„)nОІkвҖІ(0)вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁnОұkвҹ©вҹЁnОІkвҖІвҹ©]
are
thermo-
dynamic susceptibilities.
The dynamical properties
are encoded in the structure [M(в„Ұ) вҲ’ iв„ҰПҮ]вҲ’1, where
MОұk,ОІkвҖІ(в„Ұ) is the вҖңmemory matrixвҖқ. To leading order
in 1/N, the memory matrix is given by:

MОұk,ОІkвҖІ(в„Ұ) = 1

iв„Ұ

пҝҪ
GR
ЛҷnОұk ЛҷnОІkвҖІ (в„Ұ) вҲ’ GR
ЛҷnОұk ЛҷnОІkвҖІ (0)
пҝҪ

where ЛҷnОұk вүЎ i[H, nОұk], and the correlation function
GR
ЛҷnОұk ЛҷnОІkвҖІ (в„Ұ) is computed to order 1/N 0.
To perform
the computations, it is convenient to write the equiva-
lent Hamiltonian to Eq. (3) [59]. ЛҷnОұk is then given by

ЛҷnОұk =
iО»
вҲҡ

N

пҝҪ

q
ПҶq
пҝҪ
fk,kвҲ’qcвҖ 
ОұkcОұkвҲ’q вҲ’ fk,k+qcвҖ 
Оұk+qcОұk
пҝҪ
.

(5)

A diagrammatic representation of this operator is shown
in Figure 1(a).
The real part of the memory matrix describes the scat-
tering rate between different momentum states. Its eigen-
values are non-negative, and describes the decay rate of
various collective modes on the Fermi surface. If there is
a conserved mode, for example the total electron number,
then the corresponding eigenvalue is zero. The memory
matrix is related to the collision integral of the Boltz-
mann equation; as we demonstrate in Appendix F, the
memory matrix formalism coincides with the standard
Boltzmann kinetic equation away from the critical point
(where the interactions between electrons can be treated
as static), but incorporates more complicated scattering
processes important near the QCP.
Below we first construct the memory matrix in the
absence of any current-relaxing mechanisms, and study
its structure and conservation laws. Next we will study
how the memory matrix and the transport properties are
affected by different scattering mechanisms.

A.
Feynman diagrams and conservation laws

At temperatures T вү« в„ҰNFL, we compute MОұk,ОІkвҖІ in
a 1/N expansion. Depending on the placement of the
two momentum states k and kвҖІ, there are two classes
of Feynman diagrams that contribute to leading order,
as illustrated in Figure 1(b-d). In these diagrams, the
nematic propagator includes the one-loop self energy:
DвҲ’1(q, iОҪn) = DвҲ’1
0
вҲ’ О (q, iОҪn), where

О (q, iОҪn) = вҲ’О»2T
пҝҪ

Пүm,k
f 2
k,k+qG0(k, iПүm)G0(k+q, iПүm+iОҪn),

(6)
whereas the fermion propagators G0(k, iПүn) = 1/(iПүn вҲ’
Оөk) are the bare ones.
At low frequencies, we write
DвҲ’1(q, iОҪn)
=
rq + Оіq|ОҪn|, where rq includes the
renormalization effects from О (q, iОҪn = 0), and Оіq =
ПҖО»2 пҝҪ
k f 2
k,k+qОҙ(Оөk)Оҙ(Оөk+q).

Figure 1: RPA diagrams for the memory function MkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn).
Open (filled)

circles at the vertex means an external frequency iв„Ұn coming in (going out)

The memory matrix MkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) can be calculated from the retarded response

function (in Matsubara frequencies analytically continue to time-ordered one)

to be:

MkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ 1

в„Ұn

пҝҪ

G Лҷnk ЛҷnkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) вҲ’ G Лҷnk ЛҷnkвҖІ (0)

пҝҪ

G Лҷnk ЛҷnkвҖІ (iв„Ұn) = вҲ’T

пҝҪ

dП„eiв„ҰnП„G Лҷnk ЛҷnkвҖІ (П„)

(1)

There are three RPA diagrams as shown in the above figure. Mathematically,

they can be shown to be:

M (1)
kkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’О»2T 2

в„Ұ

пҝҪ

qОҪ

f 2
kвҲ’q/2ПҮ(q, iОҪ)
nk вҲ’ nkвҲ’q

Оөk вҲ’ ОөkвҲ’q вҲ’ iОҪ вҲ’ iв„Ұ Г— (ОҙkkвҖІ вҲ’ ОҙkвҲ’kвҖІ,q)

(2)

Class II

k

k + q

kвҖІпҝҪвҲ’ q

kвҖІпҝҪ

k

k + q

kвҖІпҝҪвҲ’ q

kвҖІпҝҪ

Figure 1: RPA diagrams for the memor

circles at the vertex means an external fr

The memory matrix MkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) can be

function (in Matsubara frequencies analy

to be:

MkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ 1

в„Ұn

пҝҪ

G Лҷnk

k, kвҖІпҝҪ

k + q

q

Class I

(a)
(b)

Figure 1: RPA diagrams for the memory function MkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn).
Open (filled)

circles at the vertex means an external frequency iв„Ұn coming in (going out)

The memory matrix MkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) can be calculated from the retarded response

function (in Matsubara frequencies analytically continue to time-ordered one)

to be:

q
q
q
q

(c)
(d)

q

Оұ, k

Оұ, k + q

О»NвҲ’ 1

2fk,k+q

FIG. 1.
(a) Diagrammatic representation of ЛҷnОұk(в„Ұ).
The
open/closed circles denote inflow/outflow of an external fre-
quency в„Ұ. The vertex function changes sign depending on if
the Оұk state is an initial (final) state of the scattering. (b-d)
Two class of diagrams for the memory matrix MОұk,ОІkвҖІ (в„Ұ).
The red colored labels correspond to external momenta k
and kвҖІ. For convenience we omitted the flavor index on the
fermionic GreenвҖҷs functions, and the summation over internal
frequencies is implicit.

A detailed derivation of the expressions corresponding
to these Feynamn diagrams is presented in Appendix A 2.
For class I [Fig. 1(b)], we obtain:

M (1)
Оұk,ОІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) =ОҙОұОІ
О»2T
Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

q,ОҪn
Dq,ОҪn+в„Ұn

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,О¶q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+О¶qRk,k+О¶q,О¶ОҪn

where Rk,k+q,ОҪn is the polarization bubble summed over
the internal fermionic Matsubara frequencies:

Rk,k+q,ОҪn = nF (Оөk+q) вҲ’ nF (Оөk)

Оөk вҲ’ Оөk+q + iОҪn
.
(7)

Here, nF (Оө) is the Fermi function. Similarly, the expres-
sion for class II diagrams is

M (2)
Оұk,ОІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»4T

N 2в„Ұn

пҝҪ

q,ОҪn
Dq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqRk,k+О¶q,О¶ОҪn

Г—
пҝҪ
RkвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq,О¶вҖІОҪn вҲ’ RkвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq,О¶вҖІ(ОҪn+в„Ұn)
пҝҪ

(8)

For
simplicity,
we
have
omitted
the
static
part
GR
ЛҷnОұk ЛҷnОІkвҖІ (0) in the expressions.
However, they are al-
ways subtracted in later calculations. The memory ma-
trix are expressed in Matsubara frequencies. To obtain


5

real-time dynamics, we perform an analytic continuation
iв„Ұn вҶ’ в„Ұ + iОҙ.
At high frequencies, these terms in the memory ma-
trix reproduce the standard Feynman diagrams de-
scribing contributions to optical conductivity, namely
Maki-Thompson (MT), Density of States (DOS) and
Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) diagrams. This is shown in Ap-
pendix G. In particular, MT and DOS diagrams combine
to give class I diagram, corresponding to the ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q and
ОҙkkвҖІ terms respectively. AL is equivalent to class II dia-
grams.
In the dc limit, our memory matrix approach is equiva-
lent to the quantum Boltzmann equation discussed in the
Kadanoff-Baym-Keldysh framework [60вҖ“62], and that
conservation laws are explicitly built in. We discuss the
conservation laws and their implications for the struc-
ture of the memory matrix. One can easily check that
пҝҪ

Оұk MОұk,ОІkвҖІ = 0, corresponding to electron number con-
servation. Note that the two class of diagrams separately
conserve particle number. In Appendix B we show that in
the absence of impurity and umklapp scattering, the total
electronic momentum is conserved: пҝҪ

Оұk kMОұk,ОІkвҖІ = 0.
Momentum conservation crucially relies on the fact that
the nematic fluctuations gain their dynamics only as a
result of their coupling to the electrons.
As a result,
they do not act as a вҖңsinkвҖқ for the total electronic mo-
mentum. It is worth noting that momentum is conserved
only when the two classes of diagrams are combined, but
not for each class separately.

B.
Low temperature and dc limit

At low temperatures compared to the Fermi energy
ОөF , the dominant scattering processes occur in the vicin-
ity of the Fermi surface. For two given momentum states
on the Fermi surface k and kвҖІ, there are three types of
processes described by class I and class II diagrams, as
depicted in Figure 2. Class I diagram describes the direct
scattering between k and kвҖІ states mediated by a nematic
boson with momentum q = kвҖІ вҲ’ k. Class II diagram de-
scribes two-electron scattering which involves two addi-
tional momentum states k + q and kвҖІ Вұ q. We consider a
convex Fermi surface with inversion symmetry [63]. Due
to the one-dimensionality of the Fermi surface, there are
only two allowed scattering processes which satisfy that
all four momentum states are on the Fermi surface, as
shown in Figs. 2(b) and (c). Panel (b) describes mo-
mentum exchange scattering, with q = kвҖІ вҲ’ k. Here two
electrons at k and kвҖІ are scattered into each other. (c) is
a head-on collision, with q = k + kвҖІ. Here two electrons
initially at k and вҲ’k are scattered into kвҖІ and вҲ’kвҖІ.
Since the dominant contribution to the memory ma-
trix comes from the vicinity of the Fermi surface, we can
approximate R defined in Eq. (7) as follows:

Rk,kвҖІ+q,ОҪn вүҲ вҲ’ПҖ|ОҪn|Оҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q) .
(9)

This approximation is justified in Appendix C. After per-

-ПҖ
0
ПҖ

-ПҖ

0

ПҖ

-ПҖ
0
ПҖ

-ПҖ

0

ПҖ

k
kвҖІпҝҪ

q = k вҲ’ kвҖІпҝҪ

-ПҖ
0
ПҖ

-ПҖ

0

ПҖ

-ПҖ
0
ПҖ

-ПҖ

0

ПҖ

k

kвҖІпҝҪ

вҲ’kвҖІпҝҪ

вҲ’k

q = k + kвҖІпҝҪ

-ПҖ
0
ПҖ

-ПҖ

0

ПҖ

-ПҖ
0
ПҖ

-ПҖ

0

ПҖ

k
kвҖІпҝҪ

q = k вҲ’ kвҖІпҝҪ

(a)

(b)
(c)

FIG. 2. Three types of scattering processes when the rele-
vant momentum states are in the vicinity of the Fermi sur-
face. (a) class I diagram describes direct scattering between
k and kвҖІ mediated by exchanging an nematic boson ПҶq with
q = kвҖІ вҲ’ k. (b) and (c) are two-electron scatterings medi-
ated by two nematic bosons, described by class I diagram.
(b) describes the momentum exchange scattering, where two
electrons with momentum k and kвҖІ exchange their momen-
tum. (c) describes the head-on scattering, where two electrons
located at k and вҲ’k are scattered into kвҖІ and вҲ’kвҖІ.

forming summation over the bosonic Matsubara frequen-
cies, we can simplify the memory matrix to be:

M (1)
Оұk,ОІkвҖІ = ОҙОұОұвҖІ 2ПҖО»2

N

пҝҪ

q
Vq(T) (ОҙkkвҖІ вҲ’ ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q)

Г— f 2
k,k+qОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q) ,

(10)

and

M (2)
Оұk,ОІkвҖІ = вҲ’2ПҖ2О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q

Vq(T)

Оіq
f 2
k,k+qОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q)

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶вҖІf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqОҙ (ОөkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ+О¶вҖІq) ,

(11)

where we have defined

Vq(T) вүЎ
ЛҶ вҲһ

вҲ’вҲһ

dПү
ПҖ ПүImDq,Пү

пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB(Пү)

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ
,
(12)

The imaginary part of the nematic propagator is
ImDq,Пү = ОіqПү/(r2
q + Оі2
qПү2), and nB(Пү) is the Bose-
Einstein distribution function.
In the case of a single convex Fermi sheet with no umk-
lapp scattering, there are additional conservation laws


6

that emerge at low temperature. In particular, all the
odd-parity deformations of the Fermi surface are quasi-
conserved, in the sense that the lifetimes of these modes
are parametrically larger than those of the even-parity
modes [5, 44, 64]. This is because the only possible col-
lisions on a one dimensional convex Fermi surface are ei-
ther forward scattering or head-on collisions, and in both
cases the odd moments of the distribution function do not
change. These approximate conservation laws are man-
ifest in the structure of the memory matrix, as demon-
strated in Appendix D.

IV.
CURRENT RELAXATION MECHANISMS
AND DC RESISTIVITY

We now turn to discuss how the quantum critical fluc-
tuations manifest themselves in the temperature depen-
dence of the dc resistivity, ПҒ(T), through different cur-
rent relaxation mechanisms. In a metal with a generic
electron density, the electrical current cannot relax com-
pletely (and hence ПҒ = 0) unless momentum conservation
is violated. Having a non-zero resistivity therefore relies
crucially on the momentum relaxation mechanism, either
through impurity or umklapp scattering. In the special
case of a compensated metal with an equal density of
electrons and holes, the resistivity is finite even if the
total momentum is conserved.
We note that in our calculation, the temperature de-
pendence comes from the scattering rates, encoded in
the memory matrix. The thermodynamic susceptibilities,
ПҮJx,Оұk and ПҮОұk,ОІkвҖІ, defined in Eq. (4), can be regarded as
temperature independent. While this is not true for the
Ising-nematic (B1g) channel, where the thermodynamic
susceptibility diverges at the QCP, this divergence does
not affect the transport properties, since the current op-
erator (as well as any other odd-partiy deformation of
the Fermi surface) is orthogonal to the nematic order pa-
rameter.
We will present our results for ПҒ(T) in dimensionless
units. The temperature is rescaled by the energy scale
set by the Landau damping term: в„ҰL вүЎ Оө2
F О»вҲ’2.
As
we discuss in Appendix A 2, the natural scale for the
resistivity in our problem is ПҒL вүЎ
в„Ҹ
e2 О»4

Оө2
F
1

N 2 . Note that in
the large-N or weak coupling limits, where our approach
is valid, ПҒL is always much smaller than the quantum of
resistance в„Ҹ/e2.

A.
Impurity scattering

We consider quenched disorder, modeled by a ran-
dom potential: Himp =
1
вҲҡ

N
пҝҪ

Оұr Vimp(r)cвҖ 
ОұrcОұr, where

Vimp(r) has the following properties:
Vimp(r)
=
0
and Vimp(r)Vimp(rвҖІ)
=
g2
impОҙ (r вҲ’ rвҖІ), where В· В· В· de-
notes disorder averaging.
The time-derivative of the
electron occupation number is given by ( ЛҷnОұk)imp
=

i
вҲҡ

N
пҝҪ

q Vimp,q
пҝҪ
cвҖ 
ОұkcОұk+q вҲ’ cвҖ 
ОұkвҲ’qcОұk
пҝҪ
. As a result, for
weak disorder strength, the leading correction to the
memory matrix is given by

M imp
Оұk,ОІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = ОҙОұОІ
1

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

q,iОҪn
Dimp
q,ОҪn
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
f 2
k,k+О¶q

Г— (ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,О¶q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) Rk,k+О¶q,О¶ОҪn+О¶в„Ұn,
(13)

where the correlator of the disorder potential is static
and momentum-independent, i.e., Dimp
q,ОҪn = g2
impОҙОҪn,0. To
leading order in impurity strength, we neglect the cross-
terms involving both impurity and quantum critical scat-
tering [65]. At low temperatures, T вүӘ ОөF , we project
the processes onto the Fermi surface, and approximate
R(k, k + q, iв„Ұn) вүҲ вҲ’ПҖ|в„Ұn|Оҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q). As a result, in
the dc limit,

M imp
Оұk,ОІkвҖІ = ОҙОұОІ
2ПҖg2
imp

N

пҝҪ

q
(ОҙkkвҖІ вҲ’ ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q) Оҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q) .

(14)
One can verify that momentum is no longer conserved
under impurity scattering, by observing that
пҝҪ

Оұk
kM imp
Оұk,ОІkвҖІ = вҲ’2ПҖg2
imp
пҝҪ

q
qОҙ (ОөkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ+q) .
(15)

This expression does not vanish for a general value of kвҖІ,
due to the asymmetry of momentum states kвҖІ Вұ q.
We first show that when there is only a single convex
electron Fermi surface, quantum critical scattering does
not contribute to the dc resistivity within our lowest-
order approximation in T/ОөF . In this case, ПҒ вүҲ ПҒ0 вҲқ
g2ОҪF coming from impurity scattering, where ОҪF is the
density of states at the Fermi level. To see this, we work
in the basis of Fermi surface harmonics, einОёk, where Оёk
is the angle between a point k on the Fermi surface and
the x axis.
Since our problem is inversion-symmetric
on average, M imp
Оұn,ОІm is non zero only if m and n have
the same parity. Electron-electron scattering on a single,
convex Fermi surface conserves all the odd-parity modes
[5, 44, 64] (See Appendix D). Since the electrical current
is parity-odd, it is completely decoupled from the quan-
tum critical scattering to lowest order in T/ОөF . Hence,
to lowest order in T/ОөF , ПҒ is temperature independent.
Scattering processes away from the Fermi surface can give
rise to ПҒ(T) вҲј T 2+Оұ, with Оұ = 4/3, as argued in Ref. [5].
Next, we study the case of multiple Fermi sheets. Dif-
ferent sheets generically have different energy disper-
sions and are separated in momentum space. The small-
momentum nematic fluctuations induces intra-sheet scat-
tering, while impurity scattering can be either intra- or
inter-sheet. We write the electrical current operator as
J = пҝҪ

ik vi,kcвҖ 
i,kcik, where i is the sheet index. Due to
differences in the Fermi velocities in each Fermi sheet,
the current is not conserved by nematic scattering (un-
like total momentum).
As a result, the resistivity ac-
quires a temperature-dependent correction вҲј T Оұ, whose


7

(a)
(b)

FIG. 3. (a) Resistivity due to impurity scattering for a system
with a single Fermi surface (blue) and multiple Fermi sheets
(red) cases. In (b) we plot d ln (ПҒ вҲ’ ПҒ0) /d ln T for multi-sheet
case to extract the power-law dependence on temperature.
The dashed line marks the value 4/3. The dispersion used for
one-band case is Оөk = вҲ’2t (cos kx + cos ky)вҲ’4tвҖІ cos kx cos kyвҲ’
Вө , with t = 1, tвҖІ = вҲ’0.3 and Вө = вҲ’1. In the multi-sheet case,
we used three circularly-shaped Fermi pockets of equal size,
with two electron-like and one hole-like dispersions. Impu-
rity scattering strength is taken to be gimp = 0.02ОөF . The
nematic-electronic coupling strength is О»2 вүҲ 0.83ОөF .
The
Fermi energy is defined as ОөF = вҹЁvF kF вҹ©FS.

exponent is determined by the decay of odd-parity modes
on the Fermi surface. Scaling arguments suggest that ne-
matic contrinbution to the current decay rate scales as
ВҜq2П„ вҲ’1
sp , where ВҜq вҲј T 1/3 is the typical momentum trans-
fer following quantum critical scaling, and П„ вҲ’1
sp вҲј T 2/3 is
the single-electron decay rate. As a result, for a multi-
band system subject to impurity scattering, we expect
that ПҒ вҲ’ ПҒ0 вҲқ T 4/3 .
In Figure 3, we present a numerical calculation of ПҒ(T)
for system with either a single Fermi surface or multiple
Fermi sheets, supporting the scaling argument discussed
above. More details of the numerical procedure are given
in Appendix J. In the single Fermi surface case, the re-
sistivity is completely temperature-independent; we ex-
pect that inclusion of scattering processes away from
the Fermi surface will give rise to a weak temperature
dependence.
In the multi-Fermi sheet case, we find a
substantial temperature dependence.
In panel (b) we
showd ln (ПҒ вҲ’ ПҒ0) /d ln T as a function of T for the multi-
sheet case. At low temperature, the exponent approaches
4/3, as expected from the qualitative analysis above.
However, at intermediate temperatures, the exponent
drifts below 4/3 and can even exhibit sublinear behavior.
The cause of the drifting exponent will be discussed in
Sec. IV D.

B.
Umklapp scattering

In the presence of an underlying lattice, the electronic
momentum is only conserved up to a reciprocal lattice
vector G. In an umklapp scattering process, two of the
initial states and one of the final states are on the Fermi

q0

FIG. 4. Two-particle collision involving a Umklapp process.
One of the final states is a different Brillouin zone. Therefore,
the total momentum changes by the crystal momentum G. q0
is the minimal momentum transfer in an umklapp scattering
event.

surface in the first Brillouin zone, while the other final
state is in a neighboring Brollouin zone.
An umklapp
scattering process on the Fermi surface involves a mini-
mum momentum transfer q0 that depends on the geome-
try of the Fermi surface, as illustrated in Figure 4. Since
the critical nematic fluctuations carry small momentum,
they cannot induce umklapp scattering at asymptoti-
cally low temperatures.
Therefore, below a character-
istic temperature T0 that depends on q0, we expect the
dc transport to be governed by non-critical fluctuations.
For T вүӘ T0, the Fermi liquid behavior ПҒ(T) вҲј T 2 be-
havior should be recovered [5]. On scaling grounds, we
expect T0 вҲј |q0|z, where z is the dynamical critical ex-
ponent of the transition. At temperatures T > T0 , there
are two main factors determining the transport behav-
ior: (1) As the typical wavevector for critical fluctua-
tions |q| вҲј T 1/z > |q0|, critical fluctuations contribute
to umklapp scattering and directly modify the dc trans-
port properties. (2) The umklapp processes also mod-
ify the spectrum of the nematic critical fluctuations. In
particular, they modify the coefficient Оіq of the Landau
damping term in the bosonic self-energy, which depends
on the angle between the Fermi velocities at the points
k and k + q on the Fermi surface. This can lead to a
breakdown of the z = 3 quantum critical scaling, which
relies on the relation Оіq вҲј 1/|q|.
We study ПҒ(T) for a model with a generic, large Fermi
surface, similar to the one shown in Fig.
4.
This is
done by numerically computing the memory matrix from
Eqs. (10,11), including the effects of umklapp scattering,
and inverting it to obtain the dc conductivity according
to Eq. (4). In Fig. 5(a) and (c), we present ПҒ(T) at
and away from the Ising-nematic QCP, with a nematic
correlation length ОҫвҲ’2(T) = T + r вҲ’ rc. Here, we assume
that the at r = rc, there is a вҖңthermal massвҖқ assumed to
be proportional to T. The model parameters, listed in the
caption of Fig. 5, are chosen to be similar to the ones used
in the quantum Monte Carlo simulations in Ref.
[42].
Figure 5(b) shows d ln ПҒ/d ln T as a function of T and rвҲ’
rc. As expected, at sufficiently low temperatures, ПҒ вҲј T 2.
At higher temperature, d ln ПҒ/d ln T decreases, becoming
sublinear at temperatures of the order of в„ҰL. Defining


8

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

FIG. 5. (a) Resistivity from umklapp scattering at and away
near an Ising-nematic QCP, as a function of r вҲ’ rc and T.
Here, we use the same band dispersion studied for the single-
band case for impurity scattering (see caption of Fig. 3). The
coupling strength О»2 = 1.88ОөF . (b) d ln ПҒ/d ln T as a function
of rвҲ’rc and T. (c) Temperature cuts at the QCP (green) and
in the disordered state (r > rc, red). (d) Crossover tempera-
ture to Fermi-liquid T 2 behavior as a function of the umklapp
threshold wavevector |q0|3. q0 was varied by changing the
chemical potential Вө. We define T0 as the temperature where
d ln ПҒ/d ln T = 1.8.

T0 as the temperature where d ln ПҒ/d ln T = 1.8, we find
that at the QCP, T0 вҲқ |q0|3 [Fig. 5(d)]. Away from the
QCP, the crossover to T 2 occurs at higher temperatures,
and T0 scales linearly with the distance to the QCP r.
Although for r = rc and T > T0, there is a temper-
ature window where ПҒ(T) appears to be approximately
linear (Fig. 5c), it is important to note that d ln ПҒ/d ln T
actually changes continuously in this regime. It is also
worth noting that the dc resistivity obtained in our cal-
culation reproduces many of the qualitative features ob-
served in the QMC simulations of Ref. [42], including the
broad quasi-linear regime near the QCP, and the gradual
change of the slope of ПҒ(T) as r is tuned away from the
QCP.

C.
Compensated metal

The mechanisms for current dissipation discussed so
far rely on breaking the conservation of total electron
momentum, either by impurity or by umklapp scatter-
ing. It is well-known that in a compensated metal with
equal number of electron and hole-like charge carriers,
electron-electron interactions alone can lead to a finite

electrical resistivity, even in the absence of momentum
relaxation [66]. This is because scattering events between
electrons and holes can relax the current, despite the fact
that momentum is conserved. In a compensated metal,
the electrical current and the total electronic momentum
are orthogonal to each other: ПҮJP = 0, and the current
dissipation is driven by relaxation of other odd-parity
modes of the Fermi surface. For completeness, this re-
sult is re-derived in Appendix H.
Several of the iron-based superconductors known for
exhibiting non-Fermi liquid transport, such as FeSe1вҲ’xSx
[10] and BaFe2(As1вҲ’xPx)2 [13], are isovalently doped.
These systems have multiple small Fermi surfaces (pock-
ets) that are of either electron or hole character, with an
equal density of electron and hole carriers. It is reason-
able to assume that such materials are not far from being
a compensated metal, and that normal electron-hole scat-
tering mediated by quantum critical fluctuations plays an
important role in their transport behavior.
In this Section, we study the temperature dependence
of dc resistivity for a compensated metal near a nematic
quantum critical point.
Motivated by the case of the
iron-based superconductors, we focus on the case where
the electron and hole pockets are much smaller than the
Brillouin zone size, such that umklapp scattering is negli-
gible. Since the nematic critical fluctuations are centered
at small momenta, we assume that they cannot scatter
electrons from one pocket to the other. The Hamiltonian
is given by

H =

n
пҝҪ

i=1

пЈ«

пЈӯпҝҪ

k
ОөikcвҖ 
ikcik + О»
пҝҪ

kq
ПҶqfi,k,k+qcвҖ 
ik+qcik

пЈ¶

пЈё ,

(16)
where i = 1, . . . , n is the pocket index, and the pocket
dispersions Оөik are assumed to be such that the total area
enclosed by the electron-like pockets is equal to that of
the hole-like pockets. fi,k,k+q is the Ising-nematic form
factor of the ith pocket, centered at wavevector Qi. Im-
portantly, depending on the position of the Fermi pocket
in the Brillouin zone, the form factor may or may not
contain вҖңcold spotsвҖқ вҖ“ points on the Fermi pocket where
the form factor vanishes. For example, a pocket centered
at the О“ point [Qi = (0, 0)] has cold spots where the diag-
onals kx = Вұky intersect the Fermi surface. In contrast,
a pocket at the X or Y points [Qi = (ПҖ, 0) or (0, ПҖ),
respectively] does not have any symmetry-imposed cold
spots. The band structures of most of the iron-based su-
perconductors contain pockets centered at both the О“, X,
and Y points (in the one Fe per unit cell scheme). As we
shall see below, the presence of cold spots on the Fermi
pockets, and whether they occur on all or only some of
the pockets, changes qualitatively transport behavior at
low temperature.
We study ПҒ(T) in four different scenarios: in a clean
system where (1) all the pockets have cold spots, (2) the
hole pockets have cold spots but the electron pockets do
not, (3) no pockets have cold spots, and (4) a disordered
system where all the pockets have cold spots. For simplic-


9

f1 вү  1, f2 вү  1

f1 вү  1, f2 = 1

f1 = 1, f2 = 1

f1,2 вү  1, gimp вү  0

(a)
(b)

FIG. 6.
ПҒ(T) and the log-derivative plot at the QCP in
a perfectly compensated metal with different arrangements
of cold spots on the Fermi pockets. The model consists of
two circular pockets with equal radii, one electron-like and
one hole-like. The nematic form factor is either taken to be
cos 2Оёk when the corresponding pocket has cold spots, or unity
for the case with no cold spots.
The coupling constant is
О»2 вүҲ 0.84ОөF . Red curve: both pockets have cold spots along
the diagonals. Blue curve: cold spots on the hole pocket, but
not the electron pocket. Green curve: neither pocket has cold
spots. Magenta curve: both pockets have cold spots, but also
subject to impurity scattering of strength gimp вүҲ 0.1ОөF . The
black dashed lines in (b) correspond to exponents of 4/3, 5/3
and 2.

ity, we considered a model with two circular pockets with
identical radii, one electron-like and one hole-like. We do
not expect the results to change qualitatively for pockets
of a general shape, as long as the system is perfectly com-
pensated (see Appendix I). The results are summarized
in Fig. 6. In the case when cold spots are absent or if
there is weak impurity scattering (Fig. 6 green and ma-
genta lines), ПҒ(T) вҲ’ ПҒ0 вҲқ T 4/3, which is the naive quan-
tum critical scaling exponent discussed previously [5, 30].
However, in a clean compensated metal with cold spots
on one or both of the Fermi pockets, the asymptotic low-
temperature behavior is different. When cold spots are
present on some (but not all) of the pockets, ПҒ вҲј T 5/3

(blue curve), whereas when cold spots are present on all
the pockets, ПҒ вҲј T 2 (red curve).
To understand the origin of the strong sensitivity of
the low-temperature transport behavior to the presence
of cold spots, we examine the non-equibrium distribu-
tion function in the presence of a current.
It is con-
venient to parametrize the distribution function Оҙnik
in terms of another function ОҰik such that Оҙnk
=
[вҲ’вҲӮОөiknF (Оөik)] ОҰikEx, where i is the band index, k is a
point on the Fermi surface and E = ExЛҶx is the elec-
tric field applied along the x axis.
ОҰik can be com-
puted from the memory matrix according to:
ОҰik =
пҝҪ
M вҲ’1пҝҪ

ik,jkвҖІ ПҮjkвҖІ,Jx.
More details on relation between
our memory matrix approach and the non-equilibrium
distribution function are given in Appendix F. Fig. 7(a)

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

FIG. 7.
The function ОҰi,Оёk вҲқ Оҙni,Оёk on Fermi pocket i =
1, 2 in the presence of a current in the x direction, for the
same model as in Fig.
6.
Here Оёk is the angle measured
with respect to the x-direction. The solid (dashed) curve is
the distribution function on the electron (hole) pocket. The
colors correspond to the same cases shown in Fig. 6. All four
distribution functions are calculated at the same temperatures
T вүҲ 0.002ОөF .

shows the clean case without hot spots.
In this case,
ОҰ1Оёk = вҲ’ОҰ2Оёk = cos Оёk. However, when cold spots are
present on at least one Fermi pocket, the distribution
function on both pockets changes dramatically, as seen
in Fig. 7(b) and (c). In this case, the distribution func-
tion is nearly constant on different quadrants of the Fermi
surface, bounded by the cold spots. In the presence of
disorder, the distribution function becomes more regular
and approaches a cosine at low temperatures, as seen in
Fig. 7(d).

The shape of the non-equilibrium distribution function
in the presence of cold spots can be understood qualita-
tively as follows: at low temperatures, the characteristic
momentum transfer q due to quantum critical scatter-
ing, q вҲј kF (T/в„ҰL)1/3, is small.
The scattering rate
from a point k near one of the cold spots to a nearby
point k + q is suppressed by the nematic form factor.
Therefore, the cold spots effectively cut the Fermi surface
into four nearly-disconnected patches. The equilibration
within each patch is much faster than the equilibration
between patches (see Fig. 8). In this situation, the non-
equilibrium distribution is nearly constant in each patch,
and the bottleneck for current relaxation becomes the
slow inter-patch scattering. As a result, the resistivity
in the presence of cold spots is reduced than the resis-
tivity with no cold spots.
In Appendix I, we analyze
the transport properties in the presence of cold spots,
using a piecewise-constant distribution function of the
form shown in Fig. 7(b,c) as a variational ansatz. We
find that the power-law exponents observed in Figure 6
are exactly reproduced.


10

FIG. 8.
Electron scattering on the Fermi surface due to
small wavevector nematic fluctuations. The intersection be-
tween the Fermi surface and the dashed lines are where the
nematic form factor vanishes вҖ” the nematic вҖңcold spotsвҖқ.
Small wavevector scattering across the cold spots are strongly
suppressed by the nematic form factor.

D.
Quasi-elastic thermal fluctuations and
intermediate temperature behavior

Having analyzed the asymptotic low-temperature be-
havior of the resistivity due to different scattering mecha-
nisms, we turn to discuss the crossover behavior at higher
temperatures. In particular, depending on microscopic
parameters, there may be a regime where the temper-
ature is comparable to or larger than the energy scale
set by the Landau damping, в„ҰL, but still much smaller
than the Fermi energy. Since в„ҰL = Оө2
F /О»2, this regime is
accessible within our model at strong coupling (or, equiv-
alently, if the Fermi energy is small). Formally, the cal-
culation in this regime can still be controlled in the large
N limit, as long as T вү« в„ҰNFL. As we shall now show,
the resistivity is determined by quasi-elastic scattering of
electrons off thermally excited nematic fluctuations. De-
pending on the evolution of the correlation length with
temperature, this may lead to either ПҒ вҲј T or ПҒ вҲј const.
in the crossover regime.
We begin by examining the temperature dependence
of the scattering cross-section between electrons and ne-
matic fluctuations, Vq(T) [see Eqs. (10вҖ“12)]. We write

Eq. (12) as Vq(T) =
1
Оіq F
пҝҪ
T
Пүq

пҝҪ
, where Пүq вүЎ rqОівҲ’1
q
(re-

call that the nematic propagator is written as DвҲ’1
q,ОҪn =
rq + Оіq|ОҪn|) and

F (x) вүЎ 1

x

ЛҶ +вҲһ

вҲ’вҲһ

du
ПҖ
u2

1 + u2
1

sinh2 пҝҪ u

2x
пҝҪ.
(17)

F (x) has the following asymptotic properties: for x вүӘ 1,
F(x) вүҲ ПҖx2/3, whereas for x вү« 1, F(x) вүҲ 4x.
We can now estimate the resistivity in the regime
T
вү« в„ҰL вҲј ПүqвҲјkF , that corresponds to x вү« 1 in
Eq. (17). In this regime, the dominant contribution to
Vq(T) is from energies Пү вҲј Пүq вүӘ T, corresponding to
quasi-elastic scattering of electrons off thermally excited
nematic fluctuations.
We focus on the case of a com-
pensated metal, where momentum conservation does not

0
10

T/
L

0

5

10

15

20

25

/
L

r=T
r=0

10
2
100

T/
L

0.25

0.50

0.75

1.00

1.25

dln /dlnT

FIG. 9. ПҒ(T) in the high temperature regime T > в„ҰL, cal-
culated for a compensated metal without cold spots. r(T) вүЎ
ОҫвҲ’2(T) is the thermal mass for nematic fluctuations. The cal-
culation assumes strong coupling О»2 вү« ОөF and large fermion
flavor N, so that в„ҰL вүӘ ОөF , and our memory matrix approach
remains valid.

limit the resistivity.
At high temperatures, we do not
expect the nematic form factor to have a strong effect on
the results, and will henceforth neglect it. The resistivity
can then be estimated by overlapping the memory matrix
described by class I diagram with the current operator:

ПҒ(T) вҲқ
пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
(vk В· vkвҖІ) M (1)
kkвҖІ вҲј
ЛҶ kF

0
dqq2Vq (T) .
(18)

Placing both k and k + q on the Fermi surface (re-
call that we are still considering T вүӘ ОөF ) constrains
the allowed wave-vector q to a one-dimensional mani-
fold.
The first q2 term in the integrand is the well-
known transport factor that suppresses the contribution
of small angle scattering. This factor arises from the term
пҝҪ

q,kkвҖІ (vk В· vkвҖІ) (ОҙkkвҖІ вҲ’ ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q) вҲј пҝҪ

q,k (vk вҲ’ vk+q)2

that appears when inserting Eq. (10) in Eq. (18).
When T
> в„ҰL, nematic fluctuations with a large
wavevector q вҲј kF become thermally excited. From the
discussion above [Eq. (17)], we find that in this regime
Vq(T) вҲј T/rq, and hence

ПҒ(T) вҲқ T
ЛҶ kF

0
dq
q2

ОҫвҲ’2(T) + q2

where we have expressed rq(T) = ОҫвҲ’2(T) + q2. If Оҫ вүҲ Оҫ0
is only weakly dependent on temperature, or if ОҫвҲ’1 вүӘ
kF , then ПҒ(T) вҲј T. In contrast, if ОҫвҲ’1(T) вү« kF , then
the behavior of ПҒ(T) is determined by the temperature
dependence of Оҫ(T). For ОҫвҲ’2 вҲј T (as was observed in the
QMC simulations of Ref. [4], and experimentally in Ref.
[67]), ПҒ(T) saturates to a constant at high temperature.
In Figure 9, we illustrate both types of high temperature
behavior for a compensated metal without cold spots, as
discussed in the previous section.


11

V.
CONCLUSION

In summary, we have developed a memory matrix ap-
proach to derive a kinetic equation applicable in a broad
temperature regime near an Ising-nematic QCP. The for-
malism is applied to study the behavior of the dc resistiv-
ity in the vicinity of the QCP. The resistivity exhibits a
rich behavior that depends on the dominant mechanism
for current dissipation and on the structure of the Fermi
surface.

We find several regimes where the resistivity is strongly
affected by nematic critical fluctuations, despite their
longвҖ“wavelength nature. As long as the Fermi surface
is not very small compared to the size of the Brillouin
zone, there is a broad temperature range where the re-
sistivity is strongly enhanced near the QCP due to umk-
lapp scattering; in this regime, the umklapp processes
also modify the spectrum of the critical nematic fluctu-
ations, and z = 3 dynamical scaling does not hold. At
asymptotically low temperatures, however, z = 3 scaling
is recovered, and ПҒ вҲј T 2. In multi-band systems in the
presence of impurities, ПҒ вҲ’ ПҒ0 вҲқ T 4/3 down to the low-
est temperatures, as anticipated from z = 3 dynamical
scaling. In a compensated metal with an equal density
of electrons and holes, the quantum critical fluctuations
can affect the resistivity even in the absence of impurities
and at arbitrarily low temperatures. In this case we find
that the dc resistivity is strongly affected by the presence
of вҖңcold spotsвҖқ on the Fermi sheets, due to the symme-
try of the nematic order parameter. In the clean limit,
ПҒ вҲј T Оұ, where Оұ = 2, 5/3, or 4/3, depending on whether
there are cold spots on all the Fermi sheets, on some of
the sheets, or on none, respectively.

It is important to note that we have assumed a purely

electronic mechanism for the Ising-nematic QCP, and
have neglected the effect of coupling to the lattice. This
effect is known to change the properties of the QCP,
quenching most of the long-wavelength nematic fluctua-
tions and making the transition more mean-field like [68вҖ“
70]. As a result, the effect of the critical fluctuations on
the resistivity is suppressed, recovering Fermi liquid be-
havior ПҒвҲ’ПҒ0 вҲқ T 2 at the lowest temperatures. The scale
at which the crossover to Fermi liquid behavior occurs
depends on the strength of the coupling to the lattice.
Our analysis can be extended straightforwardly to
other metallic QCPs in d = 2 dimensions that do not
involve breaking of translational symmetry, such as ferro-
magnetic transitions. In the latter case, there are gener-
ically no cold spots on the Fermi surface.
The diversity of possible behaviors found in our study
suggest that experiments in critical metals should be in-
terpreted with great care. Nevertheless, it would be in-
teresting to consider our results in the context of ongoing
experiments [16] in FeSe1вҲ’xSx, which is a compensated
system that exhibits an apparent nematic QCP with no
nearby magnetic phase.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Andrey Chubukov,
Rafael Fernandes, Sean Hartnoll, Dam T. Son, and Subir
Sachdev for helpful discussions and inputs.
XW ac-
knowledges financial support from the James Frank In-
stitute in University of Chicago. EB was supported by
the European Research Council (ERC) under the Euro-
pean Union Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Pro-
gramme (Grant Agreement No. 817799). Both XW and
EB acknowledges support from the Nordita workshop
вҖңBounding Transport and Chaos in Condensed Matter
and HolographyвҖқ, where parts of this work is carried out.

Appendix A: Memory matrix approach to transport properties

1.
General formalism

In this section, we briefly review the memory matrix formalism and its application to transport. We then discuss
the validity of the approach in the vicinity of a QCP.
We closely follow the discussion of the memory matrix approach in Ref. [56]. To set up the formalism, we first
define an inner product in the Hilbert space of operators. For two Hermitian operators A, B, the inner product is
given by

(A|B) = T
ЛҶ ОІ

0
dП„ [вҹЁA(П„)Bвҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁAвҹ©вҹЁBвҹ©] вүЎ TПҮAB.
(A1)

Here, ПҮAB is a theormodynamic susceptibility relating the operators A and B.
The Liouville вҖңsuper operatorвҖқ is defined as L = вҲ’[H, В·]. The operators satisfy the Heiseberg equation of motion:
ЛҷA = i[H, A] = вҲ’iLA. We are interested in calculating a retarded correlation function of two operators, characterizing
the response of the system. This can be done through the relation [56]

GR
AB(t) вүЎ iОҳ(t)вҹЁ[A(t), B(0)]вҹ© = вҲ’ 1

T Оҳ(t)вҲӮtCAB(t),
(A2)


12

where CAB(t) вүЎ (A(t)|B). Fourier transforming both sides, we obtain

пҝҪCAB(z) = T

iz

пҝҪ
ЛңGR
AB(z) вҲ’ ЛңGR
AB(0)
пҝҪ
,
(A3)

where пҝҪCAB(z) вүЎ
Вҙ вҲһ
0
eiztCAB(t), z is a complex number in the upper half plane, and similarly for ЛңGR
AB(z) =
Вҙ вҲһ
0
eiztGR
AB(t). For example, the frequency-dependent conductivity can be written as

Пғ(в„Ұ) вүЎ 1

iв„Ұ

пҝҪ
ЛңGR
JxJx(в„Ұ) вҲ’ ЛңGR
JxJx(0)
пҝҪ
= 1

T
пҝҪCJxJx(z = в„Ұ + i0+).
(A4)

The key step in the memory matrix technique is to identify a set of slow (or nearly-conserved) operators, and project
the dynamics onto these operators. We denote the set of slow operators by |AОұ). We assumne that the current is a
linear combination of |AОұ)вҖҷs. Then, to compute пҝҪCJxJx(z), it is sufficient to compute matrix elements of the resolvent
(or GreenвҖҷs function) ЛҶG(z) =
i

zвҲ’L in the subspace of |AОұ). To do this, we define the projection operator

ЛҶP = 1

T

пҝҪ

Оұ,ОІ
|AОұ)(ПҮвҲ’1)ОұОІ(AОІ|
(A5)

onto the slow subspace, and ЛҶQ = 1 вҲ’ ЛҶP is a projection onto the complementary subspace. The equation for the
GreenвҖҷs function G is
пҝҪ
z ЛҶP вҲ’ ЛҶPL ЛҶP
вҲ’ ЛҶPL ЛҶQ
вҲ’ ЛҶQL ЛҶP
z ЛҶQ вҲ’ ЛҶQL ЛҶQ

пҝҪ пҝҪ ЛҶP ЛҶG ЛҶP
ЛҶP ЛҶG ЛҶQ
ЛҶQ ЛҶG ЛҶP
ЛҶQ ЛҶG ЛҶQ

пҝҪ
=
пҝҪ
i 0
0 i

пҝҪ
.
(A6)

From this we obtain the two equations
пҝҪ
z ЛҶP вҲ’ ЛҶPL ЛҶP
пҝҪ
ЛҶP ЛҶG ЛҶP вҲ’ ЛҶPL ЛҶQ
пҝҪ
ЛҶQ ЛҶG ЛҶP
пҝҪ
= i,
(A7)

пҝҪ
z ЛҶQ вҲ’ ЛҶQL ЛҶQ
пҝҪ
ЛҶQ ЛҶG ЛҶP вҲ’ ЛҶQL ЛҶP
пҝҪ
ЛҶP ЛҶG ЛҶP
пҝҪ
= 0.
(A8)

Solving for ЛҶP ЛҶG ЛҶP, we arrive at

ЛҶP ЛҶG ЛҶP =
i

z ЛҶP вҲ’ ЛҶPL ЛҶP вҲ’ ЛҶPL ЛҶQ
пҝҪ
z вҲ’ ЛҶQL ЛҶQ
пҝҪвҲ’1 ЛҶQL ЛҶP
.
(A9)

The matrix elements of ЛҶG between two operators in the slow subspace can then be written as

пҝҪCОұОІ(z) = (AОұ|
i

z вҲ’ L|AОІ) = TПҮ
1

вҲ’izПҮ + N + M(z)ПҮ,
(A10)

where we have defined the matrices

NОұОІ = i

T (AОұ|L|AОІ),
(A11)

MОұОІ(z) = i

T (AОұ|L ЛҶQ
1

z вҲ’ ЛҶQL ЛҶQ
ЛҶQL|AОҙ).
(A12)

So far, the manipulations have all been exact - we have not used the fact that the operators |AОұ) are вҖңslowвҖқ. The
slowness of the operators AОұ is typically employed when computing MОұОІ(z).
We imagine that the Hamiltonian
depends on a parameter g, such that to zeroth order in g, L(g = 0)AОұ = 0. Then, to leading order in g, we can drop
the factors of ЛҶQ in the evaluation of the denominator in Eq. (A12), and the memory matrix becomes an ordinary
dynamical correlation function with H(g = 0).


13

2.
Application to the quantum critical problem

In our quantum critical system, we choose the set of operators to be the occupations of particles per flavor in
momentum space, {nОұk}. In order to evaluate the memory matrix, Eq. (A12), we note that in the N вҶ’ вҲһ limit, the
operators {nОұk} become conserved quantities. This is since

ЛҷnОұk = вҲ’iLnОұk =
iО»
вҲҡ

N

пҝҪ

q
ПҶq
пҝҪ
fk,kвҲ’qcвҖ 
ОұkcОұkвҲ’q вҲ’ fk,k+qcвҖ 
Оұk+qcОұk
пҝҪ
.
(A13)

We use a normalized set of operators, |пҝҪ
nОұk) = (nОұk|nОұk)вҲ’1/2|nОұk). In the presence of time reversal and inversion
symmetries, (пҝҪ
nОұk|L| пҝҪ
nОұвҖІkвҖІ) = 0.
Consider the matrix element of L between |пҝҪ
nОұk) and the normalized operator
| пҝҪ
LnОұвҖІkвҖІ) вүЎ (LnОұвҖІkвҖІ|LnОұвҖІkвҖІ)вҲ’1/2|LnОұвҖІkвҖІ):

(пҝҪ
nОұk|L| пҝҪ
LnОұвҖІkвҖІ) = вҲ’
(LnОұk|LnОұвҖІkвҖІ)

(nОұk|nОұk)1/2(LnОұвҖІkвҖІ|LnОұвҖІkвҖІ)1/2 .
(A14)

We can easily check that (пҝҪ
nОұk|L| пҝҪ
LnОұвҖІkвҖІ) = O(N вҲ’1/2) [71].
This implies that, to leading order in 1/N, the memory matrix can be written as

MОұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = i

T ( ЛҷnОұk|
1

z вҲ’ L| ЛҷnОұвҖІkвҖІ),
(A15)

where the correlation function is evaluated in the N вҶ’ вҲһ limit. In this limit, L does not connect the slow operators
nОұk to other operators, and the projector ЛҶQ in the denominator of Eq. (A12) is automatically accounted for.
To compute the memory matrix, we use Eq. (A3). The retarded response function can be computed from imaginary-
time-ordered correlation function via analytic continuuation. In Matsubara frequency:

GОұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’
ЛҶ ОІ

0
dП„eiв„ҰnП„вҹЁ ЛҷnОұk(П„) ЛҷnОұвҖІkвҖІ(0)вҹ©.
(A16)

Here ЛҷnОұk вүЎ вҲ’ [H, nОұk] denotes imaginary-time derivative. Let us first observe the general structure of the response
function by treating О» as a small perturbation. To order O(О»2):

G(1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = ОҙОұОұвҖІ О»2

N

ЛҶ

П„
eiв„ҰnП„ пҝҪ

q
D0(q, П„)
пҝҪ
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+qG0(k, П„)G0(k + q, вҲ’П„) + (П„ вҶ” вҲ’П„, q вҶ” вҲ’q)
пҝҪ
.

(A17)

After Fourier transformation:

G(1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ОҙОұОұвҖІ О»2T

N

пҝҪ

qОҪn
D0(q, iОҪn + iв„Ұn)
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn) .
(A18)

where we have defined

R(k, k + q, iОҪn) вүЎ вҲ’T
пҝҪ

Пүk
G0(k, iПүk)G0(k + q, iПүk + iОҪn).
(A19)

To the next order O(О»4), to see that

G(2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»4

N 2T

ЛҶ

П„
eiв„ҰnП„вҹЁПҶqПҶq1ПҶq2ПҶqвҖІвҹ©0вҹЁ
пҝҪ
fk,kвҲ’qcвҖ 
kckвҲ’q вҲ’ fk,k+qcвҖ 
k+qck
пҝҪ пҝҪ
fp1,p1+q1cвҖ 
p1+q1cp1
пҝҪ
вҹ©0

Г— вҹЁ
пҝҪ
fp2,p2+q2cвҖ 
p2+q2cp2
пҝҪ пҝҪ
fkвҖІ,kвҖІвҲ’qвҖІcвҖ 
kвҖІckвҖІвҲ’qвҖІ вҲ’ fkвҖІ,kвҖІ+qвҖІcвҖ 
kвҖІ+qвҖІckвҖІ
пҝҪ
вҹ©0.
(A20)

Here for convenience we have omitted the summation over repeated indices. The connected random phase diagram
has the structure shown in Fig. 3 (b,c) in the main text. The idea is to contract the electron momenta {k, p1} and
{kвҖІ, p2}, and bosonic momenta as вҹЁПҶqПҶqвҖІвҹ©вҹЁПҶq1ПҶq2вҹ© (b) or вҹЁПҶqПҶq2вҹ©вҹЁПҶqвҖІПҶq1вҹ©. In either cases, we obtain:

q = вҲ’q1; qвҖІ = вҲ’q2; qвҖІ = Вұq.


14

After Fourier transformation:

G(2,b)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = О»4T

N 2
пҝҪ

q,iОҪn

пҝҪ

iПүl,iПүs
D0(q, iОҪn)D0(q, iОҪn + iв„Ұn)

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶f 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶вҖІf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqR (kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn) ,

(A21)

and

G(2,c)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’О»4T

N 2
пҝҪ

q,iОҪ

пҝҪ

iПүl,iПүs
D0(q, iОҪn)D0(q, iОҪn + iв„Ұn)

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶f 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶вҖІf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqR (kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn + iО¶вҖІв„Ұn)

(A22)

Within random phase approximation corresponding to leading order in 1/N, we use the dressed nematic propagator
to be DвҲ’1 = DвҲ’1
0
вҲ’ О , but keep the fermion GreenвҖҷs function and the coupling vertex unrenormalized.
We obtain the following expression for the memory matrix within the random phase approximation:

M (1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = ОҙОұОұвҖІ О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

q,ОҪn

пЈұ
пЈІ

пЈіDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,О¶q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

пЈј
пЈҪ

пЈҫ

M (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»4T

N 2в„Ұn

пҝҪ

q,ОҪn
Dq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ

О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

Г— [R(kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn) вҲ’ R(kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn + iО¶вҖІв„Ұn)] .

(A23)

Here for simplicity of writing we have omitted the в„Ұn = 0 term inside the brackets. However, in following calculations
the static contribution is always subtracted. We refer to the two contributions to the memory matrix in Eq. (A23)
as class-I and class-II diagrams, respectively.
Naively, the class II diagrams are O(N вҲ’2) while the class I diagram is O(N вҲ’1), both contributions need to be kept
when studying transport properties. This is because in class I, the flavor indices Оұ, ОұвҖІ are constrained to be the same,
while in class II they are not.
In the {nОұk} basis, the optical conductivity is expressed as:

Пғ(в„Ұ) =
пҝҪ

Оұ,ОІ,k,kвҖІ
ПҮJx,Оұk

пҝҪ
1

M(в„Ұ) вҲ’ iв„ҰПҮ

пҝҪ

Оұk,ОІkвҖІ ПҮОІkвҖІ,Jx
(A24)

where ПҮJx,Оұk вүЎ
Вҙ ОІ
0 dП„вҹЁJx(П„)nОұk(0)вҹ© and ПҮОұk,ОІkвҖІ вүЎ
Вҙ ОІ
0 dП„ [вҹЁnОұk(П„)nОІkвҖІ(0)вҹ© вҲ’ вҹЁnОұkвҹ©вҹЁnОІkвҖІвҹ©] are thermodynamic suscep-
tibilities.
A straightforward analysis from Eq. (A24) shows that Пғ(в„Ұ) вҲј O
пҝҪ
N 2пҝҪ
, where one factor of N comes from the
number of conducting channels, and the other factor comes from the fact that the eigenvalues of the memory matrix
relevant to transport scale as O
пҝҪ
N вҲ’1пҝҪ
. As a result, the dc resistivity is ПҒ вҲј O
пҝҪ
N вҲ’2пҝҪ
in the large N limit, where our
computation is formally justified.

Appendix B: Momentum conservation

We now demonstrate that in absence of umklapp scattering and impurity scattering, the total electronic momen-
tum is exactly conserved within our formalism.
To derive momentum conservation, it is sufficient to show that
пҝҪ

ОұвҖІkвҖІ kMОұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = 0. We first look at the class I diagram contribution:


15

пҝҪ

ОұвҖІkвҖІ
kвҖІM (1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

kвҖІqОҪn
kвҖІDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,О¶q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

= О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

qОҪn
Dq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶qf 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)
(B1)

Similarly the class II diagram contribution is:

пҝҪ

ОұвҖІkвҖІ
kвҖІM (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»4T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

kвҖІqОҪn
kвҖІDq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ

О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

Г— [R(kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn) вҲ’ R(kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn + iО¶вҖІв„Ұn)] .

(B2)

By change of variables kвҖІ вҶ’ kвҖІ вҲ’ О¶вҖІq, and О¶вҖІ вҶ’ вҲ’О¶вҖІ, we get

пҝҪ

ОұвҖІkвҖІ
kвҖІM (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

qОҪn
Dq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn (О q,ОҪn+в„Ұn вҲ’ О q,ОҪn)

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶qf 2
k,k+О¶qR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn),
(B3)

where

О q,ОҪn = О»2 пҝҪ

kвҖІ
f 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+qR (kвҖІ, kвҖІ + q, iОҪn)
(B4)

is the polarization bubble. Making use of DysonвҖҷs equation DвҲ’1 = DвҲ’1
0
вҲ’ О , we obtain:

пҝҪ

ОұвҖІkвҖІ
kM (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

qОҪn
(Dq,ОҪn+в„Ұn вҲ’ Dq,ОҪn)
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶qf 2
k,k+О¶qR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

вҲ’ О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

qОҪn
Dq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ
DвҲ’1
0,q,ОҪn+в„Ұn вҲ’ DвҲ’1
0,q,ОҪn
пҝҪ пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶qf 2
k,k+О¶qR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn).
(B5)

Summing up the two classes of diagrams:

пҝҪ

ОұвҖІkвҖІ
kвҖІM (1+2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

qОҪn
Dq,ОҪn
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶qf 2
k,k+О¶qR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)

вҲ’ О»2T

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

qОҪn
Dq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ
DвҲ’1
0,q,ОҪn+в„Ұn вҲ’ DвҲ’1
0,q,ОҪn
пҝҪ пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
О¶qf 2
k,k+О¶qR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn).
(B6)

The first term is the static contribution GОұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(в„Ұn = 0) , and should be subtracted at the end of the computation.
If the dynamics of nematic fluctuations is generated by coupling to the electrons, as discussed previously, then D0
is frequency independent. In that case, the second term vanishes as well, and momentum is conserved. Whether
nematic fluctuations can act as a вҖңmomentum sinkвҖқ is fundamentally dependent on whether their propagator has its
own independent dynamics.

Appendix C: Low temperature and dc limit

We derive the expressions of the memory matrix in the dc limit and for temperature T much smaller than the Fermi
energy ОөF . It is convenient to invoke spectral representation for the nematic propagator. Define DвҲ’1
q,ОҪn вүЎ rq + Оіq|ОҪn|,
we have

Dq,ОҪn =
ЛҶ dПү

ПҖ
ImDq,Пү
Пү вҲ’ iОҪn
,
(C1)

where the spectral function is

ImDq,Пү =
ОіqПү

r2q + Оі2qПү2 .
(C2)


16

For a given momentum transfer, the spectral function is peaked at Пүq вүЎ rq

Оіq вҲј Оө2
F
О»2
пҝҪ
|q|
kF

пҝҪ3
. This can be interpreted
as the dispersion relation of Landau-damped nematic fluctuations. At small wave-vectors, Пүq вүӘ ОөF .
First, consider the class I diagram. The sum over bosonic Matsubara frequency ОҪn can be explicitly performed
using spectral representation, giving rise to:

M (1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = ОҙОұОұвҖІ О»2

Nв„Ұn

пҝҪ

q
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+q

ЛҶ dПү

ПҖ ImDq,Пү (nF,k+q вҲ’ nF,k)

Г—
пҝҪnB (Пү) вҲ’ nB (Оөk+q вҲ’ Оөk)

Пү вҲ’ iв„Ұn вҲ’ (Оөk+q вҲ’ Оөk) + h.c. вҲ’ static part
пҝҪ
(C3)

where nF,k is short for the Fermi-Dirac distribution function nF (Оөk), and nB(Пү) is the Bose-Einstein distribution
function. Following an analytic continuation iв„Ұn вҶ’ в„Ұ + iОҙ, we obtain:

M (1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(в„Ұ + iОҙ) = вҲ’ 1

iв„ҰОҙОұОұвҖІ О»2

N

пҝҪ

q
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+q

ЛҶ dПү

ПҖ ImDq,Пү (nF,k+q вҲ’ nF,k)

Г—
пҝҪ nB (Пү) вҲ’ nB (Оөk+q вҲ’ Оөk)

Пү вҲ’ (Оөk+q вҲ’ Оөk) вҲ’ в„Ұ вҲ’ iОҙ + nB (Пү) вҲ’ nB (Оөk+q вҲ’ Оөk)

Пү вҲ’ (Оөk+q вҲ’ Оөk) + в„Ұ + iОҙ вҲ’ static part
пҝҪ
(C4)

Making use of
1

ПүвҲ’iОҙ = P 1

Пү + iПҖОҙ (Пү), and taking the dc limit в„Ұ вҶ’ 0, we observe that the principle part on the second
line cancels the static part, and only the imaginary part contributes to the real frequency memory matrix. We obtain:

M (1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ вҶ’ ОҙОұОұвҖІ 2ПҖО»2

N

пҝҪ

q
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+q (nF,k+q вҲ’ nF,k)

Г—
ЛҶ dПү

ПҖ ImDq,Пү

пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ
Оҙ (Пү вҲ’ Оөk+q + Оөk) .

(C5)

This is equivalent to the linearized collision integral studied in many previous works, e.g. Ref. [19], where the class II
diagrams were not considered. From the second line, we see that the leading contribution to the frequency integration
comes from low frequencies, Пү вҲј min (Пүq, T) вүӘ ОөF . As a result, the above expression can be further simplified to be:

M (1)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ вүҲ ОҙОұОұвҖІ 2ПҖО»2

N

пҝҪ

q
(ОҙkkвҖІ вҲ’ ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q) f 2
k,k+qVqОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q),
(C6)

where we have used nF,k+q вҲ’ nF,k вүҲ вҲ’ПүОҙ (Оөk), and defined

Vq вүЎ
ЛҶ dПү

ПҖ ПүImDq,Пү

пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ
.
(C7)

We see that the dominant processes contributing to class I diagram comes from the Fermi surface.
Next we derive the expression for class II diagrams in the dc limit. There are two terms shown in Eq. (A23),
corresponding to Figs. 1(c) and (d) of the main text. We discuss the (c) contribution first. We can rewrite the
memory matrix in the following way:

M (2,c)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q;О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq

пҝҪ
T
в„Ұn

пҝҪ

ОҪn
f (iОҪn) g (iОҪn + iв„Ұn)

пҝҪ

,

f (iОҪn) = Dq,ОҪnR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)R(kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn),
g (iОҪn + iв„Ұn) = Dq,ОҪn+в„Ұn.

(C8)

Here we defined two analytic functions f and g. Both f and g are analytic everywhere except on the real axis. Hence,
we can use a spectral representation for both functions, to obtain:

M (2,c)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q;О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq

Г— 1

в„Ұn

ЛҶ dПү1dПү2

ПҖ2

ЛҶ
dz
2ПҖinB (z) Imf (Пү1)

z вҲ’ Пү1

Img (Пү2)

z вҲ’ Пү2 + iв„Ұn

(C9)


17

Carrying out the Matsubara sum:

M (2,c)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’ О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q;О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq

Г— 1

в„Ұn

ЛҶ dПү1dПү2

ПҖ2
Imf (Пү1) Img (Пү2) nB (Пү2) вҲ’ nB (Пү1)

Пү1 вҲ’ Пү2 + iв„Ұn

(C10)

Following an analytic continuation, iв„Ұn вҶ’ в„Ұ + iОҙ, and taking the zero-frequency limit, we obtain:

M (2,c)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ(в„Ұ вҶ’ 0) = О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q;О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq Г—
ЛҶ dПү

ПҖ Imf (Пү) Img (Пү)
пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ
.
(C11)

The imaginary part of the f and g functions are, respectively:

Imf (Пү) = Im (DR1R2)
= ImD (ReR1ReR2 вҲ’ ImR1ImR2) + ReD (ReR1ImR2 + ImR1ReR2)

and

Img (Пү) = ImD

Here we have used a short-hand notation: R1 = R(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn) and R2 = R(kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn).
Following a similar analysis, the second term in the bracket in the expression for M (2) [Eq. (A23)] can also be
carried out, except in this case,

Лңf (iОҪn) = Dq,ОҪnR(k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn),
Лңg (iОҪn + iв„Ұn) = Dq,ОҪn+в„ҰnR(kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn + iО¶вҖІв„Ұn).
(C12)

As a result,

Im Лңf (Пү) = ImDReR1 + ReDImR1,
ImЛңg (Пү) = ImDReR2 + ReDImR2.
(C13)

Combining the two contributions, we get the following expression for class II diagram in dc limit:

M (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = вҲ’ О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q;О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq

Г—
ЛҶ dПү

ПҖ |Dq,Пү|2ImR (k, k + О¶q, О¶Пү) ImR (kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, О¶вҖІПү)
пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ,
(C14)

where

ImR (k, k + О¶q, О¶Пү) = Im
nF,p вҲ’ nF,k

Оөk вҲ’ Оөk+О¶q + О¶ (Пү + iОҙ) = вҲ’ПҖО¶ (nF,k+О¶q вҲ’ nF,k) Оҙ (Оөk вҲ’ Оөk+О¶q + О¶Пү) ,
(C15)

and

ImR (kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, О¶вҖІПү) = вҲ’ПҖО¶вҖІ (nF,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq вҲ’ nF,kвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ вҲ’ ОөkвҖІ+О¶вҖІq + О¶вҖІПү) .
(C16)

We see again that the frequency integration is constrained to be at small frequencies Пү < min (T, Пүq). Approximating
вҲ’ПҖО¶ (nF,k+О¶q вҲ’ nF,k) вүҲ ПҖПүОҙ (Оөk) and вҲ’ПҖО¶вҖІ (nF,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq вҲ’ nF,kвҖІ) вүҲ ПҖПүОҙ (ОөkвҖІ), we see that:

M (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = вҲ’ПҖО»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q;О¶О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶О¶вҖІf 2
k,k+О¶qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ)

Г—
ЛҶ
dПүПү2|Dq,Пү|2
пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ
Оҙ (Оөk+О¶q вҲ’ О¶Пү) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ+О¶вҖІq вҲ’ О¶вҖІПү)

(C17)


18

Since the frequency is small compared to the Fermi energy, we can further approximate the two Оҙ-function constraints
as Оҙ (Оөk+О¶q) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ+О¶вҖІq), placing all four momentum states on the Fermi surface. We then make use of the identity:
ЛҶ
dПүПү2|Dq,Пү|2
пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ
= 1

Оіq

ЛҶ
dПүПүImDq,Пү

пҝҪ
вҲ’вҲӮnB

вҲӮПү

пҝҪ
= ПҖVq(T)

Оіq
,
(C18)

where Vq(T) is defined in Eq. (12). The final expression for class II contribution to the memory matrix is:

M (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ вүҲ вҲ’2ПҖ2О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q;О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
О¶вҖІ Vq

Оіq
f 2
k,k+qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІqОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ+О¶вҖІq)
(C19)

Here we have made use of the invariance under (О¶, О¶вҖІ) вҶ’ (вҲ’О¶, вҲ’О¶вҖІ) to eliminate О¶ in the expression.

Appendix D: Harmonic basis and additional conservation laws

In this section we show that in a two-dimensional system with a single, convex Fermi surface and with no umklapp
scattering, there are additional approximately conserved modes that emerge at low temperatures and frequencies due
to projection of scattering processes onto the Fermi surface.
We start from Eqs. (10) and (11) for the memory matrix in the dc limit. It is convenient to split M (2)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ as
follows:

M (2,+)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = вҲ’2ПҖ2О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q

Vq
Оіq
f 2
k,k+qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+qОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ+q) ,

M (2,вҲ’)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = 2ПҖ2О»4

N 2
пҝҪ

q

Vq
Оіq
f 2
k,k+qf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІвҲ’qОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІвҲ’q) .
(D1)

The two class II terms are related to each other via

M (2,+)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ = вҲ’M (2,вҲ’)
Оұk,ОұвҖІвҲ’kвҖІ.
(D2)

The Landau damping parameter Оіq appearing in M (2,Вұ)
Оұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ is self-consistently calculated from the electron polariza-
tion bubble:

Оіq = ПҖО»2 пҝҪ

k
f 2
k,k+qОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q) .
(D3)

Note that Оіq вҲј O
пҝҪ
N 0пҝҪ
, since nematic boson can decay into all flavors of electrons.
We define memory matrix in the harmonic basis:

MОұn,ОұвҖІm вүЎ
пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
hвҲ—
nkhmkвҖІMОұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ,
(D4)

where hnk = exp (inОёk), and hn,вҲ’k = (вҲ’1)n hnk. By introducing a short-hand notation dnkkвҖІ вүЎ hnk вҲ’ hnkвҖІ, Class I
contribution becomes:

M (1)
Оұn,ОұвҖІm = ОҙОұОұвҖІ ПҖО»2

N

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
dвҲ—
nkkвҖІdmkkвҖІf 2
k,kвҖІVkвҖІвҲ’kОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ)
(D5)

Here we made use of symmetry under k вҶ” вҲ’kвҖІ to derive the above expression. Similarly, class II contributions can
be shown to be of the form

M (2)
Оұn,ОұвҖІm = ПҖ2О»4

N 2
1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)n

2
1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)m

2

пҝҪ

kq

Vq
Оіq
f 2
k,k+qОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (Оөk+q)

Г—

пҝҪ

dвҲ—
nkkвҖІ
пҝҪ

kвҖІ
hmkвҖІf 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІвҲ’qОҙ (ОөkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІвҲ’q)

пҝҪ
(D6)


19

For a convex Fermi surface and a given momentum transfer q, to place all four momentum states {k, k + q, kвҖІ, kвҖІ вҲ’ q}
on the Fermi surface implies that kвҖІ = вҲ’k or kвҖІ = k + q. As a result, the bracket on the second line can be simplied
to be
Оіq

2ПҖО»2 dвҲ—
nkkвҖІ (hmk+q + hm,вҲ’k) .

By change of variables: k + q вҶ’ kвҖІ, we can combine the two class of diagrams to arrive at the final expression for
memory matrix in the harmonics basis:

MОұn,ОұвҖІm = ПҖО»2

N

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
dвҲ—
nkkвҖІdmkkвҖІVkвҖІвҲ’kf 2
k,kвҖІОҙ (Оөk) Оҙ (ОөkвҖІ)

Г—
пҝҪ
ОҙОұОұвҖІ вҲ’ 1

N
1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)n

2
1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)m

2

пҝҪ
(D7)

Eq. (D7) shows a dichotomy between even/odd parity modes. The second term in the bracket vanishes for even
parity modes, and as a result, these modes are fast-relaxing from critical nematic fluctuations.
In contrast, the
relaxation of odd-parity modes is strongly renormalized by scattering processes described by class II diagrams. For a
given pair of odd values of {n, m}, MОұn,ОұвҖІm has a simple N Г— N matrix structure in the flavor basis, given by 1 вҲ’ 1

N
along the diagonal and вҲ’ 1

N otherwise:
пЈ«

пЈ¬
пЈӯ

1 вҲ’ 1

N
вҲ’ 1

N
В· В· В·
вҲ’ 1

N
1 вҲ’ 1

N В· В· В·
...
...
...

пЈ¶

пЈ·
пЈё

NГ—N

There is one zero mode associated with this matrix structure, with an eigenvector given by
1
вҲҡ

N (1, 1, В· В· В· ). This

corresponds to a conservation of the generalized current Jn вүЎ пҝҪ

Оұk hnkcвҖ 
ОұkcОұk, whenever n is odd. Note that the total
electron momentum P can be represented as a linear combination of Jn, and therefore is also conserved.
We point out that except for momentum, all other odd-parity currents are only quasi-conserved. Scattering processes
away from the Fermi surface will lift these zero modes to a decay rate which is O
пҝҪ
T 2/Оө2
F
пҝҪ
smaller than the relaxation
of even-parity modes [5, 44].

Appendix E: Generalization to systems with multiple Fermi sheets

The generalization of the memory matrix to multiple electron bands is straightforward. For simplicity we omit
the flavor index, and consider the case N = 1. The generalization to the case of a general N is straightforward.
In addition, we assume that the critical nematic fluctuations can only scatter electrons within each band, since the
fluctuations carry a small momentum. The Lagrangian is taken to be:

Lmulti = L0,multi + О»
пҝҪ

ikq
ПҶqfi,k,k+qcвҖ 
ik+qcik
(E1)

where

L0,multi =
пҝҪ

i,k
cвҖ 
ik(вҲӮП„ + Оөik)cik + 1

2

пҝҪ

q
DвҲ’1
0,q|ПҶq|2.
(E2)

Here i = 1 . . . Nband is the band label, and Оөik is the dispersion for the i-th electron band.
The other terms in
The derivation of the memory matrix parallels that of the multi-flavor, single-band scenario, with the only difference
coming from different dispersions and form factors for different electron bands. There are two class of Feynman
diagrams for the memory matrix, and at low temperatures and in the dc limit, the expressions for the two class of
diagrams are:

M (1)
ik,jkвҖІ = Оҙij2ПҖО»2 пҝҪ

q
(ОҙkkвҖІ вҲ’ ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,q) f 2
i,k,k+qVqОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (Оөik+q) ,

M (2,+)
ik,jkвҖІ = вҲ’2ПҖ2О»4 пҝҪ

q

Vq
Оіq
f 2
i,k,k+qf 2
j,kвҖІ,kвҖІ+qОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (Оөik+q) Оҙ (ОөjkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөjkвҖІ+q) ,

M (2,вҲ’)
ik,jkвҖІ = 2ПҖ2О»4 пҝҪ

q

Vq
Оіq
f 2
i,k,k+qf 2
j,kвҖІ,kвҖІвҲ’qОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (Оөik+q) Оҙ (ОөjkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөjkвҖІвҲ’q) .

(E3)


20

The Landau damping coefficient describes a sum of scattering processes on each electron band:

Оіq = ПҖО»2 пҝҪ

ik
f 2
i,k,k+qОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (Оөik+q) .
(E4)

Similar to the discussion in Sec. IV, we can rewrite the memory matrix in the harmonics basis. Class I diagram can
be shown to be:

M (1)
in,jm = ОҙijПҖО»2 пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
dвҲ—
in,kkвҖІdjm,kkвҖІf 2
i,k,kвҖІVkвҖІвҲ’kОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (ОөikвҖІ)
(E5)

where we have defined a short-hand notation: din,kkвҖІ = hink вҲ’ hinkвҖІ. Similarly, class II diagrams are expressed as:

M (2)
in,jm = ПҖ2О»4 1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)n

2
1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)m

2

пҝҪ

kq

Vq
Оіq
f 2
i,k,k+qОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (Оөik+q)

Г—

пҝҪ

dвҲ—
in,kkвҖІ
пҝҪ

kвҖІ
hjmkвҖІf 2
j,kвҖІ,kвҖІвҲ’qОҙ (ОөjkвҖІ) Оҙ (ОөjkвҖІвҲ’q)

пҝҪ

.

(E6)

The term on the second line evaluates to:
Оіjq
2ПҖО»2 dвҲ—
in,kkвҖІ
пҝҪ

pj
hjmpj
(E7)

where Оіjq is the Landau damping due to j-th band, such that Оіq = пҝҪ

j Оіjq. In Eq. (E7), the pjвҖҷs are solutions of the
two equations Оөjpj = 0, ОөjpjвҲ’q = 0. Since the momentum is two-dimensional, there is a discrete set of such solutions.
For a convex, inversion symmetric Fermi surface of the jth band, there are two solutions: pj and вҲ’ (pj вҲ’ q). We
perform change of variables kвҖІ = k + q, and the terms corresponding to the two classes to obtain the final expression:

Min,jm = ПҖО»2 пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
VkвҖІвҲ’kf 2
i,k,kвҖІОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (ОөikвҖІ)

Г—

пЈ®

пЈ°ОҙijdвҲ—
in,kkвҖІdjm,kkвҖІ + ОіjkвҖІвҲ’k

ОіkвҖІвҲ’k

1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)n

2
1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)m

2
dвҲ—
in,kkвҖІ
пҝҪ

pj
hjmpj

пЈ№

пЈ»
(E8)

It is easy to see how this reduces to the one band expression in Eq. (D7). In that case, the solutions to the equations
Оөp = ОөpвҲ’q = 0 are p = вҲ’k or kвҖІ. One for the second term in Eq. (E8), we get:
пҝҪ
1 вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)n

2
1 вҲ’ (вҲ’1)m

2

пҝҪ
dвҲ—
n,kkвҖІdm,kkвҖІ

which is the same expression compared to Eq. (D7) in the case N = 1.

Appendix F: Connection to the Boltzmann equation and the non-equilibrium distribution function

Here we make explicit connection between our memory matrix approach with the familiar Boltzmann equation,
and identify the non-equilibrium distribution function in the presence of an applied electric field within the memory
function approach.
We begin with writing down the Boltzmann equation for the quasiparticle distribution function {nОұk(t)}:

вҲӮtnОұk + eExвҲӮkxnОұk = Icoll
(F1)

In the absence of an electric field, the steady state is given by the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution nF,Оұk. When a
small electric field E = ExЛҶx is applied, the distribution function deviates away from nF,Оұk, with the dominant response
occuring near the Fermi surface. We write nОұk = nF,Оұk + (вҲӮОөnF,Оұk) ЛңОҰОұk, and the linearized Boltzman equation for
the non-equilibrium distribuion {ОҰОұk(t)} has the form

(eExvОұk,x) (вҲӮОөnF,Оұk) = вҲ’ (вҲӮОөnF,Оұk) вҲӮt ЛңОҰОұk +
пҝҪ

ОұвҖІkвҖІ

ЛҶ

tвҖІ WОұk,ОұвҖІtвҖІ (t вҲ’ tвҖІ) ЛңОҰОұвҖІkвҖІ
(F2)


21

(a)
(b)
(c)

(e)
(d)

FIG. 10.
Interaction contributions to optical conductivity, to leading order in 1/N. (a,b) are DOS diagrams, (c) is MT,
and (d,e) are AL diagrams. The current vertices are labeled by circles. Open/solid circles represent the inflow/outflow of the
external frequency в„Ұ.

Fourier transformation gives:

(вҲ’iв„ҰПҮ + W) ЛңОҰ = вҲ’eПҮVxEx
(F3)

where

ПҮОұk,ОұвҖІkвҖІ вүЎ вҲ’вҲӮnF,Оұk

вҲӮОөОұk
ОҙОұОұвҖІОҙkkвҖІ
(F4)

is a thermodynamic susceptibility. ЛңОҰ вүЎ
пҝҪ
ЛңОҰОұ1k1, ЛңОҰОұ2k2 В· В· В·
пҝҪT
and Vx вүЎ (vОұ1k1x, vОұ2k2x В· В· В· )T are vectors. The electrical
conductivity is given by

Пғ (в„Ұ) =
пҝҪ

Оұk
evОұk,x (nОұk вҲ’ nF,Оұk) = e2V T
x ПҮОҰ
(F5)

where ОҰ = ЛңОҰ/Ex. In matrix form, we get

Пғ (в„Ұ) = e2V T
x ПҮ
1

W вҲ’ iв„ҰПҮПҮVx
(F6)

Comparison between Eq. (F6) and Eq. (4) in the main text shows that our memory matrix M corresponds to the
collision kernel W of the Boltzmann equation.
Due to the structure of the collision kernel, the non-equilibrium distribution function due to an applied electric field
can be very different from the quasiparticle velocity vector Vx . In particular we have shown that

ОҰ = вҲ’
1

W вҲ’ iв„ҰПҮeПҮVx
(F7)

In the main text, we address the functional form of ОҰ due to critical nematic fluctuations and how they lead to a
temperature dependent resistivity very different than previously calculated.

Appendix G: Connection to standard feynman diagrams for optical conductivity

In this section we show that at high external frequencies, our derivation of optical conductivity gives the same
results as the standard perturbative calculation. From Kubo linear response theory, the dissipative part of optical
conductivity is calculated from the imaginary part of the retarded current-current response function:

ПғвҖІ (в„Ұ) = 1

в„ҰImGJJ (в„Ұ)
(G1)


22

To leading order in 1/N, there are three types of diagrams that contribute to Пғ(в„Ұ), depicted in Figure 10(a-e). These
are the so-called density of states (DOS), Maki-Thompson (MT), and Aslamazov-Larkin (AL) diagrams. We discuss
these contributions in Matsubara frequency, and comment on the analytic continuation iв„Ұn вҶ’ в„Ұ + iОҙ.
The DOS diagrams contribute two terms (a,b), related to each other by a change of iв„Ұn вҶ’ вҲ’iв„Ұn. They can be
expressed as:

GDOS
JJ
(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’О»2T 2 пҝҪ

ОҪnПүn

пҝҪ

kq
v2
k,xf 2
k,k+qDq,ОҪnGk+q,Пүn+ОҪn

Г— G2
k,Пүn (Gk,Пүn+в„Ұn + Gk,ПүnвҲ’в„Ұn) .
(G2)

Here Gk,Пүn is short hand notation for the non-interacting fermionic GreenвҖҷs function G0 (k, iПүn) = (iПүn вҲ’ Оөk)вҲ’1.
Making use of the identity Gk,ПүnGk,Пүn+в„Ұn =
1

iв„Ұn (Gk,Пүn вҲ’ Gk,Пүn+в„Ұn), it is straightforward to show:

GDOS
JJ
(iв„Ұn) = О»2T 2

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

ОҪnПүn

пҝҪ

kq
v2
k,xf 2
k,k+qDq,ОҪnGk+q,Пүn+ОҪn (Gk,Пүn+в„Ұn + Gk,ПүnвҲ’в„Ұn)

вҲ’ О»2T 2

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

ОҪnПүn

пҝҪ

kq
v2
k,xf 2
k,k+qDq,ОҪnGk+q,Пүn+ОҪnGk,Пүn.
(G3)

The term on the second line does not contribute to ПғвҖІ (в„Ұ), since following analytic continuation, it is the real part of
the retarded response function. Focusing on the first term, by a suitable change of variables, the dependence on the
external frequency can be shifted entirely into the nematic propagator:

GDOS
JJ
(iв„Ұn) = вҲ’О»2T

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

ОҪnПүn

пҝҪ

kq
v2
k,x
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
f 2
k,k+О¶qDq,ОҪn+в„ҰnR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)
(G4)

Here, as before R (k, k + q, iОҪn) вүЎ вҲ’T пҝҪ
Пүn Gk+q,Пүn+ОҪnGk,Пүn.
The MT term (c) can be expressed as:

GMT
JJ (iв„Ұn) = вҲ’О»2T 2 пҝҪ

ОҪnПүn

пҝҪ

kkвҖІq
vk,xvkвҖІ,xf 2
k,kвҖІDq,ОҪn

Г— Gk,ПүnGk+q,Пүn+в„ҰnGkвҖІ,Пүn+ОҪn+в„ҰnGkвҖІ,Пүn+ОҪn

(G5)

Following similar procedure as above, the MT contribution can be reduced to:

GMT
JJ (iв„Ұn) = О»2T

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
vk,xvkвҖІ,x
пҝҪ

qОҪn
Dq,ОҪn+в„Ұn
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,О¶qf 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn)
(G6)

Eqs. (G4) and (G6) share a similar structure. The combination gives:

GDOS+MT
JJ
(iв„Ұn) = О»2T

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
vk,xvkвҖІ,x
пҝҪ

qОҪn
Dq,ОҪn+в„Ұn

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶=Вұ1
(ОҙkвҖІвҲ’k,О¶q вҲ’ ОҙkkвҖІ) f 2
k,k+О¶qR (k, k + О¶q, iО¶ОҪn) .
(G7)

The AL contribution (d,e) can be expressed as:

GAL
JJ (iв„Ұn) = О»4T
пҝҪ

q,ОҪn
Dq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn

Г— T
пҝҪ

kПүn
vk,xGk,ПүnвҲ’в„ҰnGk,ПүnGk+q,Пүn+ОҪn

Г— T
пҝҪ

kвҖІПүвҖІn
vkвҖІ,x
пҝҪ
GkвҖІ,ПүвҖІnвҲ’в„ҰnGkвҖІ,ПүвҖІnGkвҖІ+q,ПүвҖІn+ОҪn + GkвҖІ,ПүвҖІ
n+в„ҰnGkвҖІ,ПүвҖІnGkвҖІвҲ’q,ПүвҖІnвҲ’ОҪn
пҝҪ
.

(G8)


23

вҲ‘ Pi = вҲ‘ Pf

вҲ‘ vi вү  вҲ‘ vf

FIG. 11. Sketch of a two-electron scattering process for compensated metal. Blue Fermi pockets are electron-like and red Fermi
pocket is hole-like. The purple (green) arrows label the Fermi velocities in the initial (final) states. Such a process flips the
direction of electrical current from upward to downward.

Here the terms on the second and third lines represent the fermionic triangle. Similarly, it can be reduced to:

GAL
JJ (iв„Ұn) = вҲ’О»4T

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
vk,xvkвҖІ,x
пҝҪ

q,ОҪn
Dq,ОҪnDq,ОҪn+в„Ұn

Г— f 2
k,k+q [R (k, k + q, iОҪn) вҲ’ R (k, k + q, iОҪn + iв„Ұn)]

Г—
пҝҪ

О¶вҖІ=Вұ1
f 2
kвҖІ,kвҖІ+О¶вҖІq [R (kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn) вҲ’ R (kвҖІ, kвҖІ + О¶вҖІq, iО¶вҖІОҪn + iО¶вҖІв„Ұn)] .

(G9)

Comparing Eqs. (G7) and (G9) with our class I and class II diagrams for the memory matrix in Eqs (A23), we see
that DOS+MT correspond to class I diagram, and AL correspond to class II diagram. Specifically,

GDOS+MT
JJ
(iв„Ұn) = 1

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
vk,xM (1)
kkвҖІ (iв„Ұn) vkвҖІ,x

GAL
JJ (iв„Ұn) = 1

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
vk,xM (2)
kkвҖІ (iв„Ұn) vkвҖІ,x
(G10)

We note, however, that Пғ(iв„Ұn) computed to lowest order in perturbation theory is equivalent to our memory matrix
approach only at the high frequency limit. This is seen by expanding Eq. (A24) to leading order in the memory
matrix:

Пғ (iв„Ұn) вүҲ 1

в„Ұn

пҝҪ
ПҮJxkПҮвҲ’1
kkвҖІПҮkвҖІJx
пҝҪ
вҲ’ 1

в„Ұ2n
ПҮJxkПҮвҲ’1
kk1Mk1k2ПҮвҲ’1
k1kвҖІПҮkвҖІJx

вүҲ 1

в„Ұn

пҝҪ

k
v2
k,x
вҲӮnF
вҲӮОөk
вҲ’ 1

в„Ұ2n

пҝҪ

kkвҖІ
vk,xMkkвҖІ(iв„Ұn)vkвҖІ,x
(G11)

Repeated indices are summed over. In the second step we made use of J = пҝҪ
k vkcвҖ 
kck, and ПҮkkвҖІ = ОҙkkвҖІ (вҲ’вҲӮОөknF ).
In the dc limit, ПғвҖІ(в„Ұ вҶ’ 0) вҲқ M вҲ’1, which cannot be obtained perturbatively without resumming an infinite set of
diagrams.

Appendix H: Totally compensated metal

In a general band structure, the momentum and the current operators are not identical, and therefore electron-
electron collisions can change the total current even if they conserve momentum. However, since the total electrical
current has a finite overlap with the total momentum, meaning that the thermodynamic susceptibility ПҮJP Мё= 0, the
dc resistivity is still zero as long as momentum is conserved, because then the current cannot relax to zero.
It is well-known, however, that this is not the case for a totally compensated metal, where the densities of electron
and hole-like charge carriers are equal. This is because in a compensated metal, ПҮJP = 0. Below, we derive this


24

result for completeness, first for non-interacting electrons and then a general interacting model. , As a result, in a
compensated metal, the dc resistivity is non-zero even if momentum is perfectly conserved.

1.
Non-interacting electrons

We consider a system with i = 1, . . . , l Fermi sheets. The current operator is given by J = вҲ’e пҝҪ

ik vikcвҖ 
ikcik,
where vik = вҲҮkОөik, and Оөik is the dispersion relation of the ith sheet, while the momentum operator is given by
P = пҝҪ

ik kcвҖ 
ikcik. In the free electron limit, the thermodynamic susceptibility: ПҮJP =
Вҙ ОІ
0 dП„вҹЁJ (П„) В· P(0)вҹ© is given by:

ПҮJP = e
пҝҪ

ik
k В· vikT
пҝҪ

iПүn
G2
0i (iПүn, Оөik)
(H1)

Summing over Matsubara frequency gives вҲӮnF (Оөik)

вҲӮОөik
. At temperatures much smaller than the Fermi energy of any of

the Fermi sheets, we may approximate вҲӮnF (Оөik)

вҲӮОөik
вүҲ вҲ’Оҙ(Оөk). Then we have

ПҮJP = вҲ’eL2 пҝҪ

i

ЛҶ
d2k

(2ПҖ)2 k В· vikОҙ(Оөik) = вҲ’ eL2

(2ПҖ)2
пҝҪ

i

Лӣ

F S
dkk В· ЛҶvik.
(H2)

Here, L2 is the total area of the system. Note that
Вё

F S dkk В· ЛҶvik is the area of the ith sheet in momentum space,
with a positive sign if vik is pointing outward (electron-like), and a negative sign if vik is pointing inward (hole-like).
Thus, by Eq. (H2), ПҮJP is proportional to the total area of all the Fermi pockets, each weighted with a sign that
corresponds to the type of carriers. In a compensated metal, this is zero by definition, and hence ПҮJP = 0.

2.
Interacting compensated metal

We now derive this result in the presence of arbitrary interactions. We consider a general first-quantized Hamiltonian
of the form

H =
пҝҪ

j
Оөj (вҲ’iвҲҮj + qjA) + V ({rj})
(H3)

where Оөj(k) is the dispersion relation of the jth particle, and V ({rj}) is an arbitrary interaction potential, assumed
to be translationally invariant. Here, we have allowed for different types of carriers with different charges qj. We
would like to compute the overlap between the momentum and current operators:

ПҮJP =
ЛҶ ОІ

0
dП„
пҝҪ
P(П„) В·
пҝҪвҲӮH

вҲӮA

пҝҪ

A=0

пҝҪ
(H4)

where A is spatially uniform. Since momentum is conserved, we can replace P(П„) = P(0) = P. We write ПҮJP as

ПҮJP = 1

T
1
Z Tr
пҝҪ
eвҲ’ОІH(A)
пҝҪвҲӮH

вҲӮA

пҝҪ

A=0
В· P
пҝҪ

= вҲ’ 1

T
1
Z

пҝҪ вҲӮ

вҲӮA В· Tr
пҝҪ
eвҲ’ОІH(A)P
пҝҪпҝҪ

A=0

= вҲ’ 1

T
1
Z

пЈұ
пЈІ

пЈі
вҲӮ
вҲӮA В· Tr

пЈ®

пЈ°eвҲ’ОІH(A=0)(P вҲ’
пҝҪ

j
qjA)

пЈ№

пЈ»

пЈј
пЈҪ

пЈҫ =
пҝҪ

j
qj

(H5)

where in the last line, we have performed a gauge transformation that shifts вҲ’iвҲҮj вҶ’ вҲ’iвҲҮj вҲ’qjA, and hence removes
the A dependence from H [72]. In particular, if пҝҪ
j qj = 0, i.e., in a totally compensated metal, then ПҮJP = 0. .

Appendix I: Effect of the form factor and cold spots in compensated metal

In this Appendix, we derive the we derive the asymptotic behavior of ПҒ(T) for a clean, compensated metal discussed
in Sec. IV C. As indicated in Fig. 7, the results depend qualitatively on the configuration of вҖңcold spotsвҖқ on the


25

different Fermi sheets. Using a variational ansatz for the non-distribution function, we show that one can readily
recover the different low-temperature exponents obtained numerically.
We use Eqs. (F6,F7) to write the dc resistivity as:

ПҒ(T) =
ОҰT MОҰ

e2(ОҰT ПҮVx)2 ,
(I1)

where, as before, we treat ОҰ as a vector in momentum, Fermi sheet, and flavor space.
The computation of the
resistivity can be treated as a minimization problem: ОҰ that satisfies Eq. (F6) also minimizes the functional on
the right hand side of Eq. (I1) [73]. Hence, we can use Eq. (I1) to bound the resistivity from above, by inserting
a variational ansatz for ОҰ. Crucially, for the ansatz we use below, the denominator of Eq. (I1) will be essentially
temperature independent. Hence, to find the temperature dependence of ПҒ(T), we need to compute the numerator of
(I1) with our variational ansatz for ОҰ.
From Eq. (E8), we observe that

ПҒ (T) вҲқО»2 пҝҪ

ij;kkвҖІ
VkвҖІвҲ’kf 2
i,k,kвҖІОҙ (Оөik) Оҙ (ОөikвҖІ)

Г—
пҝҪ
Оҙij (ОҰik вҲ’ ОҰikвҖІ)2 вҲ’ ОіjkвҖІвҲ’k

ОіkвҖІвҲ’k
(ОҰik вҲ’ ОҰikвҖІ) (ОҰjk вҲ’ ОҰjkвҖІ)
пҝҪ
(I2)

where i, j are band labels, and we have replaced hink with ОҰiОёk, and replaced din,kkвҖІ with ОҰik вҲ’ОҰikвҖІ. By symmetry,
ОҰik = вҲ’ОҰi,вҲ’k. For concreteness, it is useful to consider a simple model with two circular Fermi pockets with opposite
Fermi velocities; we will comment about the generalization to more generic situations below. In the two-pocket model,
since the Fermi velocities of the two pockets are opposite, ОҰ1k = вҲ’ОҰ2k. Carrying out the summation over band as
well as performing momentum integration along the direction perpendicular to the Fermi surface, we get:

ПҒ (T) вҲқk2
F О»2

v2
F

вҖ№

ОёОёвҖІ (ОҰОё вҲ’ ОҰОёвҖІ)2 VkвҖІвҲ’k(T)
f 2
1k,kвҖІf 2
2k,kвҖІ

f 2
1k,kвҖІ + f 2
2k,kвҖІ
(I3)

Here,
as before,
Vq(T)
=
F(T/Пүq)/Оіq,
where Пүq
=
rq/Оіq,
|k вҲ’ kвҖІ|
=
2kF sin | ОёвҲ’ОёвҖІ

2 |,
and F (x)
=

1
x
Вҙ +вҲһ
вҲ’вҲһ
du
ПҖ
u2

1+u2 sinhвҲ’2 пҝҪ u

2x
пҝҪ
.
The asymptotic behavior of F(x) is: for x вүӘ 1, F (x) вҲқ x2; whereas for x вү« 1,
F (x) вҲқ x.
Equation (I3) forms the basis for carrying out scaling analysis. We analyze cases where either there are no cold
spots on either pocket, a case with cold spots on both pockets, and a case where one pocket has cold spots and the
other does not.

1.
Absence of cold spots on either Fermi surface

In this case, we assume for simplicity that f1 = f2 = 1. Since our the problem is rotationally invariant, the angular
distribution function for an electric field in the x direction is ОҰОё = cos Оё The dominant contribution to resistivity is
due to small angle scattering. We define relative angle Оұ вүЎ |Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ|, and the integrand of Eq. (I3) for Оұ вүӘ 1:

ПҒ (T) вҲқ
ЛҶ Оё0

0
dОұОұ3F
пҝҪОёT

Оұ3

пҝҪ
(I4)

Here Оё0 вҲј 1 is an upper cutoff. We defined ОёT вүЎ T/в„ҰL to be a dimensionless temperature.
The integral is convergent both for Оұ вҶ’ 0 and Оұ вҶ’ вҲһ, due to the asymptotic behavior of the scaling function
F discussed above.
Therefore, we can rescale ЛңОұ вүЎ Оұ/Оё1/3
T
, and extend the upper cutoff to infinity, resulting in
ПҒ(T) вҲқ Оё4/3
T
вҲј T 4/3.

2.
Cold spots on both Fermi surfaces

As shown in Figs. 8(b) and (c), when cold spots are present, ОҰОё deviates strongly from cos Оё. In particular, ОҰОё
becomes nearly constant between each pair of cold spots. This motivates us to consider the following variational
ansatz for ОҰОё:


26

ОҰОё вүҲ

пЈұ
пЈҙ
пЈІ

пЈҙ
пЈі

1
Оё вҲҲ
пҝҪ
вҲ’ ПҖ

4 , ПҖ

4
пҝҪ
,
вҲ’1
Оё вҲҲ
пҝҪ 3ПҖ

4 , 5ПҖ

4
пҝҪ
,
0
elsewhere.
(I5)

The contribution to Eq. (I3) then comes purely from scattering processes relating different angular regions. Let us
consider the vicinity of the cold spot at Оё = ПҖ

4 . Near the cold spot, we get:

ПҒ (T) вҲқ
ЛҶ Оё0

0
ОұdОұ
ЛҶ Оұ

0
dП•F
пҝҪОёT П•2

Оұ3

пҝҪ
.
(I6)

Here we defined П• вүЎ
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Оё+ОёвҖІ

2
вҲ’ ПҖ

4
пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ and Оұ вүЎ |Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ|. Compared to the case when cold spots are absent, the scaling
properties are not only determined the relative angle Оұ between the momentum states, but also the average angle П•
with respect to the location of the cold spot. To extract the scaling of the resisitivity with T, we split the integration
domain into two regions:

1. ОёT < Оұ < Оё0: Since in this regime the argument of F in the integrand is smaller than unity, we estimate the
integral by replacing F(x) by its small x behavior: F вҲј x2. The contribution of this regime is then estimated
as вҲҶПҒ2 вҲј
Вҙ Оё0
0 ОұdОұ
Вҙ Оұ
0 dП•
пҝҪ
ОёT П•2ОұвҲ’3пҝҪ2 вҲј Оё0Оё2
T . Notice that this contribution arises from large angle scattering,
and hence it is proportional to Оё0. This justifies considering Оұ as much larger than ОёT .

2. 0 < Оұ < ОёT : in this regime, we perform a change of variables as follows: Оұ = ЛңОұ/ОёT , П• = ЛңП•/ОёT . The integral
becomes вҲҶПҒ2 вҲј Оё3
T
Вҙ 1
0 ЛңОұdЛңОұ
Вҙ ЛңОұ
0 d ЛңП•F
пҝҪ
ЛңП•2ЛңОұвҲ’3пҝҪ
вҲј Оё3
T . This contribution is subleading compared to вҲҶПҒ1.

As a result, at low temperatures and when the nematic cold spots are present on both Fermi surfaces, ПҒ(T) вҲқ T 2 due
to scattering off non-critical nematic fluctuations carrying large momenta.

3.
Cold spots on part of the Fermi surfaces

We consider a system with cold spots on the first Fermi sheet but not on the second. In this case, we may replace
f2 = 1. For q pointing near the direction of the cold spots, the Landau damping coefficient Оіq вүҲ Оі2,q, and we can
neglect its angular dependence. We use the same variational ansatz as for case B [Eq. (I5)]. Again expanding near
Оё (ОёвҖІ) вүҲ ПҖ

4 , we find that

ПҒ(T) вҲқ
ЛҶ Оё0

0
ОұdОұ
ЛҶ Оұ

0
dП•П•2F
пҝҪОёT

Оұ3

пҝҪ
,
(I7)

where the factor of П•2 comes from f1 in Eq. (I3). As a result, ПҒ(T) вҲј
Вҙ Оё0
0 ОұdОұ
Вҙ Оұ
0 dП•П•2F
пҝҪ ОёT

Оұ3
пҝҪ
вҲј Оё5/3
T
. In this case,
the resistivity comes mostly from small-angle scattering in the vicinity of Оё (ОёвҖІ) вүҲ ПҖ

4 .
We comment on the generalization for the more generic case with more two pockets, and where the shape of the
pockets is non-circular. In this case, we use a variational ansatz where ОҰ is of the form (I5) on the pockets with cold
spots, and zero on the pockets where cold spots are absent. Evalutaing Eq. (I2) along the same lines as above gives
again ПҒ(T) вҲј Оё5/3
T
вҲј T 5/3, as in our two-pocket toy model. It is worth noting that this is an upper bound on the
resistivity, and it only provides a lower bound on the resistivity exponent at low temperature. The numerical results
for the two-pocket case [Fig. 6(b)] suggest the exponent is indeed 5/3.

Appendix J: Numerical construction of the memory matrix

In this section we provide details on the construction of the memory matrix in the dc limit, as well as further
numerical results.
We always work in the limit that temperature is much smaller than the Fermi energy. This allows us to project
all scattering processes onto the Fermi surface, and perform integration over the momentum direction perpendicular
to the Fermi surface. In practice, we use expressions in Eqs. (C6) and (C19) to construct the radially-integrated
memory matrix. For a generic multi-Fermi surface system,

MiОё,jОёвҖІ =
ЛҶ dki,вҠҘdkвҖІ
j,вҠҘ

(2ПҖ)4
Mik,jkвҖІ
(J1)


27

0
50
100
150
200

0.00

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

Eigenspectrum

nem fluct
umklapp
impurity

FIG. 12.
Eigenspectrum of the memory matrix MОё,ОёвҖІ for a single Fermi surface when only quantum critical scattering is
considered (black), when umklapp scattering is included (red), and when quenched random impurity is included (blue). In this
calculation, we used the dispersion Оөk = вҲ’2t (cos kx + cos ky) вҲ’ 4tвҖІ cos kx cos ky вҲ’ Вө , with t = 1, tвҖІ = вҲ’0.3 and Вө = вҲ’1. The
nematic coupling strength is О»2 вүҲ 2.62ОөF , and impurity strength is gimp вүҲ 0.02ОөF . The spectrum is obtained at temperature
T вүҲ 0.04ОөF . We used 200 points to uniformly discretize the Fermi surface.

and the dc conductivity is calculated as

Пғ = e2

в„Ҹ

ЛҶ dki,вҲҘdkвҖІ
j,вҲҘ

(2ПҖ)4
vikM вҲ’1
iОё,jОёвҖІvjkвҖІ
(J2)

Here vik is the Fermi velocity of the ith band, and Оё is the angle of k with respect to the x direction. dki,вҲҘ = kiF (Оё)dОё.
The off-diagonal elements (Оё Мё= ОёвҖІ) of the memory matrix are constructed from Eqs. (E3) by solving for the condition
that all participating momentum states are on the Fermi surface. For class I diagram, the following expression is used:

M (1)
iОё,jОёвҖІ = вҲ’Оҙij
О»2

8ПҖ3
f 2
i,k,kвҖІVkвҖІвҲ’k

vikvikвҖІ
(J3)

where on the right hand side both k and kвҖІ are taken to be on the Fermi surface. Class II diagrams are constructed
using:

M (2,+)
iОё,jОёвҖІ = вҲ’ О»4

32ПҖ4
пҝҪ

q=qc

Vq
Оіq
f 2
i,k,k+qf 2
j,kвҖІ,kвҖІ+q
1

vikvjkвҖІ
1

|vik+q Г— vjkвҖІ+q|,

M (2,вҲ’)
iОё,jОёвҖІ =
О»4

32ПҖ4
пҝҪ

q=qc

Vq
Оіq
f 2
i,k,k+qf 2
j,kвҖІ,kвҖІвҲ’q
1

vikvjkвҖІ
1

|vik+q Г— vjkвҖІвҲ’q|

(J4)

Here all four momentum states k, kвҖІ, k + qc and kвҖІ Вұ qc are on the Fermi surface. Note that the head-on collisions
(namely when kвҖІ = вҲ’k) need to be treated differently, as in this case, there is a one-dimensional manifold of
qc satisfying the momentum-energy conservation constraints. Specifically, we incoporate these processes using the
following expression:

M (2)
iОё,i(Оё+ПҖ) =
ЛҶ
dkвҖІ
i,вҲҘM (2,+)
iОё,iОёвҖІ

Finally, the diagonal elements of the memory matrix are constructed from number conservation, namely,

MiОё,iОё =
пҝҪ

j

ЛҶ
dkвҖІ
j,вҲҘMiОё,jОёвҖІ

In numerical calculations, we discretize the angle along the Fermi surface. The number of points is usually taken
to be 500. However, to extract proper scaling behavior at the lowest temperatures, we checked the convergence of the
results for up to 2000 points.


28

In Figure 12, we illustrate the properties of the eigenvalues of the memory matrix for a single Fermi surface. We
present the case when only quantum critical scattering is present, as well as when current-relaxing mechanisms such
as impurity and umklapp processes are incorporated.
In the absence of impurity or umklapp, there is a large number of zero modes, corresponding to the conservation
of total electron number as well as the conservation of all odd-parity modes. This is expected since we are projecting
scattering processes onto the Fermi surface. When either impurity or umklapp scattering is added, all odd-parity
modes (including momentum) are lifted from zero, and only total number is conserved. However, the way these zero
modes get lifted is different depending on the mechanism. In the case of impurity scattering, all odd-parity modes
gain a finite decay rate вҲј g2
impОҪF . However when umklapp scattering is dominant, the odd-parity modes are smoothly
lifted from 0, and form a continuous spectrum.

[1] D. J. Scalapino, вҖңA common thread: The pairing inter-
action for unconventional superconductors,вҖқ Rev. Mod.
Phys. 84, 1383вҖ“1417 (2012).

[2] Luca DellвҖҷAnna and Walter Metzner, вҖңElectrical resis-
tivity near pomeranchuk instability in two dimensions,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 136402 (2007).

[3] Sean A. Hartnoll, Raghu Mahajan, Matthias Punk, and
Subir Sachdev, вҖңTransport near the ising-nematic quan-
tum critical point of metals in two dimensions,вҖқ Physical
Review B 89 (2014).

[4] Samuel Lederer,
Yoni Schattner,
Erez Berg,
and
Steven A Kivelson, вҖңSuperconductivity and non-fermi
liquid behavior near a nematic quantum critical point,вҖқ
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,
201620651 (2017).

[5] Dmitrii L. Maslov, Vladimir I. Yudson, and Andrey V.
Chubukov, вҖңResistivity of a non-galileanвҖ“invariant fermi
liquid near pomeranchuk quantum criticality,вҖқ Phys.
Rev. Lett. 106, 106403 (2011).

[6] Eduardo Fradkin, Steven A. Kivelson, Michael J. Lawler,
James P. Eisenstein,
and Andrew P. Mackenzie, вҖңNe-
matic fermi fluids in condensed matter physics,вҖқ Annual
Review of Condensed Matter Physics 1, 153вҖ“178 (2010).

[7] Jiun-Haw Chu, James G. Analytis, Kristiaan De Greve,
Peter L. McMahon, Zahirul Islam, Yoshihisa Yamamoto,
and Ian R. Fisher, вҖңIn-plane resistivity anisotropy in an
underdoped iron arsenide superconductor,вҖқ Science 329,
824вҖ“826 (2010).

[8] R. M. Fernandes, A. V. Chubukov,
and J. Schmalian,
вҖңWhat drives nematic order in iron-based superconduc-
tors?вҖқ Nature Physics 10, 97вҖ“104 (2014).

[9] Suguru Hosoi, Kohei Matsuura, Kousuke Ishida, Hao
Wang, Yuta Mizukami, Tatsuya Watashige, Shigeru
Kasahara, Yuji Matsuda,
and Takasada Shibauchi,
вҖңNematic quantum critical point without magnetism in
fese1- xsx superconductors,вҖқ Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 113, 8139вҖ“8143 (2016).

[10] Amalia I. Coldea and Matthew D. Watson, вҖңThe key
ingredients of the electronic structure of fese,вҖқ Annual
Review of Condensed Matter Physics 9, 125вҖ“146 (2018).

[11] Y. Kohsaka, C. Taylor, K. Fujita, A. Schmidt, C. Lupien,
T. Hanaguri, M. Azuma, M. Takano, H. Eisaki, H. Tak-
agi, S. Uchida,
and J.C. Davis, вҖңAn intrinsic bond-
centered electronic glass with unidirectional domains in
underdoped cuprates,вҖқ Science 315, 1380вҖ“1385 (2007).

[12] R. Daou,
J. Chang,
David LeBoeuf,
Olivier Cyr-
Choini`ere, Francis LalibertВҙe, Nicolas Doiron-Leyraud,
B. J. Ramshaw, Ruixing Liang, D. A. Bonn, W. N.
Hardy,
and et al., вҖңBroken rotational symmetry in the

pseudogap phase of a high-tc superconductor,вҖқ Nature
463, 519вҖ“522 (2010).

[13] S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, K. Hashimoto, K. Ikada,
S. Tonegawa,
R. Okazaki,
H. Shishido,
H. Ikeda,
H. Takeya, K. Hirata, T. Terashima,
and Y. Matsuda,
вҖңEvolution from non-fermi- to fermi-liquid transport via
isovalent doping in bafe2(As1вҲ’xPx)2 superconductors,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. B 81, 184519 (2010).

[14] P. Reiss, M. D. Watson, T. K. Kim, A. A. Haghighi-
rad, D. N. Woodruff, M. Bruma, S. J. Clarke, and A. I.
Coldea, вҖңSuppression of electronic correlations by chem-
ical pressure from fese to fes,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 96, 121103
(2017).

[15] Takahiro Urata, Yoichi Tanabe, Khuong Kim Huynh,
Hidetoshi Oguro, Kazuo Watanabe, and Katsumi Tani-
gaki, вҖңNon-fermi liquid behavior of electrical resistivity
close to the nematic critical point in Fe1вҲ’xCoxSe and
FeSe1вҲ’ySy,вҖқ arXiv:1608.01044 (2016).

[16] P. Reiss,
D. Graf,
A. A. Haghighirad,
W. Knafo,
L. Drigo, M. Bristow, A. J. Schofield, and A. I. Coldea,
вҖңQuenched nematic criticality separating two supercon-
ducting domes in an iron-based superconductor under
pressure,вҖқ To appear.

[17] CM Varma, P Be Littlewood, S Schmitt-Rink, E Abra-
hams,
and AE Ruckenstein, вҖңPhenomenology of the
normal state of cu-o high-temperature superconductors,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1996 (1989).

[18] Yong Baek Kim, Patrick A. Lee,
and Xiao-Gang Wen,
вҖңQuantum boltzmann equation of composite fermions in-
teracting with a gauge field,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 52, 17275вҖ“
17292 (1995).

[19] R. Hlubina and T. M. Rice, вҖңResistivity as a function
of temperature for models with hot spots on the fermi
surface,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 51, 9253вҖ“9260 (1995).

[20] A. Rosch, вҖңInterplay of disorder and spin fluctuations in
the resistivity near a quantum critical point,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
Lett. 82, 4280вҖ“4283 (1999).

[21] S. V. Syzranov and J. Schmalian, вҖңConductivity close
to antiferromagnetic criticality,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 109,
156403 (2012).

[22] I. Paul, C. PВҙepin, and M. R. Norman, вҖңEquivalence of
single-particle and transport lifetimes from hybridization
fluctuations,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 066402 (2013).

[23] Aavishkar A. Patel and Subir Sachdev, вҖңdc resistivity at
the onset of spin density wave order in two-dimensional
metals,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 90, 165146 (2014).

[24] Andrey V. Chubukov, Dmitrii L. Maslov, and Vladimir I.
Yudson, вҖңOptical conductivity of a two-dimensional
metal at the onset of spin-density-wave order,вҖқ Phys.


29

Rev. B 89, 155126 (2014).

[25] Andrey V. Chubukov and Dmitrii L. Maslov, вҖңOptical
conductivity of a two-dimensional metal near a quantum
critical point: The status of the extended drude formula,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. B 96, 205136 (2017).

[26] W. Metzner, D. Rohe, and S. Andergassen, вҖңSoft fermi
surfaces and breakdown of fermi-liquid behavior,вҖқ Phys.
Rev. Lett. 91, 066402 (2003).

[27] Vadim Oganesyan, Steven A. Kivelson,
and Eduardo
Fradkin, вҖңQuantum Theory of a Nematic Fermi Fluid,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. B 64, 195109 (2001).

[28] JВҙerЛҶome
Rech,
Catherine
PВҙepin,
and
Andrey
V.
Chubukov, вҖңQuantum critical behavior in itinerant elec-
tron systems: Eliashberg theory and instability of a fer-
romagnetic quantum critical point,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 74,
195126 (2006).

[29] Michael J. Lawler, Daniel G. Barci, Victoria FernВҙandez,
Eduardo Fradkin,
and Luis Oxman, вҖңNonperturbative
behavior of the quantum phase transition to a nematic
fermi fluid,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 73, 085101 (2006).

[30] Hilbert v. LВЁohneysen, Achim Rosch, Matthias Vojta,
and Peter WВЁolfle, вҖңFermi-liquid instabilities at magnetic
quantum phase transitions,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 1015вҖ“
1075 (2007).

[31] Sung-Sik Lee, вҖңLow-energy effective theory of fermi sur-
face coupled with u(1) gauge field in 2 + 1 dimensions,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. B 80, 165102 (2009).

[32] Mario Zacharias, Peter WВЁolfle, and Markus Garst, вҖңMul-
tiscale quantum criticality: Pomeranchuk instability in
isotropic metals,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 80, 165116 (2009).

[33] David F. Mross, John McGreevy, Hong Liu,
and
T. Senthil, вҖңControlled expansion for certain non-fermi-
liquid metals,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 82, 045121 (2010).

[34] Max A. Metlitski and Subir Sachdev, вҖңQuantum phase
transitions of metals in two spatial dimensions. i. ising-
nematic order,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 82, 075127 (2010).

[35] Denis Dalidovich and Sung-Sik Lee, вҖңPerturbative non-
fermi liquids from dimensional regularization,вҖқ Phys.
Rev. B 88, 245106 (2013).

[36] Tobias Holder and Walter Metzner, вҖңAnomalous dynami-
cal scaling from nematic and u(1) gauge field fluctuations
in two-dimensional metals,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 92, 041112
(2015).

[37] Avraham Klein, Samuel Lederer, Debanjan Chowdhury,
Erez Berg, and Andrey Chubukov, вҖңDynamical suscep-
tibility of a near-critical nonconserved order parameter
and quadrupole raman response in fe-based superconduc-
tors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 98, 041101 (2018).

[38] Avraham Klein, Samuel Lederer, Debanjan Chowdhury,
Erez Berg, and Andrey Chubukov, вҖңDynamical suscep-
tibility near a long-wavelength critical point with a non-
conserved order parameter,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 97, 155115
(2018).

[39] John A. Hertz, вҖңQuantum critical phenomena,вҖқ Phys.
Rev. B 14, 1165вҖ“1184 (1976).

[40] A. J. Millis, вҖңEffect of a nonzero temperature on quantum
critical points in itinerant fermion systems,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
B 48, 7183вҖ“7196 (1993).

[41] TЛҶoru Moriya, вҖңSpin fluctuations in itinerant electron
magnetism,вҖқ Springer Series in Solid-State Sciences
(1985).

[42] Yoni Schattner, Samuel Lederer, Steven A. Kivelson, and
Erez Berg, вҖңIsing nematic quantum critical point in a
metal: A monte carlo study,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 6, 031028

(2016).

[43] Erez Berg, Samuel Lederer, Yoni Schattner, and Simon
Trebst, вҖңMonte carlo studies of quantum critical metals,вҖқ
Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 10 (2019).

[44] Patrick J Ledwith, Haoyu Guo, Andrey V Shytov,
and Leonid Levitov, вҖңTomographic dynamics and scale-
dependent viscosity in two-dimensional electron sys-
tems,вҖқ arXiv:1708.02376 (2017).

[45] This is the case, for instance, if the order parameter has
B1g symmetry and some of the Fermi pockets are cen-
tered away from the high symmetry points О“ = (0, 0),
M = (ПҖ, ПҖ) in the Brillouin zone, as in many of the iron-
based superconductors.

[46] This regime is accessible, within our model, in the limit
where the number of fermion flavors is large.

[47] The expression for the bare propagator DвҲ’1
0,q = r0 +
2 (2 вҲ’ cos qx вҲ’ cos qy) has lattice effects included, i.e.,
DвҲ’1
0,q+G
=
DвҲ’1
0,q, where G is any reciprocal lattice
wavevector. Later on when we study transport properties
of a compensated metal, we will instead use the continu-
ous expression: DвҲ’1
0,q = r0 + q2.

[48] Leo P Kadanoff and Paul C Martin, вҖңHydrodynamic
equations and correlation functions,вҖқ Annals of Physics
24, 419 вҖ“ 469 (1963).

[49] D. Forster, Hydrodynamic Fluctuations, Broken Symme-
try, And Correlation Functions (CRC Press; 1 edition,
March 8, 2018).

[50] W. GВЁotze and P. WВЁolfle, вҖңHomogeneous dynamical con-
ductivity of simple metals,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 6, 1226вҖ“1238
(1972).

[51] A. Rosch and N. Andrei, вҖңConductivity of a clean
one-dimensional wire,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1092вҖ“1095
(2000).

[52] E. Shimshoni, N. Andrei, and A. Rosch, вҖңThermal con-
ductivity of spin- 1

2 chains,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 68, 104401
(2003).

[53] Peter Jung and Achim Rosch, вҖңLower bounds for the con-
ductivities of correlated quantum systems,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
B 75, 245104 (2007).

[54] Raghu Mahajan, Maissam Barkeshli, and Sean A. Hart-
noll, вҖңNon-fermi liquids and the wiedemann-franz law,вҖқ
Phys. Rev. B 88, 125107 (2013).

[55] Andrew Lucas and Subir Sachdev, вҖңMemory matrix the-
ory of magnetotransport in strange metals,вҖқ Phys. Rev.
B 91, 195122 (2015).

[56] Sean A. Hartnoll, Andrew Lucas,
and Subir Sachdev,
Holographic Quantum Matter (MIT Press, 2018).

[57] Since the interaction is momentum dependent, it also
contributes a term to the current operator. However, this
term is subleading in О» and in 1/N, and will be neglected.

[58] The precise meaning of these operators being nearly con-
served is elaborated on in Appendix A 1.

[59] To do this, one introduces a field ПҖ(r) which is the conju-
gate momentum of ПҶ(r). The Hamilontian then contains
a term ПҖ2(r)/2m, where the вҖңmassвҖқ m is taken to 0 at
the end of the calculation.

[60] Leo P Kadanoff and Gordon Baym, Quantum statistical
mechanics (W A Benjamin, 1962).

[61] J. Rammer and H. Smith, вҖңQuantum field-theoretical
methods in transport theory of metals,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys.
58, 323вҖ“359 (1986).

[62] Alex Kamenev, Field Theory of Non-equilibrium Systems
(Cambridge University Press, 2011).

[63] Complications due to non-convex Fermi surfaces [5] can


30

easily be incorporated within the same formalism, but
will not be considered here.

[64] R. N. Gurzhi, A. N. Kalinenko,
and A. I. Kope-
liovich, вҖңElectron-electron momentum relaxation in a
two-dimensional electron gas,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 52, 4744вҖ“
4747 (1995).

[65] The cross term is negligible as long as the disorder po-
tential does not couple linearly to the nematic order pa-
rameter. Such coupling is generated at higher order in
disorder, but we assume it to be small. Transport in the
presence of вҖңrandom fieldвҖқ disorder that couples linearly
to the nematic order parameter was considererd in Ref.
[3]. At sufficiently low temperature, this type of disor-
der is likely to qualitatively modify the properties of the
quantum critical point, as well as its transport properties.

[66] W. G. Baber and N. F. Mott, вҖңThe contribution to the
electrical resistance of metals from collisions between
electrons,вҖқ Proc. Roy. Soc. London 158, 383 (1937) 158,
383вҖ“396 (1937).

[67] Anna E. BВЁohmer and Christoph Meingast, вҖңElectronic
nematic susceptibility of iron-based superconductors,вҖқ
Comptes Rendus Physique 17, 90 вҖ“ 112 (2016).

[68] Mario Zacharias, Indranil Paul,
and Markus Garst,

вҖңQuantum critical elasticity,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 115,
025703 (2015).

[69] U. Karahasanovic and J. Schmalian, вҖңElastic coupling
and spin-driven nematicity in iron-based superconduc-
tors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 93, 064520 (2016).

[70] I. Paul and M. Garst, вҖңLattice effects on nematic quan-
tum criticality in metals,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 227601
(2017).

[71] To appreciate the significance of this point, it is useful to
note that in contrast, the matrix element between the op-
erator cвҖ 
ОұkcОұk+q and LcвҖ 
ОұkcОұk+q is O(1). This is because
cвҖ 
ОұkcОұk+q does not commute with the kinetic energy, and
hence LcвҖ 
ОұkcОұk+q is not suppressed by a factor of 1/
вҲҡ

N.

[72] There is a subtlety at this step: if we use periodic bound-
ary conditions, then a gauge transformation can only
shift the vector potential by integer multiples of 2ПҖ/L,
where L is the systemвҖҷs spatial dimention. This can be
remedied by approximating, e.g., [вҲҮAxeвҲ’ОІH(Ax)]Ax=0 вүҲ
(eвҲ’ОІH(Ax) вҲ’ eвҲ’ОІH(0))/Ax with Ax = 2ПҖ/L, and taking
the limit L вҶ’ вҲһ.

[73] J. M. Ziman, Electrons and phonons: the theory of trans-
port phenomena in solids (Oxford Univ. Press, London
and New York, 1960).


