1

High-speed domain wall racetracks in a magnetic insulator

Saül Vélez1,§,*, Jakob Schaab1,§, Martin S. Wörnle1,2, Marvin Müller1, Elzbieta Gradauskaite1, 

Pol Welter2, Cameron Gutgsell1, Corneliu Nistor1, Christian L. Degen2,*, Morgan Trassin1,*, 

Manfred Fiebig1 and Pietro Gambardella1,*

1Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

2Department of Physics, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

§ These authors contributed equally

*e-mail: saul.velez@mat.ethz.ch (S.V.); degenc@ethz.ch (C.L.D.); morgan.trassin@mat.ethz.ch (M.T.); 

pietro.gambardella@mat.ethz.ch (P.G.)

Recent reports of current-induced switching of ferrimagnetic oxides coupled to a heavy metal layer 

have opened realistic prospects for implementing magnetic insulators into electrically addressable 

spintronic devices. However, key aspects such as the configuration and dynamics of magnetic 

domain walls driven by electrical currents in insulating oxides remain unexplored. Here, we 

investigate the internal structure of the domain walls in Tm3Fe5O12 (TmIG) and TmIG/Pt bilayers and 

demonstrate their efficient manipulation by spin-orbit torques with velocities of up to 400 m s-1 and

minimal current threshold for domain wall flow of 5 x 106 A cm-2. Domain wall racetracks embedded 

in TmIG are defined by the deposition of Pt current lines, which allow us to control the domain 

propagation and magnetization switching in selected regions of an extended magnetic layer. 

Scanning nitrogen-vacancy magnetometry reveals that the domain walls of thin TmIG films are Néel 

walls with left-handed chirality, with the domain wall magnetization rotating towards an 

intermediate Néel-Bloch configuration upon deposition of Pt. These results indicate the presence of 

a sizable interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction in TmIG, which leads to novel possibilities to 

control the formation of chiral spin textures in magnetic insulators. Ultimately, domain wall 

racetracks provide an efficient scheme to pattern the magnetic landscape of TmIG in a fast and 

reversible way.


2

Spintronics relies on the use of current-induced torques for manipulating the magnetization of

thin films and nanodevices (1). Owing to spin-orbit coupling, charge currents flowing in heavy metals, 

such as Pt, Ta or W, generate spin currents that exert a torque onto an adjacent ferromagnetic layer 

(2, 3). These so-called spin-orbit torques (SOTs) are capable of reversing the magnetization of 

ferromagnets in a highly efficient and ultra-fast manner (4–8) as well as driving domain walls at very 

high velocities (9–11). Most studies in this area, however, have been performed on ultrathin metallic 

ferromagnets, for which extensive characterizations of the domain wall (DW) structure and velocity 

have been reported (12–20).

Magnetic insulators offer exciting perspectives for spintronic and magnonic applications

beyond conventional metallic systems (21). In particular, ferrimagnetic rare-earth garnets coupled to 

heavy metal layers have attracted attention due to the possibility of electrically exciting and detecting 

propagating magnons (22–25) as well as for their low power and high frequency magnetization 

dynamics (26). Despite increasing interest in such systems, however, the electrical manipulation of the 

equilibrium magnetization has not been investigated in detail. Current-induced switching of magnetic 

insulators has been only recently demonstrated in Tm3Fe5O12 (TmIG) and BaFe12O19 in combination 

with either Pt or W layers (27–30). These studies relied on magnetoresistance measurements in order 

to detect the orientation of the magnetization, from which the dynamics of the switching process 

cannot be inferred. In this work, we present a combined scanning nitrogen-vacancy (NV)

magnetometry and spatially-resolved magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE) study of the DW structure and 

dynamics driven by SOTs in racetrack structures embedded in a TmIG layer.  We demonstrate highly 

efficient current-induced DW motion in TmIG/Pt, with mobility comparable or larger than metallic

ferromagnets, an extraordinarily low threshold for DW flow, and very small depinning fields. We 

further provide the first direct characterization of the DW width and internal structure in thin-film 

TmIG as well as TmIG/Pt bilayers. Previous studies in garnets were only able to provide estimates of 

the DW width based on indirect or diffraction-limited optical measurements, with reported values

ranging from tens of nanometers to micrometers (31–34). Scanning NV magnetometry reveals that the 

DWs in TmIG films are only ~20 nm wide and have a well-defined chiral structure, which changes from 

left Néel in TmIG to intermediate left Néel-Bloch in TmIG/Pt. These findings evidence the presence of 

strong interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction (DMI) in TmIG grown on substituted gadolinium

gallium garnet Gd3Sc2Ga3O12 (SGGG), which is attenuated by the deposition of Pt. The DMI is the key 

ingredient required to stabilize chiral Néel DWs in ferromagnets and ferrimagnets with perpendicular 

magnetization, which can then be driven by SOTs at very high velocities (10–15). In contrast with 

metallic ferromagnets, TmIG thin films support the formation of Néel DWs without introducing heavy 

metal layers. Our results show that ferrimagnetic garnets are ideal materials for fabricating efficient

and high-speed DW racetracks. 


3

TmIG(8 nm)/Pt(5 nm) bilayers were grown on SGGG (111)-oriented substrates by a 

combination of pulsed laser deposition for epitaxial growth of the garnet and in-situ dc sputtering for

Pt. The numbers between parentheses indicate the thickness of each layer. Pt current lines were 

patterned in the shape of Hall bars by optical lithography and selective etching of the metal, leaving 

the TmIG film un-etched (see Methods). Figure 1A shows an optical image of a TmIG/Pt device. The 

structural, electric, and magnetic characterization of the TmIG film and the TmIG/Pt bilayer are

reported in the Supplementary Materials (Section S1 and Figs. S1 and S2).

The magnetic state of the TmIG film underneath the Pt current line, +m (up) or -m (down), can 

be read electrically by measuring the transverse Hall resistance 𝑅𝑥𝑦, as shown in Fig. 1B during a sweep

of the out-of-plane magnetic field 𝐻𝑧. The measurement confirms that the films exhibit robust 

perpendicular magnetic anisotropy with a coercive field of about 40 Oe. In agreement with a previous 

report (27), the magnetization of TmIG can be deterministically switched upon the application of a 

current pulse of sufficient current density 𝐽𝑥 in the presence of a constant in-plane field 𝐻𝑥 (Fig. 1C). 

The switching polarity is determined by the damping-like component of the SOT (2–4), which stabilizes 

+m for 𝐽𝑥 parallel to 𝐻𝑥 and –m for 𝐽𝑥 antiparallel to 𝐻𝑥 in TmIG/Pt. Notably, we found that full 

switching can be achieved with pulses of 1 ms at current densities below 107 A cm-2 for an in-plane 

field as small as |𝐻𝑥|=20 Oe, which confirms the high quality of our devices (see also Supplementary 

Materials Section S1).

A distinctive feature of our experiments is that TmIG covers the entire substrate, but switching 

occurs only in the region defined by the Pt current line. This is clearly seen in Fig. 1D, which shows a 

differential MOKE image of a TmIG/Pt device after the application of a current pulse. The bright 

contrast coinciding with the Pt current line shows the region where the magnetization has switched 

from -m to +m, demonstrating that it is possible to control the magnetization of a continuous TmIG 

film in a local way without altering the magnetic moments of the surroundings. Only in the presence 

of an out-of-plane field, or in the case of significant Joule heating, the switched magnetic domain may 

extend beyond the Pt line (see the Supplementary Materials Section S2). Such local control of the 

magnetization is unique to magnetic insulators due to the confinement of the current in the metal 

overlayer. As discussed further below, we also find that the surrounding magnetic medium influences 

the switching dynamics underneath the Pt current line. This is seen by the fact that a larger current is 

required for inducing down-to-up switching relative to up-to-down switching when starting from a 

homogenously magnetized TmIG film pointing down (Fig. 1C), and vice versa starting from a 

homogenously magnetized layer pointing up (not shown).

As SOT-induced switching is strongly dependent on the DW structure (12–15), we use scanning 

NV magnetometry to reveal the DW magnetization profile in both TmIG and TmIG/Pt layers. The


4

technique is based on a single NV defect located at the apex of a diamond tip, which senses the 

magnetic stray field BNV(X,Y) emanating from a magnetic surface with high spatial resolution (Fig. 2A)

(17, 35, 36). Figure 2B shows BNV(X,Y) of the TmIG film measured in a region where a DW intersects an 

area partially covered by Pt. From this measurement, we reconstruct the out-of-plane component of 

the magnetization Mz(X,Y) (see Methods), as shown in Fig. 2C. Although the DW runs continuously

across the Pt edge, the linescans of BNV(X,Y) shown in Figs. 2D and 2E reveal that the DW structure 

changes going from TmIG/Pt to TmIG. In order to extract the magnetization profile of the DW from 

these measurements, we fit BNV(X,Y) by assuming that the magnetization components in the rotated 

coordinate system XYZ (Fig. 2A) vary as (17, 33)

𝑀𝑋(𝑋) = 𝑀𝑆

cos 𝜓

cosh(
𝑋

∆𝐷𝑊),

𝑀𝑌(𝑋) = 0,

𝑀𝑍(𝑋) = −𝑀𝑆 tanh (

𝑋

∆𝐷𝑊),
(1)

where 𝜓 defines the angle of the in-plane magnetization direction with respect to the X-axis, ∆𝐷𝑊 is 

the DW width, and 𝑀𝑆 the saturation magnetization. Figures 2D and 2E compare representative 

BNV(X,Y) line profiles for TmIG/Pt and TmIG together with fits performed assuming a pure Bloch wall 

(𝜓 = 90°), left Néel wall (𝜓 = 180°) and right Néel wall (𝜓 = 0°). The best fit of the stray field map in 

Fig. 2B according to Eq. 1 gives ∆𝐷𝑊= (17 ± 17) nm and ∆𝐷𝑊= (27 ± 6) nm for TmIG/Pt and TmIG, 

respectively (see Methods). Despite the large uncertainty in ∆𝐷𝑊, which is due to the weak

dependence of 𝐵NV on ∆𝐷𝑊, the fits show that the DWs in 8-nm-thick TmIG are extremely narrow. 

Moreover, we find that the DW have a Néel chiral structure in both TmIG/Pt and TmIG, which is 

characterized by the angles 𝜓 = (116 ± 33)° and 𝜓 = (173 ± 17)°, respectively. Thus, the DW 

changes from left-handed Néel to an intermediate left-handed Néel-Bloch configuration in going from 

TmIG to TmIG/Pt, which is a compelling indication of the presence of negative DMI in the bare TmIG 

layer, most likely due to symmetry breaking at the SGGG/TmIG interface. The deposition of Pt reduces

the DMI, which we ascribe to the presence of positive DMI at the TmIG/Pt interface, consistently with 

the sign of the DMI found in metallic ferromagnetic/Pt bilayers (14, 15, 17). These findings have 

important consequences for the operation of DW racetracks in magnetic insulators, because the 

reduced ∆𝐷𝑊 favors the localization of DWs, whereas the finite DMI allows for their efficient

manipulation by SOTs.

In order to prove this last point, we investigate the switching dynamics and current-induced 

DW motion below the Pt line. We refer to the switching of the magnetization starting from a 

homogeneously magnetized TmIG layer as forward switching (domain expansion), and to the return to 


5

a homogenous magnetic state starting from a reversed domain as backward switching (domain 

contraction). Figure 3A shows the relative change in the magnetization induced by a single forward 

switching current pulse as a function of 𝐻𝑥 and 𝐽𝑥. Within the experimental error, we find that the 

switching diagram is symmetric upon inversion of 𝐻𝑥 or 𝐽𝑥, indicating that the SOT efficiency is the 

same for up-to-down and down-to-up switching and independent on the current direction. Distinct to 

electrical reading (27–29), which is only sensitive to the magnetic moments in the vicinity of the Hall 

cross (Fig. 1, B and C, and Fig. S5), MOKE measurements reveal that for a wide range of 𝐻𝑥 and 𝐽𝑥 only 

partial switching is achieved. We thus study the distribution and evolution of reversed magnetic 

domains induced by a sequence of current pulses. Since we expect an influence of the surrounding 

TmIG on the magnetization dynamics underneath the Pt current line (Fig. 1C), and because the 

switching process is symmetric upon inverting both m and H (4, 8), we investigate the forward and 

backward switching processes for one fixed initial state of the film (-m).

Figures 3B and 3C show two representative sequences of differential MOKE images taken 

during forward switching and backward switching, respectively. For each case, we compare the 

combinations of field and current that allow for domain nucleation and expansion (±𝐻𝑥, ±𝐽𝑥) and 

domain contraction (±𝐻𝑥, ∓𝐽𝑥). These images reveal that forward switching occurs via nucleation of a 

reversed domain at a defect site (as confirmed by a series of repetitions) and subsequent domain 

expansion along the Pt current line, with comparable speeds for both DWs on the left- and right-hand

sides of the domain. Backward switching takes place by pushing the outer DWs towards the center of 

the domain. Similar dynamics –for either expansion or contraction– is observed upon inverting 𝐻𝑥 and

𝐽𝑥. The different timescales of the switching processes (see Figs. 3B and 3C) indicate that domain 

contraction is significantly faster than domain expansion. The most likely cause for this behavior is the 

tendency of the reversed domain to shrink in order to reduce the DW energy (37). Accordingly, we find 

that the minimum pulse length required to induce DW motion upon contraction is much smaller than 

for expansion (Fig. 3D).

Measurements of the DW velocity 𝑣𝐷𝑊 are reported in Fig. 4 for an up-down DW as a function 

of 𝐽𝑥 and 𝐻𝑥 during both domain expansion and domain contraction. 𝑣𝐷𝑊 is evaluated by considering 

the total DW displacement after a sequence of current pulses of length 𝑡𝑝 as the DW moves along the 

Pt current line. Since the same 𝑡𝑝 does not allow for sampling a large 𝐻𝑥, 𝐽𝑥 parameter space, we used

longer (shorter) pulses for smaller (larger) 𝐻𝑥, 𝐽𝑥 values. Note that the DW velocity remains almost 

constant when changing 𝑡𝑝, indicating that it is not influenced by inertia (see Methods and Fig. S6).

Our measurements reveal robust DW velocities of up to ~200 m s-1 for domain expansion (Fig. 4A) and 

~400 m s-1 for domain contraction (Fig. 4B), which are comparable to the ones found in all-metallic 

structures under similar conditions (9, 14, 15). Most remarkably, however, the DW mobility 𝜇𝐷𝑊 =


6

𝑣𝐷𝑊

𝐽𝑥 reaches values in excess of 3 × 10−10 m3 A-1 s-1 for 𝐽𝑥 = 5 × 107 A cm-2, which is comparable to 

that observed in compensated metallic ferrimagnets (11, 38). In contrast, most metallic ferromagnets 

feature 𝜇𝐷𝑊 = 0 in this current range (9, 10, 14, 15).

The linear increase of 𝑣𝐷𝑊 with 𝐽𝑥 for expanding and contracting walls (Fig. 4, A and B) further 

reveals a very low onset of the DW flow regime (≲ 5 × 106 A cm-2) compared to conventional 

ferromagnetic layers (9, 10, 14, 15). This behavior is attributed to the reduced depinning field of TmIG, 

~1-2 Oe (see Fig. S7), which is one to two orders of magnitude smaller than in metallic and 

semiconducting ferromagnets with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (39). Upon increasing the 

current, 𝑣𝐷𝑊 reaches a plateau between ~0.5 x 108 A cm-2 and ~1.0 x 108 A cm-2, followed by a further 

upturn. The plateau indicates the saturation of the DW velocity at 𝑣𝐷𝑊

𝑠𝑎𝑡 ≈ 𝛾∆𝐷𝑊

𝜋

2(𝐻𝑥 + 𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼), which

occurs at a current density 𝐽𝑥 ≫

2𝑒𝛼𝜇0𝑀𝑠𝑡

ℏ𝜃𝑆𝐻
(𝐻𝑥 + 𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼), where  is the gyromagnetic ratio, ℏ the

reduced Planck constant, 𝜇0 the vacuum permeability, 𝜃𝑆𝐻 the effective spin Hall angle of Pt, and 𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼

the effective DMI field (12, 16). Taking 𝛾 ~ 1.43 × 107 Oe-1 s-1 (40) and ∆𝐷𝑊 ~ 20 nm (Fig. 2), and by 

approximating 𝐻𝑥 + 𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼 ≈ 𝐻𝑥 = 300 Oe, we find that 𝑣𝐷𝑊

𝑠𝑎𝑡 ~ 135 m s-1, which agrees well with the

experimental data (Fig. 4, A and B). The further increase of 𝑣𝐷𝑊 beyond saturation, which is typical 

also of metallic ferromagnets (10, 15), is attributed to the influence of Joule heating and the Oersted 

field (see the Supplementary Materials Section S2 and Figs. S4 and S8).

In agreement with the presence of DMI inferred from the DW magnetization profile, we 

observe a slightly larger 𝑣𝐷𝑊 when the DW moves against the direction of the current (red symbols in 

Fig. 4). The same behavior is also confirmed for down-up DWs (Fig. S9). This asymmetry, which is 

characteristic of chiral Néel DWs (14, 15), is consistent with the left-handed Néel chirality derived from 

scanning NV magnetometry and the sign of the torques in TmIG/Pt (see Fig. S10 for more details). By 

fitting the 𝑣𝐷𝑊(𝐻𝑥) data to a linear function and extrapolating it to 𝑣𝐷𝑊 = 0 (15), we estimate

|𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼|~12 ± 3 Oe (Fig. 4, C and D). The DMI constant can then be calculated as 𝐷 = 𝜇0𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼𝑀𝑆∆𝐷𝑊

(9, 14), where 𝑀𝑆 ~ (6.0 ± 1.5) x 104 A m-1 and ∆𝐷𝑊 ~ 20 nm, yielding 𝐷 ~ − 2 ± 2 J m-2. This value

is two to three orders of magnitude smaller than the DMI reported for ultrathin metallic 

ferromagnets/Pt (14, 15, 18) and one to two orders of magnitude smaller than that of ferrimagnetic 

metal/Pt bilayers (11). As the DW mobility in the flow regime is proportional to Δ𝐷𝑊/𝛼𝑀𝑠, the large

mobility and high DW velocities in TmIG/Pt appear as the direct consequence of the small 𝑀𝑠 and low-

damping  typical of garnet layers (31, 41). By tuning the interfacial DMI, we anticipate that even larger 

𝑣𝐷𝑊 may be reached at a relatively low current density.

Our results demonstrate fast current-driven DW motion in a magnetic insulator and provide 

first insight into the internal DW structure of thin garnet layers. The chiral Néel structure of the DWs 


7

in TmIG reveals that oxide interfaces support a finite DMI even in the absence of heavy metal layers,

which makes it possible, in principle, to stabilize nontrivial topological configurations in insulating 

magnetic thin films, such as spin spirals and skyrmions. The low current threshold for DW flow and the 

large DW mobility, combined with the possibility of defining DW racetracks embedded in a continuous 

magnetic medium, make TmIG extremely attractive for spintronic applications. Local control of the 

magnetization is unique to magnetic insulators, which opens the possibility of printing arbitrary circuit 

paths enabling, for instance, the implementation and in situ reconfiguration of synthetic magnetic 

structures with tailored magnonic bands (21, 42) and nanomagnonic waveguides (43, 44).


8

Methods:

Films growth and devices fabrication. The TmIG thin films were grown by pulsed laser deposition on 

(111)-oriented Gd3Sc2Ga3O12 substrates (lattice constant a = 12.56 Å) to achieve high tensile strain 

(~2%), which promotes perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (45). The substrate temperature was 650 

°C, the oxygen pressure was 0.2 mbar, while the laser fluence and repetition rate were set to 1.35 J 

cm-2 and 8 Hz, respectively. After deposition, the samples were cooled in 200 mbar oxygen at a rate of 

-10 K/min. The bare TmIG films showed a root-mean-square roughness of about 0.15 nm over a ~5 x 5 

µm2 area. After growth, the samples were directly transferred to the sputter chamber without breaking 

vacuum, where the Pt layer was deposited at room temperature for three minutes at a power of 10 W 

in 0.05 mbar Ar. The thickness of the layers were calibrated by x-ray reflectometry. For the sample 

presented in the main text, the thicknesses of TmIG and Pt where 8.3 and 5.0 nm, respectively. The Pt 

layer was patterned into Hall bars (consisting of three Hall crosses separated by 𝐿 = 50 µm with a 

total channel length of 140 µm and width 𝑊 = 10 µm) by photolithography and subsequent Argon 

plasma etching.

Electric transport measurements. The longitudinal and transverse Hall resistances 𝑅𝑥𝑥 = 𝑉𝑥/𝐼𝑥 and

𝑅𝑥𝑦 = 𝑉𝑦/𝐼𝑥, respectively, were measured by applying an alternating current (AC) of amplitude 𝐼𝑥 =

0.3 mA and frequency 𝑓 = 11 Hz and by recording the first harmonic longitudinal (𝑉𝑥) and transverse

(𝑉𝑦)voltages, as shown schematically in Fig. 1a.

MOKE measurements. We used a home-built wide-field polar MOKE microscope with Koehler 

illumination to measure the out-of-plane component of TmIG. Magnetic contrast was enhanced by 

taking differential MOKE images, i.e., each image was subtracted by a reference image captured in a 

fully magnetized state. The setup was equipped with two sets of orthogonal coils for the generation of 

out-of-plane and in-plane magnetic fields. For the switching and DW velocity studies, current pulses 

were injected using an AGILENT 8114A (100V/2A) pulse generator with a 50  output impedance. The 

impedance matching with the Pt current line was achieved by connecting a 50  resistance in parallel

to the current line.

The relative change in the magnetization shown in Fig. 3A was evaluated by integrating the differential 

MOKE signal along the Pt current line (corresponding to the bright area in Fig. 1D) after the application 

of a single current pulse starting from a fully magnetized state.

For the domain expansion measurements (Fig. 4, A and C), an initial domain was nucleated by a single 

current pulse at a defect site near the center of the Hall bar. For the domain contraction experiments 

(Fig. 4, B and D), the initial domain was generated by switching the area underneath the Pt current line 


9

with a single current pulse of 𝑡𝑝 = 150 ns, |𝐽𝑥| = 0.94 x 108 A cm-2 and |𝐻𝑥| = 125 Oe, leading to a 

domain as the one shown in Fig. 1D. 

In order to compare the DW velocities obtained for domain expansion and domain contraction, we 

studied the same DW moving back and forth over the same area. The case presented in Fig. 4

corresponds to an up-down DW moving between the center and the right end of the Hall bar. The DW 

velocity 𝑣DW was evaluated by measuring the total DW displacement ∆𝑥 (as identified by direct MOKE 

imaging) obtained after the application of a series of 𝑁p current pulses of width 𝑡p, yielding 𝑣DW =

∆𝑥 / (𝑁p 𝑡p). The pulses were applied at a frequency of 1 Hz in order to minimize the heat load during 

the experiment. 𝑣DW was found to be nearly independent of 𝑡p –only showing a slight increase of 10% 

or less when doubling the pulse length, which we attribute to Joule heating– indicating that the DW 

motion coincides with the pulse duration (see Fig. S6 for more details). 

Scanning NV magnetometry. Spatially resolved scans of the magnetic stray field produced by a DW in

TmIG (see Fig. 2A) were acquired on a home-built nanoscale scanning diamond magnetometer (NSDM)

microscope. Experiments were carried out in ambient environment and at zero magnetic bias field.

The NSDM employed a monolithic diamond probe tip with a single NV center implanted at the apex

(QZabre LLC, www.qzabre.com). The NV center spin resonance was monitored by optically-detected

magnetic resonance (ODMR) spectroscopy (36)(46) using a nearby microwave antenna (~2.9 GHz) for

spin excitation and fluorescence microscopy (532 nm excitation, 630-800 nm detection) for spin state

readout. To convert the spin resonance frequencies to units of magnetic field, we fitted the ODMR

spectrum to a double Lorentzian and extracted the frequency difference Δf between the resonance

peaks. The detected field 𝐵𝑁𝑉 is then given by |𝐵𝑁𝑉| =

π Δ𝑓

𝛾 , where
γ = 2π ⋅ 28.0 GHz/T is the

electron gyromagnetic ratio. To re-establish the relative sign of 𝐵𝑁𝑉, we inverted (𝐵𝑁𝑉 → −𝐵𝑁𝑉) the

image on one side of the DW (Fig. 2B). Note that scanning NV magnetometry provides a vector

projection of the magnetic field,

𝐵𝑁𝑉 = 𝐵

→

∙ 𝑒

→

NV = sin𝜃𝑁𝑉 cos 𝜙𝑁𝑉 𝐵𝑥 + sin𝜃𝑁𝑉sin𝜙𝑁𝑉By + cos 𝜃𝑁𝑉𝐵𝑧,
(2)

because the NV center is sensitive only to fields that are parallel to its symmetry axis 𝑒

→

NV. Here, 𝐵

→

is

the vector field at the position of the NV center, and 𝜃𝑁𝑉 and 𝜙𝑁𝑉 are the polar and azimuth angles of

𝑒
→

NV in the laboratory frame (see Fig. S11). The direction 𝑒

→

NV is determined by the crystallographic

orientation of the diamond tip and the probe arrangement in the setup (see Fig. 2A). 𝜃𝑁𝑉 and 𝜙𝑁𝑉

were calibrated by a series of ODMR measurements and confirmed by line scans. For the experiments

presented in Fig. 2, 𝜃𝑁𝑉 = (55 ± 2)° and 𝜙𝑁𝑉 = (83 ± 3)°.


10

We investigated the magnetization, spin structure and width of the DW by analyzing the local field

image 𝐵𝑁𝑉(𝑋, 𝑌) shown in Fig. 2B. In a first step, we fitted line cuts across the TmIG to TmIG/Pt step

edge to extract the NV center stand-off distance, 𝑑 = (104 ± 5) nm (see the Supplementary Materials

Section S3). To characterize the chirality and width of the DW, we took line cuts of 𝐵𝑁𝑉 perpendicular

to the DW as shown in Fig. 2B, and compared them to the analytical model given through Eq. (1). The

associated magnetic stray field was obtained by forward propagation of Eq. (1) in 𝑘-space according

to (47)(48),

𝐵̂𝑋 = 𝑔̂(−𝑘𝑀̂𝑋 + 𝑖𝑘𝑋𝑀̂𝑍) ,

𝐵̂𝑌 = 𝑔̂(−𝑘𝑀̂𝑌 + 𝑖𝑘𝑦𝑀̂𝑍) ,

𝐵̂𝑍 = 𝑔̂(𝑖𝑘𝑋𝑀̂𝑋 + 𝑖𝑘𝑌𝑀̂𝑌 + 𝑘𝑀̂𝑍) ,
(3)

where hat symbols indicate Fourier transforms, 𝑘𝑋, 𝑘𝑌, and 𝑘 = (𝑘𝑋

2 + 𝑘𝑌

2)1/2 are the in-plane 𝑘-space

vectors, 𝑔̂ =

𝜇0𝑡

2 (

1−𝑒−𝑘𝑡

𝑘𝑡
) 𝑒−𝑘𝑑 is the Fourier transform of the Green’s function (48), and 𝑡 = 8.3 nm is

the film thickness. When taking line cuts along 𝑋 across a domain wall extending along 𝑌, the 𝑌 and

𝑀̂𝑌 terms become zero and Eq. (3) simplifies to 𝐵̂𝑋 = 𝑔̂(−𝑘𝑀̂𝑋 + 𝑖𝑘𝑋𝑀̂𝑍), 𝐵̂𝑌 = 0 and 𝐵̂𝑍 =

𝑔̂(𝑖𝑘𝑋𝑀̂𝑋 + 𝑘𝑀̂𝑍).

To extract values for 𝑀𝑠, 𝜓 and ∆𝐷𝑊 we fitted the experimentally measured 𝐵𝑁𝑉 to the analytical

prediction by Eqs. (1-3), with the domain wall position 𝑥 = 𝑥0 as an additional fit parameter. By

repeating the fitting procedure for a series of line scans, we obtained distributions for all parameters

together with their means and standard deviations. A detailed description of the fitting procedure and

error analysis is given in the Supplementary Materials Section S3.

By assuming that the magnetization is predominantly out-of-plane, we further reconstructed a

magnetization map 𝑀𝑧 from the magnetic field map 𝐵𝑁𝑉 by using

𝑀̂𝑍 =

−𝐵̂𝑁𝑉 𝑊

𝑔(𝑖𝑘𝑋𝑒𝑋+𝑖𝑘𝑌𝑒𝑌−𝑘𝑒𝑍),
(4)

where 𝑊 is a low-pass filter (cutoff 𝜆 = 𝑑) that suppressed high spatial frequencies in the image (48).

The resultant magnetization map is plotted in Fig. 2C. Note that while the magnetic domains of TmIG

and TmIG/Pt are well reproduced, the reconstruction slightly overestimates 𝑀𝑧 near the DW due to

the left Néel character of the DW.


11

Supplementary Materials

Supplementary material for this article is available at .........


Section S1. Electrical characterization of TmIG/Pt by spin Hall magnetoresistance: 

determination of the interface quality and the magnetic anisotropy


Section S2. Influence of the presence of an applied out-of-plane field, current-induced Oersted 

fields and Joule heating on the magnetization switching process


Section S3. Scanning NV magnetometry


Fig. S1. Structural and magnetic characterization of the thulium iron garnet thin films


Fig. S2. Electrical characterization of the spin Hall magnetoresistance and magnetic anisotropy 

of TmIG/Pt


Fig. S3. Forward switching in the presence of an out-of-plane field 𝐻𝑧


Fig. S4. Switching dynamics at large current densities: influence of the Oersted fields


Fig. S5. Simultaneous Hall and MOKE measurements of TmIG/Pt devices


Fig. S6. Dependence of 𝑣𝐷𝑊 on the pulse length


Fig. S7. Evaluation of the domain wall depinning field


Fig. S8. Multiple domain nucleation at large current densities


Fig. S9. Comparison of 𝑣𝐷𝑊 between an up-down and a down-up domain wall


Fig. S10. Schematics of the domain wall structure and current-induced domain wall motion in 

the presence of Hx and DMI


Fig. S11. Definition of the polar angles NV and NV


Fig. S12. In situ calibration of the NV stand-off distance on TmIG/Pt


References (50–55)

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by ETH Zurich, the Swiss Competence Centre for Materials Science and 

Technology (CCMX), by the Swiss National Science Foundation under Grants No. 200020-172775 and 

by the European Research Council through the Advanced Grant No. 694955—INSEETO. The authors 

thank Rudolf Schäfer and Eva Grimaldi for discussions, and Kevin Chang and Jan Rhensius for help in 

construction of the scanning NV magnetometer as well as for providing diamond tips. M.F. thanks ETH 

Zurich and CEMS at RIKEN for support of his research sabbatical. C.L.D. acknowledges funding by the 

Swiss National Science Foundation under Grant No. 200020-175600 and the NCCR QSIT, and by the 

European Commission through Grant No. 820394 “ASTERIQS”.


12

Author contributions

S.V., J.S., M.T., and P.G. conceived the study. J.S., E.G., and M.T. grew and characterized the magnetic 

and structural properties of TmIG and TmIG/Pt. S.V. fabricated the TmIG/Pt devices and performed 

and analyzed the electrical measurements. S.V., J.S., and M.M. performed the MOKE measurements;

S.V. and J.S. analyzed the data. M.M., C.G., and C.N. built the wide-field MOKE setup. M.S.W., P.W., 

and C.L.D. built the scanning NV magnetometer and performed and analyzed the scanning NV 

measurements. M.T., M.F., C.L.D., and P.G. supervised the work. S.V. and P.G. wrote the manuscript. 

All authors contributed to the scientific discussion and manuscript revision.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability

All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the 

Supplementary Materials. Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.

References:

1. 
A. Brataas, A. D. Kent, H. Ohno, Current-induced torques in magnetic materials. Nat. Mater.

11, 372–381 (2012).

2. 
K. Garello, I. M. Miron, C. O. Avci, F. Freimuth, Y. Mokrousov, S. Blügel, S. Auffret, O. Boulle, G. 

Gaudin, and P. Gambardella, Symmetry and magnitude of spin-orbit torques in ferromagnetic 

heterostructures. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 587–593 (2013).

3. 
A. Manchon, I. M. Miron, T. Jungwirth, J. Sinova, J. Zelezny, A. Thiaville, K. Garello, and P. 

Gambardella, Current-induced spin-orbit torques in ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic 

systems. arXiv:1801.0963 (2018).

4. 
I. M. Miron, K. Garello, G. Gaudin, P.-J. Zermatten, M. V. Costache, S. Auffret, S. Bandiera, B. 

Rodmacq, A. Schuhl, and P. Gambardella, Perpendicular switching of a single ferromagnetic 

layer induced by in-plane current injection. Nature 476, 189–193 (2011).

5. 
L. Liu, C.-F. Pai, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, Spin-torque switching with 


13

the giant spin Hall effect of tantalum. Science 336, 555–558 (2012).

6. 
K. Garello, C. O. Avci, I. M. Miron, M. Baumgartner, A. Ghosh, S. Auffret, O. Boulle, G. Gaudin, 

and P. Gambardella, Ultrafast magnetization switching by spin-orbit torques. Appl. Phys. Lett.

105, 212402 (2014).

7. 
S. Fukami, T. Anekawa, C. Zhang, H. Ohno, A spin-orbit torque switching scheme with collinear 

magnetic easy axis and current configuration. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 621–625 (2016).

8. 
M. Baumgartner, K. Garello, J. Mendil, C. O. Avci, E. Grimaldi, C. Murer, J. Feng, M. Gabureac, 

C. Stamm, Y. Acremann, S. Finizio, S. Wintz, J. Raabe, and P. Gambardella, Spatially and time-

resolved magnetization dynamics driven by spin–orbit torques. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 980–

986 (2017).

9. 
I. M. Miron, T. Moore, H. Szambolics, L. D. Buda-Prejbeanu, S. Auffret, B. Rodmacq, S. Pizzini, 

J. Vogel, M. Bonfim, A. Schuhl, and G. Gaudin, Fast current-induced domain-wall motion 

controlled by the Rashba effect. Nat. Mater. 10, 419–423 (2011).

10. 
S.-H. Yang, K.-S. Ryu, S. Parkin, Domain-wall velocities of up to 750 m s-1 driven by exchange-

coupling torque in synthetic antiferromagnets. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 221–226 (2015).

11. 
M. Mann, F. Büttner, K. Ueda, B. Pfau, C. M. Günther, P. Hessing, A. Churikova, C. Klose, M. 

Schneider, D. Engel, C. Marcus, D. Bono, K. Bagschik, S. Eisebitt, and G. S. D. Beach, Fast 

current-driven domain walls and small skyrmions in a compensated ferrimagnet. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 13, 1154–1160 (2018).

12. 
A. Thiaville, S. Rohart, É. Jué, V. Cros, A. Fert, Dynamics of Dzyaloshinskii domain walls in 

ultrathin magnetic films. Europhys. Lett. 100, 57002 (2012).

13. 
A. V. Khvalkovskiy, V. Cros, D. Apalkov, V. Nikitin, M. Krounbi, K. A. Zvezdin, A. Anane, J. 

Grollier, and A. Fert, Matching domain-wall configuration and spin-orbit torques for efficient 

domain-wall motion. Phys. Rev. B. 87, 020402 (2013).

14. 
S. Emori, U. Bauer, S.-M. Ahn, E. Martinez, G. S. D. Beach, Current-driven dynamics of chiral 

ferromagnetic domain walls. Nat. Mater. 12, 611–616 (2013).

15. 
K.-S. Ryu, L. Thomas, S.-H. Yang, S. Parkin, Chiral spin torque at magnetic domain walls. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 8, 527–533 (2013).

16. 
E. Martinez, S. Emori, N. Perez, L. Torres, G. S. D. Beach, Current-driven dynamics of 

Dzyaloshinskii domain walls in the presence of in-plane fields: Full micromagnetic and one-

dimensional analysis. J. Appl. Phys. 115, 213909 (2014).


14

17. 
J.-P. Tetienne, T. Hingant, L. J. Martínez, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville, L. H. Diez, K. Garcia, J.-P. Adam, 

J.-V. Kim, J.-F. Roch, I. M. Miron, G. Gaudin, L. Vila, B. Ocker, D. Ravelosona, and V. Jacques,

The nature of domain walls in ultrathin ferromagnets revealed by scanning

nanomagnetometry. Nat. Commun. 6, 6733 (2015).

18. 
T. Ha Pham, J. Vogel, J. Sampaio, M. Vaňatka, J. C. Rojas-Sánchez, M. Bonfim, D. S. Chaves, F. 

Choueikani, P. Ohresser, E. Otero, A. Thiaville, and S. Pizzini, Very large domain wall velocities 

in Pt/Co/GdOx and Pt/Co/Gd trilayers with Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction. Europhys. Lett.

113, 67001 (2016).

19. 
J. Torrejon, E. Martinez, M. Hayashi, Tunable inertia of chiral magnetic domain walls. Nat. 

Commun. 7, 13533 (2016).

20. 
C. K. Safeer, E. Jué, A. Lopez, L. Buda-Prejbeanu, S. Auffret, S. Pizzini, O. Boulle, I. M. Miron, 

and G. Gaudin, Spin-orbit torque magnetization switching controlled by geometry. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 11, 143–146 (2016).

21. 
A. V Chumak, V. I. Vasyuchka, A. A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, Magnon Spintronics. Nat. Phys. 11, 

453–461 (2015).

22. 
Y. Kajiwara, K. Harii, S. Takahashi, J. Ohe, K. Uchida, M. Mizuguchi, H. Umezawa, H. Kawai, K. 

Ando, K. Takanashi, S. Maekawa, and E. Saitoh, Transmission of electrical signals by spin-wave 

interconversion in a magnetic insulator. Nature 464, 262–266 (2010).

23. 
L. J. Cornelissen, J. Liu, R. A. Duine, J. Ben Youssef, B. J. van Wees, Long-distance transport of 

magnon spin information in a magnetic insulator at room temperature. Nat. Phys. 11, 1022–

1026 (2015).

24. 
S. T. B. Goennenwein, R. Schlitz, M. Pernpeintner, K. Ganzhorn, M. Althammer, R. Gross, and 

H. Huebl, Non-local magnetoresistance in YIG/Pt nanostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 172405 

(2015).

25. 
M. Evelt, L. Soumah, A. B. Rinkevich, S. O. Demokritov, A. Anane, V. Cros, J. Ben Youssef, G. De 

Loubens, O. Klein, P. Bortolotti, and V. E. Demidov, Emission of Coherent Propagating 

Magnons by Insulator-Based Spin-Orbit-Torque Oscillators. Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 041002 

(2018).

26. 
M. Collet, X. De Milly, O. D’Allivy Kelly, V. V. Naletov, R. Bernard, P. Bortolotti, J. Ben Youssef, 

V. E. Demidov, S. O. Demokritov, J. L. Prieto, M. Muñoz, V. Cros, A. Anane, G. De Loubens, and 

O. Klein, Generation of coherent spin-wave modes in yttrium iron garnet microdiscs by spin-

orbit torque. Nat. Commun. 7, 10377 (2016).


15

27. 
C. O. Avci, A. Quindeau, C. Pai, M. Mann, L. Caretta, A. S. Tang, M. C. Onbasli, C. A. Ross, and 

G. S. D. Beach, Current-induced switching in a magnetic insulator. Nat. Mater. 16, 309–314 

(2017).

28. 
C. O. Avci, E. Rosenberg, M. Baumgartner, L. Beran, A. Quindeau, P. Gambardella, C. A. Ross, 

and G. S. D. Beach, Fast switching and signature of efficient domain wall motion driven by 

spin-orbit torques in a perpendicular anisotropy magnetic insulator/Pt bilayer. Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 111, 072406 (2017).

29. 
Q. Shao, C. Tang, G. Yu, A. Navabi, H. Wu, C. He, J. Li, P. Upadhyaya, P. Zhang, S. A. Razavi, Q. 

L. He, Y. Liu, P. Yang, S. K. Kim, C. Zheng, Y. Liu, L. Pan, R. K. Lake, X. Han, Y. Tserkovnyak, J. Shi, 

and K. L. Wang, Role of dimensional crossover on spin-orbit torque efficiency in magnetic 

insulator thin films. Nat. Commun. 9, 3612 (2018).

30. 
P. Li, T. Liu, H. Chang, A. Kalitsov, W. Zhang, G. Csaba, W. Li, D. Richardson, A. DeMann, G. 

Rimal, H. Dey, J. S. Jiang, W. Porod, S. B. Field, J. Tang, M. C. Marconi, A. Hoffmann, O. 

Mryasov, and M. Wu, Spin-orbit torque-assisted switching in magnetic insulator thin films 

with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Nat. Commun. 7, 12688 (2016).

31. 
A. Paoletti, Physics of Magnetic Garnets (North-Holland Company, Amsterdam, 1978).

32. 
A. P. Malozemoff, J. C. Slonczewski, Magnetic Domain Walls in Bubble Materials (Academic 

Press, New York, 1979).

33. 
A. Hubert, R. Schäfer, Magnetic Domains: The Analysis of Magnetic Microstructures (Springer, 

Berlin, 1998).

34. 
V. A. Bokov, V. V. Volkov, N. L. Petrichenko, M. Maryshko, Relation between relaxation losses 

in domain-wall motion and ferromagnetic resonance in garnet films. Phys. Solid State. 40, 

1377–1382 (1998).

35. 
C. L. Degen, Scanning magnetic field microscope with a diamond single-spin sensor. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 92, 243111 (2008).

36. 
R. Schirhagl, K. Chang, M. Loretz, C. L. Degen, Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers in Diamond: 

Nanoscale Sensors for Physics and Biology. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 65, 83–105 (2014).

37. 
L. F. Bates, P. F. Davis, Direct Measurement of Domain Wall Energy. Proc. Phys. Soc. 74, 170–

176 (1959).

38. 
S. A. Siddiqui, J. Han, J. T. Finley, C. A. Ross, L. Liu, Current-Induced Domain Wall Motion in a 

Compensated Ferrimagnet. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 057701 (2018).


16

39. 
V. Jeudy, R. Díaz Pardo, W. Savero Torres, S. Bustingorry, A. B. Kolton, Pinning of domain walls 

in thin ferromagnetic films. Phys. Rev. B. 98, 054406 (2018).

40. 
V. V. Randoshkin, V. I. Kozlov, Y. A. Koksharov, A. M. Saletskiĭ, N. N. Sysoev, and N. N. 

Usmanov, Ferromagnetic resonance in (Bi,Tm)3(Fe,Ga)5O12(210) epitaxial films. Tech. Phys. 52, 

495–497 (2007).

41. 
C. N. Wu, C. C. Tseng, Y. T. Fanchiang, C. K. Cheng, K. Y. Lin, S. L. Yeh, S. R. Yang, C. T. Wu, T. 

Liu, M. Wu, M. Hong, and J. Kwo, High-quality thulium iron garnet films with tunable 

perpendicular magnetic anisotropy by off-axis sputtering – correlation between magnetic 

properties and film strain. Sci. Rep. 8, 11087 (2018).

42. 
H. Yu, O. d’ A. Kelly, V. Cros, R. Bernard, P. Bortolotti, A. Anane, F. Brandl, F. Heimbach, and D. 

Grundler, Approaching soft X-ray wavelengths in nanomagnet-based microwave technology. 

Nat. Commun. 7, 11255 (2016).

43. 
K. Wagner, A. Kákay, K. Schultheiss, A. Henschke, T. Sebastian, and H. Schultheiss, Magnetic 

domain walls as reconfigurable spin-wave nanochannels. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 432–436 

(2016).

44. 
A. Haldar, D. Kumar, A. O. Adeyeye, A reconfigurable waveguide for energy-efficient 

transmission and local manipulation of information in a nanomagnetic device. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 11, 437–443 (2016).

45. 
M. Kubota, K. Shibuya, Y. Tokunaga, F. Kagawa, A. Tsukazaki, Y. Tokura, and M. Kawasaki,

Systematic control of stress-induced anisotropy in pseudomorphic iron garnet thin films. J. 

Magn. Magn. Mater. 339, 63–70 (2013).

46. 
A. Gruber, A. Drabenstedt, C. Tietz, L. Fleury, J. Wrachtup, and C. von Borczyskowski, Scanning 

Confocal Optical Microscopy and Magnetic Resonance on Single Defect Centers. Science 276, 

2012–2014 (1997).

47. 
I. A. Beardsley, Reconstruction of the Magnetization in a Thin Film by a Combination of 

Lorentz Microscopy and External Field Measurements. IEEE Trans. Magn. 25, 671–677 (1989).

48. 
B. J. Roth, N. G. Sepulveda, J. P. Wikswo, Using a magnetometer to image a two-dimensional 

current distribution. J. Appl. Phys. 65, 361–372 (1989).

49. 
Y.-T. Chen, S. Takahashi, H. Nakayama, M. Althammer, S. T. B. Goennenwein, E. Saitoh, and G. 

E. W. Bauer, Theory of spin Hall magnetoresistance. Phys. Rev. B. 87, 144411 (2013).


17

Figures

Fig. 1. Device schematics and local switching of TmIG. (A) Optical image of a Pt Hall bar patterned on 

TmIG with superposed electric wiring, coordinate system, and magnetization vector m. (B) Hall 

resistance 𝑅𝑥𝑦 as a function of 𝐻𝑧. The anomalous Hall-like signal arises from the interaction of the 

spin current generated in the Pt layer with the out-of-plane magnetization component 𝑚𝑧 of TmIG (27,

49), leading to a high (low) 𝑅𝑥𝑦 for -m (+m). The data are shown after subtraction of a constant sample-

dependent offset. (C) Electrical measurement of current-induced switching of TmIG (𝑡𝑝 = 150 ns, 𝐻𝑥 = 

+ 20, black dots, and -20 Oe, red dots). Note that, starting from a film saturated in the –m state, higher 

current densities are required to induce forward switching relative to backward switching. The same 

behavior is observed for ±𝐻𝑥, thus ruling out a misalignment of the sample as a possible explanation 

for this effect. (D) Wide-field differential MOKE image of a TmIG/Pt device after injection of a current 

pulse (𝐽𝑥 = 0.94 x 108 A cm-2, 𝑡𝑝 = 150 ns, 𝐻𝑥 = 100 Oe). The film was initially saturated in the –m state 

by applying a magnetic field 𝐻𝑧 = -100 Oe. The bright contrast shows that only the TmIG region 

underneath the Pt current line has switched to +m.


18

Fig. 2. Domain wall structure and chirality in TmIG and TmIG/Pt measured by scanning NV

magnetometry. (A) Schematic of the NV probe and sample. The color code represents the out-of-plane 

component of the surface magnetization of the film, with red (blue) corresponding to areas of opposite 

magnetization. A DW crosses the TmIG/Pt and TmIG regions. The inset shows a NV center within the 

diamond lattice and the corresponding spin quantization axis. (B) Stray field BNV(X,Y) measured by 

scanning the diamond tip over the sample surface shown in (A). (C) Reconstructed out-of-plane

magnetic map 𝑀𝑧(𝑋, 𝑌) from the data shown in (B) (see Methods). The larger 𝑀𝑧 = (74.6 ± 1.7) kA 

m-1 of TmIG/Pt relative to 𝑀𝑧 = (44.1 ± 2.5) kA m-1 of TmIG is mainly attributed to the proximity-

induced polarization of the Pt layer (deduced from measurements performed on a reference TmIG 

layer, see the Supplementary Materials Section S3). (D and E) Line scans of BNV along the dashed lines 

indicated in (B) (square dots). The solid lines are fits of BNV profiles assuming pure Bloch (cyan), left-

handed Néel (violet) and right-handed Néel (green) DW structures.


19

Fig. 3. Current-induced DW dynamics in embedded TmIG racetracks. (A) Magnetization switching 

diagram showing the percent change of the magnetization underneath the Pt current line as a function 

of 𝐽𝑥 and 𝐻𝑥. For each switching event, the initial m was always set fully up or down by applying an 

out-of-plane field 𝐻𝑧 = +100 or -100 Oe, respectively (+m for ±𝐻𝑥 , ∓𝐽𝑥 and –m for ±𝐻𝑧 , ±𝐽𝑧 according 

to the symmetry of SOT switching). Forward switching is triggered by a single current pulse with 𝑡𝑝 = 

500 ns. (B) Sequence of differential MOKE images showing current-induced domain nucleation and 

expansion and (C) domain contraction for the different combinations of 𝐻𝑥 and 𝐽𝑥 that allow each 

scenario to take place. 𝑡𝑝 = 𝑁𝑡𝑝 is the accumulated pulse time after applying N current pulses of 

length 𝑡𝑝. The pulse length is 𝑡𝑝 = 350 and 50 ns and the current density |𝐽𝑥| = 0.65 x 108 and 0.75 x 

108 A cm-2 for (B) and (C), respectively. |𝐻𝑥| = 250 Oe in all cases. Bright and dark MOKE contrasts 

correspond to +m and –m states, respectively. Note that the TmIG film not covered by Pt remains fully 

down magnetized. (D) Switching diagram showing the minimum pulse length 𝑡𝑝 required to nucleate 

a domain starting from a fully saturated film (green triangles), to expand a domain (red circles), and to 

contract a domain (black squares) as a function of |𝐻𝑥|. The current density of the pulses is fixed to 

|𝐽𝑥| = 0.75 x 108 A cm-2. The results show that it is easier to move a DW than to nucleate a domain, 

and that the onset of DW motion is lower for contraction relative to expansion. 


20

Fig. 4. DW velocity upon expansion and contraction of domains in TmIG/Pt surrounded by uniformly 

magnetized TmIG. (A) 𝑣𝐷𝑊 of an up-down DW (corresponding to a +m domain in a –m medium) as a 

function of 𝐽𝑥 upon expansion and (B) contraction. The magnetic field is set to |𝐻𝑥| = 300 Oe. The inset 

in (A) shows an enlarged view of 𝑣𝐷𝑊 in the flow regime at low current density. (C) 𝑣𝐷𝑊 of an up-down 

DW as a function of 𝐻𝑥 upon expansion and (D) contraction. The current density is fixed at |𝐽𝑥| = 0.75 

x 108 A cm-2 in either case. DWs move faster when 𝐽𝑥 is opposite to 𝑣𝐷𝑊 (red symbols), indicating the 

presence of a weak DMI favoring left-handed Néel chiral DWs. Dashed lines in either (C) and (D) are 

linear fits to the experimental data assuming same slope of 𝑣𝐷𝑊(𝐽𝑥) for both polarities of 𝐽𝑥 and 

opposite magnetic field at which 𝑣𝐷𝑊 crosses zero, which allows evaluating the effective DMI field

|𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼| ~ 12 ± 3 Oe (15).


21

Supplementary Materials for

High-speed domain wall racetracks in a magnetic insulator

Saül Vélez1,§,*, Jakob Schaab1,§, Martin S. Wörnle1,2, Marvin Müller1, Elzbieta Gradauskaite1, 

Pol Welter2, Cameron Gutgsell1, Corneliu Nistor1, Christian L. Degen2,*, Morgan Trassin1,*, 

Manfred Fiebig1 and Pietro Gambardella1,*

1 Department of Materials, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

2Department of Physics, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

§ These authors contributed equally

*e-mail: saul.velez@mat.ethz.ch (S.V.); degenc@ethz.ch (C.L.D.); morgan.trassin@mat.ethz.ch (M.T.); 

pietro.gambardella@mat.ethz.ch (P.G.)

This pdf file includes:


Section S1. Electrical characterization of TmIG/Pt by spin Hall magnetoresistance: 

determination of the interface quality and the magnetic anisotropy


Section S2. Influence of the presence of an applied out-of-plane field, current-induced Oersted 

fields and Joule heating on the magnetization switching process


Section S3. Scanning NV magnetometry


Fig. S1. Structural and magnetic characterization of the thulium iron garnet thin films


Fig. S2. Electrical characterization of the spin Hall magnetoresistance and magnetic anisotropy 

of TmIG/Pt


Fig. S3. Forward switching in the presence of an out-of-plane field 𝐻𝑧


Fig. S4. Switching dynamics at large current densities: influence of the Oersted fields


Fig. S5. Simultaneous Hall and MOKE measurements of TmIG/Pt devices


Fig. S6. Dependence of 𝑣𝐷𝑊 on the pulse length


Fig. S7. Evaluation of the domain wall depinning field


Fig. S8. Multiple domain nucleation at large current densities


Fig. S9. Comparison of 𝑣𝐷𝑊 between an up-down and a down-up domain wall


Fig. S10. Schematics of the domain wall structure and current-induced domain wall motion in 

the presence of Hx and DMI


Fig. S11. Definition of the polar angles NV and NV


Fig. S12. In situ calibration of the NV stand-off distance on TmIG/Pt


References (50–55)


22

Fig. S1. Structural and magnetic characterization of the thulium iron garnet thin films. (A) Symmetric 

X-ray diffraction scan around the (444) peak of a SGGG/TmIG(14 nm) sample. The TmIG (444) peak

shifts towards higher angles because of a reduction of the out-of-plane lattice constant of the film 

provided by the tensile strain (gray dashed line indicates the (444) peak position of bulk TmIG, 

extracted from Ref. (50). (B) Reciprocal space maps of the same sample around the (486) and (664) 

substrate peaks. The coinciding in-plane lattice constants of film and substrate along the two 

perpendicular directions [1-10, 11-2] confirm full epitaxy. The same strain state is expected for the 

thinner TmIG(8.3 nm)/Pt sample discussed in the main text as strain is maintained for thicknesses up 

to ~50 nm (45). (C) Out-of-plane VSM measurement of the TmIG(8.3 nm)/Pt sample. A clear square-

like hysteresis loop with a coercivity of about 15 Oe is observed, confirming that the film exhibits 

perpendicular mangetic anisotropy. The determined saturation magnetization 𝑀𝑠 (~75-80 emu cm-3) 

is slightly reduced compared to bulk TmIG (110 emu cm-3, (31)), possibly attributed to a slight oxygen 

deficiency caused by the low oxygen pressure during growth (45).


23

Section S1. Electrical characterization of TmIG/Pt by spin Hall magnetoresistance: 

determination of the interface quality and the magnetic anisotropy

Fig. S2. Electrical characterization of the spin Hall magnetoresistance and magnetic anisotropy of 

TmIG/Pt. (A) Optical image of a patterned Pt Hall bar on the TmIG(8.3 nm) film presented in the 

manuscript with superposed electric wiring, coordinate system and the definition of the polar angles 

, , and the magnetization vector m (B) Magnetoresistance measurements performed for m rotating 

in the xy- (green,  = 90° and variable ), yz- (blue, fixed  = 90° and variable ), and xz-plane (red,  = 

0° and variable ). The direction of m is controlled by rotating the sample in a magnetic field of 

amplitude 5 kOe. The angular dependences display the symmetry expected for spin Hall 

magnetoresistance (49). (C) Hall resistance 𝑅𝑥𝑦 measurements performed by sweeping the magnetic 

field in the plane of the sample ( = 90°) at   ° (black and red dots, trace and retrace) and   ° 

(green and blue dots, trace and retrace). The variation of 𝑅𝑥𝑦with the applied magnetic field H is due 

to the canting of m –from the out-of-plane easy axis– towards H. The saturation of 𝑅𝑥𝑦 at large 

magnetic fields indicates that m is saturated in the plane of the film, thus giving an estimation for the 

magnetic anisotropy field of the TmIG film of about Hk ~ 3 kOe.

According to the theory of the spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR), the first harmonic response of the 

magnetoresistance in TmIG/Pt can be described as (27, 49):

𝑅𝑥𝑥 =

𝑉𝑥
𝐼𝑥 = 𝑅0 + Δ𝑅𝑆𝑀𝑅(1 − sin2 𝜃 sin2 𝜑),
(S1)

𝑅𝑥𝑦 =

𝑉𝑦
𝐼𝑥 =

𝑊

2𝐿

Δ𝑅𝑆𝑀𝑅

2
sin2 𝜃 sin 2𝜑 + 𝑅𝐻

𝐴𝐻𝐸,𝑆𝑀𝑅 cos 𝜃 + 𝑅𝐻

𝑂𝐻𝐸𝐻𝑧,
(S2)

where 𝜃 and 𝜑 denote the polar and azimuthal angle of the normalized magnetization vector 𝐦 =

𝑀/𝑀𝑠(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) collinear to the applied field 𝑯 (see Fig. S2A), W/2L = 0.1 is the width/length ratio of 

the measuring configuration of the Hall bar (i.e., 10/100, see Fig. S2A), 𝑅0 is the longitudinal base 

resistance, Δ𝑅𝑆𝑀𝑅 the SMR amplitude, 𝑅𝐻

𝐴𝐻𝐸,𝑆𝑀𝑅 the anomalous Hall-like SMR amplitude, and 𝑅𝐻

𝑂𝐻𝐸𝐻𝑧

the ordinary Hall resistance. Fig. 1B shows the normalized (𝑅𝑥𝑥 − 𝑅0)/𝑅0 angular dependent 

magnetoresistance measurements performed in our sample with m rotating along the three main 

plains of the sample. 𝑅0 is determined to be ~640 . The change in resistance follows the expected 

behavior for SMR (49): i) a sin2 𝜃 dependence for m rotating in the plane of the film (green,  = 90°), 

ii) a distorted sin2 𝜃 dependence for m rotating in the yz-plane (blue,  = 90°) due to the strong 


24

demagnetizing field, and iii) no significant change when m rotates in the xz-plane (red,  = 90°). The 

SMR amplitude Δ𝑅𝑆𝑀𝑅/𝑅0 ≈ 4.1 x 10-4 agrees with previously reported values in TmIG/Pt structures 

(27–29). From the Hall measurements shown in Fig. S2C and Fig. 1B we estimate the 𝑅𝐻

𝐴𝐻𝐸,𝑆𝑀𝑅

amplitude to be ~-0.47 mΩ and the ratio 

𝑅𝐻

𝐴𝐻𝐸,𝑆𝑀𝑅

𝑅0

2𝐿

𝑊 ~ − 0.734 × 10−5, which is also consistent with 

earlier reports in TmIG/Pt (27–29, 51). From these measurements, we can estimate the real and 

imaginary parts of the spin-mixing conductance 𝐺↑↓ = 𝐺𝑟 + 𝑖𝐺𝑖 using the following expressions (49):

Δ𝑅𝑆𝑀𝑅

𝑅0
= 𝜃𝑆𝐻

2
𝜆𝑁
𝑑𝑁 Re [

2𝜆𝑁 𝐺↑↓ tanh2 𝑑𝑁

2𝜆𝑁

𝜎𝑁+2𝜆𝑁 𝐺↑↓ coth𝑑𝑁

𝜆𝑁

],
(S3)

𝑅𝐻

𝐴𝐻𝐸,𝑆𝑀𝑅

𝑅0

2𝐿

𝑊 = −𝜃𝑆𝐻

2
𝜆𝑁
𝑑𝑁 Im [

2𝜆𝑁 𝐺↑↓ tanh2 𝑑𝑁

2𝜆𝑁

𝜎𝑁+2𝜆𝑁 𝐺↑↓ coth𝑑𝑁

𝜆𝑁

] ,
(S4)

where 𝜃𝑆𝐻 is the spin-Hall angle, 𝜆𝑁 the spin diffusion length, 𝑑𝑁 = 5.0 nm the thickness and 𝜎𝑁 =

3.13 × 106 Ωmthe conductivity of the Pt layer. From the conductivity we estimate that 𝜆𝑁 ~ 2.0 nm 

and 𝜃𝑆𝐻 ~ 0.049 (52). By considering that 𝐺r ≫ 𝐺i (53), Eqs. (S3) and (S4) yield 𝐺r ~ 1.1 x 1015 Ω-1m-2

and 𝐺𝑖 ~ 3.4 x 1013 Ω-1m-2, with a corresponding ratio 𝐺r/𝐺𝑖 ~ 32, which is consistent with literature 

values for magnetic insulator/heavy metal bilayers (27, 28, 54, 55) and confirms the high quality of the 

TmIG/Pt interface.


25

Section S2. Influence of the presence of an applied out-of-plane field, current-induced 

Oersted fields and Joule heating on the magnetization switching process.

As presented in the manuscript, a precise control of the magnetic moment underneath the Pt current 

line can be achieved in a continuous TmIG film by applying current pulses in the Pt line without altering 

the magnetic moments of the surrounding (Fig. 1D). However, the extremely small depinning field of 

the DWs in TmIG, ~1-2 Oe (see Fig. S7), makes the dynamics of the magnetization switching by current 

pulses to be extremely sensitive to the presence of any tiny out-of-plane magnetic field. Fig. S3 shows 

a sequence of differential MOKE images taken during forward switching in the presence of an out-of-

plane field 𝐻𝑧 ~ 2 Oe, showing that in contrast to what is observed in Fig. 1D and Fig. 3B, the switched 

domain clearly extends away from the Pt current line. The generation of out-of-plane Oersted fields at 

large current densities (𝐽𝑥 ~ 108 A cm-2 or larger) also favors that the switched domain slightly extends 

away from the edges of the Pt current line (for about a couple of m). This is seen in Fig. S3 (see image 

#7), where the switched domain extends more on the bottom side at the edge of the Pt current line, 

where the Oersted field favors the forward switching. The Oersted field has an even stronger influence 

on the switching dynamics during backward switching, as seen in Fig. S4. Finally, Joule heating 

produced by long current pulses (𝑡𝑝 ~ 1 s or larger) at large current densities can also favor the 

switched domain to extend away from the Pt current line.

Fig. S3. Forward switching in the presence of an out-of-plane field 𝑯𝒛. Sequence of differential MOKE 

images taken during a series of forward switching current pulses of 𝐽𝑥 = 0.9 × 108 A cm-2 and 𝑡𝑝 =

75 ns in the presence of an external field of 400 Oe applied along the Pt current line at an angle of  

~0.3° with respect to the plane of the film, which results in an out-of-plane field 𝐻𝑧 ~ 2 Oe. The film 

is initially saturated down (-m, dark contrast). Bright contrast indicates the TmIG region that has 

switched to +m. The finite 𝐻𝑧 favors the spreading of the switched domain away from the current line. 

These measurements indicate that the accuracy in the alignment of the sample for the measurements 

presented in the manuscript is better than 0.1°.


26

Fig. S4. Switching dynamics at large current densities: influence of the Oersted field. (A and B)

Different examples of the dynamics of the DWs upon the application of a series of backward switching 

current pulses at large current densities. The current pulses produce out-of-plane Oersted fields of 

opposite polarity at the opposite edges of the Pt current line (i.e., bottom and top edges in the images). 

For a negative current, a positive (negative) out-of-plane Oersted field is generated at the bottom (top) 

edge of the Pt current line, and vice versa upon inverting the current direction. These Oersted fields 

can influence the switching dynamics given the extremely small DW depinning field in TmIG ~1-2 Oe 

(see Fig. S7). Therefore, for current pulses inducing the contraction of a +m domain (bright regions) in 

a -m medium (black regions), the negative out-of-plane Oersted field generated at the top (bottom) 

edge of the Pt current line for a negative (positive) current is sufficient to induce the depinning of the 

DW at the edge, pushing it towards the center of the line. As a result, the domain contraction has both 

transverse and longitudinal components, driven by the SOT and Oersted field, respectively (see images 

in A and B).


27

Fig. S5. Simultaneous Hall and MOKE measurements of TmIG/Pt devices. (A) Measurement scheme. 

Current pulses are applied via two capacitors (C = 150 nF) to the Hall bar, which allows current pulses 

faster than ~ 1 s to completely pass through while filtering low-frecuency signals. The current line is 

shunted by a 50 Ohm resistance 𝑅𝑝 to ensure optimum impedence matching. The AC current source 

for the harmonic Hall measurements (f = 11 Hz) is connected via inductors (L = 440 µH), which filter 

signals faster than ~ 1 s. The voltage probes for 𝑉𝑦 are connected through two resistors 𝑅𝑦 = 100 kΩ, 

which prevent damage of the Hall contacts from the current pulses. (B) Tracking of the current-induced

expansion of a +m domain (bright area) in a down magnetized medium (-m, black). Between each 

image, a current pulse of 𝐽𝑥 = 7.5 x 107 A cm-2 and adjustable pulse length (50 to 500 ns) is applied to 

slowly drive the DW through the Hall cross located at the center of the Hall bar (see A). The magnetic 

field is set at 𝐻𝑥 = 100 Oe. (C) Simultaneous measurement of the relative change in the Hall signal 

(black) together with the measurement of the magnetization change by direct MOKE imaging (red) for 

the sequence of images shown in (B). The change in magnetization corresponds to the red dashed area 

indicated in image #8. The change in the Hall resistance is due to 𝑅𝐻

𝐴𝐻𝐸,𝑆𝑀𝑅 (see Section S1 and Fig. 

S2), which reflects the change of mz. From these measurements we infer that the electrical reading of 

the magnetization state of TmIG is only sensitive to changes in the magnetization in the vicinity of the 

Hall cross. Comparison of the Hall and MOKE data reveals that the sensitivity of the Hall measurement 

extends slightly away from the Hall cross. Spreading of domains beyond the Pt current line can also 

influence 𝑅𝐻

𝐴𝐻𝐸,𝑆𝑀𝑅. Electrical measurements alone do not allow to determine the DW position and 

displacement with precision after the application of current pulses. 


28

Fig. S6. Dependence of 𝒗𝐃𝐖 on the pulse length. (A) Differential MOKE images showing the 

displacement of an up-down DW after the application of 𝑁 = 4 current pulses of 𝑡𝑝 = 200 ns and 𝑁 =

2 pulses of 𝑡𝑝 = 400 ns. 𝐻𝑥 = −250 Oe and 𝐽𝑥 = −6.5 × 107 A cm-2 in both cases. The same 

displacement ∆𝑥 is observed for both sequences of current pulses, leading to the same estimate for 

the DW speed 𝑣DW = ∆𝑥 / (𝑁p 𝑡p) (see Methods). (B) Systematic evaluation of 𝑣DW for an up-down 

DW during domain expansion as a function of 𝑡𝑝 in the regime where DWs move upon the application 

of current pulses but are not strongly influenced by Joule heating. (C) Same as (B) for domain 

contraction. Within the experimental error, 𝑣DW remains roughly constant although tp changes by a 

factor of ~4, which allows us to conclude that the DW speed is accurately evaluated upon changing 𝑡𝑝
and not influenced by DW inertia. We attribute the slight increase of 𝑣DW at large 𝑡𝑝 to Joule heating. 

For the measurements presented in Fig. 4 we reduced the influence of Joule heating by measuring 

𝑣DW at the lower edge of the parameter space 𝑡𝑝 at any given 𝐻𝑥, 𝐽𝑥 combination. Joule heating (as 

well as the Oersted field, see Section S2) is found to influence the DW dynamics and magnetization 

switching at current densities ≳ 1 × 108 A cm-2.


29

Fig S7. Evaluation of the domain wall depinning field. Sequence of differential MOKE images. #1, The 

TmIG film is initially satured –m by applying 𝐻𝑧 = −100 Oe (dark contrast). #2, The magnetization 

underneath the Pt current line is switched to +m (bright contrast) by applying a forward switching 

current pulse. #3 to #8, An out-of-plane field +𝐻𝑧 is applied and the evolution of the DWs of the +m

domain tracked with time and strength of the magnetic field. Images #3/5/7 are taken right after 

applying 𝐻𝑧 = +1/2/3 Oe, whereas images #4/6/8 are the subsequent MOKE images taken after 

waiting 20 sec at the same field. A first tiny DW displacement is already observed for 𝐻𝑧 = +1 Oe. At 

𝐻𝑧 = +2 Oe the DW is clearly depinned and the domain extends significantly through the TmIG film. 

We thus determine that the DW depinning field in TmIG is on the order of ~1-2 Oe.


30

Fig. S8. Multiple domain nucleation at large current densities. (A and B) Examples of multiple 

nucleation of domains at large current densities. Images #1 to #4 correspond to a series of forward 

switching current pulses. In contrast to low current densities, where nucleation takes place at a defect 

site (see Fig. 3B and Fig. S3), here the nucleation takes place preferentially in the region comprised 

between two adjacent Hall crosses (not right at the cross, see #2), where the current density is larger.


31

Fig. S9. Comparison of 𝒗𝑫𝑾 between an up-down and a down-up domain wall. 𝑣𝐷𝑊 as a function of 

𝐻𝑥 for a down-up DW, and for the two combinations of 𝐻𝑥 and 𝐽𝑥 that lead to a domain contraction 

(open symbols), together with the data presented in Fig. 4D for a contracting up-down DW (solid 

symbols). Within the experimental error, both DWs exhibit a similar larger/slower speed when moving 

against/along 𝐽𝑥, confirming the weak negative DMI found in TmIG/Pt. See also Fig. S10, where the DW 

structure and current-induced DW motion is discussed for both up-down and down-up DWs and for 

all four combinations of 𝐻𝑥, 𝐽𝑥 directions.


32

Fig. S10. Schematics of the domain wall structure and current-induced domain wall motion in the 

presence of Hx and DMI. (A) Cross-sectional schematics (xz-plane) of a down-up and an up-down DW 

(positioned along the y-direction) in TmIG/Pt illustrating its internal structure in the absence of 𝐻𝑥.

The finite left-handed Néel chirality of the DWs reflects the negative DMI found in TmIG/Pt (see Fig. 2 

and Fig. 4, C and D). (B to E) The internal magnetization of the DWs can be controlled by applying a 

magnetic field 𝐻𝑥 exceeding the effective DMI field 𝐻𝐷𝑀𝐼, where the latter is positive (negative) for a 

down-up (up-down) DW (A). Consequently, upon the application of 𝐻𝑥, the internal magnetization of 

up-down and down-up DWs has either a larger or smaller projection on the direction of 𝐽𝑥. As the 

amplitude of the damping-like SOT is maximal when the DW magnetization is parallel or antiparallel to 

𝐽𝑥, up-down and down-up DWs move at different speed. The damping-like SOT is represented by the 

corresponding effective field 𝐻𝐷𝐿 in the figure. Application of current pulses drive the DWs as indicated 

for all four possible combinations of 𝐻𝑥 and 𝐽𝑥 applied (see B to E). DWs are driven at larger (smaller) 

velocities when moving against (towards) 𝐽𝑥, which is consistent with the results presented in Fig. 4 

and Fig. S9.


33

Section S3. Scanning NV magnetometry

Definition of the polar angles NV and NV

Fig. S11. Definition of the polar angles NV and NV with respect to the laboratory coordinate frame 

(see Fig. 2). NV = (55 ± 2)° is determined by sample fabrication. Analysis of the stray field BNV allows us 

to determine that NV = (83 ± 3)°.

Determination of the stand-off distance d:

The sample-to-sensor distance d is inferred in situ from the change in the stray field BNV at the TIG/Pt 

edge (see Fig. 2B) due to the different magnetic response of TmIG relative to TmIG/Pt (see Fig. 2C), 

which we mainly attribute to a proximity induced polarization of the Pt layer (see second dataset taken 

in a reference TmIG film). The change in magnetization gives rise to a stray field that is added to the 

field produced by the DW. In order to disentangle both fields we use a differential approach by shifting 

the images along the y-axis and subtracting them from each other, see Fig. S12. In this way we cancel 

the domain wall stray field and end up with a stray field showing only two Pt edges. The magnetic stray 

field emanating from the Pt edges, with the image orientated such that they are aligned with the y-

direction, can be described analytically as

𝐵𝑥 = 𝜇0𝑀𝑆,𝑃𝑡𝑡

2𝜋
[
𝑑 − 𝑥1

𝑑2 + (𝑥 − 𝑥1)2 −
𝑑 − 𝑥0

𝑑2 + (𝑥 − 𝑥0)2]

𝐵𝑦 = 0

𝐵𝑧 = −

𝜇0𝑀𝑆,𝑃𝑡∙𝑡

2𝜋
[

𝑥−𝑥1

𝑑2+(𝑥−𝑥1)2 −

𝑥−𝑥0

𝑑2+(𝑥−𝑥0)2], 
(S5)

where 𝑥0, 𝑥1 denote the edge positions and 𝑀𝑆,𝑃𝑡𝑡 is the surface magnetization of Pt. By fitting this 

model to the experimental line scan we can extract a value for the stand-off distance d and 𝑀𝑆,𝑃𝑡. 

Further fit parameters are the edge positions and the azimuth angle of the NV vector orientation. To 

improve statistics and estimate the error, we fit several line scans across the stripe using the same 

starting parameters and extract the mean value and standard error. For the image shown in Fig. 2B 

and Fig. S12, we obtain 𝑑 = 104 ± 3.3 nm. Further stand-off distance measurements on a separate 

calibration sample (Pt/Co/AlOx) before and after the domain wall measurement are in good agreement 


34

with this value. To compensate for the fact that we have not included the height profile of the stripe 

as well as the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction, we deliberately over-estimated the error in the stand-

off distance to be larger than the fit errors and set it to 5 nm.

Fig. S12. In situ calibration of the NV stand-off distance on TmIG/Pt. (A) Differential stray field image. 

The plotted image was obtained by subtracting two original images (Fig. 2B) that were shifted relative 

to each other by 800 nm along the Pt edge. (B) Representative line cut of the differential image along 

the dashed line indicated in (A), together with the fit according to Eq. (S5).

Fits of the domain wall magnetization profile:

We fit several line scans of the DW in TmIG and TmIG/Pt using the same starting fit parameters as 

described in the Methods section. The resulting fit parameters 𝑝𝑖 are averaged, with weights according 

to their variance. The sum is taken over all line scans corresponding to the selected region. The nominal 

value of the parameters are calculated as 𝑝̅𝑖 = ∑
𝑤 ∙ 𝑝𝑖

𝑁
𝑘=1
. The standard deviation of each parameter 

is then 𝜎𝑖 = √∑
𝑤 ∙ 𝑝𝑖

2 − 𝑝̅𝑖

2
𝑁
𝑘=1
+ (𝛿𝑑

𝜕𝑝̅𝑖
𝜕𝑑̅ )

2 . The last term describes the uncertainty due to the error 

of the stand-off distance 𝛿𝑑. Since the fitting algorithm assumes the stand-off distance to be fixed, it 

is not included in the fitting results directly. We estimate 

𝜕𝑝̅𝑖
𝜕𝑑̅ via finite differences by repeating the 

fitting procedure with the stand-off distance equal to the error boundaries 𝑑± = 𝑑̅ ± 𝛿𝑑 with 𝑑̅ = 104

nm.

Second dataset: reference TmIG film

We recorded a second dataset with a different scanning probe (𝑑 = 66 ± 6 nm) on an unprocessed 

TmIG film of thickness 8.5 nm. Analysis of this second dataset yielded a chiral angle of 𝜓 = (180 ± 0)°, 

which corresponds to a pure left-handed chiral Néel domain wall structure, a DW width of ∆𝐷𝑊=

(20 ± 4), and an out-of-plane magnetization 𝑀𝑧 = (53.3 ± 3.5) kA m-1. These values are consistent 

with the ones presented in Fig. 2 for TmIG(8.3 nm), supporting the finding of a strong DMI in an all-

oxide structure without the presence of a metallic heavy metal layer.


35

Supplementary References

50.
G. P. Espinosa, Crystal chemical study of the rare-earth iron garnets. J. Chem. Phys. 37, 2344–
2347 (1962).

51. 
C. Tang, P. Sellappan, Y. Liu, Y. Xu, J. E. Garay, and J. Shi, Anomalous Hall hysteresis in 
Tm3Fe5O12/Pt with strain-induced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Phys. Rev. B. 94, 
140403 (2016).

52. 
E. Sagasta, Y. Omori, M. Isasa, M. Gradhand, L. E. Hueso, Y. Niimi, Y. C. Otani, and F. 
Casanova, Tuning the spin Hall effect of Pt from the moderately dirty to the superclean 
regime. Phys. Rev. B, 94, 060412 (2016).

53. 
X. Jia, K. Liu, K. Xia, G. E. W. Bauer, Spin transfer torque on magnetic insulators. Europhys. 
Lett. 96, 17005 (2011).

54. 
M. Althammer, S. Meyer, H. Nakayama, M. Schreier, S. Altmannshofer, M. Weiler, H. Huebl, S. 
Geprägs, M. Opel, R. Gross, D. Meier, C. Klewe, T. Kuschel, J.-M. Schmalhorst, G. Reiss, L. 
Shen, A. Gupta, Y.-T. Chen, G. E. W. Bauer, E. Saitoh, and S. T. B. Goennenwein, Quantitative 
study of the spin Hall magnetoresistance in ferromagnetic insulator/normal metal hybrids. 
Phys. Rev. B. 87, 224401 (2013).

55. 
T. Kosub, S. Vélez, J. M. Gomez-Perez, L. E. Hueso, J. Fassbender, F. Casanova, and D. 
Makarov, Anomalous Hall-like transverse magnetoresistance in Au thin films on Y3Fe5O12. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 222409 (2018).


