Stacking control in graphene-based materials: a promising way for 

fascinating physical properties 

Jiliang Zhang,1,* Guangcun Shan,2,3,* 

1Department of Energy & Materials Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul, 04620 Republic 
of Korea 

2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, 
Hong Kong SAR, China 

3 Institute of Quantum Sensing, School of Instrumentation Science and Opto-electronic 
Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China 

 
 
Abstract: 
Graphene, defined as a single atomic plane of graphite, is a semimetal with small overlap between 
the valence and the conduction bands. The stacking of graphene up to several atomic layers can 
produce diverse physical properties, depending on the stacking way. The bilayer graphene is also a 
semimetal, adopting the AB-stacked (or Bernal-stacked) structure or the rare AA-stacked structure. 
The trilayer or a few layer graphene (FLG) can be semimetal or semiconductor, depending on 
whether it takes Bernal (ABA) stacking or rhombohedral (ABC) stacking. We will give a perspective 
on the recent two mild approaches to control the stacking via local transition from ABC stacking 
into ABA stacking. It is believed that with the rapid development of graphene-based materials, 
these techniques for stacking control can be used for more complex structure to fulfill fascinating 
properties and devices. 
 
 
Graphene, defined as a single atomic plane of graphite, is a semimetal with small overlap between 
the valence and the conduction bands [1]. The stacking of graphene up to several atomic layers can 
produce diverse physical properties, depending on the stacking way. The bilayer graphene is also a 
semimetal, adopting the AB-stacked (or Bernal-stacked) structure or the rare AA-stacked structure 
[2]. The trilayer or a few layer graphene (FLG) can be semimetal or semiconductor, depending on 
whether it takes Bernal (ABA) stacking or rhombohedral (ABC) stacking.  
 
Compared with these ideal stacking structure, the stacking structure in most graphene multilayers 
is actually more complex. Twinning is a common feature, where different stacking configurations 
coexist, connected by discrete twin boundaries [3]. Twisted multilayers, where one layer is rotated 
relative to another, have also been observed experimentally. These complex structures usually lead 
to more fruitful or even exotic physical properties. It has recently been reported in 2018 that a 
small twist angle of 1.1o induced unconventional superconductivity [4], and this feature can be 
used for a superconducting transistor made of graphene for quantum devices. 
 

                                                             
* Email: jiliangz@dongguk.edu, gshan2@cityu.edu.hk 


Owing to the possibility of different stacking configurations, controlling the stacking structure of 
graphene materials is vital to realize specific properties and/or novel functional devices. In early 
2018, Japanese scientists reported their success in selective fabrication of pure ABA and ABC 
trilayer graphene [5]. Their methods include a heat treat at high temperatures up to 1510 °C under 
pressure or high vacuum (ca. 10-7 Torr), and the precise temperature and pressure control is the 
key to the selective fabrication [5]. Obviously, the application of their methods will be limited by 
these harsh conditions. 
 
Very recently, Latychevskaia et al. [6] has presented two mild approaches to control the stacking 
via local transition from ABC stacking into ABA stacking. One approach is joule heating by passing 
high currents through a hBN/ABC FLG/hBN heterostructures, where hBN is the hexagonal boron 
nitride, and the fraction of the ABA stacking can be controlled by tuning the applied voltage. This 
approach has a spatial resolution of ca. 1um for the initial transition, which could be utilized as a 
more effective way to fabricate many graphene-based electronic devices with different stacking 
structures. The second approach is illuminating by laser pulses to trigger the transition in the laser 
focused zone.  
 
In joule heating, the high temperature induced stress was thought to be the driving force for the 
transition. However, the high density direct current can also induce significant stress or structural 
change due to strong electron-lattice couplings [7,8]. It would be more promising to explore the 
possibility of the large current to tune the stacking. An electropulsing technique [8], which employs 
a high density direct current and generates less heat, can be employed for this purpose. With the 
high density electric pulses, it is possible to bind two separate FLGs and produce twisted layers or 
numerous interesting stacking configurations. 
 
 
Laser pulses of 790 nm wavelength were used to initialize the transition in a focused zone of ca. 20 
um as the second method. The stacking transition is triggered by the laser illumination the focused 
zone. Compared with the laser, a short-wavelength UV light (10 nm- 400nm), which generates 
much higher energy, is more promising to control the stacking transition in a smaller focused zone. 
This method will allow customized design of the stacking structure on a scale of nanometers by 
controlling the pathway of the pulsing beam like stereo lithography, which widen the feasibility of 
making novel graphene-based functional devices.  
 
Although nanospot angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy is powerful to characterize the 
local stacking structure [9], many researchers cannot access it due to the limited availability of such 
synchrotron facilities. Latychevskaia and coworkers have demonstrated that a convergent beam 
electron holographic technique allows the characterization and reconstruction of the stacking and 
defects (e.g. misorientation, strain, ripples etc.) at a subnanometer spatial resolution [10,11]. The 
qualitative information on these defects can also be extracted from obtained patterns or images 
via using the technique, which enable the further optimization of controlled stacking structures. 
 
The above techniques to control and characterize the stacking structure can also be applied to 
other 2D or layered materials, which makes it possible to introduce more exciting properties or 


solve structural mysteries. One example is graphitic C3N4 (g-C3N4), the most stable allotrope of 
carbon nitrides and a fascinating 2D semiconductor. In past decades, many efforts to make g-C3N4 
produce mainly graphitic s-heptazine based C3N4 (gh-C3N4), containing a small amount of H [12]. 
The successful synthesis of graphitic s-trizaine based C3N4 (gt-C3N4), the final condensation form of 
gh-C3N4, was reported in 2014, and only triple layers are obtainable by exfoliation in the work [13]. 
Despite these efforts, the 3D stacking structure of these g-C3N4 is still unsolved. Now it is possible 
to uncover and modify the stacking, which will open new possibilities for post-silicon electronic 
devices.  
 
With the rapid development of graphene-based materials, these techniques for stacking control 
can be used for more complex structure to fulfill fascinating properties and devices. However, 
challenges still lie ahead, e.g. encapsulation of heterostructure, precise control of heating effects, 
mechanical performance of devices, etc. To tackle these challenges, in-depth understanding is 
required not only on these techniques but also on the structure-properties relationships of 
graphene-based materials, which also leads to better structural design. Compared with the 
extensive studies in structure and electronic behaviors, less attention was paid to mechanical 
properties of graphene-based materials and functional devices. From the perspective of practical 
application, the mechanical properties are also very important and therefore significant efforts are 
needed to be devoted [14]. Theoretical investigations based on first-principle calculations will 
provide a simple and effective way to design the desirable structure for verifying the performance 
on demand [15], and meanwhile utilize the multi-physics simulations further to optimize the 
technical parameters [16]. It is worthwhile pointing out that it is a matter of time to overcome 
these challenges. It can be postulated that more amazing 2D graphene-related materials with well-
controlled van der Waals 2D heterostructures will be available soon, which endows not only 
extremely exciting physical phenomena but also superior functional devices for various 
applications. 
 
 
 
References 

[1] A.K. Geim, Graphene: Status and Prospects, Science 324(5943), 1530 (2009). 

[2] Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, P.J.F. Harris, S. Iijima, Open and Closed Edges of Graphene Layers, Physical Review 

Letters 102(1), 015501 (2009). 

[3] L. Brown, R. Hovden, P. Huang, M. Wojcik, D.A. Muller, J. Park, Twinning and Twisting of Tri- and 

Bilayer Graphene, Nano Lett. 12(3), 1609 (2012). 

[4] Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, P. Jarillo-Herrero, Unconventional 

superconductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices, Nature 556, 43 (2018). 

[5] K. Sugawara, N. Yamamura, K. Matsuda, W. Norimatsu, M. Kusunoki, T. Sato, T. Takahashi, Selective 

fabrication of free-standing ABA and ABC trilayer graphene with/without Dirac-cone energy bands, Npg 

Asia Mater. 10, e466 (2018). 

[6] T. Latychevskaia, S.-K. Son, Y. Yang, D. Chancellor, M. Brown, S. Ozdemir, I. Madan, G. Berruto, F. 

Carbone, A. Mishchenko, K.S. Novoselov, Stacking transition in rhombohedral graphite, Front. Phys. 

14(1), 13608 (2019). 

[7] I.A. Blech, C. Herring, Stress generation by electromigration, Appl. Phys. Lett. 29(3), 131 (1976). 


[8] H. Conrad, Effects of electric current on solid state phase transformations in metals, Mater. Sci. Eng. 

A 287(2), 227 (2000). 

[9] C. Bao, W. Yao, E. Wang, C. Chen, J. Avila, M.C. Asensio, S. Zhou, Stacking-Dependent Electronic 

Structure of Trilayer Graphene Resolved by Nanospot Angle-Resolved Photoemission Spectroscopy, 

Nano Lett. 17(3), 1564 (2017). 

[10] T. Latychevskaia, C.R. Woods, Y.B. Wang, M. Holwill, E. Prestat, S.J. Haigh, K.S. Novoselov, 

Convergent beam electron holography for analysis of van der Waals heterostructures, Proc. Nat. Acad. 

Sci. 115(29), 7473 (2018). 

[11] T. Latychevskaia, C.R. Woods, Y.B. Wang, M. Holwill, E. Prestat, S.J. Haigh, K.S. Novoselov, 

Convergent and divergent beam electron holography and reconstruction of adsorbates on free-standing 

two-dimensional crystals, Front. Phys. 14(1), 13606 (2019)  

[12] Y. Wang, X.C. Wang, M. Antonietti, Polymeric Graphitic Carbon Nitride as a Heterogeneous 

Organocatalyst: From Photochemistry to Multipurpose Catalysis to Sustainable Chemistry, Angew.Chem. 

Int. Ed. 51(1), 68 (2012). 

[13] G. Algara-Siller, N. Severin, S.Y. Chong, T. Björkman, R.G. Palgrave, A. Laybourn, M. Antonietti, Y.Z. 

Khimyak, A.V. Krasheninnikov, J.P. Rabe, U. Kaiser, A.I. Cooper, A. Thomas, M.J. Bojdys, Triazine-Based 

Graphitic Carbon Nitride: a Two-Dimensional Semiconductor, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 53(29), 7450 (2014). 

[14] B. Uder, H. Gao, P. Kunnas, N. de Jonge, U. Hartmanna, Low-force spectroscopy on graphene 

membranes by scanning tunneling microscopy, Nanoscale, 2018,10, 2148 (2018). 

[15] L. Zhou, L. Kou, Y. Sun, C. Felser, F. Hu, G. Shan, S. Smith, B. Yan, T. Frauenheim, New Family of 

Quantum Spin Hall Insulators in Transition-Metal Halide with Large Nontrivial Band Gaps, Nano Lett. 

15(12), 7867 (2015). 

[16] R. Wang, X. Ren, Z. Yan, and W. E. I. Sha, L. J. Jiang, G. C. Shan, Graphene based functional devices: 

A short review, Front. Phys. 14(1), 13603 (2019). 

 
 
 


