Achromatic Non-Interferometric Single Grating Neutron Phase Imaging 
 
M. Strobl,1,2* J. Valsecchi,1,$ R.P. Harti,1 P. Trtik,1 A. Kaestner,1 C. Gruenzweig,1 E. Polatidis,1 J. 
Capek1  
 
1Laboratory for Neutron Scattering and Imaging, Paul Scherrer Institut, 5232 Villigen, 
Switzerland 
2Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Nørregade 10, 1165 Copenhagen, Denmark 
 
*markus.strobl@psi.ch 
$jacopo.valsecchi@psi.ch 
 
Abstract 
We demonstrate a simple single grating beam modulation technique, which enables the use 
of a highly intense neutron beam for phase imaging and thus spatially resolved structural 
correlation measurements in full analogy to quantum interference based methods. In 
contrast to interferometric approaches our method is intrinsically achromatic and provides 
unprecedented flexibility in the choice of experimental parameters. Utilizing merely a 
macroscopic absorption mask unparalleled length scales become accessible. The results 
presented, including application to a variety of materials, establish a paradigm shift in phase 
imaging.   
 
 
State of the art imaging with visible light as well as with electrons comprises numerous 
contrast mechanisms, including phase and dark-field contrast schemes [1,2]. X-ray and 
neutron imaging, on the other hand, have only recently seen the development of an 
analogous variety of contrast modalities [3,4]. Today interferometric and non-interferometric 
techniques play an important role in phase imaging with all these types of radiation in 
providing contrast based on the real part of the refractive index, where conventional 
attenuation contrast fails.  
 
Neutron interferometry has created significant impact in neutron imaging in particular when 
Talbot Lau grating interferometers enabled unprecedented high efficiency phase contrast 
imaging with neutrons early in the millennium [5]. Attempts to utilize interferometry and its 
outstanding sensitivity to quantum beam phase effects for spatially resolved measurements 
have been reported earlier and in particular with single crystal Mach-Zehnder interferometers 
[6]. However, their coherence and stability requirements as well as spatial restrictions 
hindered practical applications. Also attempted non-interferometric techniques suffered 
from high coherence requirements [7,8]. The ability of the grating interferometer to operate 
at relatively low coherence requirements overcame these restrictions. Thus, it unlocked the 
potential of the highly penetrating quantum beam of neutrons to visualize through phase 
contrast e.g. magnetic structures. Studies of vortex structures, magnetic domains and domain 
wall kinetics in the bulk of superconductors and ferromagnets which were not amenable to 
any other technique have been reported [9-14]. In addition, the high sensitivity of the 
apparatus was found to qualify it an excellent tool for the investigation of micro-structural 
features based on coherent scattering length density variations in bulk materials and objects 
[15-18]. In contrast to conventional instrumentation, the combination of microstructural 


sensitivity with macroscopic real space resolution enables the study of heterogeneous 
structures and processes in representative volumes [19-21]. Due to analogies to dark-field 
microscopy, this phase imaging technique is in x-ray and neutron imaging referred to as dark-
field contrast imaging [15,22]. 
 
Today grating interferometers for imaging are available at many leading instruments at 
neutron sources around the world [5,15,23-26]. Numerous successful studies [9-21] triggered 
continuous developments with regards to varying implementations of analogue techniques 
[10,25-30]. Advances targeted mainly efficiency, complexity and assessable correlation length 
scales. Key progress was established in particular by the quantitative interpretation of dark-
field contrast providing correlation length information [17,18]. The first quantitative 
characterization of microstructures was reported on the nano-scale already when a spin-echo 
interferometer was successfully introduced to neutron imaging [28]. It operates in full 
analogy to Talbot Lau grating interferometric imaging but builds on the quantum spin phase 
and interference of the two spin states of the neutron wave function. The advantage of the 
this method is access to the nano-scale, full remote control of the modulation as well as its 
suitability for the most efficient time-of-flight wavelength dispersive measurement approach 
with neutrons at pulsed spallation sources [28,29]. Disadvantages are the sophisticated and 
elaborate set-up and technological barriers to assess the micro-scale, without excessive 
sample to detector distances. This scale is however covered by the common Talbot Lau 
interferometry [18]. A more recent implementation, referred to as far-field multi-phase-
grating interferometer [30], implies similar issues in the conventional range, but in addition 
faces efficiency issues due to a high general collimation requirement. An advantage is meant 
to be a lower wavelength dependence of the visibility achieved in the beam modulation.  
 
Here we introduce a paradigm shift demonstrating that the interferometric nature of the 
applied techniques is not relevant but only the spatial modulation of the beam, no matter 
how it is achieved. In contrast to previous works underlining the virtues of quantum particle-
wave interferometry we chose the most basic approach to create spatial beam modulation 
on a suitable length scale to retrievably encode small angle beam deviations superimposed 
to real space images [17]. We prove that we are thus able to record and analyse the 
corresponding multi-modal images providing attenuation contrast, differential phase and 
dark-field contrast in full analogy to the discussed interferometric techniques. In addition, a 
close analogy to non-interferometric phase imaging through structured illumination in light 
microscopy [31,32] can be found in this approach. 
 
The set-up is established by merely adding an attenuation grating in a conventional pinhole 
collimated imaging instrument (Fig. 1). The image of the grating will be an accordingly 
spatially modulated intensity profile. Due to the geometric blur the modulation image will 
feature a sinusoidal intensity distribution, comparable to these of interferometric methods. 
The achievable visibility V=(Imax-Imin)/(Imax+Imin) depends, for a perfect absorption grating, only 
on the resolution capability of the set-up and is fully independent of the wavelength, hence 
fully achromatic in contrast to any approach presented earlier (Fig.1b, c). This modulation of 
the beam which is simply a projection image of an absorption grating will be used in analogy 
to all interference based beam modulations before to provide quantifiable spatially resolved 
measurements of attenuation, phase and scattered wave interference. The principle of the 
latter is schematically depicted in Fig. 1a. 


 

   
 

FIG. 1 Set-up and parameters (a) sketch of the basic set-up adding a simple attenuation grating at a 
distance L from the pinhole and upstream of a variable sample position in a conventional neutron 
imaging instrument. The principles of differential phase and scattering detection (dark-field contrast) 
are depicted. The blue curve represents the undisturbed pattern and red is the refracted (sample sides) 
and scattered (sample center) pattern. (b) visibilities V achieved for L=7m pinhole to grating distance 
for different standard pinhole sizes D = 40, 20 and 10 mm and the utilized absorption grating period 
365 µm. The red line at 10% marks the theoretical resolution limit and the lines provide a conservative 
visibility estimate based on the calculated geometric blur d=l/(L/D). The point marked by a red circle 
indicates the parameters used for the presented study. (c)  measured proof of achromatic visibility with 
data taken at the point marked with yellow circle in (b). (d) achievable correlation lengths according 
to eq. (2)[17] for standard pinhole sizes available at the benchmark instrument ICON at PSI [33] and 
D=0.2mm like utilized for far-field interferometry [30]. Minima of indicated ranges refer to LS = 10 mm 
and a minimum wavelength of 2.8 Å, maxima to LS according to (b) and a wavelength of 5.6 Å. At D=20 
mm a comparison with the use of a 222 µm period grating is provided and at D=10 mm the parameters 
utilized in the presented study are shown. 
 
The sensitivity of a modulated beam measurement technique depends on the modulation 
period p and the sample to detector distance Ls  (Fig. 1a) and can in the small angle 
approximation be expressed by the characteristic angle or the probed scattering vector length 
 
qc = p/2Ls 
and        qc = pp/lLs  ,  
 
 
 
(1) 

 
respectively. At this angle, or scattering vector, intensity is shifted from the maxima exactly 
into the intensity depleted minima – the dark-field - of the modulation pattern. This in turn 
for the probed length scale equals [17] 
 
x = lLs/p 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 

 
For the intrinsically achromatic technique the wavelength l is a free parameter (Fig. 1c), but 
it is limited by the typically used spectra in the thermal and cold energy range. Both other 
parameters, Ls and p, are limited by the spatial resolution ability of the set-up (Fig. 1b). A 


larger distance and a smaller period provide access to larger structures (Fig. 1d). A typical 
Talbot Lau interferometer provides modulation conditions enabling to resolve micrometer 
sized structures with micrometer modulation periods. These require analyser gratings to be 
resolved. Here we consider periods of some 100 micrometer which can be resolved spatially 
up to some 100 mm distances by the detector directly. A workable compromise between 
visibility and resolvable range has to be found (Fig. 1b & d). Because the spatial resolution 
and hence the visibility at a certain grating to detector distance in a conventional pinhole 
collimated set-up is indirect proportional to the available flux density, also efficiency 
considerations have to be evaluated carefully. Theoretical approximations as well as 
measurements confirm the ability to create modulations with substantial visibility and 
compatible with outstanding correlation length ranges probed from the nanometer to 
micrometer scale with standard instrument settings (Fig. 1b & d). This applies despite the 
limited wavelength range of 2.8 to 5.6 Å accessible with the utilized instrumentation. Fig. 1 d, 
in addition, displays the unparalleled extensive range our technique covers when employing 
slits as reported to be applied for far field interferometry [30]. For our demonstration an 
intermediate regime with the potential to cover nearly two orders of magnitude in correlation 
lengths has been chosen while analyzed data are restricted to correlation lengths ranging 
from about 10 to 300 nm. This range clearly complements that of conventional Talbot Lau 
interferometry.  
 
The measurements were performed with a 10 mm pinhole, common for conventional high 
resolution imaging measurements and leading to a collimation ratio L/D of about 700. The 
chosen L/D and grating to detector distance l of 0.26 m enabled a visibility of 18% (Fig. 1b) 
comparable to such utilized in neutron Talbot Lau interferometry. The grating consisted of 20 
µm high Gd lines on a quartz wafer with a duty cycle of 50% and a period of 365 µm. The 
detector used was a common combination of a 20 µm thick gadolinium oxysulfide (Gadox) 
scintillator screen and a commercial CCD camera (Andor, iKon-L) with a 100 mm Zeiss 
photographic lens system. The corresponding field of view (FoV) was 70 x 70 mm2 with an 
effective pixel size of 35 µm and an intrinsic spatial resolution of around 70 µm. The grating 
had an effective size of 50 x 50 mm2 and hence did not cover the full FoV of the detection 
system. The exposure time per image was 3 times 120 sec irrespective of the wavelength 
used.  

  

Fig. 2 Three imaging modalities are measured simultaneously and in analogy to grating 
interferometric imaging [9]; the images display a measurement of three samples, a 304L steel cylinder 


and two quartz glass cuvettes containing aqueous solutions; (a) the conventional transmission image 
(TI) corresponds to the ratio between transmitted and incident beam intensities A/A0 (eq. 3); (b) the 
differential phase image (DPI) is established by the modulation phase difference between open beam 
and sample q (eq. 3), the line profile contains a theoretical calculation for the steel cylinder (black 
curve)(eq. 4); (c) the dark-field image (DFI) reflects the relative visibility loss through scattering from 
the sample V/V0=BA0/(B0A) (eq. 3);  
 
A macroscopic beam modulation superimposed to an image enables different routes of 
measurement and analyses strategies for the contrast modalities [15,28,34,35]. While in 
principle it is possible to fully analyse such images for all modalities from a single shot [28,35], 
here, again in analogy to Talbot Lau interferometry, a grating scan has been performed with 
11 steps over one period. This enables conventional pixel-wise extraction of all three contrast 
parameters: transmission A, differential phase parameter q and visibility V=B/A constituting 
the measured image as 
 
Ii,j = Ai,j + Bi,j sin(Ci,jX + qi,j) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 

 
where i,j are the pixel indices, C is the phase of the open beam modulation and X is the grating 
scan parameter.  
 
For an individual measurement of a set of samples the images corresponding to the three 
parameters: transmission image (TI), differential phase image (DPI) and dark-field image (DFI) 
are depicted in Fig. 2. The samples in this measurement are a cylindric tensile test dogbone 
sample of 304L steel and two aqueous solutions in quartz glass cuvettes placed in the beam. 
While the attenuation by the water in the 5mm thick cuvettes is substantial as can be seen in 
the attenuation contrast transmission image (TI) it affects the statistics in the corresponding 
areas in the differential phase image (DPI) and in the dark-field image (DFI) significantly. 
Nevertheless, all three contrast modalities display the typical corresponding features with 
respect to the samples, which are well-known from corresponding interferometric imaging 
approaches. Due to the good spatial resolution capability of the set-up and the significant 
sample to detector distance even the signature of far field phase contrast [7] is visible upon 
careful inspection in the attenuation contrast image (TI, Fig. 2a). The differential phase 
contrast image depicts the influence of the distorted neutron wave-front on the spatial 
modulation phase q (Fig. 1a). The respective local neutron wave phase shift can be extracted 
from this according to the relation [5] 
 
𝜃 =

#$%

&

'(

)* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 

 
where ∂Q/∂x is the gradient of the neutron wave-front perpendicular to the modulation. The 
phase can be retrieved straightforwardly from corresponding integration [5]. For the phase 
profile of the cylindric steel sample we compare the measurement to the according 
calculation of the differential phase in Fig. 2b, underlining good quantitative agreement 
within the spatial resolution limit. 
 
Systematic quantitative reference measurements have been performed on a second set of 
samples. The study focusses on quantitative dark-field imaging [15,17-21] which has 
established as the dominant application of interferometeric modulated beam imaging in 


material research. The first reference samples were two commercially available fractal 
powders, namely Sipernat-350 and Sipernat-310 with characteristic particle sizes of 4 and 8.5 
micrometers, respectively [36]. Sipernat-310 is a powder of silica featuring a large surface 
area of 700 m2/g. The large surface area together with the micrometer sized particle 
characteristics makes Sipernat-310 a well-suited material to investigate basic characteristics 
of cohesive powders. It has recently been used in a study observing with spatial resolution 
the heterogeneous breakdown of the fractal microstructure [21]. This study provided the 
required reference data and model fit from more conventional spin-echo small angle neutron 
scattering measurements with no direct spatial resolution. 
 
  

 

FIG. 3 Mapping scattering length density correlations Quantitative dark-field imaging performed 
through variation of wavelength and sample to detector distance at set-up parameters as indicated in 
Fig. 1b & d and applied to a number of samples as shown in the TI in (d); (a) results of measurement 
on a silica powder (Sipernat-310 [36]) combined with SESANS data and a model fit from literature [21]; 
the inset compares the applied model to the model used for the related powder sample presented in 
(b). Results of correlation length scan on two thicknesses of Sipernat-350 [36] powder with model fit 
(red line); insert displays the model applied separately to the results for the two different sample 
thicknesses before normalization. (c) data and fit for ferrofluid sample (violet squares) and a porous 
solid ferromagnet cube (red circles) and corresponding model fits. (d) an attenuation contrast TI 
indicating samples with symbols and colors used in the corresponding plots. Note, that where the error 
bars are not visible they are lying within the size of the used symbols. 
 
 
Both powders were measured contained in quartz glass cuvettes with sample thicknesses of 
5 mm for both Sipernat-310 and -350 and additionally a 2mm thick sample of Sipernat-350. 
Distance scans were performed at wavelengths of 3.5 Å and 5.6 Å from Ls 20 to 250 mm and 


120 to 250 mm, respectively (compare Fig. 1b). The measured visibilities from grating scans 
at each of these settings were analysed pixel-wise using our standard Talbot Lau data 
reduction software [37]. The normalized visibilities can be written as [17] 
  
+(-)

+/ = 𝑒12(3 - 45) 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 

 
where V0 is the visibility without sample, S is the total small angle scattering cross section and 
G(x) is the projected real space correlation function of the microscopic sample structures [17]. 
The data is further reduced pixel-wise by computing the logarithm and dividing by the sample 
thickness t and the wavelength square. The total scattering probability St depends on l2, 
which needs to be normalized in order to combine scans at different wavelengths and to 
achieve results independent of the utilized beam. Subsequently the data is modelled with 
specific projected real space correlation functions G(x) representative of the microscopic 
structure investigated. A fitting procedure finally enables to retrieve the respective structural 
parameters. 
 
According to Ref. [21] Sipernat-310 is best modelled with a randomly distributed two-phase 
medium [38] corresponding to 
 
𝐺 𝜉 =

-

8 𝐾5

-

8  
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 

 
where K1 is the modified Bessel function of second kind and first order and a represents the 
characteristic structure size in the two-phase medium. The model and parameters found 
through small angle scattering measurements in Ref.[21], where a = 1.56 µm and S = 0.45, fit 
the single grating data as depicted in Fig. 3a. This model, however, did not fit the data of 
Sipernat-350, the second powder sample (compare inset Fig. 3a). This correlates with the fact 
that the powders are significantly different in their specific structure and surface area, which 
for Sipernat-350 is 55 m2/g, compared to 700 m2/g of Sipernat-310 [36]. The two data sets 
from two different sample thicknesses of Sipernat-350, Fig. 3b inset, could both be fitted with 
the same model 
 
𝐺 𝜉 = 𝑒 4 - 8 :  
. 
 
 
 
 
(7) 

 
This model describes a simplified limited fractal taking into account an exponential cut-off 
[39]. The two data sets after normalization with their respective thicknesses coincide well 
(Fig. 3b). The fit yields a characteristic length scale a = 7 µm and a = 0.5, with a being related 
to the structure of the phase boundary. Here a ranges in the lower domain of 0< a <1 which 
corresponds to open and branched distributions with high specific surfaces.  
 
Additional data on well characterized samples returned the porosity on the probed length 
scale of a ferrite magnet produced through sintering as well as the poly-disperse structure 
size distribution in a ferrofluid (Fig. 3c). The cubic ferrite sample of 10 mm side length 
consisting of Fe2O3 (86%) and SrCO3 (14%) is revealed to have significant porosity in the 
probed size range constituting about 1% of the volume. The pores are characterized with a 
poly-disperse size distribution with predominant sizes of 20 and 210 nm diameter. Hard 


sphere models [17] were used to approximate the pore structure, and remaining deviations 
can be assumed to be due to deviation of average pore shape from the spherical model. The 
volume fraction of the smaller pores is found to be more than a factor two lower than the 
one of the dominating 200 nm pores constituting a volume fraction of 0.6%. In addition, 
microscopy reveals, that pores can also be found on the scale of several micrometers, which 
is, however, beyond the probed length scale and does not influence the presented results. 
The ferrofluid can be described by a random two-phase medium (Eq. 6) consisting of a 
polydisperse particle distribution (inset Fig. 3c) suspended in a liquid. Analyses provides a 
characteristic size parameter of a = 250 nm, corresponding to the smallest particles found in 
the liquid. In addition, the largest length scale derived from model fitting coincides with the 
largest particle dimension in the ferrofluid of about 3 µm (Fig. 3c). The deviations of the 
measured points from the fit at the lowest probed correlation lengths are understood to be 
due to incoherent scattering from the hydrogenous liquid phase. 
 
We conclude, that our most simple approach of a single attenuation grating with sub-
millimeter period that requires no specific and sensitive alignment, does overcome stability 
requirements, design and fabrication issues related to fine structures as well as other 
limitations of interferometers. In particular the intrinsically achromatic nature of our 
technique enables straightforwardly multi-wavelength and polychromatic studies without the 
corresponding drawbacks of interferometry. In contrast, it provides the capability for 
efficient, simple, flexible and quantitative multi-modal imaging and especially phase imaging 
in the form of differential phase and dark-field contrast. In addition, the method holds the 
potential to straightforwardly cover an unprecedented correlation length range. The 
capability to extend the range reported for Talbot Lau interferometers [17-21] by more than 
an order of magnitude into the nanometer range has been demonstrated. Flux densities 
available even at medium flux sources allow to further increase collimation ratios within 
standard imaging settings (Fig. 1). This enables to substantially increase the total covered 
correlation length scale range from the nanometer regime into and beyond the typically 
assessed micrometer range of neutron Talbot Lau interferometry. In particular a comparison 
with recent approaches of far-field interferometers [30] (compare Fig. 1d) suggests that 
similar collimation conditions lead to significantly superior performance parameters. This 
implies that our much simpler and in contrast non-interferometric and truly achromatic set-
up can provide higher efficiency with at least the same accuracy and range of experiments 
without the need for careful alignment, stability and interferometry per se. Thus, the 
introduced approach constitutes a paradigm shift for corresponding measurements and 
methods.  
Furthermore, especially the wider spectral range accessible continuously at high flux 
spallation neutron sources generates substantial benefit from the achromatic nature of the 
set-up for large range high flux measurements including kinetic studies. Instruments like the 
imaging beamline ODIN under construction at the European Spallation Source [40] cover 
wavelength ranges of up to one order of magnitude. This implies that a correlation length 
range of the same order of magnitude can be probed simultaneously, enabling the spatially 
resolved observation of microstructural changes not only in time-dependent but non-uniform 
environments such as e.g. in shear fields, flow, inhomogeneous temperature, pressure and 
magnetic fields in full field observations. This paves the way to foster entirely new analytical 
capabilities for complex inhomogeneous and non-equilibrium structural states in materials 
either opaque to or not providing sufficient contrast with other types of radiation.   


An extension to 2-dimensional phase contrast sensitivity and resolution is similarly straight 
forward through the utilization of 2D absorption patterns in contrast to recent elaborate 
approaches with interferometry [27,41]. This enables to additionally study micro-structural 
anisotropies without the need of several sample scans. 
Extending this approach to x-rays is expected to be similarly rewarding because it is suited to 
profit from the superior phase space densities available from x-ray sources. These allow 
projecting small periods at significant distances, thus covering an outstanding correlation 
length scale range.  
 
 
 
References  
[1] D. B. Murphy, Fundamentals of Light Microscopy and Electronic Imaging (Wiley, New 
York, 2001). 
[2] E. G. Ramberg, Phase contrast in electron microscope images. J. Appl. Phys. 20, 441–444 
(1949). 
[3] J. Als-Nielsen and D. McMorrow, Elements of Modern X-ray Physics (Wiley, 2011). 
[4] N. Kardjilov, I. Manke, A. Hilger, M. Strobl, and J. Banhart, Neutron imaging in material 
science, Materials Today, 14, 6 (2011). 
[5] F. Pfeiffer, C. Grünzweig, O. Bunk, G. Frei, E. Lehmann, and C. David, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 
215505 (2006). 
[6] H. Rauch and S. A. Werner, Neutron Interferometry: Lessons in Experimental Quantum 
Mechanics, Wave-Particle Duality, and Entanglement, 2nd ed. (Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, UK, 2015), Vol. 12. 
[7] B. E. Allman, P. J. McMahon, K. A. Nugent, D. Paganin, D. L. Jacobson, M. Arif, and S. A. 
Werner, Nature 408, 158 (2000). 
[8] W. Treimer, M. Strobl, A. Hilger, C. Seifert, and U. Feye-Treimer, Refraction as imaging 
signal for computerized (neutron) tomography, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 2 (2003). 
[9] C. Grünzweig, C. David, O. Bunk, M. Dierolf, G. Frei, G. Kühne, J. Kohlbrecher, R. Schäfer, 
P. Lejcek, H. Rønnow, and F. Pfeiffer, Neutron decoherence imaging for visualizing bulk 
magnetic domain structures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 025504 (2008). 
[10] I. Manke, N. Kardjilov, R. Schäfer, A. Hilger, M. Strobl, M. Dawson,  C. Grünzweig, G. 
Behr, M. Hentschel, C. David, A. Kupsch, A. Lange, and J. Banhart, Three-dimensional 
imaging of magnetic domains, Nature Commun. 1, 125 (2010). 
[11] T. Reimann, S. Mühlbauer, M. Schulz, B. Betz, A. Kaestner, V. Pipich, P. Böni, and C. 
Grünzweig, Visualizing the morphology of vortex lattice domains in a bulk type-II 
superconductor, Nature Communications 6, 8813, (2015). 
[12] B. Betz, P. Rauscher, R. P. Harti, R. Schäfer, H. Van Swygenhoven, A. Kaestner, J. Hovind, 
E. Lehmann, and C. Grünzweig, Frequency-Induced Bulk Magnetic Domain-Wall Freezing 
Visualized by Neutron Dark-Field Imaging, Phys. Rev. Applied 6, 024024 (2016). 
[13] P. Rauscher, B. Betz, J. Hauptmann, A. Wetzig, E. Beyer, and C. Grünzweig, The 
influence of laser scribing on magnetic domain formation in grain oriented electrical steel 
visualized by directional neutron dark-field imaging, Scientific Reports 6, 38307 (2016). 
[14] R. P. Harti, M. Strobl, R. Schäfer, N. Kardjilov, A. S. Tremsin, and C. Grünzweig, Dynamic 
volume magnetic domain wall imaging in grain oriented electrical steel at power frequencies 
with accumulative high-frame rate neutron dark-field imaging, Sci. Reports 8, 1 (2018).  


[15] M. Strobl, C. Grünzweig, A. Hilger, I. Manke, N. Kardjilov, C. David, and F. Pfeiffer, 
Neutron dark-field tomography Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 123902 (2008). 
[16] A. Hilger, N. Kardjilov, T. Kandemir, I. Manke, and J. Banhart, D. Penumadu, A. Manescu, 
and M. Strobl, Revealing micro-structural inhomogeneities with dark-field neutron imaging, 
J. Appl. Phys. 107, 036101 (2010). 
[17] M. Strobl, General solution for quantitative dark-field contrast imaging with grating 
interferometers, Scientific Reports 4, 7243 (2014). 
[18] M. Strobl, B. Betz, R. P. Harti, A. Hilger, N. Kardjilov, I. Manke, and C. Gruenzweig, 
Wavelength dispersive dark-field contrast: micrometer structure resolution in neutron 
imaging with gratings, J. Appl. Cryst. 49 (2016). 
[19] R. P. Harti, M. Strobl, B. Betz, K. Jefimovs, M. Kagias, and C. Gruenzweig, Sub-pixel 
correlation length neutron imaging: Spatially resolved scattering information of 
microstructures on a macroscopic scale, Scientific Reports 7:44588 (2017).  
[20] M. Strobl, R. P. Harti, C. Grünzweig, R. Woracek, and J. Plomp, Small Angle Scattering in 
Neutron Imaging—A Review, J. Imaging 3, 64 (2017). 
[21] R. P. Harti, J. Valsecchi, P. Trtik, D. Mannes, C. Carminati, M. Strobl, J. Plomp, C. P. Duif, 
and C. Grünzweig, Visualizing the heterogeneous breakdown of a fractal microstructure 
during compaction by neutron dark-field imaging, Scientific Reports  8, 17845 (2018). 
[22] F. Pfeiffer, M. Bech, O. Bunk, P. Kraft, E. F. Eikenberry, Ch. Brönnimann, C. Grünzweig 
and C. David, Hard-X-ray dark-field imaging using a grating interferometer, Nat Mater. 7, 2 
(2008). 
[23] S. W. Lee, D. S. Hussey, D. L. Jacobson, C. M. Sim, and M. Arif, Development of the 
Grating Phase Neutron Interferometer at a Monochromatic Beam Line, Nuclear Instruments 
and Methods in Physics Research A 605 (2009). 
[24] S. W. Lee, Y. K. Jun, and O. Y. Kwon, A Neutron Dark-field Imaging Experiment with a 
Neutron Grating Interferometer at a Thermal Neutron Beam Line at HANARO, J. Korean Phy. 
Soc. 58, 730 (2011). 
[25] T. Reimann, S. Mühlbauer, M. Horisberger, B. Betz, P. Böni and M. Schulz, The new 
neutron grating interferometer at the ANTARES beamline: design, principles and 
applications, J. Appl. Cryst. 49, 1488 (2016). 
[26] Y. Seki, T. Shinohara, J.D. Parker, W. Ueno, T. Samoto, W. Yashiro, A. Momose, Y. Otake 
and Y. Kiyanagi, Efficient phase imaging using wavelength-resolved neutron Talbot-Lau 
interferometry with TOF method, EPL 123(1):12002 (2018). 
[27] Y. Kim, J. Kim, D. Kim, D.S. Hussey, and S.W. Lee, Feasibility evaluation of a neutron 
grating interferometer with an analyzer grating based on a structured scintillator, Rev. Sci. 
Instr. 89, 033701 (2018). 
[28] M. Strobl, M. Sales, J. Plomp, W. G. Bouwman, A. S. Tremsin, A. Kaestner, C. Pappas, 
and K. Habicht, Quantitative Neutron Dark-field Imaging through Spin-Echo Interferometry, 
Scientific Reports 5, 16576 (2015). 
[29] M. Sales, J. Plomp, K. Habicht, A.S. Tremsin, W.G. Bouwman, and M. Strobl, 
Wavelength-Independent Constant Period Spin-Echo Modulated Small Angle Neutron 
Scattering, Rev. of Sci. Instr. 87(6):063907 (2016). 
[30] D. A. Pushin, D. Sarenac, D. S. Hussey, H. Miao, M. Arif, D. G. Cory, M. G. Huber, D. L. 
Jacobson, J. M. LaManna, J. D. Parker, T. Shinohara, W. Ueno, and H. Wen, Far-field 
interference of a neutron white beam and the applications to noninvasive phase-contrast 
imaging, Phys. Rev. A 95, 043637 (2017). 


[31] M. Saxena, G. Eluru, and S.S. Gorthi, Structured illumination microscopy, Adv. Opt. 
Photon. 7, 241-275 (2015). 
[32] S. R. P. Pavani, A. R. Libertun, S. V. King, and C. J. Cogswell, “Quantitative structured-
illumination phase microscopy,” Appl. Opt. 47, 15–24 (2008). 
[33] A. Kaestner, S. Hartmann, G. Kühne, G. Frei, C. Grünzweig, L. Josic, F. Schmid, and E.H. 
Lehmann, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 659, 1 (2011). 
[34] M. Sales, J. Plomp, W. G. Bouwman, A. S. Tremsin, K. Habicht and M. Strobl, On the 
analysis of time-of-flight spin-echo modulated dark-field imaging data, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 
862, 012026 (2017). 
[35] N. Bevins, J. Zambelli, K. Li, Z. Qi, and G.-H. Chen, Multicontrast x-ray computed 
tomography imaging using Talbot-Lau interferometry without phase stepping, Med. Phys. 
39, 1 (2012).  
[36] http://www.thecarycompany.com/media/pdf/specs/tds-evonik-sipernat-310.pdf and 
http://www.thecarycompany.com/media/pdf/specs/tds-evonik-sipernat-350.pdf (2018) 
[37] R. P. Harti and J. Valsecchi, TaPy 0.2 - https://github.com/nGImagic/TaPy/releases, 
10.5281/zenodo.1252995, 2017. 
[38] R. Andersson, W. G.Bouwman, S. Luding, and I.M. de Schepper, Structure in cohesive 
powders studied with spin-echo small angle neutron scattering, Granular Matter 10, 6 
(2008). 
[39] R. Andersson, L. F. van Heijkamp, I. M. de Schepper, and W. G. Bouwman, Analysis of 
spin-echo small-angle neutron scattering. J. Appl. Cryst. 41, 868 (2008). 
[40] M. Strobl, The Scope of the Imaging Instrument Project ODIN at ESS, Physics Procedia 
69 (2015). 
[41] M. Kagias, Z. Wang, P. Villanueva-Perez, K. Jefimovs, and M. Stampanoni, 2D-
Omnidirectional Hard-X-Ray Scattering Sensitivity in a Single Shot Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 
093902 (2016). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


