Figure 1. Schematic of common reconfigurable structures in photonic integrated circuits for optical processing: (a) Lattice filter of 
unbalanced Mach-Zehnder Interferometers (MZIs), [4] (b) Coupled Resonator Optical Waveguides (CROWs), [3], (c)  side-coupled 
integrated spaced sequence of resonators (SCISSOR) with two bus waveguides, (d) Coupled CROW and SCISSORs,  Single-bus 
SCISSORs, (e) tunable delay line, (f) Cavity-loaded cascade of MZIs, (g) Processing cells combining interferometric structures and SOAs.

Programmable Multifuctional Photonics ICs

Daniel Pérez, Ivana Gasullla and José Capmany:

Photonics Research Labs

Universitat Politècnica de València

Valencia, Spain

dperez@iteam.upv.es

Abstract— Here, we review present and future work in 

the next photonic IC generation aiming at integration of 
multi-functional 
software-defined 
systems 
for 
signal 

processing operations.

Keywords—Integrated 
optics; 
Analog 
optical 
signal 

processing; programmable photonics.

I. INTRODUCTION 

Since the first integration of photonic circuits, scientists

and commercial partners have tried to increase the 
versatility of their components. This is commonly achieved 
by locally changing the effective index properties of the 
waveguides through the application of different electro-
optical, thermo-optical, electro-mechanical or electro-
magnetic effects. The controlled alteration of the phase and 
absorption of light has led to the design of integrated 
modulators, tunable filters, tunable splitters, optical 
switches and flexible beamforming networks, to cite a few 
examples. 
The 
notion 
of 
reconfigurable 
photonic 

components has evolved to more complex photonic 
integrated circuits (PICs), where the versatility is conferred 
to the whole system. By software programming each 
subsystem after fabrication, multiple functionalities are 
targeted with a single hardware platform, [1,2]. This new 
paradigm will radically enable cost-effective photonic-
driven solutions to the market since the overhead costs of 
design, fabrication, packaging and testing stages can be 
shared between multiple applications. In addition, driving a
reconfigurable hardware will create the expansion of a new 
field to be explored in terms of generic photonic physical 
architectures and software development opportunities.

Programmable Integrated Photonics can be divided 

into: Multipurpose devices and reconfigurable subsystems. 
While the latter can be reconfigured to increase and vary 
the performance of a certain application (e.g., filter 
tunability/ reconfigurability, programmable delays), the 
former spans on a wider range of applications. Here, we 
will provide an analysis and overview of the state of the art 
of programmable integrated photonics field.

II. ARCHITECTURES

A reconfigurable photonic integrated circuit is typically 
built up by combining passive structures that allow light 
propagation, splitting and/or recombination together with 
structures that allow the modification of the phase of the 
optical signal based on an externally-driven actuator. 

A. Reconfigurable photonic integrated circuits

In practice, most of the reconfigurable photonic circuits 

proposed in the literature are either based on the cascade of 
finite (i.e., Mach-Zehnder interferometers) or infinite (i.e.,
ring cavity) impulse response cells or a combination of 
both. Some examples are illustrated in Fig. 1, which 
correspond to circuit configurations limited to the synthesis 
of 1-input/1-output or 2input/2-output circuits with fixed-
period spectral response and delay line structures, [3]. As 
an example, most of the configurations can be designed to 
perform as optical filters that allow for bandwidth 
reconfiguration and notch tunability by moving their zeros 
and poles along the z-plane. In addition, they can be 
designed and configured to find applications in arbitrary 
dispersion compensation, optical equalization and multi-
channel filter selection, [4]. Thus, these circuits provide a 
good compromise between performance, footprint and 
accumulated loss. However, once designed and fabricated, 
these might be limited to few applications and constrained 
to fixed free spectral ranges.

B. Multifunctional programmable beamsplitting arrays

The great promise of versatile integrated optics lies in 
integrating the optimum number of components to 
perform the greatest number of functionalities with a 
common/shared hardware, [1]. In Fig. 2 (a), we can see an 
example of an integrated system that incorporates an array 
of electro/optic and opto/electronic converters, several 
optical sources among other high-performance blocks 
specifically designed to perform a single functionality 
(e.g., high-selectivity narrowband filtering and dispersive 


Figure 2. Schematic of a generic-purpose photonic processor 
architecture covering RF-photonic assisted operations and photonic 
operations.

elements) and a reconfigurable optical core. These 
processing 
architectures 
allow 
multiple 
photonic 

processing functionalities as well as microwave /
millimeter wave operations. 

A very versatile optical processing engine is required 

to implement the core of these architectures. The purpose 
of this element is two-fold. It needs, first, to provide a 
reconfigurable/dynamic interconnection scheme between 
all the subsystems. Secondly, it should provide the 
synthesis of the main optical signal processing operations. 
These tasks can be achieved by means of waveguide mesh 
arrangements [5-7]. These arrangements are massive 
interconnections of waveguide pairs arrays coupled by a 
2x2 beamsplitting elements (mainly balanced Mach-
Zehnder Interferometers with a phase modulator on each 
arm), describing vastly inter-coupled closed unity cells. 
Conventional PICs are then discretized into these 
beamsplitters or Tunable Basic Units (TBUs) to define the 
light path geometries and design parameters of the 
synthetized/programmed circuits. Once discretized, each 
TBU of the circuit is programmed either in cross-state, 
bar-state or as a tunable coupler with the desired splitting 
ratio. The common phase at each TBU can be set as well.

Depending on the optical node topology employed for 

the interconnection of the TBUs, the physical circuit will 
result in different waveguide mesh configurations. These 
topologies 
have 
been 
analyzed, 
highlighting 
the 

performance of the hexagonal waveguide interconnection 
topology as the most versatile and flexible, among other 
characteristics related to the integration itself, [7]. 

The first three experimental examples
of this 

arrangement provide a powerful proof of concept of a new 
generation of programmable photonic integrated circuits. 
They are based on two square cells in silicon nitride [5], 
30-TBUs describing a 
7-cell
hexagonal 
topology 

fabricated in silicon on insulator [6], and a recently 
fabricated hexagonal mesh based on 40 thermally-tuned 
TBUs currently under test. 

Despite the simplicity of the layouts, even a 7-cell

hexagonal structure is capable of implementing over 100 
different circuits for optical filtering applications (basic 

MZI, finite impulse response transversal filters, basic 
tunable ring cavities and infinite impulse response filters, 
as well as compound structures such as CROWs and 
SCISSORs), true time delay lines and optical coherent 
interferometry, [6,8].

Once chosen a certain topology, the versatility of 

waveguide arrangements is proportional to the number 
TBUs. The example of Fig. 3 illustrates how each of the 
81 TBUs of a waveguide mesh is configured to perform 
three PICs working in parallel simultaneously. Each one 
of the circuits consists of three optical ring resonators with 
three different cavity lengths. Additionally, the tunability 
of the shortest cavity is achieved by tuning the phase of 
the TBU labelled as C19. The response of each ring is 
computed based on a spectral analysis model, [9]. In this 
case, 0.2-dB insertion loss and 30-dB optical crosstalk are 
assumed for each TBU.

III. WAVEGUIDE MESHES SCALABILITY: LIMITS AND 

CHALLENGES

If 
we 
compare 
the 
characteristics 
of 
classical 

reconfigurable PICs against the new generation based on 
massively coupled TBUs, we find that the versatility and 
the flexibility come at the cost of several limitations. It is 
clear that the ideal behaviour of the TBU leads to the 
perfect performance of the reconfigurable optical engine. 
However, in practice, several sources of degradation must 
be taken into account: imperfect splitting ratios, phase 
control, 
parasitic 
back-reflections, 
loss 
imbalances, 

fabrication errors (gradients through the circuit in thickness 
or temperature), and drift in time, [6]. Although these 
problems affect both circuit approaches, the ones based on 
waveguide mesh arrangements will be negatively fostered 
due to the inherent interconnection topology. We briefly 
discuss the most important ones below.

Internal reflections: The use of imperfect 3-dB 

couplers and/or possible fabrication errors that change the 
losses in the upper/lower arm of each TBU introduce 
optical crosstalk.
Due to the cascade arrangement of 

TBUs, and the potential light recirculation of the mesh 
topologies, large optical crosstalk or a drift in each TBU 
configured state leads to signal leaking through the mesh. 
In [6], a TBU optical crosstalk below 30 dB was measured 
and 
maintained
constant
during 
the 
experimental 

demonstrations of programmed complex PICs, showing 
the robustness of the configured states. In addition, it can 
be showed that smart programming of the unused regions 
to guide the reflected and leakage signals as far as possible 
from the defined circuit or to defined drain optical ports,
contribute to relax the specifications of the TBUs in term 
of optical crosstalk, [9].

Accumulated losses: The TBU insertion losses are one 

of the most limiting issues in optical mesh networks. 
Losses limit the maximum number of TBUs to define the 
programmed circuit and thus, the versatility and scalability 
of the overall mesh. In the same sense, a minimum TBU 
performance improvement leads to a high improvement in 
the overall mesh behaviour. State-of-the-art MZI-based 
TBUs insertion losses are below 0.25 dB in silicon 
photonics [10], which would allow a maximum number of 
50 TBUs with a penalty of 10-dB loss in the programmed 
circuit.


Figure 3. Spectral analysis of a waveguide mesh implementing three Optical Ring Resonator filters composed of cavity lengths equal to 6, 
10, and 12 TBUs. (a) Mesh architecture and configuration for simultaneously implementing the three filters. (b) Equivalent circuit layouts 
with indication of the input and output ports in red ink (upper). (c1) Transmission response of the 6-BUL ORR, (c2) Transmission Response 
of the 10-BUL ORR and (c4) the 12-BUL ORR. (c3) Tunability response of 6-BUL ORR for ϕc13 = 0, 0.5, 1 and 1.5, respectively

Miniaturization trade-off: minimum delay and losses. The
structures susceptible of being programmed must be able 
to be discretized into a number of discrete TBUs. Ideally, 
a large count of TBUs with reduced length would enhance 
the resolution of the mesh allowing a better fitting of the 
circuits to be programed. A total BUL of 240 µm seems 
achievable with the state-of-the-art couplers and tuners. 
Assuming a typical SOI group index of 4.18, this is 
translated to maximum FSRs of around 150 and 50 GHz 
for the synthesis of MZIs and ORRs, respectively, in the 
hexagonal waveguide mesh topology, [7]. However, a 
reduction of the BUL implies that the signal must go
through a greater number of TBUs to obtain a desired 
delay. If the 3-dB couplers limit the overall IL of the TBU, 
this miniaturization trade-off must be considered.

Finally, waveguide mesh arrangements face similar 

extended issues to the ones handled by the integrated 
optical switching matrices research field. Thermal stability,
tuning-based crosstalk, power consumption, integration
density and packaging involving a large count of electrical 
and optical i/o ports. However, the integration of less than 
100 TBUs provides a considerable number of circuit 
topologies to be designed and limited, in principle, by
accumulated IL in the largest circuit synthesis. The 
integration in silicon of more than 450 thermally tuned 
TBUs in optical switch networks has been recently 
demonstrated [11].

The current research in the field is focused on 

alternative tuning mechanisms to reduce the overall power 
consumption and footprints, TBU geometries and loss 
optimization, as well as the development of software to 
drive and control the reconfigurable subsystems. All in all, 
the arising of general-purpose programmable PICs is a 
promising candidate to enable cost-effective devices by a 
reduction of non-recurring engineering costs, shorter 

times to production and to market,
as well as

multifunctional and multitask operation. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors acknowledge financial support by the ERC 
ADG-2016 UMWP-Chip, the Generalitat Valenciana 
PROMETEO 2017/017 research excellency award,  the 
COST Action CA16220 EUIMWP, and the  Spanish 
MINECO Ramon y Cajal program RYC-2014-16247 for I. 
Gasulla’s fellowship.

REFERENCES

[1]
D. Pérez, I. Gasulla, J. Capmany, “Software-defined universal 
microwave photonics processor,” Opt. Exp. 23, 11, 14640-14654, 
(2015).

[2]
Y. Xie, et al., "Programmable optical processor chips: toward 
photonic RF filters with DSP-level flexibility and MHz-band 
selectivity." Nanophotonics 7.2, 421-454, (2017).

[3]
Madsen, C.K. & Zhao, J. H., Optical Filter Design and Analysis: A 
Signal Processing Approach. 1st edn., (Wiley,  1999).

[4]
Jinguji, K. Synthesis of coherent two-port Optical delay-line circuit 
with ring waveguides. J. Lightw. Technol. 14, 1882–1898 (1996).

[5]
L. Zhuang, et al., “Programmable photonic signal processor chip 
for radiofrequency applications," Optica, 2, 10, 854-859, (2015).

[6]
D. Pérez, et al., "Multipurpose silicon photonics signal processor 
core," Nature Comms, 8, 636, (2017).

[7]
D. Pérez, I. Gasulla, J. Capmany, R.A. Soref, “Reconfigurable 
lattice mesh designs for programmable photonic processors” Optics 
Express, Vol. 24, no. 11, p.12093, (2016)

[8]
D. Pérez, et al., et al. Silicon Photonics Rectangular Universal 
Interferometer. Lasers and Photon Rev 2017, 11, 1700219.

[9]
D. Pérez, J. Capmany., submitted, (2018).

[10] L. Chen, Y. K. Chen,. “Compact, low-loss and low-power 8× 8 

broadband silicon optical switch,” Optics express, 20, 17, 18977-
18985, (2012)

[11] D. Celo et al.,“32x32 silicon photonics switch,” in OptoElectronics 

and communications conference & IEEE PS, (2016).


