ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
1/9

Transformation of the mechanical properties of materials 

by the geomagnetic resonance

Vladimir I. Alshits1, Elena V. Darinskaya1, Marina V. Koldaeva1, Romuald K. Kotowski*2

and Elena A. Petrzhik1

1Department of Crystallography and Photonics of FSRC, Shubnikov Institute of Crystallography of RAS, 

Leninskii prosp. 59, Moscow 119333, Russia

2Faculty of Information Technology, Polish-Japanese Academy of Information Technology,

Koszykowa 86, 02-008 Warsaw, Poland

E-mail: rkotow@pja.edu.pl

Abstract. The strong geomagnetic influences on mechanical properties of crystals due to their exposure to 
ultralow crossed magnetic fields, the Earth’s field (~50 T) and the AC field (~3 T) in the electron 
paramagnetic resonance scheme, are discussed. Resonance relaxation displacements of dislocations in NaCl
crystals are found both for a harmonic pump field and for a pulse AC field of resonance duration ~0.5 s. 
Resonant changes have been also detected in the microhardness of ZnO, triglycine sulfate, and potassium acid 
phthalate crystals after their exposure in the same EPR scheme. The both effects manifest new strongly 
anisotropic properties. In particular, the frequency of the resonance is very sensitive to the mutual orientation 
of the sample and the Earth’s field. Physical mechanisms and practical significance of the phenomenon are 
discussed.

Keywords: magnetoplasticity, resonance, properties of materials, EPR, magnetic fields 

1. INTRODUCTION

The magnetoplastic effect (MPE) was discovered as the movement of dislocations in NaCl crystals 

held in a DC magnetic field B  0.5 T in the absence of a mechanical load Alshits (1987). Numerous
subsequent independent studies (see for example the review papers by Alshits (2003); Golovin (2004),
Morgunov (2004), Alshits (2008)), showed that this phenomenon is due to a magnetically induced change 
in the structure of impurity stoppers on dislocations, which results in the reduction of the force of pinning 
of dislocations and their relaxation displacements in the field of the  internal stresses. The role of the 
magnetic field is reduced to changing the spin states of the impurity centers with the removal of the 
quantum exclusion of a certain electronic transition, which leads to their transformation.

The phenomenon manifests itself also in macroplasticity of crystals: under the active loading when the 

stress load is increasing with the constant rate: 𝜎̇ = const Golovin (1995), active deformation 𝜀̇ = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡
Urusovskaya (2003), creep 𝜎 = const Smirnov (2001), and internal friction Tyapunina (1999).

The magnetoplastic effect is observed in crystals of various types not only in a static magnetic field but 

also in crossed static and alternating magnetic fields in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) regime 
at the resonance frequency

𝜈𝑟 = 𝑔𝜇𝐵 𝐵/ℎ,
(1)

where the 𝑔-factor is usually close to 2, 𝜇𝐵 is the Bohr magneton, and ℎ is the Planck’s constant. Such 
resonances in NaCl and silicon crystals were found by the three independent groups at the frequency of 
9.5 GHz and the related magnetic field ~0.3 T Golovin (1998), (2000), (2002), Osip’yan (2004) and 
Badylevich (2005).


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
2/9

More recently, a similar resonance in NaCl was detected and studied in ultralow fields: the Earth’s field 

~50 𝜇T and the pump field with an amplitude of 3 𝜇T and a frequency of ~1 MHz Alshits (2016). This 
particular low-frequency resonance will be a subject of this paper. As we shall see, it has a number of new 
very informative properties, primarily the strong anisotropy of the effect with respect to the mutual 
orientation of the crystal, dislocations, and magnetic fields. In particular, the resonance frequency becomes 
very sensitive to the angle 𝜃 made by the sample with the Earth’s magnetic field (giant anisotropy of the 
effective 𝑔-factor: 𝑔𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≈ 𝑔0 cos 𝜃). In addition, as will be shown, this resonance also manifests itself in 
changing the microhardness of the zinc oxide (ZnO), triglycine sulfate (TGS), and potassium acid phthalate 
(KAP) crystals after their exposure in the same EPR scheme in the Earth’s magnetic field together with 
very strong anisotropy of the effect including even the giant anisotropy of 𝑔-factor.

2. EXPERIMENT

To create the EPR conditions, the samples were placed in crossed static and alternating magnetic fields. 

In most experiments as the static magnetic field the Earth’s magnetic field was used. Its direction and 
magnitude were measured at the place of a sample. The vector of the Earth’s magnetic field 𝐁Earth made 
an angle of 29.5 with the vertical direction and had a length of 49.97 𝜇T. The alternating pump field 𝐁̃
was produced in a screened coaxial chamber around rectilinear conductor 1 through which a sinusoidal current
flowed as shown in Fig. 1a. Its frequency 𝜈 varied in the rangeof 10kHzto1.5MHz.The amplitude of the harmonic
pumpfieldwasfrom  1 to 6 𝜇Tandthetimeofexposure was from 15 s to 2 h depending on the type of the tests.

In situ effects were studied when the response of a crystal to the magnetic action occurs in the process 

of exposure and directly involves moving dislocations. “Memory” effects were also studied when the 
response occurs in a certain time after exposure. They were found by measuring the microhardness of ZnO, 
TGS, and KAP crystals.

In the former case, histograms of paths of fresh dislocations in NaCl crystals introduced in the samples 

just before the exposure were measured. Using these histograms, the mean free paths 𝑙 for various physical 
parameters and conditions was calculated. Their positions before and after exposure were determined by 
the selective etching method. In addition to the absolute mean path 𝑙, the normalized dimensionless path
𝑙√𝜌 which is the ratio of the 𝑙 to the average distance 1/√𝜌
between dislocations was used. Here

𝜌 ~104 cm−2 is the total density of dislocations.

Fig. 1 (a) Scheme of the experiment in the crossed magnetic fields, (b) the geometry configuration of dislocation 
motion in the NaCl crystal.


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
3/9

3. RESONANCE OF DISLOCATION DISPLACEMENTS

3.1 Basic features of the harmonic resonance 

Effect of the mutual orientation of dislocations and magnetic fields

The NaCl samples were chipped out along the {100} cleavage planes and had approximate dimensions 

of 335 mm. Fresh dislocations were introduced in a sample by a weak impact. In this case, most 
dislocations were rectilinear being directed along the directions L || a = [100], b = [010], or c = [001]. 
Their slip planes belonged to the {110} system. Here we described the experiments with the sample 
oriented so that the edge c was parallel to the Earth’s field and the a edge was orthogonal to the plane of 
the magnetic fields {𝐁Earth, 𝐁̃} (see Fig. 1b). In this geometry of crossed magnetic fields, а-dislocations 
(L || a) are the most mobile whereas b- and с-dislocations have noticeably smaller paths under the same 
conditions. The orientation L || a ⊥ {𝐁Earth, 𝐁̃} the chosen position of the sample with respect to the 
magnetic fields remains optimal for all studied crystals NaCl.

The intensity of the discussed resonance depends also on the mutual orientation of the fields 𝐁Earth and  

𝐁̃. However, this type of anisotropy is not universal and is manifested in different degrees in crystals with 
different impurity compositions. Figure 1a shows two positions 2 and 3 of the sample that correspond to 
the mutually orthogonal and parallel fields: 𝐁̃ = 𝐁̃⊥ ⊥ 𝐁Earth and 𝐁̃ = 𝐁̃∥ ∥ 𝐁Earth. Normally, for 
usual EPR with high-frequency pump field (~10 GHz) the first of these orientations is much more 
preferable. In our case of low-frequency EPR (~1 MHz) we met in NaCl crystals with different impurities 
both traditional situation and the cases of comparable dislocation responses. Figure 2a demonstrates the 
example of a traditional case which is realized in NaCl crystals with Ni impurities where the pump field 
𝐁̃∥ causes the EPR of very suppressed amplitude.

Fig. 2 (a) Peaks of the mean dislocation paths l in NaClNi samples exposed for t = 3 min to the fields 𝐁̃ ⊥ 𝐁Earth
(line 1) and 𝐁̃ ∥ 𝐁Earth (line 2) at 𝐁̃ = 3.12 𝜇𝑇 in the vicinity of the resonance frequency 1.38 MHz of the pump 
field, (b) the maximum paths 𝑙𝑟 versus the square of pump field amplitude 𝑩̃ (at 𝑡 = 1 min) and the exposure time 
𝑡 for 𝐁̃ = 3.12 𝜇𝑇.

Dependence of the resonance mean path on the key parameters

Here the dependences of the resonance mean paths 𝑙𝑟 on the amplitude of the pump magnetic field 𝐁̃, 

time 𝑡 of exposure of samples to the magnetic field, and the concentration 𝐶 of the impurity is discussed. 
Dislocations and crossed fields are chosen mutually orthogonal in order to ensure the maximum effect. 

Figure 2 (b) shows quasi-linear dependences of the mean path amplitude 𝑙𝑟 on 𝐁̃2 and 𝑡with saturation 

at large paths, which corresponds to the depletion of relaxation of the dislocation structure. The presented 
results are obtained for the same NaClNi crystal as data shown in Fig. 2 (a). The linear part of these 


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
4/9

dependences can be represented by the empirical formula 𝑙𝑟 = 𝑙0 + 𝑘 𝐁̃ 2 t. Here, 𝑙0 is the background 
path caused by the etching procedure of near-surface stoppers and manipulations with the samples. The 
linear dependence of the increment of paths Δ𝑙 = 𝑙𝑟 − 𝑙0 on the time 𝑡 means that the process of 
displacement of dislocations is quasi-stationary, and the proportionality Δl ∝ 𝐁̃2 likely corresponds to 
the quadratic dependence of the effect on the amplitude of the pump field as it is typical for the EPR
phenomenon.

3.2 Anisotropy of the resonance frequency

The value of the resonance frequency νr = 1.38 MHz of the pump field in Fig. 2 (a) is obtained from 

Eq. (1) for B = BEarth and  g = 1.97. It was found that it does not change under the rotation of the pump 
field. However, the resonance frequency appeared strongly dependent on the orientation of the sample in 
the Earth’s field. In particular, at the rotation of the sample about its edge а by the angle θ from the BEarth
direction, the peak of dislocation paths shown in Fig. 2 (а) is shifted toward lower frequencies 
proportionally to cos θ (see Fig. 3):

𝜈𝑟 ≈ 𝜈0 cos 𝜃, 𝜈0 = 𝑔 𝜇𝐵BEarth/ℎ,
(2)

where 𝜈0 = 1.38 MHz. Each peak specified by Eq. (2) at a fixed value is accompanied by an additional 
peak at the resonance frequency:

𝜈𝑟′ ≈ 𝜈0 cos(90° − 𝜃) = 𝜈0 sin 𝜃.
(3)

Such a pair of peaks in Fig. 3 (а) corresponds to the angles of 30 and 60, and these peaks at 45 are joined 
into one.

Fig. 3 (a) Peaks of resonance mean paths of a-dislocations for various angles 𝜃, (b) angular dependence on the 
relative resonance frequency 𝜈𝑟/𝜈0
(𝜈0 = 1.38 ). The inset shows the scheme of the mutual orientation of the 

sample and magnetic fields.

Thus, by Eq. (2), our low-frequency EPR resonance is characterized by the giant anisotropy of the effective 
𝑔-factor: 𝑔eff = 𝑔 cos 𝜃.Interpretation of this property will be given in Section 4.


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
5/9

3.3 The resonance with a pulse pump field

There is else the other variant of the dislocation EPR, when a magnetic harmonic pumping field is 

replaced by a pulsed one. In this case, the resonance frequency 𝜈𝑟 in Eqn. (1) is replaced by the resonance 
pulse duration 𝜏𝑟: 𝜈𝑟 → 𝜏−1. This effect of the influence of the Earth magnetic field was studied in a 
collaboration with the group of V.A. Morozov at the St. Petersburg State University Alshits (2013b). The 
Earth magnetic field at the place of the sample in the setup was obviously different from that in the Moscow 
experiments. This field was specially measured and was 66 𝜇T at an angle to the vertical of 7.7°. Certainly, 
this field contained some admixture of the lab background field. The pulsed magnetic field was produced 
in a solenoid loaded by a rectangular pulse with the controlled duration and amplitude from the generator. 
Single pulses with the amplitudes 𝐵̃𝑚 = 4.0 ÷ 17.6 𝜇T and durations 𝜏 = 0.50 ÷ 0.57 𝜇T were used in 
the experiments described below.

Fig. 4 (а) Normalized mean dislocation path versus the duration of the pulse, (b) the resonance maximum path versus 
the amplitude of the pulse for NaClCa crystals.

In the first series of experiments (see Fig. 4 (а)), the dependence of the mean paths 𝑙 of dislocations on 

the duration 𝜏 of the pulses of the pump field with a constant amplitude of 𝐵̃𝑚 = 17.6 𝜇T was studied. The 
results were obtained for the three orientations of this field, 𝐁̃ ⊥ 𝐁Earth (1) ,  𝐁̃ ∥ 𝐁Earth (2) and at the 
orientation of the sample like It was shown in Fig. 1 (b). As in the previous cases, а-dislocations were the 
most mobile. Their paths at both orientations of the pulsed pump field form pronounced resonance peaks, 
reaching a maximum at the same duration 𝜏𝑟 ≈ 0.53 𝜇s, which corresponds to the 𝑔-factor of EPR

𝑔 = ℎ/ (𝜏𝑟 𝜇𝐵𝐵Earth) ≈ 2.
(4)

In the parallel fields 𝐁̃ ∥ 𝐁Earth, the amplitude of the effect from which background paths are 

subtracted is almost half of that in orthogonal fields, which approximately corresponds to the relation for 
the same crystals under harmonic pumping.

At the same time, the relative path 𝑙𝑟 √𝜌
observed under the optimal conditions of the 

orthogonal fields is larger than unity (the absolute value is 𝑙𝑟 ≈ 80 𝜇m). This indicates a high 
degree of relaxation of the dislocation structure, particularly taking into account that the relative 
density of mobile dislocations approaches 100%. This result seems striking, because it is reached 
in a half of a microsecond. We recall that the same degree of relaxation under harmonic pumping 
was reached in ~5 min.

It was assumed in Alshits (2013b) that the observed “explosive” relaxation is a collective process of 

self-organization of dislocations at their very fast almost simultaneous magnetically induced depinning 
when the ensemble becomes unstable. Such processes are usually characterized by a certain threshold of 


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
6/9

the effect. In this case, it is a threshold in the amplitude of the pulsed field. Indeed, such a threshold of the 
effect was experimentally revealed. As is seen in Fig. 4 (b), the resonance path 𝑙𝑟 at a decrease in the pulse 
amplitude begins to decrease abruptly below 10 𝜇T, reaching background values at ~5 𝜇T.

4. RESONANCE MODIFICATIONS OF MICROHARDNESS

Resonance memory effects Alshits (2012) and Alshits (2018) were studied in ZnO crystals grown by 

the hydrothermal synthesis method, as well as in triglycine sulphate and potassium acid phthalate crystals 
grown from aqueous solutions by the temperature reduction method.

Microhardness was measured by the Vickers method on a Neophot-21 optical microscope. Each value 

of microhardness was determined from the averaged size of diagonals of 20  25 dents of the indenter. The 
error of these measurements was 1.5 ÷ 3%. Measurements were performed before magnetic exposure, 
immediately after it, each hour during the first 4  6 h, and then 1 ÷ 3 times over the next several days.

Preliminary exposure of the crystals in crossed magnetic fields for an appropriate resonance frequency 

of the pump field resulted in an increase in the microhardness in the ZnO crystal and in its decrease in TGS 
and KAP crystals. The maximum change in the microhardness (10  15%) was reached 1 ÷ 3 h after the 
magnetic treatment, the microhardness gradually returned to its initial value on the first day. Next, after a 
sufficient pause, the effect was completely reproduced under the same conditions. The delay of the 
response of the crystal to magnetic exposure occurs apparently because of diffusion processes after the 
spin transformation of impurity centres.

Figure 5 (a) shows the dependences of the relative change in the microhardness on the frequency of the 

pump field for all the crystals measured in definite optimal delay times after the exposure. It is seen that 
these dependences are clearly resonant. Magnetic memory has strong anisotropy. The effect was 
completely or partially suppressed when a certain direction of a crystal coincided with the Earth’s magnetic 
field 𝐁Earth, and such a direction was found for each crystal. In the ZnO and TGS crystals, these are axes 
of 6- and 2-symmetries, respectively. This direction in the KAP crystal is the <100> direction, which lies
in the cleavage plane and is orthogonal to axis 2. 

It was found that the most important anisotropic property of this effect is again the strong dependence 

of the resonance frequency on the sample orientation in the Earth’s field. As is seen from Fig. 5 (a), the 
three groups of peaks related to different angles of a sample inclination from the vector 𝐁Earthare 
characterized by the different resonance frequencies. The simple checking shows that the corresponding 
relative frequencies 𝜈𝑟 / 𝜈0 are proportional to cos 𝜃 (see Fig. 5 (b)).

Thus, in complete analogy with the dislocation effect in the NaCl crystal  (see Fig. 3) a giant anisotropy 

of the effective 𝑔-factor: 𝑔eff ≈ 𝑔 cos 𝜃 was meet again. This means that the observed anomaly is a 
general property of the studied low-frequency EPR. As it was shown in Alshits (2018), the discussed effect 
probably arises due to the local magnetic fields 𝐁loc in crystals which have definite orientation and rotates 
together with sample. Ordinarily, the field Bloc is by 2-3 orders smaller than the static field 𝐵 in the 
standard EPR, so it produces the ordinary small anisotropy of the 𝑔-factor. However, in our case

and the situation is radically different. According to Alshits (2018) the Zeeman’s splitting of the magnetic 
energy level is determined by

ℎ 𝜈𝑟 = 𝑔 𝜇𝐵(|𝐁Earth + 𝐁loc| − 𝐁loc),
(5)

where for 𝐵loc ≫ 𝐵Earth one has

|𝐁Earth + 𝐁loc| − Bloc ≈ √Bloc

2 + 2BEarth ∙ Bloc − Bloc ≈ BEarth cos𝜃.
(6)

Thus, we come to the observed dependence descby equation (2) which may be described by the effective 
𝑔-factor 𝑔eff ≈ 𝑔 cos 𝜃.

.


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
7/9

Fig. 5 (a) Resonance peaks of the microhardness changes |H|/H0 for ZnO, TGS and KAP crystals at three angles 
 of sample rotations by 0, 45 and 80 about the BEarth direction, (b) the relative resonance frequency 𝜈𝑟 / 𝜈0
versus the angle  of sample rotation.

5. CONCLUSIONS

The features of the resonance magnetoplasticity in ultralow magnetic fields have been studied primarily 

for NaCl crystals, which have been used for a long time as a convenient model objects for the extensive 
studies of various properties of the magnetoplastic effect. This work concerns a new direction of studies 
where the exposure of crystals occurs in the EPR scheme with the use of the Earth’s magnetic field and 
radiofrequency pumping.

It has been found that the observed resonance of dislocation mobility has new, very specific, strongly 

anisotropic properties. The main such feature is the sensitivity of the mean path and the resonance 
frequency to the orientation of the sample and the directions of dislocations with respect to crossed 
magnetic fields. This sensitivity was not previously observed under usual EPR conditions corresponding 
to the pump frequencies of 10 GHz and 150 MHz.

Pulse EPR has also been detected in NaCl crystals in the Earth’s magnetic field. The resonance peak of 

paths appears in a narrow range of durations of a pump field pulse near 0.53 𝜇s (see Fig. 4 (а)). At fairly 
large amplitudes of the pump pulse beginning with a threshold level of ~10 𝜇T (see Fig. 4 (b)), an explosive 
coherent relaxation of the dislocation structure occurs: almost all fresh dislocations move in 0.5 𝜇s to the 
same distances of ~100 𝜇m as under harmonic pumping in a time of exposure of ~5 min.

The resonance change in the microhardness of the ZnO, TGS, and KAP crystals after their exposure in 

the same EPR scheme in the Earth’s magnetic field indicates that this phenomenon and its specific 
anisotropic features are fairly general. It occurs in the very different materials and is responsible for both 


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
8/9

in situ effects and magnetic memory effects. In essence, this concerns a very wide range of relaxation 
processes that have magnetic resonance nature. 

An important consequence of the existence of magnetic resonance transformations of defects is the 

recognition of new dangers of modern technical civilization. The mentioned processes can occur 
uncontrollably in critical elements of constructions and devices, leading to their degradation, when weak 
background radiofrequency fields are imposed on the Earth’s magnetic field. These are not abstract 
possibilities but are real processes, e.g., the accidental observation in 1985 of mass displacements of 
dislocations in a NaCl crystal under the action of magnetic pickups because of click of a switch described 
in Alshits (1999). This observation initiated the study of magnetoplasticity.

This work was partly supported by the Federal Agency of Scientific Organizations of Russia 

(Agreement No. 007-GZ/Ch3363/26) and by the Presidium of the Russian Academy of Sciences (program 
no. 32 for 2018-2020). Authors are grateful to V.A. Morozov and S.A. Minyukov for collaboration and 
helpful remarks.

References

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Perekalina, T.M. and Urusovskaya, A.A. (1987), “Dislocation motion in NaCl crystals 

under static magnetic field”, Sov. Phys. Solid State, 29(2), 265-269.

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Legen’kov, M.A. and Morozov, V.A. (1999), “Dislocation motion in NaCl crystals 

under combined action of mechanical and electromagnetic pulses created by an electron beam”, Phys. Solid State,
41(11), 1839-1841.

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Koldaeva, M.V. and Petrzhik, E.A. (2003), „Magnetoplastic effects: basic properties 

and physical mechanisms“, Crystallogr. Reports, 48(5), 768-795.

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Koldaeva, M.V. and Petrzhik, E.A. (2008), „Magnetoplastic effect in nonmagnetic 

crystals”, in: Dislocations in Solids, V. 14, Ch. 86, Ed. J.P. Hirth, Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 333-437.

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Koldaeva, M.V. and Petrzhik, E.A. (2012), „Change in the microhardness of 

nonmagnetic crystals after their exposure to the Earth’s magnetic field and AC pump field in the EPR scheme“, 
Phys. Solid State, 54(2), 324-331.

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Koldaeva, M.V. and Petrzhik, E.A. (2013a), „Anisotropic resonant magnetoplasticity 

of the NaCl crystals in the Earth’s magnetic field“, Phys. Solid State, 55(2), 358-366.

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Morozov, V.A., Kats, V.M., and Lukin, А.А. (2013b), “Resonant dislocation motion 

in NaCl crystals in the EPR scheme in the Earth’s magnetic field with pulsed pumping”, Phys. Sol. State, 55(11), 
2289-2296.

Alshits, V.I., Darinskaya, E.V., Koldaeva, M.V. and Petrzhik, E.A. (2016), “Resonance magnetoplasticity in ultralow 

magnetic fields”, JETP Letters, 104(5), 353-364.

Alshits, V.I., Koldaeva, M.V. and Petrzhik, E.A. (2018), “Anisotropy of resonance transformation of microhardness 

of crystals after their exposure in the EPR scheme under the Earth’s magnetic field”, JETP Letters, 107(10), 650-
655.

Badylevich, M.V., Kveder, V.V., Orlov, V.I., and Osip‘yan, Yu.A. (2005), “Spin-resonant change of unlocking stress 

for dislocations in silicon”, Phys. Status Solidi, C 2, 1869-1872.

Golovin, Yu.I. and Morgunov, R.B. (1995), “Effect of a static magnetic field on the rate of macroplastic flow of ionic 

crystals”,JETP Lett., 61(7),583-586.

Golovin, Yu.I., Morgunov, R.B., Ivanov, V.E., Zhulikov, C.E. and Dmitrievskii, A.A. (1998), “Electron paramagnetic 

resonance in a subsystem of structural defects as a factor in the plasticization of NaCl crystals”, JETP Lett., 
68(5),426-431.

Golovin, Yu.I., Morgunov, R.B., Ivanov, V.E. and Dmitrievskii, A.A. (2000), “Softening of ionic crystals as a result 

of a change in the spin states of structural defects under paramagnetic resonance conditions”, J. Exp. Theor. Phys.,
90(6), 939-949.

Golovin, Yu.I., Morgunov, R.B. and Baskakov, A.A. (2002), “Magnetoresonant softening of solids”, Mol. Phys., 

100(9), 1291-1296.

Golovin, Yu.I. (2004), “Magnetoplastic Effects in Solids”, Phys. Solid State, 46(5), 789-824.
Morgunov, R.B. (2004), “Spin micromechanics in the physics of plasticity”, Phys. Usp., 47(5), 125-147.
Osip’yan, Yu.A., Morgunov, R.B., Baskakov, A.A., Orlov, A.M., Skvortsov, A.A., Inkina, E.N. and Tanimoto, J. 

(2004), “Magnetoresonant hardening of silicon single crystals”, JETP Lett., 79(3), 126-130.

Smirnov, B.I., Peschanskaya, N.N. and Nikolaev, V.I. (2001), “Magnetoplastic effect in NaNO2 ferroelectric 

crystals”, Phys. Solid State, 43(12), 2250-2252.


ArXiv19-Geomagnetic.docx
9/9

Tyapunina, N.A., Krasnikov, V.L. and Belozerova, E.P. (1999), “The influence of a magnetic field on the inelastic 

properties of LiF crystals”, Phys. Solid State, 41(6), 942-946.

Urusovskaya, A.A., Alshits, V.I., Smirnov, A.E. and Bekkauer, N.N. (2003), The influence of the magnetic effects 

on the mechanical properties and real structure of nonmagnetic crystals, Crystallogr. Reports, 48(5), 796-812.


