1

A caloritronics-based Mott neuristor

Javier del Valle*, Pavel Salev, Yoav Kalcheim and Ivan K. Schuller

Department of Physics and Center for Advanced Nanoscience, University of California-San Diego, La 

Jolla, California 92093, USA

*Corresponding author: jdelvallegranda@ucsd.edu

Machine learning imitates the basic features of biological neural networks to 
efficiently perform tasks such as pattern recognition1,2. This has been mostly
achieved at a software level, and a strong effort is currently being made to mimic 
neurons and synapses with hardware components, an approach known as 
neuromorphic computing3–6. CMOS-based circuits have been used for this 
purpose4–7, but they are non-scalable, limiting the device density and motivating the 
search for “neuromorphic materials”8. While recent advances in resistive switching 
have provided a path to emulate synapses at the 10 nm scale9–13, a scalable neuron 
analogue is yet to be found. Here, we show how heat transfer can be utilized to mimic
neuron functionalities in Mott nanodevices. We use the Joule heating created by 
current spikes to trigger the insulator-to-metal transition in a biased VO2 nanogap. 
We show that thermal dynamics allow the implementation of the basic neuron 
functionalities: activity, leaky integrate-and-fire, volatility and rate coding7,14. By 
using local temperature as the internal variable, we avoid the need of external 
capacitors, which reduces neuristor size by several orders of magnitude. This 
approach could enable neuromorphic hardware to take full advantage of the rapid 
advances in memristive synapses, allowing for much denser and complex neural 
networks. More generally, we show that heat dissipation is not always an 
undesirable effect: it can perform computing tasks if properly engineered.

Machine learning has experienced an unprecedented growth in recent years, often referred 
to as an “artificial intelligence revolution”1,2. Its fundamental approach is inspired by
biological systems: using neural networks to classify large amounts of data into sorting 
categories. Classic examples are speech and image recognition 1,2. Neural networks are 
composed of two basic elements: neurons and synapses. Current machine learning
schemes implement these elements at a software level: neurons and synapses are 
simulated on standard computers based on a von Neumann architecture1,2. This approach 
is inefficient in terms of computation speed and energy consumption, motivating a great 
effort towards developing hardware-based neuromorphic systems3,5. CMOS-based 
circuitry has been successfully used for this, allowing to build tuneable and energy 
efficient neural networks4,6,7. Unfortunately, CMOS-based components rely on 
combinations of multiple transistors and capacitors that make them complex and large7. 
This limits circuit scalability and, hence, poses a limitation to achieve dense neural 
networks which could eventually rival the brain.


2

A solution to this problem might be found in “neuromorphic materials”, whose intrinsic 
properties mimic those of neurons and synapses815. Resistive switching (RS), a 
phenomenon in which an applied electric field modifies the resistance of the material, 
offers a unique opportunity to achieve this goal13,16,17. RS can be volatile18–20 or non-
volatile9,21, giving the possibility to emulate synapse or neuron behaviours, respectively.
Multiple groups have used non-volatile RS to achieve synaptic functionalities11,22, and 
memristor crossbar arrays have already been used to perform pattern recognition10,12,23.
These synapse realizations, however, still rely on traditional electronics to play the role
of neurons (neuristors). This approach does not take full advantage of the scalability and 
simplicity offered by memristive synapses, and motivates the search for a simpler and 
more scalable neuristor.

A neuristor must feature the most basic functionalities of real neurons: i) activity
(outputting a current), ii) leaky integrate-and-fire, iii) volatility (resetting after a firing), 
and iv) rate coding of the external stimuli. Several groups have explored the possibility
of a RS-based neuristor. Pickett et al.24 and Ignatov et al.25 use volatile RS in Mott 
insulators to emulate neurons, but their solution relies on large capacitors and is non-
scalable. Wang et al.26, Tuma et al.27 and Stoliar et al.28 successfully implement integrate 
and fire dynamics using diffusive memristors, phase-change materials and Mott 
insulators, respectively. However, these systems are not active as they do not generate a 
current. Moreover, they are not volatile i.e. do not reset automatically, a characteristic
needed for spiking dynamics. This limits their autonomy and their practical 
implementation as standalone neurons. A fully autonomous and scalable neuristor is still
to be found.

Performing leaky integrate-and-fire is one of the key functionalities of a neuristor. It must 
integrate all the stimuli coming from previous neurons and fire when the excitation is 
above a certain threshold14. This process can be viewed as two separate ones: the leaky 
integration, and the firing mechanism (Figure 1a). In the case of biological neurons, the 
cell membrane acts as a capacitor that integrates incoming ionic currents. The firing 
mechanism, based on voltage gated sodium and potassium channels, is activated once the
membrane potential passes a certain threshold. CMOS neuristors use a similar approach: 
a capacitor plays the role of cell membrane by integrating current from incoming pulses7, 
while the CMOS circuitry produces the firing events. While this parallelism with 
biological systems is appealing, the use of capacitors to store the internal state of the 
neuron limits the circuit scalability. In order to avoid malfunctioning, their capacitance 
must be much larger than the parasitic capacitance of the electrode lines. Therefore, 
integration capacitors cover a large area in current CMOS neurons, having lateral sizes in 
the order of 10-100 m7. Capacitor downscaling is one of the most challenging issues in 
other technologies such as DRAM, where the industry has dedicated intense effort 
towards developing complex 3D capacitive structures to circumvent this problem29.

Instead of electrical currents, we propose using heat flow to perform computing tasks, an 
approach known as caloritronics. Temperature substitutes charge as the integrating 
variable, as depicted in Figure 1b. Current spikes coming from previous neurons induce 


3

Joule heating while passing through a resistive element (heater), increasing local
temperature with every spike. The heater is thermally coupled to a firing element that is 
very sensitive to temperature changes and fires once a threshold temperature is exceeded.
In this work, we use VO2, a well-known correlated oxide with a sharp insulator-to-metal 
transition (IMT) around 340 K30, as the firing element. We realize leaky integrate-and-
fire using the thermal dynamics, which are governed by similar equations to those 
describing the charge dynamics of a leaky capacitor (see figures 1a and 1b). Adopting
local temperature as the internal state allows building simple-design neuristors that can 
be downsized to the nanoscale, as thermal dynamics equations preserve the same form 
independent of the system size.

We fabricated and tested a proof-of-concept neuristor that performs all basic neuronal 
functionalities. It consists of a VO2 thin film on top of which two layers of electrodes are 
patterned (detailed fabrication process in methods section and Extended Data Figure 1). 
The first layer consists of two Ti/Au electrodes (running vertically in Figure 2a) separated 
by a 50 nm gap. These electrodes are used to apply voltage to the VO2, and provide the 
source of the neuristor’s active output. If the voltage is high enough, a transition into the 
metallic phase can be electrically triggered18,19,31. Figure 2b shows the current as a 
function of time when a voltage pulse is applied to the gap. It illustrates the threshold 
nature of the voltage triggered IMT: the device becomes metallic once a threshold voltage
(VTh) is exceeded31. The second electrode layer is a Ti/Au nanowire (running horizontally 
in Figure 2a) which acts as a heater. It is separated from the bottom electrodes by a 70-
nm-thick Al2O3 layer which provides electrical insulation (resistance larger than 20 M), 
but ensures thermal coupling between them.

Figure 2c shows VTh of the VO2 gap as a function of temperature. Two cases are shown: 
0 mA (black) and 12.5 mA (red) current flowing through the nanowire heater (horizontal 
electrode). In the second case, Joule heating locally increases the temperature of the gap
reducing its VTh. To work as a neuristor, the gap is kept under a DC bias just below its 
threshold voltage (VDC<VTh), as represented in Figure 2c by a green dot. When a high 
enough current pulse IInput is passed through the heater, it lowers VTh below VDC, and the 
gap turns metallic, generating an output current through the bottom electrodes (IOutput). 
This situation is presented in Figure 2d, where a 30 ns current pulse is applied to the 
heater, triggering the IMT in the gap. We must emphasize that the output and input 
electrodes are electrically isolated, and an output current is generated when the neuristor 
fires, making it an active element. Our device releases energy when stimulated, a crucial 
property to avoid a re-amplification stage after each neural layer. This goes one step 
beyond previous RS-based neuristors26–28, which become conducting after performing 
integrate-and-fire but do not create an output on their own.

Volatility is a necessary feature to implement spiking dynamics. As presented so far, our 
device would remain conductive once triggered. For it to reset after the firing event, we 
add a resistor (RLoad) in series with the gap (Inset figure 2e). The resistor value must be in 
between ROFF (20 k) and RON (100 ), the gap resistance in the insulating and metallic 
states, respectively32. The role of this resistor is to lower the voltage across the gap once


4

the VO2 becomes metallic32, which in turn reduces heat dissipation and decreases local 
temperature after the firing event. As a result, the VO2 returns to its insulating state, 
resetting the neuristor (Figure 2e). The result is the desired effect: spike in – spike out.

Leaky integrate-and-fire (LIF) dynamics are governed by the characteristic thermal times 
of our device, given by its specific heat and thermal resistance to the substrate. Figure 3a
shows the warm up times of the neuristor as a function of IInput, that is, how long it takes
the device to warm and fire once the current flows through the heater. Typical times are 
on the order of 10-100 ns. Using pulse widths and rates around that timescale allow us to 
implement LIF dynamics. Figure 3b shows the response of the neuristor (IOutput) when a 
train of current pulses is sent to the heater (IInput). The first pulse does not raise the 
temperature enough to fire the device, but the cumulative effect of several pulses adds up 
to trigger the IMT after an integration period. The number of pulses necessary to produce 
a firing event depends on the pulse amplitude. Figure 3c shows the probability of the 
neuristor firing after a certain number of pulses are applied to the input. Several current 
amplitudes are shown, offering a clear visualization of the LIF dynamics. For high current
pulses, the device is always triggered with just one pulse. For lower currents, the 
probability of it firing with just one pulse goes down, and more pulses are necessary to 
induce the IMT. The overall mean integration time is shifted to larger values as the current 
amplitude is decreased. When the input current is too low, heat leakage into the 
environment overcomes the dissipated power, and the device does not fire for any number
of pulses.

Another basic feature of biological neurons is rate coding: the frequency at which a 
neuron spikes depends on the amplitude of its stimulus. Strong stimulus will produce high 
frequency spiking, while weak stimulus will yield slower patterns14. Our neuristor 
reproduces that feature, as shown in figure 4a. A constant current is passed through the 
heater, resulting in a repetitive spiking output. The frequency of the output increases with
the input current (figure 4b). After the neuristor fires, both the temperature and the voltage 
across the gap drop, leaving the system in a refractory period until they increase back to 
their initial values. The time it will take the temperature to return to its firing value is 
given by the warm up time shown in figure 3a. The device will heat up faster at higher 
input currents, leading to the desired rate coding. On the other hand, the recovery time 
for the voltage will be proportional to ROFF⸱CPar, where CPar is the parasitic capacitance 
of the electrode lines. We must note that ROFF is not constant, but decreases with 
temperature (inset in figure 4b). This makes the charge up time faster at higher local 
temperatures (higher input currents), also leading to the desired rate coding. Whether the 
origin of the rate coding is given by heat dissipation or by the parasitic capacitance will 
depend on the particular geometry and characteristics of the device. In our particular case, 
the period between spikes is in the s range, 10-20 times slower than typical warm up 
times. This suggest that the charging time is the more dominant factor determining the 
recovery time in our system. Further optimization, such as embedding the load resistor 
into the lithography, could reduce CPar, to the point in which rate coding would be 
governed solely by thermal dynamics.  


5

Many of the relevant parameters of the proposed neuristor depend on the particular device 
design, as well as on the intrinsic properties of the chosen materials. This gives plenty of 
room to explore and improve its functionalities. Different substrates, insulating spacers 
or geometric designs will strongly change the device properties. For instance, a less 
thermally conductive substrate would reduce heat leakage to the environment, allowing 
for the use of lower input currents. A similar effect could be achieved by further reducing 
sizes. A larger ON/OFF ratio between insulator and metal would result in higher output 
currents when the IMT is triggered. With proper optimization, the output current could
become larger than the input current, resulting in signal amplification. This could allow
to use the neuristor as a completely independent device, without the need of a dedicated 
amplification stage.

Caloritronics and resistive switching can be combined to create scalable and autonomous 
neuristors. We demonstrated four basic neural functionalities: activity, volatility, leaky 
integrate-and-fire dynamics and rate coding using simple devices that can be downscaled 
well below the m scale. Combined with the fast advances in memristor technology, this
could pave the way to develope dense neuromorphic hardware, allowing for deeper and 
more complex neural networks. Our approach could be generalized to other physical 
phenomena. Other systems at the edge of a phase transition very sensitive to external 
stimuli might show similar behaviour. On a broader scope shows that, although often
regarded as an undesirable consequence, power dissipation might actually enable new 
ways of computing, taking advantage of the rich phenomenology of correlated systems.


6

References

1.
Lecun, Y., Bengio, Y. & Hinton, G. Deep learning. Nature 521, 436–444 (2015).

2.
Editorial. More than machines. Nat. Mach. Intell. 1, 1–1 (2019).

3.
Mead, C. Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Addison-Wesley Longman 
Publishing Co.,Inc. (Addison-Wesley, 1989).

4.
Merolla, P. A. et al. A million spiking-neuron integrated circuit with a scalable 
communication network and interface. Science (80-. ). 345, 668–673 (2014).

5.
Indiveri, G. & Liu, S.-C. Memory and Information Processing in Neuromorphic 
Systems. Proc. IEEE 103, 1379–1397 (2015).

6.
Furber, S. Large-scale neuromorphic computing systems. J. Neural Eng. 13,
(2016).

7.
Indiveri, G. et al. Neuromorphic Silicon Neuron Circuits. Front. Neurosci. 5, 1–
23 (2011).

8.
Zhou, Y. & Ramanathan, S. Mott Memory and Neuromorphic Devices. Proc. 
IEEE 103, 1289–1310 (2015).

9.
Strukov, D. B., Snider, G. S., Stewart, D. R. & Williams, R. S. The missing 
memristor found. Nature 453, 80–83 (2008).

10.
Prezioso, M. et al. Training and operation of an integrated neuromorphic network 
based on metal-oxide memristors. Nature 521, 61–64 (2015).

11.
Jo, S. H. et al. Nanoscale memristor device as synapse in neuromorphic systems. 
Nano Lett. 10, 1297–1301 (2010).

12.
Pi, S. et al. Memristor crossbar arrays with 6-nm half-pitch and 2-nm critical 
dimension. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 35–40 (2018).

13.
del Valle, J., Ramírez, J. G., Rozenberg, M. J. & Schuller, I. K. Challenges in 
materials and devices for resistive-switching-based neuromorphic computing. J. 
Appl. Phys. 124, 211101 (2018).

14.
Koch, C. Biophysics of Computation. Oxford University Press (Oxford 
University Press, 1999).

15.
Romera, M. et al. Vowel recognition with four coupled spin-torque nano-
oscillators. Nature 563, 230–234 (2018).

16.
Waser, R. & Aono, M. Nanoionics-based resistive switching memories. Nat. 
Mater. 6, 833–840 (2007).

17.
Yang, J. J., Strukov, D. B. & Stewart, D. R. Memristive devices for computing. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 13–24 (2013).

18.
Zimmers, A. et al. Role of Thermal Heating on the Voltage Induced Insulator-
Metal Transition in   VO 2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 056601 (2013).


7

19.
Brockman, J. S. et al. Subnanosecond incubation times for electric-field-induced 
metallization of a correlated electron oxide. Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 453–458 
(2014).

20.
Wang, Z. et al. Memristors with diffusive dynamics as synaptic emulators for 
neuromorphic computing. Nat. Mater. 16, 101–108 (2017).

21.
Beck, A., Bednorz, J. G., Gerber, C., Rossel, C. & Widmer, D. Reproducible 
switching effect in thin oxide films for memory applications. Appl. Phys. Lett. 77,
139 (2000).

22.
Ohno, T. et al. Short-term plasticity and long-term potentiation mimicked in 
single inorganic synapses. Nat. Mater. 10, 591–595 (2011).

23.
Boybat, I. et al. Neuromorphic computing with multi-memristive synapses. Nat. 
Commun. 9, 2514 (2018).

24.
Pickett, M. D., Medeiros-Ribeiro, G. & Williams, R. S. A scalable neuristor built 
with Mott memristors. Nat. Mater. 12, 114–117 (2013).

25.
Ignatov, M., Ziegler, M., Hansen, M., Petraru, A. & Kohlstedt, H. A memristive 
spiking neuron with firing rate coding. Front. Neurosci. 9, 376 (2015).

26.
Wang, Z. et al. Fully memristive neural networks for pattern classification with 
unsupervised learning. Nat. Electron. 1, 137–145 (2018).

27.
Tuma, T., Pantazi, A., Le Gallo, M., Sebastian, A. & Eleftheriou, E. Stochastic 
phase-change neurons. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 693–699 (2016).

28.
Stoliar, P. et al. A Leaky-Integrate-and-Fire Neuron Analog Realized with a Mott 
Insulator. Adv. Funct. Mater. 27, 1604740 (2017).

29.
Kim, S. K. et al. Capacitors with an Equivalent Oxide Thickness of &lt;0.5 nm 
for Nanoscale Electronic Semiconductor Memory. Adv. Funct. Mater. 20, 2989–
3003 (2010).

30.
Imada, M., Fujimori, A. & Tokura, Y. Metal-insulator transitions. Rev. Mod. 
Phys. 70, 1039–1263 (1998).

31.
del Valle, J. et al. Subthreshold firing in Mott nanodevices. Nature (accepted 
2019)

32.
Lee, Y. W. et al. Metal-insulator transition-induced electrical oscillation in 
vanadium dioxide thin film. Appl. Phys. Lett. 92, 162903 (2008).


8

Acknowledgments 

This work was supported as part of the Quantum Materials for Energy Efficient 
Neuromorphic Computing (Q-MEEN-C) Energy Frontier Research Center (EFRC),
funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences 
under Award # DE-SC0019273. Part of the fabrication process was done at the San Diego 
Nanotechnology Infrastructure (SDNI) of UCSD, a member of the National 
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), which is supported by the National 
Science Foundation under grant ECCS-1542148. J. del Valle thanks Fundación Ramón 
Areces for the support with a postdoctoral fellowship. The authors thank Marcelo J. 
Rozenberg, Juan Trastoy and George Kassabian for helpful discussions.

Author Contributions

J.d.V. and I.K.S. conceived the idea. J.d.V, and Y.K. designed and fabricated the devices. 
J.d.V. and P.S. performed the transport measurements and analyzed the data. J.d.V. and 
I.K.S. wrote the manuscript. All authors participated in the discussion of the results and 
corrected multiple iterations of the manuscript.

Data availability

The data supporting the plots and claims of this manuscript are available from the 
corresponding authors upon reasonable request.

Methods

Sample preparation. A 70 nm VO2 film was grown by reactive sputtering on top of an 
R-cut Al2O3 substrate. A 4 mtorr Argon/Oxygen mix (8% O2) was used during deposition.
The substrate temperature was kept at 520C, and cooled down after sputtering at a rate 
of 12C/min. X-ray diffraction shows textured orientation along 100 for VO2. Transport 
measurements show a four orders of magnitude IMT, confirming the high quality of the 
film. The device was fabricated in two lithographic steps (layers). In the first layer, e-
beam lithography end e-beam evaporation was used to pattern two Ti (20 nm)/Au (30 
nm) electrodes. A small gap (⁓50 nm) was left between both electrodes, so large electric 
fields could be generated by applying a few volts. The second layer consists on a Al2O3
(70 nm)/Ti (20 nm)/Au (30 nm) nanowire, patterned on top of the gap and running 
perpendicular to the first layer electrodes. E-beam lithography and e-beam evaporation 
was used for this purpose. Several of such devices are patterned in a single sapphire 
substrate. Optical lithography and reactive ion etching was used to remove the VO2


9

outside of the gap area and isolate the different devices from each other. More information 
on the device fabrication process can be found in Extended Data Figure 1.

Fast transport measurements. Measurements were carried out in a TTPX Lakeshore 
cryogenic probe station. The station is equipped with high-speed (20 GHz) probes, with 
ground/line/ground geometry and 50  characteristic impedance. In order to avoid 
reflections (the insulating resistance of the device is in the 104  range) a 50 
termination to ground was installed before the sample. A 240 MHz Tektronix function 
generator was used to create the voltage pulses and a 50  terminated Tektronix 
broadband oscilloscope (20 GHZ) was used to monitor the current. The electrical circuit 
set up ensured a rise time around 5 ns.


10

Figure 1│ Charge vs thermal signal integration. a Circuit representation of the leaky integrate-and-
fire neuron model. Its dynamics are described by the equation shown below the circuit. A capacitor CMem
represents the neuron membrane capacitance, and accumulates charge from input current pulses IInput
(red). The leaking resistor RL represents the leaky term of the equation. If the voltage V across CMem rises 
above a threshold, the firing stage will produce an output spike (blue). b Schematic representation of a
thermal transfer-based neuristor. Incoming current pulses (red) dissipate power (QInput) in a heating 
resistance. A Mott nanodevice is kept under a DC voltage VDC, and will emit a current spike (blue) if a 
threshold temperature is exceeded. The equation below describes the thermal dynamics of the system, 
where CSp is the specific heat, RT the thermal resistance and T’ = T – TEq: being T the local temperature 
and TEq the equilibrium (substrate) temperature.


11

Figure 2│ Experimental realization of the proposed neuristor. a SEM image of the device. Two layers 
of electrodes, electrically isolated by an Al2O3 spacer, are visible. Bottom layer consist of two Ti/Au 
electrodes, running vertically in the image. A small gap (⁓50 nm) is left in between. The upper electrode 
is kept at VDC bias. The top electrode layer is a Ti/Au nanowire, running horizontally in the image. Input 
current pulses (red) are sent through that heating electrode, while the neuristor output (blue) is collected 
though the lower bottom electrode. b Current through a VO2 gap vs time, when a 1 s voltage pulse is 
applied. T=315 K. Two different pulse amplitudes are shown, 0.87 V (black) and 0.92 V (grey). c
Threshold voltage vs temperature in a gap, when two different DC currents are applied to the heater: 0 
mA (black) and 12.5 mA (grey). The green dot is an example of the VDC and temperature conditions for 
the device to behave as a neuristor. d Current vs time. Left axis (red curve) shows the input current through 
the heater. Right axis (blue curve) shows the output through the gap. Conditions were VDC = 0.85 VTh and 
T=325 K. e Current vs time, with a load resistor in series with the gap. Left axis (red) shows the input 
current pulse. Right axis (blue) shows the output through the gap. RLoad = 10 k VDC = 0.88 VTh and 
T=325 K. Inset: schematic circuit showing RLoad connected in series with the gap.


12

Figure 3│ Leaky integrate and fire dynamics. a Warm up time as a function of the input current. VDC
= 0.85 VTh and T=325 K. b Current vs time when the neuristor is stimulated with a train of pulses. Upper 
panel shows the input current, consisting on 30 ns pulses with a 150 ns period. Bottom panel shows the 
output current through the gap. There is an integration time between the moment the pulses are applied 
and the moment the IMT is triggered. RLoad = 10 k, VDC = 0.88 VTh and T=325 K. No firing occurs after 
the last pulse because the neuron is in its refractory period (indicated with a grey shaded area). c
Probability that the device will fire after a certain number of pulses. Pulses are 150 ns apart from each 
other. Several pulse amplitudes are shown. VDC = 0.91 VTh and T=325 K. 


13

Figure 4│ Rate coding. a Current vs time when a DC current is applied as input. Top panel shows the 
input current IDC,Input through the heater (red). Middle and lower panels show the output spiking pattern 
(blue) induced in the gap. The responses to two IDC,Input values are shown: 5.3 mA (middle panel) and 8.9 
mA (lower panel). RLoad = 10 k, VDC = 0.88 VTh and T=325 K. b Firing rate of the output spiking pattern 
as a function of IDC,Input. Inset: resistance of a VO2 gap as a function of the temperature. Only the cooling 
branch is shown.


14

Extended Data Figure 1│ Fabrication and configuration of the neuristor. a-d different stages of the 
fabrication and set up process. a shows the VO2 film (light brown) on top of a sapphire substrate (light 
blue). b shows the sample after a first lithographic step in which two Ti/Au electrodes (yellow) are 
patterned, leaving a small gap in between (⁓50 nm). c shows the sample after the second lithographic step 
in which the following trilayer was grown: Al2O3 (70 nm, blue) / Ti (20 nm, red) / Au (30 nm, red). d
shows the electrical connections used for the fast transport measurements (RLoad not included). e Tilted 
SEM image of the device. The Al2O3 and metallic layers of the heating electrode can be distinguished.


