1

A Computational Phase Field Study of Conducting 
Channel Formation in Dielectric Thin Films: A View 
Towards the Physical Origins of Resistive Switching 

John F. Sevic and Nobuhiko P. Kobayashi

Department of Electrical Engineering, Baskin School of Engineering, University of California, 
Santa Cruz, California 95064 USA 

March 2, 2019

Abstract: A phase field method is used to computationally study conducting channel morphology of resistive 
switching thin film structures. Our approach successfully predicts the formation of conducting channels in 
typical dielectric thin film structures, comparable to a range of resistive switches, offering an alternative 
computational formulation based on metastable states treated at the atomic scale. In contrast to previous 
resistive switching thin film models, our formulation makes no a priori assumptions on conducting channel 
morphology and its fundamental transport mechanisms.

Keywords: thin film, dielectric, interface, resistive switching, memristor, mutlti-physics, finite-element, 
transport phenomena, surface, phase field, spinodal, phase separation, RRAM. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Physical and chemical properties of dielectric thin films for resistive switching are 

governed by the dynamical behavior of intrinsic atomic metastable states of thin film 
materials and the presence of irreversible states endowed by specific preparation processes. 
Atomic metastable states may arise from various phenomena, such as Mott localization or 
change in configurational entropy, producing such effects as insulator-metal transition and 
hysteresis often seen in appropriately prepared dielectric thin films species1, 2, 3, 4. When 
two chemically distinct and spatially distinct materials separated by an interface are forced 
to interact, they would, in the steady-state, produce either a uniform solid solution or 
decompose into two distinct phases via phase separation, depending on their mutual affinity 
associated with their unique bulk free-energy density. However, the morphological 
evolution of the interface separating each material is inherently dynamic and naturally 
produces complex microstructure resulting from various interactions of bulk free-energy, 
interface energy, electrothermal phenomena, and electrochemical phenomena the interface 
experiences5. Therefore, distinctive microstructure is expected to appear at the interface to 
self-consistently minimize the total energy, which in turn result in characteristic transport 
properties fundamental to, for instance, resistive switching behavior exhibited by dielectric 
thin films 4, 6. 


2

Various qualitative models have been adopted to study resistive switching behavior 

of dielectric thin films, largely based on formation of conducting channels composed of 
clusters of charged species7, 8, 9, 10. These models invoke both electronic transport and ionic 
transport, often treated as electrothermal and electrochemical processes, respectively, 
reproducing both unipolar and bipolar resistive switching behavior. This conducting 
channel formalism suggests an initial irreversible growth of cluster-like aggregates 
composed of charged species forming conducting channels, as illustrated by Figure 1. 
These conducting channels subsequently form and rupture under the influence of an 
external electric potential, yielding resistive switching behavior. 

Numerous computational studies have adopted the conducting channel formalism 

to advance theories on resistive switching that occurs in thin films made of dielectric 
materials. Xu posed a qualatative conducting channel model based on experimental data 
suggesting clustering and bifurcation of thread-like conducting channels to explain set and 
reset processes of bipolar resistive RAM (RRAM) devices7. Pan presented a similar study, 
with empirical evidence supporting formation and rupture of conducting channels 
corresponding to low-resistance and high-resistance states, respectively, of their ZnO 
memristor8. Ielmini presented a self-consistent electrothermal computational study based 
on a thermally activated ion migration model demonstrating conducting channel formation 
and rupture9. Using an analytical formulation, the approach correctly resolved set and reset 
behavior of a generic bipolar RRAM device by dynamic coupling of the channel resistance, 
charge transport and temperature, providing insight on conducting channel dynamic 
behavior. Gibson demonstrated steady-state negative differential resistance in niobium 
oxide selectors using a compact behavioral model self-consistently coupled to an 
electrothermal network. Their model demonstrated insulator-metal transition is not 
required for the presence of negative differential resistance, being due instead to Frenkel 
transport11. In contrast, Sevic posed a continuum-based computational study of the 
dynamical evolution of niobium oxide selector electroforming12, 13. 

The conducting channel formalism has been complimented by several empirical 

studies on channel morphology and effect on transport properties of mobile charge carriers 
as the mechanism fundamental to resistive switching behavior. Yang and Strachan, in two 
complimentary studies of titanium oxide thin films using atomic force microscopy and 
transmission electron microscopy, provided experimental evidence of regions of dynamic 
conductivity modulation corresponding to set and reset. Their studies also indicated 
resistive switching behavior of their structure is related to a localized partial reduction of 
titanium dioxide and subsequent formation of a metallic conducting channel14, 15. Miao 
studied tantalum oxide thin films using pressure-modulated conductance microscopy to 
identify regions of dynamic conductivity modulation. Transmission electron 
crosssectioning of these modulated regions suggested presence of conductive channels16. 
Ahmed used electron energy loss spectroscopy to observe formation and rupture of the 
oxygen deficient conducting channels goverening charge transport phenomema in their 


3

perovskite strontium titanate metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structure10. Their results 
suggest the presence of complex interface microstructure and spinodal decomposition 
distinguishing the semi-metallic conducting channels embedded in amorphous bulk. 

While the conducting channel formalism qualitatively explains resistive switching 

behavior of dielectric thin films, in contrast, previous computational studies have largely 
adopted a continuum transport formulation. Selfconsistent solution of the continuum 
transport equations dynamically emulates advection and diffusion of thermally-activated 
charged species, and their interaction with local electric potential and temperature, to 
model bulk resistive switching phenomena. The continuum formulation, however, depends 
vitally on an a priori conducting channel transport model and correct identification of 
diffusion and mobility expressions for each specific transport mechanism, for example 
Frenkel transport for ionic vacancy conduction11, 12, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 

A computational formulation that does not a priori impose assumptions on 

conducting channel morphology, transport phenomena, or interface uniformity, and instead 
treats resistive switching from its origin at the atomic-scale, may offer significant 
advantages over existing methods. Such a method might model the dynamical evolution of 
cluster-like charged aggregates, as illustrated by Figure 1, subject to their atomic and 
interfacial electrothermal interaction, naturally producing conducting channels in a non-
conducting host. The phase field method is one such method22, 23, 24, 25. 

In this paper, we apply a phase field method to study dynamical evolution of 

conducting channels that influence resistive switching behavior exhibited by dielectric thin 
films. With the phase field method, the assumptions of an a priori conducting channel 
model and the presence of specific transport phenomena to explain resistive switching are 
abandoned, and our model is instead formulated as a diffuse interface problem subject to a 
variational principle26 . Our approach successfully predicts the formation of conducting 
channels in typical dielectric thin film structures comparable to a range of resistive 
switches, offering an alternative computational formulation based on metastable states 
treated at the atomic scale, requiring no assumptions on conducting channel morphology 
and its fundamental transport mechanisms. Further, our approach applies to both electronic 
transport and ionic transport, e.g. ionic oxygen vacancies, however the current study 
focuses exclusively on electronic transport of dielectric thin films and unipolar resistive 
switching. 

II. SELF-CONSISTENT PHASE FIELD FORMULATION 

Charge transport properties of thin films, governed by the dynamical behavior of 

atomic metastable states, are naturally treated by the phase field method. In contrast to 
molecular dynamics, which tracks the motion of each charge carrier, the phase field 
formulation tracks the dynamical evolution of the envelope of clusters of charge carriers 


4

whose aggregate boundary, an a priori unknown, forms a conducting channel interface 
within the non-conducting host, as illustrated by Figure 1. The phase field formulation thus 
avoids the mathematically onerous problem of expressing dynamic boundary conditions 
over an interface whose location is part of the unknown solution. In our study, self-
consistent solution of the phase field equation yields the dynamical evolution of the 
interface formed between the conducting state and non-conducting state, both of which co-
exist in a dielectric thin film, subject to local conservation laws. 

To apply the phase field formulation, consider Figure 2 illustrating a pristine 

dielectric thin film structure composed of a conducting region and a non-conducting region, 
separated by an interface represented by the dotted horizontal line. This initial structure is 
viewed as an as-fabricated resistive switch comprising a dielectric thin film in which two 
distinct regions are separated by an interface, comprising a resistive switch made of a 
dielectric thin film in which mobile charges are initially distributed in a certain way 
creating the two regions, one conducting and the other non-conducting. This specific initial 
structure allows a double-well free-energy density function and the diffuse interface 
approximation to suitably describe dynamical structural evolution within our dielectric thin 
films. The bulk free-energy density function associated with the dielectric thin film 
structure of Figure 2 is given by 

where A is the magnitude of the double-well potential, c1 and c2 represent normalized 
concentration of the conducting and non-conducting states, respectively, and c(r,t) is the 
concentration variable, an unknown27. The concentration is bounded to the interval 
0 ≤ c(r, t) ≤ 1, with unity corresponding to the pure conducting state and zero corresponding 
to the pure non-conducting state. Here r represents a location in the (x,y)-plane of the 
structure of Figure 2 and t is time. 

Interaction of the bulk free-energy and interface energy with electric potential 

externally applied to the structure of Figure 2 is modeled by the following electrostatic 
energy term 

where V(r, t) is electric potential between the top and bottom edges of the structure, q is 
electronic charge, and Ω is a differential volume unit28. The free-energy functional obtains 
by combining Equations 1 and 2 with an interface gradient energy term to yield 


5

where k is an interfacial gradient energy term that relates to energy stored per unit 
application of the potential of the gradient of c(r,t) and the integration is over R, the entire 
thin film structure of Figure 2. Interfacial gradient energy is assumed to be uniformly 
constant along the interface. 

The phase field transport equation is found by seeking an energy-minimizing 

stationary state of the free-energy, identified by finding the first-order variation of free-
energy functional Equation 3. From the first-order variation of free-energy functional 
Equation 3, the phase field flux obtains 

where M is an associated mobility of the phase field flux in phase-space, and assumed 
constant. Since the concentration variable, c(r,t), is conserved, the phase field conservation 
law obtains 

This is the Cahn-Hilliard phase field equation in concentration variable c(r,t) for our 

dielectric thin film model29. The dynamical evolution of the conducting channel, created 
at the interface formed by the conducting and non-conducting states, under the influence 
of an externally applied electric potential, is described by phase field conservation Equation 
5 self-consistently coupled to the electronic Laplace equation13, 26. This yields 

where local conductivity, s[c(r,t)], is a linear positive-monotonic function of 


6

concentration, c(r,t)30. For the current computational study, an isothermal assumption is 
made for the initial forming process. Our current focus is to assess the applicability of the 
phase field method in the context of conducting channel formation in dielectric thin films, 
although we are fully aware of the importance of thermal effects used in our study and their 
intrinsic influence on the outcome12, 13. 

To study the dynamical evolution of conducting channel formation of our thin film 

structure, a self-consistent solution of Equation 6a and Equation 6b is obtained by the 
Multiphysics Object-Oriented Simulation Environment (MOOSE) finite-element 
platform31, 32, 33, 34. Periodic boundary conditions are imposed on the left and right edges 
of the discretized thin film structure of Figure 2 for both electric potential, V(r, t), and 
concentration, c(r,t). On the top and bottom edges Dirichlet boundary conditions for 
electric potential of 1.0 V and 0 V are imposed, respectively. Dirichlet boundary conditions 
for concentration are imposed on the top and bottom edges for an ideal electrical contact. 
The initial conducting and non-conducting regions are separated by an interface located at 
4 nm from the bottom contact. The initial concentration, c(r,0), is uniformly distributed 
between 0.1 and 0.3 for the non-conducting state and 0.7 and 0.9 for the conducting state, 
to approximate the pristine thinfilm structure shown in Figure 2. The double-well potential, 
A, is set to 1.0 eV ; the interfacial gradient energy term, k, is set to 5.0 eV /nm2 ; mobility, 
M , is set for 0.1 nm2 /(V × ns)35, 36, 37, 38. Convergence was defined by reaching a total 
energy minimum. 

III. DISCUSSION 

An initial simulation was performed on an ideal abrupt interface to study the impact 

of interface roughness on the initial growth process of the conducting channel, as illustrated 
by the initial and final states illustrated by Figures 3a and 3b, respectively. The initial 
concentration of the conducting and non-conducting states of the structure were set 
uniformly to 0.7 and 0.3, respectively, thereby forming an abrupt interface with no 
roughness. As seen in Figure 3b, no conducting channel growth was observed, which 
suggests that the formation of conducting channels that bridge the top and bottom contacts 
is not energetically favored if the initial interface is abrupt. In other words, conducting 
channels may form if the initial interface has a certain level of roughness, which is 
consistent with experiments in which an interface separating two domains always have 
roughness. While the initial interface of Figure 3a appears to be morphologically abrupt, 
interface roughness in our modeling relates to the magnitude of the variation in c(r,0) along 
the interface. An abrupt interface obtains when c(r,0) is constant within the conducting and 
non-conducting states and a diffuse interface obtains when c(r,0) varies within each of the 
two regions, as they do with initial conditions illustrated by Figure 2. 


7

Using the pristine initial conditions specified by Figure 2, illustrated by Figure 3c, 

the self-consistent solution of Equations 6a and 6b for concentration, c(r,t), is shown by 
Figure 3d. The results show formation of several conducting clusters and one continuous 
conducting channel, distinguished by the conducting domains shown in red and the non-
conducting domains shown in blue. These results suggest unique interface microstructure 
develops from the initial interface under the influence of electrical potential and leading to 
the birth of distinctive conducting domains running through the non-conducting states. 
Note the presence of a continuous conducting channel traversing the bottom edge to the 
top edge of the thin film structure, as well as the presence of incomplete and orphaned 
conducting domains. The presence of a continuous conducting channel suggests the 
existence of an electroformed state, for the particular conditions of the present simulation. 

The equilibrium interface formed by the conducting state and non-conducting state 

intrinsically describes the morphology of the conducting channel, represented by an 
envelope of cluster-like domains composed of many discrete charge carriers. The minimum 
energy condition imposed by the variation of the free-energy functional Equation 3 reflects 
local equilibrium between bulk free-energy density, interface energy, and their interaction 
with the applied electric potential, subject to appropriate boundary conditions and material 
properties. 

To explore the influence of film thickness on the formation of conducting channels, 

an additional simulation was carried out on an otherwise identical thin film structure 50 
nm thick, as shown by Figure 3e. Figure 3f shows the self-consistent solution for 
concentration, c(r,t), under these new conditions. It is evident that while formation of 
several conducting channel-like clusters has occurred, there does not appear to be a 
continuous conducting channel traversing the bottom edge to the top edge of the thin film 
structure. In further contrast, there appears to be relatively more incomplete and orphaned 
conducting domains. 

The thickness-to-width ratio for the structures of Figures 3c and 3e is 0.2 and 1.0, 

respectively. This suggests an affinity for conducting channel formation for low thickness-
to-width ratios, perhaps because of the dominance of the bulk free-energy, as indicated by 
the free-energy functional Equation 3. This observation has also been previously suggested 
based on experimental observations the formation of conducting channels depends 
substantially on the relative aspect ratio of the thin film structure as well as a numerous 
experiments that seem to indicate that a dielectric thin film needs to be in the range of 1 
nm to 10 nm for conducting channels to form20. 

IV. SUMMARY 

A computational phase field study of thin film conducting channel morphology and 

evolution has been presented. Atomic metastable states of thin films, responsible for 


8

resistance switching behavior, produces complex microstructure resulting from interaction 
of bulk free-energy and interface energy. The phase field formulation naturally avoids the 
mathematically onerous problem of tracking the dynamical evolution of the interface 
formed by this microstructure. 

Our computational results suggest the phase field formulation can model the 

dynamical evolution of conducting channel formation and growth, illustrating a new 
method for the study of dielectric thin films for resistive switching. Our results further 
suggest that only when the initial interface has roughness do conducting channels form. 
Since interface roughness is expected to exist in any real dielectric thin film interface, we 
thus expect to observe switching in many films. 

Furthermore, even though an initial well-prepared interface will exhibit finite 

roughness, the film thickness needs to be thin enough for a conducting channel to form, 
consistent with experimental data from thin film structures having a thickness-to-width 
ratio substantially less than unity. Physically this makes sense insofar as the lateral 
dimension establishes the number of nucleation sites at which conducting channels start 
forming, i.e. if the lateral dimension is extremely small, there exists reduced likelihood of 
conducting channel formation. 


9


10


11


