1

Unraveling Bulk and Grain Boundary Electrical Properties 

in La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ Thin Films

Francesco Chiabrera1, Iñigo Garbayo1, Dolors Pla2, Mónica Burriel2, Fabrice Wilhelm3,

Andrei Rogalev3, Marc Núñez1, Alex Morata1, Albert Tarancón1,4,*

1Department of Advanced Materials for Energy, Catalonia Institute for Energy Research (IREC), Jardí de les 

Dones de Negre 1, Planta 2, 08930 Sant Adrià de Besòs (Barcelona), Spain.

2Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP,† LMGP, F-38000 Grenoble, France

3European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), F-38054 Grenoble, France.

4ICREA, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain

* Corresponding author´s e-mail: atarancon@irec.cat;

Abstract

Grain boundaries in Sr-doped LaMnO3±δ thin films have been shown to strongly influence 

the electronic and oxygen mass transport properties, being able to profoundly modify the 

nature of the material. The unique behaviour of the grain boundaries can be correlated with 

substantial modifications of the cation concentration at the interfaces, which can be tuned by 

changing the overall cationic ratio in the films. In this work, we study the electronic 

properties of La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ thin films with variable Mn content. The influence of the 

cationic composition on the grain boundary and grain bulk electronic properties is elucidated 

by studying the manganese valence state evolution using spectroscopy techniques and by 

confronting the electronic properties of epitaxial and polycrystalline films. Substantial 

differences in the electronic conduction mechanism are found in the presence of grain 

boundaries and depending on the manganese content. Moreover, the unique defect chemistry 

of the nanomaterial is elucidated by measuring the electrical resistance of the thin films as a 

function of oxygen partial pressure, disclosing the importance of the cationic local non-

stoichiometry on the thin films behavior.

† Institute of Engineering Univ. Grenoble Alpes


2

Engineering the transport properties of complex oxides is considered one of the major 

challenges for launching the next generation of highly performing solid state devices. In this 

direction, mastering the implementation of interface-dominated materials represents a 

powerful engineering tool with implications in many different fields. For instance, grain 

boundaries (GBs) and dislocations have been demonstrated to substantially increase oxygen 

diffusion in La0.8Sr0.2MnO3±δ (LSM) thin films, improving their performance as cathodes in 

solid oxide fuel cells.1–4 Opposite, GBs are also responsible of a strong reduction of magnetic

order and electronic structure in manganites, which can be used in spintronics and resistive 

switching devices.5,6 In this sense, GBs are generally considered as an insulating

paramagnetic region, whose presence can give rise to a collection of unique properties, such 

as a large magnetoresistance below Curie temperature7,8 or the appearance of different low 

temperature conduction mechanisms in polycrystalline thin films.9,10

We recently showed that the GBs in LSM thin films are dominated by an unusual local 

modification of chemical composition, which involves both the oxygen and the cations.11

Moreover, we demonstrated that this local non-stoichiometry is modifiable by simply 

changing the overall cationic ratio Mn/(La+Sr) in the thin films. This way, for highly Mn 

deficient thin films the GBs (GBdef) are characterized by an additional depletion of Mn and 

O, while La and Sr increase. When the overall Mn concentration rises (GBrich), the interfaces 

completely change the cationic distribution, turning to La (and O) deficient regions with 

progressive increase of Mn. Notably, we confirmed that the variations observed in the GB 

composition are the cause of strong changes in the electrical and electrochemical behaviour, 

thus offering a powerful tool for tuning the functional properties of thin films.

In this work, we delve into the electronic conduction mechanism of La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ

(LSMy) thin films by studying, first, the impact of the different Mn/(La+Sr) ratios on the bulk

behaviour by spectroscopy techniques and, second, the GB properties in polycrystalline 

samples by confronting them with epitaxial LSMy with variable Mn content. The first 

analysis on the bulk defect chemistry is particularly important since large Mn deficiencies 

are explored in this study. In this sense, it is well-known that a change in the B/A ratio creates 

negative cation vacancies in LSM (𝑉𝑀𝑛

,,, or 𝑉𝐿𝑎

,,, ) that need to be compensated by positive 

defects (𝑉𝑂

∙∙ and/or 𝑀𝑛4+), strongly affecting the electronic conduction properties. Using this 

first analysis for defining the bulk references, we aim to identify then the distinct conduction 


3

mechanism occurring at the GBs, stressing the importance of these interfaces in the overall 

functional properties of thin films. Finally, we discuss the impact of the specific local non-

stoichiometry at the GBs on the electronic mechanism, showing the central role of Mn in 

defining the interface properties.

LSMy thin films with variable Mn content were deposited by combinatorial Pulsed Laser 

Deposition (c-PLD) on 5mm x 10mm Sapphire (0001) substrates and on 100 nm YSZ / Si 4” 

wafers in a large-area system from PVD Products (PLD-5000), equipped with a KrF-248 nm 

excimer laser from Lambda Physics (COMPex PRO 205). C-PLD is a technique based on 

the alternate deposition of two different parent compounds (in our case La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 and 

Mn3O4 commercial targets) at two opposite sides of a large area substrate.12–15 Due to the 

typical Gaussian shape of the PLD plasma plumes, a continuous gradient of concentration is 

obtained between the two plumes centres. For the LSMy combinatorial deposition, the 

sapphire samples were pasted to a 4” Si wafer forming a line between the LSM and Mn3O4

plume centers, allowing a gradual increase of B/A=Mn/(La+Sr) ratio. The LSMy / YSZ / Si 

sample was instead deposited at wafer level and then cut into 1x0.5 cm2 rectangular 

specimens for the electrical and structural characterization.11 Deposition parameters were 

adapted in order to obtain fully dense films with compositions from Mn/(La+Sr) ratio of B/A 

= 0.85 ± 0.02 to B/A > 1.2 ± 0.03, which was confirmed by Wavelength Dispersive 

Spectroscopy and Energy Dispersive X-ray Analysis, and thicknesses between 70 and 100 

nm (see details elsewhere11). The B/A compositional error in the structural and electrical 

characterization was calculated considering the variation of B/A ratio occurring in the portion 

of combinatorial sample analysed.11 In order to equilibrate the oxygen stoichiometry of the 

samples, all the LSMy thin films were annealed for 6 hours in air at 923 K after deposition.

Structural and surface characterization of the thin films was performed by X-ray Diffraction 

(XRD) (Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer system), Transmission Electron Microscopy 

(TEM) (FEI TITAN Low Base operated at 300 kV) and by non-contact Atomic Force 

Microscopy (AFM, XE 100 Park System Corp.). Figure 1(a) shows the Θ-2Θ XRD of the 

LSMy samples revealing a single phase deposition independent of the Mn content. These

measurements were performed applying an omega offset to reduce the contribution from the 

single crystalline substrates. A slight (110)pc preferential orientation is detected in the most 

deficient Mn thin films, which reduces increasing the B/A ratio and disappear for the nearly 


4

stoichiometric layer. The Mn rich samples show instead a small strengthening of (100)pc

orientation. Figure 1(b) shows the evolution of the lattice parameters as a function of the 

B/A ratio. A significant linear expansion of the unit cell is observed in the Mn deficient part, 

while a small shrinkage is detected increasing the Mn content (B/A > 1), as previously 

reported.11 The LSMy films deposited on Sapphire and YSZ/Si show comparable lattice 

parameters, implying that the substrate is not affecting the stress state in the polycrystalline 

layers. At the same time, AFM surface and TEM cross section images of a typical LSMy

sample with B/A = 0.92 ± 0.02, Figure 1(c) and (d) respectively, prove the characteristic 

columnar structure and nanocrystalline grains obtained. This columnar structure, without 

segregation of secondary phases, was observed in all the samples independently of the overall 

Mn content, with a small variation of the grain size for different B/A ratios.11

Figure 1. (a) XRD of the polycrystalline LSMy thin film grown on the sapphire (0001). (b) Evolution of the 

pseudo-cubic lattice parameter as a function of the B/A ratio derived from the XRD analysis for different 

substrates (c) AFM image of the surface and (d) cross-section dark field TEM image of a characteristic LSMy

sample deposited on a 100 nm YSZ / Si substrate.


5

X-ray Absorption Near-Edge Structure (XANES) and ellipsometry were carried out on the 

LSMy film series in order to investigate the effect of varying the B/A ratio on the overall 

manganese valence. It is important to note that these two techniques are not able to separate 

grain and grain boundary contributions, therefore the results described next can be 

unambiguously ascribed to the bulk LSMy, since it represents approximately the 90 vol.% of 

the polycrystalline films. XANES spectra at the Mn K-edge of LSMy thin films were 

collected at the ESRF ID12 Synchrotron beamline (Grenoble, France) under vacuum and at 

T = 298 K with a nearly constant beam current of 200 mA (see additional details in Section 

S.1. of supplementary information). Figure 2(a) shows the Mn K-edge XANES spectra of 

the polycrystalline LSMy thin films for different B/A ratios. Here we focus on the absorption 

edge region, particularly on the white line positioned at ca. 6554 eV. Its position for each 

spectrum was extracted by calculating the inflection point energy, given by the maximum of 

the first derivative (see Figure S1 of the supplementary information). This feature, which 

involves a transition from Mn 1s to Mn 4p states, has been demonstrated to display an energy 

shift depending on the Mn valence in many different compounds, including perovskites.16,17

In particular, the K-edge energy increases almost linearly with the Mn valence in LSM, 

shifting approximately 1 eV per 0.27 valence change.18,19 In our samples, no significant 

changes were measured in the Mn deficient films and only a very small increase of ~ 0.1 eV 

(corresponding to a relative increase of 3% in [𝑀𝑛4+]18–20) was observed in the La-rich 

compositions (Figure 2(b)). Complementary, ellipsometry measurements supported the 

XANES results by confirming a uniform Mn valence within the Mn deficient LSMy films 

(see detailed analysis in Section S.2. of the supplementary information). Interestingly, the 

optical conductivity measured shows a high sensitivity to the Mn content, offering a powerful 

tool to track compositional changes by studying the optical properties of the material.


6

Figure 2. (a) Normalized XANES spectra at the Mn K-edge for various B/A ratios. (b) Variation of the 

calculated inflection points energy with the cationic composition in LSMy films. The corresponding relative 

change of Mn valence is also shown in the right axis.18,19

According to the XANES and ellipsometry results, the bulk electro-neutrality in the Mn-

deficient LSMy films cannot be attributed to a change in the Mn valence state. The most 

probable compensation mechanism would be the formation of positive defects, such as 

oxygen vacancies, usually present in a very low concentration in stoichiometric LSM.21,22

However, the total charge compensation by oxygen vacancies (with equilibrium [𝑉𝑂

∙∙] = 3/2 ·

[𝑉𝑀𝑛

,,, ]) would result in a great oxygen deficiency and a much higher increase of bulk oxygen 

diffusion than the one observed in our previous works.1,3 Alternatively, we propose a 

different mechanism in which the cation vacancies are mainly compensated by the formation 

of neutral anti-sites defects (𝐿𝑎𝑀𝑛

𝑥 ). Simple calculations after the work of Nakamura et al.23

(included in Section S.3. of supplementary information) show that this compensation 

mechanism radically reduces the need of oxygen vacancies to balance the charge; e.g. for the 

nominal composition B/A = 0.90, a concentration of 𝐿𝑎𝑀𝑛

𝑥
= 0.04 lowers the effective 

concentration of 𝑉𝑀𝑛

,,, from 0.10 to nearly 0.02 per unit-formula, implying that significantly 

less negative charge needs to be compensated by positive defects (i.e. oxygen vacancies). 

Although this mechanism is not commonly observed in bulk perovskites, similar anti-site 

defects have been recently reported by Qiao et al. in Cr deficient epitaxial LaCrO3 films.24

Moreover, recent Density Functional Theory (DFT) simulations carried out for LSM11

showed that the formation energy of 𝐿𝑎𝑀𝑛

𝑥
strongly decreases in the presence of oxygen 

vacancies, i.e. the formation of the anti-site defects is favourable under highly reducing PLD 

growing conditions. This compensation mechanism is also in good agreement with the 


7

expansion of the out-of-plane lattice parameter measured in our films (see Figure 1(b)), since 

the La ionic radius is significantly bigger than the Mn one. As a counterpart, for moderately 

Mn rich samples (B/A > 1), the presence of La vacancies (𝑉𝐿𝑎

,,, ) can be mainly compensated

by the formation of the likely occurring 𝑀𝑛𝐿𝑎

𝑥
anti-site defects accompanied by a small 

increase of 𝑀𝑛4+, which can explain the slight shrinkage of the unit cell observed (see Figure 

1(b)).

In order to clearly identify the contribution of GBs on the electrical properties of 

polycrystalline LSMy films, we compared two sets of equivalent polycrystalline (on sapphire 

(0001) and on YSZ/Si substrates) and epitaxial (on NdGaO3 (110), NGO) samples with B/A 

ratios from 0.85 to 1.2. The epitaxial films showed a single phase, (001)pc oriented growth, 

with a smooth surface of rms < 0.4 nm. The evolution of out of plane lattice parameter with 

the B/A ratio follows the same trend of the polycrystalline layers, see Figure 1(b) (the

complete structural and compositional characterization of the epitaxial films can be found in 

Section S.4. of the supplementary information). All the samples were electrically 

characterized in air in a 4-point in-plane configuration by using silver electrodes in a 

temperature-controlled Linkam probe station, between 83 K and 873 K (in conformity with 

our previous works, see refs.3,11 and Section S.5. of the supplementary information). 

First, the in-plane electronic conductivity above room temperature of polycrystalline and 

epitaxial films with different Mn content have been represented using an Arrhenius plot in 

Figure 3(a). In general, the polycrystalline thin films present lower conductivity with respect 

to the epitaxial ones of similar composition, while an increase in conductivity is observed by 

increasing the Mn content, for both types of films. Independently of the composition or nature

of the films, these show a perfect agreement with a small polaron hopping conduction for the 

whole range of temperatures,10,22,25–27 also supported by the optical measurements (see 

Figure S2 in supplementary information). According to this model, the polarons can move 

to the Nearest Neighbour Hopping (NNH) site with the assistance of phonons, leading to the 

following expression of conductivity in the case of adiabatic limit:28

𝜎(𝑇) =

𝜎0
𝑇 ∙ exp (

𝐸𝑎
𝑘𝑏𝑇)
(1)

Where 𝐸𝑎 refers to the activation energy of the hopping mechanism, 𝑘𝑏 is the Boltzmann 

constant and 𝜎0 is the pre-exponential factor.


8

Figure 3. (a) In-plane electronic conductvity as a funcion of temperature for the epitaxial and polycrystalline 

LSMy thin films, plotted according to the adiabatic small polaron model. (b) Energy of activation (Ea) and (c) 

pre-exponential factor (σ0) derived by the small polaron fitting. The polycrystalline samples measured on two 

different substrates give rise to similar results. The blue dashed line in (c) indicates the theoretical trend 

expected from the decrease of Mn hopping sites and no change in Mn valence (σ0 ∝ [Mn]2).

By fitting the conductivity values with Equation 1, 𝐸𝑎 and 𝜎0 have been calculated and 

represented in Figure 3(b) and (c), respectively. First, the activation energy of the epitaxial 


9

samples is lower than that of the polycrystalline ones. Moreover, the epitaxial samples 

present a progressive decrease of the activation energy while increasing the B/A ratio, 

whereas in the polycrystalline ones 𝐸𝑎 is kept almost constant. This can be clearly associated 

to the presence of structural and chemical defects in both types of GBs (GBdef and GBrich) that 

cause the localization and trapping of charge carriers, breaking the conduction paths and 

increasing the polaron energy barrier. Noteworthy, the decrease of 𝐸𝑎 in the epitaxial samples 

is consistent with the decrease observed in the out-of-plane lattice parameter (see Figure 

1(b)), which represents a reduction of the tetragonal distortion of the cell and diminishes the 

polaron barrier.29–31 Also, this matches with the shift towards lower energies for both, the 

polaron and Jahn-Teller distortion phenomena, which govern the optical transitions observed 

by ellipsometry when increasing the Mn content in the films (see Figure S2 in 

supplementary information).32

Figure 3(c) shows the evolution of the pre-exponential factor with the B/A ratio. In the 

epitaxial films, a small increase could be measured with increasing the Mn content in the 

films. The pre-exponential factor is defined in the case of considering on-site coulombic 

repulsions as:31,33

𝜎0 =

𝑒2𝜈

𝑎𝑘𝑏 ∙ [𝑀𝑛4+] ∙ [𝑀𝑛3+]
(2)

Where e, 𝜈, 𝑎 are the electron charge, the polaron attempt frequency and the site to site 

hopping distance, respectively. In the grain bulk, since negligible manganese valence 

changes were measured, the pre-exponential directly increases with the Mn content, 𝜎0 ∝

[𝑀𝑛4+] ∙ [𝑀𝑛3+] ∝ [𝑀𝑛]2. Thus, a decrease of the Mn concentration generates fewer sites 

for the polarons to hop, resulting in lower values of conductivity. As a matter of fact, the pre-

exponential factor of the epitaxial LSMy films perfectly follows this theoretical trend (blue 

dashed line in Figure 3(c)), reinforcing the proposed defect model for the bulk material. Even 

more interestingly, polycrystalline films present a surprising increment of 𝜎0 as a function of 

Mn (from GBdef to GBrich) indicating the great impact of the cation non-stoichiometry at the 

GB level. While in the presence of GBdef the pre-exponential factor is slightly smaller than 

the bulk (straightforwardly related to the extra Mn depletion at the GB), in the films 

dominated by GBrich the increase is much higher suggesting the creation of additional 

pathways for electronic conduction probably enabled by the generation of anti-site 𝑀𝑛𝐿𝑎

𝑥 at 


10

the interface level.34 The complementary 𝜎0 and 𝐸𝑎 measured for the polycrystalline thin 

films deposited on YSZ/Si and on sapphire suggest that the substrate does not influence the 

GB composition and, therefore, the electrical properties. All in all, a remarkable impact of 

the GBs on the high temperature electrical conduction of polycrystalline samples is clearly 

proved. 

Complementary to Figure 3(a), Figure 4(a) shows a representation of the conductivity of 

specific compositions of epitaxial and polycrystalline thin films according to the NNH 

conduction model, for the whole range of temperatures measured, namely, from 83 K to 873

K. According to this figure, nearly stoichiometric (B/A = 1.03) polycrystalline layers, as well 

as epitaxial thin films (both Mn-deficient, B/A = 0.85 and slightly Mn-rich, B/A=1.05),

present the typical metal-insulator (M-I) transition observed for LSM.35 The less marked

metallic behaviour of the epitaxial Mn deficient epitaxial sample can be explained by the 

presence of scattered Mn vacancies, which are known to hinder the long range electronic 

order in manganites.36–38 Opposed to that, a suppression of the M-I transition, maintaining 

the insulating behaviour, is observed for the polycrystalline Mn deficient LSMy, see further 

details in reference 11. Moreover, its conductivity deviates from the linear behaviour expected 

for the NNH model, approaching the typical performance of a Variable Range Hopping 

(VRH) conduction mechanism, Figure 4(b), in which the probability of finding an available 

site with a proper energy level decrease with temperature, determining a temperature-

dependent hopping length.39 VRH theory was first developed for disordered materials and 

follows the general expression:

𝜎(𝑇) = 𝜎𝑝 ∙ exp (−

𝑇0
𝑇 )

𝑝

(3)

With 𝑇0 being the characteristic temperature and p the exponential term, that equals to ¼ in 

the case of a Mott regime39 and ½ for a Shklovskii–Efros (SE-VRH) mechanism.40 For Mn-

deficient polycrystalline LSM films, we found a good consistency with the SE-VRH model 

(see Figure 4(b) and more details in Section S.6. of the supplementary information). The 

appearance of VRH conduction in the polycrystalline films with GBdef is not intrinsic but due 

to the localized defects in the GBs, since the epitaxial film with the same composition shows

a better agreement with the NNH adiabatic model in the whole temperature range above the 

occurrence of the M-I transition. Indeed, the onset of this mechanism was also previously 


11

reported in polycrystalline manganite thin films,9,10 as well as in disordered bulk 

manganites41,42 and ultrathin epitaxial thin films.43 From the mechanistic point of view, the 

Mn deficiency and the presence of oxygen vacancies at the interface in GBdef of 

polycrystalline LSMy films naturally hinder the insulator metallic behaviour giving rise to 

the VRH mechanism, in which polarons need to jump towards distant sites across the GB. 

The appearance of the SE-VRH could indicate that the charged defects in the GBs promote 

polarons trapping or that the density of states at the fermi level is not constant (see Section 

S.6. in the supplementary information for additional details on the ES-VRH model).41,42,44

The recovery of the M-I transition for GBrich films indicates that the depletion of La is not 

playing an active role in the electronic conduction and that the oxygen defect equilibrium of 

these GBs is similar to the one of the bulk. 

Figure 4. In plane electronic conductvity plotted according to the adiabatic small polaron model (a) and to the

SE-VRH model (c) for a wide set of temperatures. In the polycrystalline sample with B/A = 0.85 the first well 

describe the conductivity for T > 473 K, while for T < 473 K the second shows a better fitting.

At this stage, it is clear that GBs in LSMy films are in the origin of significant changes in the 

electrical properties of the films (𝐸𝑎, 𝜎0 and suppression of M-I transition), and that a distinct 

conduction mechanism takes place, presumably linked to previously reported occurring local 

stoichiometric changes.11 These, most likely modify the defect chemistry of the bulk material 

(Mn deficient or not). In order to get deeper insights into the defect chemistry of LSMy grain 

boundaries, we analysed the high temperature oxygen partial pressure (pO2) dependence of 

the in-plane electronic conductivity. The experiments were performed in a ProboStat test 

station (NorECs). The pO2 in the station was controlled with a ZIROX oxygen pump and 


12

monitored with an oxygen lambda-sensor placed next to the sample. The temperature was set 

to 923 K for ensuring a fast equilibration with the atmosphere while preventing grain growth 

in the polycrystalline films. 

Figure 5(a) shows the pO2 dependence of the electrical conductivity for polycrystalline thin 

films with different compositions. The conductivities were normalized to the value measured 

at 50 ppm of oxygen to better visualize the relative changes originated by the pO2, since the 

Mn deficient samples show a much lower conductivity respect to the stoichiometric ones (see 

Figure S7 in supplementary information). Results obtained for an epitaxial film with 

nominal composition B/A = 0.85 are also included for comparison. Interestingly, the Mn-

deficient epitaxial sample displays the typical p-type behaviour expected for the bulk defect 

chemistry while for the polycrystalline samples p-type and n-type like dependences are 

observed for B/A > 0.9 (GBrich) and B/A < 0.9 (GBdef), respectively. Oxidation-reduction 

studies of Mn-deficient polycrystalline samples shown in Figure 5(b) prove the reversibility 

of the unusual n-type like response, discarding any type of stabilization issues and confirming 

that the phenomenon is directly linked to the high concentration of GBs present in the films. 

Moreover, complementary measurements on thicker samples with lower GB density (double 

grain size) corroborate the dominant role of the interfaces in the conductivity (Figure S8 in 

supplementary information), since two contributions could be clearly differentiated when 

changing pO2, namely, a fast one with the unusual n-type like behaviour attributable to the 

GBdef and a slower one showing the expected p-type conduction of the grain bulk. 

Figure 5. (a) Relative in-plane electronic conductivity of the polycrystalline LSMy films as a function of the 

pO2 (vs. the low pO2 (50 ppm) conductivity) measured at 923 K. The epitaxial film with B/A = 0.85 is also 


13

reported for comparison. (b) Time response of the conductivity for reducion and oxidation steps at 923 K in 

the polycrystalline thin films with B/A = 0.85. The lines indicate the times at which the oxygen content in the 

atmosphere were changed (t1 and t2).

As previously mentioned, the conductivity of GBrich films follows the bulk behavior of LSM 

suggesting a similar defect chemistry, i.e. incorporating oxygen by the creation of 𝑉𝑀𝑛

,,, and/or 

𝑉𝐿𝑎

,,, combined with an increase of [𝑀𝑛4+] that compensates the negative charges, resulting 

in the slight p-type oxygen dependence of the electronic conductivity.45 Contrary, the origin 

of the unusual pO2 dependence of GBdef films is somehow more controversial. First, it could 

be due to the appearance of Mn2+ in the GB core, which would give rise to a n-type 

conduction even in oxidizing conditions.21 However, our previous studies contradicts this 

hypothesis since we did not observe any local change of oxidation state in GBdef.11 Another 

possibility would be the creation of a negative space charge layer caused by the positive 

oxygen vacancies in the GB core, which could originate an enrichment of negative elements

(Mn2+) in the GB surroundings.46 Additionally, the presence of negative cation defects, which 

are also actively involved in the oxidation mechanism, could also play a role in defining the 

space charge properties.47 Nevertheless, due to the high carrier concentration of the bulk and 

the small band-gap of LSM, the expected width of the space charge layer is extremely small, 

apparently ruling out this possibility.7,48 Finally, a mechanism based on trapping positive 

charge carriers created upon oxygen oxidation may explain the pO2 trend observed. Indeed, 

an increase of Mn4+ necessarily implies a decrease of Mn3+ and, according to equation 2, this 

could originate a decrease of the total conductivity (if Mn4+ is trapped). In any case, the 

appearance of this unusual pO2 behaviour is undoubtedly related to the characteristic 

depletion of Mn in GBdef and could have direct implications especially on the electrochemical 

performance of the layers and their stability in redox conditions. In this sense, we previously 

observed an outstanding stability of Mn deficient polycrystalline LSM layers when employed

in symmetrical cells resulting in an anomalous weak dependence with pO2 of their oxygen 

diffusivity,49 contrary to what is expected from the defect chemistry models.21

In summary, we were able to fabricate high quality epitaxial and dense polycrystalline thin 

films of La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ with B/A ratio ranging from 0.85 (Mn deficient) to 1.2 (La 

deficient films). Conductivity measurements of epitaxial and polycrystalline LSMy thin films

allowed us to elucidate the unique features of the GBs. From our study, it is clear that the 


14

electronic conductivity of the polycrystalline samples is dominated by the GBs, which largely

impact the activation energy, the pre-exponential factor and even the conduction mechanism 

at low temperatures. The origin of these effects is ascribed to the local non-stoichiometry at 

the GB level reported by our group in a previous work. Moreover, an unusual pO2

dependency of the conductivity was observed as a function of the Mn content, indicating that 

different defect chemistries are required to fully describe the GB oxygen incorporation in 

LSMy films with different B/A ratio. All in all, the results of this work, combined to the 

recently discovered fast ion conduction along LSM GBs, anticipate a radical change in the 

understanding and implementation of complex oxides in a collection of thin film-based solid 

state devices, especially for energy and information applications.

Acknowledgements 

The research was supported by the Generalitat de Catalunya-AGAUR (2017 SGR 1421). 

This project has received funding from the European research Council (ERC) under the 

European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ULTRASOFC, Grant 

Agreement number: 681146) and under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Grant Agreement 

746648 — PerovSiC (for D.P). The XANES experiments were performed on beamline ID12 

at the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF), Grenoble, France. We are grateful 

to Fabrice Wilhelm at the ESRF for providing assistance in using beamline ID12.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Supplementary Information

See supplementary information for Supplementary Figures S1–S7, Supplementary 

References 1–26.

References

1 A.M. Saranya, D. Pla, A. Morata, A. Cavallaro, J. Canales-Vázquez, J.A. Kilner, M. Burriel, 


15

and A. Tarancón, Adv. Energy Mater. 5, 1500377 (2015).

2 E. Navickas, T.M. Huber, Y. Chen, W. Hetaba, G. Holzlechner, G. Rupp, M. Stöger-

Pollach, G. Friedbacher, H. Hutter, B. Yildiz, and J. Fleig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17, 

7659 (2015).

3 A.M. Saranya, A. Morata, D. Pla, M. Burriel, F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, A. Hornés, J.A. 

Kilner, and A. Tarancón, Chem. Mater. 30, 5621 (2018).

4 E. Navickas, Y. Chen, Q. Lu, W. Wallisch, T.M. Huber, J. Bernardi, M. Stöger-Pollach, G. 

Friedbacher, H. Hutter, B. Yildiz, and J. Fleig, ACS Nano 11, 11475 (2017).

5 A. Asamitsu, Y. Tomioka, H. Kuwahara, and Y. Tokura, Nature 388, 50 (1997).

6 A.-M. Haghiri-Gosnet and J.-P. Renard, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 36, R127 (2003).

7 R. Gross, L. Alff, B. Büchner, B.H. Freitag, C. Höfener, J. Klein, Y. Lu, W. Mader, J.B. 

Philipp, M.S.R. Rao, P. Reutler, S. Ritter, S. Thienhaus, S. Uhlenbruck, and B. Wiedenhorst, 

J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 211, 150 (2000).

8 A. Gupta, G.Q. Gong, G. Xiao, P.R. Duncombe, P. Lecoeur, P. Trouilloud, Y.Y. Wang, 

V.P. Dravid, and J.Z. Sun, Phys. Rev. B 54, R15629 (1996).

9 R. Prasad, M.P. Singh, W. Prellier, P.K. Siwach, R. Rawat, A. Kaur, and H.K. Singh, Phys. 

Status Solidi Basic Res. 246, 1662 (2009).

10 M. Ziese and C. Srinitiwarawong, Phys. Rev. B 58, 11519 (1998).

11 F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, L. López-Conesa, G. Martín, A. Ruiz-Caridad, M. Walls, L. Ruiz-

González, A. Kordatos, M. Núñez, A. Morata, S. Estradé, A. Chroneos, F. Peiró, and A. 

Tarancón, Adv. Mater. In press (2018).

12 H.M. Christen, I. Ohkubo, C.M. Rouleau, G.E. Jellison, A.A. Puretzky, D.B. Geohegan, 

and D.H. Lowndes, Meas. Sci. Technol. 16, 21 (2005).

13 J.C.H. Rossiny, J. Julis, S. Fearn, J.A. Kilner, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Yang, and J.R.G. 

Evans, Solid State Ionics 179, 1085 (2008).

14 J.A. Greer, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 47, 034005 (2014).

15 H.M. Christen and G. Eres, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 20, 264005 (2008).


16

16 A.H. De Vries, L. Hozoi, and R. Broer, Int. J. Quantum Chem. 91, 57 (2002).

17 J. García, G. Subías, V. Cuartero, and J. Herrero-Martin, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 17, 386 

(2010).

18 G. Subías, J. García, M. Proietti, and J. Blasco, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 

Phys. 56, 8183 (1997).

19 V.R. Mastelaro, D.P.F. De Souza, and R.A. Mesquita, X-Ray Spectrom. 31, 154 (2002).

20 I. Maurin, P. Barboux, Y. Lassailly, J. Boilot, and F. Villain, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 211, 

139 (2000).

21 F. Poulsen, Solid State Ionics 129, 145 (2000).

22 M. Pavone, A.B. Muñoz-García, A.M. Ritzmann, and E.A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C 118, 

13346 (2014).

23 K. Nakamura, J. Solid State Chem. 173, 299 (2003).

24 L. Qiao, K.H.L. Zhang, M.E. Bowden, T. Varga, V. Shutthanandan, R. Colby, Y. Du, B. 

Kabius, P. V. Sushko, M.D. Biegalski, and S.A. Chambers, Adv. Funct. Mater. 23, 2953 

(2013).

25 D. Varshney and N. Dodiya, Mater. Chem. Phys. 129, 896 (2011).

26 A. Lanzara, N.L. Saini, M. Brunelli, F. Natali, A. Bianconi, P.G. Radaelli, and S.-W. 

Cheong, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 878 (1998).

27 M. Jaime, H.T. Hardner, M.B. Salamon, M. Rubinstein, P. Dorsey, and D. Emin, Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 38, 951 (1997).

28 D. Emin and T. Holstein, Ann. Phys. (N. Y). 53, 439 (1969).

29 F. Yang, S. Kim, and Y. Takamura, Scr. Mater. 65, 29 (2011).

30 C. Adamo, X. Ke, H.Q. Wang, H.L. Xin, T. Heeg, M.E. Hawley, W. Zander, J. Schubert, 

P. Schiffer, D.A. Muller, L. Maritato, and D.G. Schlom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 95, 112504 (2009).

31 J. Mizusaki, Y. Yonemura, H. Kamata, K. Ohyama, N. Mori, H. Takai, H. Tagawa, M. 

Dokiya, K. Naraya, T. Sasamoto, H. Inaba, and T. Hashimoto, Solid State Ionics 132, 167 

(2000).


17

32 S. Mildner, J. Hoffmann, P.E. Blöchl, S. Techert, and C. Jooss, Phys. Rev. B 92, 035145 

(2015).

33 D.C. Worledge, L. Mie, and T.H. Geballe, Phys. Rev. B 57, 267 (1998).

34 C. Aruta, M. Minola, A. Galdi, R. Ciancio, A.Y. Petrov, N.B. Brookes, G. Ghiringhelli, L. 

Maritato, and P. Orgiani, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 86, 1 (2012).

35 A. Urushibara, Y. Moritomo, T. Arima, A. Asamitsu, G. Kido, and Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. 

B 51, 103 (1995).

36 I. Marozau, P.T. Das, M. Döbeli, J.G. Storey, M. a. Uribe-Laverde, S. Das, C. Wang, M. 

Rössle, and C. Bernhard, Phys. Rev. B 89, 174422 (2014).

37 J. Vergara and V. Madurga, Phys. Rev. B 60, 1127 (1999).

38 S. Hébert, B. Wang, A. Maignan, C. Martin, R. Retoux, and B. Raveau, Solid State 

Commun. 123, 311 (2002).

39 N.F. Mott and E.A. Davis, Electronic Processes in Non-Crystalline Materials (Oxford 

University Press, 1971).

40 A.L. Efros and B.I. Shklovskii, J. Phys. C Solid State Phys. 8, L49 (1975).

41 R. Laiho, K.G. Lisunov, E. Lähderanta, P.A. Petrenko, J. Salminen, M.A. Shakhov, M.O. 

Safontchik, V.S. Stamov, M. V Shubnikov, and V.S. Zakhvalinskii, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 

14, 8043 (2002).

42 R. Laiho, K.G. Lisunov, E. Lähderanta, V.N. Stamov, and V.S. Zakhvalinskii, J. Phys. 

Condens. Matter 13, 1233 (2001).

43 Y. Feng, K. Jin, L. Gu, X. He, C. Ge, Q. Zhang, M. He, Q. Guo, Q. Wan, M. He, H. Lu, 

and G. Yang, Sci. Rep. 6, 22382 (2016).

44 R. Laiho, K.G. Lisunov, E. Lähderanta, V.S. Stamov, V.S. Zakhvalinskii, P. Colomban, 

P.A. Petrenko, and Y.P. Stepanov, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 17, 105 (2005).

45 L. Yan, K.R. Balasubramaniam, S. Wang, H. Du, and P.A. Salvador, Solid State Ionics 

194, 9 (2011).

46 F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, and A. Tarancón, in Met. Oxide-Based Thin Film Struct.


18

(Elsevier, 2018), pp. 409–439.

47 W. Preis and W. Sitte, Solid State Ionics 177, 2549 (2006).

48 J.M. Polfus, B. Yildiz, and H.L. Tuller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 20, 19142 (2018).

49 F. Chiabrera, A. Morata, M. Pacios, and A. Tarancón, Solid State Ionics 299, 70 (2017).


