Demonstration of a 3rd order hierarchy of higher order topological states in a three-

dimensional acoustic metamaterial

Matthew Weiner1,2, Xiang Ni1,2, Mengyao Li1,2, Andrea Alù3,2,1, and Alexander B. Khanikaev1,2

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Grove School of Engineering, City College of the City 

University of New York, 140th Street and Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10031, USA.

2Physics Program, Graduate Center of the City University of New York, New York, NY 10016, 

USA.

3Photonics Initiative, Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York, New 

York, NY 10031, USA

Abstract: In the past years classical wave-systems have constituted an excellent platform for 
emulating complex quantum phenomena. This approach has been especially fruitful in
demonstrating topological phenomena in photonics and acoustics: from chiral edge states of Chern 
insulators and helical edge states of topological insulators to higher-dimensional topological states 
of quasiperiodic systems and systems with synthetic dimensions. Recently, a new class of 
topological states localized in more than one dimension of a D-dimensional system, referred to as 
higher-order topological (HOT) states, has been reported, offering an even more versatile platform 
to confine and control classical radiation and mechanical motion. However, because experimental 
research of HOT states has so far been limited to two-dimensional (2D) systems, third and higher-
order states have evaded experimental observation. Studying higher-dimensional classical systems 
therefore opens an opportunity to emulate higher-order topological insulators and explore HOT 
states beyond second order. In this letter, we design and experimentally study a 3D acoustic 
metamaterial supporting third-order (0D) topological corner states along with second-order (1D) 
edge states within the same topological bandgap, thus establishing a full hierarchy of HOT states
in three dimensions. The metamaterial is implemented over a versatile additive manufacturing 
platform, which enables rapid prototyping of metaatoms and metamolecules, which can be
snapped together to form 3D metamaterials with complex geometries. The assembled 3D 
topological metamaterial represents the acoustic analogue of a pyrochlore lattice made of
interconnected molecules, and is shown to exhibit topological bulk polarization, leading to the 
emergence of HOT states localized in all three or in two dimensions.

Topological acoustics and mechanics have been explored as a powerful platform for the 
implementation of a plethora of topological phenomena (1-4). A bias for sound propagation
imparted by the angular-momentum carried by a rotating fluid or by rotational motion in
mechanical resonators has been used to emulate the effect of magnetic bias and to demonstrate the 
emergence of quantum Hall effect (QHE)-like states with robust edge transport for acoustics and 
mechanics (5-11). In parallel, a variety of symmetry-protected topological acoustic states have 
been reported, including Zak-phase in 1D acoustic lattices (12), quantum spin Hall effect (QSHE)
(13-16), nontrivial bulk polarization induced edge and corner states in 2D Kagome lattices (17-
20). More recently, versatile 3D structures fabricated by either direct assembly or by advanced 3D 


manufacturing have been used to demonstrate Weyl points and surface Fermi arc-like states in 3D 
acoustic and mechanical metamaterials (21-24) as well as mechanical quadrupolar topological 
insulators (25-27). Indeed, 3D geometries dramatically expand the design opportunities for 
acoustic topological metamaterials,
thus offering the possibility of demonstration of 

unprecedented topological phenomena, often still unobserved in their condensed matter or 
photonic analogues. High-order topological insulators with a hierarchy of states represent one 
example in which the system dimensionality becomes crucial. HOT states have so far been 
demonstrated only in 2D topological systems, being limited therefore to second-order states (17-
19, 28). Higher-order hierarchies of topological states have so far evaded experimental 
observation. In this work, we experimentally observe for the first time such hierarchy of  second-
and third-order states in a 3D acoustic metamaterial. We exploit 3D printing and a snap assembly 
technique to construct an acoustic analogue of the topological pyrochlore lattice, which hosts a 
third-order hierarchy of topological states. We show that the manufactured acoustic metacrystal
possesses topological bulk polarization, and we experimentally demonstrate for the first time a 
hierarchy of HOT states in three-dimensional metamaterials by observing both 2nd-order edge and 
3rd-order corner states localized in two and three dimensions, respectively.

Topological acoustic metamaterial design

A three-dimensional acoustic metamaterial emulator of the pyrochlore lattice (28, 29) is realized 
using meta-molecules (unit cells) schematically shown in Fig 1A and B, whose specific 
dimensions are given in the Methods section. Each molecule consists of four acoustic resonators,
with acoustic pressure modes oscillating along the axial direction. We choose to work with the 
fundamental mode, whose only node appears in the center of the resonator. To form the lattice, the 
resonators are coupled through narrow cylindrical channels whose position on the resonator is 
carefully chosen to respect the crystalline symmetries of the pyrochlore lattice. The control over 
coupling between resonators within and between adjacent metamolecules of the metacrystal, 
which is required to induce bulk topological polarization, is achieved by varying the diameter of 
the cylindrical coupling channels. Since the acoustic modes are strongly bound to the resonant 
cavities and the design of the structure only allows nearest neighbor coupling, the tight-binding 
model (TBM) can be an effective modelling tool for our system, with nearest-neighbor hopping 
described by intra-cell 𝜅 and inter-cell 𝛾 coupling parameters. COMSOL Multiphysics (Acoustic 
Module) has been used to verify the results with full-wave finite element method (FEM) 
simulations. If the diameter of the intra-connected channels is smaller than the one of the inter-
connected channels, 𝜅 < 𝛾, the structure is referred to as the “expanded” crystal, implying stronger 
coupling among resonators of the adjacent metamolecules. In the opposite condition, 𝜅 > 𝛾, the 
structure is “shrunken”, and modes are strongly coupled within the resonators of the metamolecule 
within the same unit cell. The acoustic resonators in the metamaterial are aligned to show the sites 
and primitive vectors of the face center cubic (FCC) lattice in Fig. 1B, and the corresponding first 
Brillouin zone shown in Fig 1C. As the dimensions of the crystal exceeded the print volume of 
currently available STL 3D printers, the hybrid approach, combining 3D printing of the
constitutive elements and subsequent snap-assembly, was used. The metamolecules were 3D 


printed and snapped together using the interlocking features that are deliberately introduced in the
design, thus allowing for the assembly of rigid and stable large scale metacrystals.  The assembled 
finite structure consisting of 20 metamolecules (80 resonators) is shown in Fig. 1D. Note that the
boundaries of the crystal are terminated by smaller resonators, which are designed to have resonant 
frequencies detuned from the spectral region of interest to high frequency range, yielding an
effective boundary condition analogous to the terminated boundary in TBM.

Non-trivial topology and bulk polarization 

First, we theoretically explore the band structure of the unit cell, as shown in Fig. 2A and B. In the 
ideal pyrochlore lattice, with 𝜅 = 𝛾 (Fig. 2A), a line of degeneracy along the X-W high symmetry 
path can be observed. The degeneracy of this line is broken by making the inter-cell and intra-cell 
couplings different 𝜅 ≠ 𝛾 (Fig. 2B). Through both semi-analytical TBM and the first-principles 
FEM modeling of the structure, we observe band inversion at the W point between two cases of 
expanded crystal and shrunken crystal, which indicates a nontrivial topological transition. 
However, energy bands alone are not sufficient to determine the topological difference between 
expanded and shrunken crystals, and further analysis of the associated eigenstates is required.

Fig. 1 Concept and design of the acoustic pyrochlore lattice. (A) Schematic and realistic design of the

Wigner–Seitz unit cell of the expanded pyrochlore lattice. (B) Schematic of the Wigner–Seitz unit cell 


inserted into the FCC lattice structure. (C) The first Brillouin zone of the FCC lattice, with labeled high 

symmetry points, high symmetry paths, and reciprocal lattice vectors. (D) Photograph of the 3D 

topological metamaterial assembled from 3D printed meta-molecules, with boundary cells attached. Each 

side length of the crystal consists of 4 meta-molecules (12 acoustic resonators).

In order to explicitly confirm the topological phase transition between expanded and shrunken 
crystals, we calculated the bulk topological polarization using the eigenvalue problem of the 
Wilson loops (30). The bulk polarization of the lowest energy band, defining the emergence of 
HOT states in the first band gap above this band for both cases of the expanded and shrunken 
lattices, can be obtained through the Wannier band 𝑣3(𝑘1, 𝑘2), where (𝑘1, 𝑘2) vary along the 
reciprocal lattice vectors (𝑏1, 𝑏2) in momentum space, and the Wilson loop is evaluated along the 
direction of the reciprocal lattice vector 𝒃𝟑 (Fig 1C). Then, the bulk polarization of the lowest 
energy band of interest is defined as

𝑝3(𝑘1, 𝑘2) =

1

𝑁1𝑁2 ∑
𝑏3 𝑣3(𝑘1, 𝑘2)
,
(1)

where 𝑁1,2 is the total number of points in the discretized momentum space. Due to the spatial 
symmetries of the pyrochlore crystal, the bulk polarizations with cyclically permutated indexes are 
equivalent to each other, and therefore the system is characterized by nontrivial bulk polarization 
in all three dimensions. As shown in Fig 2C and D, the bulk polarization of the expanded crystal 
calculated through Eq. (1) yields ¼, which indicates that the average position of the modes 
belonging to the lowest energy band has a 

𝑎0
4 deviation (shift) from the center of the sites in the 

unit cell. According to the bulk-boundary correspondence principle (19), when boundaries are 
introduced in the expanded pyrochlore lattice with nonvanishing bulk polarization, the boundary 
modes such as surface, edge and corner states should appear hanging at the dangling sites of the 
corresponding terminations of the crystal. Meanwhile, the bulk polarization of the shrunken crystal 
is zero, implying that the average position of the desired modes resides at the center of the four
sites in the metamolecule, and no boundary modes are present at any boundary.

Experimental demonstration of a hierarchy of higher-order topological states

We numerically calculated the energy spectrum of the metamaterial sample in Fig. 1d as a function 
of the ratio 𝜅/𝛾 (Fig. 3A) by using TBM of the finite crystal. Based on the prediction from 
nontrivial bulk polarization outlined in the previous section, for the case of expanded lattice (when 
𝜅

𝛾 < 1) we expect surface modes (purpled colored), edge modes (blue colored) and corner modes 

(red colored) to emerge at the boundaries. Both TBM and numerical simulations based on finite 
element method (FEM) fully confirm these predictions. Interestingly, when  

𝜅

𝛾 <

1

3, 4-fold 

degeneracy corner modes split from the bulk continuum (yellow colored bands), and, as can be
proven analytically (see S.M. for details), the transition point indeed occurs at

𝜅

𝛾 =

1

3. 


Fig. 2 Theoretical prediction of nontrivial bulk polarization. (A) Dispersion relation of the un-

dimerized and (B) dimerized (expanded or shrunken) unit cell obtained by TBM (solid lines) and first-
principle COMSOL calculations (circular dots) along a high symmetry path through the Brillouin zone 
shown in Fig 1C, and the corresponding mode profiles shown at X and W points. The inset in (B) shows 
the mode profiles of the shrunken unit cell at X and W, demonstrating the characteristic band inversion of 

topological systems. (C,D) Wannier bands of the pyrochlore lattice obtained by TBM for (C) the 

shrunken and (D) expanded unit cell. The ratio of intra-cell and inter-cell hopping terms are 𝜅/𝛾 =

0.111 and 𝜅/𝛾 = 9.009 for the expanded and shrunken cases, respectively.

In the 3D printed structure fabricated for our experimental investigation, we choose to work in the
κ/γ = 0.111 regime of the energy spectrum of the lattice (indicated by dashed line in Fig.3A). In 
this case, the zero-energy corner states, as well as the edge and surface states, appear fully 
immersed into the bulk band gap and show no overlap with the bulk continuum. In agreement with 
the TBM energy spectrum, the density of states extracted from acoustic measurements on the 
structure (Fig. 3B) reveals a wide bulk band gap, as well as a hierarchy of topological boundary 
modes, including surface states, and HOT edge states and (four-fold degenerate) corner states 
(localized at the four corners of the structure). The Methods section provides details of the
procedure to extract the density of states from experimental measurements. Interestingly, the 
corner states appear at “zero-energy”, i.e. their frequency corresponds to the frequency of a 
separate individual resonator, however, the collective nature of these modes is evidenced by the 
nonvanishing field strength in other sites of the lattice. All the topological states appear within the 
bulk band gap, with some overlap due to the finite bandwidth of the corresponding spectral lines


caused by their finite lifetime. Some overlap among the bulk, surface, edge, and corner spectra,
can be seen in Fig.3B and is attributed to inhomogeneous broadening due to energy dissipation. 
Two major loss mechanisms in our experiment are (i) the absorption in the resin used in 3D 
printing, (ii) the leakage through the probe holes, which are deliberately introduced in the design 
of the individual resonators to allow excitation and probing of the acoustic field. The resultant 
experimentally measured quality factors of the individual resonators are within the range of 50 to 
60, and, therefore, the corresponding finite lifetimes of the modes of the lattice are long enough 
not to alter their topological nature.

Fig. 3 Experimental demonstration of second- and third-order topological edge and corner states.
(A) Energy spectrum obtained from TBM for the pyrochlore lattice. Yellow, purple, blue, and red colored 

shaded regions are for bulk, surface, edge, and corner states, respectively. (B) Normalized density of 
states for the expanded lattice obtained from the measurements of the frequency response at the top of 

each site. Each region’s densities of states (bulk, surface, edge, and corner) were obtained by filter 

functions of bulk, surface, edge and corner, respectively. (C) Logarithmic map of the spatial distribution 
of acoustic power with source placed at the top corner indicated by white colored cylinder evaluated at 
frequency I and II. (D) Logarithmic map of the spatial distributions of acoustic power with source placed 

at the center edge site (depicted in white colored cylinder) evaluated at frequency III. The inset of (D) 

shows the linear map for the same measurement.


The experimentally measured field profiles of all the modes, shown in Fig. 3C and 3D, are in 
excellent agreement with the numerically calculated profiles of higher-order states. From Fig. 3C,
one can easily ascertain the difference between field profiles of the exponentially decaying bulk 
modes (excited at the frequency within the bulk band indexed by the label I in Fig. 3B) and of the 
extremely localized zero-energy corner state excited at the corresponding frequency (indexed by 
the label II in Fig. 3B). Note that the field decay of the spectral profile of bulk modes is less rapid, 
following a 1/𝑟2 dependence with an exponential correction due to loss. It is worth mentioning
that the generalized chiral symmetry in the pyrochlore lattice provides inherent robustness of the 
corner modes, as the corner states are always pinned to “zero-energy” states, and their field 
profiles, are ideally localized at one of the sublattices (19), which is evident in the corner mode 
spectral profile in Fig. 3C. The generalized chiral symmetry for the present case of 3D pyrochlore 

lattice is described by the operator Γ̂4, with the property Γ̂4

4 = 1, connecting a sequence of 

inequivalent Hamiltonians 𝐻̂𝑛 with the same spectrum Γ̂𝑛𝐻̂0Γ̂−𝑛 = 𝐻̂𝑛, where 𝑛 = 1,2,3, and 
H0 + H1 + H2 + H3 = 0 (S.I. section S3). Indeed, as can be seen from the logarithmic field maps 
in Fig. 3C, right panel, the corner state predominantly localizes on the same sublattice. Thus, the 
amplitude of at the atoms of different sublattices within the same unit cell appears to be at least
500 times smaller compared to the amplitude in the same sublattice of the adjacent cells (only 40 
time weaker). As expected, the similar sublattice localization is not observed for the bulk modes 
plotted in the left panel of Fig. 3C.

In addition to corner states localized in three dimensions, the nonzero value of bulk topological 
polarization gives rise to the formation of another class of HOT states – 2nd order edge states 
confined to the edges of the fabricated finite metacrystal. These modes are shown in Fig. 3D, where 
we can see that they exhibit extreme localization to a particular edge, where the mode is excited 
halfway between the terminating corners, and it forms a standing wave-like profile with two nodes 
located at the respective corners.

Conclusions

Advanced manufacturing techniques based on 3D printing meta-molecules and their snap-
assembly to form complex acoustic metamaterials provides exciting opportunities in acoustics. 
Here, this platform has been applied to fabricate a 3D topological metamaterial forming the 
acoustic analogue of pyrochlore crystal, and supporting a regime with nontrivial topological bulk 
polarization. We demonstrated for the first time that such topological polarization leads to the 
emergence of a hierarchy of higher-order topological states, 3nd order states confined to corners, 
2nd order states localized at the edges of the 3D metacrystal. The respective modes show strong 
and topologically robust confinement to the respective edges and corners, making them ideal 
candidates for applications in which precise control of energy localization is critical. In this respect, 
topological metamaterials not only hold the promise for desirable field concentration, but also add 
the unique feature of robustness, which ensures the spectral position of the HOT states to be stable, 
as long as the generalized chiral symmetry of the manufactured structure is ensured by its design 
and fabrication. The use of additional synthetic degrees of freedom, engineered by the complex 
geometries of the 3D multimodal metamolecules, may further facilitate control of topological 


acoustic modes, opening even more interesting applications, with sound-waves filtered, steered, 
and routed based on their internal synthetic polarization.

Data availability

Data that are not already included in the paper and/or in the Supplementary Information are 
available on request from the authors.

Author contributions

All authors contributed extensively to the work presented in this paper.

Acknowledgements
The work was supported by the DARPA Nascent program and by the National Science Foundation 
with grants No. CMMI-1537294, EFRI-1641069, and DMR-1809915. Research carried out in part 
at the Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, which is supported 
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-
SC0012704. MW acknowledges the guidance of Benjamin Hahn for the preparation of 3D 
graphics.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Corresponding authors
Correspondence to Andrea Alù (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4297-5274) or Alexander B. 
Khanikaev (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7689-216X).


Methods

1. Structure design, 3D printing, and generic measurements – The unit cell designs of the 
topological expanded lattice are shown in Fig. 1A-B with lattice constant 𝑎0 = 61.66 mm, height 
𝐻0 = 20.00 mm, and radius 𝑟0 = 9.70 mm. The connectors between the cylinders are radial 
channels with diameter 𝑑𝛾 = 3.66 mm and 𝑑𝜅 = 1.00 mm. To preserve the rotational symmetries
of the pyrochloric unit cell, we rotated the cylinders about their axis along the 𝑧 direction by 
angle 𝜃 = 18.60° in y-z plane (such that the three modes remain degenerate at Γ point, as 
shown in Fig. 2B). The centers of the four cylinders in each unit cell are aligned to form the FCC 
lattice. The boundary cells, as shown in the photograph of the finite structure (Fig. 1D), have the 
same geometric parameters except their heights are 90% that of the cylinders within the unit cell.

The unit cells and boundary cells were fabricated using the B9Creator v1.2 3D printer. All cells 
were made with acrylic-based light-activated resin, a type of plastic that hardens when exposed 
to UV light. Each cell was printed with a sufficient thickness to ensure a hard wall boundary 
condition and narrow probe channels were intentionally introduced on top and bottom of each 
cylinders to excite and measure local pressure amplitude at each site. The diameter of each port 
is 2.50 mm with a height of 2.20 mm. When not in use, the probe channels were sealed with 
plumber’s putty. Each unit cell and boundary cell were printed one at a time and the models were 
designed specifically to interlock tightly with each other. The expanded structure shown in Fig. 
1D contains 20 unit cells and 60 boundary cells. For all measurements, a frequency generator 
and FFT spectrum analyzer scripted in LabVIEW were used.

2. Numerical method – Finite element solver COMSOL Multiphysics 5.2a with the Acoustic 
module was used to perform full-wave simulation. In the acoustic propagation wave equation, 
the speed of sound was set as 343.2 m/s and density of air as 1.225 kg/m^3. Other dimensional 
parameters of the structure are the same as the fabricated parameters. 

TBM is used to fit the band diagrams of the dimerized and un-dimerized structures with the first 
principles COMSOL solution. For the un-dimerized band structure with X-W line degeneracy, 
the on-site frequency is fitted as ω0 = 8584 Hz and κ = γ = 12.8 Hz. For the dimerized band 
structure with X-W line broken degeneracy, ω0 = 8470 Hz and κ = 12.8 Hz, γ = 115 Hz (κ and γ 
are flipped for the shrunken case). These numbers were used to extract the bulk polarization of 
the expanded and shrunken cases.

3. Density of States (DOS) measurement – The speaker was placed at the bottom port and the 
microphone at the top port of the same site. The frequency generator was used to run a sweep 
from 7600 Hz to 8800 Hz in 20 Hz intervals with a dwell time of 0.5 seconds while the FFT 
spectrum analyzer obtained the amplitude responses φ(ω) at each frequency. Field distributions 
φj(ω) are obtained by repeating this process for each site j. Once each amplitude response was 
obtained for each of the 80 individual sites, we separate the response of the bulk, surface, edge, 
and corner sites depending on which mode dominates at that site, put it another word, we use the 
filter functions to obtain the spectra for different type of modes. We obtained the average power 
spectrum 𝑃𝑎(𝜔) = ∑ |Φ𝑗(𝜔)|
𝑗

2 /𝑁 for each region where N is the number of resonators within 

that region and then normalized the spectra with 𝑃𝑛(𝜔) = 𝑃𝑎(𝜔)/ ∑ 𝑃𝑎(𝜔)
𝜔
. For the field 


profiles excited by a single frequency, the speaker was fixed at the port of the site of interest and 
the microphone was placed over each site of the lattice to measure the magnitude response at the 
desired frequency (shown in Fig. 3B).


References

1.
R. Susstrunk, S. D. Huber, Classification of topological phonons in linear mechanical 
metamaterials. P Natl Acad Sci USA 113, E4767-E4775 (2016).

2.
C. L. Kane, T. C. Lubensky, Topological boundary modes in isostatic lattices. Nat Phys 10, 39-45 
(2014).

3.
N. P. Mitchell, L. M. Nash, D. Hexner, A. M. Turner, W. T. M. Irvine, Amorphous topological 
insulators constructed from random point sets. Nat Phys 14, 380-+ (2018).

4.
K. Bertoldi, V. Vitelli, J. Christensen, M. van Hecke, Flexible mechanical metamaterials. Nat Rev 
Mater 2,  (2017).

5.
Z. J. Yang et al., Topological Acoustics. Phys Rev Lett 114,  (2015).

6.
A. B. Khanikaev, R. Fleury, S. H. Mousavi, A. Alu, Topologically robust sound propagation in an 
angular-momentum-biased graphene-like resonator lattice. Nat Commun 6,  (2015).

7.
R. Fleury, A. B. Khanikaev, A. Alu, Floquet topological insulators for sound. Nat Commun 7,  
(2016).

8.
S. D. Huber, Topological mechanics. Nat Phys 12, 621-623 (2016).

9.
P. Wang, L. Lu, K. Bertoldi, Topological Phononic Crystals with One-Way Elastic Edge Waves. 
Phys Rev Lett 115,  (2015).

10.
V. Peano, C. Brendel, M. Schmidt, F. Marquardt, Topological Phases of Sound and Light. Phys Rev 
X 5,  (2015).

11.
L. M. Nash et al., Topological mechanics of gyroscopic metamaterials. P Natl Acad Sci USA 112, 
14495-14500 (2015).

12.
M. Xiao et al., Geometric phase and band inversion in periodic acoustic systems. Nat Phys 11, 
240-244 (2015).

13.
R. Susstrunk, S. D. Huber, Observation of phononic helical edge states in a mechanical 
topological insulator. Science 349, 47-50 (2015).

14.
C. He et al., Acoustic topological insulator and robust one-way sound transport. Nat Phys 12, 
1124-+ (2016).

15.
M. Miniaci, R. K. Pal, B. Morvan, M. Ruzzene, Experimental Observation of Topologically 
Protected Helical Edge Modes in Patterned Elastic Plates. Phys Rev X 8,  (2018).

16.
S. H. Mousavi, A. B. Khanikaev, Z. Wang, Topologically protected elastic waves in phononic 
metamaterials. Nat Commun 6,  (2015).

17.
X. Ni, M. A. Gorlach, A. Alu, A. B. Khanikaev, Topological edge states in acoustic Kagome lattices. 
New J Phys 19,  (2017).

18.
H. Xue, Y. Yang, F. Gao, Y. D. Chong, B. Zhang, Acoustic higher-order topological insulator on a 
Kagome lattice. ArXiv: 1806.09418,  (2018).

19.
X. Ni, M. Weiner, A. Alu, A. Khanikaev, Observation of Higher-Order Topological Acoustic States 
Protected by Generalized Chiral Symmetry. Nat Mater to be published,  (2018).

20.
S. Yves, R. Fleury, F. Lemoult, M. Fink, G. Lerosey, Topological acoustic polaritons: robust sound 
manipulation at the subwavelength scale. New J Phys 19,  (2017).

21.
H. Ge et al., Experimental Observation of Acoustic Weyl Points and Topological Surface States. 
Phys Rev Appl 10,  (2018).

22.
F. Li, X. Q. Huang, J. Y. Lu, J. H. Ma, Z. Y. Liu, Weyl points and Fermi arcs in a chiral phononic 
crystal. Nat Phys 14, 30-+ (2018).

23.
M. Xiao, W. J. Chen, W. Y. He, C. T. Chan, Synthetic gauge flux and Weyl points in acoustic 
systems. Nat Phys 11, 920-924 (2015).

24.
C. He et al., Three-dimensional topological acoustic crystals with pseudospin-valley coupled 
saddle surface states. Nat Commun 9,  (2018).


25.
M. Serra-Garcia et al., Observation of a phononic quadrupole topological insulator. Nature 555, 
342-+ (2018).

26.
W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, Electric multipole moments, topological multipole 
moment pumping, and chiral hinge states in crystalline insulators. Phys Rev B 96,  (2017).

27.
W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, Quantized electric multipole insulators. Science
357, 61-66 (2017).

28.
M. Ezawa, Higher-Order Topological Insulators and Semimetals on the Breathing Kagome and 
Pyrochlore Lattices. Phys Rev Lett 120,  (2018).

29.
M. Ezawa, Minimal models for Wannier-type higher-order topological insulators and 
phosphorene. Phys Rev B 98,  (2018).

30.
R. D. Kingsmith, D. Vanderbilt, Theory of Polarization of Crystalline Solids. Phys Rev B 47, 1651-
1654 (1993).


