1

Engineering Transport in Manganites by Tuning Local 

Non-Stoichiometry in Grain Boundaries

F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, L. López-Conesa, G. Martín, A. Ruiz-Caridad, M. Walls, L. Ruiz-
González, A. Kordatos, M. Núñez, A. Morata, S. Estradé, A. Chroneos, F. Peiró, A. 
Tarancón*

F. Chiabrera, Dr. I. Garbayo, Dr. M. Núñez, Dr. A. Morata, Prof. Dr. A. Tarancón
Department of Advanced Materials for Energy, Catalonia Institute for Energy Research 
(IREC), Jardí de les Dones de Negre 1, Planta 2, 08930 Sant Adrià de Besòs (Barcelona), 
Spain.

Dr. L. López-Conesa, G. Martín, A. Ruiz-Caridad, Dr. S. Estradé, Prof. Dr. F. Peiró
Department of Electronics and Biomedical Engineering, University of Barcelona, C. de Martí 
i Franquès 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Dr. L. López-Conesa, G. Martín, A. Ruiz-Caridad, Dr. S. Estradé, Prof. Dr. F. Peiró
Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, 
Spain.

Dr. L. López-Conesa
TEM-MAT Unit, Scientific and Technological Centers of the University of Barcelona 
(CCiTUB), C. de Lluís Solé i Sabarís 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

M. Walls
Laboratoire de Physique des Solides Bldg. 510, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Orsay Cedex, 91405 France.

Prof. Dr. L. Ruiz-González
Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Facultad de CC. Químicas, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

A. Kordatos, Prof. Dr. A. Chroneos 
Faculty of Engineering, Environment and Computing, Coventry University, Priory Street, 
Coventry CV1 5FB, United Kingdom.

Prof. Dr. A. Chroneos 
Department of Materials, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.

Prof. Dr. A. Tarancón
ICREA, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.

E-mail: atarancon@irec.cat

Keywords: grain boundary, manganites, nanoionics, interface-dominated materials, local non-
stoichiometry


2

Interface-dominated materials such as nanocrystalline thin films have emerged as an enthralling 

class of materials able to engineer functional properties of transition metal oxides widely used 

in energy and information technologies. In particular, it has been proved that strain-induced 

defects in grain boundaries of manganites deeply impact their functional properties by boosting 

their oxygen mass transport while abating their electronic and magnetic order. In this work, the 

origin of these dramatic changes is correlated for the first time with strong modifications of the 

anionic and cationic composition in the vicinity of strained grain boundary regions. We are also 

able to alter the grain boundary composition by tuning the overall cationic content in the films, 

which represents a new and powerful tool, beyond the classical space charge layer effect, for 

engineering electronic and mass transport properties of metal oxide thin films useful for a 

collection of relevant solid state devices.


3

Perovskite manganites with general formula RE1-xBxMnO3±δ (where RE stands for a trivalent 

Rare-Earth element and B for a divalent alkaline ion) have been extensively investigated for 

their wide variety of intriguing properties, such as oxygen electrocatalysis in solid oxide fuel 

cell (SOFC),[1,2] colossal magnetoresistivity,[3,4] resistive switching[5,6] and magnetocaloric 

effect.[7,8] Classically, engineering the electro-chemo-mechanical properties in such materials 

(either bulk or thin films) was reached by the selection of the RE element and/or by doping the 

A-site with aliovalent atoms.  However, in the last years the study of interface-dominated thin 

films has opened new horizons in the understanding and control of functional transition-metal 

oxides. For instance, the control of the strain imposed by a substrate in epitaxial thin films was 

demonstrated to have a large impact on many different aspects, such as the electronic and 

magnetic properties,[9,10] or the oxygen surface exchange rate.[11] In addition to the study of pure 

strain effects, also structural defects, such as dislocations or grain boundaries (GBs), have been 

shown to strongly influence the overall properties of manganites.[8,12–16]

It was recently discovered that GBs in La0.8Sr0.2MnO3±δ (LSM) thin films are responsible for a 

substantial enhancement of oxygen diffusion and oxygen reduction reactions (ORR),[13,14,17]

contrary to what is determined in many oxides where the GBs are known to hinder the oxygen 

mobility.[18,19] The improvement of oxygen mass transport properties is able to completely 

change the nature of the material converting the mainly electronic LSM into a good mixed 

ionic-electronic conductor (MIEC). Moreover, it was also determined that dislocations in 

epitaxial compressive thin films can accelerate oxygen diffusion, suggesting an interesting 

similarity with the behaviour of the GBs.[16] This substantial difference between LSM and other 

oxides is at the centre of an important debate within the scientific community, since the 

comprehension of the phenomena might open new horizons to take advantage of GB 

peculiarities in several families of solid state electrochemical devices.

Alternatively, GBs are also known to deeply impact the electronic and magnetic properties of 

manganites, generally giving rise to a highly insulating and magnetically disordered 


4

region,[12,20,21] which can strongly affect, among others, the performance of magnetic cooling 

devices[8] or magnetic memories.[22] Since the electronic transport properties of manganites are 

determined by the chemical and structural order of Mn,[3,23] phenomena occurring at the GB 

level such as lattice strain, cation deficiency and variable oxygen concentration will certainly 

have an impact on the electronic behaviour. 

In this direction, the present study correlates structural and local compositional changes in the 

vicinity of GBs with the changes observed in the electrochemical and electronic behaviour of 

LSM thin films, revealing the origin of both their superior ORR catalysis and their deleterious 

higher resistivity. Ultimately, we prove that the modification of the local composition at the GB 

level allows tuning these electrochemical, electronic and magnetic properties thus proposing a 

new and effective tool for engineering the functionality of these, and other technologically 

relevant materials.

To understand the correlation between the superior performance of dense LSM layers and their 

local structure, we first prepared Mn-deficient polycrystalline films by means of Pulsed Laser 

Deposition (PLD) on top 
of 
yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ)-based substrates 

(YSZ/Si3N4/SiO2/Si), using a proper selection of deposition parameters.[24–26] LSM films 

showed a fully dense polycrystalline structure, with well-defined nanometric columnar grains 

of tens of nanometers in diameter (Figure 1a and 1b) and a Mn/(La+Sr) ratio of B/A = 0.85 ± 

0.02, as measured by Wavelength Dispersive Spectroscopy (WDS). High Resolution 

Transmission Electron Microscopy (HR-TEM) images of the cross section (Figure 1c) revealed 

the good crystallinity of the LSM grains and the absence of secondary phases neither at the GB 

nor at the core of the columnar-like grains. The most relevant feature of the grain boundaries, 

observed after Fourier filtering of HRTEM images, is the presence of a high concentration of 

ordered lattice defects with a periodicity of ∼1nm (Figure 1d, see also section S.1. of the 

supplementary information). Higher magnification images show the existence of a regular 

dense array of dislocations, consisting of a missing atomic plane one out every five (Figure 1e). 


5

This dislocation network imposes an elastic stress field that propagates for several nanometers 

inside the grains. Eventually, due to the short distance between the dislocations, the strain field 

overlaps determining a strained region far beyond the grain boundary core.[27]

Figure 1. a, SEM top-view and b, cross-section of the fully-dense and columnar LSM/YSZ bi-
layer grown on the top of Si3N4/SiO2/Si. c. HRTEM image of YSZ/LSM interface showing one 
grain boundary (highlighted by a white dashed line) oriented in a direction perpendicular 
respect to the substrate. d, Fourier filtered image of a LSM grain boundary consisting of a dense 
pattern of dislocations repeating every ∼ 1 nm. e, coloured enlargement of the red dotted square 
shown in d, in which 3 dislocations are highlighted by white “T” symbols.  

The effect of these highly defective GBs on the chemical composition was analysed by high 

angle annular dark-field (HAADF) and electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS). First, 

HAADF (Figure 2a) clearly showed a strong contrast associated to the defective region, 

a
c

e
d

YSZ

200 nm

YSZ

LSM

GB

Growth direction

5 nm

2 nm
5 Å

Grain 1
Grain 2

b

200 nm


6

indicating a local variation in the atomic number likely related to deviations from the bulk grain 

stoichiometry. More precisely, EELS analysis across and along the grain boundary (Figure 2b 

and 2d, respectively) revealed this significant variation in the atomic composition. Across the 

interface, Figure 2b, we observed an increase of the concentration of Sr and La coupled to a 

decrease in Mn and O, common to all GBs analysed (see also Figure S4 in the Supplementary 

Information). Importantly, despite the stoichiometry deviation, a constant Mn L23 ratio of ca.

2.5 (corresponding to a Mn oxidation state of ~3.4)[28] was measured across the GB (Figure 

S5). Moreover, the EELS measurements along the GB interface, Figure 2c, yielded analogous 

compositional variations with complementary La and Mn profiles when crossing the local strain 

fields created by the dislocations (Figure 2d). This latter observation suggests that the strained 

regions generated by the dislocations are strongly related with the local variation of the 

stoichiometry. Although the observed oxygen deficiency is fully compatible with the well-

known reducing nature of dislocations,[18,29–31] the presence of a cation rearrangement 

(combined with the constant oxidation state of Mn) indicates a more complex charge 

compensation mechanism than the classical space charge layer formation. The presence of large 

concentration of manganese vacancies in the bulk (B/A = 0.85 ± 0.02) suggests an 

interdependence between the grain interior and the GBs, opening the way for tuning the local 

non-stoichiometry at the GB level by controlling the overall cationic content in the films.


7

Figure 2. a, HAADF image of the GB, showing a different contrast at the interface. b, chemical 
composition obtained from the EELS scan across the GB (white arrow in a). Integrated intensity 
signals were normalized to the grain (bulk) values for each element. A significant compositional 
variation is visible near the GB interface. c, Bright field HRTEM figure of a grain boundary 
showing atomic fringes at the interface (indicated by black arrows) that agree with the 
dislocations pattern observed in Figure 1.c. d, La and Mn variation extracted from EELS scan 
along the GB (white arrow in c). A simultaneous increase of La and decrease of Mn 
concentration is observed at specific locations that correspond well with the fringe pattern 
observed, indicating that the chemical variations occurs in the proximity of the dislocations.

We therefore investigated the possibility of tuning the ionic composition in the GBs and thus, 

the functional properties of the LSM films. For this purpose, combinatorial pulsed laser 

deposition (c-PLD) was employed to generate a thin film with a continuous map of 

compositions La0.8Sr0.2MnyO3±δ (LSMy, y = 0.85-1.2). LSM and Mn3O4 targets were used as 


8

parent compounds, as shown in Figure 3a (see section S.3.1. for further details on the 

fabrication process). High quality and dense polycrystalline thin films with variable content of 

Mn were grown on different substrates, as confirmed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) 

and Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis (section S.3.2. includes a complete structural 

characterization of the combinatorial film). Importantly, the structural characterization of the 

LSMy film carried out by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) confirmed the absence of secondary phases 

in the whole Mn/(La+Sr) range under study and independently of the substrate, indicating that 

the Mn was effectively introduced in the perovskite structure (Figure 3b). The expected 

continuous increase of the pseudo-cubic lattice parameter cpc in the Mn-deficient part together 

with negligible variations in the La-deficient part was obtained (Figure 3c).[32,33] Analogously 

to the study of Mn-deficient LSM films, HAADF and EELS analysis of the LSMy layers was 

carried out by TEM. Here, a clear impact of the change in the bulk stoichiometry on the local 

cation composition at the grain boundary level was observed, see representative GBs for each 

composition in Figure 3d-k. The analysis reflects that the GBs suddenly pass from a Mn-

deficient state to a La-deficient with the overall Mn content, presumably changing the defect 

chemistry and giving rise to two different types of GBs, with opposite cation depletion (for a

discussion on the quantitative variations we refer to section S.3.3 in the Supplementary 

Information). Notably, oxygen deficiency was found in all the GBs, independently on the Mn 

content (see Figure S14 in the Supplementary Information). In order to assess the impact of the 

local non-stoichiometry of the GBs on the transport properties of the LSMy films, we evaluated 

for the whole series of compositions both the in-plane electrical conductivity (measured on 

insulating substrates, Sapphire (0001) and YSZ/Si3N4/SiO2/Si) and the electrochemical 

properties (on an oxygen ion conducting electrolyte, YSZ (001)), see Figures 4a and 4b 

respectively. First, we focus on the changes observed in the electrical properties, Figure 4c. 

Here, we show the evolution of the electronic resistivity as a function of temperature (T= 85-

575 K) for the polycrystalline LSMy series on a sapphire substrate. Note that, for comparison, 


9

the plot also includes results obtained for a 60 nm-thick epitaxial LSM film, grown on an 

NdGaO3 (110) substrate under the same deposition conditions than the polycrystalline LSM0.85

(see section S.2. for a complete characterization). This epitaxial film is expected to behave 

mostly like the grain interior of polycrystalline LSM0.85 and is taken as a reference to ensure 

that the effects observed are associated to the GBs. Indeed, the polycrystalline and epitaxial 

LSM0.85 thin films present the same bulk cationic composition, Mn oxidation state and, 

consequently, oxygen content.[34] As shown in Figure 4c, the epitaxial LSM0.85 film (blue open 

symbols) indeed presents a metal-insulator (M-I) transition typical of bulk stoichiometric 

manganites. Although a suppression of M-I transition was previously reported for Mn deficient 

compositions,[24,35,36] the absence of extended structural defects (GBs) in the epitaxial films 

preserves the long range electronic order, allowing the onset of metal behaviour. Opposed to 

that, the polycrystalline counterpart (LSM0.85) presents at least one order of magnitude higher 

resistance together with the suppression of the M-I transition. Moreover, it is important to note 

that no changes in the electrical resistivity were observed after annealing at temperatures as 

high as 923 K for 5 hours, suggesting a strong equilibrium of the GB (see Figure S17 in 

Supplementary Information). Remarkably, as shown in Figure 4c, progressively increasing the 

B/A ratio leads to a continuous decrease of the resistivity recovering the low temperature M-I 

transition for Mn/(La+Sr) > 0.92 (complementary results were obtained for the YSZ/Si 

substrate as shown in the supplementary information, Figure S18). 


10

Figure 3. a. Sketch of the combinatorial approach used for varying B/A ratio. b. XRD of LSMy
samples deposited on YSZ/Si for different B/A ratio. Black asterisk marks the YSZ diffraction 
peaks. c. Evolution of pseudo-cubic lattice parameter obtained by XRD for different Mn content. 
The inset shows the shift of the 110 peak in the samples deposited on sapphire (0001) d-g, 
Annular dark field images of grain boundaries in samples with different B/A ratio and h-k
corresponding La and Mn variation extracted from EELS scans. A sudden decrease of La and 
a progressive increase of Mn are obtained in the GBs changing the overall B/A ratio in the thin 
films.

Figure 4. a. Sketch of the in-plane electrical measurement and c. resistivity obtained as a 
function of temperature for different B/A ratio. Results obtained for the epitaxial LSM0.85 are 
reported for comparison b. Scheme of the electrochemical measurements. The columnar 
structures of the films offer a preferential ionic pathway along the grain boundaries. Oxygen 

In-plane electronic resistivity
a

I+
I-
V-
V+

Jel

Bulk diffusion

YSZ

Porous Silver

Porous Gold

Impedance 
Spectroscopy

O--

b

O2

Out of Plane Electrochemical properties

Electrical resistivity (Ωcm)

d

Oxygen diffusion (cm2/s)

c

Bulk surface exchange

Surface exchange (cm/s)

e


11

diffusion (d) and surface exchange coefficient (e), extracted from the impedance at 650ºC in 
air for different B/A ratio. Diffusion coefficients measured in SIMS experiments by Saranya et 
al., [13] Navickas et al., [14] De Souza et al. [2] and in EIS by Chiabrera et al. [15] are reported for 
comparison. Stoichiometry of films from references [13,15] were measured within the frame of 
this work.

This M-I transition in manganites has been traditionally interpreted as a Jahn-Teller (JT) 

mediated double-exchange mechanism, consisting of the transfer of one electron between two 

ferromagnetic spin-aligned Mn ions through the oxygen orbital.[37,38] In the Mn-deficient LSM 

GBs (see Figure 2), the simultaneous decrease of O and Mn is expected to strongly impede the 

metallic behaviour due to the interruption of the Mn-O-Mn chains and the formation of a highly 

insulating zone of the width of the local non-stoichiometry. The recovery of the M-I transition

in the polycrystalline thin films well correlates with the change of GB composition observed

increasing the overall B/A ratio (see Figure 3). In these Mn-rich GBs, the decrease of La is not 

supposed to affect the electronic transport, while the progressive increase of Mn helps to restore 

the metallic long-range order, gradually improving the metallic behaviour. It is worth 

mentioning that also an enhancement of the bulk conductivity was measured in the epitaxial 

thin films increasing the Mn content (see Figure S19 in Supplementary Information).[34]

Nevertheless, the conductivity of the polycrystalline thin films is orders of magnitude lower 

than the corresponding epitaxial one, meaning that the GB contribution is always dominating 

the macroscopic electronic transport.

Complementary to the electrical measurements, we carried out the electrochemical 

characterization of the LSMy series as part of LSMy/YSZ/Ag cells, where YSZ is a pure ionic 

conductor acting as an electrolyte and the silver is playing the role of the backside electrode. 

The study of this type of MIEC-based cells by Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) 

allows the determination of their oxygen mass transport properties,[1] i.e. the oxygen diffusion 

coefficient, D*, and the surface exchange coefficient, k* (see section S.3.5. for a detailed 

explanation). The evolution of the oxygen diffusion and surface exchange coefficients obtained 


12

by EIS analysis in air at 923K are presented in Figure 4d and e, respectively. First, a substantial 

increase of the diffusivity (above two orders of magnitude) with respect to the reported bulk 

values is observed in all the samples. This confirms the existence of an oxygen fast diffusion 

pathway along the GBs, independently of the Mn/(La+Sr) ratio, consistent with the oxygen 

deficiency observed in all the GB types (Figure S14). On top of that, Mn-deficient layers with 

Mn/(La+Sr) < 0.9 present an additional increase up to two orders of magnitude, for a total of 

four, in the diffusivity. On one side, these results may be behind the discrepancies observed by 

different authors in the past,[13–15] while on the other they show for the first time the possibility 

of tuning the diffusivity by controlling the content of Mn. Regarding the surface exchange 

(Figure 4e), an analogous trend to the oxygen diffusion is observed in the Mn deficient GBs. 

The strong coupling of the two oxygen parameters, along with the observed oxygen depletion 

in the GBs, corroborate the hypothesis that the accumulation of oxygen vacancies is at the origin 

of the large improvement of the Oxygen Reduction Reactions (ORR) reported for manganite 

thin films by different authors.[17] This conclusion is also supported by theoretical works from 

Choi et al. [39] and Mastrikov et al.,[40] where the scarce concentration of oxygen vacancies was 

found as the limiting factor for oxygen incorporation in bulk LSM. The strong implications of 

our observation contribute to the general understanding of the ORR mechanism for metal 

transition based perovskites, which is still under debate.[41–43] In this direction, a traditional gap 

of knowledge regarding the unexpected excellent behaviour of a mainly electronic conductor 

such as LSM bulk is overcome by considering the superior interface performance proved, when 

the material is not limited by the availability of oxygen vacancies. 

With these results we unambiguously show that the origin of the deleterious effects on the 

electrical behaviour and the superior oxygen mass transport properties rely on the evolution of 

the nature of the GB, which is dominated by the cation and anion local non-stoichiometry. A 

transition in the nature of GBs occurs at Mn/(La+Sr) ~ 0.9 in LSM, likely associated to a change 

in the local defect chemistry. Above this value, slightly Mn-deficient and Mn-rich films are 


13

characterized by a significant oxygen vacancies concentration (𝑉𝑂

∙∙), arising from the presence 

of highly reducing dislocations,[31] compensated by lanthanum vacancies ( 𝑉𝐿𝑎

,,, ) and the 

formation of naturally occurring antisite defects (𝑀𝑛𝐿𝑎

× ),[44] which is fully compatible with our 

HRTEM-EELS observations. More interestingly, for highly Mn-deficient layers (Mn/(La+Sr) 

< 0.9), an increasing oxygen diffusivity is observed due to a further increase of the oxygen 

vacancies concentration, which seems to be strongly interrelated to the decrease in Mn content 

and the presence of compensating negative defects such as Mn vacancies (𝑉𝑀𝑛

,,, ) (Figure 2). As 

previously mentioned, this decrease of Mn at the GB level is complemented by an increase of 

the La and Sr content. This, together with the absence of secondary phases (such as the La-rich 

Ruddlesden-Popper phase) in the GBs, suggests the formation of the 𝐿𝑎𝑀𝑛

×
antisite defect. 

However, this type of defect is hardly formed in strain-free bulk LSM due to the much bigger 

ionic radius of La3+ compared to Mn3+/Mn4+.[45] Density Functional Theory (DFT) simulations 

were carried out in this work (see details in the experimental section) to evaluate the formation 

of these unusual 𝐿𝑎𝑀𝑛

×
defects in combination with other defects and constrains typically 

present at the LSM GBs, i.e. strain, the presence of oxygen vacancies and Sr dopants. The 

formation energies of different defect clusters under variable strain states (𝜀) were calculated 

to find the most stable defect configurations in the presence of Mn vacancies (see Table 1). 

Several conclusions arise from this analysis: first, the formation of the oversized 𝐿𝑎𝑀𝑛

×
defect 

is more favourable in the vicinity of the smaller Sr cations (𝑆𝑟𝐿𝑎

′ ); second, the formation energy 

is even lower in the presence of one oxygen vacancy, 𝑉𝑂

∙∙ (additional Sr dopants in the cluster 

do not reduce this value); third, no significant variation was obtained when applying strain in 

the presence of Sr doping atoms and/or oxygen vacancies. All in all, this indicates that the 

driving energy for the antisite defect formation in GBs relies on a complex association of 

defects (𝑉𝑀𝑛

,,, , 𝑆𝑟𝐿𝑎

′ 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑉𝑂

∙∙) rather than a classical space charge mechanism.


14

Table 1. Formation energy of 𝐿𝑎𝑀𝑛

×
defect calculated by DFT in different configurations.

Formation energy 

(eV)

Without 𝑽𝑶

∙∙
With one 𝑽𝑶

∙∙

𝜺 = 𝟎
𝜺 = 𝟏%
𝜺 = 𝟐%
𝜺 = 𝟎
𝜺 = 𝟏%
𝜺 = 𝟐%

# 𝑺𝒓𝑳𝒂

′

0
5.25
-
-
2.29
-
-

1
3.36
3.34
3.43
2.61
2.58
2.66

3
2.96
2.48
2.13
2.32
2.35
2.3

It is important to note that local cation non-stoichiometry in manganites was also observed in 

other type of interfaces, e.g. dislocations in epitaxial La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 on LaAlO3[46,47] or purely 

strained La0.7Sr0.3MnO3/SrTiO3 hetero-interfaces.[48–50] This suggests that the compensation 

mechanism observed in this work can be generally extrapolated to other strained and oxygen 

deficient interfaces. The natural presence of cationic vacancies in manganites, even in the 

nominally stoichiometric material,[51] is most likely the main driver of this unusual elemental 

rearrangement. The GB engineering shown in this work could be therefore extended to other 

interfaces and, more interestingly, to other perovskites, opening the way for new strategies to 

control the transport properties of materials by tuning the local non-stoichiometry.

In summary, we revealed the origin of the superior mass transport properties of interface-

dominated LSM thin films by directly observing a strain-related accumulation of oxygen 

vacancies in the GBs that defines high diffusion pathways. We found a strong correlation 

between these changes and the local cation non-stoichiometry observed at the GB level, which 

we were able to actively modify for completely change the nature of the interface. Therefore, 

we present here a new tool for tailoring the transport properties of technologically relevant 

interfaces such as grain boundaries (beyond the traditional space charge layer engineering) 

suitable for direct application in a collection of solid state devices based on mixed ionic-

electronic conductors, including thin film based solid oxide fuel cells, resistive switching 

devices, magnetoresistance or supercapacitors.

Experimental Section


15

Films. La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-yO3±δ
(LSM) / Yttria-stabilized Zirconia (YSZ) polycrystalline 

heterostructures (100nm LSM / 100 nm YSZ) were grown by PLD on Si (100) substrates, 

electrically and stress passivated by 300nm Si3N4 / 100 nm SiO2 bilayers. The PLD system used 

is a large-area system from PVD Products (PLD-5000), equipped with a KrF-248 nm excimer 

laser from Lambda Physics (COMPex PRO 205). Commercial targets with nominal 

composition La0.8Sr0.2MnO3 (LSM) and 3 mol-% Y2O3 stabilized ZrO2 (3YSZ) were used for 

the thin films deposition. The films were deposited with an energy fluency of 1 J cm-2 per pulse 

at a frequency of 10 Hz. The substrate was kept at 700ºC, in an oxygen partial pressure of 0.026 

mbar during the deposition and the substrate-target distance was set to 95mm. Epitaxial LSM 

films were deposited under the same conditions of the polycrystalline films on NdGaO3 (110) 

substrates. Combinatorial pulsed Laser deposition (c-PLD) technique was used to grow LSMy

films with variable Mn/(La+Sr) ratio. Commercial targets of LSM and Mn3O4 were used as 

parent compounds. The deposition conditions used were the same as for the single 

polycrystalline and epitaxial LSM. LSMy combinatorial samples were grown on YSZ/Si 4” 

wafers and 5mm x 10mm Sapphire (0001) substrates (for the in-plane electrical measurements) 

and on 3mm x 3mm  YSZ (001) single crystal (for the electrochemical measurements). More 

details on the combinatorial deposition technique can be found in section S.3.1. of the 

supplementary information. The nominal composition of the films was measured by 

Wavelength Dispersive Spectroscopy (WDS) (model- Jeol JXA-8230) technique and by Energy 

Dispersive X-ray Analysis. The films were characterized by SEM in a ZEISS AURIGA 

equipment and by XRD in a four-angle diffractometer with a Cu Kα radiation source (X’Pert 

MRD-Panalytical) and in a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer system.

Electrical characterization. LSM thin films were analysed in 4-points in-plane electrical 

measurements in a temperature-controlled Linkam probe station, between 83K and 573K (more 

details can be found in section S.3.3.1 of the supplementary information).


16

Electrochemical characterization. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was 

performed on the LSMy combinatorial dense samples deposited on YSZ single crystals with a 

Novocontrol Alpha-A analyzer. Porous silver paste was painted as backside electrode due to its 

excellent oxygen electrochemical properties. Porous gold paste was applied on the top of the 

LSMy films for assuring a homogenous current collection. The frequency range chosen was 

106-0.05 Hz and an AC voltage with amplitude 0.05 V was applied. The experiments were 

performed in a ProboStat test station (NorECs) placed inside a vertical furnace. The temperature 

was set to 650ºC and synthetic air was flown into the system. 

TEM. HRTEM images were acquired in a JEOL J2010F microscope operated at 200 kV 

accelerating voltage. EELS experiments were carried out in a JEOL ARM 200cF microscope 

operated at 200 kV, a FEI TITAN Low Base operated at 300 kV and a Nion UltraSTEM 

operated at 100 kV. 

DFT simulations.  The calculations were performed using the plane wave DFT code 

CASTEP.[52,53] The exchange and correlation interactions were modelled with the corrected 

density functional of Perdew, Burke and Ernzerhof (PBE)[54] within the generalized gradient 

approximation (GGA) and ultrasoft pseudopotentials.[55] Spin polarized calculations with the 

Hubbard U contribution were used to account for the strong Coulombic interaction of the 

localised electrons of the 3d orbitals of Mn (the U value was set to 4 eV). The plane wave basis 

set was set to a cut-off of 400 eV, in conjunction with a 2  3  2 Monkhorst-Pack (MP)[56] k-

point grid and an 80-atomic site supercell with lattice parameters of a = c = 11.1 Å, b = 7.73 Å 

and supercell volume of 954.9 Å3. LMO / LSM is an orthorombic perovskite within the (Pnma) 

space group (space group number 62). All supercells were geometry optimized and fully relaxed, 

reaching the ground state of the system. All calculations were under constant pressure 

conditions. The final configurations were used for the electronic spectroscopy. We employ the 

OptaDOS subcode[57,58] for the projected density of states visualization. The geometry 


17

optimized supercells are treated as spin-polarized with a grid of 7 x 7 x 7 k-points. The band 

structure is plotted with an analytical step of 0.001 eV.

Supporting Information
Supplementary Figures S1–S19, Supplementary References 1–22

Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the Generalitat de Catalunya-AGAUR (2017 SGR 1421) and 
the European Regional Development Funds (MAT2016-79455-P/FEDER). This project has 
received funding from the European research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (ULTRASOFC, Grant Agreement number: 
681146). Dr. R. Arenal is acknowledged for his support in the TEM analysis. Dr. J. Santiso is 
acknowledged for his support in the XRD analysis of the epitaxial thin film.

Author Contributions
F.C., I.G., A.T., conceived the original idea behind this study. F.C. grew the films, performed 
the elementary (WDS, EDX), microstructural (SEM, XRD), electrical and electrochemical 
analysis and wrote the manuscript. I.G. and A.M. supervised and helped with the experimental 
work and co-wrote the manuscript. L.L.C., G.M., A.R.C., M.W., L.R.G., M.N., S.E., and F.P. 
carried out the TEM characterization and analysis. A.K. and A.C. contributed with the DFT 
simulations. A.T. supervised and co-wrote the manuscript.

References

[1]
S. B. Adler, Chem. Rev. 2004, 104, 4791.

[2]
R. A. De De Souza, J. A. Kilner, J. F. Walker, Mater. Lett. 2000, 43, 43.

[3]
A. Urushibara, Y. Moritomo, T. Arima, A. Asamitsu, G. Kido, Y. Tokura, Phys. Rev. B
1995, 51, 103.

[4]
Y. Tokura, Y. Tomioka, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 1999, 200, 1.

[5]
A. Asamitsu, Y. Tomioka, H. Kuwahara, Y. Tokura, Nature 1997, 388, 50.

[6]
S. Q. Liu, N. J. Wu, A. Ignatiev, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2000, 76, 2749.

[7]
M.-H. Phan, S.-C. Yu, N. H. Hur, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 86, 72504.

[8]
M. H. Phan, S. C. Yu, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 2007, 308, 325.

[9]
C. Adamo, X. Ke, H. Q. Wang, H. L. Xin, T. Heeg, M. E. Hawley, W. Zander, J. 
Schubert, P. Schiffer, D. A. Muller, L. Maritato, D. G. Schlom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 
95, 112504.

[10]
H. Boschker, M. Mathews, E. P. Houwman, H. Nishikawa, A. Vailionis, G. Koster, G. 
Rijnders, D. H. A. Blank, Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 1.

[11]
L. Yan, P. a Salvador, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2012, 4, 2541.

[12]
R. Gross, L. Alff, B. Büchner, B. H. Freitag, C. Höfener, J. Klein, Y. Lu, W. Mader, J. 


18

B. Philipp, M. S. R. Rao, P. Reutler, S. Ritter, S. Thienhaus, S. Uhlenbruck, B. 
Wiedenhorst, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 2000, 211, 150.

[13]
A. M. Saranya, D. Pla, A. Morata, A. Cavallaro, J. Canales-Vázquez, J. A. Kilner, M. 
Burriel, A. Tarancón, Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5, 1500377.

[14]
E. Navickas, T. M. Huber, Y. Chen, W. Hetaba, G. Holzlechner, G. Rupp, M. Stöger-
Pollach, G. Friedbacher, H. Hutter, B. Yildiz, J. Fleig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 
17, 7659.

[15]
F. Chiabrera, A. Morata, M. Pacios, A. Tarancón, Solid State Ionics 2017, 299, 70.

[16]
E. Navickas, Y. Chen, Q. Lu, W. Wallisch, T. M. Huber, J. Bernardi, M. Stöger-
Pollach, G. Friedbacher, H. Hutter, B. Yildiz, J. Fleig, ACS Nano 2017, 11, 11475.

[17]
A. Saranya, A. Morata, D. Pla, M. Burriel, F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, A. Hornés, J. 
Kilner, A. Tarancón, Chem. Mater. 2018, accepted, acs. chemmater.8b01771.

[18]
D. Marrocchelli, L. Sun, B. Yildiz, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 4735.

[19]
L. Sun, D. Marrocchelli, B. Yildiz, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6294.

[20]
S. Kar, J. Sarkar, B. Ghosh,  a. Raychaudhuri, Phys. Rev. B 2006, 74, 85412.

[21]
A. Gupta, G. Q. Gong, G. Xiao, P. R. Duncombe, P. Lecoeur, P. Trouilloud, Y. Y. 
Wang, V. P. Dravid, J. Z. Sun, Phys. Rev. B 1996, 54, R15629.

[22]
I. Fina, G. Apachitei, D. Preziosi, H. Deniz, D. Kriegner, X. Marti, M. Alexe, Sci. Rep.
2015, 5, 1.

[23]
J. To, J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid State Chem. 1997, 128, 117.

[24]
I. Marozau, P. T. Das, M. Döbeli, J. G. Storey, M. a. Uribe-Laverde, S. Das, C. Wang, 
M. Rössle, C. Bernhard, Phys. Rev. B 2014, 89, 174422.

[25]
J. Chen, M. Döbeli, D. Stender, K. Conder, A. Wokaun, C. W. Schneider, T. Lippert, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 105, 114104.

[26]
S. Wicklein, A. Sambri, S. Amoruso, X. Wang, R. Bruzzese, A. Koehl, R. Dittmann, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 101, DOI 10.1063/1.4754112.

[27]
S. Y. Choi, S. D. Kim, M. Choi, H. S. Lee, J. Ryu, N. Shibata, T. Mizoguchi, E. 
Tochigi, T. Yamamoto, S. J. L. Kang, Y. Ikuhara, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 4129.

[28]
M. Varela, M. P. Oxley, W. Luo, J. Tao, M. Watanabe, A. R. Lupini, S. T. Pantelides, 
S. J. Pennycook, Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2009, 79, 1.

[29]
S. P. Waldow, R. A. De Souza, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 12246.

[30]
T. Mayeshiba, D. Morgan, Solid State Ionics J. 2017, 17, 2715.

[31]
J. M. Polfus, B. Yildiz, H. L. Tuller, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2018, 20, 19142.

[32]
D. J. Keeble, S. Wicklein, L. Jin, C. L. Jia, W. Egger, R. Dittmann, Phys. Rev. B 2013, 
87, 195409.

[33]
M. D. Scafetta, S. J. May, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19, 10371.


19

[34]
F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, D. Pla, M. Burriel, F. Wilhelm, A. Rogalev, M. Núñez, A. 
Morata, A. Tarancón, APL Mater, 2019, 7, 013205

[35]
J. Vergara, V. Madurga, Phys. Rev. B 1999, 60, 1127.

[36]
S. Hébert, B. Wang, A. Maignan, C. Martin, R. Retoux, B. Raveau, Solid State 
Commun. 2002, 123, 311.

[37]
C. Zener, Phys. Rev. 1951, 82, 403.

[38]
A. J. Millis, P. B. Littlewood, B. I. Shraiman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 74, 5144.

[39]
Y. Choi, M. C. Lin, M. Liu, J. Power Sources 2010, 195, 1441.

[40]
Y. A. Mastrikov, R. Merkle, E. Heifets, E. A. Kotomin, J. Maier, J. Phys. Chem. C
2010, 114, 3017.

[41]
R. A. De Souza, J. Mater. Chem. A 2017, 5, 20334.

[42]
L. Wang, R. Merkle, Y. a. Mastrikov, E. a. Kotomin, J. Maier, J. Mater. Res. 2012, 27, 
2000.

[43]
W. Jung, H. L. Tuller, Adv. Energy Mater. 2011, 1, 1184.

[44]
M. Wolcyrz, R. Horyn, F. Bouree, E. Bukowska, J. Alloys Compd. 2003, 353, 170.

[45]
D. H. Ji, S. L. Wang, X. Z. Ge, Q. Q. Zhang, C. M. Zhang, Z. W. Zeng, Y. Bai, Phys. 
Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19, 17121.

[46]
N. Bagués, J. Santiso, B. D. Esser, R. E. A. Williams, D. W. Mccomb, Z. 
Konstantinovic, L. Balcells, F. Sandiumenge, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 1704437.

[47]
K. Song, K. Du, H. Ye, Micron 2017, 96, 72.

[48]
Y. Feng, K. Jin, L. Gu, X. He, C. Ge, Q. Zhang, M. He, Q. Guo, Q. Wan, M. He, H. 
Lu, G. Yang, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 22382.

[49]
Z. Li, M. Bosman, Z. Yang, P. Ren, L. Wang, L. Cao, X. Yu, C. Ke, M. B. H. Breese, 
A. Rusydi, W. Zhu, Z. Dong, Y. L. Foo, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2012, 22, 4312.

[50]
S. Estrad́é, J. M. Rebled, J. Arbiol, F. Peiró, I. C. Infante, G. Herranz, F. Sánchez, J. 
Fontcuberta, R. Córdoba, B. G. Mendis, A. L. Bleloch, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 95, 1.

[51]
J. Nowotny, M. Rekas, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 1998, 81, 67.

[52]
M. D. Segall, P. J. D. Lindan, M. J. Probert, C. J. Pickard, P. J. Hasnip, S. J. Clark, M. 
C. Payne, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2002, 14, 2717.

[53]
C. Payne, N. York, Rev. Mod. Phys. 1992, 64, 1045.

[54]
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 3865.

[55]
D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 1990, 41, 7892.

[56]
H. J. Monkhorst, J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B 1978, 13, 5897.

[57]
R. J. Nicholls, A. J. Morris, C. J. Pickard, J. R. Yates, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2012, 371, 


20

12062.

[58]
A. J. Morris, R. J. Nicholls, C. J. Pickard, J. R. Yates, Comput. Phys. Commun. 2014, 

185, 1477.


21

Supporting Information 

Engineering Transport in Manganites by Tuning Local Non-Stoichiometry in Grain 
Boundaries

F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, L. López-Conesa, G. Martín, A. Ruiz-Caridad, M. Walls, L. Ruiz-
González, A. Kordatos, M. Núñez, A. Morata, S. Estradé, A. Chroneos, F. Peiró, A. Tarancón

F. Chiabrera, Dr. I. Garbayo, Dr. M. Núñez, Dr. A. Morata, Prof. Dr. A. Tarancón
Department of Advanced Materials for Energy, Catalonia Institute for Energy Research 
(IREC), Jardí de les Dones de Negre 1, Planta 2, 08930 Sant Adrià de Besòs (Barcelona), 
Spain.

Dr. L. López-Conesa, G. Martín, A. Ruiz-Caridad, Dr. S. Estradé, Prof. Dr. F. Peiró
Department of Electronics and Biomedical Engineering, University of Barcelona, C. de Martí 
i Franquès 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Dr. L. López-Conesa, G. Martín, A. Ruiz-Caridad, Dr. S. Estradé, Prof. Dr. F. Peiró
Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, University of Barcelona, 08028 Barcelona, 
Spain.

Dr. L. López-Conesa
TEM-MAT Unit, Scientific and Technological Centers of the University of Barcelona 
(CCiTUB), C. de Lluís Solé i Sabarís 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

M. Walls
Laboratoire de Physique des Solides Bldg. 510, CNRS, Université Paris-Sud, Université 
Paris-Saclay, Orsay Cedex, 91405 France.

Prof. Dr. L. Ruiz-González
Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Facultad de CC. Químicas, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

A. Kordatos, Prof. Dr. A. Chroneos 
Faculty of Engineering, Environment and Computing, Coventry University, Priory Street, 
Coventry CV1 5FB, United Kingdom.

Prof. Dr. A. Chroneos 
Department of Materials, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom.

Prof. Dr. A. Tarancón
ICREA, Passeig Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.

E-mail: atarancon@irec.cat


22

S.1. Chemical and structural characterization of LSM0.85 grain boundaries

Figure S1. HRTEM image containing a grain boundary separating two LSM0.85 columnar 
grains. The inset shows the corresponding FFT, indexed according to the orthorhombic space 
group 62 (Pnma).


23

Figure S2. HRTEM image containing a grain boundary separating two LSM0.85 grains. b) 
Corresponding FFT, indexed according to the orthorhombic space group 62 (Pnma) for both 
grains. c) Fourier filtered image. No dislocations are apparent in this grain boundary, although 
these may be simply not visible in this specific orientation. Insets show atomic models and 
simulated HRTEM images for both grains.


24

Figure S3. EELS spectra of the grain interior and grain boundary region obtained over a large 
energy window to measure the Sr M edge (133 eV). The inset shows a magnification of the 
region showing the O K edge (532 eV), Mn L edges (640-651 eV) and La M edges (832-849 
eV).

Figure S4. a. HAADF figure of two grains near the interface with YSZ film. EELS 
compositional maps of La (b) and Mn (c) concentrations. Compositional variation of La (d) 
and Mn (e) along the white arrow drawn in (a). The presence of La enrichment and Mn 
deficiency in two consecutive GBs shows the uniformity of the cationic variations along the 
film. 


25

Figure S5. a. HADDF of a grain boundary. b. EELS of grain and grain boundary regions 
obtained over a small energy window in order to detect variance of oxidation state. c. Mn L32
ratio across a grain boundary showing a constant profile and indicating no Mn valence change.

Figure S6. a, STEM bright field image of the grain boundary analyzed by EELS along the 
interface. The red arrows highlight the atomic disordered fringes at the GB interface created by 
the arrays of dislocations. b, STEM-HAADF image of the same GB depicted in a. The white 
dashed line indicates the GB position in both the TEM figures a and b. c, STEM-HAADF image 
of the green square shown in b. d and e shows the La and Mn compositional maps extracted by 
EELS analysis. 


26

S.2. Characterization of epitaxial LSM0.85 on NdGaO3 (NGO) (110) substrate

The epitaxial thin film of LSM0.85 on NdGaO3 (110)o (where o stands for orthorhombic) 
substrate was analysed by XRD (Figure S7). The LSM film shows a unique orientation, 
corresponding to the (00l)pc (where pc stands for pseudo-cubic). Figure S7b shows the high 
resolution XRD of the LSM0.85/NGO structure around the (002)pc peak. The film is highly 
oriented and the finite-size oscillations demonstrate the long-range homogeneity of the film. A 
thickness of 60 nm is extracted from the fitting of the oscillations, consistent with the thickness 
measured by ellipsometry. The phi scan around the 220 peak (inset of Figure S7b) and the 
reciprocal space maps around the 3̅03 and the 033 asymmetrical peaks (Figure S8) show that 
the film is coherently strained by the substrate. Therefore, a “cube on cube” growth of the film 
on the substrate is expected[1] (schematically shown in Figure S7c). The out of plane lattice 
parameter obtained for the LSM0.85 thin films is cpc=3.96 Å, which is higher than the one 
expected from the compressive strain imposed by the substrate (-0.70% and -0.47% on apc and 
bpc respectively). Such increase of the out of plane lattice parameter is likely derived from the 
Mn deficiency measured by Wavelength Dispersive Spectroscopy (WDS), and goes in line with 
the results obtained in other B site deficient perovskites.[2–4]

Figure S7. a, XRD of the LSM0.85 thin film grown on NGO (110)O substrate. b, High 
resolution XRD around the 200 peaks showing finite-size oscillations originating from the 
long-range homogeneity of the film. The inset shows the φ scan around the 220 peak. c, 
scheme of the epitaxial relation between pseudo-cubic LSM and orthorhombic NGO (110)o.

Figure S8. Reciprocal space maps of 3̅03 and 033 in plane reflection showing that the film is 
coherently strained by the substrate. 

3̅03
033


27

S.3. Grain boundary engineering through the Mn/(La+Sr) thin film variation

S.3.1. Description of the Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition (C-PLD) approach

In this work, Combinatorial Pulsed Laser Deposition (C-PLD) was used to grow La0.8Sr0.2Mn1-

yO3±δ (LSMy) with variable content of Mn. C-PLD is a technique based on the combinatorial 
deposition of two parent compound (in this work LSM and Mn3O4) on a large area substrate.[5–

8] Figure S9a shows the schematic representation of the technique. The deposition sequence 
consists in the alternate deposition of the two materials plumes focused at a relative distance d
between them. Taking advantage of the gaussian-shape of the plasma plume, a gradient of 
concentration is developed between the plumes centres, determining in one single deposition 
all the possible combinations between the two materials (Figure S9b). The thickness deposited 
per cycle and the deposition temperature must be carefully chosen in order to allow an in-situ 
synthesis of the two materials. In this work, a substrate temperature of T = 700ºC and a 
thickness of 1 nm and 0.25 nm per-cycle for LSM and Mn3O4 respectively are selected to assure 
a proper cation diffusion.[9,10] The plume distance was set at d = 8 cm to obtain a gradual 
increase of Mn content in the films. Different substrates were chosen for performing electrical 
and electrochemical experiments. For the former, Si (100) 4” wafer pre-passivated by 100 nm 
YSZ and 5mm x 10mm Sapphire (0001) single crystal substrates were used. For the out of plane 
electrochemical experiments, 3x3 mm YSZ (001) single crystal substrates were preferred for 
their pure oxygen ionic conduction behaviour. Sapphire and YSZ substrates were attached with 
Silver paste to a 4” Si wafer forming a line between the two plume centres, allowing a gradual 
increase of B/A=Mn/(La+Sr) ratio.

Figure S9. a. Sketch of the C-PLD approach employed for the deposition of LSMy films with 
different B/A ratio. b. Concentration gradient developing between the two plume centres due 
to high temperature in-situ synthesis of the two parent compounds.

S.3.2. Derivation of B/A ratio and structural characterization of the combinatorial LSMy

First, the parent compounds plumes were studied. Figure S10a and b shows respectively the 
thickness of LSM and Mn3O4 deposited on Si substrates, obtained by ellipsometry. The plumes 
were fitted with a Pseudo-Voigt curve.


28

Figure S10. Thickness measured by ellipsometry for a. LSM and b. Mn3O4 plumes. The curves 
were fitted using a Pseudo-Voigt function.

The Mn3O4 plume was analysed by XRD and SEM and Raman spectroscopy (Figure S11), 
revealing that the film has the same phase of the target. 

Figure S11. Raman spectra of the Mn3O4 deposited on sapphire (blue line) and YSZ/Si (red 
line). Both samples present the characteristic bands of the Mn3O4 phase. In the graph, blue and 
red asterisk shows respectively the sapphire and Si peaks. 

Figure S12a shows the thickness profile measured by ellipsometry along the plumes centres 
for the combinatorial sample LSMy deposited on YSZ/Si. The data were fitted by a 
superimposition of the parent compound plumes obtained before, leaving as free parameters 
only the plume maxima and position centres. The fitting shows a good similarity with the 
experimental data. Once the effective thickness and the exact position of the parent compounds 
plumes is known, the predicted thickness can be calculated as:

𝑀𝑛

𝐿𝑎+𝑆𝑟 =

𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠 𝑀𝑛𝐿𝑆𝑀+moles 𝑀𝑛𝑀𝑛3𝑂4

𝑚𝑜𝑙𝑒𝑠 𝐿𝑎𝐿𝑆𝑚+moles 𝑆𝑟𝐿𝑆𝑀
Equation S1

Transforming the equation, we get:

𝑀𝑛

𝐿𝑎+𝑆𝑟 =

1∙𝜌𝐿𝑆𝑀∙𝑡𝐿𝑆𝑀 𝑀(𝐿𝑆𝑀)
⁄
+3∙𝜌𝑀𝑛3𝑂4∙𝑡𝑀𝑛3𝑂4 𝑀(𝑀𝑛3𝑂4)
⁄

(0.8+0.2)∙𝜌𝐿𝑆𝑀∙𝑡𝐿𝑆𝑀 𝑀(𝐿𝑆𝑀)
⁄
Equation S2


29

Where 𝜌 is the density, M the molar mass, t the thickness. The result as a function of wafer 
position is shown in figure S12b along with the B/A ratio measured by Energy Dispersive X-
ray Analysis (EDX). It is clearly visible that the two methods yield to the exact same B/A ratio. 
In this study, a composition span from B/A = 0.85 to 1.2 (corresponding to X = -45 mm and -8 
mm, respectively) was analysed. For thin films with composition out of this range secondary 
phases were observed. 

Figure S12. a. Thickness of the LSMy combinatorial sample measured by ellipsometry and 
fitted by the superimposition of the parent compounds plumes. b. B/A ratio measured by EDX 
and calculated by equation S2 using the single plumes thickness obtained in a.

The surface of the LSMy sample was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Figure 
S13 shows the top-view of the LSMy for different B/A ratio concentration. No substantial 
evolution of the grains is observed, meaning that the fraction of the GB area remains nearly 
constant. This point is particularly important for the electrochemical analysis, since a 
modification of the grain size would result in a modification of oxygen mass transport 
properties.[11]

Figure S13. SEM top view of LSMy samples deposited on YSZ/Si for a. B/A=0.92, b.
B/A=0.97 and c. B/A=1.05. No significant microstructural evolution is observed.

Figure S14 shows the variation of oxygen content obtained by EELS scan across three GBs 
with different Mn content (the GBs are the same reported in Figure 3 of the main text). For all 
the composition analysed, a decrease of oxygen concentration is measured at the interface.


30

Figure S14. Compositional variation of O obtained by EELS in three GBs of LSMy samples 
deposited on YSZ/Si for  B/A=0.94, B/A=0.98 and B/A=1.05. The GBs analysed are the very 
same of Figure 3 of the main text.

S.3.3. Discussion on the quantification of cationic composition in LSMy grain boundaries

Figure S15a and b shows the Mn and La variation measured across the GB by EELS for LSMy
samples with different B/A ratio. The cation concentration was quantified knowing the 
concentration in the grain bulk, taken from EDX measurements (see Figure S12b). The figure 
shows that the Mn-deficient GB (B/A = 0.85) present the highest cationic change, while in the 
Mn rich GBs the absolute change tends to decrease while increasing the B/A ratio. In particular, 
in the Mn deficient GB, the Mn concentration in the GB is extremely low (around 0.75). Since 
no secondary phases were detected up to the GB core, this significant Mn deficiency, along 
with the La increase, strongly suggests the formation of antisite defects LaMn in order to 
maintain the perovskite structure. 

It is important to note, though, that the quantification of GB composition in polycrystalline thin 
films can be susceptible to a non-negligible error. This is because slight differences in the GB 
angles with respect to the TEM incident beam can partially mask the compositional changes. 
The tilt of the GB angle can therefore explain differences in the ionic composition when 
comparing different GBs from a sample with similar overall cation content, such as the 
interfaces for B/A = 0.85 analysed here and the ones of Figure 2b of the manuscript. 
Nevertheless, the qualitative trends presented in this work were fully consistent in the entire set 
of GB analyzed for each composition. 


31

Figure S15. Quantitative compositional variation of Mn (a) and La (b) obtained by EELS in 
the GBs of LSMy samples deposited on YSZ/Si for B/A=0.85, B/A=0.94, B/A=0.98 and 
B/A=1.05.

S.3.4. In plane electrical properties of LSMy

S.3.4.1. 4-probe in-plane measuring configuration

The LSMy combinatorial samples were analyzed in an in-plane four probe geometry, in 
accordance with our previous work.[12] 1x0.5 cm2 rectangular Sapphire substrates were acquired 
from Crystal GmbH (Germany), while the YSZ/Si substrates were prepared in house from a 4” 
wafer cut into chips of 1x0.5 cm2. Figure S16 shows a schematic representation of the 
measuring system.

Figure S16. Schematic representation of the 4-probe in-plane method used for electrical 
characterization of the LSMy combinatorial sample.

The distance between the two central electrodes (designed to reach both sides of the chips in 
order to minimize the current leakage) was set to be 1mm. The variation of Mn concentration 
occurring inside the voltage electrodes was considered in the compositional error (error bars in 
Figure 4c). The resistance of the thin films was analyzed in a linear regime. 

S.3.4.2. Electrical resistivity of LSMy thin films on different substrates

Figure S17 shows the in-plane electrical resistivity of the LSM0.85 measured as deposited and 
after a long annealing (5 hours) at 650ºC. No significant changes were observed. 


32

Figure S17. Electrical resistivity as a function of temperature of Mn-deficient polycrystalline 
LSM0.85 thin films as deposited and annealed at 650ºC for 5 hours. 

Figure S18 shows the in-plane electrical resistivity measured for LSMy films deposited on 
YSZ/Si and Sapphire. The resistivity shows no difference between the two substrates, while the 
B/A ratio appears to have a considerable influence on the electrical properties. For B/A > 0.92 
the system starts to recover the M-I transition, which then progressively takes place at higher 
temperature increasing the Mn content. This behaviour is ascribable to the local defect 
concentration at the grain boundaries, since the epitaxial sample with B/A = 0.85 normally 
displays the M-I transition.

Figure S18. In-plane electrical resistivity as a function of temperature measured for the LSMy
deposited on YSZ/Si and sapphire. 

We investigated the effect of varying the B/A ratio on the bulk electrical properties by studying 
three epitaxial thin films with composition B/A = 0.85, B/A = 1.03, B/A = 1.2. Figure S19
shows the in-plane electrical resistivity measured for these thin films. All the epitaxial thin films 
show the expected M-I transition at low temperature. An increase of M-I temperature is 


33

observed increasing the B/A ratio (see arrows in the figure), probably due to the detrimental 
effect of random Mn vacancies on the metallic order. In the Mn-rich film, a further small 
improvement of the M-I transition temperature is observed. 

These bulk changes are expected to play a secondary role on the conductivity of the 
polycrystalline samples both for low and high Mn content, since these films present orders of 
magnitude higher resistivity respect to the epitaxial thin films. The GBs are therefore expected 
to dominate the in-plane resistivity of the polycrystalline LSMy thin films.

Figure S19. In-plane electrical resistivity as a function of temperature measured for the 
epitaxial LSMy with different B/A ratios, deposited on NGO. The arrows indicate the M-I 
transition.

S.3.5. Out of plane electrochemical properties of LSMy on YSZ single crystal

Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful tool for characterizing the oxygen 
mass transport properties of high temperature MIECs.[13] In order to be able to distinguish the 
single phenomena affecting the overall oxygen electrochemical properties, MIECs thin films 
need to be deposited on a pure oxygen conductor. Hence, Combinatorial LSMy was deposited 
on 3 mm x 3 mm YSZ (001) single crystals. The small dimensions of the crystals allowed 
minimizing the compositional changes inside the single samples. Silver paste was used as 
counter back electrodes due to its high electrochemical properties and it is expected to give a 
negligible effect in the electrochemical resistance.[11] Porous gold paste was used on the LSM 
for permit a fast in plane electronic conduction, being gold known to be mostly inactive for 
ORR reactions.[14] In this way, porous gold / LSMy / YSZ / porous silver cells were 
characterized by EIS at 650 ºC in synthetic air. The temperature was set lower than the 
deposition one to minimize the grain growth during the measurements. Figure S20b and S20c
shows respectively the Nyquist and Bode plot obtained for the B/A ≈ 0.89 sample. Two major 
contributions are clearly visible, corresponding to high and low frequency. The spectrum well 
agrees with the typical MIEC behavior, where the two distinguishable phenomena correspond 
to the oxygen diffusion and surface reactions, in agreement with our previous work[15] and with 
literature.[11,16] In order to derive the resistance associated with these two contributions, the 
spectrum has been fitted using the characteristic MIEC equivalent circuits (Figure S20a), first 
described by Jamnik and Maier[17] and widely used for LSM.[11,15,16] The circuit includes a 


34

ZARC element accounting for the surface oxygen incorporation processes and a transmission 
line with two different pathways: the electronic one (without resistance associated) and the ionic 
one (with infinitesimal resistances dRi). The two rails are connected by a series of infinitesimal 
capacitances dCchem, which describes the chemical energy stored in a material under the 
application of an electrical bias.[17] Finally, a pure capacitance is placed at the end of the 
electronic rail, describing the blocking electrons surface between LSM and YSZ. As can be 
seen in figure S20, the circuit perfectly reproduces the LSMy behavior. All the impedance 
spectra measured for the LSMy samples well agrees with the MIEC equivalent circuit. A clear 
evolution of the overall electrochemical resistance is observed changing the B/A ratio (Figure 
S21).

Figure S20. a. Equivalent circuit employed for the fitting of the LSMy impedance. b. Nyquist 
and c. Bode plot of the impedance spectra obtained at 650 ºC in synthetic air for the B/A = 
0.89 sample.


35

Figure S21. a. Nyquist and b. Bode plots of the impedance spectra obtained at 650 ºC in 
synthetic air for different B/A ratio samples. A clear evolution of both the diffusion and 
surface exchange phenomena is observed. 


36

The ionic and surface resistance obtained in the impedance fitting can be used to derive the 
overall surface exchange coefficient kqav and the oxygen diffusion Dqav. The diffusion 
coefficient is calculated by:

𝐷𝑎𝑣

𝑞 =

𝐿

𝑅𝑖𝑜𝑛∙𝐴 ∙

𝑘𝑏𝑇

𝑐𝑂2𝑧𝑖

2𝑒2
Equation S3

Where 𝑅𝑖𝑜𝑛 is the ionic resistance, kb is the Boltzmann constant, zi is the number of charges 
involved in the transport, L and A are respectively the thickness and the surface area of the LSM, 
e is the elementary charge and cO2 is the concentration of oxygen in the LSM lattice. The surface 
exchange coefficient can be calculated from the surface resistance (Rs) by:

𝑘𝑎𝑣

𝑞 =

1

𝑅𝑠∙𝐴 ∙

𝑘𝑏𝑇

𝑧𝑖

2𝑒2𝑐𝑂2
Equation S4

The coefficient Dq obtained by electrical measurements can be confronted with D* (obtained 
in the oxygen tracer experiments) considering a correlation factor of f = 0.69.[18,19] Also the 
confrontation between kq and k* is possible.[18]

It is important to notice that the diffusion and surface exchange parameters obtained in this 
study represents an averaged value between the grain and grain boundary, since EIS is unable 
to distinguish the two contributions which take place in parallel. This points out that in order to 
permit a reasonable confrontation with the coefficients extracted in SIMS experiments[20–22] (in 
which grain and grain boundary coefficients were separated) one has to average D* and k* with 
the effective area that grain and grain boundary regions occupy. Being the structure of these 
thin films columnar, it is straightforward to calculate the overall D and k that these films would 
display in an electrochemical experiment. The dimensions of grain and grain boundary used for 
the calculation are the ones used for the SIMS oxygen concentration fitting in the different 
works.[20–22]


37

References 

[1]
H. Boschker, M. Mathews, E. P. Houwman, H. Nishikawa, A. Vailionis, G. Koster, G. 
Rijnders, D. H. A. Blank, Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 1.

[2]
L. Qiao, K. H. L. Zhang, M. E. Bowden, T. Varga, V. Shutthanandan, R. Colby, Y. Du, 
B. Kabius, P. V. Sushko, M. D. Biegalski, S. A. Chambers, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 
23, 2953.

[3]
D. J. Keeble, S. Wicklein, L. Jin, C. L. Jia, W. Egger, R. Dittmann, Phys. Rev. B 2013, 
87, 195409.

[4]
M. D. Scafetta, S. J. May, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19, 10371.

[5]
H. M. Christen, I. Ohkubo, C. M. Rouleau, G. E. Jellison, A. A. Puretzky, D. B. 
Geohegan, D. H. Lowndes, Meas. Sci. Technol. 2005, 16, 21.

[6]
J. C. H. Rossiny, J. Julis, S. Fearn, J. A. Kilner, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, S. Yang, J. R. G. 
Evans, Solid State Ionics 2008, 179, 1085.

[7]
J. A. Greer, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 2014, 47, 34005.

[8]
H. M. Christen, G. Eres, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2008, 20, 264005.

[9]
S. Miyoshi, M. Martin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2009, 11, 3063.

[10]
Y.-L. Lee, Y. Duan, D. Morgan, D. C. Sorescu, H. Abernathy, G. Hackett, Phys. Rev. 
Appl. 2017, 8, 44001.

[11]
R. E. Usiskin,  a S. Maruyama,  b C. J. Kucharczyk,  a I. Takeuchib, S. M. Haile, J. 
Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3, 19330.

[12]
A. Saranya, A. Morata, D. Pla, M. Burriel, F. Chiabrera, I. Garbayo, A. Hornés, J. 
Kilner, A. Tarancón, Chem. Mater. 2018, accepted, acs. chemmater.8b01771.

[13]
S. B. Adler, Chem. Rev. 2004, 104, 4791.

[14]
W. C. Chueh, W. Lai, S. M. Haile, Solid State Ionics 2008, 179, 1036.

[15]
F. Chiabrera, A. Morata, M. Pacios, A. Tarancón, Solid State Ionics 2017, 299, 70.

[16]
J. Fleig, H.-R. Kim, J. Jamnik, J. Maier, Fuel Cells 2008, 8, 330.

[17]
J. Jamnik, J. Maier, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2001, 3, 1668.

[18]
J. Maier, Solid State Ionics 1998, 112, 197.

[19]
T. Ishigaki, S. Yamauchi, K. Kishio, J. Mizusaki, K. Fueki, J. Solid State Chem. 1988, 
73, 179.

[20]
A. M. Saranya, D. Pla, A. Morata, A. Cavallaro, J. Canales-Vázquez, J. A. Kilner, M. 
Burriel, A. Tarancón, Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5, 1500377.

[21]
E. Navickas, T. M. Huber, Y. Chen, W. Hetaba, G. Holzlechner, G. Rupp, M. Stöger-
Pollach, G. Friedbacher, H. Hutter, B. Yildiz, J. Fleig, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 
17, 7659.

[22]
R. A. De De Souza, J. A. Kilner, J. F. Walker, Mater. Lett. 2000, 43, 43.


