1 

 

Materials development by interpretable machine learning 

 

Yuma Iwasaki1,2*, Ryoto Sawada1, Valentin Stanev3,4 , Masahiko Ishida 1, Akihiro Kirihara 1, Yasutomo Omori 1, 

Hiroko Someya 1 , Ichiro Takeuchi3, Eiji Saitoh5,6,7, Yorozu Shinichi1    

 

1Central Research Laboratories, NEC Corporation, Tsukuba 305-8501, Japan 

2PREST, JST, Saitama 322-0012, Japan 

3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland, College park, MD 20742, USA 

4Center for Nanophysics and Advanced Materials, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 

5Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 908-8577, Japan 

6WPI Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Sendai 908-8577, Japan 

7Advanced Science Research Center, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai, 319-1195, Japan 

 

 

Email: y-iwasaki@ih.jp.nec.com 

 

 

 

 

 


2 

 

 

Machine learning technologies are expected to be great tools for scientific discoveries. In particular, 

materials development (which has brought a lot of innovation by finding new and better functional 

materials) is one of the most attractive scientific fields. To apply machine learning to actual materials 

development, collaboration between scientists and machine learning is becoming inevitable. However, 

such collaboration has been restricted so far due to black box machine learning, in which it is difficult 

for scientists to interpret the data-driven model from the viewpoint of material science and physics. 

Here, we show a material development success story that was achieved by good collaboration between 

scientists and one type of interpretable (explainable) machine learning called factorized asymptotic 

Bayesian inference hierarchical mixture of experts (FAB/HMEs). Based on material science and physics, 

we interpreted the data-driven model constructed by the FAB/HMEs, so that we discovered surprising 

correlation and knowledge about thermoelectric material. Guided by this, we carried out actual material 

synthesis that led to identification of a novel spin-driven thermoelectric material with the largest 

thermopower to date. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


3 

 

Recent progresses of material science technologies enable us to obtain a lot of material data in a short time 1-

4. Accordingly, the development of data-processing technologies for such material big data is becoming 

indispensable. Machine learning technologies are believed to be a great solution due to not only their rapid data 

analysis 5-8 but also their potential to discover non-trivial knowledge that is not rooted in conventional material 

theory. 

To apply machine learning to actual materials development, collaboration between scientists and machine 

learning is becoming inevitable. Material scientists often try to understand the inside of the data-driven model to 

obtain some actionable information for materials development. However, such collaboration has been restricted 

so far because of the low interpretability in machine learning. For example, it is not easy for a person to 

understand the inside of data-driven models constructed by a deep neural network 9, where the data-driven 

model is expressed as the connections between large numbers of perceptrons (neurons). Therefore, the notion 

of interpretable machine learning (explainable or transparent machine learning), which has not only high 

prediction accuracy but also high interpretability, has recently seen a resurgence 10-12, especially for scientific 

discoveries led by machine learning. 

  Here, we show an actual material development success story by using one type of interpretable machine 

learning called factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference hierarchical mixture of experts (FAB/HMEs) 13-16 and 

demonstrate good collaboration between the FAB/HMEs and material scientists. In the material development, 

the machine learning algorithm must meet the following three requirements, “sparse modelling”, “prediction 

accuracy”, and “interpretability”, as shown in Figure 1. The material data is often sparse; therefore, the sparse 

modelling approach, which automatically selects some of only the important descriptors (attributes), is useful. 


4 

 

One of the most popular sparse modelling methods is LASSO, which constructs a linear model with L1 

regularization 17. However, such a linear regression model does not always have high prediction accuracy 

because material data often includes non-linear relationships such as phase transitions. For high prediction 

accuracy, non-linear modelling using, for example, a support vector machine (SVM), neural network (NN), or 

random forest (RF) can construct a flexible model 17. However, such non-linear modellings do not have enough 

interpretability. Although these non-linear machine learnings can tell us which descriptors are important for the 

data-driven model, they do not clarify how the descriptors actually contribute to it. Extracting actionable 

information from such non-linear models is not so easy. 

Interpretable machine learning FAB/HMEs constructs a piecewise sparse linear modelling 13 that meets the 

three requirements of “sparse modelling”, “prediction accuracy”, and “interpretability”. Therefore, the actionable 

information from the data-driven model provided by the FAB/HMEs smoothly leads us to discoveries of novel 

materials. 

 

Figure 1 | Three requirements of machine learning in materials developments. For good collaboration between machine 

learning and scientists in materials developments, requirements of sparse modelling, prediction accuracy, and interpretability are 


5 

 

ideal. One type of interpretable machine learning called factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference hierarchical mixture of experts 

(FAB/HMEs) meets all three requirements. 

 

  For the case study, we applied the interpretable machine learning FAB/HMEs to develop a new thermoelectric 

material. Thermoelectric technologies are becoming indispensable in the quest for a sustainable future 18,19. In 

particular, the emerging spin-driven thermoelectric (STE) material has garnered much attention as a promising 

path toward low cost and versatile thermoelectric technology with easily scalable manufacturing 20-23. However, 

STE material development is hampered by the lack of understanding of the fundamental mechanism of STE 

material because STE phenomena are at the cutting edge of material science and physics. A data-driven 

approach by machine learning can exhibit its full potential in such an unexplored scientific field. 

By searching for STE materials with improved thermopower SSTE (one of the most important figures of merit 

for thermoelectric phenomena) 24, we have used interpretable machine learning FAB/HMEs to discover non-

trivial behaviors of material parameters governing the STE phenomena. We have successfully leveraged this 

machine-learning-informed knowledge to discover a novel high-performance STE material, whose thermopower 

is far greater than that of the best known STE material to date 22. 

 

Result 

Material data. Figures 2(a-c) show the material data of STE devices using a M100-xPtx binary alloy, where M = 

Fe, Co, and Ni. The thermopower SSTE is experimental data on different experimental conditions (different 

substrates) 𝐂 ≡ {𝑆𝑖, 𝐴𝑙𝑁, 𝐺𝐺𝐺} (the details about the experimental conditions are in Supplemental Information 1). 


6 

 

The material parameters 𝐗 ≡ {𝑋1, 𝑋2, 𝑋3 … 𝑋14}, whose simple descriptions are shown in Table 1, were obtained 

by conventional material simulation technology (high-throughput DFT calculation 3,4). The details about the data, 

experiments, DFT calculations, data-preprocessing, and the reason we use these material parameters X are 

shown in Supplemental Information 1.  

 

Figure 2 | STE material data. Data of spin-driven thermopower SSTE and descriptors X used in machine learning modelling. a. 

FePt binary alloy. b. CoPt binary alloy. c. NiPt binary alloy. d. Table of simple description about these STE material data. 

 

Machine learning modelling by FAB/HMEs. With these data, we constructed the following data-driven model 

by the FAB/HMEs. 

𝑆𝑆𝑇𝐸 = 𝑓(𝑿,𝑰, 𝑺, 𝑪)                                           (1) 


7 

 

where X, I, S, and C are the material parameters 𝐗 ≡ {𝑋1, 𝑋2, 𝑋3 … 𝑋14}, their interaction terms 𝐈 ≡

{𝑋1𝑋2,𝑋1𝑋2, 𝑋1𝑋3 … 𝑋13𝑋14}, their square terms 𝐒 ≡ {𝑋1

2, 𝑋2

2, 𝑋3

2 … 𝑋14

2 }, and experimental condition terms 𝐂 ≡

{𝐶𝐴𝑙𝑁, 𝐶𝑆𝑖,𝐶𝐺𝐺𝐺}, respectively. The experimental condition terms C are binary parameters (i.e. 𝐶𝐴𝑙𝑁 = {0,1}, 𝐶𝑆𝑖 =

{0,1}, 𝐶𝐺𝐺𝐺 = {0,1}). The details are in Supplemental Information 1). The FAB/HMEs can solve data-classification 

and data-regression problems at the same time by maximizing a novel information criterion (factorized 

information criterion, which is referred to as FIC) with an EM-like algorithm (factorized asymptotic Bayesian 

inference, referred to as FAB), thus constructing a piecewise sparse linear model 13-16. 

  Figure 3a and 3b show the visualization of the data-driven model constructed by the FAB/HMEs. The data is 

classified according to the tree structure, as shown in Figure 3a. For each data group, regression models 

(component 1, 2, 3, and 4, as shown in Figure 3b) are created. Note that the FAB/HMEs does not sequentially 

carry out the data classification and data regression. The FAB/HMEs searches for proper regression models 

while searching for proper data groups, thus selecting a better combination of regression models and data 

groups from a very large model-searching space. The prediction accuracy of this model is comparable with other 

non-linear machine learning models. The details are given in the Discussion section. 

  The high interpretability of the FAB/HMEs helps us understand the inside of the data-driven model, where we 

only have to think about the data groups shown by the tree structure in Figure 3a and the regression models 

(component 1, 2, 3, and 4) for each data group shown in Figure 3b. Therefore, material scientists can interpret 

the data-driven model based on the viewpoint of physics and material science. 


8 

 

 

Figure 3 | Interpretable data-driven model created by FAB/HMEs. One type of interpretable machine learning called factorized 

asymptotic Bayesian inference hierarchical mixture of experts (FAB/HMEs) creates piecewise sparse linear model, which is 

visualized with a. tree structure and b. regression models. Scientists can interpret tree structure and regression models from 

viewpoint of material science and physics. Accordingly, notice that there is non-trivial knowledge in data-driven model. 

 

For instance, we notice that the data is firstly classified by average spin moment (X14) at gate 1. The data with 

small average spin moment X14 go to component 1, where the thermopower SSTE is equal to zero (SSTE = 0, as 

shown in Figure 3b). This is natural from the viewpoint of material science and physics. It is known that STE 

phenomena are not observed on non-magnetic materials with small average spin moment X14 25. The data of 

magnetic materials with large average spin moment X14 only have finite SSTE values; accordingly, they go to gate 


9 

 

2. Similarly, from the interpretable data-driven model, we can obtain some trivial knowledge that is consistent 

with material science and physics (this trivial knowledge is shown in Supplemental Information 2). 

Fortunately, we sometimes obtain non-trivial knowledge from the data-driven model. We notice that there is a 

positive correlation between SSTE and product term X2X8, where X2 and X8 are the amount of Pt atoms and the 

Pt spin polarization, respectively. All regression models of magnetic materials (component 2, 3, and 4) have the 

X2X8 term as positive, as shown in Figure 3b. This positive correlation uncovered by the machine learning 

models appears to be beyond our current knowledge of STE. The details of the physical interpretation underlying 

this relation is also discussed in Supplemental Information 2. The surprising connection between SSTE and X2X8, 

which was discovered by the interpretable machine learning here, will lead to a more comprehensive 

understanding of the fundamental mechanism of STE phenomena. 

Actual material development guided by FAB/HMEs modelling. Aside from the profound physical/theoretical 

discussion about the discovered non-trivial knowledge shown in Supplemental Information 2, we now focus on 

demonstrating that this unanticipated result of the interpretable machine learning can indeed help us to develop 

novel STE materials. 

It has been difficult to develop STE materials because the fundamental mechanism of STE phenomena, which 

is at the cutting edge of material science and physics, has not been understood well yet. The materials 

development in such an unexplored scientific field becomes simplified via the interpretable machine learning 

modelling. The machine-learning-informed knowledge, which is the positive correlation between SSTE and X2X8, 

suggests that we just have to search for materials with large X2X8 to obtain large SSTE. Searching for a material 

with large X2X8 is feasible because we can simulate the X2X8 value by using conventional material simulation 


10 

 

technology. 

 As a result of material screening for large X2X8 by the conventional material simulation, we found that 

Co50Pt50N10 has large X2X8 (the details are shown in Supplemental Information 3). Therefore, as an initial 

example, we carried out actual material synthesis of Co50Pt50Nx and measured its thermopower SSTE. Figure 4 

shows the results of thermopower SSTE of Co50Pt50Nx materials with different N concentration. It is clear that SSTE 

increases with increasing X2X8 accompanying an increase in N concentration. The SSTE of Co45.6Pt47.7N6.7 was 

achieved at 13.04 μV/K, which is larger than that of the current generation of STE materials 22,23. Details of this 

actual material synthesis are given in Supplemental Information 4. This data-driven material development 

succeeded because the interpretable machine learning helped us a great deal by disclosing the non-trivial 

positive correlation between SSTE and X2X8 due to its high interpretability. This novel STE material with the 

dramatically enhanced thermopower discovered here will be a key component in thermal energy harvesting 

systems, leading to a more energy-efficient future.  

 

Figure 4 | Spin-driven thermopower SSTE of CoPtN thin films. SSTE increases with increasing X2X8 in CoPtN, which was selected 

by material screening guided by FAB/HMEs non-trivial knowledge, positive correlation between SSTE and X2X8. SSTE of 

Co48.9Pt51.1N7.2 thin film was achieved at 13.04 μV/K, which is larger than that of STE materials to date. 


11 

 

 

Discussion 

Figure 5 shows the 4-fold cross-validation root mean square error (CV-RMSE) of the FAB/HMEs and major 

machine learning algorithms including the neural network (NN), support vector machine (SVM), random forest 

(RF), least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO), and multiple linear regression (MLR). Non-linear 

models using the FAB/HMEs, NN, SVM, and RF have better prediction accuracy than linear models using 

LASSO and MLR. The prediction performance of the FAB/HMEs is comparable to that of other non-linear 

models. 

Although the NN and SVM exhibit high prediction performance, it is not easy for scientists to investigate the 

data-driven model because of their low interpretability. Even though the RF, which tells us the feature importance 

of each descriptor, has better interpretability than the NN and SVM, further investigation is needed to understand 

the more specific relationship between VANE and descriptors. For example, if you only look at the RF model, it is 

difficult to notice the “positive” correlation between VANE and X2X8 “on the condition of” the magnetic material 

data (data with large X14). Actually, this surprising correlation was not achieved directly via the MLR, LASSO, 

NN, SVM and RF. On the other hand, the FAB/HMEs obviously visualized such a detailed relationship, as shown 

in Figure 3a and 3b. As described above, the interpretable machine learning FAB/HMEs provides the data-driven 

model with not only high prediction performance but also high interpretability even in the case of sparse data. 


12 

 

 

Figure 5 | Prediction accuracy of FAB/HMEs. Comparison of 4-fold cross-validation root mean square error (CV-RMSE) of major 

machine learnings. FAB/HMEs has not only high interpretability but also prediction accuracy that is comparable to other black box 

machine learning such as NN, SVM, and RF. 

 

  In summary, we have demonstrated the utility of interpretable machine learning FAB/HMEs in the material 

development process. Because of its high prediction performance and interpretability, material scientists can 

collaborate with the data-driven model obtaining non-trivial knowledge for novel materials development. Guided 

by the surprising correlation discovered by the FAB/HMEs, we have succeeded in developing an innovative STE 

material, whose thermopower SSTE is much larger than that of the current generation of STE materials. In 

addition, the non-trivial knowledge we found in the data-driven model can lead to a more comprehensive 

understanding of the mechanism of emerging STE phenomena. Thus, the enhanced collaboration between 

scientists and machine learning can lead to not only materials developments but also diverse scientific 

discoveries. 

 

Methods 


13 

 

FAB/HMEs 13-16. The factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference hierarchical mixture of experts (FAB/HMEs) 

constructs a piecewise sparse linear model that assigns sparse linear experts to individual partitions in feature 

space and expresses whole models as patches of local experts. By maximizing the factorized information 

criterion including two L0-regularizations for partition-structure determinations and feature selection for individual 

experts, the FAB/HMEs performs the partition-structure determination and feature selection at the same time. To 

maximize the FIC, a factorized asymptotic Bayesian inference (FAB), which combines an expectation-

maximization (EM) algorithm with an automatic shrinkage of non-effective experts, is used. In this paper, we set 

the termination condition δ = 10−5, shrinkage threshold ε = 0.062, and number of initial experts was 32 (i.e. 5-

depth symmetric tree). The 4-fold cross-validation root mean square error (CV-RMSE) was 0.188253, as shown 

in Figure 5. 

NN 17. The neural network (NN) models the data by means of a statistical learning algorithm mimicking the brain. 

Here, we have utilized a simple 3-layer perceptron. The cross-validation with “caret (nnet)” package in the R 

programming language decides the number r of hidden units 𝑁𝐻 = 8 and the decay value D = 3.91 × 10−3. The 

CV-RMSE was 0.169454, as shown in Figure 5. 

SVR 17. The support vector regression (SVR) constructs a data-driven model with a kernel method. Here, we 

have used the radial basis function (RBF) kernel. We set the cost value C = 16 and sigma of the RBF σ =

3.125 × 10−2, which were decided by the cross-validation with “caret (svmradial)” package in the R programming 

language. The CV-RMSE was 0.132847, as shown in Figure 5. 

RF 17. The random forest (RF) is an ensemble learning method using a multitude of decision trees. The number 

of trees (ntree) and the number of features (mtry) were set to 1000 and 120, respectively. We have performed 


14 

 

the RF by using the “caret (rf)” package in the R programming language. The CV-RMSE was 0.246274, as 

shown in Figure 5.   

LASSO 17. The least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) creates a linear regression model with 

feature selection by using a L1-regularization term. The complexity parameter λ was set to 3.052 × 10−4, which 

was decided by the cross-validation with the “caret (glmnet)” package in the R programming language. The CV-

RMSE was 0.583379, as shown in Figure 5. 

Data preparation of thermopower SSTE. The spin-driven thermoelectric performance (thermopower SSTE) data 

were obtained by experiments including material fabrication processes and material characterization processes. 

The details are shown in Supplemental Information 1. 

Data preparation of descriptors X. The descriptors X data were calculated by the conventional material 

simulation technique, the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker and coherent-potential approximation (KKR-CPA) 26. The 

details are shown in Supplemental Information 1. 

 

Reference 

1. Koinuma, H. & Takeuchi, I. Combinatorial solid-state chemistry of inorganic materials. Nat. Mater. 3, 429 

(2004) 

2. Takeuchi, I. et al. Identification of novel compositions of ferromagnetic shape-memory alloys using 

composition spreads. Nat. Mater. 2, 180-184 (2003) 

3. Curtarolo, S., Hart, G. L. W., Nardelli, M. B. Buongiorno, Nardelli, M., Mingo, N., Sanvito, S. & Levy, O. The 

high-throughput highway to computational materials design. Nat. Mater. 12, 191-201 (2013)  


15 

 

4. Nishijima, M. et al. Accelerated discovery of cathode materials with prolonged cycle life for lithium-ion battery. 

Nat. Commun. 5, 4553 (2014) 

5. Butler, K. T., Davies, D. W., Cartwright, H., Isayev, O. & Walsh, A. Machine learning for molecular and 

materials science. Nature 559, 547-555 (2018) 

6. Xia, R. & Kais, S. Quantum machine learning for electronic structure calculations. Nat. Commun. 9, 4195 

(2018) 

7. Kusne, A. G. et al. On-the-fly machine-learning for high-throughput experiments: search for rare-earth-free 

permanent magnets. Sci. Rep. 4, 6367 (4014) 

8. Iwasaki, I., Kusne, A. G. & Takeuchi, I. Comparison of dissimilarity measures for cluster analysis of X-ray 

diffraction data from combinatorial libraries. npj Comput. Mater. 3, 4 (2017) 

9. Dimiduk, D. M., Holm, E. A. & Niezqoda, S. R. Perspectives on the Impact of Machine Learning, Deep 

Learning and Artificial Intelligence on Materials, Processes and Structures Engineering. Integr Mater Manuf 

Innov 7, 157-172 (2018) 

10. Samek, W., Wiegand, T. & Müller, K-R. Interpretable Artificial Intelligence: Understanding, Visualizing and 

Interpreting Deep Learning Models. Preprint at arXiv, 1708.08296 (2018) 

11. Yang, S. C. –H. & Shafto, P. Interpretable Artificial Intelligence via Bayesian Teaching. In NIPS (2017) 

12. Guidotti, R. et al. A Survey of Methods for Explaining Black Box Models. Preprint at arXiv, 1802.01933 (2018) 

13. Eto, R., Fujimaki, R., Morinaga, S. & Tamano, H. Fully-Automatic Bayesian Piecewise Sparse Linear Models. 

In AISTATS (2014) 

14. Fujimaki, R. & Hayashi, K. Factorized Asymptotic Bayesian Hidden Markov Models. In ICML (2012) 


16 

 

15. Fujimaki, R. & Morinaga, S. Factorized Asymptotic Bayesian Inference for Mixture Modeling. In AISTATS 

(2012)  

16. Hayashi, K. & Fujimaki, R. Factorized Asymptotic Bayesian Inference for Latent Feature Models. In NIPS 

(2013). 

17. Bishop, C. M. Pattern Recognition and Machine Leaning (Springer, 2006) 

18. Goldsmid, H. J. Introduction to Thermoelectricity (Springer, 2010). 

19. Bell, L. E. Cooling, heating, generating power, and recovering waste heat with thermoelectric systems. 

Science 321, 1457–1461 (2008). 

20. Kirihara, A. et al. Spin-current-driven thermoelectric coating. Nature mater. 11, 686-689 (2012) 

21. Sakuraba, Y. Potential of thermoelectric power generation using anomalous Nernst effect in magnetic 

materials. Scr. Mater. 111, 29 (2016) 

22. Ikhlas, M. et al. Large anomalous Nernst effect at room temperature in a chiral antiferromagnet. Nat. Phys. 

13, 1085-1090 (2017) 

23. Iwasaki, Y. et al. Machine-learning guided discovery of a new thermoelectric material. Sci. Rep. 9, 2751 

(2019) 

24. Uchida, K. et al. Thermoelectric Generation Based on Spin Seebeck Effects. Proc. IEEE 104, 1946 (2016) 

25. Mizuguchi, M., Ohata, S., Uchida, K., Saitoh, E. & Takanashi, K. Anomalous Nernst Effect in an L10-Ordered 

Epitaxial FePt Thin Film. Appl. Phys. Express 5, 093002 (2012) 

26. Akai, H. Electronic Structure Ni-Pd Alloys Calculated by the Self-Consistent KKR-CPA Method. J. Phys. Soc. 

Jpn. 51, 468-474 (1982) 


17 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by JST-PRESTO “Advanced Materials Informatics through Comprehensive Integration 

among Theoretical, Experimental, Computational and Data-Centric Sciences” (Grant No. JPMJPR17N4), JST-

ERATO “Spin Quantum Rectification Project” (Grant No. JPMJER1402), I.T. is supported in part by C-SPIN, one 

of six centers of STARnet, a Semiconductor Research Corporation program, sponsored by MARCO and 

DARPA. 

Author contributions 

Y.I., M.I., A.K., H.S. and O.T. designed the experiment, fabricated the samples, and collected all of the data. Y.I., 

R.S., and E.S. contribute to the theoretical discussion. Y.I., R.S., V.S. and I.T discussed the results of machine 

learning modeling. Y.I., V.S., I.T. and M.I wrote the manuscript. S.Y. supervised this study. All the authors 

discussed the results and commented on the manuscript. 

Additional information 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

 

 

 


