3D nano-bridge-based SQUID susceptometers for scanning 

magnetic imaging of quantum materials 

Y. P. Pan1,2, S. Y. Wang1, X. Y. Liu2, Y. S. Lin1, L. X. Ma2, Y. Feng1, Z. Wang2, L. 
Chen2,*, Y. H. Wang1,* 

1. Department of Physics and State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200438 China 

2. Center for Excellence in Superconducting  Electronics, State Key Laboratory of 
Functional Material for Informatics, Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and 
Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200050 China 

* To whom correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed.  

Email: leichen@mail.sim.ac.cn ; wangyhv@fudan.edu.cn 

 

Abstract 
 
We designed and fabricated a new type of superconducting quantum interference 
device (SQUID) susceptometers for magnetic imaging of quantum materials. The 
2-junction SQUID sensors employ 3D Nb nano-bridges fabricated using electron 
beam lithography. The two counter-wound balanced pickup loops of the SQUID 
enable gradiometric measurement and they are surrounded by a one-turn field 
coil for susceptibility measurements. The smallest pickup loop of the SQUIDs were 
1 μm in diameter and the flux noise was around 1 μФ0/√Hz  at 100 Hz. We 
demonstrate scanning magnetometry, susceptometry and current magnetometry 
on some test samples using these nano-SQUIDs. 
 
Keywords: Nano-SQUIDs, 3D Nb nano-bridges, magnetic imaging, scanning 
susceptometry imaging, scanning current magnetometry imaging. 
 
 


Introduction 

The superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs)1 are one of the most 

sensitive magnetic flux detectors available. Scanning SQUID microscopy (sSQUID)2 
uses a nano-fabricated SQUID (nano-SQUID)3 4 5 as a local magnetometer to form 
magnetic images by scanning over the sample6. It collects flux through its pickup loop7 
due to DC magnetic fields as well as magnetic response of micro and nanometer scale 
structures, revealing electro-magnetic properties of materials that cannot be probed 
directly by other methods. sSQUID played an important role in determining the pairing 
symmetry in cuprate and iron-based high temperature superconductors8. Recently, it 
has been applied successfully to image the edge currents in HgTe/CdTe and InAs/GaSb 
heterostructures9 10.  

Many nano-SQUIDs11 have been developed in recent years for various applications. 

For instance, Pb SQUID-on-tip12 13 14 technology have achieved extremely high 
resolution and spin sensitivity. Nano-SQUIDs based on Nb/AlOx/Nb tri-layer junctions 
have also been developed to perform magnetic and susceptibility imaging 
simultaneously15 16. Planar Nb Dayem-bridge junctions were used in nano-SQUIDs 
fabricated by FIB to image the vectorial current density in 2D electron gas17. Dayem-
bridge junctions18 19 bear a much higher working field than that of the tri-layer junctions 
because of its much reduced area. Because a large magnetic field is an important tuning 
parameter in condensed matter systems, batch fabricated nano-SQUIDs with Dayem-
bridge junctions are desirable as ultra-sensitive magnetometers for the study of quantum 
materials. However, planar Dayem-bridges suffer from parasitic capacitance and 
relatively large flux noise, both of which compromise the sensitivity of a magnetometer. 

Here, we report the design, fabrication and characterization of nano-SQUIDs based 

on 3D nano-bridge junctions20 for magnetic imaging of quantum materials. The non-
planar geometry of the 3D nano-bridge significantly reduces parasitic capacitance21 and 
flux noise22 23. Our nano-SQUID is designed as a gradiometer so that it is not sensitive 
to a uniformly applied magnetic field16, which is suitable for scanning magnetometry 
under external field. Field coils in our nano-SQUIDs allow local measurement of 
susceptibility, which is very important for the study of 2D superconductors [monolayer 
FeSe]. Our nano-SQUIDs showed a working field range up to 5 KGs. The flux noise at 
4.2 K was around 1 μФ0/Hz1/2 at 100 Hz under zero applied field, comparable to that of 
SQUIDs based on tri-layer junctions. We were able to demonstrate highly sensitive 
scanning magnetometry, susceptometry and current magnetometry using these nano-
SQUIDs.  

 

 

 


Design and fabrication 

 

Fig. 1. Layout and SEM images of the nano-SQUIDs. (a) is a layout of our device. 
Pickup coils, field coils and modulation coils are circled with red dashed lines. (b) is an 
SEM image of the middle dotted circle in (a). (c) is an zoom-in view of the front field 
coil. (d) is a zoom-in view of the nano-bridge as circled in (b). Its width is 50 nm.  

The layout of the nano-SQUID susceptometer consists of a SQUID loop with pickup 

coils, field coils and modulation coils (Fig. 1a). In order to reduce the inductance of the 
SQUID loop, it has a very narrow width and is covered with shielding except for the 
area of the pickup coils and modulations coils. The pickup coils are counter-wound 
loops at two ends of the SQUID loop to cancel any environmental uniform background 
signal. They are separated by 1 mm (or 0.5 mm in a later design) from each other. This 
way, one of them can be positioned within 1 μm from the sample while the other one is 
far away so that the magnetic signal from the sample only goes through the front pickup 
coil. The modulation coils are essential for flux-locked-loop (FLL) operation and thus 
direct readout of the flux signal. The field coils are used to apply a local perturbing 
magnetic field to the sample so that its response can be detected in the pickup coils as 
a susceptibility signal. The field coils are not counter-wound (Fig. 1a) so that the mutual 
inductance between the field coil and the pickup coils are minimized. The spatial 
separation of these coils from the junctions reduces their cross coupling and allows 
signal flux to more efficiently couple into the pickup coil24. 


The two junctions of our nano-SQUIDs were made of 3D Nb nano-bridges (Fig.1d) 

fabricated by electron-beam lithography (EBL). The advantage of nano-bridges over 
tri-layer junctions is that shunt resistance necessary for non-hysteretic operation of a 
SQUID magnetometer is inherent to the bridges. Since shunt resistors have to be made 
from non-superconducting metallic layers, their electrical contact with the Nb layers 
were generally difficult to make. Eliminating the step for shunt resistance greatly 
simplified our fabrication process of nano-SQUIDs (Fig. 2). Nevertheless, the design 
requirement of the counter-wound pickup coils, field coils and modulation coils dictates 
a multi-metal-layer fabrication process which we detail below. 

 

Fig. 2 . Fabrication process of the 3D nano-bridge SQUIDs. (a) Deposition of the 1st 
Nb layer (150 nm) on Si substrate with 300nm SiO2 coating. (b) Photolithography and 
RIE to pattern the 1st Nb wiring layer. The photo-resist was not removed after etching 
in this step. (c) Deposition of 25 nm insulating barrier (SiO2 or MgO) to cover the resist. 
(d) Deposition of the 2nd Nb layer (200 nm) and a subsequent photolithography and RIE 
to pattern it. (e) Lift-off that removed all previous photo-resist and exposed the grooves 
for the junctions. (f) Deposition of the 3rd Nb layer and patterning of the nano-bridges 
by EBL. (g) Growth of 250 nm of SiO2 by PECVD and photolithography and RIE on 


the dielectric to make via’s to the 2nd Nb layer. (h) Deposition of the 4th Nb (300 nm) 
followed by the last photolithography and RIE patterning. 

The nano-SQUIDs fabrication process was developed based on 3D nano-bridge 

junctions. The major steps of fabrication process included four Nb wiring layers 
separated by SiO2 as the dielectric, four photolithography steps and one EBL step (Fig. 
2). The Nb wiring layers were deposited by magnetron sputtering. First, we grew a 150 
nm Nb layer on a 4” Si wafer with 300 nm SiO2 coating. We patterned the first layer by 
photolithography and reactive-ion etching machine (RIE) (Fig. 2a,b). The first layer 
contained the bias electrodes for the SQUID loop. The photo-resist (AZ MiR 703) was 
kept on in this step which we used later to make the 3D junction structure. 25 nm of 
SiO2 (or MgO) and 200 nm of Nb were subsequently deposited on top of the photo-
resist (Fig. 2c,d). The 2nd Nb layer was designed to be thicker to compensate the shadow 
effect of deposition near the edge of the 1st Nb layer. Another round of photolithography 
and RIE were performed to pattern the second Nb wiring layer. This layer and the 
insulating groove made up the two arms of the SQUID loop. Then we removed the 
photo-resist from the first two rounds of photolithography together by immersing the 
whole wafer into heated acetone for several hours (Fig. 2e). We found that hotter 
acetone solvent could facilitate the lift-off procedure. After the photo-resist were gone, 
we deposited the 3rd Nb layer and patterned the two nano-bridge junctions by EBL and 
RIE (Fig. 2f). For our nano-SQUIDs, we found the optimal nano-bridges were 15 nm 
thick and 50 nm wide. The advantage of using EBL is that the thickness and width of 
the nano-bridge, which is critical to the performance of the device, could be changed as 
desired easily. Due to the gradiometer design, the SQUID loop needs another (4th) layer 
of Nb (about 300 nm thick). We grew a 250 nm SiO2 layer by plasma enhanced chemical 
vapor deposition (PECVD) at 80℃ (Fig. 2g) to separate them. Two Nb via’s were made 
to connect the 2nd Nb wiring layer to the 4th layer (Fig. 2h) in order to complete the 
SQUID loop. Part of the 4th layer of Nb was also used as shielding for the SQUID loop. 
Other parts of the 4th wiring layer are used for the field coils and modulation coils. The 
wafer was fully patterned after the etching of the 4th Nb. Lastly, we diced up the wafer 
for electronic characterizations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Device characterization and scanning magnetometry 

imaging 

  

Fig. 3. Electrical transport characterization of the nano-SQUIDs. (a) Current-
voltage characteristics of the device at different temperatures. Inset: resistance of the 
SQUID as a function of temperature. (b) SQUID voltage modulated by flux under 
different bias current at 5 K. The flux was applied through the modulation coils. (c) 
shows the modulation amplitude as a function of a perpendicular magnetic field. (d) 
Typical flux noise spectrum at 4.2 K measured under a flux-locked loop.  

 

We carried out transport measurements of our nano-SQUIDs to characterize its noise 

performance (Fig. 3). A typical device showed two transition temperatures in its 
resistance (Fig. 3a inset). The higher one around 9.3 K was due to the Nb wirings 
making up the SQUID loop and the electrodes and the lower one around 6.5 K was 
from the Nb nano-bridges which were much thinner than the wiring layers. The Tc of 
our Nb film was very close to that of bulk Nb crystals25, suggesting good quality of our 
films. Consistent with the resistance measurement, the current-voltage (IV) 
characteristics showed non-linear dependence below 6.5 K and reached around 60 uA 
of critical current11 (𝐼") at 2 K (Fig. 3a). There was no observable hysteresis in the IV’s 
which is desirable for magnetometry. 

As expected for a SQUID, the voltage across our devices were modulated by the flux 

through the SQUID loop (Fig. 3b). Such modulation could be applied through either 
the modulation coils or the field coils. The amplitude of the modulation was the largest 
when the bias was at Ic. This amplitude was reduced when a large perpendicular 
magnetic field was applied (Fig. 3c) because magnetic field suppresses superfluid 
density and hence Ic in the junction. However, owing to the much smaller area of the 


nano-bridge comparing with tri-layer-based junctions, such suppression was mitigated 
in our nano-SQUIDs, which would be functional as a magnetometer under 5 KGs of 
external field. Under zero magnetic field, the Flux noise of our nano-SQUIDs at 4.2K 

with a SQUID array amplifier operating under FFL was about 1𝜇Φ& √𝐻𝑧
⁄
 (Fig. 3d), 

which was similar to the white noise floor of a tri-layer-based nano-SQUID under 
similar conditions26. 

 

Fig. 4. Scanning SQUID magnetometry images. Flux images of a Nb film at 4.8 K 
(a), after warming up to 10 K (a, inset) and cooling down again to 4.8 K (b). (c) and (d) 
are the optical and susceptibility image, respectively, of a zigzag test pattern made up 
of Nb and CuNi bars, which showed up as diamagnetic and ferromagnetic sections in 
susceptometry. (d) showing alternate ferromagnetism and diamagnetism. (e) Current 
flux image of the tip of a nano-SQUID when 15 μA current was passed in the field coil. 
(f) Current density reconstructed from (e) by an FFT algorithm (see text)27. 

 

We integrate our nano-SQUIDs into a closed-cycle He-4 cryostat for scanning 

SQUID microscopy. We hand-polish nano-SQUIDs and glue it to a cantilever that acts 


a capacitive sensor for height. The capacitance is approximately 1pF when the 
cantilever is relaxed and changes when the SQUID touches the sample. We use a 
balanced capacitance bridge28 to detect such a small change in capacitance. The cryostat 
is shielded by mu-metal to reduce the magnetic field on the sample and the SQUID. 

The SQUID is shunted by a small resistance and its current is inductively coupled to 

a SQUID array amplifier. The output of the array amplifier goes into room temperature 
feedback electronics which controls the current of modulation coils for a FFL detection 
of the flux signal. The susceptometry is performed by passing a low frequency current 
(IF) through the field coil and by demodulating the susceptibility (dF/dIF) out of the 
flux signal. The current magnetometry can be carried out by passing an AC current (IAC) 
through the sample and by demodulating the current flux signal (FI’/IAC) from the flux 
signal similarly. 

We tested the performance of our scanning SQUID microscope for magnetometry, 

susceptometry and current magnetometry imaging. For magnetometry, we used a Nb 
film cooled under zero applied magnetic field (Fig. 4a). We observed strong magnetic 
contrast when the sample was at 4.8 K. Such contrast disappeared when the sample was 
warmed up to 10 K (Fig. 4a inset) and reappeared in a different configuration when the 
sample was cooled back down to 4.8 K (Fig. 4b). Such magnetic contrast from the 
cooling cycle suggests the presence of trapped vortices and we estimated from the 
density of these vortices that the remnant field on the sample was about 0.6 Gs. We 
carried out the susceptometry on a CuNi/Nb zigzag grid patterned by optical 
lithography (Fig. 4c). The periodic paramagnetic and diamagnetic regions from the 
CuNi and Nb bars could be well resolved from the susceptibility image (Fig. 4d). We 
used a nano-SQUID as the sample to test current magnetometry (Fig. 4e inset). We 
passed IAC = 15 μA through the front field coil and measured the current flux around 
the tip of the nano-SQUID (Fig. 4e). We reconstructed the current density distribution 
by performing fast-Fourier transform (FFT) algorithm of the current flux image (Fig. 
4e) using the point-spread function of the pickup loop as the kernel. The similarity of 
the current density image with the SEM image of the field coil (Fig. 4e inset) suggested 
the validity of our measurement and algorithm. 

 

 

Conclusion and outlook 

In conclusion, we have designed and fabricated a type of nano-SQUID 

susceptometers based on Nb 3D-nanobridge junctions. Our fabrication process was 
simpler than that of the nano-SQUIDs based on tri-layer junctions; whereas the flux 
noise was on the same level. Our field measurement suggests that these SQUID could 
potentially function as magnetometers under 5 KGs of perpendicular magnetic field. 
We used these nano-SQUIDs for scanning SQUID microscopy and demonstrated their 
capabilities for magnetometry, susceptometry and current magnetometry imaging, 
which are important for determining the electro-magnetic properties of quantum 


materials. 

By combining deep-etching with EBL defined pickup coils, we might be able to 

fabricate nano-SQUIDs with better than 1 µm spatial resolution. Our fabrication 
process can be readily transferred to niobium nitride29 technologies to extend the 
working temperature and magnetic field range of future nano-SQUIDs.  

 

Acknowledgement 

Work done at SIMIT was supported by the Frontier Science Key Programs of CAS 

(Grant No. QYZDY-SSW-JSC033), the National Key R&D Program of China 
(2017YFF0206105), and the Strategic Priority Research program of CAS (Grant No. 
XDA18000000). Work done at Fudan University was sponsored by the Ministry of 
Science and Technology of China (2016YFA0301002 and 2017YFA0303000) and 
National Science Foundation of China (11827805). 
 


Reference 

1. John Clarke, Alex I. Braginski, The-SQUID-Handbook (2004). 

2. Kirtley, J. R. & Wikswo, J. P. SCANNING SQUID MICROSCOPY. Annual 

Review of Materials Research 29(1) (1999). 

3. Koshnick, N. C. NANO-SQUID SUSCEPTOMETRY AND FLUCTUATION 

EFFECTS IN SUPERCONDUCTING RINGS. Stanford Ph. D. thesis (2009). 

4. Foley, C. P. & Hilgenkamp, H. Why NanoSQUIDs are important: an introduction 

to the focus issue. Superconductor Science and Technology 22, 064001 (2009). 

5. Hasselbach, K. et al. High resolution magnetic imaging: MicroSQUID Force 

Microscopy. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 97, 012330 (2008). 

6. Walbrecker, J. O. et al. Direct measurement of internal magnetic fields in natural 

sands using scanning SQUID microscopy. Journal of Magnetic Resonance 242, 

10–17 (2014). 

7. Ketchen, M. B. et al. Design, fabrication, and performance of integrated miniature 

SQUID susceptometers. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 25, 1212–1215 (1989). 

8. Hilgenkamp, H. et al. Ordering and manipulation of the magnetic moments in large-

scale superconducting p-loop arrays. Nature. 422, 4, 50-53 (2003). 

9. Spanton, E. M. et al. Images of Edge Current in InAs/GaSb Quantum Wells. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 113, 026804 (2014). 

10. Nowack, K. C. et al. Imaging currents in HgTe quantum wells in the quantum spin 

Hall regime. Nature Materials 12, 787–791 (2013). 

11. Granata, C. & Vettoliere, A. Nano Superconducting Quantum Interference device: 


A powerful tool for nanoscale investigations. Physics Reports 614, 1–69 (2016). 

12. Finkler, A. et al. Self-aligned nanoscale SQUID on a tip. Nano Letters 10, 1046–

1049 (2010). 

13. Halbertal, D. et al. Imaging resonant dissipation from individual atomic defects in 

graphene. Science 358, 1303–1306 (2017). 

14. Vasyukov, D. et al. A scanning superconducting quantum interference device with 

single electron spin sensitivity. Nature Nanotechnology 8, 639–644 (2013). 

15. Kirtley, J. R. et al. The response of small SQUID pickup loops to magnetic fields. 

Superconductor Science and Technology 29, 124001 (2016). 

16. Huber, M. E. et al. Gradiometric micro-SQUID susceptometer for scanning 

measurements of mesoscopic samples. Review of Scientific Instruments 79, 053704 

(2008). 

17. Shibata, Y. et al. Imaging of current density distributions with a Nb weak-link 

scanning nano-SQUID microscope. Scientific Reports 5, 15097 (2015). 

18. Chen, L., Wernsdorfer, W., Lampropoulos, C., Christou, G. & Chiorescu, I. On-

chip SQUID measurements in the presence of high magnetic fields. 

Nanotechnology 21, 405504 (2010). 

19. Anderson, P. W. & Dayem, A. H. Radio-Frequency Effects in Superconducting 

Thin Film Bridges. Physical Review Letters 13, 195–197 (1964). 

20. Chen, L., Wang, H., Liu, X., Wu, L. & Wang, Z. A High-Performance Nb Nano-

Superconducting Quantum Interference Device with a Three-Dimensional 

Structure. Nano Letters 16, 7726–7730 (2016). 


21. Vijay, R., Sau, J. D., Cohen, M. L. & Siddiqi, I. Optimizing Anharmonicity in 

Nanoscale Weak Link Josephson Junction Oscillators. Physical Review Letters 103 

(2009). 

22. Levenson-Falk, E. M., Antler, N. & Siddiqi, I. Dispersive nanoSQUID 

magnetometry. Superconductor Science and Technology 29, 113003 (2016). 

23. Levenson-Falk, E. M., Vijay, R., Antler, N. & Siddiqi, I. A dispersive nanoSQUID 

magnetometer for ultra-low noise, high bandwidth flux detection. Superconductor 

Science and Technology 26, 055015 (2013). 

24. Huber, M. E. et al. Gradiometric micro-SQUID susceptometer for scanning 

measurements of mesoscopic samples. Review of Scientific Instruments 79, 053704 

(2008). 

25. Peiniger, M. & Piel, H. A Superconducting Nb3Sn Coated Multicell Accelerating 

Cavity. IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science 32, 3610–3612 (1985). 

26. Kirtley, J. R. et al. Scanning SQUID susceptometers with sub-micron spatial 

resolution. Review of Scientific Instruments 87, 093702 (2016). 

27. Roth, B. J., Sepulveda, N. G. & Wikswo, J. P. Using a magnetometer to image a 

two‐dimensional current distribution. Journal of Applied Physics 65, 361–372 

(1989). 

28. Hazeghi, A., Sulpizio, J. A., Diankov, G., Goldhaber-Gordon, D. & Wong, H. S. P. 

An integrated capacitance bridge for high-resolution, wide temperature range 

quantum capacitance measurements. Review of Scientific Instruments 82, 053904 

(2011). 


29. Hazra, D. et al. Superconducting properties of very high quality NbN thin films 

grown by high temperature chemical vapor deposition. Superconductor Science 

and Technology 29, 105011 (2016). 

 


