Abstract— We have developed a new method for fabrication of 
ultra-low noise
silver-silver chloride (Ag-AgCl) reference 

electrode with dramatically high stability, useful in biomedical 
precise measurements. Low noise level and high stability are the 
most important features when evaluating reference electrode for 
example when used as a half-cell at electrochemical cells. The 
noise was measured for bare Ag-AgCl electrode pairs in a saline 
electrolyte without any junction. The noise spectral density for 
such measurements increases at low frequencies due to flicker 
(1/f) noise. Thermal noise from the real part of the electrode 
impedance is always lower than 1/f noise and is shown as offset 
voltage in noise spectrum. Electrode noise is highly correlated to 
its offset voltage. Moreover, the variance of the potential 
difference in our measurements is correlated to the noise level of 
electrodes. In this paper, offset voltage spectrum and the 
variance of data while doing measurements are proposed for 
identification of noise in our electrodes. The results presented 
suggest a new process for fabrication of electrode pairs with 
differential noise potential of 16 nanovolt root mean square at 
frequency of 1 Hz.

Index Terms— Biosensor, Fabrication, Nanovolt noise level, 

Silver-silver chloride, Ultra-low noise

I. INTRODUCTION

In an electrochemical system, reference electrodes are 

essential components since they can provide stable and 
constant potential during the measurement [1], [2]. A major 
effort toward the development of reference electrodes for in 
vivo biosensing has been directed during the past half a 
century [3]. Many electrochemists frequently utilize the silver-
silver chloride electrodes (Ag-AgCl) as the reference 
electrodes in their systems. This type of electrode is 
commonly used because of environmental reasons and its 
advantageous characteristics such as low cost, high stability 
and 
reproducibility 
of 
potential, 
and 
electrochemical 

reversibility [4], [5]. This type of electrode has attracted more 
and more attention for recording physiological electrical 
signals, 
including 
electroencephalography 
(EEG), 

electromyography (EMG), and electrocardiography (ECG) 
recording [6].

One method to measure the noise power spectrum density 

of the electrode pairs is to place them in saline electrolyte and 
measure the potential difference between them in an 
electromagnetically shielded environment [7-10]. The power

spectral density of the output potential difference contains 
valuable data to determine the noise attributed to the 
electrodes. The power spectral density of differential potential
measurements increases at low frequencies, which represents 
the flicker (1/f) noise in the system. Real part of the 
impedance of the electrodes contributes to the thermal noise. 
The offset voltage in the high frequency part of the power 
spectrum is limited by the thermal noise which is always 
lower than 1/f noise [11]. Electrode noise is highly correlated 
to its dc offset voltage [12]. When electrode contact area in the 
electrolyte increases, the impedance and therefore its thermal 
noise decreases [12].

It is shown that the microstructure of the Ag-AgCl has a 

large influence on its repeatability and performance [13]. One 
of the most effective microstructural features in electrodes is 
their porosity. More porosity in electrodes provides larger 
electrolytic contact area, enabling higher exchange current 
densities at equilibrium which reduces their polarization 
voltage, thereby resulting in a highly reproducible and stable 
reference potential [14], [15]. Thus, porous electrodes perform 
more effectively in numerous applications like sensors, 
batteries, and fuel cells [16], [17]. 

Some recent studies have focused on the fabrication of 

thermal electrolytic (ThE) Ag-AgCl reference electrodes [18-
20]. ThE electrodes are conventionally prepared by applying 
Ag2O paste on a supporting wire skeleton (I. Ag2O paste 
deposition). This thin wire skeleton is usually made of a noble 
metal such as Platinum (Pt). Then Ag2O paste is thermally 
reduced to a porous Ag layer in furnace (II. Thermal 
annealing). Finally, 10-25 % of Ag layer is converted to AgCl 
through electrolysis (III. Anodization). The degree of porosity 
in ThE reference electrodes needs a critical optimization. High 
degree of porosity in ThE electrodes increases the probability 
of contact between the electrolyte and the wire skeleton. This 
occurrence will create mixed potentials as solution penetrates 
deeper [21-26]. Therefore, for increasing the exchange current 
densities at equilibrium which results in a highly reproducible 
reference potential, there is an upper limit for increasing 
surface porosity. 

In this research we developed a new technique to increase 

the effective surface of ThE reference electrodes by using a 
light Rhodium (Rh) coated silver tube as the inner skeleton 
instead of Pt wire for supporting the Ag-AgCl layers. Rh is 
also a noble metal which has a similar electrochemical 
reaction mechanism as Pt wire. Since we deposit a very thin 
layer of Rh on the outer surface of Ag tube, this method is 

Design and Fabrication of an Ultra-low Noise 

Ag-AgCl Electrode

B. Rostami, S.I. Mirzaei, A. Zamani, A. Simchi, M. Fardmanesh


more cost effective than using Pt wire as used in the 
conventional ThE methods. 

In the following sections, two different methods for 

fabrication of Ag-AgCl reference electrodes are proposed and 
their microstructure and noise level are compared to each 
other. The first method is the simplest way to fabricate an Ag-
AgCl reference electrode by only doing the anodization step 
on a silver rod (Basic standard method) and the second one is 
the ThE method by replacing Pt wire by a light Rhodium (Rh) 
coated silver tube (New ThE method).

II. BASIC STANDARD METHOD

In the basic standard fabrication method, a proportion of 

Ag rod was converted to AgCl by electrolysis technique which 
could be driven by applying a fixed current or a fixed 
potential. In this research, we have used constant current for 
converting 15 percent of the mass of identical Ag rods 
(99.99%, rectangular cross section 1mm x 0.5mm) to AgCl in 
a chloride solution. The block diagram of basic standard 
fabrication process is shown in Fig. 1. 

Prior to electrode preparation, to remove surface contaminants 
of the silver rods, they were immersed in HNO3 solution (0.1 
M, 37%, for 5 minutes) and rinsed thoroughly with DI water. 
Afterwards, they were immersed in NH4OH solution (37%, for 
5 minutes) to remove oxide surface contaminants and again 
rinsed thoroughly with DI water. Aqueous solutions of KCl 
(0.5 M) and HCl (0.004 M) were mixed and used as the 
electrolyte in electrolysis process. Prior to anodization, the 
mass of the part of each silver rod, which will be immersed in 
the electrolyte, is determined to calculate the amount of charge 
needed to convert 15 percent of that part of mass to AgCl.

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the basic standard method for fabrication of Ag-
AgCl electrodes.

III. NEW THE METHOD

In this method, Ag-AgCl electrodes were prepared by N 

times applying Ag2O paste to an Ag tube with Rh coating 

(99.99% Ag, 1 mm inner diameter and 1.6 mm outer 
diameter), followed by its thermal decomposition (100 ◦C for 
30 minutes followed by 500 ◦C for 2 hours) each time. The 
block diagram of preparation steps of silver oxide paste is 
shown in Fig. 2. 

Fig. 2. Silver oxide paste preparation steps.

Synthesized Ag2O paste was deposited on the Ag tubes 

with Rh coating and was thermally decomposed. This step was
repeated N times to obtain a thick enough layer of porous Ag 
on the tube-shaped skeleton. Approximately 15 percent of the 
mass of the part of the porous Ag, which would be immersed 
in the electrolyte, was electrolytically converted to AgCl 
through anodization with constant potential in an aqueous 
solution of HCl (0.1 M). Finally, the prepared electrodes were
stored in a KCl solution (3 M). The general block diagram of 
the new ThE method for fabricating Ag-AgCl reference 
electrode is shown in Fig. 3. Two different pairs of this type of 
electrodes with different N (One of them with N=1 and the 
other one with N=3) were processed.

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the silver paste method for fabrication of Ag/ 

AgCl electrodes.

Electrolysis in Chloride Aqueous Solution

   (0.5 M) +    

(0.004 M)

Constant Current 

(38 mA)
62 minutes

Immerse in      

5 minutes

Immerse in     

5 minutes

Dry washed particles

Add PEG (2000)

Wash     particles in Ethanol

2 times

Centrifuge for 3 minutes 

3500 rpm

1 mL     (0.2 M)

Stirring for 2 minutes
Changing color from colorless to brown

3.11 mL DI water + 0.325 mL       (0.4M) + 0.065 mL     + 0.5 mL      (0.1 M)

Stirring for 10 minutes
At Room Temperature

Storage in    (3 M)

Electrolysis in Chloride Aqueous Solution

   (0.1 M)
Constant potential

T= 500  for 120 minutes

T=100  for 30 minutes

Deposit     paste on   tubes with 

  coating

Synthesis of     paste

N


IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this section, the noise of four different pairs of Ag-AgCl 

electrodes are compared to each other. The first pair were
fabricated by using the basic standard method. Second and 
third pairs were processed by using the new ThE method with 
N=3 and N=1, respectively. The fourth pair are commercial 
double-junction Ag-AgCl reference electrodes. First, the 
microstructure of two proposed methods are compared by 
studying their Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. 
Next, the differential voltage noise of the four electrode pairs 
are compared. 

SEM measurements were carried out to study the effect of 

different fabrication methods on the microstructure of Ag-
AgCl reference electrodes. The SEM images of the surface of 
the electrodes fabricated by the new proposed ThE method 
and the basic standards method are shown in Fig. 4. As it is 
shown, 
both 
proposed 
methods 
result 
in 
porous 

microstructures, however the electrode prepared with the new 
ThE method (Fig. 4 (b)), appears to be mechanically very rigid
with larger pores. A partial explanation for these structural 
differences could be the fact that in the silver oxide paste 
method the annealing step for 1 hour at 100◦C, allows for the 
creation of larger holes in microstructure which is due to the 
removal of PEG molecules. 

Fig. 4. Scanning electron microscopy measurement: (a) basic standard 
method, (b) new ThE method.

In this research the noise quantification was achieved by 

measuring differential output potentials of two identical 
electrodes in a chloride solution in an electromagnetically 
shielded box. The electrolyte used for all the differential noise 
level experiments was aqueous solution of NaCl (3 M). In this 
measurement, both intrinsic noise (due to the different 
microstructures and not identical electrodes) and system noise 
(due to the noise of output readout and amplification circuits) 
were measured together. 

During the noise test, temperature, humidity and air 

pressure inside the electromagnetically shielded box were
measured. Since all the measurements were done in almost 
same environmental conditions (such as constant temperature, 
humidity, and air pressure), system noise was assumed to be 
the same for all measurements. The noise spectrum of system, 
captured for 2000 seconds, is shown in Fig. 5. As it is shown, 
the system noise level over a wide frequency range is almost 
constant and around 0.45 nV/√Hz.

Fig. 5. Noise spectrum of the system over 2000 seconds.

The noise level of electrodes immediately after inserting 

them in the electrolyte is much different from when keeping 
them in the same electrolyte for a while. This is due to 
imbalance between the solution ions and surface molecules of 
electrodes which affects the half-cell potential of electrodes. 
Therefore, it takes a while to reach an equilibrium condition 
on the surface of electrodes in electrolyte. It takes at least 48 
hours to reach a relatively acceptable balance in the measured 
noise level. Fig. 6 shows how the differential output potential 
stabilizes during the measurement time.

Fig. 6. Differential output measurement stabilization during the measurement 
time.

In this part, the differential noise level of four different 

pairs of Ag-AgCl electrodes are compared. The differential 
noise level of each pair was monitored over many days after 
fabrication, keeping all electrodes under same conditions, until 
they reached a relatively stable noise level. The first pair were
fabricated by using the basic standard method (named A) and 
their corresponding differential
noise level was tested 

immediately after insertion to the electrolyte and after 10 days
of storage in the same electrolyte. The noise spectrum of the 
recorded voltages, captured for 7000 seconds, is shown in Fig.
7. The noise level at 1 Hz decreases evenly from about 670
nV/√Hz to 84 nV/√Hz.


As mentioned in new ThE method section, to investigate

the effect of the number of applied silver oxide layers (N in 
Fig. 3) and its post processing steps, two different pairs of Ag-
AgCl electrodes (one pair with N=1 and the other pair with 
N=3) were fabricated. The second pair of electrodes with one 
layer of silver oxide (named B1), were tested immediately 
after insertion to the electrolyte, after one day, four days, eight 
days, and twelve days while kept in the same electrolyte. The 
noise spectrum of the recorded voltages, captured for 20,000 
seconds, is shown in Fig. 8. The noise level at 1 Hz decreases 
evenly from 11 µV/√Hz to 16 nV/√Hz.

The third pair of electrodes with N=3 (named B3) were 

tested immediately after insertion to the electrolyte, after three 
days, six days, and ten days being kept in the same electrolyte. 
The noise spectrum of the recorded voltages, captured for 
20,000 seconds, is shown in Fig. 8. The noise level at 1 Hz 
decreases generally from 5.5 µV/√ Hz at B3-immediately to 
212 nV/√ Hz after 10 days. However, the decrease of noise 
level for this type of electrode is not uniform and increases 
after three days. 

Fig. 7. Noise spectrum of the face to face differential voltage level of A type 
electrodes fabricated through the basic standard method over 7000 seconds.

A partial explanation for this observation could be the time 

degradation of the adhesion between silver oxide layers of the 
electrodes of type B3 in the electrolyte, which increases the 
effective impedance of the electrodes in the electrolyte, 
leading to an increase in its corresponding noise level. 

One of the reasons for temporal degradation of the 

adhesion between silver oxide layers could be the fact that the 
three layers of deposited silver are not exactly similar to each 
other: the first silver oxide layer is heated in the furnace three 
times while the second layer is exposed to heat twice and the 
third layer is exposed to heat only once. Therefore, the 
disparity between different layers would be one of the most 
probable reasons for adhesion degradation between layers.

Another perception from Fig. 8 is that the noise level at 1 

Hz, immediately after insertion, for type B3 is less than the 
corresponding noise level for B1, which is due to thicker layer 

of porous silver chloride in B3 compared to B1. This 
observation is verified by Electrochemical Impedance 
Spectroscopy (EIS) measurement comparing the impedance of 
electrodes type B1 and B3, conducted immediately after 
inserting them in electrolyte, which their corresponding results 
are shown as Bode plots and Nyquist diagrams in Fig. 9. As 
shown in Fig. 9, the real part of impedance of electrode type 
B3 is lower than that of electrode type B1, which is in 
harmony with the DC offset in noise spectrum density (Fig. 8, 
B1 immediately and B3 immediately). 

Fig. 8. Noise spectrum of the face to face differential voltage level of B1 and 
B3 type electrodes fabricated through the new ThE method over 20000 
seconds.

The fourth pair for noise level test consists of commercial 

double-junction Ag-AgCl reference electrodes (named C). 
Their corresponding differential noise level was tested after 10 
days of storage in the same electrolyte. The noise spectrum of 
the recorded voltages, captured for 7000 seconds, is shown in 
Fig. 10. The noise level at 1 Hz has reached a stable level of 1
µV/√ Hz after 10 days.

Other than the offset voltage in the noise spectrum, the 

variance of the recorded potential difference in face to face 
measurements is also correlated to the noise level of the 
electrodes. We calculated the variance of the recorded data 
while doing differential noise measurements and compared 
them for different pairs of electrodes. Fig. 11 shows a 
comparison between the variance of the electrode pairs type 
B1 and B3 which are fabricated using the new ThE method. 
As it is shown, the variance of the recorded data from 
electrodes type B1 after reaching its stable state (after 12 days) 
is around 3 pV. However, for B3 electrodes, this value goes 
down to 0.1 nV after 3 days and increases to 1.3 nV after 
reaching its stable state (after 10 days).

Fig. 12 shows a comparison between the variance of the 

electrode pairs type A which were fabricated using the basic 
standard method and C that are commercial double-junction 
electrodes. As it is shown, the variance of the recorded data 
from electrodes type A and C after reaching their steady state 
(after 10 days) are around 30 pV and 8 nV respectively. 


Fig. 9. EIS measurements immediately after inserting in the electrolyte; 
electrode type B1: (a) Bode plot (b) Nyquist diagram, and electrode type B3: 
(c) Bode plot (d) Nyquist diagram.

The measured noise levels of four electrode pairs at their 

steady states, resulted from the dc offset voltage in the noise
spectrum and the variance of the recorded data while doing 
face to face noise measurements, are summarized in Table I. 
As it is shown, type B1 and type B3 have more porous and 
rigid structures in comparison with type A and this is the main 
reason for lower noise level in type B1 compared with type A.

Despite the more porous structure of type B3 against type 

A, the degradation of adhesion between three silver oxide 
layers in type B3 increases its noise level after a while being 
kept in the electrolyte solution. All fabricated electrodes 
through our proposed methods have much lower noise level in 

comparison with the commercial double-junction Ag-AgCl 
pair. The electrode pair type B1 has the lowest noise level 
among other types, which regards to its dc offset voltage in 
noise spectrum. At frequency of 1 Hz, its noise level at steady 
state is around 16 nV/√Hz which is acceptable among reported 
noise levels of reference Ag-AgCl electrodes so far.

Fig. 10. Noise spectrum of the face to face differential voltage level of C type 
electrodes (the commercial double-junction Ag-AgCl reference electrode) 
over 7000 seconds.

Fig. 11. A comparison between the variance of the electrode pairs type B1 and 
B3 which were fabricated through the new ThE method.

(a)

(c)

(d)

(b)

Noise Variance [V]

TABLE I

THE MEASURED NOISE LEVELS OF FOUR ELECTRODE PAIRS AT THEIR STEADY 

STATES

Noise Level at 
Steady State
A
B1
B3
C

DC offset voltage 

(nV @ 1 Hz)
84
16
212
1000

Data variance (nV)
0.03
0.003
1.3
80


Fig. 12. A comparison between the variance of the electrode pairs type A 
which were fabricated through the basic standard method and C that are 
commercial double-junction Ag-AgCl electrodes

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper we proposed two different techniques for 

fabrication of low noise silver-silver chloride (Ag-AgCl) 
reference electrodes that are widely utilized in biomedical 
precise measurements. To find the optimum approach to 
fabrication of an ultra-low noise reference electrode, the 
electrochemical and noise properties of four different pairs of 
electrodes were measured and compared to each other. The 
noise was characterized by measuring the differential potential 
from Ag-AgCl electrode pairs in aqueous NaCl (3 M) 
electrolyte. Electrode noise performance is highly correlated 
to its DC offset voltage in the noise spectrum and the variance 
of 
the 
recorded 
data,
while 
performing 
differential

measurements. In this paper, we demonstrated a new scheme 
for fabricating pairs of electrodes using the proposed novel 
ThE method with one layer silver oxide paste, resulting in 16 
nVRMS noise voltage at 1 Hz and 3 pVRMS noise variance, 
measured
while 
located 
face-to-face 
in 
electrolyte 

environment. 

REFERENCES

[1]
L. Mattarozzi, S. Cattarin, N. Comisso, P. Guerriero, M. Musiani, E. 
Verlato, Preparation of porous nanostructured Ag electrodes for 
sensitive electrochemical detection of hydrogen peroxide, Elsevier, 
Electrochimica Acta 198 (2016) 296–303.

[2]
M. Moosavifar, A. Ansari and M. Rais-Zadeh, “An AlN-on-Si resonant 
IR sensor array with a large temperature coefficient of frequency,” 2016 
IEEE SENSORS, Orlando, FL, 2016.

[3]
F. Moussy, J. Harrison, Prevention of the Rapid Degradation of 
Subcutaneously Implanted Ag/AgCl Reference Electrodes Using 
Polymer Coatings, Analytical chemistry 66 (1994) 674-679. 

[4]
M. Fatoorechi, J. Parkinson, R.J. Prance, H. Prance, A.K. Seth, D.J. 
Schwartzman, A comparative study of electrical potential sensors and 
Ag/AgCl electrodes for characterising spontaneous and event related 
electroencephalogram signals, Journal of Neuroscience Methods 251 
(2015) 7–16.

[5]
L. Mattarozzi, S. Cattarin, N. Comisso, R. Gerbasi, P. Guerriero, M. 
Musiani, L. Vázquez-Gómez, E. Verlato, Electrodeposition of Cu-Ni 
alloy electrodes with bimodal porosity and their use for nitrate reduction, 
ECS Electrochemistry Letters 2 (2013) D58–D60.

[6]
K. Chen, L. Ren, Z. Chen, C. Pan, W. Zhou, L. Jiang, Fabrication of 
Micro-Needle Electrodes for Bio-Signal Recording by a Magnetization-
Induced Self-Assembly Method, Passaro VMN, ed. Sensors 16 (2016) 
1533.

[7]
M. Fernandez, Electrode Contact Noise in Surface Biopotential 
Measurements, 14th Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, (1992)123-124

[8]
B. Rostami, F. Shanehsazzadeh and M. Fardmanesh, “Fast Fourier 
Transform Based NDT Approach for Depth Detection of Hidden Defects 
Using 
HTS 
rf-SQUID,” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Applied 

Superconductivity, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 1-6, Oct. 2018.

[9]
F. Shanehsazzadeh, B. Rostami, S. Sadeghi, F. Rahbar, F.  Sarreshtedari, 
H. Kokabi, M. Banzet, J. Schubert, M. Fardmanesh, "Defect-depth 
dependence of Optimal Frequency and Spatial resolution in SQUID 
based NDE," 2015 23rd Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering, 
Tehran, 2015, pp. 1411-1414.

[10] B. Rostami, F. Shanehsazzadeh, M. Fardmanesh, " Electromagnetic 

Attenuation Factor Based NDE Approach for Depth Detection of Hidden 
Defects Using HTS rf-SQUID," 2019 27th Iranian Conference on 
Electrical Engineering, Yazd, 2019.

[11] A. Kosari, M. Moosavifar, D. Wentzloff, “A 152μW -99dBm BPSK/16-

QAM OFDM Receiver for LPWAN Applications,” IEEE Asian Solid-
State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC), November 2018.

[12] M. Fernandez, R. Pallas-Areny, P. J. Riu, and L. Lozano, Electrode 

noise in high resolution ECG, IV International Symposium on 
Biomedical Engineering, Peniscola, Spain, 1991.

[13] L. Mattarozzi, S. Cattarin, N. Comisso, A. Gambirasi, P. Guerriero, M. 

Musiani, L. Vázquez-Gómez, E. Verlato, Hydrogen evolution assisted 
electrodeposition of porous Cu-Ni alloy electrodes and their use for 
nitrate reduction in alkali, Electrochimica Acta 140 (2014) 337–344.

[14] N. Comisso, S. Cattarin, P. Guerriero, L. Mattarozzi, M. Musiani, L. 

Vázquez- Gómez, E. Verlato, Study of Cu, Cu-Ni and Rh-modified Cu 
porous layers as electrode materials for the electroanalysis of nitrate and 
nitrite ions, Journal of Solid-State Electrochemistry (2016).

[15] L. Mattarozzi, S. Cattarin, N. Comisso, R. Gerbasi, P. Guerriero, M. 

Musiani, L. Vázquez-Gómez, E. Verlato, Electrodeposition of compact 
and porous Cu-Zn alloy electrodes and their use in the cathodic 
reduction of nitrate, Journal of the Electrochemical Society 162 (2015) 
D236–D241.

[16] E. Rouya, S. Cattarin, M.L. Reed, R.G. Kelly, G. Zangari, 

Electrochemical characterization of the surface area of Nanoporous Gold 
Films, Journal of the Electrochemical Society 159 (2012) K97–K102.

[17] S. Cherevko, C.-H. Chung, Impact of key deposition parameters on the 

morphology of silver foams prepared by dynamic hydrogen template 
deposition, Electrochimica Acta 55 (2010) 6383–6390.

[18] M. J. Guiomar Lito, M. F. Camoes, Meeting the Requirements of the 

Silver/ Silver Chloride Reference Electrode, J Solution Chem 38 (2009) 
1471-1482.

[19] P. J. Brewer, R. J. C. Brown, Effect of Structural Design of Silver/ 

Silver Chloride Electrodes on Stability and Response Time and the 
Implications for Improved Accuracy in pH Measurements, Sensors 9 
(2009) 118-130.

[20] Q. Liu, Y. Xu, J. Wang, M. Xie, W. Wei, L. Huang, H. Xu, Y. Song, H. 

Li, Fabrication of Ag/AgCl/ZnFe2O4
Composites with Enhanced 

Photocatalytic Activity for Pollutant Degradation and E. coli 
Disinfection, Colloids and Surfaces A 553 (2018) 144-124.

[21] B.J. Plowman, L.A. Jones, S.K. Bhargava, Building with bubbles: the 

formation of high surface area honeycomb-like films via hydrogen 
bubble template electrodeposition, Chemical Communications 51 (2015) 
4331–4346.

[22] T. Rahman, T. Ichiki, Fabrication and Characterization of a Stabilized 

Thin Film Reference Electrode Modified with Self-Assembled 
Monolayer of Alkane Thiol Chains for Rapid Biosensing Applications, 
Sensors 17 (2017) 2326.

[23] J. Yin, L. Qi, H. Wang, Antifreezing Ag/AgCl reference electrodes: 

Fabrication and applications, Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry 666 
(2012) 25–31.

[24] E. Kurowska, A. Brzózka, M. Jarosz, G.D. Sulka, M. Jaskuła, Silver 

nanowire array sensor for 
sensitive and rapid detection of H2O2, 

Electrochimica Acta 104 (2013) 439–447.

[25] R.T. Bonnecaze, N. Mano, B. Nam, A. Heller, On the behavior of the 

porous rotating disk electrode, Journal of the Electrochemical Society 
154 (2007) F44– F47.

[26] C. Gouveia-Caridade, C.M.A. Brett, Strategies, development and 

applications of polymer-modified electrodes for stripping analysis, 
Current Analytical Chemistry 4 (2008) 206–214.


