 

Correspondence: Reply to ‘On the understanding of current-induced spin polarization of 

3D topological insulators’ 

 

C. H. Li1*, O. M. J. van ‘t Erve1, S. Rajput2, L. Li3, and B. T. Jonker1 

1Materials Science and Technology Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC  

20375  USA. 

2Intel Corporation, Hillsboro, OR 97124  USA. 

3 Department of Physics and Astronomy, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV  26506  

USA. 

 

* Email: connie.li@nrl.navy.mil 

 

We reported the first spin potentiometric measurement to electrically detect  spin 

polarization arising from spin-momentum locking in topological insulator (TI) surface states using 

ferromagnet/tunnel barrier contacts [1].  This method has been adopted to measure the current 

generated spin in other TI systems [2-10], albeit with conflicting signs of the measured spin voltage 

[1,2,4,6-10].  Tian et al. wish to use their model as presented in Ref. [4] to determine the sign of 

the induced spin polarization, and thereby determine whether the claims of various groups to have 

sampled the topologically protected surface states in bulk TIs are correct.  The central point of our 

Reply is that the model as presented is incapable of doing so because it fails to include separate 

physical contributions which independently effect the sign of the spin polarization measured.   

In our recent paper [9], as stated therein, we adopted the generic framework of Tian et al. 

[4] which postulates parallel spin dependent potentials in the TI channel, to be consistent with 

literature discussions.  The issue raised by Tian et al. is the specific ordering of the spin-up and 

spin-down electrochemical potentials within their original model. We had placed the spin-up 

(majority) electrochemical potential level further from zero due to its greater magnitude [9], which 

may be inconsistent with their original model.  We subsequently realized that this model neglects 


 
2

critical spin dependent parameters such as interface and channel resistances, and believe that this 

model is too simplistic to accurately account for the real experimental systems under study.  

Specifically, the potential profiles include vertical drops at the contact interface to the TI channel, 

which would indicate a current discontinuity (i.e., an infinite current), and therefore is 

fundamentally unphysical.  It is this inadequacy which has resulted in apparent contradictory 

results from different groups.  We have developed a more realistic model that includes 

experimental parameters such as interface and spin-dependent channel resistances.  We find that 

such considerations can cause a crossing of the spin-up and spin-down voltage levels within the 

TI channel, which can lead to measured spin voltages of either sign depending upon the magnitude 

of the spin dependent resistances at interfaces and in the channel [11]. Our model potentially 

reconciles the inconsistent signs of spin voltages reported in the literature. 

Any practical system will have contacts for experimental access, and these interfaces are 

crucial to electrical transport when current is converted from one type of charge carrier to another.  

The interface resistances at the current injecting contacts may be nonlinear or larger than that of 

the TI channel, perhaps due to oxidation of the TI surface or a blanket layer of tunnel barrier 

material such as Al2O3 often deposited for capping purposes and/or to simplify fabrication [1,2,4-

10].  This creates interface resistances of varying degree that can fundamentally change the carrier 

conversion at the interface. Fig. 1a shows a typical I-V curve taken between the current injecting 

Au/Al2O3/Bi2Se3 contacts, showing a non-negligible and nonlinear interface resistance where a 

voltage drop can be supported.     

Fig. 1b shows a schematic resistor circuit model for spin-up and spin-down electrons 

traveling in two independent channels [12-14]. Each component of the circuit, including the 

contacts and interfaces, is modeled as a resistor. We have used a similar approach to model spin 


 
3

filtering in graphene magnetic tunnel junctions [15]. As electrons travel from the right gold 

electrode to the left, several resistances are encountered: the right Au electrode RAu,R, the right 

Au/Al2O3/TI interface Rint,R, TI channel resistance RTI, the left TI/Al2O3/Au interface Rint,L, and the 

left Au electrode RAu,L. 

For electrons traveling from the right Au electrode, the resistance of the Au electrode is 

low for both spin-up and spin-down electrons. However, the interface resistance for spin-up and 

spin-down electrons entering into the TI channel may be different depending upon their alignment 

with the states in the TI. A steady state electron current flowing through the TI surface states from 

right to left creates a spontaneous spin-up orientation on the top TI surface due to spin momentum 

locking. Hence for spin-up electrons, this interface resistance will be lower since they align with 

those in the TI surface states [16].  The opposite is true for spin-down electrons – the interface 

resistance will be higher due to their antiparallel alignment, i.e., Rint,R↑<Rint,R↓. Within the TI 

channel, the resistance for the spin-up electrons will be significantly lower due to the available 

spin-up states arising from the left flowing electron current, and higher for the spin-down electrons. 

Finally, as these electrons enter into the left Au electrode, the interface resistance will be similar 

for both spins since there are equal number of spin-up and spin-down states in the Au, i.e., the 

interface resistance here will be spin independent, i.e., Rint,L↑=Rint,L↓. 

Given that the overall voltage drop for both the spin-up and down channels must be the 

same across the left and right Au electrodes, and that the spin-up channel is clearly a lower 

resistance channel, the current flowing through the spin-up channel (I↑) will be greater than that 

for the spin-down channel (I↓), or I↑>I↓. 

At the left TI/Al2O3/Au interface that is spin independent, or Rint,L↑=Rint,L↓, the voltage drop 

at the interfaces is greater for the spin-up (Vint,L↑) than the spin-down (Vint,L↓) channel because 


 
4

I↑>I↓, as depicted by the steeper slope for the spin-up (blue) lines within the left TI/ Al2O3/Au 

interface region in Fig. 2a. 

Conversely, at the right Au/Al2O3/TI interface that is spin-dependent, the voltage drop for 

the spin-up and spin-down electrons (Vint,R↑ and Vint,R↓, respectively) can have two different 

outcomes: Vint,R↑<Vint,R↓ or Vint,R↑>Vint,R↓, as shown in Fig. 2a and b respectively, depending on the 

relative magnitudes of the currents through the spin-up and spin-down channels (I↑, I↓), compared 

to that of the spin dependent resistances at the interface (Rint,R↑ and Rint,R↓). The case for 

Vint,R↑<Vint,R↓, due for example to I↑≥I↓ and Rint,R↑<<Rint,R↓, is depicted by the steeper slope for 

spin-down (red) bands at the right Au/Al2O3/TI interface in Fig. 2a. Connecting the end points of 

the voltage profiles for spin-up and spin-down channels yields a profile where the spin-down band 

is consistently above the spin-up band throughout the channel.  

However, in the case that Vint,R↑>Vint,R↓, due to for example I↑>>I↓ and Rint,↑≤Rint,↓, 

connecting the end points of the voltage profiles for spin-up and spin-down channels creates a 

crossing (Fig. 2b).  It is important to recognize that this crossing does not imply a change in sign 

of the spin polarization in the channel or direction of the charge flow, but will result in a reversal 

of the measured spin voltage loop, as discussed below. Here charge carrier conversion at the Au/TI 

interfaces create boundary conditions to ensure the spin and current continuity across the interface 

that must be met, just like carrier conversion at any ferromagnet/nonmagnet interfaces [12-14].  

This results in the splitting of the spin-up and spin-down levels near the interface in the TI.  

However, the spin coherence length in the TI is very large and typically greater than the TI channel 

length. Hence the equilibrium conditions that would be expected for an isolated TI are not reached, 

which allows for a current to exist where the chemical potentials overlap. Thus different voltage 

profiles and relative energies of the spin-up and spin-down levels can be created depending on the 


 
5

relative magnitudes of the spin-dependent resistances at interfaces and within the channel.  Figures 

2a and 2b clearly illustrate that opposite signs can indeed be measured for the spin voltage.  A 

detailed treatment is provided in Ref. 11. 

The probing of the voltage profiles for the spin-up and spin-down electrons by a 

ferromagnet/tunnel barrier contact via potentiometric measurement is the same as described 

originally [9].  This yields hysteresis loops of opposite signs as shown in Figs. 2c and d for the 

profiles in Figs. 2a and b, respectively. The sign in Fig. 2c is consistent with the observations in 

Refs. 4,6,8, and that of Fig. 2d is consistent with the observations reported in Refs. 1,8-10. 

As noted above, the resistances at the left TI/Al2O3/Au and right Au/Al2O3/TI interfaces 

are not symmetric, because they are spin dependent when entering the TI channel, and spin-

independent when entering the Au electrode. The metal/TI current injecting contacts are typically 

non-ohmic and/or rectifying, due to TI surface oxidation or inclusion of a tunnel barrier [1,2,4-

10].  This results in a junction where the magnitudes of these two interface resistances can vary 

depending on the current direction. This is depicted by the larger voltage drop at the higher 

resistance interface (entering the TI channel) in Figs. 2a,b.  This asymmetry leads to a larger 

splitting between the spin-up and spin-down voltage levels at the higher resistance interface, 

pushing the crossing towards the opposite end of the TI channel (Figs. 2b). Hence, the spin signal 

probed at points along the TI channel may indeed be of the same sign, although a narrow detector 

contact placed very close to the opposite end of the TI channel (entirely on the opposing side of 

the crossing) would detect the opposite sign. 

Regarding the work of Refs 9-12 on current generated spin in InAs cited in Tian et al.’s 

Correspondence, we note that different physical quantities were measured: Johnson/Hammar 

presented their results in voltage [Tian’s Ref. 9,10] whereas Park et al. have shown resistance 


 
6

[Tian’s Ref. 11,12], and hence these results are not directly comparable in terms of signs.  We 

further note that these papers provide inadequate documentation of current and/or magnetic field 

direction and/or of the polarities of voltage probes to enable a reader to accurately establish a sign 

convention for their current generated spin polarization. However, they do report a value for the 

Rashba spin-orbit coupling coefficient, a, which is more fundamental and directly addresses the 

spin ordering of the states.  The values for alpha reported in the papers by Johnson/Hammar and 

by Park et al. are positive.  We specifically addressed this in our Nature Communications 2016 

paper [9] by including a short discussion on page 7, first column, first full paragraph. 

Regarding the experiments on (Bi,Sb)2Te3 by Lee et al. [5], the sign convention used there 

is ambiguous, because the magnetic field direction was indicated by double arrows, with no 

positive direction identified. We cited it as the same sign as our work based on statements made 

by one of the authors at a conference presentation.   

In summary, the original model [4] which we adapted [9] is too simplistic and unphysical, 

and any discussion of the precise placement of the spin potentials is irrelevant to the determination 

of the sign and origin of the measured spin voltage. Our revised model remedies this by taking into 

account common experimental parameters such as spin-dependent channel and interface 

resistances, which can have a critical impact on the profiles and relative ordering of the spin 

dependent potentials, and the resultant spin voltage measured. Our conclusion in [9] that the spin 

signal we measured originates from Bi2Se3 Dirac surface states is sound -- it is independently 

supported by the different temperature dependences we reported for  Bi2Se3 and InAs, and the self-

cancellation of contributions from the spin-split 2DEG states which potentially coexist on the 

Bi2Se3 surface [17].  The opposite sign of the measured spin voltage we reported for Bi2Se3 relative 

to the InAs reference provides corroborative evidence, but we now realize is insufficient on its 


 
7

own unless the analysis includes the details of our new model [11] briefly summarized here. In 

addition, the InAs(001) surface 2DEG provides an excellent reference for the sign of the spin 

voltage in such an experiment, because the Rashba coefficient is well established, no additional 

states are present, and ultra-low resistance ohmic contacts can be obtained. Finally, our findings 

potentially reconcile the inconsistencies reported in the literature, and underscore the importance 

of recognizing these contributions in the interpretation of such data.  

 

 

 

Contributions  
 
All authors contributed to the discussion, analysis, and writing of the manuscript.  
 
 
Competing interests  
 
The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

Data availability  

The data sets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the 

corresponding author on reasonable request. 


 
8

REFERENCES 
 
1 
Li, C. H., van ‘t Erve, O. M. J., Robinson, J. T., Liu, Y., Li, L. & Jonker, B. T. Electrical 

detection of charge-current-induced spin polarization due to spin-momentum locking in 

Bi2Se3. Nature Nanotech. 9, 218–224 (2014). 

2 
Tang, J. et al. Electrical Detection of Spin-Polarized Surface States Conduction in 

(Bi0.53Sb0.47)2Te3 Topological Insulator. Nano Lett. 14, 5423-5429 (2014). 

3 
Ando, Y. et al. Electrical Detection of the Spin Polarization Due to Charge Flow in the 

Surface State of the Topological Insulator Bi1.5Sb0.5Te1.7Se1.3. Nano Lett. 14, 6226−6230 

(2014). 

4 
Tian, J., Miotkowski, I., Hong, S. & Chen, Y. P. Electrical injection and detection of spin-

polarized currents in topological insulator Bi2Te2Se, Sci. Rep. 5, 14293 (2015). 

5 
Lee, J. S., Richardella, A., Hickey, D. R., Mkhoyan, K. A. & Samarth, N. Mapping the 

chemical potential dependence of current-induced spin polarization in a topological insulator. 

Phys. Rev. B 92, 155312 (2015). 

6 
Dankert, A., Geurs, J., Kamalakar, M. V. & Dash, S. P. Room Temperature Electrical 

Detection of Spin Polarized Currents in Topological Insulators, Nano Lett. 15, 7976–7981 

(2015). 

7 
Li, C. H., van ‘t Erve, O. M. J., Li, Y. Y., Li, L. & Jonker, B. T. Electrical Detection of the 

Helical Spin Texture in a p-type Topological Insulator Sb2Te3, Sci. Rep. 6, 29533 (2016). 

8 
Yang, F. et al., Switching of charge-current-induced spin polarization in the topological 

insulator BiSbTeSe2, Phys. Rev. B 94, 075304 (2016). 

9 
Li, C. H., van ‘t Erve, O. M. J., Rajput, S., Li, L. & Jonker, B. T. Direct comparison of 

current-induced spin polarization in topological insulator Bi2Se3 and InAs Rashba states, 7, 

13518 (2016). 

10 Li, C. H., van ‘t Erve, O. M. J., Yan, C., Li, L. & Jonker, B. T. Electrical detection of charge-

to spin and spin-to-charge conversion in a topological insulator Bi2Te3 using BN/Al2O3 

hybrid tunnel barrier, Sci. Rep. 8, 10265 (2018). 

11 Li, C. H., van ‘t Erve, O. M. J., Yan, C., Li, L., & Jonker, B. T. Modeling electrical detection 

of current generated spin in topological insulator surface states, arXiv:1810.00757. 


 
9

12 Mott, N. F. The Electrical Conductivity of Transition Metals. Proceedings of the Royal 

Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 153, 699–717 

(1936). 

13 Van Son, P. C., van Kempen, H., & Wyder, P. Boundary Resistance of the Ferromagnetic-

Nonferromagnetic Metal Interface. Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2271-2273 (1987). 

14 Fert, A. & Jaffrès, H. Conditions for efficient spin injection from a ferromagnetic metal into 

a semiconductor. Phys. Rev. B 64, 184420 (2001). 

15 Cobas, E. D., van ‘t Erve, O. M. J., Cheng, S.-F., Culbertson, J. C., Jernigan, G. G., 

Bussmann, K. & Jonker, B. T. Room-temperature spin filtering in metallic ferromagnet-

multilayer graphene-ferromagnet junctions. ACS Nano 10, 10357−10365 (2016). 

16 Semenov, Y. G., Duan, X., Li, X.-L. & Kim, K. W. Conductance nonreciprocity on the 

surface of a topological insulator with magnetic electrodes. J. Phys. Chem. Solids (2017). 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpcs.2017.07.020 

17 Hong, S., Diep, V., Datta, S. & Chen, Y. P. Modeling potentiometric measurements in 

topological insulators including parallel channels. Phys. Rev. B. 86, 085131 (2012). 

 
 


 
10

FIGURE CAPTION 

 

Fig. 1 (a) Typical I-V curve taken at 8 K between current injecting Au/Al2O3/Bi2Se3 contacts, 

showing a nonlinear behavior. (b) Schematic of a resistor circuit model for spin-up and spin-

down electrons traveling in two independent channels from the right to the left electrode, where 

each component of the circuit from the contacts to interfaces are modeled as a resistor. 

 

Fig. 2 Voltage profiles for the spin-up (blue) and spin-down (red) electrons for a left flowing 

current, for the case (a) Vint,R↑ < Vint,R↓ (due to for example I↑ ≥ I↓, Rint,R↑ << Rint,R↓), and (b) 

Vint,R↑ > Vint,R↓ (due to for example I↑ >> I↓, Rint,R↑ ≤ Rint,R↓). Predicted lineshape for the spin 

voltage measured by a ferromagnet/tunnel barrier detector contact for the voltage profiles in (a) 

and (b) are shown in (c) and (d), respectively.  

 

 

 

  

 
 


 
11

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

a
b

T=8K

RAu,R
Rint,R
RTI

electron flow
Low R for spin up e

RTI,↑

Interface resistance 
not spin-dependent

Left 

Au electrode

Right 

Au electrode

Au/Al2O3/TI 

interface

TI/Al2O3/Au 

interface
TI channel 

RAu,L
Rint,L

Spin-up
Spin-up

Spin-down
Spin-down

electron flow
Low interface R for 

spin up e, Rint,↑

High interface R for 
spin down e, Rint,↓

High R for spin down e

RTI,↓

s

e

Rint,R↑ << Rint,R↓ , I↑≥ I↓

Vint,R↓

Vint,R↑

VL

VR

Left 

Au electrode

Right 

Au electrode

Right 

Au/Al2O3/TI 

interface

Left 

TI/Al2O3/Au 

interface

TI channel 

a
s

e

VL

VR

Left 

Au electrode

Right 

Au electrode

TI channel 

b

s

e

Vint,R↑

Vint,R↓

FM

FM

V↑

V↓

V(-M)
V(+M)

+M

-M

V(+M) = (V↓ - VR )

B

V

0

V(-M)= (V↑ - VR )

-M
S

e

c
d

V(+M)= (V↓ - VR )

B

V(- M) = (V↑ - VR )

0

V

-M

+M

V↑

V↓

V(-M)
V(+M)

Vint,R↑ < Vint,R↓ 

Rint,R↑ ≤ Rint,R↓ , I↑>> I↓
s

e
Vint,R↑ > Vint,R↓ 

+M
S

e

-M
S

e

+M
S

e

Right 

Au/Al2O3/TI 

interface

Left 

TI/Al2O3/Au 

interface

Li et al., Fig. 1

Li et al., Fig. 2


