Patterning of diamond like carbon films for sensor applications using silicon containing 

thermoplastic resist (SiPol) as a hard mask

D. Virganavičius a,b, V.J. Cadarso a, R. Kirchner a, L. Stankevičius b, T. Tamulevičius b, S. 

Tamulevičius b, H. Schift a

a Paul Scherrer Institut, Laboratory of Micro- and Nanotechnology, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland

b Kaunas University of Technology, Institute of Materials Science, 51423 Kaunas, Lithuania

e-mail: helmut.schift@psi.ch

Keywords: diamond like carbon, nanocomposites, thermal nanoimprint lithography, plasma etching, 

refractive index sensing

Abstract

Patterning of diamond-like carbon (DLC) and DLC:metal nanocomposites is of interest for an increasing 

number of applications. We demonstrate a nanoimprint lithography process based on silicon containing 

thermoplastic resist combined with plasma etching for straightforward patterning of such films. A 

variety of different structures with few hundred nanometer feature size and moderate aspect ratios were 

successfully realized. The quality of produced patterns was directly investigated by the means of optical 

and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Such structures were further assessed by employing them in 

the development of gratings for guided mode resonance (GMR) effect. Optical characterization of such 

leaky waveguide was compared with numerical simulations based on rigorous coupled wave analysis 

method with good agreement. The use of such structures as refractive index variation sensors is 

demonstrated with sensitivity up to 319 nm/RIU, achieving an improvement close to 450% in sensitivity 

compared to previously reported similar sensors. This pronounced GMR signal fully validates the 

employed DLC material, the technology to pattern it and the possibility to develop DLC based gratings 


as corrosion and wear resistant refractometry sensors that are able to operate under harsh conditions 

providing great value and versatility.

1.
Introduction

Patterning of diamond and diamond-like materials is of interest for a number of applications, such as 

stamps in nanoimprint lithography (NIL), in hard X-ray optics or infrared optics [1-3], due to their 

unique properties (i.e. high hardness, optical transparence, high refractive index, and chemical

inertness). Particularly diamond-like carbon (DLC) films have become attractive because of their

physical and mechanical properties similar to those of diamond, cost-efficient fabrication and room 

temperature deposition. DLC is an amorphous material consisting of sp3 and sp2 type bonded carbon 

atoms with the possible presence of hydrogen and other dopants including silicon dioxide, metals, etc.

There exists a variety of amorphous carbon materials that can be fabricated employing different 

deposition techniques using a vast number of precursors. Therefore optical, electrical, mechanical and 

other properties of DLC films can also be tuned greatly. More detailed information on diamond like 

coatings can be found in review articles [4, 5].

Despite the great potential of such materials, their patterning is still challenging and usually depends on 

complex processing involving multilayer masks and elaborate etching schemes [6-9], relies on costly 

low throughput patterning [10], or has very limited feasibility [11]. However, well-defined DLC micro-

and nanostructures are highly desirable for variety of optical and MEMS devices [12-14]. In particular, 

DLC based guided mode resonance (GMR) structures appear to be very attractive sensing platforms. 

The GMR phenomenon occurs in subwavelength dielectric periodic structures, where under resonant 

conditions incident light can be coupled to leaky surface wave and guided by the nanostructure resulting 

in Wood-type anomalies at the resonant wavelength in the transmission or reflection spectra. Resonant 

spectral response and wavelength depends on material and geometry of periodic structure. Moreover 

resonance conditions are also very sensitive to the effective refractive index and extinction changes in 

the vicinity of the grating surface, i.e. evanescent field of the leaky wave. Combination of GMR sensor 

together with fluid cell enables to use the leaky waveguide chip as an in-situ refractive index sensor with 


sensitivities down to 10-6 RIU (refractive index units). Compared to the metallic nanostructures based 

on localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) phenomenon, GMR sensors can offer comparable

sensitivity, have the advantage of tunability, which allows working in desired region of the spectrum,

and also usually have narrower peaks resulting in orders of magnitude higher figure of merit (FOM) 

value. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that GMR sensors can be integrated in lab-on-chip devices 

[15]. DLC is a promising material for GMR sensors in the VIS-NIR range enabling development of 

robust wear and corrosion resistant GMR sensors [16, 17]. The biggest shortcoming of DLC is its high 

internal stress that affects film adhesion to substrate and limits film thickness.

During the growth of the DLC film it is possible to dope it with nanometer scale clusters of metals and 

semiconductors. This doping of DLC films is an additional advantage since it further broadens their 

application spectrum and helps to reduce internal stress. However, this also increases the complexity of 

patterning of such composite materials. Metal-doped DLC has all the intrinsic properties associated with 

DLC. In addition, DLC films containing metal nanoparticles show interesting optical characteristics due 

to localized surface plasmon resonance. Silver, gold and copper doped films are particularly interesting 

because they have a matrix and metal dielectric function and nanoparticle size dependent pronounced 

plasmonic absorption peak in the visible region of the spectrum. It has been shown that by changing 

film deposition conditions and applying plasma post processing it is possible to control size and amount 

of nanoparticles on the surface [18]. Gratings with silver nanoparticles on the surface have the potential 

to be utilized in sensor devices enabling simultaneous guided-mode and plasmonic resonance based 

sensing approaches. In this article we refer to hydrogenated amorphous carbon coatings (a-C:H) as DLC 

and hydrogenated amorphous carbon coatings doped with silver (a-C:H:Ag) as DLC:Ag.

Although DLC films can be effectively etched with oxygen plasma, the use of standard resist (i.e. 

PMMA, photoresist, etc.) is hampered since the selectivity between typical organic resists and DLC is

extremely low [11]. Additionally, the inclusion of the metallic particles (in case of DLC 

nanocomposites) prohibits the use of metallic hard masks for enhancing selectivity, since it may result 

in the removal or modification of the nanoparticles on the DLC surface. This renders in an increased 

complexity for the patterning of DLC films, especially at sub-micron resolutions. 


In this work we present a method capable of pattern DLC films in a straightforward way by using thermal 

nanoimprint lithography (T-NIL) [19] with the silicon containing SiPol resist (micro resist technology 

GmbH) [20]. The SiPol standard process was optimized, further simplifying the nanoimprint steps for a 

pattern transfer in DLC using it as a hard mask. This enabled us to pattern both pure DLC and DLC 

nanocomposite doped with silver nanoparticles in a high throughput, cost-efficient and reproducible 

way. The obtained high quality DLC structures were used in the development of a GMR refractive index 

sensor, demonstrating its feasibility for applications by testing with different concentration of organic 

solvents with known optical properties.

2.
Materials and Methods

DLC as well as other carbon based materials e.g., diamond or polymeric resists, can be etched by reactive 

ion etching (RIE) using pure oxygen plasma [3]. As masking layers, it is possible to use polymer resists 

of suitable height (for “competitive” etching), or hard masks such as thin Cr or SiO2 films for enhanced 

etch resistance. Often multilayer-resist strategies are pursued, e.g., for patterning a thin hard mask with 

a polymer resist or by patterning a thick polymeric transfer layer with a thin hard mask. As suitable

masking layers we aimed using a thermal NIL (T-NIL) compatible process which would require a 

minimum processing steps and at the same time offer good selectivity towards DLC enabling direct 

pattern transfer. Therefore, we chose SiPol (Micro Resist Technology GmbH), a thermoplastic resist 

(glass transition temperature Tg 63°C) with 10% content of covalently bonded silicon that makes it 

highly resistant to oxygen plasma. This enables to use it as spin-coatable and imprintable hard mask

combined with good etching selectivity towards DLC. Initially SiPol was developed to be used in bilayer 

system with an organic transfer layer UL1 (Fig. 1 a-b) [20]. In a standard process, the patterned SiPol 

layer is thinned down by fluorine based etching chemistry, thus etching both the organic and inorganic 

content of SiPol, which results in removal of the residual layer. After opening the SiPol mask windows, 

oxygen plasma is used to pattern the purely polymeric transfer layer UL1 and at the same time converting

the SiPol masking layer into almost pure silicon oxide. This transfer layer has at the same time the 

function of improving adhesion to, both substrate and SiPol layer. However, for the etching of DLC 


materials in pure O2-plasma, the anisotropy is too high for UL1 even when inductively coupled plasma 

(ICP) systems are used and it is only possible to obtain very shallow DLC structures (Fig. 1b). In order 

to prevent this, the T-NIL process was optimized as described below to replicate the SiPol directly on 

the DLC coatings, i.e. without UL1 as intermediate layer resulting in much deeper structures (Fig. 1c). 

Furthermore, in order to simplify the process and reduce the number of steps, it was intended to eliminate 

the fluorine chemistry step and use directly the oxygen plasma for conversion of the SiPol into a SiO2

hard mask. For this purpose, the residual layer had to be as thin as possible and ideally close to 0 nm. 

The optimized processing scheme used to pattern DLC and DLC:Ag films in the step by step fashion is 

graphically depicted in Fig. 2. 

2.1. DLC films deposition

DLC films were synthesized on silicon and Borofloat glass substrates by a direct ion beam deposition 

employing a closed drift ion beam source and acetylene gas as a precursor. Film growth parameters were 

as following: precursor gas C2H2 99.6% purity; base pressure: 2∙10-4 Pa, working pressure 1-2∙10-2 Pa, 

ion energy 800 eV±20eV, substrate temperature 293±3 K, film thickness 250-450 nm. The refractive 

index of the films measured by a laser ellipsometer (Gaertner L115) at 633 nm wavelength was 

2.8 ± 0.1.

DLC:Ag films were fabricated by direct current reactive magnetron sputtering using an argon and 

acetylene gas mixture and a silver cathode. Film growth parameters using C2H2 with 99.6% purity and

Ar with 99.9% purity as precursor gases were as following: base pressure: 2∙10-4 Pa, working pressure 

1-2∙10-2 Pa. The Ar flow was 70 sccm, C2H2 flow was 18 sccm, magnetron current 0.1-0.15A, substrate 

temperature 293±3 K, film thickness 250-450 nm. 

Before the deposition, substrates were cleaned in acetone (VLSI quality) in an ultrasound bath for 1 min 

and rinsed in isopropanol. Additionally, oxygen RIE plasma cleaning was used to remove remaining 

solvents and activate the surface prior DLC deposition. The Vickers hardness (HV) of fabricated 

coatings measured by nanoindentation employing a HM2000S (Fischer Technology) tester was 9750


HV for DLC and 7470 HV for DLC:Ag, respectively. More details on the used deposition processes, 

optical and mechanical properties of the films can be found in [21,22] 

2.2 Master fabrication

Master stamps with different geometries for nanoimprint process were fabricated using an EBPG 

5000Plus (Vistec) direct writing electron beam lithography (EBL) tool. Zeon ZEP520A spin-coated on 

silicon substrates was used as a positive e-beam resist. After development and etching with oxygen 

plasma to remove residual layer, the resist was used as a mask to transfer pattern into silicon by SF6/C4F8

ICP plasma. Etched Si masters were cleaned with oxygen plasma. Prior to use the Si masters were

cleaned by oxygen plasma (Oxford RIE 80 plasma system, 100 W, 1 mbar, 120 s) and then silanized by

trichloro-(1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyl)-silane. Silanization was performed in a custom vacuum 

chamber at 10 mbar pressure for 10 min. Typical masters were 20×20 mm2 in area and had 250-350 nm 

deep cavities.

2.3 Patterning by thermal nanoimprint lithography

Thermal NIL (T-NIL) was chosen for patterning the resist, due to its large area, high throughput 

patterning capabilities with nanoscale resolution [23]. Silicon and Borofloat glass substrates with the 

DLC films were spin-coated with SiPol thermoplastic resist. Borofloat glass is suitable for optical 

transmission measurements of the GMR signal in gratings. Also it has a similar thermal expansion as 

silicon helping to minimize pattern displacement and distortion effects arising due to difference of 

thermal expansion coefficients between template and substrate. A HEX03 (Jenoptik) hot embossing tool 

was used for imprints. SiPol resist was diluted with propylene glycol methyl ether acetate (PGMEA) to 

achieve a desired resist thickness ranging from 60 nm to 100 nm depending on stamp pattern. Due to 

poor SiPol adhesion to the DLC surface, the standard imprint process had to be modified in order to 

avoid resist peel-off during demolding. An incomplete filling of the stamp cavities strategy was pursued 


in order to minimize the contact area of resist with the stamp and to achieve zero residual layer (i.e. a 

completely dewetted surface below the stamp protrusions). Stamps with 250 nm deep patterns with 50% 

area fill factor were used, with an intended filling height of 50 nm for a 100 nm thick initial resist 

(calculation with a grating of 400 nm period and 200 nm structure width). Other structures such as 

hexagonal pillar and hole structures with 300 nm diameter were used, too. The process with the T-NIL 

was optimized at low temperature (83°C) to avoid other issues such as lack of adhesion, capillary effects 

or dewetting, since both DLC and SiPol alone are only exhibiting moderate adhesion. Low imprint 

temperature is an additional advantage of SiPol because heating of hydrogenated DLC films causes 

changes in dimensions and properties of the material. Additionally, the lower imprint temperature of 

SiPol (83 ºC) instead of PMMA (180 ºC) is beneficial as it significantly reduces the tendency of the 

material to develop capillary bridges.

Imprints with 2-5 min long thermocycles with an applied pressure of 107 Pa·s were found to be sufficient 

for the resist to homogeneously fill stamp cavities for proper and effective pattern transfer. After cooling 

down to a temperature 20 C below the Tg of the polymeric resist material, the stamp was separated from

the substrate with the patterned resist layer.

2.4 Etching of DLC films

The imprinted SiPol resist, exhibiting a negligible residual layer, was directly used as a mask for pattern 

transfer into DLC, avoiding the usual window opening with fluorine based plasma. Hence, direct etching 

of DLC with pure oxygen plasma can be performed immediately after imprint. When etched by pure

oxygen, the organic content is removed at the surface and SiPol converts into silicon oxide which has 

high etch resistance. In contrast to the standard process presented before, it converts only a thin surface 

skin into SiO2 and thus the remaining SiPol is still organic in the bulk with negligible further thinning 

down.

As for etching of DLC process is fairly straightforward. The exposed DLC surface is chemically etched 

by reactive oxygen species creating volatile products in combination with physical etching caused by 


ion bombardment. In order to achieve high etch rates and smoothly etched surfaces a high plasma 

density, reasonably high bias and low pressure for strongly directional ion bombardment of the sample

are required. For these reasons the etchings were done with a RIE100 (Oxford Instruments) ICP system.

Optimal etching parameters were determined resulting to highly directional sidewalls and smooth 

surface of etched DLC structures. The same method was applied for the DLC:Ag nanocomposite 

containing 8 at.% of Ag. In this case during the O2-RIE the DLC was effectively etched but the exposed 

Ag particles started acting as hard mask preventing the etching of the underlying DLC. In order to 

overcome this issue, combined O2 and Ar plasma was used, resulting in a more efficient etching of the 

nanocomposite material. Although, the selectivity of the mask with respect to the composite material is 

slightly reduced it was still large enough to allow the patterning. Etch rates of both DLC and DLC:Ag 

against SiPol are presented in Fig. 3. Furthermore, these etch rates are compared to that of a commonly 

used resist such as PMMA to further validate them. After etching, the remaining residues of SiPol were 

removed in CHF3/CF4 plasma followed by rinsing with acetone and isopropanol. Care has to be taken 

that this descum using fluorinated plasma does not lead to the extensive formation of silver fluoride, 

which is likely to impair the plasmonic properties of the silver nanoparticles. This could e.g. be achieved 

by choosing an appropriate initial resist thickness by which the resist is almost completely removed by 

the combined O2 and Ar plasma step. The prolonged exposure to solvents, e.g., acetone or PGMEA,can 

also provide sufficient removal of resist residues. Etching recipes for the different materials involved in 

processing are presented in Table 1. Finally, surface characterization was done using SEM (Zeiss Supra 

VP55).

Table 1. Etching parameters.

Etch step
DLC
DLC:Ag
SiPol removal

Gas (sccm)
10 O2
10 O2, 10 Ar 
10 CHF3, 10 CF4

Power ICP (W)
1000
1000
900

Power bias (W)
80
80
30

Pressure (mTorr)
11
11
11


2.5 Grating reflectance spectra modeling and optical characterization

Numerical simulations of the polarized white light reflection spectrum from the DLC grating were 

performed employing RCWA based GSolver software (Grating Solver Development Co.). In RCWA 

method the results are provided for one frequency only, therefore multiple simulations are necessary in 

order to cover the broadband spectrum. The profile relief and optical properties of the structure were 

chosen according to the SEM micrographs of the actual investigated samples (as seen in Fig. 1c). The 

grating was approximated by a finite number of slabs to the closest ideally rectangular profile.

Additional information regarding numerical simulations can be found in [24].

Experimental optical measurements of GMR response in DLC linear gratings were carried out using 

custom optical setup consisting of a white light source (halogen lamp), collimating optics and a Glan–

Taylor polarizing prism, thermostated fluidic cell with sensor chip, fiber optics and spectrometer (see

Fig. 4). A fluidic cell together with the diffraction grating was mounted on a goniometric stage 

(resolution 1′). The fluidic cell is fabricated from a polytetrafluorethylene (PTFE) based compound. On 

the front side of the cell, the chip with diffraction grating is fixed and on the back side a thermoelectric 

Peltier element. This thermoelectric element is water cooled and driven by TEC-1090 (Meerstetter 

Engineering GmbH) temperature controller allowing precise temperature setting and stability up to 

0.01°C during the measurements. Temperature was monitored with PT100 temperature sensors. The 

cavity in between the thermoelectric element and the DLC sensor chip is filled with the liquid analyte 

through several inlets and outlets. As a proof of concept, different mass concentrations of isopropanol 

(IPA) solution in DI water (0-100%) were used as analyte. The refractive index of the different solutions

(ranging from 1.330 for pure DI water to 1.375 for pure IPA) was determined using an Abbe 

refractometer (Carl Zeiss). Then the analyte was filled into the measurement cell with the DLC sensor 

chip to determine the optical response. All experiments were carried out at 23 ºC temperature and 20% 

humidity. The measured spectra were normalized to the lamp spectrum taking into account different 

polarizations and integration times. The spectrum was collected at angle of incidence of 20º.


The polarized white light spectra reflected from grating was coupled to an optical fiber connected to a 

AvaSpec-2048 (Avantes) spectrometer using a quartz lens fixed on a platform that can be rotated 

independently around the same axis as the grating. The spectrometer collects the data with a spectral 

range between 360– 860 nm and a resolution of 1.2 nm. The whole setup is automated and controlled 

through custom LabView based software. The setup is described in more detail in [12,13].

3
Results and Discussion

3.1 Imprinted structures in Sipol resist

Due to poor adhesion between DLC and SiPol the conventional imprint routine when the resist 

completely fills stamp cavities was found to be unsuitable for densely packed patterns. Lack of adhesion 

between DLC and SiPol always resulted in complete or partial resist peel off from the substrate (silicon 

or DLC) during stamp separation. None of the usual measures, e.g. surface pre-treatment (plasma, 

baking), variation of imprint conditions or low demoulding temperature, provided significant positive 

effect. The combination of low-temperature and incomplete filling approach was found to be the best 

solution to cope with the issue and also greatly simplifies the process by enabling pattern transfer with

the single etching step.

Imprinted structures into SiPol are presented in Fig. 5a-b. For the linear gratings the 70 nm high resist 

was equally distributed within the cavities and showed only low tendency to form capillary bridges (due 

to the high cavity height, the small lateral dimension and the low imprint temperature versus the Tg).

Small rims at the sides of up ~20 nm are caused by wetting of sidewalls and do not interfere with a 

pronounced anisotropic etching (this even might reduce the rounding of the resist edge during etching).

At the same time, almost zero residual layer thickness was achieved due to the high ability of the SiPol 

material to flow (Fig. 5a). Although, complete dewetting down to 0 nm seems possible, the actual 

remaining thickness is difficult to determine. However, even if a few nanometers remain, the following 

etching step (in O2-plasma) will serve as an effective descum (window opening) step before the DLC is 


etched. In this case the remaining residual layer can be considered as effectively equal to zero. The same 

dewetting effect can also be seen in other type patterns, e.g. round holes of 300 nm in diameter ordered 

in hexagonal array (Fig. 5b). Small rims around the holes are due to wetting of sidewalls.

The maximum fill rate of stamp cavities for the linear grating patterns until delamination of SiPol from 

the underlying DLC substrate starts to occur was found to be at the aspect ratio of ~0.7. For not such 

dense patterns e.g., holes, where much larger area of resist is in contact with substrate than with stamp,

this is less of an issue and the ratio could be higher.

3.2 Pure DLC etching with different patterns

The low-temperature, incomplete filling approach greatly simplifies the process by enabling the transfer 

of the masking layer pattern into DLC films with oxygen plasma. The etching of SiPol itself is a complex 

process which has two goals: the thinning down of the organic-inorganic polymer until windows are 

opened and the conversion of the remaining polymer into almost pure SiO2 by removing the organic 

content. In the ideal case this results in a thin homogeneous layer of SiO2 which would not be susceptible 

to heat in the extended oxygen process. Since we virtually achieved a zero residual layer patterning, a 

pure oxygen etching step was found sufficient to achieve the removal of any resist residues but this 

process would not convert the SiPol into SiO2 completely, as for the standard SiPol removal process. 

Once the upper few nanometers of SiPol are converted, it would not further etch and develop into a thin 

skin on the still intact SiPol. The thermoplastic properties of this core would then be susceptible to any 

heat treatment, which in case of oxygen plasma was found enough that the resist lines would develop 

into thermally reflowed cylinder structures (see Fig. 1a). The reflow would be enhanced if undercuts 

develop which further pull the skin into a rounded shape (see Fig. 1b). This effect is greatly pronounced 

when SiPol is used in a bilayer system with purely organic material e.g., UL1. The advantage would be 

that we can create undercuts. However, this behavior is greatly diminished when SiPol is used directly 

on DLC. High etch rates prevents SiO2 skin formation by a constant formation – erosion cycle during 

the etching and the mask thins down rather gradually.


Etching parameters for DLC were optimized to achieve highly directional transfer. From etching rates 

depicted in Fig 3. Selectivity between Sipol and DLC were determined to be at least 1:4.

The linear gratings and hexagonal structures (both holes and pillars) were successfully transferred into 

DLC. Fig. 6a-b shows 400 nm period 140 nm depth and 380 nm period 300 nm depth gratings etched 

into DLC. In Fig. 6c the 380 nm deep holes in DLC are not yet deep enough to etch through the entire, 

450 thick film. At the same time, the SiPol is not yet completely removed (estimated 10-20 nm). It

shows, in the area between the holes, a visible undulation, which is, as in the case of the linear gratings, 

due to the fact that the SiPol wets the stamp pillars. This is due to capillary effects (electro-hydrodynamic 

effect) and therefore shows some shallow voids and lateral displacement of material. The choice of 

process parameters thickness contrast shows that even in this special case no capillary bridges could 

form and that the surface undulations presenting the onset of capillary action were far from causing 

problems in etching.

The pillars in the DLC shown in Fig. 6d are completely etched, i.e. the 400 nm thick film is etched down 

to the silicon substrate and the SiPol removed by using an additional CHF3/CF4 step. In this case silicon 

substrate was also etched by fluorine species proving the use of DLC as an etching mask with a high 

selectivity towards silicon and silicone oxide.

3.3 Patterning of DLC:Ag composite films

The SiPol mask was also used to etch DLC films doped with silver (DLC:Ag). However, in this case 

etching with pure oxygen plasma wasn’t sufficient, due to presence of silver nanoparticles scattered all 

over the surface (and in the bulk) with each of one acting as individual etching mask. In this case the 

addition of Argon in the plasma was beneficial resulting in more effective removal of silver.

Argon also contributed to the faster deterioration of SiPol resulting to lover selectivity of 1:2.5 towards 

DLC:Ag. The residues of SiPol on the surface were removed as in the pure DLC case. This process was 

employed to structure DLC:Ag films with 400 nm period and approximately 150 nm depth (the precise 

depth is hard to determine due to roughness of the etched profile) grating patterns (see Fig.7a) leaving 


a high concentration of silver nanoparticles on the surface (see Fig.7b). The proposed process allowed 

obtaining DLC gratings and simultaneously exposing the Ag nanoparticles to the environment.

3.4 Optical characterization of grating structures 

Using the fabrication method described above, 380-400 nm period grating type structures were 

fabricated in DLC and their optical response was characterized. As can be seen in reflectance spectra 

(Fig. 8) there is a clear resonant peak at 669 nm which red shifts towards longer wavelengths as the IPA 

concentration in analyte increases as so refractive index. The simulated response (Fig. 8a) is in good 

agreement with the experimental one (Fig. 8b). Small differences, such as the broadening of the peaks, 

arise due to limitations of measurement system and from small imperfection in the fabricated structures, 

despite the high quality of the fabricated gratings. 

A total number of hundred reflectance spectra measurements for each concentration were carried out 

and the automatically defined average value of the peak position was chosen for refractometry 

calibration plot. In (Fig. 9) the peak shift is depicted as a function of refractive index that was obtained 

from the Abbe refractometer, which follows a linear behavior as expected. From this graph, a sensor 

sensitivity of 319 nm/RIU was determined. This result represent an improvement close to 450% when 

compared with previously reported sensors DLC based on similar DLC films doped with silicon oxide 

and patterned using interference lithography [12, 24]. Such improvements are mostly due to the precise 

geometry control by the fabrication method and the defined optical properties of the material used. 

Furthermore, such sensitivity is much higher than reported recently for conventional grating sensors 

[26-28] and compares to that what can be achieved theoretically in high complexity resonators [29]. The 

detection limit of this sensor, calculated according methodology presented in [30], was determined to 

be 7.5×10−5 RIU. However, this is limited mostly by the spectrometer resolution and not by the 

developed arrays. Broad resonant peak linewidth would also impose limitations on sensor performance

when attempting to monitor very small changes close to detection limit. However, the high sensitivity

of DLC based sensors enables utilization in areas where extreme sensitivity isn’t necessary but rather 


cost and robustness are the key factors providing high accuracy with less sophisticated peripherals, i.e. 

spectrometers, etc. The use of T-NIL combined with the SiPol resist has allowed to straightforwardly 

pattern complex materials that usually will require challenging and costly processes. Enabling the 

manufacturing of novel DLC based systems with enhanced capabilities in a cost-efficient and 

reproducible mass-manufacturing method.

4
Conclusions

We demonstrated the successful use of the new thermoplastic resist SiPol as a hard mask to pattern DLC 

films by thermal NIL process. SiPol can serve as efficient hard mask for etching DLC coatings, ensuring 

1:4 selectivity for non-doped and 1:2.5 for silver doped DLC coatings. Adhesion issues can be addressed

by using low temperature imprint in combination with incomplete filling of stamp cavities. The low 

temperature imprint approach, combined with incomplete filling of stamp cavities did not only allow a 

virtually zero residual layer imprint but also facilitated the original SiPol process involving an organic 

transfer layer by removing intermediate etchings resulting into minimum number of processing steps. 

DLC coatings and to some extent DLC coatings doped with silver can be effectively etched with oxygen 

plasma (ICP) with high precision and vertical sidewalls at least up to 500 nm depth. This enables the 

homogeneous transfer of relatively large area patterns of 20×20 mm2 into DLC. The current applications

have moderate aspect ratio and resolutions down to several hundred nanometers, which does not seem 

to be the final limit. High quality gratings fabricated by this method have been characterized as DLC 

leaky-waveguides-based sensors. The optical response shows a high agreement with simulations of 

ideally rectangular gratings, resulting in a measured high sensitivity (319 nm/RIU) to refractive index 

changes in the analyte. This represents an improvement close to 450 % when compared to previous 

works. These results confirm the high quality of the obtained structures, validating the use thermal NIL 

for patterning of DLC based devices with a high degree of reproducibility.


Acknowledgments:

This work was realized within the project and funded by the Scientific Exchange Programme SCIEX-

NMS (Project n° 13.193) between Switzerland and the New Member States of the European Union. 

Additional partial financial support came from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNF) 

Ambizione project (n° PZ00P2_142511) granted to V.J.C. and the project NFFA (n° 654360) under the 

H2020 European research and innovation programme. K. Vogelsang, A. Weber, A. Vasiliauskas, and 

V. Kopustinskas are acknowledged to for their technical assistance.

References

[1]
J. Taniguchi, Y. Tokano, I. Miyamoto, M. Komuro, M. Komuro and H. Hiroshima, Diamond 

nanoimprint technology, Nanotechnology 13, (2002), 592–596.

[2]
B. Nöhammer, J. Hoszowska, A. K. Freund, C. David, Diamond planar refractive lenses for 

third- and fourth-generation X-ray sources, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 10(2) (2003) 168–171.

[3]
P. Forsberg, M. Karlsson, High aspect ratio optical gratings in diamond, Diam. Relat. Mater. 34 

(2013) 19–24. 

[4]
J. Robertson, Diamond-like amorphous carbon, Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports. 37 (2002) 129–

281.

[5] 
A. Grill, Diamond-like carbon: state of the art, Diam. Relat. Mater. 8 (1999) 428–434. 

[6]
H. J. Lee, B.S. Kwon,Y. R. Park et al., Inductively coupled plasma etching of chemical-vapor-

deposited amorphous carbon in N2/H2/Ar chemistries, Journal of the Korean Physical Society 

56 (2010) 1441-1445.

[7]
J.K. Kim, S. Il Cho, N.G. Kim, M.S. Jhon, K.S. Min, C.K. Kim, et al., Study on the etching 

characteristics of amorphous carbon layer in oxygen plasma with carbonyl sulfide, J. Vac. Sci. 

Technol. A Vacuum, Surfaces, Film. 31 (2013) 021301. 

[8]
K.A. Pears, A new etching chemistry for carbon hard mask structures, Microelectron. Eng. 77 

(2005) 255–262.

[9]
K.A. Pears, J. Stolze, Carbon etching with a high density plasma etcher, Microelectron. Eng. 81 

(2005) 7–14.


[10]
M. Kakuchi, M. Hikita, T. Tamamura, Amorphous carbon films as resist masks with high 

reactive ion etching resistance for nanometer lithography, Appl. Phys. Lett. 48 (1986) 835-837.

[11]
S. Ramachandran, L. Tao, T.H. Lee, S. Sant, L.J. Overzet, M.J. Goeckner, et al., Deposition 

and patterning of diamondlike carbon as antiwear nanoimprint templates, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 

B Microelectron. Nanom. Struct. 24 (2006) 2993–2997.

[12]
T. Tamulevičius, R. Šeperys, M. Andrulevičius, V. Kopustinskas, Š. Meškinis, S. 

Tamulevičius, et al., Application of holographic sub-wavelength diffraction gratings for 

monitoring of kinetics of bioprocesses, Appl. Surf. Sci. 258 (2012) 9292–9296. 

[13]
T. Juknius, T. Tamulevičius, I. Gražulevičiūtė, I. Klimienė, A.P. Matusevičius, S. 

Tamulevičius, In-situ measurements of bacteria resistance to antimicrobial agents employing 

leaky mode sub-wavelength diffraction grating, Sensors Actuators B Chem. 204 (2014) 799–

806

[14]
J.K. Luo, Y.Q. Fu, J. a. Williams, S.M. Spearing, W.I. Milne, Diamond and diamond-like 

carbon MEMS, J. Micromechanics Microengineering. 17 (2007) 147–163. 

[15]      D. Threm, Y. Nazirizadeh, and M. Gerken, Photonic crystal biosensors towards on-chip 

integration, J Biophoton. 5(8-9) (2012) 601–616.

[16]      J.M. Jaramillo, R.D. Mansano, L.S. Zambom, M. Massi, H.S. Maciel, Wet etching of 

hydrogenated amorphous carbon films, Diam. Relat. Mater. 10 (2001) 976–979.

[17]      Y. Sasaki, A. Takeda, K. Ii, S. Ohshio, H. Akasaka, M. Nakano, et al., Evaluation of etching 

on amorphous carbon films in nitric acid, Diam. Relat. Mater. 24 (2012) 104–106.

[18]    T. Tamulevičius, A. Tamulevičienė, D. Virganavičius et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 341 (2014) 

1-6.

[19] 
H. Schift, Nanoimprint Lithography: An old story in modern times? A review, J. Vac. Sci.              

Technol. B 26(2) (2008) 458-480.

[20]
M. Messerschmidt, A. Schleunitz, C. Spreu, T. Werner, M. Vogler, F. Reuther, et al., Thermal 

nanoimprint resist for the fabrication of high-aspect-ratio patterns, Microelectron. Eng. 98 

(2012) 107–111.


[21] 
A. Tamuleviciene, S. Meskinis, V. Kopustinskas, S. Tamulevicius, Multilayer amorphous 

hydrogenated carbon (a-C:H) and SiO(x) doped a-C:H films for optical applications, Thin 

Solid Films. 519 (2011) 4004–4007.

[22]
Š. Meškinis, A. Čiegis, A. Vasiliauskas, A. Tamulevičienė, K. Šlapikas, R. Juškėnas, et al., 

Plasmonic properties of silver nanoparticles embedded in diamond like carbon films: Influence 

of structure and composition, Appl. Surf. Sci. 317 (2014) 1041–1046. 

[23]
S.Y. Chou, P.R. Krauss, P.J. Renstrom, Imprint of sub-25 nm vias and trenches in polymers, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 67, 3114–3116 (1995)

[24]
T. Tamulevicius, I. Gražuleviute, D. Urbonas, M. Gabalis, R. Petruškevicius, S. Tamulevicius, 

Numerical and experimental analysis of optical response of sub-wavelength period structure in 

carbonaceous film for refractive index sensing, Opt. Express. 22 (2014) 27462–27475.

[25]
B.S. Kwon, J.S. Kim, N.-E. Lee, J.W. Shon, Ultrahigh selective etching of SiO2 using an 

amorphous carbon mask in dual-frequency capacitively coupled C4F8/CH2F2/O2/Ar plasmas, J. 

Electrochem. Soc. 157 (2010) D135. 

[26]
A. Szeghalmi, E.B. Kley, M. Knez, Theoretical and experimental analysis of the sensitivity of 

guided mode resonance sensors, J. Phys. Chem. C. 114 (2010) 21150–21157.

[27]
G. Hermannsson, K.T. Sørensen, C. Vannahme, C.L.C. Smith, J.J. Klein, M. Russew, et al., 

All-polymer photonic crystal slab sensor, Opt. Express. 23 (2015) 16529–16539.

[28]
Y.-F. Ku, H.-Y. Li, W.-H. Hsieh, L.-K. Chau, G.-E. Chang, Enhanced sensitivity in injection-

molded guided-mode-resonance sensors via low-index cavity layers, Opt. Express. 23 (2015) 

14850–14859.

[29]
S. Abbas, J. Moghaddas, M. Shahabadi, S. Member, M. Mohammad-Taheri, Surface sensitivity 

using coupled cross-stacked gratings, IEEE Sensors Journal, 14 (2014) 1216–1222.

[30]
I.M. White, X. Fan, On the performance quantification of resonant refractive index sensors, 

Opt. Express.16 (2008) 1020–1028.


Figures and Tables

Figure 1: Cross-sections of etched grating structures A) Structures etched in bi-layer SiPol-UL1 resist 

mask B) Bilayer SiPol-UL1 resist mask used to etch into DLC showing high under etching of UL1 layer. 

C) DLC etched using only SiPol resist mask

Figure 2: Schematic depiction of processing steps of DLC patterning using SiPol resist as hard mask. a) 

Plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition process was used to grow thin DLC films. b) Thin layer of 


silicon containing resist was spin coated directly on DLC. c) Nanoimprint lithography with incomplete 

stamp filling was used to replicate reverse patterns of the silicon stamp into resist layer. d) Reactive ion 

etching by oxygen plasma was employed to transfer patterns into DLC. e) Reactive ion etching by 

fluorine plasma was employed to remove remaining resist layer of DLC surface.

Figure 3: Etching rates in the oxygen plasma at the optimized parameters for DLC etching.

Figure 4: Schematics of optical setup hosting the DLC grating on a transparent substrate in a fluidic cell.


Figure 5: Patterning of SiPol with incomplete filing strategy: a) imprinted 580 nm period grating b) 

imprinted 300nm diameter holes ordered in hexagonal array.


Figure 6: Patterning DLC: a) 400 nm period 140 nm depth grating etched into DLC b) 380 nm period 

300 nm depth grating etched into DLC c) hexagonal hole pattern (300 nm diameter, 380 nm depth) 

etched into DLC, d) hexagonal pillars pattern (300 nm diameter, 400 nm depth) etched into DLC and 

substrate.


Figure 7: 400nm period and 150nm depth gratings in DLC:Ag nanocomposite a) from side, b) from top


Figure 8: Simulated (a) and measured (b) reflectance spectra of different concentration of isopropanol 


solution in DI water showing GMR peak shift due to changing refractive index. Measured and simulated 

with TM polarization at 20º angle of incidence of 400 nm period and 220 nm depth with 40 nm 

waveguide layer grating fabricated in DLC. Insets show zoomed graphs at the resonance peaks.

Figure 9: Experimentally obtained resonance peak position shift as a function of the analyte refractive 

index.


