Microwave neural processing and broadcasting with 

spintronic nano-oscillators

P. Talatchian1, M. Romera1, S. Tsunegi2, F. Abreu Araujo1,3, V. Cros1, P. Bortolotti1, J. Trastoy1, K. Yakushiji2, A. Fukushima2, H.

Kubota2, S. Yuasa2, M. Ernoult1,4, D. Vodenicarevic4, T. Hirtzlin4, N. Locatelli4, D. Querlioz4, J. Grollier1

1Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, France, email: julie.grollier@cnrs-thales.fr

2National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Spintronics Research Center, Japan

3Institute of Condensed Matter and Nanosciences, UCLouvain, Belgium

4 Centre de Nanosciences et de Nanotechnologies, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, France

Abstract— Can we build small neuromorphic chips capable of 
training deep networks with billions of parameters? This 
challenge requires hardware neurons and synapses with 
nanometric dimensions, which can be individually tuned, and 
densely connected. While nanosynaptic devices have been 
pursued actively in recent years, much less has been done on 
nanoscale artificial neurons. In this paper, we show that 
spintronic nano-oscillators are promising to implement analog 
hardware neurons that can be densely interconnected through 
electromagnetic signals. We show how spintronic oscillators 
maps the requirements of artificial neurons. We then show 
experimentally how an ensemble of four coupled oscillators 
can learn to classify all twelve American vowels, realizing the 
most complicated tasks performed by nanoscale neurons.

I.
SPINTRONIC NANO-OSCILLATORS

Spintronic nano-oscillators are magnetic tunnel junctions, 

whose CMOS-compatible technology is essentially identical to 
magnetic memory cells that can be fabricated by billions on a 
chip [1]. They are cylinder shaped, with a diameter that can be 
reduced below 10 nm. The central part is a tunnel barrier 
(usually MgO) separated by two ferromagnetic layers (often 
based on cobalt, iron and boron alloys). As illustrated in Fig. 1, 
when a direct current is sent through the cylinder, it gets spin-
polarized by crossing the first magnetic layer, tunnels to the 
other one, to which it transfers its excess of angular momentum 
by exerting a torque on the magnetization [2]. This spin-torque 
can then induce sustained magnetization precessions which are 
converted through magnetoresistance to voltage oscillations
that can reach up to a few millivolts across the junction (Fig.2)
[3]. The power consumption of spin-torque nano-oscillators, 
which decreases with their diameter, is around one microwatt 
for a diameter of ten nanometers. The frequency of the 
oscillations varies from hundreds of megahertz to tens of 
gigahertz. While the power consumption per se is not weak
weak compared to slower CMOS-based neurons, the energy 
can therefore be very small, below a hundred attojoules per 
oscillation [4]. This means that hundreds of millions of 
oscillators could be assembled on a chip and used for 
computing.

II.
SPIN-TORQUE NANO-OSCILLATORS CAN COMPUTE A 

NON-LINEARITY AND BROADCAST THE RESULT

A. Spin-torque nano-oscillators are non-linear nano-radios

The key feature of spin-torque nano-oscillators that makes

them interesting as neurons is their non-linear response. As can 
be observed in Fig. 3, when the dc current through the oscillator 
is varied, the angle with which magnetization precesses varies 
widely, resulting in a non-linear dependence of the oscillation 
voltage amplitude. This means that, just like formal neurons in 
deep networks, spin-torque nano-oscillators can non-linearly 
transform their input (here the injected current). Moreover, the 
output of the computation is a microwave voltage or magnetic 
field that can be emitted. In other words, spin-torque-nano-
oscillators can non-linearly process information like neurons, 
then broadcast the result to other neurons.

B. Using the non-linear response of spin-torque nano-

oscillators for computing
The non-linear response of spin-torque nano-oscillators 

combined with their stability and long life time enables 
neuromorphic computing. This has been experimentally 
demonstrated recently by our team and collaborators [3]. We 
have used time-multiplexing to emulate a full neural network 
of 400 neurons with a single spin-torque nano-oscillator (Fig. 
4). The temporal connections between neurons come from the 
finite relaxation time of oscillator due to magnetization 
relaxation. Using the framework of reservoir computing [5], we 
have demonstrated that the multiplexed nano-oscillator could 
recognize spoken digits from 0 to 9 with a precision up to 99.6 
%, which is as good as much larger neurons and software 
simulations. These results show that spin-torque nano-
oscillators can be readily used as neurons.

III. SPIN-TORQUE NANO-OSCILLATORS CAN LEARN TO 

CLASSIFY THE MICROWAVE SIGNALS THEY RECEIVE 

A. Spin-torque nano-oscillators response is highly sensitive 

to incoming microwave signals
Spin-torque 
nano-oscillators 
feature 
an 
oustanding

tunability [6]. For instance, their frequency can be varied by 
more than 50 % by changing the injected direct current or the 
applied magnetic field. Due to this property, their dynamics can 
easily be influenced by weak external microwave currents or 
magnetic fields. In particular, spin-torque nano-oscillators have 


a high ability to phase lock to external microwave signals (Fig. 
5) and to mutually synchronize (Fig. 6). From a neural network 
point of view, this means that spintronic oscillators as neurons 
in layer k+1 have the ability to adapt their response to the 
microwave outputs broadcasted by neurons in layer k. In other 
words, microwave inter-neuron communication is possible in 
spin-torque nano-oscillator networks, opening a path to ultra-
fast processing. How such a network would function and
compute is an open question, but many possibilities exist. Fig. 
7 gives an insight on how this would work: if neuron i in layer 
k and neuron j in layer k+1 are synchronized, they share the 
same frequency, which means that the synapse wij that connects 
them is strong. On the other hand, if neuron i and j have very 
different frequencies, the synaptic weight wij is weak.

B. Learning to classify microwave inputs

We have recently given a proof of concept of microwave 

signal classification through synchronization
[4]. The 

experimental network is composed of four spin-torque nano-
oscillators interconnected by millimeter-long wires (Fig. 8). 
The microwave emission from each oscillator propagates
through this electrical loop and in turn modifies the dynamics 
of all the other oscillators. The oscillators are all-to-all coupled
though this mechanism, which emulates synaptic connections.
The frequency of the individual oscillators can be controlled by 
injecting different direct currents in the junctions. The oscillator 
microwave emissions are detected with a spectrum analyzer. As 
illustrated in Fig. 9, microwave inputs are injected in an antenna 
(a strip line) located just above the oscillators. Through the 
antenna, the microwave inputs generate a microwave magnetic 
field that modifies the dynamics of the oscillators. Depending 
on the relative frequency of oscillators and inputs, the 
frequency of the oscillator is pulled by the ensemble of input 
signals, or it can synchronize to one of the inputs. These 
emerging synchronization configurations can be used to 
classify inputs, if a given class of inputs always gives rise to the 
same synchronization configuration (for instance, the same set 
of synchronized oscillators). This behavior can be obtained by 
training the neural network through a gradual modification of 
the direct currents injected in the oscillators, which results in 
frequency tuning. 

C. Vowel recognition

We have recently shown that this neural network of four 

spin-torque nano-oscillators could be trained to classify seven 
American 
vowels
(https://youtu.be/IHYnh0oJgOA). 
The 

frequencies characteristics of the vowels are accelerated and 
combined to generate two input signals in the microwave 
domain. The experimental recognition rate after training is 89% 
on the test data (84% after cross validation). This performance 
is comparable and even slightly better than that of a multilayer 
perceptron trained on the same task with a similar number of 
parameters. Indeed, in our scheme the coupled oscillators 
cooperate to decide which vowel is recognized. This is not the 
case in perceptrons where intra-layer neurons are not 

connected. This result demonstrates that spin-torque nano-
oscillators dynamical properties can be finely tuned to learn. It 
also shows that their coupling and synchronization properties 
can be harnessed to classify.

To go further, we show here that our scheme can be 

extended to classify all twelve American vowels. For this we 
use a larger number of the twenty experimentally observed 
synchronization states and combine them to recognize a vowel. 
The currents injected in the oscillators, their frequency and the 
recognition rate during training are plotted in Fig. 10. The final 
map of synchronization states and corresponding vowels is 
shown in Fig. 11. We reach a recognition rate of 68.4 % on train 
and test datasets. This recognition rate can be largely increased 
in the future by increasing the number of oscillators in the 
system. Indeed, the number of synchronization regions that can 
be used and combined for recognition scales as N2 where N is 
the number of oscillators [7]. 

IV. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES

We have shown that spin-torque nano-oscillators can non-

linearly transform inputs and broadcast the result of their 
computation. We have shown that they can also learn to classify 
the microwave signals they receive. Two main challenges 
remain to build large scale deep neural networks with these 
devices: fabricating synapses that can tune the inter-neuron 
microwave communication, and
densely interconnecting 

neurons through these synapses. In future work, we will 
investigate how the multifunctionality of spintronic building 
blocks [8] and the possibility to assemble them in 3D [9] can
enable solutions to these challenges. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported by the European Research 

Council ERC under Grant bioSPINspired 682955, the French 
National Research Agency (ANR) under Grant MEMOS ANR-
14-CE26-0021 and by a public grant overseen by the ANR as 
part of the “Investissements d’Avenir” program (Labex 
NanoSaclay, reference: ANR-10-LABX-0035).

REFERENCES

[1] S. W. Chung et al., 2016 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting 

(IEDM), 2016, p. 27.1.1-27.1.4.

[2] N. Locatelli, V. Cros, et J. Grollier, Nat. Mater., vol. 13, no 1, p. 11‑20, 

janv. 2014.

[3] J. Torrejon et al., Nature, vol. 547, no 7664, p. 428‑431, juill. 2017.
[4] M. Romera et al.,  ArXiv171102704 Cond-Mat Q-Bio, nov. 2017.
[5] L. Appeltant et al., Nat. Commun., vol. 2, p. 468, sept. 2011.
[6] A. Slavin et V. Tiberkevich, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no 4, p. 

1875‑1918, avr. 2009.

[7] D. Vodenicarevic, N. Locatelli, F. A. Araujo, J. Grollier, et D. Querlioz, 

Sci. Rep., vol. 7, p. 44772, mars 2017.

[8] J. Grollier, D. Querlioz, et M. D. Stiles, Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no 10, p. 

2024‑2039, oct. 2016.

[9] A. Fernández-Pacheco, R. Streubel, O. Fruchart, R. Hertel, P. Fischer, et 

R. P. Cowburn, Nat. Commun., vol. 8, p. 15756, juin 2017.


Fig. 6. a) Schematic of the magneto-transport set-up for the electrical 
mutual synchronization of two oscillators (b) Oscillators frequency as 

a function of dc current. In the locking-range, the two oscillator 

frequencies become identical.

Fig. 1. (a) SEM picture of a 400 nm diameter 
resist dot before etching the magnetic tunnel 

junction stack. (b) Illustration of 

magnetization dynamics under spin-torque in 

a magnetic tunnel junction. 

Fig. 2. Spin-torque induced voltage 

oscillations in a magnetic tunnel junction. 

The amplitude of the oscillations is 

indicated in red. The central stack is based 
on a CoFeB 2.4 nm pinned layer, MgO 1nm 
and FeB 6 nm free layer. The ground state 

is a magnetic vortex.  

Fig. 3. Voltage amplitude as a function 

of the injected direct current for the 

junction of Fig.2.

Fig. 4. Illustration for spoken digit recognition with a single time-

multiplexed spin-torque nano-oscillator through reservoir computing.
Fig. 5. (a) Schematic of the magneto-transport set-up for phase-
locking (b) Oscillator frequency versus source frequency. When 
the oscillator is phase-locked, its frequency becomes equal to the 

source frequency.

Fig. 7 Illustration of the working principle of a microwave neural 

network.


Fig. 10. Frequencies, dc currents through the oscillators and recognition rates on the train and 

test datasets as a function of training step.

Fig. 8. Schematic of the neural network composed of four 

interconnected spin-torque nano-oscillators. Independent direct currents 

can be applied to the different oscillators, and their microwave 

emissions are detected with a spectrum analyzer.

Fig. 11 Maps of synchronization regions before and after learning. The label (XA,YB) indicates that oscillator X is synchronized to source A 
and oscillator Y is synchronized to source B. Vowels are indicated as circles with the color of the synchronization regions in which they should 

be classified.

Fig. 9. Schematic of the spin-torque oscillator neural networks with 

microwave inputs are applied through a strip line above the 

oscillators. In that case, oscillator 4 is synchronized to frequency fB.


