 
1

Effect of the nanowire diameter on the linearity of the 

response of GaN-based heterostructured nanowire 

photodetectors 

 

Maria Spies1, Jakub Polaczyński1,*, Akhil Ajay2, Dipankar Kalita2, Jonas 

Lähnemann2,†, Bruno Gayral2, Martien I. den Hertog1, Eva Monroy2 

 

1 University Grenoble-Alpes, CNRS, Institut Néel, 25 av. des Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, 
France  

2 University Grenoble-Alpes, CEA, INAC, 17 av. des Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France 
 
OrcIDs: 
Martien I. den Hertog: 0000-0003-0781-9249 
Eva Monroy: 0000-0001-5481-3267 
Maria Spies: 0000-0002-3570-3422 
Jonas Lähnemann: 0000-0003-4072-2369 
Akhil Ajay: 0000-0001-5738-5093 
 
 

 
 
 
Abstract 

Nanowire photodetectors are investigated because of their compatibility with flexible 

electronics, or for the implementation of on-chip optical interconnects. Such devices are 

characterized by ultrahigh photocurrent gain, but their photoresponse scales sublinearly with 

the optical power. Here, we present a study of single-nanowire photodetectors displaying a 

linear response to ultraviolet illumination. Their structure consists of a GaN nanowire 

incorporating an AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure, which generates an internal electric field. The 

activity of the heterostructure is confirmed by the rectifying behavior of the current-voltage 

characteristics in the dark, as well as by the asymmetry of the photoresponse in magnitude and 

 

* Current address: Institute of Physics Polish Academy of Sciences, Aleja Lotnikow 32/46, 02668 Warsaw, 
Poland, and International Research Centre MagTop, Aleja Lotnikow 32/46, 02668 Warsaw, Poland. 
† Current address: Paul-Drude-Institut für Festkörperelektronik, Leibniz-Institut im Forschungsverbund Berlin 
e.V., Hausvogteiplatz 5-7, 10117 Berlin, Germany 

Page 1 of 22
 

 


 
2

linearity. Under reverse bias (negative bias on the GaN cap segment), the detectors behave 

linearly with the impinging optical power when the nanowire diameter is below a certain 

threshold (≈ 80 nm), which corresponds to the total depletion of the nanowire stem due to the 

Fermi level pinning at the sidewalls. In the case of nanowires that are only partially depleted, 

their nonlinearity is explained by a nonlinear variation of the diameter of their central 

conducting channel under illumination.  

Keywords: GaN, nanowire, ultraviolet, photodetector  
 

Page 2 of 22
 

 


 
3

1. Introduction 

Nanowire photodetectors [1–5] have the potential to surpass the spatial resolution and 

speed of planar devices, as well as having intrinsic advantages such as the reduced dimensions 

and small electrical cross section. In the ultraviolet region, ZnO and GaN nanowires have been 

intensively studied as spectrally-selective photodetectors. For this application, III-nitride 

nanowires present advantages in terms of robustness and heterostructuring possibilities. 

Nanowire photoconductors are characterized by high photocurrent gains, which can reach 106, 

and strong spectral contrast above and below the bandgap. A general feature in nanowire 

photoconductors is the fact that the photocurrent scales sublinearly with the impinging laser 

power, which has been shown for single GaN nanowires regardless of the presence of 

heterostructures [6–10], as well as for nanowires of other material systems such as ZnTe [11], 

ZnO [12,13], InP [14], CuO [15], and GaAs [16]. This sublinearity of the response hampers 

the use of such devices for quantification of the radiant fluence, and restricts their application 

domain to digital detection. The high photocurrent gain and the sublinearity have been related 

to the light-induced reduction of the depletion layer at the nanowire sidewalls [3,6,7,12,17]. 

Indeed, the large surface to volume ratio in nanowires makes them very sensitive to surface 

effects (presence of charge traps or Fermi level pinning, which can be modified by adsorbed 

species). In the case of undoped GaN nanowires, Sanford et al. reported an improvement of 

the linearity in nanowires with small diameter (≈ 100 nm), which they attributed to the total 

depletion of the nanowires associated with the axial electric field generated by asymmetric 

Schottky-like contacts [6].  

In this paper, we systematically investigate GaN nanowire photodetectors with an 

embedded AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure, which is responsible for creating an axial electric 

field within the nanowire. We demonstrate that for reverse-biased (negative bias on the GaN 

cap segment) nanowires with diameters < 80 nm, the response to ultraviolet illumination is in 

Page 3 of 22
 

 


 
4

fact linear, which is consistent with the total depletion of the nanowire stem due to the Fermi 

level pinning at the sidewalls. Using theoretical calculations, we show that in these thin wires 

illumination does not have any significant effect on the lateral electric field. On the contrary, 

in large nanowires (diameter > 80 nm), which are only partially depleted, illumination results 

in a variation of the lateral electric field and a nonlinear increase of the conducting section in 

the center of the wires. Therefore, we show here that the depletion of the nanowire due to 

surface effects can be beneficial for the photodetector performance since it allows the 

fabrication of linear devices if the nanowire heterostructure is properly designed. 

2. Sample Design, Growth and Device Fabrication 

The samples under study are GaN nanowires incorporating an AlN/GaN/AlN 

heterostructure to enhance the responsivity at low bias, as a consequence to the internal electric 

field generated by the large difference in spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization between 

GaN and AlN. A schematic description of the structure is presented in figure 1(a). For the 

design of the heterostructure, we calculated the band profile using the Nextnano3 8×8 k·p self-

consistent Schrödinger-Poisson solver [18] using the parameters listed in ref. [19]. The result 

is illustrated in figure 1(c). The heterostructure consists of two 10-nm-thick AlN insertions, 

separated by 2.3 nm of GaN. The heterostructure is surrounded by segments of undoped GaN 

(each 130 nm long), while the ends of the nanowires are doped at 8×1017 cm3 to facilitate 

Ohmic contacts. Thereby, the depletion region induced by the internal electric field is 

maximized. As self-assembled nanowires grow along the [0001] crystallographic axis [20], 

the polarization-induced depletion region is located below the heterostructure. In turn, 

accumulation of free electrons occurs on top of the heterostructure. To avoid the risk of 

covering the depletion region when depositing the contacts, the wire is asymmetric, with the 

heterostructure located towards the top of the nanowire. Under illumination, the depletion 

Page 4 of 22
 

 


 
5

region is expected to separate charge carriers, as illustrated in figure 1(c).  

The presence of the GaN/AlN heterojunction favors the collection of photogenerated 

electrons, but it is an obstacle for hole transport. The field-emission transport through such a 

barrier should be negligible. However, transport through relatively large AlN barriers has been 

experimentally observed [21,22]. The strong band bending in the heterostructure favors a 

generation-recombination current that involves holes from the stem and electrons from the cap 

region. In the case of a single barrier, transport proceeds via interband Zener tunneling [21]. 

In our case, where two barriers are involved, the states in the intermediate GaN section should 

play a role as intermediate states in the transport process.  

Note that the thickness of the layers in the AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure is not critical, 

within certain limits. Increasing the size of the AlN barriers would have the positive impact of 

decreasing the dark current, but it would lead to problems for the collection of photogenerated 

holes. Therefore, if a larger heterostructure were desired, it should be implemented as an 

AlN/GaN multi-quantum-well structure. However, if several periods were added, the 

heterostructure would start showing its own contribution to the spectral response, particularly 

when positive bias is applied to the cap. On the other hand, a thinner heterostructure would 

result in a reduction of the electric field in the stem. This would decrease the extension of the 

depletion region where the charge carrier separation takes place. 

These GaN nanowires were synthesized by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy 

(PAMBE) on Si(111) substrates. The growth rate of the GaN nanowires was ≈ 0.11 nm/s and 

the substrate temperature was TS = 810°C. Prior to the growth of the nanowires, an AlN buffer 

layer was deposited using the 2-step growth procedure described in ref. [23]. In the sample 

under study, the nanowire base consists of a 2.5-µm-long GaN stem doped with Ge 

([Ge] = 8×1017 cm3), and a 130-nm-long undoped GaN segment. This was followed by the 

AlN/GaN/AlN (10 nm/2.3 nm/10 nm) heterostructure and by a 130-nm-thick undoped GaN 

Page 5 of 22
 

 


 
6

segment, which is finally capped with a Ge-doped ([Ge] = 8×1017 cm3) GaN segment of about 

410 nm length. The choice of Ge as n-type dopant was motivated by previous reports 

indicating that Si has a tendency to migrate to the nanowire surface [24], whereas Ge 

incorporates efficiently without deformation of the nanowire geometry [25,26]. During the 

growth of the AlN barriers, a thin AlN shell forms around the GaN stem and the AlN/GaN/AlN 

heterostructure, as indicated in the scheme in figure 1(a). A scanning electron microscopy 

(SEM) image of the as-grown nanowire ensemble can be seen in figure 1(b), where the arrows 

on the side of the SEM image mark the location of the heterostructure. The nanowires exhibit 

diameters of ≈ 80 nm. 

The as-grown nanowire ensemble is sonicated in isopropanol and dispersed on sets of 

Si3N4 membranes fabricated on Si(100). The aim of the membranes is to provide an electron-

transparent support to enable scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) studies of 

the nanowires after their optoelectronic characterization. Such SiNx grids are fabricated using 

a 400-μm-thick n++ Si(100) wafer with layers of 200 nm SiO2 and 40 nm of stoichiometric 

Si3N4 on both sides. Using laser lithography, membrane windows are defined on one side of 

the wafer and subsequently etched through the nitride and oxide layers using reactive ion 

etching. Then, a KOH bath etches through the Si and the oxide on the other side of the wafer, 

leaving only the 40-nm-thick layer of SiN, which then constitutes the 200 μm × 200 μm 

membrane. In a further step, contact pads and markers are defined by laser lithography and 

electron beam deposition of Ti/Au (10 nm/35 nm). The nanowires dispersed on such 

membranes are either bundles [figure 1(d)] or single wires [figure 1(e)], which are contacted 

using electron beam lithography and deposition of Ti/Al (10 nm/120 nm). The example of a 

contacted nanowire can be seen in figure 1(f).  

3. Experimental results 

Page 6 of 22
 

 


 
7

The current-voltage (I-V) characteristics in the dark exhibit a strongly rectifying behavior, 

as illustrated in figure 2 for two typical specimens. The asymmetry of the I-V curve is 

explained by the electronic asymmetry presented in figure 1(c), which results from the 

polarization fields in wurtzite III-nitride heterostructures. The band profile resembles that of a 

Schottky diode, where the cap layer plays the role of the metal Schottky contact. Consistently, 

forward bias in figure 2 corresponds to a positive voltage being applied to the nanowire cap 

with respect to the stem.  

Following the interpretation for the case of a single AlN insertion [20], the reverse current 

is associated to a leakage path through the barriers, involving a GaN shell, surface conduction 

or the coalescence of multiple wires [10]. Under forward bias, among the set of nanowires 

under study, we observe a strong dispersion of the dark current, varying from a few 

nanoamperes to microamperes at +1 V bias. STEM images of 10 nanowire bundles (19 

nanowires) show no correlation of the dark current with the number of nanowires that are 

effectively contacted or with possible fluctuations in the thickness of the AlN barriers. 

However, there is a correlation between the dark current and the nanowire diameter, as 

illustrated in the inset of figure 2. For clarity, we have divided the studied nanowires into two 

groups: those with dark current in the nanoampere range at +1 V bias – we shall call them 

group A from here on and those that display microampere-ranged currents at the same bias – 

we shall call them group B. As shown in the inset of figure 2, the limit between the two groups 

is found for a diameter of ≈ 80 nm. 

Moving to measurements under illumination, the variation of the photocurrent as a 

function of the ultraviolet irradiance was studied at 325 nm. Figures 3(a) and (b) present 

typical results for specimens in groups A and B, respectively. They were measured at zero and 

negative bias. Straight lines are fits to 𝐼𝑝ℎ = 𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑡
𝛽 , where 𝐼𝑝ℎ is the photocurrent, 𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑡 is the 

impinging optical power and the proportionality constant A and the power law exponent  are 

Page 7 of 22
 

 


 
8

fitting parameters. Note that  = 1 indicates that the photoresponse is linear. In both figures, 

the photocurrent at zero bias scales sublinearly with the impinging irradiance, which is 

consistent with previous reports on samples containing GaN/AlN superlattices [27]. This 

behavior differs from the observations in planar photodetectors [28]. Planar photovoltaic 

devices are systematically linear since the photocurrent is due to the linear generation of 

electron-hole pairs separated by the internal electric field. The deviation from this behavior in 

the case of nanowires reveals the involvement of an additional mechanism in the zero-bias 

photoresponse, which remains unknown at this moment.  

Under 100 mV bias, nanowires in groups A and B exhibit different behaviors. Figure 

3(a) displays a linear photocurrent behavior for group A, whereas the photoresponse of group 

B in figure 3(b) remains sublinear. Additionally, figure 3(a) shows a significant improvement 

of the linearity for bias voltages as low as 10 mV. Figure 3(c) displays a summary of the 

values of β (at 100 mV) as a function of the dark current through the nanowire (at +1 V) for 

all the nanowires in this study. The nanowires in group A present β = 1.0±0.2, i.e. their 

photocurrent scales linearly with the optical power within the error bars of the measurement, 

whereas the nanowires in group B clearly show a sublinear behavior, with β = 0.45±0.11.  

Note that, for this linearity measurements, the range of bias voltage applied to the 

nanowires was chosen to keep the maximum photocurrent lower than 10 µA, to prevent device 

failure. This implies that the maximum applied voltage was in the range of 1 V (lower for 

some of the specimens). In the devices where a linear behavior is observed (group A), the 

linearity improves with bias, without any indication of degradation at higher bias. 

To verify that the photocurrent induced by ultraviolet illumination stems from the GaN 

nanowires, we have recorded the spectral response for both sets of devices. The results are 

presented in figure 3(d). In both cases (groups A and B), the absorption exhibits a sharp cutoff 

Page 8 of 22
 

 


 
9

around 365 nm, which corresponds well to the band gap of GaN at room temperature. This 

experiment confirms that in both cases a potential leakage photocurrent through the silicon 

substrate is negligible. 

If we approximate the exposed photodetector area by the in-plane cross-section of the 

contacted nanowire (on average, 1.5 µm × 
 nm), we can estimate that the typical 

responsivity (geometric mean) for an irradiance of 10 mW/cm  is around 0.3 A/W at zero bias. 

(Regarding the calculation of the responsivity, see section 1 of the Supporting Information). 

At a bias of 100 mV, the typical responsivity, measured under the same conditions and 

calculated in the same manner, increases to around 20 A/W for nanowires in group A, and up 

to around 700 A/W for nanowires in group B. The increase of the responsivity with the 

nanowire diameter is consistent with previous reports on GaN nanowire photodetectors [6,30].  

To confirm the role of the heterostructure in the responsivity of the nanowires, we have 

compared the photocurrent under forward and reverse bias. Under reverse bias, the response 

is expected to be dominated by the presence of the space charge region, which separates 

photogenerated electrons and holes. The response is hence expected to resemble that of a 

Schottky diode (low dark current and linear response with the optical power) [31]. In contrast, 

under forward bias, the space charge region disappears and the nanowire resembles a 

photoresistor (high dark current and sublinear response) [31]. Figure 4 presents the variation 

of the photocurrent as a function of the ultraviolet irradiance in a specimen from group A 

measured at +1 V and 1 V bias. As expected, the photoresponse scales linearly with the 

irradiance under reverse bias (β = 0.96±0.06) only, whereas forward bias results in a strongly 

sublinear behavior (β = 0.61±0.05). This asymmetric behavior is a confirmation of the role of 

the AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure in the photoresponse.  

Finally, we have assessed the effect of the limited response time of the photodetectors on 

Page 9 of 22
 

 


 
10

our measurements. The measurements reported above were recorded using a synchronous 

detection setup (see Methods for details) where the light is chopped at a frequency of 33 Hz. 

In the case of planar structures, it is known that the chopping frequency has dramatic effects 

on the linearity and spectral response of photoconductors [28,31], whereas Schottky 

photodiodes are relatively insensitive to the chopping frequency in the typical experimental 

range (1-1000 Hz). However, in the case of single GaN nanowires, we have reported that the 

spectral response does not vary as a function of the chopping frequency [7]. To validate the 

results of this manuscript, we have verified that the value of the  exponent as a function of 

the irradiance is insensitive to the chopping frequency. The experimental confirmation is 

presented as section 2 of the Supporting Information. 

4. Discussion 

The drastic reduction of the dark current in nanowires with a diameter below ≈ 80 nm has 

been observed previously in GaN nanowires [30], and it was explained by the presence of a 

space charge layer extending inwards from the nanowire sidewalls. In the report by Calarco et 

al. [30], total depletion of the GaN nanowires was obtained for a diameter of 85 nm, when the 

residual doping level was 6.25×1017 cm3. To confirm that our result is consistent for the 

doping level in the nanowires under study, three-dimensional calculations of the band diagram 

have been carried out. Different diameters, namely 50, 60, 80 and 120 nm, were considered. 

The results of the simulations are summarized in figure 5(a), which displays the cross-sectional 

view of the conduction band structure in the doped stem region extracted 200 nm below the 

first GaN/AlN heterointerface [see dashed line in figure 1(a)]. We note that for nanowires with 

a diameter of 60 nm, the space charge regions extending from opposite sidewalls touch each 

other, and the location of the conduction band edge in the center of the nanowire increases by 

about 100 meV when decreasing the nanowire diameter from 80 to 50 nm. This confirms the 

Page 10 of 22
 

 


 
11

full depletion of the thin nanowires and justifies the drastic drop in the dark current. 

Ultraviolet illumination is known to unpin the Fermi level at the nanowire sidewalls. This 

phenomenon has been experimentally studied by Pfüller et al. [29], and it was attributed to 

photoinduced desorption of oxygen from the nanowire sidewalls. Therefore, to simulate the 

effect of ultraviolet illumination, we have analyzed the consequences of changing the position 

of the Fermi level at the surface in the range of 2.0 eV to 2.2 eV below the conduction band 

edge of the AlN shell. Taking a look at the simulations of a nanowire with a diameter of 50 

nm (group A) [figure 5(b)] we observe that changes to the Fermi level pinning shift the radial 

position of the conduction band as a whole across the nanowire, but the shape of the potential 

profile is not modified. In other words, the component of the electric field along the nanowire 

diameter seen by photogenerated electrons is approximately the same in all cases, with its 

maximum value at the GaN/ AlN interface being 210 kV/cm ± 3%. In a nanowire with 

diameter of 120 nm (group B) [figure 5(c)] we note a different behavior. When the location of 

the Fermi level pinning changes from 2.2 eV to 2.0 eV below the conduction band edge of the 

AlN shell, the maximum radial electric field varies from 360 kV/cm to 240 kV/cm (by more 

than 30%). At the same time, the space charge region at the sidewalls of the nanowire shrinks, 

increasing the extent of the central conducting channel in the nanowire. Therefore, in thick 

nanowires (group B), light induces not only a linear increase in the carrier concentration, but 

also a nonlinear variation in the diameter of the conducting channel that such carriers have to 

traverse to be collected.  

This explains also the enhancement of the responsivity with the nanowire diameter. The 

responsivity is linked to the total number of photogenerated carriers, i.e. it should increase 

with the square of the nanowire radius. To this dependence, we have to add the variation of 

the conductivity due to the change in the diameter of the central conducting channel in the 

stem. Both phenomena are relatively independent. In small, fully depleted nanowires, the 

Page 11 of 22
 

 


 
12

variation of the responsivity with the diameter will be given by the change in the total amount 

of photogenerated carriers. In large, partially-depleted wires, it is the modulation of the 

conductive section that dominates, which can lead to huge photocurrent gains. A theoretical 

analysis of both contributions can be found in ref. [32]. 

In summary, these different behaviors of the radial potential profiles explain the observed 

differences in linearity (β) as a function of the nanowire diameter. 

In this manuscript, linearity is observed for nanowires with a diameter smaller than ≈ 80 

nm. For larger nanowires, there are two approaches to improve the linearity, namely obtaining 

a full depletion of the nanowires or rendering the band bending at the sidewalls insensitive to 

light. Full depletion of larger nanowires can be achieved by reducing the doping level. 

Reducing the sensitivity of the band bending to light is more challenging. The use of a thicker 

AlN shell might help, but there is a risk of generating structural defects due to the lattice 

mismatch between m-plane AlN and GaN. Alternatively, the use of dielectrics as passivation 

layer should be explored. 

5. Conclusions 

We have demonstrated single-nanowire ultraviolet photodetectors consisting of a GaN 

nanowire with an embedded AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure, which generates an electric field 

along the nanowire axis as a result of the difference in polarization between III-nitride 

compounds with wurtzite crystal structure. The influence of the heterostructure is confirmed 

by the rectifying behavior of the current-voltage characteristics in the dark, and by the 

asymmetry of the photoresponse in magnitude and linearity. Under reverse bias (negative bias 

on the cap segment), the detectors behave linearly with the impinging optical power when the 

nanowire diameter remains below a certain threshold (≈ 80 nm). This is explained by the 

linearity of the photogeneration process, the separation of photogenerated carriers induced by 

Page 12 of 22
 

 


 
13

the axial electric field, and the fact that illumination does not have a significant effect on the 

radial electric field. In the case of nanowires that are not fully depleted (diameter > 80 nm), 

the light-induced change in the Fermi level at the sidewalls results in a variation of the diameter 

of the central conducting channel in the stem, which leads to an overall nonlinear 

photoresponse.  

6. Methods 

The structural properties of the nanowires were probed both by high angle annular dark 

field (HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) and TEM using a probe 

corrected FEI TITAN Themis working at 200 kV and a CM 300 working at 300 kV. We used 

a DENSSolutions 6 contact double tilt holder. Current voltage (I-V) characteristics have been 

investigated with the nanowires connected to an Agilent 4155C semiconductor parameter 

analyzer. Forward bias corresponds to higher voltage in the cap segment than in the stem. 

Photocurrent measurements as a function of optical power have been carried out using an 

unfocused continuous-wave HeCd laser (wavelength = 325 nm, spot diameter on the sample 

≈ 1 mm), chopped at 33 Hz (unless indicated). The nanowire is biased and connected in series 

with a ×106 V/A transimpedance amplifier, which is read out by a Stanford Research Systems 

SR830 lock-in amplifier. The spectral response has been measured using the same read-out 

configuration, but exciting with light from a 450 W xenon lamp passed through a Gemini 180 

Jobin-Yvon monochromator. In general, the bias was chosen to keep the maximum 

photocurrent lower than 10 µA to prevent device failure. All measurements were carried out 

at room temperature. 

Theoretical calculations of the band diagram were performed using the commercial 8×8 

k·p band Schrödinger-Poisson equation solver nextnano3. The nanowire was modeled as a 

hexahedral prism consisting of a 150 nm long n-type GaN segment followed by 130 nm of 

Page 13 of 22
 

 


 
14

undoped GaN, an AlN/GaN/AlN (10 nm/2.3 nm/10 nm) heterostructure, 130 nm of undoped 

GaN, and 50 nm of n-type GaN. The n-type doping density and residual doping were fixed to 

8×1017 cm−3 and 1×1017 cm−3, respectively. The structure was defined on a GaN substrate to 

provide a reference in-plane lattice parameter, and was embedded in a rectangular prism of air 

to include elastic strain relaxation. In a first stage, the three-dimensional strain distribution 

was calculated by minimization of the elastic energy assuming zero stress at the nanowire 

surface. Then, for the calculation of the band profiles, the piezoelectric fields resulting from 

the strain distribution were taken into account. Diameters of 50, 60, 80 and 120 nm were 

considered. Regarding the treatment of the surface, it is generally accepted that in GaN 

nanowires the Fermi level at the m-plane sidewalls is located around 0.6 eV below the 

conduction band edge [33,34] with a certain dependence on the environment [17,35]. However, 

the presence of an AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructure leads to the formation of an AlN shell around 

the GaN stem, which places the Fermi level around 2.1 eV below the conduction band of AlN 

[36]. Therefore, in our calculations, we have fixed the Fermi level at the AlN sidewalls of the 

stem at 2.1 eV below the AlN conduction band. On the contrary, in the cap region, we have 

fixed the Fermi level at the GaN/air interface at 0.6 eV below the conduction band. However, 

this latter value has no critical influence on the results, since the area of the cap exposed to 

light is small and the polarization-induced accumulation of electrons at the upper AlN/GaN 

heterointerface screens the effect of the surface. 

 

Acknowledgements 

Financial support from the ANR-COSMOS (ANR-12-JS10-0002) project and the AGIR 

2016 Pole PEM funding proposed by Grenoble Alpes University (UGA) for the CoPToN 

project is acknowledged. J.P. acknowledges support of the Erasmus+ programme of the 

Page 14 of 22
 

 


 
15

European Union. A.A. acknowledges financial support from the French National Research 

Agency via the GaNEX program (ANR-11-LABX-0014). We benefitted from the access to 

the Nano characterization platform (PFNC) in CEA Minatec Grenoble. Membrane production 

and nanowire contacting have been carried out at the NanoFab cleanroom of Institut Néel, 

Grenoble. Thanks are due to Bruno Fernandez and Jean-François Motte for cleanroom support, 

as well as to Yohan Curé and Yann Genuist for PAMBE support. 

 

Page 15 of 22
 

 


16

References

[1] 
Wang J, Gudiksen M S, Duan X, Cui Y and Lieber C M 2001 Highly Polarized 
Photoluminescence and Photodetection from Single Indium Phosphide Nanowires Science
293 1455–7 
[2] 
Tian B, Kempa T J and Lieber C M 2009 Single nanowire photovoltaics Chem Soc 
Rev 38 16–24 
[3] 
Soci C, Zhang A, Bao X-Y, Kim H, Lo Y and Wang D 2010 Nanowire Photodetectors 
J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 10 1430–49 
[4] 
Vj L, Oh J, Nayak A P, Katzenmeyer A M, Gilchrist K H, Grego S, Kobayashi N P, 
Wang S-Y, Talin A A, Dhar N K and Islam M S 2011 A Perspective on Nanowire 
Photodetectors: Current Status, Future Challenges, and Opportunities IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 17 1002–32 
[5] 
LaPierre R R, Robson M, Azizur-Rahman K M and Kuyanov P 2017 A review of III–
V nanowire infrared photodetectors and sensors J. Phys. Appl. Phys. 50 123001 
[6] 
Sanford N A, Blanchard P T, Bertness K A, Mansfield L, Schlager J B, Sanders A W, 
Roshko A, Burton B B and George S M 2010 Steady-state and transient photoconductivity in 
c-axis GaN nanowires grown by nitrogen-plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy J. Appl. 
Phys. 107 034318 
[7] 
González-Posada F, Songmuang R, Den Hertog M and Monroy E 2012 Room-
Temperature Photodetection Dynamics of Single GaN Nanowires Nano Lett. 12 172–6 
[8] 
González-Posada F, Songmuang R, Den Hertog M and Monroy E 2013 Environmental 
sensitivity of n-i-n and undoped single GaN nanowire photodetectors Appl. Phys. Lett. 102 
213113 
[9] 
Chen R S, Tsai H Y, Chan C H, Huang Y S, Chen Y T, Chen K H and Chen L C 2014 
Comparison of CVD- and MBE-grown GaN Nanowires: Crystallinity, Photoluminescence, and 
Photoconductivity J. Electron. Mater. 44 177–87 
[10] 
Lähnemann J, Den Hertog M, Hille P, de la Mata M, Fournier T, Schörmann J, Arbiol 
J, Eickhoff M and Monroy E 2016 UV Photosensing Characteristics of Nanowire-Based 
GaN/AlN Superlattices Nano Lett. 16 3260–7 
[11] 
Cao Y L, Liu Z T, Chen L M, Tang Y B, Luo L B, Jie J S, Zhang W J, Lee S T and Lee 
C S 2011 Single-crystalline ZnTe nanowires for application as high-performance 
Green/Ultraviolet photodetector Opt. Express 19 6100 
[12] 
Soci C, Zhang A, Xiang B, Dayeh S A, Aplin D P R, Park J, Bao X Y, Lo Y H and Wang 
D 2007 ZnO Nanowire UV Photodetectors with High Internal Gain Nano Lett. 7 1003–9 
[13] 
Zhang H, Babichev A V, Jacopin G, Lavenus P, Julien F H, Yu. Egorov A, Zhang J, 
Pauporté T and Tchernycheva M 2013 Characterization and modeling of a ZnO nanowire 
ultraviolet photodetector with graphene transparent contact J. Appl. Phys. 114 234505 
[14] 
Yan X, Li B, Wu Y, Zhang X and Ren X 2016 A single crystalline InP nanowire 
photodetector Appl. Phys. Lett. 109 053109 
[15] 
Wang S B, Hsiao C H, Chang S J, Lam K T, Wen K H, Hung S C, Young S J and 
Huang B R 2011 A CuO nanowire infrared photodetector Sens. Actuators Phys. 171 207–11 
[16] 
Wang H 2013 High gain single GaAs nanowire photodetector Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 
093101 
[17] 
Sanford N A, Robins L H, Blanchard P T, Soria K, Klein B, Eller B S, Bertness K A, 
Schlager J B and Sanders A W 2013 Studies of photoconductivity and field effect transistor 
behavior in examining drift mobility, surface depletion, and transient effects in Si-doped GaN 
nanowires in vacuum and air J. Appl. Phys. 113 174306 
[18] 
Birner S, Zibold T, Andlauer T, Kubis T, Sabathil M, Trellakis A and Vogl P 2007 
nextnano: General Purpose 3-D Simulations IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 54 2137–42 
[19] 
Kandaswamy P K, Guillot F, Bellet-Amalric E, Monroy E, Nevou L, Tchernycheva M, 
Michon A, Julien F H, Baumann E, Giorgetta F R, Hofstetter D, Remmele T, Albrecht M, 
Birner S and Dang L S 2008 GaN/AlN short-period superlattices for intersubband 
optoelectronics: A systematic study of their epitaxial growth, design, and performance J. Appl. 

Page 16 of 22


17

Phys. 104 093501 
[20] 
den Hertog M I, González-Posada F, Songmuang R, Rouviere J L, Fournier T, 
Fernandez B and Monroy E 2012 Correlation of Polarity and Crystal Structure with 
Optoelectronic and Transport Properties of GaN/AlN/GaN Nanowire Sensors Nano Lett. 12 
5691–6 
[21] 
Simon J, Zhang Z, Goodman K, Xing H, Kosel T, Fay P and Jena D 2009 Polarization-
Induced Zener Tunnel Junctions in Wide-Band-Gap Heterostructures Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 
026801 
[22] 
Leconte S, Guillot F, Sarigiannidou E and Monroy E 2007 Charge distribution and 
vertical electron transport through GaN/AlN/GaN single-barrier structures Semicond. Sci. 
Technol. 22 107–12 
[23] 
Ajay A, Lim C B, Browne D A, Polaczynski J, Bellet-Amalric E, den Hertog M I and 
Monroy E 2017 Intersubband absorption in Si- and Ge-doped GaN/AlN heterostructures in 
self-assembled nanowire and 2D layers Phys. Status Solidi B 254 1600734 
[24] 
Fang Z, Robin E, Rozas-Jiménez E, Cros A, Donatini F, Mollard N, Pernot J and 
Daudin B 2015 Si Donor Incorporation in GaN Nanowires Nano Lett. 15 6794–801 
[25] 
Schörmann J, Hille P, Schäfer M, Müßener J, Becker P, Klar P J, Kleine-Boymann M, 
Rohnke M, de la Mata M, Arbiol J, Hofmann D M, Teubert J and Eickhoff M 2013 Germanium 
doping of self-assembled GaN nanowires grown by plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy 
J. Appl. Phys. 114 103505 
[26] 
Ajay A, Lim C B, Browne D A, Polaczyński J, Bellet-Amalric E, Bleuse J, den Hertog 
M I and Monroy E 2017 Effect of doping on the intersubband absorption in Si- and Ge-doped 
GaN/AlN heterostructures Nanotechnology 28 405204 
[27] 
Spies M, den Hertog M I, Hille P, Schörmann J, Polaczyński J, Gayral B, Eickhoff M, 
Monroy E and Lähnemann J 2017 Bias-Controlled Spectral Response in GaN/AlN Single-
Nanowire Ultraviolet Photodetectors Nano Lett. 17 4231–9 
[28] 
Monroy E, Omnès F and Calle F 2003 Wide-bandgap semiconductor ultraviolet 
photodetectors Semicond. Sci. Technol. 18 R33–51 
[29] 
Pfüller C, Brandt O, Grosse F, Flissikowski T, Chèze C, Consonni V, Geelhaar L, 
Grahn H T and Riechert H 2010 Unpinning the Fermi level of GaN nanowires by ultraviolet 
radiation Phys. Rev. B 82 045320 
[30] 
Calarco R, Marso M, Richter T, Aykanat A I, Meijers R, v.d. Hart A, Stoica T and Lüth 
H 2005 Size-dependent Photoconductivity in MBE-Grown GaN−Nanowires Nano Lett. 5 981–
4 
[31] 
Monroy E, Calle F, Muñoz E, Omnès F, Beaumont B and Gibart P 1999 Visible-
blindness in photoconductive and photovoltaic AlGaN ultraviolet detectors J. Electron. Mater.
28 240–5 
[32] 
Garrido J A, Monroy E, Izpura I and Muñoz E 1998 Photoconductive gain modelling 
of GaN photodetectors Semicond. Sci. Technol. 13 563–8 
[33] 
Van de Walle C G and Segev D 2007 Microscopic origins of surface states on nitride 
surfaces J. Appl. Phys. 101 081704 
[34] 
Lymperakis L, Weidlich P H, Eisele H, Schnedler M, Nys J-P, Grandidier B, 
Stiévenard D, Dunin-Borkowski R E, Neugebauer J and Ebert P 2013 Hidden surface states 
at non-polar GaN (10-10) facets: Intrinsic pinning of nanowires Appl. Phys. Lett. 103 152101 
[35] 
Chen R S, Lu C Y, Chen K H and Chen L C 2009 Molecule-modulated 
photoconductivity and gain-amplified selective gas sensing in polar GaN nanowires Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 95 233119 
[36] 
Reddy P, Bryan I, Bryan Z, Guo W, Hussey L, Collazo R and Sitar Z 2014 The effect 
of polarity and surface states on the Fermi level at III-nitride surfaces J. Appl. Phys. 116 
123701 

Page 17 of 22


 
18

Figure captions 

Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the nanowires under study. (b) SEM image of the as-grown 

nanowire ensemble. The position of the insertion can be identified on the top quarter of the 

nanowires as the growth of the strained GaN on the AlN insertion results in a slight reduction 

of the nanowire diameter. (c) One-dimensional simulation of the photoactive part of the 

nanowire showing the band bending due to the AlN insertions. Electron-hole pairs 

photogenerated in the space charge region will get separated by the internal electric field, as 

depicted schematically. (d-e) HAADF STEM images of a bundle of nanowires and a single 

nanowire, respectively. (f) SEM image of a contacted nanowire.  

Figure 2. Current-voltage characteristics of two typical nanowires, one with small diameter 

<80 nm (green) and one with diameter >80 nm (orange). Inset: Dark current at +1 V bias as a 

function of the diameter of the nanowires measured by STEM in proximity of the 

AlN/GaN/AlN insertion. The error bars account for the different diameters of nanowires in a 

bundle. The dotted line is a guide to the eye. Nanowires with diameters <80 nm respond in the 

nA range (group A), whereas nanowires with diameters >80 nm present a dark current in the 

μA range (group B).  

Figure 3. Photocurrent measurements as a function of the irradiance (impinging laser power 

per unit of surface) at 325 nm for (a) a typical group-A nanowire (diameter < 80 nm), and (b) 

a typical group-B nanowire (diameter > 80 nm). Bias is indicated in the legends. Lines are fits 

to  𝐼𝑝ℎ = 𝐴𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑡
𝛽 , where 𝐼𝑝ℎ is the photocurrent, 𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑡 is the impinging optical power and A and 

 are fitting parameters. The values of  are indicated in the figure. (c) Variation of β as a 

function of the dark current (measured at +1 V). Note, the correlation of almost-linear 

nanowires with dark current in the nA range, and clearly sublinear nanowires with dark current 

Page 18 of 22
 

 


 
19

in the μA range. The solid line is a guide to the eye. (d) Spectral response measurements for 

typical group-A and group-B nanowire specimens. The dashed line marks the wavelength of 

the GaN band gap at room temperature.  

Figure 4. Photocurrent measurements as a function of the irradiance at 325 nm for a typical 

group-A nanowire measured under forward and reverse bias. 

Figure 5. Cross-sectional view of the band structure in the doped stem region of the nanowire, 

200 nm below the undoped region (a) for nanowire diameters of 50, 60, 80, 120 nm, with the 

Fermi level pinned 2.1 eV below the conduction band edge of AlN. With decreasing diameter, 

the difference in energy between Fermi level and the lowest point in the conduction band 

increases from 38 meV to 140 meV. In (b) and (c), the Fermi level pinning is varied between 

2.0, 2.1 and 2.2 eV for nanowires with diameters of 50 nm and 120 nm, respectively.  

 
 

Page 19 of 22
 

 


 
20

Figure 1 

 

Page 20 of 22
 

 


 
21

Figure 2 

 

 

Figure 3 

 

 
 

Page 21 of 22
 

 


 
22

Figure 4 

 

Figure 5 

  

Page 22 of 22
 

 


