 
1

Selective excitation of multipolar spoof plasmons using 

orbital angular momentum of light 

 

 

Takashi Arikawa1†, Tomoki Hiraoka1†, Shohei Morimoto1†, François Blanchard2,  

Shuntaro Tani3, Tomoko Tanaka3, Kyosuke Sakai4, Hiroki Kitajima4, Keiji Sasaki4 and 

Koichiro Tanaka1,3 * 

 

 

1 Kyoto University, Department of Physics, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan 

2 École de technologie supérieure (ÉTS), Department of Electrical Engineering, Montréal, 

Québec, H3C 1K3, Canada 

3 Kyoto University, Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (iCeMS), Kyoto, 606- 

8501, Japan 

4 Research Institute for Electronic Science, Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, 001-0020, 

Japan 

 

† These authors contributed equally to this work 

* email: kochan@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

 

 
 


 
2

The nature of light-matter interaction is governed by the spatial-temporal structures 

of a light field and material wavefunctions. The emergence of the light beam with 

transverse phase vortex, or equivalently orbital angular momentum (OAM) has been 

providing intriguing possibilities to induce unconventional optical transitions beyond 

the framework of the electric dipole interaction. The uniqueness stems from the OAM 

transfer from light to material, as demonstrated using the bound electron of a single 

trapped ion. However, many aspects of the vortex light-matter interaction are still 

unexplored especially in solids with extended electronic states. Here, we 

unambiguously visualized dipole-forbidden multipolar excitations in a solid-state 

electron system; spoof localized surface plasmon, selectively induced by the terahertz 

vortex beam. The results obey the selection rules governed by the conservation of the 

total angular momentum, which is numerically confirmed by the electromagnetic field 

analysis. Our results show light’s OAM can be efficiently transferred to an elementary 

excitation in solids. 

 

 

The Fermi’s golden rule defines whether an optical transition between quantum mechanical 

states is allowed or not. In the common case of the plane wave with no transverse phase 

structure in the long-wavelength regime (field gradient along the propagation direction is 

ignored), one obtains dipole selection rules, which has been successful in describing a 

variety of linear optical phenomena1. Several efforts have been made to break the selection 

rules and access dark electronic states by violating the uniform phase condition using 

oblique irradiation or steep field gradient in a metallic nanogap2,3. These methods 

simultaneously excite many modes due to the low symmetry, which is preferred for light 

energy harvesting. To selectively excite one particular dark mode, nonlinear optical 

techniques such as two-photon absorption and stimulated Raman scattering have been 

employed provided that strong light sources are available4.  

The vortex beam with the orbital angular momentum (OAM)5 is a new and ideal 

tool for selectively exciting dipole-forbidden states by linear optical absorption at normal 


 
3

incidence. Its transverse phase is structured so that different selection rules from dipole 

ones are derived6,7. The selectivity can also be understood in terms of the OAM transfer 

from light to material. This is clearly demonstrated by the observation of the 

dipole-forbidden S to D state transition in the bound electron of a trapped ion, where the 

electron absorbs both spin angular momentum (SAM) and OAM from the vortex beam8. 

However, the transition probability of such a transition is very small due to the significant 

size mismatch between the diffraction-limited spot size of the vortex beam (~ 1000 nm) and 

the spatial extent of the electronic wavefunction (< tens of nm)7,9. 

In this context, electrons in solids with extended wavefunctions are expected to 

provide a promising platform for studying vortex light-matter interaction10. In fact, 

electromagnetic field analyses predict efficient OAM transfer from vortex beams to 

localized surface plasmons (LSPs) in a metallic disk of similar size to the 

diffraction-limited excitation beam11. In the simulations, multipolar modes with larger 

angular momentums (quadrupole, hexapole, ...) are selectively excited as a result of the 

OAM transfer, while Gaussian beam (plane wave) only splits positive and negative charges 

in an opposite direction, resulting in the dipole mode. In this study, we experimentally 

demonstrated this selective excitation using the spoof LSP; a low-frequency analogue of 

LSP, that exists around the surface of a periodically textured metallic disk12-14. It mimics 

LSP with tailor-made resonance frequencies depending on the geometric parameters of the 

corrugation. By properly designing the structures, we brought the resonance frequencies 

down to the terahertz (THz) frequency region, where nondestructive imaging of the near 

field distribution is possible in a time-resolved manner15-17. This allows us to 

unambiguously visualize characteristic near-field patterns around the corrugated disk and 

identify spoof LSP modes excited in the sample.  

 
 


 
4

Generation and detection of THz vortex beam 

Let us first characterize the THz excitation beam, which is measured without metallic 

structures. Linearly polarized coherent THz pulses are focused to the electro-optic (EO) 

crystal (LiNbO3) by two lenses (Fig. 1a,b). When performing vortex beam experiments, we 

put a spiral phase plate (SPP) in the collimated part of the THz beam propagating in the 

z-direction18-21. We made two SPPs to generate vortex beams with the z-component of the 

OAM of ±ħ or ±2ħ centered at around 0.5 THz (SPP-1 and -2. See Methods and 

Supplementary information 2). Two-dimensional EO imaging was performed using a probe 

beam with a large spot size and a CMOS camera with a polarization analyzer unit (see 

Supplementary information 1). Figure 1d shows the snapshots of the THz pulse passing 

through the EO crystal taken without a SPP. A uniform phase (colour) of the electric field in 

the center suggests the original THz pulse is very close to the ideal Gaussian beam. Figures 

1e and 1f show frequency-domain intensity and phase images at 0.5 THz, which also 

exhibit Gaussian beam nature; single intensity peak and flat phase distribution around the 

center. The snapshots shown in Fig. 1g was measured with the SPP-1. A vortex phase 

structure making a clockwise turn is clearly seen. The frequency-domain intensity (Fig. 1h) 

and phase (Fig. 1i) images at 0.5 THz show the characteristic features of the vortex beam 

with the OAM of +ħ, i.e., donut-shape intensity profile and the 2π phase rotation with a 

center singular point (white cross). Similar experiments and analysis were done with the 

SPP-2 to generate the vortex beam with the z-component of the OAM of -2ħ at 0.5 THz. 

We can see a vortex rotating counter-clockwise (Fig. 1j) in the time-domain, and 4p phase 

rotation (Fig. 1l) with a center intensity null (Fig. 1k) in the frequency-domain. The 

non-ideal intensity profile suggests low OAM purity as characterized in the Supplementary 

information 2. 

 
 


 
5

 
 

 
Figure 1 | THz Gaussian and vortex beams. a. Schematic of the experimental set-up. The SPP 
converts Gaussian beam into vortex beam. Two lenses (Lens1: Tsurupica lens, f = 50 mm. Lens2: 
3-mm-thick, 2-mm-radius silicon bullet lens) were used to match the spot size of the excitation beam 
to the size of the metallic structure for efficient excitation. For details, see Supplementary 
information 1. b. Electric field waveform of the incident Gaussian THz pulse. The inset shows its 
frequency spectrum. c. Magnified view around the EO crystal (side view). 1-µm-thick, x-cut LiNbO3 
is mounted on a glass substrate. To perform EO sampling in the reflection geometry, the top and 
bottom surfaces of this substrate are coated with high-reflection (HR) and anti-reflection (AR) films 
(3 µm thick) for the probe pulse at 780 nm, respectively. The top view of the corrugated disk is 
schematically shown with the following structural parameters; inner radius (r), outer radius (R), 
periodicity (d), groove width (a), number of grooves (N). The refractive indices inside the groove 
and outside the disk are given by ng and nout, respectively. d,g,j. Time-domain EO images of the 
Gaussian and vortex beams. e,h,k. Frequency-domain intensity images of the Gaussian and vortex 
beams at 0.5 THz. The intensity images are normalized by the maximum values. f,i,l. Phase images 
of the Gaussian and vortex beams at 0.5 THz. 
 


 
6

Direct observation of multipole spoof LSPs 

To visualize the near-field pattern due to spoof LSPs, we fabricated corrugated gold disks 

directly on the top surface of the EO substrate (Fig. 1c) using photolithographic and 

vacuum deposition technique. This allows us to sample electric field only a few µm (<< 

wavelength of a few hundred µm) away from the metallic structure15-17. Figure 2a shows 

five snapshots of the THz electric field around the sample excited by a linearly polarized 

Gaussian beam. Even after the incident THz pulse has passed through the sample, an 

electric field oscillation localized around the outer circle of the sample is observed (3rd to 

5th frame), which indicates a resonant excitation of a spoof LSP. It has four nodes at fixed 

points along the outer circle. This is shown by the red curve in Fig. 2b, where we plot the 

electric field taken along the outer circle of the sample at 5.67 ps (4th frame) as a function 

of the azimuthal angle j. Notice that the selected snapshots (3rd to 5th frame) display 

almost one oscillation period. These results show that a standing wave mode with a period 

of 4.2 ps (0.24 THz) is excited. The red curve in Fig. 2b nicely follows cos(2j) drawn by 

the dashed black curve. This represents the expected electric field pattern when the dipole 

mode is excited in the sample, which is obtained by projecting the quasi-static electric field 

around the dipole onto the detection polarization axis (𝑒⃗#) in the experiment (see Methods 

for details). This confirms that the dipole mode is excited by the Gaussian beam. 

Figure 2c shows selected EO images of the sample excited by the linearly 

polarized vortex beam with the OAM +ħ. A localized electric field with six zero-crossing 

points along the outer circle is seen after the excitation. An azimuthal plot along the outer 

circle at 5.47 ps (3rd frame) agrees excellently with cos(3j) curve, which is the expected 

functional form when the quadrupole mode exists (Fig. 2d). In contrast to the Gaussian 

beam excitation, we can see this electric field pattern travels along the outer circle in a 

clockwise direction. A similar experiment and analysis were carried out for the vortex beam 

excitation with the OAM -2ħ (Fig. 2e,f). Although not clear as above, multipolar field 

pattern with eight zero-crossing points can be recognized (Fig. 2e), which partly follows 

cos(4j) curve suggesting the excitation of the hexapole mode (Fig. 2f). 

 
 


 
7

 

 

 
 

 
Figure 2 | Selective excitation of multipole spoof LSPs. Selected snapshots of the near-field 
evolution around the sample excited by a. Gaussian beam, c. vortex beam (OAM +ħ), and e. vortex 
beam (OAM -2ħ). The Double circle represents the position of the sample (inner radius r, outer 
radius R). The sample dimensions are r = 70 µm, R = 100 µm, N = 30, a/d = 0.4. The time origin (0 
ps) is the time when the first positive peak of the incident pulse comes. The colour scales are 
optimized at each frame for the sake of clarity. b,d,f. The electric field taken along the outer circle of 
the sample as a function of the azimuthal angle j (red curves). The dashed cosine curves are 
expected electric field patterns when the modes depicted on the right are excited. The solid arrows 
schematically represent the quasi-static electric field around each mode. The cosine functions are 
obtained by projecting the quasi-static field onto the polarization axis (𝑒⃗#, dashed up arrow) detected 
in the experiment. 𝑒⃗$ and 𝑒⃗% are cylindrical unit vectors. 
 
 
 
 


 
8

Field pattern analysis 

These observations indicate that multipole spoof LSPs are excited by using vortex beams. 

To clearly illustrate this point, we performed the following analysis. The orthogonal 

functional forms of the electric field [cos(mj), m: integer] for different LSP modes allow us 

to decompose the complicated field pattern into the superposition of each mode. See 

Methods for the proof of the one-to-one correspondence between the LSP modes and cosine 

functions for their electric field distributions. For this purpose, we focused on the electric 

field along the outer circle of the sample as we have done in Fig. 2b,d,f, but this time 

including the time dependence [E(j, t)]. We expanded E(j, t) along both axes by 

two-dimensional Fourier transform to obtain 𝐸(𝑚, 𝑓) = ∫
𝑑𝜑 ∫
𝑑𝑡𝐸(𝜑, 𝑡)cos (𝑚𝜑 −

67
68

9:
#

2𝜋𝑓𝑡). E(m, f) then represents the frequency (f) spectrum of each LSP mode (m = ±2; 

dipole, m = ±3; quadrupole, and so on) excited in the sample. The positive (negative) sign 

of m corresponds to the traveling wave mode in the clockwise (counter-clockwise) direction. 

To exclusively analyze the electric field generated by spoof LSPs, we only used data after 

the incident THz pulses have passed through the sample (t1 to t2 in Fig. 2). This enables us 

to minimize spurious signals due to the electric field pattern of the excitation pulse (see 

Supplementary information 2). 

Figure 3a shows the frequency spectra of the dipole [E(±2, f)], quadrupole [E(±3, 

f)], and hexapole mode [E(±4, f)] in the case of the Gaussian beam excitation. We can see 

only the dipole modes are excited at 0.24 THz. Note that both traveling modes with 

clockwise and counter-clockwise directions are equally excited, which is consistent with 

the standing wave observed in Fig. 2a. In contrast, the frequency spectra in the case of the 

vortex beam (+ħ) excitation clearly show a peak in the quadrupole mode (Fig. 3b, middle). 

Furthermore, the positive index mode (red) is selectively excited as inferred from the 

clockwise traveling wave observed in Fig. 2c. The same analysis for the case of the vortex 

beam (-2ħ) excitation clearly demonstrates the selective excitation of the negative hexapole 

mode (Fig. 3c, top). The selection of the inverse rotation modes is also confirmed by 

inverting the sign of the z-component of the OAM (See Supplementary Fig. S3). These 

results clearly demonstrate the selective and efficient excitation of the multipolar modes 


 
9

using the OAM of light. The excitation of the dipole mode in Fig. 3b,c and the negative 

quadrupole mode in Fig. 3c are explained by the residual Gaussian and vortex (-ħ) beam 

components in the excitation pulse, respectively (see Supplementary Fig. S2). Although the 

simultaneous excitation of those modes complicates the electric field pattern in the 

time-domain (Fig. 2c,e), this analysis allows us to identify all spoof LSP modes excited in 

the sample.  

This analysis also reveals the resonance frequencies of each spoof LSP mode and 

allows us to draw its dispersion relation (solid circles in Fig. 3d). As the number of poles 

increases, the resonance frequency becomes higher and shows a signature of saturation. 

This is well reproduced by the theoretical curve22,23, which supports that multipole spoof 

LSPs are excited (see Methods for the detailed procedure of the fitting). The control of the 

resonance frequency of the spoof LSP by changing the dimensions of the corrugation is 

demonstrated in Supplementary Information 3.  

 


 
10

 
 

 
Figure 3 | Mode decomposition of near field distribution. Frequency spectra of the dipole [E(±2, 
f)], quadrupole [E(±3, f)], and hexapole [E(±4, f)] modes excited in the sample illuminated by a. 
Gaussian beam, b. vortex beam (+ħ), and c. vortex beam (-2ħ). The red (positive) and blue (negative) 
traces show the traveling wave modes in the clockwise and counter-clockwise direction, respectively. 
d. Dispersion relation of the spoof LSP. The red dots represent the resonance frequencies determined 
in a-c. The blue curve is a theoretical fitting. 
 
 


 
11

Selection rules 

These results allow us to deduce the selection rules for the excitation of multipole spoof 

LSPs. Table 1 summarizes the z component of the angular momentum of the excitation 

beams (upper part) and the observed LSPs (lower part). Let us first revisit the excitation of 

the dipole mode by the uniform electric field of the Gaussian beam in terms of the angular 

momentum. The linearly polarized incident light is a superposition of two circularly 

polarized waves with the SAM of +ħ and -ħ. Due to the zero OAM, the total angular 

momentum (TAM) of the incident Gaussian beam is equal to the SAM. The excited dipole 

mode, which mimics the dipole LSP with a traveling surface charge distribution r(j,t) ∝ 

cos(±j - 2pft), also possesses the z-component of the angular momentum of ±ħ (see 

Methods for the relation between the charge and electric field distribution). This gives us an 

alternative way to interpret the selective excitation of the dipole mode by the Gaussian 

beam, i.e., transfer of the TAM (= SAM) of light to the electronic system. Similar 

arguments hold true for the vortex beam excitations. The TAM of the linearly polarized 

vortex beam (OAM +ħ) is +2ħ and 0. The clockwise quadrupole mode observed in the 

experiment also has the z-component of the angular momentum of +2ħ, which suggests the 

transfer of the TAM. Note that no LSP mode is excited by the vortex beam with the TAM of 

0 (ref. 11). The TAM of the linearly polarized vortex beam (OAM -2ħ) is -3ħ and –ħ. The 

selective excitation of the counter-clockwise hexapole mode with the z-component of the 

angular momentum of -3ħ obeys the same rule. This rule also predicts that the field 

component with the TAM of –ħ at 0.5 THz should excite counter-clockwise dipole mode. 

This is also observed in Fig. 3c (bottom) where the higher frequency tail of the 

counter-clockwise dipole mode (blue) is stronger than the other (red). These experimental 

observations strongly support the selection rules governed by the conservation of the TAM.  


 
12

 
 

 
Table 1 | Selection rules for exciting multipolar spoof LSPs. The orbital (1st row), spin (2nd row), 
and total angular momentums (3rd row) of the excitation beams are summarized in the upper part. 
The last row below the downward arrows shows the angular momentums of the spoof LSPs observed 
in the experiment. Spoof LSP modes having the same angular momentum with the total angular 
momentum of the excitation light are excited. 
 
 


 
13

Numerical simulations 

The selection rules inferred by the experiments are exactly the same as the ones predicted 

for real LSPs by numerical simulations11. This tells us that the spoof LSP mimics not only 

the dispersion relation of the LSP, but also the selection rules for excitation. We 

numerically confirmed this point by performing similar electromagnetic field analyses as 

ref. 11 for spoof LSPs (see Methods). Fig. 4a shows an electric field distribution around the 

sample excited by a linearly polarized Gaussian beam at 0.24 THz. The dipolar standing 

wave (four nodes) is seen around the outer circle, which reproduces the experimental result 

(Fig. 4b) very well. Similar field patterns are obtained in simulations performed with 

different excitation frequencies and the integrated electric field intensities along the outer 

circle are collected to draw an intensity spectrum (Fig. 4c). This shows the dipolar spoof 

LSP is resonantly excited at 0.24 THz as observed in the experiment (Fig. 4d). Similar 

simulations for the vortex beam (OAM +ħ) excitation exhibit the characteristic field 

distribution (six zero-crossing points) unique to the clockwise quadrupole mode (Fig. 4e), 

which is very similar to the one in the experimental result (Fig. 4f). The intensity spectrum 

(Fig. 4g) reveals a very similar resonance frequency (0.39 THz) found from the experiment 

(Fig. 4h). Similarly, the selective excitation of the counter-clockwise hexapole mode (eight 

zero-crossing points) is clearly seen in the vortex beam (OAM -2ħ) excitation at 0.52 THz 

(Fig. 4i). Note the purer hexapolar field pattern than the experimental result (Fig. 4j). The 

intensity spectrum (Fig. 4k) shows the resonance frequency of the hexapole mode similar to 

the one revealed by the experimental data (Fig. 4l). At lower excitation frequencies, we 

start to see the dipolar mode around 0.21 THz, which supports the selection rules described 

in Table 1. These simulations clearly demonstrate that the same selection rules apply for 

exciting the spoof LSPs. 

 

 
 


 
14

 
 

 
figure 4 | Numerical simulations showing the selective excitation of multipole spoof LSPs. a. 
Simulated electric field distribution around the sample excited by the linearly polarized Gaussian 
beam (0.24 THz). The figure shows the linear polarization component along the polarization of the 
excitation beam to simulate the experimental condition. b. One experimental snapshot from Fig. 2a is 
shown for comparison. c. Intensity spectrum showing the resonance frequency of the dipole mode at 
0.24 THz. d. The spectrum of the dipole mode from Fig. 3a is shown for comparison. e-h. Similar set 
of data for the linearly polarized vortex beam (+ħ) excitation. The field pattern (e) rotates in the 
direction shown by the black arrow (clockwise). Note that due to the pure vortex beam excitation, the 
dipolar mode at 0.24 THz is not excited at all in the spectrum (g). i-l. Similar set of data for the 
linearly polarized vortex beam (-2ħ) excitation. The field pattern (i) rotates in the direction shown by 
the black arrow (counter-clockwise).  


 
15

Conclusions 

We succeeded in selectively exciting dipole-forbidden eigen modes of spoof LSPs, 

multipolar modes with high OAM, using the phase vortex beam. The efficient TAM 

transfer from light to spoof LSPs are achieved. This is due to the negligible electron 

scattering in metals in the THz frequency region that assures the coherent collective motion 

of electrons over the entire sample with a similar size to the excitation beam. Theory 

predicts similar TAM transfer to a variety of elementary excitations in solids such as single 

electronic states24, phonons25, and skyrmions26. For the experimental realization of these 

excitations with subwavelength wavefunctions, focusing techniques beyond the diffraction 

limit should play a crucial role27,28. 

 

 
References 

[1] Fox, M. Optical Properties of Solids (Oxford University Press, 2010). 

[2] Hao, F., Larsson, E. M., Ali, T. A., Sutherland, D. S. & Nordlander, P. Shedding light on 

dark plasmons in gold nanorings. Chem. Phys. Lett. 458, 262–266 (2008). 

[3] Takase, M. et al. Selection-rule breakdown in plasmon-induced electronic excitation of 

an isolated single-walled carbon nanotube. Nat. Photon. 7, 550–554 (2013). 

[4] Boyd, R. Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, 2008). 

[5] Allen, L., Beijersbergen, M. W., Spreeuw, R. J. C., & Woerdman, J. P. Orbital angular 

momentum of light and the transformation of Laguerre-Gaussian laser modes. Phys. Rev. A 

45, 8185–8189 (1992). 

[6] Van Enk, S. J. & Nienhuis, G. Commutation rules and eigenvalues of spin and orbital 

angular momentum of radiation fields. J. Mod. Opt. 41, 963–977 (1994). 

[7] Schmiegelow, C. T. & Schmidt-Kaler, F. Light with orbital angular momentum 

interacting with trapped ions. Eur. Phys. J. D 66, 1–9 (2012). 

[8] Schmiegelow, C. T. et al. Transfer of optical orbital angular momentum to a bound 

electron. Nat. Commun 7, 12998 (2016). 

[9] Alexandrescu, A., Cojoc, D. & Di Fabrizio, E. Mechanism of angular momentum 

exchange between molecules and Laguerre-Gaussian beams. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 243001 


 
16

(2006). 

[10] Shigematsu, K., Yamane, K., Morita, R. & Toda, Y. Coherent dynamics of exciton 

orbital angular momentum transferred by optical vortex pulses. Phys. Rev. B 93, 045205 

(2016). 

[11] Sakai, K., Nomura, K., Yamamoto, T. & Sasaki, K. Excitation of Multipole Plasmons 

by Optical Vortex Beams. Sci. Rep. 5, 8431 (2015). 

[12] Pors, A., Moreno, E., Moreno, L. M., Pendry, J. B. & Vidal, F. J. G. Localized spoof 

plasmons arise while texturing closed surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 223905 (2012). 

[13] Shen, X. & Cui, T. J. Ultrathin plasmonic metamaterial for spoof localized surface 

plasmons. Laser Photonics Rev. 8, 137 (2014). 

[14] Chen, L., Wei, Y., Zang, X., Zhu, Y. & Zhuang, S. Excitation of dark multipolar 

plasmonic resonances at terahertz frequencies. Sci. Rep. 6, 22027 (2016). 

[15] Blanchard, F. et al. Real-time terahertz near-field microscope. Opt. Express 19, 8277–

8284 (2011). 

[16] Blanchard, F., Doi, A., Tanaka, T. & Tanaka, K. Real-time, subwavelength terahertz 

imaging. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 43, 237–259 (2013). 

[17] Blanchard, F. & Tanaka, K. Improving time and space resolution in electro-optic 

sampling for near-field terahertz imaging. Opt. Lett. 41, 4645–4648 (2016). 

[18] Beijersbergen, M. W., Coerwinkel, R. P. C., Kristensen, M. & Woerdman, J. P. 

Helical-wavefront laser beams produced with a spiral phaseplate. Opt. Commun. 112, 321–

327 (1994). 

[19] Turnbull, G. A., Robertson, D. A., Smith, G. M., Allen, L. & Padgett, M. J. The 

generation of free-space Laguerre-Gaussian modes at millimetre-wave frequencies by use 

of a spiral phaseplate. Opt. Commun. 127, 183–188 (1996). 

[20] Miyamoto, K., Suizu, K., Akiba, T. & Omatsu, T. Direct observation of the topological 

charge of a terahertz vortex beam generated by a Tsurupica spiral phase plate. Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 104, 261104 (2014). 

[21] Miyamoto, K. et al. Highly intense monocycle terahertz vortex generation by utilizing 

a Tsurupica spiral phase plate. Sci. Rep. 6, 38880 (2016). 


 
17

[22] Vidal, F. J. G., Moreno, L. M. & Pendry, J. B. Surfaces with holes in them: new 

plasmonic metamaterials. J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 7, S97 (2005). 

[23] Rusina, A., Durach, M. & Stockman, M. I. Theory of spoof plasmons in real metals. 

Appl. Phys. A 2, 375–378 (2010). 

[24] Quinteiro, G. F. & Tamborenea, P. I. Electronic transitions in disk-shaped quantum 

dots induced by twisted light, Phys. Rev. B 79, 155450 (2009). 

[25] Zhang, L. & Niu, Q. Chiral phonons at high-symmetry points in monolayer hexagonal 

lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 115502 (2015).  

[26] Fujita, H. & Sato, M. Ultrafast generation of skyrmionic defects with vortex beams: 

Printing laser profiles on magnets. Phys. Rev. B 95, 054421 (2017). 

[27] Arikawa, T., Morimoto, S. & Tanaka, K. Focusing light with orbital angular 

momentum by circular array antenna. Opt. Express 25, 13728-13735 (2017). 

[28] Sakai, K., Yamamoto, T. & Sasaki, K. Nanofocusing of structured light for quadrupolar 

light-matter interactions. Sci. Rep. 8, 7746 (2018). 

 

 
Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by KAKENHI (26247052, 17H06124) from Japan Society for the 

Promotion of Science (JSPS) and JST CREST. This work was supported in part by Kyoto 

University Nano Technology Hub in “Nanotechnology Platform Project” sponsored by the 

Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT), Japan. 

 

Author Contributions 

T.H, S.M performed the measurements and analyzed the data under the supervision and 

guidance of T.A, F.B. and K.T. S.T and T.T helped initial measurements and data analysis. 

K. Sakai, H.K. and K. Sasaki performed numerical simulations. T.A. and K.T. prepared the 

manuscript. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the manuscript. 

 
 


 
18

Methods 

Spiral phase plate. We used two SPPs made of ZEONEX (cyclo olefin polymer, refractive 

index 1.52) with different step heights. SPP-1 is nominally designed to convert the 

Gaussian beam into the vortex beam (±ħ) at 0.45 THz. The step height is 1.29 mm. SPP-2 

has a step of 2.18 mm, which generates the vortex beam (±2ħ) at 0.53 THz. The steps are 

discretized to 16 small steps. The sign of the OAM can be inverted by reversing the SPP in 

the beam path. 

 

Azimuthal angle dependence of the local electric field around multipolar LSPs. As 

schematically shown in Fig. 2b,d,f, the surface charge distributions of LSPs along the 

circumference (radius r = r0) can be expressed as follows, 

 

rl(j) ∝ cos(lj) 
 
 
 
(1) 

 

Here l = 1, 2, ... corresponds to the dipole, quadrupole and higher order LSPs, respectively. 

We ignore the time-dependence (rotation of the charge distribution) at this moment and 

calculate the static electric field, 𝐸>⃗?(𝑟, 𝜑). The scalar potential F(r,j) can be obtained by 

solving the Laplace equation (at r ≠ r0) in cylindrical coordinates (r, j, z). Due to the 

cosine-type charge distribution, the scalar potential is an even function about j. When the 

scalar potential is independent of z, the general solution is, 

 

𝛷(𝑟, 𝜑) = 𝐴# + 𝐵# log 𝑟 + ∑
(𝐴?

H𝑟? + 𝐴?𝑟I?)
J
?KL
cos (𝑙𝜑) 
 
(2) 

 

where A0, B0, Al, and A’l are coefficients determined by boundary conditions. In order to 

avoid the divergence of the electric field in the limit of 𝑟 → 0 and 𝑟 → ∞, the electric 

field distributions have to take the following forms, 

 

𝐸>⃗(𝑟, 𝜑) = Q

∑
𝑙𝐴?

H𝑟?ILR− cos(𝑙𝜑) 𝑒⃗$ + sin(𝑙𝜑)𝑒⃗%U
J
?KL
(𝑟 ≤ 𝑟#)

∑
𝑙𝐴?𝑟I?ILRcos(𝑙𝜑) 𝑒⃗$ + sin(𝑙𝜑) 𝑒⃗%U
J
?KL
−

WX
$ 𝑒⃗$
(𝑟 ≥ 𝑟#) 


 
19

 
(3) 

 

From the boundary condition, R𝐸>⃗(𝑟 ≥ 𝑟#, 𝜑) − 𝐸>⃗(𝑟 ≤ 𝑟#, 𝜑)U ∙ 𝑒⃗$ = 𝜌?(𝜑) at r = r0, we 

obtain the following result for the static electric field around rl(j), 

 

𝐸>⃗?(𝑟, 𝜑) = 𝑙𝐴?𝑟I?ILRcos(𝑙𝜑) 𝑒⃗$ + sin(𝑙𝜑)𝑒⃗%U 
 
(𝑟 ≥ 𝑟#) (4) 

 

By taking the projection onto the detection polarization axis 𝑒⃗# = 𝑒⃗$cos(𝜑) − 𝑒⃗%sin(φ), 

the azimuthal angle dependence of the electric field detected in the experiment is, 

 

𝐸>⃗?(𝜑) ∙ 𝑒⃗# ∝ cos](𝑙 + 1)𝜑_  
 
 
(5) 

 

When rl(j) rotates as rl(j,t) = cos(lj  ∓ 2pft) = cos(±lj  - 2pft), additional electric field 

components such as radiation field and induced field are generated. However, in the near 

field regime, the following quasi-static field is the dominant one, 

 

𝐸?(𝜑, 𝑡) ∝ cos(±(𝑙 + 1)𝜑 − 2𝜋𝑓𝑡) 
 
 
(6) 

 

By replacing ±(l + 1) by m = ±2 (dipole), ±3 (quadrupole), and so on, we have 

 

𝐸b(𝜑, 𝑡) ∝ cos(𝑚𝜑 − 2𝜋𝑓𝑡)  
 
 
(7) 

 

As mentioned in the main text, this shows different LSP modes correspond one-to-one to 

cosine functions which are orthogonal to each other. Similar calculation for l = 0, i.e., a 

uniform surface charge r0(j) ∝ Const. leads to the following form, 

 

𝐸L(𝜑, 𝑡) ∝ cos(𝜑) cos(2𝜋𝑓𝑡)  
 
 
(8) 

 


 
20

These functions 𝐸b(𝜑, 𝑡) (m = ±1, ±2, ±3, ...) plus 𝐸#(𝜑, 𝑡) = Const. form a complete 

set for symmetric field distributions about j = 0 with the period of 2p. 

 

Dispersion relation of spoof LSPs. 

The dispersion relation of the spoof surface plasmons that propagate on the periodically 

corrugated metal surfaces is given as follows22,23, 

 

𝑘 =

9:ghijk

l
m1 + n

o

p

hijk
hq r

9

tan9 n

9:ghq

l
(𝑅 − 𝑟)r  
 
(9) 

 

Here, k is the wavevector along the surface, and c is the speed of light. The asymptotic 

(cutoff) frequency in the limit of 𝑘 → ∞ is 𝑐 4𝑛x(𝑅 − 𝑟)
⁄
. By folding the surface to make 

a corrugated metallic disk, k becomes the wavevector along the circumference, which is 

quantized due to the periodic boundary condition. We used eq. (9) as a fitting function in 

Fig. 3d. The fitting parameters determined by the method of least squares are ng = 4.8 and 

nout = 2.1. These numbers represent the effective refractive indices for the electromagnetic 

waves inside the groove and outside the disk. These should be expressed by combinations 

of the refractive indices of air (n = 1.00), silicon (n = 3.41), glass (n = 1.96), high-reflection 

coating materials (n ~2) and LN (n = 5.11) with appropriate weightings depending on the 

spatial extent of the electric field (see Fig. 1c for the structure around the metallic disk). 

The high effective index inside the groove (ng = 4.8) indicates that the electromagnetic 

mode is strongly localized around the LN (n = 5.11). The effective index outside the disk 

(nout = 2.1), which is close to the index of the glass substrate (n = 1.96) suggests that the 

localization is weaker. 

 

Numerical simulation.  

We numerically calculated the electromagnetic field in our system using the finite-element 

method in the commercial software COMSOL Multiphysics with an RF module. We 

performed three-dimensional harmonic propagation calculation with perfectly matched 


 
21

layers (PMLs) on the side and lower boundaries, plus the scattering boundary condition on 

the top surface. At the top surface, we excited the THz incident beam and made it propagate 

in the z direction, normal to the EO crystal. The perfect electric conductor was used at the 

surface of the corrugated disk to simulate the spoof LSP. To ensure the good match in the 

resonance frequency between the experiment and the simulation, an air layer of 1 µm 

thickness was introduced above the corrugated disk. 

 

 
 


 
22

Supplementary information 

 

Selective excitation of multipolar spoof plasmons using 

orbital angular momentum of light 

 

Takashi Arikawa1†, Tomoki Hiraoka1†, Shohei Morimoto1†, 

François Blanchard2, Shuntaro Tani3, Tomoko Tanaka3, 

Kyosuke Sakai4, Hiroki Kitajima4, Keiji Sasaki4 and Koichiro Tanaka1,3 * 

 

1Kyoto University, Department of Physics, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan 

2 École de technologie supérieure (ÉTS), Department of Electrical Engineering, Montréal, 

Québec, H3C 1K3, Canada 

3 Kyoto University, Institute for Integrated Cell-Material Sciences (iCeMS), 

Kyoto, 606- 8501, Japan 

4 Research Institute for Electronic Science, Hokkaido University, 

Hokkaido, 001-0020, Japan 

 

† These authors contributed equally to this work 

* email: kochan@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

 
 
Table of contents 
1. Experimental setup 
2. OAM purity of the excitation beam 
3. Additional data 

3.1 Excitation of inverse rotation modes 
3.2 Groove depth dependence 
3.3 Outer radius dependence 

4. References 

 
 


 
23

1. Experimental setup 

Figure S1 schematically shows the experimental setup. We used a mode-locked 

Ti:Sapphire regenerative amplifier (Solstice, Spectra-Physics) that delivers 100 fs optical 
pulses (center wavelength 780 nm) with 3.2 mJ pulse energy at 1 kHz repetition rate. 
Linearly polarized coherent THz pulses with Gaussian beam profile were generated by 
optical rectification in a LiNbO3 (LN) crystal using tilted-pulse-front excitation scheme 1,2. 
We used 1-µm-thick x-cut LN as an electro-optic (EO) crystal to detect electric field of THz 
pulses3. The image of the probe beam at the EO crystal was relayed to a 16 bit CMOS 
camera from PCO (model PCO Edge) with a polarization analyzer unit. The short pass (SP) 
and long pass (LP) filters were used to enhance the detection sensitivity using the probe 
spectrum filtering technique4. An x-cut LN with the thickness of 2 µm is used to 
compensate for the birefringence of the EO crystal. 
 

 
 

 

Figure S1 | Experimental setup. Optical system for the THz near-field microscope. 
SPP: spiral phase plate, BS: beam splitter, SP: short pass filter, LP: long pass filter, 
QWP: quarter wave plate, PBS: polarizing beam splitter. The optical image of the 
sample used in the main text is shown in the upper right corner. 


 
24

2. OAM purity of the excitation beam 

The OAM purity of the excitation beam can be evaluated by the same field pattern 

analysis performed in the main text. The drawings on the top of Fig. S2a schematically 
shows the electric field vector (𝐸>⃗, grey arrows) of the linearly polarized Gaussian beam and 
vortex beams with the OAM of ±ħ and ±2ħ. These are drawn at a time t = t0 when the 
electric field at j = 0 position is positive and maximum. The azimuthal angle dependence 
of the electric field along a virtual dashed circle are also plotted [𝐸(𝜑, 𝑡 = 𝑡#) = 𝐸>⃗ ∙ 𝑒⃗#, 𝑒⃗#: 
polarization direction detected in the experiment]. As shown in these graphs, different 
OAM modes are characterized by different orthogonal functions [cos(lj), l = 0; Gaussian, l 
= ±1; vortex (±ħ), l = ±2; vortex (±2ħ)]. This is evident because the electric field of the 
vortex beams with the OAM of lħ have the azimuthal angle dependence of exp(ilj). This 
enables us to analyze the OAM purity of the excitation beam. 

We performed two-dimensional Fourier transform of E(j, t) taken from the excitation 

beams (Fig 1d,g,j) to obtain frequency spectra E(l, f). The same radius as the outer radius of 
the corrugated metallic disk used in the main text was used for the radius of the virtual 
circle. Figure S2b shows the frequency spectra of the Gaussian [E(0, f)], ±ħ vortex [E(±1, 
f)], and ±2ħ vortex [E(±2, f)] components. In the case of no SPP, the spectra show that the 
beam is very close to the Gaussian beam. With SPP-1, most of the frequency component 
around 0.55 ± 0.2 THz is converted to the vortex beam (+ħ). The spectral shape depends on 
the spectrum of the original beam before going through the SPP. This explains the center 
frequency of 0.55 THz although SPP-1 is nominally designed at 0.45 THz. The residual 
Gaussian component around 0.25 THz is responsible for the dipole mode observed in Fig. 
3b. SPP-2 generates vortex beam (-2ħ) around 0.55 ± 0.1 THz. As expected, it also 
generates vortex beam (-ħ) around the half frequency region. This component excites the 
quadrupole mode observed in Fig. 3c. The vortex beam (-ħ) component around 0.6 THz is 
presumably due to the imperfection of the SPP.  

As shown in the main text and above, cos(±2j) component contains information on the 

dipole LSP mode and vortex beam (±2ħ). This is the reason why we eliminate the excitation 
beam signal in time-domain for the LSP mode identification done in the main text. 
 


 
25

 

Figure S2 | Field pattern analysis of the excitation beam. a. Electric field vector 
(grey arrows) of the linearly polarized Gaussian beam and vortex beams with the 
OAM of ±ħ and ±2ħ. The black cross represents the centre position of the beam and 
virtual dashed circle. The azimuthal angle dependence of the electric field for each 
beam is shown below. b. Frequency spectra of the Gaussian, vortex (±ħ), and vortex 
(±2ħ) components obtained from the data shown in Fig. 1d (No SPP), Fig. 1g (SPP-1), 
and Fig. 1j (SPP-2). 


 
26

3. Additional data 
3.1 Excitation of inverse rotation modes 
 
Figure S3a shows frequency spectra of the quadrupole mode excited by the 

vortex beam with the OAM of +ħ and -ħ. These data clearly show that we can selectively 
excite both clockwise and counter-clockwise modes depending on the sign of the OAM. 
These results also obey the same selection rules discussed in the main text. The similar data 
set in Fig. S3b for the hexapole mode excited by the vortex beam with the OAM of +2ħ and 
-2ħ also shows the same selectivity governed by the conservation of the TAM. 
 

 
 
 

 

Figure S3 | Selection of inverse rotation modes. a. Frequency spectra of the 
quadrupole mode excited by vortex beams with the OAM of +ħ and -ħ. The left graph 
is the same as the one shown in Fig. 3b (middle). b. Frequency spectra of the hexapole 
mode excited by vortex beams with the OAM of +2ħ (left) and -2ħ (right). The right 
graph is the same as the one shown in Fig. 3c (top). All the data were taken with the 
same sample as the one used in the main text. 


 
27

3.2 Groove depth dependence 
 
As described in the Methods section, the cutoff frequency of the spoof LSP is 

inversely proportional to the groove depth (R - r). Accordingly, the resonance frequency of 
the spoof LSP is expected to increase as the groove depth becomes shallow. To verify this 
point, we fabricated corrugated metallic disks with differing groove depths (outer radius R 
= 100 µm is fixed). Figure S4a shows the spectra of the dipole mode observed in three 
different samples drawn on the left. We can see that the resonance frequency shifts to the 
higher frequency as the groove becomes shallower. Similar trends are observed for 
quadrupole and hexapole modes as shown in Fig. S4b,c, respectively. 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Figure S4 | Groove depth dependence. a. Frequency spectra of the dipole mode 
excited in three different samples. Gaussian beam is used for the excitation. b. 
Frequency spectra of the quadrupole mode excited in two different samples. Vortex 
beam (+ħ) is used for the excitation. c. Frequency spectra of the hexapole mode 
excited in two different samples. Vortex beam (-2ħ) is used for the excitation. 


 
28

3.3 Outer radius dependence 
 
Figure S5 shows how the resonance frequency of the spoof LSP mode changes 

depending on the outer radius of the metallic disk. We fabricated three samples with 
different outer radius while maintaining the groove depth constant (35 µm). As shown in 
Fig. S5a, the resonance frequency of the dipole mode shifts to the higher frequency as the 
outer radius decreases; shorter circumference leads to a LSP with shorter wavelength. The 
same trend is observed for the quadrupole mode (Fig. S5b).  
 

 
 
 
 

 

Figure S5 | Outer radius dependence. a. Frequency spectra of the dipole mode 
excited in three different samples. Gaussian beam is used for the excitation. b. 
Frequency spectra of the quadrupole mode excited in two different samples. Vortex 
beam (+ħ) is used for the excitation. 


 
29

4. References 
[1] Hebling, J., Almási, G., Kozma, I., & Kuhl, J. Velocity matching by pulse front tilting 

for large area THz-pulse generation. Opt. Express 10, 1161–1166 (2002). 

[2] Hirori, H., Doi, A., Blanchard, F., & Tanaka, K. Single-cycle terahertz pulses with 

amplitudes exceeding 1 MV/cm generated by optical rectification in LiNbO3. Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 98, 091106 (2011). 

[3] Winnewisser, C., Jepsen, P. Uhd, Schall, M., Schyja, V., & Helm, H. Electro-optic 

detection of THz radiation in LiTaO3, LiNbO3 and ZnTe. Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 3069 (1997). 

[4] Blanchard, F., & Tanaka, K. Improving time and space resolution in electro-optic 
sampling for near-field terahertz imaging. Opt. Lett. 41, 4645–4648 (2016). 
 


