Miniature Multi-Level Optical Memristive Switch 

Using Phase Change Material

Hanyu Zhang1, Linjie Zhou1*, Liangjun Lu1, Jian Xu1, Ningning Wang1, Hao Hu1, B. M. A. 

Rahman2, Zhiping Zhou3, and Jianping Chen1

1State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Shanghai 

Institute for Advanced Communication and Data Science, Department of Electronic Engineering, 

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

2Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, City, University of London, London EC 1V 

0HB, U.K.

3State Key Laboratory of Advanced Optical Communication Systems and Networks, Department 

of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China

KEYWORDS: Phase change material, Optical switch, Integrated photonics

ABSTRACT

The optical memristive switches are electrically activated optical switches that can memorize the 

current state. They can be used as optical latching switches in which the switching state is changed 

only by applying an electrical Write/Erase pulse and maintained without external power supply. 

We demonstrate an optical memristive switch based on a silicon MMI structure covered with 


nanoscale-size Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) material on top. The phase change of GST is triggered by 

resistive heating of the silicon layer beneath GST with an electrical pulse. Experimental results 

reveal that the optical transmissivity can be tuned in a controllable and repeatable manner with the 

maximum transmission contrast exceeding 20 dB. Partial crystallization of GST is obtained by 

controlling the width and amplitude of the electric pulses. Crucially, we also demonstrate that both 

Erase and Write operations, to and from any intermediate level, are possible with accurate control

of the electrical pulses. Our work marks a significant step forward towards realizing photonic 

memristive switches without static power consumption, which are highly demanded in high-

density large-scale integrated photonics.

INTRODUCTION

Photonic switches are core devices for energy- and cost-efficient photonic signaling and 

processing systems in cloud and data-intensive computing. Silicon photonics has emerged as a 

suitable platform for integrated optics owing to its low power consumption, small footprint, low 

cost by leveraging the advanced complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) 

manufacturing process [1, 2]. In the past few years, varieties of silicon photonic switches have 

been demonstrated on the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform with thermo-optic (TO) effect [3, 4], 

electro-optic (EO) effect [5-7], and micro-electro-mechanical-system (MEMS) actuation [8]. The 

MEMS actuator requires a high drive voltage of 40 V for turn-on and 25 V for turn-off [8]. The 

inefficient TO and EO effects provide a very small tuning range in the refractive index. Large-size 

Mach–Zehnder interferometers (MZIs) or narrow-band ring resonators are routinely used to realize 

optical switching. Moreover, the above three tuning methods are all volatile, which means that the 


switching state can only be maintained with an applied voltage. For TO and EO tuners, this results 

in a huge static power consumption.  

On the other hand, memory switching effects have been studied in electronics for many years 

[9]. One important candidate for memory switching is based on the so-called resistive random-

access memory (RRAM). Chalcogenide phase change materials (PCMs), such as germanium-

antimony-tellurides (GST), have shown outstanding properties in RRAM due to their high Write

and Read speeds, reversible phase transition, high degree of scalability, low power consumption, 

good data retention, and multi-level storage capability [10]. The reversible phase transitions 

between the amorphous and crystalline states could be triggered by thermal [11], optical [12] or 

electrical pulses [13] as long as the temperature of GST is raised above the crystallization or 

melting point. The phase change is non-volatile and therefore no power is required to keep the 

state. In addition to the electrical resistance contrast, a pronounced change in the optical property, 

including refractive index, extinction coefficient, and reflectance, also occurs in PCMs during the 

phase transition [14, 15]. Such features have led to the development of on-chip non-volatile 

photonic applications, such as nanopixel display [16, 17], photonic synapse [18, 19], optical 

computing [20], and optical switching [21-24]. 

Most interestingly, combining PCM with silicon photonics allows one to relate the worlds of 

resistive memory and optical switching, leading to the realization of a compact memristive switch. 

Optical memristive switches are digital optical switches with multiple different transmission states 

that can be stored for long periods without external voltage. Hence, it possesses characteristics 

from both an optical switch and an optical memory in one configuration [25, 26]. Optical 

memristive switches are particularly interesting for use as a new kind of optical field-

programmable devices whose optical transfer functions can be electrically written and erased. 


In this paper, we demonstrate an ultra-compact optical memristive switch based on a 

nanoscale GST-gated silicon multimode interferometer (MMI). The device exhibits a large 

transmission contrast when the GST changes between the amorphous and crystalline states. Both 

binary and multi-level optical switching has been achieved by controlling the crystallization degree 

of GST. We also investigate the dynamic processes during crystallization and amorphization of 

GST and their effect on the optical transmission. 

DEVICE STRUCTURE

Figure 1(a) illustrates the structure of the optical memristive switch composed of an MMI 

crossing with a nanoscale GST on top. Input and output silicon waveguides are 500-nm wide and 

220-nm high, connected to the MMI through two 4-m-long linear tapers with a 1.2-m tapered 

width. The MMI is 12-m long and 2-m wide. In the center of the MMI, another 1.7-m-wide 

silicon strip is orthogonally crossed. Due to the self-imaging principle of MMI, light is focused 

into the center of the MMI and the crossed strip thus does not introduce significant loss. The 

crossed strip is heavily P++-doped in the center with a doping strip width of 1 m. At the end of 

the doping region, a 20/100-nm-thick Ti/Au layer is deposited on top to form ohmic contact. 

Therefore, the doping strip works as a resistive heater when an electrical pulse is applied through 

the gold (Au) electrodes. A small circular piece of 30-nm-thick GST layer with a diameter of DGST

is placed in the center of the MMI. The GST layer is covered by another 30-nm-thick indium-tin-

oxide (ITO) film to protect it from being oxidized when it is exposed in the air. Control of light 

wave propagation relies on the evanescent coupling between the MMI and the GST material. 

Change in extinction coefficient of the GST material after phase transition alters the optical 


transmittance through the MMI. As the GST is located at the light focusing spot, the interaction is 

maximized, favoring a high optical transmission tuning efficiency. 

Finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations were performed to calculate light 

propagation through the MMI crossing. Figure 1(b) illustrates the cross-sectional electrical-field 

intensity (|E|2) distributions in the x-y and y-z planes when the GST is amorphous and crystalline. 

A significant reduction in optical transmission is observed when the GST changes from the 

amorphous to the crystalline state. 

Figure 1. Device structure and optical wave propagation. (a) Schematic of the GST-gated 

silicon MMI switch. The inset I shows the zoom-in view of the active region. The inset II shows 

the transversal cross-sectional view of the active region. (b) Simulated electric-field intensity 

distributions in the MMI when the GST is in amorphous and crystalline states.


The non-volatile phase transition is induced by an electrical pulse (green arrow in Figure 1(a)). 

For amorphization, the GST is first melted and then quenched rapidly by applying a high-voltage 

electrical pulse (Write pulse) for a short time period. For crystallization, the GST is annealed by 

applying a medium-voltage electrical pulse (Erase pulse) at a temperature between the 

crystallization and melting points for a time long enough to recover the atomic order of GST. For 

optical memristive switch applications, the nonvolatility is beneficial since no static power is 

required to keep the current state and only a short low-power pulse is required to change the phase 

of the nanoscale GST material.

The devices were fabricated (see Supplementary Material S1) using an SOI wafer with a 220-

nm-thick silicon layer on top of a 2-μm-thick buried oxide layer. Figure 2(b) presents the false-

colored scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the coupling region, where the GST/ITO 

patch is clearly discerned.

Figure 2. Fabricated devices. (a) Optical microscope image of the fabricated device. (b) False-

colored SEM image of the MMI crossing with GST/ITO in the center.


EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

CRYSTALLIZATION PROCESS. The GST crystallization (Erase) process determines the 

optical transmission dynamics during switch-off. The optical transmission (T0) when GST is in the 

full crystalline state is defined as the baseline. The normalized transmission change is then defined 

as ΔT/T0 = (T−T0)/T0. We first investigated the dynamic change in transmission with a 1-m-

diameter GST when we applied to the device a rectangular Erase pulse with a fixed duration of 

100 ns and a varying amplitude from 3.5 V to 6 V, as shown in Figure 3(a). The GST was initially 

at the amorphous state. When the Erase pulse amplitude was set to be low enough, the GST phase 

transition was inhibited. In the period of the Erase pulse, the optical transmission continuously 

decreases. At the end of the pulse, the transmission rises up until it recovers its original value. The 

recovery time is about 100 ns, determined by the heat out-diffusion process during cooling down. 

However, as the pulse amplitude increases to exceed 4.5 V, GST begins to be partially crystallized 

and the transmission continuously drops after the excitation pulse. When the material is fully 

crystallized, the transmission goes down to the minimum and remains unchanged with the further 

increasing pulse amplitude. Figure 3(b) shows the maximum transmission change as a function of 

pulse amplitude. It can be seen that once the temperature exceeds the crystallization threshold, the 

amount of transmission change increases rapidly until finally saturates at the full crystalline state.

We next fixed the Erase pulse amplitude at 3.5 V while the pulse duration increases from 40 

ns to 200 ns. Figure 3(c) shows the measured dynamic responses. The transmission returns to the 

initial level when the pulse duration is shorter than 140 ns. It begins to crystalline for pulse duration 

larger than 140 ns and is fully crystallized when the pulse duration is longer than 180 ns. Figure

3(d) shows the maximum transmission change as a function of pulse duration for various pulse 

amplitudes. The transmission is relatively insensitive for low-amplitude pulses. The threshold 


duration to initiate crystallization becomes shorter for high-amplitude pulses. It can also be seen 

from the experimental results that besides the crystalline and amorphous states, there also exist 

multiple intermediate states with a mixture of crystalline and amorphous GST. Utilizing these 

intermediate states can further increase the waveguide tuning freedom.

Figure 3. Dynamic response of optical transmission during the Erase process. (a) The input 
electrical pulse has a fixed duration and a varying amplitude. (b) The maximum transmission

change varies with the pulse amplitude. (c) The input electrical pulse has a fixed amplitude and a 

varying duration. (d) The maximum transmission change varies with the pulse duration and 

amplitude.

AMORPHIZATION PROCESS. The GST amorphization (Write) process determines the 

optical transmission dynamics during switch-on. In the amorphization process, the GST needs to 


be heated up to the melting temperature (650°C) and then quenched rapidly by applying a high-

voltage electrical Write pulse for a short time period. Figure 4(a) shows the temporal response 

when the pulse amplitude is varied and the pulse duration is fixed at 20 ns. The GST is initially at 

the fully crystalline state. When the pulse amplitude is low (<10.8 V) so that the GST is not heated 

to the melting point, the optical transmission first increases and then drops to the initial level. 

When the melting temperature is reached with a higher pulse amplitude (11V~11.6V), the GST is 

partially amorphized and the degree of amorphization increases with the pulse amplitude until it 

is fully amorphized (11.8 V). However, when the pulse amplitude is further increased (12 V), GST 

may be ablated with an increased loss, deteriorating the device performance. Figure 4(b) shows 

the maximum transmission change as a function of the pulse amplitude. 

Figure 4(c) shows the amorphization dynamic process when the Write pulse has a fixed 

amplitude but a varying duration from 10 ns to 20 ns. The transmission rises and drops to the initial 

low level when the pulse duration is shorter than 16 ns. After that, the amorphization begins and 

the transmission level goes up rapidly. Figure 4(d) illustrates the maximum transmission change 

varying with the pulse duration. 

From Figures 4 (a) and (c), one sees that the response time of the amorphization process is 

around 100 ns, governed by the gradual increasing transmission after the excitation pulse. It is 

believed to be related to the heat dissipation process when the GST is quenched. 


Figure 4. Dynamic response of optical transmission during the Write process. (a) The input 
electrical pulse has a fixed duration and a varying amplitude. (b) The maximum transmission 
change varies with the pulse amplitude. (c) The input pulse has a fixed amplitude and a varying

duration. (d) The maximum transmission change varies with the pulse duration.

TRANSMISSION CONTRAST AND OPERATION SPEED. We next investigated the 

effects of different sizes of GST on the transmission contrast and the operating speed. We 

fabricated three devices with the GST diameter being 0.75 m, 1 m, and 1.2 m. The results are 

summarized in Table 1. The silicon doping region has a fixed width of 1 μm for all devices. We 

used the same Write and Erase pulses to initiate the phase transition for all devices. The 

Supplementary Material S3 shows an example of transmission spectra for two phase-change cycles. 

The measured result suggests that the device can operate over a bandwidth of more than 100 nm 


(limited by measurement). For the device with a 1.2-m-diameter GST, the insertion loss increases 

to 4 dB and the transmission contrast is improved to 18.59 dB. It reveals that a higher transmission

contrast is obtained from the device with a larger-size GST. Because the doping region is narrower 

than the GST area, the GST is not uniformly heated up. Therefore, the GST is not completely 

amorphized after a single Write pulse, leading to a higher insertion loss due to the residual 

crystalline GST. 

Table 1. Comparison of optical memristive switches with three difference sizes of GST

Diameter of GST film, DGST (m)
Insertion loss (dB)
Transmission contrast (dB)

0.75
0.62±0.044
2.92±0.021

1
0.98±0.048
10.39±0.045

1.2
4.03±0.019
18.59±0.15

It reveals that the transmission contrast exceeding 20 dB are possible with a larger-size GST 

at the cost of a higher loss. The insertion loss can be decreased by slightly widening the doping 

region to incorporate the entire GST material. On the other hand, the recently discovered new 

optical phase change material Ge2Sb2Se4Te1 (GSST) exhibits significantly reduced extinction 

coefficient compared to GST in the telecom wavelength range [27]. Therefore, it is possible to 

realize a memristive switch based on GSST with an even lower insertion loss. In the 

Supplementary Material S4 shows the transmission dynamic responses to the Write and Erase 

pulses for three devices with different GST sizes. It reveals that the response time of the writing 

process is longer and increases with the GST size. There is a fundamental tradeoff between the 

transmission contrast and the operation speed. 


In our device, the doping region is a rectangular strip beneath the GST, and therefore, heat is 

uniformly generated along the thin strip. Given that the GST is only a micrometer-size circular 

disk, a considerable heat is thus wasted. The doping window can be further optimized to have a 

reduced waist in the GST region so that heat can be more concentrated in the center. The gap size 

between the two Au electrodes is another key parameter affecting the electrical power required for 

the Write/Erase process. A narrower gap gives a smaller silicon resistance, which helps to reduce 

the pulse voltage and improve the power efficiency. The operation speed is also increased with the 

reduced heat dissipation. It is expected that switching time of less than one hundred nanosecond 

is achievable.

OPTICAL MEMRISTIVE SWITCHING. Figure 5(a) shows the optical waveform when the 

transmission changes between the ON-state (amorphous) and the OFF-state (crystalline). A 20-ns-

wide pulse of 11.2 V amplitude was used for re-amorphization and a 100-ns-wide pulse of 4.5 V

amplitude was used for crystallization. The resistance of the P++-doped region is approximately 

250 Ω. The energy consumption was calculated to be 10 nJ for the re-amorphization process and 

8.2 nJ for the crystallization process. We also measured the recyclability of our optical memristive 

switch. Figure 5(b) shows the experimental results for repetitive switching over 50 cycles. Since a 

hundred thousand times of rewriting has been achieved with phase-change materials, the number 

of switching cycles in our device can be further improved [28]. The electrically-driven GST 

memristive switch can not only realize binary switching, but is also capable of multi-level 

operation. This multi-level operation relies on the intermediate states with a mixture of crystalline 

and amorphous GST. The number of the intermediate states can be obtained by controlling the 

degree of crystallization in a single device. Figure 5(b) shows the switching operation with five 

clear distinct levels. The initial phase of GST is fully crystalline with a low transmission (level 0). 


It returns to the high level (level 4) after amorphization at time t1 using a single Write pulse with 

20 ns duration and 520 mW peak power (11.4V pulse amplitude) to ensure that all GST is re-

amorphized. The Write operation (return to Level 4) can be performed at any intermediate level, 

such as from Level 1 and 2 to Level 4 at time t5 and t12, respectively. The Erase operation (return 

to Level 0) is also possible from any intermediate state, such as from Level 2, 3, 4 to Level 0 at t15, 

t8, t2, respectively. The Erase pulse has a duration of 100 ns and a peak power of 90 mW (4.75 V 

pulse amplitude). The partial crystallization of GST (corresponding to Level n) can be obtained 

from Level 4 by using a group of weak Erase pulses with 100 ms period, 140 ns duration, and 50

mW power (3.5 V pulse amplitude). The number of pulses required for partial crystallization is 5-

n. For example, four, three, and two weak Erase pulses are used to switch from Level 4 to Level 

1, 2, 3 during the time periods of t4-t5, t10-t11, t6-t7, respectively. This represents a crucial 

advancement, because it allows one to arbitrarily switch the transmission to the desired level using 

a combination of Write and Erase pulses without pre-knowledge of the current level. Each weak 

Erase pulse has the same duration and amplitude. As a result, the first weak Erase pulse does not 

have a significant effect on the crystallization process. In fact, a sequence of consecutive pulses 

with gradually decreasing amplitude can be used to generate more evenly distributed intermediate 

levels [12, 29]. 

We use different colors to code the bit levels, the result shows that five clearly distinguishable 

levels can be obtained. In fact, more transmission levels can be programmed, limited only by the 

noise level of the photodetector. These exciting results of our memristive optical switch 

demonstrate that any intermediate level can be reached just by applying the appropriate Write or 

Erase pulses. Such capabilities provide a huge leap forward in terms of functionality and will be 


crucial for applications in optical latching switch, optical computing, and reconfigurable photonic 

circuits.

Figure 5. (a) Binary-level temporal response when the device is switched between the ON-state 

(amorphous) and the OFF-state (crystalline). (b) Transmission contrast over more than 50 

switching cycles. (c) Multi-level switching of device with each middle level corresponding to a 

partially-crystalline state.

CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated a memristive optical switch whose optical transmission level can be 

electrically written and erased by combining a silicon MMI and the phase change material GST. 

The switching state change is based on the electrical pulse induced phase transition of a m-size 


GST material placed on top of the MMI. The measurement result reveals that the transmission 

contrast exceeding 20 dB are possible over the wavelength range of 1,500 to 1,600 nm. We have 

investigated the transient optical responses of our memristive switch in response to electrical 

pulses with varying amplitude and duration. This study helps us to better control the Erase/Write

pulse, so as to accurately control the degree of crystallization/re-amorphization of GST. Both 

binary-level and multi-level switching operations are thus possible. Our method provides a new 

tool for an on-chip programmable photonic circuit with the non-volatile operation. This successful 

implementation of an optical memristive switch actuated by GST marks a significant step forward 

in realizing an ultra-small and low-power consumption optical circuit and set the stage for further 

exciting new developments in phase-change enabled silicon photonics. 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supplementary material (PDF)

S1. Fabrication process flow 

S2. Experimental setup

S3. Transmission contrast   

S4. GST size effect on operation speed

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

E-mail: ljzhou@sjtu.edu.cn

Author Contributions

H. Zhang designed, fabricated and characterized the devices, and drafted the manuscript. L. Zhou 

and L. Lu initiated and led the project. J. Xu contributed to device fabrication. N. Wang and H. Hu 


aided in the experiment. B. M. A. Rahman, J. Chen and J. Zhou supervised the research. All authors 

contributed to technical discussions and writing the paper.

Notes

The all authors declare no conflict of interest.

Funding Sources

National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (61535006, 61705129), Shanghai 

Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (2017SHZDZX03).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank the support from National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(NSFC) (61535006, 61705129), Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project 

(2017SHZDZX03). The authors also thank the Center for Advanced Electronic Materials and 

Devices (AEMD) of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU) for support in device fabrication.

REFERENCES

1.
J. Wang and Y. Long, "On-chip silicon photonic signaling and processing: a review," Sci. 
Bull. 63, 1267-1310 (2018).

2.
M. Asghari and A. V. Krishnamoorthy, "Energy-efficient communication," Nat. Photonics 
5, 268 (2011).

3.
P. Dumais, D. J. Goodwill, D. Celo, J. Jiang, C. Zhang, F. Zhao, X. Tu, C. Zhang, S. Yan, 
J. He, M. Li, W. Liu, Y. Wei, D. Geng, H. Mehrvar, and E. Bernier, "Silicon Photonic 
Switch Subsystem With 900 Monolithically Integrated Calibration Photodiodes and 64-
Fiber Package," J. Lightwave Technol. 36, 233-238 (2018).

4.
K. Suzuki, R. Konoike, J. Hasegawa, S. Suda, H. Matsuura, K. Ikeda, S. Namiki, and H. 
Kawashima, "Low-Insertion-Loss and Power-Efficient 32 × 32 Silicon Photonics Switch 
With Extremely High-Δ Silica PLC Connector," J. Lightwave Technol. 37, 116-122 (2019).

5.
Z. Guo, L. Lu, L. Zhou, L. Shen, and J. Chen, "16 × 16 Silicon optical switch based on 
dual-ring-assisted Mach–Zehnder interferometers," J. Lightwave Technol. 36, 225-232 
(2018).

6.
L. Lu, S. Zhao, L. Zhou, D. Li, Z. Li, M. Wang, X. Li, and J. Chen, "16 x 16 non-blocking 
silicon optical switch based on electro-optic Mach-Zehnder interferometers," Opt. Express 
24, 9295-9307 (2016).


7.
L. Qiao, W. Tang, and T. Chu, "32 × 32 silicon electro-optic switch with built-in monitors 
and balanced-status units," Scientific Reports 7, 42306 (2017).

8.
T. J. Seok, K. Kwon, J. Henriksson, J. Luo, and M. C. Wu, "Wafer-scale silicon photonic 
switches beyond die size limit," Optica 6, 490-494 (2019).

9.
H. S. Philip Wong, Simone Raoux, SangBum Kim, Jiale Liang, John P. Reifenberg, Bipin 
Rajendran, Mehdi Asheghi, and Kenneth E. Goodson, "Phase change memory," P. IEEE 
98, 2201-2227 (2010).

10.
M. H. R. Lankhorst, B. W. S. M. M. Ketelaars, and R. A. M. Wolters, "Low-cost and 
nanoscale non-volatile memory concept for future silicon chips," Nat. Mater. 4, 347 (2005).

11.
M. Stegmaier, C. Rı́os, H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. P. Pernice, "Thermo-optical effect in 
phase-change nanophotonics," ACS Photonics 3, 828-835 (2016).

12.
C. Ríos, M. Stegmaier, P. Hosseini, D. Wang, T. Scherer, C. D. Wright, H. Bhaskaran, and 
W. H. P. Pernice, "Integrated all-photonic non-volatile multi-level memory," Nat. 
Photonics 9, 725-732 (2015).

13.
S. G.-C. Carrillo, G. R. Nash, H. Hayat, M. J. Cryan, M. Klemm, H. Bhaskaran, and C. D. 
Wright, "Design of practicable phase-change metadevices for near-infrared absorber and 
modulator applications," Opt. Express 24, 13563-13573 (2016).

14.
K. Shportko, S. Kremers, M. Woda, D. Lencer, J. Robertson, and M. Wuttig, "Resonant 
bonding in crystalline phase-change materials," Nat. Mater. 7, 653 (2008).

15.
Hanyu Zhang, Linjie Zhou, B. M. A. Rahman, Xing Wu, Liangjun Lu, Youhua Xu, Jian 
Xu, Junchao Song, Zhigao Hu, Liping Xu, and Jianping Chen, "Ultracompact Si-GST 
Hybrid Waveguides for Nonvolatile Light Wave Manipulation," IEEE Photonics J. 10, 1-
10 (2018).

16.
C. Rios, P. Hosseini, R. A. Taylor, and H. Bhaskaran, "Color depth modulation and 
resolution in phase-change material nanodisplays," Adv. Mater. 28, 4720-4726 (2016).

17.
K. K. Du, Q. Li, Y. B. Lyu, J. C. Ding, Y. Lu, Z. Y. Cheng, and M. Qiu, "Control over 
emissivity of zero-static-power thermal emitters based on phase-changing material GST," 
Light Sci. Appl. 6, e16194 (2017).

18.
Zengguang Cheng, Carlos Ríos, Wolfram H. P. Pernice, C. David Wright, and Harish 
Bhaskaran, "On-chip photonic synapse," Sci. Adv. 3, e1700160 (2017).

19.
Indranil Chakraborty, Gobinda Saha, Abhronil Sengupta, and Kaushik Roy, "Toward fast 
neural computing using all-Photonic phase change spiking neurons," Sci. Rep. 8, 12980 
(2018).

20.
C. Ríos, N. Youngblood, Z. Cheng, M. Le Gallo, W. H. P. Pernice, C. D. Wright, A. 
Sebastian, and H. Bhaskaran, "In-memory computing on a photonic platform," Sci. Adv. 
5, eaau5759 (2019).

21.
K. J. Miller, K. A. Hallman, R. F. Haglund, and S. M. Weiss, "Silicon waveguide optical 
switch with embedded phase change material," Optics Express 25, 26527-26536 (2017).

22.
Jan von Keitz, Johannes Feldmann, Nico Gruhler, Carlos Ríos, C. David Wright, Harish 
Bhaskaran, and Wolfram H. P. Pernice, "Reconfigurable nanophotonic cavities with 
nonvolatile response," ACS Photonics 5, 4644-4649 (2018).

23.
P. Xu, J. Zheng, J. K. Doylend, and A. Majumdar, "Low-loss and broadband nonvolatile 
phase-change directional coupler switches," ACS Photonics (2019).

24.
K. Kato, M. Kuwahara, H. Kawashima, T. Tsuruoka, and H. Tsuda, "Current-driven phase-
change optical gate switch using indium–tin-oxide heater," Appl. Phys. Express 10, 072201 
(2017).


25.
C. Hoessbacher, Y. Fedoryshyn, A. Emboras, A. Melikyan, M. Kohl, D. Hillerkuss, C. 
Hafner, and J. Leuthold, "The plasmonic memristor: a latching optical switch," Optica 1, 
198-202 (2014).

26.
Ueli Koch, Claudia Hoessbacher, Alexandros Emboras, and Juerg Leuthold, "Optical 
memristive switches," J. Electroceram. 39, 239-250 (2017).

27.
Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Li, R. Soref, T. Gu, and J. Hu, "Broadband nonvolatile photonic 
switching based on optical phase change materials: beyond the classical figure-of-merit," 
Opt. Lett. 43, 94-97 (2018).

28.
G. W. Burr, M. J. Breitwisch, M. Franceschini, D. Garetto, K. Gopalakrishnan, B. Jackson, 
B. Kurdi, C. Lam, L. A. Lastras, A. Padilla, B. Rajendran, S. Raoux, and R. S. Shenoy, 
"Phase change memory technology," J. Vav. Sci. Technol. B 28, 223-262 (2010).

29.
M. Stegmaier, C. Ríos, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright, and W. H. P. Pernice, "Nonvolatile 
all-optical 1 × 2 switch for chipscale photonic networks," Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, 1600346 
(2017).


