arXiv:1905.11792v1  [physics.optics]  28 May 2019

Upmost efficiency, few-micron-sized midwave infrared HgCdTe photodetectors

Roy Avrahamy, Mark Auslender, Rafi Shikler, and Shlomo Hava
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B 653, Beer-Sheva, Israel 84105

Moshe Zohar and Zeev Fradkin
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering,
Shamoon College of Engineering, P.O.B. 950, Beer Sheva, Israel 84100

Benny Milgrom
School of Electrical Engineering, The Jerusalem College of Technology, P.O.B 16031, Jerusalem, Israel 91160

Resonant cavity-assisted enhancement of optical absorption was a photodetector designing con-
cept emerged about two and half decades ago, which responded to the challenge of thinning the
photoactive layer while outperforming the efficiency of the monolithic photodetector. However, for
many relevant materials, meeting that challenge with such a design requires unrealistically many
layer deposition steps, so that the efficiency at goal hardly becomes attainable because of inevitable
fabrication faults. Under this circumstance, we suggest a new approach for designing photodetectors
with absorber layer as thin as that in respective resonant cavity enhanced ones, but concurrently, the
overall detector thickness being much thinner, and topmost performing. The proposed structures
also contain the cavity-absorber arrangement but enclose the cavity by two dielectric one-dimensional
grating-on-layer structures with the same grating pitch, instead of the distributed Bragg reflectors
typical of the resonant cavity enhancement approach. By design based on the in-house software, the
theoretical feasibility of such ∼ 7.0µm−8.5µm thick structures with ∼ 100% efficiency for a linearly
polarized (TE or TM) mid-infrared range radiation is demonstrated. Moreover, the tolerances of the
designed structures’ performance against the gratings’ fabrication errors are tested, and fair man-
ufacturing tolerance while still maintaining high peak efficiency along with a small deviation of its
spectral position off initially predefined central-design wavelength is proved. In addition, the elec-
tromagnetic fields amplitudes and Poynting verctor over the cavity-absorber area are visualized. As
a result, it is inferred that the electromagnetic fields’ confinement in the designed structure, which
is a key to their upmost efficiency, is two-dimensional combining in-depth vertical resonant-cavity
like confinement, with the lateral microcavity like one set by the presence of gratings.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Photodetector (PD) is an indispensable part in optical
sensors, communication systems and photonic intercon-
nects.
If each photon absorbed in a photoactive layer
of PD contributes to creation of an electron-hole pair
and there is no parasitic recombination, the quantum
efficiency η, i.e. the ratio of the number of the photo-
generated electronhole pairs to the number of incident
photons, equals the optical absorbance A. In monolithic
PDs the detected light traverses the absorber once, so η
may be increased only by increasing the absorber’s thick-
ness ta, but the larger the ta the stronger the thermal
generation-recombination noise and the longer the tran-
sit time in photodiode PDs.

For most applications, a high signal-to-noise ratio and
operation speed concurrently with high η are both cru-
cial. A drastic decrease in ta to this end while keeping
high η requires the impinging light to be strongly con-
fined in a vicinity of the absorber. An adopted approach
to the confinement is the solid-state resonant Fabry-Perot
cavity in which the absorber layer is sandwiched be-
tween two multilayers. In each multilayer, a distributed
Bragg reflector (DBR) acts as a mirror, and two lay-
ers adjacent to the absorber layer form a cavity. Thin

enough absorber may weakly affect the optical cavity-
resonance condition absorbing nevertheless at the reso-
nance wavelength the largest portion of the incident light.
Such a resonant cavity enhanced (RCE) PD1,2 enables
much more efficient and faster (for photodiode PD) de-
tection as well as operation at higher temperatures with
a much thinner absorber than its monolithic counterpart,
although these benefits are traded off against a smaller
spectral bandwidth.
The field of RCE PDs have matured over the past two
and half decades, regarding different spectral ranges, e.g.
the telecom bands in the near infrared (NIR)3–5, and
mid-wave infrared (MWIR) ranges8–10, as well as suitable
physical devices, such as p-i-n, Shottky and avalanche
photodiodes1–7, and photoconductor8–10. Yet, due to re-
strictions on the mirrors’ optical properties1,2, the RCE
PDs designed for topmost η should contain large num-
ber of layers in their DBRs that it would certainly ex-
ceed a technology defined critical value, see e.g.11 for
HgCdTe based PDs, beyond which the DBRs’ fabrica-
tion inevitably introduces growth defects. In turn, the
defects impair the DBRs’ reflectance, making attainment
η at goal impractical.
In a quest for thinning PDs, we proposed to replace the
front DBR mirror by an one-dimensional (1D) grating-
on-layer structure (GLS), and reported the proof-of-


2

concept examples of HgCdTe based PDs12,13. The round-
trip phase control1 extended to the presence of GLS and
optimization allowed us12,13 to achieve tolerant designs
with the η ≈ 100% and backside DBR twice as thin as
compared to those of an optimized conventional RCE PD
comprising the same materials. Still, if the back mirror
remains to be a DBR one the RCE device can not be
downscaled anymore due to lower bounds imposed on the
cavity and DBRs thicknesses by tailoring the round-trip
phase and DBR mirrors’ reflectance, respectively1,2.

An emergent promising approach to high capability
photo-detection is nowadays with PD focal plane array
(FPA)14,15. As the monolithic PDs are low efficient, in-
tegrating them in FPA requires high-density packaging
which may prove faulty. Thus the high capability PD
FPAs my benefit integrating upmost efficient PDs, while
thinning the latter would be favorable for the planar on-
chip applications.

Here, to meet challenge of further reducing the size
and complexity of the entire PD device by surpassing the
above thickness bounds while benefiting from our previ-
ous designs12,13 which attained uppermost η, we propose
to replace the back DBR mirror in those designs also by
an 1D GLS with the same grating period as that in the
front one. High refractive index (RI) contrast GLSs are
attracting much interest16 as a new platform for inte-
grated optoelectronics due to their ability to function in
some spectral range quite alike usual optical elements,
e.g. mirrors, being much thinner.

II.
PROPOSED PHOTODETECTOR
STRUCTURES

We consider PD structures, adapted to MWIR range
portion, around a center-design wavelength (CDW), us-
ing HgCdTe, as the absorber.
The MWIR design in-
volves a variety of materials, see8,9,11,17 and below.
Normal-incidence backside (through-substrate) illumina-
tion (BSI) is used all over the study. Benefiting the ab-
sence of electrical contacts at the PD backside, BSI has
an essential advantage of reasonable reducing the PD
pixel without decreasing the amount of the input light
power9.

Fig.1 shows the structure schematic, in which Fig.1(a)
depicts MWIR RCE PD of conventional schematic1,2

served us as a reference, and Fig.1(b) shows its double-
GLS modification. The front and back DBRs in Fig.1(a)
are composed of Ge/SiO and Hg0.56Cd0.44Te/CdTe
quarter-wave stacks in respect; CdTe builds the cavity
ambient of the Hg0.71Cd0.29Te layer, while the substrate
is Cd0.9Zn0.1Te9,11,17. In Fig.1(b), the absorber, its am-
bient, the substrate and irradiation mode are the same
as in Fig.1(a), but now the reflectors are: the air-Ge/Ge
and CdTe-Hg0.56Cd0.44Te/Hg0.56Cd0.44Te GLSs.

III.
STATEMENT OF PROBLEM AND
PRINCIPLES OF MODELING

In this study, we adopt the η = A modeling that sim-
plifies the design to one in which only the optics needs to
be considered, and still has a prevalent use for initial PD
designs1,2,6,9,12. An electronic-device simulation can be
done, see e.g.6,17,18, to complement and refine the opti-
cal approach but hardly can disprove its main outcomes.
Therefore, rather than being restricted to a specific PD
technology, we analyze the structures optically, charac-
terizing the constitutive layers, including the absorber,
by complex RIs n + ik, n and k ≪ n being real RIs and
extinction coefficients, respectively. Complex RIs of the
involved materials, see e.g.19–23, at CDW are exposed in
Table I. Neither the width nor shape of the η(λ) spectra
are of our concern, rather we put the emphasis on obtain-
ing maximal CDW efficiency ηmax = max η (λ0), while
keeping ta constant per a design and the back-grating
cladding’s thickness, similarly to the DBR layers’ ones,
fixed at the respective quarter-wavelength value through-
out. Such dimensions as the grating pitch Λ and groove
width W (constrained to be the same for both GLSs),
etch depths tfg and tbg as well as the thicknesses of the
front-grating cladding and front and back cavities, df and
db in respect, are the design variables.

It also worthwhile to prevent losses due to light es-
cape from the PD’s sides, which is achieved by suppress-
ing non-specular orders of diffraction from GLSs into the
cavity. To this end, it is sufficient to consider the sub-
wavelength grating (SWG) operation regime, viz. to con-
strain the minimum operation wavelength by λmin > λR,
where λR = ΛnCdTe. Yet, the SWG regime is not com-
pulsory for the non-specular orders can be suppressed
with additional design optimization constraints.

IV.
DESIGN PROCEDURE

We performed the designs with a trial-and-error auto-
mated multi-start optimization using in-house software,
described in detail elsewhere12. For trial df and db we
use values compatible with the cavity thickness assessed
from the round-trip phase condition1, with the mirrors’
reflection phases computed for GLSs at standalone con-
figurations. While the planar-interface multilayers are in-
sensitive to the polarization of normally incident light24,
the 1D gratings are strongly sensitive to it.
Hence,
given ta any our design yields at least three structures
– conventional quarter-wavelength DBR RCE PD, and
at least two different dual-GLS based PDs for TE- and
TM-polarized irradiation, labeled further as 2DBR, and
2GLS-TE and 2GLS-TM, in respect. When optimizing
RCE PD, we kept it comparable in thickness to corre-
sponding thickest optimized dual-GLS PD.


3

CdTe

Substrate/Input medium

Front GL Mirror

Hg0.56Cd0.44Te

Ge

CdTe

W

Hg0.71Cd0.29Te

Ge Air

ta
df

db

tc

tfg

tbg

Back GL Mirror

tGe

(b)

Cd0.9Zn0.1Te

tHgCdTe

W

z=0

Substrate/Input medium

CdTe

Ge

CdTe

CdTe

SiO

SiO

Cd0.9Zn0.1Te

CdTe

Ge

Ge

df

db
tc
ta

tCdTe

tHgCdTe

tGe

tSiO

(a)

Hg0.71Cd0.29Te

Hg0.56Cd0.44Te

Hg0.56Cd0.44Te

Hg0.56Cd0.44Te

Back DBR Mirror

(HL)kH

Front DBR Mirror

(HL)kH

z=0

x

z

y

FIG. 1:
The MWIR PDs structures, composed with an Hg0.71Cd0.29Te absorber layer in a cavity and: (a) two DBR mirrors
(RCE PD); (b) two mirror-like GLSs (dual-GLS PD). In the coordinate system above the dual-GLS PD’s schematic, the grating’s
periodicity and grooves/lines are along the x- and y-axes, respectively; the layers’ stacking and light impinging directions are
along the z-axis.

TABLE I: RIs of materials for MWIR PDs at CDW set in the text and shown below.

λ0, µm
Ge
SiO
CdTe
Hg0.56Cd0.44Te Cd0.9Zn0.1Te
Hg0.71Cd0.29Te

4.415
3.9332 + i 0 1.78 + i 0 2.6695 + i 0
2.9709 + i 0
2.6896 + i 0 3.4826 + i 0.1477

V.
STRUCTURAL PARAMETERS AND
EFFICIENCY SPECTRA

We performed design and simulation with the absorber
thickness ta = 0.75µm well tested in trials of the RCE
HgCdTe PDs fabrication9,17. The optimization of dual-
GLS PD for the TE polarization drives to a structure
with db = 0, i.e.
that in which the absorber is adja-
cent to the back grating’s top, see the parameters of the
2GLS-TE structure in Table II. For the structures shown
in Fig.1, the optimal design results including ηmax are
shown in Table II, whereas the η(λ) spectra are shown in
Fig.2.

The
design
of
reference
RCE
PD
under
the
above
thickness
constraint
results
in
the
2DBR
structure
with
the
(Ge/SiO)kGe
front
and
(Hg0.56Cd0.44Te/CdTe)mHg0.56Cd0.44Te
back
DBR
patterns, see in Fig.1(a), where k = 2, m = 7, so N = 23
as shown in Table II. The data for the 2DBR structure
in Table II show that it meets the relation ta ≪ df + db
consistent with the canonical RCE approach1,2, though
the absorber is drastically offset from the cavity center.
Releasing the above thickness constraint and searching
instead RCE PD with ηmax similar to that of obtained
dual-GLS PDs, results in N = 51 (ηmax = 99.9%),
which is unfeasible with the contemporary HgCdTe


4

TABLE II: The parameters of the MWIR PD structures optimally designed with ta = 0.075µm as set in the text∗

Structure
tbg
db
df
tGe
tfg
Λ
W
ηmax
λR
N
t

2DBR
–
0.271 0.435
–
–
–
–
0.502
–
23 8.733

2GLS-TE 0.600 0.000 4.075 1.005 0.888 1.594 0.836 0.999 4.255 6 7.015
2GLS-TM 0.785 4.803 0.358 2.000 0.096 1.600 0.701 0.995 4.271 7 8.487

∗All dimensional parameters above are in microns. t is the thickness of the structure excluding the substrate, N is the total
number of layers (including gratings, if any), ηmax is the peak efficiency, λR is the Rayleigh cutoff discussed in the text, and
other dimensions are described there and shown in Fig.1.

4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
Wavelength, λ [µm]

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Efficiency, η [abs. u.]

FIG. 2:
The efficiency spectra of the MWIR PDs, designed as
described in the text, with the 0.075 µm thick Hg0.71Cd0.29Te
absorber layer. Broken lines: red – 2GLS-TE, green – 2GLS-
TM, blue – 2DBR; full black line: 2DBRtu. The parameters
of the structures are found in Table II.

technology9,17. Yet, at technologically utmost N = 39
we obtain optimal RCE PD, notated ad hoc 2DBRtu,
with ηmax = 83.1% and t = 15.01µm12, which is ∼ 1.7
times thicker than 2DBR in Table II.
As seen from Table II and Fig.2, designed dual-GLS
PDs highly outperform optimal RCE PD with compara-
ble thickness – the 2DBR structure, the efficiency spec-
trum of which is the widest one among the spectra shown
in Fig.2. In turn, 2DBR PD outperforms any monolithic
HgCdTe based PD with similar ta. 2GLS-TE and 2GLS-
TM PDs exhibit the widest and narrowest η(λ) spec-
tra, respectively, whereas FWHM of the 2DBRtu PD ef-
ficiency spectrum lies in between corresponding FWHMs
for 2GLS-TE and 2GLS-TM PDs, see in Fig.2.

VI.
ELECTROMAGNETIC CONFINEMENT
PROPERTIES

As discussed in the Introduction, conventional pla-
nar RCE PD realizes the vertical (1D) light confine-
ment due to the optical resonance1,2. For the thinnest

device, the confinement scales with an effective wave-
length in the cavity-absorber region.
Since dual-GLS
PDs under study are assemblies of identical vertical (z)
top-to-substrate microscale cuts of the width Λ from
the structures shown in Fig.1(b), another confinement
physics, which is electromagnetic (EM) field resonant re-
circulation in micro/nanoscale areas or volumes on sub-
wavelength scales25, might be more suitable for these
structures.
We will pursue viewing the above cut as
“microcavity” (quotes indicate that it has no real ver-
tical boundaries). There were studies which put forward
the nano/microcavity analogy for another grating based
optical resonator26 and two-dimensional (2D) photonic
crystal slabs27.
While the phenomenon behind the resonant-cavity EM
confinement is well understood, the current understand-
ing of that in micro/nanocavity structures, which would
be more structure-specific, is nowadays much less ma-
ture. Computation of the electric and magnetic fields (E
and H), and Poynting vector (S) at CDW and visualiz-
ing its results, are to shed light and infer on the near-EM
field recirculation in dual-GLS PDs, while for RCE PDs
aim primarily at confirming the adopted vision1,2. Visu-
alization of S is expedient for inferring on the EM power
flow. We restrict the graphic presentation to z within the
absorber-cavity region.
For RCE PD, the only nonzero components Ey, Hx
and Sz are independent of x, so we plotted the graphs
of |Ey|2, |Hx|2 and |Sz| vs. z, shown in Fig.3 where the
intersections of the dashed vertical line with the abscissa
mark the absorber range. As seen, the fields’s amplitudes
squared are indeed concentrated in the cavity-absorber
region showing there large relative-to-input values, and
|Sz| is constant in the cavity of the RCE structure that
may be expected1,2. max
z
|Ey|2 ∼ max
z
|Hx|2 and |Sz| is
fairly linear in z across the absorber.
For TE- or TM-dual-GLS PDs, Ey, Hx, Hz ̸= 0 or
Hy, Ex, Ez ̸= 0, respectively, and S ̸= (0, 0), so we plot-
ted the surface graphs of the fields’ components mod-
ules squared and the quiver maps of S vs. x, z (Figs.4,
5), where the plots’ domains are rectangles in the (x, z)
plane.
Due to Λ-periodicity of the physical quantities
in x, any interval of the length Λ might be suitable to
eventually pick out the “microcatity” x-range. Our ini-
tial choice is with [0, Λ] overall, but it may further be


5

6.647
6.213
5.867
z[µm]

0

5

10

15

|Ey|2, |Hx|2

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

|Sz|

|Ey|2

|Hx|2

|Sz|

6.138

FIG. 3:
The electric and magnetic fields’ amplitudes squared
(left ordinate) and the Poyinting vector amplitude (right or-
dinate), normalized to those in the input medium, across the
cavity-absorber region of the RCE MWIR 2DBR structure
designed as described in the text, the parameters of which
are found in Table II. Simulated at CDW λ0 = 4.415µm.

revised depending on the structure.
For the presenta-
tion convenience, of the above chosen z-range we visual-
ize the “microcatity” slices with 10% of the front cavity
in the 2GLS-TE PD, and with 20% of the back cavity
in the 2GLS-TM PD case, which contain the real lat-
eral cavity-absorber interfaces and dummy vertical ones,
reminiscent of the real gratings’ lamella-groove interfaces.
All nonzero |Ei|2, |Hk|2 of our scope are shown in Figs.6
and 7. Let us note the continuity of H as well as of Ey
and Ex, seen in Figs.6(a) and 7(a), respectively, and the
discontinuity of Ez when crossing the cavity-absorber in-
terfaces seen in Fig.7(b), which is fairly consistent with
the EM boundary conditions.

A.
The EM power flow

We will start with visualizing the EM power flow in the
2GLS-TE structure using the quiver plot of the Poynt-
ing vector S in Fig.4.
It presents the EM power flow
over the chosen ”microcavity” slice of that structure,
clearly showing a major zero total circulation S vortex.
It consists of two sub-vortices, namely, a split ”micro-
cavity” boundary-adjoint and ”microcavity”-interior vor-
tices with the clockwise and counterclockwise S circu-
lation, respectively, around respective vorticity centers,
which locate 235 nm above the absorber-cavity interface
line z = 1.047µm.
Yet, the sub-vortex adjoint to the
boundary line x = 0 apparently has its vorticity center
at a point located in the “microcavity” adjacent left to
the considered one, whereas the vorticity center of the
vortex adjacent to the boundary line x/Λ = 1 lies just
inside the “microcavity”. It appears that the distance

between the vorticity centers are 0.5 in the units of Λ, as
may be expected from the Λ-periodicity of |S|.
To symmetrize the vortex picture and thus to force the
center of the boundary adjacent vortex to lie just on the
vertical boundaries of the “microcavity” the latter can be
rigidly shifted left to a distance of 0.0125Λ. Anyway, as
can be inferred from Fig.4, the major S vortex remains
unconfined within the “microcavity” because of an ap-
preciable lateral EM power flow between the “microcav-
ities”. In the interchange of the interior and boundary-
adjoint sub-vortexes, just along mid-lines between the
lamella-groove interface derived line and “microcavity”
vertical boundary lines, the EM power flow is vertical,
in positive and negative directions on the left and right
to the interior sub-vortex, respectively. Vorticity of the
EM power flow is a direct consequence of the continuity
of S, whereas a dense persistence of the Sx component
overall the absorber layer seems a key to the near 100%
efficiency of the 2GLS-TE structure.
In addition, as can be inferred from the zoomed inset
in Fig.4 there is a twist of S when its direction alter-
nates to sustain its continuity, and these occurs just on
the lamella-groove interface derived line x/Λ = 0.475 (or
x/Λ = 0.4875 in the redefined “microcavity”).
Thus,
the EM power flow strongly senses the presence of the
gratings even remotely of them, in the smoothly layered
“microcavity” part.
Next, we proceed to the 2GLS-TM structure. In this
case the “microcavity” assisted absorption enhancement
mechanism operates very differently from that of the
2GLS-TE structure considered above. While in the lat-
ter, we observe both vertical light flow traversing the ab-
sorber back and forth by reflection from one GLS to an-
other, similarly to the case of the RCE absorber, and
a persistent lateral light flow along the absorber layer,
in the present case the light flow is predominately lat-
eral, see quiver plot in Fig.3 and discussion below. In
addition, in the TE case the Sx continues to flow from
the “microcavity” to the adjacent one, see quiver plot in
Fig.4, whereas in the TM case it seems bouncing back
and forth between the vertical absorber layer boundaries
(inside the “microcavity” slice under consideration). In
spite of such a difference the present mechanism also pro-
vides nearly 100% efficiency.
In a detail, as seen from Fig.5, there are S density rar-
efaction vertical channel like areas in the absorber layer,
three interior ones and another one which is split among
the boundaries.
As in the TE case the left and right
boundary adjoint parts of the split ”channel” seem asym-
metric in the present “microcavity” choice, however, it
is possible to symmetrize them provided that the “mi-
crocavity” is shifted by 0.031Λ to the left. The interior
”channels” closest to the boundaries, see the left one in
the inset of Fig.5, separated by a distance of 0.5 (in the
units of Λ), seem as actually channeling light through the
absorber, up through the left and down through the right
”channels”. Yet, such a vertical traversing the absorber
is by far not dominate the lateral flow because of low


6

FIG. 4:
The EM power flow map in the structure 2GLS-TE (Table II). The quiver plot range and simulation wavelength are
the same as in Fig.6.

FIG. 5:
The EM power flow map in the structure 2GLS-TM (Table II). The quiver plot range and simulation wavelength are
the same as in Fig.7.

relative thickness of those areas and rather small values
of the S components in them as well. The main function
of these real channels is to convert the mostly vertical
flow of the incoming light into a predominantly lateral


7

FIG. 6: The normalized to the input values amplitudes squared of the electric (a) and magnetic (b), (c) fields’ components at
CDW λ0 = 4.415µm in the structure 2GLS-TE (Table II) vs. 0 ≤ x/Λ ≤ 1 and, as defined in the text, 0.972µm ≤ z ≤ 1.45µm;
x/Λ = 0.475 is the inner grating lamella-groove interface derived line, (0, 1) × (0.972µm, 1.047µm) is the absorber cut within
the “microcavity”.


8

FIG. 7:
The normalized to the input values amplitudes squared of the electric (a), (b) and magnetic (c) fields’ components at
CDW λ0 = 4.415µm in the structure 2GLS-TM (Table II) vs. 0 ≤ x/Λ ≤ 1 and, as defined in the text, 5.µm ≤ z ≤ 6.392µm;
x/Λ = 0.562 is the inner grating lamella-groove interface derived line, (0, 1) × (5.959µm, 6.034µm) is the absorber cut within
the “microcavity”.


9

flow inside the absorber. The above noted mid-lines be-
tween the “microcavity” vertical boundary lines and the
gratings’ lamella-groove interface-derived lines cross the
absorber just in the middle of those channels.
Concerning the other two ”channels”, upon the shift
note above, the interior one moves to the redefined
“microcavity” center and the boundary adjoint channel
halves will start and end at the redefined “microcavity”
vertical boundary lines. In the central ”channel” there
seen a very small Sx component vanishing at the middle,
as a result of the counter propagating lateral light flow
which arrive from two real channels discussed previously.
At the same time, the left and right parts of the boundary
split ”channel” serve as flow ”sources” draining the light
off the (redefined) “microcavity” to the adjacent ones.
When crossing the absorber’s boundary lines z =
5.959µm and z = 6.034µm in the z-direction, Sx exhibits
jumps both in the magnitude and direction which is due
to the discontinuity of the Ez component as a function of
z. Due to this peculiarity of the TM case, the absorber
layer as a whole turns out to act as a laterally periodic
absorbing waveguide. In spite of the lateral infiniteness
of the structure, the periodicity dictated by the presence
of the gratings, creates an evident lateral resonance the
same in any “microcavity” so that the nearly 100% ab-
sorbance is acquired within it.
In addition, in the back cavity, there occurs a twist of
S, which points to a positive z direction becomes more
and more lateral until zeroing at a point lying on the
lamella-groove interface derived line x/Λ = 0.562 (or
x/Λ = 0.531 in the redefined “microcavity”) and then
returns to having the initial direction. Again, the EM
power flow strongly senses the presence of the gratings
even remotely of them, in the smoothly layered “micro-
cavity” part.

B.
The EM Fields

The surface plots of the relevant EM fields ampli-
tudes squared in the 2GLS-TE structure are shown in
Fig.6. The |Ey|2 and |Hz|2 surfaces, see in Figs.6a and
c, respectively, show a similarity in attaining their max-
ima over the chosen “microcavity” slice just on the line
z = 0.972µm, which is the boundary between the ab-
sorber and the back GLS, and comparability of their
maxima. At the same time, those surfaces and |Hx|2 in
Fig.6c are different. First, |Hx|2 maxima are an order of
magnitude smaller than of those for the former ones. Sec-
ond, while the |Ey|2 and |Hx|2 maxima, two for each, are
remote from the vertical “microcavity” boundary lines,
one of three apparent |Hz|2 maxima lies left to the x = 0
boundary. The boundary-adjoint |Hz|2 patterns can be
thought as a part of one surface due to the periodicity in x
but the left pattern is not symmetric with the right one.
The symmetry can be restored by the above discussed
“microcavity” shift done for the S quiver plot.
Inside
the “microcavity” slice under consideration all the func-

tions |Ey|2, |Hx|2 and |Hz|2 exhibit a gradual decay when
moving its argument point along the z-axis towards the
front cavity boundary line (remind that we display only
10% of it). On the contrary, those functions are decaying
very sharply when moving their argument point along the
x-axis towards some critical vertical lines. While in the
case of the |Ey|2 and |Hx|2, the lines are “microcavity”
vertical boundary ones and the line x/Λ = 0.4875, which
becomes the mid-line of the redefined “microcavity”, in
the case of the |Hz|2 they are the mid-lines between the
“microcavity” vertical boundary ones and the gratings’
lamella-groove interface derived line.
In addition, the
maxima and minima of both |Ey|2 and |Hz|2 comple-
ments each other respectively. The same is strictly valid
also for the pair |Hx|2 and |Hz|2.
One can observe some behavioral trends making it pos-
sible to relate the fields amplitudes and S while this re-
lationship may be not completely equivocal. It can be
seen, e.g. that the decrease of |Hx| (Hx enters Sz) inside
the absorber layer, which is seen in Fig.6b is reflected in
the S direction change there, that is the sharpest change
overall the vortex. In addition, the similar behavior of
|Ey| and |Hz| seen in Figs.6a and 6c, where the maxi-
mum regions complement the minimum ones is reflected
in the opposite circularity of the interior and “microcav-
ity” boundary-adjoint S sub-vortices.
There is a topological difference between the fields am-
plitude squared surfaces, and the EM power flows, for the
TE and TM cases. Nevertheless, some regularities as con-
cerns geometrical positions of critical lines and points and
the appearance of “microcavity” boundary adjoint pat-
terns of the EM fields z components, remain similar with
the circular replacement of E ↔ H. However, in the TM
case there is a much more pronounced EM fields’ vertical
(along with lateral) confinement and electrical isolation
of the “microcavities”. In addition contrary to |Hx|2 in
the TE case, the maximum of |Ex|2 in the TM case seen
in Fig.7a do not lie on one horizontal line. This notice-
able difference is supposedly due to the absence of a back
cavity in the TE case.
Note that Ez in a contrast with Hz is not continuous
when crossing the absorber-cavity interfaces as seen in
Fig 7b. That discontinuity of function |Ez|2 does not af-
fect its steep descent occurring when its argument move
away the maxima locations along the z-axis towards the
boundary line of the back cavity slice (z = 5µm) un-
der consideration. In a detail, |Ez|2 jumps down just in
the absorber layer, then acquires a local maximum and
next starts to continue the descent. As in the TE case
some qualitative relationship between the EM fields’ am-
plitudes and S can be stated. For example, it can be
seen that the decrease of the Hy and Ex components’
amplitudes towards the absorber layer, would affect the
Sz, which is indeed seen decreasing while steeply chang-
ing the S direction from being mostly vertical to pre-
dominantly lateral within the absorber layer. Moreover,
due to the similar behavior of |Ez| and |Hy| that have
maximum regions corresponding to minimum regions we


10

can observe an opposite direction of the Poynting vector
along the x-axis. The above noted ”channels” in which
S is vanishingly small, correlate well with the regions
around the maxima of |Ez| and minima |Hy| as seen from
a comparison of Fig.5 with Figs.7b and 7c, respectively.

VII.
DESIGN TOLERANCES

Last but not least is the fabrication tolerance issue
which is of primary importance for practicality of the pro-
posed PD structures. Therein, for manufacturing such
devices needs only few layer deposition steps, the grat-
ing fabrication accuracy is most critical. Hitherto test-
ing the sensitivity of the η spectra of the designed one-
GLS mirror RCE PDs to changes in the grating’s etch
depth and width around the design values, we found12,13

ones with tolerances certainly practical from the current
micro-fabrication status viewpoint.

TABLE III: The performance tolerances of the dual-
GLS PD structure for the TE polarization.a

Etching errors
2GLS-TE

∆W/W ∆tbg/tbg ∆tfg/tfg ∆λ0, nm ∆ηmax, %

−
−
−
− 1.0
− 0.7

−
−
+
− 1.0
− 1.2

−
+
−
− 1.0
− 2.2

−
+
+
− 1.0
− 0.6

+
−
−
− 1.0
− 1.5

+
−
+
− 1.0
− 1.6

+
+
−
0.0
− 0.1

+
+
+
0.0
− 0.1

aAbove ∆tbg/tbg, ∆tfg/tfg and ∆W/W are the relative
fabrication errors in the gratings grooves’ depths and width,
respectively, allowed for the etching; ∆λ0 is the shift of the
wavelength of the η(λ) maximum and ∆ηmax is the absolute
change of the peak efficiency, which result from the
fabrication errors. The single + or − sign abbreviates the
relative error of +10% or −10%.

For the dual-GLS PDs under study, we performed sim-
ilar inquiry, varying tfg, tbg and W around their optimal
values in Table II by ±10% of each. The variations are
similar to adopting such minimal absolute errors in etch-
ing the grating grooves as ±9.6nm of the depths and
±70.1nm of the widths. The tolerance tests’ results for
the dual-GLS PD structures exhibiting the best peak effi-
ciency upon TE- and TM-polarized light irradiation, are
shown in Tables III and IV, respectively.
Table III covers the PD structure adapted to the TE
polarization, and shows that under the allowed fabrica-
tion errors its sustain high performance, viz. exhibit con-
current small peak efficiency deterioration ∆ηmax < 0
and tiny peak-wavelength shift ∆λ0.
In particular, a

TABLE IV: The performance tolerances of the dual-
GLS PD structure for the TM polarization.a

Etching errors
2GLS-TM

∆W/W ∆tbg/tbg ∆tfg/tfg ∆λ0, nm ∆ηmax, %

−
−
−
− 2
− 13.8

−
−
+
+ 5
− 10.0

−
+
−
− 1
− 14.4

−
+
+
+ 5
− 15.0

+
−
−
− 3
− 13.6

+
−
+
+ 3
− 13.3

+
+
−
− 2
− 14.7

+
+
+
+ 4
− 14.0

aFor the meaning and measures of the parameters here, see
the descriptions in the text, and captions to Table III.

unique worst case emerges for the structure, such as with
∆ηmax = −2.2%, ∆λ0 = −1.0nm for 2GLS-TE. All other
fabrication errors’ combinations result in less than 2%
deterioration, with ∆λ0’s comparable to those in the re-
spective worst case. Table IV includes 2GLS-TM struc-
ture, for which the worst case is with: ∆ηmax = −15.0%,
∆λ0 = +5nm. Here, ∆ηmax’s (being an order of mag-
nitude worse than for 2GLS-TE) and ∆λ0’s have rela-
tively small scatter in the ranges from −15% to −10%
and −3nm to +5nm, respectively.

VIII.
CONCLUSIONS

The concept of RCE PD responded the challenge of
thinning the PD light absorbing layer while outperform-
ing the efficiency of respective monolithic PD. However,
for many relevant absorber materials, meeting that chal-
lenge with the RCE absorption requires so unrealistically
many layer deposition steps that the fabrication faults
become quite inevitable and the high efficiency at goal
hardly attainable. Under this circumstance, we suggested
to search PDs with the same absorber layer as in respec-
tive RCE PDs, but concurrently being much thinner and
topmost performing.
In the above quest, we proposed a renewed PD struc-
ture which alike RCE PD contains the cavity-absorber
arrangement but surrogates the DBR mirrors by two
GLSs.
By the design based on the in-house software,
we showed the theoretical feasibility of such dual-GLS
PDs of ∼ 100% efficiency for the linearly polarized (TE
or TM) MWIR radiation with thickness in the range
∼ 7.0µm−8.5µm, see in Table II. Furthermore, we tested
the dual-GLS PDs’ performance tolerance to the errors
in gratings’ groove etch, and revealed it to be superla-
tively high for TE-polarization targeted ones, see Table
III. TM polarization targeted dual-GLS PD, see in Table
IV, tolerates the gratings’ fabrication errors an order of


11

magnitude weaker than its TE counterpart, though on
the practical ground it is still fairly tolerant.
The EM fields’ amplitudes and Poynting vector over
a cavity-absorber area were visualized. As a result, it is
inferred that the EM fields’ confinement in the designed
structure, which is a key to their upmost efficiency, is
2D one combining in-depth vertical resonant-cavity like
confinement with the lateral microcavity like one set by
the presence of gratings. The 2GLS-TE structure EM
power flow showed vorticity like behavior as a direct con-
sequence of the continuity of S. The dense persistence of
the Sx component overall the absorber layer, and both
vertical light flow traversing the absorber back and forth
by reflection from one GLS to another, similarly to the
case of the RCE absorber, and a persistent lateral light
flow along the absorber layer seem the keys to the near
100% efficiency of the 2GLS-TE structure. In the 2GLS-
TM case, the “microcavity” assisted absorption enhance-
ment mechanism was shown to operate very differently
from that of the TE structure. The EM power flow is
predominately lateral bouncing back and forth between
the vertical absorber layer boundaries. Due to the dis-
continuity of the Ez component as a function of z, the

absorber layer as a whole turns out to act as a later-
ally periodic absorbing waveguide. Despite the lateral
infiniteness of the structure, the periodicity dictated by
the presence of the gratings creates an evident lateral res-
onance the same in any “microcavity” so that the nearly
100% absorbance is acquired within it. In both TE and
TM cases, the EM power flow strongly senses the pres-
ence of the gratings even remotely of them as shown by
the twist of S around the lamella-groove interface de-
rived line in the smoothly layered “microcavity” part.
Although the relationship may be not completely equivo-
cal, there exist some behavioral trends relating the fields’
amplitudes to S.

Because of a high light-polarization sensitivity of the
optical response from 1D gratings, and its lesser toler-
ance to the gratings dimensions’ variation in the TM-
polarization case, the thin PD designs like those carried
out in this study may unequivocally benefit replacing
the 1D gratings by 2D ones. PDs of the proposed type
may have high potential in integrated multidetector ar-
rays such as FPA, for the high capability of which highly
efficient thin PD elements are vital.

1 M.S. ¨Unl¨u and S. Strite, J. Appl. Phys 78, 607–639 (1995).
2 M.S. ¨Unl¨u, G. Ulu, and M. G¨okkavas, in Photodetectors
and Fiber Optics, H.S. Nalwa Ed., New York: Academic,
2001, pp. 97-201.
3 J.B. H`eroux, X. Yang, and W.I. Wang, J. Appl. Phys 75,
2716–2718 (1999).
4 I. Kimukin, E. Ozbay, N. Biyikli, T. Kartalolu, O. Ayt¨ur,
S. Unlu, and G. Tuttle, J. Appl. Phys 77, 3890–3892
(2000).
5 B. Butun, N. Biyikli, I. Kimukin, O. Ayt¨ur, E. Ozbay, P.
A. Postigo, J. P. Silveira, and A. R. Alija, J. Appl. Phys
84, 4185-4187 (2004).
6 Y.M. El-Batawy and M.J. Deen, IEEE Trans. Electron De-
vices 50, 790–801 (2003).
7 Y.M. El-Batawy and M.J. Deen, SPIE Meeting on Quan-
tum Sensing: Evolution and revolution from past to future,
M. Razeghi, G. J. Brown, eds., Proc. SPIE 4999, 363–378
(2003).
8 M. Sioma and J. Piotrowski, Opt. Electron. Rev. 12, 157-
160 (2004).
9 J.G.A. Wehner, C.A. Musca, R.H. Sewell, J.M. Dell, and
L. Faraone, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 211104-1–3 (2005).
10 M. Arnold, D. Zimin, and H. Zogg, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87,
141103-1–3 (2005).
11 J.G.A. Wehner, R.H. Sewell, J. Antoszewski, C.A. Musca,
J.M. Dell and L. Faraone, J. Electron. Mater. 34, 710-715
(2005).
12 M. Zohar, M. Auslender, L. Faraone, and S. Hava, J.
Nanophotonics 5, 051824-1–15 (2011).
13 M. Zohar, M. Auslender, L. Faraone, and S. Hava, Opt.
Quantum Electron. 44, 95–102 (2012).
14 A. Rogalski, J. Antoszewski, L. Faraone, J. Appl. Phys.

105, 091101-1–44 (2009).
15 A. Rogalski, Infrared Phys. Technol. 54, 136-154 (2011).
16 C.J. Chang-Hasnain, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 26, 014043-
1–11 (2011).
17 J.G.A. Wehner, C.A. Musca, R.H. Sewell, J.M. Dell and
L. Faraone, Solid State Electron. 50, 1640-1648 (2006).
18 Y.M. El-Batawy and M. Medhat, Int. Symposium on Pho-
tonics and Optoelectronics 2015, Zh. Zhou, ed., Proc. SPIE
9656, 96560P-1–6 (2015).
19 P.
Amirtharaj,
“Mercury
Cadmium
Telluride
(Hg1−xCdxTe),”
in
Handbook
of
Optical
Constants
of Solids, E.D. Palik, ed. (Academic Press, Burlington,
1997), pp. 655-689.
20 E.D. Palik, “Cadmium Telluride (CdTe),” in Handbook
of Optical Constants of Solids, E.D. Palik, ed. (Academic
Press, Burlington, 1997), pp. 409-427.
21 R.F. Potter, “Germanium (Ge),” in Handbook of Opti-
cal Constants of Solids, E. D. Palik, ed. (Academic Press,
Burlington, 1997), pp. 465-478.
22 H. Philipp, “Silicon Monoxide (SiO) (Noncrystalline),” in
Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, E. D. Palik, ed.
(Academic Press, Burlington, 1997), pp. 765-769.
23 B. Jensen and A. Torabi, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 19,
13621365 (1983).
24 O. S. Heavens, Optical Properties of Thin Solid Films
(Reprint), New York: Dover 1991.
25 K. Vahala, Nature 424, 839–846 (2003).
26 W. Nakagawa and Y. Fainman, IEEE J. Select. Top. Quan-
tum Electron. 10, 478–483 (2004).
27 P. Lalanne, C. Sauvan and J.P. Hugonin, Laser Photon.
Rev. 2, 514–526 (2008).


