1

Spatially Resolved Optical Excitation of Mechanical Modes in Graphene 
NEMS

David Miller1,2,3 and Benjamín Alemán1,2,3

1Department of Physics, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA

2Material Science Institute, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA

3Center for Optical, Molecular, and Quantum Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA

Emerging applications in nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) made from two-dimensional (2D) materials 

demand simultaneous imaging and selective actuation of the mechanical modes. Focused optical probes to measure 

and actuate motion offer a possible solution, but their lateral spatial resolution must be better than the size of the 

resonator. While optical interferometry is known to have excellent spatial resolution, the spatial resolution of the

focused, laser-based optical driving is not currently known. Here, we combine separately scanned interferometry and 

optical drive probes to map the motion and forces on a suspended graphene nanomechanical resonator. By analyzing 

these maps with a force density model, we determine that the optical drive force has a spatial resolution on the order 

of the size of the focused laser spot. Using the optical force probe, we demonstrate the selective actuation and

suppression of a pair of orthogonal, antisymmetric mechanical modes of the graphene resonator. Our results offer a 

powerful approach to image and actuate any arbitrary high-order mode of a 2D NEMS.

Nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) made from two-dimensional materials, such as graphene1, h-BN2, and the transition 

metal dichalcogenides3 have high promise for nanomechanical force and mass sensing4–6 as well as studies of fundamental 

physics at the nanoscale7. Initial experiments with 2D nanomechanical resonators have primarily focused on the dynamics of 

the fundamental mode6,8–10, but advanced NEMS applications are increasingly exploiting higher order-mechanical modes11,12

and the coupling between these modes13. For example, by simultaneously tracking several mechanical modes, NEMS 

resonant detectors can both weigh and localize single molecules or individual viruses14, while fine control over multiple 

modes has been used for all-mechanical phonon side-band cooling13.

Future advances in NEMS multimodal applications demand that the shape of the mechanical modes be precisely known and, 

simultaneously, that any mode of interest can be efficiently and selectively actuated. Several high-resolution imaging 

methods, including scanning optical interferometery15 and atomic force microscopy16, have already been used to map the 

mechanical mode shape of 2D NEMS. The fundamental mode and some higher-order modes of 2D NEMS are routinely 

accessed, but the efficient, selective actuation of a given mode remains a challenge. For instance, a common means to actuate 

2D NEMS is with an electrostatic gate1,5–9,15, but simple gating techniques are inherently inefficient at driving higher-order, 

antisymmetric modes13 because the gate applies a symmetric, constant-phase force density across the entire suspended 

membrane. Furthermore electrostatic gating cannot be used to actuate insulating materials2 or freestanding 2D drums17–19 and 

reduces quality factors20 due to Joule heating.

Scanning optical interferometry combined with optical drive methods, where an intensity-modulated laser is focused onto the 

mechanical resonator21,22, offer an approach to simultaneously image and actuate a 2D NEMS resonator, but only if the 

optical probe and drive force are sufficiently spatially localized. Optical drive methods can selectively actuate higher-order 


2

modes in bulk micromechanical beams because the resulting radiation pressure and photothermal bending forces are localized 

to the immediate vicinity of the laser spot23. When applied to 2D NEMS, however, it is unknown if optical driving can still 

achieve the same spatial resolution, as there are several reasons that the resolution could exceed the size of the resonator. For 

instance, 2D NEMS thermalize rapidly because of their  ultralow intrinsic heat capacity (mass) and exceptionally high 

thermal conductivity24, which can make thermomechanical bending less local. 2D materials also poorly absorb and reflect 

light, which significantly decreases photon pressure, and they commonly have lateral dimensions (~2 − 5 μm) close the size 

of the laser spot. Nevertheless, optical driving has been employed to actuate 2D NEMS with both defocused (compared to the 

size of the membrane) and focused lasers1–3,10,18,24–26. The defocused drive laser, like gating, exerts a symmetric force and is 

therefore inefficient at driving higher-order modes. By using a narrowly focused drive laser and scanning it over the 

resonator, it is possible to infer the spatial resolution of the optical drive. However, experiments to date have either used

static lasers, which can only measure mechanical spectra, or co-localized probe and drive lasers1,10, which convolve spatially 

resolved motion with actuation and therefore prevent an assessment of the spatial resolution.

To determine the spatial localization of the optical force of a focused laser on a 2D NEMS, we measure the vibrational 

amplitude of a suspended graphene membrane, which is proportional to the driving force, while we scan the position of a 

focused, driving laser across the membrane. By comparing the resulting force images to the mechanical mode shapes 

obtained by scanning optical interferometry, we find that the resolution of optical drive force is limited by the spot size of the 

laser, and this resolution is sufficient to efficiently and selectively actuate higher-order modes of the graphene membrane. 

The graphene NEMS devices we study in this work are few μm diameter nanomechanical drumheads (a 3 μm device is pictured 

in Fig. 1(a)). We fabricate the drumheads by suspending single-layer graphene over cavities etched into SiO2 on Si using a 

semi-dry transfer process27. The devices are actuated using an amplitude modulated 445 nm laser1–3,10,24–26, and the amplitude 

and phase are measured using an interferometer operating at 532 nm and standard lock-in amplifier techniques, similar to 

previous work13,15. A schematic of our experimental setup is shown in (Fig. 1(b)). Both the 445 nm drive and 532 nm probe 

lasers are scanned using independent dual-axis galvo mirrors and coupled into the same optical path. This allows us to map the 

mechanical mode shape while driving the drumhead at a specific location. Conversely, we can probe the motion at a specific 

location, typically an antinode, while scanning the drive across the drumhead. In the following, we present results for a 3 μm 

diameter device (device 1) and a 5 μm device (device 2), however, we observe similar, reproducible results for other devices 

and across a range of drumhead sizes.


3

FIG. 1. (a) SEM image of a 3 μm graphene drumhead suspended over a 300 nm cavity. Ventilation trenches allow for air to escape when 
the device is brought under vacuum. (b) Diagram of optical setup used for measurements. Two scanning mirrors allow for independent 
scanning of both the drive and probe lasers. λ/4: Quarter Waveplate, AOM: Acousto Optic Modulator, APD: Avalanche Photodiode, FSM: 
Fast-steering mirror, PBS: Polarizing Beamsplitter, DCM: Dichroic Mirror (500 nm longpass). The 40x, 0.6 NA objective yields a spot-size 
of ~1 μm for both lasers, which we confirm using the knife-edge trenches in the substrate. (c) Fitted (black lines) amplitude and phase 
response of the fundamental mode for a graphene drum. The device is driven at a frequency, fdrive, located below the resonance frequency, 
during acquisition of the spatial maps. The phase offset, 𝜃0 = −84° of the mechanical oscillation, is indicated by the horizontal dashed 
black line. (d) Amplitude and phase response maps obtained by scanning the probe laser while holding the drive laser at a fixed location, 
indicated by the white square in 1e. The greyed-out region indicates an amplitude below the noise floor of the detection electronics. (e) 
Amplitude and phase response obtained by scanning the drive laser while holding the probe laser at a constant position, indicated by the 
white circle in 1d. (Scale = 1 micron).

We create two types of spatial maps of the membrane: mode maps and force maps. To obtain these maps, first we measure 

the frequency response spectrum of the graphene drumheads to find the mechanical resonance of the mode of interest. Then, 

we set the driving frequency well below the mechanical resonance to minimize the variation of the amplitude and phase 

response due to the position of the drive15. Typical amplitude and phase curves with the off-resonant drive frequency 

indicated are shown in Fig. 1(c).  These off-resonant, fixed frequency approach allows scans to be completed in ~1 minute, 

which is 10-100 times faster than measuring the full frequency response at each point15. To obtain the mode map, which 

measures the membrane’s vibrational amplitude at different locations, we fix the position of the drive laser, 𝒓𝒅 = (𝑥𝑑, 𝑦𝑑), 

(indicated by the white square in Fig. 1(e)) and scan the probe laser over an area slightly larger than the drumhead, while 

simultaneously measuring both the amplitude and phase at each point of a 40 × 40 array, resulting in a 1600 pixel map of the 

mechanical mode. To obtain the force map, we fix the probe laser position, 𝒓𝒑 = (𝑥𝑝, 𝑦𝑝), (white circle in Fig. 1(d)) on an 

antinode (i.e. a region of maximum amplitude) and we measure the membrane amplitude response, 𝐴(𝒓𝒅), as we scan the 

position 𝒓𝒅 over the membrane. The amplitude of resulting force map is proportional to the drive force through the off-


4

resonant expression 𝐴(𝒓𝒅) ≈ 𝐹(𝒓𝒅)/(𝑚𝑒𝑓𝑓𝜔0), where 𝐹(𝒓𝒅) is the optical force at position 𝒓𝒅, 𝑚𝑒𝑓𝑓 is the membrane 

effective mass, and 𝜔0 is the membrane resonance frequency.

The mode and force maps for the fundamental mode of device 1 (U01) are shown in Fig. 1(d) and 1(e), respectively. The 

graphene drumhead used to obtain this data has a resonance frequency of 15.7 MHz and a quality factor of Q ~120. The mode 

map amplitude (Fig. 1(d), upper) exhibits azimuthal symmetry and it oscillates with a constant phase (Fig. 1(d), bottom) of 

~50° across the entire drum (Fig. 1(d), bottom), consistent with theory. The constant phase implies that the relative 

displacement between the probe and drive lasers does not impact the speed of the mechanical response. The drive force map 

resembles the measured mode shape (Fig. 1(e), top); it has azimuthal symmetry and its amplitude falls off radially from the 

center, providing strong evidence that the position of the drive laser does impact the magnitude of the driving force. From the 

force map, we also see that the membrane responds even when the drive laser is well off the membrane; this has been observed 

previously28 and is ascribed to a propagating heat wave. The force phase map is also azimuthally symmetric, but, in contrast to 

the mode phase map, the phase varies smoothly from 𝜃0~ − 45° near membrane center to 𝜃0~ − 100° at the edge of the drum. 

The non-constant phase could be due to strain variations or other defects in the drumhead, which cause local changes to the 

thermal conductivity26. Our measurements of the fundamental mode verify the drumhead amplitude response depends on the 

position of the focused drive laser, and that spatial resolution is less than the membrane size.

To further characterize the optical drive force, we examine the horizontal and vertical polarizations of the antisymmetric 

degenerate U11 mode, which we label U11H and U11V. The center frequency of the pair is about twice that of the U01, with U11H 

= 27.4 MHz and U11V = 31.0 MHz. Both mode maps (see Fig. 2(a)-(b)) show a characteristic antisymmetric shape with two 

lobes separated by a nodal line10,15, where one lobe oscillates ~180° out of phase with the other. The amplitude nearly vanishes 

on the nodal line and the phase change across the nodal line is discontinuous. Positioning the probe laser on an antinode, we 

again find the drive force maps are qualitatively similar to the mechanical mode maps; they have two lobes separated by a 

nodal line and a ~180° phase difference across the node. The nodal line of the force map has a location and orientation that is 

nearly identical to the mode map. The membrane amplitude reaches a near-zero value when the drive laser is positioned on the 

nodal line, providing strong evidence that the optical drive force is localized to the laser focus. 

Although the phase changes by a ~180° across the nodal line in both the mode and force maps, the position-dependence of 

the phase is quite different for each case. As seen in Fig. 2(c), the mode phase changes abruptly from 𝜃 to 𝜃 + 180°, as

expected for oscillations that are perfectly out of phase. Surprisingly, however, the force map phase varies continuously 

across the nodal line by ~0.3°/nm. The continuous phase could result from the force on either side of the nodal line having a 

relative phase difference that differs from 180°. The total optical drive force is the sum of the force on the left and right 

antinodes, 𝐹 = 𝐹𝐿 cos(𝜔𝑡) − 𝐹𝑅 cos(𝜔𝑡 + 𝜋 + 𝜃). For 𝜃 = 0, the phase of the driving force changes by 180° at precisely 

𝐹𝐿 − 𝐹𝑅 = 0, which occurs on the nodal line. However, if 𝜃 ≠ 0, the phase change can be continuous across the nodal line. 

The non-zero 𝜃 we observe could be due to the thermal propagation time from one antinode to the other, similar to the non-

uniform phase seen in Fig. 1(e). We note that the position dependence of the driving force phase could provide a new means 

to measure the position of a focused laser.


5

FIG 2: (a) Amplitude and phase recovered while scanning the probe (left) and drive (right) across device 1 with the frequency set just 
below the resonance frequency for the horizontally polarized U11H mode. (b) Amplitude and phase while scanning the vertically polarized 
U11V mode of device 1.  All scale bars are 1 μm. (c). Cross-sectional cut of the phase across the nodal line for both the probe (green) and 
drive (blue dashed) maps for U11H. The phase change is instantaneous for the probe laser and switches by 0.3°/nm for the drive laser (d.) 
Cross-sectional profile of the amplitude for the mode and force maps. The transduced amplitude falls to ~25% of its maximum value near 
the nodal lines. (e) Simulated photothermal force obtained by integrating U11 (green solid line) with a gaussian force density at position 𝒓𝑑. 
We plot a cross-section of the calculated force while scanning the drive laser across the nodal for three different gaussian FWHM.

We can infer a measure of the localization of the optical drive force by modeling the optical force density as a gaussian spot

and by comparing the force and mode maps. The force exerted on the membrane when the drive laser is positioned at 𝒓𝒅 is

𝐹(𝒓𝒅) = ∫ 𝑑𝐴 𝑈𝑛(𝒓)𝑓(𝒓; 𝒓𝒅)
(1)

where 𝑈𝑛(𝒓) is the normalized mechanical mode shape21–23 and 𝑓(𝒓; 𝒓𝒅) is the optical force density. The force 𝐹(𝒓𝒅) is

proportional to the experimentally measured force map. We assume that 𝑓(𝒓; 𝒓𝒅) is a gaussian distribution of the form 

𝑓(𝒓; 𝒓𝒅)~exp (

−(𝑥−𝑥𝑑)2−(𝑦−𝑦𝑑)2

2σ2
), where 𝜎 = 𝐹𝑊𝐻𝑀/2.355 gives a characterization of the force localization. A gaussian 

force distribution will approximate any azimuthally symmetric force centered at the drive laser position, such as photothermal

stress or photon pressure. To obtain 𝐹(𝒓𝒅), we numerically integrate the overlap integral in Eq. 1 using 𝑓(𝒓; 𝒓𝒅) and the 


6

theoretical mode shape of U11 for a circular membrane in two-dimensions. Cross-sections of 𝐹(𝒓𝒅) perpendicular to the nodal 

line are shown in Fig 2(e) for various values of σ. For small values of σ (FWHM = 0.5 μm), we find that 𝐹(𝒓𝒅) rises rapidly 

moving away from the nodal line and reaches a maximum before quickly falling off. As σ approaches the width of the 

membrane (FWHM = 1.2 μm), we find that 𝐹(𝒓𝒅) increases slowly from the nodal line and reaches a nonzero value near the 

membrane boundary. In this case, the gaussian spot is large enough to have significant overlap with the mode shape, even when 

it is placed near the boundary. We can infer an experimental 𝜎 by adjusting 𝜎 in the simulated 𝐹(𝒓𝒅) to match the measured 

force and mode maps for the two polarizations of the U11 mode. For the U11V mode profile shown in Fig. 2(d), this process 

gives an experimental 𝜎 between 0.5 and 1 μm, a value approximately equal to the spot size of the focused laser in our setup. 

Thus, this model predicts that the optical force is localized to the laser position within 𝜎 ≈ 1 μm. Though this procedure only 

yields an approximate value for the localization of the force density, the stark contrast between the measured force map and 

that predicted from a larger area force density (i.e. 𝜎 > 1 μm) strongly suggests that the drive force localized to a small region 

centered around the laser spot. Reducing the laser spot size by using shorter wavelengths or higher NA objectives could further 

enhance the control of the optomechanical drive efficiency, especially for smaller drumheads or beams which tend to vibrate 

at high frequencies29. 

FIG 3: (a) Frequency response traces with the drive laser at four different locations on device 1. 1: A common node of the U11H and U11V
modes. 2: A common antinode of the U11H and U11V modes. 3: A node of the U11H and antinode U11V modes. 4: An antinode of the U11H and 
a node of the U11V modes. The probe laser is fixed at location 2 for all measurements as to be sensitive to all three modes. The higher-order 
modes are scaled by a factor of 3 compared to the fundamental for clarity. (b) Mode and force maps for the fundamental mode of device 2. 
The force map in this case is more complex than the mode map, unlike those shown for device 1. (Scale = 1 micron).

As further evidence of the local nature of the optical force in 2D NEMS, we demonstrate that a focused drive laser can 

selectively suppress or excite either polarization of the U11 mode. To show this, we position the probe laser at a location 

sensitive to the motion of U01 and both polarizations of U11, and then we measure the frequency response while the drive laser 

is positioned at four different locations on the membrane, all either on an antinode or node of the orthogonal U11H and U11V

modes (see Fig. 3). The spectra show that the mode can be excited when the drive is placed on an antinode, or suppressed by 


7

~75% when placed on a node. The suppression is sensitive to the beam shape and beam positioning—which we did not fully 

optimize—so it is possible to achieve a much higher degree of mode suppression. Suppressing individual modes of a 

degenerate pair is typically quite hard, since they overlap in frequency, making this technique useful for probing the motion

of a single mechanical polarization30. Placing the drive laser at the point of a mode’s maximum response also reduces the 

need for high laser powers, which can lead to irreversible changes in the device25. Although we only study the first three 

modes here, this technique could also be used at higher frequencies, where the dense spectrum of modes can overlap 

significantly31.

In some devices, we observe more complex behavior in the force map than the mode map would indicate. For device 2, the 

mode map appears to be highly symmetric, similar to theoretical predictions15 as well as device 1. However, we see

significant variation in the phase and amplitude response of the device in the force map and observe a “dead-zone”, where the

drive force disappears and a 180° phase change occurs (Fig. 3(b)), much like crossing a nodal line. This is a likely due to a 

breakdown of our assumption of a gaussian force density and could be cause by various defects in the drumhead, such as 

adlayers or grain boundaries26. These observations indicate that the position of the drive force can drastically alter the 

expected amplitude and phase of a given mode. A better understanding of origin of this non-uniform phase response will be 

important for experiments which precisely measure the oscillation phase24.

In summary, we have combined spatially-resolved imaging with a force density model to infer the spatial resolution of the 

optical drive in a graphene nanomechanical resonator. Despite the fast thermalization, low reflectivity, and micrometer-scale 

size of the graphene resonator, we found that the optical force is localized to within 1 μm of the laser spot and can selectively

and efficiently actuate high-order mechanical modes. The combination of high-spatial-resolution optical drive and read-out 

enables full multimodal control of suspended 2D nanomechanical resonators for future NEMS applications. Our high-

resolution, all-optical approach could be combined with optical beam shaping and spatial light modulation to selectively address 

an arbitrary subset of resonators within large arrays, a feat not easily achievable with electrostatic gating, or could serve as a 

point source of propagating mechanical waves for use in 2D nanomechanical circuits32 and waveguides33. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge the facilities and staff from the Center for Advanced Materials in Oregon (CAMCOR), and the use 

of the University of Oregon’s Rapid Materials Prototyping facility, funded by the Murdock Charitable Trust. The 

authors thank Vincent Bouchiat, Andrew Blaikie, Brittany Carter, Joshua Ziegler, and Rudy Resch for scientific 

discussions and feedback related to this work. This work was supported by the University of Oregon and the National 

Science Foundation (NSF) under grant No. DMR-1532225.

REFERENCES

1 J.S. Bunch, A.M. van der Zande, S.S. Verbridge, I.W. Frank, D.M. Tanenbaum, J.M. Parpia, H.G. Craighead, and P.L. 

McEuen, Science 315, 490 (2007).

2 S.J. Cartamil-Bueno, M. Cavalieri, R. Wang, S. Houri, S. Hofmann, and H.S.J. van der Zant, Npj 2D Mater. Appl. 1, 16 


8

(2017).

3 A. Castellanos-Gomez, R. Van Leeuwen, M. Buscema, H.S.J. Van Der Zant, G.A. Steele, and W.J. Venstra, Adv. Mater. 

25, 6719 (2013).

4 M. Kumar and H. Bhaskaran, Nano Lett. 15, 2562 (2015).

5 P. Weber, J. Güttinger, A. Noury, J. Vergara-Cruz, and A. Bachtold, Nat. Commun. 7, 12496 (2016).

6 C. Chen, S. Rosenblatt, K.I. Bolotin, W. Kalb, P. Kim, I. Kymissis, H.L. Stormer, T.F. Heinz, and J. Hone, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 4, 861 (2009).

7 J. Güttinger, A. Noury, P. Weber, A.M. Eriksson, C. Lagoin, J. Moser, C. Eichler, A. Wallraff, A. Isacsson, and A. 

Bachtold, Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 631 (2017).

8 R.A. Barton, I.R. Storch, V.P. Adiga, R. Sakakibara, B.R. Cipriany, B. Ilic, S.P. Wang, P. Ong, P.L. McEuen, J.M. Parpia, 

and H.G. Craighead, Nano Lett. 12, 4681 (2012).

9 A.M. van der Zande, R.A. Barton, J.S. Alden, C.S. Ruiz-Vargas, W.S. Whitney, P.H.Q. Pham, J. Park, J.M. Parpia, H.G. 

Craighead, and P.L. McEuen, Nano Lett. 10, 4869 (2010).

10 R.A. Barton, B. Ilic, A.M. Van Der Zande, W.S. Whitney, P.L. McEuen, J.M. Parpia, and H.G. Craighead, Nano Lett. 11, 

1232 (2011).

11 E. Sage, M. Sansa, S. Fostner, M. Defoort, M. Gély, A.K. Naik, R. Morel, L. Duraffourg, M.L. Roukes, T. Alava, G. 

Jourdan, E. Colinet, C. Masselon, A. Brenac, and S. Hentz, Nat. Commun. 9, 3283 (2018).

12 S. Olcum, N. Cermak, S.C. Wasserman, and S.R. Manalis, Nat. Commun. 6, 7070 (2015).

13 R. De Alba, F. Massel, I.R. Storch, T.S. Abhilash, A. Hui, P.L. McEuen, H.G. Craighead, and J.M. Parpia, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 11, 741 (2016).

14 A. Stark, M.A. Halim, E. Vernhes, M. Gely, C. Masselon, and S. Hentz, Science 922, 918 (2018).

15 D. Davidovikj, J.J. Slim, S.J. Cartamil-Bueno, H.S.J. van der Zant, P.G. Steeneken, and W.J. Venstra, Nano Lett. 16, 2768 

(2016).

16 D. Garcia-Sanchez, A.M. van der Zande, A.S. Paulo, B. Lassagne, P.L. McEuen, and A. Bachtold, Nano Lett. 8, 1399 

(2008).

17 C. Schwarz, B. Pigeau, L. Mercier de Lépinay, A.G. Kuhn, D. Kalita, N. Bendiab, L. Marty, V. Bouchiat, and O. Arcizet,

Phys. Rev. Appl. 6, 064021 (2016).

18 D. Miller and B. Alemán, 2D Mater. 4, 025101 (2017).

19 C.H. Liu, I.S. Kim, and L.J. Lauhon, Nano Lett. 15, 6727 (2015).


9

20 M. Will, M. Hamer, M. Müller, A. Noury, P. Weber, A. Bachtold, R.V. Gorbachev, C. Stampfer, and J. Güttinger, Nano 

Lett. 17, 5950 (2017).

21 D. Ramos, J. Tamayo, J. Mertens, and M. Calleja, J. Appl. Phys. 99, (2006).

22 B. Ilic, S. Krylov, K. Aubin, R. Reichenbach, and H.G. Craighead, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 1 (2005).

23 M. Vassalli, V. Pini, and B. Tiribilli, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 1 (2010).

24 R.J. Dolleman, S. Houri, D. Davidovikj, S.J. Cartamil-Bueno, Y.M. Blanter, H.S.J. van der Zant, and P.G. Steeneken, 

Phys. Rev. B 96, 165421 (2017).

25 J.T. Robinson, M.K. Zalalutdinov, C.D. Cress, J.C. Culbertson, A.L. Friedman, A. Merrill, and B.J. Landi, ACS Nano 11, 

4745 (2017).

26 C. Schwarz, Ph.D. Thesis, Université Grenoble Alpes, France, 2017.

27 J.W. Suk, A. Kitt, C.W. Magnuson, Y. Hao, S. Ahmed, J. An, A.K. Swan, B.B. Goldberg, and R.S. Ruoff, ACS Nano 5, 

6916 (2011).

28 F. Ye, J. Lee, and P.X.L. Feng, Nanoscale 9, 18208 (2017).

29 Z. Wang, H. Jia, X. Zheng, R. Yang, Z. Wang, G.J. Ye, X.H. Chen, J. Shan, and P.X.-L. Feng, Nanoscale 7, 877 (2015).

30 Z. Wang, H. Jia, X.Q. Zheng, R. Yang, G.J. Ye, X.H. Chen, and P.X.L. Feng, Nano Lett. 16, 5394 (2016).

31 I. Bargatin, I. Kozinsky, and M.L. Roukes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 10 (2007).

32 J. Cha and C. Daraio, Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 1016 (2018).

33 D. Hatanaka, I. Mahboob, K. Onomitsu, and H. Yamaguchi, Nat. Nanotechnol. 9, 520 (2014).


