1

Polariton Nanophotonics using Phase Change Materials

Kundan Chaudhary1‡, Michele Tamagnone1‡*, Xinghui Yin1‡*, Christina M. Spägele1‡, Stefano L. 

Oscurato1,2, Jiahan Li3, Christoph Persch4, Ruoping Li1, Noah A. Rubin1, Luis A. Jauregui5, Kenji 

Watanabe6, Takashi Taniguchi6, Philip Kim5, Matthias Wuttig4, James H. Edgar3, Antonio Ambrosio7, 

Federico Capasso1*

1 Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, 

Massachusetts 02138, USA.

2 Department of Physics “E. Pancini”, University of Naples “Federico II”, Complesso Universitario di 

Monte S. Angelo, Via Cinthia 21, 80126, Naples, Italy.

3 Department of Chemical Engineering, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, USA.

4 1. Physikalisches Institut IA, RWTH Aachen University, 52056 Aachen, Germany.

5 Department of Physics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

6 National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, 305-0044, Japan

7 Center for Nanoscale Systems, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA. 

*Correspondence to mtamagnone@seas.harvard.edu, xyin@seas.harvard.edu,

capasso@seas.harvard.edu

‡These authors contributed equally to this work.


2

Polaritons formed by the coupling of light and material excitations such as plasmons, phonons, or 

excitons enable light-matter interactions at the nanoscale beyond what is currently possible with 

conventional optics1-18. Recently, significant interest has been attracted by polaritons in van der Waals 

materials, which could lead to applications in sensing,15 integrated photonic circuits4 and detectors3.

However, novel techniques are required to control the propagation of polaritons at the nanoscale and 

to implement the first practical devices. Here we report the experimental realization of polariton 

refractive and meta-optics in the mid-infrared by exploiting the properties of low-loss phonon 

polaritons in isotopically pure hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)5, which allow it to interact with the 

surrounding dielectric environment comprising the low-loss phase change material, Ge3Sb2Te6

(GST)19-28. We demonstrate waveguides which confine polaritons in a 1D geometry, and refractive 

optical elements such as lenses and prisms for phonon polaritons in hBN, which we characterize using 

scanning near field optical microscopy. Furthermore, we demonstrate metalenses, which allow for

polariton wavefront engineering and sub-wavelength focusing. Our method, due to its sub-diffraction 

and planar nature, will enable the realization of programmable miniaturized integrated 

optoelectronic devices, and will lay the foundation for on-demand biosensors.

Phonon polaritons (PhP) in thin films of hBN behave as confined guided optical modes, which extend as 

evanescent waves into the semi-spaces above and below the hBN. Therefore, the propagation of PhPs is 

affected by the refractive indices of the superstrate and substrate3,4,6,8. These are not interface modes but 

exist inside the volume of hBN. The permittivity values are of opposite signs along different principal axes

and thus polaritons exhibit hyperbolic dispersion3,8,12. The degree to which the optical energy density of 

polaritons extends into the substrate and superstrate depends on the wavelength and thickness of hBN. 

Therefore, the excitation wavelength can be controlled to the point where the polariton is affected even by 

the very first few nanometres of the substrate and superstrate17. This suggests the feasibility of substrate-


3

engineered polariton optics where, instead of nanopatterning the polaritonic material itself, optical functions

such as waveguiding and focusing are conferred through engineering the refractive index of the substrate. 

A heterostructure comprising the phase change material Ge3Sb2Te6 (GST) and isotopically pure h11BN

(referred to hBN hereinafter) is the ideal system for a proof-of-concept demonstration of substrate 

engineered polariton optics: hBN possess low-loss polaritons with large propagation lengths5 and GST can 

support two very different refractive indices in its amorphous and crystalline phases (𝑛𝑎 = 4.2 and 𝑛𝑐 =

6.1), which can co-exist at room temperature. Additionally, GST allows for reconfigurability in terms of 

writing, erasing, and re-writing optical components because it can be reversibly switched between its two 

phases through electrical or optical stimuli. This phenomenon is used in commercial rewritable optical 

discs21.

While GST has been previously employed to demonstrate switchable phonon polariton resonators in 

quartz26, more complex applications including metasurfaces remained elusive due to limited propagation 

lengths of phonon-polaritons in quartz. On the other hand, VO2 has been used as a substrate with hBN to 

achieve temperature dependent polariton dispersion27. However, this approach suffers from limitations 

because VO2's different phases cannot co-exist at the same temperature, and thus in close spatial proximity 

as is desirable for the realisation of optical devices. 

Here, we show an hBN-GST heterostructure in which arbitrary patterns can be written, erased, and re-

written to control the PhP propagation. We achieve this by defining several structures, ranging from 

waveguides to diffraction-limited focusing metalenses. Specifically, we use low-loss PhPs in isotopically 

pure hBN (11B isotopes with >99% purity5) with longer propagation lengths, which we combine with 

Ge3Sb2Te6, a GST stoichiometry with particularly low absorption in the mid-infrared (mid-IR)28. We work 

in the second Reststrahlen band (from 1361-1610 cm-1), which is associated with in-plane optical phonons5,6.


4

Figure 1 | Reconfigurable polaritons in hBN-GST heterostructures. a, Writing setup and device cross-
section. A 405 nm focused laser beam is used to write and reconfigure devices on GST underneath hBN
(transparent at 405 nm). b, Longer, low power laser pulses are used to crystallise GST and shorter high-
power pulses are used to melt it to restore the amorphous phase. c, Electric field profile of polaritons for the
a-GST and c-GST cases. The electric field confinement is larger in c-GST (due to its larger refractive index) 
than in a-GST. Ex represents the electric field along the direction of polariton propagation. Thicknesses for 
each layer are 195 nm for hBN, 15 nm for ZnS:SiO2, 55 nm for GST and 1 mm for CaF2, which is then 
considered semi-infinite. Refractive indices are 1.7 for ZnS:SiO2, 4.2 and 6.1 for GST in amorphous and 
crystalline phases, respectively, 1.37 for CaF2 while hBN is modelled with the Lorentz model presented in 
the Supplementary Information. d, Calculated dispersion relation of the effective index 𝑛eff for different 
hBN thicknesses on a-GST and c-GST. e, Polaritons are launched by the hBN edge when light impinges on 
the sample. The launched polaritons interact with the written devices and their propagation is imaged using 
scattering-type scanning near field optical microscopy (s-SNOM). f, Example of optical and s-SNOM 
images. Scale bar is 5 µm.

As PhPs are strongly confined, a thin layer of 55 nm of GST below hBN (195 nm of thickness) is sufficient 

to significantly alter polariton propagation. To create the heterostructure, we sputter a thin film of GST on 

a CaF2 substrate (in an amorphous phase as-deposited), protect it with a 15 nm layer of ZnS:SiO2 against 

oxidation and then transfer exfoliated hBN to form the top layer. A pulsed laser diode is used to write and 

erase patterns by selectively crystallising or re-amorphising GST21. 

The PhP mode profile is affected by the state (either crystalline or amorphous) of the GST beneath it (Figure 

1c), which can be quantified by using the effective index 𝑛eff = 𝑐/𝑣ph, where c is the speed of light and


5

𝑣ph is the PhP's phase velocity. Figure 1d shows the dispersion of 𝑛eff for different hBN thicknesses on 

both a-GST (𝑛eff,a) and c-GST (𝑛eff,c) respectively. We use scattering-type scanning near field optical 

microscopy (s-SNOM) to characterize the polaritons launched at hBN edges which propagate across the 

optical elements (Figure 1e,1f) 8,13,17.

Polariton propagation in heterostructures with a- or c-GST is analogous to light propagation in two different 

materials (such as air and glass). The continuity of the electric field at the boundary between two regions 

implies Snell’s law30:

𝑛eff,c
𝑛eff,a

= sin(𝜃a)

sin(𝜃c)
(1)

where 𝜃 is the propagation angle in corresponding regions with respect to the interface normal. 

Many conventional optical devices (such as lenses and prisms) are governed by Snell's law, suggesting that 

similar components can be implemented in our hBN-GST heterostructure. The first example to illustrate 

this principle is a refractive lens, specifically, a plano-convex semi-circular lens to focus PhPs (Figure 2a).

We write and erase a semi-circular plano-convex lens (radius (𝑅) = 5 𝜇m) twice and subsequently replace 

it with a plano-concave lens of the same radius (Figure 2b-f). The straight hBN edge launches linear waves 

(the planar equivalent of three-dimensional plane waves), which are either focused by the plano-convex lens 

or diverged by the plano-concave lens (Figure 1g,h). The lateral size of the focal spot is 2 𝜇m (29 % of the 

free space wavelength), which is diffraction-limited according to the Abbe limit computed for the 2D waves 

(i.e., 2.08 𝜇m). The numerical aperture (NA) with respect to polaritons in a-GST is 0.55, while the NA with 

respect to vacuum is 2.11, which is higher than unity due to the high-confinement of PhPs.


6

Figure 2 | Rewritable flat polaritonic lenses. a, Plano-convex lens schematics for 3D and 2D semi-
spherical and semi-circular lenses. In the 2D case the material refractive index is replaced by the effective 
index of the polaritons on amorphous or crystalline GST. b-f, Optical images of the written lens. The written 
patterns are clearly visible in the pictures because the refractive index of a- and c-GST also differs at visible 
wavelengths. First a plano-convex semi-circular lens (radius R = 5 µm) is written and measured, then it is 
erased, rewritten (with same dimensions), erased again and finally the same area is reconfigured into a 
plano-concave lens (R = 5 µm). g-h, Diagram of wavefronts for 2D plano-convex and plano-concave lenses
respectively. i, s-SNOM image of the plano-convex lens after the first writing. A focal spot is clearly visible.
j, Dependence of the focal length on the wavenumber. k, s-SNOM scan after first erasing. l, s-SNOM scan 
of the re-written plano-convex lens. m, s-SNOM scan of the plano-concave lens (third writing). s-SNOM 
images in panels i, l and m have been processed to remove the fringes outside the main beam, see
Supplementary Information for details. Scale bars are 5 µm.

We performed phase resolved s-SNOM measurements after each writing and erasing step. Using amplitude 

and phase information, the wavefronts of the polaritons can be clearly imaged (see Supplementary 

Information for more details on measurements and image processing). The resulting images confirm 

focusing, which is shown by the narrow waist in the transmitted beam (Figure 1i). Characteristic curved 

wavefronts can be seen before and after the focal spot. The position of the focal spot of the lens is measured 

from the images and compared with theoretical computation with two different methods (Figure 2j). The 


7

first method is based on computing the focal spot using ray optics, while the second, more accurate, method 

models the focused beam as a Gaussian beam, and identifies the focal spot as the beam-waist29 (see more 

details in the Supplementary Information).

After erasing, only polaritons with linear wavefronts that are launched by the hBN edge are visible, whereas 

focusing is fully restored when the lens is rewritten (Figure 2k,l). Furthermore, reconfiguring the same area 

to a plano-concave lens results in curved wavefronts associated with diverging PhPs (Figure 2m).

Figure 3 | Prism and waveguides. a, Snell’s law for 2D prisms determines deflection of polaritons. b,
Optical image of the written prism, an isosceles right-angled triangle with edges of 7.5 µm. The flake edge 
is also visible. c, Optical image of the written waveguides (top 0.7 µm wide, bottom 1.1 µm wide). The 
distance between the waveguides is 8.5 µm, which ensures no coupling between them. d, Diagram of 
wavefronts for the prism. e, Schematics of wavefronts for a waveguide. Polaritons propagating inside the 
waveguide have smaller fringe spacing due to the additional confinement of the waveguide mode. f, s-
SNOM image of prism showing a clear deflection angle of the outgoing wavefronts. g, s-SNOM image of 
waveguides, showing the expected confinement of the modes inside of them. The fringe spacings are 
different for waveguides with different widths, confirming that the spacing is determined by the mode of 
the waveguide. h, Simulated and measured effective indices of the waveguides. The effective indices are 
between 𝑛eff,a and 𝑛eff,c. i, Cross-section of the guided mode of the 0.7 µm waveguide at different 
frequencies (out-of-plane Poynting vector). Scale bars are 5 µm.

The successful implementation of lenses can be extended to other common devices such as prisms and 

waveguides (Figure 3). Planar prisms are simply triangles and follow Snell’s law (Figure 3a). We wrote a 


8

prism and two waveguides (with different widths) close to the hBN edge so that edge-launched waves can 

interact with them (Figure 3b-3e). The prism is designed to be an isosceles right triangle with one side 

parallel to the hBN edge such that edge-launched waves enter orthogonal to it. When traversing the 

hypotenuse, the polariton propagation direction (k-vector) is bent downwards (as expected from Snell’s 

law), as is clearly visible in the s-SNOM measurements in the form of bent fringes (Figure 3f). 

The waveguides consist of c-GST lines with widths (0.7 and 1.1 µm) smaller or comparable to the guided 

polariton wavelength. They provide additional in-plane confinement such that the propagating mode is truly 

one-dimensional and is confined along the waveguide. Here, the c-GST line acts as the waveguide core, 

while a-GST serves as cladding. The s-SNOM measurement in Figure 3g shows that the wavefront spacing 

decreases inside the waveguides, as expected from confined modes. Furthermore, the compression is greater 

for the wider waveguide. This implies that the waveguide effective index 𝑛eff,wg is larger when the width 

of the waveguide increases, which agrees with the behaviour known from conventional dielectric 

waveguides where the core size affects the effective index of the mode. In both the conventional and the 

polariton cases, the value of the waveguide effective index lies between the indices of the core and cladding 

material, i.e. 𝑛eff,a ≤ 𝑛eff,wg ≤ 𝑛eff,c. We verified this behaviour by numerically calculating the waveguide 

dispersion relation (see Methods) and comparing the results to s-SNOM measurements taken at different 

frequencies (Figure 3h). Figure 3i shows a cross-section of a guided mode obtained from numerical 

simulation, illustrating how polaritons are confined both vertically and laterally.

Metasurfaces have recently emerged as a novel and versatile method for engineering light propagation by 

using arrays of discrete elements, which locally alter the phase of transmitted light. By changing the size 

and shape of these elements, arbitrary predetermined phase profiles can be implemented30. Figure 4 shows 

the adaptation of this concept for polaritons and its implementation in an hBN-GST heterostructure. Our 

approach allows designing one-dimensional metalenses, which focus polaritons that propagate in two 

dimensions. The metalens elements are truncated c-GST waveguides defined in a-GST environment and 

create the hyperbolic phase profile31:


9

𝜙(𝑦) = − 2𝜋

𝜆eff,a

(√𝑦2 + 𝑓2 − 𝑓)
(2)

where y is the element position in y-direction and f is the focal length (Figure 4a). We build a phase library 

for elements of varying lengths (Metalens 1, periodicity of unit cell: 1.8 µm) and widths (Metalens 2, 

periodicity of unit cell: 1.2 µm) (Figure 4b and c), and subsequently incorporate the required phase profile 

by choosing the corresponding elements (Figure 4d) 30.  First, we demonstrate a metalens based on length 

changes, then we erase and replace it with a metalens where only the width of the individual elements varies.

Figure 4 | Reconfigurable Metalenses. a, Adaptation of metalenses to the 2D case. Each discrete element 
changes the local phase of light, so the wavefronts converge to a focal spot. b-c, Local phase (in degrees)
of each element as a function of the element parameter and the frequency. b refers to unit cells with period 
1.8 µm, 1 µm width and variable lengths. c refers to unit cells with period 1.2 µm, 9 µm length and variable 
widths. d, Designed phase profile of the two metalenses (see Supplementary Information for additional 
information). The design frequency was 1452 cm-1 and 1448 cm-1 for Metalens 1 and Metalens 2 
respectively. e, Optical images of the written metalenses. Metalens 1 was written, characterised, erased and 
subsequently the same area was reconfigured into Metalens 2. f, s-SNOM image of Metalens 1 showing 
focusing of polaritons at 1452 cm-1. g, s-SNOM image of Metalens 2 at 1445 cm-1. h, Intensity profile
(square of s-SNOM signal) at the cross-section of the diffraction-limited focused polariton beam for both 
lenses (dashed vertical lines in panels f and g). Scale bars are 5 µm.


10

s-SNOM characterisation was carried out after each step and clearly reveals the focusing effect of the two 

designed lenses (Figures 4f and 4g). Figure 4h shows the confinement of polaritons at the focal spot. 

Quantitative analysis (see Supplementary Information) of both metalenses confirms that we were able to 

achieve spherical aberration free, diffraction-limited focusing using both approaches: the lateral size of the 

focal spots are 1.6 𝜇m and 2 𝜇m respectively, which is in good agreement with the respective Abbe limits 

(1.66 𝜇m and 1.90 𝜇m respectively). The focal spots are 23 % and 29 % of the free space wavelength

respectively.

In summary, our results clearly establish that the hBN-GST heterostructure used in this work can serve as a 

versatile platform to arbitrarily control polaritons at the nanoscale to achieve freeform, transformation, and 

meta optics18. While we chose to integrate hBN with GST, it can be readily combined with other polaritonic

vdW materials3 and other phase change materials31, thereby enabling a whole range of deeply 

subwavelength polaritonic devices, from visible to infrared spectral regimes. Fully-fledged polaritonic 

circuits can be cheaply fabricated without the need for traditional photolithography, allowing the low-cost 

realisation of biosensors15, and high-density optical storage, which benefit from the extreme volume 

confinement that can be achieved with polaritons. Additionally, the reconfigurability offered by GST-vdW 

heterostructures and the possibility of electrically switching GST – vdW materials heterostructures will pave 

the way to applications such as modulators, photo-detectors and, more generally, programmable optical 

devices as optical counterparts to field programmable gate arrays.

Methods

Sample Fabrication: A 55 nm GST-326 film (with 15 nm of ZnS:SiO2 protection layer) was sputter-coated 

onto a 1 mm thick CaF2 substrate. Lithography was performed to define alignment markers (positive tone 

photoresist S1813 spin coated at 3000 RPM and baked at 115 °C for 90 seconds) followed by Pt sputtering 

(30 nm) and lift-off at room temperature. Isotopically pure h11BN flakes were mechanically exfoliated onto 


11

the substrate after plasma activation (5 minutes of O2 plasma at 100 W) using a standard Scotch tape process. 

We removed traces of the glue from the Scotch tape by placing the sample in acetone for 10 minutes 

followed by an isopropyl alcohol rinse for 5 minutes and drying with nitrogen. Afterwards, samples were 

further cleaned with O2 plasma (10 minutes of O2 plasma at 100 W). The thicknesses of the flakes and of 

GST were confirmed through AFM measures (Cypher AFM from Asylum Research).

Reconfigurable Pattern Writing: see Supplementary Method 3 for details on the technique used to write 

and erase patterns in GST.

Lens and metalens parameters: see Supplementary Method 2 for a summary of the fabricated lens 

parameters.

Numerical Simulations: Numerical simulations were performed using Lumerical Mode solutions and 

Lumerical FDTD. 1D simulations in Mode Solutions were used to calculate the effective indices 𝑛eff,a, 

𝑛eff,c. A mesh size of 1 nm was used to compute the fundamental mode profile and effective indices of the 

hBN-GST-326 heterostructures in the RS2 band of h11BN. Here, hBN was modelled as an anisotropic 

dielectric with its permittivity values obtained from the Lorentz model (Supplementary Method 1). The 

effective indices of the waveguides were calculated via 2D simulations of their cross-sections, also done in 

Modes Solutions. Metalenses were designed by first simulating numerically each element in a periodic 

environment with full wave 3D simulations performed in FDTD. The result was a library of elements, used 

to implement the required phase profile. The final metalens was also completely simulated to verify the 

focusing behaviour. For 3D simulations we used a mesh size smaller than 50 nm along x- and y-axes and 5 

nm along the z-axis. A series of dipole sources were used to excite the polariton modes in hBN in the RS2 

band.

s-SNOM Measurements: The near field scans were obtained using a commercial system from NeaSpec. 

Tapping-mode AFM is used (tapping amplitude of 130 nm, Pt-Ir coated tips with resonant frequency of 

~300 kHz, tip diameter of ~20 nm). A quantum cascade laser (QCL) array from Daylight Solutions was 


12

used as a tuneable mid-IR source for imaging. The phase-amplitude images are obtained using a pseudo-

heterodyne demodulation. The images of lenses and metalenses were processed using the technique shown

in the Supplementary Method 4 to isolate the polaritons focused by the structure. In all cases polaritons are 

self-launched by the edges32. See Supplementary method 5 for additional measurements.

References

[1] Ma, W., et al. In-plane anisotropic and ultra-low-loss polaritons in a natural van der Waals crystal. 
Nature 562, 557 (2018).
[2] Alonso-González, P., et al. Acoustic terahertz graphene plasmons revealed by photocurrent nanoscopy. 
Nat. Nanotech. 12, 31 (2017).
[3] Basov, D., Fogler, M. & de Abajo, F. G. Polaritons in van der Waals materials. Science 354, aag1992 
(2016).
[4] Low, T. et al. Polaritons in layered two-dimensional materials. Nat. Mater. 16, 182–194 (2017).
[5] Giles, A. J. et al. Ultralow-loss polaritons in isotopically pure boron nitride. Nat. Mater. 17, 134–139 
(2018).
[6] Dai, S., et al. Tunable phonon polaritons in atomically thin van der Waals crystals of boron nitride. 
Science 343, 1125-1129 (2014).
[7] Li, P. et al. Infrared hyperbolic metasurface based on nanostructured van der Waals materials. Science
359, 892–896 (2018).
[8] Ambrosio, A. et al. Selective excitation and imaging of ultraslow phonon polaritons in thin hexagonal 
boron nitride crystals, Light Sci. App. 7, 27 (2018).
[9] Caldwell, J. D. et al. Low-loss, infrared and terahertz nanophotonics using surface phonon polaritons. 
Nanophotonics 4, 44–68 (2015).
[10] Yoxall, E. et al. Direct observation of ultraslow hyperbolic polariton propagation with negative phase 
velocity. Nat. Photon. 9, 674–678 (2015).
[11] Kumar, A., Low, T., Fung, K. H., Avouris, P. & Fang, N. X. Tunable light-matter interaction and the 
role of hyperbolicity in graphene-hbn system. Nano Lett. 15, 3172–3180 (2015).
[12] Tamagnone, M. et al. Ultra-confined mid-infrared resonant phonon polaritons in van der Waals 
nanostructures. Sci. Adv. 4, 4–10 (2018).
[13] Grigorenko, A. N. et al. Graphene plasmonics. Nat. Photon. 6, 749-758 (2012).
[14] Hillenbrand, R., T. Taubner, and F. Keilmann. Phonon-enhanced light–matter interaction at the 
nanometre scale. Nature 418, 159 (2002).
[15] Rodrigo, D., et al. Mid-infrared plasmonic biosensing with graphene. Science 349 165-168 (2015).
[16] Chen, J., et al. Optical nano-imaging of gate-tunable graphene plasmons. Nature 487, 77 (2012).
[17] Chaudhary, K. et al. Engineering Hyperbolic Phonon Polaritons in van der Waals Heterostructure 
Waveguides to Enhance In-plane Optical Anisotropy, arXiv:1807.03339, (2018).
[18] Ashkan, V., and Engheta, N. Transformation optics using graphene. Science 332, 1291-1294 (2011).
[19] Wuttig, M., Bhaskaran, H. and Taubner, T. Phase-change materials for non-volatile photonic 
applications. Nat. Photon. 11, 465–476 (2017).
[20] Lin, H. et al. Chalcogenide glass-on-graphene photonics. Nature Photon. 11, 798–805 (2017).
[21] Wuttig, M. & Yamada, N. Phase-change materials for rewriteable data storage. Nat. Mater. 6, 824–
832 (2007).
[22] Tuma, T., et al. Stochastic phase-change neurons. Nat. Nanotech. 11, 693–699 (2016).
[23] Ríos, C. et al. Integrated all-photonic non-volatile multi-level memory. Nat. Photon. 9, 725–732 
(2015).


13

[24] Hosseini, P., Wright, C. D. and Bhaskaran, H. An optoelectronic framework enabled by low-
dimensional phase-change films. Nature 511, 206–211 (2014).
[25] Yin, X. et al. Beam switching and bifocal zoom lensing using active plasmonic metasurfaces. Light: 
Science & Applications 6, e17016 (2017).
[26] Li, P. et al. Reversible optical switching of highly confined phonon–polaritons with an ultrathin 
phase-change material. Nat. Mater. 15, 870–875 (2016).
[27] Folland, T. G. et al. Reconfigurable infrared hyperbolic metasurfaces using phase change materials. 
Nat. Commun. 9, (2018).
[28] Michel, A.-K. U. et al. Using Low-Loss Phase-Change Materials for Mid-Infrared Antenna 
Resonance Tuning. Nano Lett. 13, 3470–3475 (2013).
[29] Yariv, A. & Yeh, P. Photonics. (Oxford University Press, USA, 2007).
[30] Khorasaninejad, M. et al. Metalenses at visible wavelengths: Diffraction-limited focusing and 
subwavelength resolution imaging. Science 352, 1190–1194 (2016).
[31] Raty, J.‐Y., et al. A Quantum‐Mechanical Map for Bonding and Properties in Solids. Advanced 
Materials, 2018 1806280 (2018).
[32] Gilburd, L., et al. Hexagonal boron nitride self-launches hyperbolic phonon polaritons. The journal of 
physical chemistry letters, 8 2158-2162 (2017).

Acknowledgements

Funding: This work was supported by the NSF EFRI, award no. 1542807. This work was performed in part 

at the Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS), a member of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated 

Infrastructure Network (NNCI), which is supported by the National Science Foundation under NSF award 

no. 1541959. M.T. acknowledges the support of the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) grant no. 

168545 and 177836. S.L.O. acknowledges “Fondazione Angelo Della Riccia”, and the program for 

“International Mobility of Researchers” of the University of Naples “Federico II" (Italy), for financial 

support. The h11BN crystal growth was supported by the National Science Foundation, award number 

1538127. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the Elemental Strategy Initiative conducted by the 

MEXT, Japan and and the CREST (JPMJCR15F3), JST.

Author Contributions 

K.C., M.T. and X.Y. conceived the project. M.T., K.C., X.Y., C.S., A.A. and F.C. devised experiments. 

X.Y., C.S. designed and implemented the setup for writing patterns on GST-326 with help from R.L. and 

N.A.R.. J.L. and J.E. provided isotopically pure h11BN for final devices. C.P. and M.W. optimized and 


14

deposited the GST layer on the substrate. K.W., T.T., L.A.J. and P.K. provided natural abundance hBN for 

initial tests. X.Y. and C.S. wrote and erased patterns on h11BN/GST-326 heterostructures. K.C., M.T., 

S.L.O., C.S. and A.A., performed s-SNOM and AFM scans. K.C., M.T., X.Y. and C.S. performed FDTD 

simulations. M.T. and K.C. analysed the experimental data. F.C. led the project. All authors contributed to 

discussions and manuscript preparation.

Author Information

The Authors declare no competing financial interests. Please contact M.T. for any request of materials and 

additional data.


