Stability of Cubic FAPbI3 from X-Ray
Diffraction, Anelastic and Dielectric
Measurements

Francesco Cordero,∗,† Floriana Craciun,† Francesco Trequattrini,‡,† Amanda
Generosi,† Barbara Paci,† Anna Maria Paoletti,¶ and Giovanna Pennesi¶

†Istituto di Struttura della Materia-CNR (ISM-CNR), Area della Ricerca di Roma - Tor
Vergata, Via del Fosso del Cavaliere 100, I-00133 Roma, Italy
‡Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Roma "La Sapienza", p.le A. Moro 2, I-00185
Roma, Italy
¶Istituto di Struttura della Materia-CNR (ISM-CNR), Area della Ricerca di Roma 1, Via
Salaria, Km 29.300, I-00015 Monterotondo Scalo, Roma, Italy

E-mail: francesco.cordero@ism.cnr.it

Abstract

Among the hybrid metal-organic perovskites for
photovoltaic applications FAPbI3 (FAPI) has
the best performance regarding efficiency and
the worst regarding stability, even though the
reports on its stability are highly contradic-
tory. In particular, since at room temperature
the cubic α phase, black and with high pho-
tovoltaic efficiency, is metastable against the
yellow hexagonal δ phase, it is believed that
α−FAPI spontaneously transform into δ−FAPI
within a relatively short time. We performed
X-ray diffraction and thermogravimetric mea-
surements on loose powder of FAPI, and present
the first complete dielectric and anelastic spec-
tra of compacted FAPI samples under various
conditions. We found that α−FAPI is perfectly
stable for at least 100 days, the duration of the
experiments, unless extrinsic factors induce its
degradation. In our tests, degradation was de-
tected after exposure to humidity, strongly ac-
celerated by grain boundaries and the presence
of δ phase, but it was not noticeable on the
loose powder kept in air under normal labora-
tory illumination. These findings have strong
implications on the strategies for improving the

stability of FAPI without diminishing its pho-
tovoltaic efficiency through modifications of its
composition.

Graphical TOC Entry

1

arXiv:1905.02992v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  8 May 2019


Although MAPbI3 (MAPI, MA = methylam-
monium CH3NH3) is the most studied hybrid
metal-organic perovskite for photovoltaic appli-
cations,1 better performance in terms of photo-
voltaic efficiency are found in FAPbI3 (FAPI,
FA = formamidinium CH(NH2)2). This is due
both to a smaller bandgap of FAPI and to the
fact that the FA+ ion, in spite of a smaller elec-
tric dipole with respect to MA+, has a much
larger quadrupole and faster reorientation dy-
namics that better screen the photoexcited car-
riers, enhancing their lifetime.2 FAPI also has
a better stability than MAPI at high temper-
ature but its major flaw is that the black cu-
bic α phase, which has the high photovoltaic
efficiency, is metastable at room temperature,
where instead the stable phase, and the one ob-
tained by standard chemical methods, is the
yellow hexagonal δ phase. For these reasons,
major efforts are directed now at trying to sta-
bilize the cubic α phase of FAPI through par-
tial substitutions of FA with MA, Cs, etc. or
I with Br, although this approach increases the
bandgap.3,4 It has been discussed, based on
neutron diffraction measurements and simula-
tions, that the α → δ transformation is complex
and occurs through various intermediate stages,
requiring to overcome a free energy barrier esti-
mated in the order of hundreds of milli–electron
volt.5 This explains why the α phase of FAPI
is kinetically trapped, resulting in a large ther-
mal hysteresis between the δ → α transition at
T h
δα = 350 K and the α → δ at T c
δα = 290 K.5

Actually, the barrier for the α → δ transition
has not been measured, and there is complete
uncertainty on the kinetics of this transition.
Indeed, also the reported temperatures for the
δ → α transition during heating span quite a
broad range between 350 K5 and 458 K,6 and
this may be partly explained with the slow ki-
netics of the transformation, since the lowest
temperature is observed in a quasistatic neu-
tron scattering experiment while the highest
during fast heating at 5 K/min. The uncertain-
ties on the reverse transformation are worse.
The reported stability of the α phase at room
temperature in humid or dessicated air ranges
from few hours,7–11 to few days,12–14 but sta-
bility over months has been achieved by grow-

ing FAPI in a solution with long chain alkyl
or aromatic ammonium cations which cover the
(100) grain surfaces and render them stable,4 or
by growing FAPI within template alumina nan-
otubes.14 At variance with studies that high-
light the role of defects and grain boundaries in
stimulating degradation,15,16 it is also believed
that nanostructured FAPI has a superior stabil-
ity.17,18 Closely connected with this issue is the
variety of results obtained in different experi-
ments using a technique as effective as neutron
diffraction for studying the nature of the poly-
morphism of FAPI, as recently summarized in
Ref. 19.
We will show that a loose micrometric pow-
der of FAPI, prepared by slightly modifying the
known procedures can remain exposed in air
at normal laboratory illumination for at least
100 days without any sign of degradation and
pressed pellets can likewise remain in the α
phase for at least one month after being thor-
oughly dried in high vacuum. This observations
suggest that the kinetic trapping of the α phase
of FAPI at room temperature lasts for much
longer than previously thought, and the trans-
formation to the δ phase, itself highly hygro-
scopic, is catalyzed by humidity together with
other extrinsic factors, such as grain bound-
aries.
FAPI samples were obtained following an al-
ready reported procedure20 with slight modifi-
cations, by precipitating with toluene the yel-
low phase from a solution of HC(NH2) I2 and
PbI2 in GBL. The yellow powder was recov-
ered by centrifugation and put under vacuum at
150 ÷ 160 ◦C for ∼ 4 h until completely trans-
formed into dark grey/black α−FAPI (details
in SI).
We performed four types of experiments on
two types of samples: X-ray diffraction (XRD)
in air at room temperature on loose powder
and also on the compacted samples; complex
Young’s modulus versus temperature in high
vacuum on a compacted thin bar (FAPI-b) and
dielectric permittivity versus temperature in a
small closed volume on compacted discs (FAPI-
d1 and FAPI-d2). The results on the stability of
α−FAPI turned out to be strongly dependent
on the different experimental conditions.

2


In order to test whether traces of water or
other solvents were present in the freshly pre-
pared powders, we performed Thermo Gravi-
metric Analysis (TGA) and Differential Scan-
ning Calorimetry (DSC) on 20 − 30 mg batches
of δ−FAPI-before and after its conversion to
α−FAPI. The results are shown in Fig. S1 and
no mass loss attributable to water or other sol-
vents could be detected until the sample de-
composition started above 250 ◦C. The yellow
samples exhibited a dip in the DSC signal at
≳ 150 ◦C, due to the δ → α conversion.
An unexpected positive result was the perfect
stability for at least 97 days of the loose pow-
der of α-FAPI in air under normal laboratory
illumination with neon lamps. In Fig. 1 the
XRD spectra taken over a period of 100 days
did not change at all (during the 2 months be-
fore the last measurement the powder was kept
in a closed polypropylene vial). The initial pat-
tern was acquired few hours after the conversion
of the δ−FAPI powder into α−FAPI. The par-
ticles had sizes exceeding the micrometer, as de-
duced from the narrow reflections, whose width
was determined by the XRD setup (SI). This is
plain evidence that the kinetics of the δ → α
transition in bulk α−FAPI at room tempera-
ture is much slower than generally assumed,
even without the often cited stabilization size
effect in nanometric particles.17,18 This is true
not only above T c
δα ≃ 290 K deduced from neu-
tron diffraction,5 but also including one week
at several degrees below that temperature. The
stability against decomposition is likewise high,
since no trace of PbI2 is detected. The first sign
of degradation through reversion to the δ phase
has been found after additional 45 days (Fig.
S2).
On the other hand, the small part of powder
that remained attached to the walls of the glass
bottle rapidly became yellow (SI).
The pressures at which we compacted the
discs and the bars were 0.62 and 0.2 GPa re-
spectively, in the range of structural transitions
of α-FAPI reported in the literature, notably
to the δ phase,23 even though there is disagree-
ment.24,25 Indeed, the presence of δ-FAPI in the
pressed samples could be determined both vi-
sually, as yellow spots (see Fig. S3), and from

Figure 1: XRD patterns collected from the pre-
cursor FAPI powder at different times.
The
α−FAPI cubic phase was detected and labeled
according to the literature.21,22

the XRD analysis of the disc FAPI-d2 (Fig.
S2). It seems that also grinding the powder of
originally pure α-FAPI in air rapidly induced
a transformation to δ-FAPI. In fact, being the
first attempts to make a bar unsuccessful, we
repeatedly pressed and reground the powder in
an agate mortar, observing a progressive enrich-
ment in yellow grains. The bar finally used in
the anelastic experiments (FAPI-b) was pressed
from freshly prepared powder of α−FAPI in a
single successful attempt.
The anelastic measurements were performed
in a vacuum of < 10−5 mbar at high tempera-
ture or in < 0.2 mbar He at low temperature,
and the system was left in static vacuum be-
tween the experiments.
Details on the tech-
nique and sample conditions are found in SI.
The anelastic spectrum of FAPI has been mea-
sured here for the first time, similarly to the
complete dielectric spectrum, and both are used
here for the specific task of evaluating the frac-
tion of α phase in our samples. The conclusions
that can be drawn from these spectra on the na-
ture of the structural transitions that α−FAPI
undergoes are left for future work.
Figure 2 presents most of these measurements
as Young’s modulus E normalized to the value
E0 initially reached in the α phase. During the
first heating, a sudden rise of the modulus at

3


Figure 2: Young’s modulus, normalized to the
initial value in the α phase, measured at 3.5 kHz
over several temperature cycles during 35 days.
The sample was always in vacuum, except for
6 days between curves 4 and 5 and additional
3 days for measuring the dielectric permittivity
before curve 6. See SI for details.

∼ 390 K must correspond to the transformation
of the δ phase induced by pressure back to the α
phase, after which the sample remains in the α
phase for all the subsequent temperature cycles
and agings at room temperature. When cool-
ing, the α phase transforms into β at 280 K26

and then into γ at 141 K.26 The anomalies oc-
curring at these temperatures are retraced dur-
ing heating, except for some thermal hysteresis
above the γ → β transition, as indicated by the
arrows. It is not the aim of this paper to analyze
the elastic anomalies at these phase transitions;
we will only say that the steplike softening at
the α → β transition is as expected for a transi-
tion where the PbI6 octahedra tilt with respect
to the symmetric cubic phase (strain is coupled
to the square of the tilt angle27), and is analo-
gous to what happens in MAPI.28 The transi-
tion to the γ phase is more enigmatic, defined as
reentrant psudocubic26 with near cancelation of
the octahedral tilting and presumably freezing
of the reorientations of the FA molecules. Such
a freezing would explain the restiffening of the

elastic modulus well above the value of the cu-
bic phase, and is similar to what happens below
the analogous transition in MAPI, although in
that case the reorientational freezing is mainly
thermally activated and occurs below the tran-
sition to the γ phase.
The interesting point in the present context
is that, after the initial δ → α transforma-
tion, the E (T) curves remain perfectly stable
for 1 month, and this excludes that any trans-
formation to the δ phase or degradation occurs
over the month time scale in vacuum. A minor
degradation, indicated by ≲ 1%, decrease of E,
occurred during a total of 9 days in air between
curves 4 and 6, during which the dielectric per-
mittivity was also measured. Details are found
in the SI.
Few days after completing the cycle of anelas-
tic measurements, the XRD spectra showed
that a rapid degradation processes had started.
The α phase was still present but the dominant
peak was (001) of PbI2 (Fig. S2). The high de-
gree and irreversibility of degradation was con-
firmed by a new cycle of anelastic measurements
(Fig. S6) with an extremely low Young’s mod-
ulus that could not be recovered by annealing
above 400 K.
The complex dielectric permittivity was mea-
sured in a Linkam stage with modified Examina
Probe having a sealed volume of ∼ 100 cm3.
The standard procedure for removing humid-
ity is flushing the probe with a dry gas evapo-
rated from liquid nitrogen or air, for few min-
utes at 40 ◦C, then the probe volume is sealed
and the measurement starts. The permittivity
ϵ (T) curves measured two hours after pressing
the powder into disc are shown in Fig. 3 for
the sample FAPI-d2. The permittivity had an
initially low value ≲ 20, which sharply raised
above 45 around 400 K, the temperature of the
δ → α transformation. Heating was stopped at
430 K in order to avoid the thermal degrada-
tion of the organic component and immediately
followed by cooling at −1.2 K/min.
During
cooling the permittivity remained high and pre-
sented two anomalies at the structural α → β
and β → γ transitions, in agreement with the
anelastic measurements.
There were also an
additional anomaly at 173 K and some struc-

4


ture below the β/γ transition, which were re-
producible over several temperature cycles on
two different samples.

Figure 3:
Real part of the permittivity of
FAPI measured at 100 kHz during (1) heat-
ing at 1.2 K/min 2 h after pressing the disc,
(2) cooling at −1.2 K/min and (3) heating at
1.5 K/min. Note the broken vertical scale.

The ϵ (T) curve during heating perfectly re-
produces the cooling, except for the peak/step
at Tβα, which is sharper and higher, but this
is probably an effect of incomplete removal of
humidity, as discussed below. Indeed, if some
humidity is present during cooling, it condenses
and freezes on the sample and increases the con-
ductivity and permittivity after becoming liq-
uid during subsequent heating.
If humidity was removed with the standard
procedure described above, after one day the
permittivity dropped again to values even lower
than the initial one of mixed α and δ phase.
This is shown in Fig.
4 reporting results on
FAPI-d1. The experiment was repeated twice
at one day interval (curves 2 and 3), yield-
ing the same result, and after four days (4)
the starting permittivity was even lower, un-
til the sample was removed.
Its border free
from Ag was still black and was analyzed by
XRD (Fig. S3), which indicated a strongly de-
graded α phase, without any sign of δ phase.

Figure 4: Real part of the permittivity of FAPI
measured at 100 kHz during several tempera-
ture cycles using the standard procedure for re-
moving humidity at 40 ◦C. After vacuum an-
nealing, ϵ is more stable at its higher level.

Then the sample was annealed for 5 min in a
vacuum of 10−4 mbar at ≲ 200 ◦C and immedi-
ately mounted in the dielectric probe with the
standard procedure for flushing out the humid-
ity. This time the initial permittivity was high
(5), and remained so when repeating the exper-
iment the following day (6). During all these
temperature runs there was a progressive over-
all decrease of the ϵ (T) curves in the α, β and
γ sequence of phases, indicating that some ir-
reversible damage to the sample occurred after
each cycle. There is also a small step when cool-
ing through 350 K, whose amplitude increases
at every cycle; it is tentatively indicated as par-
tial α → δ transition. These results strongly
suggest that humidity is stored in the sam-
ple, cannot be removed by the standard purg-
ing procedure at 40 ◦C and is responsible for
the degradation of the α phase, though initially
without full conversion to the δ phase. Above
the δ → α transition temperature, most of the
water is expelled by the sample, but remains
trapped into the closed volume of the probe, so
promoting again the degradation of the α phase
already during the hours following the measure-
ment. Water was instead removed by the short
treatment at high temperature in vacuum be-

5


fore measuring the last curves 5 and 6.

Figure 5: Real part of the permittivity of FAPI-
d2 measured at 100 kHz during two tempera-
ture cycles and aging. (a) ϵ (T) curves measured
(1) just after pressing the sample with standard
purging from humidity ar 313 K (same as Fig.
3) and (2) after aging 1 month and purging at
440 K. Notice the broken vertical scale.
(b)
ϵ measured at 295 K and 100 kHz versus time.

In order to confirm this hypothesis, we re-
peated the measurement of sample FAPI-d2
with an improved drying procedure. Figure 5a
shows the previous measurement of Fig. 3 (gray
curves 1) with the standard drying procedure
followed by one month aging and the new mea-
surement (black curves 2) with a protocol where
purging is carried out during 6 min at 440 K,
above the δ → α transition (details in the SI).
As expected, the latter procedure was much
more effective in removing water from both the
sample and the probe volume: it yielded a more

complete transformation into the α phase, as
demonstrated by the higher level reached by
the permittivity, and greatly extended the sta-
bility in time of the α phase, as shown in the
lower panel. As explained in the SI, the degra-
dation kinetics was more than 30 times slower
than previously, and longer dehydration treat-
ment would have certainly further improved the
stability of the α phase.
The experimental results described above can
be summarized as follows:
1) According to XRD the loose powder re-
mains stable in the α phase in normally humid
air at room temperature for at least 100 days.
2) Pressing the powder of pure α−FAPI into
bars or discs at 0.2 − 0.6 GPa for few minutes
induces a partial transformation to the δ phase
and rapid absorption of humidity. The partially
degraded phase reverts to α during the first
heating above 400 K, but the subsequent results
on the pressed samples depend on whether the
measurements are carried out in dynamic high
vacuum or in a small closed volume.
3) According to the anelastic experiments in
high vacuum, the compacted powder remains
stable in the α phase for at least one month,
including one week in air, but after further ex-
posure to air it rapidly degrades.
4) According to the dielectric experiments in
a small closed volume purged from humidity be-
fore each experiment at 313 K, most of the com-
pacted powder remains stable in the α phase
during the full temperature run from 450 K
down to 100 K and heating again to above room
temperature. However, already after half day
the dielectric permittivity drops back to the
original state of partially degraded α phase,
with a seeming saturation of the degradation
process after few days. Yet, repeating the full
temperature cycles reproduces the first experi-
ment, and the whole process of transformation
into α phase and partial degradation can be re-
peated several times.
The stability of the α
phase is enhanced after purging from humidity
is made more effectively at higher temperature.
5) the yellow δ phase is an advanced stage in
the paths to degradation in the presence of hu-
midity and the dielectric constant and elastic
modulus are strongly sensitive also to the ini-

6


tial and partly reversible stages of degradation,
without visible formation of yellow phases.
At first these observations may seem to add
puzzling information to the already rich known
phenomenology, but they can all be easily ex-
plained and harmonized with the existing liter-
ature.
The first strong conclusion that can be drawn
from 1) and 3) is that α−FAPI, although
metastable at room temperature, is much more
stable than previously thought, over a time
scale of months and possibly more, depending
on the extrinsic factors that induce the α → δ
transformation and/or degradation into PbI2
with loss of the organic part.
The nature of
these extrinsic factors can be deduced form the
above observations and finds confirmation in
the literature.
The discs and bars were pressed at 0.6 and
0.2 GPa, respectively, and the observation of
diffraction peaks of the δ phase and of yellow
grains is in accordance with the recent report
that pressure induces the α → δ transition
at room temperature already at < 0.1 GPa.23

On the other hand, there is no agreement with
the few other cases where the effect of pressure
on the structure of α−FAPI has been studied:
no transition has been found up to 2.5 GPa,25

or up to 0.6 GPa in colloidal FAPI nanocrys-
tals18 or transitions to different phases have
been observed,18,24,29 while nanocrystalline in-
organic halide perovskites exhibit better stabil-
ity.30,31 Among all these data, we find agree-
ment with those or Ref. 23 and, regarding the
variety of the available results, we observe that
in the small volumes of the high pressure ex-
periments the issues discussed below related to
adsorbed water or solvents are greatly ampli-
fied.
Humidity is perhaps the most acknowledged
cause of degradation of the metal-organic per-
ovskites,32 but there is extreme variability in
the rate and nature of degradation of FAPI, as
mentioned in the introduction and also within
the results presented here. The effect of humid-
ity has been much studied in MAPI, where two
different types of degradation have been recog-
nized, depending whether water condenses at
the perovskite surface or not. Condensed water

irreversibly decomposes MAPI into PbI2 and HI
with the organic molecule dissolved in water or
lost as gas. In addition, the reaction sequence
seems autocatalytic through the degradation
products,33 so that beyond a certain point it
becomes very fast. On the other hand, if water
does not condense it diffuses in the bulk and
forms hydrated compounds where the network
of alkali octahedra is partially broken and inter-
calated with the organic and H2O molecules;34

this type of degradation during a first stage can
be reversed by drying the material.32

In FAPI, as in other materials, water con-
densation should occur preferentially at grain
boundaries. For example in gold, it has been
observed that grain boundaries and terraces on
the surface are preferential sites for water ab-
sorption,35 presumably due to their favorable
topographic conformation.
In addition, grain
boundaries often have a higher density of de-
fects, which in the case of the metal-organic per-
ovskites might favor both the adsorption and
reaction of water molecules.
Indeed in FAPI
films there are both indirect and direct evidence
in this sense. Voids attributed to the conden-
sation of water during preparation are found
to run along the grain boundaries,36 and the
degradation in FAPI films exposed to humidity
has been observed via Kelvin probe force mi-
croscopy to initiate at grain boundaries.16 In
addition, combined scanning TEM and energy
loss spectroscopy detected the presence of OH−

ions at the FAPI grain boundaries, a sign of
reacted water.15

With these premises, the above observations
1) − 4) become clear.
The superior stability,
even in humid air, of α−FAPI in loose powder
with respect to the compacted form is explained
with the fact that the powder has few grain
boundaries, if any, whereas in the compacted
powder, as in films, each grain is circumscribed
by grain boundaries acting as water condensa-
tion centers.
Both types of degradation under humidity de-
scribed above, reversible intercalation of H2O
and subsequent decomposition, considerably
lower the elastic moduli and dielectric constant,
because they break the network of Pb-I bonds
and eliminate the polyhedral spaces between

7


octahedra, where the organic molecules are free
to reorient.
It is therefore impossible to dis-
tinguish among the various stages of hydration
and occurrence of partial α → δ transformation
from sets of curves like those of Figs. 1−3. The
positive step in ϵ and M when heating through
400 K is labeled α → δ because it corresponds
to the known temperature of that transition,
but probably it includes the contribution from
dehydration of the material. Analogously, the
smaller step sometimes observed during cooling
in ϵ (T) is labeled "α → δ? ", but it must also
include rehydration from the water remained
trapped in the closed volume of the dielectric
probe. The hydration and subsequent reactions
are frozen during cooling to lower temperatures,
but proceed when back to room temperature,
where ϵ drops to less than half within the next
day. The proof that water drives the degrada-
tion process is given by the prolonged stability
of the α phase during aging at room tempera-
ture (curve 2 in Fig. 5a and Fig. 5b) after the
improved dehydration of the sample and elimi-
nation of water from the closed volume. A simi-
lar result is obtained by a preventive drastic de-
hydration at 10−4 mbar and 200 ◦C (curves 5,6
of Fig. 4). Moreover, the bar for the anelastic
measurements remains stable in air for 9 days,
after a thorough dehydration in high vacuum
for few days.
This is in accordance with re-
sults in films, where a thermal treatment after
preparation is found to improve the stability.16

Considering that the TGA runs do not show
measurable losses of water on α−FAPI powder,
we must conclude that water is mainly adsorbed
after pressing the powder, due to the formation
of the grain boundaries and probably even more
to a higher hygroscopicity of the δ phase, and
is released only at high enough temperature,
probably ≥ 400 K. Therefore, if the outgassing
of the sample is performed near room tempera-
ture or not at all, the adsorbed water remains in
the sample and starts to be released only near
or above the δ → α transition and, if trapped
in a closed volume, it is readsorbed during cool-
ing and promotes degradation and possibly the
reverse α → δ transformation.
This is what
happened in our first dielectric runs (curves 1-4
of Fig. 4).

The conclusion drawn from this discussion is
that, although α−FAPI is metastable at room
temperature, having δ−FAPI a lower energy,
the energy barrier for converting the α into the
δ phase is so high that no measurable conver-
sion occurs at room temperature for at least 100
days (results from XRD on powder). The α →
δ reaction is probably catalyzed by water, to-
gether with other degradation pathways, which
include hydration and decomposition; the lat-
ter has been found to occur even spontaneously
in vacuum at the surface of MAPI.37

As pointed out in the Introduction, there is
no consistency among the various reports on
the stability of α-FAPI in the literature. This
may be due to several factors, such as differ-
ent preparation protcols, different types of sam-
ples, testing conditions and methods. Yet, it
seems that the major discrepancy between the
present observations and the literature is with
the careful investigation of FAPI powder by
neutron diffraction in Ref. 5. In particular, in
that experiment it is found that a large quan-
tity (10−12 g) of FAPI powder undergoes both
the δ → α transition at 350 K during heat-
ing and the α → δ at 290 K during cooling in
a closed volume filled with He, whereas we do
not observe the latter neither in vacuum nor in
air, when starting from pure α-FAPI. Instead,
similarly to other neutron and X-ray diffraction
experiments,19,26 the octahedral tilt transitions
of the perovskite structure are observed during
cooling. Considering the well controlled condi-
tions and effectiveness of the experimental tech-
nique of Chen et al.,5 the discrepancy calls for
an explanation, which we think is in the sim-
ilarity between the conditions of that experi-
ment and of our dielectric measurements with
incomplete purging of humidity. In fact, in both
cases the starting phase is completely or par-
tially δ, most likely hydrated, so that the water
expelled by the sample at high temperature re-
mains trapped in the experimental volume and
drives the partial reversion to the δ phase dur-
ing cooling.
The picture presented here is also in agree-
ment with the previous observation26 that the
powder of α-FAPI obtained after heating δ-
FAPI overnight in a vacuum oven at 120 ◦C was

8


stable for 20−30 days, whereas heating δ-FAPI
in an evacuated ampoule under static vacuum
yields a black powder that reverts to yellow af-
ter few minutes. In the latter case the consid-
erable amount of water contained in δ-FAPI re-
mains completely trapped in the ampoule and
drives the reverse α → δ reaction immediately
after cooling to room temperature.
It would also be interesting to reconsider the
experiments where the stability is found to
be highly enhanced in nanocrystalline FAPI.
The observations include stable photolumines-
cence of colloidal nanocrystals with protected
surface,17 where the stabilization of the cubic
phase is explained as a general effect of the
small size of the particles, which enhances the
surface-to-volume ratio.17,18 Similarly, the ob-
servations of stability over several months of
FAPI nanostructures protected by long chain
alkyl or aromatic ammonium cations has been
explained in terms of change of balance be-
tween bulk and surface energy after the sur-
face functionalization,4 while the stability of
α−FAPI embedded in alumina nanotubes has
been explained with the fact that the latter
limit the possibility of expansion of α−FAPI
during degradation.14 In view of the stability of
our micrometric loose powder and thoroughly
dried compacted powder, we suggest that also
the stability of nanostructured FAPI might al-
ternatively be explained in terms of protection
of α−FAPI from humidity by the surface treat-
ments or by the nanotubes and in terms of re-
duced fraction of grain boundaries in these sin-
gle nanocrystals.
Our observations show that, even if the α
phase of FAPI is metastable with respect to
the yellow δ phase, its kinetic trapping at room
temperature lasts for much longer than previ-
ously thought. The present data set the period
of perfect stability of α−FAPI to at least 100
days, corresponding to the duration of our tests,
but this time range exceeds seven months if pre-
vious experiments on FAPI embedded in alu-
mina nanotubes14 or with functionalized sur-
faces4 are reinterpreted in terms of protection
against humidity. This stability also includes
the absence of spontaneous decomposition.
It appears that by far the most important

factor inducing degradation of α−FAPI is hu-
midity at grain boundaries, and that the pro-
cedures used for dehydrating the material are
often insufficient.
Since grain boundaries are
also present in films, these findings should help
in devising strategies for improving the stability
of α−FAPI without modifying its composition,
particularly by improving the initial dehydra-
tion process and subsequent surface protection.
This is especially true in the cases of intentional
exposure to moisture during preparation in or-
der to improve the grain morphology through
solvent annealing.38,39

Acknowledgement
The
authors
thank
Paolo Massimiliano Latino (ISM-Tor Vergata)
for his technical assistance, Sara Notarantonio
(ISM-Montelibretti) for the assistance in the
synthesis, Marco Guaragno (ISM-Tor Vergata)
for his technical support in X-ray experiments,
Dr. Cristina Riccucci for the DTA-DSC mea-
surements and Dr. Gloria Zanotti for fruitful
discussions.

Supporting Information Avail-
able

The following files are available free of charge.
The following files are available free of charge.

• SuppInfo.pdf: Synthesis, Thermal Analy-
sis of α− and δ−FAPI; Pressing; X-ray
diffraction, particle size, degraded sam-
ples; Complex Young’s modulus method
and data of degraded sample; Dielectric
measurements.

References

(1) Kakavelakis, G.; Paradisanos, I.; Paci, B.;
Generosi, A.; Papachatzakis, M.; Maksu-
dov, T.; Najafi, L.; Castillo, A. E. D. R.;
Kioseoglou, G.; Stratakis, E. et al. Ex-
tending the Continuous Operating Life-
time of Perovskite Solar Cells with a
Molybdenum Disulfide Hole Extraction
Interlayer. Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8,
1702287.

9


(2) Chen, T.; Chen, W. L.; Foley, B. J.;
Lee, J.;
Ruff, J. C.;
Ko, J. Y. P.;
Brown, C. M.; Harriger, L. W.; Zhang, D.;
Park, C. et al. Origin of Long Lifetime
of Band-Edge Charge Carriers in Organic-
Inorganic Lead Iodide Perovskites. PNAS
2017, 114, 7519.

(3) Binek, A.; Hanusch, F. C.; Docampo, P.;
Bein, T. Stabilization of the Trigonal
High-Temperature
Phase
of
Formami-
dinium Lead Iodide. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2015, 6, 1249.

(4) Fu, Y.;
Wu, T.;
Wang, J.;
Zhai, J.;
Shearer, M. J.; Zhao, Y.; Hamers, R. J.;
Kan, E.; Deng, K.; Zhu, X. Y. et al. Sta-
bilization of the Metastable Lead Iodide
Perovskite Phase via Surface Functional-
ization. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 4405.

(5) Chen,
T.;
Foley,
B.
J.;
Park,
C.;
Brown, C. M.; Harriger, L. W.; Lee, J.;
Ruff, J.; Yoon, M.; Choi, J. J.; Lee, S. H.
Entropy-Driven Structural Transition and
Kinetic Trapping in Formamidinium Lead
Iodide Perovskite. Sci. Adv. 2016,
2,
e1601650.

(6) Han, Q.; Bae, S. H.; Sun, P.; Hsieh, Y. T.;
Yang, Y. M.;
Rim, Y. S.;
Zhao, H.;
Chen, Q.; Shi, W.; Li, G. et al. Sin-
gle Crystal Formamidinium Lead Iodide
(FAPbI3):
Insight into the Structural,
Optical, and Electrical Properties. Adv.
Mater. 2016, 28, 2253.

(7) Lee, J. W.; Kim, D. H.; Kim, H. S.;
Seo, S. W.; Cho, S. M.; Park, N. G. For-
mamidinium and Cesium Hybridization
for Photo- and Moisture-Stable Perovskite
Solar Cell. Adv. Energy Mater. 2015, 5,
1501310.

(8) Zhou, Y.;
Kwun, J.;
Garces, H. F.;
Pangb, S.;
Padturea, N. P. Observa-
tion of Phase-Retention Behavior of the
HC(NH2)2PbI3
Black Perovskite Poly-
morph upon Mesoporous TiO2 Scaffolds.
Chem. Commun. 2016, 52, 7273.

(9) Li, Z.; Yang, M.; Park, J. S.; Wei, S. H.;
Berry, J. J.;
Zhu, K. Stabilizing Per-
ovskite Structures by Tuning Tolerance
Factor: Formation of Formamidinium and
Cesium Lead Iodide Solid-State Alloys.
Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 284.

(10) Zheng, X.; Wu, C.; Jha, S. K.; Li, Z.;
Zhu, K.; Priya, S. Improved Phase Stabil-
ity of Formamidinium Lead Triiodide Per-
ovskite by Strain Relaxation. ACS Energy
Lett. 2016, 1, 1014.

(11) Zhu, X.; Zuo, S.; Yang, Z.; Feng, J.;
Wang, Z.; Zhang, X.; Priya, S.; Liu, S. F.;
Yang, D. In Situ Grain Boundary Modi-
fication via Two-Dimensional Nanoplates
to Remarkably Improve Stability and Ef-
ficiency of Perovskite Solar Cells. ACS
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2018, 10, 39802.

(12) Jeon, N. J.; Noh, J. H.; Yang, W. S.;
Kim, Y. C.; Ryu, S.; Seo, J.; Seok, S. I.
Compositional Engineering of Perovskite
Materials
for
High-Performance
Solar
Cells. Nature 2015, 517, 476.

(13) Smecca, E.; Numata, Y.; Deretzis, I.; Pel-
legrino, G.; Boninelli, S.; Miyasaka, T.;
Magna, A. L.; Albert, A. Stability of
Solution-Processed MAPbI3 and FAPbI3
Layers. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2016,
18, 13413.

(14) Gu, L.; Zhang, D.; Kam, M.; Zhang, Q.;
Poddar, S.; Fu, Y.; Mo, X.; Fan, Z. Sig-
nificantly Improved Black Phase Stability
of FAPbI3 Nanowires via Spatially Con-
fined Vapor Phase Growth in Nanoporous
Templates. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 15164.

(15) Aguiar,
J.
A.;
Wozny,
S.;
Holesinger, T. G.; Aoki, T.; Patel, M. K.;
Yang, M.; Berry, J. J.; Al-Jassim, M.;
Zhoub, W.; Zhu, K. In Situ Investigation
of the Formation and Metastability of
Formamidinium
Lead
Tri-Iodide
Per-
ovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci.
2016, 9, 2372.

(16) published:
17 January 2018, H.-B. F.
Humidity-Induced Degradation via Grain

10


Boundaries of HC(NH2)2PbI3 Planar Per-
ovskite Solar Cells. Adv. Funct. Mater.
2018, 28, 1705363.

(17) Levchuk,
I.;
Osvet,
A.;
Tang,
X.;
Brandl, M.;
Perea, J. D.;
Hoegl, F.;
Matt, G. J.; Hock, R.; Batentschuk, M.;
Brabec,
C.
J.
Brightly
Luminescent
and Color-Tunable Formamidinium Lead
Halide Perovskite FAPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I)
Colloidal Nanocrystals. Nano Lett. 2017,
17, 2765.

(18) Zhu, H.; Cai, T.; Que, M.; Song, J. P.;
Rubenstein, B. M.; Wang, Z.; Chen, O.
Pressure-Induced Phase Transformation
and Band-Gap Engineering of Formami-
dinium Lead Iodide Perovskite Nanocrys-
tals. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9, 4199.

(19) Weber, O. J.;
Ghosh, D.;
Gaines, S.;
Henry, P. F.; Walker, A. B.; Islam, M. S.;
Weller, M. T. Phase Behavior and Poly-
morphism of Formamidinium Lead Iodide.
Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 3768.

(20) Liu, Y.; Sun, J.; Yang, Z.; Yang, D.;
Ren, X.; Xu, H.; Yang, Z.; Liu, S. F.
20-mm-Large
Single-Crystalline
Formamidinium-Perovskite
Wafer
for
Mass Production of Integrated Photode-
tectors. Adv. Optical Mater. 2016, 4,
1829.

(21) Weller, M. T.; Weber, O. J.; Frost, J. M.;
Walsh, A. Cubic Perovskite Structure
of Black Formamidinium Lead Iodide,
α−[HC(NH2)2]PbI3, at 298 K. J. Phys.
Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 3209.

(22) Xie,
L.
Q.;
Chen,
L.;
Nan,
Z.
A.;
Lin, H. X.;
Wang, T.;
Zhan, D. P.;
Yan, J. W.; Mao, B. W.; Tian, Z. Q.
Understanding the Cubic Phase Stabiliza-
tion and Crystallization Kinetics in Mixed
Cations and Halides Perovskite Single
Crystals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139,
3320.

(23) Jiang, S.; Luan, Y.; Jang, J. I.; Baikie, T.;
Huang, X.;
Li, R.;
Saouma, F. O.;

Wang, Z.; White, T. J.; Fang, J. Phase
Transitions of Formamidinium Lead Io-
dide Perovskite under Pressure. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 13952.

(24) Wang, P.; Guan, J.; Galeschuk, D. K.;
Yao, Y.; He, C. F.; Jiang, S.; Zhang, S.;
Liu, Y.; Jin, M.; Jin, C. et al. Pressure-
Induced Polymorphic, Optical, and Elec-
tronic Transitions of Formamidinium Lead
Iodide Perovskite. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2017, 89, 2119.

(25) Liu, G.; Kong, L.; Gong, J.; Yang, W.;
Mao, H.; Hu, Q.; Liu, Z.; Schaller, R. D.;
Zhang,
D.;
Xu,
T.
Pressure-Induced
Bandgap
Optimization
in
Lead-Based
Perovskites with Prolonged Carrier Life-
time and Ambient Retainability. Adv.
Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, 1604208.

(26) Fabini, D. H.; Stoumpos, C. C.; Lau-
rita, G.; Kaltzoglou, A.; Kontos, A. G.;
Falaras,
P.;
Kanatzidis,
M.
G.;
Se-
shadri, R. Reentrant Structural and Opti-
cal Properties and Large Positive Thermal
Expansion in Perovskite Formamidinium
Lead Iodide. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016,
55, 15392.

(27) Rehwald, W. The Study of Structural
Phase Transitions by Means of Ultrasonic
Experiments. Adv. Phys. 1973, 22, 721.

(28) Cordero, F.; Craciun, F.; Trequattrini, F.;
Imperatori, P.;
Paoletti, A. M.;
Pen-
nesi, G. Competition between Polar and
Antiferrodistortive
Modes
and
Corre-
lated Dynamics of the Methylammonium
Molecules in MAPbI3. J. Phys. Chem.
Lett. 2018, 9, 4401.

(29) Sun, S.; Deng, Z.; Wu, Y.; Wei, F.; Isik-
gor, F. H.; Brivio, F.; Gaultois, M. W.;
Ouyang,
J.;
Bristowe,
P.
D.;
Cheetham, A. K. et al. Variable Tem-
perature
and
High-Pressure
Crystal
Chemistry of Perovskite Formamidinium
Lead Iodide:
a Single Crystal X-Ray
Diffraction
and
Computational
Study.
Chem. Commun. 2017, 53, 7537.

11


(30) Xiao, G.; Cao, Y.; Qi, G.; Wang, L.;
Liu, C.;
Ma, Z.;
Yang, X.;
Sui, Y.;
Zheng, W.;
et al. Pressure Effects on
Structure and Optical Properties in Ce-
sium Lead Bromide Perovskite Nanocrys-
tals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 10087.

(31) Ma, Z.;
Liu, Z.;
Lu, S.;
Wang, L.;
Feng, X.; Yang, D.; Wang, K.; Xiao, G.;
Zhang, L.; Redfern, S. T. et al. Pressure-
Induced Emission of Cesium Lead Halide
Perovskite Nanocrystals. Nat. Commum.
2018, 9, 4506.

(32) Docampo, P.;
Bein, T. A Long-Term
View on Perovskite Optoelectronics. Acc.
Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 339.

(33) Pont, S.; Bryant, D.; Lin, C. T.; Aristi-
dou, N.; Wheeler, S.; Ma, X.; Godin, R.;
Haque, S. A.;
Durrant, J. R. Tuning
CH3NH3Pb(I1−xBrx)3 Perovskite Oxygen
Stability in Thin Films and Solar Cells. J.
Mater. Chem. A 2017, 5, 9553.

(34) Leguy,
A.
A.;
Hu,
Y.;
Campoy-
Quiles, M.; Alonso, M. I.; Weber, O. J.;
Azarhoosh,
P.;
van
Schilfgaarde,
M.;
Weller, M. T.; Bein, T.; Nelson, J. et al.
Reversible Hydration of CH3NH3PbI3 in
Films, Single Crystals, and Solar Cells.
Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 3397.

(35) Gil, A.; Colchero, J.; Gómez-Herrero, J.;
Baró, A. Different Stages of Water Ad-
sorption on Au Studied by Dynamic SFM
and Jumping Mode. Appl. Phys. A 2001,
72, S137.

(36) Aguiar, J. A.; Wozny, S.; Alkurd, N. R.;
Yang, M.; Kovarik, L.; Holesinger, T. G.;
Al-Jassim,
M.;
Zhu,
K.;
Zhou,
W.;
Berry, J. J. Effect of Water Vapor, Tem-
perature, and Rapid Annealing on For-
mamidinium Lead Triiodide Perovskite
Crystallization. ACS Energy Lett. 2016,
1, 155.

(37) Deretzis, I.; Alberti, A.; Pellegrino, G.;
Smecca, E.; Giannazzo, F.; Sakai, N.;

Miyasaka, T.; Magna, A. L. Atomistic Ori-
gins of CH3NH3PbI3 Degradation to PbI2
in Vacuum. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 106,
131904.

(38) Petrus, M. L.; Hu, Y.; Moia, D.; Cal-
ado, P.; Leguy, A. A.; Barnes, P. F.; Do-
campo, P. The Influence of Water Vapor
on the Stability and Processing of Hybrid
Perovskite Solar Cells Made from Non-
Stoichiometric Precursor Mixtures. Chem.
Sus. Chem. 2016, 9, 2699.

(39) Contreras-Bernal, L.; Aranda, C.; Valles-
Pelarda,
M.;
Ngo,
T.
T.;
Ramos-
Terron, S.; Gallardo, J. J.; Navas, J.;
Guerrero, A.; Mora-Sero, I.; Idígoras, J.
et al. Homeopathic Perovskite Solar Cells:
Effect of Humidity during Fabrication on
the Performance and Stability of the De-
vice. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 5341.

12


