1

1 | Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
2 | University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest, 060042 Bucharest, Romania
3 | Universitat PolitГЁcnica de ValГЁncia, 46022 Valencia, Spain
* | Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: andrei.muller@epfl.ch

Reconfigurable radiofrequency electronic functions designed with 3D Smith 
Charts in Metal-Insulator-Transition Materials

Andrei A. Muller1*, Alin Moldoveanu2, Victor Asavei2, Riyaz A. Khadar1, Esther Sanabria-
Codesal3, Anna Krammer1, Montserrat Fernandez-BolaГұos1, Matteo Cavalleri1, Junrui Zhang1, 
Emanuele Casu1, Andreas Schuler1, Adrian M. Ionescu1

Recently, the field of Metal-Insulator-Transition (MIT) materials has emerged as an unconventional solution for 

novel energy efficient electronic functions, such as steep slope subthermionic switches, neuromorphic hardware, 

reconfigurable radiofrequency functions, new types of sensors, teraherz and optoelectronic devices. Designing 

radiofrequency (RF) electronic circuits with a MIT material like vanadium dioxide, VO2, requires the 

understanding of its physics and appropriate models and tools, with predictive capability over large range of 

frequency (1-100GHz).

In this work, we develop 3D Smith charts for devices and circuits having complex frequency dependences, like 

the ones resulting by the use of MIT materials. The novel foundation of a 3D Smith chart involves here the

geometrical fundamental notions of oriented curvature and variable homothety in order to clarify first theoretical 

inconsistencies in Foster and Non Foster circuits, where the driving point impedances exhibit mixed clockwise 

and counter-clockwise frequency dependent paths on the Smith chart as frequency increases. We show here the 

unique visualization capability of a 3D Smith chart, which allows to quantify orientation over variable frequency.

The new 3D Smith chart is applied as a 3D multi-parameter modelling and design environment for the complex 

case of Metal-Insulator-Transition (MIT) materials where their permittivity is dependent on the frequency.

In this work, we apply 3D Smith charts to on Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) reconfigurable Peano inductors. We report

fabricated inductors with record quality factors using VO2 phase transition to program multiple tuning states, 

operating in the range 4 GHz to 10 GHz. Finally, the 3D Smith chart enables the design and fabrication of a new 

variety of Peano curves filters that are also used to experimentally extract the frequency-dependent dielectric 

constant of VO2 within 1 GHz- 50 GHz, a quasi-unexplored field of major importance for the accurate predictive 

design of radio frequency electronic applications with phase change materials.

The Smith chart, invented in 19391, is a graphical tool widely used in various fields of electrical engineering and 
applied physics when dealing with frequency dependent reflection coefficients or impedances. The Smith chart is 
widely employed in the design/measurement stage of a large variety of circuits, from metasurfaces2 to coils3

(Supplementary Fig. 3 in3) or scanning microwave microscopy4, while being mostly present in microwave-
terahertz frequency region in the design and characterization of antennas5, transmission lines6-7, power amplifiers8,
filters9 or acoustic resonators10. The 3D Smith chart proposed in11 generalizes the Smith chart (which is limited 
within the unit circle to circuits with reflection coefficients (рқӣӨ = рқӣӨрқ‘ҹ + рқ‘—рқӣӨрқ‘–) magnitudes smaller than unity Fig. 1a)
onto the Riemann sphere in order to make it usable for all circuits (Fig. 1b and Fig. 1c).

An essential drawback of the Smith chart and previous 3D Smith chart representations1-13 is the lack of 
visualization of the variable parameter (frequency), thus the orientation changes and dynamics of the scattering 
parameters frequency dependency being impossible to be pictured. Although many circuits exhibit a clockwise 
orientation of their driving point impedances and reflection parameters curves as frequency increases2-5,9,(6,10 вҖ“
unspecified), the absence of a clockwise motion (i.e. discontinuity points or counter-clockwise motion) was often
reported leading to diverse interpretations. In active devices (transistors), as for example in14,15 it is referred as 
вҖңkink-phenomenonвҖқ, in lossless (purely reactive) non-Foster circuits (such as negative capacitors and inductors)16-

19, as an intrinsic phenomenon. Unfortunately, this counter-clockwise dynamics phenomenon recurrent existence
in lossy circuits with non-Foster elements18,20-23, led to some misleading conclusions: in20-23 the authors assume 


2

that the existence of this phenomenon proves the presence of a non-Foster element, while in24 it is stated that 
passive linear devices cannot exhibit driving point immittances with counter-clockwise frequency dependency on 
the Smith chart.

2D Smith chart representations lacking in zooming may oversee the changes of orientation occurring in passive 
networks (for input impedances and reflection coefficients) with Foster elements (observed too in25-26). This
orientation reversal phenomenon in lossy networks with Foster elements is often overlooked or seen an 
interpolation error and its presence is often ignored. Since the paths of the reflection coefficients of these circuits 
(excepting orientation) may be identical the Smith chart on a specific frequency range (as for negative inductors 
and positive capacitors and viceversa16,18,19,25) a frequency dependency visualization is missing in order to get an 
insight to the intrinsic phenomenon.

For this purpose, we first introduce the notion of oriented curvature27, prove the mixed clockwise-counter-
clockwise orientation phenomenon in lossy circuits with Foster elements and propose a frequency orientation
quantification (while increasing the sweeping range) with a new implementation within the 3D Smith chart tool 
by using the topology of the Riemann sphere28-29. Thus, a new vision to detect this orientation reversal for both 
Foster and Non-Foster16-23,30-32 elements based networks is first presented (while increasing the frequency of 
analysis), impossible to quantify for 2D parametrical plot such as the Smith chart or basic 3D Smith chart (where 
only the Riemann sphere surface is used).

Further the 3D Smith chart is additionally exploited and further developed in order to display simultaneously
parameters needed in reconfigurable frequency designs while dealing with inductors. Frequency dependent 
inductances based on the Y1133-35 admittance parameter (shunt models), series models of inductances based on the 
Y2136-37 parameter, quality factors33-38 , self-resonant frequencies, Smith chart information38 need all to be 
simultaneously optimized and analyzed over a wide frequency range during the designs and characterizing stages
of inductors. This leads33-38 to a larger number of graphics or to different scaling in order to grasp all parameters
of interest. Here all these factors are implemented and analyzed on a display using the 3D Smith chart topology
and different perspectives.

The newly developed capabilities are particularly suited to explore and design reconfigurable CMOS-compatible 
inductors design for microwaves frequencies using a phase change material like Vanadium Dioxide (VO2)36-37, 39-

46 for tuning the values of inductance. Indeed, it is known that VO2 behaves like an insulator under its phase 
transition temperature Tc = 68 В°C (or higher when dopped41) with monoclinic crystal structure39 while deposited 
on SiO2/Si substrates. Because of its ease of integration, reversible insulator to metal transition (IMT), low 
transition temperature and fast switching time, the employment of Vanadium Dioxide (VO2) as a reconfigurable 
radio frequency (RF) material has been just recently investigated for a variety of RF-reconfigurable devices36-

37,39,43,44. Still, much of existing studies are carried out in the frequency range of terahertz or far-infrared40,42-43, 
leaving (RF) VO2 a largely uncharted area for exploration in development. The conductivity levels of VO2 in its 
off (isolating state) and on state (conductive state) vary over a wide range depending on the substrate36-37,39-46
causing limitations in the RF devices performances (being below 50,000S/m for SiO2/Si depositions in the on 
state).

The on state limited conductivity levels restricted the quality factors of the reconfigurable inductors fabricated 
with VO2 in its conductive state37 to sub-unitary values, while to less than three in36 for CMOS compatible Si VO2
reconfigurable inductors.

Here we further introduce a new type of reconfigurable inductors based on the Peano curves47 with VO2 switches
and using the freshly implemented multi parameter displays we manage to increase with a factor of 2.33 the quality 
factors previously reported in36 at reconfigurable inductors with VO2 in on state (and with orders of magnitude in 
respect to37) while increasing too the number of tuning states. Further due to its original geometry the inductor 
exhibits a tuning range of 77% (better than 55% in36 or 32% in37) and a ratio of Qmax_on/ Qmax_off of 0.87 unlike 
0.27 in our previous work36 on SiO2/Si substrates. It is worth pointing out that the inductor while facing the limited 
conductivity levels of VO2 on SiO2/Si substrates exhibits a 2.33 better quality factor in the on state also in respect 
to other VO2 based reconfigurable inductors such as the SiO2/Sapphire inductor reported in48 where the 
conductivity levels exceed 300.000S/m.

Motivated by the large variety of the values reported at room temperatures for the dielectric constant40 (the real 
part of the relative effective permittivity) of the VO2 in its semiconductor state (30 in36,44(stated) or 90-700 in the 
0.1 GHz-30 GHz range (frequency dependent43), 3-10 at infrared frequencies40,45) we elaborate and validate a new


3

model of the effective permittivity of VO2. The model in43 is facing the limitations of the conformal mapping 
extraction techniques46 while dealing with finite ground planes (assumed infinitely in43), skin effect losses49 while 
neglecting damping losses50 in the final extraction model of the relative effective permittivity.

By producing a series of Peano inspired filters (using the space filling property of the curves to shift resonance 
frequencies down while using limited areas) with a series of different resonance frequencies with or without a thin 
VO2 layer below them we propose based on a mixed frequency shift model and avoiding the limitations of
conformal mapping43 a more complete model of the effective permittivity including both intrinsic dielectric losses
(damping) and conductive losses50 and we extract the frequency dependency of the dielectric constant. The 
extraction is performed within the commercial, satellites communications frequency bands, from 1 GHz-50 GHz 
and thus provide a more complete model for this emerging material whose applications in reconfigurable wireless 
communications are in its birth moments. 

Oriented curvature of input impedances, reflection coefficients, slope of reactance and 3D Smith chart 
implementation of frequency dependency orientation

Based on the notion of oriented curvature introduced and explained in the Supplementary Material, we show that 
the changes in sign of the reactance frequency derivative do not imply changes in orientation neither for the input 
impedance nor for the reflection coefficient of 1- port networks (when losses occur). We provide the conditions 
and equations under which one may have the same orientation (more details in Supplementary Section 1) for both 
reflection coefficient and input impedances. The lossless (reactive) cases (purely Foster16-17,26 and non-Foster16-19) 
become particular cases where the reflection coefficients are direct inversive (Mobius) and indirect inversive 
transformations of the oriented imaginary axes of the impedance plane and the clockwise and counter-clockwise 
motion on circles is a consequence of the reactance slope and sign.
By introducing the geometrical notion of oriented curvature in this field27 we prove that the assumptions made by 
other authors20-24 may not apply (see Supplementary Section 1). Further, as seen also for the input impedance of 
an antenna in26, the negative frequency derivative of the reactance of a lossy 1-port network does not imply 
counter-clockwise motions in the case of lossy 1-port networks.
Consider first a 1-port network terminated on a resistive load r. The input impedance is given by (1), where  рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)
denotes its resistive part and рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) its reactive part, while its reflection coefficient is given by (2). Computing the 
oriented curvature values for both of them (Supplementary Section 1) we get рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) (the oriented curvature of 
the input impedance) and рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) (the oriented curvature of the 1-port reflection coefficient) as (3) and (4).
рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) = рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) + рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)
(1)

рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) =

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”)/рқ‘ҹвҲ’1

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”)/рқ‘ҹ+1
(2)

рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”))

вҖІ

(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2)3 2
вҒ„
(3)

рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2((рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”))2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)2)(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”))

вҖІ
+2 рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)2(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2)(рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) )

вҖІ

2 рқ‘ҹ (рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2)3 2
вҒ„
(4)

(i) If рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0 then рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is counter-clockwise oriented; (ii) if рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0 then рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is clockwise 
oriented;  (iii) if рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0 then рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is counter-clockwise oriented;  (iv) рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0 then рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is 
clockwise oriented; (v) If  рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) = 0 then рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is a line; (vi) If  рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) = 0 then рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is a line. The 
complex link between the change of sign of (3) and (4) is described in Supplementary Section 1.
Denoting with рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡрқҗ№(рқң”) and рқҗөрқ‘ҡрқҗ№(рқң”) the reactance and susceptance of purely Foster elements and with рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)

and рқҗөрқ‘ҡрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”) the ones for Non Foster elements we obtain: for Foster networks рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =0 while 

рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
> 0 and

рқ‘‘рқҗөрқ‘ҡрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
> 0 and using (3)-(4) we get the input impedance and 1 вҖ“port reflection coefficient curvatures for them 

as: рқ‘ҳрқҗ№рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”)= 0 and рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқҗ№(рқң”) = вҲ’1 (Supplementary Section 1).  For Non-Foster networks рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =0 too, while  

рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
< 0 рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣрқ‘‘

рқ‘‘рқҗөрқ‘ҡрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
< 0 hold thus via (3) and (4) we get the input impedance and 1 вҖ“port reflection 

coefficient curvatures for them as рқ‘ҳрқ‘Ғрқҗ№рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”)= 0 and рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”) = 1.

In the case of two port networks with equal port impedances similar computations can be done for purely Foster 
and non-Foster elements resulting in the corresponding reflection coefficients рқӣӨ2рқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқҗ№ and рқӣӨ2рқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ғрқҗ№ with their 
corresponding oriented curvatures рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқҗ№(рқң”)= -2 and рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)= 2. Their oriented curvature magnitudes explain
their paths on 0.5 radius circles in Fig. 1d and Fig. 1e on the Smith chart and 3D Smith chart) (see Supplementary 


4

Section 1).
The reflection coefficients on the other hand of purely reactive 1-port elements are given in Fig. 2a-

Fig. 2d (purely reactive Foster and non-Foster circuits in Fig. 2a, lossy circuits with non-Foster elements in c and 
lossy circuits with Foster elements in Fig. 2d. The results in Fig. 2d show that clockwise and counter clockwise 
reflection coefficients rotations (and the same for input impedance) can occur at lossy 1-port networks containing 
only Foster elements too.

The results plotted in Fig. 1d and Fig. 1e, Fig. 2b - Fig. 2c show the new 3D Smith chart implementations capable 
of detecting orientation changes and intrinsic behavior where the Smith chart shows a limited insight capability to 
the phenomenon. Supplementary Section 2 describes fully the employment details.

Fig. 1| Smith chart limitations and clockwise and counter-clockwise frequency dependency of Foster and non-Foster 
elements on a newly introduced frequency dependent 3D Smith chart. a, Smith chart. b, Extended Smith chart c, 3D Smith 
chart as in 2018 (without frequency dependency). d, 3D Smith chart representation of the two port reflection coefficient and newly 
implemented frequency dependent 3D Smith chart representation for it. For a capacitor with purely negative capacitance and an 
inductor with positive inductance their reflection coefficient frequency representation overlaps on the Smith chart for a wide 
frequency range, their orientation changes cannot be distinguished. On the newly implemented frequency dependent 3D Smith 
chart one can clearly see their clockwise motion with increasing frequency for the inductor while the counter-clockwise motion for 
the capacitor with negative capacitance. e, 3D Smith chart representation of the reflection coefficient and newly implemented 
frequency dependent 3D Smith chart for a negative valued inductor and capacitor with positive capacitance. Again, their trace is 
identical on a Smith chart, their intrinsic opposed frequency dependency cannot be seen. On the 3D Smith chart one can directly 
see the clockwise motion of the reflection coefficient of the capacitor and the counter-clockwise motion of the reflection coefficient 
of the negative valued inductor.

The main new insight is given by the representation of the frequency parameter over the 3D Smith chart 
representation of the reflection coefficient рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) via a variable homothety with its center in the center of the 
3D Smith chart: Each frequency that corresponds to a point of the 3D Smith chart reflection point of the рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”)
curve will be displayed as a segment on the line that passes from the center of the 3D sphere and the point of the 
3D Smith chart surface curve of рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) . The length of the segment will be given by the normalized frequency 
and the direction will be outwards of the surface of the 3D sphere. Fig 1d displays in the 3D Smith chart 
surrounding space the counter-clockwise dynamics of the two port negative capacitor reflection coefficient while 
the clockwise dynamics of the two port reflection coefficient of the positive inductor. In Fig. 1e one may see the 


5

clockwise frequency increasing orientation of the reflection coefficient of the positive capacitor and the counter-
clockwise orientation of the negative inductor.

The Smith chart plot can detect the magnitude of the curvature |рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”)| (which gives the path of the reflection 
coefficient) but cannot see its sign which determines its direction, the new 3D Smith chart orientation 
quantification implementation (the frequency sweeping is always increasing in our modelling) detects its sign (see 
additional video) and thus its orientation. In the cases presented in Fig. 1d and Fig. 1e |рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”)| is constant and 
not zero thus a circle. The same happens in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b. However in more complex circuits one does not 
deal with constant curvatures, these can alternate in sign and frequency dependency exhibiting orientation changes 
for both Foster and Non Foster circuits as seen in Fig. 2c and Fig. 2d. In Fig. 2d it can be seen that even a network 
characterized by a positive real function can generate mixed curvature in its input impedance and reflection 
coefficient. These reversals of orientation may be easy overlooked on the Smith chart if the zooming scales are 
not properly chosen but using (3) and (4) this is clearly discovered in Fig. 2d.

Fig. 2| Reflection coefficient orientation changes and the sign of the oriented curvature for different circuits. a, Smith 
chart representation of the reflection coefficient for a 1-port negative capacitance (purely non-Foster circuit) and a positive 
inductance (purely Foster). For a capacitor with purely negative capacitance and an inductor with positive inductance their
reflection coefficients рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) overlap on the Smith chart on a wide frequency range. Their opposite orientation is given by the 
different sign of their oriented curvature рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”). Their same path is given by the same absolute value of their oriented curvature. 
b, On the newly implemented frequency dependent 3D Smith chart one can see the clockwise motion with increasing frequency 
for the inductor with positive inductance and the counter-clockwise motion for the negative valued capacitor, the motion is on the 
contour of the equatorial plane (lossless circuits). c, Mixed motion for a fabricated circuit containing non-Foster (lossy elements). 
d, Mixed clockwise and counter-clockwise motion of the reflection coefficient of a passive lossy network described by the positive 
real function рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘ ) with the 1 port reflection  coefficient (for s=jПү) рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”). The reflection coefficient has a clockwise orientation 
from -2< Пү<-0.28 and for 0.28< Пү<2, while counter-clockwise orientation for -0.28< Пү<0.28. The sign changes of its 1-port 
reflection coefficient curvature рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”)(4) generates the changes of orientation of its path on the Smith chart. It is interesting to 
notice that mixed motion can exist on limited bandwidth also for lossy circuits with only Foster elements and thus that the counter-
clockwise motion is by no means a prove of an existence of a non-Foster element in the network. A more detailed description on 
oriented curvature and 1-port and two port networks is given in Supplementary Section 1.

3D visualization insights of frequency dependent series and shunt inductances and quality factors

The S parameters of the inductors are directly converted by the new implementations in the software tool into the 
series inductance model рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ (рқң”)36-37 and shunt inductance model рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў(рқң”)33-35 using classical conversion 
techniques of two port parameters (see Supplementary Section 2). The series and shunt inductances values are then 
normalized to their maximum value over the frequency range of interest and we get the corresponding normalized 
values рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ғ(рқң”) and рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ғ(рқң”). The reflection parameter S11(jПү) of the inductor is then plotted first on the 
surface of the 3D Smith chart as рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) using the previously implemented features11-12. Then the 3D space 
surrounding the 3D Smith chart is used by means of a variable homothethy with the homothetic center in the center 


6

of the sphere through the рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) parameter of the inductors. The рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) parameter is sent to another point 
in 3D at a distance corresponding to рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ғ рқ‘ңрқ‘ҹ рқҗҝрқ‘ в„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ғ:

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ , рқ‘ в„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў3рқ‘‘(рқң”) = (рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ғ, рқ‘ в„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ғ(рқң”) + 1) вҲ— рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”)
(5)

The quality factor рқ‘„(рқң”) of the inductors is also computed by the new 3D Smith chart tool implementation using 
classical conversion formulas (from the S parameters) (see Supplementary Section 2) and normalized to its 
maximum over the frequency range of interest obtaining рқ‘„рқ‘Ғ(рқң”). Using the 3D representation of the 
рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ , рқ‘ в„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў3рқ‘‘(рқң”) curves we then use the normal plane of the curves to associate to each (frequency) point of 
them the quality factor as a cylinder of variable radius associated to its normalized value рқ‘„3рқҗ·(рқң”). In Fig. 3 one 
may see the implementations done for the newly fabricated Peano inductor compared whose performances are 
compared with the spiral inductor in36.

Fig. 3| Series, shunt and quality factor frequency variations representations on a 2D plot and simultaneous 3D Smith 
chart visualization for the new fabricated Peano (pink) inductor in the conductive state of VO2 versus previously reported 
best performing inductor (red) using VO2 in same technology36 a, 2D series inductance representation versus frequency: 
both Peano inductor and previously reported inductor36 show stable series inductance in within the 4GHz-10GHz frequency range. 
b, 2D frequency dependency of quality factors in the 4 GHz-10 GHz frequency range. c, Shunt inductance frequency dependency
shows linearity on a sharper frequency range (see Supplementary Section 3) for both inductors. d, 3D Smith chart representation 
of series inductance over the S11 parameters in the 4 GHz-10 GHz frequency range. e, 3D Smith chart representation of series 
inductance and quality factors 4GHz-10GHz over the series inductances 3D curves. f, 3D Smith chart representation of series 
inductance and quality factors 4GHz-15GHz. The Qs start descending to 0 close to 15 GHz (the cylinders radius becomes 0 
when Q becomes negative) for both models while the S11 parameters crossed into the West hemisphere of the Smith chart 
(capacitive region). g, 3D Smith chart representation of shunt inductance 4GHz-15GHz. One may see that the shunt inductance
becomes negative below 15GHz (entering the 3D Smith chart) .h, 3D Smith chart representation of shunt inductance and quality 
factors 4GHz-15GHz.i, Simultaneously 3D Smith chart representation of series, shunt inductance and quality factors (along both 
series and shunt inductance)in the 4GHz-15GHz range.

The new implementation allows the concurrent view of five different parameters: рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”), рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ 3рқ‘‘(рқң”),  
рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў3рқ‘‘(рқң”), рқ‘„3рқҗ·(рқң”) and frequency (not plotted in Fig. 3 since the dynamics of S11(jПү) is clockwise anyway in 
this case, unlike the cases presented in Fig. 2). The use of different perspectives and the topology of the 3D Smith 
chart permits one thus to simultaneously analyze matching problems (Smith chart) and visualize series and shunt 
inductances and quality factors all on a same interactive display. This plays an important role in investigation for 
directly understanding multiple phenomenon on a single display. The information contained in Fig. 3a-Fig.3c can 
be visualized together using three scaling on a common 2D plot, however still without having any information on 
the complex reflection coefficient S11(jПү) of the inductor. In Fig. 3d we may see just рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ 3рқ‘‘(рқң”), 
the display contains already more information than in the 2D Fig. 3a, allowing us to understand that the series 
inductance model is linear for both analyzed inductors and that рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”)
is still in the East hemisphere (in the 

4GHz-10 GHz frequency range) (inductive). Additionally, the zeros of the S11(jПү) are strongly related to the zeros 
of the Y11(jПү) of an inductor and under certain circumstances (in some) identical (no resistive losses in their 


7

equivalent Pi model), thus  a change of hemisphere of the S11(jПү) is strongly related to the self-resonances of the 
inductors model implying in most cases that the quality factor fails to be positive anymore (see Supplementary 
Section 3). In Fig. 3e we can see рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”), рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ 3рқ‘‘(рқң”) and рқ‘„3рқҗ·(рқң”) for the 4 GHz-10 GHz frequency range, 
again the information contained offers an insight on three parameters impossible to visualize together in 2D. In 
Fig. 3f we may see how  by increasing the analysis range up to 15 GHz the quality factors for both inductors 
become zero, while the рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) enters the capacitive hemisphere too. It is interesting to notice that the series 
inductance model stays linear. Using the 3D Smith chart tool (see supplementary video) one may see the exact 
frequencies at which рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) changes hemisphere and the frequency for which Q becomes zero (the 3D 
generalized cylinders become curves-their radius becomes zero (at 14.44 GHz for both inductors). In Fig. 
3g рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”), рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў3рқ‘‘(рқң”) models become negative starting 14.44 GHz for both inductors and thus they enter 
the interior of the 3D Smith chart from that frequency point. In Fig. 3h we may see рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”), рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў3рқ‘‘(рқң”) and 
рқ‘„3рқҗ·(рқң”), clearly рқ‘„3рқҗ·(рқң”) becomes zero once рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў3рқ‘‘(рқң”)
enters the 3D Smith chart. In Fig. 3i all these 

parameters are shown together.
The new implementation helps one to visualize key parameters of interest in the same time and thus supports and 
gives new insights, unreachable by any other means to our best knowledge, in the design stages of an inductor 
where one needs QвҶ‘, stable series and shunt inductance (or both) over a large frequency range while maintaining 
the matching information рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”).

Peano reconfigurable inductors using VO2 switches 

As a case study of the 3D Smith chart and its predictive capabilities for radiofrequency design with VO2, we have 
designed and fabricated a reconfigurable inductor based on the Peano curve of order 2 by means of VO2 switches. 
Its geometry is presented in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4a one may see the cross sectional view of the technology used. The 
inductors were fabricated using standard microelectronic processes starting with a high-resistivity (10000 в„ҰВ·cm) 
525 Ојm thick silicon substrate. A 300 nm thick amorphous silicon layer was first deposited to improve radiofrequency 
performances. The substrate was then passivated with 500 nm SiO2 deposited by sputtering. 140 nm-thick VO2 and 
films a Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD). The film was then patterned using photolithography followed by dry 
etching and Cr (20 nm)/Al (400 nm) bi-layer was deposited to contact the patterned VO2 film. This thin contact 
layer allowed for the realization of smaller than 0.6 Вөm gaps between the contact pads (unlike 2Ојm in our previous 
work36). Additionally, a 2.4Вөm-thick Al layer was deposited on top of these contact pads by conventional lift-off 
methods to provide low RF losses (to create the final CPW elements), the photo of the fabricated inductor being 
shown in Fig. 4b.

The small width of the VO2 switches (0.6 Ојm at the limit of photolithography) minimizes the losses while in the 
on state, while their increased length (120 Ојm) contributes too to this effort (a tilted photo of the switch in Fig. 4b, 
is in detail in (Supplementary Section 3). Switch photos and current distributions are further shown in Fig. 4c- Fig. 
4f.

The inductor has been designed and simulated in the Ansys HFSS commercial software tool with the aim: to obtain 
a higher Q than in36 while facing the limited VO2 conductivity in the on state, measured as 40,000S/m), Qmax_on/ 
Qmax_off вҶ‘ and more tuning range than 55%. The position of the VO2 switches was optimized in order to maximize 
these values: the final current distribution at 5 GHz being shown as simulated in Fig. 4c (when both switches are 
off), Fig. 4e when one switch is off and one on and Fig. 4f with both switches on.

The measured inductances and quality factors plotted in Fig. 3a- Fig. 3b are compared to our previous work36 for 
the on state of the inductor with two switches show (вҖңonвҖқ when measured at 100В°C): Peano inductors more than 
double the quality factor while also dealing with a smaller inductance (0.9 nH unlike 1.35 nH in36, while usually 
the Qmax decrease a lot while using lower inductances34) for the 5GHz-10 GHz frequency range. Further the series 
inductance is stable with an average value of 0.95 nH within the 4GHz-10 GHz frequency range and thus over-
performing our previous reported results36. In terms of shunt inductance (untreated in36,37) the inductor is stable 
within the 3 GHz-6 GHz frequency range with an average of 1nH as seen in Fig. 3c.

The overall performances of the inductor with two switches on, two switches off and of a fabricated inductor with 
one switch on are all plotted together in Fig. 4g (series inductances), Fig. 4h quality factors and Fig. 4i both quality 
factors and normalized 3D series inductances and quality factors. The results show 77% tuning range and Qmax_on/ 
Qmax_off 0.88 and thus 3.26 times higher than Qmax_on/ Qmax_off reported in36. The maximum quality factor in the on 


8

state exceeds 7 being comparable with the off state Qmax even though the inductance is tuned with 77% down to 
0.95 nH. This result in the on state is particularly interesting since it overcomes the limited performances of the 
previously reported inductor on VO236 while using a smaller inductance (0.95nH vs 1.35nH).

On the other hand, the limited off state (at room temperature) quality factor (Q) is comparable with the one reported 
in36 (although dealing with a smaller inductance than in36). While exhibiting a better performance in the low GHz 
frequency range and a more stable frequency dependency linearity the values are facing the same trend as in36.
The maximum value is limited as in36 by the CMOS compatible CPW SiO2/Si technology used, (Supplementary 
Section 3). Additionally, the VO2 lossy dielectric behavior in the off state, DC conductivity (20S/m) and intrinsic 
losses contribute to this. It is worth mentioning that comparable values of the Q were obtained here for smaller 
inductances 

The design of radiofrequency functions in wideband applications, with accurate predictive capability, pointed out 
the need of an accurate modeling and extraction of main parameters of VO2 such as the relative effective dielectric 
permittivity as a function of frequency, for which the reports in the literature are limited or inconsistent. A new 
extraction approach and new data are presented in the following section.

Fig. 4| Fabricated VO2 reconfigurable Peano inductor geometry and performances a, Cross sectional view b, SEM photo of 
the inductors. c, Current distribution ( 5GHz) in the off state for an inductor with 2 switches. The current ignores the VO2 switches 
and goes through all the windings in its path from port 1 (input) to port 2 (output). d, VO2 switch fabricated photo: a gap in the 
contact metal of 0.6Ојm is left in order to contact the VO2 layer. In the insulating phase of VO2 the switch is in off state (acting like 
a lossy dielectric), in the conductive state of the VO2 the 600nm gap plays an important role to minimize the conductive losses 
since the VO2 has a limited 40,000S/m conductivity on the SiO2/Si substrate. e, Current distribution (5GHz) in the hypothetical on 
state of one switch while the other is in the off state. The current ignores the off state VO2 switch and follows a shorter path from 
input to output. f, Current distribution (5 GHz) in the on state for an inductor with 2 switches. All current distributions are within a 
range from 0.5 A/m (dark blue) to 5.2 A/m (intense red) using the same scale. g, Series inductance of the fabricated inductors 
with 2 switches, in on state and off state, series inductance of an inductor with one switch in on state. h, Quality factor of the 
inductor with 2 switches in off state and on state, and of an inductor with one switch (on state) i, Simultaneous 3D Smith chart 
representation for the 2 GHz-10 GHz frequency of the series inductance and quality factors for all 3 situations.


9

Dielectric constant of VO2 in the microwave frequency range

Space filling curves can be also used to generate resonating structures with a variety of central frequencies using
very limited space. To generate resonating frequencies within the 1 GHz- 50 GHz microwave spectrum we use
tenths of Peano inspired defected ground plane structures (DGS) in the coplanar waveguides (CPW).  Peano curves 
of order 3 kind of DGS (which have 9 times the complexity of the Peano curve of order 2) are used to generate 
resonance frequencies below 10 GHz (Fig. 5a), while modified repetitions of DGS Peano curves inspired shapes
of order 2 are used to generate structures resonating within the 10 GHz-50 GHz frequency range (Fig. 5a). The 
structures have different widths of the tubes along the generating Peano types of curves and different aspect ratios. 
The structures are fabricated on bilayer SiO2/Si (Fig. 5b) substrates and on multilayer VO2/ SiO2/Si substrates (Fig. 
5c). Each of the filters performances is measured in both cases and a frequency shift and losses difference is 
noticed. The exact same DGS structure on the triple-layer substrate in Fig. 5c would always resonate at a lower 
frequency than on the bi-layer structure if the dielectric constant рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
(рқ‘“) of VO2 is higher. (рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“(рқ‘“) is the relative

effective dielectric permittivity, рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
(рқ‘“) its real part and рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ
(рқ‘“)its imaginary part while рқңҖ0 the permittivity of 

the free space)-(6).However for each DGS type of structure this relative down shift level is lower or higher for a 
fixed dielectric constant of the VO2, the relative shift itself being dependent also on each DGS type. The bandstop 
performances in terms of Q and maximum attenuation are on the other hand very sensitive to the losses of the VO2
thin film. (see Supplementary Section 4)

To overcome limitations of previously reported models of the VO2 of the рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“(рқ‘“) for the 1 GHz-50 GHz frequency 
ranges43 we include the damping losses (within the first imaginary term in (6) using the more general model50) -
the intrinsic tangent loss рқ‘Ўрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣрқӣҝ and separate this term from the losses given by the conductivity рқңҺвҖІ(рқ‘“). The presence
of this term enables us to perform the de-embedding with HFSS simulator50 which allows the user to make a 
distinction between conductive losses determined by the non-zero conductivity рқңҺвҖІ(рқ‘“) of the VO2 and other intrinsic 
damping losses of the dielectric included in рқӣҝ.

рқңҖрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“(рқ‘“) = рқңҖ0 вҲ— рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
(рқ‘“) вҲ— (1 вҲ’ рқ‘—рқ‘Ўрқ‘Һрқ‘ӣрқӣҝ вҲ’ рқ‘—рқңҺвҖІ(рқ‘“) /(ПүрқңҖ0рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
(рқ‘“)))
(6)

a


10

b                                                                                   c

Fig. 5| Dielectric constant extraction through frequency shift of Peano inspired defected ground plane structures at room 
temperature a, Frequency dependency of the dielectric constant extracted with a variety of structures resonating at different 
frequencies. The same structure fabricated without and with the VO2 layer below the metallization resonates at a different 
frequency. The frequency shift is given by the different relative effective dielectric permittivity. b, Substrate configuration for the 
measurement without the 170 nm VO2 layer. c, Substrate configuration for the measurement with the 170 nm VO2 layer just below 
the metallization (above the 500nm of SiO2).

Conclusions

We have first reported new theoretical foundations for a frequency-dependent 3D Smith with 3D visualization
methods for the orientation of parametric curves and used them to quantify and understand curvature reversal,
while sweeping the frequency, of driving point impedances and reflection coefficients of circuits in the RF 
frequency bands. Further we have additionally extended the capabilities of the tool to simultaneously envision a 
variety of frequency dependent parameters required in the inductor design and thus proposed a unique multi-
parameter display. We demonstrated by design, fabrication and measurements, original Peano reconfigurable 
inductors by employing the phase change VO2 materials in CPW/ CMOS compatible technology on SiO2. The 
reported inductors improve the previously reported state of art in the incipient field of VO2 reconfigurable 
inductors design for the S, C and X band of the radio frequency spectrum. Last, a variety of first-time DGS Peano 
structures resonating within the mobile, satellite communications and military bands were fabricated in CPW 
CMOS compatible technology in order to extract based on a frequency shift, for the first time, the VO2 dielectric 
constant within the 1 GHz-50 GHz frequency range and to propose and validate a more general and accurate model 
for it.

Methods

Fabrication

The devices were fabricated using a high resistivity (10000 в„ҰвҲҷcm) Si wafer (525 Вөm) as the starting substrate. A 300 nm-thick amorphous Si 
was deposited by low pressure chemical vapor deposition (LPCVD), to reduce the losses during measurement. A surface passivation using 500 
nm sputtered SiO2 was then carried out, followed by deposition of 140 nm (and 170nm)-thick VO2 using a Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) 
system The film was deposited by pulsed lased deposition (PLD) using a Solmates SMP 800 system. The deposition was performed at 400 C 


11

in oxygen ambient, with a chamber pressure of 0.01 mbar. The ablated V2O5 target was placed at 60 mm distance from the wafer. Further the 
deposition, an annealing of 10 min at 475 C was performed without breaking the vacuum in the chamber.

The fabrication process for the Peano filters on the above substrate then commenced with a photolithography step to pattern the VO2 followed 
dry etching to remove the VO2 from the unwanted areas. A Cr-20 nm/ Al-400 nm bi-layer metal stack was then deposited by evaporation after 
a subsequent photolithography step on the patterned VO2. This thin metallization made it possible to realize sub-micron gaps (600 nm) which 
is critical for extracting a good Q in the conductive state of VO2 for the inductors. This was followed by deposition of a 2.4 Вөm-thick Al layer 
on these contact pads by conventional lithography followed by metal lift-off procedure to form the CPW elements with low RF losses.

Devices simulation and characterization

The numerical simulations of the inductor and filters were done in HFSS ANSYS commercial software relying on the finite element method 
(FEM) to solve Maxwell equations. Considering the full wave electromagnetic simulation technique, we used the modal solution type for the 
inductors and the terminal solution type for the filter simulations. The conductivity of the Al was decreased to 3.1*10^7S/m and the VO2
switches were modeled for the inductors as simple dielectrics with 20S/m losses and a loss tangent of 0 in the off state. In the on state, the VO2
switches were simulated as lossy metals of a conductivity of 40,000S/m. Subsequently full inductors and filters models were built in the 
software according to the actual physical structure fabricated. The Peano shapes were implemented using the Equation Curve facility of the 
tool, their equations being written parametrically and where needed rotations and reflections were used for the very final shapes.

In the case of the filters an extensive de-embedding was used in order to extract the frequency dependent model of VO2 using variable dielectric 
constant, tan of losses and conductivity by fitting the results obtained. In the frequency model of the relative effective dielectric permittivity 
all parameters available in the HFSS model were used (frequency dependency of the dielectric constant, loss tangent, conductivity losses)

The devices were measured with the Anrtisu Vector Star VNA in a Cascade Summit prober with controllable chuck temperature who was set 
to 20В°C in the вҖңoff stateвҖқ and 100В°C in the on state. For the 2D graphical interpretation the measured S parameters were converted using the 
Anritsu Star VNA installed Microwave Office too into the desired parameters analyzed. 

3D Smith Chart implementation

The 3D Smith Chart application is developed using the Java programming language and the following libraries and development environment
are used:

-
3D rendering: OpenGL through the Java Binding for the Open GL API (JOGL2) library;

-
Mathematical operations and complex data representation: the Apache Commons Mathematics Library;

-
Development environment: The NetBeans IDE with Beans Binding Library for the implementation of the application GUI and 
JOGL2 usage. 

Further implementation details about the new mode of visualization, new simulation parameters used in the paper and their 3D representation 
on the Riemann sphere can be found in Supplementary Section 2.

Mathematical modelling of curvature

The calculations for the oriented curvature was performed using Mathematica software tool by writing the frequency parametric equations of 
the curves analyzed.

References

1.
Smith, P.H. Transmission-line calculator. Electronics 12, 29вҖ“31 (1939).

2.
Zhu, B.O., Zhao, J., Feng, Y. Active impedance metasurface with full 360В° reflection phase tuning. Sci. 
Rep. 3, 3059 (2013).

3.
Thang, B., Sodickson, D.K., Cloos, M.A. A high-impedance detector-array glove for magnetic resonance 
imaging of the hand. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 570-577 (2018).

4.
Tuca, S.-S. et al. Calibrated complex impedance of CHO cells and E. coli bacteria at GHz frequencies using 
scanning microwave microscopy. Nanotechnology 27, 135702 (2016).

5.
Qu L., Zhang, Zhang R., Shin, H., Kim J., Kim, H.  Mode-Controlled Wideband Slot-Fed Ground Radiation 
Antenna Utilizing Metal Loads for Mobile Applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas  Propag. 65, 2, 867-872 
(2017).

6.
Chu H.C, Ma, T. Beamwidth switchable planar microstrip series-fed slot array using reconfigurable 
synthesized transmission lines. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 65, 7, 3766-3771 (2017).

7.
Liu, C. et. al. Long-distance propagation of short-wavelength spin waves, Nat. Commun., 9, 738 (2018).

8.
Liu S., Liu A. A novel design methodology for high-efficiency current-mode and voltage-Mode Class-E 
Power Amplifiers in Wireless Power Transfer systems.  IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 32, 6, 4514-4521 
(2017).

9.
Ma J., Steer, M. B., Jiang X. An acoustic filter based on layered structure. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 111903 
(2015).

10. Dubois M.-A., Murait, P. Properties of aluminum nitride thin films for piezoelectric transducers and 

microwave filter applications. Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 20, 3032-3034 (1999).


12

11. Muller, A. A., Soto, P. Dascalu, D, Neculoiu, D. Boria, V. E. A 3d Smith chart based on the Riemann sphere 

for active and passive microwave circuits. IEEE Microw. and Wireless Comp. Lett., 21, 6,  286-288 (2011).

12. Muller, A., A., Sanabria-Codesal, E., Moldoveanu, A. Asavei, V., Lucyszyn, S. Extended capabilities with 

group delay and resonator quality factor. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., 65, 1, 10-17 (2017).

13. Muller, A. A., Moldoveanu A., Asavei V., Fleischer C. 3D Smith  chart tool (2019) www.3dsmithchart.com.
14. Shan, A., A. et al. Physics-based multi-bias RF large-signal GaN HEMT modeling and parameter extraction 

flow. IEEE J. Electron Devices Soc. 5, 5, 310-318 (2017).

15. Lu, S.-S., Meng, C., Chen, T.-W. The origin of the kink phenomenon of transistor scattering parameter S22. 

IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., 49, 2, 333-340 (2001).

16. Mirzaei, H., Eleftheriades G., V. Realizing non-Foster reactive elements using negative-group-delay 

networks. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., 61, 12, 4322вҖ“4332 (2013).

17. Muller, A.A., Lucyszyn, S., Properties of purely reactive Foster and Non-Foster passive networks. IET 

Electron. Lett., 51, 23, 1882-1884 (2015).

18. Jacob, M.M. Non-Foster circuits for high performance antennas: advantages and practical limitations.  In PhD 

thesis San Diego UCSD (2016), https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2pq549c3.

19. Sievenpiper, D., Jacob, M., Long, J. Materials and components with a negative frequency derivative of 

reactance. 
In 
UCSD 
presentation 
(2017). 
https://e3s-center.berkeley.edu/wp-

content/uploads/2017/07/PEB2012_7_DSievenpiper_Webfinal.pdf

20. Tade, O.O., Gardner. P., Hall, S.S. Negative impedance converters for broadband antenna matching. In 2012 

42nd European Microwave Conference (2012), https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6459295 (2012).

21. Tade, O.O., Gardner. P., Hall,  S.S.  Broadband matching of small antennas using negative impedance 

converters. In 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Antenna and Propagation and USNC-URSI National 
Radio Science meeting (2012). https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6348833

22. Tade, O.O., Gardner. P., Hall, S.S. Antenna bandwidth broadening with a negative impedance converter.  Int. 

J. Microwave T. 5 (3), 249-260 (2013).

23. Hrabar, S., Krois, I. Kiricenko, A., Towards active dispersion less ENZ metamaterial for cloaking 

applications. Metamaterials, 4, 2-3, 89-97 (2010).

24. Goldstone, L. A Low VSWR matching technique. (Correspondence and authorвҖҷs reply). IRE  Trans. Microw. 

Theory Tech. 5l, 2, 163 (1957).

25. Munk, B.A.  Metamaterials: Critique and Alternatives. John Wiley& Sons Inc., New Jersey, USA (2009). 
26. Best, S.R., The Foster reactance theorem and quality Factor for antennas. IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. 

Lett. 3, 306-309 (2004).

27. Berger, M., A Panoramic View Of Riemannian Geometry. Springer, Berlin (2003).
28. Bochert, M. Infinite Regions of Various Geometries. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 20, 4,185-200 (1914).
29. Brannan, D.A., Esplen, M.F., Gray, J.J., Geometry. Cambridge University Press, New York (2007).
30. Shi, T., Tang, M.-C., Wu, Z., Xu, H., Ziolkowski, R.W., Improved signal-to Noise Ratio (SNR), Bandwitdh-

enhanced electrically small antenna augmeneted with Internal non-Foster elements. IEEE Trans. Antennas  
Propag. In press (2019) https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8624545&tag=1

31. Kemp, A.M., et al, A high Q piezoelectric resonator as a portable VLF transmitter. Nat. Commun., 10, 1715

(2019).

32. Fleury, R., Sounas, D., Alu, A., An invisible acoustic sensor based on parity-time symmetry. Nat. Commun.,

6, 5905 (2015).

33. Leroy, C. et al., High quality factor copper inductors integrated in deep dry-etched quartz substrates.

Microsyst. Technol., 13, 11вҖ“12, 1483вҖ“1487 (2007)

34. Kang, J. et. al., On-chip intercalated-graphene inductors for next-generation radio frequency electronics.

Nature Electronics, 1 46-51(2018).

35. Wainstein, N., Kvatinsky, S. Time-tunable inductors using mermistors. IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg.

papers, 65, 5, 1505-1515 (2018).

36. Casu, E.A. et al. A reconfigurable inductor based on Vanadium Dioxide insulator to metal transition. IEEE

Microw. Compon. Lett. 29, 9, 795-797 (2018).

37. Wang, S., Wang, W., Shin, E., Quach, Subramanyam, G. Tunable inductors using vanadium dioxide as the 

control material. Microw. Opt. Techn. Lett., 59, 5, 1057вҖ“1061 (2017).

38. Jung, Y.H. et al. High-performance green flexible electronics based on biodegradable cellulose nanofibril

paper. Nat. Commun. 6, 7170 (2015).

39. Zhang, G., Ma, H., Lan, C., Gao, G., Zhou, J. Microwave Tunable Metamaterial Based on Semiconductor-to-

Metal Phase Transition. Scientific Reports 7, 577 (2017).

40. Prayakrao, S. et al. Tunable VO2/Au hyperbolic metamaterial. Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 061105 (2016).


13

41. Krammer, A. et al. Elevated transition temperature in Ge doped VO2 thin films. J. Appl. Phys. 122, 045304 

(2017).

42. Stinson, H.T. et al. Imaging the nanoscale phase separation in vanadium dioxide thin films at terahertz 

frequencies, Nat. Commun. 9, 3604 (2018).

43. Emond, N., Henadaoui, A., Delpart, S., Chaker, M.,Wu, K. Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of 

Thermo-Tunable MetalвҖ“InsulatorвҖ“Vanadium Dioxide Coplanar Waveguide Structure. IEEE Trans. Microw. 
Theory Tech., 65, 5, 1443вҖ“1455 (2017).

44. Casu, E.A., et al. Vanadium Oxide bandstop tunable filter for Ka frequency bands based on a novel 

reconfigurable spiral shape defected ground plane CPW. IEEE Access, 6, 12206-12212, (2018).

45. Zheng, X., Xiao, Ling, Z. X. A Tunable Hybrid Metamaterial Reflective Polarization Converter Based on 

Vanadium Oxide Film. Plasmonics, 13(1) 287-291 (2018).

46. Kovacs, G.J, et al. Effect of the substrate on the insulatorвҖ“metal transition of vanadium dioxide films. J. Appl. 

Phys. 109, 6, 063708 (2011).

47. Fan. J. A., et al. Fractal design concepts for stretchable electronics. Nat. Commun. 5, no. 3266, (2014).
48. Li, L. Wang, W., Shin, E., Subramananyam, G. Tunable inductors using integrated Vanadium Dioxide 

phase change thin films. Advances in Condensed Matter Physics, 18, 1-7 (2018).

49. Lue, H.T. and Tseng, T.-Y. Application of on-wafer TRL calibration on the measurement of microwave 

properties of Ba0.5Sr0.5TiO3 thin films. IEEE Trans. Ultrason Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 48, 6, 1640-1647. 
(2001).

50. Episkopou, E. Papantonis, S., Otter, W.J, Lucyszyn, S. Defining material parameters in commercial EM 

solvers arbitrary metal based THz structures. IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol. 2, 513вҖ“524, (2012).

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the HORIZON2020 FETOPEN PHASE-CHANGE SWITCH Project under Grant 
737109. The work of E. Sanabria-Codesal was supported in part under DGCYT Grant MTM2015-64013-P.

Author contributions
A.A.M. proposed the new quantification model of the orientation of frequency over the 3D Smith chart, use of 
oriented curvature in the mathematical modelling, 3D series and shunt inductor Q inductor modelling, designed, 
fabricated and measured the devices with VO2. A.M. supervised and guided the overall 3D Smith chart tool new 
capabilities implementations for this article. V.A. contributed to the development of the new 3D Smith chart 
concepts, their actual Java implementation and revised and arranged the paper. E.S-C refined and contributed 
extensively to the oriented curvature mathematical computations (equations). R.A.K contributed with the
fabrication and process flow in different stages, especially in obtaining the sub-micronic gaps in the Al via 
photolithography. A.K. contributed with the conductivity measurements of the VO2. M.F-B contributed with 
constructive critical view in the preliminary design stages. M.C made the PLD deposition of VO2. J.Z and E.C. 
contributed with the calibration of the measurement tool. A.S. supervised the work of A.K. A.M.I. lead the work 
of A.A.M and guided the implementation stages for each part of the work.

Competing interests
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Materials & Correspondence
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.A.M.


1

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

S1.
On the clockwise and anticlockwise frequency dependency of Foster 
and non-Foster circuits on the Smith chart

1.1.
Misleading remarks on the Counter-clockwise movement on the Smith chart

In1 (year 2012) the authors state вҖңThe locus of the deembedded measured results rotates anti-clockwise on the 
Smith chart between 595MHz and 1.5GHz and this implies the presence of a non-Foster elementвҖқ.
In2 (2012) вҖңthe result shows non-Foster behavior from 595MHz to 1.5GHz in the anticlockwise rotation of the 
tracesвҖқ.
In3 (2013) вҖңThis exhibits the expected non-Foster performance by its anticlockwise rotation around the Smith chart 
with increasing frequency between 0.595 GHz and 1.5 GHzвҖқ.
In4 (2010) вҖңIt can be seen that both prototypes clearly show non-Foster behavior (locus of input impedance rotates 
counter-clockwise with frequency) within a very broad band (more than two octaves).
In5 (1957) вҖңThe admittance function plotted by the author on the Smith chart winds counterclockwise. This is 
contrary to the laws of nature for passive linear networksвҖқ. These laws prescribed that the plot of the admittance 
function wind clockwise from the low to the high frequencyвҖқ.

1.2.
Counter-clockwise movements network containing Foster elements

In6-7 (6Appendix B)-(7Appendix A) the so often misleading interpretation of counter-clockwise movement on the 
Smith chart as a direct consequence of a non-Foster element was noticed by B. A. Munk (1929-2009) where he 
gives empirically examples when this happens also for Foster elements (on a limited bandwidth).

1.3.
Correct statements on the Counter-clockwise movements network containing 
lossy non-Foster elements

In8 it is stated (for the particular case of an antenna) вҖңUsually, the impedance of any antenna moves about the 
Smith chart in a clockwise direction with increasing frequency. However, this behavior is not dependent on the 
antenna obeying the Foster reactance theoremвҖқ.

1.4.
Oriented curvature of a one port network

We will construct our proposed theory based on the notion of oriented curvature9-10. Given a regular plane curve 
C(s)=(r(s), x(s)), i.e. C'(s) вү 0, we will call tangent vector t(s) = CвҖІ(s).  We consider that C(s) it is parametrized by 
the arc length, i.e. <t(s), t(s)>=1. In this case, the tangent vector can be completed with a vector n(s)=(-xвҖІ(s), rвҖІ(s)), 
so that {t(s), n(s)} form a positively oriented orthonormal base (the determinant of both vectors is positive). By 
using that <t(s), t(s)>=1, we obtain 2 <tвҖІ(s), t(s)>=0, then tвҖІ(s) and n(s) have the same direction. We will call the 
derivative of the tangent vector C''(s)=tвҖІ (s) the curvature vector of the curve. The oriented curvature k(s) is the 
projection of this curvature vector on the normal vector, thus 

k(s)= <n(s), CвҖІвҖІ(рқ‘ )>= вҲ’рқ‘ҘвҖІ(рқ‘ )рқ‘ҹвҖІвҖІ(рқ‘ ) + рқ‘ҹвҖІ(рқ‘ )рқ‘ҘвҖІвҖІ(рқ‘ ) = |рқ‘ҹвҖІ(рқ‘ )
рқ‘ҘвҖІ(рқ‘ )

рқ‘ҹвҖІвҖІ(рқ‘ )
рқ‘ҘвҖІвҖІ(рқ‘ )|
(S1)

The formula for the oriented curvature for an arbitrary parameterization of C(Пү)= r(Пү)+j x(Пү) is obtained13 by 
using chain rule10:

k(Пү)= 

вҲ’рқ‘ҘвҖІ(рқң”)рқ‘ҹвҖІвҖІ(рқң”)+рқ‘ҹвҖІ(рқң”)рқ‘ҘвҖІвҖІ(рқң”)

(рқ‘ҹвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘ҘвҖІ(рқң”)2)3 2
вҒ„
=

| рқ‘ҹвҖІ(рқң”)
рқ‘ҘвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹвҖІвҖІ(рқң”)
рқ‘ҘвҖІвҖІ(рқң”)|

(рқ‘ҹвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘ҘвҖІ(рқң”)2)3 2
вҒ„
(S2)

Then, the curvature sign is positive if the projection of CвҖІвҖІ(рқң”) on the normal vector has the same direction as n(Пү)
and negative in other case. As CвҖІвҖІ(рқң”) is the variation of the tangent vector t(рқң”) and the normal vector n(Пү)
completes the positively oriented orthonormal base {t(рқң”), n(Пү)} (i.e. it is always to the left of the tangent vector), 
then one gets that k(рқң”) is positive when the curve is turning "left" with respect to the tangent vector and negative 
when it turns "rightвҖқ. Therefore, the oriented curvature of a plane curve gives us information about the orientation 


2

of the curve and it is easy to see that the lines have zero curvature and that the curves with negative curvature are 
curves clockwise oriented and the curves with positive curvature are counterclockwise oriented. Consider first a 
one port network ended on a resistive load r. The input impedance рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is given by (S3), where  рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) denotes 
its resistive part and рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) its reactive part, while its reflection coefficient is given by (S4). Computing the 
oriented curvature values for both of them we get рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) (the oriented curvature of the input impedance) and 
рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) (the oriented curvature of the reflection coefficient) as (S5) and (S6).

a
b

c

Supplementary Fig.1: Oriented curvature of a plane curve. a,The oriented curvature K is positive. b, The

oriented curvature K is negative c,The oriented curvature changes sign as one moves along it.

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) = рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) + рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)
(S3)            

рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) =

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”)/рқ‘ҹвҲ’1

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”)/рқ‘ҹ+1
(S4)

рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =

вҲ’рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІвҖІ(рқң”)+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)рқ‘Ҙрқ‘§рқ‘ҡвҖІвҖІ(рқң”)

(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2)3 2
вҒ„
=

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”))

вҖІ

(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2)3 2
вҒ„
(S5)

рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2((рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”))2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)2)(рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”))

вҖІ
+2 рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)2(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2)(рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) )

вҖІ

2 рқ‘ҹ (рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2+рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)2)3 2
вҒ„
(S6)

Following (S 1)-(S 6) and Supplementary Fig.1 one can easily conclude that9-10:

(i) If рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0 then рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is counter-clockwise oriented, 

(ii) if рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0 then рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is clockwise oriented,

(iii) if рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0 then рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is counter-clockwise oriented

(iv) рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0 then рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is clockwise oriented. 

(v) If  рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) = 0 then рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is a line.

(vi) If  рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) = 0 then рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is a line.


3

In order that the orientation of the curves рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) should be the same, their curvatures must have 
the same sign. Paying attention to the formulas obtained for the curvature of рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”), the sign of рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) depends 

only of (

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”))

вҖІ
, because the rest of the factors are squared and therefore they are always positive, including r, 

which is a positive constant. However, to calculate the sign of рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”), we will have to take into 

account (

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”))

вҖІ
and (

рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) )

вҖІ
:

If рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0 and (

рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) )

вҖІ
> 0, we obtain рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘Қрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0
(S7)

If рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0 and (

рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) )

вҖІ
< 0, we obtain рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘Қрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0
(S8)

In any other case, the changes of sign between (S5) and (S6) as the angular frequency changes will depend on 
the sign of the numerator of the total expression (S6) and the following relation has to be obeyed so that both 
curvatures should have the same sign:

| рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ

вҖІ(рқң”)2((рқ‘ҹ + рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”))2 + рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)2) (

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡвҖІ(рқң”))

вҖІ
| > |2 рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)2(рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ

вҖІ(рқң”)2 + рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ

вҖІ(рқң”)2) (

рқ‘ҹ+рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) )

вҖІ
|
(S9)

This condition will assure that both curvatures have the same sign and therefore the same orientation. 

1.5.
Prove that counter-clockwise frequency dependence can occur in linear passive 
circuits driving point immitance

Any passive, causal, linear and stable network which can be realized by resistors, capacitors, inductors and 
transformers has a driving-port immitance characterized in the frequency domain by positive real functions11-12.

Let us consider a linear one port passive network represented by the following input impedance of the (S10). 
Making the notations in equations (S3)-(S4) for the real and imaginary part (where Пү represents angular frequency) 
we obtain the expressions in equations (S10)-(S14). Considering the input port impedance r=1) we may compute 
the reflection coefficient with equations (S15)-(S17). 

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘ ) =

(рқ‘ +4)(рқ‘ +1)

(рқ‘ +2)(рқ‘ +2.5)(рқ‘ +1.5)
(S10)

рқ‘  = рқ‘—рқң”
(S11)

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) = рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) + рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)
(S12)

рқ‘ҹрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =

30+27.25рқң”2+рқң”4

56.25+48.06рқң”2+12.5рқң”4+рқң”6
(S13)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) =

вҲ’9.5рқң”вҲ’14.25рқң”3вҲ’рқң”5

56.25+48.06рқң”2+12.5рқң”4+рқң”6
(S14)

рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) =

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”)вҲ’1

рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”)+1 = рқӣӨрқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҹ(рқң”) + рқ‘—рқӣӨрқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқ‘–(рқң”)
(S15)

рқӣӨрқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқ‘ҹ(рқң”) = вҲ’

40.25+31.0625рқң”2+11.5рқң”4+рқң”6

132.25+119.5625рқң”2+15.5рқң”4+рқң”6
(S 16)

рқӣӨрқ‘§рқ‘ҡрқ‘–(рқң”) = вҲ’

19 рқң”+28.5рқң”3вҲ’2рқң”5)

132.25+119.5625рқң”2+15.5рқң”4+рқң”6
(S17)

Based on equations (S13) and (S14) the input impedance рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) is plotted in Supplementary Fig.2. It has a 
clockwise orientation for -2< Пү<-0.19 and for 0.19< Пү<2, while counter-clockwise orientation for -0.19< Пү<0.19. 
Using (S16) and (S17) we present in Supplementary Fig.2.b the Smith chart plot of the reflection coefficient 
рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”). It has a clockwise orientation for -2< Пү<-0.28 and for 0.28< Пү<2, while counter-clockwise orientation 
for -0.28< Пү<0.28. Using (S5) and (S6) we plot the oriented curvatures of рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) in 
Supplementary Fig.2. c: рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0 for -2< Пү<-0.19 and for 0.19< Пү<2, while рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0 for -0.19< Пү<0.19.


4

For рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) we get рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) < 0 for -2< Пү<-0.28 and for 0.28< Пү<2, while рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) > 0
-0.28< Пү<0.28. 

As described in (i) and (ii) the changes of sign in the curvature correspond to the changes of orientation in the 
рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”). In Supplementary Fig.2. d one can see рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”), it is a strictly monotonic decreasing

function while sweeping angular frequency for -2<Пү<-2 since its derivative 

рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
< 0. It worth noting that the 

curvature changes in рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқӣӨ1рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) occur for different values of Пү and that counter-clockwise motion
occurs for both of them on a limited frequency range.

a                                                                                                b

c                                                                                             d

d

Supplementary Fig. 2: Orientation and oriented curvature sign changes for the input impedance рқ’ӣрқ’Һ(рқ’ӢрққҺ) in (S 
10) and for its corresponding reflection coefficient рқңһрқҹҸрқ’ӣрқ’Һ(рқ’ӢрққҺ) . a, The input impedance рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) (red), has mixed 
orientations, with orientation changes corresponding to the zeros of its oriented curvature рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”). b, The reflection 
coefficient рқӣӨ1рқ‘Қрқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) (green) has also mixed orientations on the Smith chart with the changes in it corresponding to the 
zeros of its oriented curvature рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘Қрқ‘ҡ(рқң”). c, The oriented curvatures for рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқӣӨ1рқ‘Қрқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”): рқ‘ҳрқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқң”) (red) and рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘Қрқ‘ҡ(рқң”)
(green). They change sign at Пү= Вұ0.19 and Пү= Вұ0.28. d, The рқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡ(рқң”) has no monotony changes for -0.28< Пү<0.28.

Circuits including non-Foster elements can surely exhibit too counter-clockwise Smith chart rotations on certain 
frequency ranges. The non-Foster elements, which do not obey the Foster reactance theorem13 (which is for purely 
reactive networks), given in (S18) (where X stands for reactance and B stands for the susceptance) play a major 
role in the bandwidth enhancement, being extensively used in small antenna designs. However, in practical 
realization they are always lossy13, (being not purely reactive).  In Supplementary Fig. 3. we can see the S11
parameters of a network including Non-Foster elements (provided with the extremely kind  amiability of Prof.
R.W. Ziolkowski), employed in 13.


5

a
b
c

Supplementary Fig. 3: Circuit with non Foster elements13 (S parameters provided with kindness by R.W. Ziolkowski). 
Clockwise and counter-clockwise movement of the S parameters occurs but may be overlooked and may be uneasy to 
be detected on a classical Smith chart. Please look on Supplementary Video. The circuit changes orientation of the
S11 parameter at 0.49 GHz. Circuit is analyzed between 0.44 GHz and 0.60 GHz.

1.6.
Foster circuits вҖ“purely clockwise movement

Let us first consider a simple one port circuit (Supplementary Fig. 4a) composed just by ideal lossless inductors 
and capacitors: its driving port impedance reactance рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”) is given by (S19) (a), where which is monotonically 
increasing with the angular frequency Пү - Foster theorem7-8,12,14-15 (S18). Its 1-port рқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) reflection coefficient
is given in (S19) (b). Considering now the same Foster network in a two port (Supplementary Fig. 4b) connection
(assuming identical ports impedances r) one can compute the reflection coefficient as рқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) (S19) (c).
Calculating now the associated oriented curvatures of (S19) (a)-(c), we obtain рқ‘ҳрқ‘§(рқң”), рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқң”), рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”), i. e. the 
expressions (S20) (a), (b) and (c). The oriented curvature of the one port Foster network рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқң”)= -1 implies that 
the reflection coefficient of the 1-port Foster networks will have a clockwise orientation as рқң” increases (see 
statement (ii)). The oriented curvature the рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”)= -2 implies the same (since its sign is negative).

a                                                                b 

Supplementary Fig. 4: One port and two port networks with Foster circuit elements . a, One port circuit containing 
only Foster elements рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) = рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)
b, Two port circuit containing only Foster elements.

рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
> 0 рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣрқ‘‘

рқ‘‘рқҗөрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
> 0
(S18)

(a) рқ‘§рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) = рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)
(b)  рқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) =

рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)/рқ‘ҹвҲ’1

рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)/рқ‘ҹ+1
(c)  рқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) =

рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)+2
(S19)

(a) рқ‘ҳрқҗ№рқ‘§(рқң”)= 0, (b) рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқң”)= вҲ’

рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)

(рқ‘ҹ2+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)вҲҡ

рқ‘ҹ2рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)2

(рқ‘ҹ2+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)2

= вҲ’1,
(c)  рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”)= = вҲ’

2 (4+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)вҲҡ

рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)2

(4+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)2

рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)
= вҲ’2
(S20)


6

The reflection coefficients рқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) are direct inversive transformation of рқ‘§рқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) (simple MГ¶bius 
transformation)16,17 having the form (S21) (where a, b, c, d are constants and рқ‘“(рқң”) any real valued function)

рқӣӨ(рқ‘—рқң”) =

рқ‘ҺвҲ—рқ‘—рқ‘“(рқң”)+рқ‘Ҹ

рқ‘җвҲ—рқ‘—рқ‘“(рқң”)+рқ‘‘
(S21)

and thus17 they map the oriented line of рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”) (imaginary axes of the impedance plane) into circles with 
clockwise orientation, i. e. the curvature рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқң”) < 0 and рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”) < 0. Additionally, 1/|рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқң”)| = 1,
1/|рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”)| = 0.5, thus the reflection coefficients will move on the unit circle, respectively on a 0.5 radius circle.

1.7.
Non-Foster circuits вҖ“purely anti-clockwise movement

Let us first consider a simple one port circuit (Supplementary Fig. 5a) composed just by ideal lossless inductors 
and
capacitors
but with negative inductances and capacitances14-15:
the driving
point
reactance  

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”) (susceptance) obey (S22) while it can be always written as (S 23) where рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”) is a Foster reactance 
obeying (S18). Its 1-port рқӣӨ1рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) reflection coefficient is given in (S 25). Considering now the same Non-Foster 
network in a two port (Supplementary Fig. 5 b) connection (assuming identical ports impedances r) one can 
compute the reflection coefficient as рқӣӨ2рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) (S24) (c).  Calculating now the associated oriented curvatures of 
(S24) (a)-(c) , i. e. рқ‘ҳрқ‘Ғрқ‘§(рқң”), рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”), рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”), we get (S25) (a), (b) and (c).The oriented curvature of the one 
port Foster  network рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)= 1 implies (statement (iii)) that the reflection coefficient of the non-Foster 1 port 
networks will have a counter-clockwise orientation as рқң” increases. The oriented curvature the рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”)= 2 implies 
the same for the two port case scenario ( since its sign is positive).

a                                                               b

Supplementary Fig. 5: One port and two port networks with purely non-Foster circuit elements14-15 . a, One port 
circuit containing only Non-Foster elements рқ‘§рқ‘ҡ(рқ‘—рқң”) = рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”) b, Two port circuit containing only Non- Foster elements.

рқ‘‘рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
< 0 рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣрқ‘‘

рқ‘‘рқҗөрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)

рқ‘‘рқң”
< 0
(S22)

рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”) = вҲ’рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”)
(S23)

(a) рқ‘§рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) = вҲ’рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”)
(b)  рқӣӨ1рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) =

вҲ’рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”)/рқ‘ҹвҲ’1

вҲ’рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”)/рқ‘ҹ+1
(c)  рқӣӨ2рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) =

вҲ’рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)

вҲ’рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)+2
(S24)

(a) рқ‘ҳрқ‘Ғрқҗ№рқ‘§(рқң”)= 0,
(b) рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)=

рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)

(рқ‘ҹ2+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)вҲҡ

рқ‘ҹ2рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)2

(рқ‘ҹ2+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)2

= 1,
(c)  рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқң”)=

2 (4+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)вҲҡ

рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)2

(4+рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”)2)2

рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№вҖІ(рқң”)
= 2
(S25)

The reflection coefficients рқӣӨ1рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) and рқӣӨ2рқ‘Ғрқҗ№(рқ‘—рқң”) are indirect inversive transformation of рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”) (simple 
MГ¶bius transformation)16,17,18 having the form (S 26) (where a, b, c, d are constants and рқ‘“(рқң”) any real valued 
function)

рқӣӨ(рқ‘—рқң”) =

рқ‘ҺвҲ—рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ӣрқ‘—(рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”))+рқ‘Ҹ

рқ‘җвҲ—рқ‘җрқ‘ңрқ‘ӣрқ‘—(рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”))+рқ‘‘ =

вҲ’рқ‘Һрқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”)+рқ‘Ҹ

вҲ’рқ‘җрқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№1(рқң”)+рқ‘‘
(S26)

and thus17 they map the oriented line of рқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқҗ№(рқң”) (imaginary axes of the impedance plane) into circles with counter-
clockwise orientation, i. e. рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқң”) > 0 and рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”) > 0. Additionally, 1/|рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ1рқҗ№(рқң”)| = 1, 1/|рқ‘ҳрқӣӨ2рқҗ№(рқң”)| = 0.5,
thus the reflection coefficients will move on the unit circle, respectively on a 0.5 radius circle.  


7

S2.
New frequency orientation quantification, series and shunt inductance 
representations and inductor frequency dependent quality factors 
implementations over the 3D Smith chart tool

2.1.
3D Smith chart concept previous capabilities

The 3D Smith chart tool was released in 2017 and is based on the articles18-22. The 3D Smith chart tool generalizes  
the Smith chart23. The Smith chart became throughout the years a tool widely used in engineering in different areas 
for displaying of reflection coefficients24-31 being extensively used in the design stage or measurement phase of a 
variety of circuits in the RF, microwaves and THz frequency range.

The Smith chart main equation is given in (S27) and is applied to the grid of normalized impedance plane resulting 
in Supplementary Fig. 6 a. Equation (S27) maps the right half plane of the impedance plane into the unit circle 
of the reflection coefficients plane. The left half plane is mapped in its exterior Supplementary Fig. 6 b which 
extends to infinity. For this reason, circuits exhibiting negative part of the input impedance cannot be analyzed on 
the Smith chart, while with difficulty on the extended Smith chart.

рқӣӨ(рқ‘§) =

рқ‘§вҲ’1

рқ‘§+1 zвҲҲ{в„Ӯ}
(S27)        

a
b

Supplementary Fig. 6: Smith chart and extended 2D Smith chart . a, The regions with reflection coefficient bigger 
than unity in absolute value cannot be seen   b, The regions with reflection coefficient bigger than unity extend to infinity 
thus the chart cannot be easily used for circuits with negative part of the real part of the input impedance.

The 3D Smith chart main equation is also (S27) but it is considered that zвҲҲв„ӮвӢғ{вҲһ} and using Riemann- Maxime 
Bochert representation of Mobius transformations16-17 ( in order to preserve circle shapes in a compact space) we 
get based on  Supplementary Fig. 7 a and b in Supplementary Fig. 8. 

a
b

Supplementary Fig. 7: Smith chart and extended 2D Smith chart mapping on the Riemann sphere. a, The regions with 
reflection coefficients magnitude smaller than unity are mapped into the north hemisphere. b, The regions with reflection coefficient
magnitudes bigger than unity are mapped into the South hemisphere.


8

Supplementary Fig. 8: 3D Smith chart: South hemisphere: circuits with reflection coefficients magnitude bigger than 
unity. North hemisphere: circuits with reflection coefficients magnitude smaller than unity. East: Inductive, West: 
Capacitive.

2.2.
Implementations details for the 3D Smith Chart Application 

The 3D Smith Chart application is developed using the Java programming language and the following libraries 
are used:

-
For the 3D rendering the OpenGL API is being used through the Java Binding for the Open GL API 
(JOGL2) library with multi-platform support on 32/64 bits;

-
The Apache Commons Mathematics Library is being used for mathematical computations and program 
data structures (representation of complex numbers, fast matrix multiplication representation);

The NetBeans IDE with Beans Binding Library is used to build the GUI of the application.

2.2.1.
Frequency visualization

A new mode of visualization of the frequency associated to each point of the 3D space curve (computed using the 
рқ‘Ҷ11 (complex) reflection parameter) has been developed for the present paper. Each frequency that corresponds 
to a point of the 3D curve will be displayed as a segment on the line that passes from the center of the 3D sphere 
and the point of the 3D curve. The length of the segment will be given by the normalized frequency and the 
direction will be outwards of the surface of the 3D sphere.

To visualize the frequency dependency, the following steps are done:

For each point рқ‘ғ of the 3D curve:

Compute the direction vector defined by the center of the sphere and the point of the 3D curve

рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘ҹ(рқ‘Ӣ, рқ‘Ң, рқ‘Қ) = (рқ‘ғ(рқ‘Ӣ) вҲ’ рқ‘ рқ‘қв„Һрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқҗ¶рқ‘’рқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘ҹ(рқ‘Ӣ), рқ‘ғ(рқ‘Ң) вҲ’ рқ‘ рқ‘қв„Һрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқҗ¶рқ‘’рқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘ҹ(рқ‘Ң), рқ‘ғ(рқ‘Қ) вҲ’ рқ‘ рқ‘қв„Һрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқҗ¶рқ‘’рқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘ҹ(рқ‘Қ))

Normalize the direction vector

рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘Ӣ, рқ‘Ң, рқ‘Қ) =

рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘ҹ(рқ‘Ӣ,рқ‘Ң,рқ‘Қ)

|рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘ҹ(рқ‘Ӣ,рқ‘Ң,рқ‘Қ)|
(S28)                               

Normalize the frequency associated to each point of the 3D curve

рқ‘“рқ‘Ғ =

рқ‘“

рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘“)
(S29)

Compute рқ‘ғрқҗёрқ‘Ғрқҗ·

рқ‘ғрқҗёрқ‘Ғрқҗ·(рқ‘Ӣ, рқ‘Ң, рқ‘Қ) = (рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘Ӣ) вҲ— рқ‘“рқ‘Ғ, рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘Ң) вҲ— рқ‘“рқ‘Ғ, рқ‘‘рқ‘–рқ‘ҹрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘Қ) вҲ— рқ‘“рқ‘Ғ)
(S30)

Draw the segment [рқ‘ғрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Үрқҗҙрқ‘…рқ‘Үрқ‘ғрқҗёрқ‘Ғрқҗ·] where рқ‘ғрқ‘Ҷрқ‘Үрқҗҙрқ‘…рқ‘Ү is P, the point of the 3D curve.


9

Supplementary Fig. 9: Frequency displayed as segment on a LSeries 3D curve.

Note: if multiple circuits (multiple touchstone files) are represented then рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘“), used in the normalization of 
the frequency to obtain  рқ‘“рқ‘Ғ, is the one greater across all the circuits used.

2.2.2.
New parameters implemented

For the present paper, the following new parameters have been implemented in the 3D Smith Chart application:

-
LSeries

-
LShunt
QualityFactor for LSeries/LShunt

LSeries

LSeries is computed using the following formula:

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ (рқң”) = рқҗјрқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘” (

рқ‘…(1+ рқ‘Ҷ11вҲ’ рқ‘Ҷ12рқ‘Ҷ21+ рқ‘Ҷ22+ рқ‘Ҷ11рқ‘Ҷ22 )

2вҲ—рқ‘ғрқ‘–вҲ—рқ‘“вҲ—2вҲ— рқ‘Ҷ21
)
(S31)

Then рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ (рқң”) is normalized

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ғ(рқң”) =

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ (рқң”)

рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ (рқң”))
(S32)

To obtain the 3D representation of LSeries the following transformation is done

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ 3рқ‘‘(рқң”) = (рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ғ(рқң”) + 1) вҲ— рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”)
(S33)

Where рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) is21

рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) = рқҗјрқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘” (

2рқ‘Һ(рқң”)

1+|рқ‘Ҷ11(рқң”)|2 ,

2рқ‘Ҹ(рқң”)

1+|рқ‘Ҷ11(рқң”)|2 ,

1вҲ’|рқ‘Ҷ11(рқң”)|2

1+|рқ‘Ҷ11(рқң”)|2)
(S34)


10

Supplementary Fig. 10: LSeries 3D curve (black) displayed above the 3D Smith chart unit ball. Please note that unlike the S 

parameters which are on the unit sphere, the normalized inductance in the 3D space.

LShunt

LShunt is computed using the following formula:

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў(рқң”) = рқҗјрқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘” (

1

рқ‘Ұ11) вҲ—

1

2вҲ—рқ‘ғрқҗјвҲ—рқ‘“
(S 35)

Where рқ‘Ұ11 is

рқ‘Ұ11 = (

1+рқ‘Ҷ12рқ‘Ҷ21+рқ‘Ҷ22вҲ’ рқ‘Ҷ11(1+рқ‘Ҷ22 )

рқ‘…(1+ рқ‘Ҷ11вҲ’ рқ‘Ҷ12рқ‘Ҷ21+ рқ‘Ҷ22+ рқ‘Ҷ11рқ‘Ҷ22 ))
(S 36)

Then рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў(рқң”) is normalized

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ғ(рқң”) =

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў(рқң”)

рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў(рқң”))
(S37)

To obtain the 3D representation of LShunt the following transformation is done

рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў3рқ‘‘(рқң”) = (рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ғ(рқң”) + 1) вҲ— рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”)
(S38)

Where рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”) is defined in (S 34).

Note: if multiple circuits (multiple touchstone files) are represented then the рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ (рқң”)) / 
рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ў(рқң”)), used in the normalization step to obtain рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ҹрқ‘–рқ‘’рқ‘ рқ‘Ғ / рқҗҝрқ‘Ҷв„Һрқ‘ўрқ‘ӣрқ‘Ўрқ‘Ғ, is the one greater across all the 
circuits used.

QualityFactor for LSeries/LShunt

The QualityFactor is computed using the following formula:

рқ‘„(рқң”) = вҲ’

рқҗјрқ‘ҡрқ‘Һрқ‘”(рқ‘Ұ11)

рқ‘…рқ‘’рқ‘Һрқ‘ҷ(рқ‘Ұ11)
(S39)

The рқ‘„(рқң”) is normalized

рқ‘„рқ‘Ғ(рқң”) =

рқ‘„(рқң”)

рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘„(рқң”))
(S40)

Note: if multiple circuits (multiple touchstone files) are represented then the рқ‘Җрқ‘Һрқ‘Ҙ (рқ‘„(рқң”)), used in the 
normalization step to obtain  рқ‘„рқ‘Ғ(рқң”), is the one greater across all the circuits used.

Using the 3D representation of the LSeries / LShunt curve we can use the normal plane of the curve to associate 
to each point of the curve its quality factor as a cylinder of variable radius. This process will be described in the 
next section.

2.2.3.
LSeries / LShunt representation in 3D using the QualityFactor


11

For the 3D representation of the LSeries / LShunt, the normalized LSeries / LShunt value and the рқ‘Ҷ11transmission 
parameter are used and thus each point of the 3D curve is computed using the following formula:

рқҗҝ3рқ‘‘(рқң”) = (рқҗҝрқ‘Ғ(рқң”) + 1) вҲ— рқ‘Ҷ113рқ‘‘(рқ‘—рқң”)
(S41)

For the 3D representation that uses the quality factor as a 3D variable radius cylinder, the following steps have 
been implemented for each segment of the 3D space curve:

a)
Draw the 3D cylinder

For each segment [рқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1] of the LSeries / LShunt 3D space curve, a cylinder is drawn along the Z axis with the 
base of the cylinder centered in рқ‘ғрқ‘– and the top of the cylinder centered in рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1. The radiuses of the base and of the 
top of the cylinder will have the values associated to the normalized quality factors for point рқ‘ғрқ‘– and рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1
respectively. The height of the cylinder will have the value of the length of the [рқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1] segment of the curve.

Supplementary Fig. 11:  3D cylinder for the [PiPi+1] segment of the curve drawn along the Z axis.

b)
Compute transformation parameters for the 3D cylinder

To align the 3D cylinder along the [рқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1] segment the following parameters are computed:

-
the angle between the OZ axis and the [рқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1] segment as the dot product 

-
the axis around which the 3D cylinder will be rotated as the cross product between the OZ axis and the 
[рқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1] segment

Supplementary Fig. 12: Transformation parameters (rotation angle and rotation axis) for the 3D cylinder.

c)
Apply the transformation to the 3D cylinder

The 3D cylinder will be aligned along the [рқ‘ғрқ‘–рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1] segment (рқ‘ғрқ‘– will be at the center of the base of the cylinder 
and рқ‘ғрқ‘–+1will be at the center of the top of the cylinder) by rotating the 3D cylinder around the rotation axis and 
using the angle computed in the previous step.


12

Supplementary Fig. 13: The 3D cylinder transformed so that it wraps around the [PiPi+1] segment of the curve.

The steps described above will be applied to each segment of the 3D space curve and the result can be seen in 
the picture Supplementary Fig. 14 below:

Supplementary Fig. 14: Final representation using 3D cylinders in solid and lit mode.

S3.
Inductances and quality factors of inductors on the 3D Smith chart

It is important to stress that there are several models for extracting the inductance of a high frequency range 
inductor. For example the models in34-35 use the Y21 to extract its value (or equivalently this means using the 
parameter B of the ABCD matrix):

пғәпғ»

пғ№

пғӘпғ«

пғ©
вҖў вҲ’
пғәпғ»

пғ№

пғӘпғ«

= пғ©
пғәпғ»

пғ№

пғӘпғ«

пғ©

2

2

1

1

I

V

D
C

B
A

I

V

(S42)

пғәпғ»

пғ№

пғӘпғ«

= пғ©
пғәпғ»

пғ№

пғӘпғ«

пғ©

1
0
1
L
j

D
C

B
A
пҒ·

(S43)

Using the simplified PI  model of an inductor shown in Supplementary Fig. 15 we may see that this model 
neglects in its implementation the shunt capacitance:

jПүLseries=B = (Rs+ jПүL)||(
)   
(S44 )

Cs
jпҒ·

1


13

a                                                                                                 b

Supplementary Fig. 15: Simplified Pi model of an inductor. a,  simplified Pi model b, Simplified Pi model with a port connected 

to the ground.

In36-38 authors use the Y11 (or equivalently parameter C) model for computing thus, in their model the second port 
is connected to the ground (Supplementary Fig.15 b). For the simplified model in Supplementary Fig. 15 this 
makes Lshunt be extracted from (S45)

jПүLshunt=(Rs+jПүL)||( 
)||(

1

1

C
jпҒ·

) 
(S45)

Neverthless both models can be alternatiely used, since an inductor can be placed in between various circuits in 
various configurations39. Concerning the quality factor we adopt the common used model (S39)34-38. 
In 

Supplementary Fig. 16 we can see the performances of the newly designed Peano inductor in respect to the 
previously reported inductor with VO2 in the same technology ( in the conductive, on state of VO2).

Considering the new designed inductors extracted inductances and quality factor for two different frequency 
ranges: consider Supplementary Fig. 17 - Supplementary Fig. 21.

a      
b
c

Supplementary Fig.16: Comparative analyze of the new Peano inductor in the conductive state of VO2 versus previously 

reported reconfigurable inductor based on VO2 in the on state. (4GHz-10 GHz): a series model of inductance, b: shunt model, c: 

quality factor. Peano inductor (purple), previous34 reported inductor with VO2 вҖ“red.

Cs
jпҒ·

1


14

a              
b
c                                             d

Supplementary Fig. 17: Comparative analyze of the new Peano inductor in the conductive state of VO2 versus previously 
reported34 reconfigurable inductor based on VO2 in the on state. (4GHz-10 GHz) on the 3D Smith chart (corresponding to 

Supplementary Fig. 21 Fig): a series model of inductance, b: shunt model, c: quality factor. On the 3D smith chart one can see 

the S11 parameter to which they correspond. Please check video for better visualizations.

Supplementary Fig. 17 a contains more (indirect) information about the shunt inductance too, it shows that up to 
10 GHz both inductors are still in the East hemisphere. In Supplementary Fig. 17 b we can see how the shunt 
inductance model start being non-linear. In Supplementary Fig. 17 c and d we can see both quality factors plotted 
along the inductances, their frequency dependency being visible. In Supplementary Fig. 18 we can see the 
clockwise orientation with increasing frequency of the S11 reflection parameter for both inductors.

Supplementary Fig. 18: Comparative analyze of the new Peano inductor in the conductive state of VO2 versus previously 

reported reconfigurable inductor based on VO2 in the on state. (4GHz-10 GHz): up to 10 GHz, both inductors stay in the 

inductive hemisphere (East), rotating clockwise as frequency increases.

a                      
b
c


15

Supplementary Fig. 19: Comparative analyze of the new Peano inductor in the conductive state of VO2 versus previously 
reported reconfigurable inductor based on VO2 in the on state. (4GHz-15 GHz): a, series inductance, b: shunt inductance, c:

quality factor.

a                      
b          
c                                    d

Supplementary Fig. 20: Comparative analyze of the new Peano inductor in the conductive state of VO2 versus previously 

reported reconfigurable inductor based on VO2 in the on state. (4GHz-15 GHz) on the 3D Smith chart: a, series inductance, b: 
shunt inductance, c: quality factor along the series inductance, d: quality factor along the shunt inductance. On the 3D smith 

chart one can see the S11 parameter to which they correspond.

Supplementary Fig. 21: 3D Smith chart tool visualization of series and shunt inductances together with the quality factor on the 

4-15 GHz frequency range.

Considering the simplified model in Supplementary Fig.15 it is important to stress that if RS=0 then the zeros of   
of the imaginary part of Y11 are automatically zeros ( on the angular frequency axis) of the S11 parameter, since 
by using elementary ABCD matrices and one can easy determine the zeros of the im (Y11) as:

рққҺрқ’Ҡрқ’Һрқ’ҡрқҹҸрқҹҸ=

рқҹҸ

вҲҡрқ‘ірқ’”вҲ—рқ‘Әрқ’Ҡ+рқ‘ірқ‘әвҲ—рқ‘Әрқ‘ә
(S 46)      

While the zeros (on the angular frequency axis) of the imaginary part of S11 include the zeros of the Y11

рққҺрқ’Ҡрқ’Һрқ‘әрқҹҸрқҹҸ=

рқҹҸ

вҲҡрқ‘ірқ’”вҲ—рқ‘Әрқ’Ҡ+рқ‘ірқ‘әвҲ—рқ‘Әрқ‘ә , 

вҲҡвҲ’рқ‘ірқ’”+рқҹҗвҲ—рқ‘Әрқ’ҠвҲ—рқ’Ғ

вҲҡрқ‘ірқ’”вҲ—рқ‘Әрқ’Ҡ+рқ‘ірқ‘әвҲ—рқ‘Әрқ‘ә
(S 47)

Our Peano inductors:


16

A zoom of the VO2 switch of the fabricated inductor is shown in Supplementary Fig. 22. It is important to stress 
that our aim was to minimize resistive losses in the on state, thus we wished that the VO2 switch (gap in the Al at 
the top, where VO2 beneath is touched) should be as small in width as possible (while maintaining classical CMOS 
technology using standard microelectronic processes). This was desired since the conductivity of the VO2 in the 
on state is limited on SiO2/Si substrates.

a,

Supplementary Fig. 22: Peano fabricated inductor with a sub 600 nm gap in the Al connecting the VO2 thin film.a, Inductor 

switch fabricated layout. b, Zoom of the switch ( gap within the metallization where VO2 conductivity plays a key role)-in on state 

this gap plays a very important role-since it affects the losses ( the VO2 conductivity being below 40.000S/m) on SiO2/Si 

substrates. In off state the 20S/m conductivity of VO2 adds to dielectric losses of this material.

S4.
Frequency dependence of the relative effective permittivity of VO2

There relative effective permittivity (or dielectric function) рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“ of a material is defined as (S48) while the 
effective dielectric permittivity as (S49) where рқңҖ0 represents the permittivity of the free space40. On the other hand 
the imaginary part of the рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“ defined as рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ(рқ‘“) has two different components as described in (S50)-one 

generated by conductive losses рқңҺвҖІ(рқ‘“) and the other related to the intrinsic tangent losses embodied in рқ‘’рқ‘ҹ

вҖІвҖІ(рқ‘“).

рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“(рқ‘“) = рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ(рқ‘“) вҲ’ рқ‘—рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ(рқ‘“)
(S48)

рқңҖрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“(рқ‘“) = рқңҖ0 вҲ— рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“(рқ‘“) = рқңҖрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
(рқ‘“) вҲ’ рқ‘—рқңҖрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ (рқ‘“)
(S49)

рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ
(рқ‘“) = рқ‘’рқ‘ҹ

вҖІвҖІ(рқ‘“) +

рқңҺвҖІ(рқ‘“)

2рқңӢрқңҖ0
(S50)

The Table I presents the variety of reported values for the relative effective permittivity real part (dielectric 
constant) and imaginary part as reported throughout literature41-46. Most studies were however done in the optical 
frequency range-the values and models used being not always convergent. The only study in the microwaves 
frequency range is done on a VO2 deposition on Sapphire and are presented in42 being based on a conformal 
mapping procedure which is inaccurate for the low frequency range among others (comments on it in section VI).  
On the other hand the model in 42 neglects the first term in (S50) attributing all the losses to a frequency dependent 
conductivity while ignoring the intrinsic dielectric losses. Ignoring the first term in (S50) is done in the metal 
modellings40, while neglecting the dielectric damping loss. On the other hand in HFSS EM tool both terms in the 
right side of (S50) can be introduced unlike other tools where  рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ
alone exists. Thus in our extraction we used 

the more complex model based on (S48)-(S50)40 while using HFSS tool which allows this separation of losses and 
thus a better de-embedding.


17

Table 1:Effective relative permittivity of VO2

Reference
рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
(рқ‘“)
рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
(рқ‘“)

monotony

рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ
(рқ‘“)
Frequency
T
Observation

41
-2 вүӨрқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
вүӨ 

10

rвҶ‘
included
Optical range
200C

42
400 
вүҘрқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
вүҘ 90

rвҶ“
рқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІвҖІ
(рқ‘“) =

= рқңҺвҖІ(рқ‘“)

2рқңӢрқңҖ0

0.1GHz-40 
GHz

200C
Conformal 
mapping
Microwave 
range: 1-30 
GHz

43
9
constant
-
5.07-9.01 
THz

-

34,44
30
constant
-
1 
GHz-

40GHz

200C

45
9 вүҘрқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
вүҘ 

25

вҶ‘вҶ“
76GHz-
109GHz

580C
Upper 
microwave 
spectrum

46
7 вүӨрқңҖрқ‘ҹрқ‘’рқ‘“рқ‘“

вҖІ
вүӨ 

8

рқңҖrвҶ‘вҶ“
Optical range
Insulating 
state

47
90
constant
included
0.1 
KHz-

0.1MHz

200C
Low 
frequency 
range

Here based on Peano filters we propose a different methodology for extracting the effective relative permittivity. 
Based on the Peano space filling curve we produce a variety of filters (occupying a limited area) and resonating at 
a variety of frequencies, additionally we consider other split ring filters too. Supplementary Fig 23 a illustrates 
the substrate layer configuration for the filters fabricated without the VO2 thin film below the metallization. Fig. 
Supplementary Fig 23 b illustrates the substrate layer configuration when the VO2 layer was inserted.  The 
procedure: the defected ground plane structures (DGS) within the coplanar waveguides (CPW) resonate at a 
different frequency, depending on their geometrical dimensions and substrate configuration. The dielectric 
constant of the VO2 is extracted from de-embedding the S parameters for each structures in a bandwidth next to 
their resonances. Each identical filter is fabricated on the substrate layer  configuration from  Supplementary Fig
23 a and then on the substrate layer configuration Supplementary Fig 23 b. Supplementary Figs 24 a-
Supplementary Figs 31 a- show the different filters geometries, while Supplementary Figs 24 b-
Supplementary Figs 31 b show the transmission parameters S21 magnitudes in dB for the corresponding layouts 
in both substrates configurations.

a            
b

Supplementary Fig. 23: The fabrication of different wafers with or without a VO2 layer below the metallization. a, the DGS CPW 

metallization is on SiO2/Si substrate, b, a VO2 layer is deposited below the DGS CPW metallization.

a                                                                                                               b


18

Supplementary Fig. 24: CPW DGS Peano filter of pseudo order 9 (9 times order 2-modified) fabricated on a SiO2/Si substrate 
and on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate. a, Layout of the filter. b Measured S21 (dB) at 20В°C: blue on SiO2/Si substrate, orange with a

140 nm VO2 layer below the DGS CPW metallization while red with a 170 nm VO2 layer below the metallization.

a                                                                                                               b

Supplementary Fig. 25: CPW DGS Peano filter of pseudo order 9 (9 times order 2-modified) with a different length of the 

Peano generating curve fabricated on a SiO2/Si substrate and on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate. a, Layout of the filter. b, Measured 
S21 (dB) at 20В°C: blue on a SiO2/Si substrate, orange on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate with  a 140 nm VO2 layer while red with a 170 
nm layer. As the thickness of VO2 increases the resonance frequency shift and losses are more pronounced than in respect to 

the same filter fabricated without the VO2 layer.

a                                                                 
b


19

Supplementary Fig. 26: DGS CPW Peano filter of pseudo order 6 (6 times order 2-modified) on a SiO2/Si substrate and on a 
VO2/SiO2/Si substrate. a, Layout of the filter. b, Measured S21 (dB) at 20В°C: blue on SiO2 blue on a SiO2/Si substrate, while red

on a on a VO2/SiO2/Si  substrate with a 170 nm VO2 thick layer.

a                                                                                           
b

Supplementary Fig. 27: DGS CPW Peano filter of pseudo order 6 (6 times order 2-modified) with an additional cut. a, Layout of 

the filter. b, Measured S21 (dB) at 20В°C: on a SiO2/Si substrate, while red on a on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate with a 170 nm VO2

layer.

a                                                                                                b

Supplementary Fig. 28: DGS CPW Peano filter of pseudo order 2 (order 2 slightly modified). a, Layout of the filter. b,

Measured S21 (dB) at 20В°C: on a SiO2/Si substrate, while red on a on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate with a 170 nm thick VO2 layer.

a                                                                                              
b

Supplementary Fig. 29: DGS CPW Peano filter of pseudo order 2 with a metal block on its DGS-. a, Layout of the filter. b,

Measured S21 (dB) at 20В°C: on a SiO2/Si substrate, while red on a on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate with a 170 nm thick VO2 layer .


20

a                                                                                                b

Supplementary Fig. 30: DGS CPW Split ring filter. a, Layout of the filter. b, Measured S21 (dB) at 20В°C: on a SiO2/Si substrate, 

while red on a on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate with a 170 nm thick VO2 layer.

a                                                                                                b

Supplementary Fig. 31: Split ring CPW DGS filter with an additional cut. a, Layout of the filter. b, Measured S21 (dB) at 20В°C: 

on a SiO2/Si substrate, while red on a on a VO2/SiO2/Si substrate with a 170 nm thick VO2 layer.

The results show clearly a lower relative frequency shift (inserting theVO2 layer below the filters) as their resonant 
frequency increases. Nevertheless this is dependent on each geometry, each being more or less affected by the thin 
VO2 layer. The de-embedded results using HFSS conclude to the following dielectric constant curve with the 
losses in Supplementary Fig. 32. The results are in accordance with47 for the low frequency range while the values 
computed at 50 GHz are in accordance too with the ones reported in 45 for 75 GHz.


21

Supplementary Fig. 32: Extracted dielectric constant of VO2 on a SiO2/Si substrate at room temperature.

References

1.
Tade, O.O., Gardner, P., Hall, S.S. Negative impedance converters for broadband antenna matching. In 2012 
42nd European Microwave Conference (2012), https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6459295 (2012).

2.
Tade, O.O., Gardner, P., Hall, S.S.  Broadband matching of small antennas using negative impedance 
converters. In 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Antenna and Propagation and USNC-URSI National 
Radio Science meeting (2012). https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6348833

3.
Tade, O.O., Gardner, P., Hall, S.S. Antenna bandwidth broadening with a negative impedance converter.  Int. 
J. Microwave T. 5 (3), 249-260 (2013).

4.
Hrabar, S., Krois, I., Kiricenko, A. Towards active dispersion less ENZ metamaterial for cloaking 
applications. Metamaterials, 4, 2-3, 89-97 (2010).

5.
Goldstone, L. A low VSWR matching technique. (Correspondence and authorвҖҷs reply). IRE.  Trans. Microw. 
Theory Tech. 5, 2, 163 (1957).

6.
Munk, B.A.  Metamaterials: Critique and Alternatives. John Wiley& Sons Inc., New Jersey, USA (2009). 

7.
Munk, B.A.  Finite Antenna Arrays and FSS. John Wiley& Sons Inc., New Jersey, USA, (2003).

8.
Best, S.R., The Foster reactance theorem and quality Factor for antennas. IEEE Antennas Wireless Propag. 
Lett. 3, 306-309 (2004).

9.
Berger, M., A Panoramic View of Riemannian Geometry. Springer. Berlin, 2003.

10. Do Carmo, M. P., Differential Geometry of Curves and Surfaces. Prentice-Hall inc., New Jersey, 1976.
11. Chen, M., Z., Q., A Note on Tests for Positive-Real Functions, IEEE Trans. on Autom. Control. 54, 2, (2009).
12. Brune, O., Synthesis of a finite two-terminal network whose driving-point impedance is a prescribed function 

of frequency, PhD-thesis MIT, (1931). https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/sapm1931101191

13. Shi, T., Tang, M.-C., Wu, Z., Xu, H., Ziolkowski, R.W., Improved signal-to Noise Ratio (SNR), Bandwitdh-

enhanced electrically small antenna augmented with Internal non-Foster elements. IEEE Trans. Antennas  
Propag. In press (2019) https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8624545&tag=1

14. Mirzaei, H., Eleftheriades, G., V., Realizing non-Foster reactive elements using negative-group-delay 

networks. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., 61, 12, 4322вҖ“4332 (2013).

15. Muller, A.A., Lucyszyn, S., Properties of purely reactive Foster and Non-Foster passive networks. IET 

Electron. Lett., 51, 23, 1882-1884 (2015)

16. Bochert, M., Infinite Regions of Various Geometries. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 20, 4, 185-200, (1914).  
17. Brannan, D.A., Esplen, M.F., Gray, J.J., Geometry. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2007.
18. Muller, A.A, Soto, P., Dascalu, Boria V., The 3D Smith chart and its practical applications, Microwave 

Journal. 5, 7, 64-74 (2012).

19. Muller, A. A., Soto, P. Dascalu, D, Neculoiu, D. Boria, V. E. A 3d Smith chart based on the Riemann sphere 

for active and passive microwave circuits. IEEE Microw. and Wireless Comp. Lett., 21, 6,  286-288 (2011).

20. Muller, A.A, et al. Apollonius unilateral transducer constant power gain circles on the 3D Smith chartвҖқ, IET 

Electron. Lett., 50, 21,  1531-1533 (2014).

21. Muller, A., A., Sanabria-Codesal, E., Moldoveanu, A. Asavei, V., Lucyszyn, S., Extended capabilities with 

group delay and resonator quality factor. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., 65, 1, 10-17 (2017).

22. Muller, A. A., Moldoveanu A., Asavei V., Fleischer C. 3D Smith  chart tool (2019) www.3dsmithchart.com.
23. Smith, P.H. Transmission-line calculator. Electronics 12, 29вҖ“31 (1939).


22

24. Zhu, B.O., Zhao J., Feng Y. Active impedance metasurface with full 360В° reflection phase tuning. Sci. Rep. 

3, 3059 (2013).

25. Thang, B., Sodickson, D.K., Cloos, M.A. A high-impedance detector-array glove for magnetic resonance 

imaging of the hand. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2, 570-577 (2018).

26. Tuca, S.-S. et al. Calibrated complex impedance of CHO cells and E. coli bacteria at GHz frequencies using 

scanning microwave microscopy. Nanotechnology 27, 135702 (2016).

27. Qu L., Zhang, Zhang R., Shin H., Kim J., Kim H.  Mode-Controlled Wideband Slot-Fed Ground Radiation 

Antenna Utilizing Metal Loads for Mobile Applications. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 65, 2, 867-872 
(2017).

28. Chu, H.C, Ma T. Beamwidth switchable planar microstrip series-fed slot array using reconfigurable 

synthesized transmission lines. IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. 65, 7, 3766-3771 (2017).

29. Liu, S., Liu A. A novel design methodology for high-efficiency current-mode and voltage-Mode class-E 

power amplifiers in wireless power transfer systems.  IEEE Trans. Power Electron. 32, 6, 4514-4521 (2017).

30. Ma, J., Steer, M. B., Jiang, X. An acoustic filter based on layered structure. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 111903 

(2015).

31. Dubois, M.-A., Murait P. Properties of aluminum nitride thin films for piezoelectric transducers and 

microwave filter applications. Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 20, 3032-3034 (1999).

32. Bochert, M. Infinite Regions of Various Geometries, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 20, 4,185-200 (1914).
33. Brannan, D.A., Esplen, M.F., Gray, J.J., Geometry, Cambridge University Press, New York (2007).
34. Casu, E.A. et al. A reconfigurable inductor based on Vanadium Dioxide insulator to metal transition. IEEE

Microw. Compon. Lett. 29, 9, 795-797 (2018).

35. Wang, S., Wang, W., Shin, E., Quach, Subramanyam, G. Tunable inductors using vanadium dioxide as the 

control material. Microw. Opt. Techn. Lett., 59, 5, 1057вҖ“1061 (2017).

36. Leroy, C. et al., High quality factor copper inductors integrated in deep dry-etched quartz substrates.

Microsyst. Technol., 13, 11вҖ“12, 1483вҖ“1487 (2007).

37. Kang, J. et. al., On-chip intercalated-graphene inductors for next-generation radio frequency electronics.

Nature Electronics, 1, 46-51 (2018).

38. Wainstein, N., Kvatinsky, S. Time-tunable inductors using mermistors, IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg.

papers, 65, 5, 1505-1515 (2018).

39. Horng, T. S., Peng, K. C. , Jau,J.K, Tsai, Y.S. S-parameter formulation of quality factor for a spiral inductor 

in generalized two-port configuration. IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., 51, 11, 2197вҖ“2202 (2003).

40. Episkopou, E. Papantonis, S., Otter, W.J, Lucyszyn S., Defining material parameters in commercial EM 

solvers arbitrary metal based Thz structures . IEEE Trans. Terahertz Sci. Technol. 2, 513вҖ“524 (2012).

41. Prayakrao, S. et al. Tunable VO2/Au hyperbolic metamaterial. Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 061105 (2016).
42. Emond. N., Henadaoui, A., Delpart, S., Chaker, M.,Wu, K. Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of 

Thermo-Tunable MetalвҖ“InsulatorвҖ“Vanadium Dioxide Coplanar Waveguide Structure. IEEE Trans. Microw. 
Theory Tech., 65, 5, 1443вҖ“1455 (2017).

43. Zheng, X., Xiao, Ling, Z. X. A Tunable Hybrid Metamaterial Reflective Polarization Converter Based on 

Vanadium Oxide Film. Plasmonics, 13(1) 287-291 (2018).

44. Casu, E.A., et al. Vanadium Oxide bandstop tunable filter for Ka frequency bands based on a novel 

reconfigurable spiral shape defected ground plane CPW. IEEE Access, 6, 12206-1221, (2018).

45. Hashemi, M.R.M. et al., Direct measurement of Vanadium dioxide dielectric properties in W-band, J. Infrared 

Milli Terahz. Waves, 35, 486-492 (2014). 

46. Currie, M., Mastro, M.A, Wheeler, V.D. Characterizing the tunable refractive index of Vanadium dioxide, 

Opt. Mater. Express, 7, 1697-1707 (2017).

47. Ansingh, A.B. et al. Dielectric Behaviour of Vanadium Dioxide, Phys. Status Solidi. 49 773-779 (1978).


A supplementary video that showcases the new functionalities of the 3D 
Smith Chart (http://www.3dsmithchart.com/) developed specifically for 
the new notions presented in the article can be found at the following link:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kk1aGb8d_rg


