1 

 

Colloidal Quantum Dot Molecules Manifesting  

Quantum Coupling at Room Temperature 

Jiabin Cui1,2†, Yossef E. Panfil1,2†, Somnath Koley1,2†, Doaa Shamalia1,2, Nir Waiskopf1,2, Sergei 

Remennik2, Inna Popov2, Meirav Oded1,2 & Uri Banin1,2* 

1 Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.  

2 The Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 

91904, Israel.  

† These authors contributed equally to this work. 

* Corresponding author. Email: uri.banin@mail.huji.ac.il (U.B.) 

Abstract 

Coupling of atoms is the basis of chemistry, yielding the beauty and richness of molecules. We utilize 

semiconductor nanocrystals as artificial atoms to form nanocrystal molecules that are structurally and 

electronically coupled. CdSe/CdS core/shell nanocrystals are linked to form dimers which are then fused 

via constrained oriented attachment. The possible nanocrystal facets in which such fusion takes place are 

analyzed with atomic resolution revealing the distribution of possible crystal fusion scenarios. Coherent 

coupling and wavefunction hybridization are manifested by a red shift of the band gap, in agreement with 

quantum mechanical simulations. Single nanoparticle spectroscopy unravels the attributes of coupled 

nanocrystal dimers related to the unique combination of quantum mechanical tunneling and energy 

transfer mechanisms. This sets the stage for nanocrystals chemistry to yield a diverse selection of coupled 

nanocrystal molecules constructed from controlled core/shell nanocrystal building blocks. These are of 

direct relevance for numerous applications in displays, sensing, biological tagging and emerging quantum 

technologies. 

 
 


2 

 

Introduction 

Colloidal semiconductor Quantum Dots (CQDs) that contain hundreds to thousands of atoms have 

reached an exquisite level of control, side by side with gaining fundamental understanding of their size, 

composition and surface controlled properties leading to their implementation in technological 

applications 1. The strongly quantum confined energetic levels of CQDs possess atomic like character, for 

example - s and p states, related to their spherical symmetry. This, alongside with the ability to manipulate 

CQDs into more elaborate structures, naturally led to their consideration as "artificial atoms". Inspired by 

molecular chemistry, in which functionality of molecules depends on how atoms couple, we apply 

analogous concepts to enrich CQDs based materials. If one considers CQDs as artificial atom building 

blocks 2,3, how plentiful would be the selection of composition, properties and functionalities of the 

corresponding artificial molecules? Herein we introduce the utilization of CQDs as basic elements in 

"nanocrystal chemistry" for construction of coupled colloidal nanocrystals molecules focusing on 

homodimer quantum dots (QDs), in analogy to homonuclear diatomic molecules.  

    Coupled quantum dots were prepared by means of molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) 4–6. However, MBE-

grown double quantum dot structures exhibit some limitations. First, the size of MBE-grown QDs is larger 

than the colloidal ones, and the typically large distance between the QDs limits wave-function tunneling 

that yields coupling phenomenon. Correspondingly, such structures exhibit wave-function tunneling that 

typically yields coupling energies of a few meV confining their utility to low temperature operation in 

specialized cryogenic applications 7,8. Furthermore, MBE grown structures are inherently buried within a 

host semiconductor9. In contrast, colloidal quantum dots are free in solution and accessible for wet-

chemical manipulations through their surface functionalization. Using such knobs, CQD molecules were 

constructed by connection with DNA strands providing geometrical control 10, yet in such structures the 

linker DNA molecules form a barrier that minimizes quantum mechanical coupling. Addressing this 

limitation, core/multishell structures with concentric regions were first examples of coupling within CQDs 

architectures, where the wave-functions of two well regions within such NCs may interact leading to 

CQDs showing dual emission peaks 11. Other examples constitute synthesis of dot-in-rod structures and 

growing an additional quantum dot region on the rod apex thus yielding a coupled system 12, and dumbbell 

architectures 13. However, these progresses were either restricted by specific morphologies 14, specific 

materials and relatively large coupling barrier distance and height 15–17. Therefore, there is a lack of a 

general approach for producing coupled CQD molecules in which there is flexibility to tailor the potential 

energy landscape and to tune the coupling strength. 

    To this end we introduce a facile and powerful strategy for coupled CQD molecules with precise 

control over the composition and size of the barrier in between them to allow for tuning their electronic 


3 

 

coupling characteristics and optical properties. This entails the use of core/shell CQDs as artificial atom 

building blocks. In terms of the band gap engineering, in first instance, tuning the core size is used to 

manipulate the wave-functions and energies of the electron and hole. On top of this, further control is 

afforded by the synthesis of shells on these cores.  

While the chemical bond is the basis for combining atoms in molecules, connecting CQDs has to occur 

through adjoining of their crystal faces to form a continuous crystal. Thus, fusing two core/shell CQDs 

yields a homodimer with a tailored barrier dictated by the shell composition, thickness and fusion reaction 

conditions. With such control, using high resolution aberration corrected scanning transmission electron 

microscopy, we observed and analyzed the orientation relationships including homo-plane-attachment and 

hetero-plane-attachment in the fusion process. Moreover, the manifestations of quantum coupling were 

revealed by the broadening and red shift of the band gap transition observed in absorption and 

photoluminescence, in agreement with the quantum-mechanical calculations for the system. The scale of 

the hybridization energies and corresponding shifts are significantly lower as compared to diatomic 

molecules. This is expected considering the much larger dimensions of the CQD building blocks 

compared to atoms and the different potential energy landscape within the CQD molecule. The coupling 

also leads to broadening of the excited state transitions of the CQD dimers and the absorption spectrum for 

the high energy bands is modified as well. The emerging attributes of coupling are also revealed by single 

nanoparticle spectroscopy studies yielding modified electron-hole recombination rates and single photon 

statistics in CQD dimers in comparison to monomers. 

The approach introduced herein, serves as a basis for a wide selection of CQD molecules utilizing the 

rich collection of the artificial atom core/shell CQD building blocks. Such CQD molecules bear significant 

promise for their utilization in numerous applications, including in light-emitting devices, displays, 

photovoltaics and sensors. For example, the controlled formation of heterodimers consisting of CQD 

monomers with varying core sizes is of direct relevance for dual color emission. Similarly, forming a 

heterodimer with a staggered (type-II) band alignment between the two CQD building blocks is 

envisioned for electric field sensing. Additionally, there is high potential for CQD molecules to be used in 

emergent quantum technologies such as quantum computation8. MBE grown QD molecules were already 

demonstrated as quantum gates utilizing the interaction between the quantum dots through tunneling 5. 

CQD molecules offer enhanced coupling efficiency by their smaller sizes and by the small distances 

between the QDs resulting in quantum mechanical coupling an order of magnitude larger than prior MBE 

grown QD systems that is well resolved even at room temperature. This advance significantly widens the 

scope of quantum technologies applications of coupled quantum dot systems. 

Results 


4 

 

Formation of coupled CQDs molecules 

    Exemplary coupled homodimer molecules were generated from CdSe/CdS core/shell 18,19 CQDs via a 

procedure utilizing silica nanoparticles as a template for forming molecularly linked dimers 20, which are 

then fused via a high temperature reaction (Fig. 1a, full scheme in Supplementary Fig.1). Three different 

CdSe/CdS core/shell CQDs were studied (1.9/4.0 nm, 1.4/2.1 nm, and 1.2/2.1 nm core-radius/shell-

thickness, see SI materials and methods for synthesis details and Supplementary Fig.2 for transmission 

electron microscopy (TEM) images and optical spectra). The TEM and high angle annular dark field 

(HAADF) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) characterization manifests the wurtzite 

structure of the monomer CdSe/CdS QDs (Supplementary Fig.3). These CdSe/CdS CQDs were bonded 

via thiol linking to the surface of a SiO2 nanoparticle template substrate (Supplementary Fig.4-5). A 

second SiO2 layer was grown for masking the remaining SiO2 surface and to immobilize the bonded CQDs 

(Supplementary Fig.6), followed by treatment with a tetra-thiol linker (Supplementary Fig.7). Adding a 

second CQD leads to formation of a molecularly linked dimer structure (Fig. 1b, Supplementary Fig.8). 

Next, the SiO2 template nanoparticles were selectively etched by HF treatment. Size-selective 

precipitation was used to separate out the monomers and obtain a highly dimer enriched sample (Fig. 1c). 


5 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. Coupled CQDs molecules. (a) Scheme for fabrication of coupled CdSe/CdS CQD molecule. (b) 

The dimer@SiO2 CQD structure. The dimer 1.9/4.0 nm CQD molecules (c) before, and (d) after the fusion 

procedure. (e) The 1.4/2.1 nm fused CdSe/CdS CQD molecules. Schematic structures are illustrated. Scale 

bars (b-e) are 50 nm and insets show higher magnification images. (f) The potential energy landscape and 

a cross-section of the calculated first electron wave-function without Coulombic interaction Ψ𝑒 (red), with 

Coulombic interaction Ψ𝑒′ (green) and of the hole wave-functions Ψℎ(blue) of the coupled CQD 

molecules. (g) Calculated bonding and antibonding 2- dimensional electron wave-functions without 

(cross-section of the bonding state is the red curve in f), and (h) with Coulombic interaction (cross-section 

of the bonding state is the green curve in f). (i) Absorption (dashed lines) and fluorescence spectra (solid 

lines) of monomers (blue), unfused (green), and fused 1.4/2.1 nm CdSe/CdS CQD molecules (red). (j) 


6 

 

Calculated (red asterisk) and experimental (blue circles) band gap red shift of monomer-to-respective-

homodimer structures for CQD molecules with different core/shell dimensions. 

The dimerization procedure yields a dimer structure with an organic insulating barrier. Hence, to 

achieve a coupled system, a last step of fusion is required. The fusion procedure was performed while 

adding Cd-oleate and heating to 180 °C for 20 h. Fig. 1d-e presents the fused dimer structure after a size 

selection procedure (Supplementary Fig.9-10). At this non-trivial important stage, the reaction parameters, 

including temperature, time and ligands type and concentration, have a significant influence on the 

coupled dimers formation. If the temperature was too high (above 240 °C), collapse of the dimer 

structures through linker bond cleavage may occur, as well as CQD ripening distorting the core/shell 

architectures. On the other hand, if the temperature was too low, the fusion rate would be too slow and 

inefficient. The dimer structure formation is also very sensitive to excess of ligands in the solution, which 

inhibits the fusion and leads to a decrease in the dimer yield. Therefore, careful tuning and choice of these 

reaction parameters is crucial for achieving high dimer yields and lower yields of dimer collapse and 

ripening, while achieving a continuous linking region of the shell materials forming the barrier between 

the two cores in the fused dimers. Further considerations of this important fusion step and the resultant 

interfacial structures are discussed later. 

Optical signatures for coupling and wavefunction hybridization 

    After the fusion step, the resultant CQD dimer leaves an interesting optical signature of a red-shift in 

the absorption and photoluminescence spectra along with broadening of the band gap and excited state 

spectral features (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 11). Generally, there are several factors which can lead to 

a red-shift: the formation of alloying shell 21, alteration of the dielectric environment 22 (surface ligands) or 

interfacial strain 23. To address these different possibilities, we also studied the spectral properties of the 

monomers, which underwent the fusion reaction under similar conditions (Supplementary Fig. 9-10), and 

found them to be identical to the original monomer particles (Supplementary Fig. 12). Hence the 

possibility of observing a red shift in the band gap transition due to formation of an alloy shell or altered 

dielectric environment can be ruled out. Furthermore, strain effects and change in the dielectric properties 

during the fusion procedure can be considered negligible as we did not grow an additional shell, but rather 

the fused shell material is the same (CdS), and the surface ligands are also the same for the CQDs 

monomers and dimers. Moreover, no shift was observed after the fusion of the large 1.9/4.0nm CQDs 

(Fig.1), where dielectric and strain effects, if significant, would be expected to contribute as well. In fact, 

the red shift in the band gap transitions was found to depend systematically on the alteration of the core 

size and shell thickness of the monomer counterparts, increasing for small core and shell dimensions (Fig 


7 

 

1j). This is consistent with the difference in the delocalization of the wavefunctions in the various CQDs 

that lead to different degree of coupling of the corresponding wavefunctions in the CQD molecules.  

To this end, we have employed quantum mechanical calculations to visualize the wavefunction 

hybridization and to calculate the expected red-shift in the different CQD dimers. The changed potential 

energy landscape upon fusion leads to hybridization of the monomer QD wave-functions in the dimers 

(Fig. 1f), in analogy to homonuclear diatomic molecules. We utilized finite element software (COMSOL) 

to calculate the energy levels and wave-functions of the fused CdSe/CdS dimer and monomers within an 

effective-mass based approximation (Supplementary Discussion and Supplementary Table 1 for details). 

The conduction band in this system is demonstrating the fundamental textbook example of hybridization. 

According to this model, when the distance between two atoms is decreased, their wave-functions will 

hybridize to form a symmetric bonding state and anti-symmetric anti-bonding state with energy difference 

of twice the hopping energy. The bonding and anti-bonding electron wave-functions, which, respectively, 

are in-phase and anti-phase superpositions of the monomer wave-functions, are presented in Fig.1g for the 

case of 1.4 nm core radius and a potential energy barrier between the dots of 4.2 nm (0.1eV band-offset), 

corresponding to the CQD molecules formed from 1.4/2.1 nm core/shell CQDs. Because of the quasi-type 

II nature of the CdSe/CdS interface, the monomers electron wave-functions are easily hybridized and 

leading to 23 meV energy spacing between the bonding and anti-bonding electron states. For the hole 

however, the valence band potential manifests a relatively high band offset of 0.64 eV, and this, combined 

with the heavier hole effective mass, yields minimal hole hybridization. 

Considering the case of one exciton residing in the dimer and taking into account the Coulombic 

interaction between the electron-hole pair, since the hole wave-function is essentially not hybridized, the 

hole is in one of the dots and consequently the electron does not see a symmetric double QDs’ potential 

anymore. The calculated two lowest energy levels wave-functions of the electron including the Coulombic 

interaction are presented in Fig.1h. The Coulombic interaction for the first electron level, localized around 

the hole, is greater than the second electronic state in the opposite dot, increasing the energy spacing 

between the bonding and anti-bonding states to 60 meV. One can see that the electron is localized in the 

dot which contains the hole as well. However, there is still significant tunneling-coupling observed for the 

electron wavefunction and a red shift is predicted. This is indeed confirmed experimentally in the 

emission and absorption spectrum, where only in the case of the fused dimer a red shift is observed 

compared to the monomer (603-607 nm in case of 1.4/2.1 nm core/shell QD), whereas, for the unfused 

organically linked dimer no red shift is seen (Fig. 1i and Supplementary Table 2). The control in the 

magnitude of the red-shift, for the monomer to fused dimer transition, for three different types of CQDs is 

depicted in Fig. 1j. In the the case of 1.2/2.1 nm core/shell CQDs the red shift is increased (13/14 meV 

calculated/experimental) due to the greater spill out of the electron wave-function to the shell because of 


8 

 

the smaller core size. This is in contrast to the case of 1.9/4 nm core/shell CQD where the red shift is 

negligible (0.5/0 meV calculated/experimental) because of the localization of the electron wave-function 

in the larger core (Supplementary Fig.13, and Supplementary Table 2). 

An additional signature for the coupling in fused dimers is observed in the absorption spectra at higher 

energies. Figure 1i shows broadening only upon fusion consistent with coupling forming multiple states in 

dimers. Furthermore, the spectra normalized at the band gap manifest a significantly stronger relative 

absorbance in high energies for the fused dimers compared with monomers and unfused dimers (see also 

Supplementary Fig.11). This is assigned to the wavefunctions modification in the fused system, which can 

be considered from a viewpoint of hybridization among the excited states. 

Structural characterization of fused CQD dimers 

    We next consider further the nontrivial fusion stage and its consequences. Analysis by HAADF-STEM 

confirms that coupled dimer formation is indeed achieved based on fusion of the 1.9/4.0 nm core/shell QD 

monomers (Fig. 2). A continuous atomic lattice through the entire structure was formed upon fusing the 

two QDs shells (Fig. 2a). The core architecture in the coupled structure was maintained as demonstrated 

by the energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDS) line scan measurement (Fig. 2b-c). A continuous 

distribution of cadmium (both in core and shell) and sulfur (only in shell) is identified along the line of the 

dimer axis. Along the same line, selective regions of the selenium (only in core) are clearly identified 

signifying the cores locations. 


9 

 

 

Fig. 2. Dimer structure characterization and analysis. HAADF-STEM image (a), EDS line scan data 

(b) and STEM-EDS (c) analysis of the coupled 1.9/4.0 nm CdSe/CdS molecules. Inset presents an atomic 

model. Scale bars 5 nm. 

    Underlying our fusion reaction strategy, is the process of oriented attachment - a crystal growth 

mechanism in which secondary mono-crystalline particles can be achieved through oriented and 

irreversible attachments of primary particles 24–30. PbSe CQD dimers were prepared via oriented 

attachment in solution, but even under succinct control of ligands, concentration and reaction conditions, 

only ~30% dimer fraction, a rod-like colloidal quantum system, could be achieved along with monomers 

and higher order oligomers. In our template based strategy, high control over dimer formation was 

achieved by firstly forming a connection by molecular linkers. The molecular linkers however constrain 

the initial relative crystal orientations between the two monomers. With careful tuning of precursor and 

judicious choice of the fusion condition, we can foresee high potential for this method to serve as a 

general coupling strategy for other colloidal nanocrystal systems. Here, we studied this special case of 

“constrained oriented attachment”, and Fig. 3 shows exemplary orientation relationships observed for 

coupled molecules formed from the 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs and their detailed analysis. Both homo-plane and 


10 

 

hetero-plane (misorientation) attachment relationships are observed. Homo-plane attachment orientation 

occurs via contact between homonymous faces (101̅0) and (101̅0), (0002) and (0002), (101̅1) and (101̅1)  

(Fig. 3a-c, g, i, respectively), consistent with the CQD monomer crystal model built based on STEM 

analysis (Supplementary Fig.3). In such homo-plane attachment cases, both CQD monomers of a fused 

pair are projected under the same zone axis. This allows accurate identification of the fused faces at 

dimers orientated with its fusion axes normal to the projection zone axis (depicted in Fig.3). Hetero-plane 

attachment orientation is observed at fusion of heteronymous faces: (0002)||(101̅0) (Fig. 3e), 

(0002)||(101̅1), (101̅1)||(101̅0) (Supplementary Fig.14a,c). 

 

Fig. 3. Fusion orientation relationships in CQD molecules. Atomic structure model (a,d; cadmium 

atoms - brown, sulfur atoms - blue.), HAADF-STEM images (b,e), and FFT patterns (c,f) of the homo-


11 

 

plane (a-c) and hetero-plane (d-f) attachment of coupled CQD molecules with orientation relationship of 

attachment on (101̅0)||(101̅0) and (0002)||(101̅1), respectively. The HAADF-STEM (g, i) and atomic 

structure model (h, j) of homo-plane attachment on (0002), and (101̅1) facets, respectively. Dashed orange 

arrows indicate the CQD fusion/molecular axis in plane of the image normal to projection ZA [1̅21̅0]. 

Note that for (101̅0)||(101̅0) homo-plane attachment, the homonymous (101̅0) faces of A1 and A2 are 

parallel (c), while for the hetero-plane attachment the heteronymous faces are parallel (0002)||(101̅0) (e). 

(k) Distribution of observed homo- and hetero-plane attachment orientations on (101̅0), (0002), and 

(101̅1) faces. Here, the total amount of dimers for the statistic was 100.Inset shows the CQD model and 

faces.  

    The statistics of the orientation relationship within the CQD molecules is depicted in Fig. 3k 

(homonymous and heteronymous orientations are approximately equally abundant). The (101̅0)||(101̅0) 

and (0002)||(0002) face attachments are dominant, whereas the (101̅1)||(101̅1) attachment is much less 

common. This is consistent with an interplay between the relative reactivity, surface passivation and 

occurrence of the various faces on the monomer QDs. The (0002) facets, while in minority, manifest a Cd 

rich termination with 3 dangling bonds per atom, that can easily react with thiol linkers 31. Both (101̅0) 

and (101̅1) facets are plentiful but better passivated 32,33. However, linking to the (101̅1) facet is sterically 

hindered. The hetero-plane attachment statistics is also consistent with these considerations. 

    The generality of our formation strategy is well manifested also for the other CQD homodimers. 

Analytical and structural STEM analysis for the 1.4/2.1 nm core/shell CQDs are shown in Fig. 4 and 

Supplementary Fig.15-16. Fusion conditions need to be tuned as smaller core/shell CQDs are more 

reactive. Therefore, shorter etching times were used, and also a shorter fusion process (~10h).  


12 

 

 

Fig. 4. Characterization of 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs molecule. Fourier filtered HAADF-STEM images of the 

coupled CdSe/CdS molecules with homo-plane attachment of (0002)||(0002) (a) and hetero-plane 

attachment of (101̅0)||(101̅1) faces (b). (c) EDS line scan data and (d) STEM-EDS analysis. 

Photophysical characteristics of CQDs molecule 

    Further manifestations of coupling are observed in the fluorescence properties studied both in ensemble 

and as single particles, comparing monomers with unfused and fused dimers. For the 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs the 

fluorescence decays vary, with monomers showing a nearly single exponential lifetime of 25ns whereas 

fused dimers show nearly bi-exponential decay with a fast component of 5ns (Supplementary Table 3). 

Unfused dimers show an intermediate behavior. Molecules of the larger 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs exhibit 

significantly smaller changes in lifetimes upon fusion, supporting the role of coupling in the variations 

observed for the 1.4/2.1nm CQDs (Supplementary Fig.17). 


13 

 

 

Fig. 5. Coupling effects through fluorescence measurements for 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs molecules. (a) 

Ensemble photoluminescence lifetime decay for monomer (blue line), unfused dimer (green line) and 

fused dimer (red line). Time-tagged, time resolved data for single (b) CQD monomer and (c) fused dimer. 

Shown are, (from left to right) photoluminescence intensity time trace, second order photon correlation 

and lifetime for the single particle respectively (the green and dark grey lifetime curves were generated 

from data shaded in the same color in the corresponding time traces). The excitation fluence (<N>) for 

monomer and coupled dimer in the represented figures were 0.05 and 0.08, respectively. (d) Possible 

coupling mechanisms for shortening of lifetime in molecules. (e) Multicarrier configurations. (f) Pump 

fluence dependency of lifetime for an individual fused dimer. <N> values are 0.03 (brown trace), to 0.09 

(green trace) and 0.18 (blue trace). 

    More detailed information is garnered from single nanoparticle fluorescence measurements on the 

1.4/2.1 nm CQDs (‘Methods’ section for experimental details). The fluorescence from single monomers 

(Fig. 5b) exhibited a typical on-off bimodal distribution with a monoexponential fluorescence decay of the 

on-state 34, and strong photon antibunching 35. In comparison, individual fused dimers (Fig. 5c) under 

similar excitation conditions show more intense fluorescence consistent with their two-fold larger 

absorption cross section. However, flickering of the fluorescence with a distribution of intensities is 

observed rather than distinct on-off states, accompanied by a significantly lower antibunching contrast 


14 

 

(~0.75). The lifetime measurements indicate systematic shortening of the average single particle lifetimes 

from the monomers through the unfused to the fused dimers, in line with the ensemble measurements 

(Supplementary Fig.18 for representative traces and statistics of the lifetimes). Analyzing the lifetimes of 

the high intensity occurrences (green shaded regions in Fig. 5b,c), yields a significantly shortened average 

lifetime of 5ns for the single fused dimer compared with the monomer (29ns). It is noteworthy that within 

the fused dimers sample, we have detected ~15% of particles that have similar fluorescence characteristics 

as the CQD monomer sample, in line with their fraction from TEM analysis (Supplementary Fig.19-20). 

This establishes that the fusion procedure in its entirety did not change the core/shell CQDs.  

    We consider two possible mechanisms related to coupling, both leading to shortening the lifetime in 

dimers. First, resonance energy transfer between the two dots (Fig. 5d), a mechanism nearly equally active 

for unfused and fused dimers. Second, tunneling of the electron to the other dot (Fig. 5d) as already 

illustrated in Fig. 1. Tunneling in unfused dimers occurs by collisional electron transfer and is strongly 

dependent on the linker 36, while in the fused dimer the potential barrier for tunneling is modified and 

reduced substantially. Both mechanisms will be enhanced for the smaller CQD dimers, but tunneling is 

more strongly dependent on the size/distances. Indeed, the large CQD molecules, where tunneling 

probability is negligible according to our calculations (Fig. 1), show smaller changes in lifetimes with 

shortening in the case of dimers compared to monomers and little differences before and after fusion (Fig. 

5c, Supplementary Fig.17, 21) the notable lifetime shortening that is seen for the small CQD molecules 

upon fusion is indicative of the enhanced contribution of the tunneling mechanism in this case. 

    Next, we consider the photon statistics, which in CQDs are strongly influenced by multicarrier effects. 

An increment in the g2(0) value was found in the case of dimers in general with the possibilities of either 

two emission centers in the excitation spot or intrinsic properties of coupled systems. Specifically, in the 

fused dimers, the particles absorb the light as one unit, and at low excitation regime (<N>~0.1) the 

possibility of emission from one of the centers is rational statistically. The full understanding of the g2(0) 

value requires more rigorous experimental studies while an interesting multicarrier configuration can be 

realized in these fused CQD dimers. In dimer CQD molecules, a new type of biexcitons can occur, with 

each exciton occupying a different core (Fig. 5e). The large increase in the value of of [g2=

𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎(0𝑛𝑠)

𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎(200 𝑛𝑠) =

𝑄𝑌(𝐵𝑋)
𝑄𝑌(𝑋)   at low excitation power] observed for the dimers versus monomers can be explained by this new 

type of biexciton for which the non-radiative Auger decay will be strongly suppressed increasing the 

biexciton quantum yield (QY) (Supplementary Fig.22). Moreover, the single particle exciton QY will 

decrease for dimers on account of the tunneling of the electrons reducing the electron-hole overlap. 

    An additional difference relates to the fluorescence flickering in the dimers rather than distinct on-off 

fluorescence of the monomers (Fig. 5c, Supplementary Fig.23). This indicates presence of multitude 


15 

 

emitting configurations for dimers. Indeed, the lifetime traces for the high/low intensity regions in the 

dimer are not single exponential. The low intensity region is above background and not off and the 

lifetime has a ~5ns component. All this indicates to trion formation (positive or negative). In small CQD 

monomers, the trion states are strongly quenched by the Auger decay yielding an off state behavior. In 

dimers, which have large volume and the excess carrier may occupy the second dot region forming a new 

type of trion (Fig. 5e), the Auger rate is suppressed, and the trion can become emissive. Such an effect was 

reported for large CdSe/CdS core/shell manifesting gray state emission and is also observed by us for the 

large CQDs 37. The multitude possibilities for emissive trion formation can explain the larger distribution 

of observed fluorescence intensities and the lifetime behavior for the dimers. To further address this point, 

an excitation intensity dependence was performed varying the average exciton occupancy <N> from 0.03 

to 0.18 (Fig. 5f, Supplementary Fig.24). The lifetime decreases upon increasing the laser power, indicating 

the increasing contribution of trion formation consistent with this description 34,38. 

This study introduces a robust route to the realization of coupled colloidal quantum dot molecules with 

high purity. The construction strategy for the CQD molecules utilizes well-controlled CdSe/CdS core/shell 

nanocrystal artificial atom building blocks constructing homodimers fused via "constrained attachment" of 

the nanocrystal facets. The synthesized novel CQD dimer structures, emitting in the visible range, exhibit 

electronic coupling at room temperature signified by the red-shift and broadening of the band-edge 

transition observed both in absorption and in photoluminescence. This is attributed to the quantum 

coupling and hybridization of the monomer wavefunctions within the CQD molecules, as supported by 

quantum mechanical calculations. Broadening and modification of the absorption transitions at higher 

energies are also related to the coupling effects within the CQD dimer molecules. Furthermore, the 

photophysical properties of the CQD molecules at single nanoparticle level exhibit lifetime shortening, 

fluorescence flickering, and an increase in the g2 value for the photon antibunching compared to 

monomers. These characteristics indicate the introduction of additional recombination pathways and the 

rich possibilities for multiexciton configurations in the artificial CQD molecule compared with the 

monomers, also related to coupling within the system.  

Formation of coupled CQD homodimer molecules sets the stage for Nanocrystal Chemistry. 

Considering the rich selection of size and composition controlled CQDs emphasizes the analogy of these 

artificial atoms to atoms of the periodic table discovered by Mendeleev 150 years ago. As a future 

outcome, we foresee the formation of a diverse variety of coupled CQD molecules with prodigious 

promise for their utilization in numerous optoelectronic, sensing and quantum technologies applications. 

 


16 

 

Methods 

 Reagents 

Oleylamine (OAm, 70%), oleic acid (OA, 99%), 1-octadecene (ODE, 90%), cadmium oxide (CdO, ≥

99.99%), selenium (Se, 99.99%), trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO, 99%), 1-octanethiol (≥98.5%), 

pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercapto-propionate) (95%), ammonia aqueous (28.5%), tetrahydrofuran (THF, 

≥99.9%), N-methylformamide (NMF, 99%), toluene (99.8%), hydrofluoric acid (HF, 48%), 

polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP, 10k), ethanol (99%), tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS, 98%), hexane (95%) and 

(3-Mercaptopropyl) 
trimethoxysilane 
(MPTMS, 
95%) 
were 
obtained 
from 
Sigma 
Aldrich. 

Trioctylphosphine (TOP, 97%) was purchased from Strem Chemicals. Octadecylphosphonic acid 

(ODPA, >99% was purchased from PCI synthesis. All the reagents were used as received without further 

purification. 

 CdSe core growth 

 Briefly, 60 mg CdO, 280 mg ODPA and 3 g TOPO were added to a 50 mL flask. The mixture was heated 

to 150 °C and degassed under vacuum for 1 hour. Under argon flow, the reaction mixture was heated to 

320 °C to form a colourless clear solution. After adding 1.0 mL TOP to the solution, the temperature was 

brought up to 350 °C. At this point Se/TOP solution (60 mg Se in 0.5 mL TOP) was swiftly injected into 

the flask. The reaction was kept at 350 °C for suitable time and then stopped by removal of the heating 

mantle. The resulting CdSe particles were precipitated with acetone and redispersed in 3 mL hexane for 

use as a stock solution. 

CdSe/CdS core-shell colloidal quantum dots synthesis 

For the shell growth reaction, a hexane solution containing 200 nmol of CdSe colloidal quantum dots 

(CQDs) mixed with ODE (6 mL) and OAm (6 mL). The reaction solution was degassed under vacuum at 

room temperature for 30 min and at 90 °C for additional 30 min to completely remove the hexane, water 

and oxygen inside the reaction solution. Then the reaction solution was heated up to 310 °C under argon 

flow and magnetic stirring. During the heating, when the temperature reached 240 °C, a desired amount of 

cadmium (II) oleate (Cd-oleate, diluted in 6 mL ODE) and octanethiol (1.2 equivalent amounts to Cd-

oleate, diluted in 6 mL ODE) was injected dropwise into the growth solution at a rate of 3 mL/h using a 

syringe pump. Upon precursor infusion, 2 mL oleic acid was quickly injected and the solution was further 

annealed at 310 °C for 30 min. The resulting CdSe/CdS core/shell CQDs were precipitated by adding 


17 

 

ethanol, and then redispersed in hexane. The particles were further purified by additional two 

precipitation-redispersion cycles and finally suspended in ~2 ml hexane. 

Silica nanoparticles (NPs) synthesis  

120 µL MPTMS precursor was mixed with 30 mL ammonia aqueous solution (1%) under strong stirring. 

After stirring for 1 min, the solution was stored overnight. The SiO2 NPs were collected by centrifugation 

and dispersed in 10 mL of ethanol. Then the SiO2 solution was mixed with PVP solvent (0.02 g/mL) for 

30min. Finally, the nanoparticles were stored after the cleaning by centrifugation. 

The synthesis of CdSe/CdS@SiO2  

1mL of SiO2 NPs (0.0079 g/mL) was mixed with 0.5 nmol CdSe/CdS NPs using vortex for 5 min. Then 5 

mL of ethanol was added into the vails to precipitate and remove the unattached NPs. After three washing 

cycles the final SiO2@CdSe/CdS NPs were redispersed in 5 mL of ethanol. 

The synthesis of SiO2@CdSe/CdS@SiO2 

The CdSe/CdS@SiO2 was dispersed in 5 mL of ethanol. Then 330 μL of ammonia solvent (28.5% wt %) 

was added into the solution with stirring for 5 min. Thereafter, 50 μL of TEOS was added dropwise into 

the solution. After stirring for 10 h, the resulting solvent was centrifuged (6000 rpm, 5 min) and 

redispersed in 5 mL of THF.  

The synthesis of Dimer-CdSe/CdS@SiO2  

A tetrathiol linker ,pentaerythritol-tetrakis (3-mercapto-propionate), (200 μL) was added to the 

CdSe/CdS@SiO2 solution. Then 0.6 nmol of CdSe/CdS CQDs were added and the solution was stirred in 

an oil bath at 60 °C overnight. Samples were cleaned by centrifugation (6000 rpm,5 min) and redispersed 

with 10 mL of THF for storage. 

The release of Dimer-CdSe/CdS 

1 mL of Dimer-CdSe/CdS@SiO2 CQDs was centrifuged (5000 rpm, 5 min), and later mixed with 2 mL of 

mixed HF/NMF solvent (10%) under stirring for 10 h. Upon etching, the color of the samples changed to 

light yellow, which indicates on the removal of the SiO2. Thereafter, the samples were precipitated by 

centrifugation (6000 rpm, 10 min) and washed twice. Finally, the samples were redispersed in 2 mL of 

ethanol. 


18 

 

The synthesis of fused Dimer-CdSe/CdS CQDs  

Dimer-CdSe/CdS CQDs (in 2 mL of ethanol) were mixed with 2mL of ODE, 100 μL of Cd-oleate (0.2 

M), and 50 μL of OAm. The reaction solution was degassed under vacuum at room temperature for 30 

min and again at 90 °C for additional 30 min. Later, the reaction mixture was heated to 180 °C for 20 h 

under argon flow. The resulting fused particles were precipitated with ethanol and redispersed in 2 mL 

toluene for use as a stock solution. 

Optical and structural characterization 

Absorption spectra were measured using a Jasco V-570 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. Fluorescence 

spectra and ensemble lifetimes were measured with fluorescence spectrophotometer (Edinburgh 

instruments, FL920). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a Tecnai G2 Spirit 

Twin T12 microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 120 kV. High resolution TEM (HRTEM) 

measurements were done using Tecnai F20 G2 microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an accelerating 

voltage of 200 kV. High resolution scanning-transmission electron microscopy (STEM) imaging and 

elemental mapping was done with Themis Z aberration corrected STEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) 

operated at 300 kV and equipped with high angular annular dark field detector (HAADF) for STEM and 

Super-X energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector for high collection efficiency elemental 

analysis. CQDs atomic structure model were built by the VESTA software. Scanning electron microscopy 

imaging (SEM) was done with HR SEM Sirion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 5 kV. 

 Single particle optical measurements 

Single particle measurements were performed with an inverted microscope (Nikon Eclipse-Ti) in epi-

luminescence configuration. Dilute solution of quantum dots in 2wt% poly(methyl-methacrylate) were 

spin coated on glass coverslips (no.1, precleaned and thermally annealed) leading to minimum separation 

of 4-5μm between the dots as confirmed by wide field fluorescence microscopy. The excitation light from 

a pulsed diode laser (EPL375; Edinburgh Instruments) at a repetition rate of 5MHz was focused onto 

single particles through an oil immersion objective (100X; 1.4 NA) which was also used for collecting the 

emission. The emission light was passed through a dichroic mirror (T387lp) and additional longpass filter 

(580LP) before focusing onto two Avalanche Photodiodes (Perkin-Elmer; SPCM-AQRH-14) in a 

Hanbury-Brown-Twiss geometry. Photon statistics of the signal from the detector were performed using 

multichannel Time Tagger 20 (Swabian Instruments). Time traces, fluorescence lifetime and second order 

photon correlation were extracted from the time-tagged time-resolved data by using home written 

MATLAB code. 


19 

 

 

Data availability 

The authors declare that all the important data to support the findings in this paper are available within the 

main text or in the supplementary information. Extra data are available from the corresponding author 

upon reasonable request.  

References 

1. 
Kagan, C. R., Lifshitz, E., Sargent, E. H. & Talapin, D. V. Building devices from colloidal 

quantum dots. Science. 353, 885 (2016). 

2. 
Alivisatos, A. P. Semiconductor Clusters, Nanocrystals, and Quantum Dots. Science. 271, 933–937 

(1996). 

3. 
Banin, U., Cao, Y., Katz, D. & Millo, O. Identification of atomic-like electronic states in indium 

arsenide nanocrystal quantum dots. Nature 400, 542–544 (1999). 

4. 
Schedelbeck, G., Wegscheider, W., Bichler, M. & Abstreiter, G. Coupled quantum dots fabricated 

by cleaved edge overgrowth: From artificial atoms to molecules. Science. 278, 1792–1795 (1997). 

5. 
Bayer, M. et al. Coupling and entangling of quantum states in quantum dot molecules. Science. 

291, 451–453 (2001). 

6. 
Stinaff, E. A. et al. Optical signatures of coupled quantum dots. Science. 311, 636–639 (2006). 

7. 
Kim, D., Carter, S. G., Greilich, A., Bracker, A. S. & Gammon, D. Ultrafast optical control of 

entanglement between two quantum-dot spins. Nat. Phys. 7, 223–229 (2011). 

8. 
Loss, D. & DiVincenzo, D. P. Quantum computation with quantum dots. Phys. Rev. A 57, 120–126 

(1998). 

9. 
Rodary, G. et al. Real Space Observation of Electronic Coupling between Self-Assembled 

Quantum Dots. Nano Lett. 19, 3699–3706 (2019). 

10. 
Alivisatos, A. P. et al. Organization of ‘nanocrystal molecules’ using DNA. Nature 382, 609–611 

(1996). 

11. 
Battaglia, D., Blackman, B. & Peng, X. G. Coupled and decoupled dual quantum systems in one 


20 

 

semiconductor nanocrystal. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 10889–10897 (2005). 

12. 
Deutsch, Z., Neeman, L. & Oron, D. Luminescence upconversion in colloidal double quantum 

dots. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 649–653 (2013). 

13. 
Oh, N. et al. Double-heterojunction nanorod light-responsive LEDs for display applications. 

Science. 355, 616–619 (2017). 

14. 
Lv, B. et al. Photon antibunching in a cluster of giant CdSe/CdS nanocrystals. Nat. Commun. 9, 

1536 (2018). 

15. 
Li, B. et al. Pressure compression of CdSe nanoparticles into luminescent nanowires. Sci. Adv. 3, 

1–7 (2017). 

16. 
Graff, B. M., Bloom, B. P., Wierzbinski, E. & Waldeck, D. H. Electron Transfer in Nanoparticle 

Dyads Assembled on a Colloidal Template. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 138, 13260–13270 (2016). 

17. 
Xu, X. et al. Assembly and Separation of Semiconductor Quantum Dot Dimers and Trimers. J. 

Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 18062–18065 (2011). 

18. 
Murray, C. B., Norris, D. J. & Bawendi, M. G. Synthesis and characterization of nearly 

monodisperse CdE (E = sulfur, selenium, tellurium) semiconductor nanocrystallites. J. Am. Chem. 

Soc. 115, 8706–8715 (1993). 

19. 
Chen, O. et al. Compact high-quality CdSe-CdS core-shell nanocrystals with narrow emission 

linewidths and suppressed blinking. Nat. Mater. 12, 445–451 (2013). 

20. 
Hu, Y. & Sun, Y. A Generic Approach for the Synthesis of Dimer Nanoclusters and Asymmetric 

Nanoassemblies. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 2213–2221 (2013). 

21. 
Bae, W. K. et al. Controlled Alloying of the Core-Shell Interface in CdSe/CdS Quantum Dots for 

Suppression of Auger Recombination. ACS Nano 7, 3411–3419 (2013). 

22. 
Chen, O. et al. Surface-Functionalization-Dependent Optical Properties of II-VI Semiconductor 

Nanocrystals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 17504–17512 (2011). 

23. 
Smith, A. M., Mohs, A. M. & Nie, S. Tuning the optical and electronic properties of colloidal 

nanocrystals by lattice strain. Nat. Nanotechnol. 4, 56–63 (2009). 

24. 
Penn, R. L. & Banfield, J. F. Imperfect oriented attachment: Dislocation generation in defect-free 


21 

 

nanocrystals. Science. 281, 969–971 (1998). 

25. 
Tang, Z. Y., Kotov, N. A. & Giersig, M. Spontaneous organization of single CdTe nanoparticles 

into luminescent nanowires. Science. 297, 237–240 (2002). 

26. 
Cho, K. S., Talapin, D. V, Gaschler, W. & Murray, C. B. Designing PbSe nanowires and nanorings 

through oriented attachment of nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 127, 7140–7147 (2005). 

27. 
Schliehe, C. et al. Ultrathin PbS Sheets by Two-Dimensional Oriented Attachment. Science. 329, 

550–553 (2010). 

28. 
Hughes, B. K. et al. Synthesis and Spectroscopy of PbSe Fused Quantum-Dot Dimers. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 136, 4670–4679 (2014). 

29. 
Boneschanscher, M. P. et al. Long-range orientation and atomic attachment of nanocrystals in 2D 

honeycomb superlattices. Science. 344, 1377–1380 (2014). 

30. 
Ondry, J. C., Hauwiller, M. R. & Alivisatos, A. P. Dynamics and Removal Pathway of Edge 

Dislocations in Imperfectly Attached PbTe Nanocrystal Pairs: Toward Design Rules for Oriented 

Attachment. ACS Nano 12, 3178–3189 (2018). 

31. 
Bertoni, G. et al. Direct Determination of Polarity, Faceting, and Core Location in Colloidal 

Core/Shell Wurtzite Semiconductor Nanocrystals. ACS Nano 6, 6453–6461 (2012). 

32. 
Ithurria, S. & Talapin, D. V. Colloidal Atomic Layer Deposition (c-ALD) using Self-Limiting 

Reactions at Nanocrystal Surface Coupled to Phase Transfer between Polar and Nonpolar Media. 

J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 18585–18590 (2012). 

33. 
Manna, L., Scher, E. C. & Alivisatos, A. P. Synthesis of soluble and processable rod-, arrow-, 

teardrop-, and tetrapod-shaped CdSe nanocrystals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 12700–12706 (2000). 

34. 
Galland, C. et al. Two types of luminescence blinking revealed by spectroelectrochemistry of 

single quantum dots. Nature 479, 203–207 (2011). 

35. 
Nair, G., Zhao, J. & Bawendi, M. G. Biexciton Quantum Yield of Single Semiconductor 

Nanocrystals from Photon Statistics. Nano Lett. 11, 1136–1140 (2011). 

36. 
Koole, R., Liljeroth, P., Donega, C. de M., Vanmaekelbergh, D. & Meijerink, A. Electronic 

coupling and exciton energy transfer in CdTe quantum-dot molecules. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128, 

10436–10441 (2006). 


22 

 

37. 
Park, Y.-S., Bae, W. K., Pietryga, J. M. & Klimov, V. I. Auger Recombination of Biexcitons and 

Negative and Positive Trions in Individual Quantum Dots. ACS Nano 8, 7288–7296 (2014). 

38. 
Galland, C. et al. Lifetime blinking in nonblinking nanocrystal quantum dots. Nat. Commun. 3, 908 

(2012). 

Acknowledgments  

The research leading to these results has received financial support from the European Research Council 

(ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement 

No [741767]). J.B.C and S.K acknowledge the support from the Planning and Budgeting Committee of the 

higher board of education in Israel through a fellowship. U.B. thanks the Alfred & Erica Larisch memorial 

chair. Y.E.P. acknowledges support by the Ministry of Science and Technology & the National 

Foundation for Applied and Engineering Sciences, Israel.  

Author information 

Affiliations 

Institute of Chemistry, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.  

The Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, 

Israel.  

Author contributions  

U.B, oversaw and managed the research. J.B.C, Y.E.P, S.K, M.O and U.B. designed the experiments. 

J.B.C. performed the synthesis and materials characterization. S.K and Y.E.P carried out single molecules 

experiments. Y.E.P. and D.S performed the calculation. S.R. and I.P. assisted with HR-STEM 

measurements and structural analysis. J.B.C, S.K, Y.E.P, N.W, and U.B. wrote the manuscript with help 

from the other authors.  

Competing Interest  

The authors declare no competing interests. 

Corresponding author 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to U.B. (uri.banin@mail.huji.ac.il) 


23 

 

Additional information  

Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints. Readers are welcome to 

comment on the online version of this article at www.nature.com/nature.  

Supplementary information  

Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at www.nature.com/nature. 

Rights and permissions 

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images or other 

third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated 

otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need 

to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit 

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 

 


1 

 

Supplementary Information for 

 

Colloidal Quantum Dot Molecules Manifesting 

Quantum Coupling at Room Temperature 

 

Jiabin Cui†, Yossef E. Panfil†, Somnath Koley†, Doaa Shamalia, Nir Waiskopf, Sergei Remennik,  

Inna Popov, Meirav Oded & Uri Banin* 

 

† These authors contributed equally to this work.  

* Corresponding author. Email: uri.banin@mail.huji.ac.il (U.B.). 

 

 

Contents: 

 

Supplementary Discussion 

Supplementary Figure 1 to 24 

Supplementary Tables 1 to 3 

Supplementary References  

 
 


2 

 

Supplementary Discussion 

    Electronic structure calculation methodology: We have calculated the energy levels and the 

electron and hole wave-functions of the CdSe/CdS monomer and dimers using the multiphysics mode 

of COMSOL.1,2 Electron and hole states are calculated with a 3D single-band effective mass 

Hamiltonian. Interacting electron and hole states are obtained by iterative solution of the Schrödinger-

Poisson equations, within a self-consistent Hartree procedure, taking into account the dielectric 

mismatch between the surroundings and the CQD. The dimensions we used in the calculation are 

based on experimental data. Material-dependent parameters such as effective masses  𝑚𝑒,ℎ

∗ (𝑟) 

dielectric constants 𝜀(𝑟), and conduction and valence band profiles ( 𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡

𝑒,ℎ
) used in this 

calculation are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. The entire computational space extends further 

from the QD boundary allowing for electron and hole wavefunctions to extend outside of the QD 

boundaries and decay into free space. 

    We start the simulation by computing the non-interacting electron and hole states by solving the 

Schrödinger equation: 

(−

ℏ2

2 ∇ (

1

𝑚𝑒,ℎ

∗
(𝑟) ∇) + 𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡

𝑒,ℎ
(𝑟))Ψ𝑒,ℎ

𝑛
= 𝐸𝑒,ℎ

𝑛 Ψ𝑒,ℎ

𝑛 (𝑟)       (1) 

    We use von Neumann boundary-condition at the inner (between core-shell) and outer boundaries of 

the QD in order to impose the Ben-Daniel-Duke condition. At the edge of the computational domain 

(around 100 nm away from the QD) we set the Dirichlet boundary-condition by setting the 

wavefunction to zero. After normalization of the wavefunctions, the Poisson equation is solved to 

derive the hole or electron Coulombic potential generated from the other particle 𝜙𝑒,ℎ(𝑟). 

∇(𝜀0 ∙ 𝜀(𝑟)∇𝜙𝑒,ℎ(𝑟)) = 𝑞𝑒 < Ψ𝑒,ℎ(𝑟)|Ψ𝑒,ℎ(𝑟) >     (2) 

    With these potentials, Schrödinger equations are solved again for the electron and the hole with all 

of the contributions to the potentials: 

(−

ℏ2

2 ∇ (

1

𝑚𝑒∗(𝑟) ∇) + 𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡

𝑒
(𝑟) + 𝑞𝑒 ∙ 𝜙ℎ(𝑟)) Ψ𝑒

𝑛(𝑟) = 𝐸𝑒𝑛Ψ𝑒

𝑛(𝑟)      (3) 

(−

ℏ2

2 ∇ (

1

𝑚ℎ

∗ (𝑟) ∇) + 𝑉𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡

ℎ
(𝑟) + 𝑞𝑒 ∙ 𝜙𝑒(𝑟)) Ψℎ

𝑛(𝑟) = 𝐸ℎ

𝑛Ψℎ

𝑛(𝑟)      (4) 

    This process is repeated iteratively until the electron and hole energies converge. In most cases, 

three iterations are sufficient to obtain a convergence. The emission energy was calculated by: 

𝐸𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 𝐸𝑔 + 𝐸𝑒𝑖 + 𝐸ℎ

𝑖 − 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑜𝑚𝑏      (5) 


3 

 

𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑜𝑚𝑏 =

𝐸𝑒𝑖−𝐸𝑒

𝑓+𝐸ℎ

𝑖 −𝐸ℎ

𝑓

2
      (6) 

    Where 𝐸𝑔 (1.76 eV) 3 is the energy gap of CdSe. 𝐸𝑒𝑚𝑖𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 is calculated in a way which avoids the 

consideration of the coulomb potential twice (both for the electron and both for the hole). 

Supplementary Table 1. Material parameters used in the simulations. 

CdSe
CdS
Environment
Units
Ref.

𝑽𝒄𝒐𝒏𝒇𝒊𝒏𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕

𝒆
0
0.1
5.1
[eV]
(3)

𝑽𝒄𝒐𝒏𝒇𝒊𝒏𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕

𝒉
0
-0.64
-5.64
[eV]
(3)

𝒎𝒆∗
0.112
0.21
1
𝑚0
(4)

𝒎𝒉⊥

∗
0.48
0.376
1

1

𝑚0

𝑚0

(4)

(4)
𝒎𝒉∥

∗
1.19
0.746

𝜺⊥
9.29
8.28
1

1

-

-

(4)

(4)
𝜺∥
10.16
8.73

     

Consideration of Biexciton quantum yield (QY) to exciton QY ratio in fused dimers: To consider the 

obtained g2(0) value as the biexciton quantum yield, we kept the excitation power significantly low so 

that the average number of excitons produced per pulse (<N>) always remained below 0.2 5. 

    The average number of excitons produced per pulse is given by the formula < N >=

𝜎𝐽

𝐸𝑃ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑜𝑛.𝐴 

where σ is the absorption cross section of the particle at the excitation wavelength (375 nm in our 

case), J and EPhoton are the pulse energy and photon energy of the excitation light, respectively, and A 

is the spot area. The absorption cross-section was calculated according to the procedure reported 

elsewhere. 6 The value of the absorption cross-section for the 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs and the corresponding 

fused dimer at 375nm was found to be 2.3×10-15 cm2 and 5.7×10-15 cm2, respectively. 

    Excitation power dependence study on single fused dimer: The flickering nature of the fluorescence 

in single fused dimers associated with a tri-exponential lifetime decay (comprising of ~2 ns, ~5 ns and 

~25 ns components) was observed for the 1.4/2.1 Coupled CQDs. The fluorescence flickering nature 

was present upon changing the laser power and observed even at the lowest measurable excitation. 

The intensity traces followed a single distribution of intensities (much narrower than the high 

excitation) without reaching an off state (Supplementary Figure 24). Upon excitation of the particle by 

a short pulse laser, a charge state of the exciton can be created along with the neutral exciton which 

can contribute to the appearance of short decay components 7, 8. 

    For the 1.4/2.1 nm monomer CQDs the contribution of the short fluorescence decay component was 

found to be negligible at similar excitation condition, whereas the decay for dimers comprised of these 


4 

 

CQDs was dominated by the short components. With decrease in the excitation intensity, we observed 

an enhancement in the contribution of the ~25 ns component on account of the ~2 ns and ~5 ns 

components (Fig. 5f in the main manuscript). This clearly indicates on the enhanced photo-charging 

effect in case of fused dimers. Associated with the flickering of the intensity, we observed a lifetime 

distribution through the intensity traces (lower intensity traces have shorter lifetime as shown in figure 

5c). Upon the decrease in photo-charging not only the average lifetime increases (from 4.5 ns at 

<N>~0.18 to 7.2 ns at <N>~0.03), but also the lifetime distribution (commonly referred as lifetime 

flickering) narrows down. 

 
 


5 

 

Formation of coupled CQDs molecule dimers 

We utilized silica nanoparticles as a template 9 for the fabrication of coupled CQD molecules. The 

detailed route-line is depicted in Supplementary Figure 1. This was performed by the following steps:  

1. Fabrication of SiO2 nanoparticles, coated by MPTMS. This kind of SiO2 particle presents thiol 

groups on its outer surface, which are later used for the binding of the CQDs.  

2. Core/shell CQDs binding to the SiO2 particle surface: mixing a solution of the chosen core/shell 

CQDs with the SiO2 nanoparticles allows their binding to the available thiol sites on the silica 

surface. 

3. Growth of a secondary thin layer of SiO2 on the QDs@ SiO2 for masking: In this manner the 

CQDs are immobilized and cannot rotate or reorient while only a top hemisphere is remained 

exposed for further chemical functionalization of the CQDs.  

4. Selective surface decoration of the CQDs by linker groups: Chemical grafting of a functional 

structure based on thiol group as linkers is then applied which selectively reacts only with the 

exposed NC hemisphere. Here, a tetrathiol ligand was added as a linker by a ligand exchange 

reaction on the exposed CQDs surface (for example oleyamine).  

5. Forming the dimer geometry on the silica surface: Addition of a solution with the second CQDs 

allows their conjugation, yielding a controlled formation of a dimer structure through the binding 

linker. 

6. Dimer release: The dimers are released from the silica surface and separated. Here, this can be 

achieved by selective SiO2 etching using an HF/NMF solution. 

7. Fusion to form the coupled CQD molecule: The dimers are fused by addition of a suitable 

precursor and heated to form a continuous link between the two shell regions of the pre-made 

dimers. 

Additional optional purification (size selective separation) of the dimers from free monomer and 

higher linked oligomers is possible in between steps 6 and 7, or after the fusion step. 


6 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 1. Scheme of the coupled CQDs molecule fabrication steps. Step 1: SiO2 

nanoparticles synthesis. Step 2: core/shell CQDs binding to the SiO2 particle surface. Step 3: masking 

by a secondary thin layer of SiO2 growth on the QDs@SiO2. Step 4: selective surface decoration of the 

CQDs by linker groups. Step 5: dimer geometry formation on the silica surface. Step 6: dimer release. 

Step 7: fusion to form coupled CQD molecules. 

  

 
 


7 

 

CdSe@CdS Core/Shell NCs synthesis and characterization: 

Supplementary Figure 2 shows electron microscopy images and the absorption and emission spectra 

for the different nanocrystal building blocks which were used in this work. For example, 

Supplementary Figure 2a-c, show CdSe cores (1.9 nm, radius) which were synthesized by the hot-

injection method. The absorption (first exciton peak at 581 nm) and photoluminescence (PL) spectra 

(peak at 597 nm) were measured after purification. The CdSe@CdS CQDs (1.9/4.0 nm) were 

fabricated by CdS shell growth using the injection of Cd-oleate and octanethiol precursors. The PL 

spectrum (637 nm) after shell growth, shows a red-shift compared with the cores emission. This, along 

with the enhancement of the fluorescence quantum yield indicates the successful fabrication of quasi-

type II QDs.  

 

Supplementary Figure 2. Quantum dots characterization. TEM micrographs, absorption and 

photoluminescence spectra of different sizes of CdSe/CdS core-shell CQDs: (a-c) 1.9/4.0 nm, (d-f) 

1.4/2.1 nm, and (g-i) 1.2/2.1 nm. 
 


8 

 

Structural characterization 

The core/shell structure of the monomer is directly identified by atomic resolution STEM-HAADF 

imaging followed by fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis (Supplementary Figure 3). Supplementary 

Figure 3a, b shows raw and Fourier filtered images of CQD monomers, respectively, viewed under 

[1̅21̅0] zone axes (ZA) of their wurtzite structure. At this orientation major low index atomic planes 

(0002), (101̅0), (101̅1) are clearly observed thus providing identification of boundary faces of a 

monomer crystal (labeled on inset in (a)). Atomic structure of CQDs at [0001] ZA with clearly visible 

perfect hexagonal motifs is depicted in Supplementary Figure 3g-h. The hexagonal close-packed (hcp) 

wurtzite structure of CQDs was further evidenced by the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) and 

X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) measurement (Supplementary Figure 3k-l). 

 

 


9 

 

Supplementary Figure 3. Structural characterization of the coupled CQDs. Raw (a) and Fourier 

filtered (b) HAADF-STEM images of 1.9/4.0 nm CdSe/CdS CQD monomer viewed under [1̅21̅0] 

zone axis (ZA). Inset in (a) is a cartoon model built with VESTA software 10 with bounding faces 

indexed based on the STEM data. Magnified images of edge (shell) (c) and central (core) parts (d) of 

the CQD shown in (b). Sulfur, Selenium and Cadmium atoms are marked in blue, green and purple, 

respectively. Coherent growth of the shell lattice is identified. (e) and (f) are FFT and atomic structure 

model of (a), respectively. HAADF-STEM image of CdSe/CdS CQD under ZA [0001] (g) and atomic 

structure reconstruction imaging calculated for the same orientation (h). (i) High resolution HAADF-

STEM image and atomic structure model (j) of CdSe/CdS CQD viewed under ZA [1̅21̅0]. The core 

regions are marked with pink circles in (g) and (i). FFT patterns are inserted in (g), and (i). SAED (k) 

and XRD pattern acquired at large ensembles of CdSe/CdS CQDs (blue curve – experimental XRD 

data, red bars - theoretical positions for diffraction peaks of hcp) CdS (JCPDF 04-001-6853), black 

curve - integrated intensity of SAED (k)).  

 
 


10 

 

Step I - Silica nanoparticles characterization 

The SiO2 nanoparticles (step 1) were prepared as described in the methods section11 and characterized 

by TEM (Supplementary Figure 4). These nanoparticles are inherently covered by thiol linkers from 

the MPTMS precursor allowing QDs binding at the next step. During the washing step, small amount 

of diluted base was utilized to avoid cascade and aggregation and to ensure a uniform binding on each 

SiO2 sphere surface in the next step. 

 

Supplementary Figure 4. TEM images of SiO2 nanoparticles prepared by MPTMS precursor 

acquired at different magnifications.  

 
 


11 

 

Step II - Characterization of the Silica-QDs conjugates 

The SiO2@QDs particles were prepared in step 2 by adding the CdSe/CdS CQDs to the SiO2 

nanoparticles solution. The resulting particles were characterized by TEM and SEM as shown in 

Supplementary Figure 5. In order to avoid the CQDs overlap and aggregation on the SiO2 surface, the 

ratio of CQDs added to the SiO2 nanoparticles was controlled. In the sample below, a 1:500 SiO2:QD 

ratio yielded well-separated and clearly resolved surface distribution of CQDs. The CdSe/CdS@SiO2 

nanoparticles solution was cleaned twice from free and weakly bound CQDs by centrifugation, 

discarding the supernatant and re-dispersion in toluene. 

 

Supplementary Figure 5. CdSe/CdS@SiO2 characterized with electron microscopy. TEM and 

SEM images acquired at different magnification of the CdSe/CdS@SiO2 NPs produced with different 

loading ratios of (a-d) 1:2000, (e-h) 1:1000, and (i-l) 1:500. Scale bars are 100 nm. 

 
 


12 

 

Step III – formation of a silica masking layer 

The secondary masking silica layer provides two functions: firstly, coverage of the inherent surface 

thiol groups of MPTMS in order to avoid the adsorption of additional CdSe-CdS CQDs in the 

dimerization of step 5.11 This enhances the efficiency of the dimer formation versus monomers binding. 

Secondly, this immobilizes the CdSe-CdS CQDs such that they cannot rotate, exposing a hemisphere 

which emerges in the solvent and can be modified selectively by the chemical grafting of a functional 

structure/group. 

    In order to control the thickness of the secondary SiO2 masking layer, an optimized mixture of PVP 

and TEOS was necessary. If the PVP amount is too low, it usually results in inefficient masking. 

Conversely, if it is too high it could lead to a full QDs masking by the SiO2 layer, which prevents the 

dimer formation in the next step. Additionally, the optimization of the TEOS amount was performed 

as described below. According to the calculation, 50 L of TEOS leads to a hemisphere mask. Three 

different amounts of TEOS were tested in our system, 200 L (Supplementary Figure 6a-d), 100 L 

(Supplementary Figure 6e-h), and 50 L (Supplementary Figure 6i-l), respectively. For the highest 

TEOS loading, the CQDs were fully embedded inside the SiO2 layer, as is clearly demonstrated in 

Supplementary Figure 6a-d, which is obviously useless for the next binding procedure. Instead, 50 L 

of TEOS were utilized for the secondary essential minimal-limitation masking as well as providing the 

immobilization to ensure the dimer formation yield (Supplementary Figure 6i-l). After the growth of 

the secondary SiO2 layer, the surface roughness of the CdSe-CdS@SiO2 nanoparticles increases 

significantly, while the emergent CQDs can still be discerned. The TEM and SEM characterization of 

the resulting nanoparticles are presented in Supplementary Figure 6. 


13 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 6. TEM and SEM images acquired at different magnification of the 

SiO2@CdSe/CdS@SiO2 NPs produced with different amount of TEOS for masking (a-d) 200, (e-h) 

100, and (i-l) 50 L. Scale bars are 100 nm. 


14 

 

Step IV – linker binding 

For the dimer formation step, the chosen linkers bind to the exposed region of the anchored CQDs 

(step 4). A Tetra-thiol molecule was used as a bi-dentate linker molecule (Supplementary Figure 7). 

The thiol groups strongly bind to the CQD surface and can displace the existing surface ligands of the 

exposed CQD hemisphere. In order to enhance the conjugation of the linkers, the surface modification 

procedure was performed under Argon flow, at 60 °C overnight. The excess linker molecules were 

removed by precipitation and centrifugation. Here, the cleaning step after the linker addition was 

significant for achieving high dimer formation yield. 

 

Supplementary Figure 7. Chemical structure of the linker (pentaerythritol tetrakis(3-mercapto-

propionate)). 

 
 


15 

 

Step V – Dimer formation 

For the preparation of homodimers a CQDs, a ratio of 1:1.2 to the original amount used in step 2 was 

employed. The resulted structures are presented in Supplementary Figure 8. 

 

Supplementary Figure 8. TEM images of SiO2@dimer CdSe/CdS particles acquired at different 

magnifications. Scale bars are 20 nm. Representative dimer structures are marked by white frames. 

Step VI – Dimers release 

Precisely controlled dimer CdSe-CdS CQD molecules were successfully achieved as follows. The 

release and separation of the CdSe-CdS CQDs dimers from the SiO2 spheres was performed by 

selective etching process of the SiO2 using an HF/NMF (10%) etching solution. The free dimers are 

shown in Fig. 1c. The freed dimers were separated by centrifugation decanting the supernatant and 

repeated ethanol precipitation/centrifugation cycles for three times.  

Step VII – Fusion to form the coupled NC molecule 

The fusion procedure plays a significant role in reduction of the potential barrier in the coupled CQDs 

molecules. The choice of correct temperature, precursor amount and ligands lead to the fusion of two 

CQDs without ripening and collapse.  

 
 


16 

 

Size selective separation process for 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs dimers 

The fused dimer molecules as prepared by the procedure explained in the previous section contain 

some unreacted monomer CQDs which have been purified to achieve high yield of CQD molecule for 

further studies. Supplementary Figure 9 shows the released fused dimers, which were separated by 

centrifugation decanting the supernatant and repeated 
redispersion (ethanol)/precipitation 

(centrifugation) cycles for three times. Monomers were found mainly in the suspension, as shown in 

Supplementary Figure 9b. As seen in Supplementary Figure 9c, the monomers, along with possible 

higher order aggregates of CQDs can be well separated after this step, resulting in a purified solution 

of dimer structures.  

 

Supplementary Figure 9. TEM images of fused 1.9/4.0 nm CdSe/CdS molecules before size selective 

separation process (a). The suspension (b) and the precipitate (c) of fused CdSe/CdS molecules after 

the size selective separation process. Inset, HRTEM image of fused CdSe/CdS molecules.  

 
 


17 

 

Size selective separation process for 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs dimers 

The size selection separation for other nanocrystal sizes is similar but may require slight modifications. 

For example, for 1.4/2.1 nm CdSe/CdS CQD molecules low centrifugation rate was used for efficient 

separation. The resulting dimers are presented in Supplementary Figure 10. 

    After the separation step, the sample was stored under argon atmosphere and kept in the glovebox 

for further characterization and single nanoparticle measurement. 

 

Supplementary Figure 10. TEM images of fused 1.4/2.1 nm CdSe/CdS molecules (a) before size 

selective separation process. The suspension (b) and the precipitate (c) of fused CdSe/CdS molecules 

after the size selective separation progress. Inset, HRTEM image of fused CdSe/CdS CQD molecule. 

 
 


18 

 

Absorption spectrum measurement for 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs 

The features in the absorption spectrum change significantly after the fusion of two CQDs. To 

further demonstrate the changes, we have normalized the data at the bulk absorption regime 

(300nm). It can be observed that the band-edge absorption feature of the unfused dimer is retained 

and similar to the monomers. Upon fusion broadening is seen, along with a red shift and lower 

absorption. The excited state features are also broadened significantly upon fusion. Upon 

normalization at the band-edge, the significant relative change in absorption at higher energies upon 

fusion is emphasized (Supplementary Figure 11a). All these aspects indicate coupling effects upon 

fusion and formation of the CQD molecules. 

 

Supplementary Figure 11. The normalized absorption spectra of monomers (blue), unfused (green), 

and fused 1.4/2.1 nm CdSe/CdS CQD molecules when normalized with respect to (a) band-edge 

peak and (b) bulk transitions (300 nm). 

 
 


19 

 

Control experiment: monomer particles that were treated with the fusion procedure 

The CQDs are exposed to different conditions during the synthetic procedure such as binding, etching, 

fusion etc. An important control is to identify whether the inherent properties of the CQDs change 

during these processes, especially during etching and fusion. Hence, we studied the absorption and 

photoluminescence spectra (Supplementary Figure 12) of monomers that although did not form a 

dimer, were still treated with the complete synthetic procedures of the fusion protocol. These 

monomers were separated by size selective precipitation (Supplementary Figure 10 b) and measured 

accordingly. The identical spectral features for the monomers, that underwent the fusion procedure, 

and the original ones unequivocally confirms no change in the excitonic behavior of the CQDs. This 

rules out the possibilities of any shift due to alloying between core/shell regions. 

 

Supplementary Figure 12. The ensemble absorption and PL spectra of monomer before (black), and 

after the fusion procedure (red) for CdSe-CdS CQDs with core/shell size of 1.2/2.1 nm. 

 

 
 


20 

 

Spectral characterization of the various fused CQDs dimers 

The red shift of the fluorescence was enhanced with a size decrease in the CdSe-CdS CQDs 

composing the fused dimers. That is, the smaller core-shell CQDs molecules present strong coupling 

properties. Additionally, upon fusion, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) measured from the 

fluorescence spectrum was obviously increased compared with that of the monomer sample. 

 

Supplementary Figure 13. The PL intensity of monomer (black), and fused (red) CdSe-CdS CQDs 

molecules with core/shell size of 1.9/4.0 nm (a), and 1.2/2.1 nm (b), respectively. 

 


21 

 

Structural characterization of the fused 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs dimers 

Supplementary Figure 12 shows HAADF-STEM images and atomic structure models of the fused 

1.9/4.0 nm CdSe/CdS CQD molecules with hetero-plane orientation relationship at attachment. The 

analysis allowed to determine the (0002) faces (and thus C-axis orientation) for each CQD in a pair as 

indicated on the images and structure models in Supplementary Figure 14. It is clearly seen that the C-

axes of the monomers in a heteronymous-plane fused dimer are randomly oriented unlike the distinct 

parallel alignment observed at homonymous-plane attachment (see main text). 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 14. HAADF-STEM images and atomic structure models of the fused 1.9/4.0 

nm CdSe/CdS molecules with hetero-plane attachment of (101̅0)||(101̅1) (a-b), (0002)||(101̅1) (c-d). 

For the atomic model, the Cadmium atoms are marked in brown and Sulfur atoms in blue.  

 
 


22 

 

Structural characterization of the fused 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs dimers 

In our system, the attachment and fusion of the monomer CdSe/CdS CQDs was based on the linker’s 

binding. Therefore, the attachment orientation relationships for the smaller CdSe/CdS CQDs 

molecules were similar to those observed for the larger CQDs. Yet, a small difference was still noticed. 

Namely, there are three main options for homonymous-plane attachment: (0002)||(0002), 

(10 1̅ 0)||(10 1̅ 0), and (10 1̅ 1)||(10 1̅ 1). Supplementary Figure 13a shows the (10 1̅ 0)||(10 1̅ 0) 

homonymous-plane attachment with (101̅0) faces of A1 parallel to those of A2 and a continuous 

lattice observed through the entire dimer.  

 

Supplementary Figure 15. HAADF-STEM image and atomic structure model of the fused 1.4/2.1 nm 

CdSe/CdS molecules with homo-plane attachment on (101̅0)||(101̅0) (a), and (101̅1)||(101̅1) (b). For 

the atomic model, the Cadmium atoms are marked in purple and Sulfur atoms in light blue.  

 

 
 


23 

 

Heteronymous-plane attachment of the fused 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs dimers  

The hetero-plane attachment mainly based on (0002)||(101̅0), (0002)||(101̅1), and (101̅1)||(101̅0) was 

also observed in the fused 1.4/2.1 nm CdSe/CdS CQD molecules. In this case, due to the thin CdS 

shell (only 6 atomic layers thick), the core CdSe region (Cd: atom with high brightness, Se: atom with 

slight brightness) was directly identified at HAADF STEM image. Supplementary Figure 14 shows 

examples of heteronymous-plane attachments at (0002)||(101̅0) (a) and (0002)||(101̅1) (b). 

 

Supplementary Figure 16. HAADF-STEM images and atomic structure model of the fused 1.4/2.1 

nm CdSe/CdS molecules with heteronymous-plane attachment on (0002)||(101̅0) (a), (0002)||(101̅1) 

(b). For the atomic model, the Cadmium atoms are marked in purple and Sulfur atoms in light blue.  

 
 


24 

 

Ensemble fluorescence lifetime measurements for 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs and the corresponding 

dimers 

The molecule formed from larger CQDs (1.9/4.0 nm) also exhibit a quenching in the ensemble 

lifetime upon dimer formation but at a much lower extent compared with molecules of the small 

CQDs (1.4/2.1 nm). This is due to reduced tunneling and hybridization both because of the longer 

barrier and also due to the larger cores with less wavefunction spilling into the shell. 

 

Supplementary Figure 17. Ensemble fluorescence lifetime decay curves of the monomer (blue), 

unfused dimer (green) and fused dimer (red) for 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs.  

 
 

0
50
100
150

10

-3

10

-2

10

-1

10

0

Normalized Counts

Time (ns)


25 

 

Single particle fluorescence lifetime for small 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs and the corresponding dimers 

The fluorescence decay of a single 1.4/2.1 nm CQD follows mostly a mono-exponential decay of 

~30ns or a bi-exponential decay with a small contribution from a 5 ns component. The average 

lifetime for the single dimer particles is clearly quenched and follows mostly a tri-exponential decay. 

The distribution of the average lifetime for dimer particles is shifted to short values, which is more 

pronounced for the fused dimers than for the unfused ones. 

 

Supplementary Figure 18. Single particle fluorescence lifetime decay data for monomer (blue), 

unfused dimer (green) and fused dimer (red) composed of 1.4/2.1 nm CQD. (a) Representative single 

particle fluorescence lifetime decays. (b) Histograms summarizing the distribution of the average 

lifetimes for all three types of particles. Further shortening of the lifetime is observed upon fusion. 

 

 
 


26 

 

Characterization of the monomer particles that were treated with the fusion procedure: 

The fraction of monomer particles found is in accordance with the size selective precipitation results 

and TEM analysis therein (~15%, Supplementary Figure 10). The optical properties of single 

monomer CQDs (Supplementary Figure 19-20) that although did not form a dimer, still were treated 

with the complete synthetic procedures of the fusion protocol, were characterized. We found that the 

monomer CQDs undergoing the fusion protocol retain their optical properties exactly as the 

unprocessed monomers, such as single exponential lifetime of the on state, on-off blinking of 

fluorescence and strong photon antibunching. 

 

Supplementary Figure 19. Single particle fluorescence lifetime of a monomer CQD (1.4/2.1 nm) 

found along with the fused dimers. Two examples of the fusion protocol treated monomers are shown 

in blue and red curves. The black and green curves represent the lifetime of monomer CQDs that was 

not treated with the fusion procedure. The deviations of all representative average lifetimes are well 

under the distribution shown in Supplementary Figure 18. 

 

 
 

0
50
100
150

10

-3

10

-2

10

-1

10

0

Normalized Counts

Time (ns)


27 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 20. Time-tagged time-resolved analysis of the fusion protocol treated 

monomer CQD (1.4/2.1 nm). (a) A bimodal on-off distribution of the intensity was found (bin-50 ms). 

The black curve represents the background noise. (b) Fluorescence lifetime of the on-state follows a 

single exponential decay of 31 ns. (c) Strong photon antibunching with g2 value of 0.09. All these 

observations for the fusion protocol treated monomer are highly correlated with the untreated 

monomer particle as explained in the previous section. 

 
 


28 

 

Single particle fluorescence lifetime for 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs and the corresponding dimers 

The shortening of the lifetime upon dimerization was also observed for the 1.9/4.0 nm CQDs. When 

compared with the lifetime distribution of the smaller particles (Supplementary Figure 18), the degree 

of shortening was found to be lower in this case. A similar type of distribution in the averaged lifetime 

for unfused and fused dimer indicates absence of significant additional coupling upon fusion, 

consistent with decreased tunneling-coupling in these molecules constructed from the larger CQDs. 

 

Supplementary Figure 21. Single particle fluorescence lifetime decay data for monomer (blue), 

unfused dimer (green) and fused dimer (red) composed of 1.9/4.0 nm CQD. (a) Representative single 

particle fluorescence lifetime decays (b) Histograms summarizing the distribution of average lifetimes 

for all three types of particles. For the shake of comparison, x-axis was kept the same as in 

Supplementary Figure 18. 

 

 
 


29 

 

Comparison of g2 value for monomer and fused dimer 

The antibunching at zero time delay accounts for the ratio of biexciton to exciton quantum yield (QY) 

g2 =

𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎(0𝑛𝑠)

𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎(200 𝑛𝑠) =

𝑄𝑌(𝐵𝑋)
𝑄𝑌(𝑋)  when the value of <N> is kept well below 1. When the monomer (1.4/2.1 

nm) and fused dimer were excited with similar <N> (~0.06) value, a much higher value of g2 was 

obtained in the case of the fused dimer (0.68) than for the monomer (0.16) CQD. The possible 

pathways for the enhanced biexciton QY are explained in the main text. 

 

Supplementary Figure 22. Comparison of second order photon correlation at similar <N> value for 

excitation. The g2 value were found to be 0.16 and 0.68 for the monomer and the fused dimer, 

respectively.  

 

 
 


30 

 

Attributes of fluorescence from single unfused dimer  

The fluorescence from single unfused dimers also exhibited flickering nature instead of distinct on-off 

characteristics and followed a multi-exponential decay. The lifetime is not uniform throughout the 

intensity range, but rather presents distributions when analyzed at different intensity levels 

(Supplementary Figure 23(ii)). The single unfused dimer also gives rise to lower antibunching contrast. 

 

Supplementary Figure 23. Time-tagged time-resolved data for single unfused dimer comprised of 

1.4/2.1 nm CQD(a) Photoluminescence time trace, (b) fluorescence intensity dependent lifetime (the 

lifetime curves bear the same color code as the shaded area from (a)), and (c) second order photon 

correlation (g2). 

 

 
 


31 

 

Excitation intensity dependence of fluorescence flickering in dimer 

The flickering nature of the fluorescence from a single fused dimer persists even in very low excitation 

conditions. The brown colored time trace in Supplementary Figure 24 was obtained in the lowest 

possible excitation (<N>~0.03), where the flickering of fluorescence occurs without reaching an off 

state (black curve). With increase in the excitation intensity an increment of the extent of flickering 

was observed along with shortening of the lifetime as described in Fig. 5f in the main manuscript. 

 

Supplementary Figure 24. Fluorescence time traces information with varying excitation intensity for 

a fused dimer comprised of 1.4/2.1 nm CQDs. The blue, green and brown curve represents the traces 

obtained from fused dimer with <N> value of 0.18, 0.09, 0.03, respectively. (a) Excitation fluence 

dependent PL time traces. The black curve represents the background noise in a similar configuration. 

(b) Intensity distribution of the traces in (a). Narrow distribution is observed with decreasing laser 

power. 

 

 
 


32 

 

Supplementary Table 2. The calculated and experimental monomer-to-dimer red shift for CdSe/CdS 

CQD molecules with different core/shell diameters. 

Core/Shell

(nm)

Monomer

emission peak

(nm)

Fused

emission peak 

(nm)

Red-shift 

(meV)-Exp

Red-shift 

(meV)-Calc

1.9/4.0
637
637
0
0.65

1.4/2.1
603
606.5
11.8
11.3

1.2/2.1
593
597
13.9
12.8

 

 
 


33 

 

Supplementary Table 3. The ensemble fluorescence lifetime values for different types of CQDs and 

corresponding homodimers (in toluene).  

Core/Shell

(nm)

Monomer
Unfused Dimer
Fused Dimer

τ1(a1)
τ2(a2)
τavg
τ1(a1)
τ2(a2)
τavg
τ1(a1)
τ2(a2)
τavg

1.4/2.1 
25

(1.0)

25
7.3 

(0.9)

30

(0.1)

8.7
5.2

(0.3)

9.7

(0.7)

9.7

1.9/4.0 
8.9

(0.4)

39

(0.6)

24.5
7.9 

(0.62)

38

(0.38)

17.5
8.1

(0.65)

39

(0.35)

17.1

 
τi values are represented in ns scale, ai represents the weightage of a particular lifetime component 

 
 


34 

 

Supplementary References 

1.  
S. Zhou, L. Dong, S. Popov, A. Friberg, Radiative properties of carriers in CdSe-CdS core-

shell heterostructured nanocrystals of various geometries. J. Eur. Opt. Soc. 8, 13042 (2013). 

2.  
C. Grivas et al., Single-mode tunable laser emission in the single-exciton regime from colloidal 

nanocrystals. Nat. Commun. 4, 1–9 (2013). 

3. 
O. Madelung, Semiconductors Data Handbook. Springer: Berlin, 2004. 

4.  
M. P. Halsall, J. J. Davies, J. E. Nicholls, B. Cockayne, P. J. Wright, Photoluminescence of 

CdS/CdSe wurtzite superlattices and evidence for type II behaviour modified by piezoelectric 

fields. J. Lumin. 48, 735-739 (1991). 

5.  
G. Nair, J. Zhao, M. G. Bawendi, Biexciton Quantum Yield of Single Semiconductor 

Nanocrystals from Photon Statistics. Nano Lett. 11, 1136–1140 (2011). 

6. 
Z. Hens, I. Moreels, Light absorption by colloidal semiconductor quantum dots. J. Mater. 

Chem. 22, 10406-10415 (2012). 

7.  
C. Galland et al., Two types of luminescence blinking revealed by spectroelectrochemistry of 

single quantum dots. Nature. 479, 203–207 (2011). 

8.  
C. Galland et al., Lifetime blinking in nonblinking nanocrystal quantum dots. Nat. Commun. 3, 

908 (2012). 

9.  
Y. Hu, Y. Sun, A Generic Approach for the Synthesis of Dimer Nanoclusters and Asymmetric 

Nanoassemblies. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 135, 2213–2221 (2013). 

10.  
K. Momma. & F. Izumi, VESTA 3 for three-dimensional visualization of crystal, volumetric 

and morphology data. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 44, 1272-1276 (2011). 

11.  
Z. D. Lu. et al. Direct Assembly of Hydrophobic Nanoparticles to Multifunctional Structures.  

Nano Lett. 11, 3404-3412 (2011). 

 


