Nanoscale spin-wave wake-up receiver  

Qi Wang, Thomas Brächer, Morteza Mohseni, Burkard Hillebrands, Vitaliy I. Vasyuchka, Andrii V. Chumak, 

Philipp Pirro  

Fachbereich Physik and Landesforschungszentrum OPTIMAS, Technische Universität Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany 

 

We present the concept of a passive spin-wave device which is able to distinguish different radio-frequency 

pulse trains and validate its functionality using micromagnetic simulations. The information is coded in the 

phase of the individual pulses which are transformed into spin-wave packets. The device splits every 

incoming packet into two arms, one of which is coupled to a magnonic ring which introduces a well-defined 

time delay and phase shift. Since the time delay is matched to the pulse repetition rate, adjacent packets 

interfere in a combiner which makes it possible to distinguish simple pulse train patterns by the read-out of 

the time-integrated spin-wave intensity in the output. Due to its passive construction, this device may serve 

as an energy-efficient wake-up receiver used to activate the main receiver circuit in power critical IoT 

applications. 

 
 


An ultra-low power wireless communication capability is needed to realize wireless sensor networks 

in the real-world scenarios. The most efficient way to reduce energy consumption is to leave the device off 

and wake it up asynchronously only when it is really needed. For this task, one needs a wake-up receiver 

which continuously monitors a channel, listens for a wake-up signal from other nodes and activates the 

device on stimulus [1]. Therefore, the power consumption as well as the footprint of the wake-up receiver 

are of crucial importance. Spin waves, a collective precessional motion of localized magnetic moments, can 

propagate at GHz frequencies in either conducting or insulating magnetic media with wavelength down to 

tens of nanometer and without any flow of electrons, reducing the energy consumption caused by Joule 

heating [2-5]. In general, spin waves, and their quanta magnons, are considered as potential candidate as 

carrier of information in future devices due to their low losses [6-9], short wavelengths [10-13] and high 

frequencies [14, 15]. Another advantage of spin waves is that due to their wave nature, they can be used for 

transfer and processing of information, which is coded in their amplitude and phase. Interference effects 

between different waves play a major role to harvest the full potential of the wave nature for data processing. 

A prominent example for the advantages of wave-based data processing is the majority gate, whose output 

state represents the majority of the input states [16, 17], and which is an especially compact and readily 

scalable wave-based device.  

In this Letter, we design a magnonic wake-up receiver based on spin-wave interference. The basic 

concept of the magnonic wake-up receiver consists of Y-shaped splitter, a combiner and a coupled magnonic 

circular ring structure, as depicted in Fig. 1a. The device works in remanence. Radio frequency (RF) pulse 

trains from other wireless nodes will be converted into spin-wave pulse trains by a magnonic transducer in 

the input [18, 19]. The blue and red arrows show the flow path of the spin-wave packets in the magnonic 

wake-up receiver, which are split into two equal parts by a symmetric Y-shaped splitter. One of them is 

directly guided to the combiner region by the upper waveguide (blue channel). The other one is firstly 

transferred to the adjacent magnonic circular ring structure by dipolar coupling [5] (the red dashed area) and 

propagates along the ring and then couples back to the waveguide with an additional time delay ∆t and phase 

shift ∆j (red channel). The time delay and phase shift can be controlled by adjusting the delay length Ld 

[see Fig. 1b]. When the time delay ∆t is equal to the pulse period tp of the spin-wave pulse train, the back 

coupled spin wave in the red channel will completely interfere with the next packet of spin-wave pulse train 

in the blue channel at the combiner region. This way, a large output amplitude due to constructive 

interference is obtained only for a suitable correlation of the spin-wave phases in neighboring pulses of the 

input signal. Thus, a particular pulse sequence has to be used to create a strong output signal which serves 

to wake up the next connected device. 

 


 

Fig. 1 (a) Sketch of the spin-wave wake-up receiver consisting of a Y-shaped splitter, a combiner and a coupled 

circular ring structure. (b) Simulated ground state of the spin-wave wake-up receiver. The color code wheel 

represents the in-plane orientations of magnetization. (c) The simulated (color map) and theoretical (white 

dashed line) dispersion curve and theoretical (blue line) spin-wave group velocity.  

 

To investigate the spin-wave dynamics in the proposed structure, micromagnetic simulations were 

performed by Mumax3 [20]. The typical parameters of nanometer thick Yttrium Iron Garnet (YIG) were 

used in the simulations [9]: saturation magnetization Ms = 1.4×105 A/m, exchange constant A = 3.5 pJ/m, 

and Gilbert damping a = 2×10-4. The damping at the ends of the simulated structure was set to exponentially 

increase to 0.5 to prevent spin-wave reflection. In the real device, these waves could also be processed 

further in a larger magnonic network. The mesh was set to 10×10×50 nm3. The geometric sizes of the 

magnonic wake-up receiver are as follows: the widths of the waveguides are w = 100 nm, thicknesses are 

h = 50 nm, the minimum gap between the waveguide and the circular ring is 10 nm, the center to center 

distance of the waveguides is d =200 nm. The angles of the Y-shaped splitter and combiner are q = 20° and 

the outer radius of the corner is R = 200 nm as shown in Fig. 1b. The length where the waveguide and the 

circular ring structure are coupled to each other is adjusted to Lw = 500 nm as shown in Fig. 1b. By choosing 

a proper spin-wave frequency, all the incident wave energy is transferred from the waveguide to the 

magnonic ring structure [5] over this distance. Other frequencies can be used by changing Lw, the gap 

between the ring and the waveguide or the applied magnetic bias field. 

Figure 1b shows the simulated ground state in which the color code shows the orientation of the 

magnetization. Please note that no external bias field is applied in our simulation. In the nanoscale 

waveguide, the static magnetization orients itself parallel to the x-direction spontaneously due to the strong 


shape anisotropy. In the circular ring structure, the static magnetization is the global vortex state where the 

magnetization orients itself along the ring. This global vortex state in the ring structure has already been 

reported experimentally [21,22] and it can be realized by applying a large external field along the x-direction 

to magnetize both, the waveguides and the ring structure in the x-direction and, consequently, slowly 

decreasing this field to zero. The global vortex then forms in the ring to minimize the total energy. 

To determine the optimal parameters for the wake-up receiver, we first simulate the spin-wave 

dispersion in a single straight waveguide with the same parameters. A sinc function oscillation magnetic 

field by = b0sinc(2pfct) (in y-direction) was applied in the center of waveguide over an area of 20 nm in 

length, with a maximum oscillation amplitude b0 = 1 mT and a cut-off frequency of fc = 10 GHz. Figure 1c 

shows the dispersion curves of the first two lowest spin-wave width modes of an isolated straight waveguide. 

The color map was obtained by micromagnetic simulations and the white dashed line for the lowest width 

mode was calculated using the analytic theory for fully unpinned boundary conditions [23]. The blue line 

shows the analytic group velocity of the lowest width mode. A frequency of f = 2.8 GHz (kx = 0.03 rad/nm, 

l = 210 nm, group velocity vg = 0.39 µm/ns) has been chosen as working frequency. Then, only one 

wavenumber-frequency combination exists for the fundamental mode, avoiding the scattering between 

different width modes after the bent waveguides [24]. All the working parameters are indicated in Fig. 1(c).  

As we mentioned above, the phase of the spin waves coupled back from the ring in the red channel 

in Fig. 1(a) can be adjusted by changing the delay length Ld of the circular ring structure. Simulations with  

 

 

Fig. 2 (a) Snapshot of the out-of-plane component spin-wave amplitude mz for a continuous excitation source 

with frequency f = 2.8 GHz. (b) The normalized output power as a function of delay length Ld. (c) Spin-wave 

amplitudes at point 1 and 2 in the time range from 18 ns to 22 ns after excitation.  


 

different delay lengths Ld were performed with a continuous spin-wave excitation at frequency f. The 

normalized output power as a function of the delay length Ld is shown in Fig. 2b. A minimum is found at 

Ld = 710 nm which corresponds to a destructive interference between the two branches. Figure 2(a) shows 

a snapshot of the out-of-plane component of the dynamics magnetization mz, which is equivalent to the spin-

wave amplitude, for a delay length of Ld = 710 nm. The obvious destructive interference which is observed 

in the combiner region implies that the circular ring structure introduces an effective phase shift of p  for 

the spin waves in the lower branch. Figure 2(c) shows the amplitudes of the spin-wave signal at point 1 and 

point 2 (marked in Fig. 2a) in the time range from 18 ns to 22 ns after excitation. From this, the phase shift 

of ∆j = p is clearly visible.  

To study the delay time caused by the coupled magnonic ring, a single spin-wave pulse of 5 ns 

duration (td = 5 ns) is applied. Figure 3(a) shows a snapshot of mz in which the spin-wave energy 

transferring between the waveguide and the magnonic ring is clearly observed. The output spin-wave 

amplitude as a function of time is shown in Fig. 3(b). Two clear peaks are found which correspond to the 

spin-wave packets exiting from the upper and the lower branch, respectively. The delay time of these two 

spin-wave packets is ∆t =9.5 ns (peak-to-peak distance). This value is slightly larger than the value of 

8.6 ns estimated from the group velocity in Fig. 1. This is due to the fact that the group velocity in the 

corner of ring structure is smaller than the one in the straight waveguide [25]. Moreover, the amplitude of 

the second peak localized around 22 ns is smaller than that of the first one due to its longer propagation 

length caused by the coupled magnonic ring.  

 

Fig. 3 (a) Snapshot of the out-of-plane component spin-wave amplitude mz. (b) The output spin-wave amplitude 

as a function of simulation time t.  


 

In this design, a RF pulse train that can be used to create a strong signal at the output is, for example, 

an alternating pulse train of logical 0 (phase 0) and logical 1 (phase p) as depicted in the top panel of Fig. 4(a). 

Since the induced time delay ∆t of the second pulse train (red wave in Fig. 4(a)) matches the period of the 

initial spin-wave pulse tp and shifts the phase of the wave packet by p, the logical bit number n+1 interferes 

always with the negated logical bit number n (n is integer). For the alternating pulse train 1010101010, this 

results in a constructive interference of the central spin-wave pulses, leading to a large envelop of the spin-

wave intensity shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 4(a). Thus, with a RF to DC detector, the maximum 

possible voltage would be generated at the output. Other pulse sequences like the homogenous sequence 

1111111111 create a much lower signal due to the destructive interference shown in Fig. 4(b). Please note 

that the output signal resulting from destructive interference is not zero because of the difference in 

amplitude of the two interfering spin waves. Thus, if a threshold voltage is defined, this scheme allows to 

trigger an action by a certain, specially shaped RF signal only. Please note also that the absolute value of 

the phase is not essential in this approach. Only the phase difference between neighboring bits is of interest, 

which is important since only this information can be transmitted between an arbitrarily placed sender and 

receiver. Another advantage is the passive property that does not require additional RF or DC sources as 

reference, which are hard to integrate on a chip. Please also note that a different geometric design can be 

used to encode other pulse sequences. For instance, the homogenous sequence 11111111 pulse train can 

also be used as a trigger signal by adjusting the delay length to meet the criterion in which the time delay ∆t 

is equal to the pulse period tp and the phase shift is zero.  

 

Fig. 4 Top panel of (a) and (b): RF pattern recognition scheme (1010101010 and 1111111111): The red pulse 

train has been delayed by one pulse period tp and its phase is, consequently, shifted by ∆j = p. The bottom 

panel of (a) and (b): The simulated output spin-wave intensities for the two indicated input patterns.  

 


In summary, we have designed a planar nanoscale spin-wave wake-up receiver based on a simple 

wave interference effect and tested it by utilizing micromagnetic simulations. The wake-up receiver consists 

of a symmetric Y-shaped splitter, combiner and a coupled ring structure which acts as a phase shifter and 

delay line. The operational principle of the spin-wave wake-up receiver is demonstrated. Relying on spin-

wave interference, a dedicated RF pulse train can be used to create a strong signal at the output to wake up 

the next connected device. The presented device operates intrinsically passive and does not require any 

additional RF sources as a reference.  

Acknowledgement: Financial support by DFG within project B01 of the Transregional Collaborative 

Research Centre (SFB/TRR) 173 “Spin+X” and ERC Starting Grant 678309 MagnonCircuits and the EU 

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme within the FET-OPEN project CHIRON (contract 

number 801055) is gratefully acknowledged.  

 

 

Reference 

1. G. U. Gamm, M. Sippel, M. Kostic, and L. M. Reindl, Sensor Networks and Information Processing 

(ISSNIP), Brisbane, QLD, Australia, 7–10 December 2010; pp. 121–126. 

2. A. Khitun, M. Bao, and K. L. Wang, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 43, 264005 (2010). 

3. B. Lenk, H. Ulrichs, F. Garbs, and M. Münzenberg,  Phys. Rep. 507, 107 (2011). 

4. A. V. Chumak, V. I. Vasyuchka, A. A. Serga, and B. Hillebrands, Nat. Phys. 11, 453 (2015). 

5. Q. Wang, P. Pirro, R. Verba, A. Slavin, B. Hillebrands, and A. V. Chumak, Sci. Adv. 4, e1701517 (2018). 

6. Y. Kajiwara, K. Harii, S. Takahashi, J. Ohe, K. Uchida, M. Mizuguchi, H. Umezawa, H. Kawai, K. Ando, 

K. Takanashi, S. Maekawa, and E. Saitoh, Nature 464, 262 (2010).  

7. P. Pirro, T. Brächer, A. V. Chumak, B. Lägel, C. Dubs, O. Surzhenko, P. Görnert, B. Leven, and 

B. Hillebrands, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 012402 (2014). 

8. H. Yu, O. d’Allivy Kelly, V. Cros, R. Bernard, P. Bortolotti, A. Anane, F. Brandl, R. Huber, I. 

Stasinopoulos, and D. Grundler, Sci. Rep. 4, 6848 (2014).   

9. C. Dubs, O. Surzhenko, R. Linke, A. Danilewsky, U. Brückner, and J. Dellith, J. Phys. D Appl. Phys. 50, 

204005 (2017). 

10. S. Wintz, V. Tiberkevich, M. Weigand, J. Raabe, J. Lindner, A. Erbe, A. Slavin, and J. Fassbender, Nat. 

Nano., 11, 948 (2016). 

11. H. Yu, O. d’Allivy Kelly, V. Cros, R. Bernard, P. Bortolotti, A. Anane, F. Brandl, F. Heimbach, and D. 

Grundler, Nat. Commun. 7, 11255 (2016). 

12. T. Brächer, M. Fabre, T. Meyer, T. Fischer, S. Auffret, O. Boulle, U. Ebels, P. Pirro, and G. Gaudin, 

Nano Lett. 17, 7234 (2017). 


13. S. J. Hämäläinen, F. Brandl, K. J. A. Franke, D. Grundler, and S. Van Dijken, Phys. Rev. Appl. 8, 014020 

(2017).  

14. T. Kampfrath, A. Sell, G. Klatt, A. Pashkin, S. Mährlein, T. Dekorsy, M. Wolf, M. Fiebig, A. 

Leitenstorfer, and R. Huber, Nature Photon. 5, 31 (2011). 

15. T. Balashov, P. Buczek, L. Sandratskii, A. Ernst, and W. Wulfhekel, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 26, 

394007 (2014). 

16. S. Klingler, P. Pirro, T. Brächer, B. Leven, B. Hillebrands, and A. V. Chumak, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 

152410 (2014). 

17. T. Fischer, M. Kewenig, D. A. Bozhko, A. A. Serga, I. I. Syvorotka, F. Ciubotaru, C. Adelmann, B. 

Hillebrands, and A. V. Chumak, Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 152401 (2017). 

18. T. Kimura, Y. Otani, T. Sato, S. Takahashi, and S. Maekawa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 98, 156601 (2007). 

19. S. Cherepov, P. K. Amiri, J. G. Alzate, K. Wong, M. Lewis, P. Upadhyaya, J. Nath, M. Bao, A. Bur, T. 

Wu, G. P. Garman, A. Khitun, and K. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 082403 (2014). 

20. A. Vansteenkiste, J. Leliaert, M. Dvornik, M. Helsen, F. Garcia-Sanchez, and B. Van Waeyenberge, AIP 

Adv. 4, 107133 (2014). 

21. M. Steiner and J. Nitta, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 939 (2004). 

22. Y. Ren and A. O. Adeyeye, J. Appl. Phys. 105, 063901 (2009). 

23. Q. Wang, B. Heinz, R. Verba, M. Kewenig, P. Pirro, M. Schneider, T. Meyer, B. Lägel, C. Dubs, T. 

Brächer, and A. V. Chumak, arXiv:1807.01358. 

24. P. Clausen, K. Vogt, H. Schultheiss, S. Schäfer, B. Obry, G. Wolf, P. Pirro, B. Leven, and B. Hillebrands, 

Appl. Phy. Lett. 99, 162505 (2011). 

25. N. Kumar, G. Venkat and A. Prabhakar, IEEE Trans. Magn. 50, 1300306 (2014). 

 


