Effect of nano-carbon dispersions on signal in silicon-based sensor structure with 

photoelectrical transducer principle 

 

Anton I. Manilov a,b,*, Aleksey V. Kozinetz a,b, Sergiy V. Litvinenko a,b, Valeriy A. Skryshevsky a,b, 

Mohammed Al Araimi c,d, Alex Rozhin c 

a Institute of High Technologies, Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Volodymyrska 64, 

01033 Kyiv, Ukraine 

b Corporation Science Park Taras Shevchenko University of Kyiv, Volodymyrska Str., 60, 01033 

Kyiv, Ukraine 

c Nanotechnology Research Group, Aston Institute of Photonic Technologies, School of Engineering 

& Applied Science, Aston University, Aston Triangle, B4 7ET Birmingham, United Kingdom 

d Higher College of Technology, Al-Khuwair, PO Box 74, Postal Code 133, Sultanate of Oman 

* Corresponding author. E-mail address: anmanilov@univ.kiev.ua (A.I. Manilov). 

 

Abstract 

We identified different nano-carbon species such as graphene nanoplatelets, graphite flakes 

and carbon nanotubes dispersed in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone using a novel sensor structure based on 

a “deep” silicon barrier working as a photoelectrical transducer. Each nano-carbon particle has 

specific signature in both 2D photocurrent distribution and photocurrent dependences on bias 

changing surface band-bending. Additionally, all nano-carbon particles have characteristic features 

in the time-dependent evolution of photocurrent. The obtained results can be explained by the 

influence of nano-carbon molecules’ local electric field on the recombination parameters of defect 

centers on the silicon surface. 

Keywords: silicon; photoelectrical sensor; carbon nanotubes; graphene. 

 

1. Introduction 

Nowadays, synthesis and research of carbon nano-materials (CNM) are the driving force for 

disruptive innovations in the field of nano-electronics, photonics, sensors, biomedical applications 

as well as in new composites with unprecedented mechanical, thermal and conductive properties [1-

8]. Conventional nano-carbon species such as graphene, nanotubes, fullerenes and nanodiamonds 

have the physical and chemical properties determined by their geometric dimensions and the state 

of their surface [9-11]. Consequently, surface functionalization of carbon nanomaterials allows 

essentially changing the properties of the initial materials and makes possible interaction with 

different biological and chemical substances [5, 7, 12]. The latter is very promising for creating 

various biological and chemical sensors, as well as for detecting the nanoparticles themselves [13-

17]. Despite such sensors are less sensitive than methods of analytical chemistry, they benefit from 


fast and convenient measurements, the ability to transfer information to computer servers and 

mobile platforms almost instantly. 

There are a lot of chemical sensors based on electrical, optical or photoluminescent 

conversion principles. One of the widely known possible approaches that can be used for detecting 

analyte with complex molecular structure is LAPS (Light Addressable Potentiometric Sensor) [18]. 

In previous works we consider photoelectrical sensor with a bit different structure but another 

transducer mechanism: the “deep” silicon barrier is illuminated by strongly absorbed light [19-20]. 

It has been successfully implemented to probe carbon nanotubes with adsorbed surfactant in an 

aqueous medium [21]. The technical realization of this method is easier comparing to LAPS. Here, 

the application of the structure with the same operational principle for detection of different nano-

carbon species in organic solvent is analyzed. 

 

2. Experimental procedure 

Three types of carbon nanostructures are explored: carbon nanotubes (CNT), graphite flakes 

(GF) and graphene nanoplatelets (GNP). All carbon samples were dispersed in N-methyl-2-

pyrrolidone (NMP). 

Commercially available high-pressure carbon monoxide method (HiPCO) single-walled 

carbon nanotubes were purchased from Unidym (Lot # P0261). The SWNTs’ dispersion was 

prepared by placing 1 mg of HiPCO SWNTs in 10 mL NMP. The mixture was then sonicated, 

using a commercial ultrasonic processor for one hour at 200W and 20 kHz. Then, the resultant 

mixture was immediately ultracentrifuged for 2 h 30 minutes under 17 °C, using MLS 50 rotor for 

45000 revolutions per minute (RPM) to remove impurities and residual bundles. After 

centrifugation, the top 70% of the resultant mixture was used as initial SWNTs’ dispersion. 

Graphite flakes were produced by Sigma-Aldrich® (PubChem Substance ID 24859898). 

Dispersion of GF (0.5 g) in NMP (10 mL) was prepared by ultrasonication at 21 kHz and 250 W. 

The resulting mixture was then centrifuged at 17 °C for one hour at 30000 RPM. Graphene 

nanoplatelets were obtained from Acros OrganicsTM (Fisher Scientific UK Ltd). Dispersion of GNP 

(150 mg) in NMP (10 mL) was made by ultrasonication and ultracentrifugation at the same 

conditions as for the GF mixture. 

The nanomaterials concentrations were controlled by measuring the optical absorption of 

dispersions at 660 nm. Further analytical calculation using the Beer-Lambert law gave 

concentrations for CNT - 0.004 mg/ml, while for GF and GNP - 0.06 and 0.07 mg/ml respectively. 

At such concentrations, the dispersions of all the samples showed stability without visible 

aggregation within 3-4 months. 


Size characterization of the nanoparticles in NMP solvent was realized by dynamic light 

scattering and zeta potential measurements using Zetasizer Nano S (Malvern Instruments). The 

samples were irradiated with a helium-neon laser with λ = 633 nm at 25 °C. 

The silicon sensor structure with photoelectrical transducer principle is suggested for the 

detection of dispersed carbon nanomaterials in this study. The method is based on measurement of 

laser beam induced photoelectric signal formed on “deep” barrier of silicon wafer with the presence 

of a liquid analyte on its surface (fig. 1). 

a
b

Fig. 1. Measurement scheme: side view (a) and front view (b)

 

The wafers are double-side polished n-Si (100) with specific resistivity 30-50 Ω∙cm. The 

samples are electrically connected to three bottom contacts. Barrier junction is provided on the 

central contact. The side contacts are prepared for Ohmic junctions. The amplitude modulated green 

laser (532 nm) is used for illumination. Potential barrier for separation of photo-generated charge 

carriers is created by Schottky metal-semiconductor contact. The liquid analyte is held on the 

surface of the wafer using a metal cuvette (volume is 0.1 mL). Also, the metal cuvette plays the role 

of an electrode for surface polarization, as indicated in fig. 1. A small gap between the cuvette and 

silicon surface is made to make sure that the analyte does not propagate beyond the working cell. 

This can take place due to the surface tension of water and NMP. 

There are two measurement modes: surface scanning and surface polarization. The surface 

scanning is using a focused laser beam and results in surface distribution of photoelectric signal at 

constant surface polarization. The areas inside and outside of the cuvette are explored by this way. 

The surface polarization is realized by measurement of photoelectric signal with different external 

voltages applied to the analyte using with a fixed position of the illuminated spot (the spot size is 

0.1 mm). The laser illumination area in this mode is at the center of the cuvette. 


 

3. Results 

The characteristic distributions of the carbon particles sizes, received from Zetasizer, are 

given in Fig. 2. As can be seen from the obtained curves, GNP particles’ sizes are mostly within the 

range 40-60 nm. Maximum for GF particles distribution is between 80-110 nm. Two maximums are 

observed for CNT: centered nearly 100 nm and 800 nm. The measured values of zeta potential are -

17 mV, -12 mV and -19 mV for GNP, GF and CNT respectively. The negative values of zeta 

potential are typical for carbon nanoparticles in organic solvent [22]. It should be mentioned that 

these values suggest relative stability of nanoparticles in the solvent at temperature 25 °C. Some 

instability and coagulation tendency are possible in the case of abrupt change of external conditions. 

Fig. 2. The size distributions of the nano-carbon species in NMP. 

 

Figure 3 shows the photocurrent distribution of the laser scanning over the sensor surface 

where X and Y axis represent coordinates. The polarization voltage was not applied to the surface 

during the scanning measurements. The photocurrent increases after addition of the analyte in the 

cuvette (fig.3, a,b). The similar regularity is observed for pure NMP and all dispersions of carbon 

nanomaterials. After 30-60 min from placing of the analyte on the Si surface the photocurrent inside 

the cuvette starts behaving differently depending on the type of the sample. The dispersions of 

carbon nanotubes and graphene nanoplatelets, as well as pure NMP, are characterized with 

relatively high photocurrent during the measurement (fig.3, d). At the same time the samples of 

graphite flakes show some decreasing of the signal that is especially noticeable comparing to area 

outside the cuvette (fig.3, c). This effect is repeated for all GF samples. 


 
 

a
b

 
 

c
d

Fig.3. Photosignal surface distribution on n-Si wafer with the cuvette filled with the analyte:

(a) empty cuvette; 

(b) typical photocurrent distribution for all samples based on NMP solvent after 10 min on the 

surface; 


(c) typical photocurrent distribution for GF dispersions after 90 min on the surface;

(d) typical photocurrent distribution for CNT and GNP dispersions, as well as pure NMP, after 90 

min on the surface. 

The scanned area is about 1x2 cm, XY axis values represent coordinates of the scanned points. 

 

The surface polarization measurements are represented by the series of bell-shaped curves 

for different analytes (fig.4). Each curve is photocurrent dependence on voltage applied between the 

cuvette electrode and bottom contact of the Si wafer. The series are formed by periodic 

measurements during 90 min from addition of the analyte in the cuvette. 

Apparently, the samples based on NMP solvent have wider minimums and lower slope of 

the right branches of the bell-shaped curves in comparison with the graphs of water analyte. 

Moreover, the left branches on the plots of the samples based on NMP have no minimums observed 

on the curves corresponding for water.  

The measured photocurrent dependencies on surface polarization voltage for the nano-

carbon dispersions differ from the plot obtained for pure NMP solvent (fig. 4, e). Moreover, shape 

of the curves and their modification with time are distinctive for each type of the carbon 

nanostructure. All GF samples are characterized with shift of left branch of the "bell" to the lower 

voltages during the aging of the analyte on the semiconductor surface (fig. 4, d). This is 

accompanied with widening of the curve's minimum. Besides, it results in decrease of photocurrent 

at zero potential as observed during surface scanning (fig.3, c). The effect is not observed for CNT 

and GNP samples (fig.4, b,c, fig.3, d). 

Also, the left branches of the curves usually alter during the measurement (fig.4, b,d), 

excluding CNT samples that are characterized with relatively stable left branch (fig. 4 c).  

 

a
b


c
d

Fig.4. Photocurrent dependencies on voltage 

applied between the cuvette with analyte and 

bottom contact of Si wafer. The next analytes 

are displayed: 

(a) distilled water; 

(b) GNP solution in NMP; 

(c) CNT solution in NMP; 

(d) GF solution in NMP; 

(e) pure NMP. 

e

 

4. Discussion 

The electrical scheme of our measurements (fig.1) allows to realize the “deep” silicon p-n 

junction configuration (or more generally any silicon barrier structure) with illumination by the 

laser beam [19]. Let us consider some aspects of the signal formation in the scheme. The measured 

signal is proportional to photocurrent of the barrier structure. The photocurrent is collected due to 

built-in electric field of space charge region. It is shown in [20] that deep silicon junction can be 

regarded as effective photoelectrical transducer when light is utilized with strong absorption 

coefficient. The wavelength of the laser illumination belongs to strong light absorption in silicon 

α(λ)~105-103 cm-1. In our case the thickness of n-Si wafer d is nearly 300 μm, holes diffusion length 

lp is nearly 150μm, so when the surface of base region is illuminated all principal conditions of 

“deep” junction configuration are fulfilled. It means that the region, where non-equilibrium holes 

are generated (1/ α(λ)~ μm), and region, where these carriers are collected by electric field, are 

separated in space. The photocurrent I in the deep structure significantly depends on surface 

recombination velocity S, it can be given as: 










 +








+

≅

p
p
p

p

p

l
ch d
l
sh d
D

l
S

D
S

I S
( )
1

( )
λ
α

         ,                                                                                                    (1) 

where Dp is hole diffusion coefficient. 

It means that change of S by one or two order of its magnitude leads to the change of 

photocurrent by several dozen times. This fact is illustrated in Fig.5.  

0,001

0,01

0,1

1

1000
10000
100000
1000000

I(S), a.u.

s, cm/s
 

Fig.5 The calculated dependences (1) of the photocurrent of deep silicon barrier structure on surface 

recombination velocity S for α(λ)~103 cm-1, λ = 630nm (1), and α(λ)~104 cm-1, λ = 532 nm (2). 

 

The photocurrent depends slightly on the recombination velocity for shallow junction (up to 

several μm), because the region of built-in electric field is in the vicinity of illuminated surface. 

The parameter S corresponds to energy values of recombination levels, its concentration, 

recombination cross sections for electrons and holes and surface band bending φs in the frame of 

Stevenson- Keyes theory and it more complicated modification [23]. 

In principle, this parameter can be different for the analytes with different molecular dipole 

structures. So, the first mode, measured for the analyte, is photocurrent 2D distribution (that is 

determined by effective surface recombination velocity for fixed initial surface band bending). 

On the other hand, applying voltage V with different polarity (via surface polarization 

circuit) allows changing the surface band bending φs in the region of silicon wafer that is covered 

with analyte. The principal traits of the Stevenson- Keyes theory claim that if the concentration of 

non-equilibriums electrons and holes are close to each other, the S gets its maximal value, if default 

of electrons or holes takes place, S is strongly diminished. That is why the dependences S(φs) 

typically have bell-shaped form. As it was mentioned earlier, laser beam can be positioned in any 

point of the surface that contacts with analyte. Surface polarization in the scheme (fig.1) allows, in 

some sense, imaging of the curve S(φs) into the curve I(V) for fixed point at the surface. Thus, the 

1

2


easily measured curve I(V) can be the second characteristic mode of the analyte. In some sense, the 

described set-up realizes sensor structure with photoelectrical (recombination-based) transducer. 

Let us consider experimental results presented in figures 3-4. The initial increase of 

photocurrent (fig. 3 a,b) is most likely explained by change of surface band bending in the region of 

silicon wafer contacting with the analyte (inside cuvette). It can be connected with decrease of S 

and/or passivation of recombination centers at the silicon surface. Comparing with free silicon 

surface, the photocurrent for the silicon area covered with the nano-carbon dispersion increases by 

two times. 

As can be seen in fig. 4, the minima of curves I(V) (maximums of S(φs)) correspond to 

positive voltage applied to the surface of n-silicon for all samples. Since the base region has 

conductivity of n-type, the depletion region appears near illuminated surface. The minimum of the 

dependences I(V) is in range of +1 V – +1.5 V for all cases. Consequently, the recombination cross 

sections for electrons and holes should remain practically unchanged. 

Let us consider the curve received for initial moment of observation and the curves received 

for subsequent moments (indication of time is given at the right corners of fig. 4, a-e). Let us 

consider the curves deviations from initial one. For each of the cases corresponding to fig. 4, the 

amplitudes and character of the deviations are clearly different. As can be seen, these effects are 

observed namely for the left branches of the experimental curves. When the Si surface contacts with 

water (fig. 4 a), the shape of the curve I(V) varies insignificantly with time. Thus the recombination 

occurs basically via the level with stable recombination parameters at the interface analyte-n-Si. The 

peculiarities of I(V) near -1 V at the left branch of the curve show that recombination process may 

be more complex. Rather the system of energy levels at the silicon surface (local or distributed with 

energy) is possible and several channels of the recombination can be realized. 

The carbon samples based on NMP dispersion have noticeably wider minima and lower 

slopes of the right branches of the bell-shaped curves comparing to the case of neat DI water. The 

widening of the curves can be explained by change of the energy position of the recombination 

level. It is well known that the greater is the difference between the recombination energy level and 

the middle of the silicon band gap, the wider is the bell of S(φs) and I(V). 

The change of photocurrent in time varies for the different nano-carbon samples. The GNP 

dispersion in fig. 4 b demonstrates increase of I(V) (left branch) with time. So, the decrease of 

recombination levels concentration at the surface is in progress. The curves for CNT (fig4, c) 

demonstrate certain similarity with the neat distilled water, because no evolution of the dependences 

I(V) is observed in time. The I(V) curves for graphite flakes (fig.4,d) become wider with time that 

can be explained by the gradual shift of recombination level energy from the middle of silicon band 

gap. This effect is supplemented with decrease of the photocurrent at zero bias (fig. 3,c). Moreover, 

the photocurrent in the saturation region (i.e. when applied voltage is less than -1 V) clearly 


indicates increasing of the recombination value with time. The growth of S is explained by increase 

of the recombination centers’ concentration on the surface. So, two types of the changes are 

observed simultaneously. 

As can be seen, the shapes of the curves I(V) and their evolution in time, as well as the aging 

regularities of the photocurrent surface distributions, are very specific for each of the analytes that 

have been investigated. The chemical and electrostatic aspects should be taken into account to 

clarify the situation. 

It is known that degradation of NMP solvent occurs during ultrasonication by way of ring 

opening and supplementary chemical reactions [24]. The resulting organic substances are adhered 

onto the surface of nano-carbon species. As can be seen from Fig 2, graphite flakes, carbon 

nanotubes and graphene nanoplatelets are of different size and volume. Also, they have different 

structure of the surface and corresponding covering particularities. Together with different level of 

catalytic features of nanoparticles these effects can influence the chemical activity of the 

functionalized nano-carbon and the solvent itself. It can result in different time dependences of the 

analyte-silicon interaction. 

The chemical reaction of the analyte at the silicon surface influences pre-surface band-

bending and the recombination properties of the silicon surface. On the other hand, when 

silicon/analyte interface is illuminated, non-equilibrium carriers are generated in the n-silicon 

wafer. It can result in the minority carrier moving to the interface (due to the electric field of space 

charge region near the interface). Moreover, these carriers can be involved in the surface chemical 

reactions. That is why silicon surface passivation can be facilitated or hindered with time. 

The electrostatic interaction of the analyte molecules with the silicon surface is specific for 

each of four investigated cases. The electrical charge formed on the surface of nano-carbon is result 

of adsorption of the organic compounds from the solution and/or the dissociation of the surface 

compounds. Thus, each type of carbon nanoparticle carries some electrical charge distributed on its 

surface. In that way, specific configuration of dipole structures is formed for each of nanoparticle 

type in the solution. This configuration strongly depends on the relative spatial orientation of 

charged fragments. The local electrical field of the analyte molecules is probably the main factor 

that determines change of the initial parameters of the recombination centers at the surface of n-Si 

(that allows the detection in principle). It can be either local recombination center or system of 

recombination centers at the surface that define photocurrent behavior in our experiments. The 

energy levels can be non-uniformly distributed at the silicon surface because the dipoles of the 

surrounding analyte molecules cause the thermal fluctuations of polarization. 

So, the silicon sensor structure with photoelectrical transducer principle can be applied for 

differentiation of the nano-carbon species in NMP. 

 


5. Conclusions 

The possibility of detecting graphite flakes (GF), carbon nanotubes (CNT) and graphene 

nanoplatelets (GNP) in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent is demonstrated. The approach is 

based on the analysis of the photocurrent surface distribution and the photocurrent dependences on 

voltage (changing surface band bending) of the “deep” silicon barrier structure. 

Addition of the nano-carbon dispersion on the sensor results in the increase of the 

photocurrent in two times comparing with free silicon surface. The dependences of photocurrent on 

voltage are distinctive for each analyte: the case of GNP corresponds to narrow curve; the CNT and 

GF are characterized with wider curves. The signal for GNP samples in saturation region is in 1.5-2 

times greater than signal for CNT and GF dispersion. 

The additional information is also received from the time-dependent measurements of the 

photocurrent. The GNP dispersion is characterized with irregular in time photocurrent at negative 

and zero polarizing bias. The photocurrent for the GF samples decreases at zero bias. This is 

accompanied with widening of the I(V) curve's minimum at aging of the analyte on the surface. The 

relatively stable behavior is characteristic for CNT samples. 

These effects can be explained by the influence of the local molecular electrical field on the 

recombination parameters of the defect levels on the silicon surface (i.e. recombination levels 

energies, their concentration, recombination cross sections and pre-surface band bending). It can be 

either local level in the silicon band gap or system of levels continuously distributed with the 

energy. On the basis of the experimental results, it can be maintained that local electric field of each 

analyte changes the parameters of the recombination centers in its own specific way. 

These allow consider the proposed methods of the nano-carbon detection for further 

investigation and application. 

 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by EU Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Staff Exchange 

Programme (RISE) under Marie Sklodowska-Curie Action (project 690945 “Carther”). M.A. 

acknowledges the support from the Ministry of Higher Education, Sultanate of Oman. 

 

References 

[1] 
C. Gao, G. Chen, Conducting polymer/carbon particle thermoelectric composites: Emerging 

green energy materials, Compos. Sci. Technol. 124 (2016) 52-70. 

[2] 
D. Liu, W. Zhao S. Liu, Q. Cen, Q. Xue, Comparative tribological and corrosion resistance 

properties of epoxy composite coatings reinforced with functionalized fullerene C60 and graphene, 

Surf. Coat. Technol. 286 (2016) 354–364. 


[3] 
M. Cen-Puc, A.I. Oliva-Avilés, F. Avilés, Thermoresistive mechanisms of carbon 

nanotube/polymer composites, Physica E 95 (2018) 41-50. 

[4] 
K. Tsukagoshi, N. Yoneya, S. Uryu, Y. Aoyagi, A. Kanda, Y. Ootuka, B.W. Alphenaar, 

Carbon nanotube devices for nanoelectronics, Physica B 323 (2002) 107-114. 

[5] 
C.S. Park, H. Yoon, O. S. Kwon, Graphene-based nanoelectronic biosensors, J. Ind. Eng. 

Chem. 38 (2016) 13-22. 

[6] 
L. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, Roles of carbon nanotubes in novel energy storage 

devices, Carbon 122 (2017) 462-474. 

[7] 
A. Nag, A. Mitra, S.Ch. Mukhopadhyay, Graphene and its sensor-based applications: A 

review, Sens. Actuators, A 270 (2018) 177-194. 

[8] 
R. Wang, L. Xie, S. Hameed, C. Wang, Y. Ying, Mechanisms and applications of carbon 

nanotubes in terahertz devices: A review, Carbon 132 (2018) 42-58. 

[9] 
K.D. Sattler, Carbon nanomaterials sourcebook. Volume 1. Graphene, fullerenes, nanotubes, 

and nanodiamonds, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2016. 

[10] N. A. Abdel Ghany, S. A. Elsherif, H. T. Handal, Revolution of Graphene for different 

applications: State-of-the-art, Surfaces and Interfaces 9 (2017) 93-106. 

[11] J. Coro, M. Suárez, L.S.R. Silva, K.I.B. Eguiluz, G.R. Salazar-Banda, Fullerene applications 

in fuel cells: A review, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 41 (2016) 17944-17959. 

[12] F.V. Ferreira, L. Cividanes, F.S. Brito, B.R.C. de Menezes, W. Franceschi, E.A. Nunes 

Simonetti, G.P. Thim, Functionalizing Graphene and Carbon Nanotubes, SpringerBriefs in Applied 

Sciences and Technology, 2016. 

[13] M.E. Foo, S.C.B. Gopinath, Feasibility of graphene in biomedical applications, Biomed. 

Pharmacother. 94 (2017) 354-361. 

[14] M. I. Sajid, U. Jamshaid, T. Jamshaid, Carbon nanotubes from synthesis to in vivo biomedical 

applications, Int. J. Pharm. 501 (2016) 278-299. 

[15] K. Bates, K. Kostarelos, Carbon nanotubes as vectors for gene therapy: Past achievements, 

present challenges and future goals, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 65 (2013) 2023-2033. 

[16] M. Ema, M. Gamo, K. Honda, A review of toxicity studies on graphene-based nanomaterials 

in laboratory animals, Regul. Toxicol. Pharm. 85 (2017) 7-24. 

[17] C. Bussy, L. Methven, K. Kostarelos, Hemotoxicity of carbon nanotubes, Adv. Drug Delivery 

Rev. 65 (2013) 2127-2134. 

[18] J. Wang, L. Du, S. Krause, C. Wu, P. Wang, Surface modification and construction of LAPS 

towards biosensing applications, Sens. Actuators, B 265 (2018) 161-173. 

[19] S.V. Litvinenko, A.V. Kozinetz, V.A. Skryshevsky. Concept of photovoltaic transducer on a 

base of modified p-n junction, Sens. Actuators, A 224 (2015) 30-34. 


[20] A.V. Kozinetz, S.V. Litvinenko, V.A. Skryshevsky. Physical properties of silicon sensor 

structures with photoelectric transformation on the basis pacs of “deep” 𝑝𝑝–𝑛𝑛-junction, Ukr. J. Phys. 

62 (2017) 318-325. 

[21] A.I. Manilov, A.V. Kozinetz, I.V. Gavrilchenko, Y.S. Milovanov, T.M. Mukhamedzhanov, 

S.A. Alekseev, M. Al Araimi, S.V. Litvinenko, A. Rozhin, V.A. Skryshevsky, Photoelectric signal 

conversion in deep p-n junction for detection of carbon nanotubes with adsorbed SDBS in aqueous 

solution, J. Nano- Electron. Phys. 9 (2017) 04020. 

[22] I. Swyzer, R. Kaegi, L. Sigg, B. Nowack, Colloidal stability of suspended aqnd agglomerate 

structures of settled carbon nanotubes in different aqueous matrices, Water Res. 47 (2013) 3910-

3920. 

[23] D.T. Stevenson, R.J. Keyes, Measurements of the recombination velocity at germanium 

surfaces, Physica 20 (1954) 1041-1046. 

[24] H.Ch. Yau, M.K. Bayazit, J.H.G. Steinke, M.S.P. Shaffer, Sonochemical degradation of N-

methylpyrrolidone and its influence on single walled carbon nanotube dispersion, Chem. Commun. 

51 (2015) 16621. 

 

 

 


