1 

 

Substrate mediated nitridation of niobium into superconducting 

Nb2N thin films for phase slip study 

Bikash Gajar1,2, Sachin Yadav1,2, Deepika Sawle1,2, Kamlesh K. Maurya1,3, Anurag Gupta1,2,  R.P. 

Aloysius1,2, and Sangeeta Sahoo*,1,2 

 

1 Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), AcSIR Headquarters CSIR-HRDC 

Campus, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 201002, India. 

2Electrical & Electronics Metrology Division, National Physical Laboratory, Council of 

Scientific and Industrial Research, Dr. K. S Krishnan Road, New Delhi-110012, India. 

3Indian Reference Materials Division, National Physical Laboratory, Council of Scientific and 

Industrial Research, Dr. K. S Krishnan Road, New Delhi-110012, India. 

*The correspondence should be addressed to S.S. (Email: sahoos@nplindia.org) 

 

 

 

 

 

 


2 

 

 

Abstract: 

Here we report a novel nitridation technique for transforming niobium into hexagonal Nb2N which 

appears to be superconducting below 1K. The nitridation is achieved by high temperature annealing of Nb 

films grown on Si3N4/Si (100) substrate under high vacuum. The structural characterization directs the 

formation of a majority Nb2N phase while the morphology shows granular nature of the films. The 

temperature dependent resistance measurements reveal a wide metal-to-superconductor transition 

featuring two distinct transition regions. The region close to the normal state varies strongly with the film 

thickness, whereas, the second region in the vicinity of the superconducting state remains almost 

unaltered but exhibiting resistive tailing. The current-voltage characteristics also display wide transition 

embedded with intermediate resistive states originated by phase slip lines. The transition width in current 

and the number of resistive steps depend on film thickness and they both increase with decrease in 

thickness. The broadening in transition width is explained by progressive establishment of 

superconductivity through proximity coupled superconducting nano-grains while finite size effects and 

quantum fluctuation may lead to the resistive tailing. Finally, by comparing with Nb control samples, we 

emphasize that Nb2N offers unconventional superconductivity with promises in the field of phase slip 

based device applications.    

 

 

 

 

 


3 

 

Introduction:  

Superconducting fluctuations (SFs) lead to several interesting quantum phenomena such as 

superconductor-insulator quantum transition (SIT)1,2, quantum criticality3, phase slip (PS) effects4-7, etc. 

These quantum phenomena are mainly controlled by sample properties like geometry and dimensions, 

crystallinity, disorder and inhomogeneity and also by external parameters like electro-magnetic field, 

driving current, temperature etc. In superconductor (SC)-metal (NM) phase transition probed by 

temperature dependent resistance [R(T)] measurements, a finite transition width is inevitable as it is quite 

natural for a practical sample to be introduced with disorder and inhomogeneities during the growth and 

fabrication process. For low dimensional superconductor, inhomogeneity and superconducting 

fluctuations are the two mostly addressed origins behind wide transition width observed in R(T). 

Inhomogeneities can be of structural imperfections like chemically impure samples, granularity and grain 

boundaries etc. and also it can be of geometrical nature such as constrictions and non-uniform edges. The 

geometrical inhomogeneities should be considered in great detail when a material possesses size 

dependent Tc variation which may cause broadening in R(T)6.  However, in reduced dimension, the phase 

fluctuation of the order parameter contributes significantly to the R(T) broadening. Particularly in 1D 

superconducting nanowire, continuous phase fluctuation leads to finite resistance below Tc by phase 

slippage of 2π at the phase slip centers (PSCs). This is known as phase slip (PS) phenomenon which can 

be established in wide 2D superconducting strips by the appearance of phase slip lines (PSLs).  

In the context of SFs, more specifically superconducting phase fluctuations, NbN from the family of 

niobium-nitrogen based transition metal nitrides (TMNs) has shown its promises for the application in 

superconducting nanowire based single photon detectors (SNSPD)8 and quantum phase slip (QPS) based 

devices9-11. However, no other member from this TMN family has been explored at the equal footing in 

the field of superconductivity. Recently, hard hexagonal ε-NbN has been shown to possess 

superconducting properties with Tc ~11 K12. Among the several stable phases in the niobium-nitrogen 

based compounds, Nb2N has recently attracted a growing interests towards its epitaxial growth on SiC 


4 

 

substrate13. Nb2N is known mainly for its hardness14 and a little is known about its superconducting 

properties15. In this study, we report of superconducting properties for Nb2N thin films that are grown 

using a novel substrate mediated synthesis process. Here, we present the study of PS phenomenon in 

quasi 2D disordered granular Nb2N thin films by means of current-voltage measurements. Compared to 

the expensive MBE based growth technique15, we use a very simple route16 to achieve Nb2N by high 

temperature annealing of sputtered grown Nb thin films on Si3N4/Si (100) substrate. High resolution X-

ray diffraction (HRXRD) confirms of Nb2N as the majority phase along with a minority phase Nb4N5.  

Further, R(T) measurements on Nb2N thin films varying in thickness from 8-16 nm exhibit NM-SC 

transition at ~ 1K with broad transition width consisting of two distinct regions. While comparing with 

equivalent Nb control samples grown on SiO2/Si substrate in the same run, the transport measurements 

for Nb2N films appear drastically different and unconventional in nature. The zero-field current-voltage 

characteristics (IVCs) are also wide and equipped with intermediate resistive steps which are originated 

from phase slip lines (PSLs). The transition widths in R(T) and in IVCs strongly depend on the film 

thickness and a wider transition is observed for thinner samples. The resistive transition can be 

understood from the granular nature of the samples that can be constructed as a collection of randomly 

distributed nanoscale granules separated by grain boundaries and the two-step R(T) transition 

characteristics can be explained in terms of local and global superconductivity17,18. In this case, the 

macroscopic superconductivity is established progressively through the Josephson proximity coupling 

effect among the locally disconnected superconducting grains possessing dimensional dependent 

distribution of critical temperature. We emphasize that disorder induced inhomogeneity19, finite size 

effect (FSE) for quasi zero-dimensional (0D) grains and the phase fluctuation are the main reasons behind 

the wide transition and resistive tailing. Besides, the appearance of PSLs in the IVCs and their evolution 

with film thickness indicate that disordered superconducting Nb2N can be of future interests in the field of 

PS based studies and applications.  

 


5 

 

Results: 

We present the substrate mediated nitridation technique for Nb to form Nb2N schematically in Fig. 1(a)-

(d). We use Si3N4/Si(100) as the substrate where the only source of nitrogen for nitridation is the  

dielectric Si3N4. When a Si3N4/Si(100) substrate is heated at temperature ~ 820°C under high vacuum, 

Si3N4 decomposes into elemental Si and N atoms 20 and the lighter N atoms acquire high kinetic energy 

and become easily mobile to interact with the deposited metallic film16. The decomposition process and 

the movement of the split Si and N atoms are presented in (b) and (c).The yellow arrows in (c) show the 

movement of N atoms and the white arrows indicate the position of heavier Si atoms close to Si substrate. 

The growth of Nb films on Si3N4/Si substrate at (820 ± 10)°C by using magnetron sputtering is 

schematically displayed in Fig. 1(c). After completing the deposition we continue annealing at the same 

temperature for two hours at pressure ~ 0.5-1.5 x 10-7 Torr. At this stage, Nb atoms interact with the 

released N atoms from Si3N4 and undergo the nitridation process. The chemical reaction during the 

annealing process is shown in Fig. 1(e) by using the respective crystal structures of -Si3N4, bcc Nb and 

hexagonal Nb2N. 

For comparison, we have deposited Nb films on Si3N4/Si (nitride) and SiO2/Si (oxide) substrates 

simultaneously and the latter act as control samples. In Fig. 2, we present XRD spectra for 4 

representative samples (G1, G2, G3 and G4) with varying thickness and a control sample C1.  The 

thickness values of the samples G1, G2, G3 and G4 are about 80 nm, 40 nm, 17 nm and 12 nm, 

respectively. The control sample C1 is grown with sample G3 in the same run and they were closely 

placed during the growth process and are having almost same thickness ~ 17 nm with ± 2 nm variation. 

The XRD pattern for the control sample reveals majorly the cubic Nb phase. However, some oxide phases 

for Nb appear too due to high temperature annealing on oxide substrate21. For the samples on nitride 

substrates, majority of the peaks relate to hexagonal Nb2N phase and consequently, a clear difference 

from the control sample is evident. All strong peaks related to hexagonal Nb2N phase are present and a 

couple of other relatively weak Nb4N5 peaks appear too. The appearance of elemental Nb peaks depends 


6 

 

on the thickness of the films. For example, the two relatively thick samples G1 and G2 show the presence 

of Nb in addition to its nitride phases.  With decreasing thickness the relative amplitudes of Nb peaks get 

reduced and the nitride phases start to become prominent and finally for G3, almost there is no trace of 

Nb and the same is true for the thinnest sample G4. Here the peak, at 2Ɵ = 38.5°, corresponds to Nb (110) 

plane as evident for the control sample and the same is present in the XRD spectra of G1 and G2. 

However, if we compare the amplitude of this peak in these three samples shown from the bottom to 

upwards in Fig. 2, we find that the relative amplitude gets reduced in G1 as compared to that in C1 and a 

further reduction occurs from G1 to G2 for which a very weak peak appears at that position. Now if we 

move upward to sample G3, we observe a much stronger peak appears at the same position as that of Nb 

(110) plane along with other strong Nb2N peaks. Here it is important to note that other Nb peaks 

disappear completely from the XRD pattern for G3. Incidentally, at 2Ɵ = 38.5°, Nb2N possesses its 

strongest peak related to (101) plane. As most of the peaks correspond to Nb2N phase and no other peaks 

of Nb are present, the afore-mentioned peak certainly indicates Nb2N (101) plane. Therefore, the majority 

of the peaks guide towards the formation of Nb2N phase. Recently, it has also been shown that single 

phase Nb2N growth can be achieved in the temperature range 750-850°C which is consistent with our 

observation13. 

As the substrate induced nitridation for Nb is evident, we call the samples on Si3N4/Si and SiO2/Si 

substrates as nitride samples and Nb control samples, respectively. For low temperature transport 

measurements, the adapted device geometry is shown in the inset of Fig. 3(a). A set of R(T) is displayed 

in Fig. 3 where three nitride samples with varying thickness along with three Nb control samples are 

presented. The nitride samples B1 [(16 ± 1.6) nm], B2 [(11 ± 2) nm] and B3 [(8 ± 1.4) nm], along with 

their respective control samples B1Ox, B2Ox and B3Ox are grown in three different batches. With thickness, 

the control samples show noticeable changes in their critical temperature (Tc) and normal state resistance 

(RN) as evident in Fig. 3(a). Here, by lowering thickness, Tc decreases and RN increases. Now, for the 

nitride samples, we observe a drastic change in the values for the Tc compared to that of the 


7 

 

corresponding Nb samples. Broad metal-superconductor (NM-SC) transition featuring intermediate hump 

like structure is observed for all the nitride samples. Further, RN decreases anomalously with decreasing 

thickness. For better comparison, the normalized resistance R/RN is presented in Fig. 3(b). The clear 

differences in the transition width for nitride and oxide samples are evident. For the nitride samples, the 

NM-SC transition occurs in two steps split by the intermediated hump. Accordingly, we have marked the 

two transition regions, separated by the horizontal dotted line, and defined the critical temperatures for the 

first onset temperature (TcOnset-I), the second onset temperature (TcOnset-II), and the superconducting critical 

temperature (Tc0) as indicated by the arrows in Fig. 3(b) for the representative sample B3. The transition 

regions I & II are defined as the regions between TcOnset-I and TcOnset-II & TcOnset-II and Tc0, respectively. The 

regions are clearly distinguishable in Fig. 3(c) which shows R/RN in the reduced temperature scale (T/Tc0) 

for nitride samples.  Region-I appears differently for different samples whereas, region-II reveals very 

little change in the overall transition region among the samples. Besides, the relatively higher slope of the 

transition in Region-II indicates that the superconducting transition in region-II is mainly due to the 

majority of the phases present in all the nitride samples i.e. the Nb2N phase. The wide transition in region-

I mainly indicates the influence of inhomogeneity including the chemical impurities like the presence of 

other nitride phases as evident in the XRD spectra12. Further, region-I features the widest transition for the 

thinnest sample B3 and the width gets reduced with increasing the thickness. The overall dependence of 

the transition regions on film thickness, by means of characteristic critical temperatures, is displayed in 

Fig. 3(d).  It is apparent that the transition width varies strongly with thickness for region-I whereas it 

remains almost unaffected in region-II. Further, the final step of transition from TcOnset-II  to the 

superconducting state occurs at lower temperature for thinner sample. Therefore, the thinnest sample (B3) 

offers the lowest RN value, the highest TcOnset-I, the lowest TcOnset-II among the samples under consideration. 

The characteristic parameters are summarized in a tabular form in the Supporting Material (SM). 

Further, we have measured the current-voltage characteristics (IVCs) at different temperatures and the 

IVC isotherms are shown in Fig. 4. The IVCs for the nitride samples B1, B2 and B3 are shown in Fig. 


8 

 

4(a), (b) and (c), respectively. First, the IVCs are wide and hysteretic in nature for all the three samples. 

Here for clarity we only present the increasing current direction, i.e. up sweep, and the IVCs in both up 

and down sweep direction is shown in the SM.  The SC-to-NM transition for B1 is not occurring in a 

single step for the temperature range from 60 mK to 500 mK and an intermediate resistive step appears. 

The current-extent for the step decreases with increasing temperature and at about 600 mK, the transition 

takes place smoothly from SC to NM state without showing any intermediate step. Similarly, intermediate 

resistive steps emerge for the relatively thinner sample B2 as presented in Fig. 4(b). Interestingly, we 

observe more than one intermediate steps with increasing slopes that follow each other and converge at 

the excess current Is. With further reduction of the thickness as in B3, much wider SC-NM transition 

region consisting of multiple resistive steps in the IVCs is observed. For clarity, we have plotted them 

separately along with down sweeps in Fig. 4(d), where the IVCs are shifted in the voltage axis and the 

starting points correspond to zero-voltage. The steps in the IVCs are extended by the dotted lines those 

meet at the excess current Is. The resistive step like features in between SC and NM states may originate 

due to phase slip lines (PSLs) in 2D superconducting films22-24. However, the extent between the resistive 

states gets widened by thinning as observed from B1-to-B2-to-B3. Further, the smoothly varying region 

with finite voltage drop, between Ic0 and the first resistive transition, indicates the presence of slow 

moving vortex-antivortex pairs (VAPs) originated at the edges of 2D superconductors 25. For thinner 

samples, the aforementioned region in the IVCs gets elongated before merging into the phase slip lines at 

the instability point 23,26. However, the existence of Is and increasing slopes for the higher order resistive 

steps are the signatures of PSLs 9,23,24. Furthermore, with decreasing thickness, the number of PSLs 

increases and the whole span between SC-to-NM gets widened. This might be due to the samples 

becoming more disordered by thinning13. Finally, as the current leads are of bigger width than that of the 

superconducting strips, the lead induced inhomogeneity to cause the resistive steps in IVCs can be ignored 


9 

 

and hence the PSLs appearing in the IVCs can be considered as the analogue of the phase slip centres 

(PSCs) as appear in 1D nanowire27,28.  

As the switching from SC-to-NM does not occur in a single step, we have multiple characteristic critical 

currents among which two extreme cases are considered. The first one, defined as the critical current Ic0, 

relates to the onset of finite voltage from the SC state and the second one, named as Inm, associates with 

the transition to complete normal state. The retrapping current Ir is defined as the current when the sample 

starts to transit from its resistive state to the superconducting state in returning direction. The 

characteristic currents and the sweeping directions are shown by the dotted and the solid arrows, 

respectively in Fig. 4. The temperature dependence of the characteristic critical currents Ic0, Inm and Ir for 

all the three nitride samples along with a couple of Nb control samples on oxide substrate are shown in 

Fig. 5. First, for all the nitride samples, the retrapping current Ir is higher than the critical current Ic0, 

whereas, for the control samples shown in the insets of Fig. 5(a)&(c), the critical current is much higher 

than the retrapping current which usually occurs when the IVCs are hysteretic in nature. However, higher 

value of retrapping current than the critical current actually indicate towards the weak-links (WLs) 

formed by the nanostructured grains that might be in resistive state even at temperatures below TC 24,29. 

For the control samples, the span between Ic and Ir increases with lowering the measurement temperature. 

For particularly thinner nitride samples B2 and B3, Ic0 and Ir seem to be very close to each other and the 

variation remains almost unchanged when we reduce the temperature. However, Inm increases strongly 

and hence the extent in Ic0 or Ir and Inm gets widened while lowering the temperature. For better 

comparison, we have plotted in Fig. 5(d) the two extreme critical currents Ic0 & Inm and retrapping current 

Ir in one graph. The extent between Ic0 & Inm is shown by the vertical arrows in the left side. The largest 

(smallest) width in current is observed for the thinnest (thickest) sample B3 (B1) and this is consistent 

with the IVC isotherms presented in Fig. 4 which shows that the intermediate steps indicating PSLs are 


10 

 

much wider and more in numbers for the thinner samples. Therefore, thickness is playing a crucial role to 

control over the transition region and PS mechanism in the nitride samples.  

In order to observe the effect of magnetic field on the IVCs, we have measured IVCs for sample B1 under 

perpendicular magnetic field at 60 mK and the same is shown in Fig. 6. As it is obvious, with magnetic 

field Ic0 decreases but interestingly, one extra intermediate step appears at 50 mT compared to the zero 

field IVC. Up to 150 mT the intermediate steps are following each other and they appear much more 

widened than that at zero-field. At 50 mT, the transition to normal state happens at much higher current 

than the same at zero-field. Another point to note is the curvature of the IVCs in the span between Ic0 and 

the first resistive step changes from convex to concave under the applied field. In Fig. 4, we observe a 

similar type of curvature change with reduction in thickness from samples B1 through B2 to B3. The 

number of resistive steps is also observed to increase in the same sequence from B1 to B2 to B3. 

Therefore, the effect of magnetic field on the IVCs compliments the thinning effect at zero-field24,30.  

Discussion: 

In contrast to Nb control samples, both R(T) and IVCs show wide transition for nitride samples. The R(T) 

data features two distinct regimes in the transition. The IVCs, being hysteretic in nature, showcase 

intermediate resistive steps which are the signatures of PSLs in wide superconducting films22,24. For 

granular films, often the broadening in R(T) is referred to inhomogeneity19 and finite size effects (FSE) 

that depend mainly on the grain size and grain boundaries19. The topography images (SM), obtained by 

atomic force microscopy (AFM), reveal of granular nature and the grain size depends on the sample 

thickness. The average grain size decreases with the thickness and the same is 40 nm, 30 nm, and 23 nm 

for B1, B2, and B3, respectively. The variation in the grain size is about ± 10 nm for all the samples. 

Here, the maximum relative variation in the grain size occurs for the thinnest sample B3 which undergoes 

the widest transition [Fig. 3]. For thinner samples, an enhanced Tc is expected as thinning leads to a 

shorter mean free path and the broadening in R(T) can be due to the enhanced Tc 7,31. Interestingly for 


11 

 

region-I, we have observed that TcOnset-I increases for reduced film thickness and the thinnest sample B3 

offers the highest TcOnset-I. However, region-II does not show strong variation in the transition width 

among the samples. Here, TcOnset-II varies in a regular manner i.e. it gets reduced by thinning and the 

variation is very little particularly in the reduced temperature scale as shown in Fig. 3(c).  

 In order to have an insight into the NM-SC phase transition as appeared in the measured R(T) 

characteristics, we present the normalized resistance in the reduced temperature scale  for the nitride 

samples separately in Fig. 7(a). For clarity, different stages of the transition are marked by the vertical 

dotted lines and the different regions are shaded with different color. The resistive transition can be 

understood from the granular nature of the samples that can be constructed as a collection of randomly 

distributed nanoscale granules separated by grain boundaries as shown schematically in Fig. 7(b). Usually 

for granular films, the two-step NM-SC transition as observed in R(T) data can be explained in terms of 

local and global superconductivity17,18 32-34.  Here the differences in the grain size represent the 

inhomogeneous nature of the samples. With lowering the temperature, individual metallic grains undergo 

the NM-SC phase transition with a distribution in their transition temperatures. At this stage the 

superconductivity is established locally at individual granule level which eventually reduces the resistance 

of the system and hence, a drop in the resistance from the normal state value is expected to appear in the 

R(T). As observed in Fig. 7(a), resistance starts to drop at TcOnset-I , the temperature at which  individual 

grains started to undergo the phase transition locally.  Further lowering the temperature, the drop in 

resistance continues as more numbers of granules become superconducting and the situation is depicted in 

Fig. 7(c). As evident in Fig. 7(a) and Fig. 3(c), the temperature extent in region-I varies strongly among 

the samples that are of different thickness. With further reducing the temperature down to TcOnset-II, the 

resistive transition takes steeper step and the region-II starts. Here the superconducting nano-grains 

interconnect to each other through Josephson proximity coupling effect (PE)35-37. Through PE, the closely 

spaced superconducting granules coherently couple together and form superconducting puddles of bigger 

dimension and the progressive superconductivity is established. In Fig. 7(d), schematically we illustrate 


12 

 

the formation of superconducting puddles by combining phase coherent superconducting nano-grains in 

region-II where the phase coherence among the puddles is impaired by the phase fluctuation. Finally, 

below Tc0, the puddles couple coherently altogether to establish the coherent macroscopic SC-state as 

depicted in Fig. 7(e). In region-II, the relatively sharp resistive transition can be understood by the 

continuous phase fluctuation among the weakly coupled superconducting puddles and this region can be 

explained by the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless (BKT) transition which relates to the crossover from the 

fluctuating region-II to the condensed superconducting state. Below the BKT transition temperature TBKT, 

no unbound vortex-antivortex pair exists and long range order is established and ideally it is a zero-ohmic 

resistive state. The cyan curves in Fig. 7(a) represent the BKT fits to the resistive transition in region-II by 

using Halperin-Nelson equation38,39   

𝑅(𝑇) = 𝑅0𝑒𝑥𝑝[−𝑏 (𝑇 − 𝑇𝐵𝐾𝑇)1 2
⁄
⁄
]                    (1) 

Where, R0 and b are the material-specific parameters. The selected region of R(T) containing the fitted 

curves is presented separately in Fig. 7(f) which shows that the measured R(T) can be explained fairly 

well by the BKT model as given by equation (1).  

However as shown in Fig 7(a) &(f), for all the samples close to their Tc0, the transition from region-II to 

SC-state accompanies rounded bottom near. For B1, the BKT fit follows very closely to the experimental 

data and the TBKT appears to be the same as Tc0 (0.73 K). However, the fits for B2 and B3 deviate near 

their respective zero-ohmic resistance states and the deviation is more prominent for the thinnest sample 

B3. Further, the transition to superconducting state features resistive tailing below Tc0 for all the samples. 

For clarity, a semi-logarithmic plot of selected region from the measured R(T) is shown in Fig. S6 in SM.  

Generally, microscopic  inhomogeneities40, disorder41¸ vortex-antivortex movement in 2D23,  quantum 

fluctuation4, FSE particularly for the case of nanoscale granular systems35,40,42,43 are the  main reasons 

behind the rounding of the transition, deviation from the BKT model, resistive tailing and residual 

resistance at temperature T ≤ Tc0. Inhomogeneity and disorder play very crucial roles in the granular 


13 

 

superconductors where disorder can cause a suppression of the PE coupling which establishes the 

superconductivity19. As the thinning makes the samples more disordered it is expected that for the 

thinnest sample B3, disorder can contribute significantly to its highest residual resistance compared to 

that of other two samples [Fig. S6 in SM].  

 Further, the zero-field R(T) measurements were performed with the excitation current (100 nA) much 

less than the critical current. Hence, the dissipation related to current-induced unbound vortex-antivorex 

movement can also be disregarded. In reduced dimension, phase fluctuation is one of the dominant 

mechanisms behind the resistive tailing & residual resistance44 and above TBKT, the phase fluctuation leads 

to vortex proliferation which eventually brings the system to the normal state45. In quasi 0D granular 

superconductors, depending on the dimension of the nano-grains, phase fluctuations can lead to total 

suppression of superconductivity and may lead to even an insulating state46,47. Besides, we have observed 

the PSLs for all the samples indicating significant contributions from phase fluctuations to the resistive 

states. Similarly, due to the nanoscale dimension of the grains, FSE can play the substantial role in the 

resistive tailing and the residual resistance42,48 and also to the deviation of the BKT fit from the 

experimental data17,38,42. When the quantized energy level spacing due to FSE in quasi 0D nanoscale 

grains becomes comparable to the superconducting energy gap, residual resistance appear due to the 

decreased density of states at the Fermi level, Coulomb repulsion and suppression of Josephson coupling 

between the grains35. It is obvious that the impact of FSE is going to be the most for sample B3 with the 

smallest grain size among the samples. Indeed, it is observed in Fig. 7(f) (Fig. S6 in SM) that the residual 

resistance is the highest in B3. Therefore, we can conclude that the observed resistive tailing and the 

residual resistance in the nitride samples may be originated due to mainly the combined effect of disorder, 

quantum fluctuations and FSE.  

 

 


14 

 

Conclusion: 

We have demonstrated a simple technique to transform Nb into Nb2N by employing Si3N4 based substrate 

which serves as the source of nitrogen when it gets decomposed by high temperature annealing. The 

transformed nitride samples show unconventional superconductivity below 1K by exhibiting wide two 

step NM-SC transition featuring resistive tailing in the superconducting state. We emphasize here that the 

granularity mediated inhomogeneity, quantum fluctuation and the FSE are the main reasons behind the 

observed wide transition, the resistive tailing and the residual resistance in the R(T) characteristics. 

Interestingly, the current driven metal-superconductor transition as appeared in the IVCs also exhibits 

wide transition featuring stair-case type resistive steps that are the signatures of PSLs in 2D 

superconducting strips. The PSLs indicate a significant role of phase fluctuations to the transition too. 

Finally, our results demonstrate that Nb2N can be a promising candidate to study SFs and PS related 

phenomena and applications. 

Methods: 

Nb thin films were grown on Si3N4/Si(100) [nitride] and SiO2/Si(100) [oxide] substrates by using an ultra-

high vacuum (UHV) DC magnetron sputtering system. For nitride substrate, low pressure chemical vapor 

deposition (LPCVD) grown 100 nm thick Si3N4 layer and for oxide substrate, thermally grown 300 nm 

thick SiO2 layer act as the dielectric spacers to isolate the films from the substrates. Prior to deposition, 

substrates were gone through a rigorous cleaning process by ultrasonic cleaning in acetone and iso-propanol 

for 15 minutes in each. Afterwards, the substrates were cleaned in oxygen plasma for 15 minutes and finally, 

they were preheated at ~820°C in high vacuum (~1 × 10-7 Torr) inside the UHV chamber for 30 minutes to 

remove any chemical residues and surface contaminants. In the preheating stage, some parts of the substrate 

were covered with stainless steel shadow mask in order to have defined strips of Nb film. After the cleaning 

procedures we evacuated the chamber to less than 3.5 × 10−9 Torr and meanwhile the substrates were heated 

up to (820±10)°C which was maintained during the sputtering and post-sputtering annealing process. The 


15 

 

sputtering was done with a Nb (99.99%) target in the presence of high purity Ar (99.9999% purity) gas at 

about 5 × 10−3 mBar. The heating was continued after the deposition and post sputtering annealing was done 

at (820±10)°C for 2 hours in high vacuum condition (0.5-1.5 × 10−7 Torr). 

For low temperature transport study, electrical contact leads of Au(100 nm)/Ti(5 nm) were defined and 

aligned by a complimentary set of shadow mask on top of Nb strips. The length between the voltage probes 

for all the measured samples was ~1.1mm. The transport measurements were done in conventional 4-probe 

geometry with 100 nA excitation current by using ac lock-in technique in a dilution refrigerator (Triton 

from Oxford Instruments). For Structural characterization we have used grazing incidence X-ray diffraction 

(GIXRD) technique by Philips X’pert pro X-ray diffractometer using Cu-kα radiation operating at 40 kV 

and 20mA. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


16 

 

References:  

1 
Mason, N. & Kapitulnik, A. Dissipation Effects on the Superconductor-Insulator Transition in 2D 

Superconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5341-5344 (1999). 

2 
Breznay, N. P., Tendulkar, M., Zhang, L., Lee, S.-C. & Kapitulnik, A. Superconductor to weak-

insulator transitions in disordered tantalum nitride films. Phys. Rev. B 96, 134522 (2017). 

3 
Kim, H., Gay, F., Del Maestro, A., Sacépé, B. & Rogachev, A. Pair-breaking quantum phase 

transition in superconducting nanowires. Nat. Phys. 14, 912-917 (2018). 

4 
Alexey, B. Quantum suppression of superconductivity in nanowires. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 20, 

043202 (2008). 

5 
Zhao, W., Liu, X. & Chan, M. H. W. Quantum Phase Slips in 6 mm Long Niobium Nanowire. 

Nano Lett. 16, 1173-1178 (2016). 

6 
Lehtinen, J. S., Sajavaara, T., Arutyunov, K. Y., Presnjakov, M. Y. & Vasiliev, A. L. Evidence of 

quantum phase slip effect in titanium nanowires. Phys. Rev. B 85, 094508 (2012). 

7 
Baumans, X. D. A. et al. Thermal and quantum depletion of superconductivity in narrow 

junctions created by controlled electromigration. Nat. Commun. 7, 10560 (2016). 

8 
Murphy, A. et al. Three Temperature Regimes in Superconducting Photon Detectors: Quantum, 

Thermal and Multiple Phase-Slips as Generators of Dark Counts. Sci. Rep. 5, 10174 (2015). 

9 
Delacour, C., Pannetier, B., Villegier, J.-C. & Bouchiat, V. Quantum and Thermal Phase Slips in 

Superconducting Niobium Nitride (NbN) Ultrathin Crystalline Nanowire: Application to Single 

Photon Detection. Nano Lett. 12, 3501-3506 (2012). 

10 
Constantino, N. et al. Emergence of Quantum Phase-Slip Behaviour in Superconducting NbN 

Nanowires: DC Electrical Transport and Fabrication Technologies. Nanomaterials 8, 442 (2018). 

11 
Arutyunov, K. Y. et al. Superconductivity in highly disordered NbN nanowires. Nanotechnology 

27, 47LT02 (2016). 


17 

 

12 
Zou, Y. et al. Discovery of Superconductivity in Hard Hexagonal ε-NbN. Sci. Rep. 6, 22330 

(2016). 

13 
Katzer, D. S. et al. Epitaxial metallic β-Nb 2 N films grown by MBE on hexagonal SiC 

substrates. Appl. Phys. Express 8, 085501 (2015). 

14 
Sanjinés, R., Benkahoul, M., Papagno, M., Lévy, F. & Music, D. Electronic structure of Nb2N 

and NbN thin films. J. Appl. Phys. 99, 044911 (2006). 

15 
Yan, R. et al. GaN/NbN epitaxial semiconductor/superconductor heterostructures. Nature 555, 

183 (2018). 

16 
Yadav, S. et al. Substrate Mediated Synthesis of Ti–Si–N Nano-and-Micro Structures for 

Optoelectronic Applications. Adv. Eng. Mater. 0, doi:10.1002/adem.201900061 (2019). 

17 
Eley, S., Gopalakrishnan, S., Goldbart, P. M. & Mason, N. Approaching zero-temperature 

metallic states in mesoscopic superconductor–normal–superconductor arrays. Nat. Phys. 8, 59 

(2011). 

18 
Zhang, G. et al. Bosonic Anomalies in Boron-Doped Polycrystalline Diamond. Phys. Rev. Appl. 

6, 064011 (2016). 

19 
Ponta, L., Carbone, A. & Gilli, M. Resistive transition in disordered superconductors with 

varying intergrain coupling. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 24, 015006 (2010). 

20 
Batha, H. D. & Whitney, E. D. Kinetics and Mechanism of the Thermal Decomposition of Si3N4. 

J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 56, 365-369 (1973). 

21 
Kazim, S. et al. Light Induced Electron-Phonon Scattering Mediated Resistive Switching in 

Nanostructured Nb Thin Film Superconductor. Sci. Rep. 7, 881 (2017). 

22 
Li, J. et al. Local destruction of superconductivity by non-magnetic impurities in mesoscopic 

iron-based superconductors. Nat. Commun. 6, 7614 (2015). 


18 

 

23 
Dmitriev, V. M., Zolochevskii, I. V., Salenkova, T. V. & Khristenko, E. V. Critical currents, 

phase slip centers, and phase slip lines in superconducting films in the absence of external 

magnetic field. Low Temp. Phys. 31, 127-136 (2005). 

24 
Bawa, A., Jha, R. & Sahoo, S. Tailoring phase slip events through magnetic doping in 

superconductor-ferromagnet composite films. Sci. Rep. 5, 13459 (2015). 

25 
Berdiyorov, G. et al. Dynamics of current-driven phase-slip centers in superconducting strips. 

Phys. Rev. B 90, 054506 (2014). 

26 
Sheikhzada, A. & Gurevich, A. Dynamic transition of vortices into phase slips and generation of 

vortex-antivortex pairs in thin film Josephson junctions under dc and ac currents. Phys. Rev. B 95, 

214507 (2017). 

27 
Lu-Dac, M. & Kabanov, V. V. Phase Slip Phenomena in Superconductors: From Ordered to 

Chaotic Dynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 157005 (2010). 

28 
Berdiyorov, G. R., Milošević, M. V. & Peeters, F. M. Kinematic vortex-antivortex lines in 

strongly driven superconducting stripes. Phys. Rev. B 79, 184506 (2009). 

29 
Hazra, D., Pascal, L. M. A., Courtois, H. & Gupta, A. K. Hysteresis in superconducting short 

weak links and μ -SQUIDs. Phys. Rev. B 82, 184530 (2010). 

30 
Bawa, A., Gupta, A., Singh, S., Awana, V. P. S. & Sahoo, S. Ultrasensitive interplay between 

ferromagnetism and superconductivity in NbGd composite thin films. Sci. Rep. 6, 18689 (2016). 

31 
Petrović, A. P. et al. A disorder-enhanced quasi-one-dimensional superconductor. Nat. Commun. 

7, 12262 (2016). 

32 
Zhang, G. et al. Superconductor-insulator transition driven by pressure-tuned intergrain coupling 

in nanodiamond films. Phys. Rev. Mater. 3, 034801 (2019). 

33 
Chen, Z. et al. Carrier density and disorder tuned superconductor-metal transition in a two-

dimensional electron system. Nat. Commun. 9, 4008 (2018). 


19 

 

34 
Zhang, G. et al. Global and Local Superconductivity in Boron-Doped Granular Diamond. Adv. 

Mater. 26, 2034-2040 (2014). 

35 
Bose, S. & Ayyub, P. A review of finite size effects in quasi-zero dimensional superconductors. 

Rep. Prog. Phys. 77, 116503 (2014). 

36 
Carbillet, C. et al. Confinement of superconducting fluctuations due to emergent electronic 

inhomogeneities. Phys. Rev. B 93, 144509 (2016). 

37 
Yonezawa, S., Marrache-Kikuchi, C. A., Bechgaard, K. & Jérome, D. Crossover from impurity-

controlled to granular superconductivity in (TMTSF)2 ClO4. Phys. Rev. B 97, 014521 (2018). 

38 
Lin, Y.-H., Nelson, J. & Goldman, A. M. Suppression of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless 

Transition in 2D Superconductors by Macroscopic Quantum Tunneling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 

017002 (2012). 

39 
Xu, C., Wang, L., Liu, Z., Chen, L., Guo, J., Kang, N., Ma, X.-L., Cheng, H.-M. & Ren, W. 

Large-area high-quality 2D ultrathin Mo2C superconducting crystals. Nat. Mater. 14, 1135 

(2015). 

40 
Benfatto, L., Castellani, C. & Giamarchi, T. Broadening of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless 

superconducting transition by inhomogeneity and finite-size effects. Phys. Rev. B 80, 214506 

(2009). 

41 
Caprara, S., Grilli, M., Benfatto, L. & Castellani, C. Effective medium theory for 

superconducting layers: A systematic analysis including space correlation effects. Phys. Rev. B 

84, 014514 (2011). 

42 
He, Q. L. et al. Two-dimensional superconductivity at the interface of a Bi2Te3/FeTe 

heterostructure. Nat. Commun. 5, 4247 (2014). 

43 
Andersson, A. & Lidmar, J. Scaling, finite size effects, and crossovers of the resistivity and 

current-voltage characteristics in two-dimensional superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 87, 224506 

(2013). 


20 

 

44 
Nande, A. et al. Quantum fluctuations in percolating superconductors: an evolution with effective 

dimensionality. Nanotechnology 28, 165704 (2017). 

45 
Salasnich, L. & Bighin, G. Quantum Fluctuations and Vortex-Antivortex Unbinding in the 2D 

Bcs-Bec Crossover. J. Supercond. Nov. Magn. 29, 3103-3106 (2016). 

46 
Merchant, L., Ostrick, J., Barber, R. P. & Dynes, R. C. Crossover from phase fluctuation to 

amplitude-dominated superconductivity: A model system. Phys. Rev. B 63, 134508 (2001). 

47 
Hollen, S. M., Fernandes, G. E., Xu, J. M. & Valles, J. M. Collapse of the Cooper pair phase 

coherence length at a superconductor-to-insulator transition. Phys. Rev. B 87, 054512 (2013). 

48 
Schneider, T. & Weyeneth, S. Suppression of the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless and quantum 

phase transitions in two-dimensional superconductors by finite-size effects. Phys. Rev. B 90, 

064501 (2014). 

 

 

 

Acknowledgments: 

We gratefully acknowledge Dr. Sudhir Husale for critical reading of the manuscript and providing his 

invaluable comments and suggestions. The technical support for surface morphology imaging by AFM 

using the central facilities at CSIR-NPL is highly acknowledged. We are thankful to Mr. M. B. Chhetri 

for his technical assistance in the UHV sputtering lab. S.Y. acknowledges to UGC for JRF fellowship. 

B.G. and D.S. acknowledges to UGC-RGNF for SRF and JRF fellowships respectively. Authors 

acknowledge the financial support for establishing the dilution refrigerator facility at CSIR-NPL from the 

Department of Science and Technology (DST), Govt. of India, under the project, SR/S2/PU-

0003/2010(G). This work was supported by CSIR network project ‘AQuaRIUS’ (Project No. PSC 0110) 

and is carried out under the mission mode project “Quantum Current Metrology”. 


21 

 

 

 

 

Author contributions: 

B.G., S.Y., D.S. and S.S. fabricated the devices.  B.G., S.Y., R.P.A. and S.S. carried out the low 

temperature measurements in dilution refrigerator. A.G. supported the transport measurements in 

dilution refrigerator. K.K.M. performed the XRD characterization. B.G., S.Y. and S.S. analyzed 

the data. S.S. planned, designed and wrote the manuscript and supervised the project. All the authors 

read and reviewed the manuscript. 

 

 

Additional information 

Supporting Material contains the following, 

1. AFM morphology for nitride samples B1, B2 and B3 and the Nb control samples B1Ox, B2Ox and 

B3Ox. 

2. IVCs for oxide samples B1Ox, B3Ox for both up and down current sweep directions. 

3. IVCs for both up and down current sweep directions for nitride samples B1 and B2. 

4. R(T) measurements in presence of perpendicular magnetic field for nitride samples B1, B2 and 

B3. 

5. Calculation of Ginzburg-Landau (GL) coherence length (ξGL) for B1, B2 and B3. 

6. Resistive tailing in the SC-state. 

7. Summary Table: Characteristic parameters for the nitride samples. 

 


22 

 

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing financial and/or non-financial interests in 

relation to the work described. 

 

 

 

 

Figure Captions: 

Fig. 1: (a)-(d) Schematic presentation of the nitridation process for the transformation of Nb to Nb2N by 

using high temperature annealing with Si3N4/Si substrate. Arrows indicate the step wise process protocol. 

(e) Chemical representation of the reaction between Nb and Si3N4 under high temperature annealing leading 

to the formation of Nb2N. 

Fig. 2: XRD characterization. A set of XRD spectra for 4 nitride samples varying in thickness and one 

control sample of Nb film on SiO2/Si substrate. With decreasing thickness for the nitride substrates, 

elemental Nb phase disappears and Nb2N phase starts to dominate. The samples G3 and G4 are the reference 

samples grown simultaneously with B1 and B2, respectively, where B1 and B2 have been used to study the 

transport characteristics presented in the subsequent section. 

 

Fig. 3: Temperature dependent resistance [R(T)] measured at zero-field. (a) A set of for three nitride 

samples with varying thickness and three related to Nb control samples. For each thickness, one nitride 

sample and one control sample from the same batch have been selected. Inset: device geometry. (b) The 

same set of R(T) is shown with the resistance values normalized by the normal state resistance (RN) of 

individual sample. (c) Normalized resistance for the nitride samples are presented in reduced temperature 

(T/Tc0) scale. The vertical dotted lines represent the two transition regimes region-I and region-II. (d) 

Variation of different transition temperature (Tc) values, defined in (b), with thickness for the nitride 


23 

 

samples. The shaded regions indicate the dependence of transition width for the two transition regions on 

the sample thickness. 

 

 

Fig. 4: Current-voltage characteristics (IVCs) of Nb/Si3N4 samples measured under zero-field condition.  

IVC isotherms for (a) B1, (b) B2 and (c) B3. (d) The IVCs for B3 are shifted in voltage for clarity. The steps 

in the IVCs are extended by the dotted lines to show their convergence at a current, known as excess current 

Is which is lower than the critical current. The existence of the excess current and the increasing slopes for 

the intermediate steps for increasing current direction (up sweep) are the signature of phase slip lines. 

Critical currents are defined as shown by the dotted arrows. The line arrows indicate the current sweeping 

direction.      

 

Fig. 5: Temperature dependence of the characteristic currents for samples B1 (a), B2 (b) and B3(c). The 

temperature dependent critical currents and retrapping currents for the control samples on oxide substrates 

B1ox and B3ox are presented in the insets of (a) and (c), respectively. (d) Comparison of the critical currents 

between all the three nitride samples. Here, the critical temperature TC is defined as the temperature at which 

IVC becomes linear.          

                                                                                                                                                                                    

Fig. 6: IVCs for sample B1 under perpendicular magnetic field measured at 60 mK. 

 

Fig. 7: Representation of NM-SC phase transition of Nb2N thin films pictographically by using R(T) 

characteristics and the granular structure of the samples. (a) Normalized resistance in reduced temperature 

scale separately for all the three nitride samples. The colored shaded regions bounded by the dotted vertical 


24 

 

lines represent different stages of the phase transition and the stages are illustrated schematically through 

(b) to (e). Illustration of the granular films in normal state (b), establishment of local superconductivity in 

individual grains for the transition region-I (c), formation of superconducting puddle by combining phase 

coherent superconducting nano-grains in region-II (d), and finally the establishment of global coherence 

among the puddles to achieve the superconducting state (e). The solid cyan curves shown in (a) for the 

resistive transition in region-II represent the BKT transition using Halperin-Nelson equation which provides 

the BKT transition temperature TBKT and the fittings for individual samples are shown in (f) which 

selectively displays the fitting regions for all the three nitride samples. The details are explained in the text.  

  

 

 

 

 
 


25 

 

 

 

Fig. 1 

 

 
 


26 

 

 

 

Fig. 2 

 

 
 


27 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 

 
 


28 

 

 

 

Fig. 4 

 

 
 


29 

 

 

 

Fig. 5 

 


30 

 

 

 

Fig. 6 

 

 

 
 


31 

 

 

 

Fig. 7 

 

 


32 

 

Supporting Material 

Substrate mediated nitridation of niobium into superconducting 

Nb2N thin films for phase slip study 

Bikash Gajar1,2, Sachin Yadav1,2, Deepika Sawle1,2, Kamlesh K. Maurya1,3, Anurag Gupta1,2,  R.P. 

Aloysius1,2, and Sangeeta Sahoo*,1,2 

 

1 Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research (AcSIR), AcSIR Headquarters CSIR-HRDC 

Campus, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh 201002, India. 

2Electrical & Electronics Metrology Division, National Physical Laboratory, Council of 

Scientific and Industrial Research, Dr. K. S Krishnan Road, New Delhi-110012, India. 

3Indian Reference Materials Division, National Physical Laboratory, Council of Scientific and 

Industrial Research, Dr. K. S Krishnan Road, New Delhi-110012, India. 

*The correspondence should be addressed to S.S. (Email: sahoos@nplindia.org) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


33 

 

 

 

 Contents: 

1. AFM morphology for nitride samples B1, B2 and B3 and the Nb control samples 

B1Ox, B2Ox and B3Ox. 

2. IVCs for oxide samples B1Ox, B3Ox for both up and down current sweep directions. 

3. IVCs for both up and down current sweep directions for nitride samples B1 and B2. 

4. R(T) measurements in presence of perpendicular magnetic field for nitride samples 

B1, B2 and B3. 

5. Calculation of Ginzburg-Landau (GL) coherence length (ξGL) for B1, B2 and B3. 

6. Resistive tailing in the SC-state  

7. Summary Table: Characteristic parameters for the nitride samples. 

 

 
 


34 

 

1. AFM morphology for nitride samples B1, B2 and B3 and the Nb control 

samples B1Ox, B2Ox and B3Ox: 

 

Fig. S1: Morphological characterization. AFM topography images showing the granular nature of 

the films with variations in grain sizes for nitride samples B1, B2 and B3 in (a), (b) and (c), 

respectively and for the Nb control samples B1Ox, B2Ox and B3Ox in (d), (e) and (f), respectively. 


35 

 

 

AFM topography images, presented in Fig. S1, show the surface morphology of the nitride 

samples B1, B2 and B3 and the Nb control samples B1Ox, B2Ox and B3Ox. Both the nitride 

samples and the Nb control samples look granular in nature. The average grain sizes are 

estimated to be 40 nm, 30 nm and 23 nm for the nitride samples B1, B2 and B3, respectively. 

The overall variation in the grain size for the region bounded by the voltage probes are about ± 

10 nm for all the three samples. Therefore, grain size reduces for reduced thickness. Further, the 

surface looks less uniform for the thinner samples than that appeared for the thicker one.  On the 

other hand, the estimated average grain sizes are 37 nm, 27 nm and 12 nm for the control 

samples B1Ox, B2Ox and B3Ox, respectively with an overall variations of ± 7 nm for all of them. 

Grain sizes follow the same detrimental trend for the control samples also with reduction in 

thickness. For control samples, the reduction in Tc can be understood by the grain size reduction 

and for the thinnest sample B3Ox the grain size is much lower if we compare the same for the 

thinnest nitride sample B1. However, we do not observe staircase like phase slip lines (PSLs) in 

the current voltage characteristics (IVCs) for B3Ox and the R(T) was observed to be sharp with no 

such resistive tailing which was present for all the nitride samples. 

 

 
 


36 

 

2. IVCs for oxide samples B1Ox, B3Ox for both up and down current 

sweep directions: 

 

 

In Fig. S2, we have shown the IVCs for the oxide samples for both up and down sweep directions 

for the bias current. Here we selected the thickest (B1Ox) and the thinnest (B1Ox) samples among 

the three samples in order to observe the effects of thinning on the IVCs for the oxide samples. 

As we have already seen in the main text that for the nitride samples thickness plays a vital role 

in monitoring the transition region for superconductor-metal transition in their R(T) and also in 

IVCs. However, for the oxide samples we observe a single step sharp transition from 

superconductor to normal metallic transition at the critical current IC. The same is observed in the 

reverse direction at the retrapping current Ir which is much less than IC. Hence, the IVCs are 

hysteretic with respect to the current sweeping direction. Except for the values of these two 

Fig. S2: Current voltage characteristics (IVCs) for oxide samples. IVC isotherms for both up and 

down current sweep directions for B1Ox (a) and B3Ox (b). The critical current (IC) and the retrapping 

current (Ir) are marked by the dotted arrows while the solid arrows show the sweep direction for the 

bias current.


37 

 

characteristic currents IC and Ir both the samples show similar type of hysteretic IVCs which 

show a direct transition from SC to NM and vice-versa. It should be noted here that contrary to 

the nitride sample, we do not observe any intermediate resistive states for the oxide samples. 

 


38 

 

3. IVCs for both up and down current sweep directions for nitride samples 

B1 and B2:  

 

 

 

Fig. S3: Zero-field IVCs for nitride samples B1 and B2 for both increasing & decreasing current 

sweeping directions. Isothermal IVCs for B1 (a) and for B2 (c). For clarity, the IVC isotherms are 

shifted in the voltage axis by 10 mV from the consecutive IVC isotherm for B1 (b) and by 20 mV for 

B2 (d), respectively. The superconducting state in each IVC corresponds to zero-voltage in the voltage 

axes presented in (b) & (d). The characteristic currents, namely, the retrapping current Ir, the critical 

currents Ic0 & Inm are defined by the arrows in (b) and (d). 


39 

 

 

 

 

 

4. R(T) measurements in presence of perpendicular magnetic field for 
nitride samples B1, B2 and B3: 

 

 

 

In the main text, we have discussed about zero-field R(T) measurements in detail for the nitride 

samples. In Fig. S4, we present field-dependent R(T) including the zero-field R(T) separately for 

all the three samples. Here the variations in the zero-field R(T) characteristics among the samples 

are clearly visible. The curvature in the region-I is getting much more prominent with reduction 

in thickness from samples from B1-to-B2 and from B2-to-B3. With application of an external 

magnetic field of about 200-250 mT, the curvature in region one gets almost reversed and the 

transition shifts towards lower temperature. The kink, separating the two regions as explained in 

detail in the main text, almost disappears with the application of field and the R(T) characteristics 

look smooth compared to that measured at zero—field. The curvature in region-II remains 

almost unchanged for all the samples when measured under the external field.  

 

Fig. S4: Effects of perpendicular magnetic field on R(T) characteristics for nitride samples. Field-

dependent R(T) for B1 (a), B2 (b), and B3 (c), respectively. 


40 

 

 

 

 
 

 

5. Calculation of Ginzburg-Landau (GL) coherence length (ξGL) for B1, 

B2 and B3: 

 

We have calculated the Ginzburg-Landau coherence length, ξGL(0), from the upper critical field 

Hc2(Tesla) using the following formula1,2, 𝜉𝐺𝐿(0) = [

𝜙0

2𝜋𝑇𝑐|𝑑𝐻𝑐2

𝑑𝑇 |

𝑇𝑐

]

1 2
⁄

, where 𝜙0 is the flux 

quantum. In order to estimate  𝜉𝐺𝐿(0) , we have plotted the temperature dependent Hc2 for all the 

three nitride samples in Fig. S5. We have obtained the values for Hc2 from isothermal 

magnetoresistance R(H) measurements and the related points are marked as the star-shaped 

scattering points. Further, we have calculated TcOnset from the field dependent R(T) measurements 

carried out under a fixed external magnetic field and the points are represented by the solid 

Fig. S5: H-T phase diagram for nitride samples. Experimental points are obtained from 

magnetoresistance [R(H)] isotherms and from field dependent R(T)measurements under fixed 

external magnetic field applied perpendicular to the sample. The linear fit confirms that the 

samples are in dirty limit. The slope provides the GL coherence length ξGL, the details are explained 


41 

 

spherical scattering points in Fig. S5.The experimental data from both R(H) and R(T) 

measurements follow  a linear variation between the critical field and the critical temperatures. 

The slope of the fit is used to calculate the GL coherence length, 𝜉𝐺𝐿(0). Here, we used TcOnset-I 

as the Tc and accordingly, we have evaluated 𝜉𝐺𝐿(0) as 17.3 nm, 16.96 nm and 17.96 nm for B1, 

B2 and B3, respectively. As our thickness values for the nitride samples are of the order or less 

than the related coherence lengths, therefore, the samples can be considered in 2D limit.  

 

6. Resistive tailing in the SC-state  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. S6: A collective representation of the SC-states in a semi-logarithmic 

plot to have the insight into the SC-state. 


42 

 

 

 

7. Summary Table: Characteristic parameters for the nitride samples 

 

Table 1: Characteristic parameters for the nitride samples 

Sample
Thick-
ness 
(nm)

Grain 
size 
(nm) 
±10 
nm

RN
()

TcOnset-I

(K)

TcOnset-

II
(K)

Tc0
(K)

TCIV

(K)

TI
(K)

TII
(K)

TII
/TC0

R@ 
TcOnset-II

()

B1
16
40
79
1.18
0.82
0.73
0.8
0.36
0.09
0.123
0.4 RN

B2
11
30
72.3
1.24
0.77
0.68
0.9
0.47
0.09
0.132
0.25RN

B3
8
23
28.3
1.35
0.64
0.54
0.9
0.71
0.1
0.185
0.3 RN

 

We have summarized the characteristic parameters that are obtained from the R(T) and IVC 

measurements for the nitride samples. The thickness and the grain sizes are measured by atomic 

force microscopy (AFM). Here, TCIV relates the transition temperature obtained from IVCs and it 

is mentioned in the main text as TC. TI and TII correspond to the transition width in region-I and 

region-II respectively. It is clear that transition width is much wider in region-I than that in region-II. The 

normal state resistance RN and the onset critical temperature TcOnset-I vary in an unconventional way 

with the thickness. Further, the TCIV appears to be close to TcOnset-II and from the IVCs, we have 

observed that below TCIV PSLs appear for all the samples. This indicates that the phase fluctuations 

in region-II and SC state contribute significantly to the resistive transition.  

 

 


43 

 

 

 

References: 

1. Orlando, T. P., McNiff, E. J., Foner, S. & Beasley, M. R. Critical fields, Pauli 

paramagnetic limiting, and material parameters of Nb3Sn and V3Si. Phy. Rev. B 19, 4545 

(1979). 

2. Bawa, A., Gupta, A., Singh, S., Awana, V. P. S., Sahoo, S. Ultrasensitive interplay 

between ferromagnetism and superconductivity in NbGd composite thin films. Sci. Rep. 

6, 18689 (2016). 

 

 


