 
   
 

1 
 

Frequency-Division Multiplexing in Magnonic Logic Networks Based on Caustic-Like 
Spin-Wave Beams 
 
Frank Heussner1,*, Matthias Nabinger1, Tobias Fischer1,2, Thomas Brächer1, Alexander A. 
Serga1, Burkard Hillebrands1, and Philipp Pirro1 
 
1 Fachbereich Physik and Landesforschungszentrum OPTIMAS, Technische Universität  
  Kaiserslautern, D-67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany 
2 Graduate School Materials Science in Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany 
* E-mail: heussner@rhrk.uni-kl.de 
 
 
Keywords: frequency-division multiplexing, wave-based logic, magnonic networks, spin-
wave caustics, parallel data processing. 
 

 

Abstract: 

Wave-based data processing by spin waves and their quanta, magnons, is a promising technique 

to overcome the challenges which CMOS-based logic networks are facing nowadays. The 

advantage of these quasi-particles lies in their potential for the realization of energy efficient 

devices on the micro- to nanometer scale due to their charge-less propagation in magnetic 

materials. In this paper, the frequency dependence of the propagation direction of caustic-like 

spin-wave beams in microstructured ferromagnets is studied by micromagnetic simulations. 

Based on the observed alteration of the propagation angle, an approach to spatially combine 

and separate spin-wave signals of different frequencies is demonstrated. The presented 

magnetic structure constitutes a prototype design of a passive circuit enabling frequency-

division multiplexing in magnonic logic networks. It is verified that spin-wave signals of 

different frequencies can be transmitted through the device simultaneously without any 

interaction or creation of spurious signals. Due to the wave-based approach of computing in 

magnonic networks, the technique of frequency-division multiplexing can be the basis for 

parallel data processing in single magnonic devices, enabling the multiplication of the data 

throughput.  

 


 
   
 

2 
 

Main text: 

Multiplexing is a widely used technique of data transmission in telecommunication or computer 

networks.[1] The common aim of all different realizations of this concept is to transfer multiple 

data signals through a shared transmission line.[2–6] In view of the different challenges todays 

CMOS technology is facing,[7] the concept of multiplexing is also very interesting for new 

approaches of data processing like, e.g., the field of magnonics.[8–14] In this case, spin waves 

(SW) are used to transport data[15-17] and the information can be encoded in their amplitude or 

phase.[18] This approach is especially interesting since wave-based logic can be realized by 

utilizing interference effects[19] of the spin waves as has been shown by, e.g., the development 

of the spin-wave majority gate[20,21] and other interferometer-based devices.[22,23] 

Aiming at an efficient signal transport in magnonic circuits, spin-wave multiplexers enabling 

time-division multiplexing have already been experimentally demonstrated.[24,25] In this case, 

the information carrying spin-wave signals are getting temporarily separated, successively 

transferred through the shared magnonic waveguide and finally allocated to different output 

waveguides by the spin-wave (de)multiplexer. 

In contrast, frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) enables a simultaneous transport of 

data.[1,26] The bandwidth of the transmission medium is divided into separated frequency 

channels and the data signals are simultaneously transferred at different frequencies. This 

approach is heavily used in a broad range of applications, from radio broadcasting and fiber 

optics to communication satellites.[3–6] However, since the data handling is realized by 

transistor-based logic elements, the information cannot be simultaneously processed in a single 

device. The data has to be demodulated and divided, since one transistor can only process one 

bit at a time.[26] 

One significant advantage of wave-based logic (including spin waves) arises from the fact that 

single logic elements can perform multiple data operations simultaneously.[26] This is due to the 

superposition principle enabling independent interference-based operations in the different 


 
   
 

3 
 

frequency channels. Hence, parallel data processing in single logic elements, in addition to 

simultaneous data transport, makes FDM especially interesting for wave-based computing since 

it multiplies the throughput of the logic networks. As important preparatory work, various 

approaches for the realization of a frequency-selective propagation of spin waves have already 

been demonstrated.[27-30] 

We propose to utilize caustic-like spin-wave beams to realize FDM in magnonic circuits since 

they exhibit a pronounced frequency dependence of their propagation direction.[31-34] The origin 

of these beams is the anisotropic spin-wave propagation in an in-plane magnetized 2D magnetic 

medium which is induced by the dipole-dipole interaction. Considering a fixed spin-wave 

frequency, this anisotropy can lead to a (nearly) unchanged direction of the group velocity 

vector for a broad range of wavevectors. In this case, a focusing of spin-wave energy into 

designated propagation directions occurs which results in the creation of strong spin-wave 

beams.[32-39] A change of the spin-wave frequency leads to modified directions of the group 

velocity vector and, subsequently, to a change of the focused beam direction, as has been 

experimentally demonstrated.[32-35] We refer to all of these focused spin-wave beams, whose 

origin lies in the anisotropy of the spin-wave system, as “caustic-like”. This is due to the fact 

that a spin-wave caustic in the narrower sense only occurs at the point of the constant-frequency 

curve in k-space where its curvature is zero[31]. This condition is not necessarily fulfilled for all 

the beams studied in this work. However, the following simulations as well as previous 

experiments[33,34] show no clear distinguishing features between the caustic-like and true caustic 

beams. 

In this letter, we present the design of a passive device which performs frequency-division 

multiplexing in a microscaled magnonic logic network based on caustic-like spin-wave beams. 

As groundwork, the frequency dependence of the propagation direction of these beams is 

studied by micromagnetic simulations using the open-source simulation program MuMax3.[41] 

Subsequently, it is demonstrated how this effect can be used to combine and split spin-wave 


 
   
 

4 
 

signals of different frequencies resulting in the developed FDM device. Finally, the frequency 

spectra in the different component parts of the FDM circuit are studied to verify the proper 

separation of the frequency channels. It is shown that in the low-signal regime no spurious 

signals due to, e.g., nonlinear frequency mixing occur and the spin-wave phase is preserved 

enabling its use for data coding. 

In magnonic networks, the interconnections between logic elements are realized via narrow 

stripes of magnetic material, so called spin-wave waveguides. Hence, it is very suitable to 

perform the creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams within these networks by attaching an 

input waveguide to a widened film area.[34,36-38] Based on this approach, the geometry to study 

the frequency dependence of caustic-like spin-wave beams in microstructured ferromagnets is 

chosen as shown in Figure 1a. In all following cases, the material parameters of the Heusler 

compound Co2Mn0.6Fe0.4Si (CMFS[33,42-46]) have been used since this promising magnonic 

material combines high saturation magnetization[44] with rather low magnetic damping at 

microwave frequencies[44,45] and, thus, allows for a long-distance spin-wave propagation.[46] 

Due to the high saturation magnetization MS, the efficient creation of caustic-like spin-wave 

beams is feasible in a broad range of frequencies,[33] which is not necessarily the case for 

materials with lower MS such as, e.g., YIG.[32] The 30 nm thick structures are in-plane 

magnetized along the y-direction by an external magnetic field of μ0Hext = 75 mT. In the 

micromagnetic simulations, spin waves, which represent the input signal, are excited in the 1.5 

µm wide waveguide at the position x = −3 µm by a locally applied microwave magnetic field. 

Figure 1b shows the result of the simulations for a spin-wave frequency of f = 9.5GHz in the 

form of a two-dimensional map of the time-averaged, frequency-dependent spin-wave intensity 

(see experimental section for further information). Spin waves are excited in the input 

waveguide. The sharp transition from the waveguide to the broad magnetic area (x = 0 µm) acts 

as a point-like source for secondary spin waves exhibiting a broad wavevector spectrum, which 

leads to the creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams as discussed above. In contrast to previous 


 
   
 

5 
 

works,[34,36-38] the input waveguide is positioned on the edge of the widened area. The boundary 

of the magnetic structure leads to a reflection of spin-wave energy rather than to its total 

absorption.[36,47,48] Thus, the geometric confinement prevents from a splitting of the spin-wave 

energy into two symmetric beams and only one caustic-like beam occurs. Its angle of 

propagation θ is defined with regard to the direction of the local magnetization,[36,38] which 

coincides with the direction of the external field inside the widened film area. To determine the 

propagation angle of the beam, a linear curve fitting has been performed along the position of 

the intensity maxima between x = 1 µm and x = 11 µm. It reveals a value of θ = (77.5 ± 1.0)° 

with respect to the external magnetic field Hext. To study the frequency dependence of the beam 

direction, this procedure has been repeated in steps of 0.5 GHz for frequencies between f = 9 

GHz and f = 18 GHz. The lower limit is determined by the bottom of the spin-wave spectrum, 

which can be calculated to fb = (8.92 ± 0.05) GHz.[49,50] The graph of Figure 1c summarizes the 

result of this study by showing the occurring beam angles θ as a function of the excitation 

frequency f. A clear saturation-like behavior is discernible: The changes of the beam angle are 

most pronounced close to the minimal spin-wave frequency fb and, within the studied frequency 

range, the angle variation is diminishing as f increases. This behavior results from the excited 

wavevector spectrum in combination with the wavevector dependent direction of the group 

velocity vector at different frequencies which is determined by a complex interplay between 

the dipole-dipole and the exchange interaction: The dipole-dipole interaction induces the 

anisotropy of the spin-wave propagation in in-plane magnetized films and, hence, it is 

responsible for broad ranges of spin-wave wavevectors with (nearly) parallel directions of the 

corresponding group velocity vectors. Thus, the dipole-dipole interaction is mainly responsible 

for the creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams in this work. However, the exchange 

interaction influences the exact direction of the group velocity vectors and, hence, the studied 

frequency dependence of the direction of the caustic-like spin-wave beams. It should be 

mentioned that a creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams is also possible in the exchange 


 
   
 

6 
 

dominated regime of the spin-wave spectrum.[52] Hence, a miniaturization of the presented 

multiplexing device utilizing spin waves with extremely short wavelengths should be possible. 

Aiming at an approach to realize frequency-division multiplexing in a magnonic logic circuit, 

the strong frequency dependence of the beam directions in the vicinity of the bottom of the 

spin-wave spectrum has to be highlighted. It becomes particularly obvious when comparing, 

e.g., the beam angles θB1(9.5 GHz) = 77.5° and θB2(12.5 GHz) = 66.2°. Hence, a frequency 

variation of ∆f = 3 GHz results in a pronounced change of the beam angle of ∆θB = 11.3°. The 

distinct angle variation demonstrates the applicability of the caustic effect to separate and 

combine spin-wave signals of different frequencies. 

Based on these insights, the design of a FDM prototype circuit has been developed, which is 

adjusted for the above mentioned frequencies f1 = 9.5 GHz and f2 = 12.5 GHz. The magnetic 

structure is indicated by the surrounding black, dashed lines in Figure 2. The circuit consists 

of three main component parts: The first part of the structure acts as a combiner, also referred 

to as multiplexer. Two 1.5 µm wide input waveguides assigned to two different input 

frequencies f1 and f2 are connected to the widened film area. The spike-shaped structure between 

the two inputs suppresses the spreading of spin-wave energy from the upper input waveguide 

into the negative y-direction during the beam formation. At the end of the 2D combiner area, a 

single output is added so that the energy of both inputs can be collected if their corresponding 

spin-wave beams occur under the proper angles. This 1.5 µm wide center waveguide constitutes 

the shared transmission line for the combined signals and, thus, is representing the second and 

main building block of the circuit, the actual multiplex area. After the pass-through of the spin 

waves, it also acts as the input for the third component part. The spin-wave demultiplexer 

separates the spin-wave signals of different frequencies again. It consists of another widened 

film area and two 1.5 µm wide output waveguides. The transition zones of the outputs of both 

the combiner and the demultiplexer are specially tailored and their positions are adjusted to 


 
   
 

7 
 

ensure an efficient channeling of spin-wave energy into the subsequent waveguides according 

to the occurring beam directions.[38] 

In the micromagnetic simulations, a simultaneous excitation of spin waves of different 

frequencies takes place in both input waveguides. This is realized by applying the microwave 

magnetic field bexc, which is described in the experimental section, at the position x = −3 µm 

and centered in the respective input waveguide. In the upper input, a frequency of f1 = 9.5 GHz 

is used while the excitation in the lower one is done at f2 = 12.5 GHz. Figure 2a and b show the 

normalized spin-wave intensity distribution in the circuit at the respective frequencies. It should 

be stressed that the different input signals propagate through the structure at the same time. The 

separation of the frequency-dependent spin-wave intensities shown in Figure 2 was achieved 

by the employed temporal Fourier-transformation (see experimental section). 

Exemplarily, the passage of the spin-wave signal of frequency f1 = 9.5GHz through the circuit 

will be discussed (Figure 2a). The spin waves enter the device in the upper input waveguide. In 

the combiner region, caustic-like spin-wave beams are created and they reach the multiplex 

area due to their propagation angle of θB1(9.5 GHz) = 77.5°. After passing this center waveguide, 

the signal enters the demultiplexer and is channeled back to the upper output. Following the 

same principle, spin waves of the frequency f2 = 12.5 GHz entering the lower input are 

channeled into the same multiplex area and finally guided into the lower output again (Figure 

2b). In agreement with Ref.,[38] the caustic-like spin-wave beams, which propagate in the 

combiner and demultiplexer, are transferred back to guided waveguide modes in the multiplex 

waveguide and in the outputs. Hence, this design of a FDM circuit makes it possible to combine 

two spin-wave signals of two different frequencies into a shared transmission line and to 

separate them again afterwards. It should be highlighted that this device is based on intrinsic 

effects of the creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams and no external control, such as, e.g., 

utilized in Ref.[24,25] to realize time-division multiplexers, is required. 


 
   
 

8 
 

After demonstrating the working principle of the FDM circuit, it will be verified that both spin-

wave signals with different frequencies can pass the device simultaneously without disturbing 

each other by, e.g., nonlinear scattering effects. In the following paragraph, it will be shown 

that such effects, which might lead to spurious signals at other frequencies followed by an 

intensity decrease of the actual signals, are negligible. 

Utilizing the data calculated by the temporal Fourier-transformation as described in the 

experimental section, Figure 3a-e shows the frequency spectra of the spin-wave amplitude at 

five different positions within the FDM circuit.[51] They are located in the center of the different 

waveguides as marked by the dots in Figure 2. The solid lines in Figure 3 represent the results 

in case a simultaneous excitation of both input signals takes place. In addition, simulations with 

single frequency excitations in the respective input waveguides have been performed as shown 

by the dashed lines. At each position, the data curves are normalized to the maximal amplitude 

of all three different excitation schemes. 

In the case of a single frequency excitation at f1 = 9.5 GHz in the upper input waveguide (red 

dashed lines), only one sharp peak at f1 is visible in the upper in- and output as well as in the 

multiplex area (Figure 3a,c and d). The ratio of the signal at f1 in the upper waveguides to the 

noise amplitudes in the lower waveguides is always higher than 17 dB. Hence, only very small 

signals are detected in the lower in- and outputs (Figure 3b and e). A spin-wave excitation in 

the lower input at f2 = 12.5 GHz leads to a qualitatively equal observation with, however, 

dominant spin-wave signals at f2 in the lower in- and output instead. This result highlights the 

efficient channeling and separation of the spin-wave signals into the respective waveguides 

once more. 

In the case of a simultaneous excitation of spin-waves at f1 and f2 in the respective inputs, the 

resulting spectra are the linear combination of the previously observed spectra of the single 

frequency excitations and no intensity decrease of the maxima occurs. Inside the in- and outputs, 

only one pronounced peak is visible and two distinctly detached peaks occur in the multiplex 


 
   
 

9 
 

area. Hence, two important facts are revealed. First, the spin-wave signals are transmitted in 

two clearly separated frequency channels as can be seen in Figure 3c. Second, the discrete peaks 

in the outputs in the case of a simultaneous transmission coincide in form and also in the 

maximum value with the curves which are observed in case of single frequency excitations. In 

all cases, the signal-to-noise ratio in the outputs between signals at f1 and f2 is still higher than 

17 dB. No pronounced signals at other frequencies appear. This demonstrates that the two spin-

waves at f1 and f2 do not interact inside the multiplex area and no frequency mixing occurs. The 

simultaneous propagation without interaction can be explained by the superposition principle 

in combination with the fact that the spin-wave amplitudes are in the linear regime. In the case 

of higher signal amplitudes, nonlinear phenomena might occur leading to scattering and mixing 

effects resulting in the creation of spin-waves at other frequencies.[45] 

In addition, it has been verified that the phase of the spin-waves is not changed in case a 

simultaneous transmission takes place instead of single frequency excitations. This is shown in 

Figure 3f-e by comparing the phase evolution of the spin-wave amplitudes integrated along the 

waveguide width in the output at t = 12.5 ns.[38] Furthermore, the shown spatial phase evolution 

confirms a defined propagation of guided modes in the outputs.[38] A change of the transversal 

mode structure[53,54] during the propagation of the spin waves through the different waveguides 

of the presented circuit is not observed. 

In conclusion, the presented circuit is a passive network element which performs the operation 

of multiplexing and demultiplexing of spin-wave signals without any additional power 

consumption. The studied frequency dependence of the direction of caustic-like spin-wave 

beams is used to combine and separate spin-wave signals of different frequencies enabling 

frequency-division multiplexing for simultaneous signal transport. It is evidenced that no 

frequency-mixing or other nonlinear effects occur in the shared transmission line and, thus, no 

spurious signals disturb the functionality. In addition, the signal phase is not affected in case of 

a simultaneous transmission. By inserting proper logic elements in the multiplex area, 


 
   
 

10 
 

simultaneous data processing in a single device can be realized resulting in a large efficiency 

boost of the logic circuits. Hence, the presented device can be a pivotal element for multi-

frequency magnonic logic networks. 

 

Experimental Section 

Micromagnetic Simulations: The micromagnetic simulations presented in this paper have been 

carried out by utilizing the open-source simulation program MuMax3.[41] In all cases, the 

magnetic structures are discretized into cells of 15 nm × 15 nm × 30 nm ensuring that in-plane 

wavevectors up to at least 100 rad/µm can be resolved. To suppress reflections of spin-wave 

energy at the outer boundaries of the simulated geometry, the Gilbert damping parameter is 

incrementally increased in 25 steps over a distance of 0.5 µm from α = 0.0021 to α = 0.5 at the 

outermost left edge of the input waveguides and the outermost right edge of the magnetic 

structures. As the first step of the micromagnetic simulations, the magnetic ground state is 

calculated. Afterwards, spin waves are excited by applying a local excitation field. It is oriented 

along the z-axis and has a Gaussian shape of the form 𝑏exc = (0,0, 𝑏0) exp [−(𝑥/0.2 µm)2 −

(𝑦/0.4 µm)2] sin(2𝜋𝑓𝑡) with an amplitude of b0 = 1 mT. This profile ensures the possibility 

to excite spin waves in a broad range of wavevectors kx along the x-direction. In addition, the 

first transversal waveguide mode is dominantly excited due to the Gaussian profile in y-

direction. Both features of the excited spin waves are desired for the utilization in a magnonic 

logic network. A maximum precession angle of the magnetization of around 0.45° occurs in the 

center of the excitation field. The simulation time is adjusted in accordance with the extend of 

the magnetic structures to ensure a propagation of the spin-wave energy through the whole 

geometry. In case of the results presented in Figure 1, the simulation time is set to 7.5 ns. Due 

to the bigger extent of the FDM circuit shown in Figure 2, the simulation time is increased to 

15 ns. The resulting raw data of the micromagnetic simulations is the spatially resolved 

magnetization distribution. During the whole simulation time, the 2D data is saved every 25 ps 


 
   
 

11 
 

right after applying the excitation field. In Figure 1b and 2, the results are presented in the form 

of time-averaged, frequency-dependent spin-wave intensity maps which have been obtained by 

a temporal Fourier-transformation and an integration of the resulting frequency-dependent spin-

wave intensity over an interval of [f − 0.25 GHz, f + 0.25 GHz]. By employing the temporal 

Fourier-transformation, a separation and an independent discussion of the multi-frequency spin-

wave signals, which propagate simultaneously through the presented multiplexing circuit, is 

possible. Furthermore, the results of the calculation provide access to the time-averaged, 

frequency-dependent spin-wave intensity which can be experimentally measured by Brillouin 

light scattering spectroscopy.[55] The normalized intensity shown in Figure 2 is calculated by 

normalizing the spin-wave intensity along the y-direction to its sum. By this, the spin-wave 

damping is compensated to illustrate the working principle of the device. In addition, only the 

data of the stationary state (t > 10 ns) is used to calculate the frequency dependent spin-wave 

intensity distribution by performing the previously described evaluation steps (The spin waves 

reach the end of the output waveguides after around 10 ns). This is important to ensure a proper 

calculation of the frequency spectra shown in Figure 3. In general, MuMax3 is capable of 

studying non-linear effects of spin waves with high amplitudes.[56] However, we restrict our 

analysis to the spin-wave propagation in the linear regime. Consequently, no non-linear effects 

are visible in the presented simulations as discussed in the main article. 

Design of the multiplexing circuit: The multiplexing circuit has been designed to enable an 

efficient spatial separation of spin-wave signals of different frequencies. This separation can 

mainly be influenced by two dimensions of the multiplexing circuit: the width of the 

waveguides and the length of the widened film areas of the combiner and the demultiplexer. 

The width of the waveguides, which are connected to the combiner and to the demultiplexer, 

determines the wavevector spectrum of the spin waves in the widened areas. A change of the 

wavevector spectrum can influence the directions of the caustic-like spin-wave beams due to a 

changed distribution of its containing group velocity vectors. This could engender a change of 


 
   
 

12 
 

the spatial separation of spin-wave beams of different frequencies. However, this effect is not 

very pronounced for moderate changes of the waveguide width since the condition for the 

creation of caustic-like spin-wave beams is precisely that the direction of the spin-wave group 

velocity vector is (nearly) unchanged for a broad range of spin-wave wavevectors. 

The second influence on the separation of different spin-wave signals is more pronounced and 

mainly due to geometric reasons: To reach a sufficiently large spatial separation of the signals, 

the length of the widened areas has to be adjusted to the width of the waveguides and the angle 

difference between the different caustic-like spin-wave beams. The (initial) width of the beams 

is given by the width of transition zones. Hence, a decrease of the waveguide width in 

combination with an unchanged length of the widened film areas would lead to an enhanced 

spatial separation of the different caustic-like spin-wave beams. This statement is valid as long 

as the direction of the beams is not significantly influenced by the decreased waveguide width. 

Spin-wave transmission: The ratio of the spin-wave intensities integrated along the waveguide 

width at x = -2 µm and x = 46 µm are calculated to 26.0 dB for the signal at 9.5 GHz (upper in- 

and output) and 29.8 dB for the signal at 12.5 GHz (lower in- and output). These values can be 

mainly attributed to the intrinsic spin-wave damping of the magnetic material in combination 

with the respective propagation distances and group velocities of both signals, as it is the case 

for all spin-wave based devices. Apart from that, reflections of the spin-wave signals lead to 

additional transmission losses. It should be mentioned that the frequency-selective technique of 

(localized) parallel parametric amplification[50] could be used to compensate for losses and to 

equalize varying intensities of spin-wave signals in a multi-frequency magnonic logic circuit. 

Calculation of the bottom of the spin-wave spectrum: The calculations are based on Ref.[49,50] 

and take into account the material parameters of CMFS, the film thickness of 30 nm and the 

effective magnetic field of μ0Heff = (73 ± 1) mT, which considers demagnetizing fields inside 

the film area. 

 


 
   
 

13 
 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank A.V. Chumak, Q. Wang and T. Ludwig for valuable discussions. Financial 

support by DFG within project B01 of the Transregional Collaborative Research Centre 

(SFB/TRR) 173 ”Spin+X” and from the EU Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 

within the CHIRON project (contract number 801055) is gratefully acknowledged. 

 

References 

[1] 
R. L. Freeman, Fundamentals of Telecommunications, Wiley-IEEE Press, Hoboken, NJ, 

USA 2005. 

[2] 
D. J. Richardson, J. M. Fini, L. E. Nelson, Nat. Photonics 2013, 7, 354. 

[3] 
F. M. Ryan, J. R. Tolmie, R. O. Bach, Proc. IRE 1920, 8, 451. 

[4] 
H. Ishio, J. Minowa, K. Nosu, J. Lightw. Technol. 1984, 2, 448. 

[5] 
C. Kudsia, R. Cameron, W. C. Tang, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 1992, 40, 1133. 

[6] 
N. Michailow, M. Matthé, I. S. Gaspar, A. N. Caldevilla, L. L. Mendes, A. Festag, G. 

Fettweis, IEEE Trans. Commun. 2014, 62, 3045. 

[7] 
M. Mitchell Waldrop, Nature 2016, 530, 144147. 

[8] 
A. Khitun, M. Bao, K. Wang, IEEE Trans. Magn. 2008, 44, 2141. 

[9] 
A. V. Chumak, V. I. Vasyuchka, A. A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, Nat. Phys. 2015, 11, 453. 

[10] 
V. V. Kruglyak, S. O. Demokritov, D. Grundler, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2010, 43, 

264001. 

[11] 
A. A. Serga, A. V. Chumak, B. Hillebrands, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2010, 43, 264002. 

[12] 
G. Csaba, A. Papp, W. Porod, Phys. Lett. A 2017, 381, 1471. 

[13] 
S. Neusser, D. Grundler, Adv. Mater. 2009, 21, 2927. 

[14] 
D. Sander, S. O. Valenzuela, D. Makarov, C. H. Marrows, E. E. Fullerton, P. Fischer, J. 

McCord, P. Vavassori, S. Mangin, P. Pirro, B. Hillebrands, A. D. Kent, T. Jungwirth, O. 

Gutfleisch, C. G. Kim, A. Berger, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2017, 50, 363001. 


 
   
 

14 
 

[15] 
V. E. Demidov, S. Urazhdin, A. Zholud, A. V. Sadovnikov, S. O. Demokritov, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 2015, 106, 022403. 

[16] 
A. V. Sadovnikov, A. A. Grachev, E. N. Beginin, S. E. Sheshukova, Yu. P. Sharaevskii, S. 

A. Nikitov, Phys. Rev. Appl. 2017, 7, 014013. 

[17] 
A. V. Sadovnikov, S. A. Odintsov, E. N. Beginin, S. E. Sheshukova, and Yu. P. 

Sharaevskii, S. A. Nikitov, Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 144428. 

[18] 
F. Ciubotaru, T. Devolder, M. Manfrini, C. Adelmann, I. P. Radu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 016, 

109, 012403. 

[19] 
N. Sato, K. Sekiguchi, Y. Nozaki, Appl. Phys. Express 2013, 6, 063001. 

[20] 
S. Klingler, P. Pirro, T. Brächer, B. Leven, B. Hillebrands, A.V. Chumak, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 2015, 106, 212406. 

[21] 
T. Fischer, M. Kewenig, D. A. Bozhko, A. A. Serga, I. I. Syvorotka, F. Ciubotaru, C. 

Adelmann, B. Hillebrands, A.V. Chumak, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 110, 152401. 

[22] 
K.-S. Lee, S.-K. Kim, J. Appl. Phys. 2008, 104, 053909. 

[23] 
T. Schneider, A. A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, M. Kostylev, J. Nanoelectron. Optoelectron. 

2008, 3 (1), 69. 

[24] 
K. Vogt, F. Y. Fradin, J. E. Pearson, T. Sebastian, S. D. Bader, B. Hillebrands, A. 

Hoffmann, H. Schultheiss, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3727. 

[25] 
C. S. Davies, A. V. Sadovnikov, S. V. Grishin, Yu. P. Sharaevsky, S. A. Nikitov, V. V. 

Kruglyak, IEEE Trans. Magn. 2015, 51, 3401904. 

[26] 
A. Khitun, J. Appl. Phys. 2012, 111, 054307. 

[27] 
A. V. Sadovnikov, E. N. Beginin, S. A. Odincov, S. E. Sheshukova, Yu. P. Sharaevskii, A. 

I. Stognij, S. A. Nikitov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 108, 172411. 

[28] 
A. V. Sadovnikov, V. A. Gubanov, S. E. Sheshukova, Yu. P. Sharaevskii, S.A. Nikitov, 

Phys. Rev. Appl. 2018, 9, 051002. 

[29] 
Q. Wang, P. Pirro, R. Verba, A. Slavin, B. Hillebrands, A. V. Chumak, Sci. Adv. 2018, 4, 

e1701517. 


 
   
 

15 
 

[30] 
A. V. Sadovnikov, A. A. Grachev, S. E. Sheshukova, Yu. P. Sharaevskii, A. A. 

Serdobintsev, D. M. Mitin, S. A. Nikitov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018, 120, 257203. 

[31] 
V. Veerakumar, R. E. Camley, Phys. Rev. B 2006, 74, 214401. 

[32] 
R. Gieniusz, H. Ulrichs, V. D. Bessonov, U. Guzowska, A. I. Stognii, A. Maziewski, Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, 102409. 

[33] 
T. Sebastian, T. Brächer, P. Pirro, A. A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, T. Kubota, H. Naganuma, 

M. Oogane, Y. Ando, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 067201. 

[34] 
V. E. Demidov, S. O. Demokritov, D. Birt, B. O’Gorman, M. Tsoi, X. Li, Phys. Rev. B 

2009, 80, 014429. 

[35] 
A. V. Vashkovskii, A. V. Stal’makhov, D. G. Shakhnazaryan, Sov. Phys. J. 1988, 31, 908. 

[36] 
T. Schneider, A. A. Serga, A. V. Chumak, C. W. Sandweg, S. Trudel, S. Wolff, M. P. 

Kostylev, V. S. Tiberkevich, A. N. Slavin, B. Hillebrands, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2010, 104, 197203. 

[37] 
O. Dzyapko, I. V. Borisenko, V. E. Demidov, W. Pernice, S. O. Demokritov, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 2016, 109, 232407. 

[38] 
F. Heussner, A. A. Serga, T. Brächer, B. Hillebrands, P. Pirro, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 111, 

122401. 

[39] 
C. S. Davies, A. V. Sadovnikov, S. V. Grishin, Yu. P. Sharaevskii, S. A. Nikitov, V. V. 

Kruglyak, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 107, 162401. 

[40] 
C. S. Davies, V. V. Kruglyak, Low Temp. Phys. 2015, 41, 760. 

[41] 
A. Vansteenkiste, J. Leliaert, M. Dvornik, M. Helsen, F. Garcia-Sanchez, B. Van 

Waeyenberge, AIP Advances 2014, 4, 107133. 

[42] 
CMFS: Saturation magnetization MS = 1151 kA/m, exchange const. Aex = 22 pJ/m, Gilbert 

damping const. α = 0.0021. 

[43] 
S. Mizukami, A. A. Serga, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2015, 48, 160301. 

[44] 
T. Sebastian, Y. Kawada, B. Obry, T. Brächer, P. Pirro, D. A. Bozhko, A. A. Serga, H. 

Naganuma, M. Oogane, Y. Ando, B. Hillebrands, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2015, 48, 164015. 


 
   
 

16 
 

[45] 
P. Pirro, T. Sebastian, T. Brächer, A. A. Serga, T. Kubota, H. Naganuma, M. Oogane, Y. 

Ando, B. Hillebrands, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 227601. 

[46] 
T. Sebastian, Y. Ohdaira, T. Kubota, P. Pirro, T. Brächer, K. Vogt, A. A. Serga, H. 

Naganuma, M. Oogane, Y. Ando, B. Hillebrands, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 100, 112402. 

[47] 
P. Clausen, K. Vogt, H. Schultheiss, S. Schäfer, B. Obry, G. Wolf, P. Pirro, B. Leven, B. 

Hillebrands, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99, 162505. 

[48] 
A. V. Sadovnikov, C. S. Davies, V. V. Kruglyak, D. V. Romanenko, S. V. Grishin, E. N. 

Beginin, Y. P. Sharaevskii, S. A. Nikitov, Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 060401(R). 

[49] 
B. A. Kalinikos, A. N. Slavin, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 1986, 19, 7013. 

[50] 
T. Brächer, P. Pirro, B. Hillebrands, Phys. Rep. 2017, 699, 1. 

[51] 
Upper input: x = −2 µm, y = 3.525 µm; Lower input: x = −2 µm, y = 0.75 µm; Multiplex 

area: x = 23 µm, y = 6.885 µm; Upper output: x = 46 µm, y = 3.525 µm; Lower output: x = 46 µm, 

y = 0.75 µm. 

[52] 
J. J. Bible, R. E. Camley, Phys. Rev. B 2017, 95, 224412. 

[53] 
A. V. Sadovnikov, E. N. Beginin, K. V. Bublikov, S. V. Grishin, S. E. Sheshukova, Yu. P. 

Sharaevskii, and S. A. Nikitov, J. Appl. Phys. 2015, 118, 203906. 

[54] 
P. Pirro, T. Brächer, K. Vogt, B. Obry, H. Schultheiss, B. Leven, B. Hillebrands, Phys. 

Status Solidi B 2011, 248, No. 10, 2404. 

[55] 
T. Sebastian, K. Schultheiss, B. Obry, B. Hillebrands, H. Schultheiss, Front. Phys. 2015, 

3, 35. 

[56] 
M. Helsen, A. Gangwar, J. De Clercq, A. Vansteenkiste, M. Weigand, C. H. Back, B. Van 

Waeyenberge, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 106, 032405. 

 

 

 


 
   
 

17 
 

 

 

Figure 1. a) Sketch of the geometry used in the micromagnetic simulations. The magnetic 
structure consist of a narrow input waveguide connected to a wide film area. Spin waves are 
excited by a local excitation field inside the input waveguide. b) Resulting spin-wave intensity 
distribution for an excitation frequency of f = 9.5 GHz. A linear fit along the maxima of the 
occurring caustic-like spin-wave beam in the range from x = 1 µm to x = 11 µm is added. It 
reveals a propagation angle of θ = 77.5° with respect to the direction of the external field. c) 
Frequency dependency of the occurring beam directions. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Figure 2. Frequency-division multiplexing circuit for magnonic logic networks based on 
caustic-like spin-wave beams. Spin-wave signals of different frequencies enter the circuit 
simultaneously through different input waveguides. Due to different beam angles, they are 
combined into the shared multiplex area and afterwards separated again into different output 
waveguides. The procedure is shown for spin-wave signals at a) f1 = 9.5 GHz and b) f2 = 12.5 
GHz. The colored dots mark the extraction positions of the frequency spectra shown in Figure 
3a-e. 
 
 


 
   
 

18 
 

 

 

Figure 3. a) - e) Frequency spectra at different positions within the FDM circuit (marked by 
the dots in Figure 2). f) - g) Spin-wave intensity integrated along the width of the output 
waveguides as function of the x-position at t = 12.5 ns. All graphs show the results for three 
cases of spin-wave excitation: independent single frequency excitations at f1 = 9.5 GHz and f2 
= 12.5 GHz in the respective waveguides (dashed lines) as well as simultaneous excitation of 
both frequencies f1 and f2 (solid lines). 


