1 

arXiv:1906.10277v2 
 

 

Comments on the continuing widespread and unnecessary use of a 

defective emission equation in field emission related literature 

 

Richard G. Forbes 

 

Advanced Technology Institute & Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, 

University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, GU2 7XH, UK 

 

r.forbes@trinity.cantab.net 

 

 

ABSTRACT 

 

Field electron emission (FE) has relevance in many different technological contexts. However, many 

related technological papers use a physically defective elementary FE equation for local emission 

current density (LECD). This equation takes the tunneling barrier as exactly triangular, as in the 

original FE theory of 90 years ago. More than 60 years ago, it was shown that the so-called Schottky-

Nordheim (SN) barrier, which includes an image-potential-energy term (that models exchange-and-

correlation effects) is better physics. For a metal-like emitter with work-function 4.5 eV, the SN-

barrier-related Murphy-Good FE equation predicts LECD values that are higher than the elementary 

equation values by a large factor, often between around 250 and around 500. By failing to 

mention/apply this 60-year-old established science, or to inform readers of the large errors associated 

with the elementary equation, many papers (aided by defective reviewing) spread a new kind of 

"pathological science", and create a modern research-integrity problem. The present paper aims to 

enhance author and reviewer awareness by summarizing relevant aspects of FE theory, by explicitly 

identifying the misjudgment in the original 1928 Fowler-Nordheim paper, by explicitly calculating 

the size of the resulting error, and by showing in detail why most FE theoreticians regard the 1950s 

modifications as better physics. Suggestions are made, about nomenclature and about citation practice, 

that may help to diminish misunderstandings. 

 

 

 
 
 


2 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

 

Field electron emission (FE)––sometimes called "cold FE" or often simply "field emission"––is a 

well-known electron emission process1-4 in which most electrons escape by electrostatic-field-induced 

tunneling through a rounded triangular potential-energy (PE) barrier, at normal-energy levels 

significantly below the top of the tunneling barrier. This process is often known as "Fowler-Nordheim  

tunneling". 

Field electron emission occurs in very many different technological contexts, either 

constructively, as a means of creating an electron source, or destructively, as a cause of electrical 

breakdown. In both cases, it would be helpful, either for design purposes or for breakdown-analysis 

purposes, to have equations that reliably describe expected FE current densities and currents. 

However, the situation is confused by the widespread use in FE literature of a physically 

inadequate elementary emission equation [eq. (4) below]. This occurs most commonly in the 

literature of technological applications to which FE is or may be relevant. As compared with 

corrected theory, this elementary equation usually under-predicts local current densities by a large 

factor, which––for a metal-like emitter with work function 4.5 eV––would often be between around 

250 and around 500. For emission out of a non-degenerate semiconductor conduction band––where 

electron affinity, rather than work-function, is the relevant parameter––a similar physical problem 

exists in principle, but the errors (not discussed in detail here) would be somewhat less,  

 The physically inadequate elementary equation is a simplified version of the original FE equation 

developed by Fowler and Nordheim5,6 (FN) in 1928/29 [eq. (3) below], which is also physically 

inadequate. The problem is partly due to small misjudgments in physical thinking by FN (see 

Appendix A), whose analysis led to a mathematically correct result for an unphysical model potential-

energy variation.  

 Calculations by Nordheim7 later in 1928 used a more realistic PE model, but unfortunately 

contained a mathematical mistake that also led to under-prediction of local current densities. 

The existence of these problems has been known8 since 1953, and a corrected FE equation 

[eq. (5) below] was put in place by Murphy and Good9 (MG) in 1956. However, 60 years later, the 

defective elementary FE equation is widely used in relevant technological literature, even though the 

(better) Murphy-Good FE equation is normally used in theoretical FE papers and in FE research 

textbooks.  

More generally, there is growing concern over the integrity of scientific research (e.g., ref. 10  

and references therein, and ref. 11). As part of this, it seems likely that there may develop concern 

over the reliability of scientific reviewing, and, later, political interest in this issue. It seems to the 

author that the present situation in FE can be seen as a mild theoretical variant of "pathological 

science" as described by Langmuir12 and more recently by Park13 and by Charlton11, and that 

technological field emission has a research-integrity problem. 


3 

By "pathological science", I mean continuing situations where groups of scientists firmly 

convince themselves of the validity of some assumption or the adequacy of some approximation, 

when (a) there is strong independent scientific evidence that the assumption/approximation is not 

true/adequate, and (b) scientists outside the group do not accept the validity of the 

assumption/approximation. This is an extension of the term "pathological science" to be a neutral 

name that includes theory-oriented situations where community effects, as discussed in refs 11-13, 

seem to be operating (though I do not subscribe to the extreme viewpoint adopted by Charlton11). The 

more usual use of the term is in connection with misinterpreted experiments, by individuals or by 

groups. Langmuir and Hall12 describe various examples, and the "cold fusion" episode (as 

competently analyzed by Park13), where numbers of scientists came to believe that the effect would 

eventually generate significant power, is a more recent example. 

  It can also be argued that journals and learned societies that uncritically publish papers 

containing inadequate equations, when it has been firmly established for 60 years that these equations 

are inadequate (and that much better equations are known), also have a research-integrity problem––

and might find it difficult to justify their actions to a well-informed formal external enquiry.  

Precisely why this use of a defective FE equation persists is extremely unclear, and probably 

there is no single reason. It may be that some researchers (both authors and reviewers) are simply 

unaware that the equation is inadequate, or are unaware of the size of the error, or regard omission of 

a factor of value 300 (or thereabouts) as an "approximation" not important in their particular research 

topic, or––when developing technology––regard it as better to use an equation that is simple rather 

than a more accurate one that is marginally more complicated. Or researchers may not accept the 

scientific validity of the 1953/56 corrections and simply ignore them. Or researchers may be unduly 

influenced by statements in the original 1928 FN paper (see Section IVD below). Alternatively, as 

suggested by Charlton11, it may be that some researchers both (a) feel it best to follow community 

practice by working with what is written in the literature of the immediate subject area, and (b) do not 

consider it necessary (or do not have time) to conduct checks or report on whether the wider scientific 

community thinks their material is correct science. 

Whatever the cause or causes, I regard it as vital that this use of a clearly defective FE equation 

be discontinued in research contexts, as soon as may be achieved. The aims of the present paper are to 

provide information intended to help this process and to help and encourage reviewers to challenge 

the use of defective FE equations in research contexts, by using the arguments set out here if it helps. 

In what follows, the paper describes more of the general background relating to FE equations and 

their limitations, briefly summarizes some relevant developments in FE theory over the last 90 years, 

explicitly demonstrates the size of the error, explains why FE theoreticians (and other scientists 

outside the subject area) believe that the 1950s physical assumptions are correct (and hence that 

Murphy-Good theory is better physics than the original Fowler-Nordheim theory), and makes some 

suggestions about nomenclature and citation practice that may help to diminish confusion. 


4 

Appendix A discusses relevant weaknesses in the 1928 papers. 

In accordance with common practice in electron emission literature, this paper uses the "electron 

emission convention" in which "field" F, "current density" J, and "current" I are taken as positive 

quantities that are the negatives of the corresponding quantities as defined in conventional electrical 

theory. For reference, all universal constants used are given to 7 significant figures, but it is expected 

that these will be appropriately approximated in practical applications. 

 

 

II.  THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 

 

A.  General emission theory background   

 

In many cases, real field emitters are needle-shaped or post-shaped, with rounded ends. The 

emitter apex radius of curvature affects tunneling probabilities, and also affects issues relating to 

emission area. However, past current-voltage data analysis has normally used the planar emitter 

approximation, which assumes that emitters can be modeled as having a smooth flat planar surface, 

with effectively constant emission area. This had been thought an adequate assumption for emitters 

with apex radii of curvature greater than about 10-20 nm, but recent suggestions14,15 are that this limit 

should be significantly higher. 

Although there is a strong need to move forwards with FE theory, to deal more accurately and 

comprehensively with data interpretation from needle-shaped and post-shaped emitters, and some 

initial steps have been taken (e.g., refs. 4, 15), the present paper focuses on difficulties that exist 

within the framework of the planar emitter approximation. My thinking is that the outcome of the 

present proposals, together with other16,17 and further improvements in the use of this approximation, 

can then be put together to create a better background for future work. 

  It also needs stressing that all the FE equations discussed below, except eq. (9) as used in some 

contexts, are strictly applicable only to free-electron metals. However, it has long been normal 

practice, particularly in FE data analysis, to apply these equations to both real metals and to non-

metals "as a first approximation" (often without any deep enquiry as to whether this is really justified). 

In this context, the aim here is to improve the quality of this "first approximation". 

 

 

B.  Core FE theory equations 

 

In any theory of FE, a key component is the "core" equation that gives the local emission current 

density (LECD) JL in terms of the local work function φ and the local value FL of surface electric field. 


5 

"Auxiliary" equations are also needed, in order to relate a characteristic value of local field to the 

measured voltage, and the measured current to a characteristic LECD value. These auxiliary 

equations can be written in various different forms, but are not of significant concern here. For the 

core FE equations, many different forms and approximations have been proposed, even for the 

smooth planar emitter-surface models under discussion here (e.g., see ref. 18). Four physically 

different core FE equations are relevant to the present discussion. 

All FE equations employ in their derivations some model for the variation with distance of a 

quantity M that describes the tunneling barrier and is called here the electron motive energy. In 

planar-geometry models, this quantity is given by M(z)  =  Ue(z)–En , where Ue(z) describes the 

variation of electron potential energy with distance z measured normally outwards from the emitter's 

electrical surface, and the normal-energy En is the component (of the tunneling electron's total energy) 

associated with motion normal to the emitter surface. Both Ue(z) and En  need to be measured from 

the same energy reference level, often taken as the emitter's Fermi level (in which case the normal-

energy is denoted by εn.). The barrier is the region where M(z)≥0. 

Derivations of eqns (3) and (4) below are based on the exactly triangular (ET) barrier given by 

 

 
MET(z)  = H – eFLz ,      (z≥0), 
(1) 

 

where e is the elementary positive charge, and H [≡φ–εn] is the zero-field barrier height. By contrast, 

derivations of the Murphy-Good-type equations (5) and (9) below are based on a motive-energy 

expression that includes a planar image-PE term. A suitable definition is 

 

 
MSN(z)  =  H – eFLz – e2/16πε0z ,       (z>zc) , 
(2a) 

 

   
MSN(z)  =  –KF ,     (z≤zc), 
(2b) 

 

where ε0 is the vacuum electric permittivity, KF is the Fermi energy, and zc is a cut-off distance 

defined by applying the criterion MSN(zc) = –KF to eq. (2a). This motive-energy form is sometimes 

called the Schottky-Nordheim (SN) barrier. 

The original 1928 Fowler-Nordheim (FN) FE equation has the form5,19,20 

 

 
JL

orig  =  PF

FN aφ–1FL

2 exp[–bφ3/2/FL] , 
(3) 

 

where a and b are the FN constants20 (see Table 1), and PF

FN is a field-independent pre-factor5,20 (its 

exact form is of no interest here). 

 


6 

Table 1. Values of FE universal constants used in this paper. 

Name 
Symbol 
Numerical 

value 
Units 

First FN constant 
a 
1.541 434 µA eV V–2 

Second FN constant 
b 
6.830 890 eV–3/2 V nm–1 

Schottky constanta 
c 
1.199 985 eV (V/nm)–1/2  

- 
c2/2e 
0.719 9823 eV nm 

- 
bc2 
9.836 238 eV1/2 

- 
ac–4 
7.433 978×1011 A m–2 eV–3 

aIn the ISQ, the Schottky constant c appears in the Schottky-
effect formula Δs=cF1/2, which gives the barrier reduction Δs 
induced by field F. 

 

 

In the elementary FE equation, the pre-factor is omitted, leaving the equation 

 

  
JL

el  = aφ–1FL

2 exp[–bφ3/2/FL] . 
(4) 

 

This simplified equation is convenient for undergraduate teaching, since a simplified derivation can 

be demonstrated without the use of research-level mathematics, but it also became widely used in the 

research literature after about 2005, possibly partly as a result of a poorly-worded statement in a 

widely cited paper relating to FE from carbon nanotubes21. It is this equation that is the widely used 

"defective equation" (perhaps better described as a "defective research equation") discussed above. 

The (1956) Murphy-Good (MG) zero-temperature FE equation9,22 is conveniently written in the 

linked form 

 
JL

MG0  =  tF

–2 JkL

SN , 
(5a) 

 

 
JkL

SN  ≡ aφ–1FL

2 exp[–vFbφ3/2/FL] , 
(5b) 

 

where JkL

SN is the so-called kernel current density for the SN barrier, and vF is a particular value 

(appropriate to a SN barrier characterized by φ and FL) of a special mathematical function23 v(x). This 

function v(x) is a special solution of the Gauss Hypergeometric Differential Equation, and the Gauss 

variable x is the independent variable in this equation. tF is a particular value of a second special 

mathematical function t1(x), defined by eq. (7) below. 

For operation at non-zero temperatures, a temperature-dependent correction factor should in 

principle be inserted into eqns (3), (4) and (5a). However, at room temperature this is always small 

(<1.2), so the factor is nearly always omitted.  

In the 1956 derivation9 of eq. (5), the parameters vF and tF were given by formulae expressed in 

terms of complete elliptic integrals of the first and second kinds. Subsequently, various simple two-

term (and other) approximations were developed. However, mathematical developments22-24 in the 


7 

last ten years or so have uncovered: (a) the form of an exact series expansion23 for v(x); (b) a high-

precision numerical formula22 for v(x), accurate in 0≤x≤1to better than 8×10–10; and a simple good 

approximation24 for v(x) that is accurate22 in 0≤x≤1 to better than 0.33 %, namely 

 

 
v(x)  ≈  1 – x + (x/6)lnx . 
(6) 

 

At a corresponding level of approximation, a function t1(x) (or simply t(x)) is defined by (e.g., ref. 22) 

and given by another simple good approximation:  

 

 
t1(x)  ≡  v(x) – (4/3) xdv/dx  ≈  1+(x/9)–(x/18)lnx .  
(7)       

 

It has also been formally shown (e.g., see Section IVB in ref. 25, and set µ=f) that these formulas 

are applied to MG theory by setting x=f, where the scaled field  f  (for a SN barrier of zero-field 

height φ) is defined by 

 

 
f   ≡  c2φ–2 FL ≅  [1.439965 eV2 (V/nm)–1] φ–2 FL , 
(8) 

 

where c [≡ (e3/4πε0)1/2] is the Schottky constant (see Table 1). 

A weakness of both the FN and MG treatments is that they disregard the existence of atoms, by 

considering smooth structureless flat surfaces, rather than crystallographically structured flat surfaces. 

To recognize the quantitative uncertainty resulting from this approximation (and others), the present 

author has introduced a version of eq. (5a) in which tF

–2 is replaced by a correction factor (or 

"knowledge uncertainty factor") λ of unknown exact value (e.g., see ref. 18). This results in the so-

called Extended Murphy-Good (EMG) FE Equation16 

 

 
JL

EMG  ≡  λaφ–1FL

2 exp[–vFbφ3/2/FL] . 
(9) 

 

Current thinking26, in 2019, is that λ probably lies in the range 0.005<λ<14, though the lower limit 

may eventually prove to be unnecessarily low. 

  It can be seen that, in both eq. (5) and eq. (9), an effect of including the image-PE term in the 

motive energy has been to insert a mathematical correction factor vF into the exponent of the FE 

equation. As shown next, it is this factor vF that is primarily responsible for increasing the current 

density by an improvement factor K roughly of order 300 . 

 

 

III.  ANALYSIS  


8 

 

A.  Derivation of improvement factor values 
 

Another feature of the mathematical developments in FE theory in the last ten years has been the 

realization that a very useful scaled form27 exists for the kernel current density JkL

SN. This is obtained 

by rewriting eq. (8) as FL=c–2φ2f, inserting this expression into eq. (5b), and defining work-function- 

dependent scaling parameters θ and η by (see Table 1) 

 

 
θ  =  ac–4φ3 ,     η  =  bc2φ–1/2 . 
(9) 

 

This results in the scaled equation 

 
 

 
JkL

SN  =  θ f 2 exp[–v(f)·η/f] , 
(10) 

 

where vF has here been written explicitly as a function v(f) of f. A work-function of 4.500 eV yields 

the values η≅ 4.3868, θ≅ 6.774×1013 A/m2. This scaled form, which involves only a single 

independent variable, is often useful for algebraic manipulations and (as here) for simple numerical 

calculations. Part of its usefulness is that, in experiments on "ideal emitters"16, the scaled field f can 

be measured reasonably well by using a Fowler-Nordheim plot (or a Murphy-Good plot16), and that f 

has an obvious and easy interpretation ("to get the corresponding local barrier field, multiply f by the 

reference field FR [=φ2/c2]"). When φ=4.50 eV, then FR≈ 14.1 V/nm. 

For the exactly triangular barrier, the corresponding scaled equation is obtained by replacing v(f) 

in eq. (10) by unity, to give 

 
JL

el  =  θ f 2 exp[–η/f] . 
(11) 

 

Setting x=f in eq. (6) yields an expression for v(f). Substitution into eq. (10), and some trivial 

algebraic re-arrangement, yields 

 
J kL

SN ≈ θ f 2 f −η/6 expη exp[−η/f ]  . 
(12) 

 

The prefactor tF

–2 will make a very small contribution, but by far the largest contribution to the 

improvement factor K comes from the ratio JkL

SN/JL

el, which is given approximately by 

 

 
 K =  JkL

SN / JL

el ≈  f −η/6 expη . 
(13) 

 

This expression provides qualitative understanding of the origin of the improvement factors. For 

φ=4.500 eV, the factor expη has a value near 100; the other factor provides some additional  


9 

improvement. 

However, better numerics are obtained by using the high-precision formula22 for v(f) and a related 

formula for K, namely 

 

 
K  =  JkL

SN/JL

el  =  exp[{1–v(f)}·η/f] . 
(14) 

 

Some illustrative values are shown in Table 2. They have been calculated by coding the high-

precision formula for v(f) [=v(x=f)] into an Excel™ spreadsheet, which is provided as supplementary  

 

Table 2. To show values of v(f) and the 
improvement factor K, for values of the scaled 
field f and corresponding local field FL.  

f 
FL  (V/nm) 
vF=v(f) 
K 

0.15 
2.1 
0.800 
481 

0.20 
2.8 
0.744 
378 

0.25 
3.5 
0.690 
314 

0.30 
4.2 
0.638 
270 

0.35 
4.9 
0.587 
238 

 

material. The f-values used are based on the knowledge27 that, for tungsten, operating f-values are 

often within the range 0.15<f<0.35, corresponding (with φ=4.50 eV) to a barrier-field range 2.1 V/nm 

< FL < 4.9 V/nm. It can be seen that a "typical" value for K is around 300, (though K actually varies 

from around 250 to around 500 for the φ-value and range of f-values chosen). 

 

 

B.  Validity of using classical image potential energies 

 

As indicated above , the correction factor vF in eqns (5) and (9) derives from the inclusion of the 

classical image-PE term (–e2/16πε0z) in the motive energy. Although originally discussed as an 

obvious classical correction, it has long been understood that this term is a model for the quantum-

mechanical (QM) exchange-and-correlation (E&C) effects experienced by electrons in real metals. A 

priori, it is not obvious that the classical image PE would necessarily be a good model for E&C 

effects at surfaces. The issue is whether the classical image PE term is a "sufficiently good" 

approximation, or whether it would be better to leave it out. 

The underlying physics was first addressed in detail in a paper28 written by Bardeen in 1940. 

[Bardeen is the only person to have been awarded the Nobel prize in Physics twice. One of these 

(with Shockley and Brattain) was for the practical realization of the transistor, where a significant 

contribution from Bardeen was to develop understanding of how electron surface states affected 


10 

transistor operation. Kroemer, one the three scientists who found the mathematical mistake in the 

Nordheim 1928 paper, also (much later) received a Nobel prize for work on transistor development.] 

Put simply, Bardeen's relevant conclusion in his 1940 paper was that, as distance outwards from a 

smooth metal surface increases, the QM correlation contribution (to the total electron PE that needs to 

be inserted into the relevant one-electron Schrödinger equation) tends to become equal to the classical 

image PE. Much later (see Chap. 12 in ref. 29, and references therein), it was established that the QM 

exchange contribution also tends to become equal to the classical image PE at large distances. The 

issue thus becomes: where is the FE tunneling barrier, relative to the emitter surface atoms? 

In the context of the planar emitter approximation, this issue divides into two separate questions: 

(a) Where is the emitter's electrical surface (i.e., the reference surface from which the electrical 

distance z is measured) relative to the surface-atom nuclei?  (b) What are the electrical distances for 

the inner (zin) and outer (zout) edges of the tunnelling barrier ?  

For a SN barrier of zero-field height φ, there are well established expressions for zout and zin 

(zout>zin). These can be written (e.g., see eq. (45) in ref. 25, and put H=φ, and µ=f): 

 

 
zout, zin  =  (φ/2eFL) [1±(1–f)1/2] , 
(14) 

 

On substituting FL= c–2φ2f, this becomes 

 

 
zout, zin  =   (c2/2eφ) [(1/f ± (1/f 2–1/f)1/2]   ≅   (0.7199823 nm)·(eV/φ)·[(1/f ± (1/f 2–1/f)1/2] , (15) 

 

which for φ= 4.500 eV reduces to 

 

 
zout, zin   ≅   (160.0 pm)·[(1/f ± (1/f 2–1/f)1/2] . 
(16) 

 

Resulting values are shown in Table 3. For comparison purposes these are shown to a precision of 

1 pm, but this is not a statement of physical accuracy (which is difficult to assess reliably). 

With planar surfaces, the electrical surface is the "reference plane" that z must be measured from 

if the electrostatic potential (–eFLz) is to have its correct value at large distances. In the simplest 

models, image effects are also measured from this surface29,30. There is a "repulsion effect" that 

moves the electrical surface outwards from the plane of the surface-atom nuclei, by a distance drep 

called the repulsion distance31-33. 

Surprisingly, the issue of electrical-surface location has rarely been addressed in the specific 

context of field electron emission, though there are two recent discussions33,34. However, it is a well 

known issue in field ion emission, where it is known that its location coincides with the centroid of  

 


11 

Table  3. To show values of parameters related to the 
locations of the inner and outer edges of a SN tunneling 
barrier of zero-field height 4.50 eV, with drep=157 pm. 
[See text for explanation of notation.] 

f 
zin  

(pm) 

zout 
(pm) 

din  
(pm) 

dout 
(pm) 

0.15 
83 
2050 
240 
2207 

0.20 
84 
1516 
241 
1673 

0.25 
86 
1194 
243 
1351 

0.30 
87 
980 
244 
1137 

0.35 
89 
826 
246 
983 

 

the induced charge30,35. Estimates have been made of drep for atomically structured planar surfaces, 

using relevant crystallographic information about surface structure. The simple classical model 

originally used31,35, which attributes the repulsion effect to the electric dipole moment generated by 

the field-induced electrostatic polarization of the metal surface atoms (including mutual 

depolarization effects), is applicable to both positively and negatively charged surfaces, and for the 

tungsten (110) surface yields the value 157 pm. 

Recently34, density functional theory (DFT) calculations on a tungsten double pyramid have 

yielded estimates of 161 pm for the repulsion distance above the top atom on the positively charged 

side, and 213 pm for the repulsion distance above the top atom on the negatively charged side. (The 

difference occurs because, due to exchange repulsion forces––which obviously are not included in the 

classical model––it is easier for an impressed electrostatic field to "pull electrons out" than "push 

electrons in".) 

For safety, we take drep as equal to the lower of the estimates for a negatively charged surface, 

namely 157 pm. We can then make estimates of the distances (from the plane of the surface-atom 

nuclei) of the inner edge (din) and outer edge (dout) of the tunneling barrier. These estimates are shown 

in Table 3, and need to be compared with a distance dNN/2 that is half the nearest-neighbor separation 

dNN in the tungsten lattice, and is a measure of "effective atomic radius".  

For tungsten, dNN/2= 137 pm. Table 3 thus shows that, in all practical operating cases, the inner 

edge of the tunneling barrier is "right at the edge of the electron charge-clouds", and that most of the 

barrier region is "well away from the atom nucleus". The usual FE theoretician's conclusion, albeit a 

qualitative one, is as follows. All of the barrier region is sufficiently far away from the dense electron 

charge-clouds around the nearest atomic nuclei that the approximation that "the PE variations 

predicted by QM E&C effects are close to those predicted classically" is likely to be reasonably good, 

and hence that eq. (2a) is a good approximation. Expectation (from use of eq. (15) and the classical 

model) is that all metals should exhibit broadly similar behavior, 

Historically, there have been a few dissenting opinions, in particular those of Hartstein and 

Weinberg36 and of Ancona37, but these have not found significant acceptance. It can be validly argued 


12 

that issues of detail remain to be fully resolved, and that a slightly modified barrier (particularly on 

the inner side) might be an even better choice than the SN barrier. However, these things do not affect 

the conclusion that, in the choice between the two widely used barriers (ET and SN), it seems 

significantly better physics to choose the SN barrier, and hence choose Murphy-Good-type equations 

(with the factor vF in the exponent).  

 

 

IV.  DISCUSSION 

 

A.  The difficulties of experimental verification 

 

In the ideal world, the above issue would be settled by experiment, but in fact it is very difficult 

to do this. At a casual level, if some experimental effect that depends on current density can be 

explained by eq. (5), then it can also be explained by eq. (4) if you take the field to be somewhat 

higher and/or the emission area to be somewhat larger. So one then needs to have accurate 

independent methods of measuring local electrostatic field and emission area. But independent 

methods have not yet been applied, either because they do not exist, or because they are not yet 

sufficiently well developed with demonstrably sufficient accuracy. 

Another complication arises when eq. (9) is used: it is possible to imagine factors (such as 

"poorer wave-matching at the surface when atomic-level wave-functions are used") that would cause 

λ to be less than unity: this would tend to counterbalance effects due to the improvement factor K, 

and thus contribute to the difficulties of experimental verification. 

An alternative approach would be to plan experiments specifically to test the theory. But here the 

need would be to compare experimental results with deductions from both alternative theories, and to 

show that theory based on the SN barrier is significantly superior. For example, the field electron 

energy distribution measurements of Gadzuk and Plummer38, when compared with predictions from 

MG theory, are sometimes offered as evidence in support of MG theory. They do provide evidence of 

this. But reality is that a theory of tunneling though an ET barrier leads to generally similar results, 

and comparisons as currently made are not good enough to distinguish decisively between the two 

barrier models39.   

A wider (but incomplete) survey of possible methods was undertaken some years ago39, with 

eight possible methods identified. Overall, the evidence seemed mildly in favour of the SN barrier 

and MG theory, but it was difficult to conclude, for any individual method, that currently available 

experimental evidence and analysis led to a decisive outcome. 

This issue of how to establish a decisive experimental test of the proposition that the Murphy-

Good equations are superior to the original Fower-Nordheim ones is "unfinished business". It may be 


13 

easier to formulate a decisive test of this type when issues related to data-analysis from needle-shaped 

and/or post-shaped emitters are better understood, with one possible route (Popov, Kolosko, Filippov, 

and Forbes, unpublished work) being measurement of the value of k in the empirical FE equation for 

measured current-voltage Im(Vm) data, namely 

 

 
  Im = CVm

k exp[−B/Vm]  , 
(17)  

 
 

where B  and C are initially treated as constants. The main present difficulty with this approach seems 

to be getting experimental Im(Vm) data that is sufficiently noise free. 
  

 

 

B.  The views of neighbouring communities 

 

For the ET barrier to be better physics than the SN barrier, something like the following 

proposition would need to be true. "That, in a quantum-mechanical world the classical Schottky effect 

is not a real effect but an artefact of classical thinking, and that all phenomena attributed to the  

Schottky effect are in fact due to tunneling through an exactly triangular barrier." 

There are several contexts in physics, in particular in electronic device theory, where it is 

assumed that the Schottky effect operates, for example the theory of photocathodes and the theory40,41 

of the commercial electron microscope electron source type known as the "Schottky emitter". In the 

latter case, it is assumed that electrons escape both over and through a SN barrier, and the theory of 

the beam energy spread (which affects the focussing properties of the electron beam) is developed 

accordingly40,41. Both these applications are the basis for highly successful commercial technologies. 

In such contexts, the proposition that the Schottky effect is an artefact of classical thinking would, 

almost certainly, receive little or no credibility. 

 

 

C.  Intermediate conclusions 

 

In summary, the current position appears to be as follows. 

(1) From the theoretical point of view, there is very strong evidence that the SN barrier is better 

physics than the ET barrier, and hence that the Murphy-Good-type FE equations are better physics 

than the ET-barrier-based equations.  

(2) At present, it is difficult to conclude that there is experimental evidence decisively in favor of 

the SN barrier as being better physics, but against this there is no known experimental evidence that is 

decisively in favor of the ET barrier. 


14 

(3) There are successful neighboring communities that design, build and sell devices with theory 

that assumes that the Schottky effect is real and (in the case of Schottky emitters) that tunneling 

through a SN barrier occurs. 

In these circumstances, it seems fairly clear that the better scientific position, at present, is to 

accept that the SN barrier is better physics than the ET barrier. In any case, to do otherwise would 

disturb a lot of physics, going back to the work of Schottky42,43, and before him to Kelvin44, 

Maxwell45 and J.J. Thomson46. 

As things stand at present, it is perhaps not totally impossible in principle that a valid scientific 

case could be made for preferring the ET barrier over the SN barrier, at least in some circumstances, 

but the onus is on those who believe that "Fowler-Nordheim is better than Murphy-Good" to make a 

case that is compatible with all the existing evidence. 

Note that this discussion has been about emission from metals. There is some evidence47 that 

exchange-and-correlation effects outside a graphene sheet or a carbon nanotube cannot be well 

represented by a classical image PE. But even in this case the SN barrier is probably a better starting 

point than an ET barrier, with the most obvious simple model for such a situation being one in which 

a "weakening factor" w is included in the image PE, which then becomes (–we2/16πε0x). 

 

 

 

D.  Issues relating to nomenclature and citation practice 

 

The author is inclined to think is that the primary cause of the pathological situation discussed in 

this paper is often lack of awareness. Two practices of the wider FE and electron emission 

communities may contribute significantly to this. The first is the system for naming equations, which 

tends to be "ancestor-oriented", both in field electron and in thermal electron emission. The various 

equations that the present paper refers to as FE equations are often all called "the Fowler-Nordheim 

Equation". The problem is that different groups of researchers tend to apply this name to physically 

different equations:  most FE theoreticians regard eq. (5) as "the FN equation";  many FE papers 

concerned with technological emitter development regard eq. (4) as "the FN equation";  and non-

experts sometimes regard eq. (3) as "the FN equation" (which would probably be closest to normal 

scientific practice outside the FE community). Other authors give the name "the FN equation" to 

approximated or mathematically defective versions of eq. (5). 

Apart from generating confusion, this nomenclature practice tends to direct attention back 

towards the original 1928 FN paper, with its known weakness in physical thinking, and to disguise 

the fact that there are numerical differences between the predictions of the various equations. The 

author's present view is that all these (and the many other equations used to describe FE) are better 


15 

described as "field emission equations" or "field electron emission equations" (with both terms 

abbreviated to "FE equations"). The different core equations should be given distinctive names, 

incorporating the names of the relevant authors where helpful. If it is wished to indicate a relationship 

to the seminal 1928 work of Fowler and Nordheim, then some phraseology similar to the following 

could be used:   "… is based on the Murphy-Good zero-temperature FE equation [**], which 

corrected poor assumptions made in the physical thinking behind the derivation of the original 1928 

Fowler-Nordheim FE equation [**], …" This kind of approach would make the true scientific 

situation much clearer. 

A second unhelpful feature, particularly in some FE technological literature, is the practice of 

giving a reference to the original 1928 FN paper as the only theoretical reference in a technological 

article, with no reference given to any subsequent theoretical development carried out in the last 90 

years, or to any FE research textbook. (For example, see ref. 48, but there are many other examples.) 

It is unfortunate that modern reviewing systems regularly allow this. A major problem is that the 

weakness in the 1928 paper is as follows (see Appendix A): FN clearly state that corrections of the 

type subsequently considered by Murphy and Good are small and not important: obviously, this gives 

the impression that use of the exactly triangular barrier is an adequate approximation. As shown 

earlier in this paper, this is not in fact true in modern contexts (unless you happen to think that 

discrepancies by a factor of up to around 500 are not important). By failing to give the references that 

would allow other scientists to judge for themselves, the many (though certainly not all) FE 

technological papers that do this––and the reviewing systems that facilitate it––are accidentally 

allowing modern FE scientific practice to become determined by "1928 thinking" rather than by the 

normal scientific processes of error detection and removal. 

 

 

E.  Relevance to semiconductor literature 

 

Lack of awareness of the influence of exchange-and-correlation effects (as modeled by a classical 

image PE) on tunneling theory may also occur in other scientific and technological areas, an obvious 

example being the theory of nanoscale electronic devices. As integrated-circuit processing line-widths 

reduce towards 3 nm, it becomes obviously necessary to pay closer attention to tunneling-based 

mechanisms that might influence device quality or device failure rates. It would seem helpful, 

therefore, for undergraduate and graduate students to be made aware that image-PE-based theories 

might predict effects of this kind to be more severe than theory that neglects the role of the image PE. 

To take one example, the well-known semiconductor-device student textbook authored by Sze 

and Kwok49 disregards effects due to image PE when discussing tunneling theory. In particular, it 

might be helpful to improve the "tunneling" entry in Table 2 on p. 227 (where image-PE effects are 

included for "thermionic" emission, but not for tunneling), and to look again at equations such as 


16 

eq. (41) in Section 8.3.2, in order to assess whether the inclusion of image-PE effects would have any 

significant consequences.  

 

 

F.  Final comments 

 

Even though the theoretical evidence is clear and strong, my conclusion above was that, as yet (in 

FE), there is no decisive experimental evidence that the SN barrier is better physics that the ET 

barrier. There may be some who feel that it is better to stay with 90-year-old theory (rather than 

change to 60-year-old theory or 21st century theory) until the matter is resolved experimentally. This 

approach would probably be a mistake. In the planar emitter approximation (which is what most 

people currently use), technology development is best served by using the best theory currently 

available in that approximation, which means either eq. (5) or (better) eq. (9).  If, when we are 

eventually able to interpret measured FE current-voltage data more effectively, it turns out that in fact 

the performance of eq. (5) is worse than that of either eq.(3) or eq. (4), then the best interpretation will 

almost certainly be, not that the SN barrier is worse physics that the ET barrier, but that some other 

factor (known or unknown) is influencing the value of λ in eq. (9). To stay with eq. (3) or eq. (4) at 

the present time would likely make it more difficult to improve FE theory further in the longer term. 

For the avoidance of doubt, it is necessary to stress that there is no suggestion whatsoever here of 

any scientific dishonesty––rather, the issue is one of collective scientific misunderstandings that have 

given rise to pathological science (including pathological reviewing). Obviously, there is no 

technological reward in the use of ET-barrier-based equations rather then SN-barrier based equations. 

In the context of electrical breakdown, which tends to occur when current exceeds a certain level, 

there is no merit in writing down an equation that under-predicts current levels by a factor of 300 or 

thereabouts. Likewise, when attempting to develop/investigate new emitter materials for high-current 

electron sources, there is no merit in writing down an equation that under-predicts the performance of 

the material/device by a factor of 300 or thereabouts. 

In the absolute scale of things, this error by a factor of 300 or thereabouts may not be that 

important, but it is an unnecessary and avoidable error that also tends to discredit the process of 

scientific reviewing. In principle, this error could easily be taken out of future FE literature by 

improved knowledge of FE theory amongst authors and by enhanced care in reviewing, making use 

of the detailed discussion given in Section 3. I would encourage my FE colleagues, when acting as 

reviewers, to assist in the process. 

 

 

APPENDIX A:  WEAKNESSES IN THE 1928 PAPERS 


17 

 

Although other discrepancies exist in the original 1928 Fowler-Nordheim paper5, only those 

relating to barrier shape are of interest here. Fowler and Nordheim were well aware that image-type 

effects would round the tunneling barrier apex. But Fowler must also have known from previous 

experience50 and contact with Jeffreys (both were members of Trinity College, Cambridge) that, when 

the image PE term is included in the one-dimensional Schrödinger equation, then the resulting 

second-order differential equation had no known analytical solutions in terms of the established 

functions of mathematical physics. (This is still the case 90 years later.) 

However, the Schrödinger equation form derived from the ET barrier does have exact solutions, 

and is thus an obvious first case to be analyzed. The issue is whether image rounding of the barrier 

apex would have any significant influence. After brief earlier comments, FN return to this in their "§4 

Additional Calculations". They use the following notations. Their symbol W denotes normal kinetic 

energy, i.e. normal-energy En measured relative to the base of their PE well, their symbol C denotes 

inner potential energy, as shown in Fig. (1a) below, their κ denotes the "Schrödinger equation 

constant" (2m)1/2/ℏ, where m is electron mass and ℏ is Planck's constant divided by 2π, their Q 

denotes a parameter equal to the modern (bΗ 3/2/2F), their D denotes tunneling probability, and their 

"†" relates to a (1925) paper by Jeffreys51 that describes the mathematical approximation later known 

as the "JWKB" (or "WKB") approximation. They write the following. 

 

"It is not difficult to show generally, by comparisons with Jeffreys'† asymptotic solution of a similar 

equation, that for values of W not too near C the exact form of the potential peak and the rounding off at the 

top will not seriously affect the emission coefficient D(W). Our direct calculation for this very simple case 

is therefore sufficiently typical. For the Q of an exact solution has to be replaced by 

  
κ
(V −W )1/2

x0

x1∫
dx  , 

where V is the potential energy of the electron at any point and x0 and x1 are the points at which V–W 

vanishes. The integration range is shown in fig. 3 [our Fig. 1a, below]. It is at once clear that, provided the 

shaded area is reasonably large, modifications in the contour near the peak are unimportant." 

 

Unfortunately, FN seem to have grossly underestimated the amount of rounding that occurs. 

Nowadays, it is easily shown by spreadsheet calculations that, for work function 4.50 eV and a barrier 

field of 5 V/nm (about the worst case for the typical operating range), the true shape of a SN barrier is 

as shown in Fig. 1b. The discrepancy is obvious, the barrier is in fact much weaker than FN assumed, 

and the "contour modifications" are in fact important. 

 


18 

 

 

FIG. I.  Comparison of Schottky-Nordheim barriers:  (a) as drawn by Fowler and Nordheim5 in their 

Fig. 2(ii);  (b) as calculated from eq. (2), using H= 4.5 eV, FL= 5 V/nm (normally the worst-case 

discrepancy). The horizontal axis denotes distance and the vertical axis normal-energy. Scales are 

adjusted so that H and FL are similar for both diagrams. There is an obvious discrepancy in the 

(hatched) "area under the barrier", as between the two diagrams. This converts into a strong difference 

in tunnelling probability. 

 

As indicated earlier, a related paper by Nordheim7, emerged later in 1928. This attempted to 

apply the theory of Jeffreys51 (the modern first-order, or "simple", JWKB approximation) to the SN 

barrier. The SN barrier shape drawn in this second paper is realistic (see his Fig. 5). The first part of 

his derivation, from eq. (47) to eq. (52), although expressed in an older equation system, agrees with 

modern analysis. But, unfortunately, a mathematical mistake entered at eq. (53), where an expression 

given for the elliptic modulus k is in fact an expression for the elliptic parameter m [≡k2]. 

This mistake is easier to see when it re-appears in eq. (55), but a notation change is helpful. The 

symbol x, used by Nordheim for what was later called the Nordheim parameter, is here replaced by 

the modern notation "y". In the modern "International System of Quantities" (ISQ) (based on 

including ε0 in Coulomb's Law), y is given by 

   

 
y  ≡  (e3FL/4πε0φ2)1/2. 
(A1) 

 

[This means that, numerically, y is related to the scaled field f by y=+f1/2 or to the Gauss variable x by 

y=+x1/2]. 

The relevant part of Nordheim's eq. (55) can then be written: 

 

 
k  =  2(1–y2)1/2 /[1+(1–y2)1/2] . 
(A2) 

 

This formula remained in the literature for 25 years, until Burgess, Kroemer and Houston8 (BKH) 

pointed out, in 1953, that eq. (A2) is not correct, and should be replaced by 

 

 
k2  =  2(1–y2)1/2 /[1+(1–y2)1/2]. 
(A3) 

 


19 

In passing, note that in eq. (A2), and in all other relevant equations in Nordheim's paper, the 

Nordheim parameter appears only as its square. Thus, Nordheim could alternatively have chosen to 

formulate the theory in terms of the parameter x = y2. With hindsight, his choice of the parameter y 

was unfortunate, because we now know that the FE special mathematical function v(x) (where x is the 

Gauss variable) is a special solution of the Gauss Hypergeometric Differential Equation HDE):  it is 

mathematically perverse to express this solution as a function of the square root of the independent 

variable in the Gauss HDE. 

Some consequences of the Nordheim calculations need discussion. My general notation for the 

physical/modeling correction factor that appears in the exponent of FE equations based on the SN 

barrier is νF

SN.  As Table 4 shows, the above error made the value of νF

SN closer to unity than the 

correct (BKH) theory does. This has a corresponding effect on predicted improvement-factor values, 

and hence on predicted LECDs. (Slightly different values would be derived for the N28 quantities if 

values tabulated later by Houston52 were used.) 

 

Table 4:  Comparison of exponent correction 
factor (νF

SN) and improvement factor (K) 

values predicted by Nordheim (1928) theory 
and by BKH (1956) theory. 

y 
f 
N28 
N28 
BKH 
BKH 

νF

SN 
K 
νF

SN 
K 

0.40 
0.16 
0.849 
80 
0.7888 
456 

0.50 
0.25 
0.781 
58 
0.6900 
314 

0.60 
0.36 
0.696 
50 
0.5768 
233 

 

Notwithstanding that Nordheim's treatment is mathematically incorrect, it does generate 

improvement factors of significant size. But Fowler, in the second (1936) edition53 of his textbook on 

Statistical Mechanics, although citing Nordheim's 1928 work, reproduced a diagram similar to that in 

the original 1928 FN paper (which seems to be an oversight), and continued to state that, although 

there is a small correction to be made by including the image effect, this was not important. 

This suggests that Fowler's criterion of "importance" may have differed from that applicable to 

modern contexts. This is understandable. Relevant aspects of the metal-physics/emission-physics 

situation immediately before the FN work were as follows.  (1) The physical origin of what was then 

called "auto-electronic emission" (modern FE) was not understood.  (2) Lauritsen54 had just found 

experimentally that, when auto-electronic-emission current-voltage data were plotted in the form 

ln{Im} vs 1/Vm, then apparently straight-line plots were generated. (3) It was thought that thermal 

electron emission was  essentially different from the auto-electronic emission of conduction electrons, 

and was due to the emission of  "thermions", i.e. electrons in some form of specially excited state 

within the metal, different from that of the conduction electrons (for example, see ref. 54, and 


20 

remember that Millikan had received a Nobel prize in 1923 for experimentally verifying Einstein's 

predictions about the photoelectric effect, and for measuring the electron charge). 

Historically, the FN paper had three main achievements. It showed that auto-electronic emission 

was in fact a wave-mechanical tunneling process (but credit for this should be partially shared with 

Oppenheimer55-57). This explained the Lauritsen straight-line plots.  It explained (on the basis of 

Fermi-Dirac statistics) why auto-electronic emission currents were nearly temperature independent. 

And, probably most important historically, the FN paper argued (albeit briefly) that there was no need 

to postulate the existence of thermions: rather, both auto-electronic emission and the emission of 

thermions could be explained as the emission of conduction electrons from (what would now be 

called) a single electron energy band, under different conditions of field and temperature. 

Thus, the FN paper, together with Fowler's earlier paper58 introducing electron spin into metal 

physics and emission physics, and with the related work of Fermi59, Dirac60, Sommerfeld61,62 and 

Bethe62, were between them the foundational papers for modern metal-band theory and large parts of 

modern condensed-matter physics. 

It is understandable that, against the background of this major achievement, Fowler might––with 

considerable justification––have regarded temporary inaccuracies in calculating FE local current 

densities as not of any great importance, and be keen to stress this. It is also understandable that, in 

the modern context of predicting electrical breakdown and electron-source performance, the removal 

of unnecessary errors of order 300 does seem important. 

Given that modern FE literature tends to keep referring people back to the original 1928 FN paper, 

these historical differences may be a part cause of today's pathological FE literature. The criteria of 

scientific importance for FE in the 21st Century are clearly not the same as they were in the "golden 

years" of the late 1920s and early 1930s. 

 
 


21 

References 

 

1 G. N. Fursey, Field Emission in Vacuum Microelectronics (Kluwer, New York, 2005). 

2 A. Evtukh, H. Hartnagel, O. Yilmazoglu, H. Mimura, and D. Pavlidis, Vacuum Nanoelectronic 

Devices: Novel Electron Sources and Applications (Wiley, Chichester, UK, 2015). 

3 N. Egorov, and E. Sheshin, Field Emission Electronics (Springer, 2017). 

4 K. L. Jensen, Introduction to the Physics of Electron Emission (Wiley, Chichester, UK, 2018). 

5 R. H. Fowler, and L. Nordheim, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 119, 173 (1928). 

6 T. E. Stern, B. S. Gossling, and R. H. Fowler, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 124, 699 (1929). 

7 L. W. Nordheim, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 121, 626 (1928). 

8 R. E. Burgess, H. Kroemer, and J.M. Houston, Phys. Rev. 90, 515 (1953). 

9 E. L. Murphy, and R. H. Good, Phys. Rev. 102, 1464 (1956). 

10 D. R. Baer, and I. S. Gilmore, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 36, 068502 (2018). 

11 B. G. Charlton, Not Even Trying … The Corruption of Real Science, University of Buckingham 

Press, Buckingham, UK, 2012. 

12 I. Langmuir, and R. N. Hall, Physics Today 42(10), 36 (1989). 

13 R. L. Park, Voodoo Science: The Road from Foolishness to Fraud (Oxford University Press, 

Oxford, 2000). 

14 A. Kyritsakis, and J. P. Xanthakis, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 471, 20140811 (2014). 

15 D. Biswas, and R. Ramachndran, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 37, 021801 (2019). 

16 R. G. Forbes, "The Murphy-Good plot: a better method of analysing field emission data" 

(unpublished); arXiv:1905.07585.  

17 R. G. Forbes, "Field emission: Why converting LAFE voltages to macroscopic fields before 

making a Fowler-Nordheim plot has often led to spurious characterization results" (unpublished); 

arXiv:1905.12764. 

18 R. G. Forbes, J. H. B. Deane, A. Fischer, and M. S. Mousa, Jordan J. Phys. 8, 125 (2015). 

19 K. L. Jensen, Electron Emission Physics, Adv. Imaging Electron Phys., Vol. 149 (Academic, San 

Diego, 2007). 

20 R. G. Forbes, and J. H. B. Deane, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 467, 2927 (2011). See Electronic 

Supplementary Material for information about special universal constants used in field emission. 

21 N. de Jonge, and J.-M. Bonard, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 362, 2239 (2004). 

22 R. G. Forbes, and J. H. B. Deane, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 463, 2907 (2007). 

23 J. H. B. Deane, and R. G. Forbes, J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 41, 395301 (2008). 

24 R. G. Forbes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 113122 (2006). 

25 R. G. Forbes, "Field electron emission theory (October 2016)", in: Proc. 2016 Young Researchers 

in Vacuum Micro/Nano Electronics Conf., St Petersburg, October 2016 (Eds: N.V. Egorov and 

K.A. Nikiforov) (Electronic ISBN 978-1-5090-4605-8) (IEEE Explore, March 2017), pp. 31-39;  


22 

also see arXiv:1801.08251v2. 

26 R. G. Forbes, "Comparison of the Lepetit field emission current-density calculations with the 

Modinos-Forbes uncertainty limits", 31st International Vacuum Nanoelectronics Conf., Kyoto, 

July 2018;  doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.17153.10080 . 

27 R. G. Forbes, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 469, 20130271 (2013). 

28 J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev. 58, 727 (1940). 

29 A. Kienja, and K. F. Wojciechowski, Metal Surface Electron Physics, (Pergamon, Oxford, 1996). 

30 N. D. Lang, and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. 7, 3541 (1973). 

31 R. G. Forbes, Appl. Phys. Lett. 36, 739 (1980). 

32 R.G. Forbes, Surface Sci. 223, 326 (1989). 

33 R. G. Forbes, "Classical array models and the location of the field emission tunnelling barrier", 6th 

International Workshop on Mechanisms of Vacuum Arcs (MeVARC 2017), Jerusalem, March 

2017;  doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.25082.90569 . 

34 B. Lepetit, D. Lemoine, and M. Márquez-Mijares, J. Appl. Phys. 120, 08515 (2016). 

35 R. G. Forbes, Ultramicroscopy 79, 25 (1999). 

36 A. Hartstein, and Z. A. Weinberg, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 11, L469 (1978). 

37 M. G. Ancona, Phys. Rev. B 46, 4874 (1992). 

38 J. W. Gadzuk, and E. W. Plummer, Phys. Rev. B 3, 2125 (1971). 

39 R. G. Forbes and J. H. B. Deane, "Testing Fowler-Nordheim-type equations", 29th International 

Vacuum Nanoelectronics Conf., Vancouver, July 2016;  doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.15894.80966 . 

40 L. W. Swanson, and A. E. Bell, Adv. Electronics Electron Phys. 32, 193 (1973). 

41 L. W. Swanson, and G. A. Schwind, "Review of the ZrO/W Schottky cathode", Chap. 1 in: 

J. Orloff (ed.) Handbook of Charged Particle Optics, 2nd Edition (CRC Press, Baton Rouge, 

2009). 

42 W. Schottky, Physik. Zeitschr. 15, 872 (1914). 

43 W. Schottky, Z. Phys. 14, 630 (1923). 

44 W. P. Thomson (later, Lord Kelvin), "On the mathematical theory of electricity in equilibrium: 

Division III" (including papers published in Vol. 3 of the Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical 

Journal, 1848/49), in: Reprints of Papers on Electrostatics and Magnetism (Macmillan, London, 

1872) pp. 60-77. 

45 J. C. Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, Vol. 1 (Clarendon, Oxford, 1st edition 

1873), see Chap. XI.  
 

46 J. J. Thomson, Conduction of Electricity in Gases (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1st 

edition 1903); see p. 386. 

47 W.-L. Wang, J. Peng, G.-H. Chen, S.-Z Deng, N.-S Xu, and Z.-B.  Li, J. Appl. Phys. 104, 034306 

(2008). 

 


23 

48 A. Grillo, J. Barrat, Z. Galazka, M. Passacantando, F. Giubileo, L. Iemmo, G. Luongo, F. Urban, C. 

Dubourdieu, and A. Di Bartolomeo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 114, 193101 (2019). 

49 S. M. Sze and Kwok K. Ng, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 3rd edition (Wiley, 2007). 

50 R. H. Fowler, E. G. Gallop, C. N. H. Lock, and H. W. Richmond, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 221, 295 

(1920). 

51 H. Jeffreys, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. 23, 428 (1925). 

52 J. M. Houston, Phys. Rev. 88, 349 (1952). 

53 R. H. Fowler, Statistical Thermodynamics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2nd edition 

1936);  see pp. 356-357. 

54 R. A. Millikan, and C. C. Lauritsen, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 14, 45 (1928). 

55 J. R. Oppenheimer, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 14, 363 (1928). 

56 J. R. Oppenheimer, Uncommon Sense (Birkhauser, Boston, 1994); see p. 173. 

57 E. Merzbacher, Physics Today, 55(8), 44 (2002). 

58 R. H. Fowler, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 117, 549 (1928). 

59 E. Fermi, Zeitschr. Phys. 36, 902 (1926). 

60 P. A. M. Dirac, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 112, 661 (1926). 

61 A.  Sommerfeld, Naturwiss. 15, 825 (1927). 

62 A. Sommerfeld, and H. Bethe, "Elektronentheorie der Metalle", in: H. Geiger and K. Scheel (eds), 

Handbuch der Physik, Vol. 24 (Springer, Berlin, 1933), p. 442.  


