Quantum Nanophotonics with Group IV defects in Diamond 
Carlo Bradac,1,* Weibo Gao,2 Jacopo Forneris,3 Matt Trusheim4 & Igor Aharonovich1 

 

1 School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Technology 
Sydney, Australia 2007 

2 Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371, Singapore 

3 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN), Torino, 10125, Italy 

4 Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA  
 
* Corresponding author, Dr Carlo Bradac: carlo.bradac@uts.edu.au   
 
Abstract 
Diamond photonics is an ever-growing field of research driven by the prospects of harnessing 
diamond and its colour centres as suitable hardware for solid-state quantum applications. The 
last two decades have seen the field been shaped by the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centre both 
with breakthrough fundamental physics demonstrations and practical realizations. Recently 
however, an entire suite of other diamond defects has emerged. They are M-V colour centres, 
where M indicates one of the elements in the IV column of the periodic table—Si, Ge, Sn and 
Pb, and V indicates lattice vacancies, i.e. missing next-neighbour carbon atoms. These 
centres exhibit a much stronger emission into the zero-phonon line then the NV centre, they 
display inversion symmetry, and can be engineered using ion implantation—all attractive 
features for scalable quantum photonic architectures based on solid-state, single-photon 
sources. In this perspective, we highlight the leading techniques for engineering and 
characterizing these diamond defects, discuss the current state-of-the-art of group IV-based 
devices and provide an outlook of the future directions the field is taking towards the realisation 
of solid-state quantum photonics with diamond.  
 
 
Introduction 
The field of diamond photonics is marching into its third decade—its birth arguably marked by 
the 1997 discovery of room-temperature optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) from 
a single diamond nitrogen-vacancy (NV) centre.1 The unique ability of the NV’s spin to be 
initialised, manipulated and optically read out at room temperature gave substance to the 
aspiration of realising solid-state quantum bits operating in ambient conditions.2, 3 Tremendous 
efforts followed, driven by the goal to engineer high-quality NV centres with long spin 
coherence times, and ameliorate the fabrication of diamond nanostructures for efficient light 
extraction.4-7 The remarkable progress made in pursuit of this endeavour resulted in landmark 
realisations both in fundamental and applied science including on-demand entanglement,3 
nanoscale nuclear magnetic resonance8, 9 and quantum memories.10 
 
However for applications requiring better photon throughput, e.g. quantum repeaters, the NV 
centre is not ideal. Its long fluorescent lifetime (~11 ns) and weak emission into the zero-
phonon line (only ~4% at room temperature), puts an upper bound to the maximum photon 
rates achievable when employing NV centres in basic quantum photonic devices. While 
significant progress has been made towards improving photon extraction—for instance via the 


use of solid immersion lenses, diamond antennas or optical resonators—having photon 
emitters with better-suited properties is a desirable alternative. 
  
In the recent past, other colour centres in diamond have thus been explored. Initial 
experiments revealed a diverse spread of narrow-band emitters, spanning over the visible and 
near infrared spectral range.11 The silicon-vacancy (SiV–) colour centre was the first out of the 
group IV atoms to be investigated, as it was a known colour centre in diamond from the early 
80s12—yet only unambiguously identified as a silicon related defect with its current electronic 
level structure in the 90s.13, 14 Unfortunately, the first studies on single SiV– defects created by 
ion implantation gave mixed results.15 While the centre showed to possess a sharp zero-
phonon line (ZPL) at 738 nm (responsible for >70% of the total emission) with only weak 
vibronic sidebands at room temperature, and a short photoluminescence lifetime of ~1 ns, it 
also displayed low single-photon emission rates (a few kcounts/s) and low radiative quantum 
yield (~0.05). 
 
In 2011, the centre was revisited after a study from Neu et al.16 showed ultra-bright emission 
(~4.8 Mcounts/s, at saturation) from single diamond SiV– defects grown via microwave-
plasma-assisted chemical vapour deposition on an iridium substrate. The discovery 
reinvigorated the interest for this defect, which resulted into better understanding of its level 
structure,17, 18 photophysical properties19, 20 and spin coherence times, as well as driving the 
design of schemes for initialization, readout, and coherent preparation of the centre.21, 22 
Remarkably, the SiV– centre shows nearly lifetime-broadened optical emission, in both 
nanodiamonds23, 24 and bulk crystals.25 This derives from its inversion symmetry (group D3d, 
with the silicon atom in a split-vacancy configuration) protecting the optical transitions from 
local electric field fluctuations,26 which in turn allows for the existence—and potentially 
fabrication—of multiple, intrinsically-identical emitters in high-quality bulk diamond.27 
However, one of the main drawbacks of the SiV– is its aforementioned, intrinsically low 
quantum efficiency—alongside sub-microsecond spin coherence time even at cryogenic 
temperatures.21, 28 This prompted researchers around the world to explore—naturally—other 
group IV elements foreseeing that they will form colour centres with the same symmetry, and 
anticipating some of these might have a combination of desired properties with no or limited 
shortcomings. In 2015, the germanium-vacancy (GeV) centre was identified,29-31 followed by 
the tin-vacancy (SnV)32, 33 and the led-vacancy (PbV) centres.34, 35 The main properties of 
these defects are summarised in Table 1 and their structure and level diagram are shown in 
Figure 1. 
  

 
ZPL 
FHWM 
at RT 

Excited state 

Lifetime 

Ground state 

splitting 

Spin–lattice 
relaxation T1 

Transverse 

relaxation time 

T2 

SiV– 
738 nm 0.7-5 nm
1.0 - 2.4 ns 
~ 50 GHz 
> 1s at 100 

mK 

T2 ~13 ms at 

100 mK 

GeV– 
602 nm 
~ 5 nm 
1.4–5.5 ns 
~ 170 GHz 
25 μs at 2 K 
T2* ~ 20  ns 

SnV–
620 nm 
 ~ 6 nm
~ 6 ns 
∼ 850 GHz 
~60 μs 
N/A 


PbV–
520 nm, 
552 nm 
~7 nm 
> 3 ns  

5.7 THz @ 

520 nm  

4.2 THz @ 

552 nm  

N/A 
N/A 

 
Table 1. Photophysical properties of the group IV defects  
 
This perspective highlights the progress made along this journey—the challenges met and the 
successes made while engineering and characterising new group-IV emitters, as well as 
testing their performance for the realization of scalable quantum photonic devices. We first 
present the general properties of these emitters and the methods developed to engineer them. 
We then discuss the spin coherence properties of the SiV– and the GeV– centres, and show 
the current state of the art for a few representative quantum photonic experiments realised 
with these emitters. We conclude by giving a broad outlook over the outstanding obstacles, 
which might focus future directions and advancements in the field.         
 

 

 
Figure 1. Photoluminescence of group-IV centres in diamond. a) Atomic structure of group-IV colour 
centres in the D3d symmetry, split-vacancy configuration. The group-IV element (M, orange) lies 
between two nearest-neighbours missing carbon atoms (V, white). b) Typical room-temperature 
photoluminescence (PL) spectrum of SiV–, GeV–, SnV– and PbV– centres. c) Energy structure of 
impurity-divacancy centres within zero and non-zero external magnetic field B. d) Predicted energies of 
the ground (GS) and excited (ES) states of the group-IV colour centres with respect to the diamond 
valence band maximum (i.e. the location of the valence band at the Brillouin-zone centre). Levels in 
grey, red, green, blue refer to values calculated in Refs.29, 32, 34, 36 


 
 
Defects fabrication strategies 
The photophysical properties of diamond M-V centres are uniquely favourable to both 
fundamental and practical realizations in quantum photonics. As a result, one major aspect, 
which is currently shaping the field, is the development of methods for the deterministic—
ideally scalable—fabrication of these defects. Group-IV emitters in diamond are most 
commonly produced through either impurity incorporation during synthesis or via targeted ion 
implantation. 
 
Incorporation. The formation of SiV– centres in diamond is rather simple. Due to the residual 
silicon, often present in chemical vapor deposition (CVD) chambers from quartz bell jars or 
substrates, most of CVD-grown nanodiamond does contain SiV– centres. Likewise, many high 
pressure high temperature (HPHT) nanodiamonds and bulk single crystals can include SiV– 
centres that are present due to addition of silicon-containing precursors.37 Similarly, the 
incorporation of GeV– centres in diamond has been demonstrated by utilizing suitable 
precursors or substrates both during HPHT and CVD synthesis, while SnV– has only been 
synthesized via HPHT synthesis, so far.38-41 The effectiveness of the synthesis depends on 
the solubility of the specific element, and thus decreases as the atomic radius increases. It 
should be noted that the synthesized emitters generally exhibit better optical properties, e.g. 
higher photostability and narrower emission bandwidth, than those of centres fabricated by 
ion implantation—mainly owing to the higher crystalline quality of the former.24, 42 However, 
this approach has a significant drawback in the context of device fabrication—the synthesis 
process only offers statistical control on the number of emitters and does not allow for precise 
positioning. For this reason, incorporation during synthesis is arguably best suited for hybrid 
approaches involving the fabrication of emitters in, for instance, individual diamond 
nanoparticles which are subsequently integrated with external photonic structures by pick-
and-place techniques.43 
 
Ion implantation. This approach stems from an enticing perspective: to individually control 
the number and position of the colour centres in the diamond material—ideally forming 
arbitrary arrays of quantum emitters. Ion implantation is a technologically-mature method 
which inherits a large body of knowledge from silicon-based electronic device manufacturing. 
Its exploitation for quantum device fabrication though is still limited for it currently lacks reliable, 
sub-50 nm positioning accuracy, single-ion delivery, and close-to-unity formation yield (i.e. 
ratio between optically-active emitters and number of implanted ions).44 
 
Spatial accuracy. The deterministic formation of colour centres in diamond via implantation is 
intrinsically limited by lateral straggling, i.e. scattering of the ions as they travel through the 
target material. Notably, the relatively high mass of group-IV ions lessens the effects of 
straggling in diamond enabling sub-30 nm implantation accuracy with energies that, for 
instance for Si ions, can be as high as 200 keV. Higher placement accuracies (<10 nm) can 
be achieved at lower energies and for heavier elements (Ge–Pb).45 Ion straggling is only one 
of the factors limiting spatial accuracy. The diameter of the impinging ion beam and the 
diffusion length of the atoms during the thermal annealing step employed to form the vacancy-
centre complexes play a prime role too (see below). 
 


Arguably the main outstanding challenge to deterministic nanoscale positioning of colour 
centres in diamond is thus the availability of specific beam optics for accurate spatial delivery 
of individual ions. To this end, two main approaches are being pursued—both currently 
achieving resolutions well-below 100 nm—nanoscale focusing and scanning of a rarefied ion 
beam via electromagnetic lenses, and use of collimators in combination with nano-apertures. 
For the first approach, the main obstacle is the limited focusing capability of conventional MeV 
energy accelerators. This has however been overcome by the development—still ongoing—
of custom focused ion beam (FIB) apparatuses with commercially available alternatives to 
ordinary gallium liquid metal ion sources.46-49 Conversely—relevant to the second approach—
achromatic nanoscale collimators are compatible with any ion species as well as energy, and 
have been used in a variety of configurations to achieve spatially-resolved ion implantation. 
Specifically, collimators can consist of fixed apertures registered to specific implantation 
targets on the substrate,50 or can be mounted on a scanning system enabling ion delivery at 
arbitrary positions.51 
 
Single ion detection. In general, the delivery of a predefined number of ions on the diamond 
target cannot be achieved by a Poissonian approach which relies on preset exposure time 
and ion current. A much more deterministic solution is needed. Real-time counting of individual 
ions as they strike the target is one such solution. In this case, the target substrate itself is 
engineered to be a solid-state particle detector via patterning of suitable electrode 
geometries.52 This strategy also allows, in perspective, the exploitation of the same electrodes 
for subsequent applications, such as inducing stark shift and electroluminescence. However, 
single-ion detection is challenged by the high energy required (~13 eV) to generate an 
electron-hole pair in diamond. To date, the detection of Si ions at energies as low as 200 keV 
has been demonstrated using single-ion counting techniques developed in the context of 
nuclear microprobe technologies.52, 53 Sensitivities of ~30 keV are within reach on the basis of 
the available state-of-the-art detection technologies. Nonetheless, this requires the 
development of custom signal amplification electronics with ~fF feedback capacitance and 
careful reduction of environmental and thermal noise—to be achieved, e.g., through the design 
of shielded irradiation chambers operating at cryogenic temperatures. Note that this detection 
approach cannot be employed for target implantation in photonic structures, for these cannot 
intrinsically be fitted with sensing electrodes. In this case, ion counting could be performed 
through the detection of secondary electrons. This scheme—yet to be realized for single-ion 
delivery in diamond devices—would prevent utilizing collimators for nanoscale positioning, as 
they would absorb the secondary radiation emitted from the target. An alternative path consists 
in fabricating the photonic structures themselves registered to a set of emitters pre-implanted 
at specific positions.54 Other approaches also consider combining ion implantation with in-situ 
confocal microscopy and annealing to generate on demand emitters. A similar approach was 
recently realised with laser writing of colour centres in diamond.55 
 
Formation yield. The incorporation of different ions in diamond is the first step. This is followed 
by the formation of the implanted impurities into optically-active emitters—i.e. atom-vacancy 
complexes. This is achieved by annealing at high temperatures, which promotes the 
recombination of the ions with implantation-induced lattice vacancies. Typical annealing 
temperatures are in the 800–1200 °C range for all group-IV elements. To date, yields  of ≤25%, 
1%, 5%, and 2% have been reported for 15-50 keV implantations of Si, Ge, Sn and Pb ions, 
respectively. These estimates are statistical, due to the limited amount of experiments 
exploiting single-ion counting techniques. Promising alternative techniques—including for 


instance high pressure high temperature treatments—might lead to a significant increase in 
yield. This was demonstrated for other centres in diamond,56 as well as for the SnV– with a 
reported higher stability of the HPHT-treated centres32 with respect to those subjected to 
ordinary annealing.33 Another promising approach consists in combining femtosecond laser-
induced annealing with conventional thermal treatments.57  
 
Spin-optical properties 
Key to demonstrate fundamental phenomena, as well as realizing quantum-based devices is 
the ability to address and manipulate the spin state of these diamond colour centres. This 
aspect is still at its infancy as is the development, in parallel, of protocols to detect, manipulate 
and convert the charge state of the M-V defects—for most of these centres exist in multiple 
charge states. This is particularly important for reducing or ideally eliminating effects such as 
spectral diffusion and ionisation, which limit the practical employment of these colour centres 
in quantum applications relying on photon indistinguishability. 
 
Symmetry and structure. Group-IV diamond defects display the split-vacancy configuration 
in which the element M (Si, Ge, Sn, Pb) lies in between two adjacent diamond vacancies, i.e. 
two missing nearest-neighbours carbon atoms.13 The centre has nominally D3d symmetry with 
the diamond <111> axis as the principal, three-fold rotation axis (C3)—though lower 
symmetries (e.g. C2, D2 point groups) can occur due to lattice strain and deformation. In the 
negatively-charged state of the defects—which gives the characteristic emission lines in 
Figure 1b—there are eleven valence electrons involved: six from the dangling bonds of the 
adjacent carbons atoms, four from the group IV element and one from elsewhere in the lattice. 
The resulting M-V– defects have ground (2Eg) and excited (2Eu) states that both have E 
symmetry and double orbital degeneracy. The orbital degeneracy is lifted by spin-orbit 
coupling and dynamic Jahn-Teller interaction, leading to a pair of split ground and excited 
states, each with double spin-degeneracy (S = 1/2, Figure 1c).14, 58, 59 These eigenstates have 
corresponding optical and phononic transitions which couple only to the orbital degree of 
freedom and are spin conserving, allowing for all-optical coherent control schemes of the 
defect’s spin state. Notably, these spin states possess a near-unity spin purity, enabling spin-
tagged resonance fluorescence measurements18 and making these colour centres desirable 
spin-photon quantum interface candidates for quantum information networks. Further, owing 
to the D3d symmetry, the application of a magnetic field of given magnitude and direction 
determines the admixture of the resultant spin eigenstate and can influence the relative 
relaxation time as the ground and excited state manifolds experience different strengths of 
spin-orbit interaction. In the SiV–, for instance, tuning the orientation of the magnetic field with 
respect to the C3 symmetry axis results in the variation of the spin relaxation time from tens of 
nanoseconds to a few milliseconds—the longest relaxation time being for the field aligned 
along C3). 
  
Spin Control. For many quantum-based applications, the spin coherence of the colour 
centres is a crucial figure of merit, for it dictates the feasibility as well as the maximum number 
of fundamental operations executable on the candidate qubit. Ideally, the ratio between the 
time of a single gate operation and decoherence time of the (spin) state should be ~10–3–10–

6, as imposed by error correction limits. Here we focus on the well-studied SiV– as a 
representative case; similar considerations though can be drawn for the other diamond M-V 
centres and are briefly discussed at the end of this section. 


For the SiV– the coherence time is relatively short and is thus one of the main challenges 
towards its use as a robust qubit. The SiV– possesses two possible paths to encode 
information as a qubit—either via the two orbital branches of the ground state (ΔGS ~47 GHz)60 
or via the spin S = 1/2 sublevels of the orbital states, which have characteristic optical 
signatures and whose degeneracy is lifted by Zeeman splitting. Compared to the rather long 
spin relaxation time (T1spin ~ms), the lifetime of the orbital states of the SiV– centre is limited 
(T1Orbital ~tens of ns) due to acoustic phonon scattering between the two ground orbital 
branches (|12⟩ and |34⟩ in Fig. 1c).21, 22, 61, 62 The dephasing time involving Zeeman-split spin 
sublevels (T2⋆ ~tens of ns) is also short and of the same order of T1Orbital. It follows the same 
temperature dependence of T1Orbital, indicating that spin dephasing is also dominated by 
phonon-mediated transitions between the orbital branches.22 For completeness, longer values 

for the spin dephasing time of the SiV–, T2

⋆ ~hundred ns, have been reported in Ramsey 

interferometry experiments measuring the free induction decay time of the spin.22  
Being such a critical constraint, different approaches have been proposed to increase the 
coherence time of the SiV–, as described below 
 
Cool-down. One option is to cool down the SiV– centre to millikelvin temperatures,28 which is 
currently possible with commercial 3He/4He dilution refrigerators. At these temperatures, the 
spin coherence time can reach tens of ms if the magnetic field is well-aligned,63 as shown in 
Figure 2a–c. This allows for optical excitations of the SiV– centre for as many as ~105 cycles 
before a spin-flip event can occur, thus making high-fidelity single-shot spin readout a concrete 
possibility, even with low photon collection efficiencies (~10–4). At millikelvin temperatures the 
strong suppression of phonon-mediated dephasing allows for the observation of prominent 
Rabi oscillations between the two spin ground states. Free induction decay (FID) 
measurements have shown that the spin coherence time of the SiV– centre can increase from 
~tens or hundreds of ns for natural samples64 to ~10 μs for isotopically-pure diamond (0.001% 

13C). Extension of the spin coherence time is possible by employing dynamical decoupling 
protocols to rephase the spin via a series of π-pulses. Notably, in these schemes the fact that 
the spin coherence time does not saturate with the number of π-pulses indicates that the 
coherence time can be further extended by reducing the uncertainty on the pulses, for instance 
by using a decoupling sequence with two-axis control.65 
 
Strain-engineering. A second method to enhance the coherence time of the SiV– centre is to 
manipulate the phonon scattering strength via strain engineering,66 Figure 2d. Here a tuneable 
static strain is applied on a SiV– centre that is located in a monolithic single-crystal diamond 
cantilever with metal electrodes patterned above and below. Voltage applied across the 
electrodes deflects the cantilever downwards generating a controllable deformation. The strain 
mixes the orbitals of the ground and excited state manifolds, and alters the splitting (ΔGS and 
ΔES) in each manifold. Theoretical simulations indicate that, at 4.2 K, increasing the orbital 
splitting ΔGS would cause the phonon absorption rate of the SiV– centre to first raise slightly 
(due to the higher phonon density of states), before experiencing a monotonic drop (due to 
the competing exponential decrease in thermal occupation of the phononic states 
themselves). Overall, a reduction in phonon absorption causes the suppression of the phonon-
mediated dephasing process in the system, effectively increasing the coherence time (Figure 
2d). 
 

 


 

Figure 2. Coherent spin control in the SiV– centre. a) Spin control of the silicon-vacancy centre at 
millikelvin temperatures. Single-shot spin readout with magnetic field B = 2.7 kG: a 20-ms-long laser 
pulse pumping the transition A1 (see Fig. 1c) is used to read out the state after a 250-ms-long 
initialization pump of the A1 (red) or B2 transition (blue). b) Ramsey interference measurement of T2⋆ 
for two samples: 13C purified sample (blue, 0.001% 13C) and unprocessed natural sample (red, 1.1% 

13C). The microwave field is detuned by ~550 kHz from the Zeeman splitting between |1⟩ and |2⟩.  The 
duration of the initialization and readout period are 15 ms and 2 ms for the 0.001% 13C sample, and 2 
ms and 1.5 ms for the 1.1% 13C sample. c) Carr-Purcell-Meiboom-Gill (CPMG) pulse sequence with N 
= 1, 2, 4, 8,16 and 32 pulses in a sample with low 13C concentrations and with an aligned magnetic field 
B ≈ 1.6 kG at 100 mK. Durations of the initialization and readout laser pulses are 100 ms and 15 ms, 
respectively. Dashed lines are fits to exp[–(T/T2)4]. d) Suppression of spin dephasing via strain 
engineering. The simulated bending is at an applied voltage of 200 V between top and bottom 
electrodes. The component of the strain tensor in the direction of the long axis of the cantilever is 
indicated by the colour scale. Scale bar corresponds to 2 μm. The linewidth of coherent population 
trapping (CPT) dips as a function of ground-state orbital splitting ΔGS is shown, indicating an increase 
in spin coherence for higher levels of strain. e) Demonstration of coherent manipulation trapping with 
GeV–  centres. The top panels represent coherent excitation from the lower (1) and higher (2) energy 
ground state manifold to the excited state (3). A dip with full width at half maximum of (8.6 ± 0.5) MHz 
is visible, which corresponds to a coherence lifetime of (19 ± 1) ns. 
 
Charge-state control. An indirect alternative is to consider the neutrally-charged state of the 
M-V defects. For instance, the SiV0 displays strong (~90%), nearly transform-limited (~450 
MHz) emission in the ZPL at 946 nm. It is a S = 1 spin system which is less subject than its 
negatively-charged counterpart to decoherence caused by phonon interaction and electric 


field fluctuations.67, 68 Spin polarization of the system has been observed,69 and explained 
through state-selective intersystem crossing between singlet and triplet states, similarly to 
what occurs in NV– centres. Additionally, time-resolved electron spin resonance 
measurements on ensembles of SiV0 centres have shown long coherence times of ~1 ms 
(with Hahn-echo schemes), as well as exceptionally long spin-lattice relaxation times ~40 s, 
at temperatures <20 K. The dephasing mechanism seems to be dominated by slowly-varying 
noise from nearby 13C nuclear spins, which means it can be reduced by improving the quality 
and isotopic purity of the material. 
The main drawbacks of the SiV0 are the relatively low fluorescence at low temperature70 and 
the technological challenge of controlling the doping of diamond (e.g. controlling the 
concentration of N and B) to favour the formation of SiV0 over that of SiV– centres.   
Beyond the SiV– centre, spin manipulation using microwave fields has been demonstrated in 
GeV– centres.42 Nevertheless, for the GeV– the ground-state splitting is too small to benefit 
from suppressing the electron-phonon interaction. This leads to a relatively small spin 
dephasing time (limited by phonon-mediated orbital relaxation) of ~20 ns—as measured 
through coherent population trapping experiments at cryogenic temperatures (~2.2 K). The 
results are shown in Figure 2e. For this measurement, a (100)-oriented diamond was used 
with magnetic field applied in the plane of the diamond. The larger-than-usual splitting of the 
ground state is due to the residual strain.42 The GeV– spin relaxation time was measured to 
be ~25 μs under precise alignment (54 degrees) between the magnetic field and the GeV– 
axis. The other M-V centres in the family possess larger intrinsic orbital splitting which suggest 
they might be less prone to dephasing. In general, these experimental demonstrations show 
that the family of diamond M-V centres constitute promising systems for developing spin-
photon interfaces and quantum networks communicating via photons.   
 
Quantum Photonics with Group-IV Emitters 
Coherent light-matter interfaces are one of the key components of many proposed quantum 
technologies. They are for instance essential for advanced quantum networks and modular 
quantum computing architectures71 that exploit photon interference to entangle distant long-
lived spin-based quantum memories.72 In this framework, diamond group-IV emitters are a 
suitable candidate hardware. Their strong emission into the spin-correlated ZPL, symmetry-
protected optical transitions, and low inhomogeneous spectral distribution set them above 
many alternative systems. Further, nanofabrication in the semiconductor industry is well-
established, making diamond M-V emitters a concrete route towards realizing integrated 
nanophotonic devices based on light-matter interactions with single quanta. In this section we 
review the use of group-IV emitters in some of the main quantum optical technologies. 
 
Optical properties. One essential property of a coherent light-matter interface is a transform-
limited optical transition. This is because in the opposite case, i.e. when spectral broadening 
is present, the emitted photons are distinguishable and the fidelity of key linear-optical 
quantum operations (e.g. projective Bell-state measurements) is limited. A second desirable 
property is high quantum efficiency: emission of spectrally-coherent, spin-correlated photons 
into a specific mode with high probability after optical excitation. Finally, the inhomogeneous 
(emitter-to-emitter) variation in optical transition frequency should be small such that 
spectrally-identical emitters can be produced scalably. Group-IV defects in diamond have 
advantages over other solid-state emitters for these crucial aspects. Unlike NV– centres, which 
have poor optical linewidths when produced through ion implantation,73 SiV– centres have 
been shown to have highly coherent optical transitions when incorporated in this fashion. A 


similarly high photon coherence has since been demonstrated for GeV– and SnV–, showing 
that the inversion symmetry of the diamond M-V defects make them robust in this respect. As 
mentioned before, diamond group-IV emitters generally have higher Debye-Waller factors 
than NV– centres, resulting in higher emission efficiency into the ZPL and can have very small 
inhomogeneous spectral distribution. As a result, in 2014 the experimental demonstration of 
Hong-Ou-Mandel interference between two SiV– centres was demonstrated.27 The experiment 
set a milestone for diamond-based quantum optics and proved that group-IV emitters are 
serious contenders for advanced solid-state quantum realizations. The key properties of 
group-IV emitters in this context are summarized in Figure 3 below. 
 

 

Figure 3. Nanophotonic integration of group-IV emitters. Photonic crystals containing group-IV diamond 
colour centres and including: a) 1D triangular nanobeam cavities,49 b) quasi-isotropic etched 
nanobeams, and c) FIB-patterned diamond membranes.74 d) Fibre-microcavity integrated SiV–  centres, 
e) GeV– centres coupled to micro-rings, and f) group-IV strain tuning devices based on electrostatically-
actuated cantilevers. g, h) Optical properties of SiV– centres in 1D photonic structures. Th linewidth 
distribution shows near-lifetime limited SiV– centres in optical structures. Cavity reflectivity 
measurements indicating a high cooperativity C > 20.  
 
Device Integration. To further increase the quality of the light-matter interface, the emitters 
can be integrated into photonic devices.75, 76 By structuring the electromagnetic environment 
surrounding the emitter, light-matter interaction can be increased via the cavity-QED 
cooperativity C = 4g2/kγ, where g is the emitter-photon coupling rate, k the loss rate of the 
optical mode, and γ the emitter dephasing rate. The cooperativity is related to the Purcell factor 
FP = C/QE, with (1-QE) quantifying the emission into all other modes, which increases the 
emission rate and reduces the emitter lifetime, also reducing the effect of spectral broadening, 
and to the β-factor, which quantifies the emission efficiency into a single mode. It also defines 
optical transmission and reflectivity, key measures of quantum operation fidelities in 


networking architectures—e.g. the Duan-Kimble scheme. Diamond nanophotonic cavities with 
high quality factors, Q > 10,000, and with low mode volume, V ~ (λ/2n)3 have been 
demonstrated in several realizations.6 However, the high optical dephasing rate of NV– 
centres—for which the cavities were designed—near etched surfaces, combined with the high 
emission of the NV– into the phonon sideband, limited achievable cooperativity to C < 1 in 
these systems.  
Nanophotonic integration of group-IV emitters has since overcome these issues. The first 
demonstration of coupling of group-IV emitters to photonic crystal cavities in bulk diamond 
dates back to 2012.74, 77 The SiV– centres were integrated in 1D and 2D FIB-etched structures 
limited by a relatively low Q of 700 or to a microdisk cavity. In the following years, improved 
fabrication techniques based on angular78 and quasi-isotropic79, 80 oxygen etching led to 
increased photonic crystal cavity quality factors, resulting in significant advances towards 
strong-light matter interaction (Figure 3a-c). Other photonic configurations have also been 
explored, including fibre-based microcavities,81, 82 where Purcell factors of 9.2 have been 
shown, and diamond microdisk resonators83 (Figure 3d, e). At the same time, the use of group-
IV emitters has reduced spectral broadening, with near-lifetime limited linewidths reported for 
SiV– centres in single-mode diamond waveguides26 (Figure 3g). This combination of improved 
nanofabrication and reduced spectral width enabled the recent demonstration of  high-
cooperativity (C ~ 20) light-matter interfaces using SiV– centres coupled to 1D photonic 
crystals,84 such that high-fidelity gates between single spins and traveling photons85 are now 
possible (Figure 3h). Finally, the inhomogeneous spectral distribution of emitters has been 
overcome through the use of strain tuning, where electromechanical cantilevers are employed 
to bring multiple group-IV centres into spectral alignment66, 86 (Figure 3f). With the addition of 
long spin coherence and high-fidelity control described above, nanophotonic-integrated group-
IV emitters have all the properties required for coherent light-matter interface applications. 
These exceptional properties have been employed for several advances in quantum optics. 
For instance, SiV– and GeV– centres in nanophotonic waveguides have been used in 
demonstrations of superradiant emission, indicating entanglement between spatially separate 
emitters in a single optical mode (Figure 4a).49, 87 This set group-IV diamond emitters as 
candidate fundamental building blocks for quantum networks relying on distant entanglement 
of quantum nodes. Further work extended this concept to two emitters mutually coupled to a 
cavity mode.84 With the increased light-matter coupling afforded by the cavity, coherent 
interactions can be directly observed via an avoided crossing in the optical spectra as the 
emitters are magnetically tuned onto resonance with each other (Figure 4b). Strong, 
controllable coupling as demonstrated in this work can enable deterministic two-qubit gates, 
an essential element of a quantum repeater node. A third advance is the production of 
spectrally-tuneable coherent single photons via cavity-assisted Raman processes88 (Figure 
4c). This scheme has the potential for producing indistinguishable single photons in a scalable 
manner, which is the core requirement for linear-optical quantum computing and network 
applications. The robust optical coherence and lack of spectral diffusion in group-IV emitters 
integrated with nanophotonics, including lifetime-limited SiV– and SnV–, as well as spectrally 
narrow GeV–, are some of the key elements that enabled these breakthrough demonstrations 
of light-matter interaction. Further, the demonstrated coherent spin control with nanophotonic-
integrated group-IV systems, including ancilla nuclear spin ‘data’ qubits,89 sets the concrete 
possibility for the realization of a fully-functional multi-qubit quantum network node.   
 
 


 

Figure 4. Quantum optics with group-IV colour centres. a) Superradiant emission of GeV– centres 
coupled to a single-mode waveguide. The bunching signature with g2 > 1 (lower left) indicates 
cooperative emission between two separated GeV– centres. b) Coherent coupling between two SiV– 
centres in a photonic crystal cavity. The characteristic avoided crossing (mid panel) indicates a coupling 
greater than the optical linewidth. c) Widely-tuneable Raman emission from a SiV– centre coupled to a 
photonic crystal cavity. 
 
Quantum Plasmonics 
Colour centres in diamond have always been one of the most prominent systems for quantum 
plasmonic experiments owing to their robustness and small size.90 For instance, NV– centres 
in nanodiamond have led to the demonstration of wave-particle duality of surface plasmons,91 
and have been successfully coupled to a variety of resonators and waveguides. Remarkably, 
in a recent experiment a single nanodiamond was positioned in an ultra-small gap cavity and 
resulted in a two-order-of-magnitude enhancement in luminescence from a  hosted single NV– 
centre, achieving >10 Mcounts/s at saturation at room temperature92 (Fig. 5a).  
Beyond these first realizations exploiting the well-characterised NV– centre, the emergence of 
the group-IV emitters in diamond—with their narrowband, fully-polarised emission—brought a 
new wave of experiments as well as novel plasmonic structure designs. Recently a specific 
geometry involving gold dimers has been proposed to achieve a three-hundred-fold 
luminescence enhancement from SiV– colour centres in a diamond nanoparticle.93 
Interestingly, the proposed dimensions and geometry are within technological reach as they 
require a 10-nm nanodiamond coated with few-nm SiO2 film and located between two gold 
structures ~65–120 nm in size, depending on the geometry of the dimer (Fig. 5b). The 
experimental demonstration of this particular proposal is yet to be achieved; nevertheless, the 
first steps towards on-chip quantum plasmonics with group-IV emitters have already been 
taken. Figure 5c shows a GeV– centre in a nanodiamond host coupled to a hybrid plasmonic 
waveguide.94 The nanodiamond containing a single GeV– centre is embedded in a hydrogen 
silsesquioxane (HSQ) waveguide on top of a smooth silver film. The photoluminescence signal 
from the GeV– shows a modest three-fold enhancement and, more importantly, the same 
scheme allows for excitation of the GeV– remotely, through the grating coupler. Although the 
waveguide and cavity lengths in this particular example are small (~ tens of μm), longer lengths 
are technologically feasible with the use of more suitable dielectric crystals (e.g. TiO2) and 
larger single-crystal silver films. 


New designs and calculations are also being brought forward for realising indistinguishable 
photon sources at room temperature based on group-IV colour centres in diamond.95 The 
basic idea revolves around employing low-Q cavities that have ultra small volume and can 
lead to strong light confinement and fluorescence enhancement. This approach has already 
been realised experimentally to demonstrate ultra-bright emission (yet not of coherent or 
indistinguishable photons) in other systems, including NV– centres, emitters in 2D materials,96 
and quantum dots,97 with count rates ~MHz. Current losses in the plasmonic waveguides and 
devices can be minimized by synthesis and growth of better-quality materials, by careful 
geometric design and improved coupling to the far field. The latter can be achieved, for 
instance, via a nanoparticle acting both as a scatterer and, simultaneously, as an antenna. In 
perspective, if the spontaneous emission is decreased to ultimately reach the dephasing limit, 
experiments in the quantum regime could be performed at liquid nitrogen and perhaps even 
at room temperature.95 
 

 

Figure 5. Integrated Plasmonics with group-IV defects in diamond. a) State-of-the-art enhancement of 
luminescence from a single NV– centre, resulting in over 1x106 counts/s at saturation. b) Modelling of 
SiV– photoluminescence enhancement in an antenna configuration, showing a potential 300-fold 
enhancement. c) Example of a simple plasmonic waveguide coupled to GeV– centres. Coupling to the 
waveguide is demonstrated, and remote collection through the waveguide is shown to be better than a 
direct one. 
 
 
Applications, outlook and challenges 


Group-IV diamond emitters have already been successfully employed in a suite of 
fundamental demonstrations and practical applications. Yet the field is still at its infancy, 
especially in certain research areas. An in-depth discussion of these is beyond the scope of 
this perspective, but we deem important highlighting a few notable ones where M-V emitters 
are showing great promise (Figure 6). 
Quantum sensing has been a particularly active area of research for diamond M-V centres. 
Atom-like in nature, encased in a robust diamond matrix and mere nanometres away from the 
surface, these colour centres are ideal sensing elements. This feature has been recently 
explored to measure, for instance, temperatures at the nanoscale via all-optical approaches. 
The methods rely on monitoring the ZPL amplitude, barycentre or full-width at half-maximum 
of the emitters as the temperature varies98-100 or, in more sensitive realisations, on detecting 
changes in their fluorescence intensity under anti-stokes excitation—which probes the highly 
temperature-dependent phonons.101 Given that SiV– centres can be effectively integrated into 
atomic force microscopy (AFM) tips,102 such a method can be a strong contender for all-optical 
scanning thermometry. 
Additional applications that warrant attention in the context of sensing, are labelling and 
imaging in liquid, particularly with diamond nanoparticles in biological environments. Here, 
diamond group-IV defects have significant advantages over alternative biomarkers. The 
diamond particles can be as small as just a few nanometers,103 they are non-toxic and can be 
readily functionalized to be target-specific. The hosted M-V emitters have narrowband 
emission at different wavelengths, which allows for multi-wavelength imaging—nanodiamonds 
containing different colour centres can be functionalized to target different biological structures 
and monitored simultaneously through different optical filters. An aspect that is particularly 
appealing from a practical point of view is in situ-doping during high pressure high temperature 
growth, which can produce large quantities (~kg) of nanodiamonds. This can be achieved via 
addition of silicon or germanium-based precursors, that are readily available.   
 

 

 
Figure 6. Schematic of some of the envisioned applications for group-IV emitters in diamond. a) All-
optical charge- and spin-state control of group-iV emitters in diamond. b) Quantum sensing, e.g. 
nanothermometry of integrated circuits, using M-V defects in diamond nanoparticle hosts. c) Quantum 
network based on diamond group-IV emitters as spin-photon interfaces. The system exemplified a 
diamond photonic crystal with a tapered edge coupled to a waveguide made from e.g. aluminium nitride 
(adapted from Refs104, 105)    
 


Group-IV emitters in diamond are also showing potential for electroluminescence-based 
applications where the luminescence of the defect is triggered electrically rather than optically. 
Unlike NV– centres, SiV– centres can be driven electrically.106-109 It has been proposed that 
other group-IV defects could also be excited electrically. This area of research is still at an 
early stage, but the preliminary results and the forecast predictions are promising. While n-
type diamond is a notoriously challenging material to grow, hybrid approaches involving for 
instance p-type diamond and an external n-type material (e.g. indium tin oxide) can be used 
as an optical diode.107 Such control can be exploited to realize scalable, on-chip quantum 
circuitry—ideally comparable to state-of-the-art GaAs-based quantum dots—as well as to 
achieve tuning of spin transitions and generation of coherent photons from the colour centres. 
This is particularly advantageous for the long-term vision of realizing full integration on a single 
chip, where optical excitation is limited by the diffraction limit.      
Another direction where more research is needed is charge-state control. While the negatively-
charged M-V– emitters in diamond are well studied, so far only the neutrally-charged SiV0 
centre has been experimentally observed and characterised. The SiV0 is promising, as it offers 
a combination of long electron spin coherence and desirable optical properties—strong 
(~90%), nearly transform-limited (~450 MHz) emission in the ZPL in the near infrared at 946 
nm. However, engineering the neutrally-charged variant of M-V defects on demand has, so 
far, been proven challenging as the corresponding negatively-charged defects seem to form 
more favourably. Current strategies rely on doping the diamond with boron atoms (which can 
act as acceptors) while limiting the amount of nitrogen atoms (which can act as donors). The 
precise conditions to achieve a deterministic yield are still under study. There is also an 
ongoing debate about the feasibility of isolating single SiV0 defects in a controllable manner. 
Whilst expected, currently the neutrally-charged variant of any other diamond group-IV defect 
has not been observed. Their spectral signature should be offset to the visible range of the 
spectrum, thus enabling easier and more efficient detection.  
Overall group-IV diamond emitters combine desirable optical properties—comparable to 
quantum dots—and long spin coherence time—similar to NV– centres. We thus also anticipate 
a bloom of advanced quantum applications requiring spin-photon interfaces. One of the most 
ambitious realizations consists in the design of a prototype quantum network based on spin-
photon and spin-spin entanglement mediated by photon interference. Research on strong 
coupling between group-IV emitters and cavities, as well as the implementation of spin-photon 
controlled phase gates mediated by the cavity is currently undergoing, as is the investigation 
of spin-spin entanglement via direct dipole-dipole coupling and the realization of a qubit 
platform where nuclear spins are employed as quantum memories.  
 
References 
 
1. 
Gruber, A. et al. Scanning confocal optical microscopy and magnetic resonance on 
single defect centers. Science 276, 2012-2014 (1997). 

2. 
Wehner, S., Elkouss, D. & Hanson, R. Quantum internet: A vision for the road ahead. 
Science 362 (2018). 

3. 
Kalb, N. et al. Entanglement distillation between solid-state quantum network nodes. 
Science 356, 928-932 (2017). 

4. 
Castelletto, S., Rosa, L., Blackledge, J., Al Abri, M.Z. & Boretti, A. Advances in 
diamond nanofabrication for ultrasensitive devices. Microsystems &Amp; 
Nanoengineering 3, 17061 (2017). 

5. 
Aharonovich, I., Greentree, A.D. & Prawer, S. Diamond photonics. Nat. Photonics 5, 
397-405 (2011). 


6. 
Schröder, T. et al. Quantum nanophotonics in diamond [Invited]. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 
33, B65-B83 (2016). 

7. 
Eaton, S.M. et al. Quantum Micro–Nano Devices Fabricated in Diamond by 
Femtosecond Laser and Ion Irradiation (Adv. Quantum Technol. 5-6/2019).  2, 
1970033 (2019). 

8. 
Lovchinsky, I. et al. Nuclear magnetic resonance detection and spectroscopy of 
single proteins using quantum logic. Science 351, 836-841 (2016). 

9. 
Aslam, N. et al. Nanoscale nuclear magnetic resonance with chemical resolution. 
Science 357, 67-71 (2017). 

10. 
bradley, C. et al. A 10-qubit solid-state spin register with quantum memory up to one 
minute. arXiv:1905.02094 (2019). 

11. 
Aharonovich, I. & Neu, E. Diamond Nanophotonics. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2, 911-928 
(2014). 

12. 
Zaitsev, A.M. Optical Properties of a Diamond. (Springer, Berlin; 2001). 

13. 
Clark, C.D., Kanda, H., Kiflawi, I. & Sittas, G. silicon defects in diamond. Phys. Rev. 
B 51, 16681-16688 (1995). 

14. 
Goss, J.P., Jones, R., Breuer, S.J., Briddon, P.R. & Oberg, S. The twelve-line 
1.682eV luminescence center in diamond and the vacancy-silicon complex. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 77, 3041-3044 (1996). 

15. 
Wang, C.L., Kurtsiefer, C., Weinfurter, H. & Burchard, B. Single photon emission 
from SiV centres in diamond produced by ion implantation. Journal of Physics B: 
Atomic Molecular and Optical Physics 39, 37-41 (2006). 

16. 
Neu, E. et al. Single photon emission from silicon-vacancy centres in CVD-nano-
diamonds on iridium New J. Phys. 13, 025012 (2011). 

17. 
Hepp, C. et al. Electronic Structure of the Silicon Vacancy Color Center in Diamond. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 036405 (2014). 

18. 
Müller, T. et al. Optical signatures of silicon-vacancy spins in diamond. Nat. 
Commun. 5, 3328 (2014). 

19. 
Jahnke, K.D. et al. Electron–phonon processes of the silicon-vacancy centre in 
diamond. New J. Phys. 17, 043011 (2015). 

20. 
Neu, E., Agio, M. & Becher, C. Photophysics of single silicon vacancy centers in 
diamond: implications for single photon emission. Opt. Express 20, 19956-19971 
(2012). 

21. 
Rogers, L.J. et al. All-Optical Initialization, Readout, and Coherent Preparation of 
Single Silicon-Vacancy Spins in Diamond. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 263602 (2014). 

22. 
Pingault, B. et al. Coherent control of the silicon-vacancy spin in diamond. Nat. 
Commun. 8, 15579 (2017). 

23. 
Li, K., Zhou, Y., Rasmita, A., Aharonovich, I. & Gao, W.B. Nonblinking Emitters with 
Nearly Lifetime-Limited Linewidths in CVD Nanodiamonds. Physical Review Applied 
6, 024010 (2016). 

24. 
Jantzen, U. et al. Nanodiamonds carrying silicon-vacancy quantum emitters with 
almost lifetime-limited linewidths. New J. Phys. 18, 073036 (2016). 

25. 
Rogers, L.J. et al. Multiple intrinsically identical single-photon emitters in the solid 
state. Nat. Commun. 5, 4739 (2014). 

26. 
Evans, R.E., Sipahigil, A., Sukachev, D.D., Zibrov, A.S. & Lukin, M.D. Narrow-
Linewidth Homogeneous Optical Emitters in Diamond Nanostructures via Silicon Ion 
Implantation. Physical Review Applied 5, 044010 (2016). 

27. 
Sipahigil, A. et al. Indistinguishable Photons from Separated Silicon-Vacancy Centers 
in Diamond. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 113602 (2014). 

28. 
Pingault, B. et al. All-Optical Formation of Coherent Dark States of Silicon-Vacancy 
Spins in Diamond. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 263601 (2014). 

29. 
Iwasaki, T. et al. Germanium-Vacancy Single Color Centers in Diamond. Sci. Rep. 5, 
12882 (2015). 


30. 
Palyanov, Y.N., Kupriyanov, I.N., Borzdov, Y.M. & Surovtsev, N.V. Germanium: a 
new catalyst for diamond synthesis and a new optically active impurity in diamond. 
Sci. Rep. 5, 14789 (2015). 

31. 
Nadolinny, V.A. et al. EPR study of germanium-vacancy defects in diamonds. Journal 
of Structural Chemistry 57, 1041-1043 (2016). 

32. 
Iwasaki, T. et al. Tin-Vacancy Quantum Emitters in Diamond. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 
253601 (2017). 

33. 
Tchernij, S.D. et al. Single-Photon-Emitting Optical Centers in Diamond Fabricated 
upon Sn Implantation. ACS Photonics 4, 2580-2586 (2017). 

34. 
Trusheim, M.E. et al. Lead-related quantum emitters in diamond. Phys. Rev. B 99, 
075430 (2019). 

35. 
Ditalia Tchernij, S. et al. Single-Photon Emitters in Lead-Implanted Single-Crystal 
Diamond. ACS Photonics 5, 4864-4871 (2018). 

36. 
Thiering, G. & Gali, A. Ab Initio Magneto-Optical Spectrum of Group-IV Vacancy 
Color Centers in Diamond. Physical Review X 8, 021063 (2018). 

37. 
Crane, M.J. et al. High-pressure, high-temperature molecular doping of 
nanodiamond.  5, eaau6073 (2019). 

38. 
Teraji, T. et al. Homoepitaxial diamond film growth: High purity, high crystalline 
quality, isotopic enrichment, and single color center formation.  212, 2365-2384 
(2015). 

39. 
Palyanov, Y.N., Kupriyanov, I.N., Borzdov, Y.M., Khokhryakov, A.F. & Surovtsev, 
N.V. High-Pressure Synthesis and Characterization of Ge-Doped Single Crystal 
Diamond. Crystal Growth & Design 16, 3510-3518 (2016). 

40. 
Boldyrev, K.N., Mavrin, B.N., Sherin, P.S. & Popova, M.N. Bright luminescence of 
diamonds with Ge-V centers. J. Lumin. 193, 119-124 (2018). 

41. 
Ekimov, E.A., Lyapin, S.G. & Kondrin, M.V. Tin-vacancy color centers in micro- and 
polycrystalline diamonds synthesized at high pressures. Diam. Rel. Mater. 87, 223-
227 (2018). 

42. 
Siyushev, P. et al. Optical and microwave control of germanium-vacancy center spins 
in diamond. Phys. Rev. B 96, 081201 (2017). 

43. 
Benson, O. Assembly of hybrid photonic architectures from nanophotonic 
constituents. Nature 480, 193-199 (2011). 

44. 
Pacheco, J.L. et al. Ion implantation for deterministic single atom devices.  88, 
123301 (2017). 

45. 
Ziegler, J.F., Ziegler, M.D. & Biersack, J.P. SRIM – The stopping and range of ions in 
matter (2010). Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: 
Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 268, 1818-1823 (2010). 

46. 
Lesik, M. et al. Maskless and targeted creation of arrays of colour centres in diamond 
using focused ion beam technology.  210, 2055-2059 (2013). 

47. 
Schröder, T. et al. Scalable focused ion beam creation of nearly lifetime-limited single 
quantum emitters in diamond nanostructures. Nat. Commun. 8, 15376 (2017). 

48. 
Zhou, Y. et al. Direct writing of single germanium vacancy center arrays in diamond. 
New J. Phys. 20, 125004 (2018). 

49. 
Sipahigil, A. et al. An integrated diamond nanophotonics platform for quantum optical 
networks. Science 354, 847 (2016). 

50. 
Spinicelli, P. et al. Engineered arrays of nitrogen-vacancy color centers in diamond 
based on implantation of CN- molecules through nanoapertures. New J. Phys. 13. 

51. 
Riedrich-Möller, J. et al. Nanoimplantation and Purcell enhancement of single NV 
centers in photonic crystal cavities in diamond, Vol. 106. (2015). 

52. 
Jamieson, D.N. et al. Deterministic doping. Materials Science in Semiconductor 
Processing 62, 23-30 (2017). 

53. 
Vittone, E. Semiconductor Characterization by Scanning Ion Beam Induced Charge 
(IBIC) Microscopy. ISRN Materials Science (2013). 

54. 
Riedrich-Möller, J. et al. Deterministic Coupling of a Single Silicon-Vacancy Color 
Center to a Photonic Crystal Cavity in Diamond. Nano Lett. 14, 5281-5287 (2014). 


55. 
Chen, Y.-C. et al. Laser writing of individual nitrogen-vacancy defects in diamond 
with near-unity yield. Optica 6, 662-667 (2019). 

56. 
Orwa, J.O. et al. Nickel related optical centres in diamond created by ion 
implantation. J. Appl. Phys. 107 (2010). 

57. 
Chen, Y.-C. et al. Laser writing of coherent colour centres in diamond. Nat. Photonics 
11, 77 (2016). 

58. 
Gali, A. & Maze, J.R. Ab initio study of the split silicon-vacancy defect in diamond: 
Electronic structure and related properties. Phys. Rev. B 88, 235205 (2013). 

59. 
Rogers, L.J. et al. Electronic structure of the negatively charged silicon-vacancy 
center in diamond. Phys. Rev. B 89, 235101 (2014). 

60. 
Becker, J.N., Görlitz, J., Arend, C., Markham, M. & Becher, C. Ultrafast all-optical 
coherent control of single silicon vacancy colour centres in diamond. Nat. Commun. 
7, 13512 (2016). 

61. 
Zhou, Y. et al. Coherent control of a strongly driven silicon vacancy optical transition 
in diamond. Nat. Commun. 8, 14451 (2017). 

62. 
Zhang, J.L. et al. Complete coherent control of silicon vacancies in diamond 
nanopillars containing single defect centers. Optica 4, 1317-1321 (2017). 

63. 
Sukachev, D.D. et al. Silicon-Vacancy Spin Qubit in Diamond: A Quantum Memory 
Exceeding 10 ms with Single-Shot State Readout. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 223602 
(2017). 

64. 
Becker, J.N. et al. All-Optical Control of the Silicon-Vacancy Spin in Diamond at 
Millikelvin Temperatures. Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 053603 (2018). 

65. 
de Lange, G., Wang, Z.H., Riste, D., Dobrovitski, V.V. & Hanson, R. Universal 
Dynamical Decoupling of a Single Solid-State Spin from a Spin Bath. Science 330, 
60-63 (2010). 

66. 
Sohn, Y.-I. et al. Controlling the coherence of a diamond spin qubit through its strain 
environment. Nat. Commun. 9, 2012 (2018). 

67. 
D'Haenens-Johansson, U.F.S. et al. Optical properties of the neutral silicon split-
vacancy center in diamond. Phys. Rev. B 84, 245208 (2011). 

68. 
Rose, B.C. et al. Observation of an environmentally insensitive solid-state spin defect 
in diamond.  361, 60-63 (2018). 

69. 
Green, B.L. et al. Neutral Silicon-Vacancy Center in Diamond: Spin Polarization and 
Lifetimes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 096402 (2017). 

70. 
Green, B.L. et al. Electronic structure of the neutral silicon-vacancy center in 
diamond. Phys. Rev. B 99, 161112 (2019). 

71. 
Hucul, D. et al. Modular entanglement of atomic qubits using photons and phonons. 
Nature Phys. 11, 37 (2014). 

72. 
Moehring, D.L. et al. Entanglement of single-atom quantum bits at a distance. Nature 
449, 68-U48 (2007). 

73. 
van Dam, S.B. et al. Optical coherence of diamond nitrogen-vacancy centers formed 
by ion implantation and annealing. Phys. Rev. B 99, 161203 (2019). 

74. 
Riedrich-Moller, J. et al. One- and two-dimensional photonic crystal microcavities in 
single crystal diamond. Nature Nanotech. 7, 69-74 (2012). 

75. 
Atatüre, M., Englund, D., Vamivakas, N., Lee, S.-Y. & Wrachtrup, J. Material 
platforms for spin-based photonic quantum technologies. Nature Reviews Materials 
3, 38-51 (2018). 

76. 
Awschalom, D.D., Hanson, R., Wrachtrup, J. & Zhou, B.B. Quantum technologies 
with optically interfaced solid-state spins. Nat. Photonics 12, 516-527 (2018). 

77. 
Lee, J.C., Aharonovich, I., Magyar, A.P., Rol, F. & Hu, E.L. Coupling of silicon-
vacancy centers to a single crystal diamond cavity. Opt. Express 20, 8891-8897 
(2012). 

78. 
Burek, M.J. et al. Free-Standing Mechanical and Photonic Nanostructures in Single-
Crystal Diamond. Nano Lett. (2012). 

79. 
Mouradian, S., Wan, N.H., Schröder, T. & Englund, D. Rectangular photonic crystal 
nanobeam cavities in bulk diamond.  111, 021103 (2017). 


80. 
Khanaliloo, B., Mitchell, M., Hryciw, A.C. & Barclay, P.E. High-Q/V Monolithic 
Diamond Microdisks Fabricated with Quasi-isotropic Etching. Nano Lett. 15, 5131-
5136 (2015). 

81. 
Benedikter, J. et al. Cavity-Enhanced Single-Photon Source Based on the Silicon-
Vacancy Center in Diamond. Physical Review Applied 7, 024031 (2017). 

82. 
Häußler, S. et al. Diamond photonics platform based on silicon vacancy centers in a 
single-crystal diamond membrane and a fiber cavity. Phys. Rev. B 99, 165310 
(2019). 

83. 
Bray, K. et al. Single Crystal Diamond Membranes and Photonic Resonators 
Containing Germanium Vacancy Color Centers. ACS Photonics 5, 4817-4822 (2018). 

84. 
Evans, R.E. et al. Photon-mediated interactions between quantum emitters in a 
diamond nanocavity. Science 362, 662-665 (2018). 

85. 
Duan, L.M. & Kimble, H.J. Scalable Photonic Quantum Computation through Cavity-
Assisted Interactions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 127902 (2004). 

86. 
Maity, S. et al. in Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics JTh5C.2 (Optical Society 
of America, San Jose, California; 2019). 

87. 
Bhaskar, M.K. et al. Quantum Nonlinear Optics with a Germanium-Vacancy Color 
Center in a Nanoscale Diamond Waveguide. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 223603 (2017). 

88. 
Sun, S. et al. Cavity-Enhanced Raman Emission from a Single Color Center in a 
Solid. Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 083601 (2018). 

89. 
Metsch, M.H. et al. Initialization and Readout of Nuclear Spins via a Negatively 
Charged Silicon-Vacancy Center in Diamond. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 190503 (2019). 

90. 
Schietinger, S., Barth, M., Aichele, T. & Benson, O. Plasmon-Enhanced Single 
Photon Emission from a Nanoassembled Metal−Diamond Hybrid Structure at Room 
Temperature. Nano Lett. 9, 1694-1698 (2009). 

91. 
Kolesov, R. et al. Wave-particle duality of single surface plasmon polaritons. Nature 
Phys. 5, 470-474 (2009). 

92. 
Bogdanov, S.I. et al. Ultrabright Room-Temperature Sub-Nanosecond Emission from 
Single Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers Coupled to Nanopatch Antennas. Nano Lett. 18, 
4837-4844 (2018). 

93. 
Meng, X., Liu, S., Dadap, J.I. & Osgood, R.M. Plasmonic enhancement of a silicon-
vacancy center in a nanodiamond crystal. Physical Review Materials 1, 015202 
(2017). 

94. 
Siampour, H. et al. On-chip excitation of single germanium vacancies in 
nanodiamonds embedded in plasmonic waveguides. Light: Science & Applications 7, 
61 (2018). 

95. 
Bogdanov, S.I., Boltasseva, A. & Shalaev, V.M. Overcoming quantum decoherence 
with plasmonics.  364, 532-533 (2019). 

96. 
Luo, Y. et al. Deterministic coupling of site-controlled quantum emitters in monolayer 
WSe2 to plasmonic nanocavities. Nature Nanotech. (2018). 

97. 
Hoang, T.B., Akselrod, G.M. & Mikkelsen, M.H. Ultrafast Room-Temperature Single 
Photon Emission from Quantum Dots Coupled to Plasmonic Nanocavities. Nano Lett. 
16, 270-275 (2016). 

98. 
Fan, J.-W. et al. Correction to Germanium-Vacancy Color Center in Diamond as a 
Temperature Sensor. ACS Photonics 5, 4710-4710 (2018). 

99. 
Tsai, P.-C. et al. Measuring Nanoscale Thermostability of Cell Membranes with 
Single Gold–Diamond Nanohybrids.  56, 3025-3030 (2017). 

100. 
Choi, S., Agafonov, V.N., Davydov, V.A. & Plakhotnik, T. Ultrasensitive All-Optical 
Thermometry Using Nanodiamonds with a High Concentration of Silicon-Vacancy 
Centers and Multiparametric Data Analysis. ACS Photonics 6, 1387-1392 (2019). 

101. 
Tran, T.T. et al. Anti-Stokes excitation of solid-state quantum emitters for nanoscale 
thermometry.  5, eaav9180 (2019). 

102. 
Choi, S., Leong, V., Alagappan, G. & Krivitsky, L. Enhancing Optical Readout from 
Diamond AFM Tips for Quantum Nanosensing. ACS Photonics 5, 4244-4248 (2018). 


103. 
Bradac, C. et al. Observation and control of blinking nitrogen-vacancy centres in 
discrete nanodiamonds. Nature Nanotech. 5, 345-349 (2010). 

104. 
Ritter, S. et al. An elementary quantum network of single atoms in optical cavities. 
Nature 484, 195 (2012). 

105. 
Kim, J.-H. et al. Hybrid Integration of Solid-State Quantum Emitters on a Silicon 
Photonic Chip. Nano Lett. 17, 7394-7400 (2017). 

106. 
Berhane, A.M. et al. Electrical excitation of silicon-vacancy centers in single crystal 
diamond. Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 171102 (2015). 

107. 
Bray, K. et al. Single crystal diamond membranes for nanoelectronics. Nanoscale 10, 
4028-4035 (2018). 

108. 
Khramtsov, I.A. & Fedyanin, D.Y. Superinjection in diamond homojunction P-I-N 
diodes. Semiconductor Science and Technology 34, 03LT03 (2019). 

109. 
Mizuochi, N. et al. Electrically driven single-photon source at room temperature in 
diamond. Nat. Photonics 6, 299-303 (2012). 

 


