Signatures of Helical Edge Transport in Millimetre-Scale Thin Films of Na3Bi

Chang Liu1,2,3, Dimitrie Culcer3,4, Mark T. Edmonds1,2,3*, Michael S. Fuhrer1,2,3*

1School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Victoria 3800 Australia

2Monash Centre for Atomically Thin Materials, Monash University, Victoria 3800 Australia

3ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies, Monash University, 

Victoria 3800 Australia

4School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052 Australia

*  mark.edmonds@monash.edu and michael.fuhrer@monash.edu


Abstract

A two-dimensional topological insulator (2DTI) has an insulating bulk and helical spin-polarised edge 

modes robust to backscattering by non-magnetic disorder. While ballistic transport has been 

demonstrated in 2DTIs over short distances, larger samples show significant backscattering and a 

nearly temperature-independent resistance whose origin is unclear. 2DTI edges have shown a spin 

polarisation, however the degree of helicity is difficult to quantify from spin measurements. Here, we 

study 2DTI few-layer Na3Bi on insulating Al2O3. A non-local conductance measurement geometry 

enables sensitive detection of the edge conductance in the topological regime, with an edge mean free 

path ~100 nm. Magnetic field suppresses spin-flip scattering in the helical edges, resulting in a giant 

negative magnetoresistance (GNMR), up to 80% at 0.9 T. Comparison to theory indicates >98% of 

scattering is helical spin scattering significantly exceeding the maximum (67%) expected for a non-

helical metal. GNMR, coupled with non-local measurements demonstrating edge conduction, thus 

provides an unambiguous experimental signature of helical edges that we expect to be generically 

useful in understanding 2DTIs.


When time-reversal symmetry is preserved, the edges of a 2DTI are expected to be perfect ballistic 

conductors at zero temperature [1]. Indeed, 2DTIs were first identified experimentally through ballistic 

edge-state transport [2,3] over few-micron distances. However, in larger samples a finite, nearly 

temperature-independent resistance is observed [1,4-13]. The prevailing theoretical picture is that this 

edge resistance results from spin-flip scattering via exchange coupling to local moments, either 

impurity species [1] or metallic “puddles” of conduction electrons with odd electron number [8], 

however no experiments have probed this magnetic scattering directly.

Recent efforts have focused on identifying larger bandgap 2DTIs with the hope of demonstrating 

topological electronic devices at room temperature. WTe2 [12], bismuthene [14] and Na3Bi [15] are 

thought to be large-bandgap 2DTIs, edge-state transport has been shown up to 100 K in WTe2 [11,13]. 

However, HgTe quantum wells have shown the persistence of edge state conduction into the 

conventional insulator regime, calling into question whether edge conduction alone is decisive 

evidence of topological transport. As the study of 2DTIs expands to new materials and new regimes, 

an unambiguous signature of helical edge state transport is necessary.  

Here we demonstrate such a signature, using a combination of non-local transport measurements to 

demonstrate edge conduction, and magnetoresistance to confirm unambiguously helical transport. We 

study ultra-thin Na3Bi, especially promising for topological devices due to its very large topological 

bandgap (>300 meV) and electric-field induced topological phase transition [15]. Unlike monolayer 

WTe2 and bismuthene, Na3Bi is expected to be a 2DTI over at least 1-3 layer thicknesses. Na3Bi can 

be grown on a variety of substrates [16,17] at relatively low substrate temperature (≤ 330 °C). These 

qualities are promising for large area epitaxial ultra-thin 2DTIs, robust to temperature and layer-

number fluctuations [15]. 


We grow large area epitaxial ultra-thin (~2nm) film Na3Bi on an atomically flat insulator (α-

Al2O3[0001]). We use local and non-local [4,10] conductivity measurements to probe the bulk and 

edge conductivity as a function of doping and magnetic field. As-grown bulk-conducting films possess 

carrier mobility as high as 34,000 cm2/Vs and electron doping as low as 2.8×1010 cm-2, and show a 

carrier density-dependent transition between weak localization (WL) near the band edge to weak anti-

localization (WAL) at high doping, characteristic of a gapped Dirac system. When the Fermi level is 

tuned into the bulk gap the non-local resistance becomes comparable to the local resistance, indicating 

edge-dominated transport even in our millimetre-sized devices. An exceptional giant negative 

magnetoresistance (GNMR), up to 80% at 0.9 T, develops as a direct consequence of the spin-flip 

nature of scattering in a topological edge mode. Comparison with theory indicates that >98% of 

backscattering is spin-flip scattering, as expected for the helical edges of a 2DTI, and inconsistent with 

a non-helical metal.

The Na3Bi films were grown via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in a Createc Low-Temperature-MBE-

STM system on atomically flat α-Al2O3[0001] substrates (Shinkosha Japan) that were prepatterned 

with Ti/Au electrodes (5/50 nm) in either a van der Pauw geometry or in a Hall bar geometry by 

growing through a stencil mask affixed on the substrate. The growth was achieved by co-depositing 

Bi (99.999%) and Na (99.95%) in an over Na flux with a Na:Bi flux ratio above 10:1. Deposition rates 

were calibrated using a quartz crystal microbalance. A two-step growth method was employed with 

the first 1 nm grown at 200 °C and the remaining 1 nm grown at final temperature around 270 °C. 

After growth, annealing at 300-330 °C for 10 min in a Na flux was carried out to improve film quality. 

The as-grown film was then transferred in UHV to the low-temperature STM with 1 T perpendicular 

magnetic field and in-situ electrical contacts. The tetrafluorotetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ)

deposition was carried out in the MBE chamber at room temperature using an effusion cell and the rate 


calibrated by quartz crystal microbalance to p-type dope thin-film Na3Bi without degrading the 

electronic properties [16,18]. The thickness of a monolayer F4-TCNQ is expected to be ca. 3.6 Å [19].


Fig. 1 shows growth and transport properties of as-grown ultra-thin Na3Bi. Fig. 1(a) and 1(b) show the 

reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) pattern of the α-Al2O3[0001] substrate and ~2 nm 

Na3Bi film respectively. The clearly defined streaks in Fig. 1(b) are consistent with RHEED taken on 

ultra-thin Na3Bi [15] and 15 nm Na3Bi grown on Si(111) [20] indicating high-quality epitaxial growth. 

STM topography in Fig. 1(c) shows ~10 nm terraces with an average thickness of 2 nm (see 

Supplementary Materials for details). The carrier density and mobility for the nine different as-grown 

2 nm Na3Bi samples are shown in Fig. 1(d). In this regime non-local measurements confirm that 

conduction is dominated by the doped bulk (see below). All as-grown films are n-type with carrier 

density 2.81010-3.8×1011 cm-2, and mobility 1000-34000 cm2/Vs. Variations in density and mobility 

are most likely due to subtle variations in substrate quality and growth conditions, whilst, the n-type 

doping is due to interfacial doping, consistent with 20 nm Na3Bi thin films [17]. 


We now turn to the bulk magneto-transport properties of as-grown ultra-thin Na3Bi. Fig. 2(a) shows 

the change in conductivity, xx, as a function of perpendicular magnetic field for four as-grown 

samples with different carrier densities. At higher density there is only negative magneto-conductance 

and as the density decreases there is crossover from negative to positive magneto-conductance at 

around 0.25 T, consistent with a crossover from WAL to WL. 

We fit the data to the full Hikami-Larkin-Nagaoka (HLN) formula (solid lines in Fig. 2(a); see 

Supplementary Materials for formula and details) to obtain the phase (lϕ) and spin (lSO) coherence 

lengths, and plot the mean free path (le) (calculated in Supplementary Materials), lϕ, and lso as a function 

of carrier density in Fig. 2(b). For all films, lϕ >> le consistent with the quantum diffusive regime. The 

phase coherence length, lϕ increases monotonically with doping similar to WSe2 [21]. On the other 

hand, lso increases as the density decreases, reflecting the decrease in spin-momentum locking (perfect 

spin-momentum locking corresponds to lso = 0). At low density when lϕ ~ lso, the crossover of WAL to 

WL is expected. Additional experiments probing a p-type to n-type transition using in-situ K-dosing 

showed a similar transition from WL to WAL (see Supplementary Materials for data).

The coherence length in a conductor is ultimately limited by electron-electron scattering [22] though 

may be smaller due to other dephasing processes such as electron-phonon scattering or spin-flip 

scattering from local moments. For electron-electron scattering we expect that the ratio

𝑙ϕ
𝑙𝑒 = (

𝜏ϕ
𝜏𝑒)

1/2

=

(

4𝐸F
𝑘𝐵𝑇)

1/2

(

1

𝑙𝑛(𝜎))

1/2

≈ (

4𝐸F
𝑘𝐵𝑇)

1/2

. The electron band of few-layer Na3Bi is well approximated by a 

massive Dirac system with Fermi velocity vF = 1 x 106 m/s, gap parameter Δ = 92 meV, and effective 

mass m* = Δ /vF2 = 0.016 me, where me is the electron mass [15]. Then for our typical carrier densities 

n = 1-4 x 1011 cm-2 and T = 5 K we find 

lϕ
le ≈ 12-24. This is in good agreement with the ratio

𝑙ϕ
𝑙𝑒 ≈ 8-

14 observed in Fig. 2(b) (and Fig. S2(b)), implying that the small effective mass and large Fermi energy 


in Na3Bi enables long coherence times and phase-coherent transport at relatively high temperature. 

Further studies of the temperature dependence of the magnetoresistance could confirm whether

electron-electron interactions limit the phase coherence.

Bulk Na3Bi exhibits near perfect WAL due to the perfect spin-momentum coupling expected for a 

topological Dirac semimetal [17]. The appearance of WL at low carrier density indicates that this 

topological protection is lost in ultrathin Na3Bi, due to opening of bulk gap, while near perfect WAL 

is retained at high density far from the gapped region where spin-momentum locking is approximately 

preserved. The opening of bulk gap is a necessary but not sufficient condition for a 2DTI; it does not 

indicate whether the resulting insulator is topological or conventional.


We now investigate the transport properties when the Fermi level is within the bulk bandgap. We 

deplete the as-grown n-type doping by depositing high electron affinity (5.24 eV) F4-TCNQ to p-type 

dope thin-film Na3Bi.

Fig. 3 plots (Fig. 3(a)) the local resistance, RL, (Fig. 3(b)) the non-local resistance, RNL, and (Fig. 3(c)) 

their ratio RNL/RL as a function of F4-TCNQ coverage at temperatures of 5.3-20 K. For a uniform 

conductor we expect [23] 𝑅L = 𝜌𝑥𝑥𝐿/𝑤 and 𝑅NL = 𝜌𝑥𝑥𝑒−𝜋𝐿/𝑤. For our geometry, L/w ratio is 2 and 

hence RNL/RL ~ 10-3. This agrees well with our measurements on the as-grown film where RL ~10 k

and RNL is only few ohms. Upon initial deposition of F4-TCNQ, the local resistance increases by two 

orders of magnitude consistent with the Fermi level moving into the bulk gap. RNL is no longer 

suppressed and becomes comparable with RL and RNL/RL is close to 1 at an F4-TCNQ coverage of 

0.020 monolayer (ML). This non-local resistance in the absence of magnetic field has been previously 

taken as evidence of a 2DTI edge state [10]. We have eliminated the possibility of edge conduction by 

metallic Bi or Na (see Supplementary Materials) and conclude that conduction occurs through Na3Bi 

edge modes. For the highest coverages and lowest temperatures, RNL saturates at ~100 M, and RNL/RL 

saturates ~ 1, suggesting that when the Fermi level is deep in the bulk gap, the edge current is less 

affected by bulk leakage, and RNL reflects the edge resistance. The edge resistivity is ρedge = R/L = 

h/e2le,edge where R is the resistance of an edge section of length L, h is Planck’s constant, and e the 

elementary charge. Accounting for the two current paths, RNL ~ 100 M corresponds to ρedge ~ 300 

kΩ/μm and le,edge ~ 100 nm.

Fig. 3(b) shows that RNL is temperature-dependent, becoming larger at lower temperature. However, 

the temperature dependence appears to mirror the temperature dependence of the ratio RNL/RL; the 

largest RNL is measured at 5.3 K when RNL/RL saturates near unity, and lower RNL values coincide with 


deviation from RNL/RL ~1 and likely reflects bulk leakage rather than temperature dependence of ρedge. 

More work is needed to clarify the detailed temperature dependence of ρedge. The temperature 

dependence of RNL/RL also prevents us from probing edge transport to temperatures above 20 K, 

apparently limited by bulk leakage. This temperature is much smaller than the bandgap in ultrathin 

Na3Bi, suggesting that bulk leakage could be significantly reduced in cleaner samples, realizing higher 

temperature edge transport. 

Fig. 3(d) shows a non-local I(V) curve with around 0.036 ML F4-TCNQ coverage at 10 K when RNL/RL

~ 1. The I(V) shows two different non-local resistance regimes: at low current, the slope is large 

(RNL/RL ~ 1) as electron transport occurs through the edge states. However, at higher current the slope 

becomes much smaller, corresponding to a decrease in RNL/RL, consistent with some current being 

shunted through the bulk. The abrupt change in slope indicates that the bulk conduction turns on at a 

critical edge current/voltage; the critical voltage ~ 75 mV is of similar order as the bulk bandgap 

energy hence it is reasonable to expect significant bulk conduction at this bias.


We now demonstrate that the observed edge transport is helical. Fig. 4 shows the longitudinal 

magnetoresistance (MR) of 2 nm Na3Bi as a function of F4-TCNQ doping. In contrast to the positive 

MR due to WAL observed for bulk transport (Fig. 2(a) and black line in Fig. 4), in the edge conduction 

regime a giant negative MR (GNMR) develops, as large as -80% at 0.9 T and nearly independent of 

the doping (F4-TCNQ coverage). Negative MR in metals is unusual. GNMR has been observed 

previously in bulk Dirac and Weyl semimetals, but only in parallel electric and magnetic fields due to 

the chiral anomaly [24-27], however the GNMR observed here in ultra-thin Na3Bi is observed in a 

perpendicular magnetic field. The finite edge resistance in 2DTIs with weak temperature dependence 

has been explained as due to exchange-mediated scattering from local moments, either atomic-scale 

defects [1] or electrons localised in puddles [8] due to spatial fluctuations of the Fermi energy, at 

temperature T > TK, the Kondo temperature. Exchange-mediated scattering from magnetic impurities 

is a known source of negative MR in metals: Magnetic fields polarize local moments, making spin-flip 

scattering inelastic and unfavourable once the Zeeman energy exceeds the thermal energy.

We model the edge state magnetoresistance as follows. The edge states of Na3Bi in the presence of a 

perpendicular magnetic field // z are described by the Hamiltonian 𝐻 = (ℏ𝑣𝐹𝑘𝑥 + 𝑔𝑒𝜇𝐵𝐵) 𝜎𝑧, where 

x is the transport direction parallel to the edge, 𝑔𝑒 is the edge spin g-factor and the Pauli matrix 𝜎𝑧

represents the edge spin operator. The spins are polarised out of the plane and the magnetic field shifts 

the origin of 𝑘𝑥 without opening a gap. We consider scattering off magnetic impurities with spin 

coupled to the edge spins via a local exchange interactions 𝐽𝛿(𝑟⃗) 𝜎⃗ ∙ 𝑆⃗, whose matrix elements between 

momentum states are independent of wave vector. The magneto-resistance is calculated using 

Boltzmann theory in the spirit of Refs.[28,29] but adapted to spin-polarised edge states. Scalar and 

spin-conserving transitions ∝ σz Sz drop out when the scattering-out and scattering-in terms are both 


included, eliminating the effect of forward scattering. Single-particle spin-flip terms are determined in 

the Born approximation ∝ 𝐽2, keeping terms linear in the impurity density. This yields the following 

formula for the magneto-resistance:

𝑅(𝐵) − 𝑅(0)

𝑅(0)
= 〈𝑆𝑧〉

𝑆 [coth 𝑥

2 −

𝑥
2

(sinh 𝑥

2)

2]
(1)

where x =

gμBB

kBT , g is the impurity gyromagnetic ratio, g-factor, and 

〈Sz〉

S is given by the Brillouin 

function, which reflects the polarisation of the impurity spins by the Zeeman interaction. Spin-flip 

becomes inelastic and the energy cost associated with flipping the impurity spins leads to a negative 

magnetoresistance. We note that Kondo scattering terms logarithmic in T show up at orders J3 and 

higher. The Kondo temperature TK is expected to be vary small for known TI parameters [30], and the

good fit to Eq. (1) suggests T >> TK here.

Fig. 4 shows a fit of the experimental MR to Eq. (1); the only free parameter is g = 32.3. This is in 

reasonable agreement with g ~ 20 inferred from transport measurements on bulk Na3Bi [25], 

suggesting the impurities are quantum dot-like "puddles". In Fig.4, we also show the expected MR for 

a hypothetical non-helical metal, where the only scattering is via exchange interaction, but spin-

preserving scattering is allowed; Eq. (1) is modified by an additional prefactor 2/3, i.e. the maximum 

MR is 2/3 (67%). Generic metals with other scattering processes would show even lower MR. Our 

best estimate for the fraction of spin-flip scattering in Fig. 4 is 98.1% (see Supplementary Materials). 

We have observed at higher F4-TCNQ doping that the fraction of spin-flip scattering is reduced (see 

Supplementary Materials). This is possibly due to the formation of larger puddles with increasing 

disorder, which scatter via non-spin-flip inelastic processes, or the F4-TCNQ ions themselves acting 

as a local moments with small g ~ 2.



Our results demonstrate how electronic transport experiments can be used to observe the opening of a 

bandgap due to confinement in a topological Dirac semimetal, and to determine unambiguously 

whether the resulting insulator is topological or trivial. Our as-grown ultrathin Na3Bi films are lightly 

n-doped, and the conducting bulk shows a transition from weak anti-localisation to weak localization 

as the doping is decreased, as expected for a gapped Dirac system. The weak localization behavior 

contrasts with gapless bulk Na3Bi, which shows only perfect weak anti-localisation, strongly indicating 

a mixing of the Dirac cones and opening of a gap in ultrathin Na3Bi. When the sample is doped to 

bring the Fermi level into the bulk bandgap, the non-local resistance signal becomes comparable to the 

local signal, indicative of edge transport. A giant negative magnetoresistance arises in the edge 

transport regime due to the suppression of spin-flip scattering by a magnetic field. The field 

dependence of the resistance shows excellent agreement with theory for a helical edge mode, 

conclusively demonstrating the topological nature of the edge conductance. We expect that the 

observed GNMR should be generic to helical edge transport in any 2DTI. Furthermore the GNMR 

follows a simple universal form with only one materials parameter, g. While the GNMR is particularly 

large in Na3Bi due to the large g, even for g = 2 we expect that the GNMR should reach 90% at B = 

3.1 T and T = 1 K. Therefore we expect the combination of non-local transport measurements and 

magnetoresistance to provide a simple method for unambiguous identification of future 2DTI materials 

which is not limited to samples exhibiting ballistic transport over long distances.


[1]
J. Maciejko, C. Liu, Y. Oreg, X.-L. Qi, C. Wu, and S.-C. Zhang, Physical review letters 102, 256803 

(2009).
[2]
M. König, S. Wiedmann, C. Brüne, A. Roth, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, 

Science 318, 766 (2007).
[3]
A. Roth, C. Brüne, H. Buhmann, L. W. Molenkamp, J. Maciejko, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Science 325, 

294 (2009).
[4]
G. Gusev, E. Olshanetsky, Z. Kvon, A. Levin, N. Mikhailov, and S. Dvoretsky, Physical review letters 

108, 226804 (2012).
[5]
K. C. Nowack et al., Nature materials 12, 787 (2013).

[6]
G. Gusev, Z. Kvon, E. Olshanetsky, A. Levin, Y. Krupko, J. Portal, N. Mikhailov, and S. Dvoretsky, 

Physical Review B 89, 125305 (2014).
[7]
E. M. Spanton, K. C. Nowack, L. Du, G. Sullivan, R.-R. Du, and K. A. Moler, Physical review letters 113, 

026804 (2014).
[8]
J. I. Väyrynen, M. Goldstein, Y. Gefen, and L. I. Glazman, Physical Review B 90, 115309 (2014).

[9]
L. Du, I. Knez, G. Sullivan, and R.-R. Du, Physical review letters 114, 096802 (2015).

[10]
E. Olshanetsky, Z. Kvon, G. Gusev, A. Levin, O. Raichev, N. Mikhailov, and S. Dvoretsky, Physical 

review letters 114, 126802 (2015).
[11]
Z. Fei et al., Nature Physics 13, 677 (2017).

[12]
S. Tang et al., Nature Physics 13, 683 (2017).

[13]
S. Wu, V. Fatemi, Q. D. Gibson, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. J. Cava, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science 

359, 76 (2018).
[14]
F. Reis, G. Li, L. Dudy, M. Bauernfeind, S. Glass, W. Hanke, R. Thomale, J. Schäfer, and R. Claessen, 

Science 357, 287 (2017).
[15]
J. L. Collins et al., Nature 564, 390 (2018).

[16]
J. Hellerstedt, I. Yudhistira, M. T. Edmonds, C. Liu, J. Collins, S. Adam, and M. S. Fuhrer, Physical 

Review Materials 1, 054203 (2017).
[17]
J. Hellerstedt, M. T. Edmonds, N. Ramakrishnan, C. Liu, B. Weber, A. Tadich, K. M. O’Donnell, S. 

Adam, and M. S. Fuhrer, Nano letters 16, 3210 (2016).
[18]
M. T. Edmonds, J. Hellerstedt, K. M. O’Donnell, A. Tadich, and M. S. Fuhrer, ACS applied materials & 

interfaces 8, 16412 (2016).
[19]
J. Song, F.-Y. Kam, R.-Q. Png, W.-L. Seah, J.-M. Zhuo, G.-K. Lim, P. K. Ho, and L.-L. Chua, Nature 

nanotechnology 8, 356 (2013).
[20]
Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, B. Zhou, Y. Kim, Z. Hussain, Z.-X. Shen, Y. Chen, and S.-K. Mo, Applied Physics Letters 

105, 031901 (2014).
[21]
H. Yuan et al., Nature Physics 9, 563 (2013).

[22]
B. L. Altshuler, A. Aronov, and D. Khmelnitsky, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 15, 7367 

(1982).
[23]
Y. Wang, X. Cai, J. Reutt-Robey, and M. S. Fuhrer, Physical Review B 92, 161411(R) (2015).

[24]
C.-Z. Li, L.-X. Wang, H. Liu, J. Wang, Z.-M. Liao, and D.-P. Yu, Nature communications 6, 10137 (2015).

[25]
J. Xiong, S. K. Kushwaha, T. Liang, J. W. Krizan, M. Hirschberger, W. Wang, R. Cava, and N. Ong, 

Science 350, 413 (2015).
[26]
Y. Wang et al., Nature communications 7, 13142 (2016).

[27]
C. Zhang et al., Nature communications 8, 13741 (2017).

[28]
T. Van Peski-Tinbergen and A. Dekker, Physica 29, 917 (1963).

[29]
M.-T. Béal-Monod and R. Weiner, Physical Review 170, 552 (1968).

[30]
J. Wang and D. Culcer, Physical Review B 88, 125140 (2013).



Acknowledgments

We acknowledge Jian-Hao Chen for valuable discussions. The authors acknowledge support of the 

ARC Centre of Excellence FLEET (CE170100039). M. T. E. is supported by ARC DECRA fellowship 

(DE160101157). This work was performed in part at the Melbourne Centre for Nanofabrication (MCN) 

in the Victorian Node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF). 

Author contributions

All the authors participated in designing the experiments. C.L. grew the samples and carried out the 

electronic transport measurements with assistance from M.T.E. C.L. analysed the data, and prepared 

the draft manuscript. D.C provided theoretical interpretation of the unique giant magnetoresistance 

data. M.T.E. and M.S.F. provided further analysis of the data, and edited the manuscript.


FIG. 1.    Growth of 2 nm Na3Bi on sapphire.  RHEED patterns for (a) the α-Al2O3[0001] substrate 
prior to growth and (b) after growth of 2 nm Na3Bi. (c) Large-area (300 nm x 300 nm) topographic 
STM image (bias voltage V = 4 V and tunnel current I = 100 pA) of 2 nm Na3Bi on α-Al2O3[0001]. (d) 
Carrier mobility as a function of Hall carrier density at 5.3 K.


FIG. 2.    Magneto-transport properties of four as-grown 2 nm Na3Bi films at a temperature of 5.3 K. 
(a) Change in magneto-conductivity, xx as a function of perpendicular magnetic field B for four 
films with carrier densities indicated on right axis. Solid lines are fits to the H.L.N formula (see SI for 
details). (b) Extracted phase coherence length lϕ (squares), spin-scattering length lso (circle) and elastic-
scattering length le (triangle) of each film in (a) as a function of carrier density. The colours in (b) 
match those used in (a).


FIG. 3.    Local and non-local resistance measurement as a function of F4-TCNQ coverage. The local 
resistance RL (a) and non-local resistance RNL (b) and the ratio RL: RNL (c) are shown as a function of 
F4-TCNQ thickness at temperatures indicated in legend. The film is made less n-type with increasing 
F4-TCNQ thickness. (d) Non-local IV curve of non-local resistance measurements at 10 K with 0.036 
ML F4-TCNQ coverage. Insets in (a) and (b) show the geometries used for local and non-local 
measurements respectively. 


FIG. 4.    Resistance as a function of magnetic field at T = 5.3 K for bulk-conducting film (as grown, 
black line) and edge-conducting film (0.015 ML F4-TCNQ coverage, red line). Fits to theory for 
exchange-mediated scattering for helical and non-helical edges are shown as blue dashed and green 
dot-dashed lines, respectively. 


Supplemental Material for

Signatures of Helical Edge Transport in Millimetre-Scale Thin Films of Na3Bi

Chang Liu1,2,3, Dimitrie Culcer3,4, Mark T. Edmonds1,2,3*, Michael S. Fuhrer1,2,3*

1School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Victoria 3800 Australia

2Monash Centre for Atomically Thin Materials, Monash University, Victoria 3800 Australia

3ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies, Monash University, 

Victoria 3800 Australia

4School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2052 Australia

*  mark.edmonds@monash.edu and michael.fuhrer@monash.edu


Scanning tunneling microscopy topography

Fig. S1 presents height and roughness analysis of Fig. 1(c) of the main manuscript. Fig. S1(b) shows 

a height histogram of the topography image, with a predominant peak at ~1.5 nm, measured relative 

to rare pinholes which we identify as the Al2O3 surface, with two slight plateaus at ~1 nm and ~2 nm. 

A monolayer (half unit cell) of Na3Bi corresponds to 0.48 nm, hence Fig. S1(b) is consistent with a 

predominantly tri-layer Na3Bi film, with co-existing regions of bi-layer and quad-layer Na3Bi. Fig. 

S1(d) shows the film height along the green line of Fig. S1(a) which passes through a pinhole to the 

substrate, with most plateaus around 1.5 nm.

Fig. S2(a) is an STM topography (500 nm x 250 nm) taken from a different sample grown under 

nominally the same growth conditions. This is comparable with the high quality ultra-thin Na3Bi film 

grown on Si [1]. Here, we can see the grain size is around 25 nm in two different areas, with the bright 

regions corresponding to bi-layer, and the dark regions mono-layer. The height histogram shown in 

Fig. S2(b) has two clear peaks ~0.5 nm and ~1.0 nm, consistent with mono-layer and bi-layer regions 

given a monolayer of Na3Bi corresponds to 0.48 nm. Fig. S2(c) and S2D are two height line profiles 

representing the green and red line traces shown on Fig. 2(a) respectively.

The variation in film quality between two nominally identically grown films is most likely due to small 

variations in the sapphire substrates influencing the growth quality. To achieve the highest quality 

ultra-thin Na3Bi that will enable edge transport at higher temperature will therefore rely on improving 

the preparation of sapphire substrates in order to reliably reproduce films of the quality shown in Fig. 

S2.


FIG. S1.    Thickness analysis of STM image Fig. 1(c). (a) Topographic STM image (300 nm x 300 
nm with bias voltage V = 4 V and tunnel current I = 100 pA) of Fig. 1(c) with respective topography 
histogram (b). The crystal height along the green line in (a) shows in (c).

FIG. S2.    STM image of an ultrathin area. (a) Topographic STM image (bias voltage V = 3 V and 
tunnel current I = 100 pA) of a large flat area (500 nm x 250 nm) on another film with the respective 
histogram in (b). The crystal height along the green and red lines in (a) show in (c) and (d). 


Magnetoresistance further analysis and discussion

1. Magnetoresistance measurement

The magnetic field-dependent longitudinal and Hall resistances Rxx,m(B) and Rxy,m(B) were measured 

using the conventional Hall-bar technique. To eliminate small contributions of the other resistance 

components, 
we 
symmetrize 
data 
as 
and 

. We define the longitudinal magnetoresistance, MR(%) =

100 × [𝑅𝑥𝑥(𝐵) − 𝑅𝑥𝑥(0)] 𝑅𝑥𝑥(0)
⁄
. We calculated the 2D Hall carrier density 𝑛 =

1

𝑒

𝑑𝐵

𝑑𝑅𝑥𝑦 and Hall 

mobility 
. Here, the n-type carriers are defined as positive, and the p-type carriers as negative. 

2. Extracting mean free path

The momentum relaxation length (or the mean free path) can be extracted from our classical transport 

data, using 
where e is the elementary charge and ћ is the reduced Planck constant. This 

allowed us to fit the magnetoconductivity data to the Hikami-Larkin-Nagaoka formula (discussed 

below) with only two free parameters, instead of three.

3. Hikami-Larkin Nagaoka formula

To understand the quantum interference correction to the conductivity, we need to study the phase 

coherence (lϕ), spin-orbit (lso) and elastic (le) scattering lengths and their respective characteristic fields, 

𝐵𝑖
, 
where 𝐵𝑖 = ℎ (8𝜋𝑒𝑙𝑖

2)
⁄
(i=ϕ, 
so, 
e). 
We 
define 
the 
magneto-conductivity 
as 

in unit of e2/h where e is elementary charge, h is Planck constant and 

𝜎𝑥𝑥(𝐵) =

𝑅𝑥𝑥(𝐵)

𝑅𝑥𝑥(𝐵)2+𝑅𝑥𝑦(𝐵)2 or 𝜎𝑥𝑥(𝐵) =

1

𝑅𝑥𝑥(𝐵) when Rxx(B) >> Rxy(B). The magneto-conductance data 

is then fitted to the Hikami.Larkin.Nagaoka (H.L.N) formula [2,3]:


(S1)

where Ψ is the digamma function. The Be term is fixed using the value determined from our classical 

transport measurements.

4. Magneto-transport evolution of a p-type film with K-dosing

Interestingly, one of the films was found to become p-type after the superconducting magnet quenched 

(causing a rapid heating of the cryostat and sample stage to 50 K), resulting in the desorption of vacuum 

species such as CO, causing the p-type doping. The magneto-conductance of the now p-type film is 

plotted as a red trace in Fig. S3(a), and shows entirely weak localization. This then allowed us to study 

the evolution of the magneto-transport as a function of doping via in-situ K-dosing as shown in Fig. 

S3(a). A clear transition from pure WL (red-circle) at low p-type doping to a crossover of WL and 

WAL (green-triangle) at low n-type doping and to pure WAL at higher n-type doping level is observed 

with increasing K-dosing. The HLN analysis lϕ and lSO is shown in Fig. S3(b), and display a similar 

carrier density dependence to that observed for the as-grown films i.e. with increasing carrier density, 

lϕ is increases whilst lso decreases. Again, the crossover from WL to WAL occurs when lϕ ~ lso, as 

expected.


FIG. S3.    Magneto-transport properties of 2 nm Na3Bi with K-doping. (a) Evolution of magneto-
conductance, , of an initially p-type (shown as negative carrier density) film with K-doping time. 
Solid lines are fits to the HLN formula. (b) Extracted phase coherence length lϕ (squares), spin-
scattering length lso (circle) and elastic-scattering length le (triangle) as a function of Hall carrier density 
which increased with K-doping time (color). The colours in (b) match those used in (a).


Possibility of conduction through metallic 1D Na or Bi

One possible alternative to edge transport in ultra-thin Na3Bi, is that at the edge of the sample exists a 

pure Na or Bi nanowire (as a result of the Na3Bi film being grown through a shadow mask) which 

would display 1D metallic conduction. To rule out this possibility we grew two separate films; one 

consisting of only Bi and one consisting of only to determine whether either Bi or Na grow separately 

on the sapphire substrate. These growths were performed at the same substrate temperatures and 

conditions used for the Na3Bi growth. For both the Bi film and Na film the resistance (measured locally 

or non-locally) is above G (which is significantly larger than 100 M measured for edge transport 

in the Na3Bi ultra-thin films). This allows us to rule out that the non-local edge state transport is caused 

by pure Na or Bi metal nanowires.


Spin-flip and spin-preserving scattering

The magneto-resistance due to pure spin-flip scattering is predicated by Eq. (1) (in main manuscript). 

For a hypothetical non-helical metal, where the only scattering is via exchange interaction, but spin-

preserving scattering is allowed the expected MR is given by: 

(S2)

where 𝑆 =

1

2 is the impurity spin and 
. It is clear Eq. (S2) is the same as the Eq. 1 but with 

an extra term,  

1

𝑆+1 =

2

3. Thus, the maximum MR limit is 2/3 for this hypothetical non-helical metal. 

We can generalize the expression to an arbitrary metal with a fraction of scattering due to spin-flip 

processes A:

(S3)

We have studied the MR for ultrathin Na3Bi films doped into the bulk insulating regime at different 

F4-TCNQ coverages, as shown in Fig. S4. We find that the MR is reduced at higher F4-TCNQ 

coverages. If we assume that the gyromagnetic ratio remains unchanged (g = 32.3), we can fit the 

curves to Eq. S3 with a single parameter A, as shown in Fig. S4(a). The fits are reasonably good, and 

show that A varies from near 100% at low doping, to 64% at high doping. If we allow both A and g to 

vary as fit parameters, we find the best fits to the data as shown in Fig. S4(b). At low-doping (as shown 

in Fig. 4 of main text) the best fit is A = 0.981±0.002 and g = 32.9±0.7. Thus our best estimate of the 

fraction of spin-flip scattering is 98.1%. Fits to the data at higher F4-TCNQ coverages show little 


variation in g, but a significant variation in A, consistent with our hypothesis that g is independent of 

doping. 

The remaining fraction of the zero-field resistance 1-A may represent inelastic scattering induced by 

the disorder potential [4] or by puddles without moments [5], both of which should increase at higher 

F4-TCNQ coverages due to higher disorder, and show weak magnetic field dependence. Alternatively, 

the fraction of scattering 1-A may be due to spin-flip scattering by an additional population of local 

moments with low gyromagnetic ratio, for example the adsorbed F4-TCNQ- ions which should have 

g ~ 2. The fit to the spin-flip scattering model for two populations of moments with fraction A having 

g ~ 32 and fraction 1-A having g ~ 2 is indistinguishable from the fit to Eq. S3 in the field range studied, 

so we cannot distinguish between these two scenarios. More experiments at variable temperature and 

a larger magnetic field range would help to clarify the scattering mechanisms in the edge state, 

however, are not possible in our UHV transport setup which has a fixed temperature (T = 5.3K) and 

field range up to 1 T.


FIG. S4.    Resistance as a function of magnetic field at T = 5.3 K for edge-conducting film with 
increasing F4-TCNQ coverage: 0.015 ML (red same as the red curve in Fig. 4), 0.020 ML (orange), 
0.028 ML (green), 0.036 ML (blue), 0.044 ML (violet) and 0.077 ML (magenta). The dashed line is 
the fitting to Eq. S3. For (a) there is only one free parameter, A, with fixed g = 32.3, whilst (b) has both 
A and g as fitting parameters.


[1]
J. L. Collins et al., Nature 564, 390 (2018).

[2]
S. Hikami, A. I. Larkin, and Y. Nagaoka, Progress of Theoretical Physics 63, 707 (1980).

[3]
B. L. Altshuler, A. Aronov, and D. Khmelnitsky, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 15, 7367 

(1982).
[4]
T. L. Schmidt, S. Rachel, F. von Oppen, and L. I. Glazman, Physical review letters 108, 156402 (2012).

[5]
J. I. Väyrynen, M. Goldstein, and L. I. Glazman, Physical review letters 110, 216402 (2013).


