1 

 

Sub-single exciton optical gain threshold in colloidal 

semiconductor quantum wells with gradient alloy shelling 

Nima Taghipour, † Savas Delikanli, †, ‡ Sushant Shendre, ‡ Mustafa Sak, † Mingjie Li, § Furkan 

Isik, † Ibrahim Tanriover, † Burak Guzelturk, ^ Tze Chien Sum, § and Hilmi Volkan Demir †, ‡, # 

† Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Department of Physics, UNAM-Institute 

of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Bilkent University, Ankara 06800, Turkey 

 ‡ Luminous! Centre of Excellence for Semiconductor Lighting and Displays, School of 

Electrical and Electronic Engineering, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, School of 

Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798, 

Singapore 

§ School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

639798, Singapore 

^ Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, CA 94025, USA 

 

# Corresponding author: volkan@stanfordalumni.org 

 

 

 


2 

 

Colloidal semiconductor quantum wells have emerged as a promising material platform for 

use in solution-processable light-generation including colloidal lasers. However, application 

relying on their optical gain suffer from a fundamental complication due to multi-excitonic 

nature of light amplification in common II-VI semiconductor nanocrystals. This undesirably 

increases the optical gain threshold and shortens the net gain lifetime because of fast 

nonradiative Auger decay. Here, we demonstrate sub-single exciton level of optical gain 

threshold in specially engineered CdSe/CdS@CdZnS core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell 

colloidal quantum wells. This sub-single exciton ensemble-averaged gain threshold of 〈𝑵𝒈〉 ≈ 

0.80 (per particle) resulting from impeded Auger recombination along with a large 

absorption cross-section of quantum wells enables us to observe the amplified spontaneous 

emission starting at a low pump fluence of ~ 800 nJ cm-2, at least three-folds better than the 

previously best reported values among all colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals. Moreover, 

long optical gain lifetimes of ~ 800 ps accompanied with modal gain coefficients of ~2,000 

cm-1 are achieved. Finally, using these gradient shelled quantum wells, we show a vertical 

cavity surface-emitting colloidal laser operating at an ultra-low lasing threshold of 7.5 µJ 

cm-2. These results represent a significant step towards the realization of solution-

processable electrically-driven colloidal lasers.  

 

 

 

 

 

 


3 

 

Solution-processed semiconductor nanocrystals offer a versatile and promising gain medium for 

light amplification applications1–4 owing to their broad spectral tunability1,5,6, low-cost production 

and flexibility of using them in a broad range of matrices1,4. As a consequence, the utilization of 

colloidal semiconductor quantum dots (CQDs) as a gain medium has been experiencing a 

tremendous growth in the last few decades. In addition, alternative nanoemitters e.g., 

semiconductor nanorods7 and perovskite nanocrystal8,9, have recently emerged as an auspicious 

gain material for stimulated emission and lasing. Yet another promising candidate, colloidal 

semiconductor quantum wells (CQWs), the so-called nanoplatelets (NPLs)10–12, have been shown 

to be excellent in optical gain applications thanks to their giant oscillator strength13 and ultralarge 

modal gain coefficient14. Using different heterostructures of NPLs allows for ultra-low amplified 

spontaneous emission (ASE) thresholds10,12. However, their gain performance still suffers from 

nonradiative Auger recombination, wherein the released energy from recombination of the 

electron–hole is transferred to a third carrier. In common II-VI semiconductor nanocrystals, 

because of the non-unity degeneracy of the electron and hole states involved in emission, light 

amplification requires an ensemble-averaged number of excitons per nanocrystal greater than one 

(〈𝑁〉 > 1), thereupon multi-excitonic Auger recombination strongly affects the dynamics of the 

carriers.    

Previously, various efforts have been reported to tackle the issue of the fast Auger decay in 

nanocrystals including the smoothing of their confinement potential15 and introducing the optical 

gain in single-exciton regime2,7,16. These methods have been shown to effectively enhance the 

optical gain performance of CQDs either by reducing influence or inactivating of the Auger 

process. On the other hand, in atomically flat CQWs, significant reduction in ASE and lasing 

threshold have previously been obtained in core/shell12 and core/crown10,11 heterostructures. 


4 

 

Nonetheless, the demonstrated approaches have not addressed the fundamental issue of the optical 

gain in CQWs where the multiexciton (〈𝑁〉 > 1) nature of the light amplification results in fast 

decay of the carriers by a few hundred of picoseconds timescale17,18 as a result of the Auger 

process. One way of inactivating of Auger recombination in CQWs is to employ the concept of 

single–exciton gain mechanism for optical amplification as formerly demonstrated in various 

heterostructures of the CQDs2,7,16. 

Here, we report optical gain in sub-single exciton regime ( 〈𝑁〉 < 1 ) in quasi-type-II 

CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell (C/C@GS) CQWs tailored as a 

promising and novel solution for suppression of the Auger process with their smooth confinement 

potential, presenting an important step towards the evolution of semiconductor CQW lasers. We 

demonstrated an exceptionally low stimulated emission threshold of ~820 𝑛𝐽 𝑐𝑚01, corresponding 

to an average number of e–h pairs of 0.84 per NPL, which is also fully supported by nonlinear 

absorption measurements through ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy. Sub-single exciton 

optical gain regime is also confirmed by linear dependence of the normalized absorption changes. 

The extremely large absorption cross-section (5.06 ×  10-13 cm2) of our engineered NPLs, 

accompanied by an extremely large net modal gain coefficient of ~1,960 cm-1, and a long net 

optical gain lifetime of ~830 ps result in such ultra-low optical gain thresholds and lead to record 

long stable ASE. Employing specifically engineered core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell 

heterostructures, we present a linearly polarized single-mode lasing from a vertical cavity surface-

emitting laser enabling a record low lasing threshold of ~7.46 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01.  

For this study, we synthesized CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs with a carefully controlled 

different number of Cd1-xZnxS alloyed gradient shell monolayers (MLs), tuned from 2 to 6 MLs, 

grown on the seed of 4-ML CdSe/CdS core/crown NPLs by using colloidal atomic layer deposition 


5 

 

Figure 1 | Structure and characterization C/C@GS of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS CQWs. a, Schematic illustration of 

C/C@GS of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS NPLs synthesized by using interfacial grading of shell in the vertical dimension as 

detailed in the text. b, An approximate energy band diagram of the graded confinement potential in C/C@GS CQWs 

(based on band offset of bulk semiconductor1) along with a schematic representation of the spatial distribution of 

electron (e-) and hole (h+) wavefunctions. Here, Eg1 ≈ 1.75 eV, Eg2 ≈ 2.7 for 4+2N MLs, N= 4.19 (c-e) TEM images of c, 

4-ML core d, core/crown, e, C/C@GS CQWs. f, High-resolution TEM image of C/C@GS CQWs for 4+2N MLs, N= 4. 

The thickness equals ~ 4.25 nm, which corresponds to 4 (core) + 2×4 (shell) MLs of core/shell heterostructure. g, 

Absorbance (black line) and PL (dashed red line) spectra of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS CQWs for 4+2N MLs, N=4. Inset 

shows the absorption spectrum of the same sample across a broader range of wavelength.  

 

(c-ALD) method19. Owing to the tuned gradient alloyed shell of the NPLs, electron wavefunction 

feels soft potential confinement in the vertical dimension and is largely relaxed into the shell due 

to the small conduction band-offset, while the hole wavefunction is mostly confined in the core 


6 

 

region by virtue of the large valence band-offset19. This spatial separation between the electron and 

hole wavefunctions forms quasi-type-II electronic band alignment as previously shown in 

CdSe/CdS dot/rod heterostructure7. The schematic of C/C@GS NPL heterostructure and band-

offsets of the heterostructure are given in Figures 1a and 1b, respectively. Transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM) images of the core, core/crown and core/crown@ shell NPLs are shown in 

Figures 1c-e, respectively. For the synthesis of C/C@GS hetero-NPLs, we started with 4-ML CdSe 

cores with lateral dimensions of 13 ± 3 nm, subsequently followed by 4-ML CdS crown (8 ± 1 

nm) grown in the lateral direction, and then via using c- ALD method, a gradient alloyed shell of 

Cd1-xZnxS with 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 MLs was grown on the core/crown NPLs. Further details of the 

syntheses procedures are given in Supporting Information (SI). The absorption and 

photoluminescence spectra of C/C@GS hetero-NPLs with 4 MLs of Cd1-xZnxS shell are depicted 

in Figure 1g. The inset of Figure 1g shows the absorption spectrum in a broader range of 

wavelength. The peaks appearing in the absorption spectrum at 630 and 572 nm are associated 

with the heavy- and light-hole excitonic transitions, respectively.  

To analyze the optical gain performance of the CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS NPLs with 

different shell thicknesses, we performed femtosecond transient absorption (TA) measurements of 

NPLs in solution (hexane) with stirring (see Methods). TA measurements yield spectrally- and 

temporally-resolved pump-induced absorption changes (∆𝛼), which were used to calculate the 

nonlinear absorption spectra (𝛼 = Δ𝛼 + 𝛼9) in the excited-state, where 𝛼9is the absorption of the 

unexcited sample. Figure 2a presents 𝛼 for the C/C@GS NPLs with 4 MLs of the shell coating 

(averaged over 1-5 ps pump-probe delay time) as a function of 〈𝑁9〉, where 𝑁9 = 𝑓 × 𝜎 are the 

number of e–h pairs per NPL. Here, 𝑓 is the fluence and 𝜎 is absorption cross-section of the NPL. 

The 𝜎 is calculated based on the method that we discussed in our previous study20 (see SI). As  


7 

 

 

Figure 2 | Optical gain characteri𝒛ations of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS NPLs. a, Nonlinear absorption (𝛼) of 4- 

ML shell NPLs as a function of 〈𝑁𝑜〉 ( from 0 to 2.59, 𝑁9 is the number of e–h pairs per NPL), obtained by averaging 

the recorded TA spectra at early time over 1-5 ps after pumping at 3.1 eV. Red-shaded region exhibits optical gain 

where 𝛼 < 0. b, Normalized absorption bleaching (−∆𝛼 𝛼9
?
) as a function of 〈𝑁9〉 at the ASE peak position (𝜆ABC =

647 nm) with linear growth at low pump intensities. The red-shaded region corresponding to optical gain regime 

(−∆𝛼 𝛼9
?
> 1) implies a gain threshold of 〈𝑁D〉 = 0.78. c, Dynamics of pump-dependent average population 〈𝑁(𝑡)〉 

of 4 ML shell at ASE peak position, normalized to long term decay values. The inset shows the normalization to the 

initial values. d, Dynamics of 1, 2, 3 and 4 e–h pairs (symbols), obtained from TA spectra of 4 ML shell NPLs at the 

ASE peak position. The red solid line shows the fit to a single exponential decay. e, Biexciton Auger recombination 

rate as a function of the shell thickness. f, Nonlinear absorption (𝛼) as a function of time at the ASE peak position for 

〈𝑁9〉 = 1.30 (symbols). Shaded region corresponds to the net optical gain (𝛼 < 0), indicating the net optical gain 

lifetime of 𝜏D ≈ 830 ps. The solid line is the numerical fitting.  

shown in Figure 2a, the band-edge absorption is gradually bleaching with increasing 〈𝑁9〉 and the 

transition to optical gain occurs when the absorption bleaching (Δ𝛼 < 0) is greater than the 


8 

 

absorption of the unexcited sample (𝛼9), therefore resulting in a negative net absorption (𝛼 < 0). 

To determine the optical gain threshold (〈𝑁D〉), we depict the normalized absorption bleaching 

(−∆𝛼 𝛼9
?
) as a function of 〈𝑁9〉 at the ASE peak position (𝜆ABC = 647 nm). Then level of 〈𝑁D〉 = 

0.78 is quantified from the intersection of the measurement data (symbol) with horizontal dotted 

line at J∆𝛼 𝛼9
?
J = 1 (Fig. 2b). In addition, the growth of |∆𝛼| follows a nearly linear function (red 

dashed-line) at initial values of 〈𝑁9〉 (Fig. 2b), this feature validates the sub-single exciton level of 

optical gain in these NPLs. Similar behavior was previously reported for type-II CQDs16, where 

the optical gain occurs in the single-exciton regime. 

To investigate the dynamics of the different e–h pair NPL states, we plotted the pump-dependent 

normalized average e–h pair populations 〈𝑁(𝑡)〉 per NPL at the peak position of stimulated 

emission ( 𝜆ABC = 647 nm) (Fig. 2c). Here 〈𝑁(𝑡)〉 = ∑ 𝐴N𝑒0P/RS
N
, where 𝐴N  is the time-

independent coefficient and 𝜏N is the lifetime of 𝑁-pair NPL state. Then, to analyze the multi-

excitonic behavior of NPLs (𝑁 ≥ 2), we employed a simple subtractive process to derive the single 

exponential decay dynamics as previously used for CQDs21(See SI for details). The extracted 

single exponential dynamics are shown in Figure 2d, where 𝜏N corresponds to the lifetime of 𝑁 e–

h pair NPL state. As seen in Figure 2d, by increasing the number of e–h pairs per NPL, the carrier 

decay kinetics becomes progressively faster, as expected for Auger recombination.  

In the case of bulk semiconductor, the rate of Auger recombination (𝜏N

0U) follows 𝐶A(𝑁/𝑉9)1 for 

𝑁 ≥ 2 21. This expression results in a ratio of 𝜏X: 𝜏Z: 𝜏1 = 0.25: 0.44: 1 which is fully consistent 

with our experimental results, 𝜏X: 𝜏Z: 𝜏1 = 0.22: 0.41: 1, where the extracted lifetimes for 4 ,3 and 

2 e–h pairs correspond to 160 ± 20, 300 ± 40 and 750 ± 50 ps, respectively. Here, the single exciton 

lifetime (~3200 ps) is ~ 4-fold longer than the biexciton Auger lifetime. As expected, in the case 


9 

 

of sub-single exciton gain regime, the inherent gain kinetics is characterized by the radiative single 

exciton lifetime, which is intrinsically much longer than the Auger decay lifetime.  

Moreover, by performing the method as described above, we calculated the biexciton Auger 

recombination rate for 2, 3, 5, 6 MLs shell thicknesses. As can be seen in Figure 2e, the biexciton 

Auger decay rate exhibits a non-monotonic dependence on to the thickness of the shell. The origin 

of this behavior is the thickness-dependent oscillations in the overlap of the initial and final 

wavefunctions of the electron in the second exciton as previously shown in core/shell NPLs22. The 

temporal nonlinear absorption (𝛼) in the case of 4 ML thick shell at the ASE peak position for 

〈𝑁9〉 = 1.30 is presented in Figure 2f, in which the shaded region (𝛼 < 0) corresponds to net 

optical gain. Here the gain lifetime was found to be ~830 ps from the intersection of the 

experimental data by the line of 𝛼 = 0. As expected, this value is very close to the biexciton Auger 

decay lifetime (750 ± 50 ps). It is worth mentioning that Auger recombination is suppressed in our 

engineered NPLs, while for simple core, core/crown and core/shell NPLs, the Auger decay lifetime 

was reported to be typically 150-500 ps17,18,22. The longer biexciton Auger life time in the gradient 

alloyed shell NPLs can be attributed to the significant reduction in the strength of the intraband 

transition as a result of the smooth potential confinement23. The fine grading of the confinement 

potential also contributes to the single-exciton gain regime in our gradient alloyed shell NPLs by 

suppressing Auger15,23,24. The abrupt interfaces were shown to exhibit higher Auger rates as a result 

of the larger overlap between the initial and final states of the intraband transition15,23.  

Next, we investigated the light amplification of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs, 

particularly for 4-MLs shell thickness by performing ASE and variable stripe length (VSL) 

measurements via stripe geometry excitation of the femtosecond mode-locked laser at 3.1 eV (see 

Methods). We prepared close-packed thin films of the engineered NPLs via spin-coating 


10 

 

technique. The thickness of the ASE and VSL samples is 150 ± 20 nm. Pump-dependent PL spectra 

of the ASE measurement are shown in Figure 3a. As can be seen, by increasing the pump fluence,  

 

 
Figure 3 | ASE, VSL and optical gain stability characterizations of C/C@GS of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS for 4-ML shell 

CQWs. a, Pump-dependent ASE spectra at 〈𝑁9〉 = 0.63, 0.84 and 1.10. The position of spontaneous emission (SP), 

ASE and X-band are marked by solid black line. b, Integrated PL intensity of ASE spectra as a function of the pump 

fluence and the corresponding average number of excitons per NPL (〈𝑁9〉). c, Spectral analysis of ASE along with 

absorbance (dashed blue line) of the lowest excitonic energy state with respect to the 〈𝑁9〉. The position of 1hh-1e 

excitonic transition and ASE peak are marked by dark dashed lines. d, Pump-dependent net peak modal gain 

coefficient (symbols) at the ASE peak position (𝜆ABC = 647 nm). The solid line is the numerical fitting to the 

experimental data, indicating a saturation fluence at ~920 𝜇J cm-2. The highest G reaches 1,960 ± 100 cm-1 at 746 𝜇J 

cm-2 pump fluence. e, Pump-dependent ASE intensity as a function of the pump laser shot at 〈𝑁9〉 = 1.36. The light 

amplification is highly stable in these engineered CQWs even for 9.5 h of continuous excitation.   


11 

 

a narrow emission feature develops at a position close to the spontaneous emission (SP) (𝜆B[ = 

646 nm). The SP and ASE spectra exhibit full-width-at-half-maxima (FWHM) of ~28 and ~7 nm, 

respectively. This non-shifted ASE peak (𝜆ABC = 647 nm), near the position of the single exciton 

band (X-band), exhibits a clear excitation threshold of ~820 𝑛𝐽 𝑐𝑚01, corresponding to 〈𝑁9〉 = 

0.84 above the threshold, where the integrated intensity of emission follows a super-linear function 

of the pump fluence. (Fig. 3b) 

These important observations indicate that net optical gain regime occurs at the sub-single exciton 

level per particle in our CQWs having smooth confinement potential. In addition, the appearance 

of similar sharp emission is observed with increasing length of the stripe in VSL measurement 

while keeping the pump intensity fixed (see Methods). Also, the ASE measurements are fully 

consistent with our TA analysis in the solution form of these NPLs, which indicates an optical gain 

threshold of 〈𝑁D〉 = 0.78. Here we reckon that the successful inactivation of Auger recombination 

allows to achieve the record lowest ASE threshold (𝐼ABC), which is several orders of magnitude 

lower than the CdS/ZnSe core/shell type-II CQDs16 (𝐼ABC ≈ 2 𝑚𝐽 𝑐𝑚01), CdSe/ZnCdS core/shell 

type-I CQDs2 (𝐼ABC ≈ 90 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01) and charged CQDs1 (𝐼ABC ≈ 6 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01), in which the concepts 

of single- or sub-single exciton optical gain were reported. We attribute this superior optical gain 

performance of our engineered NPLs to their large absorption cross-section at the excitation 

wavelength (𝜎 = 5.06 × 100UZ 𝑐𝑚1 at 400 nm) owing to the core/crown heterostructure along 

with an efficient exciton funneling10. 

The lowest excitonic energy state (heavy-hole excitonic transition (1hh-1e)) is shown in Figure 3c, 

where the stimulated emission is largely Stokes-shifted with respected to the 1hh-1e excitonic 

feature. This major Stokes shift (~17 nm) significantly reduces the re-absorption of the emitted 

photon, a critical loss mechanism in optical gain, avoiding which leads to a remarkably reduced 


12 

 

ASE threshold and sub-single exciton optical gain regime. As seen in Figure 3c, the ASE peak 

emerges at the reddish tail of the absorption where the emitted photon at the ASE wavelength is 

absorbed insignificantly. This phenomenon was observed in gain media of colloidal CQDs2, 

epitaxially-grown II-VI quantum well lasers25 and organic-dyes26 as reported previously.  

The net modal gain coefficient (G) was also characterized via VSL measurement10,27, which we 

performed at different pump intensities, by using the integrated intensity of the recorded PL spectra 

as a function of the stripe length (𝑙) and employing the expression 𝐼[a(𝑙) = 𝐴 𝐺
? (𝑒cd − 1)10,14, 

where A is a constant proportional to the spontaneous emission, the net modal gain coefficient (G) 

was evaluated (see SI). Figure 3d displays G with respect to the pump intensity; for instance, we 

achieved G = 460 ± 10 cm-1 at an excitation fluence of 87 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01. Here, by increasing the pump 

fluence, G rises first linearly at the low pump intensities, then followed by a gradual saturation 

behavior at elevated excitation fluences. The maximum achieved G is 1,960 ± 100 cm-1 at 746 

𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01. The obtained net modal gain is several-folds higher than the previously reported best 

performing heterostructures of semiconductor NCs, including core/shell CQDs2 (G = 95 ± 10 cm-

1 at 120 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01), core/crown NPLs28 (G = 929 ± 23 cm-1 at 580 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01) and core/shell NPLs10 

(G = 600 ± 100 cm-1 at 200 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01). Our group also most recently reported an exceptionally large 

net modal gain in core NPLs of superior thin film quality as high as 6600 ± 350 cm-1 14.  

 


13 

 

 

 
Figure 4 | Lasing characterization of CQW-VCSEL. a, PL spectra of CQWs-VCSEL as a function of the pump fluence. 

From the linewidth of the laser emission, the quality factor (Q) is calculated as ~1,224. b, Emission intensity versus 

pump intensity (symbols). The red solid line indicating the lasing threshold of ~7.46 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01. c, Normalized emission 

spectrum of CQWs-VCSEL above the lasing threshold (~12 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01) as a function of the polarizer angle (𝜃) and the 

detector at the front of the cavity. The dashed red line is the fitting of cos1(𝜃) curve. d, Photographical image of 

the CQWs-VCSEL above the lasing threshold indicating a well-defined spatial lasing spot on the screen.   

To examine the stability of the light amplification in CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS NPLs, we 

continuously pumped the ASE sample up to 36 ×106 laser shots (at 1 kHz repetition rate), which 

corresponds to overall 10 h of continuous excitation. The excitation intensity was ~7 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01, 

which is almost 10-fold larger than the ASE threshold. As shown in Figure 3e, the ASE intensity 

is stable up to ~9.5 h, which is the record long stable ASE among all colloidal semiconductor NCs 

including CQDs29 and NPLs30, to the best of our knowledge. Therefore, our C/C@GS NPLs offer 


14 

 

an effective architecture to substantially improve the optical gain stability issue of colloidal 

semiconductor NCs as a gain medium, owing to ultralow ASE threshold which is enabled by 

stimulated emission in the sub-single exciton regime and excellent passivation of the structure 

(top, bottom and lateral surfaces) with the crown and shell layers. 

Finally, owing to highly efficient optical gain performance of our engineered CdSe/CdS@Cd1-

xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs, we incorporated these NPLs (with 4-ML shell thickness) as a gain medium 

into a vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL).The optical resonator was fabricated by 

using a pair of distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs), the reflectance of each of which reaches ~96% 

at the emission wavelength of the NPLs while keeping lower than ~10% at the excitation 

wavelength (400 nm). Then, a close-packed solid film of these NPLs was sandwiched between the 

DBRs (see Methods). The emission spectrum of the CQW-VCSEL is depicted in Figure 4a at 

different pump fluences, demonstrating a single-mode lasing with a sharp laser output (FWHM ≈ 

0.53 nm) at 649 nm corresponding to a Q-factor of ~1,224. The lasing output shows a clear 

excitation threshold of ~7.46 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01 (Fig. 4b) with a well-defined spatial coherence profile (spot 

in Fig. 4d). This lasing threshold is the lowest among all previously reported colloidal 

semiconductor NC-based VCSELs, for which the next lowest reported lasing threshold is ~60 

𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01. 2 As can be seen in Figure 4b, the pump-dependent emission displays an S-shaped curve 

(lasing intensity saturated at the elevated pump fluences > 15.2 𝜇𝐽 𝑐𝑚01) which is one of the 

characteristic identifications of the lasing action. The ratio (R) of the polarization can be defined 

as R = (𝐼∥ − 𝐼j)/(𝐼∥ + 𝐼j) 31, where 𝐼∥ and 𝐼jis the intensity parallel and perpendicular to the 

optical axis, respectively. Figure 4c shows the lasing emission with respect to the polarizer angle, 

the dumbbell distribution of the measured data (symbols) indicating a linearly-polarized emission 


15 

 

of our fabricated laser, which is well fitted by a quadratic cosine function (cos1(𝜃)) where R = 

0.82 (see SI). 

In conclusion, the conducted study presents the first demonstration of light amplification in sub-

single exciton gain regime of CQWs having smooth confinement potential, which avoids the 

complications associated with fast nonradiative multi-excitonic Auger process. This was 

confirmed by systematic nonlinear absorption analyses and linear dependence of normalized 

absorption changes below gain. This sub-single exciton (〈𝑁D〉 ≈ 0.8) optical gain, accompanied 

with extremely large absorption cross-section, in CdSe/CdS@CdZnS core/crown@gradient-

alloyed shell NPLs enables record low gain threshold among all colloidal semiconductor 

nanocrystals. The ultra-stable gain performance of these engineered NPLs addresses the stability 

problem of colloidal nanocrystals as a gain medium.  Finally, the developed CQW–VCSEL exhibit 

a record low threshold of single-mode lasing. The realization of sub-single exciton regime optical 

amplification along with ultra-stable characteristics in these CQWs may enable lasing under 

continuous-wave excitation, possibly leading to electrically driven CQW-lasers.  

 

 

 

 

 

 


16 

 

Methods 

Ultrafast transient absorption measurements. TA spectroscopy was performed using a 

HeliosTM setup (Ultrafast Systems LLC) and in transmission mode with chirp-correction. The 

white light continuum probe beam (in the range of 400-800 nm) was generated from a 3 mm 

sapphire crystal using 800 nm pulse from the regenerative amplifier. The 400-nm pump laser 

pulses were generated from a 1 kHz regenerative amplifier (Coherent LibraTM). The beam from 

the regenerative amplifier has a center wavelength at 800 nm and a pulse width of around 150 fs 

and is seeded by a mode-locked Ti-sapphire oscillator (Coherent Vitesse, 80 MHz). The 400-nm 

pump laser was obtained by frequency-doubling the 800-nm fundamental regenerative amplifier 

output using a BBO crystal. The pump beam spot size was ~0.5 mm. The probe beam passing 

through the sample in cuvette was collected using a detector for UV–Vis (CMOS sensor). All 

measurements were performed at room temperature in solution (hexane) with stirring. 

ASE measurements. As the pump source, we used a femtosecond mode-locked Ti: sapphire 

regenerative amplifier (Spectra Physics, Spitfire Pro) having a 120fs pulse width and a 1 kHz 

repetition rate, operating at the frequency-doubled output (400 nm by using a BBO crystal). A 

variable neutral density filter was employed to change the pump fluence on the sample. For the 

stripe geometry excitation, a cylindrical lens with a 10 cm focal length was used. Then, the 

photoluminescence signal was collected at the end of the stripe by a fiber coupled to a spectrometer 

(Maya 2000 Pro), where the collection was perpendicular to the excitation. For the ASE samples, 

we fabricated a thin film of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs by using a highly 

concentrated solution (40–50 mg mL-1 of the CQWs in hexane) via spin-coating (at 1,000 rpm for 

1 min) on quartz substrates.  


17 

 

VSL measurements. Sample preparation was very similar to ASE samples. The optical setup was 

slightly modified, where an adjustable slit was used to vary the length of stripe on the sample and 

also to minimize the effect of light diffraction, the sample was placed as close as possible to the 

slit (~4-5 mm). To ensure 1D amplifier assumption and to maximize the ASE intensity from the 

edge of sample, the length of the excitation was adjusted to be ~120 𝜇m. The PL signal was 

collected at the edge of the sample.   

Fabrication of the CQW-VCSEL. To fabricate highly reflective DBRs for CQW-VCSELs, eight 

pairs of SiO2/TiO2 (with the optical thickness of silica and titania chosen as quarter-wavelength 

emission of CQWs) were deposited on quartz substrate via sputtering. A narrow stripe of 120 𝜇m-

thick Kapton tape was placed at the edge of one of the DBRs. On the other side, using an epoxy, 

two DBRs were stick to each other by applying slight pressure, and then the tape was removed. 

This creates a finite wedge-shaped structure between two DBRs, which provides a built-in 

thickness variation in the resulting vertical cavity. Finally, a highly concentrated (50–60 mg mL-

1) CQW/hexane was poured and dried between two DBRs, together with which formed a cavity 

length variable Fabry-Perot resonator.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


18 

 

References  
 

1. 
Wu, K., Park, Y. S., Lim, J. & Klimov, V. I. Towards zero-threshold optical gain using 

charged semiconductor quantum dots. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 1140–1147 (2017). 

2. 
Dang, C. et al. Red, green and blue lasing enabled by single-exciton gain in colloidal 

quantum dot films. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 335–339 (2012). 

3. 
Eisler, H., Bawendi, M. G. & Hollingsworth, J. Optical gain and stimulated in nanocrystal 

emission quantum dots. 290, 314–317 (2014). 

4. 
Yang, Z., Pelton, M., Fedin, I., Talapin, D. V. & Waks, E. A room temperature continuous-

wave nanolaser using colloidal quantum wells. Nat. Commun. 8, (2017). 

5. 
Schaller, R. D., Petruska, M. A. & Klimov, V. I. Tunable near-infrared optical gain and 

amplified spontaneous emission using PbSe nanocrystals. J. Phys. Chem. B 107, 13765–

13768 (2003). 

6. 
Eisler, H. J. et al. Color-selective semiconductor nanocrystal laser. Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 

4614–4616 (2002). 

7. 
Saba, M. et al. Exciton-exciton interaction and optical cain in colloidal CdSe/CdS Dot/Rod 

nanocrystals. Adv. Mater. 21, 4942–4946 (2009). 

8. 
Yakunin, S. et al. Low-threshold amplified spontaneous emission and lasing from colloidal 

nanocrystals of caesium lead halide perovskites. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–8 (2015). 

9. 
Zhu, H. et al. Lead halide perovskite nanowire lasers with low lasing thresholds and high 

quality factors. Nat. Mater. 14, 636–642 (2015). 

10. 
Dede, D. et al. Highly stable multi-crown heterostructures of type-II nanoplatelets for ultra-

low threshold optical gain. Chem. Mater. 31, 1818–1826 (2019). 

11. 
Guzelturk, B., Kelestemur, Y., Olutas, M., Delikanli, S. & Demir, H. V. Amplified 


19 

 

spontaneous emission and lasing in colloidal nanoplatelets. ACS Nano 8, 6599–6605 (2014). 

12. 
She, C. et al. Low-threshold stimulated emission using colloidal quantum wells. Nano Lett. 

14, 2772–2777 (2014). 

13. 
Ithurria, S. et al. Colloidal nanoplatelets with two-dimensional electronic structure. Nat. 

Mater. 10, 936–941 (2011). 

14. 
Guzelturk, B., Pelton, M., Olutas, M. & Demir, H. V. Giant modal gain coefficients in 

colloidal II-VI nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 19, 277–282 (2019). 

15. 
Bae, W. K. et al. Controlled alloying of the core-shell interface in CdSe/CdS quantum dots 

for suppression of auger recombination. ACS Nano 7, 3411–3419 (2013). 

16. 
Klimov, V. I. et al. Single-exciton optical gain in semiconductor nanocrystals. Nature 447, 

441–446 (2007). 

17. 
Rowland, C. E. et al. Picosecond energy transfer and multiexciton transfer outpaces Auger 

recombination in binary CdSe nanoplatelet solids. Nat. Mater. 14, 484–489 (2015). 

18. 
Taghipour, N. et al. Near-unity efficiency energy transfer from colloidal semiconductor 

quantum wells of CdSe/CdS nanoplatelets to a monolayer of MoS2. ACS Nano 12, 8547–

8554 (2018). 

19. 
Shendre, 
S. 
et 
al. 
Ultrahigh-efficiency 
aqueous 
flat 
nanocrystals 
of 

CdSe/CdS@Cd1−xZnxS colloidal core/crown@alloyed-shell quantum wells. Nanoscale 

11, 301–310 (2019). 

20. 
Yeltik, A. et al. Experimental determination of the absorption cross-section and molar 

extinction coefficient of colloidal CdSe nanoplatelets. J. Phys. Chem. C 119, 26768–26775 

(2015). 

21. 
Klimov, V. I.,  Mikhailovsky, A. A., Mcbranch, D. W., Leatherdale, C. A. & Bawendi, M. 


20 

 

G. Quantization of multiparticle Auger rates in semiconductor quantum dots. Science (80-. 

). 1011, 1011–1013 (2000). 

22. 
Pelton, M. et al. Nonmonotonic dependence of Auger recombination rate on shell thickness 

for CdSe/CdS core/shell nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 17, 6900–6906 (2017). 

23. 
Pietryga, J. M. et al. Spectroscopic and device aspects of nanocrystal quantum dots. Chem. 

Rev. 116, 10513–10622 (2016). 

24. 
Park, Y. S., Bae, W. K., Baker, T., Lim, J. & Klimov, V. I. Effect of Auger recombination 

on lasing in heterostructured quantum dots with engineered core/shell interfaces. Nano Lett. 

15, 7319–7328 (2015). 

25. 
Ding, J., Hagerott, M., Ishihara, T., Jeon, H. & Nurmikko, A. V. (Zn,Cd)Se/ZnSe quantum-

well lasers: Excitonic gain in an inhomogeneously broadened quasi-two-dimensional 

system. Phys. Rev. B 47, 10528–10542 (1993). 

26. 
Lu, W., Zhong, B. & Ma, D. Amplified spontaneous emission and gain from optically 

pumped films of dye-doped polymers. Appl. Opt. 43, 5074 (2004). 

27. 
Samuel, I. D. W. & Turnbull, G. A. Organic semiconductor lasers. Chem. Rev. 107, 1272–

1295 (2007). 

28. 
Guzelturk, B. et al. High-efficiency optical gain in type-II semiconductor nanocrystals of 

alloyed colloidal quantum wells. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 8, 5317–5324 (2017). 

29. 
Guzelturk, B. et al. Stable and low-threshold optical gain in CdSe/CdS quantum dots: An 

all-colloidal frequency up-converted laser. Adv. Mater. 27, 2741–2746 (2015). 

30. 
Kelestemur, Y. et al. Platelet-in-box colloidal quantum wells: CdSe/CdS@CdS 

core/crown@shell heteronanoplatelets. Adv. Funct. Mater. 26, 3570–3579 (2016). 

31. 
Jiangtao, H. et al. Linearly polarized emission from colloidal semiconductor quantum rods. 


21 

 

Science (80-. ). 292, 2060–2063 (2001). 

 

 

Acknowledgment  

The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support in part from Singapore National 

Research Foundation under the programs of NRF-NRFI2016-08, NRF-CRP14-2014-03 and the 

Science and Engineering Research Council, Agency for Science, Technology and Research 

(A*STAR) of Singapore and in part from TUBITAK 115E679. H.V.D. also acknowledges support 

from TUBA. T.C.S. and M. L. acknowledge the support from Singapore National Research 

Foundation through the Competitive Research Programme (CRP Award No. NRF-CRP14-2014-

03). 

Author contributions 

N.T., S.D. and H.V.D. conceived the idea of this study and H.V.D supervised the research at all 

stages. S.D. and S.S. synthesized the engineered CQWs and characterized the optical properties of 

the samples in the solution form. N.T conducted the ASE and VSL measurements. N.T. and M.S. 

designed and fabricated the VCSEL along with the lasing measurements. M.L. and T.C.S 

conducted the pump-probe measurements. F.I. performed the ICP-MS measurements and 

contributed to the synthesis of CQWs. I.T. performed quantum mechanical calculation. N.T., S.D., 

B.G. and H.V.D analyzed and interpreted the data. N.T., S.D. and H.V.D wrote the manuscript 

with contributions from all authors.  

 

 


22 

 

Supporting Information  

for 

Sub-single exciton optical gain threshold in colloidal 

semiconductor quantum wells with gradient alloy shelling 

Nima Taghipour, † Savas Delikanli, †, ‡ Sushant Shendre, ‡ Mustafa Sak, † Mingjie Li, § Furkan 

Isik, † Ibrahim Tanriover, † Burak Guzelturk, ^ Tze Chien Sum, § and Hilmi Volkan Demir †, ‡, # 

† Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Department of Physics, UNAM-Institute 

of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Bilkent University, Ankara 06800, Turkey 

 ‡ Luminous! Centre of Excellence for Semiconductor Lighting and Displays, School of 

Electrical and Electronic Engineering, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, School of 

Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798, 

Singapore 

§ School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

639798, Singapore 

^ Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, CA 94025, USA  

 

 

 


23 

 

S1. Synthesis of core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS colloidal 

quantum wells 

Preparation of cadmium myristate: Cadmium myristate was prepared according to a previously 

reported recipe1. 1.23 g of cadmium nitrate tetrahydrate was dissolved in 40 mL of methanol and 

3.13 g of sodium myristate was dissolved in 250 mL of methanol. When both the powders were 

completely dissolved, the solutions were mixed and stirred vigorously for 1 h. Cadmium myristate 

was formed as a precipitate, which was then removed by centrifugation and washed by redispersing 

in methanol to remove any unreacted and/or excess precursors. After repeating the washing step 

for at least three times, the precipitated part was completely dried under vacuum overnight. 

Synthesis of the 4ML thick CdSe core NPLs: The synthesis followed the recipe reported 

previously with slight modifications1. 170 mg of cadmium myristate, 12 mg of Se and 15 mL of 

ODE were loaded into a three-neck flask. After degassing the mixture for 1 h at room temperature, 

the solution was heated to 240 °C under argon atmosphere. When the solution turns bright orange 

(generally around 190-200 °C), 80 mg of cadmium acetate dihydrate was swiftly added to the 

reaction solution. After reaching 240 °C, the solution was cooled to room temperature and 0.5 mL 

of OA was injected. CdSe NPLs were precipitated by adding acetone and dispersed in hexane. 

Size-selective precipitation using centrifugation at different speeds was used if any additional sizes 

of NPLs were formed. 

Preparation of anisotropic growth solution for CdS crown: A previously reported procedure 

was followed with slight modifications1. For the preparation of cadmium precursor, 480 mg of 

cadmium acetate dihydrate, 340 μL of OA, and 2 mL of ODE were loaded in a beaker. The solution 

was sonicated for 30 min at room temperature. Then, it was heated to 160 °C in ambient 


24 

 

atmosphere under continuous stirring and alternating sonication until the formation of whitish 

color homogeneous gel. After the cadmium precursor was prepared, it was mixed with 3 mL of 

0.1 M S-ODE stock solution and used for the CdS crown coating. 

Synthesis of CdSe/CdS core/crown NPLs: A typical core-seeded synthesis method reported 

previously was used with slight modifications.1 A portion of the 4 ML core synthesis in hexane 

and 15 mL of ODE were loaded in a three-neck flask. The solution was degassed at 100 °C for the 

complete removal of hexane. Then, the solution was heated to 240 °C under argon flow and a 

certain amount of anisotropic growth mixture for CdS crown was injected at the rate of 12 mL/h. 

After obtaining the desired crown size by adjusting the injection amount, the resulting mixture was 

further annealed at 240 °C for 5 min. After that, the solution was cooled down to room temperature 

and the core/crown NPLs were precipitated using ethanol. The NPLs were cleaned three times 

with ethanol and methanol to remove any traces of unreacted precursors, which was crucial for the 

shell growth step using c-ALD. Lastly, they were then dispersed in hexane to be used for the shell 

deposition. 

Synthesis of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS core/crown@shell NPLs: We used a modified procedure 

of our c-ALD recipe reported previously.2,3 1 mL of core/crown NPL seeds in hexane (having first 

absorption peak at 514 nm) were kept for use such that 100 µL of these NPLs dissolved in ~3 mL 

hexane had an optical density of ~2 at 370 nm. For cation precursors we used 0.4 M cadmium 

nitrate tetrahydrate (Cd-nitrate) and 0.4 M zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn-nitrate) solutions in NMF. 

For sulfur precursor we used 40-48 wt% solution of ammonium sulfide in water. Specifically, for 

the first sulfur shell growth, we added 40 µL of ammonium sulfide in 4 mL NMF and under 

vigorous stirring added 1 mL of CdSe/CdS core/crown seeds, which we had prepared separately. 

After 2 minutes of stirring when all the NPLs had entered the NMF phase from hexane, the reaction 


25 

 

was stopped by quickly adding acetonitrile and excess toluene to precipitate the NPLs via 

centrifugation. This cleaning step was repeated once more by redispersing the NPLs in NMF and 

precipitating them using acetonitrile and excess toluene to remove any remaining sulfur precursor. 

Finally, the NPLs were dispersed in 4 mL of NMF for the next cation deposition step. Next, we 

added 1 mL of solution having a mixture of X% Cd-nitrate and (100-X)% Zn-nitrate in NMF by 

volume for the cation step. The X (volume percentage of Cd precursor) value was varied as 50, 10, 

5, 2, 1 and 1 for the first to the sixth Cd1-xZnxS shell layers. The reaction was allowed to continue 

by stirring for at least 45 min in ambient atmosphere and under room light, after which the NPLs 

were precipitated out by adding acetonitrile and excess toluene for centrifugation. The cleaning 

step similar to the previous one was repeated once more to remove all excess precursors. The 

growth cycle of sulfur and cation precursors were further continued (now only in NMF) to increase 

the number of shells as required while gradually increasing the Zn content with each cycle as 

indicated above. Each cycle added 1 monolayer of Cd1-xZnxS shell on top of the previous. At the 

end of each cycle a small amount of the NPLs were precipitated from NMF and dispersed in hexane 

by adding oleylamine for further use. 

 

 

 

 

 


26 

 

S2. Quantum mechanical calculation of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS core/crown@gradient-

alloyed shell colloidal quantum wells 

Calculations of electron and hole wavefunctions: To calculate the electron and hole 

wavefunctions for the first excited state, we solved time–independent Schrödinger equation (TISE) 

for the potential profile given in Figure S1: 

k

ℏmnm

1onpm + 𝑉(𝑧)r 𝛹(𝑧) = 𝐸p𝛹(𝑧)  
   (S1) 

where mz is the effective mass of electron (hole), V(z) is the potential arising from conduction 

(valence) band offsets, and Ψ(z) is the wave function of electron (hole). We assumed the even 

parity for the symmetry of first excited states and solved the TISE for 𝑧 > 0. Then, because of the 

symmetry, we reflected the obtained solution to 𝑧 < 0.  

To solve the problem, we divided the right half of the potential well into five regions, as indicated 

in Figure S1, and write the general solutions for each region: 

Region I, by assuming even symmetry: 

𝛹(𝑧) = 𝐴𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝑘𝑧)  
(S2) 

where 𝑘 = w

1oxC

ℏm . 

For Regions II, III, IV and V: 

𝛹(𝑧) = 𝐶1,Z,X,z𝑒{m,|,},~p + 𝐷1,Z,X,z𝑒0{m,|,},~p  (S3) 

where 𝐾1,Z,X,z = w

1om,|,},~(•x,m,|,}0C)

ℏm
.  


27 

 

 

Figure S1. Potential diagram of CdSe core coated with N=4-MLs Cd1-xZnxS gradient alloyed-shell. Here, x represents 

the amount of Zn in the shell region, where x is 0.02%, 13.5%, 24.6% and 53.2% for 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th MLs of the 

shell coating, respectively. 𝑉U is the potential barrier offset between 4-ML CdSe core and CdS shell. 𝑉10X are the 

potential barrier offsets for the electron (or hole) wavefunctions between CdSe core and Cd1-xZnxS shell for different 

amount of x.  

Then, we solved the equations for electron (hole) by using the following boundary conditions: 

𝛹‚𝑧U,1,Z,X

0
ƒ = 𝛹‚𝑧U,1,Z,X

„
ƒ  
(S4) 

n…(p)

np │px,m,|,}
‡
=

n…(p)

np │px,m,|,}
ˆ
   (S5) 

𝛹(𝑧z) = 0  
 (S6) 


28 

 

To do so, “A” assumed to be 1 for finding the general solution, and then it was obtained by applying 

the normalization condition:  

∫
|𝛹|1𝑑𝑧

„‹
0‹
= 1               (S7) 

In our calculations, for the value of effective masses and band offsets, we used the data that are 

given in Ref. S3.    

Solutions;  

At the interface between Region I-II (𝐳 = 𝐳𝟏): 

From Equations S2 and S3 and by applying the boundary conditions of S4 and S5: 

𝐶1 =

{m Ž••(‘px)0‘ •’“(‘px)

1{m”•m–x
 and 𝐷1 =

{m Ž••(‘px)„‘ •’“(‘px)

1{m”‡•m–x
         

 

In region II-III, III-IV and IV-V interfaces (𝐳 = 𝐳𝟐,𝟑,𝟒) 

From equation 3 and applying the boundary conditions of S4 and S5: 

𝐶Z,X,z =

šm,|,}‚{|,},~„{m,|,}ƒ”•m,|,},~–m,|,}„›m,|,}‚{|,},~0{m,|,}ƒ”‡•m,|,},~–m,|,}

1{|,},~”•|,},~–m,|,}
               (S8) 

and 

 𝐷Z,X,z =

šm,|,}‚{|,},~0{m,|,}ƒ”•m,|,},~–m,|,}„›m,|,}‚{|,},~„{m,|,}ƒ”‡•m,|,},~–m,|,}

1{|,},~”‡•|,},~–m,|,}
             (S9) 


29 

 

Finally, by applying the boundary condition S6, we calculated the first excited energy state (𝐸) 

and corresponding electron (hole) wavefunctions, 𝛹(𝑧).  The [𝛹(𝑧)]1 is depicted as function of z 

in Figure S2.  

 

Figure S2. Distribution of electron and hole wavefunctions. Calculated the square of electron (red) and hole (blue) 

wavefunctions for CdSe/Cd1-xZnxS core/alloyed-shell of 4+2N MLs, with N=4 MLs (shell thickness).  

As can be seen in Figure S2, in our engineered heterostructure of CQWs, the hole wavefunction is 

mostly confined in the core region due to large band offset (0.52 eV) and heavy effective mass 

(0.89 mo) from −0.6 to +0.6 nm in Figure S2. However, the electron wavefunction relaxes to the 

shell region, because of the weak potential barrier of the conduction band (~0.1eV) and light 

electron effective mass (0.13 mo). Consequently, this partial separation of electron and hole 

wavefunctions results in quasi-type-II band alignment.  

 

 


30 

 

S3. Calculation of average number of excitons per CQW 

Absorption cross-section calculations of NPLs: First, inductively coupled plasma-mass 

spectroscopy (ICP-MS) measurement was used to calculate the concentration of NPLs. For the 

ICP-MS measurements, a solution of 1 mL of NPL sample was carefully dried. Then, the residual 

was dissolved in 5 mL nitric acid solution. The processed sample was placed into a volumetric 

flask for the ICP-MS measurement. The cadmium and zinc molar concentrations were obtained 

using an Agilent 725 ICP-MS system. 

The size of the CdSe NPLs were obtained from transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. 

NPL concentration (CNPL) was calculated using CNPL= C×(Cd+Zn)×Vunit/(4VNPL), where Vunit is 

the volume of the CdSe unit cell, VNPL is the physical volume of CdSe NPL and C×(Cd+Zn) is the 

total concentration of the Cd and Zn4. Herein, we make an assumption that the density of the NPLs 

is the same as its bulk material. After the calculation of NPL concentration, per-particle absorption 

cross-section (σ) of CdSe/CdS@CdZnS core/crown/shell NPLs was calculated by employing the 

equation of σ =2303A/(CNPL×NA×L), where A is the absorbance, NA is the Avogadro’s number, 

and L is the optical path length. 

Calculation of Zn concentrations in the CdSe/CdS@CdZnS core/crown/shell NPLs: Zn 

concentrations in the NPLs were acquired by using ICP-MS measurements. First, Zn concentration 

of all samples was calculated through ICP-MS measurements. Then, the Zn concentration at each 

shell layer was calculated by knowing the relative Zn concentration of each sample acquired 

through consecutive c-ALD procedures and considering the fact that each monolayer has the same 

volume as a result of their 2D planar geometry. 

The calculated Zn concentration in each layer of shells is given in Table S1.  


31 

 

Table S1. Calculated the Zn concentration of in CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS core/crown@gradient-alloyed shell NPLs.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


32 

 

S4. Biexciton Auger recombination lifetime calculation.  

By using the method that we mentioned in the main text, we employed a simple subtractive process 

to derive single exponential decay dynamics as previously used for CQDs5. The biexciton Auger 

recombination rate as a function of the shell layers is shown in Figure 2e.  

 

 

Figure S2. Calculated biexciton Auger recombination lifetime for CdSe/Cd1-xZnxS core/alloyed-shell CQWs with 

different shell thicknesses. a, N=2, b, N=3, c, N=5 and d, N=6 MLs.  

 

 


33 

 

S5. Amplified spontaneous emission measurement 

We examined amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) of different samples in the same setup. To 

do so, we prepared the thin films of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS C/C@GS CQWs, by applying the 

similar recipe for all samples.   

 

Figure S3. Amplified spontaneous emission characterizations. Histogram of ASE thresholds for different thin films 

of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS CQWs for 4-ML shell.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


34 

 

S6. Variable stripe length measurement 

 

Figure S4. Variable stripe length measurements of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS CQWs for 4-ML shell at different pump 

fluences. a) 12.80, b) 120, c) 384, and d) 746 𝜇J cm-2 for which the modal gain coefficient corresponds to 60, 480, 

1650 and 1960 cm-1, respectively.  

 

 

 

 


35 

 

S7. Colloidal quantum well- vertical- cavity surface-emitting laser.  

 

Figure S5. CQW-VCSEL. a, Reflection spectra of the DBRs and ASE spectrum of CdSe/CdS@Cd1-xZnxS CQWs with 4-

ML shell. b, Schematic illustration of wedge CQW-VCSEL consists of two DBRs having a reflection of ~96% where a 

close-packed solid film of CQWs is sandwiched between them. c, Schematic of vertically-pumped CQW-VCSEL wedge 

which provides a variable cavity length. To eliminate any residual excitation beam, we used a long-pass filter. The 

output laser beam was collected with a spectrometer.  

Polarization measurements of output laser beam: To characterize the polarization state of the 

laser emission, a linear polarizer was placed between the cavity output and spectrometer. By 

varying the angle of the polarizer, the signal was collected at the spectrometer. The luminescence 

intensity of the cavity is depicted as function of the detection angle in Figure S6, where the 

polarization ratio was found to be 9.09.  

 


36 

 

 

 

 
 
Figure S6. PL intensity of the collected signal versus detection angle. The polarization factor was calculated using 

experssion of R = (𝐼∥ − 𝐼j)/(𝐼∥ + 𝐼j), which leads to 0.82. The experimental data is well fit with a Cos2 function.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


37 

 

SI Refrences  
 
 
S1. 
Tessier, M. I. D., Spinicelli, P., Dupont, D., Patriarche, G., Ithurria, S. & Dubertret, B. 

Efficient exciton concentrators built from colloidal core/crown CdSe/CdS semiconductor 

nanoplatelets. Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 207-213. 

S2. 
Kelestemur, Y. et al. Platelet-in-Box colloidal quantum wells: CdSe/CdS@CdS 

core/crown@shell heteronanoplatelets. Adv. Funct. Mater. 26, 3570–3579 (2016). 

S3.  
Shendre, S. et al. Ultrahigh-efficiency aqueous flat nanocrystals of CdSe/CdS@Cd1−xZnxS 

colloidal core/crown@alloyed-shell quantum wells. Nanoscale 11, 301–310 (2019). 

S4.  
Yeltik, A. et al. Experimental determination of the absorption cross-section and molar 

extinction coefficient of colloidal CdSe nanoplatelets. J. Phys. Chem. C 119, 26768–26775 

(2015). 

S5. 
Klimov, V. I., Mikhailovsky, A. A., Mcbranch, D. W., Leatherdale, C. A. & Bawendi, M. 

G. Quantization of multiparticle Auger rates in semiconductor quantum dots. Science (80-. 

). 1011, 1011–1014 (2008). 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 


