 
1

Study of electrical conductivity of the coatings 
of bimetallic Au-Ag nanoparticles 
 
A.G. Sivakov1, R.P. Yavetskiy2, N.A. Matveevskaya2, T.G. Beynik2, A.V. Tolmachev2, 
S.I. Bondarenko1, A.S. Pokhila1, A.V. Krevsun1, V.P. Koverya1, A.S. Garbuz1 

1B. Verkin Institute for Low Temperature Physics and Engineering, National Academy of 
Sciences of Ukraine, Nauky Ave., 47, 61103 Kharkiv, Ukraine 
2Institute for Single Crystals, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine 
Nauky Ave., 60, Kharkiv, 61178, Ukraine 
 
e-mail: bondarenko@ilt.kharkov.ua 
 
 
The “metallic” temperature variation of the electrical resistivity of chemical nano gold-

silver coatings with a silver content of 6.6% at. up to 13.1% at. determined in the temperature 

range 4.2–300 K. Features of low-temperature measurements of the resistance of nano-coatings 

were found and explained. The possibility of the appearance of superconductivity in them is 

discussed. 

 

 
1. Introduction 
 

In July 2018, a message appeared from Indian scientists about the development and 

properties of a new superconducting compound in the form of a chemical coating of 

nanoparticles (NPs) of gold with silver [1]. The temperature dependences of the resistance of 

manufactured coatings, on which the linear change of resistance typical for metals is replaced by 

a sharp drop to zero in the temperature range of 236 K (–37 °C) characteristic of the 

superconducting transition, are presented in this message. Measurement of the magnetic 

permeability of the coating samples showed the presence of a diamagnetic response below the 

transition temperature, which indicates the presence of the Meissner effect. In addition, an 

external magnetic field of 0.1 to 3 T biased the beginning of the transition to lower temperatures. 

The combination of these experimental results is usually sufficient evidence of the 

existence of superconductivity. It was also reported that one of the samples had a transition 

temperature of 320 K (+47 °C), which meant that room temperature superconductivity (PCB) 

was achieved for the first time in the history of superconductivity with normal external 

atmospheric pressure. Attempts to test the possibility of the existence of such a compound [2,3] 

after the specified message were made. In [2], nanoscale films consisting of alternating layers of 

gold and silver were made and studied. It should be noted that the vacuum thermal method of 

sputtering gold and silver, applied in [2], is very far from the chemical synthesis of these 

components in [1]. As a result, superconductivity has not been found out. The technique for 


 
2

measuring the temperature dependences of coatings of NPs using the four-probe method was 

theoretically analyzed in [3]. It was shown that with certain properties of the coating and the 

location of the potential and current leads from the sample, it is possible to obtain a zero or close 

to zero value of the potential difference on the sample due to the non-uniform distribution of the 

measuring current between the NP, even in the absence of NP superconductivity. Zero-resistance 

of a sample can be mistaken for the appearance of its superconductivity. At the same time, the 

author [3] admits that the presence of the Meissner effect in the samples of [1] may be evidence 

of the existence of superconductivity in them (even if the result of transport measurements is 

erroneously explained).  

The aim of our work was to experimentally test the transport and some magnetic 

properties of gold–silver (Au–Ag) nanocoatings prepared by the chemical method. 

 
2. Samples preparation method 
 
To obtain the coatings based on “star”-shape bimetallic nanoparticles (NP) Au-Ag we 

used chloroauric acid HAuCl4·3H2O (≥99.9%); trisodium citrate Na3C6H5O7 (≥98.0%); 

hydrochloric acid HCl (~38.0%); silver nitrate AgNO3 (≥99.8%); ascorbic acid C6H8O6 

(≥99.0%); (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES) C9H23NO3Si (≥99.0%); sulfuric acid H2SO4 

(~98.0%); hydrogen peroxide H2O2 (~38.0%); ethyl hydroxide C2H6O ~ 96 % were purchased 

from Sigma-Aldrich, Germany. All chemical reagents were used as received without further 

purification. 

Aqueous NP colloidal solutions were obtained by a two-step method on Au nucleating 

seeds by reduction of chloroauric acid silver nitrate by ascorbic acid. In [4] we describe the NP 

Au-Ag synthesis in detail. The Au-Ag NP films were obtained by self-assembly method [5, 6], 

based on multistage NP absorption from the colloidal solution onto the substrate. In order to 

improve the first layer NP absorption, the substrate surface was chemically modified by APTES 

molecules [6]. After that substrates were immersed into a fresh prepared colloidal solution of NP 

and soaked for 24 hours in the temperature of 20 ± 2 °C to form Au-Ag NP coating, then 

repeatedly flushed out and air-cured. To increase the surface thickness the second and third 

cycles of NP absorption onto the substrate were processed analogously (the thickness of the NP 

layer after the third cycle is 800 nm).  

Morphology and structure of Au-Ag NP were studied by transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM) with the use of electron microscope TEM-125 (Selmi, Ukraine) with 

accelerating voltage of 100 kV. The statistical analysis of NP sizes obtained by the electron 

microscopy was processed, and the NP size distribution histograms were constructed. For every 

NP size obtained in the process the diameter of at least 300 particles was measured. Morphology 


 
3

and surface profile of NP coatings were studied by the high-resolution scanning electron 

microscope (HR-SEM) (Hitachi S-5500, Hitachi High-Technologies Corporation, Japan) and the 

atomic force microscope (AFM) (SPM-9600, Shimadzu Corp., Japan) in non-contact mode with 

frequency of 0.2 Hz using PPP-NCHR cantilever. Sample composition was analyzed by the 

scanning electron microscope JSM-6390LV with the X-ray chemical analysis system INCA 

Energy 350. Localness of energy dispersive X-ray analysis was ~1μm, concentration accuracy 

was 1-5 rel. %. Samples homogeneity was checked applying the assaying method point-to-point.  

Stable colloidal solutions of branched Au-Ag NP with the average particle size of 55-

73 nm were obtained. Silver ions presence is an important condition for forming and growth of 

sharp branches of “star”-shaped NP along certain crystallographic faces of Au nucleating seeds. 

We suppose that silver absorbs onto the surfaces of seeds faces with the largest surface energy, 

forms monolayers [7, 8], selectively stabilizes faces {110}, {310}, {720} and prevents further 

growth of Au on the surface of these faces. Anisotropic growth of NP leads to the forming of 

side branches on faces with lower surface energy. After the stabilization of faces {110} Au 

absorbs on faces {111}, that leads to the forming of gold branches. Increase of the silver ions 

concentration in the growth solution leads to an increase of the average NP size. The 

concentration of silver in Au-Ag NP of different size is represented in Table 1. 

Table 1. Concentration of silver in Au-Ag NP.  

Sample number  Average NP size, nm 
Ag concentration, at.% 

1.                                      55 
6.6 ± 0,3 

2.                                      68 
10.8 ± 0,3 

3.                                      73 
13.1 ± 0,3 

 

 

In Fig. 1 electron microscope image and size distribution histograms of Au-Ag NP with 

branched morphology are represented. NP with average size of 55 and 68 nm have ~ 20% size 

dispersion (fig. 1 a, b), and NP with average particle size of 73 nm have ~30% size dispersion 

(fig. 1 c). 

 

 


 
4

(а) 
 
 

 (b) 
 
 

 (c) 
 
 

 (d) 
 

Fig. 1. TEM of branched Au-Ag NP with average size: (а) 55 nm, (b) 68 nm, (b) 73 nm 

and the corresponding NP size distribution histograms; (d) electric micro diffraction of NP. 

 

Obtained branched Au-Ag NP are nanocrystals, and the existence of distinctive reflexes, 

corresponding to the faces {111}, {200}, {220}, {311}, indicate a face-centered cubic lattice of 

Au-Ag NP (fig.1 d). 


 
5

Using self-assembly method, stable films with different Ag concentration were obtained 

(fig. 2). Produced films are characterized by a framework (arc) structure defined by a branched 

shape of Au-Ag NP. Analysis of films surfaces by the AFM method showed that the average 

thickness of NP layer is 800 nm (fig. 3).  

 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
(c) 

Fig. 2. TEM of films surfaces of NP with different Ag concentration: (a) 6.6 at. %, (b) 

10.8 at. %, (c) 13.1 at. %. 

 

 
Fig. 3. Surface profile of NP coating with Ag concentration of 6.6 at. %, layer thickness 

is 800 nm. 

 

3. Method of electrical conductivity investigation 

 

The study of the electrical conductivity of samples with a coating of NP Au–Ag on glass 

consisted of measuring their temperature dependences of resistance using four probe methods in 

the temperature range 300–4.2 K. The connection of current and potential wires with the sample 

was carried out in one of two ways. In the first method, strips of indium-tin alloy or strips of 

indium melted in air were deposited in vacuum across the sample on the coating. Gold wires 

with a diameter of 0.05 mm were glued to the contact areas of the strips with silver paste. In the 

second method, the current leads were glued with silver paste directly on the edge of the sample. 

The typical length of the samples was 5 mm with a width of 1–2 mm. The distance between 


 
6

potential contacts ranged from 0.1 to 1 mm. Measurement of the resistance (R) of the sample as a 

function of temperature (T) was carried out automatically by recording the volt-ampere 

characteristics (I–V) of the sample at different temperatures and converting them depending on 

R(T). The maximum constant measuring current in various experiments was from 50 to 800 μA. 

I–V and and R(T) dependences were linear when using the first method of formation of current 

and potential leads in the whole range of measuring currents  (in detail look more low). The 

magnetic properties of the samples were controlled in two ways. In the first of them, a permanent 

magnet was located above the surface of the sample, creating in the coating area a magnetic field 

of 0.05 T. The temperature dependence of the resistance of the sample in the temperature range 

of 4.2–300K was then recorded. Then the dependencies obtained with and without a magnet 

were compared. In the second method, the coated substrate could be placed on a flat coil with a 

diameter close to the size of the coating. After that, measurement and comparison of the 

inductance value of the coil without a coated substrate and when it was installed on the coil was 

made. The inductance was measured using a high-frequency digital inductance meter type E7-12 

at a frequency of 1 MHz. The resolution of the meter was 100 nH. 

 

4. Research results and discussion 

 

Typical temperature dependences of the resistance R(T) of samples with different silver 

contents in the temperature ranges from room temperature to 100 K are shown in Fig.4. 

 

 
 
Fig. 4. Dependencies R/R273 K(T) of the resistance of the samples with different silver 

contents, reduced to T = 273 K: 1 — 6.6 % Ag (black line), 2 — 10.8% Ag (dark gray line), 3 — 

13.1 % Ag (light gray line). The inset shows the layout of the contacts on the samples. 

 
 


 
7

 
 
Fig. 5 Dependence of the relative resistance R/R273 K(T) reduced to T = 273 K of sample 

No. 2 (see Fig. 4), as a function of temperature, taken at intervals of 2 weeks (black line — 1st 

experiment, gray triangles — 2nd experiment). Contacts — In-Sn strips. The inset shows the 

layout of the contacts on the sample. 

 

The common property of all curves is the almost linear (“metallic”) dependence of the 

resistance R(T) in a wide temperature range with different values of the temperature coefficient 

of resistance (TCR). It is seen that the TCR of the samples increases with increasing percentage 

of silver. It is established that TCR of coatings is 2-3 times less than TCR of pure gold and 

silver. All these dependences are obtained using the first method of forming current and potential 

contacts. InSn melt strips applied to coatings across the direction of the transport current were 

used as potential and current contacts. Reproducible results with multiple repetitions of the 

cooling-heating could be obtained only with this method of forming contacts. The dependences 

R(T) for sample No. 2, taken at intervals of two weeks, are presented in Fig. 5. Reproducible 

results with multiple repetitions of the cooling-heating could be obtained only with this method 

of forming contacts. 

The resistance of the samples may increase several times after they are stored in air. The 

investigated coatings were not protected from the moisture of the surrounding air. Optical studies 

of samples showed that they are very heterogeneous in area and have poor adhesion to glass. NP 

of the coatings have poor contact not only with the substrate, but also with each other. This 

means that the coating is a heterogeneous in conductivity and loose in the volume of the grid of 

contacting with each other NR. Photomicrographs in Fig. 2, 3 confirm this idea of the electrical 

properties of coatings. Paths of current flow in such coatings are percaler. Contacts between NPs 

can change and even break, changing the configuration and number of parallel current paths with 

decreasing temperature due to different thermal expansion coefficient of glass and coating. As a 

rule, these features are more often observed with the second method of connecting current leads. 


 
8

The dependence, similar to a sharply non-linear temperature dependence of resistance with a 

superconducting transition at a temperature of 230 K, is shown in Fig. 6. 

 

 
 
Fig. 6. Dependences R(T) of sample resistance with Ag concentration 6.6% during 

cooling (black triangles) and heating (gray triangles) obtained using the second method of 

forming contacts with a sample similar to that used by the authors of [1]. Contacts — silver paste 

on the edge of the sample. The inset shows the layout of contacts. 

 
For this sample, potential leads were located on the edge of the sample. A drop in 

resistance to zero does not occur and non-linearities are preserved during thermal cycling, if 

potential contacts are applied to the same sample that intersect the entire width of the sample 

(inset in Fig. 7). Fig. 7 shows the dependences R(T) with three cycles of cooling and heating. 

 

 
 
Fig. 7. Dependences R(T) of sample resistance with Ag concentration of 10.86 % during 

cooling (black line), heating (light gray line) and re-cooling after 1.5 hours (dark gray line). The 

layout of the contacts on the sample is shown in the inset, contacts of silver paste. 

 


 
9

It can be seen that with an increase in the number of records R(T), the absolute value of 

the resistance increases, and the nonlinearity increases. However, the independence of all curves 

from the magnetic field and the absence of a decrease in the inductance of the measuring coil due 

to the expected diamagnetic effect on the inductance of the superconductivity of the coating do 

not confirm its presence. Thus, a nonlinear temperature decrease in resistance, in particular, to 

zero on one of the Au-Ag coating samples, may not be evidence of high-temperature 

superconductivity in it. At the same time, the results we obtained (Fig. 6) is an experimental 

proof of the assumption made in [3] that the shape of the experimental R(T) curves may not 

always be a criterion for the appearance of a superconducting transition. In the case of Fig. 6, 

there is a flow of the measuring current through the areas of the coating with a significantly 

lower local resistance than in the areas adjacent to the location of the potential contacts. As a 

result, these pins are actually isolated from the measuring current and there is no voltage on 

them. This can be perceived as the resistance of the sample to zero and the emergence of 

superconductivity. In fact, the non-linear portions of the curves in Fig. 6,7 can be explained by 

the non-linear dependence of the degree of isolation of potential contacts on the measuring 

current with a change in temperature. The nonlinear dependences R(T) can be explained by the 

change in the mechanical stresses in the coating as the temperature changes, which causes a 

change in the total electrical conductivity of the contacts between the NP of the coating. The 

potential leads completely overlap the measuring current paths with the first method of 

measuring the R(T) dependences, which makes it impossible to disconnect the potential leads 

from the transport current. As a result, the dependences R(T) in most cases do not have non-

linear sections. Weak non-linearities were observed in rare cases. Their appearance can be 

explained by the same processes of thermal compression (during cooling) and expansion (during 

heating) of a loose coating. This causes an irreversible decrease or increase in contact resistance 

between the NP of the coating located in the area between the potential contacts.  

Thus, the dependences obtained with the correct arrangement of potential contacts 

(Fig. 4.5) in combination with the absence of the influence of the magnetic field on the resistance 

of the samples and the absence of the diamagnetic effect suggest that in the entire temperature 

range of the experiment the superconductivity in this type of NP of Au- Ag is missing. 

Regarding the nature of the electrical conductivity of samples, the following can be 

noted. The change in the resistance R, linear with decreasing temperature, indicates their metallic 

conductivity. In this regard, it can be assumed that the total resistance (R) of the sample consists 

of the resistance (R1) of the NP itself and the resistance (R2) of the metal point contacts between 

them. The contribution to the conductivity of possible semiconductor interlayers between the 

granules is unlikely. 


 
10

The following model technique is used to estimate the value of R1. A model sample is 

made up of a complete set of substance granules. The mass of the model sample is equal to the 

total mass NP of the real sample. These NPs are laid so tightly that they are a solid coating 

without contact between the granules. Resistance R1 can be calculated if the mass (m) of the 

sample coverage, the length (l) and width (w) of the sample, the specific gravity (σ) and the 

specific resistance ( ρ) NP of the material are known. Our coating is rectangular in shape from 

densely packed NPs with dimensions in the plan of 
l × w
 (0.5 ×  5 mm) and with thickness t. In 

our case σ ≈ σAu= 19.3 g/cm3, ρ ≈ ρAu ≈ 10–6 Ohm·cm, m ≈ 0.001 mg. The value of R1 is 

calculated from two ratios: 

                       R1 ≈ ρ[l/(wt)],                                                                                          (1)  

 

                       m ≈ σ× l× w× t .                                                                                       (2) 

 

From (1) and (2) we get: 

                        
.

2

1
m
l
R
= ρσ
                                                                                             (3)  

For the above numerical parameters from formula (3), we obtain R1 ≈ 6× 10–2 Ohm·s. From a 

comparison of the resistance values (from 10 to 100 Ohm·s) experimentally measured at room 

temperature and the value of R1, it follows that the contact resistance between NPs makes the 

main contribution to the resistance of this sample. In this case, the average specific resistance of 

the coating of nanoparticles ranges from 3× 10–5 to 3× 10–4 Ohms·cm. The thickness (t) of the 

model sample, based on the ratio of (2), is about 20 nm. If we take into account the thickness of 

the investigated coatings (800 nm), it can be obtained that its specific density is 40 times less 

than the density of its granules, i. e. half the water density. This also indicates a very large 

number of small-sized electrical contacts between the coating nanoparticles. 

 

5. Conclusions 

 

The electrical conductivity of nanoparticle (NP) Au-Ag coatings in the form of “stars” in 

the temperature range 4.2–300K was first determined by measuring the temperature dependence 

of their electrical resistivity. 

The coating samples were obtained by chemical deposition of an Au–Ag colloid on glass 

substrates. The electrical resistance was determined by the four probe method. It is established 

that the temperature dependence of the coatings studied has a metallic character, i. e. the 


 
11

resistance decreases linearly with decreasing temperature up to the minimum temperature of the 

experiment (4.2 K). 

The complexity of the cryogenic measurements of the electrical resistance of these 

samples is due to the weak and non-uniform adhesion of the coating to the substrate, as well as 

the low and non-uniform density of the coating. The most repeated values of electrical 

conductivity of samples can only be obtained using the current and potential contacts developed 

with the sample in the form of either deposited in vacuum over a coating of film strips of In-Sn 

alloy with a length equal to the width of the sample or similar strips of melted indium. False and 

most often non-reproducible temperature dependences of the resistance of samples from NP, 

which coincide in shape with typical resistive transitions to the superconducting state, can arise 

in the case of using traditional electrical contacts located along the periphery of the coating. In 

particular, one can observe the occurrence of a false zero resistance at a temperature close to 

room temperature. Occurrence of false temperature dependences and them non repetition from 

one temperature cycle to another it is possible to explain irreversible thermomechanical movings 

of the nanopatricles of the coatings on the substrate surface, causing casual changes of electric 

contacts between them. This is confirmed by an estimate of the contributions to the total 

resistance of the sample to the resistance of the “stars” substance and the contacts between them. 

The last one is predominant. The same feature of coating resistance explains their very low 

density. 

The temperature dependences of the resistance of the “star” coatings of the selected 

composition, obtained using the optimal design of current and potential contacts with the sample, 

and the negative observation of the Meissner effect indicate the absence of superconductivity in 

the coatings studied. 

Further search for superconductivity in such a compound is advisable to carry out using 

additional measurement techniques and with increasing silver content in the coating, since the 

investigated coatings had a silver content of up to 13 %, and in [1] superconductivity was 

obtained with a silver content of 15 to 20 %. 

 

References 

1. D. K. Thapa, A. Pandey, Evidence for Superconductivity at Ambient Temperature and 

Pressure in Nanostructures, arXiv:1807.08572 [cond-mat.supr-con]. 

2. A. Biswas, S. Parmar, A. Jana, R. J. Chaudhary, S. Ogale, Absence of superconductivity in 

pulsed laser deposited Au/Ag modulated nanostructured thin films, arXiv:1808.10699 [cond-

mat.mtrl-sci]. 


 
12

3. D. Pekker, J. Levy, A comment on percolation and signatures of superconductivity in Au/Ag 

nanostructures, arXiv:1808.05871 [cond-mat.supr-con]. 

4. T.G. Beynik, N.A. Matveevskaya, M.V. Dobrotvorskaya, A.S. Garbuz, D.Yu. Kosyanov, V.I. 

Vovna, A.A. Vornovskikh, S.I. Bogatyrenko, Synthesis and characterization of branched gold 

nanoparticles, Functional Materials, 2017, V. 24, №1, Р. 21-25. 

5. O. Bibikova, J. Haas, A.I. López-Lorente, A. Popov, M. Kinnunen, I. Meglinski, B. Mizaikoff, 

Towards enhanced optical sensor performance: SEIRA and SERS with plasmonic nanostars, 

Analyst, 2017, 142(6), 951-958.  

6. T.G. Beynik, N.A. Matveevskaya, D.Yu. Kosyanov, A.A. Vornovskikh, V.G. Kuryavyi, V.O. 

Yukhymchuk, O.M. Hreshchuk, Nanostructured films based on branched gold particles, J. 

Nanophoton., 12(3), 036001 (2018).  

7. P. Ndokoye, X. Li, Q. Zhao, T. Li, M.O. Tade, S. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 462:341 

(2016). 

8. T. G. Beynik et al., Fabrication and properties of gold nanostars and film structures based on 

them, Nanosist. Nanomater. Nanotekhnol. 15(3), 417–429 (2017). 


