Superlubricity-Based Electrostatic Microgenerators

Xuanyu Huang1, Li Lin1, Quanshui Zheng1,2*

1 Department of Engineering Mechanics and Center for Nano and Micro Mechanics, Tsinghua 

University, Beijing 100084, China

2 State Key Laboratory of Tribology and Applied Mechanics Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing 

100084, China

*E-mail: zhengqs@tsinghua.edu.cn

Although electrostatic microgenerators (ESMGs) have promised for nearly two 

decades extensive applications in wireless, self-powered microscale devices and 

sensors for security, personal health systems, communication, infrastructure and 

environmental monitoring 1, 2, 3, 4, commercialized ESMGs are still scarce, mainly 

due to very low current densities and short product life for most applications 1, 5, 6, 

7, 8. Here we demonstrate that a combination of structural superlubricity, a state 

of nearly zero friction and wear between two contacted solid surfaces 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 

14, and nanotechnology can endow ESMGs with superlong life and high 

performances such as transferred charge, current, and power (at least three 

orders of magnitude higher than those of conventional ESMGs). Among a few 

significant advantages of superlubricity-based ESMGs, two are particularly 

noticeable. First, they can be driven by much lower external loads than 

conventional ESMGs; second, they can be massively fabricated by using micro-

machining processes. The quantitative relationships, experimental proof of

concept, and optimization results reported in this Letter can guide future design 

and facilitate the commercialization of ESMGs.

With the rapid development of nanotechnology and micro-machining processes, 

microscale sensors and devices are emerging in large numbers of applications in 

security, personal health systems, communication, infrastructure and environmental 

monitoring 1, 2, 3, 4. These sensors and devices are mostly powered by batteries and 

external chargers, which seriously limits their further applications 15. Especially for 

micro-/nano-electromechanical systems working in special conditions, such as micro-


robots working in human blood vessels 16, it is very inconvenient to supply power from 

outside. It would be ideal if microgenerators could be individually installed in these 

systems and harvest energy from the environment 1, 2, 7. Therefore, microgenerators

promise extensive applications.

There are mainly three types of microgenerators, based on electromagnetic, 

electrostatic, and piezoelectric principles, respectively. In general, electromagnetic

conversion is more suited for large systems because its efficiency scales somehow 

between 𝐿3 and 𝐿4, piezoelectric conversion is somehow better on the mesoscale, 

while electrostatic conversion becomes superior once devices are further miniatured 

because its efficiency scales somehow between 𝐿 and 𝐿2
17. Thus, it is obvious why 

commercialized ESMGs are scarce.

In fact, quite a few types of electrostatic generators, such as triboelectric 

nanogenerator (TENG) 18 and electret‐based microgenerator (EBMG) 19, have been

proposed and intensively investigated during the last decade. The concept of TENGs is 

particularly elegant because TENGs are easy to charge just through contact. However, 

reported TENGs seem to be all in the macroscale, and no EBMGs have been 

commercialized. The major obstacles to the invention of commercialized microscale 

TENGs and EBMGs are their low output performances and short product life for most 

applications, caused mainly by friction and wear in principle. In order to reduce the 

influence of friction, various efforts have been made, such as using rolling friction 20, 21

or liquid friction 22 instead of direct contact sliding. However, these efforts may result 

in not only a more complicated structure but also reduced efficiency due to an increased

gap between the two electrodes in the ESMG 19, 23, 24. To avoid friction and wear, 

TENGs may use air as the dielectric but it is easy for air between the two frictionally 

charged surfaces to break down 25.

In this Letter we demonstrate that structural superlubricity 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 provides a 

revolutionary approach to producing ESMGs with superb performance. Figure 1a 

illustrates an elementary unit of our proposed superlubricity-based ESMGs, which

consists of a SLIDER and a STATOR. The SLIDER is a thin electrode, Electrode 0,

with a conductive smooth two-dimensional material as its bottom surface 26. The 


STATOR contains two dielectric films, Dielectrics 1 and 2, with a smooth surface on 

the top of Dielectric 1 and two parallel thin electrodes, Electrode 1 and Electrode 2,

embedded in Dielectric 2. With superlubricity technology the contact between the

SLIDER and the STATOR can form a superlubric joint 9, 10. For simplicity in analysis, 

the three electrodes are set to be parallel at separating distances 𝑑1 and 𝑑2 ,

respectively, and have the same rectangular shape with length L and width W.

Figure 1. An elementary unit of the proposed superlubricity-based ESMGs: (a) The structure of the 

unit, consisting of a SLIDER and a STATOR contacted in a superlubric state. (b) The charging 

process. (c, d) The power generation process and its equivalent circuit diagram.

This ESMG model is prepared in two steps. First, we collect Electrodes 1 and 2

by a circuit (Figure 1b), apply a voltage 𝑉𝑐, and then turn off the circuit. This step leads 

to a storage of electric charges ±𝑞𝑐 in Electrode 1 and Electrode 2, with 𝑞𝑐 = 𝐶2𝑉𝑐 =

𝜀2𝐸2𝐴, where 𝐶2 = 𝜀2𝐴/𝑑2 is the capacitance, 𝜀2 is the permittivity of Dielectric 2,

𝐴 = 𝐿𝑊 is the facing area of the two electrodes, and 𝐸2 = 𝑉𝑐/𝑑2 is the electric field 

strength between the two electrodes. The main aim of this step is to store a charge in 

Electrode 1. To achieve this goal, one may also use Electrodes 0 and 1 temporarily as 

a capacitor for charging. Second, we collect Electrodes 0 and 2 by a circuit and an 

electric resistance R, as illustrated in Figure 1c. The equivalent serial capacitor and the 

circle are shown in Figure 1d.

A fundamental working model of the above ESMG is to slide Electrode 0 at a 

constant speed 𝑣 with respect to the STATOR. The changing serial capacity (Figure

1d) with time will therefore drive a time-dependent transferred charge 𝑞(𝑡) over the 


resistance 𝑅 to form a varying current i(t), and thus works as an electrostatic 

generator. As detailed in SI, with this ESMG model we can obtain the implicit solutions 

of 𝑞(𝑡) and 𝑖(𝑡) through the following expressions for the dimensionless transferred 

charge Δ𝑦(𝑧) = 𝑞(𝑡)/𝑞𝑐 and dimensionless current 𝑦′(𝑧) =

𝑑𝑦(𝑧)

𝑑𝑧
= 𝑖(𝑡)/𝑞c:

𝑦(𝑧) = − [
1

1 + 𝛽 + α ∫
𝑒𝛼𝜁

(1 − 𝜁)𝛼𝛽 𝑑𝜁

𝑧

0

] (1 − 𝑧)𝛼𝛽𝑒−𝛼𝑧,

Δ𝑦(𝑧) = 𝑦(𝑧) − 𝑦(0) = 𝑦(𝑧) +
1

1 + 𝛽 ,

(1)

where 𝜀1 denotes the permittivity of Dielectric 1, 𝑧 =

𝑣𝑡

𝐿 =

𝑡

𝑇 denotes the relative 

displacement or relative time, 𝑇 =

𝐿

𝑣 is the across-the-electrode time, and

𝛼 =
𝑇

𝐶2𝑅 = 𝑑2𝑇

𝜀2𝐴𝑅 ,

𝛽 = 𝐶2

𝐶1

= 𝜀2𝑑1

𝜀1𝑑2

,

(2)

gives two key dimensionless parameters that characterize the performance of the 

studied model ESMG.

To validate the above elementary electrostatic generator based on two capacitors, 

we perform an experiment with an equivalent setup shown in Figure 2(a), in which the 

electrode (copper, lighter green) takes a half ring in the SLIDER and the STATOR, and 

the dielectric (acrylic oligomer, darker green) takes the other half. The rings for

SLIDER and STATOR are coaxial, separated by a distance of ~0.25 mm, and in each 

experiment the SLIDER rotates at a constant angular speed maintained by a motor. An 

equivalent capacitor is connected with the STATOR to form a series of two capacitors.

More details are given in SI. Figure 2(b) plots the measured currents versus time for 

four different rotatory speeds. As shown in Figure 2(c), the average values of the 

measured current peaks agree well with the theoretical predictions.


Figure 2. Experimental proof of concept of the proposed electrostatic generator, in which the 
sampling time interval is 0.06283±0.00046 s: (a) Experimental setup. (b) Measured instant 

currents i(t) at four different angular speeds that correspond to four different sliding speeds. (c) 

Comparison with the theoretical predictions. The experimental error bars correspond to the current 

peaks at the first 20 rotating periods.

To optimize the design of our proposed ESMGs, we need more information of 

𝑞(𝑡) and 𝑖(𝑡) as functions of time t and their dependence upon the structural and 

material parameters. A detailed analysis on these functions is given in SI. From the 

numerical solution of Δ𝑦 in the phase space (𝑧, 𝛼) as detailed in SI, we can see that 

for each given 𝛼, Δ𝑦 is monotonically increasing with z and reaches its maximum, 

Δ𝑦max, at 𝑧 = 1. Further, Δ𝑦max = Δ𝑦|𝑧=1 as a function of 𝛼 becomes a plateau 

(constant) for all sufficiently large 𝛼. Similar results hold for 𝑦′. In fact, we can prove 

(see SI) that the plateau values with respect to any given finite β are

Δ𝑦pt = lim

𝛼→∞ Δ𝑦|𝑧=1 =
1

1 + 𝛽 ,

𝑦pt

′ = lim

𝛼→∞ Δ𝑦|𝑧=1 = 1

𝛽 .

(3)

Practically, since permittivities of dielectrics are very small (typically several times  

𝜀0 = 8.8542 × 10−12 in a vacuum), in most cases 𝛼 is much larger than 1 so that (3) 


holds. For example, if using SiO2 as Dielectric 2 (ε2 = 4.9ε0 ) and taking 

𝑊

𝑑2 =

1000, 𝑣 = 1𝑚/𝑠 , and 𝑅 = 1000Ω, then we have 𝛼 = 2.3 × 104.

Since both the transferred charge, 𝑞 = 𝑞𝑐Δ𝑦, and the current, 𝑖 = 𝑞𝑐𝑦′, are 

proportional to the capacitor charge 𝑞𝑐, to achieve the maximal possible 𝑞 and 𝑖, we 

can first explore the maximal allowed 𝑞𝑐 before breaking down any of the two 

dielectric films. According to 𝑞𝑐 = 𝜀2𝐸2𝐴, the maximal allowed 𝑞c, 𝑞c,max, must 

satisfy 𝑞c,max ≤ 𝜎2cr𝐴 , where 𝐸2cr denotes the breakdown electric strength of 

Dielectric 2, and 𝜎2cr = 𝜀2𝐸2cr corresponds to the maximal allowed charge density.

Again with silicon oxide as Dielectric 2 (𝐸2cr ≈ 109𝑉/𝑚 ) for example, to achieve 

𝑞c,max we need only to apply a favorably low voltage 𝑉c = 10𝑉 if the thickness of the 

dielectric between Electrodes 0 and 2 can be set at 𝑑2 = 10𝑛𝑚 (Note: the thinnest 

films reported through coating are about 0.5 nm 27); in comparison, if 𝑑2 = 100 μ𝑚,

which is a typical case in conventional ESMGs, then one has to apply an extremely 

high voltage 𝑉c = 100,000 𝑉 in order to achieve the maximum 𝑞c,max = 𝜎2cr𝐴. This 

means that 𝑞c,max is impractical to achieve for most convenient ESMGs.

We have to avoid electric breakdown of the dielectric media in not only the 

capacitor charging process (Step 2) but also the electricity generating process. 

Therefore, we need to study the electric field change during the generating process that 

corresponds to the sliding process for the entire period 0 ≤ 𝑡 ≤ 𝑇. In this process, it is 

easy to find that the electric field strength 𝐸2 in Dielectric 2 automatically satisfies

𝐸2 < 𝐸2cr as long as Dielectric 2 is not broken down in the charging process (see SI). 

However, the electric field 𝐸1 in Dielectric 1 may reach the breakdown limit of

Dielectric 1. To avoid this, the maximal allowed capacity charge has to satisfy 

𝑞c,max ≤ 𝑘𝜀1𝐸1cr𝐴, where 𝑘 is a function of 𝛼 and 𝛽, and 𝐸1cris the breakdown 

electric strength of Dielectric 1. As detailed in SI, again we find that for sufficiently 

large 𝛼 (> 10), 𝑘 is virtually equal to β. Therefore, the maximal allowed capacity 

charge 𝑞c,max is equal to 𝑘𝑚𝜀2𝐸2cr𝐴 , where 𝑘𝑚 = min(1,

𝛽𝜀1𝐸1cr
𝜀2𝐸2cr ) for sufficiently 

large α. We further find (see SI) that the optimized β is 𝛽opt =

𝜀2𝐸2cr
𝜀1𝐸1cr, corresponding 

to


𝑉c = 𝐸1cr𝑑1 = 𝐸2cr𝑑2.
(4)

The maximal allowed transferred charge 𝑞max, maximal allowed instant current 𝑖max, 

and maximal allowed average power 𝑝max can be achieved as follows:

𝑞max =

1

1+𝛽opt 𝑞c,max,,

𝑖max =

1

𝛽opt𝑇 𝑞c,max,

𝑝max =

1

3 𝑅

3+3𝛽opt+𝛽opt

2

(1+𝛽opt)

3
(

𝑞c,max

𝑇
)

2

,

(5)

where 𝑞c,max = 𝜀2𝐸2cr𝐴.

Superlubricity-Based ESMGs offer quite a few significant advantages over the 

conventional ones. First, through shrinking the thicknesses 𝑑1
and 𝑑2
into 

nanoscales, we can achieve the theoretically maximal permissive capacity charge

𝑞c,max = 𝜀2𝐸2cr𝐴 and the maximal possible values for all three major performance 

indices (𝑞max, 𝑖max, and 𝑝max) by using a very low voltage 𝑉c = 𝐸2cr𝑑2. This is 

critical in practice, in particular for healthcare applications where a high voltage is 

typically undesirable and needs to be avoided.

Second, according to (5), all three performance indices decrease with 𝛽opt in the 

form ~𝛽opt

−1 for large 𝛽opt. In conventional ESMGs, a gas or even a vacuum layer has 

to be adopted as Dielectric 1 in order to avoid friction and wear. As a result, 𝛽opt is in 

the order of 102 or even larger 19, 23, 24. In addition, as just discussed, to achieve 𝑞c,max

in conventional ESMGs requires the application of very high voltages 𝑉c. In other 

words, the acceptable 𝑞c would be orders lower than 𝑞c,max. In sum, the performance 

indices of superlubricity-based ESMGs can be at least three orders of magnitude higher 

than those of conventional ESMGs.

Third, for sufficiently large 𝛼, the maximal external force required for the best 

possible performance shown in (5) can be solved as:

𝐹e,max = 1

2 𝜀1𝐸1cr𝐸2cr𝑊𝑑2.
(6)

Therefore, the required external force can become very low if we use the dielectric film 

with superlubricity-endowed nanoscale thickness 𝑑2. For instance, when 𝐿 = 10 μm

and both Dielectrics 1 and 2 are silicon oxide (𝐸1cr = 𝐸2cr ≈ 109 V/m and ε1 = ε2 =


4.9ε0), Figure 3a displays the maximum external force needed to slide with respect to 

different widths 𝑊 (with 𝑑1 satisfying 𝛽 = 𝛽opt = 1) when the resistance is 𝑅 =

105Ω. From this plot we observe an important feature: the external force needed for 

driving the SLIDER can be reduced to the magnitude of μN when 𝑑2 is reduced to 

the nanoscale. At the same time, because of superlubricity, the mechanical-to-electrical 

efficiency can be very high (>97%), as shown in Figure 3b.

Figure 3. The maximum external force and efficiency: (a) Dependence of maximum external force

required to achieve the best possible performance upon the dielectric thickness 𝑑2 for different widths

𝑊. (b) Dependence of efficiency upon the resistance 𝑅 for different dielectric thicknesses 𝑑2 (with

𝑑1 satisfying 𝛽 = 𝛽opt = 1).

Fourth, the structure shown in Figure 1 can be easily and massively fabricated by 

using micro-machining processes. This feature is particularly
important for 

commercialization of ESMGs. 

Fifth, it is revealed by (6) that reducing the across-the-electrode time 𝑇 = 𝐿/𝑣, 

through shrinking 𝐿 or increasing 𝑣, can allow higher 𝑖max and 𝑝max. The former 

approach is practically important since the current size limit (~10 𝜇𝑚) of realized 

structural superlubricity becomes an advantage in achieving high 𝑖max and 𝑝max for 

superlubricity-based ESMGs.

Sixth, the electric breakdown strengths, 𝐸cr, of a number of solid dielectric films

exhibit an increasing tendency with shrinking film thickness as the film falls in the 

nanoscale 28, 29. Therefore, with smaller thickness we can obtain improved breakdown 

strength of the solid dielectric and thereby further increase the maximum allowed

charge, 𝑞𝑐,max.


Before concluding this Letter, we show two simple, and thus relatively easy, setups 

of superlubricity-based ESMGs. First, we suggest a rotatory ESMG as illustrated in 

Figures 4a and 4b. In the ESMG, a number (n) of equiseparated, same-sized, and 

circular sector-shaped thin electrodes (the top orange flakes) connected by a ring 

conductor (ignored for simplicity) form the SLIDER; and two layers containing the 

same number of the same electrodes, connected by an inner conductive wire, are used 

instead of Electrode 1 and Electrode 2 in Figure 1 (and E1 and E2 in Figure 4b). For 

this rotatory ESMG, if we suppose that Dielectrics 1 and 2 are the same (D1 and D2 in 

Figure 4b), then from (4) by setting 𝛽opt = 1 we can obtain the maximal allowed

instant transferred charge, instant current, and average power, in the following forms:

𝑄max =

1

2 𝑄c,max,

𝐼max = 𝑇−1𝑄c,max,

𝑃max =

7

24 𝑅(𝑇−1𝑄c,max)

2,

(7)

where R denotes the total resistance, and 𝑄c,max = 𝑛𝑞c,max is the maximal allowed

total capacity charge.

Figure 4. Two simple setups of superlubricity-based EMSG: (𝑎) The schematic diagram of the rotatory 

form superlubricity-based ESMG. (𝑏) Partial, enlarged view of the array unit, where E’s denote


Electrodes, and D’s indicate dielectrics. (𝑐) The schematic diagram of the linear array superlubricity-

based ESMG. (𝑑, 𝑒) The corresponding time-dependent dimensionless transferred charge and instant 

current of the linear array.

The second setup of the ESMG is illustrated in Figure 4c, where the SLIDER 

consists of a linear array of equi-spaced, same-sized, and square-shaped electrodes 

connected by a conductive wire (ignored for simplicity). The total length of the 

SLIDER is 𝐿SLIDER = (2𝑛 − 1)𝐿, where n denotes the number of units in the array. 

This is much like an elementary model for vibrational energy harvesters 1, 23, 24, 30, where 

the sliding displacement 𝑥(𝑡) can be random. For a quantitative understanding, we 

analyze a simple overall oscillatory form: 𝑥(𝑡) =

𝐿m
2 (1 − cos

2𝑣max𝑡

𝐿m ), where 𝐿m

denotes the maximum displacement distance of the SLIDER and 𝑣max the maximum 

instant speed. The maximal instant transferred charge and instant current have exactly 

the same forms as in (6)1,2 (for 𝛽𝑜𝑝𝑡 = 1) while the average power is slightly lower 

than that given in (6)3. For example, as 𝐿𝑚/𝐿 = 40 , the result of 𝑃max is the 

coefficient 0.4965 times the right-hand side of (6)3 . The corresponding time-

dependent dimensionless transferred charge Δ𝑦 and instant current 𝑑𝑦/𝑑𝑧
are 

shown in Figures 4d and 4e for two oscillatory periods. 

In conclusion, we propose an elementary superlubricity-based ESMG and present 

explicit results of three major performance indices of ESMGs: the maximal possible 

instant transferred charge 𝑞max, maximal possible instant current 𝑖max, and maximal 

possible average power 𝑝max. The results show that superlubricity-based ESMGs 

enjoy great advantages (at least three orders of magnitude higher) over conventional 

ones on all three performance indices. Meanwhile, the voltages and external forces 

needed can be at least three orders of magnitude lower. Therefore, commercialization

of ESMGs can be expected to a reality soon because of superlubricity, which will then 

lead to their broad applications.


References

1.
Beeby SP, Tudor MJ, White NM. Energy harvesting vibration sources for 
microsystems applications. Measurement Science and Technology 17, R175-
R195 (2006).

2.
Mitcheson PD, Green TC, Yeatman EM, Holmes AS. Architectures for 
vibration-driven micropower generators. Journal of Microelectromechanical 
Systems 13, 429-440 (2004).

3.
Mitcheson PD, Miao P, Stark BH, Yeatman EM, Holmes AS, Green TC. 
MEMS electrostatic micropower generator for low frequency operation. 
Sensors and Actuators a-Physical 115, 523-529 (2004).

4.
Wang ZL, Wu W. Nanotechnology-Enabled Energy Harvesting for Self-
Powered Micro-/Nanosystems. Angewandte Chemie-International Edition 51, 
11700-11721 (2012).

5.
Amirtharajah R, Meninger S, Mur-Miranda JO, Chandrakasan A, Lang J. A 
micropower programmable DSP powered using a MEMS-based vibration-to-
electric energy converter. 2000 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits 
Conference Digest of Technical Papers (Cat No00CH37056), 362-363, 469 
(2000).

6.
Miyazaki M, et al. Electric-energy generation using variable-capacitive 
resonator for power-free LSI: efficiency analysis and fundamental experiment. 
In: International Symposium on Low Power Electronics & Design (ed^(eds) 
(2003).

7.
Roundy S. On the effectiveness of vibration-based energy harvesting. J Intell 
Mater Syst Struct 16, 809-823 (2005).

8.
Roundy S, Wright PK, Rabaey J. A study of low level vibrations as a power 
source for wireless sensor nodes. Computer Communications 26, 1131-1144 
(2003).

9.
Berman D, Deshmukh SA, Sankaranarayanan SKRS, Erdemir A, Sumant AV. 
Macroscale superlubricity enabled by graphene nanoscroll formation. Science
348, 1118-1122 (2015).

10.
Hod O, Meyer E, Zheng Q, Urbakh M. Structural superlubricity and ultralow 
friction across the length scales. Nature 563, 485-492 (2018).


11.
Liu Z, et al. Observation of Microscale Superlubricity in Graphite. Physical 
Review Letters 108,  (2012).

12.
Song Y, Mandelli D, Hod O, Urbakh M, Ma M, Zheng Q. Robust microscale 
superlubricity in graphite/hexagonal boron nitride layered heterojunctions. 
Nature Materials 17, 894-+ (2018).

13.
Yang J, et al. Observation of High-Speed Microscale Superlubricity in 
Graphite. Physical Review Letters 110,  (2013).

14.
Zhang R, et al. Superlubricity in centimetres-long double-walled carbon 
nanotubes under ambient conditions. Nature Nanotechnology 8, 912-916 
(2013).

15.
Shao H, Tsui C-Y, Ki W-H. The Design of a Micro Power Management 
System for Applications Using Photovoltaic Cells With the Maximum Output 
Power Control. Ieee Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (Vlsi) 
Systems 17, 1138-1142 (2009).

16.
Jeon S, Jang G, Choi H, Park S. Magnetic Navigation System With Gradient 
and Uniform Saddle Coils for the Wireless Manipulation of Micro-Robots in 
Human Blood Vessels. Ieee Transactions on Magnetics 46, 1943-1946 (2010).

17.
Trimmer WSN. MICROROBOTS AND MICROMECHANICAL SYSTEMS. 
Sensors and Actuators 19, 267-287 (1989).

18.
Wang S, Lin L, Xie Y, Jing Q, Niu S, Wang ZL. Sliding-Triboelectric 
Nanogenerators Based on In-Plane Charge-Separation Mechanism. Nano 
Letters 13, 2226-2233 (2013).

19.
Nguyen CC, Ranasinghe DC, Al-Sarawi SF. Analytical modeling and 
optimization of electret-based microgenerators under sinusoidal excitations. 
Microsystem Technologies-Micro-and Nanosystems-Information Storage and 
Processing Systems 23, 5855-5865 (2017).

20.
Ghalichechian N, Modafe A, Lang JH, Ghodssi R. Dynamic characterization 
of a linear electrostatic micromotor supported on microball bearings. Sensors 
and Actuators a-Physical 136, 496-503 (2007).

21.
Lin L, Xie Y, Niu S, Wang S, Yang P-K, Wang ZL. Robust Triboelectric 
Nanogenerator Based on Rolling Electrification and Electrostatic Induction at 
an Instantaneous Energy Conversion Efficiency of similar to 55%. Acs Nano
9, 922-930 (2015).


22.
Tang W, et al. Liquid-Metal Electrode for High-Performance Triboelectric 
Nanogenerator at an Instantaneous Energy Conversion Efficiency of 70.6%. 
Advanced Functional Materials 25, 3718-3725 (2015).

23.
Naruse Y, Matsubara N, Mabuchi K, Izumi M, Suzuki S. Electrostatic micro 
power generation from low-frequency vibration such as human motion. 
Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering 19,  (2009).

24.
Yang Z, Wang J, Zhang J. A high-performance micro electret power generator 
based on microball bearings. Journal of Micromechanics and 
Microengineering 21,  (2011).

25.
Zi Y, Wu C, Ding W, Wang ZL. Maximized Effective Energy Output of 
Contact-SeparationTriggered Triboelectric Nanogenerators as Limited by Air 
Breakdown. Advanced Functional Materials 27,  (2017).

26.
Koren E, Knoll AW, Loertscher E, Duerig U. Direct experimental observation 
of stacking fault scattering in highly oriented pyrolytic graphite meso-
structures. Nature Communications 5,  (2014).

27.
Liu H, Jensen L, Ma P, Ristau D. Stress compensated anti-reflection coating 
for high power laser deposited with IBS SiO2 and ALD Al2O3. Applied 
Surface Science 476, 521-527 (2019).

28.
Chen G, Zhao J, Li S, Zhong L. Origin of thickness dependent dc electrical 
breakdown in dielectrics. Applied Physics Letters 100,  (2012).

29.
Huang J, Shian S, Diebold RM, Suo Z, Clarke DR. The thickness and stretch 
dependence of the electrical breakdown strength of an acrylic dielectric 
elastomer. Applied Physics Letters 101,  (2012).

30.
Boland J, Chao YH, Suzuki Y, Tai YC, Ieee I. Micro electret power generator. 
In: Mems-03: Ieee the Sixteenth Annual International Conference on Micro 
Electro Mechanical Systems (ed^(eds) (2003).


