Magnetic resonance imaging with optical preamplification and detection

A. Simonsen1, J. D. Sanchez2, S. A. Saarinen1,3, J. H. Ardenkjær-Larsen2, A. Schliesser1,3, and E.
S. Polzik1

1Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen
2Center for Hyperpolarization In Magnetic Resonance (HYPERMAG), Technical University of Denmark
3Center for Hybrid Quantum Networks (Hy-Q), University of Copenhagen

Abstract

Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging relies on conventional
electronics that is increasingly challenged by the push for
stronger magnetic fields and higher channel count. These
problems can be avoided by utilizing optical technologies.
As a replacement for the standard low-noise preamplifier,
we have implemented a new transduction principle that
upconverts an MR signal to the optical domain and im-
aged a phantom in a clinical 3 T scanner with signal-to-
noise comparable to classical induction detection.

1
Main

Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging is a well-established
and non-invasive tool for routine clinical diagnostics and
basic research.
Its utility would benefit from enhanced
signal-to-noise and acquisition speed—the key perfor-
mance parameters for MR imaging—and is the focus of
considerable research efforts. Two trending developments
are higher magnetic fields and more detection coils in ar-
rays.
Yet most technical innovation relies on the same
principle of matching a detection coil to a low-noise pream-
plifier in the receiver chain of the scanner [1] similar to
the diagram in Fig. 1 (lower right), a common practice
that testifies to the extraordinary performance of con-
ventional electronics obtained through decades of opti-
mization.
However, the electronics is increasingly chal-
lenged by the ever-increasing magnetic field strengths in
MR imaging [2]. And with the push for more coils, the
standard approach adds problems like cross-talk and elec-
trical interference associated with the individual pream-
plifiers and cables that each coil needs, not to mention
that dense arrays demands a miniaturization of the cor-
responding circuits [3]. These issues may be alleviated by
leveraging optical communication and sensing. In partic-
ular, optical fibers are insensitive to high magnetic fields,
immune to electrical interference, and considered MR safe
[4].
Converting the MR signal into an optical modula-
tion has been done [5], and is even commercially available
(Phillips dStream), but those approaches still use the stan-
dard electrical preamplifier first and then convert the am-
plified signal. In contrast, this work replaces the conven-
tional electrical preamplifier with a transducer [6–8] that
up-converts the MR signal onto an optical carrier. The
signal can then be analyzed at the other end of a long and

1.3 cm

2 cm

MR scanner

Laser

RF
bias

Optical fiber

Analysis

+
-

Coil

Preamplifier

Capacitors

DC source

Standard detection circuit

Analysis

Transducer

Figure 1: Simplified schematic of electro-mechano-optical
transduction.
The main photograph shows the MR scan-
ner with the vacuum chamber inside. In the sketch of the
scheme, an external frequency bias powers the detection
scheme to light and optical fibers routes light from laser to
transducer (inset lower left), and from transducer to anal-
ysis. The coil can be any standard RF coil used for MR
detection. In the standard MR detection scheme (lower
right), the RF coil is matched to a low-noise preamplifier.
A DC voltage source powers the amplifier and electrical
cables carry the amplified signal out of the scanner for
further processing.

low-loss optical fiber which moves the receiver electronics
out and away from the coils and high magnetic field in
the scanner. The idea is sketched in Fig. 1 where a signal
induced in an MR coil is combined with a radio-frequency
(RF) bias, and together they vibrate a micro-mechanical
element which, in turn, modulates the amplitude of re-
flected laser light. The transduction scheme can have a
low noise-temperature [6], can target any signal frequency,
is compatible with telecom optical wavelengths, and has
been successfully used to detect a nuclear magnetic res-
onance signal [7, 9]. And with proper circuit design and
protective steps, we here show for the first time that it
can be integrated into a commercial, clinical MR scanner
to acquire and reconstruct a complete MR image.

Fig. 1 shows a simplified version of our detection setup.
A detailed diagram is in the supplementary information.
Inside an MR imaging scanner (3 T GE MR750), a typ-
ical MR RF coil formed a resonant circuit together with
a mechanically compliant capacitor—the transducer. The

1

arXiv:1906.12260v1  [physics.med-ph]  19 Jun 2019


circuit was tuned to resonate at the Larmor precession
frequency of the nuclear spins aligned along a strong mag-
netic field.
In our case, the setup specifically involved
13C nuclear spins and a 3 T magnetic field, i.e. a preces-
sion of 32 MHz. The scanner applied an RF pulse to ex-
cite the nuclear precession—the transmit pulse. Further-
more, it applied gradient magnetic fields that enable selec-
tive excitation of atoms and encodes their phase through
spatially-dependent time evolution. As the spins precess,
they create an oscillating magnetic flux through the coil
thus inducing a voltage in the RF coil. That voltage is
usually electronically amplified and processed to gener-
ate the MR image. Our new development consists of re-
placing the standard preamplifier with an optomechanical
transducer that converts the MR signal to an amplitude
modulation of laser light. The transducer was connected
directly in parallel to the coil and consisted of a freely sus-
pended membrane—equivalent to a tiny drum-skin—that
simultaneously constitutes one side of a capacitor and one
mirror in an optical cavity. Charges on the capacitor exert
a force on the membrane and cause it to move, and this
motion then changes the capacitance and thus also the
charges that affects the motion. Hence, the mechanical
and electrical resonance are parametrically coupled [10].
As the MR signal induces charges on the capacitor, the
resulting motion proportionally changes the reflection of
light from the optical cavity. This transduction is most
sensitive when the membrane is driven near resonance,
which a signal at any frequency can do in unison with an
RF bias if the beatnote between the signal and the bias
is at the membrane’s resonance—see [11] for the detailed
theory. In our case, that meant the bias frequency had to
be the difference between the Larmor precession and the
membrane resonance, 32 MHz and 1.4 MHz respectively.
Note that because the bias and signal are non-degenerate,
interference and cross-talk between them can be removed
through filtering and the mechanical response helps with
that. After the transduction, we downconverted the de-
tected signal from optical modulation to the RF domain
simply by measuring the reflected optical power with a
detector. Although this output was frequency-shifted to
the mechanical frequency, it corresponded to the voltage
induced in the coil by the MR sequence and was conse-
quently sufficient to reconstruct the MR image through
post-processing. However, we chose, out of convenience, to
leverage the scanner’s dedicated imaging software and fed
the transduced signal back to the scanner’s receiver chan-
nel. That required the signal to be frequency-shifted back
to the signal frequency expected by the scanner, which we
did by mixing the transducer signal with the RF bias (see
the methods section and figure in supplementary informa-
tion).

The transducer’s membrane was circular and made out
of alumina and aluminum under tensile stress attached
on top of a partially reflective mirror. See the methods
section and [8] for details.
Because aluminum reflects,
the membrane and mirror formed an optical cavity with
a length determined by the cleanroom fabrication proce-
dure.
We designed the stack such that the fixed wave-
length of our laser was about one cavity linewidth (half

width at half max) away from the resonance of the op-
tical cavity. Laser light was routed to the sample by an
optical network and coupled directly from fiber into the
cavity through focusing optics. The same fiber also col-
lected the reflection, and the optical network then routed
the signal to a detector. To electrically connect the trans-
ducer and the circuit, we mounted and wirebonded the
membrane chips to an 8-pin integrated circuit socket. Be-
cause the transducer needs vacuum to operate, we placed
the assembly inside a vacuum chamber made of glass-fiber
that could hold a pressure below 1 × 10−3 mbar through-
out the measurement series—see the method section. The
chip and the circuit were then connected with a short RF
cable via a vacuum feedthrough. We protected the trans-
ducer from electro-static discharges with a switch (see Fig.
1, lower left) that could short-circuit the capacitor pins.
This was particularly important whenever we connected
the transducer to circuitry or transported it.
In addi-
tion, we took several protective steps beyond [6–9, 12] to
prevent the membrane from collapsing during the trans-
mit pulse: first, two crossed diodes were added in parallel
to the transducer to short it if the induced voltage ex-
ceed their threshold. Such protection is a common way
to protect standard preamplifiers, but did not sufficiently
protect the transducer on its own. In addition, it unfor-
tunately limits the RF bias that can be applied, but we
could anyway get satisfactory transduction performance.
Second, the detection resonance was detuned to minimize
the voltage and current induced in the coil by the transmit
pulse. This is another standard technique in MR imaging
[1] and the scanner supplied the trigger signal that con-
trolled the detuning. For this purpose, the coil loop had
a segmenting capacitor and additional components that
together created a tank circuit when the trigger activated
a PIN diode’s forward-voltage threshold. The full circuit
diagram is described in the methods section and shown
in supplementary information.
Third, the RF bias was
switched off by pulse-modulating the bias amplitude with
the same trigger that detuned the circuit.
See the full
setup diagram in supplementary information. Note that
the RF bias and spin-flip pulse overlap a little because the
long (8 m) RF cables to and from the scanner add a time
delay (∼100 ns), but this was not a problem with every-
thing else in place.

In its first implementation, the transduction scheme had
problems with excess noise which we addressed in the fol-
lowing ways: first, the RF bias was filtered twice to re-
duce its sideband noise at the detection frequency. Once
through an external filter and then through a filter built
into the detection circuit. Such sideband noise can limit
sensitivity [7, 9]. Second, there was considerable added
noise when flexible cables connected the setup inside the
scanner room with the setup outside. We believe the poor
shielding of the cables allowed ambient noise to leak into
the setup.
Using instead semi-rigid cables with better
shielding reduced the noise significantly. Third, electrical
noise at the membrane-frequency could drive the mechan-
ical motion because our sample had trapped charges [8].
We cancelled these out with a DC bias on the transducer
which gave significant reduction in the overall transducer

2


noise. With those noise-eliminating steps in place, we ob-
tained the data shown in Fig. 2 with the optomechanical
transduction.

We imaged a phantom (Fig. 2a) consisting of a bottle
filled with ethylene glycol (purity 99.8 %; natural abun-
dance, 1.1 %,
13C; triplet with JCH of 142 Hz).
The
recorded image (Fig.
2c) shows the spatial density of
13C atoms in a cross-section through the bottle. As we
expected, the image does not have a uniform signal-to-
noise throughout the volume because we used a surface coil
where the detected signal decays with the increased dis-
tance to the coil (Fig. 2b). This effect is not corrected in
the image processing. To each image voxel corresponds a
spectrum obtained from the spin-precession (Fig. 2d). For
ethylene glycol, that spectrum has a characteristic triplet
as shown in the reference measurement (Fig. 2d), obtained
with a commercial coil but still using the same phantom
and scanner. And the spectrum obtained with the trans-
ducer (Fig. 2e) also shows the same triplet. Additionally,
the two detection schemes have different background noise;
for the standard electronic amplifier the noise is flat in a
broad window, but for the transducer it has a distinctive
narrow Lorentzian lineshape plus an offset (Fig. 2e). We
believe the Lorentzian feature comes from the membrane’s
spectral response because the Lorentzian peak frequency
and linewidth changed with the bias power as we expect
from the electromechanical interaction [6, 11]. Addition-
ally, moving the bias frequency also shifted the detected
signal with respect to the noise peak and scaled its am-
plitude following the peak shape. This is an expected be-
haviour if the MR signal drives the membrane’s motion
and therefore further corroborates that the spectral shape
of the noise is related to the mechanical motion. Further-
more, the transducer’s flat noise background scales with
optical power which suggests that it originates from am-
plitude noise of the laser, most likely due to shot-noise
of light.
Finally, we have not found any other spectral
feature in the circuit response, nor any spurious noise in
the setup, that is consistent with the observed Lorentzian
peak.

In summary, we have implemented MR imaging with di-
rect optical detection and amplification of the MR induc-
tion signal thus bringing the technical benefits of optical
signal processing to the receiver chain of an MR scanner.
To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the
first successful implementation of direct electro-mechano-
optical transduction in an MR system. We clearly see the
expected image and spectrum for our phantom and coil,
and a noise-background compatible with the mechanical
motion’s Lorentzian linewidth plus an offset from optical
noise. The transducer’s spectrum shows a signal-to-noise
comparable with a commercial system, although still not
as high, and a transduction bandwidth that is narrow com-
pared to standard preamplifiers. However, both features
can be improved greatly with straightforward improve-
ments such as increasing the RF bias amplitude, reducing
the capacitance in parallel with the transducer, and espe-
cially by decreasing the membrane-capacitor gap [7]. The
noise can be reduced by cooling the system, increasing
the mechanical quality factor, and using a lighter mem-

brane [9]. Bandwidth can be increased by using multiple
mechanical modes [12]. Improvements of the optical cav-
ity will also benefit performance. Incidentally, our sample
had a suboptimal cavity length for the specific bias volt-
age, so we can expect to reach better sensitivity using
the present platform but with some fabrication optimiza-
tion.
Note that we deliberately reduced signal-to-noise
slightly by upconverting the detected signal in order to
send it back to the scanner. This step was not necessary,
but convenient. Our future work will aim to address the
trapped charges in transducer fabrication in order to elim-
inate the DC bias, and to address the transducer’s need
for vacuum with cleanroom packaging. The required vac-
uum should be achievable with available techniques [13].
Furthermore, while the RF bias is necessary to power the
transduction scheme, supplying it with cables is not a ne-
cessity. The bias could instead be delivered wirelessly [14],
potentially delivered by the same coil that generates the
transmit pulses, and collected by the RF coil.
Such a
scheme would eliminate all electrical connections to the
RF coil, leaving the optical fiber as the only physical con-
nection to the circuitry. This would enable a great increase
in the density of elements in MR array coils, avoiding all-
together the performance and safety issues that stems from
the large number of electrical connections present in MR
arrays based on current technology.

References

1.
Edelstein, W., Hardy, C. & Mueller, O. Electronic
decoupling of surface-coil receivers for NMR imag-
ing and spectroscopy. Journal of Magnetic Resonance
67, 156–161. issn: 0022-2364 (Mar. 1986).

2.
Sobol, W. T. Recent advances in MRI technology:
Implications for image quality and patient safety.
Saudi Journal of Ophthalmology 26, 393–399. issn:
1319-4534 (Oct. 2012).

3.
Wiggins, G. C. et al. 96-Channel receive-only head
coil for 3 Tesla: design optimization and evaluation.
Magnetic resonance in medicine 62, 754–62. issn:
1522-2594 (Sept. 2009).

4.
Taffoni, F., Formica, D., Saccomandi, P., Di Pino,
G. & Schena, E. Optical fiber-based MR-compatible
sensors for medical applications: an overview. Sen-
sors (Basel) 13, 14105–14120. issn: 1424-8220 (Oct.
2013).

5.
Memis, O. G., Eryaman, Y., Aytur, O. & Atalar, E.
Miniaturized Fiber-Optic Transmission System for
MRI Signals. Magnetic Resonance in Medicind, 165–
173 (2008).

6.
Bagci, T. et al. Optical detection of radio waves
through a nanomechanical transducer. Nature 507,
81–85. issn: 1476-4687 (Mar. 2014).

7.
Takeda, K. et al. Electro-mechano-optical detection
of nuclear magnetic resonance. Optica 5, 152–158.
issn: 2334-2536 (Feb. 2017).

3


Coil

Ethylene glycole

Normalized
sensitivity

6

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

6 cm

6 cm

a

b

Distance (cm)

c

d

Frequency offset (kHz)

e

Figure 2: MR image data obtained with the electro-mechano-optical transduction
a, Sketch of the coil and phantom
setup. The image plane intersects the center of the coil and is parallel to the bottle circumference. b, Simulated
sensitivity versus distance to the coil. c, Surface plot showing the normalized peak amplitude of the detected signal.
The dashed line indicates where the plane of the coil intersects the image. d, Spectrum of the MR signal measured
with classical induction detection. e, Same spectrum measured with the transducer. Both spectra shows data with
and without an induced MR signal, normalized to the signal-peak. With a signal, the spectrum shows the highest
peak among the image voxels; without, the spectrum shows the average over the entire image and is equivalent to the
noise background of detection.

4


8.
Simonsen, A. et al. Sensitive optomechanical trans-
duction of electric and magnetic signals to the opti-
cal domain. Optics Express 27, 18561–18578. issn:
1094-4087 (June 2019).

9.
Tominaga, Y., Nagasaka, K., Usami, K. & Takeda,
K. Studies on NMR-signal up-conversion from radio-
frequency to optical regimes using a lightweight
nanomembrane transducer. Journal of Magnetic Res-
onance 298, 6–15. issn: 10907807 (2018).

10.
Dougherty, W. M., Bruland, K. J., Garbini, J. L. &
Sidles, J. A. Detection of AC magnetic signals by
parametric mode coupling in a mechanical oscillator.
Measurement Science and Technology 7, 1733–1739.
issn: 0957-0233 (Dec. 1996).

11.
Zeuthen, E., Schliesser, A., Taylor, J. M. & Sørensen,
A. S. Electro-optomechanical equivalent circuits for
quantum transduction. Physical Review Applied 10,
044036. issn: 03029743 (Oct. 2017).

12.
Haghighi, I. M. et al. Sensitivity-bandwidth limit in a
multimode optoelectromechanical transducer. Physi-
cal Review Applied 9, 034031. issn: 2331-7019 (Mar.
2018).

13.
Rushton, J. A., Aldous, M. & Himsworth, M. D.
Contributed Review: The feasibility of a fully minia-
turized magneto-optical trap for portable ultracold
quantum technology. Review of Scientific Instru-
ments 85, 121501. issn: 0034-6748 (Dec. 2014).

14.
Menke, T. et al. Reconfigurable re-entrant cavity for
wireless coupling to an electro-optomechanical de-
vice. Review of Scientific Instruments 88, 094701.
issn: 0034-6748 (Sept. 2017).

15.
Rispoli, J. V. et al. Trap Design and Construction for
High-Power Multinuclear Magnetic Resonance Ex-
periments. Concepts in magnetic resonance. Part B,
Magnetic resonance engineering 46B, 162–168. issn:
1552-5031 (Oct. 2016).

16.
Abraham,
E.
R.
I.
&
Cornell,
E.
A.
Teflon
feedthrough for coupling optical fibers into ultra-
high vacuum systems. Applied Optics 37, 1762–1763.
issn: 0003-6935 (1998).

2
Methods

2.1
Transducer fabrication

We fabricated the transducer in a cleanroom using stan-
dard techniques—see [8] for a step-by-step account. The
starting substrate was a fused silica wafer, 100 mm in di-
ameter, with a partially reflective dielectric mirror on top.
Alumina layers both protected the mirror and supported
the membrane while aluminum defined the top and bottom
electrodes of the membrane-capacitor.
The membrane
consisted of ∼70 nm alumina and ∼90 nm aluminum. We
added tensile stress to the aluminum by annealing the
wafers before releasing the membrane.
Alumina got its
tensile stress during deposition.
A sacrificial silicon ni-
tride layer was between the electrodes and it had a thick-
ness designed to the desired cavity length. The layer also
determines the gap between the capacitor electrodes. At
the end of the fabrication, the layer is etched away to re-
lease the membrane.
The bottom electrode contained a hole, aligned to the
center of the membrane, where light could pass through.
Laser light was coupled into the cavity through this hole,
using a gradient refractive-index lens attached to the back-
side of the transducer chip. We achieved optical alignment
by first centering the membrane with respect to a sili-
con chip attached to the backside of the transducer chip.
The silicon die had a large, square, and centered hole that
guided the lens and ensured alignment to the cavity. Light
was supplied through a fiber-pigtail terminated in a glass
ferrule, with the ferrule and lens aligned by a glass tube
that snugly fitted both. By changing the distance between
ferrule and lens, we maximized the light delivered by the
fiber, focused through the lens, reflected from the sam-
ple, and collected back into the input fiber. Finally, all
components were fixed permanently with glue.

2.2
Circuit

The full circuit used to detect the imaging signal is shown
in the supplementary information. The RF coil was a flat
spiral coil with four windings and an outer diameter of
50 mm, wound with a 1.6 mm diameter silver wire. It had
an inductance estimated to be 490 nH from simulation.
A segmenting capacitor was inserted [15] which formed
a trap circuit together with parallel circuitry. The trap
detuned the detection coil when activated by a PIN diode,
i.e. when the diode’s forward-bias threshold was exceeded
by transmit trigger voltage. The main circuit board also
included a bandpass filter at the RF bias frequency. Its
purpose was to filter the RF bias’ sideband noise at the
MR signal frequency and prevent the RF bias from loading
the detection resonance. Notably, the filter was designed
to allow a DC offset on the bias to pass through.

2.3
MR setup

Supplementary information shows the full setup diagram
explained here. We mounted the RF coil and detection
circuit right outside a cryostat made from glass-fiber. Al-
though the cryostat can cool the transducer and circuit,

5


we only used it as a vacuum chamber. It could maintain
vacuum below 1 × 10−3 mbar up to five hours after discon-
necting from its pump because it contained two molecular
sieves (activated charcoal and sodium aluminum silicate),
both cooled to liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K). When
mounting the transducer in the cryostat, we tried to align
the membrane perpendicular to the main magnetic field.
Without this alignment, the mechanical linewidth broad-
ens, likely due to the Lorentz force on the charges in the
membrane. Laser light came to the transducer through a
custom fiber-feedthrough [16] for the cryostat, an optical
90/10 splitter, and a long single-mode fiber connected di-
rectly to the fiber-coupled 1064 nm laser outside the scan-
ner room.
The splitter only routed 10 % of input light
to the chip and dumped the remaining power. Light re-
flected from the transducer’s cavity went back into the
same splitter which then distributed 90 % into another
long single-mode fiber that lead back outside and con-
nected to a custom-built detector.
Inside the scanner room, we connected the trigger sig-
nal directly to the detuning trap on the circuit and also
sent the trigger outside to modulate the RF bias. That
same cable also carried the transduced signal back into
the scanner.
Two bias-tees handled the routing by fre-
quency discriminating the low-frequency trigger and the
high-frequency signal.
A separate cable carried the RF
bias. Outside the scanner room, the RF bias had its pulse-
modulation input connected to the trigger and its output
split 50/50. One part became the bias drive and we am-
plified it before sending it to the detection circuit through
and external filter. The other part became the local oscil-
lator in a mixer that frequency-shift the optically detected
signal back to the MR signal frequency. The output of this
mixer was the input of the scanner’s receiver channel. We
added a DC bias onto the RF bias drive with another bias-
tee, right after the first bandpass filter for the RF bias and
before the long cable going into the scanner room.

Supplementary information

Filter

Transmit
trigger

Circuit board

Modulation input
Scanner
receiver

Vacuum

90/10 splitter
Laser

50/50
splitter

Filter

Mixer
Detector

Optical
fibers
Detuning

Bias-tee

Coil

Bias-tee

RF bias

Semi-rigid
cable (7 m)

Semi-rigid
cable (7 m)

Amplifier

Inside scanner

Bias-tee

+

-

DC bias

Transducer

Figure 3: Detail setup schematic.

Trigger signal input

To transducer

Bias input

Detuning
trap circuit

Segmented pick-up coil

~ 5 cm

Bandpass
filter

Tuning capacitor and crossed diodes

Semi-rigid
coaxial cable

560 pF

560 pF

100 pF
90 pF
220 nH

22 µH

22 µH
490 nH
390 nH
390 nH

67 pF
62 pF

10 pF

Laser

Trigger
Bias

Bandpass filter
Resonance circuit
Trap circuit

Figure 4: Photo (top) and detailed diagram (bottom) of
the detection circuit

6


