A Teflon-based system for applying multidirectional voltages 

to lipid bilayers as a novel platform for membrane proteins

Maki Komiya1, †, Kensaku Kanomata2, †, Ryo Yokota1, Yusuke Tsuneta1, Madoka Sato1, 
Daichi Yamaura1, Daisuke Tadaki1, Teng Ma3, Hideaki Yamamoto3, Yuzuru Tozawa4, 
Albert Martí5, Jordi Madrenas5, Shigeru Kubota2, Fumihiko Hirose2, Michio Niwano6, 

and Ayumi Hirano-Iwata1, 3, *

1 Laboratory for Nanoelectronics and Spintronics, Research Institute of Electrical 

Communication, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-

8577, Japan

2 Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Yamagata University, 4-3-16 Jonan, 

Yonezawa-shi, Yamagata 992-8510, Japan

3Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-

ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan

4 Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, 255 Shimo-Okubo, 

Sakura-ku, Saitama-shi, Saitama 338-8570, Japan

5 Department of Electronics Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Campus 

Nord, Building C4. C. Jordi Girona, 1-3, 08034 Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain

6 Kansei Fukushi Research Institute, Tohoku Fukushi University, 6-149-1 Kunimi-ga-

oka, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 989-3201, Japan

†These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed.
Email: ayumi.hirano.a5@tohoku.ac.jp


Abstract

Artificial bilayer lipid membranes (BLMs), along with patch-clamped membranes, are 

frequently used for functional analyses of membrane proteins. In both methods, the 
electric properties of membranes are characterized by only one parameter, namely, 
transmembrane potential. Here the construction of a novel BLM system was reported, in 
which membrane voltages can be controlled in a lateral direction in addition to 
conventional transmembrane direction. A microaperture was fabricated in a Teflon film 
and Ti electrodes were evaporated around the aperture. BLMs were reproducibly formed 
in the aperture without being affected by the presence of the electrodes. The application 

of a lateral voltage induced no significant changes in the electric properties of the BLMs, 
such as baseline current, transmembrane resistance, and transmembrane capacitance. In 
contrast, lateral voltages clearly affected the activities of biological ion channels, 
suggesting that the lateral voltage might be a useful parameter for analyzing channel 
activities. The present Teflon-based system in which multidirectional voltages can be 
applied to BLMs represent a promising platform for the analysis of underlying functional 
properties of membrane proteins.

Introduction

The biological cell membrane that separates the cell from its external environment is 

composed of a bilayer lipid membrane (BLM)and membrane proteins. The BLM is a self-
assembled structure comprised of phospholipid molecules that stabilize the membrane 
through hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions. It provides an environment that 
permits membrane proteins to express their functions. There are two common methods 

for the electric functional analysis of membrane proteins, especially ion channels; the 
patch clamp technique for proteins that are in cell membranes[1–3] and the reconstitution 
of ion channels in artificially formed BLMs[4–10]. Although recordings from patch-clamp 
preparations and channel-incorporated BLMs provide basic information concerning ion 
channel biophysics, only one electric parameter can be measured in either type of 
membrane, i.e., transmembrane potential. However, BLM is a three-dimensional material

with nanometer-thickness and application of voltages in other directions might be another 
parameter for the functional analysis of ion channels. We report herein on the construction 
of a BLM system in which we are able to regulate membrane voltages in a lateral direction 
in addition to conventional transmembrane direction (Figure 1). Teflon films, which are 
traditionally used for suspending BLMs[4,11–14], were used as a base material, on which Ti 
electrodes were deposited. The resulting structure, referred to as a Teflon-based chip, was 
sufficiently stable to permit the formation of BLMs. Using BLMs in the Teflon-based 


chip, we investigated the effects of lateral voltages on background membrane properties, 
such as transmembrane currents, resistance, and capacitance, together with the effects of 
lateral voltages on the activities of biological ion channels. We show that ion channel 
activities can be regulated by the lateral voltages while the application of the lateral
voltages induces no significant changes in electric properties of BLMs. Therefore, the 
present system has the potential to serve as a novel platform for revealing the fundamental 
and functional properties of membrane proteins.

Results and Discussion

Since early BLM studies, Teflon films have been used as a septum for suspending 

BLMs[4,11–14], owing to their chemical stability and good electric properties, such as high 
resistivity, low dielectric constant, and low dielectric loss.[15] We fabricated novel Teflon-
based chips for applying multidirectional voltages in BLMs by utilizing Teflon films as 
a base material. Microapertures were first produced in Teflon films by an electrical spark, 
and then Ti electrodes and SiO2 layers were deposited around the apertures (Figure 2). 
Although numerous crack-like lines were formed on the Teflon-based chips after the 

deposition of the SiO2 layers, the Teflon-based chip showed a resistance of ~2 TΩ when 
immersed in a buffer solution, confirming that the Teflon-based chip had a high insulating 
property (Figure S1). After silanizing the surface of the SiO2 layer with PFDS, BLM 

formation in the Teflon-based chips was investigated. BLMs with resistances of >10 GΩ 
and >100 GΩ were formed in the Teflon-based chips with success probabilities of 83% 
and 70%, respectively, based on 81 trials. Thus, BLMs were reproducibly formed in the 
Teflon-based chips without being affected by the presence of the Ti and SiO2 layers 

around the apertures.

We next applied lateral voltages to BLMs through the Ti electrodes and investigated 

the effects of the lateral voltages on transmembrane currents. Figure 3(a) shows current 
traces recorded at a transmembrane voltage of +100 mV in the presence or absence of a 
lateral voltage of 3 V. No significant change in either baseline current nor the noise level 
were induced by the application of lateral voltages (P>0.1, n=33, Student’s two-tailed t-

test for paired samples). We then investigated the effects of the lateral voltage on 
transmembrane resistance and capacitance. Without a lateral voltage, the transmembrane 

resistance was close to 200 GΩ Figure 3(b)), which was approaching the upper limit of 
the patch-clamp amplifier in our recording system. When the Ti electrodes on the Teflon-
based chip were connected to a DC power source and the lateral voltage was increased 
from 0 to 4 V, the transmembrane resistance remained constant. Similarly, the application 
of the lateral voltage induced no significant change in the total capacitance (the sum of 


BLM and device capacitance) in the transmembrane direction. Thus, no significant 
change was induced in the electric properties of the BLMs in terms of baseline current 
level, transmembrane resistance and capacitance.

To demonstrate the utility of the present BLM system as a novel platform for the 

functional analysis of membrane proteins, we incorporated biological ion channel 
proteins into the BLMs, and the effect of lateral voltages on channel activities were then 
investigated. For this purpose, proteoliposomes were prepared from HEK293T cells that 
expressed a cardiac voltage-dependent sodium channel (Nav1.5) and added to the cis side 
compartment in order to incorporate the channels into the BLMs that were formed in the 

Teflon-based chips. Figure 4 shows the channel currents recorded at a transmembrane 
voltage of +100 mV after a 10 ms prepulse of -200 mV. Such a strong hyperpolarizing 
prepulse is commonly used as a voltage protocol for the Nav1.5 channel in patch-clamp 
studies[16,17]. Without lateral voltages, channel activities were infrequently observed. Only 
three opening events were observed in 23 sweeps of the voltage protocol (Figure 4(a)) 
and no channel activities were subsequently detected for the following 60 sweeps (Figure 
4(b)), indicating that the channel activities had disappeared. We then connected the DC 
power source to the Ti electrodes on the Teflon-based chip and applied a lateral voltage 
between the electrodes. When we applied a lateral voltage of 2 V, channel activities were 
dramatically enhanced, with frequent opening and closing events being detected (Figure 

4(c)). Channel activities were elicited by every sweep of the voltage protocol which was 
repeated 17 times. In contrast, when the lateral voltage was switched off, channel 
activities disappeared completely (Figure 4(d)). We next omitted the hyperpolarizing 
prepulse from the voltage protocol and investigated the channel activities at a constant 

transmembrane voltage of +100 mV. Figure 5(a) shows example traces of the channel 
currents, which were recorded under the application of the lateral voltage. The observed 
single-channel conductance (31 pS) was consistent with an estimated value (32 pS) that 
was calculated for the present Na+ concentration gradient (149.2 mM/5 mM) based on a 
reported conductance (17 pS)[17] of the Nav1.5 channel according to the Nernst equation. 
Switching off the lateral voltage resulted in the disappearance of the channel activities 

(Figure 5(b)). When we applied the lateral voltage again, the channel activities revived 
(Figure 5(c)), suggesting that the effect of the lateral voltage was reversible. Considering 
the fact that BLMs without the channels exhibited no perturbation currents, even when a 
much higher lateral voltage (3 V) was applied (Figure 3(a)), these results indicate that ion 
channel activities were affected by the application of a lateral voltage. Similar activation 
effects of lateral voltages were observed for 83% of the BLMs that exhibited channel 
activities (n = 6). The possibility of current leakage through the aqueous solution was 


rejected, since observed lateral currents were less than 0.2 pA at a lateral applied voltage 
of 4 V due to the very high resistance of the BLM and SiO2 layer (Figure S1). 

Conclusion

In conclusion, we report on the development of a novel BLM system in which the 

membrane potential can be controlled in the lateral direction to BLMs in addition to the 
conventional transmembrane direction. By utilizing artificial BLM systems, it was 
possible to position electrodes inside lipid bilayer structures through the deposition of 
metal electrodes on a Teflon film to which the BLMs were suspended. The above findings 

suggest that ion channel activities are reversibly regulated by a lateral voltage. Although 
it remains to be elucidated how the lateral voltage is related to channel openings, the 
application of the lateral voltage has the potential to open the inactivated ion channels.
This would be useful for the analysis of fast-inactivating ion channels that were difficult
to be evaluated based on the application of conventional transmembrane voltages.
Considering that inserting electrodes between very thin lipid monolayers of living cell 
membranes is not easy in the patch-clamp method, the present BLM system represents a 
promising tool for use in functional analyses of membrane proteins, including ion 
channels.

Experimental Section 
Fabrication of Teflon-based chips: Teflon films with thicknesses in the range of 12 to 
15 μm (YSI Inc. High Sensitivity Membrane Kit) were cut into rectangular sheets with a 
size of 32 × 40 mm2. Small, circular apertures (70~180 µm) across which BLMs were 

formed were produced in the Teflon sheet by passing an electrical spark generated by an 
automobile ignition coil.[14] Ti films with a thickness of 200 nm were then deposited on 
the sheet through a metal mask by using an electron beam evaporator (ANELVA VT-43N) 
with a Ti deposition rate of 0.15 nm/s. The temperature of the Teflon sheet was maintained 
at room temperature (21 ºC) during the deposition. The Ti films were used as metal 
electrodes to apply a lateral voltage inside a BLM. To electrically isolate the Ti electrodes 

from buffer solutions, SiO2 films with a thickness of 100 nm were deposited on the Ti 
films with the electron beam evaporator at room temperature at a SiO2 deposition rate of 
0.2 nm/s. The microstructure around the aperture was observed using a field emission 
scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (Hitachi High-Technologies SU-8000).

Preparation of Proteoliposomes: HEK293T cells were maintained in DMEM (1×) + 
GlutaMAXTM-I (gibco) supplemented with 10 % FBS (gibco) under 5% CO2 at 37℃. 
HEK293T cells at a 70-80% confluency were transfected with Nav1.5 DNA subcloned in 


a pCMV6-XL4 vector [Nav1.5(SCN5A) (NM_198056) Human Untagged Clone, 
ORIGENE] by using PEI MAX (Polysciences, Inc.). More than 24 hours after the 
transfection, the Nav1.5 channels were extracted from the transfected HEK293T cells as 
membrane fractions according to procedures described in the previous report[18]. In brief, 
the cells from 100-mm plates were rinsed with HBSS (gibco) and scraped off into a 
solution of 200 mM KCl, 33 mM KF, 10 mM EDTA, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4 with KOH) 
plus protease inhibitors (100 µM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 µg/ml pepstatin A, 1 
µg/ml leupeptin). The cells were homogenized and spun at 1500 × g for 10 min. The low-
speed supernatants were collected and centrifuged at 7734 × g for 30 min. The 

supernatants were then centrifuged at 157000 × g for 1 h. All steps were performed at 
4 ℃. The membrane pellets were resuspended in a 4:1 (v/v) mixture of high-Na+ buffer 
(149.2 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.3 wih NaOH)) and 
glycerol, and stored at 4 ℃ under nitrogen.

BLM formation and channel incorporation: The Teflon-based chips were washed with 
chloroform, ethanol, and toluene, and then immersed in a 2% (v/v) solution of 
(tridecafluoro-1,1,2,2-tetrahydrooctyl)-dimethylchlorosilane (PFDS) in super dehydrated 
toluene at room temperature for 6 hours in a nitrogen-filled glovebox. The BLMs were 
formed across the aperture in the silanized Teflon-based chip by the folding method, as 
described in a previous report[12]. In brief, the silanized Teflon-based chips were placed 

in the middle of a Teflon recording chamber. The Teflon-based chip separated the cis and 
trans compartments in the chamber. After washing the chamber with water, ethanol and 
chloroform, each side of the Teflon-based chip around the aperture was precoated with a 
thin layer of n-hexadecane using a cotton swab. A 1400 μL volume of high-Na+ buffer 

(149.2 mM NaCl, 4.7 mM KCl, 2.5 mM CaCl2, 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.3 with NaOH)) and 
low-Na+ buffer (5 mM NaCl, 143.9 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.3 with 
KOH)), filtered through a cellulose acetate filter (pore size 0.20 μm; Advantec Toyo, 
Tokyo, Japan), was added to cis and trans compartment, respectively. This Na+

concentration gradient was applied in order to increase the channel currents. The water 
level in both compartments was initially set below the aperture. A 30-μL portion of a lipid 

solution 
(5 
mg/mL, 
L-α-phosphatidylcholine:
L-α-phosphatidyl-ethanolamine: 

cholesterol = 7: 1: 2 (w/w) in chloroform/n-hexane (1:1, v/v)) was then carefully spread 
on the buffer solution in each compartment. After evaporation of the solvent, a BLM was 
produced by gradually increasing the water level until it surpassed the aperture. After 
BLM formation, a 30-60 μL portion of proteoliposomes containing the Nav1.5 channels 
was added to the solution in the cis compartment to incorporate the channels into the 
BLMs.


Current recordings: Recording transmembrane currents were performed with a patch-
clamp amplifier (Molecular Devices Axopatch 200B). The current signals were filtered 
online at 2 kHz with a low-pass Bessel filter, digitized at 25 kHz, and stored online using
a data acquisition system (Molecular Devices Digidata 1440A and 1550B using pClamp 
10.3 and 10.6, respectively). Transmembrane voltage was defined with respect to the 
trans side, which was held at ground. Transmembrane resistance was calculated based on 
the transmembrane currents observed at transmembrane voltages of +100 mV and -100 
mV. Transmembrane capacitance was measured by applying a ramp transmembrane 
voltage wave of 1 V/s at a holding potential of 0 mV. A homemade battery-operated DC 

power source was used to apply a lateral voltage through the connection with the Ti 
electrodes that were deposited on the Teflon-based chip. The lateral current under the 

laterally applied voltage was measured by a system sourcemeter○R (A Tektronix Company 
KEITHLEY 2636B) which was connected in series with the DC power source and the 
Teflon-based chip.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the CREST program of the Japan Science and Technology 

Agency (JPMJCR14F3), JSPS KAKENHI (19H00846), and the Nation-wide 
Cooperative Research Project Program of the Research Institute of Electrical 

Communication at Tohoku University. The authors wish to thank Mr. Shohei Fujii at 
Kyoto Sangyo University for useful discussion on proteoliposome extraction. We also 
wish to thank Ms. Yukie Takano at Saitama University for amplifying plasmid DNAs. 
Some of the equipment used in this research was manufactured by Kento Abe, a technical 

staff member in the machine shop division of Fundamental Technology Center, Research 
Institute of Electrical Communication, Tohoku University. 

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.


References
[1]
E. Neher, B. Sakmann, Nature 1976, 260, 799

[2]
O.P. Hamill, A. Marty, E. Neher, B. Sakmann, F.J. Sigworth, Pflugers Arch.

1981, 391, 85

[3]
F.J. Sigworth, K.G. Klemic, IEEE Trans. Nanobioscience 2005, 4, 121

[4]
M. Montal, P. Mueller, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 1972, 69, 3561

[5]
A. Hirano-Iwata, Y. Ishinari, H. Yamamoto, M. Niwano, Chem. An Asian J.

2015, 10, 1266

[6]
K. Kamiya, T. Osaki, K. Nakao, R. Kawano, S. Fujii, N. Misawa, M. Hayakawa, 

S. Takeuchi, Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 17498

[7]
S. Leptihn, J.R. Thompson, J.C. Ellory, S.J. Tucker, M.I. Wallace, J. Am. Chem. 

Soc. 2011, 133, 9370

[8]
A. Studer, S. Demarche, D. Langenegger, L. Tiefenauer, Biosens. Bioelectron.

2011, 26, 1924

[9]
S. Kalsi, A.M. Powl, B.A. Wallace, H. Morgan, M.R.R. de Planque, Biophys. J.

2014, 106, 1650

[10]
X. Han, A. Studer, H. Sehr, I. Geissbühler, M. Di Berardino, F.K. Winkler, L.X. 

Tiefenauer, Adv. Mater. 2007, 19, 4466

[11]
J.W. Shim, L.Q. Gu, Anal. Chem. 2007, 79, 2207

[12]
M. Sugawara, A. Hirano, M. Rehák, J. Nakanishi, K. Kawai, H. Sato, Y. 

Umezawa, Biosens. Bioelectron. 1997, 12, 425

[13]
H. Minami, M. Sugawara, K. Odashima, Y. Umezawa, M. Uto, E.K. Michaelis, 

T. Kuwana, Anal. Chem. 1991, 63, 2787

[14]
C. Miller, Ion Channel Reconsitution, New York, Plenum Press, 1986

[15]
M. Mayer, J.K. Kriebel, M.T. Tosteson, G.M. Whitesides, Biophys. J. 2003, 85, 
2684

[16]
G. Klein, A. Gardiwal, A. Schaefer, B. Panning, D. Breitmeier, Forensic Sci. Int.

2007, 171, 131

[17]
A. Beyder, J.L. Rae, C. Bernard, P.R. Strege, F. Sachs, G. Farrugia, J. Physiol.

2010, 588, 4969

[18]
A. Oshima, A. Hirano-Iwata, H. Mozumi, Y. Ishinari, Y. Kimura, M. Niwano, 

Anal. Chem. 2013, 85, 4363


Figure 1. A schematic illustration of a BLM in a Teflon-based chip with embedded 
Ti electrodes.


Figure 2. (a) Schematics of the procedure for fabricating Teflon-based chips. (b) 
Schematics of a fabricated Teflon-based chip. (c) (left) A photograph of a Teflon-
based chip having an aperture. (center) A photomicrograph of the Teflon-based chip 
around the aperture. (right) An FE-SEM image around the aperture.


Figure 3. Effects of lateral voltages on transmembrane electric properties.
(a) An example of current traces recorded at a transmembrane voltage of +100 mV with 
a BLM formed in a Teflon-based chip. (I) Without a connection between the Teflon-based 
chip and a DC power source (open state). (II) With a lateral voltage of 3 V, which was 
applied by a DC power source. (b) Relationships between lateral voltages and either BLM 
resistance or total capacitance (sum of BLM and device capacitance) in the 
transmembrane direction (n = 10). The resistance higher than 200 GΩ was counted as 200 
GΩ. The error bar is SEM.


Figure 4. Effect of lateral voltage on ion channel currents recorded from a BLM 
formed in a Teflon-based chip.
Transmembrane currents were recorded after addition of proteoliposomes containing 

Nav1.5 channels using a transmembrane voltage protocol with a 10 ms step to -200 mV, 
followed by a step to +100 mV. (a) and (b) Example of current traces that showed (a) a 
channel opening event and (b) no channel activities in the absence of the lateral voltage. 
(c) and (d) Example of current traces that were recorded when the lateral voltage of 2 V 
was (c) switched on and (d) switched off.


Figure 5. Effect of a lateral voltage on ion channel currents recorded from a BLM 
formed in a Teflon-based chip.
Transmembrane currents were recorded at a transmembrane voltage of +100 mV after the 
addition of proteoliposomes containing Nav1.5 channels. Example of current traces that 
were recorded when the lateral voltage of 2 V was (a) switched on, (b) switched off and 
(c) switched on again.


Supporting Information

A Teflon-based system for applying multidirectional voltages to lipid bilayers as a 

novel platform for membrane proteins

Maki Komiya1, †, Kensaku Kanomata2, †, Ryo Yokota1, Yusuke Tsuneta1, Madoka Sato1, 
Daichi Yamaura1, Daisuke Tadaki1, Teng Ma3, Hideaki Yamamoto3, Yuzuru Tozawa4, 
Albert Martí5, Jordi Madrenas5, Shigeru Kubota2, Fumihiko Hirose2, Michio Niwano6, 

and Ayumi Hirano-Iwata1, 3, *

1 Laboratory for Nanoelectronics and Spintronics, Research Institute of Electrical 

Communication, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-

8577, Japan

2 Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Yamagata University, 4-3-16 Jonan, 

Yonezawa-shi, Yamagata 992-8510, Japan

3Advanced Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, Aoba-

ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 980-8577, Japan

4 Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, 255 Shimo-Okubo, 

Sakura-ku, Saitama-shi, Saitama 338-8570, Japan

5 Department of Electronics Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Campus 

Nord, Building C4. C. Jordi Girona, 1-3, 08034 Barcelona, Catalunya, Spain

6 Kansei Fukushi Research Institute, Tohoku Fukushi University, 6-149-1 Kunimi-ga-

oka, Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi 989-3201, Japan

†These authors contributed equally to this work.
*Authors to whom correspondence should be addressed.
Email: ayumi.hirano.a5@tohoku.ac.jp


Supplementary Results

Figure S1. Lateral currents under laterally applied voltages. 

The currents were measured with a KEITHLEY 2636B system sourcemeter which was connected in 

series with a DC power source and Teflon-based chips in buffer solutions. (blue) Bare Teflon-based 

chips. (orange) Teflon-based chips after being modified with PFDS. (red) PFDS-modified Teflon-

based chips after BLM formation. (yellow) Current recorded when the sourcemeter was not connected 

with the Teflon-based chips nor the DC power source. The number of each trial was 5. The error bar 

is SEM.


