 
1

Gate-tunable emission of exciton-plasmon 

polaritons in hybrid MoS2-gap-mode metasurfaces 

Peinan Ni1, ‡, Andrès De Luna Bugallo2, ‡,*, Victor M. Arellano Arreola2, Mario Flores Salazar2, 

Elodie Strupiechonski2, Virginie Brändli1, Rajath Sawant1, Blandine Alloing1, and Patrice 

Genevet1,* 

1Université Cote d’Azur, CNRS, CRHEA, rue Bernard Gregory, Sophia Antipolis 06560 Valbonne, France 

2CONACYT—Cinvestav Unidad Querétaro, Querétaro, Qro. 76230, Mexico 

KEYWORDS:  Gap plasmon polariton; metasurfaces; 2D materials; excitons; light emitting 

devices 

ABSTRACT: The advance in designing arrays of ultrathin two-dimensional optical nano-resonators, 

known as metasurfaces, is currently enabling a large variety of novel flat optical components. The 

remarkable control over the electromagnetic fields offered by this technology can be further 

extended to the active regime in order to manipulate the light characteristics in real-time. In this 

contribution, we couple the excitonic resonance of atomic thin MoS2 monolayers with gap-

surface-plasmon (GSP) metasurfaces, and demonstrate selective enhancement of the exciton-

plasmon polariton emissions. We further demonstrate tunable emissions by controlling the 

charge density at interface through electrically gating in MOS structure. Straddling two very 


 
2

active fields of research, this demonstration of electrically tunable light-emitting metasurfaces 

enables real-time manipulation of light-matter interactions at the extreme subwavelength 

dimensions. 

Introduction 

Two-dimensional (2D) materials featuring exceptional optical and optoelectronic properties 

have attracted increasing interest with significant potential to develop a great number of 

emerging nano-optoelectronics devices.1-4 In particular, 2D materials host a larger variety of 

polaritons compared with conventional three-dimensional (3D) semiconductors, such as plasmon 

polaritons in graphene,5,6 phonon polaritons in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN).7,8 Moreover, the 

current “polaritonic library” of 2D materials has been greatly expanded by the wide observation 

of exciton polaritons from the recent emerging atomically thin semiconductors, such as 

molybdenum and tungsten-based transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs).9-11 Exciton 

polaritons are new quasi-particles of light-matter hybrid states, which both have the advantages 

of photons, such as ultra-fast speed, long-range spatial/temporal coherence, and exhibit strong 

light matter interactions. Their unique half-light half-matter characteristics make them 

indispensable platform to both explore fundamental research such as polariton Bose-Einstein 

condensation,12,13 polariton bistability,14-16 and propose new types of polaritonic devices like 

polariton lasers,12,17 switches,18 transistors,14 and logic gates.15,16  Among TMDCs, monolayer 

molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has been one of the most widely studied. Various excitons and 


 
3

other types of exciton complexes such as trions and biexcitons can be readily observed and 

manipulated even at room temperature in MoS2 monolayer due to its large exciton binding 

energies, which together with its direct electronic band structure, make it a unique system to 

investigate polaritonic phenomena.19-22 

Over the past 50 years, the field of plasmonic has received considerable attention, in particular 

due to its extraordinary capability of confining light below the diffraction limit. Recently, exciton-

plasmon coupling has been extensively observed from  a large variety of hybrid 2D material 

plasmonic systems, including metallic nanoparticle arrays, nanoslits and nanolattice.23-26 Such 

coupling offers an additional degree of freedom to tailor the optical properties of 2D materials, 

such as quantum efficiency enhancement, polarization control, and so forth.  Moreover, the 

feasibility of controlling of the exciton-plasmon coupling through electrical gating has been 

recently demonstrated, opening up great opportunities to modulate light-matter interactions 

inside 2D materials in real-time.27  On the other hand, the emerging two-dimensional ultra-thin 

optical components, known as metasurfaces, exhibit exceptional spectral and spatial 

manipulation of electromagnetic waves within subwavelength dimensions, which provide 

powerful tools to mold the light in a very compact and efficient way.28-30 Further extending this 

remarkable controllability of light-matter interactions into the active regime might eventually 

lead to various functionalized ultra-compact active devices. 


 
4

In this work, gap-surface-plasmon (GSP) metasurfaces are designed and coupled with selected 

exciton resonance of monolayer MoS2 to enhance exciton-plasmon polariton emissions with 

controlled polarization. Furthermore, gate-tunable exciton plasmon polariton emissions are 

realized in MoS2 material under metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) configuration for the first 

time. The tunability relies on the dynamic tuning\detuning process between the neutral exciton 

resonance and the trion resonance inside MoS2 material enabled by the manipulation of charge 

density at interface under applied gate bias. Moreover, this work demonstrates the capability of 

manipulating light-matter interactions in the active regime at the subwavelength dimensions 

thought metasurface technologies, opening up important opportunities to develop a wide range 

of lightweight, ultra-compact and power efficient optical components and optoelectronic 

devices.  

Results and discussion 

Both atomic force microscopy (AFM) and Raman spectroscopy are used to identify the 

monolayer thickness of the MoS2 material obtained in this work, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The growth 

details can be found in the supplementary information. The trigonal prismatic coordination of a 

monolayer of MoS2 as shown in inset Fig. 1a is known to be a direct band semiconductor with the 

highest valence band and the lowest conduction band formed primarily from the Mo d-orbital. 

We begin the design of the hybrid MoS2 metasurface by analyzing the light emission properties 

of the as-grown MoS2 monolayers on the SiO2/Si substrate, based on their photoluminescence 


 
5

(PL) spectra, as shown in Fig. S1. By decomposition the PL emissions through a Lorentzian fitting, 

three PL components around 620 nm, 676 nm and 686 nm are revealed, respectively. It is well-

demonstrated that by approaching an emitter close to an infinitely planar gold (Au) film, the 

latter known for supporting strong surface plasmon resonance (SPR) in the visible range, the 

spontaneous photoluminescence decay rate of the emitter, denoted by Γrad, will be significantly 

fasten due to the access to new radiative pathways. Interestingly, such system, which is supposed 

to feature high spontaneous emission rate, often fails in further enhancing the radiative 

efficiency whenever emitters are brought in very close proximity to metallic films. The physical 

mechanisms responsible for quenching of the photoluminescence properties are first related to 

the unavoidable dissipation effects arising from the strong electromagnetic field confinement 

and local field enhancements in lossy metal but also from the inelastic scattering of electrons 

close to the Fermi surface.31 In order to overcome these limitations, it is critical to reduce the 

numbers of non-radiative decay channels. Since the inelastic terms strongly depends on the 

proximity of the emitter with respect to the metallic surface, we could eventually benefit from 

the strong field enhancement, i.e. improving Γrad, meanwhile decreasing quenching effects from 

inelastic coupling with electrons in the Fermi sea by controlling the distance of the MoS2 emitters 

with respect to the gold interface. To this end, a 100 nm SiO2 was sputtered onto the Au films 

before the transfer of MoS2. Note that the thickness of the SiO2 dielectric layer is chosen based 

on the tradeoff between the optimization of the electromagnetic field enhancement and 

reducing the leakage current for effective gate bias modulations. The use of other high index 


 
6

materials with reduced thickness, such as HfO2, is expected to further improve the performance 

of the structure due to the larger plasmonic near-field enhancement effect. By doing this, it is 

found that excitonic features of the MoS2 have been considerably enhanced with blue-shifts, as 

shown in Fig. 1b. To identify the different emission channels of the MoS2 transferred onto the 

SiO2/Au substrate, we performed a Lorentzian fitting of the photoluminescence and revealed 

three resonances with enhanced intensity around 613 nm, 650 nm and 674 nm.  The first two 

features are known as the A and B excitons. They are associated with direct optical transitions 

from the highest spin-split valence band to the lowest conduction band at the K point of the 

Brillouin zone. The formation of these bound excitons transitions can be significantly modified by 

strong Coulomb interactions, leading to bound states of two electrons and a hole (trion states), 

creating an additional resonance around 674 nm. The origins of the excitonic transitions in 

monolayer MoS2 transferred onto SiO2/Au substrates were further confirmed by excitation-

dependent measurements with pumping powers ranging from 10 to 500 µW at room 

temperature as shown in Fig. 1c. By employing the power law expression: 𝐼 𝛼 𝑃𝛾,where I is  

integrated PL intensity and P is the laser power excitation, the nature of the excitonic processes 

can be identified.   Fitting by a nonlinear regression model, as shown in Fig. 1d, the gamma 

coefficients of both the peak located at 650 nm and the peak around 613 nm are determined to 

be 1, which suggest exciton-like transition (exciton A and exciton B) while the value of the feature 

peaked at 674 nm is found to be 1.3, confirming the presence of a trion. These initial 

luminescence characterizations show that the SPR in gold film can significantly tailor the emission 


 
7

spectrum of the MoS2 in the proposed hybrid structure, including 1) enhance the emission peaks 

intensity, and 2) modify the shape, in particular the positions, of the emission peaks due to the 

coupling of the plamonic resonance and the excitonic resonances of MoS2, which have been 

widely observed from the plasmon/MoS2 integrated systems.32-35   Moreover, there is another 

advantage of the introduction of the underlying Au mirror as it produces multiple reflections 

which will increase the overall light absorption of the MoS2 flake as shown in previous works.36 

However, such absorption enhancement does not present strong wavelength dependence and 

will not change the components of emissions, which is different from the selective enhancement 

caused by exciton-plasmons coupling proposed herein. 

It is worth noticing that the various excitonic emissions from the MoS2 enhanced by Au film 

open up unique opportunities to explore and develop ultra-compact tunable exciton-plasmon 

polariton light source by manipulating the coupling between excitonic resonance and SPR inside 

this structure. To this end, a tunable polaritonic light emitting structure is designed and 

fabricated considering an ultra-compact hybrid MoS2-gap-mode metasurface by integrating 

metallic nanostrip-array onto the MoS2 flake, as shown in Fig. 2a. In this structure, each metallic 

Au nanostrip can be considered as individual gap plasmon cavities. Their subwavelength 

arrangement constructs a metasurface that introduces a very basic polarization manipulation 

property. The width of nanostrips need to be designed to establish a gap plasmons resonance 

effect given by the standard Fabry-Pérot resonance formula:37 


 
8

0
wk ngsp
m




 

Where w is the width of the nanostrip, k0 is the vacuum wave number, 𝑛𝑔𝑠𝑝 is effective index 

of the GSP, m is an integer defining the mode order, and φ is an additional phase shift acquired 

by the gap plasmon upon reflection at the edges of the metallic top covering strip. As discussed 

by M. G. Nielsen et al,37 the non-zero phase shift depends on structural and material parameters 

and increases with increasing gap layer towards ϕ~

3

5 π for relatively thick cladding layer of about 

100nm. Taking these estimations into account, the effective mode index of our gap plasmon 

mode is estimated at ngsp~1.8 . Finite difference time domain simulations showing the 

reflectance of the bare GSP metasurface are performed to identify the geometrical parameters 

to achieve the proper overlap between the resonance and the PL peak of MoS2 emitters. We 

focus on the emissions of exciton A considering its larger spectral weight. To interact efficiently 

with this resonance, the nanostrip resonance of the metasurface is designed at around 650 nm, 

matching with the peak of exciton A emissions, as shown in Fig. 2b. At resonance, the exciton 

energy can be effectively coupled with the GSP mode, giving rise to exciton-plasmon polariton. 

The close proximity of the nanostrips and bottom metallic mirror creates a tight optical 

confinement which could enhance the light emission properties, as indicated by the full 

electromagnetic wave simulations presented in Fig. 2c. Field enhancement confines the 

electromagnetic energy mostly within the gap region in a mode volume in the order of 

Veff ~3.5 10−4 μm3, almost two order of magnitude smaller than the diffraction limited mode 


 
9

volume (

λ

2ngsp)

3

considering λ as the free space PL wavelength.38 Large confinement factor 

provided by the gap plasmon nanocavities will tremendously enhances the above mentioned 

radiative quantum efficiency of the active emitters that are placed in the large electromagnetic 

field enhancement regions due to the Purcell effect. To benefit from this effect, MoS2 emitters 

are directly templated on the cladding layer and brought in contact to the top metallic stripes 

that have been thereafter fabricated and aligned using standard electron beam lithography 

alignment accordingly to the MoS2 positions. Note that with our fabrication process, MoS2 is 

brought in direct contact to the top metallic layer, thus enabling electrical gating but 

unfortunately inducing coupling of the emitters with the top metallic Fermi electrons responsible 

for additional loss due to inelastic electron scattering.  

Figur 3a shows the scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of the fabricated hybrid MoS2-gap-

plasmon metasurfaces.  As can be seen from Fig. 3b, the emissions around 650 nm have been 

significantly enhanced due to the tight electromagnetic confinement at the resonance of the 

hybrid gap plasmon metasurfaces, which is in good agreement with the on-resonance design of 

the exciton A-plasmon coupling. Furthermore, direct comparison of PL of the same MoS2 flake 

placed on Au/SiO2 at the interface with the cavity at is provided in Fig S2, confirming strong 

enhancement due to gap plasmon coupling. Although significant enhancement has been 

observed from this structure, part of the emissions must have been quenched by absorption at 

the Au stripes given that the MoS2 flake is in direct contact with top electrodes. One can imagine 

that the emission enhancement would be further increased to a large extent by inserting a 


 
10

dielectric layer. For example, one could encapsulate the MoS2 in between atomically smooth 

layers of 2D hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) as done routinely to further improve the carrier 

distribution and the MoS2 emission properties.  Furthermore, the strong anisotropy introduced 

by the metasurface design provides a feasible and effective approach to control the polarization 

of light emission, as shown in Fig. 3c. It is found that emission intensity of the TM component 

(transverse magnetic, electric field component perpendicular to the Au stripes) is almost an order 

of magnitude stronger than the TE component (transverse electric, electric field component 

parallel to the Au stripes). The polarization anisotropy can be characterized by the polarization 

ratio 
TM
TE
TM
TE
(
) / (
)
I
I
I
I
 


, leading to a polarization ratio of ~0.52. Figure 3d shows the 

corresponding polar plot of the emission intensity.  The polarization dependent emission from 

this hybrid structure further confirms the plasmonic nature of the enhanced emission. Moreover, 

it also suggests that other types of metasurface designs such as zigzag wires, asymmetric metallic 

rods or chiral structures could be employed to further manipulate the polarization properties.  

Valley-polarized photoluminescence in MoS2 have been already tailored for example using chiral 

metasurfaces, spin-dependent plasmonic surface or asymmetric gradient plasmonic surfaces.39-

41 

In addition, it has been demonstrated that the various excitonic features presented on diverse 

2D material can be simply manipulated electrically, optically and chemically by controlling the 

density and polarity of the carriers. 42-44 The electrical doping based modulation mechanism in 

field effect transistor configuration (FET) offers a fast and power-efficient approach to create a 


 
11

new type of ultra-compact tunable optoelectronic devices based on TMD materials. As a proof of 

such concept, gate tunable exciton-plasmon polariton light sources are proposed and realized in 

hybrid MoS2-gap-plasmon metasurfaces, in which the Au nanostrip together with its underneath 

MoS2 monolayer, SiO2 spacing layer and the bottom Au mirror form an effective metal-oxide-

semiconductor (MOS) capacitor as shown in the inset of Fig. 4a). In this design, the nanostrip acts 

as a ground, the bottom Au mirror serves as a gate, and the SiO2 layer exhibits good dielectric 

characteristic, as demonstrated in Fig. S3. Upon application of an electrical bias between the 

nanostrip ground and the underlying gate plane, the free electrons concentration at the 

MoS2/SiO2 interface will be changed to either an electron accumulation or a depletion layer. A 

MoS2 based FET device with the same thickness of SiO2 dielectric layer was fabricated to estimate 

the change of electron density as a function of gate voltages, as shown in Fig. S4. The formation 

of excitons in the MoS2 is modified by changing the electron density under different gate voltages, 

which will modulate the light emissions accordingly, as observed in Fig. 4(a). This modulation 

mechanism can be well understood in term of the band diagram: Positive gate bias can drive 

excess electrons to the interface between SiO2 and MoS2 creating an electron accumulation layer 

at the interface (Fig. 4c). Those excess electrons will bind to photoexcited electron-hole pairs, 

giving rise to negatively charged excitons (trions). Thus, the formation of trions will lead to the 

reduction of PL emissions of excitons A. On the other hand, applying a negative gate voltage will 

repel the excess electrons from surface towards the metallic contact (Fig. 4b). It will help to 

dissociate the trion into exciton A by promoting the extra electron in a trion to the conduction 


 
12

band edge. As a result, the exciton A emission is enhanced.  Such different impacts of applying 

gate bias on the PL emissions both of exciton A and of trions can also be revealed by fitting the 

PL contribution of exciton A and trions and plotting the intensity ratios under different gate 

voltages from -30 V to 30 V, as shown in Fig. 4d which is extracted directly from the PL 

measurements under different gate bias (Fig. S5). It can be seen that applying negative bias 

increases the spectral weight of the exciton A while it is diminished under positive bias, which 

agrees very well with the previous interpretation. The PL modulation mechanism under the 

injection of carriers can be further confirmed by the excitation power dependent intensity ratios 

between trions and excitons A. It can be seen that the ratios between the PL intensity of the 

excitons A and trions decrease when increasing the excitation power, while both exciton A and 

trion emissions increase, as shown in Fig. 1(c, d) and summarized in Fig. S6. It indicates that higher 

pumping power will favor the formation of trions with respect to excitons A. This behavior is 

expected as more and more electrons are injected under higher excitation, binding to electron-

hole pairs, and converting excitons into trions. Furthermore, since the cavity resonance of the 

gap mode metasurface is designed to match with the exciton A resonance, the modulation of 

exciton A resonance caused by the gate voltage will be remarkably amplified by the cavity effect 

of the GSP metasurface, leading to an ultra-sensitive tunability. This can be confirmed by 

investigating of the spectral dependent modulation depth in Fig. 4e. As it is shown, the spectral 

modulation curve shows remarkable wavelength selectivity with its peak at around 650 nm, 

corresponding to the exciton A-plasmon polariton resonance. Moreover, it is worthy to point out 


 
13

that other effects such as Pauli blocking, many-body interactions, and Stark effect have been 

widely found to cause shifts of the neutral exciton binding energy in the MOSFET structures under 

different voltage bias.20,45 Thus, those effects are likely to modify the coupling between exciton 

A and GSP resonance in our structure as well, accounting for the modulation mechanism. In order 

to clarify it, the exciton A energy derived from the PL was investigated as a function of gate bias 

in Fig. 4f. Interestingly, it is found that the exciton A resonance in our structure almost keeps no 

change in wide range of gate bias from -30 V to 30 V. Considering that the GSP resonance of the 

metasurface has been designed to match to the exciton A resonance at 0 V, it implies that the 

existence of GSP metasurface helps to enhance the light-matter interactions inside the MoS2 

layer by making its excitonic resonance more robust to the electric static environment changes. 

The relatively small shift of the exciton resonance within our bias voltage range is beneficial to 

achieve significant tunability, which would otherwise comprehend the performance of the 

modulation mechanism investigated therein. Since the PL emissions of both exciton A and trion 

exhibit fast decay, typically within ps time scale, the modulation speed of our structure is mainly 

limited by the RC time constant of the circuit which is in the range of several nanoseconds (see 

supplementary for details).  The operation speed of this structure can be further improved by 

shrinking the size of the metallic contacts. 

Experimental methods 


 
14

MoS2 flakes were synthesized on SiO2/Si substrates using MoO2 (molybdenum dioxide) and 

sulfur powder in a quartz-tube-in-a-furnace vapor-phased deposition system at ambient pressure 

and then transferred onto the SiO2/Au for metasurface integration (Fig. S7 and Fig. S8, see 

supporting information for details). The optical properties of the MoS2 crystals were 

characterized by micro-photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy, all the spectra were measured at 

room temperature (RT) using an inverted microscope coupled with an Andor spectrometer 

equipped with a intensified CCD camera. The excitation was provided by a temperature stabilized 

continuous (405 nm) laser, impinging onto the metasurface at normal incidence with a linear 

polarization oriented along the nanoridges.  

Conclusion 

Gate-tunable exciton-plasmon polariton light emitting metasurface is designed and 

demonstrated by integrating MoS2 monolayer with gap plasmon mode-metasurfaces. This 

structure shows extraordinary advantages of controlling the light emitting characteristics such as 

polarization control, and selective enhancement of emission, benefitting from its unique 

resonant coupling between the excitonic resonance and the gap plasmon resonance. In 

particular, strong modulation of the polariton light emission can be realized by applying gate 

voltage.  Interestingly, electrically tunable polaritonic light emitting metasurface could further 

leverage on the strong sensitivity of the MoS2 d-orbitals participating in the indirect-to-direct 


 
15

transition, to both explore and advance the manipulation of light-matter interactions at the 

subwavelength dimensions, thus leading to novel nanoscale polaritonic optoelectronic devices. 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author: 

 aluna@cinvestav.mx; Patrice.Genevet@crhea.cnrs.fr 

Author Contributions 

‡These authors contributed equally. The manuscript was written through contributions of all 

authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.  

Conflict of interest 

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. 

Acknowledgements and Funding:  

We acknowledge financial support from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 under the European 

Research Council (ERC) grant agreement No. 639109 (project Flatlight). ADLB and ES 

acknowledge the financial support from SEP-CONACYT Ciencia Basica grant No 258674 and 

CONACYT-ERC grant 291826.  

REFERENCES 

(1) Geim, A. K. Graphene: Status and Prospects. Science 2009, 324 (5934) 1530-1534. 


 
16

(2) Novoselov, K. S.; Mishchenko, A.; Carvalho, A.; Castro Neto, A. H. 2D materials and van der 

Waals heterostructures. Science 2016, 353 (6298), 9439. 

(3) Li, L.; Yu, Y.; Ye, G. J.; Ge, Q.;  Ou, X.; Wu, H.; Feng, D.; Chen, X. H.; Zhang, Y. Black 

phosphorus field-effect transistors. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 372–377. 

(4) Xia, F.;  Wang, H.; Xiao, D. ; Dubey, M.;  Ramasubramaniam, A. Two-dimensional material 

nanophotonics. Nat. Photon. 2014, 8, 899-907. 

(5) Fei, Z. ; Rodin, A. S. ; Andreev, G. O.;  Bao, W.;  McLeod, A. S. ; Wagner, M. ; Zhang, L. M. ; 

Zhao, Z. ; Thiemens, M. ; Dominguez, G.; Fogler, M. M. ; Castro-Neto,A. H. ; Lau, C. N. ; 

Keilmann, F. ; Basov, D. N.  Gate-tuning of graphene plasmons revealed by infrared nano-

imaging. Nature 2012, 487, 82-85. 

(6) Ni, G. X.;  Wang, L.;  Goldflam, M. D.;  Wagner, M.;  Fei, Z.; McLeod, A. S.;   Liu, M. K.; 

Keilmann, F.;  Özyilmaz, B.; Castro Neto, A. H.; Hone, , J.;  Fogler, M. M.;  Basov, D. N. 

Ultrafast optical switching of infrared plasmon polaritons in high-mobility graphene. Nat. 

Photon. 2016, 10, 244-247. 

(7) Dai, S.;  Fei, Z.; Ma, Q.;  Rodin, A. S.; Wagner, M.; McLeod, A. S.; Liu, M. K.; Gannett,W.; 

Regan, W. ; Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Thiemens, M.; Dominguez, G.; Castro Neto, A. H.; 

Zettl, A.; Keilmann, F.; Jarillo-Herrero, P.; Fogler, M. M.;  Basov, D. N. Tunable Phonon 

Polaritons in Atomically Thin van der Waals Crystals of Boron Nitride. Science 2014, 343, 

1125-1129. 


 
17

(8) Caldwell, J. D.; Kretinin, A. V.; Chen, Y.; Giannini,V.; Fogler, M. M.; Francescato,Y.; Ellis, C. T.; 

Tischler, J. G.; Woods, C. R.; Giles, A. J.; Hong,M. ; Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Maier, S. A.; 

Novoselov, K. S. Sub-diffractional volume-confined polaritons in the natural hyperbolic 

material hexagonal boron nitride. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 5221. 

(9) Hill, H. M.; Rigosi, A. F.; Roquelet, C.; Chernikov, A.; Berkelbach,  T. C.; Reichman, D. R.; 

Hybertsen, M. S.; Brus, L. E.; Heinz, T. F. Observation of Excitonic Rydberg States in 

Monolayer MoS2 and WS2 by Photoluminescence Excitatio. n Spectroscopy. Nano Lett. 

2015, 15, 2992-2997. 

(10) Hu, F.;  Luan, Y.; Scott, M.; Yan, J.; Mandrus, D.; Xu, X.; Fei, Z. Imaging exciton–

polariton transport in MoSe2 waveguides. Nat. Photon. 2017, 11, 356-360. 

(11) 
Splendiani, A.; Sun, L.; Zhang, Y.; Li, T.; Kim, J.; Chim, C. Y.; Galli, G.; Wang, F. Emerging 

Photoluminescence in Monolayer MoS2. Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 1271-1275. 

(12) 
Kasprzak, J.; Richard, M.; Kundermann, S.; Baas, A.; Jeambrun, P.; Keeling, J.; Marchetti, 

F.; Szymańska, M.; Andre, R.; Staehli, J. L.; Savona, V.; Littlewood, P. B. Bose-Einstein 

condensation of exciton polaritons. Nature 2006, 443 (7110), 409-414. 

(13) 
Deng, H.; Haug, H.; Yamamoto, Y. Exciton-polariton Bose-Einstein condensation. Rev. 

Mod. Phys. 2010, 82 (2), 1489-1537. 

(14) 
Ballarini, D.; De Giorgi, M.; Cancellieri, E.; Houdré, R.; Giacobino, E.; Cingolani, R.; 

Bramati, A.; Gigli, G.; Sanvitto, D. All-optical polariton transistor. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 

1778. 


 
18

(15) 
Liew, T.; Kavokin, A.; Shelykh, I. Optical Circuits Based on Polariton Neurons in 

Semiconductor Microcavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 101 (1), 016402. 

(16) 
Espinosa-Ortega, T.; Liew, T. C. H. Complete architecture of integrated photonic circuits 

based on and and not logic gates of exciton polaritons in semiconductor microcavities. Phys. 

Rev. B. 2013, 87 (19), 195305. 

(17) 
Deng, H.; Weihs, G.; Snoke, D.; Bloch, J.; Yamamoto, Y. Polariton lasing vs. photon lasing 

in a semiconductor microcavity, PNAS 2003, 100 (26), 15318-15323. 

(18) 
Piccione, B.; Cho, C. H.; van Vugt, L. K.; Agarwal, R. All-optical active switching in 

individual semiconductor nanowires. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7 (10), 640−645. 

(19) 
Gogoi, P. K.; Hu, Z.; Wang, Q.; Carvalho, A.; Schmidt, D.;  Yin, X.; Chang, Y. H.; Li, L. J.; 

Sow, C. H.; Castro Neto, A. H.; Breese, M. B. H.; Rusydi, A.; Wee, A. T. S.  Oxygen Passivation 

Mediated Tunability of Trion and Excitons in MoS2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119,  077402. 

(20) 
Mak, K. F.; He, K.; Lee, C.; Lee,  G. H.; Hone, J.; Heinz, T. F.;  Shan, J. Tightly bound trions 

in monolayer MoS2. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12, 207-211. 

(21) 
Liu, W.; Lee, B.; Naylor, C. H.; Ee, H. S.; Park, J.; Johnson, A. C.; Agarwal, R. Strong 

Exciton-Plasmon Coupling in MoS2 Coupled with Plasmonic Lattice. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 

1262-1269. 

(22) 
Wang, S.; Li, S.; Chervy, T.; Shalabney, A.; Azzini, S.; Orgiu, E.; Hutchison, J. A.; Genet, C.; 

Samorì, P.; Ebbesen, T. W. Coherent Coupling of WS2 Monolayers with Metallic Photonic 

Nanostructures at Room Temperature. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 4368−4374. 


 
19

(23) 
Liu, W.;  Lee, B.; Naylor, C. H.; Ee, H. S.; Park, J.; Charlie Johnson,  A. T.; Agarwal, R. 

Strong Exciton-Plasmon Coupling in MoS2 Coupled with Plasmonic Lattice. Nano Lett. 2016, 

16, 1262-1269. 

(24) 
Vasa, P.; Wang, W.; Pomraenke, R.; Lammers; M.; Margherita, M; Manzoni, C.; Cerullo, 

G.;  Lienau, C. Real-time observation of ultrafast Rabi oscillations between excitons and 

plasmons in metal nanostructures with J-aggregates. Nat. Photon. 2013, 7 128-132. 

(25) 
Eizner, E.; Avayu, O.; Ditcovski, R.; Ellenbogen, T. Aluminum Nanoantenna Complexes for 

Strong Coupling between Excitons and Localized Surface Plasmons. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 

6215-6221. 

(26) 
Väkeväinen, A. I.;  Moerland, R. J.; Rekola, H. T.;  Eskelinen, A.P.;  Martikainen, J. P.;  Kim, 

D. H.; Törma, P.  Plasmonic Surface Lattice Resonances at the Strong Coupling Regime. Nano 

Lett. 2014, 14, 1721-1727. 

(27) 
Lee, B.; Liu, W.; Naylor, C. H.; Park, J.; Malek, S. C.; Berger, J. S.; Charlie Johnson, A. T.; 

Agarwal, R. Electrical Tuning of Exciton-Plasmon Polariton Coupling in Monolayer MoS2 

Integrated with Plasmonic Nanoantenna Lattice. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 4541-4547. 

(28) 
Yu, N.; Genevet, P.; Kats, M.; Aieta, F.; Tetienne, J.; Capasso, F.; Gaburro, Z. Light 

propagation with phase discontinuities: generalized laws of reflection and refraction. 

Science, 2011,334, 333-337. 

(29) 
Genevet, P.; Capasso, F.; Aieta, F.; Khorasaninejad, M.; Devlin, R. Recent advances in 

planar optics: from plasmonic to dielectric metasurfaces. Optica 2017, 4 (1), 139-152. 


 
20

(30) 
Aieta, F.; Kats, M.; Genevet, P.; Capasso, F. Applied optics. Multiwavelength achromatic 

metasurfaces by dispersive phase compensation. Science, 2015, 347 (6228), 1342-1345. 

(31) 
Silva Neto, M. B.; D’Angelis, F. M.; Foster, P. P. P. ; Pinheiro, F. A. Nonradiative decay and 

absorption rates of quantum emitters embedded in metallic systems: Microscopic 

description and their determination from electronic transport. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 98, 

195116. 

(32) 
Hao, Q; Pang, J; Zhang, Y; Wang, J; Ma, L; Schmidt, O. G. Boosting thePhotoluminescence 

of Monolayer MoS2 on High-Density Nanodimer Arrays with Sub-10 nm Gap. Adv. Optical 

Mater. 2018, 6, 1700984. 

(33) 
Zeng, Y.; Li, X.; Chen, W.; Liao, J.; Lou, J.; Chen, Q. Highly Enhanced Photoluminescence of 

Monolayer MoS2 with Self-Assembled Au Nanoparticle Arrays. Adv. Mater. Interfaces. 2017, 

4, 1700739. 

(34) 
Yu, Y.; Ji, Z.; Zu, S.; Du, B.; Kang, Y.; Li, Z.; Zhou, Z.; Shi, K.; Fang, Z. Ultrafast Plasmonic 

Hot Electron Transfer in Au Nanoantenna/MoS2 Heterostructures. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2016, 

26, 6394–6401. 

(35) 
Huang, J.; Akselrod, G. M.; Ming, T.; Kong, J.; Mikkelsen, M. H. Tailored Emission 

Spectrum of 2D Semiconductors Using Plasmonic Nanocavities. ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 

552−558. 

(36) 
Xu, H. Pushing the limits for enzyme-based membrane-less hydrogen fuel cells – 

achieving useful power and stability. RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 23109-23113. 


 
21

(37) 
Nielsen, M. G.; Gramotnev, D. K.;  Pors, A.; Albrektsen, O.; Bozhevolnyi, S. I. Continuous 

layer gap plasmon resonators. Opt. Express. 2011,  19(20), 19310-19322. 

(38) 
Seo, M. K.; Kwon, S. H.; Ee, H. S.; Park, H. G. Full Three-Dimensional Subwavelength 

High-Q Surface-Plasmon-Polariton Cavity. Nano Lett. 2009,  9(12) 4078-4082. 

(39) 
Li, Z.; Liu, C.;  Rong, X.; Luo, Y.; Cheng, H.;  Zheng, L.; Lin, F.; Shen, B.; Gong, Y.; Zhang, S.; 

Fang, Z.; Tailoring MoS2 Valley-Polarized Photoluminescence with Super Chiral Near-Field. 

Adv. Mat. 2018, 30, 1801908. 

(40) 
Chervy, T.; Azzini, S.; Lorchat, E.; Wang, S.; Gorodetski, Y.; Hutchison, J.A.; Berciau, S.; 

Ebbesen, T.W.; Genet C. Room Temperature Chiral Coupling of Valley Excitons with Spin-

Momentum Locked Surface Plasmons.  ACS Photon. 2018, 5, 4, 1281-1287 

(41) 
Sun, L.; Wang, C.Y.; Krasnok, A.; Choi, J.; Shi, J.; Gomez-Diaz, J. S.; Zepeda, A.; Gwo, S.; 

Shih, C.K.; Alù, A.; Li, X. Separation of valley excitons in a MoS2 monolayer using a 

subwavelength asymmetric groove array. Nat. Photon. 2019, 13, 180-184 

(42) 
Ross, J. S.; Wu, S.; Yu, H.; Ghimire, N. J.; Jones, A. M.; Aivazian, G.; Yan, J.; Mandrus, D. 

G.; Xiao, D.; Yao, W.; Xu, X. Electrical control of neutral and charged excitons in a monolayer 

semiconductor. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 1474-1474. 

(43) 
Yang, J.; Xu, R.; Pei, J.; Myint, Y. W.; Wang, F.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, S.; Yu, Z.; Lu, Y. Optical 

tuning of exciton and trion emissions in monolayer phosphorene. Light: Sci. Appl. 2015, 4, 

e312. 


 
22

(44) 
Mouri, S.; Miyauchi, Y.; Matsuda, K. Tunable Photoluminescence of Monolayer MoS2 via 

Chemical Doping. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 5944-5948. 

(45) 
Cavalcante,L. S. R.;  Costa,D. R.; Farias, G. A.; Reichman, D. R.; Chaves, A. Stark shift of 

excitons and trions in two-dimensional materials. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 98, 245309. 

 
 


 
23

 

Figure 1 (a) Raman spectrum of as-grown MoS2 flakes on SiO2 substrates. The energy difference 
between of E12g and A2g peaks and the thickness (~0.8 nm) obtain by AFM (inset) reveals the 
presence of MoS2 monolayers (b) PL spectra of the MoS2 transferred onto the Au/SiO2 
substrate. Note that the PL intensity and PL peaks of the MoS2  on SiO2/Au substrates have 
been tailored compared with as-grown MoS2  on SiO2 /Si substrate and can be decomposed into 
three excitonic features. (c) and (c) the excitation-power dependent intensity of the major 
three PL components from the MoS2 on Au/SiO2 substrate, revealing the different nature of the 
excitonic transitions, respectively.   
 


 
24

 

Figure 2 (a) The schematic of the gap plasmon metasurfaces which comprises an array of Au 

metallic stripe and a Au substrate, separated by a 100 nm thick insulating SiO2 dielectric layer and 
a monolayer MoS2 flakes (b) The simulated reflectance of the bare Gap Plasmon metasurface 
when the width of the Au nanostrip is fixed at 72 nm and the spacing between the nanostrip is 
fixed at 373 nm. (c) The calculated electric field intensity in the plane transverse to the metallic 
wires showing that the electric field is tightly confined within the gap layer, and the dash line 
indicates the position of MoS2. 

 
 


 
25

 

Figure 3 (a) The SEM image of the fabricated hybrid MoS2 gap-mode metasurface; (b) shows the 
PL emissions of MoS2 both inside and outside the metasurface at location denoted in  by the blue 
and red dots respectively; (c) The polarization dependent light emission of MoS2 inside the 
metasurface; (d) shows the polar plot of emission. 

 

 
 


 
26

 

Figure 4 (a) PL spectra of gated MoS2-gap plasmon metasurfaces under different applied 

voltages, indicating strong gate tunable emissions, the inset shows the schematic representation 
of the fabricated devices. The band diagram of the MoS2/SiO2/Au structure, at negative (b) and 
positive gate bias (c) are used to explain the tuning process between exciton A and trion. Positive 
gate bias will cause excess electrons accumulated at the interface by raising the Fermi level while 
the negative bias can expel the excess electrons from the surface into the metallic contact (d) the 
ratio of emission intensity between the exciton A and trion, showing change of the spectral 
weight under different bias (e) the relative change of light emission at -30V with respect to that 
at 0 V, indicating the selectively enhancement of modulation depth (f) The energies of exciton A 
and trion as a function of gate bias. 

 

 
 


 
27

 
Supplementary materials 
 

 

Figure S1.  PL spectra of the as-grown MoS2 on the SiO2/Si substrate, which can be decomposed 
into three excitonic features, corresponding to exciton A, exciton B and trion emission, 
respectively.  

 

Figure S2. PL spectra of the MoS2 on the SiO2/Au substrate inside and outside the grating 
structure, confirming the large luminescence enhancement due to the surrounding of metallic 
grating. 


 
28

 

 
Figure S3. I-V characteristic of the structure as a function of gate voltages, demonstrating the 

good dielectric property of the SiO2 layer with negligible leakage current. 

 
 


 
29

 

Figure S4.  We estimate the carrier density change by directly measuring the electrical 
properties of the as-grown MoS2 flakes.  To this end, we fabricated a MoS2 based FET device 
on 100nm SiO2 on highly doped p-type, using Si as a back gate (drain and source electrodes 
(Ti/Au) were deposited by optical lithography directly on MoS2 single layer). (a) depicts the 
transfer characteristics of the MoS2 FET. The Ids-Vgs curve recorded at VDS=0.5V confirms the 
n-type nature of the MoS2 flakes, by applying positive Vgate bias the transistor enters in 
electron accumulation regime whereas for negative Vgate bias the channel is depleted. Using 

the parallel-plate capacitor model for the carrier density concentration 𝑛 ≈

𝐶𝐺
𝑞 (𝑉𝐺 − 𝑉𝑇) and 

taking the threshold voltage as VT = -0.8V and CG=ε0εr/dox, where ε0 is the vacuum dielectric 
constant and εr the SiO2 relative dielectric constant of 3.9; carrier density as a function of gate 
bias is determined (b). 

 
 


 
30

 

Figure S5. PL emissions from MoS2 transferred onto SiO2/Au substrate as a function of gate 
voltages. 

 

Figure S6. Dependence of trion/ exciton PL intensity ratios on the excitation power. 

 


 
31

Modulation speed: The rise time of the structure estimated by its RC time constant 

(τr=2.2τ=2.2RC) is in the range of several nanoseconds based on the load resistance R and the 

capacitance of the circuit C=ε0εrA/dox, where ε0 is the vacuum dielectric constant, εr is the SiO2 

relative dielectric constant of 3.9, A is the size of the capacitor surface and d is the thickness of 

SiO2 dielectric layer. Therefore, it can be seen that the operation speed of the structure is mainly 

limited by its RC constant. Note that the RC time constant of the current structure in this work is 

mainly limited by the large metallic contacts which are used for wire bonding with respect to the 

subwavelength size of grating. Thus, the operation speed of this structure can be further 

improved by shrinking the size of the metallic contacts. 

 

Figure S7. Schematic of  CVD growth of MoS2 

Growth details: Single MoS2 flakes were synthesized by atmospheric chemical vapor deposition 

APCVD method at 700°C in a 1in quartz tube with argon as a carrier gas. MoO3 (99% Sigma Aldrich) 

and Sulfur powders (99% Sigma Aldrich) are used as precursors, while MoO3 is placed at the 


 
32

center of the furnace in an alumina boat, sulfur is situated upstream at the edge of the furnace. 

Finally, SiO2/Si substrates are cleaned using isopropanol and acetone and placed face down in 

the alumina boat containing the MoO3 powder. The temperature of the system is first increased 

from room temperature to 300°C with a rate of 10°C/min, after 30 minutes the temperature is 

raised up to 700°C with a ramp of 30°C/min, the system is immediately cooled down naturally 

once it reaches the growth temperature (700°C).  

 
 


 
33

 

Figure S8. Fabrication process of the gap plasmon metasurface. a) Photograph of the device, b) 
MoS2 flakes transferred on SiO2/Au substrates. c) and d) optical and SEM images after e-beam 
lithography and lift off processes 

Fabrication details: First, to form the metallic mirror of our devices, 1cm x 1cm sapphire 

substrates were covered using thermal tape leaving a window of 3mm x 10mm to deposit a layer 

of Ti/Au (5/200nm thick). Then samples are introduced in a conventional sputtering system to 

deposit 100nm of SiO2 and the tape is removed. An optical lithography step is then performed to 

define large Ti/Au (10/ 200nm) metallic contacts. MoS2 flakes are transferred from SiO2 

substrates using PMMA and KOH solution on the Au/SiO2 sandwich (a, b). Finally, metallic 

nanostrip-array metasurface was defined by means of e-beam lithography followed by a 50 nm 

Au film deposited by e-beam evaporation and lift-off during night on PG remover at 60°C (c, d). 

 


