1 

Parametric oscillation and amplification with gate controlled capacitor-within-capacitor  

 

H. Grebel 

Electronic Imaging Center at NJIT, Newark, NJ 07102. grebel@njit.edu 

 
 
Abstract: A Capacitor-within-Capacitor (CWC) is a nested electronic element that has two 
components: the cell (e.g., the outer capacitor) and the gate (e.g., the inner capacitor).  The 
designations for the gate and cell may be interchanged.  Here, an analysis and experimentation 
on a diode-interfaced parametric oscillations and amplification are described.  By replacing the 
diode with a junction, made of doped nano-graphene films, we demonstrated a new structure 
whose doping may be electronically and chemically controlled.  
 
I. Introduction:  
 
In equivalent circuit terms, capacitors may be connected in series (the overall capacitance 
becomes smaller than that of either capacitor), or in parallel (the overall capacitance is the sum 
of individual capacitances) [1].  Capacitors may take a simple form, such as two parallel plates, 
or a more complex structure of interdigitated electrodes [2].  Recently, a third possibility, a 
capacitor-within-capacitor (CWC), was considered [3].  Specifically, one capacitor, the gate 
capacitor, electronically controls the capacitance of a cell capacitor.  The gate may be nested 
inside the cell (inner gate structure) or outside it (outer gate structure).  Such a concept is general 
and may be applied to dielectric and super-capacitors alike.  If the electrodes are made of 2-D 
films, such as graphene; voltage controlled charge doping of either electrode may be achieved in 
a rather simple manner [4].   
 
Electrical parametric oscillators have been known for a long time [5].  In an electrical parametric 
oscillator, a resonating circuit is interfaced with a nonlinear capacitive, or nonlinear inductive [6] 
element.  Modulation of the nonlinear element by a pump source at frequency p and above some 
intensity threshold results in the generation of two frequency components: the signal at s and an 
idler at i.  Conservation of energy dictates that, p=s+i.  When the signal and the pump are 
in phase (or, shifted by  radians), then s=i and the signal oscillates at half-frequency of the 
pump.  Typically, a varactor, or a similar nonlinear capacitive element is used to realize the 
electrical circuit.  Here, we take a somewhat different approach to realize a nonlinear capacitor 
(Fig. 1).   
 
Consider an inner CWC structure (Fig. 1).  A diode, placed across the gate capacitor [Ref. 3 and 
its SI section] provides for a voltage controlled element.  From a circuit point of view, the effect of 
the gate diode on the cell’s capacitance is understood as follows: if the diode is reversed biased 
(namely, the gate is open), then the structure is made of three capacitors connected in series.  
The cell’s capacitance for this configuration is the smallest.  If the diode is forward biased, then it 
shorts the gate and the cell’s is made of only two capacitors in series; in this case the cell's 
capacitance increases.  Alternatively, from an artificial dielectric point of view, one may consider 
the shortened gate as a giant electrical dipole whose increased polarity affects the cell’s 
capacitance via an increase in the effective cell's permittivity.  Similar arguments may be made 
for nonlinear artificial magnetic dipole, formed by the current loop that connects the pump source 
with the inner gate electrodes, the diode and the inductor and whose effect is to decrease the 
cell's permittivity value.   
 


2 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Fig. 1. (a) Schematics of the CWC.  Four stripes of copper are placed one on top of each other 
and are separated by dielectric films.  (b) The equivalent circuit.  C – capacitor; D – diode; L – 
inductor. 
 
II. Theoretical Considerations and Modeling: 
 
Besides nonlinearities near the break-in region, a typical diode circuit exhibits nonlinearity when 
biased with either large negative amplitudes (the Zener effect), or large positive amplitudes 
(saturation effect).  The effect at large positive biases happens when a small effective resistor, R, 
is connected in series with a diode.  This resistor could be the result of contacts or wires.  The 
current-voltage equation for the circuit current becomes, Id=I=I0{exp[(V-I∙R)/Vq)-1}, where I0 is the 
dark current, V is the input voltage and Vq=26 mV at room temperature.  For a large input voltage 
and small resistances, the term I∙R competes with the input V and the current becomes saturated.  
Thus, the transition from a quasi linear I-V curve to saturated curve is also a useful parametric 
oscillation region.   
 
Let us look closely at the nonlinear capacitive response.  An equivalent circuit model is shown in 
Fig. 1b.  One may assume that the capacitance, C, between nearest pairs of plates is the same 
because the spacing and the dielectric materials are similar.  As described before, the maximum 
nonlinear swing may reach 50%, between cell capacitance values of C/3 to C/2 when the gate 
capacitor is either open or short.   
 
We start with the nonlinear equation for a pumped capacitor [7].  We assume that the capacitance 
of the cell (namely, the outer set of electrodes) depends linearly on the shunt resistance across 
the gate within some resistance region [3]: C(Rshunt)~C0(1-Rshunt/R0).  Here C0 is the cell 
capacitance without the shunt resistance and R0 is a constant.  From the diode equation for small 
currents (namely, ignoring the saturation region of the circuit), we can write for the effective diode 
resistance as a function of Vp≡Vpump,  
 
 
Reff=(dI/dVp)-1=(Vq/I0){exp(-Vp/Vq)}. 
(1) 

 
Combining, C(Vp)~C0(1-(Vq/R0I0)exp(-Vp/Vq).  Finally, C/C0~(Vq/R0I0)exp[-(Vp0/Vq)sin(pt)].  As 
the voltage increases, the diode resistance decreases and the cell’s capacitance increases.   
 
The signal is set to the resonant frequency of this circuit,s2=(1/LC).  We write, 
C=C0+C=C0(1+C/C0) and L=L0-L=L0(1-L/L0) with C/C0<<1 and L/L0<<1.  Here L0 and C0 
are associated with the resonance frequency of the gate.  The nonlinear modulation of the gate 

C
C
C

Vout

Vin

D

L


3 

affects the overall cell’s capacitance and hence its frequency output.  Note the choice of a plus 
sign to the capacitance change; the capacitance increases upon a positive pump swing.   
 
The effect of L on the effective permittivity of the cell is expected to be smaller than the capacitive 
effect since magnetic dipoles are smaller than electric ones.  In addition, the outer electrodes are 
well separated and form only a partial current loop.  We will ignore it for the sake of simplicity and 
write for the parametrization of the frequency through first order expansion, 
 

s2≈(1/LC0)(1-C/C0)(1+L/L0) → (1/LC0)(1-(Vq/R0I0)exp[-(Vp0/Vq)sin(pt)]. 
(2) 

 
This is to be compared to a more traditional parametric oscillator, 
 

s2~(1/L0C0)(1-bVp0sin(pt)), 
(3) 

 
where, b<<1 is a constant.  Eq. (2) collapses to Eq. (3) for small signals.  Pumping at twice the 
signal frequency, p~2s0=2√(1/L0C0)~2s leads to a substantial signal gain and eventually to 
oscillations at the signal frequency.   
 
Numerical results are shown in Fig. 2 for harmonic oscillator type differential equation.  The 
parametrized radial frequency of either Eq. 2 or Eq. 3 was found by using a Mathcad tool.  
Specifically, 
 
 
d2y(t)/dt2=-s2y(t)-dy/dt. 
(4) 

 
Here, the radial frequency is related to the frequency as, s=2fs and  is the loss coefficient.  In 
this semi ideal case, the loss coefficient in the simulations was small but not zero.  Larger loss 
coefficients decrease the intensity of the frequency component.  The various coefficients for the 
simulations were chosen such that Eq. 2 yields the same coefficients as Eq. 3 when expanding 
the exponent to first order of approximation.  Specifically, when using Eq. 2: (Vq/R0I0)=0.01, 
(Vp0/Vq)=2, and when using Eq. 3: bVp0=0.02.  In the case of diode interfaced circuit, higher-order 
contributions give rise to a large gain in the signal.  Finally, a fast Fourier transform (fft) module 
was used to assess the absolute value of the frequency components.   
 
Boundary conditions for the simulations were: y(0)=0 and (dy(t)/dt)t=0=2f0=20.55.  The 
normalized pump frequency varies, but it is approximately twice f0, or, fp~1.1.  With Eq. 2, the 
maximum gain is obtained with a somewhat lower or higher pump frequency than the pump 
frequency used with Eq. 3.  Specifically, in the case of a parametric oscillator that is driven 
according to Eq. 3, the maximum gain to the Fourier component is found with fp=1.1, for which 
fs=0.55.  In the case of a diode interfaced circuit, the maximum gain to the Fourier component is 
found with fp=1.085 for which fs=0.542 (Fig. 2).  The experimental peak frequency also shifts as 
shown in Fig. 9 below.  
 


4 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Fig. 2.  Models: the absolute value of the Fourier component vs the normalized frequency, f.  (a) 

When using Eq. 2: (Vq/R0I0)=0.01 and (Vp0/Vq)=2.  (b) When using Eq. 3: bVp0=0.02.  The 
larger effect is observed for the highly nonlinear element - the diode (a). 

 
 
In the simulations, a bandwidth of 0.4% of the central pump frequency, or Q~250 is noted.  The 
effective parameters, chosen for the comparison between Eqs. 2 and 3 favor a relatively narrow 
band; these parameters are translated to a large effective circuit resistance, R0.   
 
Instead of looking at the leading Fourier component it might be instructive to watch the time 
evolution of the signal.  A typical parametric oscillation, which is driven along with Eq. 3 would 
exhibit a monotonous, exponentially growing amplitude (Fig. 3b).  In the case of a diode interfaced 
circuit, higher order nonlinearities affect the kinetics of the amplitude.  The amplitude of the signal 
first decreases and then increases (Fig. 3a).  Eventually, and as observed in the experiments, its 
signal grows much faster to provide a larger gain.  Simulations also indicate that the amplitude 
minimum is shifting towards earlier times as the parameter Vq/R0I0 increases while keeping Vp0/Vq 
constant.  Similar trend is exhibited if we keep Vq/R0I0 constant while increasing Vp0/Vq; for 
example by increasing the pump amplitude, or by decreasing the temperature (and, thus 
decreasing Vq=kBT/q, with kBT - the thermal energy and q - the electron charge).  
 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Fig. 3.  Normalized amplitudes of the signal as a function of normalized time for: (a) parametric 

frequency of Eq. 2 and with parametric frequency of Eq. 3 (b).  In the harmonic oscillator 
equation (Eq. 4), the Normalized Amplitude, y multiplies the square of normalized radial 
frequency of either Eq. 2, or Eq. 3.  The normalized time is in units of 1/2fp. 

 
 

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

abs{Amplitude} x 10

4

Normalized Frequency

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

0

1

2

3

abs{Amplitude} x10

4

Normalized Frequency

0
50
100

-2

0

2

Normalized Amplitude

Normalized Time

0
50
100

-4

0

4

Normalized Amplitude

Normalized Time


5 

If the capacitance decreases upon a positive pump swing, we may choose a negative sign for the 
capacitance change.  This is the case near the saturation region or when the diode direction is 
reversed.  Hence, C=C0-C=C0(1-C/C0) and Eq. 2 now reads, 
 

s2≈(1/LC0)(1+(Vq/R0I0)exp[-(Vp0/Vq)sin(pt)]. 
(2’) 

 
For the simulations, parameters were selected as before: (Vq/R0I0)=0.01 and (Vp0/Vq)=2.  
Maximum gain is achieved with a slightly larger frequency than resonance, fp=1.115, and the 
signal is exhibited at fs=0.558.  The Fourier component is now 5 time larger than the one depicted 
in Fig. 3a and the minimum in the temporal growth has shifted to t=0 (Fig. 4a).   
 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Fig. 4. Models: (a) Time evolution and (b) absolute value of the Fourier component vs the 

normalized frequency, f when using Eq. 2’: (Vq/R0I0)=0.01 and (Vp0/Vq)=2. 

 
II. Methods and Experiments: 
 
The CWC is made of 4 copper strips (plates), making an area of 12 mm x 12 mm when put across 
one another (Fig. 5a).  They are separated by dielectric films (pieces of cut paper with slightly 
larger dimensions.  The structure is held between two glass slides 25 mm x 25 mm by two clips.  
The inner gate, which controls the outer cell is operating at resonance with a quality factor of near 
unity.  The capacitance is ca 0.014 nF and ca 0.04 nF between the outer plates and between the 
inner plates, respectively.  The sinusoidal pump frequency is aimed at ca 1.06 MHz; the signal of 
this degenerate configuration is observed at ca 0.53 MHz (Fig. 6b).  The 1N91 1DC723 Ge power 
diode that connects the gate electrodes has a large reverse breaking voltage rating (VR>75 V) 
and a negative break-in voltage (Fig. 5b). Parametric oscillations can be observed with other Ge 
diodes, as well as with Si diodes (Fig. 5b), though at different DC bias; which is applied to gate 
electrodes.  The entire circuit and layout are shown in Fig. 1c-d.  A WaveTek frequency generator, 
an HP spectrum analyzer (SA) and HP oscilloscope are used to assess the input amplitude, the 
DC offset and the output spectrum. 
 

0
50
100

-12

-6

0

6

12

Normalized Amplitude

Normalized Time

0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5

0

70

140

abs{Amplitude} x10

4

Normalized Frequency


6 

 
 
  

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Fig. 5.  (a) A picture of the circuit.  Four stripes of copper are placed one on top of each other 

and are separated by dielectric films.  (b) I-V curve of Ge and Si diodes used in the 
experiments.  A third Ge diode, whose I-V is similar to the Si diode, also enabled 
parametric oscillations. The output voltage Vout (Fig. 1b), is assessed with a spectrum 
analyzer (SA).  

 
 
III. Results and Discussions: 
 
III.a. Experimental Results 
 
As with other parametric oscillators, self-oscillation occurs beyond some pump threshold.  In Fig. 
6a we show the output signals just below the pump threshold; the pump amplitude is 1.8 Vp-p.  
The transmitted output is composed of only the pump frequency at 1.06 MHz.  By increasing the 
pump amplitude to Vp-p=2 V and with a DC bias of ca 0.1 V (Fig. 6b), two additional peaks appear: 
at 0.53 MHz and at 1.59 MHz, respectively.  The first peak is the parametric oscillation at half the 
pump frequency; the second peak is located at the pump frequency and the third one is the peak 
for the sum frequencies of pump and signal, 3p/2ps.  The input pump peak intensity was 
directly measured on the gate (including the inductor and the electrodes' capacitance), as -8.8 
dBm for a 2 Vp-p amplitude.  At threshold, the transmitted signal intensity at either s or 3p/2 is 
ca -40 dB of the direct input pump intensity, or -20 dB of the transmitted pump intensity.  This is 
not an optimized configuration: one may achieve a transmitted signal which is only 3 dB below 
the transmitted pump.  An intensity signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 40 dB is observed when 
increasing the input pump power by ca 1 dB from just below (Vpump=1.8 Vp-p) to just above 
threshold (Vpump=2 Vp-p).  Note a decrease of 2.5 dB in the transmitted peak pump power due to 
generation of the sidebands (Fig. 6b in comparison to Fig. 6a).  Fig. 6c shows that the oscillations 
are suppressed when reversing the diode connection while retaining the same pump conditions.  
This means that the polarity of the gate capacitor with respect to the polarity of the cell's capacitor, 
matters.  The oscillations may be recovered with a proper negative or positive DC bias. 
 

inductor

diode

CWC

-2
0
2

0.00

0.05

0.10
 Ge
 Si

Current (mA)

Voltage (V)


7 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

 

 

(c) 

Fig. 6.  (a) Just below threshold.  The marker is at 1.06 MHz.  (b) Above threshold.  Seen is the 

pump at 1.06 MHz, the signal at 0.53 MHz and the sum of the signal and the pump 
frequencies at 1.59 MHz.  Also note that the transmitted pump power was reduced by 
2.5 dB due to the generation of sidebands.  (c) The diode connection is reversed while 
retaining the same conditions as in (b). The oscillation may be recovered by applying a 
proper DC bias. 

 
 
Parametric oscillations rely on the nonlinearity of the diode resistance.  At large DC bias, the diode 
exhibits a quasi linear I-V curve and its resistance is almost constant (Fig. 5b).  Likewise, when 
reversed biased, the diode exhibits a constant (and a very large) resistance.  These two regions 
are not appropriate for parametric oscillations.  The diode's largest nonlinearity is near the break-
in (forward bias), break down (reverse bias) and before the saturation (large forward bias) regions.  
For a sinusoidal pump amplitude of <2 Vp-p, the DC bias range for the Ge diode shown in Fig. 5b 
is between ±0.1 V and is optimal for 0 V.   
 
Parametric oscillations may be observed for the above conditions when the pump frequency is 
scanned between f=0.45 to f=1.25 MHz.  Within that bandwidth one may observe a rich spectra 
of sub-harmonics, high pump-frequency's harmonics, as well as combinations between them all 
(Fig. 7c).  Based on the above bandwidth, the quality factor from the pump point of view, 
Q=pfp/2f is assessed as of order 1 (with p chosen at the bandwidth center).  The 
quality factor is also related to the resistance, capacitance and inductance as, Q=R√(C/L).  From 
the gate point of view with gate capacitance of ~0.04 nF and inductance of 0.22 mH we assess 
the resistance as, Reff~2.3 KOhms.  The impedance of the Ge diode in reverse DC bias is Rr=1.5 
KOhms. 


8 

 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

 

(c) 

Fig. 7.  (a,b) The DC offset is ±0.1 V and the oscillations are suppressed.  (c) Full spectra with 

harmonics, sub-harmonics and related combinations when the pump frequency is at 
0.475 MHz.  Note that the pump power is smaller at this lower end of the bandwidth.  

 
 
What happens if we increase the pump amplitude by 10 times its previous value, say to 20 Vp-p 
or, 20 dB larger than the power threshold?  Indeed, the transmitted pump intensity increases by 
20 dB (from -30 dBm to -10 dBm); yet, the transmitted signal increases by 30 dB (from -50 dBm 
to -20 dBm (Fig. 8).  The SNR of the signal is now 60 dB and its peak intensity is only 10 dB below 
the transmitted peak pump power.  As mentioned before, the transmitted signal may reach -3dB 
of the transmitted pump at optimized conditions.  
 

 

Fig. 8.  Higher pump frequencies and broader signals are associated with a larger pump 

intensities.  The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is 60 dB.  

 
 


9 

Fig. 9 shows a pump peak shift as the pump intensity increases.  Clearly, the pump frequency is 
up-shifting until the point of oscillation.  Similarly, upon changing the value of the inductor from 
L=0.22 mH to L=0.56 mH one may observe a pump frequency down shift (not shown). 
 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

 

(c) 

Fig. 9. (a-c) As the pump intensity increases throughout the 0-20 Vp-p, the pump frequency up-

shifted 

 
 
If one connects the first and third (negative) electrodes together for a shared ground keeping all 
other conditions the same, the resonance frequency shifts due to the 50 Ohms resistance of 
both the functional generator and the spectrum analyzer.  A useful frequency range was 
experimentally found at lower frequencies (fp~600 KHz and fs~300 KHz). 
 
Graphene may be doped both chemically and electrostatically.  The recipe is based on similar 
approach used for single wall carbon nanotubes [8-9].  PVP-coated nano-graphene flakes exhibit 
p-type film and PEI coated graphene flakes exhibits n-type film.  Each of the film type was 
deposited on a 0.5-nm hole, TS80 membrane and the layout was pressed together. The flakes 
were soaked in the membrane, let dry out and contact to the film was made through the membrane 
back.  The thickness of the membrane reduced the capacitance of the gate, thus, the resonance 
of the CWC has increased to ca 3.1 MHz.  In Fig. 10 we present the related I-V curve, which 
exhibits a leaky characteristics.  Despite the small nonlinearity of the junction and without the Ge 
or Si diodes, oscillations were observed (Fig. 10b).  They are attributed to the further electrostatic 
doping of the graphene flakes.  The oscillations curve is much narrower than the curve obtained 
with a standard diode of Fig. 5.  Also, the oscillations frequency may be better tuned and do not 
necessarily occur at fpump/2 but slightly above, or below it.  
 


10 

 
 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Fig. 10. (a) I-V curve of a junction made of chemically doped nano-graphene flakes. (b) Related 

oscillations.  

 
 
III.c. Amplification 
 
These elements are efficient oscillators and exhibit amplification, as well. The circuit layout is 
shown in Fig. 11a.  The transmitted pump intensity is -5 dBm, and the intensity of the nonamplified 
signalwas -50.44 dBm.  The pump power was adjusted to 1 dB below the onset of oscillations. As 
observed from Fig. 11a, the SNR of the signal was 30 dB and remained so upon amplification to 
-30.7 dBm (amplification of ca 20 dB).  Amplification of 30 dB was achievable if one adjusted the 
DC bias, as well as the pump power.  Finally, if the pump power was increased, oscillation mode 
took place.  The resistor R connected the grounds of the signal (Vs) and the pump (Vp) to the 50 
Ohm ground of the spectrum analyzer (Vout). 
 

 

(a) 

  
 

(b) 
 
 
 
 
(c) 

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

-10
-5
0
5
10

Current (mA)

DC Voltage (V)

C1
C2
C3

Vout

Vp

D
L2
L1

Vs

R


11 

  
 

(d) 
 
 
 
 
(e) 

Fig. 11. (a) The circuit layout. (b) The signal: -50.44 dBm at 547 KHz.  (c) No-signal: the ~60 

dBm amplifier noise just below the onset of oscillations.  (d) The amplified signal at 
pump - 1 dB below the onset of oscillation and (e) oscillations at pump voltage of 20 Vp-p.  
L1=L2=0.221 mH and R=0.3 MOhms. Note that transmitted oscillations are above the 
transmitted pump. 

 
 
IV. Conclusions: 
 
A simple and efficient parametric oscillator was built out of a nested structure, a capacitor-within-
capacitor (CWC), a diode and an inductor.  Higher orders and multiples of frequencies’ sum and 
difference were exhibited due to large diode's nonlinearities [10].  A junction made of chemically 
doped graphene exhibited oscillations, as well, and may be useful for diode-like, or transistor-like 
structures, where a voltage bias shifts the Fermi level and hence the electrode’s doping.    
 
Acknowledgement: 
 
To J. Grebel from U. Chicago for useful comments on the write-up. To T. Chowdhury for help 
with the nano-graphene doped junctions. 
 
 
1. 
L.D. Landau & E.M. Lifshitz, Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, (Volume 8 of A 
Course of Theoretical Physics), Pergamon Press 1960 

2. 
Lei Zhu and Ke Wu, Accurate Circuit Model of Interdigital Capacitor and Its Application 
to Design of New Quasi-Lumped Miniaturized Filters with Suppression of Harmonic 
Resonance, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Techniques, 48 (2000) 347–356. 

3. 
Grebel, H., Capacitor within capacitor, SN Appl. Sci., 1 (2019) 48. 
doi.org/10.1007/s42452-018-0058-z 

4. 
Inanc Meric, Melinda Y. Han, Andrea F. Young, Barbaros Ozyilmaz, Philip Kim, and 
Kenneth L. Shepard, Current saturation in zero-bandgap, top gated graphene field-effect 
transistors, Nature Nanotechnology, 3 (2008) 654-659.  

5. 
Roer, T.G., Microwave Electronic Devices. Springer Science and Business Media, 
(2012) ISBN 978-1461525004. 

6.  
K. D. Irwin and M. E. Huber, SQUID Operational Amplifier, Applied Superconductivity 
2000, Sept. 17-22, 2000, Virginia Beach, Virginia. 

7. 
A. Yariv, Quantum Electronics, 3rd edition, John Wiley and Sons, 1989.  


12 

8. 
T. Chowdhury and H. Grebel, Ion-Liquid Based Supercapacitors with Inner Gate Diode-
Like Separators", ChemEngineering 2019, 3(2), 39; 
https://doi.org/10.3390/chemengineering3020039  

9. 
Tazima S. Chowdhury, Haim Grebel, "Supercapacitors with electrical gates", 
Electrochimica Acta, Pub Date : 2019-04-02 , DOI: 10.1016/j.electacta.2019.03.222 

10. 
Samuel Boutin, David M. Toyli, Aditya V. Venkatramani, Andrew W. Eddins, Irfan 
Siddiqi, and Alexandre Blais, “Effect of Higher-Order Nonlinearities on Amplification and 
Squeezing in Josephson Parametric Amplifiers”, Phys. Rev. Appl. 8, (2017) 054030.  

 


