1

Effects of using carbon Nano-tubes on thermal and ductility

properties of bitumen

M. Faramarzi1, M. Arabani2, A. K. Haghi3, V. Motaghitalab4

1. M. Sc. student, Department of civil engineering, University of Guilan, I. R. Iran

2. Professor, Department of civil engineering, University of Guilan, I. R. Iran

3. Professor, Department of textile engineering, University of Guilan, I. R. Iran

4. Assistant professor, Department of textile engineering, University of Guilan, I. R. Iran

Masoud.faramarzi67@gmail.com

Arabani@guilan.ac.ir

Haghi@guilan.ac.ir

motaghitalab@guilan.ac.ir

Abstract 

New plans should be used to improve quality and to increase productivity and durability of 

conventional pavements. In this investigation, it has been attempted to promote technical 

characteristics of bitumen using carbon nanotubes as an additive. Wet and dry process methods 

are most practical ways of mixing CNF in AC. It was decided that the best method to adopt for 

this investigation was the dry process. In this study thermal and ductility properties of modified 

bitumen by 0.1, 0.5, and 1% carbon nano-tube content in bitumen were evaluated considering 

bitumen penetration, softening point, and ductility tests, then the results were compared to those 

of unmodified bitumen. It was found that adding carbon nano-tubes effects on thermal properties 

of bitumen by increasing the softening point and decreasing the bitumen penetration. It was also 

shown that bitumen ductility decreases by carbon nano-tubes modification process.

Keywords: bitumen, carbon nano-tube, ductility, bitumen penetration, softening point


2

1. INTRODUCTION

Nanotechnology is a relatively new field in science dealing with structures that are on the nano-

scale. To illustrate how miniscule the nano-scale is, the following comparison could be made: if a 

human hair has a diameter of a football field, a nano-sized particle would have the diameter of a 

pencil. In 1985, Kroto and Smalley first discovered buckminsterfullerene and since then this 

technology has evolved rapidly [1]. Nanosized particles have been used in numerous applications 

to improve various properties. However, due to many reasons including the cost of production and 

purification, nano-sized particles have seen very little use in the construction field. One of the 

promising additives in the construction field is the use of carbon nanotubes. In 1991, these 

materials were first characterized in depth by Iijima [2]. In general, carbon nanotubes are made of 

sheets of graphite that have rolled up to form a tubular structure. This is accomplished through 

various methods with a majority of them using electricity and an inert gas in an enclosed chamber 

[3]. There are two general types of carbon nanotubes: single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) and 

multi-walled nanotubes (MWNTs). Because of the physics involved, MWNTs are easier and 

cheaper to produce [4]. However, they lack the strength found in SWNTs [4]. Nevertheless, 

SWNTs are found in bundles whereas MWNTs are found as individual molecules, allowing 

MWNTs to be dispersed efficiently in a material [4]. MWNTs are also stiffer than SWNTs and 

have a longer length, sometimes approaching the centimeter range [4]. The type and production of 

nanotubes will determine the diameter the materials which could range from 0.4nm (the smallest 

possible value) [5] up to several hundred nm [4]. This combination of long length and small 

diameter can lead to aspect ratios approaching 1,000,000:1. This gives rise to unique engineering 

characteristics such as some of these materials having a Young’s Modulus of anywhere from 18

GPa to 68 GPa with a failure strain of 0.12 (12%) [6]. In addition, they can possess a tensile 

strength anywhere from 1.4 GPa to 2.9 GPa [6]. All of these properties make carbon nanotubes 

ideal candidates for improving the mechanical properties of various construction materials. Wu et 

al. [7] found that the modification applying nano-clay can not only improve the properties of

bitumen but also lower costs to a great extent. In addition, Liu et al. [8] indicated that the 

montmorillonite nano-clay has been used successfully to strongly improve properties of polymer-

modified binder. Even though and Xiao et al. [9, 10] considered that carbon nano-particle is 

beneficial in improving the rheological properties of modified asphalt binder after short-term and 


3

long-term aging procedures, there are still many challenges and difficulties to utilize these carbon 

nano-particles to enhance the properties of construction materials. There is a need for more 

research in utilizing nanotechnology to improve the rheological and engineering characteristics of 

unaged asphalt binders and develop some guidelines for their use in construction materials in 

general. The interaction of unaged modified binders is not well understood from the standpoint of 

binder properties and field performance. In addition, the research of nano particles in asphalt

binders can expand the use of modified binders. Because of the complicated relationships of 

asphalt binders and carbon nano particles in the modified binders, detailed information will be 

beneficial to help obtain an optimum balance in the use of these materials. In the study presented 

in this paper process of making bitumen modified by carbon nano-tubes was explained. Penetration 

degree, softening point and ductility which are three classic tests on bitumen were done to evaluate 

modified bitumen rheological properties. Based on the obtained experimental results, the effects 

of CNTs on material properties were analyzed and discussed.  

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS 

2.1. Material

Materials used in the experimental investigation included a neat bitumen 60/70-penetration grade 

from Tehran mineral oil refinery with the physical properties listed in Table 1.

Table 1. Properties of used bitumen

Purity Grade
Deflagration
Softening Point
Penetration Grade
Density

%
ºC
ºC
mm/10
@ 25 ºC

99
262
49
53
1.03

A commercially available multiwall CNTs with purity up to 95%, was used in this research. The 

image of Carbon nanotubes was presented in figure 1. Also the Characterization of Carbon 

nanotubes (CNTs) is showed at the Table 3.


4

Fig.1: Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) image

Table.2 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) Properties

Properties
Unit
Value
Method of Measurement

Average Length
µm
10-30
TEM

Carbon Purity
%
95
TGA

Amorphous Carbon
-
*
HRTEM

Density
g/cm
2.1
-

2.2. Experimental Procedure

Three different percentages of CNT were chosen to produce bitumen-CNT blends (0.1%, 0.5% 

and 1.0% by weight of the base binder). A simple shear mixing technique was employed to 

incorporate CNTs into the base bitumen not only because it is very convenient in laboratory 

operations, but also because it has the potential of being easily transferred to the industrial scale in 

hot mix asphalt plants. Following preliminary attempts in which different mixing times and 

temperatures were considered. The final mixing protocol adopted in the study consisted of two 

subsequent phases. the first phase in which CNTs were added and manually blended to the 

bitumen, and the second phase in which the bitumen-CNT blends were mixed with a mechanical 

stirrer operating at a speed of 1,550 rpm for a total time of 40 minutes in order to obtain satisfactory 

homogeneity. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are shown 

in figure 2. Also, the image of mechanical stirrer is presented in figure 3. During both phases of 

mixing, temperature was set at 160°C and kept constant by means of an oil bath, which was heated 

by a hot plate.


5

Fig. 2: Scanning electron microscope (SEM)

Fig.3: Mechanical stirrer used in this research image of Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)


6

2.3. Laboratory Tests

Rheological Tests on Bitumen 

To determine the optimum content of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), empirical rheological tests carried 

out on conventional and modified bitumen with different CNTs content. In this study, the 

penetration degree test was done for Control sample and samples containing different percentages 

of carbon nanotubes. The empirical tests were performed according to the standard test procedures. 

The penetration test is an empirical test which measures the consistency (hardness) of asphalt at a 

specified test condition according to ASTMD5 standard. Also, for determination the softening

point of bitumen, the ASTM-D36 was used. Ductility test according to the Standard Methods (IP. 

32/55) was done and the sample at 25°C and with a speed of 5 cm/min is drawn.  

3. Results and Analysis

3.1. Penetration Degree Test 

Figure 5 shows a graph of the penetration degree changes. According to Figure 5, at first, it can be 

seen that there is no change in graph between control sample and 0.1% modified bitumen. It is 

because of the negative effect of aging, which happens during mixing process in high temperatures. 

With the addition of carbon nanotubes to bitumen, penetration degree of bitumen reduces. This 

reduction is due to the high surface density and high stability and tensile stability of carbon 

nanotubes. It is obvious that with increasing the amount of nanotubes, penetration degree will 

further be reduced. Finally, the produced bitumen can be used in warmer climates or areas with 

more traffic. 

3.2. Softening Point Test 

Figure 6 shows a graph of the softening point changes. As the result of aging during the mixing 

process and its effect on the bitumen thermal sensitivity a decrease is seen in the softening point 

at low levels of carbon nanotubes usage, but the higher levels of carbon nanotubes resulted in an 

increase, because the Young's modulus and high stability carbon nanotube causes the bitumen to 

show more stability against the flowing and thus increases the softening point. This bitumen can 

be used in areas with high average annual temperature or areas with more and heavier traffic.


7

Fig.4: Comparison of penetration degree test for different samples

Fig.5: Comparison of softening point test results for different samples


8

3.3. Ductility Test 

Figure 6 shows a graph of the ductility changes. In this case, with increasing carbon nanotubes, 

ductility properties will decrease much more. This behavior may be the result of chemical reaction 

and change in chemical structure as also pointed by Chile [24]. Checking by the ASTM-D113 [11],

ductility of modified-samples by different percentages of CNT, was higher than the minimum of 

50 cm. Bitumen which has acceptable ductility is more resistant to thermal cracking in low 

temperatures and shows good adherence so, could perfectly coat aggregates.

Fig.6: Comparison of ductility test results for different samples

4. CONCLUSIONS 

Due to the increasing development of nanotechnology and special features of carbon nanotubes, 

you can use them as the ideal choice in asphalt mixtures. The aim of this study was experimental 

investigation on the effects of using carbon nano-tubes on rheological properties of bitumen 

binder. Based on the laboratory test results, the following conclusions were obtained:

Two samples, respectively, had the best results:

"A sample is containing 0.0005 carbon nanotubes by weight of bitumen". 

"A sample is containing 0.001 carbon nanotubes by weight of bitumen".

The initial cost of both samples is higher than the control sample but for total cost, the amount and 

type of work should be investigated. When using modified bitumen in asphalt, due to its developed 

rheological properties, the asphalt layer thickness will be less than the usual and then the amount 

of total costs will decrease. A bitumen with minimal mechanical changes in its characteristics


9

obtained that in comparison with conventional bitumen, not only in terms of physical properties is 

not much different, but also improves the quality of its chemical properties.

6. REFERENCES

1. Kroto, H.W., Heath, J.R., O'Brien, S.C., Curl, R.F., and Smalley, R.E. (1985). C60: 

Buckminsterfullerene, Nature, Vol. 318, pp. 162-163.

2. Arabani, M., & Faramarzi, M. (2015). Characterization of CNTs-modified HMA’s mechanical 

properties. Construction and Building Materials, 83, 207-215.

4. Faramarzi, M., Arabani, M., Haghi, A. K., & Mottaghitalab, V. (2015). Carbon nanotubes-

modified asphalt binder: preparation and characterization. International Journal of Pavement 

Research and Technology, 8(1), 29-37.

5. Koshio, A., Yudasaka, M., and Iijima, S. (2002). Metal-free production of high-quality multi-

wall carbon, in which the innermost nanotubes have a diameter of 0.4nm, Chemical Physics 

Letters, Vol. 356, pp. 595600.

6. Yu, M., Lourie, O., Dyer, M.J., Moloni, K., Kelly, T.F., and Ruoff, R.F. (2000). Strength and 

Breaking Mechanism of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes Under Tensile Load, Science, Vol. 287, 

pp. 637-640. 

7. Wu, S., Wang, J., and Liu J. (2010). Preparation and fatigue property of nanoclay modified 

asphalt binder, Mechanic Automation and Control Engineering (MACE), International 

Conference, pp. 1595 – 1598, Wuhan, China. 

8. Liu, G., Wu, S., van de Ven, M., Molenaar, A., and Besamusca, J. (2010). Characterization of 

Organic Surfactant on 

9. Montmorillonite Nanoclay to Be Used in Bitumen, ASCE Journal of Materials in Civil 

Engineering, 22(8), pp. 794-799. 

10. Faramarzi, M., Arabani, M., Haghi, A. K., & Motaghitalab, V. (2013). A study on the effects 

of CNT’s on hot mix asphalt marshal-parameters. Proceedings of the 7thSASTech, 1-9.

11.ASTM D 113, (2002), Standard Test Method for ductility Test, Annual Book of ASTM 

Standards, American Society for Testing and Materials, West Conshohocken.


