Dual-Drive Directional Couplers for 
Programmable Integrated Photonics

DANIEL PÉREZ-LÓPEZ,* ANA M. GUTIERREZ, ERICA SÁNCHEZ,
PROMETHEUS DASMAHAPATRA, AND JOSÉ CAPMANY

Photonics Research Labs, iTEAM Research Institute, Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain.
*dperez@iteam.upv.es

Abstract: A novel class of photonic integrated circuits employs large-scale integration of 
combined beam splitters and waveguides loaded with phase actuators to provide complex
linear processing functionalities that can be reconfigured dynamically. Here, we propose
and experimentally demonstrate a thermally-actuated Dual-Drive Directional Coupler 
(DD-DC) design, integrated in a silicon nitride platform, functioning both as a standalone 
optical component providing arbitrary optical beam splitting and common phase as well 
as for its use in waveguide mesh arrangements. We analyze the experimental 
demonstration of the first integration of a triangular waveguide mesh arrangement, and 
the first DD-DC based arrangement along with an extended analysis of its performance 
and scalability.

1.
Introduction

Microelectronics has become one of the pillars of digital economics in the early 21st

century. Current and emerging applications demand information processing at a faster 
speed and bandwidth, exposing a potential physical limitation of electronic systems. The 
cooperative use of electronics and photonics is being studied and applied as an appealing 
solution to overcome future performance limits, leveraging on the best of two worlds for 
both digital and analog processing.
Integrated photonics is the science and technology that enables the integration of a 
large number of waveguide elements and specific devices or performance blocks in order 
to enable optical signal processing on a chip. Traditionally, both industry and academia 
have mainly focused on the design and optimization of Application Specific Photonic 
Integrated Circuits (ASPICs) whereby all the stages involved in the development of a PIC 
are tailored to optimize the chip performance, power budget, electrical power 
consumption, and footprint [1]. This strategy involves the optimization of photonic-based 
systems through multiple time-consuming cycles of custom design, fabrication, 
packaging and testing, leading to solutions that, in most cases, are far from being cost-
effective for low and moderate volumes. Only very large volumes benefit from 
economies of scale, but as of yet, such applications are limited to data centre
interconnects and transceivers [2].
Most of circuit designs for linear processing applications employ combinations of 
waveguide interconnections, beamsplitters, like directional couplers (DC), and phase 
actuators. The performance of each DC is highly dependent on its wavelength of 
operation, the waveguide geometry and the refractive indices of the materials [3]. These 
aforementioned dependencies, in turn, are strongly influenced by nanometre scale 
geometrical fluctuations arising from factors such as fabrication deviations, variations in 
grown layer thickness, etc. which ultimately result in an equivalent shift of the wavelength 
of operation of such devices. On the other hand, reconfigurable phase shifters are circuit 
actuators that introduce a local phase shift of the optical signal when a control signal 
(typically electrical) is applied. These elements exploit different material properties to 
change the effective index of the waveguide: thermo-optic, electro-optic, magneto-optic, 
opto-mechanical, stress, etc. The integration of phase actuators is essential for the 
construction of functioning PICs, as the offered tunability provides for a scope to combat 
any spurious effects arising from undesired geometric variation obtained in the fabricated 
circuit. For example, a fixed optical filter can be tuned by adding extra phase shifters at 


key points in the optical circuit thus, compensating for the fabrication induced phase drifts
[4].
In parallel, a paradigm shift in PIC design explores the development of a
multifunctional programmable circuit, where a common integrated optical hardware 
configuration is programmed to implement a variety of functionalities that can be 
elaborated for basic or complex operations in many application fields [5-8]. In this respect,
this scheme might compromise the overall power consumption, power budget and 
footprint in order to provide a platform with an unprecedented degree of flexibility and 
versatility, features which are then inherited by the systems in which it is used. This 
approach enables a new generation of field-programmable PICs that will potentially offer 
cost-effective and ready-to-use solutions and allow upgradable photonic-based systems
that provide post-compensation after a failure event [9]. Most of the experimental 
demonstrations to date rely a powerful reconfigurable optical core comprising of the 
interconnection of multiple instances of a tunable coupler in the form of dual-drive Mach-
Zehnder Interferometer with a phase shifter in each of its two arms and characterized by its
simplicity, robustness, yield and performance [5-8]. However, to ensure the future 
scalability of these systems, research should be done in the optimization of this Tunable 
Basic Units (TBU) architectures and tuning mechanisms to reduce their insertion loss, 
footprint, optical crosstalk, and power consumption. In this paper, we study the Dual-
Drive Directional Coupler (DD-DC) as a candidate for application-specific PICs and 
waveguide mesh arrangements. In Section 2 we introduce the device configuration and 
operating principle. In Section 3 and 4 we present the experimental demonstration of a 
standalone component, in the context of conventional PIC layouts and as the key element 
in a waveguide mesh arrangement, respectively. Finally, in Section 5 we analyze the 
associated scalability issues and discuss their future evolution and applications. 

2.
Dual-Drive Directional Couplers

The directional coupler is one of the most frequently employed basic building blocks 
present in any PIC. Usually, it is designed to operate as a beam splitter characterised by a
desired fixed optical power splitting ratio K at a certain wavelength. The signal in one 
waveguide is completely transferred to a parallel waveguide after each periodic length Lc
by a factor referred to as coupling constant к, which depends on the wavelength of 
operation, the waveguide geometry and the refractive indices of the materials [3]. These
dependencies result in the DCs being susceptible to fabrication errors that can change the 
designed wavelength of operation, bandwidth and uniformity. 
The integration of a phase tuning mechanism in one of the arms enables the tuning of 
the effective index difference between the two waveguides, and therefore the resulting 
coupling coefficient. This capability can be used to provide a tunable splitting coefficient 
to the designed circuit as well as to compensate for fabrication variations. Standalone 
Tunable Directional Couplers (TDC) have been demonstrated in polymer materials [10-
13], photonic crystals [14] and in Silicon on Insulator (SOI) [15], providing a 
reconfigurable splitting ratio by enabling a propagation constant difference in the pair of 
waveguides. The phase-change effect employed has been performed by means of a 
thermal-tuner placed on top of one of the parallel waveguides or by applying an electro-
optic effect to introduce a propagation constant difference between the waveguides. 
However, the setting of the coupling coefficient introduces an accumulated phase shift at
each output [15].
In order to increase the capabilities of TDCs, the integration of a second phase shifter 
in the other waveguide provides a symmetric design in terms of the possible loss in each 
arm, as well as both, an independent beam splitting capability and an additional phase 
shifting capability by inducing a differential and common phase shift, respectively, at 
each arm [16]. This additional feature can find applications in conventional PICs as well 
as enable their use as TBUs in waveguide mesh arrangements. A cross-section and top-
view of a thermally-tuned Dual-Drive TDC is illustrated in Fig. 1. The analytical model is 
described in [9].


Fig. 1. Dual-Drive Directional Coupler (a) crossection and (b) topview.

3.
DD-DC Design and Experimental Demonstration

For the characterization of the DD-DC, we designed a chip layout based on a deep-etched
waveguide cross section of 1 µm width (w) and 300nm height to satisfy the single-mode 
propagation condition. This geometry has been widely employed in previous Multi-
Project Wafer Runs [17]. A mode solver was used, taking in consideration a central 
wavelength of 1.55 µm and the aforementioned geometric parameters and it yielded a TE 
mode effective index of 1.5767, group index of 1.9234 and a second-order dispersion of -
1.2027 ps/(nm·m).
The chip layout incorporates three layers: the optical waveguide, the metal layer and 
the thermal/optical isolation trench layer. It is to be noted that the isolation layer involves 
etching up to the bottom cladding layer, i.e. up to a depth of 1800 µm from the top 
cladding. The design incorporates the presence of DD-DCs as standalone couplers and
tunable couplers in optical ring resonators (ORR) and in a triangular waveguide mesh 
arrangement of five TBU [5]. One key parameter in the configuration of a DD-DC is the 
difference between the phases of each waveguide. As mentioned, the propagation 
conditions are locally modified by a thermal-tuning effect produced by a microheater 
over the waveguide. The phase shift in a standalone waveguide is proportional to:

(1)

where ∆β is the change in the propagation coefficient, L is the effective length of the 
phase actuator and ∆neff is the change in the effective index, given by the multiplication of 
the thermo-optic coefficient (dneff/ dT) and the effective temperature gradient (∆Teff) at the 
waveguide layer. Since the thermo-optic coefficient is one order of magnitude lower than 
of SOI waveguide, a thermal actuator in silicon nitride requires a ∆T·L product one order 
of magnitude greater than that in SOI. This effect translates into the need for considerably
longer phase shifters.
Even considering that only one phase shifter is actuated, some tuning effects can 
produce a strong spread effect which can lead to an induced and unwanted effective 
refractive index change in the neighbouring waveguide. In the case of thermal actuators, 
the heat can flow to the adjacent waveguide and modify its propagation conditions. This 
effect can be modelled by a thermal crosstalk coefficient (CT). Then, the difference 
between the phase alteration in an actuated waveguide with phase, ∆Φ1, and a passive 
waveguide with phase, ∆Φ2, can be expressed as:

(2)

where, CT is in the range of 0 and 1. In this case, the proximity of the waveguides means 
that the value of CT is very large. Hence, in order to obtain a large phase difference
between the waveguides, an even larger ∆T·L product is required. Increasing ∆T is limited 
by the properties of the metal layer used to fabricate the micro-heaters over the 
waveguides. This comes from the fact that increasing the electrical power fed to the 
resistive heater-element can lead to an irreversible change in the material and even result 
in its melting and breakdown [18]. In order to ensure that the phase shifters are long 


enough, we designed passive cross-state configuration DD-DCs with a length of Lco = 
1278.73 µm, and waveguide gap of 1.7 µm, as obtained from the passive mode-solver 
simulation displayed in Table I. Some of the designs include variations of Lco to 
compensate for fabrication variations.
TABLE I
SIMULATED DC COUPLING LENGTH VALUES FOR DIFFERENT GAPS AT A WAVELENGTH OF 1.55 µm.
Gap (µm)
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.7

(w=1µm), Lco (µm)
58.2
101.7
180.6
311.2
543.7
945.4
1278.73

(w=1.2 µm), Lco (µm)
90.6
163.6
301.2
565.0
1002.4
1852.3
TBD

In the following sections we analyze the measured results for each DD-DC application.

3.1 DD-DC Standalone configuration
The first group of three components are TDC1, TDC2 and TDC3. They are standalone 
DD-DCs with all ports accessible via edge-couplers. In order to compensate from 
fabrication variations and test the design tolerances, we have parametrized each coupler 
length to be:  TDC1: Lco -30 µm, TDC2: Lco, TDC3: Lco +30 µm, all of them having
separations of 1.7 µm between waveguides and 2.5 µm between micro-heaters. Using this 
combination of gap and coupling length, theoretically, we achieve a 1% uniformity of the 
coupling coefficient, across 18 nm. 
Fig. 2 shows the relevant section of the fabricate PIC and a labelled illustration of the
mask layout. The upper (UP) and lower (DW) heaters and ports are labelled 
correspondingly. 

Fig. 2. Picture and labelled mask layout of standalone DD-TDC

In the design, we introduced the use of isolation trenches to focus the heat flow onto 
the waveguide and thus, to increase the actuator efficiency. Note that the isolation 
trenches are separated by more than 5 µm from the optical waveguides in order to prevent 
fabrication defects on the region close to the waveguide core and to avoid a mode 
interaction of the trench with the effective index. This safety distance was estimated to be 
around 3 µm by means of finding the negligible interaction between the mode and the 
trench through a mode-solver analysis. 
Once fabricated, we characterized the components with both a conventional scheme 
involving a tunable laser and a synchronized optical spectrum analyser (OSA) as well as
with a broadband amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) light source. The optical 
coupling was implemented using both lensed objectives and lensed fibers. In both 
schemes, we measured edge coupling losses to be within a range of 3 dB/facet with a 
variability of ±1 dB. In regard to the electrical driving of the thermal actuators we probed 
the DC pads of each heater and employed a high precision Keithley current source. Until 
and unless specified, the measurements are single drive, i.e. only one heater is activated at 
a time.
In Fig. 3a, we illustrate the cross-port spectral response of TDC3, normalized with 
respect to the response of a 11mm long straight waveguide. We can see that a flat 


uniformity is maintained over the 6 nm range. Each trace corresponds to a different 
electrical driving condition. We can see that the power coupled to the opposite waveguide 
in a passive state is around 3 dB less than the maximum power, meaning that the targeted
passive cross-state at the design stage is not achieved. Next, if we set an electrical current 
in the upper phase shifter, we find a maximum of the total optical power in the cross-port 
(upper-trace). If we drive the lower heater (DW), we find that the coupling ratio goes in 
the opposite direction till it reaches a minimum optical coupling at around -30dB. A 0.2-
dB ripple is observed in some of the measurements and is associated to the reflections in 
the measurement setup and the chip facets.

Fig. 3. (a) Spectral response of the DD-TDC 3 and (b) Experimental spectral response of 
a DD-TDC when upper or lower phase shifters are actuated.

In order to characterize the dynamic behaviour of the structure, we performed 
continuous sweeps of electrical current with a step of 2 mA in one direction (heater up) 
and then in the opposite (heater down). For each case we measured the response for all
input-output combinations. The cross-port power is directly proportional to the optical 
power coupling value (K) of the DD-DC. From the measurements illustrated in Fig. 3b, it
can be seen that the patter is typical of a cross point interferometer and its complementary 
response, maintaining the conservation of energy during the configuration. We repeated 
the test for thirteen different TDCs in four different dies and five wafers and concluded
that all the devices, but one maintained the same trends as in Fig. 3b. Due to the setup, 
facet and alignment variation, it is challenging to estimate the insertion loss of the DD-
DC, but we can infer that this is well below 0.3 dB and that the conservation of energy is 
maintained during the dynamic configuration. When we tune the cross or bar states, we 
measure a portion of the signal that leaks over the non-desired output, known as the 
optical crosstalk (CTopt). Overall, half of the measurements obtained optical crosstalk in 
the cross and bar states better than 15 dB. The measurements summary is contained in 
Table II.
From the measurements, we can see that some of the DD-DC shown a non-ideal 
behaviour with CTopt below 15 dB in either cross or bar. We can see that this behaviour is 
present in more than the 50% of the measured TDCs, independently of the coupling 
length. This results from low fabrication tolerance of the DCs. In addition, all the 
CTbar(dB) could be increased if we do not limit the maximum applicable current to 40 
mA. However, there was a high-risk of achieving a breaking point when driving the 
heater with larger electrical currents. 

TABLE II
MEASUREMENTS OF STANDALONE DD-DC SUMMARY: CT: OPTICAL CROSSTALK, PE: ELECTRICAL POWER
item
Wafer
Die
TDC#
CT bar (dB)
CT cross (dB)
Pe bar (mW)
Pe cross (mW)

1
1
5
1
12.732
14.184
431.92
317.35

2
1
6
3
15.339
14.509
455.42
284.12

3
2
3
3
29.034
11.534
399.12
445.65

4
3
4
3
16.588
11.993
528.70
165.57

5
3
5
1
4.216
17.937
429.97
162.45

6
3
5
2
12.790
16.626
453.17
242.75

7
3
5
3
25.698
16.196
454.90
346.85

8
4
4
2
6.193
13.982
465.85
100.28


9
4
4
3
10.647
22.509
316.97
489.17

10
4
5
1
16.557
19.834
440.22
295.85

11
4
5
2
26.704
19.775
466.47
375.27

12
4
5
3
28.600
19.828
380.60
429.20

13
5
4
3
25.313
16.398
524.87
278.77

3.2 DD-DC in photonic integrated circuits
The DD-DC can be integrated in a wide variety of PICs requiring both, an arbitrary 
beam-splitting and a phase adjustment. For example, their integration in an optical ring 
resonator enables the possibility of modifying the notch position and the extinction ratio 
independently. 
In these designs, we have employed the same waveguide separation of 1.7 µm,
distance between heaters of 2.5 µm and a coupling length of Lco + ∆L with length 
variations (∆L) equal to: -100, -50, 0, 50 µm. These values have been chosen in order to 
account for the coupling length variation with changes in the waveguide geometry. For 
these lengths we created a replica with a larger distance between heaters of 3µm, 
resulting in a total of 8 optical ring resonators. Coupling length has been estimated to 
vary between ± 100 µm for waveguides with width variations of ± 20 nm. Figure 4
illustrates a picture of the fabricated device and the designed mask layout.

Fig. 4. (a) Picture, (b) labelled mask layout: Ring-loaded version of DD-TDC for its 
characterization and (c) example of resulting spectral response with single-drive 
operation, (d) example of notch wavelength tuning with dual-drive operation.

When modifying the coupling coefficient by actuating one of the phase tuners (UP or 
DW), we produce a power splitting ratio variation as covered in the previous section. This 
can be employed to modify the extinction ratio of the optical filter. However, as 
illustrated in Fig. 4c, these changes introduce a common phase shift at the DD-DC 
outputs, moving the position of the notch. If the splitter is integrated in a PIC, we might 
want to correct this accumulated phase and set the coupling factor and the accumulated 
phase independently. Fig. 4d illustrates how a dual-drive operation can be employed to 
maintain the ER over 19 dB while effectively tuning the wavelength position of the notch 
by driving the DC in Dual-Drive mode.
Fig. 5 represents the experimental results of a ring resonator based on DD-DCs. Here, 
we mapped the extinction ratio (ER) and the phase shift versus the electrical power 
applied to both heaters simultaneously. We can obtain two conclusions from Fig. 5a. 
First, we see that any arbitrary ER of the ring can be set from 0 to 24 dB by optimally 
tuning the electrical power of one heater.  Secondly, it can be seen that there is a plane 
where the ER is almost constant once the targeted ER is set and an additional common-
drive is applied simultaneously to both heaters. From Fig. 5b, we can extract two 


complementary conclusions. First, it is confirmed that a single-drive configuration will 
modify both the ER and the phase shift (notch position). Secondly, the application of the 
aforementioned common drive is translated to a linear variation of the overall phase shift 
(notch position).
Experiments, as a whole, determine that once fixed to a targeted ER by driving one of 
the phase shifters, we can drive both heaters with an additional common power in both 
actuators to set the notch position without seriously compromising the set ER value. 

Fig. 5. Extinction Ratio and phase shift variation of a single-notch ORR with a DD-DC 
(1328.73 µm).

For these measurements, we employed a tunable laser and a synchronized OSA 
featuring a 1 pm resolution. We measured 10 structures obtaining similar trends and 
behaviours.
Additionally, we have explored the effects of including a thermal isolation in the form 
of an air trench between the two adjacent waveguides. For this purpose, we designed an 
additional set of ORRs with length variations of: 1000, 1200, 1400 and 1600 µm. Figure 
6 illustrates the experimental results obtained in a DD-DC with a coupling length of 1200 
µm. From the results, we see that this time the ER maximum value is higher, but we did 
not apply enough power to achieve the bar state that can be characterized by a 0-dB ER 
value to prevent them from achieving a non-reversible state. In addition, we found that 
the ER is also limited by the reflections at the facets of the chip couplers.

Fig. 6. Extinction Ratio and phase shift variation of a single-notch ORR with a DD-DC 
(1200 µm).

However, as in the previous section, we found some randomness in the measured 
performance of both DD-DC designs that might be again related to the fabrication 
tolerances of the device. As an example, in Fig. 7 we measured the ER while applying
single-drive either in the upper or the lower phase shifter. The only difference between 
both graphs is the distance between metal layers. 


Fig. 7. Extinction Ratio and phase shift variation of a single-notch ORR with a DD-DC 
for different coupling lengths.

4.
DD-DCs based Tunable Basic Units for waveguide mesh arrangements

A novel class of programmable photonic ICs employs a massive interconnection of 
beamsplitters and phase shifter elements to produce multiport interferometric patterns. 
These arrangements have been proposed based on the replication of Tunable Basic Units 
(TBU) and their interconnection in a feedforward topology [6] and allowing light 
recirculation and feedback loops [5,7-9]. Most of the demonstrations rely on TBUs based 
on thermally-actuated Mach-Zehnder Interferometers loaded with one phase shifter per 
arm. The performance and versatility of these circuits are limited by the number of 
integrated TBUs. The scalability of this approach is constrained by the excess loss of 
each TBU, the optical crosstalk, the power consumption and the footprint. The losses
being one of the main limitations, a waveguide mesh circuit becomes impractical when it 
is made of TBUs with moderate insertion losses (> 0.4 dB) [9] and with optical crosstalk 
below 20 dB [19]. Due to the considerable number of TBUs that need to be traversed by 
the signal in a circuit with certain degree of interconnection complexity, a minimal
improvement in the TBU insertion loss has a remarkable impact on the overall mesh 
design and performance. To achieve this, we analyze the possibility of implementing the 
TBUs using the designed DD-DC instead of a 3-dB MZI.
Figure 8 shows the first implementation of a triangular waveguide mesh arrangement
and the first waveguide mesh arrangement exclusively based on DD-DCs. It is 
characterized by 5 TBUs, building-up two triangular cells, 8 optical ports and 10 phase 
shifters.
In this simple structure we can program each TBU to build up delay lines (by setting 
the TBU to cross or bar) and beam splitters of any arbitrary splitting ratio. In addition, a 
common phase term can be locally added to the outputs of each TBU, as we demonstrated
in the previous section. With all these functions, one can discretize conventional PICs 
into TBU primitives. First, we characterize all the TBU responses by using the mesh 
characterization protocol recently proposed [20]. Afterwards, we were able to program 
different structures like delay lines, a single ring resonator, an add-drop filter
(transmission and reflection response), and two coupled ring resonators (CROW).
Figure 9a describes the single ring resonator implementation. Here, TBU1 is 
configured as a tunable coupler, TBU2 and TBU3 are configured in their bar state. The 
reflection response is obtained employing input port 1 and output port 2 as illustrated in 
Fig. 9(c1). Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 9(b1), we can now exploit the independent 
phase shifting capabilities of DD-DCs and tune the position of the notch over the full 
Free Spectral Range without seriously compromising the extinction ratio. Next, we 
reprogrammed the mesh to perform an add-drop filter by modifying the TBU3
configuration to an arbitrary tunable coupler configuration. As illustrated in Fig. 9c1, we 
measured the transmission and reflection responses of the ring. Note that we have 
optimized them separately. The extinction ratios are 24 and 17 dB in the reflection and 
transmission response, respectively.


Fig. 8. Picture and labelled mask layout of a triangular waveguide mesh based on DD-DC 
tunable elements.

The next example illustrates the synthesis of two coupled optical cavities. Again, we 
employ the input port 1. The reflection response is obtained from output port 2 (Fig.
9(b2)) and the transmission response from output port 7 (Fig. 9(c2)).  In this case, the 
measured ER was 8 and 9 dB, respectively.

Fig. 9. Triangular feedforward/feed-backward waveguide mesh arrangement based on 
DD-DC units. (a) Targeted layout and TBU settings, (b) Reflection response of optical 
circuits, (c) transmission response of optical circuits, First row: single ring resonator and 
add-drop, Second row: Coupled Ring Resonator Structure.

5.
Discussion

5.1 Theoretical background

The experimental work performed in this paper confirms the behavior of the DD-DC as a 
2x2 optical component that enables a tunable splitting ratio and a common phase shift at 
the outputs. In the experimental results covered in the paper, we measured an unexpected 


non-symmetrical behaviour between the actuation of the phase shifters. Going deeper into 
the theoretical framework, directional couplers have been modelled by using coupled-
mode equations. These analyses on passive designs have been extended to account for 
single-drive and for differential modulation schemes and the possibility of altering the 
propagation conditions of each arm in a differential way [3] or independently [9]. 
According to these analyses, we would have expected that both phase actuators should 
provide a symmetric effect when tuning any of the phase shifters in a single-drive mode.  
However, the proposed theoretical solutions assume that the coupling factor between 
waveguides (κ) is kept constant during the tuning and symmetrical (the coupling factor 
from waveguide 1 to waveguide 2 is equal to the coupling factor from waveguide 2 to 
waveguide 1). Under these conditions, independently of the phase actuator employed 
(upper or lower) in a DD-DC, the overall splitting ratio would tend to κ equal to zero first 
and small oscillations would appear around the bar operation point, decoupling the 
waveguide interaction.
However, the propagation coefficient modification of each waveguide has a direct 
impact on the coupling factor between the two waveguides (κ10, κ01 ) [21], and might 
introduce a non-even function for each phase actuator. In addition, with a high
probability, the tuning effect will modify the refractive index of the cladding with a 
different proportion for each waveguide. This is the reason behind the asymmetrical / 
non-even behaviour of the DD-DC reported in this paper.

5.2 Large-scale applications
The proposed architecture can find applications in any PIC requiring reconfigurable 
beamsplitting and phase shifting. Fig. 10 illustrates examples of their local application in 
coupled-ring structures, MZIs and waveguide meshes. According to the latter, the 
proposed architecture potentially reduces the insertion loss of Tunable Basic Units, 
allowing their scalability and versatility increment. However, future development would 
require the optimization of the device to increase its tolerance to fabrication variations in 
order to maintain an optical crosstalk under 20 dB in the targeted wavelength range. In 
regard to power consumption, the thermo-optic effect requires around 350 mW to tune to 
either bar or cross state. The high-power requirement arises from the waveguide´s low
thermo-optic coefficient and the high tuning crosstalk coefficient in between them. To 
ensure the future evolution of DD-DC, it should be substituted by alternate tuning 
mechanisms. The current demonstration is the seed for future works that will potentially 
combine the proposed architecture with non-volatile phase change materials [22-23], 
maintaining the decrement in insertion losses and allowing near-zero power consumption. 
Finally, the footprint of the device is highly influenced by the length required for the
desired tuning and should be in the range of hundreds of micrometres to allow high-
density integration.

Fig. 10. Photonic integrated circuits with Dual-Drive Directional Couplers. (a) add-drop, 
(b) Mach-Zehnder Interferometer, (c) arbitrary unitary linear multiport interferometer, (d) 
feedback-enabled waveguide meshes IW: input waveguides, OW: output waveguides.


6.
Conclusions

The very-large integration density required in future field-programmable photonic 
integrated circuits demands the need for optimization of the basic programmable units. 
Here, we have proposed a new component based on adding two extra phase actuators to 
the conventional directional coupler. Taking advantage of the thermo-optic effect, we 
experimentally demonstrate that it is possible to set, independently, the coupling ratio and 
an overall phase increment that can find applications in programming conventional 
photonic integrated circuits and in waveguide mesh arrangements. In the case of the
latter, they are proposed as a possible option to overcome insertion losses and reduce 
internal reflections. Future work is required to increase the fabrication tolerances.

Acknowledgments

The authors acknowledge financial support by the ERC ADG-2016 UMWP-Chip, the 
Generalitat Valenciana PROMETEO 2017/017 research excellency award, and the COST 
Action CA16220 EUIMWP.

References

1.
R. Soref, “The Past, Present and Future of Silicon Photonics,”, IEEE Journal of selected topics in 
Quantum electronics, vol. 12, no. 6, 2006.
2.
D. Inniss and R. Rubenstein, Silicon photonics. Fuelling the Next Information Revolution, Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2018.
3.
S. Somekh, et al., "Channel Optical Waveguides and Directional Couplers in GaAs–Imbedded and 
Ridged," Appl. Opt., vol. 13, pp. 327-330, 1974.
4.
Madsen, C.K. & Zhao, J. H., Optical Filter Design and Analysis: A Signal Processing Approach. Wiley 
(1999). 
5.
D. Pérez, et al., "Reconfigurable lattice mesh designs for programmable photonic processors," Opt. 
Express, vol. 24, pp. 12093-12106, 2016.
6.
W. R. Clements, et al., “Optimal design for universal multiport interferometers,” Optica, vol. 3, no 12, p. 
1460-1465, 2016. 
7.
L. Zhuang et al., "Programmable photonic signal processor chip for radiofrequency applications," Optica,
vol. 2, pp. 854-859, 2015.
8.
D. Pérez, et al., “Multipurpose silicon photonics signal processor core,” Nature Communications, vol. 8, 
no. 636, 2017. 
9.
D. Pérez, et al., “Programmable True-Time Delay Lines using integrated waveguide meshes,” Journal of 
Lightwave and Technology, , 2018.
10.
H. Kogelnikm and R. V. Schmidt., Switched directional couplers with alternating Δβ,” IEEE Journal of 
Quantum Electronics, 1976, vol. 12, no 7, p. 396-401. 
11.
R.V. Schmidt and H. Kogelnik, “Electrooptically switched coupler with stepped reversal using Ti diffused 
LiNbO3 waveguides,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 28, pp. 503-506, May 1976.
12.
R. C. Alferness and J.J. Veselka, “Simultaneous modulation and wavelength multiplexing with a tunable 
Ti: LiNbO3 directional coupler filter,” Electronics Letters, 1985, vol. 21, no 11, p. 466-467.
13.
A. S. M. Supa’at, “Implementation of thermo-optic waveguide photonics switch using polymer material,” 
at Photonics (ICP), 2013 IEEE 4th International Conference on. IEEE, 2013. p. 33-37.
14.
A. Sharkawy, et al. Electro-optical switching using coupled photonic crystal waveguides. Optics Express, 
vol. 10, no 20, p. 1048-1059, 2002.
15.
P. Orlandi, et al. Compact tunable directional couplers in SOI. at CLEO: Science and Innovations. Optical 
Society of America, 2013. p. JTu4A. 51., 2013
16.
D. Pérez, et al., “Programmable True-Time Delay Lines using integrated waveguide meshes,” Journal of 
Lightwave and Technology, vol. 36, no. 19, pp. 4591-4601, 2018.
17.
Micó, G., Bru, L. A., Pastor, D., Doménech, D., Fernández, J., Sánchez, A., ... & Muñoz, P. (2018, 
February). Silicon nitride photonics: from visible to mid-infrared wavelengths. In Silicon Photonics XIII 
(Vol. 10537, p. 105370B). International Society for Optics and Photonics.
18.
D.Pérez, , et al., Thermal tuners on a Silicon Nitride platform. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.02958(2016).
19.
D. Pérez and J. Capmany, "Scalable analysis for arbitrary photonic integrated waveguide meshes," Optica 
6, 19-27 2019.
20.
D. Pérez, “Integrated microwave photonic processors using waveguide mesh cores”, Ph.D. Thesis, 2017.
21.
Saleh, B. E., & Teich, M. C. (2019). Fundamentals of photonics. John Wiley & Sons.
22.
C. Rios, et al., "Controlled switching of phase-change materials by evanescent-field coupling in integrated 
photonics [Invited]," Opt. Mater. Express 8, 2455-2470 (2018) 
23.
Jiajiu Zheng, Amey Khanolkar, Peipeng Xu, Shane Colburn, Sanchit Deshmukh, Jason Myers, Jesse 
Frantz, Eric Pop, Joshua Hendrickson, Jonathan Doylend, Nicholas Boechler, and Arka Majumdar, "GST-


on-silicon hybrid nanophotonic integrated circuits: a non-volatile quasi-continuously reprogrammable 
platform," Opt. Mater. Express 8, 1551-1561 (2018)


