Double Input Boost/Y-Source DC-DC Converter for
Renewable Energy Sources

*

Niteesh S Shanbog
Dept. of Electrical and Electronics
PES University
Bengaluru, India
nit1995@yahoo.co.in

K R Pushpa
Dept. of Electrical and Electronics
PES University
Bengaluru, India
pushpakr@pes.edu

Abstract—With the increasing adoption of renewable energy
sources by domestic users, decentralisation of the grid is fast
becoming a reality. Distributed generation is an important part
of a decentralised grid. This approach employs several small-scale
technologies to produce electrical energy close to the end users
or consumers. The higher reliability of these systems proves to be
of advantage when compared to traditional generation systems.
Multi-Input Converters (MICs) perform a decisive function in
Distributed Energy Resources (DERs). Making use of such MICs
prove to be beneficial in terms of size, cost, number of components
used, efficiency and reliability as compared to using several
independent converters. This thesis proposes a double input DC-
DC converter which makes use of a quasi Y-source converter in
tandem with a boost converter. The quasi Y-source converter has
the advantage of having a very high gain for low duty cycles. The
associated operating modes are analysed and the operation of the
MIC is verified using simulation result. A hardware prototype is
built for large signal analysis in open loop. Different loads are
applied and the efficiency of the MIC as a whole as well as the
load sharing between the different sources is investigated.
Index
Terms—y-source,
dc-dc
converter,
boost
converter,
Multi-input converters

I. INTRODUCTION

Multi Input Converters (MICs) are growing in popularity
because of their new found applications in the modern energy
system which includes significant amounts of renewable en-
ergy sources and distributed generation [1]. In most modern
day setups, the input power source, output load demand or
sometimes even both change instantaneously and are not
exactly the same at any given instant [2] as they should ideally
be. Providing a good match between the input source and the
output sink is thus, a complicated task. Additional sources
thus become necessary to aid the main source in load demand
fulfillment.
It is such situations that MICs have started to play a pivotal
role. One single MIC can thus be able to replace numerous
converters leading to significant savings. These converters
interface different input voltage levels and combines their
advantages to feed the load. MICs have a lower number of

components while also simultaneously increasing the reliabil-
ity and the efficiency.

The Y-source impedance network is introduced in converters
in order to achieve a high voltage gain even with small duty
cycles. A DC-DC boost converter has been implemented in [3]
using the Y-Source impedance network. This network makes
use of a tightly coupled transformer to achieve the high gain.
The quasi Y-Source DC- DC converter proposed in [4] is
a modification to the Y-source converter. This modification
over the Y-source converter enjoys continuous input current
characteristics thus enabling it to be used in fuel cells and
photo-voltaic systems. An entire family of Y-source based DC-
DC converters have been defined in [5] to make use of it’s high
gain applications in sources like photo-voltaic cells and fuel
cells. Coupled inductors have been used in literature [6] to
create magnetically coupled impedance sources in converters
to create high gain at small duty cycles. The Quasi Y-source
converter belongs to this class of converters. The DC-DC
Boost Converter [7] is one of the most basic power electronics
converters which is used to boost the DC voltage.

Liu and Chen have given the general systematic approach to
synthesize Multi Input Converters in [8]. The Quasi Y-source
converter and the boost converter act like a Pulsating Current
Source Cell according to [8] and hence they must be added
together in parallel before being supplied to the load. Various
types of double input converters which draw from two sources
either simultaneously or individually have been implemented
in [9], [10] and [11].The general structure of an MIC is given
in Fig 1.

This paper is organized into 7 sections. The next section
contains the converter topology and the operating modes.
Section III and IV discusses the simulation results and the
observations from the hardware implementation respectively.
Section V discusses about the results obtained and the pattern
of load sharing between the two sources. Section VI discusses
about the conclusions that can be drawn from this paper while
Section VII talks about the future course of work that can be
done with this converter topology.

arXiv:1907.02789v1  [eess.SY]  5 Jul 2019


Fig. 1. General structure of a Multi Input Converter.

II. CONVERTER TOPOLOGY

The double input boost/Y-source DC-DC converter is using
the guidelines given in [8]. Both the quasi Y-source converter
and the boost converter act like a Pulsating Source Current
(PCSC) cell when the load is removed. Hence they are
parallely connected to the voltage sink in order to synthesize
the Multi-Input Converter as shown in Fig 2. Vin1, Vin2 and
Vo are the input voltage of the quasi Y-source converter, the
input voltage of the boost converter and output voltage at the
load respectively. The source which is fed to the quasi Y-
source converter has a smaller voltage than the second source
because the quasi Y-source converter has a higher gain.

Fig. 2. General structure of a Multi Input Converter.

C1 and C2 are the capacitors added to the quasi Y-source
converter in order to draw continuous input current. An
additional input inductor, L1 is added to stop the large inrush
of input current at start-up and also to avoid input oscillations
due to the input parasitic capacitances of C1 and C2.
The converter drains power from both the input sources
either simultaneously or individually. Since there are two
switches, we have four modes of operation:

• Mode 1: When SW1 is ON and SW2 is OFF. The load
draws power only from Source 1. The input inductor of
the second source is being charged.

• Mode 2: When both SW1 and SW2 is ON. The load is
being supplied by both the power sources.

• Mode 3: When SW1 is OFF and SW2 is ON. The load
is supplied only by the second source through the boost
converter. The quasi Y-source converter is charging the
input inductor.

• Mode 4: When both SW1 and SW2 is OFF. The load is
completely disconnected from the source.
The output equation of quasi Y-source converter is given in
[4]:

Vo =
Vin

1 − δdST
(1)

where δ is the an integral constant determined by the
number of turns in the three winding transformer and is given

by δ = N1 + N2

N2 − N3
and dST is the duty ratio for the quasi

Y-source converter.
The output equation of a boost converter is given by

Vo =
Vin

1 − D
(2)

where D is the duty cycle of the boost converter. Simluation
is done on this converter using MATLAB-Simulink.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

The double input converter has been simulated using
MATLAB-Simulink. The circuit simulated is shown in Fig.
2 and the it’s parameters are enumerated in Table 1.

TABLE I
CIRCUIT PARAMETERS

Parameters
Values

Input Voltage (Vin1)
12V

Input Voltage (Vin2)
24V

Output Voltage (Vo)
48V

Input Inductors (Lin1 and Lin2)
1mH

DC Blocking Capacitor (C1)
470µF

DC Blocking Capacitor (C2)
150µF

Output Capacitor (Co)
470µF

Turns Ratio of Three winding transformer (N1 : N2 : N3)
3:2:1

Switching Frequency
20kHz

Fig 3 shows the simulation block of the double input
converter as used in MATLAB-Simulink. The turns ratio is
selected from the required gain (4) in order to boost the input
voltage from 12V to 48V. To get a gain of 4, the turns ratio
is required to be 3:2:1.
Fig 5 shows the output voltage when the input voltages are
12V and 24V.

Fig. 3. Simulation Block Diagram of the Double Input Converter


The gate signals to the MOSFETs of the two converters is
shown in Fig 4. The Boost Converter requires a duty cycle
of 50% to boost an input voltage of 24V to 48V whereas
the Quasi Y-Source Converter can boost 12V to 48V with a
significantly lower duty cycle.

Fig. 4. Gate signals to the MOSFETs of Boost and Quasi Y-Source Converter

Fig 5 shows the output voltage when the input voltages are
12V and 24V.

Fig. 5. Output Voltage of Double Input Converter

IV. HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION

An open loop implementation of the double input converter
has been built and tested. The PWM signals are given by using
two TL494 ICs in master slave configuration. This is to ensure
that the PWM signals are synchronized. By inhibiting the
internal oscillator of the slave TL494 and supplying the same
saw-tooth waveform generated from the master to the timing
capacitor (Ct) terminal of the slave TL494, synchronized
PWM signals are possible. Fig 6 shows the hardware of the
double input converter which is built for testing purpose.
IR2101 is used to drive the gates of the MOSFETs. The
converter is loaded with different loads from 2.5W to 25W.
The efficiency and the load sharing pattern of the converter is
observed.
Two series of batteries are used as two independent sources.
Two different voltage levels are used for this purpose. An
output of 48V is obtained for inputs of 12V and 24V.
The same output is obtained even when each of the source
is independently used as well as when they are used simultane-
ously. Fig 7 shows the operation of the Double Input Converter
when both the sources are connected to the two converters.

Fig. 6. Hardware model of the Double Input Converter

Fig. 7. Operation of the Double Input Converter

Boost converters are inherently unstable as small increases
in the duty cycle can lead to very high voltage gains. The
tuning of the duty cycles is thus done beforehand. The output
voltage of 48V is observed.

V. RESULTS

The trend of input power required to supply the given output
load is shown in Fig 8. It also shows the input power drawn
by the two converters in order to supply the given load.

Fig. 8. Input Power vs Output Power


This graph shows the pattern of load sharing by the two
converters when different loads are applied. The efficiency
of the converter is extremely low at small loads. The boost
converter supplies the majority of the load in this converter in
the open loop configuration. In the absence of any control
strategy which dictates which source is to be the primary
source, most of the current is hence drawn by the boost
converter. This is because two 12V batteries are connected in
series to derive the 24V input for the boost converter. Hence
the strain on the battery is lower and this source can supply
greater current than a single 12V battery. Fig 9 shows the
sharing of load between the two converters at different values
of loads.

Fig. 9. Load Sharing between the two sources

Fig 9 shows that the boost converter which has 2 batter-
ies supplies the majority of the load as the output load is
increased. This is a potential problem because if one of the
converter fails, then the other converter will go from supplying
a percentage of the load to supplying the full load. During this
time the voltage will droop in the absence of a closed loop
control system. The transient will be even more severe if the
converter which is supplying a higher percentage of the load
fails.
In the case of converters with multiple sources, most sources
will not share the load equally. One of the sources will always
try to supply an excessive fraction of the load. Typically, this
is the source with the highest power rating. It will always try
to deliver the highest current possible according to the design.
The voltage will drop as it supplies more current and when
the voltage has dropped to the point where it is lower than the
next source, the other source will be activated. In a system
with multiple sources, all the sources may contribute towards
fulfilling the load, but the proportion is widely unequal. In
the absence of any control strategy, the load sharing is highly
dependent on the voltages of the different sources used.
Fig 10 shows the plot of efficiency vs output power. By
loading the double input converter with loads which are closer
to the rated load, higher efficiency is obtained. At very low
loads, the efficiency is very poor. This can be explained by the
conduction losses and the V-I overlap losses which are usually

seen in DC-DC Converters at low loads. V-I overlap losses
are proportional to input voltage, load current and switching
frequency and occur due to the V-I overlap region that is seen
in converters with rapid switching cycles.

Fig. 10. Efficiency of the Double Input Converter at different loads

But at low loads, the conduction losses which are caused
due to current ripples dominate the overlap losses as the power
dissipated due to current ripples remain same whereas the
overlap losses reduce due to low load currents. Under light
loads, the gate drive losses which occur due to the charging
and discharging the gate capacitance dominate the load.

VI. CONCLUSION

With the increasing adoption of renewable energy in the
power grid, it has become imperative to look for unique
and efficient converter designs. Renewable energy sources are
primarily DC in nature. It is also one of the leading types of
distributed generation. In these conditions, the development
of a Multi-Input Converter to aggregate all the different dis-
tributed sources and feed a common load assumes importance.
This project proposes such a converter which can take in
two different sources of different voltage levels, aggregate
their power and feed a load. The use of different topologies
of converters in this aggregated converter has been well
demonstrated. A Quasi Y-Source converter which can give a
high gain is used for this converter. A boost converter has
also been used to demonstrate the use of multiple converters.
With this converter, the load can be shared between the two
sources. The use of multiple converters has been eliminated.
This method of using a multiple input converter to aggregate
different power sources can be used as a viable method to
integrate renewables into the existing power infrastructure.

VII. FUTURE SCOPE

To create a Multi Input Converter for distributed generation
sources for real life applications, the open loop version will
not be satisfactory. A control strategy has to developed where
one source is chosen to be the primary source and supplies the
bulk of the load while the other source acts as an auxiliary


source kicking in at peak demands. The converter must be
able to handle dynamic loads as well as dynamic sources as is
the case with most of the renewable sources. Current sharing
strategies must be developed so that both the converters supply
a pre-determined share of the load. This is essential so that
both the converters age at the same rate and replacement will
be easier.
An interesting method of current sharing will be to choose
one converter as the master. This master converter will be
employed with intelligent driver controls and will supply the
base load. The slave controller will boost the voltage to meet
the dynamic power requirements.
The performance of the converter with different types of
distributed generation sources like solar, wind, biomass, fuel
cells etc must be evaluated. Primary sources must be selected
based on the power availability. Auxiliary sources must be
used to supply the peak load demand. Adding extra redundant
converters to the existing topology can ensure reliability. Con-
ducting reliability studies of such converters and developing
redundancy indices will be an area of research.
Another upcoming are of research will be to develop
bidirectional converters which allow the integration of storage
devices as well. Advances in storage technology as well as
the availability of cheap second hand batteries disposed from
EV’s will increase the use of batteries as a part of the power
grid. Higher power production from renewables will be used
to store the batteries which will then be used during peak
loads. Having bidirectinal multi port converters will be useful
in such conditions.

REFERENCES

[1] H. L. Willis, Distributed power generation: planning and evaluation.
Crc Press, 2018.

[2] C. Arora, A. Soni, and N. K. Swarnkar, “Uses and comparison of multi
input converter topology with power control,” Journal of Advanced
Research in Power Electronics & Power Systems, vol. 5, no. 3&4,
pp. 21–23, 2018.

[3] Y. P. Siwakoti, P. C. Loh, F. Blaabjerg, and G. Town, “Y-source
impedance network,” in 2014 IEEE Applied Power Electronics Con-
ference and Exposition-APEC 2014, pp. 3362–3366, IEEE, 2014.

[4] E. Shehata, J. Thomas, A. Brisha, and M. Wageh, “Design and analysis
of a quasi y-source impedance network dc-dc converter,” in 2017
Nineteenth International Middle East Power Systems Conference (MEP-
CON), pp. 235–241, IEEE, 2017.

[5] Y. Wang, W. Jing, Y. Qiu, Y. Wang, X. Deng, K. Hua, B. Hu, and D. Xu,
“A family of y-source dc/dc converter based on switched inductor,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 1587–1597,
2018.

[6] Y. P. Siwakoti, F. Blaabjerg, and P. C. Loh, “New magnetically coupled
impedance (z-) source networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Elec-
tronics, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 7419–7435, 2015.

[7] B. Hasaneen and A. A. E. Mohammed, “Design and simulation of dc/dc
boost converter,” in 2008 12th International Middle-East Power System
Conference, pp. 335–340, IEEE, 2008.

[8] Y.-C. Liu and Y.-M. Chen, “A systematic approach to synthesizing
multi-input dc–dc converters,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 116–127, 2009.

[9] Y.-M. Chen, Y.-C. Liu, and S.-H. Lin, “Double-input pwm dc/dc con-
verter for high-/low-voltage sources,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1538–1545, 2006.

[10] J. Ruan, F. Liu, X. Ruan, D. Yang, Y. Li, and K. Jin, “Isolated multiple-
input dc/dc converter using alternative pulsating source as building
cells,” in The 2010 International Power Electronics Conference-ECCE
ASIA-, pp. 1463–1470, IEEE, 2010.

[11] R. Ahmadi and M. Ferdowsi, “Double-input converters based on h-
bridge cells: derivation, small-signal modeling, and power sharing anal-
ysis,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers,
vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 875–888, 2011.


