Coupling-enhanced Dual ITO Layer Electro-absorption 

Modulator in Silicon Photonics  

 

MOHAMMAD H. TAHERSIMA1*, ZHIZHEN MA1*, YALIANG GUI1, SHUAI SUN1, HAO 

WANG, RUBAB AMIN1, HAMED DALIR2, RAY CHEN3, MARIO MISCUGLIO1, VOLKER 

J. SORGER1,+ 

 

1George Washington University, 800 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20052, USA 

2Omega Optics, Inc. 8500 Shoal Creek Blvd., Bldg. 4, Suite 200, Austin, Texas 78757, USA 
 

3Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, 

Texas 78712, USA 

*Equal author contribution.  

+Corresponding author: sorger@gwu.edu 

 
 

Manuscript
Click here to access/download;Manuscript;Coupling-enhanced
ITO EAM_Final.pdf


Abstract 

Electro-optic signal modulation provides a key functionality in modern technology and 

information networks. Photonic integration has enabled not only miniaturizing photonic 

components, but also provided performance improvements due to co-design addressing both 

electrical and optical device rules. However, the millimeter-to-centimeter large footprint of many 

foundry-ready photonic electro-optic modulators significantly limits on-chip scaling density. To 

address these limitations, here we experimentally demonstrate a coupling-enhanced electro-

absorption modulator by heterogeneously integrating a novel dual-gated indium-tin-oxide (ITO) 

phase-shifting tunable absorber placed at a silicon directional coupler region. Our experimental 

modulator shows a 2 dB extinction ratio for a just 4 µm short device at 4 volt bias. Since no 

material nor optical resonances are deployed, this device shows spectrally broadband operation 

as demonstrated here across the entire C-band. In conclusion we demonstrate a modulator 

utilizing strong index-change from both real and imaginary part of active material enabling 

compact and high-performing modulators using semiconductor foundry-near materials.   

 
 


Introduction 

Integrated electro-optic (EO) modulators perform key applications in tele- and data 

communication1, inter-chip and possibly intra (on-chip) photonic interconnects for multicore 

microprocessors and memory systems2,3, RF and analog signal processing such as photonic A/D 

conversion4,5 and in sensors6. Monolithic integration, such as in silicon photonics, enables i) 

densifying photonic networks compared to discreetly-packaged components, ii) reduced device 

power-consumption7, and iii) enables a platform approach for cost- and density-scaling due to 

synergies arising largely processing Silicon-based components. The weak EO properties of 

Silicon8, however, result in order of millimeter-to-centimeter large modulator footprints, and thus 

impedes large-scale integration strategies, which was a major driver for the chip industry over 

decades9. Recent explorations in using photonic integrated circuits (PIC) for the interconnectivity 

functions of neural network also point to the importance of densification10,11.    

The performance metrics for modulators12,13 are high speed (3dB role-off, f3dB)14,15, high 

sensitivity/energy efficiency (E/bit, dynamic power)7,16,17, high extinction ratio and compact 

footprint (ER/unit-length)15. In order achieve high-performance modulators, two possible routes 

can be followed; i) increasing the light-matter interaction (LMI) such as increasing modal 

overlap, using optical resonances feedback (i.e. cavity Finesse, F ), or utilizing a high-group 

index (slow-light), and ii) utilizing materials with strong optical index tunability18. On-chip 

plasmonic modulators (surface plasmonic or hybrid plasmonic waveguide) were introduced as an 

efficient LMI enhancement approaches due to the large group index in plasmonic mode, 

resulting in compact footprint and high-bandwidth devices15,19, however, the significant ohmic 

loss from plasmonic effect limits the propagation distance of information encoded with light20, 


thus the modulation power efficiency suffers from optical power penalty21. On the other hand, 

silicon photonic micro-cavities with high quality (Q) factors were adopted to boost the LMI with 

photons interacting multiple times with the EO-tuned material proportional to the cavity’s F.22, 

but the fundamental trade-off between the photon life-time and device temporal response (f3dB) 

constrain the modulator performance, also, cavities with high Q would not operate spectrally 

broadband, thus requiring thermal resonance tuning to match the desired wavelength from the 

PIC, further increasing the modulation energy consumption via addition of this static power. To 

overcome the material limitation of Silicon as EO ‘active’ material, heterogeneous integration23 

has been introduced as a possible route to continue device scaling12 while minimizing modulator 

signaling performance; the idea is to utilize the foundry established Silicon platforms for passive 

waveguide parts for its low-loss propagation waveguide system, but to deploy other material 

options with stronger index modulation for active light-manipulation. The weak index tuning of 

Silicon, is due to a) the low carrier induced plasma dispersion, and b) the relatively low bandgap. 

A variety of EO-functional materials, such as graphene24,25, III-V materials26 and transparent 

conductive oxides (TCO)27,28 have been investigated for EO modulation. Here we select Indium-

tin-oxide (ITO) as the EO material and integrate an ITO-oxide-ITO capacitive gate-stack atop a 

silicon photonic waveguide to form an all-photonic optical mode. The choice for ITO is 

threefold; i) the carrier concentration modulation in ITO can be in the order of ~1020 cm-3, which 

results in a refractive tuning in unity order19,27, ii) Unity-strong optical index modulation (Dn ~ 1) 

has been experimentally observed at, or close to, the epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) condition29,30, iii) 

While process control of ITO has been challenging due to intrinsic material complexities, we 

have yet recently demonstrated a holistic (electrical and optical) approach to both precisely and 

repeatedly control ITO’s parameters31. iv) ITO belongs to the class of TCO family and is 


currently used massively by both smart phones and solar-cell industry for touch screens, and 

transparent low-resistive front-end contact, respectively32. Hence it might enter foundry 

processes sooner than other exotic materials. 

With the exceptional refractive index modulation, ITO has been heterogeneously integrated with 

photonic waveguide to build next generation EO modulators. If using solely the imaginary part 

index tuning, with optimization of optical mode and material processing condition, despite the 

material already gated to the ENZ point, photonic electro-absorption (EA) ITO modulator has 

been reported to have only 0.15 dB/µm extinction ratio (ER)29, due to limited light-ITO thin film 

interaction. Recently, phase-shift based ITO modulator has been also demonstrated by a Mach-

Zehnder interferometer (MZI) configuration33, but the modulator performance is limited by 

fundamental Kramers-Kronig relation, thus having either  a high insertion loss (IL), or exhibits 

degraded modulation depth as the loss and phase of the material changes simultaneously With 

the addition of a photonic crystal cavity design, Wang’s group demonstrated a nanocavity-based 

ITO modulator with ultracompact footprint34, they also claim that for such device the phase- and 

absorption modulation of the material contribute coherently to the EO modulation. The concept 

of using both real and imaginary part index tuning for modulation is indeed interesting, however, 

here we argue that for nanocavity-based devices, the extra absorption induced from ITO carrier 

accumulation would reduce the Q of the cavity thus broadening the spectrum response35. As a 

result, the overall extinction performance of such modulator would be degraded by the extra loss 

accompanying the phase change of the material. Nevertheless, the aforementioned 

heterogeneously integrated ITO photonic modulators bias (gating) ITO against Silicon, which 

usually has a low conductivity thus leads to high RC delay. Selective doping of Silicon could 


reduce the serial resistance for potentially achieving high-speed modulation, but which increase 

the design and fabrication complexity, and loss.  

Here, we experimentally demonstrate a compact coupling-enhanced dual-layer ITO modulator 

that uses both the real and imaginary parts of ITO’s tunable index synergistically to increase EO 

modulation while not relying on optical or material resonances thus allowing for truly broadband 

performance. In brief, in the absorptive stage (light OFF) of the modulator, an additional 

waveguide section (‘coupling island’) in close proximity to the bus waveguide enables a higher 

extinction ratio compared to the traditional absorption-only case without sacrificing device 

footprint by realizing light power diversion (through coupling) away the bus to the island. While 

the light-ON stage the coupling is minimized and the optical losses are minimal due to the 

photonic (non-plasmonic) mode and dielectric-like dual-gated ITO/oxide/ITO stack atop both 

waveguides (bus and island) to change the both the EAM loss and the mode coupling. We 

experimentally achieve more than 2 dB of ER from a 4 µm short device (0.5 dB/µm), benefiting 

from both the loss and coupling modulation of the system, and low energy consumption of 0.77 

pJ/bit. The nature of the directional coupling and free-carrier absorption from ITO enables a 

spectrally broadband response, which can be seamlessly integrated with wavelength division 

multiplexing (WDM) technology for higher link-level data rates. Also, the dual stack ITO 

configuration eliminates the high serial resistance from Silicon, thus enables a potentially short 

RC delay.  

Results 

For directional coupler (DC) devices, the study of a ITO based directional switch was first 

introduced in 201536, where a plasmonic mode and ITO/metal stack are placed on the bar 


waveguide to enhance the light-ITO interaction to realize large index mismatch between bus and 

bar waveguide to control the coupling between waveguides. Also, unlike other phase change 

materials such as GeSbTe (GST) that could change from dielectric to metallic phase37, the low 

mode overlap of the active region in such a photonic mode (ITO/Silicon waveguide) would not 

provide a high effective index change for efficient switching (see supplementary information iii). 

In contrast in this work, we explore a different and, thus far unexplored, modulation scheme by 

stacking ITO/oxide/ITO layer across both the bus and the coupling-island to alter both the 

absorption and beating length of such a coupled system (Fig. 1). Without bias, the dual ITO 

layers are in flat band condition (assuming same doping levels verified in ref31, thus the ITO 

layers are in a low-loss state (ITO is dielectric with low carrier concentration). Here, the DC’s 

beating length is much longer than the island length resulting in high transmission at the bus 

waveguide (Fig. 1a). By capacitively gating the dual ITO layers one achieves a higher linear 

absorption (loss) compared to the zero bias state due to carrier accumulation. Note, the dual ITO 

layers operating in a seemingly push-pull configuration appear as there would be a vanishing net 

index change (one ITO layer carrier accumulation the other ITO depletion). However, this is not 

true, since ITO’s Drude-model shows a non-symmetric index behavior with carrier concentration 

change (Fig. 3a). In addition, the carrier accumulation greatly reduces the refractive index of ITO 

(order of unity) atop the waveguides and inside the gap (between both waveguides), thus the 

optical path between two waveguides is reduced as if the gap between the bus and island 

waveguide would be shrunk. Since the coupling coefficient is rather sensitive to the gap size 

between the two waveguides, more optical power is transferred to the island waveguide with 

electrical bias and a low transmission state from bus waveguide can be observed (Fig. 1b). Here, 

between the light ON and OFF states, the synergistic usage of (turned-on with bias) absorption 


and coupling together help to reduce the light intensity in bus waveguide. As an EO modulator, 

we claim that the real and imaginary part tuning of ITO contribute together to the modulation 

depth (extinction ratio, ER).  

 

Figure 1. Operation principle for a coupling-enhanced ITO modulator, here both the change in ITO absorption and 

change of coupling coefficient contribute together to the modulation of the transmission on the bus waveguide. A. 

Without external bias, the top and bottom layer of ITO has an intrinsically low carrier concentration, thus low 

absorption for the device region. Also, a long beating length prohibit the coupling from bus waveguide to the island 

waveguide, a high transmission could be expected from the bus waveguide. B. With external gating applied, the 

bottom layer ITO becomes more absorptive due to carrier accumulation, while the beating length becomes shorter 

for the coupling region, the transmission is blocked from the bus waveguide. 

 

 


Figure 2. A. Schematic of coupling-enhanced dual-gated ITO modulator. B. Scanning electron microscopy image of 

fabricated device. C. FIBSEM cross-section illustrating the device layers and operating mechanism of the active 

region. An optical beam is modulated by modifying the coupling coefficient between bus and island waveguides via 

applying an electrical bias across the double ITO layer capacitor. In the coupling region, two waveguides are spaced 

by a gap distance g = 200 nm, covered by an active device region (zoom-in: ITO/Al2O3/ITO). In the active coupling 

region, the first 10 nm of Al2O3 layer is directly deposited on top of the Silicon waveguides as a passivation layer 

using atomic layer deposition (ALD), then the 15 nm inner ITO layer, 10 nm Al2O3 gate oxide and 15 nm outer ITO 

layer is patterned and deposited on the coupling region consecutively to define the device region, the ITO layers are 

gated in a capacitively push-pull configuration to modulate the photonic coupler region. Here ITO’s optical index 

changes nonlinearly (i.e. non-symmetrically) with applied bias (see Fig. 3a). This nonlinear behavior is further 

enhanced by a non-symmetric model overlap of the bottom vs. top ITO-layer (see inset illustrates the corresponding 

TM mode-field profile from eigenmode analysis). 

 

Our dual-gated ITO modulator consists of a Silicon photonic bus waveguide, and a short (2-8 µm 

long) coupling-island waveguide separated 200 nm away from the bus. SOI waveguides: width = 

500 nm, height = 220 nm is patterned via negative E-beam photoresist (HSQ) followed by dry 

etching using SF6 and C4F8, and the dual-gated Al2O3/ITO/Al2O3/ITO stack is deposited on top 

of the coupling region, where the lower oxide serves as electrical isolation. Note, that the short 

island waveguide is slightly curved away from the bus waveguide to minimize the abrupt 

effective index change for the propagation, thus minimizing the insertion losses from the SOI 

waveguide into the device section. Both ITO layers extend beyond the coupling region to 

facilitate electrical connection via two Ti/Au contact pads, (Fig. 2A). Overall, the 50 nm-tall 

(vertically) stack is not only on top of the waveguides but also resides inside the gap between, 

which effects the propagating constant of the TM mode inside the waveguide (Fig. 2C inset). 

This setup effectively allows voltage-tuning the coupled supermodes index and hence altering 


the coupling length of the DC. The induced change in the carrier concentration of ITO layers 

thus tunes the absorption of ITO layers and the coupling factor between two waveguides 

simultaneously.  

The optical permittivity of ITO, for near-infrared (NIR) wavelength, can be described using 

Drude model as27,29: 

𝜀"#$(𝜔) = 𝜀* −

,-.

,./0,1   
(1) 

where 𝜔 is the angular frequency of light, 𝜀* is the high frequency permittivity of ITO, Γ the 

damping frequency for the electron collisions inside ITO. And 𝜔3 = 4

567.

89:∗ is the plasma 

frequency, depends on the carrier concentration 𝑁=, and effective mass of electrons inside ITO 

film 𝑚∗ . Thus, by changing the carrier concentration 𝑁=  in ITO electrically, the optical 

permittivity is tuned. It has been reported that for ITO deposition, depending on the processing 

and post-processing conditions, such as the gas mixture, temperature during sputter and post-

annealing, the intrinsic carrier concentration could span from 1 × 10BC cmFG to 1 × 10HB cmFG, 

which greatly affects the optical index for the as-deposited ITO film38,39. In our work, we 

perform Hall-bar and ellipsometry measurement for our ITO thin films on a reference wafer 

which is processed in the same batch as the device sample, in order to control the ITO thin film 

optical property and extrapolate the carrier concentration and damping rate of the material. For 

instance, we measure an initial carrier concentration (without electrical bias) of 1.2 × 10BC cmFG 

for our as-deposited ITO from Hall-bar measurement, which is rather low due to the absence of a 

post-deposition thermal treatment. Then broadband (193-1690 nm) ellipsometric spectroscopy is 

performed and fitted with the Lorentz oscillator, Cauchy model and Drude models in order to 

extract the ITOs film parameters at zero bias giving a damping rate of 9.5 × 10BG rad/s, at the 


lowest mean square error (MSE)31. Fabricated devices, (with the 10 nm Al2O3 gate oxide) show 

an ITO carrier concentration in the accumulation layer of 5.1 × 10HR cmFG for 4 V electrical 

bias, while the optical property of ITO with carrier concentration is plotted in Fig. 3A, for 1550 

nm wavelength in our device the accumulation layer of ITO is tuned to be close to ENZ point 

(~6.8 × 10HR cmFG), achieving nearly unity change in real part of refractive index, and a 

significant increase in optical loss (𝜅) of the ITO film.  

Given the slight curvature of the coupling-island relative to the waveguide bus, the effective 

coupling length is shorter than the physical (ITO/oxide/ITO) stack; for instance, for the 4 µm 

long active device region this effective coupler length is actually 3.4 µm after normalization to a 

straight coupler with 200 nm gap size. Without bias both ITO layers exhibit dielectric material 

property with low loss. Performing a 2D eigenmode analysis, we find the effective index 

difference (phase mismatch) between the first order and second order mode to be 0.099, with a 

low linear absorption of 𝛼 = 21.89 cmFB (see supplementary information iv). The DC coupler’s 

beating length in this case can be estimated by  

𝐿X7YZ =

[

H(\]^]_F \`aa) ≈ 7.8 µm (2) 

where the 𝜆 = 1.55 µm is the operating wavelength, yielding an insertion loss of 2.1 dB for this 

4 µm long device at on state. With applied bias of 4 V (i.e. inner ITO layer biased to 

accumulation), the stronger free-carrier absorption from ITO increases the linear absorption of 

the supermode to be 𝛼 = 146 cmFB. Meanwhile, the near-unity index reduction of ITO’s real 

part reduces the effective optical path between the bus and island waveguide, resulting in an 

increased phase mismatch between the first and second order mode of 0.117, consecutively 

corresponds to a shorter beating length of 6.6 µm. Thus, more optical energy transfers from the 


bus to the island waveguide while the increased absorption further simultaneously decreases the 

transmission of the bus waveguide compared to the ON-state. Thus the increased coupling 

coefficient from real index modulation and higher free-carrier absorption accompanying the real 

index change contribute simultaneously to the intensity modulation on the bus waveguide, 

resulting in an ER = 2 dB for this 4 µm device. Interestingly, we observe a weaker modulation 

when the outer ITO layer is in accumulation state, which is due to the optical perturbation theory 

that the outer ITO is further away from the Silicon waveguide core, resulting a smaller ITO 

mode overlap (Fig. 3B). Also, the modulator performance is measured to be quite uniform across 

the C-band, because of the non-resonant nature of both the coupling effect and the intra-band 

free-carrier-based absorption from ITO (Fig. 3C). Lastly, the length dependent study of effective 

(i.e. bending-corrected) coupling length versus ER performance shows reasonable agreement 

between the numerical approach and experimental measurement (Fig. 3D). This indicates that 

indeed the change of linear absorption and coupling coefficient contribute synergistically 

towards higher ER.  


 

Figure 3. A. Experimental verified ITO refractive index data under different carrier concentration, fitted using 

Drude model. B. Modulation performance for a 4 µm device, note that for outer layer ITO accumulation shows a 

weaker modulation effect compare to inner ITO accumulation, since it is further away to the waveguide core. C. 

Broadband performance of the modulator across C band, the limitation is mainly due to the spectrum response of the 

grating coupler. D. Length dependent measurement for 3 different device length (2 µm, 4 µm and 6 µm long devices 

have been fabricated and measured, which correspond to an effective coupling device length of 1.95 µm, 3.4 µm and 

4.4 µm, respectively.) shows a good agreement with the numerical simulation result, illustrating the contribution of 

linear absorption and coupling change for the ER.  

 

 

In addition to the joint contribution from both the real and imaginary index change towards a 

mutually synergistic modulation operation, the dual-gated ITO layer also supports overcoming 


the high serial resistance drawbacks of devices where ITO is biased against Silicon33,34. 

Providing some estimation to this effect here, for our 4 µm device, the metal contacts are spaced 

6 µm away from the active region, thus the serial resistance is 1.8 KΩ using our measured 

resistivity of deposited ITO thin film of 1.8 × 10Fg Ω ∙ m from Hall bar measurement, which is 

even a few times lower than those reported for doped Silicon waveguide as the contact34. The 

estimated RC limited bandwidth of our device is 458 MHz, with the capacitance of 193 fF. 

However, with proper optimization such as reducing contact spacing of the device region both 

the serial resistance and capacitance could be reduced to 525 Ω and 56 fF, respectively, which 

corresponds to a RC bandwidth of 54 GHz, and modulation energy consumption of 200 fJ/bit, 

while keeping a minimum distance of half wavelength (750 nm) to avoid generating plasmonic 

effect. Overall, with 2 dB modulation from a 4 µm device, such a modulation of 0.5dB/µm is 

rather high compared to other device schemes, and does not even rely on resonances (spectrally 

broadband). With an IL = 2 dB, the ER/IL-ratio is about unity; while this is not outstanding 

compared to lithium-niobate40 or even Silicon21 modulators, these devices are 3-4 orders of 

magnitude more compact. Also, by engineering the device dimension, for instance, reduce the 

gap size below 200 nm, or increase the device length to reach two times of beating length at ON 

state, would further enhance the ER/IL performance of the device while keep the device footprint 

still in sub-15 µm range, which is much shorter than a linear absorption only ITO modulator29.  

Conclusion 

In summary, we introduce and experimentally demonstrate a novel coupling-enhanced dual-

gated ITO modulator heterogeneously integrated at the coupling regime between a silicon 

waveguide bus and a short coupling island. We show that for our coupling-enhanced electro-


absorption modulator, both the real and imaginary index modulation of this ITO/oxide/ITO stack 

synergistically contribute towards the modulation. This way we achieve a 2 dB extinction ratio, 

ER, modulation while being 4 µm compact (0.5 dB/µm) with an insertion loss, IL, of 2 dB 

(ER/IL = 1) for 4 volts of applied bias. We verify a flat spectral response across the C-band 

frequencies since neither optical nor material resonances are needed in this device configuration. 

The design features careful process control to enable an ITO material away from the ENZ-point 

at light ON-state to reduce losses while demonstrating a near unity ITO EO index change under 

modulation. Taken together, the heterogeneous integration of an emerging electro-optic material, 

ITO, which is commonly used in the semiconductor industry, offers positive device-synergies 

demonstrating a compact coupling-enhanced modulator on a Silicon photonic platform.  

Acknowledgement 

VS is funded by AFOSR (FA9550-17-1-0377) and ARO (W911NF-16-2-0194) and HD by 

NASA STTR, Phase I (80NSSC18P2146). 

Reference 

1. Barwicz, T. et al. Polarization-transparent microphotonic devices in the strong confinement 

limit. Nature Photonics 1, 57–60 (2007). 

2. Batten, C. et al. Building Many-Core Processor-to-DRAM Networks with Monolithic CMOS 

Silicon Photonics. IEEE Micro 29, 8–21 (2009). 

3. Green, W. M., Rooks, M. J., Sekaric, L. & Vlasov, Y. A. Ultra-compact, low RF power, 10 

Gb/s silicon Mach-Zehnder modulator. Optics Express 15, 17106 (2007). 


4. Holzwarth, C. W. et al. High speed analog-to-digital conversion with silicon photonics. in 

(eds. Kubby, J. A. & Reed, G. T.) 72200B (2009). doi:10.1117/12.808952 

5. Li, A., Singh, S. & Sievenpiper, D. Metasurfaces and their applications. Nanophotonics 7, 

989–1011 (2018). 

6. Kim, G.-D. et al. Silicon photonic temperature sensor employing a ring resonator 

manufactured using a standard CMOS process. Optics Express 18, 22215 (2010). 

7. Timurdogan, E. et al. An ultralow power athermal silicon modulator. Nature Communications 

5, (2014). 

8. Soref, R. & Bennett, B. Electrooptical effects in silicon. IEEE Journal of Quantum 

Electronics 23, 123–129 (1987). 

9. Liu, A. et al. A high-speed silicon optical modulator based on a metal–oxide–semiconductor 

capacitor. Nature 427, 615–618 (2004). 

10. 
Heuser, T., Große, J., Kaganskiy, A., Brunner, D. & Reitzenstein, S. Fabrication of dense 

diameter-tuned quantum dot micropillar arrays for applications in photonic information 

processing. APL Photonics 3, 116103 (2018). 

11. 
Miscuglio, M. et al. All-optical nonlinear activation function for photonic neural 

networks [Invited]. Optical Materials Express 8, 3851 (2018). 

12. 
Liu, K., Sun, S., Majumdar, A. & Sorger, V. J. Fundamental Scaling Laws in 

Nanophotonics. Scientific Reports 6, (2016). 

13. 
Amin, R., Khurgin, J. B. & Sorger, V. J. Waveguide-based electro-absorption modulator 

performance: comparative analysis. Optics Express 26, 15445 (2018). 


14. 
Dalir, H., Xia, Y., Wang, Y. & Zhang, X. Athermal Broadband Graphene Optical 

Modulator with 35 GHz Speed. ACS Photonics 3, 1564–1568 (2016). 

15. 
Haffner, C. et al. All-plasmonic Mach–Zehnder modulator enabling optical high-speed 

communication at the microscale. Nature Photonics 9, 525–528 (2015). 

16. 
Sorger, V. J. et al. Scaling vectors of attoJoule per bit modulators. Journal of Optics 20, 

014012 (2018). 

17. 
Amin, R. et al. Attojoule-efficient graphene optical modulators. Applied Optics 57, D130 

(2018). 

18. 
Ma, Z., Tahersima, M. H., Khan, S. & Sorger, V. J. Two-Dimensional Material-Based 

Mode Confinement Engineering in Electro-Optic Modulators. IEEE Journal of Selected 

Topics in Quantum Electronics 23, 81–88 (2017). 

19. 
Sorger, V. J., Lanzillotti-Kimura, N. D., Ma, R.-M. & Zhang, X. Ultra-compact silicon 

nanophotonic modulator with broadband response. Nanophotonics 1, (2012). 

20. 
Khurgin, J. B. How to deal with the loss in plasmonics and metamaterials. Nature 

Nanotechnology 10, 2–6 (2015). 

21. 
Li, G. et al. Ring Resonator Modulators in Silicon for Interchip Photonic Links. IEEE 

Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 19, 95–113 (2013). 

22. 
Xu, Q., Schmidt, B., Pradhan, S. & Lipson, M. Micrometre-scale silicon electro-optic 

modulator. Nature 435, 325–327 (2005). 

23. 
Amin, R. et al. Active material, optical mode and cavity impact on nanoscale electro-

optic modulation performance. Nanophotonics 7, (2017). 


24. 
Liu, M., Yin, X. & Zhang, X. Double-Layer Graphene Optical Modulator. Nano Letters 

12, 1482–1485 (2012). 

25. 
Ansell, D. et al. Hybrid graphene plasmonic waveguide modulators. Nature 

Communications 6, (2015). 

26. 
Hiraki, T. et al. Heterogeneously integrated III–V/Si MOS capacitor Mach–Zehnder 

modulator. Nature Photonics 11, 482–485 (2017). 

27. 
Feigenbaum, E., Diest, K. & Atwater, H. A. Unity-Order Index Change in Transparent 

Conducting Oxides at Visible Frequencies. Nano Letters 10, 2111–2116 (2010). 

28. 
Kinsey, N. et al. Epsilon-near-zero Al-doped ZnO for ultrafast switching at telecom 

wavelengths. Optica 2, 616 (2015). 

29. 
Liu, X. et al. Epsilon-Near-Zero Si Slot-Waveguide Modulator. ACS Photonics 5, 4484–

4490 (2018). 

30. 
Lee, H. W. et al. Nanoscale Conducting Oxide PlasMOStor. Nano Letters 14, 6463–6468 

(2014). 

31. 
Gui, Y. et al. Towards integrated metatronics: a holistic approach on precise optical and 

electrical properties of Indium Tin Oxide. 20 

32. 
Fortunato, E., Ginley, D., Hosono, H. & Paine, D. C. Conducting Oxides for 

Photovoltaics. MRS BULLETIN 32, 6 (2007). 

33. 
Amin, R. et al. 0.52 V mm ITO-based Mach-Zehnder modulator in silicon photonics. 

APL Photonics 3, 126104 (2018). 


34. 
Li, E., Gao, Q., Chen, R. T. & Wang, A. X. Ultracompact Silicon-Conductive Oxide 

Nanocavity Modulator with 0.02 Lambda-Cubic Active Volume. Nano Letters 18, 1075–1081 

(2018). 

35. 
Li, E., Nia, B. A., Zhou, B. & Wang, A. X. Transparent conductive oxide-gated silicon 

microring with extreme resonance wavelength tunability. Photonics Research 7, 473 (2019). 

36. 
Ye, C., Liu, K., Soref, R. A. & Sorger, V. J. A compact plasmonic MOS-based 2×2 

electro-optic switch. Nanophotonics 4, (2015). 

37. 
Xu, P., Zheng, J., Doylend, J. K. & Majumdar, A. Low-Loss and Broadband Nonvolatile 

Phase-Change Directional Coupler Switches. ACS Photonics 6, 553–557 (2019). 

38. 
Michelotti, F., Dominici, L., Descrovi, E., Danz, N. & Menchini, F. Thickness 

dependence of surface plasmon polariton dispersion in transparent conducting oxide films at 

155 μm. Optics Letters 34, 839 (2009). 

39. 
Ma, Z., Li, Z., Liu, K., Ye, C. & Sorger, V. J. Indium-Tin-Oxide for High-performance 

Electro-optic Modulation. Nanophotonics 4, (2015). 

40. 
Wang, C. et al. Integrated lithium niobate electro-optic modulators operating at CMOS-

compatible voltages. Nature 562, 101–104 (2018). 

 


