 
 

Control of LED Emission with Functional Dielectric Metasurfaces  

Egor Khaidarov†, Zhengtong Liu†*, Ramón Paniagua-Domínguez, Son Tung Ha, Vytautas 
Valuckas, Xinan Liang, Yuriy Akimov, Ping Bai, Ching Eng Png, Hilmi Volkan Demir and 
Arseniy I. Kuznetsov* 

E. Khaidarov, Dr. R. Paniagua-Domínguez, Dr. S. T. Ha, V. Valuckas, Dr. X. Liang, Dr. A. I. 
Kuznetsov* 

Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 
A*STAR)  

2 Fusionopolis Way, #08-03, Innovis 138634, Singapore  

E-mail: arseniy_kuznetsov@imre.a-star.edu.sg 

E. Khaidarov, Prof. H. V. Demir 

LUMINOUS! Center of Excellence for Semiconductor Lighting and Displays, The Photonics 
Institute, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, School of Physical and Mathematical 
Sciences,  Nanyang Technological University  

50 Nanyang Avenue, 639798, Singapore  

Dr. Z. Liu*, Dr. Y. Akimov, Dr. P. Bai, Dr. C. E. Png 

Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and 
Research)  

1 Fusionopolis Way, #16-16 Connexis North, 138632, Singapore 

E-mail: liuz@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg 

Prof. H. V. Demir 

Bilkent University UNAM, Institute of Materials Science and Nanotechnology 

Ankara, 06800, Turkey  

   

†These authors contributed equally to this work. 


 

Keywords: dielectric metasurfaces, cavity, LED, vortex beam, directional emission  

 

Abstract 

The improvement of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) is one of the major goals of optoelectronics 

and photonics research. While emission rate enhancement is certainly one of the targets, in this 

regard, for LED integration to complex photonic devices, one would require to have, 

additionally, precise control of the wavefront of the emitted light. Metasurfaces are spatial 

arrangements of engineered scatters that may enable this light manipulation capability with 

unprecedented resolution. Most of these devices, however, are only able to function properly 

under irradiation of light with a large spatial coherence, typically normally incident lasers. LEDs, 

on the other hand, have angularly broad, Lambertian-like emission patterns characterized by a 

low spatial coherence, which makes the integration of metasurface devices on LED architectures 

extremely challenging. A novel concept for metasurface integration on LED is proposed, using a 

cavity to increase the LED spatial coherence through an angular collimation. Due to the resonant 

character of the cavity, extending the spatial coherence of the emitted light does not come at the 

price of any reduction in the total emitted power. The experimental demonstration of the 

proposed concept is implemented on a GaP LED architecture including a hybrid metallic-Bragg 

cavity. By integrating a silicon metasurface on top we demonstrate two different functionalities 

of these compact devices: directional LED emission at a desired angle and LED emission of a 

vortex beam with an orbital angular momentum. The presented concept is general, being 

applicable to other incoherent light sources and enabling metasurfaces designed for plane waves 

to work with incoherent light emitters. 

 


 

Since their discovery in the early years of the 20th century, light-emitting diodes (LEDs) have 

found numerous applications as efficient, low-cost and compact light sources.[1,2] Due to their 

wide use in large business areas, such as lighting and displays, as well as their potential 

application in novel directions such as Li-Fi and photonic interconnects, they still attract strong 

interest of the research community. Although the various types of inorganic, organic and 

quantum-dot-based LEDs have their own peculiarities, advantages and disadvantages, most of 

the research towards their improvement shares similar goals. In particular, increasing the speed 

of these devices by reducing the recombination lifetimes via radiative channels and enhancing 

their efficiency are among the top priorities in the field. In particular, regarding the efficiency, 

the main efforts focus towards improving the external quantum efficiency (EQE), defined as the 

number of photons emitted from the device per number of electrons injected into the device and 

largely determined by device design and architecture through the extraction efficiency. For a 

planar interface, the amount of photons that can escape with respect to the total amount 

generated is limited by their total internal reflection at the interface between the LED and the 

external medium and, therefore, depends solely on the refractive index contrast between these 

two. With this is mind, a simple way to improve the EQE is patterning the surface of the device 

with different scatterers.[3,4] These scatterers can be precisely engineered, e.g. in the form of 

photonic crystal structures, to extract part of the energy that otherwise would be simply coupled 

into slab modes – and hence lost – and convert it to propagating light in the external medium, 

thus, adding to the total efficiency of the device.[5] Even more, when properly designed, these 

engineered structures[6] (as well as others such as plasmonic particles[7,8]  or grooves[9]) may also 

change the emission pattern of the LED device (or other random light sources[10,11]), an effect 


that can be used to produce directional light sources that are, as well, compact, avoiding the use 

of external elements such as mirrors or lenses. This directional emission endows LEDs with an 

attractive, yet simple, functionality for integrated devices.  

Looking forward, achieving directional emission from the LED is insufficient for more complex 

applications and further device integration. These, in general, require precise control of the 

wavefront of emitted light. Recently, a mean to achieve this degree of control has emerged by 

introducing abrupt discontinuities in the phase of the incident wave using arrangements of 

engineered scatterers[12,13], so-called metasurfaces. Among their different possible realizations, 

dielectric metasurfaces[14,15], with low losses, have emerged as a one of the best solutions to 

obtain high efficiency devices. On top of that, the rich phenomenology of optical modes excited 

in dielectric particles[14] has enabled new effects and applications for metasurfaces based on 

them. Novel effects include, e.g., the realization of optical Huygens’ metasurfaces,[16,17,18] 

generalized version of the Brewster effect,[19,20] nonradiating anapole modes[21,22] and quasi-

bound states in the continuum[23-25] The range of applications, in turn, includes achieving high 

angle light beam bending devices.[26-28] and polarization beam splitters[29,30], obtaining ultra-high 

numerical aperture,[31] tunable,[32] low reflection and/or broadband lenses,[33] generation of 

complex holograms[34,35] and vortex beams,[36] as well as the realization of near-zero refractive 

index materials[37,38] and compact cameras, microscopy[39] and spectrometers,[40,41] to mention 

some. 

In most of these applications, however, the designed metasurfaces require a spatially coherent 

illumination, most of them working under plane wave excitation (with very few exception in 

which metasurfaces are designed for point-like sources with well-defined positions[42,43]). On the 

contrary, a typical LED exhibits Lambertian-shaped emission profile with very low spatial 


coherence. This low coherence is particularly important if the metasurface and the LED source 

have comparable sizes and are placed in close proximity (several wavelengths) of each other - a 

situation desirable for compact integration. Consequently, introduction of structural 

modifications becomes necessary to obtain a combined functional device. This is the reason why, 

so far, successful integration of metasurface devices on the LED has been limited to control of 

the directionality and/or polarization[9,44,45] of emitted light, while full wavefront control remains 

elusive. 

In this work, we propose a new method for direct integration of metasurface devices on top of an 

LED. The method relies on a collimating element, in particular, a resonant cavity. Both the 

metasurface and the cavity LED can be designed separately and, thus, the method allows 

integration of any functional metasurface designed to work under normally incident plane wave 

illumination, provided that it works in the transmission regime. Moreover, due to its resonant 

character, the presence of the cavity enhances the emission of the device. We demonstrate 

experimentally the proposed concept realizing an efficient beam deflection device with a pre-

designed emission angle, which closely matches the theoretical predictions. Furthermore, to 

demonstrate the full power of this approach, which enables total wavefront control, we 

demonstrate generation of LED light with orbital angular momentum by integrating a 

metasurface designed to generate a vortex beam.  

 

The proposed method is schematically depicted in Figure 1a. First, spatially incoherent emission 

of the LED is modified by restricting the initial broad Lambertian angular distribution to a 

narrow range of angles. This is achieved by introducing a resonant Fabry-Perot (FP) cavity into 

the LED architecture. Note that, the spatial coherence increased by resonant cavities[46] (which 


have been used in the LED community for more than two decades to enhance LED 

efficiencies[47-49]) could also be realized using other approaches, such as zero index materials[37], 

plasmonic[50] or photonic crystals.[6] In this work, we use the resonant FP cavity as it provides 

sufficient collimation, emission enhancement and does not require complex fabrication steps. 

Finally, the metasurface performing the desired functionality is integrated at the output of the 

cavity to realize the compact device.   

For the theoretical analysis of the integrated device, we performed full numerical simulations 

based on the reciprocity principle,[51] as described in Experimental Section. This approach allows 

precise computation of the radiation pattern, the relative contribution of each polarization and the 

enhancement/suppression of the total emission relative to a plain LED. We choose to work with 

a GaP LED structure with an active layer consisting of multiple quantum wells (MQW) emitting 

at around 620 nm wavelength. Following the characteristics of the samples used in the 

subsequent experiment, we assume that the active layer thickness is 100 nm with its first 

interface located 200 nm below the top GaP surface. The radiation patterns for various LED 

configurations are given in Figures 1 b-d. The respective insets show the schematic side views of 

the considered structures. First, the Lambertian emission from a semi-infinite LED stack is 

calculated and plotted in Figure 1b. The red and green lines represent, respectively, the emission 

patterns of p-polarized and s-polarized light. To illustrate that direct integration of a metasurface 

(as designed for plane wave excitation) on top of the LED is not a feasible solution to preserve 

the metasurface functionality, we repeat the emission pattern calculation when a metasurface 

designed to deflect a normally incident plane wave is placed on top of the GaP LED.  The 

metasurface consists of a rectangular lattice of periodically repeated supercells with 300 nm 

(sub-diffractive) and 1200 nm (diffractive) periods. The elements constituting the supercell are 


amorphous silicon cylinders with a height of 350 nm and a circular cross-section to guarantee 

polarization-independent operation. The diameter of the cylinders increases gradually within the 

supercell (114 nm, 124 nm, 133 nm and 170 nm), leading to an increasing phase accumulation 

under coherent plane wave illumination and mapping a tilted wavefront of a deflected beam. 

When illuminated by a normally incident plane wave at a wavelength of 620 nm, this 

metasurface is able to deflect it at an angle of 30° with a 94% relative efficiency and around 50% 

overall transmission for two orthogonal polarizations (see supporting information Figure S1a).  

However, when this metasurface is directly integrated on top of the GaP LED, simulation results 

show that the Lambertian emission pattern of the bare LED remains almost unaltered (plotted in 

Supplementary Figure S1b). This means that under the angularly broad illumination of an LED 

the metasurface loses its functionality. 

In order to transform the Lambertian LED emission into the one having a narrower angular 

distribution, which can be manipulated by the metasurface, we use a hybrid Bragg-gold resonant 

FP cavity as a collimating element (see inset in Figure 1c). Such an asymmetric choice of the FP 

cavity mirror is dictated, on one hand, by the developed GaP wafer transfer to gold (which acts 

as the bottom mirror) and, on the other one, by the low losses of the Bragg mirror (acting as the 

top reflector). The gold layer is chosen to be several hundred nanometers thick to ensure a high 

reflection and the Bragg reflector consists of alternating TiO2 and SiO2 layers, chosen due to 

their high refractive index contrast and negligible losses in the visible spectral range. The 

thicknesses of the layers satisfy the quarter wavelength condition - 63 nm for TiO2 and 107 nm 

for SiO2. An analysis of the FP cavity performance as a function of the number of layers in the 

Bragg stack reveals that 2 pairs of layers are enough to ensure a sufficient emission collimation. 

The thickness of the GaP is then optimized to be 415 nm to support a Fabry-Perot resonance at 


the central wavelength of the LED emission (around 620 nm). The MQW layer thickness and 

location remains the same as before.  The resulting emission diagram of this system, generically 

known as the resonant cavity LED (RCLED),[46-49] is shown in Figure 1c. As expected, in this 

situation the light is concentrated in a narrow angular range close to the surface normal, 

corresponding to those angles for which the cavity resonance condition is met.  

As a last step, the beam deflecting silicon metasurface described above is now placed on top of 

the RCLED. A thin SiO2 spacer (210 nm) is added between them to decouple the metasurface 

from the near-fields of the cavity and to serve as a low index substrate for the metasurface. The 

emission pattern from this device, depicted in Fig. 1d, shows a single, angularly narrow emission 

lobe with a clear maximum at around 30° with respect to the normal, thus confirming the validity 

of the proposed concept. Since we used cylinders with a circular cross section as building blocks 

of the metasurface, the beam deflection effect is almost polarization insensitive, as seen by 

comparing the red and green curves representing, respectively, the emission patterns of p-

polarized and s-polarized light. An important aspect to note is that independent design of the 

cavity and the metasurface can only be applied to highly transmissive metasurfaces (or at least to 

those with low reflection). If that is not the case, the reflected light from the metasurface can 

affect the cavity performance. In that situation, a more precise engineering considering both the 

metasurface and the cavity as a whole is required. 

 For the sake of completeness, we show in supporting information Figures S2 a,b the 

performance of a device with a simpler cavity, consisting of two gold mirrors, which could be 

advantageous for electrical pumping. As can be seen, the performance of this device is very 

similar to the hybrid cavity case, but with a lower emission power. We finalize the theoretical 

characterization of the presented devices by calculating the total emitted power relative to the 


bare LED stack. This is done by integrating the directional emission over the top hemisphere. 

These results are presented in Figure S2c. The RCLED including the Bragg reflector gives an 

enhancement of the total emission of almost three times compared to the bare LED which is 

almost one order of magnitude higher compared to the RCLED based on gold mirrors. Including 

the metasurface on top of the RCLED slightly reduces, in both cases, the total emitted power. 

We attribute this to the non-negligible absorption of amorphous Si at the operating wavelength as 

well as to the small reflection from the metasurface (which was designed independently of the 

cavity). Nevertheless, the results still show that the total emitted power of the hybrid RCLED 

with the metasurface is almost twice higher than that of the bare LED and one order of 

magnitude higher than that of the configuration based on the gold FP cavity. Overall, both 

configurations - with gold or Bragg top reflector in the FP cavity - have their own advantages in 

terms of efficiency, design, fabrication simplicity and suitability for electrical pumping and, 

therefore, we believe that both architectures can find applications depending on the device 

requirements. 

 

For the experimental demonstration of the proposed concept, we focus on the hybrid Bragg-gold 

cavity configuration. To realize the device, we start with a commercially available GaP p-i-n 

junction with multiple quantum wells with a total thickness of approximately 430 nm transferred 

to a gold-coated silicon substrate. The sample exhibits a photoluminescence band centered at 628 

nm with a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of around 20 nm. To achieve the precise 

thickness of GaP, corresponding to the Fabry-Perot resonance, we use dry reactive ion etching 

(see Experimental Section for details). Next, two pairs of TiO2/SiO2 layers (63 nm /107 nm) are 

deposited on top using ion-assisted deposition, followed by a SiO2 spacer layer (210 nm). The Si 


gradient metasurface is then fabricated on top of the device using electron beam lithography, as 

explained in details in Experimental Section. As described in the previous section, the 

metasurface supercell consists of four cylindrical elements and is designed to deflect the 

incoming wavefront at an angle of 30° with respect to the normal. The scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) image of the metasurface fabricated on top of the RCLED is given in Figure 

2c. 

The optical characterization of the fabricated structures is performed using a spectrally-resolved 

back focal plane imaging setup,[24,28,30]  as described in Experimental Section, incorporating a 

Nikon 100× microscope objective with a numerical aperture NA = 0.95. Figure 2 presents a 

comparison of the angular-resolved reflection and photoluminescence spectra for the initial, 

uncovered LED slab on gold, the cavity LED incorporating the top Bragg mirror and the final 

device, with the integrated metasurface on top. The angular-resolved reflection spectra are 

obtained using the white light excitation. For the uncovered sample (Figure 2a) the 

measurements reveal two bands of slightly reduced reflectivity, corresponding to weak Fabry-

Perot resonances that arise from the reflections between the gold substrate and the GaP-air 

interface. With the Bragg mirror on top, the resonant cavity LED exhibits much better 

pronounced Fabry-Perot resonances with almost vanishing reflectivity, one being centered at the 

emission wavelength of the GaP quantum wells of 628 nm (Figure 2b).  

After characterizing the reflectivity of the device to corroborate the presence of the Fabry-Perot 

resonance at the desired working wavelength, we measure the photoluminescence (PL) signal by 

optically pumping the system with a continuous wave (CW) laser at 488 nm wavelength. We 

pump from the GaP side for the uncovered sample and from the Bragg reflector side for the 

RCLED. Figures 2d-f show the measured angularly-resolved PL spectra for all three LED 


architectures, namely, the uncovered LED and the RCLED without and with the metasurface on 

top. The angle represents the polar angle measured with respect to the normal direction to the 

sample surface. For the uncovered LED case, the PL emission is spread into all directions, 

including the large angles (Figure 2d), resembling the Lambertian pattern. A slight deviation is 

observed, however, as it is affected by the weak Fabry-Perot resonance observed in the reflection 

spectra, producing a slight narrowing of the angular emission distribution. On the other hand, the 

RCLED demonstrates a clearly enhanced directivity and angular narrowing (Figure 2e) as a 

result of the precise overlap of the PL emission maximum with the strong Fabry-Perot resonance.  

When the beam deflection metasurface is incorporated on top of the RCLED, a very clear shift of 

the emission maximum towards the designed 30° angle is observed (Figure 2f). Note that, while 

in the first two cases the emission is azimuthally symmetric, this is not the case when the 

metasurface is incorporated on top. In this case, the PL shown in the figure corresponds to a cut 

along the long axis of the metasurface supercell. Figures 2g-i show the full angular distribution 

of unpolarized PL including all emission wavelengths. Note that panels 2d-f correspond to 

spectrally resolved cuts along the y-axis in panels 2g-i. Figure 2g indeed corroborates the quasi-

Lambertian emission of the uncovered sample, while the hybrid Bragg-gold RCLED (Figure 2h) 

presents a clear directionality towards the normal to the sample surface. Finally, when the 

metasurface is integrated on top of the RCLED (Figure 2i), channeling of the LED emission 

towards the 30° angle is observed, as predicted by the metasurface design. It should be noted 

that, while numerical simulations of directivity were performed for a single wavelength, the 

experimental emission pattern contains a certain bandwidth. However, as it is a relatively narrow 

band (~20 nm), the device preserves the collimation and beam deflection functionality for the 

whole PL signal, including all wavelengths in the LED emission spectrum (Figure 2). 


Nevertheless, a fairer comparison between the theory and experiment can be obtained by 

comparing the directionality cross sections at a specific wavelength (we chose, in particular, 634 

nm wavelength providing the highest collimation). This comparison is shown in Figure 3. As 

can be seen from the figure, the experimental results have a very good correspondence with the 

theory, the main deviation being between the uncovered case and the pure Lambertian emission 

from a semi-infinite LED, stemming from the weak Fabry-Perot resonance observed in this 

system, as discussed above.    

We finalize the characterization of the fabricated devices by estimating their relative emission 

efficiencies. This can be done by integrating the emission power in Figures 3g-i over the full 

measured solid angle. The directly obtained efficiencies are 39% for RCLED and 3% for the 

RCLED with the integrated metasurface, both relative to the plain GaP LED on gold. One should 

note that the emitted power is affected by the different pumping conditions for each device. 

While all of them are pumped from the same side, the pump beam experiences different 

reflections depending on whether it is the uncovered case, the case containing the Bragg stack, or 

that having both the stack and the metasurface. Thus, these directly obtained efficiencies should 

be normalized to the actual pumping power reaching the quantum wells in each case. Numerical 

simulations estimate that the real excitation power, relative to the uncovered case, is around 58% 

for the RCLED and 38% for RCLED with the integrated metasurface. In addition, simulations 

estimate an excitation enhancement of around 2.5 times for the uncovered case of the LED layer 

on gold compared to the bare semi-infinite LED. Taking into account these numbers we arrive at 

an estimated total emission efficiency of around 168% for the hybrid RCLED relative to the bare 

LED (without the gold substrate), and of around 20% when the metasurface is integrated on top. 

These values are still lower than those predicted by the simulations (shown in Figure S2c). This 


can be attributed to the wavelength dependence of the efficiency within the bandwidth of the 

Fabry-Perot resonance (~12 nm) which, moreover, is also narrower than the PL bandwidth (~20 

nm), an effect not taken into account in the simulations. Underestimation of material losses in Si, 

Au, and the remaining EBL resist on top of the structures, as well as fabrication imperfections, 

might also affect the efficiency of the fabricated devices.    

As a last step, we illustrate how the proposed concept allows to realize full wavefront control, 

and thus possible functionalities, which are not limited to the beam deflection. To do so, we 

fabricated and integrated on top of the same hybrid gold-Bragg RCLED another metasurface 

designed to generate a beam with an orbital angular momentum and topological charge of +1. 

Note that this functionality cannot be achieved unless full control of the wavefront is realized. 

The design of this metasurface follows the same approach of phase mapping, gradually varying 

the radius of the cylinders to achieve 0-2π phase variation along a full round of the azimuthal 

angle, thus imprinting the desired topological charge. The SEM image of this vortex beam 

generating metasurface fabricated on top of the RCLED is shown in supporting information 

Figure S3a. After pumping the device, we measure the intensity profile of the emitted light. The 

result is plotted in Figure S3b. As can be seen, the measured photoluminescence exhibits the 

characteristic “doughnut-shape” profile corresponding to a vortex beam with an orbital angular 

momentum and the expected topological charge, thus confirming the predicted functionality of 

the device.        

In summary, we proposed a solution for integration of metasurfaces on top of LED to endow 

these devices with on-demand functionalities. The proposed solution is based on a collimating 

element, which can be realized, e.g., using a resonant cavity. This resonant cavity transforms the 

Lambertian-like emission from the bare LED into a directional one, thus having a large spatial 


coherence that can then be manipulated using any transmissive metasurface designed for a plane 

wave excitation. Both the cavity and the metasurface can, thus, be designed separately, as long as 

the reflection of the metasurface is low. Otherwise, the concept can still be used, provided that 

the system is optimized as a whole. Due to the resonant character of the cavity, the angular 

narrowing of the emission pattern does not come at the expense of a weaker emission, which can 

even be enhanced.  

We experimentally demonstrated the proposed concept using a GaP-based LED combined with a 

hybrid gold-Bragg cavity and a silicon metasurface. We show two different functionalities, 

namely, a beam deflection and a vortex beam generation. However, the suggested method is 

general and can be applied to realize other, more complex functionalities such as LED beam 

focusing or hologram generation. Although demonstrated here using optical pumping, the 

concept can be readily adapted to obtain electrically pumped devices, either employing a fully 

metallic RCLED architecture, such as the one proposed based on gold layers, which corresponds 

to the flip-chip LED configuration, or substituting the bottom dielectric layer of the Bragg stack 

by some transparent conducting layer (e.g. ITO). Finally, we note that this concept can be 

applied to other random emitting media such as fluorescent molecules and quantum dots. 

The proposed solution represents a step forward towards multipurpose, efficient, integrated 

optical devices, opening venues for compact integration of metasurfaces, which enable 

unprecedented control of light, with random sources. This can enable integration of LED sources 

instead of lasers into optoelectronic devices finding broad applications in optical 

communications, Li-Fi, displays, solid-state lighting, and many more.  

 

 


Experimental Section 

Numerical simulations: The Si metasurfaces on glass substrate were numerically simulated using 

the phase mapping approach with a plane wave excitation in commercially available Lumerical 

FDTD software. The unit cell boundary conditions for phase calculation were set to periodic and 

PMLs (Perfectly Matched Layers). The material data for the simulations was taken from the 

experimental ellipsometric measurements. The metasurfaces were designed separately from the 

LED. 

The radiation pattern and extracted power were calculated using the reciprocity principle51 using 

the commercially available COMSOL Multiphysics software. The proposed LED designs were 

inversely excited with a plane wave at different device emission angles. For each angle such 

backward propagating plane waves form a spatial power density distribution within the LED. 

The integral of this power density over the active region of the LED (MQW) is proportional to 

the direct power emission of the LED quantum wells at that specific angle. 

FP cavity fabrication: GaP LEDs on gold substrates were purchased from Yangzhou 

Changelight Co. The stack of multiple quantum wells of around 100 nm in thickness is 

sandwiched in the GaP p-n junction. The whole LED stack thickness is around 430 nm. The 

thickness of the gold substrate is around 1 μm.  The quantum wells emission is centered at 628 

nm full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of around 20 nm. 

Although the thickness of the GaP layers can be precisely controlled during the growth, in case 

of a very thin LED layer the lattice mismatch with the substrate material deteriorates the quality 

of the film and affects the efficiency. This issue was solved by growing thicker structures and 

subsequently thinning them down by inductively coupled plasma-reactive ion etching (ICP-RIE, 

Oxford Plasmalab 100). We did that to obtain, with a high precision, the desired slab thickness 


corresponding to the low order Fabry-Perot resonance at the emission wavelength. We combined 

the dry etch based on Ar and Cl chemistry with reflection spectra measurements to adjust the 

thickness to approximately 416 nm. In those cases in which the GaP layer was slightly over-

etched, a thin layer of amorphous Si was deposited to precisely meet the Fabry-Perot condition. 

For that we used a plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD, Oxford Plasmalab 

100).  The Bragg stack consisting of two alternating TiO2/SiO2 layer pairs (63 nm /107 nm each) 

was deposited using ion-assisted deposition (IAD Oxford Optofab 3000) with SiO2 and TiO2 

targets. The 210 nm SiO2 spacer layer was also deposited on top of the Bragg stack using IAD. 

Metasurface fabrication For the metasurface fabrication we started with a deposition of an 

amorphous silicon film using the PECVD (Oxford Plasmalab 100) process. We subsequently 

spin-coated hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ, Dow Corning XR-1541) as a resist for the following 

electron beam lithography (EBL) process as well as a layer of Espacer 300AX01 (Showa Denko) 

as a charge dissipation layer. We then proceeded to expose the sample using an electron beam 

lithography system (EBL, Elionix ELS-7000, 100kV) to define the metasurface structure. Next, 

the sample was developed using a 25% solution of tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH). 

Finally, the sample was etched using the same ICP-RIE tool with Cl2 gas. The remaining HSQ 

resist on top of the etched structures was not removed, as the hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution 

commonly used for its removal might damage the SiO2 substrate and the FP cavity stack. 

Back focal plane spectroscopy 

The angle-resolved reflection and photoluminescence measurements were performed in an 

inverted optical microscopy setup (Nikon Ti-U). A high power halogen light source (for 

reflection measurement) or continuous wave (CW) 488 nm laser (for photoluminescence 

measurement) irradiates the sample surface through the high NA objective (i.e., Nikon 100×, 


0.95 NA). The reflection or emission signal is then collected by the same objective and routed to 

a high sensitivity, thermoelectrically cooled, charge coupled detector (Andor Newton EMCCD). 

Instead of an imaging plane, the back focal plane of the sample surface is projected onto a slit 

entrance (100 μm width) of the spectrometer (Andor SR-303i) with a 150 gr/mm grating (800 nm 

blading). This measurement technique gives both angular and spectral information along the slit 

axis of the response signal from the sample. For back focal plane image (without spectral 

information) the slit width is set at 2500 μm and the grating is set at the zero order (no 

diffraction). The maximum detection angle is determined by the NA of the objective, in this case 

approximately 72°.  

 

 

References 

 

[1] 
S. T. Tan, X. W. Sun, H. V. Demir, S. P. DenBaars, IEEE Photonics J. 2012, 4, 613. 
[2] 
E. F. Schubert, J. K. Kim, H. Luo, J.-Q. Xi, Reports Prog. Phys. 2006, 69, 3069. 
[3] 
I. Schnitzer, E. Yablonovitch, C. Caneau, T. J. Gmitter, A. Scherer, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1993, 
63, 2174. 
[4] 
R. Windisch, C. Rooman, S. Meinlschmidt, P. Kiesel, D. Zipperer, G. H. Döhler, B. Dutta, 
M. Kuijk, G. Borghs, P. Heremans, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2001, 79, 2315. 
[5] 
J. J. Wierer, A. David, M. M. Megens, Nat. Photonics 2009, 3, 163. 
[6] 
C. Wiesmann, K. Bergenek, N. Linder, U. T. Schwarz, Laser Photonics Rev. 2009, 3, 262. 
[7] 
G. Lozano, D. J. Louwers, S. R. Rodríguez, S. Murai, O. T. Jansen, M. A. Verschuuren, J. 
Gómez Rivas, Light Sci. Appl. 2013, 2, e66. 
[8] 
J. DiMaria, E. Dimakis, T. D. Moustakas, R. Paiella, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 103, 251108. 
[9] 
Y. Park, J. Kim, K.-S. Cho, H. Kim, M. Lee, J. Lee, U. J. Kim, S. W. Hwang, M. L. 
Brongersma, Y.-G. Roh, Q.-H. Park, Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 14753. 
[10] G. Vecchi, V. Giannini, J. Gómez Rivas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 146807. 
[11] S. R. K. Rodriguez, S. Murai, M. A. Verschuuren, J. G. Rivas, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109, 
166803. 
[12] N. Yu, F. Capasso, Nat. Mater. 2014, 13, 139. 


[13] A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva, V. M. Shalaev, Science (80-. ). 2013, 339, 1232009. 
[14] A. I. Kuznetsov, A. E. Miroshnichenko, M. L. Brongersma, Y. S. Kivshar, B. 
Luk’yanchuk, Science. 2016, 354, aag2472. 
[15] I. Staude, J. Schilling, Nat. Photonics 2017, 11, 274. 
[16] M. Decker, I. Staude, M. Falkner, J. Dominguez, D. N. Neshev, I. Brener, T. Pertsch, Y. 
 S. Kivshar, Adv. Opt. Mater. 2015, 3, 813. 
[17] Y. F. Yu, A. Y. Zhu, R. Paniagua-Domínguez, Y. H. Fu, B. Luk’yanchuk, A. I. 
 Kuznetsov, Laser Photon. Rev. 2015, 9, 412. 
[18] M. I. Shalaev, J. Sun, A. Tsukernik, A. Pandey, K. Nikolskiy, N. M. Litchinitser, Nano 
 Lett. 2015, 15, 6261. 
[19] R. Paniagua-Domínguez, Y. F. Yu, A. E. Miroshnichenko, L. A. Krivitsky, Y. H. Fu, V. 
Valuckas, L. Gonzaga, Y. T. Toh, A. Y. S. Kay, B. Luk’yanchuk, A. I. Kuznetsov, Nat. 
Commun. 2016, 7, 10362. 
[20] D. R. Abujetas, J. A. Sánchez-gil, J. J. Sáenz, Opt. Express 2018, 26, 31523. 
[21] A. E. Miroshnichenko, A. B. Evlyukhin, Y. F. Yu, R. M. Bakker, A. Chipouline, A. I. 
Kuznetsov, B. Luk’yanchuk, B. N. Chichkov, Y. S. Kivshar, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 8069. 
[22] G. Grinblat, Y. Li, M. P. Nielsen, R. F. Oulton, S. A. Maier, Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 4635. 
[23] H. M. Doeleman, F. Monticone, W. den Hollander, A. Alù, A. F. Koenderink, Nat. 
Photonics 2018, 12, 397. 
[24] S. T. Ha, Y. H. Fu, N. K. Emani, Z. Pan, R. M. Bakker, R. Paniagua-Domínguez, A. I. 
Kuznetsov, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 1042. 
[25] M. V. Rybin, K. L. Koshelev, Z. F. Sadrieva, K. B. Samusev, A. A. Bogdanov, M. F. 
Limonov, Y. S. Kivshar, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119, 243901. 
[26] D. Lin, M. Melli, E. Poliakov, P. St. Hilaire, S. Dhuey, C. Peroz, S. Cabrini, M. 
Brongersma, M. Klug, Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 2286. 
[27] D. Sell, J. Yang, S. Doshay, R. Yang, J. A. Fan, Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 3752. 
[28] E. Khaidarov, H. Hao, R. Paniagua-Domínguez, Y. F. Yu, Y. H. Fu, V. Valuckas, S. L. K. 
Yap, Y. T. Toh, J. S. K. Ng, A. I. Kuznetsov, Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 6267. 
[29] A. Arbabi, Y. Horie, M. Bagheri, A. Faraon, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 937. 
[30] N. K. Emani, E. Khaidarov, R. Paniagua-Domínguez, Y. H. Fu, V. Valuckas, S. Lu, X. 
Zhang, S. T. Tan, H. V. Demir, A. I. Kuznetsov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 111, 221101. 
[31] R. Paniagua-Domínguez, Y. F. Yu, E. Khaidarov, S. Choi, V. Leong, R. M. Bakker, X. 
Liang, Y. H. Fu, V. Valuckas, L. A. Krivitsky, A. I. Kuznetsov, Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 2124. 
[32] E. Arbabi, A. Arbabi, S. M. Kamali, Y. Horie, M. Faraji-Dana, A. Faraon, Nat. Commun. 
2018, 9, 812. 
[33] S. Wang, P. C. Wu, V.-C. Su, Y.-C. Lai, M.-K. Chen, H. Y. Kuo, B. H. Chen, Y. H. Chen, 
T.-T. Huang, J.-H. Wang, R.-M. Lin, C.-H. Kuan, T. Li, Z. Wang, S. Zhu, D. P. Tsai, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 227. 
[34] M. Khorasaninejad, A. Ambrosio, P. Kanhaiya, F. Capasso, Sci. Adv. 2016, 2, e1501258. 


[35] L. Wang, S. Kruk, H. Tang, T. Li, I. Kravchenko, D. N. Neshev, Y. S. Kivshar, Optica 
2016, 3, 1504. 
[36] Y. Yang, W. Wang, P. Moitra, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs, J. Valentine, Nano Lett. 
2014, 14, 1394. 
[37] P. Moitra, Y. Yang, Z. Anderson, I. I. Kravchenko, D. P. Briggs, J. Valentine, Nat. 
Photonics 2013, 7, 791. 
[38] Y. Li, S. Kita, P. Muñoz, O. Reshef, D. I. Vulis, M. Yin, M. Lončar, E. Mazur, Nat. 
Photonics 2015, 9, 738. 
[39] M. P. Backlund, A. Arbabi, P. N. Petrov, E. Arbabi, S. Saurabh, A. Faraon, W. E. 
Moerner, Nat. Photonics 2016, 10, 459. 
[40] A. Y. Zhu, W. T. Chen, J. Sisler, K. M. A. Yousef, E. Lee, Y.-W Huang, C.-W Qiu, F. 
Capasso, Adv. Opt. Mater. 2018, 1801144. 
[41] A. Tittl, A. Leitis, M. Liu, F. Yesilkoy, D.-Y. Choi, D. N. Neshev, Y. S. Kivshar, H. Altug, 
Science. 2018, 360, 1105. 
[42] P. K. Jha, X. Ni, C. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 115, 025501. 
[43] L. Chen, K. Achouri, E. Kallos, C. Caloz, Phys. Rev. A 2017, 95, 053808. 
[44] M. Wang, F. Xu, Y. Lin, B. Cao, L. Chen, C. Wang, J. Wang, K. Xu, Nanoscale 2017, 9, 
9104. 
[45] S. Liu, A. Vaskin, S. Addamane, B. Leung, M.-C. Tsai, Y. Yang, P. P. Vabishchevich, G. 
A. Keeler, G. Wang, X. He, Y. Kim, N. F. Hartmann, H. Htoon, S. K. Doorn, M. Zilk, T. 
Pertsch, G. Balakrishnan, M. B. Sinclair, I. Staude, I. Brener, Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 6906. 
[46] D. G. Deppe, C. Lei, J. Appl. Phys. 1991, 70, 3443. 
[47] H. Yokoyama, K. Nishi, T. Anan, H. Yamada, S. D. Brorson, E. P. Ippen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
1990, 57, 2814. 
[48] E. F. Schubert, Y. ‐H. Wang, A. Y. Cho, L. ‐W. Tu, G. J. Zydzik, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1992, 
60, 921. 
[49] D. Delbeke, R. Bockstaele, P. Bienstman, R. Baets, H. Benisty, IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 2002, 8, 189. 
[50] N. Livneh, A. Strauss, I. Schwarz, I. Rosenberg, A. Zimran, S. Yochelis, G. Chen, U. 
Banin, Y. Paltiel, R. Rapaport, Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 1630. 
[51] O. T. A. Janssen, A. J. H. Wachters, H. P. Urbach, Opt. Express 2010, 18, 24522. 

Supporting Information  

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. 

 

 

 

Acknowledgments 


The authors acknowledge support from A*STAR SERC Pharos program, Grant No. 152 73 

00025 (Singapore). E.K. acknowledges support from A*STAR Graduate Academy for the 

SINGA scholarship. H.V.D. acknowledges support from TUBA.  

E. K.,  Z.L. contributed equally to this work.  

 

Author contributions 

Z.L., Y.A., H.V.D. and A. I. K. conceived the idea; E. K.,  Z.L. and Y.A. designed the 

metasurface and the FP cavity; Z.L., Y.A., E. K. and R. P.-D. performed the numerical 

simulations; E.K. fabricated the FP cavity and the metasurfaces on top of the LED; S.T.H. 

performed the optical measurements; X.L. measured the vortex beam emission; V. V. performed 

the SEM imaging;  E. K. and Z.L. wrote the first draft of the manuscript. A. I. K., H.V.D., C.E.P, 

P.B. coordinated the work. All authors discussed the results and reviewed the manuscript. 

Conflict of Interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1. Working principle of the LED and metasurface integration and numerical simulations 

of emission diagrams of the LED in various configurations. a) the wide angle Lambertian 

distribution of the plain LED slab is transformed into highly directional emission using the 

resonant cavity. Next, metasurface is fabricated on top providing the desired functionality (beam 

deflection as an example). b, emission pattern of a semi-infinite GaP LED stack. Results show 

the characteristic Lambertian shape. c, emission pattern of a hybrid Bragg-gold RCLED. Results 

show directional emission towards the surface normal. d, emission pattern of the hybrid RCLED 

with the integrated, beam deflecting metasurface, as described in the main text (the polar plot 

shown corresponds to a cut of the full 3D pattern along the long axis of the metasurface 

supercell). Results show an emission lobe at 30° with respect to the normal, corresponding to the 

deflection angle of the metasurface when operating under plane wave excitation. All diagrams 


are normalized to the maximum directional emission of the semi-infinite LED. The blue, solid 

line represents the unpolarized emission while the red and green dashed lines denote the p-

polarized and s-polarized light components, respectively. The insets show the side view 

schematics of the different systems under consideration.       

  

 

 

 

 


 

Figure 2. Experimental optical characterization of the uncovered LED and the resonant cavity 

LED without and with integrated beam deflecting metasurface. a-b, Angular-resolved reflection 

spectra of the (a) uncovered and (b) resonant cavity LED (RCLED). c, SEM image (taken at 30°) 

of the amorphous silicon-based, beam deflecting metasurface, fabricated on top of the RCLED. 

A supercell of the metasurface is highlighted in false red color. d-f, Angular resolved 

photoluminescence (PL) spectra of the uncovered LED (d) and the RCLED without (e) and with 

(f) the integrated beam deflecting metasurface on top. g-i, Back focal plane images of PL 

emission (including all wavelengths and polarizations) of the uncovered LED (g) and the 

RCLED without (h) and with (i) the integrated beam deflecting metasurface on top. PL was 


excited by a laser at the wavelength of 488 nm and collected using a microscope objective with 

NA=0.95. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 3. Comparison between the numerical simulations and experimentally measured emission 

directivity at a single wavelength. Simulated a) and measured b) emission patterns corresponding 

to the semi-infinite LED (red curve) and the RCLED without (green curve) and with (blue curve) 

the beam deflecting metasurface on the top. The experimental results correspond to the cross-

section of the angular-resolved PL spectrum at 634 nm wavelength. 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

A resonant cavity increases the spacial coherence of the LED source and transforms a 

Lambertian  profile into a more planar-like, suitable for most of the current state of the art 

metasurfaces excitation. This allows for direct and compact metasurface and LED device 

integration. The diversity of possible functionalities is demonstrated on the beam deflection and 

orbital angular momentum generating devices.     

 

E. Khaidarov, Z. Liu*, R. Paniagua-Domínguez, S. T. Ha, V. Valuckas, X. Liang, Y. Akimov, P. 
Bai, C. E. Png, H. V. Demir and A. I. Kuznetsov* 

 

Keywords 

dielectric metasurfaces, cavity, LED, vortex beam, directional emission  

 

Control of LED Emission with Functional Dielectric Metasurfaces  

 

TOC Figure  

 


 

 

 

 

 

Supporting Information 

Control of LED Emission with Functional Dielectric Metasurfaces  

Egor Khaidarov†, Zhengtong Liu†*, Ramón Paniagua-Domínguez, Son Tung Ha, Vytautas 
Valuckas, Xinan Liang, Yuriy Akimov, Ping Bai, Ching Eng Png, Hilmi Volkan Demir and 
Arseniy I. Kuznetsov* 

Numerical simulations of the metasurface and the gold cavity 

 

The amorphous Si metasurface was designed using the common phase mapping approach (see 

Ref. 29 in the main text) and simulated using a plane wave excitation. The resulting 

transmission, reflection and absorption spectra averaged over the two orthogonal incident 

polarizations are given in Figure S1a. The metasurface exhibits very low reflection in the 

wavelength range of interest and, hence, should have negligible effect on the properties of the 

collimating cavity. Almost all of the transmitted power is concentrated into the desired deflection 

direction (-1 diffraction order), corresponding to 94% of relative efficiency (normalized to the 

transmitted power) and 50% of absolute efficiency (normalized to the incident power) at the 

wavelength of interest of 620 nm. 

Using the reciprocity principle we simulated the emission pattern of the plain LED with the Si 

metasurface on top (Figure S1b, size parameters of the metasurface are given in the main text). 

The shape of the emission is reminiscent of the Lambertian with slight deformations and clearly 


does not correspond to the designed beam deflection functionality. When we place the GaP LED 

inside a gold cavity (Figure S2a), it gives directionality similar to the hybrid gold-Bragg 

RCLED. Thickness of the cavity corresponds to the Fabry-Perot resonance (416 nm), top gold 

reflector is 50 nm thick, chosen as a tradeoff between high reflection and low absorption losses 

in metal. 

The Si gradient metasurface placed on top of the gold RCLED deflects the emission at the 

designed 30° angle with respect to the normal as shown in Figure S2b. The emission diagram is 

similar to that of the hybrid Bragg-gold cavity case, but exhibits lower emission efficiency. The 

comparison of the emission efficiencies integrated over the top hemisphere for all proposed 

architectures is given in Figure S2c. The Bragg-gold RCLED has almost 3 times higher 

efficiency than the plain LED. The enhancement is reduced to 2 times when the metasurface is 

placed on top. Hybrid Bragg-gold RCLED with and without the metasurface have almost one 

order of magnitude higher efficiency than the pure gold one.   

 
Figure S1.  Numerical simulations of the metasurface performance and the emission diagram of 

the LED directly combined with the metasurface. a) Transmission, reflection and absorption 

(TRA) spectra of the Si metasurface excited with a normally incident plane wave; the 

metasurface is designed to deflect the incoming light at around 30° angle (into the -1 diffraction 

order) at 620 nm incident wavelength. a) Emission pattern of the plain semi-infinite LED with 


the Si metasurface directly on top. The shape of the emission is similar to the Lambertian one 

without the metasurface. The inset demonstrates the side view schematics of the structures, red 

and green lines in the emission patterns denote the p-polarized and s-polarized light components 

respectively, while the blue line denotes their sum. 

 

 

 

 
Figure S2.  Numerical simulations of the emission diagrams of the RCLED combined with the 

metasurface and the total emission efficiency comparison. a) The emission diagram of the pure 

gold RCLED; the directionality is well pronounced. b) Directional emission of the gold cavity 

RCLED integrated with the Si metasurface (as described in the main text), the deflection angle of 

30° corresponds to the theoretically designed angle for the plane wave excitation. The insets 

demonstrate the side view schematics of the structures, red and green lines in the emission 

patterns denote the p-polarized and s-polarized light components respectively, while the blue line 

denotes their sum. c, Total emission efficiency comparison for all proposed LED designs, 

calculated as an integral emitted power over the top hemisphere, normalized to that in the case of 

the plain semi-infinite LED stack.   

 

 


 

Vortex beam generation 

The vortex beam metasurface was fabricated using the same process as the beam deflecting 

metasurface. Generation of the orbital angular momentum +1 is achieved by continuous 

azimuthal variation of the cylinder radius, corresponding to 0-2π phase variation, around the 

geometrical center of the metasurface. SEM image of the central part of fabricated vortex beam 

generating metasurface is shown in Figure S3a. Photoluminescence (PL) was excited using a 590 

nm laser from the metasurface side. The PL intensity has a distinctive donut shape profile shown 

in Figure S3b, characteristic for a vortex beam. Modulation of the emission intensity observed 

along the azimuthal direction can be caused by nonuniform absorption of the excitation beam in 

the metasurface for various pillar thicknesses, the maximum in intensity (the lowest absorption) 

corresponding to the thinner cylinders. 

 

 
Figure S3. Experimental characterization of the GaP cavity LED with the vortex metasurface on 

top. a) SEM image of the central area of the vortex metasurface, taken at 30º tilt. b) Intensity 

profile of the PL from the vortex beam metasurface LED, excited at 590 nm wavelength. 

 

 


