1

Abstract— We present the first group of acoustic delay lines 

(ADLs) at 5 GHz, using the first-order antisymmetric (A1) mode 
in Z-cut lithium niobate thin films. The demonstrated ADLs sig-
nificantly surpass the operation frequencies of the prior art with 
similar feature sizes, because of their simultaneously fast phase ve-
locity, large coupling coefficient, and low-loss. In this work, the 
propagation characteristics of the A1 mode in lithium niobate are
analytically modeled and validated with finite element analysis. 
The design space of A1 ADLs is then investigated, including both 
the fundamental design parameters and those introduced from the 
practical implementation. The implemented ADLs at 5 GHz show 
a minimum insertion loss of 7.9 dB, an average IL of 9.1 dB, and a 
fractional bandwidth around 4%, with group delays ranging be-
tween 15 ns and 109 ns and the center frequencies between 4.5 GHz 
and 5.25 GHz. The propagation characteristics of A1 mode acous-
tic waves have also been extracted for the first time. The A1 ADL 
platform can potentially enable wide-band high-frequency passive 
signal processing functions for future 5G applications in the sub-6 
GHz spectrum bands.

Index Terms— Acoustic delay line, lithium niobate, A1 mode, 

piezoelectricity, microelectromechanical systems, 5G, New Radio

I. INTRODUCTION

HE NEXT GENERATION radio access technology, 
namely the fifth-generation (5G) New Radio (NR), requires

unprecedented signal processing capabilities [1], [2]. More spe-
cifically, the enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), as one cru-
cial 5G NR usage scenario targeting a thousand-fold increase in 
the mobile data volume per unit area [3], [4], is calling for novel 
wideband signal processing functions at radio frequency (RF). 
Acoustic signal processing, where the electromagnetic (EM) 
signals are converted and processed in the acoustic domain, is 
promising for providing chip-scale, low-loss, and wideband ca-
pabilities. First, acoustic devices feature miniature sizes be-
cause of the significantly shorter acoustic wavelengths (λ) com-
pared to the EM counterparts, thus making them desirable for 
mobile applications [5], [6]. Second, designing and intercon-
necting acoustic devices can lead to passive implementation of 
signal processing functions [7], [8], which do not compete 
against the analog-to-digital converters (ADC) or digital signal 
processors (DSP) for the stringent power budget in RF front-
ends [9]. Last and most importantly, the recent demonstrations 
of low-loss and high electromechanical coupling (k2) piezoelec-
tric platforms [10]–[17] enable devices with lower insertion 

Manuscript submitted July 10th, 2019. This work was supported by the DARPA 
Microsystems Technology Office (MTO) Near Zero Power RF and Sensor Op-
erations (N-ZERO) and Signal Processing at RF (SPAR) programs. 

loss (IL) and wider fractional bandwidth (FBW), thus poten-
tially overcoming the performance bottlenecks that currently 
hinder acoustic signal processing from eMBB applications.

Among various types of acoustic devices, acoustic delay 

lines (ADLs) have been demonstrated with diverse applications 
ranging from transversal filters [18], [19] and correlators [20]–
[22] to oscillators [23], sensors [24], [25], and amplifiers [26]–
[28], alongside the recent prototypes of time-domain equalizers 
[29] and time-varying non-reciprocal systems [30]. Conven-
tionally, ADLs are built upon surface acoustic wave (SAW) 
platforms [31]–[33]. Despite their success in applications below 
2 GHz, two main drawbacks hinder the broad adoption of SAW 
ADLs for eMBB applications. First, their moderate k2 funda-
mentally limits the design trades in IL versus FBW [34]. In 
other words, it is challenging to achieve wide FBW without in-
ducing substantial IL. Second, due to their slow phase velocity
(vp), it is challenging to scale the operation frequency above 3
GHz for the planned eMBB bands [1], [35], unless narrow elec-
trodes (< 300 nm) [36], thin films on costly substrates [37]–[39], 
or intrinsically high damping modes [40] are adopted.

Recently, ADLs have been demonstrated with low loss and 

wide bandwidth using the fundamental shear horizontal (SH0) 
mode [41]–[43] and fundamental symmetrical (S0) mode [44]–
[46] in suspended single-crystal lithium niobate (LiNbO3) thin 
films enabled by the thin film integration techniques [47]. Com-
pared with ADLs on other piezoelectric thin films [48]–[51], 
these demonstrations feature lower IL and larger FBW due to 
the simultaneously high k2 and low damping of S0 [52], [53]
and SH0 [54]–[56] modes in LiNbO3. Nevertheless, it remains 
challenging to scale them above 3 GHz without resorting to nar-
row electrodes and ultra-thin films (<300 nm) [44], which are 
undesirable in terms of fabrication complexity and mostly lead 
to spurious modes that limit the achievable FBW [42]. There-
fore, a new piezoelectric platform with simultaneously high vp, 
large k2, and low-loss is sought after for potential eMBB appli-
cations.

To this end, acoustic devices using the first-order antisym-

metric (A1) mode in Z-cut LiNbO3 have been reported with 
high k2 and low loss above 4 GHz [57]–[59]. Different from 
SH0 and S0, A1 is higher-order in the thickness direction, thus 
significantly enhancing vp in in-plane dimensions [60] and im-
proving frequency scalability. However, the highly dispersive

The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computing Engineering, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801 USA (email: 
rlu10@illinois.edu).

5-GHz Antisymmetric Mode Acoustic Delay 

Lines in Lithium Niobate Thin Film

Ruochen Lu, Student Member, Yansong Yang, Student Member, IEEE, Ming-Huang Li, Member,

IEEE, Michael Breen, Student Member, IEEE, and Songbin Gong, Senior Member, IEEE

T


2

nature of A1 presents new challenges in designing ADLs. De-
sign principles for S0, SH0, and SAW ADLs have to be revis-
ited and substantially modified for A1 ADLs. Moreover, the no-
table cut-off in A1 confines acoustic waves within the input 
transducers and prevents their propagation toward the output 
port. Such effects are especially pronounced in the presence of 
metallic electrodes [60], and thus have to be analyzed and cir-
cumvented for successful implementation of A1 ADLs. Finally, 
A1 devices demonstrated so far are analyzed for mostly stand-
ing wave structures (e.g., resonators [60]) where the A1 propa-
gation characteristics have not been systematically studied. 

To overcome these outstanding hurdles, we aim to provide a 

comprehensive framework in this paper for analyzing the key 
parameters and propagation characteristics of A1 waves in 
LiNbO3 thin films and subsequently implement wideband and 
high-frequency A1 ADLs. The fabricated ADLs show a mini-
mum IL of 7.9 dB, an average IL of 9.1 dB, and a fractional 
bandwidth around 4%, delays ranging between 15 ns and 109 
ns, and the center frequencies between 4.5 GHz and 5.25 GHz. 

This paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a gen-

eral discussion on the design of the A1 ADLs, focusing on A1 
propagation characteristics and key parameters of A1 ADLs.  
Section III introduces the practical considerations essential for 
A1 ADLs, including electrode configurations and device orien-
tations. Section IV presents the fabricated 5-GHz A1 ADLs. 
Section V presents the measured results of ADLs. A1 propaga-
tion characteristics, including the propagation loss (PL), vg and 
vp, are also experimentally extracted. Finally, the conclusion is 
stated in Section VI.

II. ASYMMETRIC MODE ACOUSTIC DELAY LINE

A. Acoustic Delay Line Overview

The schematic of a typical A1 ADL is shown in Fig. 1 with 

the key parameters explained in Table I. The ADL consists of 
30 nm thick aluminum interdigitated transducers (IDTs) on top 
of a suspended 490 nm Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film. The thickness 
of LiNbO3 is selected for enabling wideband operation at 5 GHz. 
More details will be provided in Section II-B. A pair of bi-di-
rectional transducers are placed on the opposite ends of the 
ADL. The transducers are composed of N pairs of cascaded 
transducer unit cells. Each cell has a length of Λ, over which is 
situated a pair of transduction electrodes (each Λ/4 wide) with 
separations of Λ/4 in between. The electrodes are alternatingly 
connected to signal (orange IDTs for Port 1, green IDTs for Port 
2) and ground (blue IDTs). The in-plane orientation of the de-
vice is shown in Fig. 1, with the material’s X-axis along the 
wave propagation direction (longitudinal direction). The orien-
tation selection will be further discussed in Section III-B. Free 
boundaries, i.e., etch windows, are in the transverse direction 
for defining the acoustic waveguide. In operation, the RF sig-
nals are sent to Port 1 and converted into acoustic waves 
through the piezoelectric transducers. The launched acoustic 
waves propagate toward both ends, therefore sending half of the 
power toward Port 2. The other half is lost in the attenuation 
and scattering into the substrate. Similarly, after traversing
through the waveguide with a gap length of Lg, only half of the 

power launched toward Port 2 is collected, causing a minimum 
IL of 6 dB. Various acoustic signal processing functions can be 
passively implemented through designing the transducers [7]
and the waveguide [61]. The 6-dB IL from the bi-directional 
transducers can be effectively reduced using unidirectional 
transducers [18], [34], [46] with smaller feature sizes. In this 
work, we will focus on implementing the first group of A1 
ADLs using bi-directional transducers.

B. A1 Mode in Lithium Niobate Thin Film

Considering a piece of Z-cut LiNbO3 waveguide (XZ plane) 

with infinite length in the Y direction, the wave propagation 
problem becomes two-dimensional (2D). Because of the planar 
geometry, the transverse resonance method [62] is used to solve 
the 2D vibration. In such a method, the modal solutions are de-
composed into the traveling waves along the waveguide direc-
tion and the resonant standing waves in the transverse direction. 
The approach has been proven for both the acoustic and the EM 
cases [62], [63]. For a lossless and isotropic plate with mechan-
ically free boundary conditions on the top and bottom surfaces, 
the symmetric and antisymmetric solutions can be analytically 
expressed using the Rayleigh-Lamb frequency equations [62]:

tan(𝑘𝑡𝑠 ∙ 𝑏/2)
tan(𝑘𝑡𝑙 ∙ 𝑏/2) = − ( 4𝛽2𝑘𝑡𝑠𝑘𝑡𝑙

(𝑘𝑡𝑠

2 − 𝛽2)2)

±1

(1)

𝑘𝑡𝑙

2 = (𝜔/𝑣𝑙)2 − 𝛽2
(2)

𝑘𝑡𝑠

2 = (𝜔/𝑣𝑠)2 − 𝛽2
(3)

where ktl and kts are the transverse wavenumbers for the longi-
tudinal and shear modes. b is the film thickness, β is the lateral
wavenumber, and ω is the angular frequency. vl and vs are the 
velocities of the longitudinal and shear modes. In equation (1), 
the “+” and “−” are used to denote Lamb wave solutions of sym-
metrical and antisymmetric modes, respectively. Note that 
equations (1)-(3) are more complex than those for a rectangular 
EM waveguide because the longitudinal and shear acoustic 

Fig. 1.  Mockup of an A1 ADL on a suspended Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film. 

TABLE I DESIGN PARAMETERS OF A1 ADLS

Sym.
Parameter
Value
Sym.
Parameter
Value

Λ
Cell length (μm)
2.0-3.2
Wa
Aperture width (μm)
50

N
Number of cells
2-4
Wd
Device width (μm)
74

Lg
Gap length (μm)
20-320
LT
Transducer length (μm) 4.8-14.4

TLN LiNbO3 thickness (nm)
490
TAl
Aluminum thickness 

(nm)
30


3

waves co-exist in the waveguide and mode conversion happens
at the top and bottom surfaces [62]. 

Although solutions for Lamb waves in isotropic media can 

be solved using equations (1)-(3), the solutions in anisotropic 
piezoelectric thin films (e.g., LiNbO3) are difficult to attain an-
alytically unless certain acoustic modes along particular crystal 
orientations are studied [64], [65]. Finite element analysis 
(FEA) is one alternative for solutions. However, it does not pro-
vide straightforward insights into the principles of A1 propaga-
tion. To this end, we first introduce two approximations for a 
simplified model. The first one is the isotropic assumption in 
which the in-plane and out-of-plane stiffness constants are
deemed the same for LiNbO3. The second assumption is the 
quasi-static approximation [62], in which the electric field is as-
sumed to have zero curl. Therefore, vland vs in a plate with elec-
trically short boundary conditions on both top and bottom sur-
faces can be approximated by:

𝑣𝑙 ≈ √𝑐11

𝐸 /𝜌
(4)

𝑣𝑠 ≈ √𝑐44

𝐸 /𝜌
(5)

where c11E and c44E are stiffness constants related to the longi-
tudinal and shear waves respectively, following the Voigt nota-
tion [62], and ρ is the material density. For single-crystal 
LiNbO3, c11E is 2.03 × 1011 N/m2, c44E is 0.60 × 1011 N/m2, and 
ρ is 4700 kg/m3 [66]. By solving equations (1)-(5) for t=490 nm, 
the estimated Lamb wave dispersion curves are attained and 
plotted in Fig. 2 (a) for the electrically short case. The A1 mode 
of interest is the second group of antisymmetric solutions, 
which are at higher frequencies than the fundamental antisym-
metric mode (A0) mode with the same β. A1 exhibits a cut-off 
frequency, below which A1 waves do not have purely real β. In 
other words, only evanescent A1 waves, which attenuate expo-
nentially with distance, exist below fc_ short in LiNbO3 with the 
electrically short surface.

Similarly, the dispersion curves in a piezoelectric slab with 

electrically open boundary conditions can be calculated using
the piezoelectrically stiffened elastic constants cij’, as [66]:

𝑐𝑖𝑗

′ = [𝑐𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝐸
+ (𝑒𝑝𝑖𝑗𝑒𝑞𝑘𝑙𝑛𝑝𝑛𝑞)/(𝜀𝑟𝑠
𝑆 𝑛𝑟𝑛𝑠)]𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑙
(6)

where i, j, k, l, p, q are the indices of the Cartesian coordinate 
system, n is the unit vector, and e, εS are the piezoelectric and 
dielectric constants, respectively. Equation (6) describes that 
the material stiffening due to the piezoelectric effect depends 
on the piezoelectric constants. For LiNbO3, c11’ is 2.19 × 1011

N/m2, and c44’ is 0.95 × 1011 N/m2 [66]. By replacing the corre-
sponding cE with c’ in equations (4)-(5), Lamb wave dispersion 
curves are attained and plotted in Fig. 2 (b) for the electrically 
open case. Likewise, a cut-off frequency fc_open can be observed. 
For a given β, A1 is at higher frequencies compared to the 
previous case [Fig. 2 (a)] due to stiffening.

Equations (1)-(6) are still cumbersome for follow-on analysis 

of A1 ADLs. Therefore, we introduce the last assumption to de-
couple longitudinal and shear waves in A1 [60]. The dispersion 
of A1 can then be approximated by:

𝜔2 = (2𝜋𝑓𝑐)2 + 𝛽2 ∙ 𝑣𝑙

2 or 𝑓2 = 𝑓𝑐

2 + 𝑣𝑙

2/𝜆2
(7)

𝑓𝑐 = 𝑣𝑠/(2𝑏)
(8)

where f is the frequency, λ is the wavelength, and vl_short and 
vl_open are the longitudinal wave velocities of respective cases. 
For a 490 nm Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film, fc_short is 3.64 GHz, vl_short
is 6572 m/s, fc_open is 4.59 GHz, and vl_open is 6795 m/s [66]. The 
dispersion curves are plotted in Fig. 2 and compared with the 
results attained without the last assumption. The good agree-
ment indicates that the model is adequate for A1 at small thick-
ness-wavelength ratios (h/λ) [62].

From equations (7)-(8), it is clear that the film thickness b

determines the dispersion of A1. For a 5 GHz center frequency, 
b has to be neither too small (450 nm for fc_open at 5 GHz) to 
avoid the cut-off, nor too large (670 nm for a λ of 1.6 μm at 5 
GHz for electrically short) to avert small feature sizes. Thus, 
490 nm is chosen as a trade-off. More discussion in the context 
of ADL designs will be presented in Section II-C. 

To validate the simplified model and obtain more accurate 

properties of A1, eigenmode FEA is set up in COMSOL for a 
490 nm Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film section with a width (the +X 
direction) of λ. Periodic boundary conditions are applied to the 
XZ and YZ planes in both the electrical and mechanical do-
mains. The top and bottom surfaces (XY planes) are set to be 
mechanically free. The electrical boundary conditions are set to 
be electrically open and short, respectively [44]. The simulated 
A1 dispersion curves (with different β) are presented in Fig. 3
(a). Similar to the analytical model, the cut-off phenomenon is 
also seen, showing an fc_short of 3.66 GHz and an fc_open of 4.37 
GHz. The eigenfrequency increases for a larger β, suggesting
that the center frequency (fcenter) of A1 devices can be tuned by 
changing λ. More specifically, one can tune fcenter from 4.5 to 
6.0 GHz by changing λ from 6 μm to 1.5 μm for the electrically 
open case. In comparison, the simplified model provides a good 
estimation of A1 properties without resorting to the time-con-
suming calculation. Therefore, the model will be used in the 
later subsections for analyzing the A1 ADL design

Fig. 2.  Solutions of Lamb waves in a 490 nm Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film under the 
isotropic and quasi-static approximations. (a) Electrically short and (b) electri-
cally open boundary conditions. Different modes are marked on their solutions 
along with the ones from the decoupled model for A1 (dashed blue lines).


4

Moreover, based on the eigenmode analysis, the phase veloc-

ity vp and the group velocity vg are [62]:

𝑣𝑝 = 𝜔/𝛽 ≈ √(2𝜋𝑓𝑐/𝛽)2 + 𝑣𝑙

2
(9)

𝑣𝑔 = 𝜕𝜔/𝜕𝛽 ≈ 𝑣𝑙

2/√𝑣𝑙

2 + (2𝜋𝑓𝑐/𝛽)2
(10)

The obtained values are plotted in Fig. 3 (b) and (c), respec-
tively. A remarkably high vp over 8000 m/s is obtained for A1
below 6.5 GHz. A low vg below 4500 m/s is also observed.
Moreover, the mode is highly dispersive, and thus requires care-
ful design for the targeted operation frequency. vp and vg calcu-
lated from the simplified model using equations (9)-(10) are 
also plotted, matching the trend of the simulated values.

k2 is then calculated from vp by [67], [68]:

𝑘2 = (𝑣𝑓

2 − 𝑣𝑚2 )/𝑣𝑚2
(11)

where vf and vm are the phase velocities of the electrically open 
and short cases. The dispersion curve of k2 is plotted in Fig. 3 
(d). High k2 over 40% can be observed for A1 waves with a long 
λ (or with operation frequencies close to fc). k2 declines for A1 
waves at a higher frequency (or with a larger h/λ). Nevertheless, 
k2 larger than 10% is obtained for 5.5 GHz devices (λ of 2 μm).
The discrepancies between the simulated and the calculated k2

are due to the assumption in the simplified model, which 

induces overestimation in the frequency difference between vf
and vm, and thus causes a larger calculated k2.

With the critical characteristics of A1 studied, it is apparent 

that A1 ADLs are promising for 5G applications for several 
reasons. First, a high vp enables high-frequency devices without 
resorting to narrow electrodes or thin films [44]. Based on Fig. 
3, it is feasible to achieve 5 GHz with a 600 nm feature size on 
490 nm thick Z-cut LiNbO3 [58]. Second, the slow vg of A1 
(e.g., 3000 m/s at 5 GHz) enables longer delays over the same 
length in comparison to alternatives with faster vg (e.g., S0, or 
SH0) [62],  thus permitting a smaller device footprint. Third, 
large k2 above 5 GHz can overcome conventionally unforgiving 
trades between IL and FBW [34], consequently allowing low-
loss and wide-band signal processing functions. For example, 
up to 30% FBW is accessible without significantly increasing 
IL at 5.5 GHz (k2 of 15%) [42].

C. Simulation of A1 Acoustic Delay Line 

The typical response of an A1 ADL will be first studied using 

2D FEA. The 2D FEA assumes that the acoustic waves are 
plane waves propagating along the X-axis (the longitudinal 
direction in Fig. 1), neglecting the fridge effects near the release 
windows. The three-dimensional (3D) case will be presented in 
Section 
III-B, 
emphasizing 
the 
in-plane 
propagation 

characteristics. As presented in [44], perfectly matched layers
(PML) are applied to the longitudinal ends of the ADL. The 
simulation assumes lossless conditions in both the electrical and 
mechanical domains because the loss factors in LiNbO3 thin 
films at RF are currently not well understood and remain an 
active area of experimental research [44], [69]. Note that mass-
less electrodes are used in this section for simplicity. The effects 
of mechanical loading from practical electrodes will be 
presented in Section III-A. 

An A1 ADL prototype (cell length Λ = 2.4 μm, gap length Lg

= 40 μm, and cell number N = 4) is simulated to showcase its 
typical frequency domain response (Fig. 4). The aperture width 

Fig. 3. Characteristics of A1 with different β in a 0.49 μm thick Z-cut LiNbO3 
thin film, obtained from both FEA and the simplified model. (a) Eigen fre-
quency, (b) vp, and (c) vg with electrically open and short boundary conditions. 
(d) k2 at different wavenumber.

Fig. 4.  (a) Simulated IL and RL with both ports conjugately matched. The ev-
anescent modes in the input transducers are labeled. (b) Displacement and Txz
stress distribution at the center frequency. (c) Displacement mode shapes and 
stress distributions in the input transducers at the marked frequencies.


5

of the device (transverse direction, along the Y-axis in Fig. 1) 
is set as 50 μm. The S-parameters are obtained from the 
frequency domain FEA and then conjugately matched with 360
+ j30 Ω for both the input and output ports [Fig. 4 (a)], showing 
a well-defined passband centered around 5 GHz. Note that, 
although a complex port impedance is used in the example, it is 
possible to achieve acceptable matching over a large FBW 
using a real port impedance without significantly increasing IL, 
thanks to the large k2 of A1 [34]. Such a high operation 
frequency is as predicted in the eigenmode analysis, validating 
the choice of 490 nm-thick LiNbO3. The displacement mode 
shape and the stress distribution (Txz) at the center frequency are 
plotted in Fig. 4 (b). The minimum in-band IL is 3.7 dB, the 
average IL is 6.0 dB, and the 3-dB FBW is 10%. The average 
IL and 3-dB FBW reported in Sections II and III are extracted 
from the transmission after smoothing with a 50-point-window 
in the frequency domain using the Savitzky-Golay approach 
[70]. The 6-dB IL is caused by the bi-directional loss. The slight 
ripples in RL and IL are caused by triple transit signals (TTS) 
between the input and output transducers, which are intrinsic to 
ADLs employing bi-directional transducers [34].

Different from S0 and SH0 ADLs, the A1 ADL features a 

non-symmetric passband, which is apparent from the sidelobes. 
The non-symmetry is caused by the cut-off of A1 (cut-off 
frequency of the LiNbO3 thin film with electrically open 
surfaces, fc_open labeled in Fig. 4). As explained in Section III-
A, A1 waves at frequencies below fc_open are evanescent. Thus, 
the amplitude decays during the propagation toward the output 
transducers. Below fc_open, the section with the input transducer 
is equivalent to an A1 mode resonator [57]–[60]. The acoustic 
impedance difference caused by different electrical boundary 
conditions acts as reflective boundaries [7], [41]. The resonant 
modes below fc_open are marked with (i)-(iii) in the frequency 
response [Fig. 4 (a)]. Their displacement and stress mode 
shapes are shown in Fig. 4 (c). Only odd lateral order A1 
resonances are built up in the input transducer because the 
charge generated from even-order lateral overtones is canceled 
in a 4-cell transducer. At odd mode resonances, a small portion 
of the energy build-up in the input transducers leaks to the 
output port through evanescent coupling. Therefore, resonances 
in IL and RL are also seen at these frequencies. These modes 
are only prominent in the simulation because the structure is set 
as lossless. It can be seen in  Section V that they are 
significantly attenuated in measurements. Naturally, we will 
focus on the frequency range above fc_open to demonstrate A1 
ADLs.

D. Key Design Parameters of A1 Acoustic Delay Lines

In this subsection, the dependence of the three main ADL 

specifications, namely the group delay (δ), center frequency 
(fcenter), and FBW, on the device dimensions will be investigated. 

The impact of Lg on the obtained δ is first studied. FEA 

simulated IL, RL, and δ of ADLs with Lg of 20, 40, and 80 μm 
are shown in Fig. 5, with ports matched to 360 + j30 Ω. For this 
group of devices, the average IL is 6.0 dB, and the 3-dB FBW 
is 10%. The results underline three key insights. First, δ in-
creases in a highly dispersive fashion for devices with longer 

gaps. vg at each frequency is extracted using least square fitting 
[71]. The extracted vg is compared with that obtained from 
eigenmode simulations, showing good agreement [Fig. 5 (d)]. 
Such a dispersive delay can be advantageous for chirp compres-
sors [72]. If a constant delay is required, one might inversely 
chirp Λ of different cells in both transducers to compensate for 
the dispersion in vg. Second, the periodicity of the ripples in the 
S-parameters is inversely proportional to the gap length, similar 
to that in S0 [44]. It shows that the ripples are caused by the 
reflections between transducers, which form a weak resonant 
structure. Last, the transmission of the modes below the cut-off 
frequency fc_open decreases for longer devices. This verifies the 
evanescent nature of these modes, as suggested by our simpli-
fied model.

The effects of Λ on the center frequency fcenter are then 

investigated. fcenter is the frequency at which most RF energy is 
converted into the EM domain. FEA simulated IL, RL, and δ of 
ADLs with different Λ of 2.4, 3.2, and 4.0 μm are shown in Fig. 
6. The ports are matched to 360 + j30 Ω, 300 – j60 Ω, and 400 
– j80 Ω, respectively. The average IL is 6 dB, 6 dB, and 11.7 
dB, while the FBW is 10%, 6.8%, and 1.0%, respectively. The 
most apparent difference lies in fcenter and the passband shape. 
The effects can be explained using the Berlincourt equation. At 
fcenter, the acoustic wavelength matches the transducer cell 

Fig. 5.  Simulated (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) group delay of A1 ADLs with different 
gap lengths. Different devices have the same cell number N of 4, the same cell 
length Λ of 2.4 μm, but different gap lengths Lg of 20, 40, and 80 μm. (d) Ex-
tracted group velocity in comparison with that directly obtained from the 
eigenmode simulation.


6

length [56]. Therefore, the equation for solving fcenter is:

𝑓𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∙ 𝐿𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛/𝑣𝑝_𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛 + 𝑓𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 ∙ 𝐿𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡/𝑣𝑝_𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 = 1
(12)

where Lopen and Lshort are the lengths of the parts without and 
with electrodes in a cell. vf and vm are the phase velocities in that 
area with electrodes (electrically short) and without electrodes
(electrically open) respectively, which can be related to fcenter by 
a variation of equation (9) [62]:

𝑣𝑓 = 𝑣𝑙_𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛/√1 − (𝑓𝑐_𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑛/𝑓)

2
(13)

𝑣𝑚 = 𝑣𝑙_𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡/√1 − (𝑓𝑐_𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡/𝑓)

2
(14)

Based on fc and vl calculated in Section II-B, fcenter for a 50% 
duty-cycled transducer with Λ between 1.5 and 4.0 μm is shown 
in Fig. 7 as the blue dash line. fcenter keeps decreasing for an 
ADL with a larger Λ. However, as fcenter gets closer to fc_open, the 
passband is truncated and distorted, leading to a reduction of 
FBW. To validate the simplified model, FEA is used to validate 
the case. 4 pairs of transducers are simulated in the frequency 
domain. fcenter and the wavelength are plotted in Fig. 7. The 
simplified model agrees well with the simulation. In addition to 
the change in the passband, longer Λ also lowers the frequencies 
of the non-propagating modes within the input transducers due 
to the longer resonant cavity. 

Finally, the effects of N on FBW are studied. FEA results of 

ADLs with different N values of 2, 4, and 8 are shown in Fig. 
8, with ports conjugately matched to 800 + j910 Ω, 360 + j30 
Ω, and 112 − j80 Ω. The average IL is around 6 dB, while the 
FBW is 21%, 10%, and 4.8%, respectively. The FBW of ADLs 
is roughly inversely proportional to the number of cells, as ex-

plained by the transfer function of the transducer pair [7]. How-
ever, because of the cut-off phenomenon, the passband gradu-
ally distorts near fc_open. Therefore, one needs to consider thor-
oughly fcenter and the FBW requirements before designing A1 
ADLs.

To sum up, we have discussed the principles and critical 

parameters (Λ, Lg, and N) of A1 ADLs. The discussions focus 
on ideal A1 ADLs without considering the mass loading of the 
electrodes. Furthermore, the actual aperture width and possible 
skewed propagation of A1 in a 3D structure are not captured by
the adopted 2D simulations.
The electrical loading in 

transducers is also ignored. All these practical considerations 
will be covered in Section III.

III. IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS

A. Electrode Mass Loading

In this subsection, we will show the simulated results of 

ADLs using electrodes of different thicknesses and different
metals. Different devices studied herein have the same cell 
length Λ of 2.4 μm, gap length Lg of 40 μm, and cell number N
of 4. 

As seen in Fig. 9, the thickness of the electrode layer affects 

the performance. The S parameters for devices with electrodes 
of 0, 30, and 60 nm Al are conjugately matched with 360 + j30 

Fig. 6.  Simulated (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) group delays of the A1 ADLs with 
different center frequencies. Different devices have the same cell number N of 
4, and the same gap length Lg of 40 μm, but different cell lengths Λ of 2.4, 3.2, 
and 4.0 μm.

Fig. 7.  Dependency of fcenter on the Λ. 

Fig. 8.  Simulated (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) group delays of the A1 ADLs with 
different bandwidths. Different devices have the same cell length Λ of 2.4 μm, 
and the same gap length Lg of 40 μm, but different cell number N of 2, 4, and 8.


7

Ω, 225 + j130 Ω,  and 145 + j220 Ω respectively. The drifting
of fcenter to lower frequencies and slightly larger ripples are ob-
served for ADLs with thicker metal. The influence of different 
types of metal (Al, Mo, and Au) with the same electrode thick-
ness (30 nm) on the ADL performance is shown in Fig. 10. The 
results are matched with 225 + j130 Ω, 105 + j215 Ω, and 87 + 
j45 Ω, respectively. The same trend in thicker electrodes can be 
observed for heavier metals. 

To better design electrodes for A1 ADLs, the lower fcenter

caused by the mass loading is first discussed. As presented in 
equations (12)-(14), fcenter is determined by the vl and fc in the 
parts with and without electrodes. For devices with different 
electrodes, both fc_short and vl_short vary. 

First, fc_short of different film stacks can be obtained analyti-

cally by solving the stress distribution (Txz) in the film stack [Fig. 
11 (a)]. At fc_short, Txz is uniform in the lateral direction. Given 
that the stress vanishes on the top and bottom surfaces with the 
mechanically free boundary conditions, the stress distribution 
can be described in the thickness direction (z) as: 

𝑇𝑥𝑧(𝑧) = 𝑇𝐿𝑁 ∙ sin(2𝜋𝑓𝑐_𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡/𝑣𝑠_𝐿𝑁 ∙ 𝑧), 𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑛 0 ≤ 𝑧 < 𝑡

(15)
𝑇𝑥𝑧(𝑧) = 𝑇𝑚𝑒𝑡 ∙ sin[2𝜋𝑓𝑐_𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡/𝑣𝑠_𝑚𝑒𝑡 ∙ (𝑡 + 𝑏 − 𝑧)],

𝑤ℎ𝑒𝑛 𝑡 ≤ 𝑧 ≤ 𝑡 + 𝑏

where TLN and Tmet are the stress amplitude, while vs_LN and vs_met
are the shear wave velocities in LiNbO3 and the electrode re-
spectively. t and b are the thicknesses of LiNbO3 and the elec-
trode. Using the boundary conditions at the interface, namely
the stress continuity and velocity continuity [8], [56], we have:

tan(2𝜋𝑓𝑐_𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡/𝑣𝑠_𝑚𝑒𝑡 ∙ 𝑏)

tan(2𝜋𝑓𝑐_𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡/𝑣𝑠_𝐿𝑁 ∙ 𝑡) = − 𝜌𝐿𝑁 ∙ 𝑣𝑠_𝐿𝑁

𝜌𝑚𝑒𝑡 ∙ 𝑣𝑠_𝑚𝑒𝑡
(16)

where ρLN and ρmet are the densities of respective materials. 
fc_short and the normalized stress distribution in the film can be 
obtained from equations (15)-(16). Two examples, 100 nm Al 
and 100 nm Au on the top of 490 nm LiNbO3, are presented in 
Fig. 11 (a) for displaying the effect of mass loading on fc_short. 
The solutions for both cases are plotted, showing that the metal 
layer changes the stress distribution and consequently lowers 
fc_short. In the Au case, nearly half of the stress variance is in Au 
due to the significantly slower shear wave velocity in the metal 
layer. In contrast, the impact is much smaller in the Al case be-
cause of a faster shear wave velocity in Al. The mass loading
effects caused by different metals are then calculated [Fig. 11 
(b)]. Thicker electrodes and metals with slower vs_met lead to a 
larger difference. Eigenmode FEA (Fig. 11) also shows great 
agreement with our analytical model. 

Second, the vl_short of different film stacks are solved through 

FEA. Although analytically solving a composite structure is 
possible through simplifications [73], FEA is used here for 
higher accuracy [Fig. 12 (a)]. 100 nm of Al leads to 1.1% ve-
locity change, while 100 nm Au leads to 22.7% velocity change. 
Thicker or heavier electrodes lead to a more significant phase 
velocity decrease. 

With the dependence of fc_short and vl_short on the electrode 

Fig. 11.  (a) Stress (Txz) distribution of A1 at fc_short in film stacks with 490 nm 
LiNbO3 and 100 nm metal on the top. The calculated stress distribution and that 
obtained from FEA are presented. (b) Calculated and simulated fc_short for 490 
nm LiNbO3 and metal on the top.

Fig. 9.  Simulated (a) IL and (b) group delay of the A1 ADLs with aluminum 
electrodes of 0, 30, and 60 nm in thickness. 

Fig. 10.  Simulated (a) IL and (b) group delay of the A1 ADLs with 30 nm 
electrodes of different types of metal.


8

thickness studied, the impact of the mass loading on fcenter is cal-
culated using the model in equations (12)-(14) and plotted in 
Fig. 12 (b) for a 50% duty cycle transducer with Λ of 2.4 μm. 
Because both parameters decrease with thicker or heavier metal 
(e.g., Au), fcenter decreases, compared to the massless case. As a 
result, the passband distorts as it shifts to lower frequencies and 
gets truncated by the cut-off (Figs. 9-10). To build A1 ADLs at 
similar frequencies using thicker or heavy electrodes, one has 
to implement transducers with a smaller Λ, which requires a 
smaller feature size. Therefore, thin electrodes with fast wave
velocities are preferred for achieving well-defined passbands 
without decreasing the feature size of IDTs.

Another effect from more severe mass loading is the larger 

ripples in IL and group delay. These are caused by more signif-
icant internal reflections at the edge of the electrodes [34], [41]. 
The edge reflections are of two origins, namely the electrically 
induced Γe and the mechanically induced Γm [41]. While Γe does 
not change with electrode thickness, Γm is larger for thicker 
metals. To study the influence quantitatively, the reflection gen-
erated at the interface between the parts with and without elec-
trodes, namely the step-up reflection coefficient, Γsu, is studied 
using the simulation procedure in [41], [61]. A slab of LiNbO3
partially covered with metal is modeled in 2D with PMLs on 
the lateral ends for absorbing the reflected waves. A1 waves are 
excited mechanically in the area without electrodes and propa-
gate toward the interface. The ratio between the reflected stress
and the incident stress (Txz) is used to calculate Γsu.  Γsu for Al 
electrodes of different thicknesses is plotted in Fig. 13 (a). First, 
Γe shows lower values at higher frequencies, which is consistent
with the lower k2 at these frequencies (Fig. 3). Second, larger 
Γsu is observed for thicker electrodes due to the larger mechan-
ically induced reflections. The larger reflections subsequently 
induce larger in-band ripples, which are more severe near fc_short. 
Similarly, heavier material leads to larger reflections [Fig. 13 
(b)]. Thus, a lighter electrode material such as Al is preferred to 
reduce Γsu for less pronounced in-band ripples [7], [18]. Note 

that the internal reflections can be further suppressed by split 
electrode designs at the cost of needing a smaller feature size 
[7].

To sum up, thinner electrodes with faster phase velocities are 

preferred in maintaining high-frequency and wide-band perfor-
mance. However, if the electrodes are too thin, the series re-
sistance would load the performance electrically (Section III-
C). In our work, 30 nm Al is chosen as a calculated trade-off.

B. In-plane Orientation of A1 Acoustic Delay Lines

The previous analysis assumes A1 ADLs placed along +X

(Fig. 1). In this subsection, the effect of in-plane orientation on 

Fig. 13.  (a) Simulated Γsu at the interface between the parts with and without 
electrodes. (b) Comparison of the Γsu caused by different metal electrodes for 
A1 waves in the acoustic waveguide at 4.95 GHz.

Fig. 14.  Simulated A1 characteristics at different in-plane orientations in a 0.49 
μm thick Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film. Simulated vp under (a) electrically open and 
(b) short boundary conditions, (c) k2, and (d) power flow angle.

Fig. 12.  (a) Simulated vl_short in film stacks with 490 nm LiNbO3 and different 
types of electrode on the top. (b) Calculated fcenter for transducers with different 
types of electrodes.


9

A1 transduction, propagation, and wideband performance will 
be discussed.

A1 characteristics at different in-plane orientations in a Z-cut 

LiNbO3 thin film are first investigated. 3D FEA is used to iden-
tify the eigenfrequencies of A1 at different orientations, using a 
2.4 μm by 50 μm by 0.49 μm Z-cut LiNbO3 plate. Periodic 
boundary conditions are applied to the lateral edges. Mechani-
cally free boundary conditions are applied to the top and bottom 
surfaces. The phase velocities for both electrically open case 
(vf) and short case (vm) are obtained, respectively. As seen in 
Fig. 14 (a) and (b), both velocities vary little pertaining to the 
in-plane orientation. vf is around 12.52 km/s, and vm is around 
11.70 km/s. A periodicity of 60° is observed in the variation, 
matching the in-plane angular periodicity of Z-cut LiNbO3 [74]. 
k2 is calculated with equation (11) and is plotted in Fig. 14 (c), 
showing a value (around 14.5%,) in agreement with the calcu-
lated in Fig. 3.  Clearly from Fig. 14, A1 transduction in Z-cut 
LiNbO3 does not vary significantly with the in-plane orientation.

Second, the propagation characteristics of A1 are studied. So 

far, the analysis assumes that the wavefront propagates in align-
ment with the energy transportation direction [75]. However, 
this is only true when the power flow angle (PFA) is zero. The 
PFA is defined as the in-plane angle between the direction of vg
and vp, pointing from vg to vp [75], which is mostly non-zero for 
waves in anisotropic materials. A large PFA would cause the 
generated wave propagating off the direction toward the output 
transducer. Although the free boundaries in the transverse di-
rection would help to confine the energy, IL degradation is still 
expected as waves scatter into the bus line area where no IDTs 
are present to collect the acoustic energy [44]. The PFA for A1 
waves in Z-cut LiNbO3 is studied through the slowness curve 
approach [75] and plotted in Fig. 14 (d) for both the electrically 
open and short cases. Small PFAs can be seen across the YZ 

plane. A PFA of 0° is seen along +X. A maximum of +0.6° 
along 15° to +X and a minimum of −0.6° along 45° to +X are 
observed. The PFA shows the same periodic dependence on ori-
entation as vf, vm, and k2. 

To explore the effects of a small PFA, 3D FEA is set up with 

a cell length Λ of 2.4 μm, a gap length Lg of 40 μm, and a cell 
number N of 4. The aperture width is 50 μm, and the total device 
width is 74 μm. PMLs are placed on the longitudinal ends, 
while the free boundaries are set on the transverse sides. The 
simulated S parameters are shown in Fig. 15 (a) and (b) with 
ports conjugately matched to 210 + j140 Ω, showing the minor 

Fig. 16. Simulated characteristics of major modes at different in-plane orienta-
tions in a 0.49 μm thick Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film, including (a) vf, (b) k2, and (c) 
displacement mode shapes of different modes.

Fig. 17.  Simulated wideband (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) group delay of A1 ADLs 
at different in-plane orientations.

Fig. 15. Simulated effects of the in-plane orientation on ADL performance. (a) 
IL and (b) group delay of ADLs at different in-plane orientations. (c) Vibration 
mode shape of A1 in the passband (top view).


10

difference between devices oriented at different angles. The dis-
placement mode shape presented in Fig. 15 (c) shows that most 
energy propagates along the longitudinal direction. Compared 
with ADLs using other modes with significant PFAs [42], [44],
A1 in Z-cut LiNbO3 allows more tolerance for angular misa-
lignment due to its small PFAs. 

Third, other modes at different angles are studied. vf and k2

of the major modes in the 2.4 μm by 50 μm by 0.49 μm Z-cut 
LiNbO3 plate are simulated using the same method as that for 
A1. The results are plotted along with the displacement mode 
shapes in Fig. 16. SH0, S0, and A0 can be effectively excited in 
Z-cut LN with moderate k2 at certain orientations. The simu-
lated wide-band performance for ADLs placed along 0°, 15°, 
and 30° to +X is shown in Fig. 17. In agreement with Fig. 16, 
S0 is not excited at 0° to +X, while SH0 is not excited at 30° to 
+X. The frequency spacings between passbands mark the dif-
ference in vp, while the difference in δ proves the difference in 
vg for different modes. Other than the non-propagating modes 
below fc_open, a clean spectrum can be observed for A1.

Based on the above analysis of A1 transduction, propagation, 

and its wideband performance, it can be concluded that the in-
plane orientation does not affect the performance significantly. 
Consequently, we will choose the X-axis as the longitudinal di-
rection for device implementation in this work.

C. Electrical Loading in Interdigitated Electrodes

The series resistance in the IDTs can cause significant per-

formance degradation in a wide device aperture [76]. With a 
wider aperture (or longer IDTs), the series resistance caused by 
the electrical loading increases, while the radiation resistance of
the ADL decreases. Consequently, the electrical loading effects 
are more prominent. To study electrical loading quantitatively, 

Rs can be calculated as [76]:

𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑒 = (2𝜌𝑠 ∙ 𝑊𝑎)/(3𝑡 ∙ 𝛬/4)
(17)

𝑅𝑠 = 2𝑅𝑒𝑙𝑒/𝑁
(18)

where Rele is the resistance in a single IDT. ρs is the electrical 
resistivity. Wa is the aperture width, Λ/4 is the electrode width, 
and t is the IDT electrode thickness. Rs is the series resistance 
of a transducer, and N is the cell number. From equations (17)-
(18), Rs is proportional to Wa. For a device with a Λ of 2.4 μm, 
an N of 4, and 30 nm Al electrodes, Rs can be calculated for 
different Wa [Fig. 18(a)]. In the calculation, ρs is set as 3 times 
of the bulk value (2.65 × 10−8 Ω∙m [77]), based on that measured 
from the in-house fabrication tests. The real part of the port im-
pedance (port resistance,
Rport)
without considering the 

electrical loading is inversely proportional to Wa, as plotted in 
Fig. 18 (a). The comparison indicates that the electrical loading 
is significant for devices wider than 50 μm. To further 
investigate the impact, the simulated S parameters of ADLs 
with 10, 50, and 100 μm are shown in Fig. 18 (b) (c), with the 
port impedance conjugately matched to 1580 + j260 Ω, 420 + 
j55 Ω, and 295 + j28 Ω respectively. A decrease in IL and an 
increase in RL are the results of the electrical loading. The 
impact is more clear on the lower frequency side of the 
passband because k2 of A1 is slightly larger at lower 
frequencies. The same Rs is more substantial in comparison to 
the radiation resistance at those frequencies. Another 
consequence is that the compound port resistance (when Rs is 
non-zero) is not inversely proportional to Wa due to the 
electrical loading. However, it is not beneficial to implement 

Fig. 18. (a) Simulated effects of the aperture width on port resistance and series 
resistance. Simulated (b) IL and (c) RL of A1 ADLs with different aperture 
widths.

Fig. 19.  Optical microscope images of the fabricated ADLs. Zoomed-out im-
ages of A1 ADLs with Lg of (a) 20, (b) 80, and (c) 320 μm. (d) Zoomed-in 
image of a transducer with 4 cells. 

TABLE II

KEY PARAMETERS OF THE FABRICATED DEVICES

Index

Cell 

Length 
(μm)

Gap 

Length
(μm)

No. of 
Cells

Sim. 
(Fig.)

Meas. 
(Fig.)
Comments

Group A
2.4
20-320
4
5, 17 20-21 Gap length & Wideband

Group B
3.2
20-320
4
6
22
Cell length & Gap length

Group C
2.8
20-160
4
6
23
Cell length & Gap length

Group D
2.0
20-320
4
6
24
Cell length & Gap length

Group E
2.4
20-320
2
8
25
Cell number, vg, and PL


11

devices with excessively small apertures because of the wave 
diffraction caused by the fringe effect [7]. Therefore, the 
aperture width is set as 50 μm as a trade-off. Based on the 
results, we choose to implement A1 ADLs along the X-axis 
direction using 30 nm of Al electrode and an aperture width of 
50 μm.

IV. A1 ACOUSTIC DELAY LINE IMPLEMENTATION

The devices were fabricated in-house with the process pre-

sented in [44].  A 490 nm Z-cut LiNbO3 thin film on a 4-inch 
Si wafer is provided by NGK Insulators, Ltd., for the fabrication. 
The optical images of the fabricated ADLs are shown in Fig. 19. 
The key design parameters, namely Λ, Lg, and N are labeled, 
and their typical values are presented in Table I. 

Five groups of A1 ADLs are designed for the implementation 

of 5-GHz broadband delays (Table II). ADLs in group A have 
the same transducer design (Λ and N) but different Lg, for 
showcasing the operation principles of A1 ADLs and 
identifying the key propagation parameters. Their wideband 
performance will also be presented to validate our design. 
Groups B, C, and D include ADLs with different cell length Λ
for showing ADL performance at different frequencies and also 
present the highly dispersive characteristics of A1. Group E 
includes ADLs with a different number of cells from Group A 
to show the dependence of BW on N. The broadband 
performance is also used to extract vg and PL. Measured results 
and discussion will be presented in the next section.

V. MEASUREMENTS AND DISCUSSION

A. Acoustic Delay Lines with Different Gap Lengths

The fabricated ADLs were first measured with a vector net-

work analyzer (VNA) at the −10 dBm power level in air, and 
then conjugately matched using ADS. ADLs in Group A (N = 
4, Λ = 2.4 μm, Lg = 20-320 μm) are designed for showcasing A1 
ADL operation and demonstrating long delays. 

The measured IL and RL are shown in Fig. 20 (a)-(b) with 

the ports conjugately matched. The ADLs show a passband 
centered at 5.0 GHz. A minimum IL of 7.9 dB, an average IL 
of 9.1 dB, and an FBW around 4% have been achieved for the 
ADL with a 20 μm gap length. The average IL and 3-dB FBW 
are extracted from the smoothed transmission (1000-point-
window from measured data) using the Savitzky-Golay 
approach [70]. Delays between 15 ns and 109 ns are measured. 
An increase in IL is observed for longer ADLs, which is caused 
by the PL of A1 in the LiNbO3 waveguide. Larger transmission 
can be observed out of the passband band for shorter devices, 
which is likely caused by the capacitive feedthrough between
the buslines and the probing pads. Ripples caused by the multi-
reflection between ports and the internal reflections in the 
transducers are seen in the passband. Larger RL out of the 
passband is observed, due to the series resistance in the 
electrodes, as explained in Section III-C. The non-propagating 
modes can be observed below the cut-off frequency in Fig. 20
(a), but they are significantly damped by PL. Dispersive group 
delays are observed for different devices, showing longer 
delays near the cut-off frequency as modeled in Section II-A. 
A1 propagation characteristics are extracted from the dataset, 
showing a PL of 71 dB/μs (or 0.0216 dB/μm), and vg of 3289 
m/s 5.0 GHz. 

The wideband performance of A1 ADLs is presented in

Fig. 21. The cut-off can be clearly identified below the fc_open
around 4.4 GHz where the onset of larger IL occurs. Three out 
of band resonances are present at 3.7 GHz, 3.9 GHz, and 4.3 
GHz, as predicted in Fig. 4. An A0 passband at 0.8 GHz and an 
SH0 passband at 1.6 GHz are also measured, consistent with 
simulations in Fig. 17. Different group delays are observed in 
the A1 and SH0 passbands as A1 is slower than SH0 in this 
frequency range. This validates that A1 features low vg and high 
vp simultaneously, promising compact device sizes while 

Fig. 20. Measured S-parameters of the A1 ADLs in Group A (N=4, Λ=2.4 μm) 
with identical transducers but different Lg (20 – 320 μm). (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) 
group delay responses. (d) Extracted propagation loss (71 dB/μs), and group 
velocity (3289 m/s) of A1 at 5.0 GHz.

Fig. 21.  Measured wideband performance of the devices in Group A: (a) IL, 
(b) RL, and (c) group delay.


12

maintaining large feature sizes at 5 GHz.

B. Acoustic Delay Lines with Different Center Frequencies

ADLs in Group B (Λ = 3.2 μm), Group C (Λ = 2.8 μm), and 

Group D (Λ = 2.0 μm) are designed for investigating the impact 
of the cell length on the center frequency. In each group, de-
vices with gap length between 20 and 320 μm are implemented.

Devices are measured at -10 dBm in air and conjugately 

matched. For devices in Group B, a minimum IL of 8.71 dB, an 
average IL of 10.4 dB, and an FBW around 5.7%, and a center 
frequency of 4.6 GHz are obtained (Fig. 22). The extracted PL 
is 75.1 dB/μs (or 0.0326 dB/μm), and vg of 2304 m/s for A1 at 
4.6 GHz. For devices in Group C, a minimum IL of 8.04 dB, an 
average IL of 11.2 dB, and an FBW around 7.3%, and a center 
frequency of 4.8 GHz are obtained (Fig. 23). The extracted PL 
is 69.8 dB/μs (or 0.0259 dB/μm), and vg of 2696 m/s for A1 at 
4.8 GHz. For devices in Group D, a minimum IL of 12.6 dB, an 

average IL of 14.5 dB, and an FBW around 8.8%, and a center 
frequency of 5.35 GHz are measured (Fig. 24). The extracted 
PL is 45.5 dB/μs (or 0.0131 dB/μm), and vg of 3472 m/s for A1 
at 5.35 GHz. Comparing the performance between ADLs from 
different groups, devices with larger cell lengths have lower 
center frequencies. However, unlike S0 and SH0 [42], [44], the 
A1 center frequency does not scale inversely to the cell length
due to the dispersive nature of A1. Moreover, higher frequency 
devices tend to have flatter group delays in the passband, which 
are consistent with Fig. 3. 

C. Acoustic Delay Lines with Different Cell Numbers

ADLs in Group E (N = 2, Λ = 2.4 μm, Lg = 20-320 μm) are 

designed for investigating the impact of cell numbers on the 
bandwidth via comparison with Group A. The passband is not 
symmetrical with larger IL shown below fc_open due to the cut-
off. For devices in Group E, a minimum IL of 7.9 dB, an 

Fig. 24.  Measured S-parameters of the A1 ADLs in Group D (N=4, Λ=2.0 μm) 
with identical transducers but different Lg (20 – 320 μm). (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) 
group delay responses. (d) Extracted propagation loss (45.5 dB/μs), and group 
velocity (3472 m/s) of A1 at 5.35 GHz.

Fig. 25.  Measured S-parameters of the A1 ADLs in Group E (N=2, Λ=2.4 μm) 
with identical transducers but different Lg (20 – 320 μm). (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) 
group delay responses. (d) Extracted propagation loss (79.7 dB/μs), and group 
velocity (3528 m/s) of A1 at 5 GHz.

Fig. 22. Measured S-parameters of the A1 ADLs in Group B (N=4, Λ=3.2 μm) 
with identical transducers but different Lg (20 – 320 μm). (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) 
group delay responses. (d) Extracted propagation loss (75.1 dB/μs), and group 
velocity (2304 m/s) of A1 at 4.6 GHz.

Fig. 23. Measured S-parameters of the A1 ADLs in Group C (N=4, Λ=2.8 μm) 
with identical transducers but different Lg (20 – 160 μm). (a) IL, (b) RL, and (c) 
group delay responses. (d) Extracted propagation loss (69.8 dB/μs), and group 
velocity (2696 m/s) of A1 at 4.8 GHz.


13

average IL of 10.7 dB, and an FBW around 19.7%, and a center 
frequency of 5.0 GHz are obtained (Fig. 23). The extracted PL 
is 79.73 dB/μs (or 0.0226 dB/μm), and vg is 3528 m/s at 4.8 
GHz. The data in Group E will be used to extract the wideband 
PL and vg for A1 ADLs.

D. Performance Summary and Discussion

The extracted propagation parameters of different ADLs are 

presented in Table III, and plotted in Fig. 26. First, the center 
frequencies fcenter of different groups are plotted in Fig. 26 (a), 
and compared to that calculated using the approach in Section 
III-A (Fig. 12). Good agreement is obtained between the 
measurement and the model, with the slight differences likely 
caused by the approximations in the model. Second, the 
extracted group velocity is presented in Fig. 26 (b). The values 
obtained from the center frequencies of different groups are 
plotted using the scattered points. The wideband performance 
obtained from Group E is also extracted using least square fit-
ting [71] at each frequency point in Fig. 25 (c). The FEA results 
(Fig. 3) are also plotted on the same figure, showing great 
agreement with measured data. The extracted group velocity 

validates the cut-off. Finally, PL at different frequencies is plot-
ted in Fig. 26 (c). Similarly, PL from different groups and the 
wideband PL from Group E are plotted. The extracted PL of A1 
in thin-film LiNbO3 around 5 GHz is reported for the first time.
Interestingly, smaller PL per distance is observed at higher fre-
quencies. The reason has not been identified and will be inves-
tigated in future studies where the passband ripples are sup-
pressed through unidirectional transducers [34].  

Finally, to identify the major loss contributors, the measured 

performance is compared to the simulated values discussed in 
Sections II and III. Without loss of generality, the IL of ADLs 
in Group A with Lg of 20, 80, and 320 μm (under conjugate 
matching conditions) are analyzed in Fig. 27. The 2D FEA of 
an ideal A1 ADL with massless electrodes, no electrical or me-
chanical loss, without considering direct capacitance feed-
through between probing pads is presented in Fig. 27 (a). The 
mass loading is first introduced [Fig. 27 (b)]. Afterward, the 
electrical loading is included [Fig. 27 (c)], introducing addi-
tional IL in the passband (Section III-C). The other element in-
fluencing the performance is the capacitive feedthrough be-
tween the pads and buslines (Section V-A). Fig. 27 (d) is plotted 
with 3.2 fF for the 20-μm Lg device, 1.2 fF for the 80-μm Lg
device, and 0.5 fF for the 320-μm Lg device, where the capaci-
tance is fitted from the measured out-of-band-rejection. The fi-
nal consideration is the experimentally measured PL of A1 
(Section V-D), which causes additional in-band IL [Fig. 27 (e)].

Fig. 27. Comparison between the simulated and measured IL of the devices in 
Group A. Different practical considerations are gradually included, based on 
(a) the ideal A1 ADL, including (b) electrode mass loading, (c) electrical load-
ing, (d) feed through capacitance, and (e) propagation loss. Simulations are 
compared with the measured results in (f).

TABLE III

EXTRACTED A1 MODE PROPAGATION CHARACTERISTICS

Index
fcenter (GHz)

Group Velocity
PL

vg (m/s)
Delay/length 

(μs/mm)

PL/length 
(dB/μm)

PL/delay 
(dB/μs)

Group A
5.0
3289
0.304
0.0216
71.0

Group B
4.6
2304
0.434
0.0326
75.1

Group C
4.8
2696
0.371
0.0259
69.8

Group D
5.35
3472
0.288
0.0131
45.5

Group E
5.0
3528
0.283
0.0226
79.7

Fig. 26. Extracted parameters of A1 ADLs. (a) Center frequencies of different 
devices in comparison to the calculated values. (b) Wideband group delay ex-
tracted from Groups A-E in comparison with FEA (Fig. 3). (c) Extracted PL 
from Groups A-E.


14

The average IL is 8.7 dB, and the FBW is 10%. The simulated 
value achieves reasonable agreement with the measurement (an 
average IL of 9.1 dB and an FBW of 4%) in Fig. 27 (f). The 
difference in FBW is caused by the higher PL at lower frequen-
cies. The additional IL in the measurement likely originates 
from the wave diffraction and the additional electrical loss in 
the IDTs at higher frequencies.

Another issue of the A1 ADL prototypes is the relatively high 

port impedance. To improve in the future, several approaches 
can be taken. First, devices with larger aperture widths can 
lower the port resistance. However, it is only feasible after re-
ducing the electrical resistivity in the IDTs (Fig. 18) with better 
controlled sputtering conditions and annealing processes [78], 
[79]. Second, more transducer pairs can be adopted to lower the 
port impedance at the cost of a smaller FBW (Section II-D),
provided device performance can still meet the application 
specifications.

To sum up, we have demonstrated A1 ADLs at 5 GHz in 

LiNbO3 thin films for the first time, significantly surpassing the 
operation frequencies of the previous reports (Table IV). Note 
that the demonstrated device performance is still far from the 
full potential of A1 ADLs. Upon further optimizations, lower 
IL devices with less pronounced passband ripples and matched 
to a lower port impedance can be expected.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this work, we have demonstrated A1 ADLs at 5 GHz in 

LiNbO3 thin films for the first time. Thanks to the fast phase 
velocity, significant coupling coefficient, and low-loss of A1,  
the demonstrated ADLs significantly surpass the state of the art 
with similar feature sizes in center frequency. The propagation 
characteristics of A1 in LiNbO3 are analyzed and modeled with 
FEA before the designs of A1 ADLs are studied and composed. 
The implemented ADLs at 5 GHz show a minimum IL of 7.9
dB, an average IL of 9.1 dB, and a 3 dB FBW around 4%. The 
design variations show delays ranging between 15 ns and 109 
ns and the center frequencies between 4.5 GHz and 5.25 GHz. 
From these measured devices, the propagation characteristics 
of A1 are extracted for the first time and shown to match our 
analysis. Upon further optimization, the A1 ADLs can lead to
wide-band and high-frequency signal processing functions for 
5G applications.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Dr. Troy Olsson for helpful 

discussions.

REFERENCES

[1]
S. Parkvall, E. Dahlman, A. Furuskar, and M. Frenne, “NR: The new 5G 
radio access technology,” IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 
24–30, 2017.

[2]
S.-Y. Lien, S.-L. Shieh, Y. Huang, B. Su, Y.-L. Hsu, and H.-Y. Wei, “5G 
new radio: Waveform, frame structure, multiple access, and initial 
access,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 64–71, 2017.

[3]
E. Hossain, M. Rasti, H. Tabassum, and A. Abdelnasser, “Evolution 
toward 5G multi-tier cellular wireless networks: An interference 
management perspective,” IEEE Wirel. Commun., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 118–
127, 2014.

[4]
P. Popovski, K. F. Trillingsgaard, O. Simeone, and G. Durisi, “5G 
Wireless Network Slicing for eMBB, URLLC, and mMTC: A 
Communication-Theoretic View,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 55765–55779, 
2018.

[5]
P. Warder and A. Link, “Golden age for filter design: innovative and 
proven approaches for acoustic filter, duplexer, and multiplexer design,” 
IEEE Microw. Mag., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 60–72, 2015.

[6]
R. Ruby, “A snapshot in time: The future in filters for cell phones,” IEEE 
Microw. Mag., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 46–59, 2015.

[7]
K. Hashimoto, Surface acoustic wave devices in telecommunications: 
modelling and simulation. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.

[8]
K. Hashimoto, RF Bulk Acoustic Wave Filters for Communications. 
Artech House, 2009.

[9]
M. T.-C. Lee, V. Tiwari, S. Malik, and M. Fujita, “Power analysis and 
minimization techniques for embedded DSP software,” IEEE Trans. Very 
Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 123–135, 1997.

[10] R. C. Ruby, P. Bradley, Y. Oshmyansky, A. Chien, and I. Larson, J.D., 

“Thin film bulk wave acoustic resonators (FBAR) for wireless 
applications,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp., 2001, pp. 813–821.

[11] M. Akiyama, T. Kamohara, K. Kano, A. Teshigahara, Y. Takeuchi, and 

N. Kawahara, “Enhancement of piezoelectric response in scandium 
aluminum nitride alloy thin films prepared by dual reactive cosputtering,” 
Adv. Mater., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 593–596, 2009.

[12] M. Kadota, T. Ogami, K. Yamamoto, H. Tochishita, and Y. Negoro, 

“High-frequency lamb wave device composed of MEMS structure using 
LiNbO3 thin film and air gap,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. 
Control, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 2564–2571, 2010.

[13] T. Takai et al., “High-performance SAW resonator on new multilayered 

substrate using LiTaO 3 crystal,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. 
Freq. Control, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 1382–1389, 2017.

[14] L. Colombo, A. Kochhar, G. Vidal-Álvarez, and G. Piazza, “X-Cut 

Lithium Niobate Laterally Vibrating MEMS Resonator With Figure of 
Merit of 1560,” J. Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 602–
604, 2018.

[15] C. Cassella, Y. Hui, Z. Qian, G. Hummel, and M. Rinaldi, “Aluminum 

nitride 
cross-sectional 
Lamé 
mode 
resonators,” 
J. 

Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 275–285, 2016.

[16] T. Kimura, M. Omura, Y. Kishimoto, and K. Hashimoto, “Comparative 

Study of Acoustic Wave Devices Using Thin Piezoelectric Plates in the 
3-5-GHz Range,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 
915–921, 2019.

[17] G. Chen, F. Pop, and M. Rinaldi, “Super High Frequency Lateral-Field-

Excited Aluminum Nitride Cross-Sectional Lamé Mode Resonators,” in 
Transducers, 2019, pp. 539–542.

[18] J. M. Hodé, J. Desbois, P. Difilie, M. Solal, and P. Ventura, “SPUDT-

based filters: Design principles and optimization,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. 
Symp., 1995, pp. 39–50.

[19] G. Martin, F. Z. Bi, D. P. Chen, and C. S. Lam, “Synthesizing and 

optimizing SPUDT SAW filters,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp., 1998, pp. 
165–168.

[20] T. Manzaneque, R. Lu, Y. Yang, and S. Gong, “An SH0 Lithium Niobate 

Correlator for Orthogonal Frequency Coded Spread Spectrum 
Communications,” in IEEE Int. Freq. Control Symp., 2017, pp. 143–147.

[21] T. Manzaneque, R. Lu, Y. Yang, and S. Gong, “Lithium Niobate MEMS 

Chirp Compressors for Near Zero Power Wake-Up Radios,” Journal of 
Microelectromechanical Systems, pp. 1204–1215, 2017.

[22] S. Ghosh and J. Cafarella, “SAW Correlators in LiNbO3 and GaN on 

TABLE IV REPORTED ADL PERFORMANCE WITH SUB-20 DB IL

Reference
IL (dB)*
FBW (%)**
fcenter (GHz)**

[34]
7.2
1.0%
0.19

[18]
10
1.0%
0.28

[80]
4.0
0.5%
0.25

[81]
9.7
2.0%
0.4

[82]
18
8.5%
2.1

[31]
5.5
3.8%
2.4

[46]
1.0
4.0%
0.30

[42]
3.7
4.0%
0.97

[44]
3.2
3.9%
0.96

This work
7.9
4.0%
5.0

*Defined by minimum in-band IL. **Values extracted from the figures in the reports.


15

Sapphire,” in IEEE Int. Freq. Control Symp., 2018, pp. 1–4.

[23] D. Ciplys et al., “GaN-based SAW delay-line oscillator,” Electron. Lett., 

vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 545–546, 2001.

[24] J. Devkota, P. Ohodnicki, and D. Greve, “SAW sensors for chemical 

vapors and gases,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 4, p. 801, 2017.

[25] A. Pohl, “A review of wireless SAW sensors,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. 

Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 317–332, 2000.

[26] L. Hackett et al., “High-gain leaky surface acoustic wave amplifier in 

epitaxial InGaAs on lithium niobate heterostructure,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 
vol. 114, no. 25, p. 253503, Jun. 2019.

[27] S. Ghosh, “FDSOI on Lithium Niobate Using Al2O3 Wafer-Bonding for 

Acoustoelectric RF Microdevices,” in Transducers, 2019, pp. 535–538.

[28] S. Ghosh et al., “Nonreciprocal acoustoelectric interaction of surface 

waves and fluorine plasma-treated AlGan/GaN 2DEG,” in Transducers, 
2017, pp. 1939–1942.

[29] R. Lu, T. Manzaneque, Y. Yang, M.-H. Li, and S. Gong, “Toward

digitally addressable delay synthesis: GHz low-loss acoustic delay 
elements from 20 ns to 900 ns,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. 
Syst., 2019.

[30] R. Lu, T. Manzaneque, Y. Yang, L. Gao, A. Gao, and S. Gong, “A Radio 

Frequency Nonreciprocal Network Based on Switched Acoustic Delay 
Lines,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 1516–
1530, 2019.

[31] S. Lehtonen, V. P. Plessky, C. S. Hartmann, and M. M. Salomaa, “SPUDT 

filters for the 2.45 GHz ISM band,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. 
Freq. Control, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 1697–1703, 2004.

[32] C. L. Grasse and D. A. Gandolfo, “Acoustic Surface Wave Dispersive 

Delay Lines as High Resolution Frequency Discriminator,” in IEEE Int. 
Ultrason. Symp, 1972, pp. 233–236.

[33] W. R. Shreve and R. L. Baer, “Reduced insertion-loss broadband SAW 

delay lines,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp, 1987, pp. 155–160.

[34] C. S. Hartmann and B. P. Abbott, “Overview of design challenges for 

single phase unidirectional SAW filters,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp, 
1989, pp. 79–89.

[35] F. C. Commission, “FCC online table of frequency allocations,” 

Online:[https://transition.fcc.gov/oet/spectrum/table/fcctable.pdf], 2019.

[36] H. Odagawa and K. Yamanouchi, “10 GHz range extremely low-loss 

ladder type surface acoustic wave filter,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp, 
1998, pp. 103–106.

[37] K. Uehara et al., “Fabrication of 5-GHz-band SAW filter with atomically-

flat-surface AlN on sapphire,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp., 2004, pp. 
203–206.

[38] M. Kadota and S. Tanaka, “Wideband acoustic wave resonators 

composed of hetero acoustic layer structure,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 57, 
no. 7S1, p. 07LD12, 2018.

[39] M. Kadota, Y. I. Yunoki, T. Shimatsu, M. Uomoto, and S. Tanaka, 

“Suprious-Free, Near-Zero-TCF Hetero Acoustic Layer (HAL) SAW 
Resonators Using LiTaO 3 Thin Plate on Quartz,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. 
Symp., 2018, pp. 1–9.

[40] T. Makkonen, V. P. Plessky, W. Steichen, and M. M. Salomaa, “Surface-

acoustic-wave devices for the 2.5–5 GHz frequency range based on 
longitudinal leaky waves,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 82, no. 19, pp. 3351–
3353, 2003.

[41] T. Manzaneque, R. Lu, Y. Yang, and S. Gong, “Low-Loss and Wideband 

Acoustic Delay Lines,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 67, no. 
4, pp. 1379–1391, 2019.

[42] R. Lu, Y. Yang, M.-H. Li, T. Manzaneque, and S. Gong, “GHz Broadband 

SH0 Mode Lithium Niobate Acoustic Delay Lines,” IEEE Trans. 
Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, under review.

[43] C. J. Sarabalis, Y. D. Dahmani, A. Y. Cleland, and A. H. Safavi-Naeini, 

“The role of resonance and bandgaps in high keff2 transducers,” arXiv 
Prepr. arXiv1904.04981, 2019.

[44] R. Lu, T. Manzaneque, Y. Yang, M.-H. Li, and S. Gong, “Gigahertz Low-

Loss and Wide-Band S0 Mode Lithium Niobate Acoustic Delay Lines,” 
IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 
1373–1386, 2019.

[45] G. Vidal-álvarez, A. Kochhar, and G. Piazza, “Delay Lines Based on a 

Suspended Thin Film of X- Cut Lithium Niobate,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. 
Symp., 2017.

[46] R. Lu, T. Manzaneque, Y. Yang, and S. Gong, “S0-Mode Lithium Niobate 

Acoustic Delay Lines with 1 dB Insertion Loss,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. 
Symp., 2018, pp. 1–9.

[47] M. Pijolat et al., “Large Qxf product for HBAR using Smart CutTM

transfer of LiNbO3 thin layers onto LiNbO3 substrate,” in IEEE Int. 
Ultrason. Symp., 2008, pp. 201–204.

[48] H. Zhu and M. Rais-Zadeh, “Switchable Lamb wave delay lines using 

AlGaN/GaN heterostructure,” in Transducers, 2017, pp. 179–182.

[49] Q. Liu, H. Li, and M. Li, “Electromechanical Brillouin scattering in 

integrated optomechanical waveguides,” Optica, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 778–
785, 2019.

[50] R. Lu, S. Link, S. Zhang, M. Breen, and S. Gong, “Aluminum Nitride 

Lamb Wave Delay Lines With Sub-6 dB Insertion Loss,” J. 
Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 569–571, 2019.

[51] P.-L. Yu and S. A. Bhave, “Acoustic delay lines to measure 

piezoelectricity in 4H silicon carbide,” in IEEE Int. Freq. Control Symp., 
2017, pp. 139–142.

[52] S. Gong and G. Piazza, “Design and analysis of lithium–niobate-based 

high electromechanical coupling RF-MEMS resonators for wideband 
filtering,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 403–
414, Jan. 2013.

[53] R. Wang, S. A. Bhave, and K. Bhattacharjee, “Design and fabrication of 

S0 Lamb-wave thin-film lithium niobate micromechanical resonators,” J. 
Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 300–308, 2015.

[54] R. H. Olsson et al., “A high electromechanical coupling coefficient SH0 

Lamb wave lithium niobate micromechanical resonator and a method for 
fabrication,” Sensors Actuators A Phys., vol. 209, pp. 183–190, 2014.

[55] G. W. Fang, G. Pillai, M.-H. Li, C.-Y. Liu, and S.-S. Li, “A VHF 

temperature compensated lithium niobate-on-oxide resonator with Q> 
3900 for low phase noise oscillators,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro 
Mech. Syst., 2018, pp. 723–726.

[56] R. Lu, T. Manzaneque, Y. Yang, J. Zhou, H. Hassanieh, and S. Gong, “RF 

Filters with Periodic Passbands for Sparse Fourier Transform-based 
Spectrum Sensing,” J. Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 
931–944, 2018.

[57] Y. Yang, A. Gao, R. Lu, and S. Gong, “5 GHz lithium niobate MEMS 

resonators with high FoM of 153,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. 
Syst, 2017, pp. 942–945.

[58] Y. Yang, R. Lu, L. Gao, and S. Gong, “4.5 GHz Lithium Niobate MEMS 

Filters with 10% Fractional Bandwidth for 5G Front-ends,” J. 
Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 575–577, 2019.

[59] V. Plessky, S. Yandrapalli, P. J. Turner, L. G. Villanueva, J. Koskela, and 

R. B. Hammond, “5 GHz laterally-excited bulk-wave resonators 
(XBARs) based on thin platelets of lithium niobate,” Electron. Lett., vol. 
55, no. 2, pp. 98–100, 2018.

[60] Y. Yang, R. Lu, T. Manzaneque, and S. Gong, “Toward Ka Band 

Acoustics: Lithium Niobate Asymmetrical Mode Piezoelectric MEMS 
Resonators,” in IEEE Int. Freq. Control Symp., 2018, pp. 1–5.

[61] R. Lu, T. Manzaneque, Y. Yang, and S. Gong, “Lithium Niobate 

Phononic Crystals for Tailoring Performance of RF Laterally Vibrating 
Devices,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, vol. 65, no. 
6, pp. 934–944.

[62] B. A. Auld, Acoustic fields and waves in solids. Krieger Publishing 

Company, 1990.

[63] D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[64] S. G. Joshi and Y. Jin, “Propagation of ultrasonic Lamb waves in 

piezoelectric plates,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 4113–4120, 1991.

[65] K. Mizutaui and K. Toda, “Analysis of lamb wave propagation 

characteristics in rotated Y‐cut X‐propagation LiNbO3 plates,” Electron. 
Commun. Japan (Part I Commun., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 47–55, 1986.

[66] A. W. Warner, M. Onoe, and G. A. Coquin, “Determination of elastic and 

piezoelectric constants for crystals in class (3 m),” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., 
vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1223–1231, 1967.

[67] Federal Standards Committee of the IEEE Ultrasonics  and Frequency 

Control Society, “IEEE Standard on Piezoelectricity.” IEEE New York, 
1987.

[68] R. Lu, M.-H. Li, Y. Yang, T. Manzaneque, and S. Gong, “Accurate 

Extraction of Large Electromechanical Coupling in Piezoelectric MEMS 
Resonators,” J. Microelectromechanical Syst., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 209–218, 
2019.

[69] I. L. Bajak, A. McNab, J. Richter, and C. D. W. Wilkinson, “Attenuation 

of acoustic waves in lithium niobate,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am., vol. 69, no. 3, 
pp. 689–695, 1981.

[70] R. W. Schafer, “What is a Savitzky-Golay filter,” IEEE Signal Process. 

Mag., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 111–117, 2011.

[71] D. York, “Least-squares fitting of a straight line,” Can. J. Phys., vol. 44, 

no. 5, pp. 1079–1086, 1966.

[72] T. Manzaneque, R. Lu, Y. Yang, and S. Gong, “An SH0 Lithium Niobate 

Trans-impedance Chirp Compressor with High Voltage Gain,” in IEEE 
Int. Conf. Micro Electro Mech. Syst., 2018, pp. 783–786.

[73] L. Wang and F. G. Yuan, “Group velocity and characteristic wave curves 


16

of Lamb waves in composites: Modeling and experiments,” Compos. Sci. 
Technol., vol. 67, no. 7–8, pp. 1370–1384, 2007.

[74] R. S. Weis and T. K. Gaylord, “Lithium niobate: summary of physical 

properties and crystal structure,” Appl. Phys. A, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 191–
203, 1985.

[75] I. E. Kuznetsova, B. D. Zaitsev, A. A. Teplykh, S. G. Joshi, and A. S. 

Kuznetsova, “The power flow angle of acoustic waves in thin 
piezoelectric plates,” IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 
vol. 55, no. 9, 2008.

[76] K. M. Lakin, “Electrode resistance effects in interdigital transducers,” 

IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 418–424, 1974.

[77] D. C. Giancoli, I. A. Miller, O. P. Puri, P. J. Zober, and G. P. Zober, 

Physics: principles with applications, vol. 4. Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2005.

[78] F. M. d’Heurle, “Aluminum films deposited by rf sputtering,” Metall. 

Mater. Trans. B, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 725–732, 1970.

[79] H. Murata, “Aluminum alloy film for wiring and sputter target material 

for forming the film,” U.S. Patent 7,166,921, 2007.

[80] C. C. W. Ruppel, R. Dill, J. Franz, S. Kurp, and W. Ruile, “Design of 

generalized SPUDT filters,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp., 1996, pp. 165–
168.

[81] H. Nakamura, T. Yamada, T. Ishizaki, and K. Nishimura, “A new design 

concept for low-loss SAW filters based on different-width split-finger 
SPUDT,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 761–
768, 2001.

[82] C.-Y. Jian and S. Beaudin, “A new type SPUDT SAW for use in high 

frequency around 2 GHz,” in IEEE Int. Ultrason. Symp., 2002, pp. 279–
282.


