1 

 

Electrokinetic Power Harvesting from Wet Textile  

Sankha Shuvra Das, Vinay Manaswi Pedireddi, Aditya Bandopadhyay, Partha Saha and Suman 
Chakraborty* 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, INDIA. 
*email: suman@mech.iitkgp.ernet.in 

 

Developing low-weight, frugal and sustainable power sources for resource-limited settings appears to be a 
challenging proposition for the advancement of next-generation sensing devices and beyond. Here, we report 
the use of centimeter-sized simple wet fabric pieces for electrical power generation, by deploying the interplay 
of a spontaneously induced ionic motion across fabric channels due to capillary action and simultaneous 
water evaporation by drawing thermal energy from the ambient.  Unlike other reported devices with similar 
functionalities, our arrangement does not necessitate any input mechanical energy or complex topographical 
structures to be embedded in the substrate. A single device is capable of generating a sustainable open circuit 
potential up to ~700 mV. This suffices establishing an inherent capability of functionalizing self-power 
electronic devices, and also to be potentially harnessed for enhanced power generation with feasible up-
scaling. 

Introduction 

In the milieu of global warming and energy crisis, frugal yet sustainable and renewable energy resources are critical 
to the advancement of human civilization1–4. Generating sustainable and stable electricity from mundane and natural 
sources without necessitating mechanized inputs and sophisticated setups triggers wishful desires and compelling 
challenges, simultaneously5–9. Natural drying of wet clothes is common in daily lives, which is a ubiquitous process 
ideally suited for harvesting thermal energy from the incipient ambient10–12. During this drying process, one may 
potentially harness the motion of salt-water solution within the fabric matrices towards creating preferential charge 
segregation13, generating electrical power14–18.  

  
By introducing fabrication of simply-designed channels on textile pieces for achieving guided 
transportation of saline water and drawing analogies of the later with evaporative transport across the parts of a 
living plant, here we demonstrate an extremely frugal, simple and viable approach of harvesting electrical power 
using cellulose-based fiber cloth. In sharp contrast to other reported devices deploying specially-structured and 
delicately-fabricated substrates towards achieving this feat1,8,19–26, we deploy a regular cellulose-based wearable 
textile as a medium for ionic motion though the interlace fibrous network by capillary action, inducing an electric 
potential in the process. The device design inherently exploits a large transpiration surface for achieving a 
sustainable salt-ion-flux migration, through natural evaporation effect. Our approach essentially deploys the surface 
energy, an intrinsic property of the material, to convert into electricity, in this manner.  Notably, upon solar 
irradiance, the device can effectively generate a significantly higher potential than that in the absence of sun-light.  

  
A single prototype fabric channel (FC)  harvester (with stem width of 4 cm, stem length of 3 cm and leaf 
area of 7 cm by 7 cm) shows the ability to generate a maximum open circuit potential of ~700 mV. Featuring these 
functionalities, the device can be exploited to electrically functionalize paper- or fabric-based rapid kits for on-spot 
diagnostics of diseases in resource-limited settings.  

 


2 

 

Experimental details 

Chemicals 

Sodium chloride, NaCl (>99% purity) was purchased from Merk Life Science Pvt. Ltd. Fabric cloth (white color) of 
~95% cotton was purchased from local garment shop. Copper sheet of ~300 µm thickness (>98%), plastic straw was 
purchased from local market. All the electrolyte solutions are prepared by dissolving the particular analyte at various 
concentrations in DI water (Millipore India, 18.2MΩ-cm). 

Device description and experimentation 

FCs are prepared from a piece of commercial wearable fiber cloth, where those are cut to the required channel 
design using scissors. FC has three segments such as root, stem and leaf (Fig. 1a) which is physically analogous to 
the transport mechanism in a leaf (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Fig. 1). Field Emission Scanning Electron Micros                             
copy (FESEM) analysis shows the stitching pattern of the fibers with crisscross orientation having periodically 
alternating micropores, with fiber interspacing of ~5-6 µm (Fig. 2b). The electrodes made of commercial grade 
copper sheet (>98% purity), with dimensions ~2 cm × 1 cm and ~300 µm thickness, are embedded at either sides of 
the stem section (ensuring a proper ohmic contact between FC surface and electrode). In order to obtain a rising 
capillary motion, the channel is inserted vertically into an electrolyte (aqueous NaCl solution) filled beaker covering 
the root area of FC, and leaving the leaf area exposed to the atmosphere (Fig. 1b). The bigger leaf area promotes the 
evaporation of water while maintaining a continuous negative pressure gradient across the channel length. To limit 
the evaporative loss, the entire stem section is inserted into a plastic straw (diameter ~6 mm) with length equal to 
that of stem length. Prior to the experimentation, FC is cleaned with DI water followed by drying.    

 

   
 

Root (upstream  
reservoir pad) 
Leaf (downstream  
reservoir pad) 

Stem 

Electrode 

Plastic 
straw 

Beaker filled  
with electrolyte 

Broom 
stick 

b 

Figure 1| Design of a fabric-based channel (FC). a, Photograph of a FC prepared from a commercial grade fiber cloth. 
b, Complete FC based electrokinetic power generator; demonstrating its various segments.    

a 


3 

 
 

Figure 2| Capillarity-coupled-evaporation driven FC based electrokinetic power generator. a, Schematic representation of 
the experimental setup for measuring induced potential. b, FESEM image of FC showing the stitching pattern and crisscross 
orientation of fibers. c, Capillary transport of ions through individual pore, showing specific ion distribution inside the pore. 

Super-capacitor 

Evaporation through 
sun-light 

Leaf 

Stem 

Root 

Beaker filled 
with electrolyte 

Electrode 

Capillary migration of ions 
through cellulose pores 

c 

b 

a 

Broom 
stick 


4 

 

The schematic representation of the complete experimental setup used for capillarity-coupled-evaporation 
induced streaming potential measurement is illustrated in Fig. 2.  In order to measure the induced electric potential 
and the corresponding short-circuit current, nanovoltmeter (Keithley 2182A) and picoammeter (Keithley 4185) are 
connected in series and parallel to the copper electrodes, respectively. The high-end of the nanovoltmeter probe is 
connected to the downstream electrode, whereas the low-end of the nanovoltmeter probe is connected to the 
upstream electrode, and we term it as straight polarity. Before the measurements, the channels are primed with the 
electrolyte solution for almost 1 hour. The entire set of experiments are performed under the sun-light of hot-
summer days (from March to June, 2018 at Kharagpur, India; latitude 22.3460° N, longitude 87.2320° E), where the 
temperature, T and relative humidity, RH fluctuate between ~32-40 °C and ~60-85%. Hence, to maintain uniform 
experimental conditions such as T ~35 °C and RH ~60%, the experiments are further conducted inside a controlled 
temperature and humidity test chamber (Labard Instrument Pvt. Ltd.). All the tests are performed thrice to check the 

repeatability of the measurements. The following are the FC dimensions; root area (
R
A ) ~7×3 cm2, stem width 

(
S
W ) ~4 cm, stem length (
sL ) ~3 cm and leaf area (
L
A ) ~7×7 cm2 (optimized FC dimensions; and discussed in the 

subsequent section), followed during the entire course of experimentation.      

Characterization 

The surface morphology of fabric cloth, structures of the fiber, pore size and distributions are characterized by Field 
Emission Scanning Electron Microscope, FESEM (JEOL, Model: JSM-7800 F). The electrical impedance of FC in 
the presence of 1 mM NaCl solution is measured using Potentiostat (GAMRY, Reference 600). Zeta-potential is 
measured using Electrokinetic analyzer for solid surface (Anton Paar GmbH, Model: SurPASS 3). 
 

Results and discussion 

Optimization of FC dimensions 

As the liquid imbibes through the porous and tortuous network of the cellulose fibers, an electrical potential is 
induced between two copper electrodes which gradually rises, and thereafter reaches a maximum value followed by 

a steady state upon absolute saturation of leaf area, 
L
A . The ions (such as Na+, Cl–, H+ and OH–) in the electrolyte 

solution (1 mM NaCl) creates an interfacial charge layer (also known as electrical double layer;  EDL) upon 
interaction with negatively charged free surface groups (such as –COOH, –OH) of cellulose fabrics25,27. The 
counter-ions (Na+, H+) thus preferentially migrate uphill through the mobile layer of the EDL under a capillary 
driven pressure gradient, which eventually creates a charge polarization, leading to induced streaming potential. 
Initial fluctuations in the readings can be attributed from the fact of rapid rise of the capillary front which eventually 
equilibrates with the pore saturation.  

We have performed sets of comprehensive experiments in order to understand the effect of FC dimensions 

(such as
S
L ,
L
A  and 
S
W ) on the induced streaming potential. Initially, the stem length (or the capillary length), 
S
L  

is varied, keeping 
S
W  ~3 cm and 
L
A  ~5×5 cm2 constant. The individual saturation voltage (or steady-state voltage), 

Vsat
 and short-circuit current, 
Isc
 is recorded in three different identical test-sets, TS, which ensures the 

repeatability of the measurement. The measurements are performed in straight polarity mode. It is observed that as 
the capillary length increases, the corresponding capillary rising time also increases with the consequence of reduced 

Vsat
 (Fig. 3a) and 
Isc
(Supplementary Fig. 2b). The recorded saturation time for different 
S
L  such as 3 cm, 5 cm, 7 

cm, 9 cm, and 11 cm are approximately 10-12 min, 18-20 min, 30-35 min, 45-50 min and 60-65 min, respectively, 


5 

 

which further changes with the number of runs. The channel resistance, which is a function of 
sL  (Supplementary 

Fig. 3; where Nyquist plot shows the variation of channel impedance with respect to stem length), increases with the 

channel length. This further impedes the transport of ions, and reduces 
Vsat
and the corresponding 
Isc
. Thus, to 

estimate the induced output power against different 
sL , a commercial capacitor of ~0.1 mF is connected to the 

circuit. The output power is calculated by following the relation, 
2
0.5
/
output
c
c
P
CV
t

; where C  is the capacitance 

value, 
c
V  is the capacitor charging voltage and 
ct  is the capacitor charging time. We observed that 
output
P
 for all 

these three sets decreases with increase in 
sL  (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Thus, a lower FC length (
sL  ~3 cm) delivers 

a stable open-circuit potential of ~350 mV with 
Isc
 of ~1.75 µA and 
output
P
of ~110 nW. 

      

 

a 
b

c 
d
Reverse polarity 

Straight polarity 

Figure 3| Optimization of FC dimension. a, Saturation voltage with respect to stem length of FC. b, Temporal evolution of 
induced electric potential for OFC connected in straight polarity, inset shows time required for charging a capacitor of ~0.1 mF. 
c, Temporal evolution of short-circuit current for OFC. d, Temporal evolution of induced potential for OFC connected in reverse 
polarity investigated under environmental conditions such as T ~32-35 °C and RH ~65-75%. All the measurements are 
performed in presence of 1 mM NaCl solution. 


6 

 

 

To further explore the effect of leaf area, 
L
A  and stem width, 
S
W  on induced potential, 
output
P
as well as 

Isc
is measured against different 
L
A  (Supplementary Fig. 2c and 2d) and 
S
W  (Supplementary Fig. 2e and 2f) 

respectively.  The bigger leaf area corresponds to a larger transpiration surface which essentially promotes the 
evaporation rate of water, resulting in a faster ion migration, and thereby induces a higher output power. The short-

circuit current, 
Isc
 increases initially with 
L
A . However, it decreases after a certain critical value (such as ~5×5 

cm2), which can be attributed to increase in channel impedance only. On the other hand, the parameter 
S
W , an 

intrinsic function of the fiber density, effectively can stimulate a higher 
output
P
 upto certain critical value (such as 

S
W  ~4 cm).  The increase in 
S
W  reduces the channel hydraulic resistance which eventually increases 
Isc
. 

However, further rise in
S
W , may amplify the channel impedance that leads to reduction in 
output
P
. Based on the 

overall parametric study, an optimized FC (OFC) dimensions that deliver maximum 
output
P
become: 
sL ~3 cm, 
L
A  

~7×7 cm2 and 
S
W  ~4 cm. The OFC is able to reliably generate a stable 
VOCV
 of ~580-700 mV (Fig. 3b; inset shows 

the charging characteristics of a capacitor) with 
Isc
 of ~2.1-3.4 µA (Fig. 3c) and 
output
P
of ~153.5 nW (see inset of 

Fig. 3b), maintained for ~8 hours of experiment under the sunlight, with environmental conditions such as T ~32-35 
°C and RH ~65-75%.  In order to further confirm the effect of EDL on induced streaming potential, we change the 

nanovoltmeter probes in reverse connection mode, where 
VOCV
changes its polarity and thereby confirms the effect 

of negative surface charge on the induced electric potential (Fig. 3d). 

Device performance 

 In order to analyze the role of temperature and associated evaporative flux on device performance, we perform a 

day-night cyclic test which consists of an uninterrupted measurement for 3 days (Fig. 4a). The maximum 
VOCV
 is 

recorded as ~550-600 mV at peak-day hours (12:30 pm-2 pm), where the effect of solar-heat and water evaporation 
is observed to be significant. The device performance deteriorates gradually from its peak value as the day-light 
intensity reduces and reaches to a minimum value of ~180-200 mV during the mid-night (1 am-3 am), where both 
these effects are quite less. The device performance improves again in the next day as the sun starts rising and 
subsequently reaches to a maximum value during the peak-day hours (almost equivalent to previous day's VOCV 
value) and thus the cycle continues. It is worth noting that the overall performance of the device is almost same at 
the end of the cyclic test (i.e. after 72 hours). Thus, to ensure evaporation as the prime source of induced potential, 
we expose the leaf area to a hot-air (T ~65°C) blowing at a speed of ~2.5 m/s. It enhances the water evaporation rate 
from the leaf area, leading to gradual increase in voltage maximum up to ~585 mV (Fig. 4b). The induced potential 
drops to ~550 mV as the hot-air blower stops, and thus represents a significant correlation between the device 
performance and the rate of water evaporation.   

On the other hand, to appreciate the performance of the device for long-term usages, and hence to 
determine the robustness of the device, we conduct an experiment (exposed to day-light only) with three different 
channels, subjected to three different conditions for more than 30 days’ (Fig. 4c). The first channel is continuously 

exposed to electrolyte solution (abbreviated as 
C
TS ) for the total 30 days’ duration of experiment; the second 

channel is cleaned using DI water and dried after each day's measurement (abbreviated as 
TSCD
); and the third 


7 

 

channel is only dried after each day's measurement under room conditions (abbreviated as 
TSD
). The readings are 

taken at different day-time intervals including the peak-day hours. It is observed that the device performance 
remains almost constant throughout the entire 30 days’ span of experiment for all these three sets (Fig. 4c), with 
minor fluctuations in the readings, which can be ascribed from the fact of change in ambient conditions.  Hence, the 
device can be treated as a 'greener power-plant' and can be used as a source of continuous power supply (at the 
expense of zero external energy consumption).  

                                                                                                                                                                
Conclusions 

To summarize, we have shown that water evaporation from a centimeter-sized piece of wet cloth containing 
frugally-cut fabric channels can generate electrical power. Drawing analogies with evaporative transport in living 
plants and harnessing the consequent preferential migration of ions towards developing an electrical potential as 
mediated by capillary action, we have demonstrated that ordinary cellulose-based wet textile, may be capable 
enough for achieving this remarkable feat. As compared to previously reported methods of energy harvesting from 

Figure 4| Device performance in different ambient conditions. a, Day-night cyclic test, showing the variation of 
induced potential of 3 days’ uninterrupted measurement. b, Effect of induced potential on periodic application of hot-air 
blower. c, Performance of OFC subjected to three different conditions against 30 days’ measurement (measurement started 
from April 15, 2018).  

b
a 

c 


8 

 

complex resources, the electricity generation occurs in natural ambience, directly converting the abundantly 
available thermal energy into electrical power. Further, in contrast to classical streaming potential generated by an 
applied pressure gradient or other external pumping resources, here the intrinsic surface energy of the fabric is used 
to drive the ionic current. Most importantly, our method paves the way of deploying regular fabric pieces as the 
sources of energy, with no special topographical manipulation of the cloth surface being demanded. Thus, the device 
does not necessitate any extensive fabrication protocol, unlike some recently reported evaporation driven energy 
harvesting devices. Finally, in a hot and dry environment, the natural evaporative transport gets spontaneously 
enhanced, so that the flow-induced electrical potential can be maximized. The device, thus, may turn out to be 
extremely effective in geographically warm and dry regions of the earth.  Our results reveal that a single fabric 
channel can stably deliver a potential of ~700 mV in ambient conditions. This eventually culminates into a 
utilitarian paradigm of low-cost power harvesting in extreme rural settings. 

References 
 
1. 
Chen, J. et al. Micro-cable structured textile for simultaneously harvesting solar and mechanical energy. 
Nat. Energy 1, 1–8 (2016). 

2. 
Wang, Z. L. & Song, J. Piezoelectric Nanogenerators Based on Zinc Oxide Nanowire Arrays. Science 312, 
242–247 (2006). 

3. 
Chu, S. & Majumdar, A. Opportunities and challenges for a sustainable energy future. Nature 488, 294-303 
(2012).  

4. 
Tian, B. et al. Coaxial silicon nanowires as solar cells and nanoelectronic power sources. Nature 449, 885–
890 (2007). 

5. 
Yang, R., Qin, Y., Dai, L. & Wang, Z. L. Power generation with laterally packaged piezoelectric fine wires. 
Nat. Nanotechnol.4, 34-39 (2009). 

6. 
Gr, M. Photoelectrochemical cells. Nature 414, 338-344 (2001). 

7.      Wang, X., Song, J., Liu,J., and Wang, Z.L. Direct-Current Nanogenerator Driven by Ultrasonic Waves.   
 
Science 316, 102–106 (2007). 

8. 
Chai, Z. et al. Tailorable and Wearable Textile Devices for Solar Energy Harvesting and Simultaneous 
Storage. ACS Nano 10, 9201–9207 (2016). 

9. 
Zhao, F. et al. Highly efficient solar vapour generation via hierarchically nanostructured gels. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 13, 489-495 (2018).  

10. 
Energy, D., Elimelech, M. & Phillip, W. A. The Future of Seawater and the Environment. Science 333, 712–
718 (2011). 

11. 
Yang, P. et al. Solar-driven simultaneous steam production and electricity generation from salinity. Energy 
Environ. Sci. 10, 1923–1927 (2017). 

12. 
Xu, B. J. et al. Large-Scale Synthesis of Long Crystalline Cu2-xSe Nanowire Bundles by Water-Evaporation-
Induced Self- Assembly and Their Application in Gas Sensing. Adv. Funct. Mater. 19, 1759–1766 (2009).  

13. 
Xue, G. et al. Water-evaporation-induced electricity with nanostructured carbon materials. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 12, 317–321 (2017). 


9 

 

14. 
Van Der Heyden, F. H. J., Stein, D. & Dekker, C. Streaming currents in a single nanofluidic channel. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 95, 9–12 (2005). 

15. 
Van Der Heyden, F. H. J., Bonthuis, J., Stein, D., Meyer, C. & Dekker, C. Power Generation by Pressure-
Driven Transport of Ions in Nanofluidic Channels. Nano Lett. 7, 1022-1025 (2007).  

16. 
Xie, Y. et al. Electric energy generation in single track-etched nanopores. Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 8–11 (2008). 

17. 
Gillespie, D. High energy conversion efficiency in nanofluidic channels. Nano Lett. 12, 1410–1416 (2012). 

18. 
Fan, B., Bhattacharya, A. & Bandaru, P. R. Enhanced voltage generation through electrolyte flow on 
 
liquid-filled surfaces. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–7 (2018).  

19. 
Li, C., Liu, K., Liu, H., Yang, B. & Hu, X. Capillary driven electrokinetic generator for environmental 
energy harvesting. Mater. Res. Bull. 90, 81–86 (2017). 

20. 
Li, J. et al. Electricity generation from water droplets via capillary infiltrating. Nano Energy 48, 211–216 
(2018). 
21. 
Li, C. et al. Wearable energy-smart ribbons for synchronous energy harvest and storage. Nat. Commun. 7, 
1–10 (2016). 

22. 
Lee, S. et al. Triboelectric energy harvester based on wearable textile platforms employing various surface 
morphologies. Nano Energy 12, 410–418 (2015). 

23. 
Li, S. et al. Cloth-based power shirt for wearable energy harvesting and clothes ornamentation. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 7, 14912–14916 (2015). 

24. 
Pu, X. et al. Wearable Self-Charging Power Textile Based on Flexible Yarn Supercapacitors and Fabric 
Nanogenerators. Adv. Mater. 28, 98–105 (2016). 

25.      Das, S. S., Kar, S., Anwar, T., Saha, P. & Chakraborty, S. Hydroelectric power plant on a paper strip. Lab 
Chip 18, 1560–1568 (2018). 

26.     Veerubhotla, R., Bandopadhyay, A., Das, D. and Chakraborty, S. Instant power generation from an air-
breathing paper and pencil based bacterial bio-fuel cell. Lab Chip 15, 2580–2583 (2015). 

27. 
Mandal, P., Dey, R. and Chaktaborty, S. Electrokinetics with ‘paper-and-pencil’ devices. Lab Chip 12, 
4026–4028 (2012). 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


10 

 

Supplementary Information 

 

Electrokinetic Power Harvesting from Wet Textile  

Sankha Shuvra Das, Vinay Manaswi Pedireddi, Aditya Bandopadhyay, Partha Saha and Suman 
Chakraborty* 

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur 721302, INDIA. 

*email: suman@mech.iitkgp.ernet.in 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Leaf

Stem

Supplementary Figure 1| Analogy of transport mechanism of a tree. Photograph representing the analogy of the various segment 
of a tree and fabric-based channel. Bigger leaf area promotes the evaporation rate.   


11 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 2| Parametric optimization of FC. (a) Output power, and (b) Short-circuit current with respect to stem 
length (with constant stem width of 3 cm and leaf area of 5×5 cm) of FC. (c) Output power, and (d) Short-circuit current with 
respect to leaf area (for optimized stem length of 3 cm and constant stem width of 3 cm) of FC. (e) Output power, and (f) Short-
circuit current with respect to stem width (for optimized stem length of 3cm and optimized leaf area of 7×7 cm) of FC. 

b 
a 

c 
d 

e 
f 


12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Supplementary Figure 4| Pore size and distribution. FESEM image (at 30,000× magnification) of single fibre thread showing the 
pore size and pore distribution. The Scalebar on the panel represents 100 nm. 

Supplementary Figure 3| Impedance measurement of FC. Nyquist plot represents the variation of impedance with 
respect to stem length of FC for 1 mM NaCl solution. 


