 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Lithographically defined site-selective growth of Fe filled 
multi-walled carbon nanotubes using a modified photoresist 
 
Joydip Sengupta a, Avijit Jana b, N.D. Pradeep Singh b, Chacko Jacob a,* 

 

a Materials Science Centre, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India 

b Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India 

 
 
 

A B S T R A C T   

 

Partially Fe filled multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were grown  by  chemical 
vapor deposition with propane at 850 oC using a simple mixture of iron (III) acetylaceto- 
nate (Fe(acac)3) powder and conventional  photoresist.  Scanning  electron  microscopy 
revealed that catalytic nanoparticles  with  an  average  diameter  of  70 nm  are  formed  on 
the Si substrate which governs the diameter of the MWCNTs. Transmission electron 
microscopy shows that the nanotubes have a multi-walled structure with partial Fe filling. 
A site-selective growth of partially Fe filled MWCNTs is achieved by a simple photolitho- 
graphic  route. 

 
 
 
 

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) exhibit a unique combination of 
electronic, thermal, mechanical and chemical properties, 
which promise a wide range of potential applications in key 
industrial sectors. In the last few years, chemical vapor depo- 
sition (CVD) has been the preferred method among different 
CNT growth methods because of its potential advantage to 
produce a large amount of CNTs growing directly on a desired 
substrate with high purity, large yield and controlled align- 
ment. The CVD synthesis of CNTs on plain substrates gener- 

ally requires catalyst metal deposition over the substrate, 
which is time consuming and the deposited area is also finite. 
These limitations can be easily overcome by employing the 
spin-coating of the catalyst material on the desired substrate. 
Moreover, in recent times, magnetic metal encapsulated CNTs 
are of huge interest as it has demonstrated widespread appli- 
cations in magnetic force microscopy [1], high-density 
magnetic recording media [2] and biology [3]. However, 
there are many technical barriers to achieve magnetic metal 

 
 

*   Corresponding  author:  Fax:  +91  3222255303. 

E-mail address: cxj14_holiday@yahoo.com (C. Jacob). 


 

 

 

Fig. 1 – SEM micrograph of the catalytic nanoparticles prepared from Mod-PR film over the Si(1 1 1) substrate after annealing at 
900 oC; (inset) the distribution histogram of the catalyst nanoparticles. 

 
 
 

 

 

Fig. 2 – SEM micrograph of the MWCNTs synthesized using Mod-PR by CVD growth; (inset) the distribution histogram of the 
external CNT diameter deposited by the CVD method. 

 
 
 

encapsulated CNT-based electronic devices; especially the 
placement of CNTs in the desired position is crucial for CNT 
integration in such devices. In this regard, photolithography 
is one of the most important and powerful patterning tech- 
niques for microfabrication and is also widely used in inte- 
grated circuit (IC) technology. Thus we have employed spin- 
coating along  with the lithographic approach for the site- 
selective growth of magnetic material filled CNTs using a sim- 
ple mixture of iron (III) acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) powder and 
conventional photoresist (HPR 504, Fuji Film) as a starting 
material. 

706 mg of Fe(acac)3 was mixed with 10 ml of HPR 504 to ob- 
tain a modified photoresist (Mod-PR) solution of concentra- 
tion 0.2 M. Then the Mod-PR solution of concentration 0.2 M 
was spin-coated with a rotation speed of 4000 rpm for 20 s 
on the Si(1 1 1) substrate to get a thin layer of the Mod-PR. 

The thin Mod-PR film was annealed  in  air  for  10 min  at 
200 oC to improve the adhesion to the substrate. The sub- 
strates were then loaded into a quartz tube furnace (ELEC- 
TROHEAT EN345T), pumped down to 10-2 Torr and backfilled 
with flowing argon to atmospheric pressure.  Afterwards, the 
samples were heated in argon up to 900 oC following which 
the argon was replaced with hydrogen. Subsequently, the 
samples were annealed in hydrogen atmosphere for 10 min. 
Finally, the reactor temperature was brought down to 850 oC 
and the hydrogen was turned off, thereafter propane was 
introduced into the gas stream at a flow rate of 200 sccm for 
1 h for CNT synthesis. 

For lithographically selective growth of CNTs, after per- 
forming the spin-coating of Mod-PR the samples were baked 
at 90 oC for 15 min followed by an exposure step with a mask 
aligner to make an array of patterns. The exposed specimens 


 

 

 

Fig. 3 – TEM images of the Fe encapsulated CNTs grown by the CVD method using Mod-PR, (a) A catalytic nanoparticle is 
encapsulated at the top of a CNT implying tip-growth mechanism; (b) TEM image of interlayer spacing of polyaromatic carbon 
in CNT; (c–f) Fe nanoparticles encapsulated in CNTs. 

 
 

were developed in the developer solution for 60 s and rinsed 
in distilled water. Thereafter, the synthesis of CNT was 
carried out on the pattern areas following the same procedure 
as described earlier. 

Fig. 1 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) im- 
age of the catalytic nanoparticles formed over the Si(1 1 1) 
substrate after annealing the Mod-PR film at 900 oC. The sta- 
tistical analysis of the size of the catalytic nanoparticles (inset 
of Fig. 1) displays a Gaussian profile with a mean of 70 nm. 
Fig. 2 shows the SEM image of the CNTs synthesized on the 
Si(1 1 1) substrate by CVD using Mod-PR. The high-aspect-ra- 
tio nanostructures had a randomly oriented spaghetti-like 
morphology with high area density. We note that in Fig. 2 
the outer diameters of CNTs are in the range of 30–130 nm 
and the corresponding distribution profile (inset of Fig. 2) is 
similar to the size distribution profile of the catalyst nanopar- 
ticles (inset of Fig. 1). Thus, the size of the catalytic particles 
largely determines the outer diameters of the CNTs. Several 

bright catalyst particles were detected at the tip of the tubes 
(indicated in Fig. 2 with white arrows) suggesting the tip- 
growth mechanism. 

Fig. 3 shows the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 
images of MWCNTs grown using Mod-PR. A catalytic nano- 
particle of size nearly 80 nm is encapsulated at the tip of a 
CNT (Fig. 3a) implying tip-growth mechanism. It can be 
clearly seen that the CNT is well graphitized and have clear 
well-ordered lattice fringes of polyaromatic sheets (Fig. 3b). 
Fig. 3(c–f) demonstrate the presence of high-aspect-ratio 
nanoparticles encapsulated inside the  CNTs  deposited 
using Mod-PR. Chemical composition analysis confirms that 
the elongated particles are of Fe (not shown here). The 
growth model of partially Fe filled CNT can be explained 
by emphasizing the role of the capillary action of the 
liquid-like Fe particles that exist at the time of CNT 
nucleation. The detail of the growth model is discussed 
elsewhere [4]. 


 

 

 

Fig. 4 – Schematic representation of the direct photolithographic route for the selective growth of partially Fe filled MWCNTs. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Fig. 5 – Site-selective growth of partially Fe filled MWCNTs by direct photolithographic route using Mod-PR (a) SEM image of 
Mod-PR pattern; (b) SEM image after CNT growth. 


 

Fig. 4 shows the schematic representation of the direct 
photolithographic route adopted for the selective growth of 
partially Fe filled MWCNTs. Fig. 5a is the SEM image of the 
Fe-containing patterns produced by the general photolitho- 
graphic process using Mod-PR whereas, Fig. 5b is the SEM im- 
age of the CNTs grown from lithographically defined catalyst 
patterns.  This  photolithography-based  approach  is  simple 

Acknowledgement 
 

J.  Sengupta  is  thankful  to  CSIR  for  providing  the  senior 
research   fellowship. 

 
 

R  E F  E  R  E N  C  E S 

and yet robust process with excellent potential to fabricate 
  
 
partially Fe filled CNTs at lithographically defined locations 
in a reproducible manner. 

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a simple and effec- 
tive method to synthesize partially Fe filled CNTs using a mix- 
ture of Fe(acac)3 powder and conventional photoresist and 
successive CVD growth. The experimental results show that 
the catalyst particle size effectively controls the diameter of 
the partially Fe filled CNTs grown through a tip-growth mech- 
anism. A simple photolithographic route has been devised for 
the spatially selective synthesis of partially Fe filled MWCNTs, 
which were grown only on a pre-defined surface in a manner 
compatible with current IC technology. 

[1]  Winkler A, Mu¨ hl T, Menzel S, Koseva RK, Hampel S, Leonhardt 
A,  et   al.  Magnetic  force  microscopy  sensors  using  iron-filled 
carbon nanotubes. J Appl Phys 2006;99:1049051–5. 

[2] Kuo CT, Lin CH, Lo AY. Feasibility studies of magnetic particle- 
embedded  carbon  nanotubes  for  perpendicular  recording 
media. Diamond Relat Mater 2003;12:799–805. 

[3]  Palen EB. Iron filled carbon nanotubes for bio-applications. 

Mater Sci (Poland) 2008;26:413–8. 

[4] Sengupta J, Jacob C. The effect of Fe and Ni catalysts on the 
growth  of  multiwalled  carbon  nanotubes  using  chemical 
vapor deposition. J Nanopart Res. 2010;12:457–65. 


