1

Three-dimensional Near-field Analysis Through Peak 

Force Scattering-type Near-field Optical Microscopy

Haomin Wang1, Jiahan Li2, James H. Edgar,2 and Xiaoji G. Xu1*

1Department of Chemistry, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

2Tim Taylor Department of Chemical Engineering, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA

*Email: xgx214@lehigh.edu

Abstract

Scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) is instrumental in 

exploring polaritonic behaviors of two-dimensional (2D) materials at the nanoscale. A 

sharp s-SNOM tip couples momenta into 2D materials through phase matching to 

excite phonon polaritons, which manifest as nanoscale interference fringes in raster 

images. However, s-SNOM lacks the ability to detect the progression of near-field 

property along the perpendicular axis to the surface. Here, we perform near-field 

analysis of a micro-disk and a reflective edge made of isotopically pure hexagonal 

boron nitride (h-11BN), by using three-dimensional near-field response cubes obtained 

by peak force scattering-type near-field optical microscopy (PF-SNOM). Momentum 

quantization of polaritons from the confinement of the circular structure is revealed in 

situ. Moreover, tip-sample distance is found to be capable of fine-tuning the 

momentum of polaritons and modifying the superposition of quantized polaritonic 

modes. The PF-SNOM-based three-dimensional near-field analysis provides detailed 

characterization capability with a high spatial resolution to fully map three-

dimensional near-fields of nano-photonics and polaritonic structures.


2

Introduction

Phonon polaritons (PhPs), quasi particles from a hybrid of electromagnetic (EM) wave and 

collective phonon oscillations, have been a research focus of nanophotonics. Utilization of PhPs 

holds the promise for bridging electronic and photonic technologies in infrared frequencies.1 PhPs 

propagate along the interface of the materials with opposite signs of the real part of the dielectric 

function,2 or in the volume of hyperbolic materials.3 PhPs have much more compressed 

wavelength than free-propagating photons, leading to a locally enhanced EM field.  Recent 

advances of two-dimensional (2D) materials provide a range of new polariton-supporting 

materials.1, 4, 5 Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) supports surface phonon polaritons and hyperbolic 

phonon polaritons and has been a fundamental material for the development of nanotechnology 

based on polaritons.6-11 Nano or micro resonators made of polaritonic materials are building units 

for next-generation polaritonic devices, and it becomes important to understand their near-field 

behaviors in the vertical direction, since resonators are usually integrated within a heterostructure, 

where near fields of resonators may interfere with other components.

The short wavelength of the polaritons is associated with high momentum, which cannot be 

directly coupled from free-space propagating photons due to the restriction from phase matching.12

Scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) is a popular scanning probe 

microscopy technique that can both excite and detect PhPs. The metallic atomic force microscope 

(AFM) tip locally enhances EM field at its apex with high spatial frequencies and is capable of 

effectively exciting polaritons in 2D materials.12-16 The excitation of polaritons modifies the 

scattering properties of the AFM tip, leading to changes of amplitude and phase of the scattered 

light, but not in frequency. To detect the near-field signal from the far-field background of same 

optical frequency, the AFM cantilever is externally driven to oscillate at its mechanical resonance 

in tapping mode AFM. The scattered light from the AFM tip is optically detected and demodulated 


3

by a lock-in amplifier at a non-fundamental harmonic of the cantilever oscillation frequency, from 

which one can extract the s-SNOM signal. 

The operation mechanism of s-SNOM demarcates its limitation: the near-field generated from 

s-SNOM is an average of near-field responses at many different tip-sample distances during the 

tip oscillation. Different tip-sample distances correspond to different spatial confinement of EM

field underneath the AFM tip, thus leading to different excitation conditions (Figs. 1a-b). However, 

s-SNOM only provides one-value signal associated with a demodulation order, thus only yielding 

a near-field image in two lateral dimensions, rather than providing three-dimensional (3D) near-

field responses with both lateral and vertical Cartesian coordinates. More information about 

polaritons in photonic nanostructures can be obtained, if all three dimensions of near-field 

responses are available. Here, we utilize a new type of near-field microscopy, the peak force 

scattering-type near-field optical microscopy (PF-SNOM),17 to obtain a 3D near-field response 

cube of polaritonic isotopically pure h-11BN microstructures. We perform near-field analysis along 

the tomographic and sectional profiles of the 3D response cube at a series of infrared frequencies, 

revealing subtleties of phonon polaritons through correlations on spatial and spectral features that 

were not previously available for s-SNOM.  

Method for Collection of 3D near-field Response Cube

PF-SNOM operates with the peak force tapping (PFT) mode of AFM. The sample is oscillated 

vertically at a low frequency (~4 kHz) that is much below the resonant frequency of the AFM 

cantilever. Under PFT mode, instantaneous tip-sample distance is deterministic from the extension 

of the piezoelectric sample stage and the dynamic deflection of the AFM cantilever. PF-SNOM 

simultaneously measures the scattered light signal from tip-sample region and the instantaneous 

tip-sample distance (Fig. 1c). The relation of the tip-sample distance versus raw scattering signal 


4

from the tip is obtained through a correlation of signal waveforms in the time domain (Fig. 1d). 

Because the oscillation amplitude of the tip-sample distance in PFT mode spans more than a 

hundred nanometers, a linear far-field background fit can be performed on the region of large tip-

sample distances where the near-field signal is negligible. The resulting linear background is back 

extrapolated to all tip-sample distances and removed from the raw scattering signal. The result is 

a vertical near-field interaction curve with an explicit tip-sample distance dependence (Fig. 1e). 

Figure 1. FDTD simulation on the effect of tip-sample distance and explicit tip-sample distance 

information in PF-SNOM. (a) The scheme used in FDTD simulation. A gold cone with end radius 

of 30 nm is used to mimic AFM tip, and the light illumination angle is 15°. (b) FDTD simulations 

of EM field enhancements with 𝑑 = 10 and 1 nm under 1403 cm-1 illumination. FFTs of signal 

profile along x-axis in the angular momentum k-space are plotted in the lower panel. Shorter tip-

sample distance couples with higher momenta. (c) Simultaneously obtained cantilever deflection 

and scattered light from the tip-sample region during one cycle of peak force tapping. Insets 

schematically illustrates the tip-sample distance during PFT. The PF-SNOM sampling region is 

right before the snap-in time point 𝑡s. (d) Cantilever deflection curve, scattered light and linearly 

fitted background shown in the tip-sample distance domain at the yellow region in (c). 

𝑡s corresponds to 𝑑 = 0 which is indicated by a vertical dashed line. The grey shadow indicates 

the background fitting range. Data in (c-d) are obtained on the Au surface at 1600 cm-1. (e) A 


5

typical vertical near-field interaction curve. (f) A 3D near-field response cube is formed by 

assembling vertical interaction curves. 

Vertical near-field interaction curves at every lateral scanned position are then assembled to 

form a 3D near-field response cube. The 3D near-field response cube 𝑆NF(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑑) includes near-

field signals 𝑆NF at each lateral scanned position (𝑥, 𝑦), as well as each tip-sample distance d (Fig. 

1f). We collect many 3D near-field response cubes at a series of infrared frequencies. In the near-

field tomography, the collected 3D near-field response cube is analyzed on the tomographic (with 

fixed d) and sectional (with fixed x or y) directions to reveal correlations between the spatial 

frequency and the excitation frequency.

Results

Tomographic Analysis of Near-field Responses 

We investigate a circular micro-disk and a reflective edge made of the isotopically pure 

hexagonal boron nitride (h-11BN).18 Hexagonal boron nitride is a two-dimensional van der Waals 

material that supports hyperbolic phonon polaritons (HPhPs).3, 19-26 Isotopically pure h-11BN is 

advantageous over regular h-BN in that it has smaller damping from the phonon relaxation, which 

leads to a longer polariton propagation length.24 On the other hand, circular optical nano-resonators 

are known for their symmetrical fringe patterns and high quality factors when on resonance.27-30

The investigated h-11BN micro-disk is 9 μm in diameter and 70 nm in thickness as revealed by the 

AFM topography image (Fig. 2a). 3D near-field response cubes are collected with PF-SNOM at a 

series of infrared frequencies. Tomographic x-y near-field images from response cubes at three tip-

sample distances (𝑑) and three frequencies (𝜔) are displayed in Figs. 2b-d. 


6

Figure 2. Fringe patterns, vertical near-field responses and dispersion relation of the h-11BN disk 

through near-field analysis. (a) AFM topography of an h-11BN micro-disk with a diameter of 9 µm 

and a thickness of 70 nm, the scale bar is 4 μm. (b-d) Normalized tomographic PF-SNOM images 

at tip-sample distances 𝑑 = 1, 5 and 10 nm (in column) and at 𝜔 = 1420, 1425 and 1427 cm-1 

(in row). In (c) and (d), positions of fringes shift inward as 𝑑 increases. (e) The 𝜔 − 𝑞p dispersion 

relation of the h-11BN micro-disk extracted from PF-SNOM results. Experimental data (blue 

squares, red circles, and green triangles) are overlaid with calculated dispersion relation (brown 

curve). Calculated 𝑘𝑠𝑛 correspond to three observed resonant conditions are shown as purple 

arrows, others are shown as dashed purple lines. Mode numbers (𝑠, 𝑛) are displayed along with 

resonant conditions. Details in the 1420-1430 cm-1 range are shown in (f). 

At first glance, circular fringes of the tomographic images from PF-SNOM resemble what one 

would obtain from regular s-SNOM with the high order lock-in demodulation (see Supplementary 

Fig. S1). However, tomographic images at different tip-sample distances d reveal additional details 


7

that are missing from regular s-SNOM images.  As d is increased from 1 to 10 nm, the spatial 

patterns of the tomographic images evolve and are dependent on the infrared frequency 𝜔. For 

𝜔 = 1420 cm-1, the fringe patterns do not exhibit noticeable changes. However, fringe patterns at 

𝜔 = 1425 and 1427 cm-1 exhibit discernable changes: as d increases, the central hole disappears 

or shrinks, indicating a change of spatial frequency of PhPs. An animation of the progression of 

the near-field images at different tip-sample distances is included in the Supplementary Movie S1. 

We then extract the periodicity of the circular fringes of the h-11BN disk to obtain the energy 

(𝜔) versus momentum (qp) dispersion relations (Fig. 2e-f). Details of the extracting method are 

described in Supplementary Fig. S2. The experimental dispersion relation exhibits an interesting 

behavior: the polariton momentum exhibits a fixed value at 2.5 × 104 and 2.85 × 104 cm-1 over a 

small range of infrared frequency regardless of the change of tip-sample distance d; between these 

two fixed values, the momentum of polariton changes with d; larger d corresponds to lower spatial 

frequencies of the polariton at a given excitation energy. The dispersion relation of the h-11BN disk 

clearly deviates from the theoretical prediction of h-11BN film that does not consider the 

geometrical confinement.3 To confirm this is a general behavior of circular micro-disk of h-11BN, 

we performed PF-SNOM measurement on another circular disk of different thickness, a similar 

behavior was found (see Supplementary Fig. S3).

We hypothesize that the confinement of the circular geometry leads to the quantized spatial 

frequencies in the lateral dimension. A question arises: Do polaritons behave similarly in the case 

of an h-11BN edge that lacks symmetry for the geometrical confinement? To answer this question, 

an edge of an h-11BN flake was measured by PF-SNOM (Fig. 3). The thickness of the flake is of 

40 nm. Tomographic PF-SNOM images at 1415 cm-1 from the 3D near-field response cube at three 

different tip-sample distances d are shown in Fig. 3b-d. Close examination of the fringe spacing 


8

after averaging (Fig. 3e) reveals a small change of the periodicity: as tip-sample distance d increase, 

the polariton wavelength 𝜆𝑝 also slightly increases. The extracted dispersion relation of the 

polaritons in the h-11BN flake at different tip-sample distances and light frequencies is displayed 

in Fig. 3f. In contrast to the behavior of the micro-disk, the momentum of polariton in the BN flake 

does not exhibit fixed values. Also, the momentum can be slightly tuned by the tip-sample distance 

d: longer d corresponds to a smaller momentum of the polaritons. An animation of the progression 

of the near-field images of the h-11BN edge at different tip-sample distances is included in 

Supplementary Movie S2.

Figure 3. Near-field analysis on the edge of an h-11BN flake. (a) Topography of an h-11BN flake 

with a thickness of 40 nm. The scale bar is 400 nm. (b-d) PF-SNOM images at 1415 cm-1 at tip-

sample distances 𝑑 of 1, 2 and 5 nm respectively. (e) Averaged profiles of near-field signals 

along the orthogonal direction to the edge, revealing an increase of polariton wavelength λp as 𝑑

increases. (f) Extracted 𝜔-𝑞p dispersion relation of polaritons from the h-11BN edge (blue 

squares, red circles, and green triangles) overlaid with the calculated dispersion relation (brown 

curve). 𝑞p exhibits distance-dependence at all frequencies. No preferred values of polariton 

momentum are observed.

Formation of Geometric Resonances

The comparison of the dispersion relations between the h-11BN micro-disk and the reflective 

edge confirms the above-mentioned hypothesis and suggests that the momentum of polaritons in 


9

the circular micro-disk is quantized. The quantized spatial frequencies are determined by 

geometrically-formed standing wave modes when hyperbolic phonon polaritons propagate and 

reflect inside the micro-disk. The standing wave solutions can be analytically solved by a method 

described in previous literature on h-BN nano-resonators, by using Equation (1) 29 (see 

Supplementary Note 1 for the derivation): 

𝐽𝑠

′(𝑘𝑠𝑛𝑟0 + 𝜙) = 0
(1)

where JS is the Bessel function of sth order, r0 is the disk radius, ksn is the nth root to Equation (1) 

and the spatial frequencies of the standing wave, n = 1, 2, 3…and 𝜙0 is the anomalous phase shift 

at the edge, which is found to be -0.28 π from fitting.

The standing wave solutions from Equation (1) have well-defined spatial frequencies (𝑘𝑠𝑛). 

When the tip launches polaritons with momenta that coincide with the characteristic frequency 

𝑘𝑠𝑛, one geometrical resonant condition is formed. Consequently, the amplitude of the tip-

launched polaritons is amplified at these resonant conditions with several discrete spatial 

frequencies. 𝑘𝑠𝑛 from standing wave solutions are marked as vertical dashed lines in Fig. 2e-f,

from which we can clearly see that the fixed values of the polariton momentum are aligned with 

these discrete values of 𝑘𝑠𝑛. Within the investigated frequency range, we observed three resonant 

frequencies: 1410, 1420 and 1428 cm-1.  

Also, when the metallic AFM tip is positioned at the crests of the standing waves, the 

coupling between the EM near-field of the tip and the polaritonic mode is amplified, leading to 

an increase of the scattering signals that is measurable by PF-SNOM. Consequently, the spatial 

fringes from PF-SNOM exhibit similar patterns as the amplitude square of the standing wave  

𝜌2 = 𝐽𝑠

2(𝑘𝑠𝑛𝑟0 + 𝜙).  Fig. 4 displays the PF-SNOM images and simulations based on the 

standing wave solution 𝜌. Simulation details are described in Supplementary Note 1.  In 


10

comparison, the reflective h-11BN edge of a large flake does not support geometric-dependent 

standing wave modes. Polaritons launched by the metallic AFM tip are not amplified at 

particular spatial frequencies (Fig. 3f). As a result, the dispersion relationship of the reflective 

edge lacks the quantization of the momentum and does not exhibit the characteristic zig-zag 

patterns in the dispersion relations of the h-11BN micro-disk in Fig. 2f.   

Figure 4. PF-SNOM images of the h-11BN micro-disk at d = 1 nm at different resonant infrared 

frequencies (upper row) and their corresponding simulations of 𝜌2 calculated from the standing 

wave solutions (lower row).

Changing the tip-sample distance can slightly tune the spatial frequency of PhP waves under 

conditions that lack geometrical resonance, such as in cases of the simple reflective edge and 

between two resonant conditions of the micro-disk (see Supplementary Fig. S4). The tuning of the 

spatial frequencies can be understood by the spatial distribution of the EM near-field underneath 

the tip at different tip-sample distances: the tip-sample configuration with a large tip-sample 

distance provides a loosely enhanced EM field with low spatial frequencies; the configuration with 

a small tip-sample distance strongly confines the EM field that spans high spatial frequencies (Fig. 


11

1a-b). When the tip-sample distance is small, the PhP wave with a higher spatial frequency is 

excited more; when the tip-sample distance is large, the PhP wave with a lower spatial frequency 

is more present. On the other hand, under geometrical resonant conditions of the circular micro-

disk, discrete spatial frequencies of the standing wave solutions are amplified. The small tuning of 

the spatial frequencies from different tip-sample distances is overshadowed by the dominant spatial 

frequency from the standing wave solutions. When the excitation of wavelength the PhP is between 

two geometric resonant conditions, the spatial frequency of the PhPs is not dominated by one 

standing wave, but from a superposition of two standing waves. Thus, the apparent momentum 

can again be tuned by the tip-sample distance. This behavior leads to the progression of the spatial 

fringe patterns as the tip-sample distance changes.    

Vertical Analysis of Near-field Response

The 3D near-field response cube contains vertical sectional information on how the near-field 

response behaves when the tip-sample distance changes. Fig. 5 displays the vertical sectional 

images and analysis of the h-11BN micro-disk. The green dashed line in Fig. 5a shows the position 

where the sectional profile was taken. Fig. 5b-c displays SNF(x, d) sectional image at infrared 

frequency of 1420 cm-1 and 1425 cm-1 respectively. A vertical signal decay range of less than 20 

nm is observed, which is the dominant range of the near-field interaction between the tip and the 

sample. This observation can be understood by the fact that the phonon polaritons in h-11BN are 

hyperbolic PhPs that travel in the volume of the material, thus the evanescent EM field outside h-

11BN is weak and not a part of the core component of hyperbolic PhPs inside h-11BN.


12

Figure 5. Vertical sectional near-field images and analysis. (a) AFM topography of the micro-disk. 

The green line across the center of the disk marks the position of vertical sectioning. (b-c) x-d

sectional near-field responses at 1420 cm-1 and at 1425 cm-1, respectively. (d) Near-field vertical 

interaction curve at the center of the micro-disk at infrared frequencies of 1420 (blue) and 1425 

cm-1 (red). The black dashed line is the boundary between the close (d < 10 nm) and far range (d > 

10 nm). Within the far range, two vertical behavior curves are effectively the same. (e) 

Reconstructed near-field image of 1425 cm-1 at d = 0 nm, by extrapolating the exponential fitting 

of vertical response curves within the close range. Reconstructed image by fitting the data within 

the far range is shown in (f), in which the center dip disappears.  

To examine the behavior of the vertical near-field interaction in situ, we read out the SNF(d) 

responses at the center of the micro-disk at 1420 and 1425 cm-1, and display them in Fig. 5d. An 

interesting phenomenon appears: For the tip-sample distance region of d > 10 nm, two curves 

practically overlap, indicating a similar signal generation mechanism. However, at d < 10 nm, two 

vertical interaction curves exhibit drastically different behavior. The curve of 1420 cm-1 exhibits a 

monotonic and rapid increase as d decreases; the curve of 1425 cm-1 exhibit a slow increase as d

decreases, at a short range of d = 2 nm, the signal even starts to decrease. How do we understand 


13

this behavioral difference? The infrared frequency of 1420 cm-1 matches the geometrical standing 

wave mode of the polaritons in the h-11BN micro disk, as revealed above; the infrared frequency 

of 1425 cm-1 is located between two resonant standing wave modes. Under the resonant condition, 

the near-field tip probes the same polaritonic standing wave mode regardless of the tip-sample 

distance. When the infrared frequency is situated between two standing wave resonant modes, the 

near-field tip can moderately couple to both adjacent standing wave modes and excite a 

superposition of them.

At large d, the tip-enhanced electric field weakly couples relatively more of the standing wave 

mode with the lower momentum; at a small d, the strongly tip-enhanced electric field excites more 

of the standing wave mode with the higher momentum. As the centers of two adjacent standing 

wave modes of the 2D Bessel Function alternate between crest and trough (Fig. 4 and 

Supplementary Fig. S5), the mixture of two adjacent Bessel functions leads to destructive 

interference between the amplitudes of the polariton wave at the center of the micro-disk. As the 

tip-sample distance becomes smaller, the relative strength of the standing wave mode with high 

momentum increases, and the destructive interference become stronger, eventually leading to the 

dip of the vertical interaction curve as seen in Fig. 5d. The existence of such superposition is 

highlighted in Figs. 5e-f by reconstructing the near-field image at 1425 cm-1 through extrapolating 

exponential fittings of vertical responses within close (0-10 nm) and far (10-50 nm) d ranges. The 

reconstructed image from the close range resembles the experimental tomographic image in Fig. 

2c. However, in the reconstructed image from the far range, the center dip disappears. The 

difference between Figs. 5e and 5f is the proof of the destructive interference at the close d range. 

The non-trivial vertical decay behavior of polaritons is the manifestation of the quantization of 

momentum from the standing wave modes, and the shift of the mode superposition is due to the 


14

change of momentum coupling from the changing tip-sample distance. 

Discussion 

The advantage of PF-SNOM for near-field analysis over traditional s-SNOM analysis is the 

ability to access one additional vertical dimension along with the tip-sample distance d. In current 

s-SNOM, the spatial distribution of x-y lateral near-field responses is collected as the nonlinearity 

of scattering signal over a range of tip-sample distance, and the progression of the lateral spatial 

distribution within the cantilever oscillation range is not accessible. As a result, the spectrum in 

the spatial frequency domain is averaged in the vertical range and inhomogeneously broadened. In 

contrast, PF-SNOM directly provides the vertical near-field response curve with well-defined tip-

sample distances d over a long range, which enables the collection of 3D near-field response cube 

for the near-field tomography to experimentally identify the geometrical resonances from both 

tomographic and sectional analysis. The addition of the near-field information in the vertical 

dimension enables the complete characterization of optical near-fields.

PF-SNOM and s-SNOM shares the same signal generation mechanism: the sharp metallic tip 

is used as both an antenna to generate a strong light confinement and a scatterer to emit detectable 

signals. Therefore, PF-SNOM can routinely provide nanometer resolution, which is better than 

other 3D near-field mapping methods based on aperture near-field scanning optical microscopy 

(NSOM), which uses the customized fiber as a light probe.31-33 The effort towards characterizing 

vertical near-field response is also achieved by s-SNOM-based techniques with approach curve34

or reconstruction method35 at a single spot, but both methods are time consuming for obtaining 

tomographic images. Unlike these single spot methods, PF-SNOM can directly measure near-field 

responses in 3D space and provides a 3D data cube with rich information in only one scan, which 

improves the acquisition speed and enables verifications of numerical modeling on near-field 


15

responses. The ability to perform measurement on individual nanostructures also bypasses the 

inhomogeneous broadening of spectra due to spatial averaging. 

The coupling between the launched phonon momentum and the momentum-quantized standing 

wave mode of h-11BN structures could be useful for a wide range of applications that rely on both 

spectral and spatial selectivity. At the resonant frequency of the standing wave mode, the EM 

nearfield is strongly enhanced and spatially localized at certain positions of the disk, e.g., at 1420 

cm-1, the strongest nearfield is located at the disk center, yielding a near-field hotspot with a 

diameter of 500 nm, which suggests that the center of the h-11BN micro-disk could be used for 

chemical sensing, as well as a platform with a strong field enhancement in mid-infrared systems 

or nonlinear optical mixing that involves mid infrared frequencies.30, 36 To increase the spectral 

selectivity, the geometry of h-11BN structures can be tailored to match resonances to infrared 

absorptions of investigated molecules. The mode quantization of the circular h-BN disk could also 

enable it serve as a momentum filter for selecting propagating PhPs with precisely defined 

momentum when integrated into a heterostructure.37, 38

Conclusion

In conclusion, we demonstrated the near-field analysis of h-11BN microstructures based on the 

3D near-field response cube from PF-SNOM with both tomographic and sectional analysis. The 

geometrical resonance from the standing wave solutions of the circular micro-disk leads to the 

quantization of the in-plane momentum of the polaritons. Between resonant conditions and for 

structures that lack geometric confinement, changing the tip-sample distance fine tunes the 

momentum of polariton. The 3D near-field tomography provides a convenient approach for in situ

examination of polaritonic nano- and microstructures and is expected to be readily applicable to 

other two-dimensional materials and devices that have exquisite plasmonic and polaritonic 


16

properties.39-43

Methods

Materials

The sample were prepared starting from a silicon wafer with 285 nm of thermal oxide. Optical 

lithography and gold evaporation were used to define alignment markers. Subsequently, the wafer 

was diced into chips. Isotopically pure h-11BN crystal flakes were grown from a molten metal 

nickel-chromium solution using monoisotopic boron-11 as the boron source.25 The h-11BN was 

exfoliated using the Scotch tape technique and transferred on the substrate. The excess of glue was 

removed with acetone and IPA. E-beam lithography with ZEP resist was performed on the flakes 

and was followed by reactive ion etching with a fluorine-based recipe. Subsequently, ZEP was 

removed with remover PG, and the sample was rinsed with acetone and IPA.

PF-SNOM setup

The PF-SNOM setup used in this work is composed of an AFM (Bruker Multimode 8 with 

Nanoscope V controller with peak force tapping), a frequency tunable quantum cascade laser (QCL) 

(MIRcat, Daylight Photonics), a mercury cadmium telluride (MCT) infrared detector (KLD series, 

Kolmartech), and data acquisition devices (PXI-5122 and PXI-4461, National Instruments). Gold-

coated AFM tips (HQ:NSC15/CR-AU, Mikromasch) were used. The infrared beam from QCL was 

focused on the tip apex with a gold-coated parabolic mirror (numerical aperture of 0.25) during 

experiments. The scattered light from the tip-sample region was collected by the same parabolic 

mirror, and then directed to the MCT detector. The light path of infrared laser was adjusted to 

maximize detected near-field signals. During the experiment, the AFM was operated in the peak 

force tapping mode of 4 kHz, where the tip is hold stationary and the peak-to-peak oscillation 

amplitude of the sample stage is set as 300 nm. Scattered signals from the MCT detector, cantilever 

deflection signals from the quadrant photodiode of AFM, and applied piezo voltages (x and y) 

from AFM are all recorded by two data acquisition devices simultaneously. In Figs. 1c-d, cantilever 

deflection and scattered signals from average of 200 cycles of peak force tapping were used. In all 

other PF-SNOM measurement, signals are from the average of 60 cycles. A custom script is used 

(MATLAB R2018b) to convert the raw data into a 3D response cube to get PF-SNOM images at 

different tip-sample distances, vertical near-field interaction curves, etc. The conversion between 

the time domain and the tip-sample distance domain and the algorithm to subtract far-field 


17

backgrounds are the same as described in the literature.17

FDTD simulation

FDTD simulations in Figs. 1a-b were conducted by Lumerical FDTD software (Lumerical Inc.). 

A gold cone with the end radius of 30 nm was used to simulate the AFM tip, and a Si disk with a 

radius of 4 µm and thickness of 80 nm was placed under the tip by a separation of 1 or 10 nm. The 

IR dielectric constant 𝜀 = 11.7 for Si was used.44 The light source was set to be a p-polarized plane 

wave with an amplitude of 1 arbitrary unit and an incident angle of 15° to mimic the actual incident 

angle from the parabolic mirror. The incident angle is defined as the angle between the light (p-

polarized in XZ plane) incident direction (which is also in XZ plane) and the horizontal plane 

(sample plane, or XY plane).

Dispersion relation simulation

The calculated dielectric function of h-11BN in Fig. 2a is based on Equation 2.3, 45

{  

  𝜀⊥ = 𝜀∞,⊥ + 𝜀∞,⊥

𝜔LO,⊥

2
− 𝜔TO,⊥

2

𝜔TO,⊥

2
− 𝜔2 − 𝑖𝜔Γ⊥

𝜀∥ = 𝜀∞,∥ + 𝜀∞,∥

𝜔LO,∥

2
− 𝜔TO,∥

2

𝜔TO,∥

2
− 𝜔2 − 𝑖𝜔Γ∥

(2)

where 𝜀⊥ and 𝜀∥ are in-plane (𝑥 and 𝑦 ) and out-of-plane (𝑧 ) dielectric functions; 𝜀∞ is high-

frequency permittivity; 𝜔 is the frequency of incident light; 𝜔LO and 𝜔TO are longitudinal and 

transverse optical phonon mode frequencies, and Γ is the phonon damping. Parameters of h-11BN 

are from Giles et al.22, and are summarized in Table 1:

Table 1. Fitting parameters of h-11BN

𝜀∞,⊥

𝜔LO,⊥

(cm-1)

𝜔TO,⊥

(cm-1)

Γ⊥

(cm-1)

𝜀∞,∥

𝜔LO,∥

(cm-1)

𝜔TO,∥

(cm-1)

Γ∥

(cm-1)

5.32
1608.7
1359.8
2.1
3.15
814
755
1

The 𝜔 − 𝑞p dispersion relation (brown curves in Figs. 2e-f) is calculated based on the air/h-

BN/SiO2 structure according to Equation (3):3, 39

𝑞p =

𝑖√𝜀∥
𝑧√𝜀⊥

[arctan(−𝑖𝜀a√𝜀∥𝜀⊥) + arctan(−𝑖𝜀s√𝜀∥𝜀⊥) + π𝑙]
(3)

where 𝑧, 𝜀a, 𝜀s are the thickness of h-11BN, dielectric functions of air and SiO2 substrate, 

respectively. We use 𝑧 = 70 nm, 𝜀a = 1, and 𝜀s = 2.05. The Si substrate used in this study 

generally has a 285 nm thick thermal oxide layer on top of the Si. This layer contains a mixture 


18

of SiO2 and Si, the permittivities of which are very different in mid-infrared. At 1400 cm-1, the 

relative permittivity of Si is 11.7,44 while for SiO2 it is 1.2.46 This heterogeneous nature of 

substrate determines that we cannot simply use the permittivity of SiO2. Therefore, we used a 

modified 𝜀s = 2.05 (between 1.2 and 11.7) to match experimental results, which is consistent for 

additional data from another BN micro disk in supplementary Fig. 3. 

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts to declare.

Acknowledgments

H.W. and X. G. X. acknowledge fruitful discussions and the help on the model simulation from 

Dr. Antonio Ambrosio, the help on the two-dimensional wave model and dispersion relation 

simulation from Dr. Michele Tamagnone and the help from Dr. William L. Wilson of Center for 

Nanoscale Systems of Harvard University for the fabrication of the BN micro-disk. X.G.X would 

like to thank Dr. Slava Rotkin and Dr. Gilbert Walker for helpful discussions. H. W. and X. G. X. 

thank for the support from Beckman Young Investigator Program. J. H. E. and J. L. appreciate the 

support from the National Science Foundation, award number CMMI 1538127. 

References 

1.
D. N. Basov, M. M. Fogler and F. J. García de Abajo, Science, 2016, 354, aag1992.

2.
V. M. Agranovich, Surface Polaritons, Elsevier, 2012.

3.
S. Dai, Z. Fei, Q. Ma, A. S. Rodin, M. Wagner, A. S. McLeod, M. K. Liu, W. Gannett, W. Regan, K. Watanabe, 
T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, G. Dominguez, A. H. C. Neto, A. Zettl, F. Keilmann, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. 
Fogler and D. N. Basov, Science, 2014, 343, 1125-1129.

4.
N. Rivera, T. Christensen and P. Narang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2653-2660.

5.
M. Xue, Q. Zheng, R. Chen, L. Bao, S. Du and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14113-14117.

6.
J. D. Caldwell, L. Lindsay, V. Giannini, I. Vurgaftman, T. L. Reinecke, S. A. Maier and O. J. Glembocki, 
Nanophotonics, 2014.

7.
J. D. Caldwell, A. V. Kretinin, Y. Chen, V. Giannini, M. M. Fogler, Y. Francescato, C. T. Ellis, J. G. Tischler, 
C. R. Woods, A. J. Giles, M. Hong, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. A. Maier and K. S. Novoselov, Nat.
Commun., 2014, 5, 5221.

8.
P. Li, X. Yang, T. W. Maß, J. Hanss, M. Lewin, A.-K. U. Michel, M. Wuttig and T. Taubner, Nat. Mater., 2016, 
15, 870.

9.
N. C. Passler, C. R. Gubbin, T. G. Folland, I. Razdolski, D. S. Katzer, D. F. Storm, M. Wolf, S. De Liberato, 
J. D. Caldwell and A. Paarmann, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4285-4292.

10.
F. C. B. Maia, B. T. O’Callahan, A. R. Cadore, I. D. Barcelos, L. C. Campos, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. 
Deneke, A. Belyanin, M. B. Raschke and R. O. Freitas, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 708-715.

11.
S. Dai, J. Quan, G. Hu, C.-W. Qiu, T. H. Tao, X. Li and A. Alù, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1009-1014.

12.
Z. Fei, G. O. Andreev, W. Bao, L. M. Zhang, A. S. McLeod, C. Wang, M. K. Stewart, Z. Zhao, G. Dominguez, 
M. Thiemens, M. M. Fogler, M. J. Tauber, A. H. Castro-Neto, C. N. Lau, F. Keilmann and D. N. Basov, Nano 
Lett., 2011, 11, 4701-4705.

13.
I. D. Barcelos, A. R. Cadore, L. C. Campos, A. Malachias, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, F. C. Maia, R. Freitas 


19

and C. Deneke, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11620-11625.

14.
T. M. Slipchenko, M. L. Nesterov, R. Hillenbrand, A. Y. Nikitin and L. Martín-Moreno, ACS Photonics, 2017, 
4, 3081-3088.

15.
V. E. Babicheva, S. Gamage, L. Zhen, S. B. Cronin, V. S. Yakovlev and Y. Abate, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 
2106-2112.

16.
L. J. Macedo, F. C. Lima, R. G. Amorim, R. O. Freitas, A. Yadav, R. M. Iost, K. Balasubramanian and F. N. 
Crespilho, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15048-15057.

17.
H. Wang, L. Wang, D. S. Jakob and X. G. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2005.

18.
S. Liu, R. He, L. Xue, J. Li, B. Liu and J. H. Edgar, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6222-6225.

19.
R. Geick, C. H. Perry and Rupprech.G, Phys. Rev., 1966, 146, 543-&.

20.
S. Dai, Q. Ma, T. Andersen, A. S. McLeod, Z. Fei, M. K. Liu, M. Wagner, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. 
Thiemens, F. Keilmann, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler and D. N. Basov, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6963.

21.
E. Yoxall, M. Schnell, A. Y. Nikitin, O. Txoperena, A. Woessner, M. B. Lundeberg, F. Casanova, L. E. Hueso, 
F. H. Koppens and R. Hillenbrand, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 674.

22.
P. Li, M. Lewin, A. V. Kretinin, J. D. Caldwell, K. S. Novoselov, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, F. Gaussmann 
and T. Taubner, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7507.

23.
L. Gilburd, K. S. Kim, K. Ho, D. Trajanoski, A. Maiti, D. Halverson, S. de Beer and G. C. Walker, The J. 
Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2158-2162.

24.
A. J. Giles, S. Dai, I. Vurgaftman, T. Hoffman, S. Liu, L. Lindsay, C. T. Ellis, N. Assefa, I. Chatzakis, T. L. 
Reinecke, J. G. Tischler, M. M. Fogler, J. H. Edgar, D. N. Basov and J. D. Caldwell, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 
134-139.

25.
T. G. Folland, T. W. Maß, J. R. Matson, J. R. Nolen, S. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. H. Edgar, T. Taubner 
and J. D. Caldwell, MRS Commun., 2018, 8, 1418-1425.

26.
A. Ambrosio, M. Tamagnone, K. Chaudhary, L. A. Jauregui, P. Kim, W. L. Wilson and F. Capasso, Light: Sci. 
Appl., 2018, 7, 27.

27.
R. Filter, J. Qi, C. Rockstuhl and F. Lederer, Phys. Rev. B, 2012, 85, 125429.

28.
T. Wang, P. Li, B. Hauer, D. N. Chigrin and T. Taubner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5051-5055.

29.
M. Tamagnone, A. Ambrosio, K. Chaudhary, L. A. Jauregui, P. Kim, W. L. Wilson and F. Capasso, Sci. Adv., 
2018, 4, eaat7189.

30.
H. Sumikura, T. Wang, P. Li, A.-K. U. Michel, A. Heßler, L. Jung, M. Lewin, M. Wuttig, D. N. Chigrin and 
T. Taubner, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2549-2554.

31.
R. Guo, E. C. Kinzel, Y. Li, S. M. Uppuluri, A. Raman and X. Xu, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 4961-4971.

32.
R. Bauld, M. Hesari, M. S. Workentin and G. Fanchini, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 243114.

33.
B. Le Feber, N. Rotenberg, D. M. Beggs and L. Kuipers, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 43.

34.
T. Taubner, F. Keilmann and R. Hillenbrand, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1669-1672.

35.
L. Wang and X. G. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8973.

36.
M. Autore, P. Li, I. Dolado, F. J. Alfaro-Mozaz, R. Esteban, A. Atxabal, F. Casanova, L. E. Hueso, P. Alonso-
González and J. Aizpurua, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 17172.

37.
S. Dai, Q. Ma, M. Liu, T. Andersen, Z. Fei, M. Goldflam, M. Wagner, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and M. 
Thiemens, Nat. Nanotech., 2015, 10, 682.

38.
Y. Jia, H. Zhao, Q. Guo, X. Wang, H. Wang and F. Xia, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 907-912.

39.
V. Aksyuk, B. Lahiri, G. Holland and A. Centrone, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3634-3644.

40.
W. Ma, P. Alonso-González, S. Li, A. Y. Nikitin, J. Yuan, J. Martín-Sánchez, J. Taboada-Gutiérrez, I. 
Amenabar, P. Li, S. Vélez, C. Tollan, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, S. Sriram, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, S.-T. Lee, R. 
Hillenbrand and Q. Bao, Nature, 2018, 562, 557-562.

41.
A. Agarwal, M. S. Vitiello, L. Viti, A. Cupolillo and A. Politano, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8938-8946.

42.
D. Hu, K. Chen, X. Chen, X. Guo, M. Liu and Q. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807788.

43.
Z. Zheng, N. Xu, S. L. Oscurato, M. Tamagnone, F. Sun, Y. Jiang, Y. Ke, J. Chen, W. Huang, W. L. Wilson, 
A. Ambrosio, S. Deng and H. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav8690.

44.
W. C. Dunlap and R. L. Watters, Phys. Rev., 1953, 92, 1396-1397.

45.
B. Zhao and Z. M. Zhang, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2017, 106, 1025-1034.

46.
J. Kischkat, S. Peters, B. Gruska, M. Semtsiv, M. Chashnikova, M. Klinkmüller, O. Fedosenko, S. Machulik, 
A. Aleksandrova and G. Monastyrskyi, Appl. Opt., 2012, 51, 6789-6798.


Supplementary Materials: Three-dimensional Near-

field Analysis Through Peak Force Scattering-type 

Near-field Optical Microscopy

Haomin Wang1, Jiahan Li2, James H. Edgar2, and Xiaoji G. Xu1*

1Department of Chemistry, Lehigh University, 6 E Packer Ave. Bethlehem, PA, 18015, USA

2Tim Taylor Department of Chemical Engineering, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506, 

USA

*Email: xgx214@lehigh.edu

Supplementary Note 1: Derivation of resonant conditions and calculation of fringe patterns

Supplementary Figure S1. s-SNOM and PF-SNOM images.

Supplementary Figure S2. Extraction of spatial frequencies.

Supplementary Figure S3. Additional PF-SNOM measurement on another h-11BN micro-disk.

Supplementary Figure S4. Tuning 𝑞p by varying tip-sample distance 𝑑 through PF-SNOM.

Supplementary Figure S5. Fringe patterns at two adjacent resonant conditions.


Supplementary Note 1: Derivation of resonant conditions and calculation of fringe patterns

Resonant conditions of h-BN nano-disk resonators had been investigated thoroughly in the previous 

work.1According to it, the propagation of polaritons on the surface of h-BN micro-disk can also be described 

by a 2D wave equation:

(𝑖𝜔)2𝜌 = 𝑣𝑝2(𝜔)∇2𝜌
(S1)

in which 𝜌 is the spatial charge density, 𝑣𝑝 is the phase velocity and 𝜔 is the angular frequency. Resonant 

conditions can be obtained by the standing wave solution of Equation S1 using a Neumann boundary 

condition at the edge of disk with radius 𝑟0, where we have:

𝜕𝜌
𝜕𝑟|

𝑟=𝑟0

= 0
(S2)

Solutions of the 2D wave equation are in forms of Bessel function with polar coordinate (𝑟, 𝜃):

𝜌 = 𝐽𝑠(𝑘𝑟)(𝐴 cos(𝑠𝜃) + 𝐵 sin(𝑠𝜃))𝑒𝑖𝜔𝑡
(S3)

in which 𝐽𝑠 is the Bessel function of 𝑠 th order, 𝑘 is the wave vector of polariton and 𝐴, 𝐵 are arbitrary 

complex amplitudes. By solving Equation S1 and S2 together, one can get standing wave solutions that 

represents the resonant conditions of a circular disk:

𝜌 = 𝐽𝑠(𝑘𝑠𝑛𝑟 + 𝜙)(𝐴 cos(𝑠𝜃) + 𝐵 sin(𝑠𝜃))𝑒𝑖𝜔𝑡

with 𝑘𝑠𝑛 = 𝑛th root of 𝐽𝑠′(𝑘𝑟0 + 𝜙) = 0

(S4)

Note that a correction phase factor 𝜙 is added to account for the extra phase shift of polariton waves that 

have been reflected by the disk edge. In our case, we found 𝜙 = −0.28π best fit our experimental results,

which agrees well with −0.28π 1 and −0.25π 2, 3found in literatures. 

Measuring 𝜌 at different non-resonant and resonant conditions with an AFM tip and illumination 

light results to different signal contributions. The majority of PF-SNOM signal is from the so-called 

roundtrip component, which is circularly symmetric and independent of 𝜃.1 Thus, we can estimate PF-

SNOM signal as roundtrip component:

PF-SNOM signal ∝ 𝜌2 = 𝐽𝑠2(𝑘𝑠𝑛𝑟 + 𝜙)
(S5)

which can be used to calculate fringe patterns that we’ve seen in PF-SNOM images. Since the anomalous 

phase shift 𝜙 affects most the outermost fringe and cannot be easily accounted due to the presence of 

fringing field,1 in our simulation of 𝜌2 we omit this term to achieve optimal agreement between simulated 

fringes and PF-SNOM fringes. 

Solving Equation S4 gives out a series of 𝑘𝑠𝑛, which should be relevant to experimentally observed 

resonant conditions. To assign a proper (𝑠, 𝑛) pair to each resonant condition, we compare 𝑘𝑠𝑛 with 𝑞p

from FFT on PF-SNOM images at resonant conditions. The workflow is shown below:

1.
Obtain resonant 𝑞p from experimentally observed PF-SNOM images. In our case, we chose 


PF-SNOM images at 1410, 1421, and 1428 cm-1 as three resonant conditions (since the 

momentum is locked no matter the change of tip-sample distance). Experimental fringe patterns 

at each resonant condition were extracted by performing a radial averaging from the disk center 

on each of resonant PF-SNOM image. Then, FFT was performed on each fringe pattern to get 

spatial frequency of the fringe 𝑘f, which then was converted to the momentum of polariton 𝑞p

by 𝑞p = π𝑘f.

2.
A series of 𝑘𝑠𝑛 from solutions of Equation S4 were plugged back into Equation S5 to get 

simulated fringe patterns 𝜌2. 

3.
Compare 𝑘𝑠𝑛 with 𝑞p and 𝜌2 with experimental fringe patterns. If they match, assign 

corresponding mode numbers (𝑠, 𝑛) to this resonant frequency. 

Parameters that are used in these steps for resonant conditions shown in the main text Figs. 2e-f

are summarized in Table S1, from which we found that the resonances that we observed by PF-SNOM 

mainly correspond to modes with 𝑠 = 0 or 1. 𝑠 = 0 corresponds to modes that show the maximal signal 

at disk center, while 𝑠 = 1 corresponds to modes that show the minimal at disk center (Supplementary 

Fig. S5).

Table S1 Parameters used in the assignment of (𝑠, 𝑛)

Resonant 

frequencies 

(cm-1)

𝑞p

(𝜇𝑚−1)

(𝑠, 𝑛)

𝑘𝑠𝑛

(𝜇𝑚−1)

Parameters used in 

solving Eq. S4

1410
2.11
(1,3)
2.08

𝜙 = −0.28π

𝑟0 = 4.5 𝜇𝑚

1421
2.48
(0,4)
2.44

1428
2.84
(1,4)
2.78


Supplementary Figure S1. s-SNOM and PF-SNOM images. s-SNOM images are obtained using the 

same homodyne setup as PF-SNOM. The AFM tip is mechanically driven by a piezo at its mechanical 

resonant frequency of 220 kHz. Scattered signals from the detector are routed into a lock-in amplifier, 

which demodulates the signal with the reference frequency of 220 kHz, the lock-in amplitude of 4th

harmonic (880 kHz) is used to produce the near-field image. 


Supplementary Figure S2. Extraction of spatial frequencies. Fringe patterns at ω = 1425 cm-1 and 𝑑 =

1, 5, 10 nm are extracted through radial averaging from the center of micro-disk and are displayed in the 

inset. The same procedure is applied to PF-SNOM images at other 𝜔 and d. Resulting fringe patterns are

then Fourier Transformed to obtain the spatial frequency of the fringe 𝑘f, and to get the polariton 

momentum 𝑞p by 𝑞p = 𝜋𝑘f.


Supplementary Figure S3. Additional PF-SNOM measurement on another h-11BN micro-disk. The 

thickness is 60 nm, and the diameter is 8.9 µm. Experimental data (blue squares, orange circles and green 

triangles) are overlaid with calculated dispersion relation (brown curve) and resonant conditions (vertical 

purple arrows, with assigned  (𝑠, 𝑛) numbers). Similar to Figs. 2e-f in the main text, polariton momentum 

𝑞p is less dependent of tip-sample distance 𝑑 at resonant conditions, and changes at different 𝑑 at non-

resonant conditions.


Supplementary Figure S4. Tuning 𝑞p by varying tip-sample distance 𝑑 through PF-SNOM. (a) Under 

non-resonant conditions such as 𝜔 = 1425, 1426 and 1427 cm-1, the wavelength of the fringe pattern 𝜆f, 

polariton wavelength 𝜆p = 2𝜆f and polariton momentum 𝑞p =

2𝜋
𝜆p can be tuned by changing tip-sample 

distance 𝑑. As this figure shows, as 𝑑 increases from 1 to 10 nm, 𝜆f increases from 1.206, 1.149, 1.118 to 

1.233, 1.178 and 1.125 µm for 1425, 1426 and 1427 cm-1, respectively. (b) A false colormap of polariton 

momentum 𝑞p over 𝜔 = 1420−1430 cm-1 and 𝑑 = 1 − 10 nm. At resonant conditions (𝜔 = 1420 − 1422

and 1428 − 1430 cm-1), 𝑞p does not change with 𝑑 . On the contrary, at non-resonant conditions (𝜔 =

1423 − 1426 cm-1), 𝑞p increases as 𝑑 increases. These results demonstrate that PF-SNOM is capable of 

tuning 𝑞p under non-resonant conditions and indicate that PF-SNOM can also be used to distinguish 

whether the system has extrinsic resonance. 


Supplementary Figure S5. Fringe patterns at two adjacent resonant conditions. According to PF-SNOM 

experimental results and model prediction (Figs. 3b-c in the main text), resonant momentum 𝑞p(𝑠, 𝑛)

increases with the increase of incident frequency 𝜔 with alternating 𝑠 between 0 and 1. In addition, the 

roundtrip component that we observed in PF-SNOM can be approximated as a square of the Bessel function 

(Equation S5). If we plug 𝑟 = 0 (disk center) into Equation S5 and omit the anomalous phase shift  𝜙, we 

will get  𝜌2 = 𝐽𝑠2(0), which are constants determined simply by the order s of Bessel function. With 𝑠 = 0

and 1 alternating, we see PF-SNOM signal at the disk center alternating from bright (𝑠 = 0, 𝐽0

2(0) is local 

maximum) to dark (𝑠 = 1, 𝐽1

2(0) is local minimum).

References

1.
M. Tamagnone, A. Ambrosio, K. Chaudhary, L. A. Jauregui, P. Kim, W. L. Wilson and F. 
Capasso, Science Advances, 2018, 4, eaat7189.

2.
A. J. Giles, S. Dai, O. J. Glembocki, A. V. Kretinin, Z. Sun, C. T. Ellis, J. G. Tischler, T. 
Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and M. M. Fogler, Nano letters, 2016, 16, 3858-3865.

3.
A. Y. Nikitin, T. Low and L. Martin-Moreno, Physical Review B, 2014, 90, 041407.


