Screening Current-Induced Field and Field Drift Study in HTS coils 

using T-A homogenous model

Edgar Berrospe-Juarez1, Frederic Trillaud2, Víctor M R Zermeño3, and Francesco Grilli4

1Postgraduate School of Engineering, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico

2Institute of Engineering, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico

3NKT, Germany

4Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany

Email: eberrospej@iingen.unam.mx

Abstract: The emergence of second generation (2G) high-temperature superconductor (HTS) tapes 
has favored the development of HTS magnets for their applications in areas such as NMR, MRI and 
high field magnets. The screening current-induced field and the field drift are two major problems 
hindering the use of HTS tapes in the mentioned areas. Both problems are caused by the screening 
current, then it is necessary to have a modeling strategy capable to estimate such phenomena. Thus 
far, the H formulation has been the most successful and used approach to model medium-size systems 
(hundreds of tapes). However, its application to large-scale systems is still impaired by excessive 
computation times and memory requirements. Homogenization and multi-scaling strategies have 
been successfully implemented to increase the computational efficiency. In this contribution, we 
show that using the homogenization technique with the recently developed T-A formulation allows 
reducing the computation time and the amount of memory up to the point that real-time simulations 
of slow ramping cycles of large-scale systems are possible. The T-A homogeneous model also allows
systematically investigating the screening current using numerical simulations 

Keywords: large-scale superconductor systems, HTS coils, screening current, screening current-
induced field, field drift.

1. Introduction

The quality of second-generation high-temperature superconductor (HTS) tapes has improved during 
recent years. Now that HTS tapes are commercially available in sufficient length, there is an 
increasing interest in the development of devices based on this technology. The applications include 
power system devices [1], NMR and MRI [2-4], accelerators for medical applications [5], scientific 
magnets [6-8]. The HTS materials are performing so well that they preserve their high critical current 
even under the effect of high magnetic fields that exceed the critical fields of low-temperature 
superconductors. For this reason, they are good candidates to produce magnets above 20 T. Some 
projects around the world are moving in this direction [7, 9, 10].
In coils wound with HTS tapes, the large aspect ratio (width/thickness) of the tapes favours the 
presence of screening currents. These currents are induced by the gradual penetration of the radial 
component of the magnetic field. The magnetic field generated by screening currents affects the 
quality of the overall magnetic field in terms of field reduction by the shielding current and temporal 


stability of the central field. These two issues are known as screening current-induced field (SCIF)
and central field drift [2, 4, 11].
Some of these applications, like accelerator, NMR and MRI magnets, require a high-accuracy of the 
magnetic field in a fiducial volume located around the center of the magnet [3, 5]. Therefore, 
phenomena like the SCIF and the field drift need to be understood and remedied. For such purpose, 
numerical models are an irreplaceable tool. Finite element models based on the H formulation have 
been successfully used during the last years to model systems made with HTS tapes [12]. The H
formulation models are limited to the study of medium-size systems, because the study of large-scale 
systems requires an excessive amount of computational resources. This limitation has favored the 
emergence of the homogenization [13] and multi-scale methods [14, 15]. A major step towards the 
reduction of the required computational resources was undergone with the use of the T-A formulation
[16, 17]. More recently, T-A homogenous and T-A multi-scale strategies have further reduced the 
computation time and the amount of memory up to the point that it is possible to achieve real-time 
simulations of slow ramping cycles of large-scale superconducting systems [18].
In this manuscript, we present the T-A homogenous model of an HTS solenoidal coil. This coil model 
is used to qualitatively investigate the dependence of the SCIF and field drift on the critical current 
density (𝐽𝑐) and the 𝑛 power law index. The effect of 𝐽𝑐 has already been addressed in the literature 
[2, 19]. Here, the effects of 𝑛 are included in the discussion. Indeed, 𝑛, similarly to 𝐽𝑐, depends on 
quantities such as the magnetic field, the temperature and the stress [20, 21], and, therefore, its 
variation could have an important impact as well. The T-A homogenous model also allows to study
the effectiveness of two remedies for the SCIF and field drift: the striation of the tapes [11] and the 
current sweep reversal [2, 22].

2. T-A homogenous approach

In this section, a brief description of the T-A homogenous approach is presented. Comprehensive
descriptions of the T-A formulation can be found in [16, 17], while the reference of the T-A
homogenous approach is given in [18]. 
The so-called T-A formulation is the combination of the T and the A formulations. The HTS layer of 
the tapes are considered to be one dimensional (1D) lines. The current vector potential (𝐓) is 
exclusively defined in the HTS 1D layers, and the magnetic vector potential (𝐀) is defined over the 
entire system. The two vector potentials are defined by the following relations,

𝐉 = 𝛻 × 𝐓
(1)

𝐁 = 𝛻 × 𝐀
(2)

where 𝐁 and 𝐉 are the magnetic flux density and the current density, respectively [12]. The governing 
equations of the T and A formulation are,

𝛻 × 𝜌𝛻 × 𝐓 = − ∂𝐁

𝜕𝑡 ,
(3)

∇ × ∇ × 𝐀 = 𝜇𝐉 ,
(4)

where 𝜌 is the resistivity and 𝜇 is the magnetic permeability.


The study of solenoidal coils can be addressed by means of a 2D axisymmetric model, see figure 1,
where 𝐓 and 𝐀 have only one component. Consequently, equations (3) and (4) are simplified to,

∇2𝐴𝜑 = 𝜇𝐽𝜑
(5)

𝜕
𝜕𝑧 (𝜌𝐻𝑇𝑆

𝜕𝑇𝑟
𝜕𝑧 ) = 𝜕𝐵𝑟

𝜕𝑡
(6)

where 𝜌𝐻𝑇𝑆 is the resistivity of the HTS material.
The transport current flowing through the tapes is imposed by the Dirichlet boundary condition on 
𝑇𝑟, that must satisfy the following relation,

𝐼 = (𝑇1 − 𝑇2)𝛿
(7)

where 𝐼 is the transport current, 𝑇1 and 𝑇2 are the 𝑇𝑟 values at the edges of the superconducting line, 
and 𝛿 is the thickness of the HTS layer. The latter being infinitely thin, equation (7) imposes a sheet
current density 𝐼/𝛿 in practice.

Figure 1. 2D axisymmetric representation of a solenoidal coil where the HTS 
layers are considered to be 1D lines. The T-A formulation combines the T and A
formulations, T is defined just along the HTS lines. The homogenization process 
transforms the stacks of lines into homogeneous bulks.

The homogeneous model assumes that a stack of HTS tapes can be represented by a homogeneous 
bulk, such process is depicted in figure 1. The bulk can be understood as the limit case of a stack 
where the spaces between adjacent HTS layers disappear. Analogous to the non-homogenous case, 𝐓
is now exclusively defined inside the bulks. Equation (6) is valid again, because the influence of the 
magnetic field component parallel to the surface of the tapes on the computation of 𝐓 is neglected.
Such component, however, influences the local value of 𝐽𝐶 (see equation (9)). The HTS bulks are 
considered to be surrounded with a medium of zero electrical conductivity, as proposed in [18].

3. Case study


The case study used in this manuscript is a solenoidal coil made of 10 HTS pancakes, already 
described in [15]. Each pancake coil have 80 turns and each turn has same dimensions. Tables 1 and 
2 contain the relevant parameters of the coil and of the HTS tape.

Table 1. Coil parameters.
Table 2. HTS tape parameters.

Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value

Pancakes
10
Width
4 mm

Turns/pancake
80
HTS layer thickness
1 m

Inner radius
20 mm
Ec
1e-4 Vm-1

Outer radius
40 mm
n
25

Height
44.5 mm
Jc0
4.5e10 Am-2

B0
0.03 T

k
0.2


0.6

The electrical resistivity of the HTS material is modeled with the so-called E-J power law,

𝜌𝐻𝑇𝑆 =
𝐸𝑐

𝐽𝑐(𝑩) |
𝑱

𝐽𝑐(𝑩)|

𝑛−1

.
(8)

It is considered that the critical current density (Jc ) has an anisotropic dependence on the magnetic 
field, described by the following elliptic relation,

𝐽𝐶(𝑩) =
𝐽𝑐0

(1 + √𝑘2𝐵𝑧2 + 𝐵𝑟2

𝐵0
)

𝛼 ,

(9)

where 𝐵𝑧 and 𝐵𝑟 are the magnetic flux density components. The values of the parameters of (8) and 
(9) are listed in Tables 1 and 2. Since there are no magnetic materials present in the system, its
permeability is the one of the vacuum 0.
The pancakes, once converted into bulks, is meshed with 60 equally-spaced rectangular elements, 
along the tape’s width. The number of elements along the bulk’s thickness is 11, the distribution of 
these elements is graded with increasing number of elements at the extremities of the bulk. The 
symmetries of the coil allow employing adequate boundary conditions to model just the right upper 
quadrant of the full coil. The model was implemented in COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4, with the help 
of the PDE and AC/DC  modules.

4. Screening current-induced field 

The screening current is induced by the gradual penetration of the magnetic field into the tapes. The 
magnetic field penetrates from the extremities of the tapes producing current fronts. The screening 
current affects the magnetic field distribution all over the coil and particularly attenuates the central 


magnetic field. This attenuation is referred to as screening current-induced field (SCIF) [2], and it is 
quantified by the following relation,

𝐵𝑆𝐶 = 𝐵𝑠𝑖𝑚 − 𝐵𝑛
(10)

where 𝐵𝑠𝑖𝑚 is the central magnetic flux density estimated by means of the model, here by the T-A
formulation homogeneous model described above, and 𝐵𝑛 is the central nominal magnetic flux 
density produced by a uniform distribution of current density. For this case study the central point 
has the coordinates (0, 0).
When 𝐵𝑆𝐶 is plotted as a function of 𝐵𝑛, a hysteresis loop is formed. The simulations in this section 
consider that the transport current is given by the figure 2. The simulations are extended to one and a 
half cycles (6 h), this lapse is enough to capture the full hysteretic behavior of the SCIF. The amplitude 
of the transport current is 26.5 A. This charge cycle represents the real conditions of operations of
high-field magnets [9]. 

Figure 2. Transport current. Triangular shape with a 4 h period, and 26.5 A
amplitude.

The magnitude of the magnetic flux density produced when the current density is uniform, at the first 
current peak (𝑡 = 1 h), is shown in figure 3 a). The magnetic flux density estimated with the T-A
homogeneous model, i.e. including the screening current effects, at 𝑡 = 1 h, is shown in figure 3 b).
For these conditions 𝐵𝑛 = 0.36 T and 𝐵𝑠𝑖𝑚 = 0.345 T, then 𝐵𝑆𝐶 = 0.015 T ( 4.1% ). Even if it is not 
easy to appreciate the attenuation of the central field, figure 3 clearly shows how the screening current 
distorts the field all over the coil. The SCIF is known to depend on the coil’s shape and values as 
large as 18% have been reported in [23].

Figure 3. a) Magnetic flux density magnitude at peak current produced by a 
uniform 𝐽. b) Magnetic flux density magnitude estimated with the T-A
homogeneous model in the base conditions {𝐽𝑐 = 𝐽𝑏, 𝑛 = 25}. The black lines 
show the position of the pancakes. The white stream lines show the field distortions 
produced by the screening current.

0
1
2
3
4
5
6

Time [h]

-26.5

-13

0

13

26.5

Transport Current [A]


The effects of 𝐽𝑐 and 𝑛 in the form and size of the SCIF hysteresis loop are studied hereinafter. The 
𝐽𝑐0 and 𝑛 provided in Table 2 are considered to be the reference values for the rest of the study. Two 
batches of simulations are performed modifying the base conditions. The first batch of simulations 
modifies the critical current density by a factor at a constant n whereas the second batch modifies n
at a constant 𝐽𝑐0.
The first batch considers 𝑛 = 25 and 𝐽𝑐0𝑛 = [1.5, 1.0, 0.5, 0.25] ∗ 𝐽𝑐0; the critical current density 𝐽𝑐
remains as defined in (9) replacing 𝐽𝑐0 by 𝐽𝑐0𝑛. Figure 4 shows the normalized current density (𝐽𝑛 =
𝐽 𝐽𝑐
⁄ ) at 𝑡 = 1 h for the four new 𝐽𝑐0 values. Figure 4 b) corresponds to the field shown in figure 3 b). 
It is possible to observe how 𝐽𝑐 influences the current density distribution, when 𝐽𝑐0𝑛 = 1.5 ∗ 𝐽𝑐0, the 
lower pancakes have non-penetrated zones, while when 𝐽𝑐0𝑛 = 0.25 ∗ 𝐽𝑐0 the current density is almost 
uniform, but reaching fully saturated values for the upper pancakes.

Figure 4. Normalized current density (𝐽𝑛) at peak current, for the cases  𝑛 = 25, 𝐽𝑐0𝑛 =
[1.5, 1.0, 0.5, 0.25] ∗ 𝐽𝑐0. The screening current is clearly observed when 𝐽𝑐0𝑛 = 1.5 ∗ 𝐽𝑐0, while 
an almost uniform 𝐽 is observed when 𝐽𝑐0𝑛 = 0.25 ∗ 𝐽𝑐0.

The SCIF hysteresis loops corresponding to the first simulation batch are presented in figure 5 a). The 
evolution of the current density can explain the hysteresis loops. At the beginning of the cycle, the 
current gradually penetrates the tapes incrementing the BSC magnitude. Once the tapes are fully 
penetrated, BSC tends to saturate. When the magnet is discharged, new current fronts penetrate the 
tapes and the BSC magnitude decreases, but the declining rate is so that a remnant magnetic field 
remains at the moment of the zero-crossing point of the cycle. The maximum values for 𝐵𝑆𝐶 as well 
as the 𝐵𝑆𝐶 values at the current peak (𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝐵𝑛)) are presented in figure 5 b). As it could have already 
been anticipated from figure 4, figure 5 shows that lower 𝐽𝑐 produce lower screening currents and 
lower 𝐵𝑆𝐶.

Figure 5. a) SCIF hysteresis loop for the cases 𝑛 = 25, 𝐽𝑐0𝑛 = [1.5, 1.0, 0.5, 0.25] ∗
𝐽𝑐0. b) Maximum values of the cases in the left.


The 
second 
batch 
of 
simulations 
considers
𝐽𝑐0 = 4.5 × 1010Am-2
and
𝑛 =

[100, 25, 10, 5], including thereby the reference case. The SCIF hysteresis loops corresponding to 
this second batch are presented in figure 6 a). The corresponding maximum values are presented in 
figure 6 b). 
It can be seen that, compared to the impact of the 𝐽𝑐0, the n has a tendency to round the extremities
of the hysteresis loops when the magnetic field changes direction. Similarly to the previous batch, as 
the n is decreased, the current distribution tends to be more uniform and the hysteresis loops flattens.
When n and 𝐽𝑐0 are decreased, the currents are induced in a larger portion of the HTS layers and the 
pancakes can saturate at a lower transport current.

Figure 6. a) SCIF hysteresis loop for the cases 𝐽𝑐0 = 4.5 × 1010A. m2, 𝑛 =
[100, 25, 10, 5]. b) Maximum values of the cases in the left.

5. Field drift

Once the coil is charged and the transport current is fixed, the flux creep inside the HTS material 
causes the relaxation of the screening current and the SCIF, which in turn produces a drift in the 
central field. In this section, the effect of 𝐽𝑐 and 𝑛 on central field drift is investigated. As in the 
previous section, the two batches of simulations are considered anew. However, the transport current 
is a single ramp that reaches a maximum value equal to 26.5 A at 𝑡 = 1 h, followed by a plateau that 
extends for 30 h to observe the field drift. 


Figure 7. Central field drift for the different cases, the plot starts at 𝑡 = 1 h once 
the maximum current is reached.

Figure 7 shows the estimated 𝐵𝑠𝑖𝑚 for the tested conditions. The x-axis has a logarithmic scale which 
starts at 𝑡 = 1 h and extends to 30 h. The larger drifts occur during the first hours, and a linear growth 
with logarithmic time is observed during the last hours. The case {𝐽𝑐0, 𝑛 = 10} (orange dashed line) 
exhibits the larger drift, from 0.352 T to 0.36 T ( 2.2% ). The case {1.5 ∗ 𝐽𝑐0, 𝑛 = 25} and { 𝐽𝑐0, 𝑛 =
25} (blue and black solid lines) have the same 1.5% drift. The cases represented by the red solid, 
cyan solid and black dashed lines have a small drift because they are close to the nominal 𝐵𝑛 =
0.36 𝑇, and as can be seen in figure 4 d) the 𝐽 is almost uniform. The case {𝐽𝑐0, 𝑛 = 100} green 
dashed line has a small 0.4% drift, even when it is away from 𝐵𝑛. The conclusion drawn from these 
simulations is that the size of the drift is a function of the 𝑛 index, the smaller 𝑛, the larger the drift. 
The case with 𝑛 = 100 is closer to the critical state where no flux creep is modeled.

6. Striation and current sweep reversal

There are some remedies for the SCIF and the field drift. For example, the SCIF can be reduced by 
applying an external AC magnetic field forcing the “vortex shaking effect” [24]. A method to reduce 
the field drift is by lowering the temperature once the operating current is reached, then the critical 
current is increased and the flux creep diminishes [2]. In this section, two of the common remedies 
are explored for the SCIF and the field drift problems: i) the striation of the HTS material, and ii) the 
current sweep. The striation process is the subdivision of the tapes into narrow strips, this process is 
known to reduce the SCIF [3]. The current sweep reversal is the overshooting of the transport current, 
this process reduces the field drift [2, 22]
In order to implement the striation in the simulations, the homogeneous bulks, representing the 
pancakes, are subdivided into narrow pancakes. The boundary conditions for T are modified to force 
that each new strip forming the narrow pancakes transport a fraction of the original transport current.
These conditions correspond to having the strips perfectly uncoupled. The T-A homogenous model
for the striation case was simulated considering the triangular shape transport current and the 
reference values used in section 4 and found in Table 2. Figure 8 shows the normalized current density 
(𝐽𝑛) at 𝑡 = 1 h for the tapes with no striation, taken as a reference case, and for the cases of tapes 
subdivided into 2, 4 and 8 strips. 


Figure 8. Normalized current density (𝐽𝑛) at peak current, for the cases with and without 
striations.

The striation process causes the formation of current fronts in each strip, and the penetration of the 
magnetic field from the extremities of the narrow strips produce the overall effect of the reduction of 
the SCIF. The SCIF hysteresis loops corresponding to the cases with striations are presented in figure 
9 a). The maximum values for 𝐵𝑆𝐶 are presented in figure 9 b).

Figure 9. a) SCIF hysteresis loop for the cases with striations. b) Maximum values 
of the cases in the left. 

The ramp transport current used in section 5 is modified to implemented the current sweep reversal, 
the ramp rate is increased, current is overshot and subsequently reduced to reach 26.5 A at 𝑡 = 1 h. 
Three simulations were performed, one with 5%, 10% and 20% overshoots. These ramps are shown 
in figure. The reduction of the current after the overshoot produces the appearance of new current 
fronts at the extremities of the tapes, thus the flux creep and the field drift are reduced.
Figure 10 shows the estimated 𝐵𝑠𝑖𝑚 for the two overshot ramps and the ramp without overshoot. The 
case with 5% overshoot reduces the drift just during the first minutes. The case with 10% overshoot 
successfully “eliminates” the drift during the first hours, but around 𝑡 = 5.5 h the drift starts again
due to a relaxation of the screening current according to the proposed model. Originally the 
reappearance of the drift was the motivation to test the 20% overshoot case. It is possible to appreciate 
that the current sweep reversal with 20% overshoot successfully eliminates the field drift, but during 
the first minutes a small negative field drift can be appreciated. These results demonstrate that the 1% 
overshoot reported in [2, 25] is insufficient for our proposed coil and the choice of the overshoot 
should be determined on a coil basis to address effectively the temporal drift of the central magnetic 
field. From the lines in figure 10, we can also conclude that the current sweep reversal is an 
appropriate method to reduce the SCIF.


Figure 10. a) Ramps with overshoot. b) Estimated central field for the ramps with and without 
overshoot. The field drift is partially eliminated with 5% and 10% overshoot, and successfully 
“eliminated” with a 20% overshoot.

The computer used to run the simulations is a desktop computer (6 cores, Intel (R) Xeon(R) ES-2630, 
2.2 GHz, 64 GB RAM). The time steps taken by the solver were adjusted to optimize the computation 
time, this is important because the simulated lapse in the simulations conducted to study the field drift 
is 3 h, but the time steps can be enlarged when the current is constant. The average computation time 
required to complete the simulations is 1 h, for both triangular and ramp transport currents. Both 
simulated lapses, 6 h and 30 h, are larger than the 1 h computation time, therefore, the T-A
homogeneous models, in the following case studies, could have been performed in real-time during 
the ramping of the magnet.

7. Conclusions

The penetration of the magnetic field into the HTS tapes causes screening currents. The coils wound 
with HTS tapes face two major problems caused by the screening current, the SCIF and the field drift. 
These problems, amongst others, must be understood and solved to pave the way for the use of HTS 
coils in applications like NMR, MRI, high field magnets, etc.
The effects of 𝐽𝑐 and 𝑛 in both problems (SCIF and field drift) were studied by means of several 
numerical simulations. It was demonstrated that higher 𝐽𝑐 values cause higher screening current, while 
higher 𝑛 values hinder the relaxation of such screening current. The main conclusion is that the 
reduction of both quantities 𝐽𝑐 and 𝑛 causes the attenuation of the mentioned problems but they go 
against the use of high performant HTS tape technologies for which greater critical currents at larger 
n are sought to the generation of higher magnetic field. Fortunately, the striation of the HTS tapes 
and the current sweep reversal are effective methods to mitigate the SCIF and the field drift. However, 
simulations showed that the field drift could reappear for current sweep reversal with 5 and 10% 
overshoot. This effect could be avoided if the overshoot is increased to 20%. It is likely that the 
magnitude of the overshoot will depend on the coil configuration as well as the ramping cycle and 
studies should be performed for each magnet for different operating cycles. The efficiency of the T-
A homogenous models was exploited in this paper to run dozens of simulations allowing studying the 
behavior of the magnet during its operation. It should be mentioned that the use of other modeling 
strategies such as the ones based on the H formulation would have required computation times in the 
order of months to obtain the same conclusion.


References 

[1] 
Melhem Z 2012 High temperature superconductors (HTS) for energy applications (Cambridge, 
U.K.: Woodhead Publishing).

[2]
Maeda, H. and Yanagisawa, Y. (2014). Recent Developments in High-Temperature 
Superconducting 
Magnet 
Technology 
(Review). IEEE 
Transactions 
on
Applied 

Superconductivity, 24(3), pp.1-12.

[3]
Amemiya, N. and Akachi, K. (2008). Magnetic field generated by shielding current in high Tc 
superconducting coils for NMR magnets. Superconductor Science and Technology, 21(9), 
p.095001.

[4]
Yanagisawa, Y., Kominato, Y., Nakagome, H., Hu, R., Takematsu, T., Takao, T., Uglietti, D., 
Kiyoshi, T., Takahashi, M. and Maeda, H. (2011). Magnitude of the Screening Field for YBCO 
Coils. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 21(3), pp.1640-1643.

[5]
Ueda, H., Fukuda, M., Hatanaka, K., Tao Wang, Ishiyama, A. and Noguchi, S. (2013). Spatial 
and Temporal Behavior of Magnetic Field Distribution Due to Shielding Current in HTS Coil 
for Cyclotron Application. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 23(3), 
pp.4100805-4100805.

[6]
Weijers, H., Trociewitz, U., Markiewicz, W., Jiang, J., Myers, D., Hellstrom, E., Xu, A., 
Jaroszynski, J., Noyes, P., Viouchkov, Y. and Larbalestier, D. (2010). High Field Magnets 
With HTS Conductors. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 20(3), pp.576-582.

[7]
Benkel, T., Miyoshi, Y., Escamez, G., Gonzales, D., Chaud, X., Badel, A. and Tixador, P. 
(2016). REBCO Performance at High Field With Low Incident Angle and Preliminary Tests 
for a 10-T Insert. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 26(3), pp.1-5.

[8]
Benkel, T., Richel, N., Badel, A., Chaud, X., Lecrevisse, T., Borgnolutti, F., Fazilleau, P., 
Takahashi, K., Awaji, S. and Tixador, P. (2017). Preliminary Tests and Margin Estimate for a 
REBCO Insulated 10 T Insert Under High Magnetic Field. IEEE Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity, 27(4), pp.1-5.

[9]
Weijers, H., Markiewicz, W., Gavrilin, A., Voran, A., Viouchkov, Y., Gundlach, S., Noyes, P., 
Abraimov, D., Bai, H., Hannahs, S. and Murphy, T. (2016). Progress in the Development and 
Construction of a 32-T Superconducting Magnet. IEEE Transactions on Applied 
Superconductivity, 26(4), pp.1-7.

[10]
Berrospe-Juarez, E., Zermeno, V., Trillaud, F., Gavrilin, A., Grilli, F., Abraimov, D., Hilton, 
D. and Weijers, H. (2018). Estimation of Losses in the (RE)BCO Two-Coil Insert of the 
NHMFL 32 T All-Superconducting Magnet. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 
28(3), pp.1-5.

[11]
Yanagisawa, Y., Xu, Y., Jin, X., Nakagome, H. and Maeda, H. (2015). Reduction of Screening 
Current-Induced Magnetic Field of REBCO Coils by the Use of Multi-Filamentary 
Tapes. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 25(3), pp.1-5.

[12]
Brambilla, R., Grilli, F. and Martini, L. (2006). Development of an edge-element model for 
AC loss computation of high-temperature superconductors. Superconductor Science and 
Technology, 20(1), pp.16-24.

[13]
Zermeno, V., Abrahamsen, A., Mijatovic, N., Jensen, B. and Sørensen, M. (2013). Calculation 
of alternating current losses in stacks and coils made of second generation high temperature 
superconducting tapes for large scale applications. Journal of Applied Physics, 114(17), 
p.173901.

[14]
Quéval, L., Zermeño, V. and Grilli, F. (2016). Numerical models for ac loss calculation in 
large-scale applications of HTS coated conductors. Superconductor Science and Technology, 
29(2), p.024007.


[15]
Berrospe-Juarez, E., Zermeño, V., Trillaud, F. and Grilli, F. (2018). Iterative multi-scale 
method for estimation of hysteresis losses and current density in large-scale HTS 
systems. Superconductor Science and Technology, 31(9), p.095002.

[16]
Zhang, H., Zhang, M. and Yuan, W. (2016). An efficient 3D finite element method model 
based on the T–A formulation for superconducting coated conductors. Superconductor Science 
and Technology, 30(2), p.024005.

[17]
Liang, F., Venuturumilli, S., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Kvitkovic, J., Pamidi, S., Wang, Y. and 
Yuan, W. (2017). A finite element model for simulating second generation high temperature 
superconducting coils/stacks with large number of turns. Journal of Applied Physics, 122(4), 
p.043903.

[18]
Berrospe-Juarez, E., Zermeño, V., Trillaud, F. and Grilli, F. (2019). Real-time simulation of 
large-scale HTS systems: multi-scale and homogeneous models using the T–A 
formulation. Superconductor Science and Technology, 32(6), p.065003.

[19]
Wang, M., Li, Z., Sheng, J., Dong, F., Zhong, L., Duan, X., Song, M., Hong, Z. and Jin, Z. 
(2019). Study on the Screening Current Induced Field of a Novel Narrow HTS Tape with 1 
mm Width. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 29(5), pp.1-5.

[20]
Shin, H., Kim, K., Dizon, J., Kim, T., Ko, R. and Oh, S. (2005). The strain effect on critical 
current in YBCO coated conductors with different stabilizing layers. Superconductor Science 
and Technology, 18(12), pp.S364-S368.

[21]
Sass, F., Sotelo, G., Junior, R. and Sirois, F. (2015). H-formulation for simulating levitation 
forces acting on HTS bulks and stacks of 2G coated conductors. Superconductor Science and 
Technology, 28(12), p.125012.

[22]
Uglietti, D., Yanagisawa, Y., Maeda, H. and Kiyoshi, T. (2010). Measurements of magnetic 
field induced by screening currents in YBCO solenoid coils. Superconductor Science and 
Technology, 23(11), p.115002.

[23]
Yanagisawa, Y., Nakagome, H., Uglietti, D., Kiyoshi, T., Ruixin Hu, Takematsu, T., Takao, 
T., Takahashi, M. and Maeda, H. (2010). Effect of YBCO-Coil Shape on the Screening 
Current-Induced Magnetic Field Intensity. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity, 
20(3), pp.744-747.

[24]
Kim, K., Song, J., Yang, D., Kim, Y., Kim, T., Kim, S., Park, M. and Lee, H. (2016). Study on 
elimination of screening-current-induced field in pancake-type non-insulated HTS 
coil. Superconductor Science and Technology, 29(3), p.035009.

[25]
Zhang, M., Yuan, W., Hilton, D., Canassy, M. and Trociewitz, U. (2014). Study of second-
generation 
high-temperature 
superconducting 
magnets: 
the 
self-field 
screening 

effect. Superconductor Science and Technology, 27(9), p.095010.


