Dynamic characterization of an alkali-ion battery as a source for laser-cooled atoms

J. P. McGilligan,1, 2 K. R. Moore,2 S. Kang,1, 2 R. Mott,3 A. Mis,3 C. Roper,3 E. A. Donley,2 and J. Kitching2

1University of Colorado, Department of Physics, Boulder, Colorado, 80309, USA
2National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder Colorado, 80305, USA∗

3HRL Laboratories, LLC; Malibu, California, 90265, USA
(Dated: November 27, 2024)

We investigate a solid-state, reversible, alkali-ion battery (AIB) capable of regulating the density
of alkali atoms in a vacuum system used for the production of laser-cooled atoms. The cold-atom
sample can be used with in-vacuum chronoamperometry as a diagnostic for the voltage-controlled
electrochemical reaction that sources or sinks alkali atoms into the vapor. In a combined reaction-
diffusion-limited regime, we show that the number of laser-cooled atoms in a magneto-optical trap
can be increased both by initially loading the AIB from the vapor for longer, and by using higher
voltages across the AIB when atoms are subsequently sourced back into the vapor.
The time
constants associated with the change in atom number in response to a change in AIB voltage
are in the range of 0.5 s - 40 s. The AIB alkali reservoir is demonstrated to survive oxidization
during atmospheric exposure, simplifying reservoir loading prior to vacuum implementation as a
replacement for traditional resistively-heated dispensers.
The AIB capabilities may provide an
improved atom number stability in next-generation atomic clocks and sensors, while also facilitating
fast loading and increased interrogation times.

INTRODUCTION

Since the first demonstration of laser cooling, ensem-
bles of laser-cooled neutral atoms have been implemented
in a wide variety of precision instruments due to the long
interrogation times that can be achieved without interac-
tion with the environment. These properties are notably
utilized in state-of-the-art metrological experiments, such
as atom interferometers and atomic clocks [1–5].
The
improved performance of these cold atom measurements
compared to their thermal counterparts has led to sig-
nificant efforts to miniaturize the laser cooling apparatus
into a field-deployable device [6–8].
Among the many challenges associated with moving
cold atom instrumentation from the laboratory to the
field is the stabilization of the alkali atom density. As the
temperature of the environment changes, so too does the
density of the alkali vapor from which the cold atom sam-
ple is loaded. The absence of an alkali density regulator
will ultimately degrade the long-term magneto-optical
trap (MOT) number stability, and can prevent a MOT
from forming altogether for large enough deviations from
room temperature.
Techniques such as light-induced-
atomic-desorption (LIAD) have demonstrated the ability
to modulate and control the background alkali density
[9, 10], however such methods have not yet demonstrated
fast desorption times, nor have they been miniaturized to
facilitate portability and micro-fabrication [11].
Previously, we demonstrated stabilization of the al-
kali density in a vapor cell with a micro-fabricated, re-
versible, in-vacuum electrolytic device, and showed that
alkali atoms sourced from such a device could be laser
cooled and trapped in a MOT [11, 12]. In this paper we
evaluate the performance of the AIB by using the MOT
as an in-situ diagnostic tool to determine the character-

istics of the electrochemical processes. We show that the
Rb emission into the vapor depends on both the initial
state-of-charge within the AIB and the applied voltage
during sourcing. In doing so, we establish how the cold
atom number and loading time depend on the operating
parameters of the AIB and elucidate some of the underly-
ing electrochemistry that determines the performance of
the battery as a source for laser-cooled atomic ensembles.

EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP

The experimental setup is illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). We
create a standard six-beam MOT close to the AIB, Fig. 1
(b), with light from a single distributed-Bragg-reflector
(DBR) laser, locked to address the 85Rb F = 3 → F ′ = 4
transition, while being frequency modulated at 2.9 GHz
to generate ≈10% sidebands for re-pumping. The light
is spatially filtered using an optical fiber and provides
a total incident power of 35 mW, red-detuned by 2Γ,
where Γ is the natural linewidth of the transition, and
a 1/e2 diameter of 5 mm.
The vacuum system inside
the 10 mm × 10 mm × 70 mm cell is maintained with a
2 L/s ion pump, and Rb can be introduced with standard
heated alkali dispensers (Rb2MoO4/AlZr). The cell walls
are coated in octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) to minimize
alkali adsorption.
The internal body of the AIB houses a layer of ion
conducting Rb-β”-alumina, sandwiched between upper
and lower electrodes. The upper electrode couples the
Rb-β”-alumina to the outer environment via an array
of electrode fingers that cover the upper surface.
The
lower electrode is housed within a graphite alkali reser-
voir, which stores neutral alkali atoms. The alkali va-
por density is enhanced when voltage is applied across
the electrodes [13, 14].
The bidirectional functionality

arXiv:1908.06898v1  [physics.atom-ph]  19 Aug 2019


2

FIG. 1. (a) An illustration of the magneto-optical trap be-
ing sourced from the AIB. (b) A cut-through of the AIB is
provided to reveal the internal composition.

to source/sink alkali atoms from the vapor is controlled
by the voltage applied across the AIB and its tempera-
ture. Excluding the upper electrodes and exposed Rb-β”-
alumina between top electrode features, the entire AIB
surface is insulated and coated in a vacuum epoxy.
MOT image acquisition was carried out with fluo-
rescence imaging on a CCD camera.
The background
Rb level was actively measured using absorption spec-
troscopy and subtracted from the fluorescence data to
reduce the effect of the changing background Rb density
levels.

RESULTS

The typical response of the measured MOT atom-
number N and AIB current I to a change in the ap-
plied voltage polarity V is illustrated in Fig. 2. The AIB
is first loaded with alkali atoms through the application
of a negative voltage for some duration of time before
t = 0 s in the presence of an alkali vapor in the cell pro-
vided by a standard heated alkali dispenser in the hours
before the experiment. The MOT light is turned on and
a small number of laser-cooled atoms appears. As a posi-
tive voltage step is applied at t = 14 s, the number of cold
atoms in the MOT is observed to increase and reaches
steady-state with a time constant τS between 0.5 s and
40 s. We note that this is not the typical MOT loading
curve observed in many cold atom experiments as a re-
sult of switching on a magnetic field gradient, described

in Ref. [16], but instead reflects changes in the alkali den-
sity induced by the AIB. This increase in the number of
cold atoms is associated with a sharp increase in the de-
vice current. When the polarity of the applied voltage is
reversed at t = 58 s, the cold atom number decays to near
the detection noise floor with time constant τL between
0.5 s and 10 s, again consistent with [15]. If instead the
voltage is set to zero at t = 58 s, a much slower decay of
the atom number is observed, with decay time constant
τD ≈100 s.
The behaviour shown in Fig. 2 can be explained as fol-
lows. When the positive voltage is applied, the neutral
Rb at the interface of the lower electrode and graphite
is ionized and conducted into the Rb-β”-alumina elec-
trolyte as a result of the electric field created by the
applied voltage. Rb+ ions recombine with electrons at
the interface between the upper electrodes and Rb-β”-
alumina, producing a large initial current while neutral
Rb metal accumulates on the surface.
As the electro-
chemical process depletes the Rb within the graphite, a
Rb concentration gradient forms within the graphite re-
ducing the Rb density near the electrode and limiting the
rate of the electrochemical process by the diffusion rate
of the remaining neutral Rb out of the graphitic reser-
voir [17, 18]. The measured time-dependent current is
observed in Fig. 2 (c) to decay with a 1/
√

t dependence.
In these measurements, only the flow of Faradaic current
is analyzed [18, 19].
By integrating the current, the total charge Q that
has flowed between the upper and lower electrodes can
be found. This charge represents the number of ions con-
ducted through the Rb-β”-alumina, as permitted by elec-
trochemical reactions at the lower and upper electrodes.
Following the electrochemical process, the neutral Rb
metal likely diffuses across the upper AIB surface to form
a metallic film, and is evaporated into the vacuum.
It is interesting to note that the response of the MOT
atom number at t = 14 s is somewhat slower that the cor-
responding decay of the AIB current. We attribute this
difference to the fact that in order for the alkali vapor
density (and hence MOT atom number) to increase, the
alkali metal likely diffuses on the AIB surface to form a
film and subsequently evaporates into the vacuum cham-
ber. The current flow through the AIB does not depend
on these processes and if they take longer than the elec-
trochemical processes, changes in the atomic vapor (and
hence MOT atom number) would be expected to occur
more slowly.
At t = 58 s, the polarity of the voltage is reversed
and the device switches from being a source of alkali
atoms to the vapor to being a sink from the vapor. Un-
der these conditions, vapor-phase Rb atoms that strike
the upper electrodes are ionized and flow through the
Rb-β”-alumina to the reservoir due to the applied elec-
tric field. The Rb+ ions undergo reduction at the lower
electrode-graphite interface, and diffuse into the reservoir


3

FIG. 2. (a) The number of laser-cooled atoms in the MOT,
(b) the applied voltage, and (c) the corresponding current
through the solid-state battery, as a function of time.
At
t = 14 s, a positive voltage is applied to the battery causing
current to flow and leading to an increase in the number of
cold atoms with a time constant τS. At t = 58 s, the polarity
of the applied voltage is reversed, leading to a reverse current
and a decrease in the number of cold atoms with time constant
τL. If instead, the voltage is set to zero (red lines), the atom
number decreases with the time constant τD.

as neutral Rb until a source voltage is applied. If instead
of sinking to the reservoir, the source voltage is simply
turned off, the atom number decays at a much slower rate
τD. We speculate that this slower decay results from a
slow decrease of the metallic Rb coverage on the AIB
surface due to removal of Rb from the vapor (and hence
AIB surface) by the ion pump. This reduces the rate at
which alkali atoms vaporize from the surface and, com-
bined with a constant pumping rate from the ion pump,
results in a lower overall Rb density in the vapor.

AIB loading time

The number of atoms in the MOT depends on the time
over which atoms were initially loaded into the AIB, tL.
To ensure a repeatable initial state of the experiment,
a positive voltage was applied across the AIB to de-
plete any previously stored Rb from the reservoir. Prior
to the set of AIB loading time measurements, the al-
kali dispenser was heated to temporarily increase the Rb
pressure in the vacuum chamber. For each loading time

FIG. 3. Device performance as a function of the time during
which the device loads atoms from the vapor. (a) The voltage
applied across the device as a function of time showing five
experimental cycles of loading at -30 V followed by sourcing
at + 30 V. The time during which the device loads atoms
at -30 V is increased with each subsequent cycle.
(b) The
number of cold atoms in the MOT increases for longer loading
times. (c) The peak atom number, (d) the time the MOT
number remains at steady-state, (e) charge transferred across
the AIB (measured by integrating the current pulse), and (f)
the time constant for the MOT atom number to reach steady-
state after application of the sourcing voltage, τS. Black lines
represent power law fits to the data.

tested, Rb was loaded into the AIB by applying -30 V to
the AIB electrodes for a variable time. Following loading,
the voltage was briefly turned off, then the polarity was
reversed and atoms were sourced from the AIB at 30 V
while monitoring the fluorescence from the MOT. The
applied voltage as a function of time and the correspond-
ing number of atoms detected in the MOT are shown in


4

Fig. 3 (a) and (b). Fig. 3 (c) shows that the peak atom
number, NP eak, measured for a constant source voltage,
increases with tL between 10 s to 1000 s. We note that
for the larger loading times there is indication that the
reservoir concentration has saturated.
The total time
the atom number remains at steady-state tSt, defined by
the time taken for the peak atom number to decrease by
25%, was seen to be consistent with a √tL dependence,
as shown in Fig. 3 (d), where the black line is a power law
fit. The total charge between the electrodes, determined
by integrating the area under the current during the first
50 s of sourcing, was observed to increase as √tL over this
same increase in loading time, as illustrated in Fig. 3 (e).
Fig. 3 (f) illustrates that the time for the MOT number
to reach steady-state, τS, is also consistent with a √tL
function of the loading time.
Longer loading times at the same loading voltage
should result in a larger number of neutral Rb atoms en-
tering the device, and hence a higher density of Rb within
the reservoir. Such an increased Rb content produces a
larger total charge during sourcing under the same sourc-
ing voltage, leading to the formation of a larger number
of Rb metal atoms on the surface and greater device sur-
face coverage. This results in an increased evaporation
rate and larger Rb vapor density and MOT number. The
reason that τS increases with AIB loading time requires
further investigation, but is possibly due to the atoms
penetrating deeper within the reservoir. The measured
increase of the sourced atom number and charge transfer
indicates the peak atom number for a constant applied
voltage is dictated by the bulk concentration within the
reservoir.
We found that Rb could be stored within the AIB
reservoir during exposure to atmosphere. Rb was loaded
into the AIB from a background alkali density before ex-
posure to atmosphere for one hour. Following this ex-
posure, the vacuum was reestablished below 10−8 mbar
in the chamber and when a sourcing voltage was applied
to the AIB, the MOT could be loaded, demonstrating
the ability to store pure metallic Rb in oxygen and wa-
ter vapor containing atmosphere without complete Rb
oxidation.

AIB sourcing voltage

The MOT atom number and loading time depended
on the applied sourcing voltage for constant loading con-
ditions. The voltage across the AIB was set to -30 V to
load Rb from the vacuum for 30 minutes. Subsequently,
positive voltage Vs was applied as illustrated in Fig. 4
(a), resulting in the formation of a MOT with a steady-
state number NSt and a time constant τS, as shown in
Fig. 4 (b).
The voltage was then set to 0 V and the
background alkali density was allowed to fall back to its
initial level. This procedure was repeated for five volt-

FIG. 4. Device performance as a function of the steady-state
source voltage. (a): The raw time domain data of the applied
voltage. (b): The raw time domain data of the atom number
sourcing.
(c): The steady-state current.
(d): The steady-
state MOT number.
(e): The charge during the first 50 s
sourcing. (f): The sourcing time constant, τS. Black lines
indicate the best fit to the data with the functional forms
described in the text.

ages. For an electrochemical reaction contribution, the
current is expected to have an exponential dependence
on the applied voltage per the Butler-Volmer equation
[21]. An exponential relation between the applied volt-
age and measured steady-state current was observed from
this data set, illustrated in Fig. 4 (c). The exponential
relation indicates that when in the regime of an increas-
ing voltage, the AIB is not entirely diffusion-limited and
is instead in a regime where there is a significant contri-
bution from the electrochemical reaction process.


5

The steady-state atom numbers that were measured
following sourcing are plotted in Fig. 4 (d) as a function of
the AIB applied voltage, where the black line represents
the best power law fit. The results demonstrate a larger
number of sourced Rb for higher applied voltages and
higher currents. In the case of sourcing, we find the data
is consistent with NSt ∝ VS. Again, the MOT number is
demonstrated to be correlated with the Rb+ charge into
and out of the Rb-β”-alumina, illustrated in Fig. 4 (e),
where we see a an exponential increase in the charge over
the range of voltages from 10 V to 100 V.
The time constant τS, shown in Fig. 4 (f), decreases
with 1/√VS, as highlighted by the black line power law
fit.
The faster time constant would be expected for a
faster electrochemical recombination process generated
by the higher potential at larger voltages. However, the
long time constants observed here may be the result of
a secondary process that increases τS. The cause of this
is not entirely known, but could possibly be caused by
Rb diffusion on the top surface of the device prior to
evaporation. In this scenario, the increased charge is due
to the larger applied voltage during sourcing providing
an increased potential to aid a faster electrochemical re-
combination rate at the surface. However, we note that
although the total source time is less than the total load
time, there may be an effect of reservoir depletion visible
towards the end of the experiment, highlighted by the
decreasing atom number from steady-state at t = 5000 s
in Fig. 4 (b).

AIB loading voltage

If the voltage across the AIB is reversed while trapped
atoms are present, the atom number in the MOT de-
cays with the time constant τL, as shown in Fig. 5 (a).
We measure this time constant as a function of the ap-
plied loading voltage by first sourcing the AIB at 30 V
until the atom number reached steady-state. The polar-
ity of the applied voltage was reversed, permitting mea-
surement of τL and the current drawn by the device as
the AIB pumped away the alkali vapor in the chamber.
This procedure was carried out for a number of load-
ing voltages, each time ensuring that the starting back-
ground density and pressure were constant, as well as the
sourcing voltage and steady-state MOT number. Three
examples of raw results of this data set are plotted in
Fig. 5 (a), with the full data sets of τL as a function of
voltage shown in Fig. 5 (b), (c), (d) and (e). As would
be expected from the reaction rate contribution during
sourcing, the steady-state loading current is also expo-
nential with the applied voltage, Fig. 5 (b), indicating
both loading and sourcing have a contribution from an
electrochemical reaction rate. While the change in atom
number ∆N is nominally independent of the loading volt-
age due to the similar initial conditions of each experi-

FIG. 5. The measured parameters for the steady state AIB
loading current. (a): The raw time domain data of the atom
number during loading with -10 V, -30 V, and -100 V in red,
gray, and black respectively. (b): The steady-state current.
(c): The change in MOT number during loading. (d): The
charge transfer during the first 10 s of loading.
(e): The
loading time constant, τL. Black lines indicate the best fit to
the data with the functional forms described in the text.

ment, small variation occurred from shot to shot due to
slowly varying experimental parameters as a result of en-
vironmental fluctuations in the laboratory. We find that
the AIB charge transferred during the first 10 s of loading
produces a 47 % fluctuation from the mean, relating to a
34 % fluctuation with the measured change in cold-atom
number, as shown in Fig. 5 (c) and (d). A correlation
coefficient of 0.82, along with the relative insensitivity of
the charge transfer to the applied loading voltage, indi-
cates that the number of Rb+ ions that sink in and out
of the Rb-β”-alumina in a given time are proportional to
the MOT and background Rb density level present dur-
ing loading. As the loading voltage is increased, a faster
electrochemical reaction process is demonstrated for the
AIB, consistent with a τL ∝ V −1.5
L
as shown in Fig. 5


6

(e), where the black line is a best power law fit.
For
the largest loading voltages, τL appears to saturate with
a minimum of τL = 540 ms, while the applied voltage
continues to increase. This indicates that the process is
limited by a time constant prior to the electrochemical
disassociation, such as the diffusion of metal Rb upon
the AIB upper surface. At the highest loading voltages
of -100 V, we were able to sink Rb over 200 times faster
than τD = 130 s in Fig. 2 (a), taken with zero applied
loading voltage. The short time constant for decreasing
the background alkali density could enable rapid loading
of a MOT at high background alkali density, followed by
long trap lifetimes after subsequent rapid removal of the
vapor by the AIB.

CONCLUSION

Alkali ion batteries can be used to store, source and
sink alkali atoms in instruments based on laser-cooled
atomic ensembles. We have demonstrated here that the
density of an alkali vapor, and hence the number of
atoms in a magneto-optical trap can be controlled by the
conditions over which the battery is operated. Increas-
ing the time over which alkali atoms are initially loaded
into the AIB results in larger MOT numbers upon sub-
sequent sourcing to the vapor, but also implies longer
sourcing time constants. Increasing the sourcing voltage
also leads to a larger number of trapped atoms, but with
shorter time constants. By combining these parameters
it is likely that a long loading time and subsequent large
source voltage could provide the best of both worlds, with
a large atom number and simultaneous fast time con-
stant. Finally, depletion of atoms from the vapor and
MOT depends strongly on the loading voltage and can
be made as low as 540 ms under optimal conditions with
the current device design. The reversible functionality
demonstrated by the device makes an ideal candidate for
stabilizing the MOT number in a fluctuating background
density or temperature environment [22]. In addition, the
AIB is able to preserve the alkali atoms stored in it upon
exposure to air and is able to successfully source atoms
upon subsequent introduction into a suitable vacuum.
The results also allow us to elucidate some aspects of
the device operation. It appears that both electrochem-
ical reaction and diffusion within the device or on the
surface both contribute to the transfer of atoms between
the vapor and reservoir. Changes in electrode design may
therefore improve the overall device time constants by
enabling faster Rb transport on the device surface. It is
not yet clear what the capacity of the device to store Rb
is since only slight indications of saturation in the MOT
atom number were evident for the range of device param-
eters we explored. The ultimate capacity of the device
to store Rb will also be explored in future research.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This material is based upon work supported by the De-
fense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and
Space and Naval Warfare Systems Center Pacific (SSC
Pacific) (Contract No. N66001-15-C-4027). J.P.M grate-
fully acknowledges support from the English Speaking
Union and Lindemann Fellowship. The authors acknowl-
edge DARPA program manager Robert Lutwak as well
as Logan Sorenson, Matthew Rakher, Jason Graetz, John
Vajo, Adam Gross, and Danny Kim of HRL Laborato-
ries, LLC for useful discussions. We further acknowledge
Florian Herrault, Geovanni Candia, Stephen Lam, Tracy
Boden, Margie Cline, Ryan Freeman, and Lian-Xin Coco
Huang for assistance with device fabrication. We thank
Vincent Maurice and Yun-Jhih Chen for their comments
on the manuscript.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

JPM, KRM and SK conceived and carried out the ex-
periments, supervised by JK and EAD. JPM wrote the
manuscript with critical input from KRM, JK, EAD, and
CR. CR conceived and designed the alkali-ion battery.
RM, AM, and CR fabricated the alkali-ion battery. All
authors reviewed the manuscript.

ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

The authors declare they have no competing interests.
Approved for Public Release, Distribution Unlimited.

∗ james.mcgilligan@nist.gov

[1] A. D. Ludlow, and J. Ye, “Progress on the optical lattice
clock” Competes Rendus Physique 16 499-505 (2015)

[2] M. Takamoto, F. L. Hong, R. Higashi, and H. Katori,
“An optical lattice clock” Nature 435 321-324 (2005)

[3] A. Arvanitaki, S. Dimopoulos, A. A. Geraci, J. Hogan,
and M. Kasevich, “Testing atom and neutron neutrality
with atom interferometry” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100 120407
(2008)

[4] A. G. Rosi, F. Sorrentino, L. Cacciapuoti, M. Prevedelli,
and G. M. Tino, “Precision measurement of the New-
tonian gravitational constant using cold atoms” Nature
510 518-521 (2014)

[5] Y. Zhai, C. H. Carson, V. A. Henderson, P. F. Griffin,
E. Riis, and A. S. Arnold, “Talbot-enhanced, maximum-
visibility imaging of condensate interference” Optica 5
80-85 (2018)

[6] J. A. Rushton, M. Aldous, and M. D. Himsworth, “Con-
tributed Review:
The feasability of a fully miniatur-
ized magneto-optical trap for portable ultracold quantum
technology” Rev. Sci. Rep. 85, 121501 (2014).


7

[7] A. T. Dellis, M. T. Hummon, S. Kang, E. A. Donley,
and J. E. Kitching, “Chip-scale MOT for microsystems
technology” Frontiers in Optics (2016).

[8] J. P. McGilligan, P. F. Griffin, R. Elvin, S. J. Ingleby,
E. Riis, and A. S. Arnold, “Grating Chips for Quantum
Technologies” Scientific Reports 7, 384 (2017).

[9] L. Torralbo-Campo, G. D. Bruce, G. Smirne, and D. Cas-
settari, “Light-induced atomic desorption in a compact
system for ultracold atoms” Scientific Reports 5, 14729
(2015).

[10] T. Karaulanov, M. T. Graf, D. English, S. M. Rochester,
Y. J. Rosen, K. Tsigutkin, D. Budker, E. B. Alexan-
drov, M. V. Balabas, D. F. J. Kimball, F. A. Narducci,
S. Pustelny, and V. V. Yashchuk, “Controlling atomic
vapor density in paraffin-coated cells using light-induced
atomic desorption” Phys. Rev. A 79, 012902 (2009).

[11] S. Kang, R. P. Mott, K. A. Gilmore, L. D. Sorenson,
M. T. Rakher, E. A. Donley, J. E. Kitching, and C. S.
Roper, “A Low-Power, Reversible Alkali Atom Source”
Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 244101 (2017).

[12] S. Kang, R. P. Mott, A. Mis, C. S. Roper, E. A. Donley,
and J. E. Kitching, “Active stabilization of alkali-atom
vapor density with a solid-state electrochemical alkali-
atom source” Opt. Express 26, 3696-3701 (2018).

[13] F. Gong, Y. Y. Jau, K. Jensen, and W. Happer, “Elec-
trolytic fabrication of atomic clock cells” Rev. Sci. In-

strum. 77 076101 (2006).

[14] J. J. Bernstein, S. Feller, A. Ramm, J. North, J. Mal-
donis, M. Mescher, W. Robbins, R. Stoner, and B. Tim-
mons, Solid State Ionics 198 47 (2011).

[15] S. Kang, K. R. Moore, J. P. McGilligan, R. P. Mott, A.
Mis, C. S. Roper, E. A. Donley, and J. E. Kitching, “A
magneto-optic trap using a reversible, solid-state alkali-
metal source” Opt. Lett. 44, 3002-3005 (2019).

[16] K. Lindquist, M. Stephens, and C. Wieman, “Experi-
mental and theoretical study of the vapor-cell Zeeman
optical trap” Phys. Rev. A 46, 7 (1992).

[17] D. A. C. Brownson, and C. E. Banks, “The Handbook of
Graphene Electrochemistry” Springer (2015).

[18] A. Molina, and J. Gonzalez, “Pulse Voltammetry in
Physical Electrochemistry and Electroanalysis: Theory
and Applications” Springer (2015).

[19] F. C. Anson, “Innovations in the study of adsorbed re-
actants by chronocoulometry” Anal. Chem 38 (1966).

[20] T. Enoki, M. Suzuki, and M. Endo, “Graphite Interca-
lation Compounds and Applications” Oxford University
Press (2003)

[21] A. J. Bard, and L. R. Faulkner, “Electrochemical Meth-
ods:
Fundamentals and Applications” Wiley, Second
Edition (2001)

[22] K. R. Moore, et. al., “Active stabilization of a magneto-
optical trap with an electro-chemical device” In Prep
(2019).


