1 of 28

MoS2 pixel arrays for real-time photoluminescence 

imaging of redox molecules

M. F. Reynolds1†, M. H. D. Guimarães1,2†, H. Gao3,4, K. Kang3,4, A. J. Cortese1, 

D. C. Ralph1,2, J. Park2,3,4, and P. L. McEuen1,2*

1 Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca – NY, USA
2 Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Cornell University, Ithaca – NY, USA
3 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca – NY, USA

4 Department of Chemistry, Institute for Molecular Engineering, and James Franck Institute, 

University of Chicago, Chicago – IL, USA

*Corresponding author: plm23@cornell.edu

† These authors contributed equally to this work

Abstract

Measuring the behavior of redox-active molecules in space and time is crucial for better 
understanding of chemical and biological systems and for the development of new 
technologies. Optical schemes are non-invasive, scalable and can be applied to many 
different systems, but usually have a slow response compared to electrical detection 
methods. Furthermore, many fluorescent molecules for redox detection degrade in 
brightness over long exposure times. Here we show that the photoluminescence of “pixel”
arrays of an atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) material, a monolayer of MoS2, can 
image spatial and temporal changes in redox molecule concentration in real time. Because 
of the strong dependence of MoS2 photoluminescence on doping and sensitivity to surface 
changes characteristic of 2D materials, changes in the local chemical potential 
significantly modulate the photoluminescence of MoS2, with a sensitivity of 0.9

mV /
Hz on a 5 µm by 5 µm pixel, corresponding to better than parts-per-hundred 

changes in redox molecule concentration down to nanomolar concentrations at 100 ms 
frame rates. The real-time imaging of electrochemical potentials with a fast response time 
provides a new strategy for visualizing chemical reactions and biomolecules with a 2D 
material screen.


2 of 28

MAIN TEXT

Introduction

Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2 are 2D semiconductors with a 
bandgap in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. They have received great 
interest since the discovery that a monolayer of MoS2 is a direct bandgap semiconductor 
with a reasonable photoluminescence (PL) efficiency (1, 2).
Since then, the PL of 

transition metal dichalcogenides has been studied extensively and shown to respond to 
electrostatic gating (3, 4), chemical doping (5, 6), changes in pH (7), and defects (8, 9).
However, only a few studies have exploited this sensitivity to use MoS2 PL as a chemical 
or biological sensor. Early work on biological sensors used ion intercalation schemes to 
optically measure cell viability (10, 11). Researchers have also studied charge transfer 
processes between MoS2 and a variety of electrolytes, observing charge transfer rates 
dependent on illumination intensity (12) and back-gate voltage (13).

One attractive application for TMDs which has not been previously demonstrated is the 
spatially resolved optical detection of redox molecules at the micron scale. Current 
approaches for spatially resolved redox molecule sensing include
arrays of 

microelectrodes (14, 15), altered CMOS camera detectors (16), ISFET arrays (17), and 
scanning electrochemical microscopy (18). These techniques demonstrate high-speed 
detection and resolution at the few micrometer level, but also require wires for read-out.
Optical detection methods such as scanned photocurrent (19), porous silicon (20), surface 
plasmon (21, 22) techniques and functionalized carbon nanotubes (23, 24) provide many 
advantages, but none of the techniques above combine fast response, good spatial 
resolution, no wires, and a simple experimental setup.

In this work, we show that MoS2 pixel arrays are a powerful new class of sensors for 
detecting redox-active molecules. Patterned arrays of MoS2 squares are used to measure 
changes in redox concentrations with micron-scale spatial resolution and at 10 millisecond 
temporal resolution. We can detect concentration changes on the order of few nM, on par 
with the best electrical microelectrode detectors. These MoS2 pixels can be deployed in a 
wide variety of environments, from optical fibers to microfluidic systems, making them an 
attractive redox sensing platform for numerous applications.

Results

The samples consist of photolithographically patterned MoS2 directly grown on fused 
silica substrates using metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) (25). We 
examine two different geometries: MoS2 “pixel arrays” (Fig 1A, left) consisting of small 
(2x2 or 5x5 m2) electrically floating squares, or MoS2 ionic-liquid gate transistors (Fig 
1A, right) with Ti/Au contacts. For most of the measurements reported here, the samples 
were 
placed 
in 
a
standard 
supporting
electrolyte 
solution 
consisting 
of

tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6) in acetonitrile. The redox couple 
ferrocene/ferrocenium was added as indicated. Similar results were obtained with other 
redox couples in aqueous environments. Details regarding the sample preparation process 
can be found in the Methods and Supplementary Information.

Figure 1B shows the PL of the MoS2 in a solution of Bu4NPF6 in acetonitrile. Both the 
pixels and the devices show bright photoluminescence. The observed internal quantum 
efficiency (IQE) of ~ 10-4 is comparable to other reports in the literature (1, 26). Fig 1D


3 of 28

shows the effect of the ferrocenium/ferrocene (Fc+/Fc) redox couple on the PL intensity
for different Fc+/Fc ratios at a fixed 1 mM total concentration. The PL increases 
dramatically with increasing concentration of ferrocenium. The Fc+ ions serve to extract 
electrons from the MoS2, as shown in Fig. 1C. This is consistent with the quenching of the 
PL in doped MoS2 observed previously as a function of a solid-state back gate voltage (3, 
4) when electrons are added to the conduction band. The devices thus operate as redox 
sensors, with orders of magnitude changes in PL seen when changing the Ox/Red ratio.

The mechanism can be understood by considering the chemical potential of the solution s
set by the ferrocene/ferrocenium ratio. This chemical potential is given by the Nernst 
equation:

0

[
]
ln
[
]

s
B

Fc
eE
k T
Fc


+


=
+





,
[1]

where kB is Boltzmann’s constant, T is the temperature, and E0 is the standard reduction 
potential. As described in the equation above, an increase in the ferrocenium/ferrocene 
ratio results on an increase in the liquid potential. This change in chemical potential is 
followed by the MoS2 Fermi level due to charge transfer between the MoS2 and the 
ferrocene/ferrocenium.
Thus, the shift in the chemical potential acts as an effective gate 

voltage on the MoS2 that changes the electron density, and therefore the PL. 

To demonstrate this quantitatively, we compare the response of the pixels to 
measurements of the gated devices, shown schematically in Fig. 2A. Figure 2B shows 
both the PL and the two-probe in-plane conductance of the MoS2 transistors as a function 
of the ionic liquid voltage (VLG). As seen in the figure, the PL of the device decreases with 
the addition of electrons (VLG > 0), and simultaneously, the device begins to conduct. For 
VLG < 0 V the electrons are depleted, the PL increases and then saturates when the Fermi 
level of the MoS2 is in the bandgap of the semiconductor. 

The equivalence of these different ways of shifting the charge density is demonstrated in 
Fig 2C, where the PL of the pixels as a function of the chemical potential is plotted on the 
same graph as the dependence of the PL of the transistor devices on gate voltage. We 
observe a one-to-one correspondence between the change in liquid potential determined 
according to Eq. (1) and the directly-applied ionic liquid gate voltage, with no rescaling.
The two curves overlay accurately, indicating that the PL of the MoS2 pixels is set by the 
shift in the chemical potential of the solution with changing redox molecule concentration. 

Figure 3 shows the use of a pixel array to image a basic electrochemical process, the 
production of oxidized molecules at a working electrode. A microelectrode (position 
indicated in the first frame of Fig. 3A) is positioned 5 m or less above the MoS2 pixel-
array in a ferrocene solution with an initial ferrocene concentration [Fc]0 = 1 mM. A 
voltage pulse is applied to the microelectrode going from a voltage below to above the 
oxidation voltage for ferrocene, Vw = 0 V to 0.8 V. This fast voltage step results in the 
rapid oxidation of ferrocene to ferrocenium. A few milliseconds after the voltage pulse we 
observe a large increase in the PL of the MoS2 pixels around our electrode (Fig. 3A and 
Movie S1, with a three-dimensional plot showing the distribution of bright pixels shown 
in Fig. 3B). The cloud of Fc+ diffuses outward from the microelectrode, lighting up the 
rest of the MoS2 pixel array.


4 of 28

By following the size of the ferrocenium cloud as a function of time we can directly 
measure its diffusion constant in the solution. For a localized source such as a 
microelectrode, the concentration of ferrocenium as a function of time (t) is expected to 

follow the form (27):

4
x
Fc
A erfc

Dt

+



 =








, where erfc is the complementary error 

function, x is the distance from the microelectrode, and D is the diffusion constant of 
ferrocenium. By plotting pixel brightness as a function of x for each frame and fitting 
every plot with the above equation (Fig. 3C), we obtain the radius R of the ferrocenium 
cloud as a function of time. Fig. 3D plots the square of this radius, which is predicted to 
grow linearly with time, 
2
4
R
= Dt
for simple diffusion. Linear fitting yields D = (1.76 ± 

0.02) × 10-9 m2/s. This agrees with the values for the diffusion constant of ferrocenium in 
acetonitrile found in the literature, 1.6 – 2.2 × 10-9 m2/s (28). The ionic current can also be 
mapped by following the PL gradient as a function of time, showing a high ionic current 
near the microelectrode that decays rapidly as a function of the distance from the electrode 
(see Supplementary Information, Fig. S4).

To determine the ultimate resolution of the pixel array to changes in redox concentrations, 
we examine noise properties of individual pixels. By recording the PL intensity of MoS2
pixels as a function of time with 10 ms exposure times, shown in the insets of Fig. 4, we 
observe that the PL intensity fluctuates around a constant value at a constant concentration 
of ferrocene and ferrocenium. We study the noise in our devices for different MoS2 areas: 
a 2×2 m2 pixel (Fig. 4A), a 5×5 m2 pixel (Fig. 4B), and a 15×15 m2 region of a MoS2
sheet (Fig. 4C). As expected, we observe that the signal to noise ratio increases with 
increasing area. The noise power spectra for all three regions is nearly frequency 
independent and lies close to the estimated shot noise from our experimental setup (shown 
by the dashed gray lines), which sets our ultimate noise floor. The shot noise in our setup 
arises from the finite number of photons reaching the camera and can be estimated by 

2
N
N

=
, where the factor of
2 accounts for added noise from the EMCCD gain of 

the camera.

Using a gate curve taken for a nearby transistor device on the same chip, this noise can be
converted to a voltage noise. The right axis in Figure 4 shows the corresponding voltage 
noise density for the three regions with the panels plotted in the same scale for better 
comparison. We obtain a voltage noise density of 2 
mV /
Hz for the 2×2 m2 MoS2

pixel, 0.9 
mV /
Hz for the 5×5 m2 MoS2 pixel and 0.5
mV /
Hz for the 15×15 m2

MoS2 region. The voltage noise can be translated to an [Ox]/[Red] detection resolution 
through the Nernst equation. For a concentration ratio of ferrocenium to ferrocene
(


r
Fc
Fc
+


= 

), the resolution is given by 
/
/
B
r r
d
k T


=
. This gives a redox 

detection resolution of
r
r

= 0.03 Hz-1/2 or 10% at a 25 Hz bandwidth on a 5×5 m2 pixel.

This detection limit, which is independent of the initial concentration, is advantageous for 
measuring changes in redox molecule concentration in dilute solutions, as we demonstrate
below.

We now compare MoS2 pixel redox sensors to the standard electrochemical method for 
measuring redox molecules, cyclic voltammetry (CV). We performed cyclic voltage 
sweeps at an ultramicroelectrode while monitoring the photoluminescence of nearby 
MoS2, shown schematically in Fig. 5A. These measurements were done at ferrocene 


5 of 28

concentrations ranging from 50 µM to 1 mM, as seen in Fig. 5B. IW abruptly increases 
when the working electrode voltage overcomes the oxidation voltage for ferrocene at 
roughly the same values for each concentration of ferrocene. Similarly, we observe a sharp 
increase in PL intensity above the ferrocene oxidation potential, coinciding with the turn 
on in current for the CV measurements. However, these two measurements have a crucial 
difference: while the current at the microelectrode scales linearly with the initial 
concentration, the PL produces roughly the same response to sweeps in voltage down to
the M-range of initial concentrations of ferrocene (Fig. 5B), limited only by the 
background concentration of any other redox molecules in the solution. 

The CV measurements and MoS2 PL measurements are related by the Nernst equation
(Eq. 1). Assuming that the large initial ferrocene concentrations [Fc]0 remains constant
and the concentration of ferrocenium is proportional to the current to the working 
electrode (a valid assumption provided the electrochemical system is in steady state as 
defined 
in 
the 
Supplementary 
Information),
we
can 
rewrite 
Eq. 
1 
as



(
0 )
ln
B
W
k T
I
Fc
 
. Therefore, for the region of MoS2 doping where the PL intensity 

is linear with the electrochemical potential, we expect that 

0

ln
W

B

I
PL
k T
Fc












.By 

plotting this change in potential versus

0

ln
IW
Fc










, the data should collapse onto the same 

curve independent of ferrocene concentration. This is indeed what we observe (Fig. 5C). 
Our data is well fit by Eq. 1 with kBT/e = (21 ± 5) meV (with uncertainty in the conversion 
between PL and voltage constituting the largest source of error), indicating a simple 
relationship between standard current-based detection methods for calculating 
concentration and our method using MoS2 PL.

Since the signal for MoS2 PL detection of molecules is independent of absolute 
concentration and depends instead on the ratio of oxidized-to-reduced species, it provides 
a method for detecting redox molecules that scales favorably down to low concentrations.
In order to test the detection limits of our system we performed simultaneous CV sweeps 
and PL measurements of MoS2 pixels at lower concentrations of ferrocene, shown in Fig. 
5D. Although the current at our microelectrode falls below the detection limit of our setup 
for concentrations under 10 µM, the PL of the MoS2 attains the same value as a function 
of voltage for 10 and 1 µM concentrations. The response begins to shift at 100 and 10 nM 
concentrations, perhaps due to comparable concentrations of contaminant redox 
molecules, but still reaches the same peak PL intensity. The low detection limit of sub-10 
nM concentrations using MoS2 PL improves upon ultramicroelectrode detection limits for 
concentration detection, which are reported to be at best around 50 nM (29, 30). The linear 
scaling of current at a microelectrode with concentration sets the detection limit for 
amperometric techniques. Assuming a microelectrode of the same area as our MoS2 pixels 
(~100 m2) and linear scaling of the current with concentration, the current would be 
approximately 100 fA for a concentration of 10 nM.  

Having explored the operation of the pixel arrays for redox sensing, we illustrate their use 
in a variety of situations. Fig. 6A and B shows a MoS2 pixel array deployed in a 
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) microfluidic channel to measure the spatial distribution of 
the oxidation state of redox active molecules.  A syringe pump connected to the channel 
supplies pressure-driven (laminar) flow, while a platinum surface electrode on chip can be 


6 of 28

used to perform redox chemistry in the channel. A short pulse applied to the surface 
electrode oxidizes ferrocene in the channel to ferrocenium, which is carried to the right by 
the flow. The resultant PL response of the MoS2 pixel array is shown in Fig. 6B and 
Movie S2, allowing the direct tracking of the oxidized molecules in real time with micron 
and millisecond space and time resolution. Similar results for electroosmotic flow are 
shown in the Supplementary Materials. 

These pixel arrays can be transferred to almost any substrate. Figure 6C shows a MoS2
pixel array on an optical fiber where the light through the fiber is used to excite the pixels. 
Figure 6D shows a measurement of the PL as a probe nearby periodically oxidizes 
ferrocenium.

Discussion

This work demonstrates a new class of 2D fluorescence sensors for the detection of redox-
active species. The sensor is shot noise limited, with a sensitivity of 10% in a 30 Hz 
bandwidth at a 5 x 5 µm2 pixel and detection limits down to nM concentrations. 
Improvements to the PL efficiency could increase this sensitivity by another 1-2 orders of 
magnitude. The fast, all-optical detection of chemical potentials, ionic densities, and 
charge transfer rates using the PL of a 2D material has great potential for monitoring 
various chemical and biological systems, such as hydrogen evolution reactions and 
neurological activity. (The supplementary materials present initial measurements of 
dopamine). Being flexible, chemical inert, and easily transferrable, MoS2 provides a local
redox sensing method that can be easily incorporated into a broad range of environments
and systems.

Materials and Methods

MoS2 Growth and Device Fabrication

The MoS2 sheets were grown by Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition on 1” fused 
silica wafers as described in reference (25). After initial PL and Atomic Force Microscopy 
characterizations (Fig. S1), we defined Ti/Au (5/50 nm) electrodes and alignment markers 
using conventional optical lithography and metal evaporation methods. The MoS2
structures (pixels and device channels) were defined by a final optical lithography step 
followed by Reactive Ion Etching (SF6:O2 5:1 ratio at 20 W). In order to increase the PL 
quantum efficiency in our films we treated our final structures with bis(trifluoromethane)-
sulfonimide (TFSI) following the procedures detailed in reference (26).

Experimental Setup

The devices were measured using a probe-station with automated micromanipulators 
(Sensapex). The samples were mounted with the MoS2 side pointing up on an inverted 
microscope and imaged with a water immersion 60x objective with numerical aperture 
1.25 and an Andor electron-multiplier CCD.

The PL measurements were made using a mercury arc lamp combined with a 550 nm 
bandpass filter (40 nm FWHM, ThorLabs) and a dichroic mirror (552 nm long pass,
Semrock) as our incident light beam. The reflected light is partially filtered by the dichroic 
beamsplitter and further selected using a 650 nm bandpass filter (40 nm FWHM, 
ThorLabs) which includes the A-exciton peak at room temperature (~ 660 nm).


7 of 28

For the electrochemical measurements we used a Pt wire as our reference electrode and 
Pt/Ir microelectrode probes (Microprobes for Life Sciences) with ~1 M impedance at 1 
kHz to the liquid as our working electrode.

Electrolyte and Ferrocene Solution Preparation

The electrolyte solution for all the measurements presented consists of 100 mM of 
tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Bu4NPF6, Sigma Aldrich) in acetonitrile. After 
the electrolyte preparation, the desired amount of ferrocene (Sigma Aldrich) is mixed to 
obtain the concentrations ranging from 1 nM to 100 mM used in our work.

The desired solution is then pipetted onto the fused silica chips containing the MoS2
structures which sits on the inverted microscope. The liquid is contained by a PDMS ring 
(~ 2 mm thick) which seals onto the wafer. For the measurements with increasing 
ferrocene concentration we start with the lowest concentration and increase it by pipetting 
away the lower concentration and flushing the liquid with the higher concentration 
solution. If a series of measurements were required, the samples were flushed in 
acetonitrile several times in order to remove any adsorbed ferrocene molecules.

H2: Supplementary Materials

Materials and Methods
Fig. S1. Characterization of MoS2 samples.
Fig. S2. Diagram of the experimental setup.
Fig. S3. Detection of ions in solutions containing ruthenocene and ruthenocene/ferrocene 
mixtures.
Fig. S4. Diffusion current mapping of ferrocene ions.
Fig. S5. Photoluminescence decay time for varied Fc concentrations.
Fig. S6. PL imaging of electroosmotic flow.
Fig. S7. Photoluminescence versus dopamine concentration.

Movie S1. Visualizing ferrocenium diffusion using a MoS2 pixels array.
Movie S2. Visualizing laminar flow of ions in a microfluidic channel.
Movie S3. Visualizing electro-osmotic flow of ions in a microfluidic channel.

References and Notes

1. 
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan, T. F. Heinz, Atomically Thin   MoS 2   : A New 
Direct-Gap Semiconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136805 (2010).

2. 
A. Splendiani et al., Emerging Photoluminescence in Monolayer MoS 2. Nano Lett. 10, 
1271–1275 (2010).

3. 
K. F. Mak et al., Tightly bound trions in monolayer MoS2. Nat. Mater. 12, 207–211 
(2013).

4. 
A. K. M. Newaz et al., Electrical control of optical properties of monolayer MoS2. Solid 
State Commun. 155, 49–52 (2013).

5. 
N. Peimyoo et al., Chemically Driven Tunable Light Emission of Charged and Neutral 
Excitons in Monolayer WS 2. ACS Nano. 8, 11320–11329 (2014).

6. 
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi, K. Matsuda, Tunable Photoluminescence of Monolayer MoS2 via 
Chemical Doping. Nano Lett. 13, 5944–5948 (2013).


8 of 28

7. 
W. Zhang, K. Matsuda, Y. Miyauchi, pH-Dependent Photoluminescence Properties of 
Monolayer Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides Immersed in an Aqueous Solution. J. Phys. 
Chem. C. 122, 13175–13181 (2018).

8. 
H. Nan et al., Strong Photoluminescence Enhancement of MoS2 through Defect 
Engineering and Oxygen Bonding. ACS Nano. 8, 5738–5745 (2014).

9. 
N. Kang, H. P. Paudel, M. N. Leuenberger, L. Tetard, S. I. Khondaker, Photoluminescence 
Quenching in Single-Layer MoS2 via Oxygen Plasma Treatment. J. Phys. Chem. C. 118, 
21258–21263 (2014).

10. 
Y. Wang et al., Electrochemical Control of Photoluminescence in Two-Dimensional MoS 
2 Nanoflakes. ACS Nano. 7, 10083–10093 (2013).

11. 
J. Z. Ou et al., Ion-Driven Photoluminescence Modulation of Quasi-Two-Dimensional 
MoS 2 Nanoflakes for Applications in Biological Systems. Nano Lett. 14, 857–863 (2014).

12. 
M. Velický et al., Photoelectrochemistry of Pristine Mono- and Few-Layer MoS 2. Nano 
Lett. 16, 2023–2032 (2016).

13. 
Y. Wang, C.-H. Kim, Y. Yoo, J. E. Johns, C. D. Frisbie, Field Effect Modulation of 
Heterogeneous Charge Transfer Kinetics at Back-Gated Two-Dimensional MoS 2
Electrodes. Nano Lett. 17, 7586–7592 (2017).

14. 
J. Wang, R. Trouillon, Y. Lin, M. I. Svensson, A. G. Ewing, Individually Addressable 
Thin-Film Ultramicroelectrode Array for Spatial Measurements of Single Vesicle Release. 
Anal. Chem. 85, 5600–5608 (2013).

15. 
I. Hafez et al., Electrochemical imaging of fusion pore openings by electrochemical 
detector arrays. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 102, 13879–13884 (2005).

16. 
D. L. Bellin et al., Electrochemical camera chip for simultaneous imaging of multiple 
metabolites in biofilms. Nat. Commun. 7, 10535 (2016).

17. 
P. Shields, B. Nemeth, R. B. Green, M. O. Riehle, D. R. S. Cumming, High-Speed Imaging 
of 2-D Ionic Diffusion Using a 16x16 Pixel CMOS ISFET Array on the Microfluidic Scale. 
IEEE Sens. J. 12, 2744–2749 (2012).

18. 
A. J. Bard et al., Chemical imaging of surfaces with the scanning electrochemical 
microscope. Science. 254, 68–74 (1991).

19. 
D. G. Hafeman, J. W. Parce, H. M. McConnell, Light-adressable potentiometric sensor for 
biochemical systems. Science (80-. ). 240, 1182–1185 (1988).

20. 
A. Jane, R. Dronov, A. Hodges, N. H. Voelcker, Porous silicon biosensors on the advance. 
Trends Biotechnol. 27, 230–239 (2009).

21. 
X. Shan, U. Patel, S. Wang, R. Iglesias, N. Tao, Imaging local electrochemical current via 
surface plasmon resonance. Science. 327, 1363–6 (2010).

22. 
K. M. Mayer, J. H. Hafner, Localized Surface Plasmon Resonance Sensors. Chem. Rev.
111, 3828–3857 (2011).

23. 
M. P. Landry et al., Single-molecule detection of protein efflux from microorganisms using 
fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotube sensor arrays. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 368–377 
(2017).

24. 
S. Kruss et al., High-resolution imaging of cellular dopamine efflux using a fluorescent 
nanosensor array. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 114, 1789–1794 (2017).

25. 
K. Kang et al., High-mobility three-atom-thick semiconducting films with wafer-scale 
homogeneity. Nature. 520, 656–660 (2015).

26. 
M. Amani et al., High Luminescence Efficiency in MoS2 Grown by Chemical Vapor 
Deposition. ACS Nano. 10, 6535–6541 (2016).

27. 
A. J. Bard, L. R. Faulkner, ELECTROCHEMICAL METHODS Fundamentals and 
Applications (2001).

28. 
Y. Wang, E. I. Rogers, R. G. Compton, The measurement of the diffusion coefficients of 
ferrocene and ferrocenium and their temperature dependence in acetonitrile using double 


9 of 28

potential step microdisk electrode chronoamperometry. J. Electroanal. Chem. 648, 15–19 
(2010).

29. 
I. F. Cheng, L. D. Whiteley, C. R. Martin, Ultramicroelectrode Ensembles, and Theoretical 
Responses and Detection Limits Comparison of Experimental Evaluation of 
Electroanalytical. Anal. Chem. J. Phys. Rev. C Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. Geochim. 
Cosmochim. Acta N.; Masuda, A. Mem. Natl. Inst. Polar Res., Spec. Issue. 6125, 762–766 
(1989).

30. 
P. Hernández, I. Sánchez, F. Patón, L. Hernández, Cyclic voltammetry determination of 
epinephrine with a carbon fiber ultramicroelectrode. Talanta. 46, 985–991 (1998).

Acknowledgments

General: We thank H. Abruña, M. Velicky, and M. Lee for fruitful discussions, and 
M. Ramaswamy for helping with the confocal PL imaging.

Funding: This work was supported by the Cornell Center for Materials Research with 
funding from the NSF MRSEC program ((DMR-1719875), by the Air Force Office of 
Scientific Research (MURI: FA9550-16-1-0031), and by the Kavli Institute at Cornell for 
Nanoscale Science. Additional funding was provided by the Samsung Advanced Institute 
of Technology and the University of Chicago MRSEC (NSF DMR-1420709). M.H.D.G. 
acknowledges funding from the Kavli Institute at Cornell and the Netherlands 
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO Rubicon 680-50-1311). This work made use 
of the NSF-supported Cornell Nanoscale Facility (ECCS-1542081) and the Cornell Center 
for Materials Research Shared Facilities, which are supported through the NSF MRSEC 
Program (DMR-1719875).

Author contributions: M.F.R. and M.H.D.G. contributed equally to this work. M.F.R., 
M.H.D.G., J.P., and P.L.M. conceived the experiments. H.G. and K.K. performed the 
growth of the MoS2 films under J.P. supervision. M.F.R. and M.H.D.G. fabricated the 
samples and performed the experiments with A.J.C. assistance and under P.L.M., J.P., and 
D.C.R supervision. M.F.R., M.H.D.G., and P.L.M. performed the data analysis and wrote 
the manuscript with comments from all authors.

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Data and materials availability: Data is available upon reasonable request.


10 of 28

Figures and Tables


11 of 28

Fig. 1. MoS2 PL response due to a change in [Fc+]/[Fc] ratio. (A) Bright field 

transmitted light optical image of an MoS2 “pixel array” consisting of 5x5 m2

MoS2 squares and Ti/Au contacted devices. The Pt/Ir electrode used to contact 
devices and oxidize the ferrocene molecules is shown in the middle of the image. 
(B) Photoluminescence image of the same region in A, excited by the 546 nm peak 
of a mercury lamp and imaged with a filter centered at 650 nm. (C) Schematic of 
the charge transfer between ferrocene molecules and MoS2. The red shade 
represents positively charged ferrocene molecules (ferrocenium). (D)
Photoluminescence of MoS2 pixels varying the relative concentrations of ferrocene 
and ferrocenium.


12 of 28

Figure 2 - MoS2 photoluminescence (PL) response to ionic liquid gating. (A)

Schematic and circuit diagram of the MoS2 PL measurement as a function of the 
ionic liquid gate voltage (VLG). (B) MoS2 photoluminescence (red; left axis) and 
source-drain current (blue; right axis) as a function of the ionic liquid gate voltage 
for a solution of B4NPF6 (100 mM) in acetonitrile. (C) PL signal from gating of 
MoS2 device and from MoS2 pixels at different concentrations of ferrocene and 
ferrocenium. The correspondence between the two curves, using kBT = 25.7 meV, 
indicates that sweeping the gate potential and changing the chemical potential 
cause an equivalent response for the MoS2.


13 of 28

Figure 3 – Visualizing ferrocenium diffusion using a MoS2 pixels array. (A) Time 

lapsed PL images of MoS2 pixels (2 µm x 2 µm) after applying a 0.6 V square 
wave pulse to a working electrode located at the top left corner of the image at t = 
0 s. The images show the MoS2 pixels lighting up in response to the diffusion of 
ferrocenium ions. (B) 3D surface plot of the image at 0.64 s, showing the spatial 
gradient of the PL signal. (C) The average PL value for each MoS2 pixel in the 
image versus distance from the working electrode at t = 0.64 s. These data are fit 
with an error function centered at zero with characteristic length-scale R = 
(4D0t)0.5, where D0 is the diffusion constant for ferrocenium. (D) Values for R2

extracted from each frame versus time. Linear fitting of these data gives D0 = (1.76 
± 0.02) x 10-9 m2/s, which matches well with other values found in the literature 
for ferrocenium.


14 of 28

Figure 4 – MoS2 Pixel detector power spectral density. Noise power spectra of PL for 

three sizes of MoS2 redox detectors. Left axis shows photons detected squared per 
Hertz, and right axis is converted to voltage via a MoS2 gate curve. All curves are 
taken at 10 ms exposure times. The power spectrum for a 2 x 2 m2 pixel (A), 5 x 
5 m2 pixel (B) and for a 15 x 15 m2 MoS2 region (C). The shot noise limit of our 
setup is shown by the dashed gray lines and correspond to 1.5 
mV /
Hz for (A), 

0.6 
mV /
Hz for (B) and 0.2 
mV /
Hz for (C). The insets show the PL versus 

time graphs from which the power spectra were calculated.


15 of 28

Figure 5 - MoS2 photoluminescence for different ferrocene concentrations. (A)

Schematic of cyclic voltammetry experiment. The initial solution contains only 
ferrocene, which is oxidized to ferrocenium by applying a potential to a Pt/Ir 
microelectrode versus a large platinum wire far from the reaction site. The local 
change in concentration in ferrocenium dopes the MoS2, changing the brightness 
of the PL. (B) Top: Current (Iw) versus voltage (Vw) of the working electrode for 
different concentrations of ferrocene Inset: Log-log plot of current at Vw = 1 V 
versus concentration of ferrocene. Bottom: MoS2 photoluminescence versus
working electrode voltage for different concentrations of ferrocene. (C) Effective 
change in potential on the MoS2 plotted against the working electrode current 
normalized by ferrocence concentration (C0). The effective change in potential is 
obtained from the MoS2 PL by using the slope of the linear region of the PL vs VLG
curve measured in the same device (Inset). The experimental points collapse to one 
curve that is well described by the the Nersnt equation: E = E’ + (kBT/e) ln(I/C0), 
with kBT/e = (21 ± 5) mV, and E’ = (0.53 ± 0.01) V accounting for a current offset 
of -1 nA/mM. (D) PL versus electrode voltage for low concentrations of 
ferrocene. First response is seen at 10 nM concentrations of ferrocene, likely 
limited by background concentrations of contaminant redox molecules.


16 of 28

Figure 6 – Flow imaging in microfluidic channels with MoS2 pixels and optical fiber. 

(A) Bright field image of PDMS channel placed on substrate with MoS2 pixel 
array and platinum surface electrode with schematic showing circuit with voltage 
VW for applying potentials to oxidize ferrocene and syringe for driving flow of 
solution. (B) Photoluminescence images MoS2 pixel array during laminar flow. A 
1 V pulse is applied to the platinum surface electrode for 1 s to oxidize ferrocene. 
(C) Reconstructed confocal PL microscopy images showing MoS2 pixels 
transferred onto an optical fiber. (D) Plot of chemical potential sensing with light 
coupled to MoS2 through the optical fiber. As in previous experiments, a pulse is 
applied to a probe nearby the MoS2 to oxidize ferrocene to ferrocenium. The MoS2
is illuminated with a 532 nm laser coupled into the optical fiber, and the 
photoluminescence is observed through an optical microscope.


17 of 28

Supplementary Information for:

MoS2 Pixel Arrays for

Real-Time Photoluminescence Imaging of Redox Molecules 

Contents:

1)
Sample fabrication

2)
MoS2 Characterization

3)
Experimental setup

4)
Relationship between carrier density and chemical potential

5)
Ionic current plots in diffusion experiments

6)
Experiments in Ruthenocene and Ruthenocene/Ferrocene mixtures

7)
Linear relationship between ferrocenium concentration and current

8)
Decay time of MoS2 PL as a function of concentration

9)
Electroosmotic Flow

10) Dopamine Detection


18 of 28

1.
Sample Fabrication

The monolayer MoS2 films are directly grown on 1” transparent fused silica substrates using the 

Metal-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition described in reference S(25). The homogeneous 

coverage of monolayer MoS2 was confirmed by atomic force microscopy and photoluminescence 

imaging. The film is patterned using UV-lithography techniques followed by SF6/O2 reactive ion 

etching at a power of 20 W. The contacts for the devices are defined using a second optical 

lithography step followed by e-beam evaporation of Ti/Au (5/50 nm).

Before measurements, the devices are treated by bis(trifluoromethane)-sulfonimide (TFSI) 

following the procedures described in reference S(26). After the TFSI treatment the samples 

usually showed improved PL quantum efficiency by a factor of 2 to 10.

2.
MoS2 Characterization

A representative atomic force microscopy (AFM) image, Fig. S1A shows continuous, monolayer 

MoS2. The photoluminescence (PL) spectrum (Fig. S1B) gives a peak at approximately 660 nm, 

consistent with previous results for MoS2 on SiO2 (1, 25, 26). The Raman spectrum (Fig. S1C) 

also confirms the monolayer characteristics of our MoS2 films.

Figure S1 – Characterization of MoS2 samples. (A) AFM of MoS2 before patterning. (B)

Raman spectrum of MoS2 before patterning. (C) PL spectrum of patterned MoS2. 


19 of 28

3.
Experimental Setup

The devices were measured using a probe-station with automated micromanipulators (Sensapex). 

The samples were mounted with the MoS2 side pointing up on an inverted microscope and 

imaged with a water immersion 60x objective with numerical aperture 1.25 and an Andor EM-

CCD camera.

The PL measurements were made using a Hg arc lamp combined with a 550 nm bandpass filter 

(ThorLabs; 40 nm FWHM) and a dichroic mirror (Semrock; 552 nm long pass) as our incident 

light beam. The reflected light is partially filtered by the dichroic beamsplitter and further selected 

using a 650 nm bandpass filter (ThorLabs; 40 nm FWHM) which includes the A-exciton peak at 

room temperature (~ 660 nm). The setup schematics are shown in Fig. S2.

Figure S2 – Diagram of the experimental setup. The schematics shows the main elements as 

described in this section.


20 of 28

4.
Relationship between carrier density and chemical potential

In general, the equation describing the potentials in the fluid can be written as:

( )
( )
cir
e
e
eV
s
m


=
−
,   [1]

where Vcir is an applied potential between the solution and the MoS2, and µe(s) and µe(m) are the 

electrochemical potentials of the solution and MoS2 respectively. This equation can be expanded 

in terms of the chemical and electrostatic potentials of the solution and MoS2, µ and φ,

(
)
cir
s
m
s
m
eV




=
−
+
−
,   [2]

with subscripts s and m for solution and MoS2 respectively.

In the case of a floating pixel, the applied voltage between the solution and the MoS2 is zero. 

The electrostatic potential difference is maintained by the double layer capacitance at the 

interface, so we can rewrite the equation:

2

'

s
m

ne
C

= 
+
,   [3]

where n is the electron doping per area and C’ is the double layer capacitance per area. In the 

highly doped (degenerate) regime, the MoS2 chemical potential is linear in doping:
2
m
 = n g D
, 

where g2D is the MoS2 density of states. In the low doping (non-degenerate) limit, the chemical 

potential of MoS2 is not linear in carrier density and can be written as:

2

ln
m
B

D
B

n
E
k T
g
k T



=
+






.   [4]

Plugging in for µm and differentiating µs with respect to n, we arrive at:

2

'

s
B
d
k T
e

dn
n
C

 =
+
.   [5]

We therefore expect that the relationship between chemical potential of the solution and 

doping of the MoS2 should be linear either when 

2

'

B

ne
k T
 C
(electrostatic capacitance dominates 


21 of 28

in non-degenerate limit) or when 

2

B

D

n
k T
 g
(chemical potential of MoS2 is in the degenerate 

regime). Since the electrostatic capacitance and quantum capacitance for MoS2 in the degenerate 

regime are both on the order of 0.1 F / m2, for room temperature thermal energy we can safely 

assume that doping is linear in chemical potential when 
n 1012
cm-2. This provides an 

explanation for the linear regime in the PL versus VLG curve in Fig. 2B and 2C in the main text.

5.
Experiments in Ruthenocene and Ruthenocene/Ferrocene mixtures

The detection of the electrochemical potential using the MoS2 PL is not limited to ferrocene ions. 

In order to demonstrate this, we performed similar experiments as described in the main text with 

ruthenocene (C10H10Ru) in place of ferrocene. Fig. S3A shows the MoS2 PL and working 

electrode current as a function of the working electrode voltage for a solution of ruthenocene (500 

µM). As with ferrocene, when the oxidation voltage of ruthenocene is reached (VW ~ 0.8 V) we 

see an increase in both IW and the MoS2 PL intensity.

The MoS2 PL can also be used to detect ionic concentrations in solutions with two different 

molecules. By using a solution containing both ferrocene and ruthenocene with equal 

concentration (500 µM), we observe changes in the PL intensity at the oxidation voltages of both 

molecules (Fig. S3B), showing that the optical detection of the ionic concentration, as the 

working electrode current in standard electrochemical cells, can be used for solutions of different 

molecules.


22 of 28

Figure S3 – Detection of ions in solutions containing ruthenocene and 

ruthenocene/ferrocene mixtures. (A) MoS2 PL intensity and working electrode current (IW) 

versus working electrode voltage (VW) for a solution containing 500 µM of ruthenocene. (B) PL 

and IW versus VW for a solution with ruthenocene (500 µM) and ferrocene (500 µM). The 

oxidation potentials for both molecules are indicated by the dashed gray lines.

6.
Ionic current plots in diffusion experiments

PL measurements during diffusion can be used to plot concentration gradients by taking local 

gradients of PL. Using the same video shown in Fig. 3 of the main text, the PL of each pixel is 

plotted in a grid. Gradients are calculated at each point to determine the direction and magnitude 

of the arrows shown in Fig. S4.

Figure S4 – Diffusion current mapping of ferrocene ions. Time series of images of the 

gradients of PL to represent the flow of ferrocenium away from the working electrode. The 


23 of 28

images are taken by calculating average PL at a MoS2 pixel for each frame, finding the local 

gradient with respect to neighboring pixels, and averaging over four pixels to give the length and 

direction of each arrow.

7. Linear relationship between ferrocenium concentration and current

For simplicity, we model our ultramicroelectrode as a sphere, with a radius of approximately 10 

µm. For oxidation of a molecule at a spherical ultramicroelectrode due to a potential step, steady 

state is reached when 

2
0

0

r
t
 D

, where t is the time between the pulse and the measurement, r0

is the radius of the electrode, and DO is the diffusion constant of the oxidized molecule (27). For 

our system, steady state is reached when the delay between potential step and measurement is 

much greater than 10 ms. For the CV measurements shown in the main text, delays between 

pulses and measurements were greater than 1 s, so our measurements were all taken in steady 

state. 

In steady state, the relationship between concentration and current can be written:

(
)

*
0
0

1 2
2

R

O
R

O
d
O

r
r
r
D
i
C
C
erfc
D
i
r
D t







−
=















,   [6]

where CO is the concentration of the oxidized molecule, CR* is the initial concentration of reduced 

molecules in the solution, i is the current and id is the limiting current, erfc is the complementary 

error function, and r is the distance between the center of the sphere and a position in the solution 

(27). This equation shows that, if t remains the same for each measurement taken, the 

concentration of oxidized molecules at a fixed distance from the electrode is linearly proportional 

to the current measured at the electrode. 

8. Decay time of MoS2 PL as a function of concentration


24 of 28

While the PL of MoS2 responds to redox molecules down to low (nanomolar) concentrations, the 

timescale of that response changes as a function of concentration. To demonstrate this, we set the 

potential of MoS2 by contacting a microprobe to a device with gold pads and adjust the 

electrostatic potential such that the photoluminescence is discernably different from its steady-

state floating value. After the electrical contact between the probe and the MoS2 is deliberately 

broken, the PL transitions to the value set by the chemical potential of the solution containing 

ferrocene molecules. A set of time-lapsed images showing this decrease in PL is shown in Fig. 

S6A. Plots of PL decay at four different concentrations are shown in Fig. S6B. The decrease in 

decay time with increased concentration can be understood based on a simple RC-circuit model. R

is the charge transfer resistance between the MoS2 and solution, which decreases with increased 

concentration. C is the capacitance of the gold pads and MoS2, which is roughly static with 

respect to changes in solution. However, the data are not fit well by a single exponential, which 

may be due to variation in the charge transfer rate as a function of doping of the MoS2.

Regardless, in lieu of plotting time constants, we plot the full width at half max of the decay time 

for each concentration measured (Fig. S6C).


25 of 28

Figure S5 – Photoluminescence decay time for varied Fc concentrations. (A) Time-lapse 

images of the photoluminescence of MoS2 after breaking contact. (B) Normalized 

photoluminescence decay for contact breaking for different concentrations of ferrocene in 

solution. The time scale for decay decreases with increased concentration. Curves are fit with a 

double exponential to extract time constants. (C) Time constant versus concentration of ferrocene. 

9. Electroosmotic Flow

In the same experimental setup as in Fig. 6A, B, we place two platinum wires on either side of the 

channel (Fig S6A). By applying 50 V across the approximately 1 mm channel, we drive an 

electroosmotic flow. This flow is imaged with the MoS2 PL in the same manner as before (Fig. 

S6B), and shows a flat flow profile, in contrast to the parabolic flow profile for laminar flow. 


26 of 28

Using the PL signal from the MoS2 pixels, we calculate the velocity of the laminar and 

electroosmotic flows and plot the difference in velocity at a given position in the channel from the 

average velocity, depicting graphically the difference between laminar and electroosmotic flows 

as imaged by the MoS2.

Figure S6 – PL imaging of electroosmotic flow. (A) Experimental setup for imaging of 

electroosmotic flow, showing the PDMS channel placed over the MoS2 pixel array and surface 

electrode as before, with the addition of platinum electrodes on either side of the channel to drive 

the flow. (B) MoS2 PL pixel imaging of electroosmotic flow, driven by a 50 V potential across the 

1 mm channel length. (C) Plot of the velocity difference from average velocity across the width of 


27 of 28

the channel as calculated by the PL imaging for both electroosmotic and laminar flow, showing a 

flat profile for electroosmotic flow and a roughly parabolic profile for laminar flow.

10. Dopamine detection

We demonstrate that our detection scheme also works for redox biomolecules in aqueous solution 

by measuring PL versus dopamine concentration in a pH buffered solution, shown in Fig. S7. 

Without any dopamine in the solution, the MoS2 is in a bright state at pH 5. Adding dopamine 

dopes the MoS2 until the PL is off, as is expected since dopamine is an electron donor. 

Figure S7 – Photoluminescence versus dopamine concentration. PL versus dopamine 

concentration. Images correspond to adjacent data points.

Movie S1 – Visualizing ferrocenium diffusion using a MoS2 pixel array. Real time video 

showing the response of a MoS2 pixel array (2 µm x 2 µm) to the oxidation of ferrocene to 

ferrocenium and resultant diffusion of ferrocene along the array.


28 of 28

Movie S2 – PL imaging of laminar flow in a microfluidic channel. Real time video of MoS2

pixels responding to pressure-driven flow of a solution with ferrocene/ferrocenium molecules. At 

the beginning of the video, a platinum surface electrode oxidizes ferrocene to ferrocenium while 

flow in the channel is simultaneously driven by a syringe pump. The MoS2 pixels turn on in 

response to the ferrocenium, imaging motion of the molecules down the channel.

Movie S3 – PL imaging of electro-osmotic flow in a microfluidic channel. Real time video of 

MoS2 pixels responding to a voltage-driven flow of a solution with ferrocene/ferrocenium 

molecules. At the beginning of the video, a platinum surface electrode oxidizes ferrocene to 

ferrocenium while flow in the channel is simultaneously driven by an applied voltage of 50 V. 

The MoS2 pixels turn on in response to the ferrocenium, imaging motion of the molecules down 

the channel.


