 

Abstract—In this work, AlGaN/GaN HEMTs with dual-layer 

SiNx stressors (composed of a low-stress layer and a high-stress 
layer) were investigated. The low-stress padding layer solved the 
surface damage problem caused during the deposition of the high-
stress SiNx, and provided a good passivated interface. The HEMTs 
with dual-layer stressors showed a 1 V increase in the threshold 
voltage (Vth) with comparable on-current (Ion) and RF current gain 
to those without stressors. Moreover, the off-current (Ioff) was 
shown to be reduced by one to three orders of magnitude in the 
strained devices as a result of the lower electric field in AlGaN, 
which suppressed the gate injection current. The dual-layer 
stressor scheme supports strain engineering as an effective 
approach in the pursuit of the normally-off operation of 
AlGaN/GaN HEMTs. 
 

Index Terms—HEMTs, gallium nitride, strain engineering, 

threshold voltage, gate leakage 
 

I. INTRODUCTION 

aN-based high electron mobility transistors (HEMTs) 

have played an increasingly important role in power 

electronics and high frequency applications [1], [2]. A high 
drive current can be achieved due to the high saturation velocity 
of electrons in GaN and the presence of two-dimensional 
electron gas (2DEG) at the AlGaN/GaN heterojunction [3]. 
Normally-off operation is preferred for radio-frequency (RF) 
power amplifiers to simplify the design of the whole RF system. 
However, major normally-off device options, such as gate-
recessed metal-insulator-semiconductor HEMT (MIS-HEMT) 
[4] or HEMT with p-type GaN gate [4], [5], require etching 
 

This work was supported by Grant #2019B010128001 from Guangdong 

Science and Technology Department, Grant #JCYJ20160226192639004 and # 
JCYJ20170412153356899 from Shenzhen Municipal Council of Science and 
Innovation. Corresponding authors: Guangrui (Maggie) Xia and Hongyu Yu.  

Wei-Chih Cheng is with the School of Microelectronics, Southern 

University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, 
Guangdong, China, and also with the Department of Electronic and Computer 
Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), 
Hong Kong (e-mail: weichih.cheng@connect.ust.hk). 

Minghao He, Siqi Lei, Liang Wang, Jingyi Wu, Fanming Zeng, and Qiaoyu 

Hu are with the School of Microelectronics, Southern University of Science and 
Technology (SUSTech) , Shenzhen 518055, China. 

Feng Zhao is with the School of Engineering and Computer Science, 

Washington State University, Vancouver, WA 98686, USA (e-mail: 
feng.zhao@wsu.edu). 

processes, which introduce surface damages that may 
deteriorate the amplifying performance of the devices [6]. Even 
though the cyclic oxidation/wet-etching digital etching 
processes can effectively avoid the etching caused damage and 
realize high-performance devices [], [], this technique is hard to 
be used for industrial application. 

Due to the piezoelectric nature of GaN, the 2DEG 

concentration and thus the electrical characteristics of the 
AlGaN/GaN HEMT can be modulated by applying stress [9], 
[10]. Besides, experimental work and simulation results showed 
that the stress provided by the dielectrics liner can induce 
significant amount of piezoelectric charges in the AlGaN/GaN 
heterostructure underneath the submicron or smaller gate metal 
[9], [11]. Therefore, strain engineering is believed to be an 
effective approach to adjust the threshold voltage (Vth) of an 
AlGaN/GaN HEMT with a scaled gate length.  
 Silicon nitride (SiNx) liners deposited using plasma enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) with dual plasma 
excitation frequencies have been reported as effective stressors 
[12]. Increasing the duty cycles of low frequency plasma 
excitation is useful to deposit highly compressively-stressed 
SiNx, but it also introduces more nitrogen ion bombardment 
onto the semiconductor surface, resulting in more surface 
damages [11], [13]. In previous work, the Vth of AlGaN/GaN 
HEMTs with gate length Lg = 0.1 μm was increased by over 1 
V using compressive SiNx liners [11]. However, the 
semiconductor surface damages caused during the deposition of 
compressive SiNx degraded the electrical performance of 
devices, such as the on-current (Ion) decrease and off-current 
(Ioff) increase [11].  

Mansun Chan is with the Department of Electronic and Computer 

Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST), 
Hong Kong. 

Guangrui (Maggie) Xia is with the School of Microelectronics, Southern 

University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, China, 
and also with the Department of Materials Engineering, The University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada (e-mail: gxia@mail.ubc.ca).  

Hongyu Yu is with the School of Microelectronics, Southern University of 

Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China, 
also with GaN Device Engineering Technology Research Center of 
Guangdong, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China, and also with The Key 
Laboratory of the Third Generation Semi-conductor, Shenzhen 518055, 
Guangdong, China (e-mail: yuhy@sustech.edu.cn). 

Threshold Voltage Improvement and Leakage 
Reduction of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs Using Dual-

Layer SiNx Stressors

Wei-Chih Cheng, Student member, IEEE, Minghao He, Siqi Lei, Liang Wang, Jingyi Wu, 

Fanming Zeng, Qiaoyu Hu, Feng Zhao, Senior member, IEEE, Mansun Chan, Fellow, IEEE, 

Guangrui (Maggie) Xia, and Hongyu Yu, Senior member, IEEE

G


To overcome the surface damage problem with the single-

layer compressive SiNx, in this work, dual-layer SiNx stressors 
were investigated. A dual-layer SiNx stressor was composed of 
a low-stress SiNx interlayer for interface passivation and a high-
stress SiNx layer for compressive stress. The AlGaN/GaN RF 
HEMTs with 0.1 μm gate length for RF application were 
prepared, and their Vth were increased by the dual-layer SiNx 
stressors. The dual-layer scheme was shown to effectively 
prevent the semiconductor surface from the nitrogen ion 
bombardment during the deposition of compressive SiNx. 
Besides the increased Vth, the strained devices with dual-layer 
stressors also showed Ion and high-frequency performance 
comparable to those of the baseline devices with optimal 
passivation scheme. Moreover, the Ioff in the strained devices 
with the dual-layer stressors was lower than in the baseline 
devices. The Vth increase without etching process and the 
compromise of electrical performance presents an alternative to 
pursue normally-off RF AlGaN/GaN HEMT.  

 

II. Vth OF GaN BASED HEMT 

The threshold voltage (Vth) of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs can be 

expressed by a polarization dependent model, which is given as 
[14] 

 

𝑉𝑡ℎ(𝑥) = 𝜑𝑚(𝑥) − ∆𝐸𝑐(𝑥) −

𝑞𝑁𝐷𝑑

2𝜖(𝑥) −

𝜎(𝑥)

𝜀(𝑥) 𝑑                   (1) 

 

where x is the aluminum mole fraction of AlGaN, φm(x) is the 
barrier height of the Schottky gate, and ΔEc(x) is conduction 
band discontinuity between AlxGa1-xN and GaN. ND, d, and ε(x) 
are doping concentration, thickness, and dielectric permittivity 
of the AlxGa1-xN barrier, respectively. σ(x) is the total 
polarization induced sheet charge density, which is given as 

[13] 

 

𝜎𝑥 = 𝑃𝑠𝑝(𝐴𝑙𝑥𝐺𝑎1−𝑥𝑁) − 𝑃𝑠𝑝(𝐺𝑎𝑁) + 𝑃𝑝𝑧(𝐴𝑙𝑥𝐺𝑎1−𝑥𝑁) − 𝑃𝑝𝑧(𝐺𝑎𝑁)  (2) 

 

where Psp and Ppz are the spontaneous polarization and the 
piezoelectric polarization in the AlGaN and GaN layers, 
respectively. Equation (1) and (2) ignored the effects from the 
GaN cap and AlN spacer for simplification.  In the AlGaN/GaN 
heterostructures, the piezoelectric polarization of AlGaN is 
caused by the tensile strain due to the lattice constant mismatch 
between AlGaN and GaN, and the GaN layer is considered to 
be fully relaxed due to the thick buffer layers. By introducing 
in-plane compressive stress, the in-plane tensile strain in 
AlGaN can be neutralized, and the total polarization reduces, 
resulting in an increase in the Vth of AlGaN/GaN HEMT. 

III. AlGaN/GaN HEMT WITH SINx STRESSORS 

The structure of the AlGaN/GaN HEMTs is shown in Fig. 1. 

The 
6 
inch 
Si 
wafer 
with 
MOCVD 
grown 

GaN/AlGaN/AlN/GaN epitaxy was purchased from a 
commercial supplier. The epitaxial structure consists of a 1.05 
μm high-resistivity GaN buffer, a 700 nm i-GaN channel, a 0.8 
nm AlN spacer, a 19 nm Al0.25Ga0.75N barrier, and a 3 nm GaN 
cap. The device fabrication started with the device isolation 
using a BCL3/Cl2 based inductively coupled plasma dry 
etching. Then, Ti/Al/Ti/Au-based metal stack was deposited 
using e-beam evaporator and annealed at 830℃ in nitrogen 
ambient to form the source/drain Ohmic contacts. After 
preparing the Ni/Au-based metal gate using e-beam lithography 
and e-beam evaporator, the SiNx layers were deposited by 
PECVD with dual plasma excitation frequencies. Subsequently, 
metal pads was deposited after via opening.  

In this work, two SiNx deposition conditions were developed. 

In the baseline devices, the low-stress-SiNx layer was optimized 
for passivation to improve the drive current, which had an 
unintentional stress of 0.3 GPa [11]. This deposition condition 

Fig. 1 Transfer characteristics of the strained devices with different interlayer 
thicknesses (0, 3.5, 7, 10.5, 14 nm) in comparison with a baseline device 
(BSL). The strained devices showed 1 V higher Vth than the baseline device. 
The device with thicker interlayer shows higher on-current (Ion), consistent 
with the trend of 2DEG sheet resistance (R□,2DEG) extracted using transmission 
line model (inset). 

Fig. 2 Device structure of AlGaN/GaN HEMT with gate length (Lg), source-
to-gate length (Lsg), and gate-to-drain length (Lgd) labelled.  

TABLE I

DEVICE MATRIX IN THIS WORK

Device group

Low-stress (0.3 GPa) 

SiNx for surface 
Passivation (nm)

High-stress (-1 GPa)

SiNx for stress 

introduction (nm)

1. Baseline devices
200
-

2. Strained devices

-
200

3.5
200

7
200

10.5
200

14
200


was also used to deposit the low-stress interlayer for surface 
passivation in the dual-layer stressor scheme. For the high-
stress layer, an increased duty cycles of low-frequency plasma 
excitation was used to introduce -1 GPa compressive stress to 
increase the Vth of devices. The stress values were obtained 
from the curvature measurements on blanket SiNx films on Si 
substrates. In this work, two groups of HEMTs were fabricated: 
the baseline devices had a low-stress SiNx layer per device, and 
the second group (strained devices) had a high-stress layer and 
may have a low-stress layer as an interlayer per device. In the 
second group with dual-layer stressors, different low-stress 
layer thicknesses were designed as listed in Table 1, and the 
incorporation of the low-stress layer was proved not influence 
the overall intrinsic stress of the dual-layer stressors. In this 
work, Group 1 and Group 2 devices will be called baseline 
devices and strained devices, respectively, even though the 
SiNx layer applied onto Group 1 devices were also slightly 
stressed (0.3 GPa). The thicknesses were calculated by the 
deposition rate and time. 

IV. ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS 

The transfer characteristics of strained devices were shown 

in Fig. 2, and the curve of baseline devices was also shown for 
comparison. Compared with the baseline devices, the Vth of 
strained devices were successfully increased by 1 V, because 
the compression depleted the 2DEG underneath the gate region, 
consistent with the previous results [11]. The Ioff was extracted, 
as shown in Fig. 3, which was defined as the drain current at 
gate bias Vg = Vth-2 V and drain voltage Vd = 1 V. Consistent 
with the previous study in [11], strained devices without 
interlayer showed reduced Ion and higher Ioff because of the 
damaged semiconductor surface from the nitrogen ion 
bombardment during the deposition of the high-stress SiNx 
[11], [13]. For strained devices with interlayers, thicker 
interlayers effectively increased Ion and decreased Ioff, 
indicating that the interlayer effectively protected the 
semiconductor surface during the deposition of the high-stress 
SiNx. The sheet resistance of 2DEG (R□,2DEG) extracted using 
the transmission line model was also shown in the inset of Fig. 
2, showing a consistent trend as Ion of devices. The strained 
device with 14 nm interlayer showed a similar Ion and a lower 
Ioff compared with the baseline devices, suggesting the 
reduction of surface damages. The reduction of semiconductor 
damages also translated to the better RF performance of 
strained devices. Fig. 4 plots the current gains (H21) of devices 
at Vd = 7 V and Vg = Vth+1 V. Strained devices with 14 nm 
interlayers showed a similar H21 current gain to the baseline 
devices, with the cutoff frequency (ft) of 36 GHz, while that 
without the interlayer showed lower h21 gain and ft of 20 GHz. 

It was shown that lower Ioff was attained with thicker 

interlayer. The higher Ioff of strained devices without the 
interlayer or with the thin interlayers were believed to have been 
caused by the surface damages during the high-stress SiNx 
deposition. However, strained devices with 7 nm or thicker 
interlayer showed even lower Ioff compared with the baseline 
devices, indicating that the passivation quality was not the only 
factor determining Ioff in this study. 

 From the above data, the devices with 14 nm interlayers had 

the best performance (similar Ion and RF performance, one to 
three orders of magnitude lower Ioff and 1 V higher Vth compared 
with the baseline devices). Therefore, these devices were 
further investigated and discussed in the following sections for 
the stress effect on AlGaN/GaN HEMTs. For simplification, 
strained devices with specifically 14 nm interlayers will be 
called strained devices in the following sections.  

V. STRESS AND DEVICE MODELLING AND SIMULATIONS 

To further investigate the influence of the applied stress on 

2DEG concentration, the distribution of the external stress and 
the electron concentration were simulated using two finite 
element analysis tools, Victory Stress and Victory Device, 
developed by Silvaco,.  

Fig. 5(a) and (b) showed the stress simulation results with the 

measured SiNx intrinsic stress values of 0.3 GPa for the low-
stress layer and -1 GPa for the high-stress layer, corresponding 
to the baseline devices and the strained devices. The high-stress 

Fig. 3 H21 current gain of a typical baseline device (BSL) and strained devices
with and without interlayers. The incorporation of interlayer improved RF 
performance of strained devices, and the strained devices with 14 nm 
interlayer showed comparable performance as the baseline device, attaining 
the cutoff frequencies (ft) of 36 GHz. The devices were tested at Vd = 7V and 
Vg = Vth+ 1 V for each device.

Fig. 4 Statistics of off-current (Ioff) of the strained devices with different 
interlayer thicknesses and the baseline devices. The strained devices with 
thicker interlayers showed lower Ioff. The strained devices with 7 nm interlayer 
or the thicker ones showed lower Ioff than the baseline devices.


layer introduced an in-plane compressive stress (up to -1.2 GPa) 
underneath the gate area and an negligible tensile stress (< 50 
MPa) in the access area, as shown in Fig. 5(b).  

The device model was calibrated to match the subthreshold 

characteristics of the baseline devices, as shown in Fig. 5(c). 
The trap densities and the relative ratio between the applied 
stress induced, lattice mismatch induced, and spontaneous 
piezoelectric effects were used as the fitting parameters. The 
best fitting parameters generated good fits to the experimental 
subthreshold I-V data, showing a 1 V Vth shift when the -1 GPa 
high-stress layer was incorporated, as shown in Fig. 5(d). The 
Vth shift was a result of the electron depletion caused by the 
applied compressive stress. Due to the piezoelectric nature of 
AlGaN, the compressive stress neutralize the original 
piezoelectric polarization in AlGaN, which is Ppz(AlGaN) in 
Section II, reducing the concentration of 2DEG, as shown in 
Fig. 5(f). In contrast, the low-stress layer only caused a slight 
electron accumulation underneath the gate, as shown in Fig, 
5(e). 

VI.  REDUCED Ioff OF STRAINED DEVICES 

 The gate length of the aforementioned devices were in 

submicron scale (Lg = 0.1 μm), and the electrical characteristics 
of submicron or even smaller device can be effectively changed 
by stress layers according to the edge force model [9]. To verify 

that the reduced Ioff of the strained devices was resulted from 
the applied stress, we prepared the devices with Lg = 2 micron-
scale gate length (micron devices). Due to the much larger sizes, 
the amount of stresses that can be introduced was much less 
than that of submicron devices, and thus the electrical 
characteristics of micron devices were proved to be influenced 
less by the applied stress [9], [11]. The structure of the micron 
devices was similar to that shown in Figure. 1, with Lg of 2 µm 
and Lgd of 10 µm. The transfer characteristics of the submicron 
devices and micron devices at Vd = 1V were shown in Fig. 6(a) 
and (b), respectively. Unlike the submicron devices, the micron 
devices showed no obvious Ioff difference with and without the 
stressors. The reverse Schottky gate leakage of the devices 
showed the similar results, as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d). The 
different effects of stressors on Ioff between micron devices and 
submicron devices suggested that the lower Ioff of the strained 
submicron device was caused by the applied stress. Besides, the 
reverse Schottky gate current Ig of the submicron devices 
overlapped when bias was below –4 V. It implied potentially 
the same leakage mechanism dominating the leakage of two 
devices under the low reverse bias condition, and another 
mechanism of leakage took place in the baseline devices when 
higher reverse bias was applied. 

In Fig. 6(c) and (d), except the submicron strained device, all 

devices showed strong bias-dependent leakage current in 
certain bias regions, as indicated with each curve. The strong 
bias-dependent leakage current of GaN based HEMT could be 
dominated by Fowler–Nordheim (FN) tunneling [15]. The 
dependence of FN tunneling current density (JFN) on the barrier 
electric field (E) is given by 

 

𝐽𝐹𝑁 = 𝐴𝐸2𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝐵 𝐸
⁄ )                                 (3) 

 

with 
 

Fig. 5 (a)(b) Transfer characteristics of the devices at Vd = 1 V with different 
gate lengths and different strain conditions. The submicron devices showed 
different level of Ioff when stress was introduced while the micron devices 
showed the same level.  (c)(d) Reverse Schottky gate leakage showed the 
similar phenomena as Ioff in the transfer curves. The submicron baseline device 
and two micron devices showed bias-dependent Schottky leakage current in 
indicated bias regions.

Fig. 6 Simulation and fitting results with Victory Stress and Victory Device. 
(a)(b) Simulated stress distribution, (c)(d) subthreshold characteristics (solid 
lines: best fitting curves and dots: experimental measurements), and (e)(f) 
electron concentration of the device with a low-stress (0.3 GPa) layer and a 
high-stress (-1 GPa) layer, respectively. The high-stress layer caused 
compression and electron depletion underneath gate. The device with a high-
stress layer showed a positive Vth shift compared with that with a low-stress 
layer only (the baseline device).


𝐵 = 8𝜋√2𝑚𝑛∗ (𝑞𝜑𝑒𝑓𝑓)

3 3𝑞ℎ
⁄
                            (4) 

 

where A is a constant, E is the internal electric field of the 
barrier (AlGaN in this system), mn* the effective mass of the 
semiconductor, h the Planck’s constant, and φeff is the effective 
barrier height. FN tunneling current is independent of 
temperature according to (3). As shown in Fig. 7, the leakage 
current of the submicron baseline device did not change 
obviously and showed no strong correlation with temperature 
in the strong bias-dependent leakage region, suggesting the 
dominance of FN tunneling. In contrast, the reverse current of 
the submicron strained device increased with temperature 
significantly, indicating the absence of FN tunneling 
occurrence. To investigate the reason why FN tunneling was 
suppressed by the stress, the conduction band diagram was 
simulated using Silvaco Victory Device with the model 
parameters calibrated with the subthreshold characteristics 
discussed in section V.  

The conduction band diagrams in the gate region of the 

baseline device and the strained device at Vg = Vth-2 V were 
simulated, as shown in Fig. 8. The internal electrical field 
strengths in AlGaN were 3.66 MV/cm and 3.18 MV/cm for the 
baseline device and strained device, respectively. For a strained 
device, the compression neutralized the inherent piezo 
polarization caused by the lattice mismatch at the 
heterojunction. As a result, the internal electrical field in AlGaN 
was reduced, and FN tunneling was hence suppressed, reducing 
the gate leakage of the strained devices. 

VII. CONCLUSION 

 Due to the piezoelectric nature of GaN, a 1 V increase in Vth 
of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs was achieved by introducing 
compressive stresses with the dual-layer SiNx stressors. The 
low-stress SiNx layer in the dual-layer SiNx stressor scheme 
successfully retained the similar Ion as the baseline devices by 
avoiding the surface damages caused during the deposition of 
the highly compressive SiNx layer. As a result, the comparable 
passivation quality translated to the comparable high-frequency 
performance of the strained devices and baseline devices. 
Moreover, the applied compression reduced the internal electric 
field in AlGaN, suppressing the leakage current Ioff caused by 
FN tunneling when a strained device is under a reverse bias. 
This Vth increase without a recess etching process or any 
compromises of the electrical performance, such as Ion, Ioff, and 
RF performance, supports strain engineering as an effective 
approach in pursuing enhancement-mode AlGaN/GaN HEMTs 
for RF applications.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The work was conducted at Materials Characterization and 

Preparation Center (MCPC) at SUSTech, and we acknowledge 
the technical support from the staff and engineers at MCPC. 
Wei-Chih Cheng would also like to thank his labmates Marzieh 
Mahrokh and Robert Sokolovskij for practical suggestions on 
this article. 
 

REFERENCES 

[1] U. K. Mishra, L. Shen, T. E. Kazior and Y. Wu, "GaN-based RF power 

devices and amplifiers," Proc IEEE, vol. 96, no.2, pp. 287–305, Feb. 2008, doi: 
10.1109/JPROC.2007.911060. 
[2] N. Ikeda et al., "GaN power transistors on Si substrates for switching 

applications," Proc IEEE, vol. 98, no.7, pp. 1151–1161, Jul. 2010, doi: 
10.1109/JPROC.2009.2034397. 
[3] O. Ambacher et al., "Two-dimensional electron gases induced by 
spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization charges in N-and Ga-face 

AlGaN/GaN heterostructures," J. Appl. Phys., vol. 85, no.6, pp. 3222–3233, 
Mar 1999, doi: 10.1063/1.369664. 
[4] K. J. Chen et al., "GaN-on-Si power technology: Devices and applications," 

IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 64, no.3, pp. 779–795, Mar. 2017, doi: 
10.1109/TED.2017.2657579. 
[5] G. Greco, F. Iucolano and F. Roccaforte, "Review of technology for 
normally-off HEMTs with p-GaN gate," Materials Science in Semiconductor 

Processing, vol. 78, pp. 96–106, May. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.mssp.2017.09.027. 
[6] D. Guerra, F. A. Marino, D. K. Ferry, S. M. Goodnick, M. Saraniti, and R. 
Soligo, “Large-signal mm-wave InAlN/GaN HEMT power amplifier 

Fig. 8 Conduction band diagram of gate metal/AlGaN/GaN system with 0.3 
GPa (baseline) and -1 GPa (strained) stressor at Vg = Vth-2V. With less 
piezoelectric polarization, the effective barrier thickness is thicker for the
strained device, and possibility of FN tunneling is less (inset).

Fig. 7 Temperature dependence of reverse Schottky gate leakage of a baseline 
(left) and a strained (right) device. Reverse current of the baseline device 
showed weaker dependence on the temperature compared with the strained 
device.


characterization through self-consistent harmonic balance/cellular Monte Carlo 

device simulation,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2011, pp. 34.2.1–34.2.4. doi: 
10.1109/IEDM.2011.6131668. 
[7] M. Hua et al., “Integration of LPCVD-SiN x gate dielectric with recessed-
gate E-mode GaN MIS-FETs: Toward high performance, high stability and 

long TDDB lifetime,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2016, pp. 10.4.1–10.4.4. doi: 
10.1109/IEDM.2016.7838388. 
[8] H. Chiu et al., " High Uniformity Normally-OFF p-GaN Gate HEMT Using 
Self-Terminated Digital Etching Technique," IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 
vol. 65, no.11, pp. 4820-4825, Nov. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TED.2018.2871689. 
[9] N. Shigekawa and S. Sugitani, "Analysis of passivation-film-induced stress 
effects on electrical properties in AlGaN/GaN HEMTs," IEICE Trans. 

Electron., 
vol. 
93, 
no.8, 
pp. 
1212–1217, 
Aug. 
2010, 
doi: 

10.1587/transele.E93.C.1212. 
[10] K. Osipov et al., "Local 2DEG Density Control in Heterostructures of 
Piezoelectric Materials and Its Application in GaN HEMT Fabrication 

Technology," IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 65, no.8, pp. 3176–3184, 
Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TED.2018.2850010. 
[11] W. Cheng et al., “Silicon nitride stress liner impacts on the electrical 
characteristics of AlGaN/GaN HEMTs,” in Proc. 2019 IEEE International 
Conference on Electron Devices and Solid State Circuits (EDSSC), Jun. 2019. 
doi: 10.1109/EDSSC.2019.8754212. 
[12] R.E. Sah, Silicon Nitride, Silicon Dioxide Thin Insulating Films, and Other 
Emerging Dielectrics VIII: Proceedings of the International Symposium. 

Pennington, NJ, USA: The Electrochemical Society, Inc., 2005, pp. 148–159. 
[13] W. S. Tan, P. A. Houston, G. Hill, R. J. Airey and P. J. Parbook, "Influence 
of dual-frequency plasma-enhanced chemical-vapor deposition Si3N4 
passivation on the electrical characteristics of AlGaN/GaN heterostructure 

field-effect transistors," J Electron Mater, vol. 33, no.5, pp. 400–407, May 
2004, doi: 10.1007/s11664-004-0191-x. 
[14] A. Kranti, S. Haldar and R. S. Gupta, "An accurate charge control model 
for spontaneous and piezoelectric polarization dependent two-dimensional 
electron gas sheet charge density of lattice-mismatched AlGaN/GaN HEMTs," 

Solid-State Electronics, vol. 46, no.5, pp. 621–630, May 2002, doi: 
10.1016/S0038-1101(01)00332-X. 
[15] S. Turuvekere et al., "Gate leakage mechanisms in AlGaN/GaN and 
AlInN/GaN HEMTs: comparison and modeling," IEEE Trans. Electron 

Devices, 
vol. 
60, 
no.10, 
pp. 
3157–3165, 
Oct. 
2013, 
doi: 

10.1109/TED.2013.2272700. 

  

 

 
 
 


