arXiv:1908.10269v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  27 Aug 2019

Studies on ultra-short pulsed laser shock peening of stainless-steel in different

confinement media

Kishore Elango,1 Jan S. Hoppius,1, a) Lalit M. Kukreja,2 Andreas Ostendorf,1 and

Evgeny L. Gurevich1, b)

1)Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum, Chair of Applied Laser Technology,

Universit¨atsstraße 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany

2)Epi-Knowledge Foundation, C2 – 4/1:3, Sector-4, Vashi, Navi Mumbai 400 703,

India

(Dated: 28 August 2019)

Laser Shock Peening (LSP) of stainless-steel 316 and 316L was studied using Ti:

Sapphire laser pulses of about 2 ps duration, maximum energy of about 1mJ and pulse

repetition rate of 5kHz in different liquid confinement media of Ethanol, Deionized

water and separate aqueous solutions of NaCl and Glycerol. It is found that the

laser fluence and/or energy attenuating mechanisms like self-focusing, filamentation,

plasma breakdown in the confinement media are less significant with ps laser pulses

than those with sub-ps or fs pulse durations. It is shown that the resulting surface

hardness of the peened steel as a function of laser fluence depends significantly on the

confinement media and the relative increase in the hardness increases monotonically

with the acoustic impedance of the liquid of the confinement medium used during

LSP.

Keywords: femtosecond laser, laser shock peening, laser processing in liquids, acoustic

impedance

a)Corresponding author: hoppius@lat.rub.de

b)Corresponding author: gurevich@lat.rub.de

1


I.
INTRODUCTION

Laser shock peening (LSP) in the ultra-short pulse durations regime of pico-second (ps)

to femto-second (fs) is a potentially important area of research for surface enhancement of

engineering components of different metals and alloys even though this area is still in its

infancy. This is because in this time regime the pressure of the shock waves generated is

correspondingly orders of magnitude higher than that generated for example in nano-second

or micro-second time regimes and the depth of the residual compressive strength is much

finer1,2. Also, the process of ultrashort pulse shock peening is fundamentally non-thermal

in nature because the laser pulse duration in this case is comparable or shorter than the

electron-phonon coupling time. The heating and cooling rates of the surface in this case can

be as large as tera Kelvin per second3 resulting in ultra-fast ablation, which is not possible

with longer laser pulses resulting in slower thermal processes like melting and vaporization.

The end result of these initial processes is the generation of sharp shock-wave4, which leaves

residual compressive stress in the surface region of the subjected metals or alloys causing its

peening through plastic deformation5.

Mostly LSP is carried out by applying a sacrificial layer on the metal or alloy surface

and an overlayer of confinement medium, generally water6,7. Even though some researchers

prefer to carry out LSP in fs time regime without a sacrificial layer8, which we have found

to result in compromised surface quality2. But even in the former case a confinement layer

is invariably used because the amount of pressure created due to laser ablation under the

confinement medium is several times or even an order of magnitude larger than the pressure

created in an unconfined open environment9. When the high intensity laser pulse interacts

with the target material, a high recoil pressure ablation plume is generated and in the

absence of a confinement layer this plume expands and loses most of its energy in the

surrounding environment away from the target surface rather quickly.
Whereas, in the

presence of a confinement medium the expanding plume is confined and thus, the shock

energy is concentrated more towards the target surface for longer time, which is beneficial

in peening the target material by resulting in enhanced compressive residual stress on its

surface region10. It has been found that the pressure induced by medium-confined ablation

plume can be as high as an order of magnitude higher and 2 to 3 times longer than pressure

induced by the same plume in air or vacuum, for the same laser intensity11. It is therefore

2


imperative to choose a good confinement medium to increase the peening efficiency.

Choice of a good confinement medium depends on its optical transparency for the

laser wavelength, chemical inertness to sample material and sacrificial layer, high acoustic

impedance and ease of usability. The layer of the confinement medium should also have an

optimum thickness. If the confinement layer is very thin, it makes the processing difficult

particularly at high laser intensities because it remains ineffective for confinement of the

ablation plume produced. And if the confinement layer is too thick, it absorbs, distorts the

pulsed laser beam that passes through this layer and attenuates the incident laser energy

due to filamentation particularly at shorter pulse durations and higher intensities12. That is

why it is also advantageous to take a confinement medium with smaller linear and nonlinear

refractive indexes n0 and n2 to increase the self-focusing threshold13.

To the best of our knowledge, N. C. Anderholm was the first to present the technique

of confined laser produced ablation14. In this study he investigated a method to generate

laser induced stress waves under a transparent overlayer of quartz disk. The experiments

were carried out using a ruby laser system at pulse energy of about 7 J and duration of

12 ns. Subsequently several studies have been carried out, which showed increased efficiency

of the peening with confinement layer. D. Devaux et al. investigated the characteristics

of laser-induced shock wave in a confining environment15. Experiments were carried out

with a conventional short ns time regime pulsed neodymium glass laser at laser intensities

ranging from 107 to 1011 W/cm2. Laser-induced shock pressures were measured using a

synthetic piezoelectric quartz gauge under glass, water and without any confinement layer.

They found that the shock pressure generated due to the laser ablated plume / plasma under

a confinement layer depends on the square root of the combined acoustic impedance of the

confinement medium and the target material15. They observed the maximum increase in

the shock pressure by about an order of magnitude due to the confinement layer in a broad

range of the laser intensity15.

Followed by these studies numerous researchers have studied the conventional LSP under

different confinement media in long and short pulse duration regimes. However, to the best

of our knowledge, a systematic study on the influence of different confinement media used

during LSP in ultra-short laser pulse duration regime of ps - fs is not yet reported in the

pertinent literature. We carried out such a study on the role of different confinement media

on the mechanical properties of stainless steel subjected to LSP in the ps time regime. We

3


FIG. 1. Schematic of experimental arrangement for the measurements of the incident beam atten-

uation due to filamentation in different confinement media.

choose four confinement media for this study viz. Ethanol, Deionized water, aqueous solu-

tions of NaCl and Glycerol separately. Since pure glycerol is highly viscous, the confinement

media in this case was prepared by mixing water in it so that we could flow it over the

target sample to remove the ablation debris and bubbles etc. at the high repetition rate of

the peening laser pulses. Using these confinement media for ps LSP we first investigated

the problems of laser induced non-linear effects like self-focusing, filamentation and plasma

breakdown etc. in the confinement media, which attenuate the laser energy that can be

delivered to the surface of the sacrificial layer. Followed by that, under the optimized condi-

tions of LSP, we studied the surface hardness of the steel subjected to ps LSP under different

confinement media. The results of these studies are presented and discussed in this paper.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL

This study was carried out in two parts. Part one was to study the laser energy at-

tenuating processes at ultra-short durations of the sub-ps and ps of the laser pulses used

for the LSP such as non-linear effects of self-focusing, plasma breakdown and filamentation

in different confinement media. Schematic of the experimental set-up for investigating the

energy attenuation due to filamentation in different confinement media is shown in figure 1.

The ultrashort laser pulses of duration of ∼ 100 fs to 5 ps, wavelength of 800 nm ±30 nm

and pulse energy of about 1 mJ was focused by a plano-convex spherical lens of focal length

of ∼ 100 mm into a test cuvette made of BK7 glass containing the confining liquid under

investigation. The focal spot size of the laser beam in water, determined by ablation exper-

iments was ∼ 20µm. A sharp metal blade was inserted incrementally into the beam path

from top to bottom of the cuvette in the focal plane of the laser beam and after the light

4


filament and white-light generation began as shown in Fig. 1 schematically, blocking the

initial laser radiation and white light in small steps. The out coming laser and white lights

were split to simultaneously pass into a power meter and a spectrum analyzer (USB2000+

made by Ocean Optics). This combined and simultaneous measurements of laser and white

light power and spectrum enabled the differentiation between white light and Ti:Sapphire

laser radiation through computational deconvolution and acquiring the spatial intensity dis-

tributions of the two lights at different pulse durations, as we will discuss in the section

Results and Discussions.

Part two of our study was to find the effect of different confinement media on the ultra-

short pulsed laser shock peening of stainless steel 316 and 316L. The experimental set-up

for studying this part is shown in figure 2. We used a Ti:sapphire laser system (Spitfire Ace

produced by Spectra Physics) operating at wavelength about 800 nm. The pulse duration was

stretched by adjusting the compressor of the laser system to about 2 ps and the maximum

peak energy was taken about 1 mJ at 5 kHz pulse repetition frequency. As shown in figure 2,

the laser beam was focused using a telecentric lens of about 128 mm focal length to the spot

diameter of about 10 µm on to the target samples through the glass window of an in-house

fabricated processing chamber and the liquid confinement media therein. The target samples

were mounted in this confinement media filled processing chamber. Liquids of confinement

media were pumped into the processing chamber using an pump to achieve a laminar flow

to remove any bubble formed due to the repeated interaction of the laser beam with the

target under the confinement media and the ablated debris that would invariably affect the

parameters of the laser light adversely. This chamber (volume of ∼ 20 cm3) was flushed with

different liquids of the confinement media flowing at a rate of about 4.2 l/min for the aforesaid

purpose. The chamber was mounted onto an X, Y-stage for positioning the samples. During

the LSP process, a galvo-scanner (SCANcube10, manufactured by SCANLAB) directed the

laser beam on to the target as shown in figure 2.

Processing of the samples was carried out at different laser fluences controlled by a λ/2

wave plate and a polarizing beam splitter. The average laser power was measured prior to

the processing using a power meter aligned in the laser beam path as shown in figure 2. As

mentioned, we carried out the LSP of stainless steel 316 and 316L under different confinement

media of Ethanol, Deionized water, aqueous solutions of NaCl and Glycerol separately using

a sacrificial layer of a black vinyl adhesive tape. Vinyl tape satisfies all the requirements of

5


FIG. 2. Experimental set-up for studying the influence of different confinement media on ultra-

short pulsed laser shock peening.

a good sacrificial layer such as good absorption of laser light, an even surface, chemically

inert, good sticking to the target metal, environmentally safe etc., which makes it a better

alternative in comparison to layers like black paint, transparent adhesive tape etc. The laser

peened samples were investigated for the resulting surface quality using a scanning electron

microscope, for chemical analysis using Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and

surface hardness using a Vickers hardness tester (KB30BV7) with HV 0.1 (equivalent to

0.981N).

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

As stated earlier, we first investigated the laser pulse energy attenuation processes due to

combined thermal and non-linear effects of the laser beam passing through the confinement

media used for the peening. Using the experimental setup shown in figure 1, a cross sec-

tional spatial intensity distribution of the laser light and the white light generated through

filamentation, which attenuated the laser energy and fluence, were acquired. These spatial

intensity profiles of the two lights are shown in figure 3. For 800 µJ pulses, transmitting

through 40mm length of water from the focal spot of the laser light, two important infer-

ences were elicited. 1) The focal spot diameter of the Ti:Sapphire radiation increased by a

factor of almost 7.5 to about ∼150 µm reducing the fluence at the target correspondingly. 2)

Depending on the pulse length, as shown in figure 3, large portion of the laser radiation was

6


100 fs
5 ps

norm.intensity

FIG. 3. Comparative spatial intensity distributions of the incident laser radiation (dark-gray sharp

peak) and of the white light generated through filamentation (light-gray broad peak) in cases of

100 fs and 5 ps laser pulses.

found to get converted into white light. The pulse energy loss due to this filamentation and

white light generation process was found to be about ∼60% for the 100 fs pulses while it was

only about 20% in case of the laser pulse duration of 5 ps, as shown in figure 3. From this

point of view, it is energetically advantageous to use a few ps laser pulses compared to that

of 100 fs for shock-wave peening in a confinement medium. Since the durations of the 100 fs

and 2-5 ps pulses do not exceed the electron-phonon coupling time in metals, we assume

that the amplitudes of the shock waves generated with these pulses are comparable at the

constant laser fluence delivered at the target metal. Hence it is imperative to investigate

the relative merits and demerits of LSP in these two duration regimes of the laser pulses.

One of the most important issues is the optimization of the confining media thickness.

Figure 4 shows a comparison of the length of the onset and the actual extension of the fila-

mentation produced in deionized water as confinement medium for the laser pulse duration

of 100 fs and 2 ps at identical pulse energy of about 1 mJ. As can be seen filamentation

and plasma breakdown initiate much later along the path of the laser beam in the deionized

water in case of the 2 ps than 100 fs. A similar behavior was also observed in ethanol12.

This gives a bench mark of the length of the confinement medium, which should be used to

locate the target sample so as to zap the laser beam with minimal loss of energy.

In our experimental studies we have also investigated the surface morphologies and con-

tamination mainly due to oxidation and carbonization. Our general finding was that there

were no significant differences in these aspects due to the different confinement media as long

as the laser beam interacted with the sacrificial layer and it was not allowed to interact with

the metal surface directly. As stated earlier, different confinement media used in this study

7


FIG. 4. Longitudinal size of filamentation and its point of initiation observed in deionized water

as a confinement medium at laser pulse duration of (a) 100 fs (b) 2 ps. The beam propagation

direction is indicated by black arrows. The red vertical line shows the focal point of the focusing

lens in the respective image.

were Ethanol, Deionized water, aqueous solution of NaCl at 20% wt./v and glycerol at 60%

concentration also in water. The pertinent physical properties of these confinement media

are summarized in table I. Deionized water was preferred over the normal water, to avoid

any mineral deposition in the chamber and on the samples usually caused by the normal

water. To study the effect of different confinement media we used two different samples of

steel and measured the surface hardness on Vickers scale at different fluences of the 2 ps

laser pulses used for the peening. The reference hardness in the following figures refers to

the hardness of the untreated steel samples and the experimental points are the hardness

relative to this reference. Throughout this work untreated reference hardness (HV) value

was taken as 160 HV for grade SUS316L and 290 HV for SUS316, both measured using

Vickers hardness testing equipment. In these experiments the sample surface was covered

by overlapping laser pulses. The repetition rate of the laser was 5 kHz, the scanning velocity

10 mm/s, corresponding to 2 micrometer shift between the centers of two consecutive pulses.

Figure 5(a) shows the hardness of the stainless steel SUS316 measured at different fluences

of the laser beam in the confinement medium of Ethanol. On the x-axis we plot calculated

fluence, which is the pulse energy measured before the processing chamber divided by the

measured laser spot area. As can be seen in this figure the surface hardness briefly increased

with laser fluence and then monotonically decreased before almost saturating at the laser

fluence of about 1500 J/cm2. The initial increase in the hardness is plausibly due to in-

crease in the shock pressure induced by the increasing fluence of the peening laser pulses.

8


TABLE I. Pertinent properties of different confinement media used in this study, ∗ are taken from16

and ∗∗ are from17.

Confinement layer Density Sound speed Acoustic impedance

(kg/m3)
(m/s)
106 (kg m−2s−1)

Ethanol∗
789
1180
0.93

Deionized water∗
998
1400
1.48

20% NaCl∗
1150
1750
1.57

60% Glycerol∗∗
1230
1899
2.34

Subsequent decrease in the hardness can be attributed to the onset of energy attenuating

processes due to non-linear absorption, filamentation etc.

Experimentally measured hardness of the SUS316L stainless-steel as a function of the

peening laser fluence in the confinement medium of Deionized water is shown in figure 5(b).

In contrast to the case of Ethanol stated above, in Deionized water, the surface hardness

shows a little decrease in its value with increasing fluence in the beginning before a drastic

increase in the hardness with the fluence preceding the final fall due to onset of the complete

ablation of the sacrificial layer on the surface of the target sample. Complete ablation of the

sacrificial layer at the laser fluence of about 3250 J/cm2 was confirmed by visual inspection

of the sacrificial layer and onset of Laser Induced Periodic Surface Structures (LIPSS) on

the target metal observed under high magnification of SEM. Earlier we had shown that

followed by the complete ablation of the sacrificial layer, whenever there is direct interaction

between the laser pulses and the metal surface, LIPSS formation is inevitable2. Formation

of LIPSS, oxidation of the exposed surface of the target metal and partial ablation at the

surface collectively seem to be responsible for the drastic decrease in hardness beyond the

laser fluence of 3250 J/cm2, where complete ablation of the sacrificial black tape occurred.

Reason for the initial gentle decrease in the hardness is not clear to us at this stage and this

could also be due to the fluctuations in the experimental conditions and/or errors in the

measurements.

Dependence of the surface hardness on laser fluence in the confinement medium of aqueous

solution of 20% NaCl is shown in figure 5(c). This dependence and the one in the confinement

medium of 60% glycerol in water, as shown in figure 5(d) are rather similar in trend. First

9


FIG. 5. (a-d). Variation in the surface hardness of stainless steel SUS316L peened at different

fluences of the laser pulses in (a) Ethanol (b) Deionized water (c) aqueous solution of NaCl of 20%

concentration and (d) 60% Glycerol in water as confinement media.

the hardness increases with the fluence due to the increase in the shock pressure generated

and beyond the maxima, it decreases putatively due to the onset of laser energy attenuating

processes as discussed earlier. However, an interesting feature in figure 5(d) is the spike of

increases in the hardness in the fluence range of 2000 - 3500 J/cm2 with the exceptionally

high peak hardness of about 230 on the Vickers scale. This can possibly be explained by

the following mechanism: The linear refractive index n0 and the nonlinear refractive index

n2 for glycerol are both larger than that of deionized water18, hence, their product in the

water-glycerol mixture is also larger than that in the water. The critical laser pulse power

needed for filamentation in transparent media (as shown in figure 4) can be estimated13 as

Pcr = 0.15λ2

n0n2 , where λ is the incident light wavelength. Moreover, the ionization potential of

glycerol is lower that of water (10.1 eV and 12.6 eV respectively). Hence, the filamentation

10


and the optical breakdown in the water-glycerol mixture must happen at lower laser peak

powers (i.e., fluences, because the laser pulse duration and the focusing conditions were the

same), than in water. Thus, we suppose that the decrease in the hardness in the figure 5(d)

is due to onset of the incident laser beam filamentation for fluences above approximately

3000 J/cm2.

To compare the effectiveness of all the confinement media used in the present study, we

have plotted the relative increase in the maximal measured hardness of the stainless steels as

a function of the acoustic impedance of the confinement medium, which is shown in figure 6.

Since acoustic impedance is a product of the density and corresponding speed of sound in

that medium it is therefore a very relevant parameter for the confinement effects of the

medium. As can be seen in figure 6, the relative increase in the hardness rises monotonically

with the acoustic impedance in the range of this parameter used in the present study. This

is plausible because if the confinement medium is denser and shock wave travels faster in

that the resulting containment of the shock energy and its delivery to the target metal will

be more effective. Here one may argue that if the speed of sound is higher in a medium,

the total duration of the shock exerted on the target might be shorter. But as we know the

total duration of the shock applied on the target metal also depends on the thickness of the

confinement medium and we expect to find an optimum duration of the shock that would

result in the maximum peening effect in the target metal.

IV.
CONCLUSIONS

Two important inferences can be drawn from this experimental study on the fundamental

role of the confinement media used during the LSP in the ultra-short laser pulse durations

regime. First, in this ultra-short pulse duration regime of LSP, the non-linear mechanisms

like self-focusing, filamentation, plasma breakdown and bubble formation at high repeti-

tion rate in the confinement media can significantly attenuate the input energy of the laser

pulses. It is therefore of paramount importance to characterize these adverse effects com-

prehensively so that their influence is minimized while carrying out the LSP in ps - fs pulse

regime. Second, it is found that the resulting surface hardness of the peened metal as a

function of laser fluence depends significantly on the confinement media and the relative

increase in the hardness increases monotonically with the acoustic impedance of the liquid

11


FIG. 6.
Comparison of maximum relative increase in surface hardness of stainless-steels laser

peened in different media of confinement at different respective acoustic impedances. The points

corresponding to Ethanol and 20% NaCl are for SUS316 and the other two points corresponding

to Deionized water and 60% Glycerol are for SUS316L

of the confinement medium. Since LSP is a technology of industrial potential, it is imper-

ative to accurately and comprehensively establish the role of different confinement media

in this technology. Further experiments are underway to get deeper insight into the role of

confinement media in the ultra-short pulsed laser shock peening.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Lalit M. Kukreja acknowledges financial support received from the Alexander von Hum-

boldt Foundation, Germany under grant no. IND/1015352 for his visiting position at Ap-

plied Laser Technologies, Ruhr-Universit¨at Bochum in Germany. Jan Hoppius acknowledges

financial support of DFG, Project GU 1075/8 in SPP 1839 Tailored Disorder.

REFERENCES

1E. I. Ageev, S. I. Kudryashov, N. V. Nikonorov, R. K. Nuryev, A. A. Petrov, A. A.

Samokhvalov, and V. P. Veiko. Non-contact ultrasonic acquisition of femtosecond laser-

driven ablative mbar-level shock waves on ti alloy surface. Appl. Phys. Lett., 108(8):084106,

2016.

12


2Jan S. Hoppius, Lalit M. Kukreja, Marina Knyazeva, and Fabian P¨ohl. On femtosecond

laser shock peening of stainless steel AISI 316. Appl. Surf. Sci., 435:1120 – 1124, 2018.

3William H Duff and Leonid V Zhigilei. Computational study of cooling rates and recrys-

tallization kinetics in short pulse laser quenching of metal targets. J. Phys.: Conf. Series,

59:413–417, 2007.

4Joachim Noack, Daniel X. Hammer, Gary D. Noojin, Benjamin A. Rockwell, and Alfred

Vogel. Influence of pulse duration on mechanical effects after laser-induced breakdown in

water. J. Appl. Phys., 83(12):7488–7495, 1998.

5Dongkyun Lee and Elijah Kannatey-Asibu.
Experimental investigation of laser shock

peening using femtosecond laser pulses. J. Laser Appl., 23(2):022004, 2011.

6B.P. Fairand and A.H. Clauer. Effect of water and paint coatings on the magnitude of

laser-generated shocks. Opt. Commun., 18(4):588 – 591, 1976.

7Jay A. Fox. Effect of water and paint coatings on laser-irradiated targets. Appl. Phys.

Lett., 24(10):461–464, 1974.

8Y. Sano, K. Akita, K. Masaki, Y. Ochi, I. Altenberger, and B. Scholtes. Laser peening

without coating as a surface enhancement technology. J. Laser Micro/Nanoengineering,

1:161–166, 2006.

9R. Fabbro, P. Peyre, L. Berthe, and X. Scherpereel. Physics and applications of laser-shock

processing. J. Laser Appl., 10(6):265–279, 1998.

10Xin Hong, Shengbo Wang, Dahao Guo, Hongxing Wu, Jie Wang, Yusheng Dai, Xiaoping

Xia, and Yanning Xie.
Confining medium and absorptive overlay: Their effects on a

laser-induced shock wave. Opt. Lasers Eng., 29(6):447 – 455, 1998.

11R. Fabbro, J. Fournier, P. Ballard, D. Devaux, and J. Virmont. Physical study of laser-

produced plasma in confined geometry. J. Appl. Phys., 68(2):775–784, 1990.

12Jan S. Hoppius, Stella Maragkaki, Alexander Kanitz, Peter Gregorcic, and Evgeny L.

Gurevich. Optimization of femtosecond laser processing in liquids. Appl. Surf. Sci., 467-

468:255 – 260, 2019.

13A. Couairon and A. Mysyrowicz. Femtosecond filamentation in transparent media. Phys.

Reports, 441(2):47 – 189, 2007.

14N. C. Anderholm. Laser-generated stress waves. Appl. Phys. Lett., 16(3):113–115, 1970.

15D Devaux, R Fabbro, and J Virmont. Generation of shock waves by laser-matter interaction

in confined geometries. J. Phys. IV, 1(C7):179–182, 1991.

13


16NDT
Resource
Center.
Accoustic
properties
for
liquids.

https://www.nde-ed.org/GeneralResources/MaterialProperties/UT/ut_matlprop_liquids.php.

Accessed: 2019-08-22.

17Latifa Negadi, Badra Feddal-Benabed, Indra Bahadur, Joseph Saab, Manel Zaoui-Djelloul-

Daouadji, Deresh Ramjugernath, and Amina Negadi. Effect of temperature on density,

sound velocity, and their derived properties for the binary systems glycerol with water

or alcohols. J. Chem. Thermodynamics, 109:124 – 136, 2017. Special Issue on Volume

Properties.

18D. C. Brown, J. M. Rinefierd, S. D. Jacobs, and J. A. Abate. Electronic, nuclear and total

nonlinear indices of liquids. In H. E. Bennet, editor, Laser Induced Damage in Optical

Materials, Proceedings of Boulder Damage Symposium, pages 91–98, 1979.

14


