Quantum optics with single molecules in a three-dimensional
polymeric platform

Maja Colautti1,2, Pietro Lombardi3, Marco Trapuzzano2, Francesco S. Piccioli3, Sofia Pazzagli2,3,
Bruno Tiribilli5, Sara Nocentini1,3, Francesco S. Cataliotti1,2,3, Diederik Wiersma1,2,6

Costanza Toninelli1,3*

1European Laboratory for Non-Linear Spectroscopy (LENS), Via Nello Carrara 1, Sesto F.no 50019, Italy

2 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università degli Studi di Firenze, Via G. Sansone 1, Sesto Fiorentino 50019, Italy

3 National Institute of Optics (CNR-INO), Largo Enrico Fermi 6, Firenze 50125, Italy

5 Institute for Complex Systems (CNR-ISC), Via Madonna del Piano 10, Sesto F.no 50019, Firenze, Italy

6 Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRiM), IT-10135 Torino, Italy

∗toninelli@lens.unifi.it

September 17, 2019

Abstract

The successful development of future photonic quantum technologies heavily depends on the possibility
of realizing robust, reliable and, crucially, scalable nanophotonic devices. In integrated networks, quantum
emitters can be deployed as single-photon sources or non-linear optical elements, provided their transition
linewidth is broadened only by spontaneous emission. However, conventional fabrication approaches are hardly
scalable, typically detrimental for the emitter coherence properties and bear limitations in terms of geometries
and materials. Here we introduce an alternative platform, based on molecules embedded in polymeric photonic
structures. Three-dimensional patterns are achieved via direct laser writing around selected molecular emitters,
which preserve near-Fourier-limited fluorescence. By using an integrated polymeric design, record-high photon
fluxes from a single cold molecule are reported. The proposed technology allows to conceive a novel class of
quantum devices, including integrated multi-photon interferometers, arrays of indistinguishable single photon
sources and hybrid electro-optical nanophotonic devices.

Polymers are used in a wide application range, from nan-
otechnology and biomedicine, to clothing and food pack-
aging [1, 2], being low-cost mass-produced materials with
tailored physical, electronic and optical properties. They
provide expanded functionalities to optoelectronic and pho-
tonic devices [3, 4].
In optical integrated circuits e.g.,
polymer photonics extends the design options to three-
dimensions (3D) and free-standing structures, supporting
hybrid integration [5] and interchip connection [6]. On the
other hand, future technologies rely on light manipulation
at the single photon level, targeting unmatched function-
alities based on quantum effects. This sets new require-
ments to traditional photonic platforms, such as the integra-
tion of quantum emitters, which hold promise as on-demand
sources of non-classical light [7] and for measurements be-
yond the classical limit [8]. An effective coupling to quan-
tum emitters is indeed mandatory to guarantee efficient col-
lection and processing of the quantum states [9].
How-
ever, structuring the environment around quantum emit-

ters in the wavelength scale affects the emission properties,
typically degrading its quantum coherence and photostabil-
ity [10, 11], thus limiting on-chip operation. Furthermore
the nanofabrication of such semiconductor hybrid devices
[12,13] is demanding and hardly scalable, while the perfor-
mances result very sensitive to imperfections. Seminal re-
sults reported in Refs. [14–16] point at the key advantages
of single-emitter integration in polymeric microstructures,
such as one-step 3D patterning and a-priori positioning of
the emitter in high-intensity regions of the electro-magnetic
field. Nevertheless, the colloidal systems employed in Refs.
[14,15] are not suitable for most quantum applications due
to decoherence and spectral diffusion [10,17], whereas the
epitaxially grown quantum dots in [16] are not favourable
for a full 3D integration.
Single organic molecules of polyaromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs) have shown remarkable quantum optical proper-
ties within numerous combinations of guest chromophores
and host matrices, and are potentially compatible with

1

arXiv:1909.07334v1  [physics.app-ph]  16 Sep 2019


polymer chemistry.
In particular, the realization of
Anthracene nanocrystals doped with Dibenzoterrylene
molecules (DBT:Ac NCXs) exhibiting photostable single-
photon emission and Fourier-limited line-widths at 3K [18],
has opened the pathway to their full embedding in poly-
meric devices [19,20].
In this work we introduce a hybrid polymeric photonic plat-
form, that shows emission close to the life-time limit from
single molecules coupled to 3D integrated optical elements.
The nanophotonic chips are obtained by direct laser writ-
ing (DLW) of polymers [21], with unique advantages in
terms of versatility, large offer of multi-purpose photore-
sists, sub-micron resolution [22] and computer-aided man-
ufacturing.
The compatibility with molecules and broad
flexibility in the design is demonstrated here by embed-
ding Anthracene nanocrystals doped with Dibenzoterry-
lene molecules at variable heights and well-defined loca-
tions in different architectures, fabricated either on silica
or on gold substrates.
Critical aspects like the perfor-
mances of the hybrid photonic device under cryogenic cool-
ing and the effect of the whole fabrication process on the
emitter quantum coherence are investigated. In particular,
close-to Fourier limited emission is observed from on-chip
molecules at cryogenic temperatures and enhanced light ex-
traction is achieved in a micro-dome solid immersion lens
design.
These results show how an all-organic platform
can be realised, that offers unique solutions for photonic
quantum technologies, combining on a chip the freedom
of three-dimensional polymeric architectures with the op-
timal properties of single photon emission from fluorescent
molecules.

Organic quantum emitters in 3D polymeric
structures

Single PAHs are excellent candidates as non-classical light
sources [23–26], non-linear elements at the few photon
level [27–29] and nano-scale sensors for electric fields,
pressure and strain [19, 30–32]. Recently they have been
successfully integrated in open optical cavities [29, 33]
and antennas [34] and evanescently coupled to nanogu-
ides [35, 36] and waveguides [37–39]. Here, in Fig. 1 we
present three different light collecting devices 3D-carved in
polymers, each fully embedding a nanocrystal with fluores-
cent molecules. In the respective artistic views (top panels
1a, 1b, 1c) the integrated emitter is represented by a dipole
(black arrow) and red arrows highlight the promoted direc-
tion for the emitted fluorescence. Fig. 1a shows a micro-
dome on a transparent dielectric substrate (silica, refractive
index n = 1.45). This is a modified Weierstrass solid im-
mersion lens (SIL) [40], consisting of a hemisphere and a
cylindrical base built on top of one DBT:Ac NCX. NCXs
are previously deposited on the substrate (grey in the Figure
and with a zoom on the DBT chemical structure) and selec-
tively addressed upon preliminary characterization of the
fluorescence intensity at room temperature. The structure
is therefore centered on the emitter, so as to maximize up-

wards redirection and collection efficiency at narrow angles.
In Fig. 1b a similar design is sketched, this time realized on
a gold-coated layer (∼ 200-nm thick) to avoid radiation in
the lower hemisphere. With DLW, suspended architectures
can also be fabricated, such as the arch waveguide outlined
in Fig. 1c. In this case the nanocrystal is completely en-
veloped at the middlepoint of the structure, which is con-
ceived to efficiently route fluorescence throughout the silica
substrate. Besides the improvement in terms of integrated
coupling efficiency [14], the possibility of suspended inte-
gration is crucial to avoid losses through the substrate due to
the usually low refractive index of polymer materials. The
correct emitter position in the vertical dimension is ensured
by the use of two photoresist layers with different viscosity
but equal refractive indices. The accurate reproduction of
the three designs can be appreciated in the scanning elec-
tron microscope images reported in Figs. 1d, 1e, 1f.
For each structure, fluorescence imaging has been acquired
to evaluate the persistence of molecular emission. Figures
1g, 1h and 1i represent the fluorescence maps obtained at
room temperature, and collected from the top in the first two
cases and through the substrate in the waveguide geometry
(see Methods). The presence of fluorescence in all the de-
vices in Fig. 1 is striking evidence for the compatibility of
the organic molecular emitters with the whole fabrication
process, both on dielectric and metallic surfaces and even
in the suspended architecture. Notably, upon optimization
of the writing parameters, all the investigated micro-domes
showed molecule emission. The integration success rate is
also enhanced by defining and anchoring the coordinate sys-
tem of the writing laser beam to the location of selected
nanocrystals within the optical microscope image. Deter-
ministic positioning with such a simple and cost-effective
fabrication method is key for scaling up the process to more
complex chips, involving e.g. multiple emitters.
We remark that the overall process of reprecipitation of
the nanocrystals, deposition and selection of single photon
sources, requires the experimenter less than one hour and
can be readily automated.
The bright spots in Fig.1g and Fig.1h correspond to emis-
sion from the nanocrystals at the bases of the micro-domes.
Comparing the two, a first indication is obtained of the
higher directivity achievable in the presence of a reflective
substrate underneath the SIL-like structure. In Fig.1i in-
stead, fluorescence is observed both in correspondence with
the nanocrystal position at the centre of the waveguide, and
at the lateral output ports, where the guided emission is
outcoupled. From the relative intensities, a lower bound
for the molecule-to-waveguide coupling efficiency can be
hence estimated, yielding a value of about 10%. We remark
that this measurement is the result of the integrated signal
from all the emitters in the NCX, each with different orien-
tation and position with respect to the guided mode, hence
with varying coupling efficiency. Furthermore, the addi-
tional propagation losses due to the emitter inclusion can
be evaluated by comparing the normalized laser throughput
(ηWG+NCX = 36±1%) with the case of empty waveguides
(ηWG = 40 ± 2%). The measured value for the additional

2


5 μm

5 μm

1 

1

0

Norm. intensity

1

0

Norm. intensity

0

Norm. intensity

1

DBT:Ac
NCX

c

d
e

g
h
i

a
b

f

785$nm$

V0

V0

Figure 1: 3D integration of organic quantum emitters in a polymeric platform. Top panel, Artistic views of three light collecting
devices realized with Direct Laser Writing and fully embedding an Anthracene nanocrystal with fluorescent molecules of Dibenzoter-
rylene (DBT:Ac NCX). The black double arrow represents the integrated emitter dipole and red arrows highlight the promoted direction
for the emitted fluorescencce. a,b Micro-dome lens design for upwards redirection, respectively realized on a silica substrate, and on
a gold-coated layer to avoid bottom radiation and maximize collection efficiency. c, Suspended arch waveguide, fully enveloping the
nanocrystal at its middlepoint, for efficient routing of fluorescence throughout the silica substrate. Middle panel (d,e,f), Scanning Elec-
tron Microscope images of the respective structures. Bottom panel (g,h,i), Fluorescence maps attesting the persistence of molecular
emission after fabrication, acquired at room temperature and collected from the top in the micro-dome designs (d,e) and through the
substrate in the waveguide geometry (f). The dashed line in the maps denotes the contour of the respective structure.

scattering losses of 10% can be further minimized upon se-
lection of smaller nanocrystals, e.g. by integrating fluores-
cence imaging capability in the DLW workstation, as done
e.g. in Ref. [14].

In the following more accurate experiments are discussed,
which characterize the emission at the single molecule
level and in a cryogenic environment, using as test bed the
geometry depicted in Fig. 1b. Indeed, in the context of
quantum technologies, coherence in the emission of single
photons is required for basic quantum optics operations,
whereas narrow lines enable sensing applications and
efficient interfacing with atomic memories [41].
Such
properties can be observed with a standard epifluorescence
microscope, upon cooling the sample down to 3K (see
Methods). The employed pumping scheme is shown in the
simplified Jablonski diagram in the inset of Fig. 2a. By
scanning the frequency of a tunable continuous-wave diode
laser around a wavelength of ≈ 785nm, the zero-phonon
line of a single DBT molecule within a highly doped

nanocrystal can be readily selected.
The Stoke-shifted
fluorescence is collected through a longpass filter and
analyzed in different aspects.
The emitted photon statistics is measured with two
avalanche photodiodes (SPADs) arranged in a Hanbury
Brown and Twiss (HBT) configuration.
The second
order autocorrelation function g(2)(τ) is inferred from the
histogram for short delay times of the photon coincidences
on the two SPADs. A typical result from the micro-dome
on gold structure is displayed in Fig.
2a, obtained at
saturation. The best fit to the experimental data with the
function g(2)(τ) = 1 − (1 − g(2)(0))exp(−|τ|Γ), where τ
is the time delay and Γ accounts for the excitation and
spontaneous emission rates, yields g(2)(0) = 0.00 + 0.03.
Such value clearly verifies single molecule emission and
proves the high purity of the single photon stream emitted
in the integrated-molecule geometry.
By recording the Stoke-shifted fluorescence as a function
of the laser frequency, operating well below saturation, the

3


0
1
2
3
4

0.0

0.5

1.0

Norm. Counts

Laser Detuning (GHz)

0
25
50
75

0.0

0.5

1.0

Norm. Coincidences

Time (ns)

5
10
15
20
25
30

15

30

45

60

75

Laser Detuning (GHz)

Time (min)

Norm. Counts

0.0

0.10.0

30

70±1 MH
g(2)(0)=0.00±0.03

a
b
c

1.0!

0.5!

0.0!

1.0!

0.5!

0.0!

Time (min)

70±1 MH
g(2)(0)=0.00±0.03

a
b
c

15!

0!

30!

45!

60!

75!

90!

70±1 MH
g(2)(0)=0.00±0.03

a
b
c

0!

0!

1!

0!
10!
20!
30!
0!
1!
2!
3!
4!
0!
25!
50!
75!

DBT:Ac
NCX

c

d
e

g
h
i

b

f

785$nm$

V0

V0

z

Figure 2: Optical characterization of the integrated emitters at cryogenic temperature. Measurements are performed on the micro-
dome on gold structure. Inset, Simplified Jablonski diagram of the pumping scheme. The zero-phonon line of a single DBT molecule
is selected in frequency with a tunable continuous-wave laser (≈ 785nm) and the Stoke-shifted fluorescence is collected through a
longpass filter. a, Histogram of photon coincidences on two avalanche photodiodes in a Hanbury Brown and Twiss configuration.
The second order autocorrelation function is inferred by the best fit (red line) to the experimental data (black dots) g(2)(τ) = 1−(1−
g2(0))exp(−|τ|Γ), τ being the time delay and Γ accounting for the excitation and spontaneous emission rates, and yields g(2)(0) =
0.00+0.03. b, Excitation spectrum recording the Stoke-shifted fluorescence as a function of the laser frequency. The Lorentian fit (red
line) to the experimental data (black dots) accounts for a near to the life-time limited line-width γexp = 70±1 MHz. c, Photostability of
the integrated molecule emission shown by repeated line-width measurements (b) over time for 1.5h, with fluctuations of the excitation
central frequency within the range of few line-widths.

excited state population is probed and the zero-phonon line-
width can be directly retrieved. A characteristic excitation
spectrum is shown in Fig. 2b with a near to the life-time
limited line-width γexp = 70 ± 1MHz.
Considering that
γexp is within the experimental statistics collected for the
non integrated DBT:Ac NCX [18], and that it is close to
the theoretical Fourier-limited value of 40MHz for DBT
molecules, we can deduce that this fabrication process does
not alter significantly the NCX properties and that quantum
coherence is not compromised.
Finally, spectral diffusion is investigated by repeating the
line-width measurement previously described over time,
for 1.5h.
Fig.
2c shows a good photostability of the
integrated molecule emission, whose excitation central
frequency fluctuates within the range of few line-widths.
Being spectral diffusion a sensitive tool to appreciate the
environmental disturbance on quantum emitters, these
results are a relevant indication that the proposed polymeric
platform is a reliable technique to embed single molecules
in a photonic circuit.

Record-high photon flux from a single
molecule at low temperatures

We choose the micro-dome design as a case study to in-
vestigate its performances in terms of light extraction from
single molecules. The total height of the structure is given
by h = (1 + 1/n)r, where n is the polymer refractive index
and r the radius of curvature. This design provides redi-
rection via refraction at all upwards angles and efficiently
compresses emission into a small numerical aperture. It
also offers advantages in terms of simplicity of fabrication
and robustness against imperfections.

In Fig. 3, the results of 2D numerical simulations for the
collection efficiency and the collected photon flux (for the
experimental numerical aperture NA ∼ 0.62) for the micro-
dome geometry on gold are summarized (see Methods).
The structure dimensions are optimized assuming a dipole-
to-gold distance dipoleh = 100nm, which promotes emis-
sion in the upper hemisphere following Ref. [34], yield-
ing hth = 8.7µm and rth = 5.3,µm. Since experimentally
though there is no control over the fluorophore position
within the nanocrystal volume, calculations are performed
varying its value within the largest possible NCX thickness
of 400nm. The DBT alignment within Ac crystal is instead
well known and lies horizontally on the plane of the sub-
strate [24]. As a result, for dipoleh ≈ 100nm, a remarkable
collection efficiency above 85% is obtained, together with a
small enhancement of the total emission rate. In the corre-
sponding polar plot, the emission pattern appears highly di-
rectional, resulting in ∼ 80% of the total emission funneled
within a polar angle of about 30◦. The oscillatory behavior
in the detected photon flux is due to the interference nature
of the photonic redirection effect, as already discussed for
a similar case e.g. in Ref. [34]. Close to the metal layer,
the dipolar emission is obviously quenched. As the dipole
position is further displaced away from the gold surface, the
onset of emission lobes beyond the critical angles is clearly
visible in the second polar plot, reducing the overall collec-
tion efficiency, even when constructive interference in the
forward direction is recovered for dipoleh ≃ 350nm.

Based on such theoretical results, the fabrication of the
micro-dome on gold embedding a single DBT:Ac NCX
was optimized and characterized by means of atomic force
microscopy (AFM). A typical AFM image is displayed in
Fig. 4a. In particular, a strip-scan of the structure passing
through the dome pole is shown together with a high re-

4


Coll. Eff.

dipoleh [µm]

0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Coll. Photon Flux

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

0.51

0.9

Figure 3: 2D numerical simulation of the micro-dome geometry. Collection efficiency and collected photon flux calculated as a
function of the fluorophore vertical position within the nanocrystal volume (dipoleh), for the the micro-dome on gold. The collected
photon flux is calculated as the radiated power within the numerical aperture acceptance NA ∼ 0.62 (Phom) and the total power emitted
in a homogeneous medium (Phom). For dipoleh = 110nm the collection efficiency is maximum, above 85%, and the corresponding
polar plot shows a highly directional pattern with ∼ 80% of the total emission within a polar angle of ∼ 30◦. While the emission is
quenched close to the metal layer, at bigger distances the overall collection efficiency is reduced due to emission lobes beyond the
collection limits (grey dashed lines in the polar plots), as displayed in the corresponding emission patterns.

solved AFM map of the top 4x4µm2 surface area. From
the dome profile we estimate the experimental dimensions
of the structure, with a total height h = 9.1 ± 0.1µm and a
radius r = 5.0 ± 0.1µm, in good agreement with the nom-
inal values set by the numerical optimization. From the
AFM map, the average surface roughness is estimated to
be ∆r = 41±4nm.

Finally, Fig. 4b shows one of the main results of the pa-
per, that is the collected photon flux as a function of pump
power at low temperatures, emitted from a single molecule
embedded in the polymeric micro-dome device, whose de-
sign has just been commented. The measurements are com-
pared to the case of a nude nanocrystal and of a molecule
in the micro-dome device on silica. The photon flux is ob-
tained, for a given excitation power, by measuring the exci-
tation spectrum and recording the detected count rates in the
Stokes-shifted band at resonance, without correcting for the
detector internal efficiency, (ηdet ≃ 65%). In case indistin-
guishable photons from the ZPL are required, non-resonant
excitation on low-density NCXs can be employed [42] and
a similar count rate can be estimated, based on the typical
expected branching ratio for DBT:Ac (30% ÷ 50% [29]).
For each configuration, the variability in the emitter posi-
tion within the crystal results in some statistical fluctuations
in the measured count rate within nominally identical struc-
tures. The stronger effect is to be found for the dome-on-
gold, as follows from the previous discussion on Fig. 3. The
direct comparison reported in Fig. 4 is however representa-
tive of the typical observed trend.

As expected, a saturation curve is observed in all three cases
as a function of the pump power, expressed in logarith-

mic scale. The detected counts are fitted according to the
formula R(P) = (a + bP) + R∞P/(P + Ps), with R∞ being
the maximum detected count rate, P the laser power, Ps
the saturation power and (a+bP) accounting for the resid-
ual laser scattering as a linear contribution. We obtain a
maximum measured photon flux at the detector equal to
R∞NC = (0.18 ± 0.01)Mcps, R∞dome = (0.66 ± 0.02)Mcps
and R∞Au−dome = (2.38 ± 0.11)Mcps, respectively. The de-
tected count rate from a single cold molecule in the opti-
mized micro-dome design is to our knowledge the high-
est reported to date and appears particularly significant
when associated with the long excited state lifetime of DBT
molecules (≃ 4.5 ns). Furthermore, taking into account the
efficiency of the detector (ηdet), of the optical path (55%)
and the objective transmission (70%), the real photon flux at
the detector is ∼ 10Mcps. In particular, with respect to the
nude nanocrystal, we measure a factor 3.7 ± 0.2 improve-
ment in the collected photon flux for the micro-dome on
silica, and a factor 13±1 in the case of the optimal config-
uration for the micro-dome on gold. Moreover a reduction
in the saturation power by about two orders of magnitude
is observed, passing from a value of (56 ± 10)W/cm2 to
(0.10±0.02)W/cm2. Indeed, the presence of the modified
SIL has the primary effect of increasing the effective nu-
merical aperture of the optical system, hence improving its
focusing efficiency. The reflective layer underneath further
increases the intensity at the emitter position for a given in-
put power.

In order to probe the emission pattern of the devices, we
perform back focal plane (BFP) measurements of the emit-
ted fluorescence, providing the power distribution in mo-

5


0

z (μm)

9

a

0,001
0,01
0,1
1
10
100

0,0

0,5

1,0

1,5

2,0

2,5

 dome Au
 dome silica
 NC silica

Fluorescence (Mcps)

uW
Laser Power (μW)

Fluorescence (Mcps)

 dome Au
 dome silica
 NC silica

μ-dome on Au
μ-dome on silica
NC on silica

Norm. intensity

1

0

NC on silica

c
d
e

Norm. intensity

1

0

μ-dome on silica

Norm. intensity

1

0

μ-dome on Au

b

Figure 4: Experimental results. a, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) characterization of the fabricated micro-dome on gold. The
strip-scan (20x1µm2) of the structure passing through the dome pole gives an estimation of the experimental dimensions, with a total
height h = 9.1±0.1µm and a radius r = 5.0±0.1µm, in good agreement with the optimal values based on simulations, hth = 8.7µm
and rth = 5.3µm, and displayed in the grey silhouette. From the AFM map of the top 4x4µm2 surface area, the surface roughness
is estimated to be ∆r = 200 ± 150nm. b, Experimental collected photon flux at low temperature from a single molecule embedded
in the fabricated micro-dome structure on gold (yellow stars), compared to the case of the micro-dome on silica (red dots) and of the
nude nanocrystal (blue triangles). Saturation curves are obtained by plotting the maximum counts of the measured excitation spectrum
as a function of pump power. The data are fitted (continuous lines) according to the formula R(P) = (a + bP) + R∞P/(P + Ps). The
corresponding maximum detected photon flux at the detector are R∞Au−dome = (2.38 ± 0.11)Mcps, R∞dome = (0.66 ± 0.02)Mcps and
R∞NC = (0.18 ± 0.01), respectively. c,d,e, Back focal plane (BFP) measurements of the emitted fluorescence showing the emission
pattern for the micro-dome on gold, the micro-dome on silica and the nude nanocrystal, respectively. Detected counts are plotted in
momentum space and normalized to the maximum for all plots, whereas the white dashed circumferences identify the experimental
maximum collection angle of ∼ 42◦ .

mentum space. In Figures 4c, 4d, 4e we compare the nor-
malized BFP maps for the nude nanocrystal on silica, the
micro-dome device on silica, and the micro-dome on gold.
The white dashed circumferences in the plots identify the
experimental maximum collection angle of ∼ 42◦, whereas
the centre of the circumference corresponds to the objec-
tive optical axis. Fig. 4c shows a homogeneously bright
map, as expected from a dipole emission and consistently
with the typical on-plane orientation of the DBT:Ac sys-
tem [18, 24]. Conversely, Fig. 4d and 4e confirm an ef-
fective redirection into small angles achieved in the micro-
devices, competitive with what shown in much more com-
plex structures [43]. In the last cases, the slight misalign-
ment of the bright spots is evidence of the not perfectly cen-

tred emitter, which owes both to the 3DLW process and to
the uncertainty in the fluorophore position within the Ac
nanocrystal. Consistent with the results of the numerical
simulations presented in Fig.3, the pattern of a micro-dome
on gold hosting a horizontally oriented molecule at an ap-
propriate distance from the gold surface (≃ 100nm) features
most of its emission within the first 30◦ (see also Supple-
mentary Information (S.I.) Fig.1). It is worth noticing that
this configuration is not the one exhibiting the highest di-
rectivity. Narrower emission lobes can indeed be observed
(see Fig.2 in the S.I.), corresponding though to a lower col-
lection efficiency, as clearly evident from the central polar
plot of Fig.3.

The effective redirection at narrow angles combined with

6


Fiber-coupled

Fluorescence 51%

Collection
optics

Gaussian mode 
Fluorescence 

Overlap integral

76%

a
b

Cryogenic
station

Normalized field intensity 

x (μm)

Fiber-collimator

Figure 5: Efficient coupling into a fiber. a, Estimation of the expected coupling efficiency for the optimal configuration of the micro-
dome on gold. The target value is evaluated in terms of mode matching by comparison of the measured fluorescence spatial distribution
of the integrated structure with a Gaussian mode, typical of a single mode optical fiber. The estimation gives the best overlap integral
of ≈ 80%. b, Schematic of the experimental setup and measured performance of up to 51% coupling efficiency, which is normalized
to the detected counts on a SPAD. In particular, the setup consists in the objective, a telescope and a tunable-distance fiber-collimator.

the high detected count rate achieved with the micro-dome
device are particularly suitable for the efficient coupling
into a fiber, within the perspective of a compact fiber-
coupled single photon source. With the experimental setup
schematically shown in Fig. 5b, a coupling efficiency up
to 51% into a single mode fiber is achieved. The target
value can be estimated in terms of mode matching by com-
paring the measured fluorescence spatial distribution in the
micro-dome on gold with a Gaussian mode, typical of a sin-
gle mode optical fiber (see Fig. 5a). In particular, we esti-
mate the best overlap integral to be of the order of ≃ 80%.
Considering the flexibility offered by a polymeric photonic
platform [44], a monolitic fiber coupler can be integrated
onto the metal-coated micro-dome in order to realize an
alignment-free and ultra compact fiber-coupled SPS.

Conclusions

We have demonstrated the fast, efficient integration of sin-
gle molecule quantum emitters in 3D polymeric structures,
thus realizing a novel flexible photonic platform, leverag-
ing the versatility of polymeric materials. The experimental
results entail deterministic positioning of the source, fabri-
cation on different substrates (dielectric, metallic) as well
as integration in suspended designs. Furthermore, the com-
patibility of direct laser writing with organic nanocrystals
is demonstrated by showing close-to Fourier-limited emis-
sion from a single embedded dibenzoterrylene molecule at
3K. As a first example of the performances attainable by
our platform, we show unequalled collection efficiency for
single organic emitters at low temperatures, reaching pho-
ton fluxes above 2.3 Mcps. This value approximately dou-

bles the state of the art for the detected count rate from a
single molecule, with the improvement rising to a factor 5
considering the specific case of DBT [45, 46]. The effec-
tive fluorescence redirection displayed in back-focal-plane
measurements makes this device suitable for fiber-coupling,
with an expected efficiency of ≃ 80% and a measured value
up to 50%.
The use of single-molecule emitters, intrinsically identi-
cal, offers the appealing possibility of conveying indistin-
guishable photons from different remote sources [23]. Few-
photon non-linearities can be also envisaged, based on such
quantum emitters interacting with confined optical modes
[29, 47]. Owing to the great flexibility of the direct laser
writing technique and to the versatility of polymeric ma-
terials, the proposed approach can be potentially extended
to operational chips integrating monolithic cavities, waveg-
uides and directional couplers [48]. For example, a complex
quantum effect such as the interference among more than
two particles can be observed, using on-demand single pho-
tons generated by individual molecules embedded in 3DL-
written polymeric tritters [49].
Otherwise, the proposed
technology can be adapted for scalable and efficient cou-
pling of multiple emitters, even in hybrid polymer-silicon
nitride circuits [5]. Furthermore, the possibility to engi-
neer photo-functional materials as photoresists
[50] en-
ables full customization, from the optimization of spatial
resolution and mechanical stability, to the employment of
photo-reactive [51] or electro-optical features for tunable
resonances. Thanks to its advantages, we expect that our
platform will lead to a plethora of novel scalable micro-
photonic devices with tailored functionalities, at the single
emitter level. Our achievements anticipate the impact or-
ganic materials can have also in quantum technologies.

7


Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge and thank Hengsbach Stefan and
Bade Klaus from the Institute of Microstructure Technology
(MIT) in Karlsruhe, for the useful discussions and insights
on the fabrication process.

Funding
This project has received funding from the EraNET Cofund
Initiatives QuantERA within the European Union’s Horizon
2020 research and innovation program grant agreement No.
731473 (project ORQUID). M.C. acknowledges the Karl-
sruhe Nano Micro Facility (KNMF) for the access to fabri-
cation and characterization technologies within the KNMF
proposals 2018-019-021009 and 2019-021-025773.

Author contributions
M.C., P.L. and C. T. conceived the research and designed
the experiments. M.C. fabricated the devices with help from
S.N..
M.C, P.L. and M. T. carried out the experimental
characterization. F.P., P.L., M.C. carried out the theoreti-
cal analysis. B.T. and M.C. performed the morphological
characterization. C.T. supervised the project. All authors
discussed the results. M.C. and C.T. wrote the manuscript
with critical feedback from all authors.

Competing financial interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

References

[1] Li, H. & Huck, W. T. S. Polymers in nanotechnology.
Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science
6, 3 – 8 (2002).

[2] Green, J. J. & Elisseeff, J. H. Mimicking biological
functionality with polymers for biomedical applica-
tions. Nature 540, 386 (2016).

[3] Tang, C. W. & VanSlyke, S. A. Organic electrolumi-
nescent diodes. Applied Physics Letters 51, 913–915
(1987).

[4] Paquet, C. & Kumacheva, E. Nanostructured poly-
mers for photonics.
Materials Today 11, 48 – 56
(2008).

[5] Schumann, M., Bückmann, T., Gruhler, N., Wegener,
M. & Pernice, W. Hybrid 2D-3D optical devices for
integrated optics by direct laser writing. Light: Sci-
ence & Applications 3, e175 (2014).

[6] Lindenmann, N. et al. Photonic wire bonding: a novel
concept for chip-scale interconnects. Opt. Express 20,
17667–17677 (2012).

[7] Lounis, B. & Orrit, M. Single-photon sources. Reports
On Progress In Physics 68, 1129–1179 (2005).

[8] Degen, C. L., Reinhard, F. & Cappellaro, P. Quantum
sensing. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 035002 (2017).

[9] Benson, O.
Assembly of hybrid photonic architec-
tures from nanophotonic constituents.
Nature 480,
193 (2011).

[10] Jantzen, U. et al.
Nanodiamonds carrying silicon-
vacancy quantum emitters with almost lifetime-
limited linewidths.
New Journal of Physics 18,
073036 (2016).

[11] Liu, J. et al. Single self-assembled InAs/GaAs quan-
tum dots in photonic nanostructures:
The role of
nanofabrication. Phys. Rev. Applied 9, 064019 (2018).

[12] Sipahigil, A. et al. An integrated diamond nanopho-
tonics platform for quantum-optical networks.
Sci-
ence 354, 847–850 (2016). URL http://science.
sciencemag.org/content/354/6314/847.
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/
354/6314/847.full.pdf.

[13] Thyrrestrup, H. et al.
Quantum optics with near-
lifetime-limited quantum-dot transitions in a nanopho-
tonic waveguide.
Nano Lett. 18,
1801–1806
(2018).
URL https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
nanolett.7b05016.

[14] Shi, Q. et al.
Wiring up pre-characterized single-
photon emitters by laser lithography.
Scientific Re-
ports 6, 31135 (2016).

[15] Morozov, S., Gaio, M., Maier, S. A. & Sapienza, R.
Metal-dielectric parabolic antenna for directing single
photons. Nano Letters 18, 3060–3065 (2018).

[16] Sartison, M. et al. Combining in-situ lithography with
3D printed solid immersion lenses for single quantum
dot spectroscopy. Scientific Reports 7, 39916 (2017).

[17] Frantsuzov, P., Kuno, M., Janko, B. & Marcus, R. A.
Universal emission intermittency in quantum dots,
nanorods and nanowires.
Nature Physics 4, 519–
(2008).

[18] Pazzagli, S. et al.
Self-assembled nanocrystals of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons show photostable
single-photon emission.
ACS Nano 12, 4295–4303
(2018).

[19] Schädler, K. G. et al. Electrical control of lifetime-
limited quantum emitters using 2D materials. Nano
Letters 19, 3789–3795 (2019).

[20] Ciancico, C. et al. Narrow linewidth quantum emitters
in electron-beam shaped polymer. Under submission .

[21] Kawata, S., Sun, H.-B., Tanaka, T. & Takada, K.
Finer features for functional microdevices.
Nature
412, 697–698 (2001).

8


[22] Zhang, Y.-L., Chen, Q.-D., Xia, H. & Sun, H.-B. Des-
ignable 3D nanofabrication by femtosecond laser di-
rect writing. Nano Today 5, 435 – 448 (2010).

[23] Lettow, R. et al.
Quantum interference of tun-
ably indistinguishable photons from remote organic
molecules. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 123605 (2010).

[24] Toninelli, C. et al. Near-infrared single-photons from
aligned molecules in ultrathin crystalline films at room
temperature. Opt. Express 18, 6577–6582 (2010).

[25] Rezai, M., Wrachtrup, J. & Gerhardt, I. Polarization-
entangled photon pairs from a single molecule. Optica
6, 34–40 (2019).

[26] Nicolet, A. A. L. et al.
Single dibenzoterrylene
molecules in an anthracene crystal: Main insertion
sites. Chemphyschem 8, 1929–1936 (2007).

[27] Hwang, J. et al. A single-molecule optical transistor.
Nature 460, 76 (2009).

[28] Maser, A., Gmeiner, B., Utikal, T., Gøtzinger, S. &
Sandoghdar, V. Few-photon coherent nonlinear op-
tics with a single molecule. Nat Photon 10, 450–453
(2016).

[29] Wang, D. et al. Turning a molecule into a coherent
two-level quantum system. Nature Physics 15, 483–
489 (2019).

[30] Troiani, F., Ghirri, A., Paris, M., Bonizzoni, C. & Af-
fronte, M. Towards quantum sensing with molecular
spins. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials
165534 (2019).

[31] Tian, Y., Navarro, P. & Orrit, M.
Single molecule
as a local acoustic detector for mechanical oscillators.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 135505 (2014).

[32] Mazzamuto, G. et al.
Single-molecule study for a
graphene-based nano-position sensor. New Journal of
Physics 16, 113007 (2014).

[33] Toninelli, C. et al. A scanning microcavity for in situ
control of single-molecule emission. Applied Physics
Letters 97, 021107 (2010).

[34] Checcucci, S. et al. Beaming light from a quantum
emitter with a planar optical antenna. Light: Science
& Applications 6, e16245 (2016).

[35] Skoff, S. M., Papencordt, D., Schauffert, H., Bayer,
B. C. & Rauschenbeutel, A. Optical-nanofiber-based
interface for single molecules.
Phys. Rev. A 97,
043839 (2018).

[36] Faez, S., Türschmann, P., Haakh, H. R., Götzinger, S.
& Sandoghdar, V. Coherent interaction of light and
single molecules in a dielectric nanoguide. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 113, 213601 (2014).

[37] Lombardi, P. et al. Photostable molecules on chip: in-
tegrated single photon sources for quantum technolo-
gies. ACS Photonics (2012).

[38] Grandi,
S. et al.
Hybrid plasmonic waveg-
uide coupling of photons from a single molecule.
arXiv:1905.06321 (2019).

[39] Türschmann, P. et al. On-chip linear and nonlinear
control of single molecules coupled to a nanoguide.
arXiv:1702.05923 (2017).

[40] Barnes, W. et al. Solid-state single photon sources:
light collection strategies.
The European Physical
Journal D - Atomic, Molecular, Optical and Plasma
Physics 18, 197–210 (2002).

[41] Siyushev, P., Stein, G., Wrachtrup, J. & Gerhardt, I.
Molecular photons interfaced with alkali atoms. Na-
ture 509, 66–70 (2014).

[42] Lombardi, P. et al. A molecule-based single-photon
source applied in quantum radiometry. Under submis-
sion .

[43] Johlin, E., Mann, S. A., Kasture, S., Koenderink,
A. F. & Garnett, E. C.
Broadband highly directive
3d nanophotonic lenses. Nature Communications 9,
4742 (2018).

[44] Gissibl, T., Thiele, S., Herkommer, A. & Giessen,
H.
Two-photon direct laser writing of ultracom-
pact multi-lens objectives. Nature Photonics 10, 554
(2016).

[45] Polisseni, C. et al.
Stable, single-photon emitter
in a thin organic crystal for application to quantum-
photonic devices. Opt. Express 24, 5615–5627 (2016).

[46] Wrigge, G., Gerhardt, I., Hwang, J., Zumofen, G. &
Sandoghdar, V. Efficient coupling of photons to a sin-
gle molecule and the observation of its resonance flu-
orescence. Nat. Phys. 4, 60–66 (2008).

[47] Kewes, G. et al.
A realistic fabrication and design
concept for quantum gates based on single emitters
integrated in plasmonic-dielectric waveguide struc-
tures.
Scientific Reports 6, 28877– (2016).
URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/srep28877.

[48] Flatae, A. M. et al. Optically controlled elastic mi-
crocavities. Light: Science & Applications 4, e282
(2015).

[49] Spagnolo, N. et al. Three-photon bosonic coalescence
in an integrated tritter.
Nature Communications 4,
1606 (2013).

[50] Kudo, H. & Nishikubo, T.
Development of novel
photo-functional materials based on cyclic oligomers.
Polymer Journal 41, 569 (2009).

9


[51] Nocentini, S. et al. Three-dimensional photonic cir-
cuits in rigid and soft polymers tunable by light. ACS
Photonics 5, 3222–3230 (2018).

[52] Mueller, J. B., Fischer, J., Mayer, F., Kadic, M.
& Wegener, M.
Polymerization kinetics in three-
dimensional direct laser writing. Advanced Materials
26, 6566–6571.

[53] Jiang, L. J. et al. Two-photon polymerization: investi-
gation of chemical and mechanical properties of resins
using Raman microspectroscopy. Opt. Lett. 39, 3034–
3037 (2014).

Methods

Sample Fabrication

The Direct laser writing process is based on two-photon
polymerization induced by a strongly focused laser beam.
We employed a commercial DLW workstation (Nano-
scribe) and the commercially available negative-tone IP-
photoresists (IPs).
IPs provide high resolution and high
mechanical stability for structures in the micro- and sub-
micron range and are chemically compatible with the Ac
crystalline matrix. Moreover they require low exposure and
developing time for the writing process [52,53], thus mini-
mizing possible detrimental effects on DBT:Ac NCXs. Fi-
nally, the choice of IPs is motivated by the absence of back-
ground fluorescence in the spectral range of the molecule
emission.
The DBT:Ac NCX growth procedure consists in injecting
250µL of a mixture of 4 : 103 1mM DBT-toluene and 5mM
Ac-acetone solutions into 5mL of sonicating water. While
continuously sonicating the system for 30min, solvents dis-
solve in water and DBT:Ac crystals are formed in aque-
ous suspension, as described in detail in ref. [18].
Sol-
vents and Ac were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, water
was deionized by a Milli-Q Advantage A10 system (resis-
tivity of 18.2mΩ·cm at 25◦C), and DBT was purchased
from Mercachem.
In the micro-dome configurations, the nanocrystals were
deposited on a fused silica coverslip via dessication af-
ter drop-casting ∼ 10µL of the aqueous suspension. Be-
fore the deposition, the substrate was extensively cleaned
with acetone and optical paper. In the micro-dome on gold
configuration, the substrate was also sputter-coated with a
∼ 200nm thick gold film. After the deposition NCX were
protected from sublimation and from fabrication damage
by spin-coating a 200nm thick layer of PVA (purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich).
To fabricate the micro-lens struc-
tures, the optimized geometry is translated into a series of
concentric rings by an automated script which fits the vol-
umetric dimensions of the writing laser focus (the voxel,
typically ellipsoidal and depending on laser power) to the
target external surface dimensions and smoothness of the
structure. We used 7.5mW laser power, measured at the
entrance of the objective. The translated rings were writ-
ten directly in drop-cast IP-DIP (micro resist technology

GmbH, n = 1.54) resist via dip-in DLW lithography (Nano-
scribe GmbH). Each micro-dome was written on the top of
a single nanocrystal by localizing it through the same mi-
croscope objective at the imaging feedback of the worksta-
tion. Total writing time for one micro-lens is ∼ 20min. The
unexposed photoresist was eventually removed in a devel-
opment bath of propylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate
(PGMEA) for 5min and then in isopropyl alcohol for 5min.
After development the sample was carefully dried with a
weak clean air flux.
For the suspended waveguide configuration, DBT:Ac NCX
were dispersed in the photoresist such to be successively
embedded in the suspended middlepoint of the structure.
This is achieved by firstly spin-coating a layer of IP-G (mi-
cro resist technology GmbH, n=1.52) resist of 5 ÷ 10µm
thickness, upon which NCX are then deposited. This thick-
ness is imposed by mechanical stability (waveguides bend
and fall for thickness ≳ 10µm) and by coupling efficiency
(fluorescence is absorbed by the substrate and not efficiently
guided for thickness ≲ 5µm) reasons. The choice of IP-
G is prescribed by the necessity of rigidity of the spin-
coated layer in order to avoid sinking of the deposited NCX,
and this is attained by pre-baking of IP-G at 100 ◦C for
30min. Therefore, deposition of NCX was carried through
the same procedure previously described, and followed by
drop-casting of IP-DIP for total envelopment of the emit-
ters. The suspended waveguide was then written in one
step fabrication by localizing the nanocrystal, estimating its
distance from the substrate via the piezo-system feedback
of the workstation, and defining the suitable waveguide di-
mensions to be employed to effectively wrap the nanocrys-
tal. In this case, the waveguide design was translated into a
series of arch-like lines. Development and drying was per-
formed as previously described.

Morphological characterization

Topological images were performed by SEM (Phenom
Pro, PhenomWorld) and AFM (home-built equipment
based on piezo XYZ positioning system (PI-527.3CL from
Physik Instrumente) and R9 controller (RHK Technology))
equipped with a soft silicon probe CSG01 (NTMDT). In
particular, for SEM contrast images, after optical charac-
terization, the samples were sputter-coated with a ∼ 50nm
gold film.

Simulations

Numerical simulations of the collection efficiency for non-
integrated nanocrystal on silica and for the NCX inside
the micro-domes on silica and on gold respectively, were
performed using a commercial software (Comsol Mul-
tiphysics) implementing the 2D Finite Element Method
(FEM). The nanocrystal is modelled in each configura-
tion as a 800nmx400nm platelet of Ac (n = 1.7) with
the molecules modelled with an in-plane dipole source at
the centre of the nanocrystal, 100nm from the substrate.
A layer of 200nm of PVA (n = 1.475) covers the whole

10


considered area, including the nanocrystal.In the integrated
configurations the micro-dome consists in a hemisphere of
radius 5.3µm placed on a cylindrical base with the same
radius and height h = 3.4µm. For the optimal configura-
tion on reflective surface, the silica substrate is covered with
a 180nm-thick layer of gold. The collection efficiency is
evaluated by integrating the far fields within the acceptance
angle defined by the numerical aperture of our setup (42◦),
and normalizing by the integrated far fields on the whole
2π angle. The collected photon flux is calculated as the ra-
tio between the power radiated by a dipole in the far field
within the maximum acceptance angle given by the numer-
ical aperture NA ∼ 0.62 and the power radiated by the same
dipole in a homogeneous medium with the refractive index
of 1.7.

Optical Set-up

The optical characterization of DBT molecules within the
Ac NCX was performed with a versatile home-built scan-
ning fluorescence confocal microscope.
The set-up is
equipped with a closed-cycle helium cryostat (Cryostation
by Montana Instruments), capable of cooling samples to
2.7K. Molecules can be excited off-resonance at 767nm by
a CW laser (Toptica DL110-DFB) or alternatively at cryo-
genic temperature with a resonant tunable narrowband CW
laser (Toptica, LD-0785-0080-DFB-1), which is centered
at 784.6nm and can be scanned continuously in frequency
over a range of 800GHz. All laser sources are fibercou-
pled and linearly polarized by means of a half-wave plate
in the excitation path to allow optimal coupling to single
DBT transition. The laser intensities reported in the main
text are calculated from the power measured at the objec-
tive entrance divided by the measured area of the confocal
spot at the substrate. For low-temperature measurements,
the excitation light is focused onto the sample by a glass-
thickness- compensation air objective (OptoSigma 50x,
N.A. = 0.65, WD = 10.48mm) and can be scanned over the
sample by a telecentric system and a dual-axis galvo-mirror.
For room temperature measurements, a long-distance air
objective (Mitutoyo 100x Plan Apochromat, N.A. = 0.7,
WD = 6mm) is used to focus light onto the sample, which
is mounted on a piezoelectric nanopositioner (NanoCube
by Physik Instrumente). The Stokes-shifted fluorescence is
collected by the same microscope objective used in excita-
tion, separated from the excitation light through a dichroic
mirror (Semrock FF776-Di01) and a long-pass filter (Sem-
rock RazorEdge LP02-785RE-25), and detected by either
an EMCCD camera (Andor iXon 885, 1004x1002pixels,
pixel size 8µmx8µm) or by a SPAD (τ-SPAD-50 single
photon counting modules by PicoQuant).
For the HBT
configuration, we employ two fibred SPADs (fiber-coupled
photon counting modules by Excelitas) and a time corre-
lated single photon counting (TCSPC) card (PicoHarp, Pi-
coQuant). A converging lens can be inserted in the exci-
tation path to switch between confocal and wide-field illu-
mination, while a converging lens is added in the detection
path before the EMCCD camera to study the wave-vector

distribution of the light emitted by single DBT molecules
via BFP imaging. For the fiber-coupling configuration, a
single-mode fibre, a fiber-collimator and a telescope were
employed to match the fluorescence mode to the fibre. Mea-
surements of laser throughput in the waveguides were per-
formed by focusing the laser at one coupler, through the
substrate, and evaluating the transmitted light at the oppo-
site coupler. The measured signal was then normalized to
the direct reflection of the input laser on a mirror. Finally,
the value was corrected for the overlap integral between the
laser spatial mode and the waveguide spatial mode, which
were not optimally matched in the experiment.

11


