1 

 

Piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride-based epoxy composites produced by combined uniaxial 

compression and poling  

 

Konstantinos Bezaitis 1, Anthony N. Papathanassiou 1 * and Elias Sakellis 1,2 

1 National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Physics Department, Solid State Physics Section 

Panepistimiopolis, GR 15784 Zografos, Athens, Greece 

2 National Center of Natural Sciences Demokritos, Institute of Nanomaterials and Nanotechology, Aghia 

Paraskevi, Athens, Greece 

 

Abstract 

We present a simple, efficient method, which combines uniaxial compression and subsequent poling, to 

produce piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride-based epoxy composites. The values of the piezoelectric 

factors obtained are slightly higher than those of neat piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride. The 

composites respond rapidly and reach a saturation voltage output, to the application of mechanical 

stimulus quickly. The composites   are promising for the creation of bulk piezoelectric devices, different 

from the usual stretched films, exploiting the physic-chemical a of the epoxy matrix. The piezoelectric 

factor d31 versus the mechanical stimulus for the specimens studied, scale according to a double 

logarithmic representation. 

 

Keywords:  δ-PVDF; piezoelectric coefficient; relaxation; solid-state-processing; polarization; energy 

harvesting 

(*) Corresponding author; e-mail address antpapa@phys.uoa.gr 

 
 


2 

 

Polymer-based composites are being investigated widely due to their ceaseless expansion of 

application potentials. PolyVinylidene DiFluoride (PVDF) in particular, relishes an overgrowing heed 

ascribable to its remarkable pyroelectric and piezoelectric attributes [1 -10]. Consequently, it serves as a 

candidate for  numerous sensory and actuator devices, mostly in the form of thin stretched β-PVDF films 

[1-6,11]. Manufacturing and optimization of such specimens, often exhibits various levels of 

complication and scalability issues [6,8-9] which in this work, concurrently with providing longevity and 

adaptability features, we are attempting to surpass. Issues to be addressed in this work are: (i) the 

development of a simple and inexpensive experimental scheme for achieving the piezoelectric phase, (b) 

the efficiency and response of the composite be comparable or better than those of PVDF and composites. 

(iii) the optimization of the fraction of PVDF, while the composite shares the advantageous physic-

chamical features of its matrix (epoxy). The resulting instances will be easily prepared, moldable, durable, 

efficiently adhesive to different substrates, non-corrosive and remarkably sensitive to mechanical stimuli 

devices. The protocol followed is uncomplicated compared with that commonly reported for receiving the 

piezoelectric δ-phase for PVDF microstructure [9]; moreover, it yields bulk specimens of any shape. 

Furthermore, our experimental configuration permits the determination of an inaccuracy of about 9%, 

which is better than that reported in published works. 

 

We prepared a test sample of neat PVDF (sample A), an epoxy based PVDF composite (sample 

B) and another one, loaded with nano-graphene platelets (NGPs) (sample C), the mass ratios of which are 

given in Table I. Mixtures of non-piezoelectric PVDF powder consist of average molecular weight 

~534,000 powder particles with typical size of about 1 μm  (Sigma-Aldrich - 182702-100G) and 

commercial two component epoxy (UHU - 37376) cured at ambient conditions. Moreover, samples with 

additional nano-graphene platelets (NGPs) (Angstrom - N008-P-40) were prepared as well. The 

distribution of inclusions are dispersed randomly within the epoxy matrix. The diameter of the resulting 

disk-shaped specimens are typically a few centimeters and the thickness is typically 1 - 3 mm.   For the 

transition of the as-received PVDF to one of its piezoelectric phases, we followed a two-stage procedure: 

The specimens were uniaxially compessed under      

   
 by using an Enerpack RC 504 hyraulic press 

for about 5 seconds. The force was applied along axis-1 perpendicular to the parallel surfaces of the 

composite,  while the side free surface area of the sample was un-cofined during deformation; thus, 

directions perpendicular to axis-1 are indistinguishable and isotropic (axis-3 is labeled any of these axes.  

The compressed pellets were subsequently polarized within a corona-like schedule; i.e., placed between a 

couple of parallel spring – loaded platinum electrodes and polarized by an electric field of about 

     
  for a time duration of about 5 hours. The advantages of the method applied in the present 


3 

 

workare the following: (i) while, in the literature, PVDF is available in films that are stretched to become 

piezoelectric, in the present work, bulk specimens of any size and shape can be formed, and, (ii) the 

equipment required to attain the piezoelectric phase is simple and inexpensive.  

 ( 

To ensure that the above mentioned procedure drives PVDF from the non-piezoelectric α-phase) 

to its  piezoelectric one (based on the literature, it is identical to the δ-phase, induced by axial 

compression [8]), a solid free standing PVDF pellet (sample A)  was formed from its melt and, 

subsequently, underwent the mechano-electrical scheme described above. 

 

Table I.  Mass fraction of epoxy/PVDF composites and NGP.  

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

The typical dimensions of the disk shaped specimens studied, are a few cm in diameter and about 

0.5 mm in thickness.  A couple of electrodes permanently silver pasted on the specimen’s surface (fig. 1) 

were connected to a digital Keithley 617 electrometer. Each device was placed inside a Faraday cage for 

electromagnetic shielding. Real-time voltage or  current were recorded as a function of time, while axial 

force-stimulus covering three orders of magnitude (i.e.,                  , respectively) could be 

applied. The sample capacitance was measured directly using Solartron 1260A impedance analyzer 

controlled by the  Novocontrol® WinDETA software. 

 
Determination of the piezoelectric coefficient     

Voltage and current responses to externally applied force for sample B are depicted in figs. 2 and 

3, respectively. The force F1 was applied perpendicular to the parallel surfaces of the disk-shaped 

composite (see fig. 1). Voltage    measured between the electrodeis given by: 

Specimen
(epoxy:PVDF) (w/w)
NGP loading (wt % of the total 

mass of the composite)

A
(100:0)
0

B
(95:5)
0

C
(95:5)
1.25


4 

 

   

      

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

where   denotes the sample’s capacitance and     is the piezoelectric coefficient. We measured both the 

response and relaxation for 10 s intervals, for rectangular pulses of mechanical stimuli depicted by dash 

line in figs. 2 and 3.  

The piezoelectric coefficient d31 is obtained from eq. (1), whereas V3 holds its saturation value 

dictated by the application of F1.          data points are plotted in fig. 4, for the three specimens studied 

in the present work. The determination of the saturation voltage was obdaained from single-pulse stress. 

However, after thorough experimentation, we led to the conclusion that a time interval between two 

successive force pulses, such as that depicted by the dash line in figs. 2 and 3, was optimally adequate for  

the specimen relax compared with the time-scale of the piezoelectric response; the latter  is actually 

immediate to external force triggering. We observe that, for all samples, d31 is a decreasing function of F1, 

in accordance with experimental observations and theoretical modeling for heterogeneous piezoelectric 

composites. The phenomenon was attributed to the distribution of internal stresses to the piezoelectric 

inclusions, the local change of the topology and variable degrees of physical contacting of the 

piezoelectric domains.  The piezoelectric coefficient of neat PVDF is comparable or slightly larger than 

those reported for its piezoelectric phases developed with experimental schemes different than ours (i.e., 

uniaxial compression and poling). Moreover, epoxy-based composites exhibit d31 values compable with 

those of neat PVDF (specimen A), suggesting that, despite their low content in PVDF (5 wt %), have 

equal or slightly better efficiency than neat PVDF. The piezoelectric coefficients were were determined 

with an error  than 8 % for samples A and B and 6 – 12 % for sample C. A remarkable feat is the high 

reproducibility of the results, indicative of a stable structure and predictable behavior of the samples. 

 

The d31(F1) data points collapse on a single master curve when plotted in a double logarithmic diagram 

(fig. 5). Regarding the range of mechanical modulus investigated in the present work, a universal 

empirical fitting function is : 

d31 (F1) = -5+6.136 × F1 -0.178 
 
 
 
 (2) 

with correlation factor R2>0.99. The description of the experimental results through a common function 

evidences for a common underlying process for electromechanical coupling and a unified scaled behaiour 

of the three different composites.   

 Determination of the response time to mechanical stimuli 


5 

 

  
A functional piezoelectric device  is characterized by its ability to requires both strong and 

rapidly produced voltage output signals. A piezoelectric coefficient is a measure of the ratio of the 

saturation voltage over stress and is a measure of energy conversion.  The increase of voltage to 

saturation upon applying a mechanical stimulus is described by: 

           

          

    

      

  
 
 
 
(3) 

where   is a time constant, which  tells how fast a saturation voltage value is attained.  The values of τ 

obtained by fitting eq.  (3) to the V(t) data points subsequent to  the application of the external force, is 

presented in fig. 6. At low stress applied, the three specimens share a relatively common short relaxation 

time (around 2 s) to reach a saturation output. At high stress values, epoxy results in an increase of the 

relaxation time, while, the small amount of NGPs intensifies the latter phenomenon. Among the three 

specimens, the one with NGPs (sample C) exhibit a retarded response and differences on exerting or 

removing the force stimulus.  The advantages of the methodology usedm in relation to the current status 

in the field of piezoelectric sensors and energy harvesting can be summarizes as follows: (i) the 

experimental scheme for achieving the piezoelectric phase is simple and inexpensive, (ii) the efficiency 

and response of the composite are improved, compared to those reported , (iii) the composite has 

optimally low amount of PVDF and shares the advantages of its matrix (epoxy). 

  
In the present work, we developed a simple, reliable and low cost procedure to obtain 

piezoelectric PVDF and epoxy composites. The piezoelectric d31 parameter was determined with high 

accuracy compared to that usually reported in the literature. Epoxy composites exhibit equal or slightly 

stronger piezoelectric factors than neat PVDF, probably stemming from their heterogeneous structure.  A 

universal acaling law has been found for d31(F1), evidencing for a common electro-mechanical coupling 

mechanism underlying the piezoelectric properties of different samples studied in the present work. Rapid  

response to applied stimulus is observed.  

 

References 

[1] Lovinger, A.J. Developments in Crystalline Polymers. Vol. 1 (Ed.D.C. Basset) Elsevier Applied 

Science: London, UK, (1982).) 

[2] Nalwa, H.S. Ferroelectric Polymers: Chemistry, Physics, and Applications. Vol. 1, (Ed.S.N. Hari) 

Marcel Dekker: New York, NY, (1995). 

[3] Bauer, S. Poled polymers for sensors and photonic applications. J. Appl. Phys., 80, 


6 

 

5531–5554 (1996). 

[4] Binoy Bera, Madhumita Das Sarkar, PVDF based Piezoelectric Nanogenerator as a new kind of 

device for generating power from renewable resources IOSR Journal of Polymer and Textile Engineering 

(IOSR-JPTE) e-ISSN: 2348-019X, p-ISSN: 2348-0181, 4,  01-05(2017) DOI: 10.9790/019X-04020105 

[5] Liuxia Ruan , Xiannian Yao , Yufang Chang , Lianqun Zhou , Gaowu Qin  and Xianmin Zhang, 

Properties and Applications of the β-Phase Poly(vinylidene fluoride) Polymers 10:228 (2018) 

[6] T. R. Dargaville, M. C. Celina, J. M. Elliott, P. M. Chaplya, G. D. Jones,D. M. Mowery, R. A. Assink, 

R. L. Clough, J. W. Martin Characterization, Performance and Optimization of PVDF as a Piezoelectric 

Film for Advanced Space Mirror Concepts SAND2005-6846  (2005) 

[7] Y. Wada and R. Hayakawa, “Piezoelectricity and pyroelectricity of polymers,” Japanese J. Appl. 

Phys. 15, 2041-2057 (1976) 

[8] J. Martín1, Dong Zha.I. Katsouras, D. M. de Leeuw and N. Stingel, Solid-state-processing of d-PVDF, 

Materials Horizons, June  (2007) DOI: 10.1039/C7MH00007C 

[9] B. Gusarov, PVDF polymères piézoélectriques: caractérisation et application pour la récupération 

d’énergie thermique, Doctoral Thesis, University of Grenoble Alpes (unpublished) 

[10] Kawai H. The Piezoelectricity of Poly(vinylidene fluoride), Japan J. Appl. Phys. 8 975-976 (1969) 

[11] V. Sencadas, V. M. Moreira ,S. Lanceros-Mendéz, A. S. Pouzada , d and R. Gregório Jr. ,   α to β 

transformation on PVDF films obtained my uniaxial stretch, Materials Science Forum 514-516:872-876,  

(2006) 

 
 


7 

 

 

Figure 1: Experimental configuration for measuring the piezoelectric response. Arrows indicate the 
mechanical stimuli applied along axis-1 and perpendicular to the parallel surfaces of the composite. 
Electrodes are silver pasted at both ends along axis-3. Leads from the electrodes are connected to a 
Keithley 617 electrometer (not depicted). 


8 

 

 

Figure 21: Voltage output measured between the ends of a diameter for a composite with ~5 wt % PVDF 
(specimen B). Dash line denotes a typical mechanical stimulus (in arbitrary units)  as a function  of time. 

 

 


9 

 

 

Figure 3: Current density emitted from a composite loaded with 5 wt % PVDF. (specimen B) The sign 
reversals are signatures of the application and subsequent switch off of the external mechanical stimuli  
(schematically depicted by the dashed  line), respectively. Current evolution is proportional to the rate of 
the piezoelectric voltage. 

 


10 

 

 

Figure 4: Piezoelectric coefficients for sample A (circles), B (triangles) and C (squares). Fitting is in the 
form of         with factor        . The samples provide remarkable performance when 0.02 N 
is applied and converge while the stimulus strengthens. 

 

Figure 5: A master curve (dash line) given by eq. (2) matches the entire set of data points with 
correlation factor          . 


11 

 

 

Figure 6: Time constants for the response to the application and removal of external mechanical 
stimulus: sample A (circles), B (triangles) and C (squares). Solid and dashed lines connect data points 
regarding relaxation after force application and removal, respectively. 

 


