1

Vertical transport and tunnelling in rare-earth 
nitride heterostructures

Jackson D. Miller, Felicia H. Ullstad, H. Joe Trodahl, Ben. J. Ruck and Franck Natali

The MacDiarmid Institute for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, School of Chemical and 
Physical Sciences, Victoria University of Wellington, P.O. Box 600, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 

E-mail: franck.natali@vuw.ac.nz

Abstract

We report an investigation of the ferromagnetic semiconductor rare earth nitrides (RENs) for 
their potential for cryogenic-temperature electronics and spintronics application. We have 
indentified ohmic contacts suitable for the device structures that demand electron transport 
through interface layers, and grown REN/insulator/REN heterostructures that display 
tunnelling characteristics, an enormous 400% tunneling magnetoresistance and a hysteresis 
promising their exploitation in non-volatile magnetic random access memory. 

Keywords: rare earth nitrides, ferromagnetic semiconductors, ohmic contact, magnetic tunnel
junctions, memory elements

1. Introduction

It is now well-established that the rare earth nitrides (RENs)

form a series of intrinsic ferromagnetic semiconductors
suitable
for 
full 
exploitation 
of 
the 
coupled 

magnetic/electronic technology, so-called spintronics [1]. 
They display their magnetic properties only at low 
temperatures (<70 K) and while it prevents room temperature 
applications, they are materials of choice on the more 
demanding route to devices for cryogenic electronics [2]. 
Their complementary properties, in particular the varied set of 
magnetic properties across the series, provide huge scope for 
use in memory elements such as 
non-volatile magnetic 

random access memory (MRAM) to support superconducting 
and quantum computing [3-10]. In addition, a strong impetus 
to select RENs over ferromagnetic metals or diluted magnetic 
semiconductors (DMS) derives from the ability to dope the 
materials without losing ferromagnetic spin alignment
[11,12]. This offers potential integration and impedance 
matching 
with 
the 
materials 
and 
processing 
for 

superconducting electronics. However, only little has been 
reported concerning the study of vertical transport, the so-

called Current Perpendicular to Plane (CPP) geometry, [13-
16] with the literature focussing mostly on electrical transport 
properties in planar structures for fundamental studies [17-
21]. Since devices will mostly require electronic transport
across material interfaces, there is an urgent need to provide a 
general guideline for the design and analysis of vertical 
tunnelling devices and heterostuctures if the RENs are to be 
technologically exploited. Remaining hurdles like ensuring 
ohmic contacts, developing lithographic procedures and 
reducing device size towards a practical 1µm2 target have to 
be overcome. Progress towards all of these goals are presented 
and discussed in this paper. In particular, we show evidence 
for ohmic contact to GdN, the prototypical REN, in CPP
device geometries, and optically defined device areas down to 
10 × 10 µm2 without oxidation of the GdN layer. Finally  a 
clear hysteresis at low magnetic field is oberved in magnetic 
tunnelling junctions, a promising advance towards the 
development of REN-based memory element structures.

2. Methods

In 
this 
study, 
heterostuctures 
consisting 
of 

metal/GdN/metal thin layers and magnetic tunnelling devices 


2

consisting of metal/REN/insulator/REN/metal thin layers 
have been fabricated using a multi-step approach on 300 nm 
thick SiO2 layers thermally grown on silicon (100) wafers. The 
metal/GdN/metal structures were used as a model system to 
determine the nature of the contact, ohmic or Schottky, 
between a range of metallic layers, here Al, Au and Gd, and 
the GdN semiconductor layer. Due to their wide band gap and 
their chemical and structural compatibility with the RENs, 
GaN or AlN are used as insulating layers to form tunnel 
barriers. We have chosen GdN and SmN among the fourteen 
RENs due to their contrasting magnetic properties [1,16].

RENs have been recognized for decades to react rapidly in 

air, requiring careful capping. Within this scenario REN-based
CPP structures require special attention to avoid oxidation 
from open edges exposed to air that then slowly react and 
degrade the device performances. Figure 1 schematically 
shows the fabrication steps we developed to avoid the 
problem. Special attention was given, based on a so-called 
caisson-like structure [Figure 1(a)], both to overcome the 
oxidation problem and to reduce the size of devices from the
100 × 200 µm that we have previously achieved [16]. Our 
tunnelling devices are defined by small apertures (caisson) in 
a GaN layer that expose a segment of an underlying bottom 
metal contact. The stack then consists of the bottom metal 
contact strip (i.e. Al, Au or Gd), a 40 nm thick GaN insulator 
(with square caissons of 10, 20, 30 or 40 µm), the tunnelling 
stack (i.e. GdN/GaN/GdN or GdN/AlN/SmN) and top metal 
contact (i.e. Al,
Gd); see Figure 1(b). The REN/top metal 

contact stack (step 3) fills the active area, allowing direct 
contact between the metallic bottom contact (step 1) and the 
stack. The GaN layer that defines the caisson (step 2) is grown 
thinner than the stack to ensure layer continuity across the 
active area edge. The surface profile across a GaN caisson
region is shown in Figure 1(c). The two steep slopes at 600 
and 640 µm are the caisson edges, so that the 35 nm dip in the 
middle shows the active area window depression that defines
the device. Up to 20 lithographically defined tunnelling 
devices were prepared on a single chip, thus providing
numerous devices of various sizes in a single preparation.

The REN (SmN, GdN), insulating (GaN, AlN) and top 

metal contact (Al, Gd) layers were grown at ambient 
temperature in a molecular beam epitaxy system with a base 
pressure <10-9 Torr. The ambient growth temperature allows  
GdN and SmN layers to be smooth and strongly (111) 
textured. Au was used only as a bottom contact layer and was
grown in  a different physical vapor evaporator. Further details 
regarding the growth conditions (deposition rate, nitrogen
precursor, etc) for the REN and insulating layers can be found
elsewhere [16,18]. 

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the fabrication steps; (a) 
GaN caisson-like structure (blue) grown over the metal bottom 
contact (yellow) and (b) entire structure with two REN layers 
(red) separated by the tunnel barrier (black) and finished with 
the top contact (grey). (c) Surface profile of the stack in a 
metal/REN/insulator/REN/metal structure along the red line 
shown in the inset. The dip in the middle of the surface profile
is where the stack is grown on top of the active area caisson.

The current/voltage (I/V)  characteristics of the structures 

were measured between the crossed metallic strips, each 
offering separate voltage and current leads. The (I/V) 
measurements of the devices were performed between 
ambient temperature and 2 K in both a simple closed-cycle 
cryostat and a Quantum Design Physical Property 
Measurement System (PPMS) with the facility to apply 
magnetic fields to 9 T. Care was taken to ensure that the metal 
strips were sufficiently conductive to form virtual 
equipotentials, so that in turn the current densities through the 


3

devices were uniform, as was established by noting that the 
net current in most devices was proportional to the caisson
area. To ease comparison of structures with different areas we 
report the results below in terms of the current density (J)
rather than the measured net current.  

3. Results

3.1. Metal/GdN/Metal structures 

In view of the propensity for Schottky barrier formation 

across metal-semiconductor interfaces it is important to
establish that the measured impedances of the tunnelling 
structures are dominated by the very thin tunnelling barrier
layer, rather than the metal/GdN interfaces. We have thus 
investigated several structures in which the barrier layer was
omitted to determine the resistance of metal/GdN/metal 
stacks. For technical convenience we have investgated 
contacts comprising Al, Au and Gd.

Turning first to Al contacts, there is no sign of the non-

linearity commonly associated with Schottky barriers, and the 
linear resistance observed yields a resistivity of the 100 nm-
thick GdN layer of ∼3 Ω.cm at 4 K (not shown). That value is
within the range that is commonly measured for in plane GdN
layers, charactersitic of a carrier density of order 1019 cm−3

[12,21]. The impedance ratio (voltage/current density; V/J) 
provides a direct estimate of the impact the GdN resistance has
on the tunnelling studies below. The data give V/J ~ 10-4

Ω.cm2 at low temperatures, which will be seen below to be six
orders of magnitude smaller than the impedance ratio found in
the tunnelling structures.

We have previously reported that Au forms an ohmic

contact in measurements of in-plane transport [22], a
geometry which is less sensitive to Schottky barrier effects
due to its larger form factor (length/area), as we have also 
cofirmed in the present geometry [16]. Clearly both Al and Au
form ohmic contacts to GdN.

The assessment of Gd metal as a possible contact material

is critical as the exchange interaction with GdN or SmN across
the material interface provides the pinning of the GdN 
magnetisation allowing observation of switching behaviour in
a magnetic tunnnelling junction [16]. Similarly to the case of
Al and Au, a Gd/GdN/Gd device structure was studied. As can
be seen in Figure 2, the J/V plot is linear at ambient 
temperature but develops a modest non-linearity at low
temperature. The impedance ratio (V/J) ~ 3 × 10-3 Ω.cm2 at 4
K is a factor of 102 larger than Au/GdN/Al structures. The
larger resistance suggests the formation of Schottky barriers at
the Gd/GdN interface which substantially deplete the carrier
concentration within GdN. The non-linearity of the lower
temperature is also an indication of a tunnelling-mode
transport across the interfaces of the structure. While the
conduction mode is not ohmic, the specific resistance remains 
three orders of magnitude smaller than the minimum 
impedance ratio across the tunnelling barrier structure we will 

see below, thus permitting the use of metallic Gd as a contact 
material. 

Figure 2. I/V and J/V characteristics of a Gd/GdN/Gd structure
at 10 K showing only weak nonlinearity.

3.1. Tunnelling through engineered barriers

In Figure 3 we show the strongly nonlinear response of a

Au/GdN/GaN/SmN/Al structure with target layer thicknesses 
of 100 nm GdN and SmN and 3 nm GaN. Even at the largest 
voltage, 0.9 V, the impedance ratio of order 6×10-2 Ω.cm2 is 
still almost three orders of magnitude larger than that from the 
device without an engineered barrier. The data of Figure 3 
have thus been fitted to the Simmons model [23,24] to yield 
estimates of ~1 eV and ~2 nm, respectively, for the GaN
barrier height and width. These are within the range expected 
for the 3.3 eV band gap of GaN and the designed 2.5 nm 
barrier thickness. There is an asymmetry as expected with the 
GdN/SmN asymmetry of the source/drain for the tunnelling 
current.
Figure 3. I/V and J/V characteristics of a 60×60 (m)2

Au/GdN/GaN/SmN/Al structure at 4 K.


4

Figure 4. Temperature-dependent I-V and J/V characteristics
of the device in Figure 3. These data were collected under a 
positive applied voltage, with current flowing from GdN to 
SmN. 

The temperature dependant I/V response of the forward-

biased device is shown at temperatures up to 300 K in Figure 
4. The response is again seen to be strongly nonlinear, yielding 
Simmons-model estimates of ~1 eV and ~2 nm for the barrier 
height and width that are at most only weakly temperature 
dependent. The data show a linear behaviour at low voltage, 
where the conductance increases monotonically with 
temperature. In contrast the nonlinear conduction at larger 
applied voltage shows a complex temperature dependence, 
signalling clearly the shifting band edges across the Curie 
temperatures of GdN (TC ~ 70 K) and SmN (TC ~ 30 K) [1]. 

Figure 5. Tunnelling magnetoresistance for the device of 
Figures 3 and 4 at different temperatures, 1µA excitation.

The influence of spin alignment in the GdN and SmN layers 

is seen in the magnetic-field control of resistance of Figure 5. 
Note that the conventional characterisation of tunneling 
magnetoresistance is quoted as

TMR = [𝑅(𝐵) − 𝑅(𝑚𝑎𝑥)]/R(𝑚𝑖𝑛)) ,

where 𝑅(𝑚𝑎𝑥) and R(𝑚𝑖𝑛) are the maximum and minimum 
resistance of the device, close to 0 Tesla and 8 Tesla in the 
present case. Thus the five-fold reduced resistance at 50 K 
corresponds to a TMR of 400%.

Of more direct interest for memory element devices is to 

establish the tunneling resistance in the very low-field region, 
where hysteresis exerts an influence. Thus in Figure 6 the 
hysteresis is displayed at 2 K , plotted as

R = [Rup,down(𝐵) – Rave(B)] ≡ ±[Rup(𝐵) - Rdown(B)]/2 ,

where Rup and Rdown are the resistances under increasing and 
decreasing magnetic fields, respectively. It is expected that the 
relative spin alignments on the two sides of the barrier 
influence the measured resistance, and indeed here there are 
evident transitions near the coercive fields of GdN (~0.02 T) 
and SmN (>2 T) [1]. The switching shown in Figure 6 persists 
up to 30 K, the TC of SmN, demonstrating that the hysteresis 
behaviour requires both the GdN and SmN layers to be in their 
ferromagnetic states.  

Figure 6. Magnification of low field hysteretic behaviour 

for an Au/GdN/AlN/SmN/Al structure.

4. Summary

We have reported growth of thin films of ferromagnetic 

semiconducting rare-earth nitrides in layered structures, 
designed for the investigation of the electronic reponse in 
current perpendicular to plane (CPP) configurations. Special 
care was taken to ensure that the devices were small enough 
to show excellent CPP impedance.

The work identified three contact metals (Au, Al, Gd) and 

investigated their susceptability to Schottky-barrier problems. 
Contacts comprising Au and Al show ohmic behaviour, while
there is evidence of a depressed carrier concentration in GdN 
at an interface with Gd. 

Identification of suitable ohmic-contact metals facilitated 

investigation of structures in which insulating tunnel barriers, 
1-2 nm of AlN or GaN, were introduced between two REN 


5

layers, thus forming a magnetic tunnel junction. The structures 
showed clear negative tunnelling magnetoresistance as large 
as 400% (i.e. a contrast factor of 5) between fields of 0 and 9 
T. 

Finally the work has demonstrated clear tunnelling-

resistance hysteresis, opening the door to devloping tunneling 
magnetoresistance memory for cryogenic memory banks. 

Acknowledgements

We acknowledge funding from the Marsden Fund (Grant 

No.13-VUW-1309), the New Zealand Endeavor fund (Grant 
No. RTVU1810) and the MacDiarmid Institute for  Advanced  
Materials  and  Nanotechnology,  funded by the New Zealand 
Centres of Research Excellence Fund. Jackson Miller thanks  
the  School  of  Chemical  and Physical Sciences for financial 
support.

References

[1]
Natali F,  Ruck B J, Plank N O V, Trodahl H J, Granville 

S, Meyer C and Lambrecht W R L 2013 Prog. Mater. Sci. 58 1316.
[2]
IRDS Roadmap Cryogenic Electronics and Quantum 

Information Processing 2018.
[3]
Birge N O, Madden A E and Naaman O 2018 Proc. SPIE

10732 107321M.   
[4]
Herr Q P, Herr A Y, Oberg O T and Ioannidis A G 2011 J. 

Appl. Phys. 109 103903.
[5]
Mukhanov 
O 
A 
20111 
IEEE 
Trans.
Appl.

Superconductivity 2 760.
[6]
Holmes D S, Ripple A L and Manheimer M A 2013 IEEE

Trans. Appl. Superconductivity 23, 1701610.
[7]
Manheimer 
M 
A 
2015 
IEEE 
Trans. 
Appl. 

Superconductivity 25 1.

[8]
Holmes D S, Kadin A M and Johnson M W 2015 Computer

48 34.
[9]
Tolpygo S K, Bolkhovsky V, Weir T, Wynn A, Oates D,

Johnson L and Gouker M 2016 IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond 26 1.
[10]
Johnson M W, Bunyk P, Maibaum F, Tolkacheva E, 

Berkley A J, Chapple E M, Harris R, Johansson J, Lanting T, 
Perminov I, Ladizinsky E, Oh T and Rose G Supercond. Sci. Technol.
2010 23 065004.
[11]
Lee C -M, Warring H, Vézian S, Damilano B, Granville S, 

Khalfioui M A, Cordier Y, Trodahl H J, Ruck B J and Natali F 2015 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 022401.
[12]
Trodahl H J, Natali F, Ruck B J and Lambrecht W R L  

Phys. Rev. B 96 115309.
[13]
Mudali P H, Pal A and Blamire M G 2014 Phys. Rev. B 89, 

094414.
[14]
Senapati K, Blamire M G and Barber Z H 2011, Nature 

Materials 10, 849.
[15]
Pal A, Senapati K, Barber Z H and Blamire M G 2013, Adv. 

Mat. 25, 5581.
[16]
Warring H, Trodahl H J, Plank N O V, Natali F, Granville 

S and Ruck B J 2016 Phys. Rev. Appl. 6 044002.
[17]
Scarpulla M, Gallinat C, Mack S, Speck J and Gossard A 

2009 J. Cryst. Growth 311 1239–1244.
[18]
Natali F, Plank N, Galipaud, J, Ruck B, Trodahl H, Semond 

F, Sorieul S and Hirsch L 2010 J. Cryst. Growth 312 3583.
[19]
Senapati K, Fix T, Vickers M E, Blamire M G and Barber 

Z H 2011 Phys. Rev. B 83 014403.
[20]
Wachter P 2012 Res. Phys. 2012 2 90.

[21]
Plank N O V, Natali F, Galipaud J, Richter J H, Simpson 

M, Trodahl H J and Ruck B J 2011 Appl. Phys. Lett. 98 112503.
[22]
Ullstad F, Chan J R, Warring H, Plank N, Ruck B, Trodahl

J and Natali F 2015 AIMS Mat. Sc. 2 79.
[23]
J. G. Simmons 1963, J. Appl. Phys. 34, 1793.

[24]
J. G. Simmons 1964, J. Appl. Phys. 35, 2655.


