© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
1

Efficient indoor p-i-n hybrid perovskite solar cells 
using low temperature solution processed NiO as 

hole extraction layers 

Lethy Krishnan Jagadamma, Oskar Blaszczyk, Muhammad T. Sajjad, Arvydas Ruseckas, Ifor 

D. W. Samuel*

Organic Semiconductor Centre, SUPA, School of Physics & Astronomy, North Haugh, St 

Andrews, KY16 9SS, United Kingdom

E-mail: idws@st-andrews.ac.uk

Manuscript doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.110071

Abstract: 

Hybrid perovskites have received tremendous attention due to their exceptional photovoltaic and 

optoelectronic properties. Among the two widely used perovskite solar cell device architectures of n-i-

p and p-i-n, the latter is interesting in terms of its simplicity of fabrication and lower energy input. 

However this structure mostly uses PEDOT:PSS as a hole transporting layer which can accelerate the 

perovskite solar cell degradation. Hence the development of stable, inorganic hole extraction layers

(HEL), without compromising the simplicity of device fabrication is crucial in this fast-growing

photovoltaic field. Here we demonstrate a low temperature (~100 oC) solution - processed and ultrathin 

(~ 6 nm) NiO nanoparticle thin films as an efficient HEL for CH3NH3PbI3 based perovskite solar cells. 

We measure a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 13.3 % on rigid glass substrates and 8.5 % on 

flexible substrates. A comparison with PEDOT:PSS based MAPbI3 solar cells (PCE ~ 7.9 %) shows 

that NiO based solar cells have higher short circuit current density and improved open circuit voltage 

(1.03V). Apart from the photovoltaic performance under 1 Sun, the efficient hole extraction property 

of NiO is demonstrated for indoor lighting as well with a PCE of 23.0 % for NiO based 

CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 p-i-n solar cells under compact fluorescent lighting. Compared to the perovskite 

solar cells fabricated on PEDOT:PSS HEL, better shelf-life stability is observed for perovskite solar 

cells fabricated on NiO HEL. Detailed microstructural and photophysical investigations imply uniform 

morphology, lower recombination losses, and improved charge transfer properties for CH3NH3PbI3

grown on NiO HEL.

Keywords: CH3NH3PbI3, indoor photovoltaics, mixed halides, time-resolved photoluminescence, shelf-

life

1. Introduction


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
2

Emerging hybrid perovskite solar cells hold the promise for inexpensive and highly 

efficient photovoltaic technology, with certified power conversion efficiencies of 24.2 %[1]. 

The most successful and widely investigated perovskite solar cell architecture is n-i-p

consisting of high temperature processed planar and mesoporous TiO2 as electron transporting 

layer (ETL) and expensive Spiro OMeTAD as hole transporting layer[2, 3]. In addition to the 

high energy input, the n-i-p architecture suffers serious J-V hysteresis and Spiro OMeTAD is 

a poor barrier for the migration of Au/Ag top metal contacts, critically degrading the 

performance of perovskite solar cells[4]. The alternate and emerging p-i-n planar architecture 

is promising in terms of simplifying fabrication, reducing energy input in terms of interlayer 

and reducing the detrimental hysteresis effect[5]. Because of these attributes, this device 

architecture is favourable for roll-to roll fabrication of perovskite solar cells on flexible and 

non-customized substrates. However, this architecture has challenges, such as lower efficiency 

and faster degradation due to the most commonly employed hole transporting layer of 

PEDOT:PSS, which is hygroscopic and acidic in nature[6]. Development of solution processed 

inorganic and stable hole extraction layers for the planar p-i-n structure is therefore desirable

to enable simple, energy efficient and cost effective fabrication of perovskite solar cells.

A crucial aspect of the operation of perovskite solar cells is the presence of charge 

selective contacts. For their efficient functioning, these layers need to meet important attributes 

of high transparency in the visible range, energy level matching with the perovskite active layer, 

good charge transport properties and being easy to deposit. Among the p-type inorganic 

semiconductors, NiO is interesting for hole transporting layers because of its wide bandgap, 

stability, high hole mobility in bulk, good electron blocking ability and energy level matching 

with hybrid perovskites such as CH3NH3PbI3 [7, 8]. NiO as hole extraction layer has been 

previously reported for p-i-n planar architecture [6, 9-17] and very recently for n-i-p perovskite 

solar cells [18-21]. Power conversion efficiency as high as ~ 20 % has been demonstrated for 

p-i-n perovskite solar cells using NiO as HEL and ~ 11% for n-i-p perovskite solar cells. In 

most of these reports, the NiO is prepared by physical vapor deposition technique such as ALD 

or sputtering, or by solution processing methods which involve high temperature (270- 500 oC)

annealing.  However to exploit the promises for device flexibility and conformability with 

perovskite solar cells, the interlayers also needs to be fabricated at moderate temperatures and 

specifically, below 150°C in the case where polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is used as the 

flexible substrate [22]. So far there are only a few studies on low temperature solution 

processed NiO HEL for perovskite solar cells. Liu et al [21] reported 15.9 % PCE for two step 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
3

synthesised CH3NH3PbI3 p-i-n perovskite solar cells using NiO thin films annealed at 150 oC 

and followed by a UV-ozone treatment. Very recently He et al [23] and Chen et al[24] reported 

15-20 % PCE for CH3NH3PbI3 p-i-n perovskite solar cells using room temperature processed 

NiO and Cu:NiO as HEL. Although interesting, these reports do not explore the applicability 

of using NiO HEL to perovskite compositions other than CH3NH3PbI3, or the shelf-life stability 

of the fabricated p-i-n solar cells. Furthermore, they do not directly compare the perovskite 

solar cell device performance with the widely used hole extraction layer of PEDOT:PSS. 

Hybrid perovskite solar cells have so far been mainly investigated for their performance 

under outdoor solar illumination with very few reports discussing the indoor photovoltaic 

performance of perovskite solar cells [25-29]. The tuneable bandgap (1.2-3.1 eV) of hybrid 

perovskites[30] and visible spectral range of indoor light sources give hybrid perovskites 

considerable potential for indoor light harvesting. Indoor lighting in residential buildings and 

offices are dominated by compact fluorescent lamps (CFL) and white light emitting diodes 

(LEDs) which are entirely different in intensity and spectral content compared to the solar 

spectrum. Indoor solar cells are very interesting for powering smart autonomous systems such 

as Internet of Things (IoT) applications. IoT is a huge technology field of ‘smart’ connected 

devices and is expected to grow rapidly over the coming years. By 2025, IoT is expected to 

connect 30 billion objects, sensors being more than 60% of devices [31]. Considering the huge 

number of objects being connected in IoT, the use of power distribution wires or battery is

complex, expensive and an environmental issue. Interestingly these wireless sensors need only 

microwatt ranges of power which could potentially come from indoor solar cells. Hence the 

development of cost effective, photovoltaic technology to power these sensors is important and 

hybrid perovskites are an ideal choice. 

In the present work, a low temperature (100 0C), solution processed, NiO nanoparticle 

based thin film as efficient hole extraction layer is demonstrated for CH3NH3PbI3 and mixed 

halide perovskites such as CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 and CH3NH3PbI2.9Br0.1. These NiO nanoparticles 

were synthesised using flame spray synthesis method which is capable of producing uniformly 

distributed metal oxide nanoparticles at a high production rate (200 g/h) in a cost efficient 

manner and without forming any harmful by-products [32]. Thus these NiO nanoparticles are 

attractive towards the industrial fabrication of perovskite solar cells. Detailed investigation of

the microstructural, optoelectronic and photophysical properties of the CH3NH3PbI3 on NiO

/PEDOT:PSS HELs is carried out and compared. Improved microstructural and photophysical 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
4

properties of CH3NH3PbI3 films grown on NiO hole transporting layers in comparison to those 

on PEDOT:PSS results in higher (13.3 %)  photovoltaic power conversion efficiency for the 

NiO based perovskite solar cells in comparison to PEDOT:PSS (7.9 %) as HEL. In addition to 

the performance of these hybrid perovskite solar cells under AM 1.5 G solar spectrum, their 

photovoltaic performance is characterized for indoor lighting applications. Based on this, a 

PCE of 23.0 % is demonstrated for NiO based CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1  p-i-n solar cells. Moreover, 

compared to the perovskite solar cells fabricated on PEDOT:PSS HEL, better shelf-life stability 

is observed for perovskite solar cells fabricated on NiO HEL. Detailed microstructural and 

photophysical investigations imply uniform morphology, lower recombination losses, and 

improved charge transfer properties for CH3NH3PbI3 grown on NiO HEL compared to that on 

PEDOT:PSS. 

2.
Experimental details

2.1 Preparation of NiO thin films

The dry NiO nanopowder was prepared by flame spray synthesis using a precursor solution of 

nickel salt in 2-ethylhexanoic acid; the solution was diluted with 30 wt% THF. The precursor 

then was fed to a spray nozzle, dispersed by oxygen and ignited by a premixed methane-oxygen 

flame (CH4: 1.2 l min−1 and O2: 2.2 l min−1). The off-gas was filtered through a steel mesh filter 

(20 micron mesh size) by a vacuum pump at about 20 m3h−1. The obtained dry nanopowder 

was collected from the filter mesh. A stable suspension was prepared by dispersing 2.5 wt% 

nanopowder in ethanol by using an undisclosed dispersant (proprietary information of 

Avantama AG). 

NiO nanoparticle thin films were prepared from the above mentioned NiO nanoparticle 

suspension (Avantama, P-21, product number 10128, 7 nm particle size) from Avantama. The 

as- received NiO nanoparticle was ultrasonicated for 1 minute followed by diluting (1:10 by 

volume) the suspension in anhydrous ethanol. The diluted NiO nanoparticle suspension was

sonicated for 5-10 minutes before spin coating. The spin coating was carried out under ambient 

conditions, at 2000 rpm for 60 seconds. After spin coating, the glass/ITO/NiO substrates were 

annealed at 100 oC for 10 minutes.

2.2 Fabrication of perovskite solar cells

The pre-patterned ITO-coated glass substrates were cleaned in detergent (sodium dodecyl 

sulphate-SDS), successively ultrasonicated in deionized water, acetone and isopropyl alcohol, 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
5

and exposed to oxygen Plasma Asher for 3 minutes. The solution to make the perovskite active

layer was prepared by mixing 461 mg of PbI2 (Alfa Aesar 99.999%) and 159 mg of CH3NH3I3

(Dyesol) in a mixed solvent of Dimethyl sulfoxide (66 µL) (DMSO, Sigma Aldrich, anhydrous, 

99.9%) and Dimethyl formamide (636 µL) (DMF, Sigma Aldrich, anhydrous, 99.9%). The 

precursor solution was stirred for 1 hour at room temperature and then spin-coated onto the

glass/ITO/NiO substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 seconds. During the first 7 s of the spin-coating 

process, a diethyl ether wash (700 µL) was carried out. After completing the spin coating 

process, the perovskite film was annealed in vacuum (~ 100 mbar) at 100 oC for 1 minute 

followed by annealing in N2 ambient in the glovebox for another 2 minutes. The electron 

transporting layer of PC61BM was prepared by mixing 10 mg/mL in chlorobenzene and 

followed 
by 
a 
spin 
coating 
process 
of 
1000 
rpm 
for 
60 
s. 
The 

glass/ITO/NiO/perovskite/PC61BM structure was then thermally annealed at 80 oC for 5 

minutes. The perovskite solar cell was then completed by thermally evaporating 1 nm of LiF 

and 100 nm of Ag contact. In the case of PEDOT:PSS HEL based solar cells, the HEL was

prepared by spin coating the CLEVIOS™ P VP AI 4083 P (Heraeus) PEDOT:PSS at 4000 rpm 

for 60 s and annealing in air at 140 oC for 10 minutes. All the weighing of the perovskite 

materials, precursor solution preparation, stirring, perovskite active layer spin coating and the 

PC61BM layer deposition were performed inside a nitrogen filled glove box.

After the electrode deposition, the devices were encapsulated with a UV optical 

adhesive and a glass coverslip. The current-voltage characteristics were determined under an 

illumination intensity of 100 mW∕cm2 in air using an air mass 1.5 global (AM 1.5G) 

Sciencetech solar simulator (SS150-AAA) and a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit. The 

illumination intensity was verified with a calibrated monosilicon detector and a KG-5 filter. 

The solar cells were applied a bias sweep from -0.20 V to 1.5 V, with a voltage step of 10 mV 

and a delay time of 200 ms. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were 

performed at zero bias by illuminating the device with monochromatic light supplied from a 

Xenon arc lamp in combination with a dual-grating monochromator. The number of photons 

incident on the sample was calculated for each wavelength by using a silicon photodiode 

calibrated by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL). For the indoor measurements, the LED 

light source used was Cree (Cree XML T6) and the illuminance intensity (2.2 mW/cm2) was

adjusted by changing the input voltage. A fluorescent lamp (RS components, PL 11 lamp, 11 

W) was also used as an illumination source (intensity 0.32 mW/cm2). The irradiance level is 

measured using RK 5710 power radiometer and Optometer P9710.


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
6

2.2 Characterization of the NiO and hybrid perovskite thin films

The UV-Vis absorption and transmission spectra of NiO and hybrid perovskite thin films were recorded 

using a Cary 300 spectrometer for the wavelength range of 300-800 nm. The thickness of the films were 

measured using Dektak II profilometer (stylus force 6 mg and a measurement range of 6.5 µm). HOMO 

levels of the NiO and PEDOT:PSS films were measured using ambient photoemission (KP Technology 

APS03 instrument). The Kelvin probe tip has a gold-alloy coating (2 mm diameter) and when used in contact 

potential difference (CPD) mode, vibrates at 70 Hz at an average height of 1 mm from the sample surface. 

For recording the ambient photoemission spectrum (APS), the sample was illuminated with a 4-5 mm 

diameter light spot from a tunable monochromated D2 lamp (4–7 eV). The raw photoemission data were 

corrected for detector offset; intensity normalized, then processed by a cube root power law. The energy 

resolution in APS mode is 50-100 meV. The Kelvin probe contact potential difference (CPD) technique was 

used to measure the surface photovoltage (SPV). SPV is estimated using the relation of [CPD(dark) –

CPD(light)]. For the SPV measurement the sample was illuminated using a QTH lamp. Steady state PL 

spectra were measured with a Hamamatsu streak camera C10910-05, with S-20ER photocathode and 

650 nm as excitation wavelength from an optical parametric amplifier, pumped by Pharos laser (from 

Light Conversion). Time-resolved photoluminescence was spectrally integrated in the range of 720-800 

nm and measured with a 3 ps time resolution, using a Hamamatsu streak camera in synchroscan mode,

following excitation by 200 fs pulses at 640 nm from an optical parametric amplifier, pumped by Pharos 

regenerative amplifier at 100 kHz repetition rate. The incident excitation fluence was kept low at 340 

nJ cm-2, to avoid non-geminate charge recombination. The surface morphology of the NiO and 

PEDOT:PSS thin films were characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM). AFM images were

obtained with a Bruker MultiMode 8 instrument in the tapping mode. NANOSENSORS™ PPP-NCSTR 

Si cantilever tips with force constant of 6–7 Nm−1 were used as AFM probes. The transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM) and high resolution TEM were taken using Titan Themis 200 scanning transmission 

electron microscope (S/TEM), equipped with an X-FEG Schottky field emission gun and Super-X high 

sensitivity windowless EDX detector for rapid compositional analysis. The sanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) measurements of the hybrid perovskite layers were taken using a Hitachi S4800 

scanning electron microscope. X-ray diffraction spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin films were collected 

on a Rigaku Miniflex 600 diffractometer using CuKα1,2 radiation and a D/tex Ultra detector. Data were 

collected in the range 5o -70o 2θ with a step size of 0.02o and a time per step of 0.28 s.

3. Results and Discussion:

3.1 Properties of NiO films and its comparison with PEDOT:PSS 

The characterization of the prepared NiO thin films were done to check the potential of these 

films to function as hole transporting layers in inverted perovskite solar cells. The transmission


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
7

properties, the surface morphology, energy level alignment and crystalline properties of the 

prepared NiO thin films were investigated in this regard. The transmission spectrum of the 

prepared NiO thin films on ITO substrate is shown in Figure 1(a). A comparison of the 

PEDOT:PSS transmission spectrum in the visible range is also given. The prepared thin film 

of NiO is highly transparent and does not further reduce the transmission properties of the ITO 

substrate in the visible range. The average transmission of the glass/ ITO/NiO thin films are 

above 80 % and this can be attributed to the high optical band gap (3.6 eV) for NiO thin films. 

The surface morphology of the NiO nanoparticle thin films on ITO surface obtained by atomic 

force microscopy is shown in Figure 1(b). Very fine nanoparticles with uniform size 

distribution and dense packing with full surface coverage is observed. The RMS surface

roughness of the corresponding NiO thin film is ~ 3.8 nm. The thickness of the NiO thin film 

is determined by Spectroscopic ellipsometry method and is ~ 6 nm. To ensure that the NiO 

film is covering the ITO substrate, AFM imaging of the ITO substrate is also done and is shown 

in Figure S1(a). The ITO substrate is smoother than NiO nanoparticle film and the RMS 

roughness is around 1.5 nm. Figure S1(b) shows the surface morphology of the PEDOT:PSS 

films and is even smoother (RMS roughness of ~ 1.1 nm) than the ITO surface.  To study the 

particle size distribution and crystalline properties, high resolution transmission electron 

images of the NiO nanoparticle thin film were obtained by scratching particles from the ITO 

substrate and is shown in Figure 1(c). These NiO nanoparticles have particle size of ~ 5 nm 

and show clear lattice fringes, indicating their crystalline quality. The histogram of the particle 

size distribution is shown in Figure S1(c). The selective area diffraction pattern (SAED) given 

in the inset of figure 1(c) shows that the NiO nanoparticles are highly polycrystalline. The 

elemental composition of the NiO nanoparticles shown in the TEM image is confirmed by 

taking the energy dispersive spectra (EDS) from the same imaging area and is shown in Figure 

S1(d). Only Ni and O elements were observed from the EDS spectrum except Cu coming from 

the grid. For the efficient charge transport from the perovskite active layer to the charge 

transporting layer, ohmic contact is needed at the perovskite active layer/electrode interface. 

The work function and valence band (VB) position of the prepared NiO films were studied 

using Kelvin probe (KP) and Ambient photoemission spectroscopy (APS). The APS spectra of 

NiO thin films on ITO substrate is shown in Figure 1(d) and the estimated VB is at 5.32 eV 

and the measured Fermi level is around 5.26 eV. In order to understand how much the VB of 

NiO differs from the HOMO level of the most commonly employed hole extraction layer of 

PEDOT:PSS, the Fermi level and HOMO level of PEDOT:PSS was also measured as shown 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
8

in Figure S2. The HOMO level of PEDOT:PSS is 5.46 eV and the Fermi level is 5.29 eV. 

Compared to NiO nanoparticle films, the PEDOT:PSS HOMO is slightly deeper.

3.2 Comparison of Photovoltaic properties 

After characterizing the various optoelectronic and structural properties, the low 

temperature solution processed NiO nanoparticle thin films were tested as hole extraction 

layers in inverted perovskite solar cells using CH3NH3PbI3 as the active layer. The inverted 

device configuration used consists of glass/ITO/NiO/CH3NH3PbI3/PC61BM/LiF/Ag and is 

shown in Figure 2(a). The influence of NiO nanoparticle film thickness on photovoltaic 

properties of inverted perovskite solar cells is given in Figure S3. The NiO films with thickness 

around 6 nm show the best photovoltaic properties. The control devices were fabricated using 

the same device configuration using PEDOT:PSS as the HEL. A comparison of the light J-V 

characteristics under AM1.5 G solar simulator spectrum for inverted perovskite solar cells 

using PEDOT:PSS and NiO nanoparticle thin films are shown in Figure 2(b). The 

corresponding photovoltaic performance parameters are listed in Table 1. Compared to the 

inverted solar cells using PEDOT:PSS as HEL, which show a maximum power conversion 

efficiency of 7.9 %, the inverted perovskite solar cells with NiO as HEL show much improved 

photovoltaic performance with a maximum power conversion efficiency of 13.3 %. The 

consistency and reproducibility of the NiO nanoparticle thin films as an efficient hole 

extraction layer has been confirmed by fabricating many batches of inverted perovskite solar 

cells. The histogram distribution of power conversion efficiency is shown in Figure 2(c) and is 

compared to that of PEDOT:PSS HEL based solar cells. If we compare the photovoltaic 

properties listed in Table 1, it is obvious that, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells on NiO HEL 

have higher open circuit voltage and improved short circuit current density. A comparison of 

the EQE spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells based on both NiO and PEDOT:PSS is given 

in Figure 2(d) and confirms the difference in short circuit current density from the two device 

configurations using PEDOT:PSS and NiO as HEL. 

Since the processing temperature of the NiO hole extraction layer is compatible with 

flexible substrates such as PET, CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells were fabricated on 

PET/ITO/NiO substrates. The maximum power conversion efficiency obtained is 8.5 %. The 

J-V characteristics, EQE spectra and the corresponding photovoltaic performance parameters 

are listed in Figure 3(a), (b) and Table 2. Compared to the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells 

fabricated on Glass/ITO/NiO, the solar cells on flexible substrates have slightly lower PCE. 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
9

The lower PCE is mainly due to the lower FF for the PET/ITO/NiO based perovskite solar cells 

compared to that on the glass counterpart. This could be related to the higher sheet resistance

(60 ohm/sq.) of the PET/ITO substrate compared to glass/ITO substrate (15 ohm/sq). 

So far the fabrication of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells on different HEL layers and 

the glass/flexible substrate was discussed.  Now, in order to understand the differences in solar 

cell device performance for the two hole extraction layers (NiO and PEDOT:PSS), J-V 

characteristics of the solar cells were measured as a function of light intensity. By studying the 

variation of Jsc
and Voc
as a function of light intensity, different 
charge 

extraction/recombination mechanism of photogenerated charges prevalent in these devices can 

be understood. The short circuit current density Jsc depends upon the light intensity I by a power 

law relation of,

where 𝛼 is a recombination factor and is unity when all the separated charges are collected by

the electrodes. A small decrease of 𝛼 from unity corresponds to weak bi-molecular 

recombination losses. Values of 𝛼 in the range of 0.7-0.8, however, corresponds to space 

charge effects [33, 34]. The dependence of short circuit current density Jsc on light intensity for 

perovskite solar cells using PEDOT:PSS and NiO as HEL is shown in Figure 4 (a). The nearly 

straight line in a log-log plot indicates a power law dependence (Jsc ∞ Iα). For PEDOT:PSS,

the α value is 0.83 whereas for NiO it is 0.95. The α value close to 1 for NiO indicates that no 

space charge builds up and that photocurrent extraction is efficient. In contrast the value for 

PEDOT:PSS indicates that, the photocurrent extraction is substantially space charge limited.  

Thus in NiO HEL based perovskite solar cells, the photocurrent extraction is very efficient 

whereas in PEDOT:PSS HEL based devices photocurrent extraction is space charge limited. 

This can account for the higher short circuit current  density observed in NiO HEL based 

perovskite solar cells in comparison to that of PEDOT:PSS HELs. In order to understand the 

different recombination mechanisms prevalent in the devices, based on NiO and PEDOT:PSS 

HELs, the dependence of Voc on light intensity was investigated. 

The dependence of open circuit voltage 𝑽𝒐𝒄 on incident light intensity 𝑰 is given by the relation: 

𝑉𝑜𝑐 = 𝑛𝑘𝐵𝑇

𝑞
ln 𝐼

𝐽𝑠𝑐 ∝ 𝐼𝛼


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
10

where 𝒏 is the recombination ideality factor and 

𝒌𝑩𝑻

𝒒 the thermal voltage. When the slope of 

𝑽𝒐𝒄 vs the logarithm of light intensity 𝑰 is

𝒌𝑩𝑻

𝒒 , (corresponding to 𝒏 = 𝟏) it indicates 

bimolecular recombination, whereas a steeper slope ( 𝒏 > 𝟏) indicates trap assisted 

recombination. Figure 4(b) shows that by linearly fitting the Voc vs light intensity a slope of 

1.14 kBT/q and 2.0 kBT/q is obtained for NiO and PEDOT:PSS HEL based perovskite solar 

cells respectively. This indicates that, in the case of PEDOT:PSS based perovskite solar cells, 

trap assisted recombination is dominant whereas in the NiO based devices, Shockley-Read-

Hall (SRH) recombination is largely suppressed and the recombination mechanism is mainly 

bimolecular. Variation of FF as a function of light intensity for both NiO and PEDOT:PSS 

based CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells is given in Figure S4. At low light intensity, in the 

case of NiO the FF is higher whereas in the case of PEDOT:PSS, the FF systematically 

decreases with lowering the light intensity. This behavior of FF with light intensity also 

supports the lower recombination losses in NiO compared to that  in PEDOT:PSS HELs[35, 

36].

3.3 Properties of CH3NH3PbI3 films on PEDOT:PSS and NiO Hole extraction layers: 

To understand the origin of this difference in recombination dynamics of 

photogenerated charge carriers in solar cells, based on NiO and PEDOT:PSS as HELs, the 

structural, morphological and photophysical properties of the CH3NH3PbI3 thin films on these 

interlayers were studied. Figure 4(c) shows the UV-VIS absorption spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3

films on NiO and PEDOT:PSS interlayers and both show comparable absorbance over the 

entire wavelength range of 400-800 nm. This implies that the difference in short circuit current 

density observed in Figure 2(b) and Table 1, does not arise from the absorption or charge 

generation differences in CH3NH3PbI3 film grown on NiO or PEDOT:PSS. To understand the 

crystalline properties of the perovskite layer grown on these different interlayers, the X-ray 

diffraction (XRD) pattern of the CH3NH3PbI3 films were measured and are shown in Figure 

4(d). XRD spectra of both perovskite films exhibit comparable intensities of diffraction signals 

at 14.1o and 28.5o, corresponding to the (110) and (220) planes of the tetragonal phase. No 

trace of PbI2 peak was seen in the XRD spectra of perovskite films grown on either of the 

interlayers. Thus, the observed differences in photovoltaic performance shown in Figure 2(b)

are not related to differences in absorption or crystalline properties of perovskite active layer.

To understand the contribution of any morphological differences, scanning electron 

microscopy (SEM) images were taken. Figure 5(a) and (b) show the corresponding SEM 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
11

images. As seen from the images, the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer grown on NiO consists of 

dense and uniform perovskite crystalline domains of size ranging from 100- 250 nm. In contrast 

the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer grown on PEDOT:PSS has a different morphology with non-

uniform distribution of perovskite domain sizes. In addition to the non-homogeneous 

distribution, many aggregate features are also seen on the grain boundaries. Since PbI2 related 

features were not seen in the XRD spectra, these small aggregates are also ascribed to 

perovskite crystals. These non-homogeneous and aggregate features can impede charge 

transport leading to recombination losses and space charge build up. This property can further

account for the lower short circuit current density and lower Voc in the case of PEDOT:PSS 

HEL based solar cells. 

To further investigate the hole extraction efficiency to the NiO and PEDOT:PSS layers, 

steady state and time resolved PL spectroscopy studies were carried out for the CH3NH3PbI3

layers grown on these hole extraction layers as well as on perovskite layer grown on glass 

substrates. Figure 5c shows the normalised time integrated PL spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3

layers grown on NiO and PEDOT:PSS HELs recorded using identical excitation intensity. Both 

samples show identical shape of PL spectra with a peak at 768 nm which indicates that 

perovskite layer has the same optical bandgap on different interlayers. The time resolved PL 

decays are shown in Figure 5(d). The PL in CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer comes from 

bimolecular recombination and its intensity is proportional to the product of electron and hole 

densities. The perovskite layer grown on glass shows very little decay on the time scale of 2 ns 

which indicates that charge recombination is slow. PL decays on NiO and PEDOT are faster 

which indicates hole extraction from the perovskite layer. Faster hole extraction is observed 

into NiO which agrees with previous observations of more efficient hole extraction into NiO

[37, 38].  The PL decay on NiO is nearly exponential with about 300 ps lifetime and shows that 

hole extraction occurs with a well-defined homogeneous rate. In contrast, the layer on 

PEDOT:PSS shows significant non-exponential decay with a long component exceeding 2 ns. 

This indicates that hole extraction to PEDOT:PSS is very heterogeneous; a fraction of holes 

are extracted on the same time scale as to NiO but other holes are extracted very slowly. The 

homogeneous rate of hole transfer from CH3NH3PbI3 to NiO can be explained by better energy 

level alignment of CH3NH3PbI3 with NiO (shown in Figure S5) and uniform and homogeneous 

perovskite morphology on NiO HEL compared to PEDOT:PSS HEL. In the case of 

CH3NH3PbI3 layer on PEDOT:PSS there is unfavourable energy level alignment and non-

uniform, aggregated morphology, hence holes can diffuse back into bulk perovskite and can 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
12

take many attempts to get extracted.  Faster hole extraction to NiO will also enhance charge 

collection rate and prevent charge accumulation at the interface of perovskite with the HEL. 

This faster collection of holes and the possibility for reduced recombination can thus account 

for the improved short circuit current (hence higher EQE) and better Voc of CH3NH3PbI3 solar 

cells on NiO HEL compared to those on PEDOT:PSS HEL.  

From the morphological studies and photophysical characterization, the higher short 

circuit current density of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells on NiO is revealed due to homogeneous 

morphology, better energy level alignment and faster hole extraction from the perovskite active 

layer. Even though the higher Voc of CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells on NiO can be explained by less 

recombination losses and favourable energy alignment, to confirm this further surface 

photovoltage measurement is performed and explained below. 

3.4 Surface photovoltage measurements 

To understand the contribution of HELs specifically to the open circuit voltage, surface 

photovoltage was measured using a macroscopic Kelvin probe set up. This method allows the 

measurement of photovoltage of partial or incomplete solar cell device architectures and 

analysis of each contact (buried interface) on the role of charge extraction and has previously 

been successfully used to study CH3NH3PbI3 layers grown on different interlayers[39].

Previously Lee et al[40] have shown that surface photovoltage, which is directly related to the 

open circuit voltage depends on the relative efficiency of charge extraction at the interfaces. 

Figure 6 shows the surface photovoltage measured for partial device structure of ITO/NiO or 

PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 for PEDOT:PSS and NiO HELs. The surface photovoltage 

measured for NiO based structure is 160 meV whereas the surface photovoltage measured for 

PEDOT:PSS is only 70 meV. Thus ~ 90 meV higher surface photovoltage for the ITO/NiO/ 

CH3NH3PbI3 heterostructure in comparison to ITO/ PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3 implies better 

hole extraction through NiO. 

After realising efficient CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells on NiO HEL and the superior 

quality of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layers grown on NiO, the fabrication of mixed halide 

perovskite solar cells on NiO was attempted as described in the next section. 

3.5 NiO HEL extended to other mixed halide perovskite solar cells 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
13

With the success of fabrication of efficient CH3NH3PbI3 based solar cells in inverted 

architecture, mixed halides such as CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 and CH3NH3PbI2.9Br0.1 based perovskite 

solar cells were also fabricated using NiO as HEL. The CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 based solar cells 

show a maximum PCE of 12.5 % and for CH3NH3PbI2.9Br0.1 based solar cells the maximum 

PCE is 11.3 %. The corresponding J-V characteristics, EQE spectra and the photovoltaic 

performance parameters are shown in Figure S6 and Table S2. The high efficiency of mixed 

halide-based perovskite solar cells implies the wide applicability of the NiO HEL to a range of 

perovskite solar cells. 

So far, the properties of NiO were compared to the most commonly employed HEL of 

PEDOT:PSS and the superior photovoltaic performance of NiO HEL based CH3NH3PbI3 and 

mixed halide perovskite solar cells under 1 Sun illumination was demonstrated and explained. 

In the next section, the indoor photovoltaic performance of NiO based perovskite solar cells is

investigated. 

3.6 Indoor photovoltaic testing for hybrid perovskites:

Hybrid perovskite solar cells are primarily tested and certified for outdoor applications and 

record efficiencies are reported for illumination at 1 Sun. Compared to the outdoor photovoltaic 

performance of hybrid perovskites, little attention has been given to their indoor photovoltaic 

properties. It has been previously reported that in the case of indoor lighting conditions, the 

optimum material bandgap is 1.9-2.0 eV in order to maximise the power conversion 

efficiency[41]. Hence mixed halide perovskites, as used here are more suitable than 

CH3NH3PbI3 because of their larger bandgap. According to a previous report by Steim et al

[42] the role of interlayers is crucial in determining the indoor photovoltaic performance: the 

interlayers should have higher shunt resistance and low series resistance. The low temperature 

solution processed NiO interlayer-based hybrid perovskites, which showed promising 

performance at AM 1.5 G solar spectrum, have been studied for their indoor photovoltaic 

performance without further optimization. White LED and fluorescent lamps were used as the 

indoor light sources. Figure 7 and Table 3 show the J-V characteristics and the photovoltaic 

performance of CH3NH3PbI3, and mixed halide perovskites as a function of white LED light 

with intensity 2.2 mW/cm2. Compared to pure CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells, the mixed halide 

perovskite solar cells outperform under white LED lighting at very low intensities. Under low 

light intensity, the PCE is enhanced almost 100 % for CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 mixed halide 

perovskite solar cells, giving rise to 20.8 % and for CH3NH3PbI2.9Br0.1 the PCE is 19.9 %. This 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
14

could be related to the slightly higher bandgap of mixed halide perovskites (1.63 vs 1.57 eV) 

compared to pure CH3NH3PbI3 giving rise to the better spectral overlap of solar cell EQE 

spectra with the indoor LED emission spectra [Figure 7(b)].  As can be seen from Table 3, this 

higher bandgap also leads to higher Voc for mixed halide perovskite solar cells compared to 

CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells.. In addition, the improved charge carrier diffusion length reported in 

chloride based mixed halide compared to bromide and pure iodide-based perovskite can also 

contribute to this improved device performance [43]. In all the cases the high FF of the solar 

cells under indoor lighting imply the better hole extraction through the NiO layer. 

After measuring the performance of NiO HEL based CH3NH3PbI3 and mixed halide 

perovskites solar cells for white LED lighting, their performance was characterized under 

fluorescent lamp. The fluorescent lamp spectrum is shown in Figure 7(b). The incident light 

intensity used was 0.32 mW/cm2. The J-V characteristics and the corresponding photovoltaic 

performance parameters are shown in Figure 8 and Table 4. Similar to the performance under 

white LED, mixed halide perovskite solar cells of the CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 show the highest 

performance of 23.0 %. The high FF of these solar cells even under very low intensity confirms 

the superior charge selection properties of the NiO nanoparticle interlayers. 

Up to this point, the performance of NiO nanoparticle thin films as efficient hole extraction 

layers in CH3NH3PbI3, CH3NH3PbI2.9Br0.1, CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1 based solar cells were 

demonstrated for AM 1.5 G solar spectrum and indoor lighting condition of white LED and 

fluorescent light. Now finally, the stability of the NiO nanoparticle HEL based solar cells and 

that of PEDOT:PSS HEL is investigated. 

3.7 Shelf- life stability studies

For stability studies, the encapsulated solar cells were kept in the dark under ambient air 

conditions of temperature 22 ºC and relative humidity 40% (measured using HTC-1 thermo-

hygrometer). The shelf -life study (3 months and 20 days, encapsulated solar cells kept under 

above mentioned ambient conditions) of the CH3NH3PbI3 based solar cells fabricated on NiO 

and PEDOT:PSS HELs shows that the degradation of the hybrid perovskite is faster on 

PEDOT:PSS HEL with much lower yield (12%- 1 out of 8 pixels) after the degradation,

compared to the solar cells on NiO HEL (75 %- 6 out of 8 pixels).  Figure 9(a) shows the 

appearance of NiO and PEDOT:PSS based CH3NH3PbI3 solar cells after 3 months and 20 days. 

The yellowish appearance of the CH3NH3PbI3 on PEDOT:PSS indicates moisture induced 

dissociation of the perovskite active layer whereas the CH3NH3PbI3 films on NiO HEL retains 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
15

its black brown perovskite appearance. This implies better moisture permeation prevention for 

the NiO based HEL compared to the PEDOT:PSS [44]. Regarding the photovoltaic 

performance of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells, both NiO and PEDOT:PSS HEL based 

devices retain 60-65% of initial PCE. The corresponding photovoltaic performance parameters 

are listed in the Table S3.
However in the case of mixed halide perovskite solar cells

CH3NH3PbI2.9Br0.1, CH3NH3PbI2.9Cl0.1, a better shelf-life stability of above 90 % is obtained. 

A summary of the stability study is given in Figure 9(b) and the detailed photovoltaic 

performance parameters are listed in Table S4 and in Figure S7. 

4. Conclusion

We have demonstrated that simple solution-processed NiO thin films are efficient hole 

extraction layers for perovskite solar cells.  In particular we find that NiO leads to much better 

performance than PEDOT:PSS in p-i-n perovskite solar cells.  Under solar illumination we 

obtained a power conversion efficiency of 13.3% for the NiO containing solar cells compared 

with 7.9% for those made with PEDOT:PSS.  We attribute this improvement to superior 

microstructural, optoelectronic and interface properties of hybrid perovskites grown on NiO.  

In addition we showed that the NiO layer worked well with mixed halide perovskites as well 

as for CH3NH3PbI3.  

The low temperature processing of NiO means that we could readily make devices on 

flexible substrates.  We also explored the photovoltaic performance under indoor lighting.  We 

found that the low recombination rate and fast extraction of photogenerated carriers by NiO is 

particularly suitable for low intensity indoor illumination and obtained a power conversion 

efficiency of 23%.  Further attractive features of using a NiO hole extraction layer are that it 

acts as a barrier to moisture and so enhances shelf-life.  These good results for a range of hybrid 

perovskites, substrates and lighting conditions indicate that NiO nanoparticle thin films are 

promising for the future development of perovskite solar cells and other optoelectronic devices.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We are grateful to the European Commission for financial support through the grant, 

EXCITON 321305. Dr. L.K.Jagadamma acknowledges support from a Marie Skłodowska-

Curie Individual Fellowship (European Commission) (MCIF: No. 745776). We are grateful to 

EPSRC for equipment grant (EP/L017008/1). The authors are grateful to Dr. J. Payne for 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
16

performing X-ray diffraction measurements and Dr. D. N. Miller for the transmission electron 

microscopy measurements. 

Research data:
Research data supporting this publication is available at 

DOI: 10.17630/38a7d71f-2a90-4d6e-b477-dd4d636cea07

Figure Captions

Figure 1: (a) Comparison of the transmission spectra of NiO nanoparticle thin films with 
ITO substrate and PEDOT:PSS. (b) AFM image of NiO nanoparticle thin film (c) TEM 
image of NiO nanoparticle thin film. Inset shows the selective area diffraction pattern (d) 
Ambient photoemission spectra of NiO nanoparticle thin films on ITO substrate.

Figure 2: (a) Inverted perovskite solar cell device architecture (b) J-V characteristics 
comparison of the best perovskite solar cells on NiO and PEDOT: PSS HELs. RW stands for 
reverse bias scanning and FW stands for forward bias scanning. (c) Histogram of solar cell 
device numbers and power conversion efficiency distribution for NiO and PEDOT: PSS HELs  
(d) EQE spectra comparison of the best solar cell devices for NiO and PEDOT: PSS HELs . 

Figure 3: (a) J-V characteristics of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cells on flexible PET 
substrate using NiO HEL. RW stands for reverse bias scanning and FW stands for forward bias 
scanning. (b) The corresponding EQE spectra of the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar cell. Inset 
shows the fabricated flexible perovskite solar cells. 

Figure 4:  Light intensity dependence of perovskite solar cells based on NiO and PEDOT:PSS 
HELs for (a) Jsc (log-log scale) and (b) Voc (semi log scale). (c) Absorbance spectra and (d) X-
ray diffraction pattern comparison for CH3NH3PbI3 layers grown on PEDOT:PSS and NiO 
HELs

Figure 5:  Scanning electron microscopy images of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite layer on (a) NiO 
and (b) PEDOT:PSS HELs. (c) Normalised time integrated PL spectra (over 2 ns) and (d) PL 
decays of CH3NH3PbI3 layers grown on glass without hole extraction layers, and with NiO and 
PEDOT:PSS HELs. Solid lines represent the bi-exponential fit.   

Figure 6: (a) Schematic of the incomplete device architecture used for measuring the surface 
photovoltage. (b) surface photovoltage measured for NiO as HEL and (c) surface photovoltage 
measured for PEDOT:PSS as HEL. 


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
17

Figure 7: (a) J-V characteristics of the NiO HEL based CH3NH3PbI3 and mixed halide 
perovskite solar cells under white light LED (2.20 mW/cm2). (b) White light LED and 
fluorescent lamp spectral overlap with the EQE of different perovskite solar cells. 

Figure 8: (a) J-V characteristics of the NiO HEL based CH3NH3PbI3 and mixed halide 
perovskite solar cells under fluorescent lamp (0.32 mW/cm2). 

Figure 9: (a) Images showing the NiO and PEDOT:PSS HELs based CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite 
solar cells after 3 months and 20 days of shelf life under ambient conditions. (b) Summary of 
the shelf-life studies of the various perovskite solar cells on NiO HEL. 

References

[1] NREL chart, in, June 2019.
[2] T. Salim, S. Sun, Y. Abe, A. Krishna, A.C. Grimsdale, Y.M. Lam, Perovskite-based solar cells: impact 
of morphology and device architecture on device performance, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 3 
(2015) 8943-8969.
[3] P. Gao, M. Grätzel, M.K. Nazeeruddin, Organohalide lead perovskites for photovoltaic 
applications, Energy & Environmental Science, 7 (2014) 2448-2463.


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
18

[4] K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M.K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. 
Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, Not All That Glitters Is Gold: Metal-Migration-Induced Degradation in 
Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 10 (2016) 6306-6314.
[5] L. Meng, J. You, T.-F. Guo, Y. Yang, Recent Advances in the Inverted Planar Structure of Perovskite 
Solar Cells, Accounts of Chemical Research, 49 (2016) 155-165.
[6] T.A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A.A. 
Dubale, B.-J. Hwang, Organometal halide perovskite solar cells: degradation and stability, Energy & 
Environmental Science, 9 (2016) 323-356.
[7] X.C. Yang, H.X. Wang, B. Cai, Z. Yu, L.C. Sun, Progress in hole-transporting materials for perovskite 
solar cells, Journal of Energy Chemistry, 27 (2018) 650-672.
[8] M.H. Li, J.H. Yum, S.J. Moon, P. Chen, Inorganic p-Type Semiconductors: Their Applications and 
Progress in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells and Perovskite Solar Cells, Energies, 9 (2016) 28.
[9] M.B. Islam, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, Y. Nabetani, K. Miyano, NiOx Hole Transport Layer for 
Perovskite Solar Cells with Improved Stability and Reproducibility, ACS Omega, 2 (2017) 2291-2299.
[10] B. Groeneveld, M. Najafi, B. Steensma, S. Adjokatse, H.H. Fang, F. Jahani, L. Qiu, G.H. ten Brink, 
J.C. Hummelen, M.A. Loi, Improved efficiency of NiOx-based p-i-n perovskite solar cells by using 
PTEG-1 as electron transport layer, Apl Materials, 5 (2017).
[11] Z.J. Hu, D. Chen, P. Yang, L.J. Yang, L.S. Qin, Y.X. Huang, X.C. Zhao, Sol-gel-processed yttrium-
doped NiO as hole transport layer in inverted perovskite solar cells for enhanced performance, 
Applied Surface Science, 441 (2018) 258-264.
[12] Y. Wei, K. Yao, X.F. Wang, Y.H. Jiang, X.Y. Liu, N.G. Zhou, F. Li, Improving the efficiency and 
environmental stability of inverted planar perovskite solar cells via silver-doped nickel oxide hole-
transporting layer, Applied Surface Science, 427 (2018) 782-790.
[13] J. Tang, D. Jiao, L. Zhang, X.Z. Zhang, X.X. Xu, C. Yao, J.H. Wu, Z. Lan, High-performance inverted 
planar perovskite solar cells based on efficient hole-transporting layers from well-crystalline NiO 
nanocrystals, Solar Energy, 161 (2018) 100-108.
[14] Z.L. Zhu, Y. Bai, T. Zhang, Z.K. Liu, X. Long, Z.H. Wei, Z.L. Wang, L.X. Zhang, J.N. Wang, F. Yan, S.H. 
Yang, High-Performance Hole-Extraction Layer of Sol-Gel-Processed NiO Nanocrystals for Inverted 
Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, Angewandte Chemie-International Edition, 53 (2014) 12571-12575.
[15] M.-H. Liu, Z.-J. Zhou, P.-P. Zhang, Q.-W. Tian, W.-H. Zhou, D.-X. Kou, S.-X. Wu, p-type Li, Cu-
codoped NiOx hole-transporting layer for efficient planar perovskite solar cells, Opt. Express, 24 
(2016) A1349-A1359.
[16] K.-C. Wang, J.-Y. Jeng, P.-S. Shen, Y.-C. Chang, E.W.-G. Diau, C.-H. Tsai, T.-Y. Chao, H.-C. Hsu, P.-Y. 
Lin, P. Chen, T.-F. Guo, T.-C. Wen, p-type Mesoscopic Nickel Oxide/Organometallic Perovskite 
Heterojunction Solar Cells, Scientific Reports, 4 (2014) 4756.
[17] J.-Y. Jeng, K.-C. Chen, T.-Y. Chiang, P.-Y. Lin, T.-D. Tsai, Y.-C. Chang, T.-F. Guo, P. Chen, T.-C. Wen, 
Y.-J. Hsu, Nickel Oxide Electrode Interlayer in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite/PCBM Planar-Heterojunction 
Hybrid Solar Cells, Advanced Materials, 26 (2014) 4107-4113.
[18] W. Zhang, X. Zhang, T. Wu, W. Sun, J. Wu, Z. Lan, Interface engineering with NiO nanocrystals 
for highly efficient and stable planar perovskite solar cells, Electrochimica Acta, 293 (2019) 211-219.
[19] W. Zhang, J. Song, D. Wang, K. Deng, J. Wu, L. Zhang, Dual interfacial modification engineering 
with p-type NiO nanocrystals for preparing efficient planar perovskite solar cells, Journal of Materials 
Chemistry C, 6 (2018) 13034-13042.
[20] K. Deevi, V.S.R. Immareddy, Synthesis and characterization of optically transparent nickel oxide 
nanoparticles as a hole transport material for hybrid perovskite solar cells, Journal of Materials 
Science: Materials in Electronics, 30 (2019) 6242-6248.
[21] Z. Liu, A. Zhu, F. Cai, L. Tao, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Chen, Y.-B. Cheng, H. Zhou, Nickel oxide 
nanoparticles for efficient hole transport in p-i-n and n-i-p perovskite solar cells, Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A, 5 (2017) 6597-6605.


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
19

[22] W.A. MacDonald, M.K. Looney, D. MacKerron, R. Eveson, R. Adam, K. Hashimoto, K. Rakos, 
Latest advances in substrates for flexible electronics, Journal of the Society for Information Display, 
15 (2007) 1075-1083.
[23] Q. He, K. Yao, X. Wang, X. Xia, S. Leng, F. Li, Room-Temperature and Solution-Processable Cu-
Doped Nickel Oxide Nanoparticles for Efficient Hole-Transport Layers of Flexible Large-Area 
Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 9 (2017) 41887-41897.
[24] W. Chen, Y. Wu, J. Fan, A.B. Djurišić, F. Liu, H.W. Tam, A. Ng, C. Surya, W.K. Chan, D. Wang, Z.-B. 
He, Understanding the Doping Effect on NiO: Toward High-Performance Inverted Perovskite Solar 
Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 8 (2018) 1703519.
[25] C.-Y. Chen, J.-H. Chang, K.-M. Chiang, H.-L. Lin, S.-Y. Hsiao, H.-W. Lin, Perovskite Photovoltaics 
for Dim-Light Applications, Advanced Functional Materials, 25 (2015) 7064-7070.
[26] J. Dagar, S. Castro-Hermosa, G. Lucarelli, F. Cacialli, T.M. Brown, Highly efficient perovskite solar 
cells for light harvesting under indoor illumination via solution processed SnO2/MgO composite 
electron transport layers, Nano Energy, 49 (2018) 290-299.
[27] G. Lucarelli, F. Di Giacomo, V. Zardetto, M. Creatore, T.M. Brown, Efficient light harvesting from 
flexible perovskite solar cells under indoor white light-emitting diode illumination, Nano Research, 
10 (2017) 2130-2145.
[28] H.K.H. Lee, J. Barbé, S.M.P. Meroni, T. Du, C.-T. Lin, A. Pockett, J. Troughton, S.M. Jain, F. De 
Rossi, J. Baker, M.J. Carnie, M.A. McLachlan, T.M. Watson, J.R. Durrant, W.C. Tsoi, Outstanding 
Indoor Performance of Perovskite Photovoltaic Cells – Effect of Device Architectures and Interlayers, 
Solar RRL, 3 (2019) 1800207.
[29] M. Li, C. Zhao, Z.-K. Wang, C.-C. Zhang, H.K.H. Lee, A. Pockett, J. Barbé, W.C. Tsoi, Y.-G. Yang, 
M.J. Carnie, X.-Y. Gao, W.-X. Yang, J.R. Durrant, L.-S. Liao, S.M. Jain, Interface Modification by Ionic 
Liquid: A Promising Candidate for Indoor Light Harvesting and Stability Improvement of Planar 
Perovskite Solar Cells, Advanced Energy Materials, 8 (2018) 1801509.
[30] E.L. Unger, L. Kegelmann, K. Suchan, D. Sorell, L. Korte, S. Albrecht, Roadmap and roadblocks for 
the band gap tunability of metal halide perovskites, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 5 (2017) 
11401-11409.
[31] M. Kumano, M. Ide, N. Seiki, Y. Shoji, T. Fukushima, A. Saeki, A ternary blend of a polymer, 
fullerene, and insulating self-assembling triptycene molecules for organic photovolatics, Journal of 
Materials Chemistry A, 4 (2016) 18490-18498.
[32] J.A. Azurdia, J. Marchal, P. Shea, H. Sun, X.Q. Pan, R.M. Laine, Liquid-Feed Flame Spray Pyrolysis 
as a Method of Producing Mixed-Metal Oxide Nanopowders of Potential Interest as Catalytic 
Materials. Nanopowders along the NiO−Al2O3 Tie Line Including (NiO)0.22(Al2O3)0.78, a New 
Inverse Spinel Composition, Chemistry of Materials, 18 (2006) 731-739.
[33] L.J.A. Koster, V.D. Mihailetchi, R. Ramaker, P.W.M. Blom, Light intensity dependence of open-
circuit voltage of polymer:fullerene solar cells, Applied Physics Letters, 86 (2005) 123509.
[34] S.R. Cowan, A. Roy, A.J. Heeger, Recombination in polymer-fullerene bulk heterojunction solar 
cells, Physical Review B, 82 (2010) 245207.
[35] J. You, L. Dou, K. Yoshimura, T. Kato, K. Ohya, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, C.-C. Chen, J. Gao, G. Li, Y. 
Yang, A polymer tandem solar cell with 10.6% power conversion efficiency, Nature Communications, 
4 (2013) 1446.
[36] E. Karimi, S.M.B. Ghorashi, Simulation of perovskite solar cell with P<sub>3</sub>HT hole-
transporting materials, in, SPIE, 2017, pp. 14.
[37] E. Bi, H. Chen, F. Xie, Y. Wu, W. Chen, Y. Su, A. Islam, M. Grätzel, X. Yang, L. Han, Diffusion 
engineering of ions and charge carriers for stable efficient perovskite solar cells, Nature 
Communications, 8 (2017) 15330.
[38] L.-B. Huang, P.-Y. Su, J.-M. Liu, J.-F. Huang, Y.-F. Chen, S. Qin, J. Guo, Y.-W. Xu, C.-Y. Su, Interface 
engineering of perovskite solar cells with multifunctional polymer interlayer toward improved 
performance and stability, Journal of Power Sources, 378 (2018) 483-490.


© <2019>. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 

license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
20

[39] J.R. Harwell, T.K. Baikie, I.D. Baikie, J.L. Payne, C. Ni, J.T.S. Irvine, G.A. Turnbull, I.D.W. Samuel, 
Probing the energy levels of perovskite solar cells via Kelvin probe and UV ambient pressure 
photoemission spectroscopy, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 18 (2016) 19738-19745.
[40] L. Barnea-Nehoshtan, S. Kirmayer, E. Edri, G. Hodes, D. Cahen, Surface Photovoltage 
Spectroscopy Study of Organo-Lead Perovskite Solar Cells, The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 
5 (2014) 2408-2413.
[41] M. Freunek, M. Freunek, L.M. Reindl, Maximum efficiencies of indoor photovoltaic devices, IEEE 
Journal of Photovoltaics, 3 (2013) 59-64.
[42] R. Steim, T. Ameri, P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf, G. Dennler, M. Scharber, C.J. Brabec, Organic 
photovoltaics for low light applications, Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 95 (2011) 3256-3261.
[43] S.D. Stranks, G.E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M.J.P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L.M. Herz, A. 
Petrozza, H.J. Snaith, Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal 
Trihalide Perovskite Absorber, Science, 342 (2013) 341-344.
[44] Y. Hu, J. Schlipf, M. Wussler, M.L. Petrus, W. Jaegermann, T. Bein, P. Müller-Buschbaum, P. 
Docampo, Hybrid Perovskite/Perovskite Heterojunction Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 10 (2016) 5999-6007.


