 

 

Cavity receiver designs for parabolic trough collector 

 

 
Khaled Mohamada, P. Ferrera,b 

 

              aSchool of Physics, Materials for Energy Research Group, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 

               2001, South Africa. 

              bSchool of Physics, Mandelstam institute for Theoretical Physics, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 

              2001, South Africa. 

 

Solar parabolic trough collector technology has received significant attention among researchers for its economic potential 

to meet electrical and thermal energy demands. Furthermore, parabolic trough collector power plants can be hybridized 

with fossil fuels or other renewable power plants. Improving the efficiency of the parabolic trough collector leads to 

increase the electricity production and allows the parabolic trough collector power plant to be built in a more compact 

size, at reduced capital investment. This review focuses on parabolic trough collector receivers, which uses cavity 

technology to improve efficiency. The cavity receiver has shown potential to overcome shortages of the conventional 

receiver. It was seen that the thermal losses of the cavity receiver are affected by various parameters such as aperture 

sizes, emissivities, and working fluid temperature as well as mass flow rate and wind velocity. Different cavity designs 

have a different effect on the solar flux distribution along the circumference of the receiver. An efficient cavity receiver 

still has the potential to minimize the losses and hence, improve the overall efficiency. Some of the design gaps have been 

identified as a guide for future work. 

 

Keywords: Cavity absorber; Heat transfer fluid; Parabolic trough collector; Receiver unit. 

1.  Introduction 

Among the concentrated solar power technologies, the Parabolic Trough Collector (PTC) is the earliest and most widely 

accepted design for harnessing solar energy for the dispatchable source (it refers to the source of energy that can be used 

on demand or at the request of power grid operators) of electricity or industrial and chemical, due to its low cost and 


reliability [1]. In this technology, solar radiation is focused onto a focal line aimed at the receiver unit. The receiver heats 

up and in turn, imparts a significant portion of its heat to a Heat Transfer Fluid (HTF) circulating within. The hot HTF 

can be used to generate electricity through a steam cycle or in thermochemical applications. The receiver unit is one of 

the most complex parts of the Parabolic Trough Collector (PTC). Its optical and thermal properties directly influence the 

performance of the entire system, and the efficiency of the whole system largely depends on it [2]. Therefore, the receiver 

unit has to be carefully designed in such a way to minimize energy losses. 

The conventional type of the PTC receiver unit for PTC is evacuated glass metal. It consists of a blackened absorber pipe 

encapsulated by the glass cover. An evacuated region in between minimizes convective heat losses, see Figure 1. 

 

 

Figure 1: Structure of a parabolic trough receiver [3]. 

 

The thermal contacts between the receiver pipe and the glass cover are kept to a minimum to reduce conduction heat 

losses. The conventional receiver has advantages such as high efficiency and low heat loss. However, it has some 

deficiencies, such as: 

• 
The breakage of the glass and the metal glass seal, which leads to vacuum loss in the annular region between 

the absorber pipe and the glass cover [4].   

• 
The permeation of hydrogen gas into the annular region is due to the thermal decomposition of the organic heat 

transfer fluids (HTF) such as Therminol VP-1. The hydrogen gas in the annular region is found to increase the 

heat losses to four-time those in the evacuated receiver [5].  


• 
Lower efficiency at high temperatures [6][7].  

• 
Non-uniform thermal distribution and thermal stress problems [7][8]. 

• 
High capital outlay and high maintenance cost [9][10]. 

Increasing the outlet HTF temperature is one of the main challenges to improve the overall efficiency of the PTC power 

plant and to reduce the Levelized Cost of energy and the combined thermal storage. For example, thermal storage quantity 

can be reduced to one third, if the HTF temperature increases from 350 °C to 600 °C [5]. Currently, most of the power 

plants used oil-based fluids, which operate to a limited temperature up to 400 °C. The dominant heat losses mechanism at 

high temperatures are due to the thermal emission (IR) from the receiver pipe. This loss is conventionally minimized by 

painting the receiver pipe with a spectrally selective coating. It is a material that absorbs well in the visible region of the 

solar spectrum and emits poorly in the IR region. Much work has been published on selective coatings and improving 

their properties [11]. Dudley et al. [12] investigated the performance of black chrome and cermet selective coatings, and 

found that the Cermet had lower emissivity values and thus reduced thermal losses and improved efficiency. Forristal [13] 

compared six different selective coating materials to evaluate receiver unit performance. He showed that the receiver 

performance is susceptible to the optical properties of the selective coatings, and improving the coatings could result in 

significant efficiency gain. Cheryl et al.[14] Investigated spectrally selective coating materials for concentrated solar 

power applications, and concluded that the ideal selective coating material should be easy to manufacture, low-cost, 

chemically and thermally stable in air at operating temperature of 500 °C.  Because the selective coatings are placed on 

absorber pipe of the receiver, the receiver operation temperature is limited and hence thermal efficiency. Kennedy et al. 

[15] were able to successfully model a solar-selective coating composed of materials stable to 500 °C using computer-

aided design software. Archimede Solar Energy (ASE) [16] manufactured the world's most advanced solar receiver tube 

with selective coating. It operates at temperature up to 580 °C with molten salts as HTF.  

Further, the solar receiver SCHOTT PTR 70 is designed for solar thermal power plants operating with oil-based HTF at 

a temperature up to 400 °C [17]. The heat loss measurements for SCHOTT PTR 70 are carried out in a round-robin test 

performed by SCHOTT Solar in cooperation with Deutsches Zentrum für Luft-und Raumfahrt (DLR) and US National 

Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The tests confirmed that the heat loss is less than 250 W/m at working temperature 

400 °C [17].  

 


Some complications start to appear at a high temperature (> 300 °C) and with a non-uniform solar flux distribution such 

as the thermal performance and thermal stress of the receiver unit. When a non-uniform heat flux profile is incident on 

the receiver unit, the temperature across the circumference varies, and peaks/hot spots in the receiver start to increase with 

temperature. It leads to bending of the absorber pipe and breaking of the glass cover. P Wang et al. [8] found that the 

maximum temperature gradient for the safe operation of receiver tubes is about 50 K. These complications have been 

addressed to increase the life span of the receive absorber. Some recent research focused on improving both thermal 

transfer and uniformity of the thermal distribution [7], but sacrifice pressure drop of the receiver unit or increase the 

quality of the absorber pipe and other components, adding cost [6].  

Some of these studies suggest applying inserts into the absorber pipe such as metal foam, porous discs, perforated plates 

or coiled wire turbulators inserts. A metal foam inserted into the absorber pipe facing the concentrates sunlight reduces 

the thermal stress, decreases the temperature difference on the outer surface of the absorber pipe by about 45%, but 

increases flow resistance [8]. Experimental [18] and theoretical work [19] was conducted for the porous disc insert 

application (a disc perforated with holes inserted into the pipe), increasing the thermal efficiency between 1.2% and 8% 

according to the numerical study [20]. The coiled wire turbulators insert application has been examined experimentally 

and numerically [21]. At the pitch distance 30 mm of coiled wire turbulator (a coil-shaped wire inserted into the absorber 

pipe), the heat transfer enhancement is approximately twice that of the smooth tube [21].  

Furthermore, Eliamasa-ard, Thianpong and Eiamsa-ard [22] studied the effects of three different twisted tapes inserts on 

thermal enhancement, Nusselt number (Nu) and friction factor (f), which are a single twisted tape, twin-counter (co-

twisted) tape and counter (co-swirled) tape. The experiments of four different twist ratios (2.5, 3, 3.5, and 4) were 

conducted. The twist ratio is the ratio of the axial length for 180° turn and the inner diameter of the absorber tube. The 

results showed that the thermal enhancement, Nu and f were increased with decreased the twist ratio, and co-swirled tape 

has significant heat transfer enhancement compared to co-twisted tape. Other research works investigated the heat transfer 

performance and pressure drops of the absorber pipe with wire-coil inserts. It was found that wire coil inserts increased 

the turbulence inside the absorber pipe and Nu increased to 330% [23][24]. In addition, the effect of the wire-coil inserts 

material types (aluminum, stainless steel and copper) on f  and the heat transfer rate were studied by Shashank and 

Choudhari [25]. They found that the copper wire coil inserts have improved the heat transfer rate compared to stainless 

steel and aluminum. 


Nanan, Thianpong and Pimsarn [26] conducted experimental and numerical studies to investigate tube inserts with baffle 

turbulators (straight baffles, straight cross-baffles, straight alternate-baffles, twisted baffles, alternate twisted-baffles and 

twisted cross-baffles). The twisted cross-baffles showed the highest thermal performance, while the straight cross-baffles 

showed the lowest thermal performance. Yuxiang Hong, Du J and Wang S [27] performed experimental investigation of  

the thermal and fluid flow characteristics of a spiral grooved tube (SGT) fitted with twin overlapped twisted tapes in 

counter large/small combinations (TOTT-CL/S). The experiments were conducted for plain tube (PT), SGT and SGT 

fitted with TOTT-CL/S. The heat transfer rate of SGT fitted with TOTT-CL/S was higher than that of the SGT and PT 

but larger pressure drop.  

 

Other studies focus on geometrical structure improvement for the absorber pipe of the receiver unit such as a dimpled 

tube, unilateral milt-longitudinal vortex-enhanced tube as well as symmetric and asymmetric outward convex corrugated 

tubes. These inserts manipulate the Reynolds number, substantially improving the "mixing" of different temperature layers 

of fluid. A numerical study showed improved performance of a dimpled absorber pipe under non-uniform heat flux over 

uniform heat flux [28]. Similar improvements were found for the unilateral milt-longitudinal vortex-enhanced tube, with 

better heat transfer performance than the smooth pipe under a wide range of working conditions [29]. The introduction of 

symmetric [30] and asymmetric [31] outward convex corrugated tubes, regular outwards “bulges” in the absorber pipe, 

effectively decrease the thermal strain and enhance the heat transfer performance.  

Further, researchers have investigated Nanofluids (with suspended nanoparticles) to enhance the heat transfer. The most 

used nanofluids contain nanoparticles such as Al, Fe2O3, Al2O3, Cu, TiO2, and SiO2 [32][33]. Nanofluids tend to have 

more significant thermal conductivity than normal heat transfer fluids. The thermal conductivity increases by decreasing 

the particle size and increasing the volume fraction and temperature [33]. E. Bellos found that the use of the nanofluids 

increases the efficiency of the collector by 4.25% [32].  

 

Some of the limitations associated with evacuated receivers have been overcome. Nevertheless, the monopoly over this 

technology and the cost of the receivers put barriers for solar projects, especially in the developing countries. Accordingly, 

finding alternatives to evacuated receivers that can compete in terms of efficiency and cost-effectiveness is a prime target. 

Such alternatives are expected to have a significant impact on the already long-standing industry.   

 


An alternative to the evacuated receiver is the cavity receiver, where the concept of the cavity receiver comes from the 

blackbody principle. The blackbody is an ideal object, absorbs all incident radiation, regardless of direction and 

wavelength [34]. The object that most closely resembles a blackbody is a large cavity with a small opening. The radiation 

that is incident through the opening has very little chance to escape, it is either absorbed or undergoes multiple reflections 

before being absorbed [34]. The cavity receiver that can achieve the blackbody principle could make up the shortages of 

the evacuated receiver, as mentioned earlier. Although early studies of the cavity receiver lacked detail in terms of 

optimizing, efficiency, and thermal losses, the recent researches are looking to improve and come up with innovative 

designs. In this paper, we review different cavity receiver designs. This review is intended for the receiver of a parabolic 

trough collector, but some designs are suitable for the receiver of the linear Fresnel reflector systems. This work aims to 

study different cavity designs. It is worthwhile to gather innovative ideas that help to enhance the overall efficiency and 

identify the gaps in these designs for future research work. In the following discussion, we divided the cavity receiver 

designs into cylindrical receiver units and non-cylindrical receiver units. 

2. Cylindrical receivers 

The base design of the cavity receiver consists of a cylindrical metal tube with a cavity opening for the incident solar 

radiation. In most of the cavity receivers that have been studied, the space inside the cavity was at atmospheric pressure. 

The inner cavity surface opposite to the aperture window was mirrored. The aperture window of the cavity was at the 

bottom, facing the parabolic mirror collector and it was closed by a transparent cover to reduce convection and re-radiation 

heat loss. Moreover, the outer cavity surface was thermally insulated to minimize the effect of heat loss by convection 

and radiation to surroundings. 

 

A. Mirrored glass cover with uncoated aperture  

Ramchandra et al. [5] studied and optimized the cavity receiver shown in Figure 2 for minimum heat loss. The study 

intended to evaluate and compare different PTC cavity receiver alternatives using a validated numerical model. Their 

cavity receiver, shown in Figure 2, consists of a mirrored cavity surface facing the absorber pipe. The cavity aperture is 

closed by a transparent glass cover to reduce re-radiation and convection heat losses. The annulus between them is 

separated by an air gap at atmospheric pressure. An annular ring of microtherm between the absorber and glass envelope 

at both ends is placed to suspend the absorber [5]. 


The dimension of the cavity aperture was carefully selected alongside with the focal line of the collector to ensure that all 

reflected radiation enters the cavity through the aperture and to minimize inaccuracies in both tracking and directional 

errors due to the suns shape. The optimum annulus dimension between the absorber pipe and the cavity envelope was 

selected to reduce convection and conduction heat loss. The optimum dimension of the annulus largely depended on the 

diameter of the receiver components [35]. 

 

Figure 2: Schematic representation of the linear cavity receiver[5]. 

Although this cavity receiver with a parabolic trough of small rim angle (around 45°) was capable of being a suitable 

alternative to the conventional receiver, it had some limitations. First, the intercept factor (the incident energy that enters 

the aperture and reaches the absorber) was lower than that of a conventional receiver. This problem was addressed by 

coupling this cavity design with a lower rim angle (around 45°) for the parabolic trough. The conventional receiver had a 

maximum concentration at rim angle = 90°, whereas the concentration ratio for this design was maximum at rim angle = 

45° [5].  Second, the selective coating failed because the air in the annular gap oxidized the coating. The oxidation of the 

selective coating in the presence of the air in the annulus was expected to be resolved with the progress in developing 

selective coatings [36]. Third, at a higher temperature, the thermal conductivity of the insulation material increased, thus 

the heat loss also increased [35]. This issue was solved by selecting a better-suited insulation material. 

 

B. Hot-mirror coated glass cover 

Insulation

Absorber pipe

Heat Transfer Fluid

Glass cover

Air gap at 

atmospheric pressure 

Aperture


A similar philosophy to the above mention design by Ramchandra et al. [5] of a cavity receiver that evolved from applying 

a reflective mirror coating on the inner side of the glass cover to trap the radiation inside the receiver. Ferrer et al. [37] 

[38] suggested using a hot mirror coating, a dielectric material that is transparent to the visible region of the solar spectrum 

and reflected well in the IR region. The study intended to reduce the heat losses, especially at a high temperature and 

reduce the thermal stress of the glass cover as well as introducing an alternative to the conventional receiver with a 

selective coating. In this suggested design, the annulus between the absorber pipe and the coated glass cover was under 

vacuum, see Figure 3. Hot mirror coating was first implemented for energy-efficient windows in automobiles and 

buildings [39] and for applications related to concentrating photovoltaics and thermophotovoltaics [40][41]. There are 

two general types of hot mirror films: a semiconducting oxide with a high doping level and a very thin metal film 

sandwiched between two dielectric layers (see [42][43][39] for more details). The thin metal film coating shows some 

unavoidable losses, while the highly doped semiconducting oxide shows more advantages, i.e., Indium-Tin-Oxide (ITO). 

The hot mirror coating for a solar collector must meet some performance specifications. It needs to be highly transparent 

in the visible region and have high reflectivity in the IR region of the solar spectrum. Granqvist et al. [46] and Lampert et 

al. [44] focused on improving the transparency in the visible region and the reflectivity in the IR.  

For PTCs, the effects of the hot mirror film have been modeled and studied previously, see Figure 3. Grena [43] simulated 

the system, including heat reflection using hot mirror films with simplifying assumptions, and his results showed an 

increase in overall efficiency tested over a year by 4%. Also, a 2D simulation in this regard showed the possibility of 

increasing the working fluid’s temperature to over 400 °C [45]. Other efforts of this type used a three-dimensional model 

to take into account the radiation exchange by using different segmented surfaces inside the receiver along the pipe’s 

length. This study showed that the hot mirror receiver effectively reduced the IR losses at higher temperatures, reduced 

the thermal stress on the glass cover, and suggested the use in a hybrid system [37].  


 

Figure 3: The cross-section of the receiver unit with a hot mirror coating on the glass cove envelop [37]. 

Practically, current hot mirror coatings have not been found to improve on the overall efficiency of solar plants, but have 

the capacity of reaching much higher temperatures than their selective coating counterpart. Hot mirror type systems are 

currently investigated, which may, in the near future, surpass selective coating technology [37]. If a hot mirror coating 

was found with better visible transmission/IR reflection properties than a selective coating, then the hot mirror coating 

would have some advantages.  

 

C. Mirrored cavity receiver with a hot mirror application on the aperture 

K Mohamad and P Ferrer filed a patent on a cavity receiver for PTC [46][6]. This cavity receiver design combined the 

use of the mirrored cavity receiver with a hot mirror coating in a novel way [6]. The design aims to make up the shortages 

of the conventional receiver and achieve higher efficiency, higher HTF temperature, and significantly cut the costs per 

unit PTC. The receiver consists of a highly reflective hot mirror coating on the inside of the borosilicate glass cover on 

the cavity aperture. The inner cavity surface was coated with a highly IR reflective material, such as polished aluminum. 

A vacuum in between minimized convective losses see Figure 4. The highly polished inner cavity surface reflects thermal 

radiation onto the absorber much more effectively than the hot mirror coating. The authors showed that the design was 

able to achieve the highest thermal and optical efficiencies, especially if the hot mirror coating has a higher transmission 

for the incident solar radiation. Novel aspects of the background theory for this design related to IR reflectivity in the 

receiver annulus were added and implemented in a simulation code [6]. The model of the IR reflectivity inside the receiver 

Glass cover with 
hot mirror coating 
from the inside 
(HM)

Absorber pipe (AP)

Heat Transfer Fluid (HTF)

vacuum

Incoming 
concentrated 
solar radiation 


annulus was validated in [47][38]. The simulation results indicated that the proposed design could exceed the HTF 

temperature ceiling compared to existing alternatives and could hence potentially increase the efficiency of the system. 

Further, the cavity geometry and a hot mirror coating at the aperture enable increased retention of thermal radiation of the 

receiver.  

 

Figure 4: the cross-section of the cavity receiver with a hot mirror coating on the cavity aperture [48]. 

The cavity system was simulated and studied in many aspects using the operating conditions and design parameters for 

SEGS (Solar Electric Generating System) LS2. It is one of three generations of parabolic troughs installed in the nine 

SEGS power plants in California [12]. Different aperture sizes were simulated. The smallest aperture reached the highest 

temperature and thermal efficiency. The maximum HTF temperature for this design rose close to 1300 K if the aperture 

opening size was 50% of the total size of the outer receiver circumference and 1490 K if the aperture opening size was 

15% of the outer receiver circumference size. The receiver efficiency of the smallest aperture was at 33% compared to 

27% for the largest opening, at receiver length of 400 m. Furthermore, different reflectivities for the inner surface of the 

cavity were studied (92%, 95%, and 98%). It was seen that the highest reflectivity reached the highest temperature, at 

receiver length of 500 m (about 200 K higher than the lowest reflectivity), and had the best receiver efficiency (33% 

compared to 27% for the lowest, at receiver length of 400 m). The effect of the hot mirror coating was studied by 

comparing the system with and without the hot mirror application. At the aperture opening size of 15% of the total size 

of the outer receiver circumference size and the reflectivity of the inner cavity mirror 98%, the stagnation temperature 

Opaque and highly 
reflective IR mirror 
(IRM) 

Absorber pipe (AP)

Heat Transfer Fluid (HTF)

Glass cover with hot 
mirror coating  (HM) 

vacuum

Incoming 
concentrated 
solar radiation 


was found to be∼250 K higher with coating. The cavity system without hot mirror coating initially performed better at a 

lower temperature, but after 775 K, the hot mirror coated system dominated performance. 

Furthermore, a comparison between this cavity design (in case of a cavity opening with a hot mirror coating, an opening 

size of 15% of the total outer receiver circumference, and the cavity mirror reflectivity of 98%) and conventional receivers 

with a selective coating and without coating (bare) was conducted. The results indicated that the selective coating 

performed slightly better in terms of efficiency at a lower temperature, but the cavity system dominated at higher 

temperatures, see Figure 5 and Figure 6. 

 

 

Figure 5: HTF outlet temp for 375 K inlet temperature of 
different designs [6]. 

 

Figure 6: The total efficiency of the system as a function of the 
length of the receiver with different designs [6]. 

Although the cavity system seemed theoretically capable of reaching very high temperatures, it is unlikely that it will be 

used as such. A very high reflectivity (> 99%) inside the cavity walls, which is well within the realm of possibility, will 

make the system very efficient. Higher efficiency will likely allow the HTF to achieve optimum plant temperature in a 

shorter length, thus reducing the needed AP length. This system is likely to reduce costs and the overall size of the system 

[6]. 

 

D. Cavity receiver with asymmetric compound parabolic concentrator 

Roman Bader et al. [49] has proposed a cavity receiver, presented in Figure 7, with the aim to significantly cut the costs 

per unit PTC through a decrease in the PTC size and use of low-cost materials as well as using the air as the heat transfer 

fluid. The cavity design consists of an absorber tube enclosed by an insulated stainless steel cylindrical cavity with an 

asymmetric compound parabolic concentrator (CPC) at the cavity aperture, show in Figure 7. This design was tested with 

a 43 m long prototype installed and a 9 m aperture solar trough concentrator to study the efficiency of receiver under 


different operating conditions and validate the heat transfer model of the receiver that based on Monte Carlo ray-tracing 

and finite-volume methods [49].  

 

 

Figure 7: Schematic representation of the cavity receiver design proposed by[49] 

At HTF inlet temperature of 120 °C, HTF outlet temperature was expected in the range of 250-450 °C, at summer solstice 

solar noon (input of 280 kW), while the efficiency of the receiver ranged from 45% to 29%. The optical losses were one-

third of the total incident radiation on the receiver, due to the spillage at the aperture and reflection inside the cavity. The 

thermal losses due to the natural convection from the cavity insulator were 5.6 - 9.1%. Another heat loss was due to the 

re-radiation through the cavity aperture (6.1 - 17.6%). Moreover, HTF pumping work had an associated energy penalty 

of 0.6 – 24.4% of the total power generated [50].  

The authors suggested a modified cavity receiver design that evolved from the initial design, which is discussed next. 

 

E. Corrugated cavity receiver 

Roman Bader et al. [49] suggested modifications to their previous cavity design. The modified design is shown in Figure 

8. It consists of a cylindrical cavity with a smooth or corrugated black inner surface with a single or double-glazed aperture 

window. The modification can be summarized as follows:   

The absorber pipe was eliminated to allow the HTF (air) to flow in a sufficiently large cross-section through the cavity to 

compensate for the lower volumetric heat capacity. The cavity from the inside (surface 1, Figure 8) was enhanced with 

V-corrugations to increase the heat transfer surface area. The cavity aperture was made from glass to reduce the convective 

heat loss at the aperture, where the glass is almost opaque for the radiation emitted from a blackbody at < 600 °C [49]. 


The two window panes of a double-glazed window with air in between were used to trap the emitted radiation of surface 

1 and the inner window to reduce the heat conduction through the window. 

The authors studied this design with four different receiver configurations: smooth, V-corrugated absorber tube, single, 

and double-glazed aperture window. 

 

 

 

Using the air as a HTF in this design is to avoid the chemical instability during the operation and to allow the direct 

coupling of the solar collector with a packed bed thermal storage [51][52]. However, the air has a lower volumetric heat 

capacity, which leads to lower convective heat transfer compared to conventional HTFs, such as molten salt and thermal 

oils. This problem could be solved by designing a receiver with a larger diameter and higher heat transfer area than that 

of the conventional receiver [53]. In the modified design, V- corrugations were used to increase the heat transfer of the 

surface area.  

The simulation was validated with the experimental work for the design in Figure 7, and then used to analyze the modified 

design. The modified design Figure 8 was simulated during the summer solstice at solar noon in Sevilla, Spain, with direct 

normal solar irradiance equals 847 W/m2. It had a collector efficiencies between 60% and 65% at HTF temperature of 125 

°C and between 37% and 43% at 500 °C. The largest source of energy loss was the optical loss, which was more than 

30% of the incident solar radiation. It was mainly because of the absorption by the concentrators and reflection at the 

 

Figure 8: The modified design [42]. 


receiver’s aperture window [49]. Moreover, the required pumping power for the HTF through a 200 m long receiver 

operated between 300 °C and 500 °C was between 11 and 17 kW. 

Furthermore, increasing the HTF mass flow rate would cause a decrease in heat loss with the corrugated absorber pipe, 

which led to an increase in receiver efficiency. At the expense of additional reflection loss, the double-glazed aperture 

window significantly reduced the re-radiation loss from the receiver’s aperture compared to the single-glazed window, 

where the double-glazed acted as an effective radiation trap. However, the single-glazed receiver led to higher collector 

efficiencies at low HTF temperature (< 300 °C), the double-glazed receiver led to higher collector efficiency at high HTF 

temperatures. The author suggested using a material with a high reflectivity on the aperture window to improve the overall 

efficiency of the PTC [49].  

 

F. Cavity receiver with copper pipes and copper annulus 

Barra et al. [54] proposed a different design of the cavity receiver shown in Figure 9. The motivation of their study was 

to design a blackbody cavity receiver more efficient and less expensive than the conventional receiver units. The structure 

of that cavity receiver was made from iron and copper pipes, which were selected for economic and stability reasons. The 

iron oxidation was to induce high visible absorption in the cavity. The V-shape Pyrex glass in the cavity opening was 

removable and selected for low-cost commercial availability and to reduce the convection loss. This design was tested 

with 50 m2 parabolic trough prototype, and the experiment parameters and results used to build a mathematical model to 

simulate the system. The working conditions of this cavity receiver were not optimum, but the performance of that design 

appeared promising compared to those obtained from a more expensive receiver. The study showed less solar interception 

with the cavity and more thermal losses, which were strongly depending on wind intensity and direction. Furthermore, 

the cavity receiver without a vacuum and selective treatments reached a good performance, but still inferior to the current 

receivers with highly selective coating and vacuum. The author suggested that the cavity receiver needed a design 

improvement and proposed the substitution of copper pipes with a copper annulus, as shown in Figure 10. This design 

was first proposed by Boyd et al. [55] to achieve better performance without requiring advanced materials and coating. 

The inside of the annular tube was coated with black paint. The entrance aperture with the insulation on the wall side was 

cut in V- shape to limit the thermal radiation loss from the collector aperture. It was assumed to have a diffuse surface to 

reduce the effect of radiative field view of the aperture to the surrounding [55]. In addition, the natural convection loss 

could be restricted by adjusting the entrance angle of the aperture because the narrow passage causes flow restrictions 


[55]. The receiver efficiency has been calculated for the hot end of the receiver, where it is lowest, and also averaged over 

the length of the collector, as a measure of overall performance [55]. The hot end efficiency was 53%, and the average 

was estimated to be 76% at 370 °C. Furthermore, the conduction through the insulator was dominant at a lower 

temperature (at 130 °C) and radiation loss was dominant at a higher temperature (at 370 °C).     

 

Figure 9: Vertical cross-section of the cavity receiver[54]. 

 

 

 

Figure 10: Vertical cross-section of the suggested optimized cavity 
receiver[54]. 

 

G. The arc-shaped cavity receiver  

Xueling Li et al. [56] studied an arc-shaped linear cavity receiver, where the absorber has a crescent shaped channel, as 

seen in Figure 11, with the aims to raise the HTF temperature and reducing the cost of production and maintenance as 

well as having a similar shape and size to the conventional receiver [56]. The crescent shaped channel was made from a 

copper and the outer surface of the channel covered with opaque insulation. The cavity aperture window was fabricated 

from borosilicate glass, see Figure 11.   


 

Figure 11: Arc-shaped linear cavity receiver with a lunate channel [56]. 

The thermal performance of this design was studied theoretically using a numerical model [56]. The effects of the HTF 

temperature, surface emissivity, inclination angle, and aperture width were analyzed and displayed some of the following 

characteristics: the total heat loss of the receiver decreased from 394.5 W/m to 335.8 W/m, when the inclination angles 

increased from 0° to 90°. The heat loss of the receiver increased with the aperture width of the cavity at the same collecting 

temperature. A reasonable aperture width of this cavity design is about 50 - 70 mm, where the dimensions of the cavity 

are shown in Figure 11. Generally, at a larger aperture width, the heat loss increased, and the optical loss (which could be 

from installation and tracking errors, mirror roughness and manufacturing error) decreased. At a high temperature ( > 400 

K), a comparison between the proposed design and an evacuated receiver (Solel’s UVAC) showed that the heat loss of 

the proposed design was less and slower than that of the evacuated receiver [56].   

3. Non-cylindrical receiver unit geometries 

A. Elliptical cavity receiver 

Fei Cao et al. [57] studied the elliptical cavity receiver, as shown in Figure 12, with the aim of having a receiver with high 

thermal performance, low cost, and not frangible. The outer cover was elliptic with an open inlet towards the parabolic 

trough mirror. The incoming concentrated solar radiation was incident on the receiver and entered into the absorber pipe 

through the opening. 


Figure 12: Elliptical cavity receiver [57]. 

 

 

 

Figure 13: Heat and light flux distributions around the receiver 
cavity [57]. 

The position of the absorber pipe was on the opposite focus from the opening. The design was studied using a ray-tracing 

model and a heat transfer model. The study focused on analyzing the heat transfer and the heat flux distribution in a 1m 

cavity receiver tube as well as the thermal stress distributions of the absorber pipe. The geometry of the design and its 

dimension were mentioned in [57]. The light and heat flux distribution around the absorber pipe outer surface is 

summarized in Figure 13. There was no light and heat flux from 0° to 10° and from 125° to 215°, see Figure 13. Most of 

the other light entered the cavity and reflected from the elliptic inner surface to the absorber surface. This lead to a non-

uniform heat flux absorption along the circumference of the absorber tube. The thermal stress was found to cause a 

maximum deformation of the receiver tube along the fluid direction of 3.1 mm at 0.82 m. The thermal stress was generated 

by the temperature difference between the tube inner/outer wall and the heat transfer fluid pressure and phase. This, in 

turn was caused by the fluid and steel characteristic, solar heating flux and the characteristics of the heat transfer fluid and 

the absorber material. Besides that, equivalent stress along the absorber pipe was found at higher fluid mass flow rates.  

 

B. Elliptical cavity receiver with optical funnel 

Fei Cao et al. [58] proposed a modified design that evolved from their initial design in Figure 12 to improve the 

performance of the elliptical cavity. The authors modified the design by adding a flat plate reflector at the cavity aperture, 

see Figure 14, to diminish the effect of changing the PTC focal length on the cavity opening length and the effect of 

tracking error angle on the cavity performance. 


 

Figure 14: Elliptical cavity with flat plate reflector [58]    a) Structure schematic     b) light distribution around the receiver. 

Figure 15 shows the effects of different tracking error angles and PTC focal distances on the cavity darkness of the 

modified cavity receiver. Cavity darkness is the percentage of the sunlight on the absorber surface to the total incident 

sunlight.  It was found that introducing the flat plate reflector can significantly increases the cavity darkness, where the 

flat plate breaks the monotonic relationship of the cavity darkness under different focal distances. Further, at different 

tracking error angles the incident sun radiation is reflected by the flat plate, which causes different multi-reflections inside 

the cavity, which leads to the curves in Figure 15 [58]. 

 

Figure 15: Darkness of the modified elliptical cavity receiver under different tracking angle and PTC focal distances [58]. 

 


C. Triangular and V cavity receivers 

F Chen et al. [59] studied the triangle cavity receiver experimentally and theoretically with the aims to provide high 

efficiency and make up the shortages of the conventional receivers such as high cost, leakage during long-term running, 

and challenging technology. The cavity was made from aluminum, and the absorber surface was a triangle or V-shape 

structure with fins in the dorsal side to enhance the thermal performance between the absorber surface and the HTF, see 

Figure 16. 

 

Figure 16: Cross-section of the triangle cavity receiver [59]. 

A radiation shield was placed at the aperture to reduce the view factor of the absorber pipe to the surrounding ambient. 

Experimental and theoretical work was conducted to study the heat loss due to the absorber inclination and the ambient 

wind speed. The results showed that the ambient wind speed had a relatively significant effect on heat loss, while the 

impact of the absorber inclination was relatively small. The heat loss was found to be 51.2 W/m, 53.2 W/m, 59.7 W/m 

and 61.8 W/m, when the inclination angles were 0°, 30°, 60° and 90°, respectively, at  temperature differences between 

the working fluid and ambient of 150 ± 3 °C. At the inclination of 60° and temperature differences of 27 °C, 84.5 °C, 

126.7 °C and 176.3 °C, the heat losses were 11.5 W/m, 30.4 W/m, 48.25 W/m and 71.55 W/m, respectively.  

Furthermore, the heat losses of the cavity receiver were 76.6 W/m, 85.5 W/m, 96 W/m and 102.6 W/m, when the wind 

speeds were 1 m/s, 2 m/s, 3 m/s and 4 m/s, respectively, at the temperature difference of 150 ± 3 °C.  At the wind speed 

of 3 m/s the temperature differences were 27.6 °C, 85.6 °C, 124.4 °C and 172.6 °C, and the heat losses were 17.3 W/m, 

63 W/m, 83.85 W/m and 104 W/m, respectively.  


In a windless case, the heat loss of this design was equivalent to that of  UVAC3 evacuated receiver and the new-generation 

(UVAC2008)[60].  

Two studies investigated the same design with an additional glass cover on the aperture [61][62]. Their objective was to 

reduce the heat loss from the aperture. The first study focused on heat transfer performance, where the investigation was 

theoretically and experimentally. The optical performance was studied using Monte Carlo ray-tracing method [61]. The 

design showed high optical efficiency of about 99% because the concentrated sunlight repeatedly reflected by the 

triangular shape with almost no escape [61]. Furthermore, the heat flux distribution of the heating surface of the design 

was heterogeneous, which could cause thermal stress at higher temperature [61]. The second study focused on thermal 

performance, also from a theoretical and experimental perspective [62]. The design had a good thermal performance in 

the medium temperature range, and it was comparable to that of the evacuated tube in that temperature range. The study 

involved the effect of the glass cover and the fins. These additions showed an improvement in thermal performance. 

Moreover, the heat transfer fluid temperature in this cavity design could exceed 570 K [62].  

Fei Chen et al. [2] studied the optical properties of the triangular cavity absorber using a theoretical method. They found 

that the cavity absorber's aperture width, depth to width of the triangular shape, and the offset distance from the focus of 

the triangular cavity were important parameters to improve the optical performance, where the cavity optical efficiency 

was 89.23%. It was recommended to select the depth to width ratio of 0.8 to 1, the aperture width of 70 mm, and the offset 

distance of 15 mm [2]. 

 

Figure 17 shows another design that is similar to the V- shape or triangular cavity. It consists of a center tube as absorber 

and two inclined fins which acted as the inner cavity surface with the glass cover over the aperture. A rectangular shell 

separated the cavity from the surrounding. The space between the shell and the absorber was filled with aluminum silicate 

fiber and asbestos rubber sheet between the glass cover and the end of the inclined fins. At the sides of the shell, there 

was a fixed axle to make the whole cavity movable. It rotated the system when solar irradiance was high enough to collect 

the concentrated solar energy [63][64]. The movable cavity mechanism was a novel design to prevent overheating while 

reducing heat loss. The study was based on experimental and theoretical investigations.  

 


 

Figure 17: Cross-section of the V-shape cavity receiver [63]. 

Regarding the effect of the on-off state of the movable mechanism of the cavity on the heat loss, it was found that the heat 

loss of turning off the movable cover was less than that of turning on [64], where the heat loss reduction rate varied from 

6.36% to 13.55%. The author found that the movable mechanism should be optimized for thermal insulation performance 

and operation control strategy [64]. The collector efficiency was tested at different inlet temperatures ranging from 80.6 

°C to 160.5 °C and the mass flow rate from 170 to 181 g/s. The efficiency was in the range of 34.2% to 48.5% [63]. 

Further, the thermal conductivity of insulation materials was significantly improved the thermal performance of the 

design, i.e., the collector efficiency increased by 1.47 times, if the thermal conductivity of the insulation materials changed 

from 0.1 to 0.02 W. K/m [63]. Besides, the collector efficiency could increase by decreasing the emittance of the absorber 

and glass cover, i.e., the collector efficiency increased from 34.45% to 38.49% if the emittance of the absorber 𝜀𝜀𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 and 

the glass cover 𝜀𝜀𝐺𝐺 drop down from 0.9 and 0.95 to 0.1 and 0.15, respectively.  

The efficiency of this design was comparable to the efficiency of the metal glass evacuated tube (64.25%). If we use the 

following optimized parameters: 

• 
𝜀𝜀𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 = 0.15, 

• 
 𝜀𝜀𝐺𝐺 = 0.1, 

• 
absorption coefficient of the absorber in visible region = 0.935,  

• 
thermal conductivity of insulation material 1 (Figure 16) = 0.02 W/m.K, 

• 
 thermal conductivity for insulation material 2 = 0.1W/m.K [63]. 

 


Zhai H et al. [65] studied a triangle cavity at a lower temperature (< 200 °C). The optical efficiency simulated by using a 

light tracking method and the thermal performance was tested experimentally under temperature levels of 90 °C and 150 

°C [65]. This study found that the triangle shape cavity receiver optical efficiency was 99%, and thermal losses were 20 

W and 41 W (measured at 0.5 m of the receiver length) at the inlet temperature of 90 °C and 150 °C, respectively. 

Moreover, the solar conversion efficiency could be beyond 67% for the triangle cavity [65].  

D. Trapezoidal cavity receiver 

Singh et al. [66][67] studied the effects of various design parameters of a trapezoidal cavity absorber on the thermal 

performance. The trapezoidal cavity absorber with a round pipes is shown in Figure 18. The absorber pipes were made of 

six mild steel round tubes brazed together in a single layer. The absorber pipe was at the upper portion of the cavity. Glass 

wool insulation was provided at the top and the sides of the pipes. At sidewalls of the cavity, ceramic tiles plates were 

provided. At the bottom part of the cavity, a glass plane was provided as a window for transmitting the solar radiation. 

Also, this study proposed another trapezoidal cavity receiver with a rectangular pipe absorber instead of round pipes to 

compare and evaluate their performance, see Figure 19.  

Figure 18: Cross-sectional of the trapezoidal cavity with round 
pipe absorber [66]. 

Figure 19: Cross-sectional of the trapezoidal cavity with 
rectangular pipe absorber [66]. 

The dimensions of the designs were mentioned in detail in [66]. The thermal performance was measured for eight sets of 

identical designs with round pipe and rectangular pipe absorbers. The trapezoidal cavity with round pipe absorbers was 

tested in four different setups. The first two, the round pipe absorbers, were painted with ordinary matt black paint and 

black nickel coating (selective coating) with emissivity 0.91 and 0.17 at 100 °C, respectively. The other two, the cavity 


was fabricated with double (10 mm spacing) and single glass cover. Similar to the above mentioned scenarios, the 

trapezoidal cavity with the rectangular pipe absorbers was tested with four different setups. The experimental results 

showed that the difference between the heat loss coefficient of rectangular and round pipe absorbers in the trapezoidal 

cavity were not significantly different – they differed by a factor of 3.3 to 8.2 W/m2, respectively [66]. The selective 

coating on the absorbers had a remarkable reduction of overall heat loss coefficient by 20% to 30 % compared to ordinary 

black paint. In addition, using double glass cover reduced the overall heat loss by 10% to 15 % compared to single glass 

cover [66]. Manikumar et al. [68] analyzed trapezoidal cavity numerically and experimentally. The cavity had a multi-

tube absorber with a plate and without plate underneath, see Figure 20 and Figure 21, for various values of gaps between 

the tubes and depths of the cavity. The values of the overall heat loss coefficient and convective heat transfer coefficient 

were observed to increase with gaps between the tubes and the tube temperature. The thermal efficiency of the cavity with 

a plate was higher than without. 

 

Figure 20: The arrangement of multi-tube absorber with plate[68]. 

 

Figure 21: The arrangement of multi-tube absorber with 
plate [68]. 

 

Oliveira et al. [69] analyzed and optimized a trapezoidal cavity receiver via ray-trace and computational fluid dynamic 

(CFD) simulations. It was found that the cavity with six absorber tubes of 1/2" / 5/8" inner/outer diameters collects had 

higher optical efficiency. Further, the maximum inclination of 50° of the lateral cavity wall with respect to the bottom 

base was found to be optically acceptable. CFD simulation was used to optimize the cavity depth and rock wool insulation 

thickness. The lowest heat transfer coefficient was observed at the cavity depth of 45 mm. The insulation thickness of 35 

mm of rock wool showed a good compromise between shading and insulations. 

Reynold et al. [70] studied the heat transfer rate and the heat loss of the trapezoidal cavity experimentally with the aim of 

optimizing the cavity design to achieve maximum thermal efficiency and to develop a numerical model. Furthermore, the 


cavity was modeled by using a computational fluid dynamic (CFD) software package. The heat transfer rate results and 

flow patterns showed reasonable agreement between the computational and experimental works, but the heat loss that was 

measured by CFD was underestimated by about 40% as compared to the experimental results. This discrepancy could not 

be explained. The heat transfer rate was compared between a uniform and non-uniform heating of the bottom wall with 

natural convection flows in a trapezoidal cavity using a finite element analysis with bi-quadratic elements (a method for 

evaluating the nonlinear coupled partial differential equations for flow and temperature fields) [71]. It was found that for 

all Raleigh numbers, the non-uniform heating of the bottom wall has a significant heat transfer rate as compared to uniform 

heating [71]. 

Moreover, the trapezoidal cavity receiver has been studied optically by Liang et al. [72]. The optical efficiency (it is the 

ratio between the solar radiation reaching the receiver absorber and the solar radiation coming from the concentrator 

mirror) of the total configuration was around 85% while the optical efficiency of the absorber tube was about 45%.  

 

Natarajan et al. [73] studied the effect of the Grashof number, absorber angle, aspect ratio (ratio of width and depth of 

cavity), surface emissivity and temperature ratio (ratio of the bottom and top surface temperature of the cavity) of the 

trapezoidal cavity. In their model, radiation and convection heat transfer was included. Consequently, the Grashof number 

has been included in the Nusselt number correlations. It was found that the effect of Grashof number on the combined 

heat loss (natural convection and surface radiation) was negligible. Further, the combined Nusselt number on the absorber 

angle was also negligible. The Nusselt number was decreased by increasing the aspect ratio and the temperature ratio, 

while an increase was observed in surface emissivity. Beyond the temperature ratio of 0.6 and aspect ratio 2.5, the 

combined heat loss variation in the cavity was not notable.  

4. Conclusion 

The alternative to the evacuated receiver unit of the Parabolic Trough Collector (PTC) that can overcome its shortages 

and compete in terms of efficiency, performance, and cost-effective is the objective of the research of the PTC. Cavity 

receivers have the potential to overcome the shortages of the evacuated receiver. This work is a comprehensive study of 

different cavities receiver designs. 

 


It was found that the effect of the cavity aperture size and the mirrored cavity reflectivity on the cavity performance are 

essential, where the smaller the cavity aperture and the higher cavity mirror reflectivity yield higher efficiency. Further, 

the reflectivity of the cavity mirror enhances the optical performance and solar flux distribution inside the receiver as well 

as reducing the temperature gradient and thermal stresses due to the effect of the multiple reflections in the cavity annulus. 

However, the dimension of the cavity aperture alongside with the focal line of the collector should be carefully selected 

to ensure all the reflected radiation enters the cavity receiver through the aperture. It is necessary to keep the concentration 

ratio maximum (it could require to change the parabolic trough rim angle) and to minimize inaccuracies in both tracking 

and directional errors due to the sun shape. To diminish the effect of changing the focal length on the cavity opening and 

the error in the tracking angle, the cavity aperture could have a mirrored V shape or adding flat plate reflector at the cavity 

aperture (optical funnel).  

The main deficiencies of most of the existing cavity designs are keeping the cavity annulus under atmospheric pressure 

and leaving the cavity aperture open. This often leads to significant losses. Generally, the thermal losses of the cavity are 

affected by the following: surface emissivity, working fluid temperature, mass flow rate, and wind velocity. Also, cavity 

geometry could affects both optical and thermal efficiency. In which case the cylindrical geometry seems to be more 

effective, especially in terms of thermal and optical flux distribution. 

 

In non-cylindrical geometry cavity receivers, for the case of the elliptical cavity receiver, which the absorber pipe was 

positioned on the opposite focus from the cavity opening, was prone to deformation due to non-uniform heat flux 

absorption across the pipe circumference. The triangular and V-shape cavity receivers had the best optical efficiency 

among the non-cylindrical cavity receivers followed by the elliptical cavity with a flat plate reflector. However, their heat 

flux distribution of the heating surface were heterogeneous, which could cause thermal stress at a higher temperature. In 

addition, their thermal performance was comparable to the evacuated receiver at the medium temperature range and the 

heat loss was equivalent to the evacuated receiver in a windless condition. Moreover, the optical performance was affected 

by the aperture width, the depth to width and the offset distance from the focus of the triangular shape.  

For the trapezoidal cavity receiver, the optical efficiency of the absorber tube was about 45% and for the total configuration 

was around 85%. The overall heat loss of the trapezoidal cavity aperture with double-glazed cover reduced by up to 15% 

compared to the single glass cover. 

 


For cylindrical cavity receivers, where there is no vacuum in the annulus, the convection and conduction heat loss in the 

annulus can be minimized by selecting the optimum annulus dimension between the absorber pipe and the cavity envelope. 

Although this largely depends on the diameters of the receiver components. The conventional designs that was developed 

by coating the inner side of the glass cover with a mirrored or hot mirror coatings had a deficiency of being breakable. 

The receiver unit with hot mirror over the glass cover with a vacuum in the annulus was found to be more effective than 

the conventional receiver at a higher temperature. The hot mirror receiver could be better alternative to the conventional 

receiver with improving hot mirror materials for hot mirror applications especially, the transmissivity in the visible region. 

In the current receiver unit with hot mirror application, the hybrid system is usually favored. 

Those receivers that were utilized air as a working fluid had overcome the lower volumetric heat transfer capacity of the 

air by increasing the heat transfer area. This was done by eliminating the absorber pipe and using corrugate structure 

inside the cavity wall to allow the air to flow in a sufficient large cross section, but a significant energy power was required 

for pumping the working fluid.  

In cylindrical geometry designs of the absorber pipe for the cavity receiver such as copper pipes, copper annulus and 

crescent shaped channel had the aims of raising the HTF and reducing the cost of production and maintenance. It was 

found that, the heat loss of the cavity receiver with the crescent shaped channel with a borosilicate glass on the cavity 

aperture was less and slower than that of the evacuated receiver at a high temperature (> 400 °C). 

The design of the mirrored cavity receiver with a hot mirror application on the aperture showed that it was able to achieve 

the highest thermal and optical efficiencies, especially if the hot mirror coating has a higher transmission coefficient for 

the incident solar radiation. Further, this cavity exceeded the HTF temperature ceiling compared to existing alternatives 

and hence increase the efficiency of the system. 

 

 

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to thank the following entities for their kind support: MERG (Materials for Energy Research 

Group) and MITP (Mandelstam Institute for Theoretical Research), at the University of the Witwatersrand. 


5. References 

[1]  
Chaanaoui M, Vaudreuil S, Bounahmidi T. Benchmark of Concentrating Solar Power Plants: Historical, Current 
and Future Technical and Economic Development. Procedia Comput Sci 2016; 83: 782–789. 

[2]  
Chen F, Li M, Hassanien Emam Hassanien R, et al. Study on the optical properties of triangular cavity absorber 
for parabolic trough solar concentrator. Int J Photoenergy; 2015. 

[3]  
Moya EZ. 7 - Parabolic-trough concentrating solar power (CSP) systems. In: Lovegrove K, Stein W (eds) 
Concentrating Solar Power Technology. Woodhead Publishing, pp. 197–239. 

[4]  
Forristall R. Heat transfer analysis and modeling of a parabolic trough solar receiver implemented in engineering 
equation 
solver. 
National 
Renewable 
Energy 
Lab., 
Golden, 
CO.(US), 
http://large.stanford.edu/publications/coal/references/troughnet/solarfield/docs/34169.pdf (2003, accessed 13 
August 2017). 

[5]  
Ramchandra G. P, Sudhir V. P, Jyeshtharaj B. J, et al. Alternative designs of evacuated receiver for parabolic 
trough collector. Energy; 155: 66–76. 

[6]  
Mohamad K, Ferrer P. Parabolic trough efficiency gain through use of a cavity absorber with a hot mirror. Appl 
Energy 2019; 238: 1250–1257. 

[7]  
Fuqiang W, Ziming C. Progress in concentrated solar power technology with parabolic trough collector system: 
A comprehensive review. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2017; 79: 1314–1328. 

[8]  
Wang P, Liu DY, Xu C. Numerical study of heat transfer enhancement in the receiver tube of direct steam 
generation with parabolic trough by inserting metal foams. Appl Energy 2013; 102: 449–460. 

[9]  
Sargent, Lundy LLC Consulting Group. Assessment of Parabolic Trough and Power Tower Solar Technology 
Cost 
and 
Performance 
Forecasts. 
Chicago, 
Illinois: 
DIANE 
Publishing, 
https://scholar.google.co.za/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=Assessment+of+Parabolic+Trough+and+Power+
Tower+Solar+Technology+Cost+and+Performance+Forecasts&btnG= (2003). 

[10]  
International Renewable Energy Agency. Renewable energy technologies: cost analysis series: concentrating solar 
power; 
2012., 
https://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/RE_Technologies_Cost_Analysis-
CSP.pdf (accessed 13 August 2017). 

[11]  
Antonaia A, Castaldo A, Addonizio ML, et al. Stability of W-Al 2 O 3 cermet based solar coating for receiver 
tube operating at high temperature. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 2010; 94: 1604–1611. 

[12]  
Dudley VE, Kolb GJ, Mahoney AR, et al. Test results: SEGS LS-2 solar collector. Nasa Stirecon Tech Rep N; 96. 

[13]  
Forristall R. EES heat transfer model for solar receiver performance. Proc ISEC Sol 2004; 11–14. 

[14]  
Kennedy CE. Review of mid-to high-temperature solar selective absorber materials. National Renewable Energy 
Lab., 
Golden, 
CO.(US), 

http://large.stanford.edu/publications/power/references/troughnet/solarfield/docs/31267.pdf (2002, accessed 8 
August 2017). 

[15]  
Kennedy CE, Price H. Progress in Development of High-Temperature Solar-Selective Coating. ASME Int Sol 
Energy Conf Sol Energy 2005; 749–755. 

[16]  
ASE. Archimede Solar Energy, http://www.archimedesolarenergy.it/ (accessed 8 December 2017). 


[17]  
SCHOTT. 
SCHOTT 
PTR 
70, 
https://www.schott.com/d/csp/370a8801-3271-4b2a-a3e6-
c0b5c78b01ae/1.0/schott_ptr70_4th_generation_brocure.pdf (accessed 27 February 2019). 

[18]  
Reddy KS, Ravi Kumar K, Ajay CS. Experimental investigation of porous disc enhanced receiver for solar 
parabolic trough collector. Renew Energy 2015; 77: 308–319. 

[19]  
Ghasemi S, Ranjbar A. Numerical thermal study on effect of porous rings on performance of solar parabolic trough 
collector. Appl Therm Eng 2017; 118: 807–816. 

[20]  
Mwesigye A, Bello-Ochende T, Meyer JP. Heat transfer and thermodynamic performance of a parabolic trough 
receiver with centrally placed perforated plate inserts. Appl Energy 2014; 136: 989–1003. 

[21]  
Sahin H, Baysal E. Investigation of heat transfer enhancement in a new type heat exchanger using solar parabolic 
trough systems. Int J Hydrog Energy 2015; 40: 15254–15266. 

[22]  
Eiamsa-ard S, Thianpong C, Eiamsa-ard P. Turbulent heat transfer enhancement by counter/co-swirling flow in a 
tube fitted with twin twisted tapes. Exp Therm Fluid Sci 2010; 34: 53–62. 

[23]  
Diwan K, Soni MS. Heat transfer enhancement in absorber tube of parabolic trough concentrators using wire-coils 
inserts. Univers J Mech Eng 2015; 3: 107–112. 

[24]  
Martín RH, Pérez-García J, García A, et al. Simulation of an enhanced flat-plate solar liquid collector with wire-
coil insert devices. Sol Energy 2011; 85: 455–469. 

[25]  
Shashank SC, Taji SG. Experimental studies on effect of coil wire insert on heat transfer enhancement and friction 
factor of double pipe heat exchanger. Int J Comput Eng Res; 3. 

[26]  
Nanan K, Thianpong C, Pimsarn M, et al. Flow and thermal mechanisms in a heat exchanger tube inserted with 
twisted cross-baffle turbulators. Appl Therm Eng 2017; 114: 130–147. 

[27]  
Hong Y, Du J, Wang S. Experimental heat transfer and flow characteristics in a spiral grooved tube with 
overlapped large/small twin twisted tapes. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2017; 106: 1178–1190. 

[28]  
Huang Z, LI Z. Numerical investigations on fully-developed mixed turbulent convection in dimpled parabolic 
trough receiver tubes. Appl Therm Eng 2017; 114: 1287–1299. 

[29]  
Cheng Z, He YL. Numerical study of heat transfer enhancement by unilateral longitudinal vortex generators inside 
parabolic trough solar receivers. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2012; 55: 5631–5641. 

[30]  
Fuqiang W, Qingzhi L, Huaizhi H. Parabolic trough receiver with corrugated tube for improving heat transfer and 
thermal deformation characteristics. Appl Energy 2016; 164: 411–424. 

[31]  
Fuqiang W, Zhexiang T, Xiangtao G. Heat transfer performance enhancement and thermal strain restrain of tube 
receiver for parabolic trough solar collector by using asymmetric outward convex corrugated tube. Energy 2016; 
114: 275–292. 

[32]  
Bellos E, Tzivanidis C, Antonopoulos KA. Thermal enhancement of solar parabolic trough collectors by using 
nanofluids and converging-diverging absorber tube. Renew Energy 2016; 94: 213–222. 

[33]  
Hassani S, Saidur R, Mekhilef S, et al. A new correlation for predicting the thermal conductivity of nanofluids; 
using dimensional analysis. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2015; 90: 121–130. 

[34]  
Yunus CA, Afshin JG. Heat and mass transfer: fundamentals and applications. 5 Ed. 2015. 


[35]  
Patil RG, Panse SV, Joshi JB. Optimization of non-evacuated receiver of solar collector having non-uniform 
temperature distribution for minimum heat loss. Energy Convers Manag 2014; 85: 70–84. 

[36]  
Stettenheim J, McBride TO, Brambles OJ. Cavity Receivers for Parabolic Solar Troughs. 2013. 

[37]  
Kaluba VS, Ferrer P. A model for hot mirror coating on solar parabolic trough receivers. J Renew Sustain Energy 
2016; 8: 053703. 

[38]  
Kaluba VS, Mohamad K, Ferrer P. Experimental and simulated Performance of Heat Mirror Coatings in a 
Parabolic Trough Receiver. Submitt Appl Energy J ArXiv190800866 Physicsapp-Ph. 

[39]  
Granqvist CG. Spectrally Selective Coatings for Energy Efficiency and Solar Applications. Phys Scr 1985; 32: 
401. 

[40]  
Canan K. Performance analysis of a novel concentrating photovoltaic combined system. Energy Convers Manag 
2013; 67: 186–196. 

[41]  
Miller DC, Khonkar HI, Herrero R, et al. An end of service life assessment of PMMA lenses from veteran 
concentrator photovoltaic systems. Sol Energy Mater Sol Cells 2017; 167: 7–21. 

[42]  
Lampert CM. Coatings for enhanced photothermal energy collection II. Non-selective and energy control films. 
Sol Energy Mater 1979; 2: 1–17. 

[43]  
Grena R. Efficiency Gain of a Solar Trough Collector Due to an IR-Reflective Film on the Non-Irradiated Part of 
the Receiver. Int J Green Energy 2011; 8: 715–733. 

[44]  
Granqvist CG. Radiative heating and cooling with spectrally selective surfaces. Appl Opt 1981; 20: 2606–2615. 

[45]  
Cyulinyana MC, Ferrer P. Heat efficiency of a solar trough receiver with a hot mirror compared to a selective 
coating. South Afr J Sci 2011; 107: 01–07. 

[46]  
Mohamad K, Ferrer P. [Patent] Thermal radiation loss reduction in a parabolic trough receiver by the application 
of a cavity mirror and a hot mirror coating. PCT/IB2019/053531, South Africa, Johannesburg. 

[47]  
Mohamad K, Ferrer P. Experimental and numerical measurement of the thermal performance for parabolic trough 
solar concentrators. Proc 63th Annu Conf South Afr Inst Phys SAIP2018 ArXiv190800515 Physicsapp-Ph. 

[48]  
Mohamad K, Ferrer P. Computational comparison of a novel cavity absorber for parabolic trough solar 
concentrators. Proc 62th Annu Conf South Afr Inst Phys SAIP2017 ArXiv190713066 Physicsapp-Ph. 

[49]  
Bader R, Pedretti A, Barbato M, et al. An air-based corrugated cavity-receiver for solar parabolic trough 
concentrators. Appl Energy 2015; 138: 337–345. 

[50]  
Bader R, Pedretti A, Steinfeld A. Experimental and numerical heat transfer analysis of an air-based cavity-receiver 
for solar trough concentrators. J Sol Energy Eng 2012; 134: 021002. 

[51]  
Hänchen M, Brückner S, Steinfeld A. High-temperature thermal storage using a packed bed of rocks – Heat 
transfer analysis and experimental validation. Appl Therm Eng 2011; 31: 1798–1806. 

[52]  
G. Z, A. P, A. H, et al. Design of packed bed thermal energy storage systems for high-temperature industrial 
process heat. Appl Energy; 137: 812–822. 

[53]  
Burkholder F, Kutscher C. Heat Loss Testing of Schott’s 2008 PTR70 Parabolic Trough Receiver. NREL/TP--
550-45633, 1369635. Epub ahead of print 1 May 2009. DOI: 10.2172/1369635. 


[54]  
Barra OA, Franceschi L. The parabolic trough plants using black body receivers: experimental and theoretical 
analyses. Sol Energy 1982; 28: 163–171. 

[55]  
Boyd DA, Gajewski R, Swift R. A cylindrical blackbody solar energy receiver. Sol Energy 1976; 18: 395–401. 

[56]  
Li X, Chang H, Duan C, et al. Thermal performance analysis of a novel linear cavity receiver for parabolic trough 
solar collectors. Appl Energy 2019; 237: 431–439. 

[57]  
Cao F, Li Y, Wang L, et al. Thermal performance and stress analyses of the cavity receiver tube in the parabolic 
trough solar collector. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science. IOP Publishing, 2016, p. 
012067. 

[58]  
Fei C, Lei W, Tianyu Z. Design and Optimization of Elliptical Cavity Tube Receivers in the Parabolic Trough 
Solar Collector. Int J Photoenergy; 2017: 7. 

[59]  
Chen F, Li M, Xu C, et al. Study on heat loss performance of triangle cavity absorber for parabolic trough 
concentrators. In: Materials for Renewable Energy and Environment (ICMREE), 2013 International Conference 
on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 683–689. 

[60]  
Xiong Y, Wu Y, Ma C, et al. Numerical investigation of thermal performance of heat loss of parabolic trough 
receiver. Sci China Technol Sci 2010; 53: 444–452. 

[61]  
Xiao X, Zhang P, Shao DD, et al. Experimental and numerical heat transfer analysis of a V-cavity absorber for 
linear parabolic trough solar collector. Energy Convers Manag 2014; 86: 49–59. 

[62]  
Chen F, Li M, Zhang P, et al. Thermal performance of a novel linear cavity absorber for parabolic trough solar 
concentrator. Energy Convers Manag 2015; 90: 292–299. 

[63]  
Hongbo L, Chunguang Z, Man F. Study on the thermal performance of a novel cavity receiver for parabolic trough 
solar collectors. Appl Energy 2018; 222: 790–798. 

[64]  
Liang H, Fan M, You S, et al. An analysis of the heat loss and overheating protection of a cavity receiver with a 
novel movable cover for parabolic trough solar collectors. Energy 2018; 158: 719–729. 

[65]  
Zhai H, Dai Y, Wu J, et al. Study on trough receiver for linear concentrating solar collector. In: Proceedings of 
ISES World Congress 2007 (Vol. I–Vol. V). Springer, 2008, pp. 711–715. 

[66]  
Singh PL, Sarviya RM, Bhagoria JL. Heat loss study of trapezoidal cavity absorbers for linear solar concentrating 
collector. Energy Convers Manag 2010; 51: 329–337. 

[67]  
Singh PL, Sarviya RM, Bhagoria JL. Thermal performance of linear Fresnel reflecting solar concentrator with 
trapezoidal cavity absorbers. Appl Energy 2010; 87: 541–550. 

[68]  
Manikumar R, Palanichamy R, Arasu AV. Heat transfer analysis of an elevated linear absorber with trapezoidal 
cavity in the linear Fresnel reflector solar concentrator system. J Therm Sci 2015; 24: 90–98. 

[69]  
Facão J, Oliveira AC. Numerical simulation of a trapezoidal cavity receiver for a linear Fresnel solar collector 
concentrator. Renew Energy 2011; 36: 90–96. 

[70]  
Reynolds DJ, Jance MJ, Behnia M, et al. An experimental and computational study of the heat loss characteristics 
of a trapezoidal cavity absorber. Sol Energy 2004; 76: 229–234. 

[71]  
Natarajan E, Basak T, Roy S. Natural convection flows in a trapezoidal enclosure with uniform and non-uniform 
heating of bottom wall. Int J Heat Mass Transf 2008; 51: 747–756. 


[72]  
Liang H, Fan M, You S, et al. A Monte Carlo method and finite volume method coupled optical simulation method 
for parabolic trough solar collectors. Appl Energy 2017; 201: 60–68. 

[73]  
Natarajan SK, Reddy KS, Mallick TK. Heat loss characteristics of trapezoidal cavity receiver for solar linear 
concentrating system. Appl Energy 2012; 93: 523–531. 

 


