arXiv:1909.12503v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  27 Sep 2019

xopt and xc in Cuprate Superconductors

J¨urgen R¨ohler

Fachgruppe Physik, Universit¨at zu K¨oln, 50937 K¨oln, Germany

E-mail: juergen.roehler@uni-koeln.de

(Received September 16, 2019)

The characteristic hole concentrations xopt ≃ 0.16 and xc ≃ 0.19 in the under- to overdoped transition
regime of cuprate superconductors are shown to be intimately interelated by mesoscale organization
of bond-like RVB arrays extending over 3 × 4 copper sites and comprising a hole pair spaced by 3a0.
The columnar organization maximizes the pairing gap but reduces the superconducting stiffness,
while the zigzag organization maximizes the superconducting stiffness at reduced Tc. The latter goes
hand in hand with the closure of the pseudogap. Columnar and zigzag mesoscale organizations of
the bond-like RVB arrays are displacively transformed in each other between xopt and xc.

KEYWORDS: superconductivity, cuprates, RVB, pairing, pseudogap

1.
Introduction

Two distinct hole concentrations, xopt ≃ 0.16 and xc ∼ 0.19, characterize the transition from
the under- to the overdoped regime of cuprate superconductors. At xopt the critical temperature Tc(x)
reaches its maximum value. Fundamental properties of the superconducting phase, such as the zero-
temperature superfluid density, the condensation energy, the zero temperature critical Silsbee field,
however, are maximal only at xc where the critical temperature is 10% below its maximum value
(“slightly overdoped”). xc marks also the closure of a pseudogap which arises in the normal phase at
elevated temperatures right up to the thermal decomposition of the doped crystals. Thermodynamic
and magnetic data indicate that the high temperature density of states near the chemical potential
µ = EF is partially depleted [2]. Lowering T the number of available states is significantly reduced at
T ∗(x) > T0(x) > Tc(x), a characteristic temperature used to define the energy scale of the pseudogap,
corroborated by the uniform magnetic susceptibility χ(T, x), the spin susceptibility χs(T, x) (NMR
Knight shift) and many spectroscopic data. The onset temperature of nonlinear diamagnetic suscep-
tibility from superconducting phase fluctuations is marked by T0(x), and the dome-shaped onset of
superconducting amplitude fluctuations by Tc(x).
T ∗(x) decreases linearily with increasing doping and falls to zero at xc. The pseudogap scale
∆/kB = J(1 − x/xc) with J ≃ 1000 K arises from both, spin and charge degrees of freedom, and is
comparable to the antiferromagnetic superexchange energy. Notably this strongly entropy-depleting
pseudogap is completely absent beyond xc throughout the strongly overdoped regime up to x ≃ 0.25
where superconductivity vanishes.
The apparent disparity of the superconducting properties at xopt and xc still stirs lively debates,
particularily on a possible quantum critical point at xc. In this short note we attempt to outline, al-
most phenomenologically in the framework of the resonating valence bond (RVB) theory [1], that
both characteristic hole concentrations are intimately interrelated through the spatial structure of a
non-local d-wave RVB pair state constrained by strong off-site hole – hole repulsion. We show that
geometrically limited number of connections among such d-wave RVB pair states is most likely at the
origin of the pseudogap. Weak overdoping of columnar closest packed but partially unconnected RVB
pair states is demonstrated to induce a displacive transition into a fully connected zigzag structure.

1


2.
d-wave RVB states

2.1
Electron-hole asymmetry
The physical properties of the hole doped cuprate superconductors are in essence governed by
relaxation of the frustrated kinetic energy causing antiferromagnetic “kinetic” exchange in an insu-
lating parent compound where spin-half electrons are kept apart by large on-site (Mott - Hubbard)
Coulomb repulsion Ud [8]. The electronic excitations and the pairing interaction in such a liquid of
short range spin singlet electron pairs have been elaborated with Anderson’s theory of resonating
valence bonds (RVB) [1], mostly under the implicit assumption of electronic homogeneity.
The strong desire of lattice electrons to delocalize themselves favores homogeneous spatial distri-
butions. In general metals prefer most densely packed lattice structures optimizing the gain of (neg-
ative) kinetic energy and opposing segregational interactions. The normal electron liquid in doped
cuprate superconductors however appears to be intrinsically strained, even in most carefully annealed
stoichiometric compounds with relatively simple crystal lattices. Notorious chemical metastability
and electronic symmetry breaking seem to be constituitive properties of superconducting cuprates.
One important reason is the intrinsic electron – hole asymmetry [1] arising from the on-site electron
– electron repulsion Ud, another off-site hole – hole repulsion rendering electron – electron and hole
– hole pairs spatially asymmetric.
In the narrow doping range between xopt and xc however the strain in the electron liquid seems to
be gone, with them also doping induced lattice effects [3,4]. Here the superconducting RVB d-wave
function is found to get entirely stiff.

2.2
Off-site hole – hole repulsion
Holes doped into a RVB liquid of short range spin singlets are empty states assumed to move
free. Though, double occupancy of hole sites is excluded by Ud as it is for electrons at electron sites.
It is notable that the mobile empty states in the CuO2 lattice are created by singlet combination of
the symmetrized orbital on the four oxygens around a Cu2+. Such holes are virtual Cu3+ sites with a
hard core diameter larger than the lattice constant a0, set by the “cage” of the oxygen environment.
The energy of this so-called Zhang-Rice (ZR) state is by ∼ 5 eV distinctly lower than that of all
other combined states, thus such mobile hole states are stable throughout the entire relevant doping
regime, 0 < x ≤ 0.33. Coulomb repulsion between oxygen 2px,y states at the connecting site of two
ZR singlets, Up ≃ 6 eV, may be naively held responsible for the supression of nearest neighbor hole
pairs. A rough estimate for two ZR states built out of Wannier states yields a repulsion R ≃ Up/32 ≃
0.19 eV [7]. More detailed theoretical work on this issue is elusive.
Hole doping contracts strongly the basal plane area. A preliminary inspection of the nonlinearities
in the doping dependence of basal lattice constants, bulging at xopt and collapsing at xc, lead us to
suggest that the hard cores of the virtual Cu3+ holes exclude not only onsite double occupancy but
also nearest neighbor hole – hole configurations [9]. Hence empty replica of electron – electron spin
singlets, spaced by a0, have to be excluded from the possible hole – hole configuration manifolds
of the doped electron system. Therefore also clusters of nearest neighbor holes, hole stripes, hole
puddles etc.
Indirect experimental support for this electron – hole asymmetry, particularily by STM [5], comes
from the charge density modulations (CDM) evidenced at pseudogap excitation energies in the un-
derdoped regime. These CDM’s are sinusodial in one spatial dimension (bidirectional in x, y) with a
commensurate period 4a0 centered at oxygen sites. We view the stick-like CDM patterns (see inset
in Fig.2) as signatures of bond-centered hole – hole exchange over 3a0, extending effectively to 4a0
due to the large hole sizes.

2


Fig. 1.
(Color online) Adiabatic snapshots of a resonant valence bond configuration showing singlet pairs of
electrons spaced by one lattice constant a0 (horizontal and vertical black bars), and two holes doped at electron
sites with opposite spins (large white and black circles). The holes spaced by 3a0 along the Cu – O bond axis
experience directional attraction (orange bar) through kinetic exchange with the electron singlets in an array
of as many as 3 × 4 copper sites (yellow background). Off-site hole – hole repulsion excludes occupancy of
nearest neighbor sites (see text). Hence the odd a0 hole – hole pairing symmetry realizes only for spacings
≥ 3a0 with the location of the inversion center for all directional space and spin coordinates at the central
intervening oxygen site (small rectangle in the center of a). Green wavy lines indicate spin conserving next-
nearest neighbor electron – hole interactions (t′) along the lattice diagonals (nodal lines in k-space). b–e display
two - hole excitations of a. d and e: The diagonal excitations in sites from antiparallel electrons avoid off-site
repulsion but do not lock spin and charge. b and c: Virtual excitations to excluded nearest neighbor hole – hole
sites from antiparallel electrons locking spin and charge.

2.3
Bond-like RVB arrays
The frustrated kinetic energy causing antiferromagnetism in the parent compound is relaxed
through interactions which are short range in space and time. Fig.1a displays schematically the lo-
cality of an isolated doped d-wave RVB state at pseudogap excitation energies. Bond-centered hole –
hole pairing in the liquid of electron singlets arises for spacings of 3a0 along the Cu – O bonds (antin-
odal loci in k-space) from an axial inversion center for all directional space and spin coordinates at
the central intervening oxygen site (small rectangle in the center of Fig.1a). Figs.1b–e illustrate the
kinetic exchange interaction effectively attracting the holes. Hole – hole configurations spaced by
even multiples of the lattice constant, and site centered holes spaced by a0
√

5 are unable to lock the
spin and charge degrees of freedom in a pairing state.
The green wavy lines in Fig.1 symbolize quantum fluctuations along the lattice diagonal exchang-
ing holes with electrons at the next-nearest neighbor sites without spin flips. The remote hybridization
of the Cu4s with the Cu3dO2p orbitals promotes nodal fluctuations such that the ratio of the spin
conserving, and the spin flipping hopping matrix element −t′/t achieves crucial importance for the
pairing mechanism.
We expect the nodal fluctuations to generate effectively axial hole – hole attraction by kinetic
exchange in an RVB array with at least 3 × 4 = 12 copper sites, see Fig.1 and caption. The size of the
resulting pairing gap ∆p will be almost independent on the average hole concentration, and larger than
the energy of the superconducting amplitude fluctuations kBTc. The spatial extension of the bond-like
RVB array sets the full filling of the CuO2 lattice with paired holes to x = 1/6 ≃ 0.16 = xopt,
see Fig.2 (right). Hence “overdoping” may only accomodate additional holes (still constrained by
off-site repulsion) in ferromagnetic site-centered hole – hole configurations, which will destroy the
antiferromagnetic pairing symmetry of the kinetic exchange, see Fig.4 (right). Thus three holes, still
constrained by off-site repulsion even in the overdoped regime, will depair a bond-like RVB array.
Complete destruction of the pairing gap ∆p will occur at x = 3/12 = 0.25. The unusual electronic
properties of the overdoped regime, e.g the paramagnetic susceptibility, may have its origin in a two-
component fluid of paired bond-like RVB arrays and free electrons. It is then reasonable to expect
that the superconducting stiffness decreases linearily also in the overdoped regime [10].

3


Fig. 2.
(Color online) Adiabatic snapshots of columnar connected bond-like RVB arrays. Orange bars indi-
cate directional hole – hole attraction in the yellow colored array of RVB electron singlet states. Left: Under-
doped occupation. The inserted pattern are a time integated record taken by STM at pseudogap energies [5].
Right: Optimally doped occupation (electron singlet states omitted)

2.3.1
Nano-sized columns
These bond-like RVB arrays break the rotational symmetry of the lattice and give rise to uniaxial
(“nematic”) strain in the electronic lattice spreading macroscopically with increasing hole concen-
trations. Well known macroscopic deformable bodies favor relaxation of uniaxial microscopic strain
by formation of meso-scale unidirectional areas, and orientating them most appropriately. Large field
STM maps [5] of underdoped samples evidence nanometer-scale unidirectional clusters in x and y di-
rection with no preference of one over the other. Apparently doping in the C4 symmetric RVB liquid
proceeds as correlation of doped holes in nano-sized clusters with columns of bond-like RVB arrays.
The interconnection of bond-like RVB arrays of neighbored columns underlies the off-site occupation
constraint as each single bond-like RVB array. Fig.2 (left) displays schematically an adiabatic snap-
shot of an underdoped, i.e. only partially occupied columnar cluster of bond-like RVB arrays. The
STM pattern exhibits clearly the bond-like structure of interchanging holes and the intercolumnar re-
pulsion with periodicity 4a0. Naturally it does not yield information on the spins and their dynamics
and not on the dynamics of the hole–hole exchange; its integrated intensity may be taken as a measure
of the average number of holes [6].

Fig. 3.
(Color online) Left: Nodal connections between bond-like RVB arrays in columnar organization.
Middle: Nodal connections between bond-like RVB arrays in zigzag organization. Right: Zigzag organization;
collective hole displacements along the lattice diagonal generate the excited configurations of bond-like RVB
arrays displayed in Fig.1 b – e.

2.3.2
Zigzag packing
The organization of the bond-like RVB arrays on mesoscopic and macroscopic scales encounters
a connectivity problem. Fig.3 schematizes the nodal electron – hole quantum fluctuations (green wavy

4


lines) in different most closely packed configurations: columnar (left), and ‘tweedy” zigzag (middle)
patterns. Inter-columnar electron – hole fluctuations connecting nearest neighbored bond-like RVB
arrays are obviously geometrically constrained by ”ferro” equal spin hole – hole paths. Intra-columnar
electron – hole fluctuations however are able to connect via common electron spin singlet ”antiferro”
paths.
The fully packed columnar configuration may be displacively transformed into the energetically
more favorable zigzag configuration, see Fig.4 (left). For that columnar organized holes have to be
collectively displaced along the lattice diagonals to next nearest neighbor sites, while reversing the
displacive shifts from striation to striation. Note the arrows from the hole sites in the columnar config-
uration (open rectangles). This transformation of a “martensitic” type creates a most densely packed
zigzag configuration in which all bond-like RVB arrays are able to connect through common electron
spin singlet states. Clearly this is the energetically superior configuration of the two enhancing elec-
tron delocalization through unconstrained long range phase correlation. Nevertheless the columnar
configuration may still survive at xopt with most densely packed bond-like RVB states, because uni-
axial microscopic strain inhibits long range collective displacements. Thus the number of pair states
is maximal, but the superconducting stiffness stays below its optimal value.

Fig. 4.
(Color online) Left: Displacive transformation of optimally doped and columnar organized bond-like
RVB arrays (white bars) into the optimally connected zigzag organization. The arrows mark the directions of
the collective hole displacements. Right: Weakly overdoped zigzag organization of bond-like RVB arrays at
x ≃ 0.19. The overdoped excess holes (red diamonds) depair the bond-like RVB arrays but do not destroy the
zigzag organization of the remaining. Note possible ordering of the depaired sites.

3.
Closure of the pseudogap at xc > xopt

The columnar organization of xopt at xopt is apparently metastable. A tiny amount of overdoping
excess holes however may transform the nano-sized colums into the fully connected zigzag configura-
tion, however with the consequence of partial pair breaking by ”ferro” excess holes in some bond-like
RVB arrays. This situation is illustrated in Fig.4 (right). The ”ferro” holes are marked by open and
closed diamonds for spin up and spin down electron site, and local depairing by the grey rectangles
around the broken hole pairs (omitted orange bar). Certainly local depairing will affect the super-
conducting amplitude fluctuations decreasing Tc, however at the same time establishes unconstrained
long range phase coherence thus maximal superconducting stiffness. Hence superconductivity at xc
turns out to be more robust than at xopt, though at a diminuished value of Tc.
Hence xopt at xopt are intimately connected with each other through the geometrical constraints
governing the spatial organization of fully coherent assembly of nano-sized bond-like RVB arrays.

5


References

[1] P. W. Anderson, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 25, 1 (2011).
[2] J. W. Loram, J. Luo, J R. Cooper et al., J. Phys. Chem. Sol. 62, 59 (2001).
[3] E. Kaldis, J. R¨ohler, E. Liarokapis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 79 (1997).
[4] E. S. Bozin, G. H. Kwei, H. Takagi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5856 (2000).
[5] Y. Kohsaka, T. Hanaguri, M. Azuma et al., Nature Phys. 8, 934 (2012).
[6] K. Fujita, Chung Koo Kim, Inhee Lee et al., Science 344, 612 (2012).
[7] F. Barriquand, G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B 50, 16649 (2012).
[8] P. W. Anderson, Adv. Phys. 46, 3 (1997).
[9] J. R¨ohler, J. Superconductivity 17, 157 (2004).
[10] F. Mahmood, Xi He, I. Bozovic et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 027003 (2019).

6


