Spatial and spectral dynamics in STEM hyperspectral imaging using random scan
patterns

Alberto Zobelli,1, ∗ Steffi Y. Woo,1 Luiz H. G. Tizei,1 Nathalie Brun,1 Anna
Tararan,1 Xiaoyan Li,1 Odile St´ephan,1 Mathieu Kociak,1 and Marcel Tenc´e1, †

1Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, Univ. Paris-Sud, CNRS UMR 8502, F-91405, Orsay, France

The evolution of the scanning modules for scanning transmission electron microscopes (STEM)
has realized the possibility to generate arbitrary scan pathways, an approach currently explored
to improve acquisition speed and to reduce electron dose effects.
In this work, we present the
implementation of a random scan operating mode in STEM achieved at the hardware level via a
custom scan control module. A pre-defined pattern with fully shuffled raster order is used to sample
the entire region of interest. Subsampled random sparse images can then be extracted at successive
time frames, to which suitable image reconstruction techniques can be applied. With respect to the
conventional raster scan mode, this method permits to limit dose accumulation effects, but also to
decouple the spatial and temporal information in hyperspectral images. We provide some proofs of
concept of the flexibility of the random scan operating mode, presenting examples of its applications
in different spectro-microscopy contexts: atomically-resolved elemental maps with electron energy
loss spectroscopy and nanoscale-cathodoluminescence spectrum images.
By employing adapted
post-processing tools, it is demonstrated that the method allows to precisely track and correct for
sample instabilities and to follow spectral diffusion with a high spatial localization.

I.
INTRODUCTION

In the last twenty years, significant improvements
on the spatial resolution of scanning transmission elec-
tron microscopes (STEM) have been achieved by the
widespread implementation of spherical aberration cor-
rectors. Currently, atomically-resolved images are rou-
tinely obtained for a wide range of materials going from
semiconductors, nanostructures, to functional oxides,
etc.
The structural information can be complemented
by the synchronous acquisition of several spectroscopic
signals accessible, such as electron energy loss, X-ray
emission or cathodoluminescence (CL), which can then
be bundled into hyperspectral images.
Besides the instrumental characteristics, the ultimate
spatial resolution obtainable in spectro-microscopy is
strongly limited by the radiation sensitivity of the sam-
ple. Indeed, higher spatial resolution corresponds to a
smaller illumination area and number of scattering cen-
ters, which imply higher electron doses for a given sig-
nal intensity collected. Irradiation effects have a much
stronger impact in hyperspectral imaging since inelas-
tic scattering processes have significantly lower cross sec-
tions than elastic scattering employed in STEM imag-
ing, thus hindering the signal collection efficiency. Fur-
thermore, within the finite time required for recording
a hyperspectral image, the sample might drift, trans-
form and/or the spectroscopic signals of interest evolve.
Therefore, a hyperspectral image does not always por-
tray the sample in a definitive state since different pixels
are acquired at different times. These unavoidable draw-
backs motivate the development of novel operating modes
that could reduce sample dependent limitations in STEM
spectro-microscopy.
The use of unconventional scan pathways is a promis-
ing route currently explored to improve acquisition speed,

reduce electron dose1 and, in certain cases, to avoid dis-
tortions associated with scan2 and sample instabilities.
In a STEM, the electron beam is typically scanned over
the region of interest following a sawtooth-path to fill all
pixels of a rectangular frame. Alternative spiral scans
have also been recently proposed for reducing fly-back
image distortions arising at high scanning rates.2–4 In the
last years, subsampling has been extensively discussed as
a very effective strategy for dose-reduced image acquisi-
tion. Indeed, STEM images are often associated with a
certain degree of over-redundancy, and a good approxi-
mation of the full image can already be obtained from an
appropriate subset of pixels. The subsequent application
of image reconstruction techniques can permit to fill the
missing data within the image matrix.5,6 The direct ac-
quisition of sparse images presents the important advan-
tage of reducing radiation dose, acquisition time and data
size.6,7 An easy and implementable choice for sparse sam-
pling is a fully random distribution of the pixels, which
permit high subsampling with minimal reconstruction
distortions.8 The applicability of different reconstruction
algorithms for S(T)EM imaging has been demonstrated
on simulated random scan images obtained by extracting
a subset of randomly chosen pixels from full images.5,7,9

The effectiveness of these methods has also been shown
for multi-dimensional data structures such as tomogra-
phy image series,10,11 STEM-ptychography,12, energy-
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy,13 and electron energy loss
spectroscopy (EELS) hyperspectral images.14The direct
acquisition of random sparse STEM images can be at-
tained by scripting the acquisition control software,15 but
this method suffers from a very slow response time. More
efficiently, B´ech´e and coworkers developed an experimen-
tal set up which integrates a fast electromagnetic shutter:
the electron probe follows the conventional scan pattern
but the beam can be turned off at randomly selected
pixels.16 Whereas the method permits a reduction of the

arXiv:1909.07842v1  [physics.app-ph]  17 Sep 2019


2

electron dose, the acquisition time remains invariant with
respect to a standard scan. Other methods that generate
sparse random or pseudo-random scans have been pro-
posed by exploiting the position uncertainties due to the
deflection coils dynamics.9,17 The interest of sparse sam-
pling and compressive sensing has been stressed for TEM
and STEM imaging but only minor attention has been
dedicated to hyperspectral imaging, although irradiation
effects, acquisition times and data sizes are significantly
more important in this context.
In this work, we present an original implementation of
an effective random scan acquisition mode in STEM ob-
tained directly using the scanning control unit. The setup
permits an extended control of the scanning parameters
and therefore offers a large flexibility on the acquired im-
age data structure. The complete image matrix is filled
in a fully randomized fashion, each pixel being stamped
with its acquisition time. A series of subsampled random
sparse images can then be extracted at successive time
frames and inpainting image reconstruction applied. This
method permits to decouple the space and time informa-
tion and to monitor the sample and spectral signals dy-
namics. After illustrating the operating principle (section
II) and its practical implementation (section III), we pro-
vide examples of EELS and nano-cathodoluminescence
(nano-CL) hyperspectral images acquired with the newly
implemented random scan mode (section IV). With re-
spect to the conventional raster scan mode, we demon-
strate that random scan permits to limit dose accumu-
lation effects, but we also emphasize the possibility of
tracking and correcting for sample drift and to monitor
the spectroscopic signal dynamics over time in hyperspec-
tral images.

II.
RANDOM SCAN OPERATING PRINCIPLE

In Fig.
1(a) is represented the sawtooth-scan order
typically employed in STEM hyperspectral imaging: the
region of interest is scanned from left-to-right and top-to-
bottom. In the proposed random-scan mode, each pixel
is visited only once but in an aleatory order. In the first
step, the list of pixel coordinates of the scanning matrix
is built.
This list is then shuffled to define the order
sequence for pixel illumination; the matrix representing
the pixel scanning order can be stored for post-processing
[Fig. 1(b)]. In order to avoid spurious image distortions,
acquisition and displacement should be performed in sep-
arated time frames [Fig. 1(c)].
An advantage of the random-scan mode is the reduc-
tion of dose accumulation. After illumination, the sys-
tem transitions to its ground state within a character-
istic time defined by diffusion and recombination pro-
cesses (charge or thermal diffusion, radiative recombina-
tion, etc.). The illuminated area might therefore interact
with previously visited regions or even overlap with an al-
ready excited state since excitation volumes can be larger
than the probe size. This dose accumulation effect can

lead to image artifacts or induce radiation damages.18 In
a traditional sequential scan, successively acquired pixels
are adjacent and therefore accumulation effects are max-
imized. A typical example is charge artifacts observed in
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and secondary ion
mass spectrometry (SIMS) imaging of insulating samples.
A way to minimize this issue is to ensure that the illumi-
nated area is far enough from a region exposed short time
before. The random scan mode grants that this criteria
is satisfied for the large majority of the image pixels. An
alternative method consists of scanning the region of in-
terest with several passes following a standard sequential
pattern, and acquiring only a fraction of the image pixels
per pass to fill in the full image. This method, already
implemented in SEM imaging,19 has the drawback of sig-
nificantly elongating the total acquisition time while only
a single pass is required in the random scan mode.
Reducing irradiation effects can also be achieved by
acquiring sparse images containing only a fraction of
well-interspersed pixels of the frame.
The full image
can then be reconstructed using appropriate inpainting
techniques.5,9 The effectiveness and applicability of such
image reconstruction methods for STEM-HAADF imag-
ing has been extensively discussed in Ref. 7.
Since the sparsest solution which is consistent with the
target image is a priori unknown, the choice of a pre-
defined sampling rate might be responsible for a signifi-
cant loss of information.7 An important advantage of em-
ploying an effective random scan acquisition mode arises
from the fact that any subset of pixels is spanned homo-
geneously all over the region of interest. This permits
to sequentially build sparse images with a progressively
increasing sampling density, thus image reconstruction
techniques can then be applied in real-time to gradu-
ally improve the target image resolution. Moreover, the
acquisition can be interrupted once the required level of
accuracy is achieved. The method allows therefore to op-
erate at the effective low-dose limit compatible with the
signal of interest. Furthermore, it permits fast surveys
with a wide field of view for effective tracking of regions
of interest, which can be imaged successively at a higher
sampling rate.
In a traditional sequential raster scan, the space and
time information are coupled and the temporal evolution
of the imaged region or of the spectroscopic signals during
the acquisition cannot be recovered. This limitation can
be overcome by operating in a random scan mode, and
time-stamping the pixels. The acquired data can be rep-
resented as a random sparse matrix having two space and
one time coordinate for simple images, and an additional
spectroscopic dimension for hyperspectral imaging. This
object can be segmented into successive time windows
and a series of random sparse images/hyperspectral im-
ages can be built [Fig. 1(d)]. Each time-frame can then
be used for reconstructing the full target image. The re-
covery of the time dependence of signals has several im-
portant applications: it allows to track the objects’ mo-
tion and, in pertinent cases, to correct for image drifts;


3

Exposure

Blanker off
HADF/EELS/CL acquisition

Sequential scan

Scan sequence / Time

Random scan

Scan sequence 
shuffling

(a)
(b)

Blanker on
Beam displacement

Camera

Scan

Time

Pixel n
Pixel n+1

(c)

(d)

Sparse images 
extraction

Readout

Figure 1. Principle of the standard raster scan (a) and the random scan sequence (b). The color scale represents the pixel
acquisition order. (c) Schematic representation of the synchronization between illumination, beam displacement, blanking,
camera exposure, and read-out. (d) Extraction of sparse random images at given time frames.

it permits to monitor the signal dynamics in hyperspec-
tral images; it permits to identify changes on images or
spectra which can be associated to irreversible transfor-
mations of the sample due to irradiation. Examples of
the application of time-slicing of hyperspectral images
acquired in the random scan mode will be presented in
section IV.

III.
PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION IN STEM
SPECTRO-MICROSCOPY

The evolution of the scanning modules for scanning
transmission electron microscopes (STEM) now allows
to generate arbitrary scanning patterns and to explore
new illumination modes.
Through the development of
a custom scan control module, we have implemented
the random-scan method described here on two dedi-
cated STEM microscopes: a VG-HB501 and a spherical
aberration-corrected Nion UltraSTEM 200. After defin-
ing the image matrix, the pixel acquisition order is shuf-
fled at the start and the so-defined random scan path is
loaded into a dedicated scan generator. For each pixel,
the beam illuminates the specimen only for the time re-
quired for the signals acquisition while the camera is in
the exposure mode [Fig. 1(c)]. A fast electromagnetic
blanking system with typical blanking speed below 100
ns diverts the beam from the specimen during the beam
displacement from pixel to pixel, meanwhile the camera
is in an off/readout mode. This avoids image distortion
and spurious acquisitions due to the finite dynamical re-
sponse of the beam displacement coils.

The time response of the current in the deflecting
coils implies that the nominal beam position can only
be asymptotically achieved, and therefore the displace-
ment time has to be adapted to a required level of ac-
curacy.
A typical criterion is to assume that the illu-
minated spot position should deviate from its nominal
value by less than half of the pixel size. In the random
scan mode, the longest displacement for successive pixels
occurs for a movement between the extremes of a line or
a column (vertical and horizontal movements are decou-
pled due to the independent circuits controlling the dis-
placements along the two axis). The accuracy condition
is achieved when the current attains (N − 1)/N times
its target value, where N is the number of pixels on a
row. The displacement time (t) should then satisfy the
condition t > τ ln N, where τ is the time constant of the
circuit, typically of the order of some tens of µs. This im-
plies that displacements in random-scan mode take about
one–two orders of magnitude longer than the usual dwell
time for STEM imaging (about few µs), even if shorter
times could be obtained by the use of low-inductance
magnetic coils or electrostatic deflectors.
On the ba-
sis of these arguments, Kovarik et al.17 excluded that
a pure random-scan method would be viable for STEM
imaging, and proposed an alternative line-hopping ap-
proach to scan randomization for optimizing the acquisi-
tion speed. However, typical illumination times in hyper-
spectral imaging are much longer, of the order of tens of
ms, and therefore the displacement time in the random
scan approach would not dominate the total acquisition
time. In our implementation, the beam is displaced and
blanked during the camera readout time, typically 1 ms,


4

and therefore there is negligible time difference for ac-
quiring hyperspectral images in the standard sequential
scan and in the new random scan mode.

IV.
PROOFS OF CONCEPT

The random scan method can be very generally em-
ployed in hyperspectral imaging with the sole limitation
of longer probe displacements with respect to a standard
raster scan. As already discussed, its potential interest
arises in the spectroscopy of systems sensitive to electron
irradiation, and in monitoring the spectral signal and im-
age dynamics. Here we present some proofs of concept
of the flexibility of the random scan method illustrating
its applications in different spectro-microscopy contexts:
atomically-resolved EELS mapping and nano-CL spec-
trum images.

A.
Tracking and correcting for sample instabilities
in STEM hyperspectral imaging

Specimen drifts are very often encountered in STEM
and are usually caused by limited mechanical stability
of the sample holder, sample thermalization or Coulomb
repulsion consequent of charge accumulation.
Drift is,
for instance, very difficult to fully eliminate in cryo-
STEM, as the sample holder is cooled to liquid nitro-
gen temperatures and thus experiences much larger ther-
mal gradients.20 Instability-induced image deformations
can strongly deteriorate the imaging capabilities of mod-
ern STEM microscopes which can reach sub-˚Angstrom
resolution and sub-picometer precision. Distortions are
even more pronounced in hyperspectral imaging com-
pared to HAADF imaging due to the longer dwell times.
Whenever the drift origin cannot be eliminated, images
could be corrected post-acquisition by displacing individ-
ual pixels on the basis of a time-drift function. However,
this information can be only poorly estimated by adopt-
ing strong assumptions on the structure under observa-
tion.
As an example of such problems, Fig. 2(a) presents
the high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) image syn-
chronously acquired with an EELS-hyperspectrum image
of an atomically-sharp NdNiO3 –LaAlO3 (NNO-LAO)
interface21 performed on a Nion UltraSTEM 200 mi-
croscope using the standard sequential scan. Both ma-
terials constituting the heterostructure are insulating
at room temperature, hence sample drift and the sub-
sequent strong image deformation observed arise most
probably from charge accumulation in previously scanned
pixels. Whereas image rows can be individually realigned
post-acquisition by assuming a straight interface, defor-
mation parallel to the interface cannot be corrected as
such. This imply that, although the imaging system is
capable of a very high spatial resolution, the utmost per-
formance cannot be reached: individual atomic columns

can be visualized but image distortions hinder any pre-
cise quantitative measurement.
Ultimate imaging capabilities can be recovered by
combining the random scan acquisition mode described
with a post-treatment workflow designed to segment,
cross-correlate, and realign sparse image stacks.
Fig.

2(b) presents the HAADF/EELS-hyperspectral image
acquired using similar illumination conditions as Fig.
2(a), but in random scan mode.
Now adjacent pixels
are not consecutively acquired and therefore, the result-
ing image does not appear distorted but instead heavily
blurred with a loss of atomic resolution. However, the
use of time slicing combined with image reconstruction
allows for a very effective and general way to measure
and correct sample drifts and to recover the atomic reso-
lution. Fig. 2(c–e) presents random sparse images slices
obtained by segmenting the complete random-scanned-
HAADF image in 10 successive time windows.
Each
slice can be considered as a capture of the sample mo-
tion within a given time interval. Then, target images
are reconstructed by applying the beta-process factor-
analysis (BPFA) algorithm,22,23 on which a dictionary
of functions is learned from the sparse images and used
to build the data under study by patches.
Image in-
painting using BPFA has been proven to provide high
quality reconstruction for high-resolution STEM images
using very limited pixel subsets.5 In this case, individual
atomic columns can be recovered from extracted subsets
having only 10% of the total pixels of the complete image
[Fig. 2(f–h)]. Relative image shifts have been measured
by using the image correlation routines commonly em-
ployed for the realignment of TEM image series,24 and
the derived drift-time function has been represented in
Fig.
2(i), showing an average drift speed of about 1
˚A/min. This information can then be used for correcting
the acquired image by realigning and successively aver-
aging the segmented STEM-HAADF images or by ap-
plying the estimated shift to each pixel individually. The
obtained drift-corrected image is presented in Fig. 2(j).
The reconstructed images might not present an homo-
geneous sampling: because of the drift, realigned pixels
might be denser or sparser in subregions or along specific
directions and unsampled regions might be evident. The
visual rendering has been improved by filling the miss-
ing pixels (34% of the total pixels) using an interpolation
routine, as shown in Fig. 2(k).
The recovered image presents a very straight interface
and an undistorted lattice. The same drift correction can
then be applied to time slices extracted from the full core-
loss EELS hyperspectral image synchronously acquired
with the STEM-HAADF image. Atomically-resolved el-
emental maps can then be extracted from the realigned
hyperspectral image as shown in Fig. 2(i), where inten-
sity maps of Nd-M4,5, Ni-L2,3, and La-M4,5 edges are
represented in red, green and blue, respectively.
The
aforementioned results have been obtained using a drift-
correction routine which does not require any previous
structural assumption. The applicability of the method


5

2 nm

1 nm

(a)

(b)

....

(i)

....

....
....

(f)
(g)
(h)

slice 1

(c)

2 nm

(d)

slice 5

(e)

slice 10

Time 
slicing

Image 
reconstruction

Sequential scan

Random scan

2 nm

(j)
(k)
(l)
Drift-corrected random scan
Missing pixels filled
Elemental map

Drift function

Nd
Ni
La

LAO
NNO

LAO
NNO

Figure 2. STEM-HAADF image of the NdNiO3 –LaAlO3 (NNO–LAO) interface acquired (a) in the standard sequential raster
scan mode and (b) in the random scan mode. (c–e) Time slices (10% of total pixels) derived from the random scan image,
and (f–h) corresponding images reconstructed using the BPFA method. (i) Drift function as derived from the reconstructed
image stack. (j) Drift-corrected random-scan HAADF image, and (k) the same image where missing pixels have been filled
using a cubic interpolation. (l) Atomically-resolved elemental maps obtained from the core-loss EELS hysperspectral image
acquired simultaneously with the random-scan HAADF image. Maps extracted from the Nd-M4,5, Ni-L2,3, and La-M4,5 edges
are represented in red, green and blue, respectively.

is therefore very general, and could be employed both in
atomically-resolved or lower resolution images. However,
the quality of the final result will strongly depend on the
capability of reconstructing images with a level of detail
that could grant a precise estimation of the sample drift.

B.
Reducing dose accumulation effects

In recent years, the need of reducing radiation damage
in STEM has promoted the development of new scanning
modes. The acquisition of random sparse images com-
bined with the capability of reconstructing the target im-
age with adapted post-processing techniques has emerged
as an efficient way to reduce total electron dose and dose
accumulation effects. A main drawback of the method is
the need to know a priori the sampling rate consistent
with a limited loss of information. In the random-scan
mode, the complete image is recorded and therefore no
image reconstruction is required. The random order of
the pixel acquisition, and the wide distance between suc-

cessively illuminated area, limits dose accumulation ef-
fects. To illustrate the advantage of the method we show
the difference between sequential and random scan on
nano-CL images of point defect-related emissions.
Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is a wide band-gap
semiconductor presenting strong excitonic emissions in
the deep ultraviolet (UV), at ∼6 eV.25,26 Recently, it has
been demonstrated that several defect-related emissions
may act as very stable and bright single-photon emit-
ters (SPE) in the visible and UV spectral range, opening
the way to their potential usage in the quantum optics
field.27–35 The most studied centers present a narrow zero
phonon line (ZPL) in the 1.7–2.3 eV energy range30 fol-
lowed by phonon sidebands red-shifted by about 65 meV
and 160 meV. These SPEs have stable energies when ex-
cited by green laser but exhibit a strong spectral dif-
fusion (time-variable fluctuation in energy) under blue
laser excitation.32 Finally, a blinking behavior (intermit-
tent emission) has also been described under prolonged
illumination.33

Nano-CL within a STEM is a very effective technique


6

(a)
(b)

0
50
100
150
200
Time (s)

200 nm

2.42 eV

2.46 eV

2.32 eV

2.42 eV
2.46 eV

2.32 eV

~65 meV

~160 meV

(c)

Intensity (a.u.)

Intensity (a.u.)

Wavelength (nm)

Intensity (a.u.)

Energy (eV)

500
520
540
560
580
600

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

Figure 3. (a) CL of defects emissions in the visible range from
an exfoliated h-BN flake. (b) Time evolution of the emission
intensity under continuous illumination of an individual spot
emitting at 2.32 eV. (c) Composite CL intensity map acquired
in the same flake using the standard raster scan mode. Inten-
sities have been obtained, after background subtraction, by
integrating the signal in a 10 meV energy windows centered
about the ZPL maxima. The colour code follows the schema
of panel (a), each color scale has been normalized indepen-
dently.

to investigate the spatial distribution of defect-related
emissions at sub-wavelength resolution,36,37 and when
combined with a Hanbury-Brown and Twiss interferom-
eter, to test their potential non-classical nature.38,39 In
a recent work, our group has shown that UV emitting
centers in h-BN appear, when imaged by nano-CL, as
highly localized spots whose diameter (∼80 nm) corre-
sponds to the characteristic excitation diffusion length of
the material.28 The same methodology and experimental
setup is applied here to investigate defect emissions in
h-BN in the visible range.

Fig.
3(a) shows a few examples of CL spectra of a
class of optically-active centers of h-BN on which their
typical phonon replica structure of sidebands at 65 meV
and 160 meV can be observed. With respect to photolu-
minescence typically carried out with a 532 nm (2.33 eV)
green laser excitation, high-energy electrons employed in
CL permit an easier access to higher energy excitations;
here we report ZPLs in the 2.3–2.5 eV energy window
which extends the energy range previously reported for
this class of defects. The time dependence of the emis-
sion intensity of the 2.32 eV line, obtained by continuous
illumination of an individual emission spot of 30 nm × 30
nm in size is shown in Fig. 3(b). We observe a blinking
behavior in the tens of seconds time scale, in agreement
with previous reports by photoluminescence.33 This ef-
fect has a strong impact when performing hyperspectral
images in a raster scan mode, where time and space in-
formation are coupled. As an example, Fig. 3(c) is a
post-processed regular CL hyperspectral image acquired

at an individual h-BN flake where a high density of differ-
ent emitting centers from this class can be distinguished.
CL intensity maps have been derived for each emission
line by integrating the ZPL with an energy window of
∼10 meV centered about the intensity maximum. The
2.32 eV emissions (in red) appear as isotropic spots with
a full-width at half-maximum of ∼100 nm. Within the
emission spots, stripes of dark pixels can be clearly dis-
cernible, which correspond to off states of the blinking
centers.
Other emission centers can be suddenly acti-
vated or deactivated when the electron beam position
gets close to the emitting defect.
This effect can lead
to emissions localized on just a few consecutive pixels or
emission stripes on sole two consecutive scanning lines,
as clearly seen for the 2.42 eV and 2.46 eV centers in
green and cyan, respectively. These intensity instabili-
ties are likely to be driven by the electron beam, and
may involve a variation in the charge state of the de-
fect centers: charge can progressively accumulate due to
secondary electrons ejection, and it can drive the sys-
tem to an on/off state, which can switch after a sudden
discharge. The charge hypothesis for time instabilities
has been previously suggested in Ref. 33, where charge
variations were optically-induced.
Emission instabilities strongly degrade the spatial in-
formation that can be obtained from hyperspectral im-
ages, but considerable improvements can be achieved by
operating in the random scan mode.
Fig.
4(a) shows
the HAADF image of a chemically-exfoliated h-BN flake.
Fig. 4(b) presents the CL intensity map of the 2.32 eV
center extracted from a nano-CL hyperspectral-image ac-
quired in standard raster mode, and in Fig.4(c), the map
of an equivalent area obtained in random scan mode. In
both intensity maps, four well-localized emitting centers
can be identified but, in the raster scan mode extended
dark stripes and abrupt intensity variation are observed;
whereas in the random scan mode, emission spots are
well-defined and only few dark pixels appear. In the se-
quential scan mode, adjacent pixels are consecutive in
time and charges can accumulate leading to instabilities
in the emission map, similar to artifacts observed in SEM
images of insulating samples.
In the random scanned
emission map, this effect is strongly hindered: the aver-
age distance between successive pixels is 414 nm, while
it is only 8.5 nm, corresponding to the pixel size, in the
sequential scan. It is reasonable to expect that the re-
duction of cumulative effects achieved with the random
scan mode could provide significant improvements also
in the spectroscopy of electron-beam sensitive materials
which might be amorphized or even be destroyed at high
electron doses.

C.
Time evolution in hyperspectral images

In hyperspectral imaging, the observation of the tem-
poral evolution of a spectroscopic signal with a spatial
resolution is precluded by the intrinsic coupling of the


7

200 nm
200 nm

(b)
(c)

200 nm

(a)

Figure 4. (a) HAADF image of an individual h-BN flake. (b) Corresponding CL intensity map of 2.32 eV emission centers
obtained using the standard sequential scanning mode, and (c) using the new random scan mode.

space and time coordinates given the conventional se-
quential scanning.
However, time-dependent changes
can be considerably recovered by operating in the ran-
dom scan mode, and employing a multi-step and iter-
ative post-processing. Time-slicing and spatial integra-
tion permit a precise identification of even faint and non-
recurrent spectroscopic features changing in time, and
avoid spectral mixing.
Once relevant signals are iden-
tified, their evolution with time can be monitored, the
time windows over which spectroscopic features are sta-
ble can be determined, and corresponding time-resolved
spectroscopic maps can be extracted.

As discussed in the previous section, h-BN emitting de-
fect centers present time instabilities, spectral diffusion
and a highly localized CL signal, therefore they may serve
as an ideal system to illustrate the potential of random
scan to recover the time evolution in hypersectral im-
ages. Additional plasma treatment of h-BN-loaded TEM
grids was used to generate a higher density of defect cen-
ters within the flakes.
Fig.
5 presents the space and
time dependence of several CL signals in few-layer h-BN
obtained from a random-scan hyperspectral image acqui-
sition. CL emission spectra extracted from appropriate
time slices and spatial integration are given in Fig. 5(a–
d); ZPLs followed by characteristic phonon replica can be
observed at the 3.21 eV (386 nm), 3.04 (407 nm), 2.15 eV
(576 nm) and 1.73 eV (714 nm) photon energies. The two
highest energy emissions [Fig. 5(a,b)] present a spectral
overlap and therefore intensity maps cannot be extracted
through simple signal integration within an energy win-
dow. Thus, we have employed a fitting routine using the
spectra in Fig. 5(a–d) as reference functions. Emission
intensity maps have been derived from the fitting coeffi-
cients with each map normalized independently. Appro-
priate slices of the maps for time windows over which the
spectroscopic signal are active are provided in Fig. 5(g–
j); spectra in Fig. 5(a–d) had been obtained by a further
spatial integration of these slices. Maps of Fig. 5(g,h)
indicate that the 3.21 eV and 3.04 eV emission lines are
centered in the same vicinity (point A). An analysis of the
time evolution of these spectral features is given in Fig.
5(e), as assessed by decomposing the full intensity maps
individually and tracking the pixels based on the distance
relative to an assigned origin (point A) as a function of

the pixel acquisition time. The dot brightness encodes
the intensity of the emissions. The minimal deviation in
distance of the brightest dots over time for each of the
emission lines implies minimal drift throughout the du-
ration of the data acquisition. Additionally, the decay of
the dot intensity variation with distance also corresponds
to the excitation diffusion length (∼90 nm) characteris-
tic to such defects in h-BN. The gray boxes indicate the
integrated time windows [TW1 and TW2] corresponding
to Fig. 5(g,h), within which the spectroscopic signal are
active. The alternation of dark and bright time frames
is indicative of the blinking behavior of the intermittent
emission center. Furthermore, the 3.21 eV and 3.04 eV
emissions appear in well-separated time windows despite
originating from the same vicinity; in no one pixel is a
superposition of the two signals found.
This observa-
tion is a clear indication of spectral diffusion at a single
emitting spot, an effect which might be associated with
a different charge state or with a structural degradation.
The 3.21 eV line [Fig. 5(a)] corresponds to a class of blue
defect luminescence in h-BN;40,41 the 3.04 eV line [Fig.
5(b)] is likely of similar luminescence origin but after the
irreversible change in charge state or degradation with
continued irradiation.

A similar analysis was performed for the 2.15 eV and
1.73 eV emission lines from Fig. 5(c,d). These spectral
features occur only for a limited time frame [TW3 and
TW4 in Fig. 5(f)] and the centers appear at the bor-
der of the scanned region [Fig.
5(i,j)].
Therefore the
corresponding maps are less defined and it is more dif-
ficult to identify the emission center [point B has been
used as reference origin for Fig. 5(f)]. However, we ob-
serve a spatial overlap between the emitting regions and a
temporal separation, which indicate once more a possible
spectral diffusion of the same emission center. Such emis-
sion lines can be generated by way of high-temperature
annealing in Ar or O2 atmospheres, high-energy electron
irradiation, such as in a SEM, ion irradiation or chemical
etching.29,31 The color diversity within the same class of
quantum emitter,30,31 photo-induced spectral diffusion,
and blinking, suggest a change in the charge state of the
emitter or the local crystal symmetry in the h-BN.32,33

All of which stimulate interest as to how individual de-
fect centers and their local environment can differ at the


8

375
400
425
450
475
500
Wavelength (nm)

Intensity (a.u.)

(a)

375
400
425
450
475
500
Wavelength (nm)

(b)

550
575
600
625
650
675
700
Wavelength (nm)

(c)

550
575
600
625
650
675
700
Wavelength (nm)

2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
Energy (eV)

2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
Energy (eV)

1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
Energy (eV)

1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
Energy (eV)

(j)

Intensity (a.u.)

(d)

0

200

400

Distance (nm)

0
500
1000
1500
2000
Pixel (number)

0

250

500

Distance (nm)

(e)

(f)

0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
Time (s)

(g)

100 nm

(h)
(i)

TW1
TW2

TW4
TW3

TW1
TW2
TW3
TW4

A
A

B
B

3.21 eV
3.04 eV
2.15 eV
1.73 eV

Figure 5. Space and time dependence of various CL signals in a few-layer h-BN flake obtained from a random-scan hyperspectral
image, illustrating the blinking and spectral diffusion of individual emission spots. (a–d) Characteristic CL spectral features
observed in this single hyperspectral image. (e,f) Time evolution of the emission lines as a function of the pixel acquisition
time and pixel distance from the center of the emission origin. Emission intensities are encoded in the dots transparency. (g–j)
Intensity maps extracted for the characteristic signals in (a–d) within the time windows (TW) indicated in panels (e,f). The
points A and B indicate the reference positions used for the graphs in panels (e,f).

atomic-scale, and how that plays into the dynamics of
their luminescence. The use of random scan mode with
nano-CL is perfectly suited to investigate the temporal
evolution of such phenomena at the nanoscale.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

In this work, we have presented the implementation
of a random scan operating mode in STEM obtained at
the hardware level via a custom scan control module,
and provided examples of its use in EELS and nano-
CL hyperspectral imaging.
With respect to the con-
ventional raster scanning mode, probe displacements are
longer and thus random scan might not be as suitable
for simple STEM imaging, but this is not problematic in
STEM spectro-microscopy for which longer illumination
times are required. The reduction of dose-accumulation
effects, and the possibility of decoupling the space and

time information are significant advances brought on by
the use of random scan to STEM hyperspectral imaging.
In the current implementation, the complete scan pattern
is defined prior to the acquisition and then a full image
matrix is recorded together with the pixel scanning or-
der. Hyperspectral images can be filtered as a function
of the pixel acquisition history, and image reconstruction
techniques can be applied to these time series of sub-
sampled random sparse images. By employing adapted
post-processing tools, it is shown that the random scan
method allows to track and correct for drift caused by
sample instabilities, and to follow spectral diffusion with
a high spatial localization.
The practical implementation of the method permits
a high control and flexibility of the acquisition parame-
ters, and other operating modes can be later explored.
Therefore, we foresee that STEM random scan could be
generalized to a wide class of problems for which further
specific protocols and post-processing tools might be de-
veloped. For instance, a constrain on the minimal dis-


9

tance between successive pixels could be imposed to fur-
ther limit accumulation effects. The technique can also
be easily extended to feature-adapted dynamic sampling,
which has been recently discussed as a way to combine
high-resolution and low electron dose.1,13,42 Indeed, at
the current stage, reconstructed images are already gen-
erated live in real-time from subsampled data sets; this
information can be employed to re-actualize the scanning
path during the acquisition. Progress in image and hy-
perspectral image reconstruction will also benefit from
key inputs and validator tests obtained from a direct
recording of fully-random sparse images. Furthermore,
the possibility to elaborate live partial dataset will mo-
tivate the development of faster algorithms of high accu-
racy and the interlink between microscopes and modern
computing architectures. Finally, improvements in the
microscope scan devices at the hardware level that re-
duce displacement times to the µs range, or even shorter,
will extend the interest and applicability of random scan
mode also to STEM imaging.

Appendix: Methods

A NdNiO3 (NNO) thin film was grown by pulsed laser
deposition over a LaAlO3 (LAO) substrate and a cross-
section lamella for electron microscopy was prepared
along the [100] pseudocubic zone-axis of the substrate
by focused ion beam (FIB) using a FEI Scios DualBeam.
More details on the interface growth and specimen prepa-
ration can be found in Ref. 21. Atomically-resolved EELS
mapping was performed on a Nion UltraSTEM 200 mi-
croscope operated at 100 keV.
Few-layer h-BN flakes have been obtained by liquid-
phase exfoliation of commercially available micrometric

powder following the protocol presented in Ref. 43. A
solution of h-BN powder in isopropanol (1 mg/mL) was
sonicated for 1–10 h, and then drop-casted onto a lacey
carbon TEM grid. Flakes presented a lateral size of few
microns and an average thickness of few tens of nm. Ad-
ditional plasma charging of the h-BN-loaded TEM grid
in 25% O2/Ar atmosphere was used to generate/activate
more defect centers for the results presented in Fig. 5.
Nano-CL experiments were performed on a VG-HB501
dedicated STEM operated at 60 keV, below the atomic
displacement threshold for h-BN in order to limit radi-
ation damage. The microscope was provided with a liq-
uid nitrogen cooling system for the sample stage (150
K). CL signals were collected using an Attolight M¨onch
4107 STEM-CL system fitted with an optical spectrom-
eter with a 150-grooves/mm diffraction grating blazed
at 500 nm. The spectral resolution of the spectrometer
CCD was 0.34 nm/pixel. Hyperspectral images were ob-
tained by recording one full CL spectrum per pixel while
scanning the sample. Typical dwell times were 100–300
ms per pixel.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge support from the Agence Nationale
de la Recherche (ANR), program of future investment
TEMPOS-CHROMATEM and TEMPOS-NANOTEM
(No.
ANR-10-EQPX-50).
The work has also received
funding from the European Union in the Horizon-2020
Framework Programme (H2020-EU) under Grant Agree-
ment No. 823717 (ESTEEM3). Authors would like to
acknowledge Daniele Preziosi for the LAO-NNO thin film
growth and Alexandre Gloter for the FIB lamella prepa-
ration.

∗ alberto.zobelli@u-psud.fr
† marcel.tence@u-psud.fr
1 A. Stevens, L. Luzi, H. Yang, L. Kovarik, B. Mehdi,
A. Liyu, M. Gehm,
and N. Browning, Appl. Phys. Lett.
112, 043104 (2018).

2 X. Sang, A. R. Lupini, R. R. Unocic, M. Chi, A. Y. Bori-
sevich, S. V. Kalinin, E. Endeve, R. K. Archibald,
and
S. Jesse, Adv. Struct. Chem. Imaging 2, 6 (2016).

3 X. Sang, A. R. Lupini, J. Ding, S. V. Kalinin, S. Jesse,
and R. R. Unocic, Sci. Rep. 7, 43585 (2017).

4 X. Li, O. Dyck, S. V. Kalinin,
and S. Jesse, Microsc.
Microanal. 24, 623 (2018).

5 A. Stevens, H. Yang, L. Carin, I. Arslan, and N. D. Brown-
ing, Microscopy 63, 41 (2014).

6 P. Trampert, F. Bourghorbel, P. Potocek, M. Peemen,
C. Schlinkmann, T. Dahmen,
and P. Slusallek, Ultrami-
croscopy 191, 11 (2018).

7 P. Binev, W. Dahmen, R. DeVore, P. Lamby, D. Savu, and
R. Sharpley, in Modeling Nanoscale Imaging in Electron
Microscopy (Springer, 2012) pp. 73–126.

8 M. Lustig, D. L. Donoho, J. M. Santos, and J. M. Pauly,

IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 25, 72 (2008).

9 H. S. Anderson, J. Ilic-Helms, B. Rohrer, J. Wheeler,
and K. Larson, in Computational Imaging XI , Vol. 8657
(International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2013) p.
86570C.

10 Z. Saghi, M. Benning, R. Leary, M. Macias-Montero,
A. Borras, and P. A. Midgley, Adv. Struct. Chem. Imaging
1, 7 (2015).

11 L. Donati,
M. Nilchian,
S. Tr´epout,
C. Messaoudi,
S. Marco, and M. Unser, Ultramicroscopy 179, 47 (2017).

12 A. Stevens, H. Yang, W. Hao, L. Jones, C. Ophus, P. D.
Nellist, and N. D. Browning, Applied Physics Letters 113,
033104 (2018).

13 K. A. Hujsak, E. W. Roth, W. Kellogg, Y. Li, and V. P.
Dravid, Micron 108, 31 (2018).

14 ´E. Monier, T. Oberlin, N. Brun, M. Tenc´e, M. de Frutos,
and N. Dobigeon, IEEE Trans. Comput. Imaging 4, 585
(2018).

15 S. Hwang, C. W. Han, S. V. Venkatakrishnan, C. A.
Bouman, and V. Ortalan, Meas. Sci. Technol. 28, 045402
(2017).


10

16 A. B´ech´e, B. Goris, B. Freitag,
and J. Verbeeck, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 108, 093103 (2016).

17 L. Kovarik, A. Stevens, A. Liyu,
and N. D. Browning,

Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 164102 (2016).

18 R. F. Egerton, Micron 119, 72 (2019).
19 J. T. L. Thong, K. W. Lee,
and W. K. Wong, Scanning
23, 395 (2001).

20 B. H. Savitzky, I. El Baggari, C. B. Clement, E. Waite,
B. H. Goodge, D. J. Baek, J. P. Sheckelton, C. Pasco,
H. Nair, N. J. Schreiber, et al., Ultramicroscopy 191, 56
(2018).

21 D. Preziosi, L. Lopez-Mir, X. Li, T. Cornelissen, J. H.
Lee, F. Trier, K. Bouzehouane, S. Valencia, A. Gloter,
A. Barthlmy, and M. Bibes, Nano Lett. 18, 2226 (2018).

22 J. Paisley and L. Carin, in Proceedings of the 26th Annual
International Conference on Machine Learning (ACM,
2009) pp. 777–784.

23 M. Zhou, H. Chen, J. Paisley, L. Ren, L. Li, Z. Xing,
D. Dunson, G. Sapiro,
and L. Carin, IEEE Trans. Im-
age Process. 21, 130 (2012).

24 M. Guizar-Sicairos, S. T. Thurman,
and J. R. Fienup,

Opt. Lett. 33, 156 (2008).

25 K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and H. Kanda, Nat. Mater.
3, 404 (2004).

26 G. Cassabois, P. Valvin,
and B. Gil, Nat. Photonics 10,
262 (2016).

27 T. T. Tran, C. Zachreson, A. M. Berhane, K. Bray,
R. G. Sandstrom, L. H. Li, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe,
I. Aharonovich, and M. Toth, Phys. Rev. Appl 5, 034005
(2016).

28 R. Bourrellier, S. Meuret, A. Tararan, O. St´ephan, M. Ko-
ciak, L. H. G. Tizei, and A. Zobelli, Nano Lett. 16, 4317
(2016).

29 T. T. Tran, C. Elbadawi, D. Totonjian, C. J. Lobo,
G. Grosso,
H. Moon,
D. R. Englund,
M. J. Ford,
I. Aharonovich, and M. Toth, ACS Nano 10, 7331 (2016).

30 N. R. Jungwirth, B. Calderon, Y. Ji, M. G. Spencer, M. E.
Flatt, and G. D. Fuchs, Nano Lett. 16, 6052 (2016).

31 N.
Chejanovsky,
M.
Rezai,
F.
Paolucci,
Y.
Kim,
T. Rendler, W. Rouabeh, F. Fvaro de Oliveira, P. Her-

linger, A. Denisenko, S. Yang, I. Gerhardt, A. Finkler, J. H.
Smet, and J. Wrachtrup, Nano Lett. 16, 7037 (2016).

32 Z. Shotan, H. Jayakumar, C. R. Considine, M. Mackoit,
H. Fedder, J. Wrachtrup, A. Alkauskas, M. W. Doherty,
V. M. Menon, and C. A. Meriles, ACS Photonics 3, 2490
(2016).

33 L. J. Mart´ınez, T. Pelini, V. Waselowski, J. R. Maze,
B. Gil, G. Cassabois,
and V. Jacques, Phys. Rev. B 94,
121405 (2016).

34 A. L. Exarhos, D. A. Hopper, R. R. Grote, A. Alkauskas,
and L. C. Bassett, ACS Nano 11, 3328 (2017).

35 J. D. Caldwell, I. Aharonovich, G. Cassabois, J. H. Edgar,
B. Gil, and D. Basov, Nat. Rev. Mater. 4, 552 (2019).

36 L. F. Zagonel,
S. Mazzucco,
M. Tenc´e,
K. March,
R. Bernard, B. Laslier, G. Jacopin, M. Tchernycheva,
L. Rigutti, F. H. Julien, R. Songmuang, and M. Kociak,
Nano Lett. 11, 568 (2010).

37 M. Kociak and L. Zagonel, Ultramicroscopy 176, 112
(2017).

38 L. H. G. Tizei and M. Kociak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 153604
(2013).

39 S.
Meuret,
L.
Tizei,
T.
Cazimajou,
R.
Bourrellier,
H. Chang, F. Treussart, and M. Kociak, Phys. Rev. Lett.
114, 197401 (2015).

40 V. Korsaks, B. Berzina, and L. Trinklere, Latvian Journal
of Physics and Technical Sciences 49, 57 (2012).

41 B. Berzina, V. Korsaks, L. Trinkler, A. Sarakovskis,
J. Grube,
and S. Bellucci, Diamond and Related Mate-
rials 68, 131 (2016).

42 T.
Dahmen,
M.
Engstler,
C.
Pauly,
P.
Trampert,
N. De Jonge, F. M¨ucklich,
and P. Slusallek, Sci. Rep.
6, 25350 (2016).

43 J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J.
King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith,
I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee,
G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland,
J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty,
A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieve-
son, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist,
and
V. Nicolosi, Science 331, 568 (2011).


