Material Characterization and Precise Finite Element Analysis of Fiber Reinforced
Thermoplastic Composites for 4D Printing

Yuxuan Yua,∗∗, Haolin Liua,b,∗∗, Kuanren Qiana, Humphrey Yangb, Matthew McGeheeb, Jianzhe Gub, Danli Luob, Lining Yaob,∗,
Yongjie Jessica Zhanga,∗

aComputational Bio-modeling Laboratory, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
bMorphing Matter Lab, Human-Computer Interaction Institute, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract

Four-dimensional (4D) printing, a new technology emerged from additive manufacturing (3D printing), is widely known for its
capability of programming post-fabrication shape-changing into artifacts. Fused deposition modeling (FDM)-based 4D printing, in
particular, uses thermoplastics to produce artifacts and requires computational analysis to assist the design processes of complex
geometries. However, these artifacts are weak against structural loads, and the design quality can be limited by less accurate
material models and numerical simulations. To address these issues, this paper propounds a composite structure design made
of two materials - polylactic acid (PLA) and carbon fiber reinforced PLA (CFPLA) - to increase the structural strength of 4D
printed artifacts and a workflow composed of several physical experiments and series of dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) to
characterize materials. We apply this workflow to 3D printed samples fabricated with different printed parameters to accurately
characterize the materials and implement a sequential finite element analysis (FEA) to achieve accurate simulations. The accuracy
of deformation induced by the triggering process is both computationally and experimentally verified with several creative design
examples, and the 95% confidence interval of the accuracy is (0.972, 0.985). We believe the presented workflow is essential to the
combination of geometry, material mechanism and design, and has various potential applications.

Keywords: 4D printing, design workflow, material characterization, fiber reinforcement, finite element analysis

1. Introduction

Starting from the last century, fused deposition modeling
(FDM) with additive manufacturing (3D printing) has become
a widespread approach to build new structures [1, 2]. Many
types of thermoplastics, such as polyether ether ketone (PEEK)
and polyether ketone ketone (PEKK), are frequently used in 3D
printing technology for some high-end applications [3, 4, 5].
By feeding thermoplastic filament through the heated printing
nozzle, the melted material is squeezed out and falls onto a hor-
izontal low-temperature platform; specific printing paths along
with printing parameters are designed and programmed to con-
trol the movement of the printing nozzle to form the desired 3D
structure. As the deposited material accumulates, the structure
is built layer by layer. Based on the programmability of mate-
rials and printing paths, 3D printing changes the manufacturing
process and provides an alternative approach for designers who
prefer rapid structure modeling with customized materials and
detailed distribution.
While the 3D printing industry has been introduced for both
micron-length fibers and continuous fiber composites [6], print-
ing self-assembled structures has not yet been fully adopted.
The concept of self-assembly or the term 4D printing [7], which

∗Corresponding authors
E-mail address: {liningy, jessicaz}@andrew.cmu.edu
∗∗Contributed equally

uses shape memory materials (SMM) [1] and post-production
actuation to combine 3D printing and time, is highlighted for
its capability to fabricate adaptive structures [7, 8, 9] and could
be traced back to the self-folding concept [10, 11]. 4D print-
ing produces artifacts with smart materials which enable shape-
changing [12] in specific environment [10, 13, 14]. Traditional
3D printing is capable of creating various geometry by tweak-
ing the geometry and printing parameters, while 4D printing
allows users to control the final shape of an adaptive structure
with programmable configuration.
Despite the possibility of designing programmable structures
with 4D printing techniques, there exist several limitations.
From the designer’s perspective, there are two main limitations
related to the 4D printing workflow: materials not being stiff
enough and numerical simulations not being accurate enough.
For materials usually used in 4D printing, thermoplastics is one
of the most popular shape memory polymers (SMP), which is
renowned for its high flexibility and material property transi-
tion under high temperature. However, many printable thermo-
plastics, including polylactic acid (PLA), have poor mechan-
ical performance, which is not favorable in structural design.
For numerical simulations, finite element analysis (FEA) is a
commonly used technique to predict the deformation of the de-
signed structure [15]. However, without high simulation preci-
sion, FEA results cannot truly help designers predict the struc-
ture’s final configuration, and designers must keep testing until
the final desired shape is achieved, which is extremely expen-

Preprint submitted to Computer-Aided Design
November 10, 2020

arXiv:1909.02083v2  [cs.CG]  6 Nov 2020


sive and time-consuming [16, 8]. To facilitate the 4D printing
design process, both material and simulation aspects need up-
grading: materials used in 4D printing need to be strengthened,
and prediction from simulation needs to be more accurate to
speed up the forward design process. In this paper, we provide
solutions to both aforementioned issues.
Carbon-fiber PLA (CFPLA) is known for its high stiffness-
to-weight ratio and is commonly used as a reinforcement ma-
terial. PLA is soft and easy-to-deform when heated above the
glass transition temperature (Tg), which enables PLA to be the
most widely used thermoplastics in 3D printing. To maintain
the merits of flexibility and easy-processing, meanwhile elevat-
ing its mechanical performance, we devise the use of CFPLA.
With CFPLA, the designed structure can be strengthened along
the direction of carbon fiber alignment; since the matrix mate-
rial of CFPLA is still PLA, it can be easily 3D-printed with
slightly higher extrusion temperature. In addition, based on
4D printing techniques, CFPLA can be easily combined with
PLA to form bi-layer fiber-reinforced composite (FRC), which
is relatively more difficult to adopt traditional fabrication ap-
proaches [6]. By programming the printing path, FRC can be
conveniently and effectively designed and fabricated layerwise,
and the accuracy of FRC design can also be improved.
Precise material characterization is important to ensure the
accuracy of FEA. A lot of research has been conducted to char-
acterize polymeric material properties [17, 18, 19], including
3D printing filament materials like PLA and CFPLA. Soares et
al. [20] used an incompressible, isotropic neo-Hookean hyper-
elastic material to describe the mechanical response of stents.
The static and dynamic loading effect on degradation of PLA
stent fibers was studied to further define a hyperelastic incom-
pressible material [21]. Khan et al. [22] combined compress-
ible Ogden hyperelastic model and generalized the Maxwell
model to obtain the linear viscoelastic behaviors of biodegrad-
able polymers. A modified Eyring energy was utilized to define
viscoplastic behavior of PLA [23]. Eswaran et al. [24] intro-
duced anisotropicity into the material modeling. A shape mem-
ory model was used to define thermal expansion coefficients for
each printing layer [25].
In this paper, both PLA and CFPLA are tested based on re-
peated dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), and specific mod-
els are subsequently proposed to characterize their material
properties. Another cause of low FEA fidelity is the influence of
residual stress and body force on 4D-printed samples during the
triggering process. To improve the precision of simulation, we
devise a new sequential FEA, which takes the influence of resid-
ual stress and body force into consideration, and minimizes the
necessity of test-printing intermediate designs with an accurate
prediction of the final shape from simulation results. With a
high accuracy of the final configuration prediction, we propose
a forward design process - or workflow - to summarize the it-
erative process from the material characterization to the FEA,
and the design finalization and fabrication can be achieved by
going through this proposed workflow. The main contributions
of this paper can be summarized as follows:

1. A novel workflow is proposed for forward design, with ac-

curate material property characterization and precise FEA
simulation. This workflow supports robust and accurate
fabrication of the designed object through an iterative op-
timization process and accurate control of the final config-
uration.

2. The material properties of 3D printing polymers, includ-
ing both PLA and CFPLA, are characterized in a precise
way based on the DMA experiments. The characterization
results are effectively incorporated into FEA with accurate
mathematical models.

3. A sequential FEA is developed to achieve accurate simu-
lation results, considering both the residual stress releas-
ing and the body force creeping. We simulate these two
processes in a sequence to precisely derive the final defor-
mation of the fabricated product.

The layout of this paper is as follows. Section 2 overviews
the workflow. Section 3 briefly introduces the geometric scope,
structure design and fabricating parameter determination. Sec-
tion 4 mainly discusses the physics behind material properties
and precise material characterization of both PLA and CFPLA.
Section 5 introduces simulation modeling and sequential FEA.
Section 6 shows some simulations and design results derived
from the proposed workflow. Section 7 draws conclusions and
points out potential improvement and future directions.

Figure 1: The workflow of iterative 4D printing design. (A) shows the structure
of a block with PLA as an actuator and CFPLA as constraint. (B) shows the
process of material characterization based on DMA experiments. (C) refers to
the FEA modeling on a bending unit. (D-E) show the iterative design process
based on the simulation. This iterative process yields the finalized design, and
leads to fabrication.

2. Overview of the workflow

In this paper, a workflow is proposed to precisely simulate the
self-morphing behavior of composite thermoplastic materials
and structures. The proposed workflow consists of three major

2


processes: material characterization, FEA modeling and simu-
lation, and pattern design. As shown in Figure 1, the workflow
firstly characterizes the material property based on the DMA
tests, and then creates FEA models and establishes material and
boundary condition settings for Abaqus. In the end, the work-
flow simulates the final configuration to achieve the iterative
forward design and fabricate the final product.
Material characterization. The material properties of PLA
and CFPLA are characterized by using DMA experiments,
which are conducted on strip samples under the temperature
of 80°C, aiming to obtain the stress-strain curves and derive the
material’s hyperelasticity and viscoelasticity, respectively. The
Mullins effect is taken into consideration to address material
stress-softening [26].
FEA modeling and simulation. Based on the aforemen-
tioned material characterization results, the material definition
is determined in each FEA model. The residual stress values
of each actuator and constraint are obtained by matching the
triggering experimental results with their corresponding sim-
ulation results. Then, a sequential simulation is implemented
to include both the residual stress releasing and the body force
creeping. In this way, the simulation precision can be ensured
and maintained at a high level.
Pattern design.
With precise simulation results, designs
can be created and refined iteratively. The simulation results
from intermediate geometry can be obtained from the afore-
mentioned FEA sequences, providing information on the dif-
ference between the current design and desired final configu-
ration. An iterative process of forward design is then imple-
mented from the initial geometry to the finalized design.

3. Unit structure design and fabrication

The theorem behind the deformation of 4D printing struc-
tures and materials is the residual stress releasing in response to
external stimulation. 3D printed PLA materials release embed-
ded residual stress when treated with a temperature higher than
Tg; see Figure 2(A). The releasing of residual stress will result
in the shrinkage of PLA along the printing path direction.
In this paper, all the designed products consist of bending
units. As shown in Figure 2(B-C), each unit is a cuboid with
two different blocks - the top actuator block and the bottom con-
straint block, and they form the bi-layer unit [27, 28, 29]. Each
block has a different printing path direction: the top block has a
longitudinal printing path direction while the bottom block has
a lateral printing path direction. The bending unit is the most
fundamental structural unit in this work. When a bending unit
is placed into an 80°C environment, the block with longitudi-
nal printing paths will shrink more than the block with lateral
printing paths, creating a difference in shrinkage and resulting
in a bending behavior. The block with larger shrinkage is called
an actuator block, and the layer with less shrinkage is called a
constraint block.
Various structures and patterns are adopted in product design.
In this study, the grid structure is implemented for our design
workflow, and its pattern is formed by bending units. The distri-
bution of bending units with different actuators and constraints

determines the deformation and configuration of the grid struc-
ture. Figure 2(D) shows that each bending unit is assigned with
a different actuator block and a constraint block, connected with
pure constraint blocks as joints to form a grid. By controlling
the length of the actuator block on each bending unit, differ-
ent bending curvatures can be achieved and further combined
to form a specified 3D shape.

Figure 2:
Microscale view of PLA material and block structure with differ-
ent functional components. (A) The polymer chain inside the 3D printed PLA
structure. (B) Anisotropic blocks consisting of two layers with different print-
ing path directions: the actuator blocks (white) and the constraint blocks (grey).
(C) Bending unit with actuators (white) and constraints (grey). (D) The process
from programmed printing path to fabricated flat piece and triggered bending
unit.

3.1. Three printing factors

3D printing is the basic method we use for material process-
ing and structure fabrication. The brand of 3D printer is Modix
Big60. To effectively control the deformation of the printed
structure, filament materials and printing parameters are both
tested. The distribution of actuator blocks and constraint blocks
and the design of the structure should also be studied. In this pa-
per, three printing factors with dominating effects on morphing
characteristics are studied: printing path orientation, printing
layer thickness, and filament material property.
Printing path orientation determines the shrinking direc-
tion of the thermoplastic material. During the FDM process,
residual stress is embedded in PLA along the printing path as
the filament is being extruded from the nozzle. As a result, the
printed material shrinks along the specified printing path. Us-
ing this specific shrinking behavior of PLA material, different
bending units can be created for design, as shown in Figure 2.
Printing layer thickness also affects the shrinkage ratio.
Thinner layer thickness requires more printing layers during the
FDM process, which means more residual stress is embedded
into PLA structures. As a result, higher shrinkage ratio can
be achieved by thinner layer thickness. By combining blocks

3


with different layer thicknesses into one bending unit, differ-
ent shrinkage ratios are introduced to achieve various bending
performance.
Filament material property significantly changes for dif-
ferent shrinkage ratios. The PLA and CFPLA filaments do not
exhibit the same shrinkage ratio after the FDM process, be-
cause the CFPLA material is embedded with chopped up car-
bon fibers along the printing direction. The chopped-up fibers
greatly improve the stiffness along the printing direction and
significantly undermine the shrinking performance of the block.

3.2. Determining optimal printing parameters
To characterize material properties for different printing pa-
rameters through DMA experiments, we studied three types
of thermoplastic composites.
All experimental samples are
straight bending units with the dimension of 75 mm × 10 mm ×
4 mm. Each sample consists of an actuator block at the top and a
constraint block at the bottom. Actuator blocks are printed with
a straight printing path that is along the sample’s longitude di-
rection, and constraint blocks are printed with a lateral printing
path. After the printing process is completed, samples are fixed
at one end and placed horizontally in a water bath at 80°C -
which guarantees the homogeneous and stable heat transferring
- to trigger the self-morphing process. In the experiments, three
types of thermoplastic material designs were selected: PLA,
CFPLA, and PLA-CFPLA combined bi-layer composite.
Experiments are also conducted to study the effects of
the printing layer thickness on material bending behaviors.
All experimental samples are printed with 0.6 mm nozzle,
3, 000 mm/min printing speed, but different layer thicknesses.
0.1 mm, 0.2 mm, 0.3 mm, 0.4 mm, and 0.5 mm are chosen as the
printing layer thicknesses for three batches of sample blocks,
categorized by different material types.

Figure 3: Experiment results of three types of thermoplastic materials: PLA,
CFPLA and PLA-CFPLA composite bi-layer blocks, with varying layer thick-
nesses from 0.1 mm to 0.5 mm. Results show that PLA bending units have
the largest bending deformation while CFPLA bending units have the smallest
bending deformation.

Figure 3 presents the deformed shapes for experimental sam-
ples with varying layer thicknesses. We can observe that PLA
samples with 0.1 mm printing layer thickness have the best

bending performance among all PLA samples, while PLA sam-
ples with 0.5 mm printing layer thickness have inadequate
bending performance.
All CFPLA samples show minimal
bending angles, indicating that the shrinkage ratio along the
printing path direction of CFPLA is generally lower than that
of PLA. Since CFPLA has limited bending performance, we
choose the PLA-CFPLA composite bending units as the pri-
mary component in our design. This composite material is pur-
posely designed to take advantage of the strength of CFPLA
without sacrificing too much bending performance. Figure 4(A)
shows that composite samples have similar shrinkage ratio and
bending angle as PLA samples.
Figure 4(B) shows the stress-strain curve of PLA-CFPLA
combined bending unit for five different printing layer thick-
nesses.
Samples with printing layer thickness larger than
0.3 mm do not have a large enough bending angle; however,
choosing a printing layer thickness < 0.2 mm results in ex-
tended printing time and unreliable stress-strain data. In this
paper, we chose the Modix Big60 3D printer for its versatility
in printing sizes. However, the printer produces inconsistent re-
sults when dealing with layer thickness smaller than 0.2 mm.
The Modix Big60 3D printer, designed for large-size 3D print-
ing tasks, has a printing volume of 61 cm3 and implements a
unified bed leveling technique to actively adjust for small dents
across the aluminum printing bed during printing. The design
tolerance for printing bed dents is 0.2 mm, according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. As a result, the automatic z-height
adjustment during printing leads to quality inconsistency if the
printing layer thickness is smaller than 0.2 mm. Therefore, we
choose the PLA-CFPLA combined bending units with 0.25 mm
layer thickness for our workflow implementation.

3.3. Flexural test

Concerning the flexural test, three-point bending and four-
point bending are conducted on bending units. The dimension
of each unit sample for three-point bending test is 60 mm ×
4 mm × 1.6 mm, and the effective length of the supporting span
is 40 mm. The dimension of each unit sample for four-point
bending test is 100 mm×8 mm×8 mm, and the loading span and
the supporting span are 23.56 mm and 70.68 mm, respectively.
Testing samples of PLA, CFPLA, and PLA-CFPLA composite
are designed and tested with residual stress pre-released under
room temperature to observe the corresponding flexural mod-
ulus and strength. The experimental setup of the three-point
bending test is shown in Figure 6(C). Figure 4(C) shows the ex-
perimental result of the three-point bending in terms of flexural
stiffness for three types of samples, and the corresponding four-
point bending experimental result is listed in the supplementary
material (Figure S3). From both experimental results, we can
observe that although the CFPLA sample has the highest flex-
ural stiffness, it is so brittle that it may break within relatively
small effective deflection range; the PLA sample is capable of
withstanding large deflection, but it has the lowest flexural stiff-
ness among all three types of samples. By combining CFPLA
and PLA into the bi-layer structure, the PLA-CFPLA compos-
ite bending unit can not only exhibits high flexural stiffness, but

4


Figure 4: The DMA experiment results for identifying the bending unit structure and the printing parameters. (A) Bending angle per unit length vs printing layer
thickness for PLA, CFPLA and PLA-CFPLA composite. (B) Stress-strain curves of PLA-CFPLA composite for different printing layer thicknesses. Based on the
experiments, 0.25 mm is chosen as the printing layer thickness. (C) Stress-strain curves with three different bending unit structures in the flexural test.

also withstand large deformation at the same time. Its strength-
ened mechanical properties are capable of expanding the appli-
cation space of the designed structure under different loading
cases.

4. Material characterization

Material characterization is important for precise simulation.
Both PLA and CFPLA are characterized. The physics of PLA
and CFPLA include their microstructure, anisotropic behavior
and nonlinear and time-dependent material behavior. Based on
the material physics, specific models are identified to facilitate
FEA simulations.

4.1. Material physics

As a thermoplastic polymer, PLA is composed of numerous
polymer chains [30]. These chains are often entangled together,
forming a micro-scale network. During the printing process, as
the temperature arises above the PLA’s melting point, slippage
at the network’s entanglement links may occur, introducing vis-
coelastic properties to the printed material. In the case of 4D
printing, when we reheat the material over its glass transition
temperature, these viscoelastic properties will play a dominant
role in the material’s deformation behaviors. Therefore in addi-
tion to the commonly observed plastic behaviors, the viscoelas-
ticity of PLA must be considered in establishing an accurate
material model.
The polymer chain networks of PLA usually have random
orientations, and the material can be considered to be isotropic.
Yet, when the filament material is extruded from the nozzle
during the printing process, the polymer chains are stretched
along the printing direction, causing the material to become
anisotropic. CFPLA also undergoes the same process during
3D printing, and fibers within the printed blocks are aligned,
increasing the material’s stiffness along the printing direction.
Figure 2(A) illustrates the detailed distribution and anisotropic
material property of both PLA and CFPLA, and Figure 5 further
evidences the fiber-alignment and anisotropy of printed materi-
als with scanned electron microscopy (SEM) images.

Figure 5: The SEM images of CFPLA. (A-B) show zoom-out and zoom-in
pictures of the sample with the printing direction of 0°. (C-D) show zoom-out
and zoom-in pictures of the sample with the printing direction of 45°.

4.2. Material properties

Based on the material physics, PLA is expected to show both
elastic and viscous behaviors. We adopted a hyperelastic consi-
tituive model to describe the hyperelastic behaviors, and collect
data by performing the uniaxial tensile test on both PLA and
CFPLA with the RSA-G2 equipment. The PLA material is pur-
chased from Polymax; the CFPLA material is purchased from
Proto-Pasta, with the average length of carbon fibers less than
150 microns. The following are the detailed testing procedures
for each property of interest.
Thermal expansion and Poisson’s ratio. Since the material
and the structure are triggered in a high temperature, the mate-
rial’s thermal expansion rate (αt) and the Poisson’s ratio (µ) are
considered in our workflow. These two parameters can be ob-
tained by measuring the dimensional change of a 3D printed

5


cubic sample before and after the uniaxial compression test.
The cubic sample of size 5 mm × 5 mm × 5 mm is fabricated
and subjected to a compressing load perpendicular to the top
and bottom surfaces (Figure 6(A)). The obtained αt and µ are
shown as Table 1. Each result is with an error bound calculated
from its 95% confidence interval of measurement.

Figure 6: DMA experiments setup. (A) refers to the DMA compression test
with a cubic sample. (B) refers to the tensile test with a strip like sample. (C)
refers to the three-point bending test with a bi-layer block sample.

Table 1: αt and µ of PLA and CFPLA at 80°C

Material
αt (1/°C)
µ

PLA
(9.17 ± 1.54) × 10−4
0.419 ± 0.021
CFPLA
(9.97 ± 5.92) × 10−5
0.359 ± 0.015

Hyperelasticity. The hyperelasticity data of the materials
are obtained by performing uniaxial tensile tests on a strip sam-
ple of size 5 mm×15 mm×0.5 mm (Figure 6(B)). Each sample is
heated to release its residual stress under 80°C. Since PLA can
reach the rubbery state above Tg, stress-softening or the Mullins
effect are taken into consideration. To capture this effect, four
cycles of force loading and unloading process are applied to the
samples with a speed of 0.005 mm/s and a 23% tensile strain
limit. For CFPLA, due to its higher stiffness and smaller scale
of deformation, the viscoelastic and plastic behaviors are in-
significant during the triggering and deforming process. There-
fore, we only consider the hyperelasticity for CFPLA by con-
ducting the tensile test with a speed of 0.002 mm/s and a 3%
tensile strain limit, while the Mullins effect and plasticity are
not considered in the CFPLA material setup.
Plasticity. The plastic behavior of PLA is observed after
cycles of force loading period. This behavior is described by
identifying the anchor point, the intersection of the stress-strain
curves and x-axis.
Viscoelasticity. We use the viscoelastic constitutive model
to characterize the viscoelasticity of PLA. In the experimen-
tal setup (Figure 6(B)), the equipment pre-strains the samples
(0.0095) and applies oscillating loads (0.01 Hz to 100 Hz) to
record the storage E′ and the loss E′′ modulus in the frequency
domain to describe the frequency-dependent behaviors. Figure
7 shows the modulus-frequency plot and the damping curve ob-
tained for PLA actuator and constraint. The viscoelasticity ex-
periment of CFPLA samples is also conducted, and the exper-
imental result shows that the loss modulus to storage modulus

ratio - which is also written as tanδ - of CFPLA is always less
than 1, which indicates that the viscoelastic behavior of CFPLA
is not dominant. Detailed evidence based on the experimental
result is listed in the supplementary material (Table S3, Figures
S1 and S2).

5. FEA modeling and sequential simulations

To successfully simulate deformation of designed products,
FEA processes with different boundary conditions and initial
conditions need to be implemented in order.
In this paper,
we propose two kinds of sequential simulations: the sequen-
tial residual stress estimation and the sequential deformation
simulation.

5.1. Sequential residual stress estimation

Since the deformation of a bending unit results from its em-
bedded residual stress, identifying the initial residual stress is
extremely important. Numerically identifying residual stress
can be convenient and programmable by implementing the
shooting method [31], which is a numerical method to obtain
the initial residual stress and convert the boundary value prob-
lem to an initial value problem. Based on the shooting method,
the process of residual stress estimation can be summarized
in a sequence: (1) FEA modeling and material definition; (2)
DMA experiment verification; and (3) residual stress and mate-
rial property identification.

5.1.1. FEA modeling and material definition
FEA modeling includes meshing, boundary condition setting
and material definition. As discussed in Section 3, the block and
grid structure are the main structures studied in this paper, thus
the geometry of all designed products can be easily discretized
into hexahedral elements for FEA simulations in Abaqus. The
boundary condition settings are consistent with the triggering
experiment. Since the bending unit structure can be divided
into actuator and constraint components, they are assigned with
different material properties. The boundary condition settings
are shown in Figure 8, including the fixed region, the body force
and the division of actuator and constraint components. For the
material property settings, we consider hyperelasticity, plastic-
ity and viscoelasticity based on the raw data obtained from the
aforementioned DMA experiments.
In this paper, the material’s hyperelasticity definition is as-
sumed to be isotropic.
To remove noise in the raw stress-
strain data from experiments, a penalty spline based smoothing
method [32, 33] was implemented. The processed data for PLA
is shown in Figure 9. The four cycles of loading (printing) and
unloading (releasing) processes are shown, and the main load-
ing curve (the green dashed line) can be derived from the raw
data. The material’s hyperelasticity is merely determined by
the unloading curve, which is also relevant to the initial resid-
ual stress value. Different initial residual stresses may lead to
different hyperelasticity definitions.
By using the aforementioned anchor points data, the mate-
rial’s plasticity definition is also assumed to be isotropic. The

6


Figure 7: Experimental results of the modulus-frequency plot and the damping curve for PLA actuator (A-B) and constraint (C-D).

Figure 8: Model discretization and boundary condition settings of a simple grid
structure.

unrecoverable deformation of the corresponding material can
be obtained from the anchor points, and the Mises plasticity
with an associated flow rule was implemented to model the ma-
terial’s plastic deformation [34]. In Abaqus, the hyperelasticity
and plasticity material properties are further combined. When
only one set of data is available, the Marlow model is recom-
mended [35]. The Marlow strain energy potential [36] is chosen
to fit the main loading curve, and the unloading curve is de-
scribed by the Marlow model plus the Ogden-Roxburgh model
as the damage [37] and plasticity terms [38]. From Figure 9,
we can observe that different stress values on the main loading
curve correspond to different unloading curves, which also ver-
ifies that the material property during the stress-releasing pro-
cess is highly dependent on the initial residual stress value.
The viscoelasticity definition is obvious especially for PLA
and is characterized by the storage modulus, the loss modu-
lus, and the tanδ derived from the DMA experiments (see Sec-
tion 4). Based on the explanation in Section 4.2, the viscoelas-
ticity is not the dominant mechanical property for CFPLA ma-
terial, thus we decide not to include the viscoelastic behavior
into CFPLA’s material definition.

Discussion 5.1. The Marlow model assumes that the strain
energy potential is a function of the first strain invariant and is
independent of the second strain invariant. Eliminating the sec-
ond strain invariant from the strain energy potential has several
benefits, as discussed in [39]. In our case, by using this model,
we can reduce the number of experiments (the uniaxial tension
test) required to describe the material behavior accurately. We
can, therefore, avoid using complex experimental data from bi-

Figure 9: The loading-unloading tensile test results for PLA. The stress-strain
curves from four cycles of force loading and unloading clearly show the mate-
rial’s Mullins effect. The main loading curve can be obtained from the stress-
strain curves marked as the green dashed line, which refers to the printing or
residual stress embedding process. Different loading stresses (marked as A and
B) yield different unloading stress-strain curves, which refer to the triggering
or residual stress releasing process.

axial tension and planar tension for parameters calibration.

5.1.2. DMA experiment verification
After quantifying the material properties, a simple simula-
tion model of the strip sample in DMA experiments was cre-
ated and tested to check how the simulation results match the
DMA experimental results. The dimensions of the strip sam-
ple are shown in Figure 6(B), and the exact geometry is built
for simulation. Fixing boundary conditions are set at the same
position as in experiments, and the testing process can be sim-
ulated by applying a stretching load as shown in Figure 10(A).
The simulated stress-strain results can be subsequently derived
and compared with the experimental results as shown in Fig-
ure 11. We can observe that the simulation results match the
experiment results pretty well.

5.1.3. Residual stress and material property identification
To precisely estimate the initial residual stress and finalize
the material property definition, an iterative process is pro-
grammed to implement the shooting method.
To show dif-
ferent bending curvatures for different beams, the actuator ra-
tio, which is the ratio of the actuator block length to the to-
tal length of the bending unit, is controlled from 0 to 1. The

7


Figure 10: The tensile testing samples for DMA experiments (A) and the bend-
ing unit samples (B). The colored area shows the applied boundary conditions
during experiments.

Figure 11: Comparison between the simulation results and the tensile test data
under cyclic loading conditions.

bending units with different actuator ratios should have differ-
ent bending curvatures, which may help precisely identify the
initial residual stress value from the shooting method. The trig-
gering experiment was conducted on three batches of bending
units with different actuator ratios and the same dimension of
100 mm × 7.2 mm × 4 mm, and the triggering environment is
controlled at 80°C. The distance between two selected points
on two ends of the triggered block is measured to represent the
bending curvature and describe the bending extent.
Meanwhile, the corresponding simulation model of the bend-
ing unit is built based on the aforementioned material property
definition, and the boundary conditions are shown in Figure
10(B). The initial residual stress for a particular bending unit
is randomly set in Abaqus and the corresponding deformation
of the block is derived after the simulation. Based on the de-
formation results, the difference of the measured distances be-
tween simulation and experiment can be obtained, and the ini-
tial residual stress value is subsequently adjusted to reduce this
difference.
Since the material’s hyperelasticity is dependent
on the initial residual stress value, the changing of the mate-
rial property definition follows the changing of the initial resid-
ual stress. By iteratively conducting this adjustment, the initial
residual stress value is identified, and the corresponding hyper-

elasticity definition is also finalized.

5.2. Sequential deformation simulation
Aside from accurate residual stress and material property
identification, we propose a sequence of the deformation simu-
lations, which can help improve the simulation accuracy espe-
cially for the cases with both the body force and the initial stress
considered. Since the residual stress is identified as the initial
condition for precise simulation, and we assume that the tem-
perature during the triggering (deforming) process is a constant,
the sequential deformation simulation is not time-dependent
and temperature-dependent. Assume there is a model α to be
simulated, the sequence includes (1) obtaining the initial stress
value; (2) duplicating the model α to create a new model β, and
simulating the model α with both the initial stress and the body
force considered; (3) importing the deformation results from α
after (2) into β as the initial state; and (4) removing the initial
stress condition in β and simulating β with only the body force
boundary condition.
To verify the aforementioned FEA sequences, we trigger two
bending units with different material distributions and actua-
tor ratios - one is a PLA bending unit with the actuator ratio
of 1.0, and the other is a PLA-CFPLA bending unit with the
actuator ratio of 0.75. We use the FEA sequences to simulate
these two bending units with the same geometry and material
settings as experiments (the FEA model and results of the PLA
bending unit are shown in Figure 10(B)). The experimental and
simulation results are shown in Figure 12. For the PLA and
PLA-CFPLA bending units, the errors between experiment and
simulation are 0.61% and 1.26%, respectively.

Figure 12: Simulation and experimental results of a bending unit for PLA (A)
and PLA-CFPLA composite (B).

Discussion 5.2. The shooting method is used to convert the
boundary value problem to an initial value problem, which can
simplify the problem solving process. In this paper, we assume
that the residual stress is homogeneously distributed in the sam-
ple and is released linearly, and we use the distance between
each specified point pair to measure the deformation. However,
the actual deforming process of the 4D printed material is very
complicated. For example, the rate of residual stress releasing
is not a constant of time, and the distribution of the residual
stress in each sample is not homogeneous. As such, further
study is required to more precisely identify the stress and con-
trol the deformation of the material.

8


6. 4D printing of three creative designs

Three creative designs were completed using the proposed
workflow to explore potential applications. Designers can use
the workflow to create 2D grid structures in a CAD environ-
ment, and then simulate the grid deformation in the Abaqus
software to visualize the final shape. With our workflow, the
deformation of the grid structure can be altered toward the tar-
get shape by iteratively adjusting the initial 2D grid based on
the intermediate simulation results. Numerous design iterations
can be conducted without prototyping, and the accuracy of the
simulation - the experiment to simulation ratio in terms of de-
formation - is verified by implementing the point-pair method -
measuring the distance between any pair of two points in both
experiment and simulation. The final design can be achieved
with high efficiency at low cost, and the general accuracy of the
simulation, whose 95% confidence interval is (0.972, 0.985),
can greatly assist the forward design process.
The modular lamp cover is the first implementation exam-
ple. The purpose of creating modular designs is to test the ac-
curacy of our simulation tool and to allow for large scale im-
plementation. The lamp cover is divided into three pieces: a
2x4 grid as the top section, a 2x2 grid as the bottom left section
and another 2x2 grid as the bottom right section. Each sub-
section design is constructed based on a 2x2 or 2x4 grid, and
each grid consists of bending units and joints shown in Figures
2 and 8. By combining bending units with different actuator
blocks, the 2x2 or 2x4 grid structure can achieve specific edge
shapes that match each other. Once the 2D grid structures are
printed, they are placed in an 80-degree Celsius water bath to
trigger the deformation. This approach drastically reduces the
manufacturing time because all sub-sections can be printed flat
without any support structure. With the workflow, designers can
iterate designs for the best matches without printing and trigger-
ing each design, significantly reducing time and cost. Figure
13(A) shows the design iterations completed with our proposed
workflow. Figure 13(B-C) show that our simulation tool can
precisely simulate the actual deformation.

Figure 13: Modular lamp cover design iterations. Results show the lamp cover
pieces can fit the lamp quite well after eight iterations.

The FEA results for each lamp cover sub-section are shown

in Figure 14(A-B). Since both bottom sub-sections are perfectly
symmetric, only one FEA result is needed for analysis. For each
subsection, three different point pairs are chosen to quantify
the accuracy of the simulation results. The distance between
each point pair is measured in both simulation results and ex-
perimental results. Then the simulation error is determined by
calculating the difference between experimental and simulation
distances. Part of the distance results and the calculated errors
are listed in Table 2. More measurement results are provided in
the supplementary material (Table S4). Based on the aforemen-
tioned measurement results, the 95% confidence interval for the
accuracy is (0.968, 0.998).

Figure 14:
Final configurations from simulation (A-B) and experiment (C-
D), where a-a’, b-b’, c-c’ and d-d’ are four different point pairs. Simulation
accuracy is quantified by comparing the distance between each point pair in
simulation and the corresponding distance in experiment.

Table 2: Simulation-experiment error for the lamp cover

Point pairs
Experiment (mm)
Simulation (mm)
Error (%)

a-a’
76.54
72.42
5.38
b-b’
78.16
78.50
0.44
c-c’
64.95
66.01
1.63
d-d’
65.06
61.93
4.81

The bottle holder is the second implementation example of
our workflow. The purpose of designing a bottle holder is to
enable people with disabilities to hold bottles without handles.
The bottle holder is an evolved version of a 2x2 grid struc-
ture with an approximate dimension of 500 mm by 200 mm.
By changing the construction of the 2D grid, complex and in-
tersecting 3D structures like the bottle holder can be realized.
With the conventional 3D printing strategy shown in Figure 15,
the bottle holder structure will require extensive support struc-
tures and extended printing time. With the proposed workflow,
designers can iterate through different designs and achieve the
best fit for a specific bottle with significantly faster speed. Once
the design is finalized, FDM printed 2D grid structure is printed
and placed in an 80°C water bath. The residual stress embed-
ded in the material and the gravity will deform the grid into the
programmed bottle holder shape.

9


Figure 15: Bottle holder design iteration. Results show the bottle holder can fit
the bottle quite well after six iterations.

Figure 16:
Composite bottle holder. (A), (B) and (C) are different views of
the final triggered result. (D) is the simulation result of the final configuration,
where the labeled point pairs are used for the measurement and the accuracy
calculation.

The deformation result is shown in Figure 16(A-C). The error
between simulation and experiment is also calculated based on
distance measurements. Three point pairs on the bottle holder
are labeled in Figure 16(D). Table 3 shows part of the distance
results for each point pair and the corresponding error. More
measurement results are provided in the supplementary material
(Table S4). Based on the aforementioned measurement results,
the 95% confidence interval for the accuracy is (0.962, 0.986).

Table 3: Simulation-experiment error of the bottle holder

Point pairs
Experiment (mm)
Simulation (mm)
Error (%)

e-f
71.35
70.68
0.94
e-g
161.45
160.31
0.43
e-h
67.58
64.98
3.85

The shoe supporter is the third designed product. This ap-
plication involves adapting sneakers for high-performance con-
texts such as hiking or climbing. This design is an exploration
of how the composite material can interface with both the exist-
ing products and the human body. Employing the same strategy
as the bottle holder, this design consists of two pieces - the top
part and the bottom part. The design relies on connecting these
two pieces attached to the sneaker and the ankle using elastic
straps that anchor the bottom piece and strategically limit the
movement of the top piece. In its active state, this design is
meant to prevent injuries such as a rolled or sprained ankle, as
well as to provide additional protection on the foot and the an-
kle in harsh conditions.

Figure 17: The design iteration of the shoe supporter. The shape of the shoe
supporter design is finalized to fit the shape of the foot by going through this
iterative process.

FEA results of both the top piece and the bottom piece are
shown in Figure 17. Experimental results of the finalized sam-

10


ple are shown in Figure 18. The error is measured using the
same strategy as the lamp cover and the bottle holder. Four
point pairs are labeled in Figure 18(B, E). Part of the measure-
ment results and the calculated error are listed in Table 4. More
measurement results are provided in the supplementary material
(Table S4). Based on the aforementioned measurement results,
the 95% confidence interval of the accuracy is (0.969, 0.988).

Figure 18: The simulation and experimental results of the shoe supporter with
the top piece (A-C) and the bottom piece (D-F). (A, D) show the initial condi-
tion from both the top view and the bottom view. (B, E) show the simulation
result, where the labeled point pairs are used for the measurement and the ac-
curacy calculation. (C, F) show the experimental results.

Table 4: Simulation-experiment error of the shoe support

Point pairs
Experiment (mm)
Simulation (mm)
Error (%)

i-i’
89.74
92.25
2.80
j-j’
89.83
92.25
2.69
k-k’
160.57
157.02
2.21
l-l’
161.86
157.02
2.99

7. Conclusion and future work

In this paper, we established a computational workflow that
uses FEA to produce physically accurate results of the resid-
ual stress-induced morphing behaviors of mesh-like thermo-
plastic composite structures. To accurately conduct the simu-

lation, experiments have been conducted to quantify the hyper-
elasticity and viscoelasticity of the thermoplastic component
of FRC. These tests include uniaxial tensile and compression
tests for the elastic component, DMA for the viscous compo-
nent and uniaxial unloading-reloading with different strain lev-
els for plastic deformation and the Mullins effect. This paper
has also introduced the simulation sequence based on the trig-
gering experiment and estimated the residual stress. The paper
has validated the FEA modeling with an accurate matching be-
tween simulation and experiment for three creative designs.
One of the main limitations of the presented workflow is the
high computational cost of FEA simulations, which makes it
impossible for real-time, interactive design. Here we consider
Graph Neural Network (GNN) as a potential model to speed up
the simulation. It is worth noticing that the underlying topology
of the grid structure can be abstracted to an undirected weight
graph that is well compatible with GNN [40]. We are excited
to look for appropriate abstraction and simplification by the aid
of machine learning, and to explore a simulation method with
both mechanical accuracy and computational efficiency.

Acknowledgment

This project was mainly supported by the Carnegie Mellon
University Manufacturing Futures Initiative (MFI) made pos-
sible by the Richard King Mellon Foundation, and a Honda
grant. We are also especially thankful to Mr. William Pingi-
tore, who supervised us conducting the four-point bending ex-
periment, and Dr. Guanyun Wang, who helped us on multiple
design applications, and Prof. Christopher Bettinger in the De-
partments of Materials Science and Engineering and Biomedi-
cal Engineering, who provided the DMA facility. The authors
acknowledge the use of the Materials Characterization Facility
at Carnegie Mellon University supported by the grant MCF-
677785.

References

References

[1] T. Ngo, A. Kashani, G. Imbalzano, K. Nguyen, D. Hui, Additive manu-
facturing (3D printing): A review of materials, methods, applications and
challenges, Composites Part B: Engineering 143 (2018) 172–196.

[2] W. Gao, Y. Zhang, D. Ramanujan, K. Ramani, Y. Chen, C. B. Williams,
C. C. L. Wang, Y. C. Shin, S. Zhang, P. D. Zavattieri, The status, chal-
lenges, and future of additive manufacturing in engineering, Computer-
Aided Design 69 (2015) 65–89.

[3] B. Hu, X. Duan, Z. Xing, Z. Xu, C. Du, H. Zhou, R. Chen, B. Shan,
Improved design of fused deposition modeling equipment for 3D print-
ing of high-performance peek parts, Mechanics of Materials 137 (2019)
103139.

[4] R. Singh, G. Singh, J. Singh, R. Kumar, Investigations for tensile, com-
pressive and morphological properties of 3D printed functional prototypes
of PLA-PEKK-HAp-CS, Journal of Thermoplastic Composite Materials
(2019). DOI:10.1177/0892705719870595.

[5] M. G. Roskies, D. Fang, M.-N. Abdallah, A. M. Charbonneau, N. Cohen,
J. O. Jordan, M. P. Hier, A. Mlynarek, F. Tamimi, S. D. Tran, Three-
dimensionally printed polyetherketoneketone scaffolds with mesenchy-
mal stem cells for the reconstruction of critical-sized mandibular defects,
The Laryngoscope 127 (2017) E392–E398.

11


[6] X. Tian, T. Liu, C. Yang, Q. Wang, D. Li, Interface and performance of 3D
printed continuous carbon fiber reinforced pla composites, Composites
Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing 88 (2016) 198–205.

[7] S. Tibbits, 4D printing: multi-material shape change, Architectural De-
sign 84 (2014) 116–121.

[8] Q. Ge, H. J. Qi, M. L. Dunn, Active materials by four-dimension printing,
Applied Physics Letters 103 (2013) 131901.

[9] T. H. Kwok, C. C. L. Wang, D. Deng, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen,
Four-
dimensional printing for freeform surfaces:
design optimization of
origami and kirigami structures,
Journal of Mechanical Design 137
(2015) 111413.

[10] D. Deng, Y. Chen, Origami-based self-folding structure design and fab-
rication using projection based stereolithography, Journal of Mechanical
Design 137 (2015) 021701.

[11] B. An, S. Miyashita, M. T. Tolley, D. M. Aukes, L. Meeker, E. D. De-
maine, M. L. Demaine, R. J. Wood, D. Rus, An end-to-end approach to
making self-folded 3D surface shapes by uniform heating, in: IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2014, pp. 1466–1473.

[12] Y. S. Leung, T. H. Kwok, X. Li, Y. Yang, C. C. L. Wang, Y. Chen, Chal-
lenges and status on design and computation for emerging additive man-
ufacturing technologies, Journal of Computing and Information Science
in Engineering 19 (2019) 021013.

[13] D. Davis, B. Chen, M. D. Dickey, J. Genzer, Self-folding of thick polymer
sheets using gradients of heat, Journal of Mechanisms and Robotics 8
(2016) 031014.

[14] D. Deng, Y. Yang, Y. Chen, X. Lan, J. Tice, Accurately controlled se-
quential self-folding structures by polystyrene film, Smart Materials and
Structures 26 (2017) 085040.

[15] T. H. Kwok, Y. Chen, GDFE: Geometry-driven finite element for four-
dimensional printing, Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering
139 (2017) 111006.

[16] S. E. Bakarich, R. Gorkin, M. H. Panhuis, G. M. Spinks, 4D printing
with mechanically robust, thermally actuating hydrogels, Macromolecu-
lar Rapid Communications 36 (2015) 1211–1217.

[17] D. W. Grijpma, A. J. Pennings, (Co) polymers of L-lactide, 2. mechanical
properties, Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 195 (1994) 1649–
1663.

[18] T. Maharana, B. Mohanty, Y. S. Negi, Melt–solid polycondensation of
lactic acid and its biodegradability,
Progress in Polymer Science 34
(2009) 99–124.

[19] R. R. Langer, Drug delivery and targeting, Nature 392 (1998) 5–10.
[20] J. S. Soares, J. E. Moore, K. R. Rajagopal,
Constitutive framework
for biodegradable polymers with applications to biodegradable stents,
ASAIO Journal 54 (2008) 295–301.

[21] D. Hayman, C. Bergerson, S. Miller, M. Moreno, J. E. Moore, The ef-
fect of static and dynamic loading on degradation of PLLA stent fibers,
Journal of Biomechanical Engineering 136 (2014) 081006.

[22] K. A. Khan, T. El-Sayed, A phenomenological constitutive model for the
nonlinear viscoelastic responses of biodegradable polymers, Acta Me-
chanica 224 (2013) 287–305.

[23] S. H. M. S¨ontjens, T. A. P. Engels, T. H. Smit, L. E. Govaert, Time-
dependent failure of amorphous poly-D, L-lactide: Influence of molecular
weight, Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials 13
(2012) 69–77.

[24] S. K. Eswaran, J. A. Kelley, J. S. Bergstrom, V. L. Giddings, Material
modeling of polylactide, in: SIMULIA Customer Conference, Barcelona,
Spain, May, 2011, pp. 17–19.

[25] M. Bodaghi, R. Noroozi, A. Zolfagharian, M. Fotouhi, S. Norouzi, 4D
printing self-morphing structures, Materials 12 (2019) 1353.

[26] J. Diani, B. Fayolle, P. Gilormini, A review on the mullins effect, Euro-
pean Polymer Journal 45 (2009) 601–612.

[27] L. Ionov, Soft microorigami: Self-folding polymer films, Soft Matter 7
(2011) 6786–6791.

[28] T. S. Shim, S. H. Kim, C. J. Heo, H. C. Jeon, S. M. Yang, Controlled
origami folding of hydrogel bilayers with sustained reversibility for ro-
bust microcarriers, Angewandte Chemie International Edition 51 (2012)
1420–1423.

[29] G. Stoychev, S. Turcaud, J. Dunlop, L. Ionov, Hierarchical multi-step
folding of polymer bilayers, Advanced Functional Materials 23 (2013)
2295–2300.

[30] D. R. H. Jones, M. F. Ashby, Engineering materials 2: An introduction to

microstructures, processing and design, Elsevier, 2005.

[31] M. R. Osborne, On shooting methods for boundary value problems, Jour-
nal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications 27 (1969) 417–433.

[32] P. H. C. Eilers, B. D. Marx, Flexible smoothing with B-splines and penal-
ties, Statistical Science 11 (1996) 89–102.

[33] Y. Yu, Y. J. Zhang, K. Takizawa, T. E. Tezduyar, T. Sasaki, Anatom-
ically realistic lumen motion representation in patient-specific space–
time isogeometric flow analysis of coronary arteries with time-dependent
medical-image data, Computational Mechanics (2019). DOI:10.1007/
s00466-019-01774-4.

[34] J. Lubliner, Plasticity theory, Courier Corporation, 2008.
[35] D. Syst´emes, SIMULIA user assistance, Dassault Syst`emes (2019).
[36] R. S. Marlow, A general first-invariant hyperelastic constitutive model,
Constitutive Models for Rubber (2003) 157–160.

[37] R. W. Ogden, D. G. Roxburgh, A pseudo–elastic model for the Mullins
effect in filled rubber, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 455 (1999) 2861–
2877.

[38] S. M. Govindarajan, J. A. Hurtado, W. V. Mars, Simulation of Mullins
effect and permanent set in filled elastomers using multiplicative decom-
position, in: Constitutive Models for Rubber - Proceedings, volume 5,
Balkema, 2008, p. 249.

[39] O. H. Yeoh, Some forms of the strain energy function for rubber, Rubber
Chemistry and technology 66 (1993) 754–771.

[40] J. Zhou, G. Cui, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu, M. Sun, Graph neural net-
works: A review of methods and applications, arXiv:1812.08434 (2018).

12


Supplementary material

S1. Viscoelasticity & hyperelasticity data for ABAQUS

This section includes the hyperelastic and viscoelastic data
used in ABAQUS models. The main loading stress-strain data
is provided in Table S1. As shown in Figure 9, this curve is
used to obtain several unloading stress-strain curves based on
different residual stress values. Several unloading stress-strain
data of hyperelasticity with corresponding residual stress values
are provided in Table S2, which can be used as hyperelasticity
definition data for ABAQUS. For more information about the
hyperelasticity definition based on the unloading stress-strain
curve, please refer to Section 5 in the main paper.

Table S1: Loading stress-strain data

Engineering Strain
Engineering Stress (MPa)

0
0
0.000232
0.00060322
0.000464
0.00120614
0.000812
0.00210997
0.001334
0.00346446
0.002117
0.00549213
0.0032915
0.00851022
0.00505325
0.0122125
0.00769588
0.0173997
0.0116598
0.0247775
0.0176057
0.0349489
0.0265246
0.0487535
0.0381246
0.0647783
0.0497246
0.0793461
0.0613246
0.0925438
0.0729246
0.104502
0.0845246
0.115441
0.0961246
0.125616
0.107725
0.134868
0.119325
0.143482
0.130925
0.151579
0.142525
0.158984
0.154125
0.166053
0.165725
0.172959
0.177325
0.179292
0.188925
0.185297
0.200525
0.190677
0.212125
0.195992
0.223725
0.200807
0.232
0.204067

The viscoelasticity definition data for ABAQUS is provided
in Table S3.
These data are directly from the DMA exper-
iments.
Each row defines the real and imaginary parts of
Young’s modulus (storage and loss modulus) at corresponding
frequency. The frequency describes cycles of applied loading
per time. The uniaxial strain shows the preloaded shape where
a cyclic loading is applied to.

S2. CFPLA - viscoelasticity evidence

To evidence the decision of not considering the viscoelastic-
ity of the CFPLA, correlated data and diagrams are provided
in this section. CFPLA’s storage modulus and loss modulus un-
der different loading frequencies are obtained through the DMA
experiment, and the damping ratios (loss modulus to storage
modulus, which can also be abbreviated as tan(delta)) are also
calculated based on the testing results.
Table S3 shows the DMA experimental results and the calcu-
lated tan(delta) values, and Figures S1 and S2 show the modu-
lus curves and the damping ratio curve, respectively. It can be
clearly observed that there is no intersection between the curve
of storage modulus and the curve of loss modulus, and the value
of tan(delta) is less than 1.0 through the whole range of testing
frequencies. This indicates the dominance of CFPLA’s elastic
property and elastic behavior. As such, we reasonably abandon
the CFPLA’s viscoelasticity definition in our simulation model
and regard the CFPLA as one type of hyperelastic material.

Figure S1: Storage modulus and Loss modulus of CFPLA. The curve of the
storage modulus lies above the curve of the loss modulus through the whole
frequency range.

Figure S2: Damping ratio of CFPLA. Together with Figure S1, it can offer
insight into the material physics of CFPLA that elastic properties and elastic
behaviors take the dominance over viscous properties and viscous behaviors.

1

arXiv:1909.02083v2  [cs.CG]  6 Nov 2020


Table S2: Unloading stress-strain data with different initial residual stresses

Initial residual stress
0.203 MPa

Initial residual stress
0.170 MPa

Initial residual stress
0.132 MPa

Initial residual stress
0.079 MPa

Engineering
Strain

Engineering
Stress (MPa)

Engineering
Strain

Engineering
Stress (MPa)

Engineering
Strain

Engineering
Stress (MPa)

Engineering
Strain

Engineering
Stress (MPa)

0.231577
0.203041
0.162681
0.170461
0.104322
0.132095
0.049452
0.079267
0.231181
0.202518
0.162414
0.170022
0.104158
0.131755
0.049392
0.079063
0.230648
0.201734
0.162119
0.169363
0.103963
0.131244
0.049271
0.078757
0.22985
0.200557
0.161635
0.168375
0.103624
0.130479
0.049082
0.078297
0.228679
0.198792
0.160825
0.166893
0.103107
0.12933
0.048861
0.077608
0.226846
0.196144
0.159674
0.16467
0.102343
0.127608
0.04846
0.076574
0.224179
0.192172
0.157945
0.161336
0.101161
0.125024
0.047888
0.075024
0.22009
0.186215
0.155266
0.156335
0.099355
0.121148
0.047004
0.072698
0.213945
0.177279
0.151203
0.148833
0.096469
0.115335
0.04567
0.069209
0.207032
0.167076
0.146264
0.140267
0.093033
0.108697
0.044045
0.065226
0.200133
0.156873
0.141333
0.1317
0.089435
0.102059
0.042368
0.061242
0.193013
0.146669
0.136189
0.123134
0.085708
0.09542
0.040592
0.05726
0.185701
0.136466
0.130879
0.114568
0.081911
0.088783
0.038742
0.053276
0.178143
0.126263
0.125469
0.106002
0.07793
0.082144
0.036825
0.049293
0.170048
0.116059
0.119661
0.097436
0.073899
0.075506
0.034817
0.045309
0.161563
0.105856
0.113494
0.08887
0.069693
0.068868
0.032716
0.041326
0.152897
0.095653
0.106497
0.080304
0.065287
0.06223
0.0305
0.037343
0.14397
0.085449
0.099488
0.071738
0.06077
0.055592
0.028206
0.033359
0.134307
0.075245
0.091882
0.063172
0.056154
0.048954
0.025726
0.029376
0.123376
0.065043
0.084797
0.054606
0.050867
0.042316
0.023132
0.025393
0.112395
0.054839
0.076873
0.04604
0.045547
0.035677
0.020671
0.021409
0.101224
0.044636
0.068423
0.037473
0.039771
0.02904
0.017677
0.017426
0.089966
0.034432
0.060173
0.028907
0.033847
0.022401
0.01498
0.013442
0.078535
0.024229
0.051336
0.020341
0.0279
0.015763
0.011912
0.009459
0.067843
0.014025
0.043237
0.011775
0.022177
0.009125
0.008823
0.005476
0.058737
0.003823
0.035832
0.003209
0.01703
0.002487
0.006036
0.001492
0.055328
0.0
0.03359
0.0
0.015219
0.0
0.004998
0.0

S3. Four-point bending experiment

In Section 3.3 of the paper, we present the process and re-
sults of the three-point flexural test. However, due to the limited
maximum load of the DMA equipment, the material’s strength
and fracture performance under large deflections cannot be ac-
curately characterized by our three-point bending setup. More-
over, since the three-point flexural test may result in a sharp
curvature at the loading point, the maximum stress point will
locate at the mid-point of the specimen, which is not reliable in
evaluating material strength and fracture, especially for brittle
composites like CFPLA. To resolve these problems and provide
more solid evidence for the material’s flexural performances,
we additionally conduct the four-point flexural test on the same
three types of structures (i.e., PLA, CFPLA, PLA-CFPLA bi-
layer composite). The results of the four-point bending test are
depicted in Figure S3.
The brand of the four-point bending equipment is MTS Corp.
The dimension of each specimen for four-point bending test is
100 mm × 8 mm × 8 mm, and the loading span and the support-
ing span are 23.56 mm and 70.68 mm, respectively. The test is
conducted under room temperature of 20 °C.
From the slope comparison in Figure S3, we can clearly

Figure S3: The engineering stress-strain curve derived from the four-point flex-
ural test. The result indicates that CFPLA has the highest stiffness and PLA has
the lowest stiffness, which is consistent with the conclusion drawn from our
three-point flexural test. The four-point flexural test can also show the infor-
mation of the flexural strength, the effective deflection range, and the fracture
performance.

observe that the order of the stiffness of three types of struc-
tures should be (from large to small): CFPLA > PLA-CFPLA

2


Table S3: The modulus-frequency data at pre-strains 0.0095 from 0.01 Hz to 100 Hz for PLA and CFPLA.

PLA
CFPLA

Loss
Modulus
(MPa)

Storage
Modulus
(MPa)

tanδ
Frequency
(Hz)

Uniaxial
Strain

Loss
Modulus
(MPa)

Storage
Modulus
(MPa)

tanδ
Frequency
(Hz)

Uniaxial
Strain

0.620318
2.49694
0.248431
0.01
0.0095
10.2519
46.9742
0.218246
0.01
0.0095
0.673856
3.23405
0.208363
0.031623
0.0095
18.4361
117.366
0.157082
0.039811
0.0095
0.787532
3.79361
0.207594
0.1
0.0095
23.9765
159.709
0.150126
0.1
0.0095
0.914541
4.22998
0.216205
0.158489
0.0095
29.3856
186.844
0.157273
0.199526
0.0095
0.992119
4.44871
0.223013
0.251189
0.0095
31.3125
194.104
0.161319
0.251189
0.0095
1.19299
4.54469
0.262502
0.398107
0.0095
37.1118
206.143
0.180029
0.398107
0.0095
1.2871
5.12296
0.251241
0.630957
0.0095
39.9765
219.115
0.182445
0.630957
0.0095
1.51195
5.44861
0.277493
1.0
0.0095
47.3401
231.911
0.204131
1.0
0.0095
1.6472
5.64237
0.291934
1.25893
0.0095
51.9323
239.84
0.216529
1.25893
0.0095
1.80734
5.85958
0.308442
1.58489
0.0095
61.6246
256.361
0.240382
1.99526
0.0095
1.99242
6.08222
0.327581
1.99526
0.0095
67.6072
265.431
0.254707
2.51189
0.0095
2.20423
6.30915
0.34937
2.51189
0.0095
74.3216
275.296
0.26997
3.16228
0.0095
2.40932
6.58269
0.366008
3.16228
0.0095
90.1077
298.653
0.301714
5.01187
0.0095
2.75754
6.85159
0.402467
3.98107
0.0095
99.9106
312.204
0.320018
6.30957
0.0095
3.05346
7.16496
0.426166
5.01187
0.0095
110.755
328.133
0.337532
7.94328
0.0095
3.47829
7.45562
0.466533
6.30957
0.0095
122.348
348.268
0.351304
10.0
0.0095
3.94031
7.96939
0.494431
7.94328
0.0095
145.115
388.692
0.373342
14.4544
0.0095
4.45309
8.31036
0.535848
10.0
0.0095
164.059
423.77
0.387141
19.0546
0.0095
4.85071
8.79196
0.551721
12.5893
0.0095
178.334
450.418
0.395929
22.9087
0.0095
5.7382
9.30525
0.616663
15.8489
0.0095
192.897
479.298
0.402458
27.5423
0.0095
6.69739
9.7508
0.686855
19.9526
0.0095
214.785
528.393
0.406487
36.3078
0.0095
7.57122
10.4126
0.727121
25.1189
0.0095
234.739
587.395
0.399628
47.863
0.0095
8.71075
11.1136
0.783792
31.6228
0.0095
240.298
609.785
0.394071
52.4807
0.0095
10.1849
11.9006
0.855831
39.8107
0.0095
246.22
654.085
0.376435
63.0957
0.0095
11.8424
12.7682
0.927492
50.1187
0.0095
247.398
678.274
0.364747
69.1831
0.0095
13.6883
13.4669
1.01644
63.0957
0.0095
241.281
735.224
0.328173
83.1764
0.0095
16.5182
15.0428
1.09808
79.4328
0.0095
223.761
759.381
0.294663
91.2011
0.0095
20.2038
16.7091
1.20915
100.0
0.0095
222.699
768.417
0.289815
100.0
0.0095

> PLA, which is consistent with the result of the three-point
bending experiment. In terms of the flexural strength and the ef-
fective deflection range, CFPLA cannot withstand large deflec-
tion and has the fracture strength of 63.801 MPa, while struc-
tures with PLA have larger flexural strength than CFPLA and
can withstand deflection larger than 6 mm (corresponds to the
flexural strain of 0.045).
These two types of flexural experiments can together suggest
that the PLA-CFPLA bi-layer composite combines the high
stiffness and light-weight of CFPLA and the high flexibility and
high strength of PLA. The combination of advantages of these
two materials makes PLA-CFPLA a better choice for our struc-
ture and sample design.

S4. Additional point-pair measurement result

We randomly picked several more point pairs on the designed
applications and measured the distance difference between ex-
periment and simulation (Table S4). Figure S4 shows the 95%
confidence interval from sample data for each designed appli-
cation. The abstract indicates the 95% confidence interval for

the accuracy characterization based on all sample data for the
designed applications.

Figure S4: The 95% confidence interval of point-pair measurement results.

3


Table S4: Additional simulation-experiment error data for the designed applications

Lamp Cover
Bottle Holder
Shoe Supporter

Experiment
(mm)

Simulation
(mm)
Error (%)
Experiment
(mm)

Simulation
(mm)
Error (%)
Experiment
(mm)

Simulation
(mm)
Error (%)

103
102.8
0.19
71
68.4
3.66
113
110.78
1.96
102
101.49
0.50
161
157.27
2.32
115
110.78
3.67
82
81.34
0.80
68
65
4.41
154
155.32
0.86
165
166.2
0.73
160
155.34
2.91
157
157.41
0.26
105.5
104.54
0.91
159
155.34
2.30
-
-
-

4


