This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

Advances in Microwave Near-Field Imaging: 

Prototypes, Systems, and Applications  

Wenyi Shao and Todd McCollough 

 

 
Microwave imaging is a science which evolves from detecting techniques to evaluate hidden or 

embedded objects in a structure or media using electromagnetic (EM) waves in the microwave range (i.e., 

from 300 MHz to 300 GHz). Microwave imaging is often associated with radar detection such as target 

detection and tracking, weather pattern recognition, and underground surveillance which are far-field 

applications. In recent years, due to microwave’s characteristic that allows penetration into optically 

opaque media, short-range applications including medical imaging, nondestructive testing and quality 

evaluation, through-the-wall imaging, and security screening have been utilized. Microwave near-field 

imaging occurs when detecting the profile of an object within the short-range: when the distance apart 

from the sensor to the object is from less than one wavelength to several wavelengths -- This is coarse 

definition because the size of the antenna and the object is often comparable to the range between them. 

A near-field microwave imaging system attempts to reveal the presence of an object and/or an 

electrical property distribution by measuring the scattered field from many positions surrounding the 

object. Typically many sensors are placed near the object and either a quantitative or a qualitative 

algorithm is applied to the collected data. Over the past few decades, both the hardware and software 

components of a near-field microwave imaging system technology have attracted interest throughout the 

world. Due to limitations of hardware technology (unavailability of data acquisition apparatus), 

experimental microwave imaging is very challenging for the pioneers. Examples can be found are the 

canine kidney imaging experiment carried by Jacobi and Larsen in the 1970s [1]-[3], and active 

microwave imaging for horse kidney by Jofre and Bolomey [4]. In 1990s, researchers started being able 

to use microwave signal higher than 1 GHz in real imaging systems. One example is by Bolomey and 

Pichot, who developed a practical system [5] and designed a planar microwave camera, both operating at 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

2.45 GHz [6]. However, Probably due to the hardware cost, most of the studies (operating at a few GHz) 

were still focused on software only. The feasibility of using microwave approaches to image different 

types of objects have been tested and verified by simulations in a variety of applications. Further, work 

has been conducted on improving both quantitative and qualitative algorithms to improve simulated 

reconstruction results. Nowadays, benefitting from the hardware progress and reduction of their cost, 

researchers are eager to pursue real experimental validations instead of simulations, and, more unique 

prototypes and commercial systems have been built for various applications. These prototypes and 

systems are a result of years of dedicated work and it is important to review the advancements in 

developed prototype systems. The article will provide an overview of the many of the systems designed 

from different research groups throughout the world, for applications of near-field microwave imaging. 

The article further outlines challenges faced in current microwave near-field imaging, developmental 

tendencies of engineers and scientists, and the future outlook.  

Microwave Medical Imaging  

 
Microwave imaging for medical applications has attracted significant interest within the last 

twenty years. The physics behind microwave medical imaging is that the dielectric properties of abnormal 

tissue (e.g., malignant tissue) are significantly different than that of normal tissue at microwave 

frequencies. This difference in dielectric values results in a noticeable contrast in the reconstructed 

microwave image. Current studies typically focus from 500 MHz to 10 GHz to balance the tradeoff 

between penetration depth and image resolution.  

According to various acquisition setups, the measurement system can be in a passive or active 

mode. The passive mode systems exploit the principles of radiometry [1]–[10], which produce an image 

of natural microwave radiation from the human tissue. In active mode systems, microwave radiation is 

radiated towards tissue and the scattered EM fields are detected and processed. As early as 2000, at 

Dartmouth College, Meaney’s group [11] reported the first clinical prototype for active near-field 

microwave imaging of the breast. They implemented 16 monopoles in a ring to transmit and receive 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

microwave signals in the 300~1000 MHz range. Tomographic images were created for seven different 

heights as the ring was moved from the chest wall toward the nipple. This system set the stage for later 

development in active mode microwave medical imaging. Some prior review papers and books [7]-[16] 

provide good perspective to microwave imaging technology developed by Meaney and thereafter 

researchers. Since the purpose of this article is to review hardware microwave imaging systems, our 

discussion in this section will briefly address some old systems that have been already included in prior 

review in order to reflect historic information. The focus will be on recent active-mode hardware systems 

for the early-stage breast cancer detection and brain stroke detection, because which are two prominent 

medical applications that have been investigated.  

Microwave Breast Imaging 

 
With cost reduction in RF manufacturing, many microwave breast imaging systems operate at a 

few Gigahertz to obtain high resolution, where the dielectric property provides a high contrast between 

malignant and healthy breast tissues (dielectric contrast between malignant and healthy fibroglandular 

tissue is not high [17]). In 2007, Meaney’s group reported an optimized imaging system (as shown in 

Figure 1a) [23]. In this system, the patient is examined in a prone position. The breast is suspended in a 

tank of coupling liquid composed of a glycerin and water mixture providing a better impedance match 

between the skin and a water only coupling liquid used in their earlier system [11]. Sixteen monopole 

antennas were used to transmit and receive signals at seven frequencies from 500 to 1700 MHz in 200 

MHz increments. A multi-static mode system is used, with one antenna in the array serving as a 

transmitter, while the others are receivers. Data were acquired at seven vertical positions from the chest 

wall in 0.5 or 1.0 cm increments depending on breast size. Breast phantoms with different heterogeneities 

were placed in the system and 2-D images were reconstructed with a microwave tomography approach 

where dielectric values were found. In 2011, they reported their newer result: the system was applied to 

detect a target inclusion immersed in a plastic breast phantom filled with glycerin and water. The plastic 

breast-shape phantom, as shown in Fig. 1b and Fig. 1c, was made according to MR scans of a real breast. 

The permittivity of the target inclusion is 68 at 1300 MHz and the background medium (glycerin and 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

water mixture) is 22.3. 3-D reconstruction of the breast phantom was successfully made for both the 

permittivity and conductivity as shown in Fig. 1d. The target inclusion can be clearly seen in the 

reconstructed image. 

 

(a) 

 

(d) 
 

(b)

(c)


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

Figure 1 (a) Microwave breast imaging system set up at Dartmouth College [23]. Sixteen monopole 
antennas are immersed in a tank filled with a coupling liquid. (b) side view of the breast phantom. (c) top 
view of the breast phantom and the target inclusion. (d) reconstructed permittivity (top) and conductivity 
(bottom).  

 

A more advanced microwave breast imaging system was developed at the University of Bristol 

by Craddock and his colleagues [24]-[27], as shown in Figure 2(a) and (b). The breast is placed in a 

hemispherical cup and a good match to the antennas is provided by using a layer of matching fluid, which 

may be replaced by a ceramic insert. The first design used 31 ultra-wideband (UWB) slot antennas in the 

array [24]-[26], and a later design increased the number of antenna elements to 60 [27]. The antenna array 

was connected to a switching network before being connected to an 8-port vector network analyzer 

(VNA), allowing for a rapid scan up to 8 GHz. The later system can acquire a total of 1770 unique S-

parameter measurements in only 10 seconds. In contrast, the earlier system, with a 2-port VNA, can only 

acquire a total of 65 S-parameter measurements in 90 seconds. Thus, the later system offered a reduction 

in the chance of noise due to any slight patient movement. As now the later system has been used for test 

on 86 patients for clinical trials and achieved a detection rate of 74% (64/86) for wide age range, and 

achieved 86% in dense breasts []. This result is definitely encouraging because it is comparable or even 

better than some widely applied clinic methods. Their work opens the pathway from lab prototype study 

to large scale clinical trials.     

 
 

(a)                                                                                (b) 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

Figure 2. UWB breast cancer imaging system developed at the University of Bristol [27]. (a) The UWB 
conformal antenna array consisting of 60 slot antenna elements. (b) The switching network (below) 
connects the UWB antenna array (top) and the 8-port VNA. 

 

At the University of Calgary, Fear and her colleagues developed a prototype system for radar-

based breast imaging, with a patient table similar to the one developed at Dartmouth College. A woman 

lies with one of her breasts suspended through a hole in an examination table. A tank containing 

immersion liquid, a UWB transceiver antenna [29], and a laser are located under the examination table 

[30]. The UWB antenna and the laser are mounted on an arm which can rotate about the center of the tank 

and move in the vertical direction, as shown in Figure 3(c) and (d), to achieve an equivalent effect as 

using an antenna array. The laser is utilized to first scan the 3-D surface of the breast and define the 

reconstruction volume. The UWB antenna operating in a monostatic mode sends and receives microwave 

signals over the frequency range from 2.4 GHz to 15 GHz, but data are recorded from 50 MHz to 15 GHz 

by the VNA before being converted to the time domain to process [31]. Fear and her group successfully 

created 3-D images using a confocal imaging algorithm [32] developed by Hagness et al for eight patients 

with the developed system. Such system has now been upgraded to the 2nd generation []. With the 

assistance of laser, the antenna can be precisely placed in an adaptive matter such that microwaves are 

normally incident on the skin. Such design may deliver more microwave energy into the breast and then 

significantly increase the signal to noise ratio. Fear’s ground has ever developed another system for breast 

tissue dielectric permittivity estimation []. Instead of using any coupling liquid, direct contact is made 

between the breast skin and the sensor array. It will be interesting to see the competition between two 

mechanisms developed by the same research group.  


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
(a)  
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

 

   (c) 
 
 
 
 
 (d) 

Figure 3. Monostatic radar-based microwave breast imaging system prototype developed at the 
University of Calgary [31]. (a) The entire view of the prototype system. (b) Reconstructed images using a 
confocal imaging algorithm [32] on data collected by the system for a patient. (c) Top view and (d) side 
view schematics of the antenna and the laser that can move around the breast.  
 

Using a VNA (especially one with multiple ports) with a microwave imaging system largely 

increases system cost and size. Persson’s research group at Chalmers University of Technology (CUT) 

developed a compact imaging system for medical diagnostics which does not use a VNA [35]-[37]. 

Instead, their time domain system contains an impulse generator (to transmit UWB pulses), a high-speed 

analog-to-digital converter (ADC) (to sample the analog data collected by antenna), and a field-

programmable gate array (FPGA) (to store and process digital data and control the entire measurement). 

In order to solve the problem of insufficient bandwidth of ADC (800 MHz bandwidth), a wideband track-


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

and-hold (T/H) circuit is utilized to track the received signal and freeze the signal ahead of the ADC, and 

then hold it for a length of time to allow for the ADC to sample. In addition, a direct digital synthesizer 

(DDS) is used to generate sampling instructions to T/H and the ADC. The signal receiver and the antenna 

array developed at Chalmers University of Technology are illustrated in Figure 4. An antenna array 

composed of 20 monopoles were evenly distributed on a circle and no coupling medium was used. A 

switching matrix was used to select different transmitting and receiving antenna pairs in the array. Finally, 

a 2-D time-domain inverse algorithm was implemented to reconstruct a dielectric image, illustrated in 

Figure 4(c), when a cup of vegetable oil was placed in the middle of the circle. Although no clinical test 

was performed and it was unclear as to what disease the developed system targets, the replacement of a 

VNA with a customized receiver system is an advance. Such data acquisition unit was also reported by 

Rubaek et al. [] from the same department at CUT for breast cancer detection. The difference derives 

from the antenna array which consists of 32 monopoles horizontally positioned in a tank filled with 

glycerin and water. The monopoles are placed in four rows with eight in each row. In addition, instead of 

using the FPGA, data are stored in a computer where the signal processing is accomplished with LabView 

software. Since a SAR aperture is also created in the vertical direction, it is able to create a 3-D image for 

the object under test, in contrast to reconstructing 2-D image only by Persson.        

 
 

(a)                
 
 
 
             (b) 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

 

                                           (c) 

Figure 4. Time domain microwave system for medical diagnostics at Chalmers University of Technology 
[37]. (a) The receiver system. (b) A plastic cup of vegetable oil is placed at the center of the monopole 
antenna array. (c) A reconstructed image of the cup of vegetable oil. 

Time-domain measurements may offer advantages over frequency-domain measurements, 

including, faster scan times and more cost-effective measurement devices. Popovic and her team at 

McGill University also developed time-domain microwave imaging systems for breast imaging [39]-[43]. 

In the first system developed [39]-[42], 16 antennas were inserted in slots along the outer surface of a 

hemispherical shaped radome, illustrated in Figure 5(a) and (b), allowing for transmitting and recording 

both copolarized and cross-polarized pulses using a bandwidth from 2 to 4 GHz. The radome is an 

alumina bowl in which a breast is placed in. In order to fit women with various breast sizes, the radome 

was designed to accommodate the largest anticipated size, and an immersion medium was used for 

smaller breasts to avoid air gaps. Nevertheless, the lossy immersion medium attenuated the responses 

from the breast, and added additional reflection interfaces between the antenna and breast. Therefore, in a 

later design, a wearable antenna array consisting of 16 monopoles was embedded into a bra as shown in 

Figure 5(c) [43]. The antennas are on the inside of the bra and are tangential to the skin surface. Thus, the 

antennas touch the skin directly and there is no need for an immersion medium. The scan process is a 

typical multi-static mode in the time domain: a pulse is generated then fed to a switching network which 

selects the transmitting and receiving antennas, and the received signal is recorded by a picoscope. A 

complete scan consisting of 16 X 15 signals takes about 6 minutes. The bra-based system was tested on a 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

healthy volunteer over 28 days for breast health monitoring [43]. Consistent imaging results demonstrated 

data collected by the bra-based system have good repeatability. 

  
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
  (b) 

 

(c) 

Figure 5. Time-domain measurement system for breast imaging developed at McGill University. (a) and 
(b) Views of a radome to house the antennas for a table-based prototype [18]-[21]. (c) A bra-based 
measurement system [43]. 
 
 

Another notable example of microwave imaging for breasts was by Vipianna and colleagues at 

Politecnico di Torino [44]-[46]. Like the Chalmers University of Technology group, the system 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

developed uses an embedded platform enhanced with an FPGA to receive and process signals, making the 

system more practical and able to be commercialized. Additionally, the signal processing speed of FPGA 

was 20 times faster than on a multicore CPU, allowing for more rapid image reconstructions. Figure 6(a) 

illustrates the architecture of the prototype system. Breast phantoms were scanned in a coupling liquid 

(glycerin and water mixture) that the antennas were specifically designed for working in. Only 200-MHz 

bandwidth between 1.4 and 1.6 GHz were needed to produce a fairly good image due to the use of an 

interferometric-MUSIC algorithm, which does not require a large bandwidth to detect scatterings inside 

the breast. Therefore, the system can be produced cost effectively as electronic components in the 

frequency range of interest are available for low prices.  

 

(a) 

 

(b) 
 
 
 
 (c) 

Figure 6. Microwave imaging breast cancer detection system developed at Politecnico di Torino [46]. (a) 
Architecture of the prototype system. (b) 2-D trial setup. (c) 3-D trial setup. 
 
 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

In Japan, Dr. Kikkawa reported a hand-held impulse radar detector for breast tumor detection []. 

The probe is a  4 × 4 cross-shaped dome antenna array operating in the UWB frequency range from 3.1 

to 10.6 GHz, which allows to transmit Gaussian monocycle pulses with width of 160 ps. The detector is 

designed to be placed on the breast with the patient in a supine position. Fig. X shows the bowl-type 

probe, the breakdown view of the archetecture for the detector.  A step motor is mounted on the top of the 

detector which can drive the system including the dome antenna array to rotate with 1 degree accuracy. A 

plastic cover is installed on the antenna dome to protect patient and mitigate frection during rotating. The 

acquired analog signal is sampled by an ADC with 12 bit accuracy for high resolution.  The pusle 

generator , switching matrix, and sampling module are integrated on the complementray metal-oxide-

semicondductor (CMOS) circuit with 65-nm technology. Owing to these modules, the impulse radar 

imaging system is very compact, compared to all systems that have mentioned above. The detector is 

connected to a computer by a USB cable for data collection and processing. The confocal algorithm is 

used for processing the saved data to procude an image. 

 

(a) 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

 

(b)                                                            (c) 

Fig. X. The hand-held breast tumor detector developed at Hiroshima University hospital, Japan []. (a) is 

the probe which is a dome antenna array. (b) is the breakdown diagram of the system. (c) shows the 

system testing for a volunteer.  

 

Table 1 shows a comparison of the microwave breast imaging systems described above. The comparison 

highlight differences between the numbers of antennas used, the frequencies of operation, the hardware 

used, and the use of a coupling liquid. 

Table 1: Comparison of microwave imaging detection systems based on number of antennas, frequencies 
of operation, hardware used, and use of a coupling liquid. 

Group
Antennas
Frequency
Hardware

Coupling 

Liquid

Meaney [6]

Multi-static 16 

monopoles
500 MHz to 1.7 GHz 
VNA
Yes

Craddock [10]

Multi-static 60 

elements
4 GHz to 8 GHz
VNA
Yes

Fear [13]

Mono-static 1 UWB 
transciever antenna
2.4 GHz to 15 GHz
VNA
Yes

Persson [17]

Multi-static 20 

monopoles
800 MHz to 3.8 GHz
ADC / FPGA
No

Popovic [22]

Multi-static 16 

monopoles
2 GHz to 4 GHz
picoscope
No

Vipianna [25]

Multi-static 2 wide-

band monopoles
1.4 GHz to 1.6 GHz
FPGA
Yes


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

 

Microwave Brain Imaging 

 
A microwave method for human brain imaging has not yet attracted quite as much interest as 

microwave breast imaging. This technology is based upon studies that tissue malignancies, blood supply, 

hypoxia, acute ischemia, and chronic infarction significantly change dielectric properties of the affected 

tissues at microwave frequencies [48]. By exposing head tissues to a low level of microwave energy and 

capturing the scattered signal by an antenna, estimation of dielectric profiles of brain tissues can be made.  

Pioneering research for microwave brain imaging can be traced back to 1982 by Lin and Clark’s 

work [49], in which the detection of cerebral oedema (accumulation of water in the brain) was 

experimentally tested by using a 2.4 GHz microwave signal through a simple head phantom. Modern 

active mode microwave imaging for a brain or head scan was first published in 2008, with Semnov’s 

study at Keele University [50] and Persson’s research group at Chalmers University of Technology [51]. 

Semnov simulated microwave measurements with the number of transmitters and receivers being 32 X 32 

or 64 X 64 (multi-static mode) for a 2-D model of a head with a radius of 11 cm, containing a few soft 

tissues, skull, and a small stroke area. Then data was processed in an image reconstruction procedure 

using the Newton approach [52] over a frequency range from 0.5 GHz to 2.5 GHz. A “stroke-like” area 

with a radius of 2 cm was seen in the image reconstructed at 1 GHz frequency. Semnov suggested against 

use above 1 GHz for microwave brain tomography because of high microwave energy attenuation in the 

brain. In Persson’s study, a low cost patch antenna with a triangular shape was designed to be of small 

size and lightweight, which can potentially serve as the antenna element in an array for brain stroke 

monitoring. To improve impedance matching, the use of a matching liquid with relative permittivity of 78 

was used, either placed in a bag between the antenna and the head (for the high frequency case), or with 

the antenna immersed in (for the low frequency case). Finally, a system containing 8 such antennas with 

various distances from each other was designed and simulated for overall performance characterization. A 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

later development involved a fabricated array on a helmet the head is placed in [53], and the elements in 

the array increased to 10 or 12, illustrated in Figure 7(a) and (b), respectively.  

  
 

(a) 
(b) 

Figure 7. Antenna array developed for brain stroke detection at Chalmers University of Technology [53]. 
(a) Ten patch antennas are mounted on a helmet with plastic bags used for matching liquid. (b) Twelve 
patch antennas are mounted on a custom-built supporting structure. 
 

At the University of Queensland in Australia, brain imaging for stroke injuries detection has been 

intensively studied by Abbosh and his group [54]-[58]. The first detection system [54], [56] developed by 

the group was in 2013, as shown in Figure 8(b). Sixteen corrugated tapered slot antennas (operating 

frequency from 1 to 4 GHz) are fixed on a table, and are equally distributed around a head phantom with 

a fixed distance of 5 mm from the head boundary. The antennas work in a monostatic mode. To increase 

the number of signals to be processed in image reconstruction without increasing the number of antennas 

so as to avoid unwanted mutual coupling between them, the table holding the antennas can rotate around 

to collect data from different angular positions. To carry out a practical brain scan measurement, a 

realistic 3-D head phantom was built as shown in Figure 8(a) consisting of a suitable mixture of water, 

corn flour, gelatin, agar, sodium azide, and propylene glycol so as to mimic different tissues of the brain 

with realistic dielectric properties. The dielectric properties of the fabricated tissues agree with 

measurements with less than 3% error across the frequency band from 1 to 4 GHz. An ellipsoid object 

with dielectric properties equivalent to blood was emulated as the stroke region and inserted inside the 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

head phantom. S-parameters were collected by using a VNA and algorithms were used to reconstruct 2-D 

images. Stroke regions were successfully localized with high contrast. Due to high loss in the head at high 

frequencies, in later work, antenna elements have been replaced by compact unidirectional antennas with 

an operating frequency from 1.1 to 2.2 GHz [58], which provides a compromise between penetration 

depth and image resolution. The second system developed by Abbosh’s group, uses only one 

unidirectional antenna (covering a frequency band from 1.1-3.4 GHz) to send and receive signals to and 

from the head phantom, placed on a rotatable support as shown in Figure 8(c). A portable custom-made 

microwave transceiver, Agilent N7081A, replaces a VNA to send and receive signals. N7081A is a high-

speed, small, low-cost and modular wideband transceiver device that can operate over a wide bandwidth 

from 0.1 MHz to 4 GHz and offers a maximum dynamic range of 80 dB. It is controlled by an in-home 

operation system (IHOS) installed on a PC via USB or LAN connections for post data processing. The 

IHOS manages the entire detection process with a flowchart depicted in Figure 8(d).  

 
 

(a) 
(b) 

 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

 
 

(c)        
 
 
 
 
 
(d) 

Figure. 8. Head phantom and monostatic imaging system for brain stroke detection developed at the 
University of Queensland. (a) Head phantom. (b) Antenna array consisting of 16 corrugated tapered slot 
antennas on a rotatable platform [54][56]. (c) The second system composed of one fixed antenna and the 
phantom on a rotatable support [57]. (d) A graphical flowchart of IHOS. 

 

A brain stroke imaging prototype system has been developed by EMTensor GmbH, a company 

founded by Dr. Semenov, along with Prof. Pichot and colleagues at the Universite Cote d’Azur in France 

[59], [60].  The system consists of a cylindrical metallic chamber composed of 5 rings of 32 transmitting 

and receiving antennas as shown in Figure 9(a). The antennas are ceramic loaded open-ended waveguides, 

operating from 0.9 to 1.8 GHz. The system operates in a multistatic mode using a switching matrix 

utilized to connect the antennas and a network analyzer, which results in a 160 X 160 matrix of S 

parameters. The data acquisition cycle of the system is fully electronically controlled, allowing for a total 

data acquisition to occur in around 30 seconds. As illustrated in Figure 9(b) and (c), the chamber is in a 

horizontal position allowing for easy positioning of a human head within the imaging zone. A special thin 

membrane is used for isolating the human head from a matching liquid and keeping the liquid within the 

chamber. Two measurements, one with an empty chamber, and another with the head, are conducted to 

later obtain the scattered field of the head by a subtraction. The collected data is wirelessly transferred to 

a remote computing center for high-performance post processing. Images for a numerical head model 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

have been reconstructed for verification of the developed prototype. An experimental implementation and 

verification has not yet been seen.  

 

(a)                  
 
  
    (b) 
 
 
 
 
      (c) 

Figure 9. Brain stoke imaging prototype system developed by EMTensor GmbH  [59], [60]. (a) Chamber 
with 160 antennas in 5 rings. (b) Architecture of the chamber. (c) A human head measurement with the 
prototype system.  

 

Other Medical Diagnostic Applications 

 
Besides breast cancer and brain stroke imaging, the near-field microwave approach has also been 

applied in other medical diagnoses such as knee injury, skin cancer detection, and lung cancer detection.  

The knee is one of the most frequently injured joints of the human body, with s traumatic injuries 

in the young and tissue degeneration in the old. Fear et al. utilized a simulation method and some simple 

experiments to test the feasibility of using radar-based methods to detect meniscal tears [61], [62], tendon 

[62], [63], and ligaments [63] at microwave frequencies. However, no prototype systems have been 

reported by her group for diagnosis for knee pathologies.   

For skin cancer detection, some early studies utilized microwave reflectometry to differentiate 

cancerous skin tissues from healthy skin tissues using an open-ended coaxial probe with a VNA [64] [65]. 

The reflection coefficient was compared between cancerous skin tissues and adjacent normal skin tissues 

from 300 MHz up to 6 GHz. Recent studies are more interested in exploring the properties of cancerous 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

skin tissue at millimeter wave (mm-wave) range because of better resolution and no deep penetration 

requirements for skin measurement.  In 2013, Taeb et al. proposed a reflectometry device operating at 42 

and 70 GHz for non-invasive early stage skin cancer detection [66]. Clinical trials tests were performed 

on a number of volunteer patients who suffered from basal cell carcinoma. The device presented by Taeb 

provides a low-cost solution for fast and accurate skin cancer detection and has the potential to be used 

for fast tissue inspection during surgery. Most of the open-ended rectangular waveguide probes 

implemented for skin detection have footprints in the range of several square millimeters and their EM 

field penetrates deep into the subcutaneous fat, i.e., they measure the average of a larger volume 

compared to the size of an early stage (very small) skin tumors. In fact, malignant melanoma grows from 

the bottom of the epidermis, typically starting at a depth of around 100 μm and first infiltrates the 

epidermis. Therefore, to achieve an accurate measurement, a high-quality mm-wave probe with sub-

millimeter sensing depth and high lateral resolution is desired. In 2015, Topfer et al. invented a broadband 

probe operating from 90 to 104 GHz [67], which consists of a dielectric-rod waveguide that is metallized 

and tapered towards the tip to achieve high resolution by concentrating the electric field in a small sample 

area. The sensing depth was from 0.3 to 0.4 mm, which is adapted for detecting early-stage skin tumors 

before metastasizing. The lateral resolution can be as high as 0.2 mm, allowing for resolving small skin 

tumors and even the inhomogeneities within a tumor. Other than skin cancer detection, in 2017, Gao et al. 

used mm-wave reflectometry approach to accurately assess the degree of a burn on human skin [68]. In 

the test, mm-wave reflectometry and imaging were verified as capable of distinguishing between healthy 

and burned skin as the dielectric properties of the two are significantly different in a 26.5 – 40 GHz 

frequency band.  

Other than the knee diagnosis and skin cancer detection, we noticed the recent reports regarding 

using microwave imaging for lung cancer detection, which is based on the hypothesis that significant 

difference exists between the dielectric properties of cancerous lung tissue and healthy lung tissues at 

microwave frequency band. In Australia, Abbosh’s group applied a very similar lab system developed for 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

brain stroke detection (Fig. 8b) to perform lung cancer microwave imaging experiments []-[].The head 

phantom was replaced by an artificial torso phantom comprised of ribs, muscles, skin, heart, lungs and 

abdomen block. To mimic the cancerous lung tissue, an artificial cancer of dimension 1 × 1 × 2 𝑐𝑚3, 

made of a mixture of water, corn flour, gelatin, agar, sodium azide, propylene glycol and NaCl salt, was 

inserted inside the torso phantom. The mixture has the same dielectric properties of lung cancer across the 

working bandwidth from 1.5-3 GHz. Instead of rotating the table that supports the antenna like in Fig. 8b, 

only one antenna was adopted with position fixed and the phantom was rotated in every 30° to achieve 12 

mono-static data. And then a frequency-domain algorithm was applied to the acquired data to obtain an 

image. In fact, the challenge of imaging the torso is the same to the head microwave imaging. It is 

difficult to balance the penetrating-in-body microwave energy and the imaging resolution. From the 

reconstructed image that Abbosh’s group obtained, the dimension of the “cancerous region” is much 

bigger than the artificial cancer that was inserted in the torso phantom. Thus, good ideas are expected 

before any breakthrough can be seen in the torso and head microwave imaging.   

Nondestructive Testing  

 
Nondestructive testing (NDT) technologies are often needed to determine a component of an 

object or to quantitatively measure characteristics. Traditional NDT uses ultrasound or X-ray. Due to 

good penetration capability and cost efficiency, microwave imaging techniques have been explored in 

NDT. Known applications of microwave NDT, see for example Figure 10, include moisture 

measurements, wall thickness measurements, measurements of paint thickness on carbon composites, 

quality control, e.g. presence of seams in composite materials, measurements of material permittivity, 

corrosion and precursor pitting detection in painted aluminum and steel substrates, flaw detection in 

spray-on foam insulation, and the acreage heat tiles of the Space Shuttle. In recognizing growing 

importance of NDT, an expert committee for microwave and Terahertz (THz) procedures of the German 

Society of NDT and the microwave testing committee of the American Society for NDT (ASNT) were 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

founded in 2011 and 2014, respectively. Standardization work has begun along with prototype systems in 

both reflection mode and through transmission mode. 

 

(a) 
(b) 

Figure 10. Stationary microwave test systems [71] for (a) planar substrates and (b) glass-fiber 
reinforced plastic leaf springs for automobiles. 

 

Zoughi’s research group at the Missouri University of Science and Technology [72] utilized 

microwave imaging for NDT to investigate a mortar specimen with four different embedded rebars 

located at a depth of 2 cm below the surface of the mortar as shown in Figure 11(a). A linear scan was 

performed above the surface of mortar denoted by the red arrow in Figure 11(a) and (b). The linear scan, 

was carried out by an antenna located 13.8 cm from the surface of the mortar, and spanned a 23-cm range 

along the x direction with a step size of 0.1 cm. Reflection coefficients were measured and recorded by a 

VNA from 8.2 to 12.4 GHz.  A piecewise-SAR algorithm and a Wiener filter-based layered SAR 

algorithm allowed for an image successfully specifying the rebars’ position, as shown in Figure 11(c).  

 
 

(a) 
(b) 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

 

            (c)             
   
 
 
(d) 

Figure 11. Microwave nondestructive detection experiment conducted the Missouri University of Science 
and Technology [72]. (a) A mortar specimen with four rebars under test. (b) Schematic diagram for the 
experiment setup: a probe connected to a VNA moves along the surface of mortar specimen to collect 
reflection coefficients. (c) Reconstructed image by a piecewise-SAR algorithm. (d) Reconstructed image 
by a Wiener filter-based layered SAR algorithm. 
 

More interesting, a wideband microwave camera for real-time 3-D imaging still developed by 

Zoughi’s group was reported in 2017 []. The camera operating in the 20-30 GHz frequency range can 

produce real -time 3-D images, causing the potential to provide real-time inspection and diagnosis in the 

nondestructive testing, biomedical and security applications. A monostatic antenna array composed of 16 

1-D array, with each consisting of 16 elements, is built in a printed circuit board to transmit and receive 

signal (Fig. X). The entire system, including the antenna array, the switch drivers, analog multiplexer, and 

other support circuitry such as power regulators and power sequencing circuitry for power amplifier are 

assembled up with a total size of 26 cm × 21 cm × 18 cm (Fig. X). An awesome video showing the 

working performance of the built system was uploaded by the team and can be found by 

https://youtu.be/RE-PPXmtTeA.    

 

(a)                                                          (b) 
 
 
     (c) 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

Fig. X. (a) The 1-D antenna array, (b) front side showing the array aperture, and (c) back side showing the 
source board and the switching/control circuit.     

 

Researchers formerly with the University of Michigan and now with the University of Southern 

California in Moghaddam’s group created a microwave imaging system to image changes in the dielectric 

constant due to the application of microwave heating [74], [75] as shown in Figure 12. Microwave 

imaging of differential temperature is based on that dielectric properties of water change as a function of 

temperature. They used 36 bow-tie patch antennas designed to operate at 915 MHz with a 2-port VNA in 

an isopropyl alcohol and water coupling medium. They imaged a 4 cm ping-pong ball as it cools from 55 

to 22 degrees Celsius designed to emulate a thermal therapy focal spot size in their imaging cavity. 

 

Figure 12. Microwave imaging differential temperature monitoring measurement system by the 
University of Southern California [75]. 

 

Collaborators from the University of Applied Sciences of Southern Switzerland, Centro di 

Senologia della Svizzera, and the University of Genoa including Pastorino’s research group developed a 

multi-static mode prototype system first used for the inspection of dielectric materials including wood 

objects [76], [77]. In contrast to Moghaddam’s design that uses an array and a number of cables, a pair of 

antennas is used in conjunction with a rotating table that an object is placed on. In a later development, 

plastic extension arms were connected to the antenna arms to allow them to be immersed in a coupling 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

medium [78]. Measurements were collected using a VNA. A breast phantom placed in vegetable oil was 

placed in the system and measurements were collected every 22.5 degrees from 2 to 10 GHz with a 200 

MHz increment. Figure 13(a), (b), and (c) shows the experimental setup, breast phantom, and 

reconstructed image using the inversion algorithm in [79]. 

  
 

 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 (b) 

 

(c) 

Figure 13. Microwave measurement system by Collaborators from the University of Applied Sciences of 
Southern Switzerland, Centro di Senologia della Svizzera, and University of Genoa [78]. (a) Setup for 
frequency-domain measurement. (b) Breast phantom. (c) The reconstructed image of the breast 
phantom object with the inversion algorithm of [79]. 
 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

A prototype system developed by Ellumen, Inc. [80]-[82] uses both reflected and transmitted 

signals in a multi-static mode for microwave NDT. Similar to Pastorino’s system, a pair of antennas were 

used but are fully electronically controlled to rotate about an object from 0 to 360 degrees with one-

degree accuracy with one antenna serving as the transmitter and the other as the receiver. A wooden 

circular tray is placed at the center to support an object and can move in the vertical direction. Microwave 

measurements can be conducted in the frequency domain when antennas are connected to a VNA or in 

the time domain when the transmitter antenna is connected to a signal generator and the receiver antenna 

is connected to an oscilloscope as shown in Figure 14(a) and (b). There are advantages of using movable 

antennas instead of an array containing many elements. This includes avoiding potential unwanted mutual 

couplings between elements in the array, no need for a costly and bulky switching matrix network, and to 

allow for more advanced high-gain antennas to be adopted beyond just a small and simple antenna such 

as monopole or dipole. A complete multi-static scan for both antennas transmitting and receiving from a 0 

to 360 degrees takes a few minutes, depending on the number of signals and the length of each signal. A 

phase confocal imaging algorithm [83] is used to produce an image of the cylindrical object as shown in 

Figure 14(c), in which the hollow structure is successfully revealed. The software to control the system 

consists of a series of steps as shown in Figure 14(d). The software controls the antennas to move to any 

position on the rails by setting the starting and ending positions and the angle increments, along with 

allowing for multiple measurements taken at each location and the average saved to achieve a lower-noise 

contained signal. 

 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

 

                 (c)                                                                  (d) 

Figure 14. Microwave measurement system by Ellumen Inc. with antenna movement controllable in a 
transmit-receive mode. (a) Setup for frequency-domain measurement [80]. (b) Setup for time-domain 
measurement [81]. (c) The reconstructed image of the cylindrical object with a phase confocal imaging 
algorithm [83] using the data collected by the system in [80]-[82] (d) Diagram of the important operation 
steps of the software. 
  

 
 
Researchers at the University of Manitoba in LoVetri’s group have developed a microwave 

imaging approach using a resonant air-filled metallic chamber [84] building upon some of their earlier 

work [85]. Unlike the Pastorino and Ellumen systems, no rotatable antennas or rotatable object is present. 

They used printed reconfigurable monopole antennas that can be turned on or off using PIN diodes. They 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

also differed from some other systems described by using a metallic chamber to allow better control over 

unwanted reflections, potentially allowing the incorporation of a lossless or low-loss matching medium 

and to shield what is in the chamber from external electromagnetic noise. The system was used to image a 

wooden cube and nylon cylinder as shown in Figure 15(a) and (b). Reconstructed images, as in Figure 

15(c), successfully showed the targets at 1.75 GHz. 

 

 
 
(a) 
  
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
(c)  

Figure 15. Microwave measurement system by the University of Manitoba [85]. (a) Setup for frequency-
domain measurement. (b) Wooden cube and nylon cylinder. (c) The reconstructed image of the wooden 
cube and nylon cylinder at 1.75 GHz. 
 

 
Through-The-Wall Imaging 

 
Through-the-wall microwave imaging is one of the important emerging microwave techniques in 

recent years. Such an imaging system provides enhanced situational awareness in a variety of civilian and 

military applications. Such systems not only detect the presence of the targets behind walls, but also 

provide information concerning each target’s location, motion, size, and backscattering cross section 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

(RCS). Compared to traditional radar applications, through-the-wall radar imaging faces challenges such 

as unknown dielectric characteristics and thickness of the wall, signal attenuation in the wall, and 

unknown target movement.   

 
 

(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 

Figure 16. Tests for through-the-wall radar imaging by a collaborated research group from AGT Group 
GmbH, Technische Universitat Darmstadt, and Villanova University [88]. (a) A few objects with different 
shapes located behind a wall. (b) A human located behind the wall. 

 

Many approaches have been attempted in testing through-the-wall radar imaging techniques. The 

most widely used approach is the wideband or UWB radar mechanism, which contains an antenna array, 

or one antenna measuring at multiple locations to form a synthetic aperture [86]-[92]. The bandwidth 

covered is typically from a few hundred MHz to several GHz. The backscattered signals measured by all 

antenna elements in the array (or one antenna at all locations) are accounted for their time delaying and 

weighting, and are finally synthesized to produce an image. An example of this is shown in Figure 17. 

Another example is a device developed by Akduman’s group [] which uses a pair of horn antenna 

operating between 0.8-5 GHz. The antenna pair works in a bistatic mode and moves together along the 

wall to collect the signal from different positions. The experiment was performed in a big anechoic 

chamber as well. Image of the objects behind the wall was reconstructed by processing the acquired data 

based on an inverse scattering algorithm (microwave tomography). A second approach used is by using a 

frequency-modulated continuous wave (FMCW) radar [94], [95] or step-frequency continuous wave 

(SFCW) radar [96]. This is based on the detection of a Doppler frequency shift due to the target’s motion, 

such as heartbeat and breath. In addition, other approaches including the time reversal technique [97] and 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

the tomographic inverse scattering approach [98] have been used in through-the-wall microwave imaging. 

The through-wall imaging has achieved commercial success. An interesting video available at 

https://walabot.com/diy shows a portal microwave device that can be connected to a cell phone is able to 

detect objects behind the wall and the motion of a mouse inside the wall.         

Security Screening  
 
 
The microwave imaging technique has been proposed to detect concealed weapons at major 

transportation hubs to replace the conventional X-ray screening method, as it may cause less potential 

health risks of X-ray, especially for pregnant women and infants. The non-ionizing characteristic, and the 

low cost of the microwave imaging system makes it more likely to be adopted in security screening.   

Microwave imaging for security applications uses a high frequency which is reflected by human 

skin yet still penetrates through most fabrics. Thus, a 3-D shape reconstruction of the human along with 

any metal they may have on them is possible as microwave cannot penetrate through metals. Likely due 

to hardware restrictions, there are only a limited number of studies in this area. In 2001, an engineering 

team at Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (Sheen et al.) reported the first 3-D whole-body imaging 

using the principles of microwave holography []. The goal was to achieve a real-time imaging (on the 

order of 3 to 10 s) for concealed weapon detection. A prototype imaging system utilizing a 27-33 GHz 

linear sequentially switched array was developed and tested for scanning concealed explosive. Later they 

developed the microwave holographic imaging technology for multiple applications with different 

frequency range [], for example, 3-D imaging of a helicopter using an impulse radar with nominal 1-5 

GHz, X-band (8-12GHz) imaging of Bradley fighting vehicle, 3-D GPR imaging with twin waste storage 

tanks operating at 200-400 MHz, and 40-60 GHz test and 10-20 GHz test for detecting concealed 

weapons attached to a mannequin.   

In 2011, Zhuge, et al. [101], [102] attempted to use the UWB method with a multi-input multi-

output (MIMO) array to deliver high-resolution 3-D images for concealed weapon detection in quasi-real 

time. This system successfully combines UWB, MIMO, and SAR technology. The MIMO array consists 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

of four antipodal Vivaldi antennas as transmitters and eight such antennas as receivers, operating at a 

center frequency of 11.15 GHz and 150% fractional bandwidth (2.8-19.5 GHz). Elements in the MIMO 

array are connected to a network analyzer through a multiport switch, and the entire array is mounted on a 

computer-controlled mechanical scanner allowing for both azimuth and elevation scan to form a synthetic 

aperture for a 3-D volumetric imaging, as shown in Figure 17(b). When a weapon attached to a 1.8-m-

high-and-0.5-m-wide mannequin (covered with an aluminum foil to mimic a shield for the weapon) is 

exposed to the MIMO array, a 3-D image of the mannequin can be achieved by processing the received 

data. It is possible to determine the shape of the weapon that was attached to the mannequin as shown in 

Figure 17(c).  

 
 

(a) 
                                            (b) 

 

(c)    
 
 
             (d) 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

Figure 17. UWB MIMO-SAR measurement system setup with network analyzer in an anechoic chamber at 
Delft University of Technology [101]. (a) Schematic diagram of the MIMO array structure and its 
movement for a scan. (b) MIMO-SAR configuration with additional multiport switch. (c) A gun and a 
knife attached to a mannequin covered with an aluminum foil and (d) its 3-D imaging result with the 
developed system. 

 

Due to technical progress in RF manufacturing and reduction in costs, mm wave [103], [104] and 

THz [105] imaging have been considered in security applications. The usage of a shorter wavelength 

leads to better range resolution. In [103], an active mm-wave SFCW radar operating at 59-61 GHz was 

tested to image an aluminum foil wrapped toy gun covered with a cloth piece. In the experiment, a 2-D 

scan composed of 30 X 18 locations with 0.02 m spacing in both the vertical and the horizontal directions 

were performed. Imaging results validated the idea of using mm wave imaging radar system for concealed 

weapon detection. In contrast, THz imaging uses even higher frequencies to achieve higher spatial 

resolution. In [105], Knipper et al. compared the effect of using 0.35 and 0.85 THz for a passive security 

camera to detect a weapon under clothes. THz imaging was found to be influenced by signal absorption in 

fabric, especially wet clothes, causing a 0.85 THz band to be a less desirable option than 0.35 THz, 

although 0.85 THz provided a better resolution.  

 

Outlook 

 
Over the past few decades, microwave near-field imaging has experienced conceptualizations, 

theoretical analyses, simulation tests, and experimental validations. Due to technical developments both 

in the hardware manufacturing and the software, many prototype systems for a variety of applications 

have emerged since the early 2000s. Microwave scientists and engineers are working towards optimizing 

current prototypes in order to bring these systems into production and more widespread use. 

One trend for current microwave near-field imaging systems is that bulky and expensive signal 

recording tools, such as a VNA and an oscilloscope, are replaced by more compact, more cost-effective, 

and customized instruments such as a high-speed ADC accompanied with an FPGA. This trend will allow 

for current prototypes to lead the way towards the first commercial microwave imaging product. In 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

addition, the growth of this technology will further extend from research institutions and academia into 

industrial research and development. It can be expected that in the not too distant future, more 

applications of microwave imaging techniques and their products will emerge and lead to benefits to 

humans and society. 

Reference 

[1] L. E. Larsen and J. H. Jacobi, “Microwave interrogation of dielectric targets. Part I: By scattering parameters,” Med. Phys., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 

500–508, 1978. 

[2] L. E. Larsen and J. H. Jacobi, “Microwave interrogation of dielectric targets. Part II: By microwave time delay spectroscopy,” Med. Phys., 

vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 509–513, 1978. 

[3] L. E. Larsen and J. H. Jacobi, Eds., Medical Applications of Microwave Imaging. New York: IEEE Press, 1986. 
[4] C. Pichot, L. Jofre, G. Peronnet, and J.-C. Bolomey, “Active microwave imaging of inhomogeneous bodies,” IEEE Trans. Antennas 

Propagat., vol. AP-33, no. 4, pp. 416–425, Apr. 1985. 

[5] J. C. Bolomey and C. Pichot, “Microwave tomography: From theory to practical imaging systems,” Int. J. Imaging Systems and 

Technology,  vol. 2, pp. 144-156, 1990. 

[6] A. Franchois, A. Joisel, C. Pichot, and J.-C. Bolomey, “Quantitative microwave imaging with a 2.45-GHz planar microwave camera,” IEEE 

Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 550–561, Aug. 1998. 

[7] G. Schaller, “On the imaging of hot spots using correlation radiometers and a circular aperture,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 

37, no. 8, pp. 1210–1216, Aug. 1989. 

[8] K. L. Carr, “Microwave radiometry: Its importance to the detection of cancer,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 

1862–1869, Dec. 1989. 

[9] S. Mouty, B. Bocquet, R. Ringot, N. Rocourt, and P. Devos, “Microwave radiometric imaging for the characterization of breast tumors,” 

Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., vol. 10, pp. 73–78, 2000. 

[10] K. L. Carr, P. Cevasco, P. Dunlea, and J. Shaeffer, “Radiometric sensing: An adjuvant to mammography to determine breast biopsy,” in 

Proc. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., Jun. 2000, pp. 929–932.  

[11] P. M. Meaney, M. W. Fanning, D. Li, S. P. Poplack, and K. D. Paulsen, “A clinical prototype for active microwave imaging of the breast,” 

IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 1841 –1853, Nov. 2000. 

[12] E. C. Fear, et al, "Enhancing breast tumor detection with near-field imaging." IEEE Microwave magazine, vol. 3, no.1, pp. 48-56, March 

2002. 

[13] B. D. Steinberg and H. M. Subbaram, “Microwave imaging techniques,” Wiley Series in Remote Sensing, 1991. 
[14] M. Pastorino, “Microwave imaging,” John Wiley & Sons, 2010. 
[15] N. K. Nikolova, “Microwave imaging for breast cancer,” IEEE Microwave magazine, vol. 12, no.7, pp. 78-94, Dec. 2011. 
[16] N. K. Nikolova, “Microwave biomedical imaging,” Wiley Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, pp 1-22, 2014. 
[17] R.K. Amineh, J. McCombe, A. Khalatpour, and N.K. Nikolova, "Microwave holography using measured point-spread functions," IEEE 

Trans. Instrum.&Meas., vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 403-417, Feb. 2015. 

[18] S. Kwon and S. Lee, "Recent advances in microwave imaging for breast cancer detection," Int. J. Biomedical Imaging, vol. 2016, Article ID 

5054912, 26 pages, 2016. 

[19] Nikolova, “Introduction to Microwave Imaging,” Combridge University Press, 2017. 
[20] D. O'Loughlin, et al, “Microwave breast imaging: clinical advances and remaining challenges,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical 

Engineering, pp. 1, Feb 2018. 

[21] Yang, et al, “High-resolution microwave imaging,” Springer Singapore, 2018. 
[22] T. Sugitani et al., "Complex permittivities of breast tumor tissues obtained from cancer surgeries," Applied Phys. Lett., vol. 104, 253702, 

June 2014. 

[23] P. M. Meaney, et al, “Initial clinical experience with microwave breast imaging in women with normal mammography,” Acad. Radiol., vol. 

14, no. 2, pp. 207–218, Feb. 2007. 

[24] M. Klemm, I. Craddock, J. Leendertz, A. Preece, and R. Benjamin, “Experimental and clinical results of breast cancer detection using UWB 

microwave radar,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas and Propag. Society Int. Symp., Jul. 2008. 

[25] M. Klemm, I. J. Craddock, J. A. Leendertz, A. Preece, D. R. Gibbins, M. Shere, and R. Benjamin, “Clinical trials of a UWB imaging radar 

for breast cancer,” in Proc. 4th European Conf. Antennas and Propag. (EuCAP), Apr. 2010. 

[26] M. Klemm, J. A. Leendertz, D. Gibbins, I. J. Craddock, A. Preece, and R. Benjamin, “Microwave radar-based differential breast cancer 

imaging: Imaging in homogeneous breast phantoms and low contrast scenarios,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 2337–
2344, Jul. 2010. 

[27] M. Klemm, D. Gibbins, J. Leendertz, T. Horseman, A. W. Preece, R. Benjamin and I. J. Craddock, “Development and testing of a 60-

element UWB conformal array for breast cancer imaging,” in Proc. 5th European Conf. Antennas and Propag. (EuCAP), Apr. 2011, pp. 
3077–3079. 

[28] A. W. Preece, I. Craddock, M. Shere, L. Jones, and H. L. Winton, “MARIA M4: clinical evaluation of a prototype ultrawideband radar 

scanner for breast cancer detection,” J. Medical Imaging, vol. 3, no. 3, July 2016.  

[29] J. Bourqui, M. Okoniewski, and E. C. Fear, “Balanced antipodal Vivaldi antenna with dielectric director for near-field microwave imaging,” 

IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 2318–2326, Jul. 2010. 

[30] T. C. William, J. Bourqui, T. R. Cameron, M. Okoniewski, and E. C. Fear, “Laser surface estimation for microwave breast imaging systems,” 

IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1193–1199, May 2011. 

[31] E. C. Fear, J. Bourqui, C. Curtis, D. Mew, B. Docktor, and C. Romano, “Microwave breast imaging with a monostatic radar-based system: A 

study of application to patients,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2119–2128, May 2013. 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

[32] X. Li and S. C. Hagness, “A confocal microwave imaging algorithm for breast cancer detection,” IEEE Microw. Wireless Compon. Lett., vol. 

11, no. 3, pp. 130–132, Mar. 2001. 

[33] J. Bourqui, , M. Kuhlmann, D. J. Kurrant, B. R. Lavoie, and E. C. Fear, “Adaptive monostatic system for measuring microwave reflections 

from the breast,” Sensors, vlo. 18, no. 5, pp. 1-13, May 2018. 

[34] J. Bourqui and E. C. Fear, “System for bulk dielectric permittivity estimation of breast tissues at microwave frequencies,” IEEE Trans. 

Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 3001-3009, Sep. 2016. 

[35] X. Zeng, A. Fhager, P. Linner, M. Persson, and H. Zirath, “Experimental investigation of the accuracy of an ultrawideband time-domain 

microwave-tomographic system,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3939–3949, Dec. 2011.  

[36] X. Zeng, A. Fhager, M. Persson, P. Linner, and H. Zirath, “Accuracy evaluation of ultrawideband time domain systems for microwave 

imaging,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 4279–4285, Nov. 2011.  

[37] X. Zeng, A. Fhager, Z. He, M. Persson, P. Linner, and H. Zirath, “Development of a time domain microwave system for medical 

diagnostics,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 2931–2939, Dec. 2014.  

[38] V. Zhurbenko, T. Rubaek, V. Krozer, and P. Meincke, “ Design and realization of a microwave three-dimensional imaging system with 

application to breast-cancer detection,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag. vol. 4, no. 12, pp. 2200-2211, Mar. 2010. 

[39] E. Porter, A. Santorelli, M. Coates, and M. Popovic, “An experimental system for time-domain microwave breast imaging,” in Proc. 5th 

European Conf. Antennas and Propag. (EuCAP), Apr. 2011, pp. 2906–2910. 

[40] M. Popovic and H. Kanj, “Microwave scanning system and miniaturized microwave antenna,” U.S. Patent 8 089 417, Jan. 3, 2012. 
[41] E. Porter, E. Kirshin, A. Santorelli, M. Coates, and M. Popovic, “Time-domain multistatic radar system for microwave breast screen,” IEEE 

Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 12, pp. 229–232, 2013. 

[42] E. Porter, M. Coates, and M. Popovic, “An early clinical study of time-domain microwave radar for breast health monitoring,” IEEE Trans. 

Biomed. Eng., vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 530–539, Mar. 2016. 

[43] E. Porter, H. Bahrami, A. Santorelli, B. Gosselin, L. A. Rusch, and M. Popovic, “A wearable microwave antenna array for time-domain breast 

tumor screening,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1501–1509, Jun. 2016. 

[44] J. A. Tobon Vasques, F. Vipiana, M. R. Casu, and A. Pulimeno, “Microwave imaging for early breast cancer detection: Experimental testing 

of a low-cost portable system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Antennas and Propag. (APSURSI), July 2016, pp. 1479–1480. 

[45] J. A. Tobon Vasques, F. Vipiana, M. R. Casu, M. Vacca, and A. Pulimeno, “Experimental testing of a low-cost microwave imaging system 

for early breast cancer detection,” in Proc. 10th European Conf. on Antennas and Propag. (EuCAP), Apr. 2016. 

[46] M. R. Casu, M. Vacca, J. A. Tobon, A. Pulimeno, I. Sarwar, R. Solimene, and F. Vipiana, “A cots-based microwave imaging system for 

breast cancer detection,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Circuits Syst., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 804–814, Aug. 2017. 

[47] H. Song et al., “Detectability of breast tumor by a hand-held impulse-radar detector: performance evaluation and pilot clinical study,” 

Scientific Reports, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 16353, Nov. 2017. 

[48] S. Y. Semenov et al., “Dialectical spectroscopy of canine myocardium during acute ischemia and hypoxia at frequency spectrum from 100 

kHz to 6 GHz,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imag., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 703–707, Jun. 2002. 

[49] J. C. Lin and M. J. Clark, “Microwave imaging of cerebral edema,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 523–524, May 1982. 
[50] S. Y. Semenov and D. R. Corfield, “Microwave tomography for brain imaging: Feasibility assessment for stroke detection,” Int. J. Antennas 

Propag., vol. 2008, 2008. 

[51] H. Trefna and M. Persson, “Antenna array design for brain monitoring,” in Proc. IEEE Antennas and Propag. Society Int. Symp., Jul. 2008. 
[52] A. E. Souvorov, A. E. Bulyshev, S. Y. Semenov, R. H. Svenson, A. G. Nazarov, Y. E. Sizov, and G. P. Tatsis, “Microwave tomography: A 

two-dimensional Newton iterative scheme,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 1654–1659, Nov. 1998. 

[53] M. Persson, A. Fhager, H. D. Trefna, Y. Yu, T. McKelvey, G. Pegenius, J.-E. Karlsson, and M. Elam, “Microwave-based stroke diagnosis 

making global prehospital thrombolytic treatment possible,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 2806–2817, Nov. 2014. 

[54] S. Mustafa, B. Mohammed, and A. Abbosh, “Novel preprocessing techniques for accurate microwave imaging of human brain,” IEEE 

Antennas Wireless Propag. Lett., vol. 12, pp. 460–463, 2013. 

[55] D. Ireland, K. Bialkowski, and A. Abbosh, “Microwave imaging for brain stroke detection using Born iterative method,” IET Microw., 

Antennas Propag., vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 909–915, May 2013.  

[56] B. J. Mohammed, A. M. Abbosh, S. Mustafa, and D. Ireland, “Microwave system for head imaging,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 63, 

no. 1, pp. 117–123, Jan. 2014.  

[57] A. T. Mobashsher, A. M. Abbosh, and Y. Wang, “Microwave system to detect traumatic brain injuries using compact unidirectional antenna 

and wideband transceiver with verification on realistic head phantom,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 1826–1836, 
Sep. 2014. 

[58] A. T. Mobashsher and A. M. Abbosh, “Compact 3-D slot-loaded folded dipole antenna with unidirectional radiation and low impulse 

distortion,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 3245–3250, Jul. 2016. 

[59] P.-H. Touriner, F. Hecht, F. Nataf, S. Semenov, M. Bonazzoli, F. Rapetti, V. Dolean, I. El Kanfoud, I. Aliferis, C. Migliaccio, C. Pichot, 

“Microwave tomography for brain stroke imaging,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp Antennas and Propag. USNC/URSI National Radio Sci. 
Meeting, July 2017, pp. 29–30. 

[60] P.-H. Tournier et al, “Numerical modeling and high-speed parallel computing: New perspectives on tomographic microwave imaging for 

brain stroke detection and monitoring,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Magazine, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 98–110, Oct. 2017. 

[61] S. M. Salvador, E. C. Fear, M. Okoniewski, and J. R. Matyas, “Microwave imaging of the knee: On sensitivity, resolution and multiple tears 

detection,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Antenna Technol. Appl. Electromagn. Can. Radio Sci. Meeting, Feb. 2009, pp. 1–4. 

[62] S. M. Salvador, E. C. Fear, M. Okoniewski, and J. R. Matyas, “Exploring joint tissues with microwave imaging,” IEEE Trans. Microw. 

Theory Techn., vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2307–2313, Aug. 2010. 

[63] S. M. Salvador, E. C. Fear, M. Okoniewski, and J. R. Matyas, “Microwave imaging of the knee: Application to ligaments and tendons,” in 

Proc. IEEE MTT-S Int. Microw. Symp. Dig., pp. 1437–1440, Jul. 2009. 

[64] K. Chand, P. Mehta, D. G. Beetner, R. Zoughi, and W. V. Stoecker, “Microwave reflectometry as a novel diagnostic method for detection of 

skin cancers,” in Proc. IEEE Instrum. Meas. Technol. Conf. Proc., May 2005, pp. 1425–1428. 

[65] P. Mehta, K. Chand, D. Narayanswamy, D. G. Beetner, R. Zoughi, and W. V. Stoecker, “Microwave reflectometry as a novel diagnostic tool 

for detection of skin cancers,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1309–1316, Aug. 2006. 

[66] A. Taeb, S. Gigoyan, and S. Safavi-Naeini, “Millimetre-wave waveguide reflectometers for early detection of skin cancer,” IET Microw. 

Antennas Propag., vol. 7, no. 14, pp. 1182–1186, Nov. 2013. 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

[67] F. Topfer, S. Dudorov, and J. Oberhammer, “Millimeter-wave near-field probe designed for high-resolution skin cancer diagnosis,” IEEE 

Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 2050–2059, Jun. 2015. 

[68] Y. Gao and R. Zoughi, “Millimeter wave reflectometry and imaging for noninvasive diagnosis of skin burn injuries,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. 

Meas., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 77–84, Jan. 2017. 

[69] A. Zamani, S. A. Rezaeieh, and A. M. Abbosh, “Lung cancer detection using frequency-domain microwave imaging,” Electronics Lett. vol. 

51, no. 10, pp. 740-741, May 2015. 

[70] S. A. Rezaeieh, A. Zamani, K. S. Bialkowski, and A. M. Abbosh, “Novel microwave torso scanner for thoracic fluid accumulation diagnosis 

and monitoring,” Scientific Reports, vol. 7, no.1, pp. 304, Mar. 2017. 

[71] J. Hinken. (2016, July). Microwave Testing (µT): an overview. FI Test- und Messtechnik GmbH. [Online] Available: http://fitm.de/wp-

content/uploads/2017/07/N38e-Microwave-Testing_An-Overview.pdf 

[72] M. Fallahpour, J. T. Case, M. T. Ghasr, and R. Zoughi, “Piecewise and wiener filter-based SAR techniques for monostatic microwave 

imaging of layered structures,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 282–294, Jan. 2014.  

[73] M. T. Ghasr, M. J. Horst, M. R. Dvorsky, and R Zoughi, “Wideband microwave camera for real-time 3-D imaging,” IEEE Trans. Antennas 

Propag., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 258-268, Jan. 2017. 

[74] M. Haynes, J. Stang, and M. Moghaddam, “Microwave Breast Imaging System Prototype with Integrated Numerical Characterization,” Int. J. 

Biomed. Imaging, vol. 2012, 2012. 

[75] M. Haynes, J. Stang, and M. Moghaddam, “Real-time Microwave Imaging of Differential Temperature for Thermal Therapy Monitoring,” 

IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1787-1796, June. 2014. 

[76] A. Salvade, M. Pastorino, R. Monleone, G. Bozza, and A. Randazzo, “A New Microwave Axial Tomograph for the Inspection of Dielectric 

Materials,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 2072-2079, Jul. 2009. 

[77] A. Randazzo, M. Pastorino, A. Salvade, R. Monleone, M. Maffongelli, and M. Lanini, “A multistatic tomographic approach to microwave 

imaging of dielectric targets,” Proc. 5th European 5th European Conf. Antennas and Propag. (EUCAP), Apr. 2011, pp. 2790-2794. 

[78] M. Maffongelli, S. Poretti, A. Salvade, R. D. Monleone, F. Meani, A. Fedeli, M. Pastorino, and A. Randazzo, “Preliminary Test of a 

Prototype of Microwave Axial Tomograph for Medical Applications,” Proc. Int. Symp. Medical Measurements and Applicat. (MeMeA), 
May. 2015. 

[79] G. Bozza, C. Estatico, A. Massa, M. Pastorino, and A. Randazzo, “Short-Range Image-Based Method for the Inspection of Strong 

Scatterers Using Microwaves,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1181-1188, Aug. 2007. 

[80] W. Shao, A. Edalati, T. R. McCollough, W. J. McCollough, “Experimental microwave near-field detection with moveable antennas,” in 

Proc. IEEE Int. Symp Antennas and Propag. USNC/URSI National Radio Sci. Meeting, July 2017, pp. 2387–2388. 

[81] W. Shao, A. Edalati, T. R. McCollough, W. J. McCollough, “A time-domain measurement system for UWB microwave imaging,” IEEE 

Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 2265–2275, Feb. 2018. 

[82] W. J. McCollough, T. R. McCollough, W. Shao, A. Edalati, and J. R. Leslie, “Microwave imaging device,” U.S. Patent 9 869 641, Jan. 16, 

2018. 

[83] W. Shao, A. Edalati, T. R. McCollough, W. J. McCollough, “A phase confocal method for near-field microwave imaging,” IEEE Trans. 

Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 2508–2515, Jul. 2017. 

[84] M. Asefi, A. Zakaria, and J. LoVetri, “Microwave Imaging using Normal Electric-Field Components Inside Metallic Resonant Chambers,” 

IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 923-933, Mar. 2017. 

[85] M. Ostadrahimi, A. Zakaria, J. LoVetri, and L. Shafai, “A Near-Field Dual Polarized (TE–TM) Microwave Imaging System,” IEEE Trans. 

Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 1376-1384, Mar. 2013. 

[86] M. G. Amin and F. Ahmad, “Wideband synthetic aperture beamforming for through-the-wall imaging,” IEEE Signal Processing Mag., vol. 

25, no. 4, pp. 110–113, Jul. 2008. 

[87] C. Debes, M. G. Amin, and A. M. Zoubir, “Target detection in single-and-multiple-view through-the-wall radar imaging,” IEEE Trans. 

Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 1349–1361, May 2009. 

[88] C. Debes, A. M. Zoubir, and M. G. Amin, “Enhanced detection using target polarization signatures in through-the-wall radar imaging,” 

IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1968–1979, May 2012. 

[89] X. Liu, H. Leung, and G. A. Lampropoulos, “Effect of wall parameters on ultra-wideband synthetic aperture through-the-wall radar 

imaging,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 48, no. 4, pp. 3435–3449, Oct. 2012. 

[90] J. Li, Z. Zeng, J. Sun, and F. Liu, “Through-wall detection of human being’s movement by UWB radar,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., 

vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1079–1083, Nov. 2012.  

[91] S. Wu, K. Tan, Z. Xia, J. Chen, S. Meng, and F. Guangyou, “Improved human respiration detection method via ultra-wideband radar in 

through-wall or other similar conditions,” IET Radar Sonar Navigation, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 468–476, Feb. 2016. 

[92] X. Liang, H. Zhang, G. Fang, S. Ye, and T. A. Gulliver, “An improved algorithm for through-wall target detection using ultra-wideband 

impulse radar,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 22101–22118, Oct. 2017. 

[93] I. Akduman, L. Crocco, and F. Soldovieri, “Experimental validation of a simple system for through-the-wall inverse scattering,” IEEE 

Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 258-262, Mar. 2011. 

[94] F. Wang, T. Horng, K.-C. Peng, J.-K. Jau, J.-Y. Li, and C.-C. Chen, “Detection of concealed individuals based on their vital signs by using 

a see-through-wall imaging system with a self-injection-locked radar,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 696–704, 
Jan. 2013. 

[95] F. Fioranelli, S. Salous, and X. Raimundo, “Frequency-modulated interrupted continuous wave as wall removal technique in through-the-

wall imaging,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 6272–6283, Oct. 2014. 

[96] V. Dang and O. Kilic, “Simulation framework for compressive sensing-based through-wall detection of moving targets,” IET Radar, Sonar 

Navigation, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 1349–1358, Sep. 2017. 

[97] V. C. Odedo, M. E. Yavuz, F. Costen, R. Himeno, and H. Yokota, “Time reversal technique based on spatiotemporal windows for through 

the wall imaging,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3065–3072, Jun. 2017. 

[98] F. Soldovieri, R. Solimene, and F. Ahmad, “Sparse tomographic inverse scattering approach for through-the-wall radar imaging,” IEEE 

Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 3340–3350, Dec. 2012. 

[99] D. M. Sheen, D. L. McMakin, and T. E. Hall, “Three-dimensional millimeter-wave imaging for concealed weapon detection,” IEEE Trans. 

Microw. Theory Techn., vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 1581-1592, Sep. 2001. 

[100] D. M. Sheen, D. L. McMakin, and T. E. Hall, “Near-field three-dimensional radar imaging techniques and applications,” Applied Optics, 

vol. 49, no. 19, pp. E83-E93, 2010. 


This paper has been accepted by IEEE Microwave Magazine and published on a future issue. 
 

[101] X. Zhuge and A. G. Yarovoy, “A sparse aperture MIMO-SAR-based UWB imaging system for concealed weapon detection,” IEEE Trans. 

Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 509–518, Jan. 2011. 

[102] X. Zhuge and A. Yarovoy, “Automatic target recognition in ultra-wideband 3-D images for concealed weapon detection,” in Proc. 9th 

European Conf. Synthetic Aperture Radar, Apr. 2012, pp. 186–188. 

[103] S. Agarwal, B. Kumar, and D. Singh, “Non-invasive concealed weapon detection and identification using V band millimeter wave imaging 

radar system,” in Proc. National Conf. Recent Advances Electron. and Comput. Eng. (RAECE), Feb. 2015. 

[104] K. P. Jaisle and C. M. Rappaport, “Ray-based reconstruction algorithm for multi-monostatic radar in imaging system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. 

Symp Antennas and Propag. USNC/URSI National Radio Sci. Meeting, Jul. 2017, pp. 405–406. 

[105] R. Knipper, A. Brahm, E. Heinz, T. May, G. Notni, H.-G. Meyer, A. Tunnermann, and J. Popp, “THz absorption in fabric and its impact on 

body scanning for security application,” IEEE Trans. THz Sci. Technol., vol. 5, no. 6, pp. 999–1004, Nov. 2015. 

 
 


