1

Ideal spectral emissivity design for extreme radiative cooling

Suwan Jeon1 and Jonghwa Shin1,a)

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 

34141, Republic of Korea

Abstract

Radiative coolers that can passively cool objects by radiating heat into the outer space have recently received much attention. 

However, the ultimate limits of their performance as well as their ideal spectral design are still unknown. We present the 

fundamental lower bound of the temperature of a radiatively cooled object on earth surfaces under general conditions, including 

non-radiative heat transfer, and the upper bound of the net radiative power density of a radiative cooler as a function of 

temperature. We derive the ideal spectral emissivities that can realize such bounds and, contrary to common belief, find that 

the ideal emission window is different from 8 to 13 μm and forms disjointed sets of wavelengths, whose width diminishes at 

lower temperatures. We show that ideal radiative coolers with perfect thermal insulation against conduction and convection 

have a steady-state temperature of 243.6 K in summer and 180.5 K in winter, much below previously measured values. We 

also provide the ideal emission window for a single-band emitter and show that this window should be much narrower than 

that of previous designs if the objective is to build a radiative freezer that can operate in summer. We provide a general guideline 

for designing spectral emissivity to achieve the maximum temperature drop or the maximum net radiative power density.

Manuscript

The atmosphere acts as a selective window to electromagnetic waves, transmitting most of the visible sunlight and blocking 

harmful ultraviolet and X-rays1. Recently, the transparency window in the long-wavelength infrared, which ranges from 8 to 

13 μm, has received great attention because it allows for below-ambient cooling without energy consumption2-15. The principle 

of this spontaneous cooling is based on thermal radiation in the transparency window being able to transfer heat between an 

object on the earth surface and the cold outer space without being blocked by the atmosphere. Even under direct sunlight, 

below-ambient cooling has been experimentally achieved by enhancing the reflectivity in the solar spectrum and the emissivity 

in the transparency window using various methods3,7,9–12,15. However, it remains unproven whether the 8.0–13.0 μm range is 

the exact optimal range to realize the maximum temperature drop versus ambient temperature, and the fundamental limit of the 

achievable cooling temperature has not been theoretically derived yet.

Here, we present the ideal spectral emissivity under general conditions that realizes the ultimate lower bound of the temperature

of a radiatively cooled object on earth. Contrary to common belief, we prove that the optimal window is different from 8 to 13

μm and depends strongly on the target temperature, which in turn is limited by the non-radiative heat transfer rate. Particularly, 

with no non-radiative heat transfer, the cooler should have a needle-like spectral emissivity if the objective is to have as low 

steady-state temperature as possible, and can induce 56.4 K and 92.5 K drops in summer and winter, respectively, if enough 

time is given to reach a steady state. More generally, we establish a universal guideline for designing spectral emissivity under 

________________________

a) E-mail: qubit@kaist.ac.kr. 


2

given environmental conditions, including ambient temperature and the non-radiative heat transfer coefficient, and present the 

ultimate lower bound of the temperature as well as the ultimate upper bound of the net radiative power density under those 

conditions.

Before we derive the ideal spectral emissivity, we provide our model and its assumptions on how a radiative cooler interacts 

with its surroundings. A radiative cooler that covers a target object is horizontally placed on the ground at sea level with no

nearby obstacles so that the view angle of the sky is 2π steradian. The cooler and the object are in thermal equilibrium and thus

have the same temperature (T). The cooler undergoes radiative heat exchange with the sun, the outer space, and the atmosphere.

It also undergoes non-radiative, i.e., conductive and convective, heat exchange with the ambient air and the ground (Fig. 1(a)). 

The radiation through the atmosphere is subject to various conditions, such as season16, humidity17, and temperature variations

along the altitude18. We denote these environmental variables as α. The ground is assumed to be at the same temperature as the

ambient air (Tamb). Then, the net cooling power density of the radiative cooler is given by

𝑃net(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) = 𝑃cooler(𝑇) − 𝑃sun(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) − 𝑃space(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) − 𝑃atm(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) − 𝑃non−rad(𝑇amb, 𝑇), (1)

where Pcooler(T) is the radiant exitance of the cooler, Psun(Tamb, T, α), Pspace(Tamb, T, α), and Patm(Tamb, T, α) are the absorbed 

irradiance on the cooler from the sun, the outer space, and the atmosphere, respectively, and Pnon-rad(Tamb, T) is the absorbed 

non-radiative power density from the surroundings; these all have a unit of W/m2. Pspace(Tamb, T, α) can be usually ignored 

because the cosmic background is much cooler than Tamb or T. The rest of the terms in Eq. (1) are expressed as

𝑃cooler(𝑇) = ∫ d𝛺 cos 𝜃 ∫ d𝜆 𝐼̃BB(𝜆, 𝑇)𝜖c(𝜆, 𝛺, 𝑇),
(2a)

𝑃sun(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) = ∫ d𝜆 𝐼sun(𝜆, 𝛺sun, 𝑇amb, 𝛼)𝜖c(𝜆, 𝛺sun, 𝑇),
(2b)

𝑃atm(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) = ∫ d𝛺 𝑐𝑜𝑠 𝜃 ∫ d𝜆 𝐼̃atm(𝜆, 𝛺, 𝑇amb, 𝛼)𝜖c(𝜆, 𝛺, 𝑇),
(2c)

𝑃non−rad(𝑇amb, 𝑇) = ℎc(𝑇amb − 𝑇),
(2d)

where∫ d𝛺 = ∫
d𝜙

2π
0
∫
d𝜃 sin𝜃

π/2
0
is the hemispherical integration and 𝐼̃BB(𝜆, 𝑇) =

2ℎ𝑐2

𝜆5

1

exp(ℎ𝑐/𝜆𝑘B𝑇)−1 is the spectral radiance 

of an ideal blackbody following Plank’s law (h, c, kB, and λ are the Plank constant, the velocity of light in vacuum, the 

Boltzmann constant, and wavelength, respectively). ϵc(λ, Ω, T) represents the spectral and directional emissivity of the cooler.

Isun(λ, Ωsun, Tamb, α) is the spectral solar irradiance at a mid-latitude, sea-level location in the northern hemisphere when the 

sunlight is incident from angle Ωsun. In Eqs. (2b-c), the absorptivity of the cooler is replaced by its emissivity using Kirchhoff’s 

law. In Eq. (2d), the non-radiative absorption is expressed by an effective non-radiative heat transfer coefficient hc, which 

depends on environmental conditions, such as wind speeds, as well as on how well the cooler and the object are thermally 

insulated from the environment19. 𝐼̃atm(𝜆, 𝛺, 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏, 𝛼) is the angle-dependent spectral radiance from the atmosphere, obtained 

by multiplying the black-body radiation spectrum with the atmospheric emissivity ϵatm. The latter has been approximated as

ϵatm(λ, Ω, Tamb, α) = 1 – t(λ, Tamb, α)AM(θ)20, where t(λ, Tamb, α) is the atmospheric transmittance from the sea level toward the 

outer space in the zenith direction (data from MODTRAN 621) and AM(θ) accounts for larger attenuations at a non-zero zenith 

angle θ. In doing so, we applied a spherical shell model for AM(θ) (Fig. S1 in the supplementary material) instead of the flat-

earth model of AM(θ) = 1/cosθ20.

Now, let us derive the ideal spectral emissivity of a radiative cooler at a specific temperature for maximum net cooling power 

density assuming it is isotropic at all angles. We first rearrange the net cooling power density in Eq. (1) into radiative and non-

radiative parts as

𝑃net(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) = 𝑃rad(𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) − 𝑃non−rad(𝑇amb, 𝑇)

= ∫ d𝜆 [𝐼BB(𝜆, 𝑇) − 𝐼sun(𝜆, 𝛺sun, 𝑇amb, 𝛼) − 𝐼atm(𝜆, 𝑇amb, 𝛼)]𝜖c(𝜆, 𝑇) − ℎc(𝑇amb − 𝑇),
(3)


3

where 𝐼BB(𝜆, 𝑇) = ∫ d𝛺 cos 𝜃 𝐼̃BB(𝜆, 𝑇) and 𝐼atm(𝜆, 𝑇amb, 𝛼) = ∫ d𝛺 cos 𝜃 𝐼̃atm(𝜆, 𝛺, 𝑇amb, 𝛼) are spectral irradiances and

Prad(Tamb, T, α) = Pcooler(T) − Psun(Tamb, T, α) – Patm(Tamb, T, α) is the net radiative power density. We note that ϵc(λ, T) works as 

a scaling factor for the net radiative heat exchange at each wavelength. For maximal Pnet(Tamb, T, α) and Prad(Tamb, T, α) at a 

given temperature, ϵc(λ, T) can be suitably adjusted between 0 and 1 depending on the sign of the term Irad,BB = IBB(λ, T) – Isun(λ, 

Ωsun, Tamb, α) – Iatm(λ, Tamb, α). For wavelengths at which the sign is positive (i.e., net radiative emission occurring), ϵc(λ, T) = 

1 should be chosen to maximize the radiation whereas, for other wavelengths, ϵc(λ, T) = 0 should be chosen to minimize 

absorption. This emissivity design rule is summarized as

𝜖ideal(𝜆; 𝛺sun, 𝑇amb, 𝑇, 𝛼) =

1

2 [1 + sgn(𝐼rad,BB)],
(4)

where sgn(𝑥) = { 1 if 𝑥 > 0

−1 if 𝑥 < 0 is the sign function, whose value at x = 0 is undefined but does not affect the results in this 

situation.

We emphasize that ϵideal is sensitively determined by the temperature of the cooler. This aspect was not fully investigated in

previous studies, and two types of emissivity patterns were usually considered as optimal: a broadband emissivity pattern for 

above-ambient cooling and a rectangular (1 over 8–13 μm and 0 for other wavelengths) emissivity pattern for below-ambient 

cooling6,7,14,22–25. However, the actual spectral regions contributing to cooling and heating via radiation change dramatically as 

the temperature drops below the ambient temperature. Thus, emissivity spectra designed for a temperature range around 

ambient temperature are no longer an optimal solution at lower temperatures.

Another important fact revealed by Eq. (4) is that the temperatures achievable through radiative cooling have a fundamental 

lower bound. For Prad(Tamb, T, α) to be positive, Irad,BB must be positive at least for one wavelength. This imposes the ultimate 

lower bound, Tideal,min, for the temperature of a radiatively cooled object, where Tideal,min is the temperature at which Irad,BB is 

zero at one (or more) wavelengths and negative at all other wavelengths.

The temperature of the cooler in a steady state can be identified by solving Eq. (3) for Pnet(Tamb, T, α) = 0. First, we investigate 

the most extreme case of ℎc = 0. Without non-radiative heat transfer, Pnet(Tamb, T, α) is always positive if T > Tideal,min. Thus, 

the ideal radiative cooler cools down until the temperature approaches Tideal,min. For example, at Daejeon city (36.35○ N in 

latitude), Tideal,min is 243.6 K and 180.5 K at noon in summer and winter, respectively, as shown in Figs. 1(b–c). This corresponds 

to 56.4 K and 92.5 K drops below ambient temperature (Tamb is assumed to be 300 K and 273 K in summer and winter, 

respectively). Owing to seasonal variations in atmospheric emissivity, the temperature drop is much larger in winter than in 

summer. As expected from Eq. (4), the ideal emissivity at these temperatures is a needle-like function centered at 8.96 μm in 

summer and 11.61 μm in winter; these wavelengths are the only ones at which Irad,BB is non-negative. Considering the lowest 

measured temperature in previous studies (approximately 243 K under vacuum conditions in winter)5, our results suggest that 

temperature can be further lowered by more than 50 K in principle. 

In reality, the presence of conduction or convection (hc ≠ 0) increases the steady-state temperature of an ideal cooler, Tideal, 

above Tideal,min. The steady-state temperature of any radiative cooler with temperature-independent spectral emissivity can be 

easily found graphically because Prad and Pnon-rad are monotonically increasing and decreasing functions of T, respectively, and 

they cross each other at the steady-state temperature. For example, Prad's for an 8–13 emitter (ϵ8–13, black dashed line) and a 

broadband emitter (ϵFull, black dotted line) are plotted in Fig. 2(a), under summer atmospheric conditions assuming solar 

irradiance corresponding to AM1.5 and an average solar zenith angle of 48.2°. The 8–13 emitter and the broadband emitter 

have a unity emissivity for wavelengths between 8 and 13 μm and for all wavelengths longer than 4 μm, respectively. Both 


4

hypothetical emitters have exactly zero emissivity for all other wavelengths. The red solid lines in Fig. 2(a) represent Pnon-rad

for several hc values. As expected, the steady-state temperature for either emitter rises for higher hc values.

In general, the net radiative power density of any radiative cooler cannot exceed the values indicated by the black solid line in 

Fig. 2(a), representing the performance of an ideal radiative cooler at each cooler temperature. In previous studies, the 8–13

emitter was considered as an almost ideal radiative cooler for below-ambient cooling cases. However, it can be seen that the 

net radiative power density of this cooler (black dashed line in Fig. 2(a)) never touches the black solid line at any temperature. 

In other words, there is always a better spectral design than unit emissivity from 8 to 13 μm at any target temperature. For 

example, at 273.15 K, the net radiative power density of the 8–13 μm emitter is 7.31 W/m2, whereas that of the ideal cooler 

optimized for this temperature is more than two times larger at 16.84 W/m2. Note that these results are independent of hc. For 

the particular case of hc = 0.5 W/(m2K), the lower bound of the steady-state temperature, which is 271.10 K, is below the 

freezing temperature of water. The ideal cooler, which can reach this bound, has a highly selective spectral emissivity with 

many disjointed sets of wavelengths over which the emissivity is unity, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Thermal insulation on the level 

of hc = 0.5 W/(m2K) can be achieved with a 7 cm-thick polystyrene foam at the back and an infrared-transmitting composite 

window at the front. Inside the previously accepted 8–13 μm transparency window, it is possible to identify several important 

wavelength ranges for which the emissivity must be minimized. One such wavelength range is around 9.5 μm, where there are 

multiple atmospheric absorption resonances due to O3 and other substances23. If these wavelengths are included in the emission 

band as done in previous designs, the steady-state temperature (275.84 K) rises above the freezing point of water.

At lower hc values, the difference becomes more dramatic. Tideal and ϵideal are plotted for a range of hc values in Figs. 2(c–d). As

hc decreases, the difference between Tideal and the steady-state temperature of the 8–13 μm emitter (T8–13) becomes larger, 

reaching 24.67 K at hc = 0, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The width of the wavelength ranges for which the emissivity should be unity 

diminishes as hc is reduced and become highly selective, as illustrated in Fig. 2(d). These results imply that, in a properly 

insulated system, it is possible to achieve a much lower steady-state temperature than T8–13 if the spectral emissivity is optimally 

designed to benefit from the lower hc.

In practice, however, it might be challenging to realize such a highly selective spectrum. Thus, we also consider a simper, 

single-band emitter with unit emissivity over a single wavelength range from λshort to λlong and optimize λshort and λlong for best 

performance. For hc = 0.5 W/(m2K), the steady-state temperature is shown in Fig. 3(a) for different combinations of λshort and 

λlong. Among the various potential designs, the optimal design is λshort = 8.30 μm and λlong = 12.38 μm, with a corresponding 

steady-state temperature of 274.40 K. Whereas the ideal, multi-band emitters depicted in Fig. 2 have non-negative net radiative 

emission at all wavelengths, single-band emitters have net radiative absorption at some wavelength regions, as shown in Fig. 

3(b) with a red color. Nonetheless, an optimally designed single-band emitter can exhibit a considerably lower steady-state 

temperature (Tideal,SB) than T8–13 for highly insulated systems (Fig. 3(c)). In particular, at the perfect insulation limit, Tideal,SB and 

T8–13 converge to 243.64 K and 268.31 K, respectively, exhibiting a difference of 24.67 K. Even in a more realistic case of hc

= 0.13 W/(m2K), Tideal,SB (265.60 K) is 5 K lower than T8–13 and the corresponding emission band is from 9.98 μm to 12.26 μm.

Figure 3(d) illustrates the optimal emission band for a wide range of hc values. At high hc values, the ideal emission band for a 

single-band radiative cooler is similar to previous designs of 8 to 13 μm. However, at low hc values, the optimal emission band 

narrows down considerably. In particular, it can be seen from Figs. 3(c–d) that it is better to abandon the wavelength range 

from 8 to 10 μm if the target steady-state temperature is lower than the freezing point of water. Of course, if dual or multi-band 

designs are permissible, a part of this wavelength range can be used for radiation to decrease the steady-state temperature 

further or to increase the net radiative power density.


5

In conclusion, we presented a systematic method to calculate the ultimate lower bound of a radiatively cooled object’s steady-

state temperature as well as the ultimate upper bound of net radiative power density at a given cooler temperature under general 

environmental conditions with an arbitrary effective non-radiative heat transfer coefficient. We also derived the ideal spectral 

emissivities that can reach such bounds. Unlike the often-adopted contiguous emission window of 8 to 13 μm used in previous 

radiative coolers, the ideal radiative cooler exhibits unity emissivity over disjointed sets of wavelengths. We also investigated 

the ideal emission band for a single-band emitter and found that the optimal band narrows down considerably at lower 

temperatures. The proposed scheme may serve as a basic guideline for designing the emissive properties of extreme radiative 

coolers as well as for estimating the amount of thermal insulation required for them.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) 

(No. 2018M3D1A1058998 and No. 2017R1A2B2005702).

References

1 C. Elachi and J. Van Zyl, Introduction to the Physics and 
Techniques of Remote Sensing, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 
2006).
2 E. Rephaeli, A. Raman, and S. Fan, Nano Lett. 13, 1457 
(2013).
3 A.P. Raman, M.A. Anoma, L. Zhu, E. Rephaeli, and S. 
Fan, Nature 515, 540 (2014).
4 M.M. Hossain, B. Jia, and M. Gu, Adv. Opt. Mater. 3, 
1047 (2015).
5 Z. Chen, L. Zhu, A. Raman, and S. Fan, Nat. Commun. 7, 
1 (2016).
6 Z. Huang and X. Ruan, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 104, 890 
(2017).
7 J. long Kou, Z. Jurado, Z. Chen, S. Fan, and A.J. Minnich, 
ACS Photonics 4, 626 (2017).
8 C. Zou, G. Ren, M.M. Hossain, S. Nirantar, W. 
Withayachumnankul, T. Ahmed, M. Bhaskaran, S. Sriram, 
M. Gu, and C. Fumeaux, Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, 1 (2017).
9 E.A. Goldstein, A.P. Raman, and S. Fan, Nat. Energy 2, 1 
(2017).
10 Y. Zhai, Y. Ma, S.N. David, D. Zhao, R. Lou, G. Tan, R. 
Yang, and X. Yin, Science 355, 1062 (2017).
11 S. Atiganyanun, J.B. Plumley, S.J. Han, K. Hsu, J. 
Cytrynbaum, T.L. Peng, S.M. Han, and S.E. Han, ACS 
Photonics 5, 1181 (2018).

12 G.J. Lee, Y.J. Kim, H.M. Kim, Y.J. Yoo, and Y.M. Song, 
Adv. Opt. Mater. 6, 1 (2018).
13 B. Bhatia, A. Leroy, Y. Shen, L. Zhao, M. Gianello, D. 
Li, T. Gu, J. Hu, M. Soljačić, and E.N. Wang, Nat. 
Commun. 9, 1 (2018).
14 D. Wu, C. Liu, Z. Xu, Y. Liu, Z. Yu, L. Yu, L. Chen, R. 
Li, R. Ma, and H. Ye, Mater. Des. 139, 104 (2018).
15 H. Bao, C. Yan, B. Wang, X. Fang, C.Y. Zhao, and X. 
Ruan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 168, 78 (2017).
16 Y. Iijima and M. Shinoda, J. Appl. Meteorol. 41, 734 
(2002).
17 A.W. Harrison, Sol. Energy 26, 243 (1981).
18 X. Berger, J. Bathiebo, F. Kieno, and C.N. Awanou, 
Renew. Energy 2, 139 (1992).
19 J.A. Duffie, W.A. Beckman, and J. McGowan, Solar 
Engineering of Thermal Processes, 4th ed. (John Wiley & 
Sons, 2013).
20 C.G. Granqvist and A. Hjortsberg, J. Appl. Phys. 52, 4205 
(1981).
21 A. Berk, P. Conforti, R. Kennett, T. Perkins, F. Hawes, 
and J. van den Bosch, Proc. SPIE 9088, 90880H-1 (2014).
22 M.M. Hossain and M. Gu, Adv. Sci. 3, 1 (2016).
23 D. Zhao, A. Aili, Y. Zhai, S. Xu, G. Tan, X. Yin, and R. 
Yang, Appl. Phys. Rev. 6, 021306 (2019).
24 L. Zhu, A. Raman, K.X. Wang, M.A. Anoma, and S. Fan, 
Optica 1, 32 (2014).
25 L. Zhu, A. Raman, and S. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103,
223902 (2013).


6

Figure 1. (a) Schematic of a radiative cooler and its surroundings. (b–c) Spectral irradiance of a blackbody at the steady state 
temperature of the ideal radiative cooler (black solid line) and that of the sun and the atmosphere combined (border line of the 
colored area) in (b) summer and (c) winter for hc = 0 W/(m2K) at Daejeon city. Each color indicates the spectral irradiance of

a blackbody at different temperatures (black dashed lines are for ambient temperature). The bottom panels show the ideal 

spectral emissivities.


7

Figure 2. (a) Radiative (black) and non-radiative (red) power densities as a function of cooler temperature. (b) Spectral 

irradiance and spectral emissivity of the ideal radiative cooler for hc = 0.5 W/(m2K). (c) The steady-state temperature as a 
function of hc. In (a, c), data for the ideal radiative cooler is plotted with black solid line, the 8–13 μm emitter with black 

dashed lines, and the broadband emitter with black dotted lines. (d) Ideal spectral emissivity as a function of hc.


8

Figure 3. (a) The steady-state temperature of a single-band emitter for various λshort and λlong combinations. (b) Spectral 

irradiances (top panel) and the spectral emissivity of an ideal single-band emitter for hc = 0.5 W/(m2K) (bottom panel). The 
blue and red areas in the bottom panel indicate the spectral regions of emission and absorption via radiation, respectively. (c) 
The steady-state temperature of the ideal single-band emitter (black solid line) and the 8–13 μm emitter (black dashed line), 
and the difference between them (red line), as a function of hc. (d) Ideal single-band spectral emissivity as a function of hc.


9

Ideal spectral emissivity design for extreme radiative cooling - Supplementary material

Suwan Jeon1 and Jonghwa Shin1,a)

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 

34141, Republic of Korea

A.
Spherical shell model

As electromagnetic wave transmitting through the atmosphere, it is scattered and absorbed by air molecules. The level of 

attenuation depends on atmospheric thickness along the line-of-sight, which can be represented by the angle of sight. In order 

to evaluate cooling performance of radiative coolers, which normally emit thermal radiation over all directions, angular 

properties of atmospheric transmittance must be precisely described. From Beer-Lambert law, the transmittance through lossy 

medium, i.e., the atmosphere, at the zenith angle θ can be expressed as T(θ) = 10-A(θ). The angle-dependent attenuation 

coefficient A(θ) can be approximated as A(θ) = A0∙h(θ)/h0, where A0 is the attenuation constant, h(θ) is the angle-dependent 

thickness of the atmosphere, and h0 is the atmospheric thickness at the zenith direction. Then, the angle-dependent transmittance 

through the atmosphere can be arranged as

𝑇(𝜃) = 10−𝐴(𝜃) = (10−A0)ℎ(𝜃)/h0 = (T0)AM(𝜃)
(S1)

where T0 is the atmospheric transmittance at the zenith direction (denoted as t(λ, Tamb, α) in the manuscript to express spectral 

and environmental effects) and AM(θ) = h(θ)/h0 is the air mass coefficient at the zenith angle θ. In flat earth model, mostly 

used in previous studies, the air mass coefficient is AM(θ) = 1/cosθ. Although it might be a simple model expressed only with 

zenith angle, the air mass coefficient diverges at large zenith angle, close to 90°. On the other hand, spherical shell model can 

represent atmospheric thickness even at large zenith angle by assuming that the atmosphere surrounds the earth just like a 

spherical shell (Fig. S1(a)). In this paper, we applied geometric parameters as h0 = 99 km and R = 6400 km. Figure S1(b) 

illustrates that spherical shell model is reliable over 70° contrary to flat earth model.


10

Figure S1. (a) Schematic of spherical shell model and (b) atmospheric thickness as a function of the zenith angle for flat earth 

model and spherical shell model.


