> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
1

Abstract— Independent current extraction in multi-junction 

solar cells has gained attention in recent years because it can 
deliver higher annual energy yield and can work for more 
semiconductor material combinations than the more established 
series-connected multi-junction technology. The heterojunction 
bipolar transistor solar cell concept (HBTSC) was recently 
proposed as a simple, compact and cost-effective multi-terminal 
device structure that allows independent current extraction. It 
consists of only three main layers: emitter, base and collector. In 
this work we use a drift-diffusion model to analyze important 
aspects in the design of an HBTSC structure based on typical III-
V semiconductor materials. We find that carrier injection from the 
emitter into the collector (transistor effect) degrades the open-
circuit voltage of the top sub-cell, but this risk can be eliminated 
by optimizing the base design. We find requirements for the base 
layer which are, in principle, achievable in the context of current 
III-V semiconductor technology.

Index Terms — Drift-diffusion model, heterojunction bipolar 

transistor solar cell, multi-junction solar cell, novel photovoltaic 
concept. 

I. INTRODUCTION

ULTI-junction solar cells combine several sub-cells 

made of different semiconductor materials, each one 

absorbing a portion of the solar spectrum. This absorption 
selectivity leads to a high photovoltaic efficiency because the
sub-cells converting high energy photons can deliver their 
photocurrent at correspondingly high voltages. This is the main 
reason why, multi-junction solar cells and, in particular, those 
made of epitaxial III-V materials, hold the absolute efficiency 
records to-date among all existing photovoltaic technologies
[1].

In order to facilitate the integration of multi-junction devices 

into modules, most of them have been designed to operate under 
the condition of current-matching, that is, the device has only 
two terminals and the sub-cells are forced to produce the same 
photocurrent because they are interconnected in series. 
Although this configuration has been very successful, the 
current-matching constraint introduces some problems. First, 

Manuscript received June , 2019. This work has been partially funded by the 

European Union’s Horizon2020 Research and Innovation Programme under 
Grant Agreement 787289 and by the Spanish Ministry of Economy under the 
project INVENTA-PV (TEC2015-64189-C3-1-R). E.A. acknowledges a 
Ramón y Cajal Fellowship (RYC-2015-18539) funded by the Spanish Science, 
Innovation and Universities Ministry. Funding from Universidad Politécnica de 

current-matched structures are very sensitive to the choice of 
band-gap energies. Efficiency limit calculations show that 
adopting an independent current extraction design increases 
enormously the range of band-gap energies that are suitable for 
each different sub-cell in a multi-junction stack [2], [3]. This is 
a crucial aspect when there is a need to combine specific 
semiconductor materials for technological or economic reasons, 
as it is recently the case of the perovskite/silicon tandem [4], 
[5]. It has to be noted that, even if the chosen materials have 
optimum band-gap energies at 25 ºC, those energies will change 
under real operation conditions due to temperature variations. 
Also, the condition of current-matching makes multi-junction 
solar cells sensitive to spectral changes caused by the 
movement of the sun in the sky and by atmospheric phenomena
[6]. This results in a significant reduction of the annual energy 
yield for three or more junctions with respect to the case where 
the same junctions were independently connected [7], [8]. 

Those limitations in current–matched multi-junction cells 

have motivated a growing interest in device architectures with 
three or more terminals [9]–[15], in spite of the extra 
operational effort that they may introduce [16]–[18]. In this 
context, it is desirable not to introduce excessive complexity in 
the solar cell structure. The heterojunction bipolar transistor 
solar cell (HBTSC) proposed in Ref. [9] is a three-terminal 
device with the theoretical efficiency limit of an independently 
connected double-junction solar cell and with an extremely 
simple structure, compatible with monolithic, thin-film and 
low-cost technologies [19]. At this respect, it is remarkable that 
the HBTSC does not require the introduction of tunnel junctions 
or isolating layers. Fig. 1(a) shows the basic layer structure of 
an HBTSC. It resembles a heterojunction bipolar transistor and, 
as in the case of the transistor, it can be either npn or pnp. The 
top junction is formed between two layers called emitter (E) and 
base (B) in analogy to the bipolar transistor. They are made of 
semiconductors of high band-gap energy (not necessarily the 
same one). The bottom junction is formed between the base (B) 
and collector (C) layers with the latter made of a low-bandgap 
semiconductor.

Madrid is acknowledged by E.A. & P.G.L. (Young Researcher Grant) and 
M.H.Z. (Predoctoral Grant). 

All authors are with the Instituto de Energía Solar - Universidad Politécnica 

de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain (corresponding author: Elisa Antolín, 
elisa.antolin@upm.es). 

Considerations for the design of a 

heterojunction bipolar transistor solar cell

Elisa Antolín, Member, IEEE, Marius H. Zehender,

Pablo García-Linares, Simon A. Svatek, Antonio Martí

M

© 2019 IEEE.  Personal use of this material is permitted.  Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future 
media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or 
redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works

This document is the accepted manuscript that has been published at IEEE Journal of Photovoltatics with DOI: 10.1109/
JPHOTOV.2019.2945914,


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
2

Fig. 1: (a) Structure of an npn HBTSC showing the three-terminals 
and the external circuits for independent current extraction. (b) 
Band diagram of an npn HBTSC in open circuit. Dashed lines 
represent the electron and hole quasi-Fermi levels. Note that the 
bending of the minority carrier quasi-Fermi level in the base layer 
enables the top junction to have a higher VOC than the bottom 
junction. The pnp structure is conceptually identical, exchanging 
the roles of electrons and holes.

Compared to conventional multi-junction technologies, the 

HBTSC has the advantage of a very simple structure. The 
current efficiency record for independently-connected double-
junction devices corresponds to a four-terminal solar cell that 
comprises an epitaxial III-V (five layers) top cell and a 
complete silicon bottom solar cell, the two of them attached to 
either side of a glass slide [12]. On the other hand, monolithic, 
current-matched double-junction solar cells made of III-V 
semiconductors have at least 13 epitaxial layers and require a 
tunnel junction. An HBTSC also made of III-V materials is 
monolithic and contains a total of six layers, including all 
passivating and contact layers.

To exploit the potential of the HBTSC simple structure and 

make the step from theory to practical implementation it is 
necessary to find cost-effective and efficient device designs. In 
the band diagram of Fig. 1(b) we see that, conceptually, the top 
junction open-circuit voltage (VOC) can be larger than the 

bottom junction VOC, as expected from a double-junction solar 
cell, even though the two junctions share the base layer. This 
results from a strong bending of the minority carrier quasi-
Fermi level in the base [9], [20]. The question arises: is it 
possible to produce this quasi-Fermi level bending without 
power losses and achieve a high voltage on the top cell using a 
base layer of realistic material parameters and reduced 
thickness, 
compatible 
with 
monolithic 
or
low-cost 

technologies? In this work we apply a simple drift-diffusion 
model to answer this question. We use the example of an 
HBTSC made of III-V semiconductor materials because their
properties are well characterized, but the main conclusions of 
the model are applicable to other material systems. We have
also recently produced proof-of-concept HBTSC prototypes 
based on this type of materials which corroborate the main 
features of the HBTSC (see Ref. [18] for an AlGaAs/GaAs 
prototype and Ref. [21] for a GaInP/GaAs prototype).

II.
HBTSC DRIFT-DIFFUSION MODEL

In order to illustrate the role of the base layer on the 

performance of the HBTSC we use a drift-diffusion model. For 
simplification, we do not introduce illumination and study only 
the dark characteristics (with the exception of Fig. 6). Also, we 
fix all electronic parameters of the emitter and collector. 
Throughout the paper, only the base parameters will vary. 
Moreover, the thickness of emitter and collector are set to 
infinity. This way, their contribution to the dark current can be 
calculated with the long diode model (the recombination 
depends only on the diffusion length, and not on the actual 
thickness or the surface recombination velocity at the front or 
rear surfaces). 

As long as the device is in the dark, the equations of the drift-

diffusion model are the same as for an ideal bipolar transistor 
(BJT). It is known that the BJT performance profits from strong 
carrier injection from emitter to collector because this leads to 
a high transistor gain. For that reason, the design always 
considers a very small base thickness (WB) and the equations 
are simplified. However, we can anticipate that the typical 
short-base approximation should not be used here because the 
detailed balance model of the HBTSC shows that carrier 
injection has to be avoided to reach the efficiency limit of a 
double-junction solar cell [9]. Therefore, we will use the non-
approximated set of equations for a long base, which can be 
found in detailed BJT books such as [22]. They are compiled in 
Table III in the Annex. 

TABLE I

EMITTER AND COLLECTOR MATERIAL PARAMETERS

Emitter
Collector

Representetive of 
Ga0.5In0.5P
Al0.33Ga0.67As
GaAs

EG (eV)
1.84
1.42

ni (cm-3)
1064
2.1  106

ND (cm-3)
2  1017
2  1017

Lh (µm)
0.2
2

µh (cm²/V∙s)
50
200


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
3

We have chosen the material parameters so that they are 

approximately representative of a state-of-the-art lattice-
matched III-V-semiconductor photovoltaic device. Table I
summarizes the main parameters for the emitter and collector. 
The emitter has a band-gap energy (EG) of 1.84 eV and an 
intrinsic carrier concentration (ni) of 1064 cm-3 at room 
temperature,
which is representative of Ga0.5In0.5P
or 

Al0.33Ga0.67As (this relationship between EG and ni is exact for 
AlGaAs and approximate for GaInP). The collector has the 
parameters of GaAs, EG = 1.42 eV and ni = 2.1∙106 cm-3. Doping 
concentrations (ND), minority carrier mobilities (µe) and 
minority carrier diffusion lengths (Le) are also given in Table I. 
They have been chosen so that two single-junction solar cells 
made of either material and stacked on top of each other would 
produce approximately 1.39 V and 1.02 V VOC under one-sun 
illumination.

For the base, we consider three possible materials. We have 

labelled them base material 1 to 3 (BM1 to BM3), as 
summarized in Table II. BM1 is similar to the emitter material, 
BM2 is representative of a higher band-gap material, such as 
Al0.5Ga0.5As or AlGaInP with low Al content, and BM3 is 
representative of a very high band-gap material, such as AlAs 
or Al-rich AlGaInP. We set the base minority carrier mobility 
(µB) to 100 cm2/V∙s and vary the doping level (NA) and minority 
carrier diffusion length (LB).

III.
RESULTS – DESIGN OF THE BASE LAYER

Fig. 2shows the dark current density calculated for the top 

junction (J0top) when this junction is biased at 1.3 V and the 
bottom junction is biased at 1.0 V (close to maximum power 
point operational voltages). The base thickness has been set to 
800 nm and different minority carrier diffusion lengths are 
considered. The three plots show the three material choices for 
the base, from lower to higher band-gap energy: BM1 (a), BM2 
(b) and BM3 (c). As for any pn junction, an increase in the dark 
current is detrimental because it will lead to a decrease in the 
output power delivered by the top junction when it is under 
illumination (for a fixed photogenerated current density).

The J0top value results from the sum of an emitter contribution 

(holes injected from the base, Eq. (5)) and a base contribution
(electrons injected from the emitter, Eq. (4)). Therefore, the 
minimum possible J0top is achieved when the base contribution 
is negligible, and it is determined by the emitter parameters. 
The increase in J0top over that baseline that we observe in some 
curves can be explained by the injection of majority carriers 
from the emitter into the base. Fig. 2 shows that carrier injection

is reduced with high band-gap energy and/or doping level in the 
base. Increasing the minority carrier diffusion length in the base 
also decreases carrier injection. It has to be noted that the plots 
have a logarithmic scale – any difference in J0top that is 
noticeable to the eye in these plots will already have an impact 
on the one-sun VOC of the junction. In the case of our example 
with WB = 800 nm we see that, if we choose material BM1,
carrier injection can be avoided for very high doping levels (≥
1018 cm-3) and high LB values (≥ 300 nm). This combination is 
difficult to find in practice. With material BM2 more feasible 

Fig. 2: Calculated dark current in the top junction at (VTOP = 1.3 V, 
VBOT = 1.0 V) vs. base doping concentration for the device 
described in the text (WB = 800 nm) with different base materials: 
(a) BM1, (b) BM2 and (c) BM3. Different curves correspond to 
different LB values.

TABLE II

CHOICES OF MATERIAL PARAMETERS FOR THE BASE

BM 1
BM2
BM3

Representative of
like 
emitter

Al-poor AlGaInP
Al0.5Ga0.5As

Al-rich AlGaInP 
AlAs

EG (eV)
1.84
2.00
2.17

ni (cm-3)
1064
274
12.4 


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
4

combinations work, such as (NA ≥ 1017 cm-3, LB ≥ 300 nm) or 
(NA ≥ 1018 cm-3, LB ≥ 50 nm). For the high band-gap material 
BM3, we see that carrier injection is avoided independently of 
other parameters. 

Let us now discuss the dark current density in the bottom 

junction (J0bot). Fig. 3 shows J0bot calculated for the same cases 
and the same working point as in Fig. 2. Interestingly, the 
combinations of band-gap energy and doping level that made 
J0top increase, make J0bot decrease. This can be understood with 
the aid of the sketch in Fig. 4. Since the two junctions oppose 

each other, they have opposite signs for the photogenerated 
current density (JL) and the dark current density. If the dark J0top

injected from the emitter reaches the collector, it is seen as an
apparent
bottom photogenerated current density
(JLbot)

contribution. In fact, if we choose the right parameters and plot 
the complete dark J0bot (VBOT) curves for sufficiently high top 
junction voltage (Vtop) values, they appear as if the junction was 
illuminated (see Fig. 5). Therefore, we conclude that the 
injection of carriers from the emitter into the collector 
(transistor effect) is beneficial for the photovoltaic performance 
of the bottom junction, although the “apparent photocurrent” 
added is very little compared to standard one-sun photocurrents. 
Note that, in principle, the bottom junction could also inject 
carriers into the top junction and improve its performance. 
However, this will not happen under normal operation 
conditions because Vtop > Vbot.

Fig. 4: Illustration of the direction of photogenerated currents and 
dark currents in an npn HBTSC.

Another important aspect in the interpretation of Figs. 2 and 

3 is the impact of LB. The detrimental increase in J0top is larger 
for low LB values, but the beneficial effect on J0bot is stronger 
for high LB values. This is because, if LB is low, carrier injection 

Fig. 3: Calculated dark current in the bottom junction for the same 
device (WB = 800 nm) and at the same working point as Fig. 2, vs.
base doping concentration, with different base materials: (a) BM1, 
(b) BM2 and (c) BM3.
Fig. 5: Calculated bottom junction dark current for an HBTSC with 
base material BM1, WB = 800 nm, NA = 7  1017 cm-3 and LB = 900 
nm. They look like illumination curves due to the transistor effect.


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
5

from the emitter into the base is strong, but those carriers 
recombine in the base and do not reach the collector. Only if LB
is large enough, they contribute to the performance of the 
bottom junction. Therefore, we can conclude that, in the cases 
where the band-gap energy and doping of the base allow it,
small LB’s degrade strongly the performance of the top junction
without improving the bottom junction. Large LB’s lead to a 
lesser degradation of the top junction and to some improvement 
of the bottom junction. However, when illumination currents 
are added to our model, the net power balance for the cell as a 
whole is negative because the top cell operates at a higher 
voltage than the bottom cell. Therefore, the loss in the top 
junction always exceeds the gain in the bottom junction if the 
two cells are biased at their respective maximum-power point 
voltages (VMPP). This is consistent with the results of the 
detailed balance model presented in [9] which advanced that the 
transistor effect has to be avoided by decreasing the emitter 
injection efficiency in order to maximize the photoconversion 
efficiency. At this respect it is worth noting that when we 
choose the base material BM3, no carrier injection is observed 
for any doping level or LB value even for base thicknesses as 
low as 50 nm. It has to be noted that the problem of power loss 
due to carrier injection through the base can appear in any kind 
of transistor-like solar cell, not only in the heterojunction 
transistor like solar cell presented here. Refs. [23] and [24]
present thorough discussions on the nature and the impact of 
minority carrier diffusion currents in the base of transistor-like 
silicon interdigitated back contact (IBC) solar cells designed to 
be used as bottom cell in current-mismatched tandems. 

IV. IMPACT OF THE BASE DESIGN ON THE VOC

Finally, we present in Fig. 6 an example of illumination J-V

curves for an incorrect HBTSC design in which the transistor 
effect has not been correctly eliminated. The following 
parameters have been considered: base material BM1, WB = 50 
nm, NA = 1  1017 cm-3 and LB = 900 nm. This is an illustrative 
example where we have directly applied the superposition 
principle directly, subtracting from both cells a photogenerated 
current JLtop = JLbot = 15 mA/cm2. This approximation is 
acceptable if we assume that emitter and collector are able to 
absorb virtually all photons in their respective spectral ranges.

Fig. 6 (a) shows the illumination J-V curve of the top 

junction. We have considered the cases where the bottom 
junction is short-circuited (red curve) and biased at its VMPP
(orange curve). Note that in cases where there is cross-talk 
between the junctions, such as here, the MPP has to be 
calculated by maximizing the total power produced by both 
junctions. As a reference, we have also plotted the case of an 
isolated homojunction with emitter and base having the same 
parameters as before and an infinite length (long diode).

In Fig. 6 (b) similar curves are plotted for the bottom 

junction. To be consistent in the comparison with reference 
devices, in this case the homojunction considered would be a 
GaAs homojunction (blue curve). This way, both blue curves 
together illustrate the case of a conventional four-terminal 
double-junction solar cell. 

Fig. 6: Illumination J-V curves calculated for an incorrectly designed 
HBTSC where carrier injection from emitter to collector is possible. 
(a) top junction, (b) bottom junction. The red and orange curves 
represent different voltages of the opposite junction. The blue curves 
represent, respectively, the top and bottom homojunctions in a 
conventional independently-connected double-junction solar cell. 

We observe that the photocurrent of the bottom cell increases 

slightly when Vtop is raised [see inset in Fig. 6 (b)], which can 
be explained with the same arguments applied to Fig. 5Fig. 3. 
Changes in the top junction plot are not appreciable when Vbot
is varied. What results very noticeable in this example of non-
optimal HBTSC design is that the VOC in the top cell is worse 
than in the reference homojunction. Having a thin base layer, 
the top junction of the HBTSC behaves like a short diode which 
has not been passivated, which compares badly to a long diode 
with the same material parameters. In the case of the bottom 
junction, we see that the non-optimal HBTSC design has been 
beneficial, because the base component to the dark current is 
smaller than in a GaAs homojunction. However, the total 
balance when both junctions are considered is negative for the 
non-optimal HBTSC. Having allowed carrier injection comes 
at the cost of a decrease in efficiency with respect to the 
conventional double-junction design. Nevertheless, it has to be 
noted that the total efficiency loss is marginal, from 31.92 % in 
the long diode case to 31.80 % in the non-optimized HBTSC. 
Such a small decrease is striking if we take into account that the 
base thickness in this non-optimized example is extremely low


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
6

(50 nm) and the doping level quite low (1  1017 cm-3). This 
illustrates that the HBTSC design is very robust with respect to 
carrier injection, provided that the band-gap energy of the base 
material is equal or greater than of the emitter material.

V. CONCLUSION

Using a simple drift-diffusion model with parameters 

representative of III-V materials, we have shown that the 
penalty that can be expected from the compact structure of the 
HBTSC is a voltage loss (dark current increase) in the top cell
if the design is not optimized. This voltage loss is related to the 
injection of carriers from the emitter into the base. If the carriers 
reach the collector (long minority carrier diffusion length in the 
base), the performance of the bottom junction can be marginally 
improved. However, the overall balance between degradation 
of the top cell and improvement of the bottom cell is always 
negative for the ideal devices studied here when carrier 
injection is possible. Therefore, maximum efficiency can only 
be achieved when that affect is eliminated.

Further indications are given about the suitable base 

parameter space to design an efficient III-V semiconductor
HBTSC. In general, it is found that increasing the band-gap 
energy, the doping concentration and/or the minority carrier 
diffusion length in the base reduces carrier injection and 
improves the overall performance. Some combinations of those 
parameters are feasible from the point of view of III-V material 
technology. In particular, it is found that, if the material in the 
base has a sufficiently high band-gap energy (above 2.1 eV), 
carrier injection is eliminated independently of all other base 
parameters, and specifically, independently of having a thin 
base layer. In fact, our calculations show that with that band-
gap energy carrier injection is negligible even for a base as thin 
as 50 nm. This implies that the HBTSC concept is compatible 
with compact, thin-film and cost-effective technologies.

VI. REFERENCES

[1] F. Dimroth et al., “Four-Junction Wafer-Bonded 

Concentrator Solar Cells,” IEEE J. Photovolt., vol. 6, no. 
1, pp. 343–349, Jan. 2016.

[2] Z. (Jason) Yu, M. Leilaeioun, and Z. Holman, “Selecting 

tandem partners for silicon solar cells,” Nat. Energy, vol. 
1, p. 16137, Sep. 2016.

[3] M. W. Wanlass, K. A. Emery, T. A. Gessert, G. S. 

Horner, C. R. Osterwald, and T. J. Coutts, “Practical 
considerations in tandem cell modeling,” Sol. Cells, vol. 
27, no. 1, pp. 191–204, Oct. 1989.

[4] M. T. Hörantner and H. J. Snaith, “Predicting and 

optimising the energy yield of perovskite-on-silicon 
tandem solar cells under real world conditions,” Energy 
Environ. Sci., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 1983–1993, Sep. 2017.

[5] J. Werner, B. Niesen, and C. Ballif, “Perovskite/Silicon 

Tandem Solar Cells: Marriage of Convenience or True 
Love Story? – An Overview,” Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 
vol. 5, no. 1, p. 1700731, 2018.

[6] A. S. Brown and M. A. Green, “Limiting efficiency for 

current-constrained two-terminal tandem cell stacks,” 

Prog Photovolt Res Appl, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 299–307, 
2002.

[7] J. Villa and A. Martí, “Impact of the Spectrum in the 

Annual Energy Production of Multijunction Solar Cells,” 
IEEE J. Photovolt., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 1479–1484, Sep. 
2017.

[8] H. Schulte-Huxel, T. J. Silverman, M. G. Deceglie, D. J. 

Friedman, and A. C. Tamboli, “Energy Yield Analysis of 
Multiterminal Si-Based Tandem Solar Cells,” IEEE J. 
Photovolt., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 1376–1383, Sep. 2018.

[9] A. Martí and A. Luque, “Three-terminal heterojunction 

bipolar transistor solar cell for high-efficiency 
photovoltaic conversion,” Nat. Commun., vol. 6, p. 6902, 
Apr. 2015.

[10] M. A. Steiner et al., “A monolithic three-terminal 

GaInAsP/GaInAs tandem solar cell,” Prog. Photovolt. 
Res. Appl., vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 587–593, 2009.

[11] T. Nagashima, K. Okumura, K. Murata, and Y. Kimura, 

“Three-terminal tandem solar cells with a back-contact 
type bottom cell,” in Conference Record of the Twenty-
Eighth IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference - 2000 
(Cat. No.00CH37036), 2000, pp. 1193–1196.

[12] S. Essig et al., “Raising the one-sun conversion efficiency 

of III–V/Si solar cells to 32.8% for two junctions and 
35.9% for three junctions,” Nat. Energy, vol. 2, no. 9, p. 
17144, Sep. 2017.

[13] E. L. Warren, M. G. Deceglie, M. Rienäcker, R. Peibst, 

A. C. Tamboli, and P. Stradins, “Maximizing tandem 
solar cell power extraction using a three-terminal design,” 
Sustain. Energy Fuels, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 1141–1147, May 
2018.

[14] M. Schnabel et al., “Equivalent Performance in Three-

Terminal and Four-Terminal Tandem Solar Cells,” IEEE 
J. Photovolt., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 1584–1589, Nov. 2018.

[15] S. Sista, Z. Hong, M.-H. Park, Z. Xu, and Y. Yang, 

“High-Efficiency Polymer Tandem Solar Cells with 
Three-Terminal Structure,” Adv. Mater., vol. 22, no. 8, 
pp. E77–E80, 2010.

[16] J. M. Gee, “A comparison of different module 

configurations for multi-band-gap solar cells,” Sol. Cells, 
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 147–155, May 1988.

[17] H. Schulte-Huxel, D. J. Friedman, and A. C. Tamboli, 

“String-Level Modeling of Two, Three, and Four 
Terminal Si-Based Tandem Modules,” IEEE J. 
Photovolt., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 1370–1375, Sep. 2018.

[18] M. Zehender et al., “Module interconnection for the 

three-terminal heterojunction bipolar transistor solar 
cell,” AIP Conf. Proc., vol. 2012, no. 1, p. 040013, Sep. 
2018.

[19] P. G. Linares, E. Antolín, and A. Martí, “Novel 

heterojunction bipolar transistor architectures for the 
practical implementation of high-efficiency three-
terminal solar cells,” Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, vol. 
194, pp. 54–61, Jun. 2019.

[20] A. Martí, E. Antolín, P. García‐Linares, E. López, J. 

Villa, and I. Ramiro, “Operation of the Three Terminal 
Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor Solar Cell,” Phys. 
Status Solidi C, vol. 14, no. 10, p. 1700191, 2017.


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
7

[21] M. H. Zehender et al., “Demonstrating the GaInP/GaAs 

Three-Terminal Heterojunction Bipolar Transistor Solar 
Cell,” presented at the 46th IEEE Photovoltaics 
Specialists Conference, Chicago, 2019.

[22] G. W. Neudeck, The bipolar junction transistor, vol. III. 

Adison-Wesley.

[23] R. Rienäcker, E. L. Warren, T. F. Wietler, P. Stradins, A. 

C. Tamboli, and R. Peibst, “Three-Terminal Bipolar 
Junction Bottom Cell as Simple as PERC: Towards Lean 
Tandem Cell Processing,” in Proceedings of the 46th 
IEEE PVSC, 2019.

[24] P. Stradins, M. Rienaecker, R. Peibst, A. C. Tamboli, and 

E. L. Warren, “A simple physical model for three-
terminal tandem cell operation,” in Proceedings of the 
46th IEEE PVSC, 2019.


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) <
8

VII. ANNEX

We summarize in Table III the equations used in this work. 

The first four are definitions and the rest constitute the
theoretical model. They are the solution to the system of current 
drift-diffusion equations, continuity equations and the Poisson 
equation when they are applied to the emitter, base and 
collector. We have assumed that all regions are electrically 
long. k is the Boltzmann constant and T the absolute 
temperature. The derivation of this model can be found in texts 
where the BJT is explained in detail, such as [22].

TABLE III

EQUATIONS OF THE DRIFT-DIFFUSION MODEL

𝑃𝑂𝐸(𝐶) =

𝑛𝑖𝐸(𝐶)2

𝑁𝐷,𝐸(𝐶) ,  𝑛𝑂𝐵 =

𝑛𝑖𝐵2

𝑁𝐷𝐵

(1)

𝑛𝑖

2 ∝ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (

−𝐸𝐺
𝑘𝑇 )
(2)

𝐷𝑋 = 𝑘𝑇

𝑒 µ𝑋

(3)

𝐹(𝑉) = exp (𝑒𝑉

𝑘𝑇) − 1
(4)

𝐽𝐸𝑛(𝑉𝐵𝐸,𝑉𝐵𝐶) = 𝑒𝐷𝐵𝑛0𝐵

𝐿𝐵

[(coth(𝑊𝐵

𝐿𝐵

) ∙ 𝐹(𝑉𝐵𝐸)) − (
1

sinh(𝑊𝐵 𝐿𝐵
⁄
) ∙ 𝐹(𝑉𝐵𝐶))]
(5)

𝐽𝐸𝑝(𝑉𝐵𝐸) = 𝑒𝐷𝐸𝑃𝑂𝐸

𝐿𝐸

𝐹(𝑉𝐵𝐸)
(6)

𝐽𝐸 = 𝐽𝐸𝑛 + 𝐽𝐸𝑝 = 𝐽0

𝑡𝑜𝑝
(7)

𝐽𝐶𝑛(𝑉𝐵𝐸, 𝑉𝐵𝐶) = 𝑒𝐷𝐵𝑛0𝐵

𝐿𝐵

[(
1

sinh(𝑊𝐵 𝐿𝐵
⁄
) ∙ 𝐹(𝑉𝐵𝐸)) − (coth(𝑊𝐵

𝐿𝐵

) ∙ 𝐹(𝑉𝐵𝐶))]
(8)

𝐽𝐶𝑝(𝑉𝐵𝐶) = − 𝑒𝐷𝐶𝑃𝑂𝐶

𝐿𝐶

𝐹(𝑉𝐵𝐶)
(9)

𝐽𝐶 = 𝐽𝐶𝑛 + 𝐽𝐶𝑝 = −𝐽0

𝑏𝑜𝑡
(10)

𝐽𝐵 = 𝐽𝐸 + 𝐽𝐶
(11)


