Real-Time Machine Learning Based Fiber-Induced 
Nonlinearity Compensation in Energy-Efficient 
Coherent Optical Networks

Elias Giacoumidis 1,*,†, Yi Lin 1,†, Michaela Blott2, and Liam P. Barry1

1 Dublin City University, School of Electronic Engineering, Radio and Optical Communications Lab, 

Glasnevin 9, Dublin, Ireland.

2 Xilinx Inc, 2020 Bianconi Ave, Citywest Business Campus, Dublin, D24 T683, Ireland.

* Correspondence: elias.giacoumidis@dcu.ie

† Equally contributed to this work.  

Abstract: We experimentally demonstrate the worlds’ first field-programmable gate-array 

(FPGA)-based real-time fiber nonlinearity compensator (NLC) using sparse K-means++ machine 
learning clustering in an energy-efficient 40-Gb/s 16-quadrature amplitude modulated (QAM) 
self-coherent optical system. Our real-time NLC shows up to 3 dB improvement in Q-factor 
compared to linear equalization at 50 km of transmission.  

Keywords: Machine learning; Clustering; Nonlinearity Compensation; Real-time processing.

1. Introduction

Surging data traffic demands caused by bandwidth-hungry Internet services such as video streaming 
or cloud computing pose a significant challenge to the underlying fiber-optic communication 
systems. The only viable solution for increasing the data rates is the employment of advanced 
modulation formats (e.g. 16-QAM). The core difficulty on the transmission of such signals is the Kerr-
induced fiber nonlinearity [1] which is responsible for nonlinear optical effects such as FWM [2]. The 
optical Kerr effect is attributed to the so-called nonlinear Shannon capacity limit [2] which sets an 
upper bound on the achievable data rate in optical fiber communications when using traditional 
linear transmission techniques. There have been extensive efforts in attempting to surpass the 
nonlinear Shannon limit through several fiber nonlinearity compensators (NLCs) [1-5], with the most 
well-known being the optical phase conjugation [1], digital back-propagation [2, 3], phase-conjugated 
twin-waves [4], and the nonlinear Fourier transform (NFT) [5]. However, besides these solutions 
being either complex [1-3, 5] or spectrally inefficient [4], more importantly, they traditionally 
compensate deterministic nonlinearities thus ignoring critical stochastic nonlinear effects such as the 
interplay between amplified spontaneous emission from optical amplification with fiber 
nonlinearity. Recently, digital machine learning has been under the spotlight for compensation of 
nonlinear distortions, harnessing various algorithms that perform classification such as supervised 
artificial neural networks [6] and support vector machines [7] or unsupervised clustering such as K-
means, fuzzy-logic C-means, hierarchical [8, 9] and affinity propagation [10]. Digital-based machine 
learning digital blocks are independent from mathematically tractable models and can be optimized 
for a specific hardware configuration and channel [11]. Hitherto, reported machine learning based 
NLCs have been implemented offline using conventional software platforms (e.g. Matlab®). 
However, there is a tremendous need for a practical algorithm for application in real-time 
communication links that can maximize transmission performance without sacrificing network 
latency and energy efficiency. Recent advances in the field of field-programmable gate-arrays 
(FPGAs) have made it possible to process high bandwidth digital signals in next-generation 
telecommunication systems. On the other hand, unsupervised machine learning clustering is more 


2 of 6

attractive than supervised algorithms because training signals that limit signal capacity and increase 
computational time are absent.

In this work, we experimentally demonstrate the first FPGA-based NLC using sparse K-means++ 

clustering for 40-Gb/s 16-QAM energy-efficient self-coherent systems [12] (see Fig. 1). We show that 
our proposed NLC can offer up to 3 dB Q-factor enhancement for transmission at 50 km of SSMF.

Figure 1. Self-coherent system for 50 km transmission incorporating the machine learning based FPGA receiver.

2. FPGA design and experimental setup

K-means clustering is a method of vector quantization that has been popular for cluster analysis in 

data mining. It aims to partition n observations into K clusters in which each observation belongs to 

the cluster with the nearest mean, serving as a prototype of the cluster. However, K-means is 

computationally inefficient especially for real-time signal processing where many calculations are 

required for thousands or millions of data points in a very limited timeframe (msec). Here, we 

propose a sparse K-means++ based NLC for real-time self-coherent optical signals. In this algorithm, 

we take regular time intervals (sparsity) from the real-time incoming signal to update the centers of 

the clusters thus eliminating time delays and latency. The clustering algorithm is based on the Lloyd’s 

approach [8, 9] and its objective is to minimize the total intra-cluster variance, or, the squared error 

function: 𝐽 = ∑
∑
‖𝑥𝑖

(𝑗) − 𝑐𝑗‖

2
𝑛
𝑖=1

𝐾
𝑗=1
. Where J, K, n, are the objective function, number of clusters, and 

number of symbols, respectively. 𝑥𝑖 is the ith symbol and 𝑐𝑗 is the centroid for a cluster j. The inside 

term in the norm ‖ . ‖ defines the distance function between a symbol and a centroid. In the 

algorithm, we have knowledge about the centers (i.e. the ‘++’ term) of the adopted modulation format 

level to enable faster convergence and adaptivity. 


3 of 6

(a)

(b)

(c)                                            
(d)

Figure 2. (a) Design of sparse K-means++ on FPGA. Inset: First initialization step with ideal centres in a 4-QAM signal. N: 

number of parallel FPGA channels; M: number of clusters in the constellation diagram. (b) Floorplan of the DSPs on the FPGA. 

CMA (purple); K-means hard-decision (yellow) and coefficients update (blue); LMS (green). (c) On-chip power report (power 

estimation from Xilinx Synthesized netlist). (d) Performance of sparse K-means ++ for 16-QAM at 50 km.

The steps of our algorithm are given below, while the conceptual diagram in Fig. 2(a) shows an 
example of the four centers’ updates of a 4-QAM signal:

1.
Initiate K cluster centers (centroids) by averaging the received data per cluster after linear 

equalization;

2.
Compute point-to-cluster-centroid distances of all observations to each centroid;


4 of 6

3.
Assign each observation to the cluster with the closest centroid (Batch update);

4.
Compute the average of the observations in each cluster to obtain K new centroid locations;

5.
Repeat steps 2 through 4 until cluster assignments do not change, or the maximum number of 

iterations is reached.

In our NLC the number of iterations was fixed, as further iterations didn’t improve the Q-factor. 

In Fig. 2(a), we show the design of the NLC. As shown, in order to update the centers in K-means, 

only information from one of the N-parallel FPGA-channels (32 in total) is required for the I and Q 

components, thus significantly reducing the processing time. The system is split into two parallel 

processors, where in the upper diagram the minimum Euclidean distance among sparse received 

data per constellation cluster M and the ideal centres is first calculated (i.e. the ‘++’ term). The inset 

of Fig. 2(a) shows an example of the first ideal centres initialization of a 4-QAM signal. Afterwards, 

hard decision is executed and the BER/Q-factor is calculated. After this initialization, the lower arm 

in the design is activated where we calculate the coefficients of the K-means following a similar 

procedure as before (i.e. via Euclidean minimum distance calculation per cluster) and estimate the 

mean for each center, and then update them in each iteration depending on renewed cluster mean. 

In the last iteration of the process, we re-assign symbols until all of them are properly assigned, 

considering the minimum BER value has been reached (convergence). The FPGA used in our 

experiment was a Xilinx Virtex Ultrascale+VCU118 Evaluation FPGA Platform. The self-coherent 

system (Fig. 1) employs a 10 GBaud 16-QAM signal at 40-Gb/s. The transmitter-DSP was processed 

offline in Matlab® using a look-up-table (LUT) in which pre-distortion was used to mitigate the opto-

electronic components impairments similarly to [13]. A narrow linewidth (<100 kHz) ECL was tuned 

to 1549.5 nm and using an arbitrary waveform generator (AWG) operating at 20 GS/s, two 

uncorrelated pseudo-random level signals (215-1) were applied to the IQ modulator to generate the 

16-QAM signal. After IQ modulation the optical signal was transmitted over 50 km of SSMF. At the 

receiver, the optical signal was converted to an electrical one using a self-homodyne coherent 

receiver. Afterwards, the signal was captured by a real-time oscilloscope sampled at 50 GS/s and 

directly after the ADCs the resultant electrical signal entered our FPGA board. First, the real-time 

signal passed through the constant modulus algorithm (CMA) combined with multi-modulus 

algorithm (MMA) for signal equalization. Afterwards, the signal went through a least-mean squares 

(LMS) digital filter for carrier phase recovery, and finally our proposed machine learning was 

processed 
in 
which 
hard 
and 
soft 
decision 
were 
included 
before 
BER/Q-factor 

(=20log10[√𝟐𝒆𝒓𝒇𝒄−𝟏(𝟐𝑩𝑬𝑹)]) calculation. The design structure of the CMMA/MMA and LMS for real-

time application is identical to that reported in [14]. For our FPGA design, 32 parallel channels (Ch. 

N) were attached to meet the required 20 GHz bandwidth considering the available clock rate per 

channel is 312.5 MHz. From Ch. 1 to Ch. N, we only selected one channel and used it to update the 

information of the centers in K-means. However, for each channel we processed separately the I and 

Q components.

3. Results

Fig. 2(b) and Table 1 present the resources utilization of the receiver DSP after FPGA synthesis and 

implementation, and Fig. 2(c) shows the on-chip power which is in total 10.219 W. It is evident that 

sparse K-means++, in which the hard-decision (yellow) and the coefficients update (blue) are 


5 of 6

included, covers > 60% of the total complexity of the DSP receiver (e.g. LUTs, configurable logic block 

(CLB), 8-bit carry chain per CLB (CARRY8)). The rest of the complexity is allocated to the CMA 

(purple) and the LMS (green). While this is contributed to a self-coherent system, it is worth noting 

that in a conventional coherent system, additional linear equalization is required for the frequency 

offset compensation between the transmitter and receiver laser. Finally, since our system was tested 

for short-each transmission at 50 km, chromatic dispersion compensation was ignored in the linear 

equalization process. We thus envisage that the total complexity of the linear equalizer in traditional 

coherent homodyne systems is much larger than the proposed machine learning algorithm. 

Table 1. Key FPGA resources of developed DSP.

Finally, in Fig. 3(d), we show the transmission performance of the 16-QAM 10 Gbaud signal at 

50 km when using linear equalization and sparse K-means++ for launched optical powers (LOPs) of 

up to 14 dBm. We show that our NLC enhances the Q-factor by 3 dB at 14 dBm of LOP (a constellation 

diagram is also included). This is attributed to the compensation of self-phase modulation as a single-

channel/carrier is transmitted.

4. Conclusion

We experimentally demonstrated a novel, practical fiber-induced nonlinearity compensator, the
sparse K-means++, for 40-Gb/s real-time 16-QAM energy-efficient self-coherent systems. At 50 km of
commercial fiber transmission, our approach improved the Q-factor by up to 3 dB over linear 
equalization. This is the worlds’ first implementation of machine learning in an FPGA board for 
compensation of nonlinearities in optical networks. We believe our technique can be also valuable 
for other modulation techniques such as fast optical orthogonal frequency division multiplexing [15-
17]. 

5. Acknowledgments

This work was supported by SFI through 13/RC/2077, 12/RC/2276, 15/US-C2C/I3132, the HEA 
INSPIRE, and the EU/EDGE Marie-Curie COFUND programme (713567).

6. References

1.
Al-Khateeb, M. A. Z., McCarthy, M. E., Sánchez, C., Ellis, A. D., “Nonlinearity compensation using optical 
phase conjugation deployed in discretely amplified transmission systems”, Opt. Exp., 2018, 26, (18), pp. 
23945–23959.

2.
Temprana, E., Myslivets, E., Kuo, B. P.-P., et al., “Overcoming Kerr-induced capacity limit in optical fiber 
transmission”, Science, 2015, 348, (6242), pp. 1445–1448.

3.
Maher, R., Galdino, L., Sato, M., et al., “Linear and nonlinear impairment mitigation in a Nyquist spaced 
DP-16QAM WDM transmission system with full-field DBP”. Proc. Europ. Conf. in Opt. Comms. (ECOC), 
Cannes, France, Sep. 2014, P.5.10 

4.
Liu, X., Chraplyvy, A. R., Winzer, et al.: 'Phase-conjugated twin waves for communication beyond the Kerr 
nonlinearity limit', Nature Photon., 2013, 7, pp. 560–568.

5.
Le, S. T., Aref, V., Buelow, H., “Nonlinear signal multiplexing for communication beyond the Kerr 
nonlinearity limit”, Nature Photon., 2017, 11, pp. 570–576. 


6 of 6

6.
Shaoliang Z., Yaman, F., Nakamura, K., et al., “Field and lab experimental demonstration of nonlinear 
impairment compensation using neural networks”, Nature Commun., 2019, 10, (3033).

7.
Li, M., Yu, S., Yang, J., et al., “Nonparameter Nonlinear Phase Noise Mitigation by Using M-ary Support 
Vector Machine for Coherent Optical Systems”, IEEE Phot. J., 2013, 5, (6).

8.
Giacoumidis, E., Matin, A., Wei, J., et al., “Blind Nonlinearity Equalization by Machine Learning based 
Clustering for Single- and Multi-Channel Coherent Optical OFDM”, IEEE J. Lightw. Techn., 2018, 36, (3), 
pp. 721–727.

9.
Zhang, J., Chen, W., Gao, M., Shen, G., “K-means-clustering-based fiber nonlinearity equalization 
techniques for 64-QAM coherent optical communication system”, Opt. Exp., 2017, 25, (22), pp. 27570–27580.

10.
Giacoumidis, E., Aldaya, I., Wei, J. L., et al., “Affinity propagation clustering for blind nonlinearity 
compensation in coherent optical OFDM”. Proc. Conf. on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO), San Jose, CA, 
USA, Nov. 2018, p. STh1C.5.

11.
Zibar, D., Piels, M., Jones, R., Schäeffer, C. G., “Machine Learning Techniques in Optical Communication”, 
IEEE J. Lightw. Techn., 2016, 34, (6), pp. 1442–1452.

12.
Giacoumidis, E., Choudhary, A., Magi, E., et al. “Chip-based Brillouin processing for carrier recovery in 
coherent optical communications”, Optica, 2018, 5, (10), pp. 1191–1199.

13.
Zhang, J., Yu, J., Chien, H.-C., “Advanced linear and nonlinear compensations for 16QAM SC-400G 
unrepeatered transmission system”, Opt. Comms., 2018, 409, pp. 34–38.

14.
Liu, G., Zhang, K., Zhang, R., et al., “Demonstration of a carrier frequency offset estimator for 16-/32-QAM 
coherent receivers: a hardware perspective”, Opt. Exp., 2018, 26, (4), pp. 4853–4862.

15.
Giacoumidis, E., Ibrahim, S. K., Zhao, J., et al., “Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Intensity-
Modulation and Direct-Detection Optical Fast-OFDM over MMF-links”, IEEE Photonics Technology 
Letters, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 52–54, 2012.

16.
Giacoumidis, E., Tsokanos, A., Mouchos, C., et al., “Extensive Comparisons of Optical Fast-OFDM and 
Conventional Optical OFDM for Local and Access Networks”, IEEE/OSA J. Opti. Commun. Netw., 2012, 
4, (10), pp. 724–733.

17.
Giacoumidis, E., Ibrahim, S. K., Zhao, J., et al., "Experimental Demonstration of Cost-Effective Intensity-
Modulation and Direct-Detection Optical Fast-OFDM over 40km SMF Transmission”. Proc. Conf. Optical 
Fiber Communications and Exposition and the National Fiber Optic Engineers Conference (OFC/NFOEC), 
March 2012, Los Angeles, California, USA, p JW2A.65.


