 
1

Electro-deposition and Mechanical Stability at 

Lithium/Solid Electrolyte Interface during Plating in 

Solid-State Batteries 

Qingsong Tu ab, Luis Barroso-Luque a, Tan Shi a, Gerbrand Ceder ab*@ 

a. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, 

CA 94720, USA 

b. Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 

94720, USA 

 
*Corresponding author Email: gceder@berkeley.edu 

@ Lead contact 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
2

Summary 

Interfacial deposition stability between Li metal and a solid electrolyte (SE) is important 

in preventing interfacial contact loss, mechanical fracture, and dendrite growth in Li-metal 

solid state batteries (SSB). In this work, we investigate the deposition and mechanical 

stability at the Li metal/SE interface and its consequences (such as SE fracture and contact 

loss). A wide range of contributing factors are investigated, such as charge and mass 

transfer kinetics, plasticity of Li metal and fracture of the SE, and the applied stack pressure. 

We quantify the effect of the ionic conductivity of the SE, the exchange current density of 

the interfacial charge-transfer reaction and SE surface roughness on the Li deposition 

stability at the Li metal/SE interface. We also propose a “mechanical stability window” for 

the applied stack pressure that can prevent both contact loss and SE fracture, which can be 

extended to other metal-electrode (such as Sodium) SSB systems.  

 

Keywords 

Li-Metal solid-state battery, Continuum modeling, Interfacial deposition stability, 

Mechanical stability, Li plasticity, SE fracture, Contact loss 

 

 

 


 
3

Introduction 

Li-metal all-solid-state batteries (SSBs) are promising candidates to replace 

conventional secondary batteries, providing improved safety with the use of non-

flammable solid electrolytes (SE) 1,2, and higher energy density with the use of a Li-metal 

anode. 3,4 However, several bottlenecks originating from the intrinsic properties of Li metal 

and SEs hinder the practical application of Li-metal SSBs. First, although ceramic SEs 

have elastic moduli that are several times higher than that of Li metal, and are predicted to 

be stiff enough to suppress Li growth in the SE 5,6, recent experiments have revealed the 

presence of metallic Li in the SE, which can lead to cell shorting and potential safety issues. 

7,8 Second, the high interfacial overpotential limits the power density and rate performance 

of Li-metal SSBs 9, which has been attributed to poor mechanical contact at the Li metal/SE 

interface 10,11 and the slow charge transfer kinetics stemming from the unstable interface 

between the SE and Li metal. 12,13 Substantial efforts have been devoted to design a system 

with stable Li deposition and intimate interfacial contact, including new design of porous 

electrodes to suppress dendrite growth 14,15, the use of artificial interlayers to eliminate SEI 

formation 16,17, and application of mechanical stress to reduce the interfacial resistance. 18-

20 

Theoretical investigations are important for understanding the behavior at the Li 

metal/SE interface considering the difficulty in characterizing the buried interface between 

Li metal and the SE. Monroe and Newman investigated the role of mechanical stress in the 

growth stability of a planar interface 5, and suggested that a high shear modulus of the 

electrolyte (at least two times higher than that of Li metal) removes the inherent instability 

of planar growth, and by extension, may limit dendrites. 6 Their work has been further 


 
4

extended by considering the plasticity of Li metal 21 and the large shear modulus of SEs. 22 

In their derivations, the interfacial stress was believed to be the main factor that affects the 

surface overpotential, which in turn changes the current density distribution at the Li 

metal/SE interface. Therefore, they concluded that mechanical properties of the Li metal 

and the SE (such as Shear moduli, Poisson’s ratio) were dominant factors for the Li 

deposition stability. However, it has been demonstrated that many other factors, such as 

interfacial geometry 23, charge-transfer kinetics on the interface 24, ion transfer in bulk SE 

25, and the externally applied compressive stress 26, can all influence the stability. 

In general, uneven distributions of current and stress at the Li metal/SE interface (due 

to geometric irregularity 23 or material inhomogeneity 27) lead to unstable Li 

electrodeposition (dendrite formation) and unstable morphological evolution (interfacial 

contact loss). Slow ionic transport and/or slow charge transfer between Li metal and SE 

may increase the area-specific resistance (ASR) of the cell 28,29 but the latter can also 

suppress dendrite formation by creating a more homogeneous current distribution. An 

externally applied compressive stress (“stack pressure”) in the range of 1~10 𝑀𝑃𝑎 when 

Sulfide SE are used in the cell 30,31) may alleviate physical contact loss through deformation 

and flow of Li metal 26, but can also facilitate dendrite propagation when stress 

intensification at specific locations of the interface (such as the tips of defects) leads to 

fracture of the SE. 32 Investigating the combined effects of these various factors requires a 

model that couples Li electrodeposition and mechanical deformation together. 

The objective of the current study is to provide basic models for the deposition and 

mechanical stability of the interface between Li metal and the SE, under boundary 

conditions (BCs) that are relevant for practical Li-metal SSBs. We first show that the 

interfacial stress caused by the stack pressure has a much smaller effect on the Li deposition 


 
5

stability compared to other factors, such as the charge-transfer of 𝐿𝑖*/𝐿𝑖 at the interface 

and the mass-transfer rate of 𝐿𝑖* in the SE. Secondly, we investigate Li electrodeposition 

and plastic deformation for a wide range of BCs and material properties, including the 

shape of a surface irregularity, the charge-transfer kinetics at the Li metal/SE interface, the 

conductivity of bulk SE, the yield strength of Li metal, and the applied stack pressure. 

Finally, we examine the development of contact loss arising from a finite amount of Li 

deposition. The increase of surface overpotential as a consequence of contact loss is also 

discussed. In conclusion, we demonstrate that although ideal stable Li electrodeposition is 

impossible, the electrochemical and mechanical conditions can be optimized to reduce the 

electro-deposition instability and ensure mechanical stability of the Li metal/SE interface, 

thereby allowing control of the overpotential and suppression of dendrite formation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
6

Results 

Model geometry 

The model geometry used for all calculations is shown in Figure 1, where the Li metal 

anode is on top of a rough SE surface with perfect initial contact. The cell is reduced to a 

2D geometry by assuming plane strain and isotropic transport properties in the out-of-plane 

z-direction. This assumption is reasonable since the surface defects on the SEs are usually 

long in one dimension compared to the other two dimensions 8, which has been widely 

employed in similar work. 5,22,23 A good initial contact can be experimentally achieved by 

applying large stress or heat treatment. 26,33 Here, we mainly focus on the interfacial 

morphology evolution with continued Li deposition at the interface. We first study the 

inhomogeneities of current density, overpotential and stress at the Li metal/SE interface 

caused by the conformal defects of the initial geometry, and then study the evolution of 

these inhomogeneities when the interface evolves (For example, contact loss may develops 

if the plastic flow of the Li metal in the confined space is not enough). 

In the present work, the Li deposition stability and the mechanical stability are described 

by the electro-deposition stability factor ϑ and the contact loss factor γ respectively. The 

deposition stability factor is defined as ϑ = 𝑖𝒏(𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘)/𝑖𝒏(𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑦), where 𝑖𝒏(𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘) and 

𝑖𝒏(𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑦) are the current densities at the peak and valley of the Li protrusion, respectively, 

as defined in other work. 22,34 If the current density (𝑖𝒏) is evenly distributed at the interface 

S, the stability factor ϑ = 1, corresponding to homogeneous deposition of metallic Li along 

the interface S. If ϑ ≫ 1, Li deposition at the interface S is strongly inhomogeneous. The 

mechanical stability is defined by the degree of interfacial contact: γ = A:(𝑡)/A:(0), 

where A:(𝑡) is the remaining contact area after 𝑡 seconds and A:(0) is the initial contact 


 
7

area. If γ = 1, the initial conformal contact is maintained. When γ < 1, interfacial contact 

loss develops, which not only causes larger uneven Li deposition but also increases the 

surface overpotential at interface S.  

 Both the Li electrodeposition and interfacial contact loss are affected by the charge-

transfer reactions at interface S (described by the Butler-Volmer relation), mass transfer in 

the SE (described by the Ohmic relation), and interfacial contact mechanics (described by 

elastoplastic continuum mechanics). Equations and assumptions associated with the related 

physical processes are reviewed and discussed in the Method section. 

 

Effect of initial surface irregularity on Li deposition stability 

As the presence of surface defects (such as cracks/voids) on the interface S is common 

on the SE surface 7,8, we first study the effect of such defects on Li deposition. We guide 

ourselves by experimental SE surface roughness data, as for example, determined through 

atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements. 35 Several critical parameters are needed 

to define the surface roughness, including the arithmetic mean length (the average length 

of defects on a rough surface, 𝑙) and mean width (𝑤), area percent (the ratio of the real 

surface area to the sampling area), and kurtosis (the shape of defects, with a larger value 

indicating a sharper defect). For a typical SE material, the mean defect length and width 

range from 0.01 to 1 𝜇𝑚, and the kurtosis varies from -1 to 10. 35,36 

Figure 2a shows the model geometry where a small interface irregularity is created at 

the top of the SE with varying length (𝑙), width (𝑤), and shape (cosine-shaped, elliptical, 

or circular). Perfect initial contact between Li metal anode and the SE is assumed and a 

constant total current density (𝑖A = 0.1 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D) is applied at the bottom boundary. Small 


 
8

irregularities (both defect length and width are much smaller than cell size: 

E

F ≪ 1,

I

J ≪ 1) 

are introduced to ensure that any perturbations of the current density induced by the defect 

vanish at the boundaries, as indicated by the vertical flow of current density (red arrows) 

when approaching the boundary 𝑥 = ±0.5 𝜇𝑚. The current contour lines in Figure 2a show 

that current is concentrated near the defect, causing an uneven distribution of the normal 

current density 𝑖N. Figure 2b shows the perturbations affected by defects of typical sizes 

(𝑤 = 40 𝑛𝑚, 𝑙 = 100 𝑛𝑚) that are obtained after fine surface polishing of the SE. 8 While 

the current density near the defect is highly perturbed, the current density 𝑖N at the interface 

S reaches a constant value (~ 0.1 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D ) for |𝑥| > 0.2 𝜇𝑚 , implying that the 

perturbation from the defect does not affect the region beyond ten times the defect width. 

For typical solid electrolyte materials, the contact surface area can be as little as 10% of 

the total surface area in simple micro/nano polishing. 35,37 This means that most 

irregularities at Li metal/SE interface will only cause “local” effects to the current density 

and potential distribution for a well-polished SE surface. 

The inset in Figure 2b shows that the peak value of the current density for the three 

different shaped defects is almost the same (~0.11 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D), with the cosine-shaped 

defect exhibiting a lower magnitude difference (ϑ = 𝑖𝒏(𝑝𝑒𝑎𝑘)/𝑖𝒏(𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑦)) than the 

elliptical or circular defect. Because the current differences between the three shapes are 

small, only cosine-shaped defects are considered for further calculation and discussion. 

Figure 2c plots the charge-transfer overpotential 𝜂 of three defects with different lengths 

(𝑙 = 10 𝑛𝑚, 100 𝑛𝑚, 200 𝑛𝑚) and the same width (𝑤 = 40 𝑛𝑚). As the defect length 

increases, the overpotential becomes more concentrated near the defect and its maximal 

value grows. For a defect with length of 1 𝜇𝑚 and width of 8 𝑛𝑚 under applied current 


 
9

density 1 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D, the maximal overpotential reaches 3 𝑚𝑉. If unscreened, this large 

overpotential could generate a stress with magnitude 25 𝑀𝑃𝑎  according to the 

thermodynamic relation: 𝜎 =

Y

Z[\] 𝜂, which is sufficient to crack SE materials with low 

fracture toughness. 8 

A more systematic study of the geometry effect (defect width 𝑤 and length 𝑙) on the 

stability factor ϑ is done by calculating stability factors for defects with various widths and 

lengths, which is shown in Figure 2d. In general, ϑ decreases when the defect is “shallow 

and wide” (top right area) and increases when the defect is “deep and narrow" (bottom left 

area). Therefore, to increase deposition stability, surface engineering methods should be 

employed to make the SE surface as flat as possible. For example, mechanical polishing 

can be used to reduce the defect length, and surface corrosion and etching can be applied 

to increase the defect width or modify the defect shape 36. Moreover, Figure 2d shows that 

for a long defect, ϑ is very sensitive to 𝑤. Thus, for a defect length > 10 𝜇𝑚, a small 

increase of the defect width can notably homogenize the plating of metallic Li and increase 

the deposition stability. 

The interfacial area-specific resistance can be computed as 𝐴𝑆𝑅`Nabcdefb = 𝜂/𝑖N, where 

𝜂 is the overpotential at interface S and 𝑖N is the normal current density at the same point. 

Notably, 𝐴𝑆𝑅`Nabcdefb is dependent of the interfacial contact loss and the exchange current 

density at the interface. In experiments, the interfacial resistance can be measured through 

electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and the measured value is usually a 

combined effect of the interfacial contact loss and the interfacial charge transfer, which 

explains why the measured values can be very different even with the same material. For 

example, ASR values between 0.2 and 200 Ω ∙ 𝑐𝑚D have been measured for Li/LLZO/Li 


 
10

cells depending on the applied pressure. 20 To decouple the contact loss resistance and the 

charge transfer resistance, intimate interfacial contact is needed, which can be achieved 

either by applying large enough stack pressure (400 𝑀𝑃𝑎 stack pressure gives ~0.2 Ω ∙

𝑐𝑚D for LLZO 20), or by smooth enough surface conditions (10 𝑛𝑚 surface roughness 

gives ~0.5 Ω ∙ 𝑐𝑚D for LiPON 35). When intimate contact is assumed in our work, the 

interfacial resistance 𝐴𝑆𝑅`Nabcdefb is 0.26 Ω ∙ 𝑐𝑚D , in good agreement with the above 

experiments. Effects from contact loss will be discussed in the last section. 

 

Effect of charge transfer kinetics on deposition stability 

Additional factors that affect the deposition stability are the SE ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j 

and the exchange current density 𝑖bkf, which controls the 𝐿𝑖* mass-transfer rate at the 

interface, as shown in Equation 5. Because the formation of a SEI is common between the 

electrode and SE (such as Li metal with LPS), substantial changes of the ionic conductivity 

𝜎F`j (10lm-10ln 𝑚𝑆/𝑐𝑚) 38 and exchange current density 𝑖bkf (10-10m 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D) 39,40 are 

considered in this study. 

The effect of ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j and exchange current density 𝑖bkf on Li deposition 

is studied with the same model shown in Figure 2a. A constant total current density (𝑖A =

0.1 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D) is applied at the bottom boundary. In Figure 3a, the normal current density 

𝑖N at interface S is plotted for three different values of 𝑖bkf with 𝜎F`j = 0.3 𝑚𝑆/𝑐𝑚. 38 

While a small exchange current density 𝑖bkf  leads to a higher overpotential, it can 

homogenize the current distribution when it becomes the rate limiting step. Figure 3b 

shows the current density 𝑖N for three different values of ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j with 

𝑖bkf = 100 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D . 39 A larger ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j  corresponds to faster 𝐿𝑖* 


 
11

migration in the SE, which also homogenizes the current distribution. Therefore, a smaller 

exchange current density 𝑖bkf or larger ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j is preferred for stable Li 

electrodeposition. The coupled effect of 𝜎F`j  and 𝑖bkf  on the deposition stability ϑ is 

shown in Figure 3c, with ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j ranging from 3 × 10lp to 3 × 10ln 𝑚𝑆/

𝑐𝑚 and exchange current density 𝑖bkf ranging from 10 to 10m 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D. It is clear from 

the figure that both the ionic conductivity and the exchange current density can have a large 

influence on the stability factor of deposition. 

To maintain stable electrodeposition (top left area of Figure 3c) at interface S without 

dendrite formation and contact loss, a Li metal SSB should possess a SE with high ionic 

conductivity 𝜎F`j in the bulk and low exchange current density 𝑖bkf at the interface with 

Li metal. Notably, a higher 𝜎F`j not only ensures more stable Li deposition but also results 

in a lower ohmic area-specific-resistance (ASR) of the bulk SE. However, although a lower 

exchange current density 𝑖bkf ensures more stable deposition, it may result in a higher 

charge-transfer ASR at the interface. Figure 3d plots the interfacial charge-transfer ASR as 

a function of the exchange current density 𝑖bkf . The charge-transfer ASR increases 

dramatically when 𝑖bkf is less than 50 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D. Notably, lots of work has focused on 

decreasing the interfacial ASR through interface modification 18,41 in order to prevent 

dendrite formation, which may appear to contradict the conclusion in this work that higher 

charge-transfer ASR is expected to homogenize the current density. This apparent 

contradiction occurs because in most experimental measurements, it is hard to separate the 

local charge-transfer ASR from the total interfacial ASR, which includes contact loss as 

well as interfacial overpotential, as discussed previously. We believe that in experiments, 

the decrease of interfacial ASR arises mainly from better interfacial contact. Our 

conclusion only applies to the part of the ASR that is controlled by the charge transfer.  


 
12

Conventionally, the formation of a SEI (Figure 1b) between Li metal and the SE is 

believed to be detrimental to cell performance. One reason is that the ionic conductivity 

𝜎F`j within the SEI is usually much lower than that in the bulk SE, leading to a higher 

ohmic ASR at the SEI and lower Li deposition stability (Figure 3c). However, there are 

scenarios under which the effectively lowered exchange current density 𝑖bkf through SEI 

formation may enhance depositional stability. Therefore, in determining the function of the 

SEI in a Li metal SSB, both the negative effect on the ASR and the beneficial effect on the 

depositional stability should be considered.  

Effect of stack pressure and yield strength on Li metal plasticity and SE fracture 

Unstable Li deposition may cause contact loss at interface S. Therefore, the application 

of a stack pressure 𝑃A is essential during cell cycling to maintain intimate contact. In 

principle, 𝑃A should be large enough to drive plastic/creep deformation of Li metal to 

smooth out the inhomogeneities caused by the uneven deposition. A wide range of yield 

strengths for Li, 𝜎q, from 0.6 to 50 𝑀𝑃𝑎 has been reported in the literature. 42-44 Although 

creep behavior of Li metal has been observed in some experiments 42,45,46, it is not included 

in the current study due to the lack of reliable constitutive measurements. Instead, perfect 

plasticity without hardening and with different yield strength 𝜎q (ranging from 0.5 to 

3 𝑀𝑃𝑎) is assumed to reflect the effect of applied current density on the yield strength. 42 

The effects of the stack pressure 𝑃A (ranging from 1 to 5 𝑀𝑃𝑎) and the yield strength 

of Li metal 𝜎q (ranging from 0.5 to 3 𝑀𝑃𝑎) on Li deformation are investigated using the 

model shown in Figure 2a (defect width 𝑤 = 80 𝑛𝑚 and length 𝑙 = 200 𝑛𝑚). The 

existence of surface irregularities will cause local intensification of both the hydrostatic 

pressure 𝑃 and the von Mises stress 𝜎r at the interface S. The latter is the relevant quantity 


 
13

that determines the plastic yield of Li metal. Figure 4a and 4b show the distributions of 

hydrostatic pressure 𝑃 and von Mises stress 𝜎r of Li metal along interface S near the Li 

protrusion for different stack pressures 𝑃A and a yield strength (𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎) before any 

current is applied. As observed in Figure 4a and 4b, the pressure 𝑃 increases as the stack 

pressure 𝑃A increases, reaching a maximal value of 5.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎 when the stack pressure is 3 

MPa. The interfacial von Mises stress 𝜎r also increases but is bounded by the yield strength 

𝜎q (0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎 in this case). The peak point of the surface irregularity has the largest von 

Mises stress 𝜎r and therefore reaches plasticity first. When a larger stack pressure 𝑃A is 

applied, the plastic region of Li metal grows from the peak area. 

Figure 4c shows the distribution of the elastic/plastic regions of Li metal under a stack 

pressure 𝑃A = 3 𝑀𝑃𝑎 and Li yield strength 𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. The elastic area is colored in 

light gray (labeled as region III in Figure 4c), and the plastic area is colored in dark blue 

(labeled as regions I & II). The peak area of the Li protrusion (region I) reaches plasticity 

due to stress intensification, which is consistent with the results in Figure 4b. It is more 

difficult for the top area of the Li protrusion (region III) to reach plasticity than the area far 

away from the protrusion (region II). This result stems from the hydrostatic stress in region 

III being much higher than the Von-Mises stress because of the confining geometry, 

consistent with the plastic deformation of a material in a confined space. 47 The degree of 

plasticity 𝛽 (the ratio of the plastically deformed area to the total area of Li metal) can be 

used to describe the plastic flow of Li metal. Figure 4d shows the effect of the stack 

pressure 𝑃A and yield strength 𝜎q on 𝛽, with minimum value 0 (fully elastic) and maximum 

value 1 (fully plastic). 


 
14

From Figure 4c, we can see that the location of Li plasticity may play a role in the cell 

performance an aspect which has not been previously discussed in other studies. In Figure 

4c, region I and II reach plasticity while region III only elastically deforms. Note that the 

maximal elastic deformation for metals is typically very small and for Li metal is ~0.01%. 

46 The lack of plastic flow in region III is destructive because any voids/defects developed 

in this region may not be filled in by Li plastic flow because of the limited deformation 

taking place. When a larger stack pressure (such as 𝑃A = 3.5𝑀𝑃𝑎) is applied, region III 

will disappear and the Li metal reaches full plasticity (𝛽 = 1). As the stack pressure keeps 

on increasing, larger pressure intensification will develop near the defect area of the Li 

metal since the Von-Mises stress is bounded by its yield strength. This stress intensification 

near the defect area in both the Li metal and the SE may cause the fracture of the SE if the 

defect is sharp and the stack pressure is large enough. 48  

In Figure 4d, the degree of plasticity 𝛽 increases as the stack pressure 𝑃A increases or 

the yield strength 𝜎q decreases. Considerable debate exists in the literature as to the yield 

stress of Li. 42,43,45 To maintain a high enough plasticity (such as 𝛽 = 0.8 shown in Figure 

4d), the stack pressure 𝑃A must be increased accordingly if the yield strength of Li metal 

were to be larger than the accepted macroscale value (0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎). For example, if the yield 

strength of Li can reach 50 𝑀𝑃𝑎 43, a stack pressure of 150 𝑀𝑃𝑎 (extrapolated from the 

curve 𝛽 = 0.8 shown in Figure 4d) is needed to drive enough Li deformation to remove 

effects of inhomogeneous current deposition. However, although this high stack pressure 

𝑃A can be used to promote the Li metal deformation, it can also result in fracture of the SE 

material. Such SE fracture under cell operation conditions has been observed in 

experimental studies. 32 A detailed analysis of the fracture mechanisms of solid electrolytes 

is beyond the scope of this paper. One can assess the effects of stack pressure 𝑃A and the 


 
15

relative Young’s moduli of electrolyte and Li metal (𝐸c = 𝐸vw/𝐸F`) on fracture through an 

elementary fracture mechanics model 49, as summarized in Figure 5. 

In order to provide direct comparison with experimental studies 48,50, the model built in 

Figure 5 follows the real defect sizes measured in these studies: defect width 𝑤 = 1 𝜇𝑚 

and length 𝑙 = 20 𝜇𝑚. SE fracture will occur near the tip of defect and propagate if the 

stress intensity factor under mode I loading condition (𝐾y) is larger than the fracture 

toughness (𝐾yz) of the SE material. 49 According to the G-criterion, the stress intensity 

factor 𝐾y and the strain energy release rate (𝐺) around the defect are related by: 𝐾y =

|𝐺 ∙

w}~
nl•€, 𝜈 is the Poisson’s ratio of the SE. 49 The strain energy release rate (𝐺) can be 

extracted from the stress state near the defect tip through the use of J-integral. 51 The 

maximal allowed stack pressure 𝑃A to prevent SE fracture should satisfy the relation: 

𝐾y(𝑃A, 𝐸c) ≤ 𝐾yz. (More details are shown in section 1-d). 

Figure 5a shows the stress intensity factor (𝐾y) as a function of the applied stack pressure 

𝑃A for two different Young’s moduli ratio 𝐸c (𝐸c = 2.5 for LPS and 𝐸c = 19.2 for LLZO) 

when the yield strength of Li metal 𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. Under the same stack pressure, the 

stress intensity factor of a rigid SE material (larger 𝐸c, red line) is smaller than a flexible 

SE material (smaller 𝐸c, black line). Estimating the maximally allowed stack pressure 𝑃A 

from the black and red lines in Figure 5a using the published fracture toughness of LPS 

(0.25 𝑀𝑃𝑎 ∙ 𝑚n/D) and LLZO (1.25 𝑀𝑃𝑎 ∙ 𝑚n/D) 31,52 gives 160 𝑀𝑃𝑎 for LPS and 3𝐺𝑃𝑎 

for LLZO, respectively. Therefore, the LLZO-type SE has a higher resistance to fracture 

than LPS-type SE, not only due to the higher fracture toughness but also because of the 

lower stress intensity factor under the same stack pressure. 


 
16

Figure 5b shows the stress intensity factor 𝐾y of the SE as a function of the stack pressure 

𝑃A for three different yield strengths of Li metal 𝜎q with an LPS-type SE. Under the same 

stack pressure, the stress intensity factor is smaller if the yielding point of the Li metal is 

higher. When the stack pressure 𝑃A is less than 4 𝑀𝑃𝑎, the stress intensity factor 𝐾y of the 

SE are almost identical for the three different yield strengths of Li metal. This is because 

part of the Li metal is still in the elastic regime, leading to similar mechanical responses of 

the contact pair. However, as the stack pressure 𝑃A rises, the 𝐾y − 𝑃A curves start to deviate 

from linearity (The smaller the yielding strength, the earlier the deviation). This is due to 

the transition of Li metal deformation from elastic to plastic. After Li metal reaches full 

plasticity, a new linear relation between the stress intensity factor 𝐾y and the stack pressure 

𝑃A is observed. 

In general, results in Figure 5 show that the fracture of the SE is not only determined by 

its toughness, but also by its stiffness and by the yielding strength of the metal anode. An 

SE with higher fracture toughness and Young’s modulus paired with a metal anode with 

high yielding strength are preferred in order to increase the fracture resistance of the cell. 

Coupled effect of Li electrodeposition and Li plasticity on contact loss 

Whether contact loss occurs at an interface is determined by the competition between 

the irregular Li deposition and the ability to displace Li metal under plastic deformation 

driven by the stack pressure 𝑃A.  In this section, both the mechanical and electro-deposition 

effects on interfacial contact loss are discussed. To quantify the contact loss, the degree of 

contact γ is defined as γ(t) = A:(𝑡)/A:(0), where A:(𝑡) is the remaining interfacial 

contact area after 𝑡 seconds and A:(0) is the initial contact area. For the 2D model used in 

this work, the "contact area" is the contact length of interface S.  


 
17

A similar model as that in Figure 2a is built with defect width 𝑤 = 40 𝑛𝑚 and length 

𝑙 = 200 𝑛𝑚, and the degree of contact γ at interface S is investigated for different values 

of the exchange current density 𝑖bkf (30 − 160 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D), applied total current density 𝑖A 

(0.01 − 0.2 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D), stack pressure 𝑃A  (1 − 5 𝑀𝑃𝑎), and yield strength 𝜎q  (0.8 −

4 𝑀𝑃𝑎), with the ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j maintained at 0.3 𝑚𝑆/𝑐𝑚. The thickness of Li 

deposited is calculated from the Faradaic relation 𝐻 =

Z\]
Y 𝑖N∆𝑡, where 𝐻 is the thickness 

of newly deposited Li and ∆𝑡 is the deposition time. The simulation proceeds by depositing 

Li metal for a discrete timestep, followed by a mechanical equilibration after each timestep, 

including elastic and plastic deformation.  (A convergence test is done on the selection of 

the timestep, as described in section SI-6). The process is shown in more detail in the 

flowchart in Figure SI-1. A total deposition time of 50𝑠  (with average deposition thickness 

~1𝑛𝑚) is conducted in all calculations with timestep ∆𝑡 = 10𝑠. 

Figure 6a and Figure 6b show examples of the contact loss at interface S with conditions: 

applied total current density 𝑖A = 0.1 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D, exchange current density 𝑖bkf = 100 𝑚𝐴/

𝑐𝑚D, and yield strength of Li metal 𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. When the stack pressure is low (such 

as 𝑃A = 1 𝑀𝑃𝑎 in Figure 6a), the deformation of Li metal is not sufficient to fill in the 

voids developed during the Li deposition. Voids near the edges of the defect develop, 

preventing further Li deposition in these area as shown by the current density in Figure 6b 

after the voids develop. Once the SE and Li metal anode are separated in the void area, a 

sharp discontinuity in the current density 𝑖N is created. Higher pressure is able to reduce 

the contact loss, and when 𝑃A is 3 𝑀𝑃𝑎 no contact loss occurs during the limited time of 

the simulation.  


 
18

Figure 6c shows the degree of contact γ for different applied total current density 𝑖A and 

exchange current density 𝑖bkf for a Li metal yield strength of 𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎 and stack 

pressure 𝑃A = 2 𝑀𝑃𝑎. It is clear that higher charge-transfer rate and larger current density 

leads to more contact loss, consistent with our earlier observation that large exchange 

current density magnifies the inhomogeneity in the current density arising from surface 

irregularity. For a low charge-transfer rate (𝑖bkf = 30 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D), a higher charging rate (𝑖A 

up to 0.2 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D) can be tolerated to maintain physical contact (γ = 1). However, 

approximately 30% of the contact is lost when the exchange current density 𝑖bkf increases 

to 160 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D and the applied total current density 𝑖A increases to 0.2 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D. The 

contact loss shown in Figure 6c originates from uneven electrodeposition because of the 

original defect geometry. In general, when the applied current density 𝑖A is too large (x-

axis in Figure 6c) or the exchange current density is too large (curves from top to bottom), 

the deposition becomes more unstable, and more void space develops. 

Figure 6d shows the degree of contact γ for various stack pressure 𝑃A and values of the 

Li metal yield strength 𝜎q with applied current density 𝑖A = 0.1 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D and exchange 

current density 𝑖bkf = 100 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D. A low yield strength and a large stack pressure both 

help to prevent contact loss. When Li metal is soft (𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎), a small value of the 

stack pressure 𝑃A (~2.5 𝑀𝑃𝑎) is sufficient to maintain perfect contact (γ = 1). However, 

approximately 6% of the contact will be lost when the yield strength of Li metal is 3 𝑀𝑃𝑎 

even if the stack pressure 𝑃A increases to 5 𝑀𝑃𝑎. Therefore, the stack pressure 𝑃A needs to 

be well above the yield strength of Li metal 𝜎q to maintain intimate contact near surface 

irregularities (As shown in Figure 6d, 𝑃A > 2.2 𝑀𝑃𝑎 is needed if 𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎, and 𝑃A >

3.6 𝑀𝑃𝑎 is needed if 𝜎q = 1.3 𝑀𝑃𝑎). Moreover, the degree of contact γ decreases more 


 
19

rapidly as the yield strength 𝜎q increases; such as for 𝜎q = 1.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎, a minimum value of 

the stack pressure 𝑃A = 5 𝑀𝑃𝑎 is needed maintain contact, which is close to the fracture 

limit (6 𝑀𝑃𝑎) for LPS fracture (Figure 5a). The contact loss developed in Figure 6d mainly 

originates from insufficient mechanical deformation. In general, when the applied stack 

pressure is too low (x-axis in Figure 6d), or the yield strength of Li metal is high (curves 

from top to bottom), deformation of Li metal is not sufficient to smooth out the uneven 

deposition. 

 

Discussion 

Unstable Li deposition is believed to be one of the main sources for dendrite 

formation/propagation and interfacial contact loss. Both effects will amplify current 

inhomogeneity by either focusing current on a Li domain that is growing into the SE, or by 

redirecting current from the contact loss area to other areas where now the local current 

density needs to increase. As the internal stress of irregularly deposited Li accumulates 

(Figure 4a and Figure 4b), two different mechanisms can be triggered to release this 

internal stress: a) The deposited lithium is driven into pores or GBs of the SE, where the 

mechanical strength of the SE is weaker, initiating dendrite propagation; b) If the stack 

pressure is low enough, the excess internal stress in deposited Li can also be released by 

pushing the Li metal anode backward, resulting in interfacial contact loss (Figure 6). Since 

an ideal homogeneous current density distribution (with stability factor ϑ = 1) is likely to 

be impossible due to the geometric and/or material inhomogeneities, it is more practical to 

minimize its detrimental consequences through an optimization of the material’s structure 


 
20

(such as surface geometry and pore connectivity of SE) and boundary conditions (such as 

the stack pressure or applied current density). 

 To increase deposition stability, both the geometry and the electrochemical properties 

of Li metal and SE are important: a) “Shallow and wide” surface defects are preferred 

(Figure 2d). Specifically, a decrease in the surface roughness by ten times results in an 

increase in deposition stability by approximately 20%. b) A higher ionic conductivity of 

the SE is always preferred for both decreasing the SE bulk resistance and increasing the 

deposition stability. For example, interfacial deposition can be 25 times more stable 

(stability factor ϑ decreases from 30 to 1.2 when the ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j increases from 

0.003 𝑚𝑆/𝑐𝑚 to 0.3 𝑚𝑆/𝑐𝑚 (Figure 3b). c) For a given defect geometry, a relatively slow 

interfacial charge-transfer kinetics (low exchange current density) is preferred (Figure 3a) 

though this has to be kept within what is acceptable in terms of total interfacial resistance 

(Figure 3d). Increasing the ionic conductivity of the SE is clearly the most efficient way to 

stabilize the electrodeposition, as decreasing the exchange current density (Figure 3a) or 

preparing a well-polished SE surface (Figure 2d) only decrease ϑ by around 3 times and 

1.5 times respectively. Therefore, screening for solid electrolyte with a high ionic 

conductivity 53 is important for the performance of SSB, not only for lower SE resistance 

but also for more stable interfacial deposition. The reason the ionic conductivity is so 

important is that it effectively acts to screen surface irregularities. Through Ohm’s law 

inhomogeneous current near a defect also corresponds to inhomogeneities in the electric 

potential. A conductor with high 𝜎F`j can spread this current laterally in the conductor 

more easily, thereby effectively screening the defect. This can be well observed in Figure 

3b where for high enough ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j the effect of the defect in the current 

density becomes almost invisible. Hence, we want to stress that high ionic conductivity in 


 
21

a solid-state electrolyte is not only important to lower the impedance of the full cell, but 

also plays an important role in screening the current inhomogeneities from defects near the 

charge transfer interface. One very different option to mitigate surface irregularity is to 

throttle the transport at or very near the interface. This is evidenced in our calculations 

which show that a smaller exchange current leads to more homogeneous deposition and 

less void formation. While it seems unlikely that much can be done to change the actual 

charge transfer kinetics between Li metal and the conductor, a varying exchange current 

density can be mimicked by using a thin buffer layer. If this thin buffer layer has lower 

conductivity than the SE it will dampen irregular current coming from the SE over some 

length scale.  But a key requirement is that this buffer layer itself has good contact with the 

Li metal so that even deposition can occur from the buffer layer. If the buffer layer were to 

have worse contact with the Li anode, then deposition inhomogeneity would actually be 

aggravated by its application. 

To make our discussion more general, a quantity 𝑙A = 𝜎F`j ∙

‰Š

`‹Œ•Y  is defined to reflect 

the combined effect of the bulk (ionic conductivity 𝜎F`j) and the surface (exchange current 

density 𝑖bkf) of the SE on the Li deposition stability. Notably, the second term 

‰Š

`‹Œ•Y equals 

the charge transfer area-specific resistance 𝐴𝑆𝑅 , when the Butler-Volmer relation 

(Equation 5) is linearized (when the overpotential 𝜂 is small: 𝜂 ≪

‰Š

Y ). We call 𝑙A (with 

length unit) the damping length as it quantifies the ability of the SE to dampen deposition 

instability caused by surface irregularities. Figure 7a shows the deposition stability as a 

function of the defect length 𝑙 and the damping length 𝑙A. The dark blue, sky blue and 

yellow colors correspond to deposition stability factor ϑ ≤ 10, 10 < ϑ < 20 and ϑ ≥ 20, 

respectively. The two horizontal white lines are the damping length 𝑙A of LPS (28 µm, 39) 


 
22

and LLZO (2 µm, 41). As previously discussed, the deposition is more stable when defect 

length decreases (Figure 2c and 2d) and damping length increases (exchange current 

density decreases in Figure 3a, or ionic conductivity increases in Figure 3b). An SE with 

large 𝑙A (such as LPS) creates more stable deposition than an SE with small 𝑙A (such as 

LLZO) when their surface roughness is similar. That is to say, an SE with larger 𝑙A can 

tolerate worse surface quality. LPS allows a defect length up to 4 µm while LLZO can only 

tolerate a value less than 1.4 µm if the deposition stability factor ϑ has to be kept less than 

20. Results in Figure 7a make it possible to evaluate the Li deposition stability at the Li 

metal/SE interface just from the material and geometry information of the SE.  

Accumulation of internal stress near surface irregularities (Figure 4a and 4b) provides 

a driving force for Li deformation. Low stack pressure may result in insufficient Li 

deformation (Figure 4d) and cause interfacial contact loss (Figure 6a), while large stack 

pressure may lead to stress intensification (Figure 5) and cause Li infiltration into 

pores/GBs or even SE fracture if the stress intensity factor is above the limit of the fracture 

toughness of the SE. We find that in general, the stack pressure required to cause sufficient 

Li flow and maintain contact is well above the Li yield stress.  For example, a minimal 

value of 2.2 𝑀𝑃𝑎 is needed to maintain intimate contact when the Li yield strength is 

0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎 (Figure 6d) and a maximal value of 160 𝑀𝑃𝑎 is allowed to prevent SE fracture 

against LPS (Figure 5a). Therefore, a “mechanical stability window” of the stack pressure 

([ 2.2 𝑀𝑃𝑎, 160 𝑀𝑃𝑎 ]) is available to prevent both contact loss and SE fracture. Notably, 

this window would be modified if the Li metal yield strength is larger than 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. This 

is because larger stack pressure is required to maintain intimate contact at higher Li metal 

yield strength (Figure 6d) while larger stack pressure is allowed for SE fracture at higher 

Li metal yield strength (Figure 5b). Therefore, a mechanical stability window for the stack 


 
23

pressure must be established for a Li-metal SSB system depending on the mechanical 

properties of both Li metal and the SE material. 

Conclusions drawn above are also applicable to other metal SSB system (such as 

Sodium and Magnesium) as long as the metal electrode/SE interface is chemically stable. 

For solid-state battery system with different combination of metal electrodes and SEs, the 

required mechanical stability window for stack pressure can be very different. From the 

available material properties of electrodes and SEs in typical SSB systems (as shown in 

Table SI-1), we can extract the lower and upper limits of the stack pressure from Figure 6d 

and Figure 5b respectively. A summary of the mechanical stability window for the stack 

pressure for typical SSB systems is shown in Figure 7b. Smaller stack pressure is needed 

in Na-metal system than in Li-metal system to maintain intimate contact. This is because 

Na-metal has a lower yield strength (𝜎q = 0.2 𝑀𝑃𝑎) than Li-metal (𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎). Oxide-

SE systems can withstand much larger stack pressure than sulfide-SE systems because of 

their much larger moduli and fracture toughness (Table SI-1). Notably, results shown in 

Figure 7b assume no hardening of metal electrode and no degradation of the mechanical 

properties of the SE from voids/GBs. 

In this work, the continuum theory with a two-dimensional model is employed to 

investigate the Li electrodeposition stability and mechanical stability at the Li metal/solid 

electrolyte interface in Li-metal solid-state battery. Through our analysis, we find that the 

Li deposition can be stabilized by increasing the ionic conductivity of the SE, decreasing 

the exchange current density of the interfacial charge-transfer reaction, and preparing a 

well-polished smooth SE surface. We show that LPS can tolerate worse surface quality 

than LLZO at the same deposition stability because LPS has much larger “damping length” 


 
24

than LLZO (28 µm vs. 2 µm). We also find that a “mechanical stability window” for the 

applied stack pressure is important for different SSB systems in order to prevent both 

contact loss and SE fracture. We conclude that cell performance of SSBs can be enhanced 

by a more comprehensive selection of SE materials, and a more careful control of applied 

stack pressure. 

 

Experimental Procedures 

Lead Contact 

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and 

will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Gerbrand Ceder (gceder@berkeley.edu). 

 

Materials Availability 

This study did not generate new unique reagents. 

 

Data and Code Availability 

All data and code associated with the study have not been deposited in a public 

repository because , but available from the lead contact upon reasonable request. 

 

Mechanical equations 

The continuous plating on interface S generates stress fields in both the Li metal and the 

SE. The presence of initial defects creates inhomogeneous stress distribution, which may 

be sufficient to drive plastic deformation of Li metal or fracture of the SE 21. Varying yield 

strength and creep behavior for Li metal have recently been reported at room temperature. 


 
25

45,46 A comprehensive approach combining transport with elasticity and plasticity of both 

the Li metal and SE can be achieved by solving the following equations: 

Quasi-static mechanical equilibrium is assumed for both Li metal and the SE: 

∇ ∙ 𝝈 = 𝟎  
 
 
 
 
 
         (1) 

Linear elasticity is assumed for the elastic state of both Li metal and the SE: 

 𝝈 =

w

n*• 𝜺 +

•w

(n*•)(nlD•) 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒(𝜺)𝑰  
 
 
 
(2) 

An elastic/perfect plastic model without hardening is assumed for the Li metal plastic 

flow, with the Von Mises criterion and associated flow rule (Details in section SI-1b): 

  Φ(𝝈) ≡ |

𝟑

𝟐 |𝑑𝑒𝑣(𝝈)| − 𝜎q = 0,
d𝜺 = 𝑑𝜆

¢£

¢𝝈  
 
 
(3) 

At boundary S: Interfacial contact equilibrium (More details in section SI-1c). 

At boundary 𝑆n: Neumann BC with constant compressive stress:  𝝈𝒏 = −𝑃A𝒏. 

At boundary 𝑆A: Fixed in both x and y direction. At 𝑆F and 𝑆‰: Fixed in x direction. 

Here, 𝝈 is the stress tensor; 𝜺 and 𝜺  are the total strain tensor and the plastic strain 

tensor, respectively; E and 𝜈 are the Young's modulus and Poisson’s ratio of Li metal or 

the SE, respectively; 𝜎q is the yield strength of Li metal; Φ(𝝈) ≡ 0 defines the surface of 

stress state at which yield occurs; 𝒏 is the unit normal direction of the interface S oriented 

toward the exterior (for example, the normal of the Li metal, 𝒏F`, points downward and the 

normal of the SE, 𝒏vw, points upward in Figure 1); 𝑃A is the magnitude of the externally 

applied compressive stress (known as “stack pressure” in experiments); and ∇ ∙, 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒(∗) 

and 𝑑𝑒𝑣(∗) are the divergence, trace, and deviatoric operators, respectively. 𝑑𝜆 is the 

plastic multiplier; the hydrostatic pressure 𝑃 (𝑃 = −

n

m 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒(𝝈)), which may affect the 

current density 𝑖𝒏 as discussed later, and the deviatoric stress 𝒔 (𝒔 = 𝑑𝑒𝑣(𝝈)), which drives 

the plastic flow of metallic Li. The von Mises stress 𝜎r of a material point is defined as: 


 
26

𝜎r = |𝟑

𝟐𝒔: 𝒔. The stress intensity factor 𝐾y can be calculated from the stress state of the SE 

according to the G-criterion, which will be used to describe the fracture of the SE (more 

details in section SI-1d). 

Notably, the boundary conditions defined here are different from that in recent work 

which concluded that the deposition induced stress can grow up to 1GPa and thereby 

modify the overpotential and current density distribution in a significant way 54. Klinsmann 

et al. assume that Li in a sharp crack cannot be pushed out so that very high stresses can 

build up at the crack front.  Whether or not such boundary condition is applicable, may 

depend on the adhesion strength between lithium metal and the SE, something that is not 

well understood at this point.  In our model, no adhesive forces between Li metal and SE 

are present, with the Li electrode only constrained by a Neumann boundary condition at 𝑆n 

with constant compressive stress, representative of the stack pressure 𝑃A typically used in 

experiments. We note that recently a more thermodynamic mechanism that may limit the 

pressure at a crack tip has also been proposed, arguing that any substantial pressure build 

up at the crack tip will redirect the current away from the crack tip. 55 

In our time resolved simulations, mechanical equilibrium (equation 1) is reached at the 

end of each timestep for which the electrochemical problem is solved because mechanical 

equilibrium occurs at a speed much faster than the electro-chemical kinetics in the bulk SE 

and at the interface S. 56 

Electrochemical equations 

Since the SE is a single-ion conductor, it cannot accumulate carriers, and the conduction 

is therefore purely ohmic (More details in section SI-2a):  

𝛻D𝜙vw = 0,
𝒊 = −𝜎𝐿𝑖+∇𝜙vw 
 
 
 
(4) 


 
27

At interface S, the Butler-Volmer relation 5,6 is employed as the boundary condition: 

 𝑖fa = 𝑖bkf𝑒

(ª«¬-)®\]∆¯\]

°±
²𝑒

¬-³
°± ´ − 𝑒l¬•³

°± ´µ 
 
 
(5) 

𝑖fa = −𝑖N = −𝒊 ∙ 𝒏vw   
 
 
 
 
(6) 

At boundary 𝑆A, constant current flows into the SE: 𝒊 = 𝒊A.  

At boundary 𝑆F and 𝑆‰, no current flows out of the sample box: 𝒊 ∙ 𝒏 = 0. 

𝜙vw is the electric potential in the SE; 𝒊 is the current density in the SE; 𝑖fa is the ion 

current density across the interface S (positive for anodic reaction); 𝑖bkf is the exchange 

current density of the 𝐿𝑖/𝐿𝑖* reaction; 𝛼e  and 𝛼f  are the anodic and cathodic charge 

transfer coefficients, respectively; 𝜂  is the surface overpotential incorporating the 

mechanical effect: 𝜂 = 𝜙·N¸¹b − 𝜙vw − 𝑉A −

𝑉𝐿𝑖∆𝑃𝐿𝑖

Y
, where 𝜙·N¸¹b is the applied electric 

potential at the Li metal anode and 𝑉A is the unstressed equilibrium potential; 𝑉F`∆𝑃F` is the 

mechanical energy induced by the local hydrostatic pressure at the interface 5,6 (Details in 

section SI-2b). 𝑖N is the current density at the surface S of the SE normal to the rough 

interface S ( 𝑖N = 𝒊 ∙ 𝒏𝑆𝐸). 

Equation 4 implies that 𝐿𝑖* ions are homogeneously distributed in both the bulk and on 

the surface of the SE without the presence of a “space charge layer”. Equation 5 is the 

Butler-Volmer equation that incorporates the effect of interfacial stress, which was first 

studied by Monroe and Newman 5,6 and extended in other more recent work 34,54. Equation 

6 is the mass continuity equation at the interface S implying that only the 𝐿𝑖* ions current 

along the normal direction of the surface S are involved in the plating reaction. 

In general, there are two mechanisms by which stress modifies the Butler Volmer 

equation for non-stress conditions; 1) Most importantly, the hydrostatic pressure modifies 

the equilibrium potential due to a change in free energy of the metal electrode.  This term 


 
28

is 𝑉F`∆𝑃F` and is included in our work through the modification of the overpotential 𝜂. 2) It 

is also possible that the exchange current density (“𝑖bkf” in the Butler-Volmer relation) 

varies due to changes in the barrier for ion transfer from the electrolyte and metal electrode. 

Lacking a direct determination of this contribution it is often related to the changes in free 

energy of the end states in the electrode and electrolyte. A recent overview of the various 

assumptions by which this can be done is given by Ganser et al. 57.  In the approximation 

made by Newman 5 this change in barrier leads to the extra prefactor exp ½

(nl¾-)𝑉𝐿𝑖∆𝑃𝐿𝑖

‰Š
¿ in 

Equation 5. Because under most of these assumptions the change in 𝑖bkf is very small for 

the pressure values seen in this work, we have neglected this effect pressure on exchange 

current density (but retain the effect of pressure on the overpotential). For a typical value 

of stack pressure when sulfide-type electrolytes are used (For example, 1 to 5 MPa), ∆𝑃F` 

developed in the Li metal near interface S is no more than ~10 MPa (even considering the 

stress intensification at the peak of defects, as shown in the Results section). At room 

temperature, the term corresponding to the mechanical effect on the exchange current, 

exp ½

(1−𝛼𝑎)Z\]∆𝑃𝐿𝑖

𝑅𝑇
¿, is smaller than 1.02, which implies a very small change of exchange 

current density at interface S due to hydrostatic pressure. 

Notably, the hydrostatic pressure (𝑃 = −

n

m 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑒(𝝈)) was used in this work to quantify 

the effect of stress on the overpotential (𝑉F`∆𝑃𝐿𝑖), while the normal stress component (𝜎N =

(𝝈𝒏F`) ∙ 𝒏F`) has also been used in literature. 54 We show in section SI-4 that the magnitude 

of these two components are almost the same ( 𝑃 ≈ 𝜎N ) since Li metal behaves similar to 

a fluid. 57 A detailed study of the effect of hydrostatic pressure on the surface overpotential 

is shown in section SI-5. Within the range of practically used stack pressure (1 ~ 5 MPa), 

the mechanical effect is very small as compared to the effect of inhomogeneities from 


 
29

surface irregularities and transport kinetics. However, this effect can be significant if the 

stack pressure reaches ~1GPa, as studied in other work. 54,55 

All the partial differential equations (PDEs) are summarized in section SI-3a. An in-

house code based on the finite element method is used to solve these nonlinear PDEs. A 

flow chart of the code is presented in Figure SI-1. Default values of parameters used in this 

work are from reported experimental measurements of reference papers listed in the last 

column of Table SI-1. The thickness of both Li metal and the SE are set to be 10 𝜇𝑚 to 

ensure the inhomogeneities of stress and current become small when reaching the top and 

bottom boundaries of the cell. Notably, the thickness of Li metal will affect the behavior 

of the Li metal anode during cell cycling (such as pop-up delamination 58). 

 

Supplementary information 

Supplemental information can be found with the article online. 

 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy of the 

U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. 1384-1778. This research used the 

Lawrencium computational cluster resource provided by the IT Division at Lawrence 

Berkeley National Laboratory (supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of 

Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-

05CH11231) and the Savio computational cluster resource provided by the Berkeley 

Research Computing program at the University of California, Berkeley (supported by the 

UC Berkeley Chancellor, Vice Chancellor for Research, and Chief Information Officer). 


 
30

Author contributions 

Q.T. planned the project with G.C.; Q.T. derived all equations, programmed all codes and 

calculated all data with the help from L.B. and T.S.; The manuscript was written by Q.T. 

and was revised by L.B., T.S.  and G.C. with the help of the other authors. All authors 

contributed to discussions. 

 

Declaration of interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 
 
 
References 

1. 
Li J, Ma C, Chi M, Liang C, Dudney NJ. Solid electrolyte: The key for high-voltage 

lithium batteries. Advanced Energy Materials. 2014;5(4). 

2. 
Wenzel S, Leichtweiss T, Krüger D, Sann J, Janek J. Interphase formation on lithium 

solid electrolytes—an in situ approach to study interfacial reactions by photoelectron 

spectroscopy. Solid State Ionics. 2015;278:98-105. 

3. 
Cheng XB, Zhang R, Zhao CZ, Wei F, Zhang JG, Zhang Q. A review of solid electrolyte 

interphases on lithium metal anode. Advanced Science. 2016;3(3):1500213. 

4. 
Kim H, Jeong G, Kim Y-U, Kim J-H, Park C-M, Sohn H-J. Metallic anodes for next 

generation secondary batteries. Chemical Society Reviews. 2013;42(23):9011-34. 

5. 
Monroe C, Newman J. The effect of interfacial deformation on electrodeposition 

kinetics. Journal of the Electrochemical Society. 2004;151(6):A880-A6. 

6. 
Monroe C, Newman J. The impact of elastic deformation on deposition kinetics at 

lithium/polymer interfaces. Journal of the Electrochemical Society. 2005;152(2):A396-A404. 

7. 
Cheng E, Sharafi A, Sakamoto J. Intergranular Li metal propagation through 

polycrystalline 
Li6.25Al0.25La3Zr2O12 
ceramic 
electrolyte. 
Electrochimica 
Acta. 

2017;223:85-91. 


 
31

8. 
Porz L, Swamy T, Sheldon B, Rettenwander D, Fromling T, Thaman H, et al. Mechanism 

of Lithium Metal Penetration through Inorganic Solid Electrolytes. Advanced Energy 

Materials. 2017;7(20). 

9. 
Takada K. Progress and prospective of solid-state lithium batteries. Acta Materialia. 

2013;61(3):759-70. 

10. 
Nam YJ, Cho S-J, Oh DY, Lim J-M, Kim SY, Song JH, et al. Bendable and thin sulfide 

solid electrolyte film: a new electrolyte opportunity for free-standing and stackable high-

energy all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries. Nano letters. 2015;15(5):3317-23. 

11. 
Luntz AC, Voss J, Reuter K. Interfacial challenges in solid-state Li ion batteries. ACS 

Publications; 2015. 

12. 
Zhu Y, He X, Mo Y. First principles study on electrochemical and chemical stability 

of solid electrolyte–electrode interfaces in all-solid-state Li-ion batteries. Journal of Materials 

Chemistry A. 2016;4(9):3253-66. 

13. 
Santhanagopalan D, Qian D, McGilvray T, Wang Z, Wang F, Camino F, et al. Interface 

limited lithium transport in solid-state batteries. The journal of physical chemistry letters. 

2013;5(2):298-303. 

14. 
Liu Y, Lin D, Liang Z, Zhao J, Yan K, Cui Y. Lithium-coated polymeric matrix as a 

minimum volume-change and dendrite-free lithium metal anode. Nature communications. 

2016;7:10992. 

15. 
Yang C-P, Yin Y-X, Zhang S-F, Li N-W, Guo Y-G. Accommodating lithium into 3D 

current collectors with a submicron skeleton towards long-life lithium metal anodes. Nature 

communications. 2015;6:8058. 

16. 
Yan K, Lee H-W, Gao T, Zheng G, Yao H, Wang H, et al. Ultrathin two-dimensional 

atomic crystals as stable interfacial layer for improvement of lithium metal anode. Nano 

letters. 2014;14(10):6016-22. 

17. 
Mizuno F, Hayashi A, Tadanaga K, Tatsumisago M. Design of composite positive 

electrode in all-solid-state secondary batteries with Li2S-P2S5 glass–ceramic electrolytes. J 

Power Sources. 2005;146(1-2):711-4. 

18. 
Luo W, Gong Y, Zhu Y, Li Y, Yao Y, Zhang Y, et al. Reducing Interfacial Resistance 

between Garnet ‐ Structured Solid ‐ State Electrolyte and Li ‐ Metal Anode by a 

Germanium Layer. Advanced Materials. 2017;29(22):1606042. 

19. 
Wang C, Gong Y, Liu B, Fu K, Yao Y, Hitz E, et al. Conformal, nanoscale ZnO surface 

modification of garnet-based solid-state electrolyte for lithium metal anodes. Nano letters. 

2016;17(1):565-71. 


 
32

20. 
Fu KK, Gong Y, Liu B, Zhu Y, Xu S, Yao Y, et al. Toward garnet electrolyte–based Li 

metal batteries: An ultrathin, highly effective, artificial solid-state electrolyte/metallic Li 

interface. Science Advances. 2017;3(4):e1601659. 

21. 
Ferrese A, Newman J. Mechanical Deformation of a Lithium-Metal Anode Due to a 

Very Stiff Separator. Journal of the Electrochemical Society. 2014;161(9):A1350-A9. 

22. 
Ahmad Z, Viswanathan V. Stability of electrodeposition at solid-solid interfaces and 

implications for metal anodes. Physical review letters. 2017;119(5):056003. 

23. 
Yang L, Chen H-S, Jiang H, Song W-L, Fang D. Lithium redistribution around the 

crack tip of lithium-ion battery electrodes. Scripta Materialia. 2019;167:11-5. 

24. 
Wu B, Wang S, Lochala J, Desrochers D, Liu B, Zhang W, et al. The role of the solid 

electrolyte interphase layer in preventing Li dendrite growth in solid-state batteries. Energy 

& Environmental Science. 2018;11(7):1803-10. 

25. 
Famprikis T, Canepa P, Dawson JA, Islam MS, Masquelier C. Fundamentals of inorganic 

solid-state electrolytes for batteries. Nature materials. 2019. 

26. 
Krauskopf T, Hartmann H, Zeier WG, Janek Jr. Towards a Fundamental Understanding 

of the Lithium Metal Anode in Solid State Batteries-An Electrochemo-Mechanical Study on 

the Garnet-type Solid Electrolyte Li6. 25Al0. 25La3Zr2O12. ACS applied materials & 

interfaces. 2019. 

27. 
Ishikawa K, Ito Y, Harada S, Tagawa M, Ujihara T. Crystal orientation dependence of 

precipitate structure of electrodeposited Li metal on Cu current collectors. Crystal Growth & 

Design. 2017;17(5):2379-85. 

28. 
Braun S, Yada C, Latz A. Thermodynamically consistent model for space-charge-layer 

formation in a solid electrolyte. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C. 2015;119(39):22281-8. 

29. 
de Klerk NJJ, Wagemaker M. Space-charge Layers in All-Solid-State Batteries; 

Important or Negligible? ACS Applied Energy Materials. 2018. 

30. 
Li WJ, Hirayama M, Suzuki K, Kanno R. Fabrication and All Solid-State Battery 

Performance of TiS2/Li10GeP2S12 Composite Electrodes. Mater Trans. 2016;57(4):549-52. 

31. 
McGrogan FP, Swamy T, Bishop SR, Eggleton E, Porz L, Chen X, et al. Compliant Yet 

Brittle Mechanical Behavior of Li2S–P2S5 Lithium‐Ion‐Conducting Solid Electrolyte. 

Advanced Energy Materials. 2017;7(12):1602011. 

32. 
Park R, Swamy T, Sheldon BW, Rettenwander D, Porz L, Berendts S, et al., editors. 

Criteria for Lithium “Dendrite” Propagation Evaluated in Single Crystal Solid Electrolytes2018: 

The Electrochemical Society. 


 
33

33. 
Sharafi A, Meyer HM, Nanda J, Wolfenstine J, Sakamoto J. Characterizing the Li–

Li7La3Zr2O12 interface stability and kinetics as a function of temperature and current 

density. J Power Sources. 2016;302:135-9. 

34. 
Barai P, Higa K, Srinivasan V. Lithium dendrite growth mechanisms in polymer 

electrolytes and prevention strategies. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2017;19(31):20493-505. 

35. 
Li L, Liu S, Xue X, Zhou H. Effects of rough interface on impedance of solid LiPON 

in MIM cells. Ionics. 2018;24(2):351-62. 

36. 
Armstrong RD, Burnham RA. The effect of roughness on the impedance of the interface 

between a solid electrolyte and a blocking electrode. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry and 

Interfacial Electrochemistry. 1976;72(3):257-66. 

37. 
Wang S, Wang J, Liu J, Song H, Liu Y, Wang P, et al. Ultra-fine surface solid-state 

electrolytes for long cycle life all-solid-state lithium–air batteries. Journal of Materials 

Chemistry A. 2018;6(43):21248-54. 

38. 
Bachman JC, Muy S, Grimaud A, Chang H-H, Pour N, Lux SF, et al. Inorganic solid-

state electrolytes for lithium batteries: mechanisms and properties governing ion conduction. 

Chemical reviews. 2015;116(1):140-62. 

39. 
Chiku M, Tsujiwaki W, Higuchi E, Inoue H. Microelectrode studies on kinetics of 

charge transfer at an interface of Li metal and Li2S-P2S5 solid electrolytes. Electrochemistry. 

2012;80(10):740-2. 

40. 
Munichandraiah N, Scanlon LG, Marsh RA, Kumar B, Sircar AK. Determination of the 

exchange current density of the Li++ e−⇆ Li reaction in polymer electrolytes by galvanostatic 

linear polarization of symmetrical cells. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry. 1994;379(1-

2):495-9. 

41. 
Tsai C-L, Roddatis V, Chandran CV, Ma Q, Uhlenbruck S, Bram M, et al. Li7La3Zr2O12 

interface modification for Li dendrite prevention. ACS applied materials & interfaces. 

2016;8(16):10617-26. 

42. 
LePage WS, Chen Y, Kazyak E, Chen K-H, Sanchez AJ, Poli A, et al. Lithium Mechanics: 

Roles of Strain Rate and Temperature and Implications for Lithium Metal Batteries. Journal 

of The Electrochemical Society. 2019;166(2):A89-A97. 

43. 
Xu C, Ahmad Z, Aryanfar A, Viswanathan V, Greer JR. Enhanced strength and 

temperature dependence of mechanical properties of Li at small scales and its implications 

for Li metal anodes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2017;114(1):57-61. 

44. 
Tariq S, Ammigan K, Hurh P, Schultz R, Liu P, Shang J, editors. Li material testing-

fermilab antiproton source lithium collection lens2003: IEEE. 


 
34

45. 
Herbert EG, Hackney SA, Thole V, Dudney NJ, Phani PS. Nanoindentation of high-

purity vapor deposited lithium films: A mechanistic rationalization of the transition from 

diffusion to dislocation-mediated flow. Journal of Materials Research. 2018;33(10):1361-8. 

46. 
Masias A, Felten N, Garcia-Mendez R, Wolfenstine J, Sakamoto J. Elastic, plastic, and 

creep mechanical properties of lithium metal. Journal of Materials Science.1-16. 

47. 
Korovin GI, Filippov AV, Proskokov AV, Gorbatenko VV, editors. Cutting edge geometry 

effect on plastic deformation of titanium alloy2016: IOP Publishing. 

48. 
Doux JM, Nguyen H, Tan DHS, Banerjee A, Wang X, Wu EA, et al. Stack Pressure 

Considerations for Room ‐ Temperature All ‐ Solid ‐ State Lithium Metal Batteries. 

Advanced Energy Materials. 2020;10(1):1903253. 

49. 
Anderson TL, Anderson TL. Fracture mechanics: fundamentals and applications: CRC 

press; 2005. 

50. 
Doux J-M, Yang Y, Tan DHS, Nguyen H, Wu EA, Wang X, et al. Pressure Effects on 

Sulfide Electrolytes for All Solid-State Batteries. Journal of Materials Chemistry A. 2020. 

51. 
Rice JR. A path independent integral and the approximate analysis of strain 

concentration by notches and cracks. Journal of applied mechanics. 1968;35(2):379-86. 

52. 
Yu S, Schmidt RD, Garcia-Mendez R, Herbert E, Dudney NJ, Wolfenstine JB, et al. Elastic 

properties of the solid electrolyte Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO). Chemistry of Materials. 

2015;28(1):197-206. 

53. 
Wang Y, Richards WD, Ong SP, Miara LJ, Kim JC, Mo Y, et al. Design principles for 

solid-state lithium superionic conductors. Nature materials. 2015;14(10):1026. 

54. 
Klinsmann M, Hildebrand FE, Ganser M, McMeeking RM. Dendritic cracking in solid 

electrolytes driven by lithium insertion. J Power Sources. 2019;442:227226. 

55. 
Barroso-Luque L, Tu Q, Ceder G. An Analysis of Solid-State Electrodeposition-Induced 

Metal Plastic Flow and Predictions of Stress States in Solid Ionic Conductor Defects. Journal 

of The Electrochemical Society. 2020;167(2):020534. 

56. 
Zhang X, Shyy W, Sastry A. Numerical simulation of intercalation-induced stress in 

Li-ion battery electrode particles. Journal of the Electrochemical Society. 2007;154(10):A910-

A6. 

57. 
Ganser M, Hildebrand FE, Klinsmann M, Hanauer M, Kamlah M, McMeeking RM. An 

Extended Formulation of Butler-Volmer Electrochemical Reaction Kinetics Including the 

Influence of Mechanics. Journal of The Electrochemical Society. 2019;166(4):H167-H76. 

58. 
Guo K, Tamirisa PA, Sheldon BW, Xiao X, Gao H. Pop-up delamination of electrodes 

in solid-state batteries. Journal of The Electrochemical Society. 2018;165(3):A618-A25. 


 
35

Figure/table titles and legends 

 

Figure 1. (A) Schematic model of a half SSB cell consisting of a Li metal anode Ωn and solid 

electrolyte ΩA. The roughness at the interface S is approximated by the periodic protrusion defined 

in (c). The surfaces 𝑆A and 𝑆n are flat. The left and right boundaries of Li metal and SE are labeled 

as 𝑆F and 𝑆‰, respectively. A stack pressure 𝑃A is applied to the ends of the cell (𝑆A and 𝑆n). Li ions 

are extracted from the cathode (not shown) and migrate from 𝑆A toward S under galvanostatic 

conditions: 𝐼A = 𝑖A ∙ 𝐴A = ∫ 𝑖𝒏 𝑑𝑆, where 𝑖A is the applied current density on 𝑆A with constant area 

𝐴A, and 𝑖𝒏 is the normal current density on S (𝑖𝒏 = 𝒊 ∙ 𝒏, where 𝒊 is the current density in the SE 

and 𝒏 is the normal direction of the interface S). Upon reaching S, these ions are plated onto Ωn via 

the reaction 𝐿𝑖* + 𝑒l ↔ 𝐿𝑖. (B) 𝐿𝑖 deposition on the interface S with normal current density 𝑖𝒏. A 

thin layer of SEI above S is shown in yellow. c). Geometry of the contact pair of Li metal protrusion 

and SE defect on the interface S, with shape 𝑦(𝑥, 𝑡), width 2𝑤, and length 𝑙. 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. (A) Current density distribution in SE for a cosine-shaped defect with defect width 

𝑤 = 40 𝑛𝑚 and defect length 𝑙 = 100 𝑛𝑚; the magnitude is represented by the contour line, and 

the direction is represented by the red arrows. (B) Distribution of normal current density 𝑖N at 

interface S within range |𝑥| < 0.2 𝜇𝑚 for different shapes with 𝑤 = 40 𝑛𝑚 and 𝑙 = 100 𝑛𝑚. The 

inset shows 𝑖N within the range |𝑥| < 0.05 𝜇𝑚. (C) Surface overpotential η near a defect with 

different length 𝑙 but same width 𝑤 = 40 𝑛𝑚. (D) Stability factor ϑ (contour surface) as a function 

of length 𝑙 and width 𝑤 for cosine-shaped defect. 


 
36

 

Figure 3. Distribution of normal current density 𝑖N at interface S near the defect with width 𝑤 =

40 𝑛𝑚  and 𝑙 = 100 𝑛𝑚 : (A) varying exchange current density 𝑖bkf  while keeping ionic 

conductivity 𝜎F`j  constant ( 0.3 𝑚𝑆/𝑐𝑚 ) and (B) varying 𝜎F`j  while keeping 𝑖bkf  constant 

(100 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D). (C) Stability factor ϑ (color map) as a function of the exchange current density 

𝑖bkf and 𝑙𝑜𝑔 (𝜎F`j). (D) Charge-transfer ASR as a function of exchange current density 𝑖bkf. All 

data at applied current density of 0.1mA/cm2. 

 
 

 

Figure 4. Hydrostatic pressure (A) and von Mises stress (B) of Li metal along interface S near 

the defect for a Li metal yield strength 𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. (C) Elastic/plastic region of Li metal in 

contact with the SE (light gray indicates the elastic region, and dark blue indicates the plastic 

region), with the stack pressure 𝑃A = 3 𝑀𝑃𝑎 and the yield strength 𝜎q = 0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. (D) Degree of 

plasticity 𝛽 of Li metal as a function of the yield strength 𝜎q (varying from 0.5 to 2.5 𝑀𝑃𝑎), and 

the stack pressure 𝑃A (varying from 0.5 to 4.5 𝑀𝑃𝑎). The width and length of the Li protrusion (SE 

defect) are 𝑤 = 80 𝑛𝑚 and 𝑙 = 200 𝑛𝑚, respectively. 

 

 

Figure 5. (A) Stress intensity factor 𝐾y of SE near the defect tip as a function of the 

applied stack pressure 𝑃A at two different relative Young’s moduli 𝐸c (𝐸c = 𝐸vw/𝐸F`, the 

ratio of Young’s moduli between SE and Li metal), with the yield strength 𝜎q fixed at 

0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. (B) Stress intensity factor 𝐾y as a function of the applied stack pressure 𝑃A at 

three different values of the yield strength of Li metal 𝜎q, with the relative Young’s moduli 

𝐸F` fixed at 2.5 (for LPS-type SE). 


 
37

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6. (A) Loss of interfacial contact after a finite amount of Li deposition with applied total 

current density 𝑖A = 0.1 𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D, stack pressure 𝑃A = 1 𝑀𝑃𝑎, and Li metal yield strength 𝜎q =

0.8 𝑀𝑃𝑎. (B) Current distribution near defect for the conditions in (a) but with three different stack 

pressure 𝑃A. (C) Degree of contact for different values of exchange current density 𝑖bkf and applied 

total current density 𝑖A. (D) Degree of contact for different values of Li metal yield strength 𝜎q and 

stack pressure 𝑃A. 

 
 
 

 

Figure 7. (A) the deposition stability ϑ as a function of defect length 𝑙 and damping length 𝑙A. 

The two black dash lines (ϑ = 10 and ϑ = 20) separate the deposition stability into three regions: 

dark blue (ϑ ≤ 10), light blue (10 < ϑ < 20), and yellow (ϑ ≥ 20). The two white lines represents 

the values of damping length for LPS and LLZO respectively. (B) The mechanical stability window 

of the stack pressure for different SSB systems. The lower limit in each window is the minimal 

value of stack pressure needed to maintain intimate contact of the metal electrode and SE. The 

upper limit is the maximal value allowed to prevent SE fracture. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
38

Table 1. Critical parameters used in this work 

Name 
Symbol 
Unit 
Value 
Ref. 

Mechanical 

 

Parameters 

Young’s modulus of Li metal 
𝐸F`
𝐺𝑃𝑎
7.8 
46

Poisson’s ratio of Li metal 
𝜈F`
1 
0.38 
46

Density of Li metal 
𝜌F`
𝑘𝑔/𝑚m
534 
46

Yield strength of Li metal 
𝜎A
𝑀𝑃𝑎
0.8 
46

Young’s modulus of SE 
𝐸vw
𝐺𝑃𝑎
19.5 
31

Density of SE 
𝜌vw
𝑘𝑔/𝑚m
1880 
31

Poisson’s ratio of SE 
𝜈vw
1 
0.36 
31

Fracture toughness of SE 
𝐾yz
𝑀𝑃𝑎 ∙ 𝑚n/D
0.25 
31

Electro 
chemical 

 

Parameters 

Anodic/cathodic transfer 
coefficients 

𝛼e,𝛼f
1 
0.5 
34

Exchange current density 
𝑖bkf
𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D
100
39

Li+ conductivity in SE 
𝜎F`j
𝑚𝑆/𝑐𝑚
0.3 
38

Applied current density 
𝒊A
𝑚𝐴/𝑐𝑚D
0.1 
8

 

 
 
 
 
 
 


