1

Pathways towards 30% efficient single-junction perovskite solar cells and the role of 
mobile ions

Jonas Diekmann, Pietro Caprioglio, Moritz H. Futscher, Vincent M. Le Corre, Sebastian 
Reichert, Frank Jaiser, Malavika Arvind, Lorena Perdigón Toro, Emilio Gutierrez-Partida, 
Francisco Peña-Camargo, Carsten Deibel, Bruno Ehrler, Thomas Unold, Thomas Kirchartz, 
Dieter Neher, Martin Stolterfoht*

Jonas Diekmann, Pietro Caprioglio, Dr. Vincent M. Le Corre, Dr. Frank Jaiser, Malavika 
Arvind, Lorena Perdigón Toro, Emilio Gutierrez-Partida, Francisco Peña-Camargo, Prof. Dr. 
Dieter Neher, Dr. Martin Stolterfoht

Institute of Physics and Astronomy, University of Potsdam, Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, D-
14476 Potsdam-Golm, Germany
E-mail: stolterf@uni-potsdam.de

Dr. Moritz H. Futscher, Prof. Dr. Bruno Ehrler
AMOLF, Center for Nanophotonics, Science Park 104, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands

Sebastian Reichert, Prof. Dr. Carsten Deibel
Institut für Physik, Technische Universität Chemnitz, 09126 Chemnitz, Germany

Dr. Thomas Unold
Department of Structure and Dynamics of Energy Materials, Helmholtz-Zentrum-Berlin, 
Hahn-Meitner-Platz 1, D-14109 Berlin, Germany

Prof. Dr. Thomas Kirchartz
IEK5-Photovoltaik , Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, 52425 Jülich, Germany

Keywords: perovskite solar cells, solar cell simulations, transport-layer doping, solar cell 
hysteresis


2

Perovskite semiconductors have demonstrated outstanding external luminescence quantum 

yields, enabling high power conversion efficiencies (PCE). However, the precise conditions to 

advance to an efficiency regime above monocrystalline silicon cells are not well understood. 

Here, we establish a simulation model that well describes efficient p-i-n type perovskite solar 

cells and a range of different experiments. We then study important device and material 

parameters and we find that an efficiency regime of 30% can be unlocked by optimizing the 

built-in potential across the perovskite layer by using either highly doped (1019 cm-3), thick 

transport layers (TLs) or ultrathin undoped TLs, e.g. self-assembled monolayers. Importantly, 

we only consider parameters that have been already demonstrated in recent literature, that is a 

bulk lifetime of 10 µs, interfacial recombination velocities of 10 cm/s, a perovskite bandgap 

(𝐸gap) of 1.5 eV and an EQE of 95%. A maximum efficiency of 31% is predicted for a bandgap 

of 1.4 eV. Finally, we demonstrate that the relatively high mobile ion density does not represent 

a significant barrier to reach this efficiency regime. Thus, the results of this paper promise 

continuous PCE improvements until perovskites may become the most efficient single-junction 

solar cell technology in the near future.

1. Introduction

Over the last 10 years perovskite solar cells have triggered an enormous research interest and 

with power conversion efficiencies of 25.5%1 they are close to the efficiencies of 

monocrystalline silicon solar cells (26.7%).2,3 As such, perovskites provide an exciting 

opportunity to approach the thermodynamic efficiency limit of single-junction perovskite solar 

cells (33.7%4,5) due to their exceptional optical and material properties. An optimal

semiconductor for solar cell applications must basically fulfil three requirements, that is (i) a 

high absorption coefficient, in particular strong absorption at the band edge, (ii) long charge 

carrier diffusion lengths to efficiently collect charges in several hundred nm thick films and

(iii) a high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY).6 Despite the impressive efficiencies 


3

achieved with perovskite solar cells, there are many other key considerations that need to be 

addressed prior to a successful commercialization of the technology, such as the environmental 

stability,7
the toxicity of lead,8
and the scalability
of the fabrication processes.9

Notwithstanding these points, in order to improve the efficiencies of state-of-the-art perovskite 

cells further it is imperative to supress all non-radiative recombination to an absolute minimum. 

This is particularly the case for the perovskite/transport layer (TL) interfaces but also for the 

perovskite absorber itself. This task requires a deep understanding of defect chemistry and 

device physics. Very encouraging in this regard are recent studies which highlighted

exceptional external PL efficiencies (PLQY) in several perovskite compositions.10–15 For 

example Braly et al.11 demonstrated an external fluorescence yield of 20% with a charge carrier 

bulk lifetime (𝜏bulk) of approximately 8.8 µs, even with the most standard methyl ammonium 

lead iodide (MAPI) perovskite absorber which was passivated with trioctylphosphine oxide 

(TOPO).16,17 Even higher PLQYs were demonstrated on a neat, potassium-passivated mixed 

perovskite film, however, no lifetimes were specified.10 It is also clear, that when it comes to 

complete cells, a key consideration is the non-radiative loss at the interfaces. A suitable 

approach to quantify the non-radiative recombination loss at the interface is based on absolute 

photoluminescence.18–20 In fact, many recent record cells now commonly report luminescence 

quantum efficiencies of several percent which underline the exceptional opto-electronic quality 

of the whole device stack.13 Important parameters that define the non-radiative interfacial 

recombination loss are the interface recombination velocity (S) and the energy offsets between 

the TLs and the perovskite.21,22 Both parameters depend on the underlying substrate and the 

specific chemical environment at the interface.23 In very high efficiency systems, S can be 

reduced to be on the order of 10 cm/s12,22,24 although this parameter is not routinely quantified 

in the literature and further research must be done to clearly disentangle the interfacial charge 

transfer and recombination based on kinetic measurements, such as transient PL.20,22,24–27


4

A key consideration to improve the efficiency of single junction cells is to lower the bandgap 

(𝐸gap) to the optimum value in the Shockley-Queisser model (e.g. ~1.34 eV).4,5 Commonly 

used perovskites such as methylammonium lead iodide (MAPI)28,29 and formamidinium lead 

iodide (FAPI)30–32 do allow some flexibility in modifying the bandgap within a range of 1.6 eV 

to approximately 1.5 eV,33 while CsPbBr3 allows to increase the bandgap further to 2.4 eV34

which is an important consideration for tandem solar cell applications.23 Notably, both MAPI 

and FAPI perovskite cells allow achieving PCEs above 20%.20,29,35 Moreover, the 

incorporation of small amounts of Sn36–38 allows reducing the bandgap to the optimum bandgap 

in the S.Q. model (1.1-1.4 eV) and PCEs above 21% have been reported for cells based on a 

1.22 eV perovskite bandgap in 2019.39 Unfortunately, tin perovskite brings other problems due 

to the high probability of oxidation from Sn2+ to Sn4+.38 Other key parameters include the donor 

and acceptor density (𝑛dop) in the TLs (i.e. doping),40–42 the charge carrier mobilities (𝜇) in all 

layers,43 as well as the kinetics and density of mobile ions (𝑛ions), which are expected to screen 

and re-distribute the internal field thereby causing recombination losses and hysteresis

effects.35,44–47 Other important considerations include the built-in potential (𝑉BI) across the 

device and the energy-level alignment between the perovskite and the charge TLs for majority 

carriers (Δ𝐸maj).48–50 It is fair to say that until today the impact of most of these parameters 

remains heavily debated in the community and there exist many conflicting findings in the 

literature with regard to these parameters. For example, so far, no consensus has been reached 

on the density of mobile ions with reported values typically varying from 1015 – 1019 cm-3 for 

MAPI.46,51–53 Moreover, some literature reports suggest that the energy-level alignment does 

not play an important role for the device performance,54 which is in contrast to other studies 

where the 𝑉OC correlated to Δ𝐸maj.25,55–57 Also, the distribution of the built-in potential (𝑉BI) 

across the device remains in general poorly understood despite significant progress in this 

regard.35,58–60 Other examples include the chemical doping with several reports linking doping 


5

to enhanced losses in 𝑉OC or quasi-Fermi level splitting (QFLS),61–63 although in many 

inorganic solar cell technologies doping is a key factor in preventing minority carrier 

recombination at the metal contacts.3,64

In this work, we aim to understand the most promising and simple optimization strategies in 

order to allow perovskites to reach and surpass the efficiency of monocrystalline silicon and 

even GaAs (29.1%).1 To this end we have optimized previously validated device simulations 

based on the well-established drift-diffusion simulator SCAPS,65,66 by fitting the simulations

to a number of different experimental results. Furthermore, the numerical simulations were 

extended to incorporate mobile ions based on experimentally measured diffusion constants and 

ion densities using the software IonMonger.67,68 Based on a set of standard simulation 

parameters that describe a typical p-i-n type cell (with a PCE of 19.2%), we have varied several 

important parameters to understand their relative importance within the limits of the simulation

model, such as 𝑛dop, 𝑛ions, 𝜇, 𝑉BI, 𝐸maj, 𝐸gap, 𝑆, 𝜏bulk and the device absorption. Starting from 

the standard simulation, we find that increasing the carrier mobilities (in all layers) by a factor 

of 10 may only lead to small efficiency improvements (~1% absolute) by allowing fill factors 

of up to 85%. This is in contrast to chemical doping of the transport layers (𝑛dop = 1019 cm-

3) which allows exceeding FFs of 85% and to reach 𝑉OCs close to the radiative limits with PCEs 

of 24% for the standard cell configuration. We explain the potentially huge benefit of doped 

TLs through an effective increase of the 𝑉BI across the absorber layer which repels minority 

carriers from the interfaces, thereby reducing interfacial recombination losses. Related to this,

we show that a high dielectric constant in the neat material would lead to a decrease in fill 

factor due to a decrease in the 𝑉BI across the absorber layer. These considerations imply the 

importance of maximizing the 𝑉BI across the perovskite and also imply the benefit of a small 

ion density to prevent a screening of the internal field (𝑛ion << electrode charge/volume ~1016

cm-3). Nevertheless, the experimentally measured mobile ion density greatly exceeds this 


6

critical value (≥6x1016 cm-3) and we discuss the implication of this on the device performance. 

Finally, we demonstrate that 30% efficient perovskite solar cells are within reach by only using 

parameters that have already been demonstrated in recent literature, i.e. a bandgap of 

approximately 1.5 eV, a bulk carrier lifetime of 10 µs, an interfacial recombination velocity of 

10 cm/s and an EQE of 95% throughout the spectrum. The key to unlock this efficiency regime 

is to maximize the device built-in field by either increasing the doping concentration in the TLs 

to at least 1019 cm-3, or using ultrathin (≈10nm), undoped TLs, if a strong built-in field can be 

created by other means. Finally, we show that although the mobile ion density is very 

significant in our triple cation perovskite devices (≥6x1016 cm-3), it will most likely not 

represent a significant barrier for reaching such near-ideal solar cell performances as the 

relative impact of the mobile ions decreases with reduced interfacial and bulk recombination. 

2. Results

In the first part of the study, we optimized our SCAPS65,66 device simulation parameters by 

fitting several experimental results. First, standard simulation parameters were established to 

describe 
our 
reference 
cells 
with
the 
following 
architecture: 
ITO/PTAA/PFN-

Br/perovskite/C60/BCP/Cu.20,69 These cells exhibit on average a 𝑉OC of approximately 1.13 V, 

a fill factor of 79% and a short-circuit current density of 21.5 mA cm-2 with an average external 

quantum efficiency (EQE) of close to 88% between 400 nm to 750 nm (Supplementary 

Figure S1) which results in a PCE of ~19.2%.20 We note these p-i-n type cells initially exhibit 

essentially no hysteresis at different scan speeds that are accessible with our JV-measurement 

setup (scan rate <150 mV/s, Supplementary Figure S2), which, however, doesn’t imply the 

absence of a hysteresis at even faster scan speeds. Using TRPL measurements, we obtained an 

interface recombination velocity of S = 2000 cm/s at the perovskite/ETL interface and S = 100 

cm/s at the HTL/perovskite interface, as well as a bulk lifetime 𝜏bulk of 500 ns


7

(Supplementary Figure S3).20 Moreover, we note that the perovskite layer is effectively 

undoped (≈6x1011 cm-3) as evidenced by lateral conductivity measurements (Supplementary 

Figure S4). A fit of the standard simulations to experimental JV-curves is shown in Figure 1a 

while the simulation parameters are shown in Supplementary Table S1. The set of basic 

equations solved by SCAPS is presented in Supporting Note 1. We note, that we used a 

bandgap-dependent bimolecular recombination coefficient (𝑘2) as detailed in Supporting 

Note 2. Knowing the radiative recombination current density in the dark and the effective 

density of states 𝑁C = 𝑁V = 2.2×1018 cm-3,24 𝑘2 can be readily obtained (e.g. for a bandgap of 

1.63 eV, we obtain a  𝑘2 = 3×10-11 cm3/s).70,71 We note, that this represents the external 𝑘2

which is impacted by photon recycling inside the bulk.6,72–75 Therefore, by using the external 

𝑘2, we effectively consider the effect of photon recycling in our simulations. Importantly, using 

the bandgap-dependent 𝑘2 and no parasitic losses, we can well reproduce the Shockley-

Queisser efficiency vs. bandgap (Supplementary Figure S5) with a maximum PCE of 33.77% 

at a bandgap of 1.36 eV.5 Note, the precise value of k2 has no impact under a 1 sun illumination

for cells which are limited by SRH recombination in the bulk or at the interfaces (such as the 

standard cell). Moreover, it is interesting to note that reported Auger recombination coefficients

(10-28 cm-6/s)70 reduce the maximum obtainable PCE in our simulations by only 0.03% and are

therefore not a limiting factor. The simulated parallel recombination currents in the perovskite 

layer, interface and/or metal contacts are shown in Figure 1b which accurately correspond to 

the experimentally obtained recombination currents (Figure 1c). The latter were obtained by 

measuring the QFLS of individual perovskite/transport layer films of the cell as reported in a 

previous publication.48 Notably, at 𝑉OC, interfacial recombination outweighs the recombination 

in the neat material by more than 1 order of magnitude. Moreover, the simulations reproduce 

the ideality factor of the standard cells of approximately 1.35 across a broad range of light 

intensities (Figure 1d).76 Based on these settings, several recent experimental results were 


8

fitted by changing only one parameter depending on the particular experiment. These 

experiments include cells with reduced interface recombination at the perovskite/ETL interface

upon adding LiF (Figure 1e),20 cells with different hole transport layers resulting in different 

𝑉OCs (Figure 1f),48 as well as cells with different PTAA layer thicknesses resulting in different 

fill factors (Figure 1g).43,77 Overall, Figure 1 demonstrates that the SCAPS simulations can 

well reproduce these experimental results while also produce the quantified recombination 

currents in the bulk and the interfaces by taking into account the measured interface and bulk 

lifetimes. 

Figure 1. (a) Experimental and numerically simulated light and dark JV curves of p-i-n type 
cells based on PTAA/PFN-Br/triple cation perovskite/C60. The interface recombination 
velocities and bulk lifetime were obtained from transient PL (TRPL) measurements.20 (b)
Simulated voltage-dependent radiative and non-radiative recombination currents in the neat 
perovskite and at both interfaces compared to the generation current. Interfacial recombination 
reduces the possible open-circuit voltage which is roughly 10× larger than Shockley-Read-Hall 
recombination in the neat material. (c) This is consistent with experimentally measured 
recombination currents under open-circuit conditions using steady-state PL measurements.48

(d) The simulation parameter set also reproduces the ideality factor (nID ~ 1.35 ) of the standard 
cells.76 The standard simulation settings allow to fit several experimental results by changing 
a single parameter depending on the particular experiment. (e) Inserting LiF between the 
perovskite and C60 leads to concurrent increase of the transient PL (TRPL) lifetime, device VOC


9

and PCEs above 21%.20 The TRPL results suggest that S decreases 1 order of magnitude upon 
application of LiF which allows to reproduce the experimentally observed VOC gain of 35 mV. 
(f) Cells with different HTLs and varying majority carrier band offsets as obtained from UPS 
measurements.48 Implementing energy offsets at the p-interface for the cells with a 
PEDOT:PSS and P3HT hole transport layer allows to reproduce the experimental JV-curves. 
(g) Cells with changing PTAA thickness. The mobility in the PTAA layer has a significant 
impact on the device fill factor consistent with previous work.77 The fitting allowed to finetune 
the perovskite and the PTAA layer mobility (μpero=1 cm2/V/s, μPTAA=1.5×10-4 cm2/V/s, while 
μC60=1.0×10-2 cm2/V/s).

2.1 Mobile ions

Despite the good fits shown in Figure 1, it is important to note that the SCAPS simulations 

above were performed assuming a negligible mobile ion density.43–46 To address the role of 

mobile ions on our simulation results, we performed additional experiments and simulations 

using the open-source simulation software IonMonger.59,60 In a first step, we confirmed the 

comparability of IonMonger and SCAPS (without mobile ions) by comparing the key-

parameters such as S and the majority carrier offset 𝐸maj (Supplementary Figure S6) which 

provided very similar results. To implement the mobile ion density in IonMonger, we first 

quantified the ion diffusion constant and activation energy (𝐸A) using transient capacitance 

measurements following a recently introduced approach (Supplementary Figure S7).46,51,78

We note that we observed in fact the features of 2 mobile ion species, however, for simplicity 

we only considered the faster component in the simulations (𝐷ion = 6×10-10 cm2/s and 𝐸A = 

120 meV). Moreover, in order to estimate the ion density in our cells, we used bias-assisted 

charge extraction (BACE) experiments (Supplementary Figure S8).
The BACE 

measurements indicate an ion density of 6x1016 cm-3 at a collection voltage of -1.6 V, which is 

consistent with Bertulozzi et al. who obtained a value of 7x1016 cm-3 for double cation/halide 

perovskite compositions (e.g. Cs0.17FA0.83Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3). Unfortunately, as larger collection 

voltages would break the devices, we can presently not exclude that the ion density is larger 

than the obtained value. Figure 2a and b visually depict the obtained 𝑉BI distribution in steady-


10

state from IonMonger upon implementing a mobile ions density of 6x1016 cm-3 (assumed to be 

halide vacancies), in comparison to the idealized homogenous distribution obtained in SCAPS. 

Figure 2c-e demonstrates a good agreement between both simulation programs in terms of the 

JV-scan, bulk and interface recombination currents as well as ideality factor. We note that we 

used similar simulation parameters for both programs, however, in order to compensate the 

detrimental effect of the significant ion density in IonMonger, we used a slightly higher built-

in voltage (+100 mV). Overall, this comparison shows that both programs provide very similar 

results and although the mobile ion density significantly redistributes the 𝑉BI, its effect on the 

device performance is rather small (i.e. ~1.5% in PCE), which is obtained by comparing the 

PCE in case with and without mobile ions in IonMonger. 

Figure 2. (a) and (b). The band-diagrams and resulting built-in potential obtained in SCAPS 
and IonMonger at short-circuit conditions. In case of Ionmonger, the signs in the active layer 
denote the distribution of mobile halide vacancies (“+”) and immobile remaining ions (“–“). 


11

(c), (d) and (e) show a direct comparison of the JV, interfacial and bulk recombination currents 
and the ideality factor for both programs. 

Starting from this simulation set, we aim to find the most promising ways to improve the PCE 

of perovskite solar cells. A large set of simulations was performed to check most parameters 

accessible in SCAPS and IonMonger. We note, that in the following, we will show the results 

as obtained from SCAPS, while IonMonger simulations are shown again towards the end of 

the paper. We also emphasize that we have cross-checked each simulation with IonMonger

which led to very similar results and identical trends. 

2.2 Mobility and TL Doping

A generic approach to optimize the performance of a solar cell is to maximize the carrier 

mobility to improve the charge-extraction efficiency. To this end, we first varied the majority 

carrier mobility in the HTL and ETL simultaneously as well as both carrier types in the 

perovskite layer (Supplementary Figure S9). Only relatively small PCE improvements 

(~1.5%) are possible by increasing the mobility in all layers (Figure 3a). We note that this 

improvement comes likely from the hole mobility in the HTL because the PTAA layer mobility 

(𝜇PTAA=1.5×10-4 cm2/V/s) with respect to the thickness of the layer (𝑑HTL= 10 nm) is 

significantly lower than the C60 and perovskite mobility (𝜇C60=1.0×10-2 cm2/V/s, 𝜇pero=30 

cm2/V/s) vs. their thicknesses (30 nm and 500 nm, respectively). Therefore, PTAA sets the 

transport limitation despite the thin layer. 


12

Figure 3. (a) Numerically simulated current density vs. voltage characteristics of p-i-n type 
perovskite solar cells by simultaneously increasing the e- and h+ mobility (μe−, μh+) in the 
transport layers (TLs) by the specified factor in the legend, which allows relatively small 
efficiency improvements (< 1%). (b) By contrast, increasing the donor/acceptor doping density 
in the TLs (and keeping the mobility constant) can significantly increase the fill factor (FF) and 
VOC of the cell. (c) and (d) show the resulting band diagrams of a cell with undoped and doped 
TLs (1019 cm-3), respectively. Doping increases the effective driving field across the active 
layer which repels minority carriers from the interfaces. The resulting carrier densities at the
VOC of the undoped, reference cell (1.13 V) are shown in panel (e). 

The situation is, however, markedly different upon chemical doping of the TLs. Figure 3b

shows that both the FF and the 𝑉OC improve significantly by increasing the donor/acceptor 

concentration in the TLs (from 1015-1020 cm-3). This results in PCEs above 24% for the standard 

cell. We attribute this result to the effective increase of the built-in-field across the perovskite 

layer which greatly reduces the minority-carrier concentration at the interfaces and thus 

interfacial recombination. This is because of two effects: 1) The potential drop across heavily 

doped TLs becomes negligible and 2) the energy offset of the doped TLs (difference between 

the ionization potential of the HTL and electron affinity of the ETL) maximizes the voltage 


13

drop across the perovskite (here 1.6 V). This is illustrated by the band diagrams in Figure 3c,d

for an undoped (reference) cell at its 𝑉OC as well as the same cell with doped TLs (𝑛dop=1019

cm-3). The latter still exhibits a considerable internal field at the same applied voltage. Figure 

3e shows that these concomitant effects lead to a significant reduction of the minority-carrier 

density at the interfaces which supresses the dominating interfacial recombination (see 

Supplementary Figure S10a) and increases the VOC and the FF. Interestingly, the higher 

carrier density in the doped TL does not speed up the SRH recombination, because the 

recombination rate is largely determined by the minority-carrier density at the interfaces. In 

general, the increase in the TL conductivity also reduces charge transport losses, although for 

our reference cell this effect is small due to the thin TLs and little transport losses (Figure 3a). 

The relative importance of these effects is further discussed in Supplementary Figure S10b.

It is also interesting to note that both TLs need to be doped simultaneously as otherwise (if only 

one TL is doped) the other interface becomes the limiting component of the cell. Therefore, 

doping of the C60 layer allows considerable improvements until the PTAA/perovskite interface 

and the absorber layer itself are limiting the performance (Supplementary Figure S11). In 

contrast, almost no performance gains are achieved by doping the HTL only, as in this case the 

perovskite/C60 interface remains the limiting factor for the FF and 𝑉OC. Lastly, we emphasise 

that identical performance improvements can be achieved by using only a thin doped interlayer 

instead of a doped TL as shown in Supplementary Figure S12, which increases the 

experimental possibilities to reduce the critical interfacial recombination at the top-interface 

through implementation of a doped interlayer.

2.3 Device built-in potential & energy-level alignment

In a next step, we aimed to understand the impact of the built-in electrostatic potential 

difference (𝑉BI) and the energy-level alignment (𝐸maj) on cells with doped and undoped TLs. 


14

Both parameters have been shown to be critical for the device performance.25,48–50,55,79 Figure 

4a shows that a high built-in voltage above 1.2 V across the whole device is required in the 

undoped cell with a band gap of 1.63 eV in order to efficiently extract the carriers and minimize 

fill factor losses and to prevent the formation of a reverse field in the device.79 A similar picture 

appears to be the case for the cell with doped TLs (𝑛dop=1019 cm-3), although the cell is more 

tolerant to a lower 𝑉BI with >0.8 V being sufficient to avoid considerable PCE and FF losses. 

This is also shown in Supplementary Figure S13 for cells with and without doped TLs for 

different 𝑉BI and 𝐸maj values. In fact, we believe that in reality no metal work function 

mismatch may be required in case of strongly doped TLs, because carriers could tunnel through 

the TL to the electrode which is challenging to implement numerically. Therefore, the observed 

PCE drop in Figure 4a at 𝑉BIs below 0.8 V may be incorrect. For the reference cell with 

undoped TLs, we find that 𝑉BIs below 1.0 V would not allow reproducing our high FFs of close 

to 80% even if the carrier mobilities are significantly increased (Supplementary Figure S14). 

Note, that we assumed 𝑉BI = 1.2 V in the standard settings which is consistent with Mott-

Schottky analysis in our cells. However, we acknowledge that we do not precisely know its 

origin considering the almost equal work function of ITO and Cu.48 A large 𝑉BI may indicate a 

considerable modification of the metal work functions in the presence of thin organic layers 

and/or the perovskite layer, or that the built-in potential is a result of remotely doped TL in our 

cell.80,81

While a built-in potential across the complete device (in the dark) is indeed necessary to 

achieve a well-performing device, it is an interesting question whether it is possible that the 

𝑉BI drops only across the transport layers but not across the perovskite layer, as it is sometimes 

assumed in literature. To investigate this, we artificially increase the dielectric constant in the 

perovskite layer which screens the field in the perovskite, thereby redistributing the relative 

potential drop across the perovskite layer and the TLs. Supplementary Figure S15 shows that 


15

when the mobilities in the TLs are kept constant, the efficiency decreases the larger the relative 

drop of the built-in voltage across the transport layers which reduces the voltage across the 

perovskite. This efficiency loss occurs even if the diffusion length in the perovskite layer (𝐿d) 

exceeds the film thickness (d) as observed experimentally.82–84 The reason is that the charge 

extraction may not be limited by the perovskite layer but rather by the TLs, and also because 

interfacial recombination (which also impacts the FF) would be considerably enhanced if the 

𝑉BI was lower across the perovskite layer. Nevertheless, this does not mean that the potential 

cannot be partially flat across the perovskite active layer. For example, as shown above at 

Figure 2b, in case of a significant mobile ion density, large field-free regions do exist in the 

perovskite layer, however, there is also a significant field at perovskite surfaces that repels 

minority carriers from the interface. This scenario considerably lowers the interfacial 

recombination, which means that the majority of the perovskite bulk could be field-free 

provided that the charge carrier diffusion length in the perovskite is sufficient. 

As to the impact of the energy level alignment, Figure 4b shows that the energy levels of the 

transport layers need to be matched with respect to the energy levels of the perovskite layer 

and any downhill energetic offset for electrons (uphill for holes) would cause substantial 𝑉OC

and PCEs losses regardless whether the TLs are doped or not. Considering our previous study 

where we observed a match between the internal QFLS and the device 𝑉OC,47 we expect that 

the alignment in our standard cells is well optimized. We note that any energetic offset will 

cause an equal loss in device 𝑉OC as long as the interface between the perovskite and the 

misaligned TL is limiting the performance of the cell (and not another interface or the bulk).  


16

Figure 4. (a) The impact of the device built-in potential (VBI, here defined as the work function 
difference of the contact metals) and (b) the energy alignment between the perovskite and the 
transport layers (TLs) on the JV-characteristics and performance parameters of cells with 
doped and undoped TLs. In panel (b), the VBI was kept constant (1.2 V). In the case of intrinsic 
TLs, increasing the VBI from 1.2 V (standard cell) to 1.6 V allows to improve the FF to 83.5%. 
Doped TLs are more tolerant with respect to the VBI. Considerable losses appear below 1.0 V
(marked with *), however, we attribute this to a limitation of the simulation model as discussed 
in the main text. In contrast, the energy level mismatch between the perovskite and the transport 
layers has a large impact on the device VOC regardless of the doping of the TLs. 

2.4 Suppressed Recombination

Having analysed the impact of the charge-carrier mobility, doping, mobile ions and the 

energetics on the device performance, we now focus our attention on supressing the defect 

recombination in the bulk of the material and at the interfaces.85 In the following we

demonstrate the impact of S and 𝜏bulk as a function of the perovskite bandgap. Figure 5a shows 

the PCE of the standard cell as a function of the perovskite bandgap (red line). Interestingly, 

lowering the bandgap (from currently 1.63 eV to the optimum of ~1.34 eV5) does not lead to 

significant performance gains (from 19.2% to 20.4%) due to the limitations imposed by the 

interfaces and the recombination in the bulk. We note that we kept the injection barriers 

between the contact metals and the TLs at 0.2 eV (as used in the standard simulations) and the 

energy levels of the transport layers well aligned, as otherwise the PCE drops rapidly for higher 

and lower bandgaps (see Supplementary Figure S16). This also indicates difficulties in 

maintaining the perovskite performance when increasing the perovskite bandgap when the 


17

energy levels of the TLs do not move in accordance with the energetics of the perovskite 

absorber (Supplementary Figure S17). Although this may actually not be the limiting 

mechanism (considering a possible phase segregation, see ref.34), it could be relevant when 

aiming for high performance Si/perovskite tandem cells where a perovskite bandgap of 1.7 eV 

would be better than a typical gap of 1.6 eV.86 Figure 5a also shows that switching off bulk 

recombination (blue) does not improve the PCE across the bandgap as it is the interface 

recombination that governs the PCE. Improvements up to a PCE of 23.8% are, however,

possible if interface recombination is switched off completely (green); and close to 27% when 

both S and 𝜏bulk are switched off simultaneously (orange, "bimolecular only”). Considering 

now optimized, yet already demonstrated recombination parameters, e.g. S = 10 cm/s12,22,24 (at 

both interfaces) and 𝜏bulk =10 µs (light blue)16 allows reaching efficiencies of 25.3% which is 

above the situation without interfacial recombination. Interestingly, the optimum bandgap in 

case of the optimized recombination parameters is considerably different (~1.36 – 1.53 eV) 

than expected from the S.Q. model (1.12 – 1.4 eV). This is indicated by the dashed circles in 

Figure 5a. 

In the following we tried to maximize the PCE using undoped TLs. First, we note that all 

simulations so far were performed by using an absorption model for a direct semiconductor 

which matches the experimentally measured absorption coefficient, 𝛼 and reproduces the short-

circuit current in our standard cells with an average EQE slightly below 88% (Supplementary 

Figure S1). By further increasing the light-in-coupling and thus the EQE to 95% above the 

bandgap while simultaneously enhancing the carrier mobilities in all layers by a factor of 10

and also reducing the injection barriers from the metals to the TLs from 0.2 eV to 0.1 eV (i.e. 

increasing the 𝑉BI), we obtain a maximum efficiency of 29.4% at a bandgap of 1.36 – 1.4 eV. 

To check whether such high EQEs are reasonable in our devices, we also performed transfer-

matrix simulations87,88 (see Supplementary Figure S18 and corresponding discussion) which 


18

predict an average above-gap EQE slightly below 95% resulting in a 𝐽SC that is ~1 mAcm-2

lower than the current obtained with SCAPS for the best case, marked with an open star in 

Figure 5a. Nevertheless, we note that EQE spectra with an average EQE of approximately 

95% above the bandgap have been already demonstrated in efficient n-i-p-type devices with 

certified short-circuit currents and PCEs (23.48%).89 This is clearly a key aspect to reach the 

30% PCE milestone. 

In the next step, starting from the simulation with optimized recombination parameters (light 

blue, max PCE = 25.3%), we further checked the impact of TL doping (using again 1019 cm-3

for both TLs). As shown in Figure 5b, this further enhanced the PCE to 28.7% (dashed dotted 

light blue). As a comparison the red lines show the corresponding PCE improvement vs. 𝐸gap

upon TL doping in the standard cells. Finally increasing the EQE to 95%, results in a maximum 

PCE of 31% at a bandgap of 1.4 eV (purple line in Figure 5b). We note that for the same 

simulation parameters, the PCE stays above 30% for bandgaps of up to 1.5 eV, yet drops to 

27.7% at a bandgap of 1.6 eV. We also checked under which conditions, in particular, for which 

energetic offsets and interface recombination velocities such high power conversion 

efficiencies may be maintained. Figure 5c, d and e shows the PCE as a function of S and 

𝐸maj at both interfaces for our standard cells, as well as the optimized cells with undoped and 

doped TLs, respectively. Interestingly, Figure 5e shows that PCEs of ~30% may be 

maintained in case of doped TLs even with interface recombination velocities of 1000 cm/s if 

the majority carrier band offsets are small (𝐸maj between -0.1 eV and 0 eV). However, higher 

values and positive energy offsets lead to rapid efficiency losses. We note that an analogous 

plot of PCE vs. S and the bulk lifetime is shown in Supplementary Figure S19.


19

Figure 5. (a) Numerically simulated power conversion efficiency (PCE) versus perovskite 
bandgap (Egap) considering aligned perovskite/transport layer energy levels for different 
scenarios. Starting from the standard settings plotted in red (S = 2000 cm/s at the 
perovskite/ETL interface and bulk lifetime of 500 ns); (blue) in absence of bulk recombination; 
(green) in absence of interfacial recombination; (orange) in absence of interface and bulk 
recombination (bimolecular recombination only); (light blue) using optimized, yet plausible 
recombination parameters (S=10 cm/s at both interfaces and a bulk-lifetime, τbulk, of 10 µs). 
The magenta curve depicts an optimized cell with undoped TLs with optimized bulk and 
interface recombination, increased EQE (95% above gap), increased mobilities in all TLs by a 
factor of 10 and reduced injection barriers from the metal to the TLs (from 0.2 eV to 0.1 eV) 
resulting in a PCE of 29.4% at an optimum gap. (b) shows the impact of TL doping (1019 cm-

3) for the standard cell in red (solid line without doping, dashed dotted line with doping), the 
cell with optimized recombination parameters in light blue (solid line without doping, dashed 
dotted line with doping), as well as for the cell with optimized recombination and light in-
coupling and EQE of 95% (solid magenta line). The black curve shows the PCE vs. bandgap 
according to the Shockley-Queisser model.5 (c-e) PCE vs. S and majority-carrier band offsets 
at both interfaces for the standard cell and the optimized cells with undoped and doped TLs, 
respectively. Note, a positive offset is defined as energy offset towards midgap, while a 
negative offset means an energy barrier for electrons and holes.  

Based on the bandgap-dependent analysis in Figure 5, we propose two different cell 

architectures employing doped and undoped TLs, which could be realized experimentally to 

reach the 30% PCE milestone. For the first cell shown in Figure 6a, we take advantage of the 


20

fact that doping allows increasing the TL thickness without compromising the device 

performance (Supplementary Figure S20, assuming that the parasitic absorption in the TL

and the dopant is negligible).40 This might be an important consideration from the 

manufacturing perspective as it could help to protect the perovskite from moisture and oxygen 

ingress. Here, we assumed a bandgap of 3.5 eV for the bottom TL which is comparable to the 

bandgaps of TiO2 (3.3 eV), SnO2 (3.6 eV) or NiOx.90,91 Using 100 nm thick TLs, realistic 

interface recombination velocities of 10 cm/s,12,22,24 bulk lifetimes of 10 µs (shown in ref.16) 

and doped TLs (𝑛dop=1019 cm-3),41 we can simulate a PCE of 30% even for a bandgap of 1.5

eV (which is within reach for FAPI-based perovskites).32 However, it is clear that realizing a 

stable doping experimentally without critically enhancing S, which may in reality 

overcompensate the potential benefits (Figure 5e) will remain a critical experimental 

challenge. We note that a thin insulating layer could be implemented to avoid a direct contact 

between the doped TL and the perovskite potentially lowering the interfacial recombination. 

The second cell shown in Figure 6b, is based on a 1 nm-thick self-assembled monolayer as 

bottom TL. It was recently shown92–94 that a self-assembled monolayer (SAM) can replace and 

even outperform the omnipresent PTAA layer in p-i-n type cells with negligible recombination 

at the bottom interface. Using a SAM at the bottom and a thin TL at the top (20 nm) and the 

same setting as discussed above for the optimized cell in Figure 4a, also allows to reach the 

30% milestone; however, we emphasise that this is strictly limited by the thickness of the layer. 

For example, implementing two 100 nm thick TLs for this particular device reduces the PCE 

to 27%, which is due to the increased interface loss when lowering the 𝑉BI across the perovskite.

Nevertheless, we note that the SAM is likely beneficial in terms of parasitic absorption 

compared to doped TLs and in terms of device stability.94 The parallel recombination currents 

in the device for both cells based on the doped TL and the SAM are shown in Figure 6c.

Finally, by implementing the above quantified ion density (𝑛ion ~6×1016 cm-3), we observed 


21

that the steady-state performance of both proposed high-efficiency cells is hardly affected by 

the mobile ion density (red dotted lines in Figure 6a and b). In fact, Figure 6d shows that this 

holds true for ion densities of up to up to 1×1018 cm-3. This finding can be explained by the 

increased 𝑉BI and reduced S which mitigates the effect of the ion density as previously 

observed.68 Therefore, we can conclude, although mobile ions are a key for the perovskite 

stability they do not represent a significant barrier for perovskite solar cells on their pathway 

towards the 30% efficiency milestone. 

Figure 6. (a) Numerically simulated current density vs. voltage (JV) characteristics of p-i-n 
type cells with comparatively thick, doped TLs (1019 cm-3) and a bandgap of 1.5 eV, interface 
recombination velocities (S) of 10 cm/s, a bulk lifetime of 10 µs and a power conversion 
efficiency (PCE) of ~30%. As shown in this paper, the doped TL maximize the field across 
the perovskite which enhances the PCE despite significant S values. (b) Numerically simulated 
JV characteristics of a perovskite cell with a 1 nm-thick self-assembled monolayer at the 
bottom as an alternative strategy to reach 30% with undoped TLs. Note, that the short-circuit 


22

current and the open-circuit voltage differ between the 2 cells due to their different bandgaps. 
The red dotted lines in panel (a) and (b) demonstrate that adding the measured ion density of 
~6x1016 cm-3 while keeping the other simulation parameters identical has an almost negligible 
effect on the steady-state performance in these 2 high efficiency systems. Panel (c) shows the 
parallel recombination currents as a function of applied voltage in both cells w/o ions. The 
graph also demonstrates a photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY) of ~60% for the cell 
with doped TLs and ~25% for the SAM-based cell under open-circuit conditions. This 
difference is because the built-in potential-drop across the 20 nm thick top TL renders the cell 
with undoped TLs more vulnerable to interfacial recombination. Therefore, when aiming to 
avoid doping and keeping the S at a realistic value (S > 1 cm/s), such high PCEs can only be 
reached in case of ultrathin TLs such as SAMs. (d) The steady-state efficiency of the doped-
TL cells versus ion density reveals a negligible efficiency loss for ion densities up to 1×1018

cm-3.

3. Conclusion

In summary, in this work we explored possible optimization strategies to advance the PCEs of 

perovskite solar cells beyond those of monocrystalline silicon (>26%) and GaAs cells (>29%). 

To this end we established a standard simulation to describe our reference (standard) p-i-n type 

cells with an efficiency of close to 20% using SCAPS and IonMonger to incorporate mobile 

ions. We then checked a wide range of simulation parameters and discussed the importance of

𝜇, 𝑛ion, 𝑛dop, 𝑉BI, 𝐸maj, 𝐸gap, 𝑆, 𝜏bulk as key parameters in defining the cells’ performance. In 

combination with transient capacitance measurements and charge extraction, we demonstrated

that the ion density is rather significant (≥6x1016 cm-3) which significantly redistributes the 

internal field. Starting from the standard cells, we showed that (10 fold) optimization of the 

mobilities of the TL and the perovskite layer will result in comparatively marginal PCE 

improvements (~1% absolute). Instead, doping the transport layers relaxes the need of 

electrodes with large work function offsets and enables drastic FF and 𝑉OC gains. We attributed

this result to an effective increase in the 𝑉BI across the perovskite layer which drives minority 

carriers away from the interfaces. We further discussed the need of a high built-in field across 

all stack layers including the absorber layer, at least at its surfaces. Also, energy level matching

between the perovskite and the TL remains a necessity to avoid PCE losses irrespective of the 


23

TL doping. We then varied the perovskite bandgap for cells with supressed defect 

recombination in the bulk and/or the interface. In combination with doped TLs, we identified 

that recombination parameters that have already been demonstrated in recent literature (𝜏bulk

= 10 µs and S = 10 cm/s) would allow PCEs of up to 31% for a perovskite with a bandgap of 

1.4 eV, if an average above-gap EQE of 95% can be realized. Based on these findings we

numerically demonstrated the feasibility of 30% efficient perovskite cells with comparatively 

thick (≈ 100 nm), doped TLs (~1019 cm-3) by implementing a perovskite layer with realistic 

interface recombination velocities (S = 10 cm/s) and a bandgap of 1.5 eV. Alternatively, cells 

with ultrathin TLs (e.g. by implementing self-assembled monolayers at the bottom contact) 

may also allow to reach the 30% milestone, if the 𝑉BI across the perovskite layer can be 

maximized to supress the critical interface recombination. However, although doped TLs allow 

to relax several strict requirements to realize such near-ideal solar cells; e.g. by allowing to use

thicker TLs and by increasing the tolerance against interfacial defects; SAMs are beneficial in 

terms of optical losses and device stability, which is a key for future developments. Finally, we

also demonstrated that the rather high ion density does not represent a major roadblock to 

unlock efficiencies at the radiative limits and therefore, we expect that perovskite solar cells 

will become the most efficient single-junction solar technology in the near future.

Supporting Information

Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author.

Acknowledgements

This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) 

- project numbers 423749265 and 424216076 as well as by HyPerCells (a joint graduate school of the 

Potsdam University and the HZB). The work of M.H.F. and B.E. is part of the Dutch Research 


24

Council (NWO) and was performed at the research institute AMOLF. The work by V.M.L.C. is 

supported by a grant from STW/NWO (VIDI 13476). This is a publication by the FOM Focus Group 

\Next Generation Organic Photovoltaics", participating in the Dutch Institute for Fundamental Energy 

Research (DIFFER). TK acknowledge the Helmholtz Association for funding via the PEROSEED 

project. We also thank Nicola Courtier for her kind support with IonMonger.

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))
Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff))

References

(1) 
NREL. Best Research-Cell Efficiencies. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html 

(accessed Jan 9, 2021).

(2) 
Yamamoto, K.; Yoshikawa, K.; Uzu, H.; Adachi, D. High-Efficiency Heterojunction 

Crystalline Si Solar Cells. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2018, 57 (8S3), 08RB20.

(3) 
Yoshikawa, K.; Kawasaki, H.; Yoshida, W.; Irie, T.; Konishi, K.; Nakano, K.; Uto, T.; 

Adachi, D.; Kanematsu, M.; Uzu, H.; et al. Silicon Heterojunction Solar Cell with 

Interdigitated Back Contacts for a Photoconversion Efficiency over 26%. Nat. Energy

2017, 2 (5), 17032.

(4) 
Shockley, W.; Queisser, H. J. Detailed Balance Limit of Efficiency of Pn Junction Solar 

Cells. J. Appl. Phys. 1961, 32 (3), 510–519.

(5) 
Rühle, S. Tabulated Values of the Shockley-Queisser Limit for Single Junction Solar 

Cells. Sol. Energy 2016, 130, 139–147.

(6) 
Miller, O. D.; Yablonovitch, E.; Kurtz, S. R. Strong Internal and External Luminescence 

as Solar Cells Approach the Shockley-Queisser Limit. IEEE J. Photovoltaics 2012, 2

(3), 303–311.


25

(7) 
Fu, F.; Pisoni, S.; Jeangros, Q.; Sastre-Pellicer, J.; Kawecki, M.; Paracchino, A.; Moser, 

T.; Werner, J.; Andres, C.; Duchêne, L.; et al. I2 Vapor-Induced Degradation of 

Formamidinium Lead Iodide Based Perovskite Solar Cells under Heat–Light Soaking 

Conditions. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (10), 3074–3088.

(8) 
Babayigit, A.; Ethirajan, A.; Muller, M.; Conings, B. Toxicity of Organometal Halide 

Perovskite Solar Cells. Nat. Mater. 2016, 15 (3), 247–251.

(9) 
Hong, S.; Lee, J.; Kang, H.; Kim, G.; Kee, S.; Lee, J. H.; Jung, S.; Park, B.; Kim, S.; 

Back, H.; et al. High-Efficiency Large-Area Perovskite Photovoltaic Modules Achieved 

via Electrochemically Assembled Metal-Filamentary Nanoelectrodes. Sci. Adv. 2018, 4

(8), 1–9.

(10) Abdi-Jalebi, M.; Andaji-Garmaroudi, Z.; Cacovich, S.; Stavrakas, C.; Philippe, B.; 

Richter, J. M.; Alsari, M.; Booker, E. P.; Hutter, E. M.; Pearson, A. J.; et al. Maximizing 

and Stabilizing Luminescence from Halide Perovskites with Potassium Passivation. 

Nature 2018, 555 (7697), 497–501.

(11) Braly, I. L.; DeQuilettes, D. W.; Pazos-Outón, L. M.; Burke, S.; Ziffer, M. E.; Ginger, 

D. S.; Hillhouse, H. W. Hybrid Perovskite Films Approaching the Radiative Limit with 

over 90% Photoluminescence Quantum Efficiency. Nat. Photonics 2018, 12 (6), 355–

361.

(12) Liu, Z.; Krückemeier, L.; Krogmeier, B.; Klingebiel, B.; Márquez, J. A.; Levcenko, S.; 

Öz, S.; Mathur, S.; Rau, U.; Unold, T.; et al. Open-Circuit Voltages Exceeding 1.26 V 

in Planar Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells. ACS Energy Lett. 2019,

4 (1), 110–117.

(13) Jiang, Q.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, X.; Yang, X.; Chen, Y.; Chu, Z.; Ye, Q.; Li, X.; Yin, Z.; 

You, J. Surface Passivation of Perovskite Film for Efficient Solar Cells. Nat. Photonics


26

2019, 13 (7), 460–466.

(14) Cao, Y.; Wang, N.; Tian, H.; Guo, J.; Wei, Y.; Chen, H.; Miao, Y.; Zou, W.; Pan, K.; 

He, Y.; et al. Perovskite Light-Emitting Diodes Based on Spontaneously Formed 

Submicrometre-Scale Structures. Nature 2018, 562 (7726), 249–253.

(15) Stolterfoht, M.; Grischek, M.; Caprioglio, P.; Wolff, C. M.; Gutierrez‐Partida, E.; Peña‐

Camargo, F.; Rothhardt, D.; Zhang, S.; Raoufi, M.; Wolansky, J.; et al. How To Quantify 

the Efficiency Potential of Neat Perovskite Films: Perovskite Semiconductors with an 

Implied Efficiency Exceeding 28%. Adv. Mater. 2020, 32 (17), 2000080.

(16) deQuilettes, D. W.; Koch, S.; Burke, S.; Paranji, R. K.; Shropshire, A. J.; Ziffer, M. E.; 

Ginger, D. S. Photoluminescence Lifetimes Exceeding 8 Μs and Quantum Yields 

Exceeding 30% in Hybrid Perovskite Thin Films by Ligand Passivation. ACS Energy 

Lett. 2016, 1 (2), 438–444.

(17) Braly, I. L.; Hillhouse, H. W. Optoelectronic Quality and Stability of Hybrid Perovskites 

from MAPbI3 to MAPbI2Br Using Composition Spread Libraries. J. Phys. Chem. C

2016, 120 (2), 893–902.

(18) Sarritzu, V.; Sestu, N.; Marongiu, D.; Chang, X.; Masi, S.; Rizzo, A.; Colella, S.; 

Quochi, F.; Saba, M.; Mura, A.; et al. Optical Determination of Shockley-Read-Hall and 

Interface Recombination Currents in Hybrid Perovskites. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7 (1), 44629.

(19) Wu, N.; Wu, Y.; Walter, D.; Shen, H.; Duong, T.; Grant, D.; Barugkin, C.; Fu, X.; Peng, 

J.; White, T.; et al. Identifying the Cause of Voltage and Fill Factor Losses in Perovskite 

Solar Cells by Using Luminescence Measurements. Energy Technol. 2017, 5 (10), 

1827–1835.

(20) Stolterfoht, M.; Wolff, C. M.; Márquez, J. A.; Zhang, S.; Hages, C. J.; Rothhardt, D.; 


27

Albrecht, S.; Burn, P. L.; Meredith, P.; Unold, T.; et al. Visualization and Suppression 

of Interfacial Recombination for High-Efficiency Large-Area Pin Perovskite Solar 

Cells. Nat. Energy 2018, 3 (10), 847–854.

(21) Krogmeier, B.; Staub, F.; Grabowski, D.; Rau, U.; Kirchartz, T. Quantitative Analysis 

of the Transient Photoluminescence of CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 /PC 61 BM Heterojunctions by 

Numerical Simulations. Sustain. Energy Fuels 2018, 2 (5), 1027–1034.

(22) Wang, J.; Fu, W.; Jariwala, S.; Sinha, I.; Jen, A. K. Y.; Ginger, D. S. Reducing Surface 

Recombination Velocities at the Electrical Contacts Will Improve Perovskite 

Photovoltaics. ACS Energy Lett. 2019, 4 (1), 222–227.

(23) Olthof, S.; Meerholz, K. Substrate-Dependent Electronic Structure and Film Formation 

of MAPbI3 Perovskites. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7 (1), 40267.

(24) Staub, F.; Hempel, H.; Hebig, J.-C.; Mock, J.; Paetzold, U. W.; Rau, U.; Unold, T.; 

Kirchartz, T. Beyond Bulk Lifetimes: Insights into Lead Halide Perovskite Films from 

Time-Resolved Photoluminescence. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2016, 6 (4), 044017.

(25) Wolff, C. M.; Zu, F.; Paulke, A.; Toro, L. P.; Koch, N.; Neher, D. Reduced Interface-

Mediated Recombination for High Open-Circuit Voltages in CH 3 NH 3 PbI 3 Solar 

Cells. Adv. Mater. 2017, 29 (28), 1700159.

(26) Hutter, E. M.; Hofman, J. J.; Petrus, M. L.; Moes, M.; Abellón, R. D.; Docampo, P.; 

Savenije, T. J. Charge Transfer from Methylammonium Lead Iodide Perovskite to 

Organic Transport Materials: Efficiencies, Transfer Rates, and Interfacial 

Recombination. Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7 (13), 1–8.

(27) Hages, C. J.; Redinger, A.; Levcenko, S.; Hempel, H.; Koeper, M. J.; Agrawal, R.; 

Greiner, D.; Kaufmann, C. A.; Unold, T. Identifying the Real Minority Carrier Lifetime


28

in Nonideal Semiconductors: A Case Study of Kesterite Materials. Adv. Energy Mater.

2017, 1700167, 1–10.

(28) Kojima, A.; Teshima, K.; Shirai, Y.; Miyasaka, T. Organometal Halide Perovskites as 

Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (17), 

6050–6051.

(29) Shin, S. S.; Yeom, E. J.; Yang, W. S.; Hur, S.; Kim, M. G.; Im, J.; Seo, J.; Noh, J. H.; 

Seok, S. Il. Colloidally Prepared La-Doped BaSnO 3 Electrodes for Efficient, 

Photostable Perovskite Solar Cells. Science 2017, 356 (6334), 167–171.

(30) Liu, T.; Zong, Y.; Zhou, Y.; Yang, M.; Li, Z.; Game, O. S.; Zhu, K.; Zhu, R.; Gong, Q.; 

Padture, N. P. High-Performance Formamidinium-Based Perovskite Solar Cells via 

Microstructure-Mediated δ-to-α Phase Transformation. Chem. Mater. 2017, 29 (7), 

3246–3250.

(31) Yu, Y.; Wang, C.; Grice, C. R.; Shrestha, N.; Chen, J.; Zhao, D.; Liao, W.; Cimaroli, A. 

J.; Roland, P. J.; Ellingson, R. J.; et al. Improving the Performance of Formamidinium 

and Cesium Lead Triiodide Perovskite Solar Cells Using Lead Thiocyanate Additives. 

ChemSusChem 2016, 9 (23), 3288–3297.

(32) Yang, W. S.; Noh, J. H.; Jeon, N. J.; Kim, Y. C.; Ryu, S.; Seo, J.; Seok, S. Il. High-

Performance Photovoltaic Perovskite Layers Fabricated through Intramolecular 

Exchange. Science 2015, 348 (6240), 1234–1237.

(33) Min, H.; Kim, M.; Lee, S. U.; Kim, H.; Kim, G.; Choi, K.; Lee, J. H.; Seok, S. Il. 

Efficient, Stable Solar Cells by Using Inherent Bandgap of a-Phase Formamidinium 

Lead Iodide. Science 2019, 366 (6466), 749–753.

(34) Unger, E. L.; Kegelmann, L.; Suchan, K.; Sörell, D.; Korte, L.; Albrecht, S. Roadmap 


29

and Roadblocks for the Band Gap Tunability of Metal Halide Perovskites. J. Mater. 

Chem. A 2017, 5 (23), 11401–11409.

(35) Weber, S. A. L.; Hermes, I. M.; Turren-Cruz, S. H.; Gort, C.; Bergmann, V. W.; Gilson, 

L.; Hagfeldt, A.; Graetzel, M.; Tress, W.; Berger, R. How the Formation of Interfacial 

Charge Causes Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11 (9), 

2404–2413.

(36) Kromdijk, J.; Głowacka, K.; Leonelli, L.; Gabilly, S. T.; Iwai, M.; Niyogi, K. K.; Long, 

S. P. Improving Photosynthesis and Crop Productivity by Accelerating Recovery from 

Photoprotection. Science 2016, 354 (6314), 857–861.

(37) Zhao, B.; Abdi-Jalebi, M.; Tabachnyk, M.; Glass, H.; Kamboj, V. S.; Nie, W.; Pearson, 

A. J.; Puttisong, Y.; Gödel, K. C.; Beere, H. E.; et al. High Open-Circuit Voltages in 

Tin-Rich Low-Bandgap Perovskite-Based Planar Heterojunction Photovoltaics. Adv. 

Mater. 2017, 29 (2), 1604744.

(38) Ogomi, Y.; Morita, A.; Tsukamoto, S.; Saitho, T.; Fujikawa, N.; Shen, Q.; Toyoda, T.; 

Yoshino, K.; Pandey, S. S.; Ma, T.; et al. CH 3 NH 3 Sn x Pb (1– x ) I 3 Perovskite Solar 

Cells Covering up to 1060 Nm. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014, 5 (6), 1004–1011.

(39) Lin, R.; Xiao, K.; Qin, Z.; Han, Q.; Zhang, C.; Wei, M.; Saidaminov, M. I.; Gao, Y.; 

Xu, J.; Xiao, M.; et al. Monolithic All-Perovskite Tandem Solar Cells with 24.8% 

Efficiency Exploiting Comproportionation to Suppress Sn(Ii) Oxidation in Precursor 

Ink. Nat. Energy 2019, 4 (10), 864–873.

(40) Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Bandiello, E.; Hutter, E. M.; Sessolo, M.; Lederer, K.; 

Blochwitz-Nimoth, J.; Bolink, H. J. Efficient Vacuum Deposited P-i-n and n-i-p 

Perovskite Solar Cells Employing Doped Charge Transport Layers. Energy Environ. 

Sci. 2016, 9 (11), 3456–3463.


30

(41) Olthof, S.; Mehraeen, S.; Mohapatra, S. K.; Barlow, S.; Coropceanu, V.; Brédas, J. L.; 

Marder, S. R.; Kahn, A. Ultralow Doping in Organic Semiconductors: Evidence of Trap 

Filling. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 109 (17), 1–5.

(42) Wang, Q.; Bi, C.; Huang, J. Doped Hole Transport Layer for Efficiency Enhancement 

in Planar Heterojunction Organolead Trihalide Perovskite Solar Cells. Nano Energy

2015, 15, 275–280.

(43) Stolterfoht, M.; Wolff, C. M.; Amir, Y.; Paulke, A.; Perdigón-Toro, L.; Caprioglio, P.; 

Neher, D. Approaching the Fill Factor Shockley–Queisser Limit in Stable, Dopant-Free 

Triple Cation Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 2017, 10 (6), 1530–1539.

(44) Richardson, G.; O’Kane, S. E. J.; Niemann, R. G.; Peltola, T. A.; Foster, J. M.; Cameron, 

P. J.; Walker, A. B. Can Slow-Moving Ions Explain Hysteresis in the Current-Voltage 

Curves of Perovskite Solar Cells? Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9 (4), 1476–1485.

(45) Calado, P.; Telford, A. M.; Bryant, D.; Li, X.; Nelson, J.; O’Regan, B. C.; Barnes, P. R. 

F. Evidence for Ion Migration in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells with Minimal Hysteresis. 

Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 1–10.

(46) Futscher, M. H.; Lee, J. M.; McGovern, L.; Muscarella, L. A.; Wang, T.; Haider, M. I.; 

Fakharuddin, A.; Schmidt-Mende, L.; Ehrler, B. Quantification of Ion Migration in CH 

3 NH 3 PbI 3 Perovskite Solar Cells by Transient Capacitance Measurements. Mater. 

Horizons 2019, 6 (7), 1497–1503.

(47) Tessler, N.; Vaynzof, Y. Insights from Device Modeling of Perovskite Solar Cells. ACS 

Energy Lett. 2020, 5 (4), 1260–1270.

(48) Stolterfoht, M.; Caprioglio, P.; Wolff, C. M.; Márquez, J. A.; Nordmann, J.; Zhang, S.; 

Rothhardt, D.; Hörmann, U.; Amir, Y.; Redinger, A.; et al. The Impact of Energy 


31

Alignment and Interfacial Recombination on the Internal and External Open-Circuit 

Voltage of Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (9), 2778–2788.

(49) Kirchartz, T. High Open-Circuit Voltages in Lead-Halide Perovskite Solar Cells: 

Experiment, Theory and Open Questions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci.

2019, 377 (2152), 20180286.

(50) Zhang, M.; Chen, Q.; Xue, R.; Zhan, Y.; Wang, C.; Lai, J.; Yang, J.; Lin, H.; Yao, J.; 

Li, Y.; et al. Reconfiguration of Interfacial Energy Band Structure for High-Performance 

Inverted Structure Perovskite Solar Cells. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10 (1), 4593.

(51) Reichert, S.; Flemming, J.; An, Q.; Vaynzof, Y.; Pietschmann, J.-F.; Deibel, C. Ionic-

Defect Distribution Revealed by Improved Evaluation of Deep-Level Transient 

Spectroscopy on Perovskite Solar Cells. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2020, 13 (3), 034018.

(52) Bertoluzzi, L.; Boyd, C. C.; Rolston, N.; Xu, J.; Prasanna, R.; O’Regan, B. C.; McGehee, 

M. D. Mobile Ion Concentration Measurement and Open-Access Band Diagram 

Simulation Platform for Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. Joule 2020, 4 (1), 109–127.

(53) Walsh, A.; Scanlon, D. O.; Chen, S.; Gong, X. G.; Wei, S. H. Self-Regulation 

Mechanism for Charged Point Defects in Hybrid Halide Perovskites. Angew. Chemie -

Int. Ed. 2015, 54 (6), 1791–1794.

(54) Belisle, R. A.; Jain, P.; Prasanna, R.; Leijtens, T.; McGehee, M. D. Minimal Effect of 

the Hole-Transport Material Ionization Potential on the Open-Circuit Voltage of 

Perovskite Solar Cells. ACS Energy Lett. 2016, 1 (3), 556–560.

(55) Schulz, P.; Edri, E.; Kirmayer, S.; Hodes, G.; Cahen, D.; Kahn, A. Interface Energetics 

in Organo-Metal Halide Perovskite-Based Photovoltaic Cells. Energy Environ. Sci.

2014, 7 (4), 1377.


32

(56) Polander, L. E.; Pahner, P.; Schwarze, M.; Saalfrank, M.; Koerner, C.; Leo, K. Hole-

Transport Material Variation in Fully Vacuum Deposited Perovskite Solar Cells. APL 

Mater. 2014, 2 (8), 1–6.

(57) Gelmetti, I.; Montcada, N. F.; Pérez-Rodríguez, A.; Barrena, E.; Ocal, C.; García-

Benito, I.; Molina-Ontoria, A.; Martín, N.; Vidal-Ferran, A.; Palomares, E. Energy 

Alignment and Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells: Weighted Influence on the 

Open Circuit Voltage. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (4), 1309–1316.

(58) Cai, M.; Ishida, N.; Li, X.; Yang, X.; Noda, T.; Wu, Y.; Xie, F.; Naito, H.; Fujita, D.; 

Han, L. Control of Electrical Potential Distribution for High-Performance Perovskite 

Solar Cells. Joule 2018, 2 (2), 296–306.

(59) Hermes, I. M.; Hou, Y.; Bergmann, V. W.; Brabec, C. J.; Weber, S. A. L. The Interplay 

of Contact Layers: How the Electron Transport Layer Influences Interfacial 

Recombination and Hole Extraction in Perovskite Solar Cells. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 

9 (21), 6249–6256.

(60) Byeon, J.; Kim, J.; Kim, J.-Y.; Lee, G.; Bang, K.; Ahn, N.; Choi, M. Charge Transport 

Layer-Dependent Electronic Band Bending in Perovskite Solar Cells and Its Correlation 

to Light-Induced Device Degradation. ACS Energy Lett. 2020, 5 (8), 2580–2589.

(61) Correa-Baena, J.-P.; Tress, W.; Domanski, K.; Anaraki, E. H.; Turren-Cruz, S.-H.; 

Roose, B.; Boix, P. P.; Grätzel, M.; Saliba, M.; Abate, A.; et al. Identifying and 

Suppressing Interfacial Recombination to Achieve High Open-Circuit Voltage in 

Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 2017, 10 (5), 1207–1212.

(62) Pisoni, S.; Stolterfoht, M.; Löckinger, J.; Moser, T.; Jiang, Y.; Caprioglio, P.; Neher, D.; 

Buecheler, S.; Tiwari, A. N. On the Origin of Open-Circuit Voltage Losses in Flexible 

n-i-p Perovskite Solar Cells. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 2019, 20 (1), 786–795.


33

(63) Du, T.; Xu, W.; Daboczi, M.; Kim, J.; Xu, S.; Lin, C. T.; Kang, H.; Lee, K.; Heeney, M. 

J.; Kim, J. S.; et al. P-Doping of Organic Hole Transport Layers in p-i-n Perovskite Solar 

Cells: Correlating Open-Circuit Voltage and Photoluminescence Quenching. J. Mater. 

Chem. A 2019, 7 (32), 18971–18979.

(64) Fossum, J. G. Physical Operation of Back-Surface-Field Silicon Solar Cells. IEEE 

Trans. Electron Devices 1977, 24 (4), 322–325.

(65) Burgelman, M.; Nollet, P.; Degrave, S. Modelling Polycrystalline Semiconductor Solar 

Cells. Thin Solid Films 2000, 361, 527–532.

(66) Decock, K.; Zabierowski, P.; Burgelman, M. Modeling Metastabilities in Chalcopyrite-

Based Thin Film Solar Cells. J. Appl. Phys. 2012, 111 (4), 043703.

(67) Courtier, N. E.; Cave, J. M.; Walker, A. B.; Richardson, G.; Foster, J. M. IonMonger: A 

Free and Fast Planar Perovskite Solar Cell Simulator with Coupled Ion Vacancy and 

Charge Carrier Dynamics. J. Comput. Electron. 2019, 18 (4), 1435–1449.

(68) Courtier, N. E.; Cave, J. M.; Foster, J. M.; Walker, A. B.; Richardson, G. How Transport 

Layer Properties Affect Perovskite Solar Cell Performance: Insights from a Coupled 

Charge Transport/Ion Migration Model. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (1), 396–409.

(69) Zheng, X.; Chen, B.; Dai, J.; Fang, Y.; Bai, Y.; Lin, Y.; Wei, H.; Zeng, X. C.; Huang, J. 

Defect Passivation in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells Using Quaternary Ammonium 

Halide Anions and Cations. Nat. Energy 2017, 2 (7), 17102.

(70) Richter, J. M.; Abdi-Jalebi, M.; Sadhanala, A.; Tabachnyk, M.; Rivett, J. P. H.; Pazos-

Outón, L. M.; Gödel, K. C.; Price, M.; Deschler, F.; Friend, R. H. Enhancing 

Photoluminescence Yields in Lead Halide Perovskites by Photon Recycling and Light 

Out-Coupling. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 13941.


34

(71) Sherkar, T. S.; Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Bolink, H. J.; Koster, L. J. A. Improving 

Perovskite Solar Cells: Insights From a Validated Device Model. Adv. Energy Mater.

2017, 7 (13), 1602432.

(72) Pazos-Outon, L. M.; Szumilo, M.; Lamboll, R.; Richter, J. M.; Crespo-Quesada, M.; 

Abdi-Jalebi, M.; Beeson, H. J.; Vruini, M.; Alsari, M.; Snaith, H. J.; et al. Photon 

Recycling in Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells. Science 2016, 351 (6280), 1430–1433.

(73) Pazos-Outón, L. M.; Xiao, T. P.; Yablonovitch, E. Fundamental Efficiency Limit of 

Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2018, 9 (7), 1703–1711.

(74) Kirchartz, T.; Staub, F.; Rau, U. Impact of Photon Recycling on the Open-Circuit 

Voltage of Metal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. ACS Energy Lett. 2016, 1 (4), 731–739.

(75) Brenes, R.; Laitz, M.; Jean, J.; DeQuilettes, D. W.; Bulović, V. Benefit from Photon 

Recycling at the Maximum-Power Point of State-of-the-Art Perovskite Solar Cells. 

Phys. Rev. Appl. 2019, 12 (1), 1.

(76) Caprioglio, P.; Stolterfoht, M.; Wolff, C. M.; Unold, T.; Rech, B.; Albrecht, S.; Neher, 

D. On the Relation between the Open‐Circuit Voltage and Quasi‐Fermi Level Splitting 

in Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells. Adv. Energy Mater. 2019, 9 (33), 1901631.

(77) Le Corre, V. M.; Stolterfoht, M.; Perdigón Toro, L.; Feuerstein, M.; Wolff, C.; Gil-

Escrig, L.; Bolink, H. J.; Neher, D.; Koster, L. J. A. Charge Transport Layers Limiting 

the Efficiency of Perovskite Solar Cells: How To Optimize Conductivity, Doping, and 

Thickness. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2019, 2 (9), 6280–6287.

(78) Futscher, M. H.; Gangishetty, M. K.; Congreve, D. N.; Ehrler, B. Quantifying Mobile 

Ions and Electronic Defects in Perovskite-Based Devices with Temperature-Dependent 

Capacitance Measurements: Frequency vs Time Domain. J. Chem. Phys. 2020, 152 (4), 


35

044202.

(79) Sandberg, O. J.; Kurpiers, J.; Stolterfoht, M.; Neher, D.; Meredith, P.; Shoaee, S.; 

Armin, A. On the Question of the Need for a Built-In Potential in Perovskite Solar Cells. 

Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 2000041, 2000041.

(80) Würfel, U.; Seßler, M.; Unmüssig, M.; Hofmann, N.; List, M.; Mankel, E.; Mayer, T.; 

Reiter, G.; Bubendorff, J. L.; Simon, L.; et al. How Molecules with Dipole Moments 

Enhance the Selectivity of Electrodes in Organic Solar Cells – A Combined 

Experimental and Theoretical Approach. Adv. Energy Mater. 2016, 6 (19), 1–11.

(81) Nüesch, F. A. Interface Dipoles for Tuning Energy Level Alignment in Organic Thin 

Film Devices. Chim. Int. J. Chem. 2013, 67 (11), 796–803.

(82) Wehrenfennig, C.; Eperon, G. E.; Johnston, M. B.; Snaith, H. J.; Herz, L. M. High 

Charge Carrier Mobilities and Lifetimes in Organolead Trihalide Perovskites. Adv. 

Mater. 2014, 26 (10), 1584–1589.

(83) Johnston, M. B.; Herz, L. M. Hybrid Perovskites for Photovoltaics: Charge-Carrier 

Recombination, Diffusion, and Radiative Efficiencies. Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49 (1), 

146–154.

(84) Stranks, S. D.; Eperon, G. E.; Grancini, G.; Menelaou, C.; Alcocer, M. J. P.; Leijtens, 

T.; Herz, L. M.; Petrozza,  a.; Snaith, H. J. Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 

1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Absorber. Science 2013, 342

(6156), 341–344.

(85) Sherkar, T. S.; Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Ávila, J.; Sessolo, M.; Bolink, H. J.; 

Koster, L. J. A. Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells: Significance of Grain 

Boundaries, Interface Traps, and Defect Ions. ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2 (5), 1214–1222.


36

(86)
Sahli, F.; Werner, J.; Kamino, B. A.; Bräuninger, M.; Monnard, R.; Paviet-Salomon, B.; 

Barraud, L.; Ding, L.; Diaz Leon, J. J.; Sacchetto, D.; et al. Fully Textured Monolithic 

Perovskite/Silicon Tandem Solar Cells with 25.2% Power Conversion Efficiency. Nat. 

Mater. 2018, 17 (9), 820–826.

(87) Peumans, P.; Yakimov, A.; Forrest, S. R. Small Molecular Weight Organic Thin-Film 

Photodetectors and Solar Cells. J. Appl. Phys. 2003, 93 (7), 3693–3723.

(88) Pettersson, L. A. A.; Roman, L. S.; InganaÌˆs, O. Modeling Photocurrent Action Spectra 

of Photovoltaic Devices Based on Organic Thin Films. J. Appl. Phys. 1999, 86 (1), 487.

(89) Kim, M.; Kim, G.-H.; Lee, T. K.; Choi, I. W.; Choi, H. W.; Jo, Y.; Yoon, Y. J.; Kim, J. 

W.; Lee, J.; Huh, D.; et al. Methylammonium Chloride Induces Intermediate Phase 

Stabilization for Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells. Joule 2019, 3 (9), 2179–2192.

(90) Kegelmann, L.; Wolff, C. M.; Awino, C.; Lang, F.; Unger, E. L.; Korte, L.; Dittrich, T.; 

Neher, D.; Rech, B.; Albrecht, S. It Takes Two to Tango - Double-Layer Selective 

Contacts in Perovskite Solar Cells for Improved Device Performance and Reduced 

Hysteresis. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9 (20), 17245–17255.

(91) Pang, S.; Zhang, C.; Dong, H.; Chen, D.; Zhu, W.; Xi, H.; Chang, J.; Lin, Z.; Zhang, J.; 

Hao, Y. Efficient NiO x Hole Transporting Layer Obtained by the Oxidation of Metal 

Nickel Film for Perovskite Solar Cells. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2019, 2 (7), 4700–

4707.

(92) Magomedov, A.; Al-Ashouri, A.; Kasparavičius, E.; Strazdaite, S.; Niaura, G.; Jošt, M.; 

Malinauskas, T.; Albrecht, S.; Getautis, V. Self-Assembled Hole Transporting 

Monolayer for Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells. Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8 (32), 

1801892.


37

(93) Al-Ashouri, A.; Magomedov, A.; Roß, M.; Jošt, M.; Talaikis, M.; Chistiakova, G.; 

Bertram, T.; Márquez, J. A.; Köhnen, E.; Kasparavičius, E.; et al. Conformal Monolayer 

Contacts with Lossless Interfaces for Perovskite Single Junction and Monolithic 

Tandem Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (11), 3356–3369.

(94) Al-Ashouri, A.; Köhnen, E.; Li, B.; Magomedov, A.; Hempel, H.; Caprioglio, P.; 

Márquez, J. A.; Morales Vilches, A. B.; Kasparavicius, E.; Smith, J. A.; et al. Monolithic 

Perovskite/Silicon Tandem Solar Cell with over 29% Efficiency by Enhanced Hole 

Extraction. Science 2020, 370 (6522), 1300–1309.


38

Jonas Diekmann, Pietro Caprioglio, Moritz H. Futscher, Vincent M. Le Corre, Sebastian 
Reichert, Frank Jaiser, Malavika Arvind, Lorena Perdigón Toro, Emilio Gutierrez-Partida, 
Francisco Peña-Camargo, Carsten Deibel, Bruno Ehrler, Thomas Unold, Thomas Kirchartz, 
Dieter Neher, Martin Stolterfoht*

Pathways towards 30% efficient single-junction perovskite solar cells and the role of 
mobile ions

Here, we establish drift-diffusion simulation parameters to describe efficient (20%) p-i-n type 

perovskite solar cells. Using this parameter set, we explore effective strategies to improve the 

performance further. We find that the key to reach the 30% efficiency milestone is maximizing 

the built-in voltage across the perovskite layer by implementing doped- or ultrathin transport 

layers like self-assembled monolayers. 


39

Supporting Information

Pathways towards 30% efficient single-junction perovskite solar cells and the role of 
mobile ions

Jonas Diekmann, Pietro Caprioglio, Moritz H. Futscher, Vincent M. Le Corre, Sebastian 
Reichert, Frank Jaiser, Malavika Arvind, Lorena Perdigón Toro, Emilio Gutierrez-Partida, 
Francisco Peña-Camargo, Carsten Deibel, Bruno Ehrler, Thomas Unold, Thomas Kirchartz, 
Dieter Neher, Martin Stolterfoht*

Supplementary Figure S1. Experimental External Quantum Efficiency of the standard cells 
and numerically simulated EQEs using SCAPS and on optimal transfer matrix simulations 
providing an integrated JSC of roughly 21.5 mAcm-2. 


40

Supplementary Figure S2. JV-scans of the standard cell measured in forward and reverse 
direction at different scan rates demonstrating a negligible hysteresis within the studied time-
range accessible in our standard JV measurement setup using a Keithley 2400. 

Supplementary Figure S3. Transient PL measurements on partial triple cation cell stacks with 
and without transport layers (PTAA/PFN-Br and (LiF/)C60). Using the expression shown in 


41

ref.1 (

1

τeff =

1

τbulk + (

4d2

π2D +

d

S)

−1

), where τeff and τbulk is the effective and bulk lifetime 

respectively, d the film thickness (400 nm), S the interface recombination velocity, D = μVth
is the diffusion coefficient, which is the product of mobility and thermal voltage (25.86 meV 

at 300 K), we can quantify the interface recombination velocity S =

dDπ2(τbulk−τ)

(Dπ2τbulkτeff − 4d2(τbulk−τ))

to be approximately 2000 cm/s at the perovskite/C60 interface, and 100 cm/s at the PTAA/PFN-
Br/perovskite interface. We note, the improvement in lifetime upon addition of LiF at the n-
interface is also shown, which we have used to model the cell shown in Figure 1e.  

Supplementary Figure S4. (a) Current density versus voltage characteristics measured on a 
transistor-like structure shown in (b) to measure the perovskite conductivity. The electrode 
width (L3) was 1 cm, the perovskite thickness (L2) was 500 nm, Rc refers to the contact 
resistance. The channel length L1 is variable. The conductivity of σ~1∙10-7 S/cm is obtained 

from a fit of the slope of resistance versus channel length using the expression 

V

I =

1

σ

L1

L2L3 + Rc

. Considering that the conductivity is σ = enμ and using a mobility of 1 cm2/Vs yields an 
equilibrium carrier density of 6x1011 cm-3. We note any equilibrium carrier density below 
1x1014 cm-3 has no effect on the simulation results.  


42

Supplementary Figure S5. A comparison between the analytic Shockley-Queisser model 
(assuming a perfect rear reflector)2 and numerical simulations assuming only radiate 
recombination losses using a bandgap-dependent k2 as described below in Supplementary 
Note 1.

Supplementary Table S1. SCAPS simulation parameters for the standard cells.

Parameter
Symbol
Value
Unit
Comment

Majority carrier band offset 
between perovskite and C60

∆𝐸maj,c
0 
eV
Due to QFLS=Voc match in these 
devices, ref.3

Majority carrier band offset 
between perovskite and PTAA

∆𝐸maj,v
0 
eV
Due to QFLS=Voc match in these 
devices and UPS data, ref.3

Lifetime in perovskite
𝜏pero
500
ns
Measured with TRPL, Figure S3

Trap density perovskite
𝑁t,pero
2∙1015
cm-3
From the measurement of the 
lifetime, see caption*

Lifetime in PTAA
𝜏𝑝
1
ns
Sub-ns exciton lifetime in organic 
conjugated polymer, ref.4

Lifetime in C60
𝜏𝑛
1
ns
Sub-ns exciton lifetime in organic 
conjugated polymer, ref.5

Ionized acceptors in PTAA
𝑁A,𝑝

−
0
cm-3
No doping used in fabrication

Ionized donors in C60
𝑁D,𝑛

+
0
cm-3
No doping used in fabrication

Intrinsic carrier density in 
perovskite

𝑁i
1x1012
cm-3
Effectively undoped (irrelevant 
<1x1014 cm-3) as evidenced by the 
low conductivity, Figure S4

Minority carrier recombination 
velocity from perovskite to PTAA

𝑆min,𝑛
100
cm/s
Measured with TRPL, Figure S3

Trap density at p-interface
𝑁t,𝑝−if
1∙1011
cm-2
From 
the 
measurement 
of 

interface 
rec. 
velocity, 
see 

caption**


43

Minority carrier recombination 
velocity from perovskite to C60

𝑆min,𝑝
2000
cm/s
Measured with TRPL, Figure S3

Trap density at n-interface
𝑁t,𝑛−if
2∙1012
cm-2
From 
the 
measurement 
of 

interface 
rec. 
velocity, 
see 

caption**

Majority carrier recombination 
velocity from perovskite to PTAA

𝑆maj,𝑝
1x107
cm/s
Assumption

Majority carrier recombination 
velocity from perovskite to C60

𝑆maj,𝑛
1x107
cm/s
Assumption

Majority and Minority carrier 
velocity at front metal contact 
(ITO)

𝑆met
1x107
cm/s
Typical value for metal, ref.6

Majority and Minority carrier 
velocity at back metal contact 
(Cu)

𝑆met
1x107
cm/s
Typical value for metal, ref.6

Thickness of PTAA
𝑑PTAA
10
nm
Measured with profilometer

Thickness of perovskite
𝑑pero
400
nm
Measured with profilometer

Thickness of C60
𝑑C60
30
nm
Measured with profilometer

Offset between metal and PTAA
∆𝐸F,metal−𝑝0.2
eV
Assumption

Offset between metal and C60
∆𝐸F,metal−𝑛0.2
eV
Assumption

Device built-in voltage
𝑉BI
1.2
V
Fit to experimental data, see 
caption***

Bandgap PTAA
𝐸G,PTAA
3.0
eV
Measured by UV-Vis

Electron affinity PTAA
𝐸A,PTAA
2.5
eV
Consider aligned PTAA HOMO 
with perovskite valence band

Bandgap perovskite 
𝐸G,pero
1.63
eV
Measured by UV-Vis

Electron affinity perovskite
𝐸A,pero
3.9
eV
Using photon yield spectroscopy 
measurements, ref.3

Electron affinity C60
𝐸A,C60
3.9
eV
Consider aligned C60 LUMO with 
perovskite conduction band

Bandgap C60
𝐸G,C60
2.0
eV
Measured by UV-Vis

Electron mobility in C60
𝜇𝑛,C60
1x10-2
cm2/
Vs

1.5∙10-2 cm2/Vs measured with 
SCLC in ref.7 Ref.8 showed that  
𝜇𝑛,C60 and 𝜇𝑛,pero are much larger 
than 𝜇𝑝,PTAA in these devices. 

Hole mobility in PTAA 
𝜇𝑝,PTAA
1.5x10-4
cm2/
Vs

Fit to thickness dependent PTAA 
JV-curves (Figure 1g). A mobility of 
7.5∙10-5
cm2/Vs measured on 

undoped PTAA with SCLC in ref.9

Electron mobility in perovskite
𝜇𝑛,pero
1
cm2/
Vs

Intra-grain 
Thz 
perovskite 

mobilities are around 35 cm2/Vs 
for triple cation perovskites.10,11

However, a better fit to the JV-
curves shown in Figure 1 was 
obtained with a mobility of 1 

Hole mobility in perovskite
𝜇𝑝,pero
1
cm2/
Vs


44

cm2/Vs, which might be related to 
grain boundaries.

Relative dielectric constant PTAA
𝜖PTAA
3.5
Typical 
value 
for 
organic 

conjugated polymers.12

Relative dielectric constant 
perovskite

𝜖pero
22
Typical value, e.g. 𝜖pero = 25 in 
ref.13

relative dielectric constant C60
𝜖C60
5.0
a relative permittivity of ~5 was 
measured at lowest frequencies 
(1kHz) at 300 K, ref.14

Effective electron density of 
states in HTL

𝑁C/V,PTAA 1x1020
cm-3
Ref.15

Effective electron density of 
states in C60

𝑁C/V,C60
1x1020
cm-3
Ref.15

Effective electron density of 
states in perovskite

𝑁C/V,pero
2.2x1018
cm-3
Ref.16

Remarks: We note that we do not claim that every individual parameter is perfectly consistent 
with existing literature, however, we consider them as plausible. Many parameters were 
obtained from our own optical and electro-optical transient measurements, such as the 
recombination rate constants and lifetimes in the perovskite layer, interfacial recombination 
velocities, energy levels and density of states in the perovskite. The absorption coefficient (α
[1/cm]) of the perovskite layer in the simulations was matched to the experimentally measured 
absorption coefficient, in particular at the band edge which has a significant impact on the EQE 
and short-circuit current. We further implemented an Urbach tail of 15 meV consistent with 
experimental data. *From the measured lifetime (Supplementary Figure S3) in the perovskite 
(τpero = 1 (Nt,perovthσ)
⁄
), a trap state density of 2∙1015 cm-3 can be estimated by assuming a 

capture cross section of 10-16 cm-2 and a thermal velocity of 1x107 cm/s. **From the obtained 
interface recombination velocities (Supplementary Figure S3), S= (Nt,ifvthσ), a trap state 
density of 1∙1011 cm-2 (S=100 cm/s) and 2∙1012 cm-2 (S=2000 cm/s) can be estimated at the p-
interface and at the n-interface, respectively, by assuming a capture cross section of 10-16 cm-2

and a thermal velocity of 1x107 cm/s. ***Figure 4a shows that a high VBI of ~1.2 V is 
necessary in case of undoped transport layers and the given interface recombination velocities 
to achieve the measured VOC. This is consistent with a large surface photovoltage of 
approximate 1V obtained on ITO/PTAA/PFN-Br/triple cation perovskite stacks with UPS.17

Supplementary Note S1.

For simulating the cells without ions, we used the well-established software SCAPS.18,19

SCAPS numerically solves a system of three coupled equations, namely the Poisson equation, 

the continuity equation and the drift-diffusion equation. The Poisson equation is given by


45

𝜕2𝜑(𝑥)

𝜕𝑥2
= − 𝑞

𝜖 (𝑝(𝑥) − 𝑛(𝑥) + 𝑁D + −𝑁A

−)
(S1)

where φ is the electrical potential, 𝑞 is the charge of an electron, ϵ is the absolute permittivity 

of the material, 𝑝(𝑥) and 𝑛(𝑥) are the the hole and electron density respectively and ND

+ and 

NA

− are the Donor and the Acceptor densities. The continuity equations for the electrons and 

holes are given by

𝜕𝑛
𝜕𝑡 = − 1

𝑞

𝜕𝐽n
𝜕𝑥 − 𝑅(𝑥) + 𝐺(𝑥)

𝜕𝑝
𝜕𝑡 = − 1

𝑞

𝜕𝐽p
𝜕𝑥 − 𝑅(𝑥) + 𝐺(𝑥)

(S2a)

(S2b)

where 𝐽𝑛 and 𝐽𝑝 are the electron and hole current densities respectively, 𝑅(𝑥) is the 

recombination rate and 𝐺(𝑥) is the generation rate. The drift-diffusion equations are given by

𝐽n = 𝑞𝑛(𝑥)𝜇n

𝜕𝜑
𝜕𝑥 + 𝑞𝐷n

𝜕𝑛(𝑥)

𝜕𝑥

𝐽p = 𝑞𝑝(𝑥)𝜇p

𝜕𝜑
𝜕𝑥 + 𝑞𝐷p

𝜕𝑝(𝑥)

𝜕𝑥

(S3a)

(S3b)

where 𝜇n and 𝜇𝑝 are the mobilities of electrons and holes, 𝐷𝑛 and 𝐷𝑝 are the diffusion constants 

of electrons and holes. The mobility and the diffusion constants are related via the Einstein 

relation


46

𝐷 = 𝜇𝑘B𝑇/𝑞
(S4)

The surface recombination at the metal electrodes dictates the boundary conditions of the 

carrier current densities for the cell as a whole

𝐽n(−𝑑H) = 𝑞𝑆n,fc(𝑛(−𝑑H) − 𝑛o(−𝑑H))

𝐽p(−𝑑H) = 𝑞𝑆p,fc(𝑝(−𝑑H) − 𝑝o(−𝑑H))

𝐽n(d + 𝑑E) = 𝑞𝑆n,bc(𝑛(𝑑 + 𝑑E) − 𝑛o(𝑑 + 𝑑E))

𝐽p(d + 𝑑E) = 𝑞𝑆p,bc(𝑝(𝑑 + 𝑑E) − 𝑛o(𝑑 + 𝑑E))

(S5a)

(S5b)

(S5c)

(S5d)

Here, 𝑆 is the recombination velocity which is given by S= 𝑁t,if𝑣th𝜎, where 𝑁t,if is the trap 

density at the interface, 𝑣th the thermal velocity and 𝜎 the capture cross section. Fc, bc denote 

the front contact and back contact. 𝑑𝐸 , 𝑑𝐻 and 𝑑 are the thicknesses of the of the electron-

transport layer, the hole transport layer and the active layer respectively. 𝑛0 and 𝑝0 are the 

equilibrium electron and hole carrier densities. The equilibrium majority carrier concentration 

at a metal-semiconductor interface is related to the difference of the Fermi-levels, also known 

as the Schottky barrier height 𝜑𝑏 as follows

𝑝0(𝑥 = −𝑑H) = 𝑁V 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝜑b(−𝑑H)

𝑘B𝑇
)
(S6a)


47

𝑛0(𝑥 = 𝑑 + 𝑑E) = 𝑁C 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝜑b(𝑑 + 𝑑E)

𝑘B𝑇
)
(S6b)

where 𝑁𝐶 and 𝑁𝑉 denote the effective density of states in the conduction and valence band 

respectively. The minority carrier concentration at equilibrium can then be calculated from 

these results using the following equation

𝑛0(𝑥)𝑝0(𝑥) = 𝑛i

2 = 𝑁C𝑁V 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−𝐸g

𝑘B𝑇)
(S7)

where 𝑛𝑖 is the intrinsic carrier concentration and 𝐸g the bandgap. 

Similarly, the interface recombination dictates the boundary conditions at the perovskite-ETL 

(back interface, bi) and HTL-perovskite (front interface, fi) interfaces

𝐽n(0) = q𝑆n,fi(𝑛(0) − 𝑛o(0))

𝐽p(0) = 𝑞𝑆p,fi(𝑝(0) − 𝑝o(0))

𝐽n(d) = 𝑞𝑆n,bi(𝑛(𝑑) − 𝑛o(𝑑))

𝐽p(d) = 𝑞𝑆p,bi(𝑝(𝑑) − 𝑛o(𝑑))

(S8a)

(S8b)

(S8c)

(S8d)

The Recombination in the bulk material is given by the following equations


48

𝑅(𝑥) = 𝑅SRH + 𝑅radiative + 𝑅Auger

𝑅radiative(x) = 𝑘2(𝑛(𝑥)𝑝(𝑥) − 𝑛i

2)

𝑅Auger(𝑥) = (𝑐n

A𝑛 + 𝑐p

A𝑝)(𝑛(𝑥)𝑝(𝑥) − 𝑛i

2)

𝑅SRH =
𝑛(𝑥)𝑝(𝑥) − 𝑛𝑖

2

(𝑛(𝑥) + 𝑛1)𝜏p + (𝑝(𝑥) + 𝑝1)𝜏n

(S9a)

(S9b)

(S9c)

(S9d)

where 𝑘2 is the radiative radiation coefficient, 𝑐n

A and 𝑐p

A are the Auger coeffients for electrons 

and holes respectively, 𝜏p and 𝜏n are the SRH-lifetimes for holes and electrons and 𝑛1 =

𝑁Cexp (−(𝐸C − 𝐸T)/𝑘B𝑇) and 𝑝1 = 𝑁Vexp ((𝐸V − 𝐸T)/𝑘B𝑇) is the generation of electrons in 

the conduction band and holes in the valence band from the trap level, respectively. The 

minimum SRH lifetime in the bulk is given by 

𝜏p/n = 1 (𝑁t𝑣th𝜎)
⁄
(S10)

where 𝑁t is the trap density in the bulk. The Generation is given by

𝐺(𝑥) = ∫
𝛼(𝜆)𝑁phot(𝜆, 𝑥)𝑑𝜆

𝜆max

𝜆min

(S11)

where α is the wavelength dependent absorptivity, which we determined experimentally, 𝑁phot

is the photon flux at each position, which is given by

𝑁phot(𝜆, 𝑥)

= 𝑁phot,0(𝜆)𝑇front 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝑥𝛼(𝜆)) 1 + 𝑅back 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−2(𝑑 − 𝑥)𝛼(𝜆))

1 − 𝑅back𝑅int 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−2𝑑𝛼(𝜆))

(S12)


49

where 𝑁phot,0(𝜆) is the incident photon flux, in this case the AM1.5G spectrum, 𝑇front is the 

transmission of the front contact, 𝑅int is the internal reflection at the front contact and 𝑅back is 

the reflection of the back contact. 

Supplementary Note S2. 

We obtain the external bimolecular recombination rate constant 𝑘2 from the radiative 

recombination current density in the dark (𝐽0,rad) and knowledge of the effective density of 

states 𝑁𝐶 = 𝑁V =2.2x10-18 cm-3 (ref.20) which corresponds to an effective electron mass 𝑚𝑒

∗ of 

0.2. 

𝐽0,rad = 𝑒𝑑𝑘2𝑛i

2 = 𝑒𝑑𝑘2𝑁C𝑁V𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝐸G/𝑘B𝑇) ,
(S13)

where 𝑒 is the elementary charge, 𝑑 is the film thickness, 𝐸G the bandgap and 𝑘B𝑇 the thermal 

energy. Note, 𝐽0,rad is obtained from integrating the EQE and black body spectrum (𝜙𝐵𝐵)

𝐽0,rad = ∫
EQE ⋅ 𝜙𝐵𝐵 𝑑𝐸

∞
0
(S14)

Considering that 𝜙BB ∝ 𝐸G

2𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝐸G/𝑘B𝑇) and 𝐽0,rad ∝ 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝐸G/𝑘B𝑇) shows that 𝑘2 must 

depend on the bandgap itself. For a bandgap of 1.63 eV and 𝑑 = 500 nm, we obtain an external  

𝑘2 of 3x10-11 cm3/s which is similar to previously specified values ref.20–22


50

Supplementary Figure S6. a A direct comparison between IonMonger and SCAPS using the 
standard simulations settings in Supplementary Table S1 without mobile ions. These settings 
could well reproduce the standard simulation setting of SCAPS. In order to check whether both 
programs lead to identical results with respect to key recombination parameters, such as the 
interface recombination velocity (S) and the majority carrier offset (Emaj), we varied these 2 
parameters as shown in panel b and c, which resulted in very similar results.

Supplementary Figure S7. Transient capacitance measurements. a Change of capacitance as 
a function of time after switching from 1.25 V (applied for 2 seconds) to 0 V measured between 
210 and 330 K in steps of 3 K. The capacitance is measured at 0 V by applying a sinusoidal 
voltage with an AC amplitude of 20 mV to the device at high frequencies (104 Hz) where the 
measured capacitance corresponds to the geometric capacitance of the device. The change in 
capacitance directly shows the redistribution of mobile ions in the internal field under short-
circuit conditions. The measured capacitance is divided by the steady-state capacitance, which 
is 56 nF/cm2 at 300 K. b Arrhenius plot of the obtained capacitance decay times for the filling 
voltages shown in b. Fits with a confidence level below p = 0.2 are rejected. The linear fit 
reveals the characteristics for two mobile ion species (Ion 1: Activation energy = 121 ± 1 meV, 
diffusion coefficient = (1.1 ± 0.1) x 10-10 cm2/s and Ion 2: Activation energy = 118 ± 1 meV, 
diffusion coefficient = (5.8 ± 3.1) x 10-10 cm2/s). Diffusion coefficients are calculated at 300 K. 
The values were obtained assuming a perovskite thickness of 400 nm, a fully depleted 
perovskite layer with a built-in voltage of 1.0 V, that diffusion of mobile ions is negligible 
against drift, and that the electric field varies linearly within the perovskite layer. The obtained 


51

time constants can then be approximated as τ =

dpero
2
kBT

DqVBI . The diffusion coefficient is given by 

D = D0 exp(−EA/kBT), where D0 is a pre-factor and EA the activation energy. 

Supplementary Figure S8. a Bias assisted transient charge extraction measurements are 
performed by switching the voltage from open-circuit conditions to a reverse bias of -1.6 V to 
collect the charges (collection bias). It is important to note that the extraction of injected 
charges (during the application of the VOC and the RC-charging of the electrodes happens on 
much faster times scales, i.e. <5 µs in the studied device), allowing to rule out the contribution 
of these 2 processes on the extracted charge on these long times scales presented here. The 
extracted charge in panel b shows that the ions are transported through the active layer on 
timescales of around tens of ms which roughly matches the diffusion constants calculated from 
transient capacitance measurements. c By assuming a homogenous distribution of ions in the 
active layer under open-circuit conditions, we can estimate the ionic charge to be at least 6x1016

cm-3. However, as larger reverse biases consistently break our devices, larger ion densities 
cannot be excluded at this point. 

.

Supplementary Figure S9. Numerically simulated current density vs. voltage characteristics 
of p-i-n type perovskite solar cells by varying the e- and h+ mobility (μe−, μh+) in the perovskite 
layer (a) and resulting power conversion efficiency (PCE) vs. perovskite mobility (b); μh+ in 


52

the HTL (c) and resulting PCE vs. HTL mobility (d), μe− in the ETL (e) and resulting PCE vs. 
ETL mobility (f).

Supplementary Figure S10. (a) A comparison of the parallel interfacial recombination 
currents for a simulated standard cell with (dashed) and without (solid) doped TLs. The main 
effect of the doping is the suppression of the interfacial recombination current (red) which is 
significantly lower than in the reference cell (e.g. ~25x at an applied voltage of 1.0 V). (b) 
compares the JV-curves of cells with and without doped TLs to a cell with no VBI drop across 
the TLs (red). This is achieved by including a high relative dielectric constant (e.g. ϵr=1000) 
in the TL. Further optimizing the TL mobilities (100x higher compared to the reference cell) 
shows that the transport limitations are negligible (orange line). Further maximizing the VBI to 
1.6 eV (blue) can closely describe the cell with doped TLs (where the small differences 
dependent on the exact value of ϵr). This comparison shows that the effective increase of the 
VBI across the perovskite absorber layer due to the doping of the TLs is the primary reason for 
the performance improvement. 

Supplementary Figure S11. Simulated JV characteristics of p-i-n type perovskite solar cells 
by varying the acceptor concentration in the hole transport layer (TL) (a) and the donor 
concentration in the electron TL (b). Considering that perovskite/ETL interface is limiting the 
performance, doping the HTL does allow performance improvements. In contrast significant 


53

improvements are achieved upon doping of the ETL until the HTL/perovskite interface and or 
the bulk limit the cells performance. 

Supplementary Figure S12. (a) Simulated JV characteristics of p-i-n type perovskite solar 
cells for different donor concentrations in the electron transport layer (ETL, solid lines) 
compared to varying the doping in an interlayer between the perovskite and the ETL (dashed 
lines). Both possibilities yield the same PCE, therefore enhancing the experimental possibilities 
to reduce the critical interfacial recombination at the top-interface through implementation of 
a doped layer. (b) A comparison of the electron and hole density in the cell in case of the doped 
ETL and the doped interlayer for a donor concentration of 1019 cm-3. A doped interlayer (here 
implemented between the perovskite and the ETL) gives the same PCE as a doped ETL. Panel 
(c) and (d) demonstrate the simulated band diagram in case of a doped ETL and interlayer, 
respectively. 


54

Supplementary Figure S13. (a) Heat maps of PCE vs. built-in voltage and majority offset 
(Emaj) at both ETL and HTL for the standard cell with undoped transport layers (a) and for the 
same cell with doped TLs (b). Doped TLs allow more tolerance with respect to the electrode 
work function difference (defined as the VBI in the work) but not with respect to Emaj.

Supplementary Figure S14. Heat maps of fill factor (a) and PCE (b) vs. built-in voltage and 
electron and hole mobility in the perovskite layer (μe− and μh+) for the standard cell. In order 
to reproduce the high experimental fill factor (of ~80%), a considerable VBI of above 1.1 V is 
required regardless of the perovskite mobility because it is the interface recombination that 
deteriorates the FF in case of low driving voltages. 


55

Supplementary Figure S15. Numerically simulated JV-curves (a) and fill factors (FFs) (b) as 
a function of the dielectric constant (ϵr). Increasing ϵr flattens the VBI in the perovskite layer 
as shown (c) and (d). Panel (b) shows a continuous drop of FF with increasing dielectric 
constant in the perovskite layer regardless of mobility in the perovskite. Note, the different 
coloured lines represent simulations where the mobility in both transport layers has been 
multiplied (increased) by the given factor. Even if the perovskite electron and hole mobility is 
as high as 50 cm2/V/s (or even higher), a nearly flat VBI in the perovskite layer (here 
implemented by using a hypothetical ϵr of 1000) would not allow to reproduce the high fill 
factors obtained experimentally (almost 80%) if the TL mobilities are unchanged (black lines). 
This is a result of the increased interface recombination in this scenario. We note that this does 
not exclude that there are filed free regions in the perovskite in case of ions. This is because 
any barrier for minority carriers within the perovskite (as shown for example in Figure 2a) 
would significantly reduce the interface recombination which would allow a field-free 
perovskite layer for the given interface recombination parameters. 


56

Supplementary Figure S16. The graphs shows a drop in PCE if the energy levels of the TLs 
and the work functions of the contact metals are kept as used in the standard simulations 
(“unaligned”). 

Supplementary Figure S17. (a) Simulated JV characteristics for different perovskite 
bandgaps by keeping the electron and hole transport layer energy levels constant. (b) The open-
circuit voltage as a function of perovskite bandgap in case of energetically aligned and 
energetically misaligned transport layer energy levels (i.e. keeping the energy levels constant 
upon varying the perovskite bandgap). The graph shows that alignment of the energy level of 
the transport layers with respect to the perovskite is an important consideration. If only the 
bandgap of the perovskite is increased but the transport layer energetics is not changed than 
the VOC cannot be improved. 


57

Supplementary Figure S18. (a) Transfer Matrix simulations of (hypothetical) optimized cells 
with a bandgap of 1.4 eV. Limitations on the JSC are only imposed by the reflections from the 
glass and the parasitic absorption in ITO and PTAA while the parasitic absorption of the thin 
PTAA layer and other layers are minimal (less than 1% average EQE loss in PTAA). However 
there is a relatively large reflection loss (dashed line) due to the comparatively high n of the 
perovskite layer23 and the glass which can be, however, minimized by using an antireflection 
coating (~4% gain). Leaving only reflection from the perovskite, we obtain an EQE (solid blue 
line) that is on average slightly below 95% above the gap which leads to JSC loss of roughly 
~1 mAcm-2 as compared to the JSC obtained with SCAPS in the record cell (marked with an 
open circle in Figure 5a) at a bandgap of 1.4 eV. (b) shows the n and k values of the perovskite 
layer used for the simulations shown in panel (a). We note, the n and k values were measured 
on a 83-17 triple cation perovskite with a bandgap of 1.63 eV using spectroscopy ellipsometry. 
For the transfer matrix simulations of cells with a lower bandgap cells (1.4 eV), we used the 
same n and k values as for the 1.63 eV triple cation perovskite with a bandgap but shifted the 
x-axis accordingly to consider the available experimental data to some extend

Supplementary Figure S19. (a) Heat maps of PCE vs. interface recombination velocity (S) 
(at both perovskite/transport layer interfaces) and bulk carrier lifetime (τbulk) for the standard 


58

cell (a) and for the high efficiency system with a perovskite bandgap of 1.4 eV and doped TLs 
(b).

Supplementary Figure S20. The power conversion efficiency vs. the thickness of both 
transport layers with doping concentrations of 1019 cm-3. The thickness of the TLs can be 
increased up a few hundred nm without significant PCE losses. 

Supplementary References

(1) 
Stolterfoht, M.; Wolff, C. M.; Márquez, J. A.; Zhang, S.; Hages, C. J.; Rothhardt, D.; 

Albrecht, S.; Burn, P. L.; Meredith, P.; Unold, T.; et al. Visualization and Suppression 

of Interfacial Recombination for High-Efficiency Large-Area Pin Perovskite Solar

Cells. Nat. Energy 2018, 3 (10), 847–854.

(2) 
Rühle, S. Tabulated Values of the Shockley-Queisser Limit for Single Junction Solar 

Cells. Sol. Energy 2016, 130, 139–147.

(3) 
Stolterfoht, M.; Caprioglio, P.; Wolff, C. M.; Márquez, J. A.; Nordmann, J.; Zhang, S.; 

Rothhardt, D.; Hörmann, U.; Amir, Y.; Redinger, A.; et al. The Impact of Energy 

Alignment and Interfacial Recombination on the Internal and External Open-Circuit 

Voltage of Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (9), 2778–2788.


59

(4) 
Dimitrov, S.; Schroeder, B.; Nielsen, C.; Bronstein, H.; Fei, Z.; McCulloch, I.; Heeney, 

M.; Durrant, J. Singlet Exciton Lifetimes in Conjugated Polymer Films for Organic 

Solar Cells. Polymers (Basel). 2016, 8 (1), 14.

(5) 
Qin, D.; Gu, P.; Dhar, R. S.; Razavipour, S. G.; Ban, D. Measuring the Exciton Diffusion 

Length of C 60 in Organic Planar Heterojunction Solar Cells. Phys. Status Solidi Appl. 

Mater. Sci. 2011, 208 (8), 1967–1971.

(6) 
Würfel, P.; Würfel, U. Physics of Solar Cells: From Basic Principles to Advanced 

Concepts, 2nd ed.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 2009.

(7) 
Mendil, N.; Daoudi, M.; Berkai, Z.; Belghachi, A. Disorder Effect on Carrier Mobility 

in Fullerene Organic Semiconductor. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2015, 647 (1), 012057.

(8) 
Stolterfoht, M.; Wolff, C. M.; Amir, Y.; Paulke, A.; Perdigón-Toro, L.; Caprioglio, P.; 

Neher, D. Approaching the Fill Factor Shockley–Queisser Limit in Stable, Dopant-Free 

Triple Cation Perovskite Solar Cells. Energy Environ. Sci. 2017, 10 (6), 1530–1539.

(9) 
Luo, J.; Xia, J.; Yang, H.; Chen, L.; Wan, Z.; Han, F.; Malik, H. A.; Zhu, X.; Jia, C. 

Toward High-Efficiency, Hysteresis-Less, Stable Perovskite Solar Cells: Unusual 

Doping of a Hole-Transporting Material Using a Fluorine-Containing Hydrophobic 

Lewis Acid. Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11 (8), 2035–2045.

(10) Al-Ashouri, A.; Köhnen, E.; Li, B.; Magomedov, A.; Hempel, H.; Caprioglio, P.; 

Márquez, J. A.; Morales Vilches, A. B.; Kasparavicius, E.; Smith, J. A.; et al. Monolithic 

Perovskite/Silicon Tandem Solar Cell with over 29% Efficiency by Enhanced Hole 

Extraction. Science 2020, 370 (6522), 1300–1309.

(11) Herz, L. M. Charge-Carrier Mobilities in Metal Halide Perovskites: Fundamental 

Mechanisms and Limits. ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2 (7), 1539–1548.


60

(12) Torabi, S.; Jahani, F.; Van Severen, I.; Kanimozhi, C.; Patil, S.; Havenith, R. W. A.; 

Chiechi, R. C.; Lutsen, L.; Vanderzande, D. J. M.; Cleij, T. J.; et al. Strategy for 

Enhancing the Dielectric Constant of Organic Semiconductors without Sacrificing 

Charge Carrier Mobility and Solubility. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25 (1), 150–157.

(13) Brivio, F.; Butler, K. T.; Walsh, A.; Van Schilfgaarde, M. Relativistic Quasiparticle 

Self-Consistent Electronic Structure of Hybrid Halide Perovskite Photovoltaic 

Absorbers. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2014, 89 (15), 1–6.

(14) Chern, G.; Mathias, H.; Testardi, L. R.; Seger, L.; Schlenoff, J. Low-Frequency 

Dielectric Permittivity of C60. J. Supercond. 1995, 8 (2), 207–210.

(15) Kirchartz, T.; Gong, W.; Hawks, S. A.; Agostinelli, T.; MacKenzie, R. C. I.; Yang, Y.; 

Nelson, J. Sensitivity of the Mott–Schottky Analysis in Organic Solar Cells. J. Phys. 

Chem. C 2012, 116 (14), 7672–7680.

(16) Staub, F.; Hempel, H.; Hebig, J. C.; Mock, J.; Paetzold, U. W.; Rau, U.; Unold, T.; 

Kirchartz, T. Beyond Bulk Lifetimes: Insights into Lead Halide Perovskite Films from 

Time-Resolved Photoluminescence. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2016, 6 (4), 1–13.

(17) Zu, F.; Wolff, C. M.; Ralaiarisoa, M.; Amsalem, P.; Neher, D.; Koch, N. Unraveling the 

Electronic Properties of Lead Halide Perovskites with Surface Photovoltage in 

Photoemission Studies. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11 (24), 21578–21583.

(18) Burgelman, M.; Nollet, P.; Degrave, S. Modelling Polycrystalline Semiconductor Solar 

Cells. Thin Solid Films 2000, 361, 527–532.

(19) Decock, K.; Zabierowski, P.; Burgelman, M. Modeling Metastabilities in Chalcopyrite-

Based Thin Film Solar Cells. J. Appl. Phys. 2012, 111 (4), 043703.

(20) Staub, F.; Hempel, H.; Hebig, J.-C.; Mock, J.; Paetzold, U. W.; Rau, U.; Unold, T.; 


61

Kirchartz, T. Beyond Bulk Lifetimes: Insights into Lead Halide Perovskite Films from 

Time-Resolved Photoluminescence. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2016, 6 (4), 044017.

(21) Richter, J. M.; Abdi-Jalebi, M.; Sadhanala, A.; Tabachnyk, M.; Rivett, J. P. H.; Pazos-

Outón, L. M.; Gödel, K. C.; Price, M.; Deschler, F.; Friend, R. H. Enhancing 

Photoluminescence Yields in Lead Halide Perovskites by Photon Recycling and Light 

Out-Coupling. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 13941.

(22) Sherkar, T. S.; Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Bolink, H. J.; Koster, L. J. A. Improving 

Perovskite Solar Cells: Insights From a Validated Device Model. Adv. Energy Mater.

2017, 7 (13), 1602432.

(23) Werner, J.; Nogay, G.; Sahli, F.; Yang, T. C. J.; Bräuninger, M.; Christmann, G.; Walter, 

A.; Kamino, B. A.; Fiala, P.; Löper, P.; et al. Complex Refractive Indices of Cesium-

Formamidinium-Based Mixed-Halide Perovskites with Optical Band Gaps from 1.5 to 

1.8 EV. ACS Energy Lett. 2018, 3 (3), 742–747.


