Volume Fabrication of Quantum 

Cascade Lasers on 200 mm-CMOS pilot 

line

JG Coutard1, M Brun2, M Fournier1, O Lartigue1, F Fedeli1, G Maisons2, JM Fedeli1, S Nicoletti1, M 
Carras2 and L Duraffourg1*

1 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, LETI, F38054 Grenoble.
² mirSense - Centre d’intégration NanoINNOV, Bâtiment 863, 8 avenue de la Vauve F91120 Palaiseau

* Laurent.duraffourg@cea.fr

Abstract

The manufacturing cost of quantum cascade lasers is still a major bottleneck for the adoption of 
this technology for chemical sensing. The integration of Mid-Infrared sources on Si substrate 
based on CMOS technology paves the way for high-volume low-cost fabrication. Furthermore, 
the use of Si-based fabrication platform opens the way to the co-integration of QCL Mid-InfraRed
sources with SiGe-based waveguides, allowing realization of optical sensors fully integrated on 
planar substrate. We report here the fabrication and the characterization of DFB-QCL sources
using top metal grating approach working at 7.4 µm fully implemented on our 200 mm CMOS 
pilot line. These QCL featured threshold current density of 2.5 kA/cm² and a linewidth of 0.16
cm-1 with a high fabrication yield. This approach paves the way toward a Mid-IR spectrometer 
at the silicon chip level.


Introduction

These two last decades, hybrid photonics circuits using both silicon based materials and III-V 
materials have been successfully developed for data communication and are a complementary 
technology to advanced CMOS for high performance computers too.  In 2006, Soref suggested 
to consider a similar technological approach to make photonics circuits dedicated to the 
mid/long wave infrared region [1]. This IR-wavelength range enables to address multiple
applications from free-space data communication [2], optical countermeasures [3], IR imaging 
of biological tissues [4] to spectroscopy [5]. So far, the detection of chemical species in solid [6], 
liquid [7] or gas mixtures [8] remains the most popular application that drives the technological 
development. In fact, the spectral range between 3 μm and 12 μm corresponds to the first 
harmonic resonance between rovibrational energy levels of the most chemical species, leading 
to absorption cross sections that are order of magnitude stronger than overtone in the near IR 
for instance. This is especially true for light molecules in gaseous phase. This unique feature 
enables to detect a great number of gasses with extreme sensitivity and selectivity. A limit of 
detection lower than 1 part per billion (ppb) and unequivocal identification of chemical species
can typically be reached through MIR absorption spectroscopy techniques [9].
Even if chemical detection using diode lasers has been developed since the mid-1960s, it is with 
the advent of unipolar sources based on multiple quantum well stacks that spectroscopic 
sensing in the MIR wavelength band has become commercially available. With the recent 
progress in Quantum Cascade Laser (QCL) [10], [11] and Interband Cascade Laser (ICL) 
technology, compact and reliable MIR light sources are now readily available [12]. In particular, 
Distributed FeedBack (DFB) sources allow the selection of specific emission wavelengths to 
target the detection of chemicals of interest [13], [14]. With these sources, a novel generation 
of sensing tools suitable for real-time in-situ detection of trace element gasses is now available. 
With the advent of MIR Si photonics, a novel class of integrated components has been developed 
allowing the integration at chip level of the main building blocks required for chemical sensing,
i.e. the source, a photonics integrated circuits (PICs) and the detector [15]. At wavelengths 
around 4.8 µm, Spott et al. developed a silicon on SiN waveguide coupled with a bonded QCL 
material. DFB lasers with threshold currents as low as 80 mA and threshold current densities 
below 1 kA/cm2 emitted more than 200 mW from a polished III-V/Si facet, and operated in 
pulsed mode up to 100 °C [16]. They rely on InP type fabrication using III/V-manufacturing lines
on two inch format. 
Such technological approaches cannot satisfy volume markets. Today manufacturing price may 
be estimated around 1k€ per laser after fabrication, test, sorting and bonding of the die on its 
holder. To date, even if III-V technologies are sufficient to meet the needs of niche markets they 
cannot tackle the QCL volume manufacturing challenges: implementation of automatic testing 
procedures at the wafer level, improvement of the reproducibility of electro-optical features, 
simplification of the sorting operations and implementation of a quality-control system. These 
elements enable bringing to market at a suitable manufacturing cost, most probably around few 
€ with volume largely higher than 100 kunits per year.
So far, these challenges have not been properly addressed and prevent from a large 
development and dissemination of these lasers beyond scientific community and niche 
applications. In this paper, we present an original approach for the Mid-IR based upon the use 
of microelectronic tools to realize the fabrication of QCL on 200 mm Si wafers. Doing so, we are 
able to dramatically increase the laser reproducibility, while preserving the same performances 
as those reached on InP and to set-up automatic test procedure for reducing or even removing 


the sorting of lasers. This paves the way to the manufacturability of low cost devices suitable for 
numerous applications from single laser to complete analysis system of chemicals, biologicals at 
liquid or gas phases. This work address a fundamental building block for the co-integration of
QCL array with suitable MIR PICs and PhotoAcoustic detectors for making a spectrometer fully 
miniaturized at chip level. 
This paper reports on the design, fabrication, and characterization of DFB-QCL single sources 
and arrays made on 200 mm Si wafers and compares their performances with QCLs made on InP 
substrate, whose designs are similar to those used in this work. For the sack of clarity, here 
following we will mainly focus on the devices emitting at 7.4 µm, even if similar experimental 
results have been obtained at 4.5 µm.

Design

QCLs are commonly based on III-V materials depending on the chosen wavelength range. 
Nowadays, most of the QCL emitting in the MIR region (in particular between 3 µm and 11 µm)
are made from a stack of InGaAs / AlInAs layers on InP substrate. These heterostructures are 
significantly more efficient than the GaAs / AlGaAs stacks and have the optical power record by 
reaching up to few watts [17], [18] in continuous mode and at room temperature. InAs based 
QCL are also good candidates in particular for short wavelengths around 3 µm. More recently, 
Baranov and co-workers have demonstrated InAs / AlSb QCL emitting at 15 µm wavelength with 
a low threshold current density at room temperature [19].
The QCL developed within this work will be used for the chemical analysis in the 4 - 10 µm 
wavelength range. The design has been derived from previous stacks developed a couple of 
years ago and specifically designed to operate in the 7.4 µm emission wavelength bands. The
laser heterostructure is a standard lattice-matched GaInAs and AlInAs multilayers grown on InP. 
Our active region is composed of 25 elementary periods, which are composed of a 3-quantum-
wells and a superlattice resonant injection regions. For more details on the heterostructure, the 
reader can refer to [13]. 
The electroluminescence spectrum of the epitaxy layers, measured at 80 K, showed that the 
emission band is actually centered at 1400 cm-1 (7.1 µm) with a full width at half 
maximum, 𝐹𝑊𝐻𝑀 = 14.4 𝑚𝑒𝑉.
The multi-layer stack designs were however modified from DFB-QCL sources originally done on 
InP to take into account the constraints set by CMOS processing tools. The bottom contacts of 
the lasers are in particular no longer on the backside of the chips, but reported aside from the 
ridge of the laser introducing doped layers below the active region.
Three lengths of ridge have been investigated (𝐿𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑔𝑒 = 1, 2, and 4 𝑚𝑚). We designed four 
ridge widths per length ( 𝑤𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑔𝑒 = 6, 8, 10 and 12 µ𝑚 ) for studying the current density 
threshold and the related overlap with the active region that should degrade the output power 
at same injected current density level. The nominal ridge geometry is 10 µm-wide, 2 mm-long. 
It corresponds to a good compromise between gain and losses and enables to have a single 
spatial mode. This width is adjusted to increase the losses of the higher order modes to the 
benefit of the first spatial mode. The DFB-QCL requires a wavelength selection mechanism, 
which is done with a metal surface grating according to the approach coupling a surface 
plasmon-polariton mode and the propagative modes [13].


Technology and fabrication

To fabricate the laser on the 200 mm CMOS pilot line, we directly bonded a 2 inch InP wafer 
with the active layers on a 200 mm Si wafer via a thin oxide layer. This process step is a now 
mature technology but it requires high-quality defect-free epilayers. This key process step has 
been addressed first by the study of the impact of the surface quality of the InP wafers with 
epitaxial QC stack from different providers. The bonding is very sensitive to defects and requires 
a low roughness and a low bow. If the availability of defect-free epitaxial layers are primordial, 
the quality of the InP substrates is also critical. Provided that the surface defects are low enough 
on the epitaxial wafers, we achieved direct bonding of more than 90% of surface on oxidized 
200 mm Si wafer. The InP substrate was first grinded and then fully removed by chemical etching 
of the different sacrificial layers in order to leave a perfect upper surface for further processing. 
It is worth to mention that a single Si wafer can receive up to four 2 inch wafers so that the 
number of devices fabricate on a single wafer can be increased from 2700 up to 10000 single 
lasers per wafer.
This QCL manufacturing is fully compatible with standard microelectronics processes as it 
directly exploits the top metal grating technology, which does not require any further process 
on the InP wafer before the molecular bonding, ensuring the high volume rate. The 
implementation of QCL fabrication process on silicon benefit from the specific DFB technology 
developed a few year ago [20], [16] and routinely implemented on InP [13], [21].
The manufacturing of DFB QCL is realized through a grating in the III/V stack exhibiting a periodic 
index variation. This approach implies regrowth of III-V material after the grating etching [10]. 
Today, this regrowth is not possible in a CMOS-like manufacturing of QCL on silicon wafer. To 
overcome this issue, the wavelength selection, presented in [16], is achieved on a silicon/nitride 
waveguide. This approach requires to couple the QCL cavity to a silicon/oxide waveguide, which 
exhibits two main drawbacks. It complicates the design to have an efficient coupling inside the 
laser cavity, and reduces the useful wavelength range due to the presence of oxides in the 
waveguide. Oxide usually exhibits high losses above 4 µm mid IR wavelength (likewise SiN above 
7 µm). The top metal grating approach in double trench does not require regrowth and has 
therefore provided the basis for the manufacturing process that we present in this paper.
A typical silicon wafer with the active 2” area including the QCLs is presented in Fig. 1 a.  The 
main challenge encountered in the fabrication of QCL within a 200 mm CMOS compatible facility 
was the development of suitable processes matching the etching of thick layers up to 10 µm and 
high resolutions down to 300 nm. For deep UV lithography at 248 nm, the thicknesses of the 
resists, the coverage of steep and steps depth are the key points compared to the fabrication 
of Near-IR lasers heterogeneously integrated on Si. The partial etch of InP and InGaAs layers 
combined with precise stopping level are the challenges for the etching steps. The deposited 
material should be optically and chemically compatible with QCL structure. We used SiN for 
fabricating the hard mask for InP etching as well as for the deposition of conformal thick layers 
on steep edges. Thick conformal gold layers are used for the DFB operation and for getting good 
contacts. Finally, the complete process has been performed in our MEMS 200 mm Si platform 
enabling the delivery of numerous DFB QCL lasers and QCL arrays. In this work, we manufactured
five wafers, three centered on 7.4 µm emission wavelength and two centered on 4.5 µm 
emission wavelength. A 200 mm Si wafer with components (Fig. 1 a), a lithographic 22 x 22 mm² 
field and a SEM zoom-in of a single QCL are shown in Fig. 1 b&c. The performance of lasers 
depends not only on the quantum well stack but also on the morphology of the laser ridge and 
the DFB filter. SEM characterizations were performed to verify the geometry of the ribbon and 


the quality of its edges. The expected widths were larger by 1.4 µm. The manufacturing accuracy 
is in the order of +/-100nm over the entire center of the 200mm wafer (Fig. 1a)). The roughness 
of the etching flanks is less than 100nm (RMS). The ribbon edges are metallized with gold to 
increase the losses of higher order optical modes and to have a single mode laser. It should be 
noted that the metallization of the back mirror allows a 95% reflectivity and that an anti-
reflective layer (SiN) ensures a 95% transmission on the output facet.

Figure 1: a) 200 mm Si wafer with QCL components (the dotted circle refers to plate 2" InP & the dotted square 

refers to a laser field) – b) Field of (22 mm x 22 mm) of single QCL devices and QCL arrays – c) SEM picture QCL laser 

– inset: Zoom in of the DFB grating (at the end of the ridge tip)

Electro optic characterizations

As aforementioned, the fabrication of QCLs on 200 mm substrate enables to use large-scale
characterization tools. Thus, 2700 devices (corresponding to single QCLs and QCL arrays) were 
measured at wafer-level on an automatic 200/300 mm test prober to determine the emission
threshold levels. To do so, 𝑉(𝐼) and 𝑃(𝐼) characteristics were systematically measured using 
synchronized IR detector (VIGO system, Poland) to measure the output light emission. The 
measurements were performed in pulsed mode at low duty cycle (3%) and at 17 °C to avoid any 
self-heating effect. The pressure exerted on the electrical contact pads as well as the positioning 
of the prober tips remain delicate and may modify the series resistance (typically in the order of 
1  or less). Calibration of our prober has shown an average contact resistance of a few tens of 
m (and a dispersion in the order of 1 m), which is negligible compared to the differential 
resistance of our QCLs that are typically around 40. We extracted the repartition of threshold 
current densities, 𝐽𝑡ℎ , per wafer, which enables the selection of functional dies and the 
evaluation of the fabrication yield. In particular, we computed the average threshold currents 
and the standard deviations for each geometry of ridges. 
In Figure 2, we have represented the threshold current density as a function of the length and 
width of lasers. Each point corresponds to the average value of the current density and its 
standard deviation computed over 225 identical lasers. Figure 2a) corresponds to measurements 


made on one typical wafer. Figure 2b) shows the averages and standard deviations computed
from the cumulative measurements done on two wafers according to the ridge length. For 
reference, we have superimposed the typical (non-statistical) threshold current densities 
measured on lasers manufactured on InP. For the shortest lasers (1mm), the threshold current 
density is around 4.6kA/cm² and drops for the longest lasers (4mm) down to 2.5 kA/cm². The
threshold current decreases rapidly with the length of the DFB grating, whose reflectivity tends 
towards 1 from a value close to or greater than 4mm. The losses of the laser ribbon becomes 
predominant from this length. The threshold current densities exhibited by QCL fabricated on 
InP substrate remain lower (2.6 kA/cm² & 1.9kA/cm² for 2mm and 4mm respectively). As 
reported in the fabrication section, the bottom contacts reported aside from the ridge of the 
laser requires doped layers below the active region, which may induce additional losses, which 
tend to increase the threshold current.
Figure 2c) shows the average values and standard deviations as a function of width (values from 
SEM observations). We reported two sets of measurements corresponding on two different 
wafers. The orange circles are for the typical wafer (same as in Fig 2a)) since the blue ones are 
for a second wafer from the same fabrication batch. There is no clear trend in the variation of 
the threshold current with the width. For the lengths of 1mm and 2mm, it nevertheless seems 
that lasers around 10µm wide have the lowest current densities. This observation appears to be 
consistent with the initial sizing of the laser, whose theoretical optimal width was set at 10µm 
for the stack considered. The values from the two wafers remain very close, in particular for 
1mm and 2mm long lasers. The 4mm long lasers of the second wafer show a larger dispersion
in the measured current densities.
The relative standard deviation 𝜎𝐽𝑡ℎ/𝐽𝑡ℎ
̅̅̅̅ is about 3% except for the 4mm long lasers of the 

second wafer. This weak dispersion demonstrates the pretty good robustness of our technology. 
To go further, it is interesting to compare the disparity of the threshold current values with the 
dimensional dispersion related to our lithography/entching processes, used to structure the 
laser ribbon and DFB grating. The tolerance of the manufacturing process is better than 100nm 
over a ridge width and does not induce the relative dispersion of few percent observed in Fig. 2. 
Moreover, the DFB design uses a coupling of the surface plasmon mode at the metal / dielectric 
interface with the guided mode [13], [20]. This approach enables a coupling strength of the 
grating and losses that are almost constant over a wide range of etching depths [20]. We
estimated that the acceptable tolerance depth is +/-100nm. The variation of our etching process 
remains below this limit (typically +/-50nm measured on few samples) what should not 
significantly influence the threshold current.
With this systematic electro-optical characterization, we estimated a yield of 98% of functional 
lasers per wafer (with similar electro-optical features).


Figure 2: Current density threshold: a) average and standard deviation values with the length and the width (225 
dies per geometry) for one typical 200 mm-wafer at 7.4 µm emission – b) average and standard deviation values 

with width (orange circles: wafer 1, blue circles: wafer 2) – c) average and standard deviation values as a function of 

length for the two silicon wafers (orange circles) and for lasers made on InP (green stars)

After these first characterizations, the wafers were diced into discrete components (2700 dies / 
wafer).  𝑃(𝐼) and 𝑉(𝐼) were once again measured according to the applied current through the 
laser to extract 𝐽𝑡ℎ and the maximum current density 𝐽𝑚𝑎𝑥 . These measurements were 
performed at four different operating temperatures (from 15°C to 45°C) at 1.5%-duty cycle. 
When the current density reaches 𝐽𝑚𝑎𝑥, the injection band level becomes higher than the 
transition level and the Stark rollover effect appears. In this regime, the optical power drops 
with the current. From the curve at different temperature, we estimated the variation of 𝐽𝑡ℎ(𝑇)
and extracted the characteristic temperature 𝑇0 according to (1).

𝐽𝑡ℎ(𝑇) = 𝐽0𝑒

𝑇
𝑇0
(1)

In the figure 3, we present typical 𝑃(𝐼) and 𝑉(𝐼) curves obtained for the nominal geometry 
(theoretical ridge width= 8µm, measured width = 10.4 µm, ridge length = 2 mm). As shown in 
inset of Fig. 3, 𝑇0 is close to 176 K, which corresponds to quite common value obtained on InP 
substrate. This demonstrates that both the bonding process of quantum well stacks on Si wafers 
and the ridge /DFB structuration using CMOS compatible tools do not degrade the electro-
optical performances of the QCL. The roll-off currents are quite common too. These 


characterizations have however been done at low duty cycle preventing from large self-heating 
occurrences and no systematic measurements of the heat diffusion through the Si substrate has 
been made so far. Further measurements at the die level are in progress to better characterize 
the QCL when working in pulsed mode up to 15%-duty cycle. In this case, the average optical 
powers would be between 5 mW and 10 mW.

A differential optical power 𝑑𝑃 𝑑𝐼
⁄
of ~83 mW/A can be easily estimated from measurements 

presented in Fig. 3 considering the duty cycle of 1.5%. For comparison, typical differential 
powers that can be found with commercial lasers on InP are around few 100mW/A in similar 
conditions (in pulse mode and at 15°C) [22]. 

Figure 3: Typical characteristics 𝑃(𝐼), 𝑉(𝐼) of QCL lasers at 7.4µm emission wavelength (ridge width=8 µm, ridge 

length=2mm) at four temperatures: blue: 15 °C, green: 25 °C, orange: 35 °C and red: 45 °C – inset:  𝐽𝑡ℎ(𝑇) vs. 

temperature

We also report the normalized typical emission spectra of an array of QCLs working in the 7.4 
µm wavelength range for the nominal geometry in Fig. 4a). The output power was measured 
operating the lasers at the same condition (applied voltage = 9.9 V, pulsed mode with a 50 ns-
pulse duration and 100 kHz-repetition rate (i.e 0.5%-duty cycle), operating temperature T=21
°C. The spectral resolution of our Fourier-transform infrared spectrometer (Thermofisher 
Scientific Nicolet IS-50) is 0.0125 cm-1 (4375 points over the spectral range).  Apart from sources 
2 and 6, the devices showed single-mode emission and 25 dB side mode suppression ratios over 
the working wavelength range (see Fig 4b) insert). The emission wavenumbers extracted from 
this measurement are in good agreement with the expected wavelengths defined by the DFB 
design, as shown in Fig 4 b). In the figure 4c), we plot the intensity emitted by a QCL at the middle 
of the array (i.e. QCL12) with the wavenumber. The maximum power density is 199 µW at 1357.6 
cm-1. The optical power integrated over the entire emission spectrum corresponds to 18 µW 
(@0.5% duty cycle). This value is coherent with the power measured in Fig. 3 at 10 V at 1.5%-
duty cycle (i.e. 54 µW nearby the threshold). In this operating condition, the typical FWHM is
0.16 cm-1 with a current pulse duration of 50ns and a repetition rate at 100 kHz. The FWHM is 


in particular affected by self-heating phenomenon that broadens the linewidth (FWHM of a free 
running QCL is between 1MHz-10MHz in CW mode with an efficient thermal drain) [23]. Other 
technical noises of the set-up results also in a spectral broadening, and the self-heating 
contribution cannot be properly quantified with our current set-up. The emission spectrum even
widens rapidly for pulses exceeding 100ns up to 1 cm-1 (FWHM) for 100ns-pulse duration and 
13V of applied voltage.

Figure 4: a) Typical spectral power densities of a QCL array (inset: photography of the QCL array, top view) – b) 

Intensity of a QCL (QCL in mid array; inset: Log representation) – c) Comparison between expected nominal 

wavenumber and experimental ones 

Conclusion

In this paper, we report the fabrication of QCL sources on silicon substrate within 200 mm 
CMOS/MEMS pilot. To do so, we have successfully transferred the top metal grating process on 
an appropriate fabrication process flow that fully respects the design and the process rules of a
standard CMOS manufacturing line. This fabrication run achieves performance at the state of 
the art, that are comparable with those of QCL fabricated on InP substrate. The first 
characterizations done at wafer level have demonstrated average threshold current densities 
between 3 kA/cm² and 2.5 kA/cm² with a relative dispersion around 3%. The measurements 
have demonstrated fabrication yields of 98% per wafer having electro-optical features shown in 
this paper. The optical power can reach 1 mW at ambient temperature, 1.5% duty cycle. This 
value can easily be increased up to ten mW, which is enough to address many applications in 
industrial process monitoring or even medical and health fields, by increasing up to reasonable 
duty cycle value that is estimated around 15%. At this repetition rate, the self-heating will
probably affect the quantum wells stack and the electro-optical properties will be degraded.
Immediate works on this approach will hence consist of studying the self-heating processes and 


propose a technological way to define a thermal drain toward the silicon tank. In next fabrication 
batches, Si wafers will also receive up to four 2 inch wafers for multiplying the number of 
functional dies. In parallel, development of InAs/AlSb layers grown by molecular beam epitaxy 
(MBE) on (100 mm and then 200mm) silicon substrate [24] opens new opportunities that should 
be further explored for a full integration into a CMOS line.  
The fabrication in a CMOS/MEMS pilot line and wafer-level tests on probe stations should
greatly accelerate the commercialization of QCLs by further decrease the fabrication cost of such 
components. Furthermore, the integration on a common technological platform implemented 
on Si substrate is crucial to the realization of miniaturized and cost-effective MIR photonic 
devices. MIR sources fabricated on Si should penetrate a number of new markets beyond the 
gas sensing for professional applications.
With these preliminary results, we added a capital milestone to our works initiated a couple of 
years ago on passive MIR photonics circuits and integrated photoacoustic detectors [25]. The 
integration of MIR sources on common technological platforms based on IC/MEMS technology 
is essential for the realization of miniaturized and cost-effective MIR optical sensors and paving 
the way for the implementation of a spectrometer fully integrated on Si chip.

Acknowledgements

This research has been partially supported from the European Union through the H2020 project 
RedFinch, N°780240 and the French ADEME project CIDO. The authors thank LETI Silicon 
fabrication division and G. Lasfargues and L. Boutafa for their helpful supports with the 
component fabrication and characterizations.

References

[1]
R. A. Soref, S. J. Emelett, and W. R. Buchwald, “Silicon waveguided components for the long-wave infrared region”, J. 
Opt. Pure Appl. Opt., vol. 8, 840-848 (2006).

[2]
G. Overton in http://www.laserfocusworld.com/articles/print/volume-46/issue-11/features/photonics-applied-free-space-
communications-sophisticated-optical-system-extend-reach-of-free-space-communications.html (2010)

[3]
R.J. Grasso, "Defence and security applications of quantum cascade lasers", Proc. SPIE9933, Optical Sensing, Imaging, and 
Photon Counting: Nanostructured Devices and Applications 2016, 99330F (2016)

[4]
B. Bird and M. J. Baker, “Quantum Cascade Lasers in Biomedical Infrared Imaging”, Trends in Biotechnology 33, 557-558 
(2015)

[5]
Q. Gaimard, M. Triki, T. Nguyen-Ba, L. Cerutti, G. Boissier, R. Teissier, A. Baranov, Y. Rouillard, and A. Vicet, 
"Distributed feedback GaSb based laser diodes with buried grating: a new field of single-frequency sources from 2 to 3 µm 
for gas sensing applications", Opt. Express 23, 19118-19128 (2015)

[6]
P. Geiser, “New Opportunities in Mid-Infrared Emission Control” Sensors 15, 22724-22736 (2015)

[7]
See for example: M.R. Alcaráz, A. Schwaighofer, C. Kristament, G. Ramer “External-cavity quantum cascade laser 
spectroscopy for mid-IR transmission measurements of proteins in aqueous solution”, Anal Chem. 87(13), 6980-6987 
(2015)

[8]
See for example: R. Ostendorf et al., “Recent Advances and Applications of External Cavity-QCLs towards Hyperspectral 
Imaging for Standoff Detection and Real-Time Spectroscopic Sensing of Chemicals”, Photonics 3(2), 28 (2016) 

[9]
See for example: F.K. Tittel, D. Richter and A. Fried, “Mid-Infrared Laser Applications in Spectroscopy”, in Sorokina I.T., 
Vodopyanov K.L. (eds): Solid-State Mid-Infrared Laser Sources, Topics in Applied Physics 89, Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 445-516 (2003)

[10] J. Faist, C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, C. Sitori, D. L. Sivco, J. N. Baillargeon, A. L. Hutchinson, and A. Y. Cho, Distributed 

feedback quantum cascade lasers, Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 2670 (1997).

[11] C. Gmachl, F. Capasso, D.-L. Sivco and A.Y. Cho, “Recent Progress in quantum cascade lasers and applications”, Rep. 

Prog. Phy. 64, 1533-1601 (2001)

[12] M. S. Vitiello, G. Scalari, B. Williams and P. De Natale, Quantum cascade lasers: 20 years of challenges, Optics Express 

Vol. 23, No. 4, 5167- 5182 (2015)

[13] M. Carras, M. Garcia, X. Marcadet, O. Parillaud, A. De Rossi, and S. Bansropun, “Top grating index-coupled distributed 

feedback quantum cascade lasers”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 011109 (2008)

[14] W. Zeller, L. Naehle, P. Fuchs, F. Gerschuetz, L. Hildebrandt, J. Koeth, “DFB Lasers Between 760 nm and 16 µm for 

Sensing Applications”, Sensors 10, 2492-2510 (2010)

[15] Sergio Nicoletti, Jean-Marc Fédéli, Maryse Fournier, Pierre Labeye, Pierre Barritault, Adrien Marchant, Alain Glière, 

Alexandre Teulle, Jean-Guillaume Coutard, and Laurent Duraffourg "Miniaturization of mid-IR sensors on Si: challenges 
and perspectives ", Proc. SPIE 10923, Silicon Photonics XIV, 109230H (4 March 2019)

[16] A. Spott, E.J. Stanton, N. Volet, J.D. Peters, J.R Meyer and J. Bowers, “Heterogeneous Integration for Mid-Infrared Silicon”,

Photonics. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 23, 8200810 (2017)


[17] Y. Bai, N. Bandyopadhyay, S. Tsao, E. Selcuk, S. Slivken, and M. Razeghia, “Highly temperature insensitive quantum 

cascade lasers”, App. Phys. Lett. 97, 251104 (2010)

[18] See for instance: https://mirsense.com/products/powermir/, mirsense (2018)
[19] A.N. Baranov, M. Bahriz, and R. Teissier, Optics Express 24, 16, 18799-18806 (2016)
[20] M Carras, A De Rossi, Photonic modes of metallodielectric periodic waveguides in the midinfrared spectral range, Physical 

Review B 74, 235120 (2006)

[21] M. Carras, G. Maisons, B. Simozrag, M. Garcia, O. Parillaud, J. Massies, and X. Marcadet, Room-temperature continuous-

wave metal grating distributed feedback quantum cascade lasers, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 161105 (2010)

[22] See for instance: Gangyi Xu, Aizhen Li, Yaoyao Li, Lin Wei, Yonggang Zhang, Chun Lin, and Hua Li, Low threshold 

current density distributed feedback quantum cascade lasers with deep top gratings, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 161102 (2006)

[23] S. Schilt, L. Tombez, G. Di Domenico and D. Hofstetter, Frequency Noise and Linewidth of Mid-infrared Continuous-

Wave Quantum Cascade Lasers: An Overview, in The Wonders of Nanotechnology: Quantum and Optoelectronic Devices 
and Applications (chapter 12), SPIE Press book, M. Razeghi, L. Esaki, and K. von Klitzing, Eds., 261-287 (2013)

[24] H. Nguyen-Van, A.N. Baranov, Z. Loghmari, L. Cerutti, J.-B. Rodriguez, J. Tournet, G. Narcy, G. Boissier, G. Patriarche, 

M. Bahriz, E. Tournié and R. Teissier, “Quantum cascade lasers grown on silicon”, Scientific Reports 8, 7206 (2018)

[25] J.-M. Fédéli, S. Nicoletti, Mid-Infrared (Mid-IR) Silicon-Based Photonics, PROCEEDINGS OF THE IEEE, Vol. 106, No. 

12, 2302- 2312 (2018)


