1

Electromagnetic Absorption as a Novel Tool in Chemical Vapor Deposition

Toolbox: Ultra-Fast Growth of Continuous Graphene Film

Hadi Arjmandi-Tash and Grégory F. Schneider†

Leiden University, Faculty of Science, Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Einsteinweg 55, 2333CC Leiden, 

The Netherlands

† to whom correspondence should be addressed: g.f.schneider@chem.leidenuniv.nl

Abstract

This report introduces the electromagnetic absorption of the catalyst as a novel knob in optimizing chemical 

vapor deposition of graphene. A chromium film initially deposited at one side of a catalyst copper foil

absorbs radiative thermal energy several times higher than the plain copper foil and migrates to the other 

side of the foil in the form of microscale grains. The process involves local melting of the copper which 

together with the increased operation temperature, improves the crystalline quality of growing graphene. 

Local melting of copper replaces the otherwise-necessary annealing process; dramatically lowering the 

process duration and costs. Now a continuous graphene film can be grown in only five minutes, nominating 

the protocol as the shortest ever reported. The observations reported in this manuscript boost the general 

knowledge about metal mixture, additional to promoting graphene growth science and technology.

Introduction

Since the introduction of chemical vapor deposition as an efficient approach to synthesize graphene [1], the 

process has been optimized/adjusted to improve/customize the properties of graphene [2], [3]. Increasing 

the crystalline quality [4], [5] and global uniformity of graphene [6], [7] as well as improving the throughput 

[8], [9] and minimizing the production cost [10], [11] along with the generalization of the process [12]–

[15] are among the targets. Traditionally, copper serves as an important catalyst for the growth of graphene. 

Thanks to the low carbon solubility of carbon in copper, the growth is self-limited to produce (primarily) 

monolayer graphene. Interestingly, the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process temperature − in 

annealing and growth phases − approaches the melting point of the copper (𝑇𝑚𝐶𝑢). Though it is technically 


2

complex, graphene can be grown on molten copper also [16]. The number of the crystalline defects 

including grain boundaries − as potential graphene nucleation sites − in molten copper is limited which can 

eventually lead to crystalline monolayer graphene [17]. Indeed by using appropriate supporting layers to 

prevent the de-wetting of the copper foil, epitaxial growth of single crystal domains of ~200 μm has been 

realized above 𝑇𝑚𝐶𝑢 [16]. As the second advantage of using molten copper, the immobilized catalytic species 

at the surface lowers the crystalline defects (e.g. voids) in growing graphene. Though relevant experimental 

evidence can be hardly found in literature, it has been shown theoretically that high mobility and diffusion 

of the surface catalyst atoms drives “defect healing” processes in which defects such as pentagons and 

heptagons promote to carbon hexagons [18]. We target this aspect in this report.

Mixing (alloying) metals enable to combine the favorable properties of different metals for specific 

applications; this remains yet a seldomly touched strategy in the growth of graphene. As one of the few 

successful reports, nickel and molybdenum were rationally combined to achieve self-limiting growth with 

outstanding reproducibility [19]. Here, the precipitated carbon species form strong and stable bonds with 

molybdenum and are excluded from the growth to yield strictly single-layer graphene. Separately the 

catalytic capability of the copper was dramatically improved by alloying with nickel [20]; Indeed the nickel-

mediated segregation of carbon radicals in the Cu-Ni alloy system can boost the growth rate by an order of 

magnitude over singular copper.

In this paper, we report a peculiar approach in growing graphene on a bi-component substrate composed of 

copper and chromium: chromium species, initially deposited at the backside of the copper foil migrate

thought the bulk copper to the other side, where graphene is to be grown. Copper serves as the traditional 

catalyst to mediate cracking of methane molecules into carbon radicals. Dilute chromium species on the 

other hand, locally melt the copper and run the defect healing mechanism to improve the crystalline quality 

of forming graphene lattice.

CVD of graphene is traditionally performed in tube oven (= “hot-wall”) chambers [7], [21], [22] with the 

heating element placed outside the chamber. Symmetrical thermal radiation forms a uniform thermal zone 

in which the specimen (e.g. copper foil) receives a homogenous heat flux (= flow of thermal energy per 


3

unit area and time) from surrounding. The heating in “cold-wall chambers” [10], [23]–[25] is 

heterogeneous: Here a heating stage is placed inside the chamber which directly heats-up the specimen in 

contact, via thermal conduction. The radiated thermal energy, on the other hand, exposes one side of the 

copper foil. The camber features a huge thermal gradient between the stage (normally at T > 1000 °C) and 

the walls (normally at T ~ 100 °C) which eventually provide a non-uniform heating zone which potentially 

can lead to random growth. Although graphene growth in cold-wall chambers is cost-effective, the 

heterogeneous heating is a major drawback. In this letter, however, we benefit from this heterogeneity to 

drive chromium specious from one side to the other side of the copper foil during the growth of graphene.

We demonstrate that our approach − uniquely feasible in the cold-wall chambers − considerably boosts the 

crystalline quality of graphene while minimizing the growth time and costs. 

Experiments

The test sample is a copper foils (Alfa Aesar, 99.999% purity, 25 µm thickness) on which a chromium film 

of 50 nm was evaporated. We placed the sample on the hot stage of a cold-wall CVD set-up (nanoCVD-

8G, Moorfield Nanotechnology) with the chromium deposited side facing the stage (we will refer to this 

side as the “bottom side” throughout this manuscript, see the schematic in inset Figure 1-a). In an earlier 

publication [11], we characterized and compared graphene grown in a “cold-wall” and “hybrid cold/hot

wall” chambers, concluding the graphene grown via the conventional cold-wall approach is less uniform 

and of poorer quality. We adopted this unsuccessful recipe ‒ including subsequent annealing and growth 

phases ‒ to grow graphene in this work (see the Methods). We varied the growth temperature and the 

annealing duration but used a fixed growth duration of three minutes in different experiments. Later on, we 

will show that with an annealing duration of seven minutes at 1035°C, chromium migrate to the top side 

where graphene grows during the growth phase. Figure 1-a displays the top side of a copper foil initially 

and partially covered with chromium film at the bottom left side (see the inset schematic). The right side of 

the sample (with no chromium film deposited) appears shiny and smooth; the migration of the chromium

film to the top side, however, turns the sample matte (rough) on the left side. High resolution atomic force 


4

microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Figure 1-b,c and d) evidence that the diffusion 

of the chromium have induced a complex microstructure at the surface of the foil: The surface has split into 

a landscape of two phases where a lath structure with sharp edges pops-out from the background mattress

(Figure 1-b and c). Standard copper etching solution (ammonium persulfate) dissolves the background 

while the lath structure is well dissolved in chromium etcher (supplementary information). The experiment 

implies that copper remains the major constituent of the background while the lath structure mainly consists 

of chromium (although a trace amounts of one element in another is possible). 

We characterize the quality of the grown graphene by means of Raman spectroscopy (Figure 1-e). In 

agreement with our earlier publication [11], the growth recipe provides poor quality graphene (or even 

amorphous graphite) on plain copper side. The graphene grown on the Cu/Cr side, however, exhibits 

standard Raman peaks (G peak at ~1580 cm-1 and 2D peak at ~2680 cm-1) and is of superior crystalline 

quality, evidenced by a negligible D peak (at 1350 cm-1). 


5

Figure 1: Graphene grown on Cr/Cu structure

a)
Optical micrograph of a test sample (2 cm × 1 cm) after the growth of graphene: the bottom side of 
the copper foil (facing the heating stage) was initially covered with a thin (~100 nm) chromium film
(demonstrated in the inset). During the growth, chromium drives to and makes the top surface rough.

b)
Representative atomic force micrograph featuring chromium texture popped-out from the copper 

background on left side of the sample in a.

c)
and d) Representative low- and high-resolution scanning electron micrographs of the left side of the 

sample in a.

e) Comparison of the Raman spectroscopy data recorded on the left (on Cr/Cu) and right (plain Cu) sides in a.


6

Figure 2Figure 2 provides an in-depth Raman characterization of the sample after the growth of graphene. 

The migration of the chromium from the bottom to the top side is evident in the optical micrograph in a. 

We identified low-frequency Raman spectral bands which are sensitive to the chemical constituents of the 

substrate. The chromium phase manifests itself as a strong peak centered at 85 cm-1 and is distinct from the

background mattress with a low-amplitude signature at its right shoulder (inset Figure 2-a, b and c). 

Mappings of the Raman characteristic peaks of graphene are provided in panels d to f. The narrow 2D peak 

(FWHM < 50, panel d) and large I2D/IG ratio (> 1, panel e) are the signatures of a monolayer graphene [26]. 

The graphene is of pronounced crystalline quality evidenced by a negligible ID/IG ratio (panel f). 

Interestingly, the properties of the graphene is independent of the local structure (texture) of the underlying 

substrate as no correlation between the mappings in d-f and b are observed. This is an important evidence 

to explain the migration of the chromium and the improved quality of the graphene which will be discussed 

later.  


7

The migration of the chromium from the bottom to the top side of the copper starts during the annealing 

phase of the growth. Figure 3-a correlates the Raman spectra and the surface properties of several graphene 

samples grown at 1035°C with varied annealing durations. The growth duration (after the annealing) is set 

on three minutes for all the experiments. Annealing durations below six minutes (i.e. the total process 

Figure 2: Raman characterization of graphene on the Cr/Cu structure

a)
Optical micrograph of a selected window featuring chromium structures migrated to the front side of the Cu foil after ten 

minutes of growth (seven minutes of annealing) at 1035 °C. Inset shows a low frequency peak sensitive to Cr/Cu composition 

in Raman spectrum. 

b) Mapping the amplitude of the Raman signal at the narrow band centered at 100 cm-1 (see the spectrum in a). The band 

corresponds to the chromium microstructures. 

c) Mapping the amplitude of the Raman signal at the narrow band centered at 85 cm-1 (see the spectrum in a). The band 

corresponds to the copper background. 

d) Mapping the width of the graphene Raman 2D peak (centered at ~2670 cm-1): The width of the 2D peak hardly exceeds 50 

cm-1, manifesting that the graphene is predominantly monolayer. 

e)
Mapping the relative intensity of the 2D (I2D, centered at ~2680 cm-1) and G (IG, centered at ~1580 cm-1) peaks: The I2D/IG

ratio stays mainly above one as another indication of monolayer graphene.

f)
Mapping the relative intensity of the D (ID, centered at ~1350 cm-1) and G (IG, centered at ~1580 cm-1) peaks: The ID/IG

ratio stays close to zero indicating a negligible amount of the crystalline defects. 


8

duration below nine minutes) have negligible effect on the surface corrugations on the foil and are 

insufficient to have chromium migrated to the top side. Here, the growth process is similar to conventional 

approaches with an insufficient (short) copper annealing phase leading to a poor graphene quality, 

manifested by a considerably large amplitude D peak. Chromium traces starts to appear in the sample with

the total process duration of ten minutes (referred to as optimize process duration, t*). Graphene quality is 

the highest in a tight “temporal window” (Δt* ~ 1 minute at 1035°C) close to t*. Longer process durations, 

however degrades graphene.

The optimized process duration depends on how fast chromium migrates to the top side of the copper foil 

which itself is a strong function of the growth temperature. Figure 3-b plot the t* at various growth 

temperatures depicting a linear correlation between 1005°C and 1045°C. Interestingly, while a minimum

total process duration of t*= 20 (with Δt*= 6 min) minimizes the crystalline defects at 1005°C, the process 

could be as short as five minutes (two minutes of annealing followed by three minutes of growth) to achieve 

a decent graphene quality at 1045°C. The allowed temporal window is tighter at elevated temperatures,

demanding an efficient temperature control unit. Increasing the growth temperature above 1045°C does not 

affect t* and Δt* considerably. 


9

Figure 3: Quality of the graphene as a function of the process (annealing) duration

a) Raman spectra of several graphene samples grown with different process durations, ranging from three to 

thirteen minutes (annealing duration ranging from zero to ten minutes); t* marks the optimum process duration 

which provides the lowest D peak (highest crystalline quality). The insets on left shows the AFM 

characterization of the surface of the corresponding sample. 

b) Optimum process duration (t*) of different samples as a function of the growth temperature. Δt* (open 

rectangular markers) corresponds to the temporal window over which graphene quality persists the highest. 

Filled markers correspond to uncertain regions in between subsequent samplings. 

c) Chromium content as a function of the process duration estimated by the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 

(XPS) at the top surface of the foil


10

Few mechanisms might be considered in action to drive the chromium film from one side to the other side 

of the copper foil: Mixing the chromium and copper to form a conventional binary alloy is a potential 

scenario. The operation temperature of the CVD set-up remains below the solidus line in Cr-Cu phase 

diagram (1076 °C [27]) illustrating that the conventional alloying process – including mixing molten 

components – is irrelevant here. Random thermal motion of the materials formulated by the Fick’s law of 

diffusion[28] (including grain boundary and lattice diffusion[29]), on the other hand, should be independent 

of the placement of the sample with respect to the heating stage and would eventually result in a uniform 

concentration across the foil. The chromium film in our experiments, however, migrates through the copper

only when it initially faces the heating stage and is specific to the cold-wall chambers: Indeed similar 

thermal processes with flipped samples (chromium film initially facing up) or inside a tube-oven chamber 

(instead of a cold-wall chamber) did not cause the migration of the chromium (Supplementary Information). 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the samples, furthermore, revealed the concentration 

of the chromium in the top copper side exceeds 40% (Supplementary Information); indeed the governing 

mechanism in our system, shifts a high concentrated chromium region from one side to the other side of 

the foil. Thermal diffusion of solids in which a temperature gradient energizes a material of a certain 

thermodiffusion coefficient to diffuse, might explain the directionality of the observation: in-contrast to the 

tube-oven chambers which provide a uniform heating zone, there is a huge thermal gradient between the 

heating stage (T > 1000 °C) and the walls (~ 100 °C) in cold-wall reaction chambers. A naive hypothesis 

may argue that the foil “feels” this thermal gradient, causing the chromium atoms to diffuse from the hotter 

side (facing the heater) to the colder side (facing the cold wall, in-contact with the fresh operation gases) of 

the copper foil, but not in reverse direction. Our finite element simulations, however, rules out this scenario

as the high thermal conductivity of copper results in a negligible temperature gradient in between its faces 

(Supplementary Information).

Any successful scenario explaining our observations has to be built-up based on two important facts. Firstly, 

at the elevated operation temperature, the heating stage acts as a (semi-) black body radiator, emitting 

electromagnetic waves in near-infrared spectrum (inset Figure 4-a). Copper is a reflective material in this 


11

spectral range exhibiting a negligible absorption of 7% at elevated temperatures [30]. In contrary, chromium 

is known as a lossy metal with electromagnetic absorption of ~40% [31]. In other words, while uncoated 

copper reflects back some 93% of upcoming radiation, chromium coating dramatically improves radiative 

heat transferring by almost six folds. Thermal conduction remains yet a parallel heat transfer mechanism. 

We modeled the heat flow inside the oven considering thermal convection (by the process gases) and

radiation to the cold-walls (Figure 4-a, see SI for the details of modeling). Interestingly, by powering-up 

the heater, the temperature of the uncoated copper foil falls below that of the stage by ~100°C. Note that 

the quality of chemically synthesized graphene is highly sensitive to the reaction temperature as insufficient 

heating fails to provide the necessary activation energy to decompose the precursors [32]. Indeed this 

temperature difference between the foil and the stage explains the typically seen poor quality of graphene 

in cold-wall chambers [7], [11]. The improved thermal energy absorption, however, drives the chromium 

coated copper foil to follow the temperature of the stage closely. The higher growth temperature, however, 

is not the only origin of the increased graphene quality in chromium coated copper foil. 

As another important fact, certain observations demonstrate that the migration of the chromium is 

accompanied by locally melting the copper foil. A first evidence appears by comparing the morphology of 

the foils (top surface) with and without chromium (Figure 4-b): The plain copper side features gradual 

undulations of the surface with the amplitude and wavelength of few hundreds of nanometers; the wavy 

surface is a result of the fabrication process of the copper foil and is typically observed in graphene growth 

studies on commercial copper foils [34]. Migrated chromium, on the other hand, form large mesas of ~ 80 

nm. Interestingly, the surface of the copper in between the chromium mesas has been flattened which would 

be possible only after a melting process. Additionally, we regularly observed grooves forming between the 

Cr/Cu and plain Cu sides (Figure 4-c), indicating the presence of a liquid phase during the operation: indeed 

the transformation of a melt (lower density thus higher volume) to a solid (higher density thus lower 

volume) comes along with a shrinkage in the volume causing the groove [35]. It worth noting that similar

grooves are typically seen at the melt/mold interface after solidifying a molten metal in a casting process

[36]. Chromium assisted melting of the copper is the major cause of the improvement in graphene 


12

crystalline quality: In fact the higher mobility and longer surface diffusion range of the molten copper atoms

drive a “defect healing” processes in which the structural defects (e.g. pentagons and heptagons) transform 

into perfect hexagonal rings, as observed by quantum chemical molecular dynamics simulations [18].

Experimentally, defect-free graphene achieved by chemical vapor deposition has already been 

demonstrated on molten copper foil [16], [17].

We now propose a potential mechanism to explain our observations (Figure 4-d): Chromium deposited on 

the bottom side of the copper absorbs electromagnetic radiation – well beyond the plain copper – and starts 

melting neighboring layers of the copper foil. Melting the copper opens up paths for the migration of the 

chromium. In an optimize timing, the growth of the graphene would start when the most top copper layers 

are in molten state but chromium has not reach there yet. The defect healing process on molten copper foil 

achieves the highest graphene quality. In a delayed process, the presence of the chromium on the top layer 

repels the catalyst copper and degrades the graphene. Presence of molten copper layers in-between the 

chromium and forming graphene justifies the lack of any correlation between the Raman mappings of 

graphene and the underlying features on the foil (Figure 2). The rate of advancing the chromium front scales 

inversely with the temperature which matches with the longer t* measured at lower temperatures (Figure 3-

bFigure 2). Once the molten layer forms at the top copper surface, the optimized growth occurs in a larger 

temporal window (larger Δt*) at lower temperatures before chromium reaching the top surface. 

We note that the improved radiation absorption by the chromium cannot directly cause the melting of the 

copper foil as the temperature of the heating stage remains below the melting point of copper. Particularly 

we noticed the migration of the chromium at temperatures as low as 870°C (~ 200°C below the melting 

point of copper). Surface melting phenomenon [18], [35] in which a thin layer (typically of few nanometer 

thickness) at the surface melts below the melting point of the bulk is an important consideration. In-fact the 

reduced coordination degree of atoms accounts for this advance melting. The phenomenon lowered the 

melting temperature at the surface of lead by 25 %[35]. The same phenomenon might be on-going at the 

Cu/Cr interface in our work. Our findings, however, are insufficient to validate (or rule-out) this hypothesis

and more systematic investigations must be followed-up.


13

Figure 4: A potential scenario explaining the migration of the chromium film 

accompanied by an improved graphene quality

a)
Simulation of the temperature of the heating stage, chromium-coated and plain 

copper foil upon powering up the resistive heater; inset: black-body radiation spectrum at 

1035 °C, formulated by the Planck’s equation [38]

b)
Optical micrograph focusing at the border of the Cr/Cu and plain Cu sides after ten

minutes of the process at 1035°C. A groove appears and splits the two sides, marked by 

white arrows. 

c)
Representative surface profiles over the Cr/Cu (corresponding to the dash-line in 

Figure 1-b) and plain Cu sides

d)
A potential mechanism explaining the migration of the chromium from the bottom 

to the top sides of the copper foil: The chromium film absorbs electromagnetic energy 

radiated by the hot stage at the elevated temperatures and partially melts the neighboring 
layers of the copper foil. The chromium film moves up through the molten copper; with 
an appropriate timing, the growth of graphene on the molten copper layers improves the 

crystalline quality of graphene.    


14

Conclusion 

We introduce a peculiar approach in chemical vapor deposition of graphene in which the migration of a

chromium film, initially deposited on one side of a copper foil to the other side causes the local melting of 

the foil and eventually boosts the quality of the graphene. A continuous graphene sheet now is grown in 

less than five minutes as a result of eliminating the surface activating the copper foil by thermal annealing. 

We investigate the mechanism driving the chromium species through the copper. Our report nominates 

electromagnetic absorption as a novel tool in the CVD toolbox to further improve the efficiency of the 

approach, being of great potential in scalable and cost-effective preparation of high-quality graphene. The 

findings in this report promote the science of interfacing metals.

Acknowledgements

The work leading to this work has gratefully received funding from the European Research Council under 

the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP/2007-2013)/ERC Grant Agreement No. 335879 

project acronym ‘Biographene’, and the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (Vidi 

723.013.007). 

References

[1]
X. Li et al., “Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene films on copper foils.,” 

Science, vol. 324, no. 5932, pp. 1312–1314, 2009.

[2]
C. Mattevi, H. Kim, and M. Chhowalla, “A review of chemical vapour deposition of graphene on 

copper,” J. Mater. Chem., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 3324–3334, Feb. 2011.

[3]
W. Choi, I. Lahiri, R. Seelaboyina, and Y. S. Kang, “Synthesis of Graphene and Its Applications: A 

Review,” Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 52–71, Feb. 2010.

[4]
Y. Hao et al., “The Role of Surface Oxygen in the Growth of Large Single-Crystal Graphene on 

Copper,” Science (80-. )., vol. 342, no. 6159, pp. 720–723, Nov. 2013.

[5]
G. H. Han et al., “Influence of Copper Morphology in Forming Nucleation Seeds for Graphene 


15

Growth,” Nano Lett., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 4144–4148, Oct. 2011.

[6]
Q. Yu et al., “Control and characterization of individual grains and grain boundaries in graphene 

grown by chemical vapour deposition,” Nat. Mater., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 443–449, Jun. 2011.

[7]
Z. Han et al., “Homogeneous optical and electronic properties of graphene due to the suppression 

of multilayer patches during CVD on copper foils,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 964–970, 

2014.

[8]
S. Bae et al., “Roll-to-roll production of 30-inch graphene films for transparent electrodes.,” Nat. 

Nanotechnol., vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 574–8, Aug. 2010.

[9]
J.-H. Lee et al., “Wafer-Scale Growth of Single-Crystal Monolayer Graphene on Reusable 

Hydrogen-Terminated Germanium,” Science (80-. )., no. April, pp. 1–6, 2014.

[10]
T. H. Bointon, M. D. Barnes, S. Russo, and M. F. Craciun, “High Quality Monolayer Graphene 

Synthesized by Resistive Heating Cold Wall Chemical Vapor Deposition,” Adv. Mater., vol. 27, no. 

28, pp. 4200–4206, 2015.

[11]
H. Arjmandi-Tash, N. Lebedev, P. van Deursen, J. Aarts, and G. F. Schneider, “Hybrid cold and 

hot-wall chamber for fast synthesis of uniform graphene,” Carbon N. Y., vol. 118, pp. 438–442, 

2017.

[12]
W. Yang et al., “Epitaxial growth of single-domain graphene on hexagonal boron nitride,” Nat. 

Mater., no. July, pp. 792–797, 2013.

[13]
S. Tang et al., “Silane-catalysed fast growth of large single-crystalline graphene on hexagonal boron 

nitride.,” Nat. Commun., vol. 6, p. 6499, 2015.

[14]
H. Arjmandi-Tash et al., “Large scale graphene/h-BN heterostructures obtained by direct CVD 

growth of graphene using high-yield proximity-catalytic process,” J. Phys. Mater., vol. 1, no. 1, p. 

015003, Sep. 2018.

[15]
H. Arjmandi-tash, “In situ growth of graphene on hexagonal boron nitride for electronic transport 

applications,” arXiv Prepr. arXiv 1701.06062, 2017.

[16]
Y. A. Wu et al., “Large Single Crystals of Graphene on Melted Copper Using Chemical Vapor 


16

Deposition,” ACS Nano, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 5010–5017, 2012.

[17]
D. Geng et al., “Uniform hexagonal graphene flakes and films grown on liquid copper surface,” 

Proceeding Natl. Acad. Sci. PNAS, vol. 109, no. 21, pp. 7992–7996, 2012.

[18]
H.-B. Li et al., “Graphene nucleation on a surface-molten copper catalyst: quantum chemical 

molecular dynamics simulations,” Chem. Sci., vol. 5, no. 9, pp. 3493–3500, Jul. 2014.

[19]
B. Dai et al., “Rational design of a binary metal alloy for chemical vapour deposition growth of 

uniform single-layer graphene,” Nat. Commun., vol. 2, no. May, p. 522, 2011.

[20]
T. Wu et al., “Fast growth of inch-sized single-crystalline graphene from a controlled single nucleus 

on Cu–Ni alloys,” Nat. ma, vol. 15, pp. 43–47, 2016.

[21]
X. Li et al., “Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene films on copper foils SOI,” 

Science, vol. 324, no. 5932, pp. 1312–4, Jun. 2009.

[22]
X. Li et al., “Large-Area Graphene Single Crystals Grown by Low-Pressure,” J. Am. Chem. Soc., 

vol. 133, no. 9, pp. 2816–9, 2011.

[23]
A. I. S. Neves et al., “Transparent conductive graphene textile fibers,” Sci. Rep., vol. 5, p. 9866, 

2015.

[24]
V. Miseikis et al., “Rapid CVD growth of millimetre-sized single crystal graphene using a cold-wall 

reactor,” 2D Mater., vol. 2, no. 1, p. 014006, 2015.

[25]
N. Mishra, V. Miseikis, D. Convertino, M. Gemmi, V. Piazza, and C. Coletti, “Rapid and catalyst-

free van der Waals epitaxy of graphene on hexagonal boron nitride,” Carbon N. Y., vol. 96, pp. 497–

502, 2016.

[26]
a C. Ferrari et al., “Raman Spectrum of Graphene and Graphene Layers,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 97, 

no. 18, p. 187401, Oct. 2006.

[27]
K. Zeng and M. Hämäläinen, “Thermodynamic analysis of stable and metastable equilibria in the 

Cu-Cr system,” Calphad, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 93–104, Mar. 1995.

[28]
D. Gupta, Ed., Diffusion Processes in Advanced Technological Materials.     Springer-Verlag Berlin 

Heidelberg, 2005.


17

[29]
R. M. German and R. M. German, Thermodynamic and Kinetic Treatments. Butterworth-

Heinemann, 2014.

[30]
I. Setién-Fernández, T. Echániz, L. González-Fernández, R. B. Pérez-Sáez, and M. J. Tello, 

“Spectral emissivity of copper and nickel in the mid-infrared range between 250 and 900 °C,” Int. 

J. Heat Mass Transf., vol. 71, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2014.

[31]
P. Johnson and R. Christy, “Optical constants of transition metals: Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and 

Pd,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 5056–5070, Jun. 1974.

[32]
Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, and C. Zhou, “Review of chemical vapor deposition of graphene and related 

applications,” Acc. Chem. Res., vol. 46, pp. 2329–2339, 2013.

[33]
P. Procházka et al., “Ultrasmooth metallic foils for growth of high quality graphene by chemical 

vapor deposition,” Nanotechnology, vol. 25, no. 18, p. 185601, May 2014.

[34]
A. J. Marsden, M. Phillips, and N. R. Wilson, “Friction force microscopy: a simple technique for 

identifying graphene on rough substrates and mapping the orientation of graphene grains on copper,” 

Nanotechnology, vol. 24, no. 25, p. 255704, Jun. 2013.

[35]
A. A. Pakhnevich, S. V. Golod, and V. Y. Prinz, “Surface melting of copper during graphene growth 

by chemical vapour deposition,” J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys., vol. 48, no. 43, 2015.

[36]
ASM International, Casting design and performance. ASM International, 2009.

[37]
Y. Fan, K. He, H. Tan, S. Speller, and J. H. Warner, “Crack-Free Growth and Transfer of Continuous 

Monolayer Graphene Grown on Melted Copper,” 2014.

[38]
Lambert M. Surhone, Miriam T. Timpledon, and Susan F. Marseken, Eds., Planck’s Law: Black 

Body, Radiance, Electromagnetic Radiation, Wavelength. Betascript Publishing, 2010.


