1

Unconventional charge-spin conversion 

in Weyl-semimetal WTe2

Bing Zhao1,2, Bogdan Karpiak2, Dmitrii Khokhriakov2,Annika Johansson3,4, Anamul Md. Hoque2, 

Xiaoguang Xu1, Yong Jiang1, Ingrid Mertig3,4, Saroj P. Dash2,5,*

1Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Materials Genome Engineering, School of Materials Science and Engineering, 

University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China

2Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296, Göteborg, Sweden

3Institute of Physics, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, 06099 Halle, Germany

4Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, Weinberg 2, 06120 Halle, Germany

5Graphene Center, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-41296 Göteborg, Sweden.

Abstract

An outstanding feature of topological quantum materials is their novel spin topology in the electronic 
band structures with an expected large charge-to-spin conversion efficiency. Here, we report a charge 
current-induced spin polarization in the type-II Weyl semimetal candidate WTe2 and efficient spin 
injection and detection in a graphene channel up to room temperature. Contrary to the conventional 
spin Hall and Rashba-Edelstein effects, our measurements indicate an unconventional charge-to-spin 
conversion in WTe2, which is primarily forbidden by the crystal symmetry of the system. Such a large 
spin polarization can be possible in WTe2 due to a reduced crystal symmetry combined with its large
spin Berry curvature, spin-orbit interaction with a novel spin-texture of the Fermi states. We 
demonstrate a robust and practical method for electrical creation and detection of such a spin 
polarization using both charge-to-spin conversion and its inverse phenomenon and utilized it for 
efficient spin injection and detection in a graphene channel up to room temperature. These findings 
open opportunities for utilizing topological Weyl materials as non-magnetic spin sources in all-
electrical van der Waals spintronic circuits and for low-power and high-performance non-volatile 
spintronic technologies.

Keywords: Weyl-semimetal, Type-II, WTe2, spin-momentum locking, Edelstein effect, Graphene, van 
der Waals heterostructures, current-induced spin polarization, unconventional charge-spin 
conversion.

Corresponding author: Saroj P. Dash, Email: saroj.dash@chalmers.se


2

Main

Topological quantum materials have attracted significant attention in condensed matter physics and 

spintronic technology because of their unique electronic bands with topologically protected spin 

textures[1]. After the realization of graphene, topological insulators (TIs), and semimetals with Dirac 

fermions, Weyl semimetals (WSMs) where the electrons behave as Weyl fermions have been 

discovered[2]. The WSMs constitute topologically secured Weyl nodes, which exist with opposite 

chirality in bulk with linear band dispersions in three-dimensional momentum space forming the Weyl 

cones[3]. The fascinating revelation in a WSM is the presence of nontrivial Fermi-arc surface states 

that connect the projections of Weyl nodes on the surface Brillouin zone. In a recent breakthrough, 

WSMs of type-I and -II are realized in TaAs and WTe2 family of materials with symmetric and tilted 

Weyl cones, respectively[4,5]. 

WTe2 hosts unique transport phenomena such as chiral anomaly[6,7], unconventional quantum 

oscillations[8], colossal magnetoresistance[9], spin-orbit torque[10,11], substantial spin Hall effect[12] and 

quantum spin Hall states in monolayers[13], which opens a new era for physics experiments. Most 

importantly, novel spin textures have been discovered in WSMs by photoemission experiments, 

showing spin polarization of Fermi pockets in bulk bands and Fermi arc surface states[14,15]. In such 

WSMs, the application of an electric field is expected to induce a macroscopic spin polarization, 

known as the Edelstein effect[16], that can be utilized to generate and detect spin currents efficiently. 

Moreover, in crystals with lower or broken symmetry compared to conventional metals[17], 

unconventional spin conductivity components can be existent[18]. Additionally, in the search for spin-

polarized current sources in topological quantum materials, various experiments have been reported 

on TIs[19]. However, a reliable nonlocal measurement for spin polarization in TIs and its utilization for 

spin injection into non-magnetic materials are so far limited to cryogenic temperatures (below 

20K)[20,21], because of the interference from nontrivial bulk bands[19]. Therefore, finding a highly 

efficient spin-polarized topological material at room temperature is indispensable for practical 

applications in spintronics and quantum technologies.   

Here, we report a highly efficient and unconventional charge-to-spin conversion (CSC) and its inverse 

phenomena (ICSC), in the type-II Weyl semimetal candidate WTe2 up to room temperature. 

Importantly, the detected spin polarization in WTe2 is found to be different from the conventional spin 

Hall effect (SHE) and 2D Rashba-Edelstein effect (REE)[12]. Furthermore, the detection of both the

unconventional CSC and ICSC prove the robustness of spin polarization in WTe2 obeying Onsager 

reciprocity relation and provides a new method for utilization of spin current in graphene for an all-

electrical van der Waals spintronic device at room temperature.


3

Figure 1. Unconventional charge-to-spin conversion in WTe2 and efficient spin injection into graphene 

at room temperature. a-c. Crystal structure of Td phase bulk WTe2 with a mirror plane Ma (blue dot-dash line) 

and a glide mirror plane 𝑀𝑏
̃ with the translation of (a+c)/2 in the unit cell. d. Schematic of measurement 

geometry and colored device picture (the scale bar is 5 µm) for electrical detection of unconventional charge-

spin conversion in WTe2. The investigated device structure consists of a flake of WTe2 (green) with a graphene 

channel (gray). The ferromagnetic tunnel contact (yellow) on graphene is used to detect the current-induced 

spin polarization of WTe2. The insets in the schematics show the spin polarization due to perpendicular current 

component Kz, the simplified type-II Weyl semimetal band structure, and the Dirac band diagram of graphene. 

The upper inset is the optical microscope image of the hybrid WTe2/graphene van der Waals heterostructure 

device with a ferromagnetic Co detector contact. The contacts (1234) are used as I12(34) and V34(12) for the (I)CSC 

measurements. e, f. The nonlocal spin-valve measurement (RCSC=VCSC/I, I is the bias current across WTe2-

graphene junction) and corresponding Hanle spin precession signal observed for parallel and anti-parallel 

orientation of the injected spin (s) from WTe2 and magnetization of ferromagnet (M) with positive and negative 

magnetic field B sweep directions at I = +50 μA and 300 K in Device 1. 


4

The measurements of unconventional charge-spin conversion phenomena have been possible by 

employing a hybrid device structure of WTe2 with graphene channel and ferromagnetic tunnel 

contacts (FM) in a reliable nonlocal (NL) device geometry. We fabricated van der Waals 

heterostructures of WTe2 with graphene taking advantage of its layered structure. The schematics 

and the nanofabricated device picture are shown in Fig. 1d, which consists of WTe2-graphene 

heterostructure with ferromagnetic tunnel contacts (Co/TiO2) (see Methods for details). The graphene 

(CVD monolayer[22] and exfoliated few layers) and the WTe2 (20-70 nm in thickness) are exfoliated 

from single crystals (from Hq Graphene). The Raman spectroscopy characterization shows the Td-

bulk phase of WTe2 at room temperature (see Supplementary Fig. S1a). The crystal structure of WTe2

has a  nonsymmorphic symmetry, with the space group Pmn21 for bulk WTe2 crystals with only one 

mirror plane Ma (bc plane), a glide mirror plane 𝑀̃𝑏 (ac plane with translation of (a+c)/2), and a screw 

axis || c (Fig.1a, 1b, 1c). Neither two-fold rotational invariance nor inversion symmetry is  present in 

this system[17]. In the measured devices, the heterostructures of WTe2 with graphene show good 

contact properties with interface resistance in the range of 1-3 kΩ (see Supplementary Fig. S1b), 

which is an order of magnitude higher than used for detection of conventional CSC in WTe2[12]. The 

standard spin injection and detection behavior of ferromagnetic tunnel contacts and spin transport 

properties of graphene was confirmed, as shown in Supplementary Fig. S2.

For the measurement of the unconventional charge-spin conversion effects, an electric current is 

applied vertically through the WTe2 flake, which generates and injects a spin current into the graphene 

channel (Fig. 1d). To be noted, here, we used a bias current across the WTe2-graphene junction,

which is different from the conventional CSC measurement configuration reported earlier[12] (see 

details in Supplementary Note 1). The injected spin polarization from WTe2 is detected by a 

ferromagnetic contact (FM) after transport in a graphene channel by a NL measurement method. 

Figure 1d shows the NL spin-valve resistance (RCSC=VCSC/I) for bias current of I = +50 μA with an in-

plane magnetic field (By) sweep at room temperature. The spin resistance RCSC changes upon 

reversing the magnetization M direction of the FM detector with respect to the directions of the injected 

spins (s) from the WTe2 (Fig. 1e). 

To prove that the origin of the signal is purely due to a spin current, the Hanle measurements were 

performed with a perpendicular magnetic field Bz sweep along the z-axis (Fig. 1f). The Hanle effect 

induces precession of the spins injected from WTe2 and transported in the graphene channel about 

the Bz field with Larmor frequency of ωL=𝑔𝜇𝐵𝐵𝑧 ħ
⁄ (where g is the Landé factor=2, and μB is the Bohr 

magneton) as the projection of the spin current onto the magnetization of the detector ferromagnet 

change. The spin injection signal from WTe2 into graphene is reproducibly observed in several devices 

(six devices were investigated) consisting of both monolayer and few-layer graphene channel with 

20−70 nm thick WTe2 flakes (Supplementary Fig. S3 and S4). From these devices, we extracted spin 

parameters (with spin diffusion length 0.8−2.4μm, spin lifetime in the range 100−400ps) by fitting the 


5

Hanle signals (see Supplementary Table 1). The observation of both the spin valve and Hanle signal 

provide the direct and unambiguous evidence of the creation of current-induced spin polarization in 

WTe2 and subsequent spin current injection and transport in the graphene channel at room 

temperature. 

In a WTe2-graphene hybrid device, the source of the spin polarization can have several origins, such 

as spin Hall effect (SHE) and Edelstein effect (EE) from the bulk WTe2, Rashba-Edelstein effect (REE) 

from the surface states[12], and proximity-induced SHE and REE in graphene[23–25]. Moreover, some 

of these effects can induce the in-plane spin polarization and can be entangled with each other[12]. To 

distinguish different sources of the spin polarization, and to identify the origin of the induced spin 

current in our WTe2 device, control experiments with geometrical dependence were performed. 

We first examine the bias current direction dependence of the unconventional CSC signal (Fig. 2a), 

where the direction of the generated spins s in WTe2 is found to be dependent on the polarity of the 

applied current bias. Reversing the bias current direction (Idc =+/-50 μA) in WTe2 results in an opposite 

spin polarization and hence an inverted hysteretic behavior of the measured spin-valve signal. These 

measurements show that the direction of spin polarization can be controlled by electrical means, and 

the spin density is observed to scale linearly with the applied bias current (see Supplementary Fig. 

S3). The observation of linear bias dependence and a sign reversal behavior with bias current 

directions rule out the thermal contributions in the measured signal[26,27] (see detail discussion in Note 

4). 


6

Figure 2. Geometrical dependence of the unconventional charge-spin conversion effect in WTe2. a.

Schematics of the measurement geometry (solid and dash arrows show the applied bias current directions) and 

the corresponding CSC signal with reversal of bias current polarity in Dev 1. The arrows show the switching 

direction of the signals. The inset shows the spin polarization due to an out-of-plane charge current component 

jc. b. Schematics of the measurement with bias current applied at both sides of the WTe2 flake and 

corresponding spin valve signals measured in Dev 2. This measurement creates a reversal of the component 

Kx of the bias current. c. Schematics of the measurement with bias current applied at both terminals of the WTe2
flake and the corresponding spin valve signals measured in Dev 3. This measurement creates a reversal of the 

component Ky of the bias current. A shift in Y-axis is added for the sake of clarity.

The charge current (I) applied in WTe2 can have three components, i.e., Kx, Ky, and Kz, that can 

possibly induce the spin polarization (see schematics in Supplementary Fig. S5). We performed 

control experiments by reversing the bias current polarity along different directions to check the 

polarity of unconventional CSC signals. As shown in Fig. 2b, the switching directions of 

unconventional CSC signal (RCSC) remain the same with the reversal of bias currents along both sides 

of the WTe2 flake, i.e., the Kxand -Kx directions. Therefore, the bias current component in Kx direction 

is not the source for the current-induced spin polarization. Consequently, we can rule out the origins 

of spin polarizations entangled to Kx-direction, like SHE and REE effect in WTe2[12]; and also proximity-

induced SHE and REE in graphene[24,28–31]. Secondly, when the bias current was applied either to one 

or the opposite terminal (Ky and -Ky directions) of WTe2 (Fig. 2c), the Rcsc signal switching directions 

remain the same. This rules out the contribution to the spin polarization from the current component 


7

in Ky direction. Both the control experiments in Kx and Ky directions were reproduced in other batches 

of devices (see Supplementary Fig. S6 and Fig. S7). To be noted, the switching direction of the spin-

switch signal is observed to be different for different devices (Dev 2 and 3 in Fig. 2b and 2c). This 

can be due to the uncertainty in different crystal orientations (±a, ±b axis) of the exfoliated WTe2 flakes 

relative to the detector FM. 

All these control experiments indicate that the current component in Kz direction in WTe2 is the primary 

source for the generation of spin polarization in the measurement geometry of WTe2-graphene 

devices. Therefore, the origin of the spin signal can be attributed to the out-of-plane current-induced 

spin momentum locking of the spin-polarized Fermi states at room temperature[14,15]. Moreover, the 

out-of-plane current component along Kz can have two contributions: one (Kz,B) through the bulk 

states; and the other (Kz,S) via the surface states (see Supplementary Fig. 5c). From the recent 

ARPES measurement on WTe2[32], it is clear that the surface states barely disperse with kz over an 

entire Brillouin zone and can thus be considered fully two-dimensional (2D) in the kx-kz plane, i.e. the 

Fermi lines are straight lines at the edge of the bulk electron and hole pockets. Therefore, the current 

in Kz direction is not accompanied by any significant transport originating from the surface states: 

nearly no surface states would contribute to the observed unconventional CSC signal (see details in 

Supplementary Note 5). Moreover, according to our control experiments (Fig. 2), we know that it is 

the current along z-axis that induces the spin polarization s, which are parallel to FM magnetic 

moments M，i. e. s//M//y. We also know that the spin current js is along the z-axis in our measurement 

geometry, i.e., js//z//Kz, which is also the direction of the charge current. However, in the conventional 

SHE measurements, charge current, spin current, and spin polarization should be mutually 

perpendicular,  following the right-hand rule, i.e., js⊥Kz⊥s[12,33]. Therefore, the measured data in the 

present experimental configuration do not follow the conventional SHE rules (see Supplementary 

Note 1). Further, the unconventional CSC signal in this geometry can also neither originate from an 

unconventional spin conductivity nor the Edelstein effect of the spin-polarized Fermi states for 

symmetry reasons, as long as the symmetry operations of the space group Pmn21, in particular mirror 

and glide mirror symmetries, are present (see Supplementary Note 5). However, if the symmetry of 

WTe2 is reduced, e.g., by strain[34–36], magnetic field[37,38] or the interfaces [39] between WTe2 and 

graphene, both unconventional spin Hall effect and Edelstein effect can give rise to the observed spin 

polarization (see details in Supplementary material Note 5). However, our observation suggests that 

a magnetic field is less likely to be the origin of the unconventional CSC signal (see details in 

Supplementary material Note 3). Strain can arise in the WTe2 flakes due to fabrication of contacts 

and interfaces with different materials in the device, breaking both mirror Ma and glide mirror 𝑀̃𝑏
symmetry. Furthermore, the interface between WTe2 and graphene can as well break glide mirror and 

screw symmetries locally. This symmetry breaking leads to the occurrence of a y-polarized spin 

current and (or) a homogeneous spin density in y direction, leading to a spin current js || Kz (here we 

name it 𝒋𝒔

y). Thus, although the symmetries of space group Pmn21 prohibit the generation of a spin 


8

current 𝒋𝒔

y by the spin Hall and Edelstein effects, breaking the crystal symmetries by strain or the 

occurring interface allows the emergence of the observed spin current.

To further confirm the orientation of spin polarization from WTe2, we also performed angle-dependent 

measurements of the unconventional CSC signals both with in-plane and out-of-plane B field sweeps 

in Dev 4 (see Supplementary Fig. S8). The measured unconventional CSC signal is observed to 

evolve from a step-like spin valve signal to a Hanle signal with changing the angle from 0 to 90 deg. 

Considering the direction of the spin current js, the spin polarization s, and bias current Kz, the 

contribution of the conventional CSC from WTe2 can also be ruled out. These systematic 

measurements again support the observation of the unconventional CSC in bulk WTe2. The 

unconventional CSC measurements in WTe2 using both the spin valve and Hanle geometry were also 

performed as a function of gate voltage (Vg) in Dev 4 (see Supplementary Fig. S9), where an 

enhancement of the unconventional CSC signal magnitude is observed close to the Dirac point of 

graphene. As the metallic WTe2 channel resistance does not show any noticeable modulation with Vg

(Supplementary Fig. S10), the increase of unconventional CSC signal can be attributed to the 

increase in the graphene channel resistance in the heterostructure and conductivity matching issues 

at the interface (Supplementary Fig. S9c). However, in the conventional spin valve signals with both 

FM injector and detector contacts on graphene, a small modulation of spin signal magnitude is 

observed (Supplementary Fig. S10)[40]. This increasing trend of CSC signal with Vg suggests a 

possible enhancement of the spin injection efficiency from WTe2 to graphene near the graphene Dirac 

point.

In comparison to the symmetric Hanle curves in other devices, Device 2 shows an in-plane 
asymmetric characteristic in the Hanle spin precession signal (Fig. 3a). By decomposing the 
measured raw data mathematically, we obtained the symmetric and the anti-symmetric spin 
components, i.e., the spins along FM and the spins perpendicular to FM, respectively. Specifically, 
the magnitude of the symmetric (R1) and the anti-symmetric (R2) components are extracted by fitting 
the Hanle curves. Thus, the out-of-plane charge current generates a net spin polarization and/or a 
spin current, which is polarized with an angle of 76.4° (=arctan(R1/R2)) with respect to the FM. Such 
an asymmetric Hanle curve can be caused by the coexistence of spin polarization components 
parallel and perpendicular to the ferromagnet[41]. This can be explained by considering the 
simultaneously broken mirror symmetry Ma and glide symmetry M̃ b (see the symmetry analysis in 
Supplementary Note 5). We cannot distinguish the orientation of the samples in the present case, 
however, considering the randomly distributed a(b)-axis in the exfoliated WTe2 flakes relative to the 
crystal boundary and presence of strain as well as the glide-symmetry (M̃ b) -breaking interface in the 
devices, such an unconventional and asymmetric signal due to charge-to-spin convention is observed.


9

Figure 3. Observation of the in-plane asymmetric Hanle signal and temperature dependence of the 

unconventional charge-spin conversion in WTe2. a. The measured asymmetric Hanle raw data (bottom 
panel) of the unconventional CSC signal in Device 2. The symmetric (top panel) and anti-symmetric (middle 

panel) components of the Hanle signal and the corresponding fittings. The inset shows the measurement 

geometry with charge current-induced spin polarization s in WTe2 can be with an angle relative to the detector 

FM. b. Temperature dependence spin-switch signal of the unconventional CSC effect in WTe2 for Device 2 
(RCSC=VCSC/I, with I=-50μA in the range of 10-300 K. c. Top panel: Temperature dependence of the WTe2-

graphene interface resistance. Bottom panel: Temperature dependence of the CSC signal magnitude. The error 

bars are estimated from the noise in the measured CSC signal.   

Next, the temperature-dependent measurements of the unconventional CSC in WTe2 were carried 

out to correlate the basic characteristics of the Weyl materials and their spin polarization. The WTe2

has been experimentally verified to be a type-II Weyl semimetal by observing the negative

magnetoresistance[8,42] and the anomalous-quantum oscillation[8] at low temperatures. However, the 

verification of WTe2 to be a type-II Weyl semimetal at room temperature is still under debate[32,43,44], 

because the momentum difference for Weyl points (WPs) is beyond the resolution of ARPES 

measurement[32,45],[7]. Hence, it is intriguing to check the temperature dependence of the signal and 

its relationship with the possible Weyl phase transition at a lower temperature[8,42]. Figure 3a shows 

the temperature dependence of the unconventional CSC signals from WTe2, measured in Dev 2 in 

the temperature range of 10 – 300 K at a fixed bias current I =-50μA. The switching direction of the 

measured unconventional CSC signal in WTe2 remains the same throughout the temperature range,

indicating that the origin of the spin polarization remains the same. The apparent slightly larger 

switching field observed for the signal at lower temperatures is due to an increase in the coercive field 

of the FM detector contact. The modulation of the magnitude of the unconventional CSC signal of 

WTe2 is plotted with temperature in Fig. 3b (lower panel), where two different regimes were observed. 

The signal magnitude is weakly temperature-dependent in the range 175 – 300K, whereas a notable 


10

decrease is observed below 175K. As spin transport parameters in graphene are known to weakly 

dependent on temperature[46], we identified that the decrease in unconventional CSC magnitude could 

be due to the increase in WTe2-graphene contact resistance at lower temperatures (Fig. 3b upper 

panel). The increase in WTe2-graphene contact resistance could cause a decrease in spin injection 

efficiency form WTe2 into graphene, while the other parameters were very stable with temperature 

(see Supplementary Fig. S11). The increased noise level in the unconventional CSC signal at the 

lower temperature can also be due to the larger WTe2-graphene contact resistances. All these 

measurements suggest that the observed unconventional CSC effect is robust from 10K to room 

temperature, and the spin-polarized bulk Fermi states in WTe2 should be present through all the 

measured temperature range. 

Figure 4: Inverse charge-spin conversion in WTe2 at room temperature. a. Schematics of the inverse 

charge-spin conversion (ICSC) measurement configuration with spin current injected into the WTe2 from the 

FM/graphene structure. b, c. Measured data of both spin valve and corresponding z Hanle signal with the 

fitting curve for both CSC and ICSC in Device 1 with an application of I=-70µA at room temperature. The Hanle 

signal of the (I)CSC is defined by R(I)CSC= (V(I)CSC(P)-V(I)CSC (AP))/(2*I).

To check the reciprocity[47] of the unconventional charge-spin conversion effect in WTe2, the inverse 

charge-spin conversion (ICSC)[48,49] measurements were also performed at room temperature (see 

Fig. 4a). Here, the spin current is injected from an FM tunnel contact into a graphene channel and 

subsequently detected by the WTe2 due to the ICSC effect in a NL measurement geometry. The spin 

current with spin polarization s along the y-axis is absorbed into the WTe2, resulting in a net charge 

current in the Kz direction due to the inverse charge-spin conversion. By reversing the FM magnetic 


11

moments by an external in-plane magnetic field sweep, the opposite spins -s are injected into the 

graphene channel and subsequently absorbed by the WTe2, which induces a charge current -Kz. An 

apparent hysteric switching behavior of the measured voltage signal is observed with By magnetic 

field sweep, with the switching fields corresponding to the magnetization switching of the spin injector 

FM electrode (Fig. 4b). Importantly, both the ICSC and CSC signals measured in the same device 

show a good Onsager reciprocity with comparable signal magnitude and opposite switching directions, 

i.e., RCSC(B)=RICSC(-B) (Fig. 4b). The ICSC effect is reproducibly observed in different devices and the 

magnitude of the signal is also found to scale linearly with spin injection bias current and changes 

sign with the bias polarity (see Supplementary Fig. S12 for data on Dev 2). As a confirmatory test for 

the observed ICSC effect, corresponding Hanle spin precession measurements were also performed 

with application of an out-of-plane magnetic field Bz in the same NL measurement geometry. Figure 

4c shows the measured modulation of signal RICSC=VICSC/I as detected by ICSC in WTe2 due to spin 

diffusion and precession in the graphene channel. 

We estimate the unconventional CSC efficiency αCSC (=js/jc) in WTe2 to be up to 9% at room 

temperature by fitting the Hanle curves of (I)CSC signals (see details in Supplementary Note 2). The 

calculated lower limit of Edelstein length is λEE= αCSCλWTe2≈ 0.72nm (considering spin diffusion length 

of WTe2 λWTe2=8nm[12]). The observed large charge-spin conversion efficiency in WTe2 is believed to 

be due to the spin polarization of Fermi states, broken space inversion symmetry, and a significant 

influence of SOI in WTe2 as known from the band structure calculations and spin-resolved ARPES 

results[15]. Interestingly, our measurements show that the charge-spin conversion is not restricted to

the 2D surface but originates in the bulk Weyl semimetal WTe2. From our control experiments, we 

could rule out the origins of the observed spin polarization related to conventional SHE and REE in 

WTe2[12]; and also proximity induced SHE and REE in graphene[24,28–31]. These observations of the 

unconventional CSC are fundamentally different from the conventional REE, which is an interface 

phenomenon where the spins and current density are confined in the 2D plane[49,50] as measured in 

the heterostructures of metals[49]
and oxides[51], topological insulator[52,53],
Transition metal 

dichalcogenides (TMDCs)[54] and in graphene heterostructures with MoS2[28], WS2[29,31], TaS2[25],

MoTe2[24] and (Bi0.15Sb0.85)2Te3[55]. This unconventional charge-spin conversion phenomenon in WTe2, 

however, is shown to be useful for injection and detection of spin polarization in graphene at room 

temperature, avoiding problems existing in topological insulators[20,21], and open ways for spintronic 

devices without the use of traditional ferromagnets. The WTe2 based van der Waals heterostructure 

devices also provide the advantage that their operating temperature is not restricted by a Curie 

temperature (Tc), such as recently discovered 2D ferromagnets have Tc much below the room 

temperature [56]. Other advantages are that the direction of spin polarization in WTe2 can be controlled 

by using an electric bias current, instead of using an external magnetic field in case of FMs to switch 

the magnetic moments. From the application point of view, spin-orbit torque (SOT) studies[10,11] show 

that WTe2 can be more efficient and energy-saving in SOT technologies compared to traditional heavy 

metals.


12

In summary, we demonstrated the electrical creation, detection, and control of the unconventional 

charge-spin conversion and its inverse phenomenon in type-II Weyl semimetal candidate WTe2 up 

to room temperature. Contrary to conventional bulk spin Hall effect and surface states dominated 

Rashba-Edelstein effect, the charge-spin conversion is shown here to be created in WTe2 due to 

unconventional spin Hall effect or (and) Edelstein effect. The unconventional spin conductivities in 

WTe2 are allowed by considering strain as well as the WTe2/graphene interface to break the crystal 

symmetry. The spin polarization created in WTe2 is shown to be utilized for spin injection and detection 

in a graphene channel in an all-electrical van der Waals heterostructure spintronic device at room 

temperature, which circumvents the problem existing in topological insulators for spin injection into 

graphene below 20K[20,21]. Such unique spin-polarized electronic states in Weyl semimetal candidates 

with novel spin topologies can be further tuned by tailoring their electronic band structure through 

enhancing their spin-orbit interaction strength, increasing the separation between the Weyl nodes 

through Berry curvature design, and controlling strain to break the crystal symmetry. These findings 

in Weyl semimetal WTe2 for efficiently transforming the electric current into a spin polarization at 

room temperature is highly desirable for energy-efficient spintronic memory and information 

processing technologies[57]. 

Note
After submission of our manuscript, we noticed two very recent papers on the multidirectional and 
unconventional charge-spin conversion in MoTe2 [36,39]. Our results on Weyl semimetal candidate WTe2
show an efficient and unconventional charge-spin conversion, which is different from conventional SHE 
and REE and demonstrates a practical approach for efficient generation and injection of spin polarization 
into graphene channel up to room temperature. 

Methods

The devices with monolayer CVD graphene on Si/SiO2 substrate (from Groltex) were patterned by electron 

beam lithography (EBL) followed by an O2 plasma etching. The WTe2 (from Hq Graphene) flakes were exfoliated 

and dry transferred on to the CVD graphene in the N2 atmosphere inside a glovebox. The few layers graphene 

devices were mechanically transferred onto the n-doped Si substrate with 300 nm SiO2. The WTe2 flakes were 

exfoliated and dry transferred on to the few-layer graphene in by a transfer stage in a class 100 cleanroom 

environment. For the preparation of ferromagnetic tunnel contacts to graphene, a two-step deposition and 

oxidation process was adopted, 0.4nm Ti was deposited, followed by a 30 Torr O2 oxidation for 10 mins each, 

followed by 100 nm Co deposition. Measurements were performed inside a vacuum cryostat and a PPMS 

measurement system in the temperature range of 10-300K with a magnetic field and a sample rotation stage. 

The electronic measurements were carried out using current source Keithley 6221, nanometer 2182A, and dual-

channel source meter Keithley 2612B.  

Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors on reasonable 
request.


13

Acknowledgments

The authors at Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden acknowledge financial supports from EU Graphene 

Flagship (Core 1 No. 604391, Core 2 No. 785219, and Core 3 No. 881603), Swedish Research Council VR 

project grants (No. 2016-03658), EU FlagEra project (from Swedish Research council VR No. 2015-06813), 

Graphene center and the AoA Nano program at Chalmers University of Technology. The authors from the 

University of Science and Technology, Beijing, China, acknowledge financial supports from the National Basic 

Research Program of China (Grant No. 2015CB921502) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(Grant Nos. 51731003, 51471029). Bing Zhao would like to thank the financial support from the program of 

China Scholarships Council (File No. 201706460036) for his two years of research at Chalmers. The authors 

from Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg acknowledge support by CRC/TRR 227 of Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). The authors would like to thank Binghai Yan, Marcos Guimaraes, C. K. Safeer 

and Felix Casanova for useful discussions.

Author information

Contributions
SPD and BZ conceived the idea and designed the experiments. BZ, BK, DK, AMH, SPD fabricated and 

measured the devices at the Chalmers University of Technology. BZ and SPD analyzed, interpreted the 

experimental data, compiled the figures, and wrote the manuscript. AJ and IM performed theoretical calculations. 

BK, DK, AMH, XX, YJ discussed the results and provided feedback on the manuscript. SPD supervised the 

research.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Corresponding authors: 
Saroj P. Dash, Email: saroj.dash@chalmers.se

References

[1]
Y. Tokura, M. Kawasaki, N. Nagaosa, Nat Phys 2017, 13, 1056.

[2]
S.-Y. Xu, I. Belopolski, N. Alidoust, M. Neupane, G. Bian, C. Zhang, R. Sankar, G. Chang, Z. Yuan, C.-C. Lee, S.-

M. Huang, H. Zheng, J. Ma, D. S. Sanchez, B. Wang, A. Bansil, F. Chou, P. P. Shibayev, H. Lin, S. Jia, M. Z. 

Hasan, Science (80- ) 2015, 349, 613.

[3]
N. P. Armitage, E. J. Mele, A. Vishwanath, Rev Mod Phys 2018, 90, 15001.

[4]
H. Zheng, M. Zahid Hasan, Adv Phys X 2018, 3, 1466661.

[5]
B. Yan, C. Felser, Annu Rev Condens Matter Phys 2017, 8, 337.

[6]
H. B. Nielsen, M. Ninomiya, Phys Lett B 1983, 130, 389.

[7]
A. A. Soluyanov, D. Gresch, Z. Wang, Q. Wu, M. Troyer, X. Dai, B. A. Bernevig, Nature 2015, 527, 495.

[8]
P. Li, Y. Wen, X. He, Q. Zhang, C. Xia, Z.-M. Yu, S. A. Yang, Z. Zhu, H. N. Alshareef, X.-X. Zhang, Nat Commun

2017, 8, 2150.

[9]
M. N. Ali, J. Xiong, S. Flynn, J. Tao, Q. D. Gibson, L. M. Schoop, T. Liang, N. Haldolaarachchige, M. Hirschberger, 

N. P. Ong, R. J. Cava, Nature 2014, 514, 205.

[10]
D. MacNeill, G. M. Stiehl, M. H. D. Guimaraes, R. A. Buhrman, J. Park, D. C. Ralph, Nat Phys 2017, 13, 300.

[11]
S. Shi, S. Liang, Z. Zhu, K. Cai, S. D. Pollard, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Q. Wang, P. He, J. Yu, G. Eda, G. Liang, H. 

Yang, Nat Nanotechnol 2019, 14, 945.


14

[12]
B. Zhao, D. Khokhriakov, Y. Zhang, H. Fu, B. Karpiak, A. M. Hoque, X. Xu, Y. Jiang, B. Yan, S. P. Dash, Phys 

Rev Res 2020, 2, 013286.

[13]
S. Tang, C. Zhang, Di. Wong, Z. Pedramrazi, H.-Z. Tsai, C. Jia, B. Moritz, M. Claassen, H. Ryu, S. Kahn, J. Jiang, 

H. Yan, M. Hashimoto, D. Lu, R. G. Moore, C.-C. Hwang, C. Hwang, Z. Hussain, Y. Chen, M. M. Ugeda, Z. Liu, X. 

Xie, T. P. Devereaux, M. F. Crommie, S.-K. Mo, Z.-X. Shen, Nat Phys 2017, 13, 683.

[14]
B. Feng, Y.-H. Chan, Y. Feng, R.-Y. Liu, M.-Y. Chou, K. Kuroda, K. Yaji, A. Harasawa, P. Moras, A. Barinov, W. 

Malaeb, C. Bareille, T. Kondo, S. Shin, F. Komori, T.-C. Chiang, Y. Shi, I. Matsuda, Phys Rev B 2016, 94, 195134.

[15]
P. K. Das, D. Di Sante, I. Vobornik, J. Fujii, T. Okuda, E. Bruyer, A. Gyenis, B. E. Feldman, J. Tao, R. Ciancio, G. 

Rossi, M. N. Ali, S. Picozzi, A. Yadzani, G. Panaccione, R. J. Cava, Nat Commun 2016, 7, 10847.

[16]
A. Johansson, J. Henk, I. Mertig, Phys Rev B 2018, 97, 085417.

[17]
B. E. Brown, Acta Crystallogr 1966, 20, 268.

[18]
D. Culcer, R. Winkler, Phys Rev Lett 2007, 99, 226601.

[19]
M. Z. Hasan, C. L. Kane, Rev Mod Phys 2010, 82, 3045.

[20]
K. Vaklinova, A. Hoyer, M. Burghard, K. Kern, Nano Lett 2016, 16, 2595.

[21]
J. A. Voerman, C. Li, Y. Huang, A. Brinkman, Adv Electron Mater 2019, 5, 1900334.

[22]
D. Khokhriakov, B. Karpiak, A. M. Hoque, S. P. Dash, Carbon N Y 2020, 161, 892.

[23]
T. S. Ghiasi, A. A. Kaverzin, P. J. Blah, B. J. van Wees, Nano Lett 2019, 19, 5959.

[24]
A. M. Hoque, D. Khokhriakov, B. Karpiak, S. P. Dash, 2019, DOI preprint arXiv:1908.09367v2.

[25]
L. Li, J. Zhang, G. Myeong, W. Shin, H. Lim, B. Kim, S. Kim, T. Jin, S. Cavill, B. S. Kim, C. Kim, J. Lischner, A. 

Ferreira, S. Cho, ACS Nano 2020, acsnano.0c01037.

[26]
A. Slachter, F. L. Bakker, J.-P. Adam, B. J. van Wees, Nat Phys 2010, 6, 879.

[27]
J. F. Sierra, I. Neumann, J. Cuppens, B. Raes, M. V. Costache, S. O. Valenzuela, Nat Nanotechnol 2018, 13, 107.

[28]
C. K. Safeer, J. Ingla-Aynés, F. Herling, J. H. Garcia, M. Vila, N. Ontoso, M. R. Calvo, S. Roche, L. E. Hueso, F. 

Casanova, Nano Lett 2019, 19, 1074.

[29]
T. S. Ghiasi, A. A. Kaverzin, P. J. Blah, B. J. van Wees, Nano Lett 2019, 19, 5959.

[30]
L. Li, J. Zhang, G. Myeong, W. Shin, H. Lim, B. Kim, S. Kim, T. Jin, B. Kim, C. Kim, J. Lischner, A. Ferreira, S. 

Cho, 2019, DOI preprint arXiv:1906.10702.

[31]
L. A. Benítez, W. Savero Torres, J. F. Sierra, M. Timmermans, J. H. Garcia, S. Roche, M. V. Costache, S. O. 

Valenzuela, Nat Mater 2020, 19, 170.

[32]
F. Y. Bruno, A. Tamai, Q. S. Wu, I. Cucchi, C. Barreteau, A. de la Torre, S. M. Walker, S. Riccò, Z. Wang, T. K. 

Kim, M. Hoesch, M. Shi, N. C. Plumb, E. Giannini, A. A. Soluyanov, F. Baumberger, Phys Rev B 2016, 94, 

121112.

[33]
J. Sinova, S. O. Valenzuela, J. Wunderlich, C. H. Back, T. Jungwirth, Rev Mod Phys 2015, 87, 1213.

[34]
M. H. D. Guimarães, G. M. Stiehl, D. MacNeill, N. D. Reynolds, D. C. Ralph, Nano Lett 2018, 18, 1311.

[35]
J. Lee, Z. Wang, H. Xie, K. F. Mak, J. Shan, Nat Mater 2017, 16, 887.

[36]
C. K. Safeer, N. Ontoso, J. Ingla-Aynés, F. Herling, V. T. Pham, A. Kurzmann, K. Ensslin, A. Chuvilin, I. Robredo, 

M. G. Vergniory, F. de Juan, L. E. Hueso, M. R. Calvo, F. Casanova, Nano Lett 2019, 19, 8758.

[37]
Y. Chen, Y.-M. Lu, H.-Y. Kee, Nat Commun 2015, 6, 6593.

[38]
Y. Chen, H.-S. Kim, H.-Y. Kee, Phys Rev B 2016, 93, 155140.

[39]
P. Song, C.-H. Hsu, G. Vignale, M. Zhao, J. Liu, Y. Deng, W. Fu, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Lin, V. M. Pereira, K. P. Loh, 

Nat Mater 2020, 19, 292.

[40]
W. Han, K. Pi, K. M. Mccreary, Y. Li, J. J. I. Wong, A. G. Swartz, R. K. Kawakami, Phys Rev Lett 2010, 105, 

167202.

[41]
B. Zhao, D. Khokhriakov, B. Karpiak, A. M. Hoque, L. Xu, L. Shen, Y. P. Feng, X. Xu, Y. Jiang, S. P. Dash, 2D 


15

Mater 2019, 6, 035042.

[42]
Y. Wang, E. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Pan, L. Zhang, J. Zeng, Y. Fu, M. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Z. Lu, D. Xing, 

B. Wang, X. Wan, F. Miao, Nat Commun 2016, 7, 1.

[43]
W. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Zhang, S.-W. Cheong, A. A. Soluyanov, W. Wu, Phys Rev B 2017, 96, 165125.

[44]
P. Rüßmann, A. P. Weber, F. Glott, N. Xu, M. Fanciulli, S. Muff, A. Magrez, P. Bugnon, H. Berger, M. Bode, J. H. 

Dil, S. Blügel, P. Mavropoulos, P. Sessi, Phys Rev B 2018, 97, 075106.

[45]
C. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Huang, S. Nie, G. Liu, A. Liang, Y. Zhang, B. Shen, J. Liu, C. Hu, Y. Ding, D. Liu, Y. Hu, S. 

He, L. Zhao, L. Yu, J. Hu, J. Wei, Z. Mao, Y. Shi, X. Jia, F. Zhang, S. Zhang, F. Yang, Z. Wang, Q. Peng, H. 

Weng, X. Dai, Z. Fang, Z. Xu, C. Chen, X. J. Zhou, Phys Rev B 2016, 94, 241119.

[46]
M. V. Kamalakar, C. Groenveld, A. Dankert, S. P. Dash, Nat Commun 2015, 6, 6766.

[47]
L. Onsager, Phys Rev 1931, 37, 405.

[48]
K. Shen, G. Vignale, R. Raimondi, Phys Rev Lett 2014, 112, 096601.

[49]
J. C. R. Sánchez, L. Vila, G. Desfonds, S. Gambarelli, J. P. Attané, J. M. De Teresa, C. Magén, A. Fert, Nat 

Commun 2013, 4, 2944.

[50]
V. M. Edelstein, Solid State Commun 1990, 73, 233.

[51]
Q. Song, H. Zhang, T. Su, W. Yuan, Y. Chen, W. Xing, J. Shi, J. Sun, W. Han, Sci Adv 2017, 3, 1.

[52]
H. Wang, J. Kally, J. S. Lee, T. Liu, H. Chang, D. R. Hickey, K. A. Mkhoyan, M. Wu, A. Richardella, N. Samarth, 

Phys Rev Lett 2016, 117, 076601.

[53]
J.-C. Rojas-Sánchez, S. Oyarzún, Y. Fu, A. Marty, C. Vergnaud, S. Gambarelli, L. Vila, M. Jamet, Y. Ohtsubo, A. 

Taleb-Ibrahimi, P. Le Fèvre, F. Bertran, N. Reyren, J.-M. George, A. Fert, Phys Rev Lett 2016, 116, 096602.

[54]
Q. Shao, G. Yu, Y.-W. Lan, Y. Shi, M.-Y. Li, C. Zheng, X. Zhu, L.-J. Li, P. K. Amiri, K. L. Wang, Nano Lett 2016, 

16, 7514.

[55]
D. Khokhriakov, A. M. Hoque, B. Karpiak, S. P. Dash, 2019, DOI preprint arXiv:1910.06760.

[56]
M. Gibertini, M. Koperski, A. F. Morpurgo, K. S. Novoselov, Nat Nanotechnol 2019, 14, 408.

[57]
S. Manipatruni, D. E. Nikonov, C.-C. Lin, T. A. Gosavi, H. Liu, B. Prasad, Y.-L. Huang, E. Bonturim, R. Ramesh, I. 

A. Young, Nature 2019, 565, 35.


