1

Techno-economic analysis of solar PV power-to-

heat-to-power storage and trigeneration in the 

residential sector

A. Datas1,2, A. Ramos1,2, and C. del Cañizo1

1Instituto de Energía Solar, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

2Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Jordi Girona 1-3, Barcelona 08034, Spain.

Keywords: PHPS, CCHP, TES, trigeneration, cogeneration, energy storage, heat, thermal, 
photovoltaics, solar, self-consumption, thermophotovoltaics, Stirling, ultra-high temperature.

Abstract

This article assesses whether it is profitable to store solar PV electricity in the form of heat and 

convert it back to electricity on demand. The impact of a number of technical and economic 

parameters on the profitability of a self-consumption residential system located in Madrid is 

assessed. The proposed solution comprises two kinds of heat stores: a low- or medium-grade 

heat store for domestic hot water and space heating, and a high-grade heat store for combined 

heat and power generation. Two cases are considered where the energy that is wasted during the 

conversion of heat into electricity is employed to satisfy either the heating demand, or both 

heating and cooling demands by using a thermally-driven heat pump. We compare these 

solutions against a reference case that relies on the consumption of grid electricity and natural 

gas and uses an electrically-driven heat pump for cooling. The results show that, under 

relatively favourable conditions, the proposed solution that uses an electrically-driven heat 

pump could provide electricity savings in the range of 70 – 90% with a payback period of 12 –

15 years, plus an additional 10 – 20% reduction in the fuel consumption. Shorter payback 

periods, lower than 10 years, could be attained by using a highly efficient thermally driven heat 

pump, at the expense of increasing the fuel consumption and the greenhouse gas emissions.

Hybridising this solution with solar thermal heating could enable significant savings on the 

global emissions, whilst keeping a high amount of savings in grid electricity (> 70 %) and a 

reasonably short payback period (< 12 years).


2

1.
Introduction

The energy consumption in buildings represents around 40% of the world energy consumption

and one-third of global CO2 emissions [1]. Thus, during the last decade a number of 

technological solutions have been proposed targeting the improvement of the energy efficiency 

and the reduction of the CO2 emissions associated to energy consumption in the building sector.

Among them, the so-called combined cooling, heating and power (CCHP), or trigeneration 

systems [2]–[6] are of especial interest, as they are intended to reduce the emissions associated 

to the three main kinds of energy demands in a building: electricity, heating and cooling. A 

typical CCHP system comprises a power generation unit (PGU), e.g. a microturbine, and a 

thermally-driven heat pump (THP) [7], e.g. an absorption chiller. The PGU is typically powered 

by natural gas and produces electricity and heat as by-product. This heat can be directly used for 

heating in winter or transferred to a THP for cooling in summer. Compared with the solution 

based on large centralized power plants and local air-conditioning systems, distributed CCHP 

provides a significant improvement of fuel utilization, in the range of 70 to 90% with respect to 

30 – 45% of centralized power plants [2]. Further reduction of the emissions is possible by fully 

or partially replacing natural gas by solar thermal heating [8]. Most of the studies consider 

organic Rankine cycles (ORC) [9], [10] in this case, as they enable operation temperatures 

below 220 ºC, meeting the requirements of non-concentrating solar collectors that could be used 

in residential and commercial environments. However, the low exergy content of such a low-

grade heat results in very low PGU conversion efficiencies, typically below 10 – 15% [9], [11], 

[12], which precludes the achievement of a clear economic advantage.

In the last decade, the dramatic cost reductions of solar PV technology have triggered the 

interest on self-consumption of PV electricity in both commercial and residential buildings [13].

With an average growth rate of 51% [14], new solar PV power additions in 2017 accounted up 

to 98 GW, out-stripping the 70 GW of net fossil fuel generating capacity added the same year.

Small-scale solar PV systems in distributed applications, mostly building integration, accounts 

for a significant share of these new PV additions (~ 38% [15]). Only in China, distributed 

capacity additions in 2017 summed up to 19.4 GW, and new rooftop systems saw a three-fold 

increase relative to 2016 [16]. Solar PV installations are simple, reliable, and do not require 

high maintenance. Thus, they are very appealing to produce electricity in small distributed 

applications. In the residential context, many solutions have been proposed to integrate solar PV 

systems with CCHP systems, including the hybridization of solar PV with gas-powered CCHP 

[17]–[20], the use of hybrid PV/thermal (PVT) solar collectors, using both non-concentrating

[10], [21]–[24] and concentrating technologies [25], the integration of PV systems with 

electrically-driven heat pumps (EHP) [26]–[28], as well as the direct use of PV electricity for 

heat production [29].


3

In all these cases, the self-consumption of PV electricity is limited due to the lack of 

synchronization between solar irradiance and local consumption. For systems where PV 

electricity is used exclusively to satisfy the electric power demand, self-consumption ratio 

(defined here as the fraction of the PV generated electricity that is used to supply the loads) is 

usually limited to 25 – 30% [30]. Self-consumption can be increased in systems where solar PV 

electricity is also used to provide heating and cooling [13], [26], [31], [32]. However, in this 

case, the attainable self-consumption ratio strongly depends on the climate conditions and the 

building standardized heating load. For instance, in old building standards located in Stuttgart 

(Germany), the combination of a heat pump and a hot water storage enable self-consumption 

increments of ~ 35% [26]. However, for next generation zero-energy buildings the same 

solution provides self-consumption potential increments of only ~ 10%, as energy demand of 

appliances dominates compared to the electrical energy demand to drive the heat pump [26].

To increase the self-consumption levels, solutions must integrate a system that stores the excess 

of PV electricity, such as electrochemical batteries [17]–[19], [33]. However, current prices for 

stationary residential battery storage are prohibitive, exceeding 1000 US$2015 per kWh of 

electricity storage capacity [34]. Even in the case of reaching global cumulative storage 

capacities of 1000 GWh (from a current cumulative capacity of ~ 1 GWh), empirical learning 

curves project that the future cost of stationary residential electricity storage, regardless of the 

technology type, will be in the range of ~ 340 $2015/kWhel [34]. Additionally, in most CCHP 

systems lifetime (> 20 years), the batteries require replacement (4 -15 years) and this can have a 

significant impact on the lifetime cost of the full installation [17]. Consequently, when looking 

at the profitability of the CCHP solution, the high capital cost of batteries results in optimal 

systems with a relatively small storage capacity, consequently providing small self-consumption 

improvements in the range of 13 – 24% [13]. For this reason, finding low-cost alternatives for 

electricity storage in the residential sector is an important field of research today [35], [36].

Although it might sound counterintuitive, among the many possible energy storage options,

those that are particularly interesting for CCHP applications are those with low round-trip 

(electric-to-electric) efficiency, as they may deliver part of the stored energy in a form of heat. 

Some examples are compressed air [37] or hydrogen storage combined with fuel cells [38]. In 

these cases, the comparatively low round-trip efficiency can be compensated by the (eventual) 

lower cost of the technology and the profitable use of the exhaust heat. In this regard, a

potentially low-cost alternative for electricity storage that has not received much attention is the

power-to-heat-to-power storage (PHPS) concept. PHPS involves the conversion of electricity 

into heat, which is then stored and later converted back to electricity on demand. The dramatic 

cost reduction of solar PV electricity along with the potentially lower capital costs of PHPS 

might result in a profitable PV+PHPS solution in the context of CCHP applications, where the 


4

low-grade heat produced during the heat-to-power conversion process may be used for 

satisfying both heating and cooling demands. Today, the use of thermal storage for power 

generation is virtually limited to concentrated solar power (CSP) plants, where the store 

temperature rarely surpasses ~ 500 ºC [39]. On the contrary PHPS systems could theoretically 

reach ultra-high temperatures (> 1000 ºC), subsequently enabling very high heat-to-power 

(H2P) conversion efficiencies of ~ 40% or beyond. This is around 3 - 4 times greater than that 

of low-temperature solar thermal ORC systems discussed above [9], [11], [12]. A hypothetical 

system comprising a 40% efficient solar thermal collector and a 10% efficient ORC [40], [9]

would produce an overall solar-to-electric conversion efficiency of 4%, which is half the 

efficiency than that of a PHPS system comprising 20% efficient solar PV modules and 40%

efficient PGU. Besides, the use of high grade heat store would potentially enable much more 

efficient THP cooling, as well as higher stored energy densities [41], [42], which is a 

remarkable advantage in space constrained residential applications.

Recent studies have established a few conceptual PHPS embodiments, which differentiate in the 

way that heat is produced, stored, and converted back into electricity. A particularly promising 

concept is pumped heat electricity storage (PHES), in which a high temperature heat pump 

cycle transforms electricity into heat, which is stored inside two large regenerators, and a 

thermal engine cycle transforms the stored heat back into electricity [43]–[45]. PHES has a high 

theoretical round-trip efficiency (RTE) in the range of 40 – 70%, depending on the operational 

temperature range [44]. Predominately conceived for large grid-electricity storage applications, 

the potential viability of PHES in the residential sector has not been assessed yet. Other 

conceptually simpler approaches consider the use of ultra-high temperature (> 1000 ºC) joule 

heating for sensible- [46] and latent- [41] heat storage combined with a thermophotovoltaic 

(TPV) power generation. Despite having lower RTE potential (less than ~ 40%), these designs 

might bring some advantages, as the modularity and the lack of moving parts. Solutions based 

on the use of high temperature heat pumps have been also recently proposed to mitigate the high 

thermal losses that could be eventually derived from operating at ultra-high temperatures; 

theoretically enabling an increment of the round-trip conversion efficiency up to ~ 50% [47], 

[48]. 

Regardless of the particular system implementation, it is still unclear under what circumstances 

a PHPS system could be profitable. In [46], [49] the minimum tolerable RTE of an energy 

storage system used for grid-electricity storage is estimated at 36% for the case of Pennsylvania-

New-Jersey-Maryland grid in 2017. However, this study assumes that the electricity is 

purchased from the grid, and therefore, the minimum RTE, is entirely determined by the ratio 

between on-peak and off-peak electrical prices in a very specific case. Besides, the exhaust heat 

produced by the PGU is not used, which is detrimental for the profitability of a PHPS solution.


5

In this study we assess the integration of a PHPS system in a CCHP solution for the self-

consumption of solar PV electricity in the residential environment. To the best of our 

knowledge, no comprehensive techno-economical assessment of PV generation coupled with a 

PHPS system has been evaluated so far. Thus, we will answer some of the most fundamental 

questions regarding the profitability of this solution, such as the maximum cost, the minimum 

PGU conversion efficiency, or the maximum heat insulation losses that are tolerable in order to 

provide reasonably low payback periods and significant energy savings.

2.
System model and methodology

Figure 1 shows the three kinds of system configurations that are analysed in this work. The 

reference case (Figure 1-a) comprises a conventional boiler (for heating) and an EHP (for 

cooling). In this case, all the energy consumption, either electricity (𝐶𝑒) or heat (𝐶ℎ), is obtained 

from the retail markets. This reference case will be used to evaluate the relative improvements 

of the proposed solutions incorporating a PHPS system. Figure 1-b illustrates a PHPS 

configuration comprising a solar PV system, high-grade thermal energy store (HTES), a PGU, a 

low- or mid-grade thermal energy store (LTES), and an EHP. Grid electricity and fuel are used 

as backups to ensure reliability of energy supply. In what follows, this configuration will be 

named PHPS-E. Figure 1-c illustrates a very similar configuration but using a thermally-driven 

heat pump (THP), instead of an EHP. This configuration will be named PHPS-T. In both 

configurations the PV electricity (𝐺𝑒) is either i) used directly to satisfy the electric demand, ii) 

stored as high-grade heat in the HTES (𝑃𝑖𝑛,𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆), iii) stored as low-grade heat in the LTES 

(𝑃𝑖𝑛,𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆), or iv) lost (𝑃𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝑃𝑉) if there is no electricity consumption and both HTES and LTES 

stores are at their maximum capacities (𝐸𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝐸𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥, respectively). The possibility 

of selling the excesses of PV electricity to the grid is not considered in this study. The high-

grade heat stored in the HTES can be supplied on demand to the PGU (𝑄𝑖𝑛,𝑃𝐺𝑈) to produce 

electricity with a conversion efficiency 𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈 (𝑃𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑃𝐺𝑈 = 𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈𝑄𝑖𝑛,𝑃𝐺𝑈). During this process, 

the produced low-grade exhaust heat 𝑄𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑃𝐺𝑈 = (1 − 𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈)𝑄𝑖𝑛,𝑃𝐺𝑈 can be either stored in the 

LTES (𝑄𝑖𝑛,𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆), or lost (𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝑃𝐺𝑈) if the LTES is at maximum capacity. Additional losses take 

place due to the non-ideal thermal insulation of the LTES ( 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 ) and the HTES 

(𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆). All these kinds of losses (𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠 = 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 + 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 + 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝑃𝐺𝑈 + 𝑃𝑃𝑉,𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠) 

contribute to reduce the self-consumption ratio, defined in this work as 𝑆𝐶 = 1 −

∑
8760𝑇 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝑡)
𝑡=1
∑
8760𝑇 𝐺𝑒(𝑡)
⁄ 𝑡=1
, being 8760 × 𝑇 the total number of hours during the entire 

system lifetime 𝑇 (in years).

The cooling power (𝐶𝑐) is satisfied by either an EHP (case PHPS-E, Figure 1-b) or a THP (case 

PHPS-T, Figure 1-c). The former case implies an extra consumption of electricity (𝑃𝐸𝐻𝑃 =


6

𝐶𝑐 𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐸𝐻𝑃
⁄
), whereas the latter implies an extra consumption of heat (𝐶ℎ𝑐 = 𝐶𝑐 𝐶𝑂𝑃𝑇𝐻𝑃
⁄
). The 

coefficient of performance (COP) of each device indicates the ratio between the useful cooling 

provided to the input energy, either heat (THP) or electricity (EHP). The low-grade heat in the 

LTES can be used either to satisfy the space heating and domestic hot water demands (𝐶ℎ =

𝐶ℎℎ) in the PHPS-E configuration (Figure 1-b) or both heating and cooling demands (𝐶ℎ =

𝐶ℎℎ + 𝐶ℎ𝑐) in the PHPS-T configuration (Figure 1-c). In both cases, additional heating from the 

external boiler (𝑄𝑒𝑥𝑡) might be necessary to ensure supply reliability. Notice that in the PHPS-T 

configuration (Figure 1-c) an additional heat coming from the boiler may be needed for 

satisfying the cooling demand. Hybrid absorption-compression heat pumps [50] enabling both 

heat and electricity inputs might be interesting in this application, but they are not considered in 

this study for the sake of simplicity.

In this study we use simplified models for each device of the PHPS system. The detailed model 

equations are shown in Figure 2, which also illustrates the energy management algorithm. At 

every time step (𝛥𝑡 = 1 hour), the energy rates (in kWel and kWth) shown in Figure 1, and the 

stored energy (in kWhth) in the HTES and LTES (𝐸𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 and 𝐸𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆, respectively) are calculated 

following the procedure illustrated in Figure 2. This algorithm first evaluates whether there is 

an excess or defect of generated PV electricity, i.e. whether the net consumed electrical power

𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡 = 𝐶𝑒 − 𝐺𝑒 is negative or positive, respectively. If demand exceeds the PV generation 

(𝐶𝑒 < 𝐺𝑒), all the PV electricity is directly used to satisfy that demand. The additional electricity

( 𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡 ) is supplied by either the PGU, if the HTES has enough stored heat ( 𝐸𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 >

𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡𝛥𝑡 𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈
⁄
), or by the electrical grid, in the opposite case. If the electrical power demand is 

higher than the maximum power capacity of the PGU (𝑃𝑛𝑒𝑡 > 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑃𝐺𝑈), both the PGU and 

electrical grid contribute to satisfy such demand. The low-grade heat produced during the 

operation of the PGU (𝑄𝑜𝑢𝑡,𝑃𝐺𝑈) may be stored in the LTES, if this is not already at its 

maximum capacity. In the case the PV generation exceeds the consumption of electricity (𝐺𝑒 >

𝐶𝑒), such excess may be stored as high-grade heat in the HTES or as low-grade heat in the 

LTES. In principle, the system will prioritize the charge of the HTES, as it stores a higher-grade 

heat that can be later converted into electricity by the PGU. There is only one scenario where 

this excess of PV electricity is stored in the LTES instead of HTES. This is the case that there is 

heat consumption (𝐶ℎ = 𝐶ℎℎ + 𝐶ℎ𝑐 > 0), the HTES charge is high (𝐸𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 > 𝑥𝐸𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥), and 

the LTES charge is low (𝐸𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 < 𝑦𝐸𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥). In this study we have fixed 𝑥 = 0.99 and 𝑦 =

0.1, which means that this situation is very improbable, and the vast majority of the excesses of 

PV electricity is stored in the HTES rather than in the LTES. The optimization of the values of 

the parameters 𝑥 and 𝑦 is out of the scope of this work. In the case that both LTES and HTES 

are at their maximum capacities, the PV electricity is inevitably lost, contributing to the increase

of the total energy losses of the system (𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠). Finally, the total heat consumption (𝐶ℎ = 𝐶ℎℎ +


7

𝐶ℎ𝑐) is satisfied either by the LTES, the boiler, or both combined, depending on whether the 

amount of stored heat in the LTES is enough to fully satisfy the heat demand. The amount of 

heat stored in the HTES and LTES is updated at every time step by evaluating the 

corresponding energy balance equations, as shown at the bottom of Figure 1.

The model described above assumes no exergy degradation of stored heat in both HTES and 

LTES. A non-degraded heat flowing out of the high-grade HTES enables assuming a constant 

PGU conversion efficiency during the full discharge cycle. This assumption is reasonable 

especially for thermal stores based on latent heat, where exergy losses are minimum. The energy 

losses in the LTES are approximated using the standard EN 12977-3 for hot water stores, 

according to which the heat loss rate in W/K is 𝑈𝐴𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 𝑎𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆√𝑉𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆, being 𝑉𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 the water 

volume in litres, and 𝑎𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 a constant that usually takes a value of ~ 0.1 for good insulated hot 

water storage stores. The overall heat losses (in W) are approximated by 𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 =

𝑎𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆√𝑉𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆∆𝑇𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 , being ∆𝑇𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 the mean difference between LTES and ambient 

temperatures (assumed ∆𝑇𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 70 ºC for the PHPS-E system and ∆𝑇𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 130 ºC for the 

PHPS-T one, as the later requires higher temperature to operate a highly efficient thermally 

driven heat pump). The heat losses in the HTES are calculated using a similar approach, so that

𝑄𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠,𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆√𝑉𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆∆𝑇𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 , being 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 an unknown parameter that should be 

eventually determined for high temperature heat stores.To relate the volume (𝑉𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 and 𝑉𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆) 

with the storage maximum capacity (𝐸𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥 and 𝐸𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥) we assume an energy storage 

density of 0.08 kWhth/l for the LTES, corresponding to that of a hot water store, while for the 

HTES, the energy density strongly depends on the storage media and its operational 

temperature. In this study we assume a latent heat store with an energy density that depends on 

the operational temperature
according to the following equation: 𝐸𝑑,𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 6.74 ×

10−7(𝑇𝑇𝐸𝑆)2 − 1.72 × 10−4𝑇𝑇𝐸𝑆 + 0.140 that has been obtained from fitting the latent heat of 

fusion of a few pure metals with different melting points in the range of 230 – 2070 ºC (Sn, Zn, 

Al, Si and B) [41]. This equation captures the fact that higher temperatures enable higher stored 

energy densities. For instance, a 20 kWhth HTES operating at 1414 ºC (which will be the case if 

silicon is used as phase-change material) would have an energy density of 1.24 kWhth/l (silicon 

latent heat). Assuming an optimistic value for 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 of 0.1, such HTES system would lose 

about 2.8% of its maximum stored energy in one hour. As a reference, a hot-water store of the 

same capacity and with 𝑎𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 0.1 would lose only 0.24% per hour. For a HTES at 800 ºC, 

heat losses would be only very slightly reduced to 2.7% (assuming the same value of 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆). 

This is because the lower temperature also brings a lower energy density, counteracting to keep 

a similar amount of heat losses. The evident way to reduce the losses is the use of advanced 

thermal insulation designs with a very small 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 value. Possible options include the use of 


8

vacuum insulation or other advance concepts, such as the use of heat pumps [47]. Whether such 

low 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 values are attainable by practical thermal insulation systems is out of the scope of 

this work. Our aim is to provide its bounds in order to reach profitability in a PHPS application.

An additional possibility to reduce heat losses in the HTES is to use eutectic alloys, instead of 

pure elements, with enhanced latent heats at lower melting temperatures, such as Al-12Si (549 

kWh/m3 at 577 ºC) [51] or Fe-26.3Si-9.3B (~ 1240 kWh/m3 at ~ 1200 ºC) [42].

Time-dependent profiles of heating (space and hot water), cooling, and electricity consumptions 

(𝐶ℎℎ and 𝐶𝑐, 𝐶𝑒) are obtained by the Energy Plus software [52] for a detached household with 

two floors with an area of 60 m2 each, 30% of openings (glazing), the U-value of the façade is 

0.26 W/(m2·K) and the U-value of the roof is 0.18 W/(m2·K). These U-values match with the 

guidelines provided in the Spanish Building Code [53], which in turn are also in agreement with 

the corresponding guidelines of most of the European countries [54], [55]. For the energy 

simulations, typical occupancy profiles of a 4-inhabitant house (2 adults and 2 children) are 

considered. The simulations differentiate between working and non-working days, and provide 

loads, schedules for lighting and home appliances, as well as for occupancy, and the air 

renovations in the different months. The primary and secondary set-points for air conditioning 

in summer (i.e. from June to September) are 25 ºC and 27 °C, respectively, while primary and 

secondary temperature set-points for space heating (i.e. from January to October) are 20 °C and 

17 °C. DHW inlet/delivery temperature is 15/60 ºC and the normalized lighting power density 

in W/m2 -100 lux is 5. The Energy Plus software calculates the energy consumption (for 

heating, cooling and DHW) of a given household for a user-defined HVAC and DHW systems, 

thus resultant energy consumption will depend on the conversion efficiency of the selected 

systems. In the particular case of the electricity, electricity demand will be equal to electricity 

consumption if no losses are considered. Therefore, in order to obtain energy demand profiles 

which will be later inputs in our system model, conversion efficiency of the HVAC and DHW 

systems is set to 1. Energy simulations of the reference building consider 1-hour step weather 

data from Energy PlusTM database, which includes: direct and diffuse solar irradiance, solar 

height and azimuth, atmospheric pressure, ambient temperature and wind direction and velocity. 

Finally, from the energy simulations, hourly global energy demand of the reference building 

over a year is calculated. Thus, 1-hour step data of electricity for lighting and other appliances, 

cooling, domestic hot water (DHW) and space heating demands is obtained. The hourly PV 

electrical power generation per kW of installed PV capacity (𝐺𝑒∗, in equivalent hours) in Madrid 

is calculated by means of the PVsyst software [56]; and considering the same weather data from 

Energy PlusTM database for coherence with the time-dependent energy consumption profiles. 

For this calculation monocrystalline silicon PV modules of 318 Wp from the manufacturer 

SunPower and a Sunny Boy series inverter of the manufacturer SMA have been considered. PV 


9

modules are orientated to the South and their tilt angle is 34º, which is the optimum value that 

maximises the annual PV generation in Madrid. For the comprehensive system model, energy 

output after the inverter is considered. The total PV electricity generated during one hour (𝐺𝑒, in 

kWh) is estimated from these simulations as 𝐺𝑒 = 𝐺𝑒∗𝑃𝑛𝑜𝑚,𝑃𝑉, being 𝑃𝑛𝑜𝑚,𝑃𝑉 the nominal PV 

installed power (in kW).

Figure 3-a shows an example of the resultant electrical (top) and thermal (bottom) energy rates

along with the amount of energy stored in the HTES (top, solid line) and LTES (bottom, solid 

line) for a system with 𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈 = 30 %, 𝑃𝑛𝑜𝑚,𝑃𝑉 = 10.6 kWel, 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑃𝐺𝑈 = 1.35 kWel, and 

𝐸𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 33.7 kWhth. As it will be seen in the discussion section, the sizing of the three key 

elements of this system, i.e. the PV, HTES and PGU, has been optimized to minimize the cost 

of the consumed electricity all through the lifetime of the installation. The proper selection of 

the merit function that must be minimized is of extreme relevance, as different merit functions 

provide completely different optimum solutions. For instance, a key performance indicator of 

the system could be its levelized cost of total (consumed) energy or LCOE, which is defined in 

this work as:

𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸 =

𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋 + ∑
[
𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋(𝑡′)

(1 + 𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑜𝑚)𝑡′]
𝑇
𝑡′=1

∑
[∑
8760(𝐶𝑒(𝑡) + 𝐶ℎ(𝑡))𝛥𝑡
𝑡=1

(1 + 𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙)𝑡′
]
𝑇
𝑡′=1

(1)

where 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋 is the total capital expenditure (in €), 𝑡′ is the time variable (in years), 𝑇 is the 

total lifetime of the installation (in years), 𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋(𝑡′) are the total operational expenditures in 

year 𝑡′ (in €), and ∑
8760 𝐶𝑒(𝑡) + 𝐶ℎ(𝑡)𝛥𝑡
𝑡=1
is the total energy consumption (in kWh) during a 

year, evaluated at time intervals of 𝛥𝑡 = 1 hour. 𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑜𝑚 and  𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 are the nominal and 

real 
weighted 
average 
cost 
of 
capital, 
respectively, 
and 
are 
mutually 
related 

through 𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙 = (1 + 𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑜𝑚) (1 + 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙)
⁄
− 1, being 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙 the annual inflation rate. 

The 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋of the solution is the addition of the individual 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋of each element (PV, HTES, 

LTES, PGU, Boiler, and THP or EHP), each of which are assumed proportional to the element’s 

nominal capacity. For instance, the 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋of the PV system is estimated as 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑃𝑉 =

𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑃𝑉

∗ 𝑃𝑛𝑜𝑚,𝑃𝑉, being 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑃𝑉

∗
the capital expenditure per kW of a PV installation. 

A key difference of equation (1) with respect to conventional definitions of LCOE is that in the 

denominator we put the total energy consumption, rather than the electricity generated by the 

PV system. Thus, the LCOE defined in equation (1) refers to the cost of the total amount of

energy that is consumed (heat plus electricity), including the cost of the electricity and the fuel 

that are purchased from the grid. The 𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋(𝑡′) is calculated as


10

𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋(𝑡′) = (1 + 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑙)𝑡′{𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑓𝑖𝑥

∗
max[𝑃𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑(𝑡)] +

𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑣𝑎𝑟

∗
∑
8760 𝑃𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑(𝑡)𝛥𝑡
𝑡=1
} + (1 + 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙)

𝑡′

{𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑓𝑖𝑥 +

𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑣𝑎𝑟

∗
∑
8760 𝑄𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝑡)𝛥𝑡
𝑡=1
}

(2)

where 𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑓𝑖𝑥

∗
is the fixed annual cost per installed electric-grid power capacity in current 

money, and max[𝑃𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑(𝑡)] is the maximum peak-power demanded to the electrical grid, 

assumed here to be equal to the maximum grid power capacity. This is an important assumption,

as the incorporation of storage in the system enables a significant reduction of max[𝑃𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑(𝑡)], 

subsequently providing a noticeable reduction in the fixed costs of external electric power 

supply. 𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑓𝑖𝑥 is the annual fixed cost of fuel, while 𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑣𝑎𝑟

∗
and 𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑣𝑎𝑟

∗
are 

the annual costs of externally-purchased electricity and heat (in €/kWhel and €/kWhth) expressed 

in current money. Equation (2) implicitly assumes that electricity and fuel prices increase with 

constant annual energy inflation rates 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑙 and 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙 , respectively (which are not 

necessarily equal to the overall economy inflation rate 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙), and that all years are identical in 

terms of energy generation and consumption. Other kinds of operational expenditures, such as 

taxes and the maintenance costs, are neglected.

Preliminary attempts to minimize the total LCOE, as defined in equation (1), resulted in 

“optimal” solutions tending to maximize the amount of PV electricity dedicated to produce heat. 

This subsequently resulted in large PV, HTES and LTES systems. Despite the fact that this 

brings some economical savings after the entire lifetime of the installation, the very high 

CAPEX results in an intolerable increase of the discounted payback period. As a consequence, 

we opted for using the levelized cost of consumed electricity (LCOEel) as merit function, which 

is defined in this work as:

𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸𝑒𝑙 =

𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑡 + ∑
[
𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙(𝑡′)

(1 + 𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑜𝑚)𝑡′]
𝑇
𝑡′=1

∑
[
∑
8760 𝐶𝑒(𝑡)𝛥𝑡
𝑡=1

(1 + 𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙)𝑡′]
𝑇
𝑡′=1

(3)

and differentiates from equation (1) in that it only considers electricity consumption, i.e.:

𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙(𝑡′) = (1 + 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑙)𝑡′ {𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑓𝑖𝑥

∗
max[𝑃𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑(𝑡)]

+ 𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑣𝑎𝑟

∗
∑ 𝑃𝑔𝑟𝑖𝑑(𝑡)𝛥𝑡

8760

𝑡=1

}

(4)


11

The minimization of 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸𝑒𝑙 will guide us towards the best system configuration in terms of 

maximum savings of grid-electricity, which is the most relevant contributor to the total OPEX. 

Minimizing 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸𝑒𝑙 appears to be a more reasonable approach that produces shorter payback 

periods at the expense of obtaining slightly higher LCOE. The search for the minimum 𝐿𝐶𝑂𝐸𝑒𝑙

is performed in this work by means of the multi-variable direct search (Nelder-Mead) algorithm

[57] evaluated over a matrix of different initial conditions to avoid local minimums.

Finally, the discounted payback period is calculated in this study by computing the annual 

discounted saves (in current money) in the OPEX due to the reduced consumption of external 

electricity and fuel, with respect to the reference case in Figure 1-a. The discounted payback 

period represents the time needed for these cumulative savings to pay-off the higher CAPEX of 

the PV+PHPS installation.

All the variables used in this study to describe the PHPS+PV solution are summarized in Table 

1. A selected number of them have been used to define the four different economic scenarios 

that are summarized in Table 2. These scenarios are ordered from more favourable (Scenario 1) 

to less favourable (Scenario 4). The most favourable scenario assumes a PV CAPEX of 900 

€/kW, while the rest of scenarios assume a price of 1200 €/kW (taxes included). These data are 

selected based on the estimations of the European JCR, according to which the worldwide 

average price of a residential PV systems without tax was 1150 €/kW[58] in 2018, being the 

minimum prices found in Australia (950 €/kW).Taking into account that the average learning 

curve of CAPEX for residential PV installations is in the range of 80-90% [59], it is expectable 

that CAPEX values below 900 € (taxes included) could be reached in the near future.

Concerning the CO2-equivalent emissions reported in Table 1 it must be noticed that the value 

for solar PV (20 gCO2eq/kWhth) is taken from the harmonization of a number of published life-

cycle assessments conducted by Louwen et al. that assumes a performance ratio of 0.75 and 

insolation conditions of 1700 kWh/m2-year [60], which are similar to those existing in Madrid.

In the case of natural gas, the CO2-equivalent emissions are typically reported in the range of 

220 – 280 gCO2eq/kWhth [61]; thus, we set a value of 250 gCO2eq/kWhth. However, it is worth 

mentioning that a controversy exists on the determination of the emissions for natural gas in 

CO2-equivalent units. Natural gas is largely composed of methane, which has a lower 

atmospheric lifetime (~ 12 years) than CO2 (> 100 years), but a much higher greenhouse 

potential. Thus, the amount of emissions of natural gas in CO2-equivalent units depends on the 

time-frame considered for the calculation. Howarth [62] estimated emissions in the range of 550 

– 750 gCO2eq/kWhth for natural gas when considering a shorter timeframe of  20 years. These 

considerations are not taken into account in this study to keep the coherence among the data 


12

obtained from different sources. Finally, the emissions per kWhel of consumed grid electricity is 

set to 340 gCO2eq/kWhel, which is the one obtained for Spain in 2013 from a Well-To-Wheels 

(WTW) analysis that takes into account not only the direct emissions in the generation site, but 

also the upstream emissions associated with the fuel extraction and transport, and the power 

losses along the grid [63].It is worth mentioning that the average emissions for EU grid 

electricity is 447 gCO2eq/kWhel, meaning that a PHPS system installed in Spain has a 

comparatively lower potential to reduce the CO2 emissions than in other countries such as 

Germany (615 gCO2eq/kWhel) or Italy (431 gCO2eq/kWhel). The investigation of the impact of 

this solution on different emplacements is not the aim of this study.

It is also worth commenting on the assumption of an identical CAPEX for both EHP and THP. 

Some studies have reported air conditioning prices ranging from 500 to 700 €/kWcool [64]. These 

values are in agreement with the empiric relation between the capital cost and the heating 

capacity (kWheat) for
EHPs reported by Staffell in 2012 as £2012/kWheat
= 200 +

4750 kWheat

1.25
⁄
[7]. This equation results in CAPEX of 395 and 590 €2012/kWheat for systems with 

large (20 kWheat) and medium (10 kWheat) heating capacities, respectively. Unfortunately, the 

price of THPs is not as well reported in the literature. In 2002, Grossman [65] estimated the cost 

of LiBr-water absorption chiller technology in the rage of 165 – 200 $/kWcool. However, in 

2008, Kim and Infante Ferreira [66] reported significantly higher prices (300 - 400 €/kWcool) for

the same kind of technology. In both studies, it is estimated that the higher COP of double- and 

triple-stage chillers would result in lower prices per unit of cooling capacity, despite the higher 

complexity. Although a lower CAPEX has been reported for THPs, in this study we set an 

identical price for both EHP and THP of 500 €/kWcool in order to cope with the uncertainty in 

the published data.

A constant COP is assumed for the EHP all through the year. A value of 4 has been used in 

most of the cases, as this is the average seasonal energy efficiency ratio (SEER) for residential 

air conditioners installed worldwide, as reported by the IEA in 2019. However, the best SEER

available in the market are up to ~ 12.  According to the IEA, it is unlikely that these efficient 

devices reach the market in many countries, but it illustrates the huge potential for improvement 

in the near future. For the THP, current absorption technology’s COPs range from 0.4 – 1.7 

depending on the operation temperature and number of stages. Low temperature (75 – 90 ºC) 

single-stage chillers have COPs in the range of 0.4 to 0.7; double-stage chillers operating at 

intermediate temperatures of ~ 150 ºC have COPs in between 1.2 and 1.4; and high temperature 

(200 – 250 ºC) triple-stage chillers have COPs of up to ~ 1.7. [35], [66], [67]. The COP for THP 

will be set to 1.3; thus, representing the case of a double-stage chiller operating at intermediate 

temperatures of ~ 150 ºC. This temperature is compatible with typical indirect pressurized hot 

water storage systems. Thus, for the case of PHPS-T systems we will consider the combination 


13

of COP = 1.3 and a pressurized hot water store at 150 ºC. As it will be seen in the discussion 

section, lower COPs do not provide a significant advantage with respect to the PHPS solution 

comprising an EHP.

Concerning the energy prices, two main components have been assumed: energy and network. 

Typically, energy and taxes are charged per kWh of consumed energy, while the network 

component is charged annually per contracted kWel. The share of the fixed and variable 

components in the price of natural gas and electricity varies significantly among countries . The 

increasing amount of grid-connected distributed renewable power systems is triggering a trend 

to increase the fixed components of the price [68], which contributes to increase the uncertainty 

of this variable in the future. In this study we assume a price of electrical energy and power of 

0.17 €/kWhel and 50 €/kWel-year, respectively, which results in an average annual price of 

electricity of 22.41 c€/kWhel for the specific consumption profile of the reference case 

considered in this study (Figure 1-a). This value is only slightly below the average price of 

electricity for households’ consumers in Spain, as reported by Eurostat, of 24.77 c€/kWhel. The 

resultant share of fixed component in the grid electricity price is 24%. For the natural gas, we 

assume a price for heating energy and power of 0.07 €/kWhth and 60 €/year, respectively, which 

results in an average price of 7.39 c€/kWhth for the specific consumption profile of the reference 

case in Figure 1-a. This price is slightly below the average value reported for Spain in Eurostat 

of 8.75 c€/kWhth, and the fixed term represents only 5% of the total price.

3.
Results and Discussion

This work aims at determining under which circumstances a PHPS system could be profitable 

for the self-consumption of solar PV electricity in the residential sector. To afford this analysis, 

we will search for the optimal sizing of the three main elements of the system, i.e. the storage 

capacity of HTES in kWhth, the peak power output of the PGU in kWel, and the nominal power 

of the solar-PV installation in kWel, which result in the minimum costs of the consumed 

electricity after the entire lifetime of the installation. This optimal sizing depends on a number 

of parameters, such as the cost of grid-electricity and fuel, or the cost and productivity of the PV 

system, among many others. In this study, we will pay special attention to those parameters 

related to the PGU and HTES components, as they are not typically used in residential 

applications and subsequently, there are no reliable data on their cost and performance. Such 

elements are described in this study by the following five parameters: the PGU conversion 

efficiency (𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈), the HTES CAPEX (𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑇𝐸𝑆

∗
in €/kWhth), the HTES thermal losses (𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆

and ∆𝑇𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆), and the PGU CAPEX (𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝐻2𝑃

∗
in €/kWel). Performing a bottom-up estimation 

of these five parameters would be very unprecise, provided the immaturity of these 

technologies; thus, our first analysis focuses on conducting an up-bottom analysis, according to 


14

which the minimum value of 𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈, and the maximum values of 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆

∗
, 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑃𝐺𝑈

∗
, 

𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 and ∆𝑇𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆that leads to profitability will be determined assuming a favourable economic 

scenario. Thus, the outcome of this analysis will be the technological requirements for each 

element of the solution in order to reach profitability. This information will be useful to assess 

the candidate technologies. Nevertheless, despite the fact that we will mention a few possible 

specific options, it is not the aim of this study to provide a thorough assessment of the most 

suitable technological implementation.

To quantify the “profitability” of the solution we will look at the amount of electricity savings 

enabled by the PHPS system. Electricity savings can only be attributed to the presence of 

significantly large PV, HTES and PGU systems (optimized variables) that provide a significant 

reduction of the cost of consumed electricity (merit function for the optimization). The first part 

of the discussion focuses on the PHPS-E configuration (Figure 1-b), which is characterized by 

using an electrically driven heat pump for cooling; thus, the rejected heat from the PGU is only 

used to satisfy the DHW and space heating needs. In the second part of the discussion, we 

assess the PHPS-T configuration (Figure 1-c), and we discuss under which conditions a PHPS-

T system would be preferable than a PHPS-E one. Some of the most relevant results are 

summarized in Table 3 in order to facilitate the readability of the analysis. Table 4 shows 

identical results but for the ideal case of loss-less (adiabatic) HTES and LTES systems; thus, 

they represent the upper bounds of performance for the PHPS solution, which are unattainable 

in practice.

3.1. PHPS-E system

Figure 3 (b-d) shows the savings on grid electricity resulting from an optimized PHPS-E system

as a function of different variables. Every dot in these figures represents an optimized system, 

meaning that the optimal sizing of the three main elements of the system (PV, HTES and PGU) 

are set to minimize the cost of the electricity consumed during the system lifetime. The rest of 

parameters are set to the values reported in Table 1, and to those corresponding to the most

favourable scenario in Table 2 (Scenario 1). In the case of Figure 3-b, the two independent 

variables are the PGU efficiency and the HTES and PGU CAPEX. As it could be expected, the 

largest savings are obtained for high PGU efficiency and small HTES and PGU CAPEX. 

Besides, the minimum attainable savings of electricity are about 30%, and correspond to the 

case of direct self-consumption of PV electricity, without storage. The results shown in Figure 

3-b enable determining the maximum cost targets for HTES and PGU technologies if the PGU 

conversion efficiency is known. Similarly, it is possible to estimate the minimum PGU 

conversion efficiency that is needed to reach profitability if the costs of HTES and PGU devices 

are provided. For instance, a CAPEX of ~ 300 €/kWhth and ~ 4000 €/kWel for the HTES and 


15

PGU devices are tolerable (enable a significant savings on electricity consumption) if the PGU 

conversion efficiency is higher than ~ 40%. However, if the conversion efficiency is 20%, the 

maximum tolerable CAPEX is reduced to ~ 100 €/kWhth and ~ 2000 €/kWel, respectively.

It is worth noticing that high thermal-to-electric conversion efficiencies (> 40%) and low costs 

(< 1000 €/kW) are attainable by current state of the art Rankine and open-cycle Brayton engines 

of large (> 1 MWel) [39], [69], [70] and medium (30 - 300 kWel) [71] sizes. Unfortunately, 

current state of the art small-scale (< 10 kWel) closed-cycle engines, which have been developed 

for both terrestrial and space-power applications, have either low conversion efficiency (e.g. 

Rankine/ORC) or high cost (Brayton) [72], [73]. Probably, among all the current dynamic-

engine options, the best choice is a Stirling engine, which has a conversion efficiency in the 

range of 30 - 40% at power outputs ranging from 1 to 30 kWe [73]. However, low power costs 

(~ 2,000 €/kWel) are only attainable by the largest units (~ 30 kWel), whilst the smallest units (~ 

1-2 kWel) could reach power costs more than 10,000 €/kWel. This price lies outside the 

profitability limit, as seen in Figure 3-b. Solid-state converters are better suited for power 

generation at small-scale and could lead, in principle, to low power costs. In this regard, 

thermoelectric generators are the most mature technology, but they lack of high conversion 

efficiency (typically below ~ 10%). A particularly interesting highly-efficient alternative is

thermophotovoltaics (TPV), which has been already assessed theoretically for PHPS 

applications [41], [46]. Despite its much lower degree of development, TPV has already 

demonstrated significantly higher conversion efficiencies (~ 24%) [74], becoming the most 

efficient solid-state thermal-to-electric converter to date. TPV is particularly well suited for 

ultra-high temperature (> 1000 ºC) heat conversion; thus, enabling the use of ultra-dense heat 

stores, such as silicon or boron latent heats [41]. TPV technology has also potential to reach

very low power costs, even below 300 €/kWel [46]. Thus, in the opinion of the authors, TPV 

should be regarded as a promising choice for future developments in residential (small-scale)

PHPS solutions.

Figure 3-c illustrates how heat losses in the HTES, i.e. the parameters 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 and ∆𝑇𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆, 

impact on the profitability of the PHPHS-E solution. As it could be expected, small 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 and 

∆𝑇𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 values (small heat losses in the HTES) result in larger savings in electricity. For 

instance, reducing the HTES temperature below ~ 500 ºC allows a significant reduction of the 

heat losses, or alternatively enables the use of higher 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 values; thus, simplifying the 

thermal insulation design, and eventually enabling a reduction of its cost. However, lower

HTES temperatures could result in lower PGU conversion efficiencies and negatively impact on 

the profitability of the solution. For instance, a HTES operating at 1500 ºC with 40% conversion 

efficiency requires 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 < 0.2 for reaching electricity savings more than ~ 80%. Reducing the 

HTES temperature to 250 ºC while keeping a conversion efficiency of 40% could enable similar 


16

savings for less a restrictive 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 < 0.4. However, if the efficiency drops to 20%, such

amounts of savings would not be reachable even using an ideal thermal insulation system 

(𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 0). This illustrates an existing trade-off on the optimal HTES temperature between the 

PGU conversion efficiency and the HTES’s thermal insulation losses. High conversion 

efficiencies and low thermal losses are needed to reach profitability, but both of them increase 

with temperature. Nevertheless, a very interesting result illustrated in Figure 3-c is that this 

trade-off disappears for temperatures more than ~ 500 ºC. For such high temperatures, 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆

values near or below ~ 0.1, and PGU efficiency more than ~ 20% result in a profitable solution, 

independently of the HTES temperature. This is partially attributed to the higher storage energy 

density that is attainable at very high temperatures, which enables a more compact and smaller

HTES that compensates the larger amounts of heat losses per unit of store area at higher 

temperatures. According to this result, the HTES temperature could be as high as required to 

reach high energy density and PGU conversion efficiency, provided that a low-cost thermal 

insulation system with 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 values near or below ~ 0.1 are attainable at such temperatures.

Therefore, the selection of the optimal operation temperature should be made based on an 

overall techno-economic analysis of the entire solution, being the main objective the 

achievement of high PGU efficiency and low thermal insulation losses at low cost. In this 

regard, the results shown in Figure 3-c could guide the design of an optimal thermal insulation

system for PHPS applications.

The results in Table 4 show to the ideal case of adiabatic HTES and LTES systems (i.e. 

𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 𝑎𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 0). Despite the fact that this ideal situation is unattainable in practice, these 

results are valuable to set the upper bounds of the technology. If compared with the results in 

Table 3, (which assume 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 𝑎𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 0.1 ) the self-consumption ratio is drastically 

increased due to the reduced amount of heat losses. This results in a smaller PV system and 

CAPEX, which leads to significantly shorter payback periods. These results highlight the 

relevance of thermal insulation in the PHPS solution, at least for small-scale residential 

applications.

Figure 3-d assess the sensibility of the PHPS-E solution to variations in the economic 

conditions. The results shown in Figure 3-c and d assume the most favourable case, which is 

characterized by low PV CAPEX (900 €/kWel), low WACCnom (2%), and a high energy price 

inflation rate (Infle = 4%). This optimistic scenario allows estimating the minimum requirements 

for the PHPS-E solution (in terms of cost and heat losses of the HTES, and efficiency of the 

PGU) to reach profitability in the most favourable economic conditions. Figure 3-d illustrates

how these requirements are modified for more unfavourable economic scenarios. By calculating

the savings on consumed grid electricity resulting from an optimized PHPS-E system as a 

function of the Infle and the WACCnom we observed that the scenarios having the same 


17

difference between the WACCnom and the energy price inflation rate result in identical optimal 

systems and savings of electricity. This means that the profitability can be analyzed through a 

single variable: the difference between the WACCnom and Infle. Figure 3-d illustrates the 

combined effect on the electricity savings of the PV CAPEX and (WACCnom - Infle). As 

expected, having a low PV CAPEX and an energy inflation rate higher than the WACCnom is 

very important to reach profitability, especially when the PGU conversion efficiency is low. 

Higher PGU conversion efficiencies enable reaching profitability under less favourable 

economic conditions. However, even in the case of high PGU conversion efficiency (e.g. 40%), 

a low PV CAPEX (below 1000 €/kWel) and an energy price inflation rate greater than 

WACCnom are needed to reach electricity savings of 80% or beyond. A less favourable scenario, 

e.g. PV CAPEX of 1300 €/kWel and an energy price inflation rate 1% smaller than the 

WACCnom, would enable maximum electricity savings of ~ 55% if the PGU conversion 

efficiency is 40%, and of ~ 30% if the PGU conversion efficiency is 20%. The latter represents 

a solution without HTES nor PGU devices, in which the PV electricity is directly consumed 

without being stored. This illustrates how important are the economic boundary conditions on 

the potential of the PHPS-E concept. 

All the results shown in Figure 3(b-d) show deviations of a selected number of parameters (i.e. 

CAPEX of HTES, PGU and PV, PGU efficiency, WACCnom and energy price inflation rate) 

from the most favourable economic scenario indicated in Table 2. Besides, they illustrate the 

electricity savings only, as they represent a quantification of the profitability of a PHPS 

solution. But no observations have been made so far on other relevant parameters such as the 

discounted payback period, the savings of fuel and CO2 emissions, or the self-consumption 

ratio, among others. In the next discussion, we will pay attention to these parameters. To that 

end, Figure 4 shows a selection of eight system’s parameters as a function of the PGU 

conversion efficiency, for an optimized PHPS-E system under the four different economic 

scenarios indicated in Table 2. The selected parameters for the representation are: the optimal 

PGU maximum power capacity (a), the optimal HTES storage capacity (b), the optimal PV 

nominal power (c), the discounted payback period (d), the savings in fuel (e), and CO2

emissions (f), the self-consumption ratio (g), and the savings in electricity (h). In these graphs, 

each dot represents the best solution obtained by the direct-search algorithm after being 

evaluated with 78 different initial simplexes to avoid local minimums.

The first important observation is that there exists a threshold value for the PGU conversion 

efficiency beyond which the PHPS-E system becomes profitable, i.e. the optimal sizes for the 

PGU (Figure 4-a) and the HTES (Figure 4-b) are significant. Besides, this threshold efficiency

is higher when the economic conditions are less favourable. For instance, the most favourable 

scenario (Scenario 1) enables profitability at PGU conversion efficiencies more than ~ 10%, 


18

while the most unfavourable one (Scenario 4) requires PGU conversion efficiencies more than ~ 

80%. For efficiencies below those thresholds, the optimal sizes for the PGU and HTES devices 

tend to zero, and the only component that remains in the solution is the PV system. In this case, 

the PV electricity is consumed instantaneously (without storage in the HTES); thus, resulting in 

a small optimal PV system that enables very high self-consumption ratios (~ 80%, Figure 4-g).

Notice that such high self-consumption ratios are attributed to the use of solar PV electricity to 

produce low-grade heat that is stored in the LTES. This explains why such high self-

consumption ratios are combined with small electricity savings (~ 30%, Figure 4-h). 

When the PGU efficiency is higher than the profitability threshold, the optimal PHPS-E system 

comprises significantly large HTES, PGU and PV systems (Figure 4-a, b, c), subsequently 

enabling electricity savings in the range of 70 - 95% (Figure 4-h), depending on the specific 

economic boundary conditions. The most favourable scenarios bring particularly large optimal 

HTES (up to 80 kWhth), PGU (up to 3 kWel) and solar PV (up to 12 kWel) systems, along with 

higher electricity savings (up to 95%). On the other hand, less favourable economic conditions 

bring smaller optimal HTES (10 – 20 kWhth), PGU (~ 0.8 kWel), and solar PV (5 – 7 kWel) 

systems, as well as lower electricity savings of 70 – 75%. A particularly important observation 

is that increasing the efficiency beyond a certain value does not improve the savings in 

electricity. Instead, it leads to lower savings of fuel and subsequently higher CO2 emissions. 

This critical efficiency is ~ 40% for the scenarios 1 and 2, and ~ 60% (~ 80%) for the scenario 3 

(4). At these specific efficiencies, the CO2 emissions are minimum, as higher PGU conversion 

efficiencies result in the production of smaller amounts of heat that bring a larger consumption 

of fuel. Unfortunately, the same efficiency that minimizes the CO2 emissions maximizes the 

payback period and minimizes the self-consumption ratio, as it implies the use of significantly 

large PV, HTES and PGU systems. However, the potential reduction in the payback period due 

to an increment of the conversion efficiency beyond such values might not be very significant. 

For instance, in the Scenario 1, the payback period is reduced only 3 years (from 14 to 11 years) 

when the PGU conversion efficiency increases from 40% to 80%, while the electricity savings 

are not improved. This illustrates that increasing the PGU conversion efficiency beyond a 

certain critical value (which depends on the boundary economic conditions) might not be as 

important as it could be intuitively expected.

Other interesting observation concerns the very small self-consumption ratios (35 – 60%) that 

are obtained, meaning that a high amount of PV electricity is finally wasted. To understand the 

source of these losses, Figure 5 shows the four main contributions to the energy lost in the 

system as a function of the PGU conversion efficiency for each of the four economic scenarios 

indicated in Table 2. For low conversion efficiencies, i.e. when the solution lacks of both HTES 

and PGU devices, most of the losses (> 80%) are attributed to heat losses in the LTES. 


19

However, these losses are not very significant in absolute value, as they enable very high self-

consumption ratios of ~ 80% (Figure 4-g). On the other hand, when the PGU conversion 

efficiency is large enough, and subsequently the optimal HTES and PGU sizes are significant, 

the HTES thermal insulation heat losses account for most of the energy losses of the PHPS-E 

solution (70 – 90%). Thus, heat losses in the HTES are the main reason for the low self-

consumption levels observed in Figure 4-h. The next contribution is the heat lost in the LTES 

(10 – 20%). Both the PV electricity that is neither consumed nor stored, and the exhaust heat 

from the PGU converter that is wasted, represent a negligible contribution to the total energy 

losses in the system. Only in Scenario 1 the PV electricity that is directly wasted could represent 

a significant amount of losses (up to 20%) due to the oversized PV installation, which is 

possible due to its low cost. But even in this case the heat losses in the HTES represent the 

highest contributor to the overall energy losses of the system. Therefore, improving thermal 

insulation of the HTES is key to improve the self-consumption ratio. However, it is important to 

notice that, even with such low self-consumption ratios, the PHPS-E system can provide 

significant electricity savings (> 70%) and reach profitability with reasonably short payback 

periods. The heat losses through the HTES thermal insulation system could be recovered as 

low-grade heat to further reduce the amount of fuel consumption, as proposed in [47], [48]. 

Analysing this and other possible improvements could be the aim of a future work.

3.2. PHPS-T system

This last part of the article focuses on the analysis of the PHPS-T system (Figure 1-c), where a 

thermally-driven heat pump (THP) is used instead of an electrically-driven one to satisfy the 

cooling demand. In this case, the heat generated in the PGU is not only used for DHW and 

space heating, but it is also used for powering the THP and satisfying the cooling needs in 

summer season. Thus, one could expect a more efficient use of the generated heat all through 

the year. However, one could also argue that an increment in the COP of the EHP could have a 

similar effect on reducing the electricity consumption both in the reference case (Figure 1-a) 

and in the PHPS-E solution (Figure 1-b); thus, hindering the profitability of the PHPS-T 

solution. Thus, the payback period of the PHPS-T system should be analysed as a function of 

the difference between the COPs of the THP and the EHP. 

In this regard, Figure 6 shows the payback period of an optimized PHPS-T (top), and the 

difference between the payback periods of PHPS-E and PHPS-T solutions (bottom) as a 

function of the THP and EHP COPs for four different PGU conversion efficiencies. Payback 

periods are calculated with respect to the reference case (Figure 1-a). As expected, increasing 

the EHP COP produces a significant increment on the payback period of the PHPS-T solution, 

hindering its profitability (Figure 6-top). This increment could result in intolerable payback 


20

periods (> 20 years) if the THP COP is low (< 0.7) and the EHP COP is reasonably high (> 4). 

In this case, the PHPS-E solution would be the preferable solution, with payback periods 

significantly shorter than those of PHPS-T. Very high THP COPs (more than ~ 1.3) would be 

needed for PHPS-T to reach reasonably low payback periods (< 12 years) when the EHP COP is 

considerably high (~ 6 or beyond). In this case, the PHPS-T solution could provide significantly 

shorter payback periods than PHPS-E. It is worth noticing that the improvement of the EHP 

COP is beneficial not only for the PHPS-E system, but also for the reference case. Thus, 

improving the EHP COP does not bring a significant reduction of the payback period for the 

PHPS-E system with respect to the reference case. For this reason, the only way to drastically 

reduce the payback period is to adopt the PHPS-T solution with a very highly efficient THP. 

High THP COPs of 1.2 – 1.7 can be attained with current state of the art double-stage or triple-

stage absorption chillers operating at temperatures in the range of 150 - 250 ºC [35], [66], [67]. 

This implies that a PHPS-T solution should rely on the use of PGU with a high-grade rejected 

heat (> 150 ºC) able to power an efficient double- or triple-stage absorption chiller. Otherwise, 

the PHPS-E system would be a preferable solution. This will impact on the selection of the 

PGU. High rejection temperature dynamic engines or solid-state devices are preferable. In this 

regard, the low rejection temperature of TPV devices is detrimental. High TPV cell 

temperatures lead to a significant reduction of the conversion efficiency. Thus, the requirement 

of higher temperature rejected heat points in the direction of an interesting research line for 

TPV, which is the development of highly efficient TPV cells able to operate at temperatures of 

~ 200ºC [72]. Other high-rejection temperature solid-state alternatives, such as thermionic 

generators [72], could also be regarded as an interesting option for the future.

Figure 7 shows the optimization results for a PHPS-T system with COPEHP = 4 and COPTHP = 

1.3; thus, representing a case where the PHPS-T system provides shorter payback periods than 

PHPS-E, as shown in Figure 6 (bottom). The results are presented in a similar way than it was 

done in Figure 4 for the PHPS-E system, evaluating the four scenarios in Table 2. Despite the

fact that the general tendencies are similar, there are some remarkable differences. First, the 

optimal PHPS-T system requires smaller components, ultimately resulting in significantly 

shorter payback periods (8 – 14 years). This is mostly attributed to the reduction in the 

electricity consumption when removing the EHP, which results in a significantly lower amount 

of electricity that needs to be generated and stored by the PV+PHPS system; thus, leading to 

smaller HTES and PGU devices. It is worth mentioning that the smaller HTES and PGU 

devices also result in a slightly lower potential of the PHPS-T solution to reduce the grid-

electricity consumption. This illustrates an existing trade-off between obtaining either small 

payback periods or high energetic savings.


21

The other main difference observed when comparing PHPS-T (Figure 7) with PHPS-E (Figure 

4) is the increment in the consumption of fuel (up to ~ 20%). The THP consumes large amounts 

of heat, especially in summer, which cannot be fully provided by the rejected heat from the 

PGU. This implies that a larger amount of external fuel is consumed. This contributes to the 

increase of the CO2 equivalent emissions, which are barely compensated by the savings in 

emissions due to the self-consumption of solar-PV electricity. As a result, the PHPS-T solution 

produce significantly lower savings in CO2 emissions (up to ~ 0.75-ton eqCO2/year, from a total 

emission of 5.2 ton/year). If the COPTHP would be lower, a PHPS-T solution could even produce 

an increment of the emissions with respect to the reference case. It must be noticed that these 

results are obtained for a system that aims at minimizing the lifetime cost of electricity. 

Choosing other kinds of merit functions (e.g. the total LCOE in eq. 1) would lead to larger 

HTES and PGU systems that bring higher savings in CO2 emissions at the expenses of 

increasing the payback period. Another obvious strategy to reduce the CO2 emissions could be 

hybridizing a PHPS-T solution with a kind of renewable heat source, such as solar thermal 

collectors. The resultant hybrid PHPS-T solution would enable a significant reduction in the 

CO2 emissions of up to 4.5 ton/year (from the total reference emissions of 5.2 ton/year), as well 

as a low payback period of 12 years or below.

4
Conclusions

In this article we have evaluated the implementation of a power-to-heat-to-power storage 

solution for the self-consumption of solar PV electricity in a dwelling in Madrid. Our results 

indicate that the solution has potential to provide a significant amount of savings in the 

consumption of grid electricity (> 70%) with reasonably short discounted payback periods (< 15 

years), if compared to a solution that uses fuel for heating and grid-electricity. This holds true

even when the heat-to-power conversion efficiencies is moderately low (20 - 30%), provided 

that the economic conditions are favourable. If the cost of the technology is sufficiently low, 

there exists a certain thermal-to-electric conversion efficiency (~ 40% in the most favourable 

case analysed in this study) beyond which the power generation system can be made slightly 

smaller, but the amount of savings in electricity does not increase, i.e. increasing the efficiency 

might not be as important as it could be intuitively expected. Besides, the inefficient power 

conversion process results in a large amount of rejected heat that can be used to satisfy other 

kinds of energetic demands. For instance, if an electrically driven heat pump is used for cooling,

the rejected heat could be used for providing space heating and domestic hot water, bringing 

additional savings in the fuel consumption in the range of 10 – 20%, and global savings in CO2

equivalent emissions in the range of 1.2 – 1.6 ton/year (24 – 31%). If a thermally driven heat 


22

pump is used instead, the generated heat could be also used for satisfying the cooling demands.

This leads to shorter payback periods if the COP of the thermally driven heat pump is 

significantly high (> 1.3). This condition is attainable by current state of the art double- or 

triple-stage absorption chillers operating at temperatures in the range of 150 – 250 ºC, meaning 

that a high rejection temperature would be necessary in the conversion of the stored heat into 

electricity. However, the very large cooling needs during summer in Madrid may not be fully 

satisfied by the rejected heat in the system, in which case an extra consumption of fuel is

needed, subsequently leading to a small reduction (or even an increment) in the greenhouse gas 

emissions. A possible solution consists of replacing the use of fossil fuels by a renewable heat 

source, such as solar thermal. In this case, the entire power-to-heat-to-power solution 

comprising a highly efficient thermally driven heat pump and solar thermal collectors could

provide a drastic reduction of the emissions (~ 4.5 ton/year, or 86%) while keeping reasonably 

short payback periods (< 12 years). Notice that a clearer economic advantage would be obtained 

if we compared the proposed PHPS solution with a reference case that uses an electric-powered

boiler, instead of a fuel-powered one. This most favourable scenario is not analysed in this 

study, and should be assessed in future works.

The main drawback of the proposed solution, independently of using a thermally- or an 

electrically-driven heat pump, concerns the small self-consumption ratios of PV electricity (40 –

60%), which are mainly attributed to the large amount of heat losses in the high temperature 

thermal store. Possible ways of minimizing these losses include the development of novel ultra-

dense heat stores at moderately low temperatures, or more advanced thermal insulation systems.

Another disadvantage concerns the low readiness level of heat-to-power generation technologies 

that are highly efficient at small scales (~ 1 kW). Some solid-state power generators, such as 

thermophotovoltaics, show potential to reach the required conversion efficiency and low cost. 

However, they are not readily available in the market. Next works should assess the use of 

PHPS systems in larger residential buildings, where the use of market-available dynamic 

engines, such as Stirling generators, could be profitable. Future analyses should also assess the 

possibility of selling the excess of PV electricity to the grid, which has been disregarded in the 

current work. This could negatively impact on the profitability of the solution as it is considered

in this study.

Finally, regardless of the particular system implementation, the system model and methodology 

presented in this article becomes a quite powerful tool which will allow to answer fundamental 

questions regarding the profitability of different energy solutions (including novel energy 

storage technologies) by evaluating payback periods and energy saving as well as optimal sizing 

that results in minimum costs of energy, among many other parameters.


23

5
Acknowledgements

This work has been partially funded by the projects MADRID-PV2-CM (P2018/EMT-4308),

funded by the government of the Comunidad de Madrid with the support from FEDER Funds, 

TORMES (ENE2015-72843-EXP), and AMADEUS (737054), funded by the European 

Commission through the Horizon 2020 programme, FET-OPEN action. The sole responsibility 

for the content of this publication lies with the authors. It does not necessarily reflect the 

opinion of the European Union. Neither the REA nor the European Commission are responsible 

for any use that may be made of the information contained therein. A. Datas acknowledges 

postdoctoral fellowship support from the Spanish "Juan de la Cierva-Incorporación" program 

(IJCI-2015-23747). A. Ramos acknowledges the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya for her 

Serra Hunter Tenure Track professor post. The authors acknowledge the fruitful discussions to 

Dra. Marta Victoria Pérez, especially concerning the methodology to assess the economic 

aspects of the system, and to Dr. Stephan Lang for his advices concerning the thermal losses 

analysis in the heat stores.

References

[1]
P. Nejat, F. Jomehzadeh, M. M. Taheri, M. Gohari, and M. Z. Abd. Majid, “A global 
review of energy consumption, CO2 emissions and policy in the residential sector (with an 
overview of the top ten CO2 emitting countries),” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 43, pp. 843–862, Mar. 2015.

[2]
D. W. Wu and R. Z. Wang, “Combined cooling, heating and power: A review,” Progress 
in Energy and Combustion Science, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 459–495, Sep. 2006.

[3]
H. I. Onovwiona and V. I. Ugursal, “Residential cogeneration systems: review of the 
current technology,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 389–
431, Oct. 2006.

[4]
H. Cho, A. D. Smith, and P. Mago, “Combined cooling, heating and power: A review of 
performance improvement and optimization,” Applied Energy, vol. 136, pp. 168–185, 
Dec. 2014.

[5]
D. Sonar, S. L. Soni, and D. Sharma, “Micro-trigeneration for energy sustainability: 
Technologies, tools and trends,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 790–
796, Oct. 2014.

[6]
L. Trygg and S. Amiri, “European perspective on absorption cooling in a combined heat 
and power system – A case study of energy utility and industries in Sweden,” Applied 
Energy, vol. 84, no. 12, pp. 1319–1337, Dec. 2007.

[7]
I. Staffell, D. Brett, N. Brandon, and A. Hawkes, “A review of domestic heat pumps,” 
Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 5, no. 11, pp. 9291–9306, Oct. 2012.

[8]
E. Bellos and C. Tzivanidis, “Multi-objective optimization of a solar driven trigeneration 
system,” Energy, vol. 149, pp. 47–62, Apr. 2018.

[9]
A. Ramos, M. A. Chatzopoulou, J. Freeman, and C. N. Markides, “Optimisation of a high-
efficiency solar-driven organic Rankine cycle for applications in the built environment,” 
Applied Energy, vol. 228, pp. 755–765, Oct. 2018.


24

[10] A. Kasaeian, G. Nouri, P. Ranjbaran, and D. Wen, “Solar collectors and photovoltaics as 

combined heat and power systems: A critical review,” Energy Conversion and 
Management, vol. 156, pp. 688–705, Jan. 2018.

[11] K. E. N’Tsoukpoe et al., “Integrated design and construction of a micro-central tower 

power plant,” Energy for Sustainable Development, vol. 31, pp. 1–13, Apr. 2016.

[12] Y. M. Seshie, K. E. N’Tsoukpoe, P. Neveu, Y. Coulibaly, and Y. K. Azoumah, “Small 

scale concentrating solar plants for rural electrification,” Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, vol. 90, pp. 195–209, Jul. 2018.

[13] R. Luthander, J. Widén, D. Nilsson, and J. Palm, “Photovoltaic self-consumption in 

buildings: A review,” Applied Energy, vol. 142, pp. 80–94, Mar. 2015.

[14] “REN21. 2018. Renewables 2018 Global Status Report,” ISBN 978-3-9818107-0-7, 2018.
[15] “IEA SNAPSHOT OF GLOBAL PHOTOVOLTAIC MARKETS,” IEA - International 

Energy Agency, IEA PVPS T1-33:2018, 2018.

[16] REN21, “RENEWABLES 2018 GLOBAL STATUS REPORT.”
[17] A. H. Nosrat, L. G. Swan, and J. M. Pearce, “Improved performance of hybrid 

photovoltaic-trigeneration systems over photovoltaic-cogen systems including effects of 
battery storage,” Energy, vol. 49, pp. 366–374, Jan. 2013.

[18] A. S. Mundada, K. K. Shah, and J. M. Pearce, “Levelized cost of electricity for solar 

photovoltaic, battery and cogen hybrid systems,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 57, pp. 692–703, May 2016.

[19] S. Acha, A. Mariaud, N. Shah, and C. N. Markides, “Optimal design and operation of 

distributed low-carbon energy technologies in commercial buildings,” Energy, vol. 142, 
pp. 578–591, Jan. 2018.

[20] Y.-Y. Jing, H. Bai, J.-J. Wang, and L. Liu, “Life cycle assessment of a solar combined 

cooling heating and power system in different operation strategies,” Applied Energy, vol. 
92, pp. 843–853, Apr. 2012.

[21] A. H. A. Al-Waeli, K. Sopian, H. A. Kazem, and M. T. Chaichan, “Photovoltaic/Thermal 

(PV/T) systems: Status and future prospects,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 77, pp. 109–130, Sep. 2017.

[22] A. Ramos, M. A. Chatzopoulou, I. Guarracino, J. Freeman, and C. N. Markides, “Hybrid 

photovoltaic-thermal solar systems for combined heating, cooling and power provision in 
the urban environment,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 150, pp. 838–850, 
Oct. 2017.

[23] M. Herrando, A. Ramos, I. Zabalza, and  christos N. Markides, “Energy Performance of a 

Solar Trigeneration System Based on a Novel Hybrid PVT Panel for Residential 
Applications,” in Proc. of the Solar World Conference, 2017.

[24] M. Herrando and C. N. Markides, “Hybrid PV and solar-thermal systems for domestic 

heat and power provision in the UK: Techno-economic considerations,” Applied Energy, 
vol. 161, pp. 512–532, Jan. 2016.

[25] A. Selviaridis, B. R. Burg, A. S. Wallerand, F. Maréchal, and B. Michel, “Thermo-

economic analysis of a trigeneration HCPVT power plant,” AIP Conference Proceedings, 
vol. 1679, no. 1, p. 100004, Sep. 2015.

[26] C. J. C. Williams, J. O. Binder, and T. Kelm, “Demand side management through heat 

pumps, thermal storage and battery storage to increase local self-consumption and grid 
compatibility of PV systems,” in 2012 3rd IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies 
Europe (ISGT Europe), 2012, pp. 1–6.

[27] J. Tong, Z. Quan, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, J. Cai, and Y. Chi, “The Study on the Performance 

of Solar Photovoltaic and Air Source Heat Pump Composite Building Energy Supply 
System,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 205, pp. 4082–4089, Jan. 2017.

[28] C. Roselli, M. Sasso, and F. Tariello, “Integration between electric heat pump and PV 

system to increase self-consumption of an office application,” Renew. Energy Environ. 
Sustain., vol. 2, p. 28, 2017.

[29] A. Bloess, W.-P. Schill, and A. Zerrahn, “Power-to-heat for renewable energy integration: 

A review of technologies, modeling approaches, and flexibility potentials,” Applied 
Energy, vol. 212, pp. 1611–1626, Feb. 2018.


25

[30] J. Li and M. A. Danzer, “Optimal charge control strategies for stationary photovoltaic 

battery systems,” Journal of Power Sources, vol. 258, pp. 365–373, Jul. 2014.

[31] R. Thygesen and B. Karlsson, “Simulation and analysis of a solar assisted heat pump 

system with two different storage types for high levels of PV electricity self-
consumption,” Solar Energy, vol. 103, pp. 19–27, May 2014.

[32] D. Parra, G. S. Walker, and M. Gillott, “Are batteries the optimum PV-coupled energy 

storage for dwellings? Techno-economic comparison with hot water tanks in the UK,” 
Energy and Buildings, vol. 116, pp. 614–621, Mar. 2016.

[33] A. Mariaud, S. Acha, N. Ekins-Daukes, N. Shah, and C. N. Markides, “Integrated 

optimisation of photovoltaic and battery storage systems for UK commercial buildings,” 
Applied Energy, vol. 199, pp. 466–478, Aug. 2017.

[34] O. Schmidt, A. Hawkes, A. Gambhir, and I. Staffell, “The future cost of electrical energy 

storage based on experience rates,” Nature Energy, vol. 2, no. 8, p. 17110, Aug. 2017.

[35] R. Z. Wang, X. Yu, T. S. Ge, and T. X. Li, “The present and future of residential 

refrigeration, power generation and energy storage,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 
53, no. 2, pp. 256–270, May 2013.

[36] M. Zheng, C. J. Meinrenken, and K. S. Lackner, “Smart households: Dispatch strategies 

and economic analysis of distributed energy storage for residential peak shaving,” Applied 
Energy, vol. 147, pp. 246–257, Jun. 2015.

[37] Y. Li, X. Wang, D. Li, and Y. Ding, “A trigeneration system based on compressed air and 

thermal energy storage,” Applied Energy, vol. 99, pp. 316–323, Nov. 2012.

[38] D. Teichmann, K. Stark, K. Müller, G. Zöttl, P. Wasserscheid, and W. Arlt, “Energy 

storage in residential and commercial buildings via Liquid Organic Hydrogen Carriers 
(LOHC),” Energy Environ. Sci., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 9044–9054, Sep. 2012.

[39] L. A. Weinstein, J. Loomis, B. Bhatia, D. M. Bierman, E. N. Wang, and G. Chen, 

“Concentrating Solar Power,” Chem. Rev., vol. 115, no. 23, pp. 12797–12838, Dec. 2015.

[40] M. A. Sabiha, R. Saidur, S. Mekhilef, and O. Mahian, “Progress and latest developments 

of evacuated tube solar collectors,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 51, 
pp. 1038–1054, Nov. 2015.

[41] A. Datas, A. Ramos, A. Martí, C. del Cañizo, and A. Luque, “Ultra high temperature 

latent heat energy storage and thermophotovoltaic energy conversion,” Energy, vol. 107, 
pp. 542–549, Jul. 2016.

[42] A. Datas et al., “AMADEUS: Next generation materials and solid state devices for ultra 

high temperature energy storage and conversion,” in AIP Conference Proceedings, 2018, 
vol. 2033, p. 170004.

[43] T. Desrues, J. Ruer, P. Marty, and J. F. Fourmigué, “A thermal energy storage process for 

large scale electric applications,” Applied Thermal Engineering, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 425–
432, Apr. 2010.

[44] A. Thess, “Thermodynamic Efficiency of Pumped Heat Electricity Storage,” Phys. Rev. 

Lett., vol. 111, no. 11, p. 110602, Sep. 2013.

[45] R. B. Laughlin, “Pumped thermal grid storage with heat exchange,” Journal of Renewable 

and Sustainable Energy, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 044103, Jul. 2017.

[46] C. Amy, H. R. Seyf, M. A. Steiner, D. J. Friedman, and A. Henry, “Thermal energy grid 

storage using multi-junction photovoltaics,” Energy Environ. Sci., Nov. 2018.

[47] A. Robinson, “Ultra-high temperature thermal energy storage. part 1: concepts,” Journal

of Energy Storage, vol. 13, pp. 277–286, Oct. 2017.

[48] A. Robinson, “Ultra-high temperature thermal energy storage. Part 2: Engineering and 

operation,” Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 18, pp. 333–339, Aug. 2018.

[49] R. Sioshansi, P. Denholm, T. Jenkin, and J. Weiss, “Estimating the value of electricity 

storage in PJM: Arbitrage and some welfare effects,” Energy Economics, vol. 31, no. 2, 
pp. 269–277, Mar. 2009.

[50] P. Srikhirin, S. Aphornratana, and S. Chungpaibulpatana, “A review of absorption 

refrigeration technologies,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 
343–372, Dec. 2001.


26

[51] J. P. Kotzé, T. W. von Backström, and P. J. Erens, “High Temperature Thermal Energy 

Storage Utilizing Metallic Phase Change Materials and Metallic Heat Transfer Fluids,” 
Journal of Solar Energy Engineering, vol. 135, no. 3, pp. 035001–035001, May 2013.

[52] EnergyPlusTM. .
[53] Spanish Government, “Spanish Building Code (Código técnico de la edificación):  Orden 

FOM/1635/2013, de 10 de septiembre, por la que se actualiza el Documento Básico DB-
HE «Ahorro de Energía», del Código Técnico de la Edificación, aprobado por Real 
Decreto 314/2006, de 17 de marzo, Boletín Oficial del Estado.,” 2013.

[54] B. Atanasiu, J. Maio, D. Staniaszek, I. Kouloumpi, and T. Kenkmann, “ENTRANZE 

Project, “Overview of the EU-27 Building Policies and Programs. Factsheets on the nine 
Entranze Target Countries,” 2014.

[55] JRC IPTS, 2012, “Green Public Procurement: Windows Technical Background Report. 

Windows, Glazed Doors and Skylights,” 2012.

[56] “PVsyst Software.” [Online]. Available: http://www.pvsyst.com/en/software. [Accessed: 

11-Sep-2018].

[57] J. Lagarias, J. Reeds, M. Wright, and P. Wright, “Convergence properties of the Nelder-

Mead simplex method in low dimensions,” Siam Journal on Optimization, vol. 9, no. 1, 
pp. 112–147, Dec. 1998.

[58] A. JÄGER-WALDAU, “PV Status Report 2018,” EUR 29463 EN, 2018.
[59] A. M. Elshurafa, S. R. Albardi, S. Bigerna, and C. A. Bollino, “Estimating the learning 

curve of solar PV balance–of–system for over 20 countries: Implications and policy 
recommendations,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 196, pp. 122–134, Sep. 2018.

[60] A. Louwen, W. G. J. H. M. van Sark, A. P. C. Faaij, and R. E. I. Schropp, “Re-assessment 

of net energy production and greenhouse gas emissions avoidance after 40 years of 
photovoltaics development,” Nature Communications, vol. 7, p. 13728, Dec. 2016.

[61] R. Dones, T. Heck, and S. Hirschberg, “Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Energy 

Systems: Comparison And Overview,” 2004.

[62] R. W. Howarth, “A bridge to nowhere: methane emissions and the greenhouse gas 

footprint of natural gas,” Energy Science & Engineering, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 47–60, 2014.

[63] A. Moro and L. Lonza, “Electricity carbon intensity in European Member States: Impacts 

on GHG emissions of electric vehicles,” Transportation Research Part D: Transport and 
Environment, vol. 64, pp. 5–14, Oct. 2018.

[64] N. Pardo Garcia, K. Vatopoulos, A. Krook Riekkola, A. Perez Lopez, and L. Olsen, “Best 

available technologies for the heat and cooling market in the European Union,” Joint 
Reserach Center, EUR 25407 EN, 2012.

[65] G. Grossman, “Solar-powered systems for cooling, dehumidification and air-

conditioning,” Solar Energy, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 53–62, Jan. 2002.

[66] D. S. Kim and C. A. Infante Ferreira, “Solar refrigeration options – a state-of-the-art 

review,” International Journal of Refrigeration, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 3–15, Jan. 2008.

[67] Y. Fan, L. Luo, and B. Souyri, “Review of solar sorption refrigeration technologies: 

Development and applications,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 11, no. 
8, pp. 1758–1775, Oct. 2007.

[68] E. Vartiainen, G. Masson, and C. Breyer, “The True Competitiveness of Solar PV. A 

European Case Study,” European PV Technology and Innovation Platform (ETIP PV), 
2017.

[69] C. K. Ho, M. Carlson, P. Garg, and P. Kumar, “Cost and Performance Tradeoffs of 

Alternative Solar-Driven S-CO2 Brayton Cycle Configurations,” presented at the ASME 
2015 9th International Conference on Energy Sustainability collocated with the ASME 
2015 Power Conference, the ASME 2015 13th International Conference on Fuel Cell 
Science, Engineering and Technology, and the ASME 2015 Nuclear Forum, 2015, p. 
V001T05A016-V001T05A016.

[70] S. Quoilin, M. V. D. Broek, S. Declaye, P. Dewallef, and V. Lemort, “Techno-economic 

survey of Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC) systems,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, vol. 22, pp. 168–186, Jun. 2013.


27

[71] P. A. Pilavachi, “Mini- and micro-gas turbines for combined heat and power,” Applied 

Thermal Engineering, vol. 22, no. 18, pp. 2003–2014, Dec. 2002.

[72] A. Datas and A. Martí, “Thermophotovoltaic energy in space applications: Review and 

future potential,” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 161, pp. 285–296, Mar. 
2017.

[73] A. Mazzetti, M. Gianotti Pret, G. Pinarello, L. Celotti, M. Piskacev, and A. Cowley, “Heat 

to electricity conversion systems for moon exploration scenarios: A review of space and 
ground technologies,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 156, pp. 162–186, Mar. 2019.

[74] D. N. Woolf et al., “High-efficiency thermophotovoltaic energy conversion enabled by a 

metamaterial selective emitter,” Optica, OPTICA, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 213–218, Feb. 2018.

[75] EASE (European Association for Storage of Energy), “Thermal Hot Water Storage.” .
[76] L. F. Cabeza, E. Galindo, C. Prieto, C. Barreneche, and A. Inés Fernández, “Key 

performance indicators in thermal energy storage: Survey and assessment,” Renewable 
Energy, vol. 83, pp. 820–827, Nov. 2015.


28

Figure 1. Illustration of the electrical (grey dashed lines) and thermal (red solid lines) energy 

flows in the system configurations analysed in this study: (a) reference case comprising a boiler 

for heating and an electrically driven heat pump (EHP) for cooling, (b) PHPS-E configuration 

comprising an EHP for cooling, a solar PV system, a high- and low- grade thermal stores 

(HTES and LTES, respectively), and a power generation unit (PGU), c) PHPS-T configuration 

similar to the PHPS-E but using a thermally-driven heat pump (THP) instead of an EHP. Notice 

that in each case, the variables take different values (e.g. the electricity consumption Ce is lower 

in the PHPS-T system than in the other two cases). The same notation is used to avoid an 

excessively complicated notation.


29

Figure 2. Energy management algorithm and system model equations. 


30

Figure 3. Simulation results for a PHPHS-E system (Figure 1) under Scenario 1 (Table 1). 

Other system parameters as set to the values in Table 2. (a) Hourly variation of both grid- and 
self-consumed electricity along with the thermal energy stored in the HTES (top) and the hourly 

variation of both grid- and self-consumed heat along with the thermal energy stored in the 

LTES (bottom) for an optimized system with 𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈 = 30%, 𝑃𝑛𝑜𝑚,𝑃𝑉 = 10.6 kWel, 𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑃𝐺𝑈 =

1.35 kWel, and 𝐸𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 33.7 kWth; (b-d) Contour plots representing the savings of 

electricity, in percentage with respect to the reference case (Figure 1), for an optimized system
and two PGU conversion efficiencies (20 % and 40 %) as a function of (b) the CAPEX of PGU 

and HTES, (c) the HTES temperature and 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆, (d) the CAPEX of PV system and the 

difference between WACC and the energy price inflation rate.


31

Figure 4. Performance parameters of an optimized PHPS-E system (Figure 1-b) installed in 

Madrid as a function of the PGU conversion efficiency, evaluated for the four different 

economic scenarios indicated in Table 2.


32

Figure 5. Contribution of each kind of energy loss in a PHPS-E system optimized for each 

scenario indicated in Table 2: (a) Thermal insulation losses in the HTES, (b) thermal insulation 
losses in the LTES, (c) PV electricity that is not used nor stored, (d) waste heat from the PGU

that is not stored in the LTES.


33

Figure 6. (top) Contour plots representing the discounted payback period resulting from the 

installation of an optimized PHPS-T system as a function of the COP of THP (used in the 

PHPS-T system) and the COP of the EHP (used in the reference system); (bottom) contour plots 
representing the difference between the discounted payback period of a PHPS-E and a PHPS-T 
solution as a function of the COP of THP (used in the PHPS-T system) and the COP of the EHP 

(used in the PHPS-E system). Positive values (in blue) represent a PHPS-E solution with a 

shorter payback period than the PHPS-T one. Results are shown for four different PGU 

efficiencies. The rest of the parameters are taken from Table 1 and the Scenario 1 in Table 2.


34

Figure 7. Performance parameters of an optimized PHPS-T system (Figure 1-c) installed in 

Madrid as a function of the PGU conversion efficiency, evaluated for the four different 

economic scenarios indicated in Table 2.


35

Table 1. Summary of the techno-economic variables used to describe the PHPS+PV system. 

Parameter
Value
Units

PGU conversion efficiency (𝜂𝑃𝐺𝑈)
Independent variable
%

PV nominal installed power (𝑃𝑛𝑜𝑚,𝑃𝑉)
Variable (optimized)
kWel

HTES maximum capacity (𝐸𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥)
Variable (optimized)
kWhth

PGU maximum generation capacity (𝑃𝑚𝑎𝑥,𝑃𝐺𝑈)
Variable (optimized)
kWel

Inflation for electricity and fuel (𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑒 = 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑙 = 𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙)
Variable (Table 2)
%

Weighted average cost of capital (𝑊𝐴𝐶𝐶𝑛𝑜𝑚)
Variable (Table 2)
%

CAPEX of HTES (𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆

∗
)
Variable (Table 2)
€/kWhth

CAPEX of PGU (𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑃𝐺𝑈

∗
)
Variable (Table 2)
€/kWel

CAPEX of PV (𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑃𝑉

∗ )
Variable (Table 2)
€/kWel

CAPEX of LTES (𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆

∗
)
30 [75], [76]
€/kWhth

CAPEX of EHP and THP (𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝐸𝐻𝑃

∗
= 𝐶𝐴𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑇𝐻𝑃

∗
)
500 [7][64]
€/kWcool

LTES temperature (∆𝑇𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆)
70 (for PHPS-E)
130 (for PHPS-T)
ºC

HTES temperature (∆𝑇𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆)
1200
ºC

Parameter “aLTES” for heat losses
0.1
W·K-1dm-3/2

Parameter “aHTES” for heat losses
0.1
W·K-1dm-3/2

Overall inflation (𝐼𝑛𝑓𝑙)
2
%

LTES maximum capacity (𝐸𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆,𝑚𝑎𝑥)
20
kWhth

Installation lifetime (𝑇)
25
years

CO2 emissions of external fuel heating
250 [61]
gCO2eq/kWhth

CO2 emissions of external grid electricity
340 [63]
gCO2eq/kWhel

CO2 life-cycle equivalent emissions of PV electricity
20 [60]
gCO2eq/kWhel

CO2 life-cycle equivalent emissions of HTES, LTES and PGU
Neglected (*)
gCO2eq/kWhel

COP of EHP (𝐶𝑂𝑃𝐸𝐻𝑃)
4 [7]
-

COP of THP (𝐶𝑂𝑃𝑇𝐻𝑃)
1.3 [35], [66], [67]
-

Variable cost of grid electricity (𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑣𝑎𝑟

∗
)
0.17
€/kWhel

Fixed cost of grid electricity (𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐,𝑓𝑖𝑥

∗
)
50
€/kWel-year

Variable cost of fuel (𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑣𝑎𝑟

∗
)
0.07
€/kWhth

Fixed cost of fuel (𝑂𝑃𝐸𝑋𝑓𝑢𝑒𝑙,𝑓𝑖𝑥)
60
€/year

(*) Due to the difficulty on estimating the life cycle emissions for the HTES, LTES and PGU devices, we 
neglect their contribution. Thus, the CO2 equivalent emissions will need to be corrected accordingly, 
when confident data become available.


36

Table 2. Economic scenarios considered in the study

Scenario
WACCnom

(%)

Infle
(%)

CAPEXHTES

(€/kWhth)

CAPEXPGU

(€/kWel)

CAPEXPV
(€/kWel)

Scenario 1

2
4

30
300
900

Scenario 2
100
1000
1200
Scenario 3

3
2
Scenario 4
200
2000


37

Table 3. Summary of the results for the two kinds of systems (PHPS-E and PHPS-T) indicated 
in Figure 1, and the four scenarios described in Table 2. The rest of parameters are set to the 

values indicated in Table 1.

Scenario

PGU 
Eff 
(%)

Optimized variables
Merit figures

PGU 
size

(kWel)

HTES 

size

(kWhth)

PV 
size

(kWel)

Total 
CAPE
X (*) 

(k€) 

Discounte
d payback 

period
(years)

PV self-

consumptio
n ratio (%)

Electricit
y saves

(%)

Fuel 
saves 
(%)

CO2

emission 

saves

(ton/year)

PHPS-E
Scenario 1

60
3.11
49.02
11.48
12.74
11.82
41.0
95.3
19.0
1.69

40
2.15
62.87
11.62
12.99
12.99
38.6
91.7
18.0
1.59

20
1.25
29.47
8.37
8.79
12.22
48.7
69.3
19.8
1.46

PHPS-E
Scenario 2

60
0.94
16.67
6.20
10.05
14.14
50.2
75.6
9.6
1.20

40
0.82
22.20
7.63
12.20
15.51
48.1
75.0
14.8
1.36

20
0.16
3.85
2.29
3.28
14.70
49.7
28.1
3.7
0.45

PHPS-E
Scenario 3

60
0.79
8.53
3.47
5.81
17.11
56.2
54.3
4.4
0.80

40
0.04
0.01
1.33
1.64
13.45
70.4
20.5
3.8
0.39

20
0.02
0.01
1.45
1.76
13.54
70.4
20.7
4.5
0.41

PHPS-E
Scenario 4

60
0.04
0.01
1.34
1.68
13.53
71.6
20.9
3.8
0.39

40
0.04
0.00
1.34
1.69
13.66
70.6
20.6
3.9
0.39

20
0.02
0.01
1.40
1.71
13.84
69.0
20.2
4.1
0.39

PHPS-T
Scenario 1

60
0.80
14.18
4.68
4.88
9.14
42.3
85.6
-17.6
0.32

40
0.80
17.19
5.50
5.71
9.59
45.9
84.8
-12.5
0.49

20
0.80
19.37
6.02
6.24
9.52
56.6
77.9
-3.2
0.74

PHPS-T
Scenario 2

60
0.80
7.73
3.36
5.60
11.38
52.6
76.4
-17.5
0.24

40
0.79
10.24
3.82
6.39
12.17
53.8
75.0
-14.6
0.32

20
0.04
0.01
1.75
2.14
7.95
66.4
49.3
-16.2
-0.02

PHPS-T
Scenario 3

60
0.71
6.82
2.85
4.81
13.36
51.3
71.8
-19.2
0.13

40
0.04
0.00
1.32
1.62
8.47
63.2
47.4
-18.8
-0.14

20
0.02
0.01
1.23
1.50
8.51
59.7
45.8
-19.3
-0.18

PHPS-T
Scenario 4

60
0.05
0.00
1.14
1.46
8.33
63.9
46.5
-19.7
-0.18

40
0.04
0.00
1.18
1.49
8.44
61.6
46.2
-19.5
-0.18

20
0.02
0.01
1.19
1.46
8.55
58.5
45.4
-19.6
-0.19

(*) The addition of the CAPEX of PGU, HTES and PV systems


38

Table 4. Identical results than in Table 3, but for the case of loss-less (adiabatic) HTES and 

LTES (i.e. 𝑎𝐻𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 𝑎𝐿𝑇𝐸𝑆 = 0). The values in this table represent the upper bound for 
performance (unattainable in practice) of PHPS concept under the selected scenarios.

Scenario

PGU 
Eff 
(%)

Optimized variables
Merit figures

PGU 
size

(kWel)

HTES 

size

(kWhth)

PV 
size

(kWel)

Total 
CAPE

X(*)

(k€) 

Discounte
d payback 

period
(years)

PV self-

consumptio
n ratio (%)

Electricit
y saves

(%)

Fuel 
saves 
(%)

CO2

emission 

saves

(ton/year)

PHPS-E
Scenario 

1

60
3.35
51.92
6.77
8.65
7.78
81.3
99.0
24.8
2.09

40
2.78
52.84
8.67
10.22
8.80
70.4
97.5
30.7
2.25

20
1.32
32.09
7.31
7.93
9.26
73.5
78.5
28.8
1.96

PHPS-E
Scenario 

2

60
2.13
31.25
5.93
12.37
11.69
85.9
95.4
22.1
1.96

40
0.87
20.47
5.86
9.95
11.25
81.6
81.5
22.7
1.80

20
0.71
20.14
5.20
8.97
12.65
80.9
63.3
22.1
1.56

PHPS-E
Scenario 

3

60
0.78
13.74
4.05
7.01
11.27
93.4
78.4
14.4
1.49

40
0.78
13.53
3.77
6.66
12.69
92.5
68.7
14.2
1.36

20
0.17
6.76
2.01
3.25
12.81
98.8
32.4
9.8
0.75

PHPS-E
Scenario 

4

60
0.67
12.24
3.65
8.16
14.28
95.2
73.0
13.1
1.38

40
0.30
6.29
2.32
4.64
14.16
99.0
44.1
9.7
0.90

20
0.03
0.27
1.42
1.81
11.55
100
21.1
7.5
0.53

PHPS-T
Scenario 

1

60
0.80
17.69
3.11
3.57
5.86
100
93.3
-10.7
0.74

40
0.80
19.62
3.94
4.38
6.25
100
91.8
-2.8
1.00

20
0.80
24.01
5.34
5.77
6.98
97.0
86.6
9.6
1.38

PHPS-T
Scenario 

2

60
0.79
9.55
2.94
5.27
8.39
100
90.4
-11.6
0.67

40
0.80
12.62
3.42
6.16
9.06
100
87.7
-6.5
0.82

20
0.47
14.78
3.68
6.36
9.67
99.7
74.4
-0.9
0.85

PHPS-T
Scenario 

3

60
0.79
8.83
2.48
4.64
9.51
100
86.8
-14.8
0.51

40
0.72
11.13
2.84
5.24
10.30
100
82.4
-10.4
0.61

20
0.13
5.56
1.54
2.53
9.12
100
54.3
-15.1
0.09

PHPS-T
Scenario 

4

60
0.61
6.98
2.18
5.23
11.78
100
80.6
-15.9
0.39

40
0.20
4.77
1.69
3.39
10.44
100
61.4
-15.5
0.17

20
0.02
0.18
1.17
1.49
7.48
100
45.8
-16.3
-0.06

(*) The addition of the CAPEX of PGU, HTES and PV systems


