1

Extreme Sub-Wavelength Light Confinement 

in Plasmonic Film-Coupled Nanostar Resonators

Negar Charchi1, Ying Li2, Margaret Huber1, Elyahb Allie Kwizera3, Xiaohua Huang3, Christos 

Argyropoulos2, Thang Hoang1

1Department of Physics and Materials Science, The University of Memphis,

Memphis, TN 38152

2Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln,

Lincoln, NE 68588

3Department of Chemistry, The University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152

Confining light in extreme subwavelength scales is a tantalizing task. In this work, we report a 

study of individual plasmonic film-coupled nanostar resonators where plasmonic optical modes 

are trapped in ultrasmall volumes. Individual gold nanostars, separated from a flat gold film by a 

thin dielectric spacer layer, exhibit a strong light confinement between the sub-10 nm volume of 

the nanostar’s tips and the film. Through dark field scattering measurements of many individual 

nanostars, a statistical observation of the scattered spectra is obtained and compared with extensive 

simulation data to reveal the origins of the resonant peaks. We observe that an individual nanostar 

on a flat gold film can result in a resonant spectrum with single, double or multiple peaks. Further, 

these resonant peaks are strongly polarized under white light illumination. Our simulation data 

revealed that the resonant spectrum of an individual film-coupled nanostar resonator is related to 

the symmetry of the nanostar, as well as the orientation of the nanostar relative to its placement on 

the gold substrate. Our results demonstrate a simple method to create an ultrasmall mode volume 

plasmonic platform which could be useful for applications in sensing or enhanced light-matter 

interactions.


2

Attempts to create ultrasmall hot spots to confine light at the nanoscale have led to various 

nanophotonic system designs realized via both lithographic and colloidal approaches [1-9]. Among 

these, plasmonic nanoparticles have proven to be an excellent platform to strongly confine light at 

length scales much smaller than the diffraction limit [4, 10-13]. As a general rule of thumb, the 

mode volume (or the hot spot) of a plasmonic nanoparticle is scaled with the size of the particle. 

Further, the resonant wavelength is also proportional to the size of the particle itself [4, 10, 11, 

14]. For instance, the resonant wavelength of spherical gold (Au) occurs between 550 - 800 nm 

for particle sizes ranging from 30-100 nm. Similarly, for silver nanocubes with sizes varying from 

50-150 nm, their gap mode resonant wavelengths change from around 600 nm to 1200 nm [4, 10, 

14]. However, smaller particle sizes (< 30 nm) will limit the capability to perform single particle 

measurements due to the limited possibility of single particle identification, for example, under a 

dark field illumination. Therefore, the plasmonic hot spot volumes are usually in the order of a few 

tens of nanometers due to the relatively large particle sizes. Other lithographic techniques also 

attempted to create very small mode volume structures [2, 7] but the results are still limited to 

around 30 nm due to several limitations of conventional electron beam lithography systems. 

Recently, many works have devoted considerable attention to the optical properties of plasmonic 

nanostars [15-19], which have several advantageous characteristics. Unlike many other previously 

studied metallic nanoparticles with given symmetries, such as nanospheres [20, 21] or nanocubes 

[10, 14], nanopopcorns [22, 23] and nanostars [16-18] exhibit to a certain degree non-uniform 

distribution of localized plasmonic fields along their spikes or tips. Nanostars have recently 

attracted intensive attention in nanophotonics [18, 19], biology [24-27], and materials science [5, 

28, 29], thanks to their ability to localize electromagnetic fields in tiny hot spots at their highly 

engineered nanoscale tips. However, it is also noted that the majority of recent studies related to 

optical properties of Au nanostars have studied ensembles of particles [5, 24, 30], which cannot 

reveal the true origin of the mode resonances. Several works have also looked into the plasmon 

resonances of individual star-shaped nanoparticles in free space or in a solution [9, 15, 31]. Shao 

et. al. have also reported optical properties of single nanostars on an indium tin oxide substrate 

[17].

Here, we demonstrate an alternative approach to confine plasmonic optical modes in ultrasmall 

volumes by using film-coupled nanostar resonators. Specifically, a Au nanostar is placed on top 

of a Au film, separated by a thin (5 nm) dielectric polymer layer. We show that the plasmon 


3

resonances of the nanostar’s tips are significantly enhanced due to the resulted extreme sub-

wavelength mode volume. Our results clearly indicate that the highly intense electromagnetic field 

enhancement in the tiny gaps formed between the nanostar’s tips and the Au film can strongly 

confine light at a sub-10 nm volume. Moreover, the nanostars are clearly visible under a typical 

dark field microscope, despite the ultrasmall mode volume, allowing easy identification and 

measurement of single nanoparticles. Indeed, when illuminated by a white light source, the 

nanostars that are coupled to a Au film appear to be much brighter than the same particles that are 

deposited on a glass substrate. The strong light-matter interactions achieved by the proposed 

plasmonic film-coupled nanostar platform can be used for sensing [13], or nonlinear [32, 33],  and 

quantum [5, 34] optical applications.

The sample structure of this present study consists of colloidal synthesized iron oxide-gold core-

shell nanostars with an approximate size of 75 nm placed over a Au film (50 nm thick, fabricated 

by electron beam evaporation method). The magnetic iron oxide core was about 35 nm and the Au 

shell layer was 40 nm. The iron oxide-gold core-shell nanostar’s original purpose was to make use 

of its dual-functionality, namely magnetic and plasmonic properties, for biomedical applications 

[30]. However, for this particular work the iron core’s role was to serve as a catalyst for the 

nanostar growth and its influence on the plasmon resonances of the Au nanostar is negligible. The 

core-shell Au nanostar and the Au film were separated by a 5 nm polymer spacer layer sandwiched 

in between (Fig. 1(a)).

Fig. 1: (a) Schematic of the proposed ultrasmall mode volume plasmonic film-coupled 

nanostar resonator: A nanostar with sub-10 nm tips situated on top of a Au film, separated 

by a very thin 5 nm polymer dielectric layer. (b) TEM image of typical nanostars. Scale 

bar is 50 nm.


4

The polymer spacer layer was formed by alternative dip coating with polyelectrolytes (PE) [3]. 

Specifically, five alternating positive PAH (poly(allylamine) hydrochloride) and negative PSS 

(polystyrenesulfonate) layers (1 nm each) were used. The thickness of the spacer layer may affect 

the resonant wavelength and the amplitude of the scattered light intensity of the coupled nanostar-

film resonator, depending on the incident angle of the illuminated light [35]. The spikes (or tips) 

of the Au nanostars were estimated, via Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 

1(b)), to be less than 10 nm. Indeed, the small tips of the nanostar permit the formation of extremely 

tiny nanoscale hot spots. The deposition technique of nanostars on a Au film was described 

elsewhere [3] and the surface coverage of nanostars was less than 5% (Fig. 2).

In the experimental procedure, individual nanostars were identified and isolated by a set of lenses 

and pinholes to allow single particle measurements. Specifically, individual nanostars were 

illuminated by a white light source through a 100X Nikon objective lens operating in the dark field 

mode. The scattered light from particles was collected by the same objective, filtered by a pinhole 

aperture, refocused onto the entrance slit of a spectrometer (Horiba Jobin-Yvon iHR550) and 

analyzed by a CCD (Charged-Coupled Device) camera (Horiba Jobin-Yvon Synapse). For the TE 

(transverse electric) and TM (transverse magnetic) polarized light, our customized optical setup 

allowed for a rotatable linear polarizer to be placed in a microscope slider or on the optical path in 

free space. The final scattering spectrum of a particular particle was normalized as 𝑆𝑐𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑛𝑔 =

𝐼𝑁𝑆−𝐼𝑆𝑆

𝐼𝑊𝐿−𝐼𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑘 where 𝐼𝑁𝑆, 𝐼𝑆𝑆, 𝐼𝑊𝐿 and 𝐼𝑑𝑎𝑟𝑘 are the light intensities measured from the nanostar, 

substrate, white light standard reflection piece, and the CCD dark counts, respectively. For better 

visualization (Figs. 2(a) and 2 (b)) and for scattering intensity analysis (Fig. 2(c)), the nanostar 

scattering images were captured by a color camera (Thorlabs DCC 1645 C) and by a high dynamic 

range black and white camera (Photometrics CoolSnap DYNO).

Figures 2(a) and 2(b) show the dark field scattering color images of Au nanostars for two different 

cases: on a flat Au film and on a glass substrate, respectively. Individual Au nanostars are visible 

as bright, red dots. For both cases, an identical 5 nm thin polymer layer was coated on the Au film 

or glass substrate prior to the nanostar deposition. Due to the random distribution of the nanostars 

on a given substrate (Au or glass), it is not simple to compare the resonant characteristics of 

individual nanostars with different polymer layer gap thicknesses. A previous computational study 

by Solis et al. [35] has shown that depending on the incident angle of the illumination the thickness 


5

of the gap may have an effect on the spectral characteristics as well as the amplitude of the resonant 

peaks. In our optical measurements, because the nanostars’ orientations were random, the incident 

angle of the illumination could vary from one to another. Therefore, throughout this work we used 

a fixed polymer gap thickness of 5 nm to limit the number of involved parameters. It can be clearly 

seen that the nanostars on a Au film in Fig. 2(a) are much brighter compared to similar stars on a 

glass substrate (Fig. 2(b)). This indicates that the nanostars have coupled with the underneath Au 

film and resulted in a strong plasmonic resonance response. Furthermore, in order to confirm the 

individual bright scattering dots shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) are from individual nanostars, Fig. 

2(c) shows a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of nanostars on a Au film. Even though 

the SEM image cannot reveal detail of individual nanostar’s tip (inset of Fig. 2(c)), it is clear that 

the nanoparticles were well separated and did not form clusters. Further, we would like to mention 

that we could not perform the SEM measurement of nanostars on a glass substrate (without a Au 

mirror film) due to a charging issue. However, we believe that the distribution of the nanostars on 

a glass sample is the same as on a Au film sample, because in both cases the surface of the samples 

were coated with an identical 5 nm PE spacer layer.

The images presented in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) were captured by a color camera that has a 255-pixel 

depth for each color (red, green, and blue) and is only sensitive in the visible frequency range. In 

order to get the true image intensity from near UV to near IR (400-1050), we used another black 

and white CCD camera to take images of the nanostars for both cases. Fig. 2(c) shows the 

histogram of the integrated scattering intensity of individual nanostars for both samples. Each 

intensity value of an individual nanostar was integrated over an area of 20x20 pixels of the camera 

image. It is clear that the intensity from the film-coupled nanostar resonators is much brighter 

compared with the nanostars on a glass substrate. 

Figure 3 shows the scattering spectra for individual nanostars on a Au film (Figs. 3(a) and 3(b)) 

and on a glass substrate (Figs. 3(c) and 3(d)). Due to the fact that the deposited nanostars on a 

surface were randomly distributed, the localized surface plasmon resonances will strongly depend 

on how an individual nanostar is oriented on the surface [15, 17, 31]. As shown in Fig. 3, our 

measurements indicate that the resonant spectra of individual nanostars can be categorized into 

two main groups, those with single (Figs. 3(a) and 3(c)) and double (Figs. 3(b) and 3(d)) resonant 

peaks. For each sample, i.e. on glass or on Au film substrate, we have measured more than one 

hundred individual particles to draw this conclusion. During several occasions, we also observed 


6

resonant spectra with multiple (more than two) plasmon resonances. Previous studies [9, 15, 31]

have also observed similar resonant features for the case of nanostars in air. However, in contrast 

to these previous works, our case has the existence of the Au film in close proximity to the tips of 

the nanostars, which helps to drastically enhance the mode confinement at the bottom tips.

Fig. 2: Dark-field scattering and SEM studies. (a) Dark-field image of nanostars on a Au 

film and (b) on glass substrate. Both (a) and (b) were plotted by using the same brightness 

scale. (c) SEM image of the nanostars on a Au film substrate. (Scale bars are 1 𝜇𝑚). (d) 

Integrated pixels’ intensity of the CCD images for nanostars on a Au film (blue) and on 

a glass substrate (red). Solid curves represent the intensity distributions.

It is also noticed that for the nanostars on a Au film the spectral full width at half maximum 

(FWHM) of the plasmon resonances was narrower compared with the FWHM for the nanostars 

on a glass substrate. Specifically, for the nanostars on a Au film with a single resonant peak the 

average of measured FWHMs was 35.7 nm while for the nanostars on a glass substrate the 

averaged FWHMs was 55 nm. For the nanostars on a Au film that exhibited double resonant peaks 

the average of measured FWHMs were 32.5 nm and 32.0 nm for the lower and longer wavelength 

resonant peaks, respectively. On a glass substrate, these values were 48 nm and 47 nm for the 

lower and longer wavelength resonant peaks, respectively. As we have mentioned above the 


7

spectral characteristics of an individual nanostar resonator may vary depending on the orientation 

of the nanoparticle and the illumination condition. Nevertheless, our statistical data indicates a 

strong light confinement by the nanostars on the Au film. Furthermore, the spectral characteristics 

of the film-coupled Au nanostars presented in our current work are different compared to other 

film-coupled nanoparticle resonators, such as nanospheres [12] and nanocubes [4, 10], where only 

a single peak was observed. As we will be discussing below, the appearance of a single peak or 

double peaks in the resonant spectrum is closely related to the geometry of the nanostar and how 

the nanostar contacts with the substrate.

Fig. 3: (a)-(b) Measured scattering spectra from individual nanostars on a Au film. Each 

panel represents a different group of spectral characteristic. (c)-(d) Similar 

measurements but for nanostars on a glass substrate.

The results presented in Figs. 3(a) and 3(c) may indicate that the measured spectra were from 

nanostars with poorly formed tips [31]. However, in such a situation one would expect an 

unpolarized resonant spectrum for a given particle due to its less asymmetrical shape. This is not 

always the case in our observations. In Fig. 4 we show the polarization dependent measurements 

of individual nanostars on Au film for two different cases: single and double peaks. In the case of 

the single peak, the TE and TM polarized components resulted in a degree of polarization of 𝑃 =

28.7%. Here, TE and TM polarized waves were chosen to be perpendicular to each other and the 


8

polarization degree was defined as 𝑃 =

|𝐼𝑇𝐸−𝐼𝑇𝑀|

𝐼𝑇𝐸+𝐼𝑇𝑀 , where 𝐼𝑇𝐸 and 𝐼𝑇𝑀 are the scattering intensities 

for TE and TM signal, respectively. For the two-peak resonance case, the degrees of polarization 

were 𝑃 = 61% and 𝑃 = 86% for the 687 nm and 758 nm resonant peak, respectively. Previous 

studies by Hrelescu [9], Hao [15], and Nehl [31] have also observed a similar polarization behavior 

in the individual nanostar’s scattering spectrum, which was related to the different tip geometries 

in these nanoparticles. Thus, these measurements allow us to conclude that the collected signal 

was from star-shaped nanoparticles.

Fig. 4: Scattering spectra detected for TE and TM polarization components for (a) single 

peak and (b) two peaks cases.

The deposited nanostars on a Au substrate can take random positions. In an ideal situation, one 

can label the position of a nanostar, measure its scattering spectrum and then proceed with a SEM 

measurement of the same particle [36]. Via this way, one can correlate the geometry of the film 

coupled nanostar resonator with the optical property of the same particle. However, our current 

measurement capability does not allow us to follow this approach. Therefore, we must turn our 

attention to computer simulations. We use the commercial finite-element simulation software 

Comsol Multiphysics to model several geometries that would represent possible experimental 

scenarios, including asymmetric properties, number of tips that touch the bottom film, and the 

polarizations of the scattered light from individual nanostars. Figure 5 shows the simulated 

extinction spectra for nanostars at several different configurations and geometries placed on a Au 

film. In order to calculate the extinction cross section (ECS) of the film-coupled nanostars, we 

employ the scattered-field formulation that directly computes the scattered fields by subtracting 

the analytical solution of an incident plane wave in the absence of the nanostars, which is 


9

considered to be the background field [33]. Perfectly matched layer (PML) boundary conditions 

are used outside the simulated spherical area to completely truncate the computation domain and 

absorb the scattered energy. The dimensions and geometries of the nanostar were predicted from 

the actual shapes of the particles taken from the TEM images, as shown in Fig. 1(b). For simplicity, 

we first consider a nanostar that has 12 relatively short and equal-length sharp tips branching out 

from a central spherical core. However, as observed from the experimental results of the TEM 

measurements, the nanostars’ tips were not necessarily uniformly distributed around the bulk of 

the particle. In our first initial calculations, we assumed that the 12 tips are uniformly distributed 

around the central core resulting in a star-like dodecahedral gold nanocrystal and such nanostar 

has only one tip touching the bottom surface. The core diameter is around 75 nm and the tip length 

is about 30 nm. Each tip has corn shape with small apex (~ 3 nm) and 34- 52 corn angle. Figure 

5(a) shows the polarized (TE and TM) and unpolarized extinction spectra for this specific situation. 

The dielectric function of Au used in the simulations was taken from experimental data [37]. A 

thin 5 nm polymer layer was placed in the nanogap with refractive index n=1.4, which is identical 

to the thin polymer layer used in the experiment. The associated field enhancement distributions 

are shown in Fig. S1 of the Appendix. We find that the symmetric nanostar under TE polarization 

illumination will not exhibit a plasmonic gap mode inside the thin polymer dielectric layer. 

Fig. 5: Simulated extinction spectra for three different geometries as schematically shown in 

the top row: (a) A single equal-length tip touches the substrate, (b) one asymmetric tip touches 

the substrate, and (c) two asymmetric tips touch the bottom substrate. 

The result of this particular simulation matches well with the measurement scattering spectra 

presented in Figs. 3(a) and 4(a). The TE and TM polarized waves in the simulation were 


10

perpendicular to each other. After checking the field enhancement distribution for each 

polarization illumination, we find that a strong plasmonic gap mode can be excited only under TM 

polarization illumination and no gap enhancement exists with TE polarization incidence. In 

addition, the incidence angle for this case is 45, because the symmetric nanostar under normal 

illumination will not exhibit a plasmonic gap mode inside the thin (5 nm) polymer dielectric layer. 

This has also been demonstrated in reference [35]. However, after we introduce some asymmetry 

in the nanostructure, such as elongating either one or two of the asymmetric tips, a strong gap field 

enhancement can be achieved for both TE and TM polarization even under normal incidence 

illumination. We also study the cases when the nanostar has one and two asymmetric tips touching 

the surface under a normal incident illumination. For these scenarios, we observed two distinct 

peaks in the resonant spectra, which are indeed polarized differently for TE and TM illuminations. 

These later configurations result in an excellent agreement with the measured data presented in 

Figs. 3(b) and 4(b). In addition, we also performed the simulation for similar configurations of 

nanostars on Au film at different thicknesses of the polymer layer (not shown here). We also note 

that there is a small wavelength offset between the computational data and the experimental data 

shown in Figs. 3 and 4. Indeed, in the experimental data there was quite a broad range of resonant 

wavelengths observed due to the fact that the nanostars were randomly distributed as well as 

difference in size. Additional simulation data regarding this wavelength offset is shown in Fig. S2 

of the Appendix. Therefore, the simulation data shown in Fig. 5 demonstrates the polarization 

properties of these film-coupled nanostars, which are indeed in agreement with the experimental 

data.

TABLE 1. Estimated mode volume Veff of the plasmonic resonance modes for a single nanostar 

placed on a Au film corresponding to three different geometries shown in Figs. 5(a)-(c).

Veff (nm3)
(a)
(b)
(c)

TE
2.30x10−5𝜆3
1.62x10−5𝜆3
1.05x10−7𝜆3

TM
2.46x10−6𝜆3
1.81x10−5𝜆3
9.75x10−7𝜆3

We also compute and present in Table 1 the estimated mode volume Veff of the plasmonic 

resonance modes in the three different geometries shown in Figs. 5(a) - 5(c). The mode volume is 


11

defined as 𝑉𝑒𝑓𝑓 = ∫ 𝜖(𝐫) |𝐄(𝐫)|2𝑑3𝐫/Max[𝜖(𝐫)|𝐄(𝐫)|2], where  𝜖(𝐫) is the material permittivity 

and the integration is performed over and around the mode’s bright spot [38]. From the above 

equation, the mode volume is characterized as the ratio of total electric energy to the maximum 

value of the electric energy density, where the maximum electric energy densities in our system 

are located around the tiny gaps formed between the nanostar’s tips and Au film. The results in 

Table 1 show that a sub-10 nm mode volume can be achieved for both TE and TM polarization 

illuminations, especially in the case of the nanostar geometry with two asymmetric tips touching 

the bottom substrate (Table 1(c) and Fig. 5(c)). Compared to the configurations of one tip touching, 

the maximum electric filed enhancement is increased in the case of two tips touching. Several 

previous works have also demonstrated very small mode volumes for both plasmonic and dielectric 

platforms. For instance, Huang et al.[1] have reported a computational work to demonstrate a 

nanoparticle – on – mirror structure that offers a mode volume below 10−7𝜆3. Several other 

experimental works have also demonstrated 10−5𝜆3 plasmonic mode volume [2, 6]. Our method 

provides a quick approach to create ultrasmall mode volume (considering the case of Fig. 5(c)) 

plasmonic nanocavities without need for complicated electron lithography procedure.

In conclusion, we have investigated a film-coupled nanostar resonator system that offers extreme 

sub-wavelength mode volumes. It is demonstrated that by placing a Au nanostar on a flat Au film, 

ultrasmall mode volumes are formed and strong light confinement is achieved in between the 

nanostar’s tip and the film region. We have performed simulations to correlate the plasmonic 

resonant features with the geometry of the resonators by considering the asymmetric shape of the 

nanostar and how it may orient with respect to the underneath film. The film-coupled nanostar 

resonators provide a new approach to achieve strong light confinement within sub-10 nm mode 

volumes, which makes them an ideal platform for applications requiring enhanced light-matter 

interactions at low dimensions.

Appendix: Simulation of film-coupled nanostar resonators

For simplicity, we first simulate a symmetric nanostar, containing 12 equal-length sharp tips 

branching out from a central spherical core (Fig. S1(a)). The 12 tips are uniformly distributed 

around the central core resulting in a star-like dodecahedral gold nanocrystal. The core diameter 

is around 75 nm and the tip length is about 30 nm. Each tip has corn shape with small apex (3 nm). 

We simulate the interaction of such nanostar with a planer Au surface when the nanostar is 


12

illuminated at 45 incidence angle under both TE and TM polarization. The separation between 

nanostar and Au film is due to a thin 5 nm polymer layer with refractive index n = 1.4, which is 

identical to the thin polymer layer used in the experiment. The associated field enhancement 

distributions are shown in Figs. S1(a1) and S1(a2). We find that the symmetric nanostar under TE 

polarization illumination will not exhibit a plasmonic gap mode inside the thin polymer dielectric 

layer. In order to produce stronger gap plasmonic mode enhancement, we further simulate several 

additional asymmetric nanostar designs, such as elongating one or two of the tips of the nanostars 

that will resemble the experimentally used nanostars (Fig. 1(b) in the main text). As shown in Fig. 

5(c) of the main text, we simulate the extinction spectra when a nanostar has one asymmetric tip 

and two tips touching the polymer layer surface. The associated electric filed distribution is shown 

in Fig. S2(b) under different (TE/TM) polarization normal illumination.

Figures S1(a1) and S1(a2) show the normalized electric field distribution in the case of symmetric 

tips in the one tip touching geometry under different polarization illumination (TE or TM) by using 

45 incidence angle. It is clear that a strong plasmonic gap mode can be excited only under TM 

polarization illumination. However, after we introduce some asymmetry in the structure, such as 

by using one or two asymmetric tips, a strong gap field enhancement can be achieved in both TE 

and TM polarization illumination. Figs. S1(b1)- S1(b4) show four different field enhancement 

distributions in the case of one asymmetric tip, two tips touching nanostar, with geometry shown 

in Fig. 5(c) in the main text, where Figs. S1(b1) and S1(b2) correspond to two ECS peaks when 

the nanostar is illuminated by TE polarization, Figs. S1(b3) and S1(b4) correspond to other two 

resonance peaks under TM polarization. We find that the value of the field enhancement nearly 

doubles for the case of asymmetric tips geometry even under normal incidence illumination (Fig. 

S1(b)), compared to the field enhancement using only symmetric nanostar (Fig. S 1(a)). 

Furthermore, we note that, around the second resonant wavelength (~780 nm), a strong plasmonic 

gap mode always exists under both TE (Fig. S1(b2)) and TM (Fig. S1 (b4)) polarization incidence, 

which is different from the symmetric nanostar response.

A complete statistical analysis by using simulations is not feasible because multiple 3D simulations 

are required and that will take a very long time to run. However, we present some results of a 

parametric study by changing the dimensions or shape (one tip or two tips touching or 

symmetric/asymmetric designs) of the nanostar as shown in Fig. S2. The simulated extinction 


13

spectra for different sizes of nanostar match well with the measured scattering spectra presented 

in Fig. 3 in the main text, where some nanostars have single resonant peak (Fig. S2(a)) and others 

have double resonant peaks (Fig. S2(b)). 

Fig. S1. Normalized field distribution for two different geometries with different resonant 

wavelengths. (a1) - (a2) correspond to the geometry of symmetric tips, i.e., one tip touching 

nanostar, and (b1) - (b4) correspond to the case of asymmetric tip, i.e., two tips touching nanostar.

Fig. S2. Simulated extinction spectra for several different geometries and shapes of nanostars 

located on a Au film. (a) Single resonant peak and (b) two resonant peaks cases.

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) (Grant # DMR-1709612). TH 

acknowledges the Ralph E. Powe Junior Faculty Enhancement Award from Oak Ridge Associated 


14

Universities and FedEx Institute of Technology at the University of Memphis. XH acknowledge 

the support from the National Institutes of Health (Grant No. 1R15 CA 195509-01) and the Fedex 

Institute of Technology at the University of Memphis.

References

1.
S. Huang, T. Ming, Y. Lin, X. Ling, Q. Ruan, T. Palacios, J. Wang, M. Dresselhaus, and 
J. Kong, "Ultrasmall Mode Volumes in Plasmonic Cavities of Nanoparticle-On-Mirror 
Structures," Small 12(37), 5190-5199 (2016).

2.
M. Kuttge, F. J. García de Abajo, and A. Polman, "Ultrasmall Mode Volume Plasmonic 
Nanodisk Resonators," Nano Lett. 10(5), 1537-1541 (2010).

3.
T. B. Hoang, Huang, J., Mikkelsen, M. H., "Colloidal Synthesis of Nanopatch Antennas 
for Applications in Plasmonics and Nanophotonics," J. Vis. Exp. 111(e53876 (2016).

4.
T. B. Hoang, G. M. Akselrod, C. Argyropoulos, J. Huang, D. R. Smith, and M. H. 
Mikkelsen, "Ultrafast spontaneous emission source using plasmonic nanoantennas," Nat. 
Commun. 6(7788 (2015).

5.
H. Asgar, L. Jacob, and T. B. Hoang, "Fast spontaneous emission and high Förster 
resonance energy transfer rate in hybrid organic/inorganic plasmonic nanostructures," J. 
Appl. Phys 124(10), 103105 (2018).

6.
H. Choi, M. Heuck, and D. Englund, "Self-Similar Nanocavity Design with Ultrasmall 
Mode Volume for Single-Photon Nonlinearities," Phys. Rev. Lett. 118(22), 223605 (2017).

7.
A. Kinkhabwala, Z. Yu, S. Fan, Y. Avlasevich, K. Müllen, and W. E. Moerner, "Large 
single-molecule fluorescence enhancements produced by a bowtie nanoantenna," Nat. 
Photonics 3(654 (2009).

8.
E. B. Ureña, M. P. Kreuzer, S. Itzhakov, H. Rigneault, R. Quidant, D. Oron, and J. Wenger, 
"Excitation Enhancement of a Quantum Dot Coupled to a Plasmonic Antenna," Adv. 
Mater. 24(44), OP314-OP320 (2012).

9.
C. Hrelescu, T. K. Sau, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, and J. Feldmann, "Single gold nanostars 
enhance Raman scattering," Appl. Phys. Lett. 94(15), 153113 (2009).

10.
J. B. Lassiter, F. McGuire, J. J. Mock, C. Ciracì, R. T. Hill, B. J. Wiley, A. Chilkoti, and 
D. R. Smith, "Plasmonic Waveguide Modes of Film-Coupled Metallic Nanocubes," Nano 
Lett. 13(12), 5866-5872 (2013).

11.
C. Ciracì, R. T. Hill, J. J. Mock, Y. Urzhumov, A. I. Fernández-Domínguez, S. A. Maier, 
J. B. Pendry, A. Chilkoti, and D. R. Smith, "Probing the Ultimate Limits of Plasmonic 
Enhancement," Science 337(6098), 1072 (2012).

12.
J. J. Mock, R. T. Hill, A. Degiron, S. Zauscher, A. Chilkoti, and D. R. Smith, "Distance-
Dependent Plasmon Resonant Coupling between a Gold Nanoparticle and Gold Film," 
Nano Lett. 8(8), 2245-2252 (2008).

13.
J. J. Baumberg, J. Aizpurua, M. H. Mikkelsen, and D. R. Smith, "Extreme nanophotonics 
from ultrathin metallic gaps," Nat. Mater. 18(7), 668-678 (2019).


15

14.
A. Moreau, C. Ciracì, J. J. Mock, R. T. Hill, Q. Wang, B. J. Wiley, A. Chilkoti, and D. R. 
Smith, "Controlled-reflectance surfaces with film-coupled colloidal nanoantennas," Nature 
492(86 (2012).

15.
F. Hao, C. L. Nehl, J. H. Hafner, and P. Nordlander, "Plasmon Resonances of a Gold 
Nanostar," Nano Lett. 7(3), 729-732 (2007).

16.
K. Pandian Senthil, P.-S. Isabel, R.-G. Benito, F. J. G. d. Abajo, and M. L.-M. Luis, "High-
yield synthesis and optical response of gold nanostars," Nanotechnolog 19(1), 015606 
(2008).

17.
L. Shao, A. S. Susha, L. S. Cheung, T. K. Sau, A. L. Rogach, and J. Wang, "Plasmonic 
Properties of Single Multispiked Gold Nanostars: Correlating Modeling with 
Experiments," Langmuir 28(24), 8979-8984 (2012).

18.
J. Ziegler, C. Wörister, C. Vidal, C. Hrelescu, and T. A. Klar, "Plasmonic Nanostars as 
Efficient Broadband Scatterers for Random Lasing," ACS Photonics 3(6), 919-923 (2016).

19.
A. Kedia and P. S. Kumar, "Gold nanostars reshaping and plasmon tuning mechanism," 
AIP Conf. Proc. 1512(1), 232-233 (2013).

20.
F. Tam, G. P. Goodrich, B. R. Johnson, and N. J. Halas, "Plasmonic Enhancement of 
Molecular Fluorescence," Nano Lett. 7(2), 496-501 (2007).

21.
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez, and Y. Xia, "Gold 
nanostructures: engineering their plasmonic properties for biomedical applications," 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 35(11), 1084-1094 (2006).

22.
Z. Fan, D. Senapati, A. Khan Sadia, K. Singh Anant, A. Hamme, B. Yust, D. Sardar, and 
C. Ray Paresh, "Popcorn‐Shaped Magnetic Core–Plasmonic Shell Multifunctional 
Nanoparticles for the Targeted Magnetic Separation and Enrichment, Label‐Free SERS 
Imaging, and Photothermal Destruction of Multidrug‐Resistant Bacteria," Chem.: Eur. J. 
19(8), 2839-2847 (2013).

23.
W. Lu, A. K. Singh, S. A. Khan, D. Senapati, H. Yu, and P. C. Ray, "Gold Nano-Popcorn-
Based Targeted Diagnosis, Nanotherapy Treatment, and In Situ Monitoring of 
Photothermal Therapy Response of Prostate Cancer Cells Using Surface-Enhanced Raman 
Spectroscopy," J. Am. Chem. Soc. 132(51), 18103-18114 (2010).

24.
Y. Liu, H. Yuan, R. F. Kersey, K. J. Register, C. M. Parrott, and T. Vo-Dinh, "Plasmonic 
Gold Nanostars for Multi-Modality Sensing and Diagnostics," Sensors 15(2)(2015).

25.
V. Raghavan, C. O'Flatharta, R. Dwyer, A. Breathnach, H. Zafar, P. Dockery, A. Wheatley, 
I. Keogh, M. Leahy, and M. Olivo, "Dual plasmonic gold nanostars for photoacoustic 
imaging and photothermal therapy," Nanomedicine 12(5), 457-471 (2017).

26.
I. G. Theodorou, Q. Jiang, L. Malms, X. Xie, R. C. Coombes, E. O. Aboagye, A. E. Porter, 
M. P. Ryan, and F. Xie, "Fluorescence enhancement from single gold nanostars: towards 
ultra-bright emission in the first and second near-infrared biological windows," Nanoscale
10(33), 15854-15864 (2018).

27.
S. K. Dondapati, T. K. Sau, C. Hrelescu, T. A. Klar, F. D. Stefani, and J. Feldmann, "Label-
free Biosensing Based on Single Gold Nanostars as Plasmonic Transducers," ACS Nano 
4(11), 6318-6322 (2010).


16

28.
X.-L. Liu, J.-H. Wang, S. Liang, D.-J. Yang, F. Nan, S.-J. Ding, L. Zhou, Z.-H. Hao, and 
Q.-Q. Wang, "Tuning Plasmon Resonance of Gold Nanostars for Enhancements of 
Nonlinear Optical Response and Raman Scattering," J. Phys. Chem. C 118(18), 9659-9664 
(2014).

29.
B. Munkhbat, J. Ziegler, H. Pöhl, C. Wörister, D. Sivun, M. C. Scharber, T. A. Klar, and 
C. Hrelescu, "Hybrid Multilayered Plasmonic Nanostars for Coherent Random Lasing," J. 
Phys. Chem. C 120(41), 23707-23715 (2016).

30.
E. A. Kwizera, E. Chaffin, X. Shen, J. Chen, Q. Zou, Z. Wu, Z. Gai, S. Bhana, R. 
O’Connor, L. Wang, H. Adhikari, S. R. Mishra, Y. Wang, and X. Huang, "Size- and Shape-
Controlled Synthesis and Properties of Magnetic–Plasmonic Core–Shell Nanoparticles," J. 
Phys. Chem. C 120(19), 10530-10546 (2016).

31.
C. L. Nehl, H. Liao, and J. H. Hafner, "Optical Properties of Star-Shaped Gold 
Nanoparticles," Nano Lett. 6(4), 683-688 (2006).

32.
Z. Huang, A. Baron, S. Larouche, C. Argyropoulos, and D. R. Smith, "Optical bistability 
with film-coupled metasurfaces," Optics Letters 40(23), 5638-5641 (2015).

33.
C. Argyropoulos, C. Ciracì, and D. R. Smith, "Enhanced optical bistability with film-
coupled plasmonic nanocubes," Appl. Phys. Lett. 104(6), 063108 (2014).

34.
T. B. Hoang, G. M. Akselrod, and M. H. Mikkelsen, "Ultrafast Room-Temperature Single 
Photon Emission from Quantum Dots Coupled to Plasmonic Nanocavities," Nano Lett. 
16(1), 270-275 (2016).

35.
D. M. Solís, J. M. Taboada, F. Obelleiro, L. M. Liz-Marzán, and F. J. García de Abajo, 
"Toward Ultimate Nanoplasmonics Modeling," ACS Nano 8(8), 7559-7570 (2014).

36.
A. Rose, T. B. Hoang, F. McGuire, J. J. Mock, C. Ciracì, D. R. Smith, and M. H. Mikkelsen, 
"Control of Radiative Processes Using Tunable Plasmonic Nanopatch Antennas," Nano 
Lett. 14(8), 4797-4802 (2014).

37.
E. D. Palik, Handbook of optical constants of solids (Academic, 1985).

38.
B. Bahari, R. Tellez-Limon, and B. Kante, "Directive and enhanced spontaneous emission 
using shifted cubes nanoantenna," J. Appl. Phys 120(9), 093106 (2016).


