1

Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces:
Physics, Propagation, and Pathloss Modeling

Г–zgecan Г–zdogan, Student Member, IEEE, Emil BjГ¶rnson, Senior Member, IEEE, Erik G. Larsson, Fellow, IEEE

AbstractвҖ”Intelligent reflecting surfaces can improve the com-
munication between a source and a destination. The surface
contains metamaterial that is configured to вҖңreflectвҖқ the incident
wave from the source towards the destination. Two incompatible
pathloss models have been used in prior work. In this letter,
we derive the far-field pathloss using physical optics techniques
and explain why the surface consists of many elements that
individually act as diffuse scatterers but can jointly beamform
the signal in a desired direction with a certain beamwidth. We
disprove one of the previously conjectured pathloss models.

Index TermsвҖ”Intelligent reflecting surface, pathloss model.

I. INTRODUCTION

Conventional wireless communication systems consist of
a transmitter sending information-bearing electromagnetic
waves to a receiver via an uncontrollable propagation environ-
ment. When searching for beyond 5G network architectures,
there is a growing interest in creating real-time reconfigurable
propagation environments [1]вҖ“[4]. This can potentially be
achieved by deploying special surfaces, known as intelligent
reflecting surfaces (IRS) [1], software-controlled metasurfaces
[2]вҖ“[4], and reconfigurable intelligent surfaces [5], [6], that
can control how the waves that reach them are reflected. In
this context, the word вҖңreflectionвҖқ has a wide meaning [7],
including diffuse reflection (e.g., scattering by rough material)
and ideal specular reflection (e.g., from an infinite mirror).
While the design of reconfigurable surfaces has a long his-
tory in the electromagnetic literature [8], the communication
analysis is in its infancy. There is no consensus on the basic
propagation modeling, but two incompatible pathloss models
have been conjectured without derivation from physical princi-
ples: surfaces consisting of many scattering elements [9], [10]
and surfaces consisting of many ideal mirrors [5]. In this letter,
we fill this gap by first explaining in Section II how a passive
metallic surface scatters an incident wave and then derive in
Section III how an IRS must be designed to mimic such a
surface while also controlling the directivity of the scattered
wave. This results in a rigorous pathloss model and a way to
build system models that can be used for further research.

II. PRELIMINARIES: PASSIVE METALLIC SURFACE

In this section, we review preliminaries on the field strength
and beamwidth of the waveform scattered by a вҖңpassiveвҖқ
metallic (perfectly conducting) plate of finite size. The results
will later be used to explain the ideal operation of an IRS.

The letter was supported by ELLIIT and the Swedish Research Council.
The
authors
are
with
the
Department
of
Electrical
Engineering
(ISY), LinkГ¶ping University, SE-58183 LinkГ¶ping, Sweden. Email: {ozge-
can.ozdogan,emil.bjornson,erik.g.larsson}@liu.se.

b/2
b/2

a/2

a/2

Оёi
Оёs

ex

ey

ez
Incident wave
Scattered wave

Fig. 1: An incident wave is scattered by a a Г— b metal plate.

We consider a rectangular, perfectly conducting plate of size
aГ—b, and negligible thickness, located in the horizontal plane
(spanned by ex, ey). A point source far away, at distance di, is
radiating a linearly polarized electromagnetic wave with wave
number k = 2ПҖ

О» where О» is the wavelength. We assume, for
the sake of argument, that the polarization of the source is
such that the E-field is parallel to ex and the H-field lies in
the plane spanned by ey and ez. Let Оёi вҲҲ [0, ПҖ

2 ] denote the
angle of incidence, that is, the angle between the Poynting
vector of the wave and ez. This setup is illustrated in Fig. 1.
We further assume that di is sufficiently large relative to
a and b (i.e., the source is in the far-field) that the curvature
of the wavefront, over the dimensions of the plate, can be
neglected. Hence, the impinging wavefield is approximated as
a plane wave with some magnitude Ei. To determine when
this approximation holds, we compute the phase differential
between a spherical wave and its plane-wave approximation
between the center and the edges of the plate. For the sake of
argument, suppose the plate is oriented such that the Poynting
vector enters with Оёi = 0 at the plate center; however the
analysis can be generalized to arbitrary incidence angles.
With the plane-wave approximation, the wave from the source
travels a distance of di to any point on the plate, but the wave
is actually spherical and at the edges of the plate it has traveled
the distance
пҝҪ

d2
i + b2

4 . The phase discrepancy is

k

пҝҪпҝҪ

d2
i + b2

4 вҲ’ di

пҝҪ

вүҲ ПҖ

4
b2

О»di
(1)

With e.g., b = 1 m, di = 100 m, О» = 0.1 m, this is less than
five degrees and should have a minor impact. The incident
plane wave has the electric and magnetic field distributions

Ei = EieвҲ’jk(sin(Оёi)yвҲ’cos(Оёi)z)ex,
(2)

Hi =вҲ’Ei

О· (cos(Оёi)ey + sin(Оёi)ez) eвҲ’jk(sin(Оёi)yвҲ’cos(Оёi)z), (3)

arXiv:1911.03359v2  [physics.app-ph]  16 Dec 2019


2

where О· is the characteristic impedance of the medium.
The E-field will induce motion of electrons in the plate. The
electrons will move in the direction of ex, but not in ey (since
the E-field is orthogonal to ey) and also not in the ez-direction
since the plate is assumed thin. The moving electrons induce
electromagnetic radiation, resulting in a scattered wave.

Lemma 1. The squared magnitude of the scattered field, in the
ey, ez plane and at an arbitrary observation angle Оёs вҲҲ [0, ПҖ

2 ]
(measured against ez) is

S(r, Оёs)=
пҝҪab

О»

пҝҪ2 E2
i

r2 cos2(Оёi)

пҝҪ
sin
пҝҪ ПҖb

О» (sin(Оёs)вҲ’sin(Оёi))
пҝҪ

ПҖb
О» (sin(Оёs)вҲ’sin(Оёi))

пҝҪ2

(4)

at a far-field observation distance r вүҘ 2 max(a2,b2)

О»
.

Proof: This result follows from standard physical optics
techniques (which neglect edge effects) as in [11, Example
11-3].

The expression in (4) for the magnitude of the scattered field
in the far-field has several intuitive properties; for example, it
is proportional to the area (ab)2 of the plate and to E2
i вҲқ
1/d2
i , since the impinging wave from a point source in line-
of-sight (LoS) has a field strength inversely proportional to
d2
i . As expected from SnellвҖҷs law, for the polarization that
we consider, S(r, Оёs) attains its maximum for the observation
angle Оёs = Оёi, which is the specular direction, for which the
last parenthesis in (4) is unity.1

A. Beamwidth of the Scattered Wave

The expression S(r, Оёs) reveals that the scattered field looks
like a beam that tapers off as Оёs is moved away from Оёi. The
3-dB beamwidth equals twice the deviation |Оёs вҲ’ Оёi| required
to make the square of the second parenthesis in (4) equal to
1/2. Using the Taylor expansion cos(x) = 1 + O(x2) and
standard trigonometric identities, we have

sin(Оёs) вҲ’ sin(Оёi) = sin(Оёi + Оёs вҲ’ Оёi) вҲ’ sin(Оёi)

= sin(Оёi) cos(Оёs вҲ’ Оёi) + cos(Оёi) sin(Оёs вҲ’ Оёi) вҲ’ sin(Оёi)

= cos(Оёi)(Оёs вҲ’ Оёi) + O
пҝҪ
(Оёs вҲ’ Оёi)2пҝҪ
.
(5)

From (5) and using the Taylor expansions sin(x)

x
= 1 вҲ’ x2

6 +
O(x3) and ( sin(x)

x
)2 = 1вҲ’ x2

3 +O(x3), we obtain the following
second-order approximation of (4):

S(r, Оёs)=
пҝҪab

О»

пҝҪ2 E2
i

r2 cos2(Оёi)
пҝҪ
1 вҲ’ ПҖ2b2

О»2
cos2(Оёi)(Оёs вҲ’ Оёi)2

3

пҝҪ

+ O
пҝҪ
(Оёs вҲ’ Оёi)3пҝҪ
.
(6)

Hence, the 3-dB beamwidth is approximately twice the devi-
ation |Оёs вҲ’ Оёi| required to make ПҖ2b2

О»2
cos2(Оёi)(ОёsвҲ’Оёi)2

3
= 1

2:

|Оёs вҲ’ Оёi| <

пҝҪ

1
2
3О»2

ПҖ2b2 cos2(Оёi) =

пҝҪ

3
2
О»

ПҖb cos(Оёi).
(7)

1For other incident wave polarizations, this is true only approximately.
However, the observation angle that maximizes S(r, Оёs) approaches Оёi as
the size of the plate increases.

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90

-60

-40

-20

0

20

Fig. 2: Normalized squared magnitude of the scattered field
as a function of the angle Оёs where Оёi = 30в—Ұ.

This inequality shows that the 3-dB beamwidth is inversely
proportional to the plate width b. The beamwidth is also
proportional to the wavelength О», thus a fixed-size plate
can provide an extremely narrow beamwidth in the visible
spectrum (i.e., an almost perfect specular reflection), but 4-
5 orders-of-magnitude wider beamwidths in the typical radio
spectrum bands.2

The plate acts as a mirror in the sense that the diffusely
reflected or, more accurately, the scattered field has a 3-dB
beamwidth inversely proportional to b. Hence, it becomes very
small if b is large relative to О». This scaling is no surprise: if
we think of the plate as an antenna, it is just the usual relation
that beamwidth is inversely proportional to antenna aperture.
Fig. 2 shows the squared magnitude S(r, Оёs) as a function of
Оёs. It is normalized by multiplying with
r2

E2
i , and we consider
Оёi = 30в—Ұ. When a and b are smaller or equal to the wavelength,
the scattered field is almost equally strong in all observation
angles. It is first when the plate is substantially larger than О»
that the beamwidth becomes small. The 3-dB beamwidth is
вүҲ 5.7в—Ұ for a plate with a = b = 10О» where the second-order
approximation in (7) gives вүҲ 5.2в—Ұ.

Corollary 1. A receiving antenna of effective electrical size
О»
v Г— О»

v , located at distance r вү« b/v from the plate with angle
Оёs to the antenna center will receive the signal power

S(r, Оёs)
пҝҪО»

v

пҝҪ2
.
(8)

Proof: The antenna will see the plate through an angular
window of
О»
vr radians. As long as
О»
vr вүӘ
О»

b cos(Оёi), i.e., approx-
imately, r вү« b/v, the field strength will be approximately
constant over the antenna and (8) is obtained.

Since E2
i
вҲқ 1/d2
i in LoS, Corollary 1 proves that the
received power is proportional to (ab)2/(dir)2, where the pro-
portionality constant depends on the wavelength and angles.
If Оёs = Оёi, the received power increases monotonically with
a and b, because more energy is induced into the plate and
then radiated in a gradually narrower beam. Even when the

2Comparing radio signals at 6 GHz with green visible light at 600 THz,
the former has a 105 larger wavelength and thus needs a 105 wider plate to
give a reflection with the same beamwidth as for green light.


3

beamwidth is small in absolute terms, it can be large relative to
О»/r and, thus, most of the energy of the scattered field anyway
misses the receiver antenna aperture. This is why the received
power in (8) is proportional to 1/r2. As a and b are increased
without bound, eventually the plane-wave approximation of
the incident field breaks down and the results in this section
become inaccurate. In the asymptotic limit, geometric optics
can be used instead to model a perfect mirror.

B. Multiple Adjacent Metallic Surfaces

Since the plate has a finite size, we can deploy multiple
adjacent plates. If the gaps in between are sufficiently large
then coupling effects can be neglected and superposition ap-
plies. When the scattered fields from these plates are received
at a given location, the relative phase shifts will lead to con-
structive or destructive interference. Under ideal constructive
interference, the squared field strength from N plates will be
пҝҪ
N
пҝҪ

S(r, Оёs)
пҝҪ2
= N 2S(r, Оёs).
(9)

The variables N, a, and b only appear in (9) as a joint term
(Nab)2, where Nab is the total area of the N plates. Hence, it
does not matter if the total area is made up by many small or
a few large plates, the maximum received power is the same.

III. SYSTEM MODEL FOR INTELLIGENT METASURFACES

If the incident angle Оёi from the transmitter to the surface
equals the observation angle Оёs leading to the receiver, then
the passive surface considered in Section II represents the ideal
case. Since the angles are generally different when one of the
devices is mobile, the main purpose of an IRS is to achieve
вҖңanomalous reflectionвҖқ [7], which means shaping the scattered
field so that the main beam is directed towards the receiver.
We now consider an IRS consisting of a metasurface of the
same dimensions as in Fig. 1 and the same impinging plane
wave. The goal of an IRS is to achieve total reflection with
its main beam pointing in a desired direction that we denote
as Оёr. Hence, the surface must be designed to redirect the
incident plane wave (Ei, Hi) in (2) and obtain the following
ideal field distributions of the reflected/scattered wave:

Er = EreвҲ’jk(sin(Оёr)y+cos(Оёr)z)ex,
(10)

Hr=вҲ’Er

О· (sin(Оёr)ezвҲ’ cos(Оёr)ey) eвҲ’jk(sin(Оёr)y+cos(Оёr)z). (11)

A widely used approach in the literature that designs reflec-
tive metasurfaces is based on the generalized SnellвҖҷs law of
reflection [12]. Using this method, the required surface phase
profile to transform the incident wave (Ei, Hi) into (Er, Hr)
is obtained by tailoring the surface impedance. At the surface
(z = 0), the superposition of the incident and reflected E-field
can be written as [13]

Et = EieвҲ’jk sin(Оёi)yex + EreвҲ’jk sin(Оёr)yex.
(12)

Then, the desired phase of the desired reflection coefficient is

ПҶr(y) = вҲ 
пҝҪEreвҲ’jk sin(Оёr)y

EieвҲ’jk sin(Оёi)y

пҝҪ
= вҲ’k sin(Оёr)y + k sin(Оёi)y,

(13)

-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8

-180

-135

-90

-45

0

45

90

135

180

Fig. 3: Local surface phase that is required to redirect the
incident wave with Оёi = 30в—Ұ in a desired direction Оёr.

and differentiating it with respect to y gives the gradient of
the reflection coefficient in the generalized SnellвҖҷs law:

k(sin(Оёi) вҲ’ sin(Оёr)) = dПҶr(y)

dy
,
(14)

which gives the relation between Оёi, Оёr and the local surface
phase ПҶr(y). By altering the surface impedance, ПҶr(y) is
obtained at each point of the surface and the output waveвҖҷs
desired phase вҲ’k sin(Оёi)y+ПҶr(y) = вҲ’k sin(Оёr)y is achieved.
Fig. 3 shows the required local surface phase profile to
redirect (Ei, Hi) with Оёi = 30в—Ұ into (Er, Hr) for different
values of Оёr. Fig. 3 shows that it is easier to implement a
surface when the desired Оёr is close to Оёi since the required
phase profile varies more slowly over the surface (i.e., (14)
is closer to zero). In practical implementations, the desired
local phase shift in the metasurface is discretized by dividing
the surface into sub-О»-sized elements, each having a constant
phase shift. The smaller the elements are, the more closely
the local phase shift can be approximated. In [14], the phase
distribution is discretized/quantized with a step size of О»/5, to
represent the finite number of resonators used in practice. In
[15], the surface is discretized by О»/8 as also shown in Fig. 4.
Small high-precision elements require sophisticated design
and expensive hardware, and also lead to coupling issues. On
the other hand, if the elements are too large (relative to О»)
then the required local phase will be coarsely quantized. This
will lead to a mismatch between the desired reflection angle
and the surface response. In this paper, we neglect the errors
due to quantization.

A. Propagation and Pathloss Model

In contrast to a metallic surface, for which it does not matter
if it consists of one or multiple plates (see Section II-B),
an IRS must consist of many small elements to reconfigure
the local phases with high resolution and thereby achieves a
main beam with the desired angle Оёr. This has no negative
impact on the maximum magnitude of the scattered field and
the beamwidth will not be narrower than in the ideal case
of a passive metallic surface. As discussed in Section II, the
incoming waveвҖҷs E-field in (2) induces an electric surface
current in the direction of ex. This current is adjusted in the


4

-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2

-180

-135

-90

-45

0

45

90

135

180

Fig. 4: The quantized local surface phase that is required to
redirect the incident wave with Оёi = 0в—Ұ to Оёr = 75в—Ұ.
IRS by tuning the surface impedance in each element to obtain
a surface phase profile that approximates that required by the
generalized SnellвҖҷs law. This operation results in a scattered
wave with maximum amplitude towards Оёr instead of Оёi.

Lemma 2. When using an IRS to reflect a signal in the
direction Оёr, the squared magnitude of the scattered field at
an arbitrary observation angle Оёs вҲҲ [вҲ’ ПҖ

2 , ПҖ

2 ] is

SIRS(r, Оёs, E2
i )

=
пҝҪab

О»

пҝҪ2 E2
i cos2(Оёi)

r2

пҝҪ
sin
пҝҪ ПҖb

О» (sin(Оёs) вҲ’ sin(Оёr))
пҝҪ

ПҖb
О» (sin(Оёs) вҲ’ sin(Оёr))

пҝҪ2

(15)

at a far-field distance r вүҘ
2 max(a2,b2)

О»
.

Proof: The negligible thickness of the surface allows us to
write the electric current density on the surface (z = 0, y = yвҖІ)
approximately as Jx = 2Ei

О· cos(Оёi)eвҲ’jk sin(Оёr)yвҖІ [11, Eq. (7-
54)] assuming the surface is lossless, i.e., E2
i cos(Оёi) =
E2
r cos(Оёr). Then, we use the same steps as in Lemma 1.
The intercepted power by the IRS is the same as for the
perfectly conducting plate in Section II, but the maximum of
SIRS(r, Оёs, E2
i ) is achieved at Оёs = Оёr instead of Оёs = Оёi.
Suppose the transmit power is Pt and the transmitter has
antenna gain Gt. Then the relation between Ei and Pt is

E2
i

2О· = PtGt

4ПҖd2
i
,
(16)

where Ei has unit Volt/m and О· вүҲ 377 Ohm. Furthermore,
assume that the effective area of the receiver antenna is О»2

4ПҖGr,
where Gr is the antenna gain. Then, the received signal power
Pr for a receiver at far-field distance r in direction Оёs is

Pr(Pt, di, r, Оёs) = 1

2О· SIRS

пҝҪ
r, Оёs, PtGtО·

2ПҖd2
i

пҝҪ пҝҪ О»2

4ПҖ Gr

пҝҪ
. (17)

Corollary 2. When using an IRS to reflect a signal in the
direction Оёr, the pathloss at the far-field distance r is

ОІIRS(r, di, Оёs) = Pr(Pt, di, r, Оёs)

Pt

= GtGr

(4ПҖ)2

пҝҪ ab

dir

пҝҪ2
cos2(Оёi)

пҝҪ
sin
пҝҪ ПҖb

О» (sin(Оёs) вҲ’ sin(Оёr))
пҝҪ

ПҖb
О» (sin(Оёs) вҲ’ sin(Оёr))

пҝҪ2

(18)

-90 -75 -60 -45 -30 -15
0
15
30
45
60
75
90

-200

-150

-100

-50

Fig. 5: The pathloss of the reflected path. The angles are Оёi =
30в—Ұ and Оёr = 60в—Ұ where the antenna gains are Gt = Gr = 5
dB, the distances are di = 50 and r = 25 meters.

and in the ideal case when the receiver has Оёs = Оёr, the
pathloss expression simplifies to

ОІIRS(r, di, Оёr) = GtGr

(4ПҖ)2

пҝҪ ab

dir

пҝҪ2
cos2(Оёi).
(19)

Remark 1. The derivations have assumed the incoming wave
and the desired scattered wave have E-fields that are both
parallel to ex, but the analysis can be generalized. The end
result will still become the pathloss expression ОІIRS(r, di, Оёr)
that only depends on the total effective area ab cos(Оёi) of the
IRS as seen from the transmitter.

Fig. 5 shows the pathloss ОІIRS(r, di, Оёs) as a function of Оёs
for different sizes of the IRS and Оёr = 60в—Ұ. The maximum is
achieved at Оёs = Оёr and the main beamwidth gets narrower as
the IRSвҖҷs surface area increases. When the dimension is sub-
wavelength (вүӨ О»/2), the IRS almost acts as a diffuse scatterer.

B. Interpreting an IRS as an Array of Diffuse Scatterers

As noted above, an IRS of size aГ—b consists of many sub-
О»-sized surface elements. Suppose the IRS consists of NaГ—Nb
elements, each having the size
a
Na Г—
b
Nb , where
a
Na ,
b
Nb вүӨ О».
The pathloss between the transmitter and receiver through the
nth surface element (assuming the others are removed) is

ОІs
IRS(r, di, Оёr) = GtGr

(4ПҖ)2

пҝҪ
ab

NaNbdir

пҝҪ2
cos2(Оёi)
(20)

since the last term in (18) is approximately unity for an ele-
ment of this size (as shown in Fig. 5). Note that ОІs
IRS(r, di, Оёr)

is the same for all n since we have assumed r вүҘ
2 max(a2,b2)

О»
.
Let ПҶn denote the local surface phase of the nth element. If
it is selected to achieve constructive interference from all N =
NaNb surface elements at the receiver, the pathloss between
the transmitter and receiver through the whole IRS is
пҝҪ
N
пҝҪ

ОІs
IRS(r, di, Оёr)
пҝҪ2
= ОІIRS(r, di, Оёs).
(21)

Hence, we can interpret an IRS as an array of diffuse scatterers
(each sub-О»-sized) that phase-align their reflected signals at the
receiver and thereby achieve вҖңanomalousвҖқ reflection.


5

C. System Model for IRS-Supported Communications

To exemplify how one can derive a physically correct
system model for IRS-supported communication, we consider
an LoS setup where вҲҡОІsdejПҶsd is the direct channel between
the single-antenna source and destination. When including the
reflected path from the IRS, we get the received signal

y =
пҝҪпҝҪ

ОІs
IRSh
T
srОҰhrd +
пҝҪ

ОІsdejПҶsd
пҝҪ
x + w,
(22)

where hsr
=
[ejПҲsr
1 , . . . , ejПҲsr
n , . . . , ejПҲsr
N ]T
and hrd
=
[ejПҲrd
1 , . . . , ejПҲrd
n , . . . , ejПҲrd
N ]T are the normalized LoS chan-
nels between the source and IRS and the IRS and receiver,
respectively. The signal x has power Pt, w вҲј NC(0, Пғ2) is
additive noise, and the surface phases of each surface element
are stacked in ОҰ = diag
пҝҪ
ejПҶ1, . . . , ejПҶn, . . . , ejПҶN пҝҪ
, which is
a diagonal matrix. An equivalent way to write (22) is

y =
пҝҪ

ОІs
IRS

N
пҝҪ

n=1
ej(ПҲsr
n +ПҲrd
n +ПҶn)x +
пҝҪ

ОІsdejПҶsdx + w.
(23)

The IRS can select ОҰ to maximize the received signal power
[9]. If we select ПҶn =ПҶsdвҲ’ПҲsr
n вҲ’ПҲrd
n to phase-align all the sig-
nal terms in (23), we obtain y = (N
пҝҪ

ОІs
IRS+вҲҡОІsd)ejПҶsdx+w
and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is

SNR =

пҝҪ
N
пҝҪ

ОІs
IRS + вҲҡОІsd
пҝҪ2 Pt

Пғ2
=

пҝҪвҲҡОІIRS + вҲҡОІsd
пҝҪ2 Pt

Пғ2
,

(24)

where the second equality follows from (21). Hence, the
considered phase-shifts coincide with those achieved by the
discretized generalized SnellвҖҷs law, with the extra condition
that not only the N terms in the sum in (23) are phase-aligned,
but that they are also phase-aligned with the LoS path.
If an IRS is used for вҖңanomalousвҖқ reflection, there is no
need to take the detour via (22), but we use the IRSвҖҷs total
pathloss in (19) and directly write the received signal as y =
вҲҡОІIRSejПҶIRSx+вҲҡОІsdejПҶsdx+w, where the phases of the IRS
elements have already been aligned. It then only remains to
select the common phase ПҶIRS of all IRS elements to equal
ПҶsd. However, there are other scenarios (e.g., with multiple
antennas) where one can start from a system model as (22).

IV. SUMMARY AND RELATION TO PRIOR WORK

We have used physical optics techniques to derive the
pathloss expression in (19) for an IRS that is configured to
reflect an incoming wave from a far-field source towards a
receiver in the far-field. Even if the incoming signal is a plane
wave, the reflected signal is a beam with beamwidth inversely
proportional to the size of the IRS. Importantly, the received
signal power is proportional to the square of the IRS area and
to 1/(dir)2, where di is the distance between the transmitter
and IRS, and r is the distance between the IRS and receiver.
This disproves the conjecture in [5] that the received power
would be proportional to 1/(di + r)2. That conjecture might
hold for an infinitely large IRS acting or in the near-field, but

provably not in the far-field setup studied herein.3 In particular,
one cannot use multiple infinite-sized IRS as in [5]. However,
the system models used in [6], [9], [10] are essentially correct,
if the pathloss of each element are selected according to (20).
A practical IRS consists of N sub-wavelength-sized ele-
ments that scatter the incoming signals with unique phase-
shifts to achieve coherent beamforming in a direction of
interest. This is rather similar to a phased array, except that
the signal power comes from another place. The ideal phase-
shifts that create a single beam are given by the generalized
SnellвҖҷs law, but if a superposition of multiple beams should
be created, the phase-shifts must be explicitly optimized.

REFERENCES

[1] Q. Wu and R. Zhang, вҖңTowards smart and reconfigurable environ-
ment: Intelligent reflecting surface aided wireless network,вҖқ CoRR, vol.
abs/1905.00152, 2019.

[2] C. Liaskos, S. Nie, A. Tsioliaridou, A. Pitsillides, S. Ioannidis, and
I. Akyildiz, вҖңA new wireless communication paradigm through software-
controlled metasurfaces,вҖқ IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 162вҖ“
169, 2018.

[3] E. BjГ¶rnson, L. Sanguinetti, H. Wymeersch, J. Hoydis, and T. L.
Marzetta, вҖңMassive MIMO is a realityвҖ”What is next? Five promis-
ing research directions for antenna arrays,вҖқ Digital Signal Processing,
vol. 94, pp. 3вҖ“20, Nov. 2019.

[4] M. D. Renzo et al., вҖңSmart radio environments empowered by recon-
figurable AI meta-surfaces: an idea whose time has come,вҖқ EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Commun. and Networking, vol. 2019:129, 2019.

[5] E. Basar, M. Di Renzo, J. De Rosny, M. Debbah, M. Alouini, and
R. Zhang, вҖңWireless communications through reconfigurable intelligent
surfaces,вҖқ IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 116 753вҖ“116 773, 2019.

[6] C. Huang, A. Zappone, G. C. Alexandropoulos, M. Debbah, and
C. Yuen, вҖңReconfigurable intelligent surfaces for energy efficiency in
wireless communication,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 4157вҖ“4170, Aug 2019.

[7] L. Liang, M. Qi, J. Yang, X. Shen, J. Zhai, W. Xu, B. Jin, W. Liu,
Y. Feng, C. Zhang, H. Lu, H.-T. Chen, L. Kang, W. Xu, J. Chen, T. J.
Cui, P. Wu, and S. Liu, вҖңAnomalous terahertz reflection and scattering
by flexible and conformal coding metamaterials,вҖқ Advanced Optical
Materials, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 1374вҖ“1380, 2015.

[8] J. Shaker, M. Chaharmir, and J. Ethier, Reflectarray Antennas: Analysis,
Design, Fabrication, and Measurement.
Artech House, 2014.

[9] Q. Wu and R. Zhang, вҖңIntelligent reflecting surface enhanced wireless
network via joint active and passive beamforming,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 5394вҖ“5409, Nov. 2019.

[10] E. BjГ¶rnson, Г–. Г–zdogan, and E. G. Larsson, вҖңIntelligent reflecting
surface vs. decode-and-forward: How large surfaces are needed to beat
relaying?вҖқ IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., 2019, to appear.

[11] C. A. Balanis, Advanced Engineering Electromagnetics, 2nd ed.
John
Wiley & Sons, 2012.

[12] N. Yu, P. Genevet, M. A. Kats, F. Aieta, J.-P. Tetienne, F. Capasso, and
Z. Gaburro, вҖңLight propagation with phase discontinuities: Generalized
laws of reflection and refraction,вҖқ Science, vol. 334, no. 6054, pp. 333вҖ“
337, 2011.

[13] V. S. Asadchy, M. Albooyeh, S. N. Tcvetkova, A. DГӯaz-Rubio, Y. RaвҖҷdi,
and S. A. Tretyakov, вҖңPerfect control of reflection and refraction using
spatially dispersive metasurfaces,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B, vol. 94, p. 075142, Aug
2016.

[14] D. Headland, T. Niu, E. Carrasco, D. Abbott, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran,
C. Fumeaux, and W. Withayachumnankul, вҖңTerahertz reflectarrays and
nonuniform metasurfaces,вҖқ IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum
Electronics, vol. 23, no. 4, July 2017.

[15] N. M. Estakhri and A. AlГә, вҖңWave-front transformation with gradient
metasurfaces,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X, vol. 6, p. 041008, Oct. 2016.

3More specifically, [5, Sec. II.D] states that вҖңa metasurface that is capable
of shaping the angle and the phase of the reflected signal has a size of the
order of 10О» Г— 10О». This size allows, in general, a metasurface to be viewed
as a specular reflector according to geometrical optics.вҖқ On the contrary, as
shown in Fig. 2 herein, the beamwidth of the scattered wave from such a
surface is вүҲ 10в—Ұ, hence it is far from a specular reflector, irrespective of О»,
when the source and destination are in the far-field.


