Determining Ultra-low Absorption Coefficients of Organic Semiconductors from the 
Sub-bandgap Photovoltaic External Quantum Efficiency 
 
Christina Kaiser, Stefan Zeiske, Paul Meredith* and Ardalan Armin* 
 

Christina Kaiser, Stefan Zeiske, Prof. Paul Meredith, Dr. Ardalan Armin 
Department of Physics, Swansea University, Singleton Park SA2 8PP, Wales, UK 
E-mail: ardalan.armin@swansea.ac.uk, paul.meredith@swansea.ac.uk 
 
Keywords: absorption coefficient, external quantum efficiency, sub-bandgap states, organic 
solar cells and organic photodetectors 
 
 
Energy states below the bandgap of a semiconductor, such as trap states or charge transfer 

states in organic donor-acceptor blends, can contribute to light absorption. Due to their low 

number density or ultra-small absorption cross-section, the absorption coefficient of these 

states is challenging to measure using conventional transmission/reflection spectrophotometry. 

As an alternative, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of photovoltaic devices is often used 

as a representative of the absorption coefficient, where the spectral line shape of the EQE is 

considered to follow the absorption coefficient of the active layer material. In this work, it is 

shown that the sub-bandgap EQE is subject to thickness dependent low finesse cavity 

interference effects within the device – making this assumption questionable. A better estimate 

for the absorption coefficient is obtained when EQE spectra corresponding to different active 

layer thicknesses are fitted simultaneously for one attenuation coefficient using an iterative 

transfer matrix method. The principle is demonstrated for two model acceptor-donor systems 

(PCE12-ITIC and PBTTT-PC71BM) and accurate sub-gap absorption coefficients are 

determined. This approach has particular relevance for both understanding sub-gap states and 

their utilization in organic optoelectronic devices. 

 
 
 


1. Introduction 

Electro-optical modelling has been extensively used to design and optimise the performance of 

optoelectronic devices such as solar cells[1,2], photodetectors[3,4] and thin-film light-emitting 

diodes (LEDs)[5]. For example, an accurate electro-optical model can help to increase the 

photocurrent produced by a solar cell[6], tune the spectral response of a photodetector[7] and 

increase the outcoupling efficiency of thin-film LEDs[8]. To perform these optimisations, a full 

knowledge of the complex refractive indices of all active and buffer layers of the device 

structure is required. For photon energies hv above the bandgap Eg, the complex refractive 

index is often determined through transmission and reflection spectrophotometry or 

spectroscopic ellipsometry. The same experimental techniques become very challenging when 

applied to the sub-bandgap optical constants, particularly because for hv  < Eg the absorptance 

is typically orders of magnitude weaker than for hv > Eg. Throughout this work, the absorptance 

correctly refers to the ratio of absorbed to incident light power, whereas absorption is the 

physical process of photo-excitation through light-matter interaction. Precise sub-bandgap 

optical constants are, however, crucial for modelling a variety of semiconductor devices 

operating at energies below the bandgap such as near-infrared photodetectors[9,10] or light 

emitting exciplex LEDs[11]. In addition, the spectral line shape of the absorption coefficient for 

hv  < Eg is indicative of a variety of phenomena such as disorder in amorphous semiconductors 

and charge transfer absorption in organic semiconductors. Disorder-induced and charge 

transfer state absorptions are related to loss mechanisms in organic solar cells, and have been 

studied extensively to improve solar cell efficiencies.[12–14] Given the considerable interest in 

the sub-bandgap absorption coefficients, sensitive methods of measuring it have been 

developed. This includes photothermal deflection (PDS) spectroscopy as a powerful technique 

for measuring absorption coefficients down to 0.001 cm-1 in the best case, but more commonly 

down  to 1 cm-1 in condensed matter phases.[15,16],[17],[18] Similar to ellipsometry, PDS requires 


the preparation of single layer samples and a rather complicated data analysis subject to model 

fitting. Another technique is Fourier Transform Photocurrent Spectroscopy (FTPS) that is 

based on recording the photocurrent action spectrum using a Fourier Transform Infrared 

spectrometer. FTPS is often used to determine low energy trap states in inorganic 

semiconductors.[19,20] One should note that photocurrent-based methods may be more sensitive 

than PDS but can only probe the absorptance of the photocurrent-generating species. In 

amorphous silicon, it has been shown that FTPS systematically underestimates the optical 

absorptance for hv  < 1.4 eV when compared with PDS.[21,22] Similar to FTPS, the external 

quantum efficiency (EQE) is another photocurrent-based method commonly used to 

characterize the photocurrent response of solar cells and photodetectors over the visible (VIS) 

and near-infrared (NIR) spectral range. The EQE is the product of absorptance (A) of the active 

layer as a function of wavelength and the internal quantum efficiency (IQE), such that 

EQE(𝜆𝜆) = 𝐴𝐴(𝜆𝜆) × IQE .                                                             (1) 

As a consequence of equation (1), the spectral line shape of the EQE must be directly 

transferrable to A assuming that the IQE does not feature any substantial energy dependence. 

The latter assumption has been proven in technologically relevant high efficiency systems such 

as efficient bulk heterojunction[23–26] and perovskite[27] solar cells. Nevertheless, examples for 

donor-acceptor systems with an excitation energy dependent IQE have been shown 

recently.[28,29] If the spectral lineshape of the EQE changes with applied bias, the IQE is not 

spectrally flat and A can be more precisely inferred from the EQE measured at the largest 

possible bias to ensure photocurrent saturation.[28,30] 

The active layer absorptance spectrum 𝐴𝐴(𝜆𝜆) depends on the absorption coefficient 𝛼𝛼(𝜆𝜆), but 

also the wave-optics of the multi-layer stack device that is the solar cell or the photodetector. 

In the case of an optically thin layer with αt ≪ 1 (layer thickness 𝑡𝑡) and in the limit of negligible 

cavity effects (such as a semiconductor film deposited on a transparent substrate), it is often 


assumed that 𝐴𝐴 ≈ 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 for hv < Eg.[26,31–33] Therefore the spectral lineshape of the EQE should 

follow α via A. However, the assumption of 𝐴𝐴 ≈ 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 is invalid in the presence of electrodes as 

the device forms a low-finesse cavity with an associated thickness dependence. The well-

known cavity effects are typically observed as pronounced interference fringes in the above-

gap EQE (where αt ~ 1) but can have a similar effect on the sub-gap EQE. The prominence of 

these cavity effects depends primarily on the relative difference between the individual layer 

refractive indices. A higher mismatch of the refractive index between the organic / transparent 

conducting electrode interface causes substantial Fresnel reflection making the respective 

electrode partially reflective. This can be quite a subtle effect, but important in regions of low 

attenuation coefficient and/or high dispersion in the refractive index – both circumstances 

encountered below the bandgap again making A ≈ αt a questionable approximation. A better 

estimate for A is obtained by modelling the optical field distribution within a device, which 

requires knowledge of the optical constants (that is the real and imaginary components of the 

refractive index) for all materials constituting the layers of the device. In the so-called transfer 

matrix method, the electric field is described as a position- and wavelength-dependent matrix 

considering the absorption and reflection of every layer and interface.[34] A(𝜆𝜆) of the active 

layer is then calculated as the sum of the position (x)-dependent modulus squared of the electric 

field 𝐸𝐸(𝜆𝜆, 𝑥𝑥) over the layer thickness t multiplied by the absorption coefficient α and the 

refractive index n. 

A(λ) = α(λ)n(λ) ∑
|𝐸𝐸(𝜆𝜆, 𝑥𝑥)|2
𝑡𝑡
𝑥𝑥=0
                                             (2) 

It is a relatively straightforward task to model a thin film solar cell when all optical constants 

are known but challenging when the sub-bandgap optical constants are unknown. In this work, 

we determined absorption coefficients as low as 10-2 cm-1 in the sub-gap spectral range of two 

exemplary acceptor-donor blends often used in high efficiency organic solar cells. The full 

molecular structures of these model systems, PBTTT-PC71BM and PCE12-ITIC are provided 


in the Supporting Information (SI). Solar cells with active layer thicknesses between 60 – 375 

nm were fabricated to study the effect of thickness on the shape of the EQE spectra in the sub-

gap spectral range. The absorption coefficients were obtained by numerically fitting for 

multiple EQE spectra and including thickness-dependent optical field simulations via an 

iterative transfer matrix method. We validated the modelled coefficients by simulating EQE 

spectra of devices with different thicknesses where we find a good agreement between the 

simulated and experimental results. It becomes clear that the EQE lineshape is strongly 

dependent on the active layer thickness and hence assuming that 𝐴𝐴 ≈ 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 can only be true for a 

small range of thicknesses. In the PCE12-ITIC system, the interference-induced thickness 

dependence of EQE in the sub-gap regime is more pronounced due to the large refractive index 

of this material system. These results indicate that one cannot directly relate the sub-gap EQE 

spectra to the sub-gap absorption coefficient without performing appropriate optical 

simulations. This is particularly important in systems with larger refractive index such as the 

recently introduced non-fullerene donor/acceptor blends.  

 

2. Results 

2.1 Optical Constants 

PBTTT-PC71BM (1:4) and PCE12-ITIC (1:1) were chosen as model material systems for 

investigations of sub-gap ultra-low attenuation coefficients. PBTTT-PC71BM is known for its 

extended sub-gap EQE shoulder due to charge transfer state (CT) absorption[35], while PCE12-

ITIC shows a narrow CT state-related-EQE contribution that is barely distinguishable from the 

above-gap EQE caused by singlet excitations[33]. First, we obtained the optical constants from 

single layer samples of spin-coated material with thicknesses ranging between 100 – 400 nm 

on both glass and silicon substrates. Ellipsometry is considered as an indirect method for 

obtaining the optical constant, as it measures polarization parameters tan Ψ(λ) and cos Δ(λ), 


which are then globally fitted for the film thickness t and refractive index n in the transparent 

region between 1200 – 1600 nm (κ ≈ 0, i.e., the Cauchy region). Thereafter, n and κ are fitted 

stepwise over the entire spectrum with fixed t. Figure 1 shows the optical constants obtained 

for PCE12-ITIC and PBTTT-PC71BM. We find that the ellipsometric data could be reliably 

determined in good agreement between the experimental data and the mathematical model 

(mean-squared error < 15) as well as high reproducibility between samples in the VIS spectral 

range. The dashed lines in Figure 1 indicate the sensitivity limit for determining κ, which 

roughly corresponds to the bandgap energy beyond which this method is not applicable to κ 

(as seen from the divergence of κ for different t). At the same time, the relative change in n 

with t in the Cauchy regime compared to κ is insignificant, as n lacks spectral features and 

converges to a constant value around 2. In summary, we used n as obtained from ellipsometry 

for transfer matrix simulations in the entire spectral range but dismissed κ for wavelengths 

beyond the dashed lines illustrated in Figure 1. We further determined the optical constants of 

indium tin oxide (ITO), MoO3 and ZnO experimentally, while relying on reported tabulated 

data for Ag.[36] As a next step, electrically inverted photovoltaic cells with the structure ITO 

(105 nm) / ZnO (37 nm) / active layer / MoO3 (7 nm) / Ag (130 nm) were fabricated with 

different active layer thicknesses (PCE12-ITIC: 60, 132, 215, 375 nm and PBTTT-PC71BM: 

60, 81, 110, 140, 190 nm).  

2.2 Numerical determination of κ 

The EQE spectra are used in the procedure depicted in the process flowchart of Figure 2 to 

obtain ultra-low attenuation coefficients. The full protocol was implemented in MATLAB and 

is provided in the SI. The numerical basis for this process is the Nelder-Mead simplex 

algorithm that minimizes a non-linear and constrained objective function.[37] Importantly, the 

presented method does not depend on the algorithm used for the minimization. Other 

derivative-free algorithms like the Brent’s method or Powell's conjugate direction method can 


also be employed.[38] To numerically determine the attenuation coefficient κ, two steps were 

followed as shown in Figure 2a and 2c: (1) Estimation of the precise active layer thickness for 

the single device (defined as the ‘pixel’) and (2) calculation of the attenuation coefficient κ 

under consideration of the pre-optimized thickness. First, the absorption A of each device is 

modelled by the transfer matrix method. The experimental input data required for the modeling 

is the measured active layer thickness t0 and the optical constants in the VIS spectral range that 

is from 400 – 600 nm for PBTTT-PC71BM and 400 – 700 nm for PCE12-ITIC. Thereafter, 

IQEVIS and the mean (IQEmean) are obtained using equation (1). From the available 

ellipsometric constants, values were chosen that resulted in the minimum deviations of the 

IQEVIS from its mean. The IQE of one exemplary PCE12-ITIC device (375 nm active layer 

layer) is depicted in Figure 1b showing a deviation of the IQE of no more than 13 % from its 

mean. Such deviations can be caused by thickness variations over the device area which are 

common for solution-processed layers and could even be seen with the naked eye for the 

210 nm PBTTT-PC71BM device. We therefore pre-optimized the active layer thickness t within 

± 10 nm boundaries around the experimental thickness t0. To do so, the absorptance 𝐴𝐴′ is 

calculated from the IQEmean as 𝐴𝐴′ = EQE × IQEmean-1. Figure 2b shows that the absolute 

difference between 𝐴𝐴′ and 𝐴𝐴 is largest where the IQE deviates most from its mean. To match 

𝐴𝐴′ to 𝐴𝐴, t is numerically varied to minimize the function (𝐴𝐴 −  𝐴𝐴′)2/𝐴𝐴. In the case of 𝐴𝐴 = 𝐴𝐴′, 

IQEVIS would be spectrally flat, which is impossible to achieve given the experimental errors 

and uncertainties related to optical constants and thicknesses of other device layers. 

Nevertheless, the IQE spectra remains approximately flat within these unavoidable errors. IQE 

spectra of the devices under investigation are shown in Figure S1-S2. The experimental and 

the numerically optimized thicknesses of all the investigated devices are shown in Table S1. 

Once the optimized thicknesses and IQEmean for all devices are obtained, the absorption spectra 

below the bandgap can be estimated by 𝐴𝐴′′= EQE × IQEmean-1 using the experimental EQE over 


the full spectral range. Importantly, 𝐴𝐴′′ is now a matrix containing the estimated absorptance 

of all devices. Figure 2c shows the process of numerically obtaining κ. The fixed input 

comprises the absorption matrix 𝐴𝐴′′, the experimental attenuation coefficient at the last 

wavelength within the VIS spectral range κ(λm-1), the attenuation coefficient n over the full 

spectral range, and the numerically obtained thicknesses t. The optimization of κ proceeds 

wavelength by wavelength starting from the λm, where λm-1 is the last wavelength within the 

VIS spectral range. At λm, the transfer matrix calculates 𝐴𝐴′′′ using κ(λm-1) as the initial guess 

of the attenuation coefficient. To further match 𝐴𝐴′′′ to 𝐴𝐴′′(λm), the κ is varied between 0 and 

κ(λm-1)+ κ(λm-1)/10 with the goal to minimize the function (𝐴𝐴′′(λ𝑚𝑚) −  𝐴𝐴′′′) 2/𝐴𝐴′′(λ𝑚𝑚) . Once 

a pre-defined number of iterations has been exceeded, κ(λm) is fixed and the algorithm proceeds 

to the next wavelength λm+1 choosing κ(λm) as the initial estimate for fitting κ(λm+1).  

2.3 EQE simulations 

A computer code for this method is provided in the supporting information with exemplar data. 

The presented method is applicable to a single or more devices of a different active layer 

thickness. However, inaccuracies in the determined thickness and small deviations from the 

flat IQE assumption will have a large impact on the numerically obtained attenuation 

coefficient if only one device is considered. Therefore, it will be more accurate to numerically 

fit devices with different thicknesses. From the globally obtained attenuation coefficient, the 

active layer absorptance can be simulated and then scaled by IQEmean to obtain the EQE. It is 

important to consider that electronic effects, such as the charge collection imbalance of thick 

junctions, are not considered in the optical model. Figure 3a and 3b illustrate the absorption 

coefficients, the experimental EQE (EQEexp) and simulated EQE (EQEsim) spectra of PCE12-

ITIC and PBTTT-PC71BM. The agreement between simulation and experiment for different 

active layer thicknesses was quantified by calculating the relative percentage difference. 

EQEsim is typically within 40 % deviation around the absolute EQEexp despite the simulation 


covering 7 orders of magnitude. Moreover, the difference in EQEexp with active layer thickness 

in the sub-bandgap region is mostly larger than the deviation of the simulation around EQEexp. 

Consequently, EQEsim spectra follow the overall trend of the thickness dependent EQEexp 

spectra. To exemplify this, the maximum difference in EQE of 60 nm and 215 nm PCE12-ITIC 

devices in the sub-bandgap region is 20-fold, whereas the fit-error for one thickness is at most 

2 times the experimental EQE, i.e. a maximum relative percentage error of 100 %. The 

strongest deviations of EQEsim from EQEexp (65 % and 75 %) occur in the spectral range of the 

bandgap (210 nm PBTTT-PC71BM and 60 nm PCE12-ITIC) and at the sensitivity limit of the 

EQE measurement (e.g. 60 nm PCE12-ITIC and 60 nm PBTTT-PC71BM above 1300 nm). 

From a Gaussian fit to the absorption coefficient of PBTTT-PC71BM, a charge transfer energy 

(ECT) of 1.16 eV and a reorganization energy λ of the donor-acceptor complex of 163 meV 

were determined as shown in Figure S3. ECT of PBTTT-PC61BM was previously reported to 

be 1.15 eV in a thin solar cell, where the active layer absorptance A in the device was 

approximated by 𝐴𝐴 ≈ 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡.[32] As both ECT values are in excellent agreement, we performed the 

Gaussian fit on EQEexp spectra for different active layer thicknesses under the assumption of 

𝐴𝐴 ≈ 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡. The 190 nm PBTTT-PC71BM, could not be reliably fitted, while other devices with 

active layer thicknesses of 60, 81, 110 and 140 nm resulted in ECT and λ values ranging from 

1.15 – 1.18 eV and 143 – 186 meV respectively (see SI Table S2). Given the dependence of 

the fit parameters on the chosen fitting range, an uncertainty of  ± 10 meV for ECT  and ± 

20 meV for λ is estimated. To conclude this phase of the analysis, the assumption of 𝐴𝐴 ≈ 𝛼𝛼𝑡𝑡 

leads to an insignificant error in determining ECT and reorganisation energy for the material 

system PBTTT-PC71BM for layer thicknesses below 190 nm. For PCE12-ITIC devices, the 

thickness dependent EQE features above 1000 nm were identified as resonances of the device 

acting as a low-finesse cavity. The resonance modes are highly dependent on the active layer 

thickness as expected. To eliminate the possible effect of higher order harmonics derived from 


the illumination system (see Experimental), the EQE of the 190 nm device was remeasured 

with long-pass filters placed in front of the sample. No significant changes in the EQE were 

observed as depicted in Figure S5. We should also note that the recorded EQE spectra are all 

above the electrical noise level of the apparatus as shown in Figure S5. In Figure 3a and 3b, 

the numerically obtained α is scaled to compare its spectral lineshape to the EQE spectra of 

devices with different active layer thicknesses 𝑡𝑡. The assumption A ≈ αt, according to which 

the spectral lineshape of α follows A and therefore the EQE, is not applicable to any PCE12-

ITIC device without greatly over- or underestimating α. To find the thickness at which this 

assumption is valid, we simulated the active layer absorptance A using the conventional transfer 

matrix method over a broad range of thicknesses (see Figure S4). For PCE12-ITIC, the best 

fit was obtained for thicknesses between 130 - 170 nm, however, the assumption clearly fails 

for other thicknesses. This is mainly caused by a strong dispersion of n for PCE12-ITIC (see 

refractive indices in Figure 1). The strong dispersion arises from the high absorption coefficient 

and its sharp bandgap resulting in larger Cauchy factors. Consequently, interference effects are 

more pronounced in PCE12-ITIC than in PBTTT-PC71BM devices, which presumably also 

applies to other non-fullerene containing systems with similarly large absorption coefficients. 

For PBTTT-PC71BM, A ≈ αt can give a better estimate for the numerical α over a wide range 

of thicknesses. At the same time, the change in thickness between 60 – 150 nm also affects the 

spectral lineshape of the simulated absorptance. From these two examples, it becomes clear 

that active layer thickness plays a significant role in the observed spectral lineshape of the EQE 

and care must be taken to not mistake material properties with device properties. 

2.4 Trap states 

Figure 3 further indicates a broad feature in the absorption coefficient spectrum of PCE12-ITIC 

between 1000 – 1400 nm with an ultra-low absorption coefficient of 0.1 – 0.01 cm-1. According 

to the empirically established relation ECT ≈ qVOC + 0.6 eV, the CT state energy of PCE12-


ITIC is expected to be around 1.5 eV. This has been experimentally shown[33,39] and can be 

observed in Figure 3 as a shoulder in the absorption coefficient spectrum at 800 nm. The 

corresponding Gaussian-distributed absorptance of CT states occurs at much higher energies 

than the observed tail states. Importantly, the ability to determine absorption coefficients 

between 0.1 – 0.01 cm-1, allows one to observe ultra-weak optical transitions that are typically 

associated with defect absorption in this spectral range.[21,22,40] Moreover, the tail of the 

absorption coefficient observed here can be easily fitted by an exponential function. Similar to 

FTPS measurements, the presented method determines exclusively photocurrent-generating 

trap states. Therefore, it possibly underestimates the optical absorption coefficient in the 

spectral range of defect absorption. However, the thus obtained “effective absorption 

coefficient” is advantageous for modelling solely photocurrent-based devices like solar cells 

and photodetectors, and to perform detailed balance analysis to determine the open circuit 

voltage of the solar cells and thermodynamic limit of the detectivity of the photodetectors.   

2.5 Minimal EQE 

Using the presented method, the sensitivity to the absorption coefficient depends solely on the 

ability to measure small photocurrents in the weakly absorbing spectral region. Figure S5a 

shows the EQE of PCE12-ITIC cells measured up to 1700 nm. Depending on the device noise 

current and measurement integration time, the noise floor is reached at different wavelengths, 

but always above 1400 nm. In Figure S5b, the current response of a 105 nm thick PCE12-ITIC 

device in the dark is depicted as the noise-equivalent EQE of the measurement system utilized 

in this work. We believe it is therefore possible to obtain α values down to 10-3 cm-1 if the 

device noise is decreased via (for example) increasing the shunt resistances (i.e., lowering the 

thermal noise). Importantly, this α is only valid for charge-generating states. Another limitation 

of this method concerns finding the accurate optical constants via spectroscopic ellipsometry 

needed to determine the IQE. Anisotropy or thickness dependent morphology as well as 


birefringent optical properties can be very difficult to model. Moreover, it has been reported 

that some material systems show an excitation energy dependent IQE.[23,28] In that case the sub-

bandgap IQE cannot be inferred from the above bandgap IQE making the method presented 

here not applicable. However, if the experimental EQE spectra for several thicknesses can be 

simulated reliably, the numerical absorption coefficient is valid for the material system under 

investigation and hence the assumption of an energy independent IQE applies. 

3. Conclusion 

In summary, we have presented a numerical and experimental approach to determine ultra-

small absorption coefficients of sub-gap states from external quantum efficiency spectra and 

applied it to organic semiconductors-based solar cells. Due to non-negligible cavity effects, the 

spectral shape of the sub-bandgap EQE is influenced by interference fringes that are greater 

when the refractive index is more dispersive as exemplified with the PCE12-ITIC system. The 

thickness-dependent EQE spectra of PCE12-ITIC and PBTTT-PC71BM devices were 

accurately predicted when modelling the device using the as-obtained absorption coefficients. 

While the charge transfer energy of the PBTTT-PC71BM was determined as previously 

reported, sub-bandgap states were observed for the PCE12-ITIC blend, which are most likely 

linked to photocurrent generating trap states. The method presented here refines how to obtain 

the absorption coefficient from EQE spectra while offering a novel way to study sub-bandgap 

absorption with relatively low experimental overhead. 

4. Experimental Section  

Device preparation: On a pre-cleaned glass substrate with a pre-structured layer of 105 nm 

ITO, a 35 nm thin layer of ZnO was deposited via a sol-gel spin coating at 4000 rpm from a 

0.5 M solution of zinc acetate dihydrate in ethanolamine and 2-methoxy ethanol (volume ratio 

3:97). The as-spun layer was annealed at 150 °C for 10 min in air. The ZnO hole-transporting 

layer was followed by the active layer comprising either PBTTT-PC71BM or PCE12-ITIC. For 


PBTTT-PC71BM as the active layer, PBTTT (Sigma-Aldrich, Mw > 50 000 g mol-1,  PDI < 3)) 

and [6,6]-Phenyl C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) was mixed in a weight ratio of 1:4 

and dissolved in chloroform:1,2-dichlorobenzene (6:4 volume ratio). The solution was stirred 

overnight, filtered through a 0.2 µm PTFE filter in the cold and spin-coated at 65 °C for 60 s. 

For film thicknesses between 100 – 200 nm, the concentration of the solution was chosen to be 

32 mg mL-1 and the spin-speed is varied between 1000 – 3000 rpm. For layer thicknesses below 

100 nm, the same solution was diluted to 20 mg mL-1 and the spin-speed varied between 1000 

– 1500 rpm. For PCE12-ITIC as the active layer, the polymer PCE12 (PBDB-T) and the 

acceptor ITIC were mixed in a weight ratio of 1:1 and dissolved in chlorobenzene at 50 °C 

overnight to form a 20 mg mL-1 solution. 0.5 vol% diiodooctane was added prior to spin-

coating, while keeping the solution at 50 °C throughout the deposition process. Film 

thicknesses between 60 – 375 nm were obtained by varying the spin-speed between 400 – 2700 

rpm and subsequent thermal annealing at 160 °C for 10 min. The active layer was followed by 

7 nm of MoO3 and 130 nm of silver thermally evaporated under high vacuum. All devices were 

defined by the geometrical overlap of the bottom and the top contact that equals 15 mm2. To 

avoid exposure to ambient conditions, the organic part of the device was covered by a small 

glass substrate glued on top. 

Ellipsometry: The optical constants of spin-coated films were determined experimentally by 

spectroscopic ellipsometry (instrument: J.A. Woollam M-2000; software: CompleteEASE 

5.23). Samples comprised a single layer of material spin-coated from the same solution as 

utilized for device fabrication on either quartz glass or silicon substrates.  

Sensitive EQE measurements: A Spectrophotometer (LAMBDA 950, PerkinElmer) with an 

integrated monochromator was used as a light source spanning 400 - 1800 nm. The output light 

from the spectrometer was chopped at 273 Hz and focused onto a photodiode. The short-circuit 

current was derived from the device was fed to a current preamplifier (Femto DHCPA-100) 


before being analyzed with a lock-in amplifier (SR860 Stanford Research Systems). To resolve 

low photocurrents, the preamplifier was set to high amplification, while the time-constant of 

the lock-in amplifier was chosen to be 1 s in the strongly absorbing and 30 s in the weakly 

absorbing spectral range. For the calibration process, a NIST‐calibrated silicon photodiode (for 

wavelength between 400 nm and 1100 nm) and a germanium photodiode (for wavelength 

between 780 nm and 1800 nm) from Newport were used. 

 

Supporting Information 
 

Acknowledgements 

This work was funded through the Welsh Government’s Sêr Cymru II Program ‘Sustainable 

Advanced Materials’ (Welsh European Funding Office − European Regional Development 

Fund). C.K. and S.Z. are recipients of a UKRI EPSRC Doctoral Training Program studentship. 

P.M. is a Sêr Cymru II Research Chair and A.A. a Rising Star Fellow also funded through the 

Welsh Government’s Sêr Cymru II ‘Sustainable Advanced Materials’ Program (European 

Regional Development Fund, Welsh European Funding Office and Swansea University 

Strategic Initiative).  

 

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 
Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 
Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 

 

References 

[1] 
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke, M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 3293. 

[2] 
A. H. Fallahpour, A. Gagliardi, F. Santoni, D. Gentilini, A. Zampetti, M. Auf Der 

Maur, A. Di Carlo, J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 116, DOI: 10.1063/1.4901065. 

[3] 
K. H. An, B. O’Connor, K. P. Pipe, M. Shtein, Org. Electron. physics, Mater. Appl. 

2009, 10, 1152. 


[4] 
J. B. Héroux, X. Yang, W. I. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1999, 75, 2716. 

[5] 
Z. Liu, K. Wang, X. Luo, S. Liu, Opt. Express 2010, 18, 9398. 

[6] 
N. Dahan, Z. Jehl, T. Hildebrandt, J.-J. Greffet, J.-F. Guillemoles, D. Lincot, N. 

Naghavi, J. Appl. Phys. 2012, 112, 1. 

[7] 
A. Mischok, B. Siegmund, D. S. Ghosh, J. Benduhn, D. Spoltore, M. Böhm, H. Fröb, 

C. Körner, K. Leo, K. Vandewal, ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 2228. 

[8] 
M. Kovačič, P. A. Will, B. Lipovšek, M. Topič, S. Lenk, S. Reineke, J. Krč, ACS 

Photonics 2018, 5, 422. 

[9] 
B. Siegmund, A. Mischok, J. Benduhn, O. Zeika, S. Ullbrich, F. Nehm, M. Böhm, D. 

Spoltore, H. Fröb, C. Körner, K. Leo, K. Vandewal, Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1. 

[10] J. Piotrowski, W. Gawron, Infrared Phys. Technol. 1997, 38, 63. 

[11] G. Tregnago, C. Fléchon, S. Choudhary, C. Gozalvez, A. Mateo-Alonso, F. Cacialli, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 105, 1. 

[12] W. J. D. Beenken, F. Herrmann, M. Presselt, H. Hoppe, S. Shokhovets, G. Gobsch, E. 

Runge, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2013, 15, 16494. 

[13] F. J. Kahle, A. Rudnick, H. Bässler, A. Köhler, Mater. Horizons 2018, 5, 837. 

[14] S. Nunomura, I. Sakata, K. Matsubara, J. Non. Cryst. Solids 2016, 436, 44. 

[15] A. Skumanich, J. C. Scott, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst. Inc. Nonlinear Opt. 2007, 183, 365. 

[16] A. C. Boccara, W. Jackson, N. M. Amer, D. Fournier, Opt. Lett. 1981, 6, 51. 

[17] C. H. Y. Ho, S. H. Cheung, H. W. Li, K. L. Chiu, Y. Cheng, H. Yin, M. H. Chan, F. 

So, S. W. Tsang, S. K. So, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7, 1. 

[18] S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S. J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F. J. Haug, J. 

H. Yum, C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014, 5, 1035. 

[19] M. Vanecek, A. Poruba, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 80, 719. 

[20] J. W. Tomm, A. Jaeger, A. Bärwolff, T. Elsaesser, A. Gerhardt, J. Donecker, Appl. 


Phys. Lett. 1997, 71, 2233. 

[21] N. M. Amer, in Semicond. Semimetals, 1984, pp. 83–112. 

[22] Z. E. Smith, V. Chu, K. Shepard, S. Aljishi, D. Slobodin, J. Kolodzey, S. Wagner, T. 

L. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1987, 50, 1521. 

[23] A. Armin, I. Kassal, P. E. Shaw, M. Hambsch, M. Stolterfoht, D. M. Lyons, J. Li, Z. 

Shi, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 11465. 

[24] K. Vandewal, S. Albrecht, E. T. Hoke, K. R. Graham, J. Widmer, J. D. Douglas, M. 

Schubert, W. R. Mateker, J. T. Bloking, G. F. Burkhard, A. Sellinger, J. M. Frechet, A. 

Amassian, M. K. Riede, M. D. Mcgehee, D. Neher, A. Salleo, Nat. Mater. 2014, 13, 

63. 

[25] J. Kurpiers, T. Ferron, S. Roland, M. Jakoby, T. Thiede, F. Jaiser, S. Albrecht, S. 

Janietz, B. A. Collins, I. A. Howard, D. Neher, Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 1. 

[26] J. Lee, K. Vandewal, S. R. Yost, M. E. Bahlke, L. Goris, M. A. Baldo, J. V. Manca, T. 

Van Voorhis, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 11878. 

[27] Q. Lin, A. Armin, R. C. R. Nagiri, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, Nat. Photonics 2015, 9, 

106. 

[28] S. Khan, G. Londi, X. Liu, M. A. Fusella, G. D. Avino, L. Muccioli, A. N. Brigeman, 

B. Niesen, T. C. Yang, Y. Olivier, J. T. Dull, N. C. Giebink, D. Beljonne, B. P. Rand, 

Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 1450. 

[29] C. H. Tan, A. Wadsworth, N. Gasparini, S. Wheeler, S. Holliday, R. S. Ashraf, S. D. 

Dimitrov, D. Baran, I. McCulloch, J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C 2019, 123, 5826. 

[30] X. Liu, K. Ding, A. Panda, S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 7619. 

[31] M. Azzouzi, J. Yan, T. Kirchartz, K. Liu, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. X 

2018, 8, 31055. 

[32] Z. Tang, Z. Ma, A. Sánchez-Díaz, S. Ullbrich, Y. Liu, B. Siegmund, A. Mischok, K. 


Leo, M. Campoy-Quiles, W. Li, K. Vandewal, Adv. Mater. 2017, 1702184, 1702184. 

[33] W. Zhao, D. Qian, S. Zhang, S. Li, O. Inganäs, F. Gao, J. Hou, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 

4734. 

[34] K. Ohta, H. Ishida, Appl. Opt. 1990, 29, 1952. 

[35] E. Buchaca-Domingo, K. Vandewal, Z. Fei, S. E. Watkins, F. H. Scholes, J. H. 

Bannock, J. C. De Mello, L. J. Richter, D. M. DeLongchamp, A. Amassian, M. 

Heeney, A. Salleo, N. Stingelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 5256. 

[36] Y. Jiang, S. Pillai, M. A. Green, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 187. 

[37] J. D’Errico, MATLAB Cent. File Exch. (retrieved January 12, 2010) 2010. 

[38] W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, B. P. Flannery, in Numer. Recipes 

Fortran Art Sci. Comput., 1992, pp. 394–444. 

[39] K. Vandewal, K. Tvingstedt, A. Gadisa, O. Inganäs, J. V. Manca, Nat. Mater. 2009, 8, 

904. 

[40] C. M. Sutter-Fella, D. W. Miller, Q. P. Ngo, E. T. Roe, F. M. Toma, I. D. Sharp, M. C. 

Lonergan, A. Javey, ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 709. 

 

 
 


 
 

 

Figure 1. Spectroscopic ellipsometry obtained refractive indices n and attenuation 

coefficients κ of PBTTT-PC71BM and PCE12-ITIC on silicon (Si) and glass with the 

respective layer thicknesses as shown. Dashed lines highlight the sensitivity limit in κ of the 

ellipsometric technique. PCE12-ITIC shows a significantly larger dispersion in n compared to 

PBTTT-PC71BM. 

 
 


 

 
Figure 2. Process flow for obtaining ultra-low attenuation coefficients in the weakly 

absorbing spectral range using numerical optimization. a,b) The active layer thickness t is 

optimized such that the difference between 𝐴𝐴 and 𝐴𝐴′ in the visible spectral range is minimal 

resulting in a spectrally flat IQEVIS. c) From the mean of the IQE and sensitively measured 

sub-bandgap EQE, an absorptance matrix 𝐴𝐴′′ for several device thickness is calculated. Using 

the pre-optimized t, κ is numerically obtained by recursive simulation of the active layer 

absorptance 𝐴𝐴′′′(𝜆𝜆𝑚𝑚) for all device thicknesses at one wavelength with the goal to fit 𝐴𝐴′′.  

 

 

a)

c)

b)


Figure 3. Absorption coefficients of PCE12-ITIC and PBTTT-PC71BM (dashed black lines) 

comprising ellipsometric data for above-gap and numerical data for sub-bandgap absorption. 

Using α in a conventional transfer matrix simulation, the active layer absorptance was 

calculated and scaled by IQEmean to obtain the simulated EQE (dotted lines). The thickness-

dependence of the sub-bandgap EQE is clearly reproduced in the simulation validating the 

numerical α as well as indicating that the commonly used assumption 𝐴𝐴𝑡𝑡 ≈ 𝛼𝛼 is only true for 

a subset of thicknesses. 

 
 


 

ToC Text: The absorption coefficient in the weakly absorptive region of the spectrum is of 

great importance for thin-film solar cells and photodiodes. This study presents a method for 

obtaining the sub-bandgap absorption coefficient from multiple EQE spectra.  

 
Christina Kaiser, Stefan Zeiske, Paul Meredith *, Ardalan Armin * 
 

Determining Ultra-low Absorption Coefficients from the Sub-bandgap External Quantum 

Efficiency in Organic Solar Cells and Photodiodes 

 

 

 
 

? 


Supporting Information  
 

 

Determining Ultra-low Absorption Coefficients from the Sub-bandgap External 
Quantum Efficiency in Organic Solar Cells and Photodiodes 
 
 
Christina Kaiser, Stefan Zeiske, Paul Meredith *, Ardalan Armin * 
 
 
Content: 

Scheme S1: Molecular structures of PCE12, ITIC, PBTTT and PC71BM 

Figure S1: Active layer absorption and IQE of PCE12-ITIC devices in the VIS spectral 

Figure S2: Active layer absorption and IQE of PBTTT-PC71BM devices in the VIS spectral 

Table S1: Experimental and numerical active layer thicknesses 

Figure S3: Gaussian fit to the absorption coefficient of PBTTT-PC71BM  

Table S2: Charge transfer energies and reorganization energies extracted from Gaussian fits 

to the experimental EQE spectra 

Figure S4: Simulated sub-bandgap active layer absorption 

Figure S5: EQE of PCE12-ITIC devices with long pass filters 

 
 
 
 


 

PBTTT

Poly[2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl) 
thieno[3,2-b]thiophene]
PC71BM

[6,6]-Phenyl C71 butyric acid 
methyl ester

ITIC

3,9-bis(2-methylene-(3-(1,1-dicyanomethylene)-indanone))-
5,5,11,11-tetrakis(4-hexylphenyl)-dithieno[2,3-d:2’,3’-d’]-s-
indaceno[1,2-b:5,6-b’]dithiophene 

PCE12
 
Poly[(2,6-(4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-
yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b’]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-
(1’,3’-di-2-thienyl-5’,7’-bis(2-
ethylhexyl)benzo[1’,2’-c:4’,5’-c’]dithiophene-
4,8-dione)] 

Scheme S1 Molecular structures of the materials investigated in this study.


 
 

Figure S1 Simulated active layer absorption, IQE and the mean of the IQE (IQEmean) of devices
with the structure ITO (109 nm) / ZnO (37 nm) / PCE12-ITIC (60 – 400 nm) / MoO3 (7 nm) / Ag 
(130 nm). A corresponds to the absorption calculated by the transfer matrix using the 
experimentally obtained optical constants. A'  corresponds to the absorption calculated as
A' = EQE × IQEmean
-1
. 


 
 

Figure S2 Simulated active layer absorption, IQE and the mean of the IQE (IQEmean) of a device
with the structure ITO (109 nm) / ZnO (37 nm) / PBTTT-PC71BM (60 – 190 nm) / MoO3 (7 nm) 
/ Ag (130 nm). A corresponds to the absorption calculated by the transfer matrix using the 
experimentally obtained optical constants. A’ corresponds to the absorption calculated as 
A’=EQE × IQEmean
-1
. 


Measured 
thickness in nm

Numerical 
thickness in nm

PBTTT-
PC71BM 

70 
60

80
81

120
110

130
140

200
190

PCE12-ITIC
50
60

142
132

205
215

385
375

 

Table S1 Active layer thickness of devices with either PBTTT-PC71BM or PCE12-ITIC. The 
numerical thickness is obtained using a numerical fitting procedure that varies the thickness 
between ± 10 nm around the measured thickness. The fit aims to find a more precise thickness 
by reducing the deviations of the IQE from its mean. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Active layer 
thickness in nm

ECT in eV
λ in meV

Absorption 
Coefficient

--
1.155
162.7

EQE
60
1.175
152.9

81
1.181
134.4

110
1.150
182.5

140
1.158
150.8

190
--
--

Table S2 Charge transfer energy (ECT) and reorganization energy (λ) of PBTTT-PC71BM 
obtained from a Gaussian fit to the low-energy part of the absorption coefficient or the 
experimental external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra. The Gaussian fit to the EQE of the 
190 nm thick device was not reliable and therefore excluded. ECT and λ extracted as fit-
parameter from the EQE spectra show negligible deviation from the values extracted from the 
absorption coefficient given an estimated fit-error of ±10 meV and ± 20 meV for ECT and λ 
respectively. 

Figure S3 Absorption coefficient of PBTTT-PC71BM inferred from the ellipsometric 
extinction coefficient in the VIS spectral range and the numerical extinction coefficient in 
the sub-bandgap range. It is known that PBTTT-PC71BM exhibits a strongly redshifted CT 
absorption leading to a sub-bandgap EQE shoulder. The low energy part of the absorption 
coefficient was fit by a Gaussian-like function to extract the charge transfer energy (ECT) 
and the reorganization energy (λ). A charge transfer energy (ECT) of 1.15 eV has already 
been reported in literature for PBTTT-PC61BM. 


Figure S4 Sub-bandgap spectral line-shape of the active layer absorption for different 
thicknesses in devices with PCE12-ITIC (left) and PBTTT-PC71BM (right). Colored 
lines represent the simulated absorption obtained from the transfer matrix method and 
the numerical α. Grey lines represent the absorption obtained by assuming A ≈ 𝛼𝛼t for 
random thicknesses. 

grey:  A ∝ α
colour: A from transfer matrix 

grey:  A ∝ α
colour: A from transfer matrix 


 

Figure S5 Left: EQE spectra measured for PCE12-ITIC devices showing optical interference 
fringes as the result of the device acting as a low-finesse cavity for wavelengths above 
1000 nm. Right: EQE of the PCE12-ITIC device with a 215 nm active layer. Different longpass 
filters were placed in front of sample to eliminate higher incident light order harmonics. The 
noise-equivalent EQE of a 105 nm thick PCE12-ITIC cell was recorded by fully blocking the 
light beam.  

 
 


