 

 

The Exit-Wave Power-Cepstrum Transform for Scanning Nanobeam 
Electron Diffraction: Robust Strain Mapping at Subnanometer 
Resolution and Subpicometer Precision  
 
Elliot Padgett1, Megan E. Holtz1,2, Paul Cueva1, Yu-Tsun Shao1, Eric Langenberg2, Darrell G. 
Schlom2,3, David A. Muller1,3 
 
1 School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, 
United States 
2 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 
14853, United States 
3 Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Scanning nanobeam electron diffraction (NBED) with fast pixelated detectors is a valuable 
technique for rapid, spatially resolved mapping of lattice structure over a wide range of length 
scales. However, intensity variations caused by dynamical diffraction and sample mistilts can 
hinder the measurement of diffracted disk centers as necessary for quantification. Robust data 
processing techniques are needed to provide accurate and precise measurements for complex 
samples and non-ideal conditions. Here we present an approach to address these challenges using 
a transform, called the exit wave power cepstrum (EWPC), inspired by cepstral analysis in audio 
signal processing. The EWPC transforms NBED patterns into real-space patterns with sharp peaks 
corresponding to inter-atomic spacings. We describe a simple analytical model for interpretation 
of these patterns that cleanly decouples lattice information from the intensity variations in NBED 
patterns caused by tilt and thickness. By tracking the inter-atomic spacing peaks in EWPC patterns, 
strain mapping is demonstrated for two practical applications: mapping of ferroelectric domains 
in epitaxially strained PbTiO3 films and mapping of strain profiles in arbitrarily oriented core-shell 
Pt-Co nanoparticle fuel-cell catalysts. The EWPC transform enables lattice structure measurement 
at sub-pm precision and sub-nm resolution that is robust to small sample mistilts and random 
orientations. 
 
 

1 
Introduction 

 
Characterization of nanoscale variations in lattice structure is essential for understanding the 
properties of many materials systems. (Scanning) transmission electron microscopy ((S)TEM) 
provides a powerful toolset for this, with several techniques for mapping local crystal structure, 
strain, and lattice distortions. [1–3] Aberration correctors have made atomic resolution STEM 
and TEM imaging widely available and effective for direct measurement of real-space lattice 
structure at the single-atom level. However, direct atomic resolution imaging is limited to 
relatively small fields of view (FOVs) around ~100 nm and requires a high beam dose and a 
specimen oriented on a high-symmetry zone axis. Furthermore, the quality of atomic resolution 


 

 

images is highly sensitive to instabilities such as sample drift, vibration, electromagnetic 
interference, and scan distortion.  
 
Recent advances in fast, high-dynamic-range pixel-array detectors [4–6] are making scanning 
diffraction techniques, including nanobeam electron diffraction (NBED) and convergent beam 
electron diffraction (CBED), a promising approach for characterization of local lattice 
structure.[7] In NBED, a relatively low convergence angle is used such that the diffracted disks 
do not overlap and can be measured similarly to conventional TEM diffraction.[8] In CBED 
strain mapping, a highly convergent probe is used and the strain is extracted through 
measurement of the higher order Laue zone (HOLZ) lines formed by dynamical diffraction 
effects.[9] Both CBED and NBED techniques allow high precision, high spatial resolution lattice 
structure measurements over FOVs reaching up to micrometer length scales while imposing 
fewer constraints on stability.[10,11]  
 
NBED is compatible with a wide range of sample thicknesses and orientations, making it a 
versatile scanning diffraction technique.[7,12]  However, several challenges arise in applying 
NBED for structural characterization of complex specimens. High-spatial-resolution NBED 
measurements require a relatively high convergence angle, resulting in broad diffracted disks. In 
this case, intensity variations caused by dynamical diffraction and sample mistilts can hinder 
accurate and precise measurement of the disk centers. [13–15] Effective methods for extracting 
lattice information must ensure high computational efficiency, precision with limited beam dose, 
and robustness under nonideal conditions including background signals, varying peak intensities, 
and internal structure within the diffracted disks. One experimental technique that has been 
successfully deployed to improve NBED patterns is precession electron diffraction (PED), where 
the incident beam is tilted off of the optic axis of the microscope and precessed around the optic 
axis during NBED pattern acquisition.[16,17] PED can increase the number of higher order 
diffraction spots present by bringing the Ewald sphere to intersect more reciprocal lattice points, 
while also averaging out dynamical effects to create a more kinematic-like diffraction pattern 
with more internally uniform diffraction spots.[18–20] However, employing precession methods 
for NBED adds experimental complexity, increases acquisition time, and limits the achievable 
spatial resolution. Furthermore, precise localization of broad diffracted disks is a difficult 
computational task even under the relatively ideal conditions provided by PED. While a wide 
variety of techniques for data processing and disk localization have been employed – including 
correlation methods,[10,15] iterative fitting methods,[13,21] center of mass calculation,[11] and 
the circular Hough transform [22] – these challenges remain a limitation to the application of 
NBED to complex materials systems. 
 
In this paper we propose a transformation to aid in the extraction of lattice structure and strain 
information from nanobeam diffraction maps, which can be applied both with and without PED. 
Our approach is inspired by the use of cepstral analysis in signal processing. Cepstral analysis 
was developed for echo detection and pitch determination, and was subsequently used for a wide 
variety of audio and image processing applications, especially the analysis of speech. [23–25] In 
audio processing, to track the time evolution of an audio signal, a short segment is selected using 
a time-domain window function and processed using short-time Fourier analysis. In particular, 
the power cepstrum (PC) of a time-domain function is calculated by first taking the logarithm of 
the power spectrum to produce a frequency-domain function. By then taking the power spectrum 


 

 

of this frequency-domain function, a new real-space function, similar to the autocorrelation 
function, is obtained; this is the PC.  
 
The PC provides a very useful separation property for signals that are convolved in the time 
domain. In the frequency domain these signals become multiplicative, and then additive after the 
application of a logarithm. The originally convolved functions remain additive after the second 
Fourier transform to the time-domain PC, allowing convenient, independent measurement of 
signals with differing time-scales. 
 
The measurement of crystal structure with NBED is analogous to short-time Fourier analysis of 
audio signals, with the goal instead being the determination of spatial variations in crystal 
structure. In NBED, a small real-space area is selected by the probe, and the diffraction pattern 
reveals its periodic structure in reciprocal space. The diffraction process physically “calculates” 
the Fourier transform of the real-space structure. Several of the problems complicating lattice 
structure measurements from NBED patterns, including intensity variations from sample mistilt 
and multiple scattering, can be approximated as multiplicative in diffraction space (and therefore 
convolutions in real space). Analogy to audio signal processing suggests that a real-space 
cepstrum may be useful for separating these effects from the lattice structure of interest. Because 
the first steps of producing a real-space cepstrum are performed physically by the diffraction 
process, a real-space cepstrum can be calculated by taking the power spectrum of the log-scaled 
NBED pattern. As shown in Section 2, this is equivalent to the power cepstrum of the exit wave, 
and so we denote this transform the exit wave power cepstrum (EWPC).  
 
The process of calculating the EWPC is illustrated in Figure 1. Figure 1(a) shows a NBED 
pattern for a face-centered cubic Pt-Co alloy oriented on the [110] zone axis with the direct beam 
saturated in post-processing for display purposes. Figure 1(b) shows the logarithm of the NBED 
pattern, which flattens the intensity variation between the diffraction spots and brings more spots 
into the intermediate intensity range. Figure 1(c) shows the EWPC transform of the NBED, or 
the magnitude of the Fourier transform of Figure 1(b). The EWPC pattern is similar to an 
autocorrelation of the real lattice, i.e. a Patterson function, [26] and concentrates the signal from 
the diffracted disks into sharp real-space points corresponding to inter-atomic spacings. This 
transform makes precise fitting of the peaks for measurement of the lattice structure numerically 
convenient and separates the effects of tilt and thickness on the NBED pattern from the lattice 
structure information. 
 


 

 

 

 
In this manuscript we present a simple model of the EWPC transform in the context of NBED 
and experimentally demonstrate its key features for strain mapping. Using Bloch wave 
simulations to incorporate dynamical diffraction effects, we investigate the robustness of the 
approach to varying sample thickness and mistilt. We then demonstrate its practical value for 
two applications: ferroelectric domains in epitaxially strained PbTiO3 films and core-shell Pt-Co 
nanoparticle catalysts. For the PbTiO3 films we show EWPC mapping is robust to large mistilts 
caused by ferroelastic strain. For the Pt-Co nanoparticles we show that the EWPC transform 
enables sub-nm resolution strain mapping that is robust to random particle orientations and 
suitable to provide strain measurements in ~nm thick shells. These examples show that the 
EWPC transform is a powerful tool for high spatial resolution NBED strain mapping that is 
precise, dose efficient, and robust to a variety of sample complexities, suppressing artefacts from 
thickness fringes and bend contours. 
 

2 
Theory of the EWPC 

 
2.1 
Cepstral Analysis and the Exit Wave Power Cepstrum 

 
Cepstral analysis was originally developed for the analysis of human speech, with the goal of 
determining the time evolution of the pitch in audio signals.[23] Cepstral analysis provides a 
means for separating the fundamental pitch frequency from convolved formants that shape the 
wave. In particular, the power cepstrum of a function 𝑓(𝑡) is defined as the power spectrum of 
the log of the power spectrum of 𝑓(𝑡): 

PC'𝑓(𝑡)( = *ℱ ,ln /0ℱ'𝑓(𝑡)(0

!12*

!

,
(1) 

where ℱ denotes a Fourier transform. For convolved functions 𝛼(𝑡) ∗ 𝛽(𝑡) with Fourier 
transforms 𝛢(𝜔) = ℱ'𝛼(𝑡)( and 𝛣(𝜔) = ℱ'𝛽(𝑡)(, the power cepstrum provides a useful 
separation property: 

PC'𝛼(𝑡) ∗ 𝛽(𝑡)( = 0ℱ'ln(|𝛢(𝜔) ∙ 𝛣(𝜔)|!)(0

! 

= 0ℱ'ln(|𝛢(𝜔)|!) + ln(|𝛣(𝜔)|!)(0

! 

 

Figure 1: Illustration of the EWPC transform for an FCC Pt-Co alloy oriented on the [110]-
zone axis. (a,b) Nanobeam electron diffraction (NBED) pattern shown with (a) linear and (b) 
logarithmic intensity scales. (c) The EWPC transform for this diffraction pattern, calculated 
as the fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the log of the NBED pattern.


 

 

= *ℱ ,ln /0ℱ'𝛼(𝑡)(0

!12 + ℱ ,ln /0ℱ'𝛽(𝑡)(0

!12*

!

.
(2) 

 
For 𝛼(𝑡), 𝛽(𝑡) with well-separated frequency bands, this allows additive separation of the 
convolved signals, 

PC'𝛼(𝑡) ∗ 𝛽(𝑡)( ≈ PC'𝛼(𝑡)( + PC'𝛽(𝑡)(,
(3) 

as desired for independent analysis of pitch and formants. 
 
This situation is closely analogous to the problem of lattice mapping using nanobeam diffraction, 
where our goal is to measure the spatial variation of the periodic lattice structure in a sample. 
Sample tilt and thickness create modulations in the intensity of diffracted beams, similar to the 
effect of formants on an audio power spectrum, which we would ideally separate from the lattice 
information. These similarities suggest that some form of cepstral analysis may be useful in 
nanobeam diffraction mapping as well.  
 
To determine how to structure the analysis, it is useful to consider the trade-off presented by the 
choice of probe size in nanobeam diffraction. A probe that provides high localization in real 
space will result in delocalization of the reciprocal lattice information in diffraction space by 
broadening diffracted peaks into disks. As a result, measurement of the lattice structure in 
diffraction space may become imprecise or computationally inconvenient. A transform into real 
space can avoid these challenges for lattice measurement. 
 
To take advantage of the cepstral separation properties and real space lattice measurement, we 
will define the exit wave power cepstrum (EWPC) as follows: 

EWPC"(𝒙) = PC'𝜙(𝒙)( = *ℱ ,ln /0ℱ'𝜙(𝒙)(0

!12*

!

= *ℱ /ln'𝐼(𝒒)(1*

!

,
(4) 

for exit wave 𝜙(𝒙) with real-space position 𝒙 and reciprocal-space scattering vector 𝒒. The 
EWPC can easily be calculated from the diffraction pattern 𝐼(𝒒) = 0ℱ'𝜙(𝒙)(0

!, which 

“calculates” the first part of the power cepstrum transform physically. The EWPC concentrates 
the signal from the set of periodic diffracted disks into sharp real-space points that are 
convenient for high-precision lattice measurements while also separating out “undesirable” 
effects from specimen tilt and thickness, as we will discuss in detail below. 
 
2.2 
Interpretation of EWPC Patterns 

 
We will use a simple model of nanobeam electron diffraction to qualitatively illustrate the 
separation properties of the EWPC and provide a basis for the interpretation of EWPC patterns 
for diffraction mapping.  Dynamical effects are considered using Bloch wave simulations in 
Section 4.2, and similar trends hold. To provide an illustrative and simplified analytical model of 
the real-space exit wave 𝜙(𝒙) and the EWPC we can begin by approximating the specimen as a 
strong phase object, such that: 

𝜙(𝒙) = 𝜙#(𝒙)exp'𝑖𝜎𝑉P(𝒙)(,
'5( 

where 𝜙#(𝒙) is the probe function, 𝜎 is a scaling factor, and 𝑉P(𝒙) is the projected specimen 
potential. Foreshortening from geometric projection [29] is included in 𝑉P.  The diffraction 
pattern is  


 

 

𝐼(𝒒) = 0ℱ'𝜙(𝒙)(0

! 

= *ℱ'𝜙#(𝒙)( ∗ ℱ /exp'𝑖𝜎𝑉P(𝒙)(1*

!
 

= |Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱(𝒒)|!,
'6( 

where Φ#(𝒒) is the diffraction-space probe and 𝒱(𝒒) = ℱ /exp'𝑖𝜎𝑉P(𝒙)(1. In the kinematical or 

weak phase approximation, we take exp'𝑖𝜎𝑉P(𝒙)( ≈ 1 + 𝑖𝜎𝑉P(𝒙), so that 𝒱(𝒒) is essentially the 
Fourier transform of the projected specimen potential. In the strong phase approximation, the 
additional higher order terms can be thought of as multiple scattering corrections. 
 

 

 
The strong phase model can be extended to account for kinematical specimen tilt and thickness 
effects by inclusion of the Ewald sphere’s intersection with the reciprocal lattice.[27,28] The 
reciprocal space distance between the Ewald sphere and the reciprocal lattice points is expressed 
by the excitation error 𝑠(𝒒), illustrated in Figure 2(a,b). For electrons with incident wavevector 
𝒌𝟎, the excitation error for an on-axis specimen is 𝑠(𝒒) ≈ 𝑞! 2𝑘%
⁄
, where 𝑞! = 𝑞&

! + 𝑞'

!. A tilt in 

the reciprocal lattice by an angle 𝜏 about the 𝑘'-axis will add an additional term Δ𝑠 =
−𝑞&sin𝜏 ≈ −𝑞&𝜏, for a total excitation error 𝑠(𝒒) ≈ 𝑞! 2𝑘% − 𝑞&𝜏
⁄
. 

 
A sample of thickness 𝑇 can be represented in real space by a top-hat function in the z-direction 
multiplied on the infinite lattice. In reciprocal space, this finite thickness broadens the reciprocal 
lattice points by convolving with the Fourier transform of the top-hat function, sinc(𝑘(𝑇/2). The 
excitation error thus leads to an attenuation of the diffracted amplitude1:  

𝐼(𝒒) = 0Φ#(𝒒) ∗ '𝐸(𝒒) ∙ 𝒱%(𝒒)(0

!,
'7( 

 

1 Here we have neglected phase shifts on the diffracted beams, which do not impact the diffracted intensities. 

 

Figure 2: Diagram of the Ewald sphere intersecting with reciprocal lattice points broadened 
by finite specimen thickness for (a) an on-axis specimen and (b) a specimen tilted at angle 𝜏, 
with incident wavevector 𝒌𝟎, scattering vector 𝒒, and excitation error 𝒔. The curve at the right 
of (a) illustrates the reciprocal lattice point broadening. The coordinates are oriented with 𝑘& 
to the right, 𝑘' into the page, and 𝑘( up. (c) The resulting amplitude-attenuating envelope 
function 𝑬(𝒒) for each case.


 

 

where 𝒱% is the “tilt-free” object function, defined such that 𝒱(𝒒) = 𝐸(𝒒) ∙ 𝒱%(𝒒), and 

𝐸(𝒒) = sinc f𝑠(𝒒)𝑇

2
g = sinc hf 𝑞!

2𝑘%

− 𝑞&𝜏g 𝑇

2i .
'8( 

 
The function 𝐸(𝒒), illustrated in Figure 2(c), can be viewed as an envelope function attenuating 
the diffraction pattern. For samples of finite thickness, multiple scattering will also tend to 
broaden the envelope of the diffraction pattern, although this effect is difficult to model 
analytically. This effect can also be included within 𝐸(𝒒) for purposes of this simple model. 
Typically, this envelope function varies slowly in comparison to the convergence angle of the 
probe2, and so we can make the approximation: 

𝐼(𝒒) ≈ 0𝐸(𝒒) ∙ 'Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)(0

! = |𝐸(𝒒)|! ∙ |Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)|!.
'9( 

This approximation allows for separation of the tilt envelope in the EWPC: 

EWPC"(𝐱) ≈ 0ℱ'ln(|𝐸(𝒒)|! ∙ |Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)|!)(0

! 

= 0ℱ'ln(|𝐸(𝒒)|!) + ln(|Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)|!)(0

!.
'10( 

 
The second term above can be further simplified with the assumption of nanobeam diffraction 
conditions. In particular, we will assume that the probe Φ#(𝒒) is a flat, top-hat function in 
diffraction space, and the separation between Bragg points in 𝒱%(𝒒) is larger than twice the 
convergence semi-angle, so that the diffracted disks do not overlap. Under these conditions, the 
second term in Equation 10 is equivalent to a simpler form with the probe function outside of the 
logarithm: 

ln(|Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)|!) ≈ Φ#(𝒒) ∗ ln(|𝒱%(𝒒)|!).
'11( 

 
With these simplifications, the EWPC becomes: 

EWPC"(𝐱) ≈ 0ℱ'ln(|𝐸(𝒒)|!) + Φ#(𝒒) ∗ ln(|𝒱%(𝒒)|!)(0

! 

= 0ℱ'ln(|𝐸(𝒒)|!)( + ℱ'Φ#(𝒒)( ∙ ℱ'ln(|𝒱%(𝒒)|!)(0

! 

= *ℱ ,ln /0ℱ'𝜖(𝒙)(0

!12 + 𝜙#(𝒙) ∙ ℱ ,ln /0ℱ'𝓋%(𝒙)(0

!12*

!

,
'12( 

where we have defined the real-space tilt-blur function 𝜖(𝒙) = ℱ)*'𝐸(𝒒)(, and the real-space 
tilt-free object function 𝓋%(𝒙) = ℱ)*'𝒱%(𝒒)(. 
 
We will generally have 𝜖(𝒙) and 𝓋%(𝒙) with well-separated frequency bands, allowing us to 
assume no overlap between these terms: 
 

EWPC"(𝐱) ≈ PC'𝜖(𝒙)( + |𝜙#(𝒙)|! ∙ PC'𝓋%(𝒙)(.
'13( 

 
This provides a simple interpretation of EWPC patterns. The lattice information in contained in 
the power cepstrum of the tilt-free real-space lattice PC'𝓋%(𝒙)(. The lattice power cepstrum is 
similar to a Patterson function [26] or an autocorrelation of the real lattice, which also contains 

 

2 For a sample tilted far from a major zone axis, the assumption of a slowly varying envelope function degrades, 
and the effect of tilt will remain convolved into the EWPC to some degree rather than separating linearly, causing 
some blurring of the pattern. 


 

 

peaks corresponding to inter-atomic spacings, although by separating out the envelope function 
the EWPC provides sharper, more easily measured peaks. This difference is discussed further in 
the Appendix. Like a Patterson function, the lattice power cepstrum is higher symmetry than the 
real lattice, losing any inversion asymmetry. These peaks will be attenuated by a probe function 
envelope |𝜙#(𝒙)|!. This is intuitively appealing – we observe the interatomic spacings and 
orientations in the region illuminated by the probe – and sets a lower bound for the size of probe 
that can be used. The effect of the Ewald sphere intersecting the reciprocal lattice, which is 
sensitive to both sample tilt and thickness, is additively separated into the term PC'𝜖(𝒙)( and 
concentrated into the short-length region of the EWPC pattern. 
 
For simplicity, the calculations of the EWPC in this paper will generally omit the outermost 
power of two from the definition. This exponent is sometimes included to give the power 
cepstrum a symmetric form to the power spectrum, where the power of two allows physical 
interpretation as an energy density per unit frequency for many applications.  However, the 
power cepstrum does not carry any equivalent physical meaning, as it does not represent an 
energy distribution. For purposes of strain mapping this exponent has no practical importance 
because it does not alter the position of peak maxima, and simply acts as a gamma adjustment on 
EWPC patterns that can make secondary features more difficult to discern. All of our patterns are 
thus calculated from nanobeam diffraction patterns using the transform:  

EWPC = *ℱ /ln'𝐼(𝒒)(1* .
'14( 

In practice, it is also useful to multiply the log-scale diffraction pattern by a window function to 
prevent the introduction of artifacts caused by non-periodic boundaries in diffraction space. A 
Hann window is used for this purpose in calculations throughout the paper. 
 
2.3 
Lattice and Strain Mapping Using EWPC Patterns 

 
Lattice mapping can be achieved by calculating the positions of the inter-atomic spacing peaks in 
EWPC patterns. These peaks will include full-unit-cell translations, which will generally have 
the brightest peaks, as well as sub-unit-cell spacings. If peaks are identified to correspond to 
known lattice spacings, this provides a direct measurement of the local lattice parameters. 
 
Systems with spatially varying lattice distortions or strain are of particular interest for high 
resolution lattice mapping. Calculation of lattice distortions or strain requires the selection of a 
reference structure. It is often ideal to use the local lattice parameters of the material in its 
undeformed state as a reference, and strain calculated using this convention is known as the 
“material strain”. However, the local, undeformed lattice parameters are often not known, 
making this approach impractical. An alternative is to use a single fixed reference, giving a 
quantity known as the “Lagrange strain”.[2] The Lagrange strain can be calculated from a lattice 
map alone, without the need for any prior knowledge of the crystal structure. 
 
To determine the projected strain tensor, a 2X2 matrix 𝐷 is calculated that transforms the 
reference lattice points 𝒑 onto the measured points 𝒑+, i.e. 𝒑+ = 𝐷 ⋅ 𝒑. This distortion matrix 𝐷  
includes both rigid rotation of the lattice and strain deformation. These may be separated by 
polar decomposition: 

𝐷 = 𝑅 ⋅ 𝑈 = 𝑉 ⋅ 𝑅,
'15( 


 

 

where 𝑅 is a unitary rotation matrix, and 𝑈 and 𝑉 are the non-rotational deformation 
transformations. The choice of 𝑈 or 𝑉 determines the coordinate system of the strain tensor: 𝑈 is 
in “lattice coordinates”, corresponding to the local lattice directions, and 𝑉 in "image 
coordinates", corresponding to the fixed 𝑞& and 𝑞' directions in the diffraction pattern 
(independent of the lattice rotation). The strain tensor 𝜀 is then calculated as: 

𝜀 = 𝑈 − 1, or 𝜀 = 𝑉 − 1.
'16( 

The components of the strain tensor, 𝜀&&, 𝜀'', and 𝜀&' = 𝜀'& are the 𝑥-direction stretch, 𝑦-
direction stretch, and diagonal 𝑥𝑦-direction stretch or shear, respectively. These quantities, along 
with the in-plane lattice rotation 𝜃 determined from 𝑅, are often of interest and can be examined 
directly. For some systems, such as core-shell nanoparticles, the geometry leads to varying strain 
directions that are not easily interpreted in rectangular coordinates. An alternative formulation is 
the “strain ellipse”, which describes the strain through the semi-major axis, semi-minor axis, and 
angle of the ellipse formed by applying the strain transformation to a circle. This is 
mathematically equivalent to describing the strain in its local eigenbasis, with the eigenvalues 
defining the semi-major and semi-minor axes of the strain ellipse and the direction of the 
eigenvectors defining the angle of principal strain.  
 

3 
Materials and Methods 

 
3.1 
TEM Sample Preparation 

 
Cross-sectional specimens of PbTiO3 thin films on DyScO3 and GdScO3 substrates were 
prepared using focused ion beam lift-out and thinning with an FEI Strata 400 Focused Ion Beam 
with a final 2 keV milling step to reduce surface damage. Specimens of carbon-supported Pt-Co 
nanoparticle fuel cell catalysts were prepared by cross-sectioning a fuel cell membrane electrode 
assembly that had undergone an accelerated stability test. Details of catalyst, cell assembly, and 
stability testing are reported in another manuscript. [30] Cross-sections were cut using a Leica 
Ultracut UCT Ultramicrotome at a nominal thickness of 40 nm and collected on lacey carbon-
coated TEM grids. The monolayer MoS2 specimen was suspended on a holey amorphous silica 
support film. 
 
3.2 
Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (STEM) 

 
STEM imaging, electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and diffraction mapping were 
performed in a FEI Titan Themis (S)TEM operated at 300 kV (120 kV for 2D materials). Atomic 
resolution imaging was performed using a convergence semi-angle of 21.4 mrad with the image 
signal collected on a high angle annular dark field (HAADF) detector. EELS mapping of Pt-Co 
nanoparticles was performed using a Gatan GIF Quantum 965 spectrometer in single-range 
EELS mode. Maps were acquired with a convergence semi-angle of 21.4 mrad, a ~200 pA beam 
current, a 10 ms dwell time, and ~1 Å pixel size, leading to a total dose of ~109 e-/nm2. 
Composition maps were extracted by integrating the signal from the Co L2,3 and Pt M4,5 edges 
after background subtraction using exponential and linear-combination-of-power-laws 
background fits, respectively. EELS calculations were performed in MATLAB using functions 
in the image processing toolbox. 
 


 

 

Lattice maps from atomic resolution STEM imaging were calculated using high-quality images 
made from 12-24 cross correlated acquisitions taken with a short dwell time (0.5-2 us) to 
minimize drift and improve signal. Using a 40 pA beam, this corresponded to a typical beam 
dose around 107 e-/nm2. Rough atomic positions were found by segmenting the image using a 
threshold after morphological background subtraction. Then, precise atomic positions were 
found by fitting with a two-dimensional Gaussian function near each rough atomic position. The 
atomic columns for Pb and Ti were then separated based on their HAADF intensity. Strain 
calculations were made from the Pb atomic positions following the same conventions detailed in 
the following section. 
 
3.3 
STEM Nanobeam Diffraction Mapping 

 
Nanobeam diffraction maps were acquired in STEM microprobe mode using the EMPAD 
pixelated detector, which has high dynamic range and single electron sensitivity to allow 
collection of all scattered electrons as well as the unsaturated direct beam. [4] Typical 
acquisitions used a 1 ms exposure time and 256X256 real-space pixels. With the ~1 ms detector 
readout time this results in a total acquisition time of ~2 minutes. Typical doses ranged from 103 
– 106 e-/nm2 depending on the required resolution and field of view. The detector reads out 
128X128 pixels per frame, (with 124X124 used for diffraction pattern acquisition,) in 32-bit 
floating point numbers, resulting in ~4 GB files for typical acquisitions.  
 
3.4 
Calculation of Nanobeam Diffraction Lattice Maps 

 
All computation was performed in Matlab. Essential functions and example codes for power-
cepstral STEM (PC-STEM) analysis are available on Github at https://github.com/muller-group-
cornell/PC-STEM. Prior to calculating the EWPC transform, a constant value is added to the raw 
diffraction patterns to make all values greater than zero for numerical convenience when 
computing logarithms. For calculation of 2D EWPC transforms a discrete fast Fourier transform 
is used, with a 2D Hann window to minimize edge artifacts. 
 
Peaks are identified for lattice mapping using small rectangular masks that include the peak 
maximum for all pixels in the region of interest. At least two peaks must be tracked. At each real 
space pixel and for each peak mask, the mapping routine first determines a coarse (1-pixel 
precision) peak position from the pixel with maximum EWPC intensity within the mask. A high 
precision (sub-pixel) measurement of the peak maximum is then calculated using an optimization 
routine initialized at the coarse peak position. The objective function for the optimization 
calculates the value of the EWPC transform at a single point using a continuous Fourier 
transform, as well as the same constant offset and 2D Hann window used for 2D EWPC 
calculations. Optimization was performed using the Nelder-Mead simplex method (Matlab’s 
fminsearch). The optimization algorithm is constrained within the peak region using a modified 
objective function. The convergence tolerance of the optimization algorithm can also be adjusted 
to improve computation time. Strain mapping calculations were performed on a high-end 
desktop computer (2015 iMac 27”; 4.0GHz Quad-core Intel Core i7; 32GB 1600MHz DDR3 
SDRAM). Typically ~10 ms of computation time was required per EWPC peak fit, allowing 
strain map calculations within a few minutes. 
 


 

 

After peak maxima are located for the entire map, lattice parameters may be calculated directly, 
or lattice distortions may be tracked by calculation of a 2X2 strain tensor. For calculation of the 
strain tensor, a transformation matrix 𝐷 is first determined for each real-space pixel by fitting the 
peak positions to reference points, (using Matlab’s fitgeotrans,) either absolute lattice vectors for 
known structures or relative, internal references for the Lagrange strain.  
 
3.5 
Growth of PbTiO3 films 

 
High crystal quality PbTiO3 films were grown on 110-oriented DyScO3 and GdScO3 substrates 
by reactive molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) in a Veeco GEN 10 system using distilled ozone 
(»80% mol O3) as an oxidant and elemental Pb and Ti as source materials, with typical fluxes of 
1.7x1014 and 1.5x1013 atoms/(s×cm2). Distilled ozone pressure in the MBE chamber and the 
substrate temperature were fixed to 9x10-6 Torr and 600°C, respectively. Pb and Ti were 
continuously codeposited, achieving the alternation of PbO and TiO2 atomic layers by 
adsorption-control. The layer-by-layer growth and the adsorption control growth window is 
continuously monitored by reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED). After 
deposition, the films were cooled down at »100°C/min, while setting the distilled ozone pressure 
at 5x10-6 Torr. 
 
3.6 
Diffraction Simulations 

 
The diffraction simulation is based on the Bloch-wave method [2] with 1.3 mrad semi-convergence 
angle, using the neutral atomic scattering factors of Doyle & Turner [31], absorption parameters 
of Bird & King[32], a total of 101 beam and 797 incident beam directions within the diffracted 
disc. For testing the EWPC at different diffraction conditions, the crystal is tilted in 0.05° 
increments from exact incidence along the [001] zone axis up to 3°. At each tilt, diffraction patterns 
were simulated for different sample thicknesses. 
 

4 
Results and Discussion 

 
4.1 
Properties of EWPC Patterns 

 
A series of experiments was conducted to validate and illustrate the model presented in the 
theory section and to guide use of EWPC patterns for strain mapping. The EWPC transform 
leverages the additive separation properties provided by the log-scaled NBED to separate the 
effects of tilt and thickness from useful lattice information. Figure 3 illustrates these properties 
for NBED patterns (a) taken from a1/a2 domains in a PbTiO3 film that are oriented on the [100] 
zone axis (left) and tilted ~60 mrad off axis (right). As the EWPC transform (Figure 3b) is the 
Fourier transform of the log-scaled NBED, it can be used for filtering as done in conventional 
Fourier filtering. The slowly-varying envelope function 𝐸(𝒒) formed by tilt and thickness effects 
has its information concentrated into the short-distance region near the origin in the EWPC 
space. Selecting this region (highlighted in red in Figure 3b) with a low-pass filter of the log-
scaled NBED isolates the envelope, as shown in Figure 3c. The lattice information is 
concentrated in the peaks at longer distances in the EWPC space. Selecting these with a high-
pass filter of the log-scaled NBED isolates the periodic diffraction spots, as shown in Figure 3d. 


 

 

These two components can be additively recombined to reconstruct the original log-scaled 
NBED. The relative tilt between the left and right halves of Figure 3 primarily changes the 
envelope function, impacting short-distance region of EWPC separately from lattice information. 
However, the separation is imperfect for such a high tilt angle because the assumption of a 
slowly-varying envelope function required for complete separation is violated. This is visible in 
the slight blurring of the EWPC peaks at the right in Figure 3b, although these peaks remain 
sharp and suitable for fitting to measure the lattice structure. 
 
 


 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Illustration of additive separation of the tilt-envelope and the lattice information 
using the EWPC transform from a PbTiO3 film on GdScO3. (a) Log-scaled NBED patterns 
for PbTiO3 oriented on [100] axis (left) and tilted ~60 mrad off axis. (b) EWPC patterns 
corresponding to the NBED patterns in (a). The short-distance region is selected with a low-
pass filter shown by red coloring in (b), and the resulting low-pass filtered log(NBED) pattern 
(c) corresponds to the envelope function. The long-distance region is selected with a high-
pass filter shown by blue coloring in (b), and the resulting high-pass filtered log(NBED) 
pattern (d) corresponds to the periodic diffraction information. The patterns in (c) and (d) 
additively recombine to the log(NBED) pattern in (a).


 

 

 

 
The choice of STEM convergence angle in NBED determines both the real-space resolution and 
the size of the diffracted disks, which may impact the precision and ease of calculation of lattice 
structure. Figure 4 illustrates the impact of the convergence angle on EWPC patterns (d-f) 
calculated from NBED patterns (a-c) from monolayer MoS2. As shown in Equation 13, the probe 
creates an envelope function multiplied over the lattice structure peaks in the EWPC pattern. 
Smaller convergence angles give a wider probe that makes more inter-atomic spacing peaks 
apparent in the EWPC pattern. Larger convergence angles give a smaller probe, attenuating the 
intensity of higher-order spacings. In contrast to direct diffraction, the intensity of the peaks, and 
not their localization, is affected by the convergence angle. Measuring more higher-order peaks 
in a lattice structure may improve precision of EWPC analysis. It is notable that weak higher 
order peaks are also present in the tails of the probe envelope, although these peaks represent 
lattice structure information that is more delocalized than the lower order peaks within the 
central part of the probe envelope. 
 
The upper bound on the spatial resolution achievable for EWPC structure determination comes 
as the convergence angle approaches a value where the disks in the NBED pattern would 
overlap. At this point the probe envelope in the EWPC pattern shrinks so that the first order 
lattice spacing peaks are lost. EWPC lattice measurement may be done using a FWHM probe 
diameter just larger than the unit cell. For example, Figure 4(c,d) show NBED and EWPC 
patterns taken with a 5 mrad convergence angle, giving a probe with a 0.4 nm diffraction-limited 

 

Figure 4: Diffraction patterns (a-c) and corresponding EWPC patterns (d-f) for different 
convergence semi-angles of the STEM probe acquired with 120 keV beam energy on 
monolayer MoS2. Convergence semi-angles are (a,d) 1.3 mrad, (b,e) 2.5 mrad, (c,f) 5 mrad, 
corresponding to diffraction-limited resolutions (FWHM probe diameter) of 1.6 nm, 0.8 nm, 
and 0.4 nm, respectively.


 

 

full-width half maximum (FWHM), just larger than the 0.315 nm unit cell of MoS2. The first-
order spots are present and viable to fit, although they are significantly attenuated because their 
corresponding 0.315 nm spacing is larger than the half-width half maximum (HWHM) probe 
radius of 0.2 nm. Near-unit-cell spatial resolution is thus possible, although this attenuation will 
reduce the precision of lattice structure measurements and require a larger electron dose for high-
precision measurements. With a HWHM probe radius equal to the unit cell size, giving 2-unit-
cell resolution, or larger, the attenuation and precision loss will be relatively minor. 
 

 

 
Another important experimental consideration is the camera length used for NBED pattern 
acquisition. Changing the camera length will scale the size of the NBED pattern on the detector 
and the calculated EWPC pattern, as illustrated in Figure 5 for monolayer MoS2. The EWPC 
pattern scales inversely to the NBED pattern, with the EWPC pattern expanding as the NBED 
pattern shrinks. EWPC patterns using relatively small camera lengths therefore may be useful for 
resolving very similar lattice spacings.  
 
The precision of lattice measurements from either direct diffraction or EWPC patterns is also 
affected by the choice of camera length. Figure 5(g) illustrates the trend in precision by plotting 

 

Figure 5: Comparison of diffraction patterns (a-c) and corresponding EWPC patterns (d-f) of 
monolayer MoS2 at different camera lengths for a 2.5 mrad convergence angle. Camera 
lengths are 300 mm for (a,d), 600 mm for (b,e) and 1200 mm for (c,f). (g) Comparison of 
standard deviation of lattice parameter 𝝈𝑨 calculated from the center of mass (COM) of 
diffraction spots (red) and from EWPC peak fits (blue) for different camera lengths. Dotted 
lines show calculation for lower-dose patterns with ~7*104 eletrons per pattern and solid lines 
are for higher-dose patterns with 6*105 electrons per pattern. 


 

 

the standard deviation of the average lattice parameter 𝜎- calculated using a center of mass 
(COM) approach and the EWPC. In the direct diffraction approach, which is similar to that used 
by Han et al., [11] we calculated the COM of the six {110} diffraction spots marked in Figure 
5(c) and determined the three lattice vectors from the difference in the opposing spot positions. 
In the EWPC approach, we calculated the three lattice vectors from the positions of the three 
peaks marked in Figure 5(d) (the remaining three in the set are numerically identical). At each 
spatial position, the overall lattice constant 𝐴 was calculated as the average of the 3 lattice vector 
magnitudes.  Diffraction patterns were collected from ~3000 distinct spatial points across a 
single-grain region of monolayer MoS2 each separated by a ~9 nm step size. The same number 
of patterns were collected from the same sample region for four different camera lengths. To 
allow a comparison at both relatively low and high dose conditions the calculation was repeated 
using the same patterns after 3X3 binning in real space to increase the total electron counts from 
~7*104 electrons per pattern to ~6*105 electrons per pattern (corresponding to beam currents of 
~10 pA and ~90 pA for 1 ms acquisitions). The sample may have some intrinsic variations from 
point defects or buckling of the suspended sample, but these result in less than 1 pm spread and 
the same datasets were used to calculate both COM and EWPC lattice parameters. 
 
Figure 5g shows the EWPC fitting has better precision at lower camera lengths, which allow the 
inclusion of more diffraction spots in the EWPC to improve the peak signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). 
The diffraction COM shows better precision at higher camera lengths where the diffracted disks 
are spread over more pixels. The precision of the diffraction COM technique degrades markedly 
at the lowest 300 mm camera length, where the diffracted disks are only ~2 pixels across. With 
the higher dose, both approaches provide precision well below 1 pm and vary slightly with 
camera length. At the lower dose, EWPC fitting outperforms diffraction COM, achieving sub-pm 
precision at lower camera lengths. This difference is likely due to the inclusion of electrons from 
all diffraction spots in the calculation of the first-order EWPC peaks. Even though monolayer 
materials such as MoS2 represent a best-case scenario for the COM measurements because they 
do not display strong diffraction artifacts, EWPC fitting still outperforms COM at low beam 
current or at small camera lengths.   
 


 

 

4.2 
Dynamical Effects of Thickness and Tilt on EWPC Patterns 

 
 
To benchmark the performance of the EWPC method while accounting for dynamical diffraction 
effects, we performed a Bloch-wave simulation of NBED diffraction from a SrTiO3 specimen 
over a range of tilts and thicknesses (Figure 6). Here the NBED is simulated down the [001] zone 
axis and tilted around the [100] zone. In Figure 6b we compare the intensity of diffraction and 
EWPC spots as well as measurements of the lattice parameter made from the diffraction pattern 

 

Figure 6: Bloch-wave simulations of the NBED and the corresponding EWPC pattern (a) for 
SrTiO3 shown for 0° tilt and 10 nm thickness. b) Variation in the intensity (top) and lattice 
parameter (bottom) calculated from the selected NBED and EWPC spots shown in (a) for 
different sample tilts and thicknesses. c) Variation in the intensity and lattice parameter vs 
thickness, measured from the selected NBED and EWPC spots for an untilted sample. The 
EWPC measurement of lattice constant has relatively little thickness dependence.  


 

 

using the spot COM (left) and the EWPC pattern (right). Because of dynamical diffraction 
effects, the intensity of the diffracted discs oscillates strongly with tilt and thickness. Intensity 
variations within the diffracted disks cause the lattice parameter measured from the diffraction 
COM to vary with both sample tilt and thickness, with inaccuracies of ~10 pm or more. These 
oscillations appear for both lattice parameter directions and become more severe for greater 
sample thicknesses.  Furthermore, the strong intensity loss in the diffraction spots under some 
conditions may lead to a poor signal-to-noise ratio in practical experiments.  
 
In contrast, the EWPC spots are more stable, showing smaller variations in intensity and 
measured lattice parameter. The stability of the EWPC pattern despite instability in the 
diffraction pattern results from the logarithm and Fourier transform in its calculation, which 
averages out dynamical variations across many diffraction spots. The lattice parameter measured 
from the EWPC shows little variation (~1 pm) with thickness (Figure 6c). The intensity of the 
EWPC spots also show little thickness variation as the cepstral transform transfers intensities to 
the lower spatial frequencies (i.e. central peak) through the envelope function.  The spots outside 
the central peak are best thought of as a type of  normalized pair-correlation function.  
 
In the [100] spacing, which is oriented parallel to the tilt axis, there is minimal variation in the 
lattice parameter with tilt up to 3° (Figure 6b). The [010] spacing shows variation of only ~1 pm 
below ~1.5° (26 mrad), but at higher tilts the measurement becomes systematically lower. The 
error appears to approximately follow the cosine of the tilt angle, but with a greater magnitude 
than expected from geometric foreshortening alone. At these relatively large tilts some of the 
assumptions for both our method and the Bloch wave simulation may break down, so the source 
of this systematic error is currently unknown, but may be explained and corrected in future 
investigations. Despite this, the EWPC provides significantly improved robustness in 
measurement, especially for mistilts less than ~1.5°. For samples oriented far from zone axis, use 
of the Lagrange strain can help avoid potential inaccuracies in the absolute lattice parameter 
measured with the EWPC method.  
 
4.3 
Lattice Mapping of Ferroelectric Domains in PbTiO3 

 
Ferroelectric materials often have atomic displacements in the crystal that drive the ferroelectric 
polarization, and require microscopic techniques such as atomic resolution imaging to determine 
local polarization. Additionally, many ferroelectric systems experience ferroelastic distortions of 
their unit cell on the order of a few percent of the lattice parameters and rotations of a few 
degrees, making strain mapping useful as a proxy for ferroelectric domains. Ferroelectric 
domains span wide length scales from nanometers to microns and can have atomically abrupt 
domain walls with emergent properties that may not be present in the bulk. While studying the 
domain and domain wall structure by STEM is an important step in understanding these 
materials, ferroelastic strain and other complexity in the specimen may introduce challenges such 
as varying crystallographic tilt which requires more robust characterization methods than direct 
lattice imaging with atomic resolution STEM. Lattice mapping with nanobeam electron 
diffraction and the EWPC transform combines the potential for high spatial resolution, large 
fields of view, and robust measurement to address these challenges. 
 


 

 

Here we demonstrate this approach for epitaxially-grown PbTiO3 films. PbTiO3 has a tetragonal 
unit cell with its long axis in the direction of the ferroelectric polarization. Here we will examine 
two types of ferroelectric-ferroelastic domain arrangements:  periodic a- and c-domains, 
alternating lattice elongation along the in-plane and out-of-plane directions; and periodic a1- and 
a2-domains alternating lattice elongation along [100] and [010] in-plane directions. The a/c and 
the a1/a2 domain configurations are formed as a mechanism to accommodate the epitaxial strain 
when PbTiO3 is grown on lattice-mismatched DyScO3 and GdScO3 substrates, respectively. 
Details on this material system and the domain structure can be found in a separate 
publication.[33] 
 

 

 
Figure 7 presents lattice mapping of this domain structure for PbTiO3 on a DyScO3 substrate 
using the EWPC approach and aberration-corrected STEM (AC-STEM) imaging and atom-
fitting for validation. Figure 7(a) shows an AC-STEM image of the PbTiO3/ DyScO3 domain 
structure with wide c-domains at the left and right where the long axis of the unit cell is oriented 
out of the plane of the film (in the “y” direction). These are separated by a narrower a-domain 
with the polarization oriented in the plane of the film (in the “x” direction in the image plane) 
that cuts diagonally across the field of view. Figure 7(b) shows quantitative lattice maps 
calculated from atom-fitting, including the lattice parameters ax and ay and the lattice rotation θ. 
These maps confirm that the structure consists of domains where the tetragonal unit cell’s long 

 

Figure 7: Lattice parameter mapping of ferroelastically strained PbTiO3 by AC-STEM and 
EWPC. a) HAADF-STEM atomic resolution image of the PbTiO3 (PTO) on a DyScO3 (DSO) 
substrate. By inspecting the Ti displacement, the polarization direction can be found. At 
ferroelectric domains, a rotation of the lattice is observed. b) lattice parameters measured 
from fitting the atomic positions in the in-plane (ax) direction, out-of-plane direction (ay), and 
the rotation of the unit cell, θ. c) the NBED pattern of a single domain and d) the 
corresponding EWPC pattern. By mapping the spots indicated in d) the lattice parameters and 
rotation can be measured as shown in e).


 

 

4.156 Å axis and short 3.902 Å axis alternate directions together with a 3° rotation between the 
domains. 
 
Figure 7(c) and (d) show NBED and EWPC patterns for a PbTiO3 c-domain with the EWPC 
peaks used for fitting marked with yellow boxes. Figure 7(e) shows maps of the lattice 
parameters and lattice rotation calculated by tracking the EWPC peaks, which are both 
qualitatively and quantitatively consistent with the lattice maps from atomic resolution imaging. 
Comparing the lattice parameters in the c-domain, we measure 3.90 ± 0.02 Å in-plane and 4.09 ± 
0.05 Å out-of-plane for atomic resolution imaging, and 3.90 ± 0.01 Å in-plane and 4.10 ± 0.02 Å 
out-of-plane for EWPC mapping. Mapping using the EWPC technique provides the additional 
advantages of allowing large fields of view with a 3-4 orders of magnitude lower beam dose.  
 

 

 

 

Figure 8: Mapping the lattice parameter of on and off-axis regions of PbTiO3 that occur in 
ferroelectric domain configurations of PbTiO3 / GdScO3 (PTO/GSO). a) Atomic resolution 
STEM shows that at the domain marked in blue, the crystal tilts off axis and atomic resolution 
is lost. b) NBED and c) EWPC patterns from the regions of the crystal corresponding to ones 
like marked in green and blue in a). NBED shows a clear tilting off axis in the blue region, 
but the EWPC spots remain clear. d) EWPC is still able to map the in-plane (ax) and out-of-
plane (ay) lattice parameters.


 

 

Depending on the film-substrate lattice mismatch, a domain structure may form in which some 
domains tilt in the plane of the film, such that the domain structure cannot be visualized with 
both domains simultaneously on axis. Figure 8 illustrates this situation with a PbTiO3 film on a 
GdScO3 substrate. The lattice structure of one domain cannot be resolved in atomic resolution 
imaging (Figure 8(a)), and NBED patterns (Figure 8(b)) show that this domain has a relative tilt 
of ~60 mrad or ~3.4°. This presents a major challenge for characterization of this domain 
structure by AC-STEM. However, in the EWPC patterns for the two domains (Figure 8(c)) the 
atomic-spacing peaks remain quite sharp even for the off-axis domain. While some blurring of 
one set of peaks is present, which may contribute to to the excessive foreshortening error shown 
in Figure 6, it does not prevent domain mapping from the EWPC patterns, shown in Figure 8(d). 
These maps reveal the domain structure to be an a1-a2 type, with wide domains oriented with 
their long axis in the film plane along the optic axis and narrow domains oriented in the film and 
image planes (“x” direction). 
 
4.4 
Strain Mapping of Core-Shell Pt-Co Catalyst Nanoparticles 

 
Another application space where high-resolution strain characterization can be highly valuable is 
catalytic nanoparticles. Application of strain to a catalytic surface to alter chemical binding 
strengths is an important strategy to enhance the catalytic activity. [34–36] Nanoparticles are 
commonly used as catalytic materials because of their high surface area to volume ratios and 
strain engineering can be achieved through core-shell nanoparticle structures. Direct lattice 
imaging can be used effectively to characterize lattice structure and strain for some 
nanoparticles, such as strongly faceted, unsupported particles that can easily be aligned and 
imaged on zone axis. [37–39] Supported catalysts, which are used in applications such as 
chemical processing and fuel cells, tend to have catalyst particles at random orientations, 
especially for non-crystalline supports such as carbon blacks. Furthermore, these materials are 
frequently heterogeneous, and high throughput characterization is needed to ensure statistically 
representative measurements. These concerns make direct imaging methods poorly suited for 
supported catalyst nanoparticles while NBED-EWPC strain mapping excels. 
 


 

 

 

 
To demonstrate the effectiveness of EWPC strain mapping for catalytic nanoparticles, we will 
examine the strain distribution in Pt-Co/C fuel cell catalyst nanoparticles. Pt-alloy fuel cell 
catalyst nanoparticles are generally prepared with a thin Pt shell which experiences a 
compressive strain from the smaller lattice constant of the alloy core. [40–43] This compressive 
strain is intended to decrease the oxygen binding strength on the surface to enhance the oxygen 
reduction activity. One challenge to this approach is that the catalyst particles degrade and lose 
catalytic activity during use because of electrochemical cycling and the harsh acidic environment 
in the fuel cell, which lead to growth of the Pt shells to thicknesses ranging from one to several 

 

Figure 9: Strain mapping of of a core-shell Pt-Co fuel cell catalyst nanoparticle. (a) Atomic 
resolution STEM image of the particle oriented on the [110] zone axis. (b) EELS composition 
map showing Pt in red and Co in green. Microprobe STEM conditions were used for NBED 
mapping of the same particle. (c) Averaged NBED pattern and (d) corresponding EWPC 
pattern from the center of the particle. EWPC spots circled in red in (d) were used for strain 
mapping. (e) Maps of strain tensor elements for Lagrange strain referenced to the particle 
center. (f) Visualization of principal strain vectors as red arrows for both the principal and 
orthogonal secondary strain directions. (g) Schematic of the strain ellipse construction, with 
semi-major axis a, semi-minor axis b, and angle of principal strain 𝜙. (h) Visualizations of 
the strain ellipse axes a and b. 


 

 

nanometers. [30,44] Growth in the shell thickness is expected to lead to relaxation of the surface 
strain, resulting in loss of catalytic activity, but the details of this process are poorly understood 
because of the lack of suitable strain characterization.  
 
To simulate a lifetime of fuel cell use, the Pt-Co/C catalyst examined here has been subjected to 
an electrochemical stability test, as described in a separate publication. [30] Figure 9(a) shows a 
~5 nm diameter nanoparticle oriented on the [110] axis. An electron energy loss spectroscopy 
(EELS) map (Figure 9b) of the Co L2,3 and Pt M4,5 edges shows that a ~1 nm thick Pt shell is 
present around the Pt-Co core. Compressive strain in the Pt shell is visible in the AC-STEM 
image (Figure 9(a)) as a slight inward bowing of the near-surface lattice planes. A NBED map 
of this particle was acquired using a 1.75 mrad convergence angle giving a 0.7 nm diffraction-
limited resolution. An averaged NBED pattern and corresponding EWPC pattern are shown in 
Figure 9(c) and (d), respectively. Three strong peaks in the EWPC pattern, marked in Figure 
9(d), were tracked for strain mapping. These peaks represent interatomic spacings in the 

projected lattice, corresponding to the }

*.

/ ,

*.

/ ,

*

!~, }

*

/ ,

*.

/ ,

*

!~, and }

*

! ,

*.

! , 0~ vectors in the real face-

centered cubic lattice.  
 
The Lagrange strain was calculated using the center of the particle as a reference, and the 
resulting strain tensor components and lattice rotation are shown in Figure 9(e). The primary 
effect visible is the radially outward Poisson expansion resulting from the tangential compression 
of the Pt shell. In rectangular coordinates, this manifests as high 𝜀** at the top and bottom, high 
𝜀!! at left and right, and 𝜀*! that is high at top-left and bottom right and low at top-right and 
bottom left. The changing strain direction around the shell can make these tensor components 
difficult to interpret. An alternative is to visualize principal strain vectors, as shown in Figure 
9(f) which can more directly show that the strain is primarily a radially outward expansion in the 
shell. The principal strain can also be presented using the strain ellipse construction, which is 
formed by applying the strain transformation to a unit circle, as illustrated in Figure 9(g). The 
semi-major and semi-minor axes of the strain ellipse, a and b, (Figure 9(h)) indicate the 
magnitudes of the two principal strain vectors. For this approximately spherical core-shell 
geometry, the semi-major axis is approximately the radial strain, and the semi-minor axis is 
approximately the tangential strain. By adjusting to the varying strain direction, the strain ellipse 
axes produce a visualization of the particle’s core-shell structure that is simpler to interpret. 
 
The on-axis particle shown in Figure 9 could in principal have its strain mapped from direct 
imaging, as previously reported for an unsupported Pt nanoparticle. [37] Reaching the required 
precision on the order of a few picometers using AC-STEM imaging requires both high SNR and 
correction of STEM imaging distortions, typically by image stack acquisition and registration in 
post-processing. These requirements impose high dose requirements – on the order of 108 – 109 
e-/nm2.[37] High beam dose can be problematic as particles may rotate from damage to the 
support or momentum transferred from incident electrons. NBED-EWPC strain mapping is 
dramatically more dose efficient, with a dose of around 106 e-/nm2 used here. NBED-EWPC 
strain mapping also compares favorably on dose to EELS as a method to visualize core-shell 
structure, as the EELS map in Figure 9(b) required 109 e-/nm2. 


 

 

 

 

 
EWPC strain mapping can also overcome the major challenges of random particle orientations 
and varying mistilt in strained particles. Given the mechanical imprecision of TEM stages, it is 
generally impractical to orient any given nanoparticle onto zone axis. On-axis particles such as 
the one in Figure 9 typically must be sought out and relying on these for strain mapping will 
compromise throughput and statistical representativeness. Figure 10 shows four examples of 
particles with varying orientations. Some particles are oriented near a major zone axis, like in 
Figure 10 (a), which is a couple degrees from the 200 orientation. Similar to the PbTiO3/GdScO3 
example in Figure 8, these particles will have the same peaks visible as they would if oriented 
precisely on a nearby major axis. The peaks show some mild blurring, but are easily sharp 
enough for mapping. More commonly, particles selected at random are not close to any major 
zone axis, as in Figure 10(b) and (c). However, these patterns nearly all have sharp peaks 
suitable for tracking and calculation of the Lagrange strain. Varying mistilt caused by lattice 
distortions also generally do not cause EWPC peaks to disappear, in contrast to diffraction spots, 
making both random particle orientations and varying internal mistilts not significant obstacles to 

 

Figure 10: Strain mapping of three off-axis Pt-Co and Pt nanoparticles, including, from left 
to right, a virtual ADF image of the particle, an averaged NBED pattern from the particle 
center, the corresponding EWPC pattern with spots used for mapping circled in red, and the 
Lagrange strain referenced to the particle center visualized through the semi-major axis a and 
semi-minor axis b of the strain ellipse. The particles in (a-c) are Pt-Co alloys with a pure Pt 
shell that shows strain, while the particle in (d) is pure Pt and shows no core-shell strain. The 
particle shown in (a) is oriented near the [200] zone axis, while the particles in (b-d) are far 
from any major zone axis.


 

 

producing strain maps.  For the Pt-Co alloy particles in Figure 10(a-c), the strain maps produced 
by this method reveal the strain profiles formed in the Pt shells strained by the underlying Pt-Co 
cores.  In contrast, the pure Pt particle in Figure 10(d) shows no core-shell strain profile. 
 
These methods are also suitable for high throughput characterization of nanoparticle strain. A 
typical 256X256 NBED map takes ~2 minutes to acquire and can contain several particles 
suitable for strain mapping. The example maps shown here typically have ~40X40 real space 
pixels for a single particle map. With the high-end desktop computer used for this study, less 
than 30s of computation was needed to produce a strain map of a nanoparticle with the off-
particle pixels excluded. With only a few minutes needed per map between acquisition and 
computation, the throughput of this technique is at least as high as EELS mapping of the core-
shell structure for the same system, which has previously been used for a statistical study 
including hundreds of nanoparticle composition maps.[44] Strain mapping with the EWPC 
transform and EMPAD detector is a practical method to collect and analyze tens or hundreds of 
particle maps as needed for statistics. 
 

5 
Summary and Outlook 

 
In this manuscript we have demonstrated the EWPC transform for NBED to enable robust 
mapping of strain and lattice structure in complex specimens. We presented a simplified 
analytical model to aid in interpretation of transformed patterns. This model indicates that the 
EWPC transform allows additive separation of the effects of tilt and thickness from the lattice 
information contained in periodic diffraction spots. The resulting peaks correspond to real-space 
inter-atomic spacings, similar to a Patterson pair-correlation function. The EWPC peaks are 
attenuated by a function corresponding to the real-space probe, and first-order inter-atomic 
spacings can be measured for probe sizes just above the unit cell size. This allows the method to 
attain near-unit-cell resolution, which is sub-nm for many materials. Fitting of the EWPC peaks 
can provide measurements of the lattice parameters with sub-pm precision. Precision is optimum 
for NBED patterns acquired with low camera lengths to allow inclusion of many diffraction 
spots. Measurement of lattice structure from EWPC peaks is also highly dose efficient, using 
~1000X less dose than comparable atomic-resolution STEM measurements. 
 
We have demonstrated the practical use of the EWPC transform for mapping ferroelectric-
ferroelastic domains in strained PbTiO3 films and compressively strained Pt shells in core-shell 
Pt-Co nanoparticle fuel cell catalysts. The distortions in the PbTiO3 films measured with the 
EWPC technique were consistent with measurements by atomic-resolution STEM atom-fitting, 
while providing a larger field of view and lower beam dose. Use of the EWPC technique 
provided the additional benefit of allowing quantitative lattice mapping in domains tilted ~3-4° 
off zone-axis, which could not be resolved in atomic-resolution STEM. For the core-shell Pt-Co 
nanoparticles, the EWPC technique allowed sub-nm resolution mapping of strain in Pt shells 
thinner than a few nanometers. The technique was further demonstrated to be capable of 
mapping strain in off-axis particles and providing high-throughput analysis for statistically 
representative study of heterogeneous nanoparticle samples. 
 
The EWPC transform for NBED mapping has the potential to be a useful tool in a wide range of 
applications. The sharp interatomic spacing peaks make precise fitting for lattice structure 


 

 

extraction numerically convenient, which may be beneficial even when precession is used. The 
EWPC properties allowing separation of useful lattice information from tilt and thickness effects 
make the technique robust for application to complex and challenging specimens. The EWPC 
peaks maintain stable intensity to allow precise mapping even with varying mistilt, and the 
presence of sharp peaks when far from major zone axis enable strain mapping in randomly 
oriented crystallites.  
 
Essential functions and example MATLAB codes for power-cepstral STEM (PC-STEM) 
analysis are available on Github at https://github.com/muller-group-cornell/PC-STEM. 

6 
Appendix 

 
6.1 
Comparison of the EWPC to the Patterson Function 

 
The exit wave power cepstrum (EWPC) is closely related to the Patterson function, which used 
for atomic structure determination from diffraction patterns.  The Patterson function 𝑃𝐹(𝒙) can 
be calculated from a diffraction pattern 𝐼(𝒒) as the Fourier transform of the diffraction pattern: 

PF(𝒙) = 0ℱ'𝐼(𝒒)(0.
(17) 

The key difference between the Patterson function and the EWPC is the addition of the logarithm 
in the EWPC: 

EWPC = *ℱ /ln'𝐼(𝒒)(1* .
'18( 

This provides the useful separation properties of the EWPC transform described in Section 2 of 
the main text, which give it advantages over the Patterson function for nanobeam electron 
diffraction. 
 
To contrast with the Patterson function, we will attempt to follow the logic of Section 2.2 for the 
interpretation of Patterson functions calculated from nanobeam electron diffraction patterns. 
Following Eq. 9, we can approximate the diffraction pattern in terms of the reciprocal space 
probe function Φ#(𝒒), the projected potential 𝒱%(𝒒), and the Ewald sphere envelope function 
𝐸(𝒒): 

𝐼(𝒒) ≈ |𝐸(𝒒)|! ∙ |Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)|!.
'19( 

Using this model of the diffraction pattern and following Eq. 10, 

PF(𝐱) ≈ |ℱ(|𝐸(𝒒)|! ∙ |Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)|!)| 

= |ℱ(|𝐸(𝒒)|!) ∗ ℱ(|Φ#(𝒒) ∗ 𝒱%(𝒒)|!)|,
'20( 

the envelope term does not additively separate, as in the EWPC case, but remains convolved into 
lattice structure and probe terms. Using the probe approximation to simplify as in Eq. 11, the 
probe function may be extracted from the inner convolution at the right: 

PF(𝐱) = |ℱ(|𝐸(𝒒)|!) ∗ ℱ(Φ#(𝒒) ∗ |𝒱%(𝒒)|!)|
 

= 0ℱ(|𝐸(𝒒)|!) ∗ '𝜙#(𝒙) ∙ ℱ(|𝒱%(𝒒)|!)(0.
'21( 

The probe function thus behaves similarly for the Patterson function and EWPC, attenuating at 
large real-space spacings. However, without the separation properties of the EWPC, the envelope 
function 𝐸(𝒒) is convolved into the useful lattice information in the Patterson function, as 
illustrated in Figure 11. This makes the interatomic spacing peaks broader, and more difficult to 
distinguish (Figure 11c) in comparison to an equivalent EWPC pattern (Figure 11b). This is 
especially troublesome for a tilted (or thick) specimen, such as shown at right in Figure 11, 


 

 

where the envelope function is broadened, leading to a degradation of the interatomic spacing 
peaks. 

 

Figure 11: Illustration of NBED patterns (a) from on axis (left) and off-axis (right) domains of 
PbTiO3 for comparison of EWPC (b) and Patterson function (c) transforms calculated from the 
NBED patterns. 

7 
Acknowledgements 

 
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and 
Renewable Energy under grant DE-EE0007271, and through the Center for Alkaline-based 
Energy Solutions, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the US Department of Energy, 
Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences Award DE-SC0019445. Elliot Padgett acknowledges 
support from an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE-1650441). Paul Cueva acknowledges 
funding from the Center for Bright Beams (NSF award PHY-1549132). Megan Holtz, Eric 
Langenberg, and Darrell Schlom acknowledge support from the US Department of Energy, 
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, under Award 
No. DE-SC0002334. Eric Langenberg acknowledges funding from the EU’s Horizon 2020 
program through the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions: Individual Fellowship-Global Fellowship 


 

 

(ref. MSCA-IF-GF-708129). Yu-Tsun Shao and David Muller acknowledge support from the 
AFOSR Hybrid Materials MURI, under award number FA9550-18-1-0480. This work made use 
of electron microscopy facilities supported by the NSF MRSEC program (DMR-1719875) and 
an NSF MRI grant (DMR-1429155). The authors thank John Grazul, Malcolm Thomas, and 
Mariena Silvestry Ramos for assistance with electron microscopy facilities and sample 
preparation, as well as Anusorn Kongkanand at General Motors for providing fuel cell catalyst 
samples, and Ariana Ray, Swathi Chandrika, and Don Werder for the molybdenum disulfide 
samples. The authors thank Michael Cao, Zhen Chen, Yimo Han, and Kayla Nguyen for useful 
discussions and assistance with the EMPAD. 
 
References 
[1] 
A. Béché, J.L. Rouvière, J.P. Barnes, D. Cooper, Strain measurement at the nanoscale: 
Comparison between convergent beam electron diffraction, nano-beam electron 
diffraction, high resolution imaging and dark field electron holography, Ultramicroscopy. 
131 (2013) 10–23. doi:10.1016/j.ultramic.2013.03.014. 

[2] 
J.M. Zuo, J.C.H. Spence, Advanced Transmission Electron Microscopy, Springer New 
York, New York, NY, 2017. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-6607-3. 

[3] 
M.J. Hÿtch, A.M. Minor, Observing and measuring strain in nanostructures and devices 
with transmission electron microscopy, MRS Bull. 39 (2014) 138–146. 
doi:10.1557/mrs.2014.4. 

[4] 
M.W. Tate, P. Purohit, D. Chamberlain, K.X. Nguyen, R. Hovden, C.S. Chang, P. Deb, E. 
Turgut, J.T. Heron, D.G. Schlom, D.C. Ralph, G.D. Fuchs, K.S. Shanks, H.T. Philipp, 
D.A. Muller, S.M. Gruner, High Dynamic Range Pixel Array Detector for Scanning 
Transmission Electron Microscopy, Microsc. Microanal. 22 (2016) 237–249. 
doi:10.1017/S1431927615015664. 

[5] 
A. Mac Raighne, G. V. Fernandez, D. Maneuski, D. McGrouther, V. O’Shea, Medipix2 as 
a highly flexible scanning/imaging detector for transmission electron microscopy, J. 
Instrum. 6 (2011) C01047–C01047. doi:10.1088/1748-0221/6/01/C01047. 

[6] 
K. Müller, H. Ryll, I. Ordavo, S. Ihle, L. Strüder, K. Volz, J. Zweck, H. Soltau, A. 
Rosenauer, Scanning transmission electron microscopy strain measurement from 
millisecond frames of a direct electron charge coupled device, Appl. Phys. Lett. 101 
(2012) 212110. doi:10.1063/1.4767655. 

[7] 
C. Ophus, Four-Dimensional Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy (4D-STEM): 
From Scanning Nanodiffraction to Ptychography and Beyond, Microsc. Microanal. (2019) 
1–20. doi:10.1017/s1431927619000497. 

[8] 
K. Usuda, T. Mizuno, T. Tezuka, N. Sugiyama, Y. Moriyama, S. Nakaharai, S. Takagi, 
Strain relaxation of strained-Si layers on SiGe-on-insulator (SGOI) structures after mesa 
isolation, Appl. Surf. Sci. 224 (2004) 113–116. doi:10.1016/j.apsusc.2003.11.058. 

[9] 
P.M. Jones, G.M. Rackham, J.W. Steeds, Higher Order Laue Zone Effects in Electron 
Diffraction and their Use in Lattice Parameter Determination, Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. 
Eng. Sci. 354 (1977) 197–222. doi:10.1098/rspa.1977.0064. 

[10] V.B. Ozdol, C. Gammer, X.G. Jin, P. Ercius, C. Ophus, J. Ciston, A.M. Minor, Strain 

mapping at nanometer resolution using advanced nano-beam electron diffraction, Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 106 (2015). doi:10.1063/1.4922994. 

[11] Y. Han, K.X. Nguyen, M. Cao, P.D. Cueva, S. Xie, M.W. Tate, P. Purohit, S.M. Gruner, 

J. Park, D.A. Muller, Strain Mapping of Two-Dimensional Heterostructures with Sub-


 

 

Picometer Precision, Nano Lett. 18 (2018) 3746–3751. doi:10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b00952. 

[12] A. Béché, J.L. Rouvière, L. Clément, J.M. Hartmann, Improved precision in strain 

measurement using nanobeam electron diffraction, Appl. Phys. Lett. 95 (2009) 123114. 
doi:10.1063/1.3224886. 

[13] K. Müller, A. Rosenauer, M. Schowalter, J. Zweck, R. Fritz, K. Volz, Strain Measurement 

in Semiconductor Heterostructures by Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy, 
Microsc. Microanal. 18 (2012) 995–1009. doi:10.1017/s1431927612001274. 

[14] D. Cooper, T. Denneulin, N. Bernier, A. Béché, J.L. Rouvière, Strain mapping of 

semiconductor specimens with nm-scale resolution in a transmission electron microscope, 
Micron. 80 (2016) 145–165. doi:10.1016/j.micron.2015.09.001. 

[15] T.C. Pekin, C. Gammer, J. Ciston, A.M. Minor, C. Ophus, Optimizing disk registration 

algorithms for nanobeam electron diffraction strain mapping, Ultramicroscopy. 176 
(2017) 170–176. doi:10.1016/j.ultramic.2016.12.021. 

[16] R. Vincent, P.A. Midgley, Double conical beam-rocking system for measurement of 

integrated electron diffraction intensities, Ultramicroscopy. 53 (1994) 271–282. 
doi:10.1016/0304-3991(94)90039-6. 

[17] P.A. Midgley, A.S. Eggeman, Precession electron diffraction – a topical review, IUCrJ. 2 

(2015) 126–136. doi:10.1107/S2052252514022283. 

[18] J.L. Rouviere, A. Béché, Y. Martin, T. Denneulin, D. Cooper, Improved strain precision 

with high spatial resolution using nanobeam precession electron diffraction, Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 103 (2013). doi:10.1063/1.4829154. 

[19] M.P. Vigouroux, V. Delaye, N. Bernier, R. Cipro, D. Lafond, G. Audoit, T. Baron, J.L. 

Rouvière, M. Martin, B. Chenevier, F. Bertin, Strain mapping at the nanoscale using 
precession electron diffraction in transmission electron microscope with off axis camera, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 105 (2014). doi:10.1063/1.4901435. 

[20] J.S. Barnard, D.N. Johnstone, P.A. Midgley, High-resolution scanning precession electron 

diffraction: Alignment and spatial resolution, Ultramicroscopy. 174 (2017) 79–88. 
doi:10.1016/j.ultramic.2016.12.018. 

[21] C. Mahr, K. Müller-Caspary, T. Grieb, M. Schowalter, T. Mehrtens, F.F. Krause, D. 

Zillmann, A. Rosenauer, Theoretical study of precision and accuracy of strain analysis by 
nano-beam electron diffraction, Ultramicroscopy. 158 (2015) 38–48. 
doi:10.1016/j.ultramic.2015.06.011. 

[22] R. Yuan, J. Zhang, J.-M. Zuo, Lattice strain mapping using circular Hough transform for 

electron diffraction disk detection, Ultramicroscopy. 207 (2019) 112837. 
doi:10.1016/j.ultramic.2019.112837. 

[23] A.M. Noll, Cepstrum Pitch Determination, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 41 (1967) 293–309. 

doi:10.1121/1.1910339. 

[24] B.P. Bogert, M.J.R. Healy, J.W. Tukey, The quefrency alanysis of time series for echoes; 

Cepstrum, pseudo-autocovariance, cross-cepstrum and saphe cracking, Proc. Symp. Time 
Ser. Anal. 15 (1963) 209–243. 

[25] A. V. Oppenheim, R.W. Schafer, From frequency to quefrency: A history of the cepstrum, 

IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 21 (2004). doi:10.1109/MSP.2004.1328092. 

[26] A.L. Patterson, A fourier series method for the determination of the components of 

interatomic distances in crystals, Phys. Rev. 46 (1934) 372–376. 
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.46.372. 

[27] J.C.H. Spence, High-Resolution Electron Microscopy, 4th ed., Oxford University Press, 


 

 

New York, NY, 2013. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199668632.001.0001. 

[28] A. Howie, The theory of electron diffraction image contrast, in: U. Valdre, A. Zichinchi 

(Eds.), Electron Microsc. Mater. Sci., Academic Press, New York, NY, 1971: pp. 275–
300. 

[29] K. Ishizuka, Multislice formula for inclined illumination, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. A. 38 

(1982) 773–779. doi:10.1107/S0567739482001594. 

[30] E. Padgett, V. Yarlagadda, M.E. Holtz, M. Ko, B.D.A. Levin, R.S. Kukreja, J.M. 

Ziegelbauer, R.N. Andrews, J. Ilavsky, A. Kongkanand, D.A. Muller, Mitigation of PEM 
Fuel Cell Catalyst Degradation with Porous Carbon Supports, J. Electrochem. Soc. 166 
(2019) F198–F207. doi:10.1149/2.0371904jes. 

[31] P.A. Doyle, P.S. Turner, Relativistic Hartree–Fock X-ray and electron scattering factors, 

Acta Crystallogr. Sect. A. 24 (1968) 390–397. doi:10.1107/S0567739468000756. 

[32] D.M. Bird, Q.A. King, Absorptive form factors for high-energy electron diffraction, Acta 

Crystallogr. Sect. A Found. Crystallogr. 46 (1990) 202–208. 
doi:10.1107/S0108767389011906. 

[33] E. Langenberg, D. Saha, M.E. Holtz, J.-J. Wang, D. Bugallo, E. Ferreiro-Vila, H. Paik, I. 

Hanke, S. Ganschow, D.A. Muller, L.-Q. Chen, G. Catalan, N. Domingo, J. Malen, D.G. 
Schlom, F. Rivadulla, Ferroelectric Domain Walls in PbTiO 3 Are Effective Regulators of 
Heat Flow at Room Temperature, Nano Lett. 19 (2019) 7901–7907. 
doi:10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b02991. 

[34] B. Hammer, Y. Morikawa, J.K. Nørskov, CO Chemisorption at Metal Surfaces and 

Overlayers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76 (1996) 2141–2144. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.76.2141. 

[35] A. Ruban, B. Hammer, P. Stoltze, H.. Skriver, J.. Nørskov, Surface electronic structure 

and reactivity of transition and noble metals1Communication presented at the First 
Francqui Colloquium, Brussels, 19–20 February 1996.1, J. Mol. Catal. A Chem. 115 
(1997) 421–429. doi:10.1016/S1381-1169(96)00348-2. 

[36] M. Mavrikakis, B. Hammer, J.K. Nørskov, Effect of Strain on the Reactivity of Metal 

Surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81 (1998) 2819–2822. doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.81.2819. 

[37] A.B. Yankovich, B. Berkels, W. Dahmen, P. Binev, S.I. Sanchez, S.A. Bradley, A. Li, I. 

Szlufarska, P.M. Voyles, Picometre-precision analysis of scanning transmission electron 
microscopy images of platinum nanocatalysts., Nat. Commun. 5 (2014) 4155. 
doi:10.1038/ncomms5155. 

[38] J.-S. Kim, H.-K. Kim, S.-H. Kim, I. Kim, T. Yu, G.-H. Han, K.-Y. Lee, J.-C. Lee, J.-P. 

Ahn, Catalytically Active Au Layers Grown on Pd Nanoparticles for Direct Synthesis of 
H 2 O 2 : Lattice Strain and Charge-Transfer Perspective Analyses, ACS Nano. (2019) 
acsnano.9b01394. doi:10.1021/acsnano.9b01394. 

[39] N. Bhattarai, G. Casillas, A. Ponce, M. Jose-Yacaman, Strain-release mechanisms in 

bimetallic core-shell nanoparticles as revealed by Cs-corrected STEM, Surf. Sci. 609 
(2013) 161–166. doi:10.1016/j.susc.2012.12.001. 

[40] F. Hasché, M. Oezaslan, P. Strasser, Activity, Stability, and Degradation Mechanisms of 

Dealloyed PtCu3 and PtCo3 Nanoparticle Fuel Cell Catalysts, ChemCatChem. 3 (2011) 
n/a-n/a. doi:10.1002/cctc.201100169. 

[41] Q. Jia, K. Caldwell, J.M. Ziegelbauer, A. Kongkanand, F.T. Wagner, S. Mukerjee, D.E. 

Ramaker, The Role of OOH Binding Site and Pt Surface Structure on ORR Activities, J. 
Electrochem. Soc. 161 (2014) F1323–F1329. doi:10.1149/2.1071412jes. 

[42] K.M. Caldwell, D.E. Ramaker, Q. Jia, S. Mukerjee, J.M. Ziegelbauer, R.S. Kukreja, A. 


 

 

Kongkanand, Spectroscopic in situ Measurements of the Relative Pt Skin Thicknesses and 
Porosities of Dealloyed PtM n (Ni, Co) Electrocatalysts, J. Phys. Chem. C. 119 (2015) 
757–765. doi:10.1021/jp5098553. 

[43] B. Han, C.E. Carlton, A. Kongkanand, R.S. Kukreja, B.R. Theobald, L. Gan, R. O’Malley, 

P. Strasser, F.T. Wagner, Y. Shao-Horn, Record activity and stability of dealloyed 
bimetallic catalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Energy Environ. Sci. 8 
(2015) 258–266. doi:10.1039/C4EE02144D. 

[44] H.L. Xin, J.A. Mundy, Z. Liu, R. Cabezas, R. Hovden, L.F. Kourkoutis, J. Zhang, N.P. 

Subramanian, R. Makharia, F.T. Wagner, D. a Muller, Atomic-Resolution Spectroscopic 
Imaging of Ensembles of Nanocatalyst Particles Across the Life of a Fuel Cell, Nano Lett. 
12 (2012) 490–497. doi:10.1021/nl203975u. 

 
 
 
 


