1

Abstract—
The tremendous progress in Metal
Oxide

Semiconductor (MOS) technology has been a direct consequence 
of device scaling for past several decades. 
But as we have 

entered the nanometer era many problems related to leakage 
currents and other issues related to variability impacting the 
yield are of concern. Herein we have investigated how the change 
in the Fin Architecture and Gate Length of the MOS device 
impacts the Threshold Voltage.

Keywords— MOS, Leakage, MOSFET, NANO, Ivy Bridge, 

Threshold Voltage.

I. INTRODUCTION

With ever increasing digital performance and application, 

the demands are very high for better and higher performance 
digital semiconductor devices. This is directly dependent on 
the semiconductor industry being able to scale the Metal
Oxide Semiconductor Field Effect Transistor (MOSFET).
With many innovations in the gate-stack technology, we are
able to push the physical gate length 14 nm and this will go 
well beyond this scale. The High K metal gate reduces the 
gate leakage significantly by improving the electrostatics
within the MOSFET channel. Another way to improve the 
electrostatic situation in the MOSFET channel is to optimize 
the MOSFET channel structure or geometry. The further 
scaling will continue to face increasing number of 
technological and physical challenges, among these the 
structural optimization of the channel is also one of the major 
concerns. The other challenges being able to control the 
variability in doping, poly-silicon granularity, random grain 
orientation within the High-K dielectric [1-3].

In the present work we have full three-dimensional

simulation of the gate-structure impact on the nano-scale 
MOSFET threshold characteristics. We have also done some 
experimental studies of this phenomena. In addition, there are 
full-bandstructure tight binding calculations which can 
provide further insight but are not discussed in this paper [4-
13]. In the next section we describe the simulation setup, and 
results of the gate structure changes on the transistor threshold 
voltage ( Vt ).

II.
SIMULATION SETUP

TCAD based tools[14] are widely used to simulate 

electrical characteristics of MOS transistors, e.g:- Vth, SS, 
Ion, Ioff , gm, gds etc. These characteristics are very 
important metrics of device behavior and are used to compare 
and contrast different devices. Within the framework of 
TCAD they are determined by first doing the process
simulation then doing a device simulation and finally an 
extraction from the the results of the device simulation. We 
compared the behavior of four devices: planar MOSFET , 
triangular bulk 3D-MOSFET, rectangular bulk 3D-MOSFET 
and rectangular SOI 3D-MOSFET. These analyses will 
indicate the superiority of the 3D-MOSFET over the planar 
device. The 3D-MOSFET height is equal to 24 nm, the base 
width is 10.7 nm. The angle of the fin in the triangular 3D-
MOSFET is equal to 84 degrees. These devices have the same 
underlying process. The planar device is
obtained by 

modifying the 3D-MOSFET, by reducing the fin height(H) 
and stretching the fin width(W) equal to the (2 ∗ H + W). The 
doping concentration in the source and the drain is 1020 cm3 
and that in the channel region is 1018 cm3. We have closely 
tried to follow Intel Ivy Bridge [1] device dimensions.

Figure 1: TEM Lattice image of NMOS fin structure. 
Adapted from [15]

III.
RESULTS 

Threshold Voltage variation with respect to Gate 

geometry in Nano-scale MOSFETS

Raja N. Mir 


2

In the Figure:2 we see that the threshold voltage of the 3D-

MOSFET’s is very close as we move down the gate length. 
We observe a voltage rollon trend, which is there because of 
the fact that the halo implants overlap as the source and the 
drain come closer together. In case of the planar device the 
threshold voltage is more than 3D-MOSFET’s. Overall a
voltage rolloff in case of the planar device is observed but the 
rolloff is not very clear as there are two competing effects 
going on in the MOSFET. One is that the Drain Induced 
Barrier Lowering ( DIBL ) effect will tend to give a rolloff but 
on the other hand due to source and drain halo implants the 
voltage rollon should take place. The combined result of these 
two effects in this specific case resulted in overall lowering of 
the threshold voltage as we move down the gate length.

Figure 2:Threshold voltage for various devices with 
similar gate lengths and widths.

IV.
CONCLUSION

It is clearly seen that the threshold voltage of the 3D-
MOSFET is better than the planar counterpart. The voltage 
roll-on for the 3D MOSFET is evident as the channel is 
reduced, the roll-off for the planar counter part is also 
observed to some degree.

REFERENCES

[1]
D. James. Intel ivy bridge unveiled x2014; the first commercial tri-gate, 
high-k, metalgate cpu. In Custom Integrated Circuits Conference 
(CICC), 2012 IEEE, pages 1–4, 2012.

[2]
Fu-Liang Yang, Haur-Ywh Chen, Fang-Cheng Chen, Yi-Lin Chan, 
Kuo-Nan Yang, Chih-Jian Chen, Hun-Jan Tao, Yang-Kyu Choi, Mong-
Song Liang, and Chenming Hu. 35 nm cmos finfets. In VLSI 
Technology, 2002. Digest of Technical Papers. 2002 Symposium on, 
pages 104–105, 2002.

[3]
K. von Arnim, E. Augendre, A.C. Pacha, T. Schulz, K.T. San, F. 
Bauer, A. Nackaerts, R. Rooyackers, T. Vandeweyer, B. Degroote, N. 
Collaert, A. Dixit, R. Singanamalla, W. Xiong, A. Marshall, C. R. 
Cleavelin, K. Schrufer, and M. Jurczak. A low-power multi-gate fet 
cmos technology with 13.9ps inverter delay, large-scale integrated high
performance digital circuits and sram. In VLSI Technology, 2007 IEEE 
Symposium on, pages 106–107, 2007.

[4]
W. R. Frensley, R. N. Mir. “Simple remedy for spurious states in 
discrete K.P models of semiconductor structures.” arXiv:1412.7201,
Dec 22, 2014.

[5]
R. N. Mir, WR Frensley, S. Shichijo, P. A. Blakey, “Computational 
technique for probing terminal control mechanisms inside three-
dimensional nano-scale MOSFET.” 
pp.2, Electronics Letters, May 

2014.

[6]
R. N. Mir, W. R. Frensley, “Electrical design of InAs-Sb/GaSb 
superlattices for optical detectors using full bandstructure sp3s* tight-
binding method and Bloch boundary conditions.”, pp.1, Journal of 
Applied Physics, October 2013.

[7]
R. N. Mir “Electronic structure of III-V broken gap materials and 
terminal control in three dimensional nano-scale MOSFETs.” Thesis, 
The University of Texas at Dallas; 2014.

[8]
Mir RN. “Bulk bandstructure computation of III-V compounds using 
the K P method.” Thesis, The University of Texas at Dallas; 2009.

[9]
R. N. Mir and W. R. Frensley, "Quantifying the local influence of 
terminal voltages within an electron device," pp.3, 2018 Texas 
Symposium on Wireless and Microwave Circuits and
Systems 

(WMCS), Waco, Texas.

[10]
R. N. Mir, “Linearization Approach for 5G Millimeter-Wave N-Array 
Beamforming Device”, pp.1, 2019 IEEE Texas Symposium on 
Wireless and Microwave Circuits and Systems (WMCS)

[11]
RN Mir, WR Frensley - arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.04718, 2019 -
arxiv.org

[12]
Craig S. Lent and David J. Kirkner. The quantum transmitting 
boundary method. Journal of Applied Physics, 67(10), 1990.

[13]
F. Sols, M. Macucci, U. Ravaioli, and K. Hess, Appl. Phys. Lett. 54, 
350 (1989).

[14]
Synopsys. TCAD Sentaurus. Synopsys, Inc.,

[15]
Dick 
James. 
Intels 
22-nm 
tri-gate 
transistors 
exposed.

http://www.chipworks.com/en/technical-competitive-
analysis/resources/blog/intels-22-nm-tri-gate-transistors-exposed, 2012.


