1

Spintronics, from Giant Magnetoresistance to magnetic Skyrmions and 
Topological Insulators

Albert Fert1 and Frédéric Nguyen Van Dau1

1Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 91767, 
Palaiseau, France

This article aims at giving a general presentation of spintronics, an important field of 
research developing today along many new directions in physics of condensed matter. We 
tried to present simply the physical phenomena involved in spintronics – no equations but 
many schematics. We also described the applications of spintronics, those of today and 
those expected to have an important impact on the next developments of the information 
and communication technologies. This article was published in the Comptes Rendus
Physique of the French Academy of Sciences (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crhy.2019.05.020).

Keywords: spintronics, nano-magnetism, topological physics, technologies of information 

and communication

1
Introduction

Spintronics is generally defined as a new type of electronics manipulating electrons by acting 
not only on the charge of the electrons but also on their spin. Its development started with the 
discovery [1], [2] of the giant magnetoresistance (GMR) of magnetic multilayers in 1988. The 
new concepts on the manipulation of spin-polarized currents introduced by the GMR and, in 
addition, the potential of GMR for applications boosted the development of an intense activity 
in a field of research that was later called spintronics. In the experiments of these first times of 
spintronics, the spin-polarized currents were generated by using the influence of the orientation 
of the spin on the transport properties of the electrons in ferromagnetic conductors. This 
influence, first suggested by Mott [3], had been experimentally demonstrated and theoretically 
described in early works [4]–[6] more than ten years before the discovery of the GMR. This 
type of production of spin-polarized currents by magnetic materials was used in the “classical 
spintronics” of the first decade after GMR discovery. Major events of this time were the 
discoveries of the Tunneling Magnetoresistance (TMR) and Spin Transfer Torque. It was also 
the time of the introduction of important concepts as those of spin accumulation and pure spin 
current (current of spin without current of charge). More recently, it became possible to produce 
spin polarized currents and pure spin currents without magnetic materials by using the spin-
orbit interactions in non-magnetic materials, in a field that has been called spin-orbitronics. 
Today spintronics is expanding in many directions. The promising new axes that we will discuss
are spintronics with topological systems (as the interfaces states of topological insulators), and
spintronics with magnetic skyrmions.

2
Roots of spintronics

2.1
Spin dependent conduction in ferromagnetic metals

The dependence of the electrical conduction in ferromagnetic metals on the orientation of the 
electron spin with respect to the direction of the magnetization can be understood from the 
typical band structure of a ferromagnetic metal shown in Fig.1a. As there is an energy splitting 
between the “majority spin” and “minority spin” bands (spin up and spin down in the usual 
notation), the electrons at the Fermi level, which carry the electrical current, are in different 
states and exhibit different conduction properties for opposite spin directions. Such a 


2

dependence of the conduction on the spin orientation was proposed by Mott [3] in 1936 to 
explain some features of the resistivity of ferromagnetic metals at the Curie temperature. 
However, in 1966, at the beginning of the Ph.D. thesis of one of the authors (AF), the subject 
was still almost completely unexplored. The experiments of this thesis were resistivity 
measurements on Ni or Fe doped with different types of impurities and, from the analysis of 
the temperature dependence of the resistivity and also, mainly, from experiments on ternary 
alloys described in the next paragraph, it could be shown that the resistivities of the two 
channels can be very different in metals doped with specific impurities presenting a strongly 
spin dependent scattering cross-section [4]–[6] . In Fig.1b, we show the example of the spin up 
and spin down resistivities of nickel doped with 1% of different impurities. It can be seen that 
the ratio  of the spin down resistivity to the spin up one can be as large as 20 for Co impurities 
or, as well, smaller than one for Cr or V impurities. This was consistent with the theoretical 
models developed at this time by Jacques Friedel and Ian Campbell for the electronic structures 
of impurities in metals. The two current conduction was rapidly confirmed in other groups and, 
for example, extended to Co-based and Fe-based alloys [7], [8].

2.2
Experiments on Ni-based ternary alloys anticipating the concept of GMR

Let us consider resistivity measurements on ferromagnetic metals doped with two types of 
impurities [4]–[6], [8], [9]. Suppose, as illustrated by Fig.2, a ternary alloy of nickel doped with 
0.5% of impurities A (Co for example) which scatter strongly the electrons of the spin down 
channel and, in the same ternary alloy, 0.5% of impurities B (Rh for example) which scatter 
strongly the spin up electrons. In such a ternary alloy Ni(Co, Rh), that we call of type #1, the 
electrons of both channels are strongly scattered either by Co in one of the channels or by Rh 
in the other, so that there is no shorting by one of the channels as when Ni is doped only with 
either 1% of Co or 1% of Rh, and the resistivity is strongly enhanced. For a total impurity 
concentration of 1% and variable proportions x and (1-x) of the Co and Rh concentrations, as 
illustrated in Fig.2a, the resistivity is definitely enhanced by a mixed doping of Co and Rh. On 
the contrary, there is no such enhancement in ternary alloys of type #2 doped by impurities A 
and B (Co and Au in Fig.2b) scattering strongly the electrons in the same channel and leaving 
the second channel open. 
The concept of GMR is the replacement of the impurities A and B of the ternary alloy by the 
successive layers A and B of the same magnetic metal in a multilayer. If the magnetizations of 
the layers A and B are antiparallel, this corresponds to the situation of strong scattering in both 
channels for ternary alloys of type #1 (Fig.2a). In contrast, the configuration with parallel 
magnetizations corresponds to the situation with a “free channel” in all the layers as in ternary 
alloys of type #2. What is new with respect to the ternary alloys is the possibility of switching 
between high and low resistivity states by simply changing the relative orientation of the 
magnetizations of layers A and B from antiparallel to parallel. However, the transport equations 
tell us that the relative orientation of layers A and B can be felt by the electrons only if their 
distance is smaller than the electron mean free path, that is, practically, if they are spaced by 
only a few nm. Unfortunately, in the seventies, it was not technically possible to make 
multilayers with layers as thin as a few nm and the discovery of the GMR waited until the 
development of sophisticated deposition techniques.

3
The discovery of GMR (Giant Magnetoresistance) and applications of GMR

In the mid-eighties, with the development of techniques like the Molecular Beam Epitaxy 
(MBE), it became possible to fabricate multilayers composed of very thin individual layers and 
one could consider trying to extend the experiments on ternary alloys to multilayers. In addition, 
in 1986, Peter Grünberg and co-workers [10] discovered the existence of antiferromagnetic 
interlayer exchange couplings in Fe/Cr multilayers. Fe/Cr appeared as a magnetic multi-layered


3

system in which it was possible to switch the relative orientation of the magnetization in 
adjacent magnetic layers from antiparallel to parallel by applying a magnetic field. In 
collaboration with a group of at the Thomson-CSF company, the authors (AF and FVD) started 
the fabrication and investigation of Fe/Cr multilayers. This led in 1988 to the discovery [1] of 
very large magnetoresistance effects (Fig.3a) that was called GMR. Peter Grünberg and co-
workers at Jülich [2] obtained effects of the same type in Fe/Cr/Fe trilayers practically at the 
same time. The interpretation of the GMR is similar to that described above for the ternary 
alloys and is illustrated by Fig.3b. The first classical model of the GMR was published in 1989 
by Camley and Barnas [11] and Levy and co-workers worked out the first quantum model [12]
in 1991.
GMR attracted rapidly attention for its fundamental interest as well as for the many possibilities 
of applications. The research on magnetic multilayers and GMR developed rapidly. On the 
experimental side, two important results were published in 1990. Parkin et al [13] demonstrated 
the existence of GMR in multilayers made by the simpler and faster technique of sputtering and 
found the oscillatory behaviour of the GMR due to the oscillations of the interlayer exchange
as a function of the thickness of the nonmagnetic layers. Shinjo and Yamamoto [14], as well as 
Dupas et al [15], demonstrated that GMR effects can be found in multilayers without 
antiferromagnetic interlayer coupling but composed of magnetic layers of different coercivities. 
Another result, in 1991, was the observation of large and oscillatory GMR effects in Co/Cu, 
which became an archetypical GMR system [16], [17]. Also in 1991, Dieny et al [18], reported
the first observation of GMR in spin-valves, i.e. trilayered structures in which the magnetization 
of one of the two magnetic layers is pinned by coupling with an antiferromagnetic layer while 
the magnetization of the second one is free. The magnetization of the free layer can be reversed 
by very small magnetic fields, so that the concept is now used in many devices [19]. 
GMR had quickly various applications, first several types of magnetic sensors used today in the 
car industry. Then, in 1996, came the application to the read heads of the hard disk drives (Fig. 
3c,d) which is certainly the most economically important [20], [21]. The GMR and similar 
magnetoresistance effects called TMR and CPP-GMR (see next section) provided sensitive read 
techniques and led to an increase of the areal recording density by more than two orders of 
magnitude (from  1 to  1000 Gbit/in2 today). This increase opened the way both to highly 
improved storage capacities (up to several terabytes) for video recording or backup and to 
smaller HDD sizes (down to .85-inch disk diameter) for mobile appliances like ultra-light 
laptops or portable multimedia players. GMR sensors are also used in many other types of 
application, for example the compass that we have today in some smartphones and series of 
bio-medical devices [22].

4
Classical spintronics

After the early years spent to extensively study GMR, spintronics became a broader research 
domain after the successive discoveries of several physical effects, all relying on the role of 
spin on electronic transport. In this section, we review the most important steps, in this classical 
spintronics phase, and their impact on applications.

4.1
CPP-GMR, spin accumulation and pure spin currents

As the first magnetic multilayers were made of metallic magnetic or non-magnetic materials, 
the first GMR experiments were carried out in a straight forward experimental configuration 
where current is flowing along the plane of the layers (CIP geometry). From 1991, it has been 
possible to investigate GMR when the current is flowing perpendicularly to the layers (CPP 
Geometry), first by using superconducting electrodes [23], then by electrodepositing 
multilayers into the nanopores of a membrane [24]. In the CPP geometry, GMR was found to 
be substantially higher than in the CIP geometry, and to subsist up to much larger layer 
thicknesses. The Valet-Fert model [25] explains that, owing to spin accumulations occurring 


4

when the current crosses interfaces between layers, the length scale in the CPP geometry 
becomes the long spin diffusion length (SDL) instead of the short mean free path limiting the 
CIP GMR to multilayers with very thin layers. The CPP-GMR studies have clearly revealed the 
spin accumulation effects, which govern the propagation of a spin-polarized current through
successive layers of magnetic and non-magnetic materials and have played an important role in 
the subsequent developments of spintronics.
The physics of spin accumulation occurring when an electron flux crosses an interface between 
a ferromagnetic and a non-magnetic material is explained in Fig. 4a for a simple situation 
(single interface, no interface resistance, no band bending and single polarity). To summarize, 
there is a broad zone of spin accumulation which extends on both sides of an F/N interface with 
an exponential decreases at the scale of the spin diffusion length of each material. The 
progressive transition between spin-polarized current and non-polarized current occurs by spin-
flips in this zone.
The physics of spin accumulation and spin-polarized currents can be described by new types of 
transport equations in which the electrical potential is replaced by a spin-and position-
dependent electrochemical potential [25]–[27]. These equations can also be extended to take 
into account band bending and high current density effects [28]. These equations can be applied 
to the general situation of multi-contact systems with interplay of the spin accumulation 
occurring around the different interfaces [29], [30]. A standard structure for this situation is 
illustrated by Fig.4b. A spin polarized current is injected from the ferromagnetic contact F1 
into the non-magnetic channel N and flows to the left side of N. The blue and red curves 
represent the spin up and spin down electro-chemical potentials associated with the spin 
accumulation at the F1/N interface. The opposite gradients of these electro-chemical potentials 
(pseudo electric fields) on the right side of N generate currents of spin up and spin down 
electrons in opposite directions. This current distribution is described as a pure spin current 
which does not carry any charge but only a flux of spin momentum. 

4.2
Tunnel Magnetoresistance (TMR)

In a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) where an ultrathin tunnel barrier is separating two 
ferromagnetic electrodes, TMR refers to the change of junction resistance, depending on the 
magnetic configuration of the electrodes (parallel or antiparallel magnetizations). Early 
observations of TMR were reported in 1975 by Jullière [31] and in 1982 by Maekawa and 
Gäfvert [32]. These pioneering works did not follow immediately, probably due to the difficulty 
to reproduce them. In 1995, large (~20%) and reproducible TMR were reported by Moodera’s 
[33] and Miyasaki’s [34] groups on MTJs using a tunnel barrier made of an oxidized ultrathin 
Al layer.
These original contributions have then triggered an intense activity around the development of 
MTJs. One important step has been the transition from MTJs using amorphous tunnel barriers 
(mainly oxidized Al) to single-crystal MTJs, in particular using MgO barrier. Whereas the first 
results obtained with MgO-based MTJ were only slightly larger than with alumina barriers [35], 
a breakthrough was achieved in 2004 with the first report of large TMR ratios (~200% at room 
temperature, Fig. 4c,d) in epitaxial MTJs at Tsukuba [36] and IBM [37]. Continuous progress 
have been achieved since 2004 with MgO-based MTJs and TMR ratios have increased above 
600% [38].
The origin of large TMR in MTJ having a single-crystal barrier such as MgO has been attributed 
to symmetry selection [39]–[42]. At a high quality interface between a magnetic electrode and 
a tunnel barrier, an evanescent wave function of a given symmetry is connected to the Bloch 
functions of the same symmetry and spin direction at the Fermi level of the electrodes. In 
(001)MgO barriers, one of the symmetry corresponding to highly spin-polarized bands has a 
much slower decay, which results in a higher TMR. Other symmetry rules have been observed
in barriers made of different materials, leading to different properties such as negative effective 
spin polarization in SrTiO3-based MTJ [43]. 


5

Other research directions have been followed in order to further increase TMR ratios such as 
the replacement of conventional ferromagnetic electrodes by 100% spin polarized half metals 
made of oxide materials [44] or Heussler alloys [45], or using ferromagnetic barriers as a spin 
filter [46].
From an applicative point of view, TMR have been introduced by the industry in read-heads of 
hard disk drives (HDD) in 2006, mainly because it was bringing improvements in terms of 
signal to noise ratio. This has allowed sustaining the continuous increase of areal densities of 
stored information and, at the same time, the cost reduction for this storage. Since the 
introduction of GMR in HDD read heads in 1997, the cost per GByte stored in a desktop have 
dropped by more than three orders of magnitude, from $100 to less than 3 cents. This has been 
a clear driver in the emergence of the big data era [47]. Another domain of applications that 
was impacted by TMR was the emergence of magnetic random access memories (MRAM). 
Whereas the concept of MRAM was already introduced by Honeywell before the discovery of 
GMR [48], [49], its development has only been triggered by the late 1990’s using TMR. Indeed, 
the natural configuration of MTJ building block, with current flowing perpendicular to layers, 
was particularly well suited to the development of compact architectures such as cross bars. 
However, in the first generation of TMR-based MRAM developed by the mid-2000’s, writing 
information was achieved through magnetic fields generated by “word” and “bit” lines, which 
proved to be expensive in terms of power consumption and also lead to problems of cross-talk. 
This was solved by the introduction of spin transfer torque writing [21]. Indeed, it was realized 
at that time that the impossibility to locally generate a magnetic field was a real hurdle (in word 
and bit lines, only the magnetic field generated at the cross point is useful, the rest being wasted 
energy). This has triggered the subsequent research toward an electrical control of 
magnetization, using spin transfer torque (see 4.3), multiferroics (combining ferroelectric and 
ferromagnetic properties) [50][51], up to the recent Intel’s MESO device concept [84]. In this 
concept, an input voltage pulse is used to switch a multiferroic/ferromagnetic bilayer and the 
magnetization of the magnetization direction of the ferromagnetic layer is converted into an 
output voltage by the Edelstein effect of a topological bi-dimensional electron gas (see 5.2).

4.3
Spin Transfer Torque (STT)

STT relates to the manipulation of the magnetic moment of a ferromagnetic element without 
applying any magnetic field but only by transferring spin angular momentum by a spin 
polarized current. The concept was first introduced theoretically by Slonczewski [52] and 
Berger [53] and is illustrated in Fig. 5a. The injection of a spin polarized current into a magnetic 
element leads to the transfer of the transverse component of the spin current, which creates a 
torque acting on the magnetization of the element. This spin transfer torque can be used to either 
switch the magnetization (Fig. 5b,d) or to create a steady-state gyration regime (Fig. 5c,e). In 
the latter case, GMR or TMR can be used to translate this magnetization gyration into an 
oscillating voltage in the microwave frequency range, leading to the concept of spin transfer 
oscillator. 
The first experimental evidence of spin transfer were obtained using either point contacts [54], 
[55] or on pillar-shaped elements [56], [57]. Whereas the first experimental investigations of 
spin transfer were carried out on uniformly magnetized elements, the use of non uniform 
configurations such as magnetic vortices has proved to open interesting perspectives. In 
particular, it has allowed to strongly increase the power emission and decrease the linewidth of
spin transfer oscillators [58]. Spin transfer torque has also be used to move domain walls in 
nanostructures [59] leading to the concept of racetrack memory.
As far as applications are concerned, the appearance of STT has undoubtedly boosted the 
development of MRAM, which are now called STT-RAM. Indeed, it allows to significantly 
reduce the power consumption associated with the writing function while also improving 
reliability with respect to cross talk, in particular. Since the first demonstrations of STT-RAM 
in the mid-2000’s [60] this new product has often been presented as a potential universal 


6

electronic memory. It has indeed arguments to compete with the three main types of electronic 
memories: DRAM and SRAM to which it will bring non volatility (to compete with SRAM, 
one must also face a very hard speed challenge) and embedded Flash to which it will bring a 
better write endurance and a simpler fabrication process. Since the introduction of the first STT-
RAM product on the market in 2012 by Everspin [61], several companies have been active in 
the industrialization. During the last two years, several major players have announced the start 
of mass production [62].

5
Spin-orbitronics

In classical spintronics, during the first decade of its development, magnetic materials were 
used to spin-polarize the current. An important change, a few years after 2000, came from the 
possibility of creating spin-polarized current and pure spin currents by using the spin-orbit 
coupling (SOC, relativistic correction to the equations of quantum physics coupling spin and 
momentum). In magnetic materials, the SOC is known to be at the origin of properties as the 
magnetocrystaline anisotropy, the Anomalous Hall Effect (AHE), the Anisotropic 
Magnetoresistance (AMR). In nonmagnetic conductors, the SOC generates the Spin Hall Effect 
(SHE), which appeared to be very efficient to convert charge currents into spin currents and 
vice-versa, which is the basic operation in any spintronic devices. Today, the SHE of heavy 
metals having a large SOC is used in several spintronic devices. We will present successively 
the SHE, then the similar but more efficient effects obtained by exploiting SOC effects in bi-
dimensional electron gas at the surface of topological insulators or at Rashba interfaces, and 
finally the fast development of the physics of the topological magnetic solitons called 
skyrmions.

5.1
Spin Hall Effect (SHE)

For currents flowing in non-magnetic materials, the SHE results from the SOC-induced 
deflection of electrons of opposite spins in opposite direction, as represented in Fig.6a with spin 
up and spin down electrons deflected respectively to the right and left of the conductor. This 
leads to opposite spin accumulations on opposite edges, for example spin up accumulated and 
spin down depleted on the left edge on the figure. On each edge, due to the balance between 
the accumulation and depletion of opposite spins, there is no charge accumulation, as for the 
Ordinary Hall Effect, and therefore no voltage between the Hall contacts (Fig. 6a). The SHE 
has been predicted by Dyakonov and Perel [63] in 1971, theoretically revisited more recently
by Hirsh [64] and the spin accumulation on the edges has been seen for the first time by Kerr 
optical measurements on GaAs in 2004 [65]. Valenzuela and Tinkham [66], [67] performed the 
first demonstration by transport measurements with the device shown in Fig. 6b. A current 
flowing from the ferromagnetic channel to the nonmagnetic channel on the left (from A to B) 
generates a spin accumulation at their interface and this spin accumulation diffuses a pure spin 
current to the right of the nonmagnetic channel (as already represented in Fig. 4b, a spin current 
corresponds to opposite flows of opposite spins). With spin up and spin down electrons flowing 
in opposite directions, the SOC deflects both of them in the same direction of the transverse 
channel, which generates a nonzero charge current in this channel or, in the open circuit 
conditions of the figure, a nonzero voltage between C and D. Experimental results are in Fig.
6c.In term of conversion between charge and spin current, the type of experiment described in 
the preceding paragraph and Fig .6b-c represents a conversion of a pure spin current into a 
charge current (or voltage), what is generally described as an experiment of Inverse Spin Hall 
Effect (ISHE). Direct SHE corresponds to the opposite conversion in the typical situation of 
Fig.6d. As shown in the figure, the charge current in the heavy metal (Ta) deflects the blue and 
red spins downward and upward. At the top interface, the blue spins accumulate and this spin 
accumulation can diffuse into an adjacent conducting layer, injecting blue spins and sucking 
down red spins. In other terms, the SHE of the heavy metal injects a pure spin current into an 


7

adjacent layer, which corresponds to a conversion of the horizontal charge current into a vertical 
(pure) spin current. 
Fig.6e represents a Spin-Orbit-Torque-MRAM (SOT-MRAM) exploiting the SHE of a Ta layer 
to inject a pure spin current into the bottom magnetic layer of a M-RAM memory and the Spin 
Transfer Torque induced by this injection of spin current switches its magnetization [68].
The SHE and ISHE are characterised by the spin Hall angle 𝜭, defined as the ratio between the 
SHE-induced transverse spin current density and the longitudinal charge current density, also 
equal to the ratio between the ISHE-induced transverse charge current density and the 
longitudinal spin current density. Actually, 𝜭 characterises the ratio between spin and charge 
currents inside an infinite material. If the material of Spin Hall angle 𝜭 is interfaced with other 
materials, the efficiency of the final conversion depends also on the interface transparency and 
properties of the other materials.
The larger SHE effects can be found in materials with heavy elements of large SOC [69]. The 
most used in spintronics are heavy metals such as Pt (𝜭 ≈ 0.05 [70]), Ta (𝜭 ≈ 0.15 [71]) or W 
𝜭 ≈ 0.3 [72], [73]. In pure metals the SHE is generally an intrinsic property related to the effect 
of the SOC on the band structure (Berry curvature). Large Spin Hall angles can also be obtained 
in metals of small SOC doped with heavy nonmagnetic impurities, as, for example, Cu doped 
with  Bi [74]. In this case, the mechanism of the SHE is the skew scattering or, alternatively, 
the scattering by side-jump, both types of mechanisms induced by the SOC of the heavy 
impurity scattering potential. Actually, the SHE and Spin Hall angle induced by heavy 
nonmagnetic impurities in Cu had been already measured in early experiments almost 40 years 
ago. At this time, the technologies did not exist to fabricate nanostructures such as that of Fig.6b 
to unbalance the deflections of opposite spin in opposite directions. However, in Cu doped with 
heavy nonmagnetic impurities, adding a tiny concentration of paramagnetic Mn impurities and 
polarizing their spin by a field was used to unbalance the spin up and spin down currents and 
single out the SHE induced by skew scattering by the nonmagnetic impurities [75].

5.2
Spintronics with topological insulators or Rashba interfaces

As shown in the preceding section, the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) can be harnessed for the 
conversion between charge and spin currents by using the SHE or ISHE of heavy metal layers. 
More efficient conversions between spin and charge by SOC can be obtained in the bi-
dimensional (2D) electron gas (2DEGs) at the surface/interface of topological insulators (TI) 
or at Rashba interfaces. Such 2DEGs are characterized by Fermi contours with helical locking 
between the spin and momentum degrees of freedom. Figure 7a presents an artist view of the 
dispersion Dirac cone of  TI surface or interface states as well as the helical spin configurations 
of the corresponding Fermi contours. The ARPES image of the Dirac cone of the 2D states at 
the interface between the TI 𝜶-Sn cone and Ag is shown in Fig.7b. Rashba interface states also 
characterized by such locking between spin and momentum.
As depicted in Fig.7c, the current carried by  helically spin-polarized 2D electrons at a TI 
surface or interface is automatically associated with a nonzero spin polarization along the in-
plane direction transverse to the current, an effect predicted in 1990 by Edelstein [76]. The spin 
polarization of the 2DEG can diffuse into an adjacent conducting layer and inject a pure spin 
current into it, in the same way as the SHE injects a spin current into an adjacent layer (Fig.6d).  
The creation of a pure spin current by the spin polarization in the 2DEG can be described as the 
conversion of a 2D charge current Jc into a 3D spin current Js [77], [78]. This Edelstein Effect 
(EE) at TI or Rashba interfaces has been demonstrated by measuring directly the spin-
polarization of the interface states [79] or by measuring the Spin Tranfer Torque induced by the 
injected spin into an adjacent magnetic layers [77].
The Inverse Edelstein Effect (IEE) correspond to as inverse conversion [80], [81]. As depicted 
in Fig.17e-f, the injection of a 3D vertical spin current into the 2DEG at the interface between 
the TI 𝜶-Sn and Ag induces a 2D charge current Ic in the 2DEG. 


8

The spin/charge conversions by EE and IEE can be characterized by the conversion coefficient 
qICS = Js /Jc (inverse of length) for the EE [77] and the IEE length1 IEE = Jc/ Js (length) for the 
IEE [80]. In Fig.7f, we present on example of spin to charge conversion by IEE in spin pumping 
experiments on the interface states of the TI 𝜶-Sn. The ferromagnetic resonance of the NiFe 
top layer in the device of Fig.7e pumps (injects) vertically a pure spin current into the 2DEG at 
Ag/𝜶-Sn interface and we show in Fig.7f the peaks of charge current in the 2DEG detected at 
the resonance field (around 100 mT). The results in Fig. 7f lead to a conversion is characterized 
by IEE = 2.1 nm for the IEE conversion length, which corresponds to a conversion larger than 
with the ISHE of heavy metals by about one order of magnitude. Similar results (EE and IEE) 
have been obtained with 2DEGs of Rashba interfaces [78], [82]. Particularly efficient 
conversions (IEE = 6.4 nm) have been found with the Rashba 2DEG at the interface between 
the insulating oxides SrTiO3 and LaAlO3 [83]. Such efficient spin/charge conversions by 
2DEGS are promising for the developments of new types of devices such as the TI-based 
MESO logic devices proposed by the company Intel [84].

5.3
Magnetic skyrmions

A magnetic skyrmion is a topological swirling configuration of the spins of neighbor atoms in 
a magnetic material [85]–[88]. In Figures 8 a-b, we show schematic representations of the spin 
configuration in a magnetic skyrmion standing in a thin film uniformly magnetized in the up 
direction outside the skyrmion. The magnetization inside the skyrmion rotates progressively 
with a fixed chirality from the up direction at one edge to down at the center and again up on 
the opposite edge. This spin configuration can be mapped on a unit sphere and it covers all the 
possible axes on the sphere. Fig.8a (Néel-like skyrmion) and Fig. 8b (Bloch skyrmion) 
correspond to different directions of the rotation. Experimental images of skyrmions are shown 
in Fig.8c and 8d. A topological number S (or skyrmion number) characterizes the winding of 
the normalized local magnetization, m, which, in the two-dimensional limit, can be written as

𝑆 =

1

4𝜋 ∫ 𝒎 ⋅ (𝜕𝑥𝒎  𝜕𝑦𝒎)d𝑥d𝑦 = ±1,
(Eq. 1)

and equals + or – 1 for the configuration types of the figure. This peculiar topology of skyrmions 
gives rise to a topological protection of the structure: the spin configuration cannot be twisted 
continuously to obtain a configuration of different S, a ferromagnetic configuration for 
example; there is a topological barrier stabilizing the skyrmion. Finally, a crucial property of 
magnetic skyrmion is their solitonic nature: they behave as particles and, for example, can be 
put into motion by an electrical current. As the skyrmions combine mobility and non-volatility, 
they are of high interest for new types devices that we describe in more details hereafter. 
The specific chirality of the spin configuration in a skyrmion, in most systems, is given by the 
existence of chiral interactions of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya type (DMI) [89], [90].

HDMI = (S1  S2).d12
(Eq.2)

Here S1 and S2 are neighbour spins and d12 is the DMI vector. The DMI is a chiral interaction 
lowering or increasing the energy of the spins depending on whether the rotation from S1 to S2 
around d12 is clockwise or counter-clockwise. If S1 and S2 are initially parallel in a 
ferromagnetic material, the effect of a sufficiently strong DMI interaction is to introduce a 
relative tilt around d12.
SOC induces such DMI interactions in systems without inversion symmetry. DMIs exist in 
magnetic compound of non-centrosymmetric crystal lattice and when the breaking of inversion 
symmetry is due to disorder or to the presence of an interface between different materials. For 
non-centrosymmetric crystal lattices, the DMIs have been introduced in 1958 and 1960 by 
Dzyaloshinskii and Moriya as a term of the super-exchange interactions to explain the magnetic 
properties of insulating magnetic oxides such as 𝜶-Fe2O3 [89], [90]. In 1980, Fert and Levy 


9

[91] showed that DMIs mediated by conduction electrons also exist in magnetic metals and 
explain some properties of disordered dilute magnetic alloys doped with heavy impurities such 
as Pt. This picture was then extended to predict the existence of DMIs at interface of magnetic 
metals [92], as shown in the picture of Fig.9a representing the DMI vector  at the interface 
between a magnetic metal (Fe) and an heavy metal of large SOC (Pt). Today the interfacial 
DMIs have been derived by ab-initio calculations in many types of interfaces [93], [94]. As
shown in Fig.9b, DMIs affect predominantly the spins of the magnetic atoms just at the 
interface. It decreases rapidly, with possible change of sign, when one moves away from the 
interface, what gives that a global effect on a magnetic layer is effective for only very thin 
layers. Several experimental methods are used to measure the interfacial DMI, Brillouin light 
scattering being the most direct [95], [96].
Skyrmions induced by bulk DMIs were first identified in single crystals with a non-
centrosymmetric lattice [97], [98], generally in applied magnetic field and at low temperature. 
These skyrmions are generally organized in a periodic lattice, as in the image of Fig. 8c taken 
on the non-centrosymmetric magnetic compound, FeCoSi [99]. Spin textures induced by 
interfacial DMIs were first observed in the form of spin spirals on ultra-thin films of Fe on 
W(110) [100]. The first skyrmions induced by interfacial DMIs were identified in the form of 
skyrmion lattice in a Fe monolayer on Ir(110) [101]. The skyrmions can form a skyrmion lattice 
but can also exist as non-coupled or weakly coupled individual skyrmions, as shown for the 
skyrmions represented by  Fig. 8d in PdFe bilayer on Ir(111) [86].  Such individual skyrmions, 
because they can be manipulated individually as nano-balls, are the most interesting for 
applications. The difference between skyrmion lattices and individual skyrmions is related to 
the nature of the ground state of the system. If the state with skyrmions is the ground state, this 
state is a skyrmion lattice. If the ground state is a classical magnetic configuration, 
ferromagnetic state for example, individual skyrmions appear as metastable states, magnetic 
defects stabilized by their topological protection [102], [103].
A crucial challenge for applications was the stabilization at room temperature (RT) of small 
skyrmions. The ordering temperature of bulk materials hosting skyrmions are generally below 
RT or not much higher than RT. The skyrmions in ultra-thin films (one of a few atomic layers) 
of the earliest experiments are stable only at low temperature. A direction taken by several 
groups is the development of multilayers stacking layers of magnetic metals and heavy 
nonmagnetic metals with additive DMIs at successive interfaces, as in the multilayer in Fig.9c. 
As the DMIs for Co on Ir and Pt are opposite, the symmetry of the interfacial DMIs makes that 
the DMIs induced by Ir and Pt in a trilayer Ir/Co/Pt are additive. By repeating these trilayer 
stacks, the interlayer interactions between successive trilayers couple the skyrmions in a single 
column, a 3D skyrmion of large magnetic volume of spins which can be stable at RT. Several 
groups [104]–[107] work today with skyrmions stabilized at RT in this way. Some groups have 
been able to stabilize skyrmion with diameters as small as 10 nm at RT [108].
The next steps on the way to applications were the development of mechanisms to create 
skyrmions on purpose, put them into motion and detect them. Fig. 10a shows an example of 
skyrmion nucleation by the Spin Transfer Torque induced near a constriction by current pulses 
[109], [110]. Nucleation can also be achieved by replacing constrictions by prepared defects or 
local injectors from outside the film [103].  Skyrmions in a track can be detected by harnessing 
the Anomalous Hall Effect of the magnetic multilayer, as illustrate by Fig.10b for the detection 
of a single skyrmion [111]. Finally, skyrmions can be moved by current-induced Spin Transfer 
Torques. It turned out that the best mechanism is based on the use of the pure spin current 
generated by the SHE in the heavy metal layers below or above the magnetic layers in the 
multilayer [103], [112] (for the generation of vertical spin current by SHE, see the paragraph 
on SHE and Fig.6d). The velocity of the skyrmions can be very high, up to 100 m/s (at 100m/s, 
50 ps is needed to cover 20 nm in a nano-device) in the experimental results in Fig.10c [106].
The interest of skyrmions for technology comes from their properties of quasi-particle, not only 
ultra-small but also non-volatile. For example, they present all the basic functions needed for 


10

information storage and processing: the data can be coded in the form of a train of skyrmions, 
with writing by nucleation of individual skyrmions at a given position, reading by individual 
detection of skyrmions at another position, easy current-induced displacement of the 
information from the nucleation to the detection, logic operations by duplicating or merging 
skyrmions and easy storage due to the non-volatility. 

We will describe only one of the most largely discussed applications of today, the skyrmion-
based race track memory. The massive storage of information today, in data centers for 
example, is based on the use of hard disk drives in which the information is stored by “magnetic 
bits” fixedly written in the magnetic film covering the disk. Finding a given bit of information 
is done by rotating the disk under the arm of the write/read head (Fig.3c) and rotating the arm 
itself. The writing/reading operations thus imply a mechanical system which is complex, fragile 
and consumer of energy. The race track memory is based on the concept of coding data by a 
succession of magnetic domain walls in a magnetic track in the first suggestion of Parkin et al
[113]. Today with skyrmions, the concept is coding by a train of skyrmions that can be 
electrically displaced along a track between the points where the skyrmions can be created and 
detected [114]–[116]. With respect to the hard disk of today, the advantage is that of a purely 
spintronic and nanoscale device without any mechanical motion of purely electronic devices 
for a much lower energy consumption. A schematic of skyrmion base race-track memory is 
shown in Fig.10d. With respect to race-track memory with domain walls, the advantage with 
skyrmions comes from the flexibility of their shapes and trajectories (reduced pinning), with 
the possibility of motion in curved tracks (Fig.10d). However, the competition of this 
technology with 3D Flash memories should be quite severe, especially if this three dimensional 
integration allows flash memories to reduce their price per bit stored by more than one order of 
magnitude. Skyrmion-based devices have also been designed to make logic gates in which the 
duplication or merging of skyrmions is used to perform logic operations [117]. We could also 
cite the exploitation of the interaction of magnons with skyrmions for the design of skyrmion 
magnonic crystals for tunable rf filtering [118] or the development of rf oscillators based on the 
specific dynamical modes of skyrmionic spin configurations [119].

6
Conclusion

In this article, we have described a part of the story of spintronics, from its foundation in pure 
physics of the electronic properties of the ferromagnetic metals to the discovery of GMR, TMR, 
STT and some very recent developments with topological materials and skyrmions. 
Unfortunately, in a review of limited length, some other recent developments of spintronics 
could not be included. Remarkable breakthroughs have also been achieved in spintronics with 
oxides, a field of research that is generally called oxitronics [50], [51] and includes, for example, 
the research on the multiferroic materials gathering ferroelectric and ferromagnetic properties. 
Other interesting directions are spintronics with semiconductors, spin-qbits, spintronics for 
neuromorphic computing devices, spintronics with graphene and other bidimensional materials 
as transition metal dichalcogenides, molecular spintronics…On the side of the applications, we 
have described how spintronics has increased considerably the capacity of data storage and is 
now bringing its STT-RAM and SOT-RAM components to reduce the energy consumption of 
our computers and telephones. What will be the next important innovations? The ultra-low 
power topological logic devices proposed by the researchers at Intel Corporation [84] the STT-
oscillator-based neuromorphic devices designed for deep learning [120] ?


11

Figures

Figure 1: Basics of spintronics. (a) Schematic band structure of a ferromagnetic metal. (b) Resistivities of the spin 
up and spin down conduction channels for nickel doped with 1% of several types of impurity [5] (measurements 
at 4.2 K). The ratio  between the resistivities 0 and 0 can be as large as 20 (Co impurities) or, as well, 
smaller than one (Cr or V impurities). (c) Schematic for spin dependent conduction through independent spin up 
and spin down channels in the limit of negligible spin mixing ( = 0 in the formalism of Ref. [5], [6]).

Figure 2: Experiments on ternary alloys based on the same concept as that of the GMR. On the sketches illustrating 
the conduction by two channels in a ferromagnet doped with impurities A (blue) and B (red), the circles are at the 
scale of the scattering cross sections of impurities A and B. (a) Schematic for the spin dependent conduction in 
alloys with impurities of opposite scattering spin asymmetries (A =  A/A > 1, B =  B/B < 1, AB >> A + 
B) and experimental results on the resistivity of Ni0.9(Co1-xRhx)0.1 alloys. (b) Same for alloys with impurities of 
similar scattering spin asymmetries (A =  A/A > 1, B =  B/B > 1, AB  A + B) and experimental results 
for Ni0.9 (Au1-xCox)0.1 alloys. Figures adapted from [9] (similar results in [4]–[6]). In GMR the impurities A and B 
are replaced by multilayers, the situation of a (b)  corresponding to the antiparallel (parallel) magnetic 
configurations of adjacent magnetic layers.


12

Figure 3: Discovery of GMR. (a) GMR in Fe/Cr(001) multilayers [1]. With the current definition of the 
magnetoresistance ratio, MR= 100x[RAP-RP/Rp], MR = 85% for the Fe 3nm/Cr 0.9nm multilayers. GMR effects 
were observed at about the same time with Fe/Cr/Fe trilayers in the team of Peter Grünberg at Jülich [2] (b) 
Schematic of the mechanism of the GMR. In the parallel magnetic configuration (bottom), the electrons of one of 
the spin directions can go easily through all the magnetic layers and the short-circuit through this channel leads to 
a small resistance. In the antiparallel configuration (top), the electrons of both channels are slowed down every 
second magnetic layer and the resistance is high (figure from Ref. [21]). (c) Schematic of a GMR write/read head 
in HDD (courtesy of Dr. C. Tiusan). (d) Example of magnetic bits on HDD of today (courtesy of Dr. J. Childress).

Figure 4: (a) Schematic representation of the spin accumulation (out of equilibrium splitting between the spin up 
and spin down electro-chemical potentials) at an interface between a ferromagnetic metal and a non magnetic layer 
crossed by a current (arrows symbolize the spin flips induced by the spin accumulation and controlling the 
progressive depolarization of the current). Figures from Ref. [21]. (b) Schematic of a device in which a current 
flowing from the ferromagnetic F1 to the left side of the nonmagnetic channel N induces a spin accumulation 
around the FI/N interface. This spin accumulation generates a pure spin current in the right side of N (zero charge 
current, only spin flux). (c) Electron microscopy image of a Fe(001)/MgO(001)/Fe(001) MTJ [36]. (d) TMR curves 
(résistance vs field of a Fe/MgO/Fe MTJ [36].


13

Figure 5: (a) Illustration of the spin transfer concept introduced by John Slonczewski [52] and Berger [53]. A 
spin-polarized current is prepared by a first magnetic layer F with an obliquely oriented spin-polarization with 
respect to the magnetization axis of a second layer F2. When it goes through F2, the exchange interaction aligns 
its spin-polarization along the magnetization axis. The exchange interaction being spin conserving, the transverse 
spin-polarization lost by the current is transferred to the total spin of F2, which can also be described by a spin-
transfer torque acting on F2. Figure from Ref. [21]. (b) MTJ nano-pillar (as well, schematic of STT-RAM) for 
experiments of magnetic switching by STT: the magnetization of the free magnetic layer is reversed by the STT 
due to injection of a spin-polarized current created by the CoFeB layer. An experimental example of back and 
forth switching between parallel and antiparallel of MTJ in Fig.5d [121]. (c) Same as (b) but with creation of a 
steady-states gyration of the magnetization of the free layer (STT oscillator). (e) Example of microwave power 
emission from gyration of a magnetic vortex in a STT-oscillator.

Figure 6: (a) SHE: spin accumulation on the sides of a conductor due to the deflection of opposite spins in opposite 
directions. No charge accumulation and V = 0. (b) Device for the first electrical demonstration of SHE: with 
opposite spins moving in opposite directions in a situation of pure spin current (as explained for the device of 
Fig.4b), they are deflected in the same direction into the transvers channel and V ≠ 0. An example of experimental 
result [66] is in (c). Schematics in (a) and (b) from [67]. (d) SHE with deflection of blue and red spins upward and 
downward and injection of a pure spin current into an adjacent layer. (e) SOT-RAM: the SHE in the Ta layer 
injects a spin current into the bottom CoFeB layer to reverse its magnetization and switch the memory.


14

Figure 7: (a) Dirac cone of the dispersion surfaces of the 2D electrons at the surface or interface of a topological 
insulator (TI). Arrow indicate the locking of the spin orientations with the momentum direction. (b) ARPES image 
of the Dirac cone at the interface of the 𝜶-Sn TI with Ag [80]. (c) Edelstein Effect (EE): more spins along +y for 
a current along - x and corresponding shift toward + x of the Fermi contour and production of a vertical pure spin 
current polarized along +y. (d) Inverse Edelstein Effect (IEE): injection of spin along + y on the + x side of Fermi 
contour for production of a charge current along x. (e) Spin pumping device for injection of a vertical spin current 
into the 𝜶-Sn/Ag interface states by ferromagnetic resonance in the Fe layer and production of a horizontal charge 
current Ic in these states by IEE. (f) Experimental Ic at the resonance field in the device of (e) [80].

Figure 8: (a-b) Spin configurations of Néel (a) and Bloch (b) skyrmions in a magnetic film of out-of-plane 
magnetization. (c) Lorentz microscopy image of a skyrmion lattice in the non-centrosymmetric magnetic 
compound  Fe0.5Co0.5Si [99]. (d) Spin Polarized Scanning Tunnelling Microscopy image of individual skyrmions 
induced by interfacial DMI in a Fe/Pd atomic bilayer grown in the heavy metal Ir [122].


15

Figure 9: (a) Schematic of DMI at the interface between a Co film and the heavy metal P. D12 is the DMI vector 
in the interface plane. (b) Calculated layer resolved DMI strength in a Co atomic trilayer at interface with Pt [94]
(c) Multilayer with additive DMI at the Ir/Co and Co/Pt interfaces. The exchange interactions between successive 
Co layers couple the skyrmions in a single column of skyrmions [104]. (d) Skyrmions in the multilayer of (c) 
[104].

Figure 10: (a) Creation of skyrmions at the edge of a constriction in a (Pt/CoFeB/MgO) x 15 multilayer by 
successive current pulses in opposite directions[110]. (b) Detection of the presence of a single skyrmion by the 
change in AHE [111]. (c) Skyrmion velovity vs current density in different types of multilayers [106]. (d) 
Schematic of a skyrmion-based race track memory [103].


16

References

[1]
M. N. Baibich et al., “Giant Magnetoresistance of (001)Fe/(001)Cr Magnetic 
Superlattices,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 61, no. 21, pp. 2472–2475, Nov. 1988.

[2]
G. Binasch, P. Grünberg, F. Saurenbach, and W. Zinn, “Enhanced magnetoresistance in 
layered magnetic structures with antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange,” Phys. Rev. B, 
vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 4828–4830, Mar. 1989.

[3]
“The electrical conductivity of transition metals,” Proc. R. Soc. London. Ser. A - Math. 
Phys. Sci., vol. 153, no. 880, pp. 699–717, Feb. 1936.

[4]
A. Fert and I. A. Campbell, “Two-Current Conduction in Nickel,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 
21, no. 16, pp. 1190–1192, Oct. 1968.

[5]
A. FERT and I. A. CAMPBELL, “TRANSPORT PROPERTIES OF 
FERROMAGNETIC TRANSITION METALS,” Le J. Phys. Colloq., vol. 32, no. C1, 
pp. C1-46-C1-50, Feb. 1971.

[6]
A. Fert and I. A. Campbell, “Electrical resistivity of ferromagnetic nickel and iron 
based alloys,” J. Phys. F Met. Phys., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 849–871, May 1976.

[7]
B. Loegel and F. Gautier, “Origine de la resistivite dans le cobalt et ses alliages dilues,” 
J. Phys. Chem. Solids, vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2723–2735, Jan. 1971.

[8]
J. W. F. Dorleijn and A. R. Miedema, “The residual resistivities of dilute iron-based 
alloys in the two-current model,” J. Phys. F Met. Phys., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. L23–L25, Jan. 
1977.

[9]
I. A. Campbell and A. Fert, “Chapter 9 Transport properties of ferromagnets,” Handb. 
Ferromagn. Mater., vol. 3, pp. 747–804, Jan. 1982.

[10]
P. Grünberg, R. Schreiber, Y. Pang, M. B. Brodsky, and H. Sowers, “Layered 
Magnetic Structures: Evidence for Antiferromagnetic Coupling of Fe Layers across Cr 
Interlayers,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 57, no. 19, pp. 2442–2445, Nov. 1986.

[11]
R. E. Camley and J. Barnaś, “Theory of giant magnetoresistance effects in magnetic 
layered structures with antiferromagnetic coupling,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 
664–667, Aug. 1989.

[12]
P. M. Levy, S. Zhang, and A. Fert, “Electrical conductivity of magnetic multilayered 
structures,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 65, no. 13, pp. 1643–1646, Sep. 1990.

[13]
S. S. P. Parkin, N. More, and K. P. Roche, “Oscillations in exchange coupling and 
magnetoresistance in metallic superlattice structures: Co/Ru, Co/Cr, and Fe/Cr,” Phys. 
Rev. Lett., vol. 64, no. 19, pp. 2304–2307, May 1990.

[14]
T. Shinjo and H. Yamamoto, “Large Magnetoresistance of Field-Induced Giant 
Ferrimagnetic Multilayers,” J. Phys. Soc. Japan, vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 3061–3064, Sep. 
1990.

[15]
C. Dupas et al., “Very large magnetoresistance effects induced by antiparallel 
magnetization in two ultrathin cobalt films,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 5680–
5682, May 1990.

[16]
D. H. Mosca, F. Petroff, A. Fert, P. A. Schroeder, W. P. Pratt, and R. Laloee, 
“Oscillatory interlayer coupling and giant magnetoresistance in Co/Cu multilayers,” J. 
Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 94, no. 1–2, pp. L1–L5, Mar. 1991.

[17]
S. S. P. Parkin, R. Bhadra, and K. P. Roche, “Oscillatory magnetic exchange coupling 
through thin copper layers,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 66, no. 16, pp. 2152–2155, Apr. 
1991.

[18]
B. Dieny, V. S. Speriosu, S. S. P. Parkin, B. A. Gurney, D. R. Wilhoit, and D. Mauri, 
“Giant magnetoresistive in soft ferromagnetic multilayers,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 43, no. 1, 
pp. 1297–1300, Jan. 1991.

[19]
P. Grünberg, “Magnetic field sensor with ferromagnetic thin layers having 
magnetically antiparallel polarized components,” US Pat. US4949039A, Jun. 1989.

[20]
S. Parkin, “Applications of Magnetic Nanostructures,” in Spin Dependent Transport in 


17

Magnetic Nanostructures, S. Maekawa and T. Shinjō, Eds. Taylor & Francis, 2002, pp. 
237–279.

[21]
C. Chappert, A. Fert, and F. N. Van Dau, “The emergence of spin electronics in data 
storage,” Nat. Mater., vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 813–823, Nov. 2007.

[22]
P. P. Freitas et al., “Magnetoresistive biochips,” Europhys. News, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 
224–226, Nov. 2003.

[23]
W. P. Pratt, S.-F. Lee, J. M. Slaughter, R. Loloee, P. A. Schroeder, and J. Bass, 
“Perpendicular giant magnetoresistances of Ag/Co multilayers,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 
66, no. 23, pp. 3060–3063, Jun. 1991.

[24]
L. Piraux et al., “Giant magnetoresistance in magnetic multilayered nanowires,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 65, no. 19, pp. 2484–2486, Nov. 1994.

[25]
T. Valet and A. Fert, “Theory of the perpendicular magnetoresistance in magnetic 
multilayers,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 7099–7113, Sep. 1993.

[26]
A. Fert and H. Jaffrès, “Conditions for efficient spin injection from a ferromagnetic 
metal into a semiconductor,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 64, no. 18, p. 184420, Oct. 2001.

[27]
M. Johnson and R. H. Silsbee, “Thermodynamic analysis of interfacial transport and of 
the thermomagnetoelectric system,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 4959–4972, Apr. 
1987.

[28]
Z. G. Yu and M. E. Flatté, “Electric-field dependent spin diffusion and spin injection 
into semiconductors,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 66, no. 20, p. 201202, Nov. 2002.

[29]
T. Kimura, J. Hamrle, and Y. Otani, “Estimation of spin-diffusion length from the 
magnitude of spin-current absorption: Multiterminal ferromagnetic/nonferromagnetic 
hybrid structures,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 72, no. 1, p. 014461, Jul. 2005.

[30]
S. Takahashi and S. Maekawa, “Spin Current in Metals and Superconductors,” J. Phys. 
Soc. Japan, vol. 77, no. 3, p. 031009, Mar. 2008.

[31]
M. Julliere, “Tunneling between ferromagnetic films,” Phys. Lett. A, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 
225–226, Sep. 1975.

[32]
S. Maekawa and U. Gafvert, “Electron tunneling between ferromagnetic films,” IEEE 
Trans. Magn., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 707–708, Mar. 1982.

[33]
J. S. Moodera, L. R. Kinder, T. M. Wong, and R. Meservey, “Large Magnetoresistance 
at Room Temperature in Ferromagnetic Thin Film Tunnel Junctions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 
vol. 74, no. 16, pp. 3273–3276, Apr. 1995.

[34]
T. Miyazaki and N. Tezuka, “Giant magnetic tunneling effect in Fe/Al2O3/Fe 
junction,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 139, no. 3, pp. L231–L234, Jan. 1995.

[35]
M. Bowen et al., “Large magnetoresistance in Fe/MgO/FeCo(001) epitaxial tunnel 
junctions on GaAs(001),” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 79, no. 11, pp. 1655–1657, Sep. 2001.

[36]
S. Yuasa, T. Nagahama, A. Fukushima, Y. Suzuki, and K. Ando, “Giant room-
temperature magnetoresistance in single-crystal Fe/MgO/Fe magnetic tunnel 
junctions,” Nat. Mater., vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 868–871, Dec. 2004.

[37]
S. S. P. Parkin et al., “Giant tunnelling magnetoresistance at room temperature with 
MgO (100) tunnel barriers,” Nat. Mater., vol. 3, no. 12, pp. 862–867, Dec. 2004.

[38]
S. Ikeda et al., “Tunnel magnetoresistance of 604% at 300K by suppression of Ta 
diffusion in CoFeB∕MgO∕CoFeB pseudo-spin-valves annealed at high temperature,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 93, no. 8, p. 082508, Aug. 2008.

[39]
I. I. Oleinik, E. Y. Tsymbal, and D. G. Pettifor, “Structural and electronic properties of  
Co /    Al   2       O 3    / Co  magnetic tunnel junction from first principles,” Phys. 
Rev. B, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 3952–3959, Aug. 2000.

[40]
J. Mathon and A. Umerski, “Theory of tunneling magnetoresistance in a junction with 
a nonmagnetic metallic interlayer,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 1117–1121, Jul. 
1999.

[41]
P. Mavropoulos, N. Papanikolaou, and P. H. Dederichs, “Complex Band Structure and 
Tunneling through Ferromagnet  /  Insulator  /  Ferromagnet Junctions,” Phys. Rev. 


18

Lett., vol. 85, no. 5, pp. 1088–1091, Jul. 2000.

[42]
X.-G. Zhang and W. H. Butler, “Large magnetoresistance in bcc   Co ∕ Mg O ∕ Co   and   
Fe Co ∕ Mg O ∕ Fe Co   tunnel junctions,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 70, no. 17, p. 172407, Nov. 
2004.

[43]
J. M. De De Teresa JM, A. Barthelemy, A. Fert, J. P. Contour, F. Montaigne, and P. 
Seneor, “Role of metal-oxide interface in determining the spin polarization of magnetic 
tunnel junctions,” Science, vol. 286, no. 5439, pp. 507–9, Oct. 1999.

[44]
M. Bowen et al., “Nearly total spin polarization in La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 from tunneling 
experiments,” Nov. 2002.

[45]
T. Ishikawa et al., “Spin-dependent tunneling characteristics of fully epitaxial magnetic 
tunneling junctions with a full-Heusler alloy Co2MnSi thin film and a MgO tunnel 
barrier,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 89, no. 19, p. 192505, Nov. 2006.

[46]
P. LeClair, J. K. Ha, H. J. M. Swagten, J. T. Kohlhepp, C. H. van de Vin, and W. J. M. 
de Jonge, “Large magnetoresistance using hybrid spin filter devices,” Appl. Phys. Lett., 
vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 625–627, Jan. 2002.

[47]
E. E. Fullerton and J. R. Childress, “Spintronics, Magnetoresistive Heads, and the 
Emergence of the Digital World,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 10, pp. 1787–1795, Oct. 
2016.

[48]
A. V. Pohm, J. S. T. Huang, J. M. Daughton, D. R. Krahn, and V. Mehra, “The design
of a one megabit non-volatile M-R memory chip using 1.5*5 µm2 cells,” IEEE Trans. 
Magn., vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 3117–3119, 1988.

[49]
J. M. Daughton, “Magnetoresistive memory technology,” Thin Solid Films, vol. 216, 
no. 1, pp. 162–168, Aug. 1992.

[50]
M. Bibes and A. Barthelemy, “Oxide Spintronics,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 
54, no. 5, pp. 1003–1023, May 2007.

[51]
J. Varignon, L. Vila, A. Barthélémy, and M. Bibes, “A new spin for oxide interfaces,” 
Nat. Phys., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 322–325, Apr. 2018.

[52]
J. C. Slonczewski, “Current-driven excitation of magnetic multilayers,” J. Magn. 
Magn. Mater., vol. 159, no. 1–2, pp. L1–L7, Jun. 1996.

[53]
L. Berger, “Emission of spin waves by a magnetic multilayer traversed by a current,” 
Phys. Rev. B, vol. 54, no. 13, pp. 9353–9358, Oct. 1996.

[54]
M. Tsoi et al., “Excitation of a Magnetic Multilayer by an Electric Current,” Phys. Rev. 
Lett., vol. 80, no. 19, pp. 4281–4284, May 1998.

[55]
W. Rippard, M. Pufall, S. Kaka, S. Russek, and T. Silva, “Direct-Current Induced 
Dynamics in    C o  90    F e  10  /   N i  80    F e  20   Point Contacts,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 
vol. 92, no. 2, p. 027201, Jan. 2004.

[56]
F. J. Albert, J. A. Katine, R. A. Buhrman, and D. C. Ralph, “Spin-polarized current 
switching of a Co thin film nanomagnet,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 77, no. 23, pp. 3809–
3811, Dec. 2000.

[57]
J. Grollier et al., “Spin-polarized current induced switching in Co/Cu/Co pillars,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 78, no. 23, pp. 3663–3665, Jun. 2001.

[58]
A. Dussaux et al., “Large microwave generation from current-driven magnetic vortex 
oscillators in magnetic tunnel junctions,” Nat. Commun., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Apr. 
2010.

[59]
J. Grollier et al., “Switching a spin valve back and forth by current-induced domain 
wall motion,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 509–511, Jul. 2003.

[60]
M. Hosomi et al., “A novel nonvolatile memory with spin torque transfer 
magnetization switching: spin-ram,” in IEEE InternationalElectron Devices Meeting, 
2005. IEDM Technical Digest., pp. 459–462.

[61]
“Everspin ships first ST-MRAM memory with 500X performance of flash | 
Computerworld.” [Online]. Available: 
https://www.computerworld.com/article/2493603/everspin-ships-first-st-mram-


19

memory-with-500x-performance-of-flash.html. [Accessed: 05-Mar-2019].

[62]
“Intel Says FinFET-Based Embedded MRAM is Production-Ready | EE Times.” 
[Online]. Available: https://www.eetimes.com/document.asp?doc_id=1334343#. 
[Accessed: 15-Apr-2019].

[63]
M. I. American Institute of Physics. and V. I. Perel’, JETP letters., vol. 13. American 
Institute of Physics, 1971.

[64]
J. E. Hirsch, “Spin Hall Effect,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 83, no. 9, pp. 1834–1837, Aug. 
1999.

[65]
Y. K. Kato, R. C. Myers, A. C. Gossard, and D. D. Awschalom, “Observation of the 
Spin Hall Effect in Semiconductors,” Science, vol. 306, no. 5703, pp. 1910–1913, Dec. 
2004.

[66]
S. O. Valenzuela and M. Tinkham, “Direct electronic measurement of the spin Hall 
effect,” Nature, vol. 442, no. 7099, pp. 176–179, Jul. 2006.

[67]
S. O. Valenzuela and M. Tinkham, “Electrical detection of spin currents: The spin-
current induced Hall effect (invited),” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 101, no. 9, p. 09B103, May 
2007.

[68]
M. Cubukcu et al., “Spin-orbit torque magnetization switching of a three-terminal 
perpendicular magnetic tunnel junction,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 104, no. 4, p. 042406, 
Jan. 2014.

[69]
A. Hoffmann, “Spin Hall Effects in Metals,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 
5172–5193, Oct. 2013.

[70]
J.-C. Rojas-Sánchez et al., “Spin Pumping and Inverse Spin Hall Effect in Platinum: 
The Essential Role of Spin-Memory Loss at Metallic Interfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 
112, no. 10, p. 106602, Mar. 2014.

[71]
C.-F. Pai, L. Liu, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, “Spin transfer 
torque devices utilizing the giant spin Hall effect of tungsten,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 
101, no. 12, p. 122404, Sep. 2012.

[72]
L. Liu, C.-F. Pai, Y. Li, H. W. Tseng, D. C. Ralph, and R. A. Buhrman, “Spin-torque 
switching with the giant spin Hall effect of tantalum.,” Science, vol. 336, no. 6081, pp. 
555–8, May 2012.

[73]
C. Hahn, G. de Loubens, O. Klein, M. Viret, V. V. Naletov, and J. Ben Youssef, 
“Comparative measurements of inverse spin Hall effects and magnetoresistance in 
YIG/Pt and YIG/Ta,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 87, no. 17, p. 174417, May 2013.

[74]
Y. Niimi et al., “Giant Spin Hall Effect Induced by Skew Scattering from Bismuth 
Impurities inside Thin Film CuBi Alloys,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 109, no. 15, p. 156602, 
Oct. 2012.

[75]
A. Fert, A. Friederich, and A. Hamzic, “Hall effect in dilute magnetic alloys,” J. Magn. 
Magn. Mater., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 231–257, Oct. 1981.

[76]
V. M. Edelstein, “Spin polarization of conduction electrons induced by electric current 
in two-dimensional asymmetric electron systems,” Solid State Commun., vol. 73, no. 3, 
pp. 233–235, Jan. 1990.

[77]
K. Kondou et al., “Fermi-level-dependent charge-to-spin current conversion by Dirac 
surface states of topological insulators,” Nat. Phys., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 1027–1031, 
Nov. 2016.

[78]
W. Han, Y. Otani, and S. Maekawa, “Quantum materials for spin and charge 
conversion,” npj Quantum Mater., vol. 3, no. 1, p. 27, Dec. 2018.

[79]
H. J. Zhang et al., “Current-induced spin polarization on metal surfaces probed by spin-
polarized positron beam,” Sci. Rep., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 4844, May 2015.

[80]
J.-C. Rojas-Sánchez et al., “Spin to Charge Conversion at Room Temperature by Spin 
Pumping into a New Type of Topological Insulator:   α -Sn Films,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 
vol. 116, no. 9, p. 096602, Mar. 2016.

[81]
Y. Shiomi et al., “Spin-Electricity Conversion Induced by Spin Injection into 


20

Topological Insulators,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 113, no. 19, p. 196601, Nov. 2014.

[82]
J. C. R. Sánchez et al., “Spin-to-charge conversion using Rashba coupling at the 
interface between non-magnetic materials,” Nat. Commun., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 2944, Dec. 
2013.

[83]
E. Lesne et al., “Highly efficient and tunable spin-to-charge conversion through 
Rashba coupling at oxide interfaces,” Nat. Mater., vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 1261–1266, Dec. 
2016.

[84]
S. Manipatruni et al., “Scalable energy-efficient magnetoelectric spin–orbit logic,” 
Nature, vol. 565, no. 7737, pp. 35–42, Jan. 2019.

[85]
A. N. Bogdanov and U. K. Rößler, “Chiral Symmetry Breaking in Magnetic Thin 
Films and Multilayers,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 87, no. 3, p. 037203, Jun. 2001.

[86]
R. Wiesendanger, “Nanoscale magnetic skyrmions in metallic films and multilayers: a 
new twist for spintronics,” Nat. Rev. Mater., vol. 1, no. 7, p. 16044, Jul. 2016.

[87]
A. Fert, N. Reyren, and V. Cros, “Magnetic skyrmions: advances in physics and 
potential applications,” Nat. Rev. Mater., vol. 2, no. 7, p. 17031, Jun. 2017.

[88]
K. Everschor-Sitte, J. Masell, R. M. Reeve, and M. Kläui, “Perspective: Magnetic 
skyrmions—Overview of recent progress in an active research field,” J. Appl. Phys., 
vol. 124, no. 24, p. 240901, Dec. 2018.

[89]
I. Dzyaloshinsky, “A thermodynamic theory of ‘weak’ ferromagnetism of 
antiferromagnetics,” J. Phys. Chem. Solids, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 241–255, Jan. 1958.

[90]
T. Moriya, “Anisotropic Superexchange Interaction and Weak Ferromagnetism,” Phys. 
Rev., vol. 120, no. 1, pp. 91–98, Oct. 1960.

[91]
A. Fert and P. M. Levy, “Role of Anisotropic Exchange Interactions in Determining the 
Properties of Spin-Glasses,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 44, no. 23, pp. 1538–1541, Jun. 
1980.

[92]
A. Fert, “Magnetic and Transport Properties of Metallic Multilayers,” Mater. Sci. 
Forum, vol. 59–60, pp. 439–480, Jan. 1991.

[93]
B. Dupé, M. Hoffmann, C. Paillard, and S. Heinze, “Tailoring magnetic skyrmions in 
ultra-thin transition metal films,” Nat. Commun., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 4030, Dec. 2014.

[94]
H. Yang, A. Thiaville, S. Rohart, A. Fert, and M. Chshiev, “Anatomy of 
Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction at   Co / Pt   Interfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 115, 
no. 26, p. 267210, Dec. 2015.

[95]
K. Di et al., “Direct Observation of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction in a 
Pt/Co/Ni Film,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 114, no. 4, p. 047201, Jan. 2015.

[96]
M. Belmeguenai et al., “Interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction in 
perpendicularly magnetized   Pt/Co/AlO x   ultrathin films measured by Brillouin light 
spectroscopy,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 91, no. 18, p. 180405, May 2015.

[97]
U. K. Rößler, A. N. Bogdanov, and C. Pfleiderer, “Spontaneous skyrmion ground 
states in magnetic metals,” Nature, vol. 442, no. 7104, pp. 797–801, Aug. 2006.

[98]
S. Mühlbauer et al., “Skyrmion Lattice in a Chiral Magnet,” Science (80-. )., vol. 323, 
no. 5916, pp. 915–919, Feb. 2009.

[99]
X. Z. Yu et al., “Real-space observation of a two-dimensional skyrmion crystal,” 
Nature, vol. 465, no. 7300, pp. 901–904, Jun. 2010.

[100] A. Kubetzka, M. Bode, O. Pietzsch, and R. Wiesendanger, “Spin-Polarized Scanning 

Tunneling Microscopy with Antiferromagnetic Probe Tips,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 88, 
no. 5, p. 057201, Jan. 2002.

[101] S. Heinze et al., “Spontaneous atomic-scale magnetic skyrmion lattice in two 

dimensions,” Nat. Phys., vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 713–718, Sep. 2011.

[102] N. Romming, C. Hanneken, M. Menzel, J. E. Bickel, B. Wolter, and K. von Bergmann, 

“Writing and Deleting Single Magnetic Skyrmions,” Science, vol. 341, no. 6146, pp. 
636–639, Aug. 2013.

[103] J. Sampaio, V. Cros, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville, and A. Fert, “Nucleation, stability and 


21

current-induced motion of isolated magnetic skyrmions in nanostructures,” Nat. 
Nanotechnol., vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 839–844, Nov. 2013.

[104] C. Moreau-Luchaire et al., “Additive interfacial chiral interaction in multilayers for 

stabilization of small individual skyrmions at room temperature,” Nat. Nanotechnol., 
vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 444–448, May 2016.

[105] A. Soumyanarayanan et al., “Tunable room-temperature magnetic skyrmions in 

Ir/Fe/Co/Pt multilayers,” Nat. Mater., vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 898–904, Jul. 2017.

[106] S. Woo et al., “Observation of room-temperature magnetic skyrmions and their 

current-driven dynamics in ultrathin metallic ferromagnets,” Nat. Mater., vol. 15, no. 5, 
pp. 501–506, May 2016.

[107] G. Yu et al., “Room-Temperature Creation and Spin–Orbit Torque Manipulation of 

Skyrmions in Thin Films with Engineered Asymmetry,” Nano Lett., vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 
1981–1988, Mar. 2016.

[108] L. Caretta et al., “Fast current-driven domain walls and small skyrmions in a 

compensated ferrimagnet,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 1154–1160, Dec. 
2018.

[109] W. Jiang et al., “Magnetism. Blowing magnetic skyrmion bubbles.,” Science, vol. 349, 

no. 6245, pp. 283–6, Jul. 2015.

[110] F. Büttner et al., “Field-free deterministic ultrafast creation of magnetic skyrmions by 

spin–orbit torques,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 1040–1044, Oct. 2017.

[111] D. Maccariello et al., “Electrical detection of single magnetic skyrmions in metallic 

multilayers at room temperature,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 233–237, Mar. 
2018.

[112] A. Hrabec et al., “Current-induced skyrmion generation and dynamics in symmetric 

bilayers,” Nat. Commun., vol. 8, p. 15765, Jun. 2017.

[113] S. Parkin and S.-H. Yang, “Memory on the racetrack,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 10, no. 

3, pp. 195–198, Mar. 2015.

[114] R. Tomasello, E. Martinez, R. Zivieri, L. Torres, M. Carpentieri, and G. Finocchio, “A 

strategy for the design of skyrmion racetrack memories,” Sci. Reports 2014 4, vol. 4, 
no. 1, p. 6784, Oct. 2014.

[115] X. Zhang et al., “Skyrmion-skyrmion and skyrmion-edge repulsions in skyrmion-based 

racetrack memory,” Sci. Rep., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 7643, Jul. 2015.

[116] W. Kang, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, and W. Zhao, “Skyrmion-Electronics: An 

Overview and Outlook,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 104, no. 10, pp. 2040–2061, Oct. 2016.

[117] X. Zhang, M. Ezawa, and Y. Zhou, “Magnetic skyrmion logic gates: conversion, 

duplication and merging of skyrmions,” Sci. Rep., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 9400, Aug. 2015.

[118] F. Ma, Y. Zhou, H. B. Braun, and W. S. Lew, “Skyrmion-Based Dynamic Magnonic 

Crystal,” Nano Lett., vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 4029–4036, Jun. 2015.

[119] G. Finocchio et al., “Skyrmion based microwave detectors and harvesting,” Appl. Phys. 

Lett., vol. 107, no. 26, p. 262401, Dec. 2015.

[120] M. Romera et al., “Vowel recognition with four coupled spin-torque nano-oscillators,” 

Nature, vol. 563, no. 7730, pp. 230–234, Nov. 2018.

[121] H. Kubota et al., “Evaluation of Spin-Transfer Switching in CoFeB/MgO/CoFeB 

Magnetic Tunnel Junctions,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 44, no. No. 40, pp. L1237–
L1240, Sep. 2005.

[122] N. Romming, A. Kubetzka, C. Hanneken, K. von Bergmann, and R. Wiesendanger, 

“Field-Dependent Size and Shape of Single Magnetic Skyrmions,” Phys. Rev. Lett., 
vol. 114, no. 17, p. 177203, May 2015.


22

Appendix

As Ref [92] (A. Fert, “Magnetic and Transport Properties of Metallic Multilayers,” Mater. Sci. 
Forum, vol. 59–60) is not easily electronically accessible, we present the pages (244-245)
describing the mechanism of interfacial DMI. In this proceedings of a 1990 Summer School, 
the description of interfacial DMI was very short; at this time, the priority was the results on 
GMR.

We proceed to the question of the anisotropic pair interactions between moments on surfaces 
or interfaces. The exchange interaction between two localized moments is generally written:

Hech = -J S1.S2
(Eq. 1)

In the most general case, anisotropic interaction terms should also exist, first bilinear 
antisymmetric terms of the Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) form [89].

HDM = D12.(S1  S2)
(Eq. 2)

and higher order terms. The DM term is ruled out when there is a center of inversion symmetry 
in the system, so that it generally does not exist in ordered crystal lattices, except for some 
complex structures [89]. However, in disordered systems, in spin glasses for example, there is 
no longer a center of inversion symmetry, and the DM interactions are known to be significant 
(~10% of the isotropic exchange, Eq. 1 [91]). The calculation of the DM interaction for the 
standard geometry of Fig.1 - triangle of Mn impurities in Cu for example – gives a DM 
interaction, Eq. 1, with D12 perpendicular to the plane of the triangle [91].

Figures

Fig.1
Fig.2

Figure 1: Low symmetry geometry giving rise to DM interactions in 
disordered magnetic alloys. For a triangle of magnetic impurities A1A2B, the 
spins S1 and S2 in A1 and A2 are coupled by HDM = D12.(S1  S2) where 
D12 along BA1  BA2.

Figure 2: Low symmetry for a pair of magnetic atoms A1 and A2 on a bcc(110) 
surface or interface.

In the same way the symmetry breaking at surfaces and interfaces should give rise to DM 
interactions. For example, in the case of a (110) surface or interface of bcc lattice, see Fig.2, 


23

there is no symmetric atom of B with respect to O (as in the absence of surface) and a DM 
interaction with D12 perpendicular to the plane of the triangle A1A2B is expected. Such DM 
interactions are also expected at surfaces or interfaces of fcc and hcp lattices. For both rare-
earth and transition metals, one estimates D12/J≈ 10-1 [91].The effect of such anisotropic
interactions on the macroscopic anisotropy properties have never been worked out. For non-S 
rare-earth ions, it is likely that the effect of the DM interactions is not important with respect to 
the very strong surface crystal fields. For gadolinium S-ions the crystal field is much smaller 
and the DM interactions should play a role in the anisotropy properties. In ferromagnetic 
transition metals, because the exchange is strong, the DM interactions should be significant and 
likely should contribute to the anisotropy properties. Of course the anisotropic pair interaction 
effects we have described suppose a localized moment picture of the ferromagnetism and do 
not turn out in the band structure models usually applied for transition metal ferromagnets.


