1

PMMA-grafted graphene nanoplatelets to reinforce the mechanical and thermal 

properties of PMMA composites

Cristina Vallés*, Dimitrios G. Papageorgiou, Fei Lin, Zheling Li, Ben F. Spencer, 

Robert J. Young, Ian A. Kinloch*

School of Materials and National Graphene Institute, University of Manchester, Oxford 

Road, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK

Abstract

In order to realise the potential of graphene nanocomposites it is vital to control the degree of 

dispersion and achieve a strong graphene/polymer interface. Herein, we developed a facile 

‘grafting to’ functionalisation approach for graphene nanoplatelets. NH2-terminated graphene 

nanoplatelets (NH2-GNPs) prepared by a diazonium coupling were used as a ‘platform’ to 

covalently graft PMMA chains to the surface of graphene through an amidation between the 

–NH2 groups and PMMA chains (PMMA-NH-GNPs). A degree of PMMA grafting of ~3.8 

wt.% (one chain per ~40 carbon atoms) was found to both improve the dispersion of the 

GNPs in a PMMA matrix and give strong graphene/polymer interfaces compared to as-

provided GNPs. Thus, 2 wt.% of PMMA-NH-GNPs in PMMA was found to increase the 

elastic modulus, strength and strain at break of PMMA, whereas the incorporation of 

unmodified GNPs showed poor levels of reinforcement at all loadings. Furthermore, Tg and 

Td of PMMA were increased by 15 °C and 29 °C, respectively, by adding 5 wt.% of PMMA-

NH-GNPs, whereas incorporating unmodified GNPs led to smaller increases. This work 

offers the possibility of controlling the properties of graphene/polymer composites through 

*Corresponding authors.
cristina.valles@manchester.ac.uk; Tel: +44(0)161 306 1454
ian.kinloch@manchester.ac.uk; Tel: +44(0)161 306 3615


2

chemically tuning the graphene/polymer interface, which will have broad implications in the 

field of nanocomposites.

1. Introduction

Since its isolation, graphene has attracted strong interest for a range of applications, including 

composite materials, transistors, electronics, supercapacitors, hydrogen storage and solar cells

[1-3]. Graphene-related materials (GRMs) are of particular interest to the field of polymer 

composites due to GRMs’ exceptional mechanical, electrical and thermal properties. 

However, to achieve this potential, good dispersions of the flakes in the polymer matrix and 

strong interfaces between both components are required. Gong et al. [4] used Raman 

spectroscopy to monitor the stress transfer efficiency and breakdown of the 

graphene/polymer interface, finding that the graphene/polymer stress transfer depended on 

both s (i.e. aspect ratio of the graphene) and the parameter n (widely accepted as an effective 

measure of the interfacial stress transfer efficiency, i.e. the degree of interaction that graphene 

has with the polymer matrix). They probed that the interface between unfunctionalized 

graphene and polymer is very weak and ns > 20 is required for a sufficient reinforcement of 

the polymer. Relatively large graphene flakes will be thus needed before efficient 

reinforcement can take place in a graphene/polymer composite (> 20 µm, as we probed 

experimentally in PMMA and PP matrices [5, 6]). Alternatively, chemical modification of the 

surface or edges of the graphene flakes may significantly strengthen the interface between 

graphene and polymer, reducing the critical length (thus s) and increasing n. We recently 

showed that graphene oxide (GO) has a stronger interface with poly(methyl methacrylate)

(PMMA) relative to un-functionalized graphene. This strong interface was reasoned to be due 

to the presence of the high number of oxygen-containing functionalities on the surface of the 

GO flakes [6, 7]. However, it was found that at loadings above 1 wt.% the flake-flake 

interactions began to dominate over flake-polymer interactions, leading to the formation of 


3

agglomerates through π-π and van der Waals interactions. These aggregates inevitably caused

the deterioration of the mechanical performance of the final composite. The controlled

grafting of functional groups to the graphene related materials (GRM) surfaces could prevent 

the agglomeration of graphene sheets through steric stabilisation, whilst still promoting a

strong filler/polymer interaction, which will promote enhanced mechanical and thermal 

properties for the composites.

The grafting of aryl groups by reduction of the corresponding diazonium salts, previously 

used for carbon nanotubes (CNTs), pyrolytic graphite, glass carbon electrodes, etc. [8, 9], has

been recently applied to GO-derived materials [10-12] with the objective of improving the 

thermal and mechanical properties of polymer composites through enhanced compatibilities

between filler and polymer. However, in order to achieve stable dispersions of graphene and 

optimize the microstructure of the nanocomposites, polymer functionalization of the 

graphene surface is often necessary, particularly when non-polar polymers are used as the 

host matrix [13]. The incorporation of polymer grafted GO materials into host polymers of 

different nature has been reported to improve their compatibilities and filler/polymer 

interfaces, leading to enhanced mechanical and/or thermal properties of the nanocomposites.

For example, the incorporation of polyetheramine-functionalized GO into an epoxy resin was 

reported to render significant enhancements of the mechanical properties of the epoxy (up to 

63% in tensile strength and 90% in toughness for 0.5 wt.% filler loading), as well as of the 

thermal properties (the glass transition temperature, Tg, of the polymer was found to increase

with the addition of this filler) [14]. Epoxy-grafted-GO was recently shown to form chemical 

bonds with a polycarbonate (PC) matrix, leading to increases of the Young’s modulus and 

tensile strength by 52.3% and 5.3%, respectively, for 0.5 wt.% loaded GO-epoxy/PC

composite, showing also increased thermal stabilities with low loadings of epoxy-grafted-GO 

[15]. Similarly, nylon 6-grafted-GO/nylon 6 composites prepared using an in-situ


4

polymerization method were reported to improve the modulus of the compounds by 139% 

with the incorporation of 0.015 wt.% of the grafted GO in the polymer matrix, as well as to 

increase the degradation and the melting temperatures of the polymer [16].

Improving the compatibility and interface between carbon nanomaterials and 

thermoplastic polymers is challenging due to the polymers’ low polarity and passive surface 

chemistry. However, an approach for preparing PMMA-functionalized-exfoliated graphene 

(GPMMA) via in situ free radical polymerization can be found in the literature [17]. In that

work, the PMMA/GPMMA composites showed simultaneously improved Young’s modulus, 

tensile stress, elongation at break and thermal stability by adding only 0.5 wt.% of GPMMA, 

which the authors attribute to a good dispersion of GPMMA and strong interfacial adhesion 

between GPMMA and the PMMA matrix. Chemically reduced GO sheets grafted with 

PMMA polymer by an emulsion polymerization have been also recently reported to give an 

efficient stress-transfer in the composites through an improved dispersion and strong 

sheet/matrix interfacial interaction [18]. In a different work, PMMA chains were ‘grafted 

from’ the GO surface via atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), improving the 

toughness and thermal stability of the composites through strong interfacial interactions 

between filler and host polymer [19]. These reported ‘grafting from’ methods (i.e. in-situ

polymerization and ATRP) do not offer an easy up-scalability though, with alternative 

‘grafting to’ methods emerging as more appropriate for industrial applications. Only one

report [20] on the chemical grafting of PMMA chains to the surface of GO, leading to 

increases in Young’s modulus and yield strength of a polyvinylidene fluoride and an 

acrylonitrile butadiene styrene polymer blend through an improved compatibility between the 

immiscible pair of polymers and improved stress-transfer at their interface, has been reported 

so far to the best of our knowledge. Crucially, almost all the studies discussed above report

the modification of GO derived materials, which have intrinsic functional groups on their 


5

surfaces that facilitates the grafting reactions. It is important for industrial applications that 

alternative grafting techniques are developed for commercially available GNPs, since GNPs 

are significantly cheaper than GO and have no need for reduction to remove defects and 

restore the electrical and thermal conductivities.

We report here the first, highly scalable ‘grafting to’ method for the fabrication of

covalently-bonded, polymer-functionalized commercially available graphene. This grafting is

achieved by combining a diazonium addition reaction to give –NH2 terminated GNPs (–NH2-

GNPs) with an amidation between the –NH2 terminated GNPs and PMMA chains, to give 

PMMA grafted GNPs (PMMA-NH-GNPs). This process is specifically designed to reinforce 

PMMA composites through enhanced interfaces between filler and polymer in which the 

‘grafted’ polymer chains are acting as ‘bridges‘, connecting strongly both components of the 

composite and creating a ‘continuity’ between filler and matrix. GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-

NH-GNPs/PMMA composite systems at loadings from 0.5 wt.% to 5 wt.% were prepared 

using the solvent method. The microstructure, thermal, mechanical and electrical properties 

of these composites were evaluated and related to the different surface chemistry of the GNPs 

and, thus, to the different graphene/polymer interfaces.

2. Experimental.

2.1 Synthesis of NH2 terminated graphene nanoplatelets (NH2-GNPs)

NH2 terminated graphene platelets (NH2-GNPs) were synthesized by a nucleophilic 

substitution reaction through a spontaneous diazonium coupling reaction. In a typical 

reaction, 150 mg of graphene nanoplatelets (GNP-M25 from XG Sciences, with lateral 

dimension and thickness of ~25 µm and ~6 nm, respectively, quoted by the manufacturer) 

was initially suspended in 125 ml of acetonitrile (CH3CN) together with 1.5 g of p-phenylene 

diamine and heated up to 60 °C under mechanical stirring. Once this temperature was 

reached, 2 mL of isoamylnitrite were added to the mixture and left to react under mechanical 


6

stirring for 24h. The resultant solid was then separated by vacuum filtration, rinsed first three 

times with CH3CN and then three times with EtOH and left to dry at room temperature. This 

material was labelled as NH2-GNPs. (Both reaction time and reactants ratio were previously

optimized, details in Fig.S1, SI).

2.2 Synthesis of PMMA grafted graphene nanoplatelets (PMMA-NH-GNPs)

NH2-GNPs and PMMA powders (50/85 mg) were dispersed together in chloroform (CHCl3) 

and the mixture was stirred at 70 °C for 24 h. After that time, the reaction mixture was cooled 

down to room temperature, filtered to collect the resultant powder, washed with 50 mL of 

CHCl3 and dried. This material was labelled as PMMA-NH-GNPs.

2.3 (PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA) composite preparation

The appropriate amount of filler (PMMA-NH-GNPs or GNPs) and 1 g of PMMA were 

dissolved in 15 mL of CHCl3 using mechanical stirring at room temperature for 30 minutes to 

prepare composite materials (PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA or GNPs/PMMA) at various 

loadings from 0.5 to 5 wt.%. Composite films were prepared by depositing these dispersions 

on a Teflon dish using the solvent-casting method, followed by complete removal of the 

solvent and peeling-off of the composite films. Specimens with the desired shapes and sizes 

were cut out of these composite films for characterization. 

2.4 Characterization of the graphene materials and the composites

Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was used to characterize the microstructure of the 

composite materials using a Zeiss Ultra 55 FEG-SEM. Differential scanning calorimetry 

(DSC) was employed for the determination of the glass transition temperature (Tg) of the neat 

PMMA and the composites using a TA Q2000 DSC. Samples with a mass of approximately 

10 mg were heated to 200 °C at a rate of 10 °C /min and held there for 3 minutes, in order to 

erase any thermal history. Subsequently, the samples were cooled to 25 °C at a rate of 10 °C 

/min. The samples were then heated at 10 °C/min in order to clearly observe the Tg.


7

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was carried out using an Axis Ultra Hybrid 

spectrometer (Kratos Analytical, Manchester, United Kingdom), using monochromated Al 

Kα X-ray radiation at 1486 eV (10 mA emission at 15 kV, 150 W), under ultra-high vacuum 

at a base pressure of 1 x 10-8 mbar. Samples were pressed onto conductive copper tape. A 

charge neutraliser was used to remove any differential charging at the sample surface. 

Calibration of the binding energy (BE) scale was performed using the C 1s photoelectron 

peak at ~ 284.5 eV for graphitic carbon. Spectral deconvolution was performed using 

CASAXPS (www.casaxps.com) with Shirley-type backgrounds. Graphitic carbon was fit 

with an asymmetric peak shape analogous to those used to fit metallic peaks, due to the high 

conductivity of this carbon species. Graphitic carbon also exhibits a signature broad spectral 

feature between approximately 290-295 eV (a BE region where no other carbon species are 

expected), associated with excitation of the π- π* transition, which was fitted with one broad 

peak. While the choice of asymmetry factors for graphitic carbon is not well prescribed, they 

were optimized to fit the C1s spectrum for unmodified GNPs (where the spectra showed a 

minimal amount of other carbon species), and this was then applied to all spectra and found 

to yield satisfactory fits for all the C1s spectra consistently. This self-consistency between the 

spectra allowed for the relative amounts of graphitic carbon compared to other carbon species 

between unmodified and modified GNPs to be obtained. Other carbon species required for 

adequate fitting of the spectra included hydrocarbon at ~ 284.8 eV (fixed at an offset in BE of 

0.3 eV from graphitic carbon, given the close proximity of the peak positions), C-N at 

approximately 285.5 eV, C-O at approx. 286.5 eV, C=O at ~ 289 eV, and finally the broad 

shakeup feature above 290 eV. 

Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed at a heating rate of 10 °C/min under

nitrogen using a TGA Q500 (TA Instruments). Stress-strain curves were obtained from dog-

bone shaped specimens using an Instron 1122 machine, using a tensile rate of 0.05 mm/min 


8

and a load cell of 500 N. Micromechanical characterization was performed to follow 

interfacial stress-transfer in the nanocomposites. The shift of the Raman bands of graphene 

can be followed during deformation and it has been used to evaluate stress-transfer from the 

polymer matrix to the graphene reinforcement [4, 21]. In-situ Raman spectroscopy was 

performed on the nanocomposites deformed in four-point bending mode using a low-power 

633 nm HeNe laser in the Renishaw 2000 spectrometer, with the Raman laser beam polarized 

parallel to the tensile axis. A strain gauge attached to the surface of the specimens was used 

to determine the strain applied. Atomic force microscope (AFM) images were acquired by 

using Dimension 3100 (Bruker) for the as-received nanoplatelets and NanoWizard 4 (JPK 

Instruments) for the functionalised graphene.

The impedances of the polymer and composites were tested on 6 mm x 6 mm x 0.2 mm films

specimens using a PSM 1735 Frequency Response Analyzer from Newtons4th Ltd connected 

with Impedance Analysis Interface (IAI) at the range of frequencies from 1 to 106 Hz. The 

specific conductivities (σ) of the materials were calculated from the measured impedances 

using:

σ (ω) = |Y* (ω)| 

𝑡

𝐴 = 

1

𝑍∗ ×

𝑡

𝐴
Equation (1)

where Y*(ω) is the complex admittance, Z* is the complex impedance, t and A are the 

thickness and cross section area of the sample, respectively. 

3. Results and discussion

3.1 Polymer chains grafting to the GNPs

NH2-terminated graphene nanoplatelets (NH2-GNPs) prepared by a simple diazonium 

coupling were used here as ‘platform’ to graft the PMMA chains covalently to the 

nanoplatelets through an amidation between –NH2 groups and the PMMA chains to render

PMMA-NH-GNPs (PMMA undergoes this hydrolysis reaction due to the presence of 


9

methacrylic acid comonomer, as shown in the supplier’s FT-IR), as schematically represented 

in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Scheme of the reaction developed to fabricate polymer functionalized GNPs.

The first step of the process involved a spontaneous diazonium coupling reaction 

performed on the as-received GNPs. It was previously reported by Dyke et al. [22] the ability 

of a diazonium salt to receive an electron from a carbon surface, liberating N2 and forming 

the corresponding active radical. Since the formed active radical and the carbon ‘substrate’ 

are in close proximity, they eventually couple to each other and a covalent bond is formed

between them. Raman spectroscopy, XPS and TGA analysis gave evidence of a successful 

diazonium coupling between the GNPs and the p-phenylene diamine, leading to the synthesis 

of NH2-terminated graphene nanoplatelets through a similar mechanism to the one described

by Dyke et al. [22].

The increased ID/IG values revealed by Raman spectroscopy for the NH2-GNPs relative to 

the starting GNPs (Fig. 2a) suggested a successful attachment of the –NH2 groups to the 

nanoplatelets, since the functional groups are detected as defects on the carbon network by 


10

Raman spectroscopy. (The materials had been thoroughly rinsed, which further suggests

covalent functionalization rather than just surface absorption). TGA analysis performed on 

the NH2-GNPs (Fig. 3a) showed a weight loss of ~2.7 wt.% between 160 °C and 210 °C, 

which we relate to the removal of the –NH2 functional groups attached to the GNPs (i.e. the 

thermal decomposition of p-phenylene diamine), and further evidenced the successful 

attachment of the diamine groups to the GNPs. In order to probe that this attachment occurs 

through the formation of covalent bonds, XPS analysis is required. High resolution XPS C1s 

spectra (Fig. 2b-d) showed the presence of -C-N- for the NH2-GNPs, whereas no N was 

found in the starting GNPs. (For further evidence, high resolution N1s XPS spectra are shown 

in Fig. S2, SI). The amount of N incorporated on the GNPs during the diazonium coupling 

was found ~2.34 at.%, which corresponds to a N/C ratio of ~1/40 and suggests a degree of 

functionalization of 1 aniline group per ~40 carbons (survey XPS spectra and atomic 

composition shown in the SI).


11

Figure 2. Raman spectra of the GNPs, -NH2-GNPs and PMMA-NH-GNPs (a). High 

resolution C1s XPS spectra of the GNPs (b), NH2-GNPs (c) and PMMA-NH-GNPs (d).


12

Figure 3. Thermogravimetric curves for the graphene materials (a) and composite systems (b, 

c) at different loadings (zooms inserted). Variation of the Td with loading for the composite 

systems (d).

On the second step of the chemical procedure PMMA chains were ‘grafted to’ the GNPs 

through an amidation between the attached –NH2 groups and the PMMA chains to give 

PMMA-NH-GNPs (Fig. 1). Evidence of a successful grafting of the PMMA chains to the 

GNPs was given by Raman spectroscopy, XPS and TGA (Raman and TGA can only give 

evidence of a successful functionalization of the GNPs, whereas XPS gives evidence of a 

covalent attachment). Raman spectra showed an increase in ID/IG relative to that found for the 

as-received GNPs (Fig. 2a), which suggested successful grafting of the polymer chains, since 

they are detected as defects on the carbon network by Raman spectroscopy (the slightly 

higher ID/IG found for the PMMA grafted GNPs relative to the NH2-GNPs must be related to 


13

the incorporation of defects and/or some additional functional groups or polymer chains 

physically adsorbed onto the surface of the flakes). In agreement with the Raman results, 

TGA analysis revealed a degree of polymer grafting of ~3.8 wt.% (given by the difference in 

weight loss found for the PMMA-NH-GNPs relative to GNPs at ~400 °C, which is the 

PMMA degradation temperature, Fig. 3a). XPS results revealed increased amounts of C-N 

(due to the covalent bonding between PMMA chains and NH2-GNPs), as well as increased 

amounts of C-O, C=O and –COO (from the PMMA chains) for the PMMA-NH-GNPs (at.% 

determined by XPS compiled in Table S1; high resolution XPS N1s spectra shown in Fig.S2, 

SI), which gave strong evidence of an amidation between the -NH2 functional groups 

covalently bonded to the GNPs and the PMMA chains as the ‘grafting to’ mechanism. (As a 

control experiment, an identical reaction was performed on the as-received GNPs with no -

NH2 groups attached and no PMMA grafting could be observed, Table S1 in the SI, which

further evidences that the suggested ‘grafting to’ mechanism happens through the -NH2

groups). In addition, XPS analysis revealed the incorporation of ~2 atoms of O per atom of N

in the NH2-GNPs during the grafting reaction, which corresponds to the attachment of one 

polymer chain per -NH2, i.e. a degree of grafting of one polymer chain per ~40 atoms of C. In 

the field of composites it is important to gain control on the degree of the 

functionalization/grafting of the surface of the filler in order to ‘design’ the optimal 

graphene-polymer interface (a combination of a strong affinity between graphene and 

polymer and weak flake-flake interactions is required). We expect that the grafting of PMMA 

chains on the surface of the GNPs will enhance the compatibility/affinity between filler and 

polymer through chemical interactions due to a similar nature between the grafted polymer 

chains and the polymer matrix. The idea of controlling the level of grafting by controlling the 

level of oxidation of the starting graphene nanoplatelets should be kept in mind for future 

work.


14

3.2 GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA composites 

Both as received unmodified GNPs and the PMMA grafted GNPs (i.e. PMMA-NH-GNPs) 

were incorporated into a PMMA matrix using a solvent casting method at loadings from 0.5 

to 5 wt.%. The microstructure, thermal, mechanical and electrical properties of the 

composites were evaluated and related to both the dispersion of the flakes in the host polymer 

matrix and the strength of the graphene-polymer interface.  

3.2.1 Microstructure

The microstructure of specimens of neat PMMA and of the two series of composites at 

different loadings were evaluated by SEM, and representative micrographs of the fracture 

sections are presented in Fig.4 (SEM micrographs of the top surface of the specimens are 

shown in SI, Fig. S3).

Figure 4. SEM micrographs of the fracture surface of: (a) PMMA, (b) GNPs/PMMA-0.5 

wt.%, (c) GNPs/PMMA-5wt.%, (d) PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA-0.5 wt.%, (e) PMMA-NH-

GNPs/PMMA-2 wt.%, (f) PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA-5 wt.%.

Fig.4 reveals a smooth surface for the neat PMMA specimen, whereas rougher surfaces 

were found for the composites at the studied loadings, with this ‘roughness’ increasing with 


15

loading of both modified and unmodified nanofillers. Fig.4(a-c) shows the presence of 

agglomerates of GNPs for the GNPs/PMMA composites at all loadings studied, from a 

loading as low as 0.5 wt.% and showing increasing amounts of agglomerates at higher

loadings. (In thin composite films, below 1mm thick, prepared using the solvent-casting 

method, the effect of a different density between filler and polymer must be also contributing 

to this non-homogeneous distribution observed by SEM). However, for the PMMA-NH-

GNPs/PMMA composites (Fig.4(d-f)) much lower levels of agglomeration were observed at 

all the loadings studied relative to the GNPs/PMMA ones with identical loadings. (At 0.5 

wt.% content of PMMA-NH-GNPs, Fig.4d, practically no agglomerates could be found, 

whereas only a few agglomerates were observed at 5 wt.% loading, Fig.4f). SEM 

micrographs revealed, thus, improved dispersions for the PMMA grafted GNPs based 

composite system relative to the unmodified GNPs based one at all loadings studied. (This 

finding is supported by optical microscopy images of composites films at low loadings, as 

shown in Fig. S7). We relate this observation to an enhanced interaction/compatibility 

between graphene and host polymer after grafting PMMA chains to the GNPs. (We consider 

that this enhanced compatibility plays an important role in overcoming the different density 

issue between filler and polymer commented above, and it is expected to have important 

implications in the mechanical performance of the overall composites).

In addition, high-resolution SEM micrographs (Fig.S4) show the few-layered structure 

typical of the GNPs employed here in one flake embedded into the host polymer, which

suggested no exfoliation of the nanoplatelets taking place during the process of 

functionalization, in agreement with X-ray diffraction performed on both as-received and 

chemically-modified GNPs (Fig.S5).


16

3.2.2 Thermal properties and non-oxidative thermal stability of the composites

DSC analysis was performed on the two series of composites (GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-

NH-GNPs/PMMA) and the results are shown in Fig.5. The values found for the glass 

transition temperature (Tg) of all the composites prepared were higher than that found for the 

pure polymer, and they were found to increase with loading up to 5 wt.%. In general, 

increased values of Tg for the nanocomposites with respect to neat polymer are typically

related to the presence of attractive interactions or enhanced interfacial adhesion between the 

polar functional groups of the filler and the polymer, due to a chemical bond or other type of 

interaction between the host polymer and the surface of the filler [23-25].

Figure 5. DSC of the GNPs/PMMA (a) and the PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA (b) series of 

composites. Variation of the Tg with loading of filler (c).


17

At 0.5 wt.% loading the values for Tg found for both composite systems were relatively 

close to each other, whereas at higher loadings the PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA system showed 

considerably higher Tg values, with the maximum difference between both systems observed 

at loadings of 2 wt.%. (The Tg reached maximum increases of 10 °C and 15 °C for 5 wt.% 

loadings of unmodified GNPs and PMMA-NH-GNPs, respectively, Fig.5c). We attribute the 

higher Tg found for the polymer grafted GNPs based system to better dispersions and 

enhanced interfacial interactions between graphene and host polymer relative to the 

unmodified GNPs, which becomes more evident with increasing filler contents. Similar 

increases (~15 °C) in the Tg of polystyrene (PS) were found for PS-grafted-GO/PS 

composites prepared by ATRP [26], whereas a maximum increment of ~24 °C was reported 

for polymer-grafted-GO/polyimide composite films prepared by in-situ polymerization [27]. 

This behaviour is attributed to the uniformly dispersed large aspect ratio graphene sheets with 

strong interfacial adhesion between filler and polymer, in total agreement with our 

observations.

Thermogravimetric analysis of both composite systems was carried under a nitrogen 

atmosphere in order to investigate how the chemical modification of the surface of the GNPs

influences the non-oxidative thermal stability of the composites relative to the neat polymer,

and the results are shown in Fig.3. Figs.3(b,c) show similar weight loss curve profiles for 

polymer and composites, with important enhancements of the thermal stability of the polymer

observed by adding the studied nanofillers. (The three-step thermal degradation observed for 

the polymer and the composites corresponds to a mixture of poly(methyl methacrylate) and 

other methyl methacrylate copolymers). Furthermore, TGA analysis revealed higher values

for the thermal degradation temperature of the PMMA (Td, defined here as the temperature at 

30% weight loss) with increasing loading of both fillers (Fig.3d). The improvement observed 

in the thermal stability of the polymer must be attributed to the formation of a high aspect


18

ratio, heat-resistant graphene network in the host polymer matrix that acts as a barrier 

inhibiting the emission of small gaseous molecules and restraining the attack of free radicals 

generated during the thermal decomposition of the polymer, slowing thus the non-oxidative

thermal degradation of the nanocomposites compared with the neat polymer [7, 28]. For the 

composites prepared with PMMA-NH-GNPs this effect is considerably more pronounced 

relative to the ones prepared with unmodified GNPs (Td of the polymer was increased by ~29 

°C with the addition of 5 wt.% loading of PMMA-NH-GNPs, whereas it was observed to 

increase only by ~7 °C for an identical loading of unmodified GNPs), showing superior 

thermal stabilities. We attribute this observation to the existence of stronger interfaces 

between filler and host polymer for the modified GNPs, facilitating the capture of the 

radicals. These results are in agreement with other works reporting improved thermal 

stabilities of epoxy-grafted-GO/PC [15] and PMMA-grafted-GO/PMMA [19] composites, 

which the authors also attribute to stronger interfaces achieved through polymer grafting of 

the graphene nanofillers.

3.2.3 Mechanical properties of the composites (Tensile testing).

The mechanical properties for both series of composites were evaluated by tensile testing. 

The results show a glassy polymeric behaviour for the neat polymer and all the composites 

prepared here (Fig.6). The addition of as-received non-functionalized GNPs into the PMMA 

matrix led to a very poor reinforcement of the matrix at all studied loadings (only an increase 

in modulus by ~7% could be observed at 0.5 wt.%, with deterioration of the mechanical 

performance at higher contents). However, the incorporation of PMMA-grafted GNPs into 

the polymer was found to lead to important reinforcements, with a maximum increase in the 

modulus of the polymer of 24% found for the optimal 2 wt.% loading. No further 

reinforcement was observed at higher loadings though due to the formation of agglomerates 

of PMMA-NH-GNPs, as revealed by SEM, Fig.4. (The formation of agglomerates of 


19

graphene through π-π interactions and van der Waals forces has been widely observed and 

reported in similar polymer composites).

Fig. 6. Stress-strain curves obtained for GNPs/PMMA (a) and PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA (b) 

composite systems. Variation of the Young’s modulus (c), stress at break (d) and strain at 

break (e) with loading for the two systems studied. Raman G band shift with strain applied to 

the 1 wt.% loading composites (f). (Errors were calculated from measuring at least seven

specimens per loading for the tensile testing and two for the Raman bending).


20

Since a linear increase of modulus was found up to the optimal 2 wt.% loading for the 

PMMA grafted GNPs system, the rule of mixtures could be applied to determine the effective 

modulus (Ef) of the fillers in the nanocomposites using:  

m
m
f
f
c
E V
E V
E
+
=
Equation (2)

where Ec is the Young’s modulus of the composite, Ef, Em are the Young’s modulus of the 

filler and matrix, respectively, and Vf and Vm are the volume fractions of the filler and the 

matrix, respectively, within the nanocomposite (with 
Vf +Vm =1
). The rule of mixtures has 

been widely employed to determine the effective modulus of graphene materials, Eeff, in 

similar systems [29], which could be calculated from Ef using Equation (3):

Ef = Eeffη0ηl
Equation (3)

where η0 is the Krenchel orientation factor that depends on the average orientation of the 

particles [30] and ηl is the length parameter which accounts for poor stress-transfer at the 

filler-matrix interface for particles with small lateral dimensions (ηl = 1 for perfect stress-

transfer and ηl = 0 for no stress-transfer). For this calculation we employed η0 = 8/15 [31]

since SEM micrographs revealed a random orientation of the GNPs in the polymer matrix at 

all loadings studied of the two series of composites (results from polarized Raman 

spectroscopy, shown in the SI, revealed that very weak levels of orientation of the flakes in 

the matrix are promoted during the preparation of these composites, which can be thus 

ignored for these calculations), and ηl = 1 assuming a perfect stress-transfer. From the slopes 

of the lines up to the optimal loading in Fig.6c values of Ef = 24 GPa and Eeff = 45 ± 26 GPa 

were determined for the PMMA grafted nanoplatelets, which are higher than those found for 

the non-modified GNPs (Ef = 6 GPa and Eeff = 11 GPa).

Although the tensile testing results revealed good levels of reinforcement for the PMMA-

NH-GNPs/PMMA composites (considerably superior than those found for the non-modified 

GNPs based composites), the effective modulus found here for this filler was still much lower 


21

than the 350 GPa theoretically predicted for the mechanical modulus of GNPs [32, 33].

Young et al. [32] recently developed a theory which explains why it is not possible to realise 

the promised 1 TPa or 350 GPa moduli for graphene or GNPs, respectively, in low modulus 

polymeric matrices. This theory predicts that the Young's modulus of a nanocomposite will 

be independent of the Young‘s modulus of the nanofiller, and highlights the importance of 

three structural parameters: (i) aspect ratio of the nanofiller, (ii) orientation of the nanofiller,

and (iii) strength of the interface with the matrix (the theory shows that a strong nanofiller-

matrix interface leads to good stress-transfer and hence better reinforcement than a weak 

interface). Even though the effective modulus found here for the polymer-grafted-GNPs is 

relatively low, the enhanced dispersions and strong filler-polymer interfaces achieved by 

grafting polymer chains on the reinforcements was found to lead to important levels of 

reinforcement, which suggests the importance of modifying chemically the interface between 

filler and host polymer to achieve very good mechanical performance, in agreement with the 

theory commented above.

Interestingly, a progressive increase of both strain (~13%) and stress at break (~28%) with

loading was also observed up to the optimal 2 wt.% loading of the PMMA-grafted-graphene, 

whereas no improvement on either the stress or the strain at break was found when the non-

functionalized GNPs were incorporated into the matrix at all studied loadings (Fig.6), 

similarly to previously reported graphene/polymer or GO/polymer composites [29], which 

were typically related to the formation of agglomerates at the interface acting as failure 

points. The enhanced interface between GNPs and PMMA achieved through polymer 

grafting of the flakes must be the responsible for the enhanced stress and strain at break

observed here, in agreement with other work reporting significant enhancements in the 

mechanical properties of polymer matrices with the addition of small amounts of polymer-

grafted-GO materials [14-16, 18-20, 34].


22

In general terms, the mechanical behaviour of both unmodified and PMMA-grafted GNPs 

were found similar to each other at low loadings (~0.5 wt.%), whereas at higher loadings the 

PMMA-grafted-GNPs system showed a superior mechanical performance, in agreement with 

our results from DSC (the values for Tg were higher for the grafted-GNPs/composites above 

0.5 wt.% content). This observation suggested a relatively good dispersion of the unmodified 

GNPs at loadings below 0.5 wt.% (evidenced by SEM, Fig.4), with agglomeration and 

subsequent deterioration of the thermal and mechanical performance at higher contents. The 

superior mechanical performance observed for the PMMA-grafted-GNPs at loadings above 

0.5 wt.% must be attributed to a combination of better dispersions of the flakes in the host 

polymer relative to the unmodified GNPs (up to 2 wt.% loading) and stronger flake-polymer 

interfaces. The different surface chemistry of the flakes must be the responsible for this 

findings, since no other significant modifications on the structure of the flakes could be found 

(X-Ray diffraction revealed that no exfoliation happened during the chemical procedure 

described in this work, whereas AFM characterization showed no significant variation on the 

dimensions of the flakes during the process, as shown in SI). AFM showed the presence of 

thicker flakes after PMMA grafting though, which we relate to the formation of a PMMA 

‘layer’ covering the surface of the flakes, which must be the responsible for the improved 

filler-polymer interface observed.

In general, the composites based on PMMA-NH-GNPs presented here show better 

mechanical performance relative to previously reported works which use unfunctionalized 

GNPs, graphene oxide, CNTs or other inorganic nanofillers. The use of unmodified GNPs in 

PMMA was probed to lead to important increases in the Young’s modulus of the polymer (78 

%) up to high loadings (~20 wt.%) [6], whereas the use of graphene with a chemically 

modified surface was probed to effectively reduce the amount of graphene filler required to 

achieve comparable levels of reinforcement. (Indeed, ~1 wt.% was typically found as the 


23

optimal loading for GO/PMMA composites [7], reaching ~37 % improvement in modulus

and 22 % in strength (relative to pure polymer), with deterioration of the mechanical 

properties of the overall composite at higher loadings due to the formation of agglomerates of 

GO in the matrix). The presence of functionalities on the surface of graphene promotes 

simultaneously both strong graphene-polymer and graphene-graphene interactions: at 

loadings below 1 wt.% the graphene-polymer interactions dominate the system, leading to 

good dispersions of the GO in the polymer matrix and, thus, to enhanced mechanical 

performance, whereas at higher loadings the flake-flake interactions are dominating the 

system and the formation of agglomerates through π-π interactions deteriorate the mechanical 

properties of the composites. Grafting PMMA chains on the surface of the GNPs provides an 

improved compatibility between filler and polymer while reducing the flake-flake 

interactions, which leads to increased optimal loading (2 wt.%). Although the increment in 

modulus (24%) is slightly lower than that observed for GO (37%), the tensile stress and strain 

are considerably higher than those observed for the GO/PMMA system. (Composites based 

on graphene and other related materials typically show a very brittle behaviour and they do 

not typically increase the stress at break either, due to the formation of small agglomerates in 

the matrix acting as failure points [29]. However, the PMMA-grafted-GNPs reported here led 

to increments of both these properties).

The results reported here are also superior to those typically observed when using CNTs 

as fillers in thermoplastics, mainly due to the difficulty to achieve good dispersions of CNTs 

in the polymer matrix at high loadings combined with a lower processability, relative to 

graphene related materials. In general, CNTs-based PMMA composites require higher 

loadings of filler (≥ 3 wt.%) to observe increased moduli and strengths, while elongation at 

break is not enhanced due to the brittle nature of these materials [35, 36]. Strength of the 

composite was found to improve at lower CNTs loading using functionalized nanotubes 


24

compared to unfunctionalized nanotubes [37, 38], due to improved dispersions, although no 

improvements in the elongation at break were found. Finally, regarding the use of 

nanoparticles with different morphology to reinforce PMMA, a lot of work has been done in 

developing chemical strategies to modify the compatibility between PMMA and SiO2

nanoparticles, for example, in order to improve the dispersion and the mechanical 

performance through enhanced compatibility and polymer-filler interactions. These strategies

have been reported to successfully lead to improved elastic modulus and scratch resistance 

[39], surface hardness, flexural strength, impact strength as well as tensile strength and 

modulus [40, 41] in thin films. However, this enhanced mechanical performance still has to 

be probed in bulk composite materials to be attractive from an industrial point of view. This 

discussion evidences that the particle size and dispersion definitely play an important role by 

tuning the surface load transfer, which affects the final materials load capacity. Graphene 

materials lead to considerably better mechanical performances (including modulus, strength 

and strain at break) due to higher surface area and 2D nature, relative to CNTs and other 

inorganic nanoparticles, through improved interfaces and larger surfaces for chemical 

modification.

3.2.4 Stress-induced Raman Band Shifts.

The nature of the interface between GNPs and the host polymer in the two composite systems 

studied was evaluated by Raman spectroscopy. In order to understand the observed 

mechanical behaviour and the mechanics of these reinforcements, we evaluated the stress-

transfer at the graphene-polymer interface, using Raman spectroscopy. Fig.6f shows the 

position of the Raman G band determined in the nanocomposites as a function of strain for 1

wt.% loaded composite specimens. The rate of the shift of the Raman bands with the applied 

strain in a nanocomposite is known to be proportional to the effective Young’s modulus of a 

graphene-based reinforcement [4, 21]. The knowledge of the Grüneisen parameter for 


25

graphene [42], which revealed a Raman G-band rate shift of -30 cm-1/% strain for a sheet of 

graphene with a Young’s modulus of 1050 GPa [43], allows us to determine the effective 

Young’s modulus of our graphene filler from Raman spectroscopy (ER), using Equation (4):

ER = −

d𝜔(G)

d𝜀
×

1050

−30 GPa
Equation (4)

where −

d𝜔(G)

d𝜀
is the G band rate shift in cm-1 per % applied strain.

Hence the slope of the lines observed in Fig.6f for the PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA 

composite sample is an indication of the effective modulus and stress-transfer from the 

polymer to the graphene occurring at the interface (no shift was found for the GNPs/PMMA 

sample at identical loading). The G band shift rate of 3 ±1 cm-1/% observed for the PMMA-

NH-GNPs/PMMA sample led to values of effective modulus of ~100 ± 40 GPa using

Equation (4), which is in agreement with the results obtained experimentally using tensile 

testing in Section 3.2.3. (This is about twice the value of the mechanical modulus, which is

reasonable as the Raman tends to pick out large aligned flakes and tend to generate higher 

modulus values [29]). There is no need to use the Krenchel orientation factor [30] in this case 

as the polarised laser beam detects predominately those flakes that are aligned parallel to the 

tensile axis [44]. This observation from polarized Raman gives a direct evidence of a stronger

interface between graphene and polymer after polymer chain grafting relative to the 

unmodified GNPs based system, which is in agreement with the experimental evidence found 

above from the thermal and mechanical characterization performed on these composite 

systems. In addition, high resolution SEM images of the fracture surface of these two 

composite materials (Figure S4, SI) revealed that the flakes remain more embedded in the 

polymer matrix after fracture with less voids at the interface between the functionalized 

graphene flakes and the polymer matrix, relative to the as-received GNPs, which gives

further evidence of a stronger interface/interaction between the functionalized GNPs and the 

polymer matrix. Due to the similar nature of the polymer chains grafted on the GNPs and the 


26

polymer matrix chemical interactions between the chemically modified filler and the matrix 

are expected, which must be responsible for this better compatibility and stronger interface.

3.2.5 Electrical properties of the GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA composites.

The electrical conductivity of both GNPs/PMMA and PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA series of 

composites at loadings from 0.5 to 10 wt.% were tested and the results are shown in Fig.S6,

in the SI. The GNPs/PMMA system behaved as a percolated system, showing a percolation 

threshold ~3.5 wt.% and reaching maximum conductivities of ~0.04 S/cm. The PMMA-NH-

GNPs/PMMA system, however, did not show electrical conductivity at any loading up to 5 

wt.%. In order to explain this observation we should consider two important points: (i) the 

disruption of the Csp2 network typical of graphenic/graphitic materials, and (ii) the dispersion 

of the nanofiller in the polymer matrix. The functionalization of graphene related materials, 

such as the grafting of PMMA chains onto the surface of the GNPs reported here, is known to 

generate a ‘disruption’ of the Csp2 network. Some C=C bonds (which are responsible for the 

electrical conductivity typically measured for graphene/graphite) open in order to incorporate

these functionalities, which generates a combination of Csp2 and Csp3. This generation of 

Csp3 domains typical of functionalized graphene materials leads to lower intrinsic electrical 

conductivities relative to the non-functionalized ones (in which the Csp2 domains are 

dominating). That is the main reason why it was not possible to measure electrical 

conductivity for the PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA composite system at any studied loading (up 

to 10 wt.% loading). In addition to this disruption of the Csp2 network, the enhanced 

dispersion found for the modified nanoplatelets must be also playing an important role in the 

electrical behaviour. It is known that very good dispersions of flakes in the matrix tend to 

deteriorate the conductivity due to an increasing difficulty for the creation of a conductive 

path throughout the composite material. The good dispersion observed for the functionalized 

flakes must be contributing to the observed deterioration of the electrical conductivity. A 


27

combination of the disruption of their Csp2 network and the enhanced dispersions of the 

flakes in the host matrix achieved with this chemical modification was probed to transform 

electrically conductive composite materials into insulating ones. 

4. Conclusions

PMMA grafted graphene nanoplatelets were successfully prepared using a simple diazonium 

coupling reaction to give NH2-terminated flakes followed by an amidation reaction between 

the NH2 groups and PMMA chains (PMMA-NH-GNPs) in order to improve the compatibility 

of graphene with a PMMA host matrix through stronger filler-polymer interactions. Raman

spectroscopy, XPS and TGA analysis revealed successful covalent attachment, corresponding 

to 1 polymer chain per ~40 atoms of C. The polymer grafted graphene was found to render

important improvements on the mechanical performance of PMMA composites (including 

improvements on the elastic modulus, stress and strain at break) up to the optimal 2 wt.%

loading, whereas poor reinforcement was observed with the addition of unmodified GNPs at 

all studied loadings. In addition, enhanced thermal stabilities and increased Tg up to high 

loadings (5 wt.%) were found for the PMMA-NH-GNPs/PMMA system relative to both pure 

polymer and the GNPs/PMMA system. We attribute this higher mechanical and thermal 

performance of the polymer-grafted-GNPs system relative to the unmodified graphene based 

one to improved dispersions of the flakes in the host polymer matrix and stronger 

graphene/polymer interfaces, as revealed by SEM and Raman spectroscopy, respectively, 

caused by the polymer chains grafted to the graphene acting as ‘bridges’ and strongly 

connecting graphene and host polymer in the composites. This work offers the possibility of 

improving and controlling the physical properties and functionality of graphene/polymer 

composites through chemically tuning the graphene/polymer interface, which will broaden

considerably the range of applications in the field of graphene based nanocomposites. The 

method developed here shows great potential for industrial applications due to an easy 


28

fabrication procedure, high productivity (> 70 wt.%) and the use of commercially available 

GNPs as starting material. Further work and investigation is still required, however, to 

optimize the process, maximizing the yield and minimizing both the use of solvents and the 

generation of waste products.

Acknowledgements. This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 

2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 785219. IAK also 

acknowledges the Royal Academy of Engineering and Morgan Advanced Materials. In 

addition, we would like to acknowledge The Henry Royce Institute for Advanced Materials, 

funded through EPSRC grants EP/R00661X/1 and EP/P025021/1, for access to the atomic 

force microscope. 

References

[1] Park S, Ruoff RS. Chemical methods for the production of graphenes. Nat Nanotechnol. 

2009;4(4):217-224.

[2] Geim AK. Graphene: Status and prospects. Science. 2009;324(5934):1530-1534.

[3] Geim AK, Novoselov KS. The rise of graphene. Nat Mater. 2007;6(3):183-191.

[4] Gong L, Kinloch IA, Young RJ, Riaz I, Jalil R, Novoselov KS. Interfacial stress transfer 

in a graphene monolayer nanocomposite. Adv Mater. 2010;22(24):2694-2697.

[5] Vallés C, Abdelkader AM, Young RJ, Kinloch IA. Few layer graphene-polypropylene 

nanocomposites: The role of flake diameter. Faraday Discussions. 2014;173:379-390.

[6] Vallés C, Abdelkader AM, Young RJ, Kinloch IA. The effect of flake diameter on the 

reinforcement of few-layer graphene-PMMA composites. Compos Sci Technol. 2015;111:17-

22.


29

[7] Vallés C, Kinloch IA, Young RJ, Wilson NR, Rourke JP. Graphene oxide and base-

washed graphene oxide as reinforcements in PMMA nanocomposites. Compos Sci Technol. 

2013;88:158-164.

[8] Bahr JL, Yang JP, Kosynkin DV, Bronikowski MJ, Smalley RE, Tour JM. 

Functionalization of carbon nanotubes by electrochemical reduction of aryl diazonium salts: 

A bucky paper electrode. J Am Chem Soc. 2001;123(27):6536-6542.

[9] Kariuki JK, McDermott MT. Nucleation and growth of functionalized aryl films on 

graphite electrodes. Langmuir. 1999;15(19):6534-6540.

[10] Liu MC, Duan YX, Wang Y, Zhao Y. Diazonium functionalization of graphene 

nanosheets and impact response of aniline modified graphene/bismaleimide nanocomposites. 

Mater Design. 2014;53:466-474.

[11] Park OK, Hahm MG, Lee S, Joh HI, Na SI, Vajtai R, et al. In Situ Synthesis of 

Thermochemically Reduced Graphene Oxide Conducting Nanocomposites. Nano Lett. 

2012;12(4):1789-1793.

[12] Yu DS, Kuila T, Kim NH, Lee JH. Enhanced properties of aryl diazonium salt-

functionalized graphene/poly(vinyl alcohol) composites. Chem Eng J. 2014;245:311-322.

[13] Balazs AC, Emrick T, Russell TP. Nanoparticle polymer composites: Where two small 

worlds meet. Science. 2006;314(5802):1107-1110.

[14] Guan LZ, Wan YJ, Gong LX, Yan D, Tang LC, Wu LB, et al. Toward effective and 

tunable interphases in graphene oxide/epoxy composites by grafting different chain lengths of 

polyetheramine onto graphene oxide. J Mater Chem A. 2014;2(36):15058-15069.

[15] Shen B, Zhai WT, Tao MM, Lu DD, Zheng WG. Chemical functionalization of 

graphene oxide toward the tailoring of the interface in polymer composites. Compos Sci 

Technol. 2013;77:87-94.


30

[16] Nguyen L, Choi SM, Kim DH, Kong NK, Jung PJ, Park SY. Preparation and 

characterization of nylon 6 compounds using the nylon 6-grafted GO. Macromol Res. 

2014;22(3):257-263.

[17] Wang JL, Shi ZX, Ge Y, Wang Y, Fan JC, Yin J. Solvent exfoliated graphene for 

reinforcement of PMMA composites prepared by in situ polymerization. Mater Chem Phys. 

2012;136(1):43-50.

[18] Gong LX, Pei YB, Han QY, Zhao L, Wu LB, Jiang JX, et al. Polymer grafted reduced 

graphene oxide sheets for improving stress transfer in polymer composites. Compos Sci 

Technol. 2016;134:144-152.

[19] Gonalves G, Marques PAAP, Barros-Timmons A, Bdkin I, Singh MK, Emami N, et al. 

Graphene oxide modified with PMMA via ATRP as a reinforcement filler. J Mater Chem. 

2010;20(44):9927-9934.

[20] Kar GP, Biswas S, Bose S. Tailoring the interface of an immiscible polymer blend by a 

mutually miscible homopolymer grafted onto graphene oxide: outstanding mechanical 

properties. Phys Chem Chem Phys. 2015;17(3):1811-1821.

[21] Frank O, Mohr M, Maultzsch J, Thomsen C, Riaz I, Jalil R, et al. Raman 2D-band 

splitting in graphene: Theory and experiment. ACS Nano. 2011;5(3):2231-2239.

[22] Dyke CA, Tour JM. Unbundled and highly functionalized carbon nanotubes from 

aqueous reactions. Nano Lett. 2003;3(9):1215-1218.

[23] Qiao R, Catherine Brinson L. Simulation of interphase percolation and gradients in 

polymer nanocomposites. Compos Sci Technol. 2009;69(3-4):491-499.

[24] Bansal A, Yang H, Li C, Cho K, Benicewicz BC, Kumar SK, et al. Quantitative 

equivalence between polymer nanocomposites and thin polymer films. Nat Mater. 

2005;4(9):693-698.


31

[25] Ellison CJ, Torkelson JM. The distribution of glass-transition temperatures in 

nanoscopically confined glass formers. Nat Mater. 2003;2(10):695-700.

[26] Fang M, Wang KG, Lu HB, Yang YL, Nutt S. Covalent polymer functionalization of 

graphene nanosheets and mechanical properties of composites. J Mater Chem. 

2009;19(38):7098-7105.

[27] Abbasi S, Carreau PJ, Derdouri A, Moan M. Rheological properties and percolation in 

suspensions of multiwalled carbon nanotubes in polycarbonate. Rheologica Acta. 

2009;48(9):943-959.

[28] Papageorgiou DG, Terzopoulou Z, Fina A, Cuttica F, Papageorgiou GZ, Bikiaris DN, et 

al. Enhanced thermal and fire retardancy properties of polypropylene reinforced with a hybrid 

graphene/glass-fibre filler. Compos Sci Technol. 2018;156:95-102.

[29] Papageorgiou DG, Kinloch IA, Young RJ. Mechanical properties of graphene and 

graphene-based nanocomposites. Prog Mater Sci. 2017;90:75-127.

[30] Krenchel H. Fibre Reinforcement. Akademisk Forlag: Copenhagen, 1964.

[31] Li Z, Young RJ, Wilson NR, Kinloch IA, Vallés C, Li Z. Effect of the orientation of 

graphene-based nanoplatelets upon the Young's modulus of nanocomposites. Compos Sci 

Technol. 2016;123:125-133.

[32] Young RJ, Liu MF, Kinloch IA, Li SH, Zhao X, Vallés C, et al. The mechanics of 

reinforcement of polymers by graphene nanoplatelets. Compos Sci Technol. 2018;154:110-

116.

[33] Gong L, Young RJ, Kinloch IA, Riaz I, Jalil R, Novoselov KS. Optimizing the 

reinforcement of polymer-based nanocomposites by graphene. ACS Nano. 2012;6(3):2086-

2095.

[34] Liao WH, Yang SY, Wang JY, Tien HW, Hsiao ST, Wang YS, et al. Effect of Molecular 

Chain Length on the Mechanical and Thermal Properties of Amine-Functionalized Graphene 


32

Oxide/Polyimide Composite Films Prepared by In Situ Polymerization. ACS Appl Mater 

Inter. 2013;5(3):869-877.

[35] Pal K. Effect of different nanofillers on mechanical and dynamic behavior of PMMA 

based nanocomposites. Compos Commun. 2016;1:25-28.

[36] Ben David O, Banks-Sills L, Aboudi J, Fourman V, Eliasi R, Simhi T, et al. Evaluation 

of the Mechanical Properties of PMMA Reinforced with Carbon Nanotubes - Experiments 

and Modeling. Exp Mech. 2014;54(2):175-186.

[37] Mathur RB, Pande S, Singh BP, Dhami TL. Electrical and mechanical properties of 

multi-walled carbon nanotubes reinforced PMMA and PS composites. Polym Composite. 

2008;29(7):717-727.

[38] Madeshwaran SR, Kwon JK, Cho JW. Functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes 

with hyperbranched aromatic polyamide for poly(methyl methacrylate) composites. Fiber 

Polym. 2013;14(2):182-187.

[39] Qu M, Meth JS, Blackman GS, Cohen GM, Sharp KG, Van Vliet KJ. Tailoring and 

probing particle-polymer interactions in PMMA/silica nanocomposites. Soft Matter. 

2011;7(18):8401-8408.

[40] Hong RY, Fu HP, Zhang YJ, Liu L, Wang J, Li HZ, et al. Surface-modified silica 

nanoparticles for reinforcement of PMMA. J Appl Polym Sci. 2007;105(4):2176-2184.

[41] Stojanovic D, Orlovic A, Markovic S, Radmilovic V, Uskokovic PS, Aleksic R.

Nanosilica/PMMA composites obtained by the modification of silica nanoparticles in a 

supercritical carbon dioxide-ethanol mixture. J Mater Sci. 2009;44(23):6223-6232.

[42] Mohiuddin TMG, Lombardo A, Nair RR, Bonetti A, Savini G, Jalil R, et al. Uniaxial 

strain in graphene by Raman spectroscopy: G peak splitting, Grüneisen parameters, and 

sample orientation. Physical Review B. 2009;79(20):205433.


33

[43] Li Z, Young RJ, Kinloch IA. Interfacial stress transfer in graphene oxide 

nanocomposites. ACS Appl Mater & Inter. 2013;5(2):456-463.

[44] Young RJ, Kinloch IA, Gong L, Novoselov KS. The mechanics of graphene 

nanocomposites: A review. Compos Sci Technol. 2012;72(12):1459-1476.


