1

Broadly-tunable smart glazing using an ultra-thin phase-change material

Nathan Youngblood*,1,§, Clément Talagrand2, Benjamin Porter1, Carmelo Guido Galante3, 
Steven Kneepkens3, Syed Ghazi Sarwat1, Dmitry Yarmolich4, Ruy S. Bonilla1, Peiman 
Hosseini2, Robert Taylor5, and Harish Bhaskaran*,1

1Department of Materials, University of Oxford, UK
2Bodle Technologies Ltd., Begbroke, UK
3Eckersley O’Callaghan Ltd, London, UK
4Plasma App Ltd., Didcot, UK
5Department of Physics, University of Oxford, UK

§Current address: Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh PA, USA
*E-mail: nathan.youngblood@pitt.edu and harish.bhaskaran@materials.ox.ac.uk

Keywords: phase-change materials, energy efficiency, smart windows

Abstract

For many applications, a method for controlling the optical properties of a solid-state 

film over a broad wavelength range is highly desirable and could have significant commercial 

impact. One such application is smart glazing technology where it is necessary to harvest 

near-infrared solar radiation in the winter and reflect it in the summer—an impossibility for 

materials with fixed thermal and optical properties. Here, we experimentally demonstrate a 

smart window which uses a thin-film coating containing GeTe, a bi-stable, chalcogenide-

based phase-change material which can modulate near-infrared absorption while maintaining

neutral-colouration and constant transmission of light at visible wavelengths. We additionally

demonstrate controlled down-conversion of absorbed near-infrared energy to far-infrared 

radiation which can be used to heat a building’s interior and show that these thin-films also

serve as low-emissivity coatings, reducing heat transfer between a building and its external 

environment throughout the year. Finally, we demonstrate fast, sub-millisecond switching 

using transparent electrical heaters integrated on glass substrates. These combined properties 


2

result in a smart window that is efficient, affordable, and aesthetically pleasing—three 

aspects which are crucial for successful adoption of green technology.

Introduction

Maintaining pleasant indoor temperatures of industrial and residential buildings

consumes large amounts of energy, accounting for 20% to 40% of the national energy 

budgets in developed countries1,2. Carbon emissions associated with heating, cooling, and 

lighting both domestic and commercial buildings are particularly high in regions of the globe 

that experience large swings in the environmental temperature throughout the year—

comprising over 12% of total CO2 emissions in the UK3,4, 14% in the US5, and as much as

30% globally6. Windows account for a significant fraction of the external surface area of 

commercial buildings, and therefore energy loss; during colder months, a significant amount 

of heat is lost through windows in the winter season—as much as 25% in the US and UK and 

up to 50% in northern China7,8. In warmer months, on the other hand, windows transmit 

unwanted near-infrared solar energy which heat a building’s interior, causing an unnecessary 

load on the cooling system. Upcoming legislation, such as the EU 2021 “nearly zero-energy 

buildings” regulation9, will require smart solutions to this problem that provide significant 

energy gains without sacrificing aesthetic appeal.

Current static window solutions such as “Low-E” coatings can be used to reduce heat 

transfer10, but cannot be actively switched to make use of near-infrared solar energy in winter 

months. Electrochromic smart windows have very slow response times (often several 

minutes)11, require a continuous electric field in the “on” state12, and cause attenuation over 

the entire solar spectrum upon switching13,14. Liquid Crystal (LCD) smart window technology

switches much faster than electrochromics (several seconds), but modulates optical 

transmission via scattering and is therefore diffuse or tinted in the off state15. Photochromic

and thermochromic smart windows, such as VO2-based coatings, switch in a volatile 


3

manner16, often have unwanted colouration17, and can even incur net-energy costs to 

buildings in temperate climates18. Thus, the combination of manufacturing ease, bi-stability,

and minimal changes in visible colouration has been elusive. Here, we experimentally 

demonstrate an active thin-film smart glazing that enables control over absorption of the 

near-infrared solar spectrum without an undesirable variation in opacity upon transition. 

Through photon-phonon energy down-conversion, we harvest near-infrared energy during the 

winter and re-emit it as far-infrared blackbody radiation. This down-conversion process 

enables additional benefits, such as anti-symmetric emission where absorbed energy is 

preferentially radiated into the building while preventing internal heat from escaping. Our 

unique design has significant implications for the future of smart windows and the design of 

energy efficient buildings.

Results and Discussion

The concept of our smart window design is illustrated in Fig. 1a where a smart 

glazing containing ZnS, Ag, and 12 nm of GeTe, a chalcogenide-based phase-change 

material (PCM), is applied to the outward-facing side of the internal window pane. This 

optical stack was optimized for maximum modulation of near-infrared solar energy while 

maintaining a constant transmission for visible light. The simulated optical spectrum for such 

a stack is shown in Fig. 1c. It is remarkable that such an active coating has a total thickness 

of less than 300 nm and can be optimized such that a significant fraction of the near-infrared 

solar energy is either reflected or absorbed depending on the state of the PCM. The external 

window pane in Fig. 1a is composed of uncoated glass and is added to protect the smart 

glazing and reduce the convective heat transfer between the outside environment and internal 

climate of the building. While this extra pane is recommended to improve the efficiency of 


4

the overall unit, it does not play a significant role in our window’s optical response and we 

therefore limit our experimental efforts to the internal window containing the smart glazing.

Figure 1: Phase-change smart glazing concept. a) 3D schematic of smart window design with 
interior window pane containing the smart glazing layer. Solar radiation is filtered and the near-
infrared is selectively reflected or absorbed. Inset: Illustration of seven-layer smart glazing optical 
stack containing silver, ZnS, and a phase-change material (GeTe) layer. b) To initiate a phase-
transition from crystalline to amorphous, a short thermal pulse greater than the melting temperature 
(Tm) is applied to the PCM layer via a resistive heater. A longer pulse between the crystallization (Tx) 
and melting temperature is used to return to the crystalline state. c) Simulated transmission, reflection 
and absorption of smart glazing. Optical spectra were optimized for minimizing change in visible 
spectrum while maximizing change of absorption at near-infrared wavelengths. d) Concept of 
thermal down-conversion used in our smart window design. In winter months, near-infrared radiation 
from the sun is absorbed in the smart glazing layer and converted to heat. In the summer months, the 
PCM is switched to the amorphous phase and reflects near-infrared photons back into the external 
environment.


5

To control the transfer of near-infrared solar energy through our smart window, we 

make use of the significant (and non-volatile) modulation of GeTe’s complex refractive index 

when in the amorphous versus crystalline phase19–23. Here, both the real and imaginary 

components are modified upon crystallization resulting in increased absorption of the near-

infrared spectrum. Thermally annealing the GeTe layer to a temperature above 450 °C for a 

short period of time before rapid quenching (less than 10 µs) randomizes the atoms in the 

lattice and results in an amorphous material with low near-infrared absorption (see Fig. 1b). 

Annealing for a longer time (greater than 10 µs) at a temperature of 280 °C allows GeTe to 

recrystallize, significantly increasing the absorption of near-infrared wavelengths. This 

process is non-volatile and reversible, meaning that energy is only consumed during the 

actual switching process and no electric field is needed to maintain either the amorphous or 

crystalline state23. Combined with the optimized Ag/ZnS optical stack, energy from the near-

infrared is maximally absorbed or reflected while the transmitted visible light is minimally 

affected. In the crystalline state, the absorbed near-infrared energy is transferred to the SiO2

glass window via phonons and re-emitted into the building through thermal radiation as 

illustrated in Fig. 1d. The high emissivity of SiO2 and the relatively low emissivity of our 

optical stack (see Fig. 3c-d) allows for an efficient transfer of absorbed near-infrared energy 

to thermal radiation via this down-conversion process. Crucially, this process also allows our 

smart glazing to behave as a low-emissivity coating, which prevents far-infrared thermal 

radiation from entering or escaping the building when the PCM is in either the amorphous or 

crystalline state, which could potentially allow this active glazing to replace static low-e 

coatings while providing additional solar control.


6

Optical images of our fabricated smart windows are shown in both states in Fig. 2a-c. 

In Fig. 2a and 2b. As expected, the transmitted visible light changes very little upon phase-

transition. This is a highly desirable property over other technologies such as electrochromic 

windows where the significant change in visible transmission can cause unwanted 

disturbance to the building’s occupants during a switching cycle14. Additionally, as quantified 

in the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram shown in Fig. 2d, the colour of the transmitted light in 

Figure 2: Experimental demonstration of phase-change smart glazing. a)-c) Optical images of 
transmission and reflection for fused quartz substrates with smart glazing on one side. b)
Transmission of a white and black image from an LCD screen through samples with the smart 
glazing in both states. The optical transmission is very similar regardless of the state of the PCM 
layer. d) CIE colour map of experimentally measured transmission and reflection from samples 
shown in a). e) Measured transmission and reflection spectrum of smart glazing in both the 
amorphous and crystalline state. f) Calculated absorption spectrum from e) plotted with the AM1.5 
solar irradiance spectrum in blue. The change in absorption is broadband and covers the entire near-
infrared region. g) Change in absorbed solar irradiance between the amorphous and crystalline states 
of the smart glazing.


7

both states remains very close to the white point, which represents a flat spectral power over 

all visible wavelengths. The reflected colour shown in Fig. 2c shifts slightly toward the blue 

end of the colour gamut upon crystallization as wavelengths at the red end of the spectrum 

are more strongly absorbed.

The optical response over the entire solar spectrum is visualized in Fig. 2e where we 

plot the transmission and reflection spectra of the smart glazing when the PCM is in both the 

amorphous and crystalline state. We observe relatively uniform transmission in the visible 

(approximately 50% transmission on average), while showing broadband modulation in the 

reflection of near-infrared wavelengths. Whilst the visible transmission of our smart glazing 

leaves room for improvement, we note that our values compare favourably with 

commercially available electrochromic smart windows in their fully transmissive state13,14. 

As the transmission of the near-infrared is below 5% in both states, we attribute the observed

change in reflection to increased absorption when the PCM is in the crystalline state. We 

calculate the absorption spectra of our smart glazing in both states (𝐴 = 1 − 𝑇 − 𝑅, where 𝐴, 

𝑇, and 𝑅 are the absorption, transmission, and reflection spectra respectively) and plot them 

against the ASTM G173 solar irradiance standard24 for an air mass of AM1.5g in Fig. 2f.

Here we see that while the absorption is relatively high at visible wavelengths, the majority of 

absorption change occurs in the near-infrared. Crucially, the absorption in the near-infrared is 

low when the glazing is in the amorphous state which minimizes the amount of unwanted 

solar energy that is transferred to the building’s interior during summer months. We plot the 

change in absorbed solar irradiance in Fig. 2g and show that the majority of the modulated 

energy occurs at wavelengths greater than 700 nm which have no benefit to illuminating a 

building’s interior. Integrating the curves shown in Fig. 2e-f and weighting by the solar 

irradiance we find that 82% of unwanted near-infrared energy (780 nm to 2.5 µm) is reflected 

in the amorphous state while 42% is absorbed or transmitted in the crystalline state. This 


8

corresponds to a 130% increase in the amount of near-infrared solar energy allowed to enter a 

building by merely switching a 12 nm thick active phase-change layer.

To demonstrate that the absorbed near-infrared solar energy can indeed be down-

converted to far-infrared thermal radiation, we designed an experiment to image the 

temperature increase of our smart window when the PCM is in the amorphous and crystalline 

states (see Fig. 3a). In this experiment, we used a FLIR® thermal camera to monitor the 

temperature of three samples: uncoated window (fused quartz), window with the smart 

glazing in the amorphous state, and window with the smart glazing in the crystalline state. 

The uncoated sample provided a reference thermal emission by which to calibrate the thermal 

Figure 3: Demonstration of down-conversion of solar energy to thermal radiation. a) Experimental 
setup used to measure temperature increase in smart glazing through near-infrared absorption. A 
thermal camera is used to simultaneously measure the temperature of three samples (uncoated 
window and windows with smart glazing in the amorphous and crystalline state) as a function of 
time. b) Measured time-dependent temperature rise in the amorphous and crystalline samples. 
COMSOL® thermal simulations (dashed lines) agree well with experimental results. c) Spectral 
absorption of our smart windows ranging from the visible to far-infrared as measured from the glazed 
and unglazed surfaces. Measurements in the range of 3 µm to 25 µm were performed using FTIR and 
show a significant difference in the smart glazing versus uncoated side. d) Illustration of asymmetric 
thermal emission from window with smart glazing. The low-emissivity glazing prevents harvested 
near-infrared energy from re-emitting back into the external environment while reducing unwanted 
heat transfer through the windows regardless of the PCM state.


9

camera and was subtracted from the final results shown in Fig. 3b. To illuminate the samples, 

we used an LOT, class ABA, solar simulator calibrated to 1 sun (1 kW/m2) and an AM1.5g 

spectrum. A heat shield composed of plasterboard covered with thick aluminium foil was 

used to prevent unwanted thermal radiation from the simulator from saturating the thermal 

camera. An additional 1.3 µm thick sheet of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) was placed 

between the samples and the simulator which prevented additional convective heating or 

cooling of the samples while minimally influencing the transmitted solar spectra. Fig. 3b

shows the temperature increase of the three samples measured every 30 seconds using the 

thermal camera. Both smart windows reached steady state shortly after 2 minutes of 

illumination with a relative 79 ± 5% increase in the temperature of the crystalline sample 

compared to the amorphous one. This agrees well with the percentage change (74%) in the

total amount of solar energy (both visible and near-infrared) that is absorbed by the smart 

glazing according to the measured absorption spectra shown in Fig. 2f. We compared our 

experimental results to a simple thermal model in COMSOL Multiphysics® which included a 

uniform heat source and radiative and convective cooling boundary conditions. Using the 

convective heat transfer coefficient as a fitting parameter (12 W/m2∙K), we observe very good 

agreement between experiment and our simulation results (dashed lines in Fig. 3b).

An additional benefit gained from down-converting the solar spectrum to far-infrared 

radiation is the asymmetric transfer of absorbed near-infrared energy through our smart 

window as illustrated in Fig. 3d. As our smart glazing is highly reflective to infrared 

radiation beyond 2.5 µm, we minimize the amount of harvested thermal energy which can be 

radiated back into the environment. On the other hand, SiO2 performs as a highly emissive 

surface at temperatures around 300 K and efficiently re-emits absorbed near-infrared 

radiation into the building’s interior. This asymmetry can be seen from the absorption 

spectrum in Fig. 3c measured on both the glass and smart glazing surfaces using Fourier-


10

transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) for wavelengths between 3 µm and 25 µm. We

overlay the absorption spectra with the theoretical emission spectrum of a black body at 300 

K and observe significant overlap with far-infrared absorption from the glass side of the 

window. This overlap could be even further enhanced by adding an additional high-

emissivity coating to the glass as demonstrated previously25,26. The absorption from the smart 

glazing side, however, remains below 20% over the entire far-infrared region in both the 

crystalline and amorphous states, resulting in a low-emissivity coating. This is a distinct 

advantage over other absorption-based smart window technologies (e.g. thermo- and 

electrochromics) which require the addition of a low-emissivity coating to prevent absorbed 

solar energy from thermally radiating into the building). Due to the asymmetric emissivity 

profile of our smart window, harvested near-infrared radiation will be down-converted 

through absorption and preferentially re-emit into the building when the PCM is in the 

crystalline state (Fig. 3d). Additionally, the low-emissivity smart glazing prevents thermal 

radiation from escaping or entering a building regardless of the state of the PCM, providing 

further energy savings throughout the year.

In a final experiment, we demonstrated electrically-controlled switching of the smart 

glazing by depositing our thin film stack on patterned FTO/glass substrates. For these 

devices, an improved PCM alloy was used which has similar optical properties to GeTe, but 

with a lower amorphization temperature27. Fig. 4a shows the experimental setup used to 

observe the switching behaviour of the smart glazing pixels in real time. A broadband light 

source (NKT WhiteLase Micro) filtered between 1.5 and 1.6 μm using dichroic and bandpass

filters was used to generate optical power in the near-IR. The near-IR light was then coupled 

to an electro-optic probe station capable of sending electrical pulses while measuring the 

change in optical reflection. Fig. 4b shows optical microscope images of a typical device 

before and after initial electrical switching and after 100 switching cycles. Notably, the 


11

reflected visible light is consistent in colour and intensity throughout the switching events. 

The switching energy was measured using an in-series 25 Ω resistor and oscilloscope. The 

left side of Fig. 4c plots the extracted pulse waveforms and switching energy for the device 

shown in Fig. 4b. The right-hand plot in Fig. 4c shows the switching energy as a function of 

device area for multiple devices and pixel sizes. We see that while a lower peak power is 

required for crystallization, the total energy consumption is higher for crystallization rather 

than amorphization due to the longer pulse duration.

Figure 4: Electrical switching and cyclability of smart glazing pixels. a) Experimental setup used to 
switch the smart glazing state while measuring its reflection for wavelengths between 1.5 and 1.6 µm. 
b) Microscope images (using top and bottom illumination) of one device before switching, after first 
crystallization, and after 100 switching cycles (scale bar 25 µm). The visible reflection of the pixel 
does not vary noticeably during switching. c) Typical pulse shapes used to achieve crystallization and 
amorphization in the PCM thin film (left). Switching energy across multiple devices as a function of 
pixel area showing how energy scales with pixel size. d) Time trace of smart glazing pixel showing 
large near-IR contrast with fast (less than 1 millisecond) switching times. e) and f) Cyclability and 
switching contrast for device from b) and c) showing increased contrast as nucleation sites are 
formed.


12

We also investigated the cyclability of our smart glazing by switching between the 

two states while monitoring the IR reflection. Fig. 4d shows a time trace for multiple 

switching cycles of the device from Fig. 4b (time trace taken starting at 500 cycles), while 

Fig. 4e-f plot the device’s cyclability and contrast for 1000 continuous cycles. Notably, we 

see both a reduction in the amorphous state reflection and an increase in contrast between the 

two bi-stable states. The first we attribute to silver migration in the optical stack during 

thermal cycling resulting in a reduction in IR reflectivity28. The increased switching contrast, 

on the other hand, is likely due to a greater fraction of crystalline domains forming due to the 

creation of nucleation sites. Indeed, for PCM memory, a “conditioning” treatment is often 

employed to stabilize the crystalline domain formation and improve the switching efficiency 

and cyclability of the memory cell29.

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a thin-film smart glazing capable of controlling 

the transfer of near-infrared energy through a window using an ultra-thin phase-change active 

layer. This glazing provided a 130% modulation of near-infrared solar energy while 

maintaining a uniform transmission and colour at visible wavelengths. By down-converting 

near-infrared to thermal radiation, we were able to demonstrate efficient harvesting of solar 

energy during winter months while retaining a glazing with desirable low-emissivity 

properties regardless of the PCM state. We then demonstrate a possible route toward 

integration onto glass windows using transparent electrical heaters with an initial cyclability 

count of 1000 cycles. Our results provide a novel and aesthetically appealing alternative to 

current smart window technologies and could play a major role in reducing the carbon 

footprint of residential and commercial buildings in the future.


13

Methods

Sample Fabrication:

Smart glazing films were deposited via RF/DC sputtering on double-side polished quartz

wafers using a Kurt J. Lesker PVD 75 system. The base pressure was 5×10-7 Torr while the 

working pressure was 3 mTorr during deposition. RF power was 100 W and 50 W for ZnS 

and GeTe respectively, while the DC power was 50 W for Ag. All targets were 2 inches in 

diameter. To ensure accurate deposition thicknesses, the film thickness was monitored in-situ 

using an optical monitor which was compared with a model of the optical stack, providing 

precise thickness control and repeatability.

Measurement Setup:

Transmission and reflection measurements from 400 nm to 2.5 µm were performed using a 

PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/VIS spectrophotometer under ambient conditions. 

Amorphous spectra were taken of the smart glazing as deposited, while crystalline spectra 

were measured after a 270° C anneal on a hot plate for 15 seconds. Mid- to far-infrared 

absorption was measured using a Varian Excalibur FTS 3500 FTIR spectrometer operating 

from 3 to 25 µm. For thermal down-conversion characterization, a FLIR© ONE Pro camera 

was used to measure the temperature rise in the uncoated quartz versus the quartz with smart 

glazing in the amorphous and crystalline states. The samples were illuminated with an LOT, 

class ABA, solar simulator calibrated to 1 sun (1 kW/m2) and an AM1.5g spectrum. A heat 

shield composed of plasterboard covered with thick aluminum foil was used to prevent 

unwanted thermal radiation from the simulator from saturating the FLIR© thermal camera. 

The transmission of the 1.3 µm thick sheet of PET was also calibrated using the PerkinElmer 

Lambda spectrometer and factored into the calculated total solar absorption.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by EPSRC via grants EP/J018694/1, EP/M015173/1,

EP/M015130/1, and EP/M022196/1 in the UK.


14

Contributions

All authors contributed to this work. NY strategized and carried out all the experiments. NY 

and HB conceptualized and developed the concept and wrote the manuscript. GSS carried out 

some of the dynamic experiments in the work. CGG and SK carried out the modeling work on 

energy savings. BFP and DY aided fabrication of transparent heaters. CT and PH deposited the 

films on the dynamic heaters. RSB and RT helped NY with spectroscopic measurements on 

the films. 

Conflicts of Interest

HB holds shares and serves on the Board of Directors at Bodle Technologies Limited. NY, HB, 

PH, CT and GSS have pending patent applications related to this technology. HB is employed 

at the University of Oxford which is incentivized to have papers published in top journals.


15

References

1.
Pérez-Lombard, L., Ortiz, J. & Pout, C. A review on buildings energy consumption 

information. Energy Build. 40, 394–398 (2008).

2.
Kamalisarvestani, M., Saidur, R., Mekhilef, S. & Javadi, F. S. Performance, materials 

and coating technologies of thermochromic thin films on smart windows. Renew. 

Sustain. Energy Rev. 26, 353–364 (2013).

3.
Ricardo Energy & Environment, . Sector, Gas, and Uncertainty Summary Factsheets. 

(2017).

4.
Delay, T., Farmer, S. & Jennings, T. Building the future today. Carbon Trust (2009).

5.
Kwok, A. G. & Rajkovich, N. B. Addressing climate change in comfort standards. 

Build. Environ. 45, 18–22 (2010).

6.
OECD/IEA. Energy Technology Perspectives 2015. (2015).

7.
Building fabric guide. Carbon Trust (2018).

8.
Rezaei, S. D., Shannigrahi, S. & Ramakrishna, S. A review of conventional, advanced, 

and smart glazing technologies and materials for improving indoor environment. Sol. 

Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 159, 26–51 (2017).

9.
Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the council on the energy 

performance of buildings. (Official Journal of the European Union, 2010).

10.
Hammarberg, E. & Roos, A. Antireflection treatment of low-emitting glazings for 

energy efficient windows with high visible transmittance. Thin Solid Films 442, 222–

226 (2003).

11.
Granqvist, C. G. Electrochromics for smart windows: Oxide-based thin films and 

devices. Thin Solid Films 564, 1–38 (2014).

12.
Wang, Y., Runnerstom, E. L. & Milliron, D. J. Switchable Materials for Smart 

Windows. Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng. 7, annurev-chembioeng-080615-034647 


16

(2016).

13.
Lee, E. Application issues for large-area electrochromic windows in commercial 

buildings. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 71, 465–491 (2002).

14.
Zinzi, M. Office worker preferences of electrochromic windows: a pilot study. Build. 

Environ. 41, 1262–1273 (2006).

15.
Kim, G. W. et al. Next generation smart window display using transparent organic 

display and light blocking screen. Opt. Express 26, 8493 (2018).

16.
Babulanam, S. M., Eriksson, T. S., Niklasson, G. A. & Granqvist, C. G. 

Thermochromic VO2 films for energy-efficient windows. Sol. Energy Mater. 16, 347–

363 (1987).

17.
Smith, G., Gentle, A., Arnold, M. & Cortie, M. Nanophotonics-enabled smart 

windows, buildings and wearables. Nanophotonics 5, 55–73 (2016).

18.
Ye, H., Meng, X. & Xu, B. Theoretical discussions of perfect window, ideal near 

infrared solar spectrum regulating window and current thermochromic window. 

Energy Build. 49, 164–172 (2012).

19.
Yamada, N., Ohno, E., Nishiuchi, K., Akahira, N. & Takao, M. Rapid-phase 

transitions of GeTe-Sb2Te3 pseudobinary amorphous thin films for an optical disk 

memory. J. Appl. Phys. 69, 2849–2856 (1991).

20.
Wuttig, M. & Yamada, N. Phase-change materials for rewriteable data storage. Nat. 

Mater. 6, 824–832 (2007).

21.
Hosseini, P., Wright, C. D. & Bhaskaran, H. An optoelectronic framework enabled by 

low-dimensional phase-change films. Nature 511, 206–211 (2014).

22.
Park, J.-W. et al. Optical properties of (GeTe, Sb2Te3) pseudobinary thin films studied 

with spectroscopic ellipsometry. Appl. Phys. Lett. 93, 021914 (2008).

23.
Broughton, B. et al. 38-4: Solid-State Reflective Displays (SRD ®) Utilizing Ultrathin 


17

Phase-Change Materials. SID Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap. 48, 546–549 (2017).

24.
Reference Solar Spectral Irradiance: Air Mass 1.5. American Society for Testing and 

Materials (ASTM) Terrestrial Reference Spectra for Photovoltaic Performance 

Evaluation Available at: http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/spectra/am1.5/. 

25.
Raman, A. P., Anoma, M. A., Zhu, L., Rephaeli, E. & Fan, S. Passive radiative cooling 

below ambient air temperature under direct sunlight. Nature 515, 540–544 (2014).

26.
Zhai, Y. et al. Scalable-manufactured randomized glass-polymer hybrid metamaterial 

for daytime radiative cooling. Science (80-. ). 7899, 1–9 (2017).

27.
Castillo, S. G. et al. 57‐4: Solid State Reflective Display (SRD ® ) with LTPS Diode 

Backplane. SID Symp. Dig. Tech. Pap. 50, 807–810 (2019).

28.
Leftheriotis, G., Yianoulis, P. & Patrikios, D. Deposition and optical properties of 

optimised ZnS/Ag/ZnS thin films for energy saving applications. Thin Solid Films 306, 

92–99 (1997).

29.
Loke, D. K. et al. Ultrafast Nanoscale Phase-Change Memory Enabled By Single-

Pulse Conditioning. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10, 41855–41860 (2018).


