1 
 

Ideal Solar Cell Efficiencies 

Tom Markvart 

Solar Energy Laboratory, Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of 
Southampton, UK, and 

Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical 
University in Prague, Czech Republic 

 

In a recent paper, Guillemoles et al1 attempt to clarify and explain the often cited paper by 
Shockley and Queisser2 (SQ) which defines the limits to photovoltaic conversion by a single-
junction solar cell. The SQ paper is not easy to read and is therefore easily misunderstood. As 
modern solar cells approach theoretical efficiency limits, the fundamentals become 
particularly important and the effort by Guillemoles et al is therefore to be welcome. 
However, in doing so, the authors have fallen into several pitfalls and the aim of the present 
note is to clarify a number of misconceptions and correct some errors in that paper. 

 

 

Fig. 1. The frequently quoted Shockley-Queisser efficiency curves: 1 – under “one-sun” 
illumination, and 2 – under sunlight at maximum concentration ratio of approximately 46,000. 
Also shown, by the dotted line, is the Trivich-Flinn efficiency (1). Sunlight modelled as black-
body radiation at 6000K, cell temperature 300K. 

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

Efficiency

1
2
3
4

Eg (eV)
Eg (eV)

1

2


2 
 

Shockley and Queisser described their result as detailed balance limit which - in an intuitive 
manner - describes a balance between the incident and emitted photon fluxes rather than a 
similar thermodynamic term of detailed balancing (also referred to as microscopic 
reversibility3), more akin to the earlier paper by van Roosbroeck and Shockley4  and more 
recent reciprocity theorems (see e.g. Rau5). The key principle of the paper that the maximum 
efficiency of a solar cell depends solely on the photon fluxes of the incident and emitted 
radiation provided the impetus for a later full thermodynamic interpretation,6 underpinning 
the earlier SQ suggestion (but see also ref. 7 for an earlier thermodynamic theory of PV 
conversion).  SQ did not find it easy to publish their ground-breaking result (see for example, 
ref. 8 ). The paper includes more material that is now usually cited but the curves that have 
survived the test of time are shown in Fig. 1.  

Guillemoles et al discuss only the SQ curve that corresponds to one sun illumination. This 
leads them to ascribe – incorrectly – a major part of voltage from the “ideal” value of Eg/q to 
electrical work of transferring a charge carrier between the contacts (labelled as “isothermal 
losses” in ref. 1). In fact, the largest part of this loss is of optical nature, a fundamental and 
unavoidable loss contained in the SQ theory and visible in Fig. 1 as the difference between 
the maximum-concentration and one-sun efficiencies. Equal to 0.28 V this voltage loss, 
sometimes called optical entropy generation,9  and due to the étendue expansion between the 
incident to emitted beam. In the SQ paper, a similar effect gives rise also to a voltage 
reduction by  kTc ln2 due to photon emission from two faces of the solar cell, an effect 
discussed in more detail in ref. 14. 

In identifying the “real” voltage losses relative to the SQ value in Eq. (3), Guillemoles et al 
define somewhat novel figures of merit rather than use more conventional parameters (see e.g. 
refs. 10, 11, 12). Doing so leads to some confusion and an incorrect estimate of one of these 
parameters (Fem), usually defined in terms of emitted photon fluxes rather than via the dark 
saturation current of the solar cell. Indeed, if 
/
real
QE
lum
o
o
e
J
J
Q
=
, as defined in Table 1,where 
lum
Qe
 

is the efficiency of luminescent emission by the solar cell when operating as a light-emitting 
diode then, by optoelectronic reciprocity5, 
QE
SQ
o
o
o
J
= EQE J
 , where EQEo is the external 

quantum efficiency for the emitted light. It therefore follows that the parameter Fem of ref. 1 
is just the reciprocal of  EQEo  and never smaller than unity, contrary to the claim on p.504. 
This conclusion can be easily understood in physical terms: because of lower efficiency, a 
real solar cell will always emit a photon flux no higher than an ideal (SQ) cell, and therefore 
Fem ≥ 1 -  in contrast to the higher dark saturation current obtained by dividing with 
lum
Qe
. It is 

also worth noting that this result is a consequence of both potentially lower-than-unit 
emissivity at the emission wavelengths (losses in Stage A, as attributed in ref. 1), but also due 
to losses in carrier transport to junction, and therefore originating from losses in Stage C. 

Possibly more subtle but nevertheless important from the fundamental viewpoint is the fact 
that the construction in Fig. 2b is not due to Shockley and Queisser, as least not what is 
generally understood to be their acclaimed work leading to the efficiencies shown by the full 
lines in Fig. 1. In fact, the maximum efficiency implied in Fig. 2b, as given by  


3 
 

0
( )
( )

g

TF
g
E
E
E dE
E
E dE
η
F
F

∞
∞
=
∫
∫
  
 
 
(1) 

is due to Trivich and Flinn,13 published some six years before the paper by Shockley and 
Queisser. Shockley and Queisser reproduce this efficiency under the name of “ultimate 
efficiency”, shown by the dotted line in Fig. 1. The construction in Fig. 2b is due to Henry14 
who discussed the full complexity of obtaining measured solar cell parameters by this 
technique and whose construction clearly highlights the difference between the “maximum 
concentration” and “ one sun” efficiencies discussed earlier in this note. The use of TF 
efficiency (1) in place of the true SQ efficiency results in an error (which seems to have 
disappeared from Fig. 2a), already contained in ref. 15, where the Trivich-Flinn efficiency is 
also incorrectly used as the starting point. 
 

References 
 
1  J.F. Guillemoles, T. Kirchartz, D. Cahen and U Rau, Guide for the perplexed to the Shockley-
Queisser model for solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 13, 501 (2019) 

2  W. Shockley and H.J. Queisser, Detailed balance limit of efficiency of p-n junction solar cells, J. 
Appl. Phys. 32, 510 (1961)  

3  R.C. Tolman, The principle of microscopic reversibility, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 11, 436 (1925)  

4  W. van Roosbroeck and W. Shockley, Photon-radiative recombination of electrons and holes in 
germanium, Phys. Rev. 94, 1558 (1954) 

5  U. Rau, Reciprocity relation between photovoltaic quantum efficiency and electroluminescent 
emission of solar cells, Phys. Rev. B 76, 085303 (2007). 

6  See, for example, T. Markvart, Solar cell as a heat engine: energy-entropy analysis of photovoltaic 
conversion, physica stat. sol. (a), 205, 2752 (2008) 

7  H.A. Müser, Thermodynamische Behandlung von Elektronenprozessen in Halbleiter-
Randschichten, Z. Physik. 148, 380 (1957). 

8  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O5JCx1QirW4 

9  T. Markvart,  The thermodynamics of optical étendue,   J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. 10, 015008 
(2008).  

10  T. Markvart, Open circuit voltage and reciprocity in solar cells, IEEE J. Photovolt. 8, 67 (2017). 

11  T. Markvart, Can thermodynamics guide us to make better solar cells, IEEE J. Photovolt. 9, 1614 
(2019). 

12  U. Rau, B. Blank, T. C. M. Müller  and T. Kirchartz, Efficiency potential of photovoltaic materials 
and devices unveiled by detailed-balance analysis, Phys. Rev. Appl., 7, 044016, 2017,  

13  D. Trivich and  P. Flinn,  Maximum efficiency of solar energy conversion by quantum processes. 
In  Daniels F., Duffie J. eds. Solar Energy Research. Thames and Hudson, London; 1955,  143. 

14  C.H. Henry, Limiting efficiencies of ideal single and multiple energy gao terrestrial solar cells, J. 
Appl. Phys. 51, 4494 (1980).  

15  L.C. Hirst  and  N.J. Ekins-Daukes,  Fundamental losses in solar cells,  Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl. 
19, 286 (2011). 

 


