 
1 

 

DOI: 10.1002/anie.201708510 

Review 

Colloidal Quantum Nanostructures: Emerging Materials for Display 

Applications 

Yossef E. Panfil,[a] Dr. Meirav Oded,[a] Prof. Uri Banin*[a] 

Dedicated to the employees of Merck and Qlight working in the field of quantum materials for 

display applications 

[a] 
Institute of Chemistry and the Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 9190401 (Israel) 

E-mail: uri.banin@mail.huji.ac.il 

This article is part of the Special Issue to commemorate the 350th anniversary of Merck KGaA 

Darmstadt. More articles can be found at  http://www.angewandte.org. 

Colloidal quantum nanostructures constitute outstanding model systems for investigating 

size and dimensionality effects. Their nanoscale dimensions lead to quantum confinement 

effects that enable tuning of their optical and electronic properties. This Review presents current 

and potential applications of semiconductor nanocrystals as sophisticated materials for display 

technologies.  

 

Keywords: 

Displays; electroluminescence; photoluminescence; quantum confinement; quantum dots 

 


 
2 

 

Abstract: Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (SCNCs) or, more broadly, colloidal quantum 

nanostructures constitute outstanding model systems for investigating size and dimensionality 

effects. Their nanoscale dimensions lead to quantum confinement effects that enable tuning of 

their optical and electronic properties. Thus, emission color control with narrow 

photoluminescence spectra, wide absorbance spectra, and outstanding photostability, combined 

with their chemical processability through control of their surface chemistry leads to the 

emergence of SCNCs as outstanding materials for present and next-generation displays. In this 

Review, we present the fundamental chemical and physical properties of SCNCs, followed by 

a description of the advantages of different colloidal quantum nanostructures for display 

applications. The open challenges with respect to their optical activity are addressed. Both 

photoluminescent and electroluminescent display scenarios utilizing SCNCs are described. 

1. Introduction 

Display devices that enable the input and output of information are central to the digital 

information era. We use displays everywhere and a lot of the time - at home, in the workplace, 

and on the go. Each of us has at least one in our pockets. Over the past 100 years, revolutions 

and evolution of display device technologies have been closely dependent upon the generation 

of innovative materials for displays enabled by clever chemistry. The focus of this Review is 

colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (SCNCs), also termed colloidal quantum nanostructures 

herein, which constitute an emerging family of materials for display applications. 

SCNCs are made up of tens to tens of thousands of atoms arranged in the ordered 

structure of the bulk semiconductor from which they are derived.[1-3] Their nanoscale 

dimensions place them as an intermediate form of matter between molecules and bulk 

macroscopic crystals. Controlling the size, shape, and composition, as illustrated in the series 

of SCNCs in Figure 1, affords powerful control over their optoelectronic properties.[4-7] 

Moreover, they are synthesized by wet chemical approaches that allow their manufacture on a 

large scale. The surface of the nanocrystals is inherently overcoated by a layer of surface 

ligands, thus enabling highly flexible manipulation for their incorporation from solution,[8] for 

example, to print individual pixels for displays. The flexibility in surface chemistry 


 
3 

 

manipulations also allows for their incorporation into different matrices, for example, in 

polymer films that can be seamlessly integrated into a display. 

Colloidal SC quantum dots (CQDs), the first type of SCNCs, were conceived in the 

early 1980s and have been developed and perfected over the past 25 years, both in terms of 

synthetic control over the materials characteristics and the understanding of their optoelectronic 

properties. A well-known property of CQDs is that the emission color of the nanocrystals can 

be tuned merely by changing their size, which has become a hallmark of nanoscience (Figure 

2a). This is a result of the quantum confinement effect,[9,10] and it provides vivid colors that are 

a perfect match for the demanding needs of current and next-generation displays. 

The images in a display are made up of a large number of small pixels with individually 

controlled light output. Adjacent pixels of typically three base colors, red, green, and blue 

(RGB), are used to generate color images. Figure 2b depicts the International Commission on 

Illumination (CIE) chromaticity diagram. This diagram, composed of the base RGB colors, 

maps the colors which are visible to the human eye (λ=380-780 nm) in terms of the hue and 

saturation. Each set of three colors located on the map defines a triangle. The colors enclosed 

within that triangle can be generated by a suitable combination of different ratios of its corners. 

Increasing the purity of the colors in the corners thus results in larger coverage of the CIE chart 

by the triangles, which is termed the color gamut. Sunlight spreads the entire color gamut, while 

the RGB spectra in most commercially available displays today spread only the black triangle 

(s-RGB standard). 

SCNCs are characterized by a narrow emission spectrum (Figure 2) with high 

fluorescence quantum yield (QY), thus providing an obvious advantage for their 

implementation in display applications to yield a wider representation of the color gamut. The 

CQDs are also characterized by a wide absorption spectrum spanning an energy range larger 

than their band gap energy, and have high photostability, thereby opening an opportunity for 

their implementation in displays using optical excitation. An additional option is to excite the 

SCNCs by charge injection, and CdSe NCs were already incorporated in 1994 into 

semiconducting polymers in hybrid organic/inorganic light emitting diodes (LEDs).[11] Since 


 
4 

 

then, SCNCs have been used in down-converting backlight applications in LCDs as well as in 

electroluminescent displays.[12-16] 

Besides using size to control their optical and electronic properties, SCNCs can be 

synthesized in a variety of shapes and dimensionalities (see below);[17-22] these characteristics 

govern the polarization and the directionality of the emission of the NCs. The surface of the 

NCs is easily processed, and hence NCs can be introduced onto various phases/substrates such 

as hydrophobic or hydrophilic media, and onto or into flexible or rigid substrates.[23-26] These 

qualities also make NCs appealing in a variety of additional applications, such as sensing,[27] 

imaging and bio-labeling,[28-30] solar cells,[31, 32] lasing,[33, 34] photocatalysis,[35] and printed 

electronics.[15,36] 

In this Review, we will discuss the utilization and potential of SCNCs in the field of 

displays. We briefly describe key principles for the synthesis of SCNCs, and then provide the 

fundamental physicochemical background regarding the energy-band structure and the charge-

carrier dynamics of the NCs. We then describe the two basic set-ups available for display 

applications: LCD-based photoluminescence and LED-based electroluminescence (EL). We 

conclude with perspectives on what the future holds for SCNCs in display applications. 

2. Synthesis of SCNCs 

SCNC synthesis has evolved into an important field of materials, inorganic, and solid-

state chemistry. Numerous reviews address this topic in great detail and herein we only briefly 

describe the key principles.[42, 43] The "ideal" SCNC sample for display applications should be 

characterized by a well-defined and controlled size, with a narrow size distribution to achieve 

the stringent color emission requirements of displays. A high degree of crystallinity is also 

important, since defects can serve as trap sites that quench the fluorescence. Good surface 

passivation is also required to eliminate surface traps. 

Although early synthetic approaches for II-VI SCs employed water-based synthesis,[2] 

the most successful and robust methods use high-temperature synthesis in organic media.[44,45] 

The separation of nucleation and growth is one essential principle for achieving the 

monodisperse samples. In this way, all the nanocrystals are "born" together in a well-defined 


 
5 

 

nucleation step and then grow together to yield a narrow size distribution upon quenching the 

growth process. A second central concept is that of focusing the size distribution,[46-49] and in 

general avoiding Ostwald ripening, by which the large particles in the distribution grow on 

account of the dissolution of the smaller less-stable particles leading to a broadening of the size 

distribution. Realizations of these principles are addressed by the "hot injection" method, in 

which suitable reactive precursors are rapidly administered to a vigorously stirred high-

temperature boiling solvent, which often itself also coordinates (or, in the presence of 

coordinating ligands) and arrests the growth to the nanoscale regime. An excess of one or both 

precursors of the SCNC is added to suppress the Ostwald ripening effect and further additions 

of the precursors are administered to grow the seeds to the desired sizes while maintaining the 

distribution in the regime of size-focusing. 

Other approaches have also been developed that may be even better suited to the batch 

synthesis of industrial amounts of NCs. One such approach is the "heating-up" method, in which 

a "one-pot mixture" of the solvent and the reactive precursors is stirred at low temperatures and 

then heated-up to induce the crystallization reaction.[50-52] It was also reported for metal-sulfide 

NPs, that working at high concentrations, near the solubility limit of the precursors, results in 

reduced sensitivity to variations in the reaction parameters, which results in the reproducible 

and large-scale production of monodisperse NCs.[53] Unlike the hot-injection technique, in 

which the size of the particles can be increased during the synthesis, while maintaining the size 

dispersity of the NCs, each reaction has a fixed set of conditions in this method (i.e. solvents 

with different boiling points, different ratios between the precursors, and time), which yields 

specific size-focused NCs without the need for additional size-selective purification steps. 

These methods can be applied to a variety of semiconductor materials to form well-

controlled NCs. The best-developed systems are those of cadmium chalcogenides, in particular, 

CdSe, which span the visible range for displays. The synthesis of shape-controlled SCNCs is 

also highly advanced in the II-VI semiconductor materials.[17,54,55] Lagging behind are the III-

V semiconductor materials, especially InP, which can be synthesized by related 

approaches.[18,56-58] In addition, the method enables the growth of shells of other SCs on the 


 
6 

 

NCs by similar principles to create heterostructures, which is essential for the further 

improvement and control of the optoelectronic characteristics of the SCNCs. 

3. Quantum Confinement, Heterostructures, and Shape Effects in SCNCs 

3.1. Optical and Electronic Properties 

The energy levels of SC bulk materials are composed of two continuous bands separated 

by an energy gap (Eg): a fully occupied lower valence band (VB) and a higher empty conduction 

band (CB). Excitation of an electron from the VB to the CB leaves behind a hole with a positive 

charge in the VB. The electron-hole pair thus formed interacts through Coulomb attraction to 

form an exciton with a characteristic binding energy and an exciton Bohr radius of a0, derived 

in analogy to the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom. As a consequence of the typically light 

effective masses of electrons and holes within the SC, and because of the dielectric screening, 

the binding energies of excitons in typical SCs of relevance for display applications are on the 

order of or smaller than the thermal energy, which leads typically to dissociation of the exciton 

in the bulk phase. When one or more dimensions of the SC nanostructure is reduced and become 

comparable or lower than the Bohr radius, strong quantum confinement effects govern the 

electronic level structure and lead to the discretization of the levels and to an increase in the 

band gap as the size decreases.[59] 

A "particle in a spherical box" model can be used to describe the discrete energy levels 

of CQDs (Figure 3a). Since the potential in the spherical geometry depends solely on the radius, 

just like in the hydrogen atom, the spherical harmonics describe the angular wave functions of 

the confined states, where the ground states in either the CB or VB will be 1Se for the CB and 

1Sh for the VB. The next levels will be 1Pe/h, 1De/h, and then 2Se/h. Thus, in CQDs, the band gap 

transition becomes that of the 1Se1Sh exciton state and the discrete level structure leads to 

emission of a photon with a narrow PL peak blue-shifted upon reducing the CQD radius. 

Figure 3b depicts the dependence of the optical characteristics of the QD on the size and 

dimensionality.[60] The energy gap increases for strongly quantum confined systems. This is 

manifested in blue-shifted absorption and emission spectra.[61] As the QD size is reduced in all 

dimensions, the quantum confinement increases. 2D or 1D systems confined with a similar 


 
7 

 

critical size (e.g. thickness in the 2D system or diameter in 1D) will have lower Eg values than 

3D confined systems. The effects of dimensionality will be discussed more thoroughly later on.  

Direct characterization of the energy levels within the bands was convincingly 

demonstrated by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements of single CQDs on a 

conducting substrate. Following imaging to locate the CQD, the tip is held at a fixed height 

above the particle and the scanning tunneling spectrum is obtained by measuring the current-

voltage (I-V) characteristics, as shown in Figure 3c for an individual InAs CQD.[62, 63] The 

density of states was extracted by plotting the tunneling conductance spectrum (dI/dV versus V, 

termed scanning tunneling spectroscopy, STS, Figure 3d). The CQD energy gap is clearly 

resolved around zero bias. On the positive bias side, which corresponds to CB states, a doublet 

appears after current onset, followed by a group of six adjacent peaks. The first doublet is 

attributed to tunneling through the lowest state in the conduction band, 1Se, which is indeed 

doubly degenerate. The energy spacing between the two peaks is due to the charging energy 

(EC) for each tunneled electron. Similarly, the next group of six peaks corresponds to the 

charging of the second CB level, 1Pe. The atomlike character of the levels, along with a 

consecutive electron filling ("Aufbau principle"), demonstrate the artificial atom behavior of 

the QD. A similar characterization was performed for the negative bias side, which relates to 

tunneling through the filled VB levels. The characteristic peak structure of the VB is denser due 

to the more elaborate VB band structure of the bulk semiconductor material, and to mixing of 

the levels. 

Examination of the STS spectra of a series of different size InAs CQDs (Figure 3e) 

clearly demonstrates the quantum confinement effects. As the size decreases, a systematic 

increase in the energy gap is seen. On the CB side, current is typically onset by a doublet of 

peaks corresponding to the 1Se state and followed then by the higher order multiplet of the 1Pe 

state. Size reduction also increases the spacing between the 1Se and 1Pe states, and the charging 

energy is also increased. 

3.2. Charge Carrier Dynamics 

The most common pathways for the generation of excitons in SCNCs, which are highly 

relevant for display applications, are either by optical excitation, which is used in 


 
8 

 

photoluminescence applications, or excitation by electrical charge injection, which is used in 

EL applications. In optical excitation, the absorption of an energetic photon by the NC leads to 

the creation of an exciton (Figure 4a). In electrical excitations, charge injection to CQDs occurs 

through electron- and hole-transporting layers (ETL and HTL, respectively). When an electric 

bias is applied, current flow takes place and electrons are injected into the CB of the QD through 

the ETL, while electrons are also drawn from the VB through the HTL, thereby leading to the 

transportation of holes into the VB and to the creation of excitons in the QD (Figure 4a). 

When a "hot exciton" (an exciton with energy way above the band gap) is created, both 

the electron and the hole first relax to the band gap states in a thermalization process involving 

electron-phonon and electron-hole interactions (Figure 4b). The relaxation usually occurs on a 

time scale ranging from sub-pico- to a few picoseconds.[64-67] Once the electron and hole reach 

the ground states of the CB and VB, respectively, they can recombine either in a radiative 

manner or in a nonradiative manner. The nonradiative recombination of the exciton is clearly 

undesired for display applications and occurs either by trap-assisted recombination[8] or by 

Auger recombination.[68] 

An example of trap-assisted recombination is illustrated in Figure 4c: an electron decays 

to a trap state which is located within the CQD band gap, from which the electron can decay to 

the VB and recombine with a hole. The process can be approximated by a two-step decay 

process, with an overall time scale of nano- to microseconds. 

Auger-type recombination (Figure 4c) is a three-particle process, in which the energy 

released by the recombination of one exciton is used to excite another charge carrier (electron 

or hole) above the band gap, with a time scale of about 100 picoseconds. Auger-type 

recombination can occur with charged CQDs or when multiexcitons are generated (i.e. upon 

high flux irradiation, injection of multiple charge carriers, or upon either the electron or the hole 

entering a trap state). Therefore, it is more common in electrical excitations where charging 

effects are more likely to occur. 

For display applications, the radiative channel is exclusively preferred, since high QYs 

are essential. Moreover, when the excess energy of an exciton is transferred to a nonradiative 

recombination channel, apart from losing a potentially emitted photon, the NC can enter an 


 
9 

 

"off" state, in which the NC is optically inactive. This phenomenon, termed "blinking", will be 

discussed in more detail in Section 3.5. 

To exclude all nonradiative processes, which quench the fluorescence of the NC, we 

need to understand the origin of each of the nonradiative routes. Atoms not fully coordinated in 

the SCNC (either on the outer surface or inside the NC) can act as traps for the trap-assisted 

nonradiative recombination process. Different types of NCs promote different trap states. For 

example, core-only SCNCs, which are passivated solely by organic molecules, quite often 

demonstrate low QY values, because of traps on the surface. The organic molecules are 

considered "poor" passivators, as they cannot fully passivate all the dangling bonds at the 

surface as a result of steric hindrance and chemical binding considerations, since the ligand will 

have affinity to either the positive or negative sites. Therefore, in an effort to improve the 

passivation and maximize the PL QY, core-shell heterostructures of SCNCs were developed, 

as discussed in the following section.[69] 

3.3. Heterostructured SCNCs 

Heterostructure SCNCs composed of two (or more) separate areas of SC materials, such 

as core-shell structures, are essential for tailoring SCNCs for display applications. In core-shell 

particles the SC core is surrounded by a passivating shell of a second SC, thus allowing the 

potential energy profile for the charge carriers to be shaped. The optical and electronic 

properties of the SCNC can be controlled by the band alignments of the core and shell SCs 

(Figure 5).[6,70-73] Systems in which the band gap of the core and the shell are straddled, such as 

is the case for CdSe/ZnS, are denoted as type I systems (Figure 5). In this case, the core is 

electronically passivated and both the electron and the hole are localized within the core. In 

these systems, the inorganic shell passivates the traps on the core/shell interface, which 

typically leads to a high QY and enhanced stability. 

Systems in which the band gap of the core and the band gap of the shell are staggered, 

such as CdSe/ZnSe, are denoted as type II systems (Figure 5). In this case, the first exciton 

transition is red-shifted relative to the band gap of either component and both charge carriers 

are localized in separate regions of the NC (either core or shell).[74] This offers access to 

wavelengths that are not possible in either SC structure separately. Although type II systems 


 
10 

 

are usually more suitable for applications which require charge separation (such as 

photocatalysis or charge-transfer processes), elevated external quantum efficiencies for a type 

II system have been reported.[12] 

An interesting intermediate case is the quasi type II system. The band alignment of the 

core and the shell are straddled, but the band offset of one of the bands (CB or VB) is small. 

An example of such a system is the well-studied CdSe/CdS system, in which the hole is 

confined to the CdSe core, but the electron wave function can also delocalize into the shell. In 

such a case, the first exciton transition is also red-shifted upon growth of the shell.[75] 

SCNC core/shell systems of ZnS- capped CdSe NCs were presented in 1996 which 

showed a QY of 50% at room temperature, an increase of an order of magnitude in the QY 

compared to the bare CdSe core.[76] Shortly after, a report was published on highly fluorescent 

core-shell CdSe/CdS CQDs.[75] Since then, numerous publications have appeared on a variety 

of different core-shell structures, including different types (type II, reverse type I, quasi type I, 

and type II),[6,77,78] multiple shell growth,[79] and in different synthesis approaches (by 

successive ion-layer adsorption and reaction[80] and from a single precursor[81]). 

However, the core and shell materials have different lattice parameters; hence, structural 

defects can occur at the interface which serve as traps and provide a nonradiative decay channel, 

which again reduces the QY of the NC. Therefore, apart from considerations of band alignment, 

the appropriate shell must be tailored for a minimal lattice mismatch between the core and the 

shell to avoid structural defects. An interesting solution for the lattice-mismatch problem is the 

use of an alloy or graded shell as a mediating layer. In this structure, an interfacial alloy layer, 

which gradually changes from one material to another, is used to ease the strain arising from 

lattice mismatch. The concept was first introduced in 2005 on a system of highly luminescent 

CdSe/CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S/ZnS multishell NCs.[37] High QY values were achieved by gradually 

changing the shell composition in the radial direction from CdS, which has a quasi-type II band 

alignment but lower lattice mismatch with CdSe, to ZnS, which has high band offsets but large 

lattice mismatch with CdSe. This concept was widely implemented on SCNCs of various types 

and materials. Apart from enabling the engineering of different shells with dissimilar lattice 

parameters, the graded alloy layer also decreases the decay rate through nonradiative Auger 


 
11 

 

recombination. This effect and its influence on the PL and QY of NCs will be discussed in 

detail in Section 3.5. 

3.4. Dimension and Dimensionality Effects 

Besides the development of the zero-dimensional CQDs and spherical core/shell 

nanocrystals, elongated quasi-1D CdSe rods were discovered, which paved the way towards 

shape control of SCNCs, offering further selection of important properties for display 

applications.[17] In 2003 a dot-in-rod architecture of a CdSe dot within a CdS rod was 

introduced,[82] and later a seeded growth synthesis for this interesting system was reported.[83,84] 

This CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod heterostructure system has a mixed dimensionality as it integrates a 

0D confined seed within a 1D confined system. Since then, SCNCs with versatile compositions, 

dimensions, and sometimes also different dimensionalities within one particle have been 

synthesized. 

A first property important for display applications is illustrated in the CdSe/CdS seeded 

rod, where the rod component has a significantly larger volume than the seed, and as a result, 

the overall absorption is dominated by this component. Figure 6a shows the absorption and 

emission spectra for a CdSe/CdS seeded rod system (core diameter 4.3 nm, rod diameter 4.7 

nm, and rod length 30 nm), and the corresponding absorption and emission spectra of the bare 

CdSe cores. For the mixed system, absorption features with wavelengths higher than λ=500 nm 

are associated with electronic transitions involving the CdSe core states, whereas for 

wavelengths shorter than λ=500 nm, a sharp rise in the absorption is observed, which is 

associated with electronic transitions involving the CdS rod states. The emission in seeded rods 

emanates from the band edge, which corresponds to the lowest excitonic state of the CdSe seed. 

The direct consequence of the difference in the dimensions of the parts constituting the particle 

is that the large-volume component of the rod acts as an efficient antenna for absorption because 

of its significant extinction coefficient, while the emission is related to the seed, which can be 

engineered to emit in a desirable wavelength. This characteristic is important for display 

applications and specifically for LCD displays using a film containing SCNCs which down-

convert blue light into red and green colors (see Section 5). The large absorption cross-section 

of the SCNCs in the blue region of the spectrum, which is attributed to the large rod component 


 
12 

 

of the particle, efficiently absorbs the blue light of the LED and converts the light into the 

desired specific green or red color point. 

Another manifestation of the importance of the separation between the absorption and 

emission of SCNCs that is particularly demonstrated by the CdS/CdS dot-in-rod structure was 

reported for ink-jet printing fluorescent layers containing SCNCs.[85] The spherical CdSe/CdS 

dots suffer from self-absorption effects, in which particles absorb the light emitted by other 

particles because of significant overlap between the absorption and the emission spectra of these 

NCs. This self-absorption causes the effective external emission QY to decrease significantly 

and induces changes in the fluorescence color by shifting the emission energy to longer 

wavelengths, whereas, for dot-in-rod structures, the QY remains at high levels and the emission 

peak does not red-shift, even in a highly concentrated layer. 

In the close-packed SCNC layers required for thin light-converting structures, or in 

LEDs, an additional possible loss mechanism is related to Förster-type fluorescence resonance 

energy transfer (FRET), in which an excited NC serves as an exciting donor through 

nonradiative dipole-dipole interactions to a neighboring NC that serves as an acceptor. The 

FRET process will also lead to an undesired red-shift of the PL and a reduced QY. Dot-in-rod 

structures exhibit significant improvement over spherical ones in such close-packed fluorescent 

layers, since their geometry leads to a reduced proximity between the emission centers and 

hence to near-elimination of the FRET processes (Figure 6b). Such SCNC systems show 

promise as RGB subpixels in display applications with inkjet printing or by additional 

patterning methods. 

SCNC heterostructures comprised of different shapes and dimensionalities also offer 

advantages and opportunities in the facilitation of charge injection or extraction of both carrier 

types from different regions. One kind of such structure is a dumbbell-shaped NC. Unlike core-

shell NCs, where at least one of the charge carriers is in an inaccessible region (irrelevant if it 

is a type I or type II NC), in a dumbbell-shaped NC, both of the charge carriers can be found in 

directly accessible regions. DHNR (double heterojunction nanorod) dumbbells comprised of 

CdSe tips at the end of a CdS rod and over-coated with a ZnSe shell,[40] were found to be very 

efficient both as an emissive layer for electroluminescent QD LED displays and as a light 


 
13 

 

detector.[12] This opened the possibility of multifunctional displays (see Section 7). Recently, 

ZnTe/ZnSe nanodumbbells (NDBs) were presented where the fluorescence could be tuned 

between about λ=500-585 nm by changing the ZnSe tip size,[87] which can also be a promising 

Cd-free system for use in multifunctional displays. 

The SCNC shape also has major implications on the polarization properties of the 

SCNCs emission, which is also applicable to display applications. Since the early studies on 

CdSe nanorods[88, 89] and InP nanowires,[90] it has been well-known that elongated NCs emit 

linearly polarized light along the elongated axis. This was verified by polarization experiments 

on single colloidal CdSe quantum rods.[89] This phenomenon was attributed to both a 

combination of a classical electromagnetic dielectric effect and a quantum mechanical 

contribution leading to a band-edge electronic transition that is polarized along the rod 

axis.[91,92] 

The mixed 0D/1D CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod heterostructure discussed above is an 

interesting case in this context.[83] It showed linearly polarized emission along its elongated 

axis, which was directly confirmed by using combined optical and atomic force microscopy to 

correlate the emission polarization with the orientation of single seeded nanorods (Figure 

6c).[86] As discussed above, this mixed 0D-1D system allows precise control of the emission 

wavelength, and also retains the linear polarization functionality inherited from the 1D part. A 

CdSe/CdS rod-in-rod heterostructure manifesting a 1D-in-1D system exhibited an even higher 

degree of linearly polarized emission.[38] 

CdSe nanoplatelets[93] (NPLs) with a 2D electronic structure and their resulting core-

shell heterostructures[94] are other potential nanomaterials with anisotropic optical properties. 

The nanoplatelets provide the highest color purity as a result of the possibility to control their 

thickness down to the atomic level,[95] and were also confirmed to show moderate emission 

polarization.[96] 

The versatile selection of anisotropic SCNCs with mixed dimensionality presented so 

far can be exploited in QD LCD technology (see Section 5) by replacing spherical QDs with 

nanostructures that emit linearly polarized light with high color purity. In addition to the 

benefits of LCDs with SCNC backlighting, such devices may efficiently transmit light through 


 
14 

 

the first polarizer filter, thereby possibly leading to another improvement in efficiency in QD 

LCD displays. Anistropic SCNCs also affect the emission directionality, which has relevance 

for light output from displays. 

3.5. Fluorescence "Blinking" and its Suppression 

SCNCs often exhibit intermittency in their emission, which is called PL "blinking". 

Until single nanocrystal measurements were conducted, the blinking nature of the SCNCs was 

hidden in the stable PL of the ensemble. This effect was first noted by Nirmal et al. in studies 

on isolated CdSe NCs.[97] Blinking is a significant phenomenon in both photo- and 

electroluminescent display applications of SCNCs. As confirmed by using correlated 

AFM/optical imaging of single QDs,[98] bright SCNCs can have near-unity quantum yields, 

thus, blinking remains the last inherent obstacle from achieving near unity QY emitters for 

efficient display applications. 

A typical time-dependent PL intensity trace from single SCNCs (Figure 7a) is 

recognized by a binary time-dependent intensity, where the emission flickers between "on" and 

"off" states in a random fashion. However, initial studies by Kuno et al. over a dynamic range 

of timescales yielded a very surprising result.[99] Neither the "on" nor "off" blinking times 

follow single exponentials, but rather a power-law distribution over some eight to nine orders 

of magnitude in the blinking probability density. This implies that there is no characteristic time 

for the blinking process. This fact has made the photophysics of blinking an intriguing subject 

that is still under debate.[100, 101] 

Currently, the most common explanation for blinking is the charging/discharging model 

(type A blinking), which involves a nonradiative Auger process (Figure 7a).[102] During the "on" 

state, each excitation of an electron-hole pair is followed by a radiative recombination process. 

However, upon charging of the SCNC core, the PL intensity switches from "on" to "off". 

Charging can happen by several mechanisms,[100] most commonly by trapping of an electron 

(or hole) in a surface or interfacial trap state. In the presence of excess charge, a nonradiative 

Auger recombination process occurs efficiently in the small confined NC. In this process, the 

additional exciton energy is efficiently transferred to the extra electron or hole instead of being 


 
15 

 

emitted as a photon. Release from the trapped state leads to return of the excess carrier to the 

nanocrystal and its neutralization, thereby restoring the "on" state. 

Interestingly, the charging/discharging model predicts a shorter lifetime during the "off" 

state because of the typically much faster Auger process; however, experiments on CdSe/CdS 

core-shell NCs revealed stable PL lifetimes during the intermittency. The stable lifetime was 

attributed to hot electrons that were trapped in surface states and then underwent fast 

nonradiative recombination with the hole before decaying to the band edge. As a result, the 

radiative recombination dynamics of the band edge continues on their normal fluorescence 

timescale, but with a much-reduced QY. To explain the PL flickering in this second type of 

blinking (known as type B), activation and deactivation of some surface trap states were 

suggested, and were tested by spectro-electrochemistry on single NCs.[102] 

Recently, non-blinking NCs started to emerge. Thick-shell SCNCs with non-blinking 

characteristics were reported for a CdSe core overcoated with a thick CdS shell.[103, 104] 

Independent of the specific blinking model, the occurrence of "off" periods during PL blinking 

is associated with a trapping of one of the carriers at the sites located outside the CQD. Non-

blinking emission can be achieved by blocking trap sites with thick shells, which prevent the 

tunneling of charge carriers to surface traps (Figure 7b). However, thick shells also often exhibit 

independent fluorescence from the shell material, which is undesired. 

Another important approach for suppressing Auger recombination was proposed in the 

theoretical study by Cragg and Efros.[105] Their studies indicated that, in addition to the QD 

size, the shape of the confinement potential arising from a composition gradient also has a 

significant effect on the rate of the Auger decay (Figure 7b). The rate of the Auger process 

depends on the strength of the intraband transition, where the third carrier is excited to a higher-

energy state. As a consequence of its large energy (Eg above the band edge), this state is 

characterized by a rapidly oscillating wave function (Ψf in Figure 7), with its Fourier transform 

narrowly distributed around a high k value in the k space. The Fourier transform of the ground-

state wave function, on the other hand, is centered on k=0 and its spreading into the k space is 

dictated by the shape of the confinement potential. For example, its spreading extends to large 

values of k in the case of an abrupt square-shaped potential, while its spreading is reduced in 


 
16 

 

the case of a smooth potential barrier. As a result, the Auger transition matrix element, which 

depends on the overlap of the distribution around the k values of the initial and final states, is 

smaller in the case of a more gradual confinement potential.[106] 

This theoretical study was verified experimentally for several gradient shell systems, for 

example, for a CdSexS1-x alloy layer with a controlled composition and thickness between the 

CdSe core and the CdS shell.[107-109] An increased biexciton lifetime was observed that 

correlates with the reduced Auger rate. The importance of the grading interface was also shown 

for other dimensionalities, as seen in CdSe/Cd1-xZnxS-seeded nanorods with a radially graded 

composition that show bright and highly polarized green emission with minimal blinking.[41] 

These observations provide direct experimental evidence that, in addition to the size of the 

quantum dot, its interfacial properties also significantly affect the rate of Auger recombination 

and can be used as an additional parameter for tuning the optical properties of SCNCs for 

display applications. 

4. Patterning and Alignment Methods for Display Applications of SCNCs 

4.1. Patterning Methods 

There is a need in various display applications to pattern a set of red-green-blue-emitting 

QDs into defined pixels at high resolution. For example, for the 4K ultrahigh-definition 

standard and a display size of 22.2 inches, the pixel dimensions are on the scale of 100 

micrometers, and for smartphone displays the dimensions can be as small as tens of 

micrometers. The chemical processability inherent to the solution-based SCNCs opens various 

possibilities for scalable patterning approaches that are applicable to display manufacturing. 

In transfer (contact) printing, patterns are replicated by an elastomeric stamp produced 

through lithographic means (Figure 8a). Initially, a uniform film of CQDs with a particular 

color is spin cast on donor substrates to yield an ink pad. The CQDs are weakly bound to the 

surface, and upon pressing a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp to the pad, the CQDs adhere 

to the stamp, and the stamp is quickly peeled back. The relationship between the pressure 

applied to the stamp and the peeling velocity influences the efficiency of the pickup process. 

The stamp is then brought into contact with a receiving surface and slowly peeled back, to allow 


 
17 

 

for complete transfer of the CQDs to the receiving substrate. This process is sequentially 

repeated for the remaining two colors to yield a compact pattern of three separate colors. This 

was used for the fabrication of a 4-inch full-color active-matrix CQD display with a resolution 

of 320×240 pixels by using CdSe/CdS/ZnS red-emitting CQDs, and CdSe/CdS green- and blue-

emitting CQDs.[110] 

The main advantage of this procedure is the ability to pattern relatively large areas 

simultaneously and, since a "dry" ink is used, this may reduce pixel cross-talk. However, 

transfer printing requires the preparation of an etched stamp by lithographic means and it has 

an inherent serial nature in its ability to pattern only one colored CQD layer at a time. This 

technique also suffers from deteriorating stamping quality as the resolution of the pixel 

increases (Figure 8a). An intaglio transfer printing technique was developed to overcome this 

disadvantage, and is claimed to demonstrate improved CQD transfer efficiencies for smaller 

features.[111] The basic process is similar to that of conventional transfer printing; however, 

instead of etching the desired pattern on the stamp, the stamp remains featureless in the intaglio 

method, and following the ink loading stage, the stamp is pressed on an engraved substrate. In 

this stage, a pattern of ink remains on the stamp to match the pattern of the engraved features, 

while all excess ink is removed (Figure 8a). In this way, pressing the stamp with the remaining 

ink onto a receiving substrate results in a pattern with defined borders being drawn. 

Another technique is the ink-jet printing method. This is a relatively simple and 

material-conserving technique, with the ability to program mask-free arbitrary patterns. It is 

also compatible with multiple "ink" materials. Ink-jet printing employs a nozzle head, which is 

electrically controlled to drop a fixed volume of ink on-demand. Once the drops hit the surface, 

they spread and dry to form a thin film. The ink-jet technique is well-established to provide 

precision along with the ability to generate almost any pattern.[112-114] For QLED applications, 

there can be three adjacent nozzle heads which can eject droplets of the three different colors 

simultaneously. This substantially simplifies the patterning process as all the colors are 

deposited in one stage. However, this method suffers from two drawbacks: the first is possible 

re-dissolution of the printed layers during the processing stage and the second is the coffee-ring 

effect, in which a drying pattern of CQDs concentrated at the rim of the droplet is formed.[118] 


 
18 

 

The first disadvantage can be treated through the ink formulation process. The ink solution must 

be adjusted to the right concentration, viscosity, and volatility to match the parameters of both 

the printing technique and the formation of a stacked structure. The second disadvantage was 

recently addressed by using a formulation solution that demonstrated a low surface tension, 

which yielded patterns without coffee-ring effects.[119] Recently, a full-color QLED display was 

fabricated by ink-jet printing (Figure 8b).[115] In this approach, cross-contamination of pixels 

was avoided by using a hydrophobic pixel-defining layer to confine the QD inks to their pixel 

areas. 

Electrohydrodynamic jet (e-jet) printing was used (Figure 8c) to improve the lateral 

resolution and control over the thickness of the deposited features. In this method a voltage bias 

is applied between a substrate and a metal-coated glass capillary. This induces rapid flow of the 

CQD ink through the nozzle. To gain control over the thickness of the pattern, a sequence of 

overlaid printing is defined. Thicker patterns do not demonstrate a significant change in the 

lateral dimensions and provide increased fluorescence.[116] 

An additional technique which can be applied to produce pixels on large areas with 

micrometer-scale resolution and thickness control is the layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly 

approach combined with photolithography (Figure 8d).[117] A photoresist (PR) layer is cross-

linked with UV light through a mask and then exposed to O2 plasma to endow the substrate 

with a negative charge. By consecutively dipping the substrate in solutions of positively charged 

polyelectrolytes followed by a solution of NCs with hydrophilic negatively charged ligands, a 

layer of NCs is formed with the thickness controlled by the number of deposition cycles. 

Immersing the substrate in acetone (lift-off process) then affords a CQD patterned substrate. 

Since the previously patterned CQDs are robust against additional photolithographic processes, 

the procedure described above can be repeated for the remaining subpixels. By using this 

method, a CQD-LED-based display was fabricated. 

4.2. Alignment Methods 

The polarization and light-output characteristics of SCNCs are also highly relevant for 

displays. For example, in LCD devices within a backlighting panel, an aligned nanorod array 

can absorb unpolarized light while re-emitting polarized light. The linearly polarized 


 
19 

 

luminescence along with the directional emission from individual nanostructures can result in 

enhancement of the brightness, compared to the emitter layers with randomly oriented 

nanostructures. Harnessing the property of polarized emission from an ensemble of particles 

requires the development of assembly techniques which provide unidirectional alignment of the 

NCs.[120] 

An external electric field can be used to align anisotropic NCs with their elongated axis 

oriented along the direction of the field lines. This was reported for the self-assembly of 1D 

CdSe-seeded CdS nanorods on a scale of tens of square micrometers, which demonstrated 

polarization ratios of 45%.[83] A solution of NCs is drop cast between two electrodes and a 

voltage is applied while the solution slowly evaporates. The rods orient along the direction of 

the field lines (Figure 9a,b). A similar approach, but with a slightly different set-up, was used 

to align CdS rods perpendicular to the substrate with a hexagonal close-packed pattern.[121] 

Although both studies demonstrate an effective alignment, their ability to align large 

areas will require the use of much higher electric fields. In that sense, the technique of 

mechanical rubbing, widely used for inducing the alignment of liquid-crystal molecules in LCD 

technology, might offer a more practical solution.[122] It was also implemented on nanorods, 

where a glass substrate was first spin coated with a solution of CdSe/CdS seeded rods to achieve 

a thick layer, and then a rubbing cloth was pressed onto the substrate while it rotated.[123] 

Whereas the fibers of the rubbing cloth pass over the NR film, the NRs align along the direction 

of the trenches in a plough-like manner, thereby resulting in a unidirectional assembly of the 

rods (Figure 9c). 

The use of mechanical force to align anisotropic NCs embedded in SCNC-polymer 

composite films has also been reported. For example, the alignment of both CdSe/CdS dot-in-

rod and rod-in-rod heterostructures, as well as colloidal CdSe nanoplatelets dispersed in a 

polymer film, has been achieved by mechanically stretching the film to 200-300% of its original 

size.[96] The aligned NR arrays resulted in a twofold enhancement of the brightness of the 

composite films compared to the emitter layers with randomly oriented nanostructures. 

Another approach for inducing the directed alignment of NCs is to utilize templates with 

either topographical and/or chemical patterns. Such templates, which most often exhibit 


 
20 

 

submicrometer patterns, are available by lithographic means or by exploiting an inherent pattern 

of a material (such as carbon nanotubes, highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) substrates, 

or block copolymers) as a platform onto which the NCs can be ordered into aligned arrays. 

Block copolymers (BCPs) are of particular interest for the alignment of anisotropic 

SCNCs. As a consequence of the chemical immiscibility of the different blocks, BCPs tend to 

undergo microphase separation into periodic nanopatterns. When the BCPs are prepared as a 

thin film, the pattern can be extended to an area on the cm2 scale. By relying on different 

intermolecular forces between the NRs and each of the blocks, mixing NRs with BCPs in the 

solution phase, followed by film preparation and an annealing process can lead to not only the 

selective placement of the rods in only one phase (i.e. block) but also to the alignment of the 

rods along the patterns exhibited by the BCP. The alignment of CdSe NRs was achieved by 

using this method (Figure 9d).[124, 126, 127] In addition, changing the ratio between the size of the 

NRs and the width of the BCP domain enabled control over the perpendicular or parallel 

orientation of the rods relative to the BCP domain. 

Alignment along an interface is another option for aligning NCs.[128] For this purpose, 

silicon substrates were vertically dipped in a vial containing a concentrated solution of NRs. By 

gently pulling out the substrate from the vial, slow evaporation of the solution along the 

solution-substrate interface yielded directional, smectic-type ordering of the NRs. The use of a 

substrate patterned with electrodes enabled alignment of the NRs in ribbons running parallel to 

the surface, vertically to the electrodes surface (Figure 9e).[125] 

Photo-lithographically patterned silicon nitride surfaces were also used to align needle-

like CdSe/CdS superparticles through capillary forces.[129] The aligned superparticles were then 

transferred into macroscopic and free-standing PDMS films. These superparticle-PDMS 

composite thin films are highly transparent and exhibit strong linearly polarized PL, with an 

emission polarization ratio even larger than the typical emission polarization ratio of individual 

single CdSe/CdS nanorods. This enhancement was attributed to dielectric effects and to 

collective electric-dipole coupling effects. In addition, the potential applicability of the 

composite films was demonstrated by their utilization as energy down-conversion phosphors to 

create polarized light-emitting diodes (LEDs). 


 
21 

 

5. SCNCs as a Down-Converting Backlight for Color Enrichment in Displays 

The first commercial application of CQDs in displays was for color enrichment as part 

of the display back-light unit (BLU). Since 2013, LCD tablets, monitors, and televisions using 

CQD-based BLU technology are at the technological forefront for display manufacturers. This 

type of application of CQDs does not require patterning and has been a good in-road for their 

implementation in displays, as they can be integrated as a drop-in solution that is fully 

compatible with the highly complex and advanced technologies for LCD fabrication. 

The emission efficiency and color quality of SCNCs, which are critical characteristics 

for their application in displays, have made them an alternative for current down-converting 

materials in BLUs. Much is being made to develop the next-generation of emitting materials 

that can cover the full-color gamut according to the standard requirements. Essentially all 

imaging-based applications need a specific well-defined color gamut to accurately reproduce 

the colors in the image content. What makes a color gamut an obligatory standard is the growing 

content created specifically for that color gamut, and thus display manufacturers strive to 

include that standard in their products. Over the years this has given rise to many different color 

gamut standards, based on what the existing displays at that specific time could produce. Both 

the displays and content have evolved together over time. 

Looking ahead, Rec. 2020 is an International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 

Recommendation, first introduced in 2012, that sets out the standards for UHDTV (ultrahigh-

definition television).[130] Included in these standards is the Rec. 2020 Color Space, which is an 

RGB color space that has a color gamut that is wider than all other RGB color spaces. SCNCs 

have inherently important advantages for addressing this demand. One of their most important 

strengths is the narrow band emission and efficiency, which extends the color gamut of the 

displays significantly. 

Figure 10a illustrates a typical structure of an LCD display with SCNCs. It contains a 

blue LED source, a diffusing plate, an SCNC film, a liquid-crystal module (LCM) unit, 

polarizers, and color filters. The BLU provides a uniform, white sheet of light behind the LCM 

of the display. The LCM contains millions of pixels, with each of them split into subpixels, 

with green, red, and blue filters. The color filter separates its component color from the white 


 
22 

 

light of the BLU. By controlling the amount of light passing through each of the color filters, 

any color that can be composed of a combination of red, green, and blue can be displayed at 

each pixel location. 

Today, white light is typically generated in LCD displays from YAG-rare-earth-based 

white LEDs (i.e. an yttrium-aluminum-garnet with rare-earth phosphor pumped by a blue GaN 

LED source). These sources produce a narrow peak in the blue region but with a broad spectrum 

throughout the yellow and red regions (Figure 10b). When this light is filtered in the RGB color 

filters at each of the subpixels, the brightness is compromised. Therefore, for the sake of 

efficiency, an ideal light source should generate narrow peaks in the red, green, and blue regions 

defined by the color filters with minimal intensity in between, as this light will eventually be 

attenuated in the color filters. 

Unlike phosphor technologies such as YAG, which emit with a fixed spectrum, SCNCs 

can be synthesized to convert light into a vast color range in the visible spectrum. Pumped with 

a blue source, such as the GaN LED, they can be engineered to emit at any desired wavelength 

with very high efficiency (quantum yield near unity) and with a very narrow spectral width 

(Figure 10b) of only 30-40 nm FWHM (full width at half maximum). Thus, the ability to tune 

and match the backlight spectrum to the color filters forms the basis of the CQD BLU 

technology. This yields displays that are brighter, more efficient, and produce lively colors. 

Several studies have addressed the required FWHM of the NC emission to be able to 

meet different color standards. Erdem and Demir concluded that the emission FWHM of the 

QDs should be at most 50 nm to cover 100% of the NTSC (National Television System 

Committee) color gamut,[131] otherwise the green end of the NTSC triangle cannot be included. 

Additionally, the blue emission should be generated with a source having an FWHM of no more 

than 70 nm. Zhu et al. showed that the FWHM of the QD emission can affect the display 

performance.[132] As the linewidth of green CQDs and red CQDs increases from 10 nm to 50 

nm, both the color gamut and efficiency are reduced. Therefore, a narrower SCNC emission is 

needed to reach both a larger color gamut and high efficiencies. 

SCNCs have another inherent potential advantage particularly for LCD display 

technology. As discussed in Section 3.4, precise control over the dimensionality and shape of 


 
23 

 

the SCNCs makes it possible to synthesize SCNCs with anisotropic shapes such as rods, dot-

in-rods,[82, 83] platelets,[93] or dumbbells.[133] SCNCs with elongated shapes emit polarized 

light.[134] In the case of LCD display panels, this may turn into an advantage. Whereas standard 

phosphors or spherical CQDs emit unpolarized light, which in principle leads to a 50% 

attenuation at the first polarizer of the LCM, elongated SCNCs can be aligned to emit a certain 

polarization which corresponds to the polarizer orientation, with a potential advantage for 

higher efficiency (Figure 10a). 

To realize and employ the great optical performance of SCNCs in displays, they have 

to be integrated into the optimal position in the BLU to demonstrate a stable operation that 

meets the stringent stability standards of state-of-the-art displays. Three typical packing 

structures to incorporate SCNCs into BLU are on-chip, on-edge, and on-surface types.[135] 

These different architectures can be realized in practice by taking advantage of the 

flexibility in tuning the nanocrystal surface ligands such that they will match the specific 

required matrices in each case. In the on-chip geometry, the SCNC material is coated onto the 

emissive LED surface within the LED package. The advantage of this method is that a minimum 

area is coated with SCNC material, thus minimizing the quantity of material consumed. 

However, the SCNC material must withstand extreme conditions, as typical LEDs operate at 

junction temperatures of 85-120°C. Moreover, the SCNC material is exposed to a high flux of 

blue light, and this also leads to an increased temperature as a result of energy loss through 

down-conversion that translates into heat. Thus, an SCNC material on-chip might need to 

operate at about 150°C.[136] Therefore, efforts are invested in stabilizing SCNCs for this 

demanding task. 

In the on-edge solutions, the SCNCs are placed adjacent to the blue LEDs on the edge 

of the waveguide. The coating area is much larger than that found in the on-chip scenario, but 

the operating conditions are also less harsh. This approach was realized by embedding the 

SCNCs into glass tubes. From a practical viewpoint, it is a rather complex task to integrate the 

glass tubes into the display, and since they are fragile components, their utilization for mobile 

devices is challenging. 


 
24 

 

In the on-surface (film) solutions,[137] the SCNCs are embedded in a sheet as part 

illuminated by the blue LEDs forming the BLU. As a result, the demands on the material are 

much reduced, as the operating temperature of the SCNCs in this configuration may be very 

close to room temperature and the optical flux through the NC material is low. This offers a 

seamless approach for display integration and it is also applicable to mobile displays. 

LCD displays with SCNC films are, therefore, a rising power in state-of-the-art displays. 

They lead to displays with a vast color range, color purity, efficiency, and stability (Figure 10c). 

6. Electroluminescent Displays with Colloidal SCNCs 

EL-driven displays incorporating colloidal SCNCs (EL QD-LEDs) have also attracted 

significant attention. The advantage over the color-enrichment applications of SCNCs materials 

is the fact that electroluminescent devices may remove the need for color filters and polarizers 

if pixelated LEDs are to be utilized. Therefore, they may offer overall high efficiencies if 

stability issues are addressed and extraction efficiencies are increased. Additionally, EL 

displays can offer the highest contrast by providing true black (off) pixels. 

EL is the phenomenon of light emission from a material excited by electric current. EL 

in displays of SCNCs is the result of radiative recombination of charge carriers (electrons and 

holes) that are injected into an emissive layer from contact electrodes, often through charge 

transport layers (CTLs) having a suitable band alignment.  

Similar to conventional light-emitting diodes (LEDs), EL QD-LEDs typically have a p-

i-n structure, which consists an anode, an HTL, a QD emissive layer (EML), an ETL, and a 

cathode (Figure 11a,b). Under forward bias, electrons and holes are injected from opposite 

electrodes and delivered by CTLs into the QD EML, in which the injected carriers recombine 

and generate photons. Photons produced in the EML have an emission energy typical for the 

SCNC band gap. 

Over the years, EL QD-LEDs have been developed extensively and tested with various 

architectures. These architectures can be categorized in general by the CTLs embedded within 

them. The first device was comprised only of an organic QD bilayer structure, where the QD 

layer served both as the ETL and EML, and the PPV polymer served as an HTL.[11, 14] However, 


 
25 

 

this device exhibited a very low EQE (external quantum efficiency) of 0.001-0.01%, poor 

brightness (ca. 100 cd·m -2), and unwanted parasitic polymer-related emission in addition to the 

emission of the NCs. 

To resolve these issues, the next generation of devices used architectures in which the 

CQDs serve only as light emitters. In this architecture, a single monolayer of CQDs is 

sandwiched between an organic ETL and an organic HTL.[138] The incorporation of another 

ETL helps to repress the electron injection into the EML. In addition, this layer also serves as 

the HBL (hole blocking layer), serving as a barrier to the flow of holes outside the EML. These 

devices show higher EQE, and no parasitic polymer emission is observed. 

However, even after embedding the ETL between the EML and the cathode, the all-

organic CTL architecture still has an inherent shortcoming. The LUMO energy level of 

traditionally used organic layers is higher than the conduction band of Cd-based CQDs, while 

the holes experience an energy barrier between the HTL and the EML. This leads to excess 

electron injection into the EML, thereby resulting in nonradiative Auger recombination. 

In addition to the efforts on the all-organic architecture, new all-inorganic architectures 

have been developed, motivated by their long-term stability and their preferred electric 

conductivity. Inorganic layers can sustain a current density of up to 4000 mA·cm-2, whereas all-

organic layers so far have a maximum current density of about 1000 mA·cm-2.[139] The first all-

inorganic device was comprised from a CdSe/ZnS CQD monolayer embedded within p- and n-

doped GaN CTLs in a type I band alignment.[140] This architecture leads to a better charge 

balance in the EML together with the advantages of inorganic layers discussed above. 

Several other all-inorganic CTLs were tested. These efforts mainly focused on metal 

oxides serving as both the ETLs (ZnO, SnO2, ZnO:SnO2, and ZnS)[141] and HTLs (NiO).[142] 

However, the efficiencies of the architectures with all-inorganic CTLs (EQE <0.01% for the p-

GaN/QD/n-GaN structures[140] and <0.1% for the NiO/QD/ZnO:SnO2 structures[142]) were 

lower than those of devices with all-organic injection layers. This was attributed mainly to the 

harsh deposition conditions of the inorganic CTL which can damage the EML of the SCNCs[140] 

as well as to a nonradiative energy transfer to the heavily doped inorganic films.[141] 


 
26 

 

Significant progress in the field of EL QD-LEDs was achieved by moving to hybrid 

CTL architectures which combine an inorganic ETL and an organic HTL. The main important 

advance in hybrid CTLs was made by utilizing solution-processible ZnO nanoparticles as the 

ETL.[143] In this method, the conductivity robustness of an inorganic CTL is achieved without 

the harmful consequences of harsh fabrication conditions. Furthermore, the band-edge positions 

in a ZnO nanoparticle provide a better charge balance in the EML and also prevent hole leakage 

from the QD EML. Qian et al. have also used a similar approach to fabricate red, green, and 

blue solution-processed QD-LEDs with brightness values of 31,000 cd·m-2, 68,000 cd·m-2, and 

4,200 cd·m-2 for the red, green, and blue devices, respectively.[144] Kwak et al. also used 

solution-processed ZnO nanoparticles as the ETL, but this time with an inverted architecture 

and by optimizing the energy levels with the organic hole transport layer, to demonstrate highly 

bright red, green, and blue QLEDs showing an EQE of 7.3%, 5.8%, and 1.7%, respectively.[145] 

Such "hybrid CTL" devices currently exhibit the highest efficiency and brightness.[146] 

A full-color 4-inch QD-LED display (Figure 11c) has also been fabricated by using 

similar "hybrid CTL" structures.[110] The pixels were patterned by a microcontact printing 

method with a resolution of up to 1000 pixels per inch (see Section 4). This display was the 

first demonstration of a full-color EL QD-LED display demonstrating the applicability of such 

a concept of using SCNCs in display applications. 

Aside from efficient transport layers, the SCNC surface ligands should also be 

engineered to improve the charge transport in electroluminescent displays. The general strategy 

to improve the transport is to exchange the ligands with shorter and often conjugated 

ligands.[147, 148] The right spacing between adjacent NCs is needed to obtain a delicate balance 

between the charge injection and undesired exciton dissociation. An optimum distance was 

indeed demonstrated by tuning the distance between adjacent PbS quantum dots through 

modifying the lengths of the linker molecules from three to eight CH2 groups.[149] In addition, 

an increase in the EQE by replacing the oleic acid ligands of the as-synthesized SCNCs with 

shorter 1-octanethiol ligands was reported for violet-blue-emitting ZnCdS/ZnS graded core-

shell QDs.[150] 


 
27 

 

Efficient electron and hole injection as well as charge balance at the CQD active layer 

are important design criteria for ensuring high-performance LEDs for electroluminescent 

displays. However, even after bringing charge carriers into the CQD layer and forming excitons 

on the QDs, the last step in the generation of light in EL CQD-LEDs brings with it inherent 

challenges that must be addressed for their future commercialization. 

SCNCs can today reach near unity QY in solution. However, SCNCs serving as the 

EML of EL CQD-LED devices operate under conditions which make it hard to emit. The 

difference between the electron and hole injection efficiencies is likely to create charge 

imbalance and, hence, a very efficient Auger process. Furthermore, the EML experiences an 

electric field on the order of 1 MV·cm-1, which can lead to a spatial separation between the 

electron and hole wave functions that reduces the radiative rate of the SCNCs.[151] 

Recent studies on the chemistry of SCNCs have exploited thick-shell CdSe/CdS QDs to 

improve the QY by eliminating blinking. In this system, the hole wave function remains 

confined at the CdSe core, while the electron wave function extends into the shell.[152,153] 

However, the electric field across the EML will decrease the luminescence QY by inducing 

charge separation.[154] On the other hand, using CdSe/ZnS CQDs with a distinct type I band 

alignment that can help to reduce the electron-hole separation even under an electric field will 

clearly fail to prevent nonradiative Auger processes, especially in EL QD-LEDs, which operate 

with a continuous charge imbalance. 

Based on these considerations, it seems that SCNCs with an alloy composition, such as 

ZnxCd1-xS, ZnxCd1-xSe, or CdSexS1-x/ZnxCd1-xS dot-in-rod structures,[41] which offer confined 

potential against the electric field and a reduction of Auger nonradiative recombination by 

smoothing the confinement potential, would be the ideal choice for an emitter in an EL QD-

LED. Indeed, relatively high efficiencies in QD-LEDs have been reported with multilayered 

alloyed structures such as ZnxCd1-xSe/ZnS, ZnxCd1-xSe/ZnxCd1-xS, and ZnxCd1-xSe.[139,142,155] 

Recently, Yang et al. reported a full series of blue, green, and red QD-LEDs, all with EQE 

values over 10% by using graded-shell Cd1-xZnxSe1-ySy as well as an ETL of ZnO nanoparticles 

in "hybrid CTL" architectures.[146] 


 
28 

 

Another challenge in electroluminescent QD-LEDs is to couple the light outside the 

layer structure. The fraction of emitted light which escapes from the surface of a device is 

determined by the difference in the refractive index of the organic and inorganic layers of the 

LED, which defines an "escape cone" for each interface, outside of which light will remain 

trapped. The light outside of the "escape cone" propagates within the plane of the device. A 

fraction of the light can return into the "escape cone" through a scattering event. A larger 

fraction is eventually lost to absorption by the CTL, reabsorbed in the EML, or attenuated by 

exciting surface plasmon modes of the metal electrode.[156] All together, the upper limit for the 

out-coupling efficiency is on the order of about 20%. 

The use of elongated-shape SCNCs can improve the out-coupling problem.[157] As 

discussed in Section 4, elongated-shape SCNCs favor emission along the elongated axis, and 

the elongated structure results in preferential flat deposition on the substrate. Therefore, the 

emission direction couples to only a very small extent with the wave-guiding modes or the 

plasmonic modes of the electrode. This is another manifestation of how diversity in the size, 

shape, and composition of SCNCs can be engineered to improve the efficiency of QD-LEDs. 

Despite the present low efficiencies, stability challenges, and manufacturing issues of 

electroluminescent QD-LEDs, this type of display has an inherent benefit: the per-pixel control, 

which leads to improved contrast. Per-pixel control can help to reach the next level of picture 

quality, with lifelike contrast ratios. This is the main reason for the on-going research into the 

optimization of QD-LEDs that eventually may emerge as important players in the display 

market. 

7. Prospects and Challenges for SCNCs in the Field of Displays 

7.1. New Functionalities and New Modes of Operation 

The discussion above on the challenges associated with designing SCNCs that exhibit 

high QY in the presence of both charge and an electric field highlights the interest in new 

systems that shift away from charge injection into the NCs, towards device architectures that 

are not p-n junctions and that operate through electrically controlled SCNC emission in new 

ways. Since the early studies of Rothenberg et al. on the optical properties of single nanorods 


 
29 

 

under electric field bias,[158] it has been known that the electric field influences the emission 

intensity through the quantum-confined Stark effect.[159] This is highly pronounced in nanorods 

aligned along the direction of the electric field, with electrons and holes being pulled in opposite 

directions towards the ends of the rods. The result is that the overlap of their wave functions is 

reduced, and the optical transition decreases in intensity (because of a decrease in the oscillator 

strength). The process depends strongly on the mutual orientations of the electric field and the 

long axis of the rod. If they are parallel, the effect is maximized, whereas if they are 

perpendicular, the influence of the electric field is negligible. Further studies by Muller et al. 

on CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod heterostructures with quasi type II band alignment showed that the 

wave function distributions of the electrons and holes were modified greatly from a 

configuration with a large overlap to a spatial separation where the holes were localized in the 

core and the electrons forced to the opposite tip by the electric field.[160] In this case, the 

emission intensity was also largely reduced due to the small spatial overlap of the electron and 

hole wave functions (Figure 12). 

These experiments pave the way to a possible new mode of operation for QD-LEDs 

controlled by an electric field. In this mode of operation, the excitons are created in a subpixel 

containing a large number of aligned SC nanorods emitting red, green, or blue light. Each 

subpixel is found between electrodes and their optical excitation from the light coming from 

the BLU, can modulate the light intensity of each color, thereby creating any desirable color 

composed from red, green, and blue. This mode of operation utilizes the high QY of SCNCs 

excited optically, but at the same time dispenses with the need for the charge injection EL 

architecture as well as the liquid-crystal unit in LCD displays. 

Besides new modes of operation, new functionalities are becoming apparent in QD-LED 

displays containing SCNCs. Recently, a novel study by Oh et al. presented DHNRs comprised 

of CdSe tips at the end of a CdS rod, with the CdSe tips coated with a ZnSe shell. These DHNRs 

acted as both charge-separation and recombination centers.[12] These particles can 

simultaneously enable efficient photocurrent generation and EL by changing from a reverse to 

a forward bias (Figure 13). These devices exhibit high efficiencies at display-relevant 

brightness with an external quantum efficiency of 8.0% at 1000 cd·m-2 under 2.5 V bias.[12] 


 
30 

 

This study opens the way to a new type of display panel that moves from just displaying 

information towards interactive devices. Possible ways to use the multifunctionality of these 

devices could be in cellphones and other devices which can be controlled through touchless 

gestures or automatically through brightness control (Figure 13). In addition, such devices can 

charge themselves, thus paving the way to a situation where a significant amount of the 

display’s power comes from the surroundings. In addition to interacting with users and their 

environment, DHNR LED displays can interact with each other and form large parallel 

communication arrays, thereby leading to optical communication between devices. 

7.2. Heavy-Metal-Free SCNCs 

One of the major drawbacks in QD-LED technology incorporating SCNCs is the 

toxicity problem. Cd-based II-VI NCs are currently the most well-developed and optimized 

system; they offer highly monodisperse NCs with near unity QY and well-developed shape 

control that can cover the entire visible spectrum. However, regulations by governments and 

organizations restricting the amount of heavy metals form an obstacle to Cd-based devices.[161] 

Thus, developing nontoxic SCNCs that have a similar performance as the Cd-containing 

systems is becoming an increasingly active area of research. 

One alternative in the II-VI group is the Zn-chalcogenide-based SC (Zn/S, Se, Te) NCs. 

Monodisperse core-shell ZnSe/ZnS QDs with narrow emission peaks (FWHM 15-18 nm) and 

tunable blue emission have, for example, been developed.[162,163] As a consequence of the 

relatively greater band gap of Zn-based NCs compared to Cd-based NCs, the emission 

wavelength is in the blue region of the spectrum. However, the use of type II Zn-based NCs can 

span a broader range of green to yellow colors. For example, type II ZnTe/ZnSe (core/shell) 

NCs were demonstrated to emit from cyan to amber.[164] 

More recently, Ji et al. presented ZnSe/ZnTe NDBs, in which ZnSe tips were selectively 

grown on the tips of ZnTe rods.[87] These NDBs can be tuned to emit between about 500-585 

nm by changing the size of the ZnSe tip. This example also shows the shape control that was 

developed in Zn-based NCs, despite their more symmetric zinc blende crystal phase. Starting 

from 1D Zn-chalcogenide-based nanowires, rods with controllable aspect ratios were 

synthesized using a ripening process through thermodynamically driven material diffusion.[165] 


 
31 

 

NCs with mixed dimensionalities such as dot-in-rod and platelets were also obtained. 

ZnSe(core)/ZnS(shell) nanorods achieved by cation exchange from CdSe(core)/CdS(shell) 

nanorods were presented by Li et al. that showed relatively narrow line widths (ca. 75 meV).[166] 

ZnSe/ZnS core-shell platelets were also demonstrated by Bouet et al. by cation exchange.[167] 

However, despite the progress achieved in Zn-based NCs, only relatively low quantum 

efficiencies as a result of defect-related emissions have so far been reported. Therefore, the 

facilitation of efficient Zn-chalcogenide-based NCs in QD-LED displays remains a challenge. 

Another promising heavy-metal free NC is InP. It is a III-V SC (Eg=1.35 eV) with an 

exciton Bohr radius of about 10 nm (compared to ca. 5 nm for CdSe) that provides large 

quantum confinement effects that can be used to span the visible spectrum through size control. 

Despite being part of the III-V group, which in general need high-temperature synthesis because 

of their more covalent-type bonding,[168] the groups of Bataglia,[48] Xie,[169] and Yang[170] 

showed that high-quality InP and InP/ZnS core/shell NCs could be synthesized at relatively low 

temperatures. The InP/ZnS core/shell NCs can cover the visible spectrum with a QY above 60% 

and a FWHM as narrow as 38 nm, which is close to that of Cd-based NCs. More recently, a 

new approach to form InP-based QDs was introduced that is based on aminophosphines as the 

phosphorus precursor.[171,172] This method enables a variety of InP-based core/shell QDs to be 

generated. Shape control of III-V CQDs was also achieved by Kan et al. by using metal 

nanoparticles to direct and catalyze one-dimensional growth.[18] An alternative to the hot-

injection synthesis of InP is to attempt to use cation exchange.[173-175] This synthetic route also 

has the advantage of preserving the original NC shape, thus paving the way towards shape 

control in these zinc blende NCs. 

InP/ZnSeS QD-LEDs that emit between 500 and 520 nm through direct charge carrier 

injection have also been demonstrated that show an EQE of 3.5 % and a maximum brightness 

of 3900 cd·m-2.[176] This example illustrates the promise of InP as a Cd-free QD-LED emitter. 

However, efficient blue or red QD-LEDs containing InP NCs have not yet been reported. 

Multinary compounds, such as ternary I-III-VI2 chalcogenides, are other candidates for 

heavy-metal-free NCS. Among these ternary I-III-VI2 compounds, CuIn(S,Se)2 is a candidate 

for emission in the visible spectrum. It can be synthesized by using a route similar to the cation-


 
32 

 

exchange approach used to produce III-V NCs starting from Cu2S.[177] Since the size and shape 

of the NCs remain unchanged, it should again enable shape control, as already exists for 

Cu2S.[178] However, the complex crystal structures lead to high-density sub-band-gap states 

being formed that cause the emission to become broader. CuInS2 NCs have also been 

successfully incorporated into direct-injection LEDs, albeit with modest results.[179,180] 

Inorganic perovskite NCs of CsPbX3 (X=Cl, Br, I) are another example of ternary 

compounds that can serve as possible candidates for future display applications, but they also 

contain the undesired heavy metal Pb. These materials can be synthesized in a variety of sizes 

and shapes, with facile compositional tuning.[181-186] Inorganic perovskite NCs demonstrate 

high chemical stability, especially for blue- and green-emitting perovskites. Their high QY 

values (ca. 70-90%) and narrow PL spectra (FWHM ranging from ca. 12-40 nm) that span the 

visible spectrum allows for a wide color gamut representation, and their demonstration as white 

LED color converters has already been reported.[187,188] These materials also show self-healing, 

with the structure of the perovskite NCs remaining intact even upon leaching out of metal atoms 

or diffusion of surfactant atoms to the surface.[184,189] However, the presence of lead in these 

perovskites presents a problem in terms of toxicity. Alternative lead-free halide perovskites 

have also been explored, such as Cs2SnI6,[190] CsGeI3,[191] and even halide double 

perovskites;[192] however, the first still suffer from instability problems, while the last are still 

being explored. 

Despite the above drawbacks, the performance of QLEDs based on heavy-metal-free 

emitters is improving. The current limitation is largely due to the undeveloped synthetic 

chemistry of the heavy-metal-free NCs. However, future developments in SCNC synthesis are 

expected to close the current gap and lead to the further development of heavy-metal-free 

SCNC-based displays. 

7.3. Outlook 

The above-told story of the emergence of SCNCs as new materials for current and next-

generation displays is a tour-de-force demonstration of the importance of basic research into 

new nanomaterials to yield important advantages in the highly advanced and demanding field 

of displays. A combination of innovative well-controlled synthesis, development of suitable 


 
33 

 

chemical processing methods, accompanied by achieving a deep understanding of the effects 

of the SCNC characteristics on their optoelectronic performance were imperative to reach this 

point. The ability to upscale the complex synthesis in an economically viable manner has been 

realized, and the SCNCs can meet the stringent stability requirements of commercial displays. 

The development of nontoxic SCNCs for next-generation displays is on its way. We foresee 

more elaborate display technologies based on SCNCs also emerging. This provides an 

optimistic perspective for the potential utilization of SCNCs in additional areas, including 

biomedical applications, sensing, solar energy conversion, and printed electronics. 

Acknowledgements 

U.B. wishes to thank the generations of students, postdoctoral researchers, and co-workers who 

worked with him over the years on research into SCNCs, and the employees of Qlight Nanotech 

who participated in the development of SCNCs for display applications. This project received 

funding in part from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s 

Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No [741767]), as well as 

from the Israel Science Foundation (ISF, Grant No. 811/13). U.B. holds the Alfred & Erica 

Larisch Memorial Chair. 

Conflict of interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

Author Contributions 

Y.P. Writing – original draft: Equal; Writing – review &amp; editing: Equal. 

M.O. Writing – original draft: Equal; Writing – review &amp; editing: Equal. 

U.B. Writing – original draft: Equal; Writing – review &amp; editing: Equal. 

[1] A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 13226-13239. 

[2] H. Weller, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1993, 32, 41-53; Angew. Chem. 1993, 105, 43-55. 

[3] M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald, L. E. Brus, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1990, 41, 477-

496. 


 
34 

 

[4] R. Krahne, G. Morello, A. Figuerola, C. George, S. Deka, L. Manna, Phys. Rep. 2011, 

501, 75-221. 

[5] J. M. Pietryga, Y. S. Park, J. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli, V. I. Klimov, 

Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 10513-10622. 

[6] A. Sitt, I. Hadar, U. Banin, Nano Today 2013, 8, 494-513. 

[7] J. Y. Kim, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 4986-5010. 

[8] M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon, D. V. Talapin, Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 141-153. 

[9] A. L. Efros, A. L. Efros, Sov. Phys. Semicond. 1982, 16, 772-775. 

[10] L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys. 1983, 79, 5566-5571. 

[11] V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp, A. P. Alivisatos, Nature 1994, 370, 354-357. 

[12] N. Oh et al., Science 2017, 355, 616-619. 

[13] B. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. 

Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan, P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics 2013, 7, 407-412. 

[14] B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, O. Onitsuka, M. F. Rubner, Appl. Phys. Lett. 1995, 66, 

1316-1318. 

[15] T. Erdem, H. V. Demir, Nanophotonics 2016, 5, 74-95. 

[16] V. Wood, V. Bulović, Nano Rev. 2010, 1, 5202. 

[17] X. Peng, L. Manna, W. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich, A. P. Alivisatos, 

Nature 2000, 404, 59-61. 

[18] S. Kan, A. Aharoni, T. Mokari, U. Banin, Faraday Discuss. 2004, 125, 23-38. 

[19] B. Dubertret, T. Heine, M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res. 2015, 48, 1-2. 

[20] J. S. Son, J. H. Yu, S. G. Kwon, J. Lee, J. Joo, T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater. 2011, 23, 3214-

3219. 

]21] C. Schliehe, B. H. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. 

Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke, H. Weller, Science 2010, 329, 550-553. 


 
35 

 

[22] A. M. Smith, H. Duan, A. M. Mohs, S. Nie, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev. 2008, 60, 1226-

1240. 

[23] Z. Tang, Y. Wang, N. A. Kotov, Langmuir 2002, 18, 7035-7040. 

 [24] T. Pellegrino, S. Kudera, T. Liedl, A. M. Javier, L. Manna, W. J. Parak, Small 2004, 1, 

48-63. 

[25] R. A. Sperling, W. J. Parak, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 2010, 368, 1333-1383. 

[26] D. A. Hines, P. V. Kamat, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6, 3041-3057. 

[27] R. Freeman, I. Willner, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41, 4067. 

[28] I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman, H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater. 2005, 4, 435-446. 

[29] A. Fu, W. Gu, C. Larabell, A. P. Alivisatos, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 2005, 15, 568-575. 

[30] P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol. 2004, 22, 47-52. 

[31] I. J. Kramer, E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 8506-8514. 

[32] A. Nozik, Phys. E 2002, 14, 115-120. 

[33] V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. 

Leatherdale, H. Eisler, M. G. Bawendi, Science 2000, 290, 314-317. 

[34] M. Kazes, D. Y. Lewis, Y. Ebenstein, T. Mokari, U. Banin, Adv. Mater. 2002, 14, 317-

321. 

[35] Y. Ben-Shahar, U. Banin, Top. Curr. Chem. 2016, 374, 54. 

[36] C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent, D. V. Talapin, Science 2016, 353, aac5523. 

[37] R. Xie, U. Kolb, J. Li, T. Basché, A. Mews, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 7480-7488. 

[38] A. Sitt, A. Salant, G. Menagen, U. Banin, Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 2054-2060. 

[39] A. Robin, E. Lhuillier, X. Z. Xu, S. Ithurria, H. Aubin, A. Ouerghi, B. Dubertret, Sci. 

Rep. 2016, 6, 24909. 

[40] N. Oh, S. Nam, Y. Zhai, K. Deshpande, P. Trefonas, M. Shim, Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 

3642. 


 
36 

 

[41] I. Hadar, J. P. Philbin, Y. E. Panfil, S. Neyshtadt, I. Lieberman, H. Eshet, S. Lazar, E. 

Rabani, U. Banin, Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 2524-2531. 

[42] J. Park, J. Joo, G. K. Soon, Y. Jang, T. Hyeon, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2007, 46, 4630-

4660; Angew. Chem. 2007, 119, 4714-4745. 

[43] X. Peng, J. Thessing, in Semicond. Nanocrystals Silic. Nanoparticles (Eds.: X. Peng, D. 

M. P. Mingos), Springer, New York, 2005, pp. 79-119. 

[44] C. B. Murray, D. Norris, M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1993, 115, 8706-8715. 

[45] W. W. Yu, X. Peng, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2002, 41, 2368-2371; Angew. Chem. 2002, 

114, 2474-2477. 

[46] X. Peng, J. Wickham, A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1998, 120, 5343-5344. 

[47] C. De Mello Donegá, P. Liljeroth, D. Vanmaekelbergh, Small 2005, 1, 1152-1162. 

[48] D. Battaglia, X. Peng, Nano Lett. 2002, 2, 1027-1030. 

[49] J. Y. Rempel, M. G. Bawendi, K. F. Jensen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 4479-4489. 

[50] J. Park, K. An, Y. Hwang, J.-G. Park, H.-J. Noh, J.-Y. Kim, J.-H. Park, N.-M. Hwang, T. 

Hyeon, Nat. Mater. 2004, 3, 891-895. 

[51] J. Joo, H. Bin Na, T. Yu, J. H. Yu, Y. W. Kim, F. Wu, J. Z. Zhang, T. Hyeon, J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 11100-11105. 

[52] W. W. Yu, J. C. Falkner, C. T. Yavuz, V. L. Colvin, Chem. Commun. 2004, 2306-2307. 

[53] C. B. Williamson, D. R. Nevers, T. Hanrath, R. D. Robinson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 

137, 15843-15851. 

[54] Y. Jun, J. Choi, J. Cheon, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2006, 45, 3414-3439; Angew. Chem. 

2006, 118, 3492-3517. 

[55] S. Kumar, T. Nann, Small 2006, 2, 316-329. 

[56] A. A. Guzelian, U. Banin, A. V. Kadavanich, X. Peng, A. P. Alivisatos, Appl. Phys. Lett. 

1996, 69, 1432-1434. 


 
37 

 

[57] O. I. Micic, C. J. Curtis, K. M. Jones, J. R. Sprague, A. J. Nozik, J. Phys. Chem. 1994, 

98, 4966-4969. 

[58] S. Tamang, C. Lincheneau, Y. Hermans, S. Jeong, P. Reiss, Chem. Mater. 2016, 28, 

2491-2506. 

[59] A. L. Efros, M. Rosen, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci. 2000, 30, 475-521. 

[60] A. M. Smith, S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res. 2010, 43, 190-200. 

[61] W. E. Buhro, V. L. Colvin, Nat. Mater. 2003, 2, 138-139. 

[62] U. Banin, Y. Cao, D. Katz, O. Millo, Nature 1999, 400, 542-544. 

[63] U. Banin, O. Millo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2003, 54, 463-494. 

[64] V. I. Klimov, J. Phys. Chem. B 2000, 104, 6112-6123. 

[65] V. Klimov, D. McBranch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1998, 80, 4028-4031. 

[66] V. I. Klimov, D. W. McBranch, C. A. Leatherdale, M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B 1999, 

60, 13740-13749. 

[67] R. Ulbricht, E. Hendry, J. Shan, T. F. Heinz, M. Bonn, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2011, 83, 543-

586. 

[68] V. I. Klimov, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 2007, 58, 635-673. 

[69] A. R. Kortan, R. Hull, R. L. Opila, M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald, P. J. Carroll, L. E. 

Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1990, 112, 1327-1332. 

[70] P. Reiss, M. Protière, L. Li, Small 2009, 5, 154-168. 

[71] D. Dorfs, A. Eychmüller in Semiconductor Nanocrystal Quantum Dots: Synthesis, 

Assembly, Spectroscopy and Applications, Springer, Wien, 2008, pp. 101-117. 

[72] C. de Mello Donegá, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 1512-1546. 

[73] L. Carbone, P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Today 2010, 5, 449-493. 

[74] X. Zhong, R. Xie, Y. Zhang, T. Basché, W. Knoll, Chem. Mater. 2005, 17, 4038-4042. 


 
38 

 

[75] X. Peng, M. C. Schlamp, A. V. Kadavanich, A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1997, 

119, 7019-7029. 

[76] M. A. Hines, P. Guyot-Sionnest, J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 468-471. 

[77] S. Kim, B. Fisher, H. J. Eisler, M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 11466-11467. 

[78] D. Dorfs, T. Franzi, R. Osovsky, M. Brumer, E. Lifshitz, T. A. Klar, A. Eychmüller, 

Small 2008, 4, 1148-1152. 

[79] P. Reiss, S. Carayon, J. Bleuse, A. Pron, Synth. Met. 2003, 139, 649-652. 

[80] J. J. Li, Y. A. Wang, W. Guo, J. C. Keay, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Johnson, X. Peng, J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 12567-12575. 

[81] D. Chen, F. Zhao, H. Qi, M. Rutherford, X. Peng, Chem. Mater. 2010, 22, 1437-1444. 

[82] D. V. Talapin, R. Koeppe, S. Götzinger, A. Kornowski, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, O. 

Benson, J. Feldmann, H. Weller, Nano Lett. 2003, 3, 1677-1681. 

[83] L. Carbone et al., Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 2942-2950. 

[84] D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler, A. P. Alivisatos, 

Nano Lett. 2007, 7, 2951-2959. 

[85] S. Halivni, S. Shemesh, N. Waiskopf, Y. Vinetsky, S. Magdassi, U. Banin, Nanoscale 

2015, 7, 19193-19200. 

[86] I. Hadar, G. B. Hitin, A. Sitt, A. Faust, U. Banin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4, 502-507. 

[87] B. Ji, Y. E. Panfil, U. Banin, ACS Nano 2017, 11, 7312-7320. 

[88] J. Hu, L. Li, W. Yang, L. Manna, L. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos, Science 2001, 292, 2060-

2063. 

[89] X. Chen, A. Nazzal, D. Goorskey, M. Xiao, Z. Peng, X. Peng, Phys. Rev. B 2001, 64, 2-

5. 

[90] J. Wang, M. S. Gudiksen, X. Duan, Y. Cui, C. M. Lieber, Science 2001, 293, 1455-1457. 

[91] A. Shabaev, A. L. Efros, Nano Lett. 2004, 4, 1821-1825. 

[92] J. Planelles, F. Rajadell, J. I. Climente, J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 27724-27730. 


 
39 

 

[93] S. Ithurria, B. Dubertret, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 16504-16505. 

[94] B. Mahler, B. Nadal, C. Bouet, G. Patriarche, B. Dubertret, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 

18591-18598. 

[95] F. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Lin, H. Shen, W. Cao, C. Yang, H. Wang, L. Yu, Z. Du, 

J. Xue, L. S. Li, Nanoscale 2016, 8, 12182-12188. 

[96] P. D. Cunningham, J. B. Souza, I. Fedin, C. She, B. Lee, D. V. Talapin, ACS Nano 2016, 

10, 5769-5781. 

[97] M. Nirmal, B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, J. J. Macklin, J. K. Trautman, T. D. Harris, 

L. E. Brus, Nature 1996, 383, 802-804. 

[98] Y. Ebenstein, T. Mokari, U. Banin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 80, 4033-4035. 

[99] M. Kuno, D. P. Fromm, H. F. Hamann, A. Gallagher, D. J. Nesbitt, J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 

112, 3117-3120. 

[100] A. L. Efros, D. J. Nesbitt, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016, 11, 661-671. 

[101] O. Schwartz, D. Oron, Isr. J. Chem. 2012, 52, 992-1001. 

[102] C. Galland, Y. Ghosh, A. Steinbrück, M. Sykora, J. A. Hollingsworth, V. I. Klimov, H. 

Htoon, Nature 2011, 479, 203-207. 

[103] B. Mahler, P. Spinicelli, S. Buil, X. Quelin, J.-P. Hermier, B. Dubertret, Nat. Mater. 

2008, 7, 659-664. 

[104] Y. Chen, J. Vela, H. Htoon, J. L. Casson, D. J. Werder, D. A. Bussian, V. I. Klimov, J. 

A. Hollingsworth, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130, 5026-5027. 

[105] G. E. Cragg, A. L. Efros, Nano Lett. 2010, 10, 313-317. 

[106] J. I. Climente, J. L. Movilla, J. Planelles, Small 2012, 8, 754-759. 

[107] Y. S. Park, W. K. Bae, L. A. Padilha, J. M. Pietryga, V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 

396-402. 

[108] K. Boldt, N. Kirkwood, G. A. Beane, P. Mulvaney, Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 4731-4738. 


 
40 

 

[109] J. Vela, H. Htoon, Y. Chen, Y. S. Park, Y. Ghosh, P. M. Goodwin, J. H. Werner, N. P. 

Wells, J. L. Casson, J. A. Hollingsworth, J. Biophotonics 2010, 3, 706-717. 

[110] T.-H. Kim et al., Nat. Photonics 2011, 5, 176-182. 

[111] M. K. Choi, J. Yang, K. Kang, D. C. Kim, C. Choi, C. Park, S. J. Kim, S. I. Chae, T.-H. 

Kim, J. H. Kim, T. Hyeon, D.-H. Kim, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7149. 

[112] M. Singh, H. M. Haverinen, P. Dhagat, G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 673-685. 

[113] P. Calvert, Chem. Mater. 2001, 13, 3299-3305. 

[114] J. Han, D. Ko, M. Park, J. Roh, H. Jung, Y. Lee, Y. Kwon, J. Sohn, W. K. Bae, B. D. 

Chin, C. Lee, J. Soc. Inf. Disp. 2016, 24, 545-551. 

[115] C. Jiang, L. Mu, J. Zou, Z. He, Z. Zhong, L. Wang, M. Xu, J. Wang, J. Peng, Y. Cao, 

Sci. China Chem. 2017, 60, 1-7. 

[116] B. H. Kim et al., Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 969-973. 

[117] J. S. Park et al., Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 6946-6953. 

[118] M. Layani, M. Gruchko, O. Milo, I. Balberg, D. Azulay, S. Magdassi, ACS Nano 2009, 

3, 3537-3542. 

[119] C. Jiang, Z. Zhong, B. Liu, Z. He, J. Zou, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Peng, Y. Cao, ACS 

Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 26162-26168. 

[120] A. Singh, R. D. Gunning, S. Ahmed, C. A. Barrett, N. J. English, J.-A. Garate, K. M. 

Ryan, J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 1562-1569. 

[121] K. M. Ryan, A. Mastroianni, K. A. Stancil, H. Liu, A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett. 2006, 6, 

1479-1482. 

[122] M. F. Toney, T. P. Russell, P. A. Logan, H. Kikuchi, J. M. Sands, S. K. Kumar, Nature 

1995, 374, 709-711. 

[123] Y. Amit, A. Faust, I. Lieberman, L. Yedidya, U. Banin, Phys. Status Solidi A 2012, 209, 

235-242. 

[124] E. Ploshnik, A. Salant, U. Banin, R. Shenhar, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 2774-2779. 


 
41 

 

[125] A. Persano, M. De Giorgi, A. Fiore, R. Cingolani, L. Manna, A. Cola, R. Krahne, ACS 

Nano 2010, 4, 1646-1652. 

[126] Q. Zhang, S. Gupta, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 3898-3899. 

[127] E. Ploshnik, A. Salant, U. Banin, R. Shenhar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2010, 12, 

11885-11893. 

[128] D. Steiner, D. Azulay, A. Aharoni, A. Salant, U. Banin, O. Millo, Phys. Rev. B 2009, 

80, 195308. 

[129] T. Wang, X. Wang, D. Lamontagne, Z. Wang, Y. C. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 

6022-6025. 

[130] International Telecommunication Union -ITU-R, Recomm. ITU-R BT. 2020 2015, 10, 1-

8. 

[131] T. Erdem, H. V. Demir, Nanophotonics 2013, 2, 57-81. 

[132] R. Zhu, Z. Luo, H. Chen, Y. Dong, S.-T. Wu, Opt. Express 2015, 23, 23680. 

[133] N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, P. Z. El-Khoury, A. N. Tarnovsky, M. Kirsanova, I. Nemitz, 

A. Nemchinov, M. Zamkov, ACS Nano 2010, 4, 1837-1844. 

[134] F. Pisanello, L. Martiradonna, G. Leménager, P. Spinicelli, A. Fiore, L. Manna, J. P. 

Hermier, R. Cingolani, E. Giacobino, M. De Vittorio, A. Bramati, Appl. Phys. Lett. 

2010, 96, 033101. 

[135] S. Coe-Sullivan, W. Liu, P. Allen, J. S. Steckel, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 2012, 

2, R3026-R3030. 

[136] K. Chen, H.-C. Chen, M.-H. Shih, C.-H. Wang, M. Kuo, Y.-C. Yang, C.-C. Lin, H.-C. 

Kuo, S. Member, J. Lightwave Technol. 2012, 30, 2256-2261. 

[138] nanosys, "QDEF-Quantum Dot Pioneers," 2017. 

[138] S. Coe, W.-K. Woo, M. Bawendi, V. Bulović, Nature 2002, 420, 800-803. 

[139] P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi, V. Bulović, Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 2532-

2536. 


 
42 

 

[140] A. H. Mueller, M. A. Petruska, M. Achermann, D. J. Werder, E. A. Akhadov, D. D. 

Koleske, M. A. Hoffbauer, V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 1039-1044. 

[141] V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. E. Halpert, J.-M. Caruge, M. G. Bawendi, V. Bulović, ACS 

Nano 2009, 3, 3581-3586. 

[142] J. M. Caruge, J. E. Halpert, V. Wood, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Photonics 2008, 

2, 247-250. 

[143] J. W. Stouwdam, R. A. J. Janssen, J. Mater. Chem. 2008, 18, 1889. 

[144] L. Qian, Y. Zheng, J. Xue, P. H. Holloway, Nat. Photonics 2011, 5, 543-548. 

[145] J. Kwak, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, I. Park, J. Lim, M. Park, H. Cho, H. Woo, D. Y. Yoon, K. 

Char, S. Lee, C. Lee, Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 2362-2366. 

[146] Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, J. R. Manders, J. Xue, P. H. 

Holloway, L. Qian, Nat. Photonics 2015, 9, 1-9. 

[147] D. V. Talapin, C. B. Murray, Science 2005, 310, 86-89. 

[148] M. V. Kovalenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, J. Zaumseil, J.-S. Lee, D. V. Talapin, J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 10085-10092. 

[149] L. Sun, J. J. Choi, D. Stachnik, A. C. Bartnik, B.-R. Hyun, G. G. Malliaras, T. Hanrath, 

F. W. Wise, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 369-373. 

[150] H. Shen, W. Cao, N. T. Shewmon, C. Yang, L. S. Li, J. Xue, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 1211-

1216. 

[151] D. Bozyigit, V. Wood, MRS Bull. 2013, 38, 731-736. 

[152] F. García-Santamaría, Y. Chen, J. Vela, R. D. Schaller, J. A. Hollingsworth, V. I. 

Klimov, Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 3482-3488. 

[153] F. García-Santamaría, S. Brovelli, R. Viswanatha, J. A. Hollingsworth, H. Htoon, S. A. 

Crooker, V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 687-693. 

[154] D. Bozyigit, O. Yarema, V. Wood, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23, 3024-3029. 


 
43 

 

[155] J. S. Steckel, P. Snee, S. Coe-Sullivan, J. P. Zimmer, J. E. Halpert, P. Anikeeva, L. A. 

Kim, V. Bulovic, M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2006, 45, 5796-5799; Angew. 

Chem. 2006, 118, 5928-5931. 

[156] R. Meerheim, M. Furno, S. Hofmann, B. Lüssem, K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 

253305. 

[157] S. Nam, N. Oh, Y. Zhai, M. Shim, ACS Nano 2015, 9, 878-885. 

[158] E. Rothenberg, M. Kazes, E. Shaviv, U. Banin, Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 1581-1586. 

[159] K. Park, Z. Deutsch, J. J. Li, D. Oron, S. Weiss, ACS Nano 2012, 6, 10013-10023. 

[160] J. Müller, J. M. Lupton, P. G. Lagoudakis, F. Schindler, R. Koeppe, A. L. Rogach, J. 

Feldmann, D. V. Talapin, H. Weller, Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 2044-2049. 

[161] The European parliament and the council of European union, "DIRECTIVE 

2002/95/EC on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical 

and electronic equipment", 2003, 19-23. 

[162] C. Ippen, T. Greco, Y. Kim, J. Kim, M. S. Oh, C. J. Han, A. Wedel, Org. Electron. 

2014, 15, 126-131. 

[163] W. Ji, P. Jing, W. Xu, X. Yuan, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 

103, 053106. 

[164] J. Bang et al., Chem. Mater. 2010, 22, 233-240. 

[165] G. Jia, U. Banin, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 11121-11127. 

[166] H. Li, R. Brescia, R. Krahne, G. Bertoni, M. J. P. Alcocer, C. D'Andrea, F. Scotognella, 

F. Tassone, M. Zanella, M. De Giorgi, L. Manna, ACS Nano 2012, 6, 1637-1647. 

[167] C. Bouet, D. Laufer, B. Mahler, B. Nadal, H. Heuclin, S. Pedetti, G. Patriarche, B. 

Dubertret, Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 3002-3008. 

[168] A. A. Guzelian, J. E. B. Katari, A. V. Kadavanich, U. Banin, K. Hamad, E. Juban, A. P. 

Alivisatos, R. H. Wolters, C. C. Arnold, J. R. Heath, J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 7212-

7219. 


 
44 

 

[169] R. Xie, D. Battaglia, X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 15432-15433. 

[170] X.Yang, D. Zhao, K. S. Leck, S. T. Tan, Y. X. Tang, J. L. Zhao, H. V. Demir, X. W. 

Sun, Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, 4180-4185. 

[171] W. S. Song, H. S. Lee, J. C. Lee, D. S. Jang, Y. Choi, M. Choi, H. Yang, J. Nanopart. 

Res. 2013, 15, 1750. 

[172] M. D. Tessier, D. Dupont, K. De Nolf, J. De Roo, Z. Hens, Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 

4893-4898. 

[173] B. J. Beberwyck, A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 19977-19980. 

[174] L. De Trizio et al., Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 1120-1128. 

[175] B. J. Beberwyck, Y. Surendranath, A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 

19759-19770. 

[176] J. Lim, M. Park, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, S. Lee, C. Lee, K. Char, ACS Nano 2013, 7, 9019-

9026. 

[177] Q. A. Akkerman, A. Genovese, C. George, M. Prato, I. Moreels, A. Casu, S. Marras, A. 

Curcio, A. Scarpellini, T. Pellegrino, L. Manna, V. Lesnyak, ACS Nano 2015, 9, 521-

531. 

[178] W. Bryks, M. Wette, N. Velez, S.-W. Hsu, A. R. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 

6175-6178. 

[179] B. Chen, H. Zhong, W. Zhang, Z. Tan, Y. Li, C. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Bando, S. Yang, B. 

Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2012, 22, 2081-2088. 

[180] J.-H. Kim, H. Yang, Opt. Lett. 2014, 39, 5002. 

[181] L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. 

Yang, A. Walsh, M. V. Kovalenko, Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 3692-3696. 

[182] Q. A. Akkerman et al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 1010-1016. 

[183] S. Sun, D. Yuan, Y. Xu, A. Wang, Z. Deng, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 3648-3657. 


 
45 

 

[184] X. Li, D. Yu, F. Cao, Y. Gu, Y. Wei, Y. Wu, J. Song, H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater. 

2016, 26, 5903-5912. 

[185] Y. Bekenstein, B. A. Koscher, S. W. Eaton, P. Yang, A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. 

Soc. 2015, 137, 16008-16011. 

[186] S. Aharon, L. Etgar, Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 3230-3235. 

[187] M. Meyns, M. Perálvarez, A. Heuer-Jungemann, W. Hertog, M. Ibáñez, R. Nafria, A. 

Genç, J. Arbiol, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Carreras, A. Cabot, A. G. Kanaras, ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 19579-19586. 

[188] X. Li, Y. Wu, S. Zhang, B. Cai, Y. Gu, J. Song, H. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2016, 26, 

2435-2445. 

[189] T. Udayabhaskararao, M. Kazes, L. Houben, H. Lin, D. Oron, Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 

1302-1308. 

[190] X. Qiu, B. Cao, S. Yuan, X. Chen, Z. Qiu, Y. Jiang, Q. Ye, H. Wang, H. Zeng, J. Liu, 

M. G. Kanatzidis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2017, 159, 227-234. 

[191] W. Ming, H. Shi, M. H. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 13852-13858. 

[192] F. Giustino, H. J. Snaith, ACS Energy Lett. 2016, 1, 1233-1240. 

 

 
 


 
46 

 

Figure 1. 
SCNCs with different dimensionalities and structures. Each dimensionality 

category illustrates different structures of SCNCs. The TEM image for 0D shows CdSe-core 

CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S/ZnS-multishell NCs (reprinted from Ref. 37 with permission). The TEM 

image for quasi-1D (q-1D) shows the nanorod-in-rod structure of CdSe-in-CdS NCs (reprinted 

from Ref. 38 with permission). TEM image for 2D presents CdSe core nanoplatelets (reprinted 

from Ref. 39 with permission). The left TEM image of mixed dimensionalities shows double 

heterojunction CdS nanorods with CdSe/ZnS core-shell tips (reprinted from Ref. 40 with 

permission). The right STEM image of mixed dimensionalities shows elemental mapping of 

CdSe/Cd1-xZnxSe seeded nanorods with a graded shell; the upper semicircle is an overlay of Zn 

and Cd spatial distributions, which demonstrates the graded-shell structure, while the bottom 

semicircle is an overlay of Zn and Se spatial distributions, which demonstrates the seeded-rod 

structure (reprinted from Ref. 41 with permission). All scale bars correspond to 20 nm. 


 
47 

 

Figure 2. 
a) Schematic representation of the electronic energy structure of different-sized 

SCNCs, from bulk to CQDs with decreasing size. b) 1931 CIE chromaticity diagram with the 

s-RGB (black triangle) and the NTSC 1987 (white triangle) color gamut. The OSRAM Color 

Calculator software ( http://www.osram.us ) was used to map the colors. c) Induced 

fluorescence (UV) of SCNCs with different sizes and dimensions along with their 

corresponding narrow PL spectra. 

 

 

 
 


 
48 

 

Figure 3. 
a) Schematic diagram of the conduction and valence band structure in a CQD. b) 

Effect of the shape on the electronic properties of SCNCs. The diagram presents the Eg value 

of CdSe quantum wells, wires, and dots, as a function of the length of the confined dimension. 

The dotted line represents the exciton Bohr radius. Reprinted from Ref. 60 with permission. c) 

Tunneling I-V curve of InAs QDs exhibiting single-electron tunneling effects. The left inset 

presents a 10×10 nm2 STM topographic image of the QD. The right inset shows a schematic 

illustration of the STM measurement; the QD is linked to the surface, while the tip is positioned 

above the QD. d) Tunneling conductance spectrum (dI/dV versus V). The arrows indicate the 

main energy separations: Ec is the single-electron charging energy, Eg is the nanocrystal band 

gap, and ΔVB and ΔCB are the spacings between levels in the valence and conduction bands, 

respectively. e) STS spectra of a size series of InAs CQDs. As the size of the CQD is decreased, 

the energy gap increases. (c)-(e) reprinted from Ref. 62 with permission. 


 
49 

 

Figure 4.  
Schematic diagrams representing the dynamics of the charge carriers in SCNCs. 

a) Two ways for generating an exciton: by photon absorption, in which an electron is excited 

to the conduction band, thereby leaving a hole in the valence band, or by injecting electrons and 

holes into the conduction band and valence band, respectively. b) A thermalization process, in 

which a high-energy exciton decays to the band gap. c) Exciton recombination routes: 

radiatively, by emitting a photon with an energy equivalent to the band gap; nonradiatively, by 

decaying to a trap state; or transferring the band gap energy to excite a third charge carrier 

(Auger recombination). 


 
50 

 

Figure 5. 
Schematic description of different band alignment possibilities in core-shell 

heterostructures. The resultant electron (red) and hole (blue) wave functions are illustrated. 

 
 


 
51 

 

Figure 6. 
a) Absorption and PL emission spectra of bare CdSe seed CQDs (4.3 nm in 

diamater, green) and the corresponding spectra of CdSe/CdS-seeded rods with the same seeds 

(dimensions 4.7×30 nm, yellow), showing the separation between the absorption and emission 

upon rod growth. b) Illustration of close-packed SCNCs layer. Whereas the spatial separation 

between the emitting cores is short for dot-in-sphere structures and leads to a FRET process, 

the emitting cores for dot-in-rod structures are separated and FRET is eliminated. Reprinted 

from Ref. 85 with permission). c) Emission polarization (P) of several dot-in-rod SCNCs 

correlated with their AFM image. The polarization direction is aligned with the long axis of the 

rod. Reprinted from ref. 86 with permission. 

 

 
 


 
52 

 

Figure 7. 
a) Typical emission time trajectory from a single NC. The intensity flickers 

between "on" and "off" states. Whereas every electron-hole pair recombine radiatively during 

the "on" state, the ejection of one of the charge carriers to a surface trap results in the SCNC 

moving into the "off" state, where the exciton recombines through a trap state, or alternatively 

the core is left charged, which leads to an enhanced nonradiative Auger process with another 

exciton. b) Two ways to eliminate blinking: either by growing a thick shell which prevents 

tunneling of one of the charge carriers to surface traps or by growing a graded shell which 

suppresses the Auger process. 

 
 


 
53 

 

Figure 8. 
Assembly techniques for display applications. a) Two mechanisms for transfer 

printing are illustrated: structured printing, in which the stamp replicates its pattern to the 

substrate upon stamping, and intaglio printing, in which the "inked" patternless stamp is pressed 

onto an engraved surface, to retain its "negative" pattern, which is later transferred to the 

substrate. Both methods lead to full-color CQDs patterns. The upper image above the printed 

device column for each printing method depicts PL images of the transfer-printed RGB QD 

patterns (reprinted from Refs. 110 and  111 with permission), while the lower part shows the 

transfer efficiencies of a pattern with different sizes, comparing the resolution limitations of 

both methods (reprinted from Ref. 111 with permission). b) A full-color QD active matrix 

display fabricated by ink-jet printing. The top panel shows microscopy images of the pixel 

arrays. Inset: magnified image of RGB subpixels; the lower panel shows an EL image of RGB 

subpixel arrays. Reprinted from Ref. 115 with permission. c) A PL image of green and red QD 

arrays printed by e-jet printing (reprinted from Ref. 116 with permission). d) 1. Illustration of 

a patterning technique involving alternating photolithography and LBL assembly steps for the 

patterning of R, G, and B CQDs. 2. PL image of the patterned substrate (reprinted from Ref. 

117 with permission). 


 
54 

 

Figure 9. 
Unidirectional alignment methods. a) Alignment of CdSe/CdS nanorods by 

applying an electric field during evaporation of the solution. The red arrow marks the direction 

of the electric field. b) Higher magnification of the red square in (a), where the individual 

nanorods are resolved; some are highlighted in red as a guide to the eye (reprinted from Ref. 83 

with permission). c) A UHR-SEM image of a thin film with aligned rods on top, obtained by 

rubbing with a cloth. The rods clearly demonstrate a preferred orientation along the rubbing 

direction. Some rods are colored in red as a guide to the eye. Inset: Illustration of the mechanical 

rubbing process: a rubbing cloth is pressed onto a spin-coated film; the rotation of the sample 

in the opposite direction to the rotation of the fibers causes the rods to pile up along the trenches 

of the fibers, and form ordered arrays of aligned rods (reprinted from Ref. 123 with permission). 

d) SEM image of aligned CdSe nanorods along a block copolymer domain (reprinted from Ref. 

124 with permission). e) SEM image of CdSe/CdS nanorods aligned by applying a voltage 

while slow evaporation along an interface occurs. In this method, ribbons of NRs oriented 

parallel to the electric field are obtained (reprinted from Ref. 125 with permission). 

 
 


 
55 

 

Figure 10. a) Typical architecture of a LCD display containing SCNCs. In this scheme, the 

anisotropic NCs are aligned with the vertical polarizer, thereby leading to an improvement of 

the efficiency. b) Schematic spectrum of a BLU of GaN LEDs with YAG phosphors along with 

the red, green, and blue color filters compared to a BLU containing SCNCs which can be tuned 

to match the color filters. c) Comparison of two LCD TV displays with and without a film 

containing SCNCs (left and right displays, respectively), showing the expanded color gamut 

which leads to a brighter, efficient, and livelier picture with SCNCs (reproduced from  

http://www.nanosysinc.com/media-room/media/ with permission). 


 
56 

 

Figure 11. a,b) Typical architecture of EL QD-LED display layers along with their band 

alignment. Electrons and holes are injected via the transport layers into the emissive layer where 

they recombine radiatively. c) The first demonstration of a full-color 4-inch EL QD-LED 

display, where the pixels were patterned by a microcontact printing method with a resolution 

of up to 1000 pixels per inch (reprinted from Ref. 110 with permission). 


 
57 

 

Figure 12. A new possible mode of operation for SCNCs in a display where the dot-in-rod is 

aligned with the electric field lines in the red, green, and blue subpixels. Application of an 

electric field bias causes the electron and hole wave functions to be spatially separated, thus 

enabling intensity switching to produce any color from a combination of red, green, and blue 

base colors. 


 
58 

 

Figure 13. New functionalities for SCNC displays. a) Energy band diagram of a DHNR-LED 

along with directions of charge flow for the emission (orange arrows) and detection (blue 

arrows) of light as well as a schematic representation of a DHNR. b) Automatic brightness 

control at the single-pixel level in response to an approaching white LED bulb or an 

approaching finger that blocks ambient light, thus paving the way towards interactive 

displays.[12] 


 
59 

 

 

Yossef E. Panfil completed his BSc at JCT and then his MSc in Applied 

Physics at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He is currently a PhD 

student at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Prof. Banin’s group. His 

research focuses on the study of excitons and multiexcitons behavior, 

interaction, and control in a variety of colloidal semiconductor 

nanostructures by using single nanocrystal spectroscopy. 

Meirav Oded received her PhD (2016) in chemistry from the Hebrew 

University of Jerusalem under the guidance of Prof. Roy Shenhar. During 

her PhD she studied the selective deposition of polyelectrolytes on block 

copolymer templates with nanometric resolution. She is currently a staff 

scientist in the group of Prof. Banin. Her research interests are surface 

chemistry and self-assembly methods of colloidal semiconductor 

nanocrystals. 

Uri Banin holds the Alfred & Erica Larisch Memorial Chair at the 

Institute of Chemistry and the Center for Nanoscience and 

Nanotechnology at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem (HU). He was the 

founding director of the HU Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology 

(2001-2010) and is a founder of Qlight Nanotech, which was acquired by 

Merck KgaA. His research focuses on chemistry and physics of 

nanocrystals including synthesis of nanoparticles, size- and shape-

dependent properties, and emerging applications in displays, lighting, solar energy harvesting, 

3D printing, electronics, and biology. 


