Fourth-Order Topological Insulator via Dimensional Reduction

Kai Chen1,2, Matthew Weiner1,2, Mengyao Li1,2, Xiang Ni3 , Andrea Alù3,2,1, and Alexander B. 

Khanikaev1,2

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Grove School of Engineering, City College of the City University 

of New York, 140th Street and Convent Avenue, New York, NY 10031, USA.

2Physics Program, Graduate Center of the City University of New York, New York, NY 10016, USA.

3Photonics Initiative, Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York, New York, NY 

10031, USA

Abstract
The properties of topological systems are inherently tied to their dimensionality. Higher-
dimensional physical systems exhibit topological properties not shared by their lower dimensional 
counterparts and, in general, offer richer physics. One example is a d-dimensional quantized 
multipole topological insulator, which supports multipoles of order up to 2𝑑 and a hierarchy of 
gapped boundary modes with 0-D corner modes at the top. While multipole topological insulators 
have been successfully realized in electromagnetic and mechanical 2D systems with quadrupole 
polarization, and a 3D octupole topological insulator was recently demonstrated in acoustics, going 
beyond the three physical dimensions of space is an intriguing and challenging task. In this work,
we apply dimensional reduction to map a 4D higher-order topological insulator (HOTI) onto an 
equivalent aperiodic 1D array sharing the same spectrum, and emulate in this system the properties 
of a hexadecapole topological insulator. We observe the 1D counterpart of zero-energy states
localized at 4D HOTI corners – the hallmark of multipole topological phase. Interestingly, the 
dimensional reduction guarantees that one of the 4D corner states remains localized to the edge of 
the 1D array, while all other localize in the bulk and retain their zero-energy eigenvalues. This 
discovery opens new directions in multi-dimensional topological physics arising in lower-
dimensional aperiodic systems, and it unveils highly unusual resonances protected by topological 
properties inherited from higher dimensions.

Introduction
The dimensionality of a topological system plays a determining role in defining the symmetry 
classification and, therefore, the topological invariants that identify the topological phase specific 
to such system1, 2, 3. For instance, four-dimensional quantum Hall systems can exhibit a non-
vanishing 2nd class Chern number that is not shared by systems with three or fewer dimensions, 
hence it cannot be implemented in three physical dimensions without mapping to a lower 
dimensional analogue4. However, already three-dimensional topological materials imply 
challenging fabrication demands due to the complex structures of the lattices5, 6, 7, 8, 9. It would 
therefore be highly advantageous to explore higher-dimensional topological physics with fewer 
physical spatial dimensions. This quest can be achieved in two ways: i) introducing synthetic 
dimensions or ii) mapping a higher-dimensional system onto its lower-dimensional counterpart. 
The first approach implements lattices with dimensions higher than the spatial dimensions by 
exploiting internal degrees of freedom, which could be of spectral10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, temporal or 
spatial in nature2, 3, 4, 5,18, 19, 20, 21 , and therefore it remains experimentally challenging. The second 


approach, based on dimensional reduction and mapping onto a lower-dimensional system, has 
been proven quite fruitful in other areas of research: as an example, the celebrated Harper-
Hofstadter Hamiltonian has been recently emulated in reconfigurable quasi-periodic 1D resonant 
acoustic lattices22, 23. In addition, the existence of boundary modes stemming from the 2nd Chern 
class topological phase has been reported in photonics4 and in an angled optical superlattice of 
ultracold bosonic atoms24.

Higher dimensions are crucial to unveil the new physics in the recently introduced class of 

higher-order topological insulators25, 26. The dimensionality of HOTIs defines the multiplicity of 
hosted topological boundary modes, which can be tailored on demand and protected by higher-
dimensional symmetries. Moreover, the possibility to control both localization and spectral 
position of a large number of topologically protected boundary states can be truly transformative 
for many applications. So far the research on HOTIs mainly focused on the experimental 
realization of a 2D quadrupole topological phase27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. The experimental realization of 
a 3D octupole topological phase remains challenging, due to the required complex dimerized 
coupling protocol within the lattice and the requirement of a synthetic magnetic flux of 𝜋 in all 
three dimensions. Only recently an octupole HOTI was implemented in 3D acoustic metamaterials 
fabricated by highly precise and controllable stereolithographic 3D printing34, but translating these
in a different physical domain and for shorter wavelengths would be extremely challenging. 

In this work, we apply dimensionality reduction to demonstrate the crucial role of higher-

dimensional topological physics by implementing a 4D hexadecapolar HOTI (h-HOTI), which is
mapped onto its aperiodic 1D counterpart, and we experimentally confirm localization of projected 
topological 4D corner states in one dimension. To this aim, we apply Lanczos tridiagonalization 
and map a 4D tight-binding model of h-HOTI onto a one-dimensional acoustic system with strictly 
local aperiodic coupling distributions along the array. We obtain one pinned corner state of the 4D 
HOTI being preserved onto the edge of our sample by such mapping – a unique feature enabled 
by the Lanczos transformation35, 36, 37, 38. Also, the other corner states, despite being located in the 
bulk, are pinned in frequency and location, and preserve their topological characteristics, being 
protected by higher-dimensional symmetries.

Results

The proposed 4D h-HOTI is described by a tight-binding Hamiltonian with nearest-neighbor 
coupling in 4D hypercubic unit cell, as schematically shown in Fig. 1a. In Bloch representation,
the Hamiltonian can be expressed as

ℋ̂4𝐷(𝒌) = 𝑡2 sin(𝑘𝑥) Γ̂3 + [𝑡1 + 𝑡2 cos(𝑘𝑥)]Γ̂4 + 𝑡2 sin(𝑘𝑦) Γ̂1

+[𝑡1 + 𝑡2 cos(𝑘𝑦)]Γ̂2 + 𝑡2 sin(𝑘𝑧) Γ̂5 + [𝑡1 + 𝑡2 cos(𝑘𝑧)]Γ̂6

+𝑡2 sin(𝑘𝑤) Γ̂7 + [𝑡1 + 𝑡2cos (𝑘𝑤 )]Γ̂8,
(1)

where 𝑡1 and 𝑡2 are the nearest-neighbor intracell and intercell hopping amplitudes, respectively. 
In Eq (1), the matrices Γ̂𝑖 = − 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎2 ⊗ 𝜎𝑖 for i = 1,2,3 , Γ̂4 = 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎1 ⊗ 𝜎0, Γ̂5 =
𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎2 ⊗ 𝜎0 ⊗ 𝜎0 , Γ̂6 = 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎1 ⊗ 𝜎0 ⊗ 𝜎0 ,  Γ̂7 = 𝜎1 ⊗ 𝜎0 ⊗ 𝜎0 ⊗ 𝜎0 , Γ̂8 = 𝜎2 ⊗ 𝜎0 ⊗
𝜎0 ⊗ 𝜎0, 𝜎𝑖=1,2,3 are Pauli matrices, and 𝜎0 is the identity matrix.


Figure 1. Unit cell, band spectra and corner modes of 4D h-HOTI.  (a) Schematic of the unit cell of a 
4D higher order topological insulator. The blue lines indicate positive hopping (zero phase) and the red
lines indicate negative hopping (𝜋 phase), so that each hypersurface has net flux of 𝜋. The black dashed 
lines indicate inter-cell connections to the lattice (with phases of 0 and 𝜋). (b) Band spectra for the trivial 
(blue dots) hyperlattice corresponding to intracell hopping amplitude 𝑡1 larger than intercell hopping 𝑡2 ( 
𝑡1
𝑡2 = 10). Band spectra for topologically nontrivial (red dots) higher-order phase with 𝑡1 < 𝑡2 ( 

𝑡2
𝑡1 = 10), 

𝛿 = 0.2𝑡1. The inset figure shows a zoom-in confirming the presence of 16 corner modes. Colored regions 
indicate topological bandgaps of different order. (c) Amplitude distribution of corner mode across the 
lattice, showing the field decay and localization in all four dimensions. Each subplot shows the field 
distribution projected on the xyz-coordinate frame for specific values of 𝑤 = 1 and 𝑤 = 3 corresponding 
to the same sublattice. The corner mode shown corresponds to the energy eigenvalue indicated by the 
enlarged (hexagon shaped) red point in (b) inset.

The energy spectrum found from the 4D tight-binding model (TBM) of a finite (3x3x3x3x16) h-
HOTI lattice with 𝜋-flux through each 2D plaquette of the unit cell is shown in Fig. 1b. The blue 


points in Fig. 1b correspond to the energy spectrum of a topologically trivial phase, with intracell 
hopping amplitude exceeding the intercell hopping 𝑡2 < 𝑡1, while the red dots show the energy 
spectrum of a topologically non-trivial HOTI phase, with 𝑡2 > 𝑡1. In the latter case, the system of
finite size in all four dimensions is expected to host sixteen 4th order topological corner states, due 
to the higher-order bulk-boundary correspondence25, 26. (See more detailed discussion in the 
Supplementary section S1, S2). The amplitude distribution of one of the corner modes within the 
h-HOTI, obtained from TBM, is shown in Fig. 1c, which confirms that this is the 4th-order state 
localized to the corner of the hyperlattice in all four (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧, 𝑤) directions. In order to make the 
selected corner state better noticeable, we added a small on-site potential to the corner site (𝛿 =
0.2𝑡1) to split this state from the rest of the corner modes.

We now map this finite four-dimensional h-HOTI onto a one-dimensional array of coupled 

resonators with aperiodic hopping amplitudes using the Lanczos transformation. The Lanczos tri-
diagonalization transforms a general Hermitian matrix into a tridiagonal form and, therefore, 
allows for an immediate mapping onto a one-dimensional tight-biding model with an only-nearest-
neighbor hopping distribution characterized by an inhomogeneous (aperiodic) profile. The 
Lanczos transformation is unitary, which ensures to preserves spectrum and eigenstate 
orthogonality of the original Hamiltonian, and it can be performed with a specific site of choice
(i.e., a component of the eigenvector) being fixed, known as anchor site. The first property 
guarantees that the final (tridiagonal) effective 1D Hamiltonian will still be Hermitian ℋ̂1𝐷

𝑒𝑓𝑓 =

𝑈̂𝐿ℋ̂4𝐷𝑈̂𝐿

−1 = ∑ 𝜖𝑖𝐶𝑖

+𝐶𝑖
𝑖
+ ∑ 𝜏𝑖𝐶𝑖

+𝐶𝑖+1
𝑖
+ 𝑐. 𝑐, where 𝑈̂𝐿 is the Lanczos transformation operator, 

and 𝜖𝑖 and 𝜏𝑖 are the effective on-site energy and hopping amplitudes in the 1D array, and that the
number of degrees of freedom of the 4D Hamiltonian is preserved. The second property ensures
that any chosen site of the 1D array will have a one-to-one correspondence with one of the sites of 
the original higher-dimensional lattice, implying that a component of the eigenstate at a chosen 
site is fully preserved. This property can be used to make sure that at least one corner site in 4D is 
still anchored and pinned to the edge of the 1D array, implying that the corresponding corner state 
confined to this site in 4D will remain localized at the physical boundary of our aperiodic 1D lattice. 

Figure 2. Band spectra and boundary mode of the truncated one-dimensional resonator array 
mapped from 4D h-HOTI. (a) Hopping amplitudes and onsite energies of the effective 1D model. (b) 
Band spectra of the effective 1D model truncated to 20 sites obtained using the tight-binding model. The 
colored regions separate modes of different order and represent topological band gaps inherited from 4D h-
HOTI. (c) Amplitude distributions corresponding to the projected 4th order topological corner mode in the 
1D array, as found from tight-binding calculations. 


The results of Lanczos transformation applied to the 4D Hamiltonian (Fig. 1a) are shown 

in Fig. 2a, where the first 100 hopping amplitudes 𝜏𝑛 and on-site energies 𝜖𝑛 of the effective 
aperiodic 1D model are plotted. The real-valued character of the 4D Hamiltonian (only phase of 0 
and 𝜋 for hopping 𝑡𝑛) ensures that the Lanczos operator 𝑈̂𝐿 is an orthogonal matrix, yielding real 
values for onsite energies and real positive hopping amplitudes in the dimensionally reduced 1D 
array. Interestingly, the on-site energy 𝜖𝑛 for the first 30 sites is found to be zero, and starts to vary
afterwards. Moreover, the hopping amplitude between the 30th and 31th site is 0, indicating that 
this part of the chain is disconnected from the rest of the array. 

We numerically confirmed that the mapped 1D Hamiltonian has a spectrum identical to the 

one of the 4D HOTI, as expected, and that the anchored corner state appears pinned to the edge of 
the 1D system. Moreover, we confirmed that the inverse transformation of a 1D boundary state 
maps it onto corner states localized at the anchor site in 4D HOTI. It is worth mentioning that the 
unitary 
character 
of 
the 
transformation 
was 
enforced 
by 
implementing 
Lanczos

biorthogonalization algorithm37, which ensured numerical stability and one-to-one correspondence 
between the spectrum and eigenstates in 4D and 1D systems.

Interestingly, as the used transformation preserves only the anchor site, all other zero-

energy 4D corner states appear in the bulk of the 1D lattice, but they have to remain spatially 
localized and topologically protected (a proof can be found in Supplement Section S3). However, 
since the number of higher-order boundary states (16 for the 4D case considered here) exceeds the 
number of boundaries of the projected 1D system (only two), most of the projected topological 
corner modes localize in the bulk of the 1D array. The proposed procedure thus not only offers an 
emulation of higher-order topological states in lower-dimensional systems, but it also unveils a 
new class of localized bulk resonances topologically protected by higher-dimensional symmetries
of HOTIs. Indeed, the inspection of the eigenstates of the effective 1D system confirms that all 
other corner states of the original h-HOTI are localized modes in the bulk of the array. (See 
amplitude distribution of these corner modes in Supplementary Section S4).

The dimensional reduction allows for one more simplification of significant relevance for 

the experimental realization of 𝐷-dimensional HOTIs, whose number of sites increases rapidly as 
(2𝑁)𝐷, where 𝑁 is the number of unit cells along one edge of the finite (hyper-) cubic array: the 
size of the system can be dramatically reduced by cutting the array at any of the weak bonds (𝜏𝑛 ≈
0) in the projected 1D lattice, without affecting the anchored higher-order topological corner state
due to its localization at the boundary. The same holds true for the projected corner states that 
localize in the bulk of the 1D system, provided that the truncation is far enough from their
localization site. The simulated results for the truncated 1D lattice with only 20 sites (out of 1296 
original sites in 4D) are shown in Fig. 2b,c, and its spectrum is seen to retain a gapped character 
with two 4th order corner states pinned to zero-energy (anchored-site corner mode slightly moves 
away from zero-energy). Note that we intentionally cut the chain after 20th site to demonstrate 
stability of the corner modes against cutting not at exactly vanishing bond (such as after 30th site). 
Inspection of the probability distribution |𝜓|2 (Fig. 2c) confirms that one of these states is 
localized at the boundary (the anchor site) and the other one is localized in the bulk at the 10th site. 

To confirm that the corner modes and their 1D projections are not affected by the 

truncation, we performed inverse Lanczos transformation and mapped the eigenstates of the 
truncated 1D system back to 4D. To this aim, we assigned zero amplitudes to the missing sites of 
the truncated 1D lattice to restore number of degrees of freedom. The comparison of the field 
distribution on the xyz hyperplane for the boundary modes of different order (indicated by numbers 


in Fig. 2b) is shown in Fig. 3, where the results for lattices truncated to 20 sites (lower panels e-h) 
and 30 sites (upper panels a-d) are plotted alongside. Since the case of 30 sites corresponds to the 
situation of 30 sites decoupled from the rest of the array, these results can be considered exact. The 
comparison reveals no difference in the field distributions not only for 4D corner states, but even 
for selected lower order hinge and surface states, and only the hypersurface states are clearly 
affected. Thus, the modes in general partially recover their field profiles in the projected 1d system, 
and appear separated by the reminiscent of bandgaps indicated by colored regions in Fig. 2b. This 
farther proves the robustness of the projected corner modes to truncations, which makes fabrication 
of systems supporting such states especially straightforward.

Figure 3. The effect of truncation of effective 1D lattice. a,b,c,d show the amplitude distributions for 
four different eigenstates of the 1D array of 30 sites, indicated by numbers (1 to 4) in Fig. 2b, projected 
back to 4D by the inverse Lanczos transformation. The modes clearly represent corner states, as well as 
reminiscent of hinge, surface, and hypersurface states in 4D, respectively. e,f,g,h – the same, but for the 
case of 1D array truncated to 20 sites. Only the projections on the  𝑥𝑦𝑧 hyperplane are shown. The 
distribution in 𝑤 direction is also found to be consistent for the two cases (not shown).

Clearly, only some of the modes are retained after the truncation of the array due to 

reduction in the number of degrees of freedom. As some of these states have an extended 
distribution in the 1D array, it is not surprising that their spectrum is slightly perturbed (due to 
weak coupling with the rest of the array). The rest of the states, which primarily localized in the 
removed part of the lattice, are dropped by the cutting procedure. We also calculated the band 
spectra and amplitude distribution of the effective 1D model truncated after the 30th site, finding
that the zero energy and the corresponding amplitude distribution are not changed (See the 
Supplementary Section S5).

To experimentally confirm the feasibility of the dimensional reduction for the h-HOTI, we 

designed an acoustic aperiodic array of resonators emulating the 1D TBM using the finite-element 
method (FEM) software COMSOL Multiphysics (Acoustic Module). The individual resonators 
have the same height 3.0 cm, so that the lowest-frequency resonance, corresponding to an odd 


pressure profile in the vertical (axial) direction (with a single node at the center), arises at 
𝑓~5720 Hz. Coupling is introduced by adding narrow channel-waveguides connecting the 
resonators in the array. The coupling strength between resonators (the hopping in the TBM) is 
modulated aperiodically in accordance with the mapping by vertically shifting the position of the 
connectors with respect to the node of the resonant mode. The simulation results for the system of 
20 coupled resonators are presented in Fig. 4a,b. Figure 4a shows the pressure field profile of the 
boundary mode and of the localized bulk mode stemming from the two corner states of the original 
4D h-HOTI. Figure 4b confirms that the spectral positions of these modes are indeed localized in 
the mid-gap (with a small deliberate shift for the edge state), and the extended bulk modes of 1D 
array are gapped, which is in agreement with the results of the TBM in Fig. 2 d.

Figure 4. Band spectra and “zero-energy” modes of the truncated one-dimensional acoustic resonator 
array mapped from 4D h-HOTI. (a),(d) Amplitude distributions corresponding to the projected 4th order 
topological corner mode in 1D array, as found from first principle simulations and experimentally, 
respectively. (b) Band spectra of the effective 1D model truncated to 20 sites obtained using first-principle 
FEM calculations. (c) The effective 1D model fabricated using 3D printing with hopping amplitudes 𝜏𝑖’s 
(the coupling between the sites) varying with position. (e) Experimentally measured density of states in the 
array. Yellow, blue, and red regions are color-coded to represent bulk, localized bulk, and localized edge 
modes dominating in these regions.

The designed array of 20 coupled acoustic resonators was fabricated with the use of a high-

resolution stereolithographic (STL) 3D printing (see Methods).The resonators with connectors 
attached to them were printed and snapped together using interlocking features deliberately 
introduced in the design, thus allowing for the assembly of a rigid and stable array. The assembled 
structure of 20 resonators is shown in Fig. 4c. The modes were probed with a local excitation in 
each resonator by placing a speaker at holes introduced on the bottom of every resonator. The 
strength of the local response was measured using a microphone attached to the second hole on 
the top of the resonators. The holes were small enough not to introduce excessive loss, but 
sufficiently large to probe the acoustic pressure field inside the resonators.

The frequency-response spectra for selected groups of resonators - the anchor boundary 

site (red band), the 10th resonator in the bulk (blue band), and averaged over all other bulk sites
(yellow bands), are shown in Fig. 4e by color-coded bands, and clearly reveal two distinct types 
of states (see Methods for detailed measurement and data analysis). The one type is represented
by two mid-gap states localized to the boundary and in the bulk at the 10th resonator, respectively;
the modes that correspond to the topological corner states of the original 4D h-HOTI. Direct 


measurement of the field profiles corresponding to the excitation at the terminal anchor site with 
the frequency close to the single-resonator (“zero-energy”) frequency confirms that the state is 
highly localized at the boundary of the array (Fig. 4d, blue line). Similarly, the second 4D corner 
state can be directly excited by driving the 10-th resonator at the “zero-energy” frequency, and it 
is found to strongly localize in the bulk. Another type of states represents delocalized states of the 
1D array, which are spectrally gapped, and corresponding to non-topological hinge states of the 
4D system. Despite the finite bandwidth of the resonances, of about 50Hz due to loss induced by 
the leakage of sound through the probe holes and absorption in the resin, the localized states 
projected from the 4D topological corner states clearly retain their properties, i.e., a strong 
localization in the array and well-defined spectral position.

The emergence of a quantized multipole moment and corner states is deeply related to the 

symmetries of the system, i.e., the presence of anti-commuting reflection symmetries in the 4D h-
HOTI. Similarly, the “zero-energy” of the states is ensured by chiral symmetry, which stems from 
the fact that in the 4D h-HOTI the sites that belong to the same sublattice do not couple with each 
other. In addition, the Hamiltonian (1) possesses reflection symmetries that anti-commutate with 
each other because of the flux of 𝜋 in each plaquette of the hypercubic lattice. The chiral symmetry
of the system, on the other hand, with matrix representation Γ̂ = 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎3 ⊗ 𝜎0, is expressed
as Γ̂ℋ̂4D Γ̂−1 = −ℋ̂4𝐷, which ensures the overall symmetry of the spectrum and “zero-energy” of 
the corner states. The fact that this
property is
retained during the dimensional 

reduction implies that the chiral symmetries is preserved in new form and can be expressed as 
𝑈̂𝐿Γ̂𝑈̂𝐿

−1. Indeed, due to its local character, the chiral symmetry can be written as a symmetry 

operator for the finite h-HOTI as Γ̂𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑒 = 𝐼𝑁×𝑁 ⊗ Γ̂, where 𝐼𝑁×𝑁 is the 𝑁 by 𝑁 identity matrix 
and 𝑁 is the number of degrees of freedom (sites), and thus is (block)-diagonal. The Lanczos 
transformation changes the local character of the chiral symmetry by mixing different sites (except 
the anchor site) Γ̂1𝐷

𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 𝑈̂𝐿Γ̂𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡𝑒𝑈̂𝐿

−1, thus inducing the new non-local form of chiral symmetry 

Γ̂1𝐷

𝑒𝑓𝑓ℋ̂1𝐷

𝑒𝑓𝑓 Γ̂𝑒𝑓𝑓−1 = −ℋ̂1𝐷

𝑒𝑓𝑓 of the effective 1D Hamiltonian. This effective chiral symmetry of 

the 1D Hamiltonian plays the same role as the original chiral symmetry for 4D h-HOTI and it 
ensures spectral stability of the modes of aperiodic 1D array. However, the non-local character of 
the symmetry operator Γ̂1𝐷

𝑒𝑓𝑓 in 1D is reflected in the presence of correlations of parameters in 

different part of array, hopping amplitudes and on-site energies, within the 1D system, responsible 
for the “zero-energy” of the localized states. The reflection symmetries and the resultant quantized 
multipole moment can be similarly analyzed in the dimensionally reduced system, and the 
quantized multipole moment of the bulk bands in the finite array can be extracted from the 
respective wave functions. Thus, despite its low-dimensional character, the effective 1D system 
inherits the properties of higher-dimensional h-HOTI. Therefore, the projected corner states, 
localized either in the bulk or on the edge of the 1D array, are induced and protected by the 
symmetries of the original 4D system, thus ensuring their very existence and stability specific to 
topological systems. (See more detailed discussion in the Supplementary Section S6).

Summary

In this work we have demonstrated a new approach to emulating higher-dimensional topological 
systems, such as 4D HOTI with quantized hexadecapolar multipole moment, in a dimensionally 
reduced 1D system. We have theoretically mapped the 4D HOTI system onto an effective 1D tight-


binding model with the use of Lanczos tridiagonalization, which was then experimentally 
implemented in an array of coupled acoustic resonators. We have proven that higher-dimensional 
topological corner states arise in the effective 1D system in the form of localized resonant modes
confined to the edge of the system or in the bulk. More importantly, we have shown that these
modes retain their spectral features enforced by chiral symmetry and reflection symmetries, which 
assumes a non-local character in the 1D system, and thus establishes correlation of parameters 
within the array. Thus, the symmetries inherited from the original 4D system are mapped into 1D 
and ensure the very existence and spectral stability of the 1D projections of higher-order 
topological corner states. The possibility to engineer multiple localized resonances via dimensional 
reduction and their unique features, such as precise spectral properties and topological robustness,
open remarkable opportunities for practical applications, from robust resonators to sensors and
aperiodic topological lasers. More broadly, our work shows how higher-dimension topological 
physics may be mapped into easily realizable devices using dimensionality reduction, opening 
unique opportunities to implement and verify the exotic features of higher-dimension topological 
physics in quantum and classical photonic and phononic systems. 

Methods

1. Structure design, 3D printing, and generic measurements – The unit cell designs of the 
topological expanded lattice are shown in Fig. 2(a) with lattice constant 𝑎0 = 33 mm, height 𝐻0 = 
30.00 mm, and radius 𝑟0 = 10 mm. The connectors between the cylinders are radial channels with 
diameter 𝑑𝛾 = 5 mm. The unit cells and boundary cells were fabricated using the B9Creator v1.2 
3D printer. All cells were made with acrylic-based light-activated resin, a type of plastic that 
hardens when exposed to UV light. Each cell was printed with a sufficient thickness to ensure a 
hard wall boundary condition and narrow probe channels were intentionally introduced on top and 
bottom of each cylinders to excite and measure local pressure amplitude at each site. The diameter 
of each port is 2.50 mm with a height of 2.20 mm. When not in use, the probe channels were sealed 
with plumber’s putty. Each unit cell and boundary cell were printed one at a time and the models 
were designed specifically to interlock tightly with each other. The expanded structure shown in 
Fig. 2(a) contains 20 unit cells. For all measurements, a frequency generator and FFT spectrum 
analyzer scripted in LabVIEW were used.

2. Numerical method – Finite element solver COMSOL Multiphysics 5.2a with the Acoustic 
module was used to perform full-wave simulation. In the acoustic propagation wave equation, the 
speed of sound was set as 343.2 m/s and density of air as 1.225 kg/m^3. Other dimensional 
parameters of the structure are the same as the fabricated parameters. 

Data availability

Data that are not already included in the paper and/or in the Supplementary Information are 
available on request from the authors.


Acknowledgements

The work was supported by the National Science Foundation with grants No. DMR-1809915, 
EFRI-1641069, and by the Defense Advanced Research Project Agency.

Author contributions

All authors contributed extensively to the work presented in this paper.

Author Information 

The authors declare no competing interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to Alexander B. Khanikaev.

References

1.
Ryu S, Schnyder AP, Furusaki A, Ludwig AW. Topological insulators and superconductors: tenfold 
way and dimensional hierarchy. New Journal of Physics 12, 065010 (2010).

2.
Hasan MZ, Kane CL. Colloquium: topological insulators. Rev Mod Phys 82, 3045 (2010).

3.
Qi X-L, Zhang S-C. Topological insulators and superconductors. Rev Mod Phys 83, 1057 (2011).

4.
Zilberberg O, et al. Photonic topological boundary pumping as a probe of 4D quantum Hall 
physics. Nature 553, 59 (2018).

5.
Yang Y, et al. Realization of a three-dimensional photonic topological insulator. Nature 565, 622 
(2019).

6.
Weiner M, Ni X, Li M, Alù A, Khanikaev AB. Demonstration of a 3rd order hierarchy of higher 
order topological states in a three-dimensional acoustic metamaterial. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:190300428,  (2019).

7.
Peng S, Zhang R, Chen VH, Khabiboulline ET, Braun P, Atwater HA. Three-dimensional single 
gyroid photonic crystals with a mid-infrared bandgap. ACS Photonics 3, 1131-1137 (2016).

8.
Lu L, Fang C, Fu L, Johnson SG, Joannopoulos JD, Soljačić M. Symmetry-protected topological 
photonic crystal in three dimensions. Nature Physics 12, 337 (2016).


9.
Lu L, Fu L, Joannopoulos JD, Soljačić M. Weyl points and line nodes in gyroid photonic crystals. 
Nature photonics 7, 294 (2013).

10.
Lin Q, Sun X-Q, Xiao M, Zhang S-C, Fan S. A three-dimensional photonic topological insulator 
using a two-dimensional ring resonator lattice with a synthetic frequency dimension. Science 
Advances 4, eaat2774 (2018).

11.
Lin Q, Xiao M, Yuan L, Fan S. Photonic Weyl point in a two-dimensional resonator lattice with a 
synthetic frequency dimension. Nature communications 7, 13731 (2016).

12.
Yuan L, Shi Y, Fan S. Photonic gauge potential in a system with a synthetic frequency dimension. 
Opt Lett 41, 741-744 (2016).

13.
Regensburger A, Bersch C, Miri M-A, Onishchukov G, Christodoulides DN, Peschel U. Parity–time 
synthetic photonic lattices. Nature 488, 167 (2012).

14.
Martin I, Refael G, Halperin B. Topological frequency conversion in strongly driven quantum 
systems. Physical Review X 7, 041008 (2017).

15.
Yuan L, Lin Q, Xiao M, Fan S. Synthetic dimension in photonics. Optica 5, 1396-1405 (2018).

16.
Ozawa T, Price HM, Goldman N, Zilberberg O, Carusotto I. Synthetic dimensions in integrated 
photonics: From optical isolation to four-dimensional quantum Hall physics. Phys Rev A 93, 
043827 (2016).

17.
Yuan L, Xiao M, Lin Q, Fan S. Synthetic space with arbitrary dimensions in a few rings undergoing 
dynamic modulation. Physical Review B 97, 104105 (2018).

18.
Luo X-W, Zhou X, Li C-F, Xu J-S, Guo G-C, Zhou Z-W. Quantum simulation of 2D topological 
physics in a 1D array of optical cavities. Nature communications 6, 7704 (2015).

19.
Fan X, et al. Probing Weyl Physics with One-Dimensional Sonic Crystals. Physical review letters
122, 136802 (2019).

20.
Lustig E, et al. Photonic topological insulator in synthetic dimensions. Nature 567, 356 (2019).

21.
Tymchenko M, Sounas D, Nagulu A, Krishnaswamy H, Alù A. Quasielectrostatic Wave 
Propagation Beyond the Delay-Bandwidth Limit in Switched Networks. Physical Review X 9, 
031015 (2019).


22.
Ni X, et al. Observation of Hofstadter butterfly and topological edge states in reconfigurable 
quasi-periodic acoustic crystals. Communications Physics 2, 55 (2019).

23.
Apigo DJ, Cheng W, Dobiszewski KF, Prodan E, Prodan C. Observation of topological edge modes 
in a quasiperiodic acoustic waveguide. Physical review letters 122, 095501 (2019).

24.
Lohse M, Schweizer C, Price HM, Zilberberg O, Bloch I. Exploring 4D quantum Hall physics with a 
2D topological charge pump. Nature 553, 55 (2018).

25.
Benalcazar WA, Bernevig BA, Hughes TL. Quantized electric multipole insulators. Science 357, 
61-66 (2017).

26.
Benalcazar WA, Bernevig BA, Hughes TL. Electric multipole moments, topological multipole 
moment pumping, and chiral hinge states in crystalline insulators. Physical Review B 96, 245115 
(2017).

27.
Mittal S, Orre VV, Zhu G, Gorlach MA, Poddubny A, Hafezi M. Photonic quadrupole topological 
phases. Nature Photonics, 1 (2019).

28.
Imhof S, et al. Topolectrical-circuit realization of topological corner modes. Nature Physics 14, 
925 (2018).

29.
Ni X, Weiner M, Alù A, Khanikaev AB. Observation of higher-order topological acoustic states 
protected by generalized chiral symmetry. Nature materials 18, 113 (2019).

30.
Xue H, Yang Y, Gao F, Chong Y, Zhang B. Acoustic higher-order topological insulator on a kagome 
lattice. Nature materials 18, 108 (2019).

31.
Noh J, et al. Topological protection of photonic mid-gap defect modes. Nature Photonics 12, 408 
(2018).

32.
Ota Y, et al. Photonic crystal nanocavity based on a topological corner state. Optica 6, 786-789 
(2019).

33.
Peterson CW, Benalcazar WA, Hughes TL, Bahl G. A quantized microwave quadrupole insulator 
with topologically protected corner states. Nature 555, 346 (2018).

34.
Ni X, Li M, Weiner M, Alù A, Khanikaev AB. Demonstration of a quantized acoustic octupole 
topological insulator. arXiv preprint arXiv:191106469,  (2019).


35.
Lanczos C. An iteration method for the solution of the eigenvalue problem of linear differential 
and integral operators. United States Governm. Press Office Los Angeles, CA (1950).

36.
Paige CC. Accuracy and effectiveness of the Lanczos algorithm for the symmetric eigenproblem. 
Linear algebra and its applications 34, 235-258 (1980).

37.
Demmel JW. Applied numerical linear algebra. Siam (1997).

38.
Maczewsky LJ, et al. Extreme defect sensitivity from large synthetic dimensionality. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:190307883,  (2019).


