DNA-functionalized gold nanoparticle assemblies for Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering

D. Capraraa, F. Ripantia,∗, A. Capocefaloa, A. Sarraa,b, F. Brasilia, C. Petrilloc, C. Fasolatoc,, P.
Postorinoa,

aDipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a Sapienza, P.le Aldo Moro 5, Roma, Italy
bDipartimento di Scienze, Universit`a di Roma Tre, Via Ostiense, Roma, Italy
cDipartimento di Fisica e Geologia, Universit`a degli Studi di Perugia, Via A. Pascoli, Perugia, Italy

Abstract

The programmable assembly of DNA strands is a promising tool for building tailored bottom-up nanos-
tructures. Here, we present a plasmonic nanosystem obtained by the base-pairing mediated aggregation of
gold nanoparticles (NPs) which are separately functionalized with two different single-stranded DNA chains.
Their controlled assembly is mediated by a complementary DNA ”bridge” sequence. We monitor the forma-
tion of DNA assembled NP aggregates in solution, and we study their Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering
(SERS) response by comparison with the single NP constituents. We interpret the revealed SERS signatures
in terms of the molecular and NP organization at the nanoscale, demonstrating that the action of the DNA
bridge molecule yields regular NP aggregates with controlled interparticle distance and reproducible SERS
response. This demonstrates the potential of the present system as a stable, biocompatible, and recyclable
SERS sensor.

Keywords:
SERS sensor, DNA hybridization, nanoparticle, self-assembly

1. Introduction

In recent years, considerable efforts have brought
to the development of novel strategies for real-
izing targeted nanostructures by bottom-up self-
assembly processes [1–3]. These represent a valid,
cost-effective alternative to the established top-
down nanofabrication techniques, as nanolithogra-
phy or ion-beam milling [4, 5]. In this framework,
DNA-based nanomaterials have gained increasing
attention, owing to the programmability of nucleic
acid assembly: indeed, the pairing of complemen-
tary bases (adenine-thymine, cytosine-guanine) en-
ables the realization of rationally-designed materi-
als [6–10].
Among these novel nanotechnological
platforms, hybrid systems composed of DNA and
noble metal plasmonic nanostructures are promis-
ing candidates [1, 3]. Indeed, the possibility of cou-
pling the self-assembly capabilities and thermal re-

∗Corresponding authors
Email addresses: francesca.ripanti@uniroma1.it (P.
Postorino), claudia.fasolato@unipg.it (P. Postorino),
paolo.postorino@roma1.infn.it (P. Postorino)

versibility of DNA with the optical properties of
metal nanoparticles (NPs) enables the realization
of systems of interest for sensing applications based
on Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) [11, 12] or
on Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)
[13, 14].
A plasmonic NP, when illuminated by light in
resonance conditions with the collective oscillation
of the electron gas of the metal, acts as a nanoan-
tenna, focusing intense electromagnetic fields at the
NP surface, far beyond the diffraction limit [15].
This effect can be exploited for the ultrasensitive
optical spectroscopy of molecules bound/located
close to the NP surface [16]. SERS spectroscopy
has enabled the detection of analytes down to the
femtomolar concentration range, by coupling the
molecular-specific vibrational fingerprinting capa-
bility with the enhanced sensitivity of the plasmonic
substrate [13, 17].
In some cases, the DNA-based SERS sensing
schemes are aimed at revealing or investigating
the DNA molecules themselves: recent works have
demonstrated the ability to determine the compo-

Preprint submitted to Elsevier
December 3, 2019

arXiv:1912.00725v1  [physics.app-ph]  2 Dec 2019


sition of DNA strands [14, 18] and the DNA-metal
hybridization/conjugation dynamics [19].
Single
base substitutions have also been detected by SERS
in single-stranded DNA chains [20, 21].
In other
cases, DNA has been used as active element modu-
lating the plasmonic efficiency of the substrate. In
these applications, DNA is not the molecule directly
studied by SERS, but its presence or its confor-
mational changes trigger the SERS activity via the
formation of hot-spots between NPs functionalized
with standard and efficient SERS markers [22–25].
In order to promote the localization of sin-
gle/double strands of DNA on the metal NP sur-
face, overcoming the electrostatic repulsion between
the negative charges of DNA and NPs, salts as
MgSO4 are commonly employed [18, 26]. Another
possibility is the ad hoc synthesis of metal NPs
stabilized by a positive ligand [14].
Indeed, the
immobilization of the DNA strands on the metal
surface is most commonly obtained stimulating the
electrostatic attraction of the DNA by positively
charged/stabilized colloidal NPs.
It is otherwise
possible to purchase properly designed, thiolated
DNA strands and induce their covalent binding to
the NP surface.
The covalent conjugation can be preferred in a
series of applications, particularly those benefiting
from a more stable linkage between the components
of the nanosystem upon variations of temperature
and pH of the environment. A stable conjugation
is to prefer also in the perspective of designing a
recyclable SERS substrate, where the analytes are
typically released by chemical or physical methods
after being trapped and revealed within the hot-
spots of the structure [27, 28].
The coverage of
the NP surface by covalently immobilized ligands
allows the control of the composition of the NP en-
vironment also in complex media, preventing the
accidental adsorption of molecules on the NP sur-
face, within the highly sensitive region for SERS
and SPR experiments. It is worth mentioning that
a covalent DNA-NP conjugation at a specific molec-
ular concentration grants the stable and predictable
orientation of the DNA strands onto the metal sur-
face [29]. This is favorable for inducing the DNA
pairing and assembly. The controlled configuration
is also very important in the SERS response of the
system, since the SERS spectrum of DNA strands
is known to be strongly affected by the molecular
orientation on the metal surface [20, 30].
Here, we report the study of gold (Au) NPs func-
tionalized with two single-stranded DNA sequences.

The SERS signature was characterized for the two
chains by comparison with their Raman spectra to
identify the spectral markers of the DNA scaffold.
The self-assembly of these two hybrid DNA-NP sys-
tems within aggregates was then achieved by the
action of a ”bridge” molecule, in halves complemen-
tary to each of the sequences attached to the NPs.
The DNA bridge acts therefore as a molecular glue.
The temperature dependent UV-Visible spectra ac-
quired on the NP aggregates during their formation
demonstrate that the aggregation is specific and
DNA mediated. Although a specific spectroscopic
marker of the DNA pairing (e.g. a band ascribed
to hygrogen-bonding) was not detected, a change in
the system spectroscopic signature arising from the
bridge molecules could be identified in the aggre-
gated state. Notably, our study is conducted with
gold NPs, while the vast majority of SERS studies
on DNA rely on silver substrates [18, 19, 31], with
rare exceptions [32]. Silver nanosubstrates are in
general more efficient for the SERS amplification,
but poorer from the point of view of the chemical
stability and biocompatibility compared to the gold
counterpart [33, 34].
The SERS study of DNA here reported is
sequence-specific, reflecting the nucleotide com-
position of the DNA strands used, and allows
monitoring the occurrence of the NP aggregation,
driven at controlled interparticle distance by the
self-assembly of DNA. The comparison between
SERS spectroscopy and electron microscopy mea-
surements demonstrates the negative correlation
between the SERS signal-to-noise ratio and the in-
terparticle distance, suggesting a path for SERS sig-
nal optimization.
Conveniently, the SERS bands of DNA are out-
side the fingerprint region of common analytes de-
tected by SERS spectroscopy [16, 35, 36]. In per-
spective, this will allow the use of this system as a
robust and controlled sensing platform. Indeed, the
DNA mediated assembly of the plasmonic nanoar-
chitecture can be induced in presence of small an-
alytes to detect, by trapping them within the NP
aggregate and reversibly releasing them by ramping
up the temperature.

2. Experimental

Materials and characterization. Stock solutions
of 60 nm diameter AuNPs stabilized by citrate
capping were purchased from Ted Pella,
inc.
(Redding, CA). Synthetic monophosphate DNA

2


sequences with DUAL HPLC purification were
purchased
from
Integrated
DNA
Technologies
(IDT, USA). For the experimental realization of
DNA-linked NP assemblies we used three different
and purposely-programmed single-stranded DNA
chains, selected according to the seminal work of
J.J. Storhoff and coworkers [37]. We refer to them
as chain-A, chain-B, and bridge.
Chain-A and
chain-B are respectively a 5′− and 3′− alkylthiol-
capped 12-base oligonucleotides. They were used
for the functionalization of the NPs. The bridge is
a non-thiolated 24-base oligomer, complementary
to the chain-A and chain-B sequences. It acts as
a linker for the aggregate formation. The specific
sequences are

chain-A: 5′ X-S=S-(CH2)6-CGCATTCAGGAT 3′

chain-B: 3′ X-S=S-(CH2)3-ATGCTCAACTCT 5′

bridge: 5′ TACGAGTTGAGAATCCTGAATGCG 3′

where the X-S=S- complex specifies the thiol protect-
ing group. Indeed, due to the high reactivity of thiol
groups, during the oligonucleotide synthesis, alkylthiol-
capped DNA sequences are protected by a disulfide
bond; a chemical reduction is necessary for ensuring
the exposition of the thiol group for the NP functional-
ization. The preliminary Raman characterization was
performed on the pristine molecular samples. Small vol-
umes of the three different strands in aqueous solution
were dropcasted on a gold leaf substrate and dried at
room temperature.

Nanoparticle functionalization. The three DNA se-
quences were separately diluted in deionized Milli-Q
water. The actual strand concentration in these solu-
tions was determined using a NanoDrop Microvolume
Spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). To
deprotect the thiolated sequences (chain-A and chain-
B) from the disulfide bonds, we dissolved 5 nmol of
each strand in a 0.1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT) solution,
allowing the reaction to continue for 2 hours. The pro-
cedure was followed by the purification through NAP-5
column (GE Healthcare UK). AuNP functionalization
with the thiol-ending nucleotides was carried out ac-
cording to the well-defined assay procedure reported in
Ref. [38]. Briefly, we initially prepared two different
DNA-NP solutions, by separately adding an excess of
thiolated DNA strands to a controlled volume of 60 nm
AuNP stock solution.
The NP dispersion was previ-
ously dialyzed for 24 hours to remove part of the cit-
rate buffer, thus making the NP surface cleaner and
available for the DNA attachment.
Phosphate buffer
(10 mM) and SDS surfactant (1%) solutions were then
added to the dispersion, for improving the wettability
of the NP surface. A slow NaCl salting aging to a final

0.7 M concentration [39] (done in 1 day) concluded the
functionalization process. The salting aging is a critical
and fundamental step that allows an optimal and homo-
geneous coverage of the NP surface, as it minimizes the
electrostatic repulsion between the negative charges on
both the oligonucleotide skeleton and the NP surface.
Finally, to remove the unbound DNA strands, we cen-
trifuged the dispersions at 15◦ C and 10000 rpm for 30
minutes, removing the supernatant and finally adding
a 0.3 M NaCl solution [29]. The purification step was
repeated five times. For SERS and Field Effect Scan-
ning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) measurements on
the single-chain functionalized NPs, the purified DNA-
NP solution was deposited on a glass slide/silicon sub-
strate and dried at room temperature.

DNA-NP controlled aggregation. The bridge sequence
mediated aggregation of the DNA-NP complexes was
induced in solution and monitored by UV-Visible spec-
troscopy.
We prepared two equimolar solutions of
AuNPs functionalized with chain-A and chain-B respec-
tively. They were mixed in the presence of an excess
of complementary bridge molecules (the bridge concen-
tration exceeded by four orders of magnitude the NP
concentration, to guarantee the formation of large ag-
gregates). The final solution was incubated for 20 min-
utes in a pre-heated Memmert oven at 75◦C, then slowly
cooled down to room temperature overnight. To remove
the fraction of unbound bridges the solution was cen-
trifuged at 4400 rpm for 30 minutes. Subsequently, the
supernatant was removed and the sample re-dispersed
in a 0.3 M NaCl solution.
The purification step was
repeated three times. For SERS and FESEM measure-
ments, the aggregated NP purified dispersion was de-
posited on the substrate and dried at room tempera-
ture.

UV-Visible spectroscopy and DNA aggregation measure-
ments. UV-Visible absorption measurements were car-
ried out from Jasco v-570 double ray spectrophotome-
ter equipped with a Jasco ETC-505T Peltier thermo-
stat which allowed to perform measurements at con-
trolled temperature. To monitor the DNA aggregation
as a function of temperature, a volume of ∼ 250 µl of
the mixed functionalized NPs and bridge solution was
sealed in a quartz cuvette (optical path 1 mm). The
system was heated up to 75◦ C, well above the melt-
ing temperature of the DNA strands, calculated to be
∼ 54◦ C using NUPACK Oligo-simulator [40]. This con-
dition ensured every sequence to be unbound from the
others.
The UV-Visible spectra were collected ramp-
ing down the temperature to 20◦ C in steps of 5◦ C (the
thermalization time was 20 minutes). The cuvette was
stirred before each acquisition, to ensure the sample ho-
mogeneity and to prevent the formation of precipitates.

3


Raman/SERS spectroscopy. Raman and SERS mea-
surements
were
carried
out
using
a
Horiba
HR-
Evolution microspectrometer in backscattering geome-
try, equipped with a He-Ne laser, λ = 632.8 nm and 25
mW output power (∼ 10 mW at the sample). Raman
spectra were acquired by illuminating the molecular de-
positions with full laser power.
Using proper optical
filters, SERS spectra were collected keeping the laser
power below 0.25 mW to avoid laser heating and sam-
ple degradation, induced by the enhanced field intensity
occurring in presence of the plasmonic NPs. The detec-
tor was a Peltier-cooled charge-coupled device (CCD)
and the resolution was better than 3 cm−1 thanks to a
600 grooves/mm grating with 800 mm focal length. The
spectrometer was coupled with a confocal microscope.
A 100× (N.A. = 0.9) Olympus objective lens was used
for the experimental acquisitions. Further details on the
experimental apparatus can be found in Ref. [16]. The
Raman and SERS spectra are presented after polyno-
mial baseline subtraction. The SERS data are presented
after a smooth processing (Savitzky-Golay method, 11
and 20 point windows for the single-chain and bridge
mediated aggregates, respectively). A comparison be-
tween smoothed and raw data is presented in Section F
of the Supplementary Material.

Electron microscopy. Samples for FESEM imaging
were prepared as described above.
Images were
recorded using a Zeiss Auriga 405 microscope at
Sapienza Nanoscience & Nanotechnology Laboratories
(SNN-Lab) of the Research Center on Nanotechnology
Applied to Engineering (CNIS) of Sapienza University.
The acquired frames were analyzed by Gwyddion soft-
ware [41], version 2.53, for characterizing the morphol-
ogy of the SERS substrates in terms of AuNPs size and
interparticle distance within clusters. The detailed de-
scription of the analysis procedure by employing the ra-
dial autocorrelation function of the scattering intensity
is reported in Section H of the Supplementary Material.

3. Results and Discussion

Raman study of the DNA strands. Preliminary Raman
measurements allowed to identify the spectral finger-
print of the selected DNA sequences. In Figure 1 we
show the spectra collected as described in the Experi-
mental section. The spectra are normalized to the most
intense peak, at ∼ 789 cm−1, associated to the convolu-
tion of the vibrational modes of the cytosine and of the
O-P-O phosphate groups. In Figure S1 of the Supple-
mentary Material, we show the Raman spectra of sin-
gle triphosphate bases as a reference. Comparing the
collected spectra with those of single bases provides a
precise and complete assignment of the Raman peaks,
as reported in the Supplementary Material (Table T1).

Figure 1:
Raman spectra of the single monophosphate
chains: chain-A (cyan), chain-B (blue), and bridge (gray).

The effect of the reduction step on the chains, i.e.
the transformation of the -S=S into -SH bond in chain-
A and chain-B, can be studied by Raman spectroscopy.
To do so, we measured the Raman signal before and
after the cleavage of the disulfide protecting groups. We
focused on the region around ∼ 2550 cm−1, where we
expected to observe the -SH stretching Raman band.
As shown in Figure S2, the -SH band is present in the
spectrum of the chains only after the occurrence of the
cleavage. This ensures that the chemical protocol here
adopted is effective.

DNA-AuNPs
conjugation
and
SERS
features. The
DNA anchoring on the NP surface can be monitored
by UV-Visible absorption measurements. In the UV-
Visible spectrum of the pristine plasmonic NP disper-
sion, a well-defined peak ascribed to the NP surface
plasmon resonance can be recognized. Its position de-
pends on the size, shape and dielectric environment
around the NP. In the case of spherical AuNPs, 60 nm
diameter, dispersed in solution, the peak is centered at
λ = 535 nm. When the NPs are functionalized with
a ligand molecule, as DNA, the dielectric environment
changes and a redshift of the plasmonic peak is observed
[36]. This is verified in the functionalization with both
chain-A (∆λ ∼ 6 nm) and chain-B (∆λ ∼ 4 nm), as
shown in Figure 2 a-b respectively, which ensures a suc-
cessful and stable conjugation of the AuNPs with the
DNA aptamers. The complete UV-Visible spectra for
both the bare and the functionalized NP solutions are
shown in Figure S3 of the Supplementary Material.
The SERS features of DNA-AuNPs were investi-
gated by carrying out direct spectroscopic measure-
ments. The good agreement between the Raman and
SERS spectra of chain-A and chain-B functionalized
NPs is evident from their comparison in Figure 2 (pan-
els c-d, respectively).
The SERS spectral features in

4


Figure 2: Characterization of Au NPs functionalized with
chain-A (top row) and chain-B (bottom row). Left column:
zoom on the UV-Visible absorption spectra of bare, citrate
capped AuNPs (dotted black curve in panels a and b) in the
region of the plasmonic absorption peak are compared to the
spectrum of AuNPs functionalized with the thiolated chain-
A (orange, panel a) and chain-B (green, panel b). The corre-
sponding full spectra are reported in Figure S3 of the Supple-
mentary Material. Spectra are normalized to the maximum
of the plasmonic peak. Right column: SERS spectra of func-
tionalized AuNPs are compared to the Raman spectra of the
corresponding DNA chain-A (panel c, orange: SERS; cyan:
Raman) and chain-B (panel d, green: SERS; blue: Raman).
The insets highlight the redshift of the most intense SERS
band (cytosine + O-P-O) as compared to the Raman spec-
trum. This band was used for spectral normalization.

the region around ∼ 2550 cm−1, where the stretching
vibration of the -SH group is expected, are shown in
Figure S4 of the Supplementary Material. The lack of
this contribution proves the absence of thiol compounds
in the system, thus confirming the successful binding of
the DNA molecules to the NP surface. Further, the op-
timized functionalization protocol minimizes the AuNP
residual citrate capping, and this does not affect con-
siderably the final SERS signal, as demonstrated by the
reference spectrum in Figure S5.
The SERS response is characterized by a good re-
producibility of the spectral shape. However, a marked
variability (∼ 100%) of the overall SERS intensity was
retrieved during repeated acquisitions. It is known that
most of the SERS signal revealed on NP-based SERS
substrates originates from the hot-spots between aggre-
gated NPs [42, 43].
The intensity variability is here
explained by the uncontrolled self-assembly of the NPs
during the drying process, which yields an irregular hot-
spot size distribution.
The Raman cross-section and typical SERS enhance-
ment factors revealed for DNA are than other com-

monly adopted SERS analytes [32]. This is an advan-
tage for developing DNA-NP assemblies for SERS sens-
ing, as the DNA signal would not cover that from other
analytes, but it can be detrimental for obtaining struc-
tural information on the DNA scaffold. Nevertheless,
despite the low intensity, the spectra in Figure 2 allow
for the recognition of the principal SERS bands, which
can be assigned thanks to the comparison with the Ra-
man counterpart (see Table T1 in the Supplementary
Material). Peaks ascribed to the four bases are iden-
tified, which provides a direct fingerprint of the DNA
chemical composition. The spectra are dominated by
an intense peak at ∼ 784 cm−1, assigned to the vibra-
tion of the cytosine and the O-P-O phosphate group
components. As highlighted in the insets of Figure
2
c-d, the vibrational band observed in the Raman spec-
tra at ∼ 789 cm−1 is redshifted in the SERS spectra
for both the chains. The effect is typically observed in
SERS spectra, being ascribed to the redistribution of
the electronic cloud induced by molecular binding to
the metal NP surface [43]. This band is used for the
spectral normalization of both SERS and Raman data.

DNA-AuNp aggregates. Once the main components of
our SERS nanosystems were characterized, we produced
DNA-NP aggregates in which the bridge sequence acts
as a selective linker between the functionalized NPs.
The adopted experimental procedure adopted is de-
scribed in the Experimental section, and it is sketched in
Figure 3. To directly monitor the NP aggregation as a
function of temperature, which leads to the formation of
mesoscopic NP assemblies, UV-Visible absorption mea-
surements were performed as a function of temperature
over the range 20-75oC, starting far beyond the DNA
melting temperature and slowly cooling down the sys-
tem. Thermalization times were long enough to induce
the gradual pairing of the DNA sequences and, conse-
quently, the NP assembly.
In Figure 4 we report the UV-Visible absorption spec-
tra collected as a function of temperature during the
NP aggregation by DNA pairing. At temperatures con-
siderably higher than the system melting temperature,
the UV-Visible profile can be associated to a dispersion
of single, DNA-functionalized AuNPs (see Figure 2 a-b
and Figure S3 in the Supplementary Material for com-
parison).
As the temperature decreases, the comple-
mentary DNA chains pair up, forming aggregates with
increasing size. The observed widening, redshift and de-
crease of the plasmonic absorption peak intensity, along
with the increased extinction in correspondence of the
red-NIR spectral region (600 ÷ 800 nm), are expected
consequences of the formation of large aggregates [36].
The temperature dependence of the observed behavior
is a signature of the specificity of the DNA binding pro-
cess, witnessing that the bridge mediated aggregation
occurs by DNA hybridization into a double helix, which

5


Figure 3: Sketch of the implemented system: AuNPs, in wa-
ter dispersion, are functionalized with two distinct 12-base
DNA chains (-A and -B). The addition of a bridge sequence,
complementary to the two chains -A and -B, induces the
system hybridization, with the formation of mesoscopic ag-
gregates.

grants the NP assembly at controlled interparticle dis-
tance.
As described, the SERS characterization of the ag-
gregates was performed measuring a microvolume of
the annealed DNA-NP solution dropcasted and dried
on a glass slide.
The SERS spectrum of the double-
stranded DNA was measured, and in Figure 5 we show
the comparison between the SERS spectra of the two
separated chains and that of the bridge-conjugated ag-
gregates. Spectra are normalized to the most intense
SERS band, ∼ 784 cm−1.
The first information derived by the spectra in Fig-
ure 5 is that no new peaks arise originating from the
presence of the bridge molecule or to the hybridization
are observed. This is not surprising since, in principle,
spurious base-pairing can occurr accidentally also be-
tween non-complementary sequences as a consequence
of the drying process. This partially prevents the spec-
troscopic discrimination between the specific hybridiza-
tions in the paired system and non-specific bindings,
which can be observed also in the single-chain systems
[31].
Nevertheless, a remarkable spectral weight redistri-
bution between the various components of the SERS
signature can be observed in the spectrum of the bridge-
conjugated system, which appears quite different from
those of chain-A and chain-B functionalized NPs. These
spectral modifications can be related to a partially dif-
ferent orientation of the chains with respect to the NP
surface in the case of the conjugated system. Indeed, in
the presence of the bridge molecule, we expect the DNA
strands to stand upright onto the NP surface, because
of the occurred interchain pairing. In the single-chain
functionalized NPs, on the other hand, the molecules

Figure 4: UV-Visible absorption spectra acquired as a func-
tion of temperature on the hybrid system composed of the
two AuNP dispersions (functionalized with chain-A and
chain-B) and the bridge molecules. As the temperature de-
creases, markers of the NP aggregation, as redshift and in-
creasing peak width, become evident.

Figure 5: SERS spectra of the single-chains, chain-A (or-
ange) and chain-B (green), are compared with the SERS
spectrum of the combined system A+B+bridge (magenta).

on the NP surface can move in a relatively more flexi-
ble manner, thus their orientation is not strictly deter-
mined. The orientation of the DNA molecules is known
to critically affect the SERS spectral shape, mostly in
the 1200-1600 cm−1 region (high-frequency side of Fig-
ure 5) and in correspondence of the adenine band at 730
cm−1 [20]. Fortunately, the use of thiolated molecules
reduces this variability [31], resulting in a less pro-
nounced spectral modification in the present case com-
pared to Refs. [20, 30].
As discussed above, a certain variability is expected
to affect the high-frequency side of the spectra in Fig-
ure 5 as a consequence of molecular orientation. On the
other hand, a close inspection of the SERS band used
for spectral normalization, around 784 cm−1, reveals a
modified shape for the bridge-conjugated system, com-

6


Figure 6: Gaussian deconvolution of the SERS spectra of
chain-A (a), chain-B (b) and bridge hybridized sample (c) in
the 760-830 cm −1 spectral region, where the band assigned
to the cytosine and O-P-O vibrations is visible. In panel d,
the ratio between the intensity of the low to high frequency
components of the band is correlated with the concentration
of cytosine in the probed sequences.

pared to the single-chain spectra.
It is generally ac-
cepted that this band originates from two distinct con-
tributions, one ascribed to the cytosine mode, the other
to the phosphate group [14, 18, 19, 44]. In particular,
the inspection of the results in Refs. [14, 44] supports
ascribing the low frequency component of the band to
the cytosine vibration, and the higher component to the
O-P-O stretching mode of the phosphate backbone. To
quantify the spectral modification in the three spectra
of Figure 5, we carried out a careful data fitting, decon-
volving the contributions to the band into two gaussian
functions, centered respectively at 783 ± 1 cm−1 and
800±1 cm−1. The ratio between the intensity of the low
frequency (cytosine) and high frequency (O-P-O) com-
ponents nicely correlates with the amount of cytosine
in the probed strands (Figure 6 d), thus demonstrat-
ing that, despite the discussed sources of variability in
the SERS spectral shape from sample to sample, the ob-
tained SERS spectra reflect the DNA composition. The
peak discussed in Fig. 6 is far from the typical SERS
fingerprint spectral region. Envisioning the use of this
system as a biosensor, this will simultaneously enable
to detect analytes and to monitor the state and compo-
sition of the molecular scaffold that holds the plasmonic
nanosystem together.
An aspect to be addressed is the less favorable signal-
to-noise ratio that characterizes the spectrum of the
A+B+bridge conjugated system compared to the spec-
tra of the single-chain samples. This is clearly visible in
Figure S6 of the Supplementary Material, where the
raw data collected on single-chain and bridge conju-
gated system are presented along with the smoothed

data of Figure 5.
This is consistent with the differ-
ent orientation of the DNA molecules in the two sam-
ples: for single-stranded functionalized NPs, the higher
flexibility of DNA with respect to the double-stranded
case can result in a more compact arrangement of the
molecules in the proximity of the gold surface, where
the enhancement is stronger, yielding to a clearer sig-
nal.
Moreover, since most of the SERS signal arises
from interparticle hot-spots, differences can be found in
accidental and controlled NP aggregations (i.e. single
and double strands).
Support to the hypothesis of a controlled molecu-
lar arrangement, orthogonal to the NP surface, in the
bridge mediated aggregates is given by the observation
that a more pronounced reproducibility in the spectral
intensity is retrieved on the bridge-conjugated system.
As a representative example, we show in Figure S7 the
most and least intense spectra acquired on a micro-
metric NP aggregate on the single-chain and bridge-
combined samples. To investigate in detail the relation
between the SERS response and the NP aggregation,
we carried out high resolution FESEM imaging on both
the single-chain AuNP depositions and on the bridge-
conjugated aggregates.
Representative results of FESEM microscopy are
shown in Figure 7, where the images acquired on chain-
A (panel a) and the A+B+bridge (panel b) samples
are compared. The morphology of the SERS substrates
appears clearly different in the two cases. In the single-
stranded case, AuNPs are sparsely and randomly dis-
tributed onto the silicon substrate and only few small
aggregates (dimers or trimers) can be found.
Con-
versely, for the bridge-conjugated system AuNPs ap-
pear organized in large clusters. The zoomed images
next to each frame show that the interparticle distance
in the chain-A trimer is smaller than the hot-spot size
within the A+B+bridge clusters. Remarkably, in the
bridge conjugated substrate it is possible to recognize a
junction between packed AuNPs that can be attributed
to the bridge-connected double-stranded DNA chains.
For quantitatively clarifying the role of the nanoar-
chitecture in the originated SERS intensity and spectral
quality, we analyzed the FESEM images in terms of ra-
dial autocorrelation function to extrapolate the average
interparticle distance, as described in Section H of the
Supplementary Material. The analyzed data, reported
in Table 1, reveals an average interparticle distance that
is almost doubled in the bridge-conjugated aggregates
with respect to single-chain functionalized AuNPs. This
depends on the semirigid, double helix DNA scaffold
holding together the NPs when their aggregation is me-
diated by the bridge molecule [45]. On the other hand,
when the single-chain functionalized NP dispersion is
deposited on a glass slide, the aggregation occurs by
the uncontrolled self-assembly of the NPs, leading to
smaller interparticle distances and more efficient, yet

7


Table 1: Inferred hot-spot size within aggregates
sample
interparticle distance (nm)

chain-A
2.6 ± 1.1
chain-B
3.0 ± 0.6
A+B+bridge
5.2 ± 0.6

Figure 7: Representative FESEM images of the SERS sub-
strates for the single chain-A (a) and combined system
A+B+bridge (b). For each sample a high resolution zoom
of the highlighted detail is also shown.

less reproducible hot-spots. Consistently, the lower sig-
nal revealed in the bridge-conjugated SERS system was
accompanied by a higher reproducibility in the overall
spectral intensity.

4. Conclusions

In conclusion, we proposed a stable, biocompatible
SERS active system based on gold NPs covalently func-
tionalized with specific DNA strands. The advantage of
covalent DNA anchoring on the NP surface is twofold:
on one hand, we demonstrated that this allows ob-
taining SERS spectra with reproducible and controlled
spectral shapes, proving that the covalent functional-
ization prevents the accidental physisorption of differ-
ent, random molecules on the NP surface [16].
On
the other hand, the covalent functionalization grants a
well-defined orientation of the conjugated DNA strands
on the NP surface, thus reducing variabilities in the
SERS spectral shape [31] and sterically favoring the
DNA hybridization. After functionalizing 60 nm gold
NPs in a buffer solution with two purposely-selected 12-
base single-stranded DNA sequences, we induced their
aggregation into mesoscopic aggregates by adding to
the NP dispersion a complementary, 24-base bridge se-
quence. We monitored the aggregation of the system

as a function of temperature by UV-Visible absorption
spectroscopy, proving the specificity of the DNA medi-
ated interparticle pairing.
The main features revealed by the DNA-SERS spec-
tra cover a spectral window that is not superimposed
to the usual fingerprint region of most of the analytes
revealed in SERS biosensors [17, 36, 46]. This, along
with the overall low Raman/SERS cross-section of DNA
molecules, grants a good contrast for the potential spec-
troscopic detection of analytes in such a DNA-SERS
biosensor. In the present study, the focus was not ex-
plicitly on the application of the system as a spectro-
scopic sensor: instead, we paid more attention to the
thorough characterization of the nanosystems from both
the composition and the structural point of view. In this
respect, all the characteristics of the SERS spectra ob-
tained from the DNA-conjugated nanosystems were jus-
tified and interpreted in terms of the system nanoscale
architecture.
The spectral shapes in all the systems are very
well-defined, as confirmed by repeated measurements,
whereas the same consideration does not hold for the
SERS intensity. We revealed a higher but less repro-
ducible intensity in the single-chain functionalized sys-
tems, while the bridge-conjugated aggregated system
features a more pronounced reproducibility. This is as-
cribed to the NP aggregation process, which is sponta-
neous and uncontrolled in the single-chain cases, lead-
ing to rare and more efficient hot-spots, while is well
predictable and reproducible when the NP aggregation
is driven by the specific pairing induced by the bridge
molecule. The lower signal-to-noise ratio in the spectra
of the bridge-conjugated system is due to the NPs be-
ing kept 5.2 nm far apart by the bridge linking. The
results suggest that selecting shorter sequences for such
a system can increase the intensity of the DNA-SERS
spectra. The spectral shapes have been interpreted in
terms of both molecular orientation and DNA strand
base composition.
We envision the application of the present system as
a stable, versatile biosensor. The advantages of such a
system can be numerous, among which, we recall the
possibility to induce the (reversible) DNA mediated ag-
gregation in presence of analytes by monitoring the tem-
perature of the NP solution. Furthermore, by selecting
the proper DNA strands, one can tune the interparticle
distance, not only controlling the SERS enhancement
but also favoring the trapping and sensing of smaller or
bigger molecules.
Finally, the base-pairing specificity
can also be exploited for specific, targeted gene detec-
tion.

Funding sources

The authors acknowledge the Physics Department of
Sapienza University for providing access to the CNIS

8


facilities for FESEM measurements.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Dr. Francesco Mura
for the technical support in FESEM imaging. D.C. ac-
knowledges Sapienza University for funding ”Avvio alla
Ricerca” project 2017.

Conflicts of interest

The authors have no competing interests to declare.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary material related to this article can be
found in the online version.

References

References

[1] I.
Hamley,
Nanostructure
fabrication
using
block
copolymers, Nanotechnology 14 (10) (2003) R39.

[2] M. Brust, C. J. Kiely, Some recent advances in nanos-
tructure preparation from gold and silver particles: a
short topical review, Colloids and Surfaces A: Physico-
chemical and Engineering Aspects 202 (2-3) (2002) 175–
186.

[3] N. C. Seeman, A. M. Belcher, Emulating biology: build-
ing nanostructures from the bottom up, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 99 (suppl 2) (2002)
6451–6455.

[4] R. Luttge, Massively parallel fabrication of repetitive
nanostructures: nanolithography for nanoarrays, Jour-
nal of physics D: applied physics 42 (12) (2009) 123001.

[5] F. Watt, A. Bettiol, J. Van Kan, E. Teo, M. Breese,
Ion beam lithography and nanofabrication: a review,
International Journal of Nanoscience 4 (03) (2005) 269–
286.

[6] N. C. Seeman,
Dna in a material world,
Nature
421 (6921) (2003) 427.

[7] S. Biffi, R. Cerbino, F. Bomboi, E. M. Paraboschi,
R. Asselta, F. Sciortino, T. Bellini, Phase behavior
and critical activated dynamics of limited-valence dna
nanostars, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences 110 (39) (2013) 15633–15637.

[8] F.
Bomboi,
F.
Romano,
M.
Leo,
J.
Fernandez-
Castanon, R. Cerbino, T. Bellini, F. Bordi, P. Filetici,
F. Sciortino, Re-entrant dna gels, Nature communica-
tions 7 (2016) 13191.

[9] N. Seeman, H. Sleiman, Dna nanotechnology, Na-
ture Reviews Materials 3 (11 2017).
doi:10.1038/
natrevmats.2017.68.

[10] F.
Bomboi,
D.
Caprara,
J.
Fernandez-Castanon,
F.
Sciortino,
Cold-swappable
dna
gels,
Nanoscale
11 (19) (2019) 9691–9697.

[11] L. He, M. D. Musick, S. R. Nicewarner, F. G. Sali-
nas, S. J. Benkovic, M. J. Natan, C. D. Keating, Col-
loidal au-enhanced surface plasmon resonance for ultra-
sensitive detection of dna hybridization, Journal of the
American Chemical Society 122 (38) (2000) 9071–9077.

[12] K. Nakatani, S. Sando, I. Saito, Scanning of guanine–
guanine mismatches in dna by synthetic ligands using
surface plasmon resonance, Nature biotechnology 19 (1)
(2001) 51.

[13] K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, V. B. Kartha, R. Manoharan,
G. Deinum, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari, M. S. Feld, De-
tection and identification of a single dna base molecule
using surface-enhanced raman scattering (sers), Physi-
cal Review E 57 (6) (1998) R6281.

[14] L.
Guerrini,
ˇZ.
Krpeti´c,
D.
van
Lierop,
R.
A.
Alvarez-Puebla, D. Graham, Direct surface-enhanced
raman scattering analysis of dna duplexes, Angewandte
Chemie 127 (4) (2015) 1160–1164.

[15] S. Eustis, M. A. El-Sayed, Why gold nanoparticles are
more precious than pretty gold: noble metal surface
plasmon resonance and its enhancement of the radiative
and nonradiative properties of nanocrystals of different
shapes, Chemical society reviews 35 (3) (2006) 209–217.

[16] F. Domenici, C. Fasolato, E. Mazzi, L. De Angelis,
F. Brasili, F. Mura, P. Postorino, F. Bordi, Engineer-
ing microscale two-dimensional gold nanoparticle clus-
ter arrays for advanced raman sensing: An afm study,
Colloids and surfaces A: Physicochemical and engineer-
ing aspects 498 (2016) 168–175.

[17] F. Domenici, A. R. Bizzarri, S. Cannistraro, Sers-
based nanobiosensing for ultrasensitive detection of
the p53 tumor suppressor, International journal of
nanomedicine 6 (2011) 2033.

[18] L.-J. Xu, Z.-C. Lei, J. Li, C. Zong, C. J. Yang, B. Ren,
Label-free surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy detec-
tion of dna with single-base sensitivity, Journal of the
American Chemical Society 137 (15) (2015) 5149–5154.

[19] A. Torres-Nunez, K. Faulds, D. Graham, R. Alvarez-
Puebla, L. Guerrini, Silver colloids as plasmonic sub-
strates for direct label-free surface-enhanced raman
scattering analysis of dna, Analyst 141 (17) (2016)
5170–5180.

[20] E. Papadopoulou, S. E. Bell, Dna reorientation on au
nanoparticles: label-free detection of hybridization by
surface enhanced raman spectroscopy, Chemical com-
munications 47 (39) (2011) 10966–10968.

[21] S. Dick, S. Bell, Quantitative surface-enhanced raman
spectroscopy of single bases in oligodeoxynucleotides,
Faraday discussions 205 (2017) 517–536.

[22] S.
Picciolini,
D.
Mehn,
C.
Morasso,
R.
Vanna,
M. Bedoni, P. Pellacani, G. Marchesini, A. Valsesia,
D. Prosperi, C. Tresoldi, et al., Polymer nanopillar–gold
arrays as surface-enhanced raman spectroscopy sub-
strate for the simultaneous detection of multiple genes,
ACS nano 8 (10) (2014) 10496–10506.

[23] L. He, E. Lamont, B. Veeregowda, S. Sreevatsan, C. L.
Haynes, F. Diez-Gonzalez, T. P. Labuza, Aptamer-
based surface-enhanced raman scattering detection of
ricin in liquid foods, Chemical Science 2 (8) (2011)
1579–1582.

[24] O. Neumann, D. Zhang, F. Tam, S. Lal, P. Wittung-
Stafshede, N. J. Halas, Direct optical detection of
aptamer conformational changes induced by target
molecules, Analytical chemistry 81 (24) (2009) 10002–
10006.

9


[25] N. H. Kim, S. J. Lee, M. Moskovits, Reversible tuning
of sers hot spots with aptamers, Advanced Materials
23 (36) (2011) 4152–4156.

[26] S. E. Bell, N. M. Sirimuthu, Surface-enhanced ra-
man spectroscopy (sers) for sub-micromolar detection
of dna/rna mononucleotides, Journal of the American
Chemical Society 128 (49) (2006) 15580–15581.

[27] G. Sinha, L. E. Depero, I. Alessandri, Recyclable sers
substrates based on au-coated zno nanorods, ACS ap-
plied materials & interfaces 3 (7) (2011) 2557–2563.

[28] L. Wang, Z.-F. Gan, D. Guo, H.-L. Xia, F. T. Patrice,
M. E. Hafez, D.-W. Li, Electrochemistry-regulated re-
cyclable sers sensor for sensitive and selective detec-
tion of tyrosinase activity, Analytical chemistry 91 (10)
(2019) 6507–6513.

[29] J. J. Storhoff, R. Elghanian, R. C. Mucic, C. A.
Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, One-pot colorimetric differ-
entiation of polynucleotides with single base imperfec-
tions using gold nanoparticle probes, Journal of the
American Chemical Society 120 (9) (1998) 1959–1964.
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1021/ja972332i, doi:10.
1021/ja972332i.
URL https://doi.org/10.1021/ja972332i

[30] A. Barhoumi, D. Zhang, F. Tam, N. J. Halas, Surface-
enhanced raman spectroscopy of dna, Journal of the
American Chemical Society 130 (16) (2008) 5523–5529.

[31] N. E. Marotta, K. R. Beavers, L. A. Bottomley, Limi-
tations of surface enhanced raman scattering in sensing
dna hybridization demonstrated by label-free dna oligos
as molecular rulers of distance-dependent enhancement,
Analytical chemistry 85 (3) (2013) 1440–1446.

[32] V. V. Thacker, L. O. Herrmann, D. O. Sigle, T. Zhang,
T. Liedl, J. J. Baumberg, U. F. Keyser, Dna origami
based assembly of gold nanoparticle dimers for surface-
enhanced raman scattering., Nature communications 5
(2014) 3448.

[33] I. Fratoddi, I. Venditti, C. Cametti, M. V. Russo, How
toxic are gold nanoparticles? the state-of-the-art, Nano
Research 8 (6) (2015) 1771–1799.

[34] O. Bar-Ilan, R. M. Albrecht, V. E. Fako, D. Y. Furge-
son, Toxicity assessments of multisized gold and silver
nanoparticles in zebrafish embryos, Small 5 (16) (2009)
1897–1910.

[35] C. Heck, Y. Kanehira, J. Kneipp, I. Bald, Placement
of single proteins within the sers hot spots of self-
assembled silver nanolenses, Angewandte Chemie In-
ternational Edition 57 (25) (2018) 7444–7447.

[36] A. Capocefalo, D. Mammucari, F. Brasili, C. Fasolato,
F. Bordi, P. Postorino, F. Domenici, Exploring the po-
tentiality of a sers-active ph nano-biosensor, Frontiers
in Chemistry 7 (2019) 413.

[37] J.
Storhoff,
A.
Lazarides,
R.
Mucic,
C.
Mirkin,
R. Letsinger, G. Schatz, What controls the optical prop-
erties of dna-linked gold nanoparticle assemblies?, Jour-
nal of the American Chemical Society 122 (19) (2000)
4640–4650. doi:10.1021/ja993825l.

[38] H. D. Hill, C. A. Mirkin, The bio-barcode assay for
the detection of protein and nucleic acid targets using
dtt-induced ligand exchange, Nature Protocols 1 (2006)
324–336.

[39] H. D. Hill, J. E. Millstone, M. J. Banholzer, C. A.
Mirkin, The role radius of curvature plays in thiolated
oligonucleotide loading on gold nanoparticles., ACS
nano 3 2 (2009) 418–24.

[40] J. N. Zadeh, C. D. Steenberg, J. S. Bois, B. R. Wolfe,

M. B. Pierce, A. R. Khan, R. M. Dirks, N. A. Pierce,
Nupack: analysis and design of nucleic acid systems,
Journal of computational chemistry 32 (1) (2011) 170–
173.

[41] D. Neˇcas, P. Klapetek, Gwyddion: an open-source soft-
ware for spm data analysis, Open Physics 10 (1) (2012)
181–188.

[42] Y. Fang, N.-H. Seong, D. D. Dlott, Measurement of the
distribution of site enhancements in surface-enhanced
raman scattering, Science 321 (5887) (2008) 388–392.

[43] C. Fasolato,
F. Domenici,
S. Sennato,
F. Mura,
L. De Angelis, F. Luongo, F. Costantini, F. Bordi,
P. Postorino, Dimensional scale effects on surface en-
hanced raman scattering efficiency of self-assembled
silver nanoparticle clusters, Applied Physics Letters
105 (7) (2014) 073105.

[44] G. J. Thomas Jr, J. M. Benevides, S. A. Overman,
T. Ueda, K. Ushizawa, M. Saitoh, M. Tsuboi, Polarized
raman spectra of oriented fibers of a dna and b dna:
anisotropic and isotropic local raman tensors of base
and backbone vibrations, Biophysical journal 68 (3)
(1995) 1073–1088.

[45] A. Japaridze, D. Vobornik, E. Lipiec, A. Cerreta,
J. Szczerbinski, R. Zenobi, G. Dietler, Toward an ef-
fective control of dnas submolecular conformation on a
surface, Macromolecules 49 (2) (2016) 643–652.

[46] J. Y. Xu,
J. Wang,
L. T. Kong,
G. C. Zheng,
Z. Guo, J. H. Liu, Sers detection of explosive agent by
macrocyclic compound functionalized triangular gold
nanoprisms, Journal of Raman Spectroscopy 42 (9)
(2011) 1728–1735.

10


