Suspended gallium arsenide platform for building large scale photonic
integrated circuits: Passive devices
Pisu Jiang1 and Krishna C. Balram1, a)

Quantum Engineering Technology Labs and Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Bristol,
Woodland Road, Bristol BS8 1UB, UK

(Dated: 12 December 2019)

The spectacular success of silicon-based photonic integrated circuits (PICs) in the past decade naturally begs the ques-
tion of whether similar fabrication procedures can be applied to other material platforms with more desirable optical
properties. In this work, we demonstrate the individual passive components (grating couplers, waveguides, multi-mode
interferometers and ring resonators) necessary for building large scale integrated circuits in suspended gallium arsenide
(GaAs). Implementing PICs in suspended GaAs is a viable route towards achieving optimal system performance in
areas with stringent device constraints like energy efficient transceivers for exascale systems, integrated electro-optic
comb lasers, integrated quantum photonics, cryogenic photonics and electromechanical guided wave acousto-optics.

The scale, complexity and performance of silicon photonic
integrated circuits (PICs) has revolutionized optical commu-
nications in the past decade1. Perhaps the most surprising as-
pect of this revolution is the fact that silicon does not possess
many desirable optical properties (apart from a high refrac-
tive index) and the silicon photonics revolution was primarily
driven by the availability of a foundry fabrication infrastruc-
ture, courtesy of the microelectronics industry, that could be
applied to optics2–4. Over the past two decades, a wide variety
of component designs have been optimized and their fabrica-
tion process perfected for silicon5 and it is hard to foresee a
similar investment of resources in any other material platform.
On the other hand, there are a number of application areas
in which silicon’s lack of desirable optical properties proves
a severe limitation to achieving system performance. These
limitations include the absence of a direct bandgap, lack of a
χ(2) nonlinearity to build fast electro-optic devices and zero
piezoelectric response which makes it challenging to design
acousto-optic devices. As a representative example, one of
the key challenges facing transceivers for exascale systems6

is avoiding the ∼ 3 dB penalty for coupling light from the
III-V laser die to the silicon PIC. Electro-optic frequency
comb7 based coherent communication systems8 will also ben-
efit greatly from monolithic integration of lasers and modula-
tors. On the quantum photonics side, one of the outstand-
ing problems facing linear optic implementations of quan-
tum computing is implementing feed-forward routines on a
chip9, which requires (monolithically) interfacing fast, low
loss modulators with efficient single photon detectors. De-
spite the outstanding performance improvements of carrier
based depletion modulators, electro-optic modulators present
the only near-term solution that can satisfy both the bandwidth
(∼ 40 GHz) and loss requirements (< 3 dB) necessary for
scalability10. Other application areas where alternative mate-
rial platforms are worth exploring are: cryogenic photonic cir-
cuits for interfacing superconducting digital circuits with the
outside world11 and integrated acousto-optics, which requires
a piezoelectric material for exciting acoustic waves12–14.

a)Electronic mail: krishna.coimbatorebalram@bristol.ac.uk

Gallium arsenide (GaAs) presents a viable alternative to
silicon for these applications as it possesses all the desirable
optical properties that silicon lacks: a direct bandgap, a χ(2)

nonlinearity, and a (weak) piezoelectric coefficient15. More
importantly, GaAs has a refractive index that is almost iden-
tical to silicon (λ = 1.55 µm), making it easy to port a va-
riety of optimised photonic designs and fabrication process
flows between the platforms. In contrast to other electro-optic
platforms like lithium niobate, it has a higher refractive index
allowing compact component design, which is key to mono-
lithic systems integration. GaAs also provides a natural route
towards incorporating active gain media like quantum dots
and wells, which are promising for applications in both classi-
cal and quantum16 photonics. Traditionally integrated photon-
ics in GaAs has suffered from the low index contrast achiev-
able between GaAs and the AlGaAs buffers which serve as
waveguide cladding layers. The low index contrast leads to
large mode sizes and bend radii which make photonic inte-
gration challenging15. In addition, the reduced optical power
density (due to larger mode area) makes it difficult to ade-
quately exploit the nonlinear coefficients for frequency con-
version and EO modulator applications17. In recent years,
there has been tremendous progress in the development of
thin films of GaAs on low index media (particularly silicon
oxide and nitride) by wafer bonding18 and a wide variety of
devices showing impressive nonlinear performance have been
demonstrated19–21 . On the other hand, wafer bonding is well-
known to be a notoriously fickle process and it is challenging
to get high device yields (a prerequisite for building PICs) in
an academic cleanroom environment.

In this work, we show that a multi-step fabrication process,
derived from a standard passive silicon photonics platform22,
can be applied to build large scale photonic integrated cir-
cuits in suspended GaAs. The suspension of the GaAs layer,
achieved by selective etching of the underlying AlGaAs film,
is necessary to achieve high refractive index contrast23. By
moving to a tethered rib waveguide geometry and judicious
choice of etch release holes, all the components of a standard
(passive) PIC platform, in particular grating couplers, waveg-
uides, ring-resonators and waveguide splitters (multi-mode in-
terference couplers), can be adapted to the suspended GaAs
platform without compromising performance efficiency . The

arXiv:1912.05301v1  [physics.app-ph]  10 Dec 2019


2

passive devices reported in this work serve as a key building
block for the development of active devices, in particular, ef-
ficient integrated electro-optic and acousto-optic modulators,
which are currently under development.
Figure 1 shows a schematic illustration of the main pro-
cess steps for a grating coupler fabricated using this process.
The process starts by patterning the grating coupler teeth and
defining the outline of the waveguides and the tethers (GRAT-
ING etch) in GaAs (Fig. 1 (a)). The patterning is carried out
using electron beam lithography with hydrogen silsesquiox-
ane (HSQ) resist and the GaAs layer is etched using a standard
Ar/Cl2 chemistry with etch thickness monitored using an el-
lipsometer to ensure precise etch depths are achieved. This is
followed by a RIB etch step (Fig. 1 (b)), where the GaAs layer
is etched a further 50 nm to define the rib waveguides. The
grating coupler region is protected with HSQ resist during this
step. The two layers are registered with respect to each other
using a set of alignment marks defined during the GRATING
etch step. A FULL etch step is next carried out by etching the
remaining 100 nm of the GaAs layer (+ 20 nm overetch) to

220 
150 

RIB ETCH

220
150
100

AlGaAs

(a)

(b)

(c)

GRATING ETCH

FULL ETCH

220
150
100

FIG. 1. Illustrative schematic of the process flow for building a sus-
pended waveguide platform in GaAs. The process follows the stan-
dard three step process used to fabricate passive silicon photonic de-
vices. The GaAs thickness (in nm) in each region is indicated. (a) A
70 nm GRATING etch is used to define the grating coupler in GaAs.
(b) The GaAs is etched a further 50 nm to define the rib waveguides
(RIB etch). (c) Finally, a 100 nm FULL etch is carried out to reach
the AlGaAs layer. The exposed AlGaAs layer is selectively etched
away in weak HF acid and the sample is covered with ∼ 2 µm SiO2.

access the AlGaAs buffer as shown in Fig.1(c). To suspend
the GaAs layer, the AlGaAs buffer is selectively etched in di-
lute hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution. To remove any remnants
of etch residue, the sample is cleaned in a dilute potassium
hydroxide solution and flash dried using isopropanol24.
A cross-section of a suspended GaAs rib waveguide fab-
ricated in this platform is shown in Fig.2(a).
A zoomed-
out SEM image of the rib waveguide suspended by tethers is
shown in Fig.2 (b). The normalized total electric field of the
fundamental transverse electric (TE) mode, calculated using
a numerical mode solver (COMSOL Multiphysics), is over-
laid for reference. The high refractive index of the GaAs layer
ensures that the mode is mainly confined to the rib region,
with very little leakage into the surrounding GaAs or the Al-
GaAs buffer. By designing rib waveguides with waveguide
width ∼ 540 nm and total rib width ∼ 6 µm, we can ensure
that the optical field has negligible overlap (ηov) with the re-
maining AlGaAs buffer layer and is tightly confined within
the GaAs waveguide. The choice of the rib width was mostly
determined by the difficulty of suspending wider GaAs de-
vices on account of the lack of intrinsic stress in the GaAs
layer. As mentioned before, the high refractive index allows
us to work with smaller rib widths without sacrificing perfor-
mance (waveguide loss). More importantly, it allows us to
design compact, low loss suspended waveguide bends with
bend radii ∼ 25 µm in this work, and the prospect of achiev-
ing bend radii ≈ 5 µm. After HF release, the suspended GaAs
film is capped with ∼ 2 µm of silicon oxide deposited using
plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). The
oxide film is necessary for separating the metal electrodes (re-
quired for the electro-optic devices) from the GaAs layer. In
addition, they provide mechanical rigidity to the suspended
films by pinning them at the corners of the etch holes (shown
by the red box in Fig.3(b)). To test this rigidity, we performed

Air (1.5 µm)

Air 

GaAs substrate 

GaAs (220 nm)

GaAs (100 nm)

(a)

(b)
220 nm GaAs tethers 

540 nm

FIG. 2.
(a) Cross-section SEM image of a suspended GaAs rib
waveguide structure. The electric field (|Enorm|) of the propagating
transverse electric (TE) mode, calculated using a numerical FEM
simulation using COMSOL, is overlaid.
(b) Zoomed-out cross-
section showing the GaAs rib waveguide held by suspension tethers.
The extent of the HF undercut can be clearly seen.


3

a stress test by placing the chip (in isopropanol) in an ultra-
sonic bath at full power for > 10 minutes. After removal from
the bath, the chip showed no signs of weakening or structural
damage, which ensures that it can survive later processing,
critical for active devices. We are able to land fiber arrays on
the GaAs chip without noticable structural damage to the de-
vices during optical characterisation. The mechanical rigidity
is key for enabling the deposition of thick metallic electrodes
for active devices and provides great benefit from a packaging
perspective, which is especially critical for cryogenic opera-
tion.

(a)

(b)
GaAs substrate

GaAs waveguide

SiO2 top cladding

Air ~ 1.3 µm
Rigid anchor

FIG. 3. (a) Measured fiber to fiber transmission spectrum of a repre-
sentative grating coupler with parameters, period (Λ) = 660 nm, duty
cycle (η) = 0.5 and etch depth (d) 70 nm. The fiber array was angled
at 12 deg. and the coupling was optimised for maximum transmis-
sion. An SEM image of a fabricated grating coupler before oxide
encapsulation is shown in the inset. (b) Cross-section image of a
GaAs rib waveguide after silicon oxide encapsulation, showing the
bottom air gap is reduced to ∼ 1.3 µm. The rigid anchoring of the
structure at the ends, due to the oxide encapsulation, is indicated by
the red box.

The standard set of passive design components available
as part of a standard silicon photonics process development
kit (PDK) are low-loss waveguides, grating couplers (GC),
resonators and on-chip waveguide splitters and combiners.
Amongst these, the grating coupler is probably the most im-
portant component, as it serves as the interface between the
PIC and the outside world. A compact low-loss grating cou-
pler is indispensable for large scale PICs as it allows in-situ
device characterisation, without the need for chip-cleaving.
Traditionally, GaAs based devices have relied on edge cou-
pling as it is challenging to design efficient grating couplers
when the index contrast between the core and cladding is low.
While compact free space grating couplers have been opti-
mized by the quantum dot community25, their coupling effi-

ciency is low and they are not suitable for building large scale
PICs. On the other hand, efficient out-of-plane grating cou-
plers have long served as the de-facto standard in the silicon
photonics community. Fig.3(a) plots the measured fiber-fiber
transmission spectrum of a grating coupler test structure that
consists of two grating couplers linked by a suspended ridge
waveguide. The device was probed using a fiber array angled
at 12 deg. The separation between the couplers is 127 µm and
the waveguide bends have a radii of 25 µm. An SEM image
of our suspended GaAs focusing grating coupler is shown in
the inset of Fig.3(a). The grating coupler is supported using
tethers, defined during the GRATING etch step. The high re-
fractive index of GaAs allows us to keep the light confined to
the central region (tGaAs = 220 nm) and efficiently focus it into
the rib waveguide. The critical fabrication step in suspending
a grating coupler is ensuring that all of the GC is released dur-
ing the wet etch step. This is ensured by providing release
holes both to the side and rear of the GC, as can be seen in
the inset. The grating coupler design is modified from the
standard silicon designs to account for the difference in sur-
rounding refractive indices and thicknesses. In the suspended
GaAs devices, the underside cladding is air and the topside
cladding is silicon dioxide. This helps reduce the insertion
loss, as the guided wave is more effectively scattered towards
the higher index side (the top oxide) towards the fiber, rather
than towards the substrate. The main parameters affecting the
coupling efficiency are the grating period (Λ), etch depth (d),
duty cycle (η), and thickness of the AlGaAs cladding layer.
For λ = 1550 nm, the design parameters used are Λ = 660 nm,
d = 70 nm, η = 0.5. The peak fiber to fiber coupling efficiency
is ∼ -8 dB at ∼ 1550 nm, which amounts to ∼ 4 dB inser-
tion loss per coupler. One of the key parameters that affects
the optimal coupling efficiency is the gap between the GaAs
device layer and the substrate, which is determined initially
by the AlGaAs thickness. The starting AlGaAs thickness of
1.5 um lies at the bottom of the coupling efficiency curve and
any reduction in the spacing between the GaAs membrane and
the substrate will improve that number. As can be seen from
a zoomed-in cross-section SEM image of the waveguide in
Fig.3(b), the deposition of the top cladding oxide loads the
membrane making it sag. This lowers the gap between the
membrane and the substrate and ends up increasing the cou-
pling efficiency. From our cross-section SEM images, we cur-
rently estimate the bottom gap to be ∼ 1.3 µm.

To build scalable PICs, it is critical to have the ability to
split and recombine light. Linear networks of waveguide split-
ters form a key building block for optical implementations
of quantum information processing26, deep neural networks27

and optical phased arrays28. A 2x2 multimode interference
coupler (MMI) is the standard building block that underpins
these linear networks.
Fig.4(a) shows an SEM image of
2x2 MMI fabricated using the suspended GaAs platform and
based on a standard silicon foundry design22. A zoomed-in
image of the same device is also shown. The measured trans-
mission spectrum of the best-performing MMI is shown in
Fig.4(b). The plot shows the transmitted power from the two
output ports (labelled by red and magenta arrows in the inset
microscope image). The grating coupler transmission spec-


4

(a)

(b)

45 µm

FIG. 4. (a) SEM image of a fabricated suspended 2x2 multimode in-
terference (MMI) coupler. A zoomed-in image of the MMI is shown
on the right. (b) Measured transmission spectrum through the two
output ports (labelled 1 and 2 and indicated by the red and magenta
curves). The reference fiber to fiber transmission spectrum (from Fig.
3(a)), without the MMI, is shown in blue. A microscope image of the
complete MMI with the input and output ports labelled is shown in
the inset.

trum from Fig.3(a) is overlaid for reference. From Fig.4(b), it
is clear that the excess insertion loss introduced by the MMI
(over the 3 dB due to power splitting) is negligible and these
devices can be used to effectively split and re-combine light
on a GaAs chip, exactly analogous to silicon. Like with the
grating coupler, the high index contrast of GaAs enables us to
port these designs from silicon to the GaAs platform with min-
imal re-design. The MMI devices also give a sense of the the
scale and complexity of the devices that can be engineered. As
silicon photonics and before it silicon microelectronics have
shown, once a set of robust building blocks have been demon-
strated, circuits of arbitrary complexity can be synthesized by
connecting these building blocks together in the desired order.
The final component of the passive devices toolkit for sus-
pended GaAs photonics are microring resonators. High qual-
ity factor dispersion engineered microring resonators have
served as the foundation of a variety of experimental advances
in photonic sensing, frequency combs and on-chip generation
of single photon pairs by spontaneous four wave mixing29.
Fig.5(a) shows an SEM image of a suspended microring res-
onator fabricated using this platform. The ring radius is 25
µm and the waveguide resonator gap was designed to be 325
nm. Fig.5(b) shows the measured transmission spectrum of
the resonator showing a series of TE resonances. The TE
mode selectivity is determined by the polarisation selectivity
of the grating coupler.
Fig.5(c) shows a narrow band transmission scan around one

50 µm
(a)

(b)

(c)

FIG. 5. (a) SEM image of a suspended GaAs microring resonator
with radius 25 µm and waveguide resonator gap 325 nm. A zoomed-
in image of the ring is shown on the right for reference. (b) Measured
transmission spectrum of the resonator showing a series of TE reso-
nant modes (Pin = -6 dBm). The TE polarisation is determined by the
grating coupler. (c) Zoomed-in scan of one of the resonances, fitted
with a Lorentzian lineshape, giving a measured Qopt ∼ 15000.

of the resonances. Overlaid is a fit to the spectrum using a
Lorentzian lineshape. The extracted quality factor (Qopt) of
the device is ∼ 15000. While the Qopt is lower than expected,
there are several design and fabrication tweaks that can be
made to increase it. On the design side, the waveguide width
can be increased to provide greater mode confinement. On
the fabrication front, we can significantly improve our post-
release device cleaning procedures to remove any residual
contaminants and incorporate surface passivation techniques
that have shown to improve Qopt30. Based on the measured
resonator Qopt and free spectral range (from Fig.5(b)), we
estimate our current waveguide propagation loss to be ∼ 7
dB/cm. We believe the resonator is currently operating in the
overcoupled regime, and hence the propagation loss estimate
is an upper bound.
In summary, we have demonstrated that the complexity of
the standard (passive) silicon photonics process can be read-


5

ily transferred to more interesting optical materials, in par-
ticular GaAs. The similarity of the refractive indices of the
two materials ensures that high device performance can be
readily ensured without requiring extensive component re-
design. Bringing the scale and complexity of silicon photonics
to more interesting optical platforms will be revolutionary for
device applications in wide-ranging areas from quantum pho-
tonics to cryogenic photonic circuits. Moving forward, we
will extend this platform to demonstrate low-loss long spiral
(Lwvg∼ cm) waveguides, and active electro-optic and acousto-
optic devices.
Acknowledgements: K.C.B. would like to thank Kartik
Srinivasan for lending him the GaAs substrate used for carry-
ing out this work. Sample fabrication was also carried out on
GaAs substrates provided by the UK Engineering and Physi-
cal Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) National Epitaxy Fa-
cility in Sheffield, through a pump-prime grant. We would like
to thank Ed Clarke, Imad Faruque, Edmund Harbord, George
Kanellos, Laurent Kling, Josh Silverstone, Joe Smith, Kar-
tik Srinivasan, and Siyuan Yu for valuable discussions and
suggestions. K.C.B. would like to acknowledge funding sup-
port from the European Research Council (ERC-StG, SBS3-5
/ 758843). Nanofabrication work was carried out on equip-
ment funded by the EPSRC (EP/N015126/1).

I.
REFERENCES

1D. Thomson, A. Zilkie, J. E. Bowers, T. Komljenovic, G. T. Reed,
L. Vivien, D. Marris-Morini, E. Cassan, L. Virot, J.-M. Fédéli, et al.,
“Roadmap on silicon photonics,” Journal of Optics 18, 073003 (2016).

2M. Hochberg and T. Baehr-Jones, “Towards fabless silicon photonics,” Na-
ture photonics 4, 492 (2010).

3A. H. Atabaki, S. Moazeni, F. Pavanello, H. Gevorgyan, J. Notaros, L. Al-
loatti, M. T. Wade, C. Sun, S. A. Kruger, H. Meng, et al., “Integrating
photonics with silicon nanoelectronics for the next generation of systems
on a chip,” Nature 556, 349 (2018).

4K. Giewont, K. Nummy, F. A. Anderson, J. Ayala, T. Barwicz, Y. Bian,
K. K. Dezfulian, D. M. Gill, T. Houghton, S. Hu, et al., “300-mm mono-
lithic silicon photonics foundry technology,” IEEE Journal of Selected Top-
ics in Quantum Electronics 25, 1–11 (2019).

5L. Chrostowski and M. Hochberg, Silicon photonics design: from devices
to systems (Cambridge University Press, 2015).

6Y. Shen, X. Meng, Q. Cheng, S. Rumley, N. Abrams, A. Gazman,
E. Manzhosov, M. S. Glick,
and K. Bergman, “Silicon photonics for
extreme scale systems,” Journal of Lightwave Technology 37, 245–259
(2019).

7M. Zhang, B. Buscaino, C. Wang, A. Shams-Ansari, C. Reimer, R. Zhu,
J. M. Kahn, and M. Lonˇcar, “Broadband electro-optic frequency comb gen-
eration in a lithium niobate microring resonator,” Nature 568, 373 (2019).

8J. Pfeifle, V. Brasch, M. Lauermann, Y. Yu, D. Wegner, T. Herr,
K. Hartinger, P. Schindler, J. Li, D. Hillerkuss, et al., “Coherent terabit
communications with microresonator kerr frequency combs,” Nature pho-
tonics 8, 375 (2014).

9G. J. Mendoza, R. Santagati, J. Munns, E. Hemsley, M. Piekarek, E. Martín-
López, G. D. Marshall, D. Bonneau, M. G. Thompson, and J. L. O’Brien,
“Active temporal and spatial multiplexing of photons,” Optica 3, 127–132
(2016).

10C. Wang, M. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Bertrand, A. Shams-Ansari, S. Chan-
drasekhar, P. Winzer, and M. Lonˇcar, “Integrated lithium niobate electro-
optic modulators operating at cmos-compatible voltages,” Nature 562, 101
(2018).

11R. Sobolewski, “Ultrafast optoelectronic interface for digital superconduct-
ing electronics,” Superconductor Science and technology 14, 994 (2001).

12M. M. de Lima Jr and P. V. Santos, “Modulation of photonic structures by
surface acoustic waves,” Reports on progress in physics 68, 1639 (2005).

13D. Hatanaka, I. Mahboob, K. Onomitsu,
and H. Yamaguchi, “Phonon
waveguides for electromechanical circuits,” Nature nanotechnology 9, 520
(2014).

14K. C. Balram, M. I. Davanço, J. D. Song,
and K. Srinivasan, “Coher-
ent coupling between radiofrequency, optical and acoustic waves in piezo-
optomechanical circuits,” Nature photonics 10, 346 (2016).

15C. P. Dietrich, A. Fiore, M. G. Thompson, M. Kamp, and S. Höfling, “Gaas
integrated quantum photonics:
Towards compact and multi-functional
quantum photonic integrated circuits,” Laser & Photonics Reviews 10, 870–
894 (2016).

16P. Lodahl, S. Mahmoodian, and S. Stobbe, “Interfacing single photons and
single quantum dots with photonic nanostructures,” Reviews of Modern
Physics 87, 347 (2015).

17J. Wang, A. Santamato, P. Jiang, D. Bonneau, E. Engin, J. W. Silverstone,
M. Lermer, J. Beetz, M. Kamp, S. Höfling, et al., “Gallium arsenide (gaas)
quantum photonic waveguide circuits,” Optics Communications 327, 49–55
(2014).

18J. Zhang, G. Muliuk, J. Juvert, S. Kumari, J. Goyvaerts, B. Haq, C. Op de
Beeck, B. Kuyken, G. Morthier, D. Van Thourhout, et al., “III-V-on-si pho-
tonic integrated circuits realized using micro-transfer-printing,” APL pho-
tonics 4, 110803 (2019).

19M. Pu, L. Ottaviano, E. Semenova, and K. Yvind, “Efficient frequency
comb generation in algaas-on-insulator,” Optica 3, 823–826 (2016).

20L. Chang, A. Boes, P. Pintus, J. D. Peters, M. Kennedy, X.-W. Guo, N. Vo-
let, S.-P. Yu, S. B. Papp, and J. E. Bowers, “Strong frequency conversion
in heterogeneously integrated gaas resonators,” APL Photonics 4, 036103
(2019).

21J. Chiles, N. Nader, E. J. Stanton, D. Herman, G. Moody, J. Zhu, J. C.
Skehan, B. Guha, A. Kowligy, J. T. Gopinath, K. Srinivasan, S. A. Diddams,
I. Coddington, N. R. Newbury, J. M. Shainline, S. W. Nam, and R. P. Mirin,
“Multifunctional integrated photonics in the mid-infrared with suspended
algaas on silicon,” Optica 6, 1246–1254 (2019).

22C. G. Littlejohns, Y. Tran, H. Du, S. Stankovi´c, X. Yan, G. Sharp, M. Sorel,
R. Webb, J. England, H. Chong, et al., “Rapid device prototyping using
the cornerstone platform (conference presentation),” in Silicon Photonics
XIV, Vol. 10923 (International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2019) p.
1092303.

23T. H. Stievater, M. W. Pruessner, W. S. Rabinovich, D. Park, R. Mahon,
D. A. Kozak, J. B. Boos, S. A. Holmstrom, and J. B. Khurgin, “Suspended
photonic waveguide devices,” Applied optics 54, F164–F173 (2015).

24L. Midolo, T. Pregnolato, G. Kiršansk˙e, and S. Stobbe, “Soft-mask fabri-
cation of gallium arsenide nanomembranes for integrated quantum photon-
ics,” Nanotechnology 26, 484002 (2015).

25X. Zhou, I. Kulkova, T. Lund-Hansen, S. L. Hansen, P. Lodahl, and L. Mi-
dolo, “High-efficiency shallow-etched grating on gaas membranes for quan-
tum photonic applications,” Applied Physics Letters 113, 251103 (2018).

26J. Carolan, C. Harrold, C. Sparrow, E. Martín-López, N. J. Russell, J. W.
Silverstone, P. J. Shadbolt, N. Matsuda, M. Oguma, M. Itoh, et al., “Uni-
versal linear optics,” Science 349, 711–716 (2015).

27Y. Shen, N. C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Hochberg,
X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle, D. Englund, et al., “Deep learning with
coherent nanophotonic circuits,” Nature Photonics 11, 441 (2017).

28J. Sun, E. Timurdogan, A. Yaacobi, E. S. Hosseini,
and M. R. Watts,
“Large-scale nanophotonic phased array,” Nature 493, 195 (2013).

29R. Osgood, N. Panoiu, J. Dadap, X. Liu, X. Chen, I.-W. Hsieh, E. Dulkeith,
W. Green, and Y. A. Vlasov, “Engineering nonlinearities in nanoscale op-
tical systems: physics and applications in dispersion-engineered silicon
nanophotonic wires,” Advances in Optics and Photonics 1, 162–235 (2009).

30B. Guha, F. Marsault, F. Cadiz, L. Morgenroth, V. Ulin, V. Berkovitz,
A. Lemaître, C. Gomez, A. Amo, S. Combrié, et al., “Surface-enhanced
gallium arsenide photonic resonator with quality factor of 6× 10 6,” Optica
4, 218–221 (2017).


