 

 

Recent advances in high-throughput 
superconductivity research 

Jie Yuan1,2, Valentin Stanev3, Chen Gao4，Ichiro Takeuchi3 and Kui Jin1,2,5 

1 Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China 
2 Key Laboratory of Vacuum Physics, School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China. 
3 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 
20742, USA. 
4 Beijing Advanced Sciences and Innovation Center of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101407 
China 
5 Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China 
 
E-mail: yuanjie@iphy.ac.cn; takeuchi@umd.edu; kuijin@iphy.ac.cn  
 

Abstract 

Superconducting materials find applications in a rapidly growing number of technological areas, and searching for novel 
superconductors continues to be a major scientific task. However, the steady increase in the complexity of candidate materials 
presents a big challenge to the researchers in the field. In particular, conventional experimental methods are not well suited to 
efficiently search for candidates in compositional space exponentially growing with the number of elements; neither do they 
permit quick extraction of reliable multidimensional phase diagrams delineating the physical parameters that control 
superconductivity. New research paradigms that can boost the speed and the efficiency of superconducting materials research 
are urgently needed. High-throughput methods for rapid screening and optimization of materials have demonstrated their utility 
for accelerating research in bioinformatics and pharmaceutical industry, yet remain rare in quantum materials research. In this 
paper, we will briefly review the history of high-throughput research paradigm and then focus on some recent applications of 
this paradigm in superconductivity research. We consider the role these methods can play in all stages of materials development, 
including high-throughput computation, synthesis, characterization, and the emerging field of machine learning for materials. 
The high-throughput paradigm will undoubtedly become an indispensable tool of superconductivity research in the near future. 

 

Keywords: superconductivity, high throughput, machine learning, combinatorial film, rapid screening 


 

1. Introduction 

Ever since Kammerlingh-Onnes in Leiden observed the 
disappearance of electrical resistance of mercury at very low 
temperatures in 1911, the phenomenon of superconductivity 
has been intensely studied. Yet, the exact nature of this effect 
remained unclear until the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) 
theory was developed in 1957 [1, 2]. Establishing the physical 
parameters behind the critical temperature (Tc) then became 
one of the main research topics in the field. Observation of an 
isotope effect clearly demonstrated that Tc in most then-
known-superconductors is linked to the coupling between the 
electrons and the lattice, with the strength of the electron-
phonon (el-ph) interaction playing a key role. Increasing el-ph 
coupling enhances Tc as long as the atoms in the crystal only 
vibrate near their equilibrium sites. But as the coupling 
strength crosses from a weak regime to an intermediate regime, 
the normal metallic state itself becomes unstable and a 
competing state such as a charge density wave may arise, 
causing structural changes. Although early analyses pointing 
to a ceiling of Tc at about 30 ~ 40 K proved too simplistic, it 
quickly become clear that achieving significantly higher 
critical temperatures would require unusual conditions or 
materials [3]. (One example is the recent remarkable 
observation of high Tc in hydrogen-rich materials under 
extreme pressure [4]) 
  In 1986, the ceramic compound Ba-La-Cu-O was found to 
become superconducting at 35 K by Bednorz and Müller in 
Zurich [5]. This milestone work not only brought hope for 
superconductors with Tc above 40 K, but also inspired other 
physicists to expand their search by exploring compounds 
with complex crystal structures and containing multiple 
elements. Soon, the limit of 40 K was crossed [6, 7]; critical 
temperatures above that of liquid nitrogen (77 K) were 
realized [8, 9], and the highest Tc reached 138 K in 
Hg0.8Tl0.2Ba2Ca2Cu3O8.33 (at ambient pressure) [10]. While 
these discoveries inspired a generation of researchers, the 
mechanism of superconductivity in this class of materials 
(dubbed cuprates) is still a mystery. 
   Before the discovery of high-Tc cuprate (HTSCs) materials, 
most known superconductors were composed of no more than 
two 
elements 
and 
were 
predominantly 
elemental 

superconductors, 
alloys, 
and 
intermetallics. 
As 
the 

superconducting transition temperature went beyond the 40 K 
mark, the superconducting compounds became more complex 
and containing more elements; for example, YBa2Cu3O6+δ, 
HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8+δ and Hg0.8Tl0.2Ba2Ca2Cu3O8.33 are made up 
of 4, 5 and 6 elements respectively. On the other hand, the 
recent discoveries of Fe-based [11, 12], Cr-based and Mn-
based superconductors [13-15] demonstrated that even 
compounds with elements once thought strongly detrimental 
to superconductivity have to be considered. Obviously, the 
number of possible combinations grows exponentially as more 
and more elements are added in the candidate materials. The 

number of compounds can be easily estimated within the 
group of natural elements; the order of magnitudes for 
possible combinations are 103, 105, 107 and 109 for binary, 
ternary, quaternary, and penternary compounds respectively. 
In 
addition, 
many 
other 
methods 
to 
modulate 

superconductivity are known: ultra-high pressure [16, 17], 
ultra-thin film deposition [18], superlattice architecture [19] 
and ionic liquid/solid gating [20, 21] are a few examples. 
Third, some HTSC materials are extremely sensitive to 
physical and chemical parameters. For instance, one percent 
variation in cation content can turn a copper oxide 
superconductor into an insulator [22]. One will have to do a 
vast amount of synthesis to construct a reliable and detailed 
phase diagram as a function of cation and anion contents [23]. 
What is more, a complete phase diagram of HTSC must 
necessarily be multivariate, i.e. alongside cation and anion 
substitutions it must include synthesis conditions, pressure, 
magnetic field, and other variables. It is clearly not feasible to 
efficiently construct such a multidimensional phase diagram 
using the traditional one-material-at-a-time experimental 
methodology.  
   In general, there are two main challenges in the experimental 
study 
of 
superconductivity: 
i) 
searching 
for 
novel 

superconductors in the enormous space of candidate 
compounds comprised of more and more elements; ii) 
delineating the key physical parameters that control the 
superconductivity, by means of establishing a reliable 
multidimensional phase diagram. Conventional experimental 
methods are not well suited to address these problems, and 
new paradigms and tools are required to boost the efficiency 
of superconductivity research [24, 25]. 

In bioinformatics and the pharmaceutical industry, similar 

challenges arose before the discovery of HTSCs. There is a 
huge number of possible gene combinations and drug 
formulas, and it is not realistic to synthesize and test them one 
by one. The idea of doing many tests at the same time – the 
so-called high-throughput strategy – was rapidly developed 
and put into practice. Ever since, high-throughput methods 
have been a key driving force behind the development of 
modern biology and medicine. This methodology was also 
gradually adopted in condensed matter physics and materials 
science.  

The general high-throughput materials research procedure 

has the following steps - sample synthesis, characterization, 
analysis of the data. Significant increase of the efficiency 
necessitates the acceleration of every step, as well as 
substantial coordination among them. The high-throughput 
approach for materials development is sketched in figure 1.  
 


3 

 

 

Figure 1. The high-throughput approach for discovery and 
development of materials. 

 

In 1970, Hanak introduced the rudiments of a multiple-

sample-concept in materials research, by developing a 
multiple-target, radio-frequency co-sputtering deposition [26]. 
However, the difficulties in obtaining and processing a large 
amount of experimental data prevented the wide-spread 
adoption of high-throughput methods in materials research at 
the time. Another factor inhibiting the spread of these methods 
was the low demand for complex functional materials. This 
has dramatically changed in the last decades, owing to the 
needs of industries such as communications, aerospace, 
energy, and transportations. The demand for novel materials 
has experienced an explosive growth, both in terms of 
diversity and required performance. This necessitated 
significant acceleration of materials research and development. 
High-throughput synthesis and characterization technology 
became a major research tool, leading to a substantial progress 
in a number of applications (see, for example, Refs. [27-34]). 
Helping these advances, the rapid progress in information 
technologies created powerful tools able to deal with the 
massive amounts of data generated by this approach.  

Thus, high-throughput paradigm provides an extremely 

promising 
approach 
to 
meet 
the 
challenges 
in 

superconductivity research outlined above. In one early 
pioneering work demonstrating the potential of these methods, 
Xiang et al. reported the rapid synthesis of high-Tc 
superconductors, with a 128-member library of copper oxide 
superconducting thin films deposited on a single substrate in 
one batch [35]. Although the superconductors synthesized in 
this work had been known already, the increase in efficiency 
achieved by the parallel synthesis was encouraging. In 2013, 
Jin et al. provided the first example of a superconductor 
discovered via the high-throughput methodology. They 
fabricated composition-spread films comprised of Fe and B, 
across 3-inch Si wafers by a co-sputtering technique. 

Indications of a superconducting region were found from the 
resistance measurement by a home-made probe with an array 
of 64 pogo-pins (figure 2b). Superconductivity was then 
confirmed by a zoom-in magnetotransport and susceptibility 
measurements [36]. In 2016, Wu et al. studied a library of 
heterostructures made up of La2CuO4 and combinatorial La2-

xSrxCuO4 (0.15≤x≤0.47), achieved by varying the deposition 
rate of the Sr content in an advanced oxide molecular beam 
epitaxy system [37]. In 2018, Stanev et al. filtered more than 
100,000 compounds and created a list of potential 
superconductors, using a machine learning models trained on 
the critical temperatures of more than 12,000 known 
superconductors [38].  

As seen from these examples, the high-throughput 

paradigm is already starting to permeate superconductivity 
research. In this review, we outline the advances in all parts of 
high-throughput superconductivity research: high-throughput 
synthesis (Section 2), high-throughput characterizations 
(Section 3), high-throughput ab-initio calculations (Section 4), 
and machine learning (Section 5). We also discuss the need to 
develop a next generation of facilities, techniques, and 
platforms in order to fully utilize the power of high-throughput 
methods (discussed in Section 6) [36].  

 

 

Figure 2. Mapping of the temperature dependence of resistivity on 
the Fe-B composition spread film.  
  

2. High throughput syntheses for superconductors. 

High-throughput synthesis is one of the foundations of the 
recent acceleration of the rate of materials exploration. 
However, that does not mean the synthesis cost has suddenly 
become irrelevant; efficiency is a key point – the speed of 
synthesis should grow faster than the resources it demands. To 
achieve this, common components and procedures used in 
different experimental steps, like evacuation, heating and 
conditioning atmosphere, should be combined as much as 
possible. This is the basis of the so-called combinatorial 
approach, which is the most efficient high-throughput 
synthesis method. Koinuma et al. gave the basic concept of 


4 

 

combinatorial chemistry for solid state materials in Ref. [39]. 
During synthesis, a chemical reaction for the target material is 
influenced by many factors. The search for new materials can 
be regarded as a process of scanning certain points in the phase 
diagram as a function of multiple variables, as shown in figure 
3. Compared to the classical synthesis process of an effective 
point-by-point search, combinatorial approach can much 
faster map key parameters (such as composition, temperature, 
and pressure) responsible for optimizing a functionality. 

 

 

Figure 3. Concepts of combinatorial synthesis versus classical 
synthesis [39]. 

 
Thin-film preparation technology is the most widely used 

combinatorial synthesis method [30]. As early as 1965, 
Kennedy et al. reported a method for rapidly obtaining a Fe-
Cr-Ni ternary library by electron beam co-evaporation of three 
precursors (Fe, Cr and Ni targets), on an equilateral-triangle 
metal foil with a side length of 10 inches [40]. Three 
generations of combinatorial film growth techniques have 
been developed since then. The first generation realizes a 
gradient chemical composition by ablating the precursors 
simultaneously and mixing them using natural diffusion. Both 
co-evaporation [40, 41], co-sputtering [26, 42, 43] and co-
laser ablating [44] techniques are categorized into this 
generation. Figure 4 shows a typical configuration of a co-
sputtering system. Different sources are mounted against the 
wafer at a certain angle to the normal direction of the wafer 
surface. During the deposition, such configuration results in a 
spatial variation of the deposition rate and allows plumes from 
different targets to overlap and form a natural composition 
gradient. Recently, Jin et al. obtained an Fe-B binary spread 
by such method, with a continuous composition across a 3-
inch Si wafer with a 200 nm SiO2 layer on top [36]. The lower 
part of figure 4 shows the photograph of one composition 

spread wafer taken under natural light; the average 
composition at different positions (solid circles) is obtained by 
the wavelength dispersive spectroscopy (WDS). A key 
advantage of the co-deposition method is that it requires 
relatively simple facilities and the deposition process is easy 
to control. However, the chemical composition cannot be 
precisely controlled because of the natural variability of the 
spatial deposition rate. The local composition of the film can 
only be determined by micro-region analysis methods 
(discussed in the section of high-throughput characterizations).  

 

 

Figure 4. Sketch of the co-sputtering deposition for an Fe-B 
composition spread combi-film. 
 

Second-generation methods were developed to overcome 

the shortcomings of the co-deposition approach. Xiang et al. 
used a method combining thin film deposition and physical 
mask techniques for a parallel synthesis of spatially 
addressable libraries of materials [35]. The programmable 
mask is at the core of the second-generation technology. Films  
fabricated with these methods contain discrete squares with 
varying compositions. Because these small regions are 
addressable, such films are also called integrated materials 
chips or combinatorial materials libraries. More details about 
this synthesis method can be found in the earlier literature (e.g. 
[32, 45-47]). It has to be noted that the mask is not necessarily 
a physical one. Wang et al. developed a combinatorial robot 
which is able to create thick-film libraries by ink-jet printing, 
as shown in figure 5 [48]. After being ground into sufficiently 
fine powder, precursors can be made into inks [49], taking the 
role of the three “primary colors”. Different doses of inks are 
ejected on designated places of the wafer. Thus, using selected 
precursors and an appropriate post processing, an addressable 
materials library can be created. In this way, the ejector 
together with the robot arm replaces the physical mask [50, 
51]. 
 


5 

 

 

 

Figure 5. (a) The ink-jet printer table within the robot gantry, 
populated with alumina substrates. The pick and place robot arm is 
seen in the top right. (b) Schematic diagram of the mixing and 
printing protocol [48]. 
 
Mask patterns has been widely utilized in the study of 
electronic, magnetic, optical and dielectric materials, as well 
as catalysts and alloys [52]. However, for more precise studies 
of material properties, distinct techniques such as atomically 
controlled layer-by-layer thin-film growth are required [25].  
 

 

Figure 6. Schematic of binary-combinatorial-film growth using the 
continuous moving mask technique [53]. 

 
Combinatorial laser molecular beam epitaxy (CLMBE)–the 

so-called third generation of combinatorial thin-film 
preparation technology–was developed to carry out a parallel 
fabrication via a layer-by-layer growth mode [25]. The state-

of-the-art laser molecular beam epitaxy in combination with a 
mobile mask technique has been already used to control 
layering sequences of high-quality superconducting films [54]. 
The procedure for preparing binary combinatorial films with 
continuous chemical composition spread on single substrate 
can be briefly described as follows (see also figure 6): once a 
target A is ablated by laser pulses, a metal mask is moving 
along the substrate in half a period time and results in a linear 
distribution of the A component. In the other half period, the 
other target B is ablated for a reverse distribution by moving 
the mask in the opposite direction [53]. A desired thickness of 
the combinatorial film can be achieved by setting 
corresponding periods of deposition. It should be emphasized 
that the two precursors A and B must be mixed in a single unit 
cell in the period, monitored by the reflection high-energy 
electron diffraction system for in-situ diagnostics. Otherwise, 
a superlattice rather than a combinatorial film will be obtained.  

 
CLMBE is easy to operate, and benefits from a wide 

chemical composition range in one batch of deposition. This 
makes it perfect for obtaining a precise phase diagrams of 
materials like cuprate superconductors [5], For instance, Yu et 
al. fabricated combinatorial La2-xCexCuO4±δ thin film with x 
from 0.1 to 0.19 on 1×1 cm2 SrTiO3 substrate by the CLMBE 
[53]. 

 

 

Figure 7. (From the introduction brochure of Pascal Co., Ltd in 

Japan) Schematic of ternary-combinatorial film growth using the 
continuous moving mask technique. The blue arrows indicate the 
direction of mask motion in every step.  

 
Following the same principle, a ternary-combinatorial film 

can be grown with ablating alternatingly three targets and 
shadowing the substrate from three directions by mask with a 
sophisticated pattern design (shown in figure 7). With this 
method, Mao et al. prepared an Mg–Ni–Al ternary thin film 
library [24]. In combinatorial films, the chemical composition 
is locked to the fixed space point of the sample surface. For a 
ternary compound, the formula can be written as AxByC1-x-y, in 
which A, B and C stand for different elements. Since there are 
two independent spatial coordinators (e.g. x and y) 


6 

 

determining the position corresponding to a unique chemical 
composition, the full ternary library can be obtained based on 
single combinatorial spread. However, if more than two 
variables are involved, e.g. three variables in the quaternary 
AxByCzD1-x-y-z, one cannot obtain all the combinations of these 
four components in a single chip; instead, a pseudo multi-
component materials library can be created.  

As explained above, three generations of distinct  

combinatorial-film 
preparation 
techniques 
have 
been 

developed. It has to be noted that each generation has its own 
unique merits, and is suitable for different kinds of materials. 
Sometime, a customized combinatorial approach is required, 
for example for compounds that only show superconductivity 
in a very narrow range of chemical doping. A typical iron-
based 
superconductor, 
FeSe1-δ 
only 
displays 

superconductivity within a finite δ [55]. Since Se is a volatile 
element, fine control of the Fe/Se ratio of the final film can be 
extremely challenging by the methods presented above. 
Recently, a double-beam laser configuration was used to 
produce a redistributed laser flux density on a FeSe target. As 
reported in the study of SrTiO3 films grown by pulsed laser 
deposition (PLD), the stoichiometric ratio can be regulated by 
the power density of the laser [56]. Tuning the parameter of 
the combinatorial laser, the Fe/Se ratio of the final film can be 
varied by a very narrow δ step (i.e. the order of magnitude is 
~ 0.001, which is beyond the resolution limit of the common 
chemical analysis methods). The left panel of figure 8 shows 
the schematic map of double-beam laser used in the deposition; 
the corresponding evolution of the superconducting critical 
temperature can be clearly seen in the normalized R-T curves 
from different space regions of the final film (right panel). 
Moving along the film from one edge to the other, Tc changes 
continuously from below 2 K to 12 K and back to below 2 K. 
There is no obvious difference in the film thickness (~150 nm) 
across the whole film (verified by scanning electron 
microscope (SEM)); thus, thickness influence on Tc can be 
excluded. Such combinatorial films offer a good platform to 
investigate the nature of tunable superconductivity in the Fe-
Se binary system [57]. 

 

Figure 8. (a) Schematic process of the double-beam pulsed laser 
deposition via spectroscope, and then focused onto the target with 
controllable displacement. (b) The temperature dependence of 
normalized resistance along the y direction, with the highest Tc in the 
middle [57]. 

 
Wu et al. used a tilted Knudsen cell in an oxide molecular 

beam epitaxy system to synthesis combinatorial La2-xSrxCuO4 
film. Although in principle this falls into the class of first 
generation combinatorial techniques, it provides a much finer 
control over the composition. The deposition rate can be 
precisely tuned and the growth process can be monitored in-
situ. The composition gradient originates in the angle between 
the sources and the substrate, as shown in figure 9. By means 
of this method, the composition across the film can be 
confined to extremely fine steps, Δx ∼0.00008 [37, 58].  

 

 

Figure 9. Schematics of the deposition geometry: thermal 

effusion cell is positioned at a shallow angle (20°) with respect to the 
substrate. Closer to the source, the deposition rate is higher [37].  

 
In addition to generating composition-spread material 

libraries, combinatorial approaches can also be used to rapidly 
ascertain the optimal growth condition for superconducting 
materials. For example, the conventional way to find the best 
deposition temperature of a superconducting material is to try 
different temperatures one by one. However, a much more 
efficient method is to create a thermal gradient on the substrate 
during film deposition [59]. Figure 10 shows one 
configuration which can create such gradient during the 
growth process. One end of the substrate is attached to a heater 
while the other end is kept free-standing. When the heater is 
set at high temperature, heat diffuses to the free-standing end 
through the substrate. Using such configuration, a temperature 
range in which only pure β-FeSe phase forms was found; only 
three batches of samples were tested with deposition 
temperature from 350 to 700℃ [60]. 

 


7 

 

 

Figure 10. (a) Schematic of the combinatorial film growth with 
gradient temperature, inset on top left is real photo of the substrate 
mounted on the heater. (b-d) the micro-region θ/2θ x-ray patterns 
of 
the 
FeSe 
films 
grown 
using 
different 
temperature 

gradients:700 ℃-550 ℃,600 ℃-450 ℃ and 500 ℃ to 350 ℃, 
respectively. Pure β-FeSe phase can be found in the region where 
the deposition temperature is not beyond 450 ℃ [60]. 
 

In addition, parallel synthesis can help reduce the 

uncertainty originating in the difference of growth conditions, 
unavoidable between separate experimental batches. Figure 
11 shows the relationship between the out-of-plane crystal 
lattice parameter (c-axis) and Tc extracted from more than one 
thousand pieces of uniform FeSe films (upper panel) as well 
as one combinatorial film (lower panel), respectively. It took 
almost three years to prepare and characterize the 1000+ 
uniform films; this is in contrast with the several weeks needed 

for the single combinatorial film. As can be seen, the amount 
of data collected from the uniform films is much larger, 
however, the positive relation between c and Tc0 is manifested 
much clearly in the combinatorial film data.  

 

 

Figure 11. The c-axis lattice constants dependence of Tc0 for （a) 
uniform FeSe films, （b) combinatorial FeSe film with gradient Tc 
[57].  
 
Combinatorial film data provides a better correlation between 
Tc and lattice parameters due to its more precise composition 
control.  
 

3. High throughput characterizations of superconductors 

As another step in the high throughput methodology, rapid 
characterization of combinatorial films is indispensable in the 
drive to accelerate superconductivity research. Because to the 
nature of combinatorial synthesis, characterization have to be 
conducted by probes with spatial resolution capabilities. 
Several 
commercially 
available 
probes 
satisfy 
this 

requirement: atomic force microscope, scanning tunneling 


8 

 

microscope (STM), optical microscope, scanning electron 
microscope are just a few examples. These tools with auto 
scan functionality can have high spatial resolution, and are 
equipped with tips or aggregated beams. There are also diverse 
homemade probes designed to study various properties of 
high-throughput samples. In this section, we focus on 
techniques relevant to superconductivity research, briefly 
summarized in the following order.  

  

3.1. Composition and structure 
 
Common probes used for composition and structure analyses 
are: x-ray diffraction; scanning electron microscopy (SEM); 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Because the 
electron beam can be focused, methods using it naturally 
provide the required spatial resolution and can be used for 
high-throughput characterizations [33, 61]. 

 
Great efforts have been dedicated to developing spatially 

resolved x-ray-based characterization methods. Since x-rays 
have much higher frequency and photon energy than visible 
light, they tend to penetrate or get absorbed in most materials. 
Unfortunately, most of the techniques used to redirect x-rays 
are unable to produce well focused beams.  
    Initially, pinholes or slits made of anti-radiation materials 
were used to shrink the profile size of x-ray beams. Figure 12 
shows the data collected from a combinatorial La2-xCexCuO4 
library chip (an electron-doped copper oxide superconductor, 
x varies from 0.10 to 0.19). Micro-area scan is realized by 
adding a narrow slot and a moving sample stage to a 
commercially-available x-ray diffractometer [53]. The 
calculated c-axis lattice constant monotonically decreases 
with raising the nominal doping level x, in accordance with 
the tendency extracted from uniform LCCO thin films 
fabricated by conventional pulsed laser deposition (PLD) 
method [62, 63].   

 

 

 Figure 12. (a) The micro-region x-ray diffraction results of combi-
film La2-xCexCuO4±δ. The component interval Δx is about 0.012. (b) 
The variation of c-axis lattice constant with increasing doping 
levels. In this figure, x refers to nominal doping level [53]. 

In this technique the analysis sensitivity and accuracy are 

unavoidably low, due to the limited incident x-ray throughput, 

which necessitates time-consuming repetitive angular-
scanning measurements. To address this, techniques using a 
zone plate as an x-ray focusing component or a 2D detector 
were developed in order to enhance the intensity of the x-ray 
beam [64] or measurement efficiency [65]. In 2005, Luo et al. 
developed a combinatorial x-ray analysis system with a spot 
size of 0.5 mm by using polycapillary x-ray lens to focus the 
divergent beam from an x-ray source. This system, integrating 
micro-region x-ray diffraction, x-ray fluorescence, and x-ray 
photoluminescence tools, meets the requirements of high-
throughput structure and composition characterizations. 
Instead of the angular-dispersive x-ray diffraction, these 
authors used energy-dispersive x-ray diffraction (EDXRD), 
which utilizes the entire spectra of the focused x-ray, from 4 
to 19 keV, without any moving parts. As a consequence, the 
measurement 
process 
was 
further 
accelerated. 
The 

configuration used in the system is shown in figure 13 [66]. 
More details about the operation principle of x-ray optics can 
be obtained, for example, in the review paper Ref. [67]. 

 

 

 
Figure 13. (a) Configuration and (b) photograph of the x-ray 

high-throughput characterization system [66]. 

 
Concurrently, special x-ray sources were developed to meet 

the requirements of high-throughput characterizations. Xiang 


9 

 

et al. used a micro-beam x-ray system to simultaneously 
screen the composition and the structure with a resolution of 
10-100 μm. The x-ray intensity in such system is 20 times 
higher than that of an ordinary x-ray source [32]. 

 Since synchrotron facilities can offer high spatial resolution 

while simultaneously providing adequate photon flux, several 
high-throughput screening techniques were developed 
specifically for such sources. In 1998, Isaacs et al. used 
synchrotron x-ray micro-beam techniques to verify the 
feasibility 
of 
high-throughput 
characterization 
in 

combinatorial libraries [68]. This work included x-ray 
fluorescence, 
diffraction 
and 
absorption 
spectroscopy 

experiments with a spatial resolution of 3×20 μm2. In 2014, 
combinatorial phase mapping techniques with a synchrotron 
source were realized by Gregoire et al [69]. The technique 
used in this work provides the capability of measuring more 
than 5000 samples per day using a synchrotron x-ray 
diffraction and fluorescence for rapid characterization. Xing 
et al. recently pushed the efficiency and automation even 
further [70]. The rate of recording diffraction images reached 
one pattern per second and the diffraction patterns were 
automatically processed to create the composition-phase map. 
In addition to commonly-used methods such as diffraction and 
fluorescence, x-ray absorption is also suitable for high-
throughput characterization. For instance, Suram et al. used 
custom-made combinatorial x-ray absorption near edge 
spectroscopy technique to obtain a detailed chemical 
information of samples [71].  

Although synchrotron x-ray 
facilities are 
powerful 

characterization tools, they remain a scarce resource, which 
impedes their use in high-throughput characterization. 
Developing more accessible rapid screening systems remains 
a grand challenge in the field. 

 
3.2. Transport properties 

 
Measuring 
transport 
properties 
such 
as 
resistivity, 

magnetoresistance and Hall effect is extremely important in 
uncovering the nature of superconductivity in various 
materials.  

In 2005, Hewitt et al. developed a 196-pin device to 

measure the dc resistance versus temperature (shown in Figure 
14). The distance between nearest pins is about 4.64 mm. In 
the configuration of Van der Pauw method, these pins can 
establish 49 parallel channels in an epoxy plate of 4.2 inches 
× 4.2 inches. For low-temperature measurement, the device 
can be cooled down to 7 K by cold fingers [72].  

 

 

Figure 14. Image of the 196-pin device which makes electrical 

contact to the 49-sample thin-film library for four-contact resistivity 
measurements [72].  

 
Typically, the sample chambers of most commercial low-

temperature measurement system, especially the ones 
equipped with magnets, have limited space. For high-
throughput magnetoresistance measurements, a more compact 
probe device, compatible with the existing systems, is highly 
desirable. In 2013, Jin et al. designed a high-throughput probe 
to search for superconductivity in the Fe-B composition 
spreads mentioned above. They used pogo pins for a better 
contact between the sample surface and the pinpoint, and also 
shortened the distance between nearest pins to ~1 mm. Thus, 
even if the lateral size of the sample chamber is limited to a 
centimeter scale, at least 16 multiplexed channels of 
temperature dependent resistance can be measured at 4 × 4 
evenly spaced 1 mm × 1 mm areas in van der Pauw 
configuration. Utilizing this probe, the authors discovered 
superconductivity in the region where the ratio of Fe to B is 
approximately 1:2; there the superconducting transition 
temperature can reach 4 K. The temperature-dependent 
resistivity curves and a sketch diagram of the pogo pin array 
are shown in figure 2. A number of diced 1 cm × 1 cm chips 
from the superconducting region were measured using the 16-
spot 
simultaneous 
resistance-versus-temperature 

measurement setup. Later, the device was upgraded and made 
compatible with a commercial physical property measurement 
system (PPMS). In this way, magnetoresistance and Hall data 
of a combinatorial film can be rapidly collected. 

The group of I. Bozovic performed multiple-channel 

measurements of the Hall signal and the resistivity by a high-
throughput system in order to characterize highly conductive 
oxides with Hall coefficients as small as 10−10 m3/C. The 
receptacles of this device are shown in figure 15(a). There are 
64 slots matching pogo pins (with 1.11 mm distance between 
the adjacent pins), which contact with the patterned film as 
shown in figure 15(b). In the center of the film, a stripe with 


10 

 

300 µm in width and 10 mm in length is bridged with 64 
square pads covered with gold. The blocks for different 
channels segment the main stripe to 300 µm in length. Using 
this device, 30 channels for the resistivity and 31 channels for 
the Hall resistivity can be measured simultaneously. Figure 15 
c) shows a series of longitudinal resistivity ρ(T) curves from a 
single La2−xSrxCuO4–La2CuO4 bilayer films. The doping 
resolution can reach ∆x = 0.0002 [73]. Due to the high special 
resolution 
of 
the 
Hall 
measurements, 
an 
intrinsic 

inhomogeneity of sample could be detected. Wu et al. were 
thereby able to construct a detailed phase diagram of this 
material and discovered a quantum charge-cluster glass state 
that competes with the superconducting state [37].  

 

Figure 15. (a) Receptacles for spring-loaded pogo pins on the 

cryostat tail. (b) Film lithography and contact pattern. (c) The 
temperature-dependent ab plane resistivity ρ measured from different 
channels on the same La2−xSrxCuO4-La2CuO4 bilayer films [37]. 

 
 Since in this design the current bridge is shared by all the 

channels, the sample should have good electrical conductivity. 
Thus, this pattern is not suitable for screening a combinatorial 
film with insulating areas. In such case, an array micro-bridge 
design with independent current paths should be employed. In 
2017, Wu et al. reported a ‘sunbeam’ lithography pattern for 
simultaneous Hall measurements [74]. The 36 Hall bars, each 
with three pairs of transverse contacts (as sketched in figure 
16(a), form a circle with 10° between two successive bars. 
Angular dependence of ρT (transverse resistivity, defined as 
VTd/I, where VT is the voltage across the sample, transverse to 
the electrical current I and d is the film thickness) and ρ in an 
under-doped (x = 0.04) LSCO film shows sin(2φ)  oscillations; 
these suggest a breaking of the four-fold rotational symmetry 
of the crystal structure as shown in figure 16(b). The fact that 
this anisotropy emerges in superconducting samples is 
significant, as its origin was attributed to electronic nematicity.  

 

 

Figure 16. (a) The ‘sunbeam’ lithography pattern used for device 
fabrication contains 36 Hall bars, each with three pairs of transverse 
contacts. (b) the measured values of ρT(φ) and ρ(φ) at T = 30 K [74]. 

 

The spread of such methods is restricted by the difficulties 

of micro-fabrication. Shan et al. followed an alternative 
approach. They developed a scanning point-contact probe 
compatible with PPMS. By mounting the sample on a moving 
stage consisting of a close-loop z-axis and x-axis piezo cubes 
as shown in the left panel of figure 17, a Pt-Ir tip can be 
positioned on the sample surface with an accuracy of sub-
micron scale. With this probe, He et al. investigated the 
tunneling spectra of [111]-, [110]-, and [001]-oriented high 
quality LiTi2O4 (LTO) thin films and unveiled anisotropic 
electron-phonon coupling in LTO system [75]. The ability to 
probe local physical properties of superconductors will allow 
to rapidly screen superconducting combinatorial films without 
the need for complex micro-fabrication. 

 

 

Figure 17. On the left: photograph of the scanning point-contact 
probe. Middle and right panels: normalized differential conductance 
versus bias voltage for the [111] film from 2.5 to 10 K and from 0 to 
9 T, respectively [75]. 

 
 

3.3. Magnetic properties 
 
     Since common probes with beams focused by optical 
lenses are commercially available, here we skip the 
description of magnetic-optical methods for high-throughput 
characterization. Scanning magnetic microscopes, e.g. 
magnetic force microscope (MFM) [76-78], scanning Hall 
probe 
microscope 
(SHPM) 
[79, 
80] 
and 
scanning 

superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) [81-
84], which possess the spatial resolution necessary for high-
throughput magnetic imaging, have played and will continue 
to play an important role in understanding the nature of 
superconductivity.  
 
      MFM, with spatial resolution of about tens of nm, is 
generally based on measuring the force between a magnetized 
tip and the scanned surface. This method shows potential for 
high-throughput mapping in both static and dynamic magnetic 


11 

 

fields [85]. MFM can study the topography of a sample and 
even image a single quantized vortex in a superconducting 
material [86]. SHPM provides quantitative magnetic field 
measurements with a spatial resolution better than 1μm under 
general conditions. A sub-micron Hall probe can be 
manufactured and used to scan a sample with the aid of 
conventional scanning techniques [87]. Similar to MFM, 
SHPM can also image the distribution of quantized vortices in 
type-II superconductors [88]. Local magnetic fields can also 
be imaged by scanning with SQUIDs, which utilize the effects 
of Cooper pair tunneling and superconducting quantum 
interference [89]. In contrast with MFM and SHPM, scanning 
SQUIDs can obtain information about the local susceptibility 
and superfluid density, as shown in figure 18 [90]. Due to the 
lack of suitable combinatorial samples, these techniques are 
still rarely applied in high-throughput characterization of 
superconductors. However, their advantages and enormous 
potential cannot be neglected. Kogan and Kirtley have 
modeled 
the 
Meissner 
response 
of 
anisotropic 

superconductors and superconductors with inhomogeneous 
penetration depths [91, 92]. This makes it possible to extract 
the evolution of the penetration depth from a local 
diamagnetic 
susceptibility 
imaging 
of 
combinatorial 

superconducting films. 

 

Figure 18. Local susceptibility image of the ab face of underdoped 
Ba(Fe1−xCox)2As2 with x=0.051 and Tc=18.25 K. (a) at T=17 K, 
sample, (b) at T = 17.5 K, (c) at T =18.5 K. The brighter patterns 
indicate the regions with stronger diamagnetic response, which 
disappear above Tc [90].  
 

In addition to the transport and magnetic properties 

characterization tools mentioned above, near-field detection 
techniques like scanning tip microwave near-field microscope 
(STMNM) was developed 
to probe 
the dynamical 

electromagnetic properties of superconductors.  

 
Wei et al. used a sharpened solid metal (instead of an 

aperture or a gap) as a point-like evanescent field emitter. 
Based on this design, they set up a near-field rf/microwave 
microscope that is capable of imaging surface resistance 
profiles with a spatial resolution of ~5 μm [93]. Later, Gao et 
al. improved the spatial resolution to the order of 100 nm by 
introducing a sapphire disk with a center hole comparable to 
the diameter of the tip wire and a metal coating layer of 1 μm 
on the surface, as shown in figure 19. In addition, a phase-
sensitive technique was applied for faster data acquisition, 
while quasi-static theoretical model was developed to 
calculate the relative dielectric constant from the raw data [94]. 

 

 

Figure 19. Schematic of the experimental setup for the STMNM 

with a resonator [93]. 

 

In the same year, Takeuchi et al. integrated the STMNM 

with a low-temperature cryostat and applied it to scan an 
YBa2Cu3O7-δ film. The high-frequency response was used to 
detect the superconducting transitions at different positions on 
the film [95].  

 
Shen group designed a near-field scanning microwave 

microscope in a different way. They separated the sensing 
probe from the excitation electrode to suppress the common-
mode signal and used co-planar waveguides to transmit 
microwave signal (shown in figure 20) [96]. Similarly, their 
microscope was later upgraded for low-temperature imaging 
[97].  

 


12 

 

 

 

Figure 20. (a) Microfabricated cantilever with co-planar 

waveguides patterned on the top. The bonding pads and the chip 
dimension are labeled in the picture. (b) Schematics of the side view 
(left) and the top view (right) of the cantilever tip. All electrodes are 
labeled in the figure. (c) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image 
of the Pt tip formed by focused ion beam (FIB) deposition [96]. 

 

    In addition to composition, structure, electrical transport, 
and magnetism, methods were developed to image thermal, 
optical, and mechanical properties of films [98-103]. From 
these 
measurements 
some 
key 
information 
about 

superconductivity can be obtained.  
   For example, Otani et al. set up an integrated scanning-
spring-probe system for high-throughput thermoelectric 
power-factor screening [101]. The schematic diagram can be 
seen in figure 21. Thermal transport measurements such as 
Nernst and thermopower are complementary to electrical 
transport results, and can be indispensable in clarifying issues 
related to multiband features [104], superconducting 
fluctuations [105] and phase transitions [106]. 

 

 

Figure 21. Schematic diagram of the probe to measure 
thermoelectric property [101].  
 

An imaging ellipsometer with a lateral resolution in the 

nanometer range was invented by Karageorgiev et al. As 
shown in figure 22, the system combines an ellipsometer with 
atomic force microscope (AFM). The sample is illuminated 
from the bottom through a prism in total internal reflection 
(TIR), and the evanescent field created at the sample surface 
is scattered by a conventional AFM tip [107, 108]. The 
intensity of the measured optical signal depends on the sample 
thickness and local optical properties. By fitting the data and 
comparing with an existing database, the local thickness and 
other parameters such as refractive index and absorption factor 
can be extracted [109, 110]. This can be extremely useful for 
studying some interesting topics like a possible negative index 
of refraction induced by surface Josephson-plasma waves in 
layered superconductors [111]. 

 

Figure 22. Experimental setup of scanning near-field ellipsometric 
microscope [107]. 

4. High throughput theoretical calculations for 
superconductors 

4.1. Introduction to high-throughput computations 
 
In combinatorial materials studies, the space of possible 
combinations is so enormous that even high-throughput 
experiments can rarely or never cover it completely. So, in 
order to achieve acceptable scale and rate of screening and 
optimizing, the number of candidate systems has to be 
restricted with the help of some heuristic or theoretical 
reasoning [112-115]. By using high-throughput calculations 
based on ab-initio methods, molecular dynamics and Monte 
Carlo simulations, etc., variety of properties for multiple 
materials can be predicted at a high rate, and serve as starting 
points for subsequent experiments. Furthermore, the 
combination of high-throughput computational results and 
experimental data can facilitate the construction of materials 
databases. These, in turn, can be mined and analyzed using  
materials informatics and artificial intelligence tools. 
Exploring the relations among the components, structure, and 
properties of materials can provide ideas for new materials 
designs.   


13 

 

High-throughput 
computations 
have 
already 
been 

employed in some research fields, such as solar water splitters 
[116, 117], solar photovoltaics [118], topological insulators 
[119], scintillators [120, 121], CO2 capture materials [122], 
piezoelectrics [123], thermoelectrics [124, 125], hydrogen 
storage materials [126, 127], Li-ion batteries [128-133]. 
 
4.2. High-throughput computations for superconductors 
 

There have been several notable successful examples of 

discovery of superconductors with the help of high-throughput 
computations. Kolmogorov et al undertook an intensive study 
of the Fe-B system via ab-initio high-throughput evolutionary 
calculations [134]. The crystal structure and formation energy 
for the entire Fe-B system was calculated, as shown in figure 
23. Calculation of the electron-phonon coupling predicted 
oP10-FeB4 to be a conventional superconductor. Stimulated 
by this theoretical study, a high-throughput combinatorial 
research was subsequently devised and executed (details are 
given above) [36].  

 

 

Figure 23. Competing B-rich Fe-B phases [134]. 

 

Matsumoto et al employed high-throughput computations 

to search for new thermoelectric or superconducting materials 
[135, 136]. By data-driven materials search, they extracted 
from a database of inorganic materials (AtomWork) thousands 
of candidates materials with some specific characteristics (e.g. 
flat band). Screening further the first-principles calculations, 
SnBi2Se4 and PbBi2Te4 were selected from all these 
candidates on the basis of their electronic structure (gap size, 
density of states near the Fermi level, etc.). The authors 
successfully synthesized SnBi2Se4 single crystal via melt and 
slow-cooling method (the exact composition is SnBi1.64Se3.53 
showed by Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy). 
Superconducting transition was indeed observed under 

pressure. A sister compound PbBi2Te4 also shows pressure-
induced superconductivity, as shown in figure 24. 

 

 

Figure 24. (a) Crystal structure, (b) band structure, (c) temperature 
dependence of resistance around superconducting transitions in 
PbBi2Te4 under various pressures [136]. 

 

Other studies have applied ab-initio high-throughput 
calculations on much larger scale. Klintenberg and Eriksson 
defined several distinct characteristics of the band structure of 
cuprates as key ingredients of their superconductivity [137]. 
They used these characteristics as criteria to filter through the 
calculated electronic structures of all materials in the 
Inorganic Crystallographic Structure Database (ICSD). Over 
100 materials were identified as potential HTSC. Similar 
approach was used by Geilhufe et al., with p-terphenyl–an 
organic material that shows sign of a superconducting 
transition at Tc≈123 K when doped with potassium–used as a 

prototype [138]. A database containing the electronic 
structures of more than 10,000 organic crystals was searched 
for compounds with similar density of states (DOS). As a 
result, 15 materials were proposed as candidate HTSC. 
   In the case of conventional superconductors, the mechanism 
of 
superconductivity 
is 
well 
understood, 
so 
their 

superconducting properties can be calculated from first 
principles, at least in theory. However, the specific 
mechanisms behind most examples of unconventional 
superconductivity are still not clear, and the electrons in these 
materials are often strongly correlated. Thus, attempts to 
predict 
new 
unconventional 
superconductors 
through 

deductive calculations are impossible even in principle. 
Nevertheless, high-throughput computations can at least 
provide some rough guidance in the search for new 
superconductors. 

High-throughput 
computations 
also 
speed 
up 
the 

construction of database containing basic properties of new 
materials, which can be combined with machine learning 
methods to predict new superconductors (see next section), 


14 

 

thus providing a new pathway for superconductivity research 
[138]. 

 

5. Machine learning for new superconductors 

High throughput experiments often result in large data sets. 

Since it can be slow and impractical to analyse this data 
manually, the analysis step has become a common bottleneck 
for the entire process. Recent developments, however, allow a 
different approach to data analysis and, even more generally, 
to exploration of superconductors and the factors that 
determine the critical temperatures of various materials. 
Machine learning and statistical methods can use the 
information amassed in databases covering various measured 
and calculated materials properties in order to predict 
macroscopic variables, circumventing to need for theoretical 
models and complicated ab-initio tools (for more details see, 
for example, Seko et al. [139]).  

The difficulties of modelling strongly correlated materials 

such as HTSCs provided an early impetus to the search for 
novel approaches. Application of statistical methods in the 
context of superconductivity began with simple clustering 
methods [140, 141]. These studies demonstrated that three 
“golden” descriptors confine the sixty known at the time 
superconductors with Tc > 10 K to three small islands, while 
other superconductors are randomly dispersed in this space. 
Based on this observation, predictions for potential high-
temperature superconductors were made. Another early work 
by Hirsch used statistical methods to look for correlations 
between normal state properties and Tc of the metallic 
elements in the first six rows of the periodic table [142]. 

These studies remained isolated early attempts to use data-

driven approaches for study of superconductivity. However, 
the recent significant increase of available data made possible 
the widespread use of machine learning algorithms to address 
a multitude of research questions. An investigation by Isayev 
et al. in 2015 again found a clustering property of HTSC 
materials using structural and electronic properties data as 
predictors 
[143]. 
A 
classification 
model 
separating 

superconductors into two groups according to their Tc was 
developed and showed good performance. As a demonstration 
of the impact that machine learning can have in the search for 
superconductors, a sequential learning framework designed by 
Ling et al. to discover the material with the highest Tc was 
evaluated on ~ 600 known superconductors [144]. The 
framework did significantly better than a method based on 
random guessing. 

A work by Stanev et al. in 2018 built upon many of the 

lessons from the earlier studies [38]. Whereas previous 

investigations explored several hundred compounds at most, 
this work considered more than ten thousand different 
compositions. These were extracted from the SuperCon 
database, created and maintained by the National Institute for 
Materials Science in Japan. The database contains information 
such as Tc for an exhaustive list of all reported 
superconductors, as well as related non-superconducting 
compounds, including many closely-related materials varying 
only by small changes in stoichiometry. This unique 
information permitted to study crucial subtleties in chemical 
composition among related compounds. The order-of-
magnitude increase in training data also allowed to optimize 
and automate the machine learning model construction 
procedures.  

 

Figure 25. Performance of the regression model for Tc presented in 
Ref. [38]. Notice that there is a clear correlation between measured 
and predicted values. 

From SuperCon, a list of approximately 16,400 compounds 

was extracted, of which 4,000 have no Tc reported. Of these, 
roughly 5,700 compounds are cuprates and 1,500 are iron-
based (about 35% and 9%, respectively), reflecting the 
significant research efforts invested in these two HTSC 
families.  

To analyse the data, first a classification model designed to 

separate materials into two distinct groups depending on 
whether Tc is above or below some predetermined value was 
developed. The temperature that separates the two groups - 
Tsep - was treated as an adjustable parameter of the model. For 
Tsep = 10 K, the proportion of above-Tsep materials is 
approximately 38%, while model accuracy is about 92%, i.e., 


15 

 

the model can correctly classify nine out of ten materials, 
which is much better than random guessing.  

Several regression models designed to predict the actual Tc 

values were presented, focused on materials with Tc > 10 K 
(see figure 25). Separate models were constructed and trained 
on materials from cuprate and iron-based HTSC families, as 
well as with all other materials denoted “low-Tc” for brevity. 
Differences in the used predictors across the family-specific 
models reflect the fact that distinct mechanisms are 
responsible for driving superconductivity in these groups.  

Finally, the classification and regression models were 

integrated in a pipeline and employed for a high-throughput 
screening of the entire ICSD database for candidate 
superconductors. First, a classification model was applied on 
this dataset to create a list of materials with predicted Tc above 
10 K. The list of candidates contained about 3,000 materials. 
Next in the pipeline, the list was fed into a regression model 
trained on the entire SuperCon database to predict Tc. Filtering 
for the materials with Tc > 20 K, the list was reduced to about 
2,000 compounds. The vast majority of the compounds 
identified as candidate superconductors were cuprate HTSC 
materials. There are also some materials clearly related to the 
iron-based superconductors. The remaining set has 35 
members, and is composed of materials that are not obviously 
connected to any known superconducting family. The list 
comprises of several distinct groups; especially interesting are 
the compounds containing heavy metals (such as Au, Ir, Ru), 
metalloids (Se, Te), and heavier post-transition metals (Bi, Tl), 
which are or could be pushed into interesting/unstable 
oxidation states.  

Although at the moment it is not clear if any of the predicted 

compounds are superconducting, the presence of one highly 
unusual electronic structure feature in many of the candidates 
is encouraging; almost all of them exhibit one or several flat 
(or nearly flat) bands just below the energy of the highest 
occupied electronic state. Such bands lead to a large peak in 
the density of states and can cause a significant enhancement 
in Tc. Attempts to synthesize several of these compounds are 
already underway. 

In another very recent work, Xie at al. utilized machine 

learning to obtain a closed-form approximation for Tc of 
phonon-driven superconductors, using an automatic algorithm 
to test a number of different functional forms [145]. The 
formula selected by the algorithm is more accurate than the 
commonly used approximation due to McMillan, Allen and 
Dynes, demonstrating once again the great promise of 
machine learning in this field. 

6. Conclusion and perspective 

In this short review, some recent developments in 
superconductivity-related high-throughput techniques are 
summarized. Revealing the mechanisms of high-temperature 
superconductivity and discovering new unconventional 
superconductors have always been important topics in 
condensed matter physics. As materials under study become 
more and more complex, the advantages of high-throughput 
methodology become more pronounced. Although these 
advantages have proven to be significant, some limitations 
should also be pointed out. Currently, most high-throughput 
experiments are based on film techniques. This brings some 
specific constrains. Effects like lattice mismatch and surface 
aging have to be considered. The number of possible 
combinations are limited, and the use of in-situ measurements 
is often required. Moreover, in view of the reduced 
dimensions 
and 
surface 
reconstruction 
effects, 
the 

experimental results obtained from film samples may not 
reflect the intrinsic properties of bulk samples [146-149]. Such 
issues are present not only for superconductors, but for many 
other materials as well. In order to further accelerate the 
research on superconductors, as well as other functional 
materials, advances in the following three aspects are highly 
desired.  

6.1. New high-throughput techniques  

While many combinatorial film preparation techniques 

have been developed, there is a great demand for high-
precision characterization instruments, especially ones that 
can perform advanced spectroscopy measurements such as 
STM and angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy 
(ARPES). This requires combinatorial material libraries in the 
form of films to be measured in-situ. Accordingly, combined 
systems such as combinatorial-film-STM and combinatorial-
film-ARPES tools will be optimal. These will be especially 
beneficial for the study of superconducting combinatorial 
libraries. Characterization methods taking advantage of 
synchrotron sources should become widespread; these 
techniques allow the study of not only composition and 
structure of materials, but also their elementary excitations. 
For instance, resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) 
technique can be used to measure spin excitation [150], charge 
excitation [151], phase of the order parameter [152], etc. 
Importantly, thin films can be probed with RIXS, since it only 
needs small sample volumes. Compared with the neutron 
scattering techniques, RIXS appears much more promising in 
high-throughput research on superconductivity[153]. 

6.2. Future high throughput superconductivity research style 
 
The high-throughput materials research paradigm is quite 
different from the traditional approaches, which sometimes 


16 

 

can be compared to a “needle-in-a-haystack” search. Hanak 
proposed an integrated materials development workflow 
about 40 years ago [26]. Potyrailo and Mirsky extended the 
workflow by adding new elements, such as planning of 
experiments and data mining, as shown in figure 26 [154].  

 

 

Figure 26. Typical combinatorial materials development cycle [154].  

Superconductivity research will certainly benefit from more 

widespread adoption of this paradigm, but it has its own 
specifics which should be taken into account. Currently, some 
characterization methods such as STM, neutron scattering and 
ARPES, commonly used in the field, lag significantly behind 
the requirements of high-throughput screening. Thus, research 
on superconductivity, especially on mechanisms of high-
temperature superconductivity, will have to combine studies 
of combinatorial libraries with exploration of conventional 
uniform films or bulk crystal samples. This was exemplified 
in the recent work on the relation between micro-structure and 
Tc in FeSe superconductor. In this study the evolution of 
electrical transport properties and crystal lattice parameters 
were delineated by high-throughput experiments, whereas the 
electronic band structure was obtained from ARPES on 
uniform films (see figure 27) [57]. 

 

Figure 27. For FeSe film: the evolution of lattice constants from the 
Tc gradient combinatorial in the upper panel; the band structure of 
three uniform samples with different Tc obtained from ARPES in the 
lower panel [57].  

6.3. MGI platform 

High-throughput methods with their enormous potential to 

accelerate materials research have already attracted significant 
attention. Some countries have started projects and programs 
in order to support the development of high-throughput 
computational tools. The US Department of Energy created 
Scientific Discovery through Advanced Computing (SciDAC) 
in 2001 to develop new computational methods for tackling 
some of the most challenging scientific problems. In 2008, 
The US National Academies created a new discipline, 
Integrated Computational Materials Engineering, aimed to 
design materials using a variety of software tools either 
simultaneously or consecutively. In 2011, the US launched the 
Materials Project, a core program of the Materials Genome 
Initiative, that uses high-throughput computing to uncover the 
properties of all known inorganic materials. “Advanced 
Concepts in ab-initio Simulations of Materials” project, 
proposed by European Science Foundation, is aimed to 
develop rapid ab-initio calculations, which allow parameter-
free calculations of real materials at the atomic level and are 
applicable to condensed matter systems. 
  However, in order to maximize the efficiency and impact of 
high-throughput methodology, it is necessary to closely 
coordinate the theoretical and experimental stages and 
combine computations with experiments and analysis of 
materials databases . One possible way of doing this is to 
integrate all the facilities in a big platform and organize them 
as nodes in an assembly line. The collected data can be 
standardized to establish a sharable databank. Techniques 
such as STM, neutron scattering and ARPES can contribute to 


17 

 

the data collection according to their limitations and 
characteristics. Since the MGI project was first announced in 
the US in 2011 [155], several similar programs have been 
initiated in different countries. Accelerated Metallurgy 
(AccMet) project initiated by the European Union and 
“MatNavi” database managed by National Institute for 
Materials Science in Japan are programs established to 
develop novel 
materials research 
and 
developments 

procedures. Among these programs, the Center for Materials 
Genome Initiative (CMGI) in Beijing, China may be the only 
one currently organized as a specialized high-throughput 
material research platform. This platform contains three large 
substations shown in figure 28: high-throughput computation 
and database station, high-throughput synthesis and fast 
characterization station, and high-throughput technique 
research and development station. MGI and similar platforms 
have the potentials to revolutionize materials research in the 
near future.  

  

 

 

Figure 28. The organization of Center for Materials Genome 
Initiative, Huairou, Beijing. 
 

In conclusion, integrating a novel research paradigm with 

new techniques, facilities, and platforms, high-throughput 
methodology is becoming more and more prominent in 
advancing the study of superconducting materials.  
 
Acknowledgments 
 
The authors would like to thank M Y Qin, X Zhang, X Y Jiang, 
G He, Z P Feng, D Li, R Z Zhang, and J S Zhang for the help 
during the manuscript preparation. This work was supported 
by the CAS Interdisciplinary Innovation Team, the Strategic 
Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences 
(XDB25000000), the National Key Basic Research Program 
of 
China 
(2015CB921000, 
2016YFA0300301, 

2017YFA0303003, and 2017YFA0302902), the National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (11927808,11674374, 
11804378 and 51672307), and the Key Research Program of 
Frontier 
Sciences, 
CAS 
(QYZDJ-SSW-SLH001 
and 

QYZDB-SSW-SLH008). The work at the University of 
Maryland was supported by ONR (N000141512222 and 
N00014-13-1-0635), and AFOSR (FA 9550-14-10332). 
 


 

References: 
[1] 
Bardeen J, Cooper L N and Schrieffer J R 1957 
Microscopic Theory of Superconductivity Phys. Rev. 
106 162 

[2] 
Bardeen J, Cooper L N and Schrieffer J R 1957 
Theory of Superconductivity Phys. Rev. 108 1175 

[3] 
Ginzburg V L and Kirzhnits D A 1982 High-
temperature superconductivity (New York: Springer 
US) 

[4] 
Flores-Livas J A, Boeri L, Sanna A, Profeta G, Arita 
R and Eremets M 2019 A Perspective on 
Conventional High-Temperature Superconductors at 
High 
Pressure: 
Methods 
and 
Materials 

arXiv:1905.06693[cond-mat.supr-con]  

[5] 
Bednorz J G and Muller K A 1986 Possible High-Tc 
Superconductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-O System Z. 
Phys. B Con. Mat. 64 189-93 

[6] 
Adachi S, Takano S and Yamauchi H 1993 
Superconductor-Ization of GaSr2yCu2O7 J. Alloys 
Compd. 195 19-22 

[7] 
Korczak W, Perroux M and Strobel P 1992 
Superconductivity in Sr0.85ln0.15CuO2 : Extension to 
Samarium Physica C 193 303-8 

[8] 
Wu M K, Ashburn J R, Torng C J, Hor P H, Meng R 
L, Gao L, Huang Z J, Wang Y Q and Chu C W 1987 
SUPERCONDUCTIVITY AT 93-K IN A NEW 
MIXED-PHASE 
Y-BA-CU-O 
COMPOUND 

SYSTEM AT AMBIENT PRESSURE Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 58 908-10 

[9] 
Zhao Z X, Chen L Q, Yang Q S, Huang Y H, Chen 
G H, Tang R M, Liu G R, Cui C G, Chen L, Wang L 
H, Guo S Q, Li S L and Bi J Q 1987 
SUPERCONDUCTIVITY 
ABOVE 
LIQUID-

NITROGEN 
TEMPERATURE 
IN 
BA-Y-CU 

OXIDES Kexue Tongbao 32 661-4 

[10] 
Sun G F, Wong K W, Xu B R, Xin Y and Lu D F 
1994 Tc enhancement of HgBa2Ca2Cu3O8 by Tl 
substitution Phys. Lett. A 192 122-4 

[11] 
Kamihara Y, Watanabe T, Hirano M and Hosono H 
2008 Iron-based layered superconductor La[O1-

xFx]FeAs (x=0.05-0.12) with Tc =26 K J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 130 3296-7 

[12] 
Hsu F C, Luo J Y, Yeh K W, Chen T K, Huang T W, 
Wu P M, Lee Y C, Huang Y L, Chu Y Y, Yan D C 
and Wu M K 2008 Superconductivity in the PbO-
type structure alpha-FeSe Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
105 14262-4 

[13] 
Wu W, Cheng J G, Matsubayashi K, Kong P P, Lin 
F K, Jin C Q, Wang N L, Uwatoko Y and Luo J L 
2014 
Superconductivity 
in 
the 
vicinity 
of 

antiferromagnetic order in CrAs Nat. Commun. 5 
5508 

[14] 
Chen R Y and Wang N L 2019 Progress in Cr- and 
Mn-based superconductors: a key issues review Rep. 
Prog. Phys. 82 012503 

[15] 
Cheng J G and Luo J L 2017 Pressure-induced 
superconductivity in CrAs and MnP J. Phys. 
Condens. Mat. 29 383003 

[16] 
Drozdov A P, Eremets M I, Troyan I A, Ksenofontov 
V 
and 
Shylin 
S 
I 
2015 
Conventional 

superconductivity at 203 kelvin at high pressures in 
the sulfur hydride system Nature 525 73-6 

[17] 
Zhang L J, Wang Y C, Lv J and Ma Y M 2017 
Materials discovery at high pressures Nat. Rev. 
Mater. 2 17005 

[18] 
Wang Q Y, Li Z, Zhang W H, Zhang Z C, Zhang J S, 
Li W, Ding H, Ou Y B, Deng P, Chang K, Wen J, 
Song C L, He K, Jia J F, Ji S H, Wang Y Y, Wang L 
L, Chen X, Ma X C and Xue Q K 2012 Interface-
Induced High-Temperature Superconductivity in 
Single Unit-Cell FeSe Films on SrTiO3 Chinese 
Phys. Lett. 29 037402 

[19] 
Butko V Y, Logvenov G, Bozovic N, Radovic Z and 
Bozovic I 2009 Madelung Strain in Cuprate 
Superconductors - A Route to Enhancement of the 
Critical Temperature Adv. Mater. 21 3644-8 

[20] 
Ye J T, Zhang Y J, Akashi R, Bahramy M S, Arita R 
and Iwasa Y 2012 Superconducting Dome in a Gate-
Tuned Band Insulator Science 338 1193-6 

[21] 
Lei B, Wang N Z, Shang C, Meng F B, Ma L K, Luo 
X G, Wu T, Sun Z, Wang Y, Jiang Z, Mao B H, Liu 
Z, Yu Y J, Zhang Y B and Chen X H 2017 Tuning 
phase transitions in FeSe thin flakes by field-effect 
transistor with solid ion conductor as the gate 
dielectric Phys. Rev. B 95 020503 

[22] 
Saadaoui H, Salman Z, Luetkens H, Prokscha T, 
Suter A, MacFarlane W A, Jiang Y, Jin K, Greene R 
L, Morenzoni E and Kiefl R F 2015 The phase 
diagram of electron-doped La2-xCexCuO4- Nat. 
Commun. 6 6041 

[23] 
Zhang X, Yu H S, He G, Hu W, Yuan J, Zhu B Y and 
Jin K 2016 Transport anomalies and quantum 
criticality in electron-doped cuprate superconductors 
Physica C 525 18-43 

[24] 
Mao S S 2013 High throughput growth and 
characterization of thin film materials J. Cryst. 
Growth 379 123-30 

[25] 
Koinuma H and Takeuchi I 2004 Combinatorial 
solid-state chemistry of inorganic materials Nat. 
Mater. 3 429-38 

[26] 
Hanak J J 1970 The "Multiple-Sample-Concept" in 
Materials Research : Synthesis, Compositional 
Analysis and Testing of Entire Multicomponent 
Systems J. Mater. Sci. 5 964-71 

[27] 
Green M L, Takeuchi I and Hattrick-Simpers J R 
2013 
Applications 
of 
high 
throughput 

(combinatorial) 
methodologies 
to 
electronic, 

magnetic, optical, and energy-related materials J. 
Appl. Phys. 113 231101 

[28] 
Iranmanesh M and Hulliger J 2016 Ceramic 
combinatorial syntheses exploring the chemical 
diversity of metal oxides Prog. Solid State Chem. 44 
123-30 

[29] 
Potyrailo R, Rajan K, Stoewe K, Takeuchi I, 
Chisholm B and Lam H 2011 Combinatorial and 
High-Throughput Screening of Materials Libraries: 


19 

 

Review of State of the Art Acs Combinatorial 
Science 13 579-633 

[30] 
Barber Z H and Blamire M G 2008 High throughput 
thin film materials science Mater. Sci. Tech.-Lond. 
24 757-70 

[31] 
Woo S I, Kim K W, Cho H Y, Oh K S, Jeon M K, 
Tarte N H, Kim T S and Mahmood A 2005 Current 
status of combinatorial and high-throughput methods 
for discovering new materials and catalysts Qsar & 
Combinatorial Science 24 138-54 

[32] 
Xiang X D 2004 High throughput synthesis and 
screening for functional materials Appl. Surf. Sci. 223 
54-61 

[33] 
Zhao J C 2006 Combinatorial approaches as effective 
tools in the study of phase diagrams and 
composition-structure-property relationships Prog. 
Mater. Sci. 51 557-631 

[34] 
de Pablo J J, Jackson N E, Webb M A, Chen L-Q, 
Moore J E, Morgan D, Jacobs R, Pollock T, Schlom 
D G, Toberer E S, Analytis J, Dabo I, DeLongchamp 
D M, Fiete G A, Grason G M, Hautier G, Mo Y, 
Rajan K, Reed E J, Rodriguez E, Stevanovic V, 
Suntivich J, Thornton K and Zhao J-C 2019 New 
frontiers for the materials genome initiative Npj 
Comput. Mater. 5 41 

[35] 
Xiang X D, Sun X, Briceno G, Lou Y, Wang K A, 
Chang H, Wallace-Freedman W G, Chen S W and 
Schultz P G 1995 A Combinatorial Approach to 
Materials Discovery Science 268 1738-40 

[36] 
Jin K, Suchoski R, Fackler S, Zhang Y, Pan X Q, 
Greene R L and Takeuchi I 2013 Combinatorial 
search of superconductivity in Fe-B composition 
spreads Apl Mater. 1 042101 

[37] 
Wu J, Bollinger A T, Sun Y and Bozovic I 2016 Hall 
effect in quantum critical charge-cluster glass Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113 4284-9 

[38] 
Stanev V, Oses C, Kusne A G, Rodriguez E, Paglione 
J, Curtarolo S and Takeuchi I 2018 Machine learning 
modeling of superconducting critical temperature 
Npj Comput. Mater. 4 29 

[39] 
Koinuma H, Aiyer H N and Matsumoto Y 2000 
Combinatorial solid state materials science and 
technology Sci. Technol. Adv. Mat. 1 1-10 

[40] 
Kennedy K, Stefansk.T, Davy G, Zackay V F and 
Parker E R 1965 Rapid Method for Determining 
Ternary-Alloy Phase Diagrams J. Appl. Phys. 36 
3808-10 

[41] 
Guerin S and Hayden B E 2006 Physical vapor 
deposition method for the high-throughput synthesis 
of solid-state material libraries J. Comb. Chem. 8 66-
73 

[42] 
Dahn J R, Trussler S, Hatchard T D, Bonakdarpour 
A, Mueller-Neuhaus J R, Hewitt K C and Fleischauer 
M 2002 Economical sputtering system to produce 
large-size composition-spread libraries having linear 
and orthogonal stoichiometry variations Chem. 
Mater. 14 3519-23 

[43] 
Saadat M, George A E and Hewitt K C 2010 Densely 
mapping 
the 
phase 
diagram 
of 
cuprate 

superconductors using a spatial composition spread 
approach Physica C 470 S59-S61 

[44] 
Koinuma H 1998 Quantum functional oxides and 
combinatorial chemistry Solid State Ionics 108 1-7 

[45] 
Xiang X D 1999 Combinatorial materials synthesis 
and high-throughput screening: An integrated 
materials chip approach to mapping phase diagrams 
and discovery and optimization of functional 
materials Biotechnol. Bioeng. 61 227-41 

[46] 
Xiang X D 1999 Combinatorial materials synthesis 
and screening: An integrated materials chip approach 
to discovery and optimization of functional materials 
Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci. 29 149-71 

[47] 
Xiang X D 1998 Combinatorial synthesis and high 
throughput evaluation of functional oxides - A 
integrated materials chip approach Mat. Sci. Eng. B-
Solid 56 246-50 

[48] 
Wang J and Evans J R G 2005 London University 
Search Instrument: A combinatorial robot for high-
throughput methods in ceramic science J. Comb. 
Chem. 7 665-72 

[49] 
Van Driessche I, Feys J, Hopkins S C, Lommens P, 
Granados X, Glowacki B A, Ricart S, Holzapfel B, 
Vilardell M, Kirchner A and Backer M 2012 
Chemical solution deposition using ink-jet printing 
for YBCO coated conductors Supercond. Sci. Tech. 
25 065017 

[50] 
Chen L, Bao J and Gao C 2004 Combinatorial 
synthesis 
of 
insoluble 
oxide 
library 
from 

ultrafine/nano particle suspension using a drop-on-
demand inkjet delivery system J. Comb. Chem. 6 
699-702 

[51] 
Reddington E, Sapienza A, Gurau B, Viswanathan R, 
Sarangapani S, Smotkin E S and Mallouk T E 1998 
Combinatorial electrochemistry: A highly parallel, 
optical screening method for discovery of better 
electrocatalysts Science 280 1735-7 

[52] 
Yoo Y K and Xiang X D 2002 Combinatorial 
material preparation J. Phys. Condens. Mat. 14 R49-
R78 

[53] 
Yu H S, Yuan J, Zhu B Y and Jin K 2017 
Manipulating composition gradient in cuprate 
superconducting thin films Sci. China Phys. Mech. 
Astron. 60 087421 

[54] 
Fukumura T, Ohtani M, Kawasaki M, Okimoto Y, 
Kageyama T, Koida T, Hasegawa T, Tokura Y and 
Koinuma H 2000 Rapid construction of a phase 
diagram 
of 
doped 
Mott 
insulators 
with 
a 

composition-spread approach Appl. Phys. Lett. 77 
3426-8 

[55] 
McQueen T M, Huang Q, Ksenofontov V, Felser C, 
Xu Q, Zandbergen H, Hor Y S, Allred J, Williams A 
J, Qu D, Checkelsky J, Ong N P and Cava R J 2009 
Extreme 
sensitivity 
of 
superconductivity 
to 

stoichiometry in Fe1+Se Phys. Rev. B 79 014522 


20 

 

[56] 
Ohnishi T, Lippmaa M, Yamamoto T, Meguro S and 
Koinuma H 2005 Improved stoichiometry and misfit 
control in perovskite thin film formation at a critical 
fluence by pulsed laser deposition Appl. Phys. Lett. 
87 241919 

[57] 
Feng Z P, Yuan J, Li J, Wu X X, Hu W, Shen B, Qin 
M Y, Zhao L, Zhu B Y, Wang H B, Liu M, Zhang G 
M, Hu J P, Yang H X, Li J Q, Dong X L, Zhou F, 
Zhou X J, Kusmartsev F V, Takeuchi I, Zhao Z X 
and Jin K 2018 High throughput research to elucidate 
tunable 
superconductivity 
in 
FeSe 
arXiv: 

1807.01273 [cond-mat.supr-con]  

[58] 
Wu J and Bozovic I 2015 Perspective: Extremely fine 
tuning 
of doping 
enabled 
by combinatorial 

molecular-beam epitaxy Apl Mater. 3 062401 

[59] 
Koida T, Komiyama D, Koinuma H, Ohtani M, 
Lippmaa M and Kawasaki M 2002 Temperature-
gradient epitaxy under in situ growth mode 
diagnostics by scanning reflection high-energy 
electron diffraction Appl. Phys. Lett. 80 565-7 

[60] 
Feng Z P 2019 High-throughput investigation in 
superconducting films. In: University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, (Beijing, China) 

[61] 
Chikyow T, Ahmet P, Nakajima K, Koida T, 
Takakura M, Yoshimoto M and Koinuma H 2002 A 
combinatorial approach in oxide/semiconductor 
interface research for future electronic devices Appl. 
Surf. Sci. 189 284-91 

[62] 
Naito M and Hepp M 2000 Superconducting T'-La2-

xCexCuO4 films grown by molecular beam epitaxy 
Jpn J. Appl. Phys. 2 39 L485-L7 

[63] 
Sawa A, Kawasaki M, Takagi H and Tokura Y 2002 
Electron-doped 
superconductor 
La2-xCexCuO4: 

Preparation of thin films and modified doping range 
for superconductivity Phys. Rev. B 66 014531 

[64] 
Rarback H, Shu D, Feng S C, Ade H, Kirz J, Mcnulty 
I, Kern D P, Chang T H P, Vladimirsky Y, Iskander 
N, Attwood D, Mcquaid K and Rothman S 1988 
Scanning-X-Ray Microscope with 75-nm Resolution 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 59 52-9 

[65] 
Ohtani M, Fukumura T, Kawasaki M, Omote K, 
Kikuchi T, Harada J, Ohtomo A, Lippmaa M, 
Ohnishi T, Komiyama D, Takahashi R, Matsumoto 
Y and Koinuma H 2001 Concurrent x-ray 
diffractometer 
for 
high 
throughput 
structural 

diagnosis of epitaxial thin films Appl. Phys. Lett. 79 
3594-6 

[66] 
Luo Z, Geng B, Bao J, Liu C, Liu W, Gao C, Liu Z 
and 
Ding 
X 
2005 
High-throughput 
x-ray 

characterization system for combinatorial materials 
studies Rev. Sci. Instrum. 76 095105 

[67] 
MacDonald C A 2017 Structured X-Ray Optics for 
Laboratory-Based Materials Analysis Annu. Rev. 
Mater. Res. 47 115-34 

[68] 
Isaacs E D, Marcus M, Aeppli G, Xiang X D, Sun X 
D, Schultz P, Kao H K, Cargill G S and Haushalter 
R 1998 Synchrotron x-ray microbeam diagnostics of 
combinatorial synthesis Appl. Phys. Lett. 73 1820-2 

[69] 
Gregoire J M, Van Campen D G, Miller C E, Jones 
R J, Suram S K and Mehta A 2014 High-throughput 
synchrotron X-ray diffraction for combinatorial 
phase mapping J. Synchrotron Radiat. 21 1262-8 

[70] 
Xing H, Zhao B, Wang Y, Zhang X, Ren Y, Yan N, 
Gao T, Li J, Zhang L and Wang H 2018 Rapid 
Construction of Fe-Co-Ni Composition-Phase Map 
by Combinatorial Materials Chip Approach ACS 
Comb. Sci. 20 127-31 

[71] 
Suram S K, Fackler S W, Zhou L, N'Diaye A T, 
Drisdell W S, Yano J and Gregoire J M 2018 
Combinatorial Discovery of Lanthanum-Tantalum 
Oxynitride Solar Light Absorbers with Dilute 
Nitrogen for Solar Fuel Applications ACS Comb. Sci. 
20 26-34 

[72] 
Hewitt K C, Casey P A, Sanderson R J, White M A 
and Sun R 2005 High-throughput resistivity 
apparatus for thin-film combinatorial libraries Rev. 
Sci. Instrum. 76 093906 

[73] 
Wu J, Pelleg O, Logvenov G, Bollinger A T, Sun Y 
J, Boebinger G S, Vanevic M, Radovic Z and 
Bozovic I 2013 Anomalous independence of 
interface superconductivity from carrier density Nat. 
Mater. 12 877-81 

[74] 
Wu J, Bollinger A T, He X and Bozovic I 2017 
Spontaneous breaking of rotational symmetry in 
copper oxide superconductors Nature 547 432-5 

[75] 
He G, Jia Y L, Hou X Y, Wei Z X, Xie H D, Yang Z 
Z, Shi J N, Yuan J, Shan L, Zhu B Y, Li H, Gu L, Liu 
K, Xiang T and Jin K 2017 Anisotropic electron-
phonon coupling in the spinel oxide superconductor 
LiTi2O4 Phys. Rev. B 95 054510 

[76] 
Bruder C 1991 Magnetic Force Microscopy and 
Superconductors Physica C 185 1671-2 

[77] 
Reittu H J and Laiho R 1992 Magnetic Force 
Microscopy of Abrikosov Vortices Superconductor 
Science & Technology 5 448-52 

[78] 
Volodin A P and Marchevsky M V 1992 Magnetic 
Force Microscopy Investigation of Superconductors 
- 1st Results Ultramicroscopy 42 757-63 

[79] 
Chang A M, Hallen H D, Harriott L, Hess H F, Kao 
H L, Kwo J, Miller R E, Wolfe R, Vanderziel J and 
Chang T Y 1992 Scanning Hall Probe Microscopy 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 61 1974-6 

[80] 
Chang A M, Hallen H D, Hess H F, Kao H L, Kwo 
J, Sudbo A and Chang T Y 1992 Scanning Hall-
Probe Microscopy of a Vortex and Field Fluctuations 
in La1.85sr0.15cuo4 Films Europhys Lett 20 645-50 

[81] 
Matsumoto Y, Murakami M, Shono T, Hasegawa T, 
Fukumura T, Kawasaki M, Ahmet P, Chikyow T, 
Koshihara S and Koinuma H 2001 Room-
temperature ferromagnetism in transparent transition 
metal-doped titanium dioxide Science 291 854-6 

[82] 
Foley C P and Hilgenkamp H 2009 Why 
NanoSQUIDs are important: an introduction to the 
focus issue Supercond. Sci. Tech. 22 064001 

[83] 
Bechstein S, Kohn C, Drung D, Storm J H, Kieler O, 
Morosh V and Schurig T 2017 Investigation of 


21 

 

nanoSQUID designs for practical applications 
Supercond. Sci. Tech. 30 034007 

[84] 
Persky E and Kalisky B 2018 Scanning SQUID View 
of Oxide Interfaces Adv. Mater. 30 9 

[85] 
Martin Y and Wickramasinghe H K 1987 Magnetic 
Imaging by Force Microscopy with 1000-a 
Resolution Appl. Phys. Lett. 50 1455-7 

[86] 
Volodin A, Temst K, Bruynseraede Y, Van 
Haesendonck C, Montero M I, Schuller I K, Dam B, 
Huijbregtse J M and Griessen R 2002 Magnetic force 
microscopy of vortex pinning at grain boundaries in 
superconducting 
thin 
films 
Physica 
C: 

Superconductivity 369 165-70 

[87] 
Oral A, Bending S J and Henini M 1996 Real-time 
scanning hall probe microscopy Appl. Phys. Lett. 69 
1324-6 

[88] 
Bluhm H, Sebastian S E, Guikema J W, Fisher I R 
and Moler K A 2006 Scanning Hall probe imaging of 
ErNi2B2C Phys. Rev. B 73 014514 

[89] 
Koshnick N C, Huber M E, Bert J A, Hicks C W, 
Large J, Edwards H and Moler K A 2008 A terraced 
scanning super conducting quantum interference 
device susceptometer with submicron pickup loops 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 93 243101 

[90] 
Kalisky B, Kirtley J R, Analytis J G, Chu J-H, 
Vailionis A, Fisher I R and Moler K A 2010 Stripes 
of 
increased 
diamagnetic 
susceptibility 
in 

underdoped superconductingBa(Fe1−xCox)2As2single 
crystals: Evidence for an enhanced superfluid density 
at twin boundaries Phys. Rev. B 81 184513 

[91] 
Kogan V G 2003 Meissner response of anisotropic 
superconductors Phys. Rev. B 68 104511 

[92] 
Kogan V G and Kirtley J R 2011 Meissner response 
of superconductors with inhomogeneous penetration 
depths Phys. Rev. B 83 214521 

[93] 
Wei T, Xiang X D, WallaceFreedman W G and 
Schultz P G 1996 Scanning tip microwave near-field 
microscope Appl. Phys. Lett. 68 3506-8 

[94] 
Gao C, Wei T, Duewer F, Lu Y L and Xiang X D 
1997 High spatial resolution quantitative microwave 
impedance microscopy by a scanning tip microwave 
near-field microscope Appl. Phys. Lett. 71 1872-4 

[95] 
Takeuchi I, Wei T, Duewer F, Yoo Y K, Xiang X D, 
Talyansky V, Pai S P, Chen G J and Venkatesan T 
1997 Low temperature scanning-tip microwave near-
field microscopy of YBa2Cu3O7-x films Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 71 2026-8 

[96] 
Lai K, Ji M B, Leindecker N, Kelly M A and Shen Z 
X 2007 Atomic-force-microscope-compatible near-
field scanning microwave microscope with separated 
excitation and sensing probes Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78 
063702 

[97] 
Kundhikanjana W, Lai K J, Kelly M A and Shen Z X 
2011 Cryogenic microwave imaging of metal-
insulator transition in doped silicon Rev. Sci. Instrum. 
82 033705 

[98] 
Potyrailo R A and Takeuchi I 2005 Role of high-
throughput characterization tools in combinatorial 
materials science Meas. Sci. Technol. 16 1-4 

[99] 
Oliver W C and Pharr G M 1992 An Improved 
Technique for Determining Hardness and Elastic-
Modulus Using Load and Displacement Sensing 
Indentation Experiments J. Mater. Res. 7 1564-83 

[100] 
Wang J S, Yoo Y, Gao C, Takeuchi I, Sun X D, 
Chang H Y, Xiang X D and Schultz P G 1998 
Identification of a blue photoluminescent composite 
material from a combinatorial library Science 279 
1712-4 

[101] 
Otani M, Lowhorn N D, Schenck P K, Wong-Ng W, 
Green M L, Itaka K and Koinuma H 2007 A high-
throughput thermoelectric power-factor screening 
tool for rapid construction of thermoelectric property 
diagrams Appl. Phys. Lett. 91 132102 

[102] 
Yan Y G, Martin J, Wong-Ng W, Green M and Tang 
X F 2013 A temperature dependent screening tool for 
high throughput thermoelectric characterization of 
combinatorial films Rev. Sci. Instrum. 84 

[103] 
Winkler G R and Winkler J R 2011 A light emitting 
diode based photoelectrochemical screener for 
distributed combinatorial materials discovery Rev. 
Sci. Instrum. 82 114101 

[104] 
Jiang W, Mao S N, Xi X X, Jiang X G, Peng J L, 
Venkatesan T, Lobb C J and Greene R L 1994 
Anomalous Transport-Properties in Superconducting 
Nd1.85Ce0.15CuO4± Phys. Rev. Lett. 73 1291-4 

[105] 
Pourret A, Spathis P, Aubin H and Behnia K 2009 
Nernst effect as a probe of superconducting 
fluctuations in disordered thin films New J. Phys. 11 
055071 

[106] 
Cyr-Choiniere O, Daou R, Laliberte F, LeBoeuf D, 
Doiron-Leyraud N, Chang J, Yan J Q, Cheng J G, 
Zhou J S, Goodenough J B, Pyon S, Takayama T, 
Takagi H, Tanaka Y and Taillefer L 2009 
Enhancement of the Nernst effect by stripe order in a 
high-Tc superconductor Nature 458 743-5 

[107] 
Karageorgiev P, Orendi H, Stiller B and Brehmer L 
2001 Scanning near-field ellipsometric microscope-
imaging ellipsometry with a lateral resolution in 
nanometer range Appl. Phys. Lett. 79 1730-2 

[108] 
Tranchida D, Diaz J, Schon P, Schonherr H and 
Vancso G J 2011 Scanning Near-Field Ellipsometry 
Microscopy: imaging nanomaterials with resolution 
below the diffraction limit Nanoscale 3 233-9 

[109] 
Zhao M L, Lian J, Yu H S, Jin K, Xu L P, Hu Z G, 
Yang X L and Kang S S 2017 Dielectric functions of 
La-based cuprate superconductors for visible and 
near-infrared wavelengths Appl. Surf. Sci. 421 611-6 

[110] 
Zhao M L, Lian J, Sun Z Z, Zhang W F, Li M M, 
Wang Y, Yu H S, Jin K and Hu X Y 2015 
Ellipsometric study of the optical properties of n-type 
superconductor La1.9Ce0.1CuO4 Opt. Mater. Express 
5 2047-53 

[111] 
Golick V A, Kadygrob D V, Yampol'skii V A, 
Rakhmanov A L, Ivanov B A and Nori F 2010 


22 

 

Surface Josephson Plasma Waves in Layered 
Superconductors above the Plasma Frequency: 
Evidence for a Negative Index of Refraction Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 104 187003 

[112] 
Gomez-Bombarelli 
R, 
Aguilera-Iparraguirre 
J, 

Hirzel T D, Duvenaud D, Maclaurin D, Blood-
Forsythe M A, Chae H S, Einzinger M, Ha D G, Wu 
T, Markopoulos G, Jeon S, Kang H, Miyazaki H, 
Numata M, Kim S, Huang W L, Hong S I, Baldo M, 
Adams R P and Aspuru-Guzik A 2016 Design of 
efficient molecular organic light-emitting diodes by 
a high-throughput virtual screening and experimental 
approach Nat. Mater. 15 1120-7 

[113] 
Chepulskii R V and Curtarolo S 2009 First-principles 
solubilities of alkali and alkaline-earth metals in Mg-
B alloys Phys. Rev. B 79 134203 

[114] 
Jiang X and Zhao J J 2015 Evolution of boron 
clusters in iron tetraborides under high pressure: 
semiconducting 
and 
ferromagnetic 
superhard 

materials Rsc. Adv. 5 48012-23 

[115] 
Landrum G A and Genin H 2002 The rational 
discovery Framework(TM): A novel tool for 
computationally guided high-throughput discovery 
Mater Res Soc Symp P 700 233-8 

[116] 
Castelli I E, Landis D D, Thygesen K S, Dahl S, 
Chorkendorff I, Jaramillo T F and Jacobsen K W 
2012 New cubic perovskites for one- and two-photon 
water splitting using the computational materials 
repository Energ. Environ. Sci. 5 9034-43 

[117] 
Castelli I E, Olsen T, Datta S, Landis D D, Dahl S, 
Thygesen K S and Jacobsen K W 2012 
Computational screening of perovskite metal oxides 
for optimal solar light capture Energ. Environ. Sci. 5 
5814-9 

[118] 
Yu L P and Zunger A 2012 Identification of Potential 
Photovoltaic Absorbers Based on First-Principles 
Spectroscopic Screening of Materials Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 108 068701 

[119] 
Yang K S, Setyawan W, Wang S D, Nardelli M B 
and Curtarolo S 2012 A search model for topological 
insulators 
with 
high-throughput 
robustness 

descriptors Nat. Mater. 11 614-9 

[120] 
Ortiz C, Eriksson O and Klintenberg M 2009 Data 
mining and accelerated electronic structure theory as 
a tool in the search for new functional materials 
Comp. Mater. Sci. 44 1042-9 

[121] 
Setyawan W, Gaume R M, Lam S, Feigelson R S and 
Curtarolo S 2011 High-Throughput Combinatorial 
Database of Electronic Band Structures for Inorganic 
Scintillator Materials ACS Comb. Sci. 13 382-90 

[122] 
Lin L C, Berger A H, Martin R L, Kim J, Swisher J 
A, Jariwala K, Rycroft C H, Bhown A S, Deem M 
W, Haranczyk M and Smit B 2012 In silico screening 
of carbon-capture materials Nat. Mater. 11 633-41 

[123] 
Armiento R, Kozinsky B, Fornari M and Ceder G 
2011 Screening for high-performance piezoelectrics 
using high-throughput density functional theory 
Phys. Rev. B 84 014103 

[124] 
Curtarolo S, Setyawan W, Wang S D, Xue J K, Yang 
K S, Taylor R H, Nelson L J, Hart G L W, Sanvito S, 
Buongiorno-Nardelli M, Mingo N and Levy O 2012 
A distributed materials properties repository from 
high-throughput ab initio calculations Comp. Mater. 
Sci. 58 227-35 

[125] 
Wang S D, Wang Z, Setyawan W, Mingo N and 
Curtarolo S 2011 Assessing the Thermoelectric 
Properties of Sintered Compounds via High-
Throughput Ab-Initio Calculations Phys. Rev. X 1 
021012 

[126] 
Alapati S V, Johnson J K and Sholl D S 2006 
Identification of destabilized metal hydrides for 
hydrogen storage using first principles calculations J. 
Phys. Chem. B 110 8769-76 

[127] 
Lu J, Fang Z Z G, Choi Y J and Sohn H Y 2007 
Potential of binary lithium magnesium nitride for 
hydrogen storage applications J. Phys. Chem. C 111 
12129-34 

[128] 
Chen H L, Hautier G, Jain A, Moore C, Kang B, Doe 
R, Wu L J, Zhu Y M, Tang Y Z and Ceder G 2012 
Carbonophosphates: A New Family of Cathode 
Materials 
for 
Li-Ion 
Batteries 
Identified 

Computationally Chem. Mater. 24 2009-16 

[129] 
Kim J C, Moore C J, Kang B, Hautier G, Jain A and 
Ceder G 2011 Synthesis and Electrochemical 
Properties of Monoclinic LiMnBO3 as a Li 
Intercalation Material J. Electrochem. Soc. 158 
A309-A15 

[130] 
Hautier G, Jain A, Chen H L, Moore C, Ong S P and 
Ceder G 2011 Novel mixed polyanions lithium-ion 
battery cathode materials predicted by high-
throughput ab initio computations J. Mater. Chem. 
21 17147-53 

[131] 
Jain A, Hautier G, Moore C, Kang B, Lee J, Chen H 
L, Twu N and Ceder G 2012 A Computational 
Investigation of Li9M3(P2O7)3(PO4)2 (M = V, Mo) as 
Cathodes for Li Ion Batteries J. Electrochem. Soc. 
159 A622-A33 

[132] 
Chen H L, Hautier G and Ceder G 2012 Synthesis, 
Computed Stability, and Crystal Structure of a New 
Family 
of 
Inorganic 
Compounds: 

Carbonophosphates J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134 19619-27 

[133] 
Wang X L, Xiao R J, Li H and Chen L Q 2017 
Oxysulfide 
LiAlSO: 
A 
Lithium 
Superionic 

Conductor from First Principles Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 
6 

[134] 
Kolmogorov A N, Shah S, Margine E R, Bialon A F, 
Hammerschmidt T and Drautz R 2010 New 
Superconducting 
and 
Semiconducting 
Fe-B 

Compounds 
Predicted 
with 
an 
Ab 
Initio 

Evolutionary Search Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 217003 

[135] 
Matsumoto R, Hou Z F, Hara H, Adachi S, Takeya 
H, Irifune T, Terakura K and Takano Y 2018 Two 
pressure-induced superconducting transitions in 
SnBi2Se4 explored by data-driven materials search: 
new approach to developing novel functional 
materials 
including 
thermoelectric 
and 


23 

 

superconducting materials Appl. Phys. Express 11 
093101 

[136] 
Matsumoto R, Hou Z F, Nagao M, Adachi S, Hara H, 
Tanaka H, Nakamura K, Murakami R, Yamamoto S, 
Takeya H, Lrifune T, Terakura K and Takano Y 2018 
Data-driven exploration of new pressure-induced 
superconductivity in PbBi2Te4 Sci. Technol. Adv. 
Mat. 19 909-16 

[137] 
Klintenberg M and Eriksson O 2013 Possible high-
temperature 
superconductors 
predicted 
from 

electronic structure and data-filtering algorithms 
Comp. Mater. Sci. 67 282-6 

[138] 
Geilhufe R M, Borysov S S, Kalpakchi D and 
Balatsky A V 2018 Towards novel organic high-T-c 
superconductors: Data mining using density of states 
similarity search Phy. Rev. Mater. 2 024802 

[139] 
Seko A, Togo A and Tanaka I 2018 Descriptors for 
Machine Learning of Materials Data. In: Tanaka I 
(eds) Nanoinformatics (Singapore: Springer) 

[140] 
Rabe K M, Phillips J C, Villars P and Brown I D 1992 
Global Multinary Structural Chemistry of Stable 
Quasi-Crystals, High-Tc Ferroelectrics, and High-Tc 
Superconductors Phys. Rev. B 45 7650-76 

[141] 
Villars P and Phillips J C 1988 Quantum Structural 
Diagrams and High-Tc Superconductivity Phys. Rev. 
B 37 2345-8 

[142] 
Hirsch J E 1997 Correlations between normal-state 
properties and superconductivity Phys. Rev. B 55 
9007-24 

[143] 
Isayev O, Fourches D, Muratov E N, Oses C, Rasch 
K, Tropsha A and Curtarolo S 2015 Materials 
Cartography: Representing and Mining Materials 
Space Using Structural and Electronic Fingerprints 
Chem. Mater. 27 735-43 

[144] 
Ling J, Hutchinson M, Antono E, Paradiso S and 
Meredig B 2017 High-Dimensional Materials and 
Process 
Optimization 
Using 
Data-Driven 

Experimental 
Design 
with 
Well-Calibrated 

Uncertainty Estimates Integr. Mater. Manuf. Innov. 
6 207-17 

[145] 
Xie S R, Stewart G R, Hamlin J J, Hirschfeld P J and 
Hennig R G 2019 Functional Form of the 
Superconducting 
Critical 
Temperature 
from 

Machine 
Learning 
arXiv:1905.06780 
[cond-

mat.supr-con]  

[146] 
Douglass D H 1964 Superconducting Thin Films 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 36 316- 

[147] 
Ando T, Fowler A B and Stern F 1982 Electronic 
properties of two-dimensional systems Rev. Mod. 
Phys. 54 437-672 

[148] 
Crittenden E C and Hoffman R W 1953 Thin Films 
of Ferromagnetic Materials Rev. Mod. Phys. 25 310-
5 

[149] 
Dawber M, Rabe K M and Scott J F 2005 Physics of 
thin-film ferroelectric oxides Rev. Mod. Phys. 77 
1083-130 

[150] 
Minola M, Lu Y, Peng Y Y, Dellea G, Gretarsson H, 
Haverkort M W, Ding Y, Sun X, Zhou X J, Peets D 

C, Chauviere L, Dosanjh P, Bonn D A, Liang R, 
Damascelli A, Dantz M, Lu X, Schmitt T, Braicovich 
L, Ghiringhelli G, Keimer B and Le Tacon M 2017 
Crossover from Collective to Incoherent Spin 
Excitations in Superconducting Cuprates Probed by 
Detuned Resonant Inelastic X-Ray Scattering Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 119 097001 

[151] 
Chen C C, Moritz B, Vernay F, Hancock J N, 
Johnston S, Jia C J, Chabot-Couture G, Greven M, 
Elfimov I, Sawatzky G A and Devereaux T P 2010 
Unraveling the Nature of Charge Excitations in 
La2CuO4 with Momentum-Resolved Cu K-Edge 
Resonant Inelastic X-Ray Scattering Phys. Rev. Lett. 
105 177401 

[152] 
Marra P, Sykora S, Wohlfeld K and van den Brink J 
2013 Resonant Inelastic X-Ray Scattering as a Probe 
of the Phase and Excitations of the Order Parameter 
of Superconductors Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 117005 

[153] 
Lin J Q, Yuan J, Jin K, Yin Z P, Li G, Zhou K-J, Lu 
X, Dantz M, Schmitt T, Ding H, Guo H, Dean M P 
M and Liu X 2019 Doping evolution of the charge 
excitations and electron correlations in electron-
doped 
superconducting 
La2-xCexCuO4 

arXiv:1906.11354 [cond-mat.supr-con]  

[154] 
Potyrailo R A and Mirsky V M 2008 Combinatorial 
and high-throughput development of sensing 
materials: The first 10 years Chem. Rev. 108 770-813 

[155] 
White A 2012 The Materials Genome Initiative: One 
year on Mrs Bull. 37 715-6 

 


