DISCOVERY OF TWO TYPES OF TWINKLING CAN EXPLAIN 

CONTRADICTORY OBSERVATIONS AMONG TWINKLING 

ARTIFACT INVESTIGATORS IN ULTRASOUND IMAGING 

Denis Leonova,*, Nicholas Kulberga, Alexandr Gromovb, Anton 

Vladzymyrskyya, Sergey Morozova 

aResearch and Practical Clinical Center of Diagnostics and Telemedicine 

Technologies, Moscow Healthcare Department, Moscow, 109029 Russia 

bA.I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry of the 

Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow, 127206 Russia 

*corresponding author; address: 109029, Russia, Moscow, 28-1 Srednyaya 

Kalintikovskaya str.; phone: +7-909-958-69-38; e-mail: LeonovD.V@yandex.ru 

 


 
2

Abstract—Twinkling Artifact is a valuable tool in detecting dense objects such 

as kidney stones, calculi etc., especially when there is no acoustic shadowing 

and presence of hyperechogenic tissues obstructs visualization. This phenome-

non is not completely understood. Different scientific groups have contradictory 

findings concerning its properties: some of them observed a decrease in Twin-

kling intensity at elevated pulse repetition frequencies (PRF), while others found 

Twinkling to be independent from PRF, etc. In this paper we hypothesize that 

this kind of contradictions can be partially resolved on an assumption that there 

are two types of Twinkling. The 1st type presumably is produced by random-

phased reflections from microcavitation and can be registered even at PRF high 

enough to suppress blood flow. The 2nd is originated from elastic vibrations as 

the object under investigation swings like a pendulum in the field of ultrasound. 

These vibrations can be associated with an external source such as a muscles 

contraction, etc. or the acoustic radiation force from signals emitted by the 

transducer. The 2nd type of Twinkling disappears at high PRF and can be regu-

larly observed in silicone and polyurethane phantoms where the occurrence of 

cavitation microbubbles is highly unlikely. 

Key Words: Ultrasound Imaging, Twinkling Artifact, Stone Detection, Doppler 

Effect, Color Frame Mapping, Acoustic Radiation Force, Elastic Vibration, Ul-

trasound Phantom, Cavitation, Microbubbles. 


 
3

INTRODUCTION 

Nowadays sensitivity of ultrasound imaging for kidney stones and soft tissue 

calculi detection is often considered insufficient, which is unfortunate since ul-

trasound is a method of choice in diagnostics of children, adolescents and preg-

nant population. In a recent study (Salmaslıoğlu et al. 2018) a range of sensitivi-

ty for kidney stones was found to be very broad and dependent on stone sizes 

with 98% sensitivity for stones larger than 10 mm and 32% sensitivity for stones 

smaller than 5 mm. Bigger stones typically appear on ultrasound scans as the 

brightest objects with a distinct posterior acoustic shadow. It is not always the 

case for smaller stones, which may be indistinguishable from a renal sinus, other 

fat tissues, tendons and may cast no shadow, thus hindering the diagnostic pro-

cess. Thankfully, researchers found the way to make diagnostics more reliable, 

they suggested using ultrasound Doppler Twinkling Artifact, since it was report-

ed to not only facilitate stone diagnostics in complicated situations (Masch et al. 

2016; Pabst et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2017; Winkel et al. 2012; Yavuz et al. 2015), 

but also inform physicians regarding compositions and architectures of stones 

(Hassani et al. 2012; Jamzad and Setarehdan 2017; Kaya et al.2016; Kim et al. 

2010). 

Twinkling Artifact (Figure 1) is a well-described phenomenon. It was in-

troduced by Rahmouni et al. in 1996 and defined as a rapidly changing mixture 

of red and blue behind presumed calcifications in Doppler color flow imaging 

(CFI). Physicians observed this artifact in vivo on kidney stones (Gao et al. 

2012; Khan et al. 2017), gallstones (Kim et al. 2010), breast microcalcifications 

(Fujimoto et al. 2017), epidermoid cysts (Clarke et al. 2016), pleural calcifica-

tion (Tian and Xu 2018), gastric bezoars (Ahn et al. 2016), testicular microcalci-

fications (Şekerci et al. 2015), calcified cardiac valves (Tsao et al. 2011), 

guidewire (Bennet et al. 2015). On the one hand, many researchers agree that 

Twinkling Artifact is a useful tool for stone detection. On the other, the artifact 

can obstruct blood flow analysis; therefore, research groups have done some 


 
4

work to suppress the artifact through the signal processing (Leonov et al. 2018a, 

2018b; Seo and Wong 2016), others found elevated levels of carbon dioxide ca-

pable of eliminating Twinkling (Simon et al. 2017). Apart from that, scientists 

extensively study the Twinkling phenomenon in phantoms (Haluszkiewicz et al. 

2017; Liu et al. 2013a, 2013b; Mavahedet al. 2017; Weinstein et al. 2002) and 

numerical models (Behnam et al. 2010; Tanabe et al. 2015). However, the re-

sults of different studies seem to contradict each other. 

DEPENDENCE ON MACHINE PARAMETERS 

Characterization of Twinkling Artifact with various machine settings has been 

thoroughly investigated by different authors. As shown in Table 1, most of the 

authors agree that Twinkling tends to become more prominent with both CFI 

gain and color priority elevated. Carrier frequency and grayscale gain tend to 

have the opposite effect on the artifact intensity. This finding does not contradict 

the works of Rahmouni et al. (1996) and Shabana et al. (2009) as they only de-

clared that Twinkling can be observed at all carrier frequencies, the intensity in 

their studies was not measured. Focal position is recommended to be slightly be-

low the target. It is often noted that Twinkling is less dependent on the focal 

placement than acoustic shadowing is. 

The researchers can be divided in two major groups based on their observa-

tion results regarding the pulse repetition frequency (PRF). Some of the re-

searchers (Clarke et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2001; Rahmouni et al. 1996; Shabana et 

al. 2009) found Twinkling almost indifferent to PRF, thus they recommended to 

set PRF at its highest to suppress blood signals to avoid potential ambiguity in 

interpretation when looking for soft tissue calculi and kidney stones. The others 

(Choi et al. 2014; Naito et al. 2014; Weinstein et al. 2002; Yang et al. 2015) re-

ported the gradual diminishing of artifact with increasing PRF. In one particular 

paper (Wang et al. 2006) it was observed that Twinkling Artifact was the most 

intense at the lowest PRF, than its intensity rapidly fell and stayed low with PRF 

increasing. 


 
5

Not many studies measured dependence of Twinkling on a wall filter 

threshold. However, it is a known fact, that this threshold increases with PRF, 

for this reason we report four papers describing the decline of Twinkling intensi-

ty with increase of the wall filtering threshold, the same number of papers found 

that this threshold had no effect on Twinkling Artifact whatsoever and one study 

even indicated the rise of intensity with the filtering threshold.  

These contradictions made us suppose that there is not just one but, indeed, 

two types of Twinkling, and the researchers in the field of Twinkling Artifact 

were unknowingly investigating two different phenomena. These phenomena 

are easy to confuse as they have a matching appearance on the screen in CFI 

mode: apparently, stationary objects colored as there is a blood flowing through 

them (see Figure 1). However, as this study will show, these phenomena have 

different underlying causes and therefore will be further referenced as the 1st and 

2nd type of Twinkling. 

The aim of this study is to test the hypothesis about two types of Twin-

kling. If two types indeed exist than it might be possible to recognize and differ-

entiate them on the basis of observations with a standard scanner. For deeper 

understanding, a research machine will be used in our study with the ability to 

thoroughly observe and analyze raw radio-frequency signals.  

MAIN HYPOTHESES OF TWINKLING 

Rahmouni et al. (1996) were the first to report Twinkling Artifact in press. Ac-

cording to their explanation there has to be a slight phase fluctuation between 

consecutive radiofrequency signals for the Twinkling Artifact to occur. This 

slight phase fluctuation is further intensified when strong radiofrequency signals 

are distorted because of the amplifier saturation. However, not all Twinkling ob-

jects are the strongest reflectors. Moreover, it is unclear how the slight phase 

fluctuation occurs in the first place. 

Kamaya et al. (2003) in their paper mentioned that conventional Doppler 

evaluations reflect the velocity of the object based on a frequency shift in the ra-


 
6

diofrequency signal due to the motion of either the target or the probe. In their 

experiments, the authors excluded the motion of the probe by securing its posi-

tion with a ring stand, and, since there was no observable motion of the object 

under investigation, the machine effects alone were regarded as the cause of 

Twinkling. They investigated two types of artifact in spectral Doppler mode: the 

narrowband one that is seen when scanning flat surfaces and the broadband one 

that occurs on rough exteriors. As a possible reason for the both, the researchers 

suggested a phase jitter, which can be intensified by rough surfaces. Phase jitter 

is caused by the slight random time fluctuations in the digital clock that syn-

chronizes the firings. Twinkling Artifact with its wide-band spectrum is generat-

ed through slight variations in path length of ultrasound signals. 

For Twinkling to occur there has to be not an initial phase fluctuation, but a 

frequency shift. The way the phase jitter can result in a frequency shift is un-

clear. It is also unclear how the slight variations in the path can amplify the shift. 

Behnam et al. in 2010 investigated the object’s motion as the cause of 

Twinkling. They suggested that the object in the ultrasound field starts oscillat-

ing at PRF with the amplitude being several micrometers; an acoustic radiation 

force, which was investigated in several studies (Andreed et al. 2014, 2016; 

Fatemi and Greenleaf 1999; Honarbakhsh et al 2010; Nikolaeva et al. 2016), 

presumably triggered these oscillations. Another team supports the predictions 

concerning amplitude (Liu et al. 2013a); in their experiments they unsuccessful-

ly tried to observe oscillations with an optical microscope, yet they registered 

variations of intensity of scattered light with a high-speed camera and a laser 

when the object was exposed to ultrasound. Thus, they concluded that fluctua-

tions of the object exist and are very small. Yang et al. (2015) also studied the 

possibility of the acoustic radiation force to cause Twinkling. They measured the 

force and found it to be insensitive to PRF while Twinkling was highly sensitive 

and observed at 0.1 and 0.3 kHz and completely disappeared when PRF exceed-


 
7

ed 0.6 kHz. They concluded that the acoustic radiation force is unlikely to be as-

sociated with Twinkling. 

Apart from the acoustic radiation force induced by ultrasound machine, ob-

ject’s motion can be caused by internal sources such as heartbeat, breathing, etc., 

as well as external ones like a vehicle passing nearby, people walking down the 

hall, etc. One team (Weinstein et al. 2002) even suggested using an additional 

audio signal to tune in the resonance frequency of the stone to enhance its Twin-

kling. 

The most recent hypothesis (Lu et al. 2013) states that microbubbles in 

stone crevices could be the dominant cause of Twinkling. The process is known 

as microcavitation. It supposedly occurs on rough surfaces in diagnostic ultra-

sound. Microbubbles apparently can be as small as red blood cells. 

Polyanskiy and Sapozhnikov in 2018 conducted a numerical simulation to 

test the ‘microbubble hypotheses’.  Results of their simulation show that the 

cavitation of gas bubbles is indeed capable of producing the Twinkling Artifact. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Ultrasound system 

Representation of Twinkling is reported to be machine dependent. That is why 

in this study we used two standard ultrasound medical diagnostic scanners with 

a variety of transducers. The first is Sonoace 8000 EX Prime (Medison, Seoul, 

Korea) with linear probe L5-9EC (Medison, Seoul, Korea), convex probe C3-

7ED (Medison, Seoul, Korea) and sector probe P2-5AC (Medison, Seoul, Ko-

rea). The second is Sonomed-500 (Spectromed, Moscow, Russia) scanner with 

linear probe 7,5L37 (Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania), convex probe 

3,5C60 (Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania), sector probe 3,5P14 

(Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania) and endocavitary probe 6,5CV13 

(Medelcom International, Vilnius, Lithuania). We repeated experiments using 


 
8

both ultrasonic machines, observed images in CFI, power Doppler and spectral 

Doppler modes and compared findings. 

In this study, we also analyzed the raw data obtained from the receive path 

of the research ultrasound scanner Sonomed-500. This machine has an open-

architecture which allows the raw data capture from Doppler and B-mode paths 

for a non-real time processing on a PC and executing third-party program mod-

ules to perform real-time experiments on the machine itself. Doppler data went 

through some preliminary processing stages in the machine including the band-

pass filtering and Hilbert transform for creating an analytic signal. The above 

processing steps were the only “black boxes” in the experiments. 

Data sources 

We used several commercially available ultrasound phantoms: in Gammex 1430 

LE Mini-Doppler Flow System (Sun Nuclear Corporation, Middleton, Wiscon-

sin, USA) we could observe conventional Doppler images of a blood mimicking 

fluid flow as well as mild Twinkling on nylon strings; in ATS 539 (CIRS, Nor-

folk, Virginia, USA) Twinkling appeared on grayscale targets; in elastography 

breast phantom by Blue Phantom Twinkling was registered on imitations of 

breast microcalcifications. In most of the experiments, a clamp held the probe to 

minimize the effect of random vibrations. 

We also investigated Twinkling Artifact with a custom-designed and 3D-

printed ultrasound phantom, which is a container with external dimensions of 

162x94x82 mm printed with styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS) (Bestfilament, 

Moscow, Russia) and having special holdings for targets allowing their place-

ment at predetermined positions. Depending on the experimental requirements, 

the container was filled with degassed water, ethanol, silicone, or agar-based tis-

sue-mimicking material with the organic sound reflecting content. We degreased 

all parts with ethanol before pouring water or adding liquid agar. Afterward, we 

processed them with a hygroscopic surfactant to reduce the residual pocket of 


 
9

gas in the parts’ crevices and place a fibrous sound-absorbing material 10 mm 

thick at the bottom of the phantom to avoid reflections. 

We attached the reflecting objects to the custom-built suspensions fixing 

them in particular positions inside the phantom body. In the early phase of our 

research, we conducted experiments on a vast number of different materials, but 

afterward we decided to focus on some minimal set of specimens with known 

physical properties. The density of the basic material had to be close to that of 

the bladder stones and calcifications, which is approximately 2.4 g/cm3. We 

used solid aluminum cylinders with diameter 1.75 mm and length between 8-20 

mm (ρ
 2.7
 g/cm3). Microcalcification was imitated by microcrystals of CaSO4 

(ρ
 2.4
 g/cm3) about 0.1 mm in size, chemically grown in agar jelly. 

Some cylinders were scratched with sandpaper to investigate the depend-

ence of Twinkling Artifact and signal characteristics from surface smoothness. 

We studied the dependence of Twinkling Artifact on material’s density us-

ing same-sized cylinders made of iron (ρ
 7.8
 g/cm3), high-impact polystyrene 

(HIPS) 
(Bestfilament, 
Moscow, 
Russia) 
(ρ
1.06
g/cm3), 
wet 
wood 

(ρ
 0.8
 g/cm3). 

Apart from the phantoms, Twinkling was studied in three adult volunteers 

(a local institutional review board approved the experimental protocol; all the 

human subjects gave their informed consent for the study):  

– Volunteer 1 in the neck area contains 3-mm calculus occurred in the place 

where hematoma had been previously diagnosed; 

– Volunteer 2 has a 15-mm stone located in the right kidney producing acoustic 

shadowing clearly visible in B-mode and creating pronounced Twinkling Arti-

fact;  

– Volunteer 3 has the gallbladder stones producing shadowing and almost no 

Twinkling.  


 
10

Signal model 

In the process of CFI frame acquisition multiple pulses are being send to each 

point of the region of interest (ROI). The number K of pulses ranges between 8-

32 depending on the frame rate needed. Each received pulse represents the state 

of the system in the current moment of time. In fact, a series of K images is be-

ing constructed; these images reflect the changing state of the ROI. For that, a 

sequence of K ultrasonic pulses with frequency 
0
ω  and interval 
PRF

PRF

2π
ω
T

 is 

sent along each beam. In the receiving path, these signals are amplified, digit-

ized and subjected to Hilbert transform to create an analytic signal. Therefore, 

Doppler data can be represented as a four-dimensional array of complex values 

Vklmn
, where , , ,
k l m n  are the numbers of the pulse in Doppler sequence, beam, 

sample and frame, respectively. The set consisting of K complex amplitudes in 

each point of the ROI represents the ensemble 


0
1
K-1
,
,
,

T
x x
x


x
. Each ele-

ment of the ensemble is a complex value, which can be described in accordance 

with a traditional Doppler signal model: 

 



B
0
A
φ
ω
ω
,
k
k
i
i
t
i
t

k
k
k
k
k
x
P e
A e
e
E
B



 
(1) 

where 
kP  describes the influence of the scanning impulse envelope at the 

moment 
kt , i.e., for a single reflector initially positioned at the center of the 

envelop 
kP  is 
A k
B k
V t
V t
P
c









. The scanning impulse can be assumed having 

Gaussian shape with the duration of several oscillation periods at frequency 
0
ω ; 

0
φ  is the initial phase of the ensemble. 

kA  is the complex amplitude of blood reflection, 
A

A
0

2
ω
V ω
c

 is a Doppler fre-

quency shift caused by a blood movement with velocity 
A
V , c  is a speed of 


 
11

sound, 
PRF
kt
 kT
 is the interval between zeroth and k-th pulse in a sequence, 

0,1,...,
1
k
K

 ;  

k
B  is the complex amplitude of slow-moving tissue signals, usually it is 20–30 

dB greater than the blood echoes. 
B

B
0

2
ω
V ω
 c
 is a Doppler frequency shift 

caused by tissue motion and transducer trembling; its velocity is assumed to be 

B
V ≪
A
V ; 

k
E is the complex component representing thermal and quantization noise in re-

ceiving front-end modules, its amplitude is 10–15 dB lesser than blood echoes.  

In this study we hypothesize that Twinkling occurs because machine re-

ceives some unordinary signals from the Twinkling area, which cannot be cor-

rectly described within the limitation of the traditional Doppler signal model (1), 

however, these Twinkling signals possess certain features of blood reflections, 

and the machine interpret them as blood signals. We suggest that Twinkling sig-

nals have unique features and envision the machine could be able to distinguish 

them from blood if these features were described in machine’s language, i.e., 

preprogrammed in the algorithms. On this assumption, we compliment the tradi-

tional Doppler signal model (1) with two components – 
k
C  and 
k
D – responsible 

for Twinkling: 

 



A
B
φ0
ω
φ
ω
,
k
k
k
i
i
t
i
i
t

k
k
k
k
k
k
k
B
x
P e
A e
C e
D
e
E





 
(2) 

where 
k
C  is the amplitude of vibration-related signals leading to the appearance 

of the 2nd type of Twinkling, its power is 0–10 dB greater than that of the soft 

tissue signals. Stones can move along with tissues resulting in the Doppler shift 

B
ω ; the acoustic radiation force can trigger their oscillations as well. We con-

sider these oscillations as an important cause of Twinkling Artifact. They are the 

reason for an additional phase shift φk  to occur. This phase change can be esti-

mated via this equation: 


 
12

 


0

C

ω
φ
sin ω
k
k

R
t
c

, 
(3) 

where R ≪

0

2 c


 
 is the amplitude of forced oscillations of stone along the 

scanning beam, 
C
ω  is the frequency of these oscillations; 

k
D is the complex amplitude increment from cavitation resulting in the 1st type 

of Twinkling. The amplitude of this signal is usually greater than the vibration-

related component 
k
C . It is assumed that 
k
D  changes from pulse to pulse chaot-

ically. 

Signal processing algorithms 

The ultrasound machine Sonomed-500 has advanced research capabilities allow-

ing to obtain the raw radio signals from its receive path for further investiga-

tions. For processing of these signals, we prepared program modules, including 

conventional CFI signal processing algorithms. There is a broad range of refer-

ences for such processing methods, e.g., (Bjærum and Torp 2000; Gerbands 

1981; Kargel et al. 2002; Kargel et al. 2003; Leonov et al. 2019a, 2019b; Lo et 

al. 2008; Løvstakken 2007; Shen et al. 2013; Torp 1997; Wang et al. 2006; Yoo 

et al. 2003; Yu and Cobbold 2008; Yu et al. 2007; Yu and Løvstakken 2010). 

We wrote all our program modules in C++ and can either upload them to the 

machine to analyze data in real time or use them for detailed analysis on a per-

sonal computer. 

Digital signal processing includes: 

– eliminating signals from slow-moving reflectors (wall filter, clutter filter). We 

tested several different variants of this procedure: bandpass filtering; polynomial 

regression of different orders; principal component analysis; Karhunen–Loève 

decomposition; empirical mode decomposition (Leonov et al. 2019a and 2019b). 

In our experiments we filtered Doppler sequences and found the polynomial re-

gression of 2nd and 3rd orders to be the most suitable for the task; 


 
13

– smoothing and signal accumulation for noise reduction. Recursive low-pass 

filters were implemented in two spatial directions along with the frame averag-

ing; 

– phase analysis of signals within a Doppler sequence (this information is used 

in CFI); 

– Doppler signals intensity analysis (this mode is known as power Doppler). 

We tested the algorithms under the following conditions: 

– observation of the liquid flowing along the Doppler phantom’s tube; flow ve-

locity was being changed between 0-174 cm/sec. The probe was held in the 

clamp; 

– the same observation, but the probe was held in hand. Wall filter efficiency 

was evaluated; 

– observation of targets, in which Twinkling Artifact appears in standard ultra-

sound machines. The machine parameters were adjusted for the most evident ar-

tifact appearance. 

Experimental design  

Experiment I: visual representation of Twinkling Artifact. With two standard 

medical ultrasound machines in all available Doppler modes, which were CFI, 

power and spectral Doppler, we investigated the presence of Twinkling in each 

target in the phantoms at our disposal and the dependence of Twinkling on ma-

chine settings: PRF, wall filter type, color write priority, Doppler power, carrier 

frequency, grayscale gain and focal position to reproduce the findings of other 

researchers given previously in the ‘Dependence on machine parameters’ sec-

tion. The main question of this experiment was: “Can two types of twinkling be 

reliably differentiated through the observation of their appearance on a screen of 

a standard scanner?” 

Experiment II: looking for the 1st and 2nd type of Twinkling signals predict-

ed by mathematical model (2). Now, after we can reliably detect and differenti-

ate 1st and 2nd type of Twinkling by their appearance on the screen, we want to 


 
14

look deeper and study the nature of the artifact by looking at raw signals them-

selves. The model (2) predicted that the signal diagram of the 1st type of Twin-

kling would be chaotic and the diagram of the 2nd type on a complex plane 

would look linear – these are the peculiarities we are looking for in this experi-

ment. 

Experiment III: quantitative differentiation of 1st and 2nd type of Twinkling 

signals. Differentiating signals based on the visual observation of their diagrams 

is a tedious process. We introduced a mathematical rule to speed up the process 

of differentiation: according to the model (2), the 2nd type of Twinkling has a 

signal of which real and imaginary parts change either in phase or with a 180 

degree delay, therefore a rule based on correlation between them can be used for 

recognizing these signals: if the correlation is close to one then the 2nd type of 

Twinkling is considered to be detected, else if the correlation is low enough then 

it is the 1st type, otherwise there could be a mixed type; the correlation is given 

by: 

 






1

0

1
1
re

2

,i

2

0

m

0

re

r

i

e

m

im

K

k
k

k

K
K

k
k

k
k

x
x

x

r

x



















, 
(4) 

where 
kx is the complex sample 
kx  with the tissue clutter removed by the wall 

filtering procedure. 

In this experiment we calculate distributions of correlation for signals with 

known types to assess the reliability of the introduced rule and construct maps of 

correlation for phantoms and in vivo data to recognize the presence and type of 

Twinkling in the volunteers. 


 
15

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Experiment I 

Twinkling was observed on different objects: on kidney stones submerged in 

water, agar gel and ethanol, on rusty metal, wooden rods, polystyrene pin tar-

gets, on grayscale targets in commercially available phantoms. We tried using 

different ultrasound probes and machine settings like did the authors of the pa-

pers described in section ‘Dependence on machine parameters’. We found that 

Twinkling strongly depends on a tissue-mimicking material or a phantom filler 

(see Figure 1): in rubber-based material Twinkling appeared only at low PRF 

(usually <1kHz) in CFI and power Doppler gradually declining with increasing 

frequency, while in water-based fillers there was no considerable dependence on 

PRF; the spectra from Twinkling areas for these materials also looked different-

ly: we registered a broadband one (Figure 2a) in water-based materials especial-

ly on objects with uneven surfaces; a narrowband spectrum (Figure 2b) was 

more likely to appear on grayscale targets in rubber-based phantoms as well as 

on objects submerged in ethanol. The narrowband spectrum was primarily seen 

at low PRF and depended on wall filter type, while the broadband one seemed to 

be indifferent to RPF and almost indifferent to the wall filter.  

Weinstein et al. (2002) suggested using an additional vibration source to 

generate Twinkling. We applied the additional vibration source with a variable 

frequency and observed the narrowband spectrum. The Doppler spectrum 

seemed to change in direct proportion to the alterations of the source frequency 

(Figure 2c).  

The kidney stone of Volunteer 1 exhibited the broadband spectrum (Figure 

2d) along with some tissue motion artifacts. 

In this experiment, through observation of pictures obtained with standard 

ultrasound machines in common Doppler modes we identified two types of 

characteristic behavior of Twinkling Artifact: it is PRF-indifferent and has the 

broadband spectrum or appears only at low PRF and has the narrowband spec-


 
16

trum. In our further discussion, we will refer to it as the 1st and 2nd type of Twin-

kling, respectively. 

Experiment II 

In this experiment the theoretical signals are compared to the empirical ones. 

The theoretical signals derive from the mathematical model (2) and presented in 

Figure 3a-j; the empirical signals were observed in phantoms and given in Fig-

ure 3k-t. All the received signals can be divided into four categories: 

– signals from stationary targets can be described as 
φ0
i

k
k
k
x
P e
B

 where both
kP  

and 
k
B  are constant for the given location and beam parameters. The exemplary 

representation of such a signal in complex plane is dot (Figure 3a) and two lines 

in Cartesian plane in Figure 3b; its counterpart obtained from a non-moving tar-

get in a phantom is given in Figure 3k and l and contains slight deviations from 

a linear form caused by ever-present noise; 

– signals from flowing targets like erythrocytes would contain a motion induced 

Doppler shift 
A
ω  and, therefore, described as 
0
A
φ
ω
k
i
i
t

k
k
k
x
P e
A e

. If dots were de-

scribed by 
ωA
k
i
t
A e
 alone, they would be located on the arc of a circle with radius 

A and center at zero with the arc length proportional to the Doppler shift 
A
ω  

and for sufficiently larger Doppler shifts there would be several rotations around 

the center of the complex coordinate system and harmonic oscillations in the 

Cartesian plane. Since targets move in respect to the spatial position of the scan-

ning beam, the instantaneous envelop 
kP  also changes causing trajectory of the 

dots to stray as seen in Figure 3c and d. We observed many signals of this type 

in the vessel area of Gammex 1430 LE Mini-Doppler Flow System; an example 

is given in Figure 3m and n; 

– chaotic signals are those whose amplitude changes from pulse to pulse without 

an observable pattern; the most known physical source of these is cavitation 


 
17

producing broadband noise-like reflections given in Figure 3e, f, o and p from 

the theory and physical observations; 

– signals from oscillating targets, an example of which according to the mathe-

matical model is given in Figure 3g-j, have a non-constant Doppler shift: it in-

creases, decreases, changes sign; therefore in the complex (Figure 3q) plane the 

dots are on the arc which is usually quite short and after the filtering procedure 

this arc jumps to the center of the complex coordinate system (Figure 3s) where 

it can be closely approximated with a straight line. Signals, as depicted in Fig-

ure 3q-t, were observed in the known areas of the 2nd type of Twinkling. 

In this experiment, we visually analyzed thousands of signals, all falling in 

the described categories. Agreement between empirical signals observed in 

phantoms and signals predicted by theoretical model proofs adequacy of the lat-

ter. 

Experiment III 

A typical signal corresponding to the 1st type of Twinkling is presented in Figure 

3o and p: it is a strong echo with randomly distributed phase and amplitude. As 

for the 2nd type of Twinkling signals, according to the mathematical model (2) 

and Figure 3g-j and q-t, the real and imaginary parts have either identical initial 

phase shift or their initial phases are off by 180 degrees. In the flow mapping, 

Doppler power is often used as a threshold to separate blood echoes from the 

noise. 1st and 2nd type of Twinkling signals easily exceed the power threshold 

and are being mapped along with the flow resulting in the appearance of Twin-

kling Artifact. 

Given the distinct appearance of the diagrams of signals, relating to both 

types of Twinkling, a correlation-based criterion can be introduced and used for 

their differentiation from each other. Figure 4 presents a distribution of the cor-

relation (4) of signals obtained with the research ultrasound machine from the 

areas with known types of Twinkling and form the flow area. Altogether we 

analyzed 4 million signals for the purpose of calculating this distribution to 


 
18

make it statistically valuable. The signals of the 2nd type of Twinkling are on the 

right as they have a considerable correlation between real and imaginary parts. 

Signals with a high absolute value of cross-correlation between real and imagi-

nary parts could be observed if the imaged object would vibrate relative to sur-

rounding tissues. For such vibrations to occur we need some energy from either 

an external acoustic source (Weinstein et al. 2002), a pulse itself (Kargel et al. 

2003; Liu et al. 2013), or an internal physiological source, e.g., a heartbeat and 

breathing. The 1st type of Twinkling typically has a low correlation due to its er-

ratic nature. Flow signals also have a low level of correlation between real and 

imaginary parts. 

As it is evident from Figure 4, the correlation (4) enables us to differentiate 

the 1st and 2nd types of Twinkling; however, as it is shown in (Leonov et al. 

2018c), this differentiation is of a probabilistic nature. Wide areas under the 

curves can be explained by the presence of an additive noise, which always ex-

ists in superposition with the other signal components and cannot be eliminated 

from them.   

Lu et al. (2013) gave strong evidence in favor of crevice microbubbles and 

cavitation as the cause of Twinkling. Cavitation microbubbles act as random 

scatterers with their continual vibrations and explosions creating a random Dop-

pler shift between pulses. There were other hypotheses trying to explain random 

phase fluctuations, namely, Rahmouni et al. (1996), who were further compli-

mented by Kamaya et al. (2003). Yet they both failed to provide a complete and 

coherent explanation since Rahmouni did not clearly state the cause of Doppler 

frequency shift and Kamaya justified this shift with a phase jitter, which by an 

unknown reason should be magnified when ultrasound field interacts with a 

rough surface. 

Lu et al. (2013) proposed microcavitation as the main reason for Twinkling 

in human subjects. If it is so indeed then correlation in the area of Twinkling 


 
19

should be low. To validate this assumption, three sets of in vivo data were ana-

lyzed. All sets were captured in a raw radiofrequency form. 

Figures 5-7 contain the maps of power and correlation superimposed on 

grayscale frames with the following color palettes: green to yellow is for the ab-

solute value of correlation between real and imaginary parts of signals; brown to 

purple represents the power of the Doppler signal. We picked the mentioned 

colors in order to avoid confusion with the traditional CFI. 

The first set contains data from the neck area of Volunteer 1 with a couple 

of wide vessels and calculus without a strong acoustic shadow in the B-mode 

image (Figure 5a) making it hard to notice in presence of strong reflecting tis-

sues. There is a correlation map in Figure 5b showing relatively strong correla-

tion only on tendons at the top of the frame and weak levels of correlation in the 

area of calculus. On the other hand, the power map of the Doppler signals in 

Figure 5c shows very large power on the calculus. On the power map blood ves-

sels should also be seen, however in this case the Doppler power induced by 

blood flow is much weaker than the power of Twinkling, signals with relatively 

weak power are not seen on the map. These findings absolutely support Lu’s as-

sumption stating that Twinkling originated from cavitation: cavitation signals 

due to their erratic nature should have strong power and weak correlation. Fig-

ure 5d contains a reference image acquired with Sonoace 8000 EX Prime: both 

the vessels and the Twinkling are present. 

The second set of data is from the kidney of Volunteer 2. This time in Fig-

ure 6b correlation on the stone is sufficiently strong. The power in Figure 6c is 

almost ten times weaker than in Figure 5c. The decrease in power can be at-

tributed to a greater depth; however, the high level of correlation on the stone 

clearly indicates its vibrations. In this case, microcavitation is not the primary 

cause of Twinkling. In spectral Doppler one can see the broadband Twinkling 

spectrum along with the signs of tissue movements (Figure 2d). Figure 6d pre-


 
20

sents the frame from Sonoace 8000 EX Prime with the Twinkling Artifact on the 

stone surface. 

The source of the third data set was the gallbladder of Volunteer 3. Again, 

a substantial level of correlation in Figure 7b indicates that in this case micro-

cavitation is not the dominant cause of Twinkling: apparently, both types of 

Twinkling are present. 

CONCLUSIONS 

This study shows Twinkling Artifact as the result of elastic vibrations and cavi-

tation microbubbles. Having two causes Twinkling Artifact appears differently 

depending on the prevalence of one cause over the other and therefore can be 

divided into two types with each having its unique properties making it possible 

to separate the 1st type of Twinkling from the 2nd one. Elastic vibrations, as well 

as cavitation bubbles, can be detected even if they are several microns in size 

and cannot be seen with an optical microscope. Elastic vibrations depend on 

such parameters of the ultrasound machine as PRF, wall filter characteristics, 

power, color priority and can often can be suppressed by elevating the wall filter 

threshold in conjunction with pulse repetition frequency. Microcavitation mostly 

depends on the roughness of the surface of stone and the power of ultrasound 

emission and is highly unlikely to occur in rubber-based tissue-mimicking mate-

rials, which are generally used in ATS, Blue Phantom and Kyoto Kagaku ultra-

sound phantoms. Gammex phantoms contain tissue-mimicking watery jelly, in 

our experiments, the 2nd type of Twinkling was observed on thin nylon strings 

serving as targets for spatial resolution checkups. 

The next step should be to design and introduce a novel diagnostic mode 

for mineral detection which creation is based on the principles discovered in this 

study. The conducted analysis of Twinkling Artifact signals has demonstrated 

that kidney stones, urinary calculi and other dense objects could be detected 

with higher reliability by implementing specific algorithms. The goal for the fu-

ture is to improve these algorithms. With our technology a better version of CFI 


 
21

can be created, mapping only blood signals and suppressing redundant Twin-

kling Signs, or, on the contrary, emphasizing Twinkling Signs and concealing 

blood signals. 

Currently, the pilot versions of these modes exist as program modules for 

real-time processing inside Sonomed-500 ultrasound machine and non-real-time 

modules with additional features for analysis and experiments (such as, e.g., a 

broader range of wall-filtering algorithms, possibility to calculate parameter dis-

tributions, etc.) available for personal computers. The mode for stone detection 

overlays a map on top of a grayscale image, similarly to traditional CFI, the only 

difference is that it depicts not blood flow, but stones and calculi. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors wish to thank Tatiana Yakovleva and Lubov Pismeniuk for proof 

reading the article. This study was funded by the Russian Foundation for Basic 

Research, project no. 17-01-00601.  

REFERENCES 

Ahn SE, Moon SK, Lee DH, Park SJ, Lim JW, Kim HC, Lee HN. Sonography 

of 
Gastrointestinal 
Tract 
Diseases: 
Correlation 
With 
Computed 

Tomographic Findings and Endoscopy. J Ultrasound Med. 2016; 35:1543–

1571. 

Andreev VG, Korolkov ZA, Shanin AV, Demin IY. Motion of spherical 

microparticles in a viscoelastic medium under the action of acoustic 

radiation force. Bull Russ Acad Sci Phys. 2016; 80:1191–1196. 

Andreev VG, Shanin AV, Demin IY. Motion of a group of microparticles in a 

viscoelastic medium under the action of acoustic radiation force. Acoust 

Phys. 2014; 60:704–709. 


 
22

Behnam H, Hajjam A, Rakhshan H. Modeling Twinkling Artifact in 

Sonography. iCBBE. 2010 DOI: 10.1109/ICBBE.2010.5515795 

Bennett JM, Estrada JC, Shoemaker MB, Pretorius M. Twinkling Artifact 

Associated with Guidewire Placement. Anesth Analg. 2015; 121:69–71. 

Bjærum S, Torp H. Statistical Evaluation of Clutter Filters in Color Flow 

Imaging. Ultrasonics. 2000; 38:376–380. 

Сhoi MJ, Cho CH, Kang G, Yang J. Color Doppler Twinkling Artifact: Possible 

Mechanisms and Clinical Potential. Biomed Eng Lett. 2014; 4:41–54. 

Clarke R, Suresh P, Thomas R, Freeman S. Twinkle artefact in the ultrasound 

diagnosis of superficial epidermoid cysts. Ultrasound. 2016; 24:147–153. 

Fatemi M, Greenleaf JF. Vibro-acoustography: An imaging modality based on 

ultrasound-stimulated acoustic emission. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1999; 

96:6603–6608. 

Fujimoto Y, Shimono C, Shimoyama N, Osaki M. Twinkling Artifact of 

Microcalcifications in Breast Ultrasound. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2017; 

43:S21. 

Gao J, Hentel K, Rubin JM. Correlation between Twinkling artifact and color 

Doppler carrier frequency: Preliminary observations in renal calculi. 

Ultrasound Med Biol. 2012; 38:1534–1539. 

Gerbands JJ. On the relationships between SVD, KLT and PCA. Pattern 

Recognit. 1981; 14:375–381. 


 
23

Haluszkiewicz E, Zelesco M, Welman CJ, Wong DD, Ramsay D. Sonographic 

twinkle artefact in renal calculus detection: Impact of scanning factors in a 

phantom model. Australasian J Ultrasound Med. 2017; 20:106–114. 

Hassani H, Raynal G, Daudon M, Vallee JN. Imaging-based assessment of the 

mineral composition of urinary stones: An in vitro study of the combination 

of Hounsfield unit measurement in noncontrast helical computerized 

tomography and the twinkling artifact in color Doppler ultrasound. 

Ultrasound Med Biol. 2012; 38:803–810. 

Honarbakhsh A, Hajjam A, Behnam H, Rakhshan H, Khatami A. Twinkling 

Artifact on Color Doppler Echocardiography and its Dependence on 

Ultrasound Force. ICR. 2008. 

Jamzad A, Setarehdan SK. Noninvasive Prediction of Renal Stone Surface 

Irregularities by Numerical Analysis of the Color Doppler Twinkling 

Artifact: An Ex Vivo Study. J Ultrasound Med. 2017; 37:1211–1224. 

Kamaya A, Tuthill T, Rubin JM. Twinkling artifact on color Doppler 

sonography: Dependence on machine parameters and underlying cause. 

AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2003; 180:215–222. 

Kargel C, Höbenreich G, Trummer B, Insana MF. Adaptive Clutter Rejection 

Filtering in Ultrasonic Strain-Flow Imaging. IEEE Trans Ultrason 

Ferroelectr Freq Control. 2003; 50:824–835. 


 
24

Kargel C, Hoebenreich G, Plevnik G, Trummer B, Insana MF. Velocity 

Estimation and Adaptive Clutter Filtering for Color Flow Imaging. 

WSEAS. 2002; 1711–1716. 

Kaya C, Baseskioglu B, Degirmenci N, Yenilmez A, Baydemir C, Dönmez T. 

Relationship between Twinkle Artefacts and in vivo Biochemical 

Composition of Kidney Stones. Urol Int. 2016; 96:212–216. 

Khan S, Zahir MZ, Khan J, Mahsud ZS. Significance of “Twinkling” artifact on 

color Doppler ultrasound in detection of urinary calculi. KJMS. 2017; 

10:233–235. 

Kim HJ, Lee JY, Jang JY, Kim SJ, Kim SH, Han JK, Choi BI. Color Doppler 

Twinkling Artifacts from Gallstones: In Vitro Analysis Regarding their 

Compositions and Architectures. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2010; 36:2117–

2122. 

Lee JY, Kim HJ, Cho JY, Han D. Color and Power Doppler Twinkling Artifacts 

from Urinary Stones: Clinical Observations and Phantom Studies. AJR. 

2001; 176:1441–1445. 

Leonov D, Kulberg N, Gromov A, Fin V, Usanov M, Kovbas V, Sergunova K, 

Strelkov N, Vladzimirskiy A, Morozov S. Ultrasound Stone Detection: 

Discovery and Analysis of Two Stone-Related Components in Reflected 

Signal and Their Role in Etiology of Twinkling Artifact. Int J CARS. 

2018a; 13 (Suppl 1):10–11. DOI: 10.1007/s11548-018-1766-y. 


 
25

Leonov DV, Kulberg NS, Gromov АI, Morozov SP, Kim SYu. Causes of 

Ultrasound Doppler Twinkling Artifact. Acoust Phys. 2018b; 64(1):105–

111. DOI: 10.1134/S1063771018010128 

Leonov DV, Kulberg NS, Gromov АI, Morozov SP, Vladzimirskiy AV. Method 

for Detection Dense Objects with Doppler Ultrasound. Acoust Phys. 2018c; 

64(5):106–118. 

Leonov DV, Kulberg NS, Podmoskovnaya VA, Ivanova LS, Shipaeva AS, 

Vladzimirskiy AV, Morozov SP. Comparison of Filtering Techniques in 

Ultrasound Color Flow Imaging. Biomed Eng. 2019a; 53:97–101. 

Leonov DV, Kulberg NS, Podmoskovnaya VA, Ivanova LS, Shipaeva AS, 

Vladzimirskiy AV, Morozov SP. Clutter Filtering for Diagnostic 

Ultrasound Color Flow Imaging. Biomed Eng. 2019b; 53:217–221. 

Liu L, Funamoto K, Ozawa K. In vitro study of ultrasound radiation force-

driven Twinkling sign using PVA-H gel and glass beads tissue-mimicking 

phantom. J Med Ultrasonics. 2013a; 40:197–203. 

Liu L, Funamoto K, Tanabe M, Hayase T. Fundamental study on 

microcalcification detection using Twinkling sign (TS): The effect of 

stiffness of surrounding tissue on the appearance of TS. 35th Annual Int 

Conf of the IEEE EMBS. 2013b; 35:1390–1393. 

Lo MT, Hu K, Liu Y, Peng CK, Novak V. Multimodal Pressure Flow Analysis: 

Application of Hilbert Huang Transform in Cerebral Blood Flow 

Regulation. EURASIP J Adv Signal Process. 2008. 


 
26

Louvet A. Twinkling Artifact in Small Animal Color-Doppler Sonography. Vet 

Radiol Ultrasound. 2006 Jul-Aug;47(4):384-90. 

Løvstakken L. Signal Processing in Diagnostic Ultrasound: Algorithms for Real-

time Estimation and Visualization of Blood Flow Velocity. PhD 

Dissertation, Norwegian University of Science and Technology. 2007. 

Lu W, Sapozhnikov OA, Bailey MR, Kaczkowski PJ, Crum LA. Evidence for 

trapped surface bubbles as the cause for the twinkling artifact in ultrasound 

imaging. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2013; 39:1026–1038. 

Masch WR, Cohan RH, Ellis JH, Dillman JR, Rubin JM, Davenport MS. 

Clinical Effectiveness of Prospectively Reported Sonographic Twinkling 

Artifact for the Diagnosis of Renal Calculus in Patients Without Known 

Urolithiasis. Am J Roentgenol. 2016; 206:326–331. 

Mavahed P, Kreider W, Maxwell AD, Bailey MR, Freund JB. Ultrasound 

induced bubble clusters and tunnels in tissue-mimicking agar phantoms. 

Ultrasound Med Biol. 2017; 43:2318–2328. 

Naito Y, Tanabe M, Hashimoto H, Shimazaki T, Jibiki T, Nishimoto M. Effect 

of PRF on Microcalcification Detection in Color Flow Imaging (Part 2). 

Proc Symp Ultrasonic Electronics. 2014; 35:521–522. 

Nikolaeva AV, Tsysar SA, Sapozhnikov OA. Measuring the radiation force of 

megahertz ultrasound acting on a solid spherical scatterer. Acoust Phys. 

2016; 62:38–45. 


 
27

Pabst G, Strobel K, Zehnder J. The value of the twinkling artifact for the 

diagnosis of sialolithiasis of the large salivary glands. J Laryngol Otol. 

2018; 132:162–167. 

Polyanskiy A.I., Sapozhnikov O.A. Theoretical Study of the Cavitation 

Mechanism of the Twinkling Artefact in the Ultrasound Imaging of Kidney 

Stones. Bull Russ Acad Sci Phys. 2018; 82(5):545–549. 

Rahmouni A, Bargoin R, Herment A, Bargoin N, Vasile N. Color Doppler 

Twinkling artifact in Hyperechoic regions. Radiology. 1996; 199:269–271. 

Salmaslıoğlu A, Bulakçı M, Bakır B, Yılmaz R, Akpınar YE, Tefik T, Şanlı Ö, 

Özel S, Acunas B. The usefulness of agent emission imaging – high 

mechanical index ultrasound mode in the diagnosis of urolithiasis: A 

prospective preliminary study. Diagn Interv Radiol. 2018; 24(3):169-174. 

DOI 10.5152/dir.2018.18005. 

Şekerci CA, Yılmaz G, Yılmaz IB. Pure Testicular Cystic Teratoma in an Adult 

Patient. J Urol Surg. 2015; 4:214–215. 

Sen V, Imamoglu C, Kucukturkmen I, Degirmenci T, Bozkurt IH, Yonguc T, 

Aydogdu O, Gunlusoy B. Can Doppler ultrasonography Twinkling artifact 

be used as an alternative imaging modality to non-contrast-enhanced 

computed tomography in patients with ureteral stones? A prospective 

clinical study. Urolithiasis. 2017; 45:215–219. 

Seo CH, Wong KY. Twinkle Artifact Suppression in Ultrasound Color Flow. 

Patent US9320498B2. 2016. 


 
28

Shabana W, Bude RO, Rubin JM. Comparison between color Doppler twinkling 

artifact and acoustic shadowing for renal calculus detection: an in vitro 

study. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2009; 35:339–350. 

Shen Z, Feng N, Shen Y, Lee CH. An Improved Parametric Relaxation 

Approach to Blood Flow Signal Estimation with Single-Ensemble in Color 

Flow Imaging. J Med Biomed Eng. 2013; 33:309–318. 

Simon JC, Wang YN, Cunitz BW, Thiel J, Starr F, Liu Z, Bailey MR. Effect of 

carbon dioxide on the twinkling artifact in ultrasound imaging of kidney 

stones: A pilot study. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2017; 43:877–883. 

Tanabe M, Liu L, Tagawa N, Nishimoto M. Fundamental study of numerical 

simulation of ultrasound wave propagation in microcalcification for 

analysis of Twinkling sign. Acoust Sci & Tech. 2015; 36:164–166. 

Tian J, Xu L. Color Doppler Twinkling artifact in diagnosis of tuberculous 

pleuritis: A comparison with gray-scale ultrasonography and computed 

tomography. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2018; 44:1291–1295. 

Torp H. Clutter Rejection Filters in Color Flow Imaging: a Theoretical 

Approach. IEEE Trans. Ultrason., Ferroelect., Freq. Control. 1997; 44:417–

424. 

Tsao TF, Wu YL, Yu JM, Kang RJ, Tseng YH, Huang HH, Hung SW, Gueng 

MK, Lin YC, Tyan YS, Su CH. Color Doppler twinkling artifact of 

calcified cardiac valves in vitro: a not well known phenomenon in 

echocardiography. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2011; 37:386–392. 


 
29

Wang PD, Shen Y, Feng NZ. A novel clutter rejection scheme in color flow 

imaging. Ultrasonics. 2006; 44:303–305. 

Weinstein SP, Seghal C, Conant EF, Patton JA. Microcalcifications in Breast 

Tissue Phantoms Visualized with Acoustic Resonance Coupled with Power 

Doppler US: Initial Observations. Radiology. 2002; 224:265–269. 

Winkel RR, Kalhauge A, Fredfeldt KE. The usefulness of ultrasound colour-

Doppler twinkling artefact for detecting urolithiasis compared with low 

dose nonenhanced computerized tomography. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2012; 

38:1180–1187. 

Yang J, Kang G, Choi MJ. The role of the acoustic radiation force in color 

Doppler twinkling artifacts. Ultrasonography. 2015; 34:109–114. 

Yavuz A, Ceken K, Alimoglu E, Kabaalioglu A. The reliability of color Doppler 

“Twinkling” 
artifact 
for 
diagnosing 
millimetrical 
nephrolithiasis: 

comparison with B-Mode US and CT scanning results. J Med Ultrasonics. 

2015; 42:215–222. 

Yoo YM, Managuli R, Kim Y. Adaptive Clutter Filtering for Ultrasound Color 

Flow Imaging. Ultrasound Med Biol. 2003; 29:1311–1320. 

Yu ACH, Cobbold RSC. Single-Ensemble-Based Eigen-Processing Methods for 

Color Flow Imaging — Part I. The Hankel-SVD Filter. IEEE Trans 

Ultrason Ferroelectr Freq Control. 2008; 3:559–572. 

Yu ACH, Johnston KW, Cobbold RSC. Frequency-Based Signal Processing for 

Ultrasound Color Flow Imaging. Can Acoust. 2007; 2:11–23. 


 
30

Yu ACH, Løvstakken L. Eigen-Based Clutter Filter Design for Ultrasound Color 

Flow Imaging: a Review. IEEE Trans Ultrason Ferroelectr Freq Control. 

2010; 5:1096–1111. 


 
31

FIGURES 

 

Fig. 1. Twinkling Artifact as a rapid change of shades and colors is seen on an 

extracted from a kidney stone (a-c) and a circular contrast scattering target in-

side a phantom (d-f) (frames d-f are borrowed from (Yang et al. 2015)). Images 

obtained with 100 Hz, 300 Hz and 600 Hz PRF. 


 
32

 

Fig. 2. Images acquired in ultrasound Doppler spectral mode. (a) Typical broad-

band spectrum obtained with a custom-designed phantom representing the 1st 

type of Twinkling at 3 kHz PRF. (b) Narrowband spectrum obtained at 500 Hz 

PRF with a commercial breast elastography phantom representing the 2nd type of 

Twinkling. Arrows point at the spectral harmonics associated with the frequency 

of vibrations. (c) The 2nd type of Twinkling registered with the additional 250 

Hz vibration source at 2 kHz PRF. (d) In vivo spectrum observed in kidney 

stones at 5 kHz PRF containing the 1st type of Twinkling and unfiltered tissue 

signals. 


 
33

 

Fig. 3. Typical Doppler signals: signals (a-j) were predicted by the equation (2); 

signals (k-t) were observed in phantoms. Arbitrary units are used along the axes 

‘Re’, ‘Im’ and ‘Value’; along the ‘Pulse number’ axis is the consecutive number 

of the current pulse within the Doppler sequence. The real part refers to the orig-

inal signal; the imaginary part refers to its Hilbert transform. 


 
34

 

Fig. 4. Distribution of absolute values of correlation between the real and imagi-

nary parts of the typical blood signals and the signals from the regions of both 

types of Twinkling. 

 

Fig. 5. Picture (a) corresponds to the grayscale image of the neck area; (b, c) – to 

the same frame with the superimposed real-imaginary correlation map and pow-

er map, respectively. Maps demonstrate relatively low correlation levels and 

strong power typical for the predominance of cavitation in Doppler sequences. 

Image (d) contains the CFI frame from the reference ultrasound machine 

demonstrating the presence of Twinkling Artifact. Arrows point at the calculus. 


 
35

 

Fig. 6. Experiments with in vivo kidney data. Sonogram (a) reveals the kidney 

stone producing acoustic shadowing. In image (b), the correlation levels are 

relatively high; in image (c), the power is relatively weak demonstrating the 

predominance of elastic vibrations in Doppler sequences. Image (d) is the refer-

ence CFI frame demonstrating the presence of Twinkling on the kidney stone. 

 

Fig. 7. Experiments with in vivo gallbladder data. The gallbladder contains 

stones (a). Strong correlation levels in image (b) and moderate power in image 

(c) indicate the predominance of the 2nd Type of Twinkling. 


 
36

TABLE 

Table 1. Characterization of dependence on machine parameters by different 

authors: ↓ – Twinkling decreases when parameter increases; ↑ – Twinkling 

increases when parameter increases; 0 – Twinkling was indifferent to changes of 

parameter values; Δ – uncertain; ⊙ – focus on target 

Study

CFI 

gain

Color 

priority

Carrier 

frequency

B 

gain

Focal 

position

PRF

Wall 

filter

Behnam et al. 2010
⊙

Choi et al. 2014
↑
↑
↓
↓
↓
↓
↓

Clarke et al. 2016
↓
0

Gao et al. 2012
↓

Haluskiewicz et al. 2017
↑
↑
↓
↓

Kamaya et al. 2003
Δ
Δ

Lee et al. 2001
↓
0

Louvet 2006
↑

Lu et al. 2013
↓

Naito et al. 2014
↓

Rahmouni et al. 1996
0
0
0
0

Shabana et al. 2009
↑
↑
0
0
0
0

Wang et al. 2011
↑
↑
↓
Δ
↑

Weinstein et al. 2002
↓

Yang et al. 2015
↓

 


