1

Large Resistance Change on Magnetic Tunnel Junction based Molecular Spintronics Devices

Pawan Tyagi1,2*, and Edward Friebe1, 

University of the District of Columbia, Department of Mechanical Engineering, 4200 Connecticut Avenue 

NW Washington DC-20008, USA1

Email*: ptyagi@udc.edu

University of Kentucky, Chemical and Materials Engineering Department, 177 F Paul Anderson Hall, 

Lexington, KY-40506, USA2

Abstract: Molecular bridges covalently bonded to two ferromagnetic electrodes can transform 
ferromagnetic materials and produce intriguing spin transport characteristics. This paper 
discusses the impact of molecule induced strong coupling on the spin transport. To study 
molecular coupling effect organometallic molecular complex (OMC) was bridged between two 
ferromagnetic electrodes of a magnetic tunnel junction (Ta/Co/NiFe/AlOx/NiFe/Ta) along the 
exposed side edges. OMCs induced strong iter-ferromagnetic electrode coupling to yield drastic 
changes in transport properties of the magnetic tunnel junction testbed at the room temperature.
These OMCs also transformed the magnetic properties of magnetic tunnel junctions. SQUID and 
ferromagnetic resonance studies provided insightful data to explain transport studies on the 
magnetic tunnel junction based molecular spintronics devices.   

Key Words: Molecular spintronics; magnetic tunnel junctions; magnetic molecules; 

Introduction: Connecting magnetic molecules between two ferromagnetic electrodes opens 
flood gate of opportunities for observing new phenomenon and making novel devices [1, 2]. 
Initial studies focused on sandwiching molecules between two ferromagnetic leads [3]. In a more 
popular approach molecules were placed in a break-junction on a nanowire on a planar insulating 
substrate [4]. However, these two approaches have been extremely difficult to mass produce 
robust molecular spintronics devices [5]. With conventional approaches it is also almost 
impossible to conduct extensive magnetic studies to explore the true effect of molecules on the 
magnetic properties of the molecular spintronics devices [6]. To date most of the experimental 
studies have only focused on the transport studies- no direct magnetic measurements were 
performed [3, 4, 7]. To overcome the limitations of the conventional molecular spintronics 
devices magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJ), produced by sandwiching an insulator between two 
ferromagnetic electrodes, were utilized as the test bed [5, 6, 8]. Under this approach an MTJ with 
the exposed side edges can enables the covalent bonding of desired molecular channels onto the 
two ferromagnetic electrodes along the junction perimeter [5]. These molecules can be single 
molecular magnets [9], porphyrin [10], single ion molecules, and DNA [11]. This approach is 
equally capable of utilizing alkane like simple molecules with low spin orbit coupling and 
Zeeman splitting. The MTJ based molecular spintronics device (MTJMSD) approach enabled us 
to study the impact of paramagnetic molecules on the spin transport and magnetic properties of 
MTJs. This paper discusses experimental studies conducted before and after transforming an
MTJ into MTJMSD. We report the observation of paramagnetic molecule induced dramatic 
changes in spin transport of an MTJ. We also report complementary SQUID and magnetic 
resonance studies exploring the underlying mechanism behind the impact of covalently bonded 
molecular channels between two ferromagnets of an MTJ testbed. 

Experimental details: To produce MTJ for MTJMSD, a bilayer ferromagnetic electrode was 
deposited by sequentially depositing ~ 3 nm tantalum (Ta), 5-7 nm cobalt (Co) and 5-3 nm NiFe 


2

with 79% Ni by weight. In the next step photolithography was performed to create a cavity with 
vertical side edges (Fig. 1b). This cavity helped defining the lateral dimensions of the deposition 
of a 2 nm thick alumina (AlOx) (Fig. 1c), and top electrode comprising a ~7 nm thick NiFe and ~ 
3 nm tantalum (Ta) (Fig. 1d). The deposition of AlOx and top electrode via the same photoresist 
(PR) cavity ensured that along the MTJ edges the minimum gap between the two ferromagnetic
electrodes is equal to the AlOx insulator thickness (Fig. 1a and g). The liftoff of PR produced 
Ta/Co/NiFe/AlOx/NiFe/Ta MTJ (Fig. 1d). This MTJ possessed exposed side edges (Fig. 1f).
Along the exposed side edges organometallic molecular complexes (OMCs) [12] were bridged 
across the AlOx to complete the MTJMSD fabrication. These OMCs exhibited S=6 spin state in 
the bulk powder form at <10 K [12]. An OMC possessed cyanide-bridged octametallic molecular 
cluster, [(pzTp)FeIII(CN)3]4[NiII(L)]4[O3SCF3]4
[(pzTp) = tetra(pyrazol-1-yl)borate; L = 1-

S(acetyl)tris(pyrazolyl)decane][12] chemical structure. With the help of thiol functional groups, 
an array of OMCs were covalently-linked onto the NiFe layer of the top and bottom electrodes
(Fig.1f). The process details for
attaching 
OMCs 
and 
the 

fabrication of tunnel junction with 
the 
exposed 
side 
edges 
are 

published elsewhere [13, 14]. 
NiFe
film 
was 
extensively 

employed in MTJMSDs. NiFe 
electrode possessed many useful 
attribute to enable the fabrication 
of an MTJMSD [15, 16]. As 
shown in the reflectance study on 
the NiFe surface, NiFe is stable in 
the ambient conditions and start
oxidizing upon heating around 90 
ºC (Fig. 1g). We also tested the 
efficacy of liftoff based molecular 
device fabrication by attaching 
and detaching the OMC between 
gold 
(Au) 
and 
nickel 
(Ni) 

electrode
(Fig. 1h). For the 

magnetic studies cylindrical MTJs 
were produced by the utilization 
of photoresist cavities (Fig. 1i). 
After the thin film deposition and 
liftoff of photoresist we produced 
an array of ~7000 MTJ cylindrical 
pillars
(Fig.
1j). Subsequently,

MTJs
were 
transformed 
into 

MTJMSDs. 
SQUID 
and 

ferromagnetic 
resonance
were 

performed as per the details 
furnished elsewhere [8]. 

Fig.1: MTJMSD fabrication steps: (a) deposit the bottom 
ferromagnetic (bottom-FM) electrode on the insulating 
substrate, (b) creates photoresist (PR) cavity pattern for the 
deposition of (c) ~2 nm AlOx and (d) top ferromagnetic 
electrode (top-FM). (e) Liftoff step produces an MTJ with the 
exposed sides where (f) OMC molecules are chemically 
bridged across the AlOx insulator to produce an MTJMSD. (g) 
NiFe films is determined by reflectivity study. (h) OMC were 
connected and disconnected on a tunnel junction to retain bare 
tunnel junction transport attributes. Fabrication steps for 
magnetic studies of MTJMSD. (i) In ~7000 photoresist cavities 
thin films were deposited to mass produce (j)an array of 
cylindrical MTJs with exposed edges. (k) Individual MTJ 
cylinders were transformed into MTJMSD by attaching OMCs.  


3

Results and discussion: It must be noted that we formed covalent bonding between the OMCs 
and the NiFe ferromagnet using thiol functional groups. Thiol anchoring group are known for 
establishing strong coupling with the metal electrodes in molecular devices [7]. Simple thiol 
assembly on non-magnetic gold surface was effective in developing permanent magnetism [17].
Also, self-assembly of molecules with thiols end group has enhanced environmental stability and 
corrosion resistance of ferromagnets[18]. We noted that OMCs interfacing with two 
ferromagnets of an MTJ influenced the magnetic properties of the ferromagnetic electrodes [8]. 
Recent, theories developed for interface based devices confirmed that molecule can significantly 
impact density of states of the ferromagnets [19, 20]. Our prior experimental and theoretical
studies [8] also indicated that MTJMSD discussed here are inclined to develop strong coupling 
between thiol-terminated OMC and NiFe ferromagnetic electrodes.

To study the impact of OMC we conducted current-voltage (I-V) studies on MTJ testbed before 
and after transforming them into MTJMSDs. Generally, OMCs lowered the current below the 
bare MTJ’s leakage current level via the ~ 2 nm AlOx tunneling barrier (Fig. 2a). In the specific 
case discussed here, OMCs lowered the current by one order for the Ta/Co/NiFe/AlOx/NiFe/Ta 

MTJ (Fig. 2b). However, after multiple current –voltage studies overall MTJMSD current settled 
in the high current state. Higher current state also appeared after magneto-resistance (MR) 
studies. The magnitude of high current state could be one to two orders of magnitude higher than 
the leakage current via the ~ 2 nm AlOx tunneling barrier. We performed MR studies to 
investigate the effect of magnetic field on the MTJMSD transport. We observed that application 
of in plane magnetic field was effective in bringing MTJMSD into suppressed current state by 
several orders (Fig. 2c). However, it appears that application of 50 mV voltage in MR studies
promoted the higher current state MTJMSD (Fig. 2c). Hence, during MR studies a competition 
occurred between voltage and magnetic field to control the MTJMSD current state. In the first 
MR study (MR1), the application of magnetic field switched MTJMSD’s current state by more 
than three orders (Fig. 2c). In the second MR study (MR2) higher current remained stable for up 
to ~170 Oe and then switched to lower current state (Fig. 2c). In 3rd MR study (MR3) current 
reduction was not sudden or sharp. MTJMSD transitioned through several current values with 
increasing magnetic field (Fig. 2c). The fourth MR study (MR4) did not show complete 

Fig. 2: Current-voltage study of the MTJ (a) before and after attaching (b) OMCs across the tunnel 
barrier along the exposed edges. (c) Magneto-resistance (MR) studies on MTJMSD showing several 
orders of change current at 50 mV bias and under in-plane magnetic field. (d) Effect of changing 
magnetic field direction from inplane to out of the plane on MTJMSD.


4

transition from sub µA to fully suppressed current state (Fig. 2c). It appears that prolong voltage 
application promoted higher current state. In the sixth MR study (MR6) MTJMSD lowered to 
suppress current state and then sprung back to higher current state. Finally, during the seventh
MR study (MR7) MTJMSD settled in the higher current state. This behavior was observed on 
multiple devices. Another device exhibiting this behavior is shown in the supplementary material
(Fig. 1S). Even though similar pattern repeated on multiple samples, but switching fields were 
not consistent over multiple MR studies. 

We also observed that the application of alternating inplane and out of the plane magnetic field 
was effective in switching MTJMSD between high and low current state (Fig. 2d). The 
application of 200 Oe magnetic fields was applied inplane and out of the plane. MTJMSD was 
subjected to 50 mV bias during this study. Switching off magnetic field appeared to stabilize the 
higher current state (Fig. 2d). 

We further investigated the suppressed current state. It is also noteworthy that due to the 
instrument limitation we were not able to capture exact transport properties of the MTJMSD in 
the suppressed current state during MR studies discussed in figure 2c-d. The observed sub nA 
level suppressed current state during MR study was more due to the instrument measurement 
limit. For the study of suppressed current state a Kithley 6430 source meter with fA level 
measurement capability was utilized. For this study another sample with exact same 
configuration was prepared in the different batch. This sample also showed consistent behavior 
and MTJ testbed current reduced below the leakage level after bridging of the OMC channels 
(Fig. 3a inset). This behavior matched with most of the samples we studied and two other 
samples (Fig. 2 and Fig 1S in the supplementary material) discussed in this paper. Knowing that 
magnetic field produced suppressed current state we applied magnetic field by using a permanent 
magnet producing ~1000 Oe inplane magnetic field in MTJMSD vicinity. As expected 
MTJMSD current reduced and settled in sub pA range at room temperature (Fig. 3a). This 
suppressed current state was persistent over multiple I-V studies. Flipping the biasing direction 
from top electrode to bottom electrode produced minor impact on transport (Fig. 3b). Results 
from three consecutive I-Vs are shown in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b. However, after leaving the sample 
intact for some time brought the MTJMSD back in the higher current state. To ensure that 
electrodes to the junction were intact the transport through the top and bottom electrodes were 
studied before and after setting MTJMSD into suppressed current state. Current through top 

Fig. 3 (a) Stabilized pA level current state on MTJMSD. Inset of this panel shows bare tunnel 
junction current before and after hosting OMC molecular channels. (b) Effect of changing biasing 
lead on pA level current state. (c) Current-voltage study through bottom electrode before and after 
the stabilization of pA level current state.  


5

electrode was almost the same before and after the setting of suppressed current state. However, 
the bottom electrode appeared to show reduced current state, but it was still almost six orders 
higher than the magnitude of the observed suppressed current state (Fig. 3c). 

It is highly intriguing that ~10,000 OMCs along the MTJ edges produced a suppressed current 
state below the leakage current level through the planar area (Fig. 2-3). This observation of OMC 
induced current suppression was only observed with the magnetic electrodes. On the other hand,
nonmagnetic tunnel junctions, prepared with gold, copper, and tantalum electrodes, exhibited an
increase in current due to the addition of OMCs channels along the side edges. The key 
difference in the magnetic and nonmagnetic electrode is the unequal density of states for the spin 
up and spin down electrons. Spin transport through a MTJ depends on the spin density of states 
of the ferromagnetic electrodes. A plausible reason behind the current suppression may be due to 
OMC induced changes in magnetic properties or spin density of states of the ferromagnetic 
electrodes. 

In the prior study, we have provided insight regarding OMC induced impact on inter-
ferromagnetic electrode coupling and magnetic ordering of the ferromagnetic electrode itself [8]. 
This prior work presented experimental SQUID, Ferromagnetic resonance (FMR), and magnetic 
force microscopy studies and it also presented theoretical insight from Monte Carlo simulations
[8]. However, the top electrode in the current study differed with previous study. In the current 
study top electrode is made up of ~ 7 nm NiFe with ~ 3 nm Ta on top. In the previous study top 
electrode was ~10 nm thick NiFe. To investigate direct correlation between magnetic properties 
and the transport studies discussed in Fig. 2 and 3 separate SQUID magnetometer and FMR 
studies were conducted (Fig. 4). These studies were performed on an array of ~ 7000 cylindrical 
MTJs before and after treating them with OMCs. The fabrication process for the cylindrical MTJ 
is shown in Fig. 1i-k. The experimental details for SQUID magnetometer and FMR studies are 
discussed elsewhere [8]. SQUID study showed that the magnetic moment of the MTJ 

Fig. 4 Magnetic studies of 7000 MTJMSD by SQUID and FMR. (a) SQUID magnetometer study of 
MTJ before and after hosting OMC channels across AlOx insulator. Top left inset shows that OMC 
can bridge across AlOx and also bond with the exposed magnetic layers, mainly NiFe. Bottom right 
inset show magnetic study of NiFe before and after interacting with OMCs. (b) FMR study of MTJ 
before and after hosting OMC channels. Inset graph shows the impact of OMC on NiFe film only. 


6

(TaCoNiFe/AlOx/NiFe/Ta) almost doubled after hosting OMC molecular channels (Fig. 4a). 
This is an average effect from 7000 cylindrical MTJs and clearly suggests that OMCs 
dramatically affected the magnetic moment of MTJ. This study also confirmed that OMC impact 
is strong and can spread all over the microscopic junction. The mechanism behind doubling of 
magnetic moment is not clear to us. However, it is quite well known that a molecule with net 
spin state can enable spin filtering and that may significantly enhance the degree of spin 
polarization. For instance if spin polarization for ferromagnet changes from ~0.5 to 1 then 
magnetic moment for each electrode may double to produce observed enhancement (Fig. 4a). 

It is noteworthy that only a small fraction of OMCs formed bridge across insulator. Most of the 
OMCs stick to the NiFe ferromagnetic electrode regions away from the tunnel barrier (top left 
inset of the Fig. 4a). SQUID magnetometer study was conducted before and after treating 
unpatterned NiFe film with OMCs. SQUID magnetometer study did not produce any noticeable 
change due to OMC (bottom right inset Fig.4a). This study also confirmed that magnetometer 
performed accurate measurement. This study also suggested that OMCs that matters in an 
MTJMSD are those which bridged across insulating AlOx. We hypothesized that other magnetic 
measurements must be able to record such a strong OMC induced change in MTJ properties. We 
performed ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) at room temperature and found that OMC treated 
sample with ~7000 MTJs was starkly different from the untreated MTJ. FMR of the OMC 
treated sample showed one pronounced resonance mode around ~1200 Oe. However, bare MTJ 
produced an optical mode (lower intensity mode) around ~650 Oe and acoustic mode (higher 
intensity mode) around 1100 Oe. According to FMR theory of coupled ferromagnetic films the 
bare MTJ seems to possess ferromagnetic coupling [21]. Luckily, prior theoretical studies have 
explored the FMR spectra from analogous system. The development of very strong coupling 
between the ferromagnetic electrodes produced one resonance mode [22]. Under strong coupling 
limit two ferromagnetic electrodes behave like one ferromagnetic electrode [22]. Similar to 
SQUID magnetometer study we also investigated the FMR response from the NiFe. OMC 
treatment did not produce significant change (inset Fig.4b). Similar to SQUID magnetometer 
study, FMR study also confirmed that OMC bridges strongly influenced the magnetic coupling 
between two ferromagnetic electrodes of the MTJ and dominated the spin transport. 

At this point we are unsure about why the application of magnetic field produced the suppressed 
current state on MTJMSD (Fig. 2-3). We hypothesize that the magnetic field play a role in 
configuring the large mass of the ferromagnetic electrodes in accordance with the molecule 
influenced area. It is noteworthy that overall magnetic leads are nearly one cm long and hence 
whole length of ferromagnetic leads cannot be influenced by the molecular junction. The 
application of magnetic field may optimally aligned magnetic moment of the ferromagnetic 
electrode. Disciplining the large mass of ferromagnet may promote or restrict the transport of 
spins through the highly ordered OMC affected junction. We also observed that repeating I-V
studies or prolong application of external voltage promoted the higher current state on an 
MTJMSD. We hypothesize that the application of voltage assist in transporting unpolarized 
electrons from the bulk of the leads into the OMC affected regions and hence, promoting 
disorder to yield settlement of higher current state. Pinpointing exact mechanism is yet to be 
done and will require first principle theoretical studies and extensive magnetic studies.

Based on the I-V study we estimated the effective barrier heights and barrier thicknesses using 
Brinkman tunneling models [23]. A bare MTJ exhibited ~2.2 nm barrier thickness and ~0.7 eV 


7

barrier height. After hosting OMC channels along the exposed side edges an MTJ become 
MTJMSD and showed very different barrier properties in the ~micro amp range high current 
state and pA range suppressed current state. According to modelling results in the µA range high 
current state an MTJMSD exhibited ~ 1.2 nm barrier thicknesses and ~0.4 eV barrier height. The 
same MTJMSD in the pA level suppressed current state (Fig. 3) exhibited ~1.4 nm barrier 
thickness and ~ 2 eV barrier heights. Importantly the barrier thickness after hosting OMCs is 
equivalent to the length of a decane molecule chain that connected the core of OMC molecules to 
the NiFe electrode in an MTJMSD (Fig. 6a). 

We investigated the effective density of states before and after transforming MTJ into an 
MTJMSD. According to prior literature density of state in the molecule affected regions depends 
on barrier height (ϕ) and the molecular coupling strength (ω) [19]. One can calculate the 
effective density of states (D(E)) the following equation:

𝐷(𝐸) =

𝜔/2𝜋

(𝜙)2+(𝜔

2)2
(1)

We estimated the relative increase in the strength of exchange coupling by utilizing the following 
equation [24]. 

. )
0 exp(
d
J


−
=
(2)

According to the analysis of charge transport data, barrier thickness (d) decreased from ~2.2 nm to ~1.2 
nm range. This effective barrier thickness of MTJMSD corresponded to alkane tether length of ~1.2 nm.  
The MTJMSD barrier thickness was comparable in the high and low current state. The barrier height (ϕ)
can be utilized to obtain tunneling decay factor β according to the relation β =10.2 nm-1√(ϕ/eV) [25]. In 
the equation (2) J0 correspond the coupling energy between two magnetic atoms that decreased 
exponentially with barrier thickness and β. According to literature Ni-Ni atoms coupling energy is ~12 
µeV [26]. It is noteworthy that in this simplified analysis we have not incorporated spin fluctuation that 
may dramatically enhance the exchange coupling [2, 27]. The density of the state of bare MTJ was 
calculated to be ~10-9 states/eV for barrier thickness 2.2 nm and 0.7 eV barrier heights. The MTJMSD’s 
density of states in the high current state was ~10-7 states/eV. However, the density of states in suppressed 
current state was ~10-13 states/eV. It is noteworthy that spin polarization has been routinely calculated by 
the high and low current states for the magnetic electrodes in magnetic tunnel junctions [28-30].  Nearly 
six orders of magnitude change in the high and low current states suggests that OMC have produced
nearly 100% spin polarized magnetic electrodes. We believe that OMC’s spin state played a crucial 
role in spin filtering [31]. The OMC molecule is capable of attaining the S=6 spin state in the 
isolated state [12, 32] . We presumed that this S=6 state is still applicable when an OMC is 
bonded to the ferromagnetic electrodes (Fig. 6a). In this state, it seems that iron (Fe) and Ni 
atoms of the OMC clusters are open for accommodating only one specific type of spin due to 
selection rule and leading to spin filtering [7].We also hypothesize that method of chemically 
bonding OMC to the magnetic electrode also played crucial role. Several thousands of OMCs are 
connected to two ferromagnetic electrodes via alkane barrier and thiol chemical bonding (Fig.
6a). We utilized thiol (-S) bonds to form covalent bonding between OMC and NiFe to produce 
very strong molecule induced exchange coupling. Prior studies illustrated the strong impact of 
thiolated molecules on the magnetic and transport properties of metallic electrodes [7, 17, 33].

Our magnetic studies provide clear evidences that OMC produced transformative exchange 
coupling on an MTJ [8] with similar thin film configuration as discussed here. Our experimental 


8

FMR study also confirmed that OMC have dramatically enhanced the exchange coupling 
between top and bottom ferromagnetic electrodes (Fig. 5b). We noted that adding Ta on top of 
the previously studied MTJ has been helpful in observing current switching in the high and low 
current state of the MTJMSD. However, we also noted that FMR response from the MTJ with Ta 
(Fig. 5b) and without Ta on top [8] were very different. The further exploration about Ta role 
will be part of future study and beyond the scope of this paper.   

We conjectured that strong OMC based coupling impacted the whole microscopic junctions and 
changed the spin polarization of the ferromagnetic electrodes. Recent studies shine light on 
molecule impact on the spin density of states on ferromagnets near interface regions [20]. 
According to our SQUID magnetometer study on an array of ~7000 MTJ OMC showed almost 
100% increase in the magnetic moment (Fig. 5a). OMCs seem to change the spin density of 
states of the ferromagnetic electrodes. The spin density of state before OMC interaction (Fig. 6b) 
is presumably adjusted to new configuration (Fig. 6c) leading to high spin polarization. The 
overall tunneling barrier energy band diagram has changed from AlOx dominant (Fig. 6d) to 
OMC dominant (Fig. 6e-f). We hypothesize that to establish high current state majority spin 
density of states of the two ferromagnetic electrodes is parallel to each other (Fig. 6e). The 
effective barrier height in this state is ~0.4 eV, as calculated from the experimental result (Fig.
6e). However, in the suppressed current state we hypothesize that spin transport depends on the 
net energy barrier with respect to the minority spin density of states on an MTJMSD (Fig. 6f). In 
this state the majority and minority spins are antiparallel to each other and hence do not allow 
transport. In this state transport between minority and majority spin is possible (Fig. 6g). Due to 
selection rule spin from majority band cannot tunnel to antiparallel majority band of the other 
magnetic electrode (Fig. 6g). Similarly, the spin from minority band of one magnetic electrode 
cannot tunnel to antiparallel minority band of the other magnetic electrode (Fig. 6g). 

Conclusions: We discussed the observation of molecule induced dramatic changes in the 
magnetic and transport properties of the magnetic tunnel junctions. OMCs were chemically 

Fig. 6: (a) Schematic of an OMC chemically bonded with two NiFe layers along the MTJ edge. 
Simplified molecular structure shows energy levels of the Fe and Ni atoms. Density of states of a 
ferromagnetic electrode (b) before, and (c) after affected by the molecular channels. (d) Tunneling 
barrier between two ferromagnetic layers for a bare magnetic tunnel junction.  OMC provide 
intermediate quantum well like energy levels for the spin transport. The conceptual depiction of 
tunneling barrier between ferromagnet and OMC energy level in the (e) high current state and (f) 
suppressed current state. (g) Possible spin pathways in the suppressed current state.   


9

bonded to ferromagnetic electrodes to bridge them across the insulating spacer along the exposed 
edges. These molecules dominated the MTJMSD’s spin transport and produced several orders 
gap in the high and low current state at room temperature. The estimation of transport data in the 
low and high current states indicated that molecules changed the spin density of states. Potential 
reason behind modification in the density of states is the molecule induced spin filtering effect.
Transport studies are strongly supported by the experimental magnetic studies. It is also 
noteworthy that our experimental studies provide a platform to connect a vast variety of 
ferromagnetic leads to the broader array of high potential molecules such as single molecular 
magnets [1], porphyrin [10], and single ion molecules [34] etc. The strength of exchange 
coupling between ferromagnetic electrodes and molecules can be tailored by utilizing different 
tethers and terminal functional groups [7]. The MTJMSD can provide advanced computer 
devices by serving as a testbed for the molecule based quantum computation devices [34-37].  

Acknowledgments: Pawan Tyagi thanks Dr. Bruce Hinds and Department of Chemical and 
Materials engineering at University of Kentucky for facilitating experimental work on MTJMSD 
during his PhD. OMC were produced Dr. Stephen Holmes’s group. The preparation of this paper 
and supporting studies were in part supported by National Science Foundation-Award (Contract 
# HRD-1238802), Department of Energy/National Nuclear Security Agency (Subaward No. 
0007701-1000043016), and Air Force Office of Sponsored Research(Award #FA9550-13-1-
0152). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the author(s) 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of any funding agency and authors’ affiliations.   

References

[1]
Bogani L and Wernsdorfer W 2008 Molecular spintronics using single-molecule magnets Nat. 
Mater. 7 179-86

[2]
Pasupathy A N, Bialczak R C, Martinek J, Grose J E, Donev L A K, McEuen P L and Ralph D C 2004 
The Kondo effect in the presence of ferromagnetism Science 306 86-9

[3]
Petta J R, Slater S K and Ralph D C 2004 Spin-dependent transport in molecular tunnel junctions 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 136601

[4]
Pasupathy A N, Park J, Chang C, Soldatov A V, Lebedkin S, Bialczak R C, Grose J E, Donev L A K, 
Sethna J P, Ralph D C and McEuen P L 2005 Vibration-assisted electron tunneling in C-140 
transistors Nano Lett. 5 203-7

[5]
Tyagi P 2011 Multilayer edge molecular electronics devices: a review J. Mater. Chem. 21 4733-42

[6]
Tyagi P, Friebe E and Baker C 2015 Advantages of Prefabricated Tunnel Junction Based 
Molecular Spintronics Devices NANO 10 1530002

[7]
Heersche H B, de Groot Z, Folk J A, van der Zant H S J, Romeike C, Wegewijs M R, Zobbi L, 
Barreca D, Tondello E and Cornia A 2006 Electron transport through single Mn-12 molecular 
magnets Phys. Rev. Lett. 96 206801

[8]
Tyagi P, Baker C and D'Angelo C 2015 Paramagnetic Molecule Induced Strong Antiferromagnetic 
Exchange Coupling on a Magnetic Tunnel Junction Based Molecular Spintronics Device 
Nanotechnology 26 305602

[9]
Rojas-Dotti C and Martínez-Lillo J 2017 Thioester-functionalised and oxime-based hexametallic 
manganese (iii) single-molecule magnets RSC Advances 7 48841-7

[10]
Jurow M, Schuckman A E, Batteas J D and Drain C M 2010 Porphyrins as molecular electronic 
components of functional devices Coord. Chem. Rev. 254 2297-310

[11]
Zwolak M and Di Ventra M 2002 DNA spintronics App. Phys. Lett. 81 925-7


10

[12]
Li D F, Parkin S, Wang G B, Yee G T, Clerac R, Wernsdorfer W and Holmes S M 2006 An S=6 
cyanide-bridged octanuclear (Fe4Ni4II)-Ni-III complex that exhibits slow relaxation of the 
magnetization J. Am. Chem. Soc. 128 4214-5

[13]
Tyagi P, Li D F, Holmes S M and Hinds B J 2007 Molecular electrodes at the exposed edge of 
metal/insulator/metal trilayer structures J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129 4929-38

[14]
Tyagi P 2012 Fabrication of Tunnel Junction based Molecular Electronics and Spintronics Devices 
J. Nanoparticle Res. 14 1195

[15]
Tyagi P, Friebe E and Baker C 2015 Addressing the challenges of using ferromagnetic electrodes 
in the magnetic tunnel junction-based molecular spintronics devices J.Nanoparticle Res. 17 452

[16]
Gobbi M, Pascual A, Golmar F, Llopis R, Vavassori P, Casanova F and Hueso L E 2012 C-60/NiFe 
combination as a promising platform for molecular spintronics Organic Electronics 13 366-72

[17]
Crespo P, Litran R, Rojas T C, Multigner M, de la Fuente J M, Sanchez-Lopez J C, Garcia M A, 
Hernando A, Penades S and Fernandez A 2004 Permanent magnetism, magnetic anisotropy, and 
hysteresis of thiol-capped gold nanoparticles Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 087204

[18]
Devillers S, Hennart A, Delhalle J and Mekhalif Z 2011 1-Dodecanethiol Self-Assembled 
Monolayers on Cobalt Langmuir 27 14849-60

[19]
Galbiati M 2015 Molecular Spintronics : From Organic Semiconductors to Self-Assembled 
Monolayers (Switzerland: Springer International Publishing)

[20]
Cinchetti M, Dediu V A and Hueso L E 2017 Activating the molecular spinterface Nat Mater 16
507-15

[21]
Linder J and Baberschke K 2003 Ferromagnetic resonance in coupled ultrathin films J. Phys. -
Condens. Matter 15 S465-S78

[22]
Layadi A and Artman J O 1990 FERROMAGNETIC-RESONANCE IN A COUPLED 2-LAYER SYSTEM J. 
Mag. Mag. Mat. 92 143-54

[23]
Brinkman W F, Dynes R C and Rowell J M 1970 Tunneling Conductance of Asymmetrical Barriers 
J. Appl. Phys. 41 1915

[24]
Xu L, Ma Z S and Wei D 2015 Spin orbital torque driven magnetization switching in magnetic 
tunnel junction with inter-layer exchange coupling J. App. Phys. 117

[25]
Cui X D, Zarate X, Tomfohr J, Sankey O F, Primak A, Moore A L, Moore T A, Gust D, Harris G and 
Lindsay S M 2002 Making electrical contacts to molecular monolayers Nanotechnology 13 5-14

[26]
Hammerling R, Zabloudil J, Weinberger P, Lindner J, Kosubek E, Nunthel R and Baberschke K 
2003 Interlayer exchange coupling and magnetic anisotropy in prototype trilayers: Ab initio 
theory versus experiment Physical Review B 68

[27]
Baberschke K 2008 Why are spin wave excitations all important in nanoscale magnetism? 
Physica Status Solidi A-App. Res. 245 174-81

[28]
Yuasa S and Djayaprawira D 2007 Giant tunnel magnetoresistance in magnetic tunnel junctions 
with a crystalline MgO (0 0 1) barrier J. Phys. D: App. Phys. 40 R337

[29]
Miao G X, Munzenberg M and Moodera J S 2011 Tunneling path toward spintronics Rep. Prog. 
Phys. 74 036501

[30]
Parkin S 2006 Spin-polarized current in spin valves and magnetic tunnel junctions MRS Bull. 31
389-94

[31]
Abufager P N, Robles R and Lorente N 2015 FeCoCp3 Molecular Magnets as Spin Filters Journal 
of Physical Chemistry C 119 12119-29

[32]
Li D F, Ruschman C, Clerac R and Holmes S M 2006 Ancillary Ligand Functionalization of Cyanide-
Bridged S = 6 FeIII4NiII4 Complexes for Molecule-Based Electronics Inorg. Chem. 45 7569

[33]
Campiglio P, Breitwieser R, Repain V, Guitteny S, Chacon C, Bellec A, Lagoute J, Girard Y, Rousset 
S, Sassella A, Imam M and Narasimhan S 2015 Change of cobalt magnetic anisotropy and spin 
polarization with alkanethiolates self-assembled monolayers New Journal of Physics 17


11

[34]
Ding Y-S, Deng Y-F and Zheng Y-Z 2016 The rise of single-ion magnets as spin qubits 
Magnetochemistry 2 40

[35]
Leuenberger M N and Loss D 2001 Quantum computing in molecular magnets Nature 410 789-
93

[36]
Coronado E and Epsetin A J 2009 Molecular spintronics and quantum computing J. Mater. Chem.
19 1670-1

[37]
Affronte M, Troiani F, Ghirri A, Candini A, Evangelisti M, Corradini V, Carretta S, Santini P, 
Amoretti G, Tuna F, Timco G and Winpenny R E P 2007 Single molecule magnets for quantum 
computation J. Phys. D-Appl. Phys. 40 2999-3004


