Verification of Short-Range Order and Its Impact on the

Properties of the CrCoNi Medium Entropy Alloy

Ruopeng Zhang1,2,†, Shiteng Zhao1,2,†, Jun Ding3, Yan Chong1,2, Tao Jia4, Colin Ophus2, Mark 
Asta1,3, Robert O. Ritchie1,3 & Andrew M. Minor1,2,*

1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 

USA.

2 National Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National 

Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA.

3 Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA

4 Department of Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA

† These authors contributed equally to this work.

* Correspondence to aminor@lbl.gov

Traditional metallic alloys are mixtures of elements where the atoms of minority species tend 

to distribute randomly if they are below their solubility limit, or lead to the formation of

secondary phases if they are above it. Recently, the concept of medium/high entropy alloys 

(MEA/HEA) has expanded this view, as these materials are single-phase solid solutions of 

generally equiatomic mixtures of metallic elements that have been shown to display

enhanced mechanical properties. However, the question has remained as to how random 

these solid solutions actually are, with the influence of chemical short-range order (SRO)

suggested in computational simulations but not seen experimentally. Here we report the first 

direct observation of SRO in the CrCoNi MEA using high resolution and energy-filtered 

transmission electron microscopy. Increasing amounts of SRO give rise to both higher 

stacking fault energy and hardness. These discoveries suggest that the degree of chemical 

ordering at the nanometer scale can be tailored through thermomechanical processing, 

providing a new avenue for tuning the mechanical properties of MEA/HEAs.

Keywords: Medium-/High-entropy alloys; short-range order; energy-filtered transmission 

electron microscopy 


The attractive concept of using multiple principal elements in a single alloy system has received a 

tremendous amount of interest over the past decade1–5. This group of materials are usually termed 

as medium-entropy alloys (MEA) in ternary systems and high-entropy alloys (HEA) in quaternary 

or quinary systems, alluding to their high degree of configurational entropy. Among the increasing 

number of medium- to high- entropy alloy systems reported in the literature6–10, the CrCoNi-based, 

face-centered-cubic (fcc) single-phase alloys exhibit an exceptional combination of mechanical 

properties including high strength, tensile ductility, fracture toughness and impact resistance11. 

Extensive studies have been documented on the deformation mechanisms in these alloys. Otto et 

al.12 evaluated the temperature dependence of plasticity behavior in CrMnFeCoNi and observed a

slip-twinning transition at reduced temperatures12. Gludovatz et al. later reported the outstanding 

fracture toughness of CrCoNiFeMn4 and CrCoNi13 at cryogenic temperatures and attributed this 

to a synergy of deformation mechanisms including a propensity for mechanical twinning14.

Interestingly, computational work has suggested that the CrCoNi-based fcc single-phase alloys 

should have near-zero stacking fault energies (SFE, SF)15; further calculations for random HEA 

and MEA solid solutions even suggest that these values could be negative at low temperatures14,16–

18. These computational predictions do not agree quantitatively with measured values19,20

(γSF_CrCoNi ~22 mJ/m2 and γSF_CrMnFeCoNi ~30 mJ/m2). Experimentally, the measured SFEs in MEAs 

and HEAs derived from separation of Shockley partial dislocations exhibit a wide distribution21, 

indicating a strong dependence of SF on local atomic configuration. Ding et al.22 showed that the 

SFE of CrCoNi MEA can be tailored over a wide range of values by tuning its local chemical order. 

The work highlights the potentially strong impact of chemical short-range order (SRO, defined as 

the deviation in the number of different chemical bond types from those corresponding to a random 

solid solution) on the mechanical properties of the MEA/HEAs. Later, Li et al.23 demonstrated the 

ruggedness of the local energy landscape and how it raises activation barriers governing 

dislocation activities with molecular dynamics simulations. However, to date experimental 

evidence for the existence of such SRO has been limited to X-ray adsorption measurements24 that 

are averaged over a relatively large volume of material. Indeed, further efforts are needed to 

characterize the degree and nature of ordering, its spatial extent, how both depend on thermal 

history in processing, and the associated effects on mechanical behavior. Here, we provide the first 

direct and quantitative visualization of the SRO structure, where we establish a direct effect of this 

SRO on the mechanical behavior of MEA/HEA materials. The results thus establish a novel design 


parameter to control the properties of MEA/HEAs that we expect could be applicable to the wide 

class of multi-principal-element alloys more generally.

To investigate the presence of chemical SRO, equiatomic CrCoNi alloy samples were arc-

melted and homogenized at 1200 C for 48 h. The alloy was then subjected to different thermal 

treatments: (1) water-quenched to room temperature (RT), or (2) aged at 1000 C for 120 h 

followed by furnace cooling to RT. All the alloys were confirmed to be a single-phase fcc structure 

via X-ray diffraction and electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) analysis. The microstructure and 

the degree of SRO were then characterized with a variety of Transmission Electron Microscope 

(TEM) imaging techniques. Diffraction contrast from SRO is inherently faint as compared to the 

long-range fcc lattice diffraction signal since it arises from the relatively minor differences in 

atomic scattering factors between the constituent elements. As a result, measurement of the 

relatively faint SRO diffraction signal has proven to be challenging. In order to enhance the signal-

to-noise ratio of the diffraction contrast from SRO, we minimized the background noise from 

inelastic scattering by using a Zeiss LIBRA 200MC microscope, equipped with an in-column Ω 

energy filter and a 16-bit dynamic range camera. Energy-filtered diffraction patterns and dark-

field (DF) images for the two heat treatment conditions are shown in Fig. 1. In the diffraction 

patterns (Figs. 1a-b), streaks along {111} directions between fcc Bragg spots are clearly observed 

in the aged sample. Dark field imaging taken with the objective aperture positioned in the center 

of the streaked region shown in Fig. 1b were used to directly image the SRO domains. While no 

DF contrast can be seen from the water-quenched samples (Fig. 1c), the aged sample (Fig. 1d) 

clearly reveals the nanoscale domains. Results from an intermediate heat treatment are shown in 

Supplementary Fig. 1 for comparison. 

The diffuse scattering in the diffraction patterns and associated contrast in the dark-field 

images could arise from a combination of effects, including static and thermal displacement 

scattering and chemical SRO25. However, the fact that the water-quenched samples (Fig. 1c) show 

negligible contrast using the same imaging conditions, and the fact that the aged samples show 

enhanced streaking and DF contrast strongly supports the interpretation that these features are 

associated with chemical SRO. This suggests that the streaking contrast in the diffraction patterns 

is caused by the SRO domains that form a diffuse superlattice with a distortion of the local lattice. 

Specifically, the enhanced contrast in samples aged at higher temperature can be interpreted to be 


associated with the higher mobility of the atoms at these temperatures, which is able to evolve 

towards a lower free energy state with higher chemical SRO.  Further evidence in support of this 

interpretation follows.

High-resolution TEM imaging (HRTEM) has been used to distinguish the difference between 

thermal- and static-displacement induced diffuse scattering in previous studies25. Figs. 1e-f shows 

a comparison of water-quenched and aged HRTEM images, where two regions in the aged sample 

show diffuse superlattice features along {111} planes as marked in Fig. 1f. In addition, the 2-D 

fast fourier transforms (FFT) of the HRTEM images (Figs. 1e, f insets), show a similar streaking 

intensity along the {111} g vectors. These observations provide clear evidence that the contrast in 

the real-space HRTEM images is associated directly with the diffuse intensity observed in the 

diffraction patterns. The features observed in the HRTEM images are qualitatively consistent with 

the type of order suggested in both the EXAFS24 and previous Monte-Carlo simulations22,26, both 

of which indicate that Cr-Cr pairs are strongly disfavored at nearest-neighbor distances such that 

the concentrations of Cr atoms in {111} planes could be expected to alternate from enhanced to 

depleted values along the various <111> directions. Such compositional variations are consistent 

with the alternating contrast along the <111> directions observed by HRTEM.

The combined evidence from diffraction contrast and HRTEM imaging is that the high-

temperature aging leads to the formation of appreciable SRO in fcc CrCoNi MEAs.  The size and 

shape of the SRO-enhanced domains can thus be evaluated through energy-filtered DF imaging. 

For example, Figures 2a-b present two DF images formed by using two different objective aperture 

positions as marked in Fig. 2c. While each DF image (Figs. 2a, b) shows mostly different sets of 

SRO enhanced domains that are preferentially scattering to different parts of reciprocal space, 

there are a number of domains that could be identified in both images (examples are marked by 

the arrows). The existence of the same domains in images formed by separate and non-parallel

directions of SRO-generated streaking is evidence for a non-planar shape of the SRO-domains.

It is also possible to characterize the size distribution of the domains by assuming a shape (in 

this case we assume a spherical shape for simplicity) and applying a Gaussian template fitting 

algorithm27 as demonstrated in the Methods section. This analysis generates an average diameter 

of the measured domains of 1.13 ± 0.43 nm, which would correspond to the 3rd to 4th atomic shells 

on the fcc lattice of CrCoNi MEA16,19,28. However, as the DF images in Figs. 1, 2 suggest, the 


domain boundaries are relatively diffuse, and there is no evidence of any specific shape that 

characterizes the SRO domains. Further evidence for the diffuse nature of the SRO domains could

be obtained by conducting geometrical phase analysis (GPA) on drift-corrected high-resolution 

scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) images29. The resulting strain maps are 

summarized in Supplementary Fig. 2. In the water-quenched sample, the fluctuation of local strain 

is minimal.  However, in the 1000 C aged sample, domain contrast similar in size to that found 

in the DF images could be identified, indicating a small yet locally ordered fluctuations in lattice 

distortions. The results are suggestive that the SRO may be associated with the changes in the 

static atomic displacements, which is of interest since lattice distortions are widely proposed to 

partially explain the mechanical properties of the CrCoNi MEA11. This result thus warrants further 

investigation. We note, however, that standard X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments conducted on 

both water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples show immeasurable changes in peak broadening 

for the two different thermal treatments (Supplementary Fig. 3), such that further investigations of 

the lattice distortions would likely require synchrotron measurements and lie beyond the scope of 

the present study.

It is known that the formation of SRO has a significant impact on dislocation plasticity, where 

an increasing degree of SRO tends to increase the planarity of dislocation slip30–32. To assess the 

effect in the CrCoNi alloy, dislocation analysis was conducted on bulk compressed samples and 

the results are summarized in Fig. 3. Specifically, a random distribution of dislocations was

observed in the water-quenched sample, whereas a marked trend of localized planar configuration 

of dislocations was present in the 1000 C aged sample with SRO (Figs. 3a, b). In the latter case, 

the leading dislocations also tend to form dislocation pairs, where the separation distance of two 

adjacent dislocations were significantly reduced (two examples were marked by the white arrows 

in Fig. 3b). One possible origin of planar slip in fcc materials is the Shockley partial dissociation 

of perfect dislocation cores, limiting the ability of cross slip. In the current study, however, the 

aged alloy possesses more compact dislocation cores than the quenched alloy while presenting 

planar slip. On the other hand, localized planar slip and leading dislocation pairs are usually 

correlated to the glide plane softening effect due to the local destruction of the SRO structure30,32,33, 

where the initial dislocation motion interrupts the SRO atomic configuration to overcome the 

energy barrier associated with the creation of a diffuse-anti-phase boundary (DAPB). 

Subsequently, dislocations following the initial dislocation would experience a lower energy 


barrier by gliding on the same path and avoiding the DAPB energy barrier. The DAPB energy as 

a function of dislocation slip events has been assessed by Density Functional Theory (DFT)

calculations based on the calculated SRO atomic configuration22, supporting this theory on the 

origin of the planar dislocation slip (Supplementary Fig. 4). 

The exceptional strength, ductility and toughness of CrCoNi MEA can be directly correlated 

with the SFE of the material11. Previous DFT-assisted Monte Carlo simulations predicted that the 

SFE of CrCoNi MEA could be highly tunable by varying the SRO.22 While the SFE of MEA/HEAs

has been experimentally probed previously via both weak-beam DF imaging19 and diffraction 

contrast STEM (DC-STEM) analysis21, the SFE has never been directly correlated to the degree 

of SRO. In the current study, the SFE was measured by DC-STEM analysis as the technique allows 

for imaging through thicker samples to minimize the sample surface effect. Figures 3c, d show 

examples of images where partial dislocations could be identified through “g · b” analysis and their 

disassociation measured directly (detailed in Supplementary Fig. 5). The separation distance and 

the statistical results are summarized in Fig. 3e and Table 1. The detailed calculation of the stacking 

fault energy is elaborated in the Methods section, which results in the 1000 C aged samples having

an SFE of 23.33 ± 4.31 mJ/m2, double the value of its water-quenched counterpart (8.18 ± 1.43

mJ/m2). This measurement confirms that the SRO directly impacts the SFE and indicates that the 

SFE could by fine-tuned by controlling the ordering, exactly consistent with the DFT-assisted 

Monte Carlo simulations.22 It is noteworthy that the SFEs of both water-quenched and 1000 C

aged samples are distributed within a range, but demonstrate a clear trend. 

In order to quantify the impact of SRO on the MEA’s mechanical properties, both 

nanoindentation tests and bulk tensile tests of the same alloys were performed. The measured 

nanoindentation hardness is 4.07 ± 0.23 GPa for the water-quenched sample and 4.37 ± 0.58 GPa 

for the 1000 C aged sample. The results show that the MEA is heat treatable, similar to the bake 

hardened steels or some aluminum alloys. SRO also significantly affects the onset of plasticity 

which is manifested by the “pop-in” event34 in the load vs. displacement curves in Figs. 4c,d. The

first pop-in events of the SRO-aged sample are distributed more discretely and usually occur later

(at a higher load) than the quenched sample. In addition, the displacement plateau that corresponds

to the strain burst of a pop-in event is larger in the aged material, as detailed in Supplementary Fig.

6. The higher pop-in load and larger displacement plateau in the SRO-aged specimen indicates the 


presence of dislocation avalanches (sudden bursts of dislocation nucleation and propagation), 

providing another evidence of the SRO hardening and the subsequent glide plane softening caused 

by passage of the first few dislocations in the slip band. Bulk tensile tests confirmed the 

strengthening effect of SRO by showing an ~ 25 % increase of the yield strength (Table 1) as well 

as a dramatic change of the work hardening behavior. As demonstrated in Figs. 4g, h, the initial 

work hardening rate of the aged sample is as twice as much of its water-quenched counterpart, 

reinforcing that the hardening is caused by the SRO domains. Traditionally, the formation of SRO 

in alloys causes planar dislocation slip and deformation localization30,35–37. In some cases, the 

deformation localization affects the alloys’ ductility and toughness, whereas in the current study, 

the formation of SRO has little effect on the overall ductility of the MEA alloy. Deformation 

twinning is reported to explain the exceptional ductility of the CrCoNi alloy11,14, in which nano-

twinning delays deformation localization. Though lacking direct evidence, considering the similar 

work hardening behavior at the later stage of the deformation of both the SRO-aged and the water-

quenched samples, we speculate that the exceptional strength and toughness of CrCoNi MEA

arises in part from this unique combination of SRO hardening and twin-induced deformation at 

later stages. However, further systematic analysis is required to fully understand any potential 

effect of SRO on the deformation twinning. 

In addition to the effect of SRO on plastic behavior, it also, in theory, should affect elastic 

properties as the local bonding environments are significantly altered from the perfect random 

solid solution. A simple rule-of-mixtures would predict a Young’s modulus of ~229 GPa for 

equiatomic CrCoNi38. However, the nanoindentation modulus (reduced modulus) of the water-

quenched sample is measured to be 181.76 ± 13.37 GPa, 18.1% smaller than that of the 1000 C

aged sample (214.79 ± 18.49 GPa). In contrast, the global Young’s moduli of the bulk materials 

were determined by ultrasonic pulse-echo technique where the longitudinal and transverse sound 

speeds are measured to calculate elastic modulus. The measured global Young’s modulus of the 

water-quenched and the aged samples are 229.93 GPa and 230.99 GPa, respectively (other 

measured elastic properties are listed in Table 1). The discrepancy between the locally-measured 

modulus by nanoindentation and the bulk-scale modulus measured acoustically may result from 

the limited size (~1 nm) of SRO clusters. The local measurement of modulus by nanoindentation

is sensitive to the homogeneity of the distribution of the SRO clusters. However, the wavelength 

of the ultrasonic acoustic waves used to measure global modulus is orders of magnitude longer 


than the size of the SRO. Therefore, the measurement is averaged over a much larger volume and 

is insensitive to the degree of SRO.

As an emerging class of structural materials, MEA/HEAs possess a desirable combination of 

mechanical properties for structural applications11,39,40.  While the concept of MEA/HEAs is based 

on production of a single-phase solid solution, there has long been a question about how well-

mixed the solid solutions are 4,6,11,24,41–45. Here, we directly imaged the local ordering and showed 

how the deformation behavior of MEAs are directly correlated with the degree of SRO. Annealing 

the MEA to promote SRO led to an increase in hardness, a doubling of the SFE and a subsequent 

increase in planar slip. The phenomenon of planar slip has been widely observed in many 

systems14,19,20,46,47, which can presumably also be linked to the degree of SRO in these systems. 

Due to its impact on the mechanical properties, the degree of SRO is a critical feature that should 

be considered in the materials design phase. Directly tailoring the SRO microstructure on an 

atomic level therefore provides another dimension for controlling the structure-property 

relationship of advanced materials. 

Methods

Materials and sample preparation. The raw ingot of the equiatomic CrCoNi MEA was argon 

arc double melted and then cut into smaller samples. The samples were then divided into two 

groups and underwent different thermal treatments, (1) homogenized at 1200 C for 48 h then 

water quenched to RT (uniform texture, grain size ~800 µm as determined by EBSD), or (2) 

homogenized at 1200 C for 48 h then aged at 1000 C for 120 h followed by furnace cooling

(uniform texture, ~1000 µm as determined by EBSD). Samples for dislocation analysis were 

further deformed by conducting bulk compression tests on an MTS Criterion (Model 43) system 

to introduce dislocation plasticity. The final strain was 6% with a strain rate of 1 × 10-3. The 

samples were then sliced and thinned by mechanical polishing. Electron-transparent samples for 

TEM observation were prepared with a Fischione twin-jet Electropolisher using a solution of 70% 

methanol, 20% glycerol and 10% perchloric acid at -20 C. The samples for nanoindentation tests 

were prepared by mono-side electrochemical polishing with aforementioned solution and 

parameters. 


Energy-filtered dark-field TEM imaging and SRO domain recognition. TEM samples of 

different heat treatments were used for observation. A Zeiss LIBRA 200MC microscope, equipped 

with an in-column Ω energy filter, was used to take both diffraction patterns and dark-field images. 

It is necessary to consider the impact on the resolution from the objective aperture, which could 

be estimated by the Airy disk radius using the following equation48,

𝑟𝐴𝑖𝑟𝑦 ≈ 1.2 𝜆𝑓

𝐷
,

where 𝜆 is the electron wavelength (0.02507 Å for 200 kV TEM), 𝑓 is the focal length of the 

objective lens (~ 3 mm for the Zeiss Libra) and 𝐷 is the diameter of the objective aperture (25 μm 

aperture used in the current study). For the experimental setup used in the current study, the size 

of the aperture Airy disk is 3.61 Å, which is below the size of the observed SRO domains. A 5-eV 

energy slit was deployed to select the zero-loss peak and eliminate the contrast from inelastic 

scattering. A Gatan US1000 CCD camera was used to acquire the diffraction patterns and DF 

images. Prior to the data analysis, the energy-filtered DF images were filtered by a dark reference 

subtraction. According to the energy-filtered DF image shown in Figs. 1, 2, there is no observable

directional tendency of the domains. Therefore, we assumed a circular kernel signal from the 

domains for our analysis. SRO-enhanced domains were identified and measured through Gaussian 

template fitting, where 2-D convolutions with the DF image were conducted using a list of 

differently sized 2-D Gaussian templates (with different values of standard deviation27). The stack 

of result images was further analyzed through a circular Hough transform to identify all signal 

peaks. The intensity cutoff was set according to the best fit result. Overlapping entities were 

deleted to ensure an accurate size measurement. Details of the algorithm are described below.

1. The standard deviation range of the Gaussian templates was set to 3 to 40 pixels (with a 0.1 

interval) based on the pixel size of the DF image (0.056 nm/pixel). 

2. 2-D Gaussian kernels with the same resolution of the DF images were constructed. The radius 

assumed for the SRO-enhanced domains was set to 1.3*sigma to best match the contrast 

observed in the DF image.

3. To suppress the background noise during convolution, each Gaussian kernel was normalized 

by a larger Gaussian function to give a zero summation, using the expression:

𝐺2𝐷(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝜎) =

1

2𝜋𝜎2 𝑒−𝑥2+𝑦2

2𝜎2 −

1

2𝜋(1.5𝜎)2 𝑒

− 𝑥2+𝑦2

2(1.5𝜎)2 ,
(1)


where G2D is the normalized 2-D Gaussian template,  is the varying standard deviation of the 

differently sized kernels, and x and y are the 2D coordinates from the kernel origin. 

4. The domain signals in the DF image were identified by a 2-D Gaussian Hough transform. For 

each kernel in the list, a 2-D convolution between the DF image and the kernel would be 

performed using:

𝑦[𝑚, 𝑛] = ∑ ∑ 𝑥[𝑖, 𝑗] ∙ ℎ[𝑚 − 𝑖, 𝑛 − 𝑗]
𝑖
𝑗
,
(2)

where 𝑥 is the DF image, ℎ is the kernel and y is the result of the convolution.

5. After each convolution, pixels of the convolution result are compared to a data storing array; 

if the current pixel has a higher signal, the corresponding value would be updated in the data 

storing array. Another similarly sized array was used to store the associated kernel size of the 

highest signal.

6. After the iterations, the pixel values were first filtered by the domain diameter range and the 

peak signal cutoff. Then the local peaks in the result array were identified if a pixel has higher 

value than all of its eight neighbor pixels. 

7. The identified peaks were ordered and checked in a “brightest to dimmest” manner according 

to their pixel value. If dimmer peaks appear in the radius of a brighter peak, they would be 

deleted. This process is to eliminate overlapping entities. 

8. The remaining peaks were treated as identified domains.

9. The diameter cutoff below 0.7 nm is set manually as this is already the size of the 1st nearest-

neighbor shell of atoms in the MEA lattice, we do not regard anything below this value as SRO 

domain.

A manual sampling was carried out to estimate the domain sizes and gain a reference for the 

optimization of parameters. Two critical parameters that would impact the identification are the 

minimal signal cutoff and the domain diameter range. The optimization process was conducted 

according to the best fitting results. In the case of a high signal cutoff or a narrow diameter range, 

the algorithm will miss some of the major contrast, whereas, in the case of a low signal cutoff or a 

wide diameter range, the algorithm will pick up lots of small intensity fluctuations that are from 

camera noise. It is worth mentioning the limitations to the domain recognition algorithm. 

Specifically, the assumption that the domains are spherical is for simplification, but the shapes of 


the domains vary. Parallel attempts of using a threshold segmentation algorithm involved much 

more subjectivity and yielded unreasonable results. However, the purpose of the analysis is to 

provide an estimated size distribution of the SRO domains, for which the current analysis is 

sufficient until large scale atomic imaging studies could provide similar statistics.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments. The XRD experiments was performed ex situ with a 

PANalytical XPert diffractometer on water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples, respectively. The 

scan range (2θ) was set to 42 – 54 ͦ to include the (111) and the (200) peaks. The angle resolution 

was set to 0.005 ͦ with a 0.8s integration time to ensure an accurate measurement of the lattice 

constants. 

High-resolution STEM (HRSTEM) imaging and geometrical phase analysis (GPA). 

HRSTEM imaging of water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples were conducted on the double-

corrected TEAM I microscope (operated at 300 kV) at the National Center for Electron 

Microscopy (NCEM), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Drift correction was conducted 

with the methods developed by Ophus et al.29 to eliminate the artifacts from beam scan jittering. 

FRWRtools plugin for Gatan Digital Micrograph software were used for the following GPA 

analysis. Averaged fast-fourier transforms were used as strain templates. The real-space resolution 

was set to 1.5 nm to achieve a relatively accurate measurement in reciprocal space.

STEM EDS measurements. Quantitative energy dispersive X-ray mapping (EDS) was conducted 

on both the water-quenched samples and aged samples using the TitanX microscope with a quad 

EDS detector. No chemical segregation was observed; results are summarized in Supplementary 

Fig. 7. The lack of any visible chemical segregation via EDS analysis in the aged samples is 

consistent with the high-resolution STEM observation presented in Supplementary Fig. 2, where 

there is no obvious Z-contrast difference despite different degrees of local lattice distortion. 

Previous theoretical studies22,23 revealed that the SRO in the CrCoNi MEA is in the range of several 

nearest neighbor distances and that the driving force for the formation of SRO is to avoid certain 

types of bonding. Combined with the observation presented in the current study, we can conclude 

that it is not necessary for the SRO structure to possess a strong chemical segregation. Further 

verification using atomic-resolution EDS or electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) could 

provide valuable insights revealing the atomic structure of SRO clusters.


Dislocation analysis. TEM dislocation analysis was conducted on both the aged and water-

quenched samples after 6% compressive deformation. TEM observations were conducted on the 

Zeiss LIBRA 200MC (operating at 200 kV) at NCEM. Low angle annular dark-field DC-STEM 

images49,50 for partial dislocation “g · b” and SFE measurements were acquired on the TEAM I

microscope. The measured partial dislocation separation was further calibrated by conducting a 

g(3g) weak-beam dark-field imaging and calculating the actual partial separation from the 

observed values19,51,52 The SFEs were calculated according to the following equation19,53,54,

𝑆𝐹𝐸 =

𝐺𝑏𝑝2

8𝜋∙𝑑 (

2−𝜈

1−𝜈)(1 −

2∙𝜈∙cos(2𝛽)

2−𝜈
) ,
(3)

where 𝐺 is the shear modulus of CrCoNi MEA (determined by the ultrasonic pulse-echo 

measurement), 𝑏𝑝 is the magnitude of the Burgers vector of partial dislocations (~0.146 nm), 𝑑 is 

the measured separation of partial dislocations, 𝜈 is the Poisson's ratio (determined by the 

ultrasonic pulse-echo measurement), and 𝛽 is the angle between the perfect dislocation Burgers 

vector and the dislocation line. For both 1000 C aged samples and water-quenched samples, 50 

individual measurements were conducted on more than 10 partial pairs from relatively thick 

regions to avoid any surface effects. Associated ± standard deviations were calculated to ensure 

accurate and representative results. 

Nanoindentation experiments. Nanoindentation tests were conducted on a Bruker Ti 950 

TriboIndenter instrument with a 1-μm Berkovich tip. The peak load was set to 1000 μN. The 

analysis was conducted with a calibrated area function of the tip. The water-quenched and 1000 

C aged samples were electrochemically polished on one side with a solution of 70% methanol, 

20% glycerol and 10% perchloric acid at -20 C. A 10 × 10 grid of indents covering an area of 1 

mm × 1 mm was set to conduct the test for each sample. No strong texture was observed by post-

mortem EBSD. All quantitative parameters were averaged among the 100 indents with associated 

± standard deviations. 

Bulk mechanical tests. Bulk tensile tests were carried out on an MTS Criterion (Model 43) 

system. A Sony A7R Mark II camera were used to record images for Digital Image Correlation

(DIC). A copy of Vic-2D Image Correlation software was utilized to conduct the DIC analysis. 

Due to the limited amount of material, the dimension of the gauge section of both water-quenched 

and 1000 C aged samples was set to 5.1 mm × 0.8 mm × 1.6 mm. Specially designed sample 


grippers were utilized to conduct the tensile test. Sample surfaces were mechanically polished and 

sparkle-sprayed prior to the tests. The strain was extracted from the DIC Von-Mises strain data 

using ‘virtual extensometers’ mode and averaged 3 virtual extensometers along the gage length. 

Ultrasonic pulse-echo measurement. An Olympus 38DL Plus thickness gauge with a Model 

5072PR pulser/receiver module was used to measure the speed of the shear velocity and the 

longitudinal velocity. The Poisson’s ratio, Young’s modulus and the shear modulus were 

calculated with the following equations,

𝜈 =

1−2(𝑉𝑇/𝑉𝐿)2

2−2(𝑉𝑇/𝑉𝐿)2 ,
(4)

𝐸 =

𝑉𝐿2𝜌(1+𝜈)(1−2𝜈)

1−𝜈
,
(5)

𝐺 = 𝑉𝐿

2𝜌 ,
(6)

where 𝜈 is the Poisson’s ratio, 𝑉𝑇 is the shear velocity, 𝑉𝐿 is the longitudinal velocity, 𝐸 is the 

Young’s modulus, 𝐺 is the shear modulus and 𝜌 is the density of the materials, which is estimated 

with the following equation,

𝜌 =

4𝑚𝑎𝐴𝑣𝑔

𝑉𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙
,
(7)

where 𝑚𝑎𝐴𝑣𝑔 is the averaged atomic mass of Cr, Co and Ni, 𝑉𝑐𝑒𝑙𝑙 is the volume of a fcc unit cell 

calculated with the lattice constants derived from the XRD results. 

Nonproportional number of local atomic pairs. To quantify the atom distribution at the 

alternating sites along <110> directions, we defined the nonproportional number of local atomic 

pairs around an atomic species for the 4th nearest-neighbor shell as detailed in a previous study22

(corresponding to the second atom sites along the surrounding <110> directions), 

∆𝛿𝑖𝑗

4 = 𝑁0,𝑖𝑗

4
− 𝑁𝑖𝑗

4 ,
(8)

where 𝑁𝑖𝑗

4 is the actual number of pairs between atoms of type j and i in the 4th shell and 𝑁0,𝑖𝑗

4
is 

the number of pairs that are proportional to the corresponding concentrations. Assuming entirely 

random atom distribution, ∆𝛿𝑖𝑗

4 = 0, a positive value means a tendency of avoiding such a pair 

and a negative value means a tendency of forming such a pair. 


Diffuse anti-phase boundary energy. The diffuse anti-phase boundary energy as the function of 

dislocation slip events was calculated via density functional theory using an “aged” atomic model 

reported in a previous literature22, which has a similar SFE as the 1000 C aged samples. Excess 

energy was calculated after each successive slip was introduced into the system.

Data Availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 

upon reasonable request.

References

1.
Yeh, J. W. et al. Nanostructured High-Entropy Alloys with Multiple Principal Elements: 

Novel Alloy Design Concepts and Outcomes. Adv. Eng. Mater. 6, 299-303+274 (2004).

2.
Cantor, B., Chang, I. T. H., Knight, P. & Vincent, A. J. B. Microstructural development in 

equiatomic multicomponent alloys. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 375–377, 213–218 (2004).

3.
Li, Z., Pradeep, K. G., Deng, Y., Raabe, D. & Tasan, C. C. Metastable high-entropy dual-

phase alloys overcome the strength–ductility trade-off. Nature 534, 227–230 (2016).

4.
Gludovatz, B. et al. A fracture-resistant high-entropy alloy for cryogenic applications. 

Science 345, 1153–8 (2014).

5.
Yang, T. et al. Multicomponent intermetallic nanoparticles and superb mechanical 

behaviors of complex alloys. Science 362, 933–937 (2018).

6.
Zhang, Y. et al. Microstructures and properties of high-entropy alloys. Prog. Mater. Sci.

61, 1–93 (2014).

7.
Gao, M. C., Yeh, J. W., Liaw, P. K. & Zhang, Y. High-Entropy Alloys: Fundamentals and 

Applications. High-Entropy Alloys: Fundamentals and Applications (Springer 

International Publishing, 2016). doi:10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5

8.
Senkov, O. N., Miracle, D. B., Chaput, K. J. & Couzinie, J. P. Development and

exploration of refractory high entropy alloys - A review. Journal of Materials Research

33, 3092–3128 (2018).

9.
Miracle, D. B. High entropy alloys as a bold step forward in alloy development. Nature 

Communications 10, 1805 (2019).

10.
George, E. P., Raabe, D. & Ritchie, R. O. High-entropy alloys. Nat. Rev. Mater. 4, 515–


534 (2019).

11.
Li, Z., Zhao, S., Ritchie, R. O. & Meyers, M. A. Mechanical properties of high-entropy 

alloys with emphasis on face-centered cubic alloys. Prog. Mater. Sci. 102, 296–345 

(2019).

12.
Otto, F. et al. The influences of temperature and microstructure on the tensile properties of 

a CoCrFeMnNi high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater. 61, 5743–5755 (2013).

13.
Gludovatz, B. et al. Exceptional damage-tolerance of a medium-entropy alloy CrCoNi at 

cryogenic temperatures. Nat. Commun. 7, 10602 (2016).

14.
Zhang, Z. et al. Dislocation mechanisms and 3D twin architectures generate exceptional 

strength-ductility-toughness combination in CrCoNi medium-entropy alloy. Nat. 

Commun. 8, 14390 (2017).

15.
Zaddach, A. J., Niu, C., Koch, C. C. & Irving, D. L. Mechanical Properties and Stacking 

Fault Energies of NiFeCrCoMn High-Entropy Alloy. JOM 65, 1780–1789 (2013).

16.
Zhang, Y. H., Zhuang, Y., Hu, A., Kai, J. J. & Liu, C. T. The origin of negative stacking 

fault energies and nano-twin formation in face-centered cubic high entropy alloys. Scr. 

Mater. 130, 96–99 (2017).

17.
Zhao, S., Stocks, G. M. & Zhang, Y. Stacking fault energies of face-centered cubic 

concentrated solid solution alloys. Acta Mater. 134, 334–345 (2017).

18.
Niu, C., LaRosa, C. R., Miao, J., Mills, M. J. & Ghazisaeidi, M. Magnetically-driven 

phase transformation strengthening in high entropy alloys. Nat. Commun. 9, 1363 (2018).

19.
Laplanche, G. et al. Reasons for the superior mechanical properties of medium-entropy 

CrCoNi compared to high-entropy CrMnFeCoNi. Acta Mater. 128, 292–303 (2017).

20.
Okamoto, N. L. et al. Size effect, critical resolved shear stress, stacking fault energy, and 

solid solution strengthening in the CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy. Sci. Rep. 6, 35863 

(2016).

21.
Smith, T. M. et al. Atomic-scale characterization and modeling of 60° dislocations in a 

high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater. 110, 352–363 (2016).

22.
Ding, J., Yu, Q., Asta, M. & Ritchie, R. O. Tunable stacking fault energies by tailoring 

local chemical order in CrCoNi medium-entropy alloys. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 

201808660 (2018).

23.
Li, Q.-J., Sheng, H. & Ma, E. Strengthening in multi-principal element alloys with local-


chemical-order roughened dislocation pathways. Nat. Commun. 10, 3563 (2019).

24.
Zhang, F. X. et al. Local Structure and Short-Range Order in a NiCoCr Solid Solution 

Alloy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 205501 (2017).

25.
Van Tendeloo, G. & Amelinckx, S. The origin of diffuse intensity in electron diffraction 

patterns. Phase Transitions 67, 101–135 (1998).

26.
Tamm, A., Aabloo, A., Klintenberg, M., Stocks, M. & Caro, A. Atomic-scale properties of 

Ni-based FCC ternary, and quaternary alloys. Acta Mater. 99, 307–312 (2015).

27.
Zhang, R. et al. Direct imaging of short-range order and its relationship to deformation in 

Ti-6Al. submitted (2019).

28.
Laplanche, G. et al. Elastic moduli and thermal expansion coefficients of medium-entropy 

subsystems of the CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy. J. Alloys Compd. 746, 244–255 

(2018).

29.
Ophus, C., Ciston, J. & Nelson, C. T. Correcting nonlinear drift distortion of scanning 

probe and scanning transmission electron microscopies from image pairs with orthogonal 

scan directions. Ultramicroscopy 162, 1–9 (2016).

30.
Gerold, V. & Karnthaler, H. P. On the origin of planar slip in f.c.c. alloys. Acta Metall. 37, 

2177–2183 (1989).

31.
Pekin, T. C., Gammer, C., Ciston, J., Ophus, C. & Minor, A. M. In situ nanobeam electron 

diffraction strain mapping of planar slip in stainless steel. Scr. Mater. 146, 87–90 (2018).

32.
Neeraj, T. & Mills, M. J. Short-range order (SRO) and its effect on the primary creep 

behavior of a Ti-6wt.%Al alloy. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 319–321, 415–419 (2001).

33.
Van De Walle, A. & Asta, M. First-principles investigation of perfect and diffuse 

antiphase boundaries in HCP-based Ti-Al alloys. Metall. Mater. Trans. A Phys. Metall. 

Mater. Sci. 33, 735–741 (2002).

34.
Gouldstone, A. et al. Indentation across size scales and disciplines: Recent developments 

in experimentation and modeling. Acta Mater. 55, 4015–4039 (2007).

35.
Fisher, J. C. C. On the strength of solid solution alloys. Acta Metall. 2, 9–10 (1954).

36.
Britton, T. B., Dunne, F. P. E. & Wilkinson, A. J. On the mechanistic basis of deformation 

at the microscale in hexagonal close-packed metals. Proc. R. Soc. A Math. Phys. Eng. Sci.

471, (2015).

37.
Hamdi, F. & Asgari, S. Influence of stacking fault energy and short-range ordering on 


dynamic recovery and work hardening behavior of copper alloys. Scr. Mater. 62, 693–696 

(2010).

38.
Brady, G. S. (George S., Clauser, H. R. & Vaccari, J. A. Materials handbook : an 

encyclopedia for managers, technical professionals, purchasing and production 

managers, technicians and supervisors. (McGraw-Hill, 1997).

39.
Miracle, D. B. et al. Exploration and development of high entropy alloys for structural 

applications. Entropy 16, 494–525 (2014).

40.
Williams, J. C. & Starke, E. A. Progress in structural materials for aerospace systems. 

Acta Mater. 51, 5775–5799 (2003).

41.
Ma, Y. et al. Chemical short-range orders and the induced structural transition in high-

entropy alloys. Scr. Mater. 144, 64–68 (2018).

42.
Singh, P., Smirnov, A. V. & Johnson, D. D. Atomic short-range order and incipient long-

range order in high-entropy alloys. Phys. Rev. B 91, 224204 (2015).

43.
Lucas, M. S. et al. Absence of long-range chemical ordering in equimolar FeCoCrNi. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 251907 (2012).

44.
Niu, C. et al. Spin-driven ordering of Cr in the equiatomic high entropy alloy NiFeCrCo. 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 161906 (2015).

45.
Linden, Y., Pinkas, M., Munitz, A. & Meshi, L. Long-period antiphase domains and short-

range order in a B2 matrix of the AlCoCrFeNi high-entropy alloy. Scr. Mater. 139, 49–52 

(2017).

46.
Laplanche, G., Kostka, A., Horst, O. M., Eggeler, G. & George, E. P. Microstructure 

evolution and critical stress for twinning in the CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy. Acta 

Mater. 118, 152–163 (2016).

47.
Somsen, C. et al. The influences of temperature and microstructure on the tensile 

properties of a CoCrFeMnNi high-entropy alloy. Acta Mater. 61, 5743–5755 (2013).

48.
Fultz, B. & Howe, J. M. Transmission electron microscopy and diffractometry of 

materials. Transmission Electron Microscopy and Diffractometry of Materials (Springer, 

2008). doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73886-2

49.
Phillips, P. J., Brandes, M. C., Mills, M. J. & de Graef, M. Diffraction contrast STEM of 

dislocations: Imaging and simulations. Ultramicroscopy 111, 1483–1487 (2011).

50.
Phillips, P. J. et al. Atomic-resolution defect contrast in low angle annular dark-field 


STEM. Ultramicroscopy 116, 47–55 (2012).

51.
COCKAYNE, D. J. H. The Weak-Beam Technnique As Applied to Dissociation 

Measurements. Le J. Phys. Colloq. 35, C7-141-C7-148 (1974).

52.
Cockayne, D. J. H., Ray, I. L. F. & Whelan, M. J. Investigations of dislocation strain 

fields using weak beamsa. Philos. Mag. 20, 1265–1270 (1969).

53.
Anderson, P. M., Hirth, J. P. & Lothe, J. Theory of dislocations. (Cambridge University 

Press, 2017).

54.
Pierce, D. T. et al. The influence of manganese content on the stacking fault and 

austenite/ε-martensite interfacial energies in Fe–Mn–(Al–Si) steels investigated by 

experiment and theory. Acta Mater. 68, 238–253 (2014).

Acknowledgements

This work was primarily supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy 

Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division, of the U.S. Department of Energy under

Contract No. DE-AC02-05-CH11231 within the Mechanical Behavior of Materials (KC 13) 

program at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. R.Z., S.Z. and Y.C. acknowledge support 

from the U.S. Office of Naval Research. Work at the Molecular Foundry was supported by the 

Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under 

Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. Work at the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF) is 

supported by the National Science Foundation under award ECCS-1542152. We thank Prof. Evan 

Ma at Johns Hopkins University for providing a 600 C aged alloy.

Author contributions

R.Z., S.Z., M.A., R.O.R. and A.M.M. conceived of the project.; R.Z. and S.Z. conducted the 

energy-filtered TEM imaging and dislocation analysis; C.O. and R.Z. developed and optimized 

the domain recognition algorithm; S. Z. conducted the nanoindentation tests; R.Z, S.Z and C.Y.

conducted the tensile tests. J.D. conducted the DFT simulations. T.J. Conducted the XRD 

experiments. R.Z., S.Z., R.O R., M.A. and A.M.M. prepared the manuscript, which was reviewed 

and edited by all authors. Project administration, supervision, and funding acquisition was 

performed by R.O.R., M.A. and A.M.M.


Author statements

Reprints and permissions information are available at www.nature.com/reprints. The authors 

declare no competing interests, financial or otherwise. Readers are welcome to comment on the 

online version of the paper. 

Data availability

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author 

upon reasonable request.

Correspondence

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to aminor@berkeley.edu.


Figure 1: Energy-filtered TEM diffraction patterns, DF images formed with “diffuse superlattice” 
streaks and the associated high-resolution TEM images. (a-b), energy-filtered diffraction patterns 
taken from water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples, respectively. The contrast is reversed and 
pseudo-colored for better visibility. The line plots of intensity show the periodic intensity of the 
“diffuse superlattice” streaks. (c-d), energy-filtered DF images taken from water-quenched and 


1000 C aged samples, respectively. The aperture positions are marked by the g vectors. (e), a 
typical high-resolution TEM image and the associated FFT image of a water-quenched sample. (f),
a typical high-resolution TEM image and the associated FFT image of a 1000 C aged sample. 
The features suggesting a superlattice are marked by the white circles and the associated streaking 
along the {111} directions is marked by the white arrows in the FFT image.


Figure 2: Evidence of the 3-dimensional structure of the domains and the size distribution of them. 
(a-b), energy-filtered DF images from different “diffuse” superlattice peaks; examples showing 
the same domain contrast are marked with the arrows. (c), energy-filtered diffraction patterns of 
the region of interest; the red and blue circles indicate the DF imaging conditions of a and b. The 
contrast is reversed for better visibility. (d), the enlarged DF image with identified SRO domains 
marked by the red circles. The DF image is pseudo-colored for better visibility. (e), the histogram 
of identified domain diameters. The average value and the standard deviation are listed in the box. 


Figure 3: Dislocation analysis of both water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples. (a), the two-
beam bright-field (BF) image showing representative wavy configuration of dislocations in the 
water-quenched sample. (b), the two-beam BF image showing representative planar configuration 
of dislocations in the 1000 C aged sample. The leading dislocation pairs are marked by the white 
arrows. (c), (d), LAADF images showing dislocation dissociations in water-quenched and 1000 
C aged samples, respectively; the Burgers vector relations are demonstrated in the figures; The 
detailed “g · b” analysis is summarized in Supplementary Fig. 4. (e), distribution of the measured 
separation of partial dislocation pairs from both water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples, 
respectively. The results of numerical analysis are summarized in Table 1.



Figure 4: Comparison of mechanical properties from nanoindentation and bulk tensile tests. (a), 
(b), Load-depth curves from a 10 × 10 grid of nanoindentations separated by 10 μm from each 
other, from the water-quenched sample and 1000 C aged samples, respectively.  Pop-in analysis 
from these same tests are provided for the (c) water-quenched and (d) 1000 C aged samples. The 
circles depict the depth and load of where the pop-in events occur. The sizes of the circles are 
proportional to the total pop-in displacement. (e), (f), results of tensile tests from the water-
quenched sample and 1000 C aged samples, respectively. Insets are the elastic portions of the 
curves and a sample image of the strain distribution during the elastic loading, as determined by 
DIC. (g), (h), work hardening rate derived from the true stress-strain curves of the water-quenched 
and the 1000 C aged samples, respectively. True stress vs. true strain data from the same tests, 
respectively, are also displayed for comparison on (g), (h). The results of numerical analysis from
these tests are summarized in Table 1.


Table 1: Statistical results of the SFE measurements and the nanoindentation tests.

Water-Quenched
Aged at 1000 ͦC

Elastic Properties

Poisson's Ratio
0.29
0.28

Young's Modulus (GPa)
229.9
231.0

Shear Modulus (GPa)
89.1
90.2

Yield Strength
0.2% Offset Yield Strength 
(MPa)
205
255

Dislocation 
Dissociation

Partial Separation, (nm)
13.59 ± 2.64
6.44 ± 1.19

SFE (mJ/m2)
8.18 ± 1.43
23.33 ± 4.31

Nanoindentation

Reduced Modulus (GPa)
181.76 ± 13.37
214.79 ± 18.49

Indentation Hardness (GPa)
4.07 ± 0.23
4.37 ± 0.58

Pop-in Load (μN)
164.52 ± 42.06
194.37 ± 36.06

Pop-in Starting Displacement 
(nm)
8.81 ± 1.04
9.40 ± 1.13


Supplementary Information


Supplementary Figure 1: Energy-filtered TEM diffraction patterns and DF images formed with 
“diffuse superlattice” streaks. (a-c), energy-filtered diffraction patterns taken from samples that 
were water-quenched, aged at 600 C for one week and aged at 1000 C for one week, respectively. 
The contrast is reversed and pseudo-colored for better visibility. The line plots of intensity show 
the periodic intensity of the “diffuse superlattice” streaks. (d-f), energy-filtered DF images taken 
from water-quenched, 600 C aged and 1000 C aged samples, respectively. The aperture positions 
are marked by the g vectors. The images of the water-quenched and the 1000 C aged samples are 
the same as in Figure 1 but are presented again here for comparison with the 600 C aged sample.


Supplementary Figure 2: Geometrical phase analysis strain mapping of a 1000 C aged sample 
and water-quenched sample. (a), (e), drift-corrected high-resolution STEM images of the 1000 C 
aged sample and the water-quenched sample, respectively. (b) - (d), strain maps of image (a) 
showing nanometer-sized local fluctuation of strain. (f) - (h), strain maps of image (e) showing 
similar but much weaker contrast of local strain. 


Supplementary Figure 3:  Results of X-ray diffraction experiments from a water-quenched 
sample and a 1000 C aged sample, respectively. 


Supplementary Figure 4: Diffuse anti-phase boundary energy as a function of successive 
dislocation slip events from a calculated SRO model. The data in the table represents different 
states of SRO and the plot is from the state marked blue. 


Supplementary Figure 5:  Detailed “g · b” analysis of partial dislocations for the water-quenched 
(a-e) and aged MEA samples (f-j). (a) and (f) are diffraction references showing the diffraction 
conditions (g vectors) used for the analysis. (b) and (g) are DC-STEM images showing lower 
magnification images of dislocations in the water-quenched and aged samples, respectively.  (c-e) 
and (h-j) are two-beam DC-STEM images with the Burgers vectors of the visible dislocations 
noted on the images.  


Supplementary Figure 6: Detailed statistical analysis of the pop-in events. (a), (b), distribution 
of the pop-in load from water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples, respectively. (c), (d), 
distribution of the pop-in depth from water-quenched and 1000 C aged samples, respectively. The 
fitted normal distribution functions are listed in the figures. The results of numerical analysis are 
summarized in Table 1.


Supplementary Figure 7: Results of energy dispersive X-ray mapping (EDS) of the water-
quenched and aged MEA samples. (a) and (f) are reference HAADF images showing the regions 
of interest of a water-quenched sample and a 1000 C aged sample, respectively. (b) – (d) and (g) 
– (i) element mapping of Co, Ni and Cr of the water-quenched sample and the 1000 C aged sample, 
respectively. (e) and (j) are quantitative results of line scans of the water-quenched sample and the 
1000 C aged sample, respectively. The line scan directions are marked by the dashed lines in (a) 
and (f).


