 
   
 

1 
 

Bioinspired Materials with Self-Adaptable Mechanical Properties  
 
Santiago Orrego1,2,3, Zhezhi Chen,1,2, Urszula Krekora4, Decheng Hou1,2, Seung-Yeol Jeon1,2, 
Matthew Pittman1, Carolina Montoya3, Yun Chen1, Sung Hoon Kang1,2,5* 
 
1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 21218, USA. 
2Hopkins Extreme Materials Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 21218, USA. 
3Department of Oral Health Sciences and Bioengineering Department, Temple University, 
Philadelphia, 19140, USA. 
4Deparment of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
21218, USA. 
5Institute for NanoBioTechnology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 21218, USA. 
E-mail: shkang@jhu.edu (S. H. Kang) 
 
Keywords: bioinspired materials, self-adaptive, mineralization, piezoelectric, graded materials 
 

Natural structural materials, such as bone and wood, can autonomously adapt their 

mechanical properties in response to loading to prevent failure. They smartly control 

the addition of material in locations of high stress by utilizing locally available resources 

guided by biological signals. On the contrary, synthetic structural materials have 

unchanging mechanical properties limiting their mechanical performance and service 

life. Here, a material system that autonomously adapts its mechanical properties in 

response to mechanical loading is reported inspired by the mineralization process of 

bone. It is observed that charges from piezoelectric scaffolds can induce mineralization 

from media with mineral ions. The material system adapts to mechanical loading by 

inducing mineral deposition in proportion to the magnitude of the loading and the 

resulting piezoelectric charges. Moreover, the mechanism allows a simple one-step route 

for making graded materials by controlling stress distribution along the scaffold. The 

findings can pave the way for a new class of self-adaptive materials that reinforce the 

region of high stress or induce deposition of minerals on the damaged areas from the 

increase in stress to prevent/mitigate failure. They can also contribute to addressing the 

current challenges of synthetic materials for load-bearing applications from self-

adaptive capabilities.  


 
   
 

2 
 

The mechanical efficiency of natural (or biological) structural materials is remarkable. 

Self-optimized architectures,[1] outstanding mechanical properties with weak constituents,[2] 

hierarchical structuring,[3] and self-adaptability of stiffness in response to external stimuli[4] are 

just a few examples of inspiring features that should be included within synthetic structural 

materials. They provide inspiration for potential solutions to address challenges associated with 

traditional approaches of material selection.[5] In the classical approach, a material is selected 

for a specific application based on the expected loading conditions, design objective and 

constraints, and databases of material properties with fixed values (e.g., Ashby method[6]). This 

methodology does not account for unpredictable loading conditions. To address this issue, 

safety factors are added, which increases the associated costs and weight of the structure; thus, 

reduces its mechanical efficiency.  

A potential solution for this dichotomy is to have materials with self-adaptable 

properties responding to loading conditions. This feature can result in materials with improved 

mechanical efficiency and reduction in costs, resources and environmental impact. So far, there 

are few synthetic materials capable of increasing stiffness in response to external stimuli. For 

example, Capadona et al. and Ramirez et al. reported polymers that changed elastic moduli by 

changing the degree of crosslinking upon chemical, thermal or mechanical stimuli.[7,8] Agrawal 

et al. reported an increase of the elastic modulus of liquid crystal elastomers during cyclic 

mechanical stress due to the alignment of nematic directors.[9] Recently, a “self-growing” 

hydrogel responding to repetitive mechanical stress was reported through mechanochemical 

transduction.[10] Despite progress there are limited synthetic material systems adapting 

mechanical properties to external mechanical stimuli. Challenges of current self-stiffening 

materials include limited load-bearing capability, difficulty of material synthesis, high cost, 

lack of or limited biocompatibility, and need of additional energy for material property 

changes.[11] 


 
   
 

3 
 

Natural structural materials have resolved these challenges by taking different 

strategies.[12] Bone,[13] wood,[14] fish scales,[15] and coral reefs[16] are dynamic structural 

materials capable of self-adapting their mechanical properties in response to external loading 

to improve their mechanical efficiency and prevent failure.[13,17] Introducing these features to 

synthetic material systems has been challenging[18] since it requires active maintenance of living 

organisms. These natural materials utilize resources available in the environment to regulate 

their properties through mechanobiological mechanisms.[16,19] For example, bone and coral 

reefs utilize cellular signals to control the addition and removal of minerals harvested from 

surrounding media (e.g. blood or seawater) at specific locations.[20] During the process, organic 

matrices serve as templates for mineral growth. Specifically, it is reported that negatively 

charged carboxyl groups can bind calcium ions and induce nucleation of biominerals.[21] 

Inspired by these findings, there have been numerous reports[22] on mineral growth using 

negatively charged surfaces obtained by using electric field[23] or self-assembled monolayers.[24] 

However, previously synthesized minerals cannot change their mechanical properties upon 

external loading. 

Here we report a synthetic material system that can change its mechanical behaviors in 

response to external loading conditions inspired by natural mineralization processes in bone 

and coral reefs. We hypothesized that if we have a scaffold that can generate charges 

proportional to an external mechanical stimulus, the charges can work as signals to induce 

mineralization from resources (e.g. mineral ions) available in surrounding media. As a result, 

the material system can exhibit self-adapting mechanical behaviors. Our material system uses 

a new mechanism to realize self-stiffening materials and overcomes limitations of current 

synthetic materials with changing mechanical properties from its enhanced load-bearing 

capability, low cost, simple synthesis, no need of extra energy, and biocompatibility.  

To test our hypothesis, we utilized piezoelectric materials as scaffolds because they 

convert mechanical forces into electrical charges while other materials (e.g. triboelectric, 


 
   
 

4 
 

flexoelectric materials) could be utilized. We immersed piezoelectric polymer films (PVDF, 

(CH2CF2)n), d33~30 pC/N) with oppositely charged surfaces in a simulated body fluid (SBF)[25] 

mimicking the ionic concentrations of human blood plasma (Figure 1a). After one week of 

SBF incubation, we observed the minerals formed on the surfaces of the films using a scanning 

electron microscope (SEM). Minerals were preferentially deposited onto the negatively charged 

surfaces (Figure 1b). This was consistent with previous study.[23] To characterize chemical 

compositions of the formed minerals, we conducted energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy 

(EDX) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements. EDX results showed peaks of Ca, P, and 

O, which are elements consisting of hydroxyapatite (HAp) (Figure S2). XRD analysis showed 

the characteristic diffraction peaks of HAp (Figure 1d). We also observed similar mineral 

deposition behavior on different substrates including piezoelectric composites (See Supporting 

Information S3 for details). Moreover, we found that we can control the type of formed minerals 

by controlling the ion composition of the media (See Supporting Information S4). Refreshing 

the SBF solution everyday led to the formation of HAp minerals (Figure 1d), whereas using 

non-refreshed SBF led to a combination of Calcite and HAp (Figure 1c). The minerals found in 

bone (HAp) and coral reefs (Calcite) originate from blood and seawater, respectively.[21] 

Metallic medical devices are typically coated with these type of minerals to enable 

biocompatibility.[26] Usually these coatings wear out and do not regenerate.  

 
To understand the dynamics of mineralization, we conducted quantitative studies by 

comparing the mineral thickness at different conditions (Figure 2). First, we studied the effect 

of the polarity of the charged surface on the mineral formation rate (see Supporting Information 

S5). We found that the negatively charged surface showed about an order of magnitude faster 

mineral formation rate than the positively charged surface (Figure 2b). The mineral growth rate 

(~6.4 µm/day) was comparable to that reported by Yamashita et al., which was obtained in 

polarized negative surfaces.[23] We also studied the effect of the concentration of the SBF on 

mineral formation rate. We found higher concentrations of calcium in SBF resulted in faster 


 
   
 

5 
 

rates (Figure 2c), which is consistent with previous study that utilized other negatively 

functionalized surfaces.[27] In our study, we mainly utilized 10× calcium concentration in SBF 

as it provides faster mineral formation. We also found that we could modulate the mineral 

growth rate by controlling the external mechanical loading. Higher electrical charges generated 

by cyclic mechanical loads led to higher quantities of minerals compared to static or no 

mechanical loads (Figure 2d). Different from previous studies that utilized permanent chemical 

functionalization,[28] one can utilize “mechanical functionalization” using piezoelectric 

scaffolds to dynamically control the formation of minerals by modulating the loading condition.  

As an application of the mineralization mechanism controlled by mechanical stress, we 

made a graded material by using a simple one-step process. A piezoelectric PVDF film was 

subjected to a cantilever loading since it offers a gradual increase of stress (σ) from the free end 

to the fixation point (see Figure 2e, Supporting Information S13). In this beam configuration, 

the electrical charge changes proportionally to the beam length. We experimentally confirmed 

higher electrical charges at regions of high stress and vice versa at regions of low stress (Figure 

2e) as a piezoelectric charge (Q) is proportional to the applied stress (Q = dσA, d: piezoelectric 

coefficient, A: area). Then, we submerged a PVDF specimen in SBF under repetitive loading 

(Supporting Information S7) and measured the amount of mineral along the beam (Supporting 

Information S8). Our results showed a gradual formation of minerals with higher amounts at 

regions of high stress (high charge) and vice versa at low stress regions (Figure 2f). This result 

indicates that our material system could autonomously reinforce regions that experience higher 

stress with more minerals. The mechanism allows materials or structures to self-adapt to the 

external loading conditions to minimize failure. We further investigated the correlation between 

the mechanical stress and the mineral distribution. We used a numerical model to calculate the 

stresses distribution along the beam and compared with the mineral thickness distribution. 

Interestingly, the stress distributions at different positions of the specimen showed similar 

trends as the mineral thickness (Figure 2f and Supporting Information S9). We also obtained 


 
   
 

6 
 

the quantitative relation between the mineral height and the charge along the beam as Equation 

(1) (Supporting Information S13) and found that the mineral height (MH) is approximately 

proportional to the square root of the charge (Q) or stress (σ). 

   
 
 
   ! ≅ #$$%(4.33 × 10-./0)                                                    (1)  

(Q: charge in C, MH: mineral height in mm, d: piezoelectric coefficient in pC/N, A: area in 

mm2).  

Furthermore, we investigated whether our material system can change its mechanical 

behavior by inducing mineral formation in response to the external loading akin to bone (Figure 

3a). We prepared porous piezoelectric scaffolds (d33~2 pC/N) using electrospinning 

(Supporting Information S10) inspired by bone’s porous architecture. The scaffolds were 

subjected to cyclic mechanical loading while submerged in SBF solution at room temperature 

(Supporting Information S11). The applied load and actuator displacement were measured to 

calculate changes in material property such as Young’s modulus.  

From the measurements, our material system showed self-stiffening behaviors by 

changing its mechanical properties in response to periodic loadings (Figure 3b). The modulus 

increased ~20% after 3 days of immersion in SBF. A control sample submerged in deionized 

water (no mineral ions available in the solution) did not show a significant increase in the 

mechanical properties over time (Figure 3c). Also, comparison of the stress-strain behaviors of 

the scaffolds before and after the external stimulation in SBF showed that the mechanical 

property increased ~30% in modulus and ~100% in toughness (Figure 3c). SEM images 

confirmed the mineralization of the scaffold that enabled the increase in mechanical property 

(Figure 3d-e). EDX results confirmed the presence of minerals with traces of calcium, 

phosphorous, and oxygen (Figure 3f). Fluorescent microscopy images showed the formation of 

minerals around the fibers (Figure 3i and Supporting Information S12).  

Moreover, to further test the self-adaptive behavior of the material system, we subjected 

scaffolds to cyclic mechanical loading with different load magnitudes while submerged in SBF. 


 
   
 

7 
 

Before cyclic loading, we verified the different piezoelectric charges under different load 

magnitudes. We measured the stress-strain responses after samples were submerged in SBF. As 

expected, the modulus of the material system increased proportional to the magnitude of the 

load and the resulting piezoelectric charge (Figure 3g-h). Specifically, the modulus increased 

by ~180% after three days for the maximum 5N cyclic load, further demonstrating the self-

adaptive capability of the material system. 

   
In summary, we report a synthetic material system capable of changing its mechanical 

properties depending on external loading conditions by utilizing scaffolds that generate “signals” 

to induce mineralization from media with mineral ions. The material system allows control of 

the location and the rate of mineral formation by modulating the loading conditions. Our 

findings can contribute to addressing current challenges of synthetic materials used for load-

bearing applications from self-adaptive capabilities. To make the material system portable, one 

can utilize porous scaffolds with suitable surface properties[29] for making liquid-infused porous 

piezoelectric scaffolds inspired by bone, which holds blood within porous matrices. Beyond 

biominerals used as a model system in this study, we can further expand the material system 

based on the reported mechanism for broader applications. We envision that the strategy and 

the mechanism that we report will open new opportunities for technological advancement 

including smart coatings for bone implants to mitigate mismatch of mechanical properties, 

scaffolds for accelerating treatment of bone-related disease or fracture, smart resins for dental 

treatments requiring tissue regeneration, and 4D materials and structures reconfiguring to adapt 

to loading conditions. They will also contribute to fundamental advances in understanding 

dynamic behaviors of adaptive materials and structures and dynamics of mineralization induced 

by mechano-electric coupling. Moreover, built upon recent studies that reported piezoelectric 

charges could stimulate cell differentiation in various cell types and improve cell adhesion, 

bone growth and function in endothelial, nerve, and bone cells,[30] the material system can serve 


 
   
 

8 
 

as a model system for quantitative understanding of the process with adequate choice of 

medium and provide guides for facilitating the regeneration. 

 
Experimental Section  

    SBF Incubation: Piezoelectric PVDF films (TE Connectivity, PN: 3-1003352-0) were 

submerged in a sealed polypropylene bottle (Dyn-A-Med, 80094) containing ~200 mL of SBF 

solution kept at 37 °C for the duration of the experiment (see Figure 1a). Every 24 hours, the 

sample was taken out of the beaker, gently rinsed with de-ionized water (Milli pore, Milli-D) 

and put back into a refreshed solution. After the incubation, the sample was repeatedly rinsed 

gently in a de-ionized water solution to remove salts of NaCl. The sample was taken out and 

dried at room temperature in air for further analysis including SEM, EDS, XRD, profilometer. 

    Self-Stiffening Experiments: To test the self-stiffening capability of our material system, 

electrospun PVDF samples were submerged in SBF solutions and were subjected to cyclic 

mechanical loadings to activate the piezoelectric charge generation. We prepared electrospun 

PVDF samples of 30×15 mm2. Simulated body fluids (10×SBF) were prepared by following 

protocols described in Supporting Information S1. While submerged in the solution at room 

temperature, samples were subjected to cyclic compression loading using an electromechanical 

universal testing machine (TA Instruments Electroforce 5500 with a 10 N capacity load cell). 

The stiffness (S) was calculated from the load (P) and displacement (∆δ) amplitudes measured 

with the actuator using the follow relation: S=∆P/∆δ. The force and displacement signals were 

monitored and recorded during experiments. To prevent any change of mechanical properties 

of electrospun films due to viscoelastic and time-dependent behavior during experiments in 

SBF, we initially subjected samples to cyclic compression loading while submerged in DI water 

for 3 days. The modulus (E) was calculated by multiplying by the cross section area and the 

deflection E=S*∆δ / A.   

 


 
   
 

9 
 

Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Mr. Eugene Kang for the help fabricating the electrospinning 
apparatus, Mr. Ian McLane for the help and guidance during contact profilometer 
measurements, and Mr. Prashant Ray for his help during the concentration measurements. 
This work is supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research Young Investigator 
Program Award (Award number: FA9550-18-1-0073, Program manager: Dr. Byung-Lip (Les) 
Lee), Johns Hopkins University Whiting School of Engineering start-up fund, and Temple 
University Maurice Kornberg School of Dentistry start-up fund (PI: Orrego). Any opinions, 
finding, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the 
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Air Force.   
 
Conflict of interest: A patent application has been filed on aspects of the described work.  
 

References 

[1] 
E. Stach, in Text. Compos. Inflatable Struct., Springer, 2005, pp. 285–303. 

[2] 
Z. Liu, M. A. Meyers, Z. Zhang, R. O. Ritchie, Prog. Mater. Sci. 2017, 88, 467. 

[3] 
P. Fratzl, J. R. Soc. Interface 2007, 4, 637. 

[4] 
S. Weiner, L. Addadi, J. Mater. Chem. 1997, 7, 689. 

[5] 
K.-I. Jang, H. U. Chung, S. Xu, C. H. Lee, H. Luan, J. Jeong, H. Cheng, G.-T. Kim, S. 

Y. Han, J. W. Lee, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6566. 

[6] 
M. F. Ashby, H. Shercliff, D. Cebon, Materials: Engineering, Science, Processing and 

Design, Butterworth-Heinemann, 2018. 

[7] 
J. R. Capadona, K. Shanmuganathan, D. J. Tyler, S. J. Rowan, C. Weder, Science 

2008, 319, 5868. 

[8] 
A. L. B. Ramirez, Z. S. Kean, J. A. Orlicki, M. Champhekar, S. M. Elsakr, W. E. 

Krause, S. L. Craig, Nat Chem 2013, 5, 757. 

[9] 
A. Agrawal, A. C. Chipara, Y. Shamoo, P. K. Patra, B. J. Carey, P. M. Ajayan, W. G. 

Chapman, R. Verduzco, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 1739. 

[10] 
T. Matsuda, R. Kawakami, R. Namba, T. Nakajima, J. P. Gong, Science 2019, 363, 

504. 

[11] 
J. F. Patrick, M. J. Robb, N. R. Sottos, J. S. Moore, S. R. White, Nature 2016, 540, 

363. 


 
   
 

10 
 

[12] 
M. A. Meyers, J. McKittrick, P.-Y. Chen, Science 2013, 339, 773. 

[13] 
S. C. Cowin, Bone Mechanics Handbook, CRC Press, 2001. 

[14] 
G. C. Mattheck, Trees: The Mechanical Design, Springer Science & Business Media, 

2012. 

[15] 
E. A. Zimmermann, B. Gludovatz, E. Schaible, N. K. N. Dave, W. Yang, M. A. 

Meyers, R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2634. 

[16] 
W. C. Dennison, D. J. Barnes, J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. 1988, 115, 67. 

[17] 
B. E. Brown, Adv. Mar. Biol. 1997, 31, 221. 

[18] 
U. G. K. Wegst, H. Bai, E. Saiz, A. P. Tomsia, R. O. Ritchie, Nat. Mater. 2015, 14, 

23. 

[19] 
D. J. Hadjidakis, I. I. Androulakis, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 2006, 1092, 385. 

[20] 
P. Fratzl, R. Weinkamer, Prog. Mater. Sci. 2007, 52, 1263. 

[21] 
S. Mann, Biomineralization: Principles and Concepts in Bioinorganic Materials 

Chemistry, Oxford University Press On Demand, 2001. 

[22] 
A.-W. Xu, Y. Ma, H. Cölfen, J. Mater. Chem. 2007, 17, 415. 

[23] 
K. Yamashita, N. Oikawa, T. Umegaki, Chem. Mater. 1996, 8, 2697. 

[24] 
H. Cölfen, Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 960. 

[25] 
T. Kokubo, H. Takadama, Biomaterials 2006, 27, 2907. 

[26] 
Y. Yang, K.-H. Kim, J. L. Ong, Biomaterials 2005, 26, 327. 

[27] 
S.-S. Kim, M. S. Park, S.-J. Gwak, C. Y. Choi, B.-S. Kim, Tissue Eng. 2006, 12, 2997. 

[28] 
M. Tanahashi, T. Matsuda, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. An Off. J. Soc. Biomater. Japanese 

Soc. Biomater. 1997, 34, 305. 

[29] 
T. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Y. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal, J. 

Aizenberg, Nature 2011, 477, 443. 

[30] 
A. H. Rajabi, M. Jaffe, T. L. Arinzeh, Acta Biomater. 2015, 24, 12. 

 


 
   
 

11 
 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1. Formation of minerals induced by piezoelectric charges. a) Schematic of the 
experimental setup. A PVDF piezoelectric film (d33~30 pC/N) was submerged in a simulated 
body fluid (SBF). The generation of negative charges controlled by external mechanical loading 
preferentially induced the formation of minerals on the negative side of the film. b) Micrographs 
of the negative (left) and positive (right) sides of the films showing significant formation of 
minerals on the negative side. c) The type of formed mineral was controlled by the medium 
used. Not refreshing the SBF solution everyday led to the formation of mainly Calcite minerals. 
d) Refreshing the SBF solution everyday led to the formation of mainly HAp minerals. Scale 
bars are 10 µm.  
 


 
   
 

12 
 

 

 
Figure 2. Dynamics of the formation of minerals by piezoelectric charges. a) The amount of 
mineral formed on films was quantified by measuring the mineral thickness. b) Time 
dependence test. A maximum of 60 µm of mineral was formed on the negative side after 2 
weeks of incubation in SBF. No significant mineral was formed on the positive side. c) SBF 
concentration dependence test. Higher concentration of the SBF solution led to higher amounts 
of mineral. d) Mechanical loading dependence test. The higher charge generated by external 
loading led to higher amounts of mineral. e) Formation of graded materials. A piezoelectric 
film submerged in SBF and subjected to cantilever loading generated higher charge at regions 
of high stress (close to the foundation) compared to regions of low stress (low charge 
generation). f) Mineral was formed proportional to the mechanical stress (gray line) with 
approximately linear (R2=0.93) distribution form the foundation to the free end (orange line). 
The orange line is the filtered (1D- median filter) data of the mineral height shown as shades in 
orange. The error bars were obtained by having one standard deviation from N=5 samples. 
 
 

 


 
   
 

13 
 

 

 
Figure 3. Self-adaptable mechanical properties. a) Electrospun piezoelectric scaffolds (d33~ 2 
pC/N) were submerged in SBF and subjected to controlled repetitive mechanical loading. The 
external activation of the electrical charges promoted the formation of minerals on the scaffold. 
The modulus of the mineralized scaffold was monitored for the duration of the experiment. b) 
The material showed a self-adapting mechanical property by increasing modulus under 
dynamic loading. A control sample submerged in deionized water (gray line) showed no 
increase of modulus as a function of time. c) After the repetitive loading experiment, samples 
were loaded-to-failure under quasi-static conditions to confirm the change of mechanical 
properties. The modulus (E) and toughness (U) increased ~30 and ~100%, respectively. d) 
Micrographs of the PVDF scaffold after submerged in SBF showing the formation of minerals, 
compared to e) the as-prepared scaffold. f) Chemical analysis (EDS) confirmed the formation 
of calcium phosphate minerals on the PVDF scaffold. g) To show the adaptability of mechanical 
properties, PVDF scaffolds were subjected to different magnitudes of mechanical stress and 
resulting electrical charge. h) The mechanical modulus increased proportional to the magnitude 
of the applied load during incubation. i) Confocal laser scanning microscopy showed the 
formation of minerals around the PVDF template. j) The average thickness of the formed 
minerals was 0.39 µm. The error bars were obtained by having one standard deviation from 
N=5 samples. 
 
 


 
   
 

14 
 

Supporting Information  
 
 
Bioinspired Materials with Self-Adaptable Mmechanical Properties 

Santiago Orrego, Zhezhi Chen, Urszula Krekora, Decheng Hou, Seung-Yeol Jeon, Matthew 

Pittman, Carolina Montoya, Yun Chen, Sung Hoon Kang* 

 

Table of Contents 

• Supporting Information S1: Mineral Incubation Procedure  

• Supporting Information S2: SEM, EDS and XRD Evaluations  

• Supporting Information S3: Mineralization on Porous Piezocomposites  

• Supporting Information S4: Ion Concentration Measurements of Simulated Body Fluids 

• Supporting Information S5: Mineral Thickness Measurements  

• Supporting Information S6: Piezoelectric Coefficient Measurements 

• Supporting Information S7: Graded Material 

• Supporting Information S8: 3D Optical Profilometer Measurements 

• Supporting Information S9: Numerical Model 

• Supporting Information S10: Electrospinning of Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) 

• Supporting Information S11: Self-Stiffening Experiments  

• Supporting Information S12: Confocal Microscopy of Mineralized Electrospun Scaffolds 

• Supporting Information S13: Analytical Model 

• References 

 

 

 

 

 


 
   
 

15 
 

Supporting Information S1: Mineral Incubation Procedure  

 
Commercial piezoelectric PVDF films (TE Connectivity, PN: 3-1003352-0) were cut 

into 2×4 cm2 specimens and hanged vertically in a sealed polypropylene bottle (Dyn-A-Med, 

80094) containing ~200 mL of SBF solution (Table S1) kept at 37 °C for the duration of the 

experiment (see Figure 1a). Every 24 hours, the sample was taken out of the beaker, gently 

rinsed with de-ionized water (Milli pore, Milli-D) and put back into a refreshed solution. After 

the incubation, the sample was repeatedly rinsed gently in a de-ionized water solution to remove 

salts of NaCl. The salinity of the rinsing solution was measured by a salinity meter (Extech, 

EC170) and after reaching a magnitude below 0.1 ppt, the sample was taken out and dried at 

room temperature in air for further analysis.  

To study the influence of ion concentration on mineralization induced by piezoelectric 

charges, different stable Calcium-saturated solutions were utilized including 1×,[1] 1.5×,[2] 5×[3] 

and 10×[4] SBF. The solutions were prepared as indicated by dissolving reagent-grade as 

received materials of NaCl, NaHCO3, KCl, K2HPO4·3H2O, MgCl2·6H2O, CaCl2 and Na2SO4 

(All from Sigma-Aldrich) in the deionized water in accordance with the following ion 

concentrations 
(Table 
S1). 
1×SBF 
and 
1.5×SBF 
are 
further 
buffered 
with 

trishydroxymethylaminomethane (Tris) and HCl until pH=7.4 at 37 ºC in an incubator as 

indicated in the recipe. 

Table S1. Ion concentrations of 1×, 1.5×, 5× and 10× SBF Solutions (mM). 

Na+ 
K+ Ca2+
Mg2+
Cl- 
HCO3-
HPO42-
SO42-

1×SBF
142.0
5.0
2.5
1.5
148.8
4.2
1.0
0.5

1.5×SBF
142.0
5.0
3.75
1.5
148.8
4.2
1.5
0.5

5×SBF
714.8
-
12.5
7.5
723.8
21
5
-

10×SBF
1030.0
5.0
25.0
5.0
1065.0
10.0
10.0
-

 


 
   
 

16 
 

 
The change in pH of the SBF solutions was monitored. A pH meter (Extech PH220-C) 

was calibrated using a 3-point method including acid (pH=4.01), neutral (pH=7.00) and alkaline 

(pH=10.00) buffers. The probe was dipped in the solution and the pH value recorded at different 

time durations. Figure S1 shows the change of a 10×SBF solution during incubation process 

of a PVDF piezoelectric film. 

 

Figure S1.  Change of pH for a 10×SBF solution kept at 36 °C during the incubation of minerals 

on a piezoelectric PVDF film for 12 hours. 

 

Supporting Information S2: SEM, EDS and XRD Evaluations  

 
A scanning electronic microscope (Tescan, Mira3) was used to observe the morphology 

of the formed minerals at an accelerating voltage of 10 kV. Figure S2a shows a representative 

layer of minerals formed on a PVDF film after 7 days of incubation in 10×SBF. Chemical and 

structural evaluations of the newly formed minerals were conducted by energy dispersion of X-

ray (EDS; EDAX Co., USA, Octane Plus) analysis and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; Philips, 

X’Pert Pro). Figure S2b shows the chemical evaluation of the mineral layer showed in Figure 

S2a. Clear peaks of calcium and phosphorus were observed with a ratio of Ca/P=1.47. Then, 

mineral powders were scratched off from a dried sample using a razor blade for XRD. XRD 

measurements were conducted with 10°-65° incident angle and step size of 0.02° using CuKα 

radiation. A typical response of XRD results is shown in Figure S2c including a comparison 

0
200
400
600
800

5.4

5.6

5.8

6.0

6.2

6.4
10×SBF

Time (min)

pH


 
   
 

17 
 

with standard hydroxyapatite (HAp) readings,[5] which showed good agreement between peaks 

of formed minerals and those from standard HAp. 

 

Figure S2. Mineralization of a piezoelectric PVDF film. a) SEM image of minerals formed on 

a negative side after 7-day incubation in 10×SBF with a 30° tilt view. b) Chemical evaluation 

of the mineral layer in the SEM image by EDS. c) XRD measurement of minerals from the 

specimen shown in the SEM image comparing with minerals formed on a PVDF film from the 

ICDD database. 

 

Supporting Information S3: Mineralization on Porous Piezocomposites  

 
Piezoelectric composites were utilized to check whether mineralizations induced by 

piezoelectric charges occur in a different material system. We employed a porous piezoelectric 

composite comprised of a PDMS matrix, carbon nanotubes and BaTiO3 fillers. The sample was 

prepared by utilizing a combination of the fabrication methods described in the work by Li et 

al. [6] and Chen et al.[7] Briefly, the piezocomposite samples were prepared via solvent-casting 

by thoroughly mixing PDMS (base material:crosslinking agent = 10:1 by weight) (Sylgard 184, 

Dow Chemical) with BaTiO3 nanoparticles (diameter: ∼200 nm, US3830, US Research 

Nanomaterials, Inc.) as 15 wt% of PDMS, carbon nanotubes (OD: 10-30 nm, US4500, US 

Research Nanomaterials, Inc.) as 1 wt% of PDMS and sacrificial NaCl microparticles (Sigma 

Aldrich S7653) as 26.5 wt% of PDMS. To thoroughly mix the compounds, a revolutionary 

mixer (KK-400W, Mazerustar) was utilized for 360 seconds. The mass ratio between BaTiO3, 

5 μm
0
1
2
3
4
5

0

500

1000

1500

2000

Energy (keV)

Intensity (cps)

a)
b)
c)

Ca

P

O

Ca

(002)

(211)

(310)

(222)

(213)

(004)

10
20
30
40
50
60

0

100

200

300

400

2θ (°)

Intensity (a.u.)

Standard HAp
Formed mineral

(ICDD 9-432)


 
   
 

18 
 

NaCl and PDMS was adjusted to create polymer composites with different porosities. The 

mixture was then cured in an oven (Lindberg Blue M, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60 °C for 6 

hours. After 24 hours, the solidified composite was immersed in water overnight to completely 

remove the NaCl grains. Microscale pores were then created. The synthesized microporous 

polymer composite was then cut with a razor blade into any shape and size according to the 

experimental requirements. Figure S3a shows a representative sample at the macroscale. The 

sample is soft and can allow high bending curvature without failure. The microstructure of a 

pristine sample is shown in Figure S3b. The average pore size is ~400 µm diameter. To improve 

the elcetromechanical output, samples were subjected to corona poling for 3 hours at 20 kV and 

120 °C.[6] The measured piezoelectric coefficient of the porous piezocomposite is d33~30 pC/N 

and obtained as explained in Supporting Information S6.  

 
After fabrication, the piezocomposite was incubated in 10×SBF for 7 days under cyclic 

mechanical loading as explained in Supporting Information S1. After incubation, the sample 

was cut in half using a razor blade, and the fractured surface was evaluated in SEM and EDS 

as explained in Supporting Information S2. Figure S3c shows the fracture surface on the center 

of the sample after 7-day incubation under cyclic mechanical stimulation. The formation of the 

minerals inside the pores can be observed, which are denoted with white arrows. Chemical 

analysis of these sample area confirmed the presence of calcium phosphate minerals and peaks 

of Si corresponding to the PDMS matrix (Figure S3e). A higher magnification view in one of 

the pores can clearly show the minerals (see Figure S3d). The corresponding chemical analysis 

confirmed the presence of calcium and phosphorus corresponding to the ions available in the 

SBF solution (Figure S3f). 

 


 
   
 

19 
 

 

Figure S3. Mineralization of porous piezoelectric composites. a) Macroscale view of the 

sample. b) SEM image of the cross-section of the as-prepared porous piezoelectric composite 

showing porous microstructure. c) Cross-section view of the porous microstructure after 7-day 

incubation in 10×SBF and under cyclic mechanical loading showing mineral formation inside 

the pores as marked by white arrows. d) Higher magnification view of the mineral. e) Chemical 

(EDS) evaluation of the section view in c) showing peaks of calcium, phosphorus and oxygen 

corresponding to the newly formed minerals, and peaks of Si corresponding to the PDMS 

matrix. f) Chemical (EDS) analysis of the section view in d) showing peaks of calcium, 

phosphorus and oxygen corresponding to minerals and peaks of Si corresponding to the PDMS 

matrix. 

 

Supporting Information S4: Ion Concentration Measurements of SBF  

To study the potential change of calcium and phosphate ions present in SBF over time 

as a result of mineral formation, we conducted ion concentration studies in the solutions. 

Calcium concentration in the SBF solution was measured using the protocol outlined by Gindler 

and King.[8] First, stock solutions of dye and base were prepared. The stock dye solution was 

prepared by combining 0.018 grams of methylthymol blue sodium salt (CAS 1945-77-3), 0.720 

500 μm
10 μm

a)
c)

b)
d)
f)

0
1
2
3
4
5

0

1000

2000

3000

Energy (keV)

Intensity (cps)

Si

O Na

P

Ca

Cl

500 μm

e)

0
1
2
3
4
5

0

1000

2000

3000

Energy (keV)

Intensity (cps)

Si

O

Na

P

Ca


 
   
 

20 
 

grams of 8-Hydroxyquinoline (Sigma Aldrich, CAS 148-24-3), and 1.00 mL of 12M HCl (CAS 

7647-01-0) in 100 mL in deionized water. The stock base solution was prepared by combining 

2.40 g of sodium sulfite (Fisher Scientific, CAS 7757-83-7) and 22.0 mL of monoethanolamine 

(Sigma Aldrich, CAS 7757-83-7) in 100 mL of deionized water. Working reagent was made by 

mixing equal amounts of stock dye solution and stock base solution. 

First, calibration measurements were done using the solutions containing known 

concentration of calcium. For each solution with known concentrations of calcium, 0.050 mL 

was mixed with 3.00 mL of working solution inside of a cuvette (Sigma Aldrich C5677). Using 

a UV-Vis photo spectrometer (LAMBDA 950, Perkin Elmer), absorbance values were 

measured from each sample. After confirming that the absorbance peak was at or near 612 nm, 

the absorbance reading was taken for each sample. After measuring absorbances of solutions 

with known concentrations treated with this assay, the relationship between calcium 

concentration and absorbance at 612 nm was found and described in Equation S1):  

                                                            3 =

567.0--

7.78$      
 
 
                         (S1) 

where C is calcium concentration in mmol/L and A is absorbance. This relationship was used 

to estimate the calcium concentration values in SBF solutions from absorbance readings.  

To test calcium concentrations in SBF buffers, 0.050 mL of SBF solution was mixed 

with 3.00 mL of working solution in a cuvette. Calcium concentrations were correlated to 

absorbance reading using the calibration curve and Equation S1. The change of calcium 

concentration in an SBF solution is presented in Figure S4. 

Phosphate concentrations in solution were measured using the protocol outlined by Karl 

and Tien.[9] Stock potassium antimonyl tartrate solution was prepared by dissolving 0.2743 g 

of potassium antimonyl tartrate (Sigma Aldrich CAS 331753-56-1) in 100 mL of deionized 

water. Mixed reagent was prepared by combining 25 mL of 2.5M H2SO4 (Alfa Aeser CAS 

7664-93-9) 0.300 grams of ammonium molybdate (Sigma Aldrich CAS 13106-76-8), 0.264 


 
   
 

21 
 

grams of ascorbic acid (Alfa Aesar CAS 50-81-7), and 2.5 mL of potassium antimonyl tartrate 

solution in a 50 mL volumetric flask and filling the remainder with deionized water and mixing 

by shaking until all solids dissolved.  

Similar to the case of the calcium ion concentration measurement, a calibration curve 

was obtained by using solutions containing known concentrations of phosphate ions. For each 

sample with known concentrations of phosphate, 4 mL of sample, 800 µL of mixed reagent, 

and 200 µL of deionized water were mixed in a cuvette. Using a UV-Vis photo spectrometer, 

absorbance readings were taken from each sample. For each sample with unknown 

concentration of phosphate, 4 mL of sample, 800 µL of mixed reagent, and 200 µL of deionized 

water was mixed in a cuvette. The absorbance readings were taken at 840 nm. Phosphate 

concentrations were correlated to absorbance reading using the calibration curve. After 

measuring absorbances of solutions with known concentrations treated with this assay, the 

relationship between calcium concentration and absorbance at 840 nm was found to be Equation 

S2.  

      9 =

5:7.700

7.0;0    
   
                                      (S2) 

where P is Phosphate concentration in mmol/L and A is absorbance. This relationship was used 

to calculate the phosphate concentration values of unknown solutions of SBF from absorbance 

readings. The change of phosphate concentration in an SBF solution is presented in Figure S4. 

Error was calculated using the following formula:[10]  

            <= = >(

?=

?5)0 <5

0    
 
 
 
 
(S3) 

where SC is the calculated error in concentration measurements and SA is the standard deviation 

of the absorbance readings.  

For calcium concentration calculations, this simplified to Equation S4. 

<= = >
AB

C

7.78$C    
 
 
                      (S4) 


 
   
 

22 
 

For phosphate concentration calculations, this simplified to Equation S5. 

  <= = >
AB

C

7.0;0C   
 
 
 
         (S5) 

 

Figure S4. Change in concentration of calcium and phosphate ions over extended period of 

time in an SBF solution without being refreshed and maintained at 36 °C. The error bars are 

obtained by having one standard deviation from N=5 samples. 

 

Supporting Information S5: Mineral Thickness Measurements  

We utilized a contact stylus profilometer to quantify the height (thickness) of the new 

mineral layer formed on the piezoelectric films of PVDF. Minerals formed on the films in 

10×SBF for different duration of times and mechanical loading conditions (see Supporting 

Information S1) were measured. The external edges of the sample were masked with Scotch® 

tape (7510000822520). After incubation period, the tape was gently de-bonded exposing the 

PVDF film. A step between the piezoelectric substrate and the newly formed mineral was 

created. The stylus of surface profilometer was placed on the mineral phase. Thickness 

measurements were performed on the mineral layer deposited on PVDF using the Dektak 3 

surface profilometer with a 0.8 mm cutoff length according to ANSI standard B46.1. The step-

height was measured by calculating the difference between the peak and valley (Ry) of the 

surface profile. Several profiles were measured along different locations of the mineral layer to 

0
5
10
15
20

0

10

20

30

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Time (days)

Calcium Concentration (mM)

Ca2+

PO4

3-

Phosphate Concentration (mM)


 
   
 

23 
 

calculate an average step-height per sample. The time-dependent thickness measurements are 

summarized in Figure 2b. The similar method was used for the SBF concentration dependence 

study as summarized in Figure 2c. 

To show the influence of mechanical loading on mineralization rates, we conducted 

incubation in 10×SBF subjecting PVDF films to three different configurations including flat 

(no stress), fully rolled under static loading condition, and cantilevered bending under cyclic 

loading (see Supporting Information S7). We measured the mineral thickness for each 

configuration using the surface profilometer by following the aforementioned procedure as 

summarized in Figure 2d. 

 

Supporting Information S6: Piezoelectric Coefficient Measurements 

 
We measured the electromechanical response of the materials utilized in this 

investigation (i.e. commercial PVDF film, electrospun PVDF and piezoelectric composite) 

based on the Berlincourt’s method.[11] Piezoelectric samples were sandwiched between 

compression platens covered with conductive carbon tape used as electrodes. The electrodes 

were wired to a charge amplifier (Piezo Film Lab Amplifier P/N 1007214, Measurement 

Specialties, Virginia). The amplifier was operated in Charge-Mode (100 pF) and bandwidth 

filter configured at 1 Hz and 10 Hz. Samples were subjected to cyclic compression loads (P) 

using an electromechanical universal testing machine (TA Instruments ElectroForce 5500). The 

load amplitude and frequency, and preload were adjusted to evaluate the electromechanical 

performance under different load conditions. The load cell and the charge amplifier signals 

were connected to a data acquisition system (NI-PCI 6251 and BNC-2110, National 

Instruments, Texas). Data was acquired with a sample rate of 1000 Hz ensuring our measures 

generated a sufficient representation of the acquired load and electrical charge signals. A 

schematic showing the wiring and configuration of the electromechanical measurements is 

showed in Figure S5a. 


 
   
 

24 
 

 

Figure S5. Piezoelectric coefficient measurements. a) Schematic of the configuration used to 

measure the electromechanical behavior of piezoelectric materials. Samples were sandwiched 

between two electrodes, which were wired to an amplifier and a data acquisition (DAQ). Signals 

were recorded and analyzed in LabVIEW. b) Electromechanical response of a commercial 

PVDF film. Signals recorded from mechanical load (blue) and electrical charge (red). 

 

LabVIEW software was used to process the measured signals and calculate the 

piezoelectric properties. The peak/valley function was used to calculate the electrical charge 

(DQ) and load cell (DP) amplitudes. The piezoelectric coefficient was calculated as Equation 

S6.[12] 

       #$$ =

∆E

∆F   
 
 
 
 
  (S6) 

To validate electromechanical experiments, we used the commercial PVDF film (TE 

Connectivity, PN: 3-1003352-0) with known piezoelectric coefficient (d33 ~ 30 pC/N) before 

each measurement (see Figure S5b).  

 

Electrode

Electrode

Sample
DAQ
Piezo 

Amplifier

P

Computer 
LabVIEW

Load Cell

P
a)

b)


 
   
 

25 
 

Supporting Information S7: Graded Material  

 
To investigate the potential capability of our material system to deposit different amount 

of minerals along a surface proportional to the amount of stress, we subjected piezoelectric 

films of PVDF to cantilever loading. With this loading configuration, regions of the film closer 

to the foundation experience high mechanical stress, thus high charge generation. Regions of 

the film closer to the point of load application will have low stress, thus low charge generation. 

This configuration can lead to having a graded material using a simple one-step procedure by 

generating graded stress distribution. We cut PVDF films of 5×40 mm2 with a razor blade. One 

side of the film was fixed to a foundation. The other side was bent by an actuator excited by a 

long stroke shaker (Electro-Seis APS 113, APS Dynamics, California). Films were subjected 

to strain-controlled actuation with a stroke of ~25 mm, guaranteeing that samples were 

sufficiently bent. The electrical charges were measured in the regions of high and low stresses 

by carbon tape electrodes of ~3×5 mm2. Electromechanical characterization was conducted as 

explained in Supporting Information S6. A schematic of the loading and charge measurement 

configuration is shown in Figure S6a. To allow mineral formation in response to the applied 

stress, the samples were submerged in a 10×SBF solution refreshed every day for 3 days under 

cyclic loading. After the incubation, samples were rinsed and prepared for surface profile 

measurements (Supporting Information S8). 

 

Supporting Information S8: 3D Optical Profilometer Measurements 

 
To measure the mineral distribution that was deposited on the PVDF films from the 

graded material experiments (Supporting Information S7), we utilized an optical profilometer.  

Samples were carefully attached to a silicon wafer by fixing with tape. A non-contact 

profilometer (Laser Scanning Microscope, Keyence VK-X100, Osaka, Japan) was used to scan 

samples over mineralized regions. The profilometer collected 3D information (x, y, z) from the 

scanned area. Samples were masked in their borders and a 3D distribution of the mineral was 


 
   
 

26 
 

obtained. Several images were taken along the length of the sample and neighboring images 

were stitched to obtain the final result. First, scanned images were initially processed by VK 

analysis application (Keyence, Osaka, Japan) to correct surface tilting by checking the level of 

the substrate layer. Common correction methods we used were the 2-point linear profile 

correction and the 3-point non-linear profile correction, depending on specific situations. Data 

was then imported to Gwyddion (Department of Nanometrology, Czech Metrology Institute). 

We utilized analysis tools to quantify height distribution of minerals along the length of sample. 

Specifically, we obtained the mineral height along the beam length by calculating the root mean 

square mineral height on the film surface. The mineral height vs. beam length data was then 

filtered using a 1-D median filtering of order 300. This allowed the mineral distribution to be 

less noisy. 

 

Supporting Information S9: Numerical Model  

A three-dimensional (3D) finite element model was developed to simulate piezoelectric 

beam deflection. The simulation was conducted using the commercial FEA package Abaqus 

(SIMULIA, Providence, RI). The Abaqus/Standard solver was employed and the model was 

built using linear solid elements (Element type: C3D8). The beam geometry was set as 15 mm 

(length) × 0.1 mm (thickness) × 5 mm (width). The material was assumed to be linearly elastic, 

with Young’s modulus of 4 GPa and Poisson’s ratio of 0.18. The one end of the beam was 

constrained in all degree of freedom and the bottom surface of the beam was loaded with 500 

Pa in the vertical direction of the beam (Figure S6). The beam deflection was 6.5 mm and stress 

(S33) values on the top surface were extracted along the beam direction.  

 


 
   
 

27 
 

 

 

Figure S6. Finite element analysis (FEA) to calculate S33 according to the piezoelectric beam 

deflection. Left image shows stress map (S33) before deformation. Right image shows stress 

distribution (S33) of beam after subjected to cantilever bending mode. 

 

Supporting Information S10: Electrospinning of Polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) 
 

 
To make porous piezoelectric scaffolds, electrospinning was utilized. PVDF pellets 

(Mw=530,000), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.8%) and acetone (99.5%) were purchased 

from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All the materials were used as received without 

further purification. The PVDF pellets were first dissolved in a DMF/acetone mixed solvent at 

a certain concentration and stirred at 80°C overnight until a transparent homogenous solution 

was obtained. The weight ratio of the DMF and acetone in the mixed solvent was 2:3 and the 

mass concentration of PVDF in the solution was 18%. Then, the PVDF/DMF/acetone solution 

was cooled down to the room temperature.  

To electrospin fibrous PVDF membranes, the PVDF/DMF/acetone solution was placed 

into a 10-mL glass syringe installed with a stainless steel-needle as the spinneret. A digitally 

controlled syringe pump (N1000 - New Era Pump Systems, Inc.) was used to feed the polymer 

solution into the needle tip at a constant feeding rate of 1 mL/hr. A rotary disk with the diameter 

of 30 cm was electrically connected to the ground and used as the fiber collector. The whole 

setup is shown in Figure S7a. During the electrospinning process, the PVDF solution 

S33

1

3

2
1

3

2

S33


 
   
 

28 
 

underwent a high DC electrical field of 138 kV/m. Such a high DC electrical field was generated 

by applying a positive voltage of 18 kV with a 13 cm gap between the spinneret and the fiber 

collector. After electrospinning, a non-woven PVDF fibrous mat was formed onto the rotary 

aluminum disk, which was peeled off as a thin fibrous PVDF membrane (Figure S7b). The 

thickness of the PVDF members was controlled around 100 - 200 µm by the electrospinning 

time, which was around 2 hours. The surface morphology of the as-prepared electrospun fibrous 

PVDF membranes (Figure S7c) were characterized by using a scanning electron microscope 

(SEM, Tescan Mira 3). Prior to SEM examination of the fibrous membranes, the membrane 

specimens were sputter-coated with Platinum to avoid possible charge accumulation onto the 

PVDF fibers during the test. 

 

 
 

Figure S7. Electrospinning of piezoelectric PVDF. a) Apparatus utilized to conduct 

electrospinning. b) A photo of an electrospun PVDF membrane. c) SEM of the microstructure 

of PVDF. d) XRD pattern of a pristine PVDF electrospun sample. 

 

 
The degree of crystallinity of the PVDF electrospun films (i.e. amount of β-phase) was 

estimated using XRD as described in Supporting Information 2. Figure S7d shows the XRD 

pattern of an electropun sample. The peaks observed 20.7°, 36.6°, and 56.9° are assigned to 

(1 1 0, 2 0 0) and (0 2 0, 1 0 1) diffractions of the β-PVDF crystal plane, respectively.[13] This 

10
20
30
40

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2θ (°)

Intensity (cps)

β (110, 200)

20.7

β (020, 101)

36.6

d) 


 
   
 

29 
 

phase has a large spontaneous polarization within crystalline phase thus providing the 

piezoelectric effect.[14] 

 

Supporting Information S11: Self-Stiffening Experiments  

 
To test the self-stiffening capability of our material system, electrospun PVDF samples 

were submerged in SBF solutions and were subjected to cyclic mechanical loading (i.e. external 

stimulus) to activate the electrical charge generation and promote the nucleation and growth of 

minerals that can modulate the effective stiffness by adding minerals. We prepared electrospun 

PVDF samples of 30×15 mm2 according to Supporting Information S10. Simulated body fluids 

(10×SBF) were prepared by following protocols described in Supporting Information S1. While 

submerged in the solution at room temperature, samples were subjected to cyclic compression 

loading using an electromechanical universal testing machine (TA Instruments Electroforce 

5500 with a 10 N capacity load cell). The stiffness (S) was calculated from the load (P) and 

displacement (d) amplitudes measured with the LVDT actuator using the follow relation:  

S=ΔP/Δδ. The force and displacement signals were monitored and recorded during experiments 

using Wintest software 7.6. To prevent any change of mechanical properties of electrospun 

films due to viscoelastic and time-dependent behavior during experiments in SBF, we initially 

subjected samples to cyclic compression loading while submerged in DI water for 3 days. The 

modulus (E) was then calculated by multiplying by the cross section area and the deflection  

Ε = SΔδ/A.   

 
After the modulus reached a constant value (Figure S8a), we switched the solution to 

the SBF and kept the same loading conditions. The force and displacement were continually 

monitored and the modulus was calculated based on the measured values as summarized in 

Figure 3b. To explore the modulus adaptation in response to the external mechanical loading, 

we subjected samples to different loading configurations in terms of frequency and load 


 
   
 

30 
 

amplitude. We chose loading conditions that offered a variety of charge conditions whose 

results are summarized in Figure 3g. 

 
 

Figure S8. Preparation of self-stiffening experiments. a) Stiffness change of a PVDF 

electrospun sample submerged in water. Initial response after cyclic loading was recorded. Due 

to viscoelastic effects, stiffness reached a plateau after 12 hours. b) Stress-strain response of as-

prepared electrospun PVDF specimen without any incubation or mineralization. The fibers 

were aligned in the direction of loading. 

 

For measuring stress-strain responses of electrospun PVDF specimens, the specimens 

were subjected to quasi-static loading to failure under a tensile configuration using a universal 

testing system (TA ElectroForce 5500) with  rate = 0.6 min-1 based on the ASTM standard.[15] 

The tensile strength (σ) of the specimens was calculated according to σ = P/A, where P is the 

measured load and A the cross-sectional area (width by thickness) of the specimen. The strain 

was calculated by measuring the gauge length divided by the displacement amplitude recorded 

by the actuator. Figure S8b shows the stress-strain response of a representative sample of 

electrospun PVDF. The elastic modulus of the sample is ~20 MPa and the tensile strength ~4 

MPa, which are comparable with values found in literature.[16] The stress-strain responses after 

cyclic loadings are shown in Figure 3c and 3 h. 

 

0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

80

100

120

140

160

Time (days)

Stiffness (N/mm)

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

0

2

4

6

8

Strain (mm/mm)

Stress (MPa)

50 μm

a) 
b) 


 
   
 

31 
 

Supporting Information S12: Confocal Microscopy of Mineralized Electrospun Scaffolds  

Mineralized electrospun PVDF sample (7 days in 10×SBF, daily refreshed) was cut into 

0.5×0.5 cm2 piece and stained with 1 mg/mL Alizarin Red S (Sigma–Aldrich A5533) in 

aqueous buffer for 20 min at room temperature. After staining, the sample was gently rinsed 

with de-ionized water for 2 min and then kept in PBS solution (Lonza 17-516F) for imaging 

purpose. Imaging of mineral deposition was performed by confocal laser scanning microscopy 

on an inverted microscope system (Leica TCS SP8) with a 63x1.40 N.A. Plan Apo oil 

immersion objective lens. Illumination of the samples stained with Alizarin Red S was provided 

by a white light laser (Leica WLL), exciting at 540 nm. Images were captured by a hybrid 

detector (Leica HyD) with a bandpass filter of 605/70 nm. The Z-step size of the image (~200 

nm) was automatically optimized by the system. Z-stacks were rendered in 3D in Leica LAS X 

software and analyzed in Fiji Image J. We confirmed that the dye preferentially stained minerals 

by comparing fluorescence images without and with minerals (Figure S9). To calculate the 

mineral thickness and fiber diameter, we did five cut section views along the field of view. 

Locations were sectioned randomly. We re-oriented the confocal view perpendicular to user. 

We utilized Image J measuring tool to manually measure the thickness of the mineral. In 

addition, we measured the hole diameter assuming it was a spaced occupied by the PVDF fiber. 

From each section cut, we averaged the fiber diameter and mineral thickness three times. The 

result summarized in Figure 3j showed good agreement with the data from the SEM analysis in 

Figure S7c. 


 
   
 

32 
 

 

Figure S9. Staining process with Alizarin Red S. a) PVDF film without formed minerals 

showing no red fluorescence in the polymer. b) Mineralized PVDF film showing the expected 

red fluorescence in regions with formed minerals. 

 

Supporting Information S13: Analytical Model 

We further analyzed the data from the functionally graded material experiment 

(Supporting Information S7) to find the relation between the mineral height and the charge 

along the beam. Assuming small deformation, linear elastic response of a material and a linear 

relation between force and charge, we can obtain Eqnuation (S6): 

      Q = d33F  

  Q = d33(σ33A)  
                                                 (S6) 

where Q is charge (unit: C), d33 is piezoelectric constant (unit: pC/N), G is stress (unit: MPa), 

and A is area perpendicular to stress direction (unit: mm2).[12] 

From the stress distribution along the beam length in the Figure S10, the stress along 

the z-direction (σ33) at a given location (x) can be described as Equation (S7) after a polynomial 

regression of second order (R2=0.99), (see Figure S10b): 

        G$$ = 0.1H0 − 4.1866H + 37.183                                             (S7) 

 

20μm
20μm

PVDF with no minerals
PVDF with minerals
a)
b)


 
   
 

33 
 

From the mineral formation distribution along the beam length, the mineral height at a 

location can be approximated as Equation. (S8) after a linear regression (R2=0.82), (see Figure 

S10c): 

        MH = -1.52×10-3 x + 1.79×10-2                                                   (S8) 

where MH is mineral height (mm), x is the beam length (mm). After solving for x in Equation 

(S8), and replacing it into Equation (S7), and then into Equation (S6), we can obtain Equation. 

(S9): 

 ! ≅ #$$%(4.33 × 10-./0)                                                (S9) 

Then, the Equation (S9) can be rewritten as Equation (S10):  
 

   ./ = >

E

-.$$×87NOPP5                                                         (S10) 

Because charge (Q) is linearly proportional to stress (σ) (Equation S6), the mineral height (MH) 

is proportional to Q1/2 or σ1/2. 

 


 
   
 

34 
 

 

 

Figure S10. Analytical model. a) Cantilever configuration for a graded material experiment. b) 

Stress distribution along the beam length obtained from numerical model (Supporting 

Information S9). Higher stress at regions closer to the foundation. c) Mineral height along the 

beam length obtained from experiments (Supporting Information S7). Higher mineral deposited 

in regions of high stress of the cantilever beam. d) Analytical model obtained from experimental 

results in combination with numerical model and analytical equation describing the relationship 

between mineral height and electrical charge. Units in mm. 

 

References 

[1] 
T. Kokubo, H. Takadama, Biomaterials 2006, 27, 2907. 

[2] 
P. Zhu, Y. Masuda, K. Koumoto, Biomaterials 2004, 25, 3915. 

0
5
10
15
20
25

0

10

20

30

40

Beam Length, x (mm)

σ33 (MPa)

a)
b)

0
5
10

0.000

0.005

0.010

0.015

0.020

Beam Length, x (mm)

Mineral Height, MH (mm)

x

c)

!33 = 0.1x2 – 4.186x + 37.182

R² = 0.9803

x

L=15

h=0.1

w=5

Load

δ = 6.5

x (1)

z (3)

0
10
20
30

0

100

200

300

400

500

Mineral Height, MH (μm)

Charge, Q (pC)

d)

Q= d33⨯A⨯43282.5⨯MH2
MH=-0.00152 (x) + 0.0179

R2=0.825

With d33= 30pC and A=0.5 mm2

A=w ⨯ L=0.5 mm2


 
   
 

35 
 

[3] 
S. Bharati, M. K. Sinha, D. Basu, 2005, 28, 617. 

[4] 
F. Yang, J. G. C. Wolke, J. A. Jansen, Chem. Eng. J. 2008, 137, 154. 

[5] 
P. D. F. JCPDS, PC PDFWIN 2000, 2, 4. 

[6] 
J. Li, Z. Zhu, L. Fang, S. Guo, U. Erturun, Z. Zhu, J. E. West, S. Ghosh, S. H. Kang, 

Nanoscale 2017, 14215. 

[7] 
F. Chen, Y. Lu, X. Liu, J. Song, G. He, M. K. Tiwari, C. J. Carmalt, I. P. Parkin, Adv. 

Funct. Mater. 2017, 27, 1702926. 

[8] 
E. M. Gindler, J. D. King, Am. J. Clin. Pathol. 1972, 58, 376. 

[9] 
D. M. Karl, G. Tien, Limnol. Oceanogr. 1992, 37, 105. 

[10] 
J. Taylor, Introduction to Error Analysis, the Study of Uncertainties in Physical 

Measurements, 1997. 

[11] 
M. Stewart, M. G. Cain, in Characterisation Ferroelectr. Bulk Mater. Thin Film., 

Springer, 2014, pp. 37–64. 

[12] 
A. Safari, E. K. Akdogan, Piezoelectric and Acoustic Materials for Transducer 

Applications, Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. 

[13] 
D. M. Esterly, B. J. Love, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 2004, 42, 91. 

[14] 
E. Kabir, M. Khatun, L. Nasrin, M. J. Raihan, M. Rahman, J. Phys. D. Appl. Phys. 

2017, 50, 163002. 

[15] 
A. International, ASTM D638-14, Standard Test Method for Tensile Properties of 

Plastics, ASTM International, 2015. 

[16] 
R. Nakashima, K. Watanabe, Y. Lee, B. Kim, I. Kim, Adv. Polym. Technol. 2013, 32, 

E44. 

 


