 
1

Schottky barrier induced asymmetry in the negative 

differential resistance response of Nb/NbOx/Pt cross-

point devices 

Shimul Kanti Nath†*, Sanjoy Kumar Nandi†, Assaad El-Helou‡, Xinjun Liu§, Shuai Li†,#, Thomas 

Ratcliff†, Peter E Raad‡, Robert G Elliman†*. 

†Department of Electronic Materials Engineering, Research School of Physics, The Australian 

National University, Canberra ACT 2601, Australia 

‡Department of Mechanical Engineering, Southern Methodist University, Texas, Dallas, USA 

§Tianjin Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Materials Physics and Preparation Technology, 

Faculty of Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300354, China 

#Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS, Thales, Université Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 

Palaiseau, France. 

KEYWORDS: Negative Differential Resistance, NbOx, Schottky Interface, Threshold Switching, 

Neuromorphic computing.   

ABSTRACT: The negative differential resistance (NDR) response of Nb/NbOx/Pt cross-point 

devices is shown to have a polarity dependence due to the effect of the metal/oxide Schottky 

barriers on the contact resistance.  Three distinct responses are observed under opposite polarity 


 
2

testing: bipolar S-type NDR, bipolar snap-back NDR, and combined S-type and snap-back NDR, 

depending on the stoichiometry of the oxide film and device area.  In-situ thermoreflectance 

imaging is used to show that these NDR responses are associated with strong current localisation, 

thereby justifying the use of a previously developed two-zone, core shell thermal model of the 

device.  The observed polarity dependent NDR responses, and their dependence on stoichiometry 

and area are then explained by extending this model to include the effect of the polarity dependent 

contact resistance. This study provides an improved understanding of the NDR response of 

metal/oxide/metal structures and informs the engineering of devices for neuromorphic computing 

and non-volatile memory applications. 

  

INTRODUCTION 

Two terminal metal-oxide-metal (MOM) devices using transition metal oxides (TMOs) are of 

increasing interest for next generation non-volatile memory technology and brain-inspired 

computing1-4. Many TMOs exhibit threshold switching or current-controlled negative differential 

resistance (NDR) response including NbOx1, 3, 5-7, TaOx8-10, VOx,11-12 TiOx13 and NiOx14 and MOM 

devices exploiting this characteristics are of great interest as self-sustained and chaotic oscillator2, 

15, threshold logic device16-17, trigger comparator18, small signal amplifier19-20 and emulator of 

biological neuronal functionalities21-22. In the recent years NbOx and VOx have drawn much 

attention due to their ability to show reliable threshold switching 23 and stable current-controlled 

negative differential resistance1-2, 5, 24. Importantly, the functionality of the device is greatly 

controlled by their specific current-voltage characteristics (e.g. specific NDR mode) 3, 15, 25, and 

therefore it is essential to understand the physical origin of the NDR response and its dependencies 

on materials and device parameters.  


 
3

In many cases the NDR response is only observed after an initial electroforming process which 

introduces a filamentary conduction path through the film23. The filament is created by the 

generation, drift and diffusion of oxygen vacancies and can result in competition between resistive 

and threshold switching, in which case it is necessary to impose constraint on the operating current 

and/or specific bias direction in order to achieve pure threshold switching26. Threshold switching 

then occurs in a small volume between the residual filament and electrode due to the localised 

current flow in this region26. In other cases, the forming process simply initiates threshold 

switching, possibly due to reduction of the oxide at the electrode interface produced by local Joule 

heating. Interestingly, filamentary conduction is expected in materials exhibiting NDR even when 

there are no material inhomogeneities and already demonstrated in high conductivity NbOx films27. 

Studies have also shown that several NDR modes including two basic types: continuous ‘S-type’ 

and discontinuous ‘snap-back’ NDR as well as more complex combinations can be observed in 

NbOx systems6, 25. The physical origin of the S-type NDR is well explained by a thermally induced 

conductivity changes due to local joule heating7, 28 and it has been shown that it can, in principle, 

arise from any electrical conduction mechanism that shows super-linear conductivity change as a 

function of temperature29. In contrast, the origin of snapback NDR was attributed to the insulator-

metal transition (IMT) associated with a Mott-Peierls transition observed in NbO26. However this 

was further questioned in a separate study based on finite-element modelling of TaOx and VOx 

devices that reproduces the snap-back response without recourse to a material specific phase 

transition8.  

In an attempt to resolve this ensuing debate about the origin of the snap back response and also 

to explain a diverse range of NDR modes observed in metal-insulator-metal (MIM) devices, we 

recently developed a core-shell model of NDR and demonstrated its utility to predict novel 


 
4

functionality for emerging electronic and neuromorphic computing applications25. This model is 

based on the fact that the current distribution in metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structure is highly 

localized after electroforming, with the NDR response dominated by the region of highest current 

density (core) and the surrounding film (shell) acting as a parallel resistance. The threshold 

switching response then depends on the relative magnitudes of the maximum negative differential 

resistance (RNDR) of the core and the shell resistances (RS). Specifically, S-type NDR is observed 

for RS > RNDR and snap-back characteristic is observed for RS < RNDR, notably, without considering 

any phase transition. Our model predicts that the threshold switching characteristics depends 

critically on the current distribution in the device structure and therefore is highly sensitive to the 

oxide conductivity, device geometry and metal/oxide interface reactions. Indeed, we have verified 

some of the model predictions by showing a clear transition between smooth S-type NDR and 

discontinuous snap back response depending on the oxide stoichiometry, thickness and area of the 

active MOM device30. On the other hand, a number of studies have shown that the metal/oxide 

interfaces can play crucial role in a MOM system by influencing the dominant resistive switching 

mode, device stability and reproducibility 2, 31. Therefore, further studies are clearly required to 

understand the impact of metal/oxide interfaces in determining the NDR response. 

In the present work, we demonstrate that the interface resistance originated from the Schottky 

barriers at the metal/oxide interfaces can significantly influence the threshold switching properties 

of an electroformed MOM device and can result in distinct NDR modes depending on the operating 

bias polarity. The observed materials and device dependencies have been analysed by combining 

in-situ thermo-reflectance imaging and temperature dependent electrical testing. The results are 

explained by extending the core-shell model of NDR.  

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 


 
5

Cross-point devices with a metal/oxide/metal structure as shown in Figure 1 were fabricated on a 

thermally oxidized Si (100) wafer with a 300 nm thick oxide layer using a three-mask 

photolithography process. The bottom electrodes were defined by a lift-off process and consisted 

of a 5 nm Ti adhesion layer and a 25 nm Pt electrode layer, deposited by e-beam evaporation. 

These were coated with sub-stoichiometric NbOx layers by reactive sputter deposition of an Nb 

target using an Ar/O ambient.  For comparison, near-stoichiometric Nb2O5 film were also 

deposited by RF-sputtering of an Nb2O5 target (Ar ambient). Top electrodes were subsequently 

defined by a second lift-off process and comprised 5 nm Nb and 25 nm Pt (or 75 nm Au for the 

thermo-reflectance measurements).  A final lithography step was then used to remove the NbOx 

film from the contact-pads of the bottom electrodes. Details of the deposition conditions and film 

thicknesses are given in Table-1 (supplementary information). The resulting cross-point structures 

had dimensions ranging from 2µm x 2µm to 20µm x 20µm. 

 

Figure 1: Three-dimensional schematic of the cross-point device with corresponding material 

layers. Inset shows an optical microscopy image of typical Au/Nb/NbOx/Pt cross-point device with 

20µm x 20µm active device area. 

The NbOx stoichiometry was determined by Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS) of 

films deposited onto vitreous carbon and Si substrates and was found to be in the range from 


 
6

x=1.92±0.03 to x=2.6±0.05. (The relationship between stoichiometry and film resistivity is 

included in the Supplementary Information). Further analysis by grazing incident-angle X-ray 

diffraction (GIAXRD) showed that the as-deposited films were amorphous.  Ex-situ electrical 

measurements were performed in air using an Agilent B1500A semiconductor parameter analyser 

attached to a Signatone probe station (S-1160) and generally consisted of bidirectional quasi-static 

current sweeps.  In-situ measurements performed during thermoreflectance imaging were 

performed with a Keithley 2410 parameter analyzer and included both DC and pulsed testing.  In 

all cases the bias was applied through the top electrode while the bottom electrode was grounded. 

Thermal imaging of the devices was performed using the TMX T°Imager® system. The imaging 

setup uses a camera-based thermoreflectance  method 32 to infer the temperature rise from the 

change in surface reflection. The measured map of the temperature rise ΔT is determined by the 

use of the relation, ∆𝑇 =

1

CTR

∆R

𝑅  ; where ΔR is the change in reflectance of the activated device 

surface. CTR is the thermoreflectance coefficient of the top electrode material (Au in the present 

case) obtained from calibration according to 𝐶𝑇𝑅 =

1

Δ𝑇

Δ𝑅

𝑅   where ΔR is the change in reflectivity 

of the device surface when subjected to a known temperature rise, Δ𝑇. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  

Electroforming and NDR characteristics. 

All devices with sub-stoichiometric NbOx films exhibited negative differential resistance (NDR) 

following a one-off electroforming step but the forming and NDR characteristics were found to 

depend on the measurement polarity, as illustrated in Figure 2 for 5 µm NbO1.92 devices.  During 

an initial positive bias sweep from 0→8 mA (Figure 2a) the device undergoes an electroforming 

step characterised by a sudden voltage drop at a current ~6 mA and a permanent change in the 


 
7

low-field device resistance from ~5 kΩ to ~4.5 kΩ (measured at 0.25V).  The impact of 

electroforming is then clearly evident during the reverse current sweep (from 8→0 mA) which 

shows S-type NDR.  Subsequent current sweeps under positive bias continued to show S-type 

characteristics under both forward and reverse sweeps (similar to that shown by the red line in 

Figure 2(c)).   

Similar electroforming characteristics were observed under negative bias during the forward 

sweep from 0→10 mA (Figure 2b), with a sudden voltage drop observed at a current of ~7 mA.  

However, in this case, the reverse current sweep produced a snap-back characteristic, with an 

abrupt voltage increase as the current was reduced to ~2.2 mA. Subsequent current sweeps under 

negative bias showed similar snap-back characteristics for both forward and reverse sweeps, but 

at a lower threshold-current and voltage (similar to that shown by the black line in Figure 2(c)). 

Once electroformed, devices exhibited characteristics similar to those depicted in Figure 2(c), 

regardless of the initial electroforming polarity.  i.e. Under positive bias they exhibited S-type 

NDR during forward and reverse current sweeps and under negative bias they exhibited a snap-

back response (Further examples of polarity dependent electroforming and subsequent I-V sweeps 

are included in the Supplementary Information).  

The permanent changes produced by electroforming are typically attributed to the creation of a 

filamentary conduction path in the oxide film and/or local breakdown of the Schottky barriers at 

the metal/oxide interfaces27. From a circuit perspective this represents a parallel conduction path 

within the device and the total device current is divided between the filamentary conduction path 

and the surrounding device area based on their relative resistances30.  Indeed, even though the 

filamentary region may have a higher conductivity, its resistance can exceed that of the 

surrounding device due to its smaller effective area. 


 
8

 

Figure 2: Polarity dependent electroforming and CC-NDR characteristics of Pt/Nb/NbO1.92/Pt 

devices: (a) electroforming of a 5 µm × 5 µm cross-point device under positive bias, (b) 

electroforming of a different 5 µm × 5 µm cross-point device under negative bias; and (c) typical 

polarity dependent switching characteristics of electroformed devices showing a transition of S-

type into snap-back NDR when a negative bias is applied to the top electrode and vice versa 

irrespective of electroforming polarity. 

In-situ temperature mapping. 

In-situ thermo-reflectance imaging was performed on 10 µm NbO1.99 devices to better 

understand the current distribution during post-forming current sweeps.  The results are 

summarised in Figure 3 and include the in-situ current-voltage (I-V) characteristics and the 

measured temperature distributions for devices subjected to positive and negative bias. Under 

positive bias the temperature distribution is highly localised in the filamentary region over the 


 
9

entire range of operating currents and the temperature in this region and that of the surrounding 

film increase monotonically with increasing current.  This clearly demonstrates that the resistance 

of the filamentary path is lower than that of the surrounding device and that the S-type NDR 

characteristic is dominated by the temperature-dependent conductivity of the filamentary region. 

In contrast, under negative bias, the temperature distribution is near-uniform at currents below 

the threshold for snap-back and only becomes localised for currents near the threshold value 

(indicated by the point ‘F’ in Figure 3(b)). At this point the temperature increases abruptly while 

that of the surrounding area decreases, consistent with current redistribution and localisation due 

to the positive feedback created by local Joule heating, as previously reported30.  This demonstrates 

that the resistance of the filamentary region is initially comparable to, or greater than that of the 

surrounding device, but becomes relatively less resistive as the current increases to the threshold 

value.  Such a change implies that the conductivity of the filamentary region increases more rapidly 

with temperature than that of the surrounding device.  For filaments near the centre of the device 

this may also be facilitated by the non-uniform temperature distribution created by the device 

geometry (see Figure 3(c)).  


 
10

 

Figure 
3: 
(a-b), 
In-situ 
I-V 
characteristics 
of 
a 
10μm × 10 μm 
Au 

(75nm)/Nb(5nm)/NbO1.99(~45nm)/Pt (25nm) device showing S-type NDR under positive bias and 

snapback under negative bias, respectively. Insets show the in-situ thermoreflectance (ΔR/R) maps 

of the 10μm × 10μm device during corresponding bias polarity, (c) Temperature profile through 

the filamentary region for different points in the current-voltage curve during positive bias, and 

(d), Temperature profile of the same device for different points in the current-voltage curve during 

negative bias. Note: The temperature map and the I-V characteristics shown in Fig. 3 were also 

obtained for 5μm × 5 μm device devices with lower threshold currents, and a snap back response 

observed under negative polarity and S-type NDR under positive polarity. But in this case, the 

filament was observed to form around the edges due to the dominance of edge effect in smaller 

area cross-point devices with a thick (75nm Au in this case) capping layer33. The short-dashed 


 
11

curves in (c-d) represent the experimental data and the smooth lines are showing Gaussian fits of 

the corresponding experimental data. A, B and C denote subthreshold, threshold and post-threshold 

points respectively in the I-V characteristic obtained under positive bias, while D, E and F denote 

the same for negative bias polarity  

Schottky barriers and polarity dependent conduction. 

 

Figure 4: (a) Temperature dependent current-voltage characteristics of a typical sub-

stoichiometric NbOx device (x=2.22), equivalent representation of the device in terms of 

electronic circuit element is shown in inset, (b-c) signature plots confirming thermionic emission 

as the major mechanism for Nb top and Pt bottom electrodes (x = 2.22), (d) extraction of zero bias 

potential barrier at top and bottom interfaces for a typical sub-stoichiometric NbOx (x= 2.22) 

device, (e) asymmetry plot of the data presented in Figure 4(a), current asymmetry ηasym is defined 

as the ratio of device current under negative bias to that under positive bias (Inegative /Ipositive), and 


 
12

(f) current asymmetry before and after electroforming for devices with different oxide 

stoichiometry, The dashed lines in Figure 4(f) represent the experimental data after electroforming 

and the smooth lines are the experimental data of the corresponding devices before electroforming. 

The temperature-dependent I-V characteristics of an as-fabricated Nb/NbO2.22/Pt device are 

shown in Figure 4(a) for both positive and negative bias.  Comparison of the device current at 

equivalent positive and negative voltages clearly highlights the asymmetry in contact resistance 

created by the Schottky barriers at the metal/oxide interfaces.  Similar asymmetry was observed 

for all NbOx films used in this study, and was found to increase with increasing device area.  From 

the electron affinity of Nb2O5 (3.9 eV) and the work functions of Nb (4.3 eV) and Pt (5.65 eV) the 

theoretical barrier heights at the Nb/oxide and Pt/oxide interfaces are calculated to be 0.4 eV and 

1.75 eV, respectively34.  As a consequence, the contact resistance is expected to be dominated by 

the Pt/oxide interface, which is under forward bias when negative voltage is applied to the top 

electrode. 

Experimentally, the current-voltage characteristics were analysed in terms of field-enhanced 

thermionic emission over a Schottky barrier, as described by35: 

𝐼 = 𝐴𝐴∗𝑇2𝑒

−(𝛷𝐵0 −𝛼√𝑉

𝑘𝐵𝑇
)  
 
.. 
.. 
(1) 

where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, ΦB0 is the zero bias potential 

barrier height at metal/oxide interface, α is the barrier lowering factor, A* is the Richardson 

constant and A is the device area.  For both bias polarities the experimental data for a given electric 

field (V) exhibits a linear trend on a ln(I/T2) vs 1000/T plot as shown in Figures 4(b-c).  The slope 


 
13

of these curves yields an activation energy corresponding to the apparent potential barrier at the 

particular applied field (corresponding to V), 

𝐸 = 𝛷𝐴𝑝𝑝 = 𝛷𝐵0 − 𝛼√𝑉   
.. 
(2) 

The obtained values were found to decrease with increasing the applied bias, as expected from 

equation (2) and the zero-bias barrier heights were determined to be 0.19 eV and 0.24 eV for 

negative and positive bias, respectively (Figure 4(d)).  These include contributions from the 

electrodes and the oxide film and are much lower than the theoretical values.  Consequently, they 

serve as a measure of the resistance asymmetry, rather than actual metal/oxide barrier heights.   

The resistance asymmetry is represented more clearly by plotting the ratio of currents measured 

under negative and positive bias as a function of absolute voltage, as shown for the Nb/NbO2.22/Pt 

device in Figure 4(e).  This shows that the current ratio (asymmetry) initially increases with 

increasing voltage before reaching a maximum at ~0.75 V and then decreases at higher voltages 

before saturating at a value between 1 and 2.  This behaviour is attributed to the dominance of 

Schottky emission at low fields and an increasing contribution from Poole-Frenkel conduction at 

higher fields as previously reported for Nb2O5-based Schottky diodes 36.  Significantly, the high-

field asymmetry is maintained for all sub-stoichiometric NbOx films even after electroforming 

(Figure 4(f)).  This reflects the fact that the Schottky barriers in the device area surrounding the 

filamentary region remain unaffected and continue to influence the current distribution in the 

devices.  

 

 


 
14

Effect of oxide stoichiometry and device scaling. 

 

Figure 5: (a-c), Asymmetric NDRs observed in Nb/NbOx~1.99/Pt MOM cross-point devices with 

5 µm × 5 µm, 10 µm × 10 µm and 20 µm × 20 µm active area respectively while subsequently 

biased with positive and negative polarities, and (d) matrix representation of dependency of S-type 

and snap-back NDR as a function film stoichiometry, device area and bias polarity. The notations 

S/S and SB/SB are used for S-type NDR and snapback NDR respectively under subsequent 

opposite biasing conditions, while S/S-B is used to indicate S-type NDR under positive bias and 

snapback NDR under negative bias. 

The film stoichiometry and device area also have a direct impact on the resistance of the region 

surrounding the electroformed filament and therefore affect the device characteristics. As a 


 
15

consequence, the behaviour reported in Figure 2 is not universal but is specific to devices with 

particular combinations of device area and film stoichiometry.  A systematic study of these 

dependencies showed that the smallest area devices (2 µm × 2 µm) displayed smooth S-type NDR 

under both positive and negative biasing regardless of film stoichiometry.  In contrast, larger area 

devices exhibited one of three behaviours depending on the stoichiometry of the oxide film: duel 

S-type characteristics (Figure 5(a)), combined S-type and snap-back characteristics (Figure 5(b)) 

or dual snap-back characteristics (Figure 5(c)). These dependencies are summarised in Figure 5(d) 

which clearly highlights the three distinct regimes.  Note that higher sub-threshold and threshold 

currents were always observed for negative bias polarity, consistent with higher contact resistance 

from the reverse biased Pt/NbOx interface. 

Discussion. 

The above data clearly show that the NDR characteristics of simple two-terminal 

metal/oxide/metal devices are sensitive to the relative resistances of the filamentary conduction 

path and the surrounding device area, including effects due to polarity dependent contact resistance 

that arise from the metal/oxide contacts.  While the dependencies appear complex, they can be 

understood with reference to a recently developed parallel-memristor or core-shell model of 

NDR25. 

In its simplest form the core-shell model assumes that the current distribution in post-formed 

metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structures is localized, with the NDR response dominated by the high 

current density filament (core) while the surrounding film (shell) acts as a parallel resistance, as 

shown schematically in Figure 6.  Analysis then shows that the threshold switching response 

depends on the relative magnitudes of the maximum negative differential resistance |𝑅𝑁𝐷𝑅| of the 


 
16

core and the shell resistances (RS). Specifically, S-type NDR characteristics are observed when RS 

> |𝑅𝑁𝐷𝑅| and snap-back characteristics are observed when RS < |𝑅𝑁𝐷𝑅|.  Since the magnitude of 

RS depends on the conductivity (stoichiometry), area (A), and thickness (t) of the oxide film the 

model predicts a transition from S-type to snap-back characteristics for critical values of these 

parameters, as previously demonstrated30.   

For the case where RS is independent of bias polarity, the above model predicts either smooth 

S-type or abrupt snap-back characteristics under both positive and negative bias, depending on 

whether RS > |𝑅𝑁𝐷𝑅| or RS < |𝑅𝑁𝐷𝑅|.  However, when RS is polarity dependent it is necessary to 

consider three distinct scenarios.  Assuming that RS=Rp under positive bias and RS=Rn under 

negative bias and that Rp > Rn we need to specifically consider the three following cases: a) for Rp 

> Rn > RNDR, S-type characteristics are expected under both positive and negative bias, as shown 

in Figure 5a; b) for RNDR > Rp > Rn, snap-back characteristics are expected under both positive and 

negative bias, as shown in Figure 5c; and c) for Rp > RNDR > Rn, we expect snap-back NDR under 

negative bias and a smooth S-type NDR under positive bias, as observed in Figure 5(b).  The 

simple criterion defined by the core-shell model therefore provides the basis for understanding the 

polarity dependent switching characteristics and its dependence on film stoichiometry and device 

area. In this context it is interesting to note that the current asymmetry is almost negligible in 

stoichiometric Nb2O5 as the film resistance in the shell region is much higher than the interface 

resistance (𝑅film ≫ 𝑅int.). As a consequence these devices showed symmetric S-type NDR as well 

as symmetric sub-threshold and threshold switching parameters under positive and negative bias.  

The effect of film stoichiometry and Schottky barrier heights on NDR characteristics can be 

illustrated using a lumped element circuit model implemented in LT-SPICE.  In this case, the 

conductivity of the core and surrounding film are assumed to be governed by Poole-Frenkel 


 
17

conduction with the core temperature determined by Joule heating, and that of the surrounding 

film assumed to remain at ambient temperature.  The shell resistance is additionally assumed to 

include a contribution from the Schottky barrier created by the metal/oxide interfaces, as governed 

by the Schottky diode equation (equation 1).  The shell resistance is therefore given by RS = Rfilm 

+ Rint., as illustrated schematically in Figures 6(a) and 6(b).  Using this model, the I-V 

characteristics of devices were calculated as a function of film and interface resistance, as shown 

in Figures 6(c) and 6(d), respectively.  

 

Figure 6: (a) Schematic of the core-shell model of memristor, (b) circuit model showing a 

Threshold switch (TS) as the core element, a variable resistor indicating the interface resistances 

at the opposite interfaces and Rfilm represents the oxide resistance in the shell area which was 

modeled by Poole-Frenkel equation, c) effect of shell resistance on the NDR response, (d) effect 


 
18

of interface resistance (as a function of increasing barrier heights) on the NDR response when the 

shell resistance (Rfilm) is fixed for a given device area, thickness and oxide stoichiometry. Note 

that, for opposite biasing conditions one interface becomes forward-biased and the other becomes 

reverse-biased and vice versa, as a result the interface resistance experiences significant change 

under polarity reversal. Details of the model and the corresponding parameters are given in the 

supplementary information. 

The data clearly demonstrate the transition from smooth S-type to abrupt snap-back NDR 

characteristics as the shell resistance is reduced, and more detailed analysis confirms that this 

occurs at RNDR.  Significantly, a difference in Schottky barrier height of as little as ~0.03 eV is 

shown to be sufficient to cause such a transition (Figure 6(d)).   

CONCLUSIONS  

In summary, we have demonstrated polarity dependent negative differential resistance 

characteristics in Nb/NbOx/Pt cross-point devices and shown that the observed asymmetry is a 

direct consequence of the Schottky barriers created by the metal/oxide contacts.  Three distinct 

behaviours were observed under opposite polarity testing: bipolar S-type NDR, bipolar snap-back 

NDR, and combined S-type and snap-back NDR, depending on the stoichiometry of the oxide film 

and device area.  By combining ex-situ current-controlled electrical measurements and in-situ 

thermoreflectance imaging we showed that these NDR responses are associated with strong current 

localisation within the device. This was used to justify the use of a previously developed two-zone, 

core shell thermal model of the device.  The observed polarity dependent NDR responses, and 

their dependence on stoichiometry and area were then explained by extending this model to include 

the effect of the polarity dependent contact resistance. Our extended model provides improved 


 
19

understanding of the NDR response of metal/oxide/metal structures and informs the engineering 

of devices for neuromorphic computing and non-volatile memory applications. 

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 

*E-mail: shimul.nath@anu.edu.au (S. K. Nath) 

*E-mail: rob.elliman@anu.edu.au (R. G. Elliman) 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This work was partly funded by an Australian Research Council (ARC) Linkage Project 

(LP150100693) and Varian Semiconductor Equipment/ Applied Materials. We would also like to 

acknowledge the Australian Facility for Advanced ion-implantation Research (AFAiiR), a node of 

the NCRIS Heavy Ion Accelerator Capability, and the Australian National Fabrication Facility 

(ANFF) ACT node for access to their research facilities and expertise.  

REFERENCES 

(1) Liu, X.; Li, S.; Nandi, S. K.; Venkatachalam, D. K.; Elliman, R. G. J. J. o. A. P. Threshold 
switching and electrical self-oscillation in niobium oxide films. J. Appl. Phys. 2016, 120 (12), 
124102. 
(2) Cho, D.-Y.; Luebben, M.; Wiefels, S.; Lee, K.-S.; Valov, I. Interfacial Metal–Oxide 
Interactions in Resistive Switching Memories. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2017, 9 (22), 
19287-19295. 
(3) Nandi, S. K.; Li, S.; Liu, X.; Elliman, R. G. Temperature dependent frequency tuning of NbOx 
relaxation oscillators. Applied Physics Letters 2017, 111 (20), 202901, DOI: 10.1063/1.4999373. 
(4) Waser, R.; Dittmann, R.; Menzel, S.; Noll, T. Introduction to new memory paradigms: 
memristive phenomena and neuromorphic applications. Faraday discussions 2019, 213, 11-27. 
(5) Li, S.; Liu, X.; Nandi, S. K.; Venkatachalam, D. K.; Elliman, R. G. High-endurance megahertz 
electrical self-oscillation in Ti/NbO x bilayer structures. Applied Physics Letters 2015, 106 (21), 
212902. 


 
20

(6) Kumar, S.; Wang, Z.; Davila, N.; Kumari, N.; Norris, K. J.; Huang, X.; Strachan, J. P.; Vine, 
D.; Kilcoyne, A. D.; Nishi, Y. Physical origins of current and temperature controlled negative 
differential resistances in NbO 2. Nature Communications 2017, 8 (1), 658. 
(7) Slesazeck, S.; Mähne, H.; Wylezich, H.; Wachowiak, A.; Radhakrishnan, J.; Ascoli, A.; 
Tetzlaff, R.; Mikolajick, T. Physical model of threshold switching in NbO 2 based memristors. 
RSC Advances 2015, 5 (124), 102318-102322. 
(8) Goodwill, J. M.; Ramer, G.; Li, D.; Hoskins, B. D.; Pavlidis, G.; McClelland, J. J.; Centrone, 
A.; Bain, J. A.; Skowronski, M. Spontaneous current constriction in threshold switching devices. 
Nature communications 2019, 10 (1), 1628. 
(9) Goodwill, J. M.; Gala, D. K.; Bain, J. A.; Skowronski, M. Switching dynamics of TaOx-based 
threshold switching devices. Journal of Applied Physics 2018, 123 (11), 115105. 
(10) Sharma, A. A.; Noman, M.; Abdelmoula, M.; Skowronski, M.; Bain, J. A. Electronic 
instabilities leading to electroformation of binary metal oxide‐based resistive switches. Advanced 
Functional Materials 2014, 24 (35), 5522-5529. 
(11) Mansingh, A.; Singh, R. The mechanism of electrical threshold switching in VO2 crystals. 
Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 1980, 13 (31), 5725. 
(12) Li, D.; Sharma, A. A.; Shukla, N.; Paik, H.; Goodwill, J. M.; Datta, S.; Schlom, D. G.; Bain, 
J. A.; Skowronski, M. ON-state evolution in lateral and vertical VO2 threshold switching devices. 
Nanotechnology 2017, 28 (40), 405201. 
(13) Alexandrov, A.; Bratkovsky, A.; Bridle, B.; Savel’Ev, S.; Strukov, D.; Stanley Williams, R. 
Current-controlled negative differential resistance due to Joule heating in TiO2. Applied Physics 
Letters 2011, 99 (20), 202104. 
(14) Lee, M.-J.; Ahn, S.-E.; Lee, C. B.; Kim, C.-J.; Jeon, S.; Chung, U.-I.; Yoo, I.-K.; Park, G.-S.; 
Han, S.; Hwang, I. R. A simple device unit consisting of all NiO storage and switch elements for 
multilevel terabit nonvolatile random access memory. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2011, 
3 (11), 4475-4479. 
(15) Kumar, S.; Strachan, J. P.; Williams, R. S. Chaotic dynamics in nanoscale NbO 2 Mott 
memristors for analogue computing. Nature 2017, 548 (7667), 318. 
(16) Lappalainen, J.; Mizsei, J.; Huotari, M. Neuromorphic thermal-electric circuits based on 
phase-change VO2 thin-film memristor elements. Journal of Applied Physics 2019, 125 (4), 
044501. 
(17) Pickett, M. D.; Williams, R. S. Phase transitions enable computational universality in 
neuristor-based cellular automata. Nanotechnology 2013, 24 (38), 384002. 
(18) Yu, S. Neuro-inspired computing with emerging nonvolatile memorys. Proceedings of the 
IEEE 2018, 106 (2), 260-285. 
(19) Chua, L.; Sbitnev, V.; Kim, H. Neurons are poised near the edge of chaos. International 
Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos 2012, 22 (04), 1250098. 
(20) Chua, L. Memristor, Hodgkin–Huxley, and edge of chaos. Nanotechnology 2013, 24 (38), 
383001. 
(21) Yi, W.; Tsang, K. K.; Lam, S. K.; Bai, X.; Crowell, J. A.; Flores, E. A. Biological plausibility 
and stochasticity in scalable VO 2 active memristor neurons. Nature communications 2018, 9 (1), 
4661. 
(22) Pickett, M. D.; Medeiros-Ribeiro, G.; Williams, R. S. A scalable neuristor built with Mott 
memristors. Nature materials 2013, 12 (2), 114-117. 


 
21

(23) Nandi, S. K.; Liu, X.; Venkatachalam, D. K.; Elliman, R. G. Threshold current reduction for 
the metal–insulator transition in NbO2− x-selector devices: the effect of ReRAM integration. 
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 2015, 48 (19), 195105. 
(24) Beaumont, A.; Leroy, J.; Orlianges, J.-C.; Crunteanu, A. Current-induced electrical self-
oscillations across out-of-plane threshold switches based on VO2 layers integrated in crossbars 
geometry. Journal of Applied Physics 2014, 115 (15), 154502. 
(25) Li, S.; Liu, X.; Nandi, S. K.; Nath, S. K.; Elliman, R. G. Origin of Current‐Controlled Negative 
Differential Resistance Modes and the Emergence of Composite Characteristics with High 
Complexity. Advanced Functional Materials 2019, 1905060. 
(26) Li, S.; Liu, X.; Nandi, S. K.; Elliman, R. G. Anatomy of filamentary threshold switching in 
amorphous niobium oxide. Nanotechnology 2018, 29 (37), 375705. 
(27) Nandi, S. K.; Nath, S. K.; Helou, A. E.; Li, S.; Uenuma, M.; Raad, P. E.; Elliman, R. G. 
Current bifurcation induced conducting filament formation in NbOx. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1909.06443 2019. 
(28) Gibson, G. A.; Musunuru, S.; Zhang, J.; Vandenberghe, K.; Lee, J.; Hsieh, C.-C.; Jackson, 
W.; Jeon, Y.; Henze, D.; Li, Z. An accurate locally active memristor model for S-type negative 
differential resistance in NbOx. Applied Physics Letters 2016, 108 (2), 023505. 
(29) Gibson, G. A. Designing Negative Differential Resistance Devices Based on Self‐Heating. 
Advanced Functional Materials 2018, 28 (22), 1704175. 
(30) Nandi, S. K.; Nath, S. K.; Helou, A. E.; Li, S.; Liu, X.; Raad, P. E.; Elliman, R. G. Current 
localisation and redistribution as the basis of discontinuous current controlled negative differential 
resistance 
in 
NbOx. 
Advanced 
Functional 
Materials 
2019, 
1906731, 
DOI: 

https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201906731. 
(31) Mikolajick, T.; Wylezich, H.; Maehne, H.; Slesazeck, S. In Versatile resistive switching in 
niobium oxide, Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2016 IEEE International Symposium on, IEEE: 
2016; pp 381-384. 
(32) El Helou, A.; Raad, P. E.; Venugopal, A.; Kande, D. In Thermal Characterization of Si BEOL 
Microelectronic Structures, ASME 2018 International Technical Conference and Exhibition on 
Packaging and Integration of Electronic and Photonic Microsystems, American Society of 
Mechanical Engineers: 2018; pp V001T03A002-V001T03A002. 
(33) Nath, S. K.; Nandi, S. K.; Li, S.; Elliman, R. G. Detection and spatial mapping of conductive 
filaments in metal/oxide/metal cross-point devices using a thin photoresist layer. Applied Physics 
Letters 2019, 114 (6), 062901. 
(34) Periasamy, P.; Guthrey, H. L.; Abdulagatov, A. I.; Ndione, P. F.; Berry, J. J.; Ginley, D. S.; 
George, S. M.; Parilla, P. A.; O'Hayre, R. P. Metal–insulator–metal diodes: Role of the insulator 
layer on the rectification performance. Advanced materials 2013, 25 (9), 1301-1308. 
(35) Michalas, L.; Trapatseli, M.; Stathopoulos, S.; Cortese, S.; Khiat, A.; Prodromakis, T. 
Interface Asymmetry Induced by Symmetric Electrodes on Metal–Al: TiO $ _ {x} $–Metal 
Structures. IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology 2017, 17 (5), 867-872. 
(36) Alimardani, N.; McGlone, J. M.; Wager, J. F.; Conley Jr, J. F. Conduction processes in metal–
insulator–metal diodes with Ta2O5 and Nb2O5 insulators deposited by atomic layer deposition. 
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 2014, 32 (1), 01A122. 

 

 


 
22

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Supplementary Information. 

1. Deposition Conditions of NbOx fims  

Table S1: Film deposition details including the stoichiometry and thickness of each layer. 

 

2. Electroforming and subsequent I-V sweeps of devices with NbO1.92 film  

 

Figure S1.  Polarity dependent electroforming and CC-NDR characteristics: (a) electroforming 

and (b) subsequent switching characteristics of a 5 µm × 5 µm cross-point devices under positive 

Deposition conditions for NbOx layers
Resisitivity 

( Ω.m)
Sputter
Target

Power
(W)

Pressure
(mTorr)

Gas flow 
(Ar/O2)
sccm/sccm

Thickness 
(nm)

x in NbOx

Nb2O5
180 (rf)
4
20/0
45
2.6±0.05
3.5x104±1.5x103

Nb
100 (dc)
1.5
19/1
44.3
1.92±0.04
8±1.5

Nb
100 (dc)
2
19/1
55
1.99±0.03
15±1

Nb
100 (dc)
1.5
18.5/1.5
57.3
2.22±0.04
120±7


 
23

bias, (c) transition of S-type into snapback when negative bias is applied to the top electrode, (d) 

electroforming and (e) subsequent switching characteristics of a 5 µm × 5 µm cross-point devices 

under negative bias, and (f) transition of snap-back into S-type NDR when positive bias is applied 

to the top electrode. 

3. SPICE Models for archetype threshold switching memristor with Poole-Frenkel model 

 

Figure S2.  SPICE equivalent circuit of a core-shell structure for one active memristor and a 

shell region in parallel. 

We considered an archetype threshold switch (memristor) in our model as the core element with 

a series combination of a parallel resistor (representing the film resistance in the shell region) and 

a constant Schottky barrier (represented by equation (1) which represents the interface barriers at 

the metal/NbOx interfaces). The electrical conductivity of the core region was assumed to be Poole-

Frenkel emission such that the device resistance is given by7:  

𝑅𝑚 = 𝑅0𝑒

1

𝑘𝐵𝑇(𝐸𝑎−𝑞√
𝑞𝐸

𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑟).. .. 
.. 
(3) 


 
24

where kB is the Boltzmann constant, Ea is the activation energy, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, 

and εr is the relative permittivity of the threshold switching volume and surrounding NbOx film. 

Tm and Tamb denote the temperature of the electrically active region and the ambient environment, 

R0 is the resistance pre-factor of the active region at 𝑇 = 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏. 

The dynamic behaviour of the memristor is defined by Newton's law of cooling: 

𝑑𝑇𝑚
𝑑𝑡 =

𝐼𝑚2𝑅𝑚

𝐶𝑡ℎ
−

∆𝑇

𝑅𝑡ℎ𝐶𝑡ℎ.. 
.. 
.. 
(4) 

where 𝑅𝑡ℎand 𝐶𝑡ℎ are the thermal resistance and the thermal capacitance of the device, and ∆T 

is the temperature difference between the Tm and 𝑇𝑎𝑚𝑏.  

The parallel resistor, Rfilm was also modelled by a similar Poole-Frenkel equation (eq. 3) with 

identical activation energy, but without any thermal feedback. The Schottky barrier represented by 

equation (1) was series connected to Rfilm. Details of the model parameters are given in the Table-

S2. 

Table S2. Memristor parameters used in simulation for core memristor and shell resistance in 

the Poole-Frenkel model. 

Model Parameters (Unit)
Symbol
Threshold 
Switch 
(Core)

Shell 
Resistance, 

Rfilm

Schottky 
parameters

Thermal capacitance (J⋅K-1)
Cth
1×10-15

Resistance prefactor (Ω)
R0
80
0.01 to 1

Thermal resistance (K⋅W−1)
Rth
2×105
2×105

Ambient temperature (K)
Tamb
298
298

Metallic state resistance (Ω)
Rv
0
0

Activation Energy (eV)
Ea
0.23
0.23

Boltzmann constant (J⋅K-1)
kB
1.38×10-23
1.38×10-23

Elementary charge (C)
e
1.6×10-19
1.6×10-19

Vacuum permittivity (F⋅m-

1)

ε0
8.85×10-12
8.85×10-12


 
25

Relative permittivity of the 
threshold switching volume 
and surrounding NbOx film

εr
45
45

Richardson’s constant(A⋅K-

2⋅m-2)

A*
480

Barrier 
lowering 
factor 

(eV)

α
0.24

Zero bias barrier (eV)
ΦB0
0.3 to 1

Schottky diode area (m2)
A
2.48×10-11

Film thickness (nm)
45

 

4. Asymmetric threshold currents for different area in sub-stoichiometric NbOx

0
25
100
225
400
625

1.0

1.5

2.0

 VTH (negative) / VTH (positive) 
 ITH (negative) / ITH (positive) 

Ratio 

Device Area (mm2)

 

Figure S3. Sub-stoichiometric NbOx (x=1.92) with three distinct device area showing 

asymmetric threshold parameters. 


 
26

5. Voltage-controlled threshold switching in sub-stoichiometric NbOx and stoichiometric 

Nb2O5. 

 

Figure S4. (a-b)  Asymmetric and symmetric threshold switching in two identical 20 µm × 20 µm 

devices with sub-stoichometric NbOx (x=1.92) and nearly-stoichiometric Nb2O5 (x=2.6) 

respectively under voltage-controlled operation.  


