Highly fluorescent copper nanoclusters for sensing and bioimaging

Yu An a,#, Ying Ren b,#, Jing Tang d,*, Jun Chen c,* and Baisong Chang a,*

a State Key Laboratory of Advanced Technology for Materials Synthesis and Processing, Wuhan 

University of Technology, Wuhan 430070, P.R. China

b Department of Radiology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 110004, 

P.R. China

c Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 

90095, USA

d Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California 

94306, USA

* Correspondence: jingtang@stanford.edu (J.T.), chang@whut.edu.cn (B.C.), jun.chen@ucla. 

edu (J.C.)

# These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract: Metal nanoclusters (NCs), typically consisting of a few to tens of metal atoms, bridge 
the gap between organometallic compounds and crystalline metal nanoparticles. As their size 
approaches the Fermi wavelength of electrons, metal NCs exhibit discrete energy levels, which 
in turn results in the emergence of intriguing physical and chemical (or physicochemical) 
properties, especially strong fluorescence. In the past few decades, dramatic growth has been 
witnessed in the development of different types of noble metal NCs (mainly AuNCs and AgNCs). 
However, compared with noble metals, copper is a relatively earth-abundant and cost-effective 
metal. Theoretical and experimental studies have shown that copper NCs (CuNCs) possess 
unique catalytic and photoluminescent properties. In this context, CuNCs are emerging as a new 
class of nontoxic, economic, and effective phosphors and catalysts, drawing significant interest 
across the life and medical sciences. To highlight these achievements, this review begins by 
providing an overview of a multitude of factors that play central roles in the fluorescence of 
CuNCs. Additionally, a critical perspective of how the aggregation of CuNCs can efficiently 
improve the florescent stability, tunability, and intensity is also discussed. Following, we present 
representative applications of CuNCs in detection and bioimaging. Finally, we outline current 
challenges and our perspective on the development of CuNCs.

Keywords: Copper nanoclusters; fluorescence; aggregation-induced emission; sensing; 
bioimaging 

1. Introduction

When decreasing the size of nanoparticles so that it approaches the Fermi wavelength of an electron, novel 
optical, electrical and magnetic properties appear (Deng et al. 2018a; Li et al. 2016b; Moghadam and Rahaie 
2019; Wang et al. 2018c). Commonly termed nanoclusters (NCs), these ultra-small nanoparticles, bridging 
the missing link between atoms and nanocrystals, have attracted considerable attention in both fundamental 
research and practical applications (Bagheri et al. 2017; Basu et al. 2019; Sun et al. 2019; Wang et al. 
2016b). Benefiting from the great progress in nanosynthetic chemistry, high-quality Copper NCs (CuNCs) 
with tailored size and good stability can be easily obtained. CuNCs, therefore, constitute an active research 
direction due to their unique properties, such as high luminous efficiency, long fluorescence lifetime, good 


optical and chemical stability, and large stokes displacement, which distinguish them as a new type of 
fluorescent probe for optical sensing and bioimaging/labeling (Cao et al. 2014; Wang et al. 2017).

In this review, we highlight recent developments of CuNCs, with a particular emphasis on the multiple 
factors affecting fluorescent properties of CuNCs, as well as the aggregation-induced emission 
enhancement (AIEE) effect. To appreciate these advances, applications focused on the detection of ions, 
macromolecules and bioimaging are summarized. Lastly, we will provide a brief conclusion, and will 
address future challenges in the rapidly growing field of fluorescent CuNCs.

2. Multiple factors that govern the fluorescence of CuNCs 

Due to the size of CuNCs falls within the sub-nanometer regime, delicate control of experimental conditions 
is critical for the synthesis of high-quality CuNCs. A series of factors, such as core size, surface ligands, 
molecular structure, charge, ionic strength, pH and temperature, have been documented to play a significant 
effect on the fluorescence of CuNCs.

2.1. Size-dependent fluorescence and ligand effect

As metal size decreases, especially approaching the Fermi wavelength of electrons, CuNCs generate strong 
photoluminescent properties (Qian et al. 2012). The fluorescence of CuNCs originates from electronic 
transitions between occupied d bands and the aforementioned Fermi level (ca. sp bands), that is to say, the 
electronic transitions between the highest occupied orbital and the lowest unoccupied orbital (HOMO-
LUMO) (Lu and Chen 2012). In 1969, Mooradian et al. (Mooradian 1969) first observed the 
photoluminescence of copper metal. The photoluminescence was further attributed to the surface plasmon 
oscillations in copper nanostructures, the electromagnetic enhancement of electrons in the sp conduction 
band below the Fermi level, and the vacancy in the d-band hole (Darugar et al. 2006).

Size dependence of the optical properties of CuNCs has been reported both theoretically and experimentally. 
The results typically follow the Vazquez-Vazquez’s theory (Vazquez-Vazquez et al. 2009), which explains 
the fluorescence of CuNCs at the atomic level. More importantly, the authors presented evidence for how 
the size of CuNCs can be controlled by adjusting the percentage of reducing agent (α) used for synthesis 
without the use of thiolates. As shown in Fig. 1, when the proportion of reducing agent was below 10%, 
Cun clusters with a small number of atoms were obtained. Specifically, when n was smaller than 10, CuNCs 
with high photoluminescence were observed. As the proportion of reducing agent increased, the 
luminescent Cun clusters disappeared, resulting in the appearance of clusters with a larger particle size 
accompanied by a red shift of the UV-visible absorption band.


Fig. 1. The evolution of the copper cluster size with increasing reducing agent (α) values. When the 
proportion of reducing agent used was below 10%, Cun clusters with a small number of atoms were 
obtained. Especially when n was smaller than 10, CuNCs with high photoluminescence were observed. 
Estimated wavelengths for each cluster were shown at the bottom. The potential energy trend was 
schematically drawn for several Cun clusters (reprinted from (Vazquez-Vazquez et al. 2009) with 
permission from American Chemical Society).

Over the past few years, assembling relatively unstable CuNCs into uniformly larger nanostructures with 
controllable size and shape has provided new opportunities for applications of CuNCs, ranging from 
electronics, and optics to nanomedicine (Nie et al. 2010; Tan et al. 2017). The use of self-assembly 
strategies to enhance fluorescence emission of nano-components has attracted much attention, such as with 
the successful synthesis of copper nanosheets and nanoribbons (Wu et al. 2015). Unfortunately, most self-
assembled components were synthesized in organic solvents, which not only limited their biological 
applications, but also hindered their use in optical devices. With this in mind, it would be of great
significance to successfully achieve self-assembly of copper nanomaterials in an aqueous solution. Inspired 
by the microemulsion method, amphiphilic compounds offer a novel strategy. The amphiphilic block 
copolymer in solution provides a unique environment for controlling the growth of NPs and building a 
uniform assembled material, and it can further facilitate structural self-assembly of controlled size and 
shape (Elsabahy et al. 2015; Mai and Eisenberg 2012).

Very recently, in 2019, Zhou and colleagues reported a practical and robust strategy for in situ synthesis of 
highly luminescent Cu nanoassemblies with uniform morphology and remarkable stability (Zhou et al. 
2019). In their study, three types of triblock copolymers, pluronic F68, F108 and F127, were used, each 
having different numbers of hydrophilic and hydrophobic blocks. The Cu nanoassemblies were synthesized 
using a multidentate thiol dipentaerythritol hexakis (S6) as the ligand and binder (Fig. 2a). Its rigid structure 
not only bridged CuNCs, but also induced enhanced component emission, and ensured photophysical and 
structural stability of the component in a physiological environment. The hydrophilic group on the surface 
of pluronic enabled the synthesized Cu nanoassemblies to dissolve in water. The oxidation of the metal 
core of the CuNCs component could also be prevented due to the unique core-shell structure. 


Fig. 2. (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of luminescent CuNPs. (b) Schematic illustration of the 
Cu nanoassemblies with controllable encapsulated CuNP number through varying block segments of 
the template. The High-Angle Annular Dark Field scanning transmission electron microscopy 
(HAADF-STEM) images of the CuNP assemblies using pluronic F68 (c), F108 (d), and F127 (e) as 
the template. (f) Number distribution of encapsulated CuNPs in an assembly and (g) size distribution 
of CuNP metal core in the assemblies (reprinted from (Zhou et al. 2019) with permission from 
American Chemical Society).

Furthermore, Cu nanoassembly growth was affected by the three different hydrophobic core sizes of the 
spherical micelle templates formed by the self-assembly of the triblock copolymers. As shown in Fig. 2b, 
when the template was changed from F68 to F108 and then F127, the dimensions of the Cu nanoassemblies 
changed from 10.8±1.2 nm, 12.9±1.4 nm to 18.8±2.4 nm, respectively. The main number of CuNPs 
encapsulated in the component went from about 2 to 3, and then to 8 (Fig. 2c-f). In the hydrophobic core, 
the three types of Cu nanoassemblies consisted of multiple homogeneously crosslinked spherical metal 
cores with an average size of 2.2-2.7 nm (Fig. 2g). Generally, the proposed strategy provided a good 
platform for realizing the synthesis of controllably packaged Cu nanoassemblies. As the amount of 
mercaptans in the ligand increased, the emission of the CuNPs module was significantly enhanced. The 
cross-linking between the ligand rigidity and ultra-small CuNPs resulted in enhanced fluorescence. The two 
properties interacted, and the major number of encapsulated CuNPs with a high quantum yield of 7.3% 
decreased from 11 to 8. In addition, the number of central atoms seemed to explain the enhancement of 
fluorescence intensity described above. The above results suggest that the integration of amphiphilic 


compounds with the self-assembly of CuNCs is a promising method to prepare stable, controlled and highly 
luminescent Cu nanoassemblies.

As anticipated, the type and state of surface ligands of CuNCs greatly influenced fluorescent properties. 
Taking AuNCs as an example, Wu et al. (Wu and Jin 2010) summarized the relationship between 
fluorescence emission of gold nanoclusters and ligands, and then gave three suggestions, which may also 
be applicable to CuNCs. In order to enhance the fluorescence emission of CuNCs, we should (1) increase 
the electron donation ability of ligands; (2) increase the electropositivity of the metal core, if the core of 
nanoparticles can maintain multiple charge states; and (3) use ligands with electron-rich atoms and groups, 
which may be the most effective strategy. 

The function of the protein directly depends on its three-dimensional conformation (Moghadam and Rahaie 
2019). It is well known that bovine serum albumin (BSA) has different conformations at different pH values, 
which will govern the physical properties of nanomaterials (Ghosh et al. 2012). The successful use of 
fluorescent CuNCs as a pH sensor was first reported in 2014 by Wang et al (Wang et al. 2014). It was found 
that the fluorescence intensity of BSA-CuNCs increased nearly 2-fold when the pH was lowered from 12 
to 6, and these changes were reversible between pH 6-12. However, there was no significant change in 
emission positions at different pH values. In order to resolve this phenomenon, they studied the secondary 
structure of BSA in the reaction systems at different pH values by circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy. It 
was found that, as the pH of the solution decreased, more alpha helices were stretched and converted into 
beta sheets, which may result in the damage or cleavage of hydrogen bonds. Accordingly, changes in 
fluorescence at different pH values could be attributed to the corresponding structural changes in BSA.

It should be noted that the luminescence mechanism is not only related to the quantum confinement effect 
of the metal core, but also the ligands on the surface of CuNCs (Chen et al. 2014; Lin et al. 2015; Luo et al. 
2012). Coordination between ligands and the metal core usually results in ligand-metal charge transfer 
(LMCT) or ligand-metal-metal charge transfer (LMMCT), and radiation relaxation through the triplet state 
of metal center (Luo et al. 2012). Compared with metal centered electron transition induced fluorescence, 
LMCT or LMMCT induced emissions always show a longer fluorescence lifetime, which is partly because 
LMCT/LMMCT can control the excited state relaxation dynamics (Sharma and Dormidontova 2017).

2.2. Cu···Cu interantion

The Group IB metal in the +1 oxidation state generally has a very short metal-metal bond length. This 
unusual physicochemical property mainly originates from the interaction of d10-d10, which is also called 
closed‐shell interactions (CSI). Although the strength of CSI is not comparable to the strength of covalent 
or ionic bonds, metallophilic attractions are related to correlation and relativistic effects, which have been 
regarded as important for explaining the luminescent behavior of metal compounds (Hermann et al. 2001). 
Although a majority of NCs are more likely to aggregate and oxidize as their size decreases, it is worth 
noting that moderate oxidation of the surface of NCs would ensure stability, and therefore enhance the 
fluorescence emission (Wang and Huang 2013). As the binding energy of Cu(0) is only 0.1 eV away from 
that of Cu(I) in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, it is not possible to exclude the formation of Cu(I). 
Therefore, the valence state of the obtained CuNCs most likely lies between 0 and +1. Wang et al. (Wang 
and Huang 2013)studied the effect of reducing agents on the fluorescent emission of thiol-protected CuNCs. 
They found that the addition of NaBH4 rapidly decreased the fluorescence of as-prepared glutathione (GSH) 
capped CuNCs (GSH-CuNCs). In addition, a new broad peak appeared in the XRD spectrum that was 
consistent with the copper particles. It is known that the charge transfer from S to metal core has a 
predominant effect on fluorescent enhancement. The oxidation of CuNCs core can thus promote the charge 
transfer efficiency and further improve the fluorescent signals (Chen et al. 2015). 


Since the solid-state emission heavily depends on the arrangement and molecular structure in the solid state, 
it is widely observed that mechanical grinding will produce a direct influence on the structural packing 
mode and, in turn, change the emission wavelength (Sagara et al. 2007). In 2014, Quentin et al. (Benito et 
al. 2014) provided new insights into the properties of mechanochromic luminescence through their in-depth 
study of luminescent copper iodide clusters. They found that the synthesized polycrystalline copper iodide 
clusters had the properties of mechanical discoloration and thermochromism, which caused a significant 
change in the color of luminescence when the solid sample was ground up. The initial green luminescence 
was converted to a yellow luminescence, while the powder color remained white. Grinding did not induce 
other chemical reactions, and the molecular structure of clusters stayed constant in the powders. After 
grinding, the product changed from crystalline to amorphous. By defining the Cu-iodine and Cu-phosphorus 
bond, the iodine-Cu-iodine bond angle indirectly determined the Cu-Cu distance. Thus, the offset of the 
emission spectrum correlated with the variation of Cu-Cu distance. Additionally, polymorphism and 
mechanical coloration can manipulate different thermochromic luminescence properties of clusters (Benito
et al. 2014). The samples before and after grinding exhibited different emissions in liquid nitrogen. As the 
temperature increased, their emission returned to their original state.

The effect of Cu···Cu interaction in the liquid phase is similar to that described above. Wu et al. (Wu et al. 
2015) also expressed a similar viewpoint through their self-assembly strategy of 1-dodecyl mercaptan (DT) 
terminated CuNCs. They declared that the compactness played an important role in the emission of NC 
components. High density not only enhanced the affinity interactions between NCs, but also greatly 
promoted the relaxation kinetics of excited states through radiation pathways (Jia et al. 2013; Luo et al. 
2012); it strongly restricted the vibration and rotation of end-capped ligands, thus enhancing the emission 
intensity of self-assembly structures (Luo et al. 2012; Mei et al. 2014). In addition, the emission energy of 
the module depended on the distance between atoms. The improved compactness could increase the average 
distance between atoms, resulting in blue shift of emission from NC modules. In their research, NCs self-
assembled through strong dipole-dipole interactions. Different fluorescence emissions were observed in 
self-assembled copper nanoribbons (Fig. 3a, b) and nanosheets (Fig. 3d, e). Although both of the 
nanocomponents were composed of a single NC rather than crystalline Cu, the nanosheets emitted blue 
fluorescence (Fig. 3c), while the nanoribbons emitted blue-green fluorescence (Fig. 3f). For nanosheets 
with loose NCs alignment, the cuprophilic interactions between NCs was weaker than that of nanoribbons. 
As a result, the average Cu(I)···Cu(I) distance was shorter than that of the nanoribbon, resulting in a 
decrease in emission energy and a red shift in the spectrum. Furthermore, they demonstrated that the 
emission of assembled nanomaterials was related to temperature. As for the nanoribbons, the intra- and 
inter-NCs Cu(I)···Cu(I) distances were simultaneously shortened under low temperature, resulting in red 
emission shifts (Fig. 3g). However, for the sheets, further temperature lowering made the increase in inter-
NCs Cu(I)···Cu(I) distance dominant, resulting in a blue emission shift (Fig. 3h). Moreover, their group 
reported that metal defects contributed to emission red-shift (Wu et al. 2017). This discovery has then 
opened up new avenues for the application of copper nanomaterials in luminescent materials.


Fig. 3. TEM characterization and fluorescence spectra of CuNCs with different self-assembly 
morphology: (a-c) ribbons; (d-f) sheets. Variation of emission spectra of ribbons (g) and sheets (h) 
with 365 nm excitation from 77 to 298 K. Fluorescent images of the powder (i) of CuNCs self-
assembly ribbons and sheets with 365 nm excitation at 298 and 77 K (reprinted from (Wu et al. 2015)
with permission from American Chemical Society).

As an important new type of porous material, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are widely used in 
catalysis, energy storage, and separation (Maurin et al. 2017). Recently, a simple one-pot synthesis of GSH-
CuNC and MOF complexes (CuNCs/MOFs) was reported for the first time (Fig. 4) (Han et al. 2018b). 
GSH-CuNCs were evenly distributed across the whole MOFs structure. The fluorescence intensity of 
CuNCs/MOFs increased about 35-fold more than that of individual GSH-CuNCs because of the MOFs 
skeleton that exhibited a space limiting effect. Additionally, the stability timeframe was greatly enhanced 
from 3 days to 3 months. The difference was that the fluorescence emission of the synthesized 
CuNCs/MOFs showed a blue shift of about 20 nm which might have been caused by the predominance of 
inter-Cu(I)⋯Cu(I) interactions over intra-interactions. However, when the pH of the solution changed, the 
synthesized complex exhibited both significant morphological differences and a drastic change in its 
fluorescence emission. At a lower pH value, the crystal structure of MOFs was easily destroyed. When the 
pH was lowered to about 3.5, the solution changed from turbid to clear, and the orange fluorescence 
emission of the solution disappeared with the blue emission occurring at 440 nm. When NaOH was added 
again, white turbidity appeared again with a recovery of the orange fluorescence emission. For this reason, 
the CuNCs/MOFs complex shows great potential as a pH probe. Notably, pH sensitivity also limits broader 
applications of MOFs-based CuNCs. 


Fig. 4. Schematic illustration of the one-pot synthesis of CuNCs/MOFs composites. Insets show the 
SEM images of MOFs (upper) and CuNCs@GSH/MOFs composites (lower) (reprinted from (Han et 
al. 2018b) with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry).

2.3. Solvent effect and AIEE

2.3.1. Solvent effect

The ground and excited states of fluorescent molecules have different electron distributions, resulting in 
different dipole moments and polarizability (Liptay 1974). Different interactions among the ground state, 
the excited state, and the solvent molecule have a great influence on the fluorescence spectrum and intensity. 
In this regard, the same fluorescent material may have various fluorescence spectra in different solvents. 
For example, the red shift of fluorescence spectrum resulting from the solvent effect has been demonstrated 
by theoretical and experimental studies (Han et al. 2018c; Prakash et al. 2019).


Fig. 5. (a) Fluorescence spectra of the PEI-capped Cu nanoclusters dispersed in different solvents; (b) 
Lippert plot of PEI-Cu nanoclusters dispersed in different solvents: (A) water, (B) methanol, (C) 
ethanol, (D) n-propanol, (E) isopropanol, (F) 1-butanol, (G) ethylene glycol, (H) acetonitrile, (I) N,N-
Dimethylformamide, (J) DMSO, (K) THF, (L) 1,4methanol, and (M) EGME (reprinted from (Ling et 
al. 2015) with permission from American Chemical Society).

Ling et al. studied the solvent effect in 12 polar organic solvents, using polyethyleneimine (PEI)-terminated 
CuNCs as a research target (Ling et al. 2015). They found that the fluorescence spectra and characteristic 
absorption spectra of PEI-CuNCs in alcohol solvents were similar to those in water. However, a special 
phenomenon was observed in solvents such as acetonitrile, tetrahydrofuran (THF), dimethyl sulfoxide 
(DMSO), ethylene glycol monomethyl ether (EGME), and 1,4-dioxane. Namely, blue shifts in emission 
peaks were found in THF and 1,4-dioxane (Fig. 5a), and there were significant changes in their absorption 
spectra. The solvent effect was generally described according to the Lippert equation. The specific 
calculation method is shown below.

𝑣𝑎 − 𝑣𝑓 =

2(μ∗−μ)2

hc𝑎3
(

𝜀−1

2𝜀+1 −

𝑛2−1

2𝑛2+1),   
(1)

The different behavior on the Stokes shift was induced by the dielectric constant (ε) and refractive index 
(n). The νa and νf are the frequencies of the absorption and emission maxima, respectively. The μ* and μ 
are the dipole moments in excited-state and ground-state, respectively. c is the speed of light, h is Planck’s 
constant, and a is the solute cavity radius. The orientation polarizability (Δf) is in parentheses, νa minus νf
is the Stokes shift. Generally, the Stokes shift decreases when the refractive index increases, whereas an 
increase in dielectric constant leads to a larger Stokes shift (Wong et al. 1992). The author also gave the 


relationship between Stokes shift and Δf. As shown in Fig. 5b-d, as the orientation polarizability increased, 
the Stokes shift also increases. In addition, THF and 1,4-dioxane were more likely to form hydrogen bonds 
with water. The hydrogen bond affected the absorption and emission spectra if a hydrogen bond interaction 
occurred in the ground state.

The development of luminescent materials is indispensable in the process of human life and civilization. 
Aggregation-induced emission enhancement (AIEE) is a phenomenon that was accidentally discovered by 
Tang’s group in 2001 (Hong et al. 2011). Researchers found that the AIEE effect was also applicable to the 
synthesis of nanoclusters (Jia et al. 2013; Jia et al. 2014; Kang et al. 2016). The aggregated NCs can change 
the ligand/ligand, ligand/metal, and metal/metal interactions, which affects the excited state relaxation 
kinetics. In the non-aggregated state, ligand molecules return electrons from excited state to the ground 
state by internal rotation or vibration (Goswami et al. 2016; Hong et al. 2011). In the state of aggregation, 
intramolecular rotation and vibration are greatly restricted, as the energy in the excited state can only be 
released by non-radiative transitions, which is manifested by a strong increase in fluorescence intensity. 
Strategically, the AIEE effect is used to increase the radiant energy transfer rate by inhibiting the ligand-
related non-radiative relaxation of the excited state (Luo et al. 2012). It is worth mentioning that this strategy 
gives us insight into designing high-efficiency luminescent CuNCs. It has been found that many CuNCs 
have unique AIEE properties (Li et al. 2016a; Liu et al. 2018b; Zhou et al. 2019).

Recently, Subarna et al. (Maity et al. 2019) gave a clear explanation of solvent effect and the AIEE effect. 
Cu34-32(SG)16-13 NCs were successfully synthesized using GSH as the ligand. They found that the addition 
of ethanol greatly affected the fluorescence emission of CuNCs. The extent of aggregation was controlled 
by the ratio of water to ethanol. In aqueous solution, Cu34-32(SG)16-13 NCs with surface electronegativity 
could form hydrated shells and exhibit good solubility and stability. Due to the difference in polarity, the 
addition of ethanol could destroy the hydrated shell and cause the surface charge to be neutralized (Maity 
et al. 2019). The particles lacked stability and became closer to each other due to higher inter and intra NCs 
Cu (I)···Cu (I) hydrophilic interactions. Large aggregates gradually formed and showed enhanced 
fluorescence intensity.

2.3.2. pH-dependent AIEE

Fluorescence properties vary with pH, usually accompanied by the formation of hydrogen bonds or 
protonation/deprotonation processes leading to significant changes in the excitation (emission) spectra. 
Superior optical reversibility is the basis for the further use of pH-responsive probes. Su et al. (Su and Liu 
2017) performed an in-depth study of pH-responsive CuNCs, using L-cysteine (Cys) as both the reducing 
and capping agents. They found that CuNCs showed a good reversible pH-responsive aggregation (from 
1.0 to 7.0). As shown in Fig. 6, CuNCs aggregated with each other and emitted intense red fluorescence at 
a lower pH of 3.0. However, as the pH gradually increased from 3.0 to 7.0, the CuNCs aggregate in the 
solution dissolved, accompanied by a significant decrease in fluorescence emission. The same phenomenon
occurred when the pH was reduced from 3.0 to 1.0. The AIEE behavior could be attributed to the formation 
of hydrogen bonds between carboxyl and amino groups of cysteine under acidic conditions (Brinas et al. 
2008; Wang et al. 2013). The changes of CuNCs from monodisperse CuNCs to aggregates mainly involved 
the interaction of ligands on the surface and the hydrophilic interaction of Cu(I)···Cu(I). Specifically, it 
could be divided into two main factors. First, the enhanced cuprophilic interactions facilitated the radiative 
pathway from the excited-state relaxation dynamics. Second, the restriction of intramolecular vibration and 
rotation reduced the nonradiative relaxation of the excited states (Su and Liu 2017). The pH-responsive 
properties of CuNCs made it possible for them to be used in tumor-specific imaging. The authors also 
showed that the pH responsiveness allowed CuNCs to self-assemble with BSA and glucose oxidase (GOx) 
and that the assembles also had similar pH responsiveness. Interestingly, the synthesized GOx-CuNCs 
emitting red fluorescence exhibited excellent responsiveness to glucose. In the presence of GOx-CuNCs, 


glucose could be oxidized by oxygen to form H2O2, which quenched the luminescence of CuNCs with a 
detection limit of 1.5 μM in the concentration range of 5-100 μM. This strategy provides an important 
guideline for the design of water-soluble luminescent biomolecule-stabilized NC hybrid nanostructures.

Fig. 6. Composition schematic of CuNCs and pH-induced AIEE phenomenon. Inset showed the 
photographs of the CuNC aggregates synthesized at different molar ratios of cysteine to Cu2+ at room 
temperature, and the pictures were taken under room light (upper panel) and 365nm UV light (lower 
panel) (reprinted from (Su and Liu 2017) with permission from American Chemical Society).

2.3.3. Ion-induced AIEE

Cation-induced aggregation is one of main methods used for enhancing the emission efficiency of CuNCs. 
Generally, cation-induced aggregation can be attributed to the neutralization of surface charges on CuNCs 
or the formation of new bonds due to the high affinity. 

Hu et al. identified that the fluorescence emission of dithiothreitol (DTT)-capped CuNCs could be 
significantly enhanced when Al3+ was added into the solution (Hu et al. 2017). It was found that, with the 
increase in Al3+ concentrations, CuNCs aggregated, and the resulting hydrodynamic diameter increased 
over 14-fold. Fundamentally, this phenomenon was observed for the following two reasons. First, the 
negative charge on the surface of CuNCs was neutralized by Al3+ due to charge interaction, resulting in a 
decrease in zeta potential and the aggregation of CuNCs. Second, Al3+ could combine with ligands on the 
surface of CuNCs to produce Al-O bonds, further promoting the aggregation of CuNCs. These two 
interactions gave rise to remarkable enhancement of fluorescence emission. Notably, this method was 
successfully applied to the detection of Al3+ in food with a detection limit as low as 0.01 μM. Based on a 
similar mechanism, strong fluorescence enhancement was observed when Zn2+ was added to GSH-CuNCs. 
In the presence of Zn2+, the fluorescence intensity of CuNCs tripled, and the absolute quantum yield 
increased from 1.3% to about 6.2% (Lin et al. 2017). A good linear detection range was observed from 
4.68-2240 μM and the limit of detection was about 1.17 μM. Due to the biocompatibility, CuNCs showed 
great advantages in Zn2+ imaging of living cells. Moreover, Li et al. (Li et al. 2018) reported a method for 
detecting Hg2+ based on induced fluorescence enhancement. They found that Hg2+ could alter the structures 
of DNA. As shown in Fig. 7a, Hg2+ induced single-stranded poly thymine (T) DNA to form a network 


structure via T−Hg2+−T base pairs, resulting in the formation of reticulated DNA. Compared with poly(T) 
DNA, poly(T) DNA treated by Hg2+ was more rigid. The reticular structure limited its non-radiative 
transitions, thus resulting in the formation of CuNCs with enhanced fluorescence. In this case, Hg2+ could 
be easily detected by fluorescence enhancement. The method used exonuclease I (exo I) to digest excess 
poly(T) DNA. Due to the high selectivity and specificity of the enzyme, exo I can remove nucleotides from 
single-stranded DNA rather than reticular DNA. It could not only reduce background noise, but could also 
protect the enhanced signal. It is worth mentioning that this method has good selectivity and can be used 
for water quality testing. In addition, since the introduction of Hg2+ and GSH is associated with a decrease 
in fluorescence intensity, the biosensor was in principle expected to be used to detect GSH.

Fig. 7. Schematic illustration of Hg2+ quantification based on fluorescence regulation of CuNCs via 
DNA template manipulation. (b) TEM image of CuNCs using poly(T) as the template. Inset: HRTEM 
image of CuNCs with a lattice spacing of 2.05 Å. (c) TEM image of CuNCs using Hg2+-treated poly(T) 
as the template. Inset: Enlargement of one aggregate of CuNCs (reprinted from (Li et al. 2018) with 
permission from American Chemical Society).

Usually, aggregation-induced products are more likely to be large productions or network structures. 
Recently, it was reported that S2- was capable of inducing silk fibroin (SF) protected CuNCs (SF@CuNCs) 
to form uniform rod-shaped fluorescence-enhanced nanoparticles (Zhang et al. 2019a). The generation of 
aggregation was attributed to the interaction of S2- with the core of SF@CuNCs. Based on this finding, it 
could be extended to the detection of S2-. The limit of the given detection was 0.286 μM in the linear 
concentration of 5-110 μM.

3. CuNCs for sensing

Selectivity, stability, detection range, and detection limit are the four important criteria when considering 
the feasibility of CuNCs as probes. Over the past few years, CuNCs have been used as intriguing ion probes 
because of their superior optical properties. By capping them with different ligands, CuNCs usually display 
powerful recognition capabilities, from small ions to large biological molecules. Strategically, the majority 
of detection methods follow a similar principle. The concentration of the target substrate can be determined 
based on the difference in fluorescence intensity before and after the detecting treatments.

3.1. Ion detection

3.1.1. Al3+ detection


So far, it has been well documented that Al3+ can enhance the fluorescence intensity of CuNCs. Boonmee 
et al. found that cysteamine capped CuNCs showed good responsiveness to Al3+ (Boonmee et al. 2018). As 
the cysteamine has only two carbon atoms and the -NH2 moiety is very close to the core cluster, a strong 
fluorescent emission might have happened once the target interactions occurred at the -NH2 moiety. In the 
presence of Al3+ with a small ion radius and high charge, CuNCs were induced to aggregate according to 
the coordination interactions. In the acidic solution, the presence of Al3+ could cause a significant increase 
in the fluorescence intensity of cysteamine-CuNCs at 380 nm, while other studied metal ions did not 
produce this effect. With the increase of Al3+ concentrations, the fluorescence intensity at 380 nm rose 
remarkably. The selectivity of CuNCs allowed it to be applied to determine Al3+ concentration in drinking 
water samples, providing a working range of 1-7 μM with a low detection limit of 26.7 nM.

Differing from the above fluorescence enhancement principle, Pang et al. designed a selective fluorescent 
switching probe for the detection of F- using Al3+ as a bridge (Pang et al. 2019). The red fluorescent CuNCs 
were synthesized with polythymidine as a template. In the presence of Al3+, the fluorescence of CuNCs was 
greatly quenched due to the coordination interactions between Al3+ and DNA. However, the addition of F-

caused the desorption of Al3+ from DNA and the formation of the Al(OH)3F− complex, resulting in the 
restoration of fluorescence intensity. The proposed method was successfully applied to determine F−

concentration in toothpaste, which delivered a working range of 2 to 150 μM and a low detection limit of 1 
μM. Moreover, a similar method was used for the detection of creatinine (CRN) with GSH-CuNCs (Jalili 
and Khataee 2018). The detection limit is 0.63 μg/L in the range of 2.5-34 μg/L.

3.1.2. Hg2+ detection

As a harmful heavy metal element, mercury exists in different forms in nature. Excessive exposure to an 
environment rich in Hg causes serious adverse effects to human body. Recently, Bhamore et al. synthesized 
CuNCs with bright blue fluorescence using curcuminoids as the template (Bhamore et al. 2018). They 
observed that, while the Hg2+ was added to the CuNCs, the dispersed CuNCs aggregated to each other and 
caused fluorescence quenching due to the strong interaction between Hg2+ ions and ligands on the surface 
of CuNCs. Based on this finding, a novel fluorescent Hg2+ sensor was established, showing a linear range 
of 0.0005-25 μM with a detection limit of 0.12 nM at room temperature.

Liu et al. (Liu et al. 2019a) proposed a colorimetric method for the detection of Mg2+ or Pb2+ in solution. In 
the absence of Pb2+ or Hg2+, H2O2 could be decomposed to produce oxygen and water, which inhibited the 
oxidation of 3,3',5,5'-Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) because of the catalase-like activity of metallothionein-
stabilized CuNCs (MT-CuNCs). However, the catalase-like activity of the MT-CuNCs was converted into 
peroxidase-like activity in the presence of Pb2+ or Hg2+. As a result, H2O2 was catalytically decomposed to 
produce hydroxyl radicals that would react with TMB. TMB was oxidized to 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine 
diimine (oxTMB) and accompanied by changes in the color of the solution (Fig. 8). Taking advantage of 
this property, Mg2+ or Pb2+ could be easily detected in the UV spectrum. Under optimal conditions, a linear 
relationship was observed while detecting Pb2+ in the concentration range of 707 nM to 96 μM with a 
detection limit of 142 nM. As for Hg2+, a linear relationship was observed in the range of 97 nM to 2.325 
μM and 3.10 to 15.59 μM with a detection limit of 43.8 nM.


Fig. 8. Schematic diagram of MT-CuNCs for the Detection of Pb2+ or Hg2+. In the presence of Pb2+ or 
Hg2+, catalase-like activity of the MT-CuNCs was converted into peroxidase-like activity. H2O2 was 
catalytically decomposed to produce hydroxyl radicals that reacted with TMB (reprinted from (Liu et 
al. 2019a) with permission from Springer). 

3.1.3. Cu2+ detection

Copper participates in many physiological processes in living organisms involving the electron transfer 
catalysis of two oxidation states (Gawande et al. 2016). However, excessive exposure to high concentrations 
of Cu2+ causes damage to the gastrointestinal tract, liver, and kidneys. Recently, Zhong et al. (Zhong et al. 
2014) observed that the addition of Cu2+ led to increased interactions between Cu2+ and BSA, which 
quenched the fluorescence of BSA-CuNCs. By adding ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid to the system, Cu2+

was removed from the surface of BSA-CuNCs, resulting in the restoration of fluorescence. Due to the lack 
of selectivity, the presence of Hg2+ or Fe3+ also led to the similar influences which limited its practicability. 
Based on the AIEE effect described above, Shen et al. (Shen et al. 2019) proposed a simple method for 
detecting Cu2+ in solution. The sample to be tested was directly added to the aqueous solution of 
tetrahydrofuran containing GSH. Cu2+ was reduced to form GSH-CuNCs, and aggregated into large particle 
aggregates with red emission. It is worth noting that the reaction time is 2 minutes with a detection limit of 
0.17 μM.

3.1.4. S2- detection 

Recently, a dual emission nanocomposite of CuNCs/CDs (carbon dots) was reportedly used as a ratiometric 
fluorescent probe for the detection of sulfide and gaseous H2S (Fig. 9a) (Wen et al. 2019). This 
nanocomposite presented two emission peaks at 469 nm and 622 nm, which were attributed to CDs and 
CuNCs, respectively. The addition of sulfides quenched the fluorescence of CuNCs, while the fluorescence 
intensity of CDs remained constant (Fig. 9b). After S2- treatment, CuNCs were converted into CuS, while 
CDs displayed a negligible change. As a result, the fluorescence of the probe changed from red to blue as 
the concentration of sulfide increased. As shown in Fig. 9c, a strong linear relationship could be observed 
in the concentration range of 2 to 10 ppb (26-128 nM) with a very low detection limit of 4.3 nM. In light 
of the unique color change of ratiometric method, portable fluorescent test paper was prepared by 
combining the nanocomposite with agar gel. Furthermore, the test paper had a good response to gaseous 
H2S, which was of great importance for H2S detection in the environment (Fig. 9d). A similar structure has 
also been reported in other noble metals. Since dual-emitting probes are more resistant to complex sample 
environments (Wang et al. 2016a), they have great potential in biological applications.


Fig. 9. (a) Schematic presentation of the synthesis of CuNCs-CDs dual-emission nano-assembly. (b) 
PL spectra of CuNCs-CDs dual-emission nano-assembly in the concentration of sulfide from 0 to 1 
ppm; (c) The relationship between the ratio of fluorescence intensity (I622/I469) and sulfide. Inset: linear 
relationship of the ratio of fluorescence intensity (I622/I469) and sulfide from 2 to 10 ppb. (d) 
Photographs of CuNCs-CDs-agar fluorescent film in different concentration of gaseous H2S under sun 
light and UV light (reprinted from (Wen et al. 2019) with permission from Springer). 

3.2. Aromatic compound detection

3.2.1. Trinitrotoluene (TNT) detection

Aparna et al. (Aparna et al. 2018) proposed that PEI-CuNCs could be used for detecting environmental 
TNT. The amino group of the PEI on the surface of CuNCs could chemically recognize TNT molecules by 
forming TNT derivatives and reducing the fluorescence intensity. It could be attributed to the following 
two reasons. First, the overlap of the excitation spectrum of CuNCs with the absorption spectrum of TNT 
led to the internal filter effect. Second, the emission spectrum of CuNCs overlapped with the absorption 
spectrum of the TNT derivative, resulting in a Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) phenomenon. The 
formation of such a complex occurred with a significant color variation that made it possible to be used as 
a colorimetric sensor. Under optimal conditions, the detection limits of the probe through the fluorescent 
and colorimetric methods were 14 pM and 0.05 nM, respectively. In addition, PEI-CuNCs were 
successfully used in test paper to detect TNT vapor with a detection limit of 10 nM, which held great 
potential for detecting environment TNT. 

3.2.2. Picric acid (PA) detection 

Ravi et al. (Patel et al. 2018) found that pyridoxamine (PM) could specifically interact with GSH-CuNCs 
and thus adsorb to their surfaces, resulting in the formation of a new band near 410 nm in the fluorescence 
spectra. However, the addition of picric acid quenched the fluorescence both at 410 nm and 625 nm with 
high efficiency and selectivity (Fig. 10a) while other common metal ions or anions did not interfere with 
this detection. The possible mechanism for this might be the formation of hydrogen bonds between PA and 
PM on the surface of CuNCs. The fluorescence quenching at 410 nm was attributed to the resonance energy 
transfer from the excited PM-CuNCs to PA because of the overlap of the emission of PM-CuNCs and the 
absorbance of PA. The photo-induced electron transfer from PA to the excited PM-CuNCs (Malik et al. 


2015) might explain the quenching of the red emission (Fig. 10b). The linear range given was 9.9-43 μM 
with a detection limit of 2.74 μM. In addition, highly selective PM-CuNC nano-assembly could be applied 
in real samples and was successfully used in the test paper. By modifying PM-CuNCs on cellulose strip test 
paper, the test paper showed distinctly different fluorescent colors while immersed in different 
concentrations (0.1 μM-1 mM) of PA solution (Fig. 10c-d). Since PA is an electron-deficient compound, it 
could easily interact with electron-rich groups. Other CuNCs have also been reported to present similar 
functions based on the fluorescence quenching mechanism (Shanmugaraj and John 2018; Zhang et al. 
2018c). Cysteamine-coated CuNCs were prepared by Bao et al. (Bao et al. 2018) to show a superior 
detection range (1-80 μM) and detection limit (139 nM).

Fig. 10. (a) Fluorescence spectral changes of PM-CuNCs upon addition of increasing PA. (b) 
Schematic representation for the synthesis of GSH-CuNCs and its interactions with PM and PA. (c) 
Schematic diagram of CuNCs used in paper strips. (d) Fluorescence color changes of the modified 
paper strips upon interaction with different concentrations of PA (0.1 μM - 1 mM) observed under UV 
light at 365 nm (reprinted from (Patel et al. 2018) with permission from Elsevier).

3.2.3. M-dinitrobenzene and quinoline yellow detection


Based on AIEE mechanism, fluorescent Cys-CuNCs were used for the detection of m-dinitrobenzene (m-
DNB) (Hambarde et al. 2019). Among different nitro-aromatics, m-DNB significantly enhanced the 
fluorescence of Cys-CuNCs in PBS buffer (pH 9.0). The detection limit was 0.13 μM in the range of 1.3-
990 μM. Additionally, Cys-CuNCs were reported to be used for the detection of quinoline yellow, a food 
coloring agent (Sivasankaran et al. 2019). The addition of quinoline yellow quenched the fluorescence 
accompanied by the formation of new compounds, which could be observed in the UV spectrum. The linear 
detection range was 0.2-5.5 μM with a detection limit of 0.11 μM.

3.3. Neurotransmitter molecular detection

3.3.1. Dopamine detection 

Dopamine acts as a neurotransmitter to regulate a variety of physiological functions of the central nervous 
system (Basu and Dasgupta 2000). For example, dopamine system dysregulation involving Parkinson's 
disease, schizophrenia, Tourette syndrome, etc. Miao et al. (Miao et al. 2018) found that BSA-CuNCs could 
selectively recognize dopamine. The fluorescence intensity of BSA-CuNCs rose with the increase of 
dopamine concentration at pH 7.4. Under optimized conditions, the fluorescence intensity of BSA-CuNCs 
showed strong linearity from 0.5 to 50 μM with a detection limit of 0.28 μM. It is worth noting that Aparna 
and colleagues (Aparna et al. 2019b) recently discovered that CuNCs in the presence of H2O2 had a faster 
response to DA. Furthermore, they developed a test paper for direct detection of dopamine. The working 
range was 0.1-0.6 nM with a low detection limit of 0.024 nM. 

He et al. (He et al. 2018) proposed a new method for the detection of dopamine. CDs-CuNCs with dual 
emission were successfully designed and prepared. The novel complex consisting of 3-aminophenylboronic 
acid (APBA) modified CDs, and red-emitting BSA-CuNCs were constructed following a carbodiimide-
activated coupling strategy. Since dopamine could specifically couple with APBA, the addition of 
dopamine caused the electrons to be transferred from CDs to dopamine, resulting in the fluorescence 
quenching (centering at 440 nm) of CDs in the complex, while the fluorescence (at 640 nm) of CuNCs 
remained constant. One important advantage of this dual emission system was the obvious fluorescence 
color change during the test, suggesting that the approximate sample concentration could be evaluated by 
the naked eye. This method provided a working range of 0.1-100 μM with a detection limit of 32 nM. The 
fluorescent probe could efficiently detect dopamine in human serum samples.

3.3.2. Carbamazepine detection 

Recently, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) coated CuNCs were designed as a probe for the 
determination of carbamazepine (CBZ). In the study, CTAB served as the linking reagent, which could 
interact with CBZ to enhance fluorescence by blocking the non-radiative e-/h + recombination defect sites 
on the surface of CuNCs (Hatefi et al. 2019). Specifically, a new emission peak appeared in the fluorescence 
spectrum at 480 nm, while the intensity at 415 nm remained unchanged in the presence of CBZ. Based on 
the relationship between fluorescence intensity and concentration, the concentration of CBZ in the sample 
could be easily obtained. The method gave a good linear relationship in the concentration range of 0.2-20 
μg/mL with a detection limit of 0.08 μg/mL.

3.4. Biological enzyme detection

3.4.1. Uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG) detection 

Ling et al. (Ling et al. 2019) proposed a new method to detect UDG, which might exist in some DNA 
viruses. As shown in Fig. 11a, a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) consisting of uracil bases (UB) and trigger 
primer (TP) with uracil damage was designed as a substrate. UDG identified and removed uracil damage 


in the substrate to expose abasic (AP) sites, which worked with exonuclease III (Exo III) to cause hydrolysis 
of dsDNA containing poly-adenine (PA) and poly-thymine (PT), and release of the PT sequence. After that, 
the TP sequence was used as a template to synthesize red fluorescent CuNCs. However, 4’,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindole (DAPI) interacted with dsDNA (UB-TP sequences and PA-PT sequences) to form a complex 
with blue fluorescence in the absence of UDG. Based on the relationship between fluorescence difference 
and UDG concentration, this new method could be applied to detect UDG. As shown in Fig. 11b, the 
experimental phenomenon was consistent with the fluorescence spectra. The increase in UDG content 
caused an increase in fluorescence intensity at 602 nm and a decrease at 452 nm. Conversely, a decrease in 
UDG content led to a decrease in fluorescence intensity at 602 nm and an increase at 452 nm. Within a 
certain range, the ratio fluorescence (RF) exhibited a good linear relationship with the concentration of 
UDG (Fig. 11c). This method gave a detection limit of 0.05 U/L, which might provide a potential platform 
for clinical diagnosis.

Fig. 11. (a) Schematic Diagram of CuNCs for the Detection of Uracil-DNA Glycosylase (b) Emission 
spectra of the system in the presence of various concentrations of UDG. (c) A linear relationship of 
RF, (F602/F°602)/(F452/F°452), versus the concentration of UDG. The concentrations of UDG are 
1.0 × 10−4, 5.0 × 10−4, 1.0 × 10-3, 2.0 × 10-3, 3.0 × 10-3, 6.0 × 10-3, 0.01, 0.015 U/mL, respectively 
(reprinted from (Ling et al. 2019) with permission from Elsevier).

3.4.2. Pyrophosphatase detection

Liu and colleagues (Liu et al. 2018a) discovered that tannic acid (TA) coated CuNCs (TA-CuNCs) could 
be used to detect the activity of pyrophosphatase (PPA). Interestingly, it was found that Fe3+ quenched the 
fluorescence of TA-CuNCs due to the interaction between TA and Fe3+. Because of the stronger affinity 
between pyrophosphate (PPi) and Fe3+, the addition of PPi removed Fe3+ from the surface of CuNCs, 
resulting in the restoration of fluorescence. Furthermore, the PPi was decomposed into two phosphate ions 
when PPA was added to the solution, causing the fluorescence of the TA-CuNCs to be quenched again. 
Taking advantage of the “on-off-on” strategy, TA-CuNCs were successfully used for the detection of PPA 
in human serum samples with a detection limit of 0.19 U/L in the range of 0.5-18 U/L. 

In addition, it was also reported that GSH-CuNCs exhibited a similar performance, which was used for 
detecting pyrophosphatase and alkaline phosphatase (Geng et al. 2019; Ye et al. 2019). The difference was 
that Fe3+ was replaced by Al3+, which could enhance the fluorescence of GSH-CuNCs mainly due to the 


AIEE effect. Consequently, the detection limit and detection range were also different due to the 
replacement of the ligand. The linear ranges for the detection of pyrophosphatase and alkaline phosphatase 
were 3-40 U/L and 0.5-25 U/L, respectively; the detection limits were 1.3 U/L and 0.15 U/L, respectively.

3.4.3. Micrococcal nuclease detection 

Staphylococcus aureus is one of the common etiological agents of food-borne illness. It often exists in blood 
vessels leading to different kinds of diseases (Suaifan et al. 2017). Micrococcal nuclease (MNase) as a non-
specific endonuclease can digest DNA rich in adenine-thymidine or adenine-uracil base sequences. It was 
reported that the content of MNase could be used to directly assess the pathogenicity of staphylococcus 
aureus (Lagace-Wiens et al. 2007). As a consequence, it is of great importance to detect MNase simply and 
quickly. Since the dsDNA could be enzymatically digested into short oligonucleotide fragments or single 
nucleotides, the fluorescence of dsDNA-CuNCs was quenched in the presence of MNase. Guided by this 
sensing strategy, Qing et al. (Qing et al. 2019a) designed a dsDNA-CuNCs for the detection of MNase. The 
detection limit was 1 U/L in the range of 1-50 U/L.

3.5. Vitamin detection

3.5.1. Folic acid (Vitamin B9) detection

Ovalbumin (OVA)-stabilized CuNCs (OVA-CuNCs) with excellent water solubility and biocompatibility 
were reported by Li and his colleagues (Li et al. 2019a). It was found that the fluorescence of OVA-CuNCs 
was quickly quenched in the presence of folic acid (FA). Based on the static quenching mechanism, OVA-
CuNCs were further used to detect FA with high selectivity. This method has been successfully applied to 
detect FA in fruits and vegetables and has worked well in the range of 0.5-200 μM with a detection limit of 
0.18 μM. Earlier, Yang et al. (Yang et al. 2018) reported that OVA-CuNCs could be used to detect both 
Vitamin B1 and doxycycline. In their study, the fluorescence of OVA-CuNCs was quenched by Vitamin B1
and restored by the addition of doxycycline because of the different affinity with OVA-CuNCs. This 
method gave a linear range of 1-1000 nM for the detection of VB1 and 1-1000 μM for detecting doxycycline. 
The detection limits were 380 pM and 270 nM, respectively.

Recently, a novel method for the determination of FA and nitrite was developed using Cys-CuNCs based 
on the reaction between diperiodate (III) (DPA) and FA (Han and Chen 2019). In this system, FA reacted 
with DPA and the product exhibited weak fluorescence. However, the fluorescence was significantly 
enhanced in the presence of Cys-CuNCs. The subsequent addition of nitrite quenched the fluorescence, as 
Cys-CuNCs would react with nitrite, resulting in the formation of a nonfluorescent ground-state complex. 
In addition, the reaction occurred with chemiluminescence, which was consistent with the fluorescent signal. 
The chemiluminescent signal was collected and was further amplified by the detector. This method was 
applied to detect nitrite in water and pickled vegetables. The detection limit was 0.0954 μM in the range of 
1-80 μM.

3.5.2. Rutin (Vitamin P) detection 

Flavonoids are known for their significant scavenging properties on oxygen radicals. As a natural flavonoid 
derivative, rutin is commonly found in many vegetables and fruits (Yang et al. 2008). Based on its good 
antioxidant properties, rutin has been used in cancer prevention and protection of nerves, and cardiovascular 
systems and cerebrovascular systems (Ganeshpurkar and Saluja 2017). Wang et al. (Wang et al. 2018a)
demonstrated that rutin can effectively quench the fluorescence of BSA-CuNCs. This phenomenon was 
attributed to the formation of hydrogen bonds and the interactions between rutin and ligand. In this case, 
electrons were shifted from CuNCs to rutin, resulting in fluorescence quenching. Based on this finding, 


fluorescent BSA-CuNCs were applied for rutin detection. This method worked in a linear range of 0.1-100 
μM, and the detection limit was 0.02 μM.

3.6. In situ generation of DNA-CuNCs for detection

DNA nanopreparation has attracted great interest as a template for bottom-up due to its excellent properties, 
including nanoscale geometry, programmable and artificial synthesis, DNA-metal ion interaction, and 
powerful molecular recognition capabilities (Qing et al. 2019b). Thymidine on the DNA template plays an 
important role in the formation of DNA-CuNCs. Fluorescent DNA-CuNCs with a special designed 
sequence have broadened prospects for staining and biosensing of ions, DNA, RNA, enzymes, proteins, 
small molecules, etc (Cao et al. 2019). 

Recently, a dual-signal strategy based on small molecule-protein interactions was successfully used for 
detection of small molecules and protein solids. As shown in Fig. 12a, this method started from the 
preparation of Fe3O4@streptavidin complex by coating streptavidin on the surface of magnetic Fe3O4
nanoparticles. At the same time, biotin was linked to single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) by covalent bonds to 
form a biotin-ssDNA structure and then bound to a magnetic complex due to the specific interaction 
between biotin and streptavidin. In the presence of deoxy-ribonucleoside triphosphate (dTTP), the biotin-
ssDNA was elongated to produce the long sequence of poly (T) with the aid of terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase (TdT). Ideally, the magnetic nanoparticles bound to the elongated DNA precipitated under the 
force of magnetism. The precipitate treated with Cu2+ and ascorbic acid emitted intense fluorescence, while 
the supernatant did not. However, it was quite different when the concentrations of either small molecules 
or proteins changed. Thus, the system can be easily utilized to detect streptavidin and biotin based on 
different competition mechanisms. It was observed that fluorescence intensity of the supernatant increased 
rapidly as the concentration of streptavidin increased, but the fluorescence intensity of precipitate almost 
maintained constant at 200 nM, since the elongated biotin-ssDNA achieved saturation in combination with 
streptavidin. Moreover, the fluorescence intensity of precipitate did not increase until the concentration of 
streptavidin increased to more than 200 nM. It was found that there was a good linear relationship between 
the ratio of fluorescence intensity of supernatant to the logarithm of the fluorescence intensity of precipitate 
and the streptavidin concentration in the range of 0-200 nM (Fig. 12b). In this way, we can easily obtain 
the concentration of streptavidin with a detection limit of 0.47 mM. A similar situation occurred when the 
detection target changed to the small molecule biotin. Biotin can competitively bind to magnetic 
Fe3O4@streptavidin, resulting in a strong fluorescence intensity in the supernatant. A linear range was 
obtained from 10-1000 nMwith a detection limit of 3.1 nM (Fig. 12c).


Fig. 12. (a) Schematic illustration of the principle for the detection of small molecules and proteins 
based on magnetic separation and highly fluorescent CuNCs. Fluorescence differences occurred at 
different locations in the tube based on different competition mechanisms. (b) Fluorescent intensity at 
617 nm of the precipitate and the supernatant vs. the concentration of streptavidin. Inset shows the 
ratio of the logarithm of the fluorescent intensity of the supernatant to that of the precipitate vs. the 
concentration of streptavidin. Pictures above showed the fluorescence images of the precipitate (left) 
and the supernatant (right) with increased concentration of streptavidin. (c) Fluorescent intensity at 
617 nm of the precipitate and the supernatant vs. the concentration of biotin. Inset shows the ratio of 
the logarithm of the fluorescent intensity of the supernatant to that of the precipitate vs. the 
concentration of biotin. Pictures above show the fluorescence images of the precipitate (left) and the 
supernatant (right) with increased concentration of biotin (reprinted from (Cao et al. 2017) with 
permission from Elsevier). 

By in situ generation of CuNCs as an electro-chemiluminator, Liao et al. (Liao et al. 2018b) successfully 
constructed an ultrasensitive biosensor for microRNA-21 detection. As shown in Fig. 13a, the presence of 


microRNA-21 initiated a cascade of reactions that produced a large number of secondary targets (T2) to 
open the hairpin DNA1 chain immobilized on the TiO2@Pt interface. Then, a large number of AT-rich 
dsDNA was formed with DNA2 and DNA3 through the hybridization chain reaction, which combined with 
Cu2+ in situ to generate electro-chemiluminescent CuNCs. In this study, TiO2 was used to accelerate the 
reduction of S2O82- to enhance the electrochemical luminescence (ECL) properties of CuNCs (Fig. 13b). 
The assay showed good selectivity and has been successfully used to detect microRNA-21 in human 
cervical cancer and human breast cancer cell lysates. A good linear relationship occurred in the range of 
0.1 pM - 100 pM with a detection limit of 0.01905 pM (Fig. 13 c-d). 

Fig. 13. (a) Schematic diagrams of the biosensor establishment process for the ultrasensitive 
determination of microRNA-21. Inset shows exo III-assisted cascade signal amplification process. (b) 
ECL mechanism of coreaction accelerator system with the promotion of TiO2. (c) ECL intensity-
voltage curves of the biosensor under different microRNA-21 concentrations. (d) Linearity curve for 
biosensors for microRNA-21 assays (reprinted from (Liao et al. 2018b) with permission from Elsevier).

3.7. Others detection

3.7.1. Glucose detection 

A new method has been developed to detect glucose based on the reaction between glucose and glucose 
oxidase (Gou et al. 2019). In the reaction system, sodium alginate, CaCO3 nanoparticles (about 80 nm), and 
GSH-CuNCs were evenly distributed in the aqueous solution by ultrasonic treatment. When H+ was added 
to the mixed system, CaCO3 decomposed rapidly to produce Ca2+. The generated Ca2+ enhanced the 
fluorescence intensity of CuNCs in two ways. First, Ca2+ crosslinked the alginate chain into a gel network 


to make the system more viscous; the vibration and rotation of molecules in the network were limited. 
Therefore, the fluorescence intensity was enhanced by inhibiting the non-radiative relaxation. Second, 
negative charge on the surface of GSH-CuNCs was neutralized by Ca2+, resulting in aggregation. Taking 
advantage of this H+-driven fluorescence enhancement, GOx was added into the system, and the mixed 
system was applied for the detection of glucose. Once glucose was present in the system, H+ was quickly 
released by glucose and the GOx reaction, which triggered the above reaction (Fig. 14). Therefore, glucose 
was detected based on the relationship between fluorescence intensity and the concentration of glucose. In 
the study, a good linear relationship was attained in the range of 0.1-2 mM with a very low detection limit 
of 32 μM. However, the entire detection process took about 210 minutes, which may limit the application 
of CuNCs in Glucose detection.

Fig. 14. Schematic illustration of the glucose sensor using hybrid CuNCs-alginate. Once glucose was 
present within the system, H+ was quickly released to react with CaCO3. Ca2+ crosslinked the alginate 
chain into a gel network resulting in the fluorescence enhancement. Insets show the TEM images of 
pure alginate and the Ca2+-triggered gel (reprinted from (Gou et al. 2019) with permission from 
American Chemical Society).

3.7.2. Histamine detection

The detection of histamine is imperative, because it plays an important role in nueroinflammation and 
microglial regulation (Wright et al. 2017). Histamine can cause an increase in blood vessel permeability 
due to multiple chronic and life-threatening inflammatory conditions, such as asthma and anaphylactic 
shock (Mikelis et al. 2015). It was reported that red fluorescent CuNCs coated with 2,3,5,6-
tetrafluorothiophenol (TFTP) showed good responsiveness to histamines (Han et al. 2018a). The 
fluorescence intensity of CuNCs gradually decreased with the addition of histamine. The fluorescence 
quenching resulted from the strong interaction between the metal and the imidazole groups, resulting in 
electron transfer from the copper core to the ligands accompanied by the formation of electron-deficient 
sites on copper atoms. Under optimal conditions, the effective monitoring range of this method was 0.1 to 
10 μM, with a detection limit of 60 nM. In addition, the prepared luminescent test strips containing TFTP-
CuNCs were successfully used in the test of histamine content in fish and shrimp red wine.

3.7.3. Bilirubin detection 


Bilirubin serves a vital role in antioxidants, and the lack of bilirubin may lead to coronary heart disease and 
anemia (Chou and Syu 2009). Recently, Ramar and his colleagues (Rajamanikandan and Ilanchelian 2019)
reported red-emitting CuNCs, which could be effectively used for detection of bilirubin in clinical samples. 
CuNCs with excellent biocompatibility were stabilized by human serum albumin (HSA), which may avoid 
the potential immunologic reaction in human. In the study, the formation of non-fluorescent complexes of 
HSA-CuNCs and bilirubin led to a decrease in fluorescence intensity. This method exhibited a good linear 
relationship over two concentration ranges, 1.25-7.5 μM and 5-28.75 μM, and the limits of detection were 
35 nM and 145 nM, respectively. 

Over the past five years, CuNCs have achieved satisfactory detection for various analytes, mainly ions and 
virous biomolecules (proteins, nucleic acids, etc.). This review has briefly described some of the analysis 
methods as shown in Table 1 below.

Table 1. A summary of photophysical properties and analytical applications of CuNCs.

Fluorescence 
sensing

Types 
of 

CuNCs

Maximum 
λem/nm 
(λex)/nm

Quantum 
yield 
(QY)/%

Linear rangeLOD
Ref.

Al3+
Cysteamine-
CuNCs

430 (330)
/
1-7 μM
26.7 nM
(Boonmee et al. 
2018)

Al3+
DNA-CuNCs
640 (340)
/
2-150 μM
1 μM
(Pang et al. 2019)

Hg2+
Curcuminoids-
CuNCs

440 (365)
7.2%
0.0005-25 
μM

0.12 nM
(Bhamore et al.
2018)

Hg2+
MT-CuNCs
/
/
97 nM-2.325 
μM and 3.1-
15.59 μM

43.8 nM
(Liu et al. 2019a)

Hg2+
Poly(T) DNA-
CuNCs

650 (340)
/
50 
pM-500 

μM

16 pM
(Li et al. 2018)

Hg2+
dsDNA-CuNCs595 (570)
/
0.04-8 nM
4 pM
(Zhang 
et 
al. 

2018a)

Cu2+
GSH-CuNCs
615 (330)
1.2%
/
0.17 μM
(Shen et al. 2019)

Pb2+
MT-CuNCs
/
/
707 
nM-96 

μM

142 nM
(Liu et al. 2019a)

Ca2+
CuNC@AF660488 
(590, 

690)

20%
2-350 μM
220±11 nM
(Liu et al. 2019b)

Zn2+
GSH-CuNCs
340 (~605)
1.3%
4.68-2240 
μM

1.17 μM
(Lin et al. 2017)

Fe3+
Albumin 
chicken 
egg-

CuNCs

340 (280)
/
0.2-100 μM 0.0234 μM
(Huang 
et 
al. 

2018)

S2-
GSH-CuNCs
607 (360)
/
0.5-20 μM
0.5 μM
(Liao 
et 
al. 

2018a)


S2-
Silk 
fibroin-

CuNCs

422 (326)
1.6%
5-110 μM
0.286 μM
(Zhang 
et 
al. 

2019a)

Sulfide
CuNCs-CDs
469, 
622 

(365)

0.77%
26-128 nM
4.3 nM
(Wen et al. 2019)

TNT
PEI-CuNCs
480 (355)
/
0-8 nM
14 pM
(Aparna 
et al. 

2018)

Creatinine
GSH-CuNCs
585 (360)
27% (Al3+) 2.5-34 μg/L 0.63 μg/L
(Jalili 
and 

Khataee 2018)

Dopamine
BSA-CuNCs
406 (325)
/
0.5-50 μM
0.28 μM
(Miao et al. 2018)

Dopamine
BSA-CuNCs
410 (355)
/
0.1-0.6 nM
0.024 nM
(Aparna 
et al. 

2019b)

Dopamine
BSA-CuNCs
440 (365)
/
0.1-100 μM 32 nM
(He et al. 2018)

Microcystin-LR
Hairpin DNA-
CuNCs

575 (340)
/
0.005-
1200 μg/L

0.003 ng/L
(Zhang 
et 
al. 

2019b)

Uracil-DNA 
Glycosylase

poly(T) DNA-
CuNCs

602 (400)
/
0.1-10 U/L
0.05 U/L
(Ling et al. 2019)

Folic acid
Ovalbumin-
CuNCs

625 (348)
3.95%
0.5-200 μM
0.18 μM
(Li et al. 2019a)

Folic acid
Cys-CuNCs
465 (365)
0.1-10 μM
69.8 nM
(Han and Chen 
2019)

Vitamin B1
Ovalbumin-
CuNCs

560 (350)
5.8%
1-1000 nM
380 pM
(Yang 
et 
al. 

2018)

Doxycycline
Ovalbumin-
CuNCs

560 (350)
5.8%
1-1000 μM
270 nM
(Yang 
et 
al. 

2018)

Nitrite
Cys-CuNCs
465 (365)
1-80 μM
0.0954 μM
(Han and Chen 
2019)

Bilirubin
HAS-CuNCs
646 (390)
3.6%
1.25-7.5 μM 
and 
5-

28.75 μM

35 nM and 
145 nM

(Rajamanikandan 
and 
Ilanchelian 

2019)

Rutin
BSA-CuNCs
640 (320)
/
0.1-100 μM 0.02 μM
(Wang 
et 
al. 

2018a)

Picric acid
GSH-CuNCs
625 (410)
/
9.9-43 μM
2.74 μM
(Patel et al. 2018)

Picric acid
Ascorbic acid-
CuNCs

430 (350)
/
2-40 μM
0.98 μM
(Zhang 
et 
al. 

2018c)

Picric acid
Cysteamine-
CuNCs

446 (365)
2.3%
1-80 μM
139 nM
(Bao et al. 2018)

Picric acid
Cys-CuNCs
494 (370)
/
2.5-25 μM
0.19 μM
(Shanmugaraj 
and John 2018)


Pyrophosphatase
TA-CuNCs
438 (360)
/
0.5-18 U/L
0.19 U/L
(Liu et al. 2018a)

Pyrophosphatase
GSH-CuNCs
615 (360)
/
3-40 U/L
1.3 U/L
(Ye et al. 2019)

Alkaline 
phosphatase

GSH-CuNCs
610 (360)
/
0.5-25 U/L
0.15 U/L
(Geng 
et 
al. 

2019)

Alkaline 
phosphatase

L-histidine-
CuNCs

410 (390)
0.5-40 U/L
45 mU/L
(Hu et al. 2018a)

Matrix 
Metalloproteinase-
7

DNA-CuNCs
/
/
0.01-100 
ng/mL

5.3 pg/mL
(Zhuang et al. 
2019)

Water
AMTD-Ac-
CuNCs

398 (332)
52.3%
/
/
(Cheng 
et 
al. 

2018)

Protamine
BSA-CuNCs
410 (330)
/
3-12 ng/mL 0.12 ng/mL
(Aparna 
et al. 

2019a)

Heparin
BSA-CuNCs
410 (330)
/
6-9 ng/mL
0.0406 ng/mL(Aparna 
et al. 

2019a)

Heparin
dBSA-CuNCs 642 (350)
2.32%
1.25-250 
ng/mL

0.26 ng/mL
(Wu et al. 2018)

Nitrofurantoin
Adenosine-
CuNCs

417 (285)
/
0.05-4 μM
30 nM
(Wang 
et 
al. 

2018b)

D‐penicillamine
BSA-CuNCs
400 (325)
/
0.6-30 μg/mL0.54 μg/mL
(Ma et al. 2019)

M-dinitrobenzene Cys-CuNCs
492 (375)
/
1.3-990 μM 0.13 μM
(Hambarde et al. 
2019)

Micrococcal 
nuclease

dsDNA-CuNCs570 (340)
/
1-50 U/L
1.0 U/L
(Qing 
et 
al. 

2019a)

DNA 
adenine 

Methylation
Methyltransferase

dsDNA-CuNCs590 (340)
/
0.5-10 U/mL 0.5 U/mL
(Gao et al. 2018)

Quinoline yellow
Cys-CuNCs
494 (370)
/
0.2-5.5 μM
0.11 μM
(Shanmugaraj 
and John 2018)

Carbamazepine
CTAB-CuNCs 415, 
480 

(290)

/
0.2-20 μg/mL0.08 μg/mL
(Hatefi 
et 
al. 

2019)

Glucose
GSH-CuNCs
610 (365)
＜0.5%
0.1-2.0 mM 32 μM
(Gou et al. 2019)

Histamine
TFTP-CuNCs 590 (325)
/
0.1-10 μM
60 nM
(Han et al. 2018a)

Creatinine
BSA-CuNCs
643 (525)
5-6 μM/L
5 nM
(Rajamanikandan 
and 
Ilanchelian 

2018)


Trihexyphenidyl 
Hydrochloride

Cys-CuNCs–
Ce(IV)/KMnO4
system

/
0.1-10.0 μM 49.0 nM
(Chen et al. 2018)

Iodine
TA-CuNCs
460 (380)
20-100 μM
18 nM
(Cao et al. 2018)

T4 polynucleotide 
Kinase 
phosphatase

dsDNA-CuNCs570 (340)
0.07-15 
U/mL

0.06 U/mL
(Zhang 
et 
al. 

2018e)

Trinitrophenol
PVP-CuNCs
518 (392)
44.67%
/
391 nM
(Li et al. 2019b)

Rifampicin
PEI-CuNCs
492 (362)
10.7%
0-20 μM
50 nM
(Tan et al. 2018)

Urea
Ascorbic acid-
CuNCs

498 (385)
6.63%
0.25-5 mM
0.01 mM
(Deng 
et 
al. 

2018b)

L-lysine
Ovalbumin-
CuNCs

440 (370)
/
10.0 μM-1.0 
mM

5.5 μM
(Zhang 
et 
al. 

2018b)

Bilirubin
BSA-CuNCs
404 (330)
/
10-150 pM
257 fM
(R et al. 2018)

Cytochrome c and 
trypsin

D-
penicillamine-
CuNCs

645 (390)
/
8-680 nM and 
0.1-6.0 
μg/mL

0.83 nM and 
20 ng/mL

(Hu et al. 2018b)

Choline
Lysozyme-
CuNCs

550 (440)
/
0.1-80 μM
25 nM
(Bu et al. 2018)

S1 nuclease
AT24-X6-
hairpin-CuNCs

/
/
5-80 U/L
3 U/L
(Peng et al. 2018)

Streptavidin
ssDNA-CuNCs349 (617)
/
0-200 nM
0.47 nM
(Cao et al. 2017)

Biotin
ssDNA-CuNCs349 (617)
/
10-1000 nM 3.1 nM
(Cao et al. 2017)

DNA
dsDNA-CuNCs570 (340)
/
0.01-10 nM 7pM
(Zhang 
et 
al. 

2018d)

DNA
dsDNA-CuNCs/
/
/
1 lesion in 74 
nucleotides.

(Singh 
et 
al. 

2018)

MicroRNA-21
dsDNA-CuNCs390 (525)
/
100 aM-100 
pM

19.05 aM
(Liao 
et 
al. 

2018b)

MicroRNA-155
DNA-stabilized 
CuNCs

/
/
100 aM-100 
pM

36 aM
(Zhou et al. 2018)

pH
L-proline-
CuNCs

458 (398)
/
9-13
/
(Han et al. 2018c)

pH
Cu9S5 NCs
567 (406)
6.8%
3-10
/
(Cheng 
et 
al. 

2019)

The symbol “/” indicated “not available”, mainly due to the weak fluorescence signals.

4. CuNCs for bioimaging


Cancer cells generally show multiple differences in intracellular pH, temperature, enhanced receptor 
mediated, protein overexpression, and reactive oxygen/nitrogen production (Dutta et al. 2018). Therefore, 
the development of nanoprobes capable of monitoring these changes is particularly important. The 
preparation of nanoprobes for the selective detection of cancer cells remains a long-term challenge. In 
addition to specificity, the problems they face include their biological toxicity and complex biological 
environment. As of yet, CuNCs hold great promise in bioimaging applications because of their excellent 
biocompatibility. It is also worth mentioning that CuNCs with different fluorescence emissions could 
provide great opportunities in bioimaging. Compared to blue and green fluorescent metal nanoclusters, red 
fluorescent metal nanoclusters show significant advantages for in vivo imaging, e.g., high cell membrane 
penetration, and low tissue absorption (Zhang et al. 2014).

The controlled and highly luminescent CuNCs assemblies showed good stability in the cell imaging 
mentioned above (Zhou et al. 2019). Due to the PEG corona with good biocompatibility on the surface of 
CuNCs, the components demonstrated no obvious signs of toxicity to living cells. As displayed in Fig. 15a, 
CuNPs emitted bright red fluorescence in human epithelial cervical carcinoma cells (HeLa cells), and the 
corrected total cell fluorescence increased from 1 to 24 h of the incubation time. According to the 
experimental results, the synthesized CuNCs assemblies were not only resistant to complex physiological 
environments, but also unaffected by 1 M NaCl, 1 mM ascorbic acid, and 0.1 mM H2O2. In addition, the 
CuNCs assemblies were highly resistant to the adsorption of serum proteins and the effects of the harsh 
lysosomal acidic microenvironment. In Fig. 15b, red fluorescent CuNCs assemblies could colocalize their 
subcellular locations with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-labeled lysosomes, exerting great benefits on 
bioimaging applications.

Fig. 15. (a) Overlay of bright and fluorescence field and three-dimensional (3D) images of the CuNPs
assemblies in HeLa cells incubated at different time points. The corrected total cell fluorescence 
increased from 1 to 24 h of the incubation time. (b) Colocalization analysis between the CuNPs 
assemblies and GFP-labeled lysosomes (reprinted from (Zhou et al. 2019) with permission from 
American Chemical Society).

Xia et al. (Xia et al. 2018) reported that FA (folic acid)-CuNCs with high selectivity for folate receptor (FR) 
could be used for FR positive cell imaging. The prepared FA-CuNCs exhibited good photostability and 


water solubility. In many human cancer cells, FR is overexpressed on the surface, so the FA is usually used 
as a cell targeting agent because of the high affinity between FA and FR. In their study, HeLa cells and 
human lung carcinoma cells (A549 cells) were both selected. Since the number of surface-specific receptors 
in the two cancer cells were different, the intake of FA-CuNCs was also different. Taking advantage of this, 
FA-CuNCs were incubated with HeLa cells and A549 cells for 3 hours, respectively. Significant blue 
fluorescence could be observed in HeLa cells, and the average fluorescence intensity of HeLa cells showed 
a good linear relationship with the concentration of FA-CuNCs. However, almost no fluorescence was 
observed in A549 cells. In addition, FA-CuNCs had very low cytotoxicity. The survival rate of HeLa cells 
after incubation with 200 μg/mL FA-CuNCs for 20 hours was still greater than 80%. It was clear that FA 
functional groups in FA-CuNCs nanoclusters could significantly enhance the targeting ability and FA-
CuNCs had great potential as fluorescent probes.

Fig. 16. (a) Fluorescence spectra of as-synthesized CuNCs at different pH values; (b) Time-dependent 
change in fluorescence spectra of CuNCs recorded at pH 7.4; (c) Change in the fluorescence intensity 
ratio (I/I0) of the probe over time (min) recorded in MCF-7 and HEK-293 cells; TEM image of the 
CuNCs dispersion recorded (d) immediately after pH adjustment at 7.4 and (e) aging for 4h; (f) 
Fluorescence image of MCF-7 cells acquired at pH 4.5; Fluorescence image of (g) MCF-7 cells and 
(h) HEK-293 cells treated with the CuNCs probe for 1 h in pH 7.4 culture media; (i-m) Time-lapsed 
live cell confocal microscopy imaging of the MCF-7 cells treated with CuNCs at pH 7.4 (reprinted 
from (Dutta et al. 2018) with permission from American Chemical Society).

Dutta and colleagues (Dutta et al. 2018) successfully synthesized cysteine-stabilized CuNCs with good pH 
responsiveness (pH 4.5-8) in the presence of chitosan. In the study, CuNCs showed strong red fluorescence 
in aqueous solutions at a lower pH (4.5). As the pH of the solution increased, the fluorescence of CuNCs 
gradually disappeared (Fig. 16a). Interestingly, a unique phenomenon appeared at pH 7.4, where CuNCs 
exhibited a blue-green fluorescence emission that increased over time after aging (Fig. 16b). It could be 
clearly seen from the TEM image that, as the aging time increased, CuNCs gradually aggregated to form 


dense aggregates (Fig. 16d-e). The presence of chitosan enhanced the stability and biocompatibility of 
CuNCs. It not only ensured the AIEE effect, but also afforded the successful internalization of CuNCs in 
human breast adenocarcinoma cells (MCF-7 cells) and human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-293 cells). 
When MCF-7 cells were incubated with CuNCs, they showed a bright red fluorescence emission incubated 
in acidic medium (Fig. 16f). Similar to the case in an aqueous solution, further experiments under the same 
conditions at pH 7.4 showed that the MCF-7 cells, originally colorless, emitted bright green fluorescence 
over time. As shown in Fig. 16i-m, MCF-7 cells internalized by CuNCs exhibited surprisingly bright green 
fluorescence after aging for 40 min. In addition, a similar phenomenon was observed in HEK-293 cells. 
The difference was that the increase in emission observed in HEK-293 cells was relatively weaker 
compared to that observed in MCF-7 cells. If the rate of fluorescence growth in HEK-293 cells was 
considered to be linear, then the fluorescence intensity in MCF-7 cells increased exponentially (Fig. 16c), 
which can therefore be used to distinguish cell lines based on the differences in AIEE kinetic rates. Given 
the good pH responsiveness of CuNCs, cell health (cancerous or non-cancerous) could be determined by 
identifying changes in intracellular pH.

Recently, a dual emission ratio fluorescent probe was reported to be used to specifically identify Ca2+ in a 
cell model (Liu et al. 2019b). The probe with good water solubility displayed two independent emission 
peaks at 590 nm and 690 nm. The intensity of the emission peak at 590 nm increased continuously as the 
concentration of Ca2+ increased while the fluorescence intensity at 690 nm stayed constant (Fig. 17a). Based 
on its good biocompatibility, the developed fluorescent probe was used for biosensing and imaging of Ca2+

in neurons. It was obvious that the green fluorescent channel became brighter as the concentration of Ca2+

increased, while the red fluorescent channel remained unchanged (Fig. 17c). The fluorescent signal ratio 
(Fgreen/Fred) was used to quantify the amount of Ca2+ in neurons. Interestingly, it was found that histamine 
could increase Ca2+ levels in living cells. As shown in Fig. 17d, after the addition of histamine, the green 
fluorescence was gradually enhanced and kept constant at the 120s, while the red fluorescence intensity 
remained unchanged. Further experimentation demonstrated that the increase of Ca2+ caused by histamine 
was different in certain parts of neurons: the concentration of Ca2+ in the somatic and proximal axons was 
significantly higher than that in other parts. More importantly, the experiment revealed a possible 
mechanism of O2•- induced neuronal death. While exposed to 80 μM O2•-, the Fgreen/Fred value increased 
significantly. Based on the established calibration curve (Fig. 17b), the cytoplasmic Ca2+ concentration 
increased to approximately 250 μM after the 600s, which exceeded normal concentrations. The excess of 
Ca2+ may explain for neuronal death.


Fig. 17. (a) Fluorescence responses of CuNCs (90 μg/mL) with the addition of various concentrations 
of Ca2+ (0, 2, 25, 80, 110, 160, 205, 215, 280, 300, 350, 380, 400 μM) in cell lysis buffer. (b) Calibration 
curve between F510−650/F660−780 and various concentrations of Ca2+. Data was obtained from Fig. 17a. 
(c) Confocal fluorescence microscopy images of neurons collected from different channels after the 
neurons were coincubated with CuNCs probe (90 μg/mL) in the presence of different concentrations
of Ca2+ (0, 100, 200, and 300 μM), respectively. Bright areas within the blue circle indicate uneven 
distribution of cytosolic Ca2+. (d) Time-tracking of confocal fluorescence microscopic images of 
neurons was stimulated by 50 μM histamine for different times (reprinted from (Liu et al. 2019b) with 
permission from American Chemical Society).

5. Conclusion and Perspectives

In this review, we focused on the fluorescence of CuNCs. The factors affecting the CuNCs fluorescence 
are primarily divided into four categories: (1) size-dependent fluorescence; (2) Cu···Cu interaction; (3) the 
solvent effect; and (4) aggregation-induced luminescence. This review highlights the effects of aggregation-
induced enhanced emission and its importance in detection processes. The unique fluorescent properties of 
CuNCs provide great opportunities in sensing and bioimaging applications. Many detection methods have 
been used for actual testing and have achieved satisfactory performances. According to the reported results, 
there are a variety of CuNC nanoprobes for certain substrates. However, the detection environment (pH, 
concentration range, etc.) for each nanoprobe is different. Therefore, we should specifically choose 


optimized CuNCs according to the environment in which the substrate is placed. Furthermore, it is worth 
mentioning that nanometer-sized CuNCs also have achieved good results in catalytic performance. 

From current research progress, most CuNC nanoprobes have been used for environmental testing, as well 
as in vitro testing. More meaningful, in vivo probes are seldomly reported. As the ultimate goal of biological 
probe usage, biological probes are subject to a variety of factors in their specific applications. Although 
CuNCs have good biocompatibility, the stability and selectivity of probes are greatly challenged by in vivo
complex environments, such as pH change, ascorbic acid, H2O2, and even lysosomes. Although significant 
advances having been made in the functionalization and biomedical applications of fluorescent CuNCs over 
the past few years, there are still challenges that need to be addressed in the future. Compared with AuNCs 
and AgNCs, CuNCs are more likely to oxidize and thus have lower quantum yields. Overall, improvement 
in fluorescence emissions and further enhancement of quantum yield remain the focus of future 
developments. Furthermore, although the AIEE effect can significantly improve the intensity of CuNCs 
fluorescence, the stability of the aggregates induced by this strategy is somewhat challenged by biological 
environments. Additionally, the use of organic solvents limits its bio-related applications. The pH-
dependent AIEE effect may be the entry point for study in vivo. Presently, another problem faced in the 
design of clusters is to determine the key factors of quantum yield and emission wavelength of CuNCs. The 
clear image underlying the fluorescence mechanism, precise determination of crystal structure, including 
the arrangement of metal atoms and metal-ligand bonding, will be an important step forward in the 
development of CuNCs. 

Acknowledgments: B.C. acknowledges financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China (51803161 and 51533007). J.C. acknowledges the University of California, Los Angeles for the 
startup support.

Declaration of competing interest: The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests.

References 

Aparna, R.S., Anjali Devi, J.S., Anjana, R.R., Nebu, J., George, S., 2019a. Reversible fluorescence modulation of BSA stabilised 

copper nanoclusters for the selective detection of protamine and heparin. The Analyst 144(5), 1799-1808.

Aparna, R.S., Anjali Devi, J.S., Sachidanandan, P., George, S., 2018. Polyethylene imine capped copper nanoclusters- fluorescent 

and colorimetric onsite sensor for the trace level detection of TNT. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 254, 811-819.

Aparna, R.S., Devi, J.S.A., Nebu, J., Syamchand, S.S., George, S., 2019b. Rapid response of dopamine towards insitu synthesised 

copper nanocluster in presence of H2O2. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 379, 63-71.

Bagheri, H., Afkhami, A., Khoshsafar, H., Hajian, A., Shahriyari, A., 2017. Protein capped Cu nanoclusters-SWCNT 

nanocomposite as a novel candidate of high performance platform for organophosphates enzymeless biosensor. Biosensors & 
Bioelectronics 89, 829-836.

Bao, Z., Zhang, K., Jian, J., Hu, Z., Yuan, K., Shao, H., Peng, K., Jiang, Z., Zapien, J.A., Yan, Y., Zhang, C., Zhou, H., 2018. 

Strongly fluorescent cysteamine-coated copper nanoclusters as a fluorescent probe for determination of picric acid. 
Mikrochimica Acta 185(11), 507.

Basu, K., Paul, S., Jana, R., Datta, A., Banerjee, A., 2019. Red-Emitting Copper Nanoclusters: From Bulk-Scale Synthesis to 

Catalytic Reduction. Acs Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 7(2), 1998-2007.

Basu, S., Dasgupta, P.S., 2000. Dopamine, a neurotransmitter, influences the immune system. Journal of Neuroimmunology 102(2), 

113-124.


Benito, Q., Le Goff, X.F., Maron, S., Fargues, A., Garcia, A., Martineau, C., Taulelle, F., Kahlal, S., Gacoin, T., Boilot, J.P., 

Perruchas, S., 2014. Polymorphic copper iodide clusters: insights into the mechanochromic luminescence properties. Journal 
of the American Chemical Society 136(32), 11311-11320.

Bhamore, J.R., Deshmukh, B., Haran, V., Jha, S., Singhal, R.K., Lenka, N., Kailasa, S.K., Murthy, Z.V.P., 2018. One-step eco-

friendly approach for the fabrication of synergistically engineered fluorescent copper nanoclusters: sensing of Hg2+ ion and 
cellular uptake and bioimaging properties. New Journal of Chemistry 42(2), 1510-1520.

Boonmee, C., Promarak, V., Tuntulani, T., Ngeontae, W., 2018. Cysteamine-capped copper nanoclusters as a highly selective turn-

on fluorescent assay for the detection of aluminum ions. Talanta 178, 796-804.

Brinas, R.P., Hu, M., Qian, L., Lymar, E.S., Hainfeld, J.F., 2008. Gold nanoparticle size controlled by polymeric Au(I) thiolate 

precursor size. Journal of the American Chemical Society 130(3), 975-982.

Bu, X., Fu, Y., Jin, H., Gui, R., 2018. Specific enzymatic synthesis of 2,3-diaminophenazine and copper nanoclusters used for dual-

emission ratiometric and naked-eye visual fluorescence sensing of choline. New Journal of Chemistry 42(21), 17323-17330.

Cao, H., Chen, Z., Zheng, H., Huang, Y., 2014. Copper nanoclusters as a highly sensitive and selective fluorescence sensor for 

ferric ions in serum and living cells by imaging. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 62, 189-195.

Cao, J., Wang, W., Bo, B., Mao, X., Wang, K., Zhu, X., 2017. A dual-signal strategy for the solid detection of both small molecules 

and proteins based on magnetic separation and highly fluorescent copper nanoclusters. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 90, 534-
541.

Cao, Q., Li, J., Wang, E., 2019. Recent advances in the synthesis and application of copper nanomaterials based on various DNA 

scaffolds. Biosensors & bioelectronics 132, 333-342.

Cao, X., Li, X., Liu, F., Luo, Y., Yu, L., 2018. Copper nanoclusters as fluorescence-quenching probes for the quantitative analysis 

of total iodine. Luminescence : The Journal of Biological and Chemical Luminescence 33(5), 981-985.

Chen, L.Y., Wang, C.W., Yuan, Z., Chang, H.T., 2015. Fluorescent gold nanoclusters: recent advances in sensing and imaging. 

Analytical Chemistry 87(1), 216-229.

Chen, X., Zhang, J., Li, Y., Han, S., 2018. Chemiluminescence of copper nanoclusters and its application for trihexyphenidyl 

hydrochloride detection. Luminescence: The Journal of Biological and Chemical Luminescence 33(5), 962-967.

Chen, Y., Yang, T., Pan, H., Yuan, Y., Chen, L., Liu, M., Zhang, K., Zhang, S., Wu, P., Xu, J., 2014. Photoemission Mechanism

of Water-Soluble Silver Nanoclusters: Ligand-to-Metal–Metal Charge Transfer vs Strong Coupling between Surface Plasmon 
and Emitters. Journal of the American Chemical Society 136(5), 1686-1689.

Cheng, Y., Deng, S., Sun, F., Zhou, Y.-H., 2019. Synthesis of luminescent Cu9S5 nanoclusters from copper-2,5-dimercapto-1,3,4-

thiadiazole coordination polymer as pH sensor. Journal of Luminescence 210, 38-46.

Cheng, Y., Sun, F., Zhou, Y., 2018. Synthesis of copper nanoclusters stabilized by 2-amino-5-mercapto-1, 3, 4 -thiadiazole and 

acetate simultaneously and as a sensitive sensor for detecting trace water in organic solvents. Journal of Luminescence 197, 
376-382.

Chou, S.-K., Syu, M.-J., 2009. Via zinc(II) protoporphyrin to the synthesis of poly(ZnPP-MAA-EGDMA) for the imprinting and 

selective binding of bilirubin. Biomaterials 30(7), 1255-1262.

Darugar, Q., Qian, W., El-Sayed, M.A., Pileni, M.-P., 2006. Size-Dependent Ultrafast Electronic Energy Relaxation and Enhanced 

Fluorescence of Copper Nanoparticles. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 110(1), 143-149.

Deng, H.-H., Li, K.-L., Zhuang, Q.-Q., Peng, H.-P., Zhuang, Q.-Q., Liu, A.-L., Xia, X.-H., Chen, W., 2018a. An ammonia-based 

etchant for attaining copper nanoclusters with green fluorescence emission. Nanoscale 10(14), 6467-6473.

Deng, H.H., Li, K.L., Zhuang, Q.Q., Peng, H.P., Zhuang, Q.Q., Liu, A.L., Xia, X.H., Chen, W., 2018b. An ammonia-based etchant 

for attaining copper nanoclusters with green fluorescence emission. Nanoscale 10(14), 6467-6473.

Dutta, A., Goswami, U., Chattopadhyay, A., 2018. Probing Cancer Cells through Intracellular Aggregation-Induced Emission 

Kinetic Rate of Copper Nanoclusters. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 10(23), 19459-19472.

Elsabahy, M., Heo, G.S., Lim, S.-M., Sun, G., Wooley, K.L., 2015. Polymeric Nanostructures for Imaging and Therapy. Chemical 

Reviews 115(19), 10967-11011.

Ganeshpurkar, A., Saluja, A.K., 2017. The Pharmacological Potential of Rutin. Saudi pharmaceutical journal : SPJ : the official 

publication of the Saudi Pharmaceutical Society 25(2), 149-164.

Gao, D., Zhang, H., Xu, Y., Liu, Y., Xu, H., Cui, J., 2018. Fluorescent copper nanoclusters as a nano-dye for DNA 

methyltransferase activity analysis and inhibitor screening. Analytical Biochemistry 559, 5-10.


Gawande, M.B., Goswami, A., Felpin, F.X., Asefa, T., Huang, X., Silva, R., Zou, X., Zboril, R., Varma, R.S., 2016. Cu and Cu-

Based Nanoparticles: Synthesis and Applications in Catalysis. Chemical Reviews 116(6), 3722-3811.

Geng, F., Zou, C., Liu, J., Zhang, Q., Guo, X., Fan, Y., Yu, H., Yang, S., Liu, Z., Li, L., 2019. Development of luminescent 

nanoswitch for sensing of alkaline phosphatase in human serum based onAl3+-PPi interaction and Cu NCs with AIE 
properties. Analytica Chimica Acta 1076, 131-137.

Ghosh, D., Mondal, S., Ghosh, S., Saha, A., 2012. Protein conformation driven biomimetic synthesis of semiconductor 

nanoparticles. Journal of Materials Chemistry 22(2), 699-706.

Goswami, N., Yao, Q., Luo, Z., Li, J., Chen, T., Xie, J., 2016. Luminescent Metal Nanoclusters with Aggregation-Induced 

Emission. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 7(6), 962-975.

Gou, S., Shi, Y.E., Li, P., Wang, H., Li, T., Zhuang, X., Li, W., Wang, Z., 2019. Stimuli-Responsive Luminescent Copper 

Nanoclusters in Alginate and Their Sensing Ability for Glucose. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 11(6), 6561-6567.

Hambarde, G., Bothra, S., Upadhyay, Y., Bera, R.K., Sahoo, S.K., 2019. m-Dinitrobenzene directed aggregation-induced emission 

enhancement of cysteine modified fluorescent copper nanoclusters. Microchemical Journal 147, 899-904.

Han, A., Xiong, L., Hao, S., Yang, Y., Li, X., Fang, G., Liu, J., Pei, Y., Wang, S., 2018a. Highly Bright Self-Assembled Copper 

Nanoclusters: A Novel Photoluminescent Probe for Sensitive Detection of Histamine. Analytical Chemistry 90(15), 9060-
9067.

Han, B., Hu, X., Yu, M., Peng, T., Li, Y., He, G., 2018b. One-pot synthesis of enhanced fluorescent copper nanoclusters 

encapsulated in metal–organic frameworks. RSC Advances 8(40), 22748-22754.

Han, B., Peng, T., Li, Y., Yu, M., Hu, X., He, G., 2018c. Ultra-stable L-proline protected copper nanoclusters and their solvent 

effect. Methods and Applications in Fluorescence 6(3), 035015.

Han, S., Chen, X., 2019. Copper nanoclusters-enhanced chemiluminescence for folic acid and nitrite detection. Spectrochimica 

acta. Part A, Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 210, 315-320.

Hatefi, A., Rahimpour, E., Khoubnasabjafari, M., Edalat, M., Jouyban-Gharamaleki, V., Alvani-Alamdari, S., Nokhodchi, A., 

Pournaghi-Azar, M.H., Jouyban, A., 2019. A single-shot diagnostic platform based on copper nanoclusters coated with cetyl 
trimethylammonium bromide for determination of carbamazepine in exhaled breath condensate. Mikrochimica Acta 186(3), 
194.

He, W., Gui, R., Jin, H., Wang, B., Bu, X., Fu, Y., 2018. Ratiometric fluorescence and visual imaging detection of dopamine based 

on carbon dots/copper nanoclusters dual-emitting nanohybrids. Talanta 178, 109-115.

Hermann, H.L., Boche, G., Schwerdtfeger, P., 2001. Metallophilic Interactions in Closed-Shell Copper(I) Compounds—A 

Theoretical Study. Chemistry – A European Journal 7(24), 5333-5342.

Hong, Y., Lam, J.W.Y., Tang, B.Z., 2011. Aggregation-induced emission. Chemical Society Reviews 40(11), 5361-5388.
Hu, X., Mao, X., Zhang, X., Huang, Y., 2017. One-step synthesis of orange fluorescent copper nanoclusters for sensitive and 

selective sensing of Al3+ ions in food samples. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 247, 312-318.

Hu, Y., He, Y., Han, Y., Ge, Y., Song, G., Zhou, J., 2018a. Determination of the activity of alkaline phosphatase based on 

aggregation-induced quenching of the fluorescence of copper nanoclusters. Mikrochimica Acta 186(1), 5.

Hu, Y., He, Y., Han, Y., Ge, Y., Song, G., Zhou, J., 2018b. Poly(styrene-4-sulfonate)-protected copper nanoclusters as a 

fluorometric probe for sequential detection of cytochrome c and trypsin. Mikrochimica Acta 185(8), 383.

Huang, Y., Zhang, H., Xu, X., Zhou, J., Lu, F., Zhang, Z., Hu, Z., Luo, J., 2018. Fast synthesis of porous copper nanoclusters for 

fluorescence detection of iron ions in water samples. Spectrochimica Acta. Part A, Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 
202, 65-69.

Jalili, R., Khataee, A., 2018. Aluminum(III) triggered aggregation-induced emission of glutathione-capped copper nanoclusters as 

a fluorescent probe for creatinine. Mikrochimica Acta 186(1), 29.

Jia, X., Li, J., Wang, E., 2013. Cu nanoclusters with aggregation induced emission enhancement. Small 9(22), 3873-3879.
Jia, X., Yang, X., Li, J., Li, D., Wang, E., 2014. Stable Cu nanoclusters: from an aggregation-induced emission mechanism to 

biosensing and catalytic applications. Chemical Communications 50(2), 237-239.

Kang, X., Wang, S., Song, Y., Jin, S., Sun, G., Yu, H., Zhu, M., 2016. Bimetallic Au2 Cu6 Nanoclusters: Strong Luminescence 

Induced by the Aggregation of Copper(I) Complexes with Gold(0) Species. Angewandte Chemie 55(11), 3611-3614.

Lagace-Wiens, P.R., Alfa, M.J., Manickam, K., Karlowsky, J.A., 2007. Thermostable DNase is superior to tube coagulase for direct 

detection of Staphylococcus aureus in positive blood cultures. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 45(10), 3478-3479.


Li, D., Chen, Z., Wan, Z., Yang, T., Wang, H., Mei, X., 2016a. One-pot development of water soluble copper nanoclusters with 

red emission and aggregation induced fluorescence enhancement. RSC Advances 6(41), 34090-34095.

Li, J., Fu, W., Bao, J., Wang, Z., Dai, Z., 2018. Fluorescence Regulation of Copper Nanoclusters via DNA Template Manipulation 

toward Design of a High Signal-to-Noise Ratio Biosensor. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 10(8), 6965-6971.

Li, X.-G., Zhang, F., Gao, Y., Zhou, Q.-M., Zhao, Y., Li, Y., Huo, J.-Z., Zhao, X.-J., 2016. Facile synthesis of red emitting 3-

aminophenylboronic acid functionalized copper nanoclusters for rapid, selective and highly sensitive detection of 
glycoproteins. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 86, 270-276.

Li, X., Wu, X., Zhang, F., Zhao, B., Li, Y., 2019. Label-free detection of folic acid using a sensitive fluorescent probe based on 

ovalbumin stabilized copper nanoclusters. Talanta 195, 372-380.

Li, Y., Feng, L., Yan, W., Hussain, I., Su, L., Tan, B., 2019. PVP-templated highly luminescent copper nanoclusters for sensing 

trinitrophenol and living cell imaging. Nanoscale 11(3), 1286-1294.

Liao, H., Hu, L., Zhang, Y., Yu, X., Liu, Y., Li, R., 2018a. A highly selective colorimetric sulfide assay based on the inhibition of 

the peroxidase-like activity of copper nanoclusters. Mikrochimica acta 185(2), 143.

Liao, H., Zhou, Y., Chai, Y., Yuan, R., 2018b. An ultrasensitive electrochemiluminescence biosensor for detection of MicroRNA 

by in-situ electrochemically generated copper nanoclusters as luminophore and TiO2 as coreaction accelerator. Biosensors & 
Bioelectronics 114, 10-14.

Lin, L., Hu, Y., Zhang, L., Huang, Y., Zhao, S., 2017. Photoluminescence light-up detection of zinc ion and imaging in living cells 

based on the aggregation induced emission enhancement of glutathione-capped copper nanoclusters. Biosensors & 
Bioelectronics 94, 523-529.

Lin, Y.J., Chen, P.C., Yuan, Z., Ma, J.Y., Chang, H.T., 2015. The isomeric effect of mercaptobenzoic acids on the preparation and 

fluorescence properties of copper nanoclusters. Chemical Communications 51(60), 11983-11986.

Ling, Y., Wu, J.J., Gao, Z.F., Li, N.B., Luo, H.Q., 2015. Enhanced Emission of Polyethyleneimine-Coated Copper Nanoclusters 

and Their Solvent Effect. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 119(48), 27173-27177.

Ling, Y., Zhou, J., Zhang, X.F., Wang, X.H., Li, N.B., Luo, H.Q., 2019. A ratiometric fluorescent sensor for sensitive detection of 

UDG using poly(thymine)-templated copper nanoclusters and DAPI with exonuclease III assisted amplification. Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical 286, 46-51.

Liptay, W., 1974. Dipole Moments and Polarizabilities of Molecules in Excited Electronic States. In: Lim, E.C. (Ed.), Excited 

States, pp. 129-229. Elsevier.

Liu, Q., Lai, Q., Li, N., Su, X., 2018a. Copper nanoclusters capped with tannic acid as a fluorescent probe for real-time 

determination of the activity of pyrophosphatase. Mikrochimica Acta 185(3), 182.

Liu, R., Zuo, L., Huang, X., Liu, S., Yang, G., Li, S., Lv, C., 2019a. Colorimetric determination of lead(II) or mercury(II) based 

on target induced switching of the enzyme-like activity of metallothionein-stabilized copper nanoclusters. Mikrochimica Acta 
186(4), 250.

Liu, Y., Yao, D., Zhang, H., 2018b. Self-Assembly Driven Aggregation-Induced Emission of Copper Nanoclusters: A Novel 

Technology for Lighting. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 10(15), 12071-12080.

Liu, Z., Jing, X., Zhang, S., Tian, Y., 2019b. A Copper Nanocluster-Based Fluorescent Probe for Real-Time Imaging and 

Ratiometric Biosensing of Calcium Ions in Neurons. Analytical Chemistry 91(3), 2488-2497.

Lu, Y., Chen, W., 2012. Sub-nanometre sized metal clusters: from synthetic challenges to the unique property discoveries. 

Chemical Society Reviews 41(9), 3594.

Luo, Z., Yuan, X., Yu, Y., Zhang, Q., Leong, D.T., Lee, J.Y., Xie, J., 2012. From aggregation-induced emission of Au(I)-thiolate 

complexes to ultrabright Au(0)@Au(I)-thiolate core-shell nanoclusters. Journal of the American Chemical Society 134(40), 
16662-16670.

Ma, C., Ren, W., Tang, J., Wang, X., Ji, D., Meng, R., Zhang, C., Wang, Q., 2019. Copper nanocluster-based fluorescence enhanced 

determination of d-penicillamine. Luminescence: The Journal of Biological and Chemical Luminescence 34(7), 767-773

Mai, Y., Eisenberg, A., 2012. Selective Localization of Preformed Nanoparticles in Morphologically Controllable Block 

Copolymer Aggregates in Solution. Accounts of Chemical Research 45(10), 1657-1666.

Maity, S., Bain, D., Patra, A., 2019. Engineering Atomically Precise Copper Nanoclusters with Aggregation Induced Emission. 

The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 123(4), 2506-2515.


Malik, A.H., Hussain, S., Kalita, A., Iyer, P.K., 2015. Conjugated Polymer Nanoparticles for the Amplified Detection of Nitro-

explosive Picric Acid on Multiple Platforms. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 7(48), 26968-26976.

Maurin, G., Serre, C., Cooper, A., Férey, G., 2017. The new age of MOFs and of their porous-related solids. Chemical Society 

Reviews 46(11), 3104-3107.

Mei, J., Hong, Y., Lam, J.W., Qin, A., Tang, Y., Tang, B.Z., 2014. Aggregation-induced emission: the whole is more brilliant than 

the parts. Advanced Materials 26(31), 5429-5479.

Miao, Z., Hou, W., Liu, M., Zhang, Y., Yao, S., 2018. BSA capped bi-functional fluorescent Cu nanoclusters as pH sensor and 

selective detection of dopamine. New Journal of Chemistry 42(2), 1446-1456.

Mikelis, C.M., Simaan, M., Ando, K., Fukuhara, S., Sakurai, A., Amornphimoltham, P., Masedunskas, A., Weigert, R., Chavakis, 

T., Adams, R.H., Offermanns, S., Mochizuki, N., Zheng, Y., Gutkind, J.S., 2015. RhoA and ROCK mediate histamine-induced 
vascular leakage and anaphylactic shock. Nature Communications 6(1).

Moghadam, F.M., Rahaie, M., 2019. A signal-on nanobiosensor for VEGF(165) detection based on supraparticle copper 

nanoclusters formed on bivalent aptamer. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 132, 186-195.

Mooradian, A., 1969. Photoluminescence of Metals. Physical Review Letters 22(5), 185-187.
Nie, Z., Petukhova, A., Kumacheva, E., 2010. Properties and emerging applications of self-assembled structures made from 

inorganic nanoparticles. Nature Nanotechnology 5(1), 15-25.

Pang, J., Lu, Y., Gao, X., He, L., Sun, J., Yang, F., Hao, Z., Liu, Y., 2019. DNA-templated copper nanoclusters as a fluorescent 

probe for fluoride by using aluminum ions as a bridge. Mikrochimica Acta 186(6), 364.

Patel, R., Bothra, S., Kumar, R., Crisponi, G., Sahoo, S.K., 2018. Pyridoxamine driven selective turn-off detection of picric acid 

using glutathione stabilized fluorescent copper nanoclusters and its applications with chemically modified cellulose strips. 
Biosensors & Bioelectronics 102, 196-203.

Peng, X.S., Chen, S.Y., Ou, L.J., Luo, F.W., Qin, S.W., Sun, A.M., 2018. Hairpin loop-enhanced fluorescent copper nanoclusters 

and application in S1 nuclease detection. The Analyst 143(2), 415-419.

Prakash, K.T., Singh, N., Venkatesh, V., 2019. Synthesis of novel luminescent copper nanoclusters with substituent driven self-

assembly and aggregation induced emission (AIE). Chemical Communications 55(3), 322-325.

Qian, H., Zhu, M., Wu, Z., Jin, R., 2012. Quantum Sized Gold Nanoclusters with Atomic Precision. Accounts of Chemical Research 

45(9), 1470-1479.

Qing, T., Long, C., Wang, X., Zhang, K., Zhang, P., Feng, B., 2019a. Detection of micrococcal nuclease for identifying 

Staphylococcus aureus based on DNA templated fluorescent copper nanoclusters. Mikrochimica Acta 186(4), 248.

Qing, Z., Bai, A., Xing, S., Zou, Z., He, X., Wang, K., Yang, R., 2019b. Progress in biosensor based on DNA-templated copper 

nanoparticles. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 137, 96-109.

R, S.A., J, S.A., John, N., K, A., S, S.S., George, S., 2018. Blue emitting copper nanoclusters as colorimetric and fluorescent probe 

for the selective detection of bilirubin. Spectrochimica acta. Part A, Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 199, 123-129.

Rajamanikandan, R., Ilanchelian, M., 2018. Protein-protected red emittive copper nanoclusters as a fluorometric probe for highly 

sensitive biosensing of creatinine. Analytical Methods 10(29), 3666-3674.

Rajamanikandan, R., Ilanchelian, M., 2019. Red emitting human serum albumin templated copper nanoclusters as effective 

candidates for highly specific biosensing of bilirubin. Materials Science & Engineering. C, Materials for Biological 
Applications 98, 1064-1072.

Sagara, Y., Mutai, T., Yoshikawa, I., Araki, K., 2007. Material Design for Piezochromic Luminescence:  Hydrogen-Bond-Directed 

Assemblies of a Pyrene Derivative. Journal of the American Chemical Society 129(6), 1520-1521.

Shanmugaraj, K., John, S.A., 2018. Inner filter effect based selective detection of picric acid in aqueous solution using green 

luminescent copper nanoclusters. New Journal of Chemistry 42(9), 7223-7229.

Sharma, H., Dormidontova, E.E., 2017. Lipid Nanodisc-Templated Self-Assembly of Gold Nanoparticles into Strings and Rings. 

ACS nano 11(4), 3651-3661.

Shen, Z., Zhang, C., Yu, X., Li, J., Liu, B., Zhang, Z., 2019. A facile stage for Cu2+ ions detection by formation and aggregation 

of Cu nanoclusters. Microchemical Journal 145, 517-522.

Singh, S., Singh, M.K., Das, P., 2018. Biosensing of solitary and clustered abasic site DNA damage lesions with copper 

nanoclusters and carbon dots. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 255, 763-774.


Sivasankaran, U., Radecki, J., Radecka, H., Girish Kumar, K., 2019. Copper nanoclusters: an efficient fluorescence sensing 

platform for quinoline yellow. Luminescence : the journal of biological and chemical luminescence 34(2), 243-248.

Su, X., Liu, J., 2017. pH-Guided Self-Assembly of Copper Nanoclusters with Aggregation-Induced Emission. ACS applied 

materials & interfaces 9(4), 3902-3910.

Suaifan, G.A., Alhogail, S., Zourob, M., 2017. Rapid and low-cost biosensor for the detection of Staphylococcus aureus. Biosensors 

& Bioelectronics 90, 230-237.

Sun, C., Mammen, N., Kaappa, S., Yuan, P., Deng, G., Zhao, C., Yan, J., Malola, S., Honkala, K., Hakkinen, H., Teo, B.K., Zheng, 

N., 2019. Atomically Precise, Thiolated Copper-Hydride Nanoclusters as Single-Site Hydrogenation Catalysts for Ketones in 
Mild Conditions. ACS nano 13(5), 5975-5986.

Tan, N.-D., Yin, J.-H., Yuan, Y., Meng, L., Xu, N., 2018. One-Pot Hydrothermal Synthesis of Highly Fluorescent 

Polyethyleneimine-capped Copper Nanoclusters for Specific Detection of Rifampicin. Bulletin of the Korean Chemical 
Society 39(5), 657-664.

Tan, S.F., Chee, S.W., Lin, G., Mirsaidov, U., 2017. Direct Observation of Interactions between Nanoparticles and Nanoparticle 

Self-Assembly in Solution. Accounts of chemical research 50(6), 1303-1312.

Vazquez-Vazquez, C., Banobre-Lopez, M., Mitra, A., Lopez-Quintela, M.A., Rivas, J., 2009. Synthesis of small atomic copper 

clusters in microemulsions. Langmuir 25(14), 8208-8216.

Wang, B., Gui, R., Jin, H., He, W., Wang, Z., 2018a. Red-emitting BSA-stabilized copper nanoclusters acted as a sensitive probe 

for fluorescence sensing and visual imaging detection of rutin. Talanta 178, 1006-1010.

Wang, C., Huang, Y.A.N., 2013. Green Route to Prepare Biocompatible and near Infrared Thiolate-Protected Copper Nanoclusters 

for Cellular Imaging. Nano 08(05), 1350054.

Wang, C., Lin, H., Xu, Z., Huang, Y., Humphrey, M.G., Zhang, C., 2016a. Tunable Carbon-Dot-Based Dual-Emission Fluorescent 

Nanohybrids for Ratiometric Optical Thermometry in Living Cells. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 8(10), 6621-6628.

Wang, C., Wang, C., Xu, L., Cheng, H., Lin, Q., Zhang, C., 2014. Protein-directed synthesis of pH-responsive red fluorescent 

copper nanoclusters and their applications in cellular imaging and catalysis. Nanoscale 6(3), 1775-1781.

Wang, F., Liu, X., Lu, C.H., Willner, I., 2013. Cysteine-mediated aggregation of Au nanoparticles: the development of a H2O2 

sensor and oxidase-based biosensors. ACS nano 7(8), 7278-7286.

Wang, Y., Chen, T., Zhuang, Q., Ni, Y., 2018b. Label-free photoluminescence assay for nitrofurantoin detection in lake water 

samples using adenosine-stabilized copper nanoclusters as nanoprobes. Talanta 179, 409-413.

Wang, Y., Zhang, X., Zhao, L., Bao, T., Wen, W., Zhang, X., Wang, S., 2017. Integrated amplified aptasensor with in-situ precise 

preparation of copper nanoclusters for ultrasensitive electrochemical detection of microRNA 21. Biosensors & Bioelectronics 
98, 386-391.

Wang, Z., Chen, B., Susha, A.S., Wang, W., Reckmeier, C.J., Chen, R., Zhong, H., Rogach, A.L., 2016b. All-Copper Nanocluster 

Based Down-Conversion White Light-Emitting Devices. Advanced Science 3(11).

Wang, Z., Shi, Y.-e., Yang, X., Xiong, Y., Li, Y., Chen, B., Lai, W.-F., Rogach, A.L., 2018c. Water-Soluble Biocompatible 

Copolymer Hypromellose Grafted Chitosan Able to Load Exogenous Agents and Copper Nanoclusters with Aggregation-
Induced Emission. Advanced Functional Materials 28(34).

Wen, Z., Song, S., Hu, T., Wang, C., Qu, F., Wang, P., Yang, M., 2019. A dual emission nanocomposite prepared from copper 

nanoclusters and carbon dots as a ratiometric fluorescent probe for sulfide and gaseous H2S. Mikrochimica Acta 186(4), 258.

Wong, M.W., Wiberg, K.B., Frisch, M.J., 1992. Solvent effects. 2. Medium effect on the structure, energy, charge density, and 

vibrational frequencies of sulfamic acid. Journal of the American Chemical Society 114(2), 523-529.

Wright, C., Shin, J.H., Rajpurohit, A., Deep-Soboslay, A., Collado-Torres, L., Brandon, N.J., Hyde, T.M., Kleinman, J.E., Jaffe, 

A.E., Cross, A.J., Weinberger, D.R., 2017. Altered expression of histamine signaling genes in autism spectrum disorder. 
Translational Psychiatry 7(5), e1126-e1126.

Wu, X.-M., Zhang, F., Li, Y., 2018. Facile synthesis of near-infrared emitting dBSA-templated Cu nanoclusters for sensitive 

detection of heparin. Journal of Materials Chemistry B 6(34), 5466-5475.

Wu, Z., Jin, R., 2010. On the ligand's role in the fluorescence of gold nanoclusters. Nano letters 10(7), 2568-2573.
Wu, Z., Liu, H., Li, T., Liu, J., Yin, J., Mohammed, O.F., Bakr, O.M., Liu, Y., Yang, B., Zhang, H., 2017. Contribution of Metal 

Defects in the Assembly Induced Emission of Cu Nanoclusters. Journal of the American Chemical Society 139(12), 4318-
4321.


Wu, Z., Liu, J., Gao, Y., Liu, H., Li, T., Zou, H., Wang, Z., Zhang, K., Wang, Y., Zhang, H., Yang, B., 2015. Assembly-Induced 

Enhancement of Cu Nanoclusters Luminescence with Mechanochromic Property. Journal of the American Chemical Society 
137(40), 12906-12913.

Xia, J.M., Wei, X., Chen, X.W., Shu, Y., Wang, J.H., 2018. Folic acid modified copper nanoclusters for fluorescent imaging of

cancer cells with over-expressed folate receptor. Mikrochimica acta 185(3), 205.

Yang, J., Guo, J., Yuan, J., 2008. In vitro antioxidant properties of rutin. LWT - Food Science and Technology 41(6), 1060-1066.
Yang, K., Wang, Y., Lu, C., Yang, X., 2018. Ovalbumin-directed synthesis of fluorescent copper nanoclusters for sensing both 

vitamin B 1 and doxycycline. Journal of Luminescence 196, 181-186.

Ye, M., Yu, Y., Lin, B., Cai, Y., Cao, Y., Guo, M., Zhu, D., 2019. Copper nanoclusters reversible switches based on ions-triggered 

for detection of inorganic pyrophosphatase activity. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 284, 36-44.

Zhang, G., Wang, R., Shi, L., Zhang, C., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y., Dong, C., Li, G., Shuang, S., 2019a. Aggregation/assembly induced 

emission based on silk fibroin-templated fluorescent copper nanoclusters for “turn-on” detection of S2−. Sensors and 
Actuators B: Chemical 279, 361-368.

Zhang, H., Guan, Y., Li, X., Lian, L., Wang, X., Gao, W., Zhu, B., Liu, X., Lou, D., 2018a. Ultrasensitive Biosensor for Detection 

of Mercury(II) Ions Based on DNA-Cu Nanoclusters and Exonuclease III-assisted Signal Amplification. Analytical Sciences 
34(10), 1155-1161.

Zhang, M., Qiao, J., Zhang, S., Qi, L., 2018b. Copper nanoclusters as probes for turn-on fluorescence sensing of L-lysine. Talanta 

182, 595-599.

Zhang, P., Yang, X.X., Wang, Y., Zhao, N.W., Xiong, Z.H., Huang, C.Z., 2014. Rapid synthesis of highly luminescent and stable 

Au20 nanoclusters for active tumor-targeted imaging in vitro and in vivo. Nanoscale 6(4), 2261-2269.

Zhang, W.J., Liu, S.G., Han, L., Ling, Y., Liao, L.L., Mo, S., Luo, H.Q., Li, N.B., 2018c. Copper nanoclusters with strong 

fluorescence emission as a sensing platform for sensitive and selective detection of picric acid. Analytical Methods 10(35), 
4251-4256.

Zhang, X., Jin, Y., Li, B., 2018d. Copper nanocluster as a fluorescent indicator for label-free and sensitive detection of DNA 

hybridization assisted with a cascade isothermal exponential amplification reaction. New Journal of Chemistry 42(7), 5178-
5184.

Zhang, X., Liu, Q., Jin, Y., Li, B., 2018e. Determination of the activity of T4 polynucleotide kinase phosphatase by exploiting the 

sequence-dependent fluorescence of DNA-templated copper nanoclusters. Mikrochimica acta 186(1), 3.

Zhang, Y., Zhu, Z., Teng, X., Lai, Y., Pu, S., Pang, P., Wang, H., Yang, C., Barrow, C.J., Yang, W., 2019b. Enzyme-free fluorescent 

detection of microcystin-LR using hairpin DNA-templated copper nanoclusters as signal indicator. Talanta 202, 279-284.

Zhong, Y., Zhu, J., Wang, Q., He, Y., Ge, Y., Song, C., 2014. Copper nanoclusters coated with bovine serum albumin as a 

regenerable fluorescent probe for copper(II) ion. Microchimica Acta 182(5-6), 909-915.

Zhou, T., Zhu, J., Gong, L., Nong, L., Liu, J., 2019. Amphiphilic Block Copolymer-Guided in Situ Fabrication of Stable and Highly 

Controlled Luminescent Copper Nanoassemblies. Journal of the American Chemical Society 141(7), 2852-2856.

Zhou, Y., Wang, H., Zhang, H., Chai, Y., Yuan, R., 2018. Programmable Modulation of Copper Nanoclusters 

Electrochemiluminescence via DNA Nanocranes for Ultrasensitive Detection of microRNA. Analytical Chemistry 90(5), 
3543-3549.

Zhuang, W., Li, Y., Chen, J., Liu, W., Huang, H., 2019. Copper nanocluster-labeled hybridization chain reaction for potentiometric 

immunoassay of matrix metalloproteinase-7 in acute kidney injury and renal cancer. Analytical Methods 11(19), 2597-2604.


