 

 

Investigation of high frequency transducers 

and coded signals suitable for cartilage volume 

imaging 

Abhishek Ranjan1, Chengxiang peng1, Anowarul Habib1, Sanat Wagle2, Frank Melandsø1 

1Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway 

                                                             2Elop AS, Nordvikvegen 50, 2316 Hamar, Norway 

Email- frank.melandso@uit.no 

 

Abstract: Cartilage degeneration in joints causing pain and 
various types of knee problems is a serious problem-affecting 
people in all ages. Degenerated articular cartilage is also known 
as a central hallmark of osteoarthritis, which is a complex 
musculoskeletal disorder involving numerous contributory 
genetic, constitutional and biomechanical factors. As a part of the 
cartilage degeneration, the volume occupied by the collagen 
fibers becomes reduced and the cell (chondrocyte) volume 
increased. Since high frequency ultrasound has the capability of 
resolving individual chondrocytes, ultrasound has been 
suggested as a promising method for determining the cartilage 
status. In the current work, the main objective has been to 
compare images taken in vitro with different transducer types, 
in order to determine their suitability for cartilage imaging.   
 
Keywords: cartilage, acoustic microscopy, PVDF, transducers, 
LabVIEW. 
 

I. INTRODUCTION 

 
Scanning acoustic microscopy (SAM) is a wide field non-
destructive and non-invasive technique that has been widely 
used over several decades for surface and subsurface 
microscopic imaging for industrial and biological specimens 
[1, 2]. SAM employs an acoustic energy which is transmitted 
via a coupling medium generally lying between 1 and 
1000 MHz [3] The capabilities of SAM also includes the 
observation of internal structures, subsurface features, and 
structural characterization of materials and detecting changes 
in the elastic properties of solids [2, 4, 5]. 
 
The commercial transducers used in SAM are made up of 
ceramic, single crystals or thin films of piezoelectric 
materials. In the field of SAM, acoustic transducers having 
broad bandwidth, high sensitivity and mechanical flexibility 
has become crucial. Polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) and its 
copolymer is a piezoelectric material and inherently possess a 
number of benefits for acoustic transducer.  
PVDF is a flexible material, which allows high degree of 
physical focusing without lenses [6]. PVDF transducers are 
also of significance because of their wide bandwidth, short 
impulse response [7]. PVDF and it copolymer films such as 
PVDF trifluoroethylene P(VDF-TrFE) offer an edge over 
conventional piezoelectric films, in terms of dielectric 
permittivity, 
higher 
phase 
velocity 
and 
higher 

electromechanical coupling. The copolymer P(VDF-TrFE) 
also has one of the highest piezoelectric activity (ratio 70:30) 
among known piezoelectric polymer materials [8]. 

The articular cartilage is a bonding tissue that acts as a cushion 
between joints. It is a hyaline, helping bones to glide over 
each other with low friction. It also lacks of blood vessels, 
lymphatics, and nerves [9-11]. The indication of degeneration 
of cartilage can be seen evidently from the changes in 
biomechanical properties. e.g. in rheumatoid arthritis or 
osteoarthritis (OA). OA is a progressive joint disease, 
involving gradual degradation of articular cartilage. The 
prevalence of OA can be viewed as an age-related 
phenomenon, as changes in the way chondrocytes function are 
often observed with growing age. The symptoms include pain, 
stiffness of the joint and weakness in muscles. Several 
morphological and structural modifications occur during the 
development of OA [12-15]. 
 
The clinical non-invasive imaging modalities such as 
radiography, 
magnetic 
resonance 
imaging, 
computed 

tomography, and conventional echography enable the 
detection of only severe cartilage lesions which is a 
characteristic of late stages of OA [16-18].  Since superficial 
cartilage degradation is the first sign of OA, its early detection 
would be of diagnostic importance. Acoustic microscopy, 
compared to other imaging modalities has the potential, to 
probe the surface or subsurface bioelastic properties of 
biological samples, thin films, circuits, piezoelectric materials 
etc. [19-22].We have fabricated a transducer made up from P 
(VDF-TrFe) material, which is adhesive free, having lower 
aperture diameter, and a lower f-number. The main purpose of 
the current work has therefore been to compare the 
performance of commercial and in-house transducers by high-
frequency ultrasonic imaging of much thicker (mm-thick) 
cartilage samples. 
 

II. SAMPLE PREPARATION 

 

Non-degenerated cartilage sample was obtained from the 
University Hospital of Northern Norway. The sample was 
from the patients (age between 50 to 60) who underwent a 
complete knee replacement. The patients having inflammatory 
joint diseases and advanced osteoarthritis were not included 
from the study. The study was approved by Regional Ethical 
Committee of Northern Norway (REK Nord 2014/920). A 
written consent was provided to all patients for the use of their 
cartilage for further study. We prepared the sample by slicing 
them carefully that resulted in a sample of around 1.25 mm 
thickness and then stored them in the PBS (Phosphate 
Buffered Saline) solution. The cartilage sample was placed 
inside a petri-dish (ibidis-50 mm) made up of polymer. The 


 

 

sample was fixed on the surface of the petri-dish using sticky 
tape. The petri-dish with cartilage was filled with water in 
order to facilitate a better acoustic coupling since air is a very 
poor transmitter of acoustic energy coming from transducers. 
Fig. 1 represents the optical image of a cartilage sample. 
 

 

Fig. 1. Cartilage sample used in the experiments for acoustic imaging 
for both the in house fabricated and the commercial PVDF 
transducer. 

 

III. TRANSDUCER FABRICATION 

 

The fabrication process of the P(VDF-TrFE) transducer 
begins with engraving of polymer polyethyleneimines (PEI) 
substrate having dimensions of 30×30 mm2 and 0.85mm 
thickness with four spherical cavities of 2 mm diameter. After 
the milling process, the spherical cavities were cleaned with 
ethanol to remove unwanted material and grease. In order to 
increase the wettability of the substrate, plasma cleaner was 
employed. Sputtering was done through a high-resolution 
metal mask to get the first electrode (lower) layer. 
Subsequently, spin-coating was done on top of the patterned 
electrode fluid phase P(VDF-TrFE) (77:23, molar ratio) 
dissolved in appropriate amount of solvent. After that, the 
spin-coated substrate was degassed at 1mbar atm to vaporize 
the solvent and thereafter annealing was done at a temperature 
of 130° C for 8 hours to increase the crystallinity. Later on, 
the upper electrode was deposited silver with a thickness of 
~80 nm on the top of P(VDF-TrFE) with the patterned metal 
mask. Each of the transducers in the substrate were connected 
directly onto a PCB using small spring contacts for poling and 
characterize the acoustic response. Fig. 2(a) represents the 
schematic diagram of the in-house P(VDF-TrFE) copolymer 
transducer, figure (b) shows the commercial transducer. 

 

IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

 

The experiments were performed on an inverted microscope 
(Leica Dmi8) assembled with a custom-designed high 
precision scanning platform (ASI MS-2000) and other 
components. A detailed overview of the experimental setup 
can be found [11].  The scanning acoustic microscope was 
given ultrasonic functionality using FlexRIO modules and 
Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) hardware from National 
Instruments. This hardware constitutes of an arbitrary 
waveform generator (AT-1212), a 3W RF-amplifier (E&I 

403LA) for pulse excitation, and a high-speed (1.6GS/s) 12-
bit digitizer for pulse recording (NI-5772). All of the scanning 
operations including transducer movements and stage 
translations 
were 
controlled 
using 
LabVIEW. 
An 

ultrasonic transducer fixed above the stage is focussed onto 
the sample and the stage is scanned in raster mode. We used 
commercial and in-house fabricated transducers and the 
comparison based on different parameters are shown in table 
1 below.  
 
TABLE 1: In house fabricated PVDF and commercial PVDF 

transducers  specification  

 
In order to explore the advantages of using coded waveforms 
for biological sample, both a Ricker wavelet and a long chirp-
coded waveform were implemented on the imaging system. 
These waveforms were also investigated using both an in-
house fabricated P(VDF-TrFE) transducer and a commercial 
PVDF transducer, both having center frequencies around 40 
MHz   
 

 
 

Fig. 2. (a) Drawing of the fabricated in-house P (VDF-TrFE) 
copolymer transducer, and (b) image of the commercial Olympus 
PVDF transducer, both with center frequencies around 40 MHz. (c) 
Optical image of a transducer panel containing 4 transducers, and (d) 
connection RF plugs for the transducers mounted on a printed circuit 
board. 
 
Figs. 3 (a) and (b) show the Ricker wavelet and the coded 
signal used for the acoustic imaging, while Figs. (c) and (d) 
show the corresponding frequency responses. 

Transducer 
Commercial 
PVDF 

Fabricated 
P(VDF-TrFE) 

Focal distance 
12.7mm 
2.6mm 

Aperture Diameter 
6.35mm 
1.6mm 

F-number 
2 
1.625 

Central Frequency 
40 MHz 
40 MHz 


 

 

 

Fig. 1. (a) The Ricker wavelet and (b) chirped code used as transducer 
excitation pulses. The corresponding amplitude spectra are shown in 
(c) and (d). 

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

 
A prepared slice of articular cartilage as shown in Fig. 1 
was used as a test sample to explore differences between the 
investigated transducers. For each transducer both Ricker and 
chirp coded pulses were used as excitation pulses, and the 
recorded time series from these pulses were averaged 16 times 
to obtain some noise reduction. 
 
The averaged backscattered signals were digitized into time 
series containing 2048 samples for each pixel in a 𝑥𝑦-scan 
matrix, and saved to a HDF5 file format for further processing 
in MATLAB. This processing includes for example, wave 
compression of the coded waveforms which was done using a 
Wiener filter in the Fourier domain as previously described in 
[11]. After wave compression, the time series were finally 
processed into C-scan and B-scan images.  
 
Examples of C-scans taken at a shallow depth into the 
cartilage sample is shown in Fig. 4. Here Figs. 4 (a) and (b) 
show the scans for the commercial and in-house transducers, 
respectively, driven by the Ricker pulse.  

Fig. 4. C-scan images generated of the test sample using different 
transducers and excitation pulses. These are (a) commercial 
transducer with Ricker wavelet, (b) in-house transducer with Ricker 
wavelet, (c) commercial transducer with chirp code, and (d) in-house 
transducer with chirp code. All images have a dimension of 3´ 5 
mm2. 
 

The corresponding results when using a chirp excitation pulse 
are shown in Figs. 4 (c) and (d).  B-scans of the test sample 
are shown in Fig. 5. with the (a) to (d) figures corresponding 
to the transducer-waveform combinations previous used Fig. 
4. The red lines in Fig. 5 show the spatial locations were the 
C-scans in Fig. 4 were taken.     
 
From Figs. 4 and 5 we notice e.g. by comparing the (a) and (b) 
figures, that the commercial transducer yields a significant 
higher SNR than the in-house transducer. Single pixel (salt & 
pepper) noise is for example, clearly visible in all domains of 
Fig. 4 (b) while it cannot be spotted in Fig. 4 (a). The observed 
difference in SNR is probably strongly related to the 
difference in transducer aperture sizes listed in Tab. 1.  
 
The commercial transducer also explore more details from the 
inner parts of the cartilage, especially from the deepest parts. 
This is clearly seen e.g. by comparing the results for the chirp 
waves shown Fig. 5 (c) and Fig. 5 (d). Here Fig. 5 (c) shows 
elliptical shaped scatters originating from cells through the 
entire sample, while these scatters are visible only towards the 
 

 

Fig. 5. B-scan images generated of the test sample using different 
transducers and excitation pulses. These are (a) commercial 
transducer with Ricker wavelet, (b) in-house transducer with Ricker 
wavelet, (c) commercial transducer with chirp code, and (d) in-house 
transducer with chirp code. 
 
upper surface in Fig. 5 (d). On the other hand, the elliptical 
scatters from the in-house transducer appear significant 
smaller than from the commercial transducer, suggesting that 
the point-spread function from the latter is larger. It is also 
possible to observe finer details on the C-scan from the in-
house transducer, which together with a smaller point-spread 
function suggest that this transducer has a significant better 
resolution. This result can to some extend be explained by the 
smaller f-number of the in-house transducer.     
 

VI. CONCLUSION 

 

The results have demonstrated that the homemade P(VDF-
TrFE) transducer is capable of producing images with good 
resolution of the cartilage test sample, and also visualising cell 


 

 

structures in the upper part of the sample. The in-house 
transducer also yielded significant better resolution and a 
smaller point-spread function than the commercial PVDF 
transducer. However, the SNR of the in-house transducer is 
currently not large enough to penetrate deep into the cartilage 
sample, and therefore not suitable for volume imaging of thick 
samples. The B- and C-scans taken with both transducers 
clearly show that the chirp-coded waveform is superior to the 
Ricker wavelet in terms of SNR and dynamical range. It is also 
believed that the SNR for the in-house transducer can be 
improved significantly by redesigning the systems pre-
amplifier for the higher electrical impedance and the lower 
signal level produced by this transducer.     
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

 
We would like to thank Dr. Ashraful Islam for providing us 
the cartilage sample. A. Ranjan would like to give 
acknowledge Norwegian Ph. D Network on Nanotechnology 
for Microsystems for providing the travel grant for attending 
the IEEE conference.  

References 

 

[1] 
Korpel, A., Kessler, L., and Palermo, P.: ‘Acoustic microscope 
operating at 100 MHz’, Nature, 1971, 232, (5306), pp. 110 

[2] 
Briggs, A., Briggs, G., and Kolosov, O.: ‘Acoustic microscopy’ 
(Oxford University Press, 2010) 

[3] 
Lee, Y.-C.: ‘Measurements of multimode leaky lamb waves 
propagating in metal sheets’, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, (1R), pp. 
359 

[4] 
Smolorz, S., and Grill, W.: ‘Focusing PVDF transducers for acoustic 
microscopy’, Res. Nondestr. Eval., 1996, 7, (4), pp. 195-201 

[5] 
Merks, E.J., Bouakaz, A., Bom, N., Lancee, C.T., Van Der Steen, A.F., 
and De Jong, N.: ‘Design of a multilayer transducer for acoustic 
bladder volume assessment’, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. 
Control., 2006, 53, (10), pp. 1730-1738 

[6] 
Snook, K., Rhee, S., Robert, M., Gottlieb, E., and Shung, K.K.: 
‘Development of P (VDF-TrFE) ultrasonic transducers operating at 50-
120 MHz’, (2), IEEE Ultrason. Symposium, 2002, (2) pp. 1249-1252 

[7] 
Lockwood, G., Turnball, D., Christopher, D., and Foster, F.S.: ‘Beyond 
30 MHz [applications of high-frequency ultrasound imaging]’, IEEE 
Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., 1996, 15, (6), pp. 60-71 

[8] 
Ohigashi, H., and Koga, K.: ‘Ferroelectric copolymers of 
vinylidenefluoride 
and 
trifluoroethylene 
with 
a 
large 

electromechanical coupling factor’, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 21, (8A), 
pp. L455 

[9]  
Hagiwara, Y., Saijo, Y., Ando, A., Onoda, Y., Suda, H., Chimoto, E., 
Hatori, K., and Itoi, E.: ‘Comparison of articular cartilage images 
assessed by high-frequency ultrasound microscope and scanning 
acoustic   microscope’, International orthopaedics, 2012, 36, (1), pp. 
185-190 

[10] Buckwalter, J., and Mankin, H.: ‘Articular cartilage: degeneration and 

osteoarthritis, repair, regeneration, and transplantation’, Instructional 
course lectures, 1998, 47, pp. 487-504 

[11] Habib, A., Vierinen, J., Islam, A., Martinez, I.Z., and Melandsø, F.: ‘In 

Vitro Volume Imaging of Articular Cartilage Using Chirp-Coded High 
Frequency Ultrasound’, IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, 2018,  pp. 1-4 

[12] Männicke, N., Schöne, M., Oelze, M., and Raum, K.: ‘Articular 

cartilage degeneration classification by means of high-frequency 
ultrasound’, Osteoarthr. Cartil., 2014, 22, (10), pp. 1577-1582 

[13]  Kuroki, H., Nakagawa, Y., Mori, K., Kobayashi, M., Yasura, K., 

Okamoto, Y., Suzuki, T., Nishitani, K., and Nakamura, T.: ‘Ultrasound 
properties of articular cartilage in the tibio-femoral joint in knee 
osteoarthritis:, Arthritis Res. Ther., 2008, 10, (4), pp. R78 

[14] Habib, A., and Melands, F.: ‘Chirp coded ultrasonic pulses used for 

scanning acoustic microscopy’, IEEE Ultrasonics Symposium, 2017 , 
pp. 1-4 

[15] Aula, A., Töyräs, J., Tiitu, V., and Jurvelin, J.: ‘Simultaneous 

ultrasound measurement of articular cartilage and subchondral bone’, 
Osteoarthr. Cartil., 2010, 18, (12), pp. 1570-1576 

[16] Recht, M.P.: ‘Magnetic resonance imaging of articular cartilage’: 

‘Musculoskeletal Diseases’ (Springer, 2013), pp. 157-160 

[17] Chu, C.R., Lin, D., Geisler, J.L., Chu, C.T., Fu, F.H., and Pan, Y.: 

‘Arthroscopic microscopy of articular cartilage using optical coherence 
tomography’, Am. J. Sports Med., 2004, 32, (3), pp. 699-709 

[18] Mollenhauer, J., Aurich, M., Zhong, Z., Muehleman, C., Cole, A., 

Hasnah, M., Oltulu, O., Kuettner, K., Margulis, A., and Chapman, L.: 
‘Diffraction-enhanced 
X-ray 
imaging 
of 
articular 
cartilage’, 

Osteoarthr. Cartil., 2002, 10, (3), pp. 163-171 

[19] Habib, A., Shelke, A., Vogel, M., Pietsch, U., Jiang, X., and Kundu, 

T.: ‘Mechanical characterization of sintered piezo-electric ceramic 
material using scanning acoustic microscope’, Ultrasonics, 2012, 52, 
(8), pp. 989-995 

[20] Habib, A., Shelke, A., Vogel, M., Brand, S., Jiang, X., Pietsch, U., 

Banerjee, S., and Kundu, T.: ‘Quantitative Ultrasonic Characterization 
of c-axis oriented polycrystalline AlN thin film for smart device 
application’, Acta Acust united Ac., 2015, 101, (4), pp. 675-683 

[21] Hofmann, M., Pflanzer, R., Habib, A., Shelke, A., Bereiter-Hahn, J., 

Bernd, A., Kaufmann, R., Sader, R., and Kippenberger, S.: ‘Scanning 
Acoustic Microscopy—A Novel Noninvasive Method to Determine 
Tumor Interstitial Fluid Pressure in a Xenograft Tumor Model’, Transl. 
Oncol., 2016, 9, (3), pp. 179-183 

[22] Wagle, S., Habib, A., and Melandsø, F.: ‘Ultrasonic measurements of 

surface defects on flexible circuits using high-frequency focused 
polymer transducers’, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, (7S1), pp. 07JC05 

 


