1 

 

Competing advection decelerates droplet 

evaporation on heated surfaces 

 

Abhishek Kaushal a, Vivek Jaiswal a, Vishwajeet Mehandia a and  

Purbarun Dhar b, * 

a Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar,  

Rupnagar–140001, India 

b Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 

Kharagpur–721302, India 

 

 

*Corresponding author: 

E–mail: purbarun@mech.iitkgp.ac.in ; purbarun.iit@gmail.com  

Tel: +91-3222-28-2938 

 

 

Abstract 

In this article we report the atypical and anomalous evaporation kinetics of saline sessile 
droplets on surfaces with elevated temperatures. In a previous we showed that saline sessile 
droplets evaporate faster compared to water droplets when the substrates are not heated. In 
the present study we discover that in the case of heated surfaces, the saline droplets evaporate 
slower than the water counterpart, thereby posing a counter-intuitive phenomenon. The 
reduction in the evaporation rates is directly dependent on the salt concentration and the 
surface wettability. Natural convection around the droplet and thermal modulation of surface 
tension is found to be inadequate to explain the mechanisms.  Flow visualisations using 
particle image velocimetry (PIV) reveals that the morphed advection within the saline 
droplets is a probable reason behind the arrested evaporation. Infrared thermography is 
employed to map the thermal state of the droplets. A thermo-solutal Marangoni based scaling 
analysis is put forward.  It is observed that the Marangoni and internal advection borne of 
thermal and solutal gradients are competitive, thereby leading to the overall decay of internal 
circulation velocity, which reduces the evaporation rates. The theoretically obtained 
advection velocities conform to the experimental results. This study sheds rich insight on a 
novel yet anomalous species transport behaviour in saline droplets.   

Keywords: sessile droplet, evaporation, Marangoni effect, PIV, infrared imaging 


2 

 

          

1. Introduction 

Thermo-hydrodynamics and species transport in microscale droplets and sprays has been an 
area of intense interest to the researcher community for the past two decades. Droplet 
evaporation, an apparently simple phenomenon, yet inherently rich in physics, is encountered 
in daily life in a wide range of applications. Typical processes and systems include the 
automobile industry and combustion engines [1], in inkjet printing [2], spray cooling in the 
metallurgy industry [3], surface coating and texturing [4], manipulation of biological fluids 
[5], in sol-gel-technology [6], power generation engineering [7-8], etc. Several researchers 
have been working in the area of evaporation dynamics of droplets owing to its bio-medical 
applications as well. These applications include nebulizers and inhalers [9], patterning and 
detection of diseases from blood [10], spray and fumigants, etc. Combustion dynamics of 
fuels is also an area directly associated with droplet evaporation kinetics [11) and is studied 
widely.  

The physics behind sessile droplet evaporation is an intriguing problem, as it is 

strongly dependent on the interactions between the droplet fluid molecules, the surrounding 
gas phase, and the surface involved [12-14]. . Maxwell [15] introduced the mass diffusion 
mechanism based simple droplet evaporation model, wherein dimensionless numbers were 
applied to evolve the governing equation and the value of droplet evaporation rate was 
determined. Picknet and Bexon [16] reported the existence of two distinct modes of 
evaporation, the constant contact radius (CCR) and the constant contact angle (CCA) modes. 
Further, strong dependence of evaporation rates on the wetting state was reported. Later, four 
intermittent modes of evaporation were reported in case of partially wetted substrates [17]. 
Bourges-Monnier and Shanahan [18] explored the influence of contact angle on the 
evaporation process and also discussed the four stages of evaporation depending on the 
roughness of different hydrophilic substrates, for water and n-decane droplets.  

Many prior studies on sessile droplet evaporation focussed on the CCR mode of 

evaporation [16, 19-21]. Popov [22] reported a vapour diffusion model based closed-form 
expression for the evaporation rates for the entire range of contact angles. Numerous studies 
to understand the role of surface wettability on the evaporation dynamics have been put 
forward [23, 24]. Sessile droplet evaporation on superhydrophobic surfaces (SHS) has been 
observed to follow three major modes of evaporation, viz. the CCA, the CCR, and the mixed 
mode [25, 26]. Dash and Garimella [27] experimentally investigated the evaporation rate of 
sessile droplets on SHS with sliding contact line. Many studies have reported the importance 
of internal hydrodynamics on the evaporation kinetics of sessile droplets. The temperature 
gradients along the liquid-air interface of the droplet exists due to non-uniform evaporative 
cooling, leading to surface tension gradients [28, 29], which give rise to thermal Marangoni 
advection inside the droplet [30-32]. These flows can either counter or aid the capillary flows 
inside the droplet.  

Xu and Lo [33] showed that the Marangoni flows also exist within evaporating pure 

water droplets; however the advection is very weak. The role of wetting states on the 


3 

 

Marangoni flow inside the droplet has also been studied  [34, 35]. Apart from the temperature 
gradients, presence of solute or other solvent phase in the droplet can induce surface tension 
gradients which results in solutal Marangoni convection. Bennacer and Sefiane [36] reported 
the presence of multiple vortices at the liquid-air interface during initial period of 
evaporation, caused by the Marangoni effect (concentration gradient) in water-ethanol 
droplets. Kang et al. [37] experimentally noted the existence of two stable counter rotating 
vortices inside a sessile droplet of water-ethanol mixture. The dominance of Marangoni 
advection over buoyancy driven Rayleigh convection inside aqueous NaCl droplets on 
hydrophilic [38] and hydrophobic surfaces [39] have been reported in literature. Karapetsas et 
al. [40] reported the influential role of dispersed particles on the flow dynamics and 
evaporation rates of the droplets.  

 
Articles discussing the role of thermal properties of the substrate on sessile droplet 

evaporation dynamics have also been reported. The role of the thermal conductivity of the 
surface [41, 42] towards altering the internal flow direction and evaporation rate of droplets 
has been reported. Substrate heating is also known to modulate the evaporation dynamics of 
sessile droplets, as reported by Girad et al. [43], Saada et al. [44], Carle et al. [45] and 
Pradhan et al. [46]. Tam et al. [35] reported the presence of two counter rotating vortices 
inside a droplet placed on a heated SHS. Sobac and Brutin [47] studied ethanol droplet 
evaporation on heated substrates and proposed a quasi-steady diffusion driven model for the 
evaporation rates. Kim et al. [48] investigated the influence of the substrate temperature on 
the flow directions of the solute particles inside a sessile droplet during evaporation process. 
Recently, the present authors (Kaushal et al. [49]) showed experimentally and theoretically 
that saline sessile droplets evaporate faster compared to water droplets when placed on non-
heated surfaces (hydrophilic and SHS). It was shown that the interfacial shear generated by 
the internal solutal hydrodynamics aided the external Stefan flow, leading to augmented 
evaporation. 

Taking cue from the previous study [49], this study extends to understand the 

evaporation kinetics of sessile saline droplets with substrate heating. Experimental and 
analytical approach to understand the evaporation behaviour with induced thermal gradient 
within the droplets for different wettability substrates (on hydrophilic and SHS) has been 
presented. Anomalous evaporation characteristics are noted when compared with the 
previous study. While the saline sessile droplets evaporated faster compared to the water 
droplets for non-adiabatic cases, the converse is noted for the heated surfaces. It is observed 
that the saline droplets evaporate at slower rates than its water counterpart at the same surface 
temperature. Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) studies were carried out to investigate the 
internal advection dynamics and the alteration in the advection behaviour within saline 
droplets on heated substrates. To understand the dynamics of the thermal Marangoni and 
Rayleigh convection and the solutal Marangoni advection inside the droplet and their 
influence on the stability of the internal circulation behaviour, a scaling analysis based 
mathematical formulation is presented. From the analysis it is obtained that individually, both 
the thermal and solutal Marangoni advection in augmented by the heated surfaces. However, 
the two advection components compete and oppose one another, leading to reduction in the 


4 

 

overall advection strength. This in turn leads to reduced evaporation rates. The theoretical 
velocity values obtained are found to be in good agreement with the PIV observations. 
        

 

2. Materials and methods 

In the present studies, Sodium Iodide (NaI) salt (procured from Merck, India, and used as 
obtained) solution in de-ionised (DI) water is employed. The salt is selected based on the 
results by the authors from literature [49]. Experiments were performed on substrates of two 
different wettabilities. For hydrophilic surface, sterile glass slides were used, which were 
cleaned with acetone and dried overnight. The SHS are synthesized by spray coating (Rust 
Oleum industrial spray, USA) the sterile glass slides and drying overnight in oven. The 
surface properties of the substrates used are tabulated [49] in the table 1. To measure the 
ambient temperature and humidity, a digital thermometer and a digital hygrometer with a 
sensing probe is used. The sensing probe is placed ~ 20 mm away from the evaporating 
droplet. For all the experiments, the ambient conditions were noted as 25 ± 2 ⁰C temperature, 
and relative humidity of 50 ± 5%. The initial temperature of the droplet is ensured as 25 ⁰C 
before placing on the substrate.  

The substrates were placed on a metallic plate heater made up copper, which is 

connected to a T-type thermocouple and a digital heating unit controller (refer fig. 1) with 
thermostat controller to control the plate temperature. The heating unit is calibrated with 
respect to the temperature drop across the glass slides and in the present experiments, the 
temperature of the substrate is varied to three different values with respected to the ambient 
temperature (25 ⁰C), viz. ∆0, ∆10 and ∆30, where thermal difference ∆0 is the ambient case. 
The difference above 30 is not studied as the evaporation rate is augmented to a very large 
extent at higher temperatures, which leads to rapid crystallization induced anomalies in the 
saline droplets, as well as the reduced droplet life-time prevents error free velocimetry. No 
significant change (not greater than ~10%) in the relevant physical properties of the fluid 
(except for the viscosity and surface tension) is noted due to rise in the substrate temperature. 
The reproducibility of the observations is verified by repeating each experiment thrice, and 
the average of the observations is considered.  

An experimental setup (shown in fig. 1) assembled in-situ is utilized in the present 

study. The droplets were dispensed carefully using a digitized droplet dispensing mechanism 
(Holmarc Opto-mechatronics, India), capable of dispensing droplets accurate to 0.1 µl 
volume. The sessile droplets are dispensed carefully so as to ensure that the droplets do not 
undergo any spreading or retraction due to the pumping effect or capillarity within the 
needle. The volume of the droplets used is 20 ± 0.5 μL, chosen such that the contact 
diameter of the sessile droplet is less than the capillary length scale for water (the associated 
Bond number is maintained < 1, such that gravity effects are not important). A 
monochromatic, CCD (charged couple diode) camera (Holmarc Opto-mechatronics, India), 
attached to a long-distance microscopic lens, and capable of recording at 30 fps at 1 
megapixel resolution, is used to record the evaporation process. The camera is mounted on a 


5 

 

3 axis translational stage for focusing. A brightness-controlled LED array light source 
(DPLED, China) was used as an illumination source for the camera.             

 

Table 1:  The liquid-gas and solid-gas components of surface energy and static contact angles 
for the substrates used in the experiments (for glass, 𝜎sg = 0.375 J/m2):  

Substrate
𝝈sl (J/m2)
𝝈lg (J/m2)
Static contact angle

Glass
0.316
0.0728
40 o ± 3o

SHS
0.441
0.0728
155o ± 3o

  

 
  

 

Figure 1: The model of the experimental setup, consisting of (a) droplet dispenser controller 
unit, (b) droplet dispensing mechanism with Hamilton syringe, (c) LED backlight assembly, 
(d) laser with sheet optics assembly (not shown), (e) laser controller (f) controller connected 
to the copper plate heating unit, (g) substrate with droplet on heating mechanism, (h) CCD 
camera with long distance microscope lens and three-axis positioning system, (i) computer 
for data acquisition and camera control. The components (b, c, d, g and h) are enclosed in an 
acrylic chamber and mounted on a vibration-free table.  

 

The whole experimental setup was kept on a vibration free table and housed within an 

acrylic chamber to eliminate external disturbances. An open source software (ImageJ) was 
used for image processing by using macro subroutines, where each image was first converted 
into binary and the geometric parameters of the droplet were extracted. The visualization of 
the internal flow behaviour and quantification of the advection velocities is done using 
particle image velocimetry (PIV). Neutrally buoyant, fluorescent particles (~10µm diameter 
of polystyrene, Cospheric LLC, USA) were used as the seeding particles. A continuous wave 


6 

 

laser (532 nm wavelength, 10 mW peak power) was used as the illumination source (Roithner 
GmbH, Germany) for the PIV. The PIV was done at 30 fps and ~120 pixels/mm resolution. A 
cylindrical lens is used to generate a laser sheet of thickness ~0.5 mm to focus the vertical 
mid-plane of the droplet. This is done in case of the droplets on the SHS as PIV of the 
vertical plane is of good resolution.  

For the case of hydrophilic substrate, the droplet height is very low, and hence PIV of 

the vertical plane of the droplet is of poor resolution. Consequently, top view micro-PIV 
studies are done using a fluorescent microscope. A CMOS monochrome camera (Sony 
Corpn.) is used at 30 fps and 10x optical zoom of the microscope. The microscope objective 
is focused at the horizontal mid-plane of the droplet. For the micro-PIV, graphite nanoflakes 
(0.3–0.5 μm size) have been used as the seeding particles. Using image processing, the 
images were later binary inverted such that the particles were converted to white pixels and 
the fluid domain was converted to black. The open-source PIV code PIV-Lab was used for 
the velocimetry analysis. A four pass, cross-correlation algorithm has been employed in the 
post processing, with consecutive interrogation window sizes of 64, 32, 16, and 8 pixels, to 
obtain high signal to noise ratio. Standard noise reduction and contrast enhancing pre-
processing algorithms are employed to enhance peak locking. Infrared thermography (at 4X 
thermal zoom) has been used to determine the thermal gradients and temperature distribution 
within the evaporating droplets (FLIR T650sc infrared camera). It employs an infrared 
detector of resolution 640 x 512 pixels and has an accuracy of ±0.3 oC  in the temperature 
range of 0-100 oC.       

 

3. Results and Discussions 

3. A. Role of substrate temperature on evaporation kinetics  

The evaporation rate in the sessile droplets is likely to enhance with temperature [43]. Figure 
2 presents the time snap array of the evaporating sessile droplets of 0.1M concentration at 
different substrate temperatures. It has been found in the literature as well as observed 
experimentally that the droplets on the hydrophilic substrate (Fig. 2(a)) evaporate faster as 
compared to that on superhydrophobic substrate (Fig. 2(b)). The influence of the different 
thermal gradients on both the substrates produce an observable changes in the evaporation 
kinetics of droplets. In Fig. 2(a), it is observed that the droplets on hydrophilic substrate 
remain pinned during most of the evaporation process and only height and contact angle of 
the droplet decreases. While on the other hand, in SHS (fig. 2(b)), the contact angle decreases 
at comparatively lower rate as compared to contact diameter in the initial stage of 
evaporation. The volume of the droplet is observed to decrease significantly and the decrease 
is direct function of the increase in temperature of the substrate. However the presence of salt 
in the droplet solution is observed to behave differently than the actual behaviour. From the 
previous study [49] it is reported that the presence of salt is likely to increase the evaporation 
kinetics in the sessile droplets on hydrophilic surface as well as on SHS (lower 
concentrations). But in the present scenario, the presence of salt in the solution decreases the 
evaporation rate of the droplets in case of elevated substrate temperatures on both hydrophilic 


7 

 

substrate and SHS and this decrease is the direct function of the concentration of the salt in 
the solution.  

        

 

 

Figure 2: Time–snap array of the evaporating sessile droplets of water droplets and 0.1 M 
NaI solution on (a) hydrophilic substrate, and (b) SHS, under different thermal gradients (∆0 
and ∆30). 

 

Figure 3 illustrates the transient variation of the non-dimensional characteristic 

volume V* (

23

0

*
V
V
V



 





, where V is the instantaneous volume and V0 is the initial volume 

of the droplet) for different thermal conditions. In case of hydrophilic substrate (fig. 3(a)), for 
the ∆0 case, the evaporation rate of the droplets is observed to increase with increase in the 
concentration of the salt. The saline droplets thus evaporate faster than the water counterpart. 
However, strangely, an anomaly is noted when the surface temperature is higher than the 
ambient. With rise in the substrate temperature, for a particular salt concentration, the 
presence of salt is observed to reduce the droplet evaporation rate compared to its water 
counterpart. And this effect is more dominant with increase in the temperature of the surface 
compared to the ambient. Similarly in the case of SHS, at ∆0, the droplet evaporation rate 
first increases with salt concentration but then decreases, which has been explained by the 
present authors earlier [49]. However, distinct differences between the different cases at the 
ambient conditions are noticeable. As the substrate temperature is enhanced to ∆10 condition, 
the evaporation curves all collapse towards one another, and the apparent differences between 
water and saline droplets disappear. This is also in stark contrast to the ambient observation. 
Thereby the observations reveal that the conjugate effect of salt and substrate heating lead to 
atypical and counter-intuitive        

 


8 

 

 

Figure 3: Behaviour of V* with time during the evaporation of water and NaI solution 
droplets for different temperature conditions on (a) hydrophilic substrate and (b) SHS.    

 

Interfacial tension plays an important role in the evaporation dynamics of sessile 

droplets. The static contact angle of the droplet depends on the equilibrium of the surface 
tension forces, which in turn dictates the evaporation modes. Figure 4 illustrates the temporal 
variation of the normalized contact angle (with respect to the initial static contact angle) of 
the droplets. It is observed that at ambient conditions, the contact angle on hydrophilic 
substrate (fig. 4 (a)) decreases almost linearly from the very initial stage (CCR mode), 
followed by the mixed mode, and then remains constant (CCA mode) towards the end of the 
evaporation process. However, at ∆10 and ∆30, the behaviour is modulated. The mixed mode 
of evaporation is observed in the later stage, with very little or no CCA mode at all. While the 
presence of the salt tends to arrest the evaporation kinetics at elevated temperatures, the 
similar anomalous effect on contact angle variation is also visible. On the contrary, on SHS 
and ambient case, the contact angle reduces slightly in the initial stages (CCA mode), 
followed by mixed mode where the droplet retracts itself over and over [49], and then reduces 
rapidly towards the end (CCR mode). With rise in the substrate temperature, it is observed 
that the droplet tends to remain in the mixed regime for most of its evaporation time, 
followed by a sudden jump to the CCR regime. Here also the substrate temperature causes the 
curves to collapse and the differences in the ambient case are no longer prominent.        

 

 


9 

 

Figure 4: Variation of the non-dimensional contact angle θ* with time for water and NaI 
solution droplets on (a) hydrophilic surface (b) SHS for different substrate temperatures.  

 

The transient response of the non-dimensional contact diameter (with respect to initial 

contact diameter) of the droplet has been shown in figure 5. On hydrophilic substrate (fig. 
5(a)), it is noted that in ambient case, the CCR regime is reduced with addition of salt, when 
compared to water droplet. However, with increase in the substrate temperature, it is 
observed that the CCR regime is extended with salt compared to the water droplet. This 
behaviour also provides another instance of anomaly with respect to the ambient case 
observations, when the saline droplet evaporates at elevated substrate temperatures. On the 
SHS (fig 5(b)), it is seen that for the ambient case, the behaviour first deviates largely from 
the water case, but tends towards the water case at higher salt concentration. This behaviour 
has been noted and explained by the authors in the previous literature [49]. However, for the 
∆10 and ∆30 case, it is seen that this unique behaviour is completely absent, and the saline 
droplets show consistent change in the contact angle with respect to concentration. The 
anomaly is furthered by the fact that this behaviour is exactly opposite to the observations in 
fig. 5 (a).   

 

 

Figure 5: Variation of the non-dimensional contact diameter d* with time for water and NaI 
solution droplets for different substrate temperatures on (a) hydrophilic substrate and (b) 
SHS.  

 

Having reported the observations, it is now essential to probe and discuss the 

mechanisms which are responsible towards such anomalous behaviour. Changes in surface 
tension and role of diffusion mediated evaporation have been shown to bring about consistent 
changes in the evaporative rates [46], and thus can be safely excluded from the discussion on 
mechanisms behind such atypical responses. It has been noted from the experimental image 
processing that the contact line recedes differently on both the substrates during the whole 
evaporation process, and the modulation of the same with thermal stimulus is also different. It 
is also interesting to find the effect of substrate temperature on the contact line receding 
velocity of the droplet (fig. 6). It is observed that the contact line does not start receding in 


10 

 

the initial stage of evaporation even at higher temperatures both in water as well as salt based 
droplets. But with rise in the substrate temperature, the contact line receding velocity 
increases in both the cases and also is direct function of the substrate temperature. It has also 
been observed that with addition of salt, contact line receding velocity increases in magnitude 
as compared to the water droplet at ambient temperature (shown in the fig. 6(a)) but 
decreases on substrate with higher temperatures.  

 

 

Figure 6: Variation in the contact line receding velocity with non-dimensional time t* (non-
dimensionalized by the droplet life-time) on hydrophilic substrate at different substrate 
temperatures in (a) water droplet and (b) 0.1 M NaI saline droplet  

 

3. B. Behaviour of the internal hydrodynamics 

The presence of solvated components and inclusions is known to modify the evaporation 
kinetics of droplets by augmenting the internal hydrodynamics of the droplets [49]. This 
internal advection in turn shears the liquid-gas interface, which entrains the external vapour 
diffusion layer with the surrounding ambient phase. This aids the Stefan flow surrounding the 
droplet, which leads to enhanced species transport. Thereby, it is necessitated that the internal 
hydrodynamics be probed to shed possible light on the observed anomalies. To this end, 
particle image velocimetry (PIV) was done for all cases within the first few minutes of the 
evaporation process. The PIV studies were performed in the initial regimes to prevent the 
effect of change in flow dynamics due to change in saline concentration within the droplet 
(the bulk concentration changes by > 10% even in that short time frame for elevated 
temperatures).As discussed in the methods section, the imaging was done in the vertical mid-
plane for the SHS droplet, and at the horizontal mid-plane for the hydrophilic droplet.  

 


11 

 

 

Figure 7: Time averaged velocity contours and vector fields for (a) water droplet and (b) 0.1 
M NaI droplet, on hydrophilic surface, for at ∆10 case. A quadrant of the droplet has been 
considered for the velocimetry. (c) Comparison of the experimentally obtained spatio-
temporally averaged advection velocities and the predicted theoretical velocities for the 
hydrophilic surface..  

 

Figure 7(a) illustrates the temporally averaged velocity contours and vector fields for 

water droplet and figure 7(b) illustrates the same 0.1 M saline droplet, both on hydrophilic 
surface of ∆10 case. The temporally averaged velocity vectors and contours are obtained 
from analysis of 1000 consecutive image frames. With increase in the substrate temperature, 
the strength of advection within the water droplet has enhanced significantly compared to the 
ambient case (not illustrated), which complies with previous report [46]. However, in case of 
the saline droplet on heated substrate, the strength of the internal advection is reduced 
compared to the corresponding water case (fig. 7 (a)). Furthermore, it is interesting to note 
that the while the direction of internal circulation is dissimilar in case of the water and saline 
droplets on heated surfaces. At the horizontal mid-plane, the water droplet exhibits inward 
internal advection, whereas the saline droplet exhibits outward internal advection currents.  

 

On the SHS (fig. 8), increase in substrate temperature has been shown [46] to enhance 

the internal advection in water droplets and similar results were obtained for water in the 
present case (fig. 8 (a)). Also, the strength of internal circulations in the droplet on the SHS is 
higher in magnitude compared to the droplet on hydrophilic substrate, due to the 


12 

 

hydrophobicity induced Marangoni stress based currents in the SHS droplet [49]. It has been 
observed in the case of saline droplet that at higher substrate temperatures, the advection 
currents within the droplet are largely diminished in magnitude compared to the water droplet 
under same thermal conditions. However, the opposite is true in case of the ambient 
evaporation case (fig. 8 (c)). Thereby, it is noted from the PIV exercises that increase in 
surface temperature leads to increase in internal advection strength in case of water droplets. 
In the ambient condition, saline droplets show higher internal advection velocity than water 
droplets. However, in the event of heated surface, the saline droplets show diminished 
internal circulation velocity compared to the water droplet at same temperature.  The PIV 
findings thus support that an anomalous and counter-intuitive phenomenon is discovered in 
the present study. Intuition and water droplet observations suggest enhanced internal 
advection in case of heated surfaces; however, the opposite is noted in saline droplets. Thus, a 
deep probing of the reason behind the same is necessitated.       

 

 

Figure 8: Time averaged velocity contours and vector fields for (a) water droplet and (b) 0.1 
M NaI droplet, on SHS, for ∆10 condition. (c) Comparison of the experimental spatio-
temporal averaged velocities with the theoretically obtained velocities.  

 

3. C. Dynamics of the internal thermal advection  

In the previous report by the authors [49], the internal advection is found to be major factor 
behind the modulated evaporation dynamics of the saline droplet, with the solutal Marangoni 
effect as the major cause behind the advection. With rise in the substrate temperature, the 


13 

 

thermal advection is likely to enhance. The temperature inside the droplet keeps on changing 
during the evaporation process, with centre of the droplet to be at minimum temperature due 
to evaporative cooling and the vapour-liquid interface at the maximum. Thermographic 
pictures of the droplets of 0.1M concentration taken at initial time period of evaporation 
process at different substrate temperatures are shown in Figure 9(a). The difference in the 
thermal profile due to presence of the thermal gradient in substrtae temperatures can be 
clearly observed. Also the various thermal regimes can be seen within the droplet due to 
evaporative cooling. Figure 9(b) and 9(c), illustrate the non-dimensional temperature profile 
inside the droplet along the non-dimensional radius r* (r*= r/r0, r0 is the initial radius of the 
droplet) of the droplet. The temperature of the droplet is non-dimensionalized as 

min

max
min

*
T
T
T
T
T




 where Tmin is minimum temperature and Tmax is the maximum temperature 

inside the droplet. These results are based on the infrared images data taken during the initial 
five minutes of the evaporation process to overlap with the PIV timeframe. The distribution 
obtained in the data is due to the evaporative cooling of the droplet’s bulk.  

Figure 9(b) reports the thermal distribution inside the droplet on the hydrophilic substrate. It 
can be observed that with increase in the concentration of the droplet, temperature profile 
inside is deviating from the linear behaviour near the centre of the droplet [49]. The drop in 
the droplet temperature near the centre is also noticeable at the elevated temperatures. But 
towards the periphery (droplet-vapour interface), the temperature profile appears to follow 
linear behaviour in all cases. On SHS (fig 9(c)), there is sudden drop in the temperature 
profile from the linear behaviour near the centre of the droplet followed by some linear 
behaviour in all the cases and then again deviates towards the periphery. Also the higher 
concentrated droplet shows more deviation from linear behaviour.    

 

 


14 

 

 

Figure 9: (a) Infrared images of the 0.1 M droplets on hydrophilic substrate at different 
substrate temperatures. Variations in the non-dimensional temperature T* within the droplet 
along the non-dimensional radius r* at different substrate temperatures on (b) hydrophilic 
substrate and (c) SHS.   

  

The role to thermal Marangoni advection in case of elevated substrate temperatures is 

understood using a mathematical scaling model, proposed along the lines of the previous 
report by the authors [49]. The balance principle is appealed to for the evaporating droplet, 
and the energy transport components, i.e., due to heat diffusion, due to thermal advection [50, 
51], and the energy transport at droplet-substrate interface are modelled. The resulting 
equation is expressed as  

𝑚̇ ℎ𝑓𝑔 = 2𝑘𝐴𝑐𝛥𝑇𝑀

cot⁡(𝜃 2
⁄ )

𝑑𝑐
+ ⁡𝜌𝐶𝑝𝑢𝑀𝛥𝑇𝑀𝐴𝑐𝑠𝑒𝑐2(𝜃 2
⁄ ) − 𝐴𝑐𝜎𝜃̇𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃         (1) 

Where, the left hand side represents the energy flux due to evaporation, and the terms of the 
right hand represent the modes of thermal transport in the droplet [49]. This equation can be 
further extended to the form [49]  

 𝜌ℎ𝑓𝑔𝑑𝑐

2𝜃̇𝑠𝑒𝑐4(𝜃 2
⁄ ) = 16𝑘∆𝑇𝑐𝑜𝑡(𝜃 2
⁄ ) {𝑀𝑎⁡𝑠𝑒𝑐2(𝜃 2
⁄ ) − 8𝑀𝑎 (

𝐽𝑎

𝐶𝑎) 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (

𝜃

2) 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (

𝜃

2)}   (2) 


15 

 

Where, 𝑀𝑎𝑇, 𝐶𝑎, and⁡𝐽𝑎𝑒 represent the associated thermal Marangoni number, the Capillary 
number and the evaporation Jacob number, respectively [49]. Mathematically, the numbers 
can be expressed in terms of droplet parameters as  

                                                       𝑀𝑎𝑇 = ⁡

𝜎𝑇𝛥𝑇𝑀𝑑𝑐

2𝜇𝛼
𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝜃 2
⁄ )                                              (3) 

                                                          𝐶𝑎 =⁡

𝜇𝑑𝑐𝜃̇

4𝜎𝑇 𝑠𝑒𝑐2(𝜃 2
⁄ )                                                  (4) 

                                                                 𝐽𝑎𝑒 =⁡

𝜇𝜃̇

𝜌ℎ𝑓𝑔⁡                                                            (5) 

Where 𝑑𝑐, 𝜃, 𝑚̇ , ℎ𝑓𝑔, 𝑘,⁡𝐶𝑝,⁡𝜌, 𝜎, 𝜇 and α denote the contact diameter, contact angle, rate of 
evaporative mass loss, the enthalpy of vaporization, the thermal conductivity of the liquid, 
specific heat of the liquid, density of the liquid, fluid surface tension, viscosity of the liquid 
and thermal diffusivity of the liquid, respectively.  

 

The average internal circulation velocity due to thermal gradient 𝑢𝑚 is scaled as 

𝑢𝑀 =

𝜎𝑇∆𝑇𝑚

𝜇
  [55, 59], where 𝜎𝑇⁡is the gradient of surface tension with temperature [40], and 

𝛥𝑇𝑀 represents the temperature difference inside the droplet occurred due to evaporative 
cooling (in ambient case) or due to the imposed substrate heating. In all cases, the magnitude 
of 𝛥𝑇𝑀 is obtained from image processing of the thermography images obtained during the 
experiments.  𝛥𝑇𝑀causes the change in the surface tension of the liquid and causes internal 
thermal gradients, which drives the thermal Marangoni currents and advection due to thermo-
viscous effect . The values of the Capillary and Jacob numbers describe the influence of the 
surface characteristics on the evaporation kinetics. Due to imposed thermal gradients in case 
of elevated substrate temperatures, buoyancy driven Rayleigh advection may play a role in 
augmenting the internal thermal advection. To obtain the associated Rayleigh number (on the 
liquid side) is expressible as [55, 59]  

                                                 𝑅𝑎 = ⁡

𝑑𝑐2

8𝛼 (

𝜌𝑔𝛽𝑑𝑐ℎ𝑓𝑔𝜃̇

𝜇𝐶𝑝
𝑠𝑒𝑐2(𝜃 2
⁄ ))

1 2
⁄

                                     (6) 

Where, 𝛽 the thermal expansion coefficient and g is the acceleration due to gravity. The 
increment in the evaporation rates due to Rayleigh convection in the gaseous phase is weaker, 
and hence [53].  

To understand the dominance of the thermal Marangoni and Rayleigh convection over 

each other, and to deduce the effect of enhanced substrate temperature on these governing  
numbers towards the modulating the internal circulations, a stability analysis has been put 
forward. As proposed by Nield [50] and Davis [51], the critical Marangoni (Mac) and critical 
Rayleigh number (Rac) can be used to express the stability of the advection within the system 
as  

                                                             

𝑀𝑎

𝑀𝑎𝑐 +⁡

𝑅𝑎

𝑅𝑎𝑐 = 1                                                            (7) 


16 

 

The Mac and Rac rely on the associated Lewis number (
0
/
Le
 q d k
), and their values ~81 

and ~1708 respectively [50, 51, 53]. Based on this analysis, a phase plot of MaT vs. Ra has 
been illustrated (figure 10) for the hydrophilic substrate and SHS at different heated cases to 
understand the dominance of the mechanism responsible for the internal advection. On 
hydrophilic substrate (fig. 10(a)) and ambient case, the point lies below the stability regimes 
proposed by Nield and Davis [50, 51] representing that the circulation inside is unstable [49].  

 

But as the substrate temperature is increased (∆10 and ∆30 case), the points for water 

shift towards the top and to the right, and moves above the Nield (N) and Davis (D) lines. 
This indicates that the advection is conditionally stable and higher the temperature, more 
stable is the circulation behaviour. Further, the cause of this circulation is predominantly 
thermal Marangoni effect, as the points cross the stability lines in the upward direction. With 
increase in the temperature, the Ra increases but is very less compared to the Rac, which 
signifies negligible role of buoyant forces in inducing the internal circulation. On the SHS, 
similar behaviour is observed, with the points traversing to the stable circulation regime at 
elevated temperatures, with the thermal Marangoni effect being the dominant mechanism. 
The values of MaT at elevated temperatures are higher on the SHS as compared to that on 
hydrophilic substrate.   

 

 

Figure 10: Stability plot for MaT and Ra for different droplets (a) hydrophilic and (b) SHS at 
different substrate temperatures. Stability criteria lines proposed by Nield [50] and Davis [51] 
(labelled as N and D respectively) indicate the regimes for stable internal circulation.  

 

3. D. Dynamics of the internal solutal advection   

In solvated systems as saline droplets, the solvated ions are preferentially adsorped and 
desorped to the interface and the bulk of the fluid, which leads to modulation of the effective 
interfacial tension [52-54]. This leads to difference between the values of the solute 
concentration at the bulk and the interface, which drives the solutal Marangoni advection 
within such evaporating droplets. Based on the droplet shape analysis, volume measurements, 


17 

 

and contact angle mapping during the evaporation process, the transient evolution of the bulk 
and the interfacial solute concentrations can be determined. The detailed analysis 
methodology for the same has been described by the authors in previous reports [55-58]. 
Figure 11 illustrates the comparison of the transient evolution of the interfacial concentration 
and bulk concentration of the salt during the evaporation, at different substrate temperatures 
and wettability. Figure 11(a) shows the time evolution of the salt concentration at the bulk 
and the dynamic interfacial concentration during the evaporation process on hydrophilic 
substrate, for different heating cases. It is noted that with time, the difference between the 
bulk and interfacial concentration increases, which complies with reports [49]. Also with 
increase in the substrate temperature (∆30 case), the difference in the concentrations reduces 
as compared to the ∆10 case. This signifies that although the solutal advection is stronger 
than the thermal counterpart in such saline droplets [49], it is weakened to some extent on 
heated surfaces. On the SHS (fig. 11(b)), the same trend is observed, and the difference in 
concentration also reduces with increasing substrate temperature.  

         

 

 

Figure 11: The solute concentration at the bulk (denoted as bulk), and the dynamic interfacial 
solute concentration (denoted as dyn) during the evaporation of 0.1 M NaI saline droplet at 
different substrate temperatures, on (a) hydrophilic substrate and (b) SHS. Time on the x-axis 
is normalized with the total evaporation time.  

 

To map the solutal advection behaviour at elevated substrate temperatures, a similar 

scaling model based on the species transport mechanisms at play is appealed to [49]. Based 
on the species transport modes from the droplet and within it, a balance model is expressed as  

                                                 𝑚̇ = 𝐷𝐴𝑐

∆𝐶

ℎ(𝑡) + 𝑢𝑐∆𝐶𝐴𝑠 +

𝐴𝑐
𝑢𝑐2 𝜎𝑐𝜃̇𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃                               (8) 

Where, 𝐴𝑐 is the frontal cross sectional area of the droplet, 𝐴𝑠 is the droplet surface area, D is 
the diffusion coefficient of the salt in water, ∆𝐶 is the difference in concentration between the 
bulk and at the interface (refer fig. 11), and ℎ(𝑡) is the height of the droplet at the instant of 
analysis. The 𝑢𝑐 denotes the solutal Marangoni advection velocity and is scaled [49] as 


18 

 

𝑢𝑐 =⁡

𝜎𝑐∆𝐶

𝜇 . 𝜎𝑐 is the rate of change of surface tension due to change in the salt concentration 

(obtained experimentally using the pendant drop method for a large number of salt 
concentrations and by fitting a best-fit correlation [55, 56]). Using the geometric parameters 
of the droplet, eqn. 8 is further expanded [49] as  

  𝜌𝑑𝑐

2𝜃̇𝑠𝑒𝑐4(𝜃 2
⁄ ) = 16𝐷∆𝐶⁡𝑐𝑜𝑡(𝜃 2
⁄ ) {𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑒𝑐2(𝜃 2
⁄ ) − 4𝑀𝑎𝑠

𝑆𝑐

𝐶𝑎𝑠 ⁡𝑠𝑖𝑛 (

𝜃

2)𝑐𝑜𝑠 (

𝜃

2)}⁡      (9) 

Where, 𝑀𝑎𝑠 = ⁡

𝜎𝑐∆𝐶𝑑𝑐

2𝜇𝐷 ⁡𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝜃 2
⁄ ) is the solutal Marangoni number, 𝐶𝑎𝑠 =⁡

𝜇𝑑𝑐𝜃̇

2𝜎 ⁡𝑠𝑒𝑐2(𝜃 2
⁄ ) 

represents the solutal Capillary number, and 𝑆𝑐 =⁡

𝜇

𝜌𝐷 is the Schmidt number.  

 

As per previous report by the authors [49], the solutal Marangoni advection plays a 

dominant in enhancing the evaporation dynamics over the thermal Marangoni advection. The 
relative strength of one over the other in case of elevated substrate temperatures needs to be 
mapped. It has been observed that that the increment in the values of thermal Marangoni 
number on heated substrate cases is large compared to the ambient case, but this does not 
prove dominance over the solutal Marangoni number. Figure 12 (a) and (b) illustrates the 
phase plot of the thermal Marangoni number with respect to the solutal counterpart on heated 
substrates. The stability criteria for the internal advection is represented by the iso-Le lines, 
as adapted from Joo [60]. All the points lying to the right side of the Le=0 line indicate stable 
circulation due to solutal Marangoni advection. It is observed that the points shift towards the 
right with increase in the substrate temperature, indicating enhanced circulation due to the 
solutal Marangoni advection in heated cases. However, comparison of the magnitudes shows 
that this increment is comparatively lesser than that observed for the thermal Marangoni 
number. The phase map thus shows that while the solutal Marangoni advection is dominant 
in the ambient evaporation case, the relative increase in strength of the thermal Marangoni 
advection is higher compared to the solutal counterpart in the case of heated substrates.        

 

  

Figure 12: Phase plot of the thermal Marangoni with the solutal Marangoni number for 
saline droplets on different substrate temperatures for (a) hydrophilic substrate and (b) SHS. 
The stability curves denote iso-Le lines [60].  


19 

 

 

It is interesting to note that the thermal Marangoni advection analysis shows that the 

strength of the internal advection increases with increase in the substrate temperature. 
However, the velocimetry shows reduction in the internal circulation velocity. But it is also 
noteworthy that the same analysis presented was shown by the authors to predict the internal 
advection kinetics accurately [49]. Likewise, the solutal advection analysis reveals that the 
solutal advection strength is also augmented by increase in the substrate temperature, leading 
to increased circulation velocity. Thus, the analyses show that both thermal and solutal 
advection is augmented by the increased substrate temperatures. However, the velocimetry 
observations show that the internal circulation velocity is reduced in strength at higher 
substrate temperatures. It is proposed that the augmented thermal and solutal advection 
counter each other, which leads to reduction in the effective internal advection velocity. This 
theory is tested based on the present analyses. The velocity of thermal advection (from 

𝑢𝑀 =

𝜎𝑇∆𝑇𝑚

𝜇
) and that of solutal advection (from⁡𝑢𝑐 = ⁡

𝜎𝑐∆𝐶

𝜇 ) are independently deduced for 

the different experimental conditions. The effective average advection velocity within the 
droplet is theorized (from|𝑢𝑒𝑓𝑓| =

𝑢𝐶−𝑢𝑀

2
) as the competitive mean of the two independent 

velocities. The velocities predicted from the proposed theory are compared against the 
velocimetry observations and illustrated in figs. 7(c) and 8(c). It is noted that majority of the 
predicted velocities agree well with the experimental velocities, thereby confirming the 
proposed theory. Thereby, it is confirmed that the competitive thermal and solutal Marangoni 
advection leads to reduced internal advection, which leads to reduced evaporation rates of 
saline sessile droplets on heated surfaces.      

       

4. Conclusions 

To infer, the article sheds insight on the evaporation kinetics of sessile saline droplets on 
heated hydrophilic surfaces and SHS. The major points of highlight from this article are as 
follows: 

 Experiments on sessile droplet evaporation of water and saline droplets at the ambient 

and different heated cases show that the evaporation kinetics possesses atypical and 
anomalous behaviour. In the ambient case, the saline droplets evaporate at faster rates 
compared to the water droplets. 

 On the heated substrates, the water droplets evaporate faster than the ambient case. 

However, anomalously, the saline droplets evaporate slower compared to the water 
counterpart.  

 Experiments show that the regimes of evaporation and their duration, along with the 

behaviour of the contact diameter and contact angles, are modulated by the substrate 
temperatures.  

 PIV studies reveal that the internal advection in the water droplets is augmented by the 

substrate heating; however, the advection velocity is diminished in case of saline droplets 
on heated substrates. Thus the observations are counter-intuitive.  


20 

 

 Scaling analysis of the energy and species conservation reveals that the thermal and the 

solutal Marangoni numbers are augmented with substrate temperature. However, the 
effective improvement in the thermal Marangoni number is higher compared to that of the 
solutal Marangoni number. In essence, theory dictates that internal advection is 
augmented, whereas velocimetry reveals the opposite.  

 It is theorized that the thermal and solutal Marangoni advection within such heated saline 

droplets are competitive in nature, and the opposing behaviour is effectively revealed 
experimentally. The velocity predictions from the theory are noted to be in good 
agreement with the velocimetry observations.  

The article thus discusses anomalous and counter-intuitive evaporation behaviour of saline 
sessile droplets on heated surfaces, and puts forward the crux mechanism behind such 
characteristics. The findings may hold utilitarian implications in several micro and 
macroscale systems and applications employing hydrodynamics, and thermo-species 
transport phenomena in droplets, sprays and jets.     

   

References   

1. G. M. Faeth, “Evaporation, and combustion of sprays,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 9(1-2), 1–76 

(1983). 

2. T. Lim, S. Han, J. Chung, J.T. Chung, S. Ko, C.P. Grigoropoulos, Experimental study on 

spreading and evaporation of inkjet printed pico-liter droplet on a heated substrate, Int. J. Heat 
Mass Transf. 52 (1–2), 431–441 (2009). 

3. Kumari, N., & Garimella, S. V. Characterization of the heat transfer accompanying electrowetting 

or gravity-induced droplet motion. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 54(17-18), 
4037-4050 (2011). 

4. Tekin, Emine, Patrick J. Smith, and Ulrich S. Schubert. "Inkjet printing as a deposition and 

patterning tool for polymers and inorganic particles." Soft Matter 4(4), 703-713 (2008). 

5. Ollesch, Julian, et al. "FTIR spectroscopy of biofluids revisited: an automated approach to spectral 

biomarker identification." Analyst 138(14), 4092-4102, (2013). 

6. Z. Zheng, S. Song, Y. Wang, Sol-gel-processed amorphous lithium ion electrolyte thin films: 

structural evolution, theoretical considerations, and ion transport pro- cesses, Solid State Ionics 
287, 60–70 (2016). 

7. M.I. Nizovtsev, V.Y. Borodulin, V.N. Letushko, Influence of condensation on the efficiency of 

regenerative heat exchanger for ventilation, Appl. Therm. Eng. 111, 997–1007 (2017). 

8. V.E. Nakoryakov, N.I. Grigoryeva, Nonisothermal Absorption in Thermotransformers, Nauka, 

Novosibirsk, 2010. 

9. Berg, E., Svensson, J. O., & Asking, L. Determination of nebulizer droplet size distribution: a 

method based on impactor refrigeration. Journal of aerosol medicine, 20(2), 97-104 (2007). 

10. Jing, J., Reed, J., Huang, J., Hu, X., Clarke, V., Edington, J., ... & Porter, B. Automated high 

resolution optical mapping using arrayed, fluid-fixed DNA molecules. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 95(14), 8046-8051 (1998). 

11. M.A. Dmitrienko, G.S. Nyashina, P.A. Strizhak, Environmental indicators of the combustion of 

prospective coal water slurry containing petrochemicals, J. Hazard Mater. 338, 148–159 (2017). 


21 

 

12. Harikrishnan, A. R., Dhar, P., Agnihotri, P. K., Gedupudi, S., & Das, S. K. Wettability of complex 

fluids and surfactant capped nanoparticle-induced quasi-universal wetting behavior. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry B, 121(24), 6081-6095 (2017).  

13. Harikrishnan, A. R., Dhar, P., Gedupudi, S., & Das, S. K. Effect of interaction of nanoparticles and 

surfactants on the spreading dynamics of sessile droplets. Langmuir, 33(43), 12180-12192 (2017).  

14. Harikrishnan, A. R., Dhar, P., Agnihotri, P. K., Gedupudi, S., & Das, S. K. Correlating contact line 

capillarity and dynamic contact angle hysteresis in surfactant-nanoparticle based complex 
fluids. Physics of Fluids, 30(4), 042006 (2018). 

15. R. Ginell, Evaporation and droplet growth in gaseous media: N. A. Fuchs (translated from the 

Russian by, in: J.M. Pratt, R.S. Bradley (Eds.), Microchemical Journal. (1960), vol. 4, Pergamon 
Press, New York and London, pp. 581–582 (4) (1959). 

16. Picknett, R. G., & Bexon, R. The evaporation of sessile or pendant drops in still air. Journal of 

Colloid and Interface Science, 61(2), 336-350 (1977). 

17. N.M. Kovalchuk, A. Trybala, V.M. Starov, Evaporation of sessile droplets, Curr. Opin. Colloid 

Interface Sci. 19(4), 336–342 (2014). 

18. C. Bourges-Monnier, M.E.R. Shanahan, Influence of evaporation on contact angle, Langmuir 

11(7) 2820–2829 (1995). 

19. Deegan, R. D., Bakajin, O., Dupont, T. F., Huber, G., Nagel, S. R., & Witten, T. A. Contact line 

deposits in an evaporating drop. Physical review E, 62(1), 756 (2000).  

20. Birdi, K. S., Vu, D. T., & Winter, A. A study of the evaporation rates of small water drops placed 

on a solid surface. The Journal of physical chemistry, 93(9), 3702-3703 (1989). 

21. Rowan, S. M., Newton, M. I., & McHale, G. Evaporation of microdroplets and the wetting of solid 

surfaces. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 99(35), 13268-13271 (1995). 

22. Popov, Y. O. Evaporative deposition patterns: spatial dimensions of the deposit. Physical Review 

E, 71(3), 036313 (2005). 

23. Quéré, D. Wetting and roughness. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 38, 71-99 (2008). 
24. Bonn, D., Eggers, J., Indekeu, J., Meunier, J., & Rolley, E. Wetting and spreading. Reviews of 

modern physics, 81(2), 739 (2009). 

25. Erbil, H. Y., McHale, G., & Newton, M. I. Drop evaporation on solid surfaces: constant contact 

angle mode. Langmuir, 18(7), 2636-2641 (2002). 

26. Dash, S., & Garimella, S. V. Droplet evaporation dynamics on a superhydrophobic surface with 

negligible hysteresis. Langmuir, 29(34), 10785-10795 (2013). 

27. Brunet, P. Particle deposition after droplet evaporation on ultra-hydrophobic micro-textured 

surfaces. Soft Matter, 8(44), 11294-11301 (2012). 

28. Zhang, N.; Yang, W.-J. Natural convection in evaporating minute drops. J. Heat Transfer, 104, 

656−662 (1982). 

29. Ristenpart, W.; Kim, P.; Domingues, C.; Wan, J.; Stone, H. Influence of substrate conductivity on 

circulation reversal in evaporating drops. Phys. Rev. Lett., 99, 234502 (2007). 

30. Hu, H.; Larson, R. G. Marangoni effect reverses coffee-ring depositions. J. Phys. Chem. B, 110, 

7090−7094 (2006). 

31. Hu, H.; Larson, R. G. Analysis of the effects of Marangoni stresses on the microflow in an 

evaporating sessile droplet. Langmuir, 21, 3972−3980 (2005). 

32. Buffone, C.; Sefiane, K.; Christy, J. R. E. Experimental investigation of self-induced 

thermocapillary convection for an evaporating meniscus in capillary tubes using micro−particle 
image velocimetry. Phys. Fluids, 17, 052104 (2005). 

33. Xu, X.; Luo, J. Marangoni flow in an evaporating water droplet. Appl. Phys. Lett., 91, 124102 

(2007). 


22 

 

34. Brutin, D., & Starov, V. Recent advances in droplet wetting and evaporation. Chemical Society 

Reviews, 47(2), 558-585 (2018). 

35. Tam, D., von ARNIM, V. O. L. K. M. A. R., McKinley, G. H., & Hosoi, A. E. Marangoni 

convection in droplets on superhydrophobic surfaces. Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 624, 101-123 
(2009). 

36. R. Bennacer, K. Sefiane, Vortices, dissipation and flow transition in volatile binary drops, J. Fluid 

Mech. 749, 649–665 (2014). 

37. K.H. Kang, S.J. Lee, C.M. Lee, I.S. Kang, Quantitative visualization of flow inside an evaporating 

droplet using the ray tracing method, Meas. Sci. Technol. 15, 1104–1112 (2004). 

38. R. Savino, R. Monti, Buoyancy and surface-tension-driven convection in hanging- drop protein 

crystallizer, J. Cryst. Growth 165, 308–318 (1996). 

39. Kang, K. H., Lim, H. C., Lee, H. W., & Lee, S. J. Evaporation-induced saline Rayleigh convection 

inside a colloidal droplet. Physics of Fluids, 25(4), 042001 (2013). 

40. Karapetsas, G., Sahu, K. C., & Matar, O. K. Evaporation of sessile droplets laden with particles 

and insoluble surfactants. Langmuir, 32(27), 6871-6881 (2016). 

41. Ristenpart, W. D., Kim, P. G., Domingues, C., Wan, J., & Stone, H. A. Influence of substrate 

conductivity on circulation reversal in evaporating drops. Physical Review Letters, 99(23), 234502 
(2007). 

42. David, S., Sefiane, K., & Tadrist, L. Experimental investigation of the effect of thermal properties 

of the substrate in the wetting and evaporation of sessile drops. Colloids and Surfaces A: 
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 298(1-2), 108-114 (2007). 

43. Girard, F., Antoni, M., Faure, S., & Steinchen, A. Influence of heating temperature and relative 

humidity in the evaporation of pinned droplets. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical and 
Engineering Aspects, 323(1-3), 36-49 (2008). 

44. Ait Saada, M., Chikh, S., & Tadrist, L. Numerical investigation of heat and mass transfer of an 

evaporating sessile drop on a horizontal surface. Physics of fluids, 22(11), 112115 (2010). 

45. Carle, F., Sobac, B., & Brutin, D. Experimental evidence of the atmospheric convective transport 

contribution to sessile droplet evaporation. Applied Physics Letters, 102(6), 061603 (2013). 

46. T.K. Pradhan, P.K. Panigrahi, Thermocapillary convection inside a stationary sessile water droplet 

on a horizontal surface with an imposed temperature gradient, Exp. Fluids 56  178 (2015). 

47. B. Sobac, D. Brutin, Thermal effects of the substrate on water droplet evaporation, Phys. Rev. E. 

86 (2) 021602 (2012). 

48. Kim, J.-H.; Park, S.-B.; Kim, J. H.; Zin, W.-C. Polymer transports inside evaporating water 

droplets at various substrate temperatures. J. Phys. Chem. C, 115, 15375−15383 (2011). 

49. Kaushal, A., Jaiswal, V., Mehandia, V., & Dhar, P. Soluto-thermo-hydrodynamics influenced 

evaporation of sessile droplets. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.10749 (2019). 

50. Nield, D. A. Surface tension and buoyancy effects in cellular convection. Journal of Fluid 

Mechanics, 19(3), 341-352 (1964). 

51. Davis, S. H. Buoyancy-surface tension instability by the method of energy. Journal of Fluid 

Mechanics, 39(2), 347-359 (1969). 

52. Harikrishnan, A. R., Das, S. K., Agnihotri, P. K., & Dhar, P. Particle and surfactant interactions 

effected polar and dispersive components of interfacial energy in nanocolloids. Journal of Applied 
Physics, 122(5), 054301 (2017). 

53. Harikrishnan, A. R., Dhar, P., Gedupudi, S., & Das, S. K. Oscillatory solutothermal convection-

driven evaporation kinetics in colloidal nanoparticle-surfactant complex fluid pendant droplets. 
Physical Review Fluids, 3(7), 073604 (2018). 


23 

 

54. Harikrishnan, A. R., Dhar, P., Agnihotri, P. K., Gedupudi, S., & Das, S. K. Effects of interplay of 

nanoparticles, surfactants and base fluid on the surface tension of nanocolloids. The European 
Physical Journal E, 40(5), 53 (2017). 

55. Jaiswal, V., Harikrishnan, A. R., Khurana, G., & Dhar, P. Ionic solubility and solutal advection 

governed augmented evaporation kinetics of salt solution pendant droplets. Physics of 
Fluids, 30(1), 012113 (2018). 

56. Jaiswal, V., Dwivedi, R. K., Harikrishnan, A. R., & Dhar, P. Magnetohydrodynamics-and 

magnetosolutal-transport-mediated evaporation dynamics in paramagnetic pendant droplets under 
field stimulus. Physical Review E, 98(1), 013109 (2018). 

57. Jaiswal, V., & Dhar, P. Interplay of electro-thermo-solutal advection and internal 

electrohydrodynamics governed enhanced evaporation of droplets. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society A, 475(2225), 20190046 (2019). 

58. Harikrishnan, A. R., & Dhar, P. Optical thermogeneration induced enhanced evaporation kinetics 

in pendant nanofluid droplets. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 118, 1169-1179 
(2018). 

59. Mandal, D. K., & Bakshi, S. Internal circulation in a single droplet evaporating in a closed 

chamber. International Journal of Multiphase Flow, 42, 42-51 (2012). 

60. Joo, S. W. Marangoni instabilities in liquid mixtures with Soret effects. Journal of Fluid 

Mechanics, 293, 127-145 (1995). 

 

 

                        


