Microresonator-enhanced, Waveguide-coupled
Emission from Silicon Defect Centers for
Superconducting Optoelectronic Networks

A. N. Tait∗, S. M. Buckley, A. N. McCaughan, J. T. Chiles,
S. Nam, R. P. Mirin and J. M. Shainline,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, CO 80305, USA
∗alexander.tait@nist.gov

Abstract:
Superconducting optoelectronic networks could achieve scales unmatched in
hardware-based neuromorphic computing. After summarizing recent progress in this area,
we report new results in cryogenic silicon photonic light sources, components central to
these architectures.

1.
Superconducting optoelectronic neural networks

Artificial neural networks are capable of a wide variety of tasks in control, simulation, and recognition. Specialized
CMOS hardware has been developed to vastly reduce the power consumption of neuromorphic computations as
compared to conventional, centralized architectures. CMOS neuromorphic hardware can outperform in certain ap-
plication areas, but they are then primarily limited by interconnect performance. Extending the application areas of
hardware neuromorphics will require new physical platforms, such as those based on photonics, analog electron-
ics, or Josephson junctions. Superconducting optoelectronic neural networks (SOENs) offer a route to hardware
neuromorphic systems with the largest scales considered to date [1]. In the SOEN architecture, light is used for
communication in order to avoid bandwidth/distance/dissipation tradeoffs affecting both analog and digital elec-
tronic interconnects. Signaling at the lowest possible light levels is achieved using single-photon detectors. Since
these detectors must operate at cryogenic temperatures, other unusual physical phenomena can be employed. In
particular, at these temperatures, crystal defect centers in silicon can emit light. W centers are ideal candidates
because they emit at 1220 nm, a wavelength that can be guided by silicon-on-insulator (SOI) waveguides, and
because they can be fabricated with a simple ion implantation. Cryogenic silicon photonic platforms to support
SOENs are nascent but rapidly developing.
Fig. 1 represents selected results from the past 6 months of SOEN research. The latest conception of the neuron
signal pathway [2] is shown in Fig. 1(a). Incoming photons are detected by superconducting nanowire single-
photon detectors (SNSPDs). Induced currents are then summed and integrated in a magnetic flux loop. The result-
ing singal is thresholded and amplified to ultimately drive a W-center-based silicon light emitting diode (LED):
the transmitter (T). A key part of this drive train was demonstrated in the circuit of Fig. 1(b) from [3]. The circuit
consisted of a high-impedance superconducting switch driving a silicon LED whose output is, in turn, detected
in an SNSPD. The essential role of the switch is to transduce a superconductor-compatible (50 mV) pulse into a
semiconductor-compatible (1 V) pulse that then drives the LED. The LED-to-SNSPD optical link was first demon-

4.6 us

Time (us)
Implant energy (keV)
40
80
120
0

Normalized intensity

100

10-2

10-4

5E12/ cm2 
5E13/ cm2
5E14/ cm2
Bulk Si 5E13 /cm2

previous [4]

optimized [5]
a)

b)

c)
d)

Fig. 1. Recent results on Superconducting Optoelectronic Networks (SOENs). a) Latest conception
of the SOEN neuron, adapted from [2]. “T” is the optical transmitter consisting of a silicon LED.
b) Part of a SOEN neuron: a thresholding, amplification, transmission, and detection drive train,
adapted from [3]. c) Demonstration of the drive chain in (b). d) Optimization of photoluminescent
brightness of W-center emitters in silicon-on-insulator substrates, adapted from [4].

arXiv:2001.05226v1  [physics.app-ph]  4 Dec 2019


strated in [5]. Fig. 1(d) shows that, when 50 mV is applied to the switch, photon clicks are detected at the end of
the link with a mean interval of 4.6 µs.
The low heat dissipation density promised by SOENs depends strongly on a mastery of silicon photonic light
sources: increasing brightness, radiative efficiency, waveguide coupling, etc. The properties of silicon emissive
defects in photonics-compatible SOI have not been studied or optimized until recently. Figure 1(d) shows an
optimization of implant parameters performed in [4]. Unlike in bulk Si (blue triangles), W-center brightness in
SOI is strongly dependent on implant energy. Compared to prior work on waveguide-coupling, which used an
80 keV implant [3,5], photoluminescence (PL) brightness has been increased by two orders-of-magnitude.

2.
Silicon photoluminescence coupled to a waveguide and microdisk resonator

In this work, we demonstrate coupling of optimized W centers to a silicon photonic circuit. The circuit – consist-
ing of a microdisk resonator, waveguide, and grating coupler – enables spatial differentiation of free-space and
waveguide-coupled emission. We show that waveguide-coupled emission is significantly enhanced at wavelengths
corresponding to the modes of the resonator. Substantial research has been devoted to SOI-compatible emitters
using III-V semiconductors, germanium, and rare-earths; however these each complicate fabrication with, respec-
tively, epitaxy or wafer bonding, quantum wells, and Al2O3 optics. W centers are created simply by damaging the
silicon crystal though silicon ion bombardment and then annealing – both of these steps are CMOS-compatible
at the wafer scale. Embedding the emitters directly in the crystal presents a great simplification for applications
below 40 K. W-center emission into a silicon-on-insulator waveguide has been observed before in an electrically
injected LED [5]. While electrical pumping is the eventual direction of our research, the optically pumped setup
presents several advantages for research: 1) many devices can be probed in an array, meaning that the physics
of the emitters can be better studied and device parameters better optimized; 2) photoluminescent properties can
be studied independent of electrical factors (e.g. ohmic heating); 3) fabrication is 2-step (Si rib, Si+ implant) in-
stead of 7-step (Si rib, Si pedestal, Si+ implant, heavy/light boron, heavy/light phosphorus). Coupling between
W centers and resonator modes has not been shown before, although copper-based centers have been coupled to
resonances of a suspended photonic crystal in [6]. Coupling resonance-enhanced silicon emission to a photonic
integrated circuit has not been shown with any defect center.
The substrate used is a 76.2 mm SOI wafer with 220 nm silicon device layer on 2 µm buried oxide. The wafer
is patterned and implanted with 28Si+ at an energy of 25 keV and fluence of 5×1012/cm2. The first mask is
stripped. The wafer is patterned again and fully etched through the silicon device layer. Finally, the whole wafer is
encapulated by a 1.5 µm PECVD oxide. More detail on fabrication can be found in [4]. Waveguides are designed
to be 350 nm wide such that they are single-mode at 1220 nm. Cutback tests indicate a single-mode waveguide
loss of 18.9 dB/cm, which is significantly higher than other runs, we expect due to a new etch recipe.

pump laser
(635 nm)

cryostat

sample

objective

IR camera

spectrometer

dichroic

beam
splitter

movable
mirror

50 µm
50 µm

10 µm

GC

Waveguide

Pump
Collect

b)
c)
d)
a)

Implanted
Microdisk

Fig. 2. Setup and circuit. a) Simplified experimental setup for distinguishing waveguide-coupled
photoluminescence (PL). b) Visible image of the circuit. c) Infrared image of PL from the circuit
when the microdisk is pumped. Some PL exits directly into free-space. Other PL is waveguide-
coupled to the GC. d) Zoomed in IR image of the microdisk.

We introduce an offset collection technique that allows for observation of waveguide-coupled PL. In the silicon
photonic circuit, shown in Fig. 2(b), a microdisk resonator with 10 µm radius is implanted with W centers. It
is coupled to a waveguide with a coupling gap of 100 nm. The waveguide is routed to a grating coupler (GC),
designed to emit normal to the sample. When the microdisk is pumped, it emits upward into free-space with a


spectrum similar to that of unpatterned SOI. Waveguide-coupled light, on the other hand, is routed to the GC. Since
this GC is offset from the free-space emission source, the waveguide-coupled component is spatially discernable.
A simplified experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2(a). An 11 mW laser pump at 635 nm (red) is focused
onto a device with W centers. The long working distance objective has a numerical aperture of 0.42. Radiative
recombination in W centers exceeds non-radiative pathways only below 45 K, so the sample is placed in an optical
cryostat. Infrared PL around 1218 nm (depicted as blue) returns from the pumped microdisk itself and from the
offset GC. When the returning light is imaged with a lens, the two emission sources are spatially separated upon
reaching a slit entering the spectrometer. Rotating a mirror before the spectrometer allows selection between
centered and offset collection. We verify this spatial resolving technique with an InGaAs camera, images from
which are shown in Fig. 2(c, d). The perimeter of the disk appears brighter due to scattering of the microdisk
modes off of the sidewalls. Additional scattering occurs at the coupling region leading to a brighter spot on the
left of the disk.

Microdisk direct
1,760 counts/sec, FWHM ≤ 0.344 nm

Unpatterned
1,390 counts/sec,
FWHM ≤ 0.368 nm

Grating coupler
134 counts/sec,
FWHM ≤ 0.170 nm

Fig. 3. Comparison of spectra when collecting from directly over the top of the pumped microdisk
(red), the offset GC (blue), and an unpatterned control region (black). The zero-phonon line ampli-
tude and upper bound of full-width half maximum (FWHM) are indicated.

Results indicate profound differences in the PL spectra of direct collection from the microdisk center (i.e., free-
space coupled) and offset collection from the GC (i.e. microresonator- and waveguide-coupled). Fig. 3 compares
these with a control that is a large unpatterned, implanted region. The zero-phonon line (ZPL) at 1218 nm is
brighter over the center of the microdisk than unpatterned due to scattering off of the device sidewalls. Otherwise
the microdisk and control are similar. Collecting from the GC yields several high-Q peaks corresponding to the
modes of the microdisk. That means waveguide-coupled emission is enhanced on resonance, even compared to
the brighter controls. The ZPL from the GC is weak because the cavity is not on resonance. The quality factor of
some peaks was measured up to 7,160, which is a lower bound as limited by the resolution of the spectrometer.
Amplitudes are affected by the efficiency of the GC, but this was not characterized at the temperatures used. Within
the same cooldown, stadard deviation is estimated to be 10%, like in [4].
The demonstration of coupling W-center emission to a silicon photonic circuit represents progress in light
sources for silicon photonics. Due to their ease of fabrication, they could play a significant role in large-scale pho-
tonic systems. Further work could also investigate Purcell enhancement, nonlinear phenomena, optical amplifiers,
or electrical pumping.

This is a contribution of NIST, an agency of the U.S. government, not subject to copyright.

References

1. J. M. Shainline et al., Phys. Rev. Applied 7, 034013 (2017).
2. J. M. Shainline et al., Journal of Applied Physics 126, 044902 (2019).
3. A. N. McCaughan et al., Nature Electronics 2, 451–456 (2019).
4. S. M. Buckley et al., arXiv eprint, arXiv:1911.01317 (2019).
5. S. Buckley et al., Applied Physics Letters 111, 141101 (2017).
6. H. Sumikura et al., Scientific Reports 4, 5040 (2014).


