Title

Replication and study of the colouration of Edmond Becquerel’s photochromatic images

Authors list

Victor de Seauvea,b, Marie-Angélique  Languillea, Saskia  Vanpeenea, Christine  Andrauda,

Chantal Garniera, Bertrand Lavédrinea.

a  Centre de Recherche sur la Conservation (CRC), Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle,

CNRS, Ministère de la Culture, 36 rue Geoffroy Saint Hilaire, 75005 Paris, France.

b SACRe (EA 7410), Ecole normale supérieure, Université PSL, 75005 Paris, France.

Abstract

Edmond Becquerel’s process of making photochromatic images, which are the first colours

photographs, is still poorly understood. In particular, the origin of the colours of these images

gave rise to a long-lasting debate, starting from the publication of Becquerel in 1848 until the

end of the XIXth century. This photographic process was replicated in the laboratory, and the

colouration  of  the  sensitized  plates  was  studied  by  means  of  visible  spectroscopy.  A

comprehensive description of the sensitization routes that were adapted from Becquerel’s

writing is given. The study of the exposition step allowed us to gain insights in the colouration

mechanisms of the sensitized plates, and to compare between the two sensitization routes

developed by Becquerel in terms of spectral sensitivity and colour faithfulness. The so-called

“electrochemically sensitized” samples were found to be more sensitive and to reach a larger

chromatic space than the “immersion-sensitized” ones. Finally, a reproducible way of creating

coloured samples is suggested.

Keyword

Edmond Becquerel, colour photography, UV-visible spectroscopy, spectral sensitivity

License

This article is under Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-ND 3.0.

1


Highlights

 Both the electrochemical and immersion sensitization routes of Edmond Becquerel’s

process were successfully reproduced in the laboratory

 The  exposition  to  visible  light  creates  a  reflectance  increase  at  the  exposition

wavelength

 At a radiant exposure of 10 kJ m-2, colours are unique and resemble that of the

exposition wavelength

 Electrochemically sensitized plates are more sensitive and allow to reach a larger

chromatic space than immersion-sensitized plates

Introduction

Since the invention and the wide spread of photography during the first half of the  XIXth

century, physicians and photographs struggled with what was often referred to as “the great

problem” of colour in photography [1] (all the translations are made by the authors). In 1848,

Edmond Becquerel introduced the very first colour photographic process and coined the term

“Photochromatic images” [2], [3]. Basing himself on Seebeck [4] (and see [5] for translation

and interpretation) and Herschel’s [6] works on silver chloride, he decided “to obtain silver

chloride by all means” [3]. To make a photochromatic image, a pinkish sensitized layer is

produced onto a polished silver plate – similar to those used for the daguerreotypes – by

immersing it in a copper chloride solution  [3] or by an electrochemical route, using an

hydrochloric acid solution [7]. The sensitized layer is then coloured by the exposition to light

and, though there is a strong component of the initial colour of the sensitized plate, the result

reminds the colour of the incident light : “a photographic imprint of the solar spectrum with

colours that remind its own colours […] the prismatic red gives a red hue, the yellow a yellow

hue, the green a green hue, the blue a blue hue and in some cases, the white a white hue, etc.”

[3]. The first photochromatic images he produced were reproductions of the solar spectrum, as

figure 1 shows. He then produced contact prints and took pictures in a camera obscura [7]. If

the photochromatic images are the first responses to the problem of colour in photography, the

long duration of exposure and the inability to fix the colours kept the Becquerel process from

spreading and being widely used [8]. Here, we study for the first time the optical properties of

2


the photochromatic images which dragged so much attention during the second part of the

XIXth century  by  measuring  samples  produced  in  the  laboratory.  This  study  is  also  an

opportunity to establish a protocol for the production of coloured samples  that can be

examined to investigate the origin of the colours of the photochromatic images.

Previously, the daguerreotypist Mark Kereun successfully replicated  a process that was

adapted from Edmond Becquerel by Abel Niépce de Saint-Victor [9]. The “heliochromies” he

produced show distinct and recognizable colours  [10]. Note that David Burder was also

successful in replicating Niépce de Saint-Victor’s process  [11]. No visible spectroscopy

analysis  of these  heliochromies  have yet been reported. Nonetheless, the exposition  of

photolyzed pure silver chloride crystals and of thin Ag-AgCl films – the closest systems from

the photochromatic images we found – to light have been studied. First Hilsch and Pohl [12],

then Brown and Wainfan  [13] and lastly Moser  et al. [14] studied the “discoloration” or

“bleaching” of darkened, photolyzed silver chloride crystals, under the influence of visible

radiations of varying wavelengths. The result is a lowering of the absorbance of the crystals at

the exposition wavelength. Likewise, the exposition to visible radiations of thin Ag-AgCl

films, studied by Ageev  et al.,  manifests itself by a decrease of the absorbance at the

exposition wavelength [15].

First, the replication in the laboratory of two sensitization routes described by Becquerel and

the optical properties of the sensitized plates are presented. As details and parameters in the

preparation of the images can be critical, a comprehensive description of the process is given

in the Material and methods section. Then the monitoring of the exposition step to light of

visible wavelengths by means of UV-Visible spectroscopy in reflectance configuration is

developed. Investigating the changes in the reflection properties of the plates allowed to better

understand the colours that were produced, and to compare the spectral sensitivity and the

colour faithfulness of both sensitization routes. Finally, the results are commented against

Becquerel’s writings.

3


Figure  1. Becquerel,  Edmond.  Spectres  solaires.  1848.  Photochromatic  images.  Musée

Nicéphore Niépce, Chalon-sur-Saône. Both solar spectra were obtained on electrochemically

prepared plates, the bottom one was preexposed to infrared.
Material and methods

Crucial details for the process replication essential to reproduce and understand the making of

the photochromatic images are described hereby. Further information can be found in the

experimental section.

Silver plate preparation. ¼ µm-diamond polished 30 µm-silver coated 20 × 20 mm² brass

plates were chosen. X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometry (XRF) analysis and Scanning Electron

Microscopy (SEM) images of the silvered plates in the supplementary information (SI)

section show minor elements in addition to Ag (figure S-1), polishing trails (figure S-2) and a

flat Ag layer on the brass support (figure S-3). The sensitization and the exposition steps then

4


take place in a room where the ambient light irradiance does not exceed 1×10-2 W m-2 without

any ultraviolet (UV) radiations.

 

Figure 2. Five 20 × 20 mm² photochromatic image samples after the three steps of the

process. a) Polished and degreased silver plate. b) Electrochemically sensitized silver plate

after heating; the part of the sample that was immersed in HCl took a pinkish hue. c)

Immersion-sensitized  silver  plate  after  heating;  the  whole  sample  was  soaked  in  the

sensitization solution. d and e) Exposed electrochemically (d) and immersion-sensitized (e)

silver plate; the sensitized plates were exposed to light spots of various wavelengths, centred

around 446 nm, 503 nm, 584 nm, 696 nm (from left to right, top to bottom).

Immersion  sensitization. The  sensitization  solution  was  prepared  according  to  [7] by

dissolving 0.2 mol L-1 CuSO4 and 2.5 mol L-1 NaCl in distilled water. The prepared silver

plates are then soaked in the solution for 1 min, abundantly rinsed with distilled water, dried

on nonabrasive and lint-free lens tissue (figure 2c). Uncarefully rinsed samples exhibit traces

of sodium and copper that were detected with X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS);

moreover, SEM images presented in the SI section show micrometric sodium chloride crystals

on unrinsed sample (figure S-4 in the SI section).

Electrochemical sensitization. The prepared silver plate and a platinum grid are connected

respectively to the positive and the negative poles of a ISO-TECH IPS-1820D direct current

generator (cf. figure S-5 in the SI section). The electrolyte in which the plate and the grid are

soaking, 2 to 3 cm apart from each other, is a 1 mol L-1 HCl solution. The voltage is adapted

between 0.3 and 0.5 V, rendering a 0.1 A current. The plates are sensitized during 50 s and

then rinsed with distilled water. Making the assumption that the sensitization creates a pure

5


AgCl layer at the top of the silver layer, a charge transfer calculation allows us to determine

the volume thickness of the sensitized layer: 3.9 µm for a 17 × 20 mm² sensitized surface

(figure 2b). This order of magnitude is consistent with Becquerel’s calculation: he finds an

optimal sensitized layer thickness of 1.7 µm, assuming the sensitized layer is pure silver

chloride.

Heating of the sensitized plates. Both immersion- and electrochemically sensitized plates are

heated up to with a heat gun (Ryobi EHG2020LCD) set at 130 °C and 500 L min-1.

Optical properties characterization and monitoring of the exposition step. The reflectance

spectra of sensitized plates are first measured with a UV-visible spectrophotometer. The

plates are then exposed to light of various wavelength (see the transmission spectra of the

interferential filters that were used in figure 3b) and their reflectance spectra are regularly

measured throughout the exposition step. The radiant exposure is calculated by multiplying

the time of exposure by the irradiance of the light. Less than 0.1 % of the reflexion is specular

and the shape of the diffuse and of the specular reflectance spectra are the same, which is why

only  the  total  reflectance  spectra,  ie.  the  sum  of  the  specular  reflectance  and  diffuse

reflectance spectra, are plotted. The measurement has a very limited effect on the reflectance

spectrum of the samples in regard to the effect of the exposition to visible light; indeed there

is a factor of 1000 between the irradiances. The change of reflectance, ΔR, calculated as R(t) -

R(sensitized), were also plotted to better assess those changes. In order to monitor the colour

change of the samples, their colorimetric coordinates in the L*a*b* CIE 1976 [16] space have

been calculated. For the sake of comparison, every L*a*b* coordinates series are shifted so

that  the  sensitized  sample  coordinates  are  the  same  as  the  average  coordinates  of  the

sensitized samples.

Results

Optical properties of the sensitized plates. The average reflectance spectra of immersion and

electrochemically  sensitized  samples  are  displayed  in  figure  3a.  The  increase  of  the

reflectance at the long wavelength side of the spectrum and the peak located bellow 400 nm

account for the pinkish hue of the sensitized plates. The average standard deviation of the

reflectance on the [200 ; 800] nm range is 3.3 % for the immersion sensitized samples and 2.5

% for the electrochemically sensitized samples; this dispersion is mainly attributed to the

variability in the heating step – distance between the heat gun and the plate – and to the

6


variability  in  the  distance  between  the  plates  at  the  platinum  grid  in  the  case  of  the

electrochemical sensitization. Spectra of samples obtained from silver platelets  showing

various initial surface states showed that the rugosity of the initial silver plate has no effect on

the reflectance properties of the sensitized sample.

The calculated L*a*b* coordinates averages of the immersion- and the electrochemically

sensitized  samples  are  respectively  (50.2;  15.5;  2.8)  and  (50.7;  15.8;  2.7).  The  colour

difference ΔE76 between those two initial states is 1.4. More than the colour, inhomogeneities

on the immersion-sensitized samples allow one to make the difference between both types of

samples (figure 2) which is consistent with naked eye observation: the colour alone does not

allow the distinction between an electrochemically and an immersion-sensitized sample.

Figure  3. a)  Average  UV-visible  reflectance  spectra  of  10  immersion  and  10

electrochemically sensitized samples. The broad lines correspond to the dispersion of the data,

taken as their standard deviations. b) transmittance spectra of the interferential filters used for

the exposition. 

Evolution of the reflection properties during the exposition. Figures 4a and b show two series

of consecutive reflectance spectra, one of an immersion-sensitized sample exposed to 677 nm-

centred light (a) and one of an electrochemically sensitized sample exposed to 502 nm-centred

light (b). Figures 4c and d show the associated series of consecutive changes of reflectance

spectra ΔR.

7


Figure 4. Successive reflectance spectra (and change of reflectance spectra) obtained for one

immersion-sensitized  sample  exposed  to  677  nm-centred  light  (a  and  c)  and  one

electrochemically sensitized sample exposed to 502 nm-centred light (b and d) together with

the transmittance spectra of the interferential filters (dotted lines).

During the exposition to light, the reflectance spectra undergo three major changes.

 A decrease and a shift toward longer wavelength of the local maximum in the violet

region, initially located at 378 nm for the immersion samples (black arrow on figure

4a) and at 397 nm for the electrochemical samples.

 An increase and a shift toward longer wavelength of the local minimum in the visible

region, initially located at 500 nm (black arrow on figure 4b). This is accompanied by

the appearance of a second local minimum at a wavelength shorter than the exposition

wavelength if the latter is shorter or equal to 500 nm (green arrow on figure 4b). If the

exposition wavelength is longer than 500 nm, the second local minimum of reflectance

appears at a wavelength longer than the exposition wavelength.

8


 A decrease (figure 4b), followed by an increase (figure 4a), of the reflectance in the

long wavelength side of the visible spectrum.

These changes can also be appreciated when looking at the consecutive changes of reflectance

spectra plotted in figures 4c and d. Indeed, a dip located bellow 400 nm and a peak located

around 500 nm appear in the reflectance change spectra, and their long wavelength tails

decrease.

Figure 5. Successive reflectance change spectra obtained for one electrochemically sensitized

sample exposed to 584 nm-centred light (a) and one immersion-sensitized egxposed to 473

nm-centred light (b) together with the transmittance spectra of the interferential filters.

Figures 5a and b show two series of consecutive changes of reflectance spectra, of an

immersion-sensitized sample exposed to 584 nm-centred light (a) and of an electrochemically

sensitized sample exposed to 473 nm-centred light (b). In addition to the above-mentioned

changes, the change of reflectance spectra exhibits a shoulder around 410 nm for all the

exposition wavelengths (black arrows on figures 5a and b). And for all the exposition

wavelengths longer than 502 nm, another shoulder centred on the exposition wavelength

appears during the exposition (yellow arrow on figure 5a). The reflectance change at the

exposition wavelength can be positive or negative; so the shoulder indicates either that the

reflectance has more increased, or that is has less decreased at the exposition wavelength. In a

later stage of the exposition step, the reflectance spectra seem to undergo no further change or

to undergo a general decrease of the reflectance with a lower efficiency than during the first

times of the exposition.

9


Evolution of the colour during the exposition. Figures 6a and b show the evolution of the

lightness L* during the exposition to light of visible wavelength versus the radiant exposure

for immersion- (a) and electrochemically (b) sensitized samples. Figures 6c and d show the

evolution of the hue in the a*b* frame immersion- (c) and electrochemically (d) sensitized

samples.

Figure 6. a and b) evolution of the lightness L* of the immersion- (a) and electrochemically

(b) sensitized samples during their exposition to light of visible wavelengths plotted versus

the radiant exposure.

c and d) evolution of the hue in the a*b* space of the immersion- (c) and electrochemically

(d) sensitized samples during their exposition to light of visible wavelengths. Some examples

of directions of colour change are plotted in dashed colour lines on figure 6d.

10


For the immersion-sensitized samples, the lightness L* remains constant or increases during

the exposition to visible light with an increasing efficiency when the exposition wavelength is

near to 550 nm (figure 6a). For the electrochemically sensitized samples, L* behaves the same

as for the immersion-sensitized samples for all wavelength that are superior or equal to 502

nm; for the shorter wavelengths, L* decreases with an increasing efficiency as the exposition

wavelength decreases (figure 6b). For both type of samples, in the first times of the exposure,

the samples colours follow directions of decreasing slope when the exposition wavelength

increases (see examples on figure 6d). a* and b* decrease until an exposure where a* stops

decreasing and b* increases again for all the wavelengths that are inferior or equal to 584 nm

(figure 6c and d).

Discussion

Replication  of  Edmond  Becquerel’s  process  of  creating  photochromatic  images. At  a

10 kJ m-2 radiant exposure, figure 6 shows that the samples have distinct colours (solid black

bar on figures 6a and b and markers on figures 6c and d). Figures 2d and e present an

electrochemically (d) and an immersion-sensitized (e) sample that were exposed to light spots

of various wavelengths, centred around 446 nm, 503 nm, 584 nm and 696 nm. The colours

blue, green, yellow and red are recognizable. Thus, the replication of Becquerel’s process

according to his memoirs was successful: a sensitized layer was created on a silver-cladded

brass support, and colours that resemble that of the incident light were obtained on it. 

Colours of the photochromatic images. When exposed to light of visible wavelengths, the

optical properties of the sensitive layer of the photochromatic images evolve depending on the

exposition wavelength. In particular, the shoulder in the reflectance change spectra that is

observed for all the wavelengths  that are longer or equal to 502 nm accounts  for the

resemblance of the resulting hue with the incident light. In the case of samples exposed to

wavelengths shorter than 469 nm, the appearance of this shoulder is probably overlaid by the

decrease of the reflectance local maximum initially located bellow 400 nm and the increase of

the reflectance local minimum initially located at 500 nm. The evolution of the reflectance

spectra during the exposition being characteristic of the wavelength, so is the evolution of the

L*a*b* values. In that respect, the resulting colours are all unique and express the changes in

the reflectance spectrum of the exposed sample. 

11


Colour faithfulness. Table 1 show the resulting colours at an exposition of 10 kJ m-², framed

by the initial sensitive layer colour; colours are displayed according to the RGB values that

were calculated from the L*a*b* coordinates  [16]. This table illustrates how unique the

resulting colours are and their resemblance  with the incident  light. Indeed, despite the

apparently strong contribution of the pinkish background of the sensitized layer, colours

resemble that of the incident light of exposition.

In the a*b* space (figures 6c and d), the direction of the colour change of exposed samples is

constant in the first 8 to 15 kJ m-2 of exposition, depending on the wavelength, which is why

10 kJ m-2 was chosen as a common radiant exposure for all the wavelengths. This direction is

wavelength dependant and express the colouration of the material toward the hue of the

incident light. Note that the resulting colours all lie in small (a* ; b*) ranges. They include a

strong component of the sensitized layers colour, upon which a wavelength dependant colour

component appears during the exposition. Contrasts between colours thus play an important

role in their distinctions, which questions the perception of colours in photochromatic images.

During the second step of the exposition, the colours shift toward increasing b*, with a*

remaining constant, for all the exposition wavelengths. This is the sign of overexposure.

Becquerel mentioned this phenomenon in his second memoir: “in general we can say that […]

it is in the first moments of the action of the spectrum that the hues of the photochromatic

image are the closest from these of the luminous spectrum”  [7]. Figure 6a shows that the

overexposure  of  immersion-sensitized  samples  brightens  them;  figure  6b  show  that

overexposing electrochemically sensitized samples darkens them when the wavelength is

lower than 500 nm and brightens them at 550 nm and 584 nm.

12


Table 1. Colours of the sensitive samples (background) and of the samples exposed up to

10 kJ m-2 (colour patches) to light of various wavelengths. Colours are displayed according to

RGB values. For the samples, these are calculated from the L*a*b* coordinates with the CIE

formulas [16]. The exposition wavelengths colours were calculated with [17]. 

λexposition (nm)
402
444
473
502
550
584
633
677

Immersion-sensitized

Electrochemically

sensitized

Spectral efficiency of the colour change. The discussion above showed that in the first 8 to 15

kJ m-2 of exposure, the colour changes toward that of the incident light. In this range, the

spectral efficiency of the colour change can then be conflated with the chromatic sensitivity,

meaning the ability of the sensitized plates to be coloured by an incident radiation. Figures 7a

and b show the CIE 1976 colour change ∆E*ab during the exposure of immersion- (a) and

electrochemically (b) sensitized samples to visible light. By comparing the slopes of these

curves, we can see that the colour change efficiency is greater as the wavelength is closer to

500 nm for immersion-sensitized samples and is greater as the wavelength is shorter for

electrochemically sensitized samples.

13


Figure 7. a and b) evolution of the CIE 1976 colour change ∆E*ab of the immersion- (a) and

electrochemically  (b)  sensitized  samples  during  their  exposition  to  light  of  visible

wavelengths plotted versus the radiant exposure.

Comparing figures 7a and b, we can also see that the electrochemically sensitized plates are

more sensitive than the immersion-sensitized plates, especially in the blue-violet region of the

visible spectra, except at 550 nm. This is apparently in contradiction with Becquerel, which

states that the immersion-sensitized plates “are impressed [by the solar spectrum] more than

ten times faster than any other kind of layers” [7]. Actually, Becquerel talks about the times

required to get a colour that resembles that of the incident wavelength from sight, which is

subjective and highly dependent on the preparation of the plate.

Colour rendering of the immersion and the electrochemical sensitization routes. Figures 6a

and b show that for every wavelength, the lightness  L* is lower for electrochemically

sensitized  samples  than  for  immersion-sensitized  samples.  This  is  in  agreement  with

Becquerel’s notes, which state: “the way of operating we just described [electrochemically]

offers the advantage of giving much more beautiful tints, although darker, than any other

14


way” [7]. Markers on figures 6c and d show the a*b* coordinates of the samples that were

exposed up to 10 kJ m-2. The chroma C* – the norm of a vector in the (a*, b*) space – of

immersion sensitized samples is usually higher than the C* of electrochemically sensitized

samples. However, the colours spread on a wider (a*, b*) surface for electrochemically

sensitized samples (d) than for immersion-sensitized samples (c). Table 2 shows the variances

of  the  L*a*b*  coordinates  of  theses  samples,  which  are  higher  for  electrochemically

sensitized  samples. This  means  that  the latter  can reach a wider chromatic  space  than

immersion-sensitized  samples. The colours  of electrochemically  sensitized  samples  then

appear more by contrast versus the sensitized layer colour than that of immersion sensitized

samples.  This  is  consistent  with  what  Becquerel  wrote  about  the  immersion-sensitized

samples: “the hues are always somewhat grey” [7] compared to electrochemically sensitized

samples.

Table 2. Variance of the L*a*b* coordinates of the samples exposed up to 10 kJ m-2,

depending on the sensitization method.

Sensitization method
Variance L*10 kJ m-2
Variance a*10 kJ m-2
Variance b*10 kJ m-2

Immersion
3.8
18
4.5

Electrochemical
9.4
28
8.8

Conclusions

The two sensitization routes described by Edmond Becquerel, namely the immersion and the

electrochemical, were successfully replicated in the laboratory. On both types of samples,

colours  were  obtained  and  resembled  that  of  the  exposition  light.  The  UV-visible

spectroscopy monitoring of the colouration step allowed us to compare our results with

Becquerel’s writings and to draw conclusions on the photochromatic images colours.

The colouration is due to the lower decrease, or the higher increase, of reflectance at the

exposition  wavelength  relatively  to  the  initial  sensitized  sample.  The  colours  of  the

photochromatic  images  are characteristic  of the preparation  of the  sensitized layer,  the

exposition  wavelength  and  the  radiant  exposure.  At  low  radiant  exposure,  under  8  to

15 kJ m-2, the colour change depends on the exposition wavelength; 10 kJ m-2 was chosen as a

common radiant exposure for all wavelengths in order to produce well defined coloured

samples for the microstructural  and chemical study of the photochromatic  images. The

electrochemically sensitized samples were found to be more sensitive than the immersion

15


sensitized samples, especially in the blue-violet region of the spectrum, and to reach a larger

chromatic space.  The latter is in agreement with Becquerel’s writings.

Experimental

Preparation of the plates. The brass plates are silver-cladded polished with carbon black and

England red by a silversmith (Orfèvrerie du Marais, 172-174 rue de Charonne – 75011 Paris,

no longer in business). The plates are re-used many times: the sensitized or coloured layer  is

dissolved in a saturated sodium thiosulfate solution, then the plate is polished using a ¼ µm

diamond suspension on a velvet polishing cloth. Before the  sensitization, the plates are

degreased in 96% ethanol in an ultrasonic bath for 5 minutes and then rinsed with distilled

water and carefully dried on nonabrasive and lint-free lens tissue.

The platinum grid used for the electrochemical sensitization is first degreased in 35 % HNO3

for 2 minutes, heated with the heat gun set on 650 °C for 2 minutes and then carefully rinsed

with distilled water.

Exposition to light. The samples were exposed to light produced by a xenon arc lamp

(Newport, Series Q, 75W 60056-75X-Q15) equipped with an IR and a UV filter; the condenser

lens was removed in order to have a large intense and homogeneous light spot. Interferential

filters centred around various wavelengths were used to produce narrow bandwidth light

spots: 402 ± 5 nm, 444 ± 5 nm, 473 ± 8 nm, 592 ± 3 nm, 550 ± 5 nm, 584 ± 5 nm, 633 ± 5

nm, 677 ± 6 nm. The samples were located around 20 cm away from the light source in order

to have a 5 cm diameter light spot, and to be able to measure the sample during the exposition

step in in situ UV-visible experimental setup. The lamp was put on a camera tripod during the

monitoring of the exposition step (figure 8). The samples were exposed during 20 to 30 hours

and they were measured 10 to 15 times during the exposition. 

Figure 8. Experimental setup for the spectroscopic monitoring of the exposition step. a) Xe

lamp used for the exposition. b) exposed sample.

16


The  sample  is  facing  inside  the  spectrophotometer’s  integrating  sphere  during  the

measurement – that is carried out with the lid closed – and facing out to the light source

during the exposition. This setup allowed us to reduce the transporting of these fragile

samples and the acquisition of multiple spectra on the same area.

Assessing the radiant exposure. Prior to light exposition, the irradiance was measured around

the sample position with a JETI specbos 1211 spectroradiometer. 20 cm away from the light

source, the usual value is around [80 – 100] W m-2 without any interferential filter and

[0.8 – 2.5] W m-2 with the interferential filters (see figure 3b for the transmittance spectra of

the interferential filters).

The radiant exposure was calculated by multiplying the irradiance and the time of exposition;

in order to monitor the exposition step, the sample were exposed at radiant exposures up to

300 kJ m-2, depending on the exposition wavelength. The inherent ambient light irradiance of

the room has been measured and is two orders of magnitude less than the light source

irradiance.

Spectroscopic measurements. The UV-Visible spectroscopic measurements were performed

in the total reflectance mode on a CARY5000 spectrophotometer equipped with an integrating

sphere (1 s nm-1, 1 nm step). No changes in the UV region have been observed. In order to

correct small variations due to slight changes in the position of the samples, all the spectra of

a series are multiplied by a correcting factor so that all the reflectance values at 260 nm are

equal.

CIEL*a*b* calculation. The colorimetric coordinates were calculated in the CIE 1976 space

from the reflectance spectra with the CIE formulas with a D65 illuminant and a standard

photometric observer at 2° [16].

References

[1]
E. de Saint-Ours, « La photochromie :  réception  critique  et développements  (1848-
1895) », Mémoire de stage, Centre de Recherche sur la Conservation, Paris, 2015.

[2]
E.  Becquerel,  « De  l’image  photographique  colorée  du  spectre  solaire »,  Comptes
Rendus Hebd. Séances Académie Sci., vol. 26, p. 181-183, févr. 1848.

[3]
E. Becquerel, « De l’image photographique colorée du spectre solaire »,  Ann. Chim.
Phys., vol. 22, p. 451-459, 1848.

[4]
T. J. Seebeck, « Von der chemichen Action des Lichts und der farbigen Beleuchtung »,
in Zur Farbenlehre, vol. 2, 2 vol., Tübingen: J.G. Cottaschen, 1810, p. 716-720.

17


[5]
K. Nielsen, « Another Kind of Light: The Work of T.J. Seebeck and His Collaboration
with Goethe. Part I », Hist. Stud. Phys. Biol. Sci., vol. 20, no 1, p. 107-178, 1989, doi:
10.2307/27757637.

[6]
John F. W. Herschel, « On the Chemical Action of the Rays of the Solar Spectrum on
Preparations of Silver and Other Substances, Both Metallic and Non-Metallic, and on
Some Photographic Processes », Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond., vol. 130, p. 1-59, 1840.

[7]
E. Becquerel, « De l’image photochromatique du spectre solaire et des images colorées
obtenues à la chambre obscure », Ann. Chim. Phys., vol. 25, p. 447-474, 1849.

[8]
B. Lavédrine, J.-P. Gandolfo, C. Capderou, R. Guinée, et J. P. McElhone, The Lumière
autochrome: history, technology, and preservation. Los Angeles: Getty Conservation
Institute, 2013.

[9]
M.  Kereun,  « L’héliochrome,  précurseur  de  la  photographie  couleur »,  présenté  à
Rencontres autrement, Nancy, 1999.

[10] M. Kereun, « L’héliochromie, une invention française inachevée »,  Actual. Chim., no

256, p. 44-45, 2002.

[11] W. R. Alschuler, « The Source and Nature of Inherent Colour in Early Photographic

Processes », présenté à The object glass of science, Museum of the History of Science,
Oxford, 2005.

[12] R. Hilsch et R. W. Pohl, « Zur Photochemie der Alkali- und Silberhalogenidkristalle »,

Z. Für Phys., vol. 64, no 9-10, p. 606-622, sept. 1930, doi: 10.1007/BF01397211.

[13] F. C. Brown et N. Wainfan, « Photolytic Darkening and Electronic Range in AgCl »,

Phys. Rev., vol. 105, no 1, p. 93-99, janv. 1957, doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.105.93.

[14] F. Moser, N. R. Nail, et F. Urbach, « Optical  Absorption Studies  of the Volume

Photolysis of Large Silver Chloride Crystals », J. Phys. Chem. Solids, vol. 9, no 3-4, p.
217-234, 1959, doi: 10.1016/0022-3697(59)90100-3.

[15] L. A. Ageev, V. K. Miloslavskii, et Kh. I. El-Ashkhab, « Spectral photoadaptation in

light-sensitive AgCl:Ag thin films »,  Opt. Spectrosc., vol. 73, no 2, p. 213-216, août
1992.

[16] Internationale Beleuchtungskommission, Éd., Colorimetry, 3. ed. Vienna: CIE, Central

Bureau, 2004.

[17] T. S. Kuntzleman et E. C. Jacobson, « Wavelength to Colour Relationship ». [En ligne].

Disponible
 
sur:
 
https://academo.org/demos/wavelength-to-colour-relationship/.

[Consulté le: 19-août-2018].

Acknowledgement

The authors would like to thank the SACRe doctoral program (PSL University) for the

financial support. This work was supported by the State managed by the National Research

Agency under the Idex Sorbonne Universities as part of the Future Investments programme

under the reference ANR-11-IDEX-0004-02.

18


Supplementary Information

Figure S-1. XRF spectra of a silver plate produced by silversmith François Cadoret and

gilded only on one side. The grey spectrum was acquired on the silver gilded side and the

yellow one on the bare brass side. Rhodium, nickel and titanium lines are due to the X-ray

source. XRF Elio XRF, Rh 40 kV, 100 mA, 480 s, 1 mm diameter beam, SDD detector. In

addition to the underlying brass signal, only silver was detected on the gilded side.

19


Figure S-2. Secondary electrons SEM image (Ultra 55 ZEISS) of a silver plate produced by

silversmith  François Cadoret. A few hundred nanometers large polishing trails are visible.

20


Figure S-3. Backscattered electrons SEM image (Ultra 55 ZEISS) of a silver plate produced

by silversmith François Cadoret in cross section view. The light grey layer on the left

corresponds to the silver coating of the brass support, which appears in dark grey on the right.

The silver thickness was initially 50 µm and 30 µm after five successive polishing and reuse

of the sample.

21


Figure S-4. Secondary electrons SEM image (Ultra 55 ZEISS) of an immersion-sensitized

sample which has not been rinsed after the sensitization. NaCl (hexagonal) crystals are

visible. EDX analysis (QUANTAX Bruker SDD) also show copper and sulfur, which can be

attributed to the presence of precipitated CuSO4 from the sensitization solution.

22


Figure S-5. Electrochemical sensitization: the silver plate and a platinum grid are linked

respectively to the positive and negative poles of a DC generator, and soaking in a 1M HCl

solution.

23


