Strain engineered domain structure and their relaxation in perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt deposited on
flexible polyimide
Esita Pandey,1 Braj Bhusan Singh,1 Purbasha Sharangi,1 and Subhankar Bedanta1, a)

Laboratory for Nanomagnetism and Magnetic Materials (LNMM), School of Physical Sciences,
National Institute of Science Education and Research (NISER), HBNI, P.O.- Jatni, 752050,
India

(Dated: 24 January 2020)

The demand of fast and power efficient spintronics devices with flexibility requires additional energy for
magnetization manipulation. Stress/and strain have shown their potentials for tuning magnetic properties to
the desired level. Here, we report a systematic study for the effect of both tensile and compressive stresses
on the magnetic anisotropy (MA). Further the effect of stress on the domain structure and magnetization
relaxation mechanism in a perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt film has been studied. It is observed that a
minimal in-plane tensile strain has increased the coercivity of the film by 38% of its initial value, while a
very small change of coercivity has been found under compressive strain. The size of ferromagnetic domains
decreases under tensile strain, while no change is observed under the compressive strain.
Magnetization
relxation measured at sub-coercive fields yields longer relaxation time in the strained state.

Miniaturization and flexibility with high speed and
low power consumption are the key aspects for develop-
ing next generation spintronic devices1–3. Perpendicular
magnetic anisotropic (PMA) systems such as Co/Pt bi-
layes have shown their importance in increasing thermal
stability and developing non-volatile magnetic random
access memories (MRAM’s) with low current density re-
quirement for magnetization switching at 20 nm bit size
level1,4–9.
The major challenge in further downscaling
of devices is the higher power dissipation10. Various ap-
proaches have been taken to reduce the power consump-
tion during magnetization switching e.g.
spin transfer
torque (STT), current induced domain wall (DW) motion
etc.11,12. However, involvement of charge current is still
a major factor to further reduce the power consumption.
In this context, stress controlled method has been proven
to be a promising one13,14. Strain engineering became an
appealing approach to meet the current device require-
ment. There are various possible ways to generate strain
on a thin film deposited on rigid substrate e.g. by lattice
mismatch15,16, voltage application via transducers17 etc.,
whereas for a film deposited on flexible substrate bend-
ing, stretching, peeling or twisting mechanism also can
generate adequate stress18.
Such mechanical methods
transfer almost uniform stress from substrate to the film,
which gives rise to device flexibility. In recent years the
stress effect on magnetic anisotropy and domain struc-
ture in various magnetic films with in-plane MA have
been studied3,19.
However, the stress effect in flexible
magnetic films with PMA is very less explored. Theoret-
ical studies predicted that magnteic anisotropy energy as
well as the easy axis of Fe/Pt multilayers can be modi-
fied by strain20. Shepley et al. showed that the MA of a
Co/Pt film decreased with increasing compressive strain
while the DW velocity was increased by 30 to 100%21.
Later the stress tuned DW velocity of Co/Pt depends

a)Electronic mail: sbedanta@niser.ac.in

on DW formation energy (balance of anisotropy and ex-
change energy) is also reported22. However, a systematic
study on the effect of different types of strain e.g. ten-
sion, compression, peeling etc. on the MA, domain nu-
cleation, its structure along with relaxation mechanism
is still lacking.
Exploring the effect of such magneto-
mechanical coupling on different magnetic properties will
not only help to understand the basics but also holds im-
portance from application viewpoint. Here, we report a
comprehensive study of the effect of tensile and compres-
sive strain on the MA, domain nucleation and relaxation
mechanism in a perpendicularly magnetized Co/Pt film
prepared on polyimide substrate.

We have prepared Pt/Co thin film upon 25 µm
thick polyimide (PI) substrate by dc magnetron sput-
tering in a high vacuum chamber manufactured by
Mantis Deposition Ltd, UK. Polyimide (PI) substrate
was cleaned ultrasonically by isopropanol before de-
position.
The
sample
structure
is
the
following:
PI/Ta(7nm)/Pt(10nm)/Co(0.7nm)/Pt(3nm) as shown in
fig.1(a). The base pressure of the deposition system was
better than 1×10−7 mbar. The rate of deposition for Co,
Pt and Ta layers were 0.10 /s, 0.15 /s and 0.13 /s respec-
tively. The thickness was measured by a quartz crystal
monitor (QCM) mounted close to the substrate holder.
Substrate was rotated at 10 rotation per minute (rpm)
during deposition to get uniformity in the samples. A 7
nm thick Ta buffer layer was used for better adhesion and
growth of Pt layer along (111) direction. A 3 nm thick
Pt was used as a capping layer to prevent the oxidation
of Co layer.

Magnetic properties of the sample have been recorded
at both the flat as well as bend state. Different tensile
(compressive) strain has been generated on the film by
sticking it on convex (concave) mold made of aluminium
with different radius of curvature.
Schematic of both
mold is shown in fig.1(b) and the molds used in the mea-
surement are shown in supplementary fig.S1.
Domain
nucleation and propagation at both states of the sam-

1

arXiv:2001.09290v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  25 Jan 2020


FIG. 1. Schematic of (a) Co/Pt thin film deposited on flexible
polyimide substrate, (b) Tensile and compressive strain gen-
eration by bending of the film achieved by convex and concave
shaped molds, respectively.

ple have been recorded by polar magneto optic Kerr ef-
fect (PMOKE) based microscope manufactured by Evico
Magnetics, Germany. Further, relaxation measurements
have been carried out in the flat as well as bend state of
the film.
We have measured magnetic hysteresis loops in the po-
lar mode by bending the sample towards inward and out-
ward direction. Such bending induced strain on the film
can be determined as,

ϵ =
t

2r ± t
(1)

where ϵ is the applied strain, ‘+’ sign for the tensile
strain, ‘-’ sign is for the compressive one, r is the ra-
dius of the mold used and t is the total thickness of
the film and substrate23–25.Using molds almost uniform
strain is possible to transfer from the substrate to the
thin film (as thickness of the film is very low in compar-
ison to the substrate). Coercivity (HC) of the sample
was found to be 26.9 mT in flat state which increases
(decreases) to 34.4 (25.7) mT under 0.13 % tensile (com-
pressive) strain (fig.2). Even a minimal in-plane tensile
strain (< 0.1%) has increased the coercivity largely (∼ 10
mT) whereas the effect of compression is almost negli-
gible.
Such behaviour can be explained by comparing
the strength of stress induced anisotropy over interfacial
anisotropy. Magneto-elastic energy of a thin film can be
expressed as:

EME = 3

2λσ sin2 θ
(2)

where λ is co-efficient of magnetostriction, σ is the ap-
plied stress, θ is the angle between the stress and mag-
netization axis26. As reported earlier λ is negative for
Co/Pt system along (111) direction21 while the applied
stress σ is positive (negetive) for tensile (compressive)
strain, hence the λσ product is negative (positive) which
induces an easy axis along the perpendicular plane (in-
plane) of the sample to minimize total energy of the sys-
tem. As the interfacial and tensile (compressive) stress
induced MA acted along the same (opposite) direction,
hence it is easier (harder) for tension (compression) to
increase (decrease) the overall MA. Hence the strength
of magneto-mechanical coupling effect require to modify

MA significantly is different, depending upon the type of
strain.

FIG. 2. Hysteresis loops measured by PMOKE microscopy at
unstrained (circle) and strained (square) states of the sample.
Inset: Zoom in view of the black marked regions (B-D) of
hysteresis loops, at which domain images are shown in fig.4.

The
variation
of
coercivity
with
increasing
ten-
sile/compressive strain has been plotted in fig.3. Here
the 1st cycle represents the values of HC obtained from
the hysteresis when the sample is bent for the first time
at different radii after deposition. After that we kept the
sample under 0.5% tension for 15 days and re-measured
HC at different strain values which is plotted as 2nd cy-
cle. The nature of the two graphs indicates an excellent
endurance of the film under long term stress application.
However under compression the effect is almost negligi-
ble and HC decrease by ∼1.0 mT when a large (∼0.5%)
strain is applied. Origin of such different behaviour is
already explained in the previous section.
Bubble domain has been observed at the initial flat
state of the sample, as the anisotropy ratio, Q
=
Ku/Kd ≫1, where Ku is the uniaxial anisotropy and Kd
is the stray field energy density, respectively27. The do-
main images are recorded at saturation, near nucleation
and sub-coercive field values of each hysteresis loops as
shown in fig.4. All the domain images are captured at the
same place of the sample, to easily compare them under
different strained conditions. Red marked circles in fig.4
(b1 and c1) are showing the domain size for better visual-
ization in the flat state of the sample. Same size of circles
are drawn on the domain images recorded under tensile
(b2 and c2) and compressive (b3 and c3) strained states
to quantify the contraction/elongation of the domains in
comparison to the flat state. It is observed that applica-
tion of an in-plane tensile strain reduces the size of bubble
domains significantly. As HC of the sample has increased
by 38% under tension, it hindered the DW propagation
which reduces the domain size. Magnetization reversal
alongwith domain nucleation also takes place at higher
(lower) field values due to the increases (decreases) in
overall energy barrier under tensile (compressive) strain.

2


The difference between nucleation field (HN) and HC was
found to be 2.5 mT at the flat state whereas it increases
(decreases) to 4 (∼1.2) mT under tension (compression).
This can be a result of increase(decreases) in Bloch wall
formation energy due to the appliaction of +0.13% (-
0.13%) strain. The effect of -0.13% strain is not much
visible possibly due to its less effect on total anisotropy
field. Under in-plane tensile strain the DW motion is ex-
pected to be reduced due to increase in potential barrier
for the magnetization reversal. Shepley et al. has already
reported a faster DW motion of Pt/Co/Pt tri-layer sys-
tem under out of plane tensile strain where the sample
was prepared near to spin-reorientation transition (SRT)
region. As our sample is far from SRT so the effect of
compression is very less in our case.

FIG. 3. Coercivity change for 1st (black circle) and 2nd (blue
circle) bending cycles under tensile strain. 2nd bending cycle
is measured after keeping the sample under ∼0.5% tensile
strain for 15 days. The square symbols represents the chnage
in coercivity by applying compressive strain.

As the compressive strain does not have much effect in
modifying magnetic properties of our film hence we per-
formed the relaxation measurement under tensile stress
only and compared with the flat one. Under the appli-
cation of a constant Zeeman energy to the system, the
magnetization relaxation can be recorded with respect to
time. This measurement basically reveals the efficiency
of thermal activation energy to complete magnetization
reversal via domain nucleation and DW motion. We have
performed similar measurement on our film by PMOKE
based microscopy. The sample was first saturated at a
negative saturation field, then the field was increased
manually near to positive sub-coercive field values e.g.
0.95 HC, 0.97 HC and kept it constant there. In this
scenario, further reversal takes place with the help of
thermal energy.
Domain images were captured during
the whole thermal relaxation process.
The amount of
dark grey contrast represents a measure of the magneti-
zation for the sample. The intensity of each image was
extracted by ImageJ software and the average intensity
of all images captured at each second were calculated.
The normalized intensity is then plotted against the time

FIG. 4. Domain images recorded at negative saturation (A),
near nucleation (B), at coercivity (C), near positive saturation
(D) and at positive saturation (E) points of the hysteresis
loops (fig.2) by MOKE microscope at flat and bend (± 0.13%
strain) state of the sample. Scale bar is 500 µm for all the
domain images.

taken to complete the reversal. Here the normalized in-
tensity as a function of time basically reflects the net
magnetization relaxation of the sample. Amongst vari-
ous proposed models to explain magnetization relaxation
phenomena Fatuzzo-Labrune model is extensively used
for FM thin films28–33. However, the approximation of
single energy barrier made in this model does not holds
for a real thin film which consists of a distribution of en-
ergy barrier with defects and inhomogeneity throughout
the surface. Hence to fit our experimental data we have
used the compressed exponential function29,34,

I(t) = I1 + I2(1 − exp(−( t

τ )β))
(3)

where I(t) is the Kerr intensity measured at time t,
I1 +I2 is the normalized Kerr intensity, β is an exponent
varying within 1 (nucleation dominated) to 3 (DW mo-
tion dominated) and τ is the relaxation time constant.
At the flat state the relaxation happens via both domain
nucleation as well as DW motion (β = 1.46±0.01 and
1.19±0.01) and the relaxation time constant is found to
be 10.90 ±0.04 and 6.86±0.07 s at 0.95 and 0.97 HC, re-
spectively. However, a slower relaxation phenomenon oc-
curs in presence of 0.13% tensile strain which started via
domain nucleation and dominated further by DW motion
(β= 2.23±0.04 and 1.95±0.04).
Relaxation time con-
stant at the bend state was 23.63±0.14 and 16.24±0.13
s at 0.95 and 0.97 HC, respectively. Nature of the relax-
ation curve also reflects a slower relaxation phenomenon
as shown in fig.5 (a-b). This is supported by a larger
relaxation time constant (τ) extracted from the fitting.
To explain the origin behind this slow relaxation we have
analyzed the domain images correspond to 0.95 HC of
both states at different time intervals viz. 0, 5, 10 and
20 s (fig.5.c). Here 0 s signifies the initial time when the
first image was taken after giving a constant (0.95 HC)
magnetic field. As 0.95 HC field is greater than the nu-
cleation field for both the states, hence bubble domains

3


FIG. 5. Relaxation measurement performed on Co/Pt sample at two sub-coercive field values (a) 0.95 HC and (b) 0.97 HC,
at 0.13% strained (blue curve) and unstrained (black curve) state. The measured data were well fitted by the compressed
exponential function.(c) Domain expansion by thermal energy at constant (0.95 HC) magnetic field recorded by PMOKE
microscope at both unstrained (upper panel) and +0.13% tensile strained state (lower panel), during different time interval (0,
5, 10 & 20 s) of the reversal process. Scale bar is 500 µm for all domain images.

are visible at both the images of 0 s. Further all the im-
ages were taken at the same place of the sample hence at
0 s the size of the domain in the bent state is smaller due
to obvious reason. Further with increasing time (5, 10
and 20 s) it has been found that the domain propagates
slower in the bend state in comparison to the flat one
due to its reduced wall motion. This reduced wall mo-
tion also reflects in the difference between HN and HC
field values of both state, as discussed earlier. In about 20
s of the relaxation process, flat sample almost completes
the reversal while for the bend one, it is still far away
from saturation. From the above result we expect that
a Co/Pt thin film prepared near to SRT will show a sig-
nificant reduction of relaxation time under compressive
strain, which holds its potential in switching application.

We presented the effect of tensile/compressive strain
on the magnetization reversal, magnetic domains and re-
laxation mechanism of a Co/Pt flexible film. It is ob-
served that tensile strain has largely modified the MA,
domain nucleation and relaxation mechanism of our film,
whereas the effect of compression is found to be less
prominent.
A substantial increase in MA, nucleation
field and decrease in domain size attributed mainly to
the magneto mechanical coupling effect. In spite of this
high coupling effect, our flexible film exhibits excellent
endurance for long term stress application. A longer field
span required to complete the magnetization reversal at
the strained state, reflects a increase in potential bar-

rier for the DW movement which modifies the relaxation
time of the film. Relaxation measurements indicates ∼13
sec of relaxation time difference between the unstrained
and curved state which is further endorsed by comparing
domain images taken at different interval of time. This
study further demands to explore the effect of compres-
sion on the relaxation time (switching time) of a Co/Pt
film prepared near to SRT region. It is expected that
in such scenario the relaxation will be faster which has
significant potential for faster device application.

Authors would like to thank Mr. Brindaban Ojha and
Dr. Tanmoy Chabri for their help during the relaxation
measurements. We also thank the Department of Atomic
Energy (DAE) of the Govt. of India for providing the
funding to carry out the research.
BBS acknowledges
DST for INSPIRE faculty fellowship.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

See supplementary material for Figure S1 which shows
the image of the convex and concave shaped molds used
in the measurement.

4


REFERENCES

1B. Tudu and A. Tiwari, “Recent developments in per-
pendicular magnetic anisotropy thin films for data stor-
age applications,” Vacuum 146, 329–341 (2017).

2Z. Bao and X. Chen, “Flexible and stretchable de-
vices,” Advanced Materials 28, 4177–4179 (2016).

3P. Sheng, B. Wang,
and R. Li, “Flexible magnetic
thin films and devices,” Journal of Semiconductors 39,
011006 (2018).

4S. Ikeda, K. Miura, H. Yamamoto, K. Mizunuma,
H. Gan, M. Endo, S. Kanai, J. Hayakawa, F. Mat-
sukura,
and H. Ohno, “A perpendicular-anisotropy
cofeb–mgo magnetic tunnel junction,” Nature materi-
als 9, 721–724 (2010).

5D. B. Gopman, C. L. Dennis, P. Chen, Y. L. Iunin,
P. Finkel, M. Staruch, and R. D. Shull, “Strain-assisted
magnetization reversal in co/ni multilayers with per-
pendicular magnetic anisotropy,” Scientific reports 6,
27774 (2016).

6L. Sampaio, M. De Albuquerque, and F. De Menezes,
“Magnetic
relaxation
and
formation
of
magnetic
domains
in
ultrathin
films
with
perpendicular
anisotropy,” Physical Review B 54, 6465 (1996).

7S. Ikeda, J. Hayakawa, Y. M. Lee, F. Matsukura,
Y. Ohno, T. Hanyu, and H. Ohno, “Magnetic tunnel
junctions for spintronic memories and beyond,” IEEE
Transactions on Electron Devices 54, 991–1002 (2007).

8K.-S. Lee, S.-W. Lee, B.-C. Min, and K.-J. Lee, “Ther-
mally activated switching of perpendicular magnet by
spin-orbit spin torque,” Applied Physics Letters 104,
072413 (2014).

9T. Vemulkar, R. Mansell, A. Fern´andez-Pacheco, and
R. Cowburn, “Toward flexible spintronics: Perpendicu-
larly magnetized synthetic antiferromagnetic thin films
and nanowires on polyimide substrates,” Advanced
Functional Materials 26, 4704–4711 (2016).

10M. Barangi and P. Mazumder, “Straintronics: A leap
toward ultimate energy efficiency of magnetic random
access memories.” IEEE Nanotechnology Magazine 9,
15–24 (2015).

11L. Liu, O. Lee, T. Gudmundsen, D. Ralph,
and
R. Buhrman, “Current-induced switching of perpen-
dicularly magnetized magnetic layers using spin torque
from the spin hall effect,” Physical review letters 109,
096602 (2012).

12B. Cui, D. Li, J. Yun, Y. Zuo, X. Guo, K. Wu,
X. Zhang, Y. Wang, L. Xi,
and D. Xue, “Mag-
netization switching through domain wall motion in
pt/co/cr racetracks with the assistance of the accompa-
nying joule heating effect,” Physical Chemistry Chem-
ical Physics 20, 9904–9909 (2018).

13A. K. Biswas,
H. Ahmad,
J. Atulasimha,
and
S. Bandyopadhyay, “Experimental demonstration of
complete 180 reversal of magnetization in isolated co
nanomagnets on a pmn–pt substrate with voltage gen-
erated strain,” Nano letters 17, 3478–3484 (2017).

14A. A. Bukharaev, A. K. Zvezdin, A. P. Pyatakov, and

Y. K. Fetisov, “Straintronics: a new trend in micro-
and nanoelectronics and materials science,” Physics-
Uspekhi 61, 1175 (2018).

15T. Chen, X. M. Li,
and S. Zhang, “Enhanced strain
relaxation induced by epitaxial layer growth mode of
mgo thin films,” Solid state communications 131, 523–
526 (2004).

16G. Abadias, E. Chason, J. Keckes, M. Sebastiani, G. B.
Thompson, E. Barthel, G. L. Doll, C. E. Murray, C. H.
Stoessel,
and L. Martinu, “Stress in thin films and
coatings: Current status, challenges, and prospects,”
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum,
Surfaces, and Films 36, 020801 (2018).

17N. Lei, S. Park, P. Lecoeur, D. Ravelosona, C. Chap-
pert, O. Stelmakhovych, and V. Hol`y, “Magnetization
reversal assisted by the inverse piezoelectric effect in co-
fe-b/ferroelectric multilayers,” Physical Review B 84,
012404 (2011).

18K. Harris, A. Elias, and H.-J. Chung, “Flexible elec-
tronics under strain: a review of mechanical characteri-
zation and durability enhancement strategies,” Journal
of materials science 51, 2771–2805 (2016).

19Y. Chen, J. McCord, J. Freudenberger, R. Kaltofen,
and O. Schmidt, “Effects of strain on magnetic and
transport properties of co films on plastic substrates,”
Journal of Applied Physics 105, 07C302 (2009).

20K. Tao, P. Liu, Q. Guo, L. Shen, D. Xue, O. Polyakov,
and V. Stepanyuk, “Engineering magnetic anisotropy
and magnetization switching in multilayers by strain,”
Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 19, 4125–4130
(2017).

21P. Shepley, A. Rushforth, M. Wang, G. Burnell,
and T. Moore, “Modification of perpendicular mag-
netic anisotropy and domain wall velocity in pt/co/pt
by voltage-induced strain,” Scientific reports 5, 1–5
(2015).

22P. Shepley, G. Burnell, and T. Moore, “Domain wall
energy and strain in pt/co/ir thin films on piezoelectric
transducers,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
30, 344002 (2018).

23X. Qiao, X. Wen, B. Wang, Y. Bai, Q. Zhan, X. Xu,
and R.-W. Li, “Enhanced stress-invariance of mag-
netization direction in magnetic thin films,” Applied
Physics Letters 111, 132405 (2017).

24G. Dai, Q. Zhan, Y. Liu, H. Yang, X. Zhang, B. Chen,
and R.-W. Li, “Mechanically tunable magnetic prop-
erties of fe81ga19 films grown on flexible substrates,”
Applied Physics Letters 100, 122407 (2012).

25D. Wang, C. Nordman, Z. Qian, J. M. Daughton,
and J. Myers, “Magnetostriction effect of amorphous
cofeb thin films and application in spin-dependent tun-
nel junctions,” Journal of applied physics 97, 10C906
(2005).

26B. Cullity and C. Graham, “Introduction to magnetic
materials, a john wiley & sons,” New Jersey (2009).

27A.
Hubert
and
R.
Sch¨afer,
“Magnetic
domains
springer,” Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, pgs 255
(1998).

5


28M. Labrune, S. Andrieu, F. Rio,
and P. Bernstein,
“Time dependence of the magnetization process of re-
tm alloys,” Journal of magnetism and magnetic mate-
rials 80, 211–218 (1989).

29H. Xi, K.-Z. Gao, J. Ouyang, Y. Shi,
and Y. Yang,
“Slow magnetization relaxation and reversal in mag-
netic thin films,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Mat-
ter 20, 295220 (2008).

30A. A. Adjanoh, R. Belhi, J. Vogel, M. Ayadi,
and
K. Abdelmoula, “Compressed exponential form for dis-
ordered domain wall motion in ultra-thin au/co/au fer-
romagnetic films,” Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic
Materials 323, 504–508 (2011).

31N. Chowdhury, S. Mallick, S. Mallik, and S. Bedanta,

“Study of magnetization relaxation in co thin films pre-
pared by substrate rotation,” Thin Solid Films 616,
328–334 (2016).

32S. Mallick, S. Mallik, and S. Bedanta, “Effect of sub-
strate rotation on domain structure and magnetic re-
laxation in magnetic antidot lattice arrays,” Journal of
Applied Physics 118, 083904 (2015).

33S. Mallick and S. Bedanta, “Size and shape dependence
study of magnetization reversal in magnetic antidot lat-
tice arrays,” Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Ma-
terials 382, 158–164 (2015).

34S. Mallick, S. S. Mishra, and S. Bedanta, “Relaxation
dynamics in magnetic antidot lattice arrays of co/pt
with perpendicular anisotropy,” Scientific reports 8, 1–
8 (2018).

6


