1

Controlling Cherenkov threshold with nonlocality

Hao Hu1,†, Xiao Lin2,*,†, Jingjing Zhang3, Dongjue Liu1, Patrice Genevet4, Baile Zhang2,5,*

and Yu Luo1,*

1School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Nanyang 

Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore

2Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, 

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637371, Singaporew

3State Key Laboratory of Millimeter Waves, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China
4CNRS, CRHEA, Universite Cote d’Azur, rue Bernard Gregory, 06560, Sophia Antipolis,

Valbonne, France

5Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 

637371, Singapore

*Corresponding author. E-mail: xiaolinbnwj@ntu.edu.sg; blzhang@ntu.edu.sg; luoyu@ntu.edu.sg

†These authors contributed equally to this work

Cherenkov radiation
is
generally
believed to
be
threshold-free in hyperbolic 

metamaterials owing to the extremely large photonic density of states in classical local 

framework. While recent advances in nonlocal and quantum effects extend our 

understanding of light-matter interactions in metallic nanostructures, the influence of 

nonlocality on threshold-free Cherenkov radiation still remains elusive. Here we 

theoretically demonstrate that the nonlocality provides an indispensable way to flexibly 

engineer Cherenkov thresholds in metallodielectric layered structures. Particularly, the 

nonlocality results in a lower-bound velocity cutoff, whose value is comparable to the

electron Fermi velocity. Surprisingly, this lower-bound threshold can be significantly 

smaller than the classically predicted one if the metamaterial works around epsilon-near-

zero frequencies. The capability to control Cherenkov thresholds opens numerous 

prospects for practical applications of Cherenkov radiation, in particular, for integrated 

free-electron radiation sources. 


2

INTRODUCTION

Cherenkov radiation was firstly discovered in experiments by P. A. Cherenkov in 1934 (1), 

under the supervision of S. I. Vavilov, and later theoretically interpreted by I. Frank and I. 

Tamm in 1937 (2). According to Frank and Tamm’s theory, Cherenkov radiation arises when 

the velocity of charged particles exceeds a finite velocity threshold known as the Cherenkov 

threshold 𝑣th. It is determined by the phase velocity of light in the surrounding medium, i.e., 

𝑣th = 𝑐/𝑛, where 𝑐 is the light speed in free space and 𝑛 is the refractive index of the 

background medium. It is generally believed in the early twentieth century that photon emission 

from a uniformly moving charge is prohibited. The discovery of Cherenkov radiation changed 

such a belief. Thus, understanding the threshold behaviors of Cherenkov radiation is of 

paramount importance to the development of fundamental physics (3-8).

Cherenkov threshold is also an important parameter to many practical applications  

including elementary particle detectors, dosimetry, medical imaging and therapy, etc (9-13). As 

a typical example, the threshold determines the sensitivity of Cherenkov detectors for the 

identification of high-energy particles over a wide momentum range. To be specific, a higher 

sensitivity of the detector requires a higher Cherenkov threshold (i.e., 𝑣th → 𝑐), and hence a 

smaller refractive index of the background material. As a result, the design of Cherenkov 

detectors generally demands materials with the refractive index close to unity (e.g., gases, 

aerogels) in order to identify charged particles in the multi-giga-electron-volt (GeV) range (14-

16). 

The capability to flexibly engineer the Cherenkov threshold could benefit many 

applications mentioned above. For instance, decreasing the Cherenkov threshold enables the 

on-chip application of low-energy free electrons in compact and integrated light sources (17-

21). However, owing to the limited value of the refractive index attainable with natural 

occurring materials (e.g., 𝑛 < 4 for transparent dielectrics at the visible regime), the kinetic 

energy of swift electrons used in these light sources is generally above 1 mega-eV (MeV). To 

address this problem, artificial metallic nanostructures, including plasmonic waveguides and 


3

hyperbolic metamaterials, have been proposed (22-28). With a proper design, the effective 

refractive index of eigenmodes in these structures could go to infinity (i.e., 𝑛 → ∞) under the 

classical local approximation. Consequently, Cherenkov radiation can be made threshold-free

under the local approximation, i.e. 𝑣th = 𝑐/𝑛 → 0. Following such theoretical proposals, a

recent experiment reported the lowest Cherenkov threshold to date, i.e., 𝑣th = 0.03𝑐 (29), in 

hyperbolic metamaterials. 

Further reducing the Cherenkov threshold beyond the results in Ref. 29 has remained 

difficult, probably because of the elusive role of nonlocality which is generally ignored in 

previous theoretical modellings. Although the nonlocality is known to modify dramatically the

electromagnetic responses of metallic nanostructures (30-35), its influence on the threshold 

behaviors of Cherenkov radiation still remains unexplored.

Here we address this issue by systematically investigating the nonlocal effects on 

Cherenkov radiation in metallodielectric layered structures. These structures have applied 

widely to construct hyperbolic metamaterials. We find that the interplay between the spatial 

dispersion from the structural periodicity and the nonlocal electron screening in metals can 

strongly modify the threshold behaviors of Cherenkov radiation. First, the nonlocality always 

enables the Cherenkov threshold to be larger than the hydrodynamical velocity 𝛽 of plasma 

pressure waves in metals, namely 𝑣th ≥ 𝛽, for metallic nanostructures including hyperbolic 

metamaterials. Such a finding is in stark contrast to the previous prediction of the zero-value 

Cherenkov threshold in hyperbolic metamaterials under the local approximation. Second, 

around the epsilon-near-zero frequency, the nonlocality may largely decrease the value of the 

Cherenkov threshold. Such a counterintuitive finding originates from the appearance of 

longitudinal modes inside metallodielectric layered structures. Note that all the features of 

longitudinal modes cannot be captured by the local approximation. Moreover, our findings also 

indicate that the nonlocality may provide novel degree of freedom in controlling the interaction 

between free electrons and photonic systems, and it can be exploited for the flexible engineering 

of Cherenkov thresholds.


4

RESULTS

Theoretical description of Cherenkov radiation in local and nonlocal framework

The basic structural setup is shown in Fig. 1A. A swift electron moves with a velocity of 𝑣̅ =

𝑧̂𝑣 in free space, along a trajectory close to the top surface of the metallodielectric layered 

structure. The unit cell of the layered structure has a pitch of 𝑃 = 𝑑1 + 𝑑2, where 𝑑1 and 𝑑2

are the thicknesses of the metal (e.g., silver) and dielectric (silicon nitride) slabs, respectively. 

Here we set 𝑑1/𝑃 = 0.4 and 𝑃 ≪ 𝜆 , where 𝜆 ∈ [0.1 10] μm is the interested range of 

wavelength. Under the local approximation, the metallodielectric layered structure is treated as

a homogeneous uniaxial material with a relative permittivity of 𝜀̿𝑟 = [𝜀||, 𝜀⊥, 𝜀||], where 𝜀|| is 

the in-plane permittivity and 𝜀⊥ is the out-of-plane permittivity. In particular, the structure in 

Fig. 1A is the hyperbolic metamaterial with Re(𝜀||) ∙ Re(𝜀⊥) < 0 if 𝜆 > 0.4 μm [Fig. S1].

On the other hand, when considering the nonlocality from the structural periodicity, the 

layered structure is used in the calculation by employing the transfer matrix method (36). When 

further considering the nonlocality from metals in the realistic layered structure, the 

hydrodynamic model is adopted to describe the nonlocal electron screening in metals. The 

nonlocal electron screening refers to the spatial spreading of surface charge densities over 

boundaries of metals, originating from the quantum repulsion of electrons or the electron gas 

pressure (33, 37, 38). The oscillation of free electron gas due to the pressure gives rise to a 

longitudinal response of metals. The corresponding longitudinal permittivity is wavevector-

dependent, that is 𝜀L(𝜔, 𝑘L) = 1 −

𝜔𝑝2

𝜔2+𝑖𝛾𝜔−𝛽2𝑘L

2 (39), where 𝜔𝑝 is the plasma frequency, 𝛾 is 

the damping rate, and 𝑘L is the wavevector of longitudinal electric fields. The 

phenomenological nonlocal parameter 𝛽 is proportional to √𝐸F/𝑚e or 𝑣F (40), where 𝐸F is the 

Fermi energy, 𝑣F is the Fermi velocity and 𝑚e is the effective electron mass. To consider the 

nonlocal response of metals, an additional boundary condition is needed to solve the Maxwell’s 

equations; see details in Supplementary Section 6. 


5

Influence of nonlocal response from the structural periodicity on the Cherenkov threshold.

We begin with the analysis of the influence of nonlocal response from the structural periodicity 

on the Cherenkov threshold in Fig. 1. That is, we consider the case that the nonlocal response 

from metals is negligible, by setting the thickness of metal 𝑑1 much larger than the Tomas-

Fermi screening length 𝜆TF . The value of 𝜆TF ≈

𝛽
𝜔𝑝 is generally a few angstrom, which 

describes the spatial extent of surface charge densities for metals (40). Here we set 𝑑1 =

10 nm ≫ 𝜆TF and 𝑃 = 25 nm in Fig. 1. 

Figure 1 (B to E) shows the field distribution of free electron radiation in time domain. 

All field distributions here and below are calculated under the framework of classic 

electromagnetic wave theory; see methods in Supplementary Section 5. Under the local 

approximation, the structure in Fig. 1A has min(𝑣th(𝜆))local = 0 in the interested range of 

wavelength or the so-called threshold-free Cherenkov radiation in hyperbolic metamaterials; 

see radiation fields at two arbitrarily selected particle velocities in Fig. 1 (B and D).  

In contrast, when under the nonlocal description, Cherenkov radiation inside the bulk 

layered structure appears if 𝑣 = 0.2𝑐 in Fig. 1C, but it disappears if 𝑣 = 0.05𝑐 in Fig. 1E. This 

provides a clear evidence that min(𝑣th(𝜆))nonlocal > 0.05𝑐 in the interested range of 

wavelength [Fig. S4A]. Such a nonzero Cherenkov threshold originates from the fact that the 

nonlocal response from structural periodicity would prohibit the excitation of bulk Bloch modes 

with extremely large wavevectors. In addition, Cherenkov radiation of surface plasmons at the 

interface also shows up in Fig. 1 (C and E), when considering the realistic structure. From Fig. 

1 (B to E), it is reasonable to argue that the local approximation fails to describe the Cherenkov 

threshold and the interaction between free electrons and metallic nanostructures, particularly 

when the free electron moves at a low speed.   

Influence of nonlocal response from the nonlocal electron screening in metals on the 

Cherenkov threshold.


6

Next, we proceed to analyze in Fig. 2 the influence of nonlocal response from metals on the

Cherenkov threshold. That is, we consider the case that the nonlocal response from metals is 

non-negligible, by setting 𝛽 ≠ 0 and 𝑑1 comparable to 𝜆TF. Figure 2A shows the Cherenkov 

threshold 𝑣th(𝜆0) as a function of the pitch 𝑃 of unit cell. Here we choose the wavelength 𝜆0, 

e.g., 𝜆0 = 1 μm, at which the metallodielectric layered structure in Fig. 1A under the local 

approximation is a hyperbolic metamaterial. If 𝑃 decreases, 𝑣th(𝜆0) decreases in Fig. 2A. 

Moreover, lim

𝑃→0 𝑣th(𝜆0) = 𝛽. In other words, the phenomenological nonlocal parameter 𝛽

determines the ultimate low-bound for the Cherenkov threshold in the layered structure, or we 

have 𝑣th(𝜆0) ≥ 𝛽 for the arbitrary value of 𝑃. As such, the Cherenkov threshold in hyperbolic 

metamaterials is always nonzero since 𝛽 ≠ 0 for realistic metals. The underlying mechanism 

is that the nonlocal response from metals regularizes the broadband singularity of photonic 

density of states in hyperbolic metamaterials, since the nonlocal metal is equivalent to a 

composite material, comprising a finite thin dielectric layer on top of a local metal (41). Note 

that if we let 𝛽 = 0, the nonlocal response of metals would be artificially neglected, and the

Cherenkov threshold reduces to zero if 𝑃 → 0 in Fig. 2A. 

Figure 2A also indicates that the nonlocality in artificial nanostructures may be 

exploited to engineer Cherenkov thresholds in a flexible way. If 𝑃 is sufficiently small (e.g., 

𝑃 < 1 nm), the nonlocal response of hyperbolic metamaterials mainly arises from nonlocal 

metals, so that 𝑣th(𝜆0)~𝛽. If 𝑃 is sufficiently large (𝑃 > 10 nm), the nonlocal response of 

hyperbolic metamaterials is dictated by the structural periodicity. As a result, a convergent 

tendency of 𝑣th(𝜆0) emerges for different values of 𝛽, and it is possible to have 𝑣th(𝜆0) ≫ 𝛽. 

If 1 nm < 𝑃 < 10 nm, 𝑣th(𝜆0) is determined both by nonlocal metals and the structural 

periodicity.

To highlight the influence of nonlocal metals on Cherenkov radiation inside hyperbolic 

metamaterials, Fig. 2 (B to E) shows the free electron radiation in time domain, by setting  𝑑1 =

0.8 nm and 𝑃 = 2 nm. In Fig. 2 (B to E), 𝑣 = 0.015𝑐 is chosen; three different values of 𝛽 are 


7

used, which are 0, 𝑐/300 and 𝑐/30, respectively, in Fig. 2 (C to E); Fig. 2B is calculated under 

the local approximation. Cherenkov radiation inside hyperbolic metamaterials emerges in Fig. 

2 (C and D) since 𝑣 > 𝛽, but it disappears in Fig. 2E since 𝑣 < 𝛽. These results numerically 

verify the nonzero Cherenkov threshold for realistic hyperbolic metamaterials. On the other 

hand, Fig. 2E shows the absence of Cherenkov radiation of surface plasmons at the interface if 

the nonlocal response of hyperbolic metamaterials is mainly induced by nonlocal metals. Such 

a result is distinct from Fig. 1E. In addition, the emitted fields of Cherenkov radiation in Fig. 2

(C and D) are similar with that in Fig. 2B, except for fields inside the triangular region 

highlighted in Fig. 2 (B to D). The difference comes from that the radiation spectrum of 

Cherenkov radiation is sensitive to 𝛽, since 𝑣th(𝜆) is dependent on both 𝛽 and 𝜆.

Dissipated power emitted by a swift electron in hyperbolic metamaterials.

To facilitate the experimental observation of the revealed nonlocal Cherenkov threshold in 

hyperbolic metamaterials, Fig. 3 shows the comparison of dissipated powers 𝑃0 for the moving 

electron in Fig. 1A by using the local and nonlocal descriptions. The total dissipated power is 

equal to the integration of energy loss spectrum 𝐺 of over the interested range of wavelength; 

see methods in Supplementary Section 7. From Fig. 3, the nonlocality induced from the 

structural periodicity has a strong influence on the dissipated power. In contrast, the nonlocal 

electron screening in metals would affect the dissipated power only when the pitch of unit cell 

is small (e.g., 𝑃 ≤ 2 nm in Fig. 3). As a clear signature for the nonlocal Cherenkov threshold, 

if 𝑣 decreases to a sufficiently small value (e.g., 𝑣 < 0.1𝑐 for 𝑃 = 10 nm in Fig. 3), the 

dissipated power would dramatically drop, due to the disappearance of radiation channels in 

more frequencies. In addition, there is a large discrepancy between the dissipated powers from 

the local and nonlocal calculations in Fig. 3, indicating the local approximation is not accurate 

for the calculation of dissipated power. 

Influence of longitudinal modes on the Cherenkov threshold around epsilon-near-zero 

frequencies. 


8

Now recall the in-plane permittivity 𝜀|| of the effective uniaxial material for the layered 

structure in Fig. 1A. Note that around the frequency of 𝜀|| → 0, the longitudinal modes will 

show up with the consideration of nonlocality, in addition to the transverse modes (35). We 

then proceed to discuss the influence of longitudinal modes on the Cherenkov threshold in Fig. 

4. In Fig. 4A, we let 𝜆0 = 0.395 μm, at which Re(𝜀||) → 0+ and Re(𝜀⊥) > 0 [Fig. S1]. We 

reveal in Fig. 4A that the longitudinal mode has a much lower Cherenkov threshold than the 

transverse mode. Such an emerging phenomenon can be understood as follows. 

On the one hand, for transverse modes, their isofrequency contour at 𝜆0 is elliptical 

[Fig. S1], since Re(𝜀⊥) ∙ Re(𝜀||) > 0. The layered structure in Fig. 1A at 𝜆0 is then denoted as 

the elliptical metamaterial below. The elliptical isofrequency contour, whether calculated under

the local or nonlocal descriptions [Fig. S3], would generally lead to a large Cherenkov threshold 

for transverse modes; for example, we always have 𝑣th

𝑇 (𝜆0) > 0.2𝑐 in Fig. 4A. On the other 

hand, for longitudinal modes, the corresponding Cherenkov threshold 𝑣th

𝐿 (𝜆0) is sensitive to 

the nonlocal response induced both by nonlocal metals and the structural periodicity in Fig. 4A. 

In short, the features of Cherenkov threshold for longitudinal modes inside elliptical 

metamaterials in Fig. 4A are similar with that for transverse modes inside hyperbolic 

metamaterials in Fig. 2A. 

Since 𝑣th

𝐿 (𝜆0) < 𝑣th

𝑇 (𝜆0) for the arbitrary value of 𝑃 in Fig. 4A, it is then reasonable to 

argue that the consideration of nonlocality would largely decrease the Cherenkov threshold for 

elliptical metamaterials at epsilon-near-zero frequencies. Such a feature is distinct from 

hyperbolic metamaterials, in which the consideration of nonlocality would instead increase the 

Cherenkov threshold. 

Figure 4 (B and C) shows the field distribution of free electron radiation at 𝜆0. The 

longitudinal mode does not show up in the local approximation [Fig. 4B], while it is excited by 

free electrons under the nonlocal description [Fig. 4C]. These results numerically verify the 

invalidity of local approximation in describing Cherenkov radiation inside elliptical 


9

metamaterials at epsilon-near-zero frequencies. Figure 4 (D and E) shows the radiation 

spectrum of excited longitudinal modes around 𝜆0. Figure 4D shows that the excitation of 

longitudinal modes is sensitive to the particle velocity 𝑣 and the wavelength 𝜆. To be specific, 

if 𝑣 is fixed, the longitudinal mode can be efficiently excited only within a narrow range of 

wavelength, although they exist in a relative wide range of wavelength [Fig. 4D]. Meanwhile, 

the longitudinal mode at a certain wavelength can be efficiently excited only for a certain range 

of 𝑣 [Fig. 4D]. Figure 4E indicates that the efficient excitation of longitudinal and transverse 

modes at the same wavelength requires different values of 𝑣. For example, at 𝜆0, the peak for 

the efficient excitation of longitudinal modes appears at 𝑣 = 0.2𝑐, while the peak for transverse 

modes is at 𝑣 = 0.6𝑐. With a proper design, the values of these two peaks are in the same order 

of magnitude. These features might facilitate the potential observations of Cherenkov radiation 

of longitudinal modes at epsilon-near-zero frequencies.

DISCUSSION

In summary, we for the first time theoretically prove the non-existence of threshold-free 

Cherenkov radiation in hyperbolic metamaterials. Instead, the realistic nonlocality would 

always enable an ultimate lower-bound velocity cutoff (whose value is comparable to the Fermi 

velocity of electrons in metals) inside metallodielectric layered structures, including hyperbolic 

and elliptical metamaterials. Moreover, we reveal that while the nonlocality would increase the

value of Cherenkov threshold in hyperbolic metamaterials, it would, in turn, decrease the value 

of Cherenkov threshold in elliptical metamaterials. In addition, although the hydrodynamic 

model is a very approximate approach in treating the nonlocal and quantum effects in metallic 

nanostructures, we emphasize that our theoretical predictions of nonlocal Cherenkov threshold 

is universal regardless of which quantum models used. This is because the observed threshold 

behaviors of Cherenkov radiation in our configuration only rely on the reduced photonic density 

of states and the appearance of longitudinal modes. Previous experimental results have verified 

that the presented approaches in this work (i.e., the hydrodynamic model and the realistic 

periodic structure) can precisely anticipate these two phenomena induced by the nonlocality


10

(40, 42). In short, the nonlocality could significantly re-shape Cherenkov radiation in complex 

media, including the Cherenkov threshold, and it provides a valuable way to flexibly engineer 

the Cherenkov threshold. Our work thus provides an important theoretical guidance for many 

practical applications of Cherenkov radiation, such as the design of novel integrated free-

electron radiation sources on chip.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

To reveal the impacts of nonlocality, we compare Cherenkov radiation in three configurations, 

i.e., homogeneous hyperbolic metamaterial, layered structure with the consideration of 

nonlocality only from the structural periodicity, and layered structure with the consideration of 

nonlocality from both the structural periodicity and the electron screening in metals. In the first 

configuration, we treat the hyperbolic material as a homogeneous medium, with the effective 

permittivity given by Maxwell Garnet approximation. In the last two configurations, the 

permittivities are explicitly defined for each region of the layered structures. Without 

considering the nonlocal electron screening in metals, we calculate the fields in all region using 

potentials with decomposition of the magnetic field and the transverse electric field. When the 

nonlocal electron screening in metals is considered, we include an additional longitudinal 

electric field with hydrodynamic model. The transmission and reflection coefficients of the 

transverse field or the longitudinal field are analytically solved by employing the method of 

transfer matrix. In addition, Cherenkov thresholds in last two configurations are analytically 

determined from the corresponding  isofrequency contours when the material loss is artificially 

neglected. Finally, we evaluate the dissipated power emitted by the swift electron using the 

power dissipation formula. 


11

REFERENCES AND NOTES
1.
P. A. Čerenkov, Visible light from pure liquids under the impact of γ-rays. Dokl. Acad. 
Sci. URSS. 2, 451-457 (1934).

2.
I. E. Tamm, I. M. Frank, Coherent radiation of fast electrons in a medium. Dokl. Acad. 
Sci. URSS. 14, 107-112 (1937).

3.
Y. Yang et al., Maximal spontaneous photon emission and energy loss from free 
electrons. Nat. Phys. 14, 894 (2018).

4.
X. Shi et al., Superlight inverse Doppler effect. Nat. Phys. 14, 1001 (2018).

5.
H. Chen, M. Chen, Flipping photons backward: reversed Cherenkov radiation. Mater. 
Today 14, 34-41 (2011).

6.
V. V. Vorobev, A. V. Tyukhtin, Nondivergent Cherenkov radiation in a wire 
metamaterial. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 184801 (2012).

7.
P. Genevet et al., Controlled steering of Cherenkov surface plasmon wakes with a one-
dimensional metamaterial. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 804 (2015).

8.
X. Lin et al., Splashing transients of 2D plasmons launched by swift electrons. Sci. Adv.
3, e1601192 (2017).

9.
O. Chamberlain, E. Segrè, C. Wiegand, T. Ypsilantis, Observation of antiprotons. Phys. 
Rev. 100, 947 (1955).

10.
M. Karpov, M. H. Pfeiffer, J. Liu, A. Lukashchuk, T. J. Kippenberg, Photonic chip-
based soliton frequency combs covering the biological imaging window. Nat. Commun.
9, 1146 (2018).

11.
J. J. Aubert et al., Experimental observation of a heavy particle J. Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 
1404 (1974).

12.
F. G. De Abajo, Optical excitations in electron microscopy. Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 209 
(2010).

13.
T. M. Shaffer, E. C. Pratt, J. Grimm, Utilizing the power of Cerenkov light with 
nanotechnology. Nat. Nanotechnol. 12, 106 (2017).

14.
T. Ypsilantis, J. Séguinot, Theory of ring imaging Cherenkov counters. Nucl. Instrum. 
Meth. A 343, 30-51 (1994).

15.
A. A. Alves Jr et al., The LHCb detector at the LHC. J. Instrum. 3, S08005 (2008).

16.
X. Lin et al., Controlling Cherenkov angles with resonance transition radiation. Nat. 
Phys. 14, 816 (2018).

17.
C. Roques-Carmes et al., Towards integrated tunable all-silicon free-electron light 
sources. Nat. Commun. 10, 1-8 (2019).

18.
S. Liu et al., Surface polariton Cherenkov light radiation source. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 
153902 (2012).

19.
N. V. Sapra et al., On-chip integrated laser-driven particle accelerator. Science 367, 79-
83 (2020).

20.
G. Adamo et al., Light well: a tunable free-electron light source on a chip. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 103, 113901 (2009).

21.
L. J. Wong, I. Kaminer, O. Ilic, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljačić, Towards graphene 
plasmon-based free-electron infrared to X-ray sources. Nat. Photon. 10, 46 (2016).

22.
C. Luo, M. Ibanescu, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, Cerenkov radiation in 
photonic crystals. Science 299, 368-371 (2003).

23.
V. Ginis, J. Danckaert, I. Veretennicoff, P. Tassin, Controlling Cherenkov radiation 
with transformation-optical metamaterials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 167402 (2014).

24.
X. Lu et al., Generation of high-power, reversed-Cherenkov wakefield radiation in a 
metamaterial structure. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 014801 (2019).

25.
J. Tao, Q. J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Luo, Reverse surface-polariton Cherenkov radiation. 
Sci. Rep. 6, 30704 (2016).

26.
A. Poddubny, I. Iorsh, P. Belov, Y. S. Kivshar, Hyperbolic metamaterials. Nat. Photon.
7, 948 (2013).

27.
S. Xi et al., Experimental verification of reversed Cherenkov radiation in left-handed 
metamaterial. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 194801 (2009).


12

28.
Z. Duan et al., Observation of the reversed Cherenkov radiation. Nat. Commun. 8, 
14901 (2017).

29.
F. Liu et al., Integrated Cherenkov radiation emitter eliminating the electron velocity 
threshold. Nat. Photon. 11, 289 (2017).

30.
W. Yan, M. Wubs, N. A. Mortensen, Hyperbolic metamaterials: nonlocal response 
regularizes broadband supersingularity. Phys. Rev. B 86, 205429 (2012).

31.
A. D. Boardman, Electromagnetic surface modes.  (John Wiley & Sons, 1982).

32.
N. A. Mortensen, S. Raza, M. Wubs, T. Søndergaard, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, A generalized 
non-local optical response theory for plasmonic nanostructures. Nat. Commun. 5, 3809 
(2014).

33.
Y. Yang et al., A General Theoretical and Experimental Framework for Nanoscale 
Electromagnetism. Nature 576, 248-252 (2019).

34.
G. A. Wurtz et al., Designed ultrafast optical nonlinearity in a plasmonic nanorod 
metamaterial enhanced by nonlocality. Nat. Nanotechnol. 6, 107 (2011).

35.
A. A. Orlov, P. M. Voroshilov, P. A. Belov, Y. S. Kivshar, Engineered optical 
nonlocality in nanostructured metamaterials. Phys. Rev. B 84, 045424 (2011).

36.
J. Benedicto et al., Numerical tool to take nonlocal effects into account in metallo-
dielectric multilayers. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 32, 1581-1588 (2015).

37.
M. B. Lundeberg et al., Tuning quantum nonlocal effects in graphene plasmonics. 
Science 357, 187-191 (2017).

38.
D. A. Iranzo et al., Probing the ultimate plasmon confinement limits with a van der 
Waals heterostructure. Science 360, 291-295 (2018).

39.
H. Hu, J. Zhang, S. A. Maier, Y. Luo, Enhancing third-harmonic generation with spatial 
nonlocality. ACS Photonics 5, 592-598 (2017).

40.
C. Ciracì et al., Probing the ultimate limits of plasmonic enhancement. Science 337, 
1072-1074 (2012).

41.
Y. Luo, A. I. Fernandez-Dominguez, A. Wiener, S. A. Maier, J. B. Pendry, Surface 
plasmons and nonlocality: a simple model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 093901 (2013).

42.
R. Pollard et al., Optical nonlocalities and additional waves in epsilon-near-zero 
metamaterials. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 127405 (2009).

Acknowledgements 

Funding: Y. Luo was sponsored in part by Singapore Ministry of Education under Grant No. 
MOE2018-T2-2-189 (S), 2017-T1-001-239 (RG91/17 (S)); A*Star AME programmatic Grant 
No. A18A7b0058. B. Zhang was partially supported by Nanyang Technological University 
for NAP Start‐Up Grant and the Singapore Ministry of Education (Grant No. MOE2018‐T2‐
1‐022 (S), MOE2016‐T3‐1‐006 and Tier 1 RG174/16 (S)). Author contributions: All 
authors contributed extensively to the work presented in this paper. Y.L. and H.H. conceived 
the research. H.H. performed the calculation. X.L., J.Z., D.L, P.G., B.Z. and Y.L. contributed
insight and discussion on the results. H.H., X.L., Y.L., and B.Z. wrote the paper. Y.L., X.L. 
and B.Z. supervised the project. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no 
competing financial interests. Data and materials availability. All data needed to evaluate 
the conclusions are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Additional data 
related to this paper may be requested from the authors. 


13

Fig. 1. Influence of nonlocal response from the structural periodicity on the Cherenkov 

threshold. (A) Structural schematic. The swift free electron has a velocity of 𝑣̅ = 𝑧̂𝑣. (B-E) 

Field distribution of free electron radiation in time domain. The realistic layered structure is 

considered in (C and E), while it is treated as a homogeneous uniaxial material in (B and D) 

according to the classical local description. The realistic nanostructure in A has a wavelength-

dependent Cherenkov threshold 𝑣th(𝜆), namely the particle velocity threshold required for the 

emergence of Cherenkov radiation. Cherenkov radiation appears if 𝑣 = 𝑣1 > min (𝑣th(𝜆)) in 

C but disappears if 𝑣 = 𝑣2 < min (𝑣th(𝜆)) in E. Other parameters are: the pitch of unit cell 

𝑃 = 𝑑1 + 𝑑2 = 25 nm; for all studied cases here and below, 𝑑1/𝑃 = 0.4, and the interested 

range of wavelength in free space is 𝜆 ∈ [0.1 10] μm.


14

Fig. 2. Influence of nonlocal response from the nonlocal electron screening in metals on 

the Cherenkov threshold. (A) Cherenkov threshold 𝑣th(𝜆0) as a function of the pitch 𝑃 of 

unit cell, where 𝜆0 = 1 μm. 𝛽 is the phenomenological nonlocal parameter for metals. For 

realistic metals, 𝛽 ≠ 0. The metallodielectric layered structure in Fig. 1A under the local 

approximation is the hyperbolic metamaterial at 𝜆0. Due to the nonlocal metals, we always have 

𝑣th(𝜆0) ≥ 𝛽. (B-E) Field distributions of free electron radiation in time domain. The realistic 

layered structure in Fig. 1A is adopted for (C to E), while it is replaced by an effective 

homogeneous uniaxial material for B according to the local approximation. Cherenkov 

radiation appears if 𝑣3 > 𝛽 in (C and D) but disappears if 𝑣3 < 𝛽 in E. Other parameters are 

𝑃 = 2 nm, and 𝑣 = 𝑣3 = 0.015𝑐 in (B to E).  


15

Fig. 3. Influence of the nonlocality on the dissipated power of a swift electron moving 

above metallodielectric layered structures. For comparison, metallodielectric layered 

structure in Fig. 1A is treated by three different ways. For the red dashed line, the layered 

structure is treated as an effective homogeneous uniaxial medium, according to the classical

local description. For the solid lines, the nonlocal response from the structural periodicity is 

considered by setting the nonlocal parameter 𝛽 = 0. For the data indicated by hollow symbols, 

the nonlocal responses both from the structural periodicity and from the nonlocal electron 

screening in metals (e.g., 𝛽/𝑐 = 1/300) are taken into consideration. When 𝑑1/𝑃 is fixed, the 

dissipated power calculated from the classical local description is independent of 𝑃. 


16

Fig. 4. Influence of longitudinal modes on the Cherenkov threshold around the epsilon-

near-zero frequency. At the wavelength around 𝜆0 = 0.395 μm, the metallodielectric layered 

structure in Fig. 1A under the local approximation has an elliptical isofrequency contour and 

one component of its effective permittivity close to zero. Then the realistic layered structure in 

Fig. 1A supports both transverse and longitudinal modes around 𝜆0. (A) Cherenkov thresholds 

of longitudinal and transverse modes vs the pitch 𝑃 of unit cell at 𝜆0, with the consideration of 

nonlocality. The results calculated from the local approximation is the same as the red dashed 

line. (B, C) Field distributions of free electron radiation at 𝜆0. The longitudinal mode appears 

in C if the realistic layered structure in Fig. 1A is considered, but it vanishes in B if the local 

approximation is used. (D) Electron energy loss spectrum 𝐺 as a function of wavelength 𝜆 and 

particle velocity 𝑣. (E) Electron energy loss spectrum 𝐺 vs 𝑣 at 𝜆0. For (B to E), 𝑃 = 25 nm. 


