1 
 

Tunable mid-wave infrared Fabry-Perot bandpass filters 
using phase-change GeSbTe 

Calum Williams1, Nina Hong2, Matthew Julian3,4, Stephen Borg5, Hyun Jung Kim4,5* 

1. Department of Physics, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, UK 
2. J.A. Woollam Co., Inc, Lincoln, NE 68508, USA 
3. Charles L. Brown Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, VA, 22904, USA 
4. National Institute of Aerospace, Hampton VA 23666, USA 
5. NASA Langley Research Center, Hampton VA 23681-2199, USA 
 
* hyunjung.kim@nasa.gov 
 

 

Abstract 

We demonstrate spectrally-tunable Fabry-Perot bandpass filters operating across the MWIR by utilizing the phase-
change material GeSbTe (GST) as a tunable cavity medium between two (Ge:Si) distributed Bragg reflectors. The 
induced refractive index modulation of GST increases the cavity’s optical path length, red-shifting the passband. Our 
filters have spectral-tunability of ~300 nm, transmission efficiencies of 60-75% and narrowband FWHMs of 50-65 
nm (Q-factor ~70-90). We further show multispectral thermal imaging and gas sensing. By matching the filter’s initial 
passband to a CO2 vibrational-absorption mode (~4.25 µm), tunable atmospheric CO2 sensing and dynamic plume 
visualization of added CO2 is realized.   

 

 

 
 
 


2 
 

1. Introduction 

 
The mid-wave infrared (MWIR) waveband (~3–5 µm) is invaluable for sensing and imaging systems, from probing 
molecular vibrations in chemical species to detecting radiant thermal signatures [1–4]. MWIR imaging devices play a 
key role in many diverse technological applications, including multi/hyperspectral imaging, thermography, chemical 
spectroscopy, surveillance, automotive safety, and astronomy [5–8]. Tunable optical properties — such as sampling 
more than single wavelength and operating across wide wavelength band — are highly desirable for maximizing the 
available detectable information [9][10]. Yet achieving this in a single compact solid-state device remains challenging, 
with no single technology providing a complete solution.  

The majority of wide-field visible-MWIR imaging systems contain passive Fabry-Perot (FP)-based bandpass 
filters comprising multi-layer dielectric, or metal-dielectric, thin-film stacks, either spatially encompassing the entire 
image sensor /focal plane array [5,11] or within multispectral filter array arrangements [10,12]. In its simplest form, 
a FP-bandpass filter consists of two distributed Bragg reflectors (DBRs) separated by a resonant single-cavity (spacer). 
The DBRs, acting as dielectric-mirrors, open up a stopband, with the resonant cavity providing a passband with narrow 
full-width-half-maximum (FWHM); layer thicknesses for each are designed for the centre wavelength (CWL) of 
operation [11,13]. Thin-film FP-bandpass filter design is well established [11,13] — with mass-produced filters still 
offering unrivalled optical performance when compared to alternative spectral filter technologies. However, once 
manufactured, these FP-bandpass filters typically offer no straightforward means to actively tune their spectral 
properties.   

For ‘active’ spectral tunability, two operating mechanisms are generally utilized: (1) modifying the physical-
optical properties of constituent material/s, or (2) mechanically altering the device design /system setup [14–16]. For 
the former, the optical properties of materials can be tuned by: (a) employing materials with adjustable refractive 
indices (i.e. index modulation capability), and or (b) incorporating patterns (i.e. gratings, waveguides etc.), then 
changing geometry (size, shape etc.). For (a), liquid crystals (LCs) — with voltage controllable birefringence 
properties — have been widely implemented (e.g. LC-Lyot filters) to provide spectral filtering [17,18]. However, this 
costly approach is inherently polarization-dependent, offers low transmission efficiencies, operates primarily in the 
visible — as LCs typically exhibit vibrational-absorption modes in the IR — and provides relatively slow switching 
speeds (~kHz) [18,19]. Another related technology are acousto-optic tunable filters (AOTFs), whereby the optical 
properties of a birefringent crystal, and subsequent diffraction output, can be controlled through acoustic waves 
generated via applied RF signals [18,20]. This approach, albeit fast-switching (~MHz), is costly, requires bulky 
hardware, has small entrance apertures and hence is generally unsuitable for wide-field imaging purposes. Over recent 
years, plasmonic /all-dielectric nanostructure arrays have been developed for compact, ultra-thin spectral filters [21–
23]. These devices provide spectral filtering through the excitation of electric /magnetic resonances in tailored metallic 
or high-index dielectric nanostructure arrays. Nonetheless, for bandpass filters, their transmission response is typically 
broad with low efficiencies; polarization-dependent multipolar (additional) modes are often excited in the same 
spectral region, and ultra-high resolution lithographic techniques (e.g. deep /extreme UV) are required for commercial 
adoption [21–23]. For active tunability, integration with electro-optic materials such as LCs [24–26] is commonly 
used.  

For ‘real-world’ wide-field multispectral imaging applications — such as remote sensing and thermal (IR) imaging 
— motorized filter wheels are widely utilized [9,27,28]. These systems contain many passive narrowband filters in a 
circular array, and through mechanical tuning (stepped rotation), the filters are time-sequentially positioned in the 
optical beam path. This approach has slow response times, provides limited spectral resolution (dependent on the 
number of the filters), is bulky, and has moving parts. A single compact solid-state tunable filter which is fast 
switching, has no moving parts, is straightforward to operate and inexpensive to manufacture is highly desirable for 
many fields underpinned by IR-spectroscopic methods and for filter wheel replacement. 

Recently, phase change materials (PCMs) have gained interest as a new platform for tunable optical devices due 
to their pronounced refractive index contrast (between disordered-amorphous and ordered-crystalline states), fast 
switching speeds, and good thermal stability [29–31]. The prototypical chalcogenide PCM, Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST), is non-
volatile, can be reversibly switched on a nanosecond timescale and exhibits large index modulation (~2.4) across the 
IR [29–32]. When GST is heated above its glass transition temperature — through laser pulse or electronic excitation 
— it produces a thermal transition occurring through nucleation and crystallization; 150ºC for face-centred cubic 
(FCC) packing, 360ºC for hexagonal close packed (HCP) growth [29–31,33]. Re-amorphization is achieved by heating 
the material above its melting temperature (632ºC) followed by quenching. This optical contrast is a key property of 
PCMs for its widespread commercial application in optically rewritable data storage device and increasingly common 
usage in tunable /reconfigurable micro-optical devices such as waveguides, variable-focal lenses and filters [30,31,33–


3 
 

36]. PCMs maintain their structural state and only require energy during the switching process, which is a clear 
advantage over liquid crystals and mechanically tuned photonic devices. Moreover, GST is both cost-effective and 
scalable for large-area integration and exhibits tunable optical properties across broad wavebands. 

In this work, we utilize GST as a phase-change cavity embedded between Ge:Si DBRs to enable spectrally-tunable 
(bi-stable) all solid-state FP-bandpass filters operating across the MWIR waveband. The optical path length of the 
GST cavity, hence resultant passband CWL, is spectrally red-shifted under phase transformation due to GSTs induced 
refractive index modulation. Therefore, through external stimuli, our filter’s CWL can be spectrally switched to two 
different states (passbands); a reversible process. Our 1-inch diameter filters have narrowband FWHMs of 50–65 nm 
(with Q-factor ~70–90) and high transmission efficiencies of 60–75%. We further show multispectral thermal (IR) 
imaging capability by integrating our filters with a commercial thermal camera and imaging two separate wavelengths. 
Moreover, by designing the GST-BP filter’s CWL to correspond to a molecular vibration mode of CO2 (~4.25 µm), 
we demonstrate gas sensing (imaging) of both atmospheric (native) CO2 and externally added CO2 gas; imaging the 
dynamic plume for the latter. Our GST-based thin-film filters have wide applicability for IR imaging and sensing 
applications which require compact, cost-effective tunable spectral filters.  
 
 


4 
 

2. Device Concept 
 
The simplest thin-film optical bandpass filters are composed of a single-spacer (resonant cavity) between two multi-
layer dielectric mirrors [11,13,37]. The dielectric mirrors — commonly known as distributed bragg reflectors (DBRs) 
— consist of a series of alternating high-and-low index materials (i.e. N bi-layers) with ¼-wave optical thickness, 
which provides a spectral ‘rejection region’ [11,13,37]. An embedded spacer opens up a transmission passband, with 
optical thickness governing the filter’s center wavelength (CWL) of operation. A material’s optical thickness is 
dependent on its refractive index, hence by utilizing the phase-change material GST — which exhibits a significant 
index modulation across the waveband of interest (MWIR) — as the spacer material, it is possible to control the 
passband CWL through the phase transformation of GST.  

As our bandpass filters are designed for operation across the MWIR, Ge (H – high index) and Si (L – low index) 
are chosen as the DBR materials, with CaF2 as the substrate. GST is then utilized as a tunable spacer material, with 
capability to operate in either its amorphous (a-GST) or crystalline (c-GST) state (induced through external stimuli). 
Our tunable resonant cavity design concept is shown schematically in Fig 1a. The simulated transmission response of 
this design, for the two GST states, is shown in Fig 1b as a function of N bi-layers. From this, N = 6 bi-layers were 
chosen for the proof of concept filters — a compromise between the filters’ optical properties and total deposition 
time — with simulated response of this arrangement shown in Fig 1c. We expect a resultant passband spectral shift of 
~300nm between the two GST states along with minimal decrease in transmission and small increase in FWHM. 

 
  

 

Fig. 1. Device concept and simulations. (a) Tunable MWIR Fabry-Perot bandpass filter layer design, with thicknesses of filter materials (e.g. 
tGST) indicated (i), whereby the centre wavelength (𝜆𝜆1 or 𝜆𝜆2) of the narrowband transmission response will spectrally shift (ii) (a reversible process) 
depending on the spacer’s optical thickness, hence GST crystallinity (refractive index). (b) Simulation of the effect of N-bi layers on the 
transmission response of the filter for a-GST and c-GST spacer layers with quarter-wave DBR stacks. (c) Simulation of the 6-layer designed FP 
filter. DBR = distributed Bragg reflector, BP = bandpass, HL = high-low index bi-layer, ∆𝜆𝜆 = blocking wavelength range (rejection region). 

 

 

 

 

 


5 
 

3. Materials and Methods 

 

3.1 GST-FP bandpass filter: thin film materials deposition and characterization 
 
Double-side polished 1.5 x 25.4 mm (1-inch optics) CaF2 wafers (Esco Optics, Inc) were sonicated in acetone, iso-
propanol, and deionized water sequentially, twice, followed by ultra-high purity compressed nitrogen (N2) blow dry, 
before deposition. All thin-films were deposited via 50W RF magnetron sputtering at a base pressure of 2.6 x 10-6 
Torr and a deposition pressure of 7 mTorr (10 sccm Ar flow, research-grade, 99.9999% purity). Three separate 
sputtering targets were used for the high-index, low-index and cavity (spacer) layers: Ge (99.999% purity), Si  
(99.999% purity) and Ge2Sb2Te5 target (14.3 wt% Ge, 23.8 wt% Sb, 61.9 wt% Te, Mitsubishi materials, Inc.). The 
chemical composition of as-deposited GST thin-films was determined by DCP-AES (Direct Current Plasma-Atomic 
Emission Spectroscopy, Luvak, Inc.). The composition was measured as 22 at% Ge, 23.5 at% Sb, and 54.5 at% Te, 
which is close to a nominal composition of bulk Ge22.2Sb22.2Te55.6 [33]. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) 
spectroscopy (ThermoFisher) was used to measure the transmission intensity data of the bandpass filters. X-ray 
diffraction (XRD) was used to determine the crystallinity, and ellipsometry used to measure complex complex 
refractive indices of the respective layers; RC2 ellipsometry system (Model: DI, J.A. Woollam) to measure up to 1.6 
µm and IR-VASE (Infrared Variable-angle spectroscopic ellipsometry, J.A. Woollam) to measure up to 7 µm. Results 
of both the XRD and ellipsometry measurements of as-deposited a-GST and c-GST (HCP) are shown in Fig 2a,b and 
Fig 2c,d respectively. A significant index modulation across the IR can be observed, with ∆n ~ 2.4 at 𝜆𝜆 = 4.5 µm. Fig 
e,f shows the refractive index measurements for RF sputtered thin-film Ge and Si (high-low bi-layer respectively). 
The measured refractive index values are summarized in Table 1 and compare closely with similar studies in the 
literature [29–31]. These values are subsequently used to determine the ¼-wave thicknesses for the fabricated FP-
bandpass filters.   
 

3.2 Multi-layer stack numerical simulation and layer thicknesses 
 
Recursive propagation matrices (transfer matrix method, implemented in MATLAB [13]) are employed to determine 
the optical output of the thin-film multilayer dielectric stacks [11,13]. The transmission and reflection coefficients at 
each interface of the thin-film stack are calculated as a function of wavelength, and overall transmission response 
determined recursively [13]. Each layer is assigned its material-specific refractive index, with values obtained 
experimentally through ellipsometry measurements. For the two DBRs either side of the GST spacer, N = 6 bi-layers 
with thicknesses = 𝜆𝜆0/4n, where n is the experimentally determined refractive index of each high-low layer and 𝜆𝜆0 the 
design CWL. As such, the stack arrangement is (HL)N(spacer)(HL)N = (Ge:Si)6(GST)(Ge:Si)6, where GST can be in 
either its amorphous or crystalline state. At 4.5 µm, an index modulation of (∆n) = 2.4 exists between the two GST 
states (Table 1) which provides the change in optical path length for the spacer and thus the spectral shift in passband 
CWL. The comparably low number of bi-layers (with respect to commercial BP-filters) was chosen as a balance 
between desirable filter performance (narrow FWHM, high transmission etc.) and total deposition /processing time 
for a proof-of-concept set of devices.     
 

3.3 Infrared imaging demonstrations 
 
A hotplate, with a NASA insignia logo (milled from a 15 cm x 15 cm x 3 mm aluminum plate) placed in front, was 
used to mimic a spatially-variant blackbody thermal source. The hotplate (thermal source) was heated from 320K to 
486K and an IR camera (FLIR SC8300HD, 0.02 Wm-2 minimum pixel sensitivity) connected to a PC, was used to 
capture the images. A field stop was used in order to eliminate unwanted signal from polluting the measurement data. 
Our GST-based FP bandpass filters were mounted and positioned between the IR camera and thermal source.  
 
 


6 
 

 

Fig. 2. Thin-film materials characterization. XRD data for sputtered amorphous Ge2Sb2Te5 (a) and (b) crystalline (HCP) Ge2Sb2Te5 states. (c) 
Real and imaginary (d) part of the refractive index for thin-film a-GST and c-GST across 𝜆𝜆 = 1-7µm, obtained through ellipsometry, with index 
modulation (∆n′) of ~2.4 at 4.5µm indicated. (e) Real and imaginary (f) part of the refractive index for sputtered Ge and Si across 𝜆𝜆 = 1-7µm, 
obtained through ellipsometry. The design CWL of 4.5µm is overlaid for visual reference. 

 

 

Table 1. Summary of the experimentally derived MWIR optical constants (at 4.5µm and 4.52µm) of the RF sputtered thin-films: Si, Ge, 
and Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST-225) in its amorphous and crystalline states 

𝜆𝜆 = 4.5µm
𝜆𝜆 = 4.2 µm

Material
n
k
n
k

Ge
4.100
~0
4.103
~0

GST-225 
(amorphous) 
2.948 
0 
 
2.952 
~0 

GST-225 
(crystalline) 
5.336 
0.089 
 
5.354 
0.086 

Si
3.42
~0
3.424
~0


7 
 

4. Tunable GST-FP bandpass filter operating in the MWIR  

 

Two bandpass filters (25.4mm diameter) with N = 1 and N = 6 alternating (HL)N bi-layers, and layer thicknesses 
designed for 𝜆𝜆0 = 4.5 µm, were fabricated and optically characterized (Fig 3a). With the arrangement 
(Ge:Si)N(GST)(Ge:Si)N, the physical layer thicknesses were, tSi = 329 nm, tGe =  280 nm and tGST = 375 nm spacer 
(single cavity). The filters were annealed at 400oC inside a vacuum chamber to induce GST crystallization, then re-
measured. Fig 3b shows the transmission results of the N = 1 GST-BP filter for the two GST states. The a-GST state 
has CWL ~ 4.5 µm with 85% transmission efficiency, and c-GST state CWL ~ 4.9 µm with 70% transmission 
efficiency. The longer wavelength state (with c-GST spacer) has a slightly reduced transmission peak attributed to the 
increased infrared absorption (extinction coefficient, Fig 2d) of the c-GST compared to a-GST. Fig 3c compares the 
transmission spectra of the two (N = 1 and N = 6) BP filters with the initial a-GST spacer. As expected, the FWHM 
(~ 50 nm) narrows at the CWL, but the transmission decreases, which in this case we speculate is attributed to 
cumulative optical scattering from grain boundary defects of the multiple layers. The blocking wavelength range (∆𝜆𝜆) 
is ~ 4.1–5 µm, and higher order ‘ripples’ can be observed outside this region. Fig 3d compares the N = 6 filter in its 
two operating states. The initial a-GST state has CWL ~ 4.5 µm (as designed) with 75% transmission efficiency, and 
c-GST state CWL ~ 4.75 µm with 60% transmission efficiency and slight increase in FWHM to ~65 nm 
(corresponding to a Q-factor ~ 70–90). This proof-of-concept filter design can be further improved through 
incorporation of multiple-cavity GST-cavities and optimization of additional layers which will suppress out-of-band 
ripples [11,38,39].  
 

 

Fig. 3. Tunable GST-FP MWIR bandpass filter characterization. (a) Schematic of the two BP filters, with N=1 and N=6 bilayers, which 
can operate in two states: a-GST or c-GST spacer. (b) Transmission spectra of the two GST spacer states for a N=1 bi-layer stack - 
(Ge:Si)N(GST)(Ge:Si)N. (c) Transmission spectra of the two filter types (with N=1 and N=6) in their a-GST states. (d) Transmission spectra of 
the N=6 filter in its two states: a-GST and c-GST.  


8 
 

5. Applications of GST-FP filters in the MWIR 

 

5.1 Thermal imaging demonstration 
 
Our GST-FP bandpass filter design (Fig 1d), with CWL(a-GST) ~ 4.5 µm and CWL(c-GST) ~ 4.75 µm, is now 
duplicated with each set to one of the two GST crystallinities. i.e. filter 1: a-GST spacer, filter 2: c-GST spacer. A 
hotplate, with Al NASA Insignia logo transmission mask placed in front, is used as a spatially varying thermal-IR 
object (blackbody source). Between 320K to 486K, the blackbody emissive spectral peak power blue shifts; from ~9 
µm to  5.8 µm, with total integrated power increasing in the MWIR band [33,40]. The emissive power is higher at 
4.75 µm than 4.5 µm, and this difference increases as the blackbody temperature increases. Thus, a difference in 
transmission intensity (counts) between the two filters, which increases as hotplate temperature increases, is expected.  
 

 

Fig. 4. Thermal imaging with GST-FP bandpass filters. (a) White light (RGB) image of the thermal imaging setup showing the hotplate, 
NASA Insignia logo (transmission mask) and the two mounted filters (left) a-GST spacer, and (right) c-GST spacer, with CWL(a-GST) ~ 4.5 
µm and CWL(c-GST) ~ 4.75 µm. (b) Shows the thermal (IR) image of the same scene but using a MWIR digital camera. The hotplate temperature 
(blackbody source) is increased from 320K (i) to 486K (iv). (c,d) Comparison of the 4.5 µm and 4.7 µm filter at 515K. (a) test setup, (b) the 
smaller objects (i.e. higher spatial frequencies) image from 4.5 µm than the 4.7 µm, and (c) the filter positions has been swapped to check 
repeatability.  

 

 

The two filters are placed between the thermal object (hotplate) and a MWIR digital camera. This arrangement is 
shown under white light (RGB) conditions in Fig 4a. Fig 4b shows the MWIR camera image data as the hotplate 
increases in base temperature, from T0 = 320K (i) to Tf = 486K (iv). A variable transmission response through the two 
filters, and subsequent identification of the NASA Insignia logo (spatially variant thermal profile), can be observed. 
As the temperature increases, the intensity captured through the longer wavelength filter is greater than that of the 
shorter wavelength filter. Note, due to the increased extinction coefficient for the c-GST state, thus longer wavelength 


9 
 

filter, the difference in intensity is slightly less than expected if the two filters had the same CWL transmission 
efficiency. The performance of our filters is further demonstrated through the imaging (resolving) of a metallic ruler 
(Fig 4. c,d) placed between source (set at 486K) and camera. It can be observed that the intensity is higher for the 
longer wavelength filter, the ruled lines (and holes) can be resolved and that the filters’ intensity response is spatially 
uniform over the entire 1-inch area. 
  

5.2 Carbon dioxide gas sensing 

 
The transmittance of electromagnetic radiation through the atmosphere is dependent on the relative amount of 
constituent gases, hence amounts of radiation-absorbing molecules [5,41]. Carbon dioxide (CO2) for example, has two 
molecular (vibrational) absorption modes in the MWIR: 2.6–2.7 µm and ~4.2–4.3 µm (Fig 5a) [41], with large (~10:1) 
transmission modulation at the longer wavelength mode. By designing our GST-FP bandpass filter to have its initial 
(a-GST) CWL centred at approximately the longer wavelength CO2 absorption peak, an induced phase-change would 
red-shift the filter’s CWL (c-GST state) to beyond the absorption peak, hence ‘seeing through’ (filtering out) the CO2 
information and transmitting at higher intensities. Fig. 5b shows the experimentally measured transmission spectra of 
this CO2 GST-FP filter. With N (bi-layer) = 6 arrangement as before, the physical layer thicknesses are now, tSi = 311 
nm, tGe = 260 nm and tGST = 355 nm spacer (cavity). Again, two filters are fabricated, one set in its initial (a-GST) 
state, with CWL (𝜆𝜆1 ~4.26 µm), and the other annealed to its secondary (c-GST) state, with CWL (𝜆𝜆2 ~4.55 µm). They 
are positioned in front of the hotplate (set at T = 486K) and a supply of pure CO2 gas is fed, via small inlet nozzle, 
between the hotplate and the filters; setup shown in Fig 5c. The CO2 gas supply is varied and MWIR camera is used 
to capture the resultant response (Fig 5d and Supplementary Video 1). Initially, the gas line valve is closed, with no 
CO2 gas flowing from the inlet, hence only CO2 within the atmosphere is present (Fig 5d, i). A uniform transmission 
intensity (counts) difference between both filters can be observed, with the 4.26 µm filter much lower in intensity as 
expected. The CO2 gas flow is then varied (Fig 5d, ii-iv) and the real-time CO2 gas flow pattern is captured through 
the 4.26 µm filter (Fig 5d and Supplementary Video 1) in the form of lower transmission spatially varying dynamic 
gas plume. The additional intensity contrast between background atmospheric (native) CO2 and the added CO2 can be 
observed. Even though two separate filters have been used for demonstration purposes here, clearly a single, 
switchable, GST-FP tunable bandpass filter of this design has the ability to both detect and resolve the variation in 
concentration of CO2 gas.  

Short term applications for these filters include both ground-based and remote-sensing based differential 
absorption LIDAR (DIAL). Such systems are critical for measuring the molecular composition of the atmosphere in 
order to better understand climate behavior and atmospheric contaminants, among other things. DIAL systems output 
two /several NIR- or IR-laser wavelengths corresponding to the ‘on /off’ resonance of the molecular absorption 
signature of specific greenhouse gases such as CO2 in the MWIR, as well as other chemical species such as water 
vapor in the NIR [42,43]. This process requires ultra-fast switching of the laser wavelength to rapidly determine 
gaseous absorption contrast in the atmosphere and typically utilizes several optical sub-systems (including FP-etalons 
and acoustic-optical-modulators) for spectral filtering. Our GST-FP filters can be designed to operate at specific points 
across IR wavebands, due to both GSTs broadband index modulation at these wavelengths and through layer thickness 
design. In addition, GST can be switched on nanosecond timescales [29,42-43]. As a result, our cost-effective tunable 
GST-FP filters may be the ideal candidate for integration into DIAL sub-systems.  

 

 


10 
 

 

Fig. 5. CO2 gas sensing with GST-FP tunable bandpass filters. IR transmittance spectra of CO2 (gas phase) — data obtained from [38] — with 
intensity modulation (𝛥𝛥) between 4.25 µm and 4.55 µm indicated. (d) Transmission spectra of the two CO2 gas filer states: a-GST and c-GST, 
which were used for imaging. (c) Image (RGB) of the gas sensing setup with two filters at the two respective CWLs (𝜆𝜆1 and 𝜆𝜆1 indicated). (d) IR-
imaging of the two GST-FP bandpass filters in front of the hotplate (set at T = 486K) with a supply of CO2 gas fed via inlet nozzle, between the 
hotplate and the filters. The CO2 gas supply, initially turned off (i), is varied and MWIR camera is used to capture the resultant response. The gas 
plume can be observed (ii-iv) as the supply is varied. Real-time capture video see Supplementary Video 1. 

 
 


11 
 

6. Conclusion 

 

The MWIR (3-5 µm) waveband is of significant interest across different sensing and imaging applications, from FTIR 
chemical spectroscopy to remote sensing. Tunable all-solid state spectral filtering is highly desirable for maximizing 
the detectable spatial-spectral information. Widely utilized optical bandpass filters based on multi-layer Fabry-Perot 
thin-films still provide ‘best-in-class’ narrowband and high transmission performance in comparison to alternative 
methodologies such as LC-based or plasmonic /nanophotonic approaches. Nonetheless, actively tunable all solid-state 
spectral filtering in a single compact device still remains challenging, with bulky filter wheels and expensive MEMS-
based devices providing sub-optimal (mechanical) solutions.  

Here, we utilize phase-change alloy GeSbTe (GST) thin-films which enable tunable all solid-state FP-bandpass 
filters operating across the MWIR waveband. GST—a cost-effective, readily available alloy—is used as a tunable 
single-cavity (spacer) between two (Ge:Si)6 DBR mirrors. Because GST exhibits a significant refractive index 
modulation (~2.4) in the MWIR between its amorphous and crystalline states, the optical path length of the cavity, 
hence resultant passband, is spectrally shifted under phase transformation. Therefore, through external stimuli, our 
filter’s CWL is spectrally switched; a reversible process. We experimentally demonstrate two tunable bandpass filter 
designs: the first, with CWLs ~4.5 µm and 4.75 µm, and the second; CWLs ~4.25 µm and 4.55 µm. The filters — 
which are 1-inch in diameter — have FWHMs of 50–65 nm (with Q-factor ~70–90) and transmission efficiencies of 
60–75%. We further show ‘real-world’ applicability by performing multispectral thermal (IR) imaging with our filters 
in front of a commercial wideband MWIR camera. A NASA Insignia logo, in front of a blackbody thermal source 
(hotplate) is imaged through our filters. In addition, the second filter is designed to have its initial CWL (amorphous 
GST state) matched to a molecular (vibrational) absorption mode of CO2 and demonstrate gas sensing (imaging) of 
both atmospheric (native) CO2 and externally added CO2 gas. For the latter, the dynamic gas plumes are captured 
through the intensity contrast between atmospheric and added gas, indicating that the filter has the ability to both 
detect and resolve the variation in concentration of CO2 gas.  

Filter operation is purely bi-stable in this paper — with the GST-spacer in either is fully-amorphous or fully-
crystalline states — yet continuous CWL tuning across the stopband should be possible by utilizing the partial-
crystallinity states of GST [29,33]. These intermediate phase states (i.e. a-GST, to p1-GST...pfinal-GST, to c-GST) 
result in a gradual change in refractive index, hence smaller change in optical path length of the cavity, thus filter 
CWL spectrally shifts in finer increments. To induce these states, the fine control /variation of external stimuli such 
as laser-induced energy densities is required [29,33].  

Our tunable all solid-state GST-FP bandpass filters (which can be modified to operate across other wavebands) 
are straightforward to manufacture—requiring no lithographic step and use cheap materials—and provide narrowband 
high transmission optical performance. Therefore, they have wide applicability for imaging and sensing applications 
requiring compact cost-effective tunable filtering, which include DIAL and CubeSat based LIDAR optical sub-
systems.  


12 
 

Funding 

H.J.K and S.B acknowledge support from the NASA LaRC CIF/IRAD Program. C.W. acknowledges support from 
the Cancer Research UK Pioneer Award (C55962/A24669), Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EP/R003599/1) and through the Wellcome Trust Interdisciplinary Fellowship. 

 

Acknowledgments 

The authors appreciate Mr. Joel Alexa at NASA LaRC with XRD analysis. H.J.K. would like to acknowledge the 
support of Mr. Thomas Jones and Mr. William Humphreys at NASA LaRC. C.W. would like to acknowledge the 
support of Dr. Sarah Bohndiek and Dr. Geroge Gordon. 

 

Disclosures 

The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

 

References 

1.  S. Türker-Kaya and C. W. Huck, "A Review of Mid-Infrared and Near-Infrared Imaging: Principles, Concepts and Applications in Plant 
Tissue Analysis," Molecules 22(1), (2017). 

2.  J. Haas and B. Mizaikoff, "Advances in Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis," Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 9(1), 45–68 (2016). 
3.  C. Mitra, "Mid-Infrared Spectroscopy and Challenges in Industrial Environment," Infrared Spectroscopy - Principles, Advances, and 
Applications (2019). 

4.  J. J. Szymanski and P. G. Weber, "Multispectral thermal imager: mission and applications overview," IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing 43(9), 1943–1949 (2005). 

5.  R. Bhargava, "Infrared spectroscopic imaging: the next generation," Appl. Spectrosc. 66(10), 1091–1120 (2012). 
6.  S. Law, V. Podolskiy, and D. Wasserman, "Towards nano-scale photonics with micro-scale photons: the opportunities and challenges of 
mid-infrared plasmonics," Nanophotonics 2(2), (2013). 

7.  G. J. Tattersall, "Infrared thermography: A non-invasive window into thermal physiology," Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Mol. Integr. 
Physiol. 202, 78–98 (2016). 

8.  T. P. Greene, D. M. Kelly, J. Stansberry, J. Leisenring, E. Egami, E. Schlawin, L. Chu, K. W. Hodapp, and M. Rieke, "λ = 2.4 - 5 m 
spectroscopy with the JWST NIRCam instrument," J Astron Telesc Instrum Syst 3(3), (2017). 

9.  N. Gat, "Imaging spectroscopy using tunable filters: a review," Wavelet Applications VII (2000). 
10.  P.-J. Lapray, X. Wang, J.-B. Thomas, and P. Gouton, "Multispectral filter arrays: recent advances and practical implementation," Sensors 

14(11), 21626–21659 (2014). 

11.  H. Angus Macleod, Thin-Film Optical Filters, Fifth Edition (CRC Press, 2017). 
12.  C. Williams, G. S. D. Gordon, T. D. Wilkinson, and S. E. Bohndiek, "Grayscale-to-Color: Scalable Fabrication of Custom Multispectral 
Filter Arrays," ACS Photonics 6(12), 3132–3141 (2019). 

13.  S. J. Orfanidis, Electromagnetic Waves and Antennas (2002). 
14.  M. Lequime, "Tunable thin film filters: review and perspectives," Advances in Optical Thin Films (2004). 
15.  C. Crandall, N. Clark, and P. Davis, "Tunable optical filters for space exploration," Nanophotonics and Macrophotonics for Space 
Environments (2007). 

16.  N. Neumann, M. Ebermann, K. Hiller, and S. Kurth, "Tunable infrared detector with integrated micromachined Fabry-Perot filter," MOEMS 
and Miniaturized Systems VI (2007). 

17.  J. Beeckman, "Liquid-crystal photonic applications," Optical Engineering 50(8), 081202 (2011). 
18.  H. R. Morris, C. C. Hoyt, and P. J. Treado, "Imaging Spectrometers for Fluorescence and Raman Microscopy: Acousto-Optic and Liquid 
Crystal Tunable Filters," Applied Spectroscopy 48(7), 857–866 (1994). 

19.  O. Aharon and I. Abdulhalim, "Liquid crystal Lyot tunable filter with extended free spectral range," Opt. Express 17(14), 11426–11433 
(2009). 

20.  L. Bei, "Acousto-optic tunable filters: fundamentals and applications as applied to chemical analysis techniques," Progress in Quantum 
Electronics 28(2), 67–87 (2004). 

21.  A. Kristensen, J. K. W. Yang, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, S. Link, P. Nordlander, N. J. Halas, and N. Asger Mortensen, "Plasmonic colour 
generation," Nature Reviews Materials 2(1), (2017). 

22.  Y. Gu, L. Zhang, J. K. W. Yang, S. P. Yeo, and C.-W. Qiu, "Color generation via subwavelength plasmonic nanostructures," Nanoscale 

7(15), 6409–6419 (2015). 

23.  F. Gildas and Y. Dan, "Review of nanostructure color filters," Journal of Nanophotonics 13(02), 1 (2019). 
24.  G. Si, Y. Zhao, E. S. P. Leong, and Y. J. Liu, "Liquid-Crystal-Enabled Active Plasmonics: A Review," Materials 7(2), 1296–1317 (2014). 
25.  R. Bartholomew, C. Williams, A. Khan, R. Bowman, and T. Wilkinson, "Plasmonic nanohole electrodes for active color tunable liquid 
crystal transmissive pixels," Opt. Lett. 42(14), 2810–2813 (2017). 

26.  Z. Ma, X. Meng, X. Liu, G. Si, and Y. J. Liu, "Liquid Crystal Enabled Dynamic Nanodevices," Nanomaterials (Basel) 8(11), (2018). 
27.  J. Qin, "Hyperspectral Imaging Instruments," Hyperspectral Imaging for Food Quality Analysis and Control 129–172 (2010). 


13 
 

28.  J. F. Bell, S. W. Squyres, K. E. Herkenhoff, J. N. Maki, H. M. Arneson, D. Brown, S. A. Collins, A. Dingizian, S. T. Elliot, E. C. Hagerott, 
A. G. Hayes, M. J. Johnson, J. R. Johnson, J. Joseph, K. Kinch, M. T. Lemmon, R. V. Morris, L. Scherr, M. Schwochert, M. K. Shepard, G. 
H. Smith, J. N. Sohl-Dickstein, R. J. Sullivan, W. T. Sullivan, and M. Wadsworth, "Mars Exploration Rover Athena Panoramic Camera 
(Pancam) investigation," Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 108(E12), (2003). 

29.  M. Wuttig, H. Bhaskaran, and T. Taubner, "Phase-change materials for non-volatile photonic applications," Nature Photonics 11(8), 465–
476 (2017). 

30.  Y. Zhang, J. B. Chou, J. Li, H. Li, Q. Du, A. Yadav, S. Zhou, M. Y. Shalaginov, Z. Fang, H. Zhong, C. Roberts, P. Robinson, B. Bohlin, C. 
Ríos, H. Lin, M. Kang, T. Gu, J. Warner, V. Liberman, K. Richardson, and J. Hu, "Broadband transparent optical phase change materials for 
high-performance nonvolatile photonics," Nat. Commun. 10(1), 4279 (2019). 

31.  Q. Wang, E. T. F. Rogers, B. Gholipour, C.-M. Wang, G. Yuan, J. Teng, and N. I. Zheludev, "Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and 
photonic devices based on phase change materials," Nature Photonics 10(1), 60–65 (2016). 

32.  H. Kim, S. Choi, S. Kang, K. Oh, and S. Kweon, "Observation of Ge2Sb2Te5 thin film phase transition behavior according to the number of 
cycles using Transmission Electron Microscope and Scanning Probe Microscope," MRS Proceedings 961, (2006). 

33.  M.N. Julian, C. Williams, S. Borg, S. Bartram, H.J. Kim, "All-optical continuous tuning of phase-change plasmonic metasurfaces for 
multispectral thermal imaging," arXiv 1912.08086 , (2017). 

34.  K. J. Miller, R. F. Haglund, and S. M. Weiss, "Optical phase change materials in integrated silicon photonic devices: review," Optical 
Materials Express 8(8), 2415 (2018). 

35.  B. Gholipour, J. Zhang, K. F. MacDonald, D. W. Hewak, and N. I. Zheludev, "An all-optical, non-volatile, bidirectional, phase-change 
meta-switch," Adv. Mater. 25(22), 3050–3054 (2013). 

36.  W. Bai, P. Yang, J. Huang, D. Chen, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Yang, and B. Xu, "Near-infrared tunable metalens based on phase change 
material Ge2Se2Te5," Scientific Reports 9(1), (2019). 

37.  A. Piegari and F. Flory, Optical Thin Films and Coatings: From Materials to Applications (Woodhead Publishing, 2018). 
38.  P. W. Baumeister, Optical Coating Technology, (2004). 
39.  R. R. Willey, Practical Design of Optical Thin Films, Fifth Edition (2018). 
40.  N. M. Ravindra, S. R. Marthi, and A. Bañobre, "Introduction to radiative properties," Radiative Properties of Semiconductors (2017). 
41.  Coblentz Society, The Coblentz Society Desk Book of Infrared Spectra (1980). 
42.  "Differential absorption LIDAR for the detection and quantification of greenhouse gases," https://www.nist.gov/programs-
projects/differential-absorption-lidar-detection-and-quantification-greenhouse-gases. 

43.  S. M. Spuler, K. S. Repasky, B. Morley, D. Moen, M. Hayman, A. R. Nehrir, “Field-deployable diode-laser-based differential absorption 
lidar (DIAL) for profiling water vapor”, Atmospheric Measurements Techniques 8(3), (2015) 


