Dynamic control of mode modulation and spatial 

multiplexing using hybrid metasurfaces

ZEMENG LIN ,1 LINGLING HUANG ,1, † RUIZHE ZHAO ,1 QUNSHUO WEI ,1 THOMAS 
ZENTGRAF,3 YONGTIAN WANG ,1 XIAOWEI LI2, *

1 School of Optics and Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China 

2 Laser Micro/Nano-Fabrication Laboratory, School of Mechanical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, 

Beijing 100081, China

3 Department of Physics, University of Paderborn, Warburger Straße 100, 33098 Paderborn, Germany

†huanglingling@bit.edu.cn

*lixiaowei@bit.edu.cn

Abstract: Designing reconfigurable metasurfaces that can dynamically control scattered electromagnetic 

waves and work in the near-infrared (NIR) and optical regimes remains a challenging task, which is 

hindered by the static material property and fixed structures. Phase change materials (PCMs) can provide 

high contrast optical refractive indexes at high frequencies between amorphous and crystal states, 

therefore are promising as feasible materials for reconfigurable metasurfaces. Here, we propose a hybrid 

metasurface that can arbitrarily modulate the complex amplitude of incident light with uniform amplitude 

and full 2π phase coverage by utilizing composite concentric rings (CCRs) with different ratios of gold 

and PCMs. Our designed metasurface possesses a bi-functionality that is capable of splitting beams or 

generating vortex beams by thermal switching between metal and semiconductor states of vanadium 

oxide (VO2), respectively. It can be easily integrated into low loss photonic circuits with an ultra-small 

footprint. Our metadevice serves as a novel paradigm for active control of beams, which may open new 

opportunities for signal processing, memory storage, holography, and anti-counterfeiting.

1. Introduction

Metasurfaces have emerged as promising candidates for transforming the interactions between 

electromagnetic waves and matter [1-4]. By utilizing the arbitrary design freedom of metasurfaces to 

tailor the amplitude, phase, and polarization response, it might be possible to provide a flexible and 

compact platform to realize all types of functional devices, such as beam deflector, polarization converter, 

phase modulator, image processor and so forth [5-12]. Reconfigurability of metasurfaces typically utilize 

the materials whose optical properties can be modified. By integrating with functional materials such as 

liquid crystals, graphene (or other 2D materials) and phase change materials (PCMs), metasurfaces can 

obtain extra freedom of modulating the optical responses. Various reconfigurable mechanisms have been 

proposed, including mechanical deformation, charge carrier injection, light pumping, thermal modulation, 

ultra-fast nonlinear all-optical switching, etc. [13-26]. The proposed future applications in their work 

may bennefit the development of integrated nano-devices and multi-functional metasurfaces. Among 

those methods, the specific design requirements including working bandwidth, modulation depth, 

transition condition under external modulations should be carefully taken into account. The free carrier 

injection, for example, is hard to work in the optical regime for high applied voltages and low modulation 

depth [27-32]. While other methods may suffer from relatively huge loss and may not be very feasible 


for the integration of metadevices. Using the PCMs can achieve dynamic functionalities with high 

efficiency, feasibility, and larger working bandwidth, which makes PCMs a promising choice for 

reconfigurable metasurfaces. 

PCMs, such as germanium antimony telluride (GST), indium antimonide (InSb), gallium lanthanum 

sulfide (GLS), and vanadium oxide (VO2), are used for data storage, integrated optical circuits, color 

printing, optical display and so on, by employing their unique reversible, nonvolatile properties [33, 34].

Upon an appropriate stimulus like thermal, optical, or electrical, PCMs offer a flexible control of optical 

parameters during the phase transition of the composite atom array between crystal and amorphous states 

or insulator-to-conductor states [35]. Such atomic rearrangements remain stable at room temperature and 

come with an abrupt change in the physical properties (e.g., complex refractive index and resistivity) 

after phase transition [36]. This transition can be not only modulated in high speed (some nanoseconds 

or less) but also reversible with repeated non-volatility (potentially up to 1015 cycles or more without 

failure) between amorphous and crystalline states [37]. Though different PCMs could offer tunable 

optical properties under external excitations, their working wavelength range and phase transition 

conditions vary from each other. In general, VO2 has the advantage of lower threshold over other PCMs 

like GST to obtain transition under thermal excitation, which makes it suitable to be integrated into the 

lower-power consumption devices, such as CMOS chips. The optical properties of VO2 in its 

amorphous/crystalline state may resemble the ones of the semiconductor and metal property respectively 

[24, 38]. Also, VO2 can offer the modulation depth as high as 80% [38]. Meanwhile, the reported 

metasurfaces based on other PCMs mainly work in the mid infrared (MIR) or far infrared (FIR) spectrum 

which hinders their applications in the near Infrared (NIR). Furthermore, VO2 based metasurfaces are 

relatively promising to conquer the bandwidth limit. Hence, by integrating VO2 with metasurface, the 

combination may provide a solution for reconfigurable metadevices.

In previous work, some reconfigurable metasurfaces integrated with PCMs or other methods have been 

proposed for achieving complex amplitude and polarization modulation of the electromagnetic fields, 

and also for digital control [39] and other applications such as mimicking synapse [40]. For example, by 

utilizing periodically arranged GST strips as modulation layer, an active metasurface that can effectively 

generate tunable ellipticity for arbitrary incident polarization has been achieved [41]. Meanwhile, 

rewritable focusing devices or reconfigurable holograms based on GST can be achieved by using optical 

pulses [42]. Also, planar retroflectors using subwavelength-thick reconfigurable C-shaped resonators 

formed by a liquid metal and an air gap was reported [43]. Though numerous devices employing PCMs 

emerged, most works are focused on the functions of beam switching, absorber, polarizer in the phase 

transition process, especially in the NIR regime [44-48]. Furthermore, the previous works may need 

precise and gradual point-by-point external modulation to accomplish phase transition for achieving the 

dynamic phenomenon, which are time-consuming [49]. Therefore, by building intelligent, more simple 

and effective algorithms to achieve active metasurfaces for effective light modulation are highly 

demanded.

In this paper, we propose and demonstrate a novel type of hybrid reconfigurable metasurface for dynamic 

control of mode modulation and spatial multiplexing. Such metasurface is composed of composite 

concentric rings (CCRs) with different ratio of gold and VO2, which can possess dual functionality 

between the two-phase states. By considering the optical properties of VO2, the CCR operates similarly 

as a concentric ring in metal (crystalline) state with relatively high conductivity like metal, while 

functions as a split ring wire loop for VO2 in its semiconductor state. The transition between the two 

states provides complex amplitude control due to the high contrast refractive index. We delicately design 


and select eight CCRs to achieve binary phase modulation for the metal (crystalline) state, and fully 2π 

phase shift for semiconductor (amorphous) state. The schematic design of such hybrid reconfigurable 

metasurface is shown in Fig. 1. When illuminated with x polarized light, the output beam with orthogonal 

polarization shows distinct patterns for different phase state of VO2. At the semiconductor state around 

room temperature of VO2 (around 25℃), a vortex beam can be generated, as shown in Fig. 1(a). When 

the metasurface is heated above 85℃ and VO2 transitioned in its metal state [38], as depicted in Fig. 1(b),

the designed metasurface functions as the beam splitter and converts the input light into four diffraction 

lobes (spatial multiplexing). Therefore, by proper design, such metasurface can provide potential 

applications in fiber communications of the C-band, high-efficiency laser fabrications, signal processing 

and optical transportation and so on.

2. Simulation results and discussion

Fig. 1 Schematic of reconfigurable metasurface for dynamic control. Dual functionality can be achieved 

within a single metasurface for two phase states when illuminated with x-polarization incident light. (a). For 

the semiconductor state of VO2, such array can produce the vortex beam under the same conditions. (b). For 

the metal state of VO2, the designed CCRs array can convert the input light into four split beams. The color 

of purple and orange indicate the semiconductor and metal state of VO2.

The building block of the metasurface (meta-atom) consists of a CCR with different ratio of gold and 

VO2 on top of a silicon substrate, as shown in Figs. 2(a) and 2(b). Such CCR structures may be fabricated 

with the state-of-art two step electron beam lithography method. By flexibly varying the inner radius, 

outer radius, orientation angle and opening angle for the VO2 arc, such geometry can locally modulate 

the amplitude and phase of the scattered light. In the metal state, the CCR can function similar as a 

concentric metal ring because the two composite arcs possess similar material properties. In the 

semiconductor state, the CCR is much more like a split ring wire loop where the loss of VO2 is relatively 

low, resembling a dielectric gap. The refractive index contrast of VO2 between the two states can result 


in totally different complex amplitude modulation. When the incident light is polarized along or 

perpendicular to the symmetry axis of the CCR, there only exist symmetric or antisymmetric mode, 

respectively. While for arbitrary polarization illumination, 𝐸⃑ 𝑥

𝑖 for example, the scattering field 𝐸⃑ 𝑦

𝑠 is the 

superposition of both modes, which can be express as [26]:

1
sin(2 )(
)
2

s
as
s
s
i
i

y
y
s
as
E
E
A e
A e



=
+
(1)

where 𝐴𝑠, 𝐴𝑎𝑠 and Φ𝑠, Φ𝑎𝑠 denote the scattered amplitude and phase from the symmetric and anti-

symmetric modes, and 𝛼 represents the orientation angle, as shown in Fig. 2(b). According to Equation 

1, for a fixed geometry of the CCR and 𝛼 between 0° and 90°, the amplitude of 𝐸⃑ 𝑦

𝑠 is solely determined 

by the orientation angle 𝛼 and the phase of the scattered field is independent of it. For the cases of 𝛼 =

∓45° the absolute value of the amplitude 𝐸⃑ 𝑦

𝑠 reaches a maximum polarization conversion. While when 

𝛼 changes from 45° to −45°, the phase of 𝐸⃑ 𝑦

𝑠 undergoes another π phase shift, which means one can 

obtain an additional π phase coverage just by rotating the orientation angle of the CCRs by 90° with 

uniform scattering amplitude. Hence we achieve simultaneous control of phase and amplitude by such 

simple design. 

Fig. 2. Design of meta-atom and refractive index of VO2. (a) the meta-atom consists of CCR patterned above 

silicon substrate. Such CCR composes of different ratio of gold and VO2. t is the thickness of CCR, which is 

50nm. p=500nm is the periodicity of the unit cell. (b) The geometry of the meta-atom. 𝑅𝑖𝑛 is the inner radius and 

the 𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑡 is the outer radius of the CCR. 𝜃 is the opening angle while 𝛼 is the orientation angle. (c) The refractive 

index of VO2 used in the simulation. Red/blue line corresponding to the semiconductor/metal state and the 

solid/dashed line is the real/imaginary part of the refractive index. The corresponding data is taken from [38].


To achieve the desired complex amplitude distribution of the transmitted light we carry out a 

parametric numerical optimization by using a finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. The 

refractive index of VO2 in the near infrared and visible range is depicted in Fig. 2(c). The refractive index 

difference between the two states is relatively drastic in the NIR regime, which may benefit the complex 

amplitude control of the CCRs. The refractive indices of silicon and gold are taken from the data of Palik

[50]. Before the implementation of the simulation, we define the duty cycle of the VO2 with R =

𝑙𝑉𝑂2
𝑙𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 =

𝜃𝑉𝑂2
𝜃𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 ranging from 0 to 1 (0 represents no VO2 mixing and 1 corresponds to full VO2 filling), where 

𝑙𝑉𝑂2, 𝑙𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 are the arc lengths of the VO2 and whole CCR, and 𝜃𝑉𝑂2 and 𝜃𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 are the corresponding 

center angles, respectively. We conduct a 2D parameter sweep by changing both the outer radius and 

duty cycle of the VO2 while keeping the width and thickness of CRRs to be 80nm and 50nm respectively. 

Note that the orientation angle of the CRR is along 45° with respect to x coordinate. The incident 

electromagnetic wave is along the x direction with wavelength of 1500 nm. The periodicity of the unit 

cell is p=500 nm. The mesh size along x and y direction is both 10nm, and the mesh size in z direction 

is 20nm. We utilize periodic boundary in both x and y direction. While we set perfect matched layer 

(PML) boundary condition in z direction. The y component of the transmitted electric field is detected 

for the analysis. Figs. 3(a) and 3(b) show the simulation results of the transmitted amplitude and phase 

for the two states of the hybrid CRR, respectively. Based on the calculated data, we select four structures 

to cover a phase shift of π in the semiconductor state and no phase change in the metal state. Each 

structure possesses almost uniform amplitude modulation. By rotating the symmetry axis with 90°, a full 

2π phase range can be realized. The opening angles for the four CCRs are 130°, 100°, 50°, 60°, the 

corresponding outer radii are 125 nm, 145 nm, 215 nm, 170 nm, which are also indicated in the hollow 

rings in Fig. 3 and listed in Table 1. 


Fig. 3. Simulation results of parameter sweep of CCR. We choose the VO2 ratio ranging from 0 to 1 and 

outer radius of the rings from 100nm to 240nm, while keeping the width constant at 80nm, to conduct 

optimization. (a)and(c) corresponding to the phase and amplitude distribution of semi state for the converted 

y-polarized transmitted light with x-polarized incident wave. Similarly, the results of metal state are shown 

in (b)and(d). Black hollow circles indicate the selected four structures. Note that tyx means the complex

transmitted coefficients of the output transmitted electric field component along y direction with the input 

incident electric field polarized in x direction.

Table1. Parameters of the selected four CCRs. Rout means the outer radius of CCRs with constant 

width of 80nm.

Number 

Parameter

1
2
3
4

α
45º
45º
45º
45º

θ
60º
50º
100º
130º

Rout
170nm
215nm
145nm
125nm

To demonstrate the modulation effect for such hybrid reconfigurable metasurface, for simplicity, we 

demonstrate anomalous refraction and symmetric diffraction by introducing a phase gradient or phase 


jump along the interface. The arrangement of the eight structures is illustrated in Fig. 4(a). According to 

the generalized Snell’s law, we have

sin
sin
2

t
t
i
i
d
n
n
dx






−
=
(2)

Where 𝑛𝑖 and 𝑛𝑡 are the refractive index of incident and refractive side correspondingly. 𝜃𝑖 and 𝜃𝑡 are 

the incident and refractive angle, respectively, and 𝜆 is the incident wavelength in vaccum, 

𝑑𝜑

𝑑𝑥

corresponding to the phase gradient. One can expect that the metasurface in the semiconductor state can 

bend the light trajectory to an oblique angle of 22.02∘ under the normal incidence (from substrate to the 

air). We calculate the electric field and visualize the phase profiles at the x-z plane in both two situations, 

which are depicted in Fig. 4(b). In the semiconductor state of VO2, the phase profile has a constant phase 

gradient, resulting in the anomalous refraction. While in the metal state, there exists a staircase-like 

pattern for the abrupt additional π phase change by rotation of the symmetry axis of the hybrid antennas. 

The total transmission efficiency at the semiconductor and metal state is 8% and 3%, respectively. We 

carry out a grating analysis to further explain this phenomenon, as shown in Fig. 4(c). The energy 

distributions of the different diffraction orders normalized with the total transmission are retrieved. We 

found that, in the semiconductor state, the energy is mainly directed to the +1 grating order. In contrast, 

the energy proportion is equivalent in the ±1 order in the metal state.

Fig. 4. Anomalous refraction and symmetry diffraction within one metasurface. The incident light with λ=1500nm is linear-

polarized along x direction and the recorded output light is along y direction. (a) The top view of the corresponding eight C-shape 

rings. The black dash lines indicate the orientation angle of the CCRs. The first four CCRs have the same orientation angle of 

45° while the angle for the later four CCRs is −45°. (b) the left panel shows the phase distribution corresponding to the 

semicondutor state where the CCR array can achieve anomalously refraction with oblique angle 𝜃𝑡 = asin (

𝜆

𝐷) = 22.02°. For the 

right panel, the phase distribution of the refracted beam shows the staircase-like pattern. (c) The energy distributions of grating 

orders according to the grating analysis (the ratio of energy distributed to each diffraction orders normalized with the total 

transmission efficiency), which clearly demonstrates the anomalous refraction and symmetry diffraction phenomenon.


Further, we demonstrate that such reconfigurable metasurface can be utilized to possess a bi-

functionality of wavefront engineering. We use the hybrid CCRs array to encode the functionalities for 

vortex beam generation (mode modulation) and beam splitting (spatial multiplexing) into the two 

different states. The CCRs array is arranged according to the phase distribution of the vortex beam in 

semiconductor state. Such a vortex beam possesses the helical phase front characterized by exp(ilφ), 

where l and φ are the topological charge and azimuthal angle, respectively. For the selected eight 

structures in the semiconductor state could cover 2π phase range while in the same time the phase in the 

metal state undergoes only 0 and π change in different regions. We use an CCRs array with size of 50×50. 

Figs. 5(a) and 5(b) show the simulation results for the semiconductor state. In Fig. 5(a), the near-field 

phase distribution is calculated, which has the topological charge of l=2 with a phase singularity in the 

center and indicating a helical phase front. Through the far-field propagation, we observe the donut-

shape intensity profile of the vortex beam in Fig. 5(b). As for the metal state as shown in Figs. 5(c) and

5(d), the near-field phase distribution is discontinuous with two areas of 0 and π, without phase 

singularity in the center. The far-field intensity distribution of the transmitted beam shows a pattern that 

is divided into four lobes. In general, such scheme can generate vortex beam with topological charge of 

l=n when in semiconductor states, while the splitting of beams equal to 2n in metal states.

Fig. 5. Simulated results of mode conversion and spatial multiplexing within one metasurface. (a) and (b) 

are the phase and amplitude distribution of vortex beam generation in semiconductor state. (c) and (d) is the 

phase and amplitude distribution of four beam splitting in metal state.

Such metasurfaces can also be well exploited in fast sensing and optical manipulation applications. In 

the metal state of our metasurface, the incident light beam can become quadruplex which can be used for 

parallel fabrication and detecting/sensing. While the output vortex beam can be applied as optical tweezer 

for manipulating biomolecules, nanoparticles and so on, under the semiconductor state. Due to the less 


contrast of refractive indices between the intermediate states may result in less modulation depth, that is, 

the phase modulation of the orthogonal component tyx is shrink to less than 0 to π range compared to the 

semiconductor state, and get closer to a flat modulation as the metal state. Hence, in the intermediate 

states varied from completely semiconductor state to completely metal state, the output light can still 

gradually change from vortex beam to four petals, with the topological charge evolution from integer to 

fractional value and finally mode splitting. As the switching speed between two states of VO2 can be as 

fast as picoseconds, the dynamic change of the functionality could be even used for relatively fast 

processes. Furthermore, the low-temperature threshold required for the phase transition between two 

states of VO2 makes such metasurface be promising for low-loss integrated photonic circuits, especially 

for the case when the operating temperature typically cannot exceed one hundred degree Celsius in 

thermal stimulus. We can further improve the efficiency by designing Metal-Insulator-Metal (MIM) 

scheme for the reflective type, which may enhance the efficiency while possessing the same complex 

amplitude modulation properties at different phase change states. In comparison with commercial beam 

splitters/spiral phase plates reported, such hybrid reconfigurable metasurface is optical thin, easy to 

fabricate, and compatible with flat optics, more importantly, it can integrate two functions into one 

element. 

3. Conclusions

In summary, we have demonstrated the complex amplitude modulation of a hybrid metasurface 

composed of nanostructure made of a dynamically reconfigurable phase change material. By building 

composite concentric ring structures with different ratio of gold and VO2, we achieve uniform amplitude 

and 2π phase shift coverage in both metal and semiconductor states. With the realizing of anomalous 

refraction resulting from a phase gradient in the semiconductor state and symmetric diffraction resulting 

from a step-like phase profile in the metal state, we demonstrate that such metasurface can implement 

dual functionalities. That is, dynamic control can be achieved by changing the environmental temperature 

or by external femtosecond laser pulse stimulus. Furthermore, we have demonstrated switchable vortex 

beam generation and beam splitting phenomenon. Compared to previously designed metadevices 

working in the far/mid-infrared regime, such metasurfaces can pave the way for applications in the NIR 

band and even have the potential to extend to the optical regime. Importantly, such metadevices may 

serve as novel platforms for parallel laser fabrications, signal processing, memory storage, holography, 

anti-counterfeiting and so on.

Funding

The authors acknowledge the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 

61775019) program, the Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation (No. 4172057), the Beijing Nova 

Program (No. Z171100001117047), the Fok Ying-Tong Education Foundation of China (No.161009). 

We also acknowledge the NSFC-DFG joint program (DFG No. ZE953/11-1, NSFC No. 61861136010).

References

1.
H. Chen, A. J. Taylor, and N. Yu, "A review of metasurfaces: physics and applications," Rep. 

Prog. Phys. 79, 076401 (2016).

2.
S. M. Choudhury, D. Wang, K. Chaudhuri, C. DeVault, A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva, and V. M. 

Shalaev, "Material platforms for optical metasurfaces," Nanophotonics 7, 959-987 (2018).


3.
P. Genevet, F. Capasso, F. Aieta, M. Khorasaninejad, and R. Devlin, "Recent advances in planar 

optics: from plasmonic to dielectric metasurfaces," Optica 4, 139 (2017).

4.
L. Zhang, S. Mei, K. Huang, and C.-W. Qiu, "Advances in Full Control of Electromagnetic Waves 

with Metasurfaces," Adv. Opt. Mater. 4, 818-833 (2016).

5.
M. I. Shalaev, J. Sun, A. Tsukernik, A. Pandey, K. Nikolskiy, and N. M. Litchinitser, "High-

Efficiency All-Dielectric Metasurfaces for Ultracompact Beam Manipulation in Transmission 

Mode," Nano Lett. 15, 6261-6266 (2015).

6.
X. Song, L. Huang, L. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Zhao, X. Li, J. Wang, B. Bai, and Y. Wang, "Near-field 

plasmonic beam engineering with complex amplitude modulation based on metasurface," Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 112, 073104 (2018).

7.
S. Sun, K. Y. Yang, C. M. Wang, T. K. Juan, W. T. Chen, C. Y. Liao, Q. He, S. Xiao, W. T. Kung, 

G. Y. Guo, L. Zhou, and D. P. Tsai, "High-efficiency broadband anomalous reflection by gradient 

meta-surfaces," Nano Lett. 12, 6223-6229 (2012).

8.
Q. Wei, L. Huang, X. Li, J. Liu, and Y. Wang, "Broadband Multiplane Holography Based on 

Plasmonic Metasurface," Adv. Opt. Mater. 5, 1700434 (2017).

9.
Y. Yang, W. Wang, P. Moitra, Kravchenko, II, D. P. Briggs, and J. Valentine, "Dielectric meta-

reflectarray for broadband linear polarization conversion and optical vortex generation," Nano 

Lett. 14, 1394-1399 (2014).

10. T. Zhang, L. Huang, X. Li, J. Liu, and Y. Wang, "High-efficiency broadband polarization 

converter based on Ω-shaped metasurface," J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 50, 454001 (2017).

11. R. Zhao, L. Huang, C. Tang, J. Li, X. Li, Y. Wang, and T. Zentgraf, "Nanoscale Polarization 

Manipulation and Encryption Based on Dielectric Metasurfaces," Adv. Opt. Mater. 6, 1800490 

(2018).

12. R. Zhao, B. Sain, Q. Wei, C. Tang, X. Li, T. Weiss, L. Huang, Y. Wang, and T. Zentgraf, 

"Multichannel vectorial holographic display and encryption," Light: Science & Applications 7, 95 

(2018).

13. N. A. Butakov, M. W. Knight, T. Lewi, P. P. Iyer, D. Higgs, H. T. Chorsi, J. Trastoy, J. Del Valle 

Granda, I. Valmianski, C. Urban, Y. Kalcheim, P. Y. Wang, P. W. C. Hon, I. K. Schuller, and J. A. 

Schuller, "Broadband Electrically Tunable Dielectric Resonators Using Metal–Insulator 

Transitions," ACS Photonics 5, 4056-4060 (2018).

14. N. A. Butakov, I. Valmianski, T. Lewi, C. Urban, Z. Ren, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. D. Wilson, I. K. 

Schuller, and J. A. Schuller, "Switchable Plasmonic–Dielectric Resonators with Metal–Insulator 

Transitions," ACS Photonics 5, 371-377 (2018).

15. S. Colburn, A. Zhan, and A. Majumdar, "Varifocal zoom imaging with large area focal length 

adjustable metalenses," Optica 5, 825-831 (2018).

16. A. L. Holsteen, S. Raza, P. Fan, P. G. Kik, and M. L. Brongersma, "Purcell effect for active tuning 

of light scattering from semiconductor optical antennas," Science 358, 1407 (2017).

17. A. Howes, W. Wang, I. Kravchenko, and J. Valentine, "Dynamic transmission control based on 

all-dielectric Huygens metasurfaces," Optica 5, 787-792 (2018).

18. P. P. Iyer, R. A. DeCrescent, T. Lewi, N. Antonellis, and J. A. Schuller, "Uniform Thermo-Optic 

Tunability of Dielectric Metalenses," Phys. Rev. Appl. 10, 044029 (2018).

19. G. Kafaie Shirmanesh, R. Sokhoyan, R. A. Pala, and H. A. Atwater, "Dual-Gated Active 

Metasurface at 1550 nm with Wide (>300°) Phase Tunability," Nano Lett. 18, 2957-2963 (2018).


20. T. Lewi, A. Butakov Nikita, and A. Schuller Jon, "Thermal tuning capabilities of semiconductor 

metasurface resonators," in Nanophotonics, 8. 331 (2019).

21. T. Lewi, H. A. Evans, N. A. Butakov, and J. A. Schuller, "Ultrawide Thermo-optic Tuning of 

PbTe Meta-Atoms," Nano Lett. 17, 3940-3945 (2017).

22. T. Lewi, P. P. Iyer, N. A. Butakov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, and J. A. Schuller, "Widely Tunable 

Infrared Antennas Using Free Carrier Refraction," Nano Lett. 15, 8188-8193 (2015).

23. S. V. Makarov, A. S. Zalogina, M. Tajik, D. A. Zuev, and Y. Kivshar, "Light-Induced Tuning and 

Reconfiguration of Nanophotonic Structures," Laser & Photonics Review 11, 1700108 (2017).

24. P. Markov, R. E. Marvel, H. J. Conley, K. J. Miller, R. F. Haglund, and S. M. Weiss, "Optically 

Monitored Electrical Switching in VO2," ACS Photonics 2, 1175-1182 (2015).

25. M. R. Shcherbakov, S. Liu, V. V. Zubyuk, A. Vaskin, P. P. Vabishchevich, G. Keeler, T. Pertsch, 

T. V. Dolgova, I. Staude, I. Brener, and A. A. Fedyanin, "Ultrafast all-optical tuning of direct-gap 

semiconductor metasurfaces," Nat. Commun. 8, 17 (2017).

26. L. Liu, X. Zhang, M. Kenney, X. Su, N. Xu, C. Ouyang, Y. Shi, J. Han, W. Zhang, and S. Zhang, 

"Broadband metasurfaces with simultaneous control of phase and amplitude," Adv. Mater. 26, 

5031-5036 (2014).

27. C. F. Chen, C. H. Park, B. W. Boudouris, J. Horng, B. Geng, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, R. 

A. Segalman, S. G. Louie, and F. Wang, "Controlling inelastic light scattering quantum pathways 

in graphene," Nature 471, 617-620 (2011).

28. N. K. Emani, T. F. Chung, A. V. Kildishev, V. M. Shalaev, Y. P. Chen, and A. Boltasseva, 

"Electrical modulation of fano resonance in plasmonic nanostructures using graphene," Nano Lett. 

14, 78-82 (2014).

29. Y. W. Huang, H. W. Lee, R. Sokhoyan, R. A. Pala, K. Thyagarajan, S. Han, D. P. Tsai, and H. A. 

Atwater, "Gate-Tunable Conducting Oxide Metasurfaces," Nano Lett. 16, 5319-5325 (2016).

30. P. P. Iyer, N. A. Butakov, and J. A. Schuller, "Reconfigurable Semiconductor Phased-Array 

Metasurfaces," ACS Photonics 2, 1077-1084 (2015).

31. S. Kruk, and Y. Kivshar, "Functional Meta-Optics and Nanophotonics Governed by Mie 

Resonances," ACS Photonics 4, 2638-2649 (2017).

32. N. Large, M. Abb, J. Aizpurua, and O. L. Muskens, "Photoconductively loaded plasmonic 

nanoantenna as building block for ultracompact optical switches," Nano Lett. 10, 1741-1746 

(2010).

33. H.-K. Ji, H. Tong, H. Qian, N. Liu, M. Xu, and X.-S. Miao, "Color printing enabled by phase 

change materials on paper substrate," AIP Advances 7, 125024 (2017).

34. M. Wuttig, H. Bhaskaran, and T. Taubner, "Phase-change materials for non-volatile photonic 

applications," Nat.Photonics 11, 465-476 (2017).

35. F. Rao, K. Ding, Y. Zhou, Y. Zheng, M. Xia, S. Lv, Z. Song, S. Feng, I. Ronneberger, R. 

Mazzarello, W. Zhang, and E. Ma, "Reducing the stochasticity of crystal nucleation to enable 

subnanosecond memory writing," Science 358, 1423 (2017).

36. K. Shportko, S. Kremers, M. Woda, D. Lencer, J. Robertson, and M. Wuttig, "Resonant bonding in 

crystalline phase-change materials," Nat Mater 7, 653-658 (2008).

37. C. R. de Galarreta, A. M. Alexeev, Y.-Y. Au, M. Lopez-Garcia, M. Klemm, M. Cryan, J. 

Bertolotti, and C. D. Wright, "Nonvolatile Reconfigurable Phase-Change Metadevices for Beam 

Steering in the Near Infrared," Adv. Funct. Mater. 28, 1704993 (2018).


38. Z. Zhu, P. G. Evans, R. F. Haglund, Jr., and J. G. Valentine, "Dynamically Reconfigurable 

Metadevice Employing Nanostructured Phase-Change Materials," Nano Lett. 17, 4881-4885 

(2017).

39. N. Manca, L. Pellegrino, T. Kanki, S. Yamasaki, H. Tanaka, A. S. Siri, and D. Marré, 

"Programmable Mechanical Resonances in MEMS by Localized Joule Heating of Phase Change 

Materials," Adv. Mater. 25, 6430-6435 (2013).

40. Z. Cheng, C. Ríos, W. H. P. Pernice, C. D. Wright, and H. Bhaskaran, "On-chip photonic 

synapse," Sci. Adv. 3, e1700160 (2017).

41. T. Li, L. Huang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, and T. Zentgraf, "Tunable wave plate based on active plasmonic 

metasurfaces," Opt. Express 25, 4216-4226 (2017).

42. Q. Wang, E. T. F. Rogers, B. Gholipour, C.-M. Wang, G. Yuan, J. Teng, and N. I. Zheludev, 

"Optically reconfigurable metasurfaces and photonic devices based on phase change materials," 

Nat.Photonics 10, 60 (2015).

43. L. Yan, W. Zhu, M. F. Karim, H. Cai, A. Y. Gu, Z. Shen, P. H. J. Chong, D. L. Kwong, C. W. Qiu, 

and A. Q. Liu, "0.2 lambda0 Thick Adaptive Retroreflector Made of Spin-Locked Metasurface," 

Adv. Mater. 30, e1802721 (2018).

44. X. Chen, S. Ghosh, Q. Xu, C. Ouyang, Y. Li, X. Zhang, Z. Tian, J. Gu, L. Liu, A. K. Azad, J. Han, 

and W. Zhang, "Active control of polarization-dependent near-field coupling in hybrid 

metasurfaces," Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 061111 (2018).

45. C. H. Chu, M. L. Tseng, J. Chen, P. C. Wu, Y.-H. Chen, H.-C. Wang, T.-Y. Chen, W. T. Hsieh, H. 

J. Wu, G. Sun, and D. P. Tsai, "Active dielectric metasurface based on phase-change medium," 

Laser Photonics Rev. 10, 986-994 (2016).

46. O. L. Muskens, L. Bergamini, Y. Wang, J. M. Gaskell, N. Zabala, C. H. de Groot, D. W. Sheel, 

and J. Aizpurua, "Antenna-assisted picosecond control of nanoscale phase transition in vanadium 

dioxide," Light Sci Appl 5, e16173 (2016).

47. J. Rensberg, S. Zhang, Y. Zhou, A. S. McLeod, C. Schwarz, M. Goldflam, M. Liu, J. Kerbusch, R. 

Nawrodt, S. Ramanathan, D. N. Basov, F. Capasso, C. Ronning, and M. A. Kats, "Active Optical 

Metasurfaces Based on Defect-Engineered Phase-Transition Materials," Nano Lett. 16, 1050-1055 

(2016).

48. X. Tian, and Z.-Y. Li, "Visible-near infrared ultra-broadband polarization-independent 

metamaterial perfect absorber involving phase-change materials," Photonics Research 4, 146 

(2016).

49. L. Li, T. Jun Cui, W. Ji, S. Liu, J. Ding, X. Wan, Y. Bo Li, M. Jiang, C.-W. Qiu, and S. Zhang, 

"Electromagnetic reprogrammable coding-metasurface holograms," Nat. Commun. 8, 197 (2017).

50. E. D. Palik, in Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids(Academic Press, Burlington, 1997).


