 
1

Direct Visualisation of Out-of-Equilibrium Structural 
Transformations in Atomically-Thin Chalcogenides 

Pawan Kumar1,2, James P. Horwath2, Alexandre C. Foucher2, Christopher C. Price2, Natalia 
Acero3, Vivek B. Shenoy2, Eric A. Stach2# and Deep Jariwala1#. 

1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia-
19104, USA. 

2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia-
19104, USA. 

3Vagelos Institute for Energy Science and Technology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia-19104, USA. 

#E-mail: dmj@seas.upenn.edu; stach@seas.upenn.edu 

 

Abstract: 

Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have been the subject of 

sustained research interest due to their extraordinary electronic and optical properties. They 

also exhibit a wide range of structural phases because of the different orientations that the 

atoms can have within a single layer, or due to the ways that different layers can stack. Here 

we report the first study of direct-visualization of structural transformations in atomically-

thin layers under highly non-equilibrium thermodynamic conditions. We probe these 

transformations at the atomic scale using real-time, aberration corrected scanning 

transmission electron microscopy and observe strong dependence of the resulting structures 

and phases on both heating rate and temperature. A fast heating rate (25 °C/sec) yields highly 

ordered crystalline hexagonal islands of sizes of less than 20 nm which are composed of a 

mixture of 2H and 3R phases.  However, a slow heating rate (25 °C/min) yields nanocrystalline 

and sub-stoichiometric amorphous regions. These differences are explained by different rates 

of sulfur evaporation and redeposition. The use of non-equilibrium heating rates to achieve 

highly crystalline and quantum-confined features from 2D atomic layers present a new route 

to synthesize atomically-thin, laterally confined nanostrucutres and opens new avenues for 

investigating fundamental electronic phenomena in confined dimensions. 

Keywords: two-dimensional, quantum dots, MoS2, phase transformation, heterojunctions, 

electron microscopy. 

 

 


 
2

Introduction: 

Two-dimensional nanomaterials have received significant attention due the wide range of 

exciting properties that they exhibit[1]. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) have 

garnered particular interest due to their ability to be utilized in novel electronic device 

applications[2]. There have been several studies investigating the effect of heat treatments 

on the structural properties of these systems, but to date these have largely focused on 

amorphous to crystalline transformation kinetics, point defect kinetics, and dislocation 

kinetics under equilibrium conditions from ranging ambient to elevated temperatures[3, 4]. 

Among 2D materials, the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) of Mo and W can exist in 

multiple phases induced by atomic distortions, including the 2H, 1T and 1T’ phases. 

Furthermore, additional phases, namely 2H and 3R, are formed by the stacking of 2D layers 

with different rotaitional arrangements. In particular, MoS2 – both as a monolayer and in 

multilayer form – is known to exhibit multiple structural phases. These include the chalcogen 

distortion-induced 1T phases for both monolayers and thicker crystals, and stacking 

alignment-induced 3R phases in multilayers[5-8]. The 2H phase is the most 

thermodynamically stable phase, while the 1T phase and 3R phases are metastable and revert 

back to the 2H phase over time, or upon application of some form of energy that allows them 

to overcome the associated activation barrier[6, 9]. Despite the fact that several studies 

regarding phase identification and evolution have been conducted, the nucleation and 

formation of metastable phases is still a topic of major debate and discussion[10-14].  Thus 

far, in-situ electron microscopy studies of TMDCs (such as MoS2, WS2, etc.) have largely 

focused on observations of the kinetics of individual point defects[15, 16]. However, with the 

rapid growth of interest in the optical, electronic, and mechanical properties of TMDCs[17, 

18], several studies have used in situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) to 

document structural transformations under equilibrium conditions[4, 19-21]. In addition, 

some observations of in-situ heterojunction formation and growth have also been made in 

the same class of materials[22, 23]. These nanoscopic investigations have shown that defects 

and vacancies form due to the application of multiple types of external stimuli, along with the 

dynamic migration of transition metal and chalcogen atoms towards favourable grain 

boundary formations[24]. There is, however, a lack of understanding on how processing 


 
3

conditions impact atomic scale structure and phase evolution in confined dimensions, 

including how they lead to the formation of new, meta-stable phases. [6, 7, 25] 

Here, we have studied the effect of equilibrium vs. non-equilibrium diffusion conditions 

during the heating of atomically thin 2D MoS2 sheets. We find that the effect of heating rate 

on the morphology of bilayer/few-layer MoS2 is consistent with the equilibrium bulk binary 

phase diagram of Mo and S[26, 27]. We see that stoichiometric MoS2 can phase-separate at 

low temperatures (T < 500 ˚C) into a two-phase region of Mo + MoS2 if the sulfur 

concentration is reduced.  At higher temperatures (500 < T < 1000 ˚C), the same process leads 

to a mixture of Mo2S3 and 3R phase of MoS2. Furthermore, if the sulfur content is reduced to 

below 60 atomic percent, a mixture of Mo and Mo2S3 forms. It has been established in the 

literature that sulfur vacancies, having a low formation energy, are the dominant defect 

species in few-layer MoS2[28], and that annealing in the 500 ˚C < T < 1000 ˚C range can lead 

to loss of sulfur atoms on a time scale of just 30 minutes[29]. Moreover, the general 

phenomena of melting point depression in quantum-confined materials relative to their bulk 

counterparts is well known[30, 31]. Based on these concepts, we propose that changing the 

heating rate of a bilayer MoS2 sample can be used as a proxy to tune the sulfur concentration 

and change the material structure and morphology of a stoichiometric crystal after synthesis. 

Direct observation of atomic level diffusion indicates the different crystalline states across the 

entire thermal diffusion process. Lateral heterophase formation along with statistical 

observation of particle evolution provides a new pathway for materials engineering in the 

quantum mechanically-relevant size regime[32]. 

 

Results and Discussion: 

Phase transformation processes in equilibrium vs non-equilibrium heating conditions: 

 


 
4

 

Figure 1: Direct visualisation of diffusion processes for non-equilibrium vs equilibrium 
environments. (a) Schematic shows the diffusion pathways for disintegration vs. decomposition of 2D 
layers in two discrete environments, (b, e) STEM imaging of pristine bilayer MoS2, as transferred to 
the MEMS chip and supporting SiNx membrane grid and corresponding (c, f) disintegrated crystalline 
nano-flakes and decomposed MoS2 respectively, (d) Disintegrated crystalline MoS2 contains multiple 
phases while (g) equilibrium decomposed MoS2 into amorphous / highly disordered structures. Atomic 
scale STEM images in Figure d and g taken from the corresponding section of Figure c and f 
respectively. 

Schematics presented in Figure 1a show the thermal diffusion process in 2D layered MoS2 

crystals, mechanically exfoliated from bulk crystals, when subjected to two different heat 

treatments: 1) localised, fast heating rates, using embedded heating elements on a chip, 

which create highly non-equilibrium thermodynamic conditions, and 2) global, slow heating 

in an equilibrium environment in a hot-walled reactor. To accomplish these experiments and 

visualize their atomic structure, exfoliated MoS2 layers were transferred to heater-embedded 

TEM grids (Hummingbird Scientific)[33]. HAADF-STEM images in Figures 1b and 1e represent 

the as-prepared 2D MoS2 layer before thermal treatment, while Figures 1c and 1f show the 

transformed MoS2 after thermal treatment in non-equilibrium and equilibrium conditions, 

respectively. Similar results for another set of samples are shown in Figure S1 (supporting 

information) to confirm the reproducibility of our experiments. In the case of non-equilibrium 

(fast) heating, we observe discrete integration of continuous, atomically thin and uniform 

layers of MoS2 into highly crystalline nanostructures or nanoparticles with lateral dimensions 


 
5

of less than 20 nm, which is within the regime of electronic quantum confinement. Figure 1d 

presents examples of nanoscale islands of MoS2 that form after fast ramping of the flakes 

shown in Figure 1b to elevated temperature (700 ˚C). Conversely, a slow increase in 

temperature results in decomposition of the stoichiometric, single crystalline MoS2 layers into 

amorphous structures. The sections below discuss the detailed mechanisms and structures 

observed in each case and correlate them with theoretical insights which account for different 

evaporation rates of sulfur from the structures. 

 

Macroscopic thermal diffusion in non-equilibrium conditions and the restructuring of 

heterophase formation: 

        While studies of phase evolution through heating or beam induced transformation have 

been previously carried out on 2D layered chalcogenides, those studies have been limited to 

small area, atomic scale investigations which offer limited insight into dynamic phenomena.  

Large area analysis and observations at different length scales using electron microscopy has 

been lacking. For the case of fast heating, we show this in Figure 2a-b where a magnification 

series of images shows how the disintegrated portion of a MoS2 flake taken through a rapid 

heating cycle develops, including analysis of its atomic structure and crystalline order. It is 

clear from these images that upon rapid heating the MoS2 single crystal flake disintegrates 

into highly crystalline, nanosized islands that retain hexagonal symmetry. This is also evident 

from the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns in Figures 2a-b. 


 
6

 

Figure 2: Crystalline disintegrated MoS2 nanoflakes formed after in-situ fast heating. (a) Low 
magnification ADF STEM image and inset selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern shows the 
high degree of crystallinity of disintegrated MoS2 from the large 2D sheets, (b) Rotated, high 
magnification STEM image of highlighted boxed region in Figure 2-a of MoS2 sheet after disintegration. 
The atomic scale HAADF STEM image shows the atomic arrangement for differently stacked MoS2. (c) 
STEM image simulation performed for different poly-phases of MoS2 to correlate with the 
experimentally observed atomic level images. (d) Atomically resolved STEM image shows formation 
of a heterojunction between the 2H and 3R phases, a mixed state layer (2H+3R) along with a transition 
state of restructured 2H MoS2. (e) Line profile across the two different phases, 2H and 3R present in 
the disintegrated nanoflake of MoS2 shows the atomic placement in the corresponding structures. 

Additional atomic resolution STEM images and compositional analysis via energy dispersive 

X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) are provided in Supporting Figures S2 and S3.  In addition to 

observing the highly ordered nature of the disintegrated MoS2 crystal, we also observe 

polymorphic phase formation, as highlighted in Figure 2b and 2d. SAED and EDS analysis 

indicated that the crystal symmetry of the 2H phase is intact. Figure 2b clearly shows the 

formation of different phases and structural rearrangements of MoS2 nanostructures, 

determined to be the 2H and 3R phases. In Figure 2c, we present image simulations (QSTEM 

package)[34] using the same experimental parameters to replicate the observed contrast and 


 
7

structural arrangements seen in the experimental HAADF STEM images. Only the 2H and 3R 

phases match with the experimentally observed contrast, and we do not see formation of any 

other phases, such as 1T and 1T’, elsewhere. However, we did find regions interconnecting 

the 2H and 3R phases which appear as transition states (Figure 2b, d). Additional analysis of 

structural arrangement of atoms and stacking order of planes for different phases in these 

transition regions is provided in Figure 2d and 2e. Atomically sharp heterojunction formation 

is observed at the intersection of the 2H and 3R regions (Figure 2d) in partially disintegrated 

regions, suggesting that the equilibrium 2H phase transforms into a metastable 3R phase in 

certain regions following a fast-thermal treatment. We speculate that the heat supply and 

dissipation across the flake is non-uniform and the partially disintegrated regions occur when 

the top atomic layers of the crystal have already disintegrated but the bottom layers have yet 

to disintegrate at the time of termination of the experiment. We observe that the occurrence 

of the 3R phase is strictly limited to fully/partially disintegrated regions of the original 2H-

phase continuous crystal. The continuous regions of the original crystal that do not 

disintegrate all remain in the pure 2H phase, while the partially disintegrated islands show a 

mixture of 2H and 3R phases (Figure S5). We hypothesize that the 3R phase is formed and 

stabilized in this case as result of restacking and vertical mass transport of the van-der-Waals 

layers during fast thermolysis of MoS29. Atomic scale line profiles along [112�0] of the two 

phases have also been plotted in the inset of Figure 2e. This clearly resolves the atomic 

locations (peak placement) and chemistry (peak height, equivalent to ∼Z2 contrast) in the two 

different structures. Additional images and analysis related to the structural model, 

distributions of 2H and 3R phases, as well as thickness variation after disintegration are 

provided in supporting information Figures S4, S5, S6 and Video V1. 

 

Coarsening and Epitaxial alignment: 

The above discussion describes the structure of the disintegrated phase upon rapid heating. 

While this provides new insight into the structural evolution, the dynamics of the 

transformation are difficult to capture in real-time measurements. This is particularly 

challenging since, upon reaching the desired temperature, layer disintegration is very rapid 

and occurs over the acquisition time of only two or three STEM images. We have therefore 

collected a sequence of bright field TEM images at different times (Figure 3), at a fixed 

temperature (650 ˚C) using a high-frame rate camera (GATAN One-View IS)[35]. The sample 


 
8

was slowly heated from room temperature to 550 ˚C and then rapidly heated from 550 ˚C to 

650 ˚C and observed in situ.  

 

Figure 3: Real time observation of few-layer MoS2 disintegration and subsequent coarsening using 
BF-TEM imaging. (a) Pristine few-layer MoS2 at room temperature and the corresponding (b) 
formation of small etched regions when slowly (∼25 ˚C/min) heated to 550 ˚C. (c) Complete 
disintegration of same few layer MoS2 when ramped to 650 ˚C with fast heating rate (∼25 ˚C/sec), (d-
g) Sequential snapshots of BF-TEM images taken at different times showing further coarsening of the 
disintegrated MoS2. 

Figures 3a and 3b show representative images of few-layer MoS2 when heated to 550 ˚C at a 

slow ramping rate (25 ˚C/min). Small etch pits form, (Figure 3b) which suggests slow 

evaporation of chalcogen atoms and associated defect creation in the MoS2 lattice, see Figure 

S7 for more details. Upon ramping at an accelerated rate of 25 ˚C/sec from 550 ˚C to 650 ˚C, 

we observe a dramatic transformation of the MoS2 sheet into disintegrated nanoscopic 

domains or islands (Figure 3c and Figure S8, supporting information). We have also examined 

the non-irradiated regions (i.e. those not exposed to the electron beam) and find that the 

MoS2 sheet undergoes a similar disintegration process after reaching 650 ˚C. Further analysis 

of sequential phase contrast TEM images (Figure 3d-g), shows the different stages of 

coarsening of the MoS2 nanostructure when held at a constant elevated temperature. It is 

worth noting that with rapid heating these nanostructures spontaneously form on a time 

scale that is less than the 100 fps frame rate of the camera.  In contrast, their slow evolution 


 
9

when held at a constant temperature can be captured. As seen in Figure 3d-g, after 55 

seconds, multiple smaller crystallites of MoS2 have coalesced into a larger crystal of ∼10 nm 

in diameter with a hexagonal shape. For Figure 3d-g, the coalescence is prominently visible in 

the bottom right corner of the image (blue dashed oval). We speculate that the initial 

disintegration mechanism breaks down the continuous few-layer thick MoS2 into regions with 

geometrical shapes based on energetically favourable facets. As the sample is held at an 

elevated temperature over time, partial etching ensues resulting in the loss of sulfur atoms 

via evaporation and the migration of atoms overall. With time, newly formed islands further 

restructure to reduce their surface energy leading to strongly faceted particles. Figures 3 d-g 

show that the island extends only slightly in the lateral dimension as the shape evolves, and 

that the thickness increases. This is evident from the decreased prominence of lattice fringes 

and darker contrast in the centre of the island.  These observations are consistent with well-

established theories of particle coalescence, wherein surface diffusion at the point of contact 

drives restructuring to reduce the total local curvature[36]. 

It is noteworthy that this thermally driven spontaneous disintegration into nanoscale islands 

occurs in both free standing as well as substrate supported crystals, as seen in Figure 3c. While 

there appears to be a partially connected network of particles in the free-standing region, on 

the amorphous non-epitaxial SiNx membrane support the particles are isolated and separated 

into “quantum dot” sized islands (See Figure S6 in supporting information for more images 

and video V2 for dynamics of coarsening). The high degree of crystallinity of the lattice both 

during coarsening (see video V2 in supporting information) and in the sub 10 nm size islands 

is remarkable and has not been seen before via chemical exfoliation or bottom up synthetic 

routes for Mo and W chalcogenides, to our knowledge. 

Epitaxy and lattice matching are not often discussed in the context of layered 2D material 

growth and synthesis, primarily because weak van der Waals (vdW) interlayer interactions 

generally preclude any significant influence by the substrates on subsequent layer orientation 

and growth. However, we see here that the van der Waals interactions, though weak in 

nature, can influence growth and epitaxial alignment of the nanoscale islands. Similar van der 

Waals epitaxy has been exploited for aligned growth of heterostructures on 2D layered 

materials, as a well as TMDC growth on standard substrates[37-43]. 


 
10

 

Figure 4: Epitaxy and orientation during the disintegration of few-layer MoS2 on in-situ MEMS chip. 
(a) Large area bright field (BF)-TEM image of the disintegrated portion of MoS2 where a portion of the 
flake has completely disintegrated. (b) Partially disintegrated MoS2 with a supporting, continuous layer 
of MoS2 underlying the islands, leading to epitaxial alignment of the islands over the continuous single 
crystalline layer. (c) Continuous bilayer MoS2 disintegrated at 700 ˚C upon rapid heating showing 
islands on top of continuous regions as well as fully disintegrated regions. Inset presents an atomic 
resolution image demonstrating epitaxial alignment in the partially decomposed region and randomly 
oriented islands in the completely disintegrated region. (d) Quantitative measurement of island size 
and shape after the non-equilibrium diffusion. Legend details described in main text. 

Furthermore, upon rapid heating, we observe an interesting epitaxial relationship 

between fully and partially disintegrated regions of few-layer MoS2 deposited on an 

amorphous support layer (SiNx), which is detailed in Figure 4. High magnification TEM images 

show that the few-layer MoS2 goes through a layer-by-layer disintegration, followed by 

coarsening of the 2D layers. Figure 4a presents a low magnification TEM image that shows 

that a large portion of the MoS2 layer has fully disintegrated into faceted nanostructures, 


 
11

while a small portion in top-left corner remains only partially disintegrated. Analysis of the 

geometric alignment of the nanoscale MoS2 islands indicates that the MoS2 nanostructures in 

the fully disintegrated region do not exhibit any preferential alignment or epitaxy with one 

another. However, the islands that sit above a continuous single crystalline MoS2 layer exhibit 

some preferential alignment (Figure 4b). We observe that the fully disintegrated MoS2 

nanostructures are transformed into “quantum dot” or faceted nanostructures with random 

orientations and alignment with respect to one another. In contrast, in the partially 

disintegrated regions (Figure 4c inset) the nanoscale islands maintain perfect epitaxial 

orientation with the remaining continuous MoS2 layer. Since the sample thickness is much 

smaller than the perpendicular phonon mean free path[44], we propose that the 

disintegration mechanism occurs via point defect formation and aggregation[16, 45] (Figure 

6). To minimize disruption of vdW interactions, these point defects will preferentially form in 

the layer furthest from the substrate, leaving the layer adjacent to the substrate intact for 

longer time and leading to the observed epitaxy. Additional characterization details of the 

nanoscale islands including information regarding their composition is provided in Figure S10. 

Our large area, in-situ analysis allows for shape characterization of the population of 

nanocrystalline islands which form after rapid heating and annealing at 650 ˚C. The ADF STEM 

images such as Figure 4c are segmented using a connected components algorithm[46] to 

identify each nanoscopic island of MoS2 from the void or substrate background. The 

perimeter and area of each island are then measured in terms of number of pixels on the 

edge and the interior of the island, respectively. We then scale the perimeter of each island 

to the average (260 pixels) and scale the area by the square of the scale factor. This enables 

us to use the perimeter to area ratio to characterize the shape of each island, removing the 

effect of dilation. A histogram of this shape factor is plotted in Figure 4d for the smallest 775 

nanostructures, comprising 90% of the islands detected by the connected components 

algorithm. The lines overlaid for reference correspond to the shape factors of regular 

polygons with equivalent perimeters, with the circle having the smallest perimeter / area 

ratio. The regular hexagon and equilateral triangle are also shown since these shapes have 

been commonly observed in CVD growth experiments of TMDCs[47]. We see that the majority 

of the nanoscale islands adopt a shape somewhere between the circle and hexagon, 

suggesting a rounded hexagonal morphology, broadly consistent with the HAADF-STEM 


 
12

images in Figure 4. The distribution of islands can be empirically fit by an inverse Gaussian 

𝑓𝑓(𝑥𝑥, 𝜇𝜇) =
1

√2𝜋𝜋𝑥𝑥3 exp (−
(𝑥𝑥−𝜇𝜇)2

2𝑥𝑥𝜇𝜇2 ) with a shape factor 𝜇𝜇 of 2.1. A non-normal distribution like this 

is expected due to the energetic preference for specific edge configurations[48]. The 

dominance of the hexagonal shape is indicative of a neutral chemical potential environment 

with a stoichiometric balance and a mixture of chalcogen and metal-terminated edges. 

Triangular flakes tend to form in extremums of the chemical potential since the edges are 

either all chalcogen or have a metal-rich zig-zag structure[49]. This is further evidence that 

the rapid in-situ heating rate preserves the composition of the lattice at the initial MoS2 ratio. 

This will be discussed in more detail below (see Figure 6). 

 

Decomposition and amorphization of MoS2 under slow, equilibrium heating: 

The above sections discuss the structural changes that occur during the rapid heating of 2D 

MoS2. To isolate the specific effects of the heating rate, we performed a comparative analysis 

with ex-situ, slow heating of the MoS2 layers on SiNx membranes. A few prior studies have 

suggested that slow formation of vacancies due to chalcogen removal and migration at 

elevated temperatures that ultimately leads to the formation of voids. Our observations agree 

with these earlier reports in monolayer to few-layer MoS2. 

 


 
13

Figure 5: Ex-situ heated (rate = 25 ºC/min) MoS2 layers in equilibrium conditions. (a) HAADF-STEM 
imaging of the MoS2 heated to 525 ˚C for 5 minutes. Triangular etch pits inside the monolayer along-
with completely etched edges are evident. (b) Images from a few-layer MoS2 region heated in these 
same conditions, and at higher magnification. (c) HAADF-STEM image of few layer MoS2 heated to 550 
˚C for 5 minutes. Nanocrystalline order is evident in corresponding FFT which shows faint, diffused 
spots (inset) (d) Fully decomposed amorphous MoS2 with along with corresponding FFT inset (550 ˚C 
for 5-10 mins). FFT patterns (inset in c and d) represent the crystallinity of the corresponding region 
indicated by the green and yellow dashed rectangular regions marked in Figure 5 (b). (e) BF-STEM 
image and corresponding EDX maps of molybdenum (cyan) and sulfur, (yellow). The yellow circles 
indicate regions of nanocrystal formation which are highly enriched in Mo, ultimately leading to 
formation of pure Mo metal crystals.  

Figure 5 presents a detailed analysis for describing these phenomena over a wide range of 

temperatures and over a large area. Ex-situ thermal treatments were carried out in a quartz 

tube furnace in two different environments (vacuum as well as pure Ar gas) using the slow 

heating rate (25 ˚C/min), as detailed in the methods section. The slow heating rate and the 

uniformity of temperature inside the tube furnace makes this an equilibrium heating 

condition, leading to a fundamentally different disintegration process (called decomposition) 

than the one observed in the non-equilibrium (rapid heating) case. Slow heating to reach 

elevated temperatures results in formation and migration of vacancies, starting with the ones 

that have the lowest formation energies as described in the literature [24, 50, 51]. This results 

in the formation of nanoscale voids in the layers, as shown in Figure 5a and 5b. Another 

distinctive feature of slow-heating induced disintegration is that the affected region is 

localized to high energy or defective regions such as the flake edges, atomic layer step edges, 

or previously formed defects. Interestingly, areas adjacent the affected regions maintain high 

structural integrity and crystalline quality as seen in Figure 5b (Figure S11, supporting 

information). This is in sharp contrast to the rapid heating case where the entire flake/crystal 

simultaneously disintegrates into nanoscale, faceted and highly crystalline islands of 

stoichiometric MoS2. Multiple ex-situ experiments have been carried out to determine the 

required thermal conditions to initiate the disintegration process in MoS2 layers (See Figure 

S12 for more details). The formation of S-vacancies as the temperature is slowly increased 

leads to a volatile ejection of sulfur compounds, reducing the composition of sulfur in the 

lattice. This mechanism has been well explored at atomic level in previous reports[24, 52, 53]. 

Since there is a net loss of S from the lattice due to its lower energy for vacancy formation, 

this results in a non-stoichiometric decomposition which leads to the formation of 

nanocrystalline to amorphous MoS2 or Mo nanocrystals. This can be clearly seen in the 


 
14

atomically resolved HAADF-STEM images as well as the corresponding Fast Fourier transform 

(FFT) pattern analyses (Figure 5c-d). To further clarify our ex-situ observations of samples 

subjected to a slow heating rate, we also carried out the same thermal decomposition for 

samples held at fixed temperature (525 ˚C) for different lengths of time, as shown in Figure 

S13 (supporting information). These HAADF-STEM images provide insight into the 

mechanistic behaviour during ex-situ thermal decomposition: as the time at 525 ˚C increases, 

the formation rate and areal density of pores also increases, which leads to increased void 

formation in the multilayers and monolayers (Figure S12c). After 10 minutes of annealing, 

bright contrast regions begin to appear, which indicates the formation of Mo/MoSx 

nanocrystals along with adjacent regions of amorphized MoS2. This suggests that the non-

stoichiometric disintegration first results in formation of nanocrystalline or amorphous MoxS2-

x followed by near complete removal of S to form Mo metal nanocrystals. Additional atomic 

resolution images and compositional analysis are provided in supporting information Figures 

S11-13. To verify that the ex-situ, slowly heated samples in a furnace are not affected by trace 

oxygen or different quality of vacuum in a tube furnace vs. the TEM column, we have also 

performed control experiments in an inert, ultra-high purity Ar environment where we 

observed similar results (see Figure S14). Here, the increased vapor pressure of the Ar 

environment as compared to vacuum raises the disintegration temperature, consistent with 

our proposed mechanism described below (Figure 6). 


 
15

 

Figure 6: (a) Schematic diagram showing that the rapid heating rate leads to the formation of S 
vacancies and adatoms (yellow circles). Diffusion of S vacancies allows Mo adatoms (purple circles) to 
recombine with S adatoms before they evolve as volatile elemental products (yellow, S2, S8) and leave 
the system. (b) In contrast, a slow heating rate prevents Mo adatom formation before S-compounds 
become volatile, preventing subsequent reformation of Mo-S bonds. This results in the system being 
driven into a two-phase regime composed of Mo-rich regions and amorphous MoS2 regions. 

During rapid in-situ heating, the samples are heated at 25 ˚C/sec from 500 ˚C to 700 ˚C (Figure 

6a), while during the ex-situ experiment (S14) shown in Figure 6b the sample was heated over 

the same temperature range at a rate of 25 ˚C/min. The non-equilibrium heating rate (Figure 

6a) causes sulfur vacancies to form quickly, leading to S-adatoms on the MoS2 surface. Over 

time, collisions between the rapidly expanding adatom population lead to formation of 

volatile elemental sulfur compounds (S2, S8) which leave the surface. However, in only a few 

seconds, the temperature increases to the point where Mo vacancies begin to form (700 ˚C), 

leading to Mo adatoms on the MoS2 surface. This is assisted by the formation of sulfur vacancy 

line defects, which reduce the formation energy of a Mo vacancy by increasing the local 

chemical potential of Mo[16, 45]. The chemical potential imbalance occurs because the 

diffusion rate of the S vacancies is much faster (barrier of 0.8 eV) than that of the S adatoms 

(barrier of 1.6 eV), which allows the Mo adatoms to begin forming before the volatile S 

compounds form and leave the surface[45, 54]. The combination of line defects and sulfur 


 
16

conservation on the surface leads to both void formation and a CVD – type environment for 

stoichiometric nucleation. CVD growth studies have shown that temperatures of 700 ˚C - 800 

˚C preferentially lead to vertically stacked MoS2 growth instead of monolayer growth[47, 54]. 

Random nucleation of these additional layers can lead to a mixture of 2H and 3R stackings, 

but as voids become larger and multilayer islands become thicker, we expect a shift toward 

the 3R morphology below 1000 ˚C, consistent with the bulk phase diagram[16]. In contrast, 

the sample in Figure 6b spends several minutes in the regime where sulfur vacancies can form 

but where the temperature is too low to activate Mo adatoms, due to the lower heating rate. 

The slow heating rate allows for enough time for volatile sulfur compounds to form and leave 

the surface. This explains the increased depression of the melt process in vacuum versus the 

neutral Ar environment, where the reduced vapor pressure accelerates the formation and 

evolution of the volatile sulfur rich compounds. This pushes the remaining atomic 

composition of the lattice into the Mo + MoS2 or Mo + Mo2S3 regimes on the bulk phase 

diagram. The phase transition temperature is affected by both the vapor pressure and the 

melting point suppression effect of nanoconfinement. At this reduced sulfur concentration, 

we expect two-phase regions of Mo and either MoS2 or Mo2S3 to form, as observed in the ex-

situ heating experiments. 

 

Conclusions: 

In conclusion, we have performed a detailed analysis of thermal decomposition and 

disintegration of atomically thin MoS2 via electron microscopy and spectroscopic analysis. We 

observe that high heating rates lead to spontaneous disintegration of MoS2 single crystalline 

flakes into highly crystalline, nanosized crystals down to 5 nm in diameter, which is in the 

regime of strong electronic quantum confinement[32]. Furthermore, we observe that this 

rapid heating leads to a partial disintegration and the subsequent formation of 3R phases in 

close proximity to the original 2H phase. The nanocrystals in the partially disintegrated region 

maintain epitaxial relationship with the underlying layer of MoS2 while the fully disintegrated 

regions show random orientation of MoS2 nanocrystals. In contrast, slow heating results in 

non-stoichiometric decomposition of MoS2 single crystals, resulting in first formation of 

nanocrystalline to amorphous MoxS2-x and ultimately Mo metal nanocrystals due to sulfur 

sublimation. Our study delineates the pathways by which thermally induced disintegration of 


 
17

atomically thin chalcogenides occurs and elucidates the impact of heating rates on the 

reaction products. This is critical knowledge in applications such as phase change memory, 

high temperature lubrication, and catalytic processes where MoS2 can be used. In addition, 

our studies have shown a novel pathway towards creation of an atomically-thin, highly 

ordered, quantum-dot like structures via top-down processing which could exhibit unique and 

novel electronic and optical properties for optoelectronic or catalytic applications. 

 

Experimental Details: 

Materials and Methods: 

Mechanically exfoliated 2D MoS2 layers were prepared using the conventional scotch tape method, as 

described elsewhere[55]. The thickness of the exfoliated layers has been intentionally chosen such 

that each sample could be reproduced for further thermal diffusion analysis. Exfoliated MoS2 layers 

were transferred to the TEM chips/grids with help of a poly-dimethyl siloxane (PDMS) strip, using a 

dry transfer technique that utilizes micromanipulator stages attached to an optical microscope. After 

transferring MoS2 to TEM grids, samples were annealed in a quartz tube furnace in a closed gas (Ar+ 

H2) environment to remove all PDMS contaminants. Annealing was performed at 300 ˚C for 2 hrs to 

clean contaminants as well as release the strain developed during the pressure-based transfer 

method. 

STEM Measurements: 

Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) has been used to measure and analyse all the 

samples made for in-situ and ex-situ heating experiments. In-situ experiments at various temperatures 

have been done in a specialised TEM holder from Hummingbird Scientific, where a uniquely designed 

microfabricated heating chip was used. An embedded heating element provides robust stability to 

perform in-situ thermal diffusion analysis at elevated temperatures. Heating calibration was received 

from the manufacturer to achieve controlled heating based on resistance measurements. Two 

different TEM/STEM systems were used: a JEOL F200 S/TEM, and probe-corrected JEOL NEOARM 

STEM, both operated at 200 KV accelerating voltage. For the JEOL NEOARM STEM, the condenser lens 

aperture was 40 μm with a camera length of 4 mm for imaging and 2 mm for EELS. The probe current 

was 120 pA. A Gatan imaging filter (GIF) aperture of 2.5 mm was also used for EELS with a collection 

semi-angle β of 41.7 mrad. All of the captured TEM images were collected on GATAN IS One View 

(JEOL F200) and Ultra-scan cameras (JEOL NEO ARM), and the STEM images were recorded on the 

integrated JEOL bright-field and annular dark field detectors. In-situ TEM videos were acquired on the 

JEOL F200 using GATAN OneView IS camera at 50 fps with 2k x 2k resolution. Corresponding elemental 


 
18

identification has been performed using dual detector EDX on the F200 system. Experimentally 

acquired STEM images are smoothed using the adaptive gaussian blur function (with radius of 1-2 

pixels) available in ImageJ. Image simulation has been performed using QSTEM software[34]. Adopted 

parameters for the image simulation were the same as in the experimental conditions for AC-STEM 

measurements. Image analysis and feature extraction were preformed using the open source SciKit-

Image[46] python library. 

 

Acknowledgements: 

This work was carried out in part at the Singh Center for Nanotechnology at the University of 

Pennsylvania which is supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) National Nanotechnology 

Coordinated Infrastructure Program grant NNCI-1542153. D.J., E.A.S and P.K acknowledge primary 

support for this work from University of Pennsylvania Materials Research Science and Engineering 

Center (MRSEC) seed grant supported by the National Science Foundation (DMR-1720530) and NSF 

DMR Electronic Photonic and Magnetic Materials (EPM) core program grant (DMR-1905853). N.A. and 

D.J. acknowledge support from Vagelos Institute for Energy Science and Technology at University of 

Pennsylvania as well as the Center for Undergraduate Research and Fellowships at Penn. D.J. also 

acknowledges support for this work by the U.S. Army Research Office under contract number 

W911NF1910109. J.P.H and E.A.S acknowledge support through the National Science Foundation, 

Division of Materials Research, Metals and Metallic Nanostructures Program under Grant 1809398. 

A.C.F and E.A.S would like to acknowledge the Vagelos Institute for Energy Science and Technology at 

the University of Pennsylvania for a graduate fellowship. C.C.P. and V.B.S acknowledge support from 

NSF grant CMMI-1727717. The authors thank Douglas Yates and Jamie Ford in the Singh Center for 

Nanotechnology for help with the TEM/STEM measurements. 

 

References: 

1. 
Novoselov, K.S., et al., Two-dimensional atomic crystals. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 2005. 102(30): p. 10451-10453. 

2. 
Jariwala, D., et al., Emerging Device Applications for Semiconducting Two-Dimensional 
Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. ACS Nano, 2014. 8(2): p. 1102-1120. 

3. 
Zhao, X., et al., Healing of Planar Defects in 2D Materials via Grain Boundary Sliding. Advanced 
Materials, 2019. 31(16): p. 1900237. 

4. 
Lin, Y.-C., et al., Atomic mechanism of the semiconducting-to-metallic phase transition in 
single-layered MoS2. Nature Nanotechnology, 2014. 9(5): p. 391-396. 

5. 
Kappera, R., et al., Phase-engineered low-resistance contacts for ultrathin MoS2 transistors. 
Nature Materials, 2014. 13(12): p. 1128-1134. 

6. 
Voiry, D., A. Mohite, and M. Chhowalla, Phase engineering of transition metal dichalcogenides. 
Chemical Society Reviews, 2015. 44(9): p. 2702-2712. 


 
19

7. 
Kumar, P., et al., Phase engineering of seamless heterophase homojunctions with co-existing 
3R and 2H phases in WS2 monolayers. Nanoscale, 2018. 10(7): p. 3320-3330. 

8. 
Ng, H.K., et al., Effects Of Structural Phase Transition On Thermoelectric Performance in 
Lithium-Intercalated Molybdenum Disulfide (LixMoS2). ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 
2019. 11(13): p. 12184-12189. 

9. 
Eda, G., et al., Coherent Atomic and Electronic Heterostructures of Single-Layer MoS2. ACS 
Nano, 2012. 6(8): p. 7311-7317. 

10. 
Yung-Chang Lin, H.N., Chung-Wei Tseng, Shisheng Li, Zheng Liu, Toshiya Okazaki, Po-Wen Chiu 
and Kazu Suenaga, Does the metallic 1T phase WS2 really exist? arXiv:1907.11398, 2019. 

11. 
Chhowalla, M., et al., The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal 
dichalcogenide nanosheets. Nature Chemistry, 2013. 5(4): p. 263-275. 

12. 
Chhowalla, M., Z. Liu, and H. Zhang, Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) 
nanosheets. Chemical Society Reviews, 2015. 44(9): p. 2584-2586. 

13. 
Leng, K., et al., Phase Restructuring in Transition Metal Dichalcogenides for Highly Stable 
Energy Storage. ACS Nano, 2016. 10(10): p. 9208-9215. 

14. 
Chen, Z., et al., Interface confined hydrogen evolution reaction in zero valent metal 
nanoparticles-intercalated molybdenum disulfide. Nature Communications, 2017. 8(1): p. 
14548. 

15. 
Ryu, G.H., et al., Atomic Structure and Dynamics of Self-Limiting Sub-Nanometer Pores in 
Monolayer WS2. ACS Nano, 2018. 12(11): p. 11638-11647. 

16. 
Chen, Q., et al., Ultralong 1D Vacancy Channels for Rapid Atomic Migration during 2D Void 
Formation in Monolayer MoS2. ACS Nano, 2018. 12(8): p. 7721-7730. 

17. 
Jariwala, D., T.J. Marks, and M.C. Hersam, Mixed-dimensional van der Waals heterostructures. 
Nature Materials, 2017. 16(2): p. 170-181. 

18. 
Sangwan, V.K., et al., Gate-tunable memristive phenomena mediated by grain boundaries in 
single-layer MoS2. Nature Nanotechnology, 2015. 10(5): p. 403-406. 

19. 
Chen, J., et al., Atomic Structure and Dynamics of Defects and Grain Boundaries in 2D Pd2Se3 
Monolayers. ACS Nano, 2019. 13(7): p. 8256-8264. 

20. 
Sutter, E., et al., Electron-Beam Induced Transformations of Layered Tin Dichalcogenides. Nano 
Letters, 2016. 16(7): p. 4410-4416. 

21. 
Lin, J., et al., Novel Pd2Se3 Two-Dimensional Phase Driven by Interlayer Fusion in Layered 
PdSe2. Physical Review Letters, 2017. 119(1): p. 016101. 

22. 
Tai, K.L., et al., Atomic-Scale Fabrication of In-Plane Heterojunctions of Few-Layer MoS2 via In 
Situ Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy. Small, 2019. 

23. 
Zuluaga, S., et al., Two-dimensional PdSe2-Pd2Se3 junctions can serve as nanowires. 2D 
Materials, 2018. 5(3): p. 035025. 

24. 
Chen, J., et al., In situ high temperature atomic level dynamics of large inversion domain 
formations in monolayer MoS2. Nanoscale, 2019. 11(4): p. 1901-1913. 

25. 
Zhao, W. and F. Ding, Energetics and kinetics of phase transition between a 2H and a 1T MoS2 
monolayer—a theoretical study. Nanoscale, 2017. 9(6): p. 2301-2309. 

26. 
Tesfaye, F. and P. Taskinen, Phase Equilibria and Thermochemistry of Selected Sulfide Systems 
in the Pyrometallurgy of Ni and Cu. 2012: Espoo. p. 39. 

27. 
Johnson, W.B., W.S. Hong, and D.W. Readey, A molybdenum sulfur binary phase diagram. 
Scripta Metallurgica, 1983. 17(7): p. 919-922. 

28. 
Komsa, H.-P. and A.V. Krasheninnikov, Native defects in bulk and monolayer 
${\mathrm{MoS}}_{2}$ from first principles. Physical Review B, 2015. 91(12): p. 125304. 

29. 
Pitthan, E., et al., Annealing Response of Monolayer MoS2 Grown by Chemical Vapor 
Deposition. ECS Journal of Solid State Science and Technology, 2019. 8(4): p. P267-P270. 

30. 
Couchman, P.R. and W.A. Jesser, Thermodynamic theory of size dependence of melting 
temperature in metals. Nature, 1977. 269(5628): p. 481-483. 


 
20

31. 
Lai, S.L., et al., Size-Dependent Melting Properties of Small Tin Particles: Nanocalorimetric 
Measurements. Physical Review Letters, 1996. 77(1): p. 99-102. 

32. 
Price, C.C., et al., Engineering Zero-Dimensional Quantum Confinement in Transition-Metal 
Dichalcogenide Heterostructures. ACS Nano, 2019. 13(7): p. 8303-8311. 

33. 
Scientific, 
H. 
MEMS 
Heating 
+ 
Biasing. 
 
[cited 
2019; 
Available 
from: 

http://hummingbirdscientific.com/products/heating-biasing/. 

34. 
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences. QSTEM: Quantitative TEM/STEM Simulations. 
2002 
 
[cited 
2019; 
Available 
from: 
https://www.physics.hu-

berlin.de/en/sem/software/software_qstem. 

35. 
AMETEK; GATAN, OneView Camera. 

36. 
Kingery, W.D., H.K. Bowen, and D.R. Uhlmann, Introduction to ceramics. 1976, New York: 
Wiley. 

37. 
Li, H., et al., Epitaxial Growth of Two-Dimensional Layered Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides: 
Growth Mechanism, Controllability, and Scalability. Chemical Reviews, 2018. 118(13): p. 6134-
6150. 

38. 
Kumar, P. and B. Viswanath, Effect of Sulfur Evaporation Rate on Screw Dislocation Driven 
Growth of MoS2 with High Atomic Step Density. Crystal Growth & Design, 2016. 16(12): p. 
7145-7154. 

39. 
Hu, Z., et al., Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides: interface and defect 
engineering. Chemical Society Reviews, 2018. 47(9): p. 3100-3128. 

40. 
Dumcenco, D., et al., Large-Area Epitaxial Monolayer MoS2. ACS Nano, 2015. 9(4): p. 4611-
4620. 

41. 
Duan, X., et al., Lateral epitaxial growth of two-dimensional layered semiconductor 
heterojunctions. Nature Nanotechnology, 2014. 9(12): p. 1024-1030. 

42. 
Fu, D., et al., Molecular Beam Epitaxy of Highly Crystalline Monolayer Molybdenum Disulfide 
on Hexagonal Boron Nitride. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2017. 139(27): p. 9392-
9400. 

43. 
Koma, A., K. Sunouchi, and T. Miyajima, Fabrication and characterization of heterostructures 
with subnanometer thickness. Microelectronic Engineering, 1984. 2(1): p. 129-136. 

44. 
Sood, A., et al., Quasi-Ballistic Thermal Transport Across MoS2 Thin Films. Nano Letters, 2019. 
19(4): p. 2434-2442. 

45. 
Le, D., T.B. Rawal, and T.S. Rahman, Single-Layer MoS2 with Sulfur Vacancies: Structure and 
Catalytic Application. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2014. 118(10): p. 5346-5351. 

46. 
van der Walt, S., et al., scikit-image: image processing in Python. PeerJ, 2014. 2: p. e453-e453. 

47. 
Ye, H., et al., Toward a Mechanistic Understanding of Vertical Growth of van der Waals 
Stacked 2D Materials: A Multiscale Model and Experiments. ACS Nano, 2017. 11(12): p. 12780-
12788. 

48. 
Chen, Q., et al., Atomically Flat Zigzag Edges in Monolayer MoS2 by Thermal Annealing. Nano 
Letters, 2017. 17(9): p. 5502-5507. 

49. 
Wang, S., et al., Shape Evolution of Monolayer MoS2 Crystals Grown by Chemical Vapor 
Deposition. Chemistry of Materials, 2014. 26(22): p. 6371-6379. 

50. 
Kumar, P., et al., Scalable faceted voids with luminescent enhanced edges in WS2 monolayers. 
Nanoscale, 2018. 10(34): p. 16321-16331. 

51. 
Zhou, W., et al., Intrinsic Structural Defects in Monolayer Molybdenum Disulfide. Nano Letters, 
2013. 13(6): p. 2615-2622. 

52. 
Li, L., et al., Role of Sulfur Vacancies and Undercoordinated Mo Regions in MoS2 Nanosheets 
toward the Evolution of Hydrogen. ACS Nano, 2019. 13(6): p. 6824-6834. 

53. 
Chen, P., et al., Thermal Degradation of Monolayer MoS2 on SrTiO3 Supports. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry C, 2019. 123(6): p. 3876-3885. 

54. 
Gong, Y., et al., Vertical and in-plane heterostructures from WS2/MoS2 monolayers. Nature 
Materials, 2014. 13(12): p. 1135-1142. 


 
21

55. 
Li, H., et al., Preparation and Applications of Mechanically Exfoliated Single-Layer and 
Multilayer MoS2 and WSe2 Nanosheets. Accounts of Chemical Research, 2014. 47(4): p. 1067-
1075. 

 

 


 
1

Supporting Information 

Direct Visualisation of Out-of-Equilibrium Structural 
Transformations in Atomically-Thin Chalcogenides 

Pawan Kumar1,2, James P. Horwath2, Alexandre C. Foucher2, Christopher C. Price2, Natalia 
Acero3, Vivek B. Shenoy2, Eric A. Stach2# and Deep Jariwala1#. 

1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia-
19104, USA. 

2Department of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia-
19104, USA. 

3Vagelos Institute for Energy Science and Technology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia-19104, USA. 

#E-mail: dmj@seas.upenn.edu; stach@seas.upenn.edu 

 

Figure S1: Non-equilibrium vs. equilibrium thermal diffusion processes within 2D MoS2 layers. (a) 
ADF STEM images during in-situ heating of MoS2 layer indicate no changes to the sample at 
temperatures of 600 ºC, while (b) a sudden (25 ºC/sec) temperature increase to 650 ºC caused 
crystalline disintegration of 2D layers into faceted nanostructures. (c) Optical view of SiNx membrane 


 
2

coated ex-situ heating TEM grid and corresponding ADF STEM image of (d) as prepared few layer MoS2 
and (e) after ex-situ heating (heat ramping rate 25 ºC/min) at 525 ºC for 10 minutes under a rough 
vacuum environment. 
 

 

 

Figure S2: In-situ heated bilayer MoS2 in a non-equilibrium environment and corresponding 
magnified HAADF-STEM imaging of polymorphic-phases. (a, b) Low magnified dark field STEM images 
after in-situ disintegration at 700 ºC in non-equilibrium conditions (25 ºC/sec) and corresponding (c) 
atomic resolution HAADF STEM image. (d) Highlighted portion in Figure c, shows restructured 
polymorphic phases, 3R (different thickness) from the pristine 2H phase of bilayer MoS2. 
 
 

 


 
3

 

Figure S3: EDS maps and spectrum of the crystalline disintegrated MoS2. (a) HAADF STEM image and 
corresponding elemental identification (b) Mo and (c) S, the full spectrum is presented in (d). 
 

 


 
4

 

Figure S4: Structural models: Structural model (along a and c axes) with marked unit cell 
representation extracted using Crystal Maker for different polymorphic phases of MoS2 according to 
the respective lattice parameters and space-group. This structural model allows us to directly 
determine and visualize the polymorphic phases in the atomic resolution HAADF-STEM images. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 
5

 

 

 

 

Figure S5: Atomic resolution STEM imaging of the highlighted portion of disintegrated bilayer MoS2 
having different stacking sequences. a-b shows the atomically resolved structural arrangement of two 
different phases. Interestingly, we can see that the rearrangement and formation of different phases 
only happens when the nanostructure is completely disintegrated.  Here, bilayer MoS2 remains in the 
original 2H arrangement when it is in a continuous layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
6

 

Figure S6: STEM imaging of disintegrated quantum dot like particles. (a) Atomic resolution ADF-STEM 
imaging for the in-situ disintegrated bilayer MoS2 and higher magnification of individual quantum dots 
(b-e). 
 

 

Figure S7: Time sequence TEM images acquired during in-situ heating of MoS2 from 500 to 550 ºC 
at a slow heating rate (25 ºC/min). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
7

 
 

 

Figure S8: Sequential TEM images captured following rapid sample degradation.  
 

 

 

 

 


 
8

 

Figure S9: Shape and size analysis of well disintegrated MoS2 using python-programmed image pixel-
contrast relationship.  
 

 

Figure S10: Additional EDS maps for a different sample heated in-situ, confirming the disintegrated 
nanostructured MoS2.  
 


 
9

 

 

 

 

 

Figure S11: Atomic resolution STEM images of bilayer MoS2, heated ex-situ to 525 ºC for 5 minutes. 
 


 
10

 

Figure S12: HAADF-STEM images of MoS2 at different temperatures (rate = 25 ºC/min) to analyse 
the thermal diffusion behaviour. 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 
11

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure S13: Set of ADF-STEM images highlight the different regions of MoS2 heated ex-situ (Rate = 
25 ºC/min) at 525 ºC for two different times. 

 

 


 
12

 

Figure S14: HAADF-STEM images from few-layer MoS2 heated at the slow ramping rate (Rate = 25 
ºC/min) in an argon (Ar) environment under equilibrium conditions. A slower etching rate and 
further decomposition occurs at higher temperatures in the Ar environment when compared with the 
rough vacuum. HAADF-STEM images of ex-situ heated MoS2 layers at (a) 650 ºC, (b) 700 ºC, (c) 750 ºC 
for 5 minutes. Figure c inset shows magnified region of smaller etching in thinner section of figure c. 
(d) STEM image following 10 minutes at 750 ºC. This leads faceted (triangular or hexagonal shaped) 
features shown at higher magnification shown in figure (e). A few portions of the MoS2 layers become 
complete decomposed into Mo nanocrystals as shown in (f), which is further confirmed by another 
sample 800 ºC for 5 minutes. The SAED pattern confirms the transformation into Mo nanocrystals. 


