This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

Data analytics approach to predict the hardness of the copper matrix 

composites

Somesh Kr. Bhattacharya, Ryoji Sahara

Research Center for Structural Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1

Sengen, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan

Dušan Božic, Jovana Ružić

Institute for Nuclear Sciences “Vinča”, University of Belgrade, Mike Petrovića, Alasa

12-14, PO Box 522, 11001 Belgrade, Serbia

Abstract

Copper matrix composite materials have exhibited a high potential in applications where 
excellent conductivity and mechanical properties are required. In this study, the machine 
learning models have been applied to predict the hardness of the copper matrix 
composite materials produced via powder metallurgy
technique. Two particular 

composites were considered in this work. From experiments, we extracted the 
independent variables (features) like the milling time (MT, Hours), dislocation density (DD, 
𝑚−2), average particle size (PS, μm), density (𝜌, 𝑔𝑚/𝑐𝑚3) and yield stress (𝜎, MPa) while 
the Vickers Hardness (MPa) was used as the dependent variable. Feature selection was 
performed by calculation the Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) between the 
independent and dependent variables. We employed six different machine learning 
regression models to predict the hardness for the two matrix composites.

Keywords: Copper Matrix Composites, Hardness, Machine Learning, Regression

1. Introduction

The excellent mechanical properties and electrical conductivity of copper matrix 
composites (CuMCs) and copper alloys possess [1, 2, 3] making them desirable materials 
in several industries viz. automotive, aerospace, military, nuclear, electronic. The main 
potential of these materials lies in reaching the favorable relation between improving the 
mechanical properties and preserving high conductivity. It is well known that the lower 
content of alloying elements in the copper matrix supports higher thermal and electrical 
conductivity. The most commonly used reinforcements [4, 5] for copper matrix are metals 
(Ti, Mg, Co, Ni, etc.) or ceramic particles SiC and Al2O3, while in recent years with 
particles such as ZrB2, TiO2, TiB2, TiC, B4C, etc. Since the properties of the CuMCs and 
its alloys strongly depends on the nature, amount and distribution of the reinforcements, 
the great attention is given to the selection of the manufacturing techniques for production 
of CuMCs and Cu alloys. Ingot and powder metallurgy are both used for production of the 
Cu based materials, where powder metallurgy is more suitable when in situ formation of 
the reinforcing particles is needed [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Although, the most recent study [11] of
the copper matrix particulate-reinforced with ZrB2 ceramics produced by ingot metallurgy 
show that as-cast Cu-ZrB2 composites can reach the improvement in hardness up to 140 
Vickers Hardness (HV) similar to the results obtained by powder metallurgy [12].


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

Investigation of the copper based materials attracts researches and engineers from 
different fields due their wide application and fast industry growth.

In powder metallurgy technique, the properties of alloys and metal matrix composites 
(MMCs) depend largely on the milling time. Thus, it is highly desirable to have a rapid and 
accurate prediction of the hardness via structure-property correlation of these MMCs. 
While physics-based models (e.g. density functional theory and phase field simulations) 
can promote understanding at a given length scale but they are often limited to low order 
model systems due to computational complexity and lack of input parameters to represent 
realistic higher-order systems. An efficient way to achieve is the data-driven methodology
that involves applying statistical learning tools to analyze correlations between hardness 
and features of the MMCs. Machine learning (ML) approach can reduce the experimental 
cost and time while predicting target properties of materials [13, 14, 15, 16].

In the present study we made an attempt to apply ML approach to predict the hardness 
of the CuMCs. We employed six different regression models (random forest, gradient 
boost, near neighbor, support vector, kernel ridge and linear) to predict the hardness. The 
remaining paper is organized as follows. In section 2.1 and 2.2, we briefly describe the 
experimental work the machine learning model, respectively. We discuss our results in 
section 3 followed by conclusion.

2. Methodology

2.1. Experimental work
The Cu-ZrB2 alloy was produced using powder metallurgy technique, where Cu, Zr and 
B were used as starting powders. Mechanical alloying was performed in the attritor mill. 
The in situ formation of ZrB2 particles inside the Cu matrix was achieved during hot-
pressing at 950oC. Morphological analyses of the mechanically alloyed (MA) powder 
mixtures were done by particle sizer and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). 
Microstructural characterization of the MA powder mixtures and hot-pressed samples 
were characterized by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and SEM. Detailed production 
procedure of Cu-ZrB2 composites and characterization methods applied have been 
described in previous studies [12, 17, 18].

2.2. Machine learning models

The primary requirement to build a statistical learning model for any material is to have a 
dataset containing the material descriptors or features, X. These descriptors represent 
the fundamental material properties. The basic task of the machine learning (ML) models 
if to map these features to a specific (target) property, Y (hardness in this case), that is, 
𝒀 = 𝒇𝑿. Thus, the two important elements of machine learning approach are the empirical 
model, 𝑓 and features, 𝑿. The ML model must be trained and cross validated using the 
training dataset which includes the measured targeted property. The trained model is then 
applied to an unseen dataset in order to predict he target property. From the experiments,
we get the milling time (MT, Hours), dislocation density (DD, 𝑚−2), average particle size 
(PS, 𝜇𝑚) , density (𝜌, 

𝑔𝑚

𝑐𝑚3) and yield stress (𝜎 , MPa) as our descriptors, 𝑿. In this study 


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

we used two datasets two different MCs: (i) Cu-7% vol. ZrB2 and (ii) Cu-2%vol. ZrB2. As 
powder metallurgy is a time consuming process, in both the cases the datasets are small. 
As will be explain later, these small datasets are enough to understand the trend for these
mechanically alloyed powders considered in the present study.

To predict the hardness of both the alloys, Cu-7%vol. ZrB2 and Cu-2%vol. ZrB2, we used 
different ML models: random forest (RF) regression [19], gradient boosting (GB)
regression [20], support vector (SV) regression [21], k-Nearest neighbors (KNN) 
regression [22], linear regression (LR) [23] and kernel ridge (KR) regression [24] as 
implemented in the Python based open source data analytics toolkit, scikit-learn [25]. RF
and GB regression models are ensemble learning methods where multiple decision trees 
are constructed. SV regression is considered a nonparametric technique as it relies on 
kernel functions. The linear regression models the relationship between the input and 
output variables using a linear predictor function and fits to minimize the residual sum of 
squares between observed data and predicted data. Kernel Ridge regression estimates
the conditional expectation of a random variable to find a non-linear relationship between 
a pair of random variables. Using the kernel method, it simplifies the product of the inner 
products in a high dimensional space and learns a linear model in the implicit feature 
space induced by the kernel and the dataset. k-Nearest neighbors regression model uses 
a nonparametric method and outputs the average number of given data points, the k 
nearest neighbors.

Due to the availability of the small dataset, we performed Leave One Out (LOO) - cross 
validation (CV) [26]. The training of ML models with CV avoids the errors due the bias 
and variance. Finally, the hyperparameters for the ML models were optimized during the 
training process. For model performance we calculated the coefficient of determination, 
𝑅2 [27]. It is important to note that for both these CuMCs, we trained the ML models 
separately with their respective datasets.

3. Results and discussion

A strong influence of the milling parameters on the morphological and mechanical 
properties of alloys and MMCs has been reported in many studies. The duration of the 
milling process is essential in providing uniform distribution of the reinforcing particles in 
the metal matrix. During milling in the Attritor mill, the powder mixture is exposed to high 
energy collisions such as ball-particle-ball. Those collisions initiate changes in lattice 
parameters, shape and size as well as the hardness of the particles. Finding the suitable 
milling parameters for each alloy or composite material is a time consuming process.

First all the features were subjected to the correlation filter to remove those which are 
uncorrelated by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient. The Pearson correlation 
is the measure of the linear correlation between the predictors, 𝑿, and target, 𝒀. The 
Pearson correlation maps for both the CuMCs are shown in Figure 1. For both the MCs, 
we observed the yield stress and density to have the strongest correlation with hardness 
followed by dislocation density. The particle size was found to have the lowest correlation 


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

coefficient in case of Cu-7%.vol ZrB2 composite. Importantly all the features were found 
to have a positive correlation coefficients for Cu-7%.vol ZrB2 composite. For the case of
Cu-2%.vol ZrB2 composite, the features, milling time and particle size, were found to have
negative correlation. While the milling time was found to have almost no correlation with 
hardness, the particle size was found to have a weak negative correlation. While we use 
all the features of Cu-7%.vol ZrB2 composite for fitting the ML models, in case of Cu-
2%.vol ZrB2 composite we dropped the two feature milling time.

Table 1: The coefficient of determination (𝑅2) and mean absolute error (MAE) values 
obtained for the various ML methods applied to the Cu-7% vol. ZrB2 composite are listed 
below.

ML models
RF 
KR
GB
SV
LR
KNN

𝑅2
0.92
0.92
0.88
0.84
0.83
0.79

Next we train the ML models using LOO-CV. We calculated the coefficient of 
determination (𝑅2) to evaluate the model performance. The coefficient of determination 
(𝑅2) which is calculated as

𝑅2 = 1 −

∑
(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦̂𝑖)
𝑛
𝑖=1

∑
(𝑦𝑖 − 𝑦̅
𝑛
𝑖=1
)
(1)

where 𝑦𝑖 is the true value, 𝑦̂𝑖 is the predicted value and 𝑦̅ is the mean of 𝑦𝑖. The 𝑅2 value 
lies between 0 and 1, with 1 signifying excellent fits.

In Table 1, we summarized the 𝑅2 for Cu-7%.vol ZrB2 composite. In this case, the random 
forest and kernel ridge regressor models exhibited the highest accuracy (92%) followed 
by gradient boosting regressor (88%) while the nearest neighbor regressor has the lowest 
accuracy of 79%. It is evident that all the models were able to achieve an accuracy of 
80% or even higher. For the two best performing ML models, random forest and kernel 
ridge, we plotted the true and predicted values of hardness for the Cu-7 vol.% ZrB2
composite as shown in Figure 2.

In Table 2, we tabulated the 𝑅2 values obtained for the different ML models applied to Cu-
2% vol. ZrB2 composite. For gradient boosting we achieved an accuracy of 79% while for 
the support vector regressor and for kernel ridge regressor we obtained an accuracy of 
74%. Overall, all the ML models have a lower accuracy in case of Cu-2vol.% ZrB2
compared to Cu-7% vol. ZrB2 composite. We think perhaps more data is necessary to 
make a better predictive model for the hardness of Cu-2% vol. ZrB2 composite. In figure 
3, we plotted the true and predicted values of hardness for the Cu-2% vol. ZrB2 composite
for the gradient boosting and random forest models.


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

Table 2: The coefficient of determination (𝑅2) and mean absolute error (MAE) values 
obtained for the various ML methods applied to the Cu-2% vol. ZrB2 composite are 
listed below.

ML models
SV
KR
LR
GB
RF
KNN

𝑅2
0.79
0.74
0.68
0.62
59
0.50

4. Conclusion

In summary, we have built a regression model to predict the hardness of CuMCs prepared 
by powdered milling method. For Cu-7 vol.% ZrB2 composite we achieved an accuracy of 
80% or higher. On the other hand, the ML models for Cu-2 vol.% ZrB2 composite have a 
lower predictive accuracy. To improve the accuracy of the ML models, we think some 
more data points must be included in the training dataset. The same strategy can be 
extended to other matrix composites prepared from mechanical alloying method.

Acknowledgments
SKB and RS acknowledge the support from the project Council for Science, Technology
and Innovation(CSTI), Cross-ministerial Strategic Innovation Promotion Program (SIP), 
“Materials Integration for revolutionary design system of structural materials” (Funding 
agency: JST). DB and JR acknowledge the financial support from the Ministry of 
Education and Science of the Republic of Serbia through the Project No 172005.

References
[1] K. U. Kainer, Metal matrix composites custom-made materials for automotive and 
aerospace engineering,, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

[2] S. R. Pogson, P. Fox, C. Sutcliffe, W. O’Neill, The production of copper parts using 
dmlr. rapid prototyping, PRB 9 (2003) 334343.

[3] M. Li, S. J. Zinkle, Comprehensive nuclear materials 4 (2012) 667–690.

[4] Y. Zhan, Y. Z. J. Zeng, Tribological properties of Al2O3/CuCrZr composites, Tribol Lett 
20 (2005) 163170.

[5] M. Sobhani, A. Mirhabibi, H. Arabi, R. M. D. Brydson, Effects of in situ formation of 
TiB2 particles on age hardening behavior of Cu1wt% Ti1wt%
TiB2, Mater Sci Eng A 577 (2013) 1622.

[6] W. S. Miller, F. J. Humphreys, Strengthening mechanisms in particulate metal matrix 
composites, Scripta Metallurgica et Materialia 25 (1991) 33-38.


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

[7] C. Zou, Z. Chen, E. Guo, H. Kang, G. Fan, W. Wang, A nano-micro dual-scale 
particulate-reinforced copper matrix composite with high strength, high electrical 
conductivity and superior wear resistance, RSC Adv 8 (2018) 30777–30782.

[8] S. J. Dong, Y. Zhou, Y. Shi, B. Chang, Formation of a TiB2-reinforced copper-based 
composite by mechanical alloying and hot pressing, Metallurgical and Materials 
Transactions A 33A.

[9] J. R. Groza, J. C. Gibeling, Principles of particle selection for dispersion strengthened 
copper, Materials Science and Engineering: A 171 (1-2) (1993) 115–125.

[10] H. Kimura, N.Muramatsu, K.Suzuki, Copper alloy and copper alloy manufacturing 
method, Patent Application Publication, US 0211346A1, United States.

[11] X. Fan, X. Huang, Q. Liu, H. Ding, H. Wang, C. Hao, The microstructures and 
properties of in-situ ZrB2 reinforced cu matrix composites, Results in Physics 14 (2019) 
102494.

[12] J. Ruzic, J. Stasic, S. Markovic, K. Raic, D. Bozic, Synthesis and characterization of 
Cu-ZrB2 alloy produced by PM techniques, Science of Sintering 46, br.2 (2014) 217-224.

[13] D. Xue, D. Xue, R. Yuan, Y. Zhou, P. V. Balachandran, X. Ding, J. Sun, T. Lookman, 
An informatics approach to transformation temperatures of NiTi-based shape memory 
alloys, Acta Materialia 125 (2017) 532 – 541.

[14] D. Shin, Y. Yamamoto, M. Brady, S. Lee, J. Haynes, Modern data analytics approach 
to predict creep of high temperature alloys, Acta Materialia 168 (2019) 321-330.

[15] J. Wei, X. Chu, X.-Y. Sun, K. Xu, H.-X. Deng, J. Chen, Z. Wei, M. Lei, Machine 
learning in materials science, InfoMat 1 (3) (2019) 338-358.

[16] J. Schmidt, M. R. G. Marques, S. Botti, M. A. L. Marques, Recent advances and 
applications of machine learning in solid-state materials science, npj Computational 
Materials 5 (2019) 83. 

[17] J. Ruzic, J. Stasic, V. Rajkovic, D. Bozic, Synthesis, microstructure and mechanical 
properties of ZrB2 nano and microparticle reinforced copper matrix composite by in situ 
processings, Materials and Design 62 (2014) 409-415.

[18] J. Ruzic, J. Stasic, V. Rajkovic, K. Raic, D. Bozic, Microstructural and mechanical 
properties of Cu-7vol.%ZrB2 alloy produced by metallurgy processing techniques, 
Science and Engineering of Composite Materials 22 (2015) 665-671.

[19] M. R. Segal, Machine learning benchmarks and random forest regression,
Biostatistics (2004) 1-14.


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

[20] L. Mason, J. Baxter, P. Bartlett, M. Frean, Boosting algorithms as gradient descent, 
In S.A. Solla and T.K. Leen and K. M¨uller (ed.) Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems 12. MIT Press. 12 (1999) 512-518.

[21] H. Drucker, C. C. Burges, L. Kaufman, A. J. Smola, V. N. Vapnik, Support vector 
regression machines, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 9, NIPS, MIT-
Press 9 (1997) 155–161.

[22] V. Cherkassky, Y. Ma, Comparison of model selection for regression, Neural Comput. 
15 (2003) 1691-1714.

[23] J. Neter, M. H. Kutner, C. J. Nachtsheim, W. Wasserman, Applied linear statistical 
models, Chicago: Irwin. 4.

[24] Y. Zhang, J. Duchi, M. Wainwright, Divide and conquer kernel ridge regression: A 
distributed algorithm with minimax optimal rate, Journal of Machine Learning Research 
16 (2015) 3299-3340.

[25] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, 
G. Louppe, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. 
Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perror, E. Duchesnay, Scikit-learn: Machine learning in 
python 12 (2012) 2825–2830.

[26] C. Sammut, G. I. Webb, Leave-one-out cross-validation in encyclopedia of machine 
learning, Springer, Boston, MA.

[27] J. L. Devore, Probability and statistics for engineering and the sciences (8th ed.), 
Boston, MA: Cengage Learning (2011) 508-510.


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

Figure 1: The Pearson correlation maps for the features and the target for (a) Cu-2%.volZrB2, 
and (b) Cu-7%.vol ZrB2. The color tone depicts the significance of the correlation.

Figure 2: The plots for the true values of Vickers hardness (experiment) and the predicted
values of hardness using the two best performing ML models for Cu-7%.vol ZrB2 composite are 
plotted. The broken red line depicts the case where the true and predicted values exactly match.


This version has been submitted to Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Journal for review.

Figure 3: The plots for the true values of Vickers hardness (experiment) and the predicted
values of hardness using the two best performing ML models for Cu-2%.vol ZrB2 composite are 
plotted. The broken red line depicts the case where the true and predicted values exactly match.


