1 

 

Optical and Electronic Properties of Colloidal CdSe Quantum Rings 

 

1James Xiao, 1Yun Liu, 2Violette Steinmetz, 1Mustafa Çağlar, 1Jeffrey Mc Hugh, 1Tomi Baikie, 1Nicolas 

Gauriot, 1Malgorzata Nguyen, 1Edoardo Ruggeri, 1Zahra Andaji-Garmaroudi, 1,3Samuel D. Stranks, 

2Laurent Legrand, 2Thierry Barisien, 1Richard H. Friend, 1Neil C. Greenham, 1Akshay Rao* and 1Raj 

Pandya* 

* correspondence: ar525@cam.ac.uk, rp558@cam.ac.uk  

1Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, J.J. Thomson Avenue, CB3 0HE, Cambridge, United 

Kingdom 

2Sorbonne Université CNRS-UMR 7588, Institut des NanoSciences de Paris, INSP, 4 place Jussieu, F-

75005 Paris, France 

3Department of Chemical Engineering & Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Philippa Fawcett 

Drive, CB3 0AS, Cambridge, United Kingdom 

 

Abstract 

Luminescent colloidal CdSe nanorings are a recently developed type of semiconductor structure that 

have attracted interest due to the potential for rich physics arising from their non-trivial toroidal shape. 

However, the exciton properties and dynamics of these materials with complex topology are not yet 

well understood. Here, we use a combination of femtosecond vibrational spectroscopy, temperature-

resolved photoluminescence (PL), and single particle measurements to study these materials. We find 

that on transformation of CdSe nanoplatelets to nanorings, by perforating the center of platelets, the 

emission lifetime decreases and the emission spectrum broadens due to ensemble variations in the ring 

size and thickness. The reduced PL quantum yield of nanorings (~10%) compared to platelets (~30%) 

is attributed to an enhanced coupling between: (i) excitons and CdSe LO-phonons at 200 cm-1 and (ii) 

negatively charged selenium-rich traps which give nanorings a high surface charge (~-50 mV). 

Population of these weakly emissive trap sites dominates the emission properties with an increased trap 

emission at low temperatures relative to excitonic emission. Our results provide a detailed picture of 

the nature of excitons in nanorings and the influence of phonons and surface charge in explaining the 

broad shape of the PL spectrum and the origin of PL quantum yield losses. Furthermore, they suggest 

that the excitonic properties of nanorings are not solely a consequence of the toroidal shape but are also 

a result of traps introduced by puncturing the platelet center. 

 


2 

 

Keywords 

CdSe nanorings, exciton-phonon coupling, single-particle photoluminescence, DFT, exciton 

localisation, trap states  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The shape and size of a semiconducting nanocrystal is key to determining both its physical and 

optoelectronic properties via the nature of exciton quantum confinement.1 Where spherical nanocrystals 

have 0D confinement, rod- and plate-shaped nanocrystals have 1D and 2D confinements leading to, for 

example, linearly polarized emission which is free of inhomogeneous broadening.2 Over the last two 

decades, a great amount of knowledge has been gained in synthesising these nanocrystals and their 

heterostructured variants (e.g. dot-in-plate),3 with cadmium chalcogenide (CdX, X = S, Se, Te) 

materials finding particular use in a range of fields from catalysis to neuronal voltage sensing.4-,6  

Recently the shape of CdSe nanocrystals has been extended to nanorings by Fedin et al.7 Where dots, 

rods, etc. all belong to the topological class with genus (g) equal to zero (g = 0) and Euler characteristic 

χ = 2, rings have g = 1.8 Due to synthetic challenges ring-like topologies are challenging to prepare. 

Epitaxial semiconductor rings have been shown to exhibit a range of unusual properties including 

terahertz absorption and the formation of magnetoexcitonic quantum states (Aharonov-Bohm effect).9,10 

Coupling these phenomena with a luminescent solution processable material would be highly desirable 

for a range of magneto-optical applications e.g. data storage or Faraday rotators.11,12 Indeed, although 

there are currently a large range of shapes available for nanostructures: dots, rods, plates, tetrapods, 

ribbons, etc., the ring geometry sits at the interface between 0D and 1D confinement which is stronger 

than in dots, but likely weaker than in platelets.13 Combining aspects of both, e.g. narrow linewidths 

and polarisation properties, could prove to be useful for display and lighting applications. In terms of 

device performance, the shape of the nanorings could result in highly polarized emission.14,15 This 

would allow for an increase in the efficiency of LEDs by removing external polarising optics used to 

minimise the reflection of ambient light. Additionally, highly directional emission via the alignment of 

dipoles in the ring plane could remove the need for external focussing optics a common issue in practical 

LEDs. Highly directional emission from this geometry would also be useful in luminescent solar 

concentrators.16 Nanoring geometries have also been shown to be promising for high harmonic 

generation17 and the potentially large absorption cross section and transition dipole moments of 

nanorings, combined with their polarised emission, could be used for applications in strong coupling.18 

The nanoring geometry has been used in photovoltaic cells as a way to stack nanoparticles without the 

need for strain compensation, allowing for potentially higher power conversion efficiencies .19 Colloidal 

nanorings could hence be useful in quantum dot sensitized solar cells.20 Many metamaterials are also 


4 

 

based on nanoring geometries.21 Combining the semiconducting properties of CdSe nanorings with 

appropriate patterning might allow for hitherto unexplored devices with additional features such as 

negative refraction.22 One recent avenue that has been explored with nanocrystals is as neuronal voltage 

sensors due to their high photoluminescence stability and response to electric fields by the quantum 

confined Stark effect.6,23 However, typically this has only been explored in the realm of 0D nanocrystals, 

whose size is comparable to the thickness of the plasma membrane (~5 – 10 nm), making them 

ineffective local probes. Using nanorings however, which have a thickness of ~1 – 2 nm and can localise 

effectively in different parts of the membrane could improve the viability of such quantum dot voltage 

sensors. The exposed facets in terms of the ring hole offers a prospect for chemistry and catalysis not 

achievable with other nanoparticle shapes.24 Indeed, threading, isolating or trapping molecules in the 

centre of rings is an attractive target for supramolecular colloidal science.25 This is in addition to the 

aforementioned fundamental physics playground this geometry offers. The potential for nanorings to 

support both Rashba-type and spin-orbit type interactions also is appealing for use of these materials in 

dual optoelectronic and spintronic applications.26  

Despite this, the electronic and optical properties of colloidal CdSe nanorings has remained largely 

unexplored, and although work by Hartmann et al. has shown that excitons in rings possess an unusual 

arrangement of in-plane linear dipoles, the exciton dynamics have not been established.15 Here, we use 

a combination of ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy and temperature-resolved optical and 

structural measurements to achieve an in-depth characterization of CdSe nanorings. Using absorption 

and TA measurements we establish that even a partial etch of the platelet induces a red-shift, a 

broadening of the absorption spectrum, and a decrease in the excited state lifetime.  Density functional 

theory (DFT) calculations show that this is a result of changes in the electronic structure and overall 

material thickness in the direction of quantum confinement introduced by etching. The emission lifetime 

also decreases as the platelet is etched to form a ring, likely arising from the activation of phonon and 

trap mediated non-radiative decay pathways. Single particle PL measurements show the solution PL is 

inhomogenously broadened, likely arising from different sizes in the central hole from ring to ring, 

leading to non-uniform decay of the PL across the emission band. The emission quantum yield of the 

rings (~10%) is markedly lower than platelets (~30%), leading to poor energy transfer between 

nanorings. We find this to be a consequence of coupling between excitons, CdSe LO-phonons at 

200 cm-1 and negative selenium rich traps. We quantify these charge effects with environmental Kelvin 

probe and zeta potential measurements. The structural modifications induced by etching of the platelet 

center systematically increase exciton-phonon coupling even when the platelet is only partially etched. 

Additionally, we find population of sub-band gap trap like states also governs the temperature resolved 

emission of rings. We quantify the energy barrier for escaping from these traps to be ~8 meV, markedly 

lower than equivalent states in platelets (~21 meV). Although the temperature dependent PL behaviour 

of nanoplatelets and nanorings are similar, we use time-resolved measurements to demonstrate the 


5 

 

electronic structure cannot simply be treated as a bright-dark doublet in the latter.27 Finally, we 

qualitatively find that Auger and carrier cooling effects are less significant in rings than in platelets, 

with the excited state lifetime of the former independent of both excitation energy and intensity. We 

ascribe this to a hopping-type picture where excitations sit in sub-bandgap trap sites on the nanoring 

surface as compared to the delocalized band like picture of excitations in platelets. Using a variety of 

models, we interpret the coupling between exciton (core) and surface state in these materials and 

quantify the number of trap sites per particle. Finally, we also suggest rational protocols in terms of 

ligands, particle sizes and aspect ratios for reproducible synthesis of this relatively recently explored 

colloidal nanocrystal geometry. Our results provide a detailed description of excitons in a ring-like 

luminescent semiconductor, whose colloidal synthesis means its structure is drastically different from 

the "volcano-like" structures obtained using epitaxy.28,29  

Our findings will be of use not only for realizing the potential of colloidal nanorings, but more generally 

in designing topological semiconductors for optoelectronic and quantum technologies. The wet 

chemical synthesis methods further explored in this work can be adapted to the wide family of II-VI 

semiconductor materials with similar chemistries spanning a broad spectral range. By understanding 

how defects deviate the properties of these materials away from ideality we will be able to better 

engineer the PLQY, lifetime etc., for such applications. Indeed, a wide range of techniques, often not 

(simultaneously) used in the study of colloidal nanostructures, e.g. impulsive vibrational spectroscopy, 

Kelvin probe etc., are explored here. The work demonstrates the power of these methods to achieve 

insights into trap states in nanocrystals, and how these techniques might be generally applied to other 

nanocrystalline systems. We present these less explored techniques as useful additions to the current 

suite of characterisation techniques and analyses commonly employed, with particular emphasis on 

shape-controlled nanocrystal systems, which expose atypical surfaces and trapping sites. The 

application of trapping models originally developed for 0D dots to the plate and annular geometries 

demonstrates the versatility of these methods regardless of nanocrystal shape. Studying the 

transformation of nanoplatelets into nanorings in a quasi-in-situ manner provides correlated structure-

function insights, e.g. between etch-time and exciton-exciton annihilation, bringing us closer to the real-

time tracking of the electronic structure in nanomaterials as they form. We also identify requirements 

for the synthesis of more complex topologies with multiple fused rings, and although this work is 

focussed on a single ring system, a basis for studying more intricate systems has been established for 

future work. In these structures the quantum confinement should be stronger than dots or single rings.13 

This allows for single bound states which may be suitable for terahertz intersublevel detectors. Although 

many of the aforementioned exotic properties of nanorings are not yet realised in this work, the 

fundamental insights into the electronic structure gained permits rational optimization and application 

of these materials in devices for quantum technologies, optoelectronics and spintronics. 

 


6 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Results and discussion 

CdSe nanorings as shown in Figure 1a were synthesized using a method previously reported by Fedin 

et al.7 Briefly, 4-monolayer thick CdSe nanoplatelets were first synthesized , and showed an excitonic 

emission at 512 nm.2,30 A solution of these nanoplatelets was then heated with Se powder for 5 – 10 min 

to etch the platelet center followed by quenching of the reaction with tributylphosphine. Nanoplatelets 

with a slightly irregular shape (Figure 1a, left) compared to square or rectangular nanoplatelets which 

are often routinely synthesised were found to give the ‘cleanest’ ring etch and most monodisperse 

samples as evidenced from TEM. 22,30 A maximum nanoplatelet aspect ratio of 1.5:1 (length:width) and 

maximum dimension of ~15 nm were also found to be important for the etch to give nanorings with a 

single hole. Further details of sample preparation can be found in the Methods section. Unless otherwise 

stated all measurements were carried out in solution on rings with a hole dimension of ~5 – 10 nm. 

Samples were always measured within 3 days of preparation and stored and measured in an oxygen-

free argon environment, to minimize oxidative degradation. 


7 

 

 

 Figure 1: Structural and optical characterization of CdSe nanorings. a. Transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM) image of CdSe nanoplatelets (left) and nanorings (right). Nanorings are formed 

following etching of the nanoplatelet center. The scale bars in the two images are 20 nm and 10 nm 

respectively. b. Absorption spectrum of CdSe nanoplatelets (blue) and nanorings (red) in solution. 

Nanoplatelets show excitonic peaks at 2.57 eV and 2.4 eV corresponding to the electron-heavy hole 

and electron-light hole transitions. In nanorings there is a broad excitonic absorption centered at 2.1 eV. 

The respective emission spectrum for 405 nm laser excitation is shown in shading33. c. Absorption 

spectrum of nanorings as a function of etch time. The nanoplatelet excitonic peaks mostly disappear 

within the first minute of etching and are replaced by a broad absorption peak. The nanoring absorption 

edge (inset) red shifts over the etch time (10 mins) with the absorption growing in intensity. The hh-1e 

or lh-1e transition in nanoplatelets potentially appear as a weak shoulder in the absorption spectra of 

the rings at ~2.8 eV. TEM images (SI, S1) show that in 1 – 6 min the majority of nanorings remain 

partially etched (colour of spectra match arrow. d. Photothermal deflection spectrum (PDS) of CdSe 

nanoplatelets (red; ~50 nm thick film) and nanorings (blue; ~75 nm thick film). Fitting the absorption 

tail, we find an Urbach energy of ~40 meV for nanoplatelets and ~38 meV for nanorings. In 

nanoplatelets there is a broad tail of absorbing states out to 1.5 eV these have been assigned to defects 

and inter-sub-band transitions.34 


8 

 

 

To understand better the transformation of nanoplatelets to nanorings in-situ absorption measurements 

were performed. Here, aliquots of solution were taken at given times during etching. Figure 1b, c shows 

the absorption spectra for 4-monolayer (ML) nanoplatelets and nanorings in solution. In order to 

minimize the effects of scattering, measurements were carried out within an integrating sphere (see 

Methods). In contrast to the sharp absorption and weakly Stokes shifted emission of nanoplatelets, 

nanorings show a broad absorption with an emission that is red-shifted from the absorption peak. 

Immediately (within 1 min) after reaching reaction temperature it can be seen that the sharp CdSe 1lh-

1e and 1hh-1e excitonic transitions30 mostly disappear and are replaced with a broad absorption feature 

that gradually red shifts as a function of etch time (although we note that the predominant optical 

changes take place below our time resolution, within 1 min of etching). This additional red-shift is most 

likely a consequence of the increased thickness of the rings over that of the initial platelets. This will in 

turn alter the nature of quantum confinement and mitigate any blue-shift that would be expected from 

the extra confinement conditions introduced by having excitations on a ring. An additional absorption 

shoulder around 500 nm also grows in throughout the etching process. This peak may correspond to the 

lh-1e or hh-1e transitions observed in nanoplatelets, which in nanorings are mixed with the localized 

valence band maximum state (see DFT below). The poor spectral resolution however precludes further 

discussion. Because there is a range of ring thicknesses (along the long and short-axes of the ring) and 

variation in the inner and outer ring diameters, following addition of the etchant, the absorption peak is 

broad and more closely resembles that observed in 0D dots.1 Structural measurements performed in the 

initial work of Fedin et al. additionally confirm increase in thickness on transforming platelets to rings.15 

We note that the TEM image of nanorings in Figure 1a show some variation in contrast suggesting the 

thickness of individual rings is non-uniform. Although this will increase the electronic disorder of 

nanorings, it does not appear to lead to multiple emissive excitonic sites as demonstrated by single 

particle PL measurements (see later).  

To understand this change in the absorption spectra further, we performed DFT calculations. We used 

a nanoplatelet infinite in lateral dimensions and 2 CdSe monolayers thick to represent the pseudo-2D 

nanoplatelet synthesized in experiments, which possess lateral dimensions much larger than the Bohr 

exciton radius (~5.4 nm).35 The top and bottom {100} surfaces of the platelet were passivated with 

chloride ligands to ensure overall stoichiometry.36,37 The nanorings were created by removing atoms 

from the platelets to form holes of different sizes. Further details about the DFT calculations can be 

found in the Methods. As seen in Figure 2a, the platelet exhibits the two absorption peaks due to the 

1lh-1e and 1hh-1e. These peaks are red-shifted compared to experiments due to the well-known 

underestimation of the semiconductor bandgap by DFT. Compared to the platelet, the first absorption 

peaks of the nanorings are red shifted by about 150-300 meV, in qualitative agreement with 

experiments.  Although we note this peak has a relatively low intensity and because exciton effects are 


9 

 

not included, our calculations likely only gives a qualitative picture. As indicated by Figure 2b, when a 

small ring is initially formed, a set of localized states (Figure 2c) emerge just above the valence band 

maximum (VBM). These states are mainly of Cl characteristics (SI, S2i) and are localized on opposite 

sides of the ring. The wavefunction localization pattern is consistent with the k-vector resolved PL 

emission reported by Hartmann et al., whereby the measured radiation pattern shows bright lobes on 

opposite ends of the ring.15 The change in topology only affects the VB states, and the conduction band 

states near the Fermi level remain delocalized and energetically similar to those of the nanoplatelet (SI, 

S2ii). We do note that our calculation is for the stoichiometric nanoring structure whereby all dangling 

bonds were passivated, but in experiments the existence of dangling bonds could introduce additional 

trap states and changes in the electronic structure.32,38 

Our DFT results suggest that the energy shifts in the experimental absorption spectra likely arises from 

two effects: (i) the redshift in the absorption peak as more materials are pushed onto the rings as the 

etching proceeds, increasing the thickness in the quantum confinement direction and (ii) the blueshift 

in the absorption peak as the size of the ring increases.   

 

 

 


10 

 

Figure 2: DFT calculations of nanoplatelet and nanoring. a. In-plane absorption spectra (imaginary 

part of the dielectric function) of the nanoplatelet compared with nanorings of different sizes. b. The 

band structure of the CdSe nanoplatelet, with the Fermi level denoted by the dashed line. The special 

k-points in the Brillouin zone of the reciprocal lattice are Γ = {0,0,0}, M= {0.5,0.5,0.5} and X = {0.5, 

0.0, 0.0}. The band energies at the Γ point of the small nanoring compared to the nanoplatelet. The 

localized states at the top of the VBM are in blue. c- e. The in-plane view of the ball-and-stick model 

of the nanorings of small, medium and large sizes respectively. The Cd, Se and Cl atoms are represented 

by magenta, red and green spheres. The isosurfaces of the VBM wavefunction are colored cyan and 

yellow. The data are visualized using VESTA.39 

 

To understand the role of disorder introduced by etching of the platelet center were performed using 

photothermal deflection spectroscopy (PDS), which is insensitive to scattering (Figure 1d; Methods).40 

The PDS absorption spectra of rings shows a single excitonic peak at ~2 eV followed by a relatively 

sharp drop. For platelets a similarly sharp drop in the absorption is observed around 2.25 eV but this 

levels to a weak and broad absorption feature around 2 eV likely related to the absorption of sub-gap or 

defect states.34,41,42 Having identified the relevant tail transitions, we can use the PDS measurements to 

quantify the energetic disorder of both rings and nanoplatelets. This is characterized by the Urbach 

energy, Eu, which is related to the absorbance of the material, A, by 𝐴(𝐸) ∝ 𝑒

𝐸
𝐸𝑢, where E is the photon 

energy.43 Fitting the absorption tail in Figure 1d to the Urbach formula gives an Eu value of 40 ± 1 meV 

for CdSe platelets and 38 ± 1 meV for CdSe nanorings. This value is approximately 4 times larger than 

that obtained for high-quality GaAs, but lower than values obtained for CdS and CdSe/CdS nanocrystals 

(Eu ≈ 48–65 meV) and common organic semiconductors (P3HT ≈ 50 meV).33,44-46 This suggests that 

although there is a change in the electronic structure on etching of nanoplatelets (with potential 

thickness variations within a single ring) these changes do not significantly impact the degree of 

electronic disorder. This is likely because the surfaces/edges of the nanostructures, common to both, is 

where most of the traps contributing to the Urbach energy are located. We note in nanoplatelets there 

is an additional tail of absorbing states between 1.5 – 2 eV, which may arise from surface defects or 

sub-band gap states.  


11 

 

 

Figure 3: Photoluminescence spectra of single CdSe nanorings at 4 K. a. Typical emission spectra 

of single CdSe nanorings (black lines; each of the spectra is taken from a different single object). Red 

overlay shows a Lorentzian fit to the spectra, with blue spectrum indicating photoluminescence from 

ensemble. A range of emission energies are observed for single nanorings suggesting the ensemble 

spectrum to be composed of rings of varying thickness and/or diameter. Both ensemble and single 

particle spectra are measured at 4 K b.  Zooming into an example single nanoring PL spectrum shows 

a line width of ~250 μeV in FWHM. c. Time-dependent spectrum of emission from a single nanoring 

at 4K. The emission intensity decreases as a result of photobleaching (SI, S3), with no new peaks 

growing in and relatively little peak shifting. 

 

The photoluminescence spectrum of nanorings in solution is relatively broad (FWHM ~90 meV) 

compared to nanoplatelets (FWHM ~ 35 meV). To understand whether this originates from sub-

structure within the emission spectrum or inhomogeneous broadening effects, low-temperature (4 K) 

single-particle PL measurements were performed. There is no phase change in the structure of either 

nanoplatelets or nanorings on cooling to 4 K (SI, S3). As exemplified in Figure 3a-b single nanorings 

show a single sharp emission peak varying in center frequency between 1.94 and 2.00 eV and 250 – 

700 μeV FWHM in width. This behavior is similar to nanoplatelets where there is large difference in 

linewidth between the ensemble (30 meV) and single particles (400 μeV) at 20 K.47  

 

If exciton-phonon coupling was the dominant PL broadening mechanism in nanorings as is the case for 

CdSe/CdTe nanoplatelets for instance, one would expect this to manifest itself also in the single particle 

spectra e.g. through phonon sidebands.48 Similarly, if emission from additional states, e.g. trions, made 

up the ensemble PL response we might expect these to manifest themselves in the single particle spectra 

also or as spectral jumps in Figure 4c. This latter figure shows the single nanoring PL peak shifts 

>30 μeV over 60 s, as a consequence of spectral diffusion, suggesting that multiple emissive states are 

not present. Ruling out homogeneous (lifetime) broadening is challenging without access to the single-

particle radiative lifetimes (ensemble lifetimes are on the order of nanoseconds at 4 K), but we note that 


12 

 

on increasing the excitation power the single-ring PL spectrum remains unchanged (albeit with rapid 

photobleaching) suggesting exciton-exciton interactions do not contribute significantly either. Finally, 

repeating single-particle PL measurements over ~14 nanorings (SI, S3) reproduces well the low-

temperature ensemble spectrum. All together this suggests that inhomogeneous PL broadening 

dominates in nanorings, with the heterogeneity in the single-particle spectra explaining the broad (room 

temperature) ensemble linewidth. This shows promise for the use of colloidal nanorings in quantum 

optical applications which require coherent manipulation of states. Furthermore, it suggests that despite 

thickness variations within a ring confinement remains predominantly 1D, and that the main 

quantization axis is either related to the hole size as this is invariant within the ring or is just dominated 

by the particle thickness. The  ensemble PL properties might be greatly improved by future synthetic 

methods such as automated microfluidic flow synthesis.49 We note that the low PLQY (~10 %), 

~90 meV Stokes shift and lack of stacking, also suggests significant FRET (see further discussion later) 

does not occur between the nanorings and they act as independent emitters. We also comment that the 

PLQY of both nanoplatelets and nanorings does not vary with excitation energy suggesting that hot 

carrier effects are marginal (see SI, S10) 50. 

 

Based on our DFT calculations nanorings with a larger radius are expected to have a larger bandgap 

and contribute to the higher energy emission within the ensemble, with smaller rings showing red-

shifted emission, potentially explaining the observed variation in emission energies. Alternatively, the 

distribution in nanoring bandgaps may arise from variations in thickness between rings induced during 

the etching process, with thicker rings having more red-shifted emission. We note that the observation 

of a single emission peak in the single-particle spectra suggests any variation in thickness still only 

leads to a single emissive site. In any case, the narrow single-particle line widths suggest that nanorings 

have potential for optical applications such as single photon sources, where the emission can be coupled 

with the unusual radiation pattern (Hartmann et al. showed the transition dipole moments in CdSe 

nanorings are arranged in a uniaxial, in-plane manner) arising from the annular shape.15 It is challenging 

to quantitatively determine the distribution in ring sizes in the ensemble, however dynamic light 

scattering (SI, S4; DLS) measurements can be used to qualitatively estimate this. Here we find an 

average (total) nanoring size (hydrodynamic radius) of 15 ± 4 nm, with the range of the size distribution 

obtained from DLS being 28 nm (taken as 2σ from the mean size; [8 – 36 nm]). For nanoplatelets the 

distribution range is smaller at 13 nm [15 – 28 nm]. In both cases a spherical particle model is used to 

extract particle distributions and the results should be treated only qualitatively. However, the relatively 

large variation in ring sizes (compared with nanoplatelets) combined with any variations in the 

confinement in the transverse direction of the rings (thickness) likely contributes to the large variation 

in emission energies observed in nanorings. Optimising control of this parameter will allow for the 

tuning of nanoring optical properties. 

 


13 

 

 

Figure 4: Transient absorption spectrum of nanoplatelets and nanorings following 

photoexcitation with a sub-10 fs pulse. a. Transient absorption spectrum of nanorings. There is a 

gradual red-shift (~50 meV; see inset) and narrowing of the bleach peak following photoexcitation 

which is ascribed to hopping of excitations between defect sites and to nanorings with the lowest 

bandgap within the ensemble. b. Selected spectral slices at given time delays of transient absorption 


14 

 

spectrum of nanorings. The weakly pronounced negative wing around ~625 nm, which is typically 

assigned to biexciton effects in nanocrystals,51,52 suggests that exciton-exciton interactions are relatively 

weak in nanorings. c. Transient absorption spectrum of nanoplatelets. Following photoexcitation there 

is relatively little shift in the excitonic peak, with a significantly slower, multi-exponential decay as 

compared to nanorings. d. Selected spectral slices at given time delays of transient absorption spectrum 

of nanorings. The GSB is relatively long-lived as compared to in nanorings. e. Decay rate of the ground 

state bleach of nanorings as a function of etch time. f. The first and second decay constants (t1 and t2) 

do not change significantly with etch time. The final decay constant (t3) appears to slightly lengthen as 

the platelet center is further etched. 

  

Although several studies have addressed the steady-state properties of CdSe nanorings, no experiments 

have been able to elucidate how the exciton dynamics are influenced by their toroidal structure.7,15 In 

order to directly probe the exciton dynamics in nanorings and understand how these excitons interact 

with phonon modes, we conducted femtosecond transient absorption (fs-TA) spectroscopy. A solution 

of nanorings was excited with a 9 fs pump pulse (upper limit verified by second-harmonic-generation 

frequency-resolved optical gating (SHG-FROG); SI, S5) centered at 530 nm such that it was partially 

resonant with the exciton transitions of the rings.53 Figure 4a shows the transient absorption spectrum 

of nanorings, where ΔT/T is plotted as a function of probe wavelength and time delay between pump 

and probe. ΔT is the change in the transmission of the sample with/without the pump pulse, and T is the 

transmission without the pump pulse. 

The positive narrow signal centered at around 580 nm (Figure 4a,b) corresponds to the ground-state 

bleach (GSB) of nanorings, which agrees well with the steady-state absorption (Figure 1b; we note at 

the fluences used here there are ~0.15 excitations per nanorings; see SI, S7). This GSB decays with two 

lifetimes, an initial fast component of ~2 ps, followed by a much slower decay with a ∼30 ps lifetime. 

The bleach red-shifts over a period of ~10 ps before beginning to decay (see Figure 4b inset). On the 

lower-energy edge of the bleach there is a weak negative feature.  In nanoplatelets (Figure 4c,d) the 

transient absorption response is quite different. Here there is a relatively slow tri-exponential decay of 

the bleaching peak with an average decay time of ~920 ps and little-to-no-peak shifting following 

excitation (fit SI, S7). There is also a strong negative band on the red-edge of the GSB. 

Several groups have performed and analyzed the transient absorption spectra of CdSe nanoplatelets. 

The derivative-like spectrum can be explained well by a model that accounts for state-filling-induced 

bleach of the electron-heavy hole and electron-light hole exciton transitions, a shift in the center 

frequency of these transitions due exciton-exciton interactions and bandgap renormalization.52,54–57 

Hole-trapping at surface defects and delocalization of excitons over the nanoplatelet have also been 

stated to occur in the first ~100 ps following photoexcitation in these materials.58 This potentially 


15 

 

explains why the GSB at 512 nm is comparatively short-lived compared to the negative feature at 

525 nm, with state filling at the band edge replaced by trap state (e.g. at the surface59) absorption and a 

large Stark shift induced by more delocalized electrons at a band edge level (see SI, S7).  

In nanorings there is a much weaker derivative-like shape to the spectrum with the negative wing on 

the red low-energy edge of the GSB decaying rapidly over ~1 ps. The spectrum is strongly reminiscent 

of that observed in metal halide perovskites, where following photoexcitation there is rapid (sub-500 fs) 

renormalization of the bandgap, giving rise to an early-time derivative feature, followed by cooling and 

hopping of excitations to localization sites.60–62 The lack of persistence of this negative wing suggests 

that hot carrier induced exciton-exciton interactions are also weaker in nanorings in keeping with a 

picture of localized excitations.63,64 This conclusion is supported by experiments on partially etched 

platelets, where the initial fast decay time remains independent of etch time, but the slow component 

lengthens, potentially as a result of more sub-bandgap trap states being introduced as the etch progresses 

(Figure 4e,f). This lack of negative feature in the transient absorption spectrum of nanorings compared 

to nanoplatelets also suggests a smaller biexciton binding energy in these materials. This is in line with 

the increased thickness of nanorings compared to nanoplatelets where Coulomb interactions are 

screened by the inorganic material.  

Given the significant inhomogeneous broadening in the emission of nanorings, the red-shift (~50 meV) 

in the center frequency of the GSB over ~1 ps, may also represent energy transfer to the lowest energy 

nanorings within the solution ensemble with different recombination rates within the manifold.65,66 

However, the relatively large (~90 meV) Stokes shift between the absorption and emission of nanorings 

suggests that this may only be a partial effect. Indeed, performing pump-probe measurements as a 

function of ring concentration shows minimal change in the degree of red-shift (~35 meV in dilute 

solutions) suggesting that energy transfer does not play a dominant role (see SI, S7 for further discussion 

and FRET calculations which show a FRET efficiency <2%). We note that in general, understanding 

the TA spectra of nanocrystals remains challenging, and the observations here will likely aid further 

interpretation of the TA spectra of CdX nanocrystals. 

 

 


16 

 

 

Figure 5: Impulsive vibrational spectrum and resonant Raman spectra of nanorings and 

nanoplatelets. a. Subtracting the electronic decay from the nanoring bleach and Fourier transforming 

the residual gives the impulsive (state-specific) vibrational spectrum (blue). Two clear peaks are 

observed at 200 cm-1 and 400 cm-1 corresponding to the CdSe LO-phonon stretch and its replica. These 

peaks also appear in the resonant (532 nm) Raman spectra (black). b. Repeating the same analysis for 

nanoplatelets appears to show no modes in either the IVS or Raman spectra, suggesting weaker exciton-

phonon coupling in nanoplatelets compared to nanorings. 

As the samples are excited with a sub-10 fs pump pulse, vibrational wavepackets can be generated on 

both the ground- and excited-state potential energy surfaces.67–69 These then appear as an oscillatory 

feature on top of the electronic decay, as seen in the TA map and kinetics.48 In order to extract the 

frequency of the vibrational modes, the electronic component of the TA spectrum in Figure 5a and b 

was subtracted and the remaining oscillatory component fast Fourier transformed into the frequency 

domain (see SI, S8; also includes wavelength resolved Fourier transform map). In the case of nanorings 

a single mode centered at ∼200 cm–1 (frequency resolution 16 cm–1; dephasing time ~800 fs) is observed 

to modulate the GSB, whereas in nanoplatelets no modes are seen to modulate the spectra (Figure 5). 

Performing steady-state resonant (532 nm) and off-resonant (633 nm) Raman measurements also shows 

the 200 cm-1 mode to be present in nanorings but there are no observable modes in the Raman spectra 

of nanoplatelets, consistent with previous studies where only weak-exciton phonon coupling has been 

observed.70 Analyzing the literature shows this 200 cm-1 mode corresponds to an LO-phonon of CdSe;71–

73 this mode also appears in the steady state and time domain Raman spectra of partially etched 

nanorings confirming it to be introduced by the etch, but is likely not necessarily a consequence of the 

annular shape (SI, S9). Strong coupling of excitons with this phonon mode further supports the idea of 

rapid localization of excitons in nanorings following photoexcitation. This is in contrast to the picture 

of excitons in nanoplatelets where the greater delocalization likely leads to weaker exciton-phonon 

coupling.70,74–77 Based on our DFT calculations, the strong localization of the excitons in the nanorings 

can be attributed to some degree to the strong localization of the hole states that emerged in the nanoring 

electronic structure. The relatively low intensity of the phonon-replica at 400 and 800 cm-1, suggest 


17 

 

only a small difference in structure between the ground and excited states in nanorings (i.e. little lattice 

relaxation on photoexcitation). A full quantitative description involving Huang-Rhys parameters is 

beyond the scope of the present work but suggests the nanoring structure is not highly deformable by 

the soft LO-phonon mode.78 

We note that in the case of nanoplatelets on increasing both the pump fluence and energy there is a 

qualitative shortening of the GSB lifetime (SI, S6). This is in keeping with a model of state filling within 

a valence band where the cooling time decreases when pumping closer to the band edge and Auger 

recombination increases with greater excitation densities.79,80 In contrast, nanorings do not appear to 

show any pump energy or excitation density dependence in their transient absorption response. This 

would again fit with a trap-like picture where excitons hop from site-to-site before localizing, likely 

assisted by the 200 cm-1 phonon mode, as opposed to being delocalized in band states (see SI, S6 for 

further discussion). 

 

Figure 6: Temperature dependent absorption spectra of nanoplatelets and nanorings. a. The 

absorption spectra of nanoplatelets (red) initially blue-shifts to higher energies on cooling, followed by 

a gradual red-shift when cooling below 20 K. Solid line marks absorption maximum at 295 K. b. In 

nanorings (blue) there is a similar blue- and then red-shift in the absorption maximum on cooling. 


18 

 

Temperature X-ray diffraction measurements confirm there is no phase transition on cooling for either 

nanorings or nanoplatelets (see SI, S3). 

 

Figure 6 reports temperature dependent absorption measurements for films of nanoplatelets and 

nanorings. In the case of both nanorings and nanoplatelets the absorption spectrum initially shows a 

concomitant blue-shift to higher energies on cooling. In both materials the absorption spectrum then 

begins to red-shift to lower energies below a certain temperature (~60 K in nanoplatelets and ~100 K 

in nanorings). In nanoplatelets this effect has been previously ascribed to phonon-mediated thermal 

redistribution between two levels having different oscillator strengths (SI, S10).81 Given the similar 

behaviour we can hence tentatively suggest in this regard a similar electronic state picture potentially 

exists for excitons in nanorings. Here, when the thermal energy becomes smaller than any energy 

splitting, only the lower level will be thermally populated. However, at elevated temperatures both 

upper and lower states are populated and because the upper state has a higher oscillator strength, this 

state will dominate the optical behaviour (see further discussion below). In nanorings (and to a weaker 

extent in nanoplatelets) there is a broad sloping sub-band gap signal between 1.8-2 eV (nanorings). 

Studies have shown that unpassivated selenium on the surface of nanocrystals can result in the formation 

of midgap charge carrier trapping states.82,83 Given the poorly-passivated, selenium-rich surface of 

nanorings it is likely these along with additional states, closely spaced at the localized valence band 

edge (Figure 2) contribute to this absorption. Inhomogeneous broadening, from variations in ring 

thickness and diameter, also may lower the conduction band in nanorings resulting in transitions to sub-

band gap states;84 in nanoplatelets the uniform quantum confinement suggests this to be a less of an 

effect. From PDS measurements (Figure 1d) we can estimate the absorption coefficient of the sub-band 

gap states. For nanorings an α ~100 cm-1 is found (1.5-1.8 eV); in nanoplatelets α ~400 cm-1 (1.7-2 eV). 

As a result of this low oscillator strength we do not expect direct absorption from these states to be 

significant.  

In nanoplatelets a similar behaviour as to that discussed for absorption measurements is also realised in 

the emission spectra, with a non-monotonic change in the PL intensity and wavelength with 

temperature, and a red-shifting zero-phonon line below 80 K (Figure 7a). A second weakly emissive 

state also appears centered around 530-550 nm in nanoplatelets. We note this state is unlikely to arise 

from a population of thicker nanoplatelets, as the thickest stable CdSe nanoplatelets synthesised thus 

far (6 monolayers) have their emission centered around ~590 nm and signatures of such nanoplatelets 

would also be expected to be present in the absorption spectra.85 For the case of nanorings the 

temperature resolved emission shows some similarities to nanoplatelets but also some differences. For 

example, where the red-shift in the nanoplatelets PL is ~10 meV between 50K and 4K, in nanorings the 

red-shift is ~25-30 meV in the temperature range 150 K to 4 K. In the former, this shift is ascribed to 


19 

 

thermalization of excitons into the lowest lying dark exciton (F) sub-level, with ~10 meV representing 

the bright-dark exciton energy splitting,81 although mixing between sub-levels also influences this gap.83 

The similarity in PL response between nanorings and nanoplatelets at first suggests a three-level bright, 

dark and ground-state exciton picture, with an albeit larger energy gap between the bright and dark 

exciton states. However, in this picture, the PL decay is expected to be faster as the temperature is 

lowered, because there is rapid relaxation into the dark exciton state (and diminished radiative decay 

from bright excitons). In nanoplatelets this is indeed observed,47,86 but in nanorings the response is more 

complex (see SI, S11). The 0-1.5 ns PL dynamics in a 4-150 K range can be well described with a bi-

exponential decay. Initially between 150-80 K the fast component of this decay quickens on cooling, 

while the slower component lengthens. Below 80 K the trend is then reversed, i.e. fast component 

increases again, (80 K, tfast = 0.03 ns, tslow = 0.57 ns; 4 K, tfast = 0.09 ns, tslow = 0.49 ns). The relative 

weight of the fast to slow component drops from ~2 at 160 K to ~0.5 at 50 K before increasing to ~2 

again at 4 K (see SI, S11). This complex transient PL response suggests a model consisting solely of a 

bright-dark exciton doublet is not suitable to describe the electronic structure of nanorings.27 This is 

consistent with DFT calculations (Figure 2) which suggest the valence band maximum to be a localized 

hole state. This state potentially mixes with bright and dark exciton states, shifting their relative 

energetic separation and population. Accessing a full picture of this is beyond the scope of this work 

and would likely require additional magneto-optical measurements, but also shows how the electronic 

structure of these nanoparticles sits between 0D and 1D confined particles. Hence, in general, our results 

suggest that between 160-80 K there is thermal population of bright, dark and any trap states (see below 

trap activation energy ~8 meV (≡ 92 K)), the increase in decay time on cooling within this range 

suggests radiative recombination from a bright state dominates. Below 80 K thermalization into a dark 

manifold occurs. However, the overall non-monotonic changes in lifetime suggest the mixing with the 

localized valence band states creates a complex electronic response. Indeed, if nanorings followed the 

same electronic structure as platelets the magnitude of the red-shift might be expected to be even 

smaller, due to the suggested increased thickness of nanorings.86 

In nanorings the PL intensity is also rapidly reduced on decreasing the temperature with a second 

spectrally broad (~70 meV at 4 K) emissive state (centered around 740 nm) growing in intensity on 

cooling. The difference in energy between trap states in nanoplatelets and nanorings suggests that 

although they are both likely located in a similar location i.e. at the surface, the change in electronic 

structure arising from shape nanocrystal shape alters their energies. At 5 K the main excitonic emission 

and emission from this second state are almost equal in intensity, in contrast to the nanoplatelets where 

emission from the excitonic state is ~10 times greater than emission from the state at ~530-550 nm, 

even at 4 K. We assign these observations to population competition with low-lying trap states as has 

been observed in 0D quantum dots.87,88 At low temperatures excitations localize in these trap states from 

which some fraction of the excitons can decay radiatively. The PL intensity of the band-edge (BE) 


20 

 

emissive state and trap state will be proportional to the occupation, n, which follows a Boltzmann 

distribution, giving: 

 

                                                                  

𝑃𝐿𝐵𝐸
𝑃𝐿𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝  ∝ 

𝑛𝐵𝐸
𝑛𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝 = 

𝑔𝐵𝐸
𝑔𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝 𝑒(−∆𝐸

𝑘𝑇 )  (Equation 1) 

 

In this equation ΔE is the energy difference between traps and the band-edge excitonic state and 𝑔𝐵𝐸 

and 𝑔𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝 are the band edge exciton and trap state degeneracy respectively. Fitting the PL ratio 

intensities from these two states as shown in Figure 5 for nanoplatelets and nanorings then allows us to 

determine the trap-state depth. In this fitting we make the assumption that any charge transfer is 

sufficiently fast to establish an equilibrium between traps and band-edge states and consequently only 

perform the fit at high temperatures (T>200 K).89 Fitting the data yields trap activation energies of 

21 ± 8 meV for nanoplatelets and 8 ± 6 meV in nanorings. We note these are both consistent with the 

observation of room temperature emission from trap states. One final observation from these low 

temperature PL measurements is that the PL maximum initially slightly blue-shifts and then begins to 

red-shift below 150 K in nanorings, suggesting the main emission from the main excitonic state is still 

consistent with a model similar to that observed in nanoplatelets (Figure 7c and e). As a final point we 

note that the exact position of the emission maximum in nanorings varies between batches (5-10 meV); 

the trends in PL peaks and quantitative values extracted e.g. trap activation energies remain unaltered 

with the error bars on these values taking this into account. 

 

In 0D CdSe (and CdS or CdTe) quantum dots, temperature-dependent emission measurements have 

revealed trap activation energies of a similar magnitude to those reported here for platelets and rings at 

7-50 meV.90–92 Adding a shell to these materials can greatly increase the activation barrier for traps, e.g. 

180 meV in CdSe/CdS/ZnS QDs,93 although in some cases the shell has been shown to also introduce 

new shallow trap states.94 The trap activation energies reported in 0D PbS quantum dots have tended to 

be larger at ~30-50 meV and as high as 180 meV in QD solids.89,95 However, in general the trap 

activation barrier in 0D QDs is dependent on a number of factors beyond shape, e.g. surface passivation, 

size, etc.96,97 This suggests that the increased surface area to volume ratio of platelets and rings, as 

compared to 0D dots, does not necessarily make them more susceptible to shallow traps and that similar 

surface treatments are required to eliminate trapping.  

 

 


21 

 

 

 

Figure 7: Low temperature emission spectra of CdSe nanoplatelets and nanorings. a. Emission 

spectra of CdSe nanoplatelets excited at 405 nm. A non-monotonic change in the PL intensity and 

maximum peak position is observed on cooling, with some secondary sub-band gap emission centered 

around 530-550 nm. Inset shows selected spectra. b. Emission spectra of CdSe nanorings. As for 

nanoplatelets, the excitonic emission initially blue-shifts to higher energies on cooling before red-

shifting when below 100 K. There is a secondary sub-band gap emission peak which grows in intensity 

on cooling. There is a secondary sub-band gap emission peak which grows in intensity on cooling. Inset 


22 

 

shows selected spectra. The data between 700-780 nm is taken using a second grating; insets show 

spectral slices. c. Maximum peak position for excitonic and sub-band gap emission as a function of 

temperature for CdSe nanoplatelets. The maximum peak position for both the sub-band gap and 

excitonic state in nanoplatelets initially shows a red-shift followed by a blue-shift below 100 K. Blue 

axis corresponds to exciton emission; red axis is sub-band gap emission. d. Log of ratio of integrated 

intensities for excitonic and sub-band gap emission in nanoplatelets. At room temperature there is ~16 

times more emission from the excitonic state as compared to sub-band gap emission. At low temperature 

this ratio is reduced to ~8 (SI, S9). Fitting the high temperature data (T > 200 K) with the model in 

equation 1 allows extraction of the trap activation energy of ~21 meV.  e. Maximum peak position for 

excitonic and sub-band gap emission as a function of temperature for CdSe nanorings. Where the sub-

band gap emission only blue-shifts to higher energies on cooling, the excitonic emission in nanorings 

initially shows a red-shift followed by a blue-shift. Blue axis corresponds to exciton emission; red axis 

is sub-band gap emission. f. Log of ratio of integrated intensities for excitonic and sub-band gap 

emission in nanorings (PLBE/PLtrap). At room temperature there is ~11 times more emission from the 

excitonic state as compared to sub-band gap emission, whereas at low temperature the emission 

intensity from these two states is almost equal (SI, S9). Fitting the high temperature data (T > 200 K) 

with the model in equation 1 allows extraction of the trap activation energy of ~8 meV. 

 

 

Broad red-shifted emission with respect to a main exciton peak has, in 0D nanocrystals, been attributed 

to surface emission. This surface emission is particularly prominent in small nanocrystals with a large 

surface-area-to-volume ratio, where emission from the surface states is coupled electronically to the 

excitonic states.98–101 Given the large surface-area-to-volume ratio of nanoplatelets and nanorings we 

investigated whether semi-classical electron transfer models,98–102 typically used to ascribe core and 

surface emission, could be applied here. At high temperatures (200-300 K) we find this ‘coupled surface 

and core’ model fits well (SI, S11). However, at low temperatures, the model deviates significantly 

from the experimental PL behaviour. From the overall fit we can we extract a free energy difference 

(ΔG) between the core and surface states of 25 ± 2 meV in both nanoplatelets and nanorings, similar to 

values found in 0D CdSe systems.98–101 The general deviation of the model from the data might be 

because of the difference in electronic structure between nanoplatelets/nanorings (e.g. localized valence 

band states in nanorings) and the 0D dots this model is normally applied to. In 0D dots the model 

assumes a single exciton state is coupled to a single surface state via a low frequency mode representing 

the bath and a high frequency LO-phonon mode of the nanocrystal.99 The LO-phonon mode allows 

tunneling between core and surface states, but in nanorings/nanoplatelets several modes or intermediate 

states might be involved which the model is unable to capture. We do indeed observe a relative increase 

in the surface emission at low temperatures and the energy difference between the exciton and surface 


23 

 

emission is significantly larger than kBT at these temperatures, suggesting population exchange cannot 

be purely thermal.100 We note previous studies on nanoplatelets have suggested that surface emission 

arises from a broad distribution of states within the bandgap (deep traps). In nanoplatelets the emission 

red shifted from the main excitonic peak is then ascribed to recombination between trapped holes and 

delocalized electrons.30,103,104 In nanorings further work is required to understand if such a picture also 

holds. Single-nanoring PL measurements shown in Figure 3 are unable to resolve PL from the trap state, 

likely due to its extremely weak emission. Understanding whether this broad emission also exists at the 

single-particle level, as well as improved models to capture any coupling between exciton and surface 

potential energy surfaces, should be a focus of future work.  

 

In order to understand the loss of emission towards trap states in nanorings and nanoplatelets at room 

temperature transient photoluminescence measurements were performed (Figure 8) on solutions of 

nanorings and nanoplatelets. In both nanoplatelets and nanorings a multi-exponential decay is observed. 

In nanoplatelets the initial fast component of the decay (>10 ns) has been ascribed to cooling, energy 

transfer and Auger decay which are accelerated due to a ‘giant oscillator strength’ effect.2 The delayed 

component of the emission (which has been shown to extend to beyond 20 μs) has been assigned to 

reversible charge trapping/detrapping. The emission decay in platelets is uniform across the band in 

keeping with the low-inhomogeneous broadening and a picture of delocalized excitations. By contrast 

the PL decay in nanorings is much shorter than platelets, although also multi-exponential, with the 

decay here well described with three decay constants of 1.3 ± 0.2 ns, 7.2 ± 2 ns and 40.3 ± 2 ns (see SI, 

S12 for all decays and associated weighting coefficients). The absence of a long-lived emission 

component in the decay suggests a model using reversible-carrier trapping/delayed luminescence 

cannot be used to explain the PL decay in these materials.105 In light of the aforementioned evidence 

for localization of excitations in nanorings, the fast component of the PL decay is potentially associated 

with a combination of cooling processes and energy transfer between different nanorings within the 

inhomogeneously broadened PL. The slower part of the decay may then reflect the time taken for the 

excitations to hop and localize between sites on a particular nanoring. Once the carriers are localized 

the recombination is relatively fast likely as a result of the strong coupling with CdSe LO-phonons and 

negatively charged selenium rich surface sites (SI, S4), hence explaining the relatively overall short 

lifetime (and low PL quantum yield).48,106,107 

 

The nanoring PL decay is not uniform across the band, with faster decay on the blue high-energy edge, 

and with the PL peak maximum shifting to lower energies over ~1 ns. This is again likely a consequence 

of inhomogeneous broadening within the emission of nanorings, with some energy transfer to nanorings 

with a smaller band gap following photoexcitation. There could also be energy transfer between 


24 

 

different sites of varying thickness (and hence band gap) on the individual nanorings. The low overall 

FRET efficiency between nanorings (see SI, S7) will further serve to reduce the PL quantum yield. 

However, the stability of the single nanoring PL precludes transient photoluminescence measurements 

to fully characterize this and establish whether the low quantum yield for nanorings results from lower 

yield for all nanorings, or arises because some are emissive and others are quenched. The results are 

also consistent with the hypothesis that rings which have a higher band energy (bluer PL) undergo faster 

radiative recombination. From our DFT simulations (Figure 2) it would be expected that these nanorings 

have a larger radius. Finally, we note in both platelets and nanorings emission from the sub-gap states 

at 530-550 nm and 740 nm (see Figure 8 inset for spectral slices) are relatively long-lived compared to 

emission from excitons. 

 

 

 

Figure 8: Transient photoluminescence measurements of nanoplatelets and nanorings excited at 

405 nm: a. Transient photoluminescence spectrum of 4-monolayer nanoplatelets in solution. There is 

a multi-exponential decay (right) which decays uniformly across the emission band. At early times the 


25 

 

decay is attributed to energy transfer and cooling whereas at later times corresponds to reversible charge 

trapping. A second, long lived emission feature at ~540 nm is observed. Inset shows spectral slices at 

selected time delays. b. Transient photoluminescence spectrum of nanorings. The emission is 

significantly shorter lived than nanoplatelets with a faster decay at higher energies (left). An additional 

emissive feature ~740 nm is observed which has relatively long lived emission compared with that of 

excitons and is suggested to originate from sub-band gap defect states. 

 

The PL decay of nanoplatelets and nanorings can also be fit to more complex stretched exponential 

functions (see SI, S13) which allow estimation of the number of traps, trapping and detrapping rates 

and energy gap between trap sites.108,109 Fitting the decay in Figure 8 to such models, shows that the 

average number of traps in nanorings is 3 times higher than in nanoplatelets with trap activation energies 

of similar magnitude to those found with the fitting of Equation 1 (see SI, S13). In nanorings the 

trapping rate is almost 100 times faster than the detrapping rate, whereas in nanoplatelets the two rates 

are comparable. This is again in keeping with observations from steady-state PL. Additionally, the 

stretching factors from these fits are consistently greater than 0.5, suggesting that FRET-based PL 

quenching by e.g. stacked nanoplatelets/nanorings is not significant.110 Stacking between nanoplatelets 

might be expected to increase the efficiency of FRET due to the small Stokes shift between absorption 

and PL. Stacking has also been shown to be responsible for additional PL peaks in the low temperature 

emission spectra of nanoplatelets due to excimer formation;111 although this is still somewhat 

debated.86,112 In this work, we observe little impact of stacking on the exciton dynamics of nanoplatelets, 

e.g. no closely spaced PL peaks in low temperature emission spectra, potentially due to the relatively 

irregular shape of nanoplatelets synthesised (Figure 1a). From qualitative assessment of TEM images 

(SI, S1) nanorings do not appear to stack to as great an extent as nanoplatelets. The relatively large 

(~90 meV) Stokes shift between absorption and emission in these materials means the efficiency of 

nanoring-to-nanoring FRET is low. Performing concentration-dependent transient PL measurements 

shows no change in the PL lifetime on increasing the concentration (SI, S13), further suggesting any 

stacking does not play an important role in the observations here, e.g. via the formation of an indirect 

exciton between stacked nanorings which would be expected to have an increased lifetime. The shape 

and peak positions in the steady-state PL spectrum similarly do not vary with concentration (SI, S13). 

Furthermore, The energy difference between the excitonic PL and PL attributed to defects is also too 

large (~0.3 eV) to be as a consequence of excimer formation.111 As a result, we can conclude stacking 

has little effect on the observations reported. In summary a variety of models can be used to fit the 

nanoplatelet and nanorings PL. These models typically only apply in the case of a two-level bright-dark 

exciton for II-VI colloidal system. In the case of nanorings this picture does not necessarily hold, hence 

the quantitative values should be treated with caution. The reasonable fit and derived parameters from 


26 

 

these models however demonstrates that many of the models developed to understand trap states in QDs 

can be applied to nanocrystals of more unusual geometries. 

 

 

Finally, we note atmospheric (gas exposure/light soaking) Kelvin probe measurements additionally 

reveal poor trap passivation of nanorings as compared to nanoplatelets (SI, Figure S14).113,114. This 

results in stronger and more irreversible oxygen binding to the surface of nanorings as compared to 

nanoplatelets, and suggests at least for nanoplatelets there are excess electrons at the surface and  oxygen 

reduces the sensitivity of holes to surface defects. These results highlight the relation between the shape 

and surface (trap) passivation, suggesting in these more complex geometries new strategies or ligands 

might be required to passivate possibly inaccessible facets.  (SI, Figure S14).113,114 A larger effect was 

observed from atmospheric exposure in nanorings compared to nanoplatelets, and this was attributed to 

less effective passivation by surface ligands, allowing oxygen to have a greater effect. This highlights 

the importance of surface trap engineering when colloidal nanocrystals become modified into nontrivial 

topologies and we expect core-shell structures to become integral to these systems. Excess electrons at 

the nanoplatelet surface and reduces the sensitivity of holes to surface defects. We emphasise that for 

other measurements in this manuscript (transient absorption, photoluminescence, etc.) the samples were 

encapsulated (films) or sealed (solution) in an inert nitrogen or argon environment. 

Conclusions 

We have investigated exciton dynamics in colloidal CdSe nanorings. Using ultrasensitive, scatter-free 

absorption measurements, we have shown forming these rings from nanoplatelets introduces relatively 

little disorder into the materials. DFT simulations show the changes in the electronic structure lead to a 

red-shift in the absorption on etching the central hole of the platelets to form a ring. Variation in the 

size, thickness, and localization properties of the rings leads to a broad absorption and emission with a 

large Stokes shift as confirmed by single-particle PL measurements. Following photoexcitation, 

excitons on the nanoring hop between (surface) trap sites before localising, this is in contrast to the 

delocalized, band-like picture of excitations in nanoplatelets. These increased exciton localization likely 

emerges from the localized hole state due to the change in topology and electronic structure from the 

creation of the nanoring. There is also likely energetic hopping between nanorings of different band 

energies within the ensemble.  The surfaces of nanorings have a large negative charge, suggesting the 

traps consist of regions of unpassivated selenium. In contrast to nanoplatelets, there is strong coupling 

between excitons and a LO-phonon mode at 200 cm-1, which we suggest plays a key role in localising 

excitations. However, the shape does not necessarily appear to play a significant role in altering the 

exciton-phonon coupling as one might expect. In-situ characterization of nanorings during their 

formation from nanoplatelets suggests this enhanced exciton-phonon coupling is introduced during the 


27 

 

etching process. Using low-temperature absorption and emission, we confirm this equilibrium between 

trap and excitonic emission, with the former dominating at low temperatures. Transient measurements 

as a function of temperature further demonstrate that despite a similar steady-state PL response to 

nanoplatelets the band-edge electronic structure in nanorings cannot be treated simply in terms of a 

bright-dark doublet. Analysis of steady state and transient PL data gives a semi-quantitative picture of 

surface traps and free energies in both nanoplatelets and nanorings and suggests potential couplings 

between the exciton and surface states.  

These results have several implications for the engineering of 2D colloidal CdSe nanorings. Firstly, 

they suggest that passivation of negative selenium anion traps is key. This might be achieved either via 

appropriate surface ligands, core-shell structures, or by better removing excess selenium from the etch 

process. Given exciton-phonon scattering is a major PL loss pathway in these materials, our results 

additionally suggest that tuning of the material structure is required. This could perhaps be achieved by 

alloying the material,115 to reduce coupling with phonon modes and alleviate strain in nanorings, an 

approach which has had success in some 2D transition metal dichalcogenides.116,117 In general, the 

nature of trap states in these materials remains poorly understood and future work should aim to better 

characterize these, e.g., via computational modelling. Here, we have shown that the application of 

models initially developed for 0D QDs can be applied to 2D and ring topologies for quantitative analysis 

of surface properties; these potentially challenge the idea of deep traps in these systems, but further 

work is required still to understand this.100,104 From a synthetic viewpoint, ensuring all nanorings have 

the same diameter would lead to emission with narrower linewidths. This could  potentially be achieved 

by flow-synthesis routes,118 although we highlight in our methods key requirements in terms of original 

nanoplatelet size, aspect ratio and surface ligands for efficient and clean single ring formation through 

the etch method. We expand on the synthetic methods of Fedin et al. which may be applied to other 

material systems. One avenue of future study is the synthesis of colloidal topological nanostructures of 

semiconductors such as HgTe which is a topological insulator.119,120 The expansive techniques applied 

here may provide a basis for understanding the exciton dynamics within topological systems of these 

different materials. 

As active materials for quantum dot LEDs, the strong exciton-phonon coupling in nanorings is not 

advantageous, due to the asymmetry and PL broadening introduced.121 However, these materials could 

find use in polariton lasers, where the strong exciton-phonon coupling increases the rate of polariton 

relaxation allowing for low lasing thresholds.122–124 The fact that the emission is sharp (FWHM μeV 

range) while at the few-particle level means they could be promising candidates for photonic 

applications which can exploit their toroidal geometry. 

 For application in solar cells, the high trap density and the fact that the main carriers are excitons as 

opposed to free charges, limits the use of nanorings, although these materials would be optimal over 


28 

 

nanoplatelets. However, if the PL quantum yield can be enhanced significantly using approaches proven 

for colloidal quantum dots, nanorings might find effective use in luminescent solar concentrators, where 

a large Stokes shift between absorption and emission coupled with the potential for highly directed 

emission is desirable. 

In terms of applications that exploit the nanoring shape, our results suggest that surface traps introduced 

by etching of the platelet center might be a limiting factor.16 However, our work points to a potentially 

unusual excitonic fine structure where there is an interplay between effects observed in 2D platelets and 

0D dots. Investigating this further with magneto-optical spectroscopies should be the focus of future 

work. 

 

 

Methods  

CdSe Nanorings synthesis 

CdSe nanorings (NRs) were synthesized according to the method of Fedin et al. following the chemical 

etching of CdSe nanoplatelets (NPLs) synthesized according to the method of Ithurria et al. All 

materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise stated and were used as received. A 

typical procedure is as follows.7,2 

Cadmium myristate was prepared by first reacting myristic acid (1.37 g, 6 mmol) with sodium 

hydroxide (0.24 g, 6 mmol) in 240 mL methanol. Cadmium nitrate (0.617 g, 2 mmol) dissolved in 

40 mL methanol was then added dropwise with vigorous stirring over 1 hour. Dropwise addition along 

with vigorous stirring are important for complete reaction and purity of cadmium myristate. The white 

precipitate was collected through vacuum filtration and washed 3 times with 30 mL methanol. The 

powder was dried under vacuum overnight at 80 °C. 

A 50 mL 3-necked flask was loaded with cadmium myristate (170 mg) and 1-octadecene (ODE, 15 mL) 

then degassed at 100 °C for 10 minutes, forming a colourless solution. The flask was switched to N2 

then cooled to room temperature. Cadmium myristate is insoluble in ODE below 100 °C and will 

precipitate to form a cloudy suspension if left at room temperature. Selenium powder (12 mg, 100-

mesh) was added under flowing N2 then the flask degassed at 90 °C for 30 minutes. The flask was 

switched to N2 and heated to 140 °C until the Se had fully dissolved. Larger Se loadings increased the 

product yield but also increased the likelihood of secondary nucleation of different thickness platelets. 

Waiting for full dissolution of the Se below CdSe nucleation temperature assisted the reproducibility of 

the synthesis by minimising differences in reaction kinetics during the temperature ramp phase. 

Proceeding with the temperature ramp before full dissolution of the Se powder may yield a 


29 

 

monodisperse platelet thickness, however this becomes more difficult especially at higher 

concentrations of Se and cadmium acetate. Increased sensitivity to Se powder particle size (mesh) and 

Cd acetate addition temperature were observed with incomplete dissolution of Se, resulting in 

polydisperse thicknesses and nanocube side products. A separate receiving Schlenk flask containing 

methylcyclohexane (MCH, 10 mL) and degassed oleic acid (OA, 2 mL) in N2 was prepared. The 3-

necked flask was rapidly heated to 240 °C, and finely ground cadmium acetate dihydrate (40 mg, 

0.15 mmol) was added to the flask under nitrogen flow when the temperature reached 190 °C. Fast 

addition of powder was easily achieved by transferring the pre-ground powder to a tubular metal or 

anti-static plastic spatula. Environmental humidity was an unexpected factor in this step. Bertrand et al. 

demonstrated control of nanoplatelet aspect ratio to water present in the reaction.31 It was discovered 

higher aspect ratio nanoplatelets were produced with increased humidity in winter, leading to nanorings 

with multiple perforations. To modify the aspect ratio, cadmium acetate could be added as a mix of the 

anhydrous and dihydrate forms, with a 50:50 molar ratio being successful for low aspect ratio platelets 

in wetter conditions. The solution was maintained 240 °C for 4 minutes. The exact reaction time could 

be between 1 minute and 8 minutes, with longer times associated to an extent with larger lateral 

dimensions. Short reaction times resulted in reduced nanoplatelet yields. The solution turned turbid 

upon successful growth of nanoplatelets whilst remaining an orange-red colour. However, if the colour 

changed to darker red, this indicated nucleation of nanocubes or dots as a side product. The hot solution 

was then extracted with a glass syringe and metal needle and rapidly injected into the receiving flask. 

For the extraction, a 30 mL glass syringe with 14 or 16 gauge stainless steel needle was used to expedite 

the transfer time. The needle and syringe was purged with nitrogen using the receiving flask, also pre-

perforating the septum to facilitate rapid insertion. The cloudy solution was allowed to settle for 3 hours 

then transferred to an Ar glovebox then centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was 

discarded and the precipitate was resuspended in 4 mL MCH and filtered through a 0.2 µm PTFE 

syringe filter, to remove large aggregates. The crude solution was purified twice by precipitation with 

ethanol, centrifugation and resuspension in MCH. The purified NPLs were stored in MCH. NPLs were 

colloidally stable in MCH but would eventually precipitate in hexane. 

A quantity of purified nanoplatelets was dispersed into degassed ODE (3 mL) and degassed OAm 

(1 mL). These were stored as three separate stock solutions in the glovebox and could be mixed together 

before transferring to the flask. The absorption spectrum of the NPLs in MCH was used to determine 

the amount of stock solution to be used. When the sharp absorption feature at 511 nm for a solution of 

NPLs diluted by a factor of 300 was 0.2 A in a 1 cm cuvette, 1 mL of the undiluted solution was used 

for the ring etch procedure. A convenient method of dilution was to disperse 6.6 µL of stock solution 

into 2 mL additional solvent. The quantity of NPL stock was varied linearly according to absorbance, 

thus for a diluted stock measured at 0.4 A, one should use 0.5 mL of NPL stock solution. The NPL 

solution in ODE/OAm was transferred to a 25 mL 3-necked flask purged with N2. The solution was 


30 

 

heated to 80 °C under N2 for 15 minutes to evaporate the MCH then the flask was slowly degassed 

whilst being allowed to cool to room temperature. The heating allowed faster and more complete 

removal of excess MCH solvent. Selenium powder (Alfa-Aesar, 7.9 mg, 325-mesh) was dispersed and 

sonicated in degassed OAm (1 mL) and 0.2 mL of this suspension was added to the degassed NPL 

solution. The finer powder mesh was used to achieve more reproducible results, allowing for better 

initial dispersion in OAm, and to improve dissolution rate when reaching solubility temperature. 

Selenium may also be pre-dissolved in OAm by heating the suspension on a hotplate within the 

glovebox at 180 °C overnight, resulting in an orange-brown solution to be used instead of the powder 

suspension. Vortexing the powder suspension with fast extraction before sedimentation was useful in 

ensuring a correct amount of Se was used. The flask was degassed at room temperature for 10 minutes 

before heating to 140 °C under N2. The temperature was maintained at 140 °C for 10 minutes, then tri-

n-butylphosphine (0.2 ml) was injected into the flask and the temperature was increased to 220 °C. A 

visible darkening of the solution was observed during the temperature plateau, which lightened 

following injection of tri-n-butylphosphine, darkening again upon heating to 220 °C. The heating 

mantle was removed immediately upon reaching 220 °C and the flask was allowed to cool to room 

temperature. At 37 °C, finely ground cadmium formate (MP Biomedicals, 10 mg) was added to the 

flask, and the mixture was stirred for 1 hour. The solution was transferred to an Ar glovebox and purified 

by precipitation with a mixture of ethanol/acetone, centrifugation and resuspension in hexane. 

 

Bright-field Transmission Electron Microscopy 

Bright-field transmission electron microscopy was performed with a FEI Tecnai F20 TEM at 200 kV 

operating voltage. Samples were prepared by deposition of diluted nanocrystals in hexane onto carbon-

coated Cu grids (Agar AGS160). 

 

Photoluminescence Quantum Efficiency (PLQE) 

Photoluminescence quantum efficiency was performed on a home-built measurement setup consisting 

of an integrating sphere (Labsphere 4P-GPS-053-SL), collection fibre (Andor SR-OPT8019), 

spectrograph (Andor Kymera-328i) and detector (Andor iDus 420). The setup was calibrated for 

spectral sensitivity with a NIST-traceable quartz-tungsten-halogen lamp (Newport 63967-200QC-OA). 

Excitation was performed with a 520 nm temperature-controlled diode laser (Thorlabs). PLQE values 

were determined via the integrating sphere method.125  

Absorption Spectroscopy 

Linear absorption spectra of colloidal nanoplatelets solutions, placed in a 1 mm path length cuvette 

(Hellma), were measured using a commercial PerkinElmer Lambda 750 UV–vis–NIR setup equipped 


31 

 

with a 10 cm integrating sphere module attachment. A Xe lamp was used as an excitation source, and 

all measurements were performed under standard ambient conditions. In order to collect the scattered 

light, the sample cuvette was placed on the front window of the sphere. The spectra were measured 

simultaneously with the solvent hexane to correct for its absorption. 

Single particle photoluminescence spectroscopy 

The samples were prepared by dropcasting a diluted solution of nanorings (dilution up to 5000 times) 

onto ~ 5 x 5 mm glass slides. They were then mounted on the cold finger of a cryostat (Oxford 

Instrument) allowing the control of the temperature from ≈ 4 K to room temperature. The samples were 

excited with a continuous wave diode-pumped solid state laser (Thorlabs DJ532) emitting at 533 nm, 

mounted in its temperature controlled laser mount (Thorlabs TCLDM9). The excitation was focused 

using a microscope objective (NA = 0.6, spot size ≈ 1 μm). The incident power density was kept around 

5 μW/μm². The luminescence was collected using the same optic and spectrally analyzed with an 

ACTON SP2760i Roper Scientific-Princeton Instruments spectrometer coupled to a nitrogen-cooled 

SPEC10-2KB-LN (RS-PI) CCD camera (1200 lines per mm grating). 

 

Temperature-Dependent Absorption 

An Agilent Cary 6000i UV–Vis–NIR spectrophotometer with blank substrate correction was used. 

Spin-coated samples on fused silica substrates were placed in a continuous-flow cryostat (Oxford 

Instruments Optistat CF-V) under a helium atmosphere. We allowed the sample temperature to 

equilibrate for 30 min before taking data. 

 

DFT Calculations 

All DFT calculations were performed using the Quantum Espresso suite (v6.4).126,127 We used the SG15 

norm-conserving pseudopotentials generated by ONCVPSP and the electronic wavefunctions were 

expanded in a plane wave basis with an energy cutoff of 60 Ry.128 The exchange correlation functional 

was approximated by the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient approximation129. A 

vaccum spacing of 15 Å was added to the supercell in the z-dimension to remove any spurious 

interactions, and atomic positions were relaxed until the residual forces were <0.01 eV/Å. The 

frequency-dependent dielectric function was computed using the independent particle approximation. 

 

Bulk zincblende CdSe was used to create nanoplatelets with their top and bottom surfaces being the 

{100} facets, which were passivated by Cl ligands. The nanorings were created in a 3 ×3 supercell, and 

all structures were stoichiometric in Cd, Se and Cl composition. The Monkhorst-Pack k-point sampling 


32 

 

scheme used for Brillouin zone has divisions of less than 0.03 Å-1, and only the Γ point was sampled in 

the z-direction. 130 

Photothermal Deflection Spectroscopy 

PDS measures the refractive index change due to heat that is caused by nonradiative relaxation when 

the incoming light is absorbed and can be considered a scatter-free technique for measuring absorption 

capable of measuring 5–6 orders of magnitude weaker absorption than the band-edge absorption. For 

the measurements, a monochromatic pump light beam produced by a combination of a Light Support 

MKII 100 W xenon arc source and a CVI DK240 monochromator was shone on the sample (film on 

Spectrosil fused silica substrate), inclined perpendicular to the plane of the sample, which on absorption 

produces a thermal gradient near the sample surface via nonradiative relaxation induced heating. This 

results in a refractive index gradient in the area surrounding the sample surface. This refractive index 

gradient was further enhanced by immersing the sample in an inert liquid FC-72 Fluorinert (3M 

Company) that has a high refractive index change per unit change in temperature. A fixed-wavelength 

CW laser probe beam, produced using a Qioptiq 670 nm fiber-coupled diode laser with temperature 

stabilizer for reduced beam pointing noise, was passed through this refractive index gradient, producing 

a deflection proportional to the absorbed light at that particular wavelength, which was detected by a 

differentially amplified quadrant photodiode and lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research SR830) 

combination. Scanning through different wavelengths gives the complete absorption spectra. 

 

Kelvin Probe 

Kelvin Probe measurements were measured using a RHC Kelvin Probe System (RHC KP030, KP 

Technology Ltd.), which measured the contact potential difference between the sample surface and a 

cylindrical gold tip (4 mm diameter). The samples were prepared under dry N2 conditions and 

transferred to the environmental chamber containing the Kelvin Probe. The work function (WF) 

measurement started immediately after the installation, when the samples were conditioned under dry 

N2. After stabilization of the work-function signal, indicating reaching the steady-state we began 

tracking of the WF value. A surface spectroscopy module (AM0.5, SPS020, KP Technology), was used 

for surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements.  

 

Temperature dependent X-Ray diffraction  

XRD was performed using a Bruker X-ray D8 Advance diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 

1.541 Å) with Johansson monochromators to eliminate Kα2. Low-temperature measurements were 

made on cooling between 300 and 12 K using an Oxford Cryosystem PheniX stage (50 K steps; 20 min 

waited for equilibration of temperature). Spectra were collected with an angular range of 10° < 2θ < 


33 

 

60° and Δθ = 0.014 31° over 60 min. Measurements were made on drop-casted films from the 

nanoplatelet or nanoring suspension onto precleaned silicon substrates.  

 

Picosecond Transient Absorption 

The picosecond transient absorption (ps-TA) experiments were performed using an Yb-based amplified 

system (PHAROS, Light Conversion) providing 14.5 W at 1030 nm and 38 kHz repetition rate. The 

probe beam is generated by focusing a portion of the fundamental in a 4 mm YAG substrate and spans 

from 520 to 900 nm. The pump beam is generated by seeding a portion of the fundamental to a narrow 

band optical parametric oscillator (ORPHEUS-LYRA, Light Conversion). The pump pulse was set to 

500 nm. The sample solutions were placed in 1 mm path length cuvettes (Hellma). The pump and probe 

beams were focused to a size of 280 μm × 240 μm and 55 μm × 67 μm, respectively. The pump fluence 

was typically 30 μJ/cm2. The white light is delayed using a computer-controlled piezoelectric translation 

stage (Newport), and a sequence of probe pulses with and without the pump is generated using a chopper 

wheel (Thorlabs) on the pump beam. The probe pulse transmitted through the sample was detected by 

a silicon photodiode array camera (Stresing Entwicklungsbüro; visible monochromator 550 nm blazed 

grating). 

Transient Photoluminescence 

To record the time-resolved emission scan or photoluminescence decay of the samples, time-correlated 

single-photon counting (TCSPC) was performed. Samples were excited with a pulsed laser (PicoQuant 

LDH400 40 MHz) 470 nm, with the resulting photoluminescence decay collected on a 500 mm focal 

length spectrograph (Princeton Instruments, SpectraPro2500i) with a cooled CCD camera. The 

instrument response was determined by scattering excitation light into the detector using a piece of 

frosted glass; a value of 265 ps was obtained.  

 

Low temperature transient PL spectroscopy  

Films of nanorings drop-cast on glass slides were mounted on the cold finger of a cryostat (Oxford 

Instrument) allowing the control of the temperature from  4 K to 293 K. A C5680 Hamamatsu streak 

camera, incorporating a M5675 synchro-scan unit, coupled to an Acton SP2760i spectrometer was used. 

The streak camera was synchronized with the pulse train of the excitation. In the experiment, pulses of 

tres  2 ps are delivered by a picosecond Ti:Sapphire laser operating at 82 MHz. Frequency conversion 

is achieved in a BBO crystal to reach an excitation wavelength of λex = 460 nm. The time resolution is 

less than 20 ps. The excitation was focused using a microscope objective (NA = 0.6, spot size ≈ 1 μm) 


34 

 

and the excitation power density was kept around 1 μW/μm². The luminescence was then collected 

using the same objective.  

Femtosecond Transient Absorption Spectroscopy 

The fs-TA experiments were performed using an Yb-based amplified system (Pharos, Light 

Conversion) providing 14.5 W at 1030 nm and a 38 kHz repetition rate. The probe beam was generated 

by focusing a portion of the fundamental in a 4 mm YAG substrate and spanned from 520 to 1400 nm. 

The pump beam was generated in a home-built noncollinear optical parametric (NOPAs; 37° cut BBO, 

type I, 5° external angle) pumped with either the second or third harmonic of the source. The NOPAs 

output (∼4–5 mW power) was centered at either 520, 660, or 860 nm, and pulses were compressed 

using a chirped mirror wedge prism (Layterc) combination to a temporal duration of 12 and 17 fs, 

respectively (upper limit determined by SHG-FROG). The white light was delayed using a computer-

controlled piezoelectric translation stage, and a sequence of probe pulses with and without pump was 

generated using a chopper wheel on the pump beam. The pump irradiance was at 19 μJ/cm2. After the 

sample, the probe pulse was split with a 950 nm dichroic mirror (Thor Laboratories). The visible light 

(520–950 nm) was then imaged with a silicon photodiode array camera (Stresing Entwicklunsbüro; 

visible monochromator 550 nm blazed grating) with the near-infrared proportion of the probe seeded to 

an IR monochromator (1200 nm blazed grating) and imaged using an InGaAs photodiode array camera 

(Sensors Unlimited). This technique allows simultaneous collection of the entire probe spectrum in a 

single shot. Offsets for the differing spectral response of the detectors was accounted for in the post-

processing of data. 

Steady-state Raman 

Raman measurements were performed with a Renishaw inVia Raman microscope under ambient 

conditions. Excitation was provided by 532 nm and 633 nm laser lines. The Raman emission was 

collected by a Lecia 100× objective (N.A. = 0.85) and dispersed by a 1800 lines per mm grating. 

Measurements were performed on thin films of nanoplatelets and nanorings atop a glass microscope 

slide. 

Zeta-potential measurements 

Zeta-potential and size distribution measurements were performed on a Malvern Zetasizer NanoZSP, 

equipped with a 633 nm He-Ne laser with a maximum power of 10 mW.  A glass cuvette (PCS1115) 

was loaded with 400 µL of QDs in hexane (1 mg/mL), and a Malvern Universal Dip Cell (ZEN1002)was 

used for measurement of zeta-potential. All measurements were performed at 25 °C, with a minimum 

equilibration period of 2 minutes following sample loading. Zeta-potential distributions were averaged 

over 5 measurements, each of which consisted of between 50 to 100 runs.  

 


35 

 

 

Associated Content 

This work was available in preprint as follows: Xiao, James; Liu, Yun; Steinmetz, Violette; Caglar, 

Mustafa; McHugh, Jeffrey; Baikie, Tomi; Gauriot, Nicolas; Nguyen, Malgorzata; Ruggeri , Edoardo; 

Andaji-Garmaroudi, Zahra; Stranks, Samuel; Legrand, Laurent; Barisien, Thierry; Friend, Richard; 

Greenham, Neil; Rao, Akshay; Pandya, Raj. Optical and electronic properties of colloidal CdSe 

Quantum Rings. 2020, 2003.11897. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11897 (accessed October 2nd, 

2020). 

Supporting Information 

TEM images of partially etched nanoplatelets, DFT calculations, temperature-dependent X-Ray 

diffraction measurements, optical pulse compression, analysis of impulsive vibrational spectroscopy 

and pump-probe data, Raman spectra of partially etched nanorings, temperature dependent absorption 

and emission spectra, zeta potential measurements. 

The Supporting Information is available free of charge at [url to be added in proof]. 

The raw data underlying this manuscript is freely available at https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.58042. 

 

 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

We thank the EPSRC (programme grant: EP/M005143/1) and Winton Program for Physics of 

Sustainability for financial support. R.H.F. and Y.L. acknowledge support from the Simons Foundation 

(grant 601946). This work was performed using resources provided by the Cambridge Service for Data 

Driven Discovery (CSD3) operated by the University of Cambridge Research Computing Service 

(www.csd3.cam.ac.uk). R.P. thanks Ryan Brady (Cambridge) for assistance with zeta-potential and 

DLS measurements, Gianluca Grimaldi (Cambridge) for assistance with interpretation of transient 

absorption data, Juan Climente (Universitat Jaume I, Spain) for insightful discussions and H.P., S.P. 

and T.P. for support. J.X thanks Simon Dowland (Cambridge) for assistance with PLQE measurements 

and X. Hong (Reading) for useful discussions. E. R. and S. D. S. acknowledge the European Research 

Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 

(HYPERION, grant agreement number 756962). E. R. was partially supported by an EPSRC 


36 

 

Departmental Graduate Studentship. S. D. S. acknowledges funding from the Royal Society and Tata 

Group (UF150033). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

References 

(1)  
Smith, A. M.; Nie, S. Semiconductor Nanocrystals: Structure, Properties and Band Gap 

Engineering. Acc. Chem. Res. 2010, 43, 190–200. 

(2)  
Ithurria, S.; Tessier, M. D.; Mahler, B.; Lobo, R. P. S. M.; Dubertret, B.; Efros, A. L. Colloidal 

Nanoplatelets with Two-Dimensional Electronic Structure. Nat. Mater. 2011, 10, 936–941. 

(3)  
Milliron, D.; Hughes, S. M.; Cui, Y.; Manna, L.; Li, J.; Wang, L. W.; Alivisatos, A. P. 

Colloidal Nanocrystal Heterostructures with Linear and Branched Topology. Nature 2004, 

430, 190–195. 

(4)  
Sigle, D. O.; Zhang, L.; Ithurria, S.; Dubertret, B.; Baumberg, J. J. Ultrathin CdSe in 

Plasmonic Nanogaps for Enhanced Photocatalytic Water Splitting. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 

6, 1099–1103. 

(5)  
Li, Q.; Zhou, B.; McBride, J. R.; Lian, T. Efficient Diffusive Transport of Hot and Cold 

Excitons in Colloidal Type-II CdSe/CdTe Core/Crown Nanoplatelet Heterostructures. ACS 

Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 174–181. 


37 

 

(6)  
Rowland, C. E.; Susumu, K.; Stewart, M. H.; Oh, E.; Mäkinen, A. J.; O’Shaughnessy, T. J.; 

Kushto, G.; Wolak, M. A.; Erickson, J. S.; L. Efros, A.; A.; Huston, A. L.; Delehanty, J. B. 

Electric Field Modulation of Semiconductor Quantum Dot Photoluminescence: Insights into 

the Design of Robust Voltage-Sensitive Cellular Imaging Probes. Nano Lett. 2015, 15, 6848–

6854. 

(7)  
Fedin, I.; Talapin, D. V. Colloidal CdSe Quantum Rings. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 9771–

9774. 

(8)  
Mitchell, B.; Massey, W. S. Algebraic Topology: An Introduction. Am. Math. Mon. 1968, 75, 

427-428. 

(9)  
Li, E.; Eggleton, B. J.; Fang, K.; Fan, S. Photonic Aharonov-Bohm Effect in Photon-Phonon 

Interactions. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 3225. 

(10)  Bayer, M.; Korkusinski, M.; Hawrylak, P.; Gutbrod, T.; Michel, M.; Forchel, A. Optical 

Detection of the Aharonov-Bohm Effect on a Charged Particle in a Nanoscale Quantum Ring. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 90, 186801. 

(11)  Chen, P.; Whaley, K. B. Magneto-Optical Response of CdSe Nanostructures. Phys. Rev. B - 

Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2004, 70, 045311.  

(12)  Ju, S.; Jeong, S.; Kim, Y.; Watekar, P. R.; Han, W. T. Demonstration of All-Optical Fiber 

Isolator Based on a CdSe Quantum Dots Doped Optical Fiber Operating at 660 nm. J. Light. 

Technol. 2013, 31, 3093–3098. 

(13)  Baghramyan, H. M.; Barseghyan, M. G.; Kirakosyan, A. A.; Ojeda, J. H.; Bragard, J.; Laroze, 

D. Modeling of Anisotropic Properties of Double Quantum Rings by the Terahertz Laser 

Field. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 6145. 

(14)  Tadić, M.; Aukarić, N.; Arsoski, V.; Peeters, F. M. Excitonic Aharonov-Bohm Effect: 

Unstrained versus Strained Type-I Semiconductor Nanorings. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter 

Mater. Phys. 2011, 84, 125307. 

(15)  Hartmann, N. F.; Otten, M.; Fedin, I.; Talapin, D.; Cygorek, M.; Hawrylak, P.; Korkusinski, 

M.; Gray, S.; Hartschuh, A.; Ma, X. Uniaxial Transition Dipole Moments in Semiconductor 

Quantum Rings Caused by Broken Rotational Symmetry. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 3253. 

(16)  Meinardi, F.; Colombo, A.; Velizhanin, K. A.; Simonutti, R.; Lorenzon, M.; Beverina, L.; 

Viswanatha, R.; Klimov, V. I.; Brovelli, S. Large-Area Luminescent Solar Concentrators 

Based on Stokes-Shift-Engineered Nanocrystals in a Mass-Polymerized PMMA Matrix. Nat. 

Photonics 2014, 8, 392–399. 


38 

 

(17)  Gerislioglu, B.; Ahmadivand, A.; Pala, N. Hybridized Plasmons in Graphene Nanorings for 

Extreme Nonlinear Optics. Opt. Mater. (Amsterdam, Neth.). 2017, 73, 729-735. 

(18)  Flatten, L. C.; Christodoulou, S.; Patel, R. K.; Buccheri, A.; Coles, D. M.; Reid, B. P. L.; 

Taylor, R. A.; Moreels, I.; Smith, J. M. Strong Exciton-Photon Coupling with Colloidal 

Nanoplatelets in an Open Microcavity. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 7137–7141. 

(19)  Wu, J.; Shao, D.; Li, Z.; Manasreh, M. O.; Kunets, V. P.; Wang, Z. M.; Salamo, G. J. 

Intermediate-Band Material Based on GaAs Quantum Rings for Solar Cells. Appl. Phys. Lett. 

2009, 95, 071908. 

(20)  Guo, Q.; Kim, S. J.; Kar, M.; Shafarman, W. N.; Birkmire, R. W.; Stach, E. A.; Agrawal, R.; 

Hillhouse, H. W. Development of CulnSe2 Nanocrystal and Nanoring Inks for Low-Cost Solar 

Cells. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 2982-2987. 

(21)  Kanté, B.; Park, Y. S.; O’Brien, K.; Shuldman, D.; Lanzillotti-Kimura, N. D.; Jing Wong, Z.; 

Yin, X.; Zhang, X. Symmetry Breaking and Optical Negative Index of Closed Nanorings. Nat. 

Commun. 2012, 3, 1180. 

(22)  Shalaev, V. M. Optical Negative-Index Metamaterials. Nat. Photonics. 2007, 1, 41-48. 

(23)  Caglar, M.; Pandya, R.; Xiao, J.; Foster, S. K.; Divitini, G.; Chen, R. Y. S.; Greenham, N. C.; 

Franze, K.; Rao, A.; Keyser, U. F. All-Optical Detection of Neuronal Membrane 

Depolarization in Live Cells Using Colloidal Quantum Dots. Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 8539-8549. 

(24)  Xiong, S.; Xi, B.; Qian, Y. CdS Hierarchical Nanostructures with Tunable Morphologies: 

Preparation and Photocatalytic Properties. J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114, 14029-14035. 

(25)  Cohen Stuart, M. A. Supramolecular Perspectives in Colloid Science. Colloid Polym. Sci.. 

2008, 286, 855-864. 

(26)  Földi, P.; Kálmán, O.; Benedict, M. G.; Peeters, F. M. Networks of Quantum Nanorings: 

Programmable Spintronic Devices. Nano Lett. 2008, 8, 2556-2558. 

(27)  Nirmal, M.; Norris, D. J.; Kuno, M.; Bawendi, M. G.; Efros, A. L.; Rosen, M. Observation of 

the Dark Exciton in CdSe Quantum Dots. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1995, 75, 3728. 

(28)  Kuroda, T.; Mano, T.; Ochiai, T.; Sanguinetti, S.; Sakoda, K.; Kido, G.; Koguchi, N. Optical 

Transitions in Quantum Ring Complexes. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2005, 

72, 205301. 

(29)  Warburton, R. J.; Schäflein, C.; Haft, D.; Bickel, F.; Lorke, A.; Karrai, K.; Garcia, J. M.; 

Schoenfeld, W.; Petroff, P. M. Optical Emission from a Charge-Tunable Quantum Ring. 

Nature 2000, 405, 926–929. 


39 

 

(30)  Ithurria, S.; Bousquet, G.; Dubertret, B. Continuous Transition From 3D to 1D Confinement 

Observed during the Formation of CdSe Nanoplatelets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 3070–

3077. 

(31)  Bertrand, G. H. V.; Polovitsyn, A.; Christodoulou, S.; Khan, A. H.; Moreels, I. Shape Control 

of Zincblende CdSe Nanoplatelets. Chem. Commun. 2016, 52, 11975–11978. 

(32)  Biadala, L.; Shornikova, E. V.; Rodina, A. V.; Yakovlev, D. R.; Siebers, B.; Aubert, T.; 

Nasilowski, M.; Hens, Z.; Dubertret, B.; Efros, A. L.; Bayer, M. Magnetic Polaron on 

Dangling-Bond Spins in CdSe Colloidal Nanocrystals. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12, 569–57. 

(33)  Mooney, J.; Kambhampati, P. Get the Basics Right: Jacobian Conversion of Wavelength and 

Energy Scales for Quantitative Analysis of Emission Spectra. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4, 

3316–3318. 

(34)  Diroll, B. T.; Chen, M.; Coropceanu, I.; Williams, K. R.; Talapin, D. V.; Guyot-Sionnest, P.; 

Schaller, R. D. Polarized Near-Infrared Intersubband Absorptions in CdSe Colloidal Quantum 

Wells. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 4511. 

(35)  Ekimov, A. I.; Hache, F.; Ricard, D.; Flytzanis, C.; Polytechnique, E.; Minchen, T. U. 

Absorption and Intensity-Dependent Photoluminescence Measurements on CdSe Quantum 

Dots: Assignment of the First Electronic Transitions. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 1993, 10, 100–107. 

(36)  Kim, D.; Kim, D. H.; Lee, J. H.; Grossman, J. C. Impact of Stoichiometry on the Electronic 

Structure of PbS Quantum Dots. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2013, 110, 1–5. 

(37)  Giansante, C.; Infante, I. Surface Traps in Colloidal Quantum Dots: A Combined Experimental 

and Theoretical Perspective. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2017, 8, 5209–5215. 

(38)  Shornikova, E. V.; Golovatenko, A. A.; Yakovlev, D. R.; Rodina, A. V.; Biadala, L.; Qiang, 

G.; Kuntzmann, A.; Nasilowski, M.; Dubertret, B.; Polovitsyn, A.; Moreels, I. Surface Spin 

Magnetism Controls the Polarized Exciton Emission from CdSe Nanoplatelets. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2020, 15, 277-282. 

(39)  Momma, K.; Izumi, F. VESTA: A Three-Dimensional Visualization System for Electronic and 

Structural Analysis. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2008, 41, 653–658. 

(40)  Jackson, W. B.; Amer, N. M.; Boccara, A. C.; Fournier, D. Photothermal Deflection 

Spectroscopy and Detection. Appl. Opt. 1981, 20, 1333. 

(41)  Tessier, M. D.; Javaux, C.; Maksimovic, I.; Loriette, V.; Dubertret, B. Spectroscopy of Single 

CdSe Nanoplatelets. ACS Nano 2012, 6, 6751–6758. 

(42)  Turtos, R. M.; Gundacker, S.; Omelkov, S.; Mahler, B.; Khan, A. H.; Saaring, J.; Meng, Z.; 


40 

 

Vasil’ev, A.; Dujardin, C.; Kirm, M.; Moreels, I. On the Use of CdSe Scintillating 

Nanoplatelets as Time Taggers for High-Energy Gamma Detection. npj 2D Mater. Appl. 2019, 

3, 37. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41699-019-0120-8. 

(43)  Greeff, C. W.; Glyde, H. R. Anomalous Urbach Tail in GaAs. Phys. Rev. B 1995, 51, 1778-

1783. 

(44)  Ikhmayies, S. J.; Ahmad-Bitar, R. N. A Study of the Optical Bandgap Energy and Urbach Tail 

of Spray-Deposited CdS:In Thin Films. J. Mater. Res. Technol. 2013, 2, 221–227. 

(45)  Guyot-Sionnest, P.; Lhuillier, E.; Liu, H. A Mirage Study of CdSe Colloidal Quantum Dot 

Films, Urbach Tail, and Surface States. J. Chem. Phys. 2012, 137, 154704. 

(46)  Tessier, M. D.; Spinicelli, P.; Dupont, D.; Patriarche, G.; Ithurria, S.; Dubertret, B. Efficient 

Exciton Concentrators Built From Colloidal Core/Crown CdSe/CdS Semiconductor 

Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 207–213. 

(47)  Biadala, L.; Liu, F.; Tessier, M. D.; Yakovlev, D. R.; Dubertret, B.; Bayer, M. Recombination 

Dynamics of Band Edge Excitons in Quasi-Two-Dimensional CdSe Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 

2014, 14, 1134–1139. 

(48)  Pandya, R.; Chen, R. Y. S.; Cheminal, A.; Dufour, M.; Richter, J. M.; Thomas, T. H.; Ahmed, 

S.; Sadhanala, A.; Booker, E. P.; Divitini, G.; Deschler, F.D,; Greenham, N. C.; Ithurria, S.; 

Rao, A. Exciton-Phonon Interactions Govern Charge-Transfer-State Dynamics in CdSe/CdTe 

Two-Dimensional Colloidal Heterostructures. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 1409–14111. 

(49)  Bezinge, L.; Maceiczyk, R. M.; Lignos, I.; Kovalenko, M. V.; DeMello, A. J. Pick a Color 

MARIA: Adaptive Sampling Enables the Rapid Identification of Complex Perovskite 

Nanocrystal Compositions with Defined Emission Characteristics. ACS Appl. Mater. 

Interfaces 2018, 10, 18869-18878. 

(50)  Li, B.; Brosseau, P. J.; Strandell, D. P.; Mack, T. G.; Kambhampati, P. Photophysical Action 

Spectra of Emission from Semiconductor Nanocrystals Reveal Violations to the Vavilov Rule 

Behavior from Hot Carrier Effects. J. Phys. Chem. C 2019, 123, 5092-5098. 

(51)  Klimov, V. I.; Multiexciton Phenomena in Semiconductor Nanocrystals, In Nanocrystal 

Quantum Dots, 2; Klimov, V. I.; CRC Press: Boca Raton, Fla 2017, Chapter 5, pp 147-213. 

(52)  Kambhampati, P. Multiexcitons in Semiconductor Nanocrystals: A Platform for 

Optoelectronics at High Carrier Concentration. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2012, 3, 1182–1190. 

(53)  Trebino, R.; DeLong, K. W.; Fittinghoff, D. N.; Sweetser, J. N.; Krumbügel, M. A.; Richman, 

B. A.; Kane, D. J. Measuring Ultrashort Laser Pulses in the Time-Frequency Domain Using 


41 

 

Frequency-Resolved Optical Gating. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 1997, 68, 3277–3295. 

(54)  Wu, K.; Li, Q.; Jia, Y.; McBride, J. R.; Xie, Z. X.; Lian, T. Efficient and Ultrafast Formation 

of Long-Lived Charge-Transfer Exciton State in Atomically Thin Cadmium 

Selenide/Cadmium Telluride Type-II Heteronanosheets. ACS Nano 2015, 9, 961–968. 

(55)  Wu, K.; Li, Q.; Du, Y.; Chen, Z.; Lian, T. Ultrafast Exciton Quenching by Energy and 

Electron Transfer in Colloidal CdSe Nanosheet-Pt Heterostructures. Chem. Sci. 2015, 6, 1049–

1054. 

(56)  Kunneman, L. T.; Schins, J. M.; Pedetti, S.; Heuclin, H.; Grozema, F. C.; Houtepen, A. J.; 

Dubertret, B.; Siebbeles, L. D. A. Nature and Decay Pathways of Photoexcited States in CdSe 

and CdSe/CdS Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 7039-7045. 

(57)  Li, Q.; Xu, Z.; McBride, J. R.; Lian, T. Low Threshold Multiexciton Optical Gain in Colloidal 

CdSe/CdTe Core/Crown Type-II Nanoplatelet Heterostructures. ACS Nano 2017, 11, 2545–

2553. 

(58)  Morgan, D. P.; Maddux, C. J. A.; Kelley, D. F. Transient Absorption Spectroscopy of CdSe 

Nanoplatelets. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 23772–23779. 

(59)  Kambhampati, P. On the Kinetics and Thermodynamics of Excitons at the Surface of 

Semiconductor Nanocrystals: Are There Surface Excitons? J. Chem. Phys. 2015, 446, 92-107. 

(60)  Yang, Y.; Ostrowski, D. P.; France, R. M.; Zhu, K.; Van De Lagemaat, J.; Luther, J. M.; 

Beard, M. C. Observation of a Hot-Phonon Bottleneck in Lead-Iodide Perovskites. Nat. 

Photonics 2016, 10, 53–59. 

(61)  Price, M. B.; Butkus, J.; Jellicoe, T. C.; Sadhanala, A.; Briane, A.; Halpert, J. E.; Broch, K.; 

Hodgkiss, J. M.; Friend, R. H.; Deschler, F. Hot-Carrier Cooling and Photoinduced Refractive 

Index Changes in Organic-Inorganic Lead Halide Perovskites. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6¸ 8420. 

(62)  Manser, J. S.; Kamat, P. V. Band Filling with Free Charge Carriers in Organometal Halide 

Perovskites. Nat. Photonics 2014, 8, 737–743. 

(63)  Geiregat, P.; Houtepen, A.; Justo, Y.; Grozema, F. C.; Van Thourhout, D.; Hens, Z. Coulomb 

Shifts upon Exciton Addition to Photoexcited PbS Colloidal Quantum Dots. J. Phys. Chem. C 

2014, 118, 22284–22290. 

(64)  Kambhampati, P. Multiexcitons in Semiconductor Nanocrystals: A Platform for 

Optoelectronics at High Carrier Concentration. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2012, 3, 1182–1190. 

(65)  Moroz, P.; Royo Romero, L.; Zamkov, M. Colloidal Semiconductor Nanocrystals in Energy 

Transfer Reactions. Chem. Commun. 2019, 55, 3033–3048. 


42 

 

(66)  De Weerd, C.; Gomez, L.; Zhang, H.; Buma, W. J.; Nedelcu, G.; Kovalenko, M. V.; 

Gregorkiewicz, T. Energy Transfer between Inorganic Perovskite Nanocrystals. J. Phys. 

Chem. C 2016, 120, 13310–13315. 

(67)  Liebel, M.; Kukura, P. Broad-Band Impulsive Vibrational Spectroscopy of Excited Electronic 

States in the Time Domain. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4, 1358–1364. 

(68)  Mooney, J.; Saari, J. I.; Myers Kelley, A.; Krause, M. M.; Walsh, B. R.; Kambhampati, P. 

Control of Phonons in Semiconductor Nanocrystals via Femtosecond Pulse Chirp-Influenced 

Wavepacket Dynamics and Polarization. J. Phys. Chem. B 2013, 117, 15651–15658. 

(69)  Sagar, D. M.; Cooney, R. R.; Sewall, S. L.; Kambhampati, P. State-Resolved Exciton-Phonon 

Couplings in CdSe Semiconductor Quantum Dots. J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 9124–9127. 

(70)  Maddux, C. J. A.; Kelley, D. F.; Kelley, A. M. Weak Exciton-Phonon Coupling in CdSe 

Nanoplatelets from Quantitative Resonance Raman Intensity Analysis. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 

122, 27100–27106. 

(71)  Lin, C.; Kelley, D. F.; Rico, M.; Kelley, A. M. The Surface Optical Phonon in CdSe 

Nanocrystals. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 3928–3938. 

(72)  Mork, A. J.; Lee, E. M. Y.; Tisdale, W. A. Temperature Dependence of Acoustic Vibrations of 

CdSe and CdSe-CdS Core-Shell Nanocrystals Measured by Low-Frequency Raman 

Spectroscopy. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2016, 18, 28797–28801. 

(73)  Dzhagan, V. M.; Valakh, M. Y.; Milekhin, A. G.; Yeryukov, N. A.; Zahn, D. R. T.; Cassette, 

E.; Pons, T.; Dubertret, B. Raman-and IR-Active Phonons in CdSe/CdS Core/Shell 

Nanocrystals in the Presence of Interface Alloying and Strain. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117, 

18225–18233. 

(74)  Brumberg, A.; Harvey, S. M.; Philbin, J. P.; Diroll, B. T.; Lee, B.; Crooker, S. A.; 

Wasielewski, M. R.; Rabani, E.; Schaller, R. D. Determination of the In-Plane Exciton Radius 

in 2D CdSe Nanoplatelets via Magneto-Optical Spectroscopy. ACS Nano 2019, 13, 8589–

8596. 

(75)  Zhang, Y.; Mascarenhas, A. Scaling of Exciton Binding Energy and Virial Theorem in 

Semiconductor Quantum Wells and Wires. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 1999, 

59, 2040. 

(76)  Achtstein, A. W.; Schliwa, A.; Prudnikau, A.; Hardzei, M.; Artemyev, M. V.; Thomsen, C.; 

Woggon, U. Electronic Structure and Exciton-Phonon Interaction in Two-Dimensional 

Colloidal Cdse Nanosheets. Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 3151–3157. 


43 

 

(77)  Benchamekh, R.; Gippius, N. A.; Even, J.; Nestoklon, M. O.; Jancu, J. M.; Ithurria, S.; 

Dubertret, B.; Efros, A. L.; Voisin, P. Tight-Binding Calculations of Image-Charge Effects in 

Colloidal Nanoscale Platelets of CdSe. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2014, 89, 

035307. 

(78)  Kelley, A. M.; Dai, Q.; Jiang, Z. J.; Baker, J. A.; Kelley, D. F. Resonance Raman Spectra of 

Wurtzite and Zincblende CdSe Nanocrystals. Chem. Phys. 2013, 422, 272–276. 

(79)  García-Santamaría, F.; Chen, Y.; Vela, J.; Schaller, R. D.; Hollingsworth, J. A.; Klimov, V. I. 

Suppressed Auger Recombination in “Giant” Nanocrystals Boosts Optical Gain Performance. 

Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 3482–3488. 

(80)  Hou, X.; Kang, J.; Qin, H.; Chen, X.; Ma, J.; Zhou, J.; Chen, L.; Wang, L.; Wang, L. W.; 

Peng, X. Engineering Auger Recombination in Colloidal Quantum Dots via Dielectric 

Screening. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1750. 

(81)  Biadala, L.; Liu, F.; Tessier, M. D.; Yakovlev, D. R.; Dubertret, B.; Bayer, M. Recombination 

Dynamics of Band Edge Excitons in Quasi-Two-Dimensional CdSe Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 

2014, 14, 1134–1139. 

(82)  Houtepen, A. J.; Hens, Z.; Owen, J. S.; Infante, I. On the Origin of Surface Traps in Colloidal 

II-VI Semiconductor Nanocrystals. Chem. Mater. 2017, 29, 752–761. 

(83)  Christodoulou, S.; Climente, J. I.; Planelles, J.; Brescia, R.; Prato, M.; Martín-Garciá, B.; 

Khan, A. H.; Moreels, I. Chloride-Induced Thickness Control in CdSe Nanoplatelets. Nano 

Lett. 2018, 18, 6248-6254. 

(84)  Luo, S.; Kazes, M.; Lin, H.; Oron, D. Strain-Induced Type II Band Alignment Control in CdSe 

Nanoplatelet/ZnS-Sensitized Solar Cells. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 11136-11143. 

(85)  Cho, W.; Kim, S.; Coropceanu, I.; Srivastava, V.; Diroll, B. T.; Hazarika, A.; Fedin, I.; Galli, 

G.; Schaller, R. D.; Talapin, D. V. Direct Synthesis of Six-Monolayer (1.9 nm) Thick Zinc-

Blende CdSe Nanoplatelets Emitting at 585 nm. Chem. Mater. 2018, 30, 6957–6960. 

(86)  Shornikova, E.; Biadala, L.; Yakovlev, D.; Sapega, V.; Kusrayev, Y.; Mitioglu, A.; Ballottin, 

M.; Christianen, P.; Belykh, V.; Kochiev, M.; Sibeldin, N. N.; Golovatenko, A. A.; Rodina, A. 

V.; Gippius, N. A.; Kuntzmann, A.; Jiang, Y.; Nasilowski, M.; Dubertret, B.; Bayer, M. 

Addressing the Exciton Fine Structure in Colloidal Nanocrystals: The Case of CdSe 

Nanoplatelets. Nanoscale 2018, 10, 646–656. 

(87)  Gao, J.; Zhang, J.; Van De Lagemaat, J.; Johnson, J. C.; Beard, M. C. Charge Generation in 

PbS Quantum Dot Solar Cells Characterized by Temperature-Dependent Steady-State 


44 

 

Photoluminescence. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 12814–12825. 

(88)  Zhang, J.; Tolentino, J.; Smith, E. R.; Zhang, J.; Beard, M. C.; Nozik, A. J.; Law, M.; Johnson, 

J. C. Carrier Transport in PbS and PbSe QD Films Measured by Photoluminescence 

Quenching. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 16228–16235. 

(89)  Gilmore, R. H.; Liu, Y.; Shcherbakov-Wu, W.; Dahod, N. S.; Lee, E. M. Y.; Weidman, M. C.; 

Li, H.; Jean, J.; Bulović, V.; Willard, A. P.; Grossman, J. C.; Tisdale, W. A. Epitaxial Dimers 

and Auger-Assisted Detrapping in PbS Quantum Dot Solids. Matter 2019, 1, 250–265. 

(90)  Abdellah, M.; Karki, K. J.; Lenngren, N.; Zheng, K.; Pascher, T.; Yartsev, A.; Pullerits, T. 

Ultra Long-Lived Radiative Trap States in CdSe Quantum Dots. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 

21682-21686. 

(91)  Kushavah, D.; Mohapatra, P. K.; Singh, M.; Ghosh, P.; Vasa, P.; Rustagi, K. C.; Bahadur, D.; 

Singh, B. P. Exciton-Phonon Interaction and Role of Defect/Trap States in CdSe Quantum 

Dots. In Materials Today: Proceedings; 2016, 3, 3992-3996. 

(92)  Murphy, G. P.; Zhang, X.; Bradley, A. L. Temperature-Dependent Luminescent Decay 

Properties of CdTe Quantum Dot Monolayers: Impact of Concentration on Carrier Trapping. J. 

Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 26490-26497. 

(93)  Jones, M.; Lo, S. S.; Scholes, G. D. Quantitative Modeling of the Role of Surface Traps in 

CdSe/CdS/ZnS Nanocrystal Photoluminescence Decay Dynamics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 

A. 2009, 106, 3011-3016. 

(94)  Jing, P.; Zheng, J.; Ikezawa, M.; Liu, X.; Lv, S.; Kong, X.; Zhao, J.; Masumoto, Y. 

Temperature-Dependent Photoluminescence of CdSe-Core CdS/CdZnS/ZnS- Multishell 

Quantum Dots. J. Phys. Chem. C 2009, 113, 13545-13550. 

(95)  Bakulin, A. A.; Neutzner, S.; Bakker, H. J.; Ottaviani, L.; Barakel, D.; Chen, Z. Charge 

Trapping Dynamics in PbS Colloidal Quantum Dot Photovoltaic Devices. ACS Nano 2013, 7, 

8771-8779. 

(96)  Van Der Stam, W.; Grimaldi, G.; Geuchies, J. J.; Gudjonsdottir, S.; Van Uffelen, P. T.; Van 

Overeem, M.; Brynjarsson, B.; Kirkwood, N.; Houtepen, A. J. Electrochemical Modulation of 

the Photophysics of Surface-Localized Trap States in Core/Shell/(Shell) Quantum Dot Films. 

Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 8484-8493. 

(97)  Veamatahau, A.; Jiang, B.; Seifert, T.; Makuta, S.; Latham, K.; Kanehara, M.; Teranishi, T.; 

Tachibana, Y. Origin of Surface Trap States in CdS Quantum Dots: Relationship between Size 

Dependent Photoluminescence and Sulfur Vacancy Trap States. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 


45 

 

2015, 17, 2850-2858. 

(98)  Krause, M. M.; Kambhampati, P. Linking Surface Chemistry to Optical Properties of 

Semiconductor Nanocrystals. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2015, 17, 18882–18894. 

(99)  Mack, T. G.; Jethi, L.; Kambhampati, P. Temperature Dependence of Emission Line Widths 

from Semiconductor Nanocrystals Reveals Vibronic Contributions to Line Broadening 

Processes. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 28537–28545. 

(100)  Mooney, J.; Krause, M. M.; Saari, J. I.; Kambhampati, P. Challenge to the Deep-Trap Model 

of the Surface in Semiconductor Nanocrystals. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 

2013, 87, 081201. 

(101)  Jethi, L.; Mack, T. G.; Kambhampati, P. Extending Semiconductor Nanocrystals from the 

Quantum Dot Regime to the Molecular Cluster Regime. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 26102-

26107. 

(102)  Mooney, J.; Krause, M. M.; Kambhampati, P. Connecting the Dots: The Kinetics and 

Thermodynamics of Hot, Cold, and Surface-Trapped Excitons in Semiconductor Nanocrystals. 

J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118, 7730–7739. 

(103)  Delikanli, S.; Yu, G.; Yeltik, A.; Bose, S.; Erdem, T.; Yu, J.; Erdem, O.; Sharma, M.; Sharma, 

V. K.; Quliyeva, U.; Shendre, S.; Dang, C.; Zhang, D. H.; Sum, T. C.; Fan, W.; Demir, H. V. 

Ultrathin Highly Luminescent Two-Monolayer Colloidal CdSe Nanoplatelets. Adv. Funct. 

Mater. 2019, 29, 1901028. 

(104)  Marino, E.; Kodger, T. E.; Crisp, R. W.; Timmerman, D.; MacArthur, K. E.; Heggen, M.; 

Schall, P. Repairing Nanoparticle Surface Defects. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 13795–

13799. 

(105)  Rabouw, F. T.; Van Der Bok, J. C.; Spinicelli, P.; Mahler, B.; Nasilowski, M.; Pedetti, S.; 

Dubertret, B.; Vanmaekelbergh, D. Temporary Charge Carrier Separation Dominates the 

Photoluminescence Decay Dynamics of Colloidal CdSe Nanoplatelets. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 

2047–2053. 

(106)  Lin, C.; Gong, K.; Kelley, D. F.; Kelley, A. M. Size Dependent Exciton Phonon Coupling in 

CdSe Nanocrystals through Resonance Raman Excitation Profile Analysis. J. Phys. Chem. C 

2015, 119, 7491–7498. 

(107)  Morello, G.; De Giorgi, M.; Kudera, S.; Manna, L.; Cingolani, R.; Anni, M. Temperature and 

Size Dependence of Nonradiative Relaxation and Exciton-Phonon Coupling in Colloidal CdTe 

Quantum Dots. J. Phys. Chem. C 2007, 111, 5846–5849. 


46 

 

(108)  Bodunov, E. N.; Danilov, V. V.; Panfutova, A. S.; Simões Gamboa, A. L. Room-Temperature 

Luminescence Decay of Colloidal Semiconductor Quantum Dots: Nonexponentiality 

Revisited. Ann. Phys. 2016, 528, 272-277. 

(109)  Bodunov, E. N.; Simões Gamboa, A. L. Photoluminescence Decay of Colloidal Quantum 

Dots: Reversible Trapping and the Nature of the Relevant Trap States. J. Phys. Chem. C 2019, 

123, 25515-25523. 

(110)  Bodunov, E. N.; Antonov, Y. A.; Simões Gamboa, A. L. On the Origin of Stretched 

Exponential (Kohlrausch) Relaxation Kinetics in the Room Temperature Luminescence Decay 

of Colloidal Quantum Dots. J. Chem. Phys. 2017, 146, 114102. 

(111)  Diroll, B. T.; Cho, W.; Coropceanu, I.; Harvey, S. M.; Brumberg, A.; Holtgrewe, N.; Crooker, 

S. A.; Wasielewski, M. R.; Prakapenka, V. B.; Talapin, D. V.; Schaller, R. D. Semiconductor 

Nanoplatelet Excimers. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 6948-6953. 

(112)  Tessier, M. D.; Biadala, L.; Bouet, C.; Ithurria, S.; Abecassis, B.; Dubertret, B. Phonon Line 

Emission Revealed by Self-Assembly of Colloidal Nanoplatelets. ACS Nano 2013, 7, 3332-

3340. 

(113)  Baikie, I. D.; Mackenzie, S.; Estrup, P. J. Z.; Meyer, J. A. Noise and the Kelvin Method. Rev. 

Sci. Instrum. 1991, 62, 1326. 

(114)  Zisman, W. A. A New Method of Measuring Contact Potential Differences in Metals. Rev. Sci. 

Instrum. 1932, 3, 367. 

(115)  Kelestemur, Y.; Guzelturk, B.; Erdem, O.; Olutas, M.; Erdem, T.; Usanmaz, C. F.; Gungor, K.; 

Demir, H. V. CdSe/CdSe1-xTex Core/Crown Heteronanoplatelets: Tuning the Excitonic 

Properties without Changing the Thickness. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 4650–4658. 

(116)  Niehues, I.; Schmidt, R.; Drüppel, M.; Marauhn, P.; Christiansen, D.; Selig, M.; Berghäuser, 

G.; Wigger, D.; Schneider, R.; Braasch, L.; Koch, R.; Castellanos-Gomez, A.; Kuhn, T.; 

Knorr, A.; Malic, E.; Rohlfing, M.; Vasconcellos, S. F.; Bratschitsch, R. Strain Control of 

Exciton-Phonon Coupling in Atomically Thin Semiconductors. Nano Lett. 2018, 18, 1751–

1757. 

(117)  Smith, A. M.; Mohs, A. M.; Nie, S. Tuning the Optical and Electronic Properties of Colloidal 

Nanocrystals by Lattice Strain. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2009, 4, 56–63. 

(118)  Naughton, M. S.; Kumar, V.; Bonita, Y.; Deshpande, K.; Kenis, P. J. A. High Temperature 

Continuous Flow Synthesis of CdSe/CdS/ZnS, CdS/ZnS, and CdSeS/ZnS Nanocrystals. 

Nanoscale 2015, 7, 15895–15903. 


47 

 

(119)  Izquierdo, E.; Robin, A.; Keuleyan, S.; Lequeux, N.; Lhuillier, E.; Ithurria, S. Strongly 

Confined HgTe 2D Nanoplatelets as Narrow Near-Infrared Emitters. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 

138, 10496–10501. 

(120)  Bernevig, B. A.; Hughes, T. L.; Zhang, S. C. Quantum Spin Hall Effect and Topological Phase 

Transition in HgTe Quantum Wells. Science 2006, 314, 1757-1761. 

(121)  Bae, W. K.; Lim, J.; Lee, D.; Park, M.; Lee, H.; Kwak, J.; Char, K.; Lee, C.; Lee, S. 

R/G/B/Natural White Light Thin Colloidal Quantum Dot-Based Light-Emitting Devices. Adv. 

Mater. 2014, 26, 6387–6393. 

(122)  Orosz, L.; Réveret, F.; Médard, F.; Disseix, P.; Leymarie, J.; Mihailovic, M.; Solnyshkov, D.; 

Malpuech, G.; Zuniga-Pérez, J.; Semond, F.; Leroux, M.; Bouchoule, S.; Lafosse, X.; Mexis, 

M.; Brimont, C.; Guillet, T. LO-Phonon-Assisted Polariton Lasing in a ZnO-Based 

Microcavity. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 85, 121201. 

(123)  Maragkou, M.; Grundy, A. J. D.; Ostatnick, T.; Lagoudakis, P. G. Longitudinal Optical 

Phonon Assisted Polariton Laser. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 97, 111110. 

(124)  Dang, C.; Lee, J.; Breen, C.; Steckel, J. S.; Coe-Sullivan, S.; Nurmikko, A. Red, Green and 

Blue Lasing Enabled by Single-Exciton Gain in Colloidal Quantum Dot Films. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 335–339. 

(125)  de Mello, J. C.; Wittmannn, H. F.; Friend, R. H. An Improved Experimental Determination of 

External Photoluminescence Quantum Efficiency. Adv. Mater. 1997, 9, 230. 

(126)  Giannozzi, P.; Baroni, S.; Bonini, N.; Calandra, M.; Car, R.; Cavazzoni, C.; Ceresoli, D.; 

Chiarotti, G. L.; Cococcioni, M.; Dabo, I.; Dal Corso, A.; de Gironcoli, S.; Fabris, S.; Fratesi, 

G.; Gebauer, R.; Gerstmann, U.; Gougoussis, C.; Kokalj, A.; Lazzeri, M.; Martin-Samos, L.; et 

al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: A Modular and Open-Source Software Project for Quantum 

Simulations of Materials. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2009, 21, 395502. 

(127)  Giannozzi, P.; Andreussi, O.; Brumme, T.; Bunau, O.; Nardelli, Buongiorno, M.; Calandra, 

M.; Car, R.; Cavazzoni, C.; Ceresoli, D.; Cococcioni, M.; Colonna, N.; Carnimeo, I.; Dal 

Corso, A.; de Gironcoloi, S.; Delugas, P.; DiStasio Jr., R. A.; Ferretti, A.; Floris, A.; Fratesi, 

G.; Fugallo, G.; et al. Advanced Capabilities for Materials Modelling with Quantum 

ESPRESSO. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2017, 29, 465901. 

(128)  Hamann, D. R. Optimized Norm-Conserving Vanderbilt Pseudopotentials. Phys. Rev. B - 

Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2013, 88, 1–10. 

(129)  Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple. 


48 

 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 3865–3868. 

(130)  Pack, J. D.; Monkhorst, H. J. Special Points for Brillouin-Zone Integrations. Phys. Rev. B 

1976, 13, 5188. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For table of contents only 

 

 

 

 

 

 


49 

 

 

 

 

 


