Reservoir Computing with Planar
Nanomagnet Arrays

Peng Zhou∗, Nathan R. McDonald†, Alexander J. Edwards∗, Lisa Loomis†, Clare D. Thiem†, Joseph S. Friedman∗

∗Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX
{peng.zhou, alexander.edwards, joseph.friedman}@utdallas.edu
†Air Force Research Laboratory - Information Directorate, Rome, NY
{nathan.mcdonald.5, lisa.loomis.3, clare.thiem}@us.af.mil

Abstract—Reservoir computing is an emerging methodology
for neuromorphic computing that is especially well-suited for
hardware implementations in size, weight, and power (SWaP)
constrained environments. This work proposes a novel hardware
implementation of a reservoir computer using a planar nano-
magnet array. A small nanomagnet reservoir is demonstrated
via micromagnetic simulations to be able to identify simple
waveforms with 100% accuracy. Planar nanomagnet reservoirs
are a promising new solution to the growing need for dedicated
neuromorphic hardware.

Keywords—Reservoir
Computing;
Nanomagnet;
Recurrent
Neural Network; Neuromorphic Computing

I. INTRODUCTION

Recurrent neural networks (RNN) are neural networks (NN)
that allow for feedback loops within the NN. Unlike con-
ventional feedforward NNs that use only the current inputs,
RNNs use current inputs in conjunction with the history of
previous states to determine the network output. Reservoir
computing (RC) [1]–[4] is a subset type of RNN, where, after
weight initialization, only the weights of the output layer are
altered during training (Fig. 1). This alternate training scheme
does not require multi-layer backpropagation and gradient
descent, making RC simpler to train. Various software and
mathematical models of RCs have demonstrated that this
simplified network approach has not diminished its computing
capability, competing with conventional deep neural networks
in spatio-temporal data analysis [4], [5]. Further still, direct
hardware implementations promise to be significantly more
SWaP-efficient, since expensive circuitry for updating internal
reservoir weights is unnecessary. This technique is therefore
well suited for resource constrained hardware environments.
Recently, spintronic devices exhibiting nanoscale magnetic
phenomena have been developed that provide opportunities for
applications in computing, especially in RC. Magnetic mem-
ory devices using magnetic tunnel junctions (MTJs) [6] are
already produced in industry, and there is now much interest
in using arrays of nanomagnets to compute and propagate
binary information through nanomagnetic logic (NML) [7]–
[11]. Memory and logic solutions with spintronics require
these complex physical devices to operate within a digital
paradigm, drastically constraining their operation. Without
these constraints, however, some spintronic devices can exhibit

Fig. 1. A generic reservoir computer. (adapted from [5])

highly nonlinear behavior that is extremely well-suited for
implementing RC in hardware.
Various hardware RC implementations have been proposed
[11]–[16], but they all require external stimuli to propagate
information within the reservoir or maintain the reservoir
state. The solution presented here, using non-volatile planar
nanomagnet arrays, propagates information passively, allowing
surrounding circuitry to be extremely simple and power-
efficient.

II. RESERVOIR COMPUTING
A. Theory
The internal dynamics of the reservoir layer state are
described by:

x(t) = f(Winu(t), Wresx(t − τ)),
(1)

where u(t) are the inputs, Win are the input weights, x(t)
are the reservoir states, Wres are the reservoir weights, and
τ is the sample period [1], [2]. Given the desired output state
of the reservoir y(t), the necessary output weights Wout can
be calculated via ridge regression:

Wout = yx⊤(xx⊤ + λI)−1,
(2)

where ⊤ denotes the transpose, λ is the regularization factor,
and I is the identity matrix. During testing, the actual reservoir
output ˆy(t) is calculated as

ˆy(t) = Woutx(t).
(3)

arXiv:2003.10948v1  [cs.NE]  24 Mar 2020


Fig. 2.
(a) Reservoir layout: Nanomagnets A and B are the inputs to the
reservoir, while the highlighted nanomagnets are those indicated in Fig 5(b).
(b-d) Micromagnetic simulation snapshots of the network at t = 63, 66, and
69 ns. Lighter (darker) colors of nanomagnets indicate magnetization in the
positive (negative) z direction. The magnetization of each nanomagnet varies
over time, indicating information is propagating among the nanomagnets.

B. Nanomagnet Reservoir

This work proposes a novel reservoir composed of a pla-
nar arrangement of nanomagnets each having perpendicular
magnetic anisotropy (PMA). Fig. 2(a) shows an example
layout of nanomagnets. The magnetization of each nanomag-

net produces a magnetic field that induces a change in the
magnetizations of the other nanomagnets. The effect of these
magnetic fields upon nanomagnet magnetization is sigmoidal
in shape due to the anisotropy [17], and a nanomagnet's ability
to influence another varies with the distance between the
two. These two features, non-linear interaction and variable
interaction strength, make the proposed implementation well-
suited for neuromorphic computing. The distances between
nanomagnets cannot be changed after fabrication (i.e. the
network weights cannot be updated), so the network cannot
be trained conventionally. However, if these nodes and weights
are considered the reservoir layer, then these weights do not
need to be changed at all, making planar nanomagnet arrays
a good match for RC.
Information is input by stimulating individual nanomagnets
or portions of the nanomagnet reservoir with external magnetic
fields. The magnetodynamics within the reservoir propagate
the input information non-linearly throughout the reservoir.
The z components of the magnetizations of various nanomag-
nets are read electrically via MTJs. A complementary single
layer circuit is used to perform vector-matrix multiplication
on the magnetization values and output weights to obtain the
output vector. Only this final layer needs to be adjusted to train
the neural network, which may be performed with a memristor
crossbar array (MCA) with current sense amplifiers at the
output [18]. Once the output weights are trained, the reservoir
can tested against the given task. Fig. 3 depicts a flowchart
describing the training and inference methodologies. Because
of the compact design, passive information propagation within
the reservoir, and non-volatile nature of the reservoir, the
proposed nanomagnet implementation is ideal for SWaP-
constrained environments.

III. WAVEFORM IDENTIFICATION

A. Micromagnetic Simulation Methodology

A reservoir layer based on planar nanomagnet arrays is
simulated and trained with a simple waveform identification
task. At each time step, the RC is tasked to determine whether
a pair of inputs are from a square or triangle wave. These
waves are quantized to two bits [12], and there is a 3 ns
delay between each input u(t). This is sufficient time for the
nanomagnets to relax towards stable states. Each bit is fed into
the reservoir simultaneously by forcing the magnetization in
the + (1) or - (0) z-direction (Fig. 4).
Immediately before every input, the z component of the
magnetization of each nanomagnet is recorded as the reservoir
state, x(t). At the end of the simulation, the output weights,
Wout, are calculated in a single calculation step, Eq. (2). The
output weights are then used to generate the output, ˆy(t), of
the network at every time step in accordance with Eq. (3).
Micromagnetic simulations are performed with MuMax3
[19] for the nanomagnet network pictured in Fig. 2(a) using
Table I parameters. The nanomagnet dynamics are simulated
with a time step on the order of femtoseconds to obtain
physically accurate results. This network has two input nodes


Fig. 3. (a) Training flow: Information is presented to the reservoir by forcing the magnetizations of specific nanomagnets. The other nanomagnets react to
decrease the total energy of the system. The states of these nanomagnets are recorded after every input. After enough samples are gathered, they are processed
along with the expected output. The output weights are determined via ridge regression and recorded in the resistance states of the memristors. (b) Inference
flow: Inputs are presented to the reservoir as in the training flow. The sampled reservoir states are fed directly into the MCA which performs vector-matrix
multiplication to obtain an output vector of currents. These currents are sensed to obtain the final digital output vector.

Fig. 4. Input encoding scheme for the (a) square-wave and (b) triangle-wave.
White (black) represents forced magnetization in the positive (negative) z-
direction. Sets of six inputs of either a square or triangle wave were randomly
concatenated together to form the input string.

and 20 reservoir nodes, all of which exhibit PMA. All of the
reservoir nodes were treated as outputs.

TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Parameter
Description
Value
Unit

Msat
Saturation Magnetization
7.23e5
A/m

Aex
Exchange Stiffness
1.3e−11
J/m

α
Gilbert Damping Factor
0.5

Kui
Input Anisotropy
3.62e5
J/m3

Kur
Reservoir Anisotropy
1.05e5
J/m3

D
Nanomagnet Diameter
30e−9
m

th
Nanomagnet Thickness
12e−9
m

T
Input Period
3e−9
s

B. Waveform Identification Results

The nanomagnet reservoir was simulated with an input
stream comprised of 25 triangle or square wave periods,
with 6 input pairs per wave, for a total of 150 input pairs.
120 of these were used to train the output weights and the
remaining 30 were used to test the RC. The reservoir identified
the waveforms with 100% accuracy for both the training
and testing data. Fig. 2(b-d) shows various snapshots of the
network during the simulation. Fig. 5 shows a segment of
the inputs and outputs to and from the network, along with
waveforms of the magnetizations of various nanomagnets. The
planar nanomagnet array thus successfully performed a simple
RC task.

IV. CONCLUSION

RC is a methodology for neuromorphic computing well-
suited for dedicated hardware implementations in SWaP-
constrained environments. This work presents a hardware
implementation of an RC using a planar nanomagnet array
that is demonstrated to identify simple waveforms with 100%
accuracy. Further work will be done to prove that these


Fig. 5. (a) Representative inputs to the reservoir: Gray (white) regions of the plot indicate a triangle (square) wave. The calculated outputs ˆy(t) are shown as
red dots, where a linear classifier (threshold 0.5) is the final step. The samples highlighted by the vertical black lines are the frames depicted in Fig. 2(b-d).
(b) Plot of magnetization over time for three nanomagnets: Nanomagnet 7 tracks input A, nanomagnet 12 tracks input B, and nanomagnet 15 is affected by
both inputs through nonlinear reservoir node interactions.

reservoirs will be successful on more complex tasks with
many inputs. Passive planar nanomagnet arrays are therefore
a promising solution for dedicated neuromorphic hardware.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Effort sponsored by the Air Force under contract number
FA8750-15-3-6000. The U.S. Government is authorized to
reproduce and distribute copies for Governmental purposes
notwithstanding any copyright or other restrictive legends.
The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily repre-
senting the official policies or endorsements, either expressed
or implied, of the Air Force or the U.S. Government. The
authors thank E. Laws, J. McConnell, N. Nazir, L. Philoon, and
C. Simmons for technical support, and the Texas Advanced
Computing Center at The University of Texas at Austin for
providing computational resources. Distribution A. Approved
for public release; distribution is unlimited. 88ABW-2020-
0939

REFERENCES

[1] H. Jaeger, “The” echo state” approach to analysing and training recur-
rent neural networks-with an erratum note’,” Bonn, Germany: German
National Research Center for Information Technology GMD Technical
Report, vol. 148, 01 2001.

[2] W. Maass et al., “Real-time computing without stable states: a new
framework for neural computation based on perturbations.” Neural
Comput., vol. 14, no. 11, 2002.

[3] H. Jaeger et al., “Harnessing nonlinearity: Predicting chaotic systems
and saving energy in wireless communication,” Science, vol. 304, no. 78,
2004.

[4] G. Tanaka et al., “Recent advances in physical reservoir computing: A
review,” Neural Networks, vol. 115, 2019.

[5] S. Ganguly et al., “Reservoir computing using stochastic p-bits,” arXiv:
1709.10211, 2017.

[6] T. Kawahara et al., “Spin-transfer torque RAM technology: Review and
prospect,” pp. 613–627, apr 2012.

[7] A. Imre et al., “Majority logic gate for magnetic quantum-dot cellular
automata,” Science, vol. 311, no. 5758, 2006.

[8] M. T. Niemier et al., “Shape engineering for controlled switching with
nanomagnet logic,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 11, no. 2, 2012.

[9] M. Alawein et al., “Multistate nanomagnet logic using equilateral
permalloy triangles,” IEEE Magn. Lett., vol. 10, 2019.

[10] G. Turvani et al., “A pNML Compact Model Enabling the Exploration
of Three-Dimensional Architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Nanotech-
nology, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 431–438, may 2017.

[11] J. H. Jensen et al., “Computation in artificial spin ice,” The 2019
Conference on Artificial Life, no. 30, 2018.

[12] L. Loomis et al., “An FPGA implementation of a time delay reservoir
using stochastic logic,” J. Emer. Tech. Comp., vol. 14, no. 4, 2018.

[13] T. Furuta et al., “Macromagnetic simulation for reservoir computing
utilizing spin dynamics in magnetic tunnel junctions,” Phys. Rev. App.,
vol. 10, 2018.

[14] H. Nomura et al., “Reservoir computing with dipole-coupled nanomag-
nets,” Jap. J. App. Phys., vol. 58, no. 7, 2019.

[15] A. M. Hassan et al., “Hardware implementation of echo state networks
using memristor double crossbar arrays,” in IJCNN, 2017, pp. 2171–
2177.

[16] C. Du et al., “Reservoir computing using dynamic memristors for
temporal information processing,” Nat Commun., vol. 8, no. 1, 2017.


[17] I. H. Cha et al., “Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and interfacial
dzyaloshinskii-moriya interaction in pt/cofesib structures,” IEEE Magn.
Lett., vol. 8, 2017.

[18] F. Alibart et al., “Pattern classification by memristive crossbar circuits

using ex situ and in situ training,” Nat Commun., vol. 4, no. 1, 2013.

[19] A. Vansteenkiste et al., “The design and verification of Mumax3,” AIP
Adv., vol. 4, no. 10, p. 107133, 2014.


