> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

1

 

Abstract— Graphene is a 2D material with appealing electronic 

and optoelectronic properties. It is a zero-bandgap material with 
valence and conduction bands meeting in a single point (Dirac 
point) in the momentum space. Its conductivity can be changed by 
shifting the Fermi level energy via an external electric field. This 
important 
property 
determines 
broadband 
and 
tunable 

absorption at optical frequencies. Moreover, its conductivity is a 
complex quantity, i.e. Graphene exhibits both electro-absorption 
and electro-refraction tunability, and this is an intriguing property 
for photonic applications. For example, it can be combined as an 
active material for silicon waveguides to realize efficient detectors, 
switches and modulators. In this paper, we review our results in 
the field, focusing on graphene- based optical modulators 
integrated on Silicon photonic platforms. Results obtained in the 
fabrication of single- and double-layer capacitive modulators are 
reported showing intensity and phase modulation, resilience of the 
generated signals to chromatic dispersion because of proper signal 
chirp and operation up to 50 Gb/s. 
 

Index Terms— Graphene Photonics, Integrated Optics, 

Modulators, Silicon Photonics. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

raphene is an allotrope of Carbon with atoms arranged on 
a single layer, two-dimensional (2D), and hexagonal 
lattice [1]. The 2D symmetric atomic structure, made of 

covalent bonds, determines the peculiar electronic band 
dispersion with a linear energy-momentum relationship where 
the conduction and valence bands meet in single point (Dirac 
point) with no energy gap [2-4]. The peculiar band structure, 
together one-atom thickness, leads to intriguing electronic 
properties, as for example ultra-high mobility [5] and 
significant electric field effect. In fact, Graphene carrier 
concentration can be easily tuned, moving the chemical 
potential from the valence to the conduction band, by electrical 
gating [6]. 

The combination of zero-bandgap and electrically tuneable 

electronic properties is of particular interest in photonics, 
because it offers ultra-broadband tuneable optical absorption 
[7]. Indeed, its conductivity at optical frequencies is a complex 
quantity affecting both the optical absorption and the refractive 
index of the material [8-11]. This property makes Graphene an 
enabling material for realizing efficient devices for next 
generation photonics [12]. In particular, Graphene can be easily 

 

V. Sorianello and M. Romagnoli are with Photonic Networks and 

Technologies Laboratory (PNTLab) at Consorzio Nazionale Interuniversitario 
per le Telecomunicazioni (CNIT), Via Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy. (e-mail: 
vito.sorianello@cnit.it and marco.romagnoli@cnit.it). 

integrated on top of several active or passive photonic platforms 
such as silicon (Si), silicon nitride (SiN) or other dielectric 
waveguides in order to realize broadband photodetectors, fast 
electro-absorption and electro-refraction modulators.  

In this paper, we review our recent results on Graphene-on-

Si modulators, moving from the operation principle to the 
summary of the latest experimental demonstrations of 
modulators for telecom and datacom applications. Our work 
follows and improves the first demonstrations of Graphene on 
Si electro-absorption modulators (EAMs): in particular, the first 
EAM was based on a single layer of Graphene (SLG) 
transferred on top of a Si doped waveguide used to gate 
Graphene [13]. The device exhibited broadband spectrum of 
operation from 1.35µm to 1.6µm but with a limited bandwidth 
of 1 GHz. Few months later, the same authors demonstrated the 
first EAM based on two self-gating layers of Graphene (double 
layer Graphene, DLG) transferred on a passive Si waveguide 
[14], again with limited bandwidth (1 GHz). The first 
demonstration of an on-off keying (OOK) modulation at 
10 Gb/s came few years later [15]. The device was based on a 
SLG transferred on top of Si doped waveguide. The same group 
improved recently their result showing up to 20 Gb/s operation 
with a similar device [16]. Larger bandwidth has been reported 
with DLG on SiN [17] and Si waveguides [18], with 30GHz 
and 35GHz electro-optical bandwidth, respectively. 

The paper is organized as follows: SECTION II is dedicated to 

describe the Graphene optoelectronic properties, in SECTION III 
the Graphene on Si modulators concept and simulations are 
reported. In Section IV, our last results on SLG on Si 
modulators are reviewed. Section V shows the most promising 
results regarding DLG on Si modulators. Conclusions and a 
short final discussion are reported in Section VI. 

II. GRAPHENE OPTOELECTRONIC PROPERTIES  

Being a 2D material, Graphene optical properties are 

properly modeled through its surface conductivity at optical 
frequencies σ(ω,µc,Γ,T), where ω is the radian frequency, µc is 
the chemical potential, Γ is a phenomenological scattering rate 
taking into account electron-disorder scattering processes, and 
T is the temperature [10]. In the following, we consider a 
simplified scattering rate model with constant Γ independent on 
the energy E [10,19]. Under this approximation, the surface 
conductivity can be expressed through the Kubo Formula [19]: 

G. Contestabile is with TECIP Institute at Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Via 

Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy. (e-mail: giampiero.contestabile@santannapisa.it). 

This work was supported by the European Union's Horizon 2020 research 

and innovation programme, GrapheneCore2 under grant 785219.  

Graphene on Silicon Modulators

V. Sorianello, G. Contestabile, and M. Romagnoli

(Invited paper)

G


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

2

𝜎(𝜔, 𝜇𝑐, 𝛤, 𝑇) = 

𝑖𝑒2(𝜔+𝑖2𝛤)

𝜋ℏ2
[

1

(𝜔+𝑖2𝛤)2 ∫
𝐸 (

𝜕𝑓𝑑(𝐸)

𝜕𝐸
−

𝜕𝑓𝑑(−𝐸)

𝜕𝐸
)

∞
0
𝜕𝐸 −

                              − ∫

𝑓𝑑(−𝐸)−𝑓𝑑(𝐸)

(𝜔+𝑖2𝛤)2−4(𝐸/ℏ)2

∞
0
𝜕𝐸],        (1) 

 

where e is the electron charge, ℏ  is the reduced Planck 

constant, E the energy, and fd(E) is the Fermi-Dirac distribution: 

𝑓𝑑(𝐸) =  

1

(𝑒

𝐸−𝜇𝑐
𝑘𝐵𝑇 +1)

,        (2) 

where kB is the Boltzmann’s constant. The first term in (1) is 

the contribution arising from intra-band electron-photon 
scattering processes, while the second is due to inter-band 
electron-photon scattering. The chemical potential µc is 
determined by the carrier density ns on the Graphene layer 
through [10]: 

𝑛𝑠 =

2

𝜋ℏ2𝑣𝐹

2 ∫
𝐸 (𝑓𝑑(𝐸) − 𝑓𝑑(𝐸 + 2𝜇𝑐)) 𝜕𝐸

∞
0
,   (3) 

where vF≈9.5∙105 m/s is the Fermi velocity. Because of the 

pronounced field effect in Graphene, the carrier density can be 
easily controlled by application of a gate voltage and/or 
chemical doping, leading to a consequent significant tunability 
of the surface conductivity. 

In order to have a clear visualization of the optical property 

of Graphene, the Drude model can be applied to the surface 
conductivity in order to derive an equivalent volumetric 
permittivity considering a finite thickness of the material hG 
[20]:  

𝜀⫽ = 𝜀𝑟 + 𝑖𝜎(𝜔, 𝜇𝑐, 𝛤, 𝑇)

𝜔𝜀0ℎ𝐺

 

𝜀⟘ = 𝜀𝑟,         (4) 

where εr is the permittivity of the surrounding medium and ε0 

is the vacuum permittivity. Figure 1 shows the calculated room 
temperature optical permittivity at 1550nm as a function of the 
Graphene chemical potential, for different scattering rate 
energies. Both the real and imaginary part vary significantly by 
changing the chemical potential, proving that both absorption 
and refraction are affected by the surface carrier concentration. 
The real part of the permittivity, mostly responsible for the 
refractive properties of the material, first gradually increases 
with the chemical potential, up to a maximum reached when the 
Pauli blocking condition is met (µc=ℏ ω/2), then decreases with 
almost linear slope. The imaginary part of the permittivity, 
mostly linked to the material absorption, is characterized by a 
first constant region where the chemical potential is below the 
Pauli blocking energy threshold (µc<ℏ ω/2) and the inter-band 
photon-electron scattering dominates, with charges of the 
valence band promoted to the conduction band. When the 
chemical potential is close to the Pauli blocking energy 
threshold (µc=ℏ ω/2), the imaginary part of the permittivity 
changes significantly with the chemical potential, here the inter-
band and intra-band occurs simultaneously. Finally, at chemical 
potentials above the Pauli blocking energy threshold 
(µc>ℏ ω/2), the imaginary part of the permittivity is almost 

constant to a level that is determined by the intra-band photon-
scattering energy. For this reason, the scattering rate is an 
important parameter for optoelectronic applications as it 
determines the maximum achievable transparency for the 
material, i.e. it influences fundamental figures of merit of 
modulators as insertion loss (IL) and extinction ratio (ER) [12]. 
There are many electron scattering mechanisms influencing the 
carrier relaxation time, i.e. scattering rate [3], and their 
discussion goes beyond the scope of the present paper.   

However, it is important to highlight that the electron 

scattering affects the material mobility as well, which is a 
simple parameter to measure for the characterization of the 
material quality. In an ideal material the electron scattering 
would the lowest possible, which means in turn that the material 
mobility is the highest and scattering rate energy the lowest. 
The relation between the scattering relaxation time and mobility 
can be derived as in [12], to give a reference, the scattering 
energies used in fig. 1, 0.33 meV, 3.3 meV and 33 meV, 
correspond to mobility at µc= 0.4eV of about 220 cm2V-1s-1, 
2200 cm2V-1s-1 and 22000 cm2V-1s-1. This means that Graphene 
modulators need high mobility to work efficiently. 

III. GRAPHENE ON SI MODULATORS: NUMERICAL 

SIMULATIONS  

Graphene optical modulators exploiting the electric field 

effect can be realized with several geometries, here we are 
interested in dielectric waveguide modulators. Figure 2 shows 
the cross sections of the two possible Graphene-based 

Fig. 1.  Top panel: real and imaginary part of Graphene permittivity as a 
function of the chemical potential for different scattering rate energies. The 
permittivity is derived at room temperature, for a photon energy of 0.8eV 
(1550nm). Bottom panel: graphic illustration of the inter-band and intra-band 
photon-scattering processes.


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

3

integrated modulators: the SLG on Si doped waveguide (Fig. 
2(a)), and the DLG on Si undoped waveguide (Fig. 2(b)).  

In both configurations, the waveguides are standard Silicon 

on Insulator (SOI) waveguides with a planarized oxide cladding 
thinned down to few nanometers from the top of the waveguide. 
Graphene optical properties are gated by means of the electric 
field generated in a capacitor, where Graphene is one or both 
the capacitor plates. By applying an external voltage to the 
capacitor, Graphene surface carrier concentration changes 
enabling modulation of the light guided in the waveguide. 

In the SLG-based modulator, the capacitor consists of the 

Graphene-insulator-Si capacitor shown in the zoomed section 
of fig. 2(a). The thin planarized oxide on top of the waveguide 
act as the gate dielectric, while the Si ridge waveguide acts as 
the second plate of the capacitor. The last must be doped in 
order to reduce the series resistance of the device and to achieve 
high-speed modulation. In the DLG-based modulator, the 
capacitor is made of a stack two layers of Graphene separated 
by a thin dielectric film (zoomed section of fig. 2(b)). In this 
case, the waveguide is a fully passive channel waveguide so that 
modulators can be fabricated using any guiding material, e.g. 
undoped Si, Silicon Nitride (SiN), glass, etc. 

The thickness of the dielectric insulator determines the 

modulator capacitance influencing both the modulator speed 
and 
the 
modulation 
efficiency, 
i.e. 
the 
amount 
of 

amplitude/phase change in the guided light versus applied 
voltage. A larger capacitance will have higher efficiency, 
because more charges will be moved on Graphene at same 
voltage, but lower speed, because of the higher RC constant.  

We simulated the modulators reported in figure 2 around 

1550nm with a commercial mode solver embedding Graphene 
optoelectronic model through the surface optical conductivity 
shown in (1) [21]. For the SLG device, the Si ridge waveguide 
is a transverse-electric (TE) single mode based on 220nm SOI 
platform with core width of 480 nm on top of a 60 nm thick Si 
slab. The top planarized oxide is a 5 nm thick silicon dioxide 
(SiO2) layer. The Si waveguide is p-type doped with acceptor 
concentration of 5∙1017 cm-3, with higher doping up to 1019 cm-

3 in the contact region. The distance between the highly doped 
region and the waveguide core was set to 500nm as a tradeoff 
between series resistance and optical losses. In the DLG device, 
two Graphene layers are placed on top of an undoped Si single 
mode TE waveguide with dimensions 480nm x 220nm. The 
waveguide has a planarized thin cladding of 5nm SiO2. The two 
Graphene layers are separated by a 5 nm SiO2 thick dielectric 
film.  

Figure 3 shows the simulated optical absorption as a function 

of the carrier concentration and Fermi level (chemical potential 

Fig. 2.  Schematic cross section of: SLG on doped Si waveguide modulator 
(a), DLG on passive undoped Si waveguide modulator (b).

Fig. 3.  Optical absorption as a function of the Graphene surface concentration 
for different scattering time constant: SLG on doped Si waveguide modulator 
(a), DLG on passive undoped Si waveguide modulator (b). [12]


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

4

[3]) of Graphene for the SLG (fig. 3(a)) and DLG (fig. 3(b)) 
modulators, for three values of the scattering time: 10fs, 100fs 
and 300fs corresponding to mobility values of 220 cm2V-1s-1, 
2200 cm2V-1s-1 and 6600 cm2V-1s-1 at 0.4eV [12]. 

As anticipated in SECTION II, in both cases we observe two 

almost constant regions above and below the Pauli blocking 
condition (0.4eV at 1550nm), and a transition region across 
0.4eV where the absorption changes significantly with the 
carrier concentration, i.e. applied voltage. This is the operating 
region where amplitude modulation (AM) is possible. The main 
difference between SLG and DLG modulators is in the 
achievable modulation depth of the two modulators. In fact, the 
DLG modulator exhibit a factor of two enhancement in the 
maximum 
absorption: 
~0.12dB/µm 
with 
respect 
to 

~0.06dB/µm of the SLG device. At the same time, also the 
transparency region above the Pauli blocking condition is 
different. In fact, we observe that the SLG modulator minimum 
absorption is strongly limited by the Si background loss due to 
free carrier effect in the doped waveguide (reported in green in 
fig. 3(a)) [22]. Conversely, the DLG modulator minimum 
absorption depends only on the Graphene quality, i.e. mobility. 
In case of a very high mobility a minimum loss below 10-3 

dB/µm can be achieved. For this reason, Graphene DLG EAMs 
are very much promising in terms of attainable ER and IL. 

In figure 1, we showed that while the imaginary part of 

Graphene permittivity saturate above the Pauli blocking 
condition, the real part still changes suggesting potential phase 
modulation. Figure 4 shows the change of the effective index of 
the SLG and DLG modulator, with mobility >2200 cm2V-1s-1 
(the real part of the permittivity does not change in the range, 
see fig. 1) as a function of the applied voltage and Graphene 
Fermi level energy.  

In the same figure, the change in the effective index of 

standard Si pn junction and Si capacitor modulators are reported 

for comparison [12].  

The applied voltage is calculated from the surface carrier 

concentration as follow [23]: 

|𝑉 − 𝑉𝐷𝑖𝑟𝑎𝑐| =

𝑒∙𝑛𝑠
𝐶𝑜𝑥 + 𝐾

|𝜇𝑐|

𝑒 ,       (5) 

where Cox is the gate capacitance per unit area, VDIRAC is the 
voltage corresponding to the charge-neutral Dirac point, with 
K= 1 or 2 for SLG or DLG, respectively. 

Figure 4 shows that both the SLG and DLG modulators 

potentially exhibit a maximum index change >4∙10-3, larger 
than Si modulators, both pn and capacitor based. The effective 
index always changes with the applied voltage without 
saturations, allowing phase modulation (PM) also in the region 
where the absorption does not change anymore. This operation 
region is suitable for the realization of phase modulators.  In 
[12], we estimated phase modulation efficiencies of VπL < 2.8 
Vmm for SLG modulators and <1.6 Vmm for the DLG 
modulator, a factor of 5 improvement with respect to state of 
the art Si pn junction modulators [24] and Si capacitor 
modulators with same Cox [25]. An important figure of merit 
(FOM) for phase modulator is given by the product of the 
modulation efficiency VπL multiplied by the propagation loss, 
i.e. FOM = Vπ∙IL. Here the material mobility plays a crucial 
role, as the FOM will be lower for high mobility Graphene. In 
[12] we estimate a FOM <2dBV when the mobility is larger 
than 2200 cm2V-1s-1, i.e. more than 5 times better than any Si 
photonic modulator.  

IV. SLG ON SI MODULATORS 

As anticipated in Section I, SLG EAMs have been reported 

in recent years working at 1, 10 and 20 Gb/s [13,15,16], being 
mainly bandwidth limited by the graphene-metal contact 
resistance. However, only a small attention has been given to 
consider the effects of the phase modulation in the device. In 
fact, even in EAMs, a certain amount of phase modulation is 
always present, as clearly noticeable in figure 4. This means that 
graphene-based EAMs generate chirped signals. In [26], we 
studied the chirp properties of the optical a signal at 1550 nm 
generated through a 100µm long SLG EAM with 5 GHz 3-dB 
electro-optic bandwidth, a modulation efficiency of 1dB/V, and 
a maximum attainable extinction ratio of 4.5 dB. The device 
was realized as described in the previous section, by transfer of 
Graphene on a planarized SOI ridge waveguide, details can be 
found in [26]. The device exhibited an IL of -19dB mainly due 
to the input/output grating couplers efficiency (5dB each), and 
to unexpected extra-losses of the air cladded Si waveguides 
before and after the device. The IL of the device was estimated 
by numerical simulation to be below 1dB [26]. We performed 
a direct measurement of the amplitude and phase of the output 
signal by using a complex spectrum analyzer. We drove the 
modulator with a sequence of isolated square pulses at 10 Gb/s 
with a 2.7V peak to peak driving voltage, biased above the Pauli 
blocking threshold (µc>0.4eV). Figure 5 shows the measured 
amplitude and phase (figure 5(a)) of the optical signal and the 
corresponding instantaneous frequency (figure 5(b)). As 
expected from fig. 3 and fig. 4, the amplitude of the signal 

Fig. 4.  Change of the effective index  as a function of the Graphene Fermi 
level and applied voltage for: the SLG on doped Si waveguide modulator 
(green), the  DLG on passive undoped Si waveguide modulator (red), Si 
capacitor modulator (grey) and Si pn junction modulator (light blue). [12]


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

5

increases (the absorption decreases) while the phase decreases 
(index change decreases). Moreover, the phase follows linearly 
the amplitude causing a linear chirp of the signal. The bell shape 
of the pulse is due to the limited bandwidth of the device, which 
is not necessarily an impairment. Indeed, thanks to the electrical 
filtering effect, which gives a bell shape also to the phase 
profile, the associated instantaneous frequency chirp is linear 
and positive, i.e. linearly increases towards the trailing edge 
[27]. The linear positive chirp superimposed on the modulated 
signals is beneficial for chromatic dispersion compensation 
while transmitting the optical signal on standard single mode 
fibers (SMFs). Indeed, the Graphene modulator introduce a pre-
chirp that compensate for fiber chromatic dispersion through 

the time lens effect [26]. Thanks to this effect, we demonstrated 

100 km non-return to zero (NRZ) transmission on SMF at 10 
Gb/s (figure 6) with a self-focusing distance (transmission 
distance for which there is the same signal sensitivity as in 
back-to-back) of 60 km [26]. The device was driven with a 
pseudo-random binary sequence (PRBS) (231-1-long) with 
Vpp=2.7 V driving voltage, corresponding to an effective ER of 
~2.5dB. 

The compactness of the device (100µm long) and the 

chromatic dispersion resilience can be combined to realize 
optical pre-emphasis obtained by cascading two EAMs [28]. 
Driving the cascaded circuit with data and properly attenuated 
and delayed inverted-data signals, the optical circuit behaves as 
a 1-tap filter frequency high-pass circuit. The cascaded EAM 
circuit introduce delay inverse weight compensation, i.e. the 
second modulator compensates for the slower part of the 

response of the first modulator (so enhancing the slow signal 
transitions due to the bandwidth limitation). This can be clearly 
appreciated in Fig. 7, where together with a picture of the 
cascaded modulators, a comparison of the eye diagrams in back 
to back is also reported. The evident eye opening gives a 
correspondent significant improvement in the sensitivity in 
back-to-back (6 dB) and in fiber transmission, in respect of the 
single graphene EAM [28]. 

As mentioned in Section III, the phase response of Graphene 

modulator can be exploited to realize phase modulators. EAM 
and phase modulator are very similar devices, the main 
difference being the bias applied to the SLG capacitor, which, 
in the phase modulator case, must be well beyond the Pauli 
blocking threshold. The device operates in the ‘transparency’ 
region, where losses are only due to the waveguide propagation 

Fig. 6.  BER vs. received power of a 10 Gb/s transmission up to 100 km SMF
of a NRZ signal generated through a SLG on Si EAM.

Fig. 7.  Top panel: optical microscope image of the cascaded graphene EAMs. 
Bottom panel: comparison of 10Gb/s NRZ eye diagram of single and cascaded 
graphene EAM. 

Fig. 5.  Amplitude and phase versus time (a), and instantaneous frequency 
versus time of an optical pulse generated by a SLG on Si modulator (b) [26]


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

6

loss. In this regime, the phase modulation is dominant with an 
enhanced modulation efficiency compared to typical Si 
photonics modulators. Working on the electro-refraction effect 
of Graphene, we reported for the first time a Mach-Zehnder 
modulator based on two SLG on Si phase modulators [29]. The 
phase modulators were based on single mode TE ridge 
waveguides fabricated on a SOI platform. The Si waveguides 
were properly doped to allow for GHz bandwidth. The device 
is structurally similar to the EAM except for the length (300µm 

and 400µm); details are reported in [29]. The device exhibited 
a VπL = 2.8Vmm as expected form theory, even if we suffered 
higher insertion loss because of poor Graphene quality, i.e. 
mobility. The insertion loss of the device was about -27dB 
including the input/output grating couplers efficiency (5dB 
each), and unexpected extra-losses of the air cladded Si 
waveguides before and after the device. In addition, the phase 
modulator electro-optic bandwidth was limited by the metal–
graphene contact resistance to 5 GHz. However, operation at 
10 Gb/s was possible also obtaining SMF transmission up to 
50 km (Figure 8) with dynamic ER of ~4dB. 

In the previous examples of SLG on Si modulators the 

bandwidth was mainly limited by the contact resistance 

between the metal and Graphene. In particular, in all of these 
examples the contact was obtained by deposition of Palladium 
(Pd) on top of the Graphene layer, which is one of the material 
allowing good contact. However, we estimated a contact 
resistance as high as 1kΩ µm. The topic is object of many 
researches, which can be found in literature. Many different 
strategies have been developed to reduce the contact resistance 
including among others the use of different materials or 
particular geometries. Recently, it has been demonstrated that 
the use of Nickel (Ni) gives very low contact resistance 
(minimum theoretical 30 Ω µm) with respect to other materials 
[30]. A different and complementary strategy is the use of 
engineered patterning of the Graphene layer below the metal, 
which may improve the contact resistance (40 Ω µm at high 
electro-static doping) [31,32].  Finally, another strategy is the 
use of edge contacting in encapsulated Graphene stacks. In this 
case, Graphene is encapsulated with hexagonal Boron Nitride 
(hBN) forming a stack which is etched to allow metal 
contacting Graphene only at its edge. This approach has been 
demonstrated to allow very low contact resistance [33,34].  

Adopting optimized contact strategies and engineered 

design, involving for example tight confinement in slot-
waveguide, Graphene modulators can achieve modulation 
bandwidth above 100GHz [35-37]. The modulator bandwidth 
may be also enhanced by adopting the use of travelling-wave 
electrodes, as already demonstrated with Si and III-V 
modulators [38-39]. This approach has not been experimentally 
demonstrated with Graphene yet, the solution has been 
theoretically discussed and simulated recently in a Graphene on 
micro-fiber modulator claiming a bandwidth as high as 82GHz 
[40]. 

V. DLG ON SI MODULATORS 

DLG on Si modulators have two graphene layers acting as 

gates, as shown in fig. 1(b). This architecture allows larger 
electro-absorption and electro-refraction effect, which is 
approximately double with respect to the SLG case. Moreover, 
the self-gating of the two Graphene layers makes it possible to 
realize modulators on simple un-doped waveguides, not 
necessarily made of silicon. For these reasons, DLG on Si 
modulators are in principle more efficient and versatile with 
respect to SLG based modulators, as reported in Section III. 
However, the fabrication process of the stack of two layers of 
graphene separated by a high quality dielectric film is not 
trivial. In fact, the deposition techniques used for the dielectric 
thin film must satisfy strict specification in order to preserve the 
quality of the first Graphene layer, which is a pass-fail condition 
to realize efficient devices. For this reason, there are only few 
examples of Graphene modulators based on DLG on Si 
modulators operating at GHz bandwidth [14,17,18]. We 
recently demonstrated a DLG on Si EAM with 29 GHz 
bandwidth capable of NRZ modulation up to 50 Gb/s [30]. The 
modulator consists of a stack of two single crystals of Graphene 
grown by chemical vapour deposition (CVD) on Copper and 
transferred on the waveguide with a semi-dry method (details 
in [30]). The use of single crystals is of paramount importance 
to preserve the material high mobility. The dielectric gate is a 
20nm thin film of SiN grown by plasma-enhanced CVD 

Fig. 8.  Top panel: optical microscope image of the Graphene-based Mach-
Zehnder modulator. Bottom panel: BER measurements of a 231− 1 PRBS NRZ 
signal at 10 Gb/s as a function of the received power in back-to-back 
configuration and after transmission over different standard SMF spool 
lengths. 


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

7

(PECVD) at 350°C [31]. This is about three times thinner than 
the alumina films used in [17] and six times thinner than [18]. 
This leads to a significant reduction of the operating voltages, 
i.e. larger modulation efficiency. Such improvement was 
possible because of a significant reduction of the contact 
resistance between metal and Graphene. We optimized the 
contact resistance down to ~300Ωµm at 0.2eV chemical 
potential. The combination of high quality material and reduced 
contact resistance allowed for the realization of the first DLG 
on Si EAM showing NRZ modulation eye diagram up to 
50Gb/s (figure 9). The device exhibited a static ER of about 
3dB and IL of ~20dB. The last was much larger than expected 
from simulation and from the overall quality of the graphene. 
We attributed the extra losses to the presence of residuals of 
metal and graphene on the input and output air-cladded 
waveguide sections. The measured eye diagrams of fig. 9 
provided ER ranging from 1.5 dB at 25 Gb/s to 1.3 dB at 50 
Gb/s. The reported eye diagrams are the state of the art for DLG 
on Si modulators. 

VI. CONCLUSIONS 

Graphene integrated photonics is attracting great interest for 

applications in telecom and datacom as a step forward in 
integrated photonics, in particular in order to improve Si 
photonics capabilities. Indeed, Graphene optoelectronic 
properties allows all the active functionalities: electro-
absorption and electro-refraction modulation, photo-detection 
and, not mentioned in this paper, efficient thermal switching. In 
particular, DLG configurations permit the implementation of all 
these functionalities on almost any kind of passive waveguide, 
reducing, in principle, fabrication costs. 

In this review paper, we discussed the optical modulation 

effects of Graphene integrated on silicon waveguides starting 
from an optoelectronic model of Graphene capable to show the 

operation principle of Graphene-based modulators. In 
particular, thanks to the enhanced electric field effect due to the 
2D nature of the material, it is possible to exploit the efficient 
carrier accumulation on the Graphene layer for obtaining 
optical modulation in both the SLG and DLG configuration. In 
the second case, optical modulation is independent on the 
waveguide material, and shows a superior performance in terms 
of attainable ER and IL. All this considered together with the 
intrinsic high speed of the material, it is expected that Graphene 
modulators can provide the required bandwidth and efficiency 
to match the telecom and datacom roadmap evolution. In 
addition, the high efficiency of the modulation process allows 
for device miniaturization (<100µm for EAMs, <500µm for 
phase modulators) and reduced power consumption. 

We also reviewed our work on both SLG and DLG on Si 

modulators carried out in the last years showing pure phase 
modulation, EAMs capable of generating signals with enhanced 
chromatic dispersion resilience and operation up to 50 Gb/s for 
the DLG EAMs. 

Reported results demonstrate that Graphene photonics offers 

a combination of potential advantages in terms of both high-end 
performance and simplification in device manufacturing. 

Concluding, we underline that the main material parameter 

for performance optimization is the carrier mobility as it affects 
significantly the overall modulator performance. In particular, 
a mobility >2200 cm2V−1s−1 0.4eV is required to realize 
competitive devices. These mobility values can be obtained by 
using single crystal graphene sheets and optimizing the transfer 
process, possibly exploiting a proper material encapsulation. To 
this extent, we expect a significant improvement of the 
technology in the next future, in order to satisfy the demands of 
performance of the next generation communication scenario. 
Further improvement of the modulation bandwidth towards 
100GHz is required, as well as targeting other applications such 
as the coherent communication.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The Authors would like to acknowledge all coworkers at 

CNIT, Photonic Networks and Technologies Laboratory, 
TeCIP Institute of Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, INPHOTEC 
Foundation and Graphene Labs, Italian Institute of Technology 
for the continuous support. All partners of the Graphene 
Flagship (WP8 Photonics and Optoelectronics) are also 
acknowledged for the continuous fruitful and collaborative 
work.  

REFERENCES  

[1] A. K. Geim, and A. H. MacDonald, “Graphene: Exploring carbon 

flatland,” Phys. Today, vol. 60, no. 8, 35, 2007.  

[2] A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, and A. K. 

Geim, “The electronic properties of graphene”, Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 81, 
109, 2009. 

[3] S. Das Sarma, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang, and E. Rossi, “Electronic transport 

in two-dimensional graphene,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 83, pp. 407, 2011. 

[4] A. Bostwick, T. Ohta, T. Seyller, K. Horn, and E. Rotenberg, 

“Quasiparticle dynamics in graphene”, Nat. Phys., vol. 3, pp. 36-40, 2007. 

[5] K. I. Bolotina, K. J. Sikesb, Z. Jiangad, M. Klimac, G. Fudenberga, J. 

Honec, P. Kima, and H. L. Stormerabe, “Ultrahigh electron mobility in 

Fig. 9.  Left panel: detail of the DLG on Si waveguide capacitor (top) and 
optical microscope picture of the fabricated device. Right panel: NRZ eye 
diagrams for a 231-1 PRBS at data rates of 10Gb/s, 25Gb/s, 40Gb/s and 50Gb/s.


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

8

suspended graphene, ” Solid State Commun., vol. 146, no. 9–10, pp. 351-
355, 2008 

[6] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S.V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S.V. 

Dubonos, I.V. Grigorieva, and A. A. Firsov, “Electric Field Effect in 
Atomically Thin Carbon Films,” Science 306, 666, 2004. 

[7] F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan, and A. C. Ferrari, “Graphene photonics 

and optoelectronics,” Nat. Photon., vol. 4, pp. 611–622, 2010. 

[8] F. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Tian, C. Girit, A. Zettl, M. Crommie, and Y. R. 

Shen, “Gate-variable optical transitions in Graphene,” Science vol. 320, 
no. 5873, pp. 206–209, 2008. 

[9] L. A. Falkovsky, “Optical properties of graphene,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser., 

vol. 129, 012004, 2008. 

[10] G. W. Hanson, “Dyadic Green’s functions and guided surface waves for 

a surface conductivity model of graphene,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 103, 
064302,  2008. 

[11] V. Sorianello, G. De Angelis, T. Cassese, M. Midrio, M. Romagnoli, M. 

Moshin, M. Otto, D. Neumaier, I. Asselberghs, J. Van Campenhout, and 
C. Huyghebaert, “Complex effective index in graphene-silicon 
waveguides,” Opt. Express, vol. 24, pp. 29984, 2016. 

[12] M. Romagnoli, V. Sorianello, M. Midrio, F. H. L. Koppens, C. 

Huyghebaert, D. Neumaier, P. Galli, W. Templ, A. D’Errico and, A. C. 
Ferrari, “Graphene-based integrated photonics for next-generation 
datacom and telecom,” Nat. Rev. Mat., vol. 3, pp. 392–414, 2018.  

[13] M. Liu, X. Yin, E. Ulin-Avila, B. Geng, T. Zentgraf, L. Ju, F. Wang, and 

X. Zhang, “A graphene-based broadband optical modulator,” Nature, vol. 
474, pp. 64-67, 2011. 

[14] M. Liu, X. Yin, and X. Zhang, “Double-layer Graphene optical 

modulator,” Nano Lett. vol. 12, pp. 1482–1485, 2012. 

[15] Y.T. Hu, M. Pantouvaki, J. Van Campenhout, S. Brems, I. Asselberghs, 

C. Huyghebaert, P. Absil and D. Van Thourhout, “Broadband 10 Gb/s 
operation of graphene electro-absorption modulator on silicon,” Laser & 
Photon Rev., vol. 10, pp. 307–316, 2016. 

[16] C. Alessandri, I. Asselberghs, Y. Ban, S. Brems, C. Huyghebaerts, J. Van 

Campenhout, D. Van Thourhout, M. pantouvaki, “Broadband 20 Gbit/s 
Graphene-Si Electro-Absorption Modulator,” paper We4C.2, ECOC 
2018, Rome, Italy, 2018. 

[17] C. T. Phare, Y. D. Lee, J. Cardenas, and M. Lipson, “Graphene electro-

optic modulator with 30 GHz bandwidth,” Nat. Photonics, vol. 9, pp. 511–
514, 2015. 

[18] H. Dalir, Y. Xia, Y. Wang, and X. Zhang, “Athermal Broadband 

Graphene Optical Modulator with 35 GHz Speed,” ACS Photonics, vol. 
3, no. 9, pp. 1564-1568, 2016. 

[19] V. P. Gusynin, S. G. Sharapov, and J. P. Carbotte, “Magneto-optical 

conductivity in graphene,” J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, vol. 19, 026222, 
2007. 

[20] V. Sorianello, M. Midrio, and M. Romagnoli, “Design optimization of 

single and double layer graphene phase modulators in SOI,” Opt. Express, 
vol. 23, pp. 6478–6490, 2015. 

[21] Lumerical Inc. https://www.lumerical.com/products/ 
[22] R. A. Soref, and B. R.  Bennett, “Electrooptical effects in silicon,” IEEE 

J. Quantum Electron., vol. 23, pp. 123–129, 1987. 

[23] A. Das, S. Pisana, B. Chakraborty, S. Piscanec, S. K. Saha, U. V. 

Waghmare, K. S. Novoselov, H. R. Krishnamurthy, A. K. Geim, A. C. 
Ferrari, and A. K. Sood, “Monitoring dopants by Raman scattering in an 
electrochemically top- gated graphene transistor,” Nat. Nanotechnol., vol. 
3, pp. 210–215, 2008. 

[24] C. Xiong, D. M. Gill, J. E. Proesel, J. S. Orcutt, W. Haensch, and W. M. 

J. Green, “Monolithic 56 Gb/s silicon photonic pulse- amplitude 
modulation transmitter,” Optica, vol. 3, pp. 1060–1065, 2016. 

[25] A. Abraham, S. Olivier, D. Marris-Morini, and L. Vivien, “Evaluation of 

the performances of a silicon optical modulator based on a silicon-oxide-
silicon capacitor,” Proc. 11th International Conference on Group IV 
Photonics, pp. 3–4, Paris, France, 2014). 

[26] V. Sorianello, G. Contestabile, M. Midrio, M. Pantouvaki, J. Van 

Campenhout, C. Huyghebaerts, A. D’Errico, P. Galli, and M. Romagnoli, 
“Chirp management in silicon-graphene electro absorption modulators,” 
Optics Express, vol. 25, pp. 19371-19381, 2017. 

[27] G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, Elsevier 2007. 
[28] V. Sorianello, G. Contestabile, M. Midrio, M. Pantouvaki, I. Asselbergs, 

J. Van Campenhout, C. Huyghebaerts, and M. Romagnoli “Optical Pre-
Emphasis by Cascaded Graphene Electro Absorption Modulators,” IEEE 
Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 31, no. 12, pp. 955-958, 15 June15, 2019 

[29] V. Sorianello, M. Midrio, G. Contestabile, I. Asselberghs, J. Van 

Campenhout, C. Huyghebaert, I. Goykhman, A. K. Ott, A. C. Ferrari and 

M. Romagnoli “Graphene–silicon phase modulators with gigahertz 
bandwidth,” Nat. Photon., vol. 12, pp. 40-44, 2018. 

[30] T. Cusati, G. Fiori, A. Gahoi, V. Passi, M.C. Lemme, A. Fortunelli, and 

G. Iannaccone “Electrical properties of graphene-metal contacts,” Sci. 
Rep. 7, 5109, 2017. 

[31] V. Passi, A. Gahoi, E. G. Marin, T. Cusati, A. Fortunelli, G. Iannaccone, 

G. Fiori, and M.C. Lemme. “Ultralow Specific Contact Resistivity in 
Metal–Graphene Junctions via Contact Engineering,” Adv. Mater. 
Interfaces 6, 1801285, 2019. 

[32] W.S. Leong, H. Gong and, J.T.L. Thong, “Low-contact resistance 

graphene devices with nickeletched-graphene contacts,” ACS Nano 8, pp. 
994–1001, 2014. 

[33] D. W. Yue, C. H. Ra, X. C. Liu, D. Y. Leea  and  W. J. Yoo, “Edge 

contacts of graphene formed by using a controlled plasma treatment,” 
Nanoscale 7, pp. 825-831, 2015.  

[34] L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, 

K. Watanabe, L. M. Campos, D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, K. 
L. Shepard, C. R. Dean, “One-Dimensional Electrical Contact to a Two-
Dimensional Material,” Science 342, pp. 614-617, 2013. 

[35] L. Ji, D. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Gao, C. Wu, X. Wang, Z. Li, and X. Sun, 

“Design of an Electro-Absorption Modulator Based on Graphene-on-
Silicon Slot Waveguide,” IEEE Photonics J. 11, 7800911, 2019. 

[36] S. J. Koester and M. Li “High-speed waveguide-coupled graphene-on-

graphene optical modulators,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 171107, 2012. 

[37] G. Kovacevic, C. Phare, S.Y. Set, M. Lipson, and S. Yamashita, “Ultra-

high-speed graphene optical modulator design based on tight field 
confinement in a slot waveguide,” Appl. Phys. Express 11, 065102, 2018. 

[38] J. Witzens, “High-speed silicon photonics modulators,” Proc. IEEE 106 

(12), 2158–2182, 2018. 

[39] G. L. Li, C. K. Sun, S. A. Pappert, W. X. Chen, and P. K. L. Yu, 

“Ultrahigh-Speed Traveling-Wave Electroabsorption Modulator - Design 
and Analysis,” IEEE T Microw. Theory 47, pp. 1177-1183, 1999. 

[40] K. Xu, Y. Xie, H. Xie, Y. Liu, Y. Yao, J. Du, Z. He, and Q. Song “High-

Speed Traveling-Wave Modulator Based on Graphene and Microfiber,” 
J. Lightwave Technol. 36, pp. 4730-4735, 2018. 

[41] M. A. Giambra, V. Sorianello, V. Miseikis, S. Marconi, A. Montanaro, P. 

Galli, S. Pezzini, C. Coletti, and M. Romagnoli, "High-speed double layer 
graphene electro-absorption modulator on SOI waveguide," Opt. Express, 
vol. 27, pp. 20145-20155, 2019 

[42] W. Zhu, D. Neumayer, V. Perebeinos, and P. Avouris, “Silicon Nitride 

gate dielectrics and band gap engineering in Graphene layers,” Nano Lett., 
vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 3572–3576, 2010. 

 
Vito Sorianello received the Ph.D. degree in electronic 
engineering from Roma Tre University, Rome, Italy, in 2010. 
In 2010, he received the IEEE Best Doctoral Thesis Award for 
his Ph.D. thesis on “Germanium-on-Silicon near-infrared 
photodetectors” by the IEEE Photonics Society Italian Chapter. 
He was a Postdoctoral Research Fellow with the Nonlinear 
Optics and OptoElectronics Lab of Roma Tre University, being 
involved 
and 
responsible 
for 
the 
fabrication 
and 

characterization 
processes 
of 
Germanium-on-Silicon 

photodetectors for three years. He is researcher at the Photonic 
Networks National Lab, Interuniversity National Consortium 
for Telecommunications, Pisa, since 2013. His main research 
interests include the modeling, design, and characterization of 
optoelectronic components and systems for the silicon 
photonics platform. 
He is currently involved in several application-oriented 
research projects in collaboration with national and 
international research institutions and industries. 
 
Giampiero Contestabile received the Laurea degree in Physics 
from “La Sapienza” University of Rome, Rome, Italy, and the 
Ph.D. 
degree 
in 
Electrical 
Engineering 
and 

Telecommunications from “Tor Vergata” University of Rome, 
in 1998 and 2001, respectively. From 1996 to 2000, he was with 
the Semiconductor Devices Group of “Fondazione Ugo 


> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR PAPER IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 
 

 

9

Bordoni,” Rome. In 2001, he was with Optospeed Italia. Since 
2002, he has been an Assistant professor with Scuola Superiore 
Sant’Anna, Pisa, Italy where, from 2018 he is an Associate 
Professor. He has co-authored more than 200 papers published 
in international peer-reviewed journals and presented in leading 
international conferences. His research interests include 
photonic integrated circuits, advanced optical systems, access 
networks, and semiconductor optical amplifiers and lasers 
 
Marco Romagnoli received the Laurea degree in physics from 
the Universita` di Roma “La Sapienza,” Rome , Italy, in 1982. 
He is currently the Head of Advanced Technologies for 
Photonic Integration at the Interuniversity National Consortium 
for Telecommunications and chief scientific officer, Pisa, Italy, 
a contract Professor at Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa, and 
the former Director in R&D Department. In 1983, he started his 
activity at IBM Research Center, San Jose, CA, USA. In 1984, 
he joined Fondazione Ugo Bordoni in the Optical 
Communications Department working on optical components 
and transmission systems. In 1998, he joined Pirelli, where he 
was the Director of Design and Characterization and a Chief 
Scientist in R&D Photonics. In October 2010, he joined 
PhotonIC Corporation, a Si-Photonics company, as the Director 
of Boston Operations and the Program Manager at the 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology for the development of 
an optically interconnected multiprocessor Si chip. He is an 
author of more than 190 journal papers and conference 
contributions and a coinventor in more than 40 patents. He is in 
the technical committee of the major conferences in photonics 
such as CLEO/QELS, CLEO Europe, ECOC, MNE, Group IV 
Photonics, and served as an expert Evaluator for EC in the 6th 
Framework Program. He has more than 35 years of experience 
in the research field, especially in the area of photonic 
technologies for TLC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 


