Image Reconstruction for Multi-frequency
Electromagnetic Tomography based on Multiple
Measurement Vector Model

Jinxi Xiang
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, U.K.
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
xiangjx16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Zhou Chen
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, U.K.
zhou.chen@ed.ac.uk

Yonggui Dong
Department of Precision Instrument
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
dongyg@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Yunjie Yang
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, U.K.
y.yang@ed.ac.uk

AbstractŌĆöImaging the bio-impedance distribution of a biolog-
ical sample can provide understandings about the sampleŌĆÖs elec-
trical properties which is an important indicator of physiological
status. This paper presents a multi-frequency electromagnetic
tomography (mfEMT) technique for biomedical imaging. The
system consists of 8 channels of gradiometer coils with adjustable
sensitivity and excitation frequency. To exploit the frequency
correlation among each measurement, we reconstruct multiple
frequency data simultaneously based on the Multiple Measure-
ment Vector (MMV) model. The MMV problem is solved by using
a sparse Bayesian learning method that is especially effective
for sparse distribution. Both simulations and experiments have
been conducted to verify the performance of the method. Results
show that by taking advantage of multiple measurements, the
proposed method is more robust to noisy data for ill-posed
problems compared to the commonly used single measurement
vector model.
Index TermsŌĆöBio-impedance, electromagnetic tomography,
image reconstruction, multi-frequency, multiple measurement
vector, sparse bayesian learning

I. INTRODUCTION
Biological tissues show complex impedance over a range
of frequencies excited by time-varying electromagnetic fields
[1]. Among the frequency range, ╬▓ dispersion operates be-
tween hundreds to megahertz, showing prominent frequency-
dependent electrical properties [2]. This principle has been
extensively explored in food agricultural produce [3], cell
culture [4] and clinic diagnosis [5].
The most straightforward way of bio-impedance measure-
ment is to contact or penetrate the sample by electrodes and
then measure the transimpedance between the electrodes. For
example, Yang and Jia reported a multi-frequency electrical
impedance tomography (mfEIT) for biomedical imaging in
[6]. However, in some situations, contact electrodes may cause
problems due to contact impedance that could be considerable
and variable with surface condition. Moreover, it maybe dif-
ficult or even impossible to place electrodes on certain test
samples intrusively due to contamination or erosion issues.

This work of Jinxi Xiang was supported in part by the China Scholarship
Council under Grant 201906210259.

Multi-frequency Electromagnetic Tomography (mfEMT) is
a contactless and non-invasive imaging technique. It mea-
sures bio-impedance by using multi-frequency excitations with
components spreading across the bandwidth of interest [1].
Its potential application in intracranial hemorrhage detection
was investigated in [5]. A differential electromagnetic probe
was designed for cervical tissue measurements in [7]. mfEMT
is, in general, more challenging than electrical impedance
tomography in terms of measurement because the higher
sensitivity required for weak signal response.
There are two imaging modes of EMT, i.e. Time-Difference
(TD) imaging and Frequency-Difference (FD) imaging [8]. FD
imaging utilizes the measurement between two frequencies
and overcomes the limitation of the TD imaging that requires
a reference data set. Commonly, multi-frequency FD image
reconstruction is to treat measurements independently and
then solve them individually. This is also known as Single
Measurement Vector (SMV) [9]. In this way, the correlations
between measurements at different frequencies are overlooked.
In the field of compressive sensing, it has been shown that
compared to the SMV model, the successful recovery rate of
signal can be greatly improved by using Multipl Measurement
Vectors (MMV) [10]. Existing MMV applications include the
direction of arrival estimation [11] and magnetic resonance
imaging [12]. Motivated by this, in this work, we apply the
MMV model in mfEMT image reconstruction. The fundamen-
tal idea is that the spatial conductivity distribution of objects
is highly correlated at different excitation frequencies. The
MMV model exploits this kind of correlation and makes use
of it to obtain a better-reconstructed image. Mathematically,
this leads to a constrained optimization problem where the
objective function promotes the signalŌĆÖs group-sparsity as well
as its rank-deficiency. In the MMV model, the signal and
noise statistics are learned directly from the data by sparse
Bayesian learning that incorporates the frequency and spatial
correlation of conductivity distribution into a prior. We then
demonstrate the improvement of the proposed method through
both simulations and experiments.

arXiv:2003.00990v1  [physics.app-ph]  2 Mar 2020


Vs

RBias

RBias

Target

Sensing coil 1

Sensing coil 2

Excitation coil
Diff. Amp.

Fig. 1. The configuration the gradiometer coil.

II. MULTI-FREQUENCY ELECTROMAGNETIC
TOMOGRAPHY SYSTEM

A. Physical Principle

In mfEMT, a sample is placed within an alternating ex-
citation magnetic field (primary field) that is produced by a
current flowing in a coil. In return, an electrical field in the
sample is generated which will cause eddy current and thus,
a secondary magnetic filed can be measured externally. Due
to the small conductivity of biological samples, the secondary
field is weak. Therefore, it is suggested that the primary field
should be eliminated before measuring the secondary field.
Previously, we reported that the gradiometer coil (see Fig.1)
with differential structure improves the sensitivity greatly [13].
Based on the quasi-static approximation of eddy current, the
sensitivity of gradiometer coil is governed by [13]:

sg = ŌłåŽĢg

ŌłåŽā = ŌłÆV0 (P1 ŌłÆ P2) Žē┬Ą0

Vres
(1)

where ŌłåŽĢg denotes the phase response of secondary field
caused by conductivity change ŌłåŽā. V0 is the voltage produced
by the primary magnetic field. P1 and P2 are the geometrical
factors that relate to the size and shape of the target and its
position relative to the coil. Žē represents the angular frequency
of excitation signal and ┬Ą0 is the permeability in free space.
Vres, the key tunning parameter of sensitivity, is the residual
voltage caused by the imbalance of two receiver coils.

B. System Structure

The mfEMT system (see Fig. 2) comprises four modules :

(1) sensor array consisting of 8 gradiometer coils;
(2) excitation modules to drive gradiometer coils;
(3) signal sensing modules and data acquisition based on Red
Pitaya platform [14];

(4) phase measurement by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and
image reconstruction in computer.
The operation principle is as follows. First of all, one
of the 8 excitation channels is enabled and the rest of the
other 7 excitation channels are disabled as open circuits.
Secondly, multi-frequency sine waves are generated by Red
Pitaya, an open-source hardware platform with dual fast (125
MSPS) ADCs and DACs. Then, 8 differential sensing coils are
sequentially selected and the sensing signals are multiplexed
to the sensing module to measure the signal phase difference

Fig. 2. The 8-channel mfEMT system using gradiometer coils.

Fig. 3. The sensitivity map J of the 8-channel mfEMT.

with the excitation signal. One completed scan consists of
64 (8├Ś8) phase values covering all the excitation/sensing coil
combinations. An image of the conductivity distribution is then
reconstructed with the proposed MMV model solved by sparse
Bayesian learning (see Section III).
The linear model describing phase change ŌłåŽĢ and the
conductivity change ŌłåŽā is generally expressed as:

ŌłåŽĢ = JŌłåŽā
(2)

Sensitivity matrix J is maps the conductivity distribution
to phase values. It reveals by previous work [15] that the
sensitivity at any pixel in the sensing region is the dot product
of the two magnetic fields, which is expressed as:

J(Ōä”) = k(B1 ┬Ę B2)
(3)

where B1 is the magnetic field produced by a current I1
injected into the excitation coil; B2 is the magnetic field
produced by a current I2 injected into the differential sensing
coil; k is a coefficient. The discretized mesh of J is 64 ├Ś 64.
The normalized sensitivity map (summation of rows) is
shown in Fig. 3. It is observed that the largest sensitivity
locates near the coils and smallest sensitivity appears at the
central region. Other electrical tomographies such as electri-
cal impedance tomography (EIT) and electrical capacitance
tomography (ECT) share similar patterns.


(a) Solution Žā in Eq.(5)
(b) Embedding block structure A

Fig. 4. Schematic illustration of MMV model

III. MULTIPLE MEASUREMENT VECTORS FRAMEWORK
USING SPARSE BAYESIAN LEARNING

To solve the mfEMT image reconstruction problem, the
commonly used SMV framework considers the multiple equa-
tions independently and separately, as shown in Eq. (4)
’Ż▒
’Ż┤
’Ż┤
’Ż┤
’Ż▓

’Ż┤
’Ż┤
’Ż┤
’Ż│

y1
= JŽā1 + v1
y2
= JŽā2 + v2
...
yL
= JŽāL + vL

(4)

where {y1, y2, . . . , yL}, yi Ōłł RN├Ś1 (i = 1, 2, . . . L) de-
notes a sequence of measurements at different frequencies;
J Ōłł RN├ŚM(N Ōē¬ M) represents the sensitivity matrix;
{Žā1, Žā2, . . . , ŽāL}, Žāi Ōłł RM├Ś1 (i = 1, 2, . . . L) are the
conductivity vectors to be solved and {v1, v2, . . . , vL}, vi Ōłł
RN├Ś1 (i = 1, 2, . . . L) are unknown noise vectors.
To utilize the correlation of mfEMT images, we consider
the MMV model for mfEMT image reconstruction, which is
given by
Y = JŽā + V
(5)

where Y = [y1, y2, . . . yL] Ōłł RN├ŚL is the multi-frequency
measurement matrix. Žā = [Žā1, Žā2, . . . ŽāL] Ōłł RM├ŚL is the
corresponding conductivity distribution at L frequencies. As
illustrated in Fig. 4(a), each column of Žā is associated with
a measurement at given frequency and each row represents a
pixel in the image. V = [v1, v2, . . . vL] Ōłł RN├ŚL denotes the
unknown noise vectors at multiple measurements.
We first make a block sparsity assumption about the spatial
conductivity. Without requiring any prior knowledge about the
block distribution pattern, we consider the general case that the
blocks have equal size of h and overlap with each other [16].
As shown in Fig. 4(b), the block structure A is embedded into
the sensitivity matrix

Žā Ōē£ Ax Ōē£ [A1, . . . , Ag]
’┐Į
xT
1 , . . . , xT
g
’┐ĮT
(6)

where g = M ŌłÆh+1 is the total number of blocks, and ŌłĆi =

1, 2, . . . g, Ai Ōē£
’┐Į
0T
(iŌłÆ1)├Śh, IT
h├Śh, 0T
(MŌłÆiŌłÆh+1)├Śh
’┐ĮT
Ōłł RM├Śh

denotes the i-th block structure and xi = [xi, . . . , xi+hŌłÆ1]T Ōłł

Rh├Ś1 denotes the weights of this block.
The spatial block-sparse underlying model in Eq. (5) is
expressed as

Y = JŽā + V = JAx + V
(7)

To solve this MMV problem, we transfer the temporally
correlated MMV (T-MSBL) method in [17] to our frequency-
correlated case. Then Eq. (7) can be rewritten as

yF = DxF + vF
(8)

by letting yF
= vec
’┐Į
YT ’┐Į
Ōłł RNL├Ś1, D = JA ŌŖŚ IL,
xF = vec
’┐Į
XT ’┐Į
Ōłł R(ghL)├Ś1, vF = vec
’┐Į
VT ’┐Į
Ōłł RNL├Ś1. ŌŖŚ
represents the Kronecker product of the two matrices. vec(.)
denotes the vectorization of the matrix by stacking its columns
into a single column vector.
We assume that the elements in the noise vector vF are
independent and each has a Gaussian distribution i.e. p (vF ) Ōł╝
N(0, ╬│0I). To exploit the spatial block sparsity and frequency
information simultaneously, we design a prior of the weights
xF using a zeromean Gaussian distribution

p (xF ; ╬│i, Bi, ŌłĆi) Ōł╝ Nx (0, ╬Ż0)
(9)

where ╬Ż0 is

╬Ż0 =

’Ż«

’Ż»’Ż░

╬│1B1
0
...
0
╬│gBg

’Ż╣

’Ż║’Ż╗ Ōłł RghL├ŚghL
(10)

and Bi Ōłł RhL├ŚhL incorporates the spatial and frequency
information into one covariance matrix. To avoid overfitting,
it is a good practice to use one positive definite matrix B
to model all the pixel covariance matrices Bi, ŌłĆi. The spatial
sparsity is controlled by ╬│i, ŌłĆi.
With this prior, Eq. (8) is solved using Bayesian rule that
seeks to optimize the posterior of p(xF |yF ), i.e.

p(xF |yF ; {╬│0, {╬│i, Bi}g
i=1}) = N (┬Ąx, ╬Żx)
(11)

The final solution is ╦åx = ┬Ąx. The hyperparameter estima-
tion of ┬Ąx, ╬Żx adopts the T-MSBL method introduced in [17].
It is an efficient Bayesian method in low dimensional space,
even with the increase of measurements.

IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

A. System Evaluation

Fig. 5 shows the setup of the mfEMT system which consists
of a coil array with a diameter of 120 mm, a signal generation
and data acquisition module based on Red Pitaya, a computer
for image reconstruction, and a circuit that incorporates mul-
tiplexer, excitation , and sensing electronics.
To evaluate the phase measurement accuracy of Red Pitaya,
we used the Agilent 33500 signal generator to produce dual-
channel signals with predefined phase differences. The signals
with an amplitude of 500 mVpp at 6.25 MHz are sampled
by Red Pitaya at 125 MSPS. The FFT data length is 16384
(maximum capacity of red pitaya buffer) and the averaging
factor is 20. Fig. 6 illustrates that the phase noise of Red Pitaya


Fig. 5. Experimental setup.

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180

0

50

100

150

200

0

5

10

15

20

Fig. 6. Phase measurement linearity and noise.

is lower than 10 mŌŚ” and the linearity is persistent over the
whole measurement range. It should be noticed that the phase
noise depends on the signal amplitude as the quantization error
of ADC is fixed.
The sensitivity of 8 channels is calibrated using a se-
quence of NaCl solution with conductivity ranges from 0.01
S/m to 5.13 S/m. The NaCl solution in plastic bottles was
placed closely to the coil which is driven by a 6.25 MHz
sinusoidal signal. As shown in Fig. 7, the phase sensitivity
of the gradiometer coils ranges from ŌłÆ1.1ŌŚ”/(S ┬Ę mŌłÆ1) to
ŌłÆ1.9ŌŚ”/(S ┬Ę mŌłÆ1). The phase response is linearly dependent
on conductivity. Due to the manufacturing inconsistency of
coils, the sensitivity of 8 channels should be calibrated before
imaging.

B. Image Reconstruction Results

Three test phantoms were designed with carrot cylinders
(see Table I). From left to right, it is empty, phantom 1 , phan-
tom 2 and phantom 3. Four excitation frequencies of mfEMT
in the test are [f1, f2, f3, f4] = [0.125, 0.25, 0.5, 1] ├Ś
6.25 MHz, which falls in the ╬▓ dispersion. These frequencies
are set to meet full-cycle sampling so as to avoid spectral
leakage, since the sampling rate of Red Pitaya is 125 MHz.
Table II illustrates the image reconstruction results of
three phantoms with simulation data. The diameter of the
cylinders is 10 mm. The frequency-dependent conductivities
of the simulation phantom are [Žāf1,
Žāf2,
Žāf3,
Žāf4]
=
[0.15, 0.25, 0.45, 0.7]S/m. These parameters are set accord-

0
1
2
3
4
5
6

-100

-95

-90

-85

#1 Sensor: -1.354 ┬░/(Sm-1)

#2 Sensor -1.363 ┬░/(Sm-1)

#3 Sensor -1.950 ┬░/(Sm-1)

#4 Sensor -1.781 ┬░/(Sm-1)

#5 Sensor -1.305 ┬░/(Sm-1)

#6 Sensor -1.637 ┬░/(Sm-1)

#7 Sensor -1.160 ┬░/(Sm-1)

#8 Sensor -1.772 ┬░/(Sm-1)

Fig. 7. Sensitivity calibration of gradiometer coil .

Fig. 8. One frame of signal amplitude and phase noise.

ing to the conductivity spectra of some agricultural produces
in [1]. In order to simulate the background noise of the real
system, same quantity of additional white noise is added
to each measurement. The reference frame is f1. The three
columns on the left show the image reconstruction results
of the dual frequency imaging, which is solved by a SMV-
based Bayesian method in [18]. At f2 and f3, the conductivity
change relative to f1 is small, in order words, the SNR is small.
Therefore, the images are corrupted with strong artifacts. At
f4, as the conductivity increases, the image restores to a quite
satisfying level. The three columns on the right are the MMV
solutions solved by the proposed algorithm in Section III. The
most intuitive finding is that at f2 and f3 where the SNR is
small, the images are reconstructed with little artifacts.
It should be noticed that the reconstructed conductivity
of objects with the MMV model has the same trend as
true conductivity spectra. For example, the average recon-
structed conductivity of phantom 1 in the object region
is [╦åŽāf2, ╦åŽāf3, ╦åŽāf4] = [0.98, 1.46, 1.89], increasing with
frequency. Although these values have not been calibrated
with absolute conductivity, it verifies that the improvement
of image quality is not just ŌĆÖaveraging the measurementsŌĆÖ.
The underlying information has been extracted in a noisy
environment with the MMV model.
Fig. 8 illustrates one frame of experimental data at
6.25 MHz with empty sensing region. The phase noise
depends on the signal amplitude, i.e., larger phase noise
corresponds to smaller amplitude. Apart from the phase errors
brought by Red Pitaya, other noise is attributed to the circuits.


TABLE I
MFEMT PHANTOMS(EMPTY, PHANTOM 1, PHANTOM 2, PHANTOM 3)

Table III illustrates the results with experimental data. The
diameter of the cylinders is 17 mm. Due to the inevitable
capacitive coupling between coils, additional phase shifts at
different frequencies would be caused. Thus, we cannot use
one frequency measurement as reference frame and instead,
we need to calibrate the phase offset at each frequency point.
Results show that the reconstructed objects of dual frequency
imaging are hardly observable due to strong background noise
and weak signal response cause by the small conductivity
of carrots. The ill-posedness of EMT is more severe even
than parallel techniques such as ECT and EIT. In contrast,
significant improvements in image quality have been observed
with the MMV model (three columns on the right). For
phantom 1, the profile and position of the carrot can be seen
under three frequencies. For phantom 2 and 3, the objects can
be found but unwanted artifacts are becoming more obvious.

V. CONCLUSION

This paper presents a novel image reconstruction algorithm
for mfEMT by introducing MMV model and sparse Bayesian
learning. The proposed method exploits the frequency-related
information between each measurement. We introduce the
sparse Bayesian learning method to solve the corresponding
MMV problem, which is especially effective for challenging
small scale conductivity distributions. Simulation and experi-
ment have been conducted to verify the performance of the
proposed method. Results show that by taking advantage
of multiple measurements, it is more robust to noisy data.
This feature is crucial for electromagnetic tomography image
reconstruction because the problem is severely ill-posed.

REFERENCES

[1] M. D. OŌĆÖToole, L. A. Marsh, J. L. Davidson, Y. M. Tan, D. W. Armitage,
and A. J. Peyton, ŌĆ£Non-contact multi-frequency magnetic induction
spectroscopy system for industrial-scale bio-impedance measurement,ŌĆØ
Measurement Science and Technology, vol. 26, no. 3, p. 035102, 2015.

[2] U. Pliquett, ŌĆ£Bioimpedance: a review for food processing,ŌĆØ Food engi-
neering reviews, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 74ŌĆō94, 2010.

[3] M. Soltani, R. Alimardani, and M. Omid, ŌĆ£Evaluating banana ripening
status from measuring dielectric properties,ŌĆØ Journal of Food Engineer-
ing, vol. 105, no. 4, pp. 625ŌĆō631, 2011.

[4] C. Justice, A. Brix, D. Freimark, M. Kraume, P. Pfromm, B. Eichen-
mueller, and P. Czermak, ŌĆ£Process control in cell culture technology
using dielectric spectroscopy,ŌĆØ Biotechnology advances, vol. 29, no. 4,
pp. 391ŌĆō401, 2011.

[5] Z. Xiao, C. Tan, and F. Dong, ŌĆ£Multi-frequency difference method for
intracranial hemorrhage detection by magnetic induction tomography,ŌĆØ
Physiological measurement, vol. 39, no. 5, p. 055006, 2018.

[6] Y. Yang and J. Jia, ŌĆ£A multi-frequency electrical impedance tomog-
raphy system for real-time 2d and 3d imaging,ŌĆØ Review of Scientific
Instruments, vol. 88, no. 8, p. 085110, 2017.

[7] J.-Y. Wang, T. Healey, A. Barker, B. Brown, C. Monk, and D. Anumba,
ŌĆ£Magnetic induction spectroscopy (mis)probe design for cervical tissue
measurements,ŌĆØ Physiological measurement, vol. 38, no. 5, p. 729, 2017.

[8] Y. Jiang and M. Soleimani, ŌĆ£Capacitively coupled resistivity imaging
for biomaterial and biomedical applications,ŌĆØ IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp.
27 069ŌĆō27 079, 2018.

[9] J. Yang, A. Bouzerdoum, F. H. C. Tivive, and M. G. Amin, ŌĆ£Multiple-
measurement vector model and its application to through-the-wall radar
imaging,ŌĆØ in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 2672ŌĆō2675.

[10] J. Ziniel and P. Schniter, ŌĆ£Efficient high-dimensional inference in the
multiple measurement vector problem,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 340ŌĆō354, 2012.

[11] Z. Yang, L. Xie, and C. Zhang, ŌĆ£Off-grid direction of arrival estimation
using sparse bayesian inference,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on Signal Process-
ing, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 38ŌĆō43, 2012.

[12] A. Majumdar and R. K. Ward, ŌĆ£Accelerating multi-echo t2 weighted mr
imaging: analysis prior group-sparse optimization,ŌĆØ journal of Magnetic
Resonance, vol. 210, no. 1, pp. 90ŌĆō97, 2011.

[13] J. Xiang, Y. Dong, M. Zhang, and Y. Li, ŌĆ£Design of a magnetic induction
tomography system by gradiometer coils for conductive fluid imaging,ŌĆØ
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 56 733ŌĆō56 744, 2019.

[14] Redpitaya.com. (2019) Red pitaya. [Online]. Available: https://www.
redpitaya.com/

[15] J. Rosell, R. Casanas, and H. Scharfetter, ŌĆ£Sensitivity maps and sys-
tem requirements for magnetic induction tomography using a planar
gradiometer,ŌĆØ Physiological measurement, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 121, 2001.

[16] S. Liu, J. Jia, Y. D. Zhang, and Y. Yang, ŌĆ£Image reconstruction
in electrical impedance tomography based on structure-aware sparse
bayesian learning,ŌĆØ IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 37,
no. 9, pp. 2090ŌĆō2102, 2018.

[17] Z. Zhang and B. D. Rao, ŌĆ£Sparse signal recovery with temporally
correlated source vectors using sparse bayesian learning,ŌĆØ IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 912ŌĆō926, 2011.

[18] D. P. Wipf and B. D. Rao, ŌĆ£An empirical bayesian strategy for solving
the simultaneous sparse approximation problem,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3704ŌĆō3716, 2007.


TABLE II
IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION RESULTS BASED ON SIMULATION DATA (10-MM CYLINDERS, 120-MM SENSING REGION IN DIAMETER)

Dual Frequency Imaging with SMV
mfEMT Imaging with MMV

f2 = 1.5625 MHz
f3 = 3.125 MHz
f4 = 6.25 MHz
f2 = 1.5625 MHz
f3 = 3.125 MHz
f4 = 6.25 MHz

TABLE III
IMAGE RECONSTRUCTION RESULTS BASED ON EXPERIMENTAL DATA (17-MM CYLINDERS, 120-MM SENSING REGION IN DIAMETER)

Dual Frequency Imaging with SMV
mfEMT Imaging with MMV

f2 = 1.5625 MHz
f3 = 3.125 MHz
f4 = 6.25 MHz
f2 = 1.5625 MHz
f3 = 3.125 MHz
f4 = 6.25 MHz


