Optical Thermometry with Quantum Emitters in Hexagonal 

Boron Nitride

Yongliang Chen,1 Thinh Ngoc Tran,1 Ngoc My Hanh Duong,1 Chi Li,1 Milos Toth,1,2 Carlo 

Bradac,1 Igor Aharonovich,1,2 Alexander Solntsev,1 Toan Trong Tran1*

1. School of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, 

NSW, 2007, Australia 

2. ARC Center of Excellence for Transformative Meta-Optical Systems (TMOS), Faculty of 

Science, University of Technology Sydney, Australia

*Corresponding author: trongtoan.tran@uts.edu.au

KEYWORDS: optical thermometry, temperature sensing, hexagonal boron nitride, 

deterministic positioning, quantum emitter, micro-circuits.

Abstract

Nanoscale optical thermometry is a promising non-contact route for measuring local 

temperature with both high sensitivity and spatial resolution. In this work, we present a 

deterministic optical thermometry technique based on quantum emitters in nanoscale 

hexagonal boron-nitride. We show that these nanothermometers exhibit better performance 

than that of homologous, all-optical nanothermometers both in sensitivity and range of working 

temperature. We demonstrate their effectiveness as nanothermometers by monitoring the local 

temperature at specific locations in a variety of custom-built micro-circuits. This work opens 

new avenues for nanoscale temperature measurements and heat flow studies in miniaturized, 

integrated devices.

Introduction

The ability to measure and control temperature at the nanoscale is critical to several areas of 

research,1-3 from biology4-5 and medicine6-9 to solid-state-based, nano-electronics and -

photonics10-12. At the nanoscale—where the Fourier’s law no longer holds13 heat transport 

behaves differently than in bulk materials. For instance, local fluctuations in sub-micron 


integrated circuits can lead to the formation of hot-spots, which often result in performance 

deterioration or even catastrophic failure. As a new generation of optoelectronic devices made 

from (stacks of heterogeneous) two-dimensional (2D) materials is on the rise,14-17 the need to 

measure local temperatures with resolution down to few atomic layers is becoming imperative. 

The motivation is two-fold. The first is practical: to drive the design of devices performing at 

the cusp between top performance and critical failure. The second is fundamental: to explore 

the complex thermal dynamics at play when circuitry is miniaturized and become quasi-two-

dimensional.1-3

Nanothermometry, based on non-invasive all-optical measurements, is well established.1

Nanoscale thermal probes include fluorescent dyes,18 organic polymers,19 quantum dots,20 gold 

nanoparticles and nanorods,21
upconversion nanoparticles22-23
and color centers in 

nanodiamonds.3
However, only a small minority of these nanosensors can withstand the 

extreme temperatures at which high-power electronics operate, especially those reached in the 

hot-spots of sub-micron integrated circuits. Diamond-based nanothermometry is indeed a 

viable option24-25 and includes, desirably, an extensive variety of methods based on mapping 

temperature changes onto the photoluminescence of different color centers—the nitrogen-

vacancy (NV),26-27 the silicon-vacancy (SiV),28-29 the germanium-vacancy (GeV)30-31 and the 

tin-vacancy (SnV) center.32 Nevertheless, one of the main issues of diamond nanothermometers 

lies in their thermal contacts. While this is not a problem29 when the nanodiamonds are entirely 

surrounded by the medium, e.g., in water or in the cytoplasm of a cell, thermal contact can be 

rather poor when nanodiamonds are merely deposited on a substrate.33 Furthermore, 

deterministic and reliable placement of single nanoparticles in the near proximity of the object 

to be sensed can be laborious, albeit accurate. 34-36 In this work, we propose a nanothermometry 

technique that addresses these shortcomings.

The technique relies on color centers in layered two-dimensional (2D) hexagonal boron nitride 

(hBN). These are atom-like defects that show ultra-bright,37 high-purity,38 and photostable 

emission to up to 800 K39 and whose zero-phonon line (ZPL) energy and linewidth display 

temperature dependence.40 These hBN nanothermometers possess a few distinguishing 

features. i) Unlike other emitter-based nanothermometers which rely on large ensemble of 

colour centres to improve signal detection (and thus resolution), hBN nanothermometers can 

achieve comparable performances with single emitters thanks to their superior brightness. It 

follows that hBN nanosensors can be as small as just a few nm,41 which is crucial for increasing 

spatial resolution. ii) Their sensitivity is comparable—in many cases higher (see below)—than 


homologous all-optical techniques. iii) They can reliably operate over a large temperature 

range, 0 K < ΔT ≲ 800 K. iv) The two-dimensional nature of hBN guarantees excellent thermal 

contact, which can be a limiting factor for other nanoparticle-based nanosensors. v)

Furthermore, hBN-based nanothermometers are compatible—in fact they are ideal—for 

measuring temperatures and temperature gradients in 2D materials. Hexagonal boron-nitride is 

commonly used as a ‘dielectric spacer’ in many photo-electronic devices designed from stacks 

of heterogeneous 2D materials, which makes its potential use as a thermo-sensing layer an 

attractive possibility.42

The key concept of optical thermometry with hBN quantum emitters is illustrated in Figure 

1a. A green laser (532-nm) is used to excite individual quantum emitters while their 

fluorescence is monitored. The emitters’ photoluminescence zero-phonon line (ZPL) 

wavelength and linewidth depends on temperature due to lattice expansion and contraction of 

hBN, as well as defect-lattice phonon-mediated interactions.40 Figure 1b shows the spectra of 

a typical hBN single photon emitter acquired at 296 K and 500 K and highlights a distinct 

temperature dependence. Specifically for this emitter, from 296 to 500 K, the ZPL wavelength 

red-shifts by ~8.5 nm and the ZPL linewidth broadens by ~13 nm, showing that both quantities 

can be used for thermal sensing. Notably, owing to the superb temperature stability of the 

material, hBN-based nanothermometers can operate at temperatures as high as 800 K without 

photobleaching or degradation—unlike other thermal probes such as fluorescent dyes, organic 


polymers or colloidal quantum dots that are prone to oxidation or photobleaching at high 

temperatures.2

Figure 1. a) Schematic of optical thermometry using a quantum emitter in hexagonal boron 

nitride. Thermally-driven changes in the emitter’s photoluminescence zero-phonon line (ZPL) 

wavelength and linewidth can be used to map the local temperatures of the substrate. b)

Fluorescence spectra of a typical hBN nanothermometer where the ZPL wavelength and 

linewidth red-shifts and broadens, respectively, as temperature is increased from 296 K to 500 

K. c) Variation of the ZPL’s full width at half maximum (FWHM) as a function of temperature. 

The blue solid line is a linear fit to the experimental data (black squares). d) Variation of the 

ZPL barycentre wavelength as a function temperature. The blue solid line is a linear fit to the 

experimental data (black squares). Each data point in (c) and (d) was extracted by fitting a 

Lorentzian function to the ZPL. Error bars are calculated using the standard deviation for five 

consecutive 10-s spectral acquisitions performed at each value of temperature. A 20-min 

waiting time was allowed for thermal stabilization at each temperature.

Figure 1 shows the basic performance of a typical hBN-based nanothermometer. The 

calibration was carried out using an external heater in contact with a thermocouple; the centre’s 

ZPL and full width at half maximum (FWHM) were measured at twelve set temperatures over 

the range 296–500 K. Five photoluminescence (PL) spectra were captured and averaged at each 

temperature. A Lorentzian function was used to fit the ZPL position and linewidth: Figure 1c


and 1d show their respective temperature dependence. Both quantities scale linearly with 

temperature over the investigated range, which is consistent with previous report.39 Linearity 

is a desirable—yet not required—feature in a nanothermometer as it grants constant sensitivity 

over the working temperature range.1, 32 The extracted slopes from the linear fits are (60 ± 2) × 

10–3 nm·K–1 and (42.9 ± 0.7) × 10–3 nm·K–1 for the ZPL linewidth and ZPL shifts, respectively. 

It should be noted that the observed linearity might not extend beyond the investigated range 

of temperatures. In fact, in semiconductors, temperature-driven variations of the bulk lattice 

constant commonly produce shifts for an intraband defect’s ZPL that scale as ~T3. 

Simultaneously, the ZPL linewidth of hBN emitters is expected to broaden following a nearly 

exponential dependence with temperature due to the interaction of the defect’s transition dipole

with lattice acoustic phonons.40 Note that this nearly-exponential dependence is different from 

that of other 3D semiconductors emitters whose temperature-driven linewidth broadening have 

been reported to follow T3, T5 and T7 dependencies.43-44 Based on these observations, for hBN 

emitters the precision in estimating the ZPL shift is higher than that for estimating the ZPL 

linewidth broadening, especially at high temperatures. This is due to the inability—exacerbated 

at high temperatures—to fit the ZPL linewidth with a single Lorentzian. Therefore, for the 

remainder of this work we utilize the emitter’s shift in ZPL wavelength rather than its linewidth 

broadening to characterize the performance of hBN nanothermometers.        

To demonstrate the utility of hBN-based nanothermometers we employed them to monitor the 

temperature of custom-designed micro-circuits. These circuits were patterned by electron beam 

lithography (EBL) with polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as the resist, followed by 

development with methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) to form the resist pattern. The metal 

deposition (gold, chromium or nickel) was performed before the lift-off process took place 

using warm acetone to remove metal and resist residues. A key feature of our thermo-sensing

method is that we can monitor the temperature in specific points of interest of the circuit as the 

hBN nanoflakes can be positioned deterministically with respect to a target object. This is 

achieved via an align dry-transfer technique for two-dimensional (2D) materials that we 

modified (cf. Supporting Information Figure S1) from previous work45-47 and allows for the 

positioning of the sensor with spatial accuracy <1 µm.

Figure 2a illustrates the transferring process of a single hBN nanoflake onto a targeted position 

of the microcircuit. We first fabricate a custom-made, dry stamp consisting of a polyvinyl 

alcohol (PVA)-coated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) hemisphere (3 mm in radius and 1 mm 

in thickness) by consecutive depositions of PDMS and PVA on a glass slide. The transparency 


of the PDMS/PVA stamp allows us to align its center to a selected hBN nanothermometer 

situated on a silicon substrate with the aid of a long-range objective lens mounted on a CMOS 

camera. The silicon substrate is then heated up to 70 ℃ and the stamp is brought into contact 

with the hBN nanothermometer. Since the temperature is close to the glass transition 

temperature of PVA (80 ℃), the polymer is softened, which causes the hBN nanoflake to 

partially set in the PVA polymer. The hemispherical shape of the stamp allows for the selective 

pick-up of the hBN nanothermometer with an effective contact area of ~50 × 50 µm2. Upon 

reducing the temperature to ambient conditions, the PVA-plus-hBN stamp solidifies. It is lifted 

and is ready to be moved over the target sample circuit, which is treated beforehand in a 

commercial UV ozone cleaner for 5 min to remove surface contaminants and render the surface 

highly hydrophilic. The stamp-plus-hBN flake is aligned to the target location of the circuit, 

brought into contact, and heated at 110 ℃ at which the PVA liquifies releasing the hBN 

nanothermometer; the temperature is kept at 110 ℃ for a minute to ensure complete release. 

The stamp is then lifted from the sample, leaving the hBN nanothermometer on the circuit. The 

PVA layer is easily washed off with warm water. Notebly, our method is universal and can be 

applied for a wide range of target materials possessing different surface energies. To 

demonstrate this point, we will perform the deterministic transfers on circuits made from three 


representative metals, namely gold, chromium and nickel. The details will be discussed in the 

later section of the text.

Figure 2. Deterministic transfer and characterization of the transferred hBN nanothermometer. 

a) Schematic of the dry-transfer process developed to transfer any hBN nanoflake from a SiO2

substrate (where the hBN nanoflakes are pre-characterized) onto the targeted location of a 

microcircuit (see main text). b) Optical image of the hBN nanoflake (marked by the red circle) 

transferred onto the circuit. c) Corresponding AFM image and height profile (inset) of the hBN 

nanoflake onto the circuit; the profile data refers to the section indicated by the white dashed 

line. d) confocal PL map showing that the emitter stays optically active after transfer. e) PL 

spectrum from the quantum emitter after transfer. Inset: second-order autocorrelation function 

showing g(2)(τ = 0) = 0.38, which is indicative of a single-photon emitter. 

Figure 2b shows a wide-field optical image with a typical hBN flake-nanothermometer 

(circled in red) successfully transferred onto the circuit. The flake was pre-characterised prior 

to transfer to confirm it hosted a stable single-photon emitter. After transfer, Raman 

spectroscopy confirmed that the nanothermometer was high-quality hBN, with the E2g peak 

appearing at ~1365 cm-1 with a full width half maximum (FWHM) of ~10 cm-1 (cf. Supporting 

Information Figure S2a). We used atomic force microscopy (AFM) to determine the height 

and dimensions of the nanothermometer (Figure 2c): the lateral and vertical dimensions of the 

hBN flake are ~900 nm and ~280 nm, respectively. We verified that the hBN emitter was still 


optically active after transfer via confocal microscopy (Figure 2d). Figure 2e shows the 

spectrum and second order autocorrelation function, g(2)(τ), collected for the emitter after 

transfer onto the circuit. The value of g(2)(τ) < 0.5 indicates that the photoluminescence 

originates from a hBN single photon emitter (SPE). Time-resolved photoluminescence and 

polarization spectroscopy measurements also show that the emitter possesses a lifetime of (6.1 

± 0.1) ns and linearly polarised emission (cf. Supporting Information Figure S2b and S2c).

Note that using a single emitter rather than an ensemble offers a series of advantages.  Besides 

the aforementioned and obvious benefit of the reduced size of the nanosensor, working with a 

single emitter should also reduce the error on the measured observables—ZPL position and 

linewidth in this case. The photoluminescence spectrum of a single emitter, for instance, is not 

subject to inhomogeneous broadening; and whilst an individual emitter can still be affected by 

local fluctuations, e.g. strain, nearby trapped charges and other lattice defects these can be more 

easily accounted for when selecting the hBN candidate nanothermometer prior to pick-up.

Figures 3a and 3b show the schematic and the actual picture of the circuit we used to conduct 

our thermosensing experiments. We gradually increased the current flown through the circuit 

to create realistic working conditions. Upon flowing current through it, the circuit is heated up 

by the Joule effect. Each value of the current was held for 10 minutes to guarantee thermal 

equilibrium was reached, after which five consecutive 10-s spectra were acquired. Each 

spectrum was fitted with a Lorentzian, and the corresponding ZPL position was extracted. 

Figure 3c shows a plot of the shift in ZPL position as a function of the applied current. From 

10 to 50 mA, the ZPL wavelength red-shifts by about ~0.25 nm, while from 50 to 90 mA it

red-shifts by ~2.25 nm.  By utilizing the temperature calibration curve for the ZPL position we 

then obtained an actual temperature reading from the circuit as a function of input current 

(Figure 3d). Specifically, we determined that the temperature increased from ~300 K to ~310 

K as the current varied from 10 to 50 mA, and from ~310 K to ~360 K as the current was 

increased from 50 to 90 mA. Similar results (data not shown) were obtained when monitoring 

the change of the ZPL linewidth but, as discussed above, the linewidth-based measurement is 

more prone to error and leads to lower resolution (cf. supporting information Figure S4). 

Figure S3 in the Supplementary Information also shows how the resolution of the 


nanothermometer can be improved at the cost of bandwidth, i.e. improving the signal to noise 

ratio of the measurement by integrating for a longer time. 

Figure 3. A real-time temperature measurement in micro-circuits using quantum emitters in 

transferred hBN nanoflakes. a) Schematic illustration of the microcircuit and hBN 

nanothermometer placed onto it for temperature mapping. b) Optical image of a gold 

microcircuit made by the EBL technique and used (red circle) in our first experiment. c) Shift 

of the quantum emitter’s ZPL wavelength as an increasing current is applied. d) Corresponding 

values for the temperature as estimated by the ZPL shift after the emitter has been calibrated 


against a known set of temperatures. e) Optical image of the chromium microcircuit made by 

EBL and used in our second experiment. Insets: zoomed-in optical images of portions of the 

microcircuit where hBN nanoflakes have been transferred on (numbered circles 1–3) and 

corresponding PL confocal map. The inset scale is 10 um. f) Temperature measurement for the 

three positions in (e) as current through the circuit is increased. Temperatures are estimated 

from the calibrated shift in the emitters’ ZPL.

To further demonstrate the utility of the technique in practical scenarios, we monitored the 

temperature of multiple target locations on a chromium micro-circuit by measuring the 

photoluminescence of three hBN nanoflakes transferred onto it (Figure 3e). The metallic 

contacts were fabricated with different widths in the inner (2-µm width) and outer (4-µm width) 

part of the circuit. Given the different resistivity and heat dissipation rates of each of the three 

target positions, their respective temperature was expected to be different. 

Each hBN-nanothermometer was a single quantum emitter. Their photoluminescence and 

temperature calibration is shown in the Supplementary Information, Figures S4g (Position 1), 

S4e (Position 2), and S4d (Position 3). Figure 3f shows the estimated temperature of each 

position as the current was increased from 2 mA to 20 mA. As expected, the temperature in 

position 3 was consistently lower than that in positions 1 and 2 as in 3 the hBN-

nanothermometer was not in contact with the metal (it was ~3 µm away). The temperature was 

the highest in position 2 where the circuit is the narrowest. Figure S5 in the Supplementary 

Information shows the details of the measurement. Briefly, both position 1 and 2 (on-circuit) 

exhibited a linear temperature vs power relationship whereas in position 3 (off-circuit) the 

relationship was non-linear. While the linear relationship with the temperature of on-circuits 

locations is due to the simple Joule heating phenomenon, the non-linear trend at the off-circuit 

location is attributed to the heat sink effect by the substrate, consistent with previous studies.48-

49 The Supplementary Information (Figure S6) shows a third example with a hBN 

nanothermometer transferred onto a nickel circuit and used to map its temperature (Fig. S4h

and S6c).   

We finally turn our attention to comparing the performance of our hBN nanothermometers to 

that of other homologous nanoscale thermal probes. The comparison is conducted only 

considering other nanothermometers which are, like ours, all-optical and specifically map 

temperature values onto spectral shifts in photoluminescence. Figure 4 summarizes the 

analysis by showing the sensitivity of each technique (y-axis) as well as the maximum working 


temperature (x-axis). Nanothermometers in the top-right corner of the table have, desirably, 

both high sensitivity and large working temperature range. The sensitivity of the hBN 

nanothermometers presented in this work (cf. Supplementary Information, Fig. S7) is, 

comparatively, almost three-fold and five-fold higher than that of nanothermometers based on 

diamond 
tin-vacancy32
and 
germanium-vacancy 
colour 
centres50
Quantum-dot 

nanothermometers can reach higher sensitivities, yet their narrow temperature range can 

prevent their application in realizations requiring the monitoring of high temperatures.51

Figure 4. Sensitivity (y-axis) and upper-temperature limit (x-axis), while maintaining linear 

response, of some of the common nanothermometers which use shifts in ZPL wavelength 

centre to map temperature.  

In conclusion, we have demonstrated a novel nanothermometry technique based on measuring 

photoluminescence spectral shifts of bright single photon sources in hexagonal boron-nitride. 

The technique has several advantages over homologous all-optical thermosensing methods. 

The single nature of the emitter results in smaller nanosensor sizes (thus potentially better 

spatial resolution), while still achieving better sensitivities over a large temperature range, 0 K 

< ΔT ≲ 800 K. Furthermore, the 2D nature of hBN grants these nanosensors excellent thermal 

contact and compatibility with the measurement of temperatures in stack of heterogeneous 2D 

materials. We have also shown the versatility of the technique by measuring the temperature 

of selected target points in a series of custom-built micro-circuits made of gold, chromium and 

nickel. Our results offer an intriguing alternative to other nanothermometry methods especially 


in the context of characterizing the performance of high-power electronics as well as 

investigating the complex thermal dynamics of miniaturized, quasi-two-dimensional electronic 

devices.

Experimental Methods

Preparation of  hBN nanoflakes on silicon (Si) substrate. The commercial solution of 200-

nm hBN nanoflakes (Graphene Supermarket) is dropcast onto a Si substrate. The substrate is 

then annealed for 1 hour in vacuum (5 mTorr) in a tube furnace (Lindberg/ Blue Minimite) at 

1000 °C with Argon flow rate of 50 sccm, which is used to activate and stabilize the hBN 

quantum emitters.

Preparation of the microcircuit on the SiO2/Si substrate by electron beam lithography 

(EBL). An amount of ~0.1 ml of 950 PMMA is dropcast on the thermally grown SiO2 (~300 

nm) on Si substrate and spun for 1 min at 3000 rpm to get an homogeneous PMMA coating 

(thickness ~200 nm). Microcircuits are patterned using a conventional SEM (Zeiss Supra 

55VP) equipped with the Raith EBL system. The pattern PMMA is removed via immersion 

into MIBK/IPS (1:3) solution. The substrate is then coated with a metal (gold, chromium or 

nickel) film (thickness ~60 nm) using a lab-built plasma sputter deposition chamber. After 

immersion in high-purity warm acetone, the metal parts on the PMMA are washed off together 

with the PMMA itself leaving behind the patterned metal microcircuits (thickness ~60 nm).   

Align transfer. The deterministic transfer was conducted by a lab-built align-transfer setup 

which includes a conventional optical microscope equipped with a long working distance 

objective, a digital camera connected to a computer and two micropositioners (one controlling 

the sample and the other the stamp) as shown in Figure S1 (cf. also main text). The optical 

microscope is used to do the alignment. The stamp is used to pick up and release a selected 

hBN nanoflake. The stamp is made by a mixture, 10:1 volume ratio, of Sylgard 184 prepolymer 

and crosslinking agent to form a hemispherical PDMS base on the slide; this is followed by 

dropping a PVA solution to form a PVA coating. The heating stage is connected to a source 

meter unit (SMU, Keithley 2400), while a thermocouple is used to track the temperature of the 

sample.

Optical characterization. The substrates and microcircuits with hBN nanoflakes are mounted 

onto a three-dimensional micropositioner in a lab-built photoluminescence (PL) confocal 


microscopy setup. The system is equipped with a  532-nm continuous wave (Gem 532, Laser 

quantum Ltd.) laser and a long working distance air objective (numerical aperture 0.7, 

Olympus). The emitted photons are collected through a graded-index multimode fiber with an 

aperture of 62.5 µm. A 20% / 80% fiber-splitter directs the photons (20%) to an avalanche 

photodiode (APD) (Excelitas Technologies)  and (80%) to a spectrometer (QEPro, Ocean 

Optics). In the experiments hBN emitters are pre-characterised, with the samples being 

mounted on the heating stage connected to the SMU (for heating) and the thermocouple (for 

measuring the sample temperature). Second-order autocorrelation measurements are conducted 

in a Hanbury Brown-Twiss interferometer equipped with two APDs and a time-correlated 

single-photon counting module (PicoHarp 300, PicoQuant). Raman spectroscopy is carried out 

with a Renishaw in Via RamanTM microscope equipped with a 633-nm laser source. Time-

resolved fluorescence measurements are performed using picosecond pulses at 510 nm, pulse 

width 100 ps and repetition rate 80 MHz  (PiL051XTM, Advanced Laser Diode Systems A.L.S. 

GmbH).

Author Information

Corresponding author

*Email (T. T. Tran): trongtoan.tran@uts.edu.au

Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest

Acknowledgments

We thank Dr. Sejeong Kim for building the transfer setup. We acknowledge financial support 

from the Australian Research Council (via DP180100077, DE180100810 and DP190101058). 


References

1.
Jaque, D.; Vetrone, F., Luminescence nanothermometry. Nanoscale 2012, 4 (15), 4301-

4326.

2.
Brites, C. D. S.; Lima, P. P.; Silva, N. J. O.; Millán, A.; Amaral, V. S.; Palacio, F.; 

Carlos, L. D., Thermometry at the nanoscale. Nanoscale 2012, 4 (16), 4799-4829.

3.
Sotoma, S.; Epperla, C. P.; Chang, H.-C., Diamond Nanothermometry. ChemNanoMat 

2018, 4 (1), 15-27.

4.
Bai, T.; Gu, N., Micro/Nanoscale Thermometry for Cellular Thermal Sensing. Small 

2016, 12 (34), 4590-4610.

5.
del Rosal, B.; Ximendes, E.; Rocha, U.; Jaque, D., In Vivo Luminescence 

Nanothermometry: from Materials to Applications. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2017, 5 (1), 1600508.

6.
Vreugdenburg, T. D.; Willis, C. D.; Mundy, L.; Hiller, J. E., A systematic review of 

elastography, electrical impedance scanning, and digital infrared thermography for breast 

cancer screening and diagnosis. Breast Cancer Res. Treat. 2013, 137 (3), 665-676.

7.
Schroeder, A.; Heller, D. A.; Winslow, M. M.; Dahlman, J. E.; Pratt, G. W.; Langer, 

R.; Jacks, T.; Anderson, D. G., Treating metastatic cancer with nanotechnology. Nat. Rev. 

Cancer 2012, 12 (1), 39-50.

8.
O'Neal, D. P.; Hirsch, L. R.; Halas, N. J.; Payne, J. D.; West, J. L., Photo-thermal tumor 

ablation in mice using near infrared-absorbing nanoparticles. Cancer Letters 2004, 209 (2), 

171-176.

9.
Kamei, Y.; Suzuki, M.; Watanabe, K.; Fujimori, K.; Kawasaki, T.; Deguchi, T.; 

Yoneda, Y.; Todo, T.; Takagi, S.; Funatsu, T.; Yuba, S., Infrared laser–mediated gene 

induction in targeted single cells in vivo. Nature Methods 2009, 6 (1), 79-81.

10.
Yue, Y.; Wang, X., Nanoscale thermal probing. Nano Reviews 2012, 3 (1), 11586.

11.
Pop, E., Energy dissipation and transport in nanoscale devices. Nano Research 2010, 3

(3), 147-169.

12.
Pop, E.; Sinha, S.; Goodson, K. E., Heat Generation and Transport in Nanometer-Scale 

Transistors. Proceedings of the IEEE 2006, 94 (8), 1587-1601.

13.
Ziabari, A.; Torres, P.; Vermeersch, B.; Xuan, Y.; Cartoixà, X.; Torelló, A.; Bahk, J.-

H.; Koh, Y. R.; Parsa, M.; Ye, P. D.; Alvarez, F. X.; Shakouri, A., Full-field thermal imaging 

of quasiballistic crosstalk reduction in nanoscale devices. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9 (1), 255.

14.
Geim, A. K.; Grigorieva, I. V., Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 2013, 499

(7459), 419-25.


15.
Akinwande, D.; Petrone, N.; Hone, J., Two-dimensional flexible nanoelectronics. Nat. 

Commun. 2014, 5, 5678.

16.
Butler, S. Z.; Hollen, S. M.; Cao, L.; Cui, Y.; Gupta, J. A.; Gutiérrez, H. R.; Heinz, T. 

F.; Hong, S. S.; Huang, J.; Ismach, A. F.; Johnston-Halperin, E.; Kuno, M.; Plashnitsa, V. V.; 

Robinson, R. D.; Ruoff, R. S.; Salahuddin, S.; Shan, J.; Shi, L.; Spencer, M. G.; Terrones, M.; 

Windl, W.; Goldberger, J. E., Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities in Two-Dimensional 

Materials Beyond Graphene. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (4), 2898-2926.

17.
Palacios-Berraquero, C.; Barbone, M.; Kara, D. M.; Chen, X.; Goykhman, I.; Yoon, D.; 

Ott, A. K.; Beitner, J.; Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Ferrari, A. C.; Atatüre, M., Atomically 

thin quantum light-emitting diodes. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 12978.

18.
Löw, P.; Kim, B.; Takama, N.; Bergaud, C., High-Spatial-Resolution Surface-

Temperature Mapping Using Fluorescent Thermometry. Small 2008, 4 (7), 908-914.

19.
Okabe, K.; Inada, N.; Gota, C.; Harada, Y.; Funatsu, T.; Uchiyama, S., Intracellular 

temperature mapping with a fluorescent polymeric thermometer and fluorescence lifetime 

imaging microscopy. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3 (1), 705.

20.
Albers, A. E.; Chan, E. M.; McBride, P. M.; Ajo-Franklin, C. M.; Cohen, B. E.; Helms, 

B. A., Dual-Emitting Quantum Dot/Quantum Rod-Based Nanothermometers with Enhanced 

Response and Sensitivity in Live Cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 (23), 9565-9568.

21.
Carattino, A.; Caldarola, M.; Orrit, M., Gold Nanoparticles as Absolute 

Nanothermometers. Nano Lett. 2018, 18 (2), 874-880.

22.
Qiu, X.; Zhou, Q.; Zhu, X.; Wu, Z.; Feng, W.; Li, F., Ratiometric upconversion 

nanothermometry with dual emission at the same wavelength decoded via a time-resolved 

technique. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), 4.

23.
Mi, C.; Zhou, J.; Wang, F.; Lin, G.; Jin, D., Ultrasensitive Ratiometric 

Nanothermometer with Large Dynamic Range and Photostability. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31 (22), 

9480-9487.

24.
Toyli, D. M.; Christle, D. J.; Alkauskas, A.; Buckley, B. B.; Van de Walle, C. G.; 

Awschalom, D. D., Measurement and Control of Single Nitrogen-Vacancy Center Spins above 

600 K. Phys. Rev. X 2012, 2 (3).

25.
Wort, C. J. H.; Balmer, R. S., Diamond as an electronic material. Mater. Today 2008,

11 (1), 22-28.

26.
Fukami, M.; Yale, C. G.; Andrich, P.; Liu, X.; Heremans, F. J.; Nealey, P. F.; 

Awschalom, D. D., All-Optical Cryogenic Thermometry Based on Nitrogen-Vacancy Centers 

in Nanodiamonds. Phys. Rev. Appl. 2019, 12 (1), 014042.


27.
Plakhotnik, T.; Gruber, D., Luminescence of nitrogen-vacancy centers in 

nanodiamonds at temperatures between 300 and 700 K: perspectives on nanothermometry. 

Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2010, 12 (33), 9751-9756.

28.
Nguyen, C. T.; Evans, R. E.; Sipahigil, A.; Bhaskar, M. K.; Sukachev, D. D.; Agafonov, 

V. N.; Davydov, V. A.; Kulikova, L. F.; Jelezko, F.; Lukin, M. D., All-optical nanoscale 

thermometry with silicon-vacancy centers in diamond. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2018, 112 (20), 

203102.

29.
Choi, S.; Agafonov, V. N.; Davydov, V. A.; Plakhotnik, T., Ultrasensitive All-Optical 

Thermometry Using Nanodiamonds with a High Concentration of Silicon-Vacancy Centers 

and Multiparametric Data Analysis. ACS Photonics 2019, 6 (6), 1387-1392.

30.
Fan, J.-W.; Cojocaru, I.; Becker, J.; Fedotov, I. V.; Alkahtani, M. H. A.; Alajlan, A.; 

Blakley, S.; Rezaee, M.; Lyamkina, A.; Palyanov, Y. N.; Borzdov, Y. M.; Yang, Y.-P.; 

Zheltikov, A.; Hemmer, P.; Akimov, A. V., Germanium-Vacancy Color Center in Diamond as 

a Temperature Sensor. ACS Photonics 2018, 5 (3), 765-770.

31.
Tran, T. T.; Regan, B.; Ekimov, E. A.; Mu, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Gao, W.-b.; Narang, P.; 

Solntsev, A. S.; Toth, M.; Aharonovich, I.; Bradac, C., Anti-Stokes excitation of solid-state 

quantum emitters for nanoscale thermometry. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5 (5), eaav9180.

32.
Alkahtani, M.; Cojocaru, I.; Liu, X.; Herzig, T.; Meijer, J.; Küpper, J.; Lühmann, T.; 

Akimov, A. V.; Hemmer, P. R., Tin-vacancy in diamonds for luminescent thermometry. Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 2018, 112 (24), 241902.

33.
Mochalin, V. N.; Shenderova, O.; Ho, D.; Gogotsi, Y., The properties and applications 

of nanodiamonds. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7 (1), 11-23.

34.
Schietinger, S.; Barth, M.; Aichele, T.; Benson, O., Plasmon-Enhanced Single Photon 

Emission from a Nanoassembled Metal−Diamond Hybrid Structure at Room Temperature. 

Nano Lett. 2009, 9 (4), 1694-1698.

35.
Kianinia, M.; Shimoni, O.; Bendavid, A.; Schell, A. W.; Randolph, S. J.; Toth, M.; 

Aharonovich, I.; Lobo, C. J., Robust, directed assembly of fluorescent nanodiamonds. 

Nanoscale 2016, 8 (42), 18032-18037.

36.
Englund, D.; Shields, B.; Rivoire, K.; Hatami, F.; Vuckovic, J.; Park, H.; Lukin, M. D., 

Deterministic coupling of a single nitrogen vacancy center to a photonic crystal cavity. Nano 

Lett. 2010, 10 (10), 3922-6.

37.
Li, X.; Scully, R. A.; Shayan, K.; Luo, Y.; Strauf, S., Near-Unity Light Collection 

Efficiency from Quantum Emitters in Boron Nitride by Coupling to Metallo-Dielectric 

Antennas. ACS Nano 2019, 13 (6), 6992-6997.


38.
Vogl, T.; Campbell, G.; Buchler, B. C.; Lu, Y.; Lam, P. K., Fabrication and 

Deterministic Transfer of High-Quality Quantum Emitters in Hexagonal Boron Nitride. ACS 

Photonics 2018, 5 (6), 2305-2312.

39.
Kianinia, M.; Regan, B.; Tawfik, S. A.; Tran, T. T.; Ford, M. J.; Aharonovich, I.; Toth, 

M., Robust Solid-State Quantum System Operating at 800 K. ACS Photonics 2017, 4 (4), 768-

773.

40.
Jungwirth, N. R.; Calderon, B.; Ji, Y.; Spencer, M. G.; Flatté, M. E.; Fuchs, G. D., 

Temperature Dependence of Wavelength Selectable Zero-Phonon Emission from Single 

Defects in Hexagonal Boron Nitride. Nano Lett. 2016, 16, 6052-6057.

41.
Duong, N. M. H.; Glushkov, E.; Chernev, A.; Navikas, V.; Comtet, J.; Nguyen, M. A. 

P.; Toth, M.; Radenovic, A.; Tran, T. T.; Aharonovich, I., Facile Production of Hexagonal 

Boron Nitride Nanoparticles by Cryogenic Exfoliation. Nano Lett. 2019, 19 (8), 5417-5422.

42.
Zhang, K.; Feng, Y.; Wang, F.; Yang, Z.; Wang, J., Two dimensional hexagonal boron 

nitride (2D-hBN): synthesis, properties and applications. J. Mater. Chem. C 2017, 5 (46), 

11992-12022.

43.
Hizhnyakov, V.; Kaasik, H.; Sildos, I., Zero-Phonon Lines: The Effect of a Strong 

Softening of Elastic Springs in the Excited State. Phys. Status Solidi B 2002, 234 (2), 644-653.

44.
Fu, K.-M. C.; Santori, C.; Barclay, P. E.; Rogers, L. J.; Manson, N. B.; Beausoleil, R. 

G., Observation of the Dynamic Jahn-Teller Effect in the Excited States of Nitrogen-Vacancy 

Centers in Diamond. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103 (25).

45.
Liu, Y.; Zhang, S.; He, J.; Wang, Z. M.; Liu, Z., Recent Progress in the Fabrication, 

Properties, and Devices of Heterostructures Based on 2D Materials. Nano-Micro Lett. 2019,

11 (1), 13.

46.
Frisenda, R.; Navarro-Moratalla, E.; Gant, P.; Perez De Lara, D.; Jarillo-Herrero, P.; 

Gorbachev, R. V.; Castellanos-Gomez, A., Recent progress in the assembly of nanodevices 

and van der Waals heterostructures by deterministic placement of 2D materials. Chem. Soc. 

Rev. 2018, 47 (1), 53-68.

47.
Kim, K.; Yankowitz, M.; Fallahazad, B.; Kang, S.; Movva, H. C. P.; Huang, S.; 

Larentis, S.; Corbet, C. M.; Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; Banerjee, S. K.; LeRoy, B. J.; Tutuc, 

E., van der Waals Heterostructures with High Accuracy Rotational Alignment. Nano Lett. 

2016, 16 (3), 1989-1995.

48.
Zheng, J.; Chen, Y.-K.; Zhou, Q., Heat transfer across a nanoscale pressurized air gap 

and its application in magnetic recording. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8 (1), 3343.


49.
Balčytis, A.; Ryu, M.; Juodkazis, S.; Morikawa, J., Micro-thermocouple on nano-

membrane: thermometer for nanoscale measurements. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8 (1), 6324.

50.
Fan, J.-W.; Cojocaru, I.; Becker, J.; Fedotov, I. V.; Alkahtani, M. H. A.; Alajlan, A.;

Blakley, S.; Rezaee, M.; Lyamkina, A.; Palyanov, Y. N.; Borzdov, Y. M.; Yang, Y.-P.; 

Zheltikov, A.; Hemmer, P.; Akimov, A. V., Correction to Germanium-Vacancy Color Center 

in Diamond as a Temperature Sensor. ACS Photonics 2018, 5 (11), 4710-4710.

51.
Li, S.; Zhang, K.; Yang, J.-M.; Lin, L.; Yang, H., Single Quantum Dots as Local 

Temperature Markers. Nano Lett. 2007, 7 (10), 3102-3105.


