IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 31, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2019
955

Optical Pre-Emphasis by Cascaded Graphene
Electro Absorption Modulators

V. Sorianello, G. Contestabile
, M. Midrio, M. Pantouvaki, I. Asselbergs,
J. Van Campenhout, C. Huyghebaerts, and M. Romagnoli

Abstract—A simple optical circuit made by a cascade of two
graphene-on-silicon electro absorption modulators (EAMs) of
different length is used for the optical pre-emphasis of 10 Gb/s
non-return-to-zero (NRZ) signals by delay-inverse-weight com-
pensation. Transmission up to 100 km on single mode fiber
(SMF) without dispersion compensation is reported, showing also
the large performance advantage (6 dB in back-to back and
around 5 dB in transmission) in respect of the conventional single
EAM transmitter configuration.

Index
Terms—Electro
absorption
modulators,
graphene
photonics, optical pre-emphasis, dispersion compensation.

I. INTRODUCTION
G
RAPHENE is nowadays extensively studied for a large
range of applications including its use in photonic inte-
grated circuits (PICs) [1]. In PICs, graphene is expected to
improve device performance simplifying, at the same time,
the fabrication technology [2]. In particular, graphene-based
photodetectors do not need Ge epitaxy (currently used for
Si photonics photodetectors), and also work on much larger
spectral regions. Moreover, they can be extremely fast, and
work at zero dark current when operated in voltage-detection
mode
[3],
[4].
Similarly,
graphene-based
electro-optic
modulators have a number of advantages over Si-based
modulators. They are capable of efficient and broadband
electro-absorption or phase modulation and are compatible
with complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
processing with simplified post-processing fabrication on var-
ious substrates. Indeed, graphene modulators do not strictly
require Si or Ge doping, hence, Si, SiN, SiO2 or other
materials can be used as waveguides [2] and short devices (of

Manuscript received February 15, 2019; revised April 17, 2019; accepted
April 24, 2019. Date of publication May 2, 2019; date of current ver-
sion May 23, 2019. This work was supported in part by the Project
GrapheneCore1 through the European Commission under Grant 696656.
(Corresponding author: G. Contestabile.)
V. Sorianello and M. Romagnoli are with the Photonic Networks and
Technologies Laboratory, Consorzio Nazionale per le Telecomunicazioni
(CNIT), 56124 Pisa, Italy.
G. Contestabile is with the Photonic Networks and Technologies Laboratory,
Consorzio Nazionale per le Telecomunicazioni (CNIT), 56124 Pisa, Italy,
and also with Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, TeCIP Institute, 56124 Pisa, Italy
(e-mail: contesta@sssup.it).
M. Midrio is with the Photonic Networks and Technologies Laboratory,
Consorzio Nazionale per le Telecomunicazioni (CNIT), 56124 Pisa, Italy, and
also with the Engineering Department, University of Udine, 33100 Udine,
Italy.
M. Pantouvaki, I. Asselbergs, J. Van Campenhout, and C. Huyghebaerts are
with the IMEC, 3001 Leuven, Belgium.
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this letter are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LPT.2019.2914366

the order of 50-150 microns length), driven in lumped mode,
can be realized.
Recently, broadband electro-absorption [5] and pure phase
modulation [6] have been reported on a Si platform using
short single layer graphene-based modulators. Graphene
electro absorption modulators (EAMs), in particular, have
been reported working at 10 Gb/s [7], and very recently,
at 20 Gb/s [8], using a single layer configuration, being
mainly bandwidth limited by the graphene-metal electrical
contact resistance value. Additionally, graphene EAMs show
significant positive linear chirp associated to the Fermi level
electrical gating responsible for the absorption changes [9].
The presence of chirp with the right sign on the modulated sig-
nals makes possible chromatic dispersion compensation while
transmitting on standard single mode fibers (SMFs). Indeed,
the combination of linearly chirped signals and anomalous
dispersion in SMFs counteracts the signal spreading due to
the fiber chromatic dispersion. This pulse temporal lensing
effect make possible the transmission of 10 Gb/s signals on,
at least, 100 km SMF, as reported in [9].
In this letter, we show that signals generated by graphene
EAMs can be significantly improved by optical pre-emphasis
using a simple compact circuit made cascading two short
graphene EAMs driven by two proper complementary elec-
trical signals. This paper is an extended version of a recently
presented conference paper [10], and reports 10 Gb/s back-
to-back and transmission results obtained with the double
EAM modulator, also performing a comparison with the single
modulator case.

II. DEVICE DESCRIPTION

The fabricated device is made by cascading two single layer
Graphene (SLG) on Si waveguide EAMs similar to the one
recently reported in [7], [9]. As shown in Fig. 1, it is made
by input/output vertical coupling gratings and the cascade of
a 100 and a 50 μm-long EAM.
The modulators are made by Si photonic waveguides
with SLG transferred on top of the Si waveguide core. The
Si photonic part was realized within the IMEC iSiPP25G
silicon on insulator (SOI) platform [11]. The Si ridge
waveguide is designed to support a single transverse electric
(TE) in-plane polarized optical mode with a core cross-section
of 480 nm x 220 nm and 60 nm slab. The waveguide is boron
doped to reduce the Si electrode resistance and allow high-
speed operation. The waveguide SiO2 top cladding is thinned
down to 10 nm on the top of the waveguide core. SLG is grown

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License. For more information, see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/


956
IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 31, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2019

Fig. 1.
Top part, mask design of the cascaded graphene EAMs. Lower part,
microscope picture of a fabricated sample.

by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on copper foil [12],
and then transferred on the waveguide by standard wet
transfer
[13].
Graphene
was
shaped
through
optical
lithography and oxygen ashing. Metal contacts were placed
by metal lift-off on the SLG and Si with separate processes:
Palladium (Pd) is used for the SLG, while Si is contacted
with a stack of Titanium (Ti)/Platinum (Pt)/Gold (Au). The
10 nm-thick layer of SiO2 insulates Graphene from the Si
waveguide core and forms a Silicon-Insulator-Graphene (SIG)
capacitor [14]. Fermi Level on Graphene may be changed by
applying a voltage across the SIG capacitor. Standard single
polarization grating couplers having 5 dB insertion loss at
1550 nm are also included in the device design for input and
output vertical fiber coupling.
As recently reported in [9], the 100 μm graphene EAM
has a 5 GHz 3-dB electrooptic bandwidth, a modulation
efficiency of 1dB/V, a maximum attainable extinction ratio
of 4.5 dB. In addition, itshows an opposite optical transmissiv-
ity and refractive index change dependence with respect to the
applied voltage. This gives, in a certain range of Fermi levels,
an instantaneous and linear frequency chirp on the carved
optical signal as shown in Fig. 2a. The figure reports the signal
chirp in GHz measured by a complex spectrum analyzer in
correspondence of an isolated signal pulse. Moreover, it results
that the amount of linear chirp depends on the applied driving
voltage as reported in Fig. 2b.
This modulator pre-chirping can be used for fiber chromatic
dispersion compensation through the time lens effect and,
thanks to this effect, 100 km transmission on SMF at 10 Gb/s
has been reported [9] demonstrating a self-focusing distance
(transmission distance for which there is the same signal
sensitivity as in back-to-back) of 60 km (at a driving voltage
of 2.5 Vpp).
This chromatic dispersion resilience can be combined with
the optical pre-emphasis obtained by cascading two EAMs:
indeed, when the cascaded circuit is driven with data, and

Fig. 2.
a) Pulse amplitude profile (blue line) and measured instantaneous
frequency variation (red line) versus time for signals generated by the
graphene EAM. b) Pulse chirp dependence from the driving voltage.

Fig. 3.
Scheme of the electrical equivalent 1-tap pre-emphasis circuit which
approximates the cascaded modulators when electrically driven like in the
picture in the inset.

properly attenuated and delayed inverted-data signals, the opti-
cal circuit emulates a 1-tap filter frequency high-pass circuit
similar to the one reported in Fig. 3. This circuit performs
delay inverse weight compensation: the effect of the delay,
inversion, and weight, due to the second modulator, is to
compensate for the slower part of the response of the first
modulator (so enhancing the slow signal transitions due to the
bandwidth limitation).

III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

The setup for the transmission experiment is reported
in Fig. 4. An optical continuous wave (CW) signal generated
by an external cavity laser (ECL) at 1550 nm was coupled
into the chip through a TE vertical grating coupler. The two
EAMs were driven by 10 Gb/s data and inverted data through
two Bias Tees. A 231−1 long non-return-to-zero (NRZ) pseudo
random bit sequence (PRBS) with a peak-to-peak voltage
of 2.5Vpp was sent to the first EAM and the same delayed
and inverted sequence with a peak-to-peak voltage of 0.8 V to
the second one. Signal time delay between the two electrical


SORIANELLO et al.: OPTICAL PRE-EMPHASIS BY CASCADED GRAPHENE EAMs
957

Fig. 4.
Experimental set-up. PC= Polarization Controller, BPF= Optical Band-Pass Filter, OA= Optical Attenuator; EDFA= Erbium Doped Fiber Amplifier.

signals was 32 ps. The EAMs were biased at −1.3 V. Chip
insertion loss was about 19 dB so distributed: 10 dB due to
the grating couplers, 4 dB (estimated by simulations) due
to the two modulators, 5 dB due to scattering loss of the
waveguide. Those 5 dB extra losses are due to the actual
fabrication process [6], [7] which leaves the Si waveguides
with a suboptimal cladding layer.
An erbium doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) was used to
compensate for the chip losses and an optical band pass filter
(BPF) with a bandwidth of 1 nm to remove the out-band
optical noise introduced by the amplifier. A variable optical
attenuator (OA) was also used to control the optical power
at the input of the transmission fiber. SMF spools were of
different length, from 10 to 100 km, all having a dispersion
parameter D=17 ps/nm/km (β2 = −21.6 ps2/km). At the
output of the SMF, another set of EDFA, BPF and OA was
used to compensate the fiber propagation losses. A noise
loading stage based on an amplified spontaneous emission
(ASE) source, a BPF and OA, was used to properly perform bit
error rate (BER) measurement versus signal ASE. The noise
loaded optical signal was collected with a photo-receiver and
analyzed with an error detector.
The effect of the optical pre-emphasis by the cascaded
EAMs can be clearly seen starting from the back-to-back eye
diagrams reported in Fig. 5. On the right top part, the best
attainable eye diagram with the single EAM, on the lower
part, the best one by the cascaded EAMs.
The comparison is made using a 100 μm long single EAM,
like the one reported in [9], and the 100 μm plus the 50 μm
long modulator driven like reported in Fig. 3, i.e., with
the same sequence with opposite sign, after attenuation and
proper delay. The main modulating device is still the 100 μm
long EAM with the same absorption length, series resistance,
capacitance, and insertion loss, the second device contributes
with the slight over-modulation needed to compensate for the
slower part of the modulator response, at the expense of an
extra loss.
In both cases the extinction ratio is 2.5 dB, but, the cascaded
eye diagram is significantly more clear and open with a net
reduction of the pattern sequence dependence. This is due to
the enhanced digital transitions by high pass optical filtering
of the modulator cascade.
Overall, this gives a Q-factor improvement, measured by
the electrical sampling scope, of around 2, from 3.4 to 5.3.

Fig. 5.
Single and cascaded graphene EAM transmitter BER vs. OSNR in
back-to-back with correspondent eye diagrams. Time reference = 20 ps/div.
Blue linear trend curves are also added in the graph.

The oscilloscope measures the difference of the mean values
of the two signal levels (level for a “1” bit and level for a
“0” bit) divided by the sum of the noise standard deviations
at the two signal levels.
Correspondent BER measurements, also reported in Fig. 5
(as a function of the optical signal to noise ratio measured on
0.1 nm), show an OSNR gain of 6 dB for the cascaded mod-
ulators and the cancellation of the slight floor tendency given
by the modulator bandwidth limitations (EAM bandwidth ∼
5 GHz [9]). The back-to-back sensitivity (at 10−9 BER) is
at an OSNR of 28 dB. However, as reported in Fig. 6, and
similarly to what happens to the single graphene EAM [9],
the time lens effect, given by the combination of the signal
chirp and the fiber dispersion, compresses the optical bits
giving a net eye opening and a correspondent sensitivity
improvement. The improvement has its maximum at 40 km,
where the sensitivity is 27 dB (a slight eye opening can
be also appreciated comparing the eye diagrams at 10 and
40 km reported in the right part of Fig.6). The self-focusing
distance, the one for which there is a 0 dB OSNR penalty,
is about 60 km. From there on, additional fiber propagation
increases the transmission penalty because of the chromatic
dispersion pulse broadening which increases the inter-symbol
interference. In particular, at 100 km, the signal shows a
floor tendency at 10−9. Nevertheless, longer transmission
without chromatic dispersion compensation with a signal BER


958
IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 31, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2019

Fig. 6.
Cascaded graphene EAM transmitter BER vs. OSNR for signals
transmitted up to 100 km SMF. On the right, sample eye diagrams. Time
reference = 20 ps/div. Blue linear trend curves are also added in the graph.

Fig. 7. Single and cascaded graphene EAM transmitter BER vs. OSNR at 40,
60 and 100 km with correspondent eye diagrams. Time reference = 20 ps/div.
Blue linear trend curves are also added in the graph.

significantly lower than the conventional Reed-Solomon for-
ward error correction (RS-FEC) threshold of 10−3 is clearly
possible.
In order to compare these results with the single EAM,
sample eye diagrams and BER curves of cascaded and single
EAM (100 μm-long) are reported in Fig. 7, together with the
corresponding BER curves for the cases 40, 60 and 100 km.
The eye opening gain at the transmitter, reported in Fig. 5,
gives an improved transmitted signal at every distance so
that the 6 dB OSNR advantage in back-to-back is still more
than 5 dB at 40 and 60 km and also removes the BER floor
at 10−6 at 100 km. The signal improvement for every of the
transmission distances can be clearly envisioned by comparing
the recorded eye diagrams for the two cases reported in the
right part of Fig. 7.

IV. CONCLUSION

A novel silicon-graphene circuit which implements the
optical pre-emphasis for NRZ signals, made by the cascade
of a 100 and a 50 μm long EAM, has been fabricated and
reported, showing a significant improved sensitivity in back-to-
back (6 dB) and in fiber transmission up to 100 km, in respect
of the single graphene EAM. The delay inverse weight high
pass filtering optical pre-processing is obtained by driving
the second shorter modulator with a delayed inverted and
attenuated copy of the modulating electrical signal. Despite
10 Gb/s operation has been reported in this letter with a 5 GHz
bandwidth modulator, this is a very promising technique
for obtaining much faster operation when larger bandwidth
graphene EAM modulators are used.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to acknowledge Graphenea, Spain
for the supply of the CVD-grown graphene samples.

REFERENCES

[1] F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan, and A. C. Ferrari, “Graphene photonics
and optoelectronics,” Nature Photon., vol. 4, no. 9, pp. 611–622,
Sep. 2010.
[2] M. Romagnoli et al., “Graphene-based integrated photonics for next-
generation datacom and telecom,” Nat. Rev. Mater., vol. 3, pp. 392–414,
Oct. 2018.
[3] A. Urich, K. Unterrainer, and T. Mueller, “Intrinsic response time of
graphene photodetectors,” Nano Lett., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 2804–2808,
2011.
[4] F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia, and P. Avouris, “Ultra-
fast graphene photodetector,” Nature Nanotechnol., vol. 4, no. 12,
pp. 839–843, Oct. 2009.
[5] M. Liu et al., “A graphene-based broadband optical modulator,” Nature,
vol. 474, no. 7349, pp. 64–67, May 2011.
[6] V. Sorianello et al., “Graphene–silicon phase modulators with gigahertz
bandwidth,” Nature Photon., vol. 12, pp. 40–44, Dec. 2017.
[7] Y. Hu et al., “Broadband 10 Gb/s operation of graphene electro-
absorption modulator on silicon,” Laser Photon. Rev., vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 307–316, 2016.
[8] C. Alessandri et al., “Broadband 20 Gbit/s graphene-Si electro-
absorption
modulator,”
in
Proc.
ECOC,
Rome,
Italy,
2018,
Paper We4C.2.
[9] V. Sorianello et al., “Chirp management in silicon-graphene electro
absorption modulators,” Opt. Express, vol. 25, no. 16, pp. 19371–19381,
2017.
[10] V. Sorianello et al., “Optical delay inverse weight compensation with
graphene electro absorption modulators,” in Proc. ECOC, Rome, Italy,
2018, Paper Mo4H.6.
[11] P. P. Absil et al., “Imec iSiPP25G silicon photonics: A robust CMOS-
based photonics technology platform,” Proc. SPIE, vol. 9367, Feb. 2015,
Art. no. 93670V.
[12] X. Li et al., “Large-area synthesis of high-quality and uniform graphene
films on copper foils,” Science, vol. 324, no. 5932, pp. 1312–1314,
2009.
[13] J. Kang, D. Shin, S. Bae, and B. H. Hong, “Graphene transfer: Key for
applications,” Nanoscale, vol. 4, no. 18, pp. 5527–5537, 2012.
[14] V. Sorianello et al., “Complex effective index in graphene-silicon
waveguides,”
Opt.
Express,
vol.
24,
no.
26,
pp.
29984–29993,
2016.


