High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors

High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors

Remi Geiger,1, a) Arnaud Landragin,1, b) S´ebastien Merlet,1, c) and Franck Pereira Dos Santos1, d)

LNE-SYRTE, Observatoire de Paris - Universit´e PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Universit´e, 61, avenue de l’Observatoire,
75014 Paris, France

(Dated: 30 March 2020)

The research on cold-atom interferometers gathers a large community of about 50 groups
worldwide both in the academic and now in the industrial sectors.
The interest in this
sub-field of quantum sensing and metrology lies in the large panel of possible applications of
cold-atom sensors for measuring inertial and gravitational signals with a high level of stability
and accuracy. This review presents the evolution of the field over the last 30 years and focuses
on the acceleration of the research effort in the last 10 years. The article describes the physics
principle of cold-atom gravito-inertial sensors as well as the main parts of hardware and the
expertise required when starting the design of such sensors. It then reviews the progress in
the development of instruments measuring gravitational and inertial signals, with a highlight
on the limitations to the performances of the sensors, on their applications, and on the latest
directions of research.

Keywords: Atom interferometry, cold atoms, inertial sensors, quantum metrology and sens-
ing.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Interferometry with matter waves nearly dates back to
the first ages of quantum mechanics as the concept of
matter waves played a key role in the development of
the quantum theory, following the theoretical work of de
Broglie in 1924 and the ensuing experiments of Davis-
son, Germer and Thomson with electron beams. Since
then, performing interference experiments with various
types of matter-waves has driven the efforts of several
communities working with electrons, neutrons, atoms,
molecules, or anti-matter.
The field of atom interfer-
ometry has developped rapidly with the advancement of
atomic physics, which offers a high level of control and
reliability to the experimental physicist. This degree of
control has become even more impressive since the advent
of laser cooling techniques in the 1980s, which enhance
the wave nature of atoms by increasing their coherence
length.
Since pioneering experiments in 19911–5, the field of
atom interferometry has constantly grown, with an accel-
eration in the last 10 years. Cold-atom inertial sensors
based on light-pulse atom interferometry have reached
sensitivity and accuracy levels competing with or beating
inertial sensors based on different technologies. Such sen-
sors cover various applications ranging from geophysics
and inertial sensing to metrology and tests of funda-
mental physics. Addressing these applications requires
to constantly push further the performances of quantum
sensors.
As of 2020, about 50 research groups worldwide are
actively developing atom interferometers for different ap-
plications, and investigating techniques to improve the
performances of cold-atom inertial sensors.
Currently,

a)Electronic mail: remi.geiger@obspm.fr
b)Electronic mail: arnaud.landragin@obspm.fr
c)Electronic mail: sebastien.merlet@obspm.fr
d)Electronic mail: franck.pereira@obspm.fr

the research focuses on three mains aspects:

1. pushing the performances of current sensors;

2. identifying new sensor architectures or generic tech-
niques that can bring performance improvement or
simplified architectures;

3. using atom interferometers for various fundamental
and/or field applications.

Improving the performances of atom inertial sensors
covers different aspects: their sensitivity, but also their
stability, accuracy, dynamic range, compactness, trans-
portability, ease-of-use and cost. While the first 20 years
of research were essentially focused on sensitivity im-
provements and tests of fundamental physics in labora-
tory environments, more projects have started to address
field applications. In particular, this is the case for iner-
tial guidance, which requires at the same time high levels
of stability, wide dynamic ranges and high sampling fre-
quencies, compactness and robustness. For this field of
application though, cold-atom sensors are not yet mature
enough to compete with other technologies in all these as-
pects (e.g. ring laser gyroscopes for navigation). In that
sense, the course for greater performance is, for example,
at the core of the Quantum Sensors and Metrology pil-
lar of the several quantum technology programs over the
world.
Several reviews of the field have been published in the
last 10 years: the review Ref.6 in 2009 presents the whole
field of matter-wave interferometry and detailed some
of the cold-atom inertial sensor developments; more re-
cently, Ref.7 from 2014 presents the advancements re-
lated to atomic gyroscopes, and Ref.8 from 2016 presents
the principle of inertial quantum sensors using light and
matter and shows some examples; a perspective (Ref.9)
published in 2019 presents the challenges required to
bring atom interferometers out of the laboratory; the
review in Ref.10 from 2018 presents in details the ap-
plication of cold-atom sensors to tests of fundamental
physics and search for new physics. At a more special-
ized level, some review articles address specific problems

arXiv:2003.12516v1  [physics.atom-ph]  27 Mar 2020


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
2

linked to cold-atom sensors (e.g. the prospect of using
atom-lasers as a source for atom interferometers11), or
specific applications (e.g.
gravitational wave detection
by atom interferometry12,13). Two books, published in
1997 (Ref.14) and 2014 (Ref.15) gathering specialized con-
tributions from experts in the field allow to catch in more
details the various techniques and applications. To avoid
overlap with these contributions and address a general
audience, we focus here on cold-atom sensors aiming at
measuring inertial signals, with the aim to present an ex-
haustive and up-to-date view of the field, including both
physical and system engineering aspects. Trapped atom
interferometers, which represent an interesting perspec-
tive for both fundamental studies and miniaturized sen-
sors (but yet not competitive in terms of sensitivity and
accuracy) are also not described in details here (see for
instance the recent review of Ref.16).
This article is organized as follows. In section II, we
present the principles of light-pulse atom interferometry
which are generic to the different sensor architectures de-
scribed in this review. We explain the main limitations
to the sensitivity which drive the design of instruments.
Section III presents the most important elements of hard-
ware common to any cold-atom inertial sensor. Section
IV shows the developments of cold-atom gravimetry and
its applications.
Section V focuses on the research on
accelerometers and gyroscopes as the potential building
blocks of future inertial navigation systems. Section VI
briefly presents for completeness an overview of other in-
ertial measurements performed with cold-atom sensors,
such as measurement of recoil velocities, prospects for
gravitational wave detection or tests of the weak equiv-
alence principle. Section VII describes the latest atomic
physics techniques under study in academic laboratories
to improve the performances of cold-atom inertial sen-
sors. After the conclusion of the review, a list of sum-
mary points highlights the most important ideas of the
article and appendix A presents an up-to-date list of the
different research groups actively working in the field of
cold-atom inertial sensors.

II.
PRINCIPLE

In this section, we explain the basic principle of light
pulse interferometry with cold atoms, from the descrip-
tion of the light pulse beamsplitters to the creation of an
atom interferometer.
We consider here the case of beamsplitters based on
two photon transitions, such as based on stimulated Ra-
man transitions or Bragg diffraction ; the later being a
degenerated case of the former.
It represents the vast
majority of atom interferometers, because it allows at
the same time for very high sensitivities and accuracies,
for a good compromise in terms of simplicity. Indeed, the
use of optical transitions allows for both a large velocity
transfer to the atom (of the order of the cm.s−1) needed
for the sensitivity, and a very good control of the diffrac-
tion process, required for the accuracy. Furthermore, the
use of two-photon transitions releases the constraint on
the control of the optical phase of the lasers used in the

beamsplitters, as only the phase difference between the
two laser beams need to be controlled at first sight.
In the case of Raman transitions, the atoms interact
with two counter-propagating lasers, of angular frequen-
cies ω1 and ω2 and wavevectors k1 and k2. These two
light fields are detuned from a strong electronic transi-
tion (typically a few hundreds of MHz to a few GHz away
from the D2 line of alkali atoms) but their frequency dif-
ference matches the energy difference between two funda-
mental atomic states |a⟩ and |b⟩, which are then coupled
by the light fields in a so-called lambda scheme (Fig.1.a).
Atoms initially in the state |a⟩ will absorb a photon in the
laser 1 and de-excite by stimulated emission of a photon
in the laser 2, ending up in the state |b⟩. Conservation of
momentum implies that the two coupled states differ in
momentum by the momentum transfer ℏ( ⃗k1− ⃗k2) = ℏ⃗keff.
The process being coherent, the system undergoes Rabi
oscillations, such that by adjusting the duration and Rabi
frequency of the laser pulses, one can prepare the state of
an atom in a superposition of the two couple states with
controlled weights. In particular, a so-called π/2 pulse
acts as a matter wave beamsplitter, placing an atom in
a balanced 50/50 superposition of the two couple states.
A twice longer pulse is a π pulse, which swaps the two
states, acting as a mirror for the matter wave.
In the most simple case, a sequence of three π/2 − π −
π/2 pulses (of duration τ − 2τ − τ for a constant Rabi
frequency), separated by free evolutions times T −T then
realizes the atom interferometer displayed in figure 1.b.
There, the three pulses act as beamsplitters and mirrors,
separating, redirecting and recombining the two partial
wavepackets. This interferometer geometry is most often
referred to as a Mach Zehnder interferometer due to its
analogy of the latter optical interferometer.
The populations in the two output ports of the in-
terferometer are measured using a state selective fluo-
rescence detection17.
One finally derives out of these
two populations (N1, N2) the transition probability P =
N1/(N1 + N2). As in any other two-wave interferom-
eter, it is given by P = P0 + C/2 × cos(∆Φ), where C
is the interferometer contrast and ∆Φ the interferometer
phase. This phase is the difference between the phases
accumulated by the atomic wavepackets along the two
arms of the interferometer.
At the laser pulses, the phase difference between the
counter-propagating lasers φ gets imprinted onto the
atomic wavefunctions, so that in the end, the interfer-
ometer phase shift is given by a linear combination of
the lasers phase difference φ at the three pulses18,19:

∆Φ = φ1 − 2φ2 + φ3.
(1)

For free falling atoms, this leads to

∆Φ = −⃗keff · ⃗aT 2 + ⃗keff · (2⃗Ω × ⃗v)T 2,
(2)

where ⃗a and ⃗Ω are respectively the acceleration and the
rotation rate of the experiment with respect to a reference
frame defined by the purely inertial motion of the atoms.
This dependence to inertial forces allows one to actually
realize sensitive and absolute atom interferometry based
inertial sensors: accelerometers and gyroscopes.


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
3

(a)
(c)

Laser 1

Laser 2

energy

time

position

Laser 1

Laser 2

0
T
2T

detection

0
1
2
3
phase (  radians)

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

probability

gravity

(b)

FIG. 1. Principle of a light-pulse cold-atom inertial sensor. (a) Three-level atom coupled to two counter-propagating
laser beams. The atom is subject to a stimulated two-photon process by absorption of a photon from laser 1 and stimulated
emission of a photon in the mode of laser 2. This level diagram is typical of alkali atoms with two hyperfine ground states and
an excited state manifold from which the two lasers are detuned in frequency by ∆. The transition between internal states
is accompanied by a change of momentum given by ℏ(⃗k1 − ⃗k2) ≡ ℏ⃗keff. (b) A sequence of three light pulses allows to split,
deflect and recombine the atomic waves to form an atomic Mach-Zehnder interferometer. The detection of the atom state at
the output yields the atomic interference which is modulated by the difference of phase along the two arms. (c) Example of
arrangement of the laser beams in the vertical direction in which atoms are free falling.

- Non magnetic materials
- Pressure < 10−9 mBar
- Magnetic shields

Vacuum chamber

Control system

- CPU controlled
- Digital & Analog outputs
- µs accuracy
- Frequency synthesisers

Laser system

- 5 frequencies lasers
- Laser power ⇠ 1 W

- Phase stability

( ⇠
− 100 dBc/Hz at 10 kHz)

Optical subsystems

- Polarization maintaining fibers

- Anti-vibration system
- Accelerometer/Seismometer

- Tiltmeter
- Barometer
- CCD camera

Supp. Instrum.

- ...

Vibration noise reduction

- Acoustic isolation

- Detection/imaging system

- Collimators (waist ⇠ 1 cm)
- Stable fiber distribution system

- Frequency agility ⇠ 1 GHz

FIG. 2. Overview of the systems required in a cold-
atom inertial sensor.

The intrinsic sensitivity of these sensors is limited by
the noise on the measurement of the transition probabil-
ity, and ultimately by the so-called quantum projection
noise resulting from the projective measurements of the
populations in the two ports of the interferometer20.

III.
SYSTEM ENGINEERING

The hardware common to all cold-atom inertial sen-
sors consists of a vacuum chamber where the atoms are
interrogated, a laser system required for cooling, manip-
ulating and detecting them, an automatized control sys-
tem to operate and interface the instruments, and some
auxiliary instrumentation to stabilize the experiment. A
general view of the different sub-systems is presented in
figure 2.

A.
Vacuum system and cold-atom source

At first, a sample of cold atoms is prepared in an Ultra-
High Vacuum (UHV) chamber surrounded by magnetic
shields, using standard laser cooling methods. The level
of vacuum in the chamber must be below 10−9 hPa in
order to be non limiting for the coherence of the system
with atoms evolving freely during hundreds of ms. Such
UHV level is reached with combinations of pumping tech-
nologies such as turbomolecular pumps during backing
of the chamber, and getter and ion pumps after baking.
Moreover, the vacuum chamber shall be made of non-
magnetic materials (e.g. Titanium, aluminium, glass ...)
in order to limit the magnetic field gradients which are a
source of stray forces owing to the second order Zeeman
effect (for atom interferometers operating on transitions
insensitive to the first order Zeeman effect). When metal-
lic, the chambers are machined to accommodate typically
a dozen of optical windows.
They are interfaced with
coils that generate magnetic fields: a magnetic gradi-
ent for the MOT phase and an homogeneous bias field
for the interferometer itself. Most often alkali atoms are
used, and a preferred choice is 87Rb (interrogation wave-
length on the D2 line λ = 780 nm (Ref.21)). Loading of
a 3 dimensional Magneto Optical Trap directly from a
background vapor22 or the intense flux of a 2D MOT23

allows for gathering of order of 108 atoms in 100 ms.
Deep molasses cooling allows reaching temperature close
to the recoil limit of the order of 2 µK. Atoms are then
launched upwards in a fountain geometry24, or simply
released in free fall from the molasses25. A sequence of
microwave, pusher, and eventually Raman, pulses is then
used to prepare the atoms in a pure Zeeman insensitive
mF = 0 state, eventually with a narrower velocity dis-
tribution. This preparation phase reduces the sensitiv-
ity of the source to stray magnetic field fluctuations and
increases the contrast of the interferometer, which is in
general limited by the finite velocity spread of the source.


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
4

R1 
R2 

Raman 
Lasers 

52P3/2 

52S1/2 

F’= 3 

F’= 2 

F’= 1 

F’= 0 

F = 2 

F = 1 

-20Γ < δ < 

-2Γ 

Cooling  

Repumper 

Detection

Pusher 

193,740 8 MHz 

156,947 MHz 

72,218 MHz 

72,911 3 MHz 

6,834 682 610 904 29(9) GHz 

-2 < Δ < -0,5 GHz 

87Rb 

780,241 209 686 (13) nm 

384 230,484 468 5(62) GHz 

2,563 005 979 089 11 GHz 

4,271 676 631 815 19 GHz 

266,652 1 MHz 

FIG. 3. Level diagram of the 87Rb D2 line. (from Ref.21)
The five laser frequencies required for cooling, detecting and
manipulating the atoms with a stimulated two-photon Raman
process are represented.

B.
Laser system

Since cooling the atoms and manipulating their quan-
tum state is performed with lasers, the optical system
represents a key subsystem of a cold-atom inertial sen-
sor. The choice of laser technology is intimately linked
with the nature of the atom used. Since alkali atoms are
widely used, in particular Rubidium and Cesium inter-
rogated on their D2 lines (respectively at 780 nm and
852 nm), semiconductor diode laser technology has been
historically vastly deployed26. But telecom based laser
sources have also attracted a lot of attention owing to
the presence of qualified components (e.g.
for field or
space applications). This technology leads to commer-
cially available laser systems for cold-atom inertial sen-
sor experiments. To get enough optical power, of order
of hundreds of mW, fiber or semiconductor amplifiers are
used. All lasers need to be precisely tuned onto specific
frequencies. This is realized using a number of frequency
locking techniques:
saturation spectroscopy in vapour
cells, offset locks based on beatnote and acousto-optic
modulation. In addition, Raman lasers need to be phase
locked together.

The five optical frequencies needed to perform a cold-
atom inertial sensor are represented in figure 3, for 87Rb
interferometers based on Raman transitions. A variety
of different laser systems have been developed and pub-
lished, with different number of lasers, ranging from five
to only one, with designs constrained by the size, the
final application, the measurement environment condi-
tions and the evolution of technologies27–40. Figure 4 dis-
plays a compact free space optical system and a complete
architecture of a fibered optical bench which reached a
Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of 4.

a)

b)

FIG. 4. Examples of laser system. a) Photography of a
free space compact laser system. (Adapted with permission
from X. Zhang et al.
”Compact portable laser system for
mobile cold atom gravimeters”, Appl. Opt. 57, 6545-6551
(2018) c⃝The Optical Society (Ref.38)) . b) Example of opti-
cal architecture for an industrial telecom-doubled based sys-
tem; Iso/Tap: optical isolator with tap coupler, PPLN-WG:
waveguide PPLN crystal, Rb: Rubidium cell, Ph-mod: phase
modulator, EDFA: Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier, AOM:
Acousto-Optic Modulator, PMUX: polarization multiplexer.
The upper part shows the master laser, followed by the cool-
ing/detection laser. The bottom part shows the Raman lasers.
The middle panel presents an optional system which allows
to realize a Bloch elevator to launch the atoms and a delta
kick collimator. (Adapted by permission from Springer Na-
ture Customer Service Centre GmbH : Springer Nature, Eur.
Phys.
J. D, ”A prototype industrial laser system for cold
atom inertial sensing in space”, R. Caldani et al.
c⃝(2020),
(Ref.40)).

C.
Optical subsystems

Optical collimators are needed to shape and route light
beams from the laser system to the vacuum chamber.
When only one collimator was used in Ref.41 to realize
all the functions of a gravimeter (trapping, interferometer
and detection), most of the sensors actually use a ten of
collimators. When driving Raman transitions, the phase
difference between the Raman lasers needs to be stable
and well controlled, not only in time (which requires the


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
5

two beams to be phase-locked), but also in space (same
wavefront for both counterpropagating laser beams). It
can be realized by shaping both beams together using a
single common collimator and retroreflecting them on a
common mirror). Special care has thus to be paid in the
realization of this Raman collimator: most often fibered
for better stability in direction and shape, with a large
beam waist for flat wavefronts (see part.IV D), with a
well defined polarisation to maximize the coupling to the
atoms and an intensity profile as flat as possible in or-
der to keep the coupling homogeneous all along the atom
trajectory. The retroreflecting system, usually composed
of a quarter-wave plate and a mirror, constitutes a key
subsystem in order to achieve high accuracy, as it defines
the lasers equiphase, which constitute the reference for
the acceleration measurement. A very high level of opti-
cal quality (in particular planeity) is thus required for this
system (see part.IV D) in order to reduce the variation
of phase difference between the two counterpropagating
beams sampled at the three pulses. To keep any eventual
residual bias due to such wavefront distortions stable, one
needs stable atom trajectories. These are determined by
the cloud temperature, its initial mean velocity and po-
sition in the beams, which can be stabilized by locking
the optical powers of the molasses beams42. Finally, the
detection system which collects the fluorescence signals
from the clouds needs to be homogeneous and symmetric
in order to avoid asymmetry effects42,43.

D.
Control system

The automatized control of the apparatus, in particu-
lar of the laser system, shares the same constraints as typ-
ical atomic physics experiments: it requires tens of ana-
log and digital outputs with temporal resolution below
the µs, agile frequency synthesizers (RF and microwaves)
and analog-to-digital converters.
An important litera-
ture is available on the topic which is a key concern in
experiments due to the rapid evolution of hardware con-
trol standards as well as operating system versions. We
therefore refer the reader to the references in the most
recent publications or online materials on this subject,
e.g. Refs. 44–46.

E.
Vibration noise reduction

When increasing the interrogation time T, phase noise
induced by parasitic vibrations (i.e. at frequencies higher
that the sampling frequency) rapidly constitutes the
dominant limit to the sensitivity. Already when 2T gets
larger than a few ms, ground vibration noise will typically
limit the sensitivity, to a level of ∼ 10−5 m.s−2.τ −1/2,
so that the sensors need to be isolated and/or the vi-
brations measured to reject them.
Different methods
have been developed in order to reduce this noise source,
which have to be adapted to the environmental condi-
tions, being thus different for static sensors in a labora-
tory, transportable sensors in outdoor environment, and
mobile sensors for onboard measurements. They rely on

the use of isolation platforms, and auxiliary sensors like
seismometers or accelerometers, eventually combined to-
gether, or on the development of better immune interfer-
ometer schemes47.

IV.
GRAVITY SENSORS

Gravity sensors are without any doubt the most em-
blematic inertial sensors based on atom interferometry.
This stems from their relatively simple interferometer
configuration, being a single axis vertical accelerometer,
from their heritage, being one of very first demonstra-
tion of inertial sensing based on atom interferometry, and
from the concrete application fields they address, in par-
ticular the field of geosciences.

A.
Historical context

In their seminal paper1, Kasevich and Chu used cold
sodium atoms in an atomic fountain to realize the first
demonstration of the 3-pulses atom interferometer based
on Raman transitions, such as described in II. In this
early demonstration, the authors anticipated that such
sensors could compete with state of the art classical
gravimeters, such as based on the precise tracking of a
free falling corner cube by optical interferometry.
Remarkably, in the following years, the efforts of Chu ’s
team made this claim become reality. A. Peters et al per-
formed a very comprehensive metrological study of the
performances, both in terms of stability and accuracy, of
a second generation instrument based on Cs atoms48,49.
The stability reached a level as low as 20 × 10−8 m.s−2

at 1.3 s measurement time, and a large number of sys-
tematic effects were studied, and evaluated with a com-
bined uncertainty of 3.2×10−8 m.s−2. A direct side by
side comparison with a commercial corner cube gravime-
ter, FG5 from the Microg solutions company50, showed
a 4 times better stability for the atom gravimeter, and
agreement between the two determinations of g, within
the combined uncertainty of 7×10−8 m.s−2. At the same
time, pioneering works on atomic gradiometers, which
are differential accelerometers, have been conducted in
Stanford51, and a few years later at LENS52.
Early works on gravimeters have triggered a wealth
of developments. Projects aiming at more compact and
transportable cold atom gravimeters started in the begin-
ning of the 2000s, in particular at SYRTE53 and HUB54,
and later by the AOSense company in the USA. Since
then, the technology of atomic gravity sensors has con-
siderably grown in maturity, as assessed by some ma-
jor achievements, such as i) the participation since 2009
to CIPM Key Comparisons (KC) and Euramet compar-
isons of absolute gravimeters55–57, in 2017, even if not in-
cluded in the 3rd KC58, four atom gravimeters developed
in China38,59–61 have participated to the associated pilot
study; ii) the demonstration of on board measurements,
in a ship62 and a plane63 and iii) the industrial devel-
opment and commercial product offer of atom gravime-
ters at a competitive level of performance64.
In total,


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
6

FIG. 5. Cold atom gravimeters. a) Scheme of the Cs based Stanford setup, with all critical functionalities represented.
(Reprinted from A. Peters et al., ”High-precision gravity measurement using atom interferometry”, Metrologia 38, 25-61
(2001) c⃝BIPM. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved (Ref.49)); b) picture of the HUB gravimeter
(Reprinted from Humboldt-Universit¨at zur Berlin website (Ref. a)), using the same fountain configuration as in a) but with Rb
atoms; c) picture of the SYRTE gravimeter, with its magnetic shields opened, which simply drops Rb atoms, (Adapted from
A. Louchet-Chauvet et al., ”The influence of transverse motion within an atomic gravimeter”, New J. Phys. 13, 065025 (2011)
(Ref.53)) d) scheme of a single beam gravimeter, (Adapted from Q. Bodart et al., ”A cold atom pyramidal gravimeter with a
single laser beam”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 134101 (2011), with the permission of AIP Publishing (Ref.41)).

a HUB website: https://www.physics.hu-berlin.de/en/qom/research

about 30 research groups and private companies are to-
day working on the development of atomic gravity sen-
sors.

B.
Principle of the gravity measurement

In a gravimeter configuration (Fig.1.c), the sensitiv-
ity to rotation, the second term of equation 2, is null as
the two interferometer arms do not enclose any physi-
cal area. Raman transitions being velocity selective, one
needs to chirp the frequency difference between the Ra-
man lasers in order to compensate for the linear increase
of the Doppler shift with time, and keep the three pulses
on resonance. A frequency chirp δω = at leads to an ad-
ditional contribution in the interferometer phase given by
aT 2, which allows for scanning the interferometer phase
in a perfectly controlled way and record a fringe pat-
tern. This chirp induced phase compensates the gravity
phase shift when it perfectly matches the Doppler shift:
a0 = keffg. This leads to a dark fringe in the interferome-
ter pattern, whose position (as a function of the chirp rate
a) does not depend on T. Indeed, in the reference frame
of the free falling atoms, the phase difference between the
Raman lasers is fixed, without any acceleration. Precisely
locating, and tracking, this fringe allows for measuring g
via the relation g = a0/keff, as well as its fluctuations,
in terms of SI traceable frequency measurements. This
gives to this kind of sensors their absolute character: they
do not require calibration, but an accurate control and
knowledge of the RF and laser frequencies involved in the
measurement. Remarkably, the cold atoms themselves,
being well shielded from environmental perturbations in
the drop chamber, can be used to guarantee the control
and knowledge of these frequencies60.

C.
Sensitivity limits

Typical
interrogation
times
are
in
the
range
2T
=
100 ms to 1 s, depending on the size of
the drop chamber (from about 10 cm up to 10 m). As
mentioned in part III E for increased T, parasitic vibra-
tions limit the sensitivity.
Different isolation methods
have been used, based on superspring stabilization65,
or the use of passive isolation platforms25, eventually
combined with additional active stabilization feedback
control66–69, or the correlation of the interferometer
phase with the remaining vibration noise measured
by a classical sensor, either a seismometer70, or an
accelerometer71. The latter method allows for correcting
the interferometer phase, either via postcorrection25, or
feed forward compensation in real time on the Raman
lasers phase difference71. The latter scheme allows for
operation without isolation platform70, and for efficient
hybridization of classical and atomic accelerometers71.
Figure 6 displays the amplitude spectral densities of
vertical vibration noise measured on the ground and on
such dedicated isolation platforms66.
These methods
enabled
several
teams
to
reach
sensitivities
below
10×10−8
m.s−2.τ −1/2
(Refs.32,72–74),
even
without
isolation platform in quiet environment75, the record
being held by HUST32, with 4.2 × 10−8 m.s−2.τ −1/2.
Many other sources of noise impact the gravity mea-
surements, such as related to the phase noise of the RF
reference frequency oscillators, frequency, phase and in-
tensity noise of the Raman lasers, and detection noise.
Detailed analysis of these noise sources have been car-
ried out, especially in Ref.49, and later in Ref.25, where
the exact transfer function of the interferometer to phase
noise fluctuations, the so-called sensitivity function de-
rived in Ref.76, was extensively used (with an extension
to arbitrary pulse shapes presented in Ref.77).
These
sources of noises can be reduced down to the mrad per


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
7

FIG. 6. Amplitude spectral densities of vibration noise mea-
sured on the ground and on isolation platforms. Active isola-
tion, based on sensing and actuation, allows to reach a level
of vibration noise as low as the intrinsic noise of the sensor
used for sensing. (Reprinted figure with permission from M.-
K. Zhou et al., Phys. Rev. A 86 043630 (2012).
c⃝2020 by
the American Physical Society ( Ref.66)).

shot level, well below the level of residual vibration noise,
which still amounts to 10-100 mrad per shot, even with
sophisticated vibration isolation schemes.
The situation is different for gravity gradiometers, for
which vibrations are a common source of noise, which is
thus rejected in the differential measurement51. This al-
lows in principle these sensors to approach their intrinsic
limit which will be set by detection noise, and ultimately
by quantum projection noise.
Best differential acceleration sensitivities of 3 − 4 ×
10−8 m.s−2.τ −1/2 have been demonstrated with standard
Raman interferometers78,79. For baselines of 1.4 m along
the vertical direction78 and of 0.72 m along the horizontal
direction80, this corresponds to best demonstrated grav-
ity gradient sensitivities of 28 and 59 × 10−9 s−2.τ −1/2.

D.
Accuracy limits

High accuracy is another appealing feature of atomic
gravity sensors. Their scale factor being tied to time and
frequency is well defined, which brings intrinsic accuracy
and long term stability to the sensors. Yet, a number of
systematic effects do bias the measurement, which have
to be well measured and/or modelled, in order to cor-
rect the gravity measurements. A first detailed analysis,
though not completely exhaustive, of systematic effects
was carried out in Ref.49. In principle, the interferometer
is insensitive to frequency detunings of the Raman con-
dition, but not to its gradients, leading to sensitivity to
inhomogeneities of light shifts and magnetic field gradi-
ents. Remarkably, these shifts, as well as others related to
electronic phase delays, can be efficiently eliminated via
the so called keff reversal technique81. Indeed, the inter-
ferometer can be realized with two different orientations
of the keff wavevector (which corresponds to diffracting
the intial wave packet upward or downward at the first
beamsplitting pulse). This reverses the sign of the grav-
ity phase shift, but not of the above mentionned system-

atic effects, so that averaging the g measurements over
the two directions cancels them. Some other effect do
remain, the most important being a second order light
shift82, the Coriolis acceleration49 and the effect of laser
wavefront aberrations53 represented in figure 7.
The first effect is related to the presence of the sec-
ond pair of Raman lasers, which is frequency detuned by
twice the Doppler shift. This is a drawback associated
to the use of retro-reflected Raman lasers, which allows
on the other hand for reducing the impact of wavefront
distortions, as detailed later. This results in a bias that
is larger when dropping the atoms than when launching
them upwards, and that scales with the Raman coupling.
It can thus efficiently be corrected by performing g mea-
surements at different Raman intensities82.
The second is related to residual transverse veloci-
ties, which lead to Coriolis accelerations. At µK tem-
peratures, atoms have residual velocities of order of
cm.s−1, which leads to Coriolis accelerations as large as
10−6 m.s−2. Hopefully, the net effect results from the av-
erage over the transverse velocity distribution. This leads
in principle to a cancellation of the effect, provided that
this velocity distribution is symmetric and well centered
around zero, and that atoms with different transverse ve-
locities do perform the interferometer and are detected
with the same efficiency, or at last symmetrically with
respect to the center of the velocity distribution. In prac-
tice, residual asymmetries and geometrical effects, such
as due to laser beams inhomogeneities and finite size of
the detection zone, can compromise this cancellation43.
The effect can then be evaluated by performing gravity
measurements with different orientations by rotating the
experiment53, the average between two opposite orienta-
tions allowing to cancel the effect. An efficient alterna-
tive consists in counter rotating the experiment49 or more
simply the retroreflecting Raman mirror83,84 in order to
compensate for the Earth rotation and thus eliminate the
phase shifts induced by Coriolis acceleration.
The third effect arises from the deviation of the Ra-
man lasers wavefronts with respect to the ideally flat
equiphase surfaces that act as a reference ruler used to
measure the position of the free falling atoms at each
of the three laser pulses. The required level of flatness
is extremely demanding as a distortion as small as 0.1
nm corresponds to a Raman phase difference of about 1
mrad. The net effect results from the averaging of all
possible trajectories, which samples differently the phase
defects at each pulse. One can calculate that for the sim-
ple case of a curvature, and for an atomic temperature
of 2 µK, a wavefront flatness of λ/300 PV over 1 cm is
required to keep the error on the gravity measurement
below 10−8 m.s−2 (Ref.85).
This implies that already
the Gaussian character of the Raman laser beams has
an effect, so that large size beam of waists larger than
1 cm are required to reduce the effect of the residual
curvature. Finally, this effect is the most important con-
tribution in the accuracy budget of the most accurate
gravimeters, with contributions, up to recently, of or-
der of 3 − 4 × 10−8 m.s−2. To evaluate this effect, one
can investigate its dependence when increasing the atom
temperature53, or when selecting the trajectories, either
by truncating the detection area86 or the size of the Ra-


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
8

FIG. 7. Wavefront aberration effect. (Adapted from R.
Karcher et al., ”Improving the accuracy of atom interferome-
ters with ultracold sources”, New J. Phys. 20, 113041 (2018)
(Ref.85)). Because of to their ballistic expansion across the
Raman beam, the atoms sample at the three π/2 − π − π/2
Raman pulses different parasitic phase shifts related to wave-
front distortions (displayed in blue as a distorted surface).
This leads to a bias in the gravity measurement, resulting
from the average of the effect over all atom trajectories, fil-
tered by finite size effects, such as related to the waist and
clear aperture of the Raman beam and to the finite field of
view at the detection.

man laser beam87. But, none of these methods allowed
to evaluate the effect with a low enough uncertainty to
make the accuracy of the atomic sensor better than the
announced one of the best classical instrument, the FG5
(Ref.50) or FG5-X (Ref.88) corner cube gravimeters. A
better method consists in extrapolating the bias to zero
temperatures by performing g measurements as a func-
tion of decreasing temperatures. Such measurements, us-
ing ultracold atoms produced via evaporative cooling in a
dipole trap, recently allowed for extracting a model of the
wavefront and reducing the uncertainty of the wavefront
aberration bias down to 1.3 × 10−8 m.s−2 (Ref.85).

E.
Commercial instruments

Even though some of the best atomic instruments have
demonstrated performances better than state of the art
classical sensors, many of these devices are ”laboratory
sensors” in the sense that they mostly operate in labora-
tory conditions, with air conditioning system for exam-
ple. This is enough for some applications, but not for
on field measurements, for which instruments have to be
robust, compact and easy to operate for non-physicist
operators, and sustain large temperature and humidity
changes. Some companies have embarked on this path.

AOSense was formed in 2004 to spin-off innovative re-
search developed at Stanford University and delivered
its first commercial compact gravimeter to an aerospace
customer in 2010 (Ref.89).
Since then, other compa-
nies, mainly in Europe have followed. They are listed
in the tables presented in the section A. One of them is
the Muquans90 company founded in 2011. Their prod-
ucts are the result of a long-term research effort initiated
by SYRTE and LP2N. They have been developing com-
mercial gravity sensors based on the simple architecture
demonstrated in Ref.41 and on the ease of use and robust-
ness of fibered laser systems29. First gravimeters have
already been delivered to customers from the geophysics
community64.

F.
Applications

Gravity sensors find applications in many fields, rang-
ing from geophysics and geodesy, navigation, civil engi-
neering and fundamental physics. So far, atom gravime-
ters have been mainly developed in or for laboratory-
type environments, where they can reach excellent short
term and long term stability, better than classical corner
cube gravimeters32,73,74. There, they allow for recording
continuous series53,59,74, a mode of operation usually re-
stricted to relative, spring or superconducting, gravime-
ters. Figure 8 displays an example for such signal. Being
accurate, they can be used as metrological standards in
National Metrology Institutes, and thus participate to
CIPM Key Comparisons55,57. Other applications in the
field of metrology are i) the precise determination of g
for Kibble balance experiments91,92, which are now pri-
mary standards that realize the kilogram based on its
new definition linked to the Planck constant93,94, and ii)
the determination of the gravitational constant G at the
10−4 level with gravity gradiometers95,96.
To address wider applications, engineering and simpli-
fication efforts in the sensors or its key subsystems are
made in order to allow performing measurements in more
aggressive environments27,31,36,38,40,41,64,97–100.
Opera-
tion of gravity sensors on board a ship62, and more re-
cently in an aircraft63, has been demonstrated, and grav-
ity mapping have been performed in both cases, showing
improved repeatability and lower uncertainties compared
to classical marine gravimeters. Figure 9 displays such
gravity mapping. Ongoing developments target the de-
ployment of gravity sensors, such as gradiometers, for
civil engineering applications101 or the installation of a
commercial atom gravimeter for natural risk manage-
ment, e.g. on the Etna volcano102.

V.
INERTIAL SENSORS

A.
Gyroscopes

Sensing rotations with an atom interferometer belongs
to one of the pioneering experiments from 1991 which
triggered the field of atom interferometry2. In that study,
a calcium atomic beam was excited in an optical Ram-


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
9

FIG. 8.
Tide signals.
Example of NIM-AGRb-1 continuous gravity measurement over 20 days expressed in µGal
(1 µGal = 10−8 m.s−2). Each data point is a 3 min average. The quantum sensor sensitivity allows for measuring grav-
ity changes due to tides, air pressure variations, polar motion, water table level fluctuations. (Adapted from S.-K. Wang et
al., ”Shift evaluation of the atomic gravimeter NIM-AGRb-1 and its comparison with FG5X”, Metrologia 55, 360-365 (2001)
c⃝BIPM. Reproduced by permission of IOP Publishing. All rights reserved (Ref.59)).

FIG. 9.
Gravity anomaly model of Meriadzec ter-
race.
(Adapted from Y. Bidel et al., ”Absolute marine
gravimetry with matter-wave interferometry”, Nat Commun
9, 627 (2018) (Ref.62)).
Gravity is expressed in mGal
(1 mGal = 10−5 m.s−2). The model was obtained from ON-
ERA ship-borne atom gravimeter measurements.

sey geometry17 on the intercombination line 1S0 →3 P1
(λ = 657.46 nm).
The whole atomic-beam apparatus
was mounted on a rotational stage and could be rotated
around a vertical axis perpendicular to the plane defined
by the laser beams and the atomic beam and the authors
observed a phase shift proportional to the rotation fre-
quency of the apparatus. Differences between rotation

rates of the order of 0.1 rad.s−1could be resolved by the
apparatus.
Following
this
proof-of-principle
experiment,
few
groups developed interferometers using atomic beams
as rotation sensors. The most important achievements
were from the Pritchard group at MIT in 1997103 us-
ing nano-fabricated gratings to realize beam-splitters and
mirrors, and from the Kasevich group at Stanford104,105

and Yale106 using stimulated two-photon Raman transi-
tions as atom-optics. A review on the historical aspects of
these developments is presented in Ref.7, which compares
the performances of atomic beam and cold-atom based
gyroscopes. While the short-term sensitivity of atomic
beam interferometers still holds the record for atomic gy-
roscopes (6×10−10 rad.s−1at 1 s integration time) owing
to the large atom flux106, achieving long-term stability
levels competitive with those of other technologies (e.g.
optical gyroscopes) was challenging. On the contrary, the
use of cold-atoms leads to a reduced atom flux, which lim-
its the short term sensitivity, but allows a better control
of atomic trajectories which is advantageous to achieve
better long term stability levels. We will therefore focus
here on cold-atom based gyroscopes.

1.
Rotation phase shift.

As explained in section II, a phase shift will appear
in an interferometer where the atomic wavepacket moves
with a velocity ⃗v with respect to a frame rotating at an
angular velocity ⃗Ω, given by

Φrot = ⃗keff · (2⃗Ω × ⃗v)T 2,
(3)

where T is the time between the light pulses (Mach-
Zehnder geometry assumed here). An argument which
is often put forward to explain the potentially very large
sensitivity of atomic gyroscopes compared to their opti-
cal counterparts is based on the expression of the phase


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
10

shift of the Sagnac effect107:

Φrot = 4πE

hc2 ⃗Ω · ⃗A.
(4)

In this expression, which ties to the (special) relativistic
nature of the Sagnac effect (pointed out by von Laue108),
E is the total energy of the particle associated with the
interfering waves and ⃗A is the oriented area-vector of
the interferometer (the prefactor is 8πE in the case of a
full loop interferometer). In the case of non-relativistic
atoms, E ≃ mc2 is about 11 orders of magnitude larger
than the energy hν of a photon used in an optical gy-
roscope, yielding a much larger scale factor for atomic
gyroscopes. This increase in scale factor has nevertheless
to be confronted to the much larger photon flux and the
larger area (e.g. in a fiber optic gyroscope) in optical in-
terferometers. While this formulation helps in assessing
the potential of an atomic gyroscope over an optical gyro-
scope, it can lead to controversies in interpretation on the
actual origin of the phase shift (see, e.g. Ref.109), which,
as shown in section II solely originates from the sam-
pling of the laser wavefront by the motion of the atomic
wavepacket in the laser frame. The link between Eq. (3)
and Eq. (4) is obtained by calculating the area of the
interferometer given by

⃗A = ℏ⃗keff

m T × ⃗vT.
(5)

The larger scale factor of the atomic gyroscope over the
optical gyroscope at constant interferometer area can be
understood from the fact that the atom travels (at veloc-
ity v) slowlier than the photon (velocity c) in the interfer-
ometer of fixed dimensions, thereby sensing the inertial
effect for an increased duration.
This consideration on the importance of the interro-
gation time T drives the design of atomic gyroscopes.
We will present below two complementary directions of
research: on one side some experiments target large in-
terrogation times in order to increase the physical area,
which supposes a large interrogation region since the free
fall distance of the atoms scales as T 2; on the other side
some efforts are conducted to reduce the physical dimen-
sions of the sensor at the cost of a reduced sensitivity.

2.
Instruments targeting high stability levels with long
interrogation times

a.
First generations of cold-atom gyroscopes.
The
first cold-atom gyroscope experiment was started at the
SYRTE laboratory in 2000 and developed until 2008.
It used two clouds of Cesium atoms launched along
parabolic trajectories and traveling in opposite directions
through a common interrogation region, where three
pairs of retro-reflected Raman beams enable to realize
a full inertial basis (the three components of rotation
and the tree components of acceleration)110,111. In par-
ticular, the use of two counter-propagating atom clouds
enabled to separate the horizontal acceleration and ver-
tical rotation components of the phase shift.
Finally,

the demonstration of principle of a four pulse interfer-
ometer sequence allowing to perform the measurement
of one component of rotation without DC acceleration
sensitivity was demonstrated. Ref.112 presents the com-
plete characterization of the instrument when measuring
one horizontal rotation axis: with a total interrogation
time 2T = 80 ms, the authors demonstrated a sensitivity
of 2.4 × 10−7 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 limited by quantum projec-
tion noise, a long term stability of 1 × 10−8 rad.s−1at
4000 s integration time and a test of the linearity of the
scaling factor at one part per 105. The limitations to the
stability were identified as coming from the fluctuations
of atom trajectories coupled to the wave-front distortions
of the Raman laser.
About at the same time, a cold Cs-atom gyroscope
was developed at Stanford University. The experiment
volume was comparable to the SYRTE gyroscope but
used an architecture dedicated to the four pulse sequence:
two clouds of atoms were also prepared in two differ-
ent regions but launched along a vertical trajectory as in
an atomic fountain, and interrogated by four-light pulses
(π/2 − π − π − π/2, total interrogation time of 206 ms).
The details of the apparatus developed during the period
from 2002 to 2010 are given in Ref.114 with the end re-
sults published in 2011 in Ref.115. In this experiment,
the authors demonstrate how this four pulse configura-
tion overcomes accuracy and dynamic range limitations
of three pulse atom interferometer gyroscopes. Moreover,
by introducing a time asymmetry in the sequence, they
present a method to suppress spurious noise terms related
to multiple-path interferences, thereby increasing the sig-
nal to noise ratio of the interferometer. They show how
the instrument can be used for precise determination of
latitude, azimuth (true north), and Earths rotation rate,
and highlight the large potential of the four pulse config-
uration.
Few other cold-atom gyroscope projects have been con-
ducted. At the University of Hannover (Germany), a sen-
sor of 13.7 cm length was developed, featuring a Sagnac
area of 19 mm2 (Fig. 10 and Ref.116). This experiment
used a three light pulse (π/2−π−π/2) configuration with
two clouds of atoms launched horizontally in opposite di-
rections from two sources, and crossing three physically
separated interaction regions.
In particular, a method
to minimize the relative alignment of the three Raman
beams was demonstrated in Ref.117 by maximizing the
contrast of the interferometer. A short term sensitivity
of 6.1×10−7 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 was achieved. A modified ver-
sion of this setup to accommodate composite light pulses
that mitigate some of the technical noise sources (e.g.
light shifts) was reported in Ref.118, where a sensitivity
of 1.2 × 10−7 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 was achieved at short time-
scales (below 10 s). Another experiment is currently be-
ing developed in China119 on a similar basis, i.e. with
separated atomic sources launched along parabolic tra-
jectories and a total interrogation time of 104 ms.
In
that setup, the current long term stability level reaches
6.2 × 10−8 rad.s−1after 2000 s of integration time.
b.
Strategy for improved long-term stability.
As
identified in Refs.110,112, the main limitation to the long-
term stability of a cold-atom gyroscope is linked with
the fluctuation of the atom’ mean trajectory coupled to


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
11

trajectories

preparation
detection

atom source 1
(2D-MOT, 
3D-MOT/molassis)

atom source 2

FIG. 10. Cold-atom gyroscope with counter-propagating cold-atom sources developed at the University of Hannover. (Figure
adapted from Ref.113).

the imperfect relative wavefront of the Raman beams.
As discussed in section IV, the atoms probe a finite re-
gion of the laser wavefront which originates in a bias on
the inertial measurement if not perfectly flat. This effect
is even more pronounced in gyroscopes based on physi-
cally separated interrogation beams (in contrast to a sin-
gle retro-reflecting mirror in the case of the gravimeter).
Fluctuations of the atomic trajectory then result in a
random sampling of the Raman beam relative wavefront,
yielding an instability. In most experiments, the effect
of initial velocity fluctuations δv0 dominates that of ini-
tial position fluctuations. The source of fluctuations then
scales as δφwf ≃ 4πδv0T δλ

λ2
, where δλ is the deviation of
the wavefront with respect to a plane wave (for which
δλ = 0).
Since the inertial signal scales at least with
T 2 (see Eq. 3), it is interesting to increase the interroga-
tion time to minimize the bias with respect to the sig-
nal, at the cost of increasing the size of the instrument
(which scales with v.T or T 2 as a function of the archi-
tecture). As a numerical example, achieving long-term
stability levels δv0 < 1 µm.s−1 is technically challenging,
which results, for wavefront aberrations δλ = λ/50 over a
typical pupil diameter of 1 cm, in an interferometer bias
δφ ∼ 15 mrad (T = 50 ms). This bias has to be compared
to a signal of about 16 rad for the Earth rotation rate
(72 µrad.s−1) in an interferometer with T = 50 ms and
v ≃ 3 m.s−1. The long term stability is thus constrained
to a level of the order of 7×10−8 rad.s−1, consistent with
the value reported in several articles112,118,119.

c.
Second generation of cold-atom gyroscopes.
In
that context, a new instrument was built at SYRTE
to target better long term stability levels by increas-
ing the interrogation time to 800 ms.
In the experi-
ment described in Ref.121, a four-light pulse architecture
with an atom cloud launched vertically in a fountain
configuration as in115. In that setup, two beams sepa-
rated by 58 cm perform the atom optics (Fig. 11). In
such a folded geometry, the interferometer phase shift
acquires a cubic dependence with T and is given by
Φrot = 1

2⃗keff · (⃗g × ⃗Ω)T 3. The phase shift associated with
Earth rotation rate (72 µrad.s−1) becomes 333 rad (the
Sagnac area is 11 cm2).
Moreover, due to the folding

of the trajectory, some effects of wavefront aberrations
are reduced.
This setup therefore currently represents
the state-of-the-art for atomic gyroscopes, with a long
term stability of 3 × 10−10 rad.s−1after 10 000 s of inte-
gration time (Fig. 11)120. Note that the instrument still
operates well above the quantum projection noise limit,
which equals 2 × 10−10 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 for 106 atoms par-
ticipating to the interferometer and a contrast of 50%
(assuming a cycle rate of 4 Hz as in Ref.120). If the bias
associated with the imperfect atomic trajectories is con-
trolled at a sufficient level (Ref.122), then stability levels
in the range of 10−12 rad.s−1can be anticipated.

3.
Example of gyroscope simplification effort

In parallel to these developments aiming at achieving
stability levels that could beat those from other naviga-
tion technologies in the future (see section below), efforts
are conducted to study simplified architectures of sensors
with a smaller volume. As an example, a group at NIST
has built an instrument with a glass vacuum chamber oc-
cupying a surface of 1 cm2 (Fig.? ) in which the rotation
(and acceleration) phase shift can be measured by ob-
serving its dependence on the individual atom velocities
according to Eq. (3). In this so-called point source in-
terferometry (PSI) technique, originally demonstrated in
a 10-meter long instrument123, the interferometer con-
figuration uses the natural expansion of the cold atom
sample due to it’s residual temperature.
If the initial
size of the atom cloud is negligible with respect to the
size after expansion, a camera, which images the atom
cloud, resolves in a position-dependent way the rotation
phase shift (Fig. 12). The Sagnac area is given by the
root-mean-square atomic velocities and equals 0.03 mm2

in this setup.
The authors identify the limitations to
the sensitivity from the short Raman interrogation time
(T = 8 ms), the technical noise, the initial size of the
cold-atom cloud, and the measurement dead time. More-
over, they show how the instrument could be used for
gyro-compassing.
While the PSI technique provides experimental sim-


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
12

100
101
102
103
104

10
10

10
9

10
8

10
7

llan deviation of rotation rate (rad.s
1)
A

10
3

10
2

10
1

llan deviation of phase (rad)
A

integration time,   (s)

 

Seismometers

Vibration isolation 
platform

 

Mirrors

L

Collimators

g

Detection

Preparation
x
y

z

FIG. 11. Cold-atom gyroscope with a 11 cm2 Sagnac area. Left panel: sketch of the experiment presented in Ref.120: a
cloud of Cesium atoms is launched in the vertical direction and interrogated by four light-pulses; the middle panel shows the
two arms of the interferometer. Right panel: the points show the rotation rate stability (Allan deviation) which is limited by
vibration noise; the dotted line shows the limit associated with detection noise. (Adapted with permission from D. Savoie et
al, Science Advances, Vol. 4, no. 12, eaau7948 (2018) (Ref.120)).

plicity, the scale factor of the sensor is dependent on the
initial size of the atom cloud which is exaggerated in com-
pact designs where the expansion ratio is small, which
leads to instabilities. In Ref.124, the authors show how
using additional information on the contrast and cloud
size from the PSI images allows to determine the scale
factor correction in each image, thereby enabling to sup-
press scale factor drifts by a factor 10 without degrading
the short term sensitivity.
Other efforts by several other teams are ongoing, in
order to build complete inertial measurement units (i.e.
3 axes of acceleration and 3 axes of rotation) in a com-
pact system. They will be presented in the section below
discussing accelerometer developments V B.

4.
Applications

We discuss here some applications of gyroscopes and
relate them to different technologies in order to appreci-
ate the efforts that must be accomplished by the commu-
nity to enlarge the potential of cold-atom sensors. The
appealing feature of cold-atom gyroscopes relies in their
inherent long-term stability associated with the stabil-
ity of the quantities involved in the gyroscope scale fac-
tor. This feature, associated with the complexity of in-
struments, naturally points for high-performance appli-
cations such as strategic inertial navigation, or scientific
applications, e.g. in geosciences or tests of fundamental
physics.
a.
High-performance inertial measurement unit.
As
discussed above, the limit to the stability of cold-atom
gyroscopes currently lies between 10−9 and 10−10 rad.s−1

for the best instruments120.
Several other gyroscope
technologies address the application of navigation. Cur-
rent developments of MEMS gyroscopes target instabil-
ity levels below 0.05 ◦/h (2.5 × 10−7 rad.s−1) (Ref.126),
which makes this technology very important for mili-

tary applications given their level of integration127. This
can be compared to the best strategic-grade fiber op-
tics gyroscopes (FOG) which feature instability levels
in the 10−10 rad.s−1 range (Refs.128–130), or to Hemi-
spherical Resonator gyroscopes (HRG) with comparable
performances131. To refine the comparison, it is worth
mentioning the importance of additional properties of
sensors such as dynamic range, number of measurement
axes, robustness to the environment (vibrations, temper-
ature fluctuations), level of integration and industrializa-
tion possibilities. A large research effort in these direc-
tion is required to enlarge the scope of applications of
cold-atom gyroscopes. As a result, the cold-atom tech-
nology will probably, in a first stage, address applications
requiring high stability levels but operating in quiet en-
vironments, for example in underwater navigation (e.g.
in a submarine);
b.
Scientific applications.
Large ring laser gyro-
scopes (RLG, Ref.132) feature instability levels in the
10−14 rad.s−1 range, which offers possibilities to study
the evolution of the Earth polar motion133. Their excel-
lent short term sensitivity is also exploited for rotational
seismology134: here, colocalized acceleration (with seis-
mometers) and rotation (with the RLG) measurements
can inform on the direction of propagation of seismic
waves as well as on the phase velocity of the waves,
which represent a key information for geophysics. Cold-
atom sensors, which can measure in a single platform
and at the same position several components of the lo-
cal instantaneous rotation and acceleration vectors could
have a large impact in this emerging field. While their
rotation rate sensitivity still not competes with that of
RLG, this technology is interesting as it is in principle
transportable, while current RLG are rather infrastuc-
tures than sensors. The accurate knowledge of the scale
factor in combination with portability could allow to spa-
tially distribute several sensors in order to perform correl-
ative rotational seismology. Much progress is expected in


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
13

FIG. 12. Point-source interferometry in a centimeter-
scale chamber.
87Rb atoms are laser-cooled in a glass cell
with 1 cm2 cross-section area. A manifold that includes an
ion pump, a Rb dispenser, and a vacuum window is connected
to the glass cell. In the glass cell, the laser beams for state
preparation, Raman interrogation, and detection propagate
vertically in a shared beam path with a 1/e2 beam diam-
eter of 8 mm and are circularly polarized inside the glass
cell. Three orthogonal and retroreflected beams (not shown
in the figure) with 1/e2 diameters of 6 mm form the magneto-
optical-trap. The achieved short term sensitivity is currently
5×10−4 rad.s−1.τ −1/2 and integrates to 5×10−5 rad.s−1after
800 s of integration time. An improved version of the sensor
could achieve a sensitivity of 10−6 rad.s−1.τ −1/2.
(Repro-
duced with permission from Y.-J. Chen et al, Phys. Rev. Ap-
plied 12, 014019 (2019). Copyright 2019, American Physical
Society (Ref.125)).

this direction together with the improvement of the short
term sensitivity levels of cold-atom gyroscopes.
Finally, cold-atom gyroscopes have been proposed for
tests of fundamental physics.
The most accomplished
project has been a test of general relativity by measur-
ing the Lense-Thirring effect in space135,136, where both
the quiet environment and long interrogation times are
suitable for the very high sensitivity required in such a
test.

B.
Accelerometers and progress for a complete inertial
measurement unit

Accelerometers using atom-interferometry are mostly
developed for applications to inertial navigation as
a building block of a full inertial measurement unit
(IMU)111,137.
As a single-axis accelerometer only re-
quires one laser beam interacting with atoms at one given
position, their implementation is simpler than for gyro-

scopes, which need to open a physical area to the inter-
ferometer.
However, the first demonstration in a mo-
bile vehicle97 (a plane) has shown the difficulties due
to high frequency accelerations (vibrations) of the car-
rier and dead times between successive measurements,
since the use of an isolation platform is not a solution for
this type of operation. Different approaches have been
demonstrated or proposed to overcome these difficulties
and will be detailed in the following.

1.
Increasing the repetition rate and bandwidth

A first approach to increase the bandwidth of cold-
atom sensor consists in reducing the interrogation time
and operate with an efficient recapture of the atoms, as
explored in several articles from the team at Sandia Na-
tional Laboratories , following Ref.138. In particular, a
dual-axis high-data-rate atom interferometer via cold en-
semble exchange was reported in139 (dual-axis accelerom-
eter and gyroscope).
By recapturing the atoms after
the interferometer sequence, the authors maintained a
large atom number at high data rates of 50 to 100 mea-
surements per second. Two cold ensembles were formed
in trap zones located a few centimeters apart and were
launched toward one another (see see Fig. 13). During
their ballistic trajectory, they were interrogated with a
stimulated Raman sequence, detected, and recaptured in
the opposing trap zone. The achieved sensitivities were
at 10−5 m.s−2.τ −1/2 and µrad.s−1.τ −1/2 levels. Keeping
the interest of accuracy, this approach combines both in-
crease of bandwidth and reduction of size of the senors
at the cost of sensitivity, leading to the possibility of a
compromise depending of the application.
A more drastic approach is to avoid the production of
the cold-atom ensembles by realizing atom interferometry
in a vapor cell as demonstrated in140. This experiment,
realized in Sandia National Laboratories, showed that in-
terference signals may be obtained without laser cooling,
by benefiting from the Doppler selectivity of the atom in-
terferometer resonance. With a data rate of 10 kHz and
an interrogation time of 15 µs, an inertial sensitivity of
10−1m.s−2.τ −1/2 is demonstrated, with the prospect to
improve the sensitivity by 2 orders of magnitude in the
future. Although the proposed scheme is much simpler
than a cold-atom sensor, the sensitivity is still far from
being competitive with that of best MEMS accelerome-
ters than can reach sensitivities in the 10−6 m.s−2.τ −1/2

range (see e.g. Ref.141 and references therein).

2.
Hybridization with a classical accelerometer

The heading of this subsection refers to the general
motivation for a cold-atom based sensor: its inherent
long-term stability. Nevertheless, the dead times in cold-
atom sensors (associated with cold-atom preparation and
detection) leads to a loss of inertial information and
strongly mitigates the possibility to realize inertial mea-
surement units (IMUs) based on atom interferometry, as
pointed out in Ref.142. Moreover, when keeping long in-


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
14

FIG. 13. Dual-axis high-data-rate atom interferometer
implementing the cold ensemble exchange. (a) Front
view: Two MOTs are loaded 36 mm apart. Cooling beams
are shown in blue, probe beams in pink, and Raman beams
in yellow. The trap is turned off, and the outer and inner
cooling beams are blue and red detuned, respectively, which
launches the ensembles towards each other. After the experi-
ment, atoms are recaptured in the opposite trap to facilitate
loading. (b) Side view: The design allows for four planes of
optical access, enabling a compact apparatus. The vector ⃗g
shows the direction of gravity, while ⃗a and ⃗Ω are the direc-
tions of acceleration and rotation measurement, respectively.
(Figure and caption reproduced with permission from A. V.
Rakholia et al, Phys. Rev. Applied 2, 054012 (2014). Copy-
right 2014, American Physical Society (Ref.139)).

terrogation times for high sensitivity, the vibrations lead
to shot to shot interferometer phase fluctuations much
higher than 2π.
The correlation with classical sensors
during the interferometer measurement allows to lift the
π ambiguity in the phase determination (the atomic sen-
sor being the fine scale of the vernier) and to improve
the signal to noise ratio.
This idea was first demon-
strated for a gravimeter70 and later for an accelerometer
in a plane97. The hybridization technique develops the
idea to measure the acceleration during the dead times
of the atomic sensor. In a similar way as an atomic clock
can steer a local oscillator (e.g. a quartz or a laser) to
constrain its instability on several days, a cold-atom ac-
celerometer can be used to servo the bias of a relative
accelerometer featuring a larger bandwidth but a poorer
bias stability71,143.

Ref.71 demonstrated at SYRTE the concept of a hybrid
accelerometer that benefits from the advantages of both
conventional and atomic sensors in terms of bandwidth
(DC to 430 Hz) and long term stability. The use of a real
time correction of the atom interferometer phase by the
signal from the classical accelerometer enabled to run

it at best performance without any isolation platform,
while a servo-lock of the DC component of the conven-
tional sensor output signal by the atomic one realized the
hybrid sensor. Following this work, a team at LP2N re-
alized a navigation-compatible hybrid accelerometer us-
ing a Kalman filter where an algorithm was hybridizing
the stable cold-atom interferometer with a classical ac-
celerometer143.
In particular, the bias of the classical
accelerometer was tracked by the cold-atom sensor in an
experimentally simulated harsh environment representa-
tive of that encountered in mobile sensing applications.
The resulting sensor exhibited a 400 Hz bandwidth and
reached a stability of 10−7m.s−2 after 11 h of integration.

3.
Multi-signal atom interferometers

In the context of onboard applications with high dy-
namic range and high sensitivity, and in order to over-
come the limit from the ambiguity in phase determina-
tion and the limit to the sensitivity when the atomic
phase shift is closed to a multiple of π rad, different
propositions of multi-signal atom interferometer have
been demonstrated.
A first work analyzes configurations for improving the
measurement range and sensitivity by relying on multi-
species atom interferometry at ONERA, involving the
simultaneous manipulation of different atomic species in
a unique instrument to deduce inertial measurements144.
Using a dual-species atom accelerometer manipulating
simultaneously both isotopes of rubidium, the authors
report a preliminary experimental realization of original
concepts involving the implementation of two atom inter-
ferometers, first, with different interrogation times and,
second, in phase quadrature.
Two other experiments at the Weizmann Institute of
Science have been achieved in the same context of oper-
ating cold-atom interferometers in mobile environments.
First, a technique producing multiple phase measure-
ments per experimental cycle was presented in Ref.145,
allowing to realize quadrature phase detection in the
presence of large phase uncertainties, and real-time sys-
tematic phase cancellation. Second, Ref.146 introduces a
scheme that improves on the trade-off between high sensi-
tivity and limited dynamic range by a factor of 50 using
composite fringes, obtained from sets of measurements
with slightly varying interrogation times. The authors
analyze the performance gain in this approach and the
trade-offs it entails between sensitivity, dynamic range,
and temporal bandwidth.

4.
Multi-axis measurements

In order to realize an IMU, a 3-axis accelerometer and
a 3-axis gyroscope is required. Even if multi-axis mea-
surements have already been demonstrated, the possibil-
ity of measuring all components of inertia or even the 3
components of acceleration relies on successive measure-
ments over the three directions. A theoretical proposal
to extract information along several axis in a single shot


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
15

was put forward at LP2N, where the authors propose
new multidimensional atom optics that can create coher-
ent superpositions of atomic wave packets along three
spatial directions147. They argue how these tools can be
used to generate light-pulse atom interferometers that are
simultaneously sensitive to the three components of ac-
celeration and rotation, and how to isolate these inertial
components in a single experimental shot.

5.
Ways forward

A large part of the works in developing atom ac-
celerometers for mobile applications aimed at mitigating
the problem of phase ambiguity and loss of information
associated with dead times. The high data rate inter-
ferometers using recapture methods partially reduce the
problem of dead times but at the cost of strong reduc-
tion of sensitivity. On the other hand, the inertial noise
aliasing associated with dead times can be alleviated by
the hybridization technique, but this method is limited
by non linearity in the correlation between both sensors.
To solve this problem, combining different approaches
will probably be needed. As an example, combining hy-
bridization with continuous operation (i.e. without dead
times) and eventually interlevead measurements, already
demonstrated for rotation measurements120,121, should
enable to achieve the full potential (i.e. quantum limited
sensitivity) of cold-atom accelerometers.

VI.
OTHER MEASUREMENTS OF INERTIAL
EFFECTS

The sensitivity of atom interferometers to inertial
forces can also be exploited for precise measurements
of fundamental constants and fundamental tests, for the
search for new exotic forces, for dark matter detection,
for gravitational wave detection. For completeness of this
review, we will briefly mention in this section some of
these applications, and refer to the review articles cited
in the introduction for further details.
Atom interferometry is for instance key to precisely
measure the change of velocity undergone by an atom
after the transfer of momenta of a large number of
photons148.
This is accomplished by using a Ramsey
Bord´e interferometer149, which acts as a sensor for the
velocity change between the first and second part of the
interferometer, both constituted of a pair of π/2 pulses.
This change of velocity is realized by placing the atoms,
in between the two pairs of pulses, in an accelerated lat-
tice. There the atoms undergo a large number of Bloch
oscillations (up to a thousand), which results in a mo-
mentum transfer of Nℏk. This allows for a precise deter-
mination of the recoil velocity. Remarkably, and this is
the main motivation for such an experiment, this allows
for the determination of fine structure constant α, the
dimensionless constant that characterizes the strength of
electromagnetic interactions, with relative uncertainties
below the 10−9 level150,151. This experimental determi-
nation can finally be compared with the more indirect

determination of α derived from the anomalous magnetic
moment of the electron, which can be precisely calculated
using quantum electrodynamics (QED) theory and out of
which a value the fine structure constant can be deter-
mined. The comparison between the two determinations
is one the most stringent tests of QED today.
Another prospected application of cold-atom inertial
sensors is the detection of gravitational waves12,152. In
the currently mostly considered schemes, a set of atom
accelerometers placed along a very long baseline (of
hundreds of meters, if not kilometers) are simultane-
ously interrogated with common laser beamsplitters, in a
gradiometer-like measurement configuration153,154. This
will allow for the detection of gravitational waves, whose
signature is actually identical to gravity gradients, in a
so far unexplored frequency band for ground-based de-
tectors (0.1-1 Hz).
Several studies have also proposed
space-based detectors to address the mHz frequency band
(e.g.155,156).
Finally, other tests of gravitational physics can be per-
formed, such as tests of the Weak Equivalence Princi-
ple, by comparing the acceleration felt by two different
atomic species157–164. To push the relative accuracy of
these atomic physics based tests below the current lim-
its of experiments involving classical test masses (at the
10−14 level165), long interrogation times are required. On
ground, dedicated facilities are being operated or cur-
rently built, where atoms will be launched or dropped
over a few seconds. This can be realized in very tall vac-
uum chambers of typically 10 meters166, or even longer,
as well as in zero-g simulators, such as drop towers167

or in zero-g planes162. This prepares the ground for fu-
ture space missions, such as the STE-QUEST mission168,
where interferometers would last tens of seconds, thus
boosting the sensitivity by 3 to 4 orders of magnitude.

VII.
NEW TECHNIQUES FOR COLD-ATOM
INTERFEROMETRY

Though the domain of cold-atom interferometry has
gained a considerable maturity, leading, for example,
to the industrial transfer of the technology, the perfor-
mances of these instruments can still be improved signif-
icantly for various applications. In the recent years, new
methods have been introduced and are still presently be-
ing actively investigated.

A.
Large Momentum Transfer (LMT) atom optics

A
variety
of
advanced
beamsplitting
methods
have
been
demontrated
such
as
double
Raman
transitions169,170
and
double
Bragg
diffraction171,
high order Bragg diffraction172, sequences of Bragg
pulses173,
Bloch
oscillations
in
accelerated
optical
lattices174, combination of Bloch oscillation and high or-
der Bragg pulses175–177, frequency-swept rapid adiabatic
passage178,179.
All these methods allow for improving
the scale factor of the sensors, through a drastic increase
of the separation of the atomic wavepackets, which can


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
16

reach about a hundred photon momentum173,180,181, or
even more. Record separation and subsequent recombi-
nation with up to 408 photon momentum separation has
recently been demonstrated182.
A drawback of these methods lie in the existence of
diffraction phases, which are parasitic phase shifts due
to the beamsplitting process that depend on the depth
of the lattice potential183,184, and to the presence of para-
sitic interferometers due to the multiport nature of Bragg
diffraction185. This leads to systematics in the interfer-
ometer phase, but also to phase noise due to intensity
temporal fluctuations, and loss of contrast, induced by
intensity inhomogeneities. Strategies are being developed
to mitigate these side effects186,187. This explains why,
although a number of proofs of principle have been made,
only few instruments have demonstrated a clear gain on
the measurement of an actual inertial quantity. In partic-
ular, the team at Stanford University implemented these
techniques in an atomic gradiometer188.
With transi-
tions of 20 ℏk, they obtained a gradient sensitivity of
3 × 10−9s−2 per shot (but with a very long cycle time
of 15 s). The differential phase noise was relatively large
though, of about 130 mrad per shot for transitions of
30 ℏk, which is well above the detection noise limit and
leaves margin for significant improvement in the future.
In the context of large-momentum transfer beam split-
ters which require larger laser intensities, schemes to
interface an atom interferometer with an optical cav-
ity tuned at resonance have been explored189–192. Such
schemes are appealing since an optical resonator can pro-
vide an interferometric control of the mode and impor-
tant laser power enhancement (≫ 100). Nevertheless, the
beam size that must be reached in the resonator (several
mm of waist) to keep an homogeneous intensity profile
over the freely expanding atom cloud tends to push to-
wards long (several meters) cavities191 or towards the
degenerate regime190,192 where the control of the impact
of optical aberrations becomes challenging. Reducing the
impact of intensity inhomogeneities over the atomic cloud
can also be achieved by increasing the size of gaussian
beams (at the cost of optical power loss)188 or by us-
ing such as so-called top-hat beams with a flat intensity
profile193.

B.
Ultracold atom sources

Another important axis of investigation is the im-
proved control over the atomic source, offered by ultra-
cold atoms. Their reduced ballistic expansion allowed for
increasing the interrogation time180, and their narrow
momentum distribution for improving the efficiency of
LMT methods194. More, lower temperatures also reduce
systematic effects, such as related to the exploration by
the atoms of intensity inhomogeneities in the spatial pro-
file of the beamsplitters, or to wavefront distortions and
Coriolis accelerations. Lensing methods, such as Delta
Kick collimation in atom chips195 and optical traps196,
allowed for the production of well collimated source, with
temperatures lower than 100 pK. New detection methods
have been demonstrated which allow for spatially resolv-

ing the variations of the interferometer phase across the
atomic source, at the output of the interferometer123,166,
increasing the fringe visibility and the dynamical range
of the sensors.

C.
Alkaline-Earth atoms

Finally, other atom sources are also being used, such as
other alkali species (eg. Potassium for tests of the Weak
Equivalence Principle), or alkaline-earth atoms, such as
Yb197 or Sr198. The latter offer, for their bosonic isotopes
having zero spin in the ground state, reduced sensitivity
to stray magnetic fields, and a richer electronic struc-
ture, with narrow lines that can be used to implement
single photon beamsplitters199,200 or to implement quan-
tum metrology measurement protocols, such as based on
spin-squeezing201,202.

VIII.
CONCLUSION

Cold-atom inertial sensors have been developed for
nearly 30 years in several groups worldwide, with an
acceleration of the research effort and of the industrial
transfer in the last 10 years. These sensors are especially
well suited for applications requiring high performance
in terms of stability and accuracy, while they compara-
tively currently feature a weak robustness, dynamic range
and level of miniaturization. Therefore, they have found
up to now natural applications in testing fundamental
physics, in metrology and in geoscience.
Nevertheless,
there is a growing research effort on taking the technol-
ogy out of the laboratory, in particular on realizing high
accuracy inertial measurement units operating in mobile
platforms. On the fundamental side, several experiments
are being set up to look for new physics, and large-scale
instruments for gravitational wave detection are under
design and realization in 3 continents.
Several atom interferometer architectures have been
considered with different atom optics techniques and dif-
ferent atomic species. So far, the best performances have
been achieved by cold-atom sensors using alkali atom
sources and two-photon stimulated Raman transitions.
Several teams are working on techniques to enhance the
sensitivity and accuracy, in particular on ways to increase
the separation between the two arms of the interferome-
ter, using colder atom samples or atomic species with a
richer level structure. Therefore, much improvement in
performance can still be expected from this technology.
Many groups are also working on simplifying the sen-
sor architecture and subsystems to broaden the scope
of applications and making cold-atom sensors compati-
ble with operation in the field. On the industrial side,
several companies have started to tackle the challenge
of integrating the subsystems and currently concentrate
on developing gravimeters or accelerometers with cold
Rb atom, for which efficient, robust, and qualified laser
sources have been realized. These efforts will ease the de-
ployment of atom interferometer sensors and allow them
to address a wide range of new applications, from ground


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
17

to space, beyond the reach of classical sensors.

SUMMARY POINTS

1. Atom interferometers use quantum superpositions
of different momentum states in atoms.

2. Realizing these superposition states is efficiently
achieved by using the interaction of an atom with
two counter-propagating laser beams, which realize
the role of beam splitter and mirror for the atomic
wave.

3. The scale factor of atom interferometers (link be-
tween the inertial effect to be measured and the
interferometer output phase) is given by the space-
time area of the interferometer, which is propor-
tional to the square of the time spent by the atoms
in the interferometer and to the wave-vector of the
interrogation lasers.

4. Using cold-atom sources for atom interferometry
allows to reach larger scale factors and high levels
of stabilitiy and accuracy. Such performance orig-
inate from the good control of atomic trajectories
associated with low temperatures.

5. The fundamental limit to the sensitivity in these
sensors is the quantum projection noise associated
with the projective measurement of the atomic
state performed at the output of the interferom-
eter for ensembles of typically 1 million of atoms.
Nevertheless, this quantum noise limit is often not
reached since the effect of vibration noise domi-
nates.

6. The mostly employed atoms are Rubidium and Ce-
sium (Potassium in few cases), cooled by lasers to a
temperature of few micro-Kelvins. Interferometers
with alkaline-Earth atoms (Strontium and Ytter-
bium) attract more and more interest.

7. Cold-atom inertial sensors mainly consist of a vac-
uum chamber hosting the atom source, optical sys-
tems to realize the momentum state superpositions,
light detectors, real-time control electronics and ex-
ternal instruments such as mechanical accelerome-
ters. Typical dimensions of instruments range from
10 cm (integrated versions for field applications)
to 10 m (large-scale experiments for fundamental
studies).

8. Gravimeters are the most studied atom interfer-
ometers.
Best instruments have inaccuracy bet-
ter than 2×10−8
m.s−2 and reach stability of
5×10−10 m.s−2 in 105 s of measurement.
These
sensors were the first instruments to be commer-
cially developed.

9. Other largely studied sensors are accelerometers,
rate gyroscopes and gravity gradiometers.
Few
large scale infrastructures (over 100 m baselines)
are developed as prototypes of gravitational-wave
detectors in the deci-Hertz frequency band.

10. Owing to their stability and accuracy, cold-atom
intertial sensors have natural applications in geo-
sciences and tests of fundamental physics. Integra-
tion and engineering efforts let anticipate impor-
tant applications in strategic inertial navigation in
a near future.

11. Several research group work on new techniques to
improve the sensitivity, stability, accuracy or com-
pactness of cold-atom inertial sensors.
Particu-
larly followed routes are implementations of large
momentum transfer beam splitters, production of
ultracold-atom sources within a short time or new
optical systems for improved atom optics efficiency.

12. About 50 research groups (including around 7 pri-
vate companies) are active in the field.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge Quentin Beaufils for careful reading
of the manuscript.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

The data that support the findings of this study are
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable
request.

IX.
REFERENCES

1M. Kasevich and S. Chu, “Atomic interferometry using stimu-
lated Raman transitions,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 181–184 (1991).

2F. Riehle, T. Kisters, A. Witte, J. Helmcke, and C. J. Bord´e,
“Optical ramsey spectroscopy in a rotating frame: Sagnac effect
in a matter-wave interferometer,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 177–180
(1991).

3D. W. Keith, C. R. Ekstrom, Q. A. Turchette,
and D. E.
Pritchard, “An interferometer for atoms,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 66,
2693–2696 (1991).

4O. Carnal and J. Mlynek, “Youngs double-slit experiment with
atoms: A simple atom interferometer,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 66,
2689 (1991).

5J. Robert, C. Miniatura, S. Le Boiteux, J. Reinhardt, V. Boc-
varski, and J. Baudon, “Atomic interferometry with metastable
hydrogen atoms,” EPL (Europhysics Letters) 16, 29 (1991).

6A. D. Cronin, J. Schmiedmayer, and D. E. Pritchard, “Optics
and interferometry with atoms and molecules,” Rev. Mod. Phys.
81, 1051–1129 (2009).

7B. Barrett, R. Geiger, I. Dutta, M. Meunier, B. Canuel, A. Gau-
guet, P. Bouyer, and A. Landragin, “The Sagnac effect: 20 years
of development in matter-wave interferometry,” Comptes Ren-
dus Physique The Sagnac effect: 100 years later / L’effet Sagnac
: 100 ans apr`es, 15, 875–883 (2014).

8B. Barrett, A. Bertoldi, and P. Bouyer, “Inertial quantum sen-
sors using light and matter,” Physica Scripta 91, 053006 (2016).

9K. Bongs, M. Holynski, J. Vovrosh, P. Bouyer, G. Condon,
E. Rasel, C. Schubert, W. P. Schleich,
and A. Roura, “Tak-
ing atom interferometric quantum sensors from the laboratory
to real-world applications,” Nat Rev Phys 1, 731–739 (2019).

10M. S. Safronova, D. Budker, D. DeMille, D. F. J. Kimball,
A. Derevianko, and C. W. Clark, “Search for new physics with
atoms and molecules,” Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 025008 (2018).


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
18

11N. Robins, P. Altin, J. Debs, and J. Close, “Atom lasers: Pro-
duction, properties and prospects for precision inertial measure-
ment,” Physics Reports 529, 265 – 296 (2013), atom lasers:
production, properties and prospects for precision inertial mea-
surement.

12R. Geiger, in Future Gravitational Wave Detectors Based on
Atom Interferometry (2016) pp. 285–313.

13S. Loriani, D. Schlippert, C. Schubert, S. Abend, H. Ahlers,
W. Ertmer, J. Rudolph, J. M. Hogan, M. A. Kasevich, E. M.
Rasel, and N. Gaaloul, “Atomic source selection in space-borne
gravitational wave detection,” New J. Phys 21, 063030 (2019).

14P. Berman, Atom Interferometry (Elsevier Science, 1997).
15G.
Tino
and
M.
Kasevich,
Atom
Interferometry,
EBL-
Schweitzer (IOS Press, 2014).

16L. Carlos Garrido Alzar, “Compact chip-scale guided cold atom
gyrometers for inertial navigation: Enabling technologies and
design study,” AVS Quantum Sci. 1, 014702 (2019).

17C. Bord´e, “Atomic interferometry with internal state labelling,”

Physics Letters A 140, 10–12 (1989).

18P. Storey and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, “The feynman path integral
approach to atomic interferometry,” J. Phys. II France 4, 1999
(1994).

19C. J. Bord´e, “Quantum theory of atom-wave beam splitters
and application to multidimensional atomic gravito-inertial sen-
sors,” General Relativity and Gravitation 36, 475–502 (2004).

20W. M. Itano, J. C. Bergquist, J. J. Bollinger, J. M. Gilligan,
D. J. Heinzen, F. L. Moore, M. G. Raizen, and D. J. Wineland,
“Quantum projection noise: Population fluctuations in two-level
systems,” Phys. Rev. A 47, 3554–3570 (1993).

21D. A. Steck, Rubidium 87 D line data (2001).
22C. Monroe, W. Swann, H. Robinson,
and C. Wieman, “Very
cold trapped atoms in a vapor cell,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 1571–
1574 (1990).

23K. Dieckmann, R. J. C. Spreeuw, M. Weidem¨uller, and J. T. M.
Walraven, “Two-dimensional magneto-optical trap as a source
of slow atoms,” Phys. Rev. A 58, 3891–3895 (1998).

24M. A. Kasevich, E. Riis, S. Chu,
and R. G. DeVoe, “rf spec-
troscopy in an atomic fountain,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 612–615
(1989).

25J. Le Gou¨et, T. E. Mehlst¨aubler, J. Kim, S. Merlet, A. Clairon,
A. Landragin, and F. Pereira Dos Santos, “Limits to the sensi-
tivity of a low noise compact atomic gravimeter,” Appl. Phys.
B 92, 133–144 (2008).

26X. Baillard, A. Gauguet, S. Bize, P. Lemonde, P. Laurent,
A. Clairon,
and P. Rosenbusch, “Interference-filter-stabilized
external-cavity diode lasers,” Opt. Comm. 266, 609–613 (2006).

27P. Cheinet, F. Pereira Dos Santos, T. Petelski, J. Le Gou¨et,
J. Kim, K. Therkildsen, A. Clairon, and A. Landragin, “Com-
pact laser system for atom interferometry,” Appl. Phys. B 84,
643–646 (2006).

28H. M¨uller, S.-W. Chiow, Q. Long, and S. Chu, “Phase-locked,
low-noise, frequency agile titanium:sapphire lasers for simulta-
neous atom interferometers,” Opt. Lett. 31, 202–204 (2006).

29G. Stern, B. Battelier, R. Geiger, G. Varoquaux, A. Villing,
F. Moron,
O. Carraz,
N. Zahzam,
Y. Bidel,
W. Chaibi,
F. Pereira Dos Santos,
A. Bresson,
A. Landragin,
and
P. Bouyer, “Light-pulse atom interferometry in microgravity,”
Eur. Phys. J. D 53, 353–357 (2009).

30O. Carraz, F. Lienhart, R. Charri`ere, M. Cadoret, N. Zahzam,
Y. Bidel,
and A. Bresson, “Compact and robust laser system
for onboard atom interferometry,” Appl. Phys. B 97, 405–411
(2009).

31M. Schmidt, M. Prevedelli, A. Giorgini, G. M. Tino, and A. Pe-
ters, “A portable laser system for high-precision atom interfer-
ometry experiments,” Appl. Phys. B 102, 11–18 (2011).

32Z.-K. Hu, B.-L. Sun, X.-C. Duan, M.-K. Zhou, L.-L. Chen,
S. Zhan, Q.-Z. Zhang,
and J. Luo, “Demonstration of an
ultrahigh-sensitivity atom-interferometry absolute gravimeter,”
Phys. Rev. A 88, 043610 (2013).

33S. Merlet, L. Volodimer, M. Lours, and F. Pereira Dos Santos,
“A simple laser system for atom interferometry,” Appl. Phys. B
117, 749–754 (2014).

34T. L´ev`eque, L. Antoni-Micollier, B. Faure,
and J. Berthon,
“A laser setup for rubidium cooling dedicated to space applica-

tions,” Appl. Phys. B 116, 997–1004 (2014).

35T. L´ev`eque, B. Faure, F. Esnault, C. Delaroche, D. Mas-
sonet, O. Grosjean, F. Buffe, P. Toressi, A. Bomer, T. Pichon,
P. B´eraud, J. Lelay, S. Thomin, and P. Laurent, “Pharao laser
source flight model: Design and performances,” Rev. Sci. In-
strum. 86, 033104 (2015).

36V. Schkolnik, O. Hellmig, A. Wenzlawski, J. Grosse, A. Ko-
hfeldt, K. Dringshoff, A. Wicht, P. Windpassinger, K. Seng-
stock, C. Braxmaier, M. Krutzik,
and A. Peters,
“A com-
pact and robust diode laser system for atom interferometry on
a sounding rocket,” Appl. Phys. B 122, 217 (2016).

37X. Wu, F. Zi, J. Dudley, R. J. Bilotta, P. Canoza, and H. M¨uller,
“Multiaxis atom interferometry with a single-diode laser and a
pyramidal magneto-optical trap,” Optica 4, 1545–1551 (2017).

38X. Zhang, J. Zhong, B. Tang, X. Chen, L. Zhu, P. Huang,
J. Wang, and M. Zhan, “Compact portable laser system for mo-
bile cold atom gravimeters,” Appl. Opt. 57, 6545–6551 (2018).

39F. Zi, X. Zhang, M. Huang, N. Li, K. Huang and X. Lu, “A
compact atom interferometer for field gravity measurements,”
Laser Phys. 29, 035504 (2019).

40R. Caldani, S. Merlet, F. Pereira Dos Santos, G. Stern, A.-S.
Martin, B. Desruelle, and V. M´enoret, “A prototype industrial
laser system for cold atom inertial sensing in space,” Eur. Phys.
J. D 73, 248 (2019).

41Q. Bodart, S. Merlet, N. Malossi, F. Pereira Dos Santos,
P. Bouyer, and A. Landragin, “A cold atom pyramidal gravime-
ter with a single laser beam,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 134101
(2010).

42T. Farah, P. Gillot, B. Cheng, S. Merlet,
and F. Pereira
Dos Santos, “Effective velocity distribution in an atom gravime-
ter: Effect of the convolution with the response of the detec-
tion,” Phys. Rev. A 90, 023606 (2014).

43P. Gillot, B. Cheng, S. Merlet,
and F. Pereira Dos Santos,
“Limits to the symmetry of a mach-zehnder-type atom interfer-
ometer,” Phys. Rev. A 93, 013609 (2016).

44B. S. Malek, Z. Pagel, X. Wu, and H. M¨uller, “Embedded con-
trol system for mobile atom interferometers,” Rev. Sci. Instrum.
90, 073103 (2019).

45A. Bertoldi, C.-H. Feng, H. Eneriz-Imaz, M. Carey, N. De-
vang, J. Junca, X. Zou, D. O. Sabulsky, B. Canuel, P. Bouyer,
and M. Prevedelli, “A control hardware based on a field pro-
grammable gate array for experiments in atomic physics,” sub-
mitted for publication (2020).

46“Artiq
(advanced
real-time
infrastructure
for
quantum
physics),” .

47B. Fang, I. Dutta, P. Gillot, D. Savoie, J. Lautier, B. Cheng,
C. L. G. Alzar, R. Geiger, S. Merlet, F. P. D. Santos,
and
A. Landragin, “Metrology with atom interferometry: Inertial
sensors from laboratory to field applications,” J. Phys. Conf.
Ser. 723, 012049 (2016).

48A. Peters, K. Y. Chung,
and S. Chu, “Measurement of gravi-
tational acceleration by dropping atoms,” Nature 400, 849–852
(1999).

49A. Peters, K. Y. Chung,
and S. Chu, “High-precision gravity
measurements using atom interferometry,” Metrologia 38, 25 –
61 (2001).

50T. M. Niebauer, G. S. Sasagawa, J. E. Faller, R. Hilt,
and
F. Klopping, “A new generation of absolute gravimeters,”
Metrologia 32, 159–180 (1995).

51M. Snadden, J. McGuirk, P. Bouyer, K. Haritos,
and M. Ka-
sevich, “Measurement of the Earth’s Gravity Gradient with an
Atom Interferometer-Based Gravity Gradiometer,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 81, 971–974 (1998).

52A. Bertoldi, G. Lamporesi, L. Cacciapuoti, M. de Angelis,
M. Fattori, T. Petelski, A. Peters, M. Prevedelli, J. Stuhler,
and G. M. Tino, “Atom interferometry gravity-gradiometer for
the determination of the Newtonian gravitational constant G,”
Euro. Phys. J. D 40, 271 (2006).

53A. Louchet-Chauvet, T. Farah, Q. Bodart, A. Clairon, A. Lan-
dragin, S. Merlet, and F. Pereira Dos Santos, “The influence of
transverse motion within an atomic gravimeter,” New J. Phys.
13, 065025 (2011).

54M. Schmidt, A. Senger, M. Hauth, C. Freier, V. Schkolnik, and
A. Peters, “A mobile high-precision absolute gravimeter based


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
19

on atom interferometry,” Gyroscopy Navig. 2, 170–177 (2011).

55Z. Jiang, V. Plink, F. E. Arias, J. Liard, S. Merlet, H. Wilmes,
L. Vitushkin, L. Robertsson, L. Tisserand, F. Pereira Dos San-
tos, Q. Bodart, R. Falk, H. Baumann, S. Mizushima, J. Mki-
nen, M. Bilker-Koivula, C. Lee, I. M. Choi, B. Karaboce,
W. Ji, Q. Wu, D. Ruess, C. Ullrich, J. Kosteleck, D. Schmerge,
M. Eckl, L. Timmen, N. Le Moigne, R. Bayer, T. Olszak, J. gren,
C. Del Negro, F. Greco, M. Diament, S. Deroussi, S. Bonvalot,
J. Krynski, M. Sekowski, H. Hu, L. J. Wang, S. Svitlov, A. Ger-
mak, O. Francis, M. Becker, D. Inglis, and I. Robinson, “The
8th International Comparison of Absolute Gravimeters 2009:
the first Key Comparison (CCM.G-K1) in the field of absolute
gravimetry,” Metrologia 49, 666–684 (2012).

56O. Francis, H. Baumann, T. Volarik, C. Rothleitner, G. Klein,
M. Seil, N. Dando, R. Tracey, C. Ullrich, S. Castelein, H. Hua,
W. Kang, S. Chongyang, X. Songbo, T. Hongbo, L. Zhengyuan,
V. P´alink´aˇs, J. Kosteleck´y, J. M¨akinen, J. N¨ar¨anen, S. Merlet,
T. Farah, C. Guerlin, F. Pereira Dos Santos, N. L. Moigne,
C. Champollion, S. Deville, L. Timmen, R. Falk, H. Wilmes,
D. Iacovone, F. Baccaro, A. Germak, E. Biolcati, J. Kryn-
ski, M. Sekowski, T. Olszak, A. Pachuta, J. Agren, A. En-
gfeldt, R. Reudink, P. Inacio, D. McLaughlin, G. Shannon,
M. Eckl, T. Wilkins, D. v. Westrum, and R. Billson, “The Euro-
pean Comparison of Absolute Gravimeters 2011 (ECAG-2011)
in Walferdange, Luxembourg: results and recommendations,”
Metrologia 50, 257–268 (2013).

57O. Francis, H. Baumann, C. Ullrich, S. Castelein, M. V. Camp,
M. A. de Sousa, R. L. Melhorato, C. Li, J. Xu, D. Su, S. Wu,
H. Hu, K. Wu, G. Li, Z. Li, W.-C. Hsieh, V. P´alink´as, J. Kost-
eleck´y, J. Mkinen, J. Nrnen, S. Merlet, F. P. D. Santos, P. Gillot,
J. Hinderer, J.-D. Bernard, N. L. Moigne, B. Fores, O. Gitlein,
M. Schilling, R. Falk, H. Wilmes, A. Germak, E. Biolcati,
C. Origlia, D. Iacovone, F. Baccaro, S. Mizushima, R. D. Plaen,
G. Klein, M. Seil, R. Radinovic, M. Sekowski, P. Dykowski, I.-
M. Choi, M.-S. Kim, A. Borreguero, S. Sainz-Maza, M. Calvo,
A. Engfeldt, J. Agren, R. Reudink, M. Eckl, D. van Westrum,
R. Billson, and B. Ellis, “CCM.G-K2 key comparison,” Metrolo-
gia 52, 07009–07009 (2015).

58S. Wu, J. Feng, C. Li, D. Su, Q. Wang, R. Hu, L. Hu, J. Xu,
W. Ji, C. Ullrich, V. P´alink´aˇs, J. Kosteleck´y, M. Bilker-Koivula,
J. Nrnen, S. Merlet, N. L. Moigne, S. Mizushima, O. Francis,
I.-M. Choi, M.-S. Kim, H. M. Alotaibi, A. Aljuwayr, H. Bau-
mann, T. Priruenrom, N. Woradet, C. Kirba¸s, ˙I. Co¸skun, and
D. Newel, “The results of CCM.G-K2.2017 key comparison,”
Metrologia 57, 07002–07002 (2020).

59S.-K. Wang, Y. Zhao, W. Zhuang, T.-C. Li, S.-Q. Wu, J.-Y.
Feng, and C.-J. Li, “Shift evaluation of the atomic gravimeter
NIM-AGRb-1 and its comparison with FG5X,” Metrologia 55,
360–365 (2018).

60Y.-y. Xu, J.-f. Cui, K. Qi, X.-b. Deng, M.-k. Zhou, X.-c. Duan,
and Z.-k. Hu, “On-site calibration of the raman laser abso-
lute frequency for atom gravimeters,” Phys. Rev. A 97, 063626
(2018).

61Z. Fu, B. Wu, B. Cheng, Y. Zhou, K. Weng, D. Zhu, Z. Wang,
and Q. Lin, “A new type of compact gravimeter for long-term
absolute gravity monitoring,” Metrologia 56, 025001 (2019).

62Y. Bidel, N. Zahzam, C. Blanchard, A. Bonnin, M. Cadoret,
A. Bresson, D. Rouxel, and M. F. Lequentrec-Lalancette, “Ab-
solute marine gravimetry with matter-wave interferometry,” Nat
Commun 9, 627 (2018).

63Y. Bidel, N. Zahzam, A. Bresson, C. Blanchard, M. Cadoret,
A. V. Olesen, and R. Forsberg, “Absolute airborne gravimetry
with a cold atom sensor,” J Geod 94, 20 (2020).

64V. M´enoret,
P. Vermeulen,
N. Le Moigne,
S. Bonvalot,
P. Bouyer, A. Landragin,
and B. Desruelle, “Gravity mea-
surements below 10−9g with a transportable absolute quantum
gravimeter,” Sci Rep 8 (2018).

65J. M. Hensley, A. Peters,
and S. Chu, “Active low frequency
vertical vibration isolation,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 70, 2735–2741
(1999).

66M.-K. Zhou, Z.-K. Hu, X.-C. Duan, B.-L. Sun, L.-L. Chen, Q.-
Z. Zhang, and J. Luo, “Performance of a cold-atom gravimeter
with an active vibration isolator,” Phys. Rev. A 86, 043630
(2012).

67B. Tang, L. Zhou, Z. Xiong, J. Wang,
and M. Zhan, “A pro-
grammable broadband low frequency active vibration isolation
system for atom interferometry,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 093109
(2014).

68M.-K. Zhou, X. Xiong, L.-L. Chen, J.-F. Cui, X.-C. Duan, and
Z.-K. Hu, “Note: A three-dimension active vibration isolator
for precision atom gravimeters,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 86, 046108
(2015).

69L. Dong-Yun, C. Bing, Z. Yin, W. Bin, W. Xiao-Long,
and
L. Qiang, “Ultra-low frequency active vibration control for cold
atom gravimeter based on sliding-mode robust algorithm,” Acta
Physica Sinica 67, 020702 (2018).

70S. Merlet, J. L. Gou¨et, Q. Bodart, A. Clairon, A. Landragin,
F. P. D. Santos, and P. Rouchon, “Operating an atom interfer-
ometer beyond its linear range,” Metrologia 46, 87–94 (2009).

71J. Lautier, L. Volodimer, T. Hardin, S. Merlet, M. Lours,
F. Pereira Dos Santos, and A. Landragin, “Hybridizing matter-
wave and classical accelerometers,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 105,
144102 (2014).

72H. M¨uller, S.-w. Chiow, S. Herrmann, S. Chu, and K.-Y. Chung,
“Atom-Interferometry Tests of the Isotropy of Post-Newtonian
Gravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 031101 (2008).

73P. Gillot, O. Francis, A. Landragin, F. Pereira Dos Santos, and
S. Merlet, “Stability comparison of two absolute gravimeters:
optical versus atomic interferometers,” Metrologia 51, L15–L17
(2014).

74C. Freier, M. Hauth, V. Schkolnik, B. Leykauf, M. Schilling,
H. Wziontek, H.-G. Scherneck, J. Mller, and A. Peters, “Mobile
quantum gravity sensor with unprecedented stability,” Journal
of Physics: Conference Series 723, 012050 (2016).

75T. Farah, C. Guerlin, A. Landragin, P. Bouyer, S. Gaffet,
F. Pereira Dos Santos,
and S. Merlet, “Underground opera-
tion at best sensitivity of the mobile LNE-SYRTE cold atom
gravimeter,” Gyroscopy Navig. 5, 266–274 (2014).

76P. Cheinet, B. Canuel, F. Pereira Dos Santos, A. Gauguet,
F. Yver-Leduc,
and A. Landragin, “Measurement of the Sen-
sitivity Function in a Time-Domain Atomic Interferometer,”
Instrumentation and Measurement, IEEE Transactions on 57,
1141–1148 (2008).

77B. Fang, N. Mielec, D. Savoie, M. Altorio, A. Landragin, and
R. Geiger, “Improving the phase response of an atom interfer-
ometer by means of temporal pulse shaping,” New J. Phys 20,
023020 (2018).

78J. M. McGuirk, G. T. Foster, J. B. Fixler, M. J. Snadden, and
M. A. Kasevich, “Sensitive absolute-gravity gradiometry using
atom interferometry,” Phys. Rev. A 65, 033608 (2002).

79F.
Sorrentino,
Q.
Bodart,
L.
Cacciapuoti,
Y.-H.
Lien,
M. Prevedelli, G. Rosi, L. Salvi, and G. M. Tino, “Sensitivity
limits of a raman atom interferometer as a gravity gradiometer,”
Phys. Rev. A 89, 023607 (2014).

80G. W. Biedermann, X. Wu, L. Deslauriers, S. Roy, C. Ma-
hadeswaraswamy,
and M. A. Kasevich, “Testing gravity with
cold-atom interferometers,” Phys. Rev. A 91, 033629 (2015).

81D. S. Weiss, B. C. Young, and S. Chu, “Precision measurement
of cs based on photon recoil using laser-cooled atoms and atomic
interferometry,” Appl. Phys. B 59, 217–256 (1994).

82A. Gauguet, T. E. Mehlst¨aubler, T. L´ev`eque, J. Le Gou¨et,
W. Chaibi, B. Canuel, A. Clairon, F. P. Dos Santos, and A. Lan-
dragin, “Off-resonant raman transition impact in an atom inter-
ferometer,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 043615 (2008).

83S.-Y. Lan, P.-C. Kuan, B. Estey, P. Haslinger,
and H. Mller,
“Influence of the Coriolis Force in Atom Interferometry,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 108, 090402 (2012).

84M. Hauth, C. Freier, V. Schkolnik, M. Senger, A. Schmidt, and
A. Peters, “First gravity measurements using the mobile atom
interferometer gain,” Appl. Phys. B. 113, 49–55 (2013).

85R. Karcher, A. Imanaliev, S. Merlet, and F. Pereira Dos Santos,
“Improving the accuracy of atom interferometers with ultracold
sources,” New J. Phys 20, 113041 (2018).

86V. Schkolnik, B. Leykauf, M. Hauth, C. Freier, and A. Peters,
“The effect of wavefront aberrations in atom interferometry,”
Appl. Phys. B 120, 311–316 (2015).

87M.-k. Zhou, Q. Luo, L.-l. Chen, X.-c. Duan, and Z.-k. Hu, “Ob-
serving the effect of wave-front aberrations in an atom interfer-


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
20

ometer by modulating the diameter of raman beams,” Phys.
Rev. A 93, 043610 (2016).

88T. M. Niebauer, R. Billson, A. Schiel, D. van Westrum,
and
F. Klopping, “The self-attraction correction for the FG5X ab-
solute gravity meter,” Metrologia 50, 1–8 (2012).

89AOSense website: https://aosense.com.
90Muquans website: https://www.muquans.com.
91M. Thomas, P. Espel, D. Ziane, P. Pinot, P. Juncar, F. Pereira
Dos Santos, S. Merlet, F. Piquemal,
and G. Genev`es,
“First
determination of the Planck constant using the LNE watt bal-
ance,” Metrologia 52, 433–443 (2015).

92M. Thomas, D. Ziane, P. Pinot, R. Karcher, A. Imanaliev,
F. Pereira Dos Santos, S. Merlet, F. Piquemal,
and P. Espel,
“A determination of the Planck constant using the LNE Kibble
balance in air,” Metrologia 54, 468–480 (2017).

93S. Schlamminger, Redefining the Kilogram and Other Units
(IOP Publishing, 2018).

94M. Stock, R. Davis, E. de Mirand´es,
and M. J. T. Milton,
“The revision of the si-the result of three decades of progress in
metrology,” Metrologia 56, 022001 (2019).

95J. B. Fixler, G. T. Foster, J. M. McGuirk, and M. A. Kasevich,
“Atom Interferometer Measurement of the Newtonian Constant
of Gravity,” Science 315, 74–77 (2007).

96G. Rosi, F. Sorrentino, L. Cacciapuoti, M. Prevedelli, and G. M.
Tino, “Precision measurement of the Newtonian gravitational
constant using cold atoms,” Nature 510, 518–521 (2014).

97R. Geiger, V. M´enoret, G. Stern, N. Zahzam, P. Cheinet, B. Bat-
telier, A. Villing, F. Moron, M. Lours, Y. Bidel, A. Bres-
son, A. Landragin,
and P. Bouyer, “Detecting inertial effects
with airborne matter-wave interferometry,” Nat Commun 2, 474
(2011).

98Y. Bidel, O. Carraz, R. Charri`ere, M. Cadoret, N. Zahzam, and
A. Bresson, “Compact cold atom gravimeter for field applica-
tions,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, 144107 (2013).

99V. M´enoret, R. Geiger, G. Stern, N. Zahzam, B. Battelier,
A. Bresson, A. Landragin,
and P. Bouyer, “Dual-wavelength
laser source for onboard atom interferometry,” Opt. Lett. 36,
4128–4130 (2011).

100M. de Angelis,
M. C. Angonin,
Q. Beaufils,
C. Becker,
A. Bertoldi, K. Bongs, T. Bourdel, P. Bouyer, V. Boyer,
S. D¨orscher, H. Duncker, W. Ertmer, T. Fernholz, T. M.
Fromhold,
W.
Herr,
P.
Kr¨uger,
C.
K¨urbis,
C.
J.
Mel-
lor, F. Pereira Dos Santos, A. Peters, N. Poli, M. Popp,
M. Prevedelli, E. M. Rasel, J. Rudolph, F. Schreck, K. Seng-
stock, F. Sorrentino, S. Stellmer, G. M. Tino, T. Valenzuela,
T. J. Wendrich, A. Wicht, P. Windpassinger,
and P. Wolf,
“iSense: A Portable Ultracold-Atom-Based Gravimeter,” Pro-
cedia Computer Science Proceedings of the 2nd European Fu-
ture Technologies Conference and Exhibition 2011 (FET 11), 7,
334–336 (2011).

101D. Boddice, N. Metje,
and G. Tuckwell, “Capability assess-
ment and challenges for quantum technology gravity sensors for
near surface terrestrial geophysical surveying,” J. Appl. Geo-
phys. 146, 149–159 (2017).

102Newton g project: http://www.newton-g.eu/index.htm.
103A. Lenef, T. D. Hammond, E. T. Smith, M. S. Chapman, R. A.
Rubenstein,
and D. E. Pritchard, “Rotation sensing with an
atom interferometer,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 760–763 (1997).

104T. L. Gustavson, P. Bouyer, and M. A. Kasevich, “Precision Ro-
tation Measurements with an Atom Interferometer Gyroscope,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 2046–2049 (1997).

105D. S. Durfee, Y. K. Shaham, and M. A. Kasevich, “Long-term
stability of an area-reversible atom-interferometer sagnac gyro-
scope,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 240801 (2006).

106T. L. Gustavson, A. Landragin,
and M. A. Kasevich, “Rota-
tion sensing with a dual atom-interferometer sagnac gyroscope,”
Classical and Quantum Gravity 17, 2385 (2000).

107G. Sagnac, “L’´ether lumineux d´emontr´e par l’effet du vent re-
latif d’´ether dans un interf´erom`etre en rotation uniforme,” C.
R. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 157, 708 (1913).

108E. Gourgoulhon, Special Relativity in General Frames: From
Particles to Astrophysics, Graduate Texts in Physics (Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013).

109P. Wolf, L. Blanchet, C. J. Bord´e, S. Reynaud, C. Salomon,
and C. Cohen-Tannoudji, “Does an atom interferometer test
the gravitational redshift at the compton frequency?” Classical
and Quantum Gravity 28, 145017 (2011).

110J. Fils, F. Leduc, P. Bouyer, D. Holleville, N. Dimarcq, A. Cla-
iron,
and A. Landragin,
English“Influence of optical aberra-
tions in an atomic gyroscope,” Eur. Phys. J. D 36, 257–260
(2005), cited By :18.

111B. Canuel,
F. Leduc,
D. Holleville,
A. Gauguet,
J. Fils,
A. Virdis, A. Clairon, N. Dimarcq, C. J. Bord´e, A. Landra-
gin,
and P. Bouyer, “Six-axis inertial sensor using cold-atom
interferometry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 010402 (2006).

112A. Gauguet, T. E. Mehlst¨aubler, T. L´ev`eque, J. Le Gou¨et,
W. Chaibi, B. Canuel, A. Clairon, F. Pereira Dos Santos, and
A. Landragin, “Off-resonant Raman transition impact in an
atom interferometer,” Phys. Rev. A 78, 043615 (2008).

113C. Jentsch, Konzeption und Aufbau eines Experimentes zur
quantenlimitierten Inertialsensorik mit lasergek¨uhlten Rubidi-
umatomen (Cuvillier Verlag, 2004).

114K. Takase, Precision rotation rate measurements with a mobile
atom interferometer, Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University (2008).

115J. K. Stockton, K. Takase,
and M. A. Kasevich, “Absolute
Geodetic Rotation Measurement Using Atom Interferometry,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 133001 (2011).

116T. M¨uller, M. Gilowski, M. Zaiser, P. Berg, C. Schubert,
T. Wendrich, W. Ertmer,
and E. M. Rasel, “A compact dual
atom interferometer gyroscope based on laser-cooled rubidium,”
Eur. Phys. J. D 53, 273–281 (2009).

117G. Tackmann, P. Berg, C. Schubert, S. Abend, M. Gilowski,
W. Ertmer,
and E. M. Rasel, “Self-alignment of a compact
large-area atomic sagnac interferometer,” New J. Phys 14,
015002 (2012).

118P. Berg, S. Abend, G. Tackmann, C. Schubert, E. Giese,
W. P. Schleich, F. A. Narducci, W. Ertmer, and E. M. Rasel,
“Composite-Light-Pulse Technique for High-Precision Atom In-
terferometry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 063002 (2015).

119Z.-W. Yao, S.-B. Lu, R.-B. Li, J. Luo, J. Wang, and M.-S. Zhan,
“Calibration of atomic trajectories in a large-area dual-atom-
interferometer gyroscope,” Phys. Rev. A 97, 013620 (2018).

120D. Savoie, M. Altorio, B. Fang, L. A. Sidorenkov, R. Geiger,
and A. Landragin, “Interleaved atom interferometry for high-
sensitivity inertial measurements,” Sci Adv 4, eaau7948 (2018).

121I. Dutta, D. Savoie, B. Fang, B. Venon, C. L. Garrido Alzar,
R. Geiger,
and A. Landragin, “Continuous cold-atom iner-
tial sensor with 1 nrad/sec rotation stability,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
116, 183003 (2016).

122M. Altorio, L. A. Sidorenkov, R. Gautier, D. Savoie, A. Lan-
dragin,
and
R.
Geiger,
“Accurate
trajectory
alignment
in cold-atom interferometers with separated laser beams,”
arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1912.04793 (2019), arXiv:1912.04793
[physics.atom-ph].

123S. M. Dickerson, J. M. Hogan, A. Sugarbaker, D. M. S. Johnson,
and M. A. Kasevich, “Multiaxis inertial sensing with long-time
point source atom interferometry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 083001
(2013).

124C. Avinadav, D. Yankelev, M. Shuker, N. Davidson,
and
O. Firstenberg, “Rotation sensing with improved stability
using point source atom interferometry,” arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:2002.08369 (2020), arXiv:2002.08369 [physics.atom-ph].

125Y.-J. Chen, A. Hansen, G. W. Hoth, E. Ivanov, B. Pelle,
J. Kitching,
and E. A. Donley, “Single-source multiaxis cold-
atom interferometer in a centimeter-scale cell,” Phys. Rev. Ap-
plied 12, 014019 (2019).

126J. Cui, Q. Zhao,
and G. Yan, “Effective bias warm-up time
reduction for mems gyroscopes based on active suppression of
the coupling stiffness,” Microsyst Nanoeng 5, 18 (2019).

127Website:
https://issuu.com/globalbusinessmedia.org/
docs/defence_industry_reports_95________.

128H. C. Lef`evre, “The fiber-optic gyroscope, a century after
Sagnac’s experiment:
The ultimate rotation-sensing technol-
ogy?” Comptes Rendus Physique The Sagnac effect: 100 years
later / L’effet Sagnac : 100 ans apr`es, 15, 851–858 (2014).

129Blue Seis 1C http://www.blueseis.com/.


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
21

130Y. N. Korkishko, V. A. Fedorov, V. E. Prilutskiy, V. G. Pono-
marev, I. V. Fedorov, S. M. Kostritskii, I. V. Morev, D. V.
Obuhovich, S. V. Prilutskiy, A. I. Zuev, and V. K. Varnakov,
“High-precision inertial measurement unit imu-5000,” in 2018
IEEE International Symposium on Inertial Sensors and Sys-
tems (INERTIAL) (26-2) pp. 1–4.

131F. Delhaye, “Hrg by safran: The game-changing technology,” in

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Inertial Sensors and
Systems (INERTIAL) (26-2) pp. 1–4.

132K. U. Schreiber and J.-P. R. Wells, “Invited review article:
Large ring lasers for rotation sensing,” Rev. Sci. Instrum. 84,
041101 (2013).

133K. U. Schreiber, T. Kl¨ugel, J.-P. R. Wells, R. B. Hurst,
and
A. Gebauer, “How to detect the chandler and the annual wobble
of the earth with a large ring laser gyroscope,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
107, 173904 (2011).

134C. Hadziioannou, P. Gaebler, U. Schreiber, J. Wassermann, and
H. Igel, “Examining ambient noise using colocated measure-
ments of rotational and translational motion,” J Seismol 16,
787–796 (2012).

135A. Landragin, A. Clairon, N. Dimarcq, P. Teyssandier, C. Sa-
lomon, E. M. Rasel, W. Ertmer, C. H. J. Bord´e, P. Tourrenc,
P. Bouyer, M. Caldwell, R. Bingham, B. Kent, M. Sandford,
P. Wolf, S. Airey, and G. Bagnasco, “Hyper: Atom interferom-
etry in space,” in Advanced Technology and Particle Physics,
pp. 16–22.

136C. Jentsch, T. Mueller, E. M. Rasel, and W. Ertmer, “Hyper: A
satellite mission in fundamental physics based on high precision
atom interferometry,” General Relativity and Gravitation 36,
2197–2221 (2004).

137B. Battelier, B. Barrett, L. Fouch´e, L. Chichet, L. Antoni-
Micollier, H. Porte, F. Napolitano, J. Lautier, A. Landragin,
and P. Bouyer, “Development of compact cold-atom sensors for
inertial navigation,” in Quantum Optics, Vol. 9900, edited by
J. Stuhler and A. J. Shields, International Society for Optics
and Photonics (SPIE, 2016) pp. 21 – 37.

138H. J. McGuinness, A. V. Rakholia,
and G. W. Biedermann,
“High data-rate atom interferometer for measuring accelera-
tion,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 011106 (2012).

139A. V. Rakholia, H. J. McGuinness,
and G. W. Biedermann,
“Dual-axis high-data-rate atom interferometer via cold ensemble
exchange,” Phys. Rev. Appl. 2, 054012 (2014).

140G. W. Biedermann, H. J. McGuinness, A. V. Rakholia, Y.-Y.
Jau, D. R. Wheeler, J. D. Sterk,
and G. R. Burns, “Atom
interferometry in a warm vapor,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 163601
(2017).

141R. P. Middlemiss, A. Samarelli, D. J. Paul, J. Hough, S. Rowan,
and G. D. Hammond, “Measurement of the Earth tides with a
MEMS gravimeter,” Nature 531, 614–617 (2016).

142C. Jekeli, “Navigation Error Analysis of Atom Interferometer
Inertial Sensor,” Navigation 52, 1–14 (2005).

143P. Cheiney, L. Fouch´e, S. Templier, F. Napolitano, B. Batte-
lier, P. Bouyer, and B. Barrett, “Navigation-compatible hybrid
quantum accelerometer using a kalman filter,” Phys. Rev. Ap-
plied 10, 034030 (2018).

144A. Bonnin, C. Diboune, N. Zahzam, Y. Bidel, M. Cadoret, and
A. Bresson, “New concepts of inertial measurements with multi-
species atom interferometry,” Appl. Phys. B 124, 181 (2018).

145D. Yankelev, C. Avinadav, N. Davidson,
and O. Firstenberg,
“Multiport atom interferometry for inertial sensing,” Phys. Rev.
A 100, 023617 (2019).

146C. Avinadav, D. Yankelev, O. Firstenberg,
and N. David-
son, “Composite-fringe atom interferometry for high dynamic-
range
sensing,”
arXiv
e-prints
,
arXiv:1912.12304
(2019),

arXiv:1912.12304 [physics.atom-ph].

147B. Barrett, P. Cheiney, B. Battelier, F. Napolitano,
and
P. Bouyer, “Multidimensional atom optics and interferometry,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 043604 (2019).

148M. Cadoret, E. de Mirandes, P. Clad´e, S. Guellati-Kh´elifa,
C. Schwob, F. Nez, L. Julien,
and F. Biraben, “Combination
of bloch oscillations with a Ramsey-Bord´e interferometer: New
determination of the fine structure constant,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
101, 230801 (2008).

149C. J. Bord´e, C. Salomon, S. Avrillier, A. van Lerberghe,
C. Br´eant, D. Bassi,
and G. Scoles, “Optical Ramsey fringes
with traveling waves,” Phys. Rev. A 30, 1836–1848 (1984).

150R. Bouchendira, P. Clad´e, S. Guellati-Kh´elifa, , F. Nez,
and
F. Biraben, “New determination of the fine structure constant
and test of the quantum electrodynamics,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
106, 080801 (2011).

151R. H. Parker, C. Yu, W. Zhong, B. Estey, and H. M¨uller, “Mea-
surement of the fine-structure constant as a test of the Standard
Model,” Science 360, 191–195 (2018).

152S. Dimopoulos, P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, M. A. Kasevich,
and S. Rajendran, “Atomic gravitational wave interferometric
sensor,” Phys. Rev. D 78, 122002 (2008).

153B. Canuel, A. Bertoldi, L. Amand, E. P. d. Borgo, T. Chantrait,
C. Danquigny, M. D. lvarez, B. Fang, A. Freise, R. Geiger,
J. Gillot,
S. Henry,
J. Hinderer,
D. Holleville,
J. Junca,
G. Lef´evre, M. Merzougui, N. Mielec, T. Monfret, S. Pelis-
son, M. Prevedelli, S. Reynaud, I. Riou, Y. Rogister, S. Rosat,
E. Cormier, A. Landragin, W. Chaibi, S. Gaffet, and P. Bouyer,
“Exploring gravity with the MIGA large scale atom interferom-
eter,” Sci Rep 8, 14064 (2018).

154M.-S. Zhan, J. Wang, W.-T. Ni, D.-F. Gao, G. Wang, L.-X. He,
R.-B. Li, L. Zhou, X. Chen, J.-Q. Zhong, B. Tang, Z.-W. Yao,
L. Zhu, Z.-Y. Xiong, S.-B. Lu, G.-H. Yu, Q.-F. Cheng, M. Liu,
Y.-R. Liang, P. Xu, X.-D. He, M. Ke, Z. Tan,
and J. Luo,
“Zaiga: Zhaoshan long-baseline atom interferometer gravitation
antenna,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. D , 1940005 (2019).

155P. W. Graham, J. M. Hogan, M. A. Kasevich, and S. Rajendran,
“Resonant mode for gravitational wave detectors based on atom
interferometry,” Phys. Rev. D 94, 104022 (2016).

156AEDGE collaboration, “AEDGE: Atomic Experiment for Dark
Matter and Gravity Exploration in Space,” arXiv e-prints ,
arXiv:1908.00802 (2019), arXiv:1908.00802 [gr-qc].

157S. Fray, C. A. Diez, T. W. Hnsch, and M. Weitz, “Atomic inter-
ferometer with amplitude gratings of light and its applications
to atom based tests of the equivalence principle,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 240404 (2004).

158A. Bonnin, N. Zahzam, Y, Bidel, and A. Bresson, “Simultane-
ous dual-species matter-wave accelerometer,” Phys. Rev. A 88,
043615 (2013).

159D. Schlippert, J. Hartwig, H. Albers, L. Richardson, C. Schu-
bert, A. Roura, W. Schleich, W. Ertmer, and E. Rasel, “Quan-
tum Test of the Universality of Free Fall,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 112
(2014), 10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.203002.

160M. Tarallo, T. Mazzoni, N. Poli, D. Sutyrin, X. Zhang,
and
G. Tino,
“Test of Einstein Equivalence Principle for 0-Spin
and Half-Integer-Spin Atoms:
Search for Spin-Gravity Cou-
pling Effects,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014), 10.1103/Phys-
RevLett.113.023005.

161L. Zhou, S. Long, B. Tang, X. Chen, F. Gao, W. Peng, W. Duan,
J. Zhong, Z. Xiong, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, and M. Zhan, “Test of
Equivalence Principle at 10−8 Level by a Dual-Species Double-
Diffraction Raman Atom Interferometer,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115,
013004 (2015).

162B. Barrett,
L. Antoni-Micollier,
L. Chichet,
B. Battelier,
T. L´ev`eque, A. Landragin,
and P. Bouyer, “Dual matter-
wave inertial sensors in weightlessness,” Nat Commun 7, 13786
(2016).

163X.-C. Duan, X.-B. Deng, M.-K. Zhou, K. Zhang, W.-J. Xu,
F. Xiong, Y.-Y. Xu, C.-G. Shao, J. Luo, and Z.-K. Hu, “Test
of the universality of free fall with atoms in different spin orien-
tations,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 023001 (2016).

164G.
Rosi,
G.
DAmico,
L.
Cacciapuoti,
F.
Sorrentino,
M. Prevedelli, M. Zych, . Brukner,
and G. M. Tino, “Quan-
tum test of the equivalence principle for atoms in coherent su-
perposition of internal energy states,” Nat Commun 8, 15529
(2017).

165P. Touboul et al, “Microscope,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 231101
(2017).

166A. Sugarbaker, S. M. Dickerson, J. M. Hogan, D. M. S. Johnson,
and M. A. Kasevich, “Enhanced atom interferometer readout
through the application of phase shear,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 111,
113002 (2013).


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
22

167T. van Zoest, N. Gaaloul, Y. Singh, H. Ahlers, W. Herr, S. T.
Seidel, W. Ertmer, E. Rasel, M. Eckart, E. Kajari, S. Arnold,
G. Nandi, W. P. Schleich, R. Walser, A. Vogel, K. Sengstock,
K. Bongs, W. Lewoczko-Adamczyk, M. Schiemangk, T. Schuldt,
A. Peters, T. Konemann, H. Muntinga, C. Lammerzahl, H. Dit-
tus, T. Steinmetz, T. W. Hansch,
and J. Reichel,
“Bose-
Einstein Condensation in Microgravity,” Science 328, 1540–
1543 (2010).

168B. Altschul and others, “Quantum tests of the Einstein Equiv-
alence Principle with the STE-QUEST space mission,” Adv.
Space Res. 55, 501–524 (2015).

169T. L´ev`eque, A. Gauguet, F. Michaud, F. Pereira Dos Santos,
and A. Landragin, “Enhancing the Area of a Raman Atom In-
terferometer Using a Versatile Double-Diffraction Technique,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 080405 (2009).

170N. Malossi, Q. Bodart, S. Merlet, L´ev`eque, A. T. Landragin,
and F. Pereira Dos Santos, “Double diffraction in an atomic
gravimeter,” Phys. Rev. A 81, 10.1103/PhysRevA.81.013617.

171H. Ahlers, H. M¨untinga, A. Wenzlawski, M. Krutzik, G. Tack-
mann, S. Abend, N. Gaaloul, E. Giese, A. Roura, R. Kuhl,
C. L¨ammerzahl, A. Peters, P. Windpassinger, K. Sengstock,
W. P. Schleich, W. Ertmer,
and E. M. Rasel, “Double bragg
interferometry,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 173601 (2016).

172H. M¨uller, S.-w. Chiow, Q. Long, S. Herrmann,
and S. Chu,
“Atom
Interferometry
with
up
to
24-Photon-Momentum-
Transfer Beam Splitters,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 180405 (2008).

173S.-w. Chiow, T. Kovachy, H.-C. Chien,
and M. A. Kasevich,
“102 h-bar k Large Area Atom Interferometers,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 107, 130403 (2011).

174P. Clad´e, S. Guellati-Kh´elifa, F. Nez,
and F. Biraben, “Large
momentum beam splitter using bloch oscillations,” Phys. Rev.
Lett. 102, 240402 (2009).

175H. M¨uller, S.-w. Chiow, S. Herrmann, and S. Chu, “Atom inter-
ferometers with scalable enclosed area,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 102,
240403 (2009).

176G. D. McDonald, C. C. N. Kuhn, S. Bennetts, J. E. Debs, K. S.
Hardman, M. Johnsson, J. D. Close,
and N. P. Robins, “80
hbar k momentum separation with Bloch oscillations in an op-
tically guided atom interferometer,” Phys. Rev. A 88 (2013),
10.1103/PhysRevA.88.053620.

177G. D. McDonald, C. C. N. Kuhn, S. Bennetts, J. E. Debs, K. S.
Hardman, J. D. Close,
and N. P. Robins, “A faster scaling in
acceleration-sensitive atom interferometers,” EPL (Europhysics
Letters) 105, 63001 (2014).

178T. Kovachy, S. wey Chiow,
and M. A. Kasevich, “Adiabatic-
rapid-passage multiphoton bragg atom optics,” Phys. Rev. A
86, 011606(R) (2012).

179K. Kotru, D. L. Butts, J. M. Kinast, and R. E. Stoner, “Large-
area atom interferometry with frequency-swept raman adiabatic
passage,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 103001 (2015).

180T. Kovachy, P. Asenbaum, C. Overstreet, C. A. Donnelly, S. M.
Dickerson, A. Sugarbaker, J. M. Hogan,
and M. A. Kasevich,
“Quantum superposition at the half-metre scale,” Nature 528,
530–533 (2015).

181B. Plotkin-Swing, D. Gochnauer, K. E. McAlpine, E. S. Cooper,
A. O. Jamison, and S. Gupta, “Three-path atom interferometry
with large momentum separation,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 133201
(2018).

182M. Gebbe, S. Abend, J.-N. Siemß, M. Gersemann, H. Ahlers,
H. M¨untinga, S. Herrmann, N. Gaaloul, C. Schubert, K. Ham-
merer, C. Lmmerzahl, W. Ertmer,
and E. M. Rasel, “Twin-
lattice atom interferometry,” (2019), arXiv:1907.08416 [quant-
ph].

183M. B¨uchner, R. Delhuille, A. Miffre, C. Robilliard, J. Vigu´e, and
C. Champenois, “Diffraction phases in atom interferometers,”
Phys. Rev. A 68, 013607 (2003).

184T. Kovachy, J. M. Hogan, D. M. S. Johnson,
and M. A. Ka-
sevich, “Optical lattices as waveguides and beam splitters for
atom interferometry: An analytical treatment and proposal of
applications,” Phys. Rev. A 82, 013638 (2010).

185R. H. Parker, C. Yu, B. Estey, W. Zhong, E. Huang,
and
H. M¨uller, “Controlling the multiport nature of bragg diffraction
in atom interferometry,” Phys. Rev. A 94, 053618 (2016).

186B. Estey, C. Yu, H. M¨uller, P.-C. Kuan,
and S.-Y. Lan,
“High-resolution atom interferometers with suppressed diffrac-
tion phases,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 083002 (2015).

187D. Gochnauer, K. E. McAlpine, B. Plotkin-Swing, A. O. Jami-
son,
and S. Gupta, “Bloch-band picture for light-pulse atom
diffraction and interferometry,” Phys. Rev. A 100, 043611
(2019).

188P. Asenbaum, C. Overstreet, T. Kovachy, D. D. Brown, J. M.
Hogan, and M. A. Kasevich, “Phase shift in an atom interfer-
ometer due to spacetime curvature across its wave function,”
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 183602 (2017).

189P. Hamilton, M. Jaffe, J. M. Brown, L. Maisenbacher, B. Estey,
and H. M¨uller, “Atom interferometry in an optical cavity,” Phys.
Rev. Lett. 114, 100405 (2015).

190I. Riou, N. Mielec, G. Lef´evre, M. Prevedelli, A. Landragin,
P. Bouyer, A. Bertoldi, R. Geiger, and B. Canuel, “A marginally
stable optical resonator for enhanced atom interferometry,”
Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics
50, 155002 (2017).

191M. Dovale-´Alvarez, D. D. Brown, A. W. Jones, C. M. Mow-
Lowry, H. Miao,
and A. Freise, “Fundamental limitations of
cavity-assisted atom interferometry,” Phys. Rev. A 96, 053820
(2017).

192R. Sapam, N. Mielec, B. Canuel, A. Bertoldi, P. Bouyer, A.
Landragin, and R. Geiger, “Study of a compact, large-mode,
degenerate optical resonator,” in preparation (2020).

193N. Mielec, M. Altorio, R. Sapam, D. Horville, D. Holleville, L. A.
Sidorenkov, A. Landragin, and R. Geiger, “Atom interferome-
try with top-hat laser beams,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 161108
(2018).

194S. S. Szigeti, J. E. Debs, J. J. Hope, N. P. Robins,
and J. D.
Close, “Why momentum width matters for atom interferometry
with bragg pulses,” New J. Phys. 14, 023009 (2012).

195H. M¨untinga, H. Ahlers, M. Krutzik, A. Wenzlawski, S. Arnold,
D. Becker, K. Bongs, H. Dittus, H. Duncker, N. Gaaloul,
C. Gherasim, E. Giese, C. Grzeschik, T. W. H¨ansch, O. Hellmig,
W. Herr, S. Herrmann, E. Kajari, S. Kleinert, C. L¨ammerzahl,
W. Lewoczko-Adamczyk, J. Malcolm, N. Meyer, R. Nolte,
A. Peters, M. Popp, J. Reichel, A. Roura, J. Rudolph, M. Schie-
mangk, M. Schneider, S. T. Seidel, K. Sengstock, V. Tamma,
T. Valenzuela, A. Vogel, R. Walser, T. Wendrich, P. Wind-
passinger, W. Zeller, T. van Zoest, W. Ertmer, W. P. Schleich,
and E. M. Rasel, “Interferometry with bose-einstein condensates
in microgravity,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 093602 (2013).

196T. Kovachy, J. M. Hogan, A. Sugarbaker, S. M. Dickerson,
C. A. Donnelly, C. Overstreet,
and M. A. Kasevich, “Matter
wave lensing to picokelvin temperatures,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 114,
143004 (2015).

197J. Hartwig, S. Abend, C. Schubert, D. Schlippert, H. Ahlers,
K. Posso-Trujillo, N. Gaaloul, W. Ertmer,
and E. M. Rasel,
“Testing the universality of free fall with rubidium and ytter-
bium in a very large baseline atom interferometer,” New J. Phys
17, 035011 (2015).

198R. P. del Aguila, T. Mazzoni, L. Hu, L. Salvi, G. M. Tino, and
N. Poli,
“Bragg gravity-gradiometer using the 1 S 0
3 P 1
intercombination transition of 88 Sr,” New J. Phys 20, 043002
(2018).

199L. Hu, N. Poli, L. Salvi, and G. M. Tino, “Atom Interferometry
with the Sr Optical Clock Transition,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 119,
263601 (2017).

200J. Rudolph, T. Wilkason, M. Nantel, H. Swan, C. M. Holland,
Y. Jiang, B. E. Garber, S. P. Carman, and J. M. Hogan, “Large
momentum transfer clock atom interferometry on the 689 nm in-
tercombination line of strontium,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 083604
(2020).

201O. Hosten, N. J. Engelsen, R. Krishnakumar,
and M. A. Ka-
sevich, “Measurement noise 100 times lower than the quantum-
projection limit using entangled atoms,” Nature 529, 505–508
(2016).

202L. Salvi, N. Poli, V. Vuleti´c,
and G. M. Tino, “Squeezing on
momentum states for atom interferometry,” Phys. Rev. Lett.
120, 033601 (2018).


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
23

Appendix A: List of groups working on cold-atom
interferometers

The tables below (I,II,III) summarize the research ef-
fort of the main actors in the field and Fig. 14 shows a

map with the different groups.


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
24

country institution
expertise (atomic species)
link

France
SYRTE, Paris
gravimeter, gyroscope, gradiometer, trapped AI,
GW detection, atom chips (Rb, Cs)

website

France
LKB, Paris
h/m, LMT, Bloch (Rb)
website

France
ONERA, Palaiseau
gravimeter, gradiometer, WEP test, field applica-
tions (Rb)

website

France
LP2N, Bordeaux
WEP test, GW (Rb, K, Sr)
website

France
LCAR,
Toulouse
Univ.

test of atom neutrality, topological phases, atom
chips (Rb)

website

France
Muquans, Bordeaux
gravimeter, gradiometer (Rb)
website

France
iXBlue, Bordeaux
inertial sensors (Rb)
website

Germany Hannover Univ.
gravimeter, gradiometer, WEP test, GW detec-
tion, LMT, atom chips (Rb, K, Yb)

website

Germany Humboldt Univ.
gravimeter, EP (Rb)
website

Italy
LENS, Florence
gradiometer, trapped AI, WEP test (Rb, Sr, Cd) website

Italy
AtomSensors
gravimeter, gradiometer (Rb)
website

Israel
Weizman Institute of
Science, Rehovot

gravimeter, inertial navigation (Rb)
website

Israel
Rafael Ltd
inertial navigation unit (Rb)
website and Ref.145

UK
Univ. Birmingham
gradiometer, field applications (Rb)
website

UK
Imperial
College,
London

accelerometer, search for dark energy (Rb)
website

UK
Teledyne e2v
gravimeter (Rb)
website

UK
M2 lasers
accelerometer (Rb)
website

TABLE I. Table of the main actors in the field of inertial sensors based on free-falling cold atoms (Europe and EU-affiliated
area).
AI: Atom interferometry; WEP: Weak Equivalence Principle; GW: Gravitational Wave; LMT: Large Momentum
Transfer techniques; BEC: interferometry with Bose Einstein Condensates; h/m: measurement of the recoil velocity. Companies
are shown in italics.

country institution
expertise (atomic species)
link

Canada
York University
echo interferometry (Rb)
website

Mexico
Univ. San Lui Potosi gravimeter (Rb)
website

USA
Stanford Univ.
WEP test, GW detection, LMT, BEC, 10-meter
fountain (Rb, Sr)

website

USA
UC Berkeley
tests
of
fundamental
physics,
h/m,
LMT,
gravimeter (Cs, Li)

website

USA
JPL, Pasadena
applications in geodesy, gradiometry (Rb)
website

USA
Sandia
National
Lab., Albuquerque

high sampling rates, multi-axis, vapor cell (Cs,
Rb)

website

USA
Draper
Lab,
Cambridge

LMT (Cs)
Ref.179

USA
Univ. Washington
LMT, BEC (Yb)
website

USA
AO Sense Inc.
gravimeter, inertial sensors (Rb)
website

USA
NIST, Boulder
miniature AI for inertial sensing (Rb)
website

USA
Northwestern Univ.
GW detection, LMT
website

USA
Goddard (NASA)
gradiometer
link

TABLE II. Table of the main actors in the field of inertial sensors based on free-falling cold atoms (North America).
Companies are shown in italics.


High-accuracy inertial measurements with cold-atom sensors
25

country
institution
expertise (atomic species)
link

Australia
ANU, Canberra
gravimeter, gradiometer (Rb)
website

China
WIPM, Wuhan
gravimeter, gyroscope, EP, GW (Rb, Sr, Cs) 10-
meter fountain

website

China
Zhejiang
Univ.
and Zhejiang Univ.
of
Technology,
Hangzhou

gravimeter, gradiometry (Rb)
61

China
Zhejiang
Univ.,
Hangzhou

gravimeter (Rb)
website

China
HUST, Wuhan
gravimeter, gyroscope, EP (Rb)
website

China
NIM, Beijing
gravimeter (Rb)
59

China
CIMM, Beijing
gravimeter (Rb)
website

China
USTC, Shanghai
gravimeter (Rb)
website

China
NUDT, Changsha
gravimeter (Rb)

China
Tsinghua University,
Beijing

cold atom beam gyroscope (Rb)

Korea
KRISS, Daejon
gravimeter (Rb)
article

India
IISER Pune
AI with BEC (Rb)
website

New Zealand Univ. Otago
gravimeter (Rb)
website

Singapore
CQT
gravimeter (Rb)
website

Singapore
Atomionics
inertial sensors
website

TABLE III. Table of the main actors in the field of inertial sensors based on free-falling cold atoms (Asia and Oceania).
Companies are shown in italics.

FIG. 14. World-map with the different research groups and companies active in the field of cold-atom intertial
sensors. List of groups as described in Tables I,II,III. Map realized with https://fortress.maptive.com/.


