SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
1

Electrically small matched antennas with
time-periodic and space-uniform modulation

Alessio DŌĆÖAlessandro (*)

AbstractŌĆöA conceptual method to realize an impedance-
matched electrically small antenna is discussed, using a trans-
mission line modulated only in time. The time-periodic space-
uniform modulation of a distributed shunt array of varcapacitors
excites a mode with very small frequency but still a small
(microwave) wavelength: the matching line then retains a prac-
tical size. The modulated transmission line brings the problem
of impedance matching to a frequency f0 much higher than
the signal, where the large antenna reactance can be easily
compensated with a much higher bandwidth for the same Q
factor: actually the bandwidth Ōłåf = f0/Q becomes large when
f0 is much larger than the signal frequency. A simple way to
obtain the space uniform modulation of the transmission line is
illustrated, making use of a Wheatstone-bridge arrangement of
the modulated varicaps. The signal and modulating lines, running
in parallel on a section of the same length, see two very different
equivalent shunt capacitances, so that the modulating voltage is
almost uniform while the signal voltage may change significantly
across the transmission line.

Index TermsŌĆöSmall antenna, electrically small, impedance
matching, metasurface, time modulation, VLF

I. INTRODUCTION

Getting radiation from an electrically small antenna, an
antenna much shorter than the radiation wavelength, has been
a longstanding problem in radio engineering since early times.
At low frequencies the radiation resistance of a small dipole
scales as the square of the ratio of the antenna and radiation
characteristic lengths, which can be extremely small. More-
over, besides the dramatic reduction of the radiation resistance,
the impedance of an electrically small dipole antenna has a
huge capacitive component and poses well-known matching
problems with the source.
Compensation of the huge capacitive component with pas-
sive linear time-invariant (LTI) elements (i.e. a large induc-
tance) can occur just in a very narrow frequency bandwidth
dictated by the Bode-Fano limit [1], [2] and it is impractical
for electrically small antennas; furthermore, the resistive losses
of the (non-ideal) inductive compensator can be much larger
than the antenna radiation resistance. That is why alternative
impedance matching methods have been deeply investigated in
literature, like non-Foster active networks [3] with a negative
effective capacitance, negative refraction index metamaterials
[4]ŌĆō[6], original meander-like antenna shapes [7] and also
magnetoelectric antennas [8]ŌĆō[13].
Nonlinear, modulated time variant networks (see for in-
stance [14]ŌĆō[16]) are a further possible way to match the
impedance of electrically small antennas without the band-
width limitation of Bode-Fano for LTI systems. Moreover, in

(*)
via
Roggerone
3/6
16159
Genova,
Italia
(email: alessiorivarolo@yahoo.it).

recent times, space-time modulation of metasurface structures
has been attracting a rise of interest in many other contexts
beside small antennas, such as parametric amplifiers, multi-
channel duplexers, and optical insulators (i.e. reflectionless
EM absorbers) [17]ŌĆō[22].
In this paper, the space-uniform modulation method is
applied to get a time-variant ╬╗/4 stub section of transmission
line, as an impedance adapter for an electrically small antenna.
As for any adapter, the impedance seen at the generator ter-
minals before the ╬╗/4 section is different from the impedance
seen at the antenna terminals and can be matched much more
easily.
A ╬╗/4 section of transmission line is not trivially realizable
at low frequencies, and normally needs complex meander
structures [7] to realize enough length in a (still) practical
space: here modulation comes into help and dramatically
reduces the needed size.
The modulation of the fundamental high frequency signal
fG of the generator (input) with a space-uniform signal of a
very close frequency (modulation) provides a low frequency
(beat) excitation with the same small wavelength of the gener-
ator (since the modulation is uniform in space) and frequency
equal to the difference of the fundamental and modulation:
this is the low frequency fs emitted by the small antenna.
Thanks to the space-uniform modulation, the ╬╗/4 match-
ing element propagates a signal with the very low antenna
frequency and the practical-size small wavelength of the gen-
erator side at the same time. As a consequence, the significant
length ╬╗/4 = c/(4fG) needed for the impedance matching is
defined at the higher generator frequency fG, and is much
smaller than c/(4fs).
The idea of applying a modulated lumped load to an
electrically small antenna has already been theorized recently
[16]: in receiving mode it is claimed to enhance the bandwidth
by a factor of two compared to the situation without modulated
load. The more complex method of space-uniform modulation
is here not applied to a lumped element but to a whole
distributed system (transmission line) in transmission mode
to obtain a larger bandwidth, as we will see.
We point out that the present method does not affect the
antenna characteristic impedance seen by its terminals, which
is unchanged and always poor. Instead we just provide an
upstream (modulated) line that facilitates the compensation
of the antenna reactance with appropriate elements at high
frequency.
This operation can be done with a significant larger band-
width compared to the standard matching technique at a single
frequency. We will show that for the same value of Q factor,
the bandwith defined at the high frequency f0 is Ōłåf = f0/Q,

arXiv:2003.08496v2  [physics.app-ph]  27 Oct 2020


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
2

Fig. 1.
Schematic of the method: the time-periodic modulation of a high
frequency signal at Žē0 induces a low frequency signal at Žē0ŌłÆŽēm transmitted
by the antenna. The generator at high frequency sees an adapted impedance
(different than the one at the antenna terminals) thanks to the ╬╗/4 matching
line.

that is larger of a factor f0/fs. This is the ultimate feature that
makes the matching at the modulated (high) frequency much
more appealing than the matching at the signal frequency.
This paper is structured as follows: in Section II the main
idea of time periodic and space-uniform modulation for electri-
cally small antennas is sketched; in Section III a system which
can provide the needed modulation is discussed; in Section IV
the boundary conditions (filters), in Section V the bandwidth
and, finally, in Section VI the limitations of the method are
illustrated.

II. TIME PERIODIC MODULATION FOR SMALL ANTENNAS

A wave of angular frequency Žē0 propagating in a conductor
with a propagation speed modulated in time, but uniform in
space, c(t) = c/(ŌłÜŽĄ(1+╬┤ cos(Žēmt))), where ŽĄ is the dielectric
permittivity and ╬┤ the modulation index, can excite modes of
different angular frequencies Žēn = Žē0 + nŽēm with the same
spatial wavenumber ŌłÜŽĄŽē0/c. This appears intuitively from the
na┬©─▒ve first order Taylor expansion

exp
’┐Į
i
’┐Į Žē0

c(t)z ŌłÆ Žē0t
’┐Į’┐Į
= exp
’┐Į
i
’┐ĮŌłÜŽĄŽē0

c
z ŌłÆ Žē0t
’┐Į’┐Į
ŌłÆ

ŌłÆ
’┐Į

n=1,ŌłÆ1

i╬┤ŌłÜŽĄŽē0z

2c
exp
’┐Į
i
’┐ĮŌłÜŽĄŽē0

c
z ŌłÆ (Žē0 + nŽēm)t
’┐Į’┐Į

(1)

for a small modulation index ╬┤.
The idea behind this paper is to provide a (space-uniform)
modulation across a ╬╗/4 section of matching transmission line,
with a modulation (angular) frequency Žēm very close to the
base radiofrequency Žē0. A low frequency wave with small fre-
quency Žē0ŌłÆŽēm << Žē0 is excited, with the same fundamental
spatial wavenumber as the generator side (Figure 1).

III. THE ANTENNA SYSTEM

Figure 2 shows an example of space-uniformly modulated
╬╗/4 matching stub, where ╬╗, as said, is defined with the (high)
generator input frequency Žē0 and not with the (small) antenna
signal frequency Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm.
Time-periodic space-uniform modulation is not as simple as
space-time modulation. While for the latter a simple travelling
wave on a dedicated line can be used to modulate the gap
voltage of an array of varactors, like in [20], space uniform
modulation requires a method for synchronizing the phase of
the modulation wave across the length of the system: for a
given time instant, each varactor must receive its modulating
voltage with the same phase.

A practical way to obtain (an approximate) space uniform
modulation across the ╬╗/4 stub of Figure 2 is to arrange the
varicap array in a Wheatstone bridge configuration as in Figure
3, with two alternative options as cross section.
As first option of Figure 3 (left), a very different spacing
and width is assigned to the conductors of the modulation line
and the signal line, the former being much closer and wider
and, consequently, having a much greater shunt capacitance
than the latter: the extra capacitive load of the varicap array is
negligible for the modulation line and the propagation speed
of the modulating signal is c. For the signal line, instead, the
conductor separation and size is designed so that the varicap
capacitance is greater than the unloaded line capacitance of a
factor ŽĄ >> 1: this sets a much smaller phase velocity c/ŌłÜŽĄ,
and then a much smaller wavelength than the modulation line.
With this arrangement the ╬╗/4 =
ŽĆc

2ŌłÜŽĄŽē0 section of transmis-
sion line in Figure 2 can be much smaller of the characteristic
quarter-wavelength
ŽĆc

2Žēm Ōł╝
ŽĆc
2Žē0 of the modulating voltage,
which is then approximately constant across the whole length.
The second option in order to assign a much larger char-
acteristic wavelength to the modulating voltage than to the
signal voltage is to use a compensating inductance array
(Figure 3 right), resonant with (the unmodulated part of) the
varicap capacitance at the modulation frequency. The signal
line and the modulating line are then realized with parallel
conductors lying on orthogonal planes: the equivalent capacity
across the signal line is the sum of the (modulated) shunt
capacitance of the varicap array and the line capacitance of
the parallel conductors, since, when the Wheatstone bridge
is balanced, there is no signal current across the inductance.
On the other hand, the equivalent capacitance seen across
the modulating line is just the conductor line capacitance,
since (the unmodulated part of) the varicap capacitance is
compensated by the shunt inductance. If we choose the varicap
capacitance to be much larger than the transmission line
capacitance, then the wavelength associated to the signal
line 2ŽĆ/(Žē0
’┐Į

L(Cline + Cvaricap)) is much smaller than the
wavelength of the modulating line 2ŽĆ/(Žēm
ŌłÜLCline), where
Žēm Ōł╝ Žē0 is the modulation frequency and Žē0 the feed
frequency. Although the conductors of the signal and the
modulating lines run in parallel with the same length, only for
the latter this lenght is electrically small and yields (almost)
uniform modulating voltage across the whole length.
For both options of Figure 3, the high symmetry of the
Wheatstone bridge configuration makes the varicap capacity
highly independent of the feed voltage of the signal: in a
back-to-back configuration, any change of the signal volt-
age induces equal and opposite changes in the capacity of
each back-to-back condenser and the overall series reactance
1

jŽē(C+╬┤C) +
1

jŽē(CŌłÆ╬┤C) =
1

jŽēC +o(╬┤C/C) stays unchanged up
to second orders in the modulation index. The high symmetry
also prevents any undesired coupling of the signal/feed line
with the modulation line: noise in the modulation line affects
in the same way each conductor of the signal line, thus
producing no differential voltage across the signal.
The two conductor bars of the signal line are connected
to a high frequency voltage feed, providing the fundamental
wave at frequency Žē0, and to the (electrically small) antenna


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
3

Fig. 2. Overview of the ╬╗/4 matching stub to the electrically small antenna,
where ╬╗/4 =
ŽĆc

2ŌłÜŽĄŽē0 is defined with respect to the feed frequency Žē0 and
not with the much smaller signal frequency Žē0 ŌłÆŽēm. The pair of conductors
in bold black is reserved for the feed/signal frequency while the other couple
of parallel conductors, in grey, carry the modulation signal, (almost) uniform
in space across the transmision line length. Alternative options for the cross
section are provided in Figure 3. The antenna and feed are placed on the
same side of the transmission line with a system of filters depicted in Figure
4. Inessential dielectric embedding (assumed ŽĄr = 1) is not shown. Assuming
a minimum 5 mm spacing between the varicap rows as in [20] and a minimum
number of N = 20 rows for the continuum limit (2) to be realized, the ╬╗/4
matching line should be longer than 10 cm.

Fig. 3. Front section of Figure 2 displaying two alternative Wheatstone bridge
arrangements of the varicaps. For OPTION 1, the modulating line (in gray)
has an unloaded shunt capacitance Cline much greater than the one of the
signal line (in black), since gray conductors are closer and wider: for the
modulation line the extra capacitance of the varicap array is negligible. For
OPTION 2, the compensating inductance is seen only by the modulating line
due to the Wheatstone bridge arrangement.

on the same end, through a system of filters shown in Figure 2
and 4 and discussed later on. The other couple of conductors,
the modulation line, is connected with a modulating source at
a frequency Žēm close to Žē0, and provides a nearly uniform
voltage in space across the length of the rods. The DC

polarization circuit can be provided on the same side of the
modulation feed with a decoupling condenser as in Figure 4.
For our simplified analysis we assume the matching sys-
tem to be embedded in a lossless dielectric with ŽĄr = 1
with mere function of support. We also neglect the varicap
parasite resistance: even though the single varicap element
may have a parasite resistance (Ōł╝ 1.8Ōä” for Infineon BB833)
of the same order as the radiation resistance of the small
antenna, the equivalent resistance of the parallel arrangement
is much smaller: this may be an appreciable feature of the
space-uniform distributed modulation compared to the lumped
modulation.
A capacitance (per unit length) of the varicap array
C0 varicap much higher than the natural capacitance Cline
of the signal parallel line provides a high effective dielectric
permittivity ŽĄ = C0 varicap/Cline: this in turn allows a shorter
length ╬╗

4 =
ŽĆc

2ŌłÜŽĄŽē0 of the conductor rods for a given frequency
Žē0, with consequent space saving.
With Infineon BB833 varicaps polarized at 2 V with a
corresponding 7 pF capacitance, a 5 mm spacing of the varicap
rows as in [20] allows to have C0 varicap=7 pF/(5mm), a much
larger value than the unloaded line capacitance of Cline=9.3
pF/m for round conductors spaced 20 times the radius. For this
configuration ŌłÜŽĄ Ōł╝12.3 and with ╬╗/4 > 10cm, corresponding
to a number N > 20 of varicap rows, the condition of space-
uniform modulation is well achieved.
On the same side as the antenna, the couple of conduc-
tor bars carrying the signal is fed with differential voltage
V (0, t) = V0 exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t), with the fundamental Žē0 in the
UHF frequency range. A fraction of the generated power at Žē0
is converted into power at Žē0 ŌłÆŽēm by the modulated varicaps
as long as the signal travels along the line, while the remaining
fraction enters the modulation circuit. At the opposite end of
the antenna, pure capacitive filters set a zero power boundary
condition at both frequencies Žē0 and Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm, as we will see
in Section IV, ensuring that all the feed energy at Žē0 has been
converted. It will be shown that energy at Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm travels
the opposite direction with respect to energy at Žē0 along the
modulated line, that is toward the antenna.
The telegraphersŌĆÖ equations

ŌłézI(z, t)=ŌłÆŌłét(C(t)V (z, t))

ŌłézV (z, t)=ŌłÆL ŌłétI(z, t)
(2)

decribe the propagation of a voltage V (z, t) and current
I(z, t) wave between the two parallel conductor bars loaded
with the time-modulated capacitor array, in parallel with their
natural (unmodulated) capacitance. The capacitance per unit
length C(t) = Cline + C0 varicap(1 + ╬┤ cos(Žēmt)) includes
both the unmodulated transmission line capacity Cline (for
round conductors of radius a, at a distance d apart, Cline =
ŽĆŽĄ0

log(d/a)) and the varicap capacitance as well, the latter sized
to be much larger than the line capacitance. In the above
equations, d is the separation gap between conductors and z
is the coordinate along the transmission line.
Neglecting dielectric leakage losses and conductor resis-
tance, equations (2) can be rearranged into the wave equation:

Ōłé2
zV (z, t) ŌłÆ L Ōłé2
t (C(t)V (z, t)) = 0
(3)


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
4

It can be shown (Appendix A) that the equation above has
solution for modes with frequency Žē0 + nŽēm for n integer:
the low frequency mode Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm is combination of a wave
with short wavelength ╬╗ =
2ŽĆc
ŌłÜŽĄŽē0 generated by the modulation,
which allows the impedance matching, along with the standard
wave with long wavelength ╬╗ =
2ŽĆc
ŌłÜŽĄ(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm) that would be
there even in absence of modulation.
Boundary conditions are carefully chosen to suppress (an-
gular) frequencies different from Žē0 and Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm, thanks to
additional dedicated filters at the conductor ends, as discussed
in Section IV. Propagation of modes Žēn = Žē0 + nŽēm with
n ╠Ė= 0, ŌłÆ1 is also discouraged by the smallness of the
modulation index ╬┤ (n-mode amplitudes are proportional to
╬┤|n|).

IV. BOUNDARY CONDITIONS AND FILTERS

A full set of voltage and current solutions of the modulated
wave equation (3) is derived in Appendix A (expressions (14)
and (15)): they are linear combination of a ŌĆØshortŌĆØ wave with
the natural wave number ╬▓0 =
ŌłÜŽĄŽē0

c
of the feed frequency
Žē0 (i.e. the wave number that the feed frequency would
have in absence of modulation), and a ŌĆØlongŌĆØ wave with
the natural wave number ╬▓ŌłÆ1 =
ŌłÜŽĄ(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)

c
of the radiated
signal frequency. Both modes (Žē0 and Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) carry both
wavelengths, in shares defined by the boundary conditions: the
latter will fix the generic (voltage-dimensional) coefficients
A, B, C, D of the linear combination in (14) and (15). The
ŌĆØinterestingŌĆØ part is of course the ŌĆØshortŌĆØ wave contribution
associated to the low frequency mode, that is proportional
to the modulation index ╬┤ and would be zero in absence of
modulation: the antenna impedance matching is made possible
thanks to this part.
Figure 4 shows the boundary conditions set by the fil-
ters: filters F0out and F1out must be pure reactive ele-
ments. Their impedance at the corresponding operating fre-
quency is F0out = Z0
2Žē2
0

iŽĆ(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)2 for the filter at Žē0 and
F1out = Z0
2Žē0

iŽĆ(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm) for the filter at Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm, as calculated
in the Appendix A, where Z0 =
’┐Į

Lline/C0 varicap =
’┐Į

Lline/(ŽĄ Cline). They can be realized with simple con-
densers in series with frequency selective filters.
At the antenna end, the block-band filter F0in (realized with
a standard LC parallel arrangement tuned to the blocking fre-
quency Žē0) ensures that the feed frequency Žē0 does not enter
the antenna, which should radiate the low mode Žē0ŌłÆŽēm only.
At the antenna terminals it is really advisable to use a block-
band filter F0in (LC parallel) rejecting the unwanted frequency
Žē0 rather than a pass-band filter (LC series) selecting the
low mode Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm. Actually, we do not want to reduce the
bandwidth by creating a not needed resonance at Žē0ŌłÆŽēm with
the filter: the large antenna reactance is to be compensated at
Žē0, where the bandwidth is large, not at Žē0ŌłÆŽēm. Moreover, a
block-band LC parallel arrangement at high frequency, unlike
the LC series bandpass at low frequency, does not introduce
a high parasite resistance of the compensating inductor which
could be of the same order as the low radiation resistance of
the antenna.

The remaining filter F1in is a LC series bandpass tuned to
Žē0, which ensures that the power at signal frequency Žē0 ŌłÆŽēm
is not dissipated in the source resistance of the feed. Finally,
filters F2 are band-pass filters shorting out the high frequency
mode Žē0 +Žēm Ōł╝ 2Žē0: since the wavelength associated to this
mode is roughly one half the wavelength at Žē0, an additional
F2 filter is placed mid-way the transmission line to remove the
occurrence of the stationary wave at Žē0+Žēm with nodes at the
end of transmission line and peak in the middle, which could
not be removed by the filters F2 at the bound of transmission
line.

V. BANDWIDTH AND POWER

With the assessment above, the input impedance at Žē0,
at the feed points A1 and A2 in Figure 4, is Zw0 in Ōł╝
Zant
(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)╬┤2

4Žē0
as calculated in (21) in the Appendix. This
impedance can be easily compensated from the feed circuit
upstream points A1 and A2, with a small inductor of opposite
reactance Ōäæ(ZG) = ŌłÆŌäæ(Zant) (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)╬┤2

4Žē0
at Žē0, cancelling
the imaginary part. For the real part, either a small-size
high-frequency transformer or a short matching section of
unmodulated transmission line at Žē0 can be used to set
Ōä£(Zant) (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)╬┤2

4Žē0
equal to the generator resistance Ōä£(ZG).
At this point it is useful to compare the radiated power
at the low frequency Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm with the feed power entering
the modulation system (at terminals A1 and A2 in Figure 4)
at Žē0. The provided feed power is P0 = Ōä£(Zw0 in)|I0(0)|2

while the power at the antenna terminals is PŌłÆ1
=
Ōä£(Zw1 in)|IŌłÆ1(0)|2 = ŌłÆŌä£(Zant)|IŌłÆ1(0)|2 (negative in sign
since power flows from the line into the antenna), where the
moduli |I0(0)| and |IŌłÆ1(0)| of the z = 0 input currents at each
frequency are provided by equation (15) evaluated at z = 0
with the condition D = 0 enforced by the boundaries (19). We
obtain |IŌłÆ1(0)|/|I0(0)| =
Žē0(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)╬┤
2Žēm(2Žē0ŌłÆŽēm) Ōł╝ (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)╬┤

2Žē0
so that
PŌłÆ1/P0 = ŌłÆ(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)/Žē0. This is a well expected result by
the Manley-Rowe theorem [23], [24], which states that that for
each power contribution flowing into the modulated varactors
at Žē0 there is one at Žē0ŌłÆŽēm opposite in sign and smaller of a
fraction (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)

Žē0
. Since varactors are pure reactive elements,
the balance fraction of energy 1 ŌłÆ (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)

Žē0
is not lost, but
enters the modulation circuit at frequency Žēm where it could
be either recovered for other purposes or eventually dissipated
in the source resistance of the modulation signal. Manley-
Rowe theorem sets the conversion rate (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)

Žē0
of the feed
power, no matter how the antenna is realized and regardless
of the boundary condition: by taking the time-averaged power
1
2Ōä£(V (z, t)IŌłŚ(z, t)) from (14) and (15) it can be also proven
that ŌłézP0(z) = ŌłÆ
Žē0

(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)ŌłézPŌłÆ1(z) holds at a generic z for
any value of the boundary condition coefficients A, B, C, D.
At the feed terminals A1 and A2, power at Žē0 is positive,
that is entering the modulated line, while power at Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm
is negative, that is coming out from the modulated line (into
the antenna); at the end z = ╬╗/4 opposite the antenna there
is no power flow at neither of the two modes, due to the pure
reactive boundary conditions: all the feed power P0 has been
converted by the varactors. The minus sign in the Manley-
Rowe relationship above enforces the power flow at frequency


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
5

Žē0ŌłÆŽēm in the opposite direction of Žē0, as shown in Figure 4.
The power transmitted to the antenna is then a fraction (Žē0 ŌłÆ
Žēm)/Žē0 of the feed power sent to the transmission line, which,
due to the impedance matching at Žē0 before the terminals A1
and A2, is one half of the generated power at Žē0 (the other
half lost in the generator resistance).
From a first impression it may look deceptive that only a
fraction (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)

Žē0
of the feed power is converted into the low
frequency to be radiated by the antenna, but a closer look
shows that it is not so bad. Actually we obtained a perfor-
mance linear in the small frequency, while for the generic
case of an unmatched antenna the radiated power is only a
fraction Rant/RG, where RG is the source resistance and
Rant is the radiation resistance: Rant and the ratio Rant/RG
are quadratic in the small frequency, hence much smaller.
Moreover, while in the latter case the residual power is entirely
dissipated in the source resistance, in the present case of a
modulated matching line the balance of power is just converted
to a different frequency Žēm. In other words, the modulated
line works as a frequency parametric downconverter where
the idler circuit operates at a frequency Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm, much lower
than the feed Žē0 and than the pump (modulation) frequency
Žēm. This result is not only a performance improvement
(linear behavior in the signal frequency, instead of quadratic
behavior) but also a bandwidth improvement with respect to
any ŌĆØstandardŌĆØ low frequency matching.
The Q factor of the match at Žē0 can be calculated from
[25]:

Q=Žē0|Ōäæ(ZŌĆ▓
w0 in(Žē0) + ZŌĆ▓
G(Žē0))|

2Ōä£(Zw0 in(Žē0))
= |Ōäæ(Zw0 in(Žē0))|

Ōä£(Zw0 in(Žē0)) =

Ōł╝|Ōäæ(Zant)|

Ōä£(Zant)
(4)

where Ōäæ(ZG) is the compensating reactance of the feed. In the
derivation of the RHS of the above we assume the canonical
inverse-frequency dependence for the reatance of the electri-
cally small dipole antenna, that is Ōäæ(Zant) = ŌłÆ
1

(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)Cant
so that Ōäæ(Zw0 in(Žē0)) = ŌłÆ
╬┤2

4Žē0Cant and the compensating
reactance is of the form Ōäæ(ZG(Žē)) =
Žē╬┤2

4Žē2
0Cant (which can be

obtained with a small inductor of value
╬┤2

4Žē2
0Cant ). In this way
Ōäæ(ZŌĆ▓
w0 in(Žē0)) = ŌłÆŌäæ(Zw0 in(Žē0))/Žē0 and Ōäæ(ZŌĆ▓
G(Žē0)) =
Ōäæ(ZG(Žē0))/Žē0 = ŌłÆŌäæ(Zw0 in(Žē0))/Žē0. The Q factor is then
the same as a conventional matching at Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm, but the
bandwidth at Žē0, defined as ŌłåŽē = Žē0/Q, is enhanced by the
(large) factor Žē0/(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) with respect to the conventional
match at the signal frequency ŌłåŽē = (Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)/Q.
As a comparison, the most performant case of standard
linear time invariant antenna model in [26], that is the folded
spherical helix, for the investigated case ka = 0.263 (a=radius
of ChuŌĆÖs sphere enclosing the antenna), has a Q factor of
84.78, which is close to the Chu limit Qmin =
1

(ka)3 +
1
ka = 58.8: a slightly higher value around Q = 120 is
obtained in [27] for a spherical helix with less windings. A
simple dipole antenna with the same ka = 0.263 has length
L = 2a and hence Ōä£(Zant) Ōł╝ 1.4Ōä” and |Ōäæ(Zant)| Ōł╝ 2kŌä”
slightly depending on the radius of conductor. With the
technique of space-uniform modulation, the large Qdipole =

Fig. 4.
Side view of the ╬╗/4 matching system to the electrically small
antenna with modulation line, filters and polarization circuit. The power flow
at Žē0 decreases from a positive value at the feed terminals A1 and A2 to
zero at the end opposite the antenna as long as energy is introduced in
the modulation circuit. Power at the low frequency mode, introduced by the
modulated varicaps, travels the opposite direction (toward the antenna) from
the zero value at the terminals B1 and B2 to the maximum value at the antenna
terminals.

|Ōäæ(Zant)|/Ōä£(Zant) Ōł╝ 1400 of the simple dipole could gen-
erate as much bandwidth as the complex spherically-folded
geometry close to the Chu limit with a modulation frequency
equal to Qdipole/Qmin = 24 times the signal frequency. The
space-uniform modulation can be applied to a more complex
antenna geometry than a dipole or to other standard methods
enhancing the radiation resistance (e.g. capacitor end plates)
by combining the techniques.

VI. LIMITATIONS OF THE TECHNIQUE

An upper limit to the high frequencies Žē0 and Žēm is set by
the space-uniform nature of the modulation, which requires a
minimum number of components (e.g. N=20 rows) to realize
the continuum limit. With a minimum row spacing of 5mm
set by the manufacturability (by simple welding), a 10cm min-
imum length for the ╬╗/4 modulation line seems reasonable,
which sets the maximum frequency Žē0 <
ŽĆc

2ŌłÜŽĄ10cm.
A further, far more important limitation is on the ratio
Žē0/(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) due to (21): not only the antenna reactance
but also the small antenna resistance is seen smaller of a
factor (Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)╬┤2

4Žē0
on the high frequency side; for high values
of Žē0/(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) it may fall below the parasite resistance
of the matching element (e.g. transformer) with the generator
source resistance. This limits the bandwidth enhancement, also
proportional to Žē0/(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm). For this reason, the space-
uniform modulation technique, with the present settings (stub
of length ╬╗/4, output filters as in (20)), is more suitable to
small antennas with an enhanced radiation resistance, such as
multi-winding loop antennas.
At present, although the theoretical basis here presented
are encouraging, a simulation of a complete setup of antenna
+ filters + matching line has not been carried out yet and
should be performed as a final validation of the practicity and
applicability of the method.


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
6

VII. CONCLUSION

The idea of time-periodic space-uniform modulation to
provide a suitable low frequency excitation to electrically
small antennas is sketched in a concept form. A high frequency
voltage feed applied to a ╬╗/4 stub section of transmission
line with modulated line impedance generates a low frequency
mode, with the same fundamental (microwave) wavelength,
which can be used to transfer the impedance matching problem
of the antenna to a much higher frequency f0 than the signal
fs. At this frequency, the antenna impedance matching can
be performed easily (e.g. by a small compensating inductor
with negligible parasite resistance and a section of unmodu-
lated transmission line of small length) and the bandwidth is
enhanced by a factor f0/fs (with the same Q-factor).

The method is here presented from a theoretical point of
view, still needing a simulation of the complete arrangement
to prove its practicity.

The same technique of space-uniform modulation with a
high frequency Žēm close to the fundamental frequency Žē0 of
the feed can be possibly applied directly on the electrically
small antenna instead of its matching circuit. A slot-loop
antenna arrangement such as [28] can be loaded with an array
of varicaps in the place of the simple capacitors used in [28].

It is worth saying that the large power fraction 1 ŌłÆ Žē0ŌłÆŽēm

Žē0
entering the modulation circuit due to the frequency downcon-
version is not necessarily dissipated in the source resistance of
this circuit, but, in principle, can be recovered and eventually
reconverted to Žē0 by an additional parametric amplifier before
the impedance matching circuit at Žē0. The ultimate configu-
ration should be a power feed at the low mode Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm first
converted to the high frequency mode Žē0 with a parametric
amplifier. Then an unmodulated line section at Žē0 where the
impedance match is performed before terminals A1 and A2
of Figure 4. Finally the modulated line downconverts the
signal back to the low frequency Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm to be radiated
by the antenna. The modulation for the upconversion and
downconversion is provided by the same voltage so that the
signal power employed in the downconversion is not lost, but
recovered in its upconversion: two parametric converters (one
lumped, one distributed, the modulated line) are in series to
achieve unit power gain
Žē0

Žē0ŌłÆŽēm ┬Ę Žē0ŌłÆŽēm

Žē0
= 1.

This paper may also provide, in principle, a mathematical
framework for the (technically challenging) generation of
modulated signals in the teraHertz band [21]. A GHz feed
signal of frequency f0 could be theoretically upconverted by
a space-uniform optical modulating signal (pump) to a much
higher optical frequency fs. In this case a huge power gain
fs/f0 with fs >> f0 is predicted by the Manley-Rowe
theorem, since the modulating part would act as parametric
upconverter.

The above further investigations are eventually open to
collaboration, in the awareness that no definite solution for
a longstanding problem is provided here but just a first sketch
of a method which may be gathered by others.

APPENDIX A
SOLUTION OF THE MODULATED WAVE EQUATION

A general voltage solution to the telegrapherŌĆÖs equation (3),
for a couple of parallel conductors loaded with a time-periodic
space-uniform modulated capacitance C(t), evenly distributed
along the conductorsŌĆÖ length, is here presented.
The solution can be decomposed in the superposition of a
forward and backward propagating wave, which in turn can
be written in the Floquet expansion form:

V ┬▒(z, t) = exp(┬▒i╬▓z)
’┐Į

n
Vn exp(ŌłÆiŽēnt)
(5)

with Žēn = Žē0 + nŽēm. Here the + sign is for the forward
and the ŌłÆ sign for the backward wave, and the pedix n is
the mode label. The mode amplitudes Vn may have different
values for the forward and the backward wave.
With ŽĄ := C0 varicap/Cline >> 1 equation (3) becomes

Ōłé2
zV (z, t) = ŽĄ

c2 Ōłé2
t ((1 + ╬┤ cos(Žēmt))V (z, t))
(6)

Plugging the ansatz (5) in the above equation we follow
similar steps as [20] to get:

’┐Į

n
Vn

’┐Į’┐Į
ŌłÆ╬▓2 + ŽĄŽē2
n

c2

’┐Į
eŌłÆiŽēnt + ╬┤ŽĄŽē2
n+1

2c2
eŌłÆiŽēn+1t+ (7)

+╬┤ŽĄŽē2
nŌłÆ1

2c2
eŌłÆiŽēnŌłÆ1t
’┐Į
= 0

Relabelling the index of terms under summation (n ŌåÆ n┬▒1)
we obtain
’┐Į

n
eŌłÆiŽēnt
’┐Į’┐Į
ŌłÆ╬▓2 + ŽĄŽē2
n

c2

’┐Į
Vn + ╬┤ŽĄŽē2
n

2c2 (Vn+1 + VnŌłÆ1)
’┐Į
= 0

(8)

The secular equation VnŌłÆ1 + bnVn + Vn+1 = 0 can thus be
derived, with

bn = 2

╬┤

’┐Į
1 ŌłÆ
c2╬▓2

ŽĄ(Žē0 + nŽēm)2

’┐Į

(9)

Now the calculation to obtain the dispersion relation from
(9) proceeds similarly to [20] in the hypothesis of weak
modulation index ╬┤ << 1. First the system

VŌłÆ1 + b0V0 =0

bŌłÆ1VŌłÆ1 + V0=0
(10)

is written: higher order terms V1 and VŌłÆ2 are neglected
because of the properly chosen boundary conditions (shortcut
filters at z = 0 and z = ╬╗/4, at the respective frequencies
Žē0 + Žēm and Žē0 ŌłÆ 2Žēm, and also because VŌłÆ2 is higher
order in the small modulation index, since it can be shown
that bn╠Ė=0 Ōł╝ O(╬┤ŌłÆ1) and b0 Ōł╝ O(╬┤). Actually, from recursion
relations (A-15) and (A-17) in [20] it appears that the n-mode
amplitude Vn is proportional ╬┤|n|. From the determinant of
(10) we obtain:

b0bŌłÆ1 = 1
(11)


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
7

Now equation (9) can be plugged into (11) yielding
’┐Į
╬▓2 ŌłÆ ŽĄŽē2
0

c2

’┐Į ’┐Į
╬▓2 ŌłÆ ŽĄ(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)2

c2

’┐Į
= ╬┤2ŽĄ2 Žē2
0(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)2

4c4
(12)

The biquadratic equation above yields two distinct solutions
for ╬▓2: with no loss of generality we can look for solutions
with only positive values of ╬▓, since the redundancy due to
the presence of a forward and a backward propagating wave is
already considered in the ┬▒ sign of (5): for ╬┤ = 0 (no modu-
lation) the solutions of (12) are the usual dispersion relations,
╬▓0 =
ŌłÜŽĄŽē0

c
for the fundamental mode and ╬▓ŌłÆ1 =
ŌłÜŽĄ(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)

c
for the low frequency mode. Solving the biquadratic equation
(12) and keeping the lowest nontrivial order in ╬┤, the dispersion
relations follow:

╬▓0=
ŌłÜŽĄŽē0

c
+
ŌłÜŽĄŽē0(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)2╬┤2

8Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)c

╬▓ŌłÆ1=
ŌłÜŽĄ(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)

c
ŌłÆ
ŌłÜŽĄŽē2
0(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)╬┤2

8Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)c
(13)

For the two wave numbers ╬▓0 and ╬▓ŌłÆ1, we obtain from
(9) b0 = ŌłÆ
(Žē0ŌłÆŽēm)2╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0ŌłÆŽēm) and b1 =
Žē2
0╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0ŌłÆŽēm) respectively.
Equation (10) yields the low frequency mode amplitude VŌłÆ1 as
a function of the fundamental V0: the resulting mode combina-
tion (V0 exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t) + VŌłÆ1 exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t)) exp(┬▒i╬▓z)
for the two wave numbers ╬▓
=
╬▓0,ŌłÆ1 solves (6). The
general voltage solution can be arranged in the following linear
combination of four independent elements:

A
’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t) +
(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)2╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t)
’┐Į
cos(╬▓0z)+

B
’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t) +
(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)2╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t)
’┐Į
sin(╬▓0z)+

C
’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t) ŌłÆ
Žē2
0╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t)
’┐Į
cos(╬▓ŌłÆ1z)+

D
’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t) ŌłÆ
Žē2
0╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t)
’┐Į
sin(╬▓ŌłÆ1z)
(14)

The application of the boundary conditions, four independent
equations overall, for the two frequencies Žē0 and Žē0ŌłÆŽēm and
the two bounds of the modulated line, completely defines the
four coefficients A, B, C, D. The current can be obtained by
I(z, t) = ŌłéV (z,t)

Ōłéz
1

iŽēnL and is expressed as:

i A
Z0

’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t) + Žē0(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t)
’┐Į
sin(╬▓0z)+

ŌłÆi B

Z0

’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t) + Žē0(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t)
’┐Į
cos(╬▓0z)+

i C
Z0

’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t) ŌłÆ Žē0(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t)
’┐Į
sin(╬▓ŌłÆ1z)+

ŌłÆi D

Z0

’┐Į
exp(ŌłÆi(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)t) ŌłÆ Žē0(Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm)╬┤

2Žēm(2Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm) exp(ŌłÆiŽē0t)
’┐Į
cos(╬▓ŌłÆ1z)
(15)

where Z0 =
’┐Į

Lline/C0 varicap =
’┐Į

Lline/(ŽĄ Cline). The
input impedance at Žē0 can be derived by the ratio of the Žē0
components in (14) and (15) evaluated at z = 0, that is the
feed connection points A1 and A2 in Figure 4:

Zw0 in = Z0
A ŌłÆ
Žē2
0╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)C

ŌłÆiB + i
Žē0ŽēŌłÆ1╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)D

(16)

where we defined ŽēŌłÆ1 := Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm. The antenna input
impedance at ŽēŌłÆ1, derived by the ratio of the Žē0 ŌłÆ Žēm
components at z = 0, is:

Zw1 in = Z0
Žē2
ŌłÆ1╬┤A + 2(Žē2
0 ŌłÆ Žē2
ŌłÆ1)C

ŌłÆiŽē0ŽēŌłÆ1╬┤B ŌłÆ i2(Žē2
0 ŌłÆ Žē2
ŌłÆ1)D = ŌłÆZant

where the minus sign in ŌłÆZant is because the current is
conventionally assumed to flow out from the antenna into the
transmission line. The output impedance at Žē0, the ratio of the
Žē0 components in (14) and (15) evaluated at z = ŽĆ/(2╬▓0), that
is at points B1 and B2 in figure 4, opposite side of the antenna,
is:

Zw0 out=Z0
B ŌłÆ
Žē2
0╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)C ŌłÆ ŽĆ

2
Žē0ŽēŌłÆ1╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)D

iA ŌłÆ i ŽĆ

2
Žē2
ŌłÆ1╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)C + i
Žē0ŽēŌłÆ1╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)D

(17)

The output impedance at ŽēŌłÆ1, the ratio of the ŽēŌłÆ1 components
evaluated at z = ŽĆ/(2╬▓0), is:

Zw1 out = Z0

Žē2
ŌłÆ1╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)B + C + ŽĆ

2
ŽēŌłÆ1
Žē0 D

i
Žē0ŽēŌłÆ1╬┤

2(Žē2
0ŌłÆŽē2
ŌłÆ1)A + i ŽĆ

2
ŽēŌłÆ1
Žē0 C ŌłÆ iD

(18)

where for both equations (17) and (18) we approximated
cos( ╬▓ŌłÆ1ŽĆ

2╬▓0 ) Ōł╝ 1 and sin( ╬▓ŌłÆ1ŽĆ

2╬▓0 ) Ōł╝
ŽēŌłÆ1ŽĆ
2Žē0 . Pure imaginary
Zw0 out and Zw1 out are required in order to ensure that all
the energy converted from Žē0 to the low mode ŽēŌłÆ1 is used
at the antenna end, with no energy loss in the filter between
B1 and B2 in Figure 4. From inspection of (17) and (18) this
happens if we set A =
ŽĆ
2 BŽē2
ŌłÆ1/Žē2
0 and D = 0. From the
additional equation (17) we obtain:

A= 2ŽĆŽēŌłÆ1(Žē2
ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ Žē2
0)Z0

(ŽĆŽē3
ŌłÆ1Z0 ŌłÆ 2iŽē3
0Zant)╬┤ C

B=
4Žē2
0(Žē2
ŌłÆ1 ŌłÆ Žē2
0)Z0

ŽēŌłÆ1(ŽĆŽē3
ŌłÆ1Z0 ŌłÆ 2iŽē3
0Zant)╬┤ C

D=0
(19)

With these settings the boundary output impedances (17) and
(18) become:

Zw0 out=Z0
2Žē2
0

iŽĆŽē2
ŌłÆ1

Zw1 out=Z0
2Žē0

iŽĆŽēŌłÆ1

(20)

while the input impedance from (16) is:

Zw0 in=iŽĆŽē2
ŌłÆ1Z0
2Žē2
0
+ iŽĆŽē4
ŌłÆ1Z0 + 2Žē3
0ŽēŌłÆ1Zant

8(Žē2
0 ŌłÆ Žē2
ŌłÆ1)2
╬┤2 Ōł╝ Zant
ŽēŌłÆ1╬┤2

4Žē0

(21)

where in the last step we considered Zant >> Z0 since it
scales as the inverse of the low frequency ŽēŌłÆ1.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was fully supported by the patience of dear
Stefania, which I want to thank for the English revision of
this paper.


SUBMITTED TO IEEE TRANSACTION ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION, ┬®IEEE 2020
8

REFERENCES

[1] H. A. Wheeler, ŌĆØFundamental limitations of small antennasŌĆØ, Proc. IRE,
vol. 35, pp. 1479-1484, Dec. 1947.

[2] L. J. Chu, ŌĆØPhysical limitations of omni-directional antennasŌĆØ, J.
Appl.Phys., vol. 19, pp. 1163-1175, Dec. 1948.

[3] K.S.Song, ŌĆØNon-Foster Impedance Matching and Loading Networks for
Electrically Small Antennas,ŌĆØ Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. and Comp.
Engin., The Ohio State University, 2011.

[4] R. W. Ziolkowski, A.D. Kipple, ŌĆØApplication of Double Negative Ma-
terials to Increase the Power Radiated by Electrically Small Antennas,ŌĆØ
IEEE Trans. on Antennas and Propag., vol. 51, no.10, Oct. 2003.

[5] R. W. Ziolkowski, A.Erentok, ŌĆØA Metamaterial-Based Efficient Elec-
trically Small Antennas,ŌĆØ Trans. IEEE, vol. AP-54, Jul. 2006, pp.
2113ŌĆō2130.

[6] R. W. Ziolkowski, ŌĆØMetamaterial-Based Antennas: Research and Devel-
opments,ŌĆØ IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E89ŌĆōC, no.9, Sep. 2006.

[7] H.Kanaya, R.K.Pokharel, R.Nabeshima, K.Yoshida, ŌĆØDesign and Perfor-
mance of an Electrically Small Antenna with Matching Circuit,ŌĆØ Proc.
of Asia-Pacific Microwave Conf., Bangkok, Dec. 2007.

[8] C.Forrest, ŌĆØAcoustically driven integrated microstrip antennas and elec-
tromagnetic radiation from piezoelectric devices,ŌĆØ Ph.D. dissertation,
Dept. Elect. Eng., Iowa State University, 1993.

[9] A.E.Hassanien, M.Breen, M.Li, S.Gong, ŌĆØA theoretical study of acous-
tically driven antennas,ŌĆØ Journal of Appl. Phys. 127, 014903 (2020).

[10] A.E.Hassanien, M.Breen, M.Li, S.Gong, ŌĆØAcoustically Driven and Mod-
ulation Inducible Radiating Elements,ŌĆØ arXiV: 1906.07797.

[11] X.Liang, H.Chen, N.Sun, H.Lin, N.Sun, ŌĆØNovel Acoustically Actuated
Magnetoelectric Antennas,ŌĆØ Proc. IEEE Internat. Symp. on Antennas
and Propag., Boston, MA, USA, 2018.

[12] T.Nan et al., ŌĆØAcoustically actuated ultra-compact NEMS magnetoelec-
tric antennas,ŌĆØ Nature Communications 8(1):296, Dec. 2017.

[13] L.Goltcman, Y.Hadad, ŌĆØScattering from artificial piezoelectriclike meta-
atoms and molecules,ŌĆØ Phys. Rev. Lett. 120(5), 054301, 2018.

[14] L. A. Thompson, ŌĆØBroadband electrically short transmitters via time-
varying antenna properties,ŌĆØ M.S. thesis, School of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, 2017.

[15] A.Shlivinski, Y.Hadad, ŌĆØBeyond the Bode-Fano bound: wideband
impedance matching for short pulses using temporal switching of
transmission line parameters,ŌĆØ Phys. Rev. Lett., 121, 204301, 2018.

[16] P.Loghmannia, M.Manteghi, ŌĆØBroadband Parametric Impedance Match-
ing
for
Small
Antennas
Beyond
the
Bode-Fano
Limit,ŌĆØ
arXiv:
1907.11683.

[17] X.Guo, Y.Ding, Y.Duang, X.Ni, ŌĆØNonreciprocal metasurface with
spaceŌĆōtime phase modulation,ŌĆØ Light: Science & Applic. 8, 123 (2019).

[18] F.Monticone, A.Al`u, ŌĆØLeaky-Wave Theory, Techniques, and Applica-
tions: From Microwaves to Visible Frequencies,ŌĆØ Proc. IEEE, vol. 103,
no.5, May 2015.

[19] S.Taravati, ŌĆØApplication of space and time modulated dispersion engi-
neered metamaterials to signal processing and magnetless nonreciproc-
ity,ŌĆØ Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. G┬┤enie ┬┤Electr., ┬┤Ecole Polytech. Montr┬┤eal,
2017.

[20] S.Taravati, C.Caloz, ŌĆØMixer-Duplexer-Antenna Leaky-Wave System
Based on Periodic Space-Time Modulation,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. on Antennas
and Propag., vol 65, Issue 2, Feb. 2017.

[21] K.H.Villegas, F.V.Kusmartsev, I.G.savenko, ŌĆØOptical Transistor for an
Amplification of Radiation in a Broadband THz Domain,ŌĆØ Phys. Rev.
Lett. 124, 087701, Feb. 2020.

[22] X.Wang, A.Diaz Rubio, H.Li, S.Tretyakov, A.Al`u, ŌĆØMultifunctional
Space-Time Metasurfaces,ŌĆØ arXiv: 1910.11812v1.

[23] J. Manley, H. E. Rowe, ŌĆØSome general properties of nonlinear elements-
part I: General energy relations,ŌĆØ Proc. IRE, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 904 ŌĆō
913, Jul. 1956.

[24] J. Manley, ŌĆØSome properties of time varying networks,ŌĆØ IRE Trans. Circ.
Theory, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 69 ŌĆō 78, Aug. 1960.

[25] A.D. Yaghjian, S.R. Best, ŌĆØImpedance, bandwidth, and Q of antennas,ŌĆØ
IEEE Trans. on Antennas and Propag., vol 53, Issue 4, Apr. 2005.

[26] S.R. Best, ŌĆØA study of the impedance properties of small antennas,ŌĆØ
Proc. Antenna Applications Symposium, 2007.

[27] F.Sarrazin, S.Pflaum, C.Delaveaud ŌĆØRadiation Efficiency Optimization
of Electrically Small Antennas,ŌĆØ Proc. IWAT2016, Feb. 2016.

[28] P.L. Chi, R. Waterhouse, T.Itoh ŌĆØAntenna Miniaturization Using Slow
Wave Enhancement Factor from Loaded Transmission Line Models,ŌĆØ
IEEE Trans. on Antennas and Propag., 59(1):48-57, Feb. 2011.


