Preprint accepted for publication in Journal of Materials Science & Technology, special issue “Advanced 

Corrosion-Resistant Materials and Emerging Applications”  

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmst.2020.01.019 

 

Advanced protection against environmental degradation of 

silver mirror stacks for space application 

 

Rajendra Kurapati,a Vincent Maurice,a Antoine Seyeux, a Lorena H. Klein,a Dimitri Mercier,a 

Grégory Chauveau,b Catherine Grèzes-Besset,b Loïc Berthod,c Philippe Marcusa 

 

aPSL Research University, CNRS-Chimie ParisTech, Institut de Recherche de Chimie Paris, Physical Chemistry 

of Surfaces Group, 11 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France 

bCILAS MARSEILLE, 600 avenue de la Roche Fourcade, Pole ALPHA Sud - Saint Mitre, 13400 Aubagne, 

France 

cCNES, Sous-direction Assurance Qualité, Service Technologies, Matériaux et Procédés, 18 Avenue Édouard 

Belin, 31401 Toulouse, France 

 


 
2

Abstract 

Protection of silver mirror stacks from environmental degradation before launching is crucial 

for space applications. Hereby, we report a comparative study of the advanced protection of 

silver mirror stacks for space telescopes provided by SiO2 and Al2O3 coatings in conditions of 

accelerated aging by sulfidation. The model silver stack samples were deposited by cathodic 

magnetron sputtering on a reference silica substrate for optical applications and a surface-

pretreated SiC substrate. Accelerated aging was performed in dry and more severe wet 

conditions. Optical micrographic observations, surface and interface analysis by Time-of 

Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and reflectivity measurements were 

combined to comparatively study the effects of degradation. The results show a lower kinetics 

of degradation by accelerated aging of the stacks protected by the alumina coating in 

comparable test conditions. 

 

Keywords: Mirror layers; protection layers; silver; atmospheric corrosion; accelerated aging; 

surface analysis; space applications  

 


 
3

Introduction 

Environmental degradation in earth atmosphere is of major concern for the space 

industry since it is a limiting factor for the long-term durability of silver mirrors for 

demanding applications such as space telescopes. Local degradation by tarnishing of the 

reflective silver layer is observed during indoor qualification and storage phases after satellite 

assembly and before launching. It occurs despite the presence of protection and confinement 

coatings that have been developed to improve the durability of the mirrors [1-4]. The 

protective overcoats can consist of SiO2 [5,6] Al2O3 [7,8] Si3N4 [9,10] or SiNx [11-13] 

dielectric layers deposited on the reflecting layer made of silver, this metal having the highest 

reflectivity in the visible and a low emissivity in the infrared [14,15].  

Degradation studies performed on space silver mirrors mostly addressed the efficiency 

of the protection layer and the effect of environmental aging on the optical properties 

[8,13,16-19]. The tarnishing mechanism has also been studied [20-24]. In indoor atmospheres, 

the predominant tarnish product of silver metal is silver sulfide (Ag2S) resulting from the 

corrosive interaction with organosulfur compounds or H2S pollutants [25-31]. In laboratory, 

H2S is mostly used to study silver sulfidation [16,32-36]. 

Recently, model stack samples consisting of thin silver layers protected by SiO2 

overcoats deposited by cathodic magnetron sputtering were studied on SiC [23,24], a 

substrate already in use in light weight all-SiC telescopes assigned to scientific or earth 

observation missions. Exposure to H2S gas was applied for accelerated aging and degradation 

was studied by surface and interface analysis. Local tarnishing was observed to result from 

the formation of Ag2S columns emerging above the stack surface. The growth of these Ag2S 

columns was promoted at the high aspect ratio surface defects (surface pores) of the SiC 

substrate due to imperfect protection by the SiO2 overcoat. In the failure sites, permeation 

channels was proposed to connect the silver layer to the environment through the deposited 


 
4

protection layer, which would enable local H2S entry and Ag2S growth with eruption at the 

stack surface [23]. Suppressing the surfaces pores resulting from the bulk SiC material 

production process by surface pretreatment was found to eliminate the high aspect ratio 

surface sites imperfectly protected by the SiO2 overcoat and thereby to markedly delay 

tarnishing initiation and longer preserve the optical performance [24]. 

Here we report a comparative study of the advanced protection provided by SiO2 and 

Al2O3 overcoats in conditions of dry and more severe wet accelerated aging by sulfidation. 

The model silver stack samples were deposited by cathodic magnetron sputtering on a 

reference silica substrate for optical applications and a surface-pretreated SiC substrate. 

Accelerated aging was performed in dry and more severe wet conditions. Optical 

micrographic observations, surface and interface analysis by Time-of Flight Secondary Ion 

Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) and reflectivity measurements were combined to 

comparatively study the effects of degradation. 

Experimental 

Substrate samples (10×10×1.5 mm3) made of silica and Boostec® silicon carbide were 

bought from Mersen Boostec. The SiO2 substrate samples have an optical surface finish with 

a typical roughness of less than 1 nm. The SiC CVD samples had one face pretreated by 

chemical vapor deposition at Mersen Boostec so as to deposit a ∼200 µm thick high purity 

SiC layer in order to suppress the surface pores left by the material processing. After 

pretreatment, these SiC CVD substrate samples had an optical finish with a nominal 

roughness of 1.2 nm of the pretreated surface.  

The PACA2M deposition platform at CILAS, in its premises of Aubagne [37-39] was 

used for preparation of the layered stacks by cathodic magnetron sputtering as in our previous 

studies [23,24]. Base pressure is 10-7 mbar and working pressure during deposition in the 10-

3–10-2 mbar range. The platform is equipped with an in situ broadband optical monitoring of 


 
5

the optical performance and thickness during deposition. Prior to deposition, the target 

cathode surfaces were pretreated by Ar sputtering in order to minimize their surface 

contamination. An adhesion interlayer consisting of metallic nickel and chromium and about 

10 nm thick was first deposited on the substrates, then the silver mirror layer, 100 to 200 nm 

thick, then another adhesion interlayer (thickness and material of this interlayer cannot be 

disclosed), and finally a dielectric protection layer consisting of silicon dioxide or aluminum 

oxide and between 140 and 200 nm thick depending on the targeted optical performance. 

After coating deposition, the stack samples, taken out to clean room atmosphere, were 

enclosed in membrane boxes under ambient pressure before shipping to CNRS-Chimie 

ParisTech for accelerated aging and surface and interface analysis. 

Dry accelerated aging was performed in H2S gas as detailed before [23,24]. The as-

received stacks were mounted into a quartz tube devoted to thermal treatments under reactive 

gases. Sample edges were not protected. At first, the tube was pumped to secondary vacuum 

in the 10-5 mbar range, and then filled with H2S gas (5N purity, Air Liquide) at a pressure of 

1000 mbar. Accelerated sulfidation was performed at 75°C using a tubular oven and during 

96 h. Thermal treatment was stopped by quenching the quartz tube with iced water and 

simultaneously pumping back the system to secondary vacuum. In H2S gas, the formation of 

silver sulfide (Ag2S) results from the dissociative adsorption of H2S on the silver metal 

surface unprotected by the dielectric coating, i.e. at the end of the permeation channels 

connecting the silver layer to the environment and bypassing the protection layer [23]. 

Wet accelerated aging was performed in a non-deaerated aqueous solution of 1 mM 

Na2S and 0.1 M NaOH of pH 13, prepared from reagent grade chemicals and ultra-pure water. 

At this pH, all (99.9%) sulfide species are HS- ions, the pKa values of the H2S/HS- and HS-

/S2-couples being 7.0 and 17.1, respectively [40]. An aqueous solution of pH 7 was also 

prepared by adding 0.1 M H2SO4 to the pH 13 solution, alumina being amphoretic and only 


 
6

stable in the 4 < pH < 8.3 range. At this pH, the solution is less aggressive since containing 

less (50%) HS- ions, the other sulfide species being H2S (50%). Immersions were performed 

at free potential, silver sulfide being formed spontaneously in these solutions without 

applying any anodic polarization [41-44]. Immersion tests were performed for 2, 4, 6 and 8 

hours. The immersed area was 0.28 cm2 delimited by a Viton O ring, thus preserving the 

sample edges from exposure to the aggressive solution. In these wet conditions, the formation 

of silver sulfide (Ag2S) results from the dissociative adsorption on the silver metal surface of 

the HS- ions also permeating the protection layer via the connected porosity of the dielectric 

coating. 

Optical microscope images were taken before and after sulphidation for all tested 

samples. Surface and interface analyses were performed by ToF-SIMS on selected samples. A 

IonTof 5 spectrometer operating at a base pressure of approximately 10−9 mbar was used. 

Chemical imaging was performed in static SIMS conditions. A pulsed 25 keV Bi+ primary ion 

source was employed, delivering 0.15 pA of current over a 100 × 100 μm2 area analyzed with 

a resolution of about 150 nm. For depth profiling analysis, static SIMS analytical conditions 

were also used with a pulsed 25 keV Bi+ primary ion source delivering a target current of 

1.2 pA over a 100 × 100 μm2 area. It was interlaced with sputtering performed with another 

gun of 2 keV Cs+ ions and delivering 100 nA of target current over a 300 × 300 μm2 area. 

Analysis in static SIMS conditions was centered in the sputtered crater to avoid edge effects. 

Data acquisition and post-processing analyses were performed with the Ion-Spec software. 

Results and Discussion 

Resistance to dry accelerated aging on silica substrate 

Figure 1 compares optical images before and after 96 h of dry accelerated aging for 

the two stacks deposited on the silica substrate. On both stacks, degradation occurs 


 
7

predominantly by forming a delamination strip propagating from the sample edges, as 

expected since the samples chamfers were not polished and the edges were not masked during 

deposition. The delamination strip is narrower on the sample with the alumina overcoat, 

showing less advanced corrosion. Further away from the edges and in the sample center, 

corrosion spots with a maximum size reaching 25 µm are observed on the sample with the 

silica overcoat (Figure 1, top row). On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure 1, 

bottom row), smaller corrosion spots (maximum size reaching 5 µm) are observed near the 

sample edge and none in the sample center, thus showing that the alumina overcoat provides 

higher corrosion protection both at the sample edges and in regions not affected by edge 

effects. 

Figure 2 shows ToF-SIMS chemical maps measured locally (analyzed area of 

100 × 100 μm2) on both samples after the dry accelerated aging test. The images were 

recorded at the topmost surface of the stacks after a slight sputtering to remove the surface 

contamination from exposure to ambient air. They are therefore chemical maps of the extreme 

surface of the protection layers. On the sample with the silica overcoat (Figure 2(a)), the 

selected negative ions are representative for the protection layer (O-, SiO2-), for formation of 

silver (109Ag-) sulphide (34S-) and for contamination (Cl-). The total ions map sums up the 

selected ions and others (18O-, Ag-, S-) not shown. Several (six) defects (dark spots) with a 

size less than 20 µm are present at the overcoat surface, some of them being aggregated. All 

these defects except the smallest coincide with the local formation of silver sulfide spots, as 

confirmed by the total ions maps that superimposes the silver sulfide spots inside the overcoat 

surface defects. The Cl contamination is quite homogeneous with a slight accumulation in the 

largest overcoat surface defect. The presence of sulfide corrosion spots inside the overcoat 

defects at the extreme surface of the stack is consistent with the mechanisms previously 

proposed for localized degradation with pre-existing channels (connected porosity) in the 


 
8

protection layer enabling H2S penetration down to the silver layer followed by local growth of 

silver sulfide with columns emerging at the stack surface [23,24]. 

On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure 2(b)), one defect, about 5 µm in size, 

is also observed at the overcoat surface (O- and SiO2- ions maps). However, it is not 

associated with silver sulfide spots. The local presence of sulfur is detected in the S- map (not 

shown) but not in the 34S- isotopic map of lower intensity. Cl contamination is present in the 

defect at the same level as in the protection layer. Thus, although a surface defect is present in 

the protection layer, it may be a preferential pathway for local penetration of H2S but not for 

subsequent local growth of silver sulfide with emergence at the stack surface. Although the 

chemical mapping is local and may not be statistically representative of the whole sample, the 

data are in coherence with the optical imaging analysis showing that the alumina overcoat 

seems to provide better protection against environmental aging with less and smaller pre-

existing defects (lower connected porosity) for preferential penetration of H2S triggering local 

silver sulfidation on these samples. 

Figure 3 shows the ToF-SIMS elemental depth profiles measured on both samples 

after the dry accelerated aging test. The intensity of the selected negative ions is plotted in 

logarithmic scale versus sputtering time. Starting from the outer surface, the intensity profiles 

define the main three regions of the deposited stacks corresponding successively to the 

protection layer (18O-, SiO2- and SiO- ions in Figure 3(a) and 18O-, AlO2- and AlO- ions in 

Figure 3(b)), the silver layer (Ag- ions) and the SiO2 substrate (18O-, SiO2- and SiO- ions). The 

observed variations of sputtering time between the SiO2/Ag/SiOx and SiO2/Ag/AlOx stacks 

comes from the fact that they were produced in different batches with variations of the 

deposited thickness of the silver layer (from 100 to 200 nm thick) and protective layer (from 

140 to 200 nm). The adhesion interlayer regions Ia and Ib are marked by a peak and a steep 

decrease in the Ag- ions profile, respectively. The peak of the Ag- ions profile in the Ia 


 
9

interfacial region is consistent with the formation of a discontinuous adhesion interlayer 

forming islands as discussed previously [23,24]. In the Ib interfacial region, the expected Ag- 

ions intensity drop down coincides with the expected steep increases in the 18O-, SiO2- and 

SiO- ions profiles also characteristic of the substrate.  

On the sample with the silica overcoat (Figure 3(a)) and like previously observed 

[23,24], the 18O-, SiO2- and SiO- ions exhibit plateaus of increasing intensity in the protection 

layer region with in-depth progress, suggesting a density of the SiO2 layer decreasing with on-

going deposition from the Ia interface. Silver contamination of the target cathode during 

previous deposition of the reflective layer could explain the detection of the Ag- ions in the 

overcoat region. This Ag presence could also result from photo-enhanced migration during 

deposition promoted by oxygen adsorption on silver, as previously proposed for a TiO2 

protection layer [45]. The profile of the Cl- ions, characteristic of atmospheric contamination 

by chlorine-containing pollutants, is consistent with the presence of channels in the protection 

layer exposing the underlying silver layer and substrate to the environment. This connected 

porosity is also supported by the 34S- ions profile, characteristic of the penetration of H2S 

during the accelerated aging test since the intensity was at noise level before the test. The 

formation of silver sulfide columns growing throughout the protection layer and emerging at 

the stack surface is confirmed by the AgS- ions profile of low but non-zero intensity in the 

overcoat region. Hence the ToF-SIMS profiles provide indirect evidence of the presence of 

permeation channels penetrating the coating and at the origin of the local growth of the silver 

sulfide corrosion spots. 

On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure 3(b)), the AlO2- and AlO- ions also 

exhibit plateaus of increasing intensity in the protection layer region with in-depth progress, 

also suggesting a density of the Al2O3 layer decreasing with on-going deposition from the Ia 

interface. Silver contamination appears more homogeneous in depth than in the silica 


 
10

overcoat. Cl contamination is at similar level in the protection layer but also observed in the 

silver layer, suggesting that some may have occurred during deposition (these samples with 

different overcoats were produced in two separate runs). The 34S- ions profile has similar 

intensity at the surface of the protection layer, as expected from the exposure to H2S gas, but 

then drops near noise level with in-depth progress inside the alumina overcoat, which is 

characteristic of the reduced penetration of H2S during the accelerated aging test compared to 

the silica-coated sample. The AgS- ions profile of zero intensity in the overcoat region is 

consistent with the absence of formation of silver sulfide columns growing throughout the 

protection layer. Some intensity is only detected at the surface of the silver layer suggesting 

that silver sulfide growth has initiated but not propagated through the protective overcoat. 

Thus in-depth profile analysis of the stacks after dry accelerated aging confirms the 

better protection provided by the alumina overcoat for the mirror stack deposited on the silica 

substrate. Penetration of H2S via the connected porosity of the protection layer would occur 

with both types of overcoats but would more slowly reach the silver layer with the alumina 

overcoat, suggesting a more compact coating with lower connected porosity delaying the 

initiation of localized degradation by sulfidation and the local growth of silver sulfide 

columns through the overcoat. 

Resistance to dry accelerated aging on SiC CVD substrate 

Figure 4 compares optical images before and after 96 h of dry accelerated aging for 

the two stacks deposited on the SiC CVD substrate. Preferential degradation is also observed 

at the sample edges with more advanced propagation of the delamination strip on the sample 

with the silica overcoat. In the samples center regions not affected by edge effects, one also 

observes larger (largest size of ~25 µm vs ~10 µm) corrosion spots on the sample with the 

silica overcoat but the spots appear more numerous on the sample with the alumina overcoat. 

These observations suggest a higher resistance to propagation with the alumina overcoat for 


 
11

the stacks deposited on the SiC CVD substrate. The higher probability of initiation of 

localized degradation could be either due a different amount of localized defects on the SiC 

CVD substrate or a lower resistance to the initiation of localized degradation. 

Figure 5 shows ToF-SIMS chemical maps measured locally on both samples after the 

dry accelerated aging test. On the sample with the silica overcoat (Figure 5(a)), one defect 

(dark spot) with a size less than 10 µm is observed at the overcoat surface in the analyzed 

area. Its presence coincides with the local formation of a silver sulfide spot, as confirmed by 

the 109Ag-, 34S- and total ions maps. The Cl contamination is quite homogeneous with no 

accumulation in the overcoat surface defect. On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure 

5(b)), several defects with a size less than 5 µm are observed at the overcoat surface, three of 

them being aggregated to form a larger one. They are also associated with the local formation 

of a silver sulfide spots except for one of them, as confirmed by the 109Ag-, 34S- and total ions 

maps. Cl contamination is also observed where sulfide spots are formed. Thus, and although 

the chemical mapping analysis may not be statistically representative of the whole sample 

behavior, it is confirmed that the sample with the alumina overcoat would be more prone to 

initiation of degradation by local sulfidation but better resist propagation by growth of the 

silver sulfide corrosion spots for the stacks deposited on the SiC CVD substrate. 

The ToF-SIMS elemental depth profiles measured on both samples after the dry 

accelerated aging test are shown on Figure 6. On the sample with the silica overcoat (Figure 

6(a)), the profile of the Cl- ions, characteristic of atmospheric contamination by chlorine-

containing pollutants, is consistent with the presence of channels in the protection layer 

exposing the underlying silver layer and substrate to the environment, as for the stack 

deposited on the SiO2 substrate (Figure 3(a)). The penetration of H2S via this connected 

porosity during the accelerated aging test is also supported by the intensity of the 34S- ions 

profile, higher than the noise level measured before the test. The few counts of AgS- ions 


 
12

profile in the overcoat region is consistent with silver sulfide columns growing throughout the 

protection layer. Again these ToF-SIMS profiles provide indirect evidence of the presence of 

permeation channels bypassing the protection provided by the dielectric overcoat. 

On the sample with the alumina overcoat (Figure 6(b)), Cl contamination is observed 

in the protection layer and in the silver layer like for the stack deposited on the SiO2 substrate 

(Figure 3(a)), confirming that it may have occurred during deposition. The 34S- ions profile 

has similar intensity at the surface of the protection layer but remains at a higher level with in-

depth progress inside the alumina overcoat than for the stack deposited on the SiO2 substrate 

(Figure 3 (b)), which is indicative of the deeper penetration of H2S during the accelerated 

aging test down to the silver layer. The AgS- ions profile is barely above noise level in the 

outer part of the overcoat region but has higher intensity in the inner part, in the Ia interface 

region and in the silver layer region than for the stack deposited on the SiO2 substrate. This 

supports the faster initiation of the growth of silver sulfide owing to a higher, i.e. more 

connected, porosity of the alumina coating deposited on the SiC CVD substrate. 

Compared with the sample with the silica overcoat (Figure 6(a)), the 34S- ions profile 

is also consistent with a connected porosity penetrating throughout the protection layer and 

reaching the silver layer. The AgS- ions profile is not detected in the outer part of the overcoat 

region but has higher intensity in the inner part and in the silver layer region, also indicating 

the lower resistance to the initiation of local sulfidation but higher resistance to the growth of 

the silver sulfide columns inferred from the micrographic observations.  

These differences are consistent with the observation of a lower resistance of the 

protected silver stacks to the initiation of local sulfidation when deposited on the SiC CVD 

substrate than on the SiO2 substrate. This substrate effect might find its origin in the surface 

pretreatment of the SiC CVD substrate which was found necessary to markedly improved the 

resistance to localized sulfidation of the stacks deposited on this substrate [23,24]. Any 


 
13

variability in the surface pretreatment for healing the surface defects might impact the quality 

of the deposited stacks and their resistance to local sulfidation during accelerated aging. 

Resistance to wet accelerated aging on SiC CVD substrates 

Figure 7 compares optical images before and after 2, 4, 6 and 8 h of wet accelerated 

aging for the two stacks deposited on the SiC CVD substrate. Two regions observed inside the 

exposed area are shown in the center and right columns for each specimen. On the samples 

with the silica overcoat (Figure 7(a)), all immersion tests were conducted with the more 

aggressive pH 13 solution. Corrosion spots are observed to increase in number and size with 

increasing immersion time showing delayed initiation of the smaller spots and growth of the 

larger spots. Their disk shape is indicative of radial growth around the initiation point. After 6 

hours of treatment, the corrosion spots have a maximum size of about 70 µm. On the sample 

treated for 8 hours, less numerous and smaller spots are observed suggesting less advanced 

corrosion that we assign to some disparities between substrate samples owing to the surface 

preparation of the substrate. On this particular sample, the silica overcoat stack would contain 

less and/or smaller channels for the penetration of the sulfide species (HS-) and thus better 

protect from the initiation and growth of the corrosion spots. 

On the samples with the alumina overcoat (Figure 7(b)), the immersion test conducted 

for 2 hours was also performed with the more aggressive pH 13 solution. The sample is fully 

corroded because of the instability of alumina that has dissolved at this alkaline pH, 

confirming that alumina cannot offer durable protection in these conditions because it is 

amphoteric. The tests conducted for 4, 6 and 8 hours were conducted with the less aggressive 

pH 7 solution. In these conditions, alumina is stable and protects the silver layer against 

generalized corrosion. As with the silica overcoat at pH 13, only localized corrosion is 

observed with formation of corrosion spots. The corrosion spots are smaller (maximum size 

of about 15 µm) but not significantly less numerous than those observed with the silica 


 
14

overcoat at pH 13, a trend also observed after dry accelerated aging in the H2S gas, suggesting 

that their growth rather than their initiation would be predominantly delayed. This difference 

may be related to the lower concentration in HS- species of the pH 7 solution. With increasing 

immersion time, one does not observe a marked increase of the corrosion spots in size and in 

number, indicating a better resistance of the alumina overcoat to growth than to initiation of 

localized corrosion, as observed after dry accelerated aging. 

Figure 8 shows the specular reflectance spectra of the less resistant stacks deposited on 

the SiC CVD substrate prior to and after wet accelerated aging in the more aggressive 

aqueous solutions. On the samples with the silica overcoat (Figure 8(a)), all curves show 

typical reflectivity drops around 375 nm caused by the protection layers. Comparing the 

samples before and after aging shows the slight degradation of the optical performance. The 

loss of reflectivity caused by the development of the corrosion spots does not exceed an 

average value of 6 % on the most corroded sample (after 6 h aging) and of 2% on the other 

corroded samples, showing that reflectivity is well-preserved despite the quite severe 

conditions of the aging test. 

On the samples with the alumina overcoat (Figure 8(b)), a slight different shape of 

reflectivity curve is observed due to a different protecting layer. Comparing the samples 

before and after aging shows no significant degradation of the optical performance. All curves 

superimpose in the 350 nm to 2 µm range, with some discrepancies due to the 

spectrophotometer accuracy. These data show that such SiC CVD samples with the stack 

protected by the alumina coating exhibit an excellent resistance to accelerated aging.  

Conclusion 

Advanced protection against environmental degradation provided to silver mirrors for 

space telescopes by SiO2 and Al2O3 overcoats was studied on stack model samples deposited 

by cathodic magnetron sputtering on two types of substrates, a reference silica substrate 


 
15

commonly used in optical applications and a CVD surface-pretreated SiC substrate. 

Accelerated aging by sulfidation was performed in dry (H2S gas, 1000 mbar, 75°C) and more 

severe wet (HS- ions-containing aqueous solution of pH 7 or 13) conditions. 

For the stacks deposited on the silica substrate and submitted to dry accelerated aging, 

the alumina overcoat was found to provide higher protection against delamination at the 

sample edges and against localized sulfidation in regions not affected by edge effects. The 

optical micrography and ToF-SIMS data are consistent with the mechanism previously 

proposed for localized degradation with pre-existing channels (connected porosity) in the 

protection layer enabling H2S penetration down to the silver layer followed by local growth of 

silver sulfide with columns emerging at the stack surface. The lower connected porosity in the 

alumina overcoat would increase the barrier property, thereby delaying the initiation of 

localized degradation by sulfidation and the local growth of silver sulfide columns through 

the overcoat. 

For the stacks deposited on the surface-pretreated SiC substrate, higher resistance to 

propagation of local silver sulfide growth was confirmed with the alumina protection. 

However, variability in the surface pretreatment might be at the origin of the lower resistance 

observed in the initiation of localized degradation, with a more connected porosity developed 

above the substrate surface sites imperfectly healed by the pretreatment. 

In the more severe wet accelerated aging conditions, the alumina overcoat provides 

protection against sulfidation only at pH 7 where it is stable but not at pH 13 where it 

dissolves. The same trend of lower resistance to the initiation of local sulfidation but higher 

resistance to the growth of the silver sulfide columns was observed for the stacks more prone 

to local degradation deposited on the surface-pretreated SiC substrate. Specular reflectivity 

measurements confirmed the advanced protection provided by the overcoats. With the 

alumina overcoat, no significant loss of the optical performance was observed in the whole 


 
16

spectral range after the most severe aging test at pH 7. With the silica overcoat, the loss of the 

optical performance was limited to a few percent of reflectivity after aging at pH 13. 

Acknowledgment 

Region Ile-de-France is acknowledged for partial funding of the ToF-SIMS 

equipment. 

 


 
17

References 

 

 
[1] D.-Y. Song, R. W. Sprague, H. A. Macleod, M. R. Jacobson, Progress in the 

development of a durable silver-based high-reflectance coating for astronomical 

telescopes, Appl. Opt. 24 (1985) 1164–1170. 

[2] M. R. Jacobson, R. C. Kneale, F. C. Gillett, K. Raybould, J. F. Filhaber, C. K. Carniglia, 

R. Laird, D. Kitchens, R. P. Shimshock, D. C. Booth, Development of silver coating 

options for the Gemini 8-m telescopes project, In: Proc. SPIE 3352, 477-502 (1998). 

[3] M. Boccas, T. Vucina, C. Araya, E. Vera, C. Ahhee, Protected silver coatings for the 8-

m Gemini telescope mirrors, Thin Solid Films 502 (2006) 275–280. 

[4] D. A. Sheikh, Improved silver mirror coating for ground and space-based astronomy, In 

Proc. SPIE 9912, 991239 (2016). 

[5]  D.W. Rice, R. J. Cappell, W. Kinsolving, J. J. Laskowski, Indoor Corrosion of Metals, J. 

Electrochem. Soc. 127 (1980) 891-901. 

[6] M. G. Dowsett, A. Adriaens, M. Soares, H. Wouters, V. V. N. Palitsin, R. Gibbons, R. J. 

H. Morris, The use of ultra-low-energy dynamic SIMS in the study of the tarnishing of 

silver, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B : Beam 

Interactions with Materials and Atoms 239 (2005) 51-64. 

[7] G. Hass, Reflectance and preparation of front-surface mirrors for use at various angles of 

incidence from the ultraviolet to the far infrared, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 72 (1982) 27-39. 

[8] G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. A. Bowmaker, J. B. Metson, Oxidation of a polycrystalline 

silver foil by reaction with ozone, Appl. Surf. Sci. 183 (2001) 191-204. 

[9] J. M. Bennett, J. L. Stanford, E. J. Ashley, Optical constants of silver sulfide tarnish 

films, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 60 (1970) 224-231.  

[10] A. C. Phillips, J. Miller, W. Brown, D. Hilyard, B. Dupraw, V. Wallace, D. Cowley, 

Progress toward high-performance reflective and anti-reflection coatings for 

astronomical optics, In Proc. SPIE 7018, 70185A (2008). 

[11] J. D. Wolfe, R. E. Laird, C. K. Carniglia, Durable silver-based antireflection coatings 

and enhanced mirrors, In: Optical Interference Coatings, Vol. 17, OSA Technical Digest 

Series (Optical Society of America), 115–117 (1995). 

[12] J. D. Wolfe, D. M. Sanders, S. Bryan, N. L. Thomas, Deposition of durable wide-band 

silver mirror coatings using long-throw, low-pressure, DC-pulsed magnetron sputtering, 


 
18

 

 

In Proc. of SPIE: Astronomical Telescopes and Instrumentation: Specialized optical 

developments in astronomy, The International Society for Optics and Photonics, 343-351 

(2003). 

[13] D. A. Sheikh, S. J. Connell, R. S. Dummer, Durable silver coating for Kepler Space 

Telescope primary mirror, In Proc. SPIE 7010, 70104E (2008). 

[14] J. M. Bennett, E. J. Ashley, Infrared Reflectance and Emittance of Silver and Gold 

Evaporated in Ultrahigh Vacuum, Appl. Opt. 4 (1965) 221-224. 

[15] N. Thomas, J. Wolfe, UV-shifted durable silver coating for astronomical mirrors, in 

Optical Design, Materials, Fabrication, and Maintenance, In Proc. SPIE 4003, Optical 

Design, Materials, Fabrication, and Maintenance, pp. 312-323 (2000). 

[16] D. K. Burge, H. E. Bennett, E. J. Ashley, Effect of Atmospheric Exposure on the 

Infrared Reflectance of Silvered Mirrors With and Without Protective Coatings, Appl. 

Opt. 12 (1973) 42-47. 

[17] Fuqua P. D.; Barrie J. D.; Optical properties and corrosion resistance of durable silver 

coatings. Mat. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 555 (1998) 85–90. 

[18]  C. T. Chu, P. D. Chaffee, C. J. Panetta, P. D. Fuqua, J. D. Barrie, Mixed Flowing Gas 

Testing of Silver Mirror Coatings, In: OSA Technical Digest (CD), Optical Interference 

Coatings, TuEPDP5 (2007). 

[19] A. Feller, K. Nagaraju, O. Pleier, J. Hirzberger, P. J. Jobst, M. Schuermann, Reflectivity, 

polarization properties and durability of metallic mirror coatings for the European Solar 

Telescope, In: Proc. SPIE 8450, 84503U, 2012. 

[20] Pellicori S. F. Scattering defects in silver mirror coatings. Appl. Opt. 19 (1980) 3096-

3098. 

[21] C.-T. Chu, P. D. Fuqua et J. D. Barrie, Corrosion characterization of durable silver 

coatings by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and accelerated environmental 

testing, Appl. Opt. 45 (2006) 1583-1593. 

[22] K. A. Folgner, C.-T. Chu, Z. R. Lingley, H. I. Kim, J.-M. Yang, J. D. Barrie, 

Environmental durability of protected silver mirrors prepared by plasma beam 

sputtering. Appl. Opt. 56 (2017) C75-C86. 

[23] E. Limam, V. Maurice, A. Seyeux, S. Zanna, L. H. Klein, G. Chauveau C. Grèzes-

Besset, I. Savin De Larclause, P. Marcus, Local degradation mechanism by tarnishing of 


 
19

 

 

protected silver mirror layers studied by combined surface analysis, J. Phys. Chem. B 

122 (2018) 578-586. 

[24] E. Limam, V. Maurice, A. Seyeux, S. Zanna, L. H. Klein, G. Chauveau C. Grèzes-

Besset, I. Savin De Larclause, P. Marcus, Role of SiC substrate surface on local 

tarnishing of deposited silver mirror stacks, App. Surf. Sci. 436 (2018) 1147–1156. 

[25] C. Leygraf, I. O. Wallinder, J. Tidblad, T. Graedel, Atmospheric Corrosion, Second 

Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, USA, 2016. 

[26] H. A. Ankersmit, N. H. Tennent, S. F. Watts, Hydrogen sulfide and carbonyl sulfide in 

the museum environment- Part 1, Atmospheric Environment 39 (2005) 695-707. 

[27]  J. Horvath, L. Hackl, Check of the potential/pH equilibrium diagrams of different metal-

sulphur-water ternary systems by intermittent galvanostatic polarization method, 

Corrosion Sci. 5 (1965) 525-538.. 

[28] D. Rice, R. Cappell, P. Phipps, P. Peterson, W. Ailor, Indoor atmospheric corrosion of 

copper, silver, nickel, cobalt and iron. In: Atmospheric Corrosion (W. H. Ailor, Ed.), 

Wiley: New York, pp. 651-666 (1982). 

[29] Y. Fukuda, T. Fukushima, A. Sulaiman, I. Musalam, L. C. Yap, L. Chotimongkol, S. 

Judabong, A. Potjanart, O. Keowkangwal, K. Yoshihara, M. Tosa, Indoor Corrosion of 

Copper and Silver Exposed in Japan and ASEAN1 Countries, J. Electrochem. Soc. 138 

(1991) 1238-1243. 

[30] S. Bouquet, C. Bodin, et C. Fiaud, Relative Infuence of Sulfide and Chloride 

Compounds on Tarnishing of Silver in Atmospheric Corrosion, CR. Acad. Sci. II 316 

(1993) 459-464. 

[31]  D. Liang, H. C. Allen, G. S. Frankel, Z. Y. Chen, R. G. Kelly, Y. Wu et B. E. 

Wyslouzil, Effects of Sodium Chloride Particles, Ozone, UV, and Relative Humidity on 

Atmospheric Corrosion of Silver, J. Electrochem. Soc. 157 (2010) C146-C156. 

[32] D. Pope, H. R. Gibbens, R. L.Moss, The tarnishing of Ag at naturally-occurring H2S and 

SO2 levels, Corrosion Sci. 8 (1968) 883-887. 

[33] S. Lilienfeld, C. E. White, A Study of the Reaction Between Hydrogen Sulfide and 

Silver. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 52 (1930) 885-892. 

[34] S. Kasukabe, Growth mechanism and growth form of Beta-Ag2S whiskers, J. Cryst. 

Growth 65 (1983) 384-390. 


 
20

 

 
[35] T. E. Graedel, J. P. Franey, G. J. Gualtieri, G. W. Kammlott, D. L. Malm,  On the 

mechanism of silver and copper sulfidation by atmospheric H2S and OCS, Corrosion 

Sci. 25 (1985) 1163-1180. 

[36] D. W. Rice, P. Peterson, E. B. Rigby, P. B. P. Phipps, R. J. Cappell, R. Tremoureux, 

Atmospheric Corrosion of Copper and Silver, J. Electrochem. Soc. 128 (1981) 275-284. 

[37] G. Chauveau, D. Torricini, C. Grèzes-Besset, D. Stojcevski, M. Lequime, PACA2M: 

magnetron sputtering for 2-meter optics. In Proc. SPIE 8168, 81680P (2011).  

[38] M. Lequime, C. Grezes-Besset, G. Chauveau, D. Stojcevski, Optimization of the 

Manufacturing Strategies of High Quality Coatings into a 2-Meter Optics Magnetron 

Sputtering Deposition Machine. In 2014 Technical Conference Proceedings, Optical 

Coatings (September 29, 2014) TechCon2014, Society of Vacuum Coaters (2014). 

[39] N. Valette, G. Chauveau, C. Grèzes-Besset, V. Costes, I. Savin de Larclause, K. Gasc, F. 

Lemarquis, PACA2M Magnetron sputtering silver coating: a solution for very big mirror 

dimensions, In ICSO 2014 Proceedings, International Conference on Space Optics, 

Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, 7 - 10 October 2014.  

[40] W. Giggenbach, Optical spectra of highly alkaline sulfide solutions and the second 

dissociation constant of hydrogen sulfide, Inorganic Chemistry 10 (1971) 1333-1338.  

[41] V. I. Birss, G. A.Wright, The kinetics of the anodic formation and reduction of phase 

silver sulfide films on silver in aqueous sulfide solutions, Electrochimica Acta 26 (1981) 

1809-1817. 

[42] D. W. Hatchett, H. S. White, Electrochemistry of sulfur adlayers on the low index faces 

of silver, Journal of Physical Chemistry 100 (1996) 9854-9859. 

[43] G. D. Aloisi, M. Cavallini, M. Innocenti, M. L. Foresti, G. Pezzatini, R. Guidelli, In situ 

STM and electrochemical investigation of sulfur oxidative underpotential deposition on 

Ag (111), Journal of Physical Chemistry B 101 (1997) 4774-4780. 

[44] N. Li, V. Maurice, L. H. Klein, P. Marcus, Structure and Morphology Modifications of 

Silver Surface in the Early Stages of Sulfide Growth in Alkaline Solution, Journal of 

Physical Chemistry C 116 (2012) 7062-7072. 

[45] K. Chiba, K. Nakatani, Photoenhance migration of silver atoms in transparent heat 

mirror coatings, Thin Solid Films 112 (1984) 359-367. 


 
21

Figure captions 

Figure 1 Optical images of multilayer stacks SiO2/Ag/SiOx (top row) and SiO2/Ag/AlOx 

(bottom row) before (0 h) and after (96 h) dry accelerated aging in H2S gas at 1000 mbar and 

75 °C. The scale bar represents 100 µm. Center and right column images were recorded in 

the center and at the edges of the samples, respectively. 

Figure 2 (color online) ToF-SIMS chemical maps (100 × 100 μm2) of selected negative 

secondary ions for multilayer stacks SiO2/Ag/SiOx (a) and SiO2/Ag/AlOx (b) after 96 h of dry 

accelerated aging in H2S gas at 1000 mbar and 75 °C. The images were recorded in the 

sample center region, away from the edges.  

Figure 3 (color online) ToF-SIMS elemental depth profiles of selected negative secondary 

ions for multilayer stacks SiO2/Ag/SiOx (a) and SiO2/Ag/AlOx (b) after 96 h of dry accelerated 

aging in H2S gas at 1000 mbar and 75 °C. The profiles were recorded in the sample center 

region, away from the edges. The protection layer, silver (Ag) layer and substrate regions are 

marked, as well as the interfacial Ia and Ib regions.  

Figure 4 Optical images of multilayer stacks SiC CVD/Ag/SiOx (top row) and SiC 

CVD/Ag/AlOx (bottom row) before (0 h) and after (96 h) dry accelerated aging in H2S gas at 

1000 mbar and 75 °C. The scale bar represents 100 µm. Center and right column images 

were recorded in the center and at the edges of the samples, respectively. 

Figure 5 (color online) ToF-SIMS chemical maps (100 × 100 μm2) of selected negative 

secondary ions for multilayer stacks SiC CVD/Ag/SiOx (a) and SiC CVD/Ag/AlOx (b) after 96 

h of dry accelerated aging in H2S gas at 1000 mbar and 75 °C. The images were recorded 

near the sample center region, away from the edges. 


 
22

Figure 6 (color online) ToF-SIMS elemental depth profiles of selected negative secondary 

ions for multilayer stacks SiO2/Ag/SiOx (a) and SiO2/Ag/AlOx (b) after 96 h of dry accelerated 

aging in H2S gas at 1000 mbar and 75 °C. The profiles were recorded near the sample center 

region, away from the edges. The protection layer, silver (Ag) layer and substrate regions are 

marked, as well as the interfacial Ia and Ib regions. 

Figure 7 Optical images of multilayer stacks SiC CVD/Ag/SiOx (a) and SiC CVD/Ag/AlOx (b) 

before (0 h) and after (2,4, 6 and 8 h) wet accelerated aging in 1 mM Na2S aqueous solution 

at pH 13 ((a) all rows and (b) first row) and pH 7 ((b) second to last row). The scale bar 

represents 100 µm. Center and right column images were recorded in two different sample 

locations. 

Figure 8 (color online) Specular reflectance spectra for the stacks SiC CVD/Ag/SiOx (a) and 

SiC CVD/Ag/AlOx (b) before and after wet accelerated aging in 1 mM Na2S aqueous solution 

at pH 13 (a) and pH 7 (b). 

 
 


 
23

Figure 1 

 

 

 


 
24

Figure 2 

(a)

(b)

 

 


 
25

Figure 3 

(a)

(b)

 

 


 
26

Figure 4 

 

 

 


 
27

Figure 5 

(a)

(b)

 

 


 
28

Figure 6 

(a)

(b)

 

 


 
29

Figure 7 

(a)
(b)

 

 


 
30

Figure 8 

(a)

(b)

 


