1

Disorder-induced signal filtering with topological metamaterials

Farzad Zangeneh-Nejad and Romain Fleury*

Labratory of Wave Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL),

Keywords: Metamaterials, Topological insulators, Acoustics, Anderson localization

Disorder, ubiquitously present in realistic structures, is generally thought to disturb the 

performance of analog wave devices, as it often causes strong multiple scattering effects 

that largely arrest wave transportation. Contrary to this general view, here, it is shown

that, in some wave systems with non-trivial topological character, strong randomness 

can be highly beneficial, acting as a powerful stimulator to enable desired analog

filtering operations. This is achieved in a topological Anderson sonic crystal that, in the 

regime of dominating randomness, provides a well-defined
filtering response

characterized by a Lorentzian spectral line-shape. Our theoretical and experimental 

results, serving as the first realization of topological Anderson insulator phase in 

acoustics, suggest the striking possibility of achieving specific, non-random analog 

filtering operations by adding randomness to clean structures.    

The performance of most wave systems, such as lasers, switches, modulators, signal 

processors etc., is largely impeded by disorder. Even at very low concentration, impurities or 

geometrical imperfections can cause severe self-interference effects, largely hindering wave 

propagation and device performance. Recently, inspired by the notion of topological 

insulators (TIs) in condensed matter systems[1-3], a fascinating solution to mitigate these 

harmful consequences has been suggested. TIs are insulating phases with non-trivial 

topological order, supporting edge states that are resilient to certain types and levels of 


2

disorder[4-6]. Such an unprecedented property, known as topological protection, promises to 

alleviate the detrimental effects of disorder on wave propagation, enabling the realization of a 

large variety of topological analog devices that maintain their original functionality even in 

the presence of impurities[7-9].

Although TIs have somewhat enhanced the robustness of analog wave systems to disorder, 

their topological protection is still limited by a phenomenon, known as Anderson localization 

(AL)[10]. This process, occurring in the regime with dominating randomness, progressively 

fills the band gap of the TI with disorder-induced localized bulk states, destroying the 

insulating topological phase and impeding the transportation of the corresponding edge state. 

Such a behavior seems to be disappointing at first glance, because it implies that even 

topological wave systems become fragile when the disorder level is high enough to turn the TI 

into an ordinary insulator. Yet, the mere fact that introducing disorder to a system can induce 

a topological phase transition is encouraging, because it suggests that the opposite transition 

might, in principle, be possible. Recently, in a remarkable development[11], it was theoretically 

demonstrated that some trivial insulators with specific parameters can indeed go through a 

topological phase transition upon introducing disorder, converting them to TIs with robust 

conductive states flowing on their boundaries. Soon after, these exotic topological phases, 

referred to as disorder-induced topological insulators or topological Anderson insulators 

(TAIs) [12-17], were experimentally observed in different physical platforms[18-20]. Yet, their 

realization in acoustics has not been reported. 

In this work, we provide the first experimental observation of TAI phase in acoustics. We 

show that the much-sought disorder-induced character of such phases can be leveraged to 

trigger a well-defined analog filtering operation, namely first-order band-pass filtering[21-25]. 

Our findings, defying the conventional view that disorder is detrimental to analog wave 

systems, hold great promises for a large variety of analog devices in which disorder acts as a 

powerful engine, forcing the system to perform the functionality of interest. 


3

Figure 1. Disorder-induced analog signal filtering based on topological Anderson 
insulators, We consider the disordered version of Su-Schrieffer–Heeger model (SSH) model, 
described by the tight-binding toy model given in Equation 1 with the specified parameters, 
and build a two-port scattering system by coupling a finite crystal piece with 100 unit cells to 
two external waveguides. a, Evolution of the corresponding (averaged) transmission spectrum 
versus disorder strength. Starting from an ordinary trivial insulator in the clean limit (red 
region), the system switches into a topological insulator in the regime 𝐷1 < 𝐷𝑠 < 𝐷2 (TAI 
regime), characterized by a zero-energy edge state which manifests itself as a resonance peak 
in the spectrum. For extremely high disorder intensities (yellow region), the transportation is 
arrested by Anderson localization. b, Averaged transmission coefficient of the system for 
several representative disorder strengths. In the TAI regime (green area), the spectrum 
exhibits a Lorentzian profile near 𝑓0, corresponding to the transfer function of a first-order 
band-pass filter. c, Demonstration of disorder-induced analog filtering. We suppose that the 
system is excited with a Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal signal and calculate the 
corresponding transmission coefficient (𝑇) and output time signal (𝑓(𝑡)), when gradually 
increasing the disorder strength from zero to the regime of TAI. It is seen that disorder acts 
like an actuator in our system, applying the desired filtering operation to the input signal.  

Let us start with considering the tight-binding toy Hamiltonian of the Su-Schrieffer–Heeger 

(SSH) chain[1], expressed as


4

𝐻 = ∑ 𝜔0𝑎𝑛

†𝑎𝑛

𝑛

+ ∑ 𝐾𝑎2𝑛−1

†

𝑛

𝑎2𝑛 + ∑ 𝐽𝑎2𝑛

†

𝑛

𝑎2𝑛+1 + 𝐻. 𝐶.
(1)

in which 𝑎𝑛

† , 𝑎𝑛 are creation and annihilation operators for the site 𝑛, 𝐾 , and 𝐽 stand, 

respectively, for the intra-cell and extra-cell coupling coefficients, and 𝜔0 = 1 is the on-site 

energy of the atoms. We suppose that the parameters 𝐾 and 𝐽 are defined as 𝐾 = 𝐾0(1 +

0.5𝐷𝑠𝑊) and 𝐽 = 𝐽0(1 + 𝐷𝑠𝑊), in which 𝐾0 = 0.1, 𝐽0 = 0.09, 𝐷𝑠 is a parameter quantifying 

the strength of disorder, and 𝑊 is a site-dependent random number. Since 𝐾 > 𝐽 in the clean 

limit (𝐷𝑠 → 0), the disorder-free system corresponds to a trivial topological phase (BDI class), 

characterized by a zero winding number[1]. To induce a topological phase transition, we start 

to increase the intrinsic disorder of the system, now considering the case in which 𝐷𝑠 > 0. 

Notice that on average, regardless of 𝐷𝑠, the parameter 𝐾 is always smaller than 𝐽. Yet, and 

quite surprisingly, the difference in their standard deviations can create a topological phase 

transition in a certain range of values for 𝐷𝑠 (see Note I Supporting information), leading to 

an insulator with non-trivial topological index (non-zero winding number). In order to 

examine such a possibility, we consider a finite two-port scattering system made of 100 unit 

cells coupled to external waveguides and report in Figure 1a the disorder-averaged 

transmission spectrum versus the parameter 𝐷𝑠 (see Note II, Supporting information for the 

numerical methods). As observed, in the disorder-free case, the spectrum is gapped around 𝑓0. 

This insulating band gap becomes narrower with increasing disorder strength, and is 

eventually closed at 𝐷1 = 1.68. After 𝐷1 (and before 𝐷2 = 3.64), the band-gap re-opens but, 

this time, it includes a resonance peak emerging at the center of the gap. This in-gap 

resonance, corresponding to resonant tunneling through a topological edge state, indicates the 

non-trivial character of the system under investigation for 𝐷1 < 𝐷𝑠 < 𝐷2 (TAI regime).  If 

one increases the disorder level further (𝐷𝑠 > 𝐷2), the onset of Anderson localization is 

reached, where all states start to localize in the bulk with decreasing transmission coefficient. 

In Figure 1b, we have plotted the disorder-averaged transmission coefficient for several 


5

representative disorder strengths. Notice that, in the TAI regime, the topological mid-gap 

resonance 
has 
a 
Lorentzian 
profile, 
following 
the 
general 
form 
of 𝐻(𝜔) =

𝐴 (𝐵𝑗(𝜔 − 𝜔0) + 𝐶)
⁄
in the vicinity of 𝜔0. Remarkably, 𝐻(𝜔) corresponds to the transfer

function of a first-order band-pass filter. It then follows that our disordered one-dimensional 

toy model acts as a first-order analog filter, induced by disorder. In particular, while the 

system under study is performing a definite task, it has a disorder-induced character and an 

indefinite randomly-drawn geometry, a property that directly stems from the underlying 

topological Anderson insulator phase.

In order to examine the functionality of the proposed system, we assume that the system is 

excited with a Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal pulse (see Note III, Supporting information for 

other forms of excitation signals), and calculate the corresponding disorder-averaged 

transmitted signal (𝑓(𝑡)) and transmission spectrum (𝑇), when gradually increasing the 

disorder level from zero to the regime of TAI. The corresponding results are depicted in 

Figure 1c, illustrating how random disorder forces the proposed system to apply a definite 

first-order filtering operation to the input signal, leading to the desired output signal (marked 

with blue color).

To validate these findings in a full-wave 3D geometry, we map the proposed tight-binding 

model into a one-dimensional phononic crystal, built from a chain of acoustic quasi-bound 

states in the continuum (BICs)[26-29] embedded in a monomode acoustic waveguide. Such 

coupled bound states, resonating at the frequency of 𝑓0 = 2310 𝐻𝑧, mimick the evanescently-

coupled tight-binding chain described by the Hamiltonian of Equation 1. This leads to the 

realization of an acoustic topological Anderson insulator that, in the regime of dominating 

randomness, supports zero-energy edge modes. Note that, to the best of our knowledge, the 

realization of topological Anderson insulator phase in acoustics has not been reported 

elsewhere. In order to probe the proposed system with far-field scattering tests based on the 


6

waveguide mode, we make the radiative quality factor of the bound states finite by slightly 

breaking the inversion symmetry of the structure with respect to its longitudinal axis. 

Figure 2. Experimental demonstration of acoustic topological Anderson insulators and 
disorder-induced analog filtering, We map the proposed tight-binding toy model into a 1D 
sonic crystal, based on coupled acoustic quasi-bound states in the continuum. a, Evolution of 
the (averaged) transmission coefficient of the phononic crystal as the strength of disorder is 
increased, obtained via 3D full-wave numerical simulations. The emergence of a disorder-
induced zero-energy state is clear in the disorder-averaged transmission spectrum (oval 
region), allowing one to perform a well-defined first-order filtering operation. b,c, Disorder-
averaged transmission spectrum and the corresponding transmitted field (numerical 
simulations), when the disordered-free system is excited with a Gaussian time-modulated 
signal. d,e, Same as b and c except that the system is sufficiently disordered, so that it finds 
itself in the TAI regime. f,g,h,i,j, Experimental measurements corresponding to the simulation 
results. 


7

Figure 2a represents the transmission coefficient (averaged over disorder realizations) as a 

function of both frequency and disorder strength, obtained via 3D full-wave numerical 

simulations based on the finite element method. The result of this figure confirms the 

emergence of a disorder-induced resonance peak, corresponding to the zero-energy state of 

the TAI phase (the oval region). The possibility to leverage the Lorentzian line shape of this 

resonance for carrying out disorder-induced filtering is demonstrated in Figures 2b-e, where 

we have reported the averaged transmittance of the system both in the clean limit and in the 

topological Anderson phase. When no disorder is imparted to the system, the transmission 

spectrum (Figure 2b) exhibits a minimum due to a band gap around 𝑓0, leading to an output 

signal (Figure 2c) that has an almost zero amplitude (the blue curve, which is analytically 

predicted). In the regime of TAI phase, on the contrary, the transmission spectrum matches 

the desired transfer function 𝐻(𝑓) (Figure 2d), corresponding to a first-order analog filter. As 

such, the corresponding transmitted signal, shown Figure 2e, follows well the targeted 

filtered signal (the blue curve). The experimental measurements corresponding to these 

numerical findings, provided respectively in Figures 2f-j, are in perfect agreement with the 

simulations. Importantly, the reported results are averaged over multiple realizations of 

disorder, and the standard deviation, which is inversely proportional to the system size, is kept 

at a small level. Note that, in principle, it is possible to achieve more complex higher-order

filtering operations by constructing a network of several realizations of the proposed first-

order filter (see Note IV, Supporting information).   

The proposed disorder-induced acoustic filter can be used to manipulate the spectral 

characteristics of two-dimensional signals, i.e. images, as well.  Consider the image of the 

Eiffel tower, shown in Figure 3a (top). Suppose that the pixels of this image are processed by 

the inverse of the target filtering function 𝐻(𝑓), therefore encrypting the image. We excite the 

proposed system with a signal corresponding to the encrypted image. Since, in the regime of 

TAI, the transfer function of the proposed system is approximately equal to 𝐻(𝑓), the system 


8

is expected to decrypt the encoded image. This is demonstrated in the insets of Figure 3b, 

illustrating how the encrypted image signal is gradually decoded by the proposed topological 

Anderson system, when more and more disorder is introduced. The associated experimental 

results, shown in Figure 3c, are in full agreement with the simulations. Note that decoding the 

image is not a trivial task as one needs not only to tune the disorder strength to the right level, 

but also to have some information about the required disorder statistics, in particular the 

difference in the standard deviations of the couplings. We note that the proposed system can 

be used for image edge detection as well (see Note IV, Supporting information).

Figure 3: Disorder-induced analog filtering of an image, a, (Top) Image of the Eiffel tower, 
(Bottom) The original image is encrypted with the inverse of the target filtering function 
𝐻(𝑓). The encrypted image is then fed into the input of the proposed topological Anderson 
system. b, Corresponding output images as the level of disorder is gradually increased. Since 
in the regime of TAI, the transfer function of the system is approximately equal to 𝐻(𝑓), the 
corresponding output is nothing but the decrypted image. c, Corresponding experimental 
results. The results, in agreement with numerical simulations, demonstrate the intriguing 
possibility of decoding the encrypted image by providing the system with more and more 
disorder.


9

In summary, we demonstrated a novel scheme for analog signal filtering, in which random 

disorder drives the system, forcing it to realize the desired filtering operation. Although 

demonstrated here in the context of acoustics, we expect the emergence of such spectral filters

to be generic. In Note V, Supporting information, we demonstrate a photonic instance. Not 

only do our findings serve as the first experimental observation of topological Anderson 

insulator phase in acoustics, but also they open a new horizon for realizing a new generation 

of analog wave filters that rely on disorder. This is in sharp contrast to ordinary trivial analog 

filters in which disorder is highly detrimental (see Note VII, Supporting information).     

Experimental Section

Figure S1 shows a photograph of the fabricated prototype of the proposed topological sonic

crystal. The sample includes a transparent pipe with square transverse cross-section, serving 

as a waveguide, and a chain of scatterers, that are embedded inside the waveguide. The 

scatterers used in the sample are commercially available Nylon 6 cast plastic rods. The width, 

height, and length of the waveguide are  𝑊 = 7 𝑐𝑚, 𝐻 = 7 𝑐𝑚, 𝐿 = 2 𝑚, respectively, the 

radii of the cylinders are 𝑅 = 1.75 𝑐𝑚, the lattice constant is 𝑎 = 16.6 𝑐𝑚 and the detuning 

parameter 𝑑 is 𝑑 = 7.8 𝑐𝑚. The structure is tested in the experimental setup shown in Figure 

S2. Apart from the fabricated prototype, the setup includes three PCB 130F20 ICP® 

microphones, measuring the associated pressure field, a loudspeaker, generating sound and 

exciting the system, an acoustic Quattro Data physic analyzer, recording the associated 

measured data, and a computer, controlling the setup. Note also that, in order to avoid 

unwanted reflection and refraction, the end of the system is terminated with an anechoic 

termination, made of adiabatically tapered foam, shown in the bottom panel of the figure. In 

order to extract the disorder-averaged transmission coefficient, we excited the system with the 

loudspeaker, and extracted the corresponding transmission spectrum for each realization of 


10

disorder by standard standing wave pattern analysis. Then, we took the average of 10 different 

independent measurements, each of which corresponds to a distinct disorder configuration.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under Grant No. 

172487. 

References

[1]
M. Z. Hasan, C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2010, 82, 3045.

[2]
C. He, X. Ni, H. Ge, X. Sun, Y. Chen, M. Lu, X. Liu, Y. Chen, Nat. Phys. 2016 ,12, 

1124.

[3]
G. Ma, M. Xiao, C. T. Chan, Nat. Rev. Phys. 2019, 1, 281-294.

[4]
X. Cheng, C. Jouvaud, X. Ni, S. H. Mousavi, A. Z. Genack, A. B. Khanikaev, Nat. 

Mater. 2016, 15, 542.

[5]
S. Yves, R. Fleury, T. Berthelot, M. Fink, F. Lemoult, G. Lerosey, Nat. Comm. 2017, 

8, 16023. 

[6]
A. Slobozhanyuk, S. H. Mousavi, X. Ni, D. Smirnova, Y. S. Kivshar, A. B. 

Khanikaev. Nat. Photonics. 2017, 11, 130.

[7]
F. Zangeneh-Nejad, R. Fleury, Nat. Comm. 2019, 10, 2058.

[8]
M. A. Bandres, S. Wittek, G. Harari, M. Parto, J. Ren, M. Segev, D. N. 

Christodoulides, M. Khajavikhan,  Science. 2018, 359, 6381.

[9]
F .Zangeneh-Nejad, and R. Fleury. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019 123, 053902.

[10]
M. Segev, Y. Silberberg, D. N. Christodoulides, Nat. Photonics. 2013, 7, 197.

[11]
J. Li, R. Chu, J. K. Jain, S. Shen. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 136806. 


11

[12]
A. Altland, D. Bagrets, L. Fritz, A. Kamenev, H. Schmiedt.  Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014,

112, 206602. 

[13]
C. B. Hua, R. Chen, D. H. Xu, and B. Zhou. Phys. Rev. B. 2019, 100, 205302.

[14]
F. Cardano, A. D’Errico, A. Dauphin, M. Maffei, B. Piccirillo, C. de Lisio, G. De 

Filippis, V. Cataudella, E. Santamato, L. Marrucci, M. Lewenstein, and P. Massignan. 

Nat. Comm. 2017, 8,1.

[15]
I. Mondragon-Shem, T. L. Hughes, J. Song, E. Prodan. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 

046802. 

[16]
X. Ni, K. Chen, M. Weiner, D. J. Apigo, C. Prodan, A. Alù, E. Prodan and A. B. 

Khanikaev. Comuun. Phys. 2019, 2, 1.

[17]
K. Chen, M. Weiner, M. Li, X. Ni, A. Alù, and A. B. Khanikaev. 2019, arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1912.06339.

[18]
S. Stützer, Y. Plotnik, Y. Lumer, P. Titum, N. H. Lindner, M. Segev, M. C. 

Rechtsman, A. Szameit. Nature.  2018, 560, 461.

[19]
E. J. Meier, F. A. An, A. Dauphin, M. Maffei, P. Massignan, T. L. Hughes, B. 

Gadway. Science. 2018,  362, 929.

[20]
Z. Q. Zhang, B. L. Wu, J. Song, H. Jiang. Phys. Rev. B. 2019 100, 184202.

[21]
A. Pors, M. G. Nielsen, S. I. Bozhevolnyi. Nano Lett. 2014, 15, 791-797.

[22]
H. Kwon, D. Sounas, A. Cordaro, A. Polman, A. Alù. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 121, 

173004. 

[23]
F. Zangeneh-Nejad, R. Fleury. New J. Phys. 2018, 20, 073001.

[24]
A. Cordaro, H. Kwon, D. Sounas,  A. F. Koenderink, A. Alù, A. Polman. Nano Lett.

2019, 19, 8418-8423.

[25]
T. Yang, J. Dong, L. Lu, L. Zhou, A. Zheng, J. Chen. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 5581.


12

[26]
A. Kodigala, T. Lepetit, Q. Gu, B. Bahari, Y. Fainman, B. Kanté. Nature. 2017, 54, 

196 (2017).

[27]
F. Zangeneh-Nejad, R. Fleury. Reviews in Physics. 2019 100031.

[28]
M. Molina, A. E. Miroshnichenko, and Y. S. Kivshar. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 108, 

070401.

[29] 
F. Zangeneh-Nejad, and R. Fleury, Topological Fano Resonances. Phys. Rev. Lett.

2019, 122, 014301


13

Supporting Information

Note I: Topological invariant of the proposed disordered system 

In this section, we investigate the topological invariant of the proposed one-dimensional 

system, and the locus of the topological phase transition based on the divergence of the 

localization length[1]. Consider again the tight-binding Hamiltonian of the proposed system, 

given in Equation 1 of the main text. We define the ratio between the intra-cell and extra 

coefficients as the parameter 𝒎 = 𝑲𝟎/𝑱𝟎. The localization length of the proposed disordered 

system can be calculated as[1]

𝑳𝒍𝒐𝒄𝒂𝒍 = 𝑨𝒃𝒔 (𝒍𝒏 (|𝟐(𝒎 − 𝑫𝒔)|

𝒎
𝟐𝑫𝒔−𝟎.𝟓|𝟐 + 𝑫𝒔|

𝟏
𝑫𝒔 +𝟎.𝟓

|𝟐(𝒎 + 𝑫𝒔)|

𝒎
𝟐𝑾+𝟎.𝟓|𝟐 − 𝑫𝒔|

𝟏
𝑫𝒔 −𝟎.𝟓))

−𝟏

(𝑺𝟏)

in which Abs stands for absolute value, and 𝑫𝒔 is disorder strength. The topological phase 

transition occurs where the localization length diverges. Figure S3a represents the evolution 

of  𝑳𝒍𝒐𝒄 as a function of disorder strength (𝑫𝑺) and the parameter 𝒎, highlighting two distinct

disconnected regions, which are characterized by different topological invariants. For our case 

study, 𝒎 = 𝟎. 𝟏/𝟎.𝟎𝟗=1.11. Figure S3b shows the corresponding winding number (𝑾) for 

this specific 𝒎 as a function of disorder strength (𝑫𝑺). As observed, 𝑫𝟏 < 𝑫𝒔 < 𝑫𝟐 (TAI 

regime in Figure 1) corresponds to a non-zero topological invariant.  On the other hand, 𝑫𝑺 <

𝑫𝟏 (regime of weak disorder) and 𝑫𝒔 > 𝑫𝟐 (regime of Anderson localization) correspond to a 

zero topological invariant. The values of 𝑫𝟏 and 𝑫𝟐 are 𝑫𝟏 = 𝟏.𝟔𝟖, and 𝑫𝟐 = 𝟑. 𝟔𝟒.

Note II: Numerical methods

The results of Figure 1 of the manuscript were obtained by considering a one-dimensional 

periodic array (see Figure S4), consisting of 200 resonators evanescently coupled to each 

other. The parameters 𝜔0, 𝐽, and 𝐾 are chosen as 𝜔0 = 1,𝐾 = 𝐾0(1 + 0.5𝐷𝑠𝑊),𝐽 = 𝐽0(1 +


14

𝐷𝑠𝑊) , in which 𝐾0 = 0.1, 𝐽0 = 0.09, 𝐷𝑠 is a parameter quantifying the strength of disorder, 

and 𝑊 is a random number. The chain is coupled (with the decay rate of 𝛾 = 0.01 𝐾0) to two 

single-mode waveguides on its left and right ends. The disorder-averaged transmission 

spectrum was obtained by calculating the transmission coefficient through the system (using 

standard coupled mode analysis) for different frequencies, averaged over 20 different 

realizations of disorder. For the case of weak disorder, the transmission spectrum of the 

system shows a band gap. By increasing the disorder strength, however, the band gap closes 

and re-opens as topological. Considering the large number of resonators involved in chain, the 

two corresponding edge modes are effectively decoupled from each other, yielding a unique 

Lorentzian spectral line-shape around 𝜔0 (there is effectively no mode splitting between the 

modes at both edges).

In order to demonstrate disorder-induced filtering operation based on such a configuration 

(results of Figure 1c), we considered, as the input, a sinusoidal signal with the frequency of 

𝜔0 (frequency of the zero-energy state of the topological Anderson phase), modulated with a 

Gaussian function with a variance of 𝜎 = 0.1𝜔0. The corresponding output signals were 

obtained by taking the inverse Fourier transform of the disordered-averaged transmission 

spectrum multiplied by the Fourier transform of 𝑔(𝑡). 

In order to implement the proposed tight-binding toy model in an acoustic platform, we 

mapped it into the phononic crystal shown in Figure S5. The crystal consists of a 

conventional acoustic waveguide, surrounded with acoustic hard walls, and an array of 

cylinders. The width, height and length of the waveguide are 𝑊 = 7 𝑐𝑚, 𝐻 = 7𝑐𝑚, 𝐿 = 2 𝑚, 

respectively. The array is composed of 14 cylinders whose radii are 𝑅 = 1.75 𝑐𝑚. The 

parameters 𝑎 and 𝑑 are 𝑎 = 16.6 𝑐𝑚, 𝑑 = 7.8 𝑐𝑚. Each cylinder of the crystal supports a 

bound state in the continuum (BIC), which is odd-symmetric with respect to the vertical 

symmetry plane of the structure. As its name suggests, such state is perfectly bounded, while 


15

it co-exists in the radiation continuum of the waveguide. The couplings between the BIC 

modes can be regulated by changing the successive distance between the nearest-neighboring 

sites.

In order to obtain the averaged transmission spectrum, we used Comsol Multiphysics, 

acoustic module. The waveguide was modeled with a rectangle surrounded by walls with 

Neumann boundary condition (

𝜕𝑃

𝜕𝑛 = 0). This boundary condition was also applied to the 

external boundaries of the cylinders. The two lateral sides of the waveguide were surrounded 

by radiation boundary conditions, one of which was excited with a plane wave. The 

transmission spectrum, for each realization of disorder, was obtained by performing regular 

standing wave pattern analysis. The disorder-averaged transmission spectrum was obtained by 

repeating this procedure for ten different realizations of disorder and taking the average of the 

corresponding transmission spectra. Note that, in order to be able to detect the BIC modes in 

such a far-field scattering test, one has to slightly shift (6 mm shift in our case study) the 

obstacles away from the centerline of the waveguide, breaking the mirror symmetry of the 

structure, and allowing the BICs to leak a little bit into the continuum (this is called a quasi 

BICs). 

Note III: Studying the response of the proposed disorder-induced acoustic filter to other 

kinds of inputs

Here, we investigate the response of the proposed acoustic system, when it is excited with 

input signals other than a typical Gaussian pulse. To this end, we consider an irregularly 

shaped pulse, modulated with the frequency of 𝑓0 (Figure S6b). Figure S6c shows the 

corresponding (averaged) output signal, when no disorder is introduced to the system. It is 

seen that the output signal has nothing to do with the targeted one. Next, we suppose that the 

system is strongly disordered so that it enters into the topological Anderson regime. Figure 

S6d represents the corresponding output signal. It is seen that, this time, the output signal 


16

follows perfectly the solution of the targeted signal. The corresponding experimental results 

are shown in Figure S7a-d. 

We also examine the functionality of the proposed disorder-induced acoustic filter for 

incident images other than the Eiffel tower image. Consider, for example, the photograph 

shown in Figure S8a, which is an image taken in our campus. We encrypt this image with the 

inverse of the target transfer function 𝐻(𝑓). The corresponding encoded image is represented 

in Figure S8b. Next, we study the evolution of the corresponding output image, when steadily 

increasing the strength of disorder from zero to the regime of topological Anderson 

localization. The corresponding (experimental) results are plotted in Figure S8c, constituting 

an evidence of the fact that the proposed system is capable of decoding the encrypted image 

for proper type and amount of disorder. 

Note IV: Performing other kinds of filtering operations with the proposed 

topological Anderson insulator system 

In this section, we discuss the possibility of performing other types of filtering operations 

using the proposed disorder-induced acoustic system. We start with describing how a nth 

order analog filter can be realized by constructing a network of the proposed disordered 

system.  

In frequency domain, the transfer function of a nth order analog filter is expressed as 

𝐻(𝜔) =
𝐵

(𝑗(𝜔 − 𝜔0)𝑛) + 𝐴𝑛−1(𝑗(𝜔 − 𝜔0))

𝑛−1+.. +𝐴1(𝑗(𝜔 − 𝜔0))+𝐴0

(𝑆2)

𝐻(𝜔) can be re-written as

𝐻(𝜔) = ∑ 𝐻𝑖(𝜔); 𝐻𝑖(𝜔) =
𝐾𝑖

𝑗(𝜔 − 𝜔0) + 𝜔0

2𝑄𝑖

𝑛

𝑖=1

(S3)

where 𝑄𝑖 = −𝜔0/2𝑃𝑖, in which 𝑃𝑖 are complex poles of the associated nth order polynomial, 

and 𝐾𝑖 are the corresponding constant coefficient. Equation S3 suggests a straightforward


17

method for realizing the nth order filtering operation. One has to add the output signals of 

several Lorentzian resonators with different quality factors 𝑄𝑖. This can be accomplished in a 

fully analog manner as in Figure S9, in which the output signals of several resonators 

(associated with the edge modes of several acoustic topological Anderson insulators) with 

different quality factors are added to each other using an array of rat-race couplers[2]. Note 

that the quality factor of most resonators (including the one of the proposed topological 

Anderson metamaterial) can be readily tuned by tailoring the dissipation losses in the system.

In Figure S10a, we have demonstrated a second-order analog filter based on the scheme 

described above. In this configuration, we have added the output signals of two realizations of 

first-order filters based on the acoustic topological Anderson insulator phase demonstrated in 

the main text. Each realization corresponds to a different dissipation loss. As a result, the 

corresponding 
transfer 
functions 
𝑯𝟏(𝝎) = 𝟔/(𝒋(𝝎 − 𝝎𝟎) + 𝟏𝟖)
and 
𝑯𝟐(𝝎) =

𝟏𝟐/(𝒋(𝝎 − 𝝎𝟎) + 𝟏𝟐) are different. The rat-race coupler adds these two transfer functions to 

each other, leading to a new transfer function 𝑯𝟑(𝝎) = 𝑯𝟏(𝝎) + 𝑯𝟐(𝝎) that corresponds to 

a second order filter. In order to verify the functionality of the system, we consider an 

arbitrarily shaped signal as the excitation (Figure S10b), and calculate the corresponding 

output signal (Figure S10c). It is observed that the output of the system matches the targeted 

filtered signal.

We note that an alternative route to realize transfer functions other than Lorentzian is to 

cascade two or several topological Anderson insulators, allowing their edge modes to couple 

to each other. The constructive and destructive interference between the associated edge 

modes may create a Fano-like spectra (rather than Lorentzian) in the regime of strong 

randomness, opening the way for more complex and sharper transfer functions including 

comb-like spectra.   

While in the main text we focused our attention on the transmission of the proposed system, 

the corresponding reflected signal is relevant for another kind of filtering operation, namely 


18

band-stop filtering. As explained in the main text, near the resonance frequency of the edge 

mode of the topological Anderson insulator phase, there exists a resonance peak in the 

averaged transmission spectrum. This corresponds to a dip (zero) of the reflection spectrum 

(Figure S11a). Near this zero, assuming that the input signal has a sufficiently small 

bandwidth, the reflection coefficient of the structure can be approximated with a linear 

function of the form 𝑅(𝜔) ≈ 𝐴𝜔 (see the dashed blue line in Figure S9a). Interestingly, 𝑅(𝜔)

is similar to the transfer function of a differentiator filter. As a result, for the input signals that 

are sufficiently wide in temporal domain, the reflected signal is nothing but the derivative of 

the incident field. In order to demonstrate this, we consider again our tight-binding toy model 

and assume that it is excited with a Gaussian-type input signal (Figure S11b). The 

corresponding reflected signal is indicated in Figure S11c. It is observed that the reflected 

signal has a Gaussian derivative profile.  

One common technique to detect the outlines of an image is to use a differentiation filter. We 

have shown that our proposed disorder-induced system can act as such a filter. As such, it is 

capable of resolving the edges of incident image (in one direction). In order to demonstrate 

this possibility, we assume that the input signal is modulated with the image shown in Figure 

S11d (top). The corresponding reflected image is shown in Figure S11d (bottom). It is 

observed that the vertical edges of the image are resolved, confirming the excellent 

performance of the proposed filter.

Note V: Photonic topological random filters  

Here we explore the possibility of generalizing the proposed disorder-induced topological 

acoustic filter to electromagnetics. To this end, similar to the acoustic case, we consider a 

regular photonic crystal consisting of a conventional metallic waveguide. In Comsol 

Multiphysics, we model the waveguide via a rectangular pipe surrounded with perfect electric 

conductors. On the other hand, we model the rods with cylinders filled with a material 


19

(silicon) with the refractive index of 3.4. We then introduce some disorder into the successive 

distance between the inclusions of the photonic crystal. In the regime where the strength of 

disorder is weak, the transmission spectrum is gapped around the resonance frequency of the 

resonators, due to the topologically trivial nature of the system in the clean limit. Adding 

disorder to the system, however, closes the trivial gap and re-opens it as topological, as 

broadly discussed in the main text. This gives rise to a zero-energy edge state, manifesting 

itself as a Lorentzian resonance peak in the averaged transmission spectrum, which is 

employed to perform first-order band-pass filtering. To demonstrate these predictions, we 

consider a Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal signal (with frequency of 𝒇𝟎 and the variance of 

𝝈 = 𝟎.𝟏𝒇𝟎) as the input signal. We then study what the system returns both in the clean and 

TAI regimes. Figures S12a,b show the output signals corresponding to the clean and 

disordered systems, respectively.  When the system is free of disorder (panels a), the output 

signal has a very low level, being far from the targeted filtered signal (blue dashed line). On 

the other hand, the output signal of the disordered system (panel b) is in perfect agreement 

with the targeted signal. 

Note VI: Analysis of the proposed disorder-induced system based on Finite 

difference time domain (FDTD) approach

In order to obtain the signal coming out of the proposed system, we calculated the inverse 

Fourier transform of the disorder-averaged transmission coefficient multiplied by the Fourier 

transform of the input signal. The alternative, more straightforward, strategy is to calculate the 

output signal via direct FDTD simulations. To do that, we suppose that the system is excited 


20

with a Gaussian-modulated sinusoidal and study the corresponding averaged output. In 

Figures S13, we plot the corresponding output signals, averaged over 10 different realizations 

disorder, for both disorder-free and disordered systems. The results of these figures are in 

complete agreement with the ones of Figure 2a of the main text. 

Note VII: Studying the effect of disorder on trivial analog wave filters 

In this section, we compare our proposed disorder-induced topological analog filter with a 

trivial ordinary one. Consider, for example, the resonant structure shown in Figure S14, based 

on defect tunneling through a Bragg band gap. Such a structure is also capable of performing 

first-order filtering operation (see the top signal path). However, when some disorder is added 

to the crystal, the transfer function of the system and the corresponding output significantly 

deviate from their original cases, as it is confirmed by direct numerical simulation. The 

behavior of our proposed resonant structure, based on TAI phase, is drastically different. Not 

only is disorder not detrimental to our proposed system, but, on the contrary, it is necessary, 

triggering the functionality of interest. 

Note VIII: Supporting Figures


21

Figure S1. Fabricated prototype of the phononic crystal, The sample consists of a 
rectangular pipe, taking the role of the acoustic waveguide, and a set of nylon cast plastic rods 
embedded inside the waveguide. 

Figure S2. Experimental setup used to test the proposed acoustic topological Anderson 
filter, In addition to the fabricated sample, the setup consists of an acoustic Quattro Data 
Physics analyzer, three ICP® microphones, a loudspeaker and an acoustic termination, made 
from appropriately tapered foam. 

Figure S3. Topological invariant of the proposed system, a, Localization length of the 
proposed disordered system as a function of disorder strength (𝐷𝑠) and the parameter 𝑚. b, 
Calculated winding number at the specific value of 𝑚 = 1.11 corresponding to our 
experiment.


22

Figure S4. Tight-binding toy model used to perform disordered-induced topological 
filtering, The model consists of an array of 200 resonators, evanescently coupled to each 
other with specified coupling coefficients and on-site potentials. From its right and left 
corners, the chain is coupled to two single mode waveguides with the tunneling rate of 𝛾.

Figure S5. Phononic crystal used to perform disorder-induced topological acoustic 
filtering, The crystal is composed of an acoustic waveguide and an array of cylinders with 
dimensions specified in the text. Each cylinder supports a resonance state that, while coexists 
in the radiation continuum of the waveguide, remains perfectly bounded. 


23

Figure S6. Response of the proposed system to an irregularly-shaped signal, a, Disorder-
averaged transmission coefficient of the proposed system versus disorder, b, We suppose that 
the system is excited with an irregularly shaped signal shown in the inset, c, Corresponding 
output signal in the disorder-free limit, being far from the targeted filtered signal (blue line). 
d, Corresponding output in the regime of topological Anderson phase. 


24

Figure S7. Response of the proposed acoustic system to an irregularly-shaped signal, The 
figure repeats the analysis of Figure S6, except that the results are obtained based on the 
measured (averaged) transmission spectrum shown in panel a. 


25

Figure S8. Performing filtering operation in an image taken in our campus, The figure 
repeats the analysis of Figure 3 of the main text, for a different test image taken on our 
campus. The results are obtained based on the measured (experimental) transmission 
spectrum shown in Figure S7a. 


26

Figure S9. Performing higher-order filtering operation by constructing a network of the 
proposed disorder-induced first-order filter, The output signals of n different Lorentzian 
resonators (with different quality factors) are added to each other, leading to the realization of 
a nth order filter. The summation is accomplished by an array of acoustic rat-race couplers[2].

Figure S10. Second order topological acoustic filter, a, The output signals of two first-
order disordered-induced filters are added to each other using acoustic rat-race couplers. This 
leads to the realization of the transfer function 𝑯𝟑 = 𝑯𝟏 + 𝑯𝟐, associated with a second-order 


27

filter. b, An arbitrarily shaped signal is considered as the excitation, c, Corresponding output 
signal. 

Figure S11. Disorder-induced analog band-stop filtering, a, Reflection coefficient of the 
proposed system in the regime of topological Anderson insulator phase. The spectrum 
exhibits a dip (zero) near the resonance frequency of the edge mode. Near this dip, the 
reflection coefficient can be approximated with a linear function. b, A Gaussian-type signal is 
considered as the excitation, c, Corresponding output, possessing a Gaussian derivative 
profile. d, Resolving the edges of an incident image modulated with an image taken our 
campus.  


28

Figure S12. Demonstration of disorder-induced filtering in electromagnetics, We 
consider a photonic crystal quite similar to the phononic crystal shown in Figure S5, 
consisting of silicon rods arranged inside a conventional metallic waveguide. In the clean 
limit, the system is designed to be topologically trivial. Yet, introducing disorder to it enables 
topological phase transition, leading to topological Anderson insulator phase. a, Disorder-
averaged transmitted signal, when the system is excited with a Gaussian-type time modulated 
signal and only weak amount of disorder is present. b, Same as a except that the system is 
strongly disordered so that it enters TAI regime. 

Figure S13. FDTD analysis of the proposed acoustic system, The figure repeats the 
analysis of Figure 2 of the main text except that the results are obtained via direct finite 
difference time domain simulations, a, Corresponding output signal when no disorder is 
present in the system under study, b, Corresponding output signal when the system is strongly 
disordered.  


29

Figure S14. Trivial analog acoustic filtering, we consider the resonance associated with the 
defect tunneling through a Bragg band gap (top signal path). Near the resonance, the system 
acts as a first-order spectral filter.  When some disorder is added to the system, the transfer 
function of the system and the corresponding output signal significantly deviates from the 
original cases.  

References 

[1]
I. Mondragon-Shem, T. L. Hughes, J. Song, E. Prodan. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 

046802. 

[2]
F. Zangeneh-Nejad, R. Fleury. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 

2019 , 146, 843.


