IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION
1

Abstract— Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a mature 

technology, which allows performing contactless data readout via wireless 
communication links. While communication protocols in this field are 
subject to regulations, there is a room of opportunities to improve the 
hardware realization of antennas devices, which support the technology. 
In particular, readout range extension and miniaturization of passive 
RFID tags is an important objective with far going impact on retail, 
security, IoT, and many others. Here we introduce a new concept of high-
permittivity ceramic tag, which relies on different physical principles. 
Instead of using conduction currents in metallic wires to drive electronic 
chips and radiate electromagnetic waves, high permittivity components 
rely on an efficient excitation of displacement currents. Those are 
efficiently converted to conduction currents, powering a memory chip. The 
practical aspect of this approach is improved robustness to environmental 
fluctuations, footprint reduction, and readout range extension. In 
particular, our high permittivity ceramic (ε ~ 100) elements have 
demonstrated a 25% reading range improvement in respect to commercial 
tags. In case, when state of the art readers and RFID chips are used, the 
readout distances of the developed ceramic tags are approaching 23 m and 
could be further extended with improved matching circuits.

Index Terms—Ceramic resonators, dielectric resonant antennas, RFID.

I. INTRODUCTION

Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a widely used technique 

for noncontact data readout via a wireless communication channel [1]. 
RFID elements are widely employed in warehouses logistics, billing 
systems, as biometric identifiers and in many other applications. 
Mature technology allows introducing RFID tags almost everywhere 
and tailors their electromagnetic design per application. The most 
commonly used architecture is based on passive ultra-high frequency 
(UHF) RFID tags and active interrogating readers, which establish 
connections and process time-modulated backscattered signals. While 
the communication channel is a subject to international regulations 
(e.g. EPCGEN2 standard), tag’s and reader’s antennae architectures 
are open to extensive research and optimization on pathways to 
improve performances, demanded by specific applications. For 
example, special tags are needed for labeling items with a metal 
surface. The later acts as a ground plane, which can quench a standard 
dipole-like RFID antenna, if additional efforts are not applied [2]. 
Ceramic materials are also used in cases, where tags should reliably 
operate under harsh conditions, including chemically aggressive 
environments and extreme temperatures. On the other hand, the textile 
industry requires integrating low-weight flexible miniature tags, 
protected against repeatable exposure to water [3]. There are dozens of 
other tailor-designed examples of RFID tags. Our objective, however, 
is to develop a new strategy to tag miniaturization and reading range 
extension without a relation to a specific application. For the sake of 
completeness, it is worth mentioning other types of tags – battery-

assisted, active, and a rather new approach of chipless tags [4]. All of 
those, however, are outside of the scope here. 

Typical architectures of RFID tags are based on folded metal strips 

with a chip, plugged in a gap. The operation of metallic resonators is 
based on phase retardation effects and, hence, those structures cannot 
be significantly smaller than a fraction of a wavelength. While quite a 
few techniques on size reduction do exist, antenna footprints cannot go 

significantly below the wavelength without a major bandwidth 
reduction. In theory, the overall radar cross-section (RCS) of a 
subwavelength structure does not depend on its overall size, if a proper 
resonant load is chosen. In practice, however, lumped element losses 
lead to significant performance degradations, making this approach to 
be less attractive in applications, where operation at moderately low 
signal-to-noise ratios is required. Extensive folding of metal strips can 
replace lumped elements and it is quite an attractive strategy for 
reducing internal losses. For example, meandered dipole antennas  [5]
are widely used in many RFID applications. Another example is the 
fractal dipole antenna [6]. Fractal geometries have self-similarity and 
space-filling nature and, being applied to antenna design, can provide 
a broadband operation at reduced spatial extend. Various methods are 
used to incorporate ground plane into designs. For example, patches, 
implemented 
on 
high-dielectric 
substrate 
materials 
and 

electromagnetic band-gaps are used to bring RFID tag antennae to the 
proximity of a metallic backplane [7], [8]. High permittivity substrates 
are also widely used for reducing tag's size [9]. Different techniques 
and types of materials have been used to develop electromagnetically 
contrast and mechanically flexible substrates for RFID antennae [10], 
including those, which allow placing tags on metal surfaces [11].
Metamaterials and compact volumetric geometries is another 
promising yet fully tested strategy for size reduction, e.g. [12],[13]. 

Another promising strategy in antenna size reduction is based on 

employing high-index materials, since the free space wavelength 
shrinks by the refractive index in all three dimensions. Dielectric 
resonant antennas (DRAs) [14] utilize this advantage towards 
demonstrating improved performances. In particular, DRAs usually 
have enhanced operational bandwidth and demonstrate robust 
performances in high-power applications. Preferable materials for 
DRA implementation are high-quality ceramics [15]. The permittivity 
of those composite materials can approach several thousand, opening 
a 
room 
of 
opportunities 
for 
electromagnetic 
design 
and 

miniaturization. 

Here we investigate capabilities of miniature high permittivity 

dielectric resonators as RFID antenna elements. The general concept 
of the ceramic-based RFID tag appears in Fig. 1. The resonator is a 
ceramic cylinder, which supports localized magnetic mode, bounded 
to the structure. A reader device interrogates the tag and excites this 
magnetic mode. A miniature non-resonant metal split ring with a 
standard RFID chip, soldered in the gap, is placed on top of the 
dielectric cylinder. Near-field coupling converts displacement currents 
of the resonators into conduction current flow in the ring, initiating the 
operation of the chip. A backscattered modulated signal undertakes the 
reverse path – from the conduction current to the far-field radiation. 
The magnetic nature of the resonator’s mode ensures an efficient 
coupling with the ring via the inductive-like coupling.

Dmitry Dobrykh, Ildar Yusupov, Sergey Krasikov, Anna Mikhailovskaya, Diana Shakirova, Andrey 

Bogdanov, Alexey Slobozhanyuk, and Dmitry Filonov, and Pavel Ginzburg

Long-range miniature ceramic RFID tags


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION
2

Fig. 1.  
Operational scheme of a miniature ceramic-based RFID tag. 

Displacement currents within high-Q resonator are inductively coupled to a 
metal split ring, functionalized with an RFID chip. Miniaturization and long 
reading range are ensured by localized modes within high permittivity 
ceramics. Inset shows the magnetic field amplitude of the fundamental 
magnetic mode. 

The report is organized as follows: theoretical and numerical 

analysis for finding bounds of ceramic tags’ miniaturization are 
discussed first. It is then followed by the experimental comparison of 
scattering efficiencies of new ceramic and commercially available 
metallic tags. Investigation of environmental fluctuation effects on 
tags’ performances comes before experimental studies, where readout 
distances, achievable for different tags, are evaluated. Long-range 
operation with the recent state of the art equipment is evaluated by 
extrapolating link budget equations. 

II. SCATTERING PROPERTIES AND BANDWIDTH OF 

CERAMIC TAGS

Size reduction of a resonator implies the decrease of the scattering 

cross section bandwidth according to the Chu-Harrington limit [16]. 
Quality factor (Q-factor) of a structure, operating at a dipolar 
resonance, obeys: 

Q >

1

𝑘𝑎 + ( 1

𝑘𝑎)

3
,                                  (1)

where k is the free space wavenumber and a is the minimal radius of 
an imaginary sphere, inclosing the geometry.  Operation with narrow 
bandwidth resonators can significantly reduce the capacity of a 
wireless communications channel. EPCGEN2 RFID standard, being 
the subject to standardization, requires establishing a reliable 
communication in 860-960 MHz frequency range, depending on a 
specific country. Those parameters suggest operating at Q-factors less 
then several thousands, which makes impossible to implement tags 
with sizes significantly smaller than 𝜆/100 in a free space. Operation 
outside the scattering peak results in a drop of the reading distance, 
nevertheless a tag still can be read out.  

In order to estimate the impact of the ceramic resonator 

miniaturization on the bandwidth, a qualitative analysis will be 
performed first and then followed by a more accurate theoretical 
investigation. The miniaturization strategy is based on a compensation 
of size reduction by increasing the permittivity. The resonant 
frequency of the fundamental magnetic TE010 mode in the closed 
cylindrical resonator is given by [16]:

(𝑓𝑟)𝑛𝑝𝑞
𝑇𝐸
=

𝑐

2𝜋𝑎√𝜀𝜇 √𝑥′𝑛𝑝
2 + (𝑞𝜋𝑎

𝑑 )

2

,                     (2)

where 𝑎 is the radius, 𝑑 its height, q is the axial order of the mode, 

𝑥𝑛𝑝
′
it is the p-th roots of the Bessel function derivative 𝐽𝑛′ (𝑥𝑛𝑝
′ ) = 0, 𝜀

and 𝜇 are the permittivity and permeability of the cylinder, 
respectively. We focus at the fundamental magnetic dipole mode of the 
resonator, thus, 𝑞 = 0, 𝑛 = 0 and 𝑝 = 1, and 𝑥01

′ =3.83. Equation (2)

assumes PEC boundaries, which is quite an accurate approximation in 
the case of high-permittivity material, filling the interior of the 
resonator. Equation (2) shows that the permittivity of a nonmagnetic 
material should grow quadratically with the scaling parameter, which 
predicts well the numerical results, obtained with
full-wave 

simulations. In order to estimate the dependence of the quality factor 
on 𝜀, equations (1) and (2) should be considered. It can be shown that 
Q grows proportionally to a superposition of 𝜀0.5 and 𝜀1.5, giving an 
approximately linear dependency (on average) in the range of the 
considered size parameters (𝑘𝑎~0.5) (bandwidth is proportional to Q-

1). The induced current in the ring is proportional to Q, since the 
magnetic field flux scales linearly with later considering that the ring’s
area is kept constant. 

While the beforehand qualitative analysis predicts the general 

behavior of the system’s parameters, it does not provide any 
quantitative measure. In order to accomplish this task, electromagnetic 
fields, leaking from the resonator, should be calculated. While the 
problem of electromagnetic scattering on a finite size cylindrical 
resonator does not have a closed-form expression, the scenario can be 
well approximated with an equivalent sphere, for which Mie solutions 
are well known [17]. The high-permittivity dielectric sphere supports 
a fundamental magnetic mode, which possesses a behavior, similar to 
the one in the cylinder. However, Mie solutions provide the full 
information on the fields outside the sphere – those fields will be used 
to obtain currents, induced in the metal ring, assuming that the latter is 
weakly coupled to the ceramic resonator and only slightly changes its 
electromagnetic response. The current in the ring is induced by the 
magnetic flux of a self-consistent electromagnetic field, according to 
Faraday’s law. In order to find the fields, the cylinder will be 
approximated with an equivalent sphere.

Resonances of cylinders can be found numerically by either 

considering the resonant structure of scattering spectra or by 
employing an eigenmode solver. A typical example, demonstrating the 
excitation of the fundamental TE010 mode in the resonator with height 
ℎ = 17 mm, radius 𝑅 = 20 mm and dielectric constant 𝜀 = 100
appears in the inset in Fig. 1. The metal ring’s radius is 11 mm. The 
incident plane wave is polarized along the x-axis, with z being the 
symmetry axis of the cylinder. The absolute value of magnetic field 
distribution at the cut plane through the cylinder’s center was 
calculated with the help of CST microwave studio, frequency domain 
solver. This analysis also shows the impact of a metal ring, placed on 
top of the ceramic resonator – the mode profile resembles the field 
distribution in a standalone structure, while the leaking fields excite 
currents in the metal ring, which acts as a perturbation. An efficient 
control over this perturbation with a switchable impedance of an RFID 
chip, placed in the gap, allows obtaining high differential RCS, which 
is the key for long-range operation.

The resonant frequency of the entire structure including the 

cylinder, metal ring, and shorten circuit was found to be 𝑓 = 900 MHz 
(in fact, the parameters were chosen to hit this frequency, which falls 
at the middle of EPCGEN2 band). An equivalent sphere, resembling 
these properties, is constructed as follows: the same permittivity 𝜀 is 
used, while the radius of the sphere is varied to match the resonant 
frequency of the fundamental magnetic dipolar mode. The expression 
for the resonant condition has a closed-form analytical form, based on 
Mie series. Once the equivalent radius is found, the fields outside the 
sphere can be calculated as: 

𝐻⃗⃗ 𝑆 = ∑
𝑖𝑛
∞
𝑛=1

2𝑛+1

𝑛(𝑛+1) 𝐸0 [𝑖𝑏𝑛𝑁⃗⃗ 𝑜1𝑛

(3) + 𝑎𝑛𝑀⃗⃗ 𝑒1𝑛

(3) ],
(3)


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION
3

where 𝑁⃗⃗ 𝑜1𝑛

(3) and 𝑀⃗⃗ 𝑒1𝑛

(3) are the vector spherical harmonics, 𝐸0 the 

amplitude of an incident plane wave [15], 𝑎𝑛 and 𝑏𝑛 are the Mie 
coefficients. 

The fundamental magnetic mode corresponds to a single 

nonvanishing coefficient in the series, namely  𝑏1 . The total magnetic 
flux through the ring is calculated by integrating the total field. The 
nontrivial part of the magnetic flux, corresponding to the scattered 
field, is calculated by integrating (3):

Φsc =

3𝜋𝑎𝐸0
𝑘0𝑍0 𝑏1ℎ1

(1)(𝑘0𝑎)(𝛼 + 0.5 𝑠𝑖𝑛( 2𝛼)) ,
(4)

where 𝑎 is the sphere radius, 𝑘0 is the wave number, 𝑍0 is the 

impedance of free space, ℎ1

(1)(𝑘0𝑎) is the spherical Hankel function of 

the first kind and 𝛼 = 𝑎𝑟𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛(𝑟/𝑎). Then current in the ring is 
calculated as:

𝐼(𝜔) = Φ𝑠𝑐/√𝐿2 + (𝑅Ω/𝜔)2, 
(5)

where 𝑅Ω is resistance and L is inductance of the ring. In our case 

𝐿 = 4.38 ∙ 10−8 H, which is several orders higher than 𝑅Ω/𝜔 and 
hence resistance can be neglected. It is worth noting that the self-
inductance of the ring can be introduced self-consistently in the model, 
but this complication does not provide any significant advantage to the 
basic understanding of the process. Equation (4), plotted as a function 
of frequency allows calculating the bandwidth, which is defined as the 
full width at half maximum of 𝐼(𝜔) spectrum. 

At the next step, theoretical predictions are assessed versus full-

wave numerical analysis. For this purpose, several cylindrical 
resonators are studied and the impact of miniaturization on bandwidth 
and current are investigated. The largest considered structure has the 
following parameters: 𝑅 = 19 mm, ℎ = 22 mm, 𝜀 = 80, and the 
resonant frequency is 900 MHz – the last parameter is kept constant 
through all the designs. The size of this initial resonator is then reduced 
by a multiplicative scaling factor.  In order to keep the resonant 
frequency constant, the value of ε was adjusted with the help of the 
numerical routine.

Figure 2 shows the operational bandwidth (panel a) and induced 

current in the metal ring (panel b). The ring’s radius is the same (11 
mm) in all the realizations. The value of the current indicates whenever 
the electronic chip, which will be plugged within the ring’s gap, will 
operate properly. Typical threshold values for the tag ‘wake up’ are in 
the range of µW, depending on an integrated circuit (IC) architecture. 
Operational bandwidth corresponds to the wireless channel capacity, 
through which the data will be transformed. Both of those values are 
crucial for a proper RFID tag functioning.  

Numerical and theoretical models predict that the resonator’s size 

reduction causes the drop in the bandwidth (in accordance with the 
Chu-Harrington limit), while the current grows with the increase of the 
quality factor, as it was also predicted by the qualitative analysis. It is 
quite remarkable that the theoretical approximation (4) is in a very 
good correspondence with the numerical analysis. Equation (4) can be 
used to estimate the minimal size of a ceramic tag, suitable for a 
reliable readout. Since this link budget calculation strongly depends on 
the reader’s and IC’s parameters and specifications of a probable 
application, this step will be skipped here. The formula can be 
straightforwardly applied on any practical scenario. 

Fig. 2.  Electric performance of ceramic tags as the function of their 
permittivity. Aspect ratio between the radius and height is constant (𝑅/ℎ =
0.85), the resonant frequency is 𝑓0 = 900 MHz. Absolute values of R and h
are uniquely defined by 𝜀 in order to keep the resonance frequency constant. (a) 
Current’s bandwidth. (b) Conduction current in a ring, placed on top or the 
resonator. Radius of the ring is 11 mm in all of the realizations (the gap is 
shorted). Solid lines – theoretical prediction, based on (4). Solid dotted line is 
the full-wave numerical analysis.

III. ELECTROMAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF CERAMIC RFID 

TAGS 

While near-field coupling governs the performance of the RFID 

readout in standard applications, an increase of the interrogation 
distance forces the system to operate at far-field conditions. 
Hereinafter the readout range will be above several meters, prevailing 
Fraunhofer distances by an order of magnitude and, hence, ensuring 
far-field conditions. 

The parameters of the fabricated ceramic resonators are shown in 

Table 1 and were adjusted to make the structures resonating at UHF 
RFID frequencies (860- 920 MHz). A foil split ring with radius 11 mm 
was placed on top of the resonators and an RFID chip (Impinj Monza 
4), detached from a commercial tag, was soldered within the gap. One 
of the crucial parameters is the matching between the IC and the 
antenna (ceramic cylinder, in this case). Conjugated impedance 
condition should be approached in order to maximize differential RCS. 

Table I. Parameters of the fabricated ceramic resonators.

Resonator 
𝑅
ℎ
𝜀

1
19 mm
22 mm
80

2
17 mm
20 mm
100

To demonstrate and optimize the matching conditions, the 

following numerical analysis has been performed. Numerical port with 
𝑍 = 4.9 − 𝑖70 ohm impedance was plugged within the ring’s gap and 
complex reflection (S11 parameter) spectra were calculated. The 


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION
4

impedance value at the resonance corresponds to the data sheet of the 
IC. Figure 3 shows the spectra and underlines an existence of a 
relatively good matching at the resonance frequency. While the IC’s 
impedance, taken from the datasheet, it is frequency dependent, its 
dispersion is rather minor in comparison to the sharp peaked resonance 
and, hence, it can be neglected. It is worth noting that no additional 
lumped elements were used to perform the matching, which is 
achieved via mutual inductive coupling between the resonator and the 
ring. The matching can be further improved by a slight modification of 
the layout, e.g. the distance between the surface of the cylinder and the 
foil ring of a geometry of the later.  

Fig. 3.  Numerically calculated S11 spectra of ceramic tags, indicated in legends. 
S11 parameters were extracted by plugging a port directly to the ring’s gap. The 
impedance of the port is equal to the value, provided by the vendor IC (Impinj 
Monza 4). Insets shows photographs of the fabricated tags. 

IV. ROBUSTNESS TO TEMPERATURE FLUCTUATIONS

Another important requirement for a proper RFID operation is the 

tolerance to environmental fluctuations. Those might include extreme 
temperature, moisture, chemical ambient, and any other hash 
condition. Ceramic composites have significant advantages with 
respect to metal structures in this context. Here we will check the 
influence of the temperature change on tag’s operation, which might 
be quite substantial in the case when resonant structures are in use. 

While there is no data on temperature-dependent permittivity for 

specific ceramics, which is in use here, related structures have been 
investigated [18], [19]. An approximate temperature-induced 
differential drift in the permittivity is ∆𝜀/∆𝑇 = 0.01/℃, which is 
quite minor. Figure 4 shows the effect of the permittivity fluctuation 
on the RCS and on the current, which drives the tag. The results were 
obtained numerically. A cylinder with fixed parameters (𝑅 =17 mm, 
ℎ = 20 mm, thermal expansion is neglected) was illuminated with a 
plane wave with an amplitude of 1 V/m. The relative permittivity was 
scanned in the range between 80 and 120. Resonant frequency of 900 
MHz corresponds to 𝜀 = 100, which is exactly at the center of the 
considered range. Values of the current were calculated for the case 
where a small resistor (0.1 Ohm) is plugged into PEC ring with the 
radius of 11 mm. 

The results suggest in Fig. 4 that the permittivity fluctuations on the 

order of unity (full width at half maximum) will still allow performing 
the readout. This range corresponds to 100-200 ℃ temperature change, 
which is more than sufficient for the normal operation. Standard tags 
are declared to operate in the interval between -20 and 80 ℃. 

It worth briefly noting that our architecture still contains unshielded 

metal elements (the ring and the chip). However, those parts can be 

embedded in the interior of the ceramic resonator, which will shield 
them from an environment to a certain extent. 

Fig. 4.   Ceramic tag parameters as the function of the permittivity detuning. 
Left scale (blue) – RCS, right scale (red) – the current trough a small resistor. 
Additional parameters are given in the main text. 

V. EXPERIMENTAL DEMONSTRATION OF THE READING 

RANGE: CERAMIC VERSUS STANDARD

In order to assess the performances of new tags, a comparative 

experiment has been performed. Two ceramic resonators and three 
commercial UHF metallic tags [thin electric dipoles, see inset in Fig. 
5(b)] Alien 9662, Impinj HR61 and Impinj E42 were evaluated in long-
range readout configuration (Fig. 5(a) is the photograph of the 
experiment layout). A reader device (model KLM900S) was plugged 
into a laptop via USB port and the amplitude of the received signal was 
monitored via the software, provided by the vendor. This device comes 
with a standard PCB patch antenna, which is not designed to provide 
long-range reading distances due to its low gain. Hence, this element 
was replaced with a custom-made Yagi-Uda antenna (4 directors), with 
-15 dB matching in 880-960 MHz frequency range inset [Fig. 5(a)]. 
The gain of 9.3 dBi has been estimated. All five tags were placed (one 
after another) at the antenna E-plane and accurately moved away from 
the minimal distance of 50 cm to the maximal of 5 m (Fig. 5(a) for the 
setup layout). The received signal intensity was monitored for each 
physical position (time average has been performed to reduce 
fluctuations). The noise level of the reader (the minimal detectable 
intensity) is -50 dBm. Figure 5(b) demonstrates the received signal 
power as the function of the distance between the tag and the reader. 
The maximal reading distance for commercial metallic elements in the 
current arrangement is less than 4 m (after further increase of the 
distance the signal goes below -50 dBm and becomes non-
processable). The ceramic tags are readable from distances, 
approaching 5 m. 

In order to underline the main mechanism for the readout distance 

improvement, the link budget of the system has been evaluated. There 
are two major parameters, related to the hardware implementation, 
have to be verified. The first factor is the chip activation threshold. 
RFID tag has a rectifier, which powers the IC. A certain threshold 
intensity should be obtained on the tag’s antenna port to power the 
electronics. The second factor is a reader’s sensitivity. The intensity of 
the backscattered signal should be within the dynamical range of the 
receiver. The beforehand mentioned factors should be assessed 
simultaneously, since the weakest part of the system will limit the 
range.


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION
5

The maximal reading distance is given by the Friis’ uplink model 

[20]–[22]:

𝐿 =

𝜆

4𝜋 √

𝑃𝑡𝐺𝑇𝑅𝐺𝑡𝜏

𝑃𝑐ℎ
,
(6)

where the parameters are given in Table 2. 

Table 2. Parameters of the RFID system for link budget calculations.

Parameter
Physical meaning 
Value

𝑃𝑡
Power, transmitted by the 
reader

0.1 W

𝐺𝑇𝑅
Gain of the reader 
transmitter/receiver antenna

8.5 dB

𝐺𝑡
Gain of the ceramic tag
1.44 dB (ε =80)
1.51 dB (ε =100)

𝑃𝑐ℎ
Chip sensitivity
1.8 ∙ 10−5 W

𝑃𝑟
Reader sensitivity
10−8 W

𝜆
Wavelength
0.33 m

𝜏
Power transmission 
coefficient

0.51 (ε =80)
0.56 (ε =100)

ME
Modulation efficiency
0.7

Few of the parameters in Table 2 require a special attention. The 

power transmission coefficient (𝜏) determines the matching between 
the tag antenna and the chip and this value ranges as 0 ≤ 𝜏 ≤ 1. Here 
we calculated this factor numerically by extracting the data from Fig. 
3 (1 − |𝑆11|). Values in Table 2 suggest a room for an additional 
improvement. The gain of ceramic tags resembles the one of a dipolar 
resonator, which is quite expected. The values were estimated with a 
standard gain calculation routine, implemented in CST Microwave 
Studio. 

The sensitivity of the basic low-cost IC (Impinj Monza 4) is -17 

dBm, which corresponds to the activation range L=5.3 m (Eq. 6). The 
improved version (Impinj Monza 6 generation) already has the 
sensitivity of -22 dBm, which will allow the activation at a distance 
L=9 m. Using new generation of sensitive electronic components 
allows improving the reading distances quite significantly.

The second factor, which might limit the range, is the reader 

sensitivity. In this case the tag is assumed to be activated, and the 
differential RCS plays the key role. In this case, the modulation 
efficiency (ME) parameter is defined. Taking into account the readers 
minimal received power (𝑃𝑟), the monostatic radar equation reads as 
[23]:

𝐿′ =

𝜆

4𝜋 √𝑃𝑡𝐺𝑡

2𝐺𝑇𝑅

2 𝑀𝐸

𝑃𝑟

4
,
(7)

In practice, ME ranges in 0 ≤ 𝑀𝐸 ≤ 4 or 𝑀𝐸 ≤ 6 𝑑𝐵 [23]. In our 

case, 𝑀𝐸 ≈ 0.7. This value was estimated numerically by calculating 
backscattering of the tag in two cases, which correspond to different 
nominals of lumped impedances, taken from Impinj Monza 4 data 
sheet.

Reader device with a moderately low dynamic range can activate a 

tag at a distance but cannot process the received signal. In this case, 
the sensitivity is the bottleneck. In our investigation we employed a 
relatively cheap device, which cannot read signals below -50 dBm 
(also can be seen in Fig. 5). State of the art readers (e.g. Alien ALR-
9900) can interpret received signals at -80 dBm level, which 
significantly improves the reading range.

Fig. 5.  (a) Photo of the experimental setup in an anechoic chamber – RFID 
reader with a custom-made Yagi-Uda antenna. (b) Received signal power as the 
function of the distance between the reader and the tag. Inset shows photograph 
of the measured commercial tags.

Finally, the link budget equations can allow extrapolating the 

reading distance in the case, when state of the art reader and tag’s IC 
are used. For example, -22 dBm chip’s sensitivity allows obtaining 
around 23 m reding distance with our ceramic-based architecture (Eq. 
6). Improving the reader (-80 dBm sensitivity is commercially 
available) and its Equivalent Isotopically Radiated Power (EIRP) to 4
W (further increase is restricted by international regulations) will allow 
reading an activated tag from a distance of 41 m (Eq. 7). In overall, the 
bottleneck in this scenario is the IC and, hence, the extrapolated 
readout distance is 23 m. It is worth noting, that the existent 
demonstrated reading distance is about 26 m, reported for a rather 
complex cumbersome tag with a high gain and improved matching 
circuitry [24].

VI. CONCLUSION

The new type of RFID tags, based on ceramic resonators, has been 

investigated and aimed at achieving miniaturization and extension of 
readout distances. Apart from the applied aspect of the investigation, a 
new physical concept in the field has been introduced. In particular, it 
has been shown that displacement currents, resonantly exited within 
the resonator’s volume, are efficiently coupled to conduction current 
in a small loop, functionalized with an RFID chip. This approach 
allows for designing robust and environmentally sable ceramic 
components, which drive the entire process. From the applied 
standpoint, this new architecture provides new routes for achieving 
small footprint RFID tags, which support long reading range, which is 
valuable in numerous applications, such as retail, security, IoT, and 
many others. 


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION
6

REFERENCES

[1]
S. B. Miles, S. E. Sarma, and J. R. Williams, RFID Technology and 
Applications. Cambridge University Press, 2011.

[2]
M. Hirvonen, P. Pursula, K. Jaakkola, and K. Laukkanen, “Planar 
inverted-F antenna for radio frequency identification,” Electron. 
Lett., vol. 40, no. 14, p. 848, Jul. 2004.

[3]
“RFID Technology | The RFID Hardware Experts.” .

[4]
C. Herrojo, F. Paredes, J. Mata-Contreras, and F. Martín, “Chipless-
RFID: A review and recent developments,” Sensors (Switzerland), 
vol. 19, no. 15. MDPI AG, 01-Aug-2019.

[5]
J. Rashed and C. T. Tai, “Communications a New Class of Resonant 
Antennas,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1428–
1430, 1991.

[6]
H. Kimouche and H. Zemmour, “A compact fractal dipole antenna 
for 915MHz and 2.4GHz RFID tag applications,” Prog. Electromagn. 
Res. Lett., vol. 26, pp. 105–114, 2011.

[7]
S. L. Chen, “A miniature RFID tag antenna design for metallic 
objects application,” IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 
1043–1045, 2009.

[8]
P. H. Yang, Y. Li, L. Jiang, W. C. Chew, and T. T. Ye, “Compact 
metallic RFID tag antennas with a loop-fed method,” IEEE Trans. 
Antennas Propag., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 4454–4462, Dec. 2011.

[9]
J. L. Volakis, C.-C. Chen, and K. (Kyōhei) Fujimoto, Small antennas: 
miniaturization techniques & applications. McGraw-Hill, 2010.

[10]
A. A. Babar, V. A. Bhagavati, L. Ukkonen, A. Z. Elsherbeni, P. 
Kallio, and L. Sydänheimo, “Performance of High-Permittivity 
Ceramic-Polymer Composite as a Substrate for UHF RFID Tag 
Antennas,” Int. J. Antennas Propag., vol. 2012, 2012.

[11]
A. Ali Babar, T. Björninen, V. A. Bhagavati, L. Sydänheimo, P. 
Kallio, and L. Ukkonen, “Small and flexible metal mountable passive 
UHF RFID tag on high-dielectric polymer-ceramic composite 
substrate,” IEEE Antennas Wirel. Propag. Lett., vol. 11, pp. 1319–
1322, 2012.

[12]
D. Filonov, A. Shmidt, A. Boag, and P. Ginzburg, “Artificial 
localized magnon resonances in subwavelength meta-particles,” 
Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 113, no. 12, p. 123505, Sep. 2018.

[13]
D. Filonov, S. Kolen, A. Shmidt, Y. Shacham-Diamand, A. Boag, 
and P. Ginzburg, “Volumetric 3D-Printed Antennas, Manufactured 
via Selective Polymer Metallization,” Phys. status solidi - Rapid Res. 
Lett., Feb. 2019.

[14]
A. Petosa, Dielectric Resonator Antenna Handbook (Artech House 
Antennas and Propagation Library). Artech House Publishers, 2007.

[15]
M. T. Sebastian, R. Ubic, and H. Jantunen, “Low-loss dielectric 
ceramic materials and their properties,” Int. Mater. Rev., vol. 60, no. 
7, pp. 392–412, Oct. 2015.

[16]
R. F. Harrington, Time-Harmonic Electromagnetic Fields, 2nd ed. 
New York: Wiley-IEEE Press, 2001.

[17]
C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and scattering of light 
by small particles. Wiley, 1983.

[18]
Z. G. Gai, M. L. Zhao, W. Bin Su, C. L. Wang, J. Liu, and J. L. Zhang, 
“Influences of ScTa co-substitution on the properties of Ultra-high 
temperature 
Bi3TiNbO9-based 
piezoelectric 
ceramics,” 
J. 

Electroceramics, vol. 31, no. 1–2, pp. 143–147, Oct. 2013.

[19]
H. Wang et al., “Microwave dielectric relaxation in cubic bismuth 
based pyrochlores containing titanium,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 100, no. 
1, 2006.

[20]
Rao, K. V. S., Nikitin, P. V., & Lam, S. F. Antenna design for UHF 
RFID tags: A review and a practical application. IEEE Transactions 
on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 53, pp. 3870–3876, 2005.

[21]
S. S. Srikant and R. P. Mahapatra, “Read Range of UHF Passive 
RFID,” Int. J. Comput. Theory Eng., pp. 323–325, 2010.

[22]
P. V. Nikitin and K. V. S. Rao, “Theory and measurement of 
backscattering from RFID tags,” IEEE Antennas Propag. Mag., vol. 
48, no. 6, pp. 212–218, Dec. 2006.

[23]
J. C. Bolomey, S. Capdevila, L. Jofre, and J. Romeu, 
“Electromagnetic 
modeling 
of 
RFID-modulated 
scattering 

mechanism. Application to tag performance evaluation,” Proc. IEEE, 
vol. 98, no. 9, pp. 1555–1569, Sep. 2010.

[24]
F. K. Byondi and Y. Chung, “Longest-Range UHF RFID Sensor Tag 
Antenna for IoT Applied for Metal and Non-Metal Objects,” Sensors, 
vol. 19, no. 24, p. 5460, Dec. 2019.


