1

Full Text

Electric Field Control of Three-Dimensional Vortex States in Core-Shell 

Ferroelectric Nanoparticles

Anna N. Morozovska 1*, Eugene A. Eliseev2, Riccardo Hertel3†, Yevhen M. Fomichov4, Viktoriia 

Tulaidan5, Victor Yu. Reshetnyak5‡, and Dean R. Evans6§

1 Institute of Physics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 

46, pr. Nauky, 03028 Kyiv, Ukraine

2 Institute for Problems of Materials Science, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, 

Krjijanovskogo 3, 03142 Kyiv, Ukraine

3 Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, Institut de Physique et Chimie des Matériaux de Strasbourg, 

UMR 7504, 67000 Strasbourg, France

4 Charles University in Prague, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, 

V Holešovičkach 2, Prague 8, 180 00, Czech Republic

5 Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, Volodymyrska Street 64, Kyiv, 01601, Ukraine

6 Air Force Research Laboratory, Materials and Manufacturing Directorate, Wright-Patterson Air 

Force Base, Ohio, 45433, USA

*
Corresponding author 1: anna.n.morozovska@gmail.com

†
Corresponding author 2: riccardo.hertel@ipcms.unistra.fr

‡
Corresponding author 3: victor.reshetnyak@gmail.com

§
Corresponding author 4: dean.evans@us.af.mil


2

Abstract

The fundamental question whether the structure of curled topological states, such as ferroelectric vortices, can 

be controlled by the application of an irrotational electric field is open. In this work, we studied the influence 

of irrotational external electric fields on the formation, evolution, and relaxation of ferroelectric vortices in 

spherical nanoparticles. In the framework of the Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire approach coupled with 

electrostatic equations, we performed finite element modeling of the polarization behavior in a ferroelectric 

barium titanate core covered with a “tunable” paraelectric strontium titanate shell placed in a polymer or liquid 

medium. 

A stable two-dimensional vortex is formed in the core after a zero-field relaxation of an initial random 

or poly-domain distribution of the polarization, where the vortex axis is directed along one of the core 

crystallographic axes. Subsequently, sinusoidal pulses of a homogeneous electric field with variable period, 

strength, and direction are applied. The field-induced changes of the vortex structure consist in the appearance 

of an axial kernel in the form of a prolate nanodomain, the kernel growth, an increasing orientation of the

polarization along the field, and the onset of a single-domain state. We introduced the term "kernel" to name

the prolate nanodomain developed near the vortex axis and polarized perpendicular to the vortex plane. In 

ferromagnetism, this region is generally known as the vortex core. 

Unexpectedly, the in-field evolution of the polarization includes the formation of Bloch point 

structures, located at two diametrically opposite positions near the core surface. After removal of the electric 

field, the vortex recovers spontaneously; but its structure, axis orientation, and vorticity can be different from 

the initial state. As a rule, the final state is a stable three-dimensional polarization vortex with an axial dipolar 

kernel, which has a lower energy compared to the initial purely azimuthal vortex. The nature of this 

counterintuitive result is that the gradient energy of the axial vortex without a kernel is significantly higher, 

while the formation of a vortex kernel only leads to a smaller increase of the depolarization energy.

The analysis of the torque and electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle in an 

irrotational electric field showed that the torque acting on the vortex with a kernel tends to rotate the 

nanoparticle in such way that the vortex axis becomes parallel to the field direction. The vortex (with or without 

a kernel) is electrostatically neutral, and therefore the force acting on the nanoparticle is absent for a 

homogeneous electric field, and nonzero for the field with a strong spatial gradient.

The vortex states with a kernel possess a manifold degeneracy, appearing from three equiprobable 

directions of vortex axis, clockwise and counterclockwise directions of polarization rotation along the vortex 

axis, and two polarization directions in the kernel. This multitude of the vortex states in a single core are 

promising for applications of core-shell nanoparticles and their ensembles as multi-bit memory and related 

logic units. The rotation of a vortex kernel over a sphere, possible for the core-shell nanoparticles in a soft 

matter medium with controllable viscosity, may be used to imitate qubit features.

Keywords: core-shell nanoparticles, ferroelectric vortices, vortex kernel, irrotational electric field 


3

I. INTRODUCTION

Nanosized ferroelectrics attract permanent attention of researchers as unique model systems for 

fundamental studies of polar surface properties, various screening mechanisms of spontaneous 

polarization by free carriers, and often the emergence of versatile multi-domain states with complex 

topology of electric dipoles [1, 2, 3, 4]. Many experimental and theoretical researchers have tried to 

answer the question whether or not complex topological states, such as flux-closure domains or 

polarization vortices and skyrmions, can exist in bulk and nanosized ferroelectrics, and whether one 

can control these topological states by an external stimulus (see e.g. Refs. [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] and citations 

therein). 

It follows from many theoretical studies that a homogeneous electric field alone is practically 

incapable of controlling the vortex polarization of nanosized ferroelectrics, and that additional 

features are required, such as particle curvature or specific defects [10, 11]. In contrast, it has been 

shown theoretically that “curled” electric fields [12], or asymmetric mechanical fields [9, 13], which 

are very hard to realize experimentally, can induce a switching of the vortex polarization. 

However, there are several experimental studies on the behavior of vortex polarization in 

nanosized ferroelectrics under the application of an irrotational electric field [5, 14]. Specifically, 

Rodriguez et al. [15] studied two-dimensional arrays of ferroelectric lead zirconate titanate nanodots 

with the help of a strongly inhomogeneous electric field created by the probe of a piezoresponse force 

microscope (PFM), and observed the presence of a quasi-toroidal polarization ordering. Karpov et 

al. [16] used Bragg coherent diffractive imaging of a single BaTiO3 nanoparticle in a composite 

“polymer/ferroelectric” capacitor to study the behavior of a three-dimensional vortex. They revealed 

a mobile vortex kernel exhibiting a reversible hysteretic transformation path under the influence of 

an external electric field. 

A much greater number of studies is devoted to the phase-field modeling of polarization 

vortices in nanosized ferroelectrics and their reaction to an external stimulus using a continuum 

phenomenological Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) approach combined with electrostatic 

equations (see Ref. [17] and refs therein). For instance, Chen and Zheng [13] performed phase-field 

modeling of the evolution of vortex domain structures in ferroelectric nanodots under asymmetric 

elastic strains induced by the substrate, dislocations, and local clamping forces. They realized single-

vortex switching using a homogeneous electric field by controlling the flow direction of the dominant 

dipole region induced by asymmetric mechanical strains. Wu et al. [18] and Xiong et al. [19] 

demonstrated that surface charge screening in combination with temperature changes can provide an 

efficient way to gain control of a vortex domain structure in ferroelectric nanodots. Mangeri et al. 

[20] simulated the behavior of the polarization in isolated spherical PbTiO3 and BaTiO3 nanoparticles 


4

embedded in a dielectric matrix, and showed that the vortex-like polarization topology is strongly 

affected by the particle diameter, as well as by the choice of inclusion and matrix materials. Mangeri 

et al. [21] then proposed different ways for the electromechanical control of polarization vortex 

ordering in interacting ferroelectric-dielectric dimers. Pitike et al. [22] modeled ferroelectric 

nanoparticles and found that the critical particle sizes of the texture instabilities were strongly 

dependent on the particle shape, with octahedral particles undergoing transitions at much larger 

volumes, compared to cubic particles. Zhu et al. [23] modeled polar properties of ferroelectric 

nanoparticles with different shapes and sizes, and it was shown that the process of polarization 

switching occurs via an emergence of intermediate phases that involve an appreciable amount of 

vorticity. 

It should be underlined that the electric field control of a nanosized ferroelectric polarization 

is of particular interest due to its perspective applications in modern electrocaloric (EC) convertors 

working around phase transition temperatures [24, 25, 26]. Using an LGD approach and numerical 

modeling, Li et al. [27], Zeng et al. [28], and Wang et al. [29] calculated the EC properties of 

ferroelectric nanoparticles with complicated vortex-like domain structures. Chen and Fang [30] 

studied the EC effect in barium titanate nanoparticles with vortex polarization using a core–shell 

model. 

To the best of our knowledge, existing theoretical papers (cited above and many others) did 

not consider analytically the possibility of controlling the vortex polarization in nanosized 

ferroelectrics by irrotational electric fields, which can be easily created.

Motivated to fill this gap in knowledge, we simulate numerically and describe analytically the 

formation of polarization vortices in spherical nanoparticles consisting of a ferroelectric core covered 

with a paraelectric shell, and analyze the vortex behavior in irrotational electric fields. We calculate 

analytically the torque and the electrostatic force acting on the core-shell nanoparticle placed in a 

liquid (or viscous) cell in the presence of a homogeneous electric field or its spatial gradient. The 

controllability feature of the nanoparticle’s core polarization by the shell screening in combination 

with external irrotational electric fields looks very attractive for new applications, such as multi-bit 

memory, qubit simulation, and logic units.

The remainder of the paper has the following structure. The formulation of the problem is 

presented in Section II, which contains the method description and calculation details. Results of 

finite element modeling and their analytical description are presented in Section III, where special 

attention is paid to the evolution of the polarization under an applied voltage, the structure of the 

initial and final polarization states, and the polarization behavior in an external electric field. The 

torque and electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle placed in homogeneous and 

inhomogeneous (gradient) electric fields are analyzed in Section IV. Possible applications of core-


5

shell nanoparticles and their ensembles as multi-bit memory and related multi-value logic units, as 

well as speculations about their ability to imitate qubit features at room temperature are discussed in 

Section V. Obtained results are summarized in Section VI.

II. FORMULATION OF THE PROBLEM

A. Method. We use the LGD approach combined with electrostatic equations, because this allows us 

to establish the physical origin of anomalies in the phase diagrams, to determine polar and dielectric 

properties of ferroelectric nanoparticles [31, 32], and to calculate the changes of their domain 

structure morphology with size reduction [33, 34]. The LGD methodology further allows the 

incorporation of various physical mechanisms ruling the size effects, such as surface bond contraction 

[35, 36], intrinsic surface stresses and strains [37, 38, 39], correlation effects, and depolarization fields 

originating from the incomplete screening of the polarization [40]. 

We performed finite element modeling (FEM) of the polarization and electric field evolution 

in a 10 nm barium titanate (BaTiO3) nanoparticle covered with a 4 nm thick “tunable” strontium 

titanate (SrTiO3) shell with a ultra-high temperature-dependent relative dielectric permittivity 

S ~ (3000 – 300), which is placed in a polymer or liquid medium with a relative dielectric permittivity 

e~10. The main role of the paraelectric shell is to provide an effective tunable screening of the core 

polarization [41]. The core size is typical of experimental values [42, 43, 44, 45]. 

The mathematical formulation of the problem, consisting in the electrostatic equations and 

time-dependent LGD equations with boundary conditions, is given in detail in Ref. [41], and it is 

repeated in Appendix A allowing for the application of a voltage to the capacitor electrodes located 

at the boundaries of the computational region. Parameters of the core and shell materials used in FEM 

are provided in Table AI. The sizes and screening conditions are chosen in such a way that the 

nanoparticle core is in a stable orthorhombic ferroelectric phase with a vortex polarization in the 

absence of an external electric field. The vortex polarization exists over a wide temperature range 

(250 – 350) K [41]. 

B. Calculation details. The simulated model system is shown in Fig. 1(a). The upper 

electrode can be biased and the bottom electrode is grounded. These two electrodes can rotate around 

the core-shell nanoparticle, remaining parallel to each other, as shown in Fig. 1(b). During the 

rotation, the crystallographic axes {x, y, z} of the particle core obviously remain unchanged, but the 

surrounding medium rotates around the particle. This rotation is characterized by angles  and 

(taken in a spherical coordinate system). The size of the upper electrode is varied to model the 

inhomogeneous electric field [see Fig. 1(c)]. Note that a strong field gradient was used in experiments 

on nanoparticle harvesting [46, 47] and PFM studies [15]. 


6

FIGURE 1. (a) A spherical ferroelectric nanoparticle (core) of radius R, covered with a paraelectric layer 

(shell) of thickness R, placed in an isotropic dielectric effective medium. (b) Rotating electrodes around the 

core-shell nanoparticle. The crystallographic axes {x, y, z} of the particle core remain unchanged during the 

rotation characterized by angles  and , taken in a spherical coordinate system. (c) The size of the top 

electrode is varied, allowing for the modelling of inhomogeneous electric fields in the computational region.

Hence, FEM was carried out according to the following scheme:

1. The position of the electrodes is defined by the angles  and .

2. The voltage between the electrodes is absent in the time interval −500 K to 0 K (see Figs. 2, left 

part), where the time is measured in units of the Landau-Khalatnikov relaxation time K [48]. The 

time K can vary in a relatively wide interval, from (10-9 − 10-6) seconds, far from the ferroelectric 

phase transition, to much higher values approaching the transition that corresponds to the critical 

slowing down of the ferroelectric response. The time 500 K appeared to be long enough for the 

formation of a stable single vortex from the initial random distribution of polarization. So, the 

characteristic time scale of “off-field relaxation” is of the order of ~ 100 K.

3. A quasi-static sinusoidal voltage pulse with an amplitude of 20 V is applied during different 

periods. Figure 2 shows a comparison between the two cases of sinusoidal pulses with different 

periods Tp. The results show that the particle polarization is in a dynamic regime at 𝑇𝑝 = 103 𝜏𝐾

[Fig. 2(a), middle part], where changes in the polarization structure lag behind the applied field, and

changes in the polarization approach the quasi-static regime at 𝑇𝑝 = 104 𝜏𝐾T [Fig. 2(b), middle part]. 

Note that the times (10 − 100)𝜏𝐾 appear to be long enough for the system’s relaxation in the electric 

field, and that the “in-field” relaxation time reduces with increasing voltage. Voltages below a certain 

critical value do not destroy the vortices, indicating the stability of these structures. Note that the 

relaxation time is weakly dependent on the orientation of the external field with respect to the 

crystallographic axes.


7

4. The field is absent again for 𝑡 > 𝑇𝑝, and the system slowly relaxes to a new equilibrium state in 

the time interval 𝑇𝑝 < 𝑡 < 2𝑇𝑝, which corresponds to a rotated and distorted vortex (see Figs. 2, right 

part). Note that the contrast in the images on the upper right indicates the appearance of a nonzero 

dipole moment at zero field. This dipole moment, which originates from the vortex kernel, can

provide a means to manipulate the vortex orientation by an external field, as discussed in more detail 

later.

5. The size of the top electrode is varied to model the inhomogeneous electric field.

FIGURE 2. Evolution of the applied voltage U and electric potential  in the region of the core-shell 

nanoparticle. Color images show characteristic distributions of the electric potential  inside and around the 

nanoparticle at different times in the units of Landau-Khalatnikov relaxation time 𝜏𝐾. (a) The vortex axis 


8

coincides with the crystallographic direction [001] before the voltage pulse, while its axis is oriented along the 

[100] direction long after the pulse ending. The amplitude of the applied sinusoidal voltage pulse is 20 V, 

the pulse duration is 103𝜏𝐾 (a) and 104𝜏𝐾 (b). The direction of the external field is [101] (a) and [100] (b), 

which corresponds to the angles  = 0o,  = 45o (a) and  = 0o (b). Particle radius R = 10 nm, shell thickness 

R = 4 nm, and temperature T=298 K; BaTiO3 core and SrTiO3 shell parameters are listed in Table AI.

III. FEM RESULTS AND THEIR ANALYTICAL DESCRIPTION

It is shown [41] that the vortex polarization in spherical nanoparticles with radius 10 nm or 

greater is stable over a wide temperature range (250 – 350) K. Our FEM simulations have shown that 

a stable vortex is formed from various initial distributions of polarization (using either random 

“seeding”, or different poly-domain initial conditions). The vortex axis is directed along one of the 

crystallographic axes, since the ferroelectric anisotropy energy of the core is minimal for these 

directions. After the vortex formation, an external electric field is applied to the nanoparticle, and its 

strength and direction with respect to the vortex axis are varied. We investigate whether the vortex 

polarization of a nanoparticle can be controlled by irrotational (homogeneous or gradient-type) 

electric fields. BaTiO3 core and SrTiO3 shell LGD parameters, collected from Refs. [49, 50, 51, 52, 

53, 54], are listed in Table AI, Appendix A. 

Our simulations demonstrate that the minimal external field required to change the vortex 

structure is about (15 – 30) mV/nm in a quasi-static case (𝑇𝑝 > 104𝜏𝐾). The fields must exceed the 

maximal depolarization electric field, that is about 15 mV/nm in the equilibrium state. Significantly 

higher fields ~ (100 – 150) mV/nm, which are still smaller than the thermodynamic coercive field ~ 

250 mV/nm, are required to rotate the polarization vortex axis, or to destroy the vortex completely. 

The discrepancy between the calculated thermodynamic coercive field (~ 250 mV/nm) and the 

experimentally observed coercive field of bulk BaTiO3 (~ 0.1 mV/nm) may originate from the 

influence of intrinsic charged defects, which we do not consider. All of these fields are significantly 

smaller than the breakdown field of a surrounding liquid medium or polymer ~ (500 – 700) mV/nm 

[55].

A. Evolution of the Polarization Under an Applied Voltage

Figure 3 shows a typical example of the polarization components’ evolution under a 

sinusoidal pulse of an applied voltage with a duration of 103 𝜏𝐾. The yz and xy cross-sections 

correspond to various snapshots taken at different delay times after the application of the external 

field, measured in 𝜏𝐾 units. A stable single vortex state with energy G1− 8.96710-18 J is formed 

from any type of polydomain (or random) polarization distribution at t = 0, but the formation time 

significantly depends on its specific form. It is greatest for a small random distribution (more than 


9

200 𝜏𝐾), and becomes considerably smaller for a closure-type polydomain polarization. It appears 

that the fastest formation of a vortex (about 20 𝜏𝐾) occurs when the initial configuration of the 

polarization is a superposition of the four Kittel-type flux-closure domains and a small random 

polarization (it is shown in Fig. 3 for t=0).

FIGURE 3. Temporal evolution of the polarization components’ distribution in the yz and xy cross-sections 

of the BaTiO3 nanoparticle covered with a SrTiO3 shell. Several moments of dimensionless time t (in the units 

of 𝜏𝐾) are shown in plots (a) − (h). Black arrows indicate polarization direction. The direction of the external 

field is [100]. The vortex axis coincides with the crystallographic direction [001] before the voltage pulse, and

is aligned with the [100] direction long after the voltage removal. The sinusoidal pulse duration is 103 𝜏𝐾. 

Other parameters are the same as in Fig. 2(a).

We chose a situation where the vortex axis coincides with the [001] crystallographic direction 

before applying the voltage pulse, at t<0. The sinusoidal voltage pulse is shown in Fig. 2(a). After 


10

the voltage is applied at t>0, the electrode position is defined by the angles  = 90o and  = 0o, which 

corresponds to an external field directed along the [100] crystallographic axis. The vortex in-field 

behavior can be described as follows: while the voltage amplitude remained below a critical value, 

only slight and gradual changes occur, but as the voltage increases it eventually destroys the vortex 

resulting in a homogeneously polarized state for sufficiently high voltages. Then, the homogeneous 

state splits into a double vortex state as the voltage sign changes. After the voltage is removed, the 

polarization relaxation leads to the formation of a new single vortex with a lower energy 

G0− 8.97810-18 J and a rotated axis that coincides with the field direction [100]. The fully relaxed 

vortex structure contains a "kernel", that resembles a nanodomain in the form of the prolate ellipsoid 

of width 6.4 nm and length 20 nm, with an almost homogeneous polarization along the vortex axis

[see two top images in Fig. 3(h)]. This ellipsoidal nanodomain in the center of the ferroelectric vortex 

has a shape that is similar to the characteristic vortex kernel (or core), which appears in the case of 

ferromagnetic three-dimensional vortex structures (see, e.g., chapter 3.6. of textbook [56] and Ref. 

[57]). The prolate shape of the vortex kernel, known from ferromagnetic vortices, is due to 

electrostatic reasons. By decreasing the radius of the kernel near the surface, the system reduces the 

amount of electrostatic surface charges 𝑃𝑛, and thereby lowers the dipole moment and depolarization 

energy. Note, that we use the term "kernel" to describe the region of the vortex near its axis that is 

polarized perpendicular to the vortex plane. In ferromagnetism, this region is generally known as the 

vortex "core" [58, 59]. We use "kernel" in this paper in order to avoid ambiguities in the general 

context of core-shell particles.

When the electric field is directed, e.g., along the [111] axis, the “relaxed” vortex axis can lie 

along any of three possible directions ([001], [010] or the initial [100]), depending on the 

computational fluctuations. Thus, there are three equilibrium directions of the vortex axis, between 

which the vortex can be switched via the application and subsequent removal of an external electric 

field. Each direction and each vortex circulation direction (clockwise or anti-clockwise) has three 

local minima, namely a simple vortex (excited state “0”) and two vortex states with a kernel having 

mutually opposite polarization (ground states “1”). Actually, for any given sense of rotation 

(vorticity), the state “1” is two-fold degenerate, as there are two equivalent states that differ by the 

sign of the polarization within the kernel. These types of the lowest states “0” and “1” have a 

relatively small energy difference G+ 1.210-20 J, corresponding to the barrier height 2.9 𝑘𝐵𝑇 at 

298 K and a relative energy difference of only about 0.1%. The formation of the state “1” with a 

kernel can be attributed to a significant reduction of the gradient energy contribution, since an empty 

vortex axis has a higher density of gradient energy near the central axis in the state “0”. The density 

becomes significantly smaller in the states “1”, when the "empty" region surrounding the vortex 


11

axis transforms into a prolate nanodomain. On the other hand, the kernel formation leads to an 

increase of the depolarization field energy. The difference in the free energies of the states “0” and 

“1” suggests that, for this specific sample, the decrease of gradient energy of the almost 

homogeneously polarized kernel is partially compensated by the increase of depolarization energy 

that arises from the kernel dipole moment.

Given the relative proximity of the simple vortex energy G1 and the energy G0 of a vortex 

with a kernel, the polarization of a nanoparticle core can pass from one local minimum to another 

under certain external conditions. By placing a particle with a simple vortex polarization in an 

external electric field, which has a nonzero average over the particle volume, it turns a simple vortex 

into a vortex with a kernel regardless of the field direction, as can be seen from Fig. 3. The magnitude 

of the field may be small, but it is sufficient to overcome the thermodynamic barrier Δ𝐺/𝑘𝐵𝑇. The 

nanoparticle core becomes completely or partially single-domain in larger fields with a nonzero 

average. 

In view of this result, we can expect that a simple vortex state “0” is a metastable state, i.e. 

that it represents an energetic local minimum. This raises the question whether the state “0” might be 

an unstable minimum, i.e. a saddle point, which is only formed in perfectly random (or polydomain) 

conditions of the simulation. A saddle point could become unstable by applying an arbitrarily small 

field, breaking the symmetry along the axis. However, we repeatedly found in our simulations that a 

simple vortex is formed spontaneously (at Eext=0) from any small random distribution of polarization, 

which has a certain (but rather small) degree of asymmetry [41]. These trial simulations thus indicate 

that state “0” is a real local minimum. We also found that in the simulations it is possible to transform 

a vortex with an axial kernel into a simple vortex. This, however, requires the application of a random 

electric field, which has a zero average over the particle volume and an amplitude that is sufficient to 

overcome the barrier.

The polarization of a two-fold degenerate kernel state and its quasi-static evolution at small 

voltages are shown in Fig. 4. Polarization profiles are calculated for a long period voltage pulse, 𝑇𝑝 =

104𝜏𝐾. Two perpendicular line scans, 𝑥 = 𝑦 = 0 and 𝑦 = 𝑧 = 0 , are shown for several small 

voltages: 𝑈 ≥ 0 in Figs. 4(a, b) correspond to the upper part of the pulse in Fig. 2(b), and U≤0 in 

Figs. 4(c, b) correspond to the lower part of the pulse in Fig. 2(b). Symbols are the FEM results. 

Solid black curves were calculated for 𝑈 = 0 using the analytical dependence 𝑃1(𝑥, 𝑦 = 0, 𝑧) = 𝑃0 +

𝑃𝑑tanh (√

𝑥2

𝑅𝑥2 +

𝑧2

𝑅𝑧2 + 𝑑2 − 𝐿𝑑)
with parameters Rx = 1.5 nm, Rz = 0.8 nm, d = 1.5,
Ld = 2.5, 

P0 = −0.105 C/m2, and Pd = 0.160 C/m2 [for Fig. 4(a,b)], or P0 = +0.105 C/m2 and Pd = −0.160 C/m2

[for Fig. 4(c,d)].


12

FIGURE 4. Polarization profiles calculated at several small voltages U for two perpendicular line scans, 𝑥 =

𝑦 = 0 (a, c) and 𝑦 = 𝑧 = 0 (b,d). Plots (a, b) correspond to 𝑈 ≥ 0 [upper part of the voltage pulse in 

Fig. 2(b)], and plots (c, d) correspond to 𝑈 ≤ 0 [lower part of the voltage pulse in Fig. 2(b)]. Symbols are the 

FEM data. Solid black curves are analytical dependences listed in the text. The voltage cycle period is 104𝜏𝐾.

We calculated that the average spontaneous polarization of the nanoparticle is 0.11 µC/cm2; 

and it is pointed along the prolate part of the kernel at 𝑈 = 0 (see color insets in Fig. 4, showing 

“blue” or “red” prolate ellipsoids inside a “green” region). At the same time, one can see the highly 

polarized kernel with a total dipole moment ±4.11 × 10−26 C m and average polarization ±6.58

µC/cm2, and the rest of the core with the total dipole moment ∓3.66 × 10−26 C m and average 

polarization ∓1.03 µC/cm2. A much smaller resulting polarization stems from the high compensation 

degree of the small kernel (15% of the ferroelectric core volume) with high positive (or negative) 

polarization in the region of small negative (or positive) polarization, whose relative volume is about 

85 %.


13

Note that the switching between the two-fold degenerate ground vortex states “1” and the 

excited vortex state “0” can be realized by external electric fields in an ensemble of non-interacting 

ferroelectric nanoparticles placed in a liquid or polymer matrix.

Our results indicate that the internal kernel structure of three-dimensional vortices is a general 

feature of nanoscale ferroelectric vortices that has so far not been thoroughly addressed. This is further 

corroborated by results reported by Mangeri et al. [21] and Pitike et al. [22], who found similar 

polarization structures in simulations of nanoparticles of other shapes, although the physical origin, 

energy stability, formation, and in-field and off-field evolution of the ferroelectric vortex with the 

kernel have not been discussed there. Our findings also correlate nicely with the well-known existence 

of analogous core structures in ferromagnetic vortices. 

B. Structure of Initial and Final Polarization States

A typical distribution of polarization components and their derivatives before the voltage 

pulse is initially applied and the final state formed a long time ( 104𝜏𝐾) after the voltage pulse are 

shown in Figs. 5(a)-(d). The vortex axis coincides with the crystallographic direction [001] prior to 

the voltage pulse. The direction of external field pulse is [100]. It is seen from Figs. 5(a)-(b) that the 

zero-field (before the pulse) and off-field (relaxed after the pulse) vortex states “0” and “1” have 

different axes and internal structures. 

The vortex axis coincides with the crystallographic direction [001] prior to the voltage pulse

(state “0”) [see Fig. 5(a)], and its polarization structure is a single curl with a weak fourfold polar 

anisotropy manifesting itself as the 4 lighter and 4 darker lobes corresponding to the azimuthal angles 

𝜓 = 𝑚 𝜋 8
⁄ + 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(n and m are integers). The polar anisotropy is inherent to a tetragonal 4mm 

phase of a bulk BaTiO3 at room temperature. The polarization derivatives satisfy the equality 

𝜕𝑃1 𝜕𝑥
⁄
= −𝜕𝑃2 𝜕𝑦
⁄
, such that its total divergence div P is zero [Fig. 5(c)]. Since div P=0 in the state 

“0”, the resulting bound charge is absent at the spherical surface in accordance with Gauss’ theorem, 

𝜎 = ∫ (𝑷𝑑𝒔)
𝑆
= ∫ div𝑷𝑑3𝑟
𝑉
= 0. Next, we checked that the resulting dipolar moment ∫ 𝑷𝑑3𝑟
𝑉
is also 

zero in the state “0”.

The domain structure of a ferroelectric core and polarization relaxation in the states “1” have 

some distinct features [see Fig. 5(b)]. In addition to the vortex part of the polarization itself lying in 

the plane of the vortex (“simple” vortex), there is a polarization outside this plane localized in an 

ellipsoidal region elongated along an axis perpendicular to the plane of the vortex. The region looks 

like a 180-degree prolate “axial nanodomain” directed along the vortex axis [001]. The azimuthal 

vortex polarization in this nanodomain is absent. It can be seen from Fig. 5(b) that the nanodomain 

has a dipole moment. The dipolar character of the kernel is further evidenced by the potential 

difference at the opposite ends of the kernel, displayed in the panel on the upper right of Fig. 2. The 


14

external dipole moment of the kernel is reduced by a partial alignment of the polarization in the 

nanoparticle along the field of this dipole in regions outside the kernel. This dipole moment of the 

vortex kernel and its coupling to the azimuthal polarization vortex is an important feature that allows 

for the manipulation of the vortex axis with a homogeneous external field. There are sub-surface 

regions near the poles of the axial kernel with nonzero div P, which are exactly the oppositely charged 

regions of the aforementioned dipole [see Fig. 5(d)]. It is seen from Figs. 2 that the vortex states “1” 

with a dipolar kernel have a non-zero dipolar moment.


15

FIGURE 5. A typical distribution of polarization components (a, b) and their derivatives (c, d) calculated by 

FEM before the voltage pulse application (a, c), and 104𝜏𝐾 after the pulse (b, d). The vortex axis coincides 

with the crystallographic direction [001] before the voltage pulse; while its axis coincides with the [100] 

direction after the pulse and polarization relaxation. The direction of external field pulse is [100]. The radial 

dependences of the polarization components in spherical coordinates are shown before the pulse in plots (e-f), 

and after the pulse and system relaxation in plots (g-i). Angle 𝜃 = 𝜋 2
⁄
for plots (e)-(i), and the symbols of 

different colors are calculated by FEM for the angles 𝜓 = 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(red), 𝜋 8
⁄ + 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(blue), 𝜋 4
⁄ + 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄

(magenta), and 3 𝜋 8
⁄ + 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(green). The solid black curves are calculated from Eqs.(2). Other parameters 

are the same as in Fig. 2.

Allowing for the spherical geometry of the nanoparticle, it appears convenient to calculate 

and analyze the polarization components in spherical coordinates {𝑟, 𝜃, 𝜓}. The radial distributions 

of the vortex polarization components before the pulse are shown in Figs. 5(e-f), and the components 

after the pulse removal and subsequent relaxation are shown in Figs. 5(g-i). The polar angle 𝜃 = 𝜋 2
⁄

for plots (e)-(i), and the symbols of different colors, calculated by FEM, correspond to characteristic 

azimuthal angles 𝜓 = 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(red), 𝜋 8
⁄ + 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(blue), 𝜋 4
⁄ + 𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(magenta), and 3 𝜋 8
⁄ +

𝑛 𝜋 2
⁄
(green).

To fit the FEM dependencies shown in Fig. 5(e)-(i) let us consider the distribution of the 

polarization describing the vortex structure in spherical coordinates, 

𝑷 = {𝑃𝑟, 𝑃𝜃, 𝑃𝜓}. 
(1)

Using the argumentation presented in Appendix B, we have “guessed” the following trial functions:

𝑃𝛼(𝑟, 𝜓, 𝜃) = ∑
𝑎𝑖(𝜓, 𝜃)tanh (

𝑟−𝑏𝑖(𝜓,𝜃)

𝑅𝑖(𝜓,𝜃) )
3
𝑖=1
,
𝛼 = 𝑟, 𝜓, 𝜃. 
(2)

For the initial state “0”, that is a single vortex without a kernel, the fitting parameters are listed 

in Table BI, Appendix B. Solid curves in Figs. 5(e)-(f) are calculated analytically from Eq. (2) using 

these parameters. For a final state “1”, that is a vortex with an axial kernel, the fitting parameters 

are listed in Table BII, Appendix B. The solid curves in Figs. 5(g)-(i) are calculated analytically 

from Eq.(2). Note that the polar component 𝑃𝜃(𝑟, 𝜓, 𝜃) is nonzero for the vortex with an axial kernel. 

The radial component 𝑃𝑟(𝑟, 𝜓, 𝜃) acquires zero values for several angles 𝜓 = 𝑛𝜋 4
⁄
defined by 

ferroelectric anisotropy for both vortex states “0” and “1”.

Since the solid curves in Figs. 5(e)-(i) are in a good agreement with the data (symbols) 

calculated by FEM, we can conclude that the trial functions (2) adequately describe the polarization 

profiles. Let us analyze the functional form (2), and discuss the meaning of the fitting parameters. 

The functions have a rather simple physical interpretation of kink-type profiles, inherent to the diffuse 

Bloch-Ising type domain walls, which are typical for multiaxial ferroelectrics [60]. Fitting parameters 

𝑎𝑖(𝜓, 𝜃) and 𝑏𝑖(𝜓, 𝜃) are angle-dependent amplitudes and shifts, respectively. The fitting parameters 


16

𝑅𝑖(𝜓, 𝜃) describe the domain wall width and depend on the wall orientation. Note that 𝑃𝑟 ≪ 𝑃𝜓 as 

anticipated for a single vortex-like state in an anisotropic ferroelectric, since for an isotropic vortex 

𝑃𝑟 = 𝑃𝜃 = 0 and 𝑃𝜓 depends only on the distance r from the particle center. 

C. Three-dimensional vortices and Bloch Point Structures: Comparison with 

Ferromagnets

Analytical expressions (2) are interpolation trial functions, which are selected from general 

considerations, but not derived. Unfortunately, we are not aware of any analytical model for the 

structure and dynamics of a ferroelectric or ferromagnetic vortex in nanospheres. At the same time, 

micromagnetic simulations of vortex structures in ferromagnetic nanodisks [57, 61], mesoscopic 

islands [62], prisms [63], ellipsoids [64], and magnetic thin films [65] have been previously 

performed under an external field. These magnetic vortices result from the tendency of the 

magnetization to form flux-closure patterns, which are frequently found in confined mesoscopic 

ferromagnets. A typical vortex structure is characterized by the circulation of the in-plane 

magnetization around a nanometer-sized kernel, whose radius is determined by the competition 

between the magnetostatic and exchange energies. The functional form of the vortex kernel profile is 

analyzed in Ref. [66] for different models. At the vortex center, the magnetization rotates out of plane 

as a result of the exchange interaction, forming an extremely stable structure [67]. The simplest 

example of a vortex structure occurs in cylindrical-shaped nanomagnets [57, 61] above the single-

domain limit [68]. 

Although the situation in a nanosphere is quite different from that in a cylinder or thin film, it 

seems possible to extend the above conclusions made for magnetic vortices to ferroelectric

nanospheres and underline some important differences between ferromagnetic and ferroelectric 

vortices. The first important difference is that in contrast to the ferroelectric vortices discussed above, 

the kernel of ferromagnetic vortices is an integral part of the vortex structure, whose existence is 

enforced by topology. In a ferromagnetic vortex, the kernel is a consequence of both the smoothness 

of the magnetization field M in ferromagnets, which is due to the dominant ferromagnetic exchange 

on short length scales, and the nonlinear constraint |M| = const., which means that M is a directional 

field of constant magnitude. In contrast to this, the polarizability of ferroelectric materials makes it 

possible to have low-dimensional regions representing topological defects, such as Ising-type domain 

walls where the polarization vanishes on the central plane between two oppositely polarized domains. 

The only case where such topological defects may occur in homogeneous ferromagnetic materials is 

the specific three-dimensional structures known as Bloch point structures (BPS), which are typically 

formed at the center of special types of magnetic vortices. For these structures, the transition between 

oppositely magnetized regions cannot proceed continuously [69, 70], leading to a point with 


17

vanishing magnetization, M=0. The simplest topological configuration of the Bloch point has the 

form 𝐌 = ∓𝑀𝒆𝑟. 

For a ferroelectric vortex state “0” we calculated that 𝐏 = 𝑃𝒆𝑟 around its axis z [see Eqs.(2) 

and Fig. 5(f) at U = 0]. Thus, formally we can interpret the line 𝑥 = 𝑦 = 0 in this state as an “Ising 

line” inside the vortex [71], because the “line” is an analogue of a diffuse Bloch-Ising type domain 

wall inherent to ferroelectrics [60]. BPSs appear when a vortex interacts with an external field and 

transforms into the state “1” with a field-induced kernel. Typical BPSs with two diametrically 

opposite Bloch-points (P = 0) located at the core surface are shown in Fig. 6 for the voltage U = −1.38 

V.

FIGURE 6. Determination of a Bloch point structure (BPS) position. (a) The intersection points (denoted with

a white cross) of the polarization components’ iso-surfaces, P1 = 0 (red), P2 = 0 (magenta), and P3 = 0 (blue), 

show the position of two diametrically opposite Bloch-points (P=0) located near the core surface. Cross-

sections z = 0 (b) and y = 0 (c) of the nanoparticle polarization with Bloch points (denoted with a cross) for 

three components of the polarization, P1 (left column), P2 (middle column), and P3 (right column). Parameters: 

voltage amplitude U = −1.38 V and period 103K. Small black arrows indicate the direction of polarization in 

plots (b)-(c). Other parameters are the same as in Fig. 2(a).

To the best of our knowledge, the BPS are new topological structures in ferroelectrics.  

Remarkably, our results evidence a close analogy with micromagnetism concerning the BPS, because 

there, too, they typically appear during switching processes. In magnetism, this was discovered more 

than 40 years ago by Arrott et al. [72], where the BPS were called "point singularities". It is worth 

noting that the Bloch points propagate from both sides of the sample during a ferromagnetic or 


18

ferroelectric switching process. This results in the temporary formation of an isolated, non-reversed 

region inside the ferromagnet called a "drop" by Hertel and Kirschner [73], or in the formation of the 

ferroelectric kernel in the considered case. These observations allow us to conclude that there are 

important similarities between magnetic BPS and the polarization BPS that we calculated in the

ferroelectric spherical nanoparticle.

D. Polarization Response to a Periodic Electric Field

The dependencies of the polarization P averaged over the core volume, with a periodic voltage 

𝑈𝑠𝑖𝑛 (

2𝜋𝑡
𝑇𝑝 ) applied between the electrodes, were studied for different periods Tp and directions of the 

nanoparticle core crystallographic axes. The homogeneous electric field Eext is perpendicular to the 

electrodes [see Fig. 1(b)]. The FEM simulation showed that a small dipolar kernel surrounded by a 

curling part of the polarization can be formed at rather small voltages (~15 mV) during the first period 

of the electric field application. The induced polarization is parallel to the field, PEext, and 

increases withan increase of Eext. The first cycle with a transient process of the initial vortex 

destruction or reorientation is not shown in the Figs. 6-8.

The quasi-static dependence P(U), shown in Fig. 7, was calculated for Tp = 104K and Eext

parallel to one of the crystallographic directions [100], [010], or [001]. The initial vortex axis 

coincides with the direction [001], and the angle between the direction [001] and Eext influences the 

polarization during the first cycle of electric field. After the first cycle, P(U) becomes the same for 

Eext parallel to the direction [100], [010], or [001]. 

The quasi-static behavior of the polarization dependence P(U), shown in Fig. 7, can be 

explained as follows. The spontaneous polarization is conditioned by the small average polarization 

of the kernel, 𝑃(0) = ±𝑃𝑘 (see zoomed inset to Fig. 7). The value of the field-induced polarization 

𝑃(𝑈) is linearly proportional to the applied voltage at |𝑈| < 𝑈𝑐𝑟, where the critical voltage 𝑈𝑐𝑟 ≈

7 V, and the internal structure of the vortex polarization continuously changes at |𝑈| < 𝑈𝑐𝑟. To 

illustrate the effect, color images show the polarization distribution at positive and negative voltages 

U. The images’ location corresponds to the counterclockwise direction along the loop. 


19

FIGURE 7. Quasi-static hysteresis loop of the average polarization P(U) for several directions of the external 

field Eext[100], [101], and [001]. The spontaneous polarization conditioned by the dipolar kernel is shown 

in the inset. Small color images show polarization distributions at different voltages U; the values are indicated 

next to each image. Polarization cross-sections, shown in the images, are parallel to Eext. Small black arrows 

indicate the direction of polarization in color images. The period of the applied voltage Tp= 104K and other 

parameters are the same as in Fig. 2(b).

Since 𝑃(𝑈) = ±𝑃𝑘 + 𝐴𝑈 at |𝑈| < 𝑈𝑐𝑟, the average polarization is linearly proportional to the 

effective electric field 𝐸𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝑈) inside the particle core:

𝑃(𝑈) = ±𝑃𝑘 + 𝜀0𝜒𝑒𝑓𝑓𝐸𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝑈),                                   (3a)

where ±𝑃𝑘 is the small spontaneous polarization of the kernel, 𝜀0 is the universal dielectric constant,

and 𝜒𝑒𝑓𝑓 is the effective linear dielectric susceptibility of the ferroelectric core. The kernel 

polarization is bi-stable, because it can be positive or negative depending on the field gradient 

(increase or decrease). The effective field 𝐸𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝑈) can be estimated from the expression,

𝐸𝑒𝑓𝑓(𝑈) = 9𝜀𝑒𝜀𝑠𝜂(𝜀𝑓)𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝑈),        𝜂(𝜀) =

(1+𝛥)3

2(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀)+(1+𝛥)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀+2𝜀𝑠).      (3b)


20

Thus 𝐸𝑒𝑓𝑓 is proportional to an external field 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝑈) multiplied by a depolarization factor 𝜂(𝜀𝑓). 

The factor depends on the relative thickness of the shell, 𝛥 =

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 ; 𝜀𝑓, 𝜀𝑆, and 𝜀𝑒 are the ferroelectric 

core, paraelectric shell, and surrounding media permittivities, respectively. Equation (3b) is derived 

in Appendix C (section C.2.1).

The value 𝜒𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≈ 360 was estimated from the curve slope in Fig. 7 using the relationship 

𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡 ≈

𝑈

2(𝑅+∆𝑅). Note, the value is essentially higher than the relative susceptibility 𝜒11

𝐵𝑇𝑂 ≈

(110 − 170) of a bulk BaTiO3 in the polar direction [001], and much smaller than 𝜒11

𝐵𝑇𝑂 ≈ 4000 in 

the perpendicular direction [100] at 298 K. The value 𝜒𝑒𝑓𝑓, being surprisingly close to the permittivity 

𝜀𝑠 ≈ 300 of a paraelectric SrTiO3 shell, can indicate the appearance of super-paraelectric features in 

small core-shell ferroelectric nanoparticles.

As the voltage overcomes the critical value of the vortex destruction, the curling part of the 

polarization disappears and the ferroelectric core becomes single-domain. In the considered case, 

𝑈𝑐𝑟1 = 7 V corresponds to the first quasi-static critical field along the main crystallographic 

directions. At 𝑈 > 𝑈𝑐𝑟1 the core remains single-domain up to the maximal voltage (20 V in the 

considered case). Next, when the voltage is reduced to the next critical value 𝑈𝑐𝑟2 = 12 V 

corresponding to the second quasi-static critical field along the direction [001], the polarization 

becomes curled again, but the vortex does not appear immediately. At first the domains with 

polarization modulated in the plane perpendicular to the field axis appear. These two different critical 

fields determine the quasi-static double hysteresis loop 𝑃(𝑈) shown in Fig. 7.

The dynamics of the average polarization, 𝑃(𝑈), shown in Fig. 8, is calculated for Eext parallel 

to: one of the crystallographic direction [100], [010], or [001] [see plot (a)], one of the face diagonal 

[101], [101] or [101] [see plot (b)], or the main diagonal [111] of the cubic cell [see plot (c)]. The 

initial vortex axis coincides with the crystallographic direction [001].

Dash-dotted green, black solid, red dashed, and blue dotted curves correspond to the relatively 

long (Tp = 104K), intermediate (Tp = 103K), short (Tp = 30K), and ultra-short (Tp = 3K) periods of 

the applied voltage, respectively. At U = 0, the case of the fast cycling (blue dotted and red dashed 

curves) shows evident remanence, while the slower cycling (dash-dotted green and black solid lines) 

corresponds to much smaller remanence, visible only in the inset to Fig. 7. A non-zero remanence is 

an inherent feature of the vortex kernel. We attribute the reduction of the remanence at slower cycles 

to a comparatively slow relaxation of the larger vortex region surrounding the kernel, such as to 

partially align the vortex polarization with the depolarization field of the kernel, i.e. in a direction 

opposite to the kernel polarization. Actually, the color images in Fig. 8(a), which show polarization 

distributions calculated for Tp= 103K at different voltages U, are very different from the images in 

Fig. 7, calculated for Tp= 104K.


21

FIGURE 8. Hysteresis loops of the average polarization P(U) calculated for several directions of an external 

field Eext[100] (a), Eext [101] (b), and Eext[111] (c). Dash-dotted green, black solid, red dashed, and 

blue dotted curves correspond to different periods Tp= (104 – 3)K of the applied voltage U. Color images in 


22

plot (a) show polarization distributions calculated for Tp= 103K at different voltages U, which are indicated 

next to each image. Small black arrows indicate the direction of polarization in the color images. Other 

parameters are the same as in Fig. 2(a).

It is seen that the polarization P(U) induced by the electric field with a period Tp = (104 –

103)K is quasi-linear in the region |𝑈| < 5𝑉 [see green dash-dotted and black solid curves in 

Fig. 8(a)]. The linear part is followed by either a change of the slope for Eext[111], or by the 

appearance of rather narrow minor loops at 5𝑉 < |𝑈| < 14𝑉 for Eext[100] [compare Fig. 8(a)-(c)].

The sub-linear increase of P(U) starts at higher voltages, being the most pronounced for Eext[100]. 

A rather slim hysteresis loop P(U) opens with decreasing Tp; and these loops are almost the same for 

different directions of Eext (see red dashed curves calculated for Tp = 30 K). The loops acquire a 

quasi-elliptic shape for a small period Tp = 3K (see blue dotted curves calculated for Tp = 3 ). 

IV. ELECTROSTATIC FORCES ACTING ON THE CORE-SHELL 

NANOPARTICLE

Using FEM, we calculated the electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle placed in a 

liquid (or viscous) medium under an external electric field. The electric field E in the ferroelectric 

core consists of external and depolarization contributions, 𝑬 = 𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡 + 𝑬𝑑, where 𝑬𝑑 is generally 

inhomogeneous. The only exceptions are homogeneously polarized ellipsoids, for which the internal 

depolarization field is homogeneous [74]. Since free charges are absent inside the core, divD = 0 and 

𝑫 = 𝑷 + 𝜀0𝑬. The electric displacement is continuous at the core-shell interface, but the radial 

component of the electric field and polarization are discontinuous at the interface due the absence of 

ferroelectric polarization 𝑷𝑺 in the shell and the different dielectric permittivities, 𝜀𝑓 and 𝜀𝑠.

The electrostatic force F and torque M components acting on a core-shell nanoparticle placed 

in the external electric field Eext can be calculated from the expressions [74]:

𝑭 = ∫ (𝑷𝒄(𝐫′) ∙ 𝛁′)𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝒓′)𝑑𝑉′

𝑉𝑐
+ ∫ (𝑷𝒔(𝐫′) ∙ 𝛁′)𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝒓′)𝑑𝑉′

𝑉𝑆
,                 (4a)

𝑴 = ∫ ([𝑷(𝐫′) × 𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝐫′)] + [𝐫′ × (𝐏(𝐫′) ∙ 𝛁′)𝐄𝑒𝑥𝑡(𝐫′)])𝑑𝑉′

𝑉
,              (4b)

where summation on 𝑖 = 1, 2, 3 is performed, the polarization 𝑷𝑐 = 𝑷𝑆 + 𝜀0(𝜀𝑓 − 1)𝑬 in the 

ferroelectric core, and 𝑷𝑠ℎ = 𝜀0(𝜀𝑠 − 1)𝑬 in the paraelectric shell. The scalar product (𝑷 ∙ 𝜵) =

𝑃𝑖

𝜕

𝜕𝑥𝑖, and the integration is performed over the core and shell regions with total volume 𝑉 = 𝑉𝑐 + 𝑉𝑠. 

Following Landau et al. [74], 𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡 is calculated under the absence of 𝑷.


23

A. Electrostatic Force and Torque Acting on a Nanoparticle Placed in a Homogeneous 

Electric Field

As it follows from Eq.(4a) the force is zero (𝐹 = 0) for any constant field, because 𝑃𝑖

𝜕𝐸𝑖

𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝜕𝑥𝑖 =

0 for 

𝜕𝐸𝑖

𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝜕𝑥𝑗 = 0. The polarization vortex (with or without a dipolar kernel) cannot move translationally 

in a homogeneous external field; it can only rotate around its axis [see Fig.1(b)]. Correspondingly, 

the torque M in a homogeneous field is 𝑴 = −[𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡 × ∫ 𝑷(𝑟′)𝑑𝑉′

𝑉
]. It is easy to check that 

∫ 𝑷(𝒓′)𝑑𝑉′
𝑉
= 0 for the vortex state “0” without a kernel, thus M=0 in this state. 

FEM shows that the average value of the “vortex + kernel” spontaneous polarization Pk is 

about 10-3 C/m2 in the absence of an external field. When the external homogeneous field is present, 

the average polarization P becomes almost collinear to the field (see e.g. Figs. 7-8). This happens 

rapidly (at times < 30K) via several mechanisms, such as nanoparticle rotation in a liquid medium, 

polarization re-orientation, and induction by the Eext. As a result, the torque acting on the particle is 

small, except for the time intervals when the external field and nanoparticle axes change their mutual 

orientation. Assuming that the only non-zero component of the average polarization is 𝑃̅𝑧, the transient 

torque is:

𝐌 =

4𝜋

3 𝑅3(𝐸𝑦

𝑒𝑥𝑡𝒆𝑥 − 𝐸𝑥

𝑒𝑥𝑡𝒆𝑦)𝑃̅𝑧,                                              (5)

where 𝑃̅𝑧 =

1

𝑉 ∫𝑉𝑃𝑧(𝐫)𝑑𝑉′ (see Section C.1 in Appendix C for mathematical details). Evolution of 

the normalized torque My acting on the core-shell nanoparticle is shown in Fig. 9. The external field

is directed in the crystallographic direction z over a time that is long enough (>100 K) to orient the 

nanoparticle polarization P in the z-direction (red curve with label “Ez”). The torque is absent for the 

case P  ext. At this point the z-directed field is removed and a subsequent field is applied in the x-

directed field over a period of one K (blue curve with label “Ex”). As one can see from Fig. 9, the 

maximal value of the torque is achieved with some delay after the electric field in both directions 

have comparable values. This is due to a certain retardation in the polarization response to the field, 

by an order of the Landau-Khalatnikov relaxation time K, which can be seen from the distribution of 

polarization components (see color images in Fig. 9). The maximal value of the torque is achieved at 

the time when the voltages Uz = 0.05 V and Ux = 14.63 V.


24

FIGURE 9. Normalized torque My (black curve) acting on the core-shell nanoparticle vs. time. At first, the 

field in z-direction (Ez, red curve) is applied, then it is turned off and quickly applied in the orthogonal direction

(Ex, blue curve). Color images show the distribution of polarization components inside the core at several 

moments of time. Parameters Umax =20 V; h = 17 nm, and the factor M0 = 0.965 10−16 J. White arrows indicate 

the direction of polarization. Other parameters are the same as in Fig. 3.

From the expression (5) and Fig. 9 we can conclude that the torque M tends to rotate the 

nanoparticle in such way that the vortex axis ([001] in the considered case) or the polarization vector 

becomes parallel to the field direction. This conclusion remains valid for an inhomogeneous electric 

field and is used in the following sections.

B.  Electrostatic Force Acting on a Nanoparticle Placed in a Strong Electric Field Gradient

As it follows from the above discussion, the studied spherical nanoparticles with a vortex 

polarization do not have any net electrostatic charge (monopole moment), and therefore such particles 

do not experience any force in a homogeneous electric field. To study the effect of an inhomogeneous

field, it is necessary to analyze the particle dipole moment. If the nanoparticle core is in the state “0”, 

representing a vortex without a central axial kernel, then it can be recognized immediately that the 

dipole moment is zero for symmetry reasons. However, if the vortex possesses a kernel forming an 

axial nanodomain (states “1”), then the kernel has a sizable dipole moment, and in that case an 

inhomogeneous external field will exert a force on the nanoparticle. The experimentally observed 

particle motion in the inhomogeneous electric field created by a charged tip or wire [42-47] can thus be 

attributed to the dipole moment of the vortex kernel, which (if not already present) might be induced 

into the vortex structure. The dipole moment of the vortex kernel leads to an attractive gradient force 

in the inhomogeneous electric field: F = (p•)E [74]. In this scenario, however, it is assumed that 

the vortex structure remains intact, and that the inhomogeneous field only generates the nanodomain 

as the kernel of the vortex without destroying it. Actually, Figs. 3, 7, & 8 demonstrate that the vortices 


25

can be partially or completely destroyed by irrotational external fields, and the particle polarization 

follows the external field. 

As a next step, the electrostatic force acting on a core-shell nanoparticle is calculated. The

ferroelectric core has an average spontaneous polarization 𝑷𝑘 = {𝑃𝑘1, 𝑃𝑘2, 𝑃𝑘3}, which originates 

from the polarized vortex kernel. The particle is placed in a strongly inhomogeneous electric field 

that is produced by the charged tip electrode [see Fig. 1(c)]. For this case, the effective point charge 

model [75] is applicable. The effective charge 𝑄∗ is located at the point 𝒉 = {0,0, ℎ}, where ℎ > 𝑅 +

∆𝑅 corresponding to the charge location outside the particle. The effective charge 𝑄∗ ≈ 𝐶𝑡𝑈, where 

𝐶𝑡 is the tip effective capacity and U is applied voltage. For a spherical tip 𝐶𝑡 = 4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒𝑅𝑡, where Rt

~ (5 – 50) nm is the tip curvature. 

After lengthy calculations made in the Section C.2.2 of Appendix C, we derived that the force 

consists of two contributions,

𝑭 = 𝑭𝐶 + 𝑭𝑄.                                                              (6а)

The first force component, FC, is proportional to the core spontaneous polarization, i.e. it is 

proportional to the kernel dipole moment. FC is expressed via an effective dipole moment, 𝒑𝑓:

𝑭𝐶 =

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒ℎ3 [𝒑𝑓 − 3(𝒑𝑓 ∙ 𝒉)

𝒉

ℎ2],         𝒑𝑓 = 12𝜋𝜀𝑠𝜀𝑒𝜂(𝜀𝑓)𝑅3𝑷𝑘.            (6b)

Note that the depolarizing factor 𝜂(𝜀𝑓) has the same functional form as in Eq.(3b), 𝜂(𝜀𝑓) =

(1+𝛥)3

2(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(1+𝛥)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠), and depends on 𝜀𝑓, which is the sum of background permittivity

𝜀𝑏 and effective susceptibility 𝜒𝑒𝑓𝑓, 𝜀𝑓 = 𝜀𝑏 + 𝜒𝑒𝑓𝑓. In accordance with Eqs.(3), the estimate 𝜀𝑓 ≈365 

is valid for voltages |𝑈| < 𝑈𝑐𝑟. The force (6b) is a typical dipole force decreasing with distance as 

1 ℎ3
⁄
.

The second contribution, 𝑭𝑄, is a dielectrophoretic force [76], 

𝑭𝑄 =

−𝑄∗2

4𝜋𝜀0 (∑
𝑅1+2𝑛

ℎ3+2𝑛 𝐺𝑛

∞
𝑛=1
(𝜀𝑓))

𝒉

ℎ,                                               (6c)

with an expansion coefficient

𝐺𝑛(𝜀) =

𝑛(1+𝑛)(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛[(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)+(𝜀𝑠−𝜀)(𝑛𝜀𝑒+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)]

𝑛(1+𝑛)(𝜀−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒(1+𝑛)+𝑛𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)
.              (6d)

The dielectrophoretic force decreases with distance as 1 ℎ5
⁄
.

If the particle is far enough from the probe tip (ℎ ≫ 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅), only the first term with n=1 is 

significant in Eq.(6c), and the force components acquire a much simpler form:

𝐹1 ≈ 3𝜀𝑠𝜂(𝜀𝑓)

𝑄∗

𝜀0 𝑃𝑘1 (

𝑅

ℎ)

3
,      𝐹2 ≈ 3𝜀𝑠𝜂(𝜀𝑓)

𝑄∗

𝜀0 𝑃𝑘2 (

𝑅

ℎ)

3
,                      (7a)

𝐹3 ≈ − [6𝜀𝑠

𝑄∗

𝜀0 𝑃𝑘3 +

𝑄2

2𝜋𝜀0ℎ2 𝜇(𝜀𝑓)] 𝜂(𝜀𝑓) (

𝑅

ℎ)

3
,                            (7b)


26

where the dielectric factor 𝜇(𝜀𝑓) = (1 + Δ)3(𝜀𝑒 − 𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓 + 2𝜀𝑠) + (𝜀𝑠 − 𝜀𝑓)(𝜀𝑒 + 2𝜀𝑠)
is 

introduced. If the nanoparticle is far enough from the tip the force component F3 scales as 𝐴 (

𝑅

ℎ)

3

+

𝐵 (

𝑅

ℎ)

5
;  thusthe dipole force ~𝐴 (

𝑅

ℎ)

3

dominates with increasing distance. 

The case 𝑷𝑘 = {0,0, ±𝑃𝑘} corresponding to an already rotated nanoparticle with two 

orientations of the kernel polarization is considered below. For this case, the only nonzero component 

is F3. The total electrostatic force F acting on the core-shell nanoparticle is 𝐹 = 𝐹𝑄 + 𝐹𝐶 [see Eq.(6a)]; 

the total force F and its contributions, FC and FQ, are shown in Fig. 10. Note that 𝐹𝐶 can change its 

sign depending on the sign of 𝑃𝑘, namely 𝐹𝐶 > 0 for 𝑄∗𝑃𝑘 > 0 and 𝐹𝐶 < 0 for 𝑄∗𝑃𝑘 < 0. Two cases, 

𝐹 = 𝐹𝑄 + |𝐹𝐶| and 𝐹 = 𝐹𝑄 − |𝐹𝐶|, are shown by black and magenta curves, respectively. The total 

force can go to zero when FC and FQ counteract each other, it can even change direction when |𝐹𝐶| >

𝐹𝑄. Figure 10(a) illustrates the dependence of the force on the voltage U calculated at a fixed distance,

h = 500 nm. The dependence of the force on the distance h calculated at a fixed voltage U=100 mV

is shown in Fig. 10(b). 

FIGURE 10. (a) Electrostatic force F (black and magenta curves) and its contributions, the absolute value of 

FC (blue curves) and FQ (red curves), acting on the core-shell nanoparticle vs. the voltage U applied to the 

electrode tip located at distance h = 500 nm. (b) F, FC, and FQ vs. the distance h at U = 100 mV. Curves are 

calculated from Eqs.(6) for a nanoparticle spontaneous polarization 𝑃𝑘 = ±0.11 C/cm2, radius R = 10 nm, 

shell thickness R = 4 nm, e = 10, s = 300, f = 365, and tip capacity Ct = 510-17 F corresponding to the 

curvature R0 = 50 nm. The force scale is 10-15 N (femtoNewtons, fN).


27

V. POSSIBLE APPLICATIONS IN LOGIC UNITS 

Since the vortex axis should have significantly enhanced electro-conductivity in comparison 

to the rest of the particle volume [77, 78], it can act as a conductive nanosized channel. Actually, as 

one can see from Fig. 11, the bound charge  being equal to Pr(R), is maximum at the contact point 

of the vortex axis to the surface. Note that pronounced red (>0) and blue (<0) maxima of the bound 

charge exist where the prolate dipolar kernel of the vortex contacts the surface of the core; they are 

absent for a simple vortex [compare Figs. 11(a)-(b) with Figs. 11(c)-(d)]. Such surface charges of 

opposite sign on opposite sides are characteristic for a dipole. In addition to this primary axial dipole 

moment, we also observe an anisotropy-induced azimuthal modulation leading to higher-order 

moments that represent a much weaker effect. 

Free charges from the surrounding medium screen the bound charges, and in turn significantly

enhance the surface conductivity around the vortex axis. The enhanced conductivity of the 

nanodomain walls, which is almost uncharged inside the BaTiO3 core, and its physical nature related 

to flexoelectricity and deformation potential has been studied in detail in Ref.[79]. Note that the 

vortex axis with an axial kernel should be conductive in other multiaxial ferroelectrics such as PbxZr1-

xTiO3 [80] or BiFeO3 [81, 82]. It should also be noted that a ferroelectric nanoparticle with 

significantly higher kernel polarization can possibly be fabricated using tunable coatings [83]. 

FIGURE 11. Bound charge distribution at the surface of a BaTiO3 nanoparticle covered with a SrTiO3 shell. 

The surface charge of vortex with an axial kernel is shown in plots (a) − (b), and the charge for a simple vortex 

is shown in plots (c) − (d). Black arrows indicate the direction of polarization. An external field is absent.

Other parameters are the same as in Fig. 2.

The energy of the vortex state “0” demonstrates a 6-fold degeneracy consisting in the 3 equally 

probable axis directions multiplied by clockwise and counterclockwise directions of polarization 

rotation across the vortex axis. For the vortex state “1” with a kernel, the degeneracy becomes 12-

fold, since the above 6-fold degeneracy doubles by 2 equiprobable signs of polarization inside the 

vortex kernel. The 18-fold degeneracy can be obtained as a sum of 6 vortex states “0” and 12 states 

“1” of vortex with an axial kernel. As we have established in this work, the manifold degeneracy of 


28

vortex states corresponds to three energy minima, where an “excited” vortex state “0” and the vortex 

ground states “1” with positive and negative axial dipolar kernels have a relatively close energy 

difference 𝐺0 − 𝐺±1 ≈+ 1.210-20 J corresponding to 2.9 kBT at 298 K. The manifold degeneracy and 

energy proximity open possible applications of core-shell nanoparticles and their ensembles as multi-

bit memory and related multi-value logic units [84]. 

To imagine a multi-bit memory cell, let us consider an ensemble of non-interacting core-shell 

nanoparticles with a vortex polarization placed in a soft matter environment (e.g. wax, liquid crystal, 

or colloid) with a viscosity that is strongly temperature-dependent around the working (i.e. room) 

temperature. The nanoparticles can freely rotate and move in the liquid soft matter, and are prevented 

from rotating when the matter becomes solid. The ferroelectric transition temperature of the particle 

core (~ 390 K) is much higher than the soft matter melting temperature. The direction of the 

crystallographic axes in a given ferroelectric core is random with respect to the electrodes, which coat 

opposite sides of the cell, and the core-shell nanoparticles sit between these electrodes. Since the 

equilibrium vortex axis should coincide with one of the crystallographic directions [100], [010], or 

[001], a given nanoparticle in the composite can be in any of three types of vortex states, with an axial 

kernel (two states “1”) and without one (state “0”). The resulting polarization of a nanocomposite 

can be presented as a sum of these states,

|𝑃⟩ = ∑
𝑖𝑗𝑘 𝐶𝑖𝑗𝑘
|𝑖𝑗𝑘⟩.                                                                  (7)

The real number Cijk is a relative fraction of the state |𝑖𝑗𝑘⟩ in the composite, ∑
𝐶𝑖𝑗𝑘

2

𝑖𝑗𝑘
= 1 and 0 ≤

𝐶𝑖𝑗𝑘 ≤ 1. The first subscript i=1, 2, 3 designates the vortex axis, the second subscript j= −1, 0, +1 

indicates the kernel “color” (i.e. polarization sign “1” or “−1” in the kernel, “0” without a kernel), 

and the third subscript k= “l” or “r” corresponds to the “chirality”, defined as a clockwise or 

counterclockwise direction of the vortex polarization rotation. For a given nanoparticle the 

coefficients can be interpreted as probabilities. The kernel characteristic "color" introduced here is 

similar to the spin-flavor characteristics used to describe specific states of elementary particles in 

magnetic fields. 

Note that cannot distinguish between some of the 18 states that are calculated using Eq.7 and 

those measured using current atomic force microscopy (C-AFM) to determine the of local 

conductivity. Actually, imagine that a single-layer of spherical core-shell nanoparticles with the 

vortex polarization of the ferroelectric core is placed in a plane capacitor with sizes that are slightly 

larger than the particle diameter 2(𝑅 + Δ𝑅) (see Fig. 12). Since the BaTiO3 core is regarded as a 

dielectric, and the thin SrTiO3 shell and the soft matter surrounding the core-shell particle are low 

conducting band-gap materials, the optimal conductance path depends on how close the electrodes 

are to the conductive vortex axis [see dotted light blue path in Fig.12(b)]. The resistance 𝜌𝐿 of the 


29

serial connection “core-shell nanoparticle + soft matter” can be estimated from the expression 

𝜌𝐿(𝛼) = 2𝑅[(1 − cos𝛼)𝜌𝑊 + 𝜌𝑘], where  is the angle between the kernel axis and the normal to 

the electrodes, 𝜌𝑊 is the specific resistivity of the soft matter, and 𝜌𝑘 is the specific resistivity of 

kernel domain walls. To observe the C-AFM contrast between the soft matter and the nanoparticle, 

the strong inequality 𝜌𝑊 ≫ 𝜌𝑘 should be valid. Hence, the measurements of local conductivity can 

distinguish only the projection of the kernel axis on the electrode plane, proportional to cos (𝛼). The 

states with 𝛼 = ±

𝜋

2 and a simple vortex without a kernel are indistinguishable [see Fig.12(a)], as well 

as the states with different signs of the kernel polarization [see Fig.12(b)-(c)]. The conclusion is true 

for non-interacting nanoparticles only, i.e. when a dipole-dipole interaction between the particles is 

negligibly small. The nanoparticles in a dense ensemble tend to align the dipole moments of their 

kernels locally antiparallel; therefore, ⟨𝑃⟩ = 0 for the macroscopic state resulting in a minimal dipole-

dipole energy [such alignment of the states “+1” and “-1” is shown in Fig.12(c)].

FIGURE 12. Spherical core-shell nanoparticles with a vortex polarization and axial dipolar kernel are placed 

in a plane capacitor with a thickness slightly greater than the sphere diameter. (a-c) If the kernel is conductive 


30

the system can be in a low conductivity state (a), intermediate state (b), or high conductivity state (c). (d)

Nano-FET with a mobile rotating channel. (e) The polarization states, |𝑃𝐴⟩ and |𝑃𝐵⟩, of two core-shell 

nanoparticles, "A" and "B". These states coupling or “entanglement” after the application of “H” and 

“CNOT” operations.

A single core-shell nanoparticle, whose polarization vortex has a dipolar kernel, placed in a 

soft matter environment, can be considered as a candidate for a nanosized field effect transistor (nano-

FET) containing a “rotating” channel with an angular dependence of the local resistivity 𝜌𝐿(𝛼). 

Actually, the voltage applied between the FET gates can rotate or shift the particle (in order to 

rotate/move the kernel axis) [see Fig.12(d)], and so the gate field Eg controls the channel conductivity 

𝜎𝐿(𝛼) =

1

2𝑅[(1−𝑐𝑜𝑠𝛼)𝜌𝑊+𝜌𝑘]. Note, that the soft matter softening or hardening with temperature can 

provide an additional temperature control of the channel conductivity. The vortex stability and kernel 

rotation feasibility are advantages of the nano-FET operation. Its drawback is a relatively low 

operation speed due to the sluggishness of sphere rotation and/or a translational motion towards the 

gate.

Another interesting aspect is that a “classical” behavior of the vortex axis (with or without a 

conductive kernel) can simulate a “qubit” at room temperature, since it formally appeared that some 

basic properties of qubits necessary for a quantum computation [85, 86] can be simulated by the 

vortex states “1” revealed in this work. These possibilities are discussed below, with a strict 

precaution that we consider an imitation of quantum behavior by classical core-shell nanoparticles 

decoupled or coupled by non-local interactions. 

A. Continuity of polarization and conductivity states over a spherical surface

For a core-shell nanoparticle placed in a liquid medium an almost free rotation of a vortex 

axis is possible. The rotation is characterized by two spherical angles,  and . Since the absolute 

value of the kernel polarization is conserved at zero external field (E=0), the polarization vector can 

be expanded in orthogonal basis vectors, |𝑃⟩ = 𝐴|𝑃𝐴⟩ + 𝐵|𝑃𝐵⟩. Ket vectors |𝑃𝐴⟩ = (1,0) and |𝑃𝐵⟩ =

(0,1) are the orthogonal basis of one-particle polarization states [see Fig. 12(e)]. The representation 

formally coincides with the Bloch sphere representation of a qubit [85, 86]. The complex coefficients 

𝐴 = 𝑐𝑜𝑠 (

𝜃

2) and 𝐵 = 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (

𝜃

2) 𝑒𝑖𝜓 are probability amplitudes for the superposition state, thus |𝐴|2 +

|𝐵|2 = 1; and the local conductivity is sensitive to the superposition. Since the vortex state “0” 

without a kernel (𝐴 = 𝐵 = 0) falls into the center of the sphere, the situation for all three polarization 

states “0” and “1” is more complex than the Bloch representation.

The general state of a qubit can be a coherent superposition of two binary “pure” states “0” or 

“1”, while the classical bit can be only either in the state “0” or in the state “1”. Whereas a 


31

measurement of a classical bit would not disturb its state, a measurement of a qubit would irreversibly

destroy its coherence and superposition state (so-called “collapse” of the wave function [85, 86]). 

Actually, we cannot measure the direction of the vortex axis in a given nanoparticle by application of 

a voltage between the electrodes, because the particle would rotate in the electric field, and after the 

rotation time (that is on the order of the Landau-Khalatnikov relaxation time K ~ (10-9 − 10-6) s, see 

Fig. 9) the axis of a dipolar kernel aligns parallel to the E-field, i.e. perpendicular to the electrodes. 

The higher the voltage, the faster the vortices are destroyed. 

The “collapse” of the core states can be avoided by freezing the soft matter. In this case, the 

nanoparticle axes cannot rotate and we can measure a “snapshot” of the vortex axes directions (at 

least hypothetically) in a solid nanocomposite. 

B. Long-range interaction between core-shell nanoparticles 

Multiple qubits can exhibit quantum entanglement unlike classical bits. Quantum 

entanglement is a nonlocal property of two or more qubits that allows a set of qubits to express a 

higher correlation than is possible in classical systems [85, 86]. Due to the partial screening of the 

core spontaneous polarization by the paraelectric shell and dielectric (or wide-gap semiconducting) 

surrounding medium, the core-shell nanoparticles interact via long-range electrostatic forces between 

their dipolar kernels. The interaction is essentially nonlocal due to the integral nature of depolarization 

factors and strong spatial dispersion of the effective dielectric permittivity. Simply speaking, the 

system consisting of two (or more) nanoparticles tends to align the dipole moment of their kernels in 

an antiparallel alignment to minimize the electrostatic energy. The electrostatic interaction between 

the particles becomes very weak for an effective (i.e. almost complete) screening of their ferroelectric 

polarization, and its strength can be controlled by the distance between the particles [43]. 

Two core-shell nanoparticles, "A" and "B", shown in Fig. 12(e), can be described by the direct 

product of |𝑃𝐴⟩ and |𝑃𝐵⟩ states, with orthogonal basis |𝐴𝐴⟩ = (1000), |𝐴𝐵⟩ = (0100), |𝐵𝐴⟩ =

(0010), and |𝐵𝐵⟩ = (0001) in a 4-dimensional Hilbert space. To imitate maximally entangled Bell 

state P+, one can start from detangled |𝑃𝐴⟩ and |𝑃𝐵⟩ states. At first one can apply a Hadamard 

transformation 𝐻 =

1

√2 (1
1

1 − 1) to |𝑃𝐴⟩ and obtain |𝑃𝐴′⟩ =

1

√2 (1,1) as the result. Next, the application 

of a controllable logic operation "NOT" (i.e. "CNOT") is realized by a unitary matrix 𝑈𝐶𝑁𝑂𝑇 =

(

1000
0100
0001
0010

) [87]. Applying 𝑈𝐶𝑁𝑂𝑇 to the direct product of |𝑃𝐴′⟩ and |𝑃𝐵⟩ states, 

1

√2 (|𝐴𝐴⟩ + |𝐵𝐴⟩), gives 

the Bell state |𝑃+⟩ =

1

√2 (|𝐴𝐴⟩ + |𝐵𝐵⟩) as a result. To realize the action of 𝐻 on the |𝑃𝐴⟩ state we can 

apply a sinusoidal pulse of an electric field directed along the axis [101] of the core-shell nanoparticle 

"A". The field rotates |𝑃𝐴⟩ vector 45 degrees, and also changes the kernel color (i.e. the sign of 


32

polarization) after the sinusoidal pulse (see e.g. Fig. 7). Only after application of H to nanoparticle 

"A", one can apply another electric field pulse to nanoparticle "B", where the aim is to rotate its |𝑃𝐵⟩

vector 90 degrees and change its kernel color. 

Since it seems possible to imitate a quantum CNOT operation using the considered multi-

degenerate ferroelectric vortex states, it may be reasonable to further elaborate on the states 

possibilities for the imitation of quantum computing [85, 86]. However, one should realize that the 

long-range electrostatic (or magnetostatic) interaction between the core-shell ferroelectric (or 

ferromagnetic) nanoparticles has no similarities with “true” entanglement of e.g. photons, because 

the photons can be entangled at macroscopic distances [86], whereas the nanoparticles cannot be 

entangled at such distances due to the attenuation of electrostatic or magnetostatic fields. Also, one 

should realize that the rotation time of ferroelectric or ferromagnetic particle is small, but much longer 

than the time of almost instant quantum interactions. 

VI. SUMMARY

In the framework of Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire approach coupled with electrostatic equations, we 

studied the influence of irrotational external electric fields on the formation, evolution, and relaxation 

of polarization vortices in spherical ferroelectric nanoparticles. In particular, we performed FEM of 

the zero-field and in-field polarization evolution in a ferroelectric BaTiO3 core covered with a 

“tunable” paraelectric SrTiO3 shell placed in a dielectric polymer or liquid medium. The role of the 

tunable paraelectric shell is to provide an effective screening of the core polarization.

A stable two-dimensional vortex was formed in the core after a zero-field relaxation of a 

random or poly-domain distribution of polarization, with the vortex axis directed along one of the 

core crystallographic axes. In order to analyze field-induced changes of the vortex structure, a 

sinusoidal pulse of a homogeneous electric field was applied, and its period, strength, and direction

were varied. A small quasi-static field induced an axial kernel inside the vortex, which formed of a 

prolate nanodomain with near-homogeneous spontaneous polarization. 

Similar to ferromagnetic vortexes, the kernel of a ferroelectric vortex acts like a dipole and 

opens the possibility to rotate the vortex axis by a small quasi-static homogeneous electric field. Due 

to the strong ferroelectric anisotropy, which effectively prevents the rotation of the dipolar kernel and 

tends to align it parallel to the one of crystallographic directions, the in-field orientation of the kernel 

is conditioned by the minimum of dipolar and anisotropy energies. As the kernel is coupled to the 

azimuthal vortex, and the vortex plane is perpendicular to the kernel axis, it is rotated with the kernel. 

The kernel increases in size with an increasing electric field, and eventually the nanoparticle becomes

single-domain.


33

Quite unexpectedly, we revealed the appearance of Bloch point structures during the 

switching process. In the case of ferromagnetic materials, Bloch points are typically formed at the 

center of special types of three-dimensional vortices, where the transition between oppositely oriented 

regions cannot proceed continuously. Here we found analogous situations leading to a Bloch point 

with a vanishing polarization (P = 0). In the considered case, the in-field evolution of the polarization 

distribution contains two diametrically opposite Bloch points located at the core surface.

After the electric field is removed, the polarization vortex recovers spontaneously, but its 

structure, axis orientation, and polarization rotation direction can be different from the initial state. 

As a rule, the final state is a three-dimensional polarization vortex with an axial dipolar kernel, whose 

energy is less than the energy of the initial two-dimensional “empty” vortex by ~ 3 kBT at room 

temperature. The nature of this counterintuitive result is a significant reduction of the gradient energy 

in the axial region of the vortex by the formation of a kernel, which is only partly compensated by an 

increase in the energy of the depolarization field for a vortex with a prolate single-domain kernel.

The relatively small difference in energies means the possible coexistence of both vortex states.

We also calculated the torque and the electrostatic forces acting on the core-shell nanoparticle 

placed in an applied electric field. The torque acting on the polarization vortex with an axial kernel 

tends to rotate the nanoparticle in such way that the vortex axis becomes parallel to the field direction. 

The vortex (with or without a kernel) is electrostatically neutral, and therefore the nanoparticle does 

not move in a homogeneous field. Because of the kernel dipole moment, a particle motion can be 

observed in electric fields with a strong spatial gradient. 

The vortex states possess a sixfold degeneracy regarding the vortex orientation and 

circulation, consisting of three crystallographic axis directions multiplied by the clockwise and 

counterclockwise directions of the polarization rotation along the axis. As two different "colors" of 

vortex states can exist, with and without an axial dipolar kernel (the latter with a two-fold degeneracy 

in terms of the polarization direction on the kernel), the number of states can further be multiplied by 

three. This multitude of vortex states in a single core makes core-shell nanoparticles and their 

ensembles promising candidates for multi-bit memory and related logic units. The opportunity to use 

the rotation of a vortex kernel, which is possible in the case of core-shell nanoparticles placed in a 

soft matter matrix with controllable viscosity, may be used to imitate qubit properties.

APPENDIX A contains a mathematical formulation of the problem in the framework of Landau-

Ginzburg-Devonshire theory, and parameters of BaTiO3 (core) and SrTiO3 (shell) materials used in 

FEM. 

APPENDIX B contains the approximate solutions of Euler-Lagrange equations and fitting 

parameters for vortex states.


34

APPENDIX C contains the details of torque and electrostatic force calculations.

Acknowledgements. A.N.M. acknowledges EOARD project 9IOE063 and related STCU partner 

project P751. V.Y.R. acknowledges the support of COST Action CA17139. 

Authors' contribution. A.N.M. generated the research idea, stated the problem, and performed 

analytical calculations jointly with V.Yu.R. and V.T. E.A.E. and Y.M.F. wrote the codes and 

performed numerical calculations. R.H. analyzed of the polarization vortex structures and generated 

the kernel concept. A.N.M, R.H., D.R.E. and V.Y.R. proposed possible applications. A.N.M. and 

R.H. wrote the manuscript draft. R.H., V.Yu.R., and D.R.E. worked intensively on the results 

interpretation and manuscript improvement.


35

REFERENCES

1
Y.L. Tang, Y.L. Zhu, X.L. Ma, A.Y. Borisevich, A.N. Morozovska, E.A. Eliseev, W.Y. Wang, Y.J. 

Wang, Y.B. Xu, Z.D. Zhang, S.J. Pennycook, Observation of a periodic array of flux-closure quadrants in 

strained ferroelectric PbTiO3 films, Science 348, 547 (2015).

2
S.V. Kalinin, Y. Kim, D. Fong, and A.N. Morozovska, Surface-screening mechanisms in ferroelectric 

thin films and their effect on polarization dynamics and domain structures, Rep. Prog. Phys. 81, 036502 (2018).

3
S. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Tang, D. Ma, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, S. Li, M. Han, D. Chen, J. Ma, B. Wu, and X. Ma. 

Polarization rotation in ultrathin ferroelectrics tailored by interfacial oxygen octahedral coupling, ACS Nano, 

12, 36813 (2018). 

4
Y. Nahas, S. Prokhorenko, J. Fischer, B. Xu, C. Carrétéro, S. Prosandeev, M. Bibes, S. Fusil, B. Dkhil, 

V. Garcia, and L. Bellaiche, Inverse transition of labyrinthine domain patterns in ferroelectric thin films, 

Nature 577, 47 (2020). 

5
J.M. Gregg, Exotic Domain States in Ferroelectrics: Searching for Vortices and Skyrmions, 

Ferroelectrics, 433, 74 (2012).

6
F. Xue, L. Li, J. Britson, Z. Hong, C.A. Heikes, C. Adamo, D.G. Schlom, X. Pan, and L.-Q. Chen, 

Switching the curl of polarization vectors by an irrotational electric field, Phys. Rev. B 94, 100103 (2016).

7
L. Baudry, A. Sené, I.A. Luk'Yanchuk, L. Lahoche, and J.F. Scott, Polarization vortex domains induced 

by switching electric field in ferroelectric films with circular electrodes, Phys. Rev. B 90, 024102 (2014).

8
J. Liu, W. Chen, and Y. Zheng, Shape-induced phase transition of vortex domain structures in 

ferroelectric nanodots and their controllability by electrical and mechanical loads, Theor. Appl. Mech. Lett. 7, 

81 (2017).

9
P. Chen, X. Zhong, J.A. Zorn, M. Li, Y. Sun, A.Y. Abid, C. Ren, Yuehui Li, X. Li, X. Ma, J. Wang, K. 

Liu, Z. Xu, C.Tan, L. Chen, P. Gao, X. Bai,Atomic Imaging of Mechanically Induced Topological Transition 

of Ferroelectric Vortices, https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.00182 (2019).

10
Z.Y. Chen, Y.X. Su, Z.D. Zhou, L.S. Lei, and C.P. Yang, The influence of the electrical boundary 

condition on domain structures and electrocaloric effect of PbTiO3 nanostructures,AIP Adv. 6, 055207 (2016).

11
L.V. Lich, T. Shimada, J. Wang, V.-H. Dinh, T.Q. Bui, and T. Kitamura, Switching the chirality of a 

ferroelectric vortex in designed nanostructures by a homogeneous electric field, Phys. Rev. B 96, 134119 

(2017).

12
J. Wang, and M. Kamlah, Intrinsic switching of polarization vortex in ferroelectric nanotubes, Phys. Rev. 

B 80, 012101 (2009).

13
W.J. Chen, and Y. Zheng, Vortex switching in ferroelectric nanodots and its feasibility by a homogeneous 

electric field: effects of substrate, dislocations and local clamping force, Acta Mater. 88, 41 (2015).

14
Z. Li, Y. Wang, G. Tian, P. Li, L. Zhao, F. Zhang, J. Yao, H. Fan, X. Song, D. Chen, and Z. Fan. High-

density array of ferroelectric nanodots with robust and reversibly switchable topological domain states. Sci. 

Adv. 3, e1700919 (2017).


36

15
B.J. Rodriguez, X.S. Gao, L.F. Liu, W. Lee, I.I. Naumov, A.M. Bratkovsky, D. Hesse, and M. Alexe. 

Vortex polarization states in nanoscale ferroelectric arrays. Nano Lett. 9, 1127 (2009).

16
D. Karpov, Z. Liu, T. dos Santos Rolo, R. Harder, P.V. Balachandran, D. Xue, T. Lookman, and E. 

Fohtung. Three-dimensional imaging of vortex structure in a ferroelectric nanoparticle driven by an electric 

field. Nat. Commun. 8, 280 (2017).

17
J.-J. Wang, B. Wang, and L.-Q. Chen. Understanding, Predicting, and Designing Ferroelectric Domain 

Structures and Switching Guided by the Phase-Field Method. Ann. Rev. Mater. Res. 49, 127 (2019).

18
C.M. Wu, W.J. Chen, Y. Zheng, D.C. Ma, B. Wang, J.Y. Liu, and C.H. Woo. Controllability of vortex 

domain structure in ferroelectric nanodot: Fruitful domain patterns and transformation paths. Sci. Rep. 4, 3946 

(2014).

19
W.M. Xiong, Q. Sheng, W.J. Chen, C.M. Wu, B. Wang, and Y. Zheng. Large controllability of domain 

evolution in ferroelectric nanodot via isotropic surface charge screening. Appl. Phys. A 122, 783 (2016). 

20
J. Mangeri, Y. Espinal, A. Jokisaari, S.P. Alpay, S. Nakhmanson, and O. Heinonen. Topological phase 

transformations and intrinsic size effects in ferroelectric nanoparticles. Nanoscale 9, 1616 (2017).

21
J. Mangeri, S.P. Alpay, S. Nakhmanson, and O.G. Heinonen. Electromechanical control of polarization 

vortex ordering in an interacting ferroelectric-dielectric composite dimer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 113, 092901 

(2018).

22
K.C. Pitike, J. Mangeri, H. Whitelock, T. Patel, P. Dyer, S.P. Alpay, and S. Nakhmanson. Metastable 

vortex-like polarization textures in ferroelectric nanoparticles of different shapes and sizes. J. Appl. Phys. 124, 

064104 (2018).

23
D. Zhu, J. Mangeri, R. Wang, and S. Nakhmanson. Size, shape, and orientation dependence of the field-

induced behavior in ferroelectric nanoparticles. J. Appl. Phys. 125, 134102 (2019).

24
M.C. Rose, R.E. Cohen. Giant electrocaloric effect around TC. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 187604 (2012).

25
X. Moya, S. Kar-Narayan, N.D. Mathur. Caloric materials near ferroic phase transitions. Nat. Mat. 13, 

439 (2014).

26
C. Ye, J.B. Wang, B. Li, X.L. Zhong, Giant electrocaloric effect in a wide temperature range in PbTiO3

nanoparticle with double-vortex domain structure. Sci. Rep. 8, 293 (2018).

27
B. Li, J.B. Wang, X.L. Zhong, F. Wang, Y.K. Zeng, and Y.C. Zhou. Giant electrocaloric effects in 

ferroelectric nanostructures with vortex domain structures. RSC Adv. 3, 7928 (2013).

28
Y.K. Zeng, B. Li, J.B. Wang, X.L. Zhong, W. Wang, F. Wang, and Y.C. Zhou. Influence of vortex domain 

switching on the electrocaloric property of a ferroelectric nanoparticle. RSC Adv. 4, 30211 (2014).

29
F. Wang, L.F. Liu, B. Li, Y. Ou, L. Tian, and W. Wang. Inhomogeneous electric-field–induced 

negative/positive electrocaloric effects in ferroelectric nanoparticles. EPL (Europhysics Letters) 117, 57002 

(2017).

30
X. Chen, and C. Fang. Study of electrocaloric effect in barium titanate nanoparticle with core–shell 

model. Physica B 415, 14 (2013).

31
S. Lin, T. Lü, C. Jin, and X. Wang. Size effect on the dielectric properties of BaTiO3 nanoceramics in a 

modified Ginsburg-Landau-Devonshire thermodynamic theory. Phys. Rev. B 74, 134115 (2006).


37

32
E.A. Eliseev, A.V. Semchenko, Y.M. Fomichov, M.D. Glinchuk, V.V. Sidsky, V.V. Kolos, Yu M. 

Pleskachevsky, M.V. Silibin, N.V. Morozovsky, and A.N. Morozovska, Surface and finite size effects impact 

on the phase diagrams, polar, and dielectric properties of (Sr, Bi)Ta2O9 ferroelectric nanoparticles, J. Appl. 

Phys. 119, 204104 (2016).

33
E.A. Eliseev, Y.M. Fomichov, S.V. Kalinin, Y.M. Vysochanskii, P. Maksymovich and A.N. Morozovska. 

Labyrinthine domains in ferroelectric nanoparticles: Manifestation of a gradient-induced morphological phase 

transition. Phys. Rev. B 98, 054101 (2018).

34
A.N. Morozovska, Y.M. Fomichоv, P. Maksymovych, Y.M. Vysochanskii, and E.A. Eliseev. Analytical 

description of domain morphology and phase diagrams of ferroelectric nanoparticles. Acta Mater. 160, 109 

(2018).

35
H. Huang, C.Q. Sun, P. Hing. Surface bond contraction and its effect on the nanometric sized lead 

zirconate titanate. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 12, L127 (2000).

36
H. Huang, C.Q. Sun, Z. Tianshu, P. Hing. Grain-size effect on ferroelectric Pb(Zr1−xTix)O3 solid solutions 

induced by surface bond contraction. Phys. Rev. B 63, 184112 (2001).

37
W. Ma. Surface tension and Curie temperature in ferroelectric nanowires and nanodots. Appl. Phys. A 

96, 915 (2009).

38
J.J. Wang, X.Q. Ma, Q. Li, J. Britson, Long-Qing Chen, Phase transitions and domain structures of 

ferroelectric nanoparticles: Phase field model incorporating strong elastic and dielectric inhomogeneity, Acta 

Mater. 61, 7591 (2013).

39
J.J. Wang, E.A. Eliseev, X.Q. Ma, P.P. Wu, A.N. Morozovska, and L.-Q. Chen. Strain effect on phase 

transitions of BaTiO3 nanowires. Acta Mater. 59, 7189 (2011).

40
A.N. Morozovska, M.D. Glinchuk, E.A. Eliseev. Phase transitions induced by confinement of ferroic 

nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B 76, 014102 (2007).

41
A.N. Morozovska, E.A. Eliseev, Y.M. Fomichov, Y.M. Vysochanskii, V. Yu. Reshetnyak, and D.R. 

Evans. Controlling the domain structure of ferroelectric nanoparticles using tunable shells. Acta Mater., 183, 

36 (2020).

42
G. Cook, A.V. Glushchenko, V. Reshetnyak, A.T. Griffith, M.A. Saleh, and D.R. Evans, Nanoparticle

Doped Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Photorefractives, Opt. Exp. 16, 4015 (2008).

43
D.R. Evans, S.A. Basun, G. Cook, I.P. Pinkevych, and V. Yu. Reshetnyak. Electric field interactions and 

aggregation dynamics of ferroelectric nanoparticles in isotropic fluid suspensions. Phys. Rev. B 84, 174111 

(2011).

44
A. Lorenz, N. Zimmermann, S. Kumar, D.R. Evans, G. Cook, and H.-S. Kitzerow. Doping the nematic 

liquid crystal 5CB with milled BaTiO3 nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. E 86, 051704 (2012).

45
E.S. Beh, S.A. Basun, X. Feng, I.U. Idehenre, D.R. Evans, and M.W. Kanan, Molecular Catalysis at 

Polarized Interfaces Created by Ferroelectric BaTiO3, Chem. Sci. 8, 2790 (2017).

46
G. Cook, J.L. Barnes, S.A. Basun, D.R. Evans, R.F. Ziolo, A. Ponce, V.Yu. Reshetnyak, A. Glushchenko, 

and P.P. Banerjee. Harvesting single ferroelectric domain stressed nanoparticles for optical and ferroic 

applications, J. Appl. Phys. 108, 064309 (2010). 


38

47
S.A. Basun, G. Cook, V.Y. Reshetnyak, A.V.Glushchenko, and D.R. Evans, Dipole moment and 

spontaneous polarization of ferroelectric nanoparticles in a nonpolar fluid suspension, Phys. Rev. B 84, 024105 

(2011).

48 L.D. Landau and I.M. Khalatnikov, On the anomalous absorption of sound near a second order phase 

transition, Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR, 96, 469-473 (1954)

49
N.A. Pertsev, A.K. Tagantsev, and N. Setter, Phase transitions and strain-induced ferroelectricity in 

SrTiO3 epitaxial thin films. Phys. Rev. B 61, R825 (2000).

50
A.J. Bell. Phenomenologically derived electric field-temperature phase diagrams and piezoelectric 

coefficients for single crystal barium titanate under fields along different axes. J. Appl. Phys. 89, 3907 (2001).

51
J. Hlinka and P. Márton, Phenomenological model of 90-degree domain wall in BaTiO3 type 

ferroelectrics, Phys. Rev. B 74, 104104 (2006). 

52
P. Marton, I. Rychetsky, and J. Hlinka. Domain walls of ferroelectric BaTiO3 within the Ginzburg-

Landau-Devonshire phenomenological model. Phys. Rev. B 81, 144125 (2010). 

53
W. Ma and L.E. Cross, Flexoelectricity of barium titanate. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 232902 (2006).

54
I. Ponomareva, A.K. Tagantsev, L. Bellaiche. Finite-temperature flexoelectricity in ferroelectric thin 

films from first principles Phys. Rev. B 85, 104101 (2012).

55
Электрические свойства полимеров. Под ред. д-ра физ.-мат. наук Б. И. Сажина. Изд. 2-е, пер. Л., 

«Химия», 1977., стр.70. (in Russian)

56
A. Hubert and R. Schäfer, Magnetic Domains (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg) (1999)

57
J.K. Ha, R. Hertel, J. Kirschner, Micromagnetic study of magnetic configurations in submicron permalloy 

disks. Phys. Rev. B 67, 224432 (2003).

58 T. Shinjo, T. Okuno, R. Hassdorf, K. Shigeto, and T. Ono, Magnetic vortex core observation in circular 

dots of permalloy, Science 289, 930 (2000). 

59
A. Wachowiak, J. Wiebe, M. Bode, O. Pietzsch, M. Morgenstern, and R. Wiesendanger, Direct 

observation of internal spin structure of magnetic vortex cores, Science 298, 577 (2002).

60
R.K. Behera, C.-W. Lee, D. Lee, A.N. Morozovska, S.B. Sinnott, A. Asthagiri, V. Gopalan, and S.R. 

Phillpot. Structure and energetics of 180° domain walls in PbTiO3 by density functional theory. Phys.: 

Condens. Matter, 23, 175902 (2011).

61
J. Raabe, R. Pulwey, R. Sattler, T. Schweinbock, J. Zweck, and D. Weiss, Magnetization pattern of 

ferromagnetic nanodisks, J. Appl. Phys. 88, 4437 (2000).

62
R. Hertel, O. Fruchart, S. Cherifi, P. Jubert, S. Heun, A. Locatelli, and J. Kirschner, Three-dimensional 

magnetic-flux-closure patterns in mesoscopic Fe islands, Phys. Rev. B 72, 214409 (2005).

63
M. Yan, R. Hertel, and C.M. Schneider, Calculations of three-dimensional magnetic normal modes in 

mesoscopic permalloy prisms with vortex structure, Phys. Rev. B 76, 094407 (2007).

64
A.S. Arrott, and R. Hertel, Formation and transformation of vortex structures in soft ferromagnetic 

ellipsoids, J. Appl. Phys. 103, 07E739 (2008).

65
O.A. Tretiakov, and O. Tchernyshyov, Vortices in thin ferromagnetic films and the skyrmion number, 

Phys. Rev. B 75, 012408 (2007).


39

66
S. Gliga, “Ultrafast vortex core dynamics investigated by finite-element micromagnetic simulations”, 

PhD Thesis, Universität Duisburg-Essen, , Schriften des Forschungszentrums Jülich: Energie & Umwelt / 

Energy & Environment, 79 (2009). ISSN 1866-1793, http://juser.fz-juelich.de/record/5595.

67
A. Thiaville, J.M. Garc´ıa, R. Dittrich, J. Miltat, and T. Schrefl, Micromagnetic study of Bloch-point-

mediated vortex core reversal, Phys. Rev. B 67, 094410 (2003).

68
R.P. Cowburn, D.K. Koltsov, A.O. Adeyeye, M.E. Welland, and D.M. Tricker, Single-Domain Circular 

Nanomagnets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 1042 (1999).

69
E. Feldtkeller, Mikromagnetisch stetige und unstetige Magnetisierungskonfigurationen. Zeitsch. Angew. 

Phys. 19, 530 (1965).

70
R. G. Elías, and A. Verga, Magnetization structure of a Bloch point singularity, Eur. Phys. J. B 82, 159 

(2011).

71
V. Stepkova, P. Marton, and J. Hlinka, Ising lines: Natural topological defects within ferroelectric Bloch 

walls, Phys. Rev. B 92, 094106 (2015).

72
A. Arrott, B. Heinrich, and A. Aharoni, Point singularities and magnetization reversal in ideally soft 

ferromagnetic cylinders, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 15, 1228 (1979)

73
R. Hertel, and J. Kirschner, Magnetic drops in a soft-magnetic cylinder. Journal of Magnetism and 

Magnetic Materials, 278, L291 (2004).

74
L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, L.P. Pitaevskii. Electrodynamics of Continuous Media, (Second Edition, 

Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1984). See Eqs. (16.10)-(16.12)

75
E.A. Eliseev, S.V. Kalinin, S. Jesse, S.L. Bravina, A.N. Morozovska. Electromechanical Detection in 

Scanning Probe Microscopy: Tip Models and Materials Contrast. J. Appl. Phys. 102, 014109 (2007).

76
A. Ammitzbøll, J.M. C. Rauba, M.H. Schultz, The dielectrophoretic force on dielectric spherical objects. 

10064 - Physics Project. MIC – Department of Micro and Nanotechnology Technical University of Denmark 

(2006).

77
N. Balke, B. Winchester, W. Ren, Y.H. Chu, A.N. Morozovska, E.A. Eliseev, M. Huijben, R.K. 

Vasudevan, P. Maksymovych, J. Britson, S. Jesse, I. Kornev, R. Ramesh, L. Bellaiche, L.Q. Chen, and S.V. 

Kalinin,. Enhanced electric conductivity at ferroelectric vortex cores in BiFeO3, Nat. Phys. 8, 81 (2012).

78
B. Winchester, N. Balke, X.X. Cheng, A.N. Morozovska, S. Kalinin, and L.Q. Chen, Electroelastic fields 

in artificially created vortex cores in epitaxial BiFeO3 thin films, Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 052903 (2015).

79
E.A. Eliseev, P.V. Yudin, S.V. Kalinin, N. Setter, A.K. Tagantsev and A.N. Morozovska, Structural phase 

transitions and electronic phenomena at 180-degree domain walls in rhombohedral BaTiO3, Phys. Rev. B 87, 

054111 (2013).

80
E.A. Eliseev, A.N. Morozovska, G.S. Svechnikov, Peter Maksymovych, S.V. Kalinin, Domain wall 

conduction in multiaxial ferroelectrics: impact of the wall tilt, curvature, flexoelectric coupling, 

electrostriction, proximity and finite size effects, Phys. Rev. B 85, 045312 (2012).

81
A.N. Morozovska, R.K. Vasudevan, P. Maksymovych, S.V. Kalinin and E.A. Eliseev, Anisotropic 

conductivity of uncharged domain walls in BiFeO3, Phys. Rev. B 86, 085315 (2012).


40

82
M.J. Han, E.A. Eliseev, A.N. Morozovska, Y.L. Zhu, Y.L. Tang, Y.J. Wang, X.W. Guo, X.L. Ma, 

Mapping gradient-driven morphological phase transition at the conductive domain walls of strained 

multiferroic films, Phys. Rev. B 100, 104109 (2019).

83
Yury A. Barnakov, Ighodalo U. Idehenre, Sergey A. Basun, Trevor A. Tyson, and Dean R. Evans, 

Uncovering the mystery of ferroelectricity in zero dimensional nanoparticles, Nanoscale Adv. 1, 664 (2019).

84
I. Lukyanchuk, E. Zaitseva, V. Levashenko, M. Kvassay, S. Kondovych, Yu Tikhonov, L. Baudry, and 

A. Razumnaya, Ferroelectric multiple-valued logic units, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.10312 (2019).

85
D.P. DiVincenzo, Quantum computation. Science 270, 255 (1995).

86
M.A. Nielsen, I.L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, Cambridge University 

Press. ISBN 978-1-107-00217-3 (2010)

87
The NOT logic operation returns true if its input is false, and false if its input is true. The action of a 

CNOT matrix lefts the upper block unchanged, and the bottom block becomes rotated at 90 degree and mirror 

reflection with respect to the axis 2. CNOT application on basis vectors leads to |𝐴𝐴⟩ → |𝐴𝐴⟩, |𝐴𝐵⟩ → |𝐴𝐵⟩, 

|𝐵𝐴⟩ → |𝐴𝐵⟩ and |𝐵𝐵⟩ → |𝐵𝐴⟩.


1

Supplementary Material to 

“Electric Field Control of Three-Dimensional Vortex States in Core-Shell 

Ferroelectric Nanoparticles”

APPENDIX A. Mathematical Formulation of the Problem

We consider a ferroelectric nanoparticle core of radius R with a three-component ferroelectric 

polarization 𝑷 directed along one of the crystallographic axes. The core is regarded as insulating, without 

any free charges. It is covered with a semiconducting tunable shell of thickness Δ𝑅 that is characterized 

by the relative dielectric permittivity tensor 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑆 . The core-shell nanoparticle is placed in a dielectric 

medium (polymer, gas, liquid, air, or vacuum) with an effective dielectric permittivity, e. The word 

“effective” implies the presence of other particles in the medium, which can be described in an effective 

medium approach. For the sake of clarity, we consider the medium as being isotropic and temperature-

independent, i.e. 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒 = 𝛿𝑖𝑗𝜀𝑒, in contrast to anisotropic and/or tunable shells. The considered physical 

model corresponds to a nanocomposite consisting of core-shell nanoparticles in a dielectric medium, 

with a small volume fraction of ferroelectric nanoparticles (less than 10%) in the composite. The core-

shell geometry is shown in Fig. 1 of the main text.

Below we assume that the shell is soft enough not to affect the strain and stress in the ferroelectric 

core. The role of the shell is to modify and affect the electrostatics only, and so the elastic part of the 

problem is the same as in our previous study [1] of a ferroelectric core alone.

Since the ferroelectric polarization contains background and soft mode contributions, the electric 

displacement vector has the form 𝐷 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑏𝐸 + 𝑃 inside the core. In this expression 𝜀𝑏 is a relative 

permittivity of the core background unrelated with the soft mode [2], and 𝜀0 is the universal dielectric 

constant, and P is a ferroelectric polarization containing the spontaneous and field-induced 

contributions, 𝑷 = 𝑷𝑺 + 𝜀0𝜒̂𝑓𝑬 + 𝜀0𝜒̂𝑓𝑓𝑬𝟑 + 𝜀0𝜒̂𝑓𝑓𝑓𝑬𝟓+.., where 𝑷𝑆 is the spontaneous polarization at 

E=0. Note that the expression 𝐷 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑏𝐸 + 𝑃 is different from the usual textbook definition, 𝑫 = 𝜀0𝑬 +

𝑷, where 𝑷 is the total polarization. Usually 4 < 𝜀𝑏 < 10, and so 𝜀𝑏 can be significantly smaller than 

the linear susceptibility 𝜒𝑓 related to the soft ferroelectric mode, since as a rule 𝜒𝑓 > 30. In the case of 

linear response to a small external electric field the displacement is 𝑫 ≈ 𝜀0𝜀̂𝑓𝑬 + 𝑷𝑆, where 𝜀̂𝑓 = 𝜒̂𝑓 +

𝜀̂𝑏. 𝐷𝑖 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑆 𝐸𝑗 in the shell and 𝐷𝑖 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑒𝐸𝑖 in the isotropic effective medium. 

The electric field components 𝐸𝑖 are derived from the electric potential  in a conventional way, 

𝐸𝑖 = −𝜕𝜑 𝜕𝑥𝑖
⁄
. The potential  satisfies the Poisson equation in the ferroelectric core (subscript "f"):

𝜀0𝜀𝑏 (

𝜕2

𝜕𝑥12 +

𝜕2

𝜕𝑥22 +

𝜕2

𝜕𝑥32) 𝜑𝑓 =

𝜕𝑃𝑖
𝜕𝑥𝑖 ,
0 ≤ 𝑟 ≤ 𝑅,                                   (A.1a)

and Debye-type equation in the shell (subscript "s"):


2

𝜀0

𝜕

𝜕𝑥𝑖 (𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑆 𝜕𝜑𝑠

𝜕𝑥𝑗) = −𝜀0

𝜑𝑠
𝑅𝑑

2 ,
𝑅 < 𝑟 < 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅,
(A.1b)

where 𝑅𝑑 is the "net" screening length of the shell. As mentioned in the introduction, there are several 

possible ways to change the dielectric permittivity tensor of the shell. In all these cases the external 

stimuli (electric field, temperature, light, heat, etc.) affect the dielectric properties of the shell, which can 

influence the spatial distribution of ferro-active ions inside the core via electrostatic interactions and 

electric boundary conditions. 

Outside the shell  satisfies the Laplace equation:

𝜀0𝜀𝑒 (

𝜕2

𝜕𝑥12 +

𝜕2

𝜕𝑥22 +

𝜕2

𝜕𝑥32) 𝜑𝑒 = 0,
𝑟 > 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅,   
(A.1c)

Equations (A.1) are supplemented with the continuity conditions for electric potential and normal 

components of the electric displacements at the particle surface and core-shell interface:

(𝜑𝑒 − 𝜑𝑠)|𝑟=𝑅+𝛥𝑅 = 0,   𝒏(𝑫𝑒 − 𝑫𝑠)|𝑟=𝑅+𝛥𝑅 = 0,                           (A.1d)

(𝜑𝑆 − 𝜑𝑓)|𝑟=𝑅 = 0,   𝒏(𝑫𝑠 − 𝑫𝑓)|𝑟=𝑅 = 0. 
(A.1e)

Since we do not apply an external field, the potential vanishes either at infinity, 𝜑𝑒|𝑟→∞ = 0, or at the 

surface of remote electrodes located at the boundaries of the computational region. 

The LGD free energy functional G additively includes a Landau expansion on powers of  2-4-6 

of the polarization, 𝐺𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑢; a polarization gradient energy contribution, 𝐺𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑; an electrostatic 

contribution, 𝐺; as well as elastic, electrostriction, flexoelectric contributions, 𝐺𝑒𝑠+𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑜, and surface 

energy, 𝐺𝑆. It has the form [3, 4]:

𝐺 = 𝐺𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑢 + 𝐺𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑 + 𝐺𝑒𝑙 + 𝐺𝑒𝑠+𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑜 + 𝐺𝑆,                                      (A.2a)

𝐺𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑢 = ∫
0<𝑟<𝑅 𝑑3𝑟
[𝑎𝑖𝑃𝑖

2 + 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑃𝑖

2𝑃𝑗

2 + 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑃𝑖

2𝑃𝑗

2𝑃𝑘

2],                              (A.2b)

𝐺𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑 = ∫
𝑑3𝑟
0<𝑟<𝑅

𝑔𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

2

𝜕𝑃𝑖
𝜕𝑥𝑗

𝜕𝑃𝑘
𝜕𝑥𝑙,   
(A.2c)

𝐺𝑒𝑙 = − ∫
0<𝑟<𝑅 𝑑3𝑟
(𝑃𝑖𝐸𝑖 +

𝜀0𝜀𝑏

2 𝐸𝑖𝐸𝑖) −

𝜀0
2 ∫
𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑆 𝐸𝑖𝐸𝑗𝑑3𝑟
𝑅<𝑟<𝑅+𝛥𝑅
−

𝜀0
2 ∫
𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑒 𝐸𝑖𝐸𝑗𝑑3𝑟
𝑟>𝑅+𝛥𝑅
,    (A.2d)

𝐺𝑒𝑠+𝑓𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑜 = − ∫
0<𝑟<𝑅 𝑑3𝑟
(

𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

2 𝜎𝑖𝑗𝜎𝑘𝑙 + 𝑄𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝜎𝑖𝑗𝑃𝑘𝑃𝑙 +

𝐹𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

2 (𝜎𝑖𝑗

𝜕𝑃𝑙
𝜕𝑥𝑘 − 𝑃𝑙

𝜕𝜎𝑖𝑗
𝜕𝑥𝑘)) −

∫
𝑑3𝑟
𝑅<𝑟<𝑅+𝛥𝑅

𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝑆

2 𝜎𝑖𝑗𝜎𝑘𝑙,
(A.1e)

𝐺𝑆 = ∫
𝑟=𝑅 𝑑2𝑟
𝑎𝑖

(𝑆)𝑃𝑖

2.
(A.1f)

The coefficient 𝑎𝑖 linearly depends on temperature T:

𝑎𝑖(𝑇) = 𝛼𝑇[𝑇 − 𝑇𝐶(𝑅)],                                                        (A.3a)

where 𝛼𝑇 is the inverse Curie-Weiss constant and 𝑇𝐶(𝑅) is the ferroelectric Curie temperature 

renormalized by electrostriction and surface tension. Actually, the surface tension induces additional 

surface stresses 𝜎𝑖𝑗 proportional to the surface tension coefficient  and equal to 𝜎11 = 𝜎22 = 𝜎33|𝑟=𝑅 =


3

−2𝜇

𝑅 for a spherical nanoparticle of radius R. The stresses affect the Curie temperature and ferroelectric 

polarization behaviour due to the electrostriction coupling. Thus, the renormalized Curie temperature, 

𝑇𝐶(𝑅), acquires the following form [1-3]:

𝑇𝐶(𝑅) = 𝑇𝐶 (1 −

𝑄

𝛼𝑇𝑇𝐶

2𝜇

𝑅 )
(A.3b)

where 𝑇𝐶 is a Curie temperature of a bulk ferroelectric. 𝑄 is the sum of electrostriction tensor diagonal 

components that is positive for most ferroelectric perovskites with cubic m3m symmetry in the 

paraelectric phase, namely 0.004 < 𝑄 < 0.04m4/C2 [1-4]. Recent experiments tell us that  is relatively 

small, not more than (2 – 4) N/m for most perovskites. 

Tensor components 𝑎𝑖𝑗 and 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 are regarded as temperature-independent. The tensor 𝑎𝑖𝑗 is 

positively defined if the ferroelectric material undergoes a second order transition to the paraelectric 

phase and negative otherwise. Higher nonlinear tensor 𝑎𝑖𝑗𝑘 and gradient coefficients tensor 𝑔𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 are 

positively defined and regarded as temperature independent. The value 𝜎𝑖𝑗 is the stress tensor, 𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 is 

the elastic compliances tensor, 𝑄𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 is electrostriction tensor, and 𝐹𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 is the flexoelectric tensor in 

Eq.(A.2e). 

Allowing for the Khalatnikov mechanism of polarization relaxation [5], minimization of the free 

energy (A.2) with respect to polarization leads to three coupled time-dependent Euler-Lagrange 

equations for polarization components, 

𝛿𝐺

𝛿𝑃𝑖 = −𝛤

𝜕𝑃𝑖
𝜕𝑡 , where the explicit form for a ferroelectric 

nanoparticle with m3m parent symmetry is:

𝛤

𝜕𝑃1
𝜕𝑡 + 2𝑃1(𝑎1 − 𝑄12(𝜎22 + 𝜎33) − 𝑄11𝜎11) − 𝑄44(𝜎12𝑃2 + 𝜎13𝑃3) + 4𝑎11𝑃1

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃1(𝑃2

2 + 𝑃3

2) +

6𝑎111𝑃1

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃1(𝑃2

4 + 2𝑃1

2𝑃2

2 + 𝑃3

4 + 2𝑃1

2𝑃3

2) + 2𝑎123𝑃1𝑃2

2𝑃3

2 − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥12 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥22 +

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥32 ) −

(𝑔44

′ + 𝑔12)
𝜕2𝑃2

𝜕𝑥2𝜕𝑥1 − (𝑔44

′ + 𝑔12)
𝜕2𝑃3

𝜕𝑥3𝜕𝑥1 + 𝐹11

𝜕𝜎11
𝜕х1 + 𝐹12 (

𝜕𝜎22
𝜕х1 +

𝜕𝜎33
𝜕х1 ) + 𝐹44 (

𝜕𝜎12
𝜕𝑥2 +

𝜕𝜎13
𝜕𝑥3 ) = 𝐸1

(A.4a)

𝛤

𝜕𝑃2
𝜕𝑡 + 2𝑃2(𝑎1 − 𝑄12(𝜎11 + 𝜎33) − 𝑄11𝜎22) − 𝑄44(𝜎12𝑃1 + 𝜎23𝑃3) + 4𝑎11𝑃2

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃2(𝑃1

2 + 𝑃3

2) +

6𝑎111𝑃2

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃2(𝑃1

4 + 2𝑃2

2𝑃1

2 + 𝑃3

4 + 2𝑃2

2𝑃3

2) + 2𝑎123𝑃2𝑃1

2𝑃3

2 − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥22 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥12 +

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥32 ) −

(𝑔44

′ + 𝑔12)
𝜕2𝑃1

𝜕𝑥2𝜕𝑥1 − (𝑔44

′ + 𝑔12)
𝜕2𝑃3

𝜕𝑥3𝜕𝑥2 + 𝐹11

𝜕𝜎22
𝜕х2 + 𝐹12 (

𝜕𝜎11
𝜕х2 +

𝜕𝜎33
𝜕х2 ) + 𝐹44 (

𝜕𝜎12
𝜕𝑥1 +

𝜕𝜎23
𝜕𝑥3 ) = 𝐸2

(A.4b)

𝛤

𝜕𝑃3
𝜕𝑡 + 2𝑃3(𝑎1 − 𝑄12(𝜎11 + 𝜎22) − 𝑄11𝜎33) − 𝑄44(𝜎13𝑃1 + 𝜎23𝑃2) + 4𝑎11𝑃3

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃3(𝑃1

2 + 𝑃2

2) +

6𝑎111𝑃3

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃3(𝑃1

4 + 2𝑃3

2𝑃1

2 + 𝑃2

4 + 2𝑃2

2𝑃3

2) + 2𝑎123𝑃3𝑃1

2𝑃2

2 − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑥32 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑥12 +

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑥22 ) −


4

(𝑔44

′ + 𝑔12)
𝜕2𝑃1

𝜕𝑥3𝜕𝑥1 − (𝑔44

′ + 𝑔12)
𝜕2𝑃2

𝜕𝑥3𝜕𝑥2 + 𝐹11

𝜕𝜎33
𝜕х3 + 𝐹12 (

𝜕𝜎11
𝜕х3 +

𝜕𝜎33
𝜕х3 ) + 𝐹44 (

𝜕𝜎13
𝜕𝑥1 +

𝜕𝜎23
𝜕𝑥2 ) = 𝐸3

(A.4c)

The Khalatnikov coefficient  determines the relaxation time of the polarization 𝜏𝐾 = 𝛤 |𝛼|
⁄
, which 

typically varies in the range (10-9 – 10-6) seconds for temperatures far from TC. As argued by Hlinka et 

al. [6], it is reasonable to assume that 𝑔44

′
= −𝑔12. 

The boundary condition for polarization at the core-shell interface 𝑟 = 𝑅 accounts for the 

flexoelectric effect: 

(𝑎𝑖

(𝑆)𝑃𝑖 + 𝑔𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝜕𝑃𝑘
𝜕𝑥𝑙 − 𝐹𝑘𝑙𝑖𝑗𝜎𝑘𝑙) 𝑛𝑗|

𝑟=𝑅

= 0
(A.5)

where n is the outer normal to the surface, i=1, 2, 3.

Elastic stresses satisfy the equation of mechanical equilibrium in the nanoparticle and its shell,

𝜕𝜎𝑖𝑗
𝜕𝑥𝑗 = 0,            0 < 𝑟 < 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅.                
(A.6a)

Equations of state follow from the variation of the energy (A.2e) with respect to elastic stress, 

𝛿𝐺

δσij =

−𝑢ij, namely:

𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝜎𝑖𝑗 + 𝑄𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝑃𝑘𝑃𝑙 + 𝐹𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝜕𝑃𝑙
𝜕𝑥𝑘 = −𝑢𝑖𝑗,     0 < 𝑟 < 𝑅 ,                        (A.6b)

𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝑆
𝜎𝑖𝑗 = −𝑢𝑖𝑗,     𝑅 < 𝑟 < 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅 ,                                        (A.6b)

where 𝑢ij is the strain tensor. We will assume that 𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝑆
≈ 𝑠𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 for a "soft" shell. Elastic boundary 

conditions at the particle core-shell interface 𝑟 = 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅 are the continuity of the elastic displacement 

vector and normal stresses.

Below we consider a tunable shell of paraelectric strontium titanate (SrTiO3), which has an 

isotropic and strongly temperature-dependent dielectric permittivity, 𝜀𝑖𝑗

𝑆 = 𝛿𝑖𝑗𝜀𝑠, with the following 

expression

𝜀𝑠(𝑇) =

1

𝜀0𝛼𝑇𝑇𝑞

(𝐸) (coth (

𝑇𝑞

(𝐸)

𝑇 ) − coth (

𝑇𝑞

(𝐸)

𝑇0

(𝐸)))

−1

(A.7)

with the Curie-Weiss parameter T =0.75106 m/(F K) and characteristic temperatures 𝑇0

(𝐸) =30 K and 

𝑇𝑞

(𝐸) =54 K [7]. It should be noted that 𝜀𝑠(𝑇) ≈3000 at T=50 K and 𝜀𝑠(𝑇) ≈300 at T=298 K allow the 

spontaneous polarization of the ferroelectric core to be effectively screened by the tunable shell at room 

and lower temperatures. 

Table AI. LGD coefficients and other material parameters of a BaTiO3 core covered with a SrTiO3 shell

Coefficient
Numerical value


5

b,s,e
b=7 (core background),     S=300 (SrTiO3 shell at 298 K),     e=10 (surrounding)

ai (C-2·mJ)
a1=3.34(T−381)105,                 (a1= −2.94107 at 298K)   

aij (C-4·m5J)
a11= 4.69(T−393)106–2.02108, a12= 3.230108, 
(at 298K a11= −6.71108, a12= 3.23108)

aijk  (C-6·m9J)
a111= −5.52(T−393)107+2.76109, a112=4.47109, a123=4.91109

(at 298K a111= 82.8108, a112=44.7108, a123=49.1108)

Qij (C-2·m4)
Q11=0.11, Q12= −0.043, Q44=0.059

sij (10-12 Pa-1)
s11=8.3, s12= −2.7, s44=9.24

gij (10-10C-2m3J)
g11=1.0, g12= (−0.2 − +0.3), g44= 0.2

Fij (10-11C-1m3)
F11= +2.46, F12=0.48, F44=0.05

Rd (nm)
>100 nm (shell screening radius)

APPENDIX B

Without electrostriction and flexoelectric coupling the explicit expressions of Landau and 

gradient energy densities have the form:

𝑔𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑢 = 𝑎1(𝑃1

2 + 𝑃2

2 + 𝑃3

2) + 𝑎11(𝑃1

4 + 𝑃2

4 + 𝑃3

4) + 𝑎12(𝑃1

2𝑃2

2 + 𝑃1

2𝑃3

2 + 𝑃2

2𝑃3

2) +

𝑎111(𝑃1

6 + 𝑃2

6 + 𝑃3

6) + 𝑎112[𝑃1

2(𝑃2

4 + 𝑃3

4) + 𝑃2

2(𝑃1

4 + 𝑃3

4) + 𝑃3

2(𝑃2

4 + 𝑃1

4)] + 𝑎123𝑃1𝑃2

2𝑃3

2
(B.1a)

𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑 =

𝑔𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

2

𝜕𝑃𝑖
𝜕𝑥𝑗

𝜕𝑃𝑘
𝜕𝑥𝑙.
(B.1b)

The three coupled time-dependent Euler-Lagrange equations (A.4) for the polarization components 

without electrostriction and flexoelectric coupling are: 

𝛤

𝜕𝑃1
𝜕𝑡 + 2𝑎1𝑃1 + 4𝑎11𝑃1

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃1(𝑃2

2 + 𝑃3

2) + 6𝑎111𝑃1

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃1(𝑃2

4 + 2𝑃1

2𝑃2

2 + 𝑃3

4 + 2𝑃1

2𝑃3

2) +

2𝑎123𝑃1𝑃2

2𝑃3

2 − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥12 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥22 +

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥32 ) = 𝐸1
(B.2a)

𝛤

𝜕𝑃2
𝜕𝑡 + 2𝑎1𝑃2 + 4𝑎11𝑃2

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃2(𝑃1

2 + 𝑃3

2) + 6𝑎111𝑃2

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃2(𝑃1

4 + 2𝑃2

2𝑃1

2 + 𝑃3

4 + 2𝑃2

2𝑃3

2) +

2𝑎123𝑃2𝑃1

2𝑃3

2 − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥22 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥12 +

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥32 ) = 𝐸2
(B.2b)

𝛤

𝜕𝑃3
𝜕𝑡 + 2𝑎1𝑃3 + 4𝑎11𝑃3

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃3(𝑃1

2 + 𝑃2

2) + 6𝑎111𝑃3

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃3(𝑃1

4 + 2𝑃3

2𝑃1

2 + 𝑃2

4 + 2𝑃2

2𝑃3

2) +

2𝑎123𝑃3𝑃1

2𝑃2

2 − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑥32 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑥12 +

𝜕2𝑃3
𝜕𝑥22 ) = 𝐸3
(B.2c)

For a vortex polarization without a kernel in the form of prolate ellipsoid, where the longer axis 

of the ellipsoid is directed along [001], the component 𝑃3 = 0, and the condition 𝑃 = 𝐸 = 0 is consistent 

with 𝐸 = 0 inside the vortex. In a static case the remaining two equations are:

2𝑎1𝑃1 + 4𝑎11𝑃1

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃1𝑃2

2 + 6𝑎111𝑃1

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃1(𝑃2

4 + 2𝑃1

2𝑃2

2) − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥12 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥22 +

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥32 ) = 0

(B.3a)

2𝑎1𝑃2 + 4𝑎11𝑃2

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃2𝑃1

2 + 6𝑎111𝑃2

5 + 2𝑎112𝑃2(𝑃1

4 + 2𝑃2

2𝑃1

2) − 𝑔11

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥22 − 𝑔44 (

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥12 +

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥32 ) = 0

(B.3b)


6

The nonlinear coupled equations (B.3) can be solved numerically for specific boundary conditions:

[𝑎𝑖

(𝑆)𝑃𝑖 + 𝑔𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙

𝜕𝑃𝑘
𝜕𝑥𝑙 𝑛𝑗]|

𝑆

= 0,      (without summation on "i" in the first term)
(B.4a)

where the explicit form is:

(𝑎1

(𝑆)𝑃1 + 𝑔11

𝜕𝑃1
𝜕𝑥1 𝑛1 + 𝑔44

𝜕𝑃1
𝜕𝑥2 𝑛2 + 𝑔44

𝜕𝑃1
𝜕𝑥3 𝑛3 + 𝑔44

𝜕𝑃2
𝜕𝑥1 𝑛2)|

𝑟=𝑅

= 0,              (B.4b)

(𝑎2

(𝑆)𝑃2 + 𝑔11

𝜕𝑃2
𝜕𝑥2 𝑛2 + 𝑔44

𝜕𝑃2
𝜕𝑥1 𝑛1 + 𝑔44

𝜕𝑃2
𝜕𝑥3 𝑛3 + 𝑔44

𝜕𝑃1
𝜕𝑥2 𝑛1)|

𝑟=𝑅

= 0 .              (B.4с)

The integral of motion of the system (B.4) is 𝑔𝐿𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑎𝑢 − 𝑔𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑 = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡. 

An analytical solution of the nonlinear system (B.3) is possible in several cases for very specific

boundary conditions, but not for more general conditions (B.4). Below we consider a hypothetical 

situation of the stress-free system with two-component polarizations, 𝑃1(𝑥3) and 𝑃2(𝑥3), consistent with 

the absence of a depolarization field.

Case I. Static one-component and one-dimensional partial solution. If only one component of 

the polarization is position dependent, and the other components are zero, the one-dimensional profile 

of the uncharged domain wall is given by expression

𝑃2(𝑥3) =

𝑃𝑆⋅𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ[(𝑥3−𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
]

√𝜂⋅sech2[(𝑥3−𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
]+1,       𝑃1(𝑥3) = 0,                                  (B.5a)

where PS is the spontaneous polarization, 𝑥3 − 𝑥0 is the distance from center of the domain wall plane, 

and 2 Rc is the domain wall width [8]. For second-order ferroelectrics 𝑃𝑆

2 = −𝑎1 (2𝑎11)
⁄
and 𝜂 = 0, 

while for first-order ferroelectrics 𝑃𝑆

2 = (√𝑎112 − 4𝑎1𝑎111 − 𝑎11) 2𝑎111
⁄
and the dimensionless 

parameter 𝜂 = 2(𝑎1 + 𝑎11𝑃𝑆

2) (4𝑎1 + 𝑎11𝑃𝑆

2)
⁄
is positive. The correlation length is 𝑅𝑐 =

√𝑔44 (𝑎1 + 3𝑎11𝑃𝑆

2 + 5𝑎111𝑃𝑆

4)
⁄
. The expression (B.5a) describes a 180-degree Ising-type uncharged 

domain wall (see Fig. B1). Since sech2[𝑥] = 1 − tanh2[𝑥], it can be more convenient to expand 

Eq.(B.5a) in series of tanh[(𝑥3 − 𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
] near the wall plane.

The solution (B.5) should fulfill the boundary condition (B.4a), which acquires the form: 

(𝑎1

(𝑆)𝑃1 + 𝑔44

𝜕𝑃1
𝜕𝑥3 𝑛3)|

𝑟=𝑅

= 0.                                                          (B.5b)

As one can see the boundary condition (B.5b) is incompatible with the solution (B.5a) at the spherical 

surface r=R. However, a rather small incompatibility corresponds to the specific case 𝑎1

(𝑆) = 0, |𝑥0| ≪

𝑅 and 𝑅 ≫ 𝑅𝑐, since sech2[(𝑅 − 𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
] ≪ 1 for this case. Allowing for 𝑅𝑐 to be of the order of a 

lattice constant, considering that the core radius should be not less than (10 – 20) lattice constants for 

the applicability of continuous LGD approach, the solution (B.5a) can be regarded as a relevant trial 

function for the case 𝑎1

(𝑆) = 0.


7

FIGURE B1. Profile of the polarization component 𝑃2 𝑃𝑆
⁄
across the domain wall, given by Eq.(B.5) for different 

values of 𝜂=0 (black curve), 1 (blue curve), 10 (magenta curve), 102 (red curve), and 103 (dashed curve).

Case II. Static two-component and one-dimensional partial solution. For ferroelectrics with a second 

order phase transition (𝑎11 > 0and 𝑎111 = 𝑎112 = 0), the one-dimensional profile of uncharged domain 

walls satisfies Eqs.(B.3), which can be simplified as follows:

2𝑎1𝑃1 + 4𝑎11𝑃1

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃1𝑃2

2 − 𝑔44

𝜕2𝑃1
𝜕𝑥32 = 0,                               (B.6a)

2𝑎1𝑃2 + 4𝑎11𝑃2

3 + 2𝑎12𝑃2𝑃1

2 − 𝑔44

𝜕2𝑃2
𝜕𝑥32 = 0 .                               (B.6b)

For the specific case 𝑎12 = 6𝑎11, the partial solution of Eqs.(B.6) is [9]:

𝑃1(𝑥3) =

𝑃𝑠
2 (𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ [

𝑥3−𝑥𝑎
√2𝑅𝑐 ] + 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ [

𝑥3−𝑥𝑏
√2𝑅𝑐 ]) ≡

𝑃𝑆⋅𝑠𝑖𝑛ℎ[𝑅0 𝑅𝑐
⁄
]

𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ[𝑅0 𝑅𝑐
⁄
]+𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ[(𝑥3−𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
], 
(B.7a)

𝑃2(𝑥3) =

𝑃𝑠
2 (𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ [

𝑥3−𝑥𝑎
√2𝑅𝑐 ] − 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ [

𝑥3−𝑥𝑏
√2𝑅𝑐 ]) ≡

𝑃𝑆⋅𝑠𝑖𝑛ℎ[(𝑥3−𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
]

𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ[𝑅0 𝑅𝑐
⁄
]+𝑐𝑜𝑠ℎ[(𝑥3−𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
],
(B.7b)

where 𝑃𝑆 = √−𝑎1 (2𝑎11)
⁄
is the spontaneous polarization (𝑎1 < 0, 𝑥3 − 𝑥0 is the distance from the 

center of the domain wall plane, the correlation length is 𝑅𝑐 = √−𝑔44 (2𝑎1)
⁄
, and 𝑅0~(𝑥𝑎 − 𝑥𝑏) is an 

arbitrary constant. For the particular case 𝑅0 = 0, we obtain 𝑃1(𝑥3) = 0
and 𝑃2(𝑥3) =

𝑃𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ[(𝑥3 − 𝑥0) 𝑅𝑐
⁄
]. For a nonzero 𝑅0 the profile (B.7) is an uncharged Ising-Bloch type domain 

wall (two “rotational” 180-degree c-domains separated by an a-domain, see Fig. B2). The wall energy 

is R0-independent [9].

Note that the boundary condition (B.5) imposed at the spherical surface r=R weakly affects the 

solution (B.7) for the specific case 𝑎1

(𝑆) = 0, |𝑥0| ≪ 𝑅 and 𝑅 ≫ 𝑅𝑐. Assuming that these inequalities are 

valid, the solution (B.7) can be considered as a relevant trial function. 

For the three-component solution the sum of three (or more) tanh-functions can be used as a trial 

function.

Coordinate x3/Rc

Polarization P2/PS

----- =0
----- =1
----- =10
----- =102

- - - - =103


8

FIGURE B2. Profile of polarization components, 𝑃1 𝑃𝑆
⁄
(blue curves) and 𝑃2 𝑃𝑆
⁄
(red curves), across the domain 

wall, given by Eq. (B.7) for different values of 𝑅0 𝑅𝑐
⁄
=0.5 (solid curves), 1 (dashed curves) and 5 (dotted curves).

The static solution of the nonlinear coupled Eqs. (B.3) can be found by a variational principle. 

Since both partial solutions (B.5) and (B.7) are expressed via hyperbolic functions, and because Figures 

B1 and B2 look very similar for 𝑃2 profiles, we use hyperbolic functions as the basis for the serial 

expansion of the trial functions:

𝑃𝑘(𝑟, 𝜓, 𝜃) = ∑
𝑎𝑖(𝜓, 𝜃)𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ (

𝑟−𝑏𝑖(𝜓,𝜃)

𝑅𝑖(𝜓,𝜃) )
3
𝑖=1
,
𝑘 = 𝑟, 𝜃, 𝜓 .              (B.8)

The trial functions should be substituted into the energy (B.1b-c), integrated over the particle volume, 

and minimized in order to determine the unknown coefficients.

Since the equality 

1

𝑟2

𝜕

𝜕𝑟 (𝑟2 𝜕𝑃𝑟

𝜕𝑟 ) =

−1

𝑟𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃 (

𝜕𝑃𝜓
𝜕𝜓 +

𝜕(𝑃𝜃𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃)

𝜕𝜃
) should be valid for 𝑃(𝑟, 𝜓) = 0, we 

obtain that the first-order harmonic correction to 𝑃𝜓(𝑟) is proportional to 𝑠𝑖𝑛(𝜃)𝑐𝑜𝑠(4𝜓).

Table BI. Fitting parameters for the polarization components of the initial vortex at 𝜃 = 𝜋 2
⁄

𝑃𝛼
𝜓
𝑎1

(C/m2)

𝑏1
(nm)

𝑅1
(nm)

𝑎2

(C/m2)

𝑏2
(nm)

𝑅2
(nm)

𝑎3

(C/m2)

𝑏3
(nm)

𝑅3
(nm)

𝑃𝑟
0, 𝜋 4
⁄
0
N/A
N/A
0
N/A
N/A
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝑟
𝜋 8
⁄ , 3 𝜋 8
⁄
0.033
1.10
1.90
0.011
0.90
0.51
2.322
3.94
342.6

𝑃𝜓
0
0.296
0
0.75
−0.035
−1.93
6,69
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝜓
𝜋 8
⁄ , 3 𝜋 8
⁄
0.275
0
0.73
0.009
8.71
2.86
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝜓
𝜋 4
⁄
0.290
0
0.85
0.028
3.89
2.48
−0.029
1.19
0.84

𝑃𝜃
N/A
0
N/A
N/A
0
N/A
N/A
0
N/A
N/A

*N/A - non-applicable

Coordinate x3/Rc

Polarization P/PS

----- P1
----- P2


9

Table BII. Fitting parameters for the polarization components of the final vortex at 𝜃 = 𝜋 2
⁄

𝑃𝛼
𝜓
𝑎1

(C/m2)

𝑏1
(nm)

𝑅1
(nm)

𝑎2

(C/m2)

𝑏2
(nm)

𝑅2
(nm)

𝑎3

(C/m2)

𝑏3
(nm)

𝑅3
(nm)

𝑃𝑟
0, 𝜋 4
⁄
0
N/A
N/A
0
N/A
N/A
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝑟
𝜋 8
⁄ , 3 𝜋 8
⁄
−0.125
5.12
16.83
0.039
1.25
0.69
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝜓
0
0.183
0.96
0.81
0.274
−0.83
0.71
−0.192
−0.82
2.00

𝑃𝜓
𝜋 8
⁄ , 3 𝜋 8
⁄
0.257
−7.36
7.10
0.238
0.79
1.09
−0.216
−0.58
2.33

𝑃𝜓
𝜋 4
⁄
0.125
0.91
1.07
0.174
−3.69
6.73
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝜃
0
0.150
1.65
0.93
−0.140
−2.39
1.72
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝜃
𝜋 8
⁄ , 3 𝜋 8
⁄
0.150
1.75
0.98
−0.139
−1.48
1.73
0
N/A
N/A

𝑃𝜃
𝜋 4
⁄
0.146
1.88
1.02
−0.138
−2.75
1.83
0
N/A
N/A

*N/A - non-applicable

APPENDIX C

Note that it is easy to check that 𝑷̅ = ∫ 𝑷𝑑𝑉
𝑉
= 0, if 𝑑𝑖𝑣𝑷 = 0 and 𝑃𝑛 = 0 at the particle surface. 

Actually 𝑷̅𝒄 = ∫ (𝒄𝑷)𝑑𝑉
𝑉
, where 𝒄 ≡ 𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑(𝒓𝒄) is an arbitrary constant vector. Then 𝑷𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑑(𝒓𝒄) =

𝑑𝑖𝑣((𝒓𝒄)𝑷) − (𝒓𝒄) 𝑑𝑖𝑣𝑷 = 𝑑𝑖𝑣((𝒓𝒄)𝑷) and so 𝑷̅𝒄 = ∫ (𝒓𝒄)𝑃𝑛𝑑𝑆 = 0
𝑆
. Since vector c is arbitrary, the 

equality 𝑷̅𝒄 = 0 leads to 𝑷̅ = 0.

C.1. Torque Calculation

The torque M acting on a particle in a constant homogeneous field 𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡 is equal to 

𝑴 = −[𝑬𝑒𝑥𝑡 × ∫ 𝑷(𝒓)𝑑3𝑟
𝑉
] .                                           (C.1)

It is easy to check that ∫ 𝑷(𝒓)𝑑3𝑟
𝑉
= 0 for the “empty” vortex without a kernel, and therefore 𝑴 = 0

for any “true” vortex polarization distribution. Unlike an empty vortex, the vortex with a kernel oriented 

along z-axis has a non-zero component of the total dipole moment, e.g. 𝑃𝑧̅ =

3𝜋

4𝑅3 ∫ 𝑃𝑧(𝒓)𝑑3𝑟
𝑉
. Thus 𝑴 =

4𝜋

3 𝑅3(𝐸𝑦

𝑒𝑥𝑡𝒆𝑥 − 𝐸𝑥

𝑒𝑥𝑡𝒆𝑦)𝑃𝑧̅. 


10

C.2. Electric Field and Force Calculations 

C.2.1. Homogeneously polarized core-shell nanoparticle in a homogeneous external field

Let us consider a core-shell nanoparticle with a homogeneously polarized core of radius R, where the 

polarization 𝑃𝑆 is pointing along the z-axis. The core, shell, and external effective medium are dielectrics. 

Thus, the electrostatic potential satisfies the Laplace equation in all of the regions: 

∆𝜑𝑒 = 0,           ∆𝜑𝑠 = 0
∆𝜑𝑓 = 0 ,                               (C.2)

where the subscripts “f”, “s”, and “e” denote the physical quantities related to the ferroelectric core, 

shell, and external media, respectively. The electric field and displacement vectors are:

𝐄𝑓,𝑠,𝑒 = −𝛁𝜑𝑓,𝑠,𝑒,           𝐃𝑓 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑓𝐄𝑓 + 𝐞𝑧𝑃𝑆,        𝐃𝑠,𝑒 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑠,𝑒𝐄𝑠,𝑒.
(C.3)

Here 𝒆𝑧 is the unit vector along the axis z. The potential corresponds to a homogeneous electric field 

𝒆𝑧𝑧𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡 very far away from the particle. The potential and radial displacement are continuous functions 

at all interfaces:

(𝜑𝑓 − 𝜑𝑠)|𝑟=𝑅 = 0,
𝐞𝑟 ∙ (𝐃𝑓 − 𝐃𝑠)|𝑟=𝑅 = 0,                            (C.4a)

(𝜑𝑠 − 𝜑𝑒)|𝑟=𝑅+∆𝑅 = 0,
𝐞𝑟 ∙ (𝐃𝑠 − 𝐃𝑒)|𝑟=𝑅+∆𝑅 = 0.
(C.4b)

Let us switch coordinate systems from Cartesian to spherical coordinates, with the polar axis along the 

z axis. It is natural to assume that the electrostatic field does not depend on the azimuthal coordinate 𝜓, 

so the general solution is

𝜑𝑓 = −𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃,
𝜑𝑠 = −𝐸𝑠𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 + 𝐵𝑠

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃

𝑟2 ,
𝜑𝑒 = 𝐵𝑒

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃

𝑟2 − 𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡 .       (C.5)

The radial components of the electric displacement are

𝐞𝑟𝐃𝑓 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑓𝐸𝑓 cos𝜃 + 𝑃𝑆cos𝜃 ,
𝐞𝑟𝐃𝑠 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑠 cos𝜃 (𝐸𝑠 +

2𝐵𝑠
𝑟3 ),        
(C.6a)

𝐞𝑟 ∙ 𝐃𝑒 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑒 ( 2

cos𝜃

𝑟3
𝐵𝑒 + cos𝜃𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡).                                  (C.6b)

Substitution of the solution (C.6) into the boundary conditions (C.4) gives a system of linear equations 

for the unknown coefficients 𝐸𝑓,𝑠 and 𝐵𝑠,𝑒. Using their values yields the following expressions:

𝐸𝑓 =

9(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3𝜀0𝜀𝑒𝜀𝑠𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡−[2𝑅3(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)]𝑃𝑆

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠))
,                           (C.7a)

𝐸𝑠 =

3(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3𝜀0𝜀𝑒(2𝜀𝑠+𝜀𝑓)𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡−2𝑅3(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)𝑃𝑆

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)),   
(C.7b)

𝐵𝑠 =

𝑅3(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3[(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)𝑃𝑆+3𝜀0(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡]

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)),                                   (C.7c)

𝐵𝑒 =

3𝑅3(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3𝑃𝑆𝜀𝑠+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3[𝑅3(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)(2𝜀𝑠+𝜀𝑒)−(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(2𝜀𝑠+𝜀𝑏)(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3]𝜀0𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠))
.          (C.7d)

From Eq.(C.7), the electric field inside of the particle core is homogeneous and equal to


11

𝐸𝑓 =

−[2𝑅3(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)]𝑃𝑆𝑒𝑧

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)) +

9(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3𝜀𝑒𝜀𝑠𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑒𝑧

2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)
(C.8)

Let us set 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 0. Outside the core-shell particle the potential and electric field created by the 

particle is inhomogeneous and has the form of a point dipole field:

𝜑𝑒 =

𝐩𝑓∙𝐫

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒𝑟3,                                             (C.9a)

with an effective dipole moment

𝐩𝑓 =

12π𝑃𝑆𝑅3(𝑅+Δ𝑅)3ε𝑠ε𝑒𝐞𝑧

2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+Δ𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠) .                      (C.9b)

If the shell is very thin (𝛥𝑅 ≪ 𝑅) or absent (𝛥𝑅 = 0) the denominator in Eq.(C.9b) is equal to 

2(𝜀𝑒 − 𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠 − 𝜀𝑓)𝑅3 + (2𝜀𝑒 + 𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓 + 2𝜀𝑠)𝑅3 = 3𝜀𝑠(2𝜀𝑒 + 𝜀𝑓)𝑅3 and so 

𝐩𝑓 ≅

4𝜋𝜀𝑒

2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑓 𝑃𝑆𝑅3𝐞𝑧.                                           (C.9c)

C.2.2. Homogeneously polarized core-shell nanoparticle in a point charge field

Next let us consider the case when an inhomogeneous external field is produced by a charged tip (see 

Fig. 1c). For this case the effective point charge model is applicable, and the effective charge is 𝑄
≈

𝐶𝑡𝑈, where 𝐶𝑡 is the capacity, 𝑈 is the voltage applied to the tip, and ℎ = {0,0, ℎ} is the charge location. 

For this case the electrostatic potential satisfies the Laplace equation in all of the regions, except 

for the point charge location: 

∆𝜑𝑒 = −

𝑄∗

𝜀0𝜀𝑒 (𝒓 − 𝒉),           ∆𝜑𝑠 = 0
∆𝜑𝑓 = 0.                 (C.10)

The electric field, displacement vectors, and boundary conditions are given by Eqs.(C.3) and (C.4), 

respectively. Using the same spherical coordinates as in subsection C.2.1, the general solution for the 

electrostatic potential is:

𝜑𝑓 = −𝐸𝑓𝑟𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 + ∑
𝐴𝑛𝑟𝑛𝐿𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)
∞
𝑛=0
,
0 ≤ 𝑟 ≤ 𝑅,
(C.11)

𝜑𝑠 = (

𝐵𝑠
𝑟2 − 𝐸𝑠𝑟) 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 + ∑
[𝐵𝑛𝑟𝑛 + 𝐶𝑛

1

𝑟𝑛+1] 𝐿𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)
∞
𝑛=0
,
𝑅 < 𝑟 < 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅,    (C.12)

𝜑𝑒 = 𝐵𝑒

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃

𝑟2 + ∑
𝐹𝑛

1

𝑟𝑛+1 𝐿𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃) +

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒|𝒓−𝒉|

∞
𝑛=0
.              𝑟 ≥ 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅.
(C.13)

where 𝐿𝑛(𝑡) =

1

2𝑛𝑛!

𝑑𝑛

𝑑𝑥𝑛 [(𝑡2 − 1)𝑛]
are Legendre polynomials, which are orthogonal, and 

∫ 𝐿𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)𝐿𝑚(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)𝑠𝑖𝑛𝜃𝑑𝜃

𝜋
0
=

2𝛿𝑛𝑚
2𝑛+1. The potential is independent on the azimuthal coordinate 𝜓. 

The constants 𝐸𝑓,𝑠 and 𝐵𝑠,𝑒, which are proportional to 𝑃𝑆, are given by Eqs.(C.7) at 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 0:

𝐸𝑓 =

−[2𝑅3(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)]𝑃𝑆

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)),                                   (C.14a)


12

𝐸𝑠 =

−2𝑅3(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)𝑃𝑆

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)),                                   (C.14b)

𝐵𝑠 =

𝑅3(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)𝑃𝑆

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)),                                   (C.14c)

𝐵𝑒 =

3𝑅3(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3𝑃𝑆𝜀𝑠

𝜀0(2𝑅3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(𝑅+𝛥𝑅)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)) .                                  (C.14d)

Using that

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒|𝒓−𝒉| =

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒 {

∑
𝑟𝑛

ℎ𝑛+1 𝐿𝑛(cos𝜃)
∞
𝑛=0
𝑎𝑡 𝑟 < ℎ,

∑
ℎ𝑛

𝑟𝑛+1 𝐿𝑛(cos𝜃)
∞
𝑛=0
𝑎𝑡 𝑟 > ℎ,

(C.15a)

the radial components of the electric displacement are:

𝐷𝑓𝑟 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑓𝐸𝑓𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 − 𝜀0𝜀𝑓 ∑
𝐴𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑛−1𝐿𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)
∞
𝑛=1
,             (C.15b)

𝐷𝑠𝑟 = 𝜀0𝜀𝑆 (−2

𝐵𝑠
𝑟3 + 𝐸𝑠) 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃 − 𝜀0𝜀𝑆 ∑
(𝐵𝑛𝑛𝑟𝑛−1 − 𝐶𝑛

𝑛+1

𝑟𝑛+2) 𝐿𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)
∞
𝑛=0
,     (C.15c)

𝐷𝑒𝑟 = 2𝜀0𝜀𝑒𝐵𝑒

𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃

𝑟3 − 𝜀0𝜀𝑒 ∑
(

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒

𝑛𝑟𝑛−1

ℎ𝑛+1 − 𝐹𝑛

𝑛+1

𝑟𝑛+2) 𝐿𝑛(𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃)
∞
𝑛=0
.              (C.15d)

After the substitution of expressions (C-11)-(C.15) to the boundary conditions (C.4) and cumbersome 
algebraic transformations we obtain

𝐴𝑛 =

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0ℎ1+𝑛

(1+2𝑛)2(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛𝜀𝑠

𝑛(1+𝑛)(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒(1+𝑛)+𝑛𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠),
(C.16a)

𝐵𝑛 =

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0ℎ1+𝑛

(1+2𝑛)(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛[𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠]

𝑛(1+𝑛)(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒(1+𝑛)+𝑛𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠),
(C.16b)

𝐶𝑛 =

𝑄∗𝑅1+2𝑛

4𝜋𝜀0ℎ1+𝑛

𝑛(1+2𝑛)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛

𝑛(1+𝑛)(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒(1+𝑛)+𝑛𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠),
(C.16c)

𝐹𝑛 =

𝑄∗𝑅1+2𝑛

4𝜋𝜀0ℎ1+𝑛

𝑛(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛[(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)+(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)(𝑛𝜀𝑒+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)]

𝑛(1+𝑛)(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒(1+𝑛)+𝑛𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)
,       (C.16d)

where 𝛥 =

𝛥𝑅

𝑅 and 𝐶0 = 𝐹0 = 0.

C.2.3. Interaction of polarized core-shell nanoparticle with a point charge

Let us consider the interaction of the polarized core-shell particle with the point charge Q*, 

localized at the point with coordinate 𝑟 = ℎ. The corresponding interaction energy is 

𝑊 = (𝑄∗𝜑𝑝 +

1

2 𝑄∗𝜑𝑄)|

𝐫=𝐡 =

𝑄∗ (𝐩𝑓∙𝐡)

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒ℎ3 +

𝑄∗2

8𝜋𝜀0 ∑
𝑅1+2𝑛

ℎ2𝑛+2 𝐹𝑛𝐿𝑛(cos𝜃)|

𝜃=0

∞
𝑛=1
.            (C.17)

Finally, the generalized electrostatic force acting on a point charge is 

𝑭 =

𝜕𝑊

𝜕𝐡 =

𝑄∗

4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒ℎ3 [𝐩𝑓 − 3(𝐩𝑓 ∙ 𝐡)

𝐡

ℎ2] −

𝑄∗2

4𝜋𝜀0 (∑
𝑅1+2𝑛

ℎ3+2𝑛 𝐺𝑛

∞
𝑛=0
)

𝐡

ℎ
(C.18а)

We used the identity 𝐿𝑛(1) ≡ 1 in the last term of Eq.(C.18a). The dipole moment,


13

𝐩𝑓 =

12π𝑃𝑆𝑅3(1+Δ)3ε𝑠ε𝑒𝐞𝑧

2(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)+(1+Δ)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠).                           (C.18c)

The coefficient 𝐺𝑛 is given by the expression

𝐺𝑛 =

𝑛(1+𝑛)(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛[(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)+(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)(𝑛𝜀𝑒+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)]

𝑛(1+𝑛)(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(1+𝛥)1+2𝑛(𝜀𝑒(1+𝑛)+𝑛𝜀𝑠)(𝑛𝜀𝑓+(1+𝑛)𝜀𝑠)
(C.18c)

Further let us consider the rotated nanoparticle, which is far enough from the tip apex located at 

the point {0,0, ℎ}. For this case ℎ ≫ 𝑅 + 𝛥𝑅, and so only the first term (n=1) is significant in 

Eq.(C.18c).In this case the force components acquire a much simpler form

𝐹3 ≈

−𝑄∗𝑝𝑓

2𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒ℎ3 −

𝑄∗2𝑅3

2𝜋𝜀0ℎ5

(1+Δ)3[(1+Δ)3(𝜀𝑒−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)+(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑓)(𝜀𝑒+2𝜀𝑠)]

2(𝜀𝑓−𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑠−𝜀𝑒)+(1+Δ)3(2𝜀𝑒+𝜀𝑠)(𝜀𝑓+2𝜀𝑠)
,      𝐹1,2 ≈

𝑄∗𝑝𝑓1,2
4𝜋𝜀0𝜀𝑒ℎ3 ≈ 0.   (C.19)

By virtue of Newton’s third law the same force, but with opposite sign, should act on the core-shell 

particle.

APPENDIX D

The action of a Hadamard matrix 𝐻 =

1

√2 ( 11

1 − 1) on a vector state |𝐴⟩ = (𝑥, 𝑦) is the following: the 

matrix action rotates the vector by 45 degrees and provides a mirror reflection with respect to the y axis. 

The action of a CNOT matrix 𝑈𝐶𝑁𝑂𝑇 = (

1000
0100
0001
0010

) leaves the upper block unchanged, and the bottom 

block becomes rotated by 90 degrees with a mirror reflection with respect to axis y. CNOT application 

on basis vectors leads to |𝐴𝐴⟩ → |𝐴𝐴⟩, |𝐴𝐵⟩ → |𝐴𝐵⟩, |𝐵𝐴⟩ → |𝐴𝐵⟩ and |𝐵𝐵⟩ → |𝐵𝐴⟩.


14

REFERENCES

1
A. N. Morozovska, Y. M. Fomichоv, P. Maksymovych, Y. M. Vysochanskii, and E. A. Eliseev. 

Analytical description of domain morphology and phase diagrams of ferroelectric nanoparticles. Acta Materialia 

160, 109 (2018).

2
A.K. Tagantsev and G. Gerra, Interface-induced phenomena in polarization response of ferroelectric thin 

films, J. Appl. Phys. 100, 051607 (2006).

3
E. A. Eliseev, Y. M. Fomichov, S. V. Kalinin, Y. M. Vysochanskii, P. Maksymovich and A. N. 

Morozovska. Labyrinthine domains in ferroelectric nanoparticles: Manifestation of a gradient-induced 

morphological phase transition. Phys.Rev. B 98, 054101 (2018).

4
J. J. Wang, E. A. Eliseev, X. Q. Ma, P. P. Wu, A. N. Morozovska, and Long-Qing Chen. Strain effect on 

phase transitions of BaTiO3 nanowires. Acta Materialia 59, 7189 (2011).

5
L. D. Landau, and I. M. Khalatnikov. On the anomalous absorption of sound near a second order phase 

transition point. In Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 96, 469 (1954).

6
J. Hlinka and P. Márton, Phenomenological model of 90-degree domain wall in BaTiO3 type 

ferroelectrics.  Phys. Rev. B 74, 104104 (2006).

7
N. A. Pertsev, A. K. Tagantsev, and N. Setter, Phase transitions and strain-induced ferroelectricity in 

SrTiO3 epitaxial thin films. Phys. Rev. B 61, R825 (2000).

8
R. K Behera, C.-W. Lee, D. Lee, A. N Morozovska, S. B Sinnott, A. Asthagiri, V. Gopalan, and S. R 

Phillpot. Structure and energetics of 180° domain walls in PbTiO3 by density functional theory. Phys.: Condens. 

Matter, 23 175902 (2011).

9
I.I. Ivanchyk. To macroscopic theory of ferroelectrics. Solid State Physics, 3, 3731 (1961) (in Russian).


