This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-
00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the 
publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 
reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States 
Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 
federally 
sponsored 
research 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
DOE 
Public 
Access 
Plan 

(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).

Exploring Nanoscale Ferroelectricity in Doped 

Hafnium Oxide by Interferometric Piezoresponse 

Force Microscopy 

Liam Collins†, and Umberto Celano

†Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 

Tennessee 37831, USA

IMEC, Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Heverlee (Leuven), Belgium

Keywords: Hafnium oxide, Ferroelectricity, Piezoresponse force microscopy, Interferometric 

displacement sensing. 


ABSTRACT 

Hafnium oxide (HfO2)-based ferroelectrics offer remarkable promise for memory and logic 

devices in view of their compatibility with traditional silicon CMOS technology, high switchable 

polarization, good endurance and thickness scalability. These factors have led to steep rise in 

research on this class of materials over the past number of years. At the same time, only a few 

reports on the direct sensing of nanoscale ferroelectric properties exist, with many questions 

remaining regarding the emergence of ferroelectricity in these materials. While piezoresponse 

force microscopy (PFM) is ideally suited to probe piezo- and ferro-electricity on the nanoscale, it 

is known to suffer artifacts which complicate quantitative interpretation of results and can even 

lead to claims of ferroelectricity in materials which are not ferroelectric. In this paper we explore 

the possibility of using an improved PFM method based on interferometric displacement sensing 

(IDS) to study nanoscale ferroelectricity in bare Si doped HfO2. Our results indicate a clear 


difference in the local remnant state of various HfO2 crystallites with reported values for the 

piezoelectric coupling in range 0.6-1.5 pm/V. In addition, we report unusual ferroelectric 

polarization switching including possible contributions from electrostriction and Vegard effect, 

which may indicate oxygen vacancies or interfacial effects influence the emergence of nanoscale 

ferroelectricity in HfO2.

INTRODUCTION

Hafnium oxide (HfO2) based ferroelectrics are one of the most studied binary oxide systems for 

applications in non-volatile memory applications.1 Interest arises from promising compatibility of 

these materials with the existing complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) process 

technology. Moreover, when compared with the traditional alternatives for integrated ferroelectric

devices,2 ferroelectric HfO2 (FE-HfO2) is lead-free and offers improved thickness scaling at 

reduced leakage with low power switching, with potential applications in memory3-5 and logic.6

Despite the remarkable improvements in device processing and performance over the past number 

of years, many questions regarding the origins of ferroelectricity remain elusive. Most 

experimental testing involve ferroelectric capacitors and require the presence of electrodes. 

Relevant approaches include temperature-dependent dielectric permittivity measurements, second 

harmonic generation, as well as classical polarization–electric field (P–E) hysteresis measurements 

with macroscopic electrodes. While macroscopic characterization techniques on electrode devices 

help our understanding regarding global ferroelectric behavior, however, these measurements 

provide little knowledge on possible nanoscale origins of ferroelectricity in FE-HfO2. 

Unfortunately,
such macroscopic experiments are not entirely suitable for exploring 

polycrystalline FE-HfO2 films which are expected to have heterogenous ferroelectric behavior.

This necessitates tools capable of exploring intrinsic ferroelectric on the length scales of the local 


inhomogeneities themselves (e.g. phases, domains, defects). Therefore, a full understanding of the 

switching processes in these devices, requires the development of reliable experimental techniques 

for probing ferroelectricity at the relevant scale. 

Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM)7 is the gold standard for exploring piezo- ferro-electric 

behavior on the nanoscale. Imaging and manipulating of ferroelectric domains and probing 

polarization dynamics has been achieved with the emergence of PFM, offering the advantages of 

probing nanometer scale volumes and high-resolution imaging and spectroscopy.8 PFM is a 

scanning 
probe 
microscopy 
(SPM)-based 
technique 
which 
measures 
the 
dynamic 

electromechanical response of the ferroelectric sample when an ac voltage is applied to the SPM 

tip in mechanical contact with a surface.9 However, to date only limited success has been achieved 

and conclusively evidence of ferroelectricity on the bare surface of FE-HfO2 using PFM is 

distinctly missing.

Regards investigation of fundamental understanding of FE-HfO2 , significant efforts have been 

reported including ab initio simulations10 and direct observation with transmission electron 

microscopy (TEM).11 Progress relating to PFM on Hafnia has seen the work of Stolichnov et al., 

using non-resonance PFM on the surface of capacitors for the analysis of individual polarization 

domains through the top electrode that provides a uniform electric field application in the 

HfxZr(1−x)O2.12 On the same material system, Chouprik et al., correlated the information of domains 

sensing by PFM with structural analysis by TEM, observing the domain structural evolution during

switching.13 Buragohain et al. focused on the kinetics of domain nucleation and wall motion, 

reporting on the use of PFM in conjunction with pulse switching measurements for the nanoscopic 

visualization of domains evolution during wake up in La-doped HfO2.14 Recently, using a 

combination of PFM and second harmonic generation, Cheema et al. demonstrated ferroelectricity 


in ultrathin (1 nm thick) Hf0.8Zr0.2O2 (HZO) when using a confinement layer (TiN), whilst also 

highlight the importance of quantitative PFM measurements.15

This work, therefore, focuses on the overcoming barriers to extracting local information on 

ferroelectricity in HfO2 using a recently developed interferometric PFM. We demonstrate the 

interferometric PFM can be used to quantify local electromechanical coupling and ferroelectric 

behavior in HfO2. Using both nanoscale imaging and spectroscopy we report an anonymously 

small effective piezoelectric coupling coefficient (deff of < 2 pm/V) in Si-doped HfO2. We 

demonstrate the appearance of nanoscale domains and ferroelectric switching, as well as additional

contributions to due to possible electrostrictive or Vegard effects (e.g. oxygen vacancy motion or 

interface effects). Our results impact the community twofold, first they provide information to 

engineers and material scientists actively trying to control and harness ferroelectricity in binary 

oxides, and second, they demonstrate the applicability of interferometric PFM for the investigation 

of ferroelectric effects in materials with ultra-low piezoelectric coefficient.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

We focus this study on silicon doped HfO2 (Si:HfO2), that is a widespread material system with 

demonstrated uses as active layer in multiple ferroelectric devices.16, 17 Standalone capacitors are 

fabricated on a p+-Si substrate (1019 at/cm3), where 8 nm of FE-HfO2 are deposited by atomic layer 

deposition (ALD) at 300 ºC. Silicon is used as dopant during the oxide deposition, we select a 

concentration in range of 3.6 mol. %. The stoichiometry is confirmed by Rutherford back 

scattering (RBS) with elastic recoil detection (ERD), not shown. After the oxide deposition, 50 nm 

thick Si capping layer is deposited by physical vapor deposition and the stack is annealed using a 

1000 ºC for 30 seconds. This step induces the oxide crystallization leading to a polycrystalline film 


containing a mixture of crystallites with different phases such as monoclinic, tetragonal, cubic and 

orthorhombic (m-, t-, c-, and, o-phase). Afterward, the Si capping layer is patterned with reactive 

ion etching thereby creating individual capacitors for electrical measurements and in between 

them, exposed regions where PFM can be performed. Cross-sectional HRTEM image of the 

capacitor is shown in the inset of Figure 1a, confirming the layer thickness, the sharp interfaces 

and the polycrystalline nature of the film. Conventional P-V hysteresis and I-V loops are acquired 

on capacitors with size 100 x 100 µm2 and shown in Figure 1b. Similarly, Figure 1c shows the 

leakage current sensed on the oxide surface using conductive atomic force microscopy (C-AFM). 

To summarize, electrically extracted values for remnant polarization (Pr) and coercive field (Ec) 

are 20 µC/cm2 and 2.6 MV/cm respectively. While the C-AFM results indicate a clear rectifying 

I-Vs behavior induced by the asymmetric stack, with a low electrical leakage in the voltage range 

+/- 4 V. 

Figure 1, (a) HRTEM cross-section of the FE capacitor, 8 nm FE-HfO2 is sandwiched between 

the Si and Poly-Si top electrode. (b) Polarization-voltage (P-V) of 100 x 100 µm2 capacitor and 

(c) I-V spectroscopy performed using C-AFM on the FE-HfO2 surface.


To explore the emergence of nanoscale ferroelectricity we interrogate the bare film using PFM. In 

PFM an ac voltage V applied to a probe tip held in contact with the sample resulting in a periodic 

surface displacement. The surface displacement arises due to the converse piezoelectric effect and

is most commonly measured using the optical beam deflection (OBD) or “beam bounce” 

method.18, 19 OBD is an indirect measurement such that the measured signal is proportional to 

angular changes of the cantilever, rather than the displacement of the tip. Thus, for quantitative 

PFM additional calibration of the deflection sensitivity (i.e. m/V) is needed to relate the measured 

angular deflection signal to the surface displacement of interest. Unfortunately, this requires 

assumptions about the cantilever mode shape which often fail, especially under dynamic contact 

mode measurements.20

In an ideal “vertical” PFM measurement, the out of plane piezoelectric tensor component (i.e. d33)

normal to the surface can be quantified directly. In reality the true surface displacement can be

influenced by additional tensor components (e.g. in plane components along the surface normal)

and or clamping effects, therefore it is more common to discuss PFM measurements in terms of 

the effective piezoelectric coefficient (deff).2, 21 Since PFM is a dynamic measurement lock in 

amplifiers are typically employed to detect the magnitude of deff, while the phase of the response 

provides information about the polarization direction. The deff is commonly reported in values of

pm/V by dividing the measured tip displacement by the amplitude of the tip-sample voltage. 

From topography channel, Figure 2a, the sample oxide surface was found to be relatively smooth 

having a roughness value of ~200 pm. We do observe regions across the sample surface which 

appeared slightly raised, which is not surprising considering this is a polycrystalline film (see 

Figure S2).  As a first attempt we employed single frequency PFM measurements on the bare HfO2

surface. 
This method was found to be unsuitable for quantifying deff
(Figure S1). 
The 


measurement lacked sufficient signal to noise performance at low frequencies (i.e. below the 

contact resonance frequency). At higher frequencies the contrast was dependent on proximity to 

the resonance peak (i.e. dependent on cantilever mode shape and not surface displacement). This 

is due to the fact that single frequency PFM methods are particularly sensitive to artifacts (e.g. 

indirect topographical crosstalk22) when operated at frequencies in the vicinity of the contact 

resonance peak. Meanwhile, the necessity for resonant amplification on the bare HfO2 would 

appear to make single frequency PFM wholly unsuitable due to an apparent low deff .

To avoid such effects and gain sensitivity we first explore the use of band excitation (BE)-PFM.23, 

24 In contrast to traditional single frequency PFM, BE-PFM is a multifrequency approach allowing 

improved signal to noise through operation close to cantilever vibrational modes.23 At the same time,

BE-PFM allows for a complete characterization of the contact mechanics by tracking the behavior of 

contact resonance peak at each spatial location. In Figure 2 we examine the deff and contact resonance 

frequency shift images collected on the bare oxide. These images were determined from fitting

coefficients of a similar harmonic oscillator (SHO) fit of the resonant peak at each spatial location. 

In supplementary Figure S3 we provide images for all the SHO fit parameters as well as the R2

goodness of fit. Operating on the bare surface, as opposed to top electrodes, we see interesting 

contrast in the piezoelectric properties. We observe a finite response across the entire sample 

surface, having an average deff of 3.8 ± 0.7 pm/V, consisting of localized domains (~100s nm) of

higher (~4 pm/V) and lower (~2.7 pm/V) piezoelectric coupling formed on length scales of 100s 

nm. In addition, from the high-resolution piezoresponse images (Figure 2b) we observed periodic 

structures on the length scales of 10s of nm (highlighted with red arrows). Such contrast is of 

significant relevance to exploring emergence of ferroelectricity on the nanoscale in this material 

system. From Figure 2c, we also observed localized variation in the contact resonance frequency 


channel. Contrast in the frequency channel indicates conservative changes in tip-sample contact 

mechanics. The frequency shift, deff, and topography channels are largely decoupled from each 

other suggesting that the frequency contrast be related to localized regions of higher elastic 

modulus or stiffness/strain. The size and area coverage of shows similarities with regions of 

differing crystallinity found in the topography maps (see Figure S2). Importantly the variation in 

the contact resonance frequency does explain the phase inversion visualized by single frequency 

PFM (see Figure S1(g)), again highlighting the unsuitability of single frequency PFM. While 

localized phase contrast may be indicative of ferroelectric, we see no evidence of phase inversion 

in these regions (see Figure S3), indicating the presence of single polarization state and absence of 

ferroelectric domain contrast in this region.

Figure 2. High resolution BE-PFM of bare HfO2 oxide surface. (a) Topography scan 

collected over a 2.5 µm2 region (top) and a smaller 800 nm2 region (bottom). BE-PFM SHO fit 


parameters showing (b) the effective piezoelectric coupling coefficient (pm/V) and (c) contact 

resonance frequency shift. Zoom area is indicated by dashed red box in (b).

In terms of magnitude of the piezoelectricity, averaging across the entire surface gave a deff value

of 3.8 ± 0.7 pm/V. In this case the average value on the bear films are comparable to values 

measured by PFM on Zr doped HfO2 capacitors having top electrodes (5.5 pm/V).12 Meanwhile 

measurements on Y-doped HfO2 measured using double beam interferometry indicated a much 

lower deff of 1 pm/V.25 Unfortunately, while BE-PFM avoids indirect crosstalk with topography 

information, it is still sensitive to non-local electrostatic interactions largely inhibiting such

quantitative comparisons.26 Indeed, all PFM methods that utilize an optical beam detection 

approach,18, 19 will be influenced by vibrations of the cantilever arising from non-piezoelectric 

contributions. Such effects are indistinguishable from local piezoelectric tip displacements and 

hence detrimental to quantitative measurements. We note that there have been extensive efforts to 

minimize the background artifacts in OBD based PFM methods, including using high loads,9 stiff 

tips,27, 28 long shanks,27 compensating voltages,29 as well as mode shape corrections using 

analytical30 and experimental methods,31 with varying degrees of success. Here, to unambiguously 

quantify the nanoscale piezoelectric properties in silicon-doped HfO2 we adopt a newly developed 

detection scheme utilizing interferometric detection sensing (IDS) as opposed to OBD.

IDS-PFM utilizes interferometric detection to directly measure the vertical tip displacement, while 

avoiding parasitic contributions from the electrostatic excitation of the cantilever beam.32 Further, 

since IDS is an intrinsically calibrated approach it avoids complications associated with conversion 

of the OBD slope measurement to a physical measure of tip displacement.20 For all IDS-PFM 

measurements the detection spot has been optimized for detection of tip displacements and 


avoidance of unwanted cantilever motion as described elsewhere.20, 32 In general both BE-PFM 

and IDS-PFM showed comparable nanoscale contrast, confirming the nanoscale variability of the 

piezoelectric properties of bare HfO2 (see comparison images in Figure S4). In contrast between 

the techniques, we found that BE-PFM consistently measured a higher effective deff compared to 

IDS-PFM, and whereas BE-PFM measured a finite deff everywhere on the film, IDS-PFM 

measured regions showing no detectable piezoelectric behavior. Indeed, due to the fact the 

orthorhombic phase is expected to account for ca. 44% of the polycrystalline film, as visible with 

by X-ray diffraction (not shown), we expect unresponsive regions of the sample. As such we 

attribute the larger deff to an artificial shift in background of the BE-PFM signal arising from

vibrations of the cantilever due to non-local electrostatic interactions. 

Across many measurements, the deff measured on the bare oxide was consistently found to be

reduced with respect to the BE-PFM measurements, giving values between 0.6-1.5 pm/V. It is 

worth noting that compared to traditional ferroelectric materials (e.g. PZT) the measured coupling 

is
remarkable small, but seemingly
in agreement with double beam interferometry 

measurements.25 From the IDS-PFM amplitude and phase images in Figure 3, it was possible to 

clearly distinguish isolated domains of enhanced local electromechanical coupling from inactive 

regions (or regions with response below the detection noise limit, ~0.4 pm/V). Initially the 

responsive areas accounted for ~ 26% of the total area covered and apparent 180-degree phase 

contrast could be distinguished from (Figure 3(f)). The phase channel is noisy due to the small 

amplitude signal response; however, such phase contrast is often used as an indication of 

ferroelectric domains. Interestingly, after repeated scanning we did observe a slight increase in the 

deff (Figure 3b). From threshold analysis of 3 consecutive scans the responsive areas were found 

to increase to ~79% of the total area (see Figure S5). The increase in deff was accompanied by a 


more uniform phase distribution (Figure 3f-h). Indeed, it is known that increased remnant 

polarization and loop opening is observed on FE-HfO2 capacitors.33, 34 Several groups have 

reported that the underlying cause for this effect might be a redistribution of oxygen 

vacancies,34, 35 or a phase transition from a non-FE to a FE phase.36 Although in this work we 

have no physical top-electrode, here replaced by our probe, we consider our observation the 

equivalent of what is commonly observed in fully-fabricated capacitors.

Interestingly, we see clear evidence of localized regions which remain void of piezoelectric 

response. The inactive regions accounted for ~20% of the total area. Finally, after repeated 

scanning over the same area, it was possible to identify the previously scanned regions from a 

larger zoom area. (Figure S6). Similar control over the deff could be found under the application of 

dc voltage (Figure S7), however, phase reversal as an indicator of ferroelectricity was not 

observed. 

The anomalously low electromechanical coupling value may be a significant underlying factor 

behind the lack of convincing reports of ferroelectricity on the nanoscale using PFM on bare film. 

Unfortunately, the weak electrochemical coupling exhibited by the bare HfO2 surface required the 

application of moderately large ac voltages (e.g. 2-4Vac) to achieve good signal-to-noise values. 

However, as shown in Figure 1c, no significant leakage is observed in this voltage range for our 

film. We observed that PFM at these voltages resulted in localized surface charging as revealed by 

Kelvin probe force microscopy (Figure S8). At larger voltages (i.e. 6 Vac), we begin to observe 

structural changes in the surface oxide as measured by a localized thickness change on the order 

of ~100 pm (Supplementary Figure S8-9). These observations suggest that surface charging at low 

bias and non-linear dielectric processes or surface electrochemical effects may impact the deff

measured by PFM, and possible mask underlying ferroic properties. 


Figure 3. Repeated IDS-PFM imaging on bare HfO2 film. (a) Topography scan collected over 

a 2 µm2 area. (b) Histogram of the measured out of plane piezoresponse over the entire region. 

Spatial maps of the PFM (c,d,e) amplitude and (f,g,h) response for the (c,f) first, (d,g) second 

and (e,h) third consecutive scans are shown. Images were collected using a drive amplitude of 4 

Vac and drive frequency of 112 kHz. 

Finally, in view of the superior immunity of IDS-PFM to electrostatic affects,20, 32 we performed 

switching spectroscopy studies on the bare oxide film as in Figure 4. We observed a hysteretic 


amplitude dependence and a 180-degree phase inversion which is often indicative of ferroelectric 

switching. Considering the confined volume probed by the tip when used in spectroscopic mode 

i.e. 500 - 1000 nm3,  the results of Figure 4 suggests strong potential for scalability for FE-HfO2-

based devices. However, we do note some inconsistencies in the ferroelectric loop shape with 

respect to a classical ferroelectric material. In particular, we do not observe a saturation of the 

amplitude loop within the voltage range, which is typical for a classical ferroelectric material. At 

larger applied voltages irreversible processes were initiated and accompanied by catastrophic 

topographical breakdown (not shown).  Interestingly, we also note a clear and gradual increase in 

the signal for both biased and remnant measurement as a function of cycling. This is accompanied 

by a significant broadening of the switching voltage with increased cycling number. The latter is 

shown in Figure 2(a,b) for one thousand consecutive cycles acquired with a pulse duration of ~10 

milliseconds applied between the tip and the sample. The value of the increase in d33 observed 

here, i.e. ~ 30 % in 1000 cycle, which is consistent with the increase in the remnant polarization 

that is obtained in capacitors based on the same material, as reported elsewhere.23 While similar 

loops have been used to directly infer ferroelectricity,37 the peculiar loop shape might suggest that 

additional underlying factors (e.g. chemical, electrochemical, and physical phenomena) are 

involved in the PFM switching of the exposed HfO2 surface.37 Indeed, similar “ferroelectric-like” 

loops can be found on non-ferroelectric materials, which have been related to surface charging due 

to the injection from the tip, charged defects (i.e., oxygen vacancies) migration, electrochemical 

reactions on the film surface, or other effects. 37 In the case of IDS-PFM we can ignore electrostatic 

contributions to the signal from surface charging. We further confirmed the absence of non-contact 

hysteresis (not shown) strongly suggested that the observed IDS measurements are true localized 

electromechanical response.32


Hence we can be confident that the underlying hysteresis is a true localized electromechanical 

coupling.32 While difficult to infer from IDS-PFM spectroscopy alone, we suspect that additional 

non-ferroelectric contributions to the electromechanical coupling arising through either localized 

ion transport (e.g. oxygen vacancies) under the tip, or interfacial effects,14 producing a surface 

displacement which is electrochemical in origin. Interestingly, Cheema et al.15 also noted similar 

non-ferroelectric contributions to the switching spectroscopy loops measured by PFM (and IDS-

PFM). In this case they speculated that this behavior is related to interfacial effects at the dielectric 

SiO2 layer through which most of the voltage is dropped. Glinchuk et al., described an 

electrochemical mechanism for the unusual ferroelectric behavior reported in HfO2 in which they 

considered oxygen vacancies as elastic dipoles which coupled with the polarization via 

electrostriction and Vegard effects.35 Indeed, such mechanisms might be expected from the 

observations of localized KPFM potentials and oxide growth under ac voltage alone (see SI 

information). 


Figure 4. Switching spectroscopy using IDS-PFM. Showing (a,c) amplitude and (b,c) phase 

loops during the (a,b) “bias on” and (c,d) remnant or “bias off” state. Blue curves represent the 

first switching event whereas the red curve indicates the 1000th switching measurement on the 

same location.

In summary, local sensing of the effective piezoelectric coefficient on the bare surface of 

polycrystalline Si-doped HfO2 has been demonstrated. We compare different scanning probe 

methods including PFM, BE-PFM and IDS-PFM. Thanks to its high sensitivity and immunity to 

electromechanical sensing artefacts, we conclude that the IDS method offers a quantitative source 

of information in thin ferroelectric binary oxides. This is especially true as it allows to remove a 

dc pre-polarization step of the oxide surface, that we prove to induce (Figure S8) a strong source 

of electrostatic artifacts for PFM and BE-PFM.  While our layer exhibits a polycrystalline structure 

containing multiple grains of different phases, only a small fraction of crystalline grains show 

contrast using IDS. For these regions we extract an electromechanical coupling coefficient in range 

0.6-1.5 pm/V. We suggest that these regions are where the local microstrain in the film is sufficient 

to stabilize the orthorhombic HfO2 grains. Upon repeated scanning under ac voltage, these 

locations present also a gradual increase in the sensed converse piezoelectric effect. Consistently, 

when individual switching spectroscopy is performed on these grains, we observe a visible 

increase in the amplitude of the loops as a function of repeated cycling. Similar to the interpretation 

given for macroscopic capacitors, we suggest that the material undergoes a field-induced material 

activation i.e. phase transition (or domains de-pinning), interestingly in our case even without the 

presence of interfacial layers and stressors (electrodes) on the top interface. 
Finally, the 

nanoscopic domains analysis resulted in a lateral resolution down to 10 nm, thus making IDS and 


interesting approach for the non-invasive, high resolution quantitative mapping and screening of 

ferroelectric doped-HfO2 layers. 

EXPERIMENTAL METHODS

AFM measurements

The AFM used in this study combines a commercial Cypher AFM (Asylum Research, Santa 

Barbara, CA) with an integrated quantitative Laser Doppler Vibrometer (LDV) system (Polytec 

GmbH, Waldbronn, Germany) to achieve highly sensitive electromechanical imaging and 

spectroscopy. All PFM measurements were captured using Pt-coated cantilevers with a spring 

constant of ∼2 N/m and resonance frequency of ∼75 kHz was used. The Cypher AFM was 

equipped with external data acquisition electronics based on an NI-6115 fast DAQ card to generate 

the probing signal and store local hysteresis loops and correlate them with surface topography. BE 

was achieved by coupling the AFM with external data acquisition electronics based on an NI-6115 

fast DAQ card to generate the probing signal and store local BE and hysteresis loops and correlate 

them with surface topography.

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting Information

Complications associated with single frequency PFM. (Figure S1) Threshold analysis of AFM 

height measurements on bare Si doped HfO2. Results of the SHO fitting off the contact resonance  

in BE- PFM (Figure S3). Hysteresis loops captured as a function of distance from a soda-lime 

glass surface. (Figure S2) DART-VM-AFM measurements on polystyrene/polycaprolactone 

(PS/PCL) blend. (Figure S5) Influence of repeated PFM scanning on the measured piezoelectric 

coupling. Larger IDS-PFM scan revealing (Figure S6) AC and (Figure S7) DC induced changes 


in the localized piezoelectric response. Figure S8 Kelvin probe force microscopy of region where 

PFM was performed. Figure S9 topography changes after poling with large voltages. (Figure 10) 

Cross sectional analysis of oxide growth after PFM imaging. This material is available free of 

charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

*E-mail:Collinslf@ornl.gov, Umberto.Celano@imec.be

Author Contributions

U.C. synthesized and characterized the Si doped HfO2 device. L.C. carried out acquisition of PFM

datasets. L.C. and U.C. participated in discussion and interpretation of results. All authors 

contributed to the writing of the manuscript.

Competing Interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Notes

This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-

00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the 

publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States 

Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or 

reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States 

Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of 


federally 
sponsored 
research 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
DOE 
Public 
Access 
Plan 

(http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This research was conducted at and supported (LC) by the Center for Nanophase Materials 

Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. The authors also want to thank Nina 

Balke and Rama K. Vasudevan for their valuable discussion. We acknowledge and thank Stephen 

Jesse for the development of the Band Excitation platform used.

1.
Böscke, T.;  Müller, J.;  Bräuhaus, D.;  Schröder, U.; Böttger, U., Ferroelectricity in 

hafnium oxide thin films. Applied Physics Letters 2011, 99 (10), 102903.
2.
Setter, N.;  Damjanovic, D.;  Eng, L.;  Fox, G.;  Gevorgian, S.;  Hong, S.;  Kingon, A.;  

Kohlstedt, H.;  Park, N.; Stephenson, G., Ferroelectric thin films: Review of materials, properties, 
and applications. Journal of applied physics 2006, 100 (5), 051606.
3.
Müller, J.;  Yurchuk, E.;  Schlösser, T.;  Paul, J.;  Hoffmann, R.;  Müller, S.;  Martin, D.;  

Slesazeck, S.;  Polakowski, P.; Sundqvist, J. In Ferroelectricity in HfO 2 enables nonvolatile data 
storage in 28 nm HKMG, 2012 Symposium on VLSI Technology (VLSIT), IEEE: 2012; pp 25-
26.
4.
Dünkel, S.;  Trentzsch, M.;  Richter, R.;  Moll, P.;  Fuchs, C.;  Gehring, O.;  Majer, M.;  

Wittek, S.;  Müller, B.; Melde, T. In A FeFET based super-low-power ultra-fast embedded NVM 
technology for 22nm FDSOI and beyond, 2017 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting 
(IEDM), IEEE: 2017; pp 19.7. 1-19.7. 4.
5.
Florent, K.;  Lavizzari, S.;  Di Piazza, L.;  Popovici, M.;  Vecchio, E.;  Potoms, G.;  

Groeseneken, G.; Van IHoudt, J. In First demonstration of vertically stacked ferroelectric Al doped 
HfO 2 devices for NAND applications, 2017 Symposium on VLSI Technology, IEEE: 2017; pp 
T158-T159.
6.
Li, K.-S.;  Chen, P.-G.;  Lai, T.-Y.;  Lin, C.-H.;  Cheng, C.-C.;  Chen, C.-C.;  Wei, Y.-J.;  

Hou, Y.-F.;  Liao, M.-H.; Lee, M.-H. In Sub-60mV-swing negative-capacitance FinFET without 
hysteresis, 2015 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), IEEE: 2015; pp 22.6. 1-
22.6. 4.
7.
Kolosov, O.;  Gruverman, A.;  Hatano, J.;  Takahashi, K.; Tokumoto, H., Nanoscale 

visualization and control of ferroelectric domains by atomic force microscopy. Physical review 
letters 1995, 74 (21), 4309.
8.
Hong, S., Nanoscale phenomena in ferroelectric thin films. Springer Science & Business 

Media: 2004.
9.
Kalinin, S. V.; Bonnell, D. A., Imaging mechanism of piezoresponse force microscopy of 

ferroelectric surfaces. Physical Review B 2002, 65 (12), 125408.


10.
Clima, S.;  McMitchell, S.;  Florent, K.;  Nyns, L.;  Popovici, M.;  Ronchi, N.;  Di Piazza, 

L.;  Van Houdt, J.; Pourtois, G. In First-Principles Perspective on Poling Mechanisms and 
Ferroelectric/Antiferroelectric Behavior of Hf 1-x Zr x O2 for FEFET Applications, 2018 IEEE 
International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), IEEE: 2018; pp 16.5. 1-16.5. 4.
11.
Sang, X.;  Grimley, E. D.;  Schenk, T.;  Schroeder, U.; LeBeau, J. M., On the structural 

origins of ferroelectricity in HfO2 thin films. Applied Physics Letters 2015, 106 (16), 162905.
12.
Stolichnov, I.;  Cavalieri, M.;  Colla, E.;  Schenk, T.;  Mittmann, T.;  Mikolajick, T.;  

Schroeder, U.; Ionescu, A. M., Genuinely Ferroelectric Sub-1-Volt-Switchable Nanodomains in 
Hf x Zr (1–x) O2 Ultrathin Capacitors. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2018, 10 (36), 30514-
30521.
13.
Chouprik, A.;  Zakharchenko, S.;  Spiridonov, M.;  Zarubin, S.;  Chernikova, A.;  Kirtaev, 

R.;  Buragohain, P.;  Gruverman, A.;  Zenkevich, A.; Negrov, D., Ferroelectricity in Hf0. 5Zr0. 
5O2 thin films: a microscopic study of the polarization switching phenomenon and field-induced 
phase transformations. ACS applied materials & interfaces 2018, 10 (10), 8818-8826.
14.
Buragohain, P.;  Richter, C.;  Schenk, T.;  Lu, H.;  Mikolajick, T.;  Schroeder, U.; 

Gruverman, A., Nanoscopic studies of domain structure dynamics in ferroelectric La: HfO2 
capacitors. Applied Physics Letters 2018, 112 (22), 222901.
15.
Cheema, S. S.;  Kwon, D.;  Shanker, N.;  dos Reis, R.;  Hsu, S.-L.; Xiao, J.;  Zhang, H.;  

Wagner, R.;  Datar, A.; McCarter, M. R., Enhanced ferroelectricity in ultrathin films grown 
directly on silicon. Nature 2020, 580 (7804), 478-482.
16.
Florent, K.;  Pesic, M.;  Subirats, A.;  Banerjee, K.;  Lavizzari, S.;  Arreghini, A.;  Di 

Piazza, L.;  Potoms, G.;  Sebaai, F.; McMitchell, S. In Vertical ferroelectric HfO 2 FET based on 
3-D NAND architecture: Towards dense low-power memory, 2018 IEEE International Electron 
Devices Meeting (IEDM), IEEE: 2018; pp 2.5. 1-2.5. 4.
17.
Luo, Q.;  Cheng, Y.;  Yang, J.;  Cao, R.;  Ma, H.;  Yang, Y.;  Huang, R.;  Wei, W.;  Zheng, 

Y.; Gong, T., A highly CMOS compatible hafnia-based ferroelectric diode. Nature 
Communications 2020, 11 (1), 1-8.
18.
Alexander, S.;  Hellemans, L.;  Marti, O.;  Schneir, J.;  Elings, V.;  Hansma, P. K.;  

Longmire, M.; Gurley, J., An atomic‐resolution atomic‐force microscope implemented using an 
optical lever. Journal of Applied Physics 1989, 65 (1), 164-167.
19.
Meyer, G.; Amer, N. M., Erratum: Novel optical approach to atomic force microscopy 

[Appl. Phys. Lett. 5 3, 1045 (1988)]. Applied physics letters 1988, 53 (24), 2400-2402.
20.
Labuda, A.; Proksch, R., Quantitative measurements of electromechanical response with a 

combined optical beam and interferometric atomic force microscope. Applied Physics Letters 
2015, 106 (25), 253103.
21.
Morozovska, A. N.;  Svechnikov, S. V.;  Eliseev, E. A.; Kalinin, S. V., Extrinsic size effect 

in piezoresponse force microscopy of thin films. Physical Review B 2007, 76 (5), 054123.
22.
Jesse, S.;  Guo, S.;  Kumar, A.;  Rodriguez, B.;  Proksch, R.; Kalinin, S. V., Resolution 

theory, and static and frequency-dependent cross-talk in piezoresponse force microscopy. 
Nanotechnology 2010, 21 (40), 405703.
23.
Jesse, S.;  Kalinin, S. V.;  Proksch, R.;  Baddorf, A.; Rodriguez, B., The band excitation 

method in scanning probe microscopy for rapid mapping of energy dissipation on the nanoscale. 
Nanotechnology 2007, 18 (43), 435503.
24.
Jesse, S.;  Vasudevan, R.;  Collins, L.;  Strelcov, E.;  Okatan, M. B.;  Belianinov, A.;  

Baddorf, A. P.;  Proksch, R.; Kalinin, S. V., Band excitation in scanning probe microscopy: 
recognition and functional imaging. Annual review of physical chemistry 2014, 65, 519-536.


25.
Starschich, S.;  Griesche, D.;  Schneller, T.;  Waser, R.; Böttger, U., Chemical solution 

deposition of ferroelectric yttrium-doped hafnium oxide films on platinum electrodes. Applied 
physics letters 2014, 104 (20), 202903.
26.
Balke, N.;  Maksymovych, P.;  Jesse, S.;  Kravchenko, I. I.;  Li, Q.; Kalinin, S. V., 

Exploring local electrostatic effects with scanning probe microscopy: implications for 
piezoresponse force microscopy and triboelectricity. ACS nano 2014, 8 (10), 10229-10236.
27.
Gomez, A.;  Puig, T.; Obradors, X., Diminish electrostatic in piezoresponse force 

microscopy through longer or ultra-stiff tips. Applied Surface Science 2018, 439, 577-582.
28.
Hong, S.;  Woo, J.;  Shin, H.;  Jeon, J. U.;  Pak, Y. E.;  Colla, E. L.;  Setter, N.;  Kim, E.; 

No, K., Principle of ferroelectric domain imaging using atomic force microscope. Journal of 
Applied Physics 2001, 89 (2), 1377-1386.
29.
Kim, S.;  Seol, D.;  Lu, X.;  Alexe, M.; Kim, Y., Electrostatic-free piezoresponse force 

microscopy. Scientific reports 2017, 7, 41657.
30.
Balke, N.;  Jesse, S.;  Yu, P.;  Carmichael, B.;  Kalinin, S. V.; Tselev, A., Quantification 

of surface displacements and electromechanical phenomena via dynamic atomic force microscopy. 
Nanotechnology 2016, 27 (42), 425707.
31.
Killgore, J. P.;  Deolia, A.;  Robins, L.; Murray, T. W., Experimental reconstruction of the 

contact resonance shape factor for quantification and amplification of bias-induced strain in atomic 
force microscopy. Applied Physics Letters 2019, 114 (13), 133108.
32.
Collins, L.;  Liu, Y.;  Ovchinnikova, O.; Proksch, R., Quantitative Electromechanical 

Atomic Force Microscopy. ACS Nano 2019, 13 (7), 8055-8066.
33.
Shibayama, S.;  Xu, L.;  Migita, S.; Toriumi, A. In Study of wake-up and fatigue properties 

in doped and undoped ferroelectric HfO 2 in conjunction with piezo-response force microscopy 
analysis, 2016 IEEE Symposium on VLSI Technology, IEEE: 2016; pp 1-2.
34.
Starschich, S.;  Menzel, S.; Böttger, U., Evidence for oxygen vacancies movement during 

wake-up in ferroelectric hafnium oxide. Applied Physics Letters 2016, 108 (3), 032903.
35.
Glinchuk, M. D.;  Morozovska, A. N.;  Lukowiak, A.;  Stręk, W.;  Silibin, M. V.;  

Karpinsky, D. V.;  Kim, Y.; Kalinin, S. V., Possible electrochemical origin of ferroelectricity in 
HfO2 thin films. Journal of Alloys and Compounds 2020, 153628.
36.
Grimley, E. D.;  Schenk, T.;  Sang, X.;  Pešić, M.;  Schroeder, U.;  Mikolajick, T.; LeBeau, 

J. M., Structural changes underlying field‐cycling phenomena in ferroelectric HfO2 thin films. 
Advanced Electronic Materials 2016, 2 (9), 1600173.
37.
Vasudevan, R. K.;  Balke, N.;  Maksymovych, P.;  Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. V., Ferroelectric 

or non-ferroelectric: Why so many materials exhibit “ferroelectricity” on the nanoscale. Applied 
Physics Reviews 2017, 4 (2), 021302.


Supplementary Information

Exploring Nanoscale Ferroelectricity in Doped 

Hafnium Oxide by Interferometric Piezoresponse 

Force Microscopy 

Liam Collins†, and Umberto Celano

†Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, 

Tennessee 37831, USA

IMEC, Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Heverlee (Leuven), Belgium

Frequency dependence in single frequency PFM measurements

Figure S1(a) shows the topography over which measurements were performed having a roughness 

of ~205 pm. Figure S1(b) shows a frequency response curve captured at a single location (indicated 

in (a) with a start) using an AC voltage of 3 V. The data in this case is represented in pm/V where 


the measured displacement was divided by the driving voltage, which leads to the effective 

electromechanically coupling coefficient deff. The frequency dependence for PFM signal collected 

by optical beam deflection (OBD) is complicated by the contact resonance of the cantilever (~335 

kHz) as the OBD method is an indirect measure of the tip displacement via detection of the 

cantilever motion. It was found that when operated far below resonance using single frequency 

PFM we measure a mean response of 3.6 ± 1.3 pm/V with no spatial variation in amplitude of 

phase channels across the sample surface (Figure S1(c,f)). Meanwhile, when operated at the 

contact resonance frequency it was possible to measure nanoscale contrast ( Figure S1(d,g). In this 

case the measured “tip” displacements are an order of magnitude larger (234 ± 64 pm/V) due to 

amplitude by the cantilever flexural mode on resonance (234 ± 64 pm/V). This is not a surprise as 

we have made no attempt to correct for the amplification due to the contact resonance quality 

factor. When operated close to the contact resonance we do measure nanoscale contrast, however, 

the contrast appears dependent on proximity to the contact resonance, where different contrast can 

be observed when above ( Figure S1(d,g) of below ( Figure S1(e,h) the contact resonance peak.


Figure S1. Single Frequency PFM on bare HfO2 film. (a) Topography and (b) single location 

PFM tune collected by sweeping the frequency of the drive voltage as the tip is held stationary in 

contact with the oxide film. (c-h) Frequency dependence of the PFM (c-e) amplitude and (f-h) 

phase captured by single frequency PFM with drive frequencies of (c,f) 215 kHz (below 

resonance), (d,h) 325 kHz (close to resonance) and (e,h) 350 kHz (above resonance). 3 Vac was 

used for all measurements and the amplitudes are reported in pm/V by diving the measured 

amplitude by 3.

Structural analysis of the bare oxide film 


Figure S2. Threshold Analysis of oxide structure as measured by tapping mode AFM. (a) 

Topography scan collected over a 5 x 5 µm area. (b) Threshold mask (red) automatically 

calculated using an iterative method in igor pro. Higher regions accounted for ~39% of the 

surface area and were found to be raised by ~200-400 pm with respect to the underlying oxide 

regions

SHO fit parameters from BE-PFM


Figure S3. Band Excitation PFM. (a) Topography scan collected over a 2.5 x 2.5 µm area. Simple 

harmonic oscillator fits maps showing the (b) maximum amplitude (pm), (c) contact resonance 

frequency, (d) phase, (e) quality factor and (f) R2 criteria for the SHO fitting. In contrast to the 

amplitude and frequency channels, we observe a relatively uniform distribution in the measured Q 

indicative of little variation in the energy dissipated across the sample. The R2 parameter, which 

gives a measure of the goodness of SHO fitting. Values greater than 0.9 would indicate that the 

BE-PFM is well approximated by an SHO model, whereas regions of smaller amplitude show 

slightly lower R2 values.


Figure S4. Comparison of Piezoresponse measured by (a) IDS-PFM and (b) BE-PFM on the 

same region of the sample. (c) Histogram of the overall response. 

Influence of applied voltage on measured response

Figure S5. Threshold analysis of the responsive regions of the sample after consecutive 

scanning with PFM. The threshold was set to be the approximate detection noise floor (0.4 

pm/V) of the measurement. With repeated scanning the responsive regions accounted for (a) 

26% (b) 60 % and (c) 79 % of the surface area. 


Figure S6. Larger IDS-PFM image after repeated scanning with AC voltage applied to the tip. 

Previously scanned region is shown in (b) and (c). While no evidence of a structural change is 

observed from the (a) topography image, enhanced (b) piezoreponse and a more uniform (c) 

phase distribution was found in the previously scanned areas.  


Figure S7. Influence of DC voltage applied to the tip. (c,d) Topography, IDS-PFM (d,e) 

piezoresponse and (c,f) phase images collected (a-c) before and (d,f) after poling experiment 

involving repeated scanning with ±4V. While no change in topography is observed, clear 

changes in PFM amplitude and phase is seen in poled regions.

Figure S8. KPFM (a) topography and (b) surface potential after scanning region by PFM with an 

AC voltage of 4V applied to the tip. (red box indicates previously scanned regions shown in Figure 

2). 

Structural changes at higher applied bias


Figure S9. IDS-PFM topography (top), Amplitude (middle) and Phase (bottom) for 3 consecutive 

scans of size (a) 350 nm2, (b) 750 nm2 and (c) 1.5 µm2. Data was collected using a drive frequency 

of 6Vac at 155 kHz. Scanning was performed at 1Hz line rate and imaging force of ~150 nN. 


Figure S10. Cross sectional analysis of oxide growth after PFM imaging



