(a)E-mail: fabrice.lemoult@espci.psl.eu 

 

Pages provided by publisher 

Structure-Composition Correspondence in Crystalline 
Metamaterials for Acoustic Valley-Hall Effect and Unidirectional 
Sound Guiding 

SIMON YVES1, GEOFFROY LEROSEY2 AND FABRICE LEMOULT1,(a) 

1 ESPCI Paris, PSL University, CNRS, Institut Langevin - 1 rue Jussieu, 75005 Paris, France 
2 Greenerwave, ESPCI Paris Incubator PC’up, 6 rue Jean Calvin, 75005 Paris, France 

 
PACS 43.20.+g – General linear acoustics 
PACS 43.35.+d – Ultrasonics, quantum acoustics, and physical effects of sound 

Abstract – Recently, the domain of topological insulators in condensed matter physics has been teeming 
with intriguing and very exciting discoveries. Notably, the capacity of guiding currents towards specific 
directions according to the spin of the travelling electrons has a great potential for electronic devices. 
This new phenomenon has been transposed to the classical domain in electromagnetics and acoustics, 
unveiling the pseudo-spin locking of guided waves. However, these macroscopic analogues are 
photonic/phononic crystals which are intrinsically wavelength scaled. In this work, we realize a genuine 
acoustic analogue of the valley-Hall effect in the audible regime using a lattice of soda cans. The 
crystalline description of this very simple metamaterial allows us to demonstrate experimentally the 
unidirectional excitation of sound guided at a scale much smaller than the wavelength of operation. These 
results not only open the tantalizing valley-topological phenomena to the audible regime but also allow 
to envision compact applications for acoustic manipulation. 

 

Introduction. – Sound manipulation is of great interest in 

numerous domains of application such as acoustic isolation, 
ultrasonic imaging, sonars and communication for example. In 
the last decades, it has been demonstrated that phononic 
crystals [1, 2] permit to tailor the propagation of sonic waves 
with great precision.  However, their wavelength-scaled 
structure makes them bulky devices, notably for low 
frequencies. Metamaterials, on the other hand, are man-made 
composite media which are structured on a scale much smaller 
than the operating wavelength [1, 3, 4, 5]. In the case of a 
resonant unit cell, these systems are named locally resonant 
metamaterials [6, 7, 8] and are usually described in terms of 
effective parameters which neglect or at least mitigates their 
sub-wavelength structural peculiarities. These homogenization 
procedures have led to the discovery of intriguing new 
phenomena such as negative index and acoustic cloaking [9, 
10, 11, 12, 13], near-zero density media [14] and deep 
subwavelength imaging [15].  

Nevertheless, due to the resonant nature of its constituents, 

multiple scattering occurs within the unit cell of such locally 
resonant metamaterials [16, 17]. It means that both their 
structure and their composition, albeit at a deep subwavelength 
scale, play a major role on the sound propagation. Hence, 
adopting such a microscopic approach has led to the obtention 
of negative refraction at a macroscopic scale [16] as well as 
topological properties [18], opening the era of so-called 
crystalline metamaterials. Moreover, the waves propagating in 
these systems follow the physics of the polariton [17, 19, 20] 
meaning that the sound is confined in the close vicinity of the 
resonators. This allows to obtain field maps experimentally and 
makes these media great table-top platforms for the study of 

fascinating solid-state physics phenomena at a macroscopic 
scale. 

In 
this 
letter, 
we 
characterize 
numerically 
and 

experimentally an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley-
Hall effect using a very genuine metamaterial made of soda 
cans, in the audible regime. We first establish a clear connection 
between structure and composition comparing the honeycomb 
and Kagome lattices. From there, inspired by a previous work 
in the microwave domain [21], we use this correspondence to 
straightforwardly induce a circular crystalline polarization, so-
called valley degree of freedom, by modifying slightly the 
subwavelength structure. In that way, it differs from the work 
of [22] which exploit the composition of the unit cell. We then 
use it to make specific interfaces which present guided modes 
carrying also a crystalline polarization linked to their direction 
of propagation. Last, but not least, this intriguing property is 
highlighted experimentally by the straightforward rotational 
excitation of such directional subwavelength acoustics 
waveguides. 

Correspondence between Honeycomb and Kagome 

lattices of soda cans. – Several macroscopic analogues of the 
quantum valley-Hall effect have been demonstrated for 
acoustic waves, with phononic crystals [23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 
29, 30, 31, 32], but also for elastic waves in structured 
plates  [33, 34, 35, 36, 37] and even at the scale of a chip [38]. 
Their creation starts by the presence of Dirac cones within the 
band diagram of the sample, and then by breaking them 
appropriately. In this study, we work in the airborne acoustic 
domain with a very simple locally resonant metamaterial whose 
building block is a mere soda can. It is a low-loss Helmholtz 


 
 
 
 

 

resonator whose resonant frequency f1 is linked to the air 
volume it contains [19]. For the case of empty cans, f1 is 
roughly 415 Hz, meaning a resonant wavelength around 80 cm 
which is far bigger than the size of a single can, making them 
relevant meta-atoms for our system. Building a subwavelength 
honeycomb lattice with these cans, as shown in Fig. 1(a), 
allows to obtain Dirac cones at the corners of the first Brillouin 
zone [39] (K and K’ valleys) as we can see on the 
corresponding numerical dispersion relation displayed in Fig. 
1(c) obtained with COMSOL Multiphysics. Interestingly, these 
peculiar degeneracies, which are the starting point before 
obtaining intriguing properties, also exist at the K points of the 
band diagram for the case of another hexagonal Bravais lattice, 
the Kagome lattice of cans (Fig. 1(b)), as depicted on Fig. 1(d). 
These two lattices, although different by nature because they do 
not contain the same number of meta-atoms per unit cell, are 
both hexagonal Bravais lattices and consequently they have 
some similarities, as for example the shape of the first Brillouin 
zone. It is therefore interesting to push the analogy between the 
two lattices, and to describe the Kagome lattice as a honeycomb 
lattice made of meta-molecules (made of a trimer of cans), as 
shown in green disks on Fig. 1(b), even if the latter are more 
complicated than the original meta-atoms. Each meta-molecule 
exhibits three resonances, a monopolar one and two dipolar 
ones, which are responsible for the propagating bands. This 
vision therefore permits to explain genuinely the presence of 
Dirac cones linking the two low-frequency bands in the 
Kagome lattice dispersion. Moreover, the existence of the third 
band is simply related to the two orthogonal symmetries of the 
trimer’s dipolar modes: one of them acts as a deaf-mode and 

hybridizes poorly with the incoming propagating wave 
according to its direction, which generates this flat band. In the 
following we use this clear connection between the two lattices 
to create an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley-Hall effect 
with our metamaterial. 

Composition-structure connection to induce valley 

differentiation. – In a previous work in the microwave 
domain [21], and recently with soda cans in acoustics [22], it 
has been proven that it is possible to break appropriately the 
Dirac cones of the honeycomb lattice by slightly detuning one 
of the two resonators of the unit-cell. In the case of the acoustic 
sample, it is realized by diminishing the Helmholtz cavity 
which is done by adding some water in one can in order to 
increase its resonance frequency f2>f1. In that case we play with 
the composition of the unit cell, and the structure is left 
unchanged, as it is shown in Fig. 2(a). Now, exploiting the 
correspondence established in the previous paragraph, we can 
also detune one of the two meta-molecules of the Kagome unit-
cell. However, this time we do not pour some water in the cans, 
one can being shared by the two meta-molecules but will play 
on the spatial pattern. Indeed, to open a band gap, we slightly 
modify the structure of the lattice as explained on Fig. 2(b). 
Notably, we shrink the trimer of one metamolecule (cyan disk) 
which directly expands the other trimer (purple disk). The 
resulting lattice is sometimes named breathing Kagome lattice 
and present higher-order topological features such as corner 
modes  [40, 41, 42]. In our study, we show that this particular 
lattice can now directly be seen as a honeycomb lattice of two 
different meta-molecules: a small and a big trimer of soda cans. 
Playing with their spatial arrangement, we control the trimers’ 

Fig. 1: (Colour on-line) (a) Subwavelength-scaled honeycomb lattice made of soda cans as meta-atoms and its first Brillouin zone 
(right). (b) Subwavelength-scaled Kagome lattice, which can be seen as a Honeycomb lattice of meta-molecules (green disks), and 
its first Brillouin zone (right). (c) Band diagram of the Honeycomb lattice. (d) Same as (c) for the Kagome lattice.


 

 

mode frequencies. More precisely, shrinking the trimers tends 
to get the corresponding monopolar and dipolar modes’ 
frequencies slightly closer whereas expanding them results in 
the opposite behaviour.  

To demonstrate the coherence of our approach, we 

compute the numerical dispersion relation of the breathing 
Kagome lattice shown in Fig. 2(c) with COMSOL 
Multiphysics. The Dirac cones are replaced by a small bandgap. 
We do not worry about the wideness of the gap in the context 
of this article, but one has to remember that it is related to the 
changes made to the original Kagome lattice: the more the 
lattice is deformed the wider the gap. We now focus on the 
wave behaviour in the metamaterial at the K valley for the 
lower frequency band, whose corresponding field map is 
displayed on Fig. 2(e). In particular, we take a closer look at the 
pressure profile within a big hexagon (dark line). We clearly 
see that the pressure is distributed on a triangle of shrunk meta-
molecules (in green on the right of the frame). Moreover, as the 
wave propagates in the K direction this field distribution rotates 
on the green triangle with a left-handed polarization. For the 
high frequency band which is depicted on Fig. 2(d), the 
pressure profile is distributed on a triangle of expanded meta-
molecules (in yellow on the right of the frame), and also rotates 
but with a right-handed polarization. Then we look at the field 
behaviour at the other K’ valley. For the lower band, the field 
is still distributed on the triangle of shrunk metamolecules, as 

shown in Fig. 2(g). However, if we compare to the previous 
case, the latter is now upside down with respect to the 
propagation direction (in yellow on the right of the frame) 
which results in a right-handed rotation. Persistently, the 
pressure field related to the high-frequency band has a left-
handed rotation (Fig. 2(f)).  

These simulated results are in complete agreement with the 

behaviour obtained in the case of a bi-disperse honeycomb 
lattice [21, 22]. In addition to undoubtedly prove the relevance 
of our approach, it shows that playing with the structure of our 
unit cell is equivalent to control its composition. We insist on 
the fact that these correspondences emerge thanks to the 
crystalline description of locally resonant metamaterials. This 
allows us to directly induce a bulk circular polarization 
(referred as valley degree of freedom in condensed matter 
physics) within the lattice of soda cans simply by modifying the 
structure of the medium at a subwavelength level.  

Subwavelength Acoustic valley-Hall effect. – We now 

want to obtain an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley-Hall 
effect. The usual procedure to follow is to make an interface 
between two media on which opposite valleys are superposed. 
This can be done simply by applying a mirror symmetry with 
respect to the KK’ direction within our breathing Kagome 
lattice of soda cans. It results in two different interfaces 
displayed on Fig. 3(a) and (e). First, we focus on the red 
interface (Fig. 3(a)). Its dispersion relation is shown in Fig. 3(b) 

Fig. 2: (Colour on-line) (a) Bidisperse honeycomb lattice of soda cans with two different meta-atoms: empty and partially filled 
cans (blue). (b) Breathing Kagome lattice which can be seen as a honeycomb lattice of two different metamolecules: shrunk (cyan) 
and expanded (purple) trimers. (c) Dispersion relation of the breathing Kagome lattice of cans. (d) (resp. (e)) Acoustic field map of 
the crystalline mode at the valley K for the high frequency band (resp. low frequency band). Insets on the right picture the rotation 
of the field within the hexagon (dark line) (f) (resp. (g)) Same as (d) (resp. (e)) at the valley K’.


 
 
 
 

 

and effectively proves the presence of a new band within the 
band gap of the medium. Looking at the pressure field map 
corresponding to the mode propagating towards the positive x, 
ie. with a positive group velocity (red dot on Fig. 3(b)), we 
clearly see that the wave is guided along the interface and 
present an antisymmetric profile with respect to the interface. 
Following the study made in microwaves [21], we can define a 
hexagon (dark line) which is now composed of two hybrid 
triangles (green and yellow) of shrunk and expanded meta-
molecules as shown in Fig. 3(d). The field pressure is now 
distributed on the two triangles (green and yellow) and it is 
possible 
to 
define 
two 
counter-propagating 
circular 

polarizations as in the previous bulk study. Their sense of 
rotation is directly linked to the direction of propagation. In the 
case of the blue interface, a guided mode also lays in the 
bandgap (Fig. 3(f)). The field map of the mode going towards 
the positive x (blue dot on Fig. 3(f)) has now a symmetric 
profile with respect to the interface. It can also be described in 
terms of two opposite circular polarizations on different hybrid 
triangles at the interface, as presented in Fig. 3(g). Interestingly, 
these senses of rotation, which are related to the direction of 
propagation, are opposite compare to the red interface.  

Hence, these numerical simulations truly evidence that we 

managed to obtain an acoustic analogue of the quantum valley-

Fig. 3: (Colour on-line) (a) Red interface obtained by applying a mirror symmetry with respect to the KK’ axis to the metamaterial. 
(b) Dispersion relation of (a). (c) Acoustic field map related of the guided mode corresponding to the red dot in (b). (d) Picture 
explaining the combined rotation scheme of the acoustic field on the resonators of the interface (dark lined hexagon of (c)). (e) Same 
as (a) but for the blue interface. (f) Dispersion relation of (e). (g) (resp. (g)) same as (c) (resp.(d)) for the blue interface.

Fig. 4: (Colour on-line) (a) Transmission towards the left (green) and towards the right (yellow) of the two sources (stars in inset) 
according to the phase shift between them, in the case of the red interface. It is possible to excite unidirectionally the guided wave 
as shown on the intensity maps 1 and 2 (below). (b) Same as (a) for the blue interface.  It is also possible to excite unidirectionally 
the guided wave as shown on the intensity maps 3 and 4 (below).


 

 

Hall effect with our structured lattice of soda cans. Particularly, 
we created two different subwavelength waveguides carrying 
an additional degree of freedom which we fully characterized 
as the combination of two counter-rotating patterns locally 
displayed on the interface metamolecules. 

Numerical study of the directional excitation of the 

guided wave. – In the following, we exploit this intriguing 
property of the guided waves in order to make them propagate 
preferentially in one direction. As we know precisely where the 
modes are rotating spatially, we can therefore induce a 
rotational excitation simply by placing two sources at 
appropriate positions and by applying a phase shift between 
them. For instance, relevant locations are the corners of one of 
the two hybrid triangles described above in Fig. 3(g) and (d). 
From now, we focus on the green triangle and only represent it 
for matters of clarity. Nevertheless, one must keep in mind that 
the actual mode presents a combination of the two rotations 
linked to its propagation direction.  

We first verify this idea numerically. The transmission 

dependence towards the phase shift between the two sources is 
presented on Fig. 4(a) and (b) for the case of the red and blue 
interfaces respectively. The sources’ positions are indicated 
with yellow stars in the insets.  For the red interface, we can see 
that the phase shift between the sources is responsible for a 
directional propagation along the domain wall. Moreover, it is 
possible to obtain purely unidirectional excitations for 
appropriate phase shifts between the two sources. Indeed, the 
field maps corresponding on these specific cases are depicted 
below as cases ranging from 1 to 4. This clearly proves that the 
sense of the field rotation on the green triangle is not only 
tightly linked to the direction of propagation of the wave but 

also that it is opposite between the two interfaces (case 3 and 4 
have opposite orders compared to cases 1 and 2). 

Experimental demonstration of directional excitation 

of sound on a sub-wavelength scale. – We now go further and 
implement this procedure experimentally, in the case of the red 
interface. The experimental setup is displayed on Fig. 5(a). We 
place the medium in an anechoic chamber and excite it with 
two loudspeakers placed at the previously described positions 
(see inset). The emitted signal is a chirp containing a broad 
frequency range (∆f = 800 Hz) centred on 415 Hz. A 
microphone, mounted on a two-dimensional translational stage, 
measures the acoustic field above the metamaterial, in its close 
vicinity. This way, we measure acoustic field maps associated 
to each source for each frequency. In a post-processing step, 
after having identified the frequencies of the guided modes 
along the interface, we apply a phase shift between the maps 
related to each loudspeaker and measure the transmission at a 
distance d = 40 cm on each side of the sources. The results are 
displayed on Fig. 5(b) (the procedure is in inset). They show an 
agreement with the previous numerical study. Notably, it is 
possible to excite unidirectionally the wave propagating along 
the domain wall as it is undoubtedly evidenced by the intensity 
maps related to the cases 1 and 3. Moreover, we insist on the 
fact that the resonant frequency of a soda can is f1 = 415 Hz 
which corresponds to a wavelength (λ1 = 80 cm) far bigger than 
the spatial scale of the guided wave. Hence, simply by 
controlling the phase of two loudspeakers we clearly managed 
to control and measure unidirectional excitation of sound 
guided at a subwavelength scale. 

Conclusion. – To conclude, in this work we exploit the 

crystalline description of locally resonant metamaterials to 

Fig. 5: (Colour on-line) (a) Experimental setup for the red interface. Zoom on the sources (inset). (b) Transmission results taken at 
a distance d on the left (green) and on the right (yellow) of the sources (yellow stars in inset), according to the phase shift between 
them. On the left, three experimental acoustic intensity maps show different cases: unidirectional to the right (1), omnidirectional 
(2), unidirectional to the left (3).


 
 
 
 

 

obtain experimentally an acoustic analogue of the quantum 
valley-Hall effect with a lattice of soda cans. This microscopic 
approach of metamaterials allows to establish strong parallels 
between different lattices to induce field rotations within the 
medium simply by modifying its subwavelength structure. We 
then use it in order to guide waves along specific domain walls 
whose direction of propagation is tightly linked to the rotation 
of sound at the level of the interface. We exploit this singular 
property to send sonic waves preferentially in one direction by 
tailoring the excitation in a very simple manner. This numerical 
work and experimental verification clearly show that 
crystalline metamaterials have a great potential as a table-top 
platform to investigate tantalizing solid-state physics 
phenomena. 
 
 
 
 
*** 

 
S.Y. acknowledges funding from French Direction Générale de 
l’Armement. This work is supported by LABEX WIFI 
(Laboratory of Excellence within the French Program 
“Investments for the Future” ) under references ANR-10-
LABX-24 and ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL* and by Agence 
Nationale de la Recherche under reference ANR-16-CE31-
0015. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P. A. Deymier, Acoustic metamaterials and 

phononic crystals, Springer, 2013. 

[2] V. Laude, Phononic crystals : artificial crystals for 

sonic, acoustic, and elastic waves. 

[3] N. (. Engheta, R. W. Ziolkowski, I. Electrical et E. 

Engineers., 
Metamaterials 
: 
physics 
and 

engineering 
explorations, 
Wiley-Interscience, 

2006, p. 414.

[4] G. Ma et P. Sheng, «Acoustic metamaterials: From 

local resonances to broad horizons,» Science 
Advances, vol. 2, p. e1501595, 2 2016. 

[5] S. A. Cummer, J. Christensen et A. Alù, 

«Controlling sound with acoustic metamaterials,» 
Nature Reviews Materials, vol. 1, p. 16001, 3 
2016. 

[6] Z. Liu, X. Zhang, Y. Mao, Y. Y. Zhu, Z. Yang, C. 

T. Chan et P. Sheng, «Locally Resonant Sonic 
Materials,» Science, vol. 289, 2000. 

[7] V. Achilleos, O. Richoux, G. Theocharis et D. J. 

Frantzeskakis, «Acoustic solitons in waveguides 
with Helmholtz resonators: Transmission line 
approach,» Physical Review E, vol. 91, p. 023204, 
2 2015. 

[8] V. Romero-García, G. Theocharis, O. Richoux, A. 

Merkel, V. Tournat et V. Pagneux, «Perfect and 
broadband acoustic absorption by critically 

coupled sub-wavelength resonators,» Scientific 
Reports, vol. 6, p. 19519, 5 2016. 

[9] J. B. Pendry, «Negative Refraction Makes a 

Perfect Lens,» Physical Review Letters, vol. 85, 
pp. 3966-3969, 10 2000. 

[10] Y. Xie, B.-I. Popa, L. Zigoneanu et S. A. Cummer, 

«Measurement of a Broadband Negative Index 
with Space-Coiling Acoustic Metamaterials,» 
Physical Review Letters, vol. 110, p. 175501, 4 
2013. 

[11] L. Zigoneanu, B.-I. Popa et S. A. Cummer, «Three-

dimensional broadband omnidirectional acoustic 
ground cloak,» Nature Materials, vol. 13, pp. 352-
355, 3 2014. 

[12] R. Zhu, X. N. Liu, G. K. Hu, C. T. Sun et G. L. 

Huang, «Negative refraction of elastic waves at the 
deep-subwavelength scale in a single-phase 
metamaterial,» Nat. Commun. , vol. 5, p. 5510, 
2014. 

[13] V. M. García-Chocano, J. Christensen et J. 

Sánchez-Dehesa, 
«Negative 
Refraction 
and 

Energy Funneling by Hyperbolic Materials: An 
Experimental 
Demonstration 
in 
Acoustics,» 

Physical Review Letters, vol. 112, p. 144301, 4 
2014. 

[14] R. Fleury et A. Alù, «Extraordinary Sound 

Transmission 
through 
Density-Near-Zero 

Ultranarrow Channels,» Physical Review Letters, 
vol. 111, p. 055501, 7 2013. 

[15] J. Zhu, J. Christensen, J. Jung, L. Martin-Moreno, 

X. Yin, L. Fok, X. Zhang et F. J. Garcia-Vidal, «A 
holey-structured metamaterial for acoustic deep-
subwavelength imaging,» Nature Physics, vol. 7, 
pp. 52-55, 1 2011. 

[16] N. Kaina, F. Lemoult, M. Fink et G. Lerosey, 

«Negative refractive index and acoustic superlens 
from multiple scattering in single negative 
metamaterials,» Nature, vol. 525(7567), p. 77, 
2015. 

[17] F. Lemoult, N. Kaina, M. Fink et G. Lerosey, 

«Soda cans metamaterial: a subwavelength-scaled 
phononic crystal,» Crystals,, vol. 6(7), p. 82, 2016. 

[18] S. Yves, R. Fleury, F. Lemoult, M. Fink et G. 

Lerosey, «Topological acoustic polaritons: Robust 
sound manipulation at the subwavelength scale,» 
New Journal of Physics, vol. , vol. 19, p. 7, 2017. 

[19] F. Lemoult, M. Fink et G. Lerosey, «Acoustic 

resonators for far-field control of sound on a 
subwavelength scale,» Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 
107(6), p. 064301, 2011. 

[20] F. Lemoult, N. Kaina, M. Fink et G. Lerosey, 

«Wave 
propagation 
control 
at 
the 
deep 


 

 

subwavelength scale in metamaterials,» Nat. 
Phys., vol. 9(1), p. 55, 2013. 

[21] S. Yves, T. Berthelot, G. Lerosey et F. Lemoult, 

«Locally Polarized Wave Propagation through 
Metamaterials' Crystallinity,» Physical Review B, 
vol. 101(3), p. 035127, 9 2020. 

[22] Z. Zhang, Y. Gu, H. Long, Y. Cheng, X. Liu et J. 

Christensen, «Subwavelength Acoustic Valley-
Hall Topological Insulators Using Soda Cans 
Honeycomb Lattices,» Research, vol. 2019, p. 
5385763, 2019. 

[23] G. Ma, M. Xiao et C. T. Chan, «Topological 

phases in acoustic and mechanical systems,» 
Nature Reviews Physics, vol. 1, pp. 281-294, 4 
2019. 

[24] Z. Zhang, Y. Tian, Y. Cheng, Q. Wei, X. Liu et J.

Christensen, «Topological Acoustic Delay Line,» 
Physical Review Applied, vol. 9, p. 034032, 3 
2018. 

[25] Z. Zhang, Y. Tian, Y. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Cheng, X. 

Liu et J. Christensen, «Directional Acoustic 
Antennas Based on Valley-Hall Topological 
Insulators,» Advanced Materials, vol. 30, p. 
1803229, 9 2018. 

[26] J. Lu, C. Qiu, M. Ke et Z. Liu, «Valley Vortex 

States in Sonic Crystals,» Physical Review Letters, 
vol. 116, p. 093901, 2 2016. 

[27] J. Lu, C. Qiu, L. Ye, X. Fan, M. Ke, F. Zhang et Z. 

Liu, «Observation of topological valley transport 
of sound in sonic crystals,» Nature Physics, vol. 
13, pp. 369-374, 4 2017. 

[28] L. Ye, C. Qiu, J. Lu, X. Wen, Y. Shen, M. Ke, F. 

Zhang et Z. Liu, «Observation of acoustic valley 
vortex states and valley-chirality locked beam 
splitting,» Physical Review B, vol. 95, p. 174106, 
5 2017. 

[29] J. Lu, C. Qiu, W. Deng, X. Huang, F. Li, F. Zhang, 

S. Chen et Z. Liu, «Valley Topological Phases in 
Bilayer Sonic Crystals,» Physical Review Letters, 
vol. 120, p. 116802, 3 2018. 

[30] B. Xie, H. Liu, H. Cheng, Z. Liu, S. Chen et J. 

Tian, «Acoustic Topological Transport and 
Refraction in a Kekulé Lattice,» Physical Review 
Applied, vol. 11, n° %14, p. 044086, 2019. 

[31] N. Lera, D. Torrent, P. San-Jose, J. Christensen et 

J. V. Alvarez, « Valley Hall phases in kagome 
lattices,» Physical Review B, vol. 99, n° %113, p. 
134102, 2019. 

[32] Z. Zhu, X. Huang, J. Lu, M. Yan, F. Li et W. D. Z. 

Liu, «Negative Refraction and Partition in 
Acoustic Valley Materials of a Square Lattice,» 
Physical Review Applied, vol. 12, n° %12, p. 
024007, 2019. 

[33] J. Vila, R. K. Pal et M. Ruzzene, «Observation of 

topological valley modes in an elastic hexagonal 
lattice,» Physical Review B, vol. 96, p. 134307, 10 
2017. 

[34] R. K. Pal et M. Ruzzene, «Edge waves in plates 

with resonators: an elastic analogue of the quantum 
valley Hall effect,» New Journal of Physics, vol. 
19, p. 025001, 2 2017. 

[35] H. Zhu, T.-W. Liu et F. Semperlotti, «Design and 

experimental observation of valley-Hall edge 
states 
in 
diatomic-graphene-like 
elastic 

waveguides,» Phys. Rev. B , vol. 97, p. 174301, 
2018. 

[36] T.-W. Liu et F. Semperlotti, «Experimental 

Evidence of Robust Acoustic Valley Hall Edge 
States in a Nonresonant Topological Elastic 
Waveguide,» Physical Review Applied, vol. 11, p. 
014040, 1 2019. 

[37] T.-W. Liu et F. Semperlotti, «Tunable Acoustic 

Valley–Hall Edge States in Reconfigurable 
Phononic Elastic Waveguides,» Physical Review 
Applied, vol. 9, p. 014001, 1 2018. 

[38] M. Yan, J. Lu, F. Li, W. Deng, X. Huang, J. Ma et 

Z. Liu, «On-chip valley topological materials for 
elastic wave manipulation,» Nature Materials, vol. 
17, pp. 993-998, 11 2018. 

[39] S. Yves, F. Lemoult, M. Fink et G. Lerosey, 

«Crystalline Soda Can Metamaterial exhibiting 
Graphene-like 
Dispersion 
at 
subwavelength 

scale,» Scientific Reports, vol. 7(1), p. 15359, 
2017. 

[40] X. Ni, M. Weiner, A. Alù et A. B. Khanikaev, 

«Observation of higher-order topological acoustic 
states protected by generalized chiral symmetry,» 
Nat. Mater. , vol. 18, p. 113–120, 2019. 

[41] H. Xue, Y. Yang, F. Gao, Y. Chong et B. Zhang, 

«Acoustic higher-order topological insulator on a 
kagome lattice,» Nat. Mater. , vol. 18, p. 108–112, 
2019. 

[42] X. Zhang, H.-X. Wang, Z.-K. Lin, Y. Tian, B. Xie, 

M.-H. Lu, Y.-F. Chen et J.-H. Jiang, «Second-
order topology and multidimensional topological 
transitions in sonic crystals,» Nature Physics, vol. 
15, n° %16, p. 582, 2019. 

 
 


