Coherent control of acoustic phonons in a silica 

fiber using a multi-GHz optical frequency comb

Mamoru Endo1, Shota Kimura1, Shuntaro Tani1 and Yohei Kobayashi1,*

1The Institute for Solid State Physics, The University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa,

Chiba 277-8581, Japan

Multi-gigahertz mechanical vibrations stemming from interactions between light 

fields and matter—also known as acoustic waves or phonons—have long been a subject of 

study. In recent years, for the purpose of the next generation of high-speed 

telecommunication applications, specially designed
functional devices
have been 

developed to enhance the light-matter interaction strength, since the excitation of acoustic 

phonons by a continuous wave (cw) laser alone is insufficient. However, with such 

structure-dependent enhancements, the strength of the interaction cannot be aptly and 

instantly controlled. We propose a new technique to control the effective interaction 

strength, which is not via the material structure in the spatial domain, as with the above-

mentioned specially designed functional devices, but through the structure of light in the 

time domain.

Here we show the effective excitation of acoustic phonons in a single mode fiber using 

our newly developed optical frequency comb (OFC). In addition to controlling the time 

structure of the OFC via its repetition frequency, we demonstrate coherent control over 

acoustic phonons by exciting, enhancing, and suppressing them. We believe this work to 

represent an important step towards “comb-matter interactions”, that it will be useful in 

topical areas of research such as the investigation of optically-accessible magnons and 


skyrmions, and that it will lead to increasingly flexible tools in combination with the 

aforementioned functional devices.

Research on the interaction between light fields and acoustic phonons in lattice media

has greatly advanced over the past decade. It holds enormous potential in scientific studies and

practical areas, where possible applications include the generation of ultra-low noise lasers1, 

optical frequency combs (OFCs)2,3, coherent control4,5, optical storage6–8, slow and fast light 

generation9, optical switching10, and Brillouin cooling11, to name of few. This light-matter

interaction is caused by a permittivity change of a medium by an incident electric field. Due to 

the weak nature of the interaction, specially-designed photonic crystal fibers5,12–14, suspended 

waveguides15,16 or microresonators1,6, are devised to constrain both the optical fields and the 

acoustic modes, to improve the interaction strength. However, with such structure-dependent 

interaction enhancement, there is a lack of ability to control the interaction strength 

dynamically or rapidly. In optical fibers, Brillouin scattering is the main process involved in 

the generation of acoustic phonons and it requires long interaction lengths, like with cw or long

pulsed (at least few nanoseconds)17 lasers. Long pulses, however, are unsuitable for

telecommunication applications that require fast and efficient control of the light-matter 

interaction.

We demonstrate here that if a second pulse is launched after a first one well within the 

lifetime of a given acoustic phonon, this acoustic phonon can be coherently enhanced or 

damped. To achieve this, we used the picosecond pulses from our own developed multi-GHz 

OFC which has its repetition rate set to the phonon resonance frequency (up to 16 GHz)18.

Enhancing and damping can be controlled by the pulse repetition rate or the time delay between 

the pulses, which make multi-GHz OFCs suitable for the effective and coherent excitation of 

acoustic phonons.


Brillouin scattering results from photon-phonon interactions through the electrostriction

effect19. When an acoustic phonon satisfies the phase-matching condition, it scatters light in 

the counter-propagating backward direction (BWD). This is shown in Fig. 1 (a), as a cw (or 

long pulsed) laser beam propagates in the forward direction (FWD) with an angular frequency 

of 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷 (FWD optical, red line) and is coupled into an optical fiber, the beam is scattered by 

the thermally excited acoustic phonons in the fiber and the back-scattered component at the 

down-shifted Stokes frequency, 𝜔𝐵𝑊𝐷 (BWD optical, purple line), is created. The density 

fluctuations caused by the two counter-propagating optical fields create a traveling acoustic 

wave with an angular frequency Δ𝜔 = 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷 − 𝜔𝐵𝑊𝐷 and a speed of 

Δ𝜔

𝑛𝐹𝑈𝑇𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷, where 𝑛𝐹𝑈𝑇

represents the refractive index of the fiber-under-test (FUT). This acoustic wave (FWD 

acoustic, sky blue line) scatters the FWD optical beam to create the BWD scattered light again

and thus the cycle continues. When the speed of the FWD acoustic wave matches the speed of 

sound in the fiber ( 𝑣𝐴 ), stimulated scattering occurs. The phase-matching condition is 

expressed as

𝜔𝐴𝑃 = Δ𝜔 = 2𝜋 × 2𝑛𝐹𝑈𝑇𝑣𝐴

𝜆𝐹𝑊𝐷

,
(1)

where 𝜆𝐹𝑊𝐷 represents the wavelength of the FWD optical wave and the concept is described 

in the dispersion diagram of Fig. 1 (b). In other words, the acoustic wave leads to a Brillouin 

gain and loss at the center frequencies of 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷 − 𝜔𝐴𝑃 and 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷 + 𝜔𝐴𝑃, respectively, as 

shown in the gain profile in Fig. 1(c). The BWD light has a broad spectrum due to Doppler 

frequency shifts caused by the thermally excited acoustic phonons. The main component at

𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷 is referred to as Rayleigh scattering and the components surrounding this main central 

peak are called Rayleigh wings. The Brillouin gain amplifies the minuscule Stokes component 

in the Rayleigh wing at 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷 − 𝜔𝐴𝑃. Under these conditions, the photon-phonon interaction 

strength is weak and long interaction lengths or specially designed structures are needed to 


enhance it. The typical frequency of acoustic phonons in a silica fiber is approximately 16 GHz 

for a pump light at a wavelength of 1 μm.

Figures 1 (d-f) are equivalent to 1 (a-c), respectively, only they relate to the case where 

the pump beam is a train of pulses, like that of an OFC with a repetition frequency of

𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑝/(2𝜋). The number of the longitudinal modes is 𝑁 and the optical angular frequency of

the 𝑛-th mode is 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)
= 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(1)
+ (𝑛 − 1)𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑝. More specifically, Fig. 1 (d-f) depict the 

instance when the repetition frequency is equal to the resonance frequency. This leads to the 

backscattered component at the Stokes angular frequency of the first longitudinal mode, 

𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(1)
− 𝜔𝐴𝑃, to have a gain spectrum similar to the one depicted in Fig. 1(c). However, as 

shown in Fig. 1(f), the potential of this technique comes in the gain spectra of the other

longitudinal modes. The Brillouin gain of the next longitudinal mode at 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(1)
coherently adds 

to the center of the Rayleigh scattering of the next longitudinal mode at 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(2) , where the

amplitude is much higher than at the Rayleigh wings, and a markedly enhanced BWD

component is produced. At the Stokes frequency of all the other longitudinal modes, the 

Brillouin loss and gain cancel each other out and this through to the anti-Stokes frequencies of 

the two highest longitudinal modes of the OFC, where for the first of the two, the Brillouin loss 

attenuates the center of the Rayleigh scattering of the last longitudinal mode at 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑁) , and in 

the case of the second one of the two, the scenario is that depicted at the anti-Stokes frequency 

in Fig. 1(c).

It should be noted that the phonon frequency depends on the optical frequency of the 

pump light, as shown with equation (1), and the center of the backscattered Rayleigh, Stokes 

and anti-Stokes gains are not perfectly matched over all the longitudinal modes of the OFC. 

The profile of the Brillouin gain in conventional single mode fibers at room temperature has a 

spectral width of several tens of MHz and the phase matching condition is more relaxed for 


pump light with spectral widths of sub-hundred GHz (corresponding to a pulse duration of 

several tens of ps). 

Figure 2 (a) illustrates the experimental apparatus and the details can be found in the 

Method. To observe a dependence between the repetition rate of the OFC and the acoustic 

phonons, we used an OFC with a repetition rate of 15.6 GHz which produced a 30-ps pulse 

train with a maximum average power of 100-mW. The optical pulses were coupled into a

10-km FUT with a core diameter of 11 μm (FutureGuide SR-15E, Fujikura) after an optical 

circulator (CIR). The input and BWD scattered lights were measured with an optical spectrum 

analyzer (OSA) and a power meter (PM) through a 99:1 fiber coupler and an optical switch 

(OS). The input is used as the reference (ref.), and the BWD light is used to measure the phonon 

amplitude (meas.). Figure 2 (b) represents the phonon amplitude estimated from the power of 

the BWD light as a function of the OFC’s repetition frequency for an input power of 20 mW.

The black dots and the error bars are the measured values, and the red solid line is the Gaussian 

fit. The BWD power was strongly enhanced when the repetition rate matched the phonon 

resonance (15.57 GHz) within the phonon linewidth (approximately 40 MHz in our case). The

excitation efficiency of acoustic phonons was significantly lower with single pulses and 

coherent excitation was made possible by using a continuous train of pulses with a repetition 

frequency close to the target phonon resonance. As shown in Fig. 2 (c), where the red line is 

the spectrum of the BWD optical wave and the black dotted line is the Rayleigh scattering 

alone that serves as a reference, the Stokes component (area in red) was enhanced and the 

energy of the higher frequency components was transferred to it. This experiment serves to 

verify acoustic phonons can be excited by OFCs with repetition rates equal to the phonon 

resonance. 

To demonstrate coherent control of acoustic phonons, the repetition rate of the OFC was 

changed to 7.8 GHz (half the phonon resonance frequency), and a Michelson interferometer


(MI) was inserted to produce double pulses as shown in Fig. 2 (d) (see Method for further 

details). Here, the pulse delay was normalized to the inverse of half the phonon resonance

(128 ps). As depicted in Fig. 3 (a), the phonon amplitude can be accumulated when the interval 

of a series of optical pulses matches the phonon resonance, which is identical to the results of 

the previous experiment illustrated in Fig. 2. In contrast, when the delay is set to the inverse of 

0.25 or 0.75 of the phonon resonance frequency, while the first pulse excites the phonon, the 

second pulse damps it (Fig. 3 (b)). As a result, the amplitude of the phonon is suppressed even 

if the fundamental repetition frequency of the OFC is matched to the phonon resonance 

frequency.

In the experiment, by sweeping the length of one of the interferometer’s arm via a

motorized stage, double pulses with a normalized time delay ranging from 0 to 1.25 of the 

inverse of the phonon resonance frequency could be obtained. Figure 3 (c) shows the phonon 

amplitude as a function of this normalized delay. The red trace is for the on-resonance case

(𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑝 = 𝜔𝐴𝑃/2) and the blue trace represents the out–of-resonance case (𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑝 =

𝜔𝐴𝑃

2 +

2𝜋 × 34 MHz). The red trace exhibits a strong dependence with the time interval of the double 

pulse. When the interval was set to 0, 0.5 or 1, the phonon amplitude increased. On the other 

hand, the phonon amplitude was suppressed when the delay was set to 0.25 and 0.75. The 

dashed line in Fig 3 (c) shows the simulated result, which is in good agreement with the 

experimental results. Figure 3 (d) and (e) show the optical spectra of the BWD light as the 

function of the normalized pulse interval ((d) at resonance and (e) out of resonance). The Stokes 

components in Fig. 3 (d) are enhanced when the pulse interval is 0, 0.5 or 1, which supports 

the concept as shown in Fig. 1 (e) and (f). In contrast, when the phonon is out of resonance, the 

optical spectrum does not change even though the pulse interval changes (Fig. 3 (e)). 

In conclusion, we demonstrate coherent control of acoustic phonons in a standard single-

mode fiber by a repetition-frequency-tailored multi-GHz OFC. Not only was the phonon 


amplitude coherently enhanced, but the acoustic phonon was also controlled by the optical 

pulse delay. Our new approach to control the effective interaction strength between photons

and phonons, can be applied in various areas of science, especially in the field of 

telecommunications. In this letter, we focus on acoustic phonon experiments, but the result 

opens an entirely new optical scheme to manipulate (quasi) particles in the field of solid-state 

physics, where there are a myriad of intriguing elemental excitations such as optically 

accessible skyrmions20 and magnons21,22. The technique could be extended to controlling

multiple kinds of excitations simultaneously by combining other degrees of freedom of the 

OFC, such as the carrier-envelope offset frequency, the pulse duration or the chirp, to name a 

few. We believe applying OFCs to study and manipulate particles has great potential in the 

field of solid-state physics and that our work represents an important step in “comb-matter 

interactions” research.

Methods

The light source (multi-GHz OFC)

An OFC based on a Kerr-lens mode-locked Yb:Y2O3 ceramic laser with a repetition rate 

of 7.8/15.6 GHz was used. The center wavelength and pulse duration were 1080 nm (278 THz) 

and 152 fs, respectively. The repetition rate was stabilized to an analog signal generator via a 

phase-locked loop circuit and a piezo actuator mounted on one of the cavity mirrors. Other 

details of this OFC can be found in the reference18. Free-running fluctuations of the carrier-

envelop offset and optical frequencies were negligible, and we did not apply any stabilization 

to them during the experiments.

The OFC output was spectrally filtered by a hand-made optical band-pass filter (OBPF) 

with a maximum frequency resolution of 2 GHz at the wavelength of 1080 nm. It is based on 

a multi-pass, high-resolution spectrograph23 and it would let through four longitudinal modes,


as shown in Fig. 2. (c). The filtered output was amplified by a three-stage optical amplifier (a 

cascade of one semiconductor optical amplifier followed by two Yb:fiber amplifiers) to a 

maximum average power of more than 100 mW. The output power could be tuned by a variable 

optical attenuator assembled in-house.

Preparation of the double pulse

The Michelson interferometer (MI) was used to generate double pulses. In one of the 

interferometer arms, a stepper-motorized mechanical stage was used to tune the pulse time 

interval between 0 and 160 ps. A piezo actuator and a noise source were used to scan the arm 

length in order to average out the spectral interference of the double pulse to achieve higher 

SNR. Without this piezo actuator, sub-wavelength stabilization of the interferometer’s arm 

would be required, and the cost would be lengthy scan times and data averaging. While the use 

of a piezo actuator reduces the time resolution of the experiment to several hundreds of

femtoseconds, such a high time resolution was not required for our measurements. The peak-

to-peak amplitude and the bandwidth were measured to be 3 µm and 300 Hz, respectively.

Photon-phonon interaction

The field distribution of the FWD and BWD optical modes in the fiber are expressed as 

𝐸𝐹𝑊𝐷(𝑧, 𝑡) = ∑ 𝐴𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡) exp [𝑖(𝑘𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝑧 − 𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝑡)]

𝑛

+ c. c.

𝐸𝐵𝑊𝐷(𝑧, 𝑡) = ∑ 𝐴𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡) exp [𝑖(−𝑘𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝑧 − 𝜔𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝑡)]

𝑛

+ c. c.

where, 𝐴𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡) and 𝐴𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡) are the amplitudes; 𝑘𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)
=

𝑛𝐹𝑈𝑇𝜔𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)

𝑐
, 𝑘𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)
=

𝑛𝐹𝑈𝑇𝜔𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)

𝑐

are the wave numbers; c.c. represents the complex conjugate. 

The intensity of each field is defined as 


𝐼𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) ∶= 2𝑛𝐹𝑈𝑇𝜖0𝑐𝐴𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡) (𝐴𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡))

∗

𝐼𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)
∶= 2𝑛𝐹𝑈𝑇𝜖0𝑐𝐴𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡) (𝐴𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝑧, 𝑡))

∗
.

Then the following coupling differential equations are obtained to describe the photon-phonon 

interaction.

𝑑𝐼𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)

𝑑𝑧
= 𝑔𝐼𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝐼𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛+1) − 𝑔𝐼𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝐼𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛−1) − 𝛼𝐼𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)

− 𝑑𝐼𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)

𝑑𝑧
= 𝑔𝐼𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝐼𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛+1) − 𝑔𝐼𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) 𝐼𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛−1) − 𝛼𝐼𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)

𝜌(𝑧, 𝑡) = 𝜖0𝛾𝑒𝑞2 ∑

𝐴𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) (𝐴𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛+1))

∗

𝛺𝐵

2 − 𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑝
2
− 𝑖𝜔𝑟𝑒𝑝𝛤𝐵
𝑛

,

where 𝜌(𝑧, 𝑡) is the intensity of the FWD acoustic wave; 𝛾𝑒 is the electrostrictive constant; 𝑞

~ 2𝑘𝐹𝑊𝐷

(1)
is the wave number of the FWD acoustic wave; Γ𝐵 is the Brillouin linewidth; Ω𝐵 is 

the Brillouin frequency shift. In the steady state, the intensity of the acoustic phonon 𝜌(𝑧, 𝑡)

can be estimated from 𝐴𝐹𝑊𝐷

(𝑛)
and 𝐴𝐵𝑊𝐷

(𝑛) . To calculate the simulated dashed line in Fig. 3(c), we 

solved these differential equations in MATLAB and as described in the supplemental 

information of reference12.

References

1.
Liang, W. et al. High spectral purity Kerr frequency comb radio frequency 

photonic oscillator. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–8 (2015).

2.
Pang, M. et al. Stable subpicosecond soliton fiber laser passively mode-locked 

by gigahertz acoustic resonance in photonic crystal fiber core. Optica 2, 339 

(2015).

3.
Dong, M. & Winful, H. G. Unified approach to cascaded stimulated Brillouin 

scattering and frequency-comb generation. Phys. Rev. A 93, 1–5 (2016).


4.
Merklein, M. et al. Enhancing and inhibiting stimulated Brillouin scattering in 

photonic integrated circuits. Nat. Commun. 6, 1–8 (2015).

5.
Kang, M. S., Brenn, A. & Russell, P. S. J. All-optical control of gigahertz 

acoustic resonances by forward stimulated interpolarization scattering in a 

photonic crystal fiber. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 2–5 (2010).

6.
Dong, C. H. et al. Brillouin-scattering-induced transparency and non-reciprocal 

light storage. Nat. Commun. 6, 2–7 (2015).

7.
Pang, M., He, W., Jiang, X. & Russell, P. S. J. All-optical bit storage in a fibre 

laser by optomechanically bound states of solitons. Nat. Photonics 10, 454–

458 (2016).

8.
Merklein, M., Stiller, B., Vu, K., Madden, S. J. & Eggleton, B. J. A chip-

integrated coherent photonic-phononic memory. Nat. Commun. 8, 1–6 (2017).

9.
Thévenaz, L. Slow and fast light in optical fibres. Nat. Photonics 2, 474–481 

(2008).

10.
Kang, M. S., Butsch, A. & Russell, P. S. J. Reconfigurable light-driven opto-

acoustic isolators in photonic crystal fibre. Nat. Photonics 5, 549–553 (2011).

11.
Bahl, G., Tomes, M., Marquardt, F. & Carmon, T. Observation of spontaneous 

Brillouin cooling. Nat. Phys. 8, 203–207 (2012).

12.
Kang, M. S., Nazarkin, A., Brenn, A. & Russell, P. S. J. Tightly trapped 

acoustic phonons in photonic crystal fibres as highly nonlinear artificial Raman 

oscillators. Nat. Phys. 5, 276–280 (2009).

13.
Dainese, P. et al. Stimulated Brillouin scattering from multi-GHz-guided 

acoustic phonons in nanostructured photonic crystal fibres. Nat. Phys. 2, 388–

392 (2006).


14.
Pang, M. et al. Stable subpicosecond soliton fiber laser passively mode-locked 

by gigahertz acoustic resonance in photonic crystal fiber core. Optica 2, 339 

(2015).

15.
Shin, H. et al. Tailorable stimulated Brillouin scattering in nanoscale silicon 

waveguides. Nat. Commun. 4, 1944 (2013).

16.
Van Laer, R., Kuyken, B., Van Thourhout, D. & Baets, R. Interaction between 

light and highly confined hypersound in a silicon photonic nanowire. Nat. 

Photonics 9, 199–203 (2015).

17.
Faris, G. W., Jusinski, L. E. & Hickman, A. P. High-resolution stimulated 

Brillouin gain spectroscopy in glasses and crystals. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 10, 587 

(1993).

18.
Endo, M., Ito, I. & Kobayashi, Y. Direct 15-GHz mode-spacing optical 

frequency comb with a Kerr-lens mode-locked Yb:Y2O3 ceramic laser. Opt. 

Express 23, 1276 (2015).

19.
Chiao, R. Y., Townes, C. H. & Stoicheff, B. P. Stimulated brillouin scattering 

and coherent generation of intense hypersonic waves. Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 

592–595 (1964).

20.
Ogawa, N., Seki, S. & Tokura, Y. Ultrafast optical excitation of magnetic 

skyrmions. Sci. Rep. 5, 1–5 (2015).

21.
Chumak, A. V., Vasyuchka, V. I., Serga, A. A. & Hillebrands, B. Magnon 

spintronics. Nat. Phys. 11, 453–461 (2015).

22.
Vogel, M. et al. Optically reconfigurable magnetic materials. Nat. Phys. 11, 

487–491 (2015).


23.
Endo, M., Sukegawa, T., Silva, A. & Kobayashi, Y. Subgigahertz-resolution 

table-top spectrograph calibrated with a 4-GHz optical frequency comb. J. 

Astron. Telesc. Instruments, Syst. 6, 1 (2020).

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank Isao Ito for loaning experimental equipment and Dr. 

Alissa Silva for careful proofreading. This research was supported by the Photon Frontier 

Network Program of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology 

(MEXT). M.E. and S.K. were supported by Grant-in-Aid for the Japan Society for the 

Promotion of Science (JSPS) Fellows (DC1).

Author contributions

M.E. is responsible for the overall execution of the experiment. M.E. and S.K. developed 

the laser source. M.E. and S.T. developed analytical models to explain the measured data with 

the assistance of Y.K. All authors participated in discussions of the results and preparation of 

the manuscript.

Competing financial interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Author information

Correspondence and requests for the materials should be addressed to Y.K. 

(yohei@issp.u-tokyo.ac.jp).


Figure 1| Conceptual images for Brillouin scattering in a fiber and dispersion diagrams (not 
to scale) of the light and the acoustic waves. In the case of CW pumping: (a), (b) and (c) are 
the in-fiber illustration, the dispersion diagram and the BWD optical spectrum, respectively. 
In the case of pulsed (multi-mode) pumping: (d), (e) and (f) are the in-fiber illustration, the 
dispersion diagram and the BWD optical spectrum, respectively. Red line: FWD optical waves 
or longitudinal modes, purple line: BWD optical waves or longitudinal modes, Sky blue line: 
FWD acoustic waves or longitudinal modes. In (b), (c), (e) and (f), areas indicated in red are
the Rayleigh scattering components with Rayleigh wings and the areas in sky-blue designate 
Brillouin gain(s) and loss(es) due to the FWD acoustic waves.


Figure 2| Experimental apparatus and results. (a) The experimental apparatus. KLM laser: 
Yb:Y2O3 ceramic Kerr-lens mode-locked laser with the repetition rate of 7.8 or 15.6 GHz. OBPF: 
optical band-pass filter based on a grating spectrometer with a resolution of 2 GHz. Amp.:
Three-stage optical amplifier (made of one semiconductor optical amplifier and two 
ytterbium-doped fiber amplifiers). VOA: variable optical attenuator. CIR: optical circulator. 
OS: optical switch. FUT: fiber-under-test. OSA: optical spectrum analyzer with a resolution of 
4 GHz. PM: optical power meter. (b) BWD power (corresponding to the phonon amplitude) as 
a function of the repetition rate detuning measured with an input power of 20 mW. The red 
trace is the Gaussian fit to the black experimental data points with error bars. (c) BWD spectra 
at the repetition rate of 15.57 GHz. Black-dashed line: Rayleigh scattering used as a reference,
Red solid line: BWD spectrum. The red and blue shaded areas correspond to the Brillouin gain 
and loss of Fig. 1 (f), respectively. (d) the Michelson interferometer used in the double pulse 
experiment. PZT: piezo actuator used for scanning the arm length. 


Figure 3| Conceptual images and results of the coherent control of phonons with double 
pulses. Time domain pictures for (a) τ = 0.5 and (b) 0.25 delays, respectively. (a) Growth of 
the phonon amplitude along the optical pulse train. In contrast, (b) the phonon amplitude
which is excited by the red pulses and damped by the blue ones. (c) BWD powers
(corresponding to the phonon amplitude) as a function of the normalized pulse delay 𝜏. Solid 
red and blue traces show the experimental data with the repetition angular frequency of 
𝜔𝐴𝑃/2 and

𝜔𝐴𝑃

2 + 2𝜋 × 34 MHz, respectively. The dashed line shows the simulation result. 

(d) and (e) show the optical spectra of the BWD lights when at resonance and out of 
resonance, respectively.


