1

Seeking for low thermal conductivity atomic configurations 

in Si0.5Ge0.5 alloys with Bayesian Optimization

Jiahao Yan,a# Han Wei,a# Han Xie,a, b Xiaokun Gu c and Hua Bao a*

a University of Michigan-Shanghai Jiao Tong University Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao 

Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

b Artificial Intelligence Lab, SAIC Motor Corporation, Shanghai 200433, China

c Institute of Engineering Thermophysics, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai 

Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

_____________________________________________________________________

* Corresponding Author

E-mail: hua.bao@sjtu.edu.cn. #These authors contributed equally

Abstract: The emergence of data-driven science has opened up new avenues for 

understanding the thermophysical properties of materials. For decades, alloys are 

known to possess very low thermal conductivity, but the extreme thermal conductivity 

can be achieved by alloying has never been identified. In this work, we combine the 

Bayesian optimization with a high throughput thermal conductivity calculation to 

search for the lowest thermal conductivity atomic configuration of Si0.5Ge0.5 alloy. It is 

found layered structures are most beneficial for reducing the thermal conductivity 

among all atomic configurations, which is attributed to the strong branch-folding effect. 

Furthermore, the roles of interface roughness and layer thicknesses in producing the 

lowest thermal conductivity are investigated. Through another comprehensive search


2

using Bayesian optimization, the layered structure with smooth interfaces and 

optimized layer thickness arrangement is identified as the optimal structure with the

lowest thermal conductivity.

Keywords: Bayesian optimization, atomic configuration, alloy, thermal conductivity, 

phonon transport


3

1. Introduction 

In the field of thermal science and material science, machine learning has been regarded 

as the “fourth paradigm”, which provides new approaches to develop understandings 

in thermophysical characteristics of materials [1-5]. Machine learning algorithms have 

been successfully implemented to extract the structural features and establish the 

structure-property linkage [6-9]. Owing to the advantages of efficient global search, 

machine learning algorithms also have benefits in structure optimization and design 

[10,11]. For example, optimization algorithms, such as genetic algorithm, Bayesian 

optimization algorithm, have been proven to be very effective in optimizing structures 

of 1D random multilayer [12], 2D nanoporous graphene [13,14] and 3D composite 

interface[15], etc. Here, we consider applying machine learning algorithm for 

optimizing the atomic configuration of alloy structures.

Lattice thermal conductivity is one of the most important material thermophysical 

properties[16]. Materials with low thermal conductivity have many applications in 

thermal insulation, thermoelectric energy conversion, and thermal management in 

microelectronics devices [17-20], etc. Careful design of the atomic configuration plays 

an important role in manipulating the thermal conductivity. Alloying has been proposed 

as an effective method to reduce thermal conductivity due to the mass and bond

difference [21-25]. Sharp decrease of lattice thermal conductivity has been observed 

after a small amount of alloying [21]. In well-developed disordered alloys, the phonon 

lifetimes can be minimized to the order of the time scale of thermal vibrations [25,26]. 

For a certain composition, the thermal conductivity of disordered alloy is often 


4

considered as the lower bound of thermal conductivity of any material, which is called 

the alloy limit [27,28]. Recently, many efforts have been endeavored to break the alloy 

limit by constructing phononic crystals [17,29-33]. The phonon propagation is greatly 

blocked by the periodic or aperiodic scattering inclusions in phononic crystals, leading 

to the localization of certain phonon modes [34,35]. Although ultra-low thermal 

conductivity can be achieved through designing the phononic crystals under the 

guidance of physical intuition, previous conclusions were based only on the study of 

limited structures. For a random composite, the characteristics of atomic configuration 

with low thermal conductivity have not been systematically investigated. A 

comprehensive search for the lowest thermal conductivity structure, to the best of our 

knowledge, is still lacking. 

Numerical simulations can be applied to investigate the thermal transport 

problems, including molecular dynamics and first-principles-based approaches. Due to 

the relatively large computational cost[36-38], if an inefficient manual search among a 

large number of candidates is adopted, the total computational cost will be unaffordable. 

Therefore, machine-learning optimization algorithms are more preferable. In this work, 

we consider Si0.5Ge0.5 alloy system and search for the optimal atomic configuration with 

the lowest thermal conductivity using Bayesian optimization. First-principles-based

approaches are adopted to compute the thermal conductivities of alloys with different 

atomic configurations. We first investigate the general characteristics of the low thermal 

conductivity structure. Then, spectrum analyses of the phonon transport properties of 

typical atomic configurations are performed to reveal physics behind the low thermal 


5

conductivity. Finally, the specific atomic configuration with the lowest thermal 

conductivity is obtained by optimizing the detailed atom arrangement. 

2. Methodology

We search for the optimal atomic configuration of Si0.5Ge0.5 alloy with the Bayesian 

optimization-based framework. The optimization unit cell is composed of half Si atoms 

(yellow spheres) and half Ge atoms (red spheres), as shown in Fig. 1. Since the lattice 

constants of Si and Ge are similar in magnitude, the lattice mismatch between Si and

Ge is ignored and the lattice constants are set as the same as Si [15]. The size of the unit 

cell is characterized by the number of face-centered-cubic (FCC) conventional unit cells 

along the x, y and z directions. For instance, a unit cell of size 4×2×2 denotes 4, 2, and 

2 FCC conventional cells along the x, y, and z-direction, respectively. The different 

atomic configurations of alloys are generated by randomly assigning the atomic masses 

at the lattice points as Si or Ge while maintaining the composition. We note some 

configurations are symmetric from the thermal transport point of view. Thus, after 

constructing different atomic configurations, we remove these symmetric 

configurations according to their translational and rotational invariances [39,40]. The 

remained configurations consist of the whole set of candidates for optimization. 

Bayesian optimization is a machine-learning-based optimization method, which is 

well suited for the optimization of “black-box” objective functions that have no explicit 

expressions and are computationally expensive to evaluate[41,42]. Recently, Bayesian 

optimization has become very popular in automatic machine learning, robotics, 

experiment and material design [43-45], etc. Therefore, in this study, we apply Bayesian 

optimization to search for the optimal atomic configurations. The optimization 


6

workflow is shown in Fig. 1. First, initial candidate configurations (20, in this work) 

are randomly selected from the whole set of candidates and the corresponding lattice 

thermal conductivities are computed. Through Bayesian optimization, the optimized 

structure among the candidates is selected according to specific strategies (see 

Supporting Information). The optimization process will iterate continuously until the 

convergence is reached and then the optimal configuration is output. The convergence 

criterion is that 80 percent of thermal conductivities of calculated candidate 

configurations have no changes comparing to the last iteration. Open-source Bayesian 

optimization library COMBO is employed to optimize the atomic configurations [46]. 

More details about Bayesian optimization are included in the Supporting Information. 

For all the configurations, the lattice thermal conductivities are along the x-direction, 

which are obtained by first-principle based calculations (see more details in Supporting 

Information).


7

Fig. 1 Schematic of the Bayesian optimization-based framework for the optimization of atomic 

configurations. The black box shows the unit cell, in which the yellow and red spheres denote Si 

and Ge atoms, respectively. The different atomic configurations are generated by randomly 

assigning the atoms at lattice points as Si or Ge while maintaining the composition of Si and Ge 

both as 0.5. Symmetric configurations are further filtered according to their translation and rotation 

invariance. The remained configurations are composed of the whole set of candidates. First-

principles based methods are implemented to evaluate the lattice thermal conductivities. Through 

Bayesian optimization, the optimal configuration can be selected after a few iterations.

3. Structure with low thermal conductivity

We start with the searching of low thermal conductivity atomic configurations in unit 

cells of size 2×1×1, 2×2×1, and 2×2×2. For 2×1×1 unit cell. Since the whole 

set of candidates only consist of 652 configurations, we simply compute the thermal 

conductivities of all candidates without further optimization. The structure with the 

lowest thermal conductivity is shown in Fig. 2(a), where silicon and germanium atoms 

are gathered together, forming a layered structure. Fig. 2(b) shows the structure with 

the highest thermal conductivity, which has alternating Si/Ge monoatomic layers.

Note that the computational cost sharply increases with increasing unit cell size (2

×2×2 unit cell possesses over 1018 candidates). In order to reduce the computational 

cost, we group neighboring atoms as new units to reduce the degree of freedom of 

systems. After grouping the atoms, the number of candidates for 2×2×1, and 2×2×

2 unit cells are reduced to 963 and 453, respectively. More details about the strategy of 

grouping neighboring atoms can be seen in the Supporting Information. Similar to the 

2×1×1 unit cell, we compute the thermal conductivities of all configurations. The 


8

optimal configurations with the lowest thermal conductivity of 2×2×1 and 2×2×2 unit 

cells are shown in Fig. 2(c) and (e), respectively. They have similar characteristics to 

the configuration in Fig. 2(a) that the Si and Ge atoms are aggregated to form layered 

structures. The corresponding configurations with the highest thermal conductivity are 

shown in Fig. 2(d) and (f), which have alternating Si/Ge monoatomic layers similar to 

the configuration in Fig. 2(b). 

With the full calculation of all the candidates of three different unit cell sizes, we 

find that layered structures have lower thermal conductivities. To confirm this, the alloy 

system with a large unit cell of size 6×1×1 is studied. Since the number of candidates 

is huge (about 1014), the computations of all the candidates are not feasible. Therefore, 

Bayesian optimization is performed to search for the optimal configurations (the 

workflow is shown in Fig. 1). Note that the full anharmonic calculation is too time-

consuming for 6×1×1 unit cell. To reduce the computational cost, a relaxation time 

model proposed by Klemens[47] is adopted to calculate the phonon relaxation time, 

while the phonon group velocity and specific heat are still obtained from the first-

principles calculations. We have demonstrated that using the simplified model to 

calculate thermal conductivities does not induce significant deviation from the full 

calculation using the 2×1×1 cell. More details can be seen in the Supporting 

Information. In spite of this, Bayesian optimization still cannot obtain converged results 

due to the huge amount of candidates. Nevertheless, the structural characteristics with 

low thermal conductivity can still be inferred by the optimization. We use the layered 

coefficient to quantify the layered state of configurations, of which the schematic is 


9

shown in Fig. 2 (g). First, a small box moving one monolayer at one step scans through 

the configuration along the x-direction, and it is defined that if all atoms in the box are 

of the same type, these atoms form a layer. The total number of layers recorded by the 

moving box is defined as the layered coefficient. A larger layered coefficient denotes 

the atomic configuration is closer to a layered structure. Note that a too thick scanning

box will cause the omission of thin layers. A too thin scanning box will lead to large 

numbers of layers in most structures so that the layered states cannot be distinguished.

After balancing those factors, the thickness of the scanning box is set to three 

monatomic layers.  

Three independent optimizations with different initial candidate datasets are 

carried out. The evolutions of thermal conductivities and the number of layers of 

optimized configurations are shown in Fig. 2(i). As the optimization proceeds, the 

thermal conductivities of optimized structures gradually decrease. The optimized 

thermal conductivities are about 30% lower than that of the initial configurations. 

Overall, the numbers of layers increase as the optimizations progress, indicating that 

the optimized configuration with lower thermal conductivity gradually approaches to 

layered structures. The configurations with the lowest and highest conductivity among 

the searched candidates are shown in Fig. 2(g) and Fig. 2(h), respectively, and are also 

marked in Fig. 2(i). Apparently, the low thermal conductivity configuration (Fig. 2(g)) 

has a more distinct layered characteristic compared with the high thermal conductivity 

one (Fig. 2(h)), which is consistent with Fig. 2 (a)-(f). 


10

Fig. 2 The search for low thermal conductivity atomic configurations of different unit cell sizes. 

The lowest thermal conductivity configuration of (a) 2×1×1, (c) 2×2×1, and (e) 2×2×2 unit cells. 

The highest thermal conductivity configuration of (b) 2×1×1, (d) 2×2×1, and (f) 2×2×2 unit cells. 

The configuration with the highest (g) and lowest conductivity (h) among the searched candidates 

in Bayesian optimization of 6×1×1 unit cell, respectively. (i) The evolutions of thermal 

conductivities and layered coefficients of optimized configurations of 6×1×1 unit cell. The red, blue, 

and black lines (dots) denote three independent optimizations.

We further analyze the cause of the low thermal conductivity in layered structures. 

It is noted that the same type of atoms in the lowest and highest thermal conductivity 

cases are aggregated (as shown in Fig. 2 a, c, e, g) and dispersed (as shown in Fig. 2 b, 

d, f, h), respectively. Therefore, we investigate the relationship between thermal 

conductivities and the state of aggregation of the same kind of atoms, which can be 


11

quantified by short range order coefficient (SROC)[48]. The SROC is defined as 

1

A

P
SROC
= − M
,
(1)

where P denotes the probability of finding the atom A at nearest neighbor positions of 

the atom B, and MA is the atom fraction of A atoms (equal to 0.5 in this work). The 

atomic configurations with aggregated and dispersed atoms of the same kind are 

clustering and short range order structures, and the corresponding values of SROC are 

positive and negative, respectively. Other atomic configurations with SROC equal to 

zero are classified as disordered crystals.

We take the configurations of the 2×1×1 unit cell as an illustration. All the 652 

configurations are divided into clustering structures, short range order structures and 

disordered crystals according to the SROC coefficients. The distribution of thermal 

conductivities of these configurations is shown in Fig. 3. Generally, the thermal 

conductivities of short range ordered structures are higher than those of disordered 

crystals, followed by the clustering structures, indicating that a more aggregated state 

of atoms can lead to lower thermal conductivity. 

Usually, the aggregation state of atoms can affect the number of atoms in the 

primitive unit cell, which is strongly correlated with the lattice thermal conductivity 

[49-51]. We further examine the number of atoms in primitive unit cells of different 

configurations, which are also presented in Fig. 3. It is seen that the lowest and highest 

thermal conductivity configurations have the largest (16) and smallest (2) number of 

atoms in the primitive unit cell, respectively. From the perspective of phonon transport, 

large number of atoms in primitive unit cell can induce the shrink of Brillouin 


12

zone[49,52-54], shown as the folding and flattening of phonon dispersion curve, which 

can reduce the thermal conductivity (will be discussed in detail later). On the contrary, 

a simple configuration, with few atoms in the primitive unit cell can have a high lattice 

thermal conductivity. Note that there are some clustering structures with abnormal high 

thermal conductivities, which are circled by a dotted line in Fig. 3. One reason for the 

high thermal conductivity is the small number of atoms in the primitive unit cell. 

Another is the formation of the transport path for coherent phonons constructed by the 

layers paralleling to the direction of thermal conductivities [15,27,55], as shown in the 

inset figure in Fig. 3. 

Fig. 3 The thermal conductivities, short range order coefficient (SROC) and numbers of atoms in 

the primitive unit cell of atomic configurations of 2×1×1 unit cell. For clustering structures, 

disordered crystals, and short range order structures, the SROCs are positive, zero and negative, 

respectively.

In addition to the aggregate state and number of atoms in the primitive unit cell, 

we investigate the phonon transport characteristics of low thermal conductivity. Three 

typical configurations of 2×1×1 unit cell are analyzed: the layered structure with the 


13

lowest thermal conductivity (shown in Fig. 2(a)), a disordered crystal with the 

intermediate thermal conductivity, and the structure with alternating Si/Ge monoatomic 

layers (alternating monolayers) with the highest thermal conductivity (shown in Fig. 

2(b)). Spectrum analyses of thermal transport properties are performed, including 

dispersion curve, group velocity v, relaxation time τ, the density of state (DOS) and the 

DOS weighted thermal conductivity
( )
� w
 . For simplicity, the implementation of 

spectrum analysis is not included here, and more details can be found in references 

[21,55]. 

The DOS weighted thermal conductivities
( )
� w
of the layered structure, 

disordered crystal, and alternating monolayers structure are shown in Fig. 4(a). It can 

be seen that the thermal conductivities of the layered structure and the disordered crystal 

are dominated by the low-frequency phonons, around 0-5 THz. However, for the 

alternating monolayers, the phonons with frequencies higher than 10 THz have large 

contributions to the thermal transport.

The dispersion curves of the layered structure and disordered crystal within the 

frequency range of 0-5 THz are shown in Fig. 4(c). It is seen that compared to the 

disordered crystal (gray lines), the dispersion curve of the layered structure (red lines) 

is more flattened. Previous studies have reported that the flattening of the dispersion 

curve can result in the reduction of phonon group velocity [52,54]. The square of 

phonon group velocities of three configurations are shown in Fig. 4(b). It is seen that in 

general, the layered structure has lower phonon group velocities, which is consistent 

with the results in Fig. 4(c). On the other hand, the flattening of the phonon dispersion 


14

curve suggests that more phonon modes are forbidden and thus the thermal transport is 

weakened. 

The DOS of three configurations and Si, Ge are depicted in Fig. 4(d). Overall, 

DOS of the layered structure is lower in the diverged frequency range of Si and Ge 

comparing to the other two structures. In other words, there are fewer available phonon 

modes for heat conduction in this range, which is consistent with the implications of 

Fig. 4(c). In addition to the filtering effect of alternate Si/Ge layers, the reflection and 

interference of phonons between layers can also forbid certain phonon states. From the 

spectrum analysis, it is reasonable that layered structure can have low thermal 

conductivity.  

The high thermal conductivity of alternating monolayers can also be deduced from 

the spectrum analyses. The dispersion curves of the alternating monolayers structure 

and disordered crystal are shown in Fig. 4(f). It is seen that the alternating monolayers 

structure has a large bandgap and a narrow optical energy band, which can lead to a 

reduction of scattering between acoustic phonons and optical phonons. Therefore, the 

phonon lifetimes in the corresponding frequency ranges will be large. The phonon 

relaxation time of the three configurations is shown in Fig. 4(e). Overall, the alternating 

monolayers structure has larger phonon relaxation time than that of the other two 

structures, which is consistent with Fig. 4 (f). Note that structure with alternating thin 

layers has been adopted to enhance the thermal conductivity in many materials 

[51,54,56,57]. This study can provide evidence of the optimality of alternating 

monolayers for the highest thermal conductivity in the alloy systems.


15

Fig. 4 Spectrum analyses of thermal transport properties of the layered structure, the disordered 

crystal, and the alternating monolayers structure. (a) DOS weighted thermal conductivity. (b) 

Phonon group velocity. (c) Comparison of dispersion curves between the disordered crystal (gray 

lines) and the layered structure (red lines). (d) DOS. (e) Phonon relaxation time. (f) Comparison of 

the dispersion curves between the alternating monolayers structure (blue lines) and the disordered 

crystal (gray lines). In (c) and (f), a is the lattice constant of the 2×1×1 unit cell in [001] direction.

4. Atomic configurations of the layered structure with the lowest thermal 
conductivity

From the investigations above, the atomic configuration with low thermal conductivity 

is identified as the layered structure. Previous studies have shown that the interface 

roughness [28,58-60] and different thicknesses of alternating layers [27,33,61] can 

significantly affect the thermal conductivity of layered structures. In this section, we 

(a)
(b)

(d)
(e)

(c)

(f)

Alternating monolayers

Disordered crystal

Layered structure


16

further search for the specific configuration of layered structure with the lowest thermal 

conductivity by manipulating the interface roughness and arrangement of alternating 

layer thickness. Since it is not easy to consider the two factors at the same time, we first 

consider one factor at a time. 

4.1 Optimizations of interface roughness and layer thickness arrangement separately

First, the optimization of interface roughness for configurations of 4 × 2 × 1 unit cells 

is carried out. Two unit cells along the z-direction are set to provide a large design 

degree of freedom for optimization the interface. For simplicity, we set the Si/Ge layers 

with the same thickness. The schematic of the optimization system is shown in Fig. 5 

(a). Along x-direction (from left to right), the unit cell contains, half of Si layer, interface 

Ⅰ, the Ge layer, interface Ⅱ, and the other half of the Si layer. In order to generate 

different configurations, the atoms in interface Ⅰ are randomly assigned as Si or Ge. 

Interface Ⅱ is then constructed by exchanging Si and Ge atoms corresponding to the 

interface Ⅰ to maintain the composition. There are 928 candidates in total, and Bayesian 

optimization is performed to search for the optimal configuration. The evolution of 

optimized thermal conductivities is similar to Fig. 2 (i). 

In this scenario, after seven drops of the searched lowest thermal conductivity, the 

converged solution is obtained. All the calculated configurations can be divided into 8 

groups according to the evolution of the optimization process. The highest and lowest 

thermal conductivity configurations exist in group 1 and 8, respectively. In order to 

investigate the characteristics of the optimized interfaces, three sets of configurations 

from groups 1, 4 and 8 are taken as representatives, of which the schematics are shown 


17

in Fig. 5(c). From group 1 to group 8, the extent of mixing of two kinds of atoms at the 

interface is decreased. For the configuration in group 1, the atoms at the interfaces are 

randomly distributed, which forms a mixed interface. For the configuration in group 8, 

every two Ge atoms at the interfaces can be connected by the path forming only by the 

Ge atoms, like the atom A and B shown in Fig. 5(c), which is in an unmixed state. With 

the evolution of optimization, the interfaces gradually turn from mixed to unmixed state. 

Previous studies have reported that the acoustic mismatch between Si/Ge layers can 

impede the phonon transport [58]. The unmixed roughness can induce large acoustic 

mismatch, resulting in the reduction of thermal conductivity. On the contrary, the mixed 

roughness can decrease the acoustic mismatch of Si/Ge layers and enhance the thermal 

conductivity. 

Fig. 5 (a) The unit cell (4 × 2 × 1) for optimization of interface roughness. The black boxes show 

the interfaces. (b) The unit cell (12 × 1 × 1) for the optimization of layer thickness arrangement. A 

black box denotes a “layer”, which is composed of multiple layers of Si and Ge. The layer thickness 

refers to the number of continuous monolayers of Si and Ge. From left to right, the configuration 


18

has three layers with thicknesses of 14, 15 and 19 and thus the average layer thickness is 16. (c) 

Three sets of representative configurations, which are from the group 1, 4 and 8. In group 1, the 

atoms at the interfaces are mixed, while in group 8, the interfaces are in an unmixed state. For 

unmixed roughness, every two Ge atoms at the interfaces, like the atom A and B, can be connected 

by the path forming only by the Ge atoms. With the evolution of optimization, the interfaces 

gradually turn from a mixed state to an unmixed state.

Next, the optimization of the arrangement of alternating layer thickness is 

performed in the alloy systems with 12 × 1 × 1 unit cells. Twelve unit cells along the x-

direction are set to provide a large design degree of freedom for optimization. For 

simplicity, we only consider the smooth interface, and the schematic of the optimization 

system is shown in Fig. 5 (b). Note that here the “layer” refers to a unit composed of 

multiple layers of Si and Ge, which are denoted by the black boxes in Fig. 5 (b). The 

layer thickness refers to the number of continuous monolayers of Si and Ge. The system 

can be characterized by the average layer thickness 𝑙̅. For example, as shown in Fig. 

5(b), the configuration has three layers with thicknesses of 14, 15 and 19 and thus 𝑙̅ of 

the system is 16. 

We perform optimization for the systems with 𝑙̅ of 12, 16, and 24. For each 

system, the different configurations are generated by randomly assigning the 

monolayers as Si or Ge. In order to reduce the degree of freedom, we limit the minimum 

layer thickness as four. The optimization results are similar for these three systems. For 

simplicity, we only present the results of the system with 𝑙̅ of 24. The optimal 

configuration with smooth interfaces and optimal layer thickness arrangement (SIOL 


19

structure) and corresponding thermal conductivity are presented in Fig. 6(b). As a 

comparison, the layered structure with smooth interfaces and equal layer thickness 

(superlattice) is shown in Fig. 6(a). The thermal conductivity of the SIOL structure is 

lower than that of the superlattice, which is consistent with previous studies [27,61]. 

The disorder arrangement of layer thickness can induce destructive interferences, which 

effectively weakens the heat conduction [61]. 

Fig. 6 (a) The layered structure with smooth interfaces and equal layer thickness (superlattice). (b) 

The layered structure with smooth interfaces and optimal layer thickness arrangement (SIOL 

structure). (c) The layered structure with rough interfaces and optimal layer thickness arrangement 

(RIOL structure). The average layer thickness of these configurations is 24. The corresponding 

thermal conductivities are shown above the configurations.

4.2 Coupling effect of interface roughness and layer thickness arrangement

Based on the optimization of interface roughness and layer thickness arrangement 

separately, it is found that the layered structure with unmixed interface roughness and 

particular layer thickness arrangement can have low thermal conductivity. We further 

identify the specific atomic configuration with the lowest thermal conductivity 

considering both two factors. 


20

We first optimize the interface roughness based on obtained SIOL structure. The 

SIOL structures with 𝑙̅ of 16 and 24 are considered. In order to generate candidate 

configurations, the atoms in the outer monolayers are randomly assigned as Si or Ge 

while maintaining the composition. With Bayesian optimization, it is found the thermal 

conductivity is not further reduced and the optimal configuration still is the original 

SIOL structure. 

We compare the detailed atomic configurations of the calculated candidates and 

the original SIOL structure. The deviations are quantified by the number of atoms that 

are different at the same lattice sites. The deviations for 𝑙̅ being 16 and 24 are shown 

in Fig. 7 (a) and (b), respectively. For both scenarios, overall, the configurations with 

higher thermal conductivities possess larger deviations from the original SIOL 

structures. As mentioned early, the particular layer thickness arrangement in SIOL 

structure can impede the thermal transport by the destructive phonon interference. 

Adding interface roughness may destroy the destructive phonon interference, leading 

to the enhancement of thermal conductivity[61]. On the other hand, adding interface 

roughness can increase the phonon-interface scattering, inducing the reduction of 

thermal conductivity[60]. From the optimization, it seems that the interface roughness 

mainly interrupts the phonon destructive interference rather than increases the 

incoherent phonon scattering.  


21

Fig. 7 The deviations between the original SIOL structure and calculated candidate structures in 

Bayesian optimization with 𝑙̅ being 16 (a) and 24 (b).

Similarly, we perform the optimization of layer thickness arrangement based on the 

configuration with unmixed interfaces. For generality, the shapes of roughness are 

randomly produced. The configurations of the 12 × 1 × 1 unit cell with 𝑙̅ being 16 and 

24 are considered. With Bayesian optimization, the configuration with rough interfaces 

(unmixed) and optimal layer thickness arrangement (RIOL structures) is found, which 

is shown in Fig. 6 (c). Compared with the SIOL structure, the thermal conductivity of 

RIOL structure is higher, which confirms that adding rough interfaces are not beneficial 

for reducing the thermal conductivity. The optimization results are the same for the 

cases with 𝑙̅ being 16. With the comprehensive search, the atomic configuration with

the lowest thermal conductivity is identified as the layered structure with smooth 

interfaces and optimal layer thickness arrangement, namely SIOL structure.

5. Conclusions

In this study, we search for the lowest thermal conductivity atomic configuration

of Si0.5Ge0.5 alloy system with first-principles calculations and Bayesian optimization. 

The optimizations of the atomic configuration of different unit cell sizes are carried out 


22

and the layered structures are found to possess lower thermal conductivities. The 

flattening of the phonon dispersion curve and the filtering effect of alternate Si/Ge 

layers of the layered structure are responsible for the low thermal conductivity. 

Furthermore, the layer thickness arrangement and interface roughness of the layered 

structure are optimized. Through a comprehensive search, we unambiguously proved 

that the optimal configuration of the alloy system with the lowest thermal conductivity 

is the layered structure with smooth interfaces and optimal layer thickness arrangement. 

This study also demonstrates the effectiveness of Bayesian optimization for material 

design at the atomic scale.

Conflict of interest

There are no conflicts to declare.

Supporting Information

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version 

at XXX.

Acknowledgements

This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 

51676121), Guangdong Province Key Area R&D Program (2019B010940001) and the 

Materials Genome Initiative Center of Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Simulations 

were performed with computing resources granted by HPC (π) from Shanghai Jiao Tong 

University.

References

[1]
A. Agrawal and A. Choudhary, APL Materials 4, 053208 (2016).

[2]
A. Jain, G. Hautier, S. P. Ong, and K. Persson, Journal of Materials Research 31, 977 (2016).


23

[3]
J. Hill, G. Mulholland, K. Persson, R. Seshadri, C. Wolverton, and B. Meredig, MRS Bulletin 41, 

399 (2016).

[4]
X. Wan, W. Feng, Y. Wang, H. Wang, X. Zhang, C. Deng, and N. Yang, Nano Letters 19, 3387 

(2019).

[5]
T. D. Sparks, M. W. Gaultois, A. Oliynyk, J. Brgoch, and B. Meredig, Scripta Materialia 111, 10 

(2016).

[6]
H. Wei, S. Zhao, Q. Rong, and H. Bao, International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 127, 908 

(2018).

[7]
Q. Rong, H. Wei, X. Huang, and H. Bao, Composites Science and Technology 184, 107861 (2019).

[8]
Z. Yang, Y. C. Yabansu, R. Al-Bahrani, W.-k. Liao, A. N. Choudhary, S. R. Kalidindi, and A. 

Agrawal, Computational Materials Science 151, 278 (2018).

[9]
R. Liu, Y. C. Yabansu, A. Agrawal, S. R. Kalidindi, and A. N. Choudhary, Integrating Materials and 

Manufacturing Innovation 4, 13 (2015).

[10] S. Ju and J. Shiomi, Nanoscale and Microscale Thermophysical Engineering 23, 157 (2019).

[11] Z. Hang, K. Hippalgaonkar, T. Buonassisi, O. Løvvik, E. Sagvolden, and D. Ding, ES Energy & 

Environment 2, 1 (2018).

[12] P. Roy Chowdhury, C. Reynolds, A. Garrett, T. Feng, S. P. Adiga, and X. Ruan, Nano Energy 69, 

104428 (2020).

[13] H. Wei, H. Bao, and X. Ruan, Nano Energy, 104619 (2020).

[14] M. Yamawaki, M. Ohnishi, S. Ju, and J. Shiomi, Science Advances 4, eaar4192 (2018).

[15] S. Ju, T. Shiga, L. Feng, Z. Hou, K. Tsuda, and J. Shiomi, Physical Review X 7, 021024 (2017).

[16] M. Kaviany, Heat Transfer Physics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2014), 2 edn.

[17] S. Volz, J. Shiomi, M. Nomura, and K. Miyazaki, Journal of Thermal Science and Technology 11, 

JTST0001 (2016).

[18] Z. Xu, Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters 6, 113 (2016).

[19] L. Qiu, P. Guo, H. Zou, Y. Feng, X. Zhang, S. Pervaiz, and D. Wen, ES Energy & Environment 2, 

66 (2018).

[20] E. Shi, T. Feng, J.-H. Bahk, Y. Pan, W. Zheng, Z. Li, G. Snyder, S. Pantelides, and Y. Wu, ES Energy 

& Environment 2, 43 (2018).

[21] J. Garg, N. Bonini, B. Kozinsky, and N. Marzari, Physical Review Letters 106 (2011).

[22] X. W. Wang et al., Applied Physics Letters 93, 193121 (2008).

[23] X. Gu and R. Yang, Physical Review B 94, 075308 (2016).

[24] B. Abeles, Physical Review 131, 1906 (1963).

[25] D. G. Cahill, S. K. Watson, and R. O. Pohl, Physical Review B 46, 6131 (1992).

[26] H. Mizuno, S. Mossa, and J.-L. Barrat, EPL 104, 56001 (2013).

[27] Y. Wang, C. Gu, and X. Ruan, Applied Physics Letters 106, 073104 (2015).

[28] X. Yang and W. Li, Phys. Rev. Materials 2, 015401 (2018).

[29] P. E. Hopkins, C. M. Reinke, M. F. Su, R. H. Olsson, E. A. Shaner, Z. C. Leseman, J. R. Serrano, L. 

M. Phinney, and I. El-Kady, Nano Letters 11, 107 (2011).

[30] L. Yang, N. Yang, and B. Li, Scientific Reports 3 (2013).

[31] M. R. Wagner, B. Graczykowski, J. S. Reparaz, A. El Sachat, M. Sledzinska, F. Alzina, and C. M. 

Sotomayor Torres, Nano Letters 16, 5661 (2016).

[32] Y. Tian, T. A. Puurtinen, Z. Geng, and I. J. Maasilta, Phys. Rev. Applied 12, 014008 (2019).

[33] H. Mizuno, S. Mossa, and J.-L. Barrat, Scientific Reports 5, 14116 (2015).


24

[34] J. Maire, R. Anufriev, R. Yanagisawa, A. Ramiere, S. Volz, and M. Nomura, Science Advances 3, 

e1700027 (2017).

[35] M. Maldovan, Nature 503, 209 (2013).

[36] S. Hu, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, K. Zeng, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, and G. Zhang, ES Energy & Environment 

1, 74 (2018).

[37] L. Lindsay, C. Hua, X. L. Ruan, and S. Lee, Materials Today Physics 7, 106 (2018).

[38] H. Bao, J. Chen, X. Gu, and B. Cao, ES Energy & Environment 1, 16 (2018).

[39] O. Hellman and I. A. Abrikosov, Physical Review B 88 (2013).

[40] O. Hellman, P. Steneteg, I. A. Abrikosov, and S. I. Simak, Physical Review B 87 (2013).

[41] E. Brochu, V. M. Cora, and N. De Freitas, arXiv preprint arXiv:1012.2599  (2010).

[42] J. Snoek, H. Larochelle, and R. P. Adams, arXiv:1206.2944 [cs, stat]  (2012).

[43] A. Sakurai, K. Yada, T. Simomura, S. Ju, M. Kashiwagi, H. Okada, T. Nagao, K. Tsuda, and J. 

Shiomi, ACS Cent. Sci. 5, 319 (2019).

[44] J. Song, Y. Chen, and Y. Yue, 10.

[45] A. Seko, A. Togo, H. Hayashi, K. Tsuda, L. Chaput, and I. Tanaka, Physical Review Letters 115, 

205901 (2015).

[46] T. Ueno, T. D. Rhone, Z. Hou, T. Mizoguchi, and K. Tsuda, Materials discovery 4, 18 (2016).

[47] P. G. Klemens, 1958), pp. 1.

[48] H. Herman, Treatise on Materials Science and Technology: Ultrarapid Quenching of Liquid Alloys 

(Elsevier, 2012).

[49] G. P. Srivastava, The physics of phonons (Routledge, 2019).

[50] G. A. Slack, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 34, 321 (1973).

[51] L. Lindsay, D. A. Broido, and T. L. Reinecke, Physical Review Letters 111, 025901 (2013).

[52] E. Dechaumphai and R. Chen, Journal of Applied Physics 111, 073508 (2012).

[53] B. Latour, S. Volz, and Y. Chalopin, Physical Review B 90, 014307 (2014).

[54] J. Garg, N. Bonini, and N. Marzari, Nano letters 11, 5135 (2011).

[55] J. Garg and G. Chen, Physical Review B 87 (2013).

[56] C. Dames, Science 361, 549 (2018).

[57] J. S. Kang, M. Li, H. Wu, H. Nguyen, and Y. Hu, Science 361, 575 (2018).

[58] Z. Tian, K. Esfarjani, and G. Chen, Physical Review B 86 (2012).

[59] L. Sun and J. Y. Murthy, Journal of Heat Transfer 132, 102403 (2010).

[60] H. Zhao and J. B. Freund, Journal of Applied Physics 105, 013515 (2009).

[61] B. Qiu, G. Chen, and Z. Tian, Nanoscale and Microscale Thermophysical Engineering 19, 272 

(2015).


Supporting Information: Seeking for low thermal 

conductivity atomic configurations in Si0.5Ge0.5 alloys with 

Bayesian Optimization

Jiahao Yan,a# Han Wei,a# Han Xie,a Xiaokun Gu b and Hua Bao a*

a University of Michigan-Shanghai Jiao Tong University Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao 

Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.  

b Institute of Engineering Thermophysics, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai 

Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China

_____________________________________________________________________

* Corresponding Author

E-mail: hua.bao@sjtu.edu.cn. #These authors contributed equally.

1. Bayesian optimization

Bayesian optimization is designed for the “black-box” global optimization. The 

strategy in Bayesian optimization is to build a surrogate model for the unknown 

objective function. Generally, Gaussian process regression is applied to build the 

surrogate to model the mapping from descriptors to the function evaluations (i.e. 

thermal conductivities in our work) of the existing candidates. Then, an acquisition 

function constructed from the surrogate model is used to decide the next candidates to 

sample, which are further added to the existing dataset to update the surrogate 

model[1,2]. By repeating this procedure, the optimal solution (i.e. optimal atomic 

configurations with the lowest thermal conductivity in our work) could be quickly 


obtained. 

In this work, 1D arrays are used to characterize the atomic configurations as the 

descriptors, which consist of “1” and “2” representing Si and Ge atoms/layers, 

respectively. The surrogate model that maps from the descriptors to the lattice thermal 

conductivities of different configurations is established by Gaussian process regression. 

We use expected improvement[2] as the acquisition function to decide the optimized

candidate configurations. 

2. Methods to calculate the lattice thermal conductivity

In Bayesian optimization-based framework, the lattice thermal conductivities of 

different configurations are obtained by the combination of the Boltzmann transport 

equation (BTE) and the Fourier's law[3]

𝑘𝛼𝛽 = ∑ 𝑐𝜆𝑣𝜆,𝛼
𝜆
𝑣𝜆,𝛽𝜏𝜆,   
(1)

where 𝜆 denotes the phonon mode marked by phonon branch 𝜈 and wave vector 𝒒.

𝑐𝜆 is the volumetric heat capacity. 𝑣𝜆,𝛼 and 𝑣𝜆,𝛽 are the phonon group velocity vector 

in 𝛼 and 𝛽 directions, respectively. 𝜏𝜆 is the phonon relaxation time. 𝑐𝜆 and 𝒗𝜆

only require harmonic interatomic force constants (IFCs)[4]. 𝜏𝜆 needs both harmonic 

and anharmonic IFCs, which is depended on the size of different unit cells. Note that 

the difference of interatomic force constants (IFCs) of Si and Ge are minor comparing 

to the mass difference. For simplicity, the IFCs for different atomic configurations are 

set as the same as Si unit cells with corresponding sizes and only the mass difference is 

considered. The IFCs for large unit cells are carefully mapped from the Si IFCs of the 


FCC unit cell. For 2×1×1 unit cell, 𝜏𝜆 is calculated by considering three-phonon 

scattering processes under single mode relaxation time approximation (SMRTA)[5]. 

The expression is given by[6]

1

𝜏𝜆 = ∑

2𝜋

ℏ2 (𝑛𝜆′
0 − 𝑛𝜆′′
0 )

+

𝜆′𝜆′′
× |𝑉𝜆,𝜆′𝜆′′
+
|
2𝛿𝒒𝜆+𝒒𝜆′−𝒒𝜆′′,𝐆 𝛿(𝜔𝜆 + 𝜔𝜆′ + 𝜔𝜆′′) +

∑

𝜋

ℏ2 (1 + 𝑛𝜆′
0 + 𝑛𝜆′′
0 ) × |𝑉𝜆,𝜆′𝜆′′
−
|
2𝛿𝒒𝜆−𝒒𝜆′−𝒒𝜆′′,𝐆 𝛿(𝜔𝜆 − 𝜔𝜆′ − 𝜔𝜆′′)

−

𝜆′𝜆′′
,
(2)

where ℏ denotes the reduced Plank constant. 𝑛𝜆

0 denotes the equilibrium phonon 

distribution. 𝐆 is a reciprocal lattice vector, and V𝜆,𝜆′𝜆′′
±
are the three-phonon 

coupling matrixes. As shown by
equation (2), the anharmonic scattering process is 

classified into two parts. The first summation represents the process that phonon mode 

𝒒𝜆 decays into phonon mode 𝒒𝜆′ and 𝒒𝜆′′. The second summation represents the 

process that phonon mode 𝒒𝜆 absorbs phonon mode 𝒒𝜆′ then yields 𝒒𝜆′′. In each 

part, the first 𝛿 is the Knonecker delta function, and the second 𝛿 is the Dirac delta 

function. The former is used to denote the normal processes and umklapp processes 

through 𝐆 = 0 and 𝐆 ≠ 0, respectively, and the latter represents the conservation of 

energy. 

In this work, the harmonic and anharmonic interatomic force constants (IFCs) are 

obtained by density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT) with 2×2×2 supercell and 

8×8×8 k-grid. The calculations are carried out by phonopy[7] and VASP package[8]

with GGA pseudopotentials[9], and two-nearest neighbors were considered in the 

calculation of anharmonic IFCs.


Note that the computational costs of thermal conductivities are unaffordable for unit 

cells larger than 2×1×1 unit cells, thus the calculation is simplified by employing a 

simplified phonon relaxation time model proposed by Klemens. The expression of the 

new relaxation time model is given by[10]

𝜏𝜆

−1 = 𝐵𝜔2𝑇3𝑒− 𝜃

𝛼𝑇,    
(3)

where 𝐵 is a fitting constant, 𝜔 denotes phonon frequency, 𝑇 denotes temperature, 

𝜃 denotes Debye temperature[11] and 𝛼 is a numerical constant. Parameter 𝐵 and 

𝛼 are fitted by the least-squares method with a set of accurate data from full first 

principle calculation, while the frequencies and the Debye temperature are carefully 

calculated to ensure the accuracy is good enough to distinguish different structures. The 

Debye temperature is in the form of expression proposed by Domb and Salter[11]

𝜃 = √5

3

ℏ2

𝑘𝐵

∫
𝜔𝜆,𝐴

2
𝐷(𝜔𝜆,𝐴)𝑑𝜔
∞
0

∫
∞ 𝐷(𝜔𝜆,𝐴)𝑑𝜔
0

, 
(4)

where ℏ denotes the reduced Plank constant, 𝑘𝐵 is Boltzmann constant, and 

𝐷(𝜔𝜆,𝐴) denotes the density of state for acoustic modes. 

To validate the accuracy of this model, we calculate the room temperature (300 K) 

thermal conductivities of all candidates in the 2×1×1 unit cell with both full first 

principle calculation and the simplified model. The results are shown in Fig. S1. The 

thermal conductivities calculated by the simplified model are close to that calculated 

by first principle calculation. Spearman correlation coefficient[12] is used to measure 

the correlation between the results from the simplified model and full calculation, of 

which the value is beyond 0.9, showing a strong correlation. In our work, the difference 

of rank of thermal conductivity is more important than the absolute values. We consider 


the simplified model as a viable way to calculate the thermal conductivities, where the 

sacrifice of accuracy within a controlled range is acceptable. Therefore, we apply this 

method for calculating the thermal conductivities of configurations in unit cells larger 

than 2×1×1.

Fig. S1 The comparison of thermal conductivities calculated by first principle calculation approach 

and the simplified model at 300 K. 

3. Group neighboring atoms for the reduction of candidates

The number of candidates increases rapidly for the optimizations of systems in 2×2×1 

(~ 109) and 2×2×2 unit cells (~ 1018), thus we group neighboring atoms as new units to 

reduce the total number of candidates. Fig. S2 shows the grouping schemes of atoms 

for 2×2×1 and 2×2×2 unit cells, where the black boxes denote the new units. In order 

to keep the space of structural adjustment in the direction of thermal conductivity, the 

black boxes for grouping are thin in that direction. For 2×2×1 unit cell, every two

neighboring atoms are grouped so that 16 groups are generated, including 8 Si groups 


and 8 Ge groups. Similarly, for 2×2×1 unit cell, every four neighboring atoms are 

grouped, yielding 8 Si groups and 8 Ge groups. The number of candidates is able to be 

reduced to 12870 by replacing atoms with groups, which corresponds to an affordable 

computational cost. 

Fig. S2 The schematic diagram of grouping schemes for (a) 2×2×1 and (b) 2×2×2 unit cells, where 

the black boxes denote the new units for manipulation.

Supplementary References 

[1]
E. Brochu, V. M. Cora, and N. De Freitas, arXiv preprint arXiv:1012.2599  (2010).

[2]
J. Snoek, H. Larochelle, and R. P. Adams, 9.

[3]
H. Xie, J. Yan, X. Gu, and H. Bao, Journal of Applied Physics 125, 205104 (2019).

[4]
J. E. Turney, E. S. Landry, A. J. H. McGaughey, and C. H. Amon, Physical Review B 79, 064301 

(2009).

[5]
W. Li, J. Carrete, N. A. Katcho, and N. Mingo, Computer Physics Communications 185, 1747 

(2014).

[6]
T. Feng and X. Ruan, Journal of Nanomaterials 2014, 1 (2014).

[7]
A. Togo, L. Chaput, and I. Tanaka, Physical Review B 91 (2015).

[8]
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Computational materials science 6, 15 (1996).

[9]
P. E. Blöchl, Physical Review B 50, 17953 (1994).

[10] P. G. Klemens, 1958), pp. 1.

[11] C. Domb and L. Salter, The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal 

of Science 43, 1083 (1952).

[12] J. L. Myers, A. Well, and ProQuest, Research design and statistical analysis (Mahwah, N.J. : 

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2003), 2nd ed edn.

(b)
(a)

Thermal conductivity 


