Microscopic Relaxation Channels in Materials for Superconducting Qubits

Anjali Premkumar,1, ∗ Conan Weiland,2 Sooyeon Hwang,3 Berthold J¨ack,4 Alexander P. M. Place,1 Iradwikanari
Waluyo,5 Adrian Hunt,5 Valentina Bisogni,5 Jonathan Pelliciari,5 Andi Barbour,5 Mike S. Miller,6 Paola Russo,6

Fernando Camino,3 Kim Kisslinger,3 Xiao Tong,3 Mark S. Hybertsen,3 Andrew A. Houck,1, † and Ignace Jarrige5, ‡

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA
2Material Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, USA
3Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA
4Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA
5National Synchrotron Light Source II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA
6Angstrom Engineering Inc.
Kitchener, Ontario, Canada N2E1W8

Despite mounting evidence that materials imperfections are a major obstacle to practical appli-
cations of superconducting qubits, connections between microscopic material properties and qubit
coherence are poorly understood. Here, we perform measurements of transmon qubit relaxation
times T1 in parallel with spectroscopy and microscopy of the thin polycrystalline niobium films
used in qubit fabrication. By comparing results for films deposited using three techniques, we re-
veal correlations between T1 and grain size, enhanced oxygen diffusion along grain boundaries, and
the concentration of suboxides near the surface. Physical mechanisms connect these microscopic
properties to residual surface resistance and T1 through losses arising from the grain boundaries
and from defects in the suboxides. Further, experiments show that the residual resistance ratio
can be used as a figure of merit for qubit lifetime. This comprehensive approach to understanding
qubit decoherence charts a pathway for materials-driven improvements of superconducting qubit
performance.

INTRODUCTION

Following two decades of dramatic improvement, su-
perconducting qubit technology has emerged as a promis-
ing platform for fault-tolerant quantum computation.
Game-changing enhancements in coherence have espe-
cially been achieved through novel designs and improved
fabrication processes.
However, performance improve-
ments by these means have started to plateau, indicating
that the dominant sources of decoherence are not well
understood [1]. This has led to a recent surge of interest
in understanding the limiting loss mechanisms in qubit
materials [2–8].
In particular, recent breakthroughs have highlighted
the central role played by uncontrolled surfaces and inter-
faces in the decoherence of transmon qubits [5–7, 9, 10].
Proposed mechanisms for loss at surfaces and interfaces
involve interactions between the qubit and microscopic
objects such as impurity-based paramagnetic defects [11],
charge-trapping defect sites [12], and two-level systems
(TLS) [5, 6, 9, 10, 13–16] characterized by atoms or
charges tunneling between two metastable states. Sev-
eral studies have quantified the macroscopic impact of
such interactions by showing a proportionality between
relaxation and participation ratios at various interfaces
[2–4, 8]. Other studies have mapped interactions between
the qubit and individual TLS’s to fluctuations in relax-
ation, dephasing, and qubit frequency [5, 6]. However,
plausible identifications of specific defects or impurities

∗ Corresponding author: anjalip@princeton.edu
† Corresponding author: aahouck@princeton.edu
‡ Corresponding author: jarrige@bnl.gov

associated with such phenomenological findings are rare.
To address this challenge, a substantial scope of mul-
tidisciplinary research is required to explore the large
phase space of potentially relevant materials properties
and identify connections with qubit performance.
In this study, we bridge the gap between qubit per-
formance and microscopic materials properties through
a combined materials-and-device investigation of trans-
mon qubits. Using spatially resolved x-ray spectroscopy
and microscopy, we characterized the structural and elec-
tronic properties of the niobium (Nb) thin films used to
fabricate transmon qubit devices.
We compared three
different deposition methods for the Nb films, yielding
a quantifiable variation in nanostructure, surface oxide
composition, and transport properties. Several of these
film properties correlate with the measured qubit relax-
ation time T1. Specifically, for qubits with shorter re-
laxation times, the corresponding films exhibited smaller
grain size, larger voids at grain boundaries, enhanced
oxygen diffusion along grain boundaries near the sur-
face, and excess suboxides at the interface between the
Nb metal and the Nb2O5 passivation layer. Addition-
ally, we observed a correlation between shorter relaxation
times and higher residual resistance in the Nb films. We
discuss mechanisms that link the observed microscopic
features to residual resistance and T1, specifically dis-
sipation at grain boundaries and defect-induced dielec-
tric loss from suboxides.
These results are a critical
first step in connecting precise materials properties with
microscopic models for decoherence and establishing a
materials-based approach to enhance qubit performance.

arXiv:2004.02908v1  [physics.app-ph]  6 Apr 2020


2

FIG. 1.
Transmon qubit design and performance.
(a) False color optical image of a representative transmon qubit from
our study. Niobium regions include the center-pin of the coplanar waveguide resonator (green), the transmon capacitor pads
(purple), and the ground plane (gray). The aluminum Josephson junction is shown in white. Black areas indicate where the
metal has been etched away, and the sapphire substrate is exposed. (b) Effective circuit diagram of a transmon qubit coupled
to a resonator. Each circuit element is schematically colored as in (a). The resonator is comprised of a center-pin coupled to
ground via a capacitor (Cr) and an inductor (Lr). EJ and C refer to the Josephson energy and the capacitance of the qubit.
The qubit is capacitively coupled to the center-pin of the resonator (Cc) and to ground (Cg). (c) Measured relaxation times
(T1) for three rounds of devices fabricated with sputtered, HiPIMS optimized, and HiPIMS normal niobium films. Error bars
indicate standard deviation.

RESULTS

Qubit Design and Performance.
Qubit charac-
terization was performed on transmon qubits, which are
widely used for quantum computing and quantum sim-
ulation applications [1, 5, 6, 17–21]. Transmons consist
of a Josephson junction—implemented with a thin alu-
minum oxide barrier between superconducting wires—
shunted by a large capacitor (Fig.
1a).
The Joseph-
son junction acts as a non-linear inductor, creating an
anharmonic oscillator where the two lowest-lying states
can be used as a coherent qubit [17].
Transmons are
controlled and measured in a circuit quantum electrody-
namics (cQED) platform, where the qubit is capacitively
coupled to a coplanar waveguide resonator and operated
in the dispersive regime (Fig. 1b). Measurements are
performed by monitoring transmission at the resonator
frequency, which shifts as a function of qubit state [22].
We employ three different deposition methods for the
Nb films used to fabricate the coplanar waveguide res-
onators, qubit capacitor pads, and ground plane in the
transmon devices.
All films are deposited on sapphire
substrates. First, we use DC sputter deposition, which is
common in superconducting qubit fabrication. We addi-
tionally study two variations of high-power impulse mag-
netron sputtering (HiPIMS), where the DC ionization
voltage is replaced with short, high-power pulses, poten-
tially leading to a higher degree of ionization and denser
films [23–25]. The average cathode power in HiPIMS is
typically chosen to be similar to standard DC sputter-
ing; such a process was performed on our first HiPIMS

variation, which we refer to as “HiPIMS normal”. Our
second variation, “HiPIMS optimized”, involves an opti-
mized geometry of the Nb target and sapphire substrate
and a higher peak current, resulting in triple the average
power.
We performed relaxation (T1) measurements to char-
acterize the dependence of qubit performance on deposi-
tion technique. Since T1 is limited by microwave losses in
the superconductors and substrate, it is a valuable probe
of materials-induced loss channels. We measured three
rounds of devices, where a given round consisted of one
device made with each Nb deposition technique, to main-
tain as consistent fabrication, packaging, and shielding as
possible within each round. Details of qubit fabrication,
measurement setup, and qubit performance are in the
Supplementary Information. The measured T1 times for
each film type show a clear statistical separation between
the three deposition techniques (Fig. 1c). The sputtered
niobium qubit consistently performs the best, followed
by the HiPIMS optimized qubit, then the HiPIMS nor-
mal qubit. The average qubit relaxation times are also
displayed in Table I. We employ a wide range of charac-
terization techniques to understand possible microscopic
origins of these coherence differences.

Surface oxides. The surface oxides on the three types
of Nb films were investigated using a combination of soft
and hard X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (PES) and
resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS). The experi-
mental details can be found in the Methods section. Fig-
ure 2a shows a representative spectrum of the spin-orbit-


3

FIG. 2. (a) Representative x-ray photoemission spectroscopy (PES) spectrum of the Nb 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 core levels, measured
on the sputtered film for a photon energy of 3330 eV (black dots) and fitted with five components. (b) Measured spectra for all
three film types at 3330 eV, normalized to the intensity of the Nb2O5 component. For each film, the measured intensity of the
Nb (c) and Nb2O5 (d) peaks are plotted at several photon energies. The sum of the signals from the different oxidation states
in a given film is normalized to one, and the error bars show a 1 % error, as estimated from the signal-to-noise of measured
data. The intensity of Nb and Nb2O5 increase and decrease with energy, respectively, indicating the presence of a surface oxide
layer.

split Nb 3d3/2 and 3d5/2 core levels, measured on the
sputtered film with an incident energy of 3330 eV. Also
shown are the fits to distinct materials components. The
PES spectra are best fit with five doublet components,
revealing that there are four coexisting oxidation states
besides Nb metal: NbOx (x<1), NbO, NbO2, and Nb2O5,
with respective shifts in binding energy of +0.5 eV, +1.8
eV, +3.8 eV, and +5.6 eV compared to Nb metal. The
presence of five total oxidation states including Nb metal
is consistent with previous PES studies [27]. Figure 2b
shows the spectra measured on all three types of film at
3330 eV, revealing clear variations in the concentrations
of different oxidation states among the different deposi-
tion techniques.
PES measurements of the Nb 3d core levels were per-
formed for seven values of the incident photon energy
between 420 eV and 5000 eV. Since higher incident pho-
ton energies probe deeper into the film, this energy range

resulted in surface sensitivity from the topmost monolay-
ers down to a depth of ≈20 nm. The relative intensities of
the signals from the five oxidation states were extracted
for different photon energies, as shown for Nb metal and
Nb2O5 in Figure 2c and 2d respectively. As expected,
the Nb and Nb2O5 components respectively increase and
decrease with increasing photon energy, which is con-
sistent with the presence of a surface oxide layer.
To
reconstruct a depth profile of the concentrations of the
oxides, we applied a maximum-entropy method (MEM)
algorithm. The MEM is a statistical method used to ob-
tain the most likely depth profile with minimal user in-
put from the energy-dependent fits to the spectra. It has
been commonly applied to angle-resolved PES [28] and,
more recently, to variable photon energy PES [29, 30] as
in the present study.
The resulting depth profiles of the relative concentra-
tions of the different oxidation states are shown in Figure


4

FIG. 3. Depth profiles of the different oxidation states of Nb reconstructed from PES data using a maximum-entropy method
(MEM) algorithm for the three types of Nb film. Each film shows a surface layer of a few nm of Nb2O5, a transition layer with
varying concentrations of different suboxides, and the Nb metal bulk. In particular, the HiPIMS normal film shows significant
concentrations of NbO and NbO2 in the transition layer and deeper penetration of NbOx into the metal.

3. For all three film types, we observe a surface oxide
layer with Nb2O5 as the main constituent, followed by
a transition layer of lower oxidation states whose thick-
ness, depth distribution, and composition vary between
the different films. The oxide/metal interface is sharpest
for the sputtered film and is increasingly diffuse for the
HiPIMS optimized and then the HiPIMS normal film.
The HiPIMS optimized film shows some Nb2O5-NbO2
interdiffusion in the 2 nm to 6 nm range, as seen from the
respectively decreasing and increasing profiles of Nb2O5
and NbO2, and it also shows a thicker NbOx layer than
the sputtered film.
The Nb2O5-NbO2 interdiffusion is
strongest in the HiPIMS normal film, and the formation
of NbO is also evident around 6 nm. Significantly, the
NbOx penetrates most deeply in the HiPIMS normal film,
extending beyond the 20 nm depth sensitivity allowed by
this technique. The relative concentrations of the differ-
ent Nb oxidation states, estimated by integrating over
the 20 nm depth profiles and expressed in percents, are
displayed in Table I.
RIXS is a complementary probe of the electronic struc-
ture that offers sensitivity to low-energy excitations of the
electronic and lattice degrees of freedom (phonons) [31].
RIXS spectra were measured on all three films at room
temperature and at a grazing incident angle of 10◦, yield-
ing a depth sensitivity of ≈10 nm. Measurements were
performed at the oxygen K-edge (O-K), a band edge cor-
responding to excitations from the oxygen 1s core level
into unoccupied valence states, thereby providing chem-
ical sensitivity to the oxide layer. The spectra in Figure
4a were collected for an incident photon energy tuned
to the resonance of the O-K absorption, shown for the
sputtered film in the inset. They are normalized in in-
tensity to the area under the peak of the emission line
(not shown), which spans the ≈3 eV to 11 eV energy loss
range.
Figure 4b shows a close-up view of the low-energy fea-
tures after removing the elastic peak, achieved by sub-
tracting the negative-energy-loss tail mirrored about zero

energy. The energy range and broad profile of the inelas-
tic features are reminiscent of a multi-phonon shake-up
process [32, 33], specifically phonons in the surface ox-
ides, dictated by the use of the O-K-edge resonance at
grazing incidence. The inelastic features are similar in en-
ergy and lineshape across the three films, with a slightly
higher intensity in the 0.1 eV to 0.3 eV energy loss range
for the sputtered film. These spectra are in stark con-
trast to the multiple vibrational modes extending up to
≈ 2 eV that would be expected from OH groups [34],
which indicates that there are no detectable hydrogen
bonds in the surface oxides of these films. This finding,
which is consistent with previous reports that the sur-
face Nb oxide layer acts as a barrier against H diffusion
[35], is significant as hydrogen bonds in Al2O3 have been
proposed as one of the primary sources of TLS resonant
absorption in superconducting qubits [36–38]. This sug-
gests that TLS’s from hydrogen bonds in particular are
unlikely to be a dominant source of loss in our Nb films.
Figure 4b also shows the phonon density of states
(DOS) calculated using density functional theory, taken
from ref. [26]. The main features of the DOS are con-
sistent with the energy and relative intensities of the ex-
perimental peaks. Ref. [26] showed that both Nb and O
vibrations contribute to the features below 70 meV (blue
region), whereas the higher-energy phonons mostly arise
from O because of its smaller atomic mass (pink region).
The two HiPIMS films show a lower intensity at higher
energies, indicating a larger quantity of O vacancies in the
Nb2O5 layer. This lower intensity cannot be explained by
a lower oxidation state, as the theoretical phonon DOS of
suboxides have a stronger, and not weaker, relative inten-
sity for the high-energy features compared with Nb2O5,
as shown for NbO2 in Ref. [39].
Structural and chemical imaging.
In order to
correlate our surface oxide spectroscopy findings with
morphology and grain size, we performed transmission
electron microscopy (TEM), spatially resolved electron-
energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and atomic-force mi-


5

FIG. 4. (a) Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) spec-
tra measured for the three types of films at the oxygen K-edge
resonance, for an incident energy of 531 eV. The inset shows
the O-K absorption spectrum of the sputtered film with a ver-
tical dashed line at the resonance. (b) Close-up view of the
RIXS spectra after subtraction of the elastic line, with the
phonon density of states (DOS) calculated for Nb2O5 from
[26]. The overall scaling factor of the DOS was chosen to aid
visualization. The DOS was reported to arise from both Nb
and O up to ≈70 meV, and mostly from O at higher energies,
as represented by the blue and pink bands, respectively.

croscopy (AFM) measurements on all three types of Nb
films. The results are summarized in Figure 5. In the
top row, we present high-angle annular dark-field scan-
ning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM)
images of film cross sections at the surface. This mea-
surement confirms the presence of a ≈5 nm thick oxide
layer at the surface of all three films. The near-surface
morphology of the HiPIMS normal film is visibly differ-
ent, with the oxide layer conforming to smaller grains.
To characterize local chemical properties near the sur-
face, we performed spatially resolved EELS. The second
row shows O-K-edge EELS spectra that were measured
at the locations indicated by colored dots on the HAADF-
STEM images. In each EELS panel, the left plot shows
chemical variation from the surface into the grain, and
the right plot shows variation along grain boundaries.
The main O-K-edge feature near 534 eV shows a transi-

Deposition
Sputtered
HiPIMS opt
HiPIMS norm

T1 (µs)
56 ± 12
33 ± 2
17 ± 9

RRR
8.9 ± 0.1
5.0 ± 0.2
2.9 ± 0.1

Tc (K)
9.0 ± 0.1
8.6 ± 0.1
8.1 ± 0.1

GSA (nm2)
1140 ± 70
500 ± 50
180 ± 30

Nb
61 ± 3
64 ± 3
45 ± 2

NbOx
15.1 ± 0.2
16 ± 0.3
20.4 ± 0.8

NbO
0 ± 2
0 ± 1
5 ± 1

NbO2
3.1 ± 0.4
3.5 ± 0.2
10 ± 2

Nb2O5
20 ± 1
15.9 ± 0.8
19 ± 2

Suboxide
19 ± 2
20 ± 1
36 ± 2

TABLE I. Summary of the main parameters extracted from
qubit and thin film measurements. For T1, we report the av-
erage and standard deviation between the three rounds for
each film. GSA is the mean grain surface area. The numbers
for the different oxidation states of Nb are relative concentra-
tions integrated over the 20 nm in the depth profiles of Figure
3, expressed in percentages. The errors were calculated for
each depth step, and summed in quadrature and weighted ac-
cording to the total measured signal for each oxidation state.
Suboxide is the sum of the relative concentrations of NbOx,
NbO, and NbO2.

tion from a clear double-peak line shape near the surface
to a single broad peak near the interface with Nb metal.
Based on EELS spectra previously reported for differ-
ent Nb reference oxides [40], this indicates a change from
Nb2O5 to lower oxidation states, in agreement with the
PES measurements. For the sputtered and HiPIMS op-
timized films, spectra along grain boundaries (locations
8-10 and 6-8, respectively) do not reveal a stronger oxida-
tion than in the Nb metal away from the grain boundaries
(locations 4 and 5 in both films). However, for the HiP-
IMS normal film, the presence of the oxide in the bound-
ary is clear, as seen from the stronger signal in locations
5-7 compared with location 4. These results are consis-
tent with the overall picture from PES profiles shown in
Figure 3, which show significant oxygen diffusion for the
HiPIMS normal films. By contrast, further TEM-EELS
analysis reveals that for all films, the substrate-metal in-
terface is chemically sharp, with no oxides observed at
grain boundaries (See Supplementary Figures S5 and S6).
To further characterize grain boundaries, bright-field
TEM images that rely on a diffraction contrast from the
transmitted beam were taken at cross sections of each
sample, as shown in the third row of Figure 5. Grain
boundaries, indicated by white dotted lines for the sput-
tered and HiPIMS optimized films, are observed in each
case. The grain structure observed using TEM appears
to be largely columnar, with grains extending through


6

FIG. 5. Structural and chemical imaging of the sputtered (left), HiPIMS optimized (middle), and HiPIMS normal (right) films.
The top row shows high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) measurements at
cross sections of the films’ surfaces, revealing a ≈5 nm oxide layer and variations in grain size. The second row shows O-K-edge
electron-energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) spectra measured at the locations indicated on the HAADF-STEM images.
For
the sputtered and HiPIMS optimized films, both the EELS spectra within a grain (left) and the spectra taken along a grain
boundary (right) show a transition from a double peak (Nb2O5) to a single peak (suboxides) to a negligible peak (metal).
However, for the HiPIMS normal film, EELS spectra along the grain boundary reveal similar oxidation peaks to the surface
oxide layer, indicating that oxygen has diffused into the grain boundary to form oxides. The third row shows TEM bright-field
images of cross sections of the films’ surfaces, where the white dotted lines delineate grain boundaries for the sputtered and
HiPIMS optimized films, and the yellow arrow points to a gap at the grain boundary for the HiPIMS normal film. The grainy,
light gray layer above the surface is platinum, which protects the surface during sample preparation. The bottom row shows
atomic force microscopy (AFM) images measured over a 500 nm x 500 nm area. It is visually evident that the sputtered film
grain size is the largest, and the HiPIMS normal film grain size is the smallest.


7

the thickness of the films (see Supplementary Figure S4).
The HiPIMS normal film is distinguished by smaller grain
sizes, and it exhibits a lower packing density with appar-
ent gaps along some of the grain boundaries (yellow ar-
row). The EELS measurements suggest that these gaps
host oxidized Nb near the film surface.
Further information about the grain morphology and
size can be extracted from the complementary, top-down
view provided by the AFM images shown in the bottom
row of Figure 5. First, it appears that the grains are elon-
gated and not spherical. Second, the grain size decreases
between the sputtered and HiPIMS optimized films, and
even more significantly between the HiPIMS optimized
and normal films. This observation is quantified by esti-
mating the mean grain surface areas using a watershed
algorithm [41], as reported in Table I. We also used AFM
to measure short-range film roughness, which is found to
be approximately 1 nm RMS for all three films.
Residual resistance ratio. Measured values of resid-
ual resistance ratio (RRR) for all three film types are
displayed in Table I. RRR is defined as the ratio between
the values of the resistivity near room temperature and
just above the superconducting critical temperature Tc,
and it quantifies the impact of defect scattering on bulk
DC conductivity. We specifically report RRR values as
the ratio of measured resistivity between 295 K and 10
K. The sputtered film has the highest RRR, followed by
HiPIMS optimized, and then HiPIMS normal. We also
report measured Tc, which shows a similar trend.

DISCUSSION

We observe correlations between T1, RRR, grain size,
and suboxide concentration near the surface, as shown by
the data in Table I. RRR has long been used as a gauge
of the quality of superconducting Nb films for the con-
struction of superconducting radio-frequency (RF) cavi-
ties [42, 43]. Further, seminal studies of RF cavities with
Nb walls have shown that residual surface resistance lim-
its the cavity quality factor at low temperatures [44–48].
Thus, our finding that T1 correlates with RRR suggests
that the relaxation time may be limited by the intrinsic
qubit quality factor arising from losses in the Nb films. In
the following, we connect our results to plausible mech-
anisms by which grain boundaries and suboxides lead to
residual surface resistance and thus limit T1.
First, we discuss how smaller grain size enhances mi-
crowave surface resistance. The correlation we observe
between grain size, RRR, and Tc is consistent with a
body of literature that links these quantities in polycrys-
talline Nb thin films [49–51]. The relationship between
grain size and RF surface resistance in Nb films has been
understood by describing grain boundaries as Joseph-
son weak-links [52, 53]. Under the assumption that the
grain boundaries’ critical current and shunt resistance
are independent of grain size, the surface resistance sim-
ply depends on grain boundary density, and thus scales

inversely with the grain size [52].
Combined with our
finding that residual resistance scales inversely with T1,
this scaling is consistent with the measured relaxation
times and grain sizes across the three deposition tech-
niques. Confirmation of the Josephson weak-link model
hinges on further characterization of the grain boundaries
and their electrical characteristics. These characteristics
likely vary across our three film types based on measured
differences in grain boundary composition, as we discuss
next.
The HiPIMS normal films not only exhibit smaller
grain size, but also a lower packing density, leading to
significant grain boundary voids which host oxides near
the surface (Fig. 5). This oxide is in fact NbOx, which
penetrates into the metal (Fig. 3). Since NbOx forms
through the migration of interstitial oxygen defects re-
sulting in local lattice distortions [54, 55], its presence
in the grain boundaries can contribute to microwave ab-
sorption, including through TLS. Given that the effective
penetration depth of Nb at 6 GHz is on the order of 60
nm at low temperatures [56], NbOx extending over 20 nm
into the film can have a sizeable impact. By contrast, in
the sputtered and HiPIMS optimized films, NbOx pen-
etrates only a few nanometers into the metal (Fig. 3),
and oxides are undetectable in the grain boundaries us-
ing EELS (Fig. 5), suggesting relatively less impact on
microwave absorption in these films.
Another potential dissipation mechanism involves the
quality of the surface oxide layer. The Nb2O5 passiva-
tion layer is found to have the lowest concentration of
oxygen vacancies and to be most homogeneous in the
sputtered film (Figs. 4 and 3, respectively). The Nb2O5
layer is least homogeneous in the HiPIMS normal film,
where NbO2 and NbO are observed at the interface with
Nb. The presence of different oxidation states is expected
to result in a more complex oxide-metal interface, where
mismatches in crystalline parameters lead to increased
strain and dislocation density. NbO itself is a source of
defects, as it crystallizes in a naturally defective struc-
ture with a quarter of the Nb and O sites vacant. These
sources of elevated defect density can enhance dielec-
tric loss through contributions from paramagnetic car-
riers [11] and bistable structural motifs, which have been
suggested to host TLS [15, 16]. Additionally, while NbO
is a superconductor, NbO2 is not, further contributing to
loss. In Table I, we report the sum of the relative concen-
trations of the suboxides NbOx, NbO and NbO2, which
exhibits a negative correlation with T1. This observation
indicates that the total suboxide concentration poten-
tially limits relaxation times in superconducting qubits.
In conclusion, this study builds a significant bridge
between the performance of superconducting transmon
qubits and the materials properties of Nb films, a crit-
ical component in qubit fabrication. Our cross-cutting
investigation exploits microscopic variations among Nb
thin films deposited using three sputtering techniques,
and reveals correlations between qubit relaxation time
and structural and chemical Nb film properties, specifi-


8

cally grain size, suboxide intergranular penetration, and
suboxide intragrain concentration near the surface. Sig-
nificantly, the measured RRR serves as a proxy for the
observed variation in qubit relaxation time and these film
properties. We anticipate that further improvements in
relaxation times will arise from optimizations of grain size
in Nb deposition techniques and from exploring the use
of superconductors that show a more chemically homoge-
neous surface oxide layer than Nb, such as tantalum [57].
More broadly, the connections between material proper-
ties and relaxation mechanisms uncovered in this work
form a solid basis for physical models to guide the devel-
opment of materials for superconducting qubits. Future
multidisciplinary efforts can also leverage the multimodal
spectroscopy and microscopy approach used here to make
further progress toward identifying microscopic mecha-
nisms for decoherence and engineering high-performance
qubits.

METHODS

Materials characterization

Synchrotron measurements were carried out at the
National Synchrotron Light Source II (NSLS-II) [58],
in Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL). Hard X-ray
photoemission spectroscopy (HAXPES) measurements
were performed on beamline 7-ID-2 of the National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology (NIST) using a
400 mm diameter hemispherical electron energy analyzer
with a 300 um slit, mounted at 90 degrees with respect to
the beam propagation, and operating at 200 eV pass en-
ergy. A double crystal monochromator was used for x-ray
energy selection, with Si (111) crystals used for 2600 eV
photon energy, and Si (220) crystals for all higher pho-
ton energies. Samples were mounted at 10 degree x-ray
incidence angle (80 degree takeoff angle).
Soft X-ray PES measurements were performed using
the ambient pressure PES (APPES) endstation at the
23-ID-2 (IOS). The samples were mounted on a sample
holder by carbon tape and all measurements were per-
formed in UHV at room temperature. The endstation
has a base pressure of 3x10−7 Pa and it is equipped with
a SPECS PHOIBOS 150 NAP analyzer. The incidence
angle of the X-ray beam and the photoemission angle
were 50 degrees and 20 degrees from the sample normal,
respectively. Survey spectra were measured at a photon
energy of 1260 eV while Nb 3d spectra were measured at
420 eV and 1260 eV. All spectra were measured with a
pass energy of 10 eV.
RIXS measurements were performed using the Soft In-
elastic X-ray (SIX) 2-ID beamline [59, 60]. Varied line
spacing (VLS) gratings with line spacings of 500 mm−1

and 1250 mm−1 were respectively used on the beamline
and spectrometer which, coupled with a 20 µm exit slit,
provided a combined resolution of 32 meV. The spec-
tra were measured with σ-incident polarization, where

the polarization is perpendicular to the scattering plane.
The incident angle was set to 10 degrees to enhance the
surface contribution, and the scattering angle was set to
90 degrees.
Transmission electron microscopy work (bright field
imaging, HAADF-STEM imaging, and STEM-EELS)
was performed at the Center for Functional Nanomate-
rials (CFN) in BNL using an FEI (Thermo-Fisher Sci-
entific) Talos F200X at an accelerating voltage of 200
kV and Gatan Enfinium EELS. TEM samples were pre-
pared with a focused ion beam method using FEI He-
lios NanoLab DualBeam, via the standard in-situ lift-out
method.
Temperature dependence of the resistivity of the Nb
films, from 295 K down to 4 K, was performed in a Janis
(model ST-3T) micromanipulated probe station at the
CFN. The pressure during measurement was kept in the
low 10−4 Pa range. The Nb films had an approximate
length and width of 7 mm and 3 mm, respectively. Con-
tacts to the films were established with 25 µm Al wires
in a 4-point-measurement configuration. Silver paint was
used to expand the current leads across the width of the
films to achieve homogeneous longitudinal current flow.
Current-voltage curves, from which the resistance of the
films was extracted, were measured with three Keithley
source-meter units (model 2636A) as current sources (one
for each Nb film) and a Keithley nanovoltmeter (model
2182A).
AFM measurements were performed at the CFN at
room temperature using a commercial Park NX20-AFM
instrument in tapping mode.
Standard Si cantilevers
with nominal resonant frequency of 330 kHz were used
for scanning topography. The XEI software was used for
image analysis.

Niobium Deposition

Sputtered Niobium

Niobium was deposited on 530 µm thick C-plane sap-
phire from CrysTec GmbH Kristalltechnologie.
Prior
to deposition, the sapphire was sonicated for 2 minutes
each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropanol, then
rinsed in deionized water and blow-dried with nitrogen.
The wafer was then loaded into an AJA hybrid deposi-
tion system, where it was heated to 350◦C for 20 minutes,
then cooled for 20 minutes. Sputter deposition was per-
formed at a pressure of 1.1 Pa, a power setpoint of 300
W, and a shutter delay of 60 seconds after reaching full
power. The deposition was run for 252 seconds, resulting
in a film thickness of 185 nm.

HiPIMS Niobium

Niobium was deposited on 530 µm thick C-plane
sapphire from CrysTec GmbH Kristalltechnologie.
At


9

Princeton University, the sapphire wafers were sonicated
for 2 minutes each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and
isopropanol, then rinsed in deionized water and blow-
dried with nitrogen. Then, the substrates were sent to
Angstrom Engineering for HiPIMS deposition of Nb. De-
tailed deposition parameters and photographs are pre-
sented in Supplementary Table S1 and Supplementary
Figure S1. The primary changes in deposition param-
eters between the normal and optimized processes were
substrate geometry and peak current. We hypothesize
that a face-on rather than a confocal substrate geometry
and higher peak currents during the HiPIMS pulse lead
to higher critical temperatures. These two alterations ne-
cessitated the other process changes. In particular, the
fixture fabricated by Angstrom for the face-on geometry
did not allow for substrate rotation. The deposited thick-

nesses were 182 nm and 135 nm for HiPIMS normal and
HiPIMS optimized, respectively.

DISCLAIMER

Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or mate-
rials are identified in this paper in order to specify the
experimental procedure adequately. Such identification
is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement
by the National Institute of Standards and Technology,
nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equip-
ment identified are necessarily the best available for the
purpose. Official contribution of the National Institute
of Standards and Technology; not subject to copyright in
the United States.

[1] Kjaergaard,
M.
et
al.
Superconducting
qubits:
Current
state
of
play.
Preprint
at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.13641 (2019).

[2] Wang, C. et al. Surface participation and dielectric loss
in superconducting qubits. Applied Physics Letters 107,
162601 (2015).

[3] Dial, O. et al. Bulk and surface loss in superconducting
transmon qubits. Superconductor Science and Technology
29, 044001 (2016).

[4] Gambetta, J. M. et al. Investigating Surface Loss Effects
in Superconducting Transmon Qubits.
IEEE Transac-
tions on Applied Superconductivity 27, 1–5 (2017).

[5] Burnett, J. J., Bylander, J., Bengtsson, A., Scigliuzzo,
M. & Niepce, D. Decoherence benchmarking of supercon-
ducting qubits. npj Quantum Information 5, 1–8 (2019).

[6] Schl¨or, S. et al. Correlating Decoherence in Transmon
Qubits : Low Frequency Noise by Single Fluctuators.
Physical Review Letters 123, 190502 (2019).

[7] Nersisyan,
A.
et
al.
Manufacturing
low
dissipa-
tion superconducting quantum processors.
Preprint at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.08042 (2019).

[8] Woods, W. et al.
Determining Interface Dielectric
Losses in Superconducting Coplanar-Waveguide Res-
onators. Physical Review Applied 12, 014012 (2019).

[9] Oliver, W. D. & Welander, P. B. Materials in supercon-
ducting quantum bits. MRS Bulletin 38, 816–825 (2013).

[10] Martinis, J. M. & Megrant, A. UCSB final report for
the CSQ program:
Review of decoherence and mate-
rials physics for superconducting qubits.
Preprint at
http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.5793 (2014).

[11] Lee, D., Dubois, J. & Lordi, V. Identification of the local
sources of paramagnetic noise in superconducting qubit
devices fabricated on α-al2o3 substrates using density-
functional calculations.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 017001
(2014).

[12] Van Harlingen, D., Plourde, B., Robertson, T., Re-
ichardt, P. & Clarke, J. Decoherence In Flux Qubits Due
to 1/f Noise in Josephson Junctions. Quantum Comput-
ing and Quantum Bits in Mesoscopic Systems 171–184
(2004).

[13] Simmonds, R. et al.
Decoherence in josephson phase
qubits from junction resonators.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 93,

077003 (2004).

[14] Lisenfeld, J. et al. Measuring the Temperature Depen-
dence of Individual Two-Level Systems by Direct Coher-
ent Control. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 230504 (2010).

[15] Paz, A., Lebedeva, I., Tokatly, I. & Rubio, A. Identifica-
tion of structural motifs as tunneling two-level systems
in amorphous alumina at low temperatures. Phys. Rev.
B 90, 224202 (2014).

[16] Muller, C., Cole, J. H. & Lisenfeld, J. Towards under-
standing two-level-systems in amorphous solids: insights
from quantum circuits.
Rep. Prog. Phys. 82, 124501
(2019).

[17] Koch, J. et al. Charge-insensitive qubit design derived
from the Cooper pair box. Physical Review A - Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics 76, 1–19 (2007).

[18] Arute, F. et al.
Quantum supremacy using a pro-
grammable superconducting processor. Nature 574, 505–
510 (2019).

[19] Ma, R. et al. A dissipatively stabilized Mott insulator of
photons. Nature 566, 51–57 (2019).

[20] Mundada, P., Zhang, G., Hazard, T. & Houck, A. Sup-
pression of Qubit Crosstalk in a Tunable Coupling Super-
conducting Circuit. Physical Review Applied 12, 054023
(2019).

[21] Guo,
Q.
et
al.
Observation
of
energy
re-
solved
many-body
localization.
Preprint
at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.02818 (2019).

[22] Blais, A., Huang, R. S., Wallraff, A., Girvin, S. M. &
Schoelkopf, R. J. Cavity quantum electrodynamics for
superconducting electrical circuits: An architecture for
quantum computation.
Physical Review A - Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics 69, 1–14 (2004).

[23] Alami, J. et al. High-power impulse magnetron sputter-
ing of Ti Si C thin films from a Ti 3 SiC 2 compound
target. Thin Solid Films 515, 1731–1736 (2006).

[24] Kouznetsov, V., Macak, K., Schneider, J. M., Helmers-
son, U. & Petrov, I. A novel pulsed magnetron sputter
technique utilizing very high target power densities. Sur-
face and Coatings Technology 122, 290–293 (1999).

[25] Souek, P. et al. Superhard nanocomposite nc-tic/a-c:h
coatings: The effect of hipims on coating microstructure
and mechanical properties. Surface and Coatings Tech-


10

nology 311, 257–267 (2017).

[26] Cheng, Z. et al. Diffuson-driven ultralow thermal con-
ductivity in amorphous nb2o5 thin films. Physical Review
Materials 3, 025002 (2019).

[27] Tian, H. et al.
Surface studies of niobium chemically
polished under conditions for superconducting radio fre-
quency (srf) cavity production.
Appl. Surf. Sci. 253,
1236 (2008).

[28] Chang, J. et al.
Profiling nitrogen in ultrathin silicon
oxynitrides with angle-resolved x-ray photoelectron spec-
troscopy. J. Appl. Phys. 87, 4449 (2000).

[29] Weiland, C. et al. Nondestructive compositional depth
profiling using variable-kinetic energy hard x-ray photo-
electron spectroscopy and maximum entropy regulariza-
tion. Surf. Interface Anal, 46, 407 (2014).

[30] Weiland, C., Rumaiz, A. K., Pianetta, P. & Woicik,
J. C.
Recent applications of hard x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 34, 030801 (2016).

[31] Ament, L., van Veenendaal, M., Devereaux, T., Hill, J.
& van der Brink, J. Resonant inelastic x-ray scattering
studies of elementary excitations. Rev. Mod. Phys. 83,
705 (2011).

[32] Bisogni, V. et al.
Bimagnon studies in cuprates with
resonant inelastic x-ray scattering at the o k edge. i. as-
sessment on la2cuo4 and comparison with the excitation
at cu l3 and cu k edges. Phys. Rev. B 85, 214527 (2012).

[33] Lee, W. et al. Role of lattice coupling in establishing elec-
tronic and magnetic properties in quasi-one-dimensional
cuprates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 265502 (2013).

[34] Ertan, E. et al. Theoretical simulations of oxygen k -edge
resonant inelastic x-ray scattering of kaolinite. Phys. Rev.
B 95, 144301 (2017).

[35] de Graaf, S. et al. Hydrogen absorption and its effect on
low- temperature electric properties of niobium. J. Appl.
Phys. 51, 4460 (1980).

[36] Jameson, J. et al. Dielectric relaxation study of hydrogen
exposure as a source of two-level systems in al2o3.
J.
Non-Crys. Solids 357, 2148 (2011).

[37] Gordon, L., Abu-Farsakh, H., Janotti, A. & Van de
Walle, C. G.
Hydrogen bonds in al2o3 as dissipative
two-level systems in superconducting qubits. Sci. Report
4, 7590 (2015).

[38] de Graaf, S. et al. Direct identification of dilute surface
spins on al2o3: Origin of flux noise in quantum circuits.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 057703 (2017).

[39] O’Hara, A. & Demkov, A. A.
Nature of the metal-
insulator transition in nbo2. Physical Review B 094305
(2015).

[40] Bach, D., Schneider, R., Gerthsen, D., Verbeeck, J. &
W., S. Eels of niobium and stoichiometric niobium-oxide
phasespart i: Plasmon and near-edges fine structure. Mi-
crosc. Microanal. 15, 505 (2009).

[41] Rabbani, A. & Ayatollahi, S.
Comparing three image
processing algorithms to estimate the grain-size distribu-
tion of porous rocks from binary 2d images and sensitivity
analysis of the grain overlapping degree. Special Topics
& Reviews in Porous Media - An International Journal
6, 71–89 (2015).

[42] Russo, R., Catani, L., Cianchi, A., Tazzari, S. & Langner,
J. High quality superconducting niobium films produced
by an ultra-high vacuum cathodic arc. Supercond. Sci.
Technol. 18, L41–L44 (2005).

[43] Valderrama, E. et al. High-rrr thin-films of nb produced
using energetic condensation from a coaxial, rotating vac-

uum arc plasma. AIP Conference Proceedings 1434, 953
(2012).

[44] Turneaure, J. & Weissman, I. Microwave Surface Resis-
tance of Superconducting Niobium. Journal of Applied
Physics 39, 4417–4427 (1968).

[45] Broom, R. & Wolf, P. Q factor and resonance amplitude
of Josephson tunnel junctions.
Physical Review B 16,
3100–3107 (1977).

[46] Halbritter, J. Surface Residual Resistance of High- Q -
Superconducting Resonators. Journal of Applied Physics
42, 82–87 (1971).

[47] Schm¨user, P. Superconductivity in high energy particle
accelerators.
Progress in Particle and Nuclear Physics
49, 155–244 (2002).

[48] Romanenko, A. & Schuster, D. Understanding quality
factor degradation in superconducting niobium cavities
at low microwave field amplitudes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119,
264801 (2017).

[49] Bose, S., Raychaudhuri, P., Banerjee, R., Vasa, P. &
Ayyub, P. Mechanism of the Size Dependence of the Su-
perconducting Transition of Nanostructured Nb. Physical
Review Letters 95, 147003 (2005).

[50] Bose, S. et al. Size induced metalinsulator transition in
nanostructured niobium thin films: intra-granular and
inter-granular contributions. Journal of Physics: Con-
densed Matter 18, 4553–4566 (2006).

[51] Bose, S., Raychaudhuri, P., Banerjee, R. & Ayyub, P.
Upper critical field in nanostructured Nb : Competing
effects of the reduction in density of states and the mean
free path. Physical Review B 74, 224502 (2006).

[52] Bonin, B. & Safa, H. Power dissipation at high fields in
granular RF superconductivity. Superconductor Science
and Technology 4, 257–261 (1991).

[53] Attanasio, C., Maritato, L. & Vaglio, R. Residual surface
resistance of polycrystalline superconductors.
Physical
Review B 43, 6128–6131 (1991).

[54] Dosch, H., Schwerin, A. & Peisl, J. Point-defect-induced
nucleation of the ω phase. Phys. Rev. B 34, 1654 (1986).

[55] Delheusy, M. et al. X-ray investigation of subsurface in-
terstitial oxygen at nb/oxide interfaces. Appl. Phys. Lett.
92, 101911 (2008).

[56] Gao, J. The physics of superconducting microwave res-
onators. Dissertation (Ph.D.) (2008).

[57] Place,
A. et al.
New
material
platform
for
su-
perconducting
transmon
qubits
with
coherence
times
exceeding
0.3
milliseconds.
Preprint
at
https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.00024 (2019).

[58] Hill, J. et al.
Future trends in synchrotron science at
NSLS-II. J. Phys. Cond. Matt. (in press).

[59] Dvorak, J., Jarrige, I., Biosgni, V., Coburn, S. & Leon-
hardt, W. Towards 10 mev resolution: The design of an
ultrahigh resolution soft x-ray rixs spectrometer.
Rev.
Sci. Instr. 87, 115109 (2016).

[60] Jarrige, I., Bisogni, V., Zhu, Y., Leonhardt, W. & Dvo-
rak, J. Paving the way to ultra-high-resolution resonant
inelastic x-ray scattering with the six beamline at nsls-ii.
Synch. Rad. News 31, 7 (2018).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research used the SST-2, IOS, and SIX beam-
lines of the National Synchrotron Light Source II, and


11

the electron microscopy facilities of the Center for Func-
tional Nanomaterials, U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)
Office of Science User Facilities operated for the DOE Of-
fice of Science by Brookhaven National Laboratory un-
der Contract No. de-sc0012704. Qubits were fabricated
in the Princeton Institute for the Science and Technol-
ogy of Materials (PRISM) cleanroom and the Quantum
Device Nanofabrication Laboratory at Princeton Univer-
sity.
A.P. acknowledges the National Science Founda-
tion Graduate Research Fellowship, B.J. acknowledges
the Humboldt Foundation, A.P.M.P. acknowledges the
National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate Fel-
lowship, and all Princeton authors acknowledge the Ma-
terials Research Science and Engineering Center (MR-
SEC) Grant No. DMR-1420541 and the Army Research

Office Grant No. W911NF-1910016.

COMPETING INTERESTS

The authors declare no competing interests.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS STATEMENT

I.J. and A.A.H. designed research, A.P., C.W., S.H.,
I.J., B.J., A.P.M.P., I.W., A.H., V.B., J.P., A.B., M.M.,
P.R., F.C., K.K., X.T. performed research, A.P., C.W.,
S.H., I.J., M.H. analyzed data, M.H. advised, A.P., I.J.,
M.H. wrote the main text of the manuscript. All authors
reviewed the manuscript.


Supplementary Information for “Microscopic
Relaxation Channels in Materials for
Superconducting Qubits”

Anjali Premkumar1,*, Conan Weiland2, Sooyeon Hwang3, Berthold J¨ack4, Alexander P. M.
Place1, Iradwikanari Waluyo5, Adrian Hunt5, Valentina Bisogni5, Jonathan Pelliciari5,
Andi Barbour5, Mike S. Miller6, Paola Russo6, Fernando Camino3, Kim Kisslinger3, Xiao
Tong3, Mark S. Hybertsen3, Andrew A. Houck1,**, and Ignace Jarrige5,***

1Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA
2Material Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899,
USA
3Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA
4Department of Physics, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA
5National Synchrotron Light Source II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA
6Angstrom Engineering Inc. Kitchener, Ontario, Canada N2E1W8
*anjalip@princeton.edu
**aahouck@princeton.edu
***jarrige@bnl.gov

Qubit Fabrication

Qubits were fabricated on each film type using the same process, except as noted. After Nb film deposition, photoresist was
spun on the wafer to protect the films from dicing. The films were diced into one-inch square chips, on which photolithography
was performed to define the coplanar waveguide resonator and qubit capacitor pads. The protective resist was stripped in
Microposit 1165. Then, the chip was sonicated for two minutes each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropanol prior to
spinning photoresist AZ1505. The resist was patterned in a Heidelberg DWL66+ into a grid of nine devices, each with inputs,
outputs, a resonator, and capacitor pads. To develop the resist, the chip was gently swirled in AZ300MIF for one minute, then
held under running water for one minute. The exposed niobium was then descumed and etched in a PlasmaTherm APEX SLR
metals etcher in an oxygen plasma and fluorine chemistry, respectively.
Manhattan Josephson junctions were patterned using electron beam lithography. After stripping photoresist, the chip was
again sonicated for two minutes each in toluene, acetone, methanol, and isopropanol. Then, a bilayer of MMA (8.5) MAA
and 950 PMMA A2 (Microchem) was spun. The MMA was baked for two minutes, and the bilayer was baked for 30 minutes
after spinning PMMA. A 40 nm aluminum anticharge layer was deposited using electron-beam evaporation in a Plassys MEB
550S. Then, the chip was diced into individual 7 mm by 7 mm devices. Next, the resist was patterned in an Elionix ELS-F125
electron beam lithography system: lower doses only exposed the MMA, leading to an “undercut” geometry. The anticharge
layer was removed by placing the device in AZ300MIF for 4 minutes and DI water for one minute. The device was swirled in
1:3 MIBK:IPA for 50 s to develop the resist. Manhattan junctions were double-angle evaporated in a Plassys MEB 550S with
a 20 nm bottom Al layer, oxidation for 15 minutes at 2×104 Pa, a 70 nm top Al layer, and a final oxidation for 20 minutes
at 4×103 Pa. The resist was lifted off in Remover PG at 80◦C for at least three hours. To complete liftoff, the device was
sonicated in Remover RG for four seconds and sprayed with IPA.
The qubits were fabricated using the same CAD files, and were thus designed to have the same qubit and cavity frequencies.
The measured qubit and cavity frequencies are presented in Supplementary Table S2.
Our study presents three rounds of devices, where each round had consistent fabrication, packaging, and shielding between
all types of Nb film. After the first round, we improved the following procedures: (1) we used a new supply of MMA and
PMMA electron-beam lithography resists, and (2) we ensured and experimentally confirmed improved thermalization between
the device and the mixing chamber of the dilution refrigerator. We believe that these two changes led to overall improvements
in qubit performance.
All materials characterization presented in this work (PES, HAXPES, RIXS, HAADF-STEM, TEM-EELS, AFM, and
resistivity) was performed on films which came from the same one-inch square chip as the qubits for a given film type. The
films used in the materials characterization underwent the same chemical processes as the qubits, described above.

1

arXiv:2004.02908v1  [physics.app-ph]  6 Apr 2020


Device Interfacing and Packaging

Each device had a coplanar waveguide resonator coupled at one end to a qubit. The input line was coupled to the opposite end
of the resonator, and the output line was coupled near the qubit end of the resonator, where the voltage is maximal. Devices
were tightly sandwiched between a high-resistivity copper mount and a printed circuit board. Wirebonds connected the PCB to
the input line, output line, and ground plane. A high-resistivity copper cap was placed atop the PCB where the device was
exposed. The copper mount was thermally sunk to the mixing chamber of a dilution refrigerator at 30 mK with a high-resistivity
copper rod. The entire device package was shielded with one inner layer of indium-coated copper and two outer layers of
µ-metal. Each µ-metal shield was covered in aluminized mylar on the outside, and the inside of the inner copper shield was
coated with stycast and grains of SiC. Refer to Supplementary Figure S2 for an interfacing and packaging schematic.

Measurement and Control

We performed time-domain measurements to characterize qubit performance. Relaxation (T1) measurements were performed
by exciting the qubit with a Gaussian π-pulse at the qubit frequency, then reading out the qubit state after delay time τ. Ramsey
(T2R) measurements were performed with two Gaussian π

2 pulses at the qubit frequency separated by delay time τ. The phase of
the second pulse was given by 2π ffringeτ, where ffringe is the desired fringe frequency to aid fits. Readout occurred immediately
after the second pulse. Echo (T2E) measurements involved, in addition to the Ramsey pulse scheme, an additional π pulse
halfway between the two π

2 pulses, in phase with the first pulse. In cases where T2E was fit using exponential decay rather than
exponentially decaying fringes, the fringe frequency ffringe was set to zero. Measured relaxation, Ramsey, and echo times are
presented in Supplementary Table S2 and Supplementary Figure S3. The reported relaxation and coherence times for a single
device are the average of 19-50 sequential measurements.
The control and measurement setup is shown in Supplementary Figure S2. Gaussian pulses at the qubit frequency were
synthesized via IQ mixing with a Tektronix AWG5014 and a Keysight E8267D Vector Signal Generator. Square pulses at the
cavity frequency for readout were synthesized using an on-off gate from the Tektronix to switch the Holzworth HS9004A
phase-coherent RF synthesizer. The qubit and cavity signals were combined, sent into the fridge, and thermalized at subsequent
stages with attenuators. For both the input and output lines, we used KNL low-pass filters outside the shields and CR110
Eccosorb filters inside the shields to attenuate high-frequency radiation.
The output was sent through a Quinstar four-port circulator mounted to the mixing chamber with two inputs terminated
with 50 ohms, then sent to a high electron mobility transistor (HEMT) low-noise amplifier mounted to the 4K stage. At room
temperature, a high-pass filter at 6.3 GHz filtered out the qubit pulse to avoid saturating the subsequent amplifiers (Miteq and
Minicircuits). The signal was mixed in homodyne with a local oscillator, which was produced by the same Holzworth as the
readout tone and was thus phase-locked with the signal. The resulting I and Q DC signals were cleaned up with low-pass filters
and amplified twice each using an SRS SR445A, then sent directly to an Agilent ADC U1082A.
The Tektronix AWG and ADC were triggered with a Keysight 33600A Series waveform generator using a square pulse at
50 % duty cycle. Each point in a single T1 trace was the average of 4000 - 20000 trigger cycles. For each trigger cycle, the
ADC read the I and Q signals for 8.2 µs with a sample rate of 1 GHz. Finally, all electronic equipment was clocked with an
SRS F2725 Rubidium Frequency Standard.

Disclaimer

Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this paper in order to specify the experimental
procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best
available for the purpose.

2/9


Parameter
HiPIMS Normal
HiPIMS Optimized

Initial Pressure
4.0 Pa
1.3 Pa

Substrate Geometry
Confocal
Face-On

Substrate Rotation
10 rpm
none

Source-substrate Distance
4.5 in
3.5 in

Process Pressure
4000 Pa
1300 Pa

Pulse length
50 µs
75 µs

Pulse repeat rate
250 Hz
250 Hz

Voltage
568 V
640 V

Current
678 mA
1565 mA

Power
385 W
1001 W

Peak Current
78 A
241 A

Gas Flow (Ar)
20 sccm
20 sccm

Deposition time
2667 s
230 s

Total thickness
182 nm
135 nm

Table S1. Deposition parameters for HiPIMS normal and HiPIMS optimized films.

Figure S1. Photographs of substrate geometries for HiPIMS deposition. (a) Confocal geometry for the HiPIMS normal
deposition. Such a geometry is commonly used in sputtering deposition. (b) Face-on geometry for the HiPIMS optimized
deposition. An angled chuck was fabricated such that the faces of the substrate and target would be parallel.

3/9


Device
T1 (µs)
T2R (µs)
T2E (µs)
T2E fit
N
Qubit Freq.
(GHz)
Cavity Freq.
(GHz)

Sputtered #1
44 ± 6
5.8 ± 0.4
7 ± 1
Exp
50
4.534
7.351

HiPIMS Opt #1
34 ± 4
4.2 ± 0.4
4.3 ± 0.2
ExpCos
19
4.552
7.249

HiPIMS Norm #1
7.3 ± 0.4
3.1 ± 0.2
4 ± 1†
ExpCos
30
4.444
7.187

Sputtered #2
58 ± 7
6.4 ± 1.0
8.3 ± 0.5
ExpCos
23
4.955
7.331

HiPIMS Opt #2
34 ± 2
11.9 ± 0.7
16.3 ± 0.7
Exp
50
4.515
7.227

HiPIMS Norm #2
26 ± 2
1.33 ± 0.04
1.4 ± 0.1
Exp
30
5.300
7.201

Sputtered #3
67 ± 3
11.4 ± 0.4
13.3 ± 0.5
Exp
50
5.008
7.333

HiPIMS Opt #3
30 ± 5
12.8 ± 0.8
13.0 ± 0.9
Exp
50
4.762
7.229

HiPIMS Norm #3
18 ± 4
9 ± 1
12 ± 2
Exp
30
4.660
7.182

Table S2. Qubit performance and measured device parameters. Each coherence time is the average and standard deviation of
N sequential measurements, all of which are shown in Supplementary Figure S3. In the T2E fit column, ”Exp” denotes
ffringe = 0 with an exponential decay fit, and and ”ExpCos” denotes a non-zero ffringe with a exponentially decaying sinusoidal
fit. † indicates that only one measurement was taken, and the error is the uncertainty of the fit.

4/9


Figure S2. Measurement setup and shielding. Optical image of the packaged device shows the qubit (small box in bottom-left
corner) coupled to one end of a coplanar waveguide resonator. Input and output lines are capacitively coupled to the resonator,
allowing for transmission measurements through the resonator and qubit drive pulses.

5/9


Figure S3. Time traces for relaxation (T1), Ramsey (T2R), and echo (T2E) measurements for all devices. Error bars on each
measurement indicate fit error.

6/9


Figure S4. Low-magnification TEM bright-field images of the three films, showing the largely columnar profile of the grains.

7/9


Figure S5. Structural and chemical imaging of the substrate-metal interface for the sputtered (left), HiPIMS optimized
(middle), and HiPIMS normal (right) films. The top row shows high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron
spectroscopy (HAADF-STEM) measurements at cross sections. The second row shows O-K-edge electron-energy loss
spectroscopy (EELS) spectra measured at the locations indicated on the HAADF-STEM images. The horizontal bars on the
HAADF-STEM images indicate a range of locations that were averaged over to obtain the EELS spectra shown. At this level,
we observe a chemically sharp transition from the oxidized sapphire substrate to the Nb film, which shows little oxidation. The
amount and locations of oxidation are similar across films.

8/9


Figure S6. Structural and chemical imaging of grain boundaries at the substrate-metal interface for the the sputtered (left),
HiPIMS optimized (middle), and HiPIMS normal (right) films. The top row shows HAADF-STEM measurements at cross
sections. The second row shows O-K-edge EELS spectra measured at the locations indicated on the HAADF-STEM images.
The large peak in the darkest green spectra corresponds to oxidation in the sapphire substrate. The reddest spectrum for each
film shows very little oxidation away from the grain boundary. Spectra taken along the grain boundary do not show stronger
oxidation than the reddest spectrum for any film, indicating that the grain boundaries at this interface are consistently
unoxidized at this level.

9/9


