Metamaterial enhancement of metal-halide perovskite 

luminescence

Giorgio Adamo,1* Harish Krishnamoorthy,1 Daniele Cortecchia, 2,3 Bhumika Chaudhary,2,3 Venkatram 

Nalla1, Nikolay Zheludev1,4 and Cesare Soci1,*

1 Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, TPI, SPMS, Nanyang Technological University, 21 

Nanyang Link, Singapore 637371

2 Energy Research Institute @ NTU (ERI@N), Research Techno Plaza, Nanyang Technological 

University, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 6375533

3 Interdisciplinary Graduate School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798.

4 Optoelectronics Research Centre & Centre for Photonic Metamaterials, University of Southampton, 

Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK

*Corresponding authors: g.adamo@ntu.edu.sg, csoci@ntu.edu.sg

Metal-halide perovskites are rapidly emerging as solution-processable optical materials for light 

emitting applications. Here we adopt a plasmonic metamaterial approach to enhance 

photoluminescence emission and extraction of methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) thin films, 

based on the Purcell effect. We show that hybridization of the active metal-halide film with resonant 

nanoscale sized slits carved into a gold film can yield more than one order of magnitude 

enhancement of luminescence intensity, and nearly threefold reduction of luminescence lifetime. 

This shows the effectiveness of resonant nanostructures in controlling metal-halide perovskite light 

emission properties over a tunable spectral range, a viable approach toward highly efficient 

perovskite light emitting devices and single-photon emitters.


Efficient nanoscale light sources are key elements for the development of advanced nanophotonic 

circuits and integrated thin-film optoelectronic devices. Thanks to their exceptional optoelectronic 

properties, hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites are gaining prominence for solid-state lighting and 

displays.1,2,3,4 Limiting factors to the adoption of perovskites in photonic applications are stability5 and 

low luminescence yield (low efficiency and relatively slow rate of spontaneous emission), which so far 

hindered the realization of perovskite-based high-speed light-emitting devices.6,7 A number of 

approaches have been adopted to overcome the luminescence yield limitation, ranging from micro-

/nano-structuring of the perovskite materials8,9,10,11,12,13 to distributed feedback and microring lasing 

cavities.14,15,16,17,18,19 Thanks to their ability of trapping, confining and enhancing the optical fields in 

nanoscale volumes, plasmonic and dielectric metamaterials have proven to be an excellent platform 

for the enhancement of both linear and non-linear properties of media,14,20 and have been used with 

great success for multifold enhancement of luminescence in variety of active materials like quantum 

dots, quantum wells and dyes and ultimately enabling both lasing and spasing.21,22,23,24 Here we exploit 

the design flexibility of plasmonic metamaterials to alter the luminescence of archetypical MAPbI3

perovskite films hybridized with planar resonant nanoslits tailored to match their emission peak 

around 765 nm. We control the degree of photoluminescence enhancement by shifting the 

metamaterial resonance across the MAPbI3 emission line and obtain more than one order of 

magnitude increase in light radiation from the perovskite film – correspondingly we observe a 

significant narrowing of the luminescence linewidth and almost three-fold reduction of the lifetime. 

These findings prove that hybridization of metal-halide perovskites with metamaterials could lead to 

the realization of more efficient and faster nanoscale integrated light emitting devices and lasers, as 

well as to the improvement of intrinsic radiative properties of perovskite compounds through the 

control of light-matter interactions at the nanoscale.

We selected a basic metamaterial design, a periodic array of nanoscale slits carved onto a 

continuous metallic film, which supports dipolar resonances in the visible spectral range whose 

wavelength is determined by the slit length. Six metamaterial nanoslit arrays (30 x 30 μm2 squares) 


were fabricated by Focused Ion Beam (FIB) milling of a 30 nm thin gold layer, evaporated over a glass 

substrate. The arrays feature an increasing slit length L, ranging from 100 nm to 150 nm, in steps of 

10 nm, a constant slit width W ≈ 35 nm, and a square lattice periodicity of 2L. Figure 1a-c show 

secondary electron images of three arrays with slits length L = 100 nm (1a), 120 nm (1b) and 140 nm 

(1c), captured over a ~750 x 750 nm2 field of view: they are presented side by side to produce a distinct 

perception of the increase in length and periodicity.

The MAPbI3 precursor solution was spin-coated over the entire nanostructured sample, 

resulting in a ~65 nm thin film, covering both the metamaterials (Figure 1d), the flat gold and a nearby 

patch exposing the glass substrate, to ensure as uniform as possible coating conditions for the arrays 

and the reference areas. To avoid direct contact between gold and the perovskite film, thus preventing 

luminescence quenching and the possibility of gold diffusion into the perovskite,25 a ~5 nm SiO2 layer 

Figure 1: a-c) Secondary electrons images of slit metamaterials with slit length of, respectively, 100, 120 
and 140 nm, carved by Focused Ion Beam (FIB) milling of a 30nm Au + 5nm SiO2 film on glass substrate; d) 
secondary electrons image of a 150 nm slit metamaterial coated with 65nm thick MAPbI3 perovskite film;
scale bar is 100 nm e-f) top-view and cross-section maps of the electric field maps at resonance for a 120 
nm long slit illuminated by 760nm light polarized along y, showing local field enhancement inside and in 
the vicinity of the slit.


was thermally evaporated onto the sample before spin-coating the MAPbI3 solution. Three-

dimensional full-wave electromagnetic simulations confirm the dipolar nature of the resonant field 

trapped inside the nanoslits and the enhancement of the field intensity and local density of states 

(LDOS), as shown in Figure 1e and 1f, respectively.

The photoluminescence spectrum of the MAPbI3 perovskite film peaks around the optical 

bandgap energy of ~1.62 eV, with relatively narrow full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of ~50 nm. 

Figures 2a and 2b show the simulated and experimentally measured optical absorption spectra of the 

different nanoslit metamaterials arrays fabricated, for normally incident light with polarization 

perpendicular to the slits (TM), before spin-coating the perovskite film. The bare metamaterial spectra 

feature well pronounced absorption resonances at progressively longer wavelengths with increasing 

slit length and crossing over the MAPbI3 photoluminescence spectrum at 765 nm (Figure 2b).

The experimental optical spectra were measured under normal incidence illumination using a 

microphotospectrometer with a circular collection aperture of 25 μm diameter, which allowed 

removing edge effects from the metamaterial arrays. The simulated spectra were obtained by three-

dimensional full-wave electromagnetic simulations using standard literature data for gold26 and 

glass27. It should be noted that, in this spectral interval, optical absorption of gold is negligible, 

therefore the optical fields are mostly trapped within the slits or within the air/glass in its vicinity 

(Figures 1e-f), thus allowing strong interaction with the overlying perovskite film.


The effect of the nanoslit gold metamaterials on the light emission properties of MAPbI3

perovskite films was evaluated by measuring both steady-state and transient photoluminescence in 

three configurations: MAPbI3 film on glass, MAPbI3 film on gold (with ~5 nm SiO2 spacer) and MAPbI3

film on each of the six nanoslits metamaterial arrays (with ~5 nm SiO2 spacer). In the steady-state 

measurements, we excited the perovskite film using a ps pulsed diode laser and measured the emitted 

light with a scanning monochromator spectrometer, while time resolved measurements were 

performed using a ~100 fs optical parametric oscillator (OPA) as pump and a streak-camera to record 

the photoluminescence. We have chosen an excitation wavelength of lambda=405 nm, detuned from 

the metamaterials’ resonance, and focused the laser beam to a spot size of about 15 μm to avoid any 

direct effect of the pump on the interaction between MAPbI3 emission and nanoslits’s resonances. 

The steady-state results indicate that the photoluminescence of the MAPbI3 perovskite film is 

strongly enhanced by the interaction with the metamaterials and that the degree of enhancement can 

be controlled by the design of the nanoslits resonators. The measurements were performed selecting 

the polarization of the emitted light, whereas the polarization of the pump light was left unchanged 

Figure 2: a) Simulated optical absorption resonance spectra for slit metamaterials with length varying from 
100 nm to 150 nm, in 10 nm steps, (magenta to blue lines); b) experimental optical absorption resonance 
spectra for slit metamaterials with length varying from 100 nm to 150 nm, in 10 nm steps, overlaid with 
photoluminescence emission spectrum of a 65 nm thick MAPbI3 perovskite film on glass (dashed black line)


since both the gold metamaterial and the perovskite film are polarization independent at this 

wavelength.

Figures 3a and 3b show the photoluminescence intensity of the perovskite film on metamaterials, for 

arrays whose resonance is blue-shifted (100 nm slit, magenta curve), centred (130 nm slit, lilac curve), 

and red-shifted (150 nm slit, blue curve) with respect to the MAPbI3 emission peak, in TM 

Figure 3: TM (a) and (b) TE (b) polarized  spectra of a 65nm thick MAPbI3 perovskite film on metamaterials 
with slit lengths of 100 nm (magenta), 130 nm (lilac) and 150 nm (blue); MAPbI3 intensity (c) and linewidth 
(d) dependence as function of the wavelength mismatch between the metamaterial optical absorption 
resonance  and the perovskite emission peak for both TM (full markers)  and TE (dashed markers) 
polarizations [as reference, the horizontal lines and shaded areas indicate the  intensities in TM (full lines) 
and TE (dashed lines) polarizations for the MAPbI3 film on glass (black), on gold (yellow)].


(perpendicular to slits) and TE (parallel to slits) polarizations, respectively. It is quite evident that, in 

TM polarization, the photoluminescence intensity is highest when the metamaterial resonance and 

the perovskite emission peaks match, while in TE polarization there is no clear dependence on the 

metamaterial resonance wavelength. To visualize how the photoluminescence intensity depends on 

the wavelength mismatch (Δλ) between the nanoslits resonance and the MAPbI3 emission, we plot in 

Figure 3c the photoluminescence peak intensity for i) the MAPbI3 film on glass (black horizontal lines), 

ii) the MAPbI3 film on gold/SiO2 (yellow horizontal lines) and iii) the MAPbI3 film on all the six nanoslit 

metamaterial arrays (red circles), in both TM (full circles) and TE polarization (dashed circles). The 

following observations can be made: i) The MAPbI3 photoluminescence intensity increases (~6x) when 

the film is placed in the vicinity of gold; ii) The MAPbI3 photoluminescence intensity is further 

enhanced, by more than one order of magnitude (~12x), when the film is placed on the metamaterial 

slits; iii) TM polarized photoluminescence shows a clear dependence on Δλ, while TE polarized  

photoluminescence is unaffected by the mismatch between the metamaterial optical absorption 

resonance and the perovskite emission peak wavelengths. This indicates that  resonant nanoslits cause 

a Purcell enhancement of the photoluminescence by confining the electrical field in a nanometric 

volume when they are excited with polarization perpendicular to the long axis of the slit21. Further 

evidence of the effect induced on the MAPbI3 photoluminescence by the photonic mode’s volume 

confinement is provided by the linewidth of the TM polarized photoluminescence emission, which 

decreases proportionally to Δλ, as shown in Figure 3d. The fact that photoluminescence enhancement 

is comparable for TM and TE polarizations shall be attributed to the non-conformal coverage of the 

nanoslit volume by the perovskite films, as explained in Figure S1 (Supplementary Information). This 

also suggests that the values reported here are only a lower bound for achievable enhancement 

factors.

A direct manifestation of the enhancement of radiative emission rates by the Purcell effect is 

the reduction of photoluminescence lifetimes.28,29 The photoluminescence decay traces for the 

MAPbI3 perovskite film on metamaterial arrays with nanoslits of increasing length are plotted in Figure 


4a, together with the fitting curves overlaid to the corresponding spectra (the spectra are vertically 

shifted for ease of visualization). The peak intensities of the decay traces show a clear dependence on 

Δλ (Figure 4b), in good agreement with the behaviour of steady-state spectra. The photoluminescence 

of MAPbI3 films on glass shows a double-exponential decay with characteristic lifetimes of τ1 ≈ 0.29 ns 

and τ2 ≈ 4.8 ns, which are in good agreement with previous assignments to Auger recombination (τ1) 

and charge carrier relaxation through band-edge emission (τ2)1. 

The hybridization of the MAPbI3 film with the nanoslit metamaterials induces a significant reduction 

of both τ1 and τ2 (Figures 4c and 4d, respectively), consistent with the dependence of 

Figure 4: a) Time resolved photoluminescence of a 65nm thick MAPbI3 perovskite film on metamaterials 
with slit lengths varying from 100 nm to 160nm, and fitting curves overlaid, (spectra are vertically shifted 
for ease of visualization); Time resolved photoluminescence peak intensity (b) and 2-exponential fitting 
time dependence (c & d) of MAPbI3 on metamaterials as function of the detuning of the metamaterial 
resonance from the perovskite emission peak [as reference, the horizontal lines and shaded areas indicate 
the PL intensities for the MAPbI3 film on glass (black), on gold (yellow)].


photoluminescence intensity and linewidth on Δλ. The three-fold shortening of radiative lifetime τ2

achieved at maximum overlap (Δλ~0, when the metamaterial resonance wavelength matches the 

MAPbI3 emission peak) corresponds to a Purcell factor of nearly 3. We also observe a slight reduction 

(~20%) of the Auger recombination lifetimes, τ1, correlated with the metamaterials resonances, which 

may be attributed to plasmon-induced hot carrier generation21; given the more significant reduction 

in τ2, employing of metamaterials is clearly advantageous to enhance photoluminescence emission. 

Note that the Purcell factor reported here shall be considered as a lower bound, since time-resolved

data were acquired for unpolarised emission while steady-state measurements indicate that nanoslit 

cavities affect almost exclusively TM polarized photoluminescence. Furthermore, all measurements 

were performed at room temperature, and a further increase in radiative rates could be expected at 

lower temperatures. Thus, the improvements in luminescence properties of perovskite films coupled 

to resonant metamaterial structures registered so far (enhancement of photoluminescence intensity, 

narrowing of steady-state linewidths and shortening of SE lifetimes) could arguably lead to a reduction 

of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) and lasing thresholds, an important step towards integrated 

perovskites light emitting devices. 

In summary, inspired by the proven ability of metamaterials to manipulate radiation, promote 

light-matter interaction and facilitate emission at any wavelength and across numerous types of 

media, we hybridized a metal-halide perovskite film with nanoslits gold metamaterials to control and 

enhance its optical emission. We demonstrated a substantial increase of the intrinsic 

photoluminescence intensity by more than one order of magnitude when the metamaterial resonance 

was tuned to the perovskite intrinsic emission peak. This increase in photoluminescence intensity is 

accompanied by a significant reduction in the spontaneous emission lifetimes, clearly indicating that 

the enhancement is radiative in nature. Improved performance and additional functionalities can be 

foreseen by optimization of the metamaterial structures and their coupling to the perovskite films 

(e.g., better permeation of the perovskite precursors into the nanostructured scaffold before 

conversion and crystallization). Similar design principles could also be adopted in the layout of 


electrodes30,31. Thus, our strategy hints potential reductions of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) 

and lasing thresholds, paving the way towards on-chip integrated perovskite photonic components

with wide spectral tunability from UV to NIR, and could potentially constitute a viable architecture for 

perovskite-based integrated light emitting devices, both optically and electrically pumped. 

Methods

Device Fabrication. The nanoslits metamaterials were fabricated by depositing a 30 nm thin film of 

gold, via thermal evaporation, over a glass coverslip substrate, followed by focused ion beam (FIB) 

milling, with a FEI Helios 650 dual FIB/SEM system, of the metamaterial arrays of nanoslits of 

increasing length and the constant width (nominally ~30 nm), and a second round of thermal 

evaporation of ~5 nm silica.  The substrates were then exposed under UV ozone cleaning for 20 

minutes before perovskite deposition. MAPbI3 perovskite film was deposited by spin coating from 

0.33M solutions. In a typical example, PbI2 (89.12 mg, TCI, 99.99%), methylammonium iodide MAI 

(30.73 mg, Dyesol) and 13.7 µl of dimethyl sulfoxide DMSO (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich) were dissolved 

in 580 µl of dimethyl formamide DMF (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich). The solution was heated at 100 °C 

for 1h, and then spin-coated on the substrate at 4000 rpm, 15 s. Solvent quenching with 300 µl of 

toluene (anhydrous, Sigma Aldrich) was performed after 6s of rotation. The films were then annealed 

for 15 min at 100 °C on a hotplate. All the perovskite deposition procedure was performed in a glove-

box under Ar inert atmosphere.

Optical Measurements. The normal-incidence absorption spectra of the metamaterials were 

measured, for incident polarizations perpendicular and parallel to the main axis of the nanoslits (TM 

and TE orientations, respectively), using a microspectrophotometer (Jasco MV2000), through a 36× 

objective with a circular sampling aperture size of 25 μm × 25 μm. Steady-state  photoluminescence 

spectra were measured under a microscope set-up and flow of nitrogen to avoid degradation of the 

MAPbI film due to moisture absorption. The samples were pumped using a PicoHarp 405 nm diode ps 


laser, with repetition rate of 40 MHz, focused down to a spot of ~20 μm diameter. The 

photoluminescence emission was polarized and detected by an ACTON spectrometer with an 

integration time of 100 ms per wavelength.

Time resolved photoluminescence. Time resolved PL measurements were done by exciting samples 

with 400nm wavelength, 100 fs pulse duration and 1000 Hz repetition rate femtosecond laser pulses. 

Femtosecond laser pulses were generated by Spectra Physics amplified laser system (MaiTai, Spitfire 

Ace). SHG crystal was used to generate 400nm wavelength. PL signals from perovskite film on 

metamaterial samples were collected and collimated before focusing in to the Optronics streak 

camera (SC 10). Temporal resolution of this streak camera is ~50 ps.

Simulations. Optical spectra and field maps were generated by full-wave electromagnetic simulations 

using COMSOL Multiphysics. Literature data were used to describe both the silica substrate, the gold 

film and the 5 nm silica overcoating, while experimental ellipsometric values were used for the 

perovskite film6. The samples were described as infinitely extended by using periodic boundary 

conditions and illuminated at normal incidence. The emission spectra were simulated by placing an 

array of infinitesimally small dipoles within the perovskite film, with spectral distribution mimicking 

the steady-state photoluminescence spectrum of the flat perovskite film. The total emission power 

was determined by averaging individual dipole contributions at each wavelength, weighted by the 

simulated field intensity generated at the dipole position by the pump beam (λ = 405 nm) to account 

for the absorption8,25.

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education Tier 3 grant (MOE2016-T3-1-006), 

the Singapore National Research Foundation, Prime Minister's Office, under its Competitive Research 

Programme (CRP Award No. NRF-CRP14-2014-03), and by the A*STAR-AME programmatic grant on 

Nanoantenna Spatial Light Modulators for Next-Gen Display Technologies (Grant No. A18A7b0058).



Supplementary Information

Figure S1: Secondary electrons image (a) of 120nm slit metamaterials carved by FIB milling on a 
30nm Au + 5nm SiO2 film, on glass substrate, and coated with 65nm thick MAPbI3 perovskite film: 
the perovskite film appears to be partially IN the slit and partially ON the slit, as exemplified by 
the schematics; and full wave COMSOL simulations of photoluminescence enhancement for the 
perovskite film IN (b) and ON (c) the metamaterial slit, for both TM (blue full curves) and TE (red 
dotted curves) polarizations, with respect to the emission of perovskite film on glass.


References

1.
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar, T. C. 

Sum, Low-temperature solution-processed wavelength-tunable perovskites for lasing, Nat 

Mater., 13, 476 (2014)

2.
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. 

Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith, R. H. Friend, Bright 

light-emitting diodes based on organometal halide perovskite, Nat. Nanotech., 9, 687, (2014) 

3.
V. D’Innocenzo, A. R. S. Kandada, M. De Bastiani, M. Gandini, A. Petrozza, Tuning the Light 

Emission Properties by Band Gap Engineering in Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskite, J. Am. Chem. 

Soc.,  136, 17730, (2014)

4.
X.Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno, C. Soci, Lead iodide perovskite light-emitting 

transistor, Nat. Commun., 6, 7383 (2015)

5.
S. G. Motti, D. Meggiolaro, A. J. Barker, E. Mosconi, C. A. R. Perini, J. M. Ball, M. Gandini, M. 

Kim, F. De Angelis, A. Petrozza, Controlling competing photochemical reactions stabilizes 

perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photon. ,13, 532

6.
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. 

Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim, E. H. Sargent, Perovskite energy funnels for 

efficient light-emitting diodes, Nat. Nanotech., 11, 872 (2016)

7.
G. Xing, B. Wu, X. Wu, M. Li, B. Du, Q. Wei, J. Guo, E. K. L. Yeow, T. C. Sum, W. Huang, 

Perovskite energy funnels for efficient light-emitting diodes, Nat. Commun., 8, 14558 (2017)

8.
Q. Zhang, S. T. Ha, X. Liu, T. C. Sum, Q. Xiong, Room-Temperature Near-Infrared High‐Q 

Perovskite Whispering-Gallery Planar Nanolasers, Nano Lett., 14, 5995, (2014)

9.
B. Gholipour, G. Adamo, D. Cortecchia, H.N.S. Krishnamoorthy, M.D. Birowosuto, N.I. 

Zheludev, C. Soci, Organometallic perovskite metasurfaces, Adv. Mat., 29, 1604268 (2017)


10. N. Pourdavoud,  S. Wang,  A. Mayer,  T. Hu,  Y. Chen,  A. Marianovich, W. Kowalsky, R. 

Heiderhoff,  H.‐C. Scheer,  T. Ried, Photonic Nanostructures Patterned by Thermal 

Nanoimprint Directly into Organo‐Metal Halide Perovskites, Adv. Mat., 29, 1605003 (2017)

11. S. V. Makarov, V. Milichko, E. V. Ushakova, M. Omelyanovich, A. C. Pasaran, R. Haroldson, B. 

Balachandran, H. Wang , W. Hu, Y. S. Kivshar,  A. A. Zakhidov, Multifold Emission 

Enhancement in Nanoimprinted Hybrid Perovskite Metasurfaces, ACS Photonics, 4, 728, 

(2017)

12. E. Y. Tiguntseva, G. P. Zograf, F. E. Komissarenko, D. A. Zuev, A. A. Zakhido, S. V. Makarov, 

Yuri. S. Kivshar, Light-Emitting Halide Perovskite Nanoantennas, Nano Lett., 18, 1185, (2018)

13. A. S. Berestennikov, P. M. Voroshilov, S. V. Makarov, Y. S. Kivshar, Active meta-optics and 

nanophotonics with halide perovskites, Appl. Phys. Rev. 6, 031307 (2019)

14. Y. Jia, R. A. Kerner, A. J. Grede, A. N. Brigeman, B. P. Rand, N. C. Giebink, Diode-Pumped 

Organo-Lead Halide Perovskite Lasing in a Metal-Clad Distributed Feedback Resonator, Nano 

Lett., 16, 4624, (2016)

15. H. Zhang,  Q. Liao,  Y. Wu,  Z. Zhang, Q. Gao, P. Liu,  M. Li, J. Yao, H. Fu, 2D Ruddlesden–

Popper Perovskites Microring Laser Array, Adv. Mater., 30, 1706186, (2018)

16. P. J. Cegielski, A. L. Giesecke , S. Neutzner, C. Porschatis, M. Gandini, D. Schall, C. A. R. Perini, 

J. Bolten, S. Suckow, S. Kataria , B. Chmielak, T. Wahlbrink, A. Petrozza, M. C. Lemme, 

Monolithically Integrated Perovskite Semiconductor Lasers on Silicon Photonic Chips by 

Scalable Top-Down Fabrication, Nano Lett., 18, 6915, (2018)

17. Z. Li. J. Moon, A. Gharajeh, R. Haroldson, R. Hawkins, W. Hu, A. Zakhidov, Q. Gu, Room-

Temperature Continuous-Wave Operation of Organometal Halide Perovskite Lasers, ACS 

Nano, 12, 10968, (2018)

18. H. Kim, K. Roh, J. P. Murphy, L. Zhao, W. B. Gunnarson, E. Longhi, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder, B. 

P. Rand, N. C. Giebink, Optically Pumped Lasing from Hybrid Perovskite Light‐Emitting 

Diodes, Adv. Optical Mater. 8, 1901297, (2020)


19. N. Pourdavoud, T. Haeger, A. Mayer, P. J. Cegielski, A. L. Giesecke, R. Heiderhoff, S. Olthof, S.

Zaefferer, I. Shutsko, A. Henkel, D. Becker-Koch, M. Stein, M. Cehovski, O. Charfi, H.-H.

Johannes, D. Rogalla, M. C. Lemme, M. Koch, Y. Vaynzof, K. Meerholz, W. Kowalsky, H.-C.

Scheer, P. Görrn, T. Riedl, Room‐Temperature Stimulated Emission and Lasing in 

Recrystallized Cesium Lead Bromide Perovskite Thin Films, Adv. Mater. 31, 1903717 (2019)

20. A. E. Nikolaenko, F. De Angelis, S. A. Boden, N. Papasimakis, P. Ashburn, E. Di Fabrizio, N. I. 

Zheludev, Carbon nanotubes in a photonic metamaterial, Phys. Rev. Lett., 104, 153902 

(2010)

21. J. Lee, M. Tymchenko, C. Argyropoulos, P.-Y. Chen, F. Lu, F. Demmerle, G. Boehm, M.-C. 

Amann, A. Alù, M. A. Belkin, Giant nonlinear response from plasmonic metasurfaces coupled 

to intersubband transitions, Nature, 511, 65 (2014)

22. K. Tanaka, E. Plum, J. Y. Ou, T. Uchino, N. I. Zheludev Multifold enhancement of quantum dot 

luminescence in plasmonic metamaterials, Phys. Rev. Lett., 105, 227403 (2010)

23. W. Zhou, M. Dridi, J.Y. Suh, C.H. Kim, D.T. Co, M.R. Wasielewski, G.C. Schatz, T.W. Odom, 

Lasing action in strongly coupled plasmonic nanocavity arrays, Nat. Nanotech., 8, 506 (2013)

24. T. B. Hoang, G. M. Akselrod, C. Argyropoulos, J. Huang, D. R. Smith, M. H. Mikkelsen, 

Ultrafast spontaneous emission source using plasmonic nanoantennas, Nat. Commun., 6, 

7788 (2015)

25. K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, 

A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel, Not All That Glitters Is Gold: Metal-Migration-Induced Degradation 

in Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 10, 6306, (2016)

26. P. B. Johnson and R. W. Christy, Optical constants of the noble metals, Phys. Rev. B, 6, 4370 

(1972)

27. I. H. Malitson. Interspecimen comparison of the refractive index of fused silica, J. Opt. Soc. 

Am. 55, 1205-1208 (1965)


28. A. F. Koenderink, On the use of Purcell factors for plasmon antennas, Opt. Lett., 35, 4208, 

(2010)

29. A. Rose, T. B. Hoang, F. McGuire, J. J. Mock, C. Ciracì, D. R. Smith, M. H. Mikkelsen, Control of 

radiative processes using tunable plasmonic nanopatch antennas, Nano Lett., 14, 4797, 

(2014)

30. M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, Plasmon-induced hot carrier science and 

technology, Nat. Nanotech., 10, 25, (2015)

31. M. Esfandyarpour, A. G. Curto, P. G. Kik, N. Engheta, M. Brongersma, Optical emission near a 

high-impedance mirror, Nat Commun., 9, 3224 (2018) 


