A polymer-based technique to remove pollutants from soft contact lenses 
 
 

Katherine Burgener1, M. Saad Bhamla1* 

 
1School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, 
United States of America 

*saadb@chbe.gatech.edu (corresponding author) 

 
Abstract 
Purpose: To demonstrate an alternative to the rinse and rub (RR) method for cleaning pollutants from the 
exterior surface of soft contact lenses. This proposed technique is termed Polymer on Polymer Pollutant 
Removal (PoPPR), which utilizes the elastic properties of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) to physically 
remove contaminants from contact lens surfaces through non-adhesive unpeeling. 
 
Methods: Three different ratios of setting agent to polymer PDMS (1:30, 1:40, and 1:50) were evaluated 
using the PoPPR method against the control method of RR with a commercial multi-purpose lens cleaning 
solution. Three simulated pollutants of different sizes: pollen (25-40 µm), microbeads (1-5 µm), and 
nanoparticles (5-10 nm), were used to test the effectiveness of both cleaning methods. The fraction of 
pollutants removed from each contact lens was recorded and evaluated for significance.  
 
Results: PDMS 1:40 was found to be the optimal ratio for lens cleaning using the PoPPR method. For larger 
particles (>10 µm), no difference was observed between conventional RR and proposed PoPPR method (p 
> 0.05). However, the new PoPPR technique was significantly better at removing small PM2.5 particles 
(<2.5 µm) compared to the RR method, specifically for microbeads (p = 0.006) and nanoparticles (p < 
0.001). 
  
Conclusion: This proof-of-concept work demonstrates that the PoPPR method of cleaning contact lenses is 
as effective as the conventional cleaning method for larger particles such as pollen. The PoPPR method is 
more effective at removing extremely fine particulate pollutants, including microplastics and nanoparticles. 
This method offers a potentially more efficient cleaning protocol that could enhance the safety, health, and 
comfort of contact lens users, especially those living in regions with significant air pollution.  
 
Keywords: Pollution Removal, PDMS, Contact Lens, Polymer, PM2.5, Nanoparticles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Introduction 
 
Solid pollutants are classified by size as particulate matter (PM). PM2.5 particles are airborne pollutants with 
diameters less than 2.5 µm. Both natural and manufactured air pollutants fall within this size range; common 
examples of these micro and nano-pollutants are carbon-rich fluffy soot aggregate, cigarette smoke, pollen, 
mushroom spores, particulates with metallic elements, as well as diesel exhaust (Fig.1) [1,2]. PM2.5 
pollutants are relevant to ocular health because they decrease tear osmolarity [3] and increase dry eye, 
ocular irritation, and burning [4].  
 

Typical soft contact lens pore sizes are on the order of sub-micrometers, with diameters up to 0.2 µm [5]. 
Large foreign objects (lashes, mascara, debris) do get caught on contact lenses and the conventional 
cleaning method of rinsing with cleaning solution and rubbing with fingers (RR) appears to work in 
dislodging them from the hydrogel matrix [6]. Due to their rough nature, smaller bodies (minerals, aerosol 
pollution) have the potential to embed themselves in the lens, rendering rubbing inadequate and potentially 
harmful to the surface of the lens [7]. 
 
Recent improvements in the hydrogel polymer matrix of contact lenses have increased the lenses' 
antimicrobial properties but have not changed the way contact lenses are cleaned (i.e. rubbing the lens or 
using multi-purpose solutions (MPS)) [8,9,10]. Some MPS were developed as a 'no-rub' cleaning alternative 
that disinfected lenses by rinsing and extended soaking overnight. While this cleaning technique has been 
shown to decrease biofilm activity on lenses, not all MPS solutions are able to remove physical deposits 
from the lens [11]. Rubbing has been demonstrated as a necessary addition to cleaning regimens due to the 
ability of the shear forces applied by the fingers to remove pollutants [6]. Prolonged wear of lenses leads 
to physical fatigue of the lens integrity [12]; constant mechanical stress changes the morphology of the 
surface and the pore sizes of the lenses [13,14]. The repetitive motion of blinking can damage the lens, so 
the shear forces of fingers rubbing across the surface would be expected to also damage the surface of 
lenses. 

Figure 1: A. Pollen is both a common allergen and airborne pollutant. For the general population, pollen on a contact 
lens may cause irritation, swelling, and scratching of the lens and upper eye lid. Further, pollen that sticks to an allergic 
person's lenses can cause prolonged allergic reactions to occur. Contact lenses are exposed to airborne pollutants 
during open eye lens wear. B. 1x image of pollen on the surface of a contact lens with a stereo microscope. C. 40x 
image of pollen taken with a stereo microscope. D. Pollen from the same source (tulip) can exhibit different 
geometries, image taken with an SEM microscope. 


 
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) has many uses due to its physical properties of straightforward fabrication 
and transparency, though it is used most frequently in microfluidic design and research [15]. PDMS was 
chosen as the candidate material in this experiment due to its extensive use and testing in research and 
industry. PDMS is widely and commercially available and its properties are well studied and understood. 
More specifically, when set, PDMS is a soft, inert, and elastic material with tunable Young’s modulus [16], 
low autofluorescence [17], and excellent biocompatibility [19]. The proposed new method of contaminant 
removal takes advantage of these ideal characteristics. Polymer on polymer pollutant removal (PoPPR) 
involves pressing a contaminated contact lens onto a surface of PDMS. The PDMS envelops the pollutants 
on the lens while the hydrophobicity of PDMS prevents the lens from sticking to the PDMS surface. The 
result is a transfer of pollutants from lens to PDMS, as shown in Fig. 2. The aim of these proof-of-concept 
experiments was to determine how effective PoPPR is at cleaning physical pollutants from contact lens 
surfaces and to compare the results to control method, RR. 
 
Materials & Methods 
Contact Lenses 
All contact lenses used for experiments were 1-Day Acuvue TruEye +6.0 lenses (Johnson & Johnson 
Vision, Jacksonville, FL). The lenses were rinsed with Biotrue multi-purpose solution (Bausch & Lomb, 
Rochester, NY) before running experiments.  
 
PDMS 
SYLGARD™ 184 Silicone Elastomer was used to make the PDMS (2646340, Dow). The commercial 
Sylgard kit contains both the PDMS polymer and the elastomer curing agent. The product suggests mixing 
a 1:10 ratio of setting agent to polymer. To increase the elasticity of the PDMS, the following ratios were 
used: 1:30, 1:40, 1:50. Both liquids were combined in 35 mm petri dishes. The average total weight of each 
experimental sample was approximately 18 g. To ensure an even distribution of setting agent in the polymer, 
samples were stirred vigorously for five minutes. After mixing the two liquid parts, samples were de-aired 
using a vacuum desiccator until all bubbles were removed from the mixture. Each sample was cured for at 
least 24 hours at 50oC in an incubator at 10% humidity. 
 
Pollutants 
Populus Tremuloids pollen averages 25-40 µm in diameter and was obtained for pollen removal trials 
(P7770-500MG, Sigma Aldrich). Fluorescent microbeads with diameters between 1-5 µm were used for 
the microbead removal experiments (300-45-225, Cospheric). For nanoparticle removal trials, copper 
indium disulfide/zinc sulfide quantum dots between 5-10 nm in diameter were used (29-8520, Strem 
Chemicals). All pollutants were suspended in water before application to contact lenses.  
 

Contact Lens

Pollutant

PDMS

A
B

Figure 2: Polymer on polymer pollutant removal (PoPPR) is the proposed 
method of cleaning. A. The contact lens surface is gently pressed against 
PDMS using a finger. B. As the contact lens is removed, pollutants stick to the 
PDMS.  


 
 
Cleaning Experiments 
 
The following experimental procedure was used. 
 
Part a. Controlled Fouling of Lenses 
First, clean lenses were polluted with a solution of water and pollutant. The concentration of pollen in water 
was 0.001 g/mL; the microbead solution had a concentration of 1.225 * 10-5 g/mL. Pollen and Microbead: 
Both pollen and microbeads were aerosolized onto the lens with a spray bottle, which released 
approximately 1 mL of solution every five sprays. Nanoparticle: 0.5 mL of 5.4*10-5 g/mL nanoparticle 
solution was pipetted onto the lens in order to avoid harmful aerosolization. The concentration of particles 
deposited on lenses using aerosolization (Fig. 1. B) or pipetting (Supplemental Information (SI) Fig. 2) 
were distributed throughout the entire lens area as evidenced through visual inspection using a microscope.  
 
Part b. Cleaning Protocol 
i). RR protocol: The lenses were cleaned by rinsing with standard multi-purpose cleaning solution and 
rubbing the polluted surface between the thumb and index finger (see SI Fig. 1). Since RR is a qualitative 
procedure, to maintain consistency between trials, the lens was gently rubbed for five seconds, followed by 
a rinse for five seconds. The rinsing solution was put in sterile petri dishes. Great care was taken to ensure 
that all cleaning solution was collected. 
ii). PoPPR protocol: The polluted surfaces of lenses were pressed into a sample of clean PDMS. Lenses 
were only pressed once onto the PDMS surface and peeled away after five seconds of contact. 
 
Part c. Analysis  
After the cleaning step, the contact lenses were allowed to dehydrate (24h) and were then sandwiched 
between two clean glass slides to enable viewing under a microscope. The rinsing solution from RR 
protocol was allowed to evaporate so that the pollutants were left on the bottom of the petri dishes. Images 
were taken of the used lens, and either the rinsing solution petri dish or PDMS with a fluorescence 
microscope (SI Fig. 2). To image the entire surface at 10x magnification, approximately 13,15, and 30 
images were required of the contact lens, petri dish, and PDMS respectively.  
 
Using the 'analyze particles' program on Fiji [19], pollutants were counted, and the fraction of pollutant 
removal was calculated. The fraction of pollutant removed was calculated as follows:  
 

Fraction Removed =
n!"#$%"&

(n!"#$%"& + n!"#'()()*) 

 
where nremoved refers to the number of pollutant particles either on the PDMS or in the petri dish and nremaining 
is the number of pollutant particles on the used lens. It should be noted that the initial number of particles 
deposited using the controlled fouling step is not measurable as it involves drying the lens to manually 
count, which renders the cleaning protocol difficult. Thus, all cleaning experiments were performed 
carefully so that nremoved + nremaining could be used as a proxy for the total initial particles.  
 
The cleaning efficiencies of PoPPR and the control (RR) were compared for three different pollutant sizes 
(25-40 µm, 1-5 µm, 5-10 nm). For all pollutant sizes, at least four trials were conducted for each test to 
ensure repeatability and reproducibility. Because pollen is not fully fluorescent and its shape is not uniform, 
each pollen grain on the lens, in solution, or on PDMS, was hand-counted. For this reason, only four trials 
were conducted. Experimental microbeads are fully fluorescent and were able to be counted with Fiji 
software, ten trials were deemed sufficient for this proof-of-concept paper. Nanoparticles are also 
fluorescent but due to the risks of aerosolization, only five trials were performed for each cleaning method. 


 
 

To examine the role of PDMS stiffness in cleaning efficiency for PoPPR, three different ratios of PDMS 
were also tested (1:30, 1:40, and 1:50).  
 
Statistical analysis 
Statistical analyses were performed using Statistical Analysis Software (SAS) Version 9.4 (SAS Institute, 
Cary, NC). The Shapiro-Wilke test was used to assess normality of the data. Wilcoxon (Rank Sums) tests 
were performed on each pollutant size to assess differences in effectiveness between the cleaning methods. 
Outliers were identified using the Grubbs test. Standard deviations (𝜎), means (µ), mid-ranges (MR), and 
number of trials (n) for each cleaning method were recorded. Finally, to assess statistical significance 
between cleaning methods, two-tailed two-sample t-tests were conducted at a 95% level of significance. 
The means and standard deviations are presented as 𝜇 ± 𝜎 in the results section below.  
 
Results 
Pollen Removal 
The fraction of pollen removed using the control method (RR) averaged 0.57 ± 0.2 (n = 4). The mean 
fractions of pollen removed from PDMS 1:30, 1:40 and 1:50 using the PoPPR method were 0.48 ± 0.01 
(n = 4), 0.65 ± 0.07 (n = 4), and 0.62 ± 0.14 (n = 5) (Fig. 3 A).  
 
For the removal of pollen from contact lenses, there were no statistical differences in the cleaning methods 
(p = 0.249). The only statistical difference in pollen removal methods was between PDMS 1:30 and 1:40 
PoPPR (p = 0.0024).  
 
Microbead Removal 
The mean fraction of microbeads removed from lenses using the RR method was 0.50 ± 0.16 (n = 10). For 
the PoPPR trials of PDMS 1:30, 1:40 and 1:50, the mean fractions of pollutant removed were 0.43 ± 0.06 
(n = 5), 0.67 ± 0.09 (n = 10), and 0.67 ± 0.11 (n = 10) respectively (Fig. 3 B). 
 
Statistical differences were observed between RR and PDMS 1:40 (p = .006) as well as RR and PDMS 1:50 
(p = .011). PDMS 1:30 results were also different from PDMS 1:40 (p < 0.001) and 1:50 PDMS (p < 0.001). 
In the microbead data for PDMS 1:40, there was one significant outlier, but removing the outlier did not 
change statistical results. 
 
Nanoparticle Removal 
The RR method resulted in a mean fraction of 0.37 ± 0.18 (n = 5) for nanoparticle removal. The mean 
fractions of nanoparticles removed from lenses using the PoPPR methods of PDMS 1:30, 1:40, and 1:50 
were 0.40 ± 0.15 (n = 5), 0.85 ± 0.06 (n = 5), and 0.70 ± 0.10 (n = 5) (Fig. 3 C). 
 
The following cleaning methods were statistically different: RR and PDMS 1:40 (p < 0.001), RR and PDMS 
1:50 (p = 0.007), PDMS 1:30 and PDMS 1:40 (p < 0.001), PDMS 1:30 and PDMS 1:50 (p = 0.0055), 
PDMS 1:40 and PDMS 1:50 (p = 0.021).  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Discussion  
The PoPPR method was comparable to the RR method for pollen pollutants. Fig. 3 shows that the means 
(µ) and standard deviations (s) of the RR method. The large mid-range (MR) in RR data (0.2) compared to 
a smaller MR of PDMS 1:40 data (0.08) indicates that the RR method is not as precise as the PoPPR 
technique. 
 
The large size of the experimental pollen can explain some of these results. Populus Tremuloids pollen has 
an average diameter of 25-40 µm which is larger than the average contact lens pore size (< 1.0 µm). While 
it is possible that some pollen was embedded in the contact lens pores, most of the pollutant likely rested 
on the surface of the lens (Fig. 1). Results suggest that for large particles (>25 µm), PoPPR is as effective 
as the RR method.  
 
Conversely, the RR and PoPPR methods differed statistically. Fig. 3 provides a visual representation of 
results. Both PDMS 1:40 and 1:50 were statistically better at removing microbeads from contact lens 
surfaces than the RR method and PDMS 1:30. Similar to the pollen results, the RR data exhibited large 
values of s and MR, indicating large variability in this technique which is expected due to the qualitative 
nature of this protocol.  
 
Nanoparticle cleaning data show the largest improvement in cleaning method performance. The PDMS 
1:40 PoPPR was significantly better at cleaning nanoparticles than RR. Similar to pollen and microbeads, 
RR and PDMS 1:30 methods remove an approximately equal fraction of nanoparticles.  

Figure 3: Data collected includes the fraction of pollutant removed using four different cleaning protocols. The 
horizontal red lines indicate the mean of each data set, the colored bars represent one standard deviation, and 
the vertical red lines show the 95% confidence level. A. Results from pollen removal trials (n>4). B. Microbead 
removal data (n>5). C. Results from nanoparticle removal trials (n=5). * p < .03, ** p < .01. 


 
In summary, the PDMS 1:40 PoPPR method removed more pollutants than the RR method (Fig. 4). The 
control method (RR) and the proposed PoPPR technique were comparable when considering large 
pollutants (> 25 µm). However, the PDMS 1:40 was significantly more successful at small contaminant 

removal (PM2.5) such as microplastics and nanoparticles. During RR removal, the frictional or shearing 
forces that act on the lens surface are assumed to dislodge particles. These forces may be sufficient for 
detaching larger particles (pollen), however, for nanoparticles, these forces may not be sufficient. This is 
attributed further to the rough contact lens surface at the nanometer length scale, where the nanoparticles 
might be tightly adsorbed on the lens surface. In contrast, the PoPPR technique leverages a normal or 
extensional peeling force applied to physically detach particles, which works across all size ranges and is 
surprisingly effective for smaller particles.  
 
The results also suggest that an optimal PDMS stiffness exists that enhances particulate removal from lenses 
using the PoPPR technique. While the PDMS 1:30 results indicate that there is no statistical significance to 
RR, 1:30 results are statistically inferior to their PDMS 1:40 counterparts for all pollutants. These results 
are expected as higher ratio PDMS (≥1:40) are softer (lower Young’s modulus) than 1:30, enabling the 
matrix of PDMS to surround small particles and detach them during peeling [20]. However, the underlying 
particle removal mechanism based on the PDMS stiffness remains an open question and will be the focus 
of future work. 
 
A major reason why contact lens cleaning techniques have not changed is that the current method is 
inexpensive, rapid, and convenient. While rinsing and rubbing is effective for large contaminants, it may 
negatively impact lens surface integrity (tears, scratches) [21, 22]. Additionally, results of the RR method 
can be highly variable depending on the user [6]. In contrast, the proposed PoPPR technique offers a more 
efficient, effective, and repeatable pollutant removal technique that utilizes a widely available, inert, and 

Figure 4: Results comparing RR to PoPPR cleaning methods for three different sized 
contaminants. When compared with a two-tailed t-test, the PoPPR method using PDMS 1:40 
is significantly more effective at removing microbead and nanoparticle pollutants. A. Results 
from pollen removal trials. B. Microbead removal data. C. Results from nanoparticle removal 
trials. ** p < .01. 


biocompatible polymer (SI Fig. 3). There are, however, a few shortcomings of the PoPPR method and 
limitations of this current study. The two shortcomings of the PoPPR method include the introduction of 
an extra step in cleaning routines and the potentially higher cost, both of which may be unattractive to 
consumers. The limitations of this current work are first, all the tests done here are for one type of 
commercial silicone hydrogel contact lens, as a proof-of-concept of this new technique. Thus, to generalize 
these results, future work will focus on extensive comparison between the different types of contact lens 
materials and a huge variety of commercial cleaning solutions, which is beyond the focus of this study. 
Second, additional testing needs to be done to test the efficacy of the PoPPR technique in removing tear 
film lipid and protein deposits that are often the more common fouling concerns in contact lens wearers. 
Despite these shortcomings and limitations, the proof-of-concept cleaning technique presented here has the 
potential to improve the comfort and long-term use of contact lenses, especially for users in regions with 
heavy air pollution. 
 
Conclusion 
This proof of concept project successfully demonstrated that the PoPPR method for cleaning contact lenses 
contaminated with different sized contaminants was comparable to or more effective than the traditional 
method of rinsing and rubbing with lens cleaners. PDMS that has a setting agent to polymer ratio of 1:40 
and 1:50 was determined to be the most effective at removing pollutants of all experimental sizes.  
 
Declarations of Interest: None 
 
Funding Source: None 
 
References 

1. J. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, S. Xu 

Contamination characteristics and possible sources of PM10 and PM2. 5 in different 
functional areas of Shanghai, China  
Atmospheric Environment 68 (2013), pp. 221-229 

2. J.R. Broich, L. Weiss, J. Rapp  

Isolation and identification of biologically active contaminants from soft contact lenses. I. 
Nicotine deposits on worn lenses  
Invest Ophthalmol Visual Sci, 19 (11) (1980), pp. 1328-1335 

3. A.A. Torricelli, P. Novaes, M. Matsuda, A. Braga, P.H. Saldiva,  M.R. Alves, et. al.  

Correlation between signs and symptoms of ocular surface dysfunction and tear osmolarity 
with ambient levels of air pollution in a large metropolitan area. 

 
 Cornea 32 (4) (2013), pp. 11-15 

4. R. Saxena, S. Srivastava, D.Trivedi, E. Anand, S. Joshi, S.K. Gupta  
 
Impact of environmental pollution on the eye  

 
Acta Ophthalmol Scand, 81 (5) (2003), pp. 491-494 

5. N.B. Omali, L.N. Subbaraman, C. Coles-Brennan, Z. Fadli, L.W. Jones  

Biological and clinical implications of lysozyme deposition on soft contact lenses 
Optom Vis Sci, 92 (7) (2015), pp. 750 

6. P. Cho, S.Y. Cheng, W.Y. Chan, W.K. Yip 

Soft contact lens cleaning: rub or no‐rub?   
Ophthalmic Physiol Opt, 29 (1) (2009), pp. 49-57 

7. M. Ruben, R.C. Tripathi, A.F. Winder 

Calcium deposition as a cause of spoilation of  hydrophilic soft contact lenses  
Br J Ophthalmol, 59 (3) (1975), pp. 141-148 

8. A. Kal, M.I. Toker, S. Kaya  

The comparison of antimicrobial effectiveness of contact lens solutions  
International ophthalmology, 37 (5) (2017), pp. 1103-1114 


9. N.B. Demina, M.N. Chirkova, A.V. Astakhova, L.A. Travina  

Contact lens maintenance systems  
Pharmaceutical Chemistry Journal, 35 (2) (2001), pp. 114-119 

10. M.J. Stiegemeier, R. Cedrone, D. Evans, G. Friederichs, D. Holle, W. Jenkins, et al.  

Clinical performance of ‘no rub’multi-purpose solutions  

 
Cont Lens Anterior Eye, 27 (2) (2004), pp. 65-74 

11. K.H. Mok, R.W. Cheung, B.K. Wong, K.K. Yip, V.W. Lee 

Effectiveness of no-rub contact lens cleaning on protein removal: a pilot study  
Optom Vis Sci, 81 (6) (2004), pp. 468-470 

12. R.C. Tripathi, M. Ruben  

Degenerative changes in a soft hydrophilic contact lens  
Ophthalmic Research, 4 (3) (1972), pp. 185-192 

13. S. Tavazzi, M. Tonveronachi, M. Fagnola, F. Cozza, L. Ferraro, A. Borghesi, et al. 

Wear effects on microscopic morphology and hyaluronan uptake in siloxane‐hydrogel 
contact lenses  
J Biomed Mater Res, (2015), pp. 1092-1098 

14. R.C. Tripathi, B.J. Tripathi, M. Ruben  

The pathology of soft contact lens spoilage  
Ophthalmology 87 (5) (1980), pp. 365-380 

15. J.C. McDonald, D.C. Duffy, J.R. Anderson, D.T. Chiu, H. Wu, O.J. Schueller, et al.  

Fabrication of microfluidic systems in poly (dimethylsiloxane)  
Electrophoresis, 21 (1)  (2000), pp. 27-40 

16. J.C. Lötters, W. Olthuis, P.H. Veltink, P. Bergveld  

The mechanical properties of the rubber elastic polymer polydimethylsiloxane for sensor 
applications  
Journal of micromechanics and microengineering, 7 (3) (1997), pp. 145 

17. A. Piruska, I. Nikcevic, S.H. Lee, C. Ahn, W.R. Heineman, P.A.  Limbach, et. al.  

The autofluorescence of plastic materials and chips measured under laser irradiation  
Lab Chip, 5 (12) (2005), pp. 1348-1354 

18. M.C. Bélanger, Y. Marois.  

Hemocompatibility, biocompatibility, inflammatory and in vivo studies of primary 
reference materials low‐density polyethylene and polydimethylsiloxane: a review  
J Biomed Mater Res, 58, (5) (2001), pp. 467-477 

19. J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, et al.  

Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis  
Nature methods, 9 (7) (2012), pp. 676-682. 

20. M.C. Lopes, E. Bonaccurso  

Evaporation control of sessile water drops by soft viscoelastic surfaces  
Soft Matter, 8 (30) (2012), pp. 7875-7881 

21. M. Chyasnavichyus, S.L. Young, V.V. Tsukruk  

Mapping micromechanical properties of soft polymer contact lenses  
Polymer, 55 (23) (2014), pp. 6091-6101 

22. S.H. Kim, A. Opdahl, C. Marmo, G.A. Somorjai  

AFM and SFG studies of pHEMA-based hydrogel contact lens surfaces in saline solution: 
adhesion, friction, and  the presence of non-crosslinked polymer chains at the surface  
Biomaterials, 23 (7) (2002), pp. 1657-1666 


A polymer-based technique to remove pollutants from soft contact lenses 

Katherine Burgener1, M. Saad Bhamla1* 

 
1School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, 
United States of America 

*saadb@chbe.gatech.edu (corresponding author) 

 

 

 

A
C

B

Supplemental Figure 1: Experimental method for cleaning contaminated contact lenses. A. For both 
cleaning methods pollutants suspended in water were sprayed onto a contact lens. B. Rinsing a lens. 
After rubbing the contact lens between the thumb and the forefinger (not pictured), lenses are rinsed with 
cleaning solution. The pollutants on the contact lens and the pollutants in the solution are counted. C. 
PoPPR cleaning method. A polluted lens is pressed onto a sample of PDMS with normal force, then 
lifted off the surface. The pollutants on the contact lens and on the PDMS are counted. 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Supplemental Figure 2: Fluorescent microbeads are easily discernable under a microscope at 5x 
magnification. For accurate data analysis, the contact lens was magnified 25x and pictures were taken 
successively to capture the entire lens. A. Fluorescent beads on the surface of contact lens under a 
combination of fluorescent and natural lighting. B. Same lens under complete fluorescence.


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A
B

Supplemental Figure 3: Experimental analysis of PDMS leaving residue. PDMS polymer was dyed before 
adding the setting agent then cured as normal. Four different ratios of setting agent to polymer were tested: 
1:10, 1:30, 1:40, and 1:50. A. Residue testing on contact lenses. Clean contact lenses were pressed onto the 
PDMS samples then removed. No PDMS was visible on the lenses microscopically. B. Residue testing on 
paper. Unlike the contact lenses, paper is completely dry and has different surface properties, mainly high 
absorbance. Clean white paper samples were pressed onto the PDMS samples and removed. No PDMS was 
visible on the paper.  


