Spin-polarized triplet supercurrent in Josephson junctions with perpendicular
ferromagnetic layers

Victor Aguilar, Demet Korucu,∗ Joseph A. Glick,† Reza Loloee, W. P. Pratt, Jr., and Norman O. Birge‡

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48824-2320, USA
(Dated: May 15, 2020)

Josephson junctions containing three ferromagnetic layers with non-collinear magnetizations be-
tween adjacent layers carry spin-triplet supercurrent under certain conditions. The signature of the
spin-triplet supercurrent is a relatively slow decay of the maximum supercurrent as a function of the
thickness of the middle ferromagnetic layer. In this work we focus on junctions where the middle
magnetic layer is a [Co/Pd]N multilayer with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), while the
outer two layers have in-plane anisotropy. We compare junctions where the middle PMA layer is or
is not configured as a synthetic antiferromagnet (PMA-SAF). We find that the supercurrent decays
much more rapidly with increasing the number N of [Co/Pd] bilayers in the PMA-SAF junctions
compared to the PMA junctions. Similar behavior is observed in junctions containing [Co/Ni]N
PMA multilayers. We model that behavior by assuming that each Co/Pd or Co/Ni interface acts
as a partial spin filter, so that the spin-triplet supercurrent in the PMA junctions becomes more
strongly spin-polarized as N increases while the supercurrent in the PMA-SAF junctions is sup-
pressed with increasing N. We also address a question raised in a previous work regarding how
much spin-singlet supercurrent is transmitted through our nominally spin-triplet junctions. We do
that by comparing spin-triplet junctions with similar junctions where the order of the magnetic
layers has been shuffled. The results of this work are expected to be helpful in designing spin-triplet
Josephson junctions for use in cryogenic memory.

PACS numbers: 74.50.+r, 74.45.+c, 75.70.Cn, 75.30.Gw

I.
INTRODUCTION

When a superconducting (S) metal is placed in contact
with a non-superconducting or normal (N) metal, elec-
tron pair correlations extend into the normal metal, giv-
ing rise to the superconducting proximity effect1. That
proximity effect can extend into N over distances of sev-
eral hundred nanometers at sufficiently low tempera-
ture, and indeed one can observe supercurrent in S/N/S
Josephson junctions where the distance between the two
S electrodes exceeds a micron2. If the normal metal is re-
placed by a ferromagnetic material (F), then the situation
changes drastically. The pair correlations oscillate in sign
as they penetrate into F, due to the momentum mismatch
between the majority and minority spin Fermi surfaces
in F3,4. Those oscillations decay algebraically in ballistic
systems5, and exponentially in diffusive systems6. The
length scale governing the decay is typically very short
– less than one nanometer in strong F materials such as
Co, Fe, or Permalloy (Py = Ni80Fe20)7.
Nevertheless,
the oscillations give rise to interesting physics, including
sign changes in the proximity-induced modification of the
density of states8 and in the sign of the current-phase re-
lation in S/F/S Josephson junctions9,10.

In 2001 Bergeret, Volkov, and Efetov predicted that
it is possible to induce spin-triplet pair correlations in a
conventional spin-singlet superconductor in contact with
a ferromagnetic material with an inhomogeneous mag-
netization containing non-collinear elements11.
Of the
three spin-triplet components, those with z-component
ms = ±1 (often called ”equal-spin triplets” in the lit-
erature) penetrate far into a homogeneous ferromagnet

with its magnetization pointing along the z-axis.
The
reason for this long-range proximity effect is that equal-
spin triplets represent electron pairs where both electrons
are in the same spin band – either the majority band for
ms = 1 or the minority band for ms = −1. By now the
predictions of Bergeret et al. have been verified in a wide
variety of different experiments; for reviews see12–14. The
initial verification was achieved by measuring the super-
current decay vs F-layer thickness in Josephson junctions;
the signature of the induced spin-triplet pair correlations
was that the supercurrent decayed much more slowly in
junctions carrying spin-triplet supercurrent than in sim-
ilar junctions that carried only the intrinsic spin-singlet
supercurrent15–18.
In this work we focus on Josephson junctions of the
form proposed by Houzet and Buzdin19, which contain
three magnetic layers with non-collinear magnetizations
between adjacent layers.
In the years since the initial
experimental results mentioned above, our group has fo-
cused on making Josephson junctions with increasing lev-
els of control over the magnetic configurations inside the
junctions. In our initial work16, there was no magnetic
control; spin-triplet supercurrent was generated haphaz-
ardly by the intrinsic non-collinearity existing in the as-
grown junctions. Shortly thereafter, we discovered that
using an in-plane synthetic antiferromagnet (SAF) as the
middle F layer20 had an unforeseen advantage21: after
applying and then removing a large in-plane field to the
junctions, the outer two layers became magnetized in the
direction of the applied field, while the SAF underwent
a spin-flop transition whereby the two magnetic layers
making up the SAF ended up with their magnetizations
perpendicular to the applied field direction. That config-

arXiv:2005.06657v1  [cond-mat.supr-con]  13 May 2020


2

uration with 90°angles between adjacent magnetizations
optimizes the magnitude of the spin-triplet supercurrent.
In addition, having the outer two F layers with their
magnetizations parallel means that the Josephson cou-
pling across the junction has a π phase shift everywhere,
whereas the initial magnetic state with random domain
orientations in the outer two layers produces a random
pattern of 0 or π Josephson couplings as a function of lat-
eral position in the junction. The combination of those
two effects resulted in a factor of twenty enhancement of
the spin-triplet supercurrent in the junctions compared
to the as-grown state21.
In another variation, we re-
placed the in-plane SAF with a [Co/Ni]n multilayer with
perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA)22. The PMA
system has two advantages. First, the magnetization of
the PMA layer is naturally orthogonal to the magnetiza-
tions of the outer two layers, if the latter have the con-
ventional in-plane magnetic anisotropy expected for thin
magnetic films. Second, the magnetic flux from the layer
itself does not interfere with the “Fraunhofer pattern” ob-
tained when the supercurrent is measured as a function
of magnetic field applied transverse to the current direc-
tion. (The physics of magnetic fields applied to Joseph-
son junctions will be discussed more in the next section.)
With the PMA system, we observed a very slow decay of
the critical current in spin-triplet junctions, whereas the
current decayed much faster in similar junctions carry-
ing only spin-singlet supercurrent – i.e. without the two
outer magnetic layers.
Most recently, we replaced the PMA system with a
PMA SAF, motivated by a desire to reduce stray fields
produced by domain walls in the PMA system23. The
spin-triplet junctions containing PMA SAFs have proven
useful in demonstrating that the ground-state phase
across the junction can be toggled between 0 and π by
reversing the magnetization direction of one of the outer
two F layers24. However, the results from the junctions
containing PMA SAFs raised two questions. First, the
decay of the critical current versus thickness of the PMA
SAF was significantly steeper than we observed in simi-
lar spin-triplet junctions containing a simple PMA layer,
but with a different materials system22. Second, at the
smallest thicknesses of the PMA SAF, the critical current
in the spin-triplet junctions was actually smaller than in
spin-singlet junctions containing the same PMA SAF,
but without the two outer F layers that are necessary for
the singlet-triplet conversion. That raised the question:
could we tell how much of the supercurrent in the spin-
triplet junctions is actually carried by spin-triplet pairs
rather than spin-singlet pairs?
Comparing the critical
current in spin-singlet and spin-triplet junctions is not
conclusive, because the latter junctions contain signifi-
cantly more magnetic material than the former.
The purpose of this paper is to address both questions
raised above. We address the second question in section
III, by comparing the critical current in our “standard”
spin-triplet junctions with the critical current in junc-
tions containing the same magnetic layers, but with the

order of the PMA SAF and one of the two in-plane fer-
romagnetic layers reversed.
These so-called ”shuffled”
junctions are not capable of converting spin-singlet pairs
to spin-triplet pairs and back again.
The spin-singlet
supercurrent, on the other hand, is less sensitive to the
order of the layers, so the critical current of such junc-
tions provides a measure of the maximum spin-singlet
supercurrent that can propagate through the spin-triplet
junctions. We observe that the supercurrent in the shuf-
fled samples is significantly smaller than that in the stan-
dard junctions, confirming that the latter do indeed carry
predominantly spin-triplet supercurrent. We address the
first question in section IV, by comparing the critical
current in junctions containing the same PMA material
system – [Co/Pd]n multilayers – either with or without
the SAF configuration. We observe that the critical cur-
rent decays much less steeply with increasing n in the
junctions with the simple PMA system than in the junc-
tions with the PMA SAFs. We propose an explanation
for this observation, namely that each Co/Pd interface
acts as a partial spin filter for supercurrent.
As a re-
sult, the spin-triplet supercurrent becomes more strongly
spin-polarized in the PMA system as the number n of
[Co/Pd] bilayers increases. Polarization of the supercur-
rent hardly affects the magnitude of the supercurrent in
the PMA junctions, while it causes a strong suppression
of the supercurrent in the PMA-SAF junctions.
The questions addressed here are not just of academic
interest. Magnetic Josephson junctions with a control-
lable phase state have potential for use in cryogenic
memory25.
While it is possible to design such junc-
tions using only two F layers26–28, the constraints on
the thicknesses of the F layers are more stringent in
those junctions than in spin-triplet junctions29. Hence
it is worthwhile to enhance our understanding of, and
improve the performance of, spin-triplet junctions. The
junctions containing PMA SAFs, used in our demonstra-
tion of phase control24, had very small critical currents –
approximately 5 µA for junctions with lateral area of 0.5
µm2. By replacing the PMA SAF with a simple PMA
layer, we hope to achieve phase-controllable spin-triplet
junctions with much larger critical currents.

II.
JUNCTION DESIGN, FABRICATION, AND
CHARACTERIZATION

Before continuing, we discuss the complications that
arise when characterizing ferromagnetic Josephson junc-
tions with an applied magnetic field.
If one applies a
magnetic field to a standard Josephson junction (JJ) in
a direction perpendicular to the current flow, the crit-
ical current Ic oscillates in amplitude and decays as a
function of field magnitude30. This is due to the contri-
bution of the magnetic vector potential to the phase of
the wavefunction, also known as the “orbital effect.” In a
rectangular junction, the behavior of Ic(B) is similar to
the well-known Fraunhofer pattern observed in single-slit


3

optical diffraction, hence Ic(B) data are often referred to
that way even when the pattern is not a true Fraunhofer
pattern. (Note that the sin(x)/x function is squared in
the optics context, whereas its absolute value describes
Ic(B) of a JJ.) In circular junctions, the pattern is an
Airy function. Fraunhofer patterns acquired from S/I/S
(I=insulator) and S/N/S junctions with appropriate ge-
ometry adhere closely to the theoretical ideal. As soon
as ferromagnetic materials are introduced into the junc-
tion, the situation gets more complicated. The magnetic
field and vector potential arising from the magnetization
add to those associated with the external field. In large-
area junctions containing multiple domains of a strong F
material, the resulting “Fraunhofer” pattern is strongly
distorted31,32. The problem is simplified in small junc-
tions where the F layer has only a single magnetic do-
main; in that case the Fraunhofer pattern is shifted along
the field axis by the nearly-uniform field produced by the
F layer, so the central peak may be visible in a full field
sweep. But if the magnetization of the F layer switches
direction before the central peak is reached, it may not
be easy to extrapolate the data to the central peak to de-
termine the true maximum value of Ic. There are at least
five ways to deal with this issue. 1) If one restricts oneself
to weak ferromagnetic alloys with small domains, then
the flux contributions from neighboring domains tend to
cancel, and a reasonable Fraunhofer pattern emerges33.
Alternatively, if the F layer is very thin such that the
magnetic flux in the junction due to the magnetization
is much smaller than the flux quantum, Φ0 = h/2e, then
the Fraunhofer patterns is hardly affected by the mag-
net. 2) One can replace a single F layer with a SAF to
achieve flux cancellation domain-by-domain, resulting in
a restored Fraunhofer pattern20. 3) One can fabricate ex-
tremely small JJs, so that the F layer tends to be single-
domain and the Fraunhofer pattern is very wide in field;
measurements at zero field then produce values of the
critical current very close to the value at the maximum
of the pattern7,34,35. 4) In junctions with single-domain
magnets, one can sometimes extrapolate the measured
part of the pattern (before the magnetization switches di-
rection) to estimate the height of the central peak in the
pattern and thus the maximum critical current23,36,37. 5)
If the magnetization points along the current direction,
then the associated vector potential has little effect on
the critical current, unless the junction is extremely long
in the current direction38,39. The spin-triplet junctions
described in this work benefit from two of the strate-
gies listed above. The PMA layer in the middle has its
magnetization along the current direction; while the two
outer magnetic layers are rather thin. Nevertheless, we
do observe shifts in the Fraunhofer patterns of our junc-
tions due to the in-plane magnetizations of the outer two
layers.

A schematic drawing of our Josephson junctions
with “standard” spin-triplet JJ geometry,
with the
middle F layer a PMA SAF, is shown in Fig.
1(a).
The PMA nanomagnets labeled F in the figure are

FIG. 1: Schematic diagrams of the three types of Joseph-
son junctions used in this work (not to scale). In all three
cases, F is a [Pd(0.9)/Co(0.3)]n multilayer with perpendic-
ular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), where all thicknesses are
in nm and n is the number of repeats of the Pd/Co bilayer.
In (a) and (b), two Pd/Co multilayers are coupled antifer-
romagnetically by the Ru(0.95) spacer to form a synthetic
antiferromagnet (SAF). F ′ and F ′′ are Ni(1.6) with in-plane
magnetization. The superconducting base S1 is a multilayer
of niobium and aluminum: [Nb(25)/Al(2.4)]3/Nb(20) while
S2 is Nb(150). (a) Triplet PMA-SAF junction. (b) Shuffled
PMA-SAF singlet junction. (c) Triplet PMA junction.

[Co(0.3)/Pd(0.9)]n multilayers (all thicknesses in nm),
with Co adjacent to Ru and Pd adjacent to Cu.
The
in-plane nanomagnets labeled F ′ and F ′′ in the fig-
ure are Ni(1.2) or Ni(1.6).
Ni is advantageous as a
“fixed” magnetic layer with in-plane magnetization,
because it has high coercivity and higher transparency
to Cooper pairs than most other magnetic materials
used to date40.
Fabrication of the junctions has been
described in detail elsewhere23; here we provide a brief
summary. First, we use photolithography to define the
bottom lead pattern, and we sputter a nearly-complete
stack consisting of the superconducting base layer
and all of the magnetic layers.
The base is a Nb/Al
multilayer of the form [Nb(25)/Al(2.4)]3/Nb(20)/Cu(2),
which
we
have
determined
to
be
smoother
than
a
pure
Nb
base
of
the
same
thickness41.
The
magnetic heart of the PMA-SAF spin-triplet junc-
tions
is
Ni(1.6)/Cu(4)/[Pd(0.9)/Co(0.3)]n/Ru(0.95)/
[Co(0.3)/Pd(0.9)]n/Cu(4)/Ni(1.6)/Cu(7)/Au(2).
The
PMA junctions are nearly identical, except that the
central Ru(0.95) layer is replaced by a Pd(0.9) layer
so that the PMA system continues uninterrupted from
one side to the other.
Because our sputtering system
contains seven sputtering guns, we can sputter the
entire stack for the PMA junctions without breaking
vacuum.
The PMA-SAF triplet junctions, however,
contain eight different materials, hence we coat the base
with a thin Au layer, break vacuum to replace the Nb
target with Co, pump down again, and lightly ion mill
the Au layer before depositing the magnetic stack. We
then use electron-beam lithography with the negative
e-beam resist ma-N2401 and Ar ion milling to define


4

the junctions. The junctions are elliptically shaped with
lateral dimensions of 1.25 µm x 0.5 µm. Ion milling is
immediately followed by thermal evaporation of SiOx
without breaking vacuum, to isolate the bottom and
top superconducting electrodes. After the e-beam resist
if lifted off, top leads of Nb(150)/Au(15) are sputtered
through another photolithographic stencil after gentle
in-situ ion milling of the protective Au layer.
Cross-
section TEM pictures of our junctions are shown in ref.
23. Fabrication of the junctions shown schematically in
Figures 1(b) and (c) proceeds similarly.
To characterize the junctions, we measure I-V curves
as a function of field Hext applied parallel to the long
axis of the elliptical junctions. The I-V curves have the
standard shape for overdamped junctions (RSJ model),30

except for some rounding for I near Ic visible in junctions
with Ic less than about 10 µA. We fit the data using
the standard form to extract Ic at each value of Hext.
To obtain Ic(Hext), we first initialize the junctions with
a field of µ0Hext = -300 mT in the negative in-plane
direction to magnetize the two Ni layers. (Due to the
very strong PMA of the [Co/Pd] multilayer system, a
300-mT in-plane field hardly perturbs the out-of-plane
magnetization of the central PMA or PMA-SAF systems
– see Figure 1 of ref. 23.) After Hext is set to zero, the
sample is slowly lifted above the liquid helium level in
the measurement dewar, so that the Nb superconducting
leads momentarily go into the normal state. That process
ensures that there is no magnetic flux trapped in the leads
as a result of the initialization process. After the junction
is lowered back into the liquid helium, the field is stepped
in the positive direction starting from -80 mT. (There is
no problem with trapped flux starting at this field value.)
Figure 2 shows a typical Fraunhofer pattern for one of
the spin-triplet junctions containing a PMA-SAF. The
main central lobe and two side-lobes are clearly visible.
We typically stop the field sweep when the field passes
through zero and reaches 20 mT in the direction opposite
to the initialization direction. Continuing the field sweep
past that point results in a distorted pattern due to the
gradual switching of the two Ni layer magnetizations, as
shown in Figure 6 of ref. 23. If the junction is initialized
in the opposite direction, with µ0Hext = +300 mT, then
a down-sweep starting at +80 mT looks like the mirror
image of the data shown in Figure 2.

III.
COMPARISON OF SPIN-TRIPLET AND
“SHUFFLED” JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS

In a previous work,23 we compared the performance of
PMA-SAF spin-triplet junctions with similar spin-singlet
junctions – the latter missing the F ′ and F ′′ layers needed
to convert spin-singlet Cooper pairs from the supercon-
ducting electrodes into spin-triplet pairs in F. Those data
are reproduced in Figure 4 as the red triangles for the
PMA-SAF spin-triplet junctions and the blue circles for
the spin-singlet junctions. The plot shows the product

-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Sweep direction

Ic (mA)

� 0Hext (mT)

Initialization direction

FIG. 2:
Critical current versus applied magnetic field
(“Fraunhofer pattern”) for Josephson junctions containing
three ferromagnetic layers. Junctions are 1.25 µm x 0.5 µm
ellipses with a 0.5 µm2 area. To initialize the Ni layers we
magnetize the sample with a large (-300 mT) in-plane field at
low temperature. The sweep starts from the direction of ini-
tialization at -80 mT. The field is increased in 2-mT steps; at
each field we take an IV measurement in field. The sweep is
stopped at +20 mT before the magnetization of the Ni layer
starts to reverse direction, which leads to distortions of the
Fraunhofer pattern.

of critical current times normal-state resistance, IcRN,
vs the total number of [Pd/Co] bilayers, N = 2n for the
PMA-SAF junctions. As expected, the critical current in
the spin-triplet junctions decays less steeply with N in
the spin-triplet junctions than in the spin-singlet junc-
tions. However, at the smallest value of N = 2, the criti-
cal current is actually larger in the spin-singlet junctions
than in the spin-triplet junctions. That might seem sur-
prising until one realizes that the spin-triplet junctions
contain two additional ferromagnetic layers compared to
the spin-singlet junctions. Given the decline in supercur-
rent through each ferromagnetic layer as well as losses
in transmission at interfaces due to Fermi-surface mis-
match, it is no surprise that the spin-triplet junctions
carry less supercurrent than spin-singlet junctions when
N = 2. At larger N, of course, the spin-triplet junctions
win; at N = 6 they already have over ten times as large
a supercurrent as the spin-singlet junctions. Given that
spin-triplet junctions have the potential to be useful de-
vices, however, it behooves us to know how much of the
measured critical current in the junctions with N = 2 is
actually due to spin-singlet pairs. To answer that ques-
tion, we fabricated junctions of the form shown in Figure
1(b), which we call ”shuffled” because the order of the fer-
romagnetic layers is shuffled compared to the spin-triplet
junctions. In these junctions the F ′ and F ′′ layers are
adjacent to each other; hence they are not capable of


5

providing spin-triplet current to the PMA layer and re-
converting it to spin-singlet current after passing through
the PMA layer. Since the shuffled junctions contain the
same magnetic layers and the same number of interfaces
as the spin-triplet junctions, they enable us to estimate
of the amount of spin-singlet supercurrent that can pass
through our PMA-SAF spin-triplet junctions.
Figure 3 shows a comparison of IcRN for the spin-
triplet and shuffled junctions, all with N = 2. The data
for junctions with a PMA-SAF are on the right-hand side
of the figure. The data for the spin-triplet and shuffled
junctions are represented by solid and open triangles, re-
spectively. Shuffled junctions were fabricated with two
different Ni thicknesses, 1.2 and 1.6 nm. As we antici-
pated, the values of IcRN for the shuffled junctions lie
well below those for the spin-triplet junctions. The data
in the figure demonstrate that the amount of spin-singlet
supercurrent that can propagate through this total com-
bination of magnetic layers is indeed smaller than the
spin-triplet supercurrent that can propagate through the
same combination of layers when they are configured cor-
rectly to convert spin-singlet supercurrent to spin-triplet
supercurrent and back again. The data on the left-hand
side of Figure 3 are for similar junctions where the cen-
tral F layer is a simple PMA layer with N = 2 [Co/Pd]
bilayers. They are the topic of the next section. For now,
we point out simply that the values of IcRN for the shuf-
fled junctions (open hexagons) lie well below the values
of IcRN for the spin-triplet junctions (solid hexagons).
In addition to the data shown in Fig. 3, one PMA shuf-
fled sample with N = 4 was fabricated and measured. Its
critical current was barely measurable; our best estimate
puts IcRN at 0.003 µV.

0.1

1

10

Shuffled

PMA                                  PMA-SAF

IcRN (µV)

Triplet

FIG. 3: (color online) Plot of IcRN for spin-triplet junctions
(solid symbols) in comparison with shuffled junctions (open
symbols). Left side: the central F layer is a simple [Pd/Co]n
multilayer with PMA, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Right side: the
central F layer is a PMA SAF, as depicted in Fig. 1(a) and
(b). For the PMA-SAF shuffled junctions, two different Ni
thicknesses were used: 1.2 nm (upward triangles) and 1.6 nm
(downward triangles). For all other cases the Ni thickness was
1.2 nm.

IV.
COMPARISON OF PMA-SAF AND PMA
SPIN-TRIPLET JOSEPHSON JUNCTIONS

The primary goal of this work is to understand the dif-
ference in supercurrent transmission between spin-triplet
junctions containing a PMA-SAF and those containing
a single PMA layer of the same total thickness.
A
schematic diagram of the PMA spin-triplet junctions is
shown in Figure 1(c).
The measurement scheme was
the same as that discussed previously for the PMA-SAF
triplet junctions and the shuffled junctions. The data for
IcRN as a function of the total number N of [Co/Pd]
bilayers in the PMA junctions are shown as green di-
amonds in Figure 4, while the data for the PMA-SAF
junctions are shown as red triangles. The data exhibit
a striking difference between the PMA and PMA-SAF
junctions.
The decay of Ic with N is much shallower
in the PMA junctions than in the PMA-SAF junctions.
Least-squares fits of an exponential decay of the form
IcRN(N) = A0exp(−αN) to the data in Fig.
4 give
αP MA
CoP d = 0.191 ± 0.017 for the PMA junctions, and
αP MA−SAF
CoP d
= 0.751±0.047 for the PMA-SAF junctions.
The ratio of those slopes is 3.9 ± 0.4. In addition, the
value of Ic is larger in the PMA junctions than in the
PMA-SAF junctions for all values of N, including the
smallest value, N = 2.
This result is very promising
for practical memory devices, if we are able to fabri-
cate controllable-phase PMA junctions by replacing one
of the two Ni layers with NiFe, as we did with PMA-SAF
junctions.24

How to explain the striking results of Figs. 4? Two
theoretical works42,43 deal with precisely the kind of spin-
triplet junctions studied here; the “P-state” and “AP-
state” junctions in those works correspond to our PMA
and PMA-SAF junctions, respectively. (The fact that the
F-layer magnetizations lie in the plane in the theoretical
works, rather than out-of-plane as in our junctions, is
not relevant; only the relative orientations of the different
magnetizations matters.) Both theoretical works predict
that the critical current in the AP state will be slightly
larger than in the P state, which clearly disagrees with
the data shown in Fig. 4. That is not surprising. Both
theoretical works utilize the quasi-classical theory, which
does not account for differences in transport properties
between majority and minority spin bands in the bulk of
the F materials and at F/N interfaces. The disagreement
with experiment highlights the fact that the differences
we observe between our PMA and PMA-SAF junctions
are almost certainly due to those band structure effects.
Before we attempt to explain the results shown in Fig.
4, we quickly review the conceptual understanding of how
three-layer spin-triplet junctions convert between spin-
singlet a spin-triplet supercurrent12,44. Spin-singlet pairs
entering F ′ from the bottom S electrode oscillate between
the singlet and ms = 0 triplet states as they propagate
through F ′. When the pairs get to F (and assuming that
the ms = 0 triplet amplitude is not zero at that point),
they are converted to ms = ±1 states in the new, rotated


6

2
4
6
8

0.01

0.1

1

10

IcRN (µV)

Pd/Co Repeats, N

FIG. 4: (color online) Plot of IcRN versus the total number N
of Pd/Co repeats, i.e. N = n for PMA junctions and N = 2n
for PMA-SAF junctions. Green diamonds: data from PMA
triplet junctions, which have the largest critical current and
shallowest decay with N.
Red triangles: data from PMA-
SAF triplet junctions show a significantly steeper decay of Ic
with N. Blue circles: data from PMA-SAF singlet junctions,
which do not contain F ′ or F ′′ layers. Ic decays very rapidly
with N in the singlet junctions. The data for the PMA-SAF
and singlet junctions were published previously in Ref. [23].

basis determined by the magnetization direction of F. If
F is sufficiently thick, then any singlet or ms = 0 triplet
component entering F will be completely suppressed af-
ter transmission through F. When the ms = ±1 pairs
arrive at F ′′, they are converted back into the ms = 0
triplet state again by the basis rotation. Finally, trans-
mission through F ′′ converts the ms = 0 triplet state
back into the singlet state, where it can be absorbed by
the top S electrode. The critical current Ic of the junction
is determined by how much of the singlet component re-
mains after all of the basis transformations, Fermi-surface
mismatches, and scattering that occurs both at the in-
terfaces and in the bulk materials inside the junction.
Let us now focus on what happens inside the PMA
system in the middle of the sample.
It is well-known
in normal-state spintronics that a charge current pass-
ing through a ferromagnetic material F becomes partially
spin-polarized due to the differences in density of states,
Fermi velocity, and mean free path between majority and
minority spin electrons. It is undoubtedly true that F
also acts as a spin filter with regard to the ms = +1
and ms = −1 spin-triplet electron pairs45–48.
Let us
assume that the majority band triplet component has
higher transmission through a [Co/Pd]n multilayer than
the minority band component. The spin-triplet super-
current passing through the multilayer then becomes par-
tially spin-polarized, so that the ms = +1 triplet compo-
nent has larger amplitude than the ms = −1 component.
In the PMA-SAF junctions, however, the majority-spin

pairs in the first PMA multilayer become minority-spin
pairs in the second PMA multilayer, and vice versa. As
a result, both triplet components suffer from the lower
transmission amplitude of the minority component some-
where in the system. If that were the whole story, then
we would expect the Ic data from the PMA-SAF samples
to be shifted downward in Figure 4 with respect to the
Ic data from the PMA samples. But that is not what we
observe. Rather, the slope of the data vs N is steeper in
the former, meaning that the downward shift increases
with the number of bilayers N. That implies that the
spin-filter efficiency of the PMA system increases with
N, at least for N as large as 8, which is the largest value
probed in this work.

A possible explanation for the increase in spin-filter
efficiency with N is that each individual Co/Pd inter-
face acts as a partial spin filter, due to a spin-scattering
asymmetry at the Co/Pd interface favoring transmission
of majority-spin pairs over minority-spin pairs. Unfor-
tunately, the spin-scattering asymmetry at the Co/Pd
interface has not been measured. Fortunately, however,
the interfacial spin-scattering asymmetry has been de-
termined for several other material interfaces by analyz-
ing Giant Magnetoresistance data obtained from metal-
lic multilayers and spin valves.49 The analysis is based
on the “two-current series resistor (2CSR) model”,50–52

which has been very successful in describing a large col-
lection of experimental results.49,53 The 2CSR model
ascribes different effective resistivities to majority and
minority-band electrons inside F materials, and differ-
ent effective interface resistances at F/N or F1/F2 inter-
faces. A good example is the Co/Ni interface, where the
spin-scattering asymmetry was found to be quite large54:
the area-resistance product for majority-band electrons
was found to be AR↑
Co/Ni = 0.03 ± 0.02fΩm2 while
the minority band interface resistance is much higher:
AR↓
Co/Ni = 1.00 ± 0.07fΩm2. Hence the Co/Ni inter-
face acts very strongly to spin-polarize a normal current,
and we suspect it does the same for supercurrent. In ad-
dition, the probability for an electron to flip its spin at
the interface has also been measured. It is expressed as
P=1-exp(−δ), with δCo/Ni = 0.35 ± 0.05.

Fortuitously, we also have data for spin-triplet junc-
tions containing [Co/Ni]n multilayers in the PMA and
PMA-SAF configurations. Those data are shown in Fig-
ure 5. The data show a similar trend as the data in Figure
4, namely that the decay of IcRN with increasing number
of Co/Ni bilayers for the junctions containing PMA SAFs
is much steeper than the decay for junctions containing
a simple PMA multilayer. Fits of exponential decay to
the data in Fig. 5 give αP MA
CoNi = 0.063 ± 0.011 for the
PMA junctions, and αP MA−SAF
CoNi
= 0.273 ± 0.048 for the
PMA-SAF junctions. The ratio of the slopes is 4.3 ± 1.0,
similar to the ratio 3.9 ± 0.4 of slopes for the PMA and
PMA-SAF data sets in Fig.
4.
An obvious difference
between the [Co/Pd] results shown in Fig.
4 and the
[Co/Ni] results shown in Fig. 5 is the huge vertical offset


7

between the PMA and PMA-SAF data in Fig. 5. The
exponential fits in Fig. 4 have nearly identical intercepts
for the PMA and PMA-SAF data, whereas the fits in Fig.
5 have intercepts that differ by a factor of about 30. That
large offset is due to several differences between the struc-
tures of the two kinds of junctions, which were fabricated
several years apart under different circumstances. First,
the Co/Ni multilayers in the PMA junctions had thick-
nesses Co(0.2)/Ni(0.4), whereas those in the PMA-SAF
junctions had thicknesses Co(0.3)/Ni(0.6). Second, the
[Co/Ni] multilayers in the PMA-SAF junctions had Co
on the outside rather than Ni; from normal-state trans-
port properties, we believe that Co/Cu interfaces are less
transparent to supercurrent than Ni/Cu interfaces. And
third, the spacers separating the F layer from the F ′ and
F ′′ layers were Cu(2)/Al(4)/Cu(2) trilayers rather than
simple Cu(4) layers. Those structural differences, while
mostly responsible for the large vertical offset between
the two data sets shown in Fig. 5, should not affect the
slopes; hence we urge the reader to focus only on the
slopes.

4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

10

IcRN (µV)

Co/Ni Repeats, N

FIG. 5: (color online) Plot of IcRN versus the total number N
of Co/Ni repeats, i.e. N = n for PMA junctions and N = 2n
for PMA-SAF junctions. Green left-pointing triangles: data
from PMA triplet junctions taken from Ref. [22]. Red right-
pointing triangles:
data from PMA-SAF triplet junctions.
The large vertical offset between the two data sets is due
mostly to several structural differences between the two kinds
of junctions; hence we urge readers to focus on the different
slopes of the two data sets.

Is it possible to create a quantitative model to ex-
plain the slopes in Figs. 4 and 5 from the normal-state
properties of the materials and interfaces in the junc-
tions? In principle, we believe that the answer is nega-
tive. While normal-state transport is dissipative and well
described by the “two-current series resistor model” men-
tioned above, supercurrent is a coherent process. Never-
theless, we propose the following simple model as a guide
to stimulate further theoretical work on this problem.

We start with the assumption that the total super-
current through the junction is equal to the sum of the
ms = +1 and ms = −1 triplet components of supercur-
rent in the central F layer of the junction.
(That as-
sumption can be justified using the hand-waving model
of supercurrent in refs.12,44.) We write that in shorthand
as

Ic ∝ Tms=+1 + Tms=−1
(1)

where Tms=+1 and Tms=−1 represent the transmission
amplitudes of the ms = +1 and ms = −1 triplet com-
ponents through the central F layer of the junction. We
will assume that each of those amplitudes can be ex-
pressed as a product of transmission amplitudes at the
interfaces inside the F layer. (We neglect bulk effects for
simplicity.) Let t↑ and t↓ be the transmission amplitudes
through a single Co/Pd interface for the majority-band
and minority-band electron pairs, respectively. A PMA
junction with N Co/Pd bilayers contains 2N Co/Pd in-
terfaces, hence we have

T P MA
ms=+1 = t2N
↑ , T P MA
ms=−1 = t2N
↓
(2)

A PMA-SAF junction contains, in each half of the
SAF, N − 1 Co/Pd interfaces and one Co/Ru interface.
To keep the formulas as simple as possible, we will as-
sume that the Co/Ru interface has the same properties
as the Co/Pd interface, so we can say that each half of
the SAF has N Co/Pd interfaces. (Deviations from that
assumption will affect the intercept but not the slope of
the line depicting log(Ic) vs N.)
Since majority-band
pairs in one half of the SAF become minority band pairs
in the other half, we have:

T P MA−SAF
ms=+1
= T P MA−SAF
ms=−1
= tN
↑ tN
↓
(3)

Putting all this together gives us:

IP MA
c
∝ t2N
↑
+ t2N
↓
(4)

IP MA−SAF
c
∝ 2tN
↑ tN
↓
(5)

If we define the ratio r = t↓/t↑, then we can write

IP MA−SAF
c

IP MA
c
=
2rN

(1 + r2N)
(6)

If r2N << 1, then we get the simple result:

ln(IP MA−SAF
c
) − ln(IP MA
c
) = ln(2) + Nln(r)
(7)

If each Ic depends exponentially on N, as the data
in both Figs.
4 and 5 show, then Eqn.
(7) implies
that the difference between the exponential slopes of


8

the PMA and PMA-SAF junction data should be ln(r).
From the values for the Co/Pd interface, we found
−αP MA−SAF
CoP d
+ αP MA
CoP d = −0.751 + 0.191 = −0.56, which
gives rCoP d = 0.57. For the Co/Ni interface, we found
−αP MA−SAF
CoNi
+ αP MA
CoNi = −0.273 + 0.063 = −0.21, which
gives rCoNi = 0.81. (Note that, while the value of rCoNi
is not much smaller than 1, r2N
CoNi = 0.19 for the smallest
value N = 4 in Fig. 5, so our use of Eqn. (7) is justified.)
From the GMR data mentioned earlier, we would have
expected rCoNi to be much smaller than 1. One possible
reason for that discrepancy is that the Co and Ni layers
used in our junctions are too thin or too disordered to
realize the bulk band structures of Co and Ni; hence the
interface does not exhibit the large spin-scattering asym-
metry determined from GMR data. We note also that
our model does not incorporate spin-flip and spin-orbit
scattering, which suppress spin-triplet supercurrent, al-
though we would expect them to cause equal suppression
of Ic in the PMA and PMA-SAF junctions. Finally, we
reiterate that the model presented here is undoubtedly
too simple to describe quantitatively the supercurrent in
a complex multilayered system.

V.
CONCLUSIONS

In conclusion, we have measured the supercurrent in
spin-triplet junctions containing ferromagnetic multilay-
ers with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). We
compared the behavior of the supercurrent in junctions
where the PMA layer is or is not configured as a syn-
thetic antiferromagnet (PMA-SAF). The critical current
decays much more steeply with increasing number of

multilayer repeats N in the PMA-SAF junctions than
in the PMA junctions. We attribute that difference to
a strong increase in the degree of spin polarization of
the supercurrent with increasing N, due to the cumula-
tive spin-filtering effect of the interfaces within the PMA
multilayers. We also compared the supercurrent in spin-
triplet junctions with that in junctions where the order
of the layers was shuffled. Because the shuffled junctions
are not capable of converting spin-singlet supercurrent to
spin-triplet supercurrent and back again, we believe that
they provide an estimate of how much spin-singlet super-
current is transmitted through the spin-triplet junctions
containing the same number of kind of ferromagnetic lay-
ers. As expected, the supercurrent is noticeably smaller
in the shuffled junctions than in the triplet junctions even
for N = 2, and much smaller for N = 4. The results of
this work are expected to be helpful in designing spin-
triplet Josephson junctions for use in cryogenic memory.

Acknowledgements: We acknowledge fruitful conver-
sations with F.S. Bergeret, A.Y. Herr, D.L. Miller, and
N.D. Rizzo, and support from Northrop Grumman Cor-
poration. We also thank B. Bi for technical assistance,
and the use of the W.M. Keck Microfabrication Facil-
ity. This research was supported initially by the Office of
the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence
Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA), via U.S.
Army Research Office contract W911NF-14-C-0115. The
views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily rep-
resenting the official policies or endorsements, either ex-
pressed or implied, of the ODNI, IARPA, or the U.S.
Government.

∗ Permanent address: Department of Physics, Gazi Univer-
sity, Ankara, Turkey
† Present address: IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, York-
town Heights, NY 10598, USA
‡ Electronic address: birge@msu.edu
1 P.G. de Gennes, Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 225 (1964).
2 P. Dubos, H. Courtois, B. Pannetier, F.K. Wilhelm, A.D.
Zaikin, and G. Schon, Phys. Rev. B 63, 064502 (2001).
3 E.A. Demler, G.B. Arnold, and M.R. Beasley, Phys. Rev.
B 55, 15174 (1997).
4 A.I. Buzdin, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77 935 (2005).
5 A.I Buzdin, L.N. Bulaevskii, and S.V. Panyukov, JETP
Lett. 35, 178 (1982).
6 A.I. Buzdin and M. Yu. Kupriyanov, Pis’ma Zh. Eksp.
Teor. Fiz. 53, 308 (1991), [JETP Lett. 53, 6, 321 (1991)].
7 J.W.A. Robinson, S. Piano, G. Burnell, C. Bell, and M.G.
Blamire, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 177003 (2006).
8 T. Kontos, M. Aprili, J. Lesueur, and X. Grison, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 86, 304 (2001).
9 V.V. Ryazanov, V.A. Oboznov, A.Yu. Rusanov, A.V.
Veretennikov, A.A. Golubov, and J. Aarts, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 86, 2427 (2001).
10 T. Kontos, M. Aprili, J. Lesueur, F. Genet, B. Stephanidis,

and R. Boursier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 137007 (2002).
11 F.S. Bergeret, A.F. Volkov, and K.B. Efetov, Phys. Rev.
B 64, 134506 (2001).
12 M. Eschrig, Phys. Today 64(1), 43 (2011).
13 M. Eschrig, Rep. Prog. Phys. 78, 104501 (2015).
14 J. Linder and J.W.A. Robinson, Nat. Phys. 11, 307 (2015).
15 R.S. Keizer, S.T.B. Goennenwein, T.M. Klapwijk, G.
Miao, G. Xiao, and A. Gupta, Nature (London) 439, 825
(2006).
16 T.S. Khaire, M.A. Khasawneh, W.P. Pratt Jr. and N.O.
Birge, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 137002 (2010).
17 J.W.A. Robinson, J.D.S. Witt and M.G. Blamire, Science
329, 59 (2010).
18 M. S. Anwar, F. Czeschka, M. Hesselberth, M. Porcu, and
J. Aarts, Phys. Rev. B 82, 100501 (2010).
19 M. Houzet and A.I. Buzdin, Phys. Rev. B 76, 060504(R)
(2007).
20 M.A. Khasawneh, W.P. Pratt Jr. and N.O. Birge, Phys.
Rev. B 80, 020506(R) (2009).
21 C. Klose, T.S. Khaire, Y. Wang, W.P. Pratt, N.O. Birge,
B.J. McMorran, T.P. Ginley, J.A. Borchers, B.J. Kirby,
B.B. Maranville, and J. Unguris, Phys. Rev. Lett.108,
127002 (2012).


9

22 E.C. Gingrich, P. Quarterman, Y. Wang, R. Loloee, W.P.
Pratt, and N.O. Birge, Phys. Rev. B 86, 224506 (2012).
23 J.A. Glick, S. Edwards, D. Koruru, V. Aguilar, B.M.
Niedzielski, R. Loloee, W.P. Pratt, Jr., N.O. Birge, P.G.
Kotula, and N. Missert, Phys. Rev. B 96, 224515 (2017).
24 J.A. Glick, V. Aguilar, A.B. Gougam, B.M. Niedzielski,
E.C. Gingrich, R. Loloee, W.P. Pratt Jr., and N.O. Birge,
Science Advances 4, eaat9457 (2018).
25 I. M. Dayton, T. Sage, E. C. Gingrich, M. G. Loving, T. F.
Ambrose, N. P. Siwak, S. Keebaugh, C. Kirby, D. L. Miller,
A. Y. Herr, Q. P. Herr, and O. Naaman, IEEE Mag. Lett.
9, 1 (2018).
26 A.A. Golubov, M. Yu. Kupriyanov, and Ya.V. Fominov,
JETP Lett. 75, 190 (2002).
27 C. Bell, G. Burnell, C.W. Leung, E.J. Tarte, D.-J. Kang,
and M.G. Blamire, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84 1153 (2004).
28 E.C. Gingrich, B.M. Niedzielski, J.A. Glick, Y. Wang, D.L.
Miller, R. Loloee, W.P. Pratt, Jr., and N.O. Birge, Nature
Phys. 12 564 (2016).
29 N.O. Birge and M. Houzet, IEEE Mag. Lett. 10 4509695
(2019).
30 A. Barone and G. Patern`o, “Physics and applications of
the Josephson effect”, Wiley (1982).
31 O. Bourgeois, P. Gandit, J. Lesueur, A. Sulpice, X. Grison,
and J. Chaussy, Eur. Phys. J. B 21, 75 (2001).
32 T.S. Khaire, W.P. Pratt, Jr., and N.O. Birge, Phys. Rev.
B 79, 094523 (2009).
33 V.V. Ryazanov, Physics-Uspekhi 42 825 (1999).
34 C. S¨urgers, T. Hoss, C. Sch¨onenberger, and C. Strunk, J.
Magn. Magn. Mater. 240, 598 (2002).
35 C. Bell, G. Burnell, D.-J. Kang, R. H. Hadfield, M. Kap-
pers, and M. G.Blamire, Nanotechnology 14, 630 (2003).
36 B. Baek, W.H. Rippard, S.P. Benz, S.E. Russek, and P.D.
Dresslehaus, Nature Commun. 5 3888 (2014).
37 B.M. Niedzielski, E.C. Gingrich, R. Loloee, W.P. Pratt,
Jr., and N.O. Birge, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28 085012
(2015).
38 M.S. Crosser, J. Huang, F. Pierre, P. Virtanen, T.T.

Heikkil¨a, F. K. Wilhelm, and N.O. Birge, Phys. Rev. B
77 014528 (2008).
39 E. Scheer, H. v. L¨ohneysen, A. D. Mirlin, P. W¨olfle, and
H. Hein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3362 (1997).
40 B. Baek, M.L. Schneider, M.R. Pufall, and W.H. Rippard,
Phys. Rev. Applied 7 064013 (2017).
41 Y. Wang, W.P. Pratt Jr., and N.O. Birge, Phys. Rev. B
85, 214522 (2012).
42 A.F. Volkov and K.B. Efetov, Phys. Rev. B 81, 144522
(2010).
43 L. Trifunovic and Z. Radovic, Phys. Rev. B 82, 020505
(2010).
44 N.O. Birge, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 376: 20150150 (2018).
45 The term “spin filtering” often refers to tunneling through
magnetic insulators – either of single electrons [46] or of
electron pairs in Josephson junctions [47,48]. But spin fil-
tering is also an intrinsic property of metallic ferromagnets
and their interfaces.
46 For a review, see J. Moodera, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
19 165202 (2007).
47 K. Senapati, M.G. Blamire, and Z.H. Barber, Nature Mat.
10, 849 (2011).
48 F.S. Bergeret, A. Verso, and A.F. Volkov, Phys. Rev. B
86, 060506(R) (2012).
49 J. Bass, in Spin Transport and Magnetism, edited by
E. Tsymbal and I. Zutic,
CRC Press (2011),
ISBN
9781439803776.
50 S.F. Zhang and P.M. Levy, J. Appl. Phys. 69, 4786 (1991).
51 S.F. Lee, W.P. Pratt, Jr., Q. Yang, P. Holody, R. Loloee,
P.A. Schroeder, and J. Bass, J. Mag. Magn. Mater. 118,
L1 (1993).
52 T. Valet and A. Fert, Phys. Rev. B 48, 7099 (1993).
53 J. Bass, J. Mag. Magn. Mater. 408, 244 (2016).
54 H. Y. T. Nguyen, R. Acharyya, E. Huey, B. Richard, R.
Loloee, W. P. Pratt, Jr., J. Bass, S. Wang, and K. Xia,
Phys. Rev. B 82, 220401 (2010).


