1 

 

Spectrum-free integrated photonic remote 
molecular identification and sensing 

ROSS CHERITON1*, SURESH SIVANANDAM2,3, ADAM DENSMORE4, ERNST DE 
MOOIJ5, DANIELE MELATI1, MOHSEN KAMANDAR DEZFOULI1, PAVEL 
CHEBEN1, DANXIA XU1, JENS H. SCHMID1, JEAN LAPOINTE1, RUBIN MA1, 
SHURUI WANG1, LUC SIMARD4, AND SIEGFRIED JANZ1 

1Advanced Electronics and Photonics, National Research Council Canada, Ottawa,, Canada 
2David A. Dunlap Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada 
3Dunlap Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada 
4Herzberg Astronomy and Astrophysics, National Research Council Canada, Victoria, 
Canada 
5Astrophysics Research Centre, School of Mathematics and Physics, Queen's University 
Belfast, Belfast, UK 
 
*Corresponding author: ross.cheriton@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca 

Abstract: Absorption spectroscopy is widely used in sensing and astronomy to understand 
remote molecular compositions. However, dispersive techniques require multichannel 
detection, reducing detection sensitivity while increasing instrument cost when compared to 
spectrophotometric methods. We present a novel non-dispersive infrared molecular detection 
and identification scheme that performs spectral correlation optically using a specially tailored 
integrated silicon ring resonator. We show experimentally that the correlation amplitude is 
proportional to the number of overlapping ring resonances and gas lines, and that molecular 
specificity can be achieved from the phase of the correlation signal. This strategy can enable 
on-chip detection of extremely faint remote spectral signatures. 

© 2020 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement 

1. Introduction 

Absorption spectroscopy is an important tool for the remote determination of molecular composition 

of a target gas where direct interaction with a target is not practical or feasible. Typical applications range 
from the measurement of trace gases in the atmosphere, gas emissions [1], hyperspectral ground [2] and 
satellite-based [3] remote sensing platforms, to deep-sky and solar system astronomical 
spectroscopy [4,5]. Many other high sensitivity molecular spectroscopy techniques have been pursued 
using active techniques such as dual comb spectroscopy [6–11] but these require laser sources, complex 
electronics and optics, and cannot probe distant targets. In particular, the compositional analysis of 
astronomical objects and distant atmospheric targets both must rely on simple absorption spectroscopy 
with naturally occurring ambient light as the only available light source. Nevertheless, many molecular 
species can be detected and identified by their unique infrared absorption spectrum that results from their 
ro-vibrational absorption line distributions overlaid upon a broadband background. 

Most absorption spectroscopy platforms are built around some form of grating spectrometer that 

disperses the incoming light across a detector array to capture the spectrum, which is subsequently 
analyzed to extract the molecular absorption features of interest. In astronomy, modern large telescopes 
must be matched to correspondingly large grating spectrometers to match their étendues [12]. Replacing 
full grating spectrometers with compact devices that can detect and quantify the presence of a specific 
target molecule may significantly reduce the size, cost, mass, development time, and complexity of 
astronomical instrumentation in applications where a complete spectrum is not required. Such size and 


2 

 

mass characteristics are even more considerable advantages for deployment in a space-based telescope.  
Integrated photonic systems allow for the processing of light in the plane of a centimetre-sized chip. 
Silicon photonics is among the most developed of these technologies, with many different types of 
integrated optical devices having been developed for telecommunications and sensing. Examples include 
integrated filters, modulators, wavelength (de)multiplexers (i.e. spectrometers), optical switches, phase 
shifters [13], and label-free biosensors [14,15].  Planar waveguide spectrometers/(de)multiplexers can be 
implemented as echelle gratings [16], arrayed waveguide gratings [17,18], Fourier transform 
spectrometers [19,19–21], and photonic crystal superprisms  [22] on integrated platforms. Waveguide 
ring resonators have been used as local gas sensors  [23,24], but these devices rely on detecting the 
interaction of trace gases with the evanescent field extending outside the single mode waveguides and 
cannot be used for remote detection.   

The state-of-the-art in optical gas sensing technology has been described in several review 

papers  [11,25,26]. In the case of remote absorption spectroscopy, the detection of absorption features in 
the spectrum of the input light is used to infer the presence and type of molecular species lying between a 
broadband light source and the detector.  As molecular species exhibit unique spectral fingerprints in the 
infrared, this uniqueness can be used to identify the molecule through a correlation of the broadband 
spectrum with a matching spectral filter. We present a novel, non-dispersive method that forgoes spectral 
acquisition, and instead carries out optical correlation in a fully integrated photonic device through the 
modulation of a specially designed optical transmission comb. The output of this device is sent to a single 
channel detector where the correlation signal is encoded as an intensity variation. This principle has been 
demonstrated using bulk optic Fabry-Pérot (FP) interferometers to produce a periodic transmission filter 
that can be correlated with a gas spectrum over a finite spectral region [27–31]. The infrared absorption 
spectrum of many gases exhibit quasi-periodic absorption spectra generated by their coupled vibrational 
and rotational degrees of freedom. While the absorption line spacings are not perfectly periodic, the 
periodicity is sufficient over a narrow spectral range to simultaneously overlap numerous transmission 
lines of a FP interferometer cavity with a suitably chosen cavity length. While the previously mentioned 
work used FP interferometers [26-29] as the comb filter, waveguide ring resonators can be used for the 
same purpose since they function as on-chip FP cavities.  Silicon waveguide ring resonators are preferable 
as they are significantly more compact, mechanically stable, have lower power consumption, lower cost, 
and their spectrum can be tuned at a much higher frequency.   

In this paper, we design and demonstrate the first integrated photonic ring resonator remote gas sensor.  

By thermally modulating a silicon waveguide ring resonator transmission comb spectrum while coupling 
light from the target through the ring, we obtain the phase and amplitude of the signal for detection and 
identification, respectively, of the target gas based on the presence of absorption lines in the incoming 
broadband light signal. This allows for on-chip detection and identification of remote molecular species 
without spectrum acquisition using only a single detection channel. This sensor analyzes light coupled 
into the sensor chip through a single mode input optical fibre. The light is coupled from the target source 
to the input fibre using collimation optics for passive, distant remote gas sensing and identification where 
active (laser-based) detection is not possible, or by an astronomical telescope coupled to an adaptive optics 
system. Optical fibres can effectively capture stellar light for further analysis in astronomy, provided the 
image is approximately diffraction-limited. The output light signal after passing through the sensor can 
be measured by directing the output light onto a single highly sensitive photodiode that is coupled to the 
chip either directly using a lens or through an intermediary output fibre. Additional devices can be tailored 
in a straightforward manner to detect other molecular species (e.g. carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide). 

 


3 

 

 

Fig. 1. (a) Ro-vibrational absorption spectrum and line spacings as a function of wavelength for 
the HCN molecule around 1540 nm (194.67 THz) and (b) the P-branch absorption lines and 
corresponding spectral spacing change with wavelength for the HCN P-branch around 1540 nm 
(194.67 THz). 

 

2. Simulation 

 
For this work, we target the most abundant isotope of hydrogen cyanide (H12C14N) gas as a proof of 

concept due to its strong absorption cross-section in the telecommunications C- band, as shown in Fig. 
1a. We design a ring resonator as a correlation filter with a free spectral range (FSR) that best matches the 
line spacing of the strongest HCN absorption lines in the C-band. To achieve the desired FSR of the ring 
resonator, the ring cavity length and also the targeted spectral lines must be chosen carefully to optimize 
the difference in overlap of multiple ring resonances and gas lines as the filter is spectrally shifted. The 
optimization of this matching has two primary benefits: a larger possible correlation signal, and molecule 
specificity.  

We generate the HCN absorption spectrum A(𝜆) using line wavelengths and relative intensities from 

the high-resolution transmission molecular absorption database (HITRAN)  [32] and modeled them as 
overlapping approximated Voigt functions. An absorption spectrum is created by subtracting the Voigt 
functions from a flat, normalized background. 

 The HCN P-branch centred at 𝜆 = 1540 nm (194.67 THz) was chosen as the target spectral signature 

since these lines have a lower relative line spacing change with wavelength than the R-branch at shorter 
wavelengths, and is therefore more suitable for correlating with the more periodic ring resonator 
transmission spectrum. Note that both the ring spectrum comb and the absorption line spacings are not 
truly periodic, and also change at different rates with wavelength. The spacing between HCN absorption 
lines varies from 0.74 nm to 0.82 nm (94 GHz to 105 GHz) for the HCN P-branch shown in Fig. 1b. 
Since the absorption lines at 1540 nm (194.67 THz) are the strongest in the HCN P-branch, a target FSR 
of approximately 0.77 nm (97.5 GHz) is likely to lead to greater detection sensitivity.  

Here we outline the simulation of the transmission through a ring resonator filter from its physical and 

optical characteristics. The resonance vacuum wavelengths 𝜆𝑚 and frequencies ν𝑚 of a ring resonator 
occur under the condition 

𝜆𝑚 =

𝑛𝑒𝐿

𝑚 , ν𝑚 =

𝑐𝑚

𝑛𝑒𝐿 ,   m = 1,2,3 …  
 (1) 

 

where ne is the effective index of the waveguide mode, c is the speed of light, m is the longitudinal mode 
number, and L is the round trip length of the ring.  The vacuum wavelength and frequency are related by 
ν =

𝑐

𝜆. 

The FSR of a ring resonator in wavelength (frequency) is described by  
 

𝐹𝑆𝑅𝜆 =

𝜆2

𝑛𝑔𝐿  ,    𝐹𝑆𝑅𝜈 =

𝑐

𝑛𝑔𝐿                 (2) 

 


4 

 

where the group index 𝑛𝑔 of the waveguide mode. The finesse (F) and quality factor (Q) are related to 
the coupling strengths and losses in the resonator, and are defined as: 

  
        𝐹 =

𝐹𝑆𝑅𝜈

𝐹𝑊𝐻𝑀𝜈 ,  
 
 (3) 

 

      
 
 
 
    𝑄 = m

𝐹𝑆𝑅𝜈

𝐹𝑊𝐻𝑀𝜈 .   
 
(4) 

 
We designed a silicon-on-insulator strip waveguide with a height of 220 nm and width of 450 nm. We 
calculated the mode properties using a finite difference eigenmode solver (Lumerical Mode Solutions) as 
a function of wavelength and temperature. We use a temperature and wavelength dependent index of 
refraction model for silicon of the waveguide to determine effective and group indices [33]. The effective 
index of the calculated TE mode is ne ~ 2.37 and a group index of ng ~ 4.30 at a wavelength of 𝜆 = 1539 
nm (194.8 THz). 

The transmission through an add-drop ring resonator is expressed by  

𝑇𝑡 = 𝑟2

2𝑎2 − 2𝑟1𝑟2𝑎 cos 𝜃 + 𝑟1

2

1 − 2𝑟1𝑟2𝑎 cos 𝜃 + 𝑟1𝑟2𝑎2     (5) 

 

for the through port, and 

 

𝑇𝑑 =
(1 − 𝑟1

2)(1 − 𝑟2

2)𝑎

1 − 2𝑟1𝑟2𝑎 cos 𝜃 + 𝑟1𝑟2𝑎2     (6) 

 
for the drop port  [34]. 

The parameters 𝑟1and 𝑟2 are the coupling coefficients into and out of the ring, respectively, a is the 

single round trip amplitude transmission for the ring. The temperature dependent phase of the light in the 
waveguide is described by 

𝜃(𝑇) =

2𝜋𝑛𝑒(𝑇)𝐿

𝜆
 ,                     (7)  
 
 

 
where 𝑛𝑒(𝑇) is the temperature dependent effective index. Since the TE mode is largely contained inside 
the silicon waveguide, the spectral shift with temperature can be approximated using the thermo-optic 
coefficient of silicon.  We can use this temperature dependence to dynamically correlate the ring resonator 
output spectrum to the absorption lines of HCN. The spectral shift is described by 

Δ𝜆𝑇𝑂 = 𝜎𝑇𝑂𝜆0

Δ𝑇

𝑛𝑔  , 
(8) 

where 𝜎𝑇𝑂 is the thermo-optic coefficient, 𝜆0 is the resonance wavelength and Δ𝑇 is the change in 
temperature.  

The resulting amplitude and relative phase of the integrated intensity can be used to identify and 

quantify the gas in the incident beam path. The thermo-optic coefficient of silicon is very large at 
1.8×10−4 K-1, enabling tuning of the ring resonances with a small change in temperature. When light with 
an imprinted absorption spectrum is inputted into the ring resonator, the output spectrum of the ring 
resonator is  

 
 

𝑆𝑑,𝜆(𝜆, 𝑇) = 𝐴(𝜆) ∙ 𝑇𝑑(𝜆, 𝑇)  ,             (9) 

 

where 𝐴(𝜆) is the gas absorption spectrum, and 𝑇𝑑(𝜆, 𝑇) is the ring resonator drop port transmission 
spectrum. The correlation signal 𝐶(𝑇) is therefore measured using a single channel detection element 
with spectrally uniform detection efficiency, and can be expressed by the integral 

 

𝐶(𝑇) = ∫
𝑆𝑑,𝜆(𝜆, 𝑇)

𝜆2
𝜆1
𝑑𝜆 .   
(10) 


5 

 

 
A suitable ring length can be calculated from Equation 2 by solving for ring length given a target FSR 

of 0.77 nm (97.5 GHz) that matches the line spacing of a target molecule. From this simple calculation a 
group index of 4.34 leads to a ring length of ~709 μm. We verify the performance of a ring resonator with 
this ring length (𝐿) by calculating the maximum correlation signal amplitude for ring lengths ranging 
from 400 μm to 1200 μm. Ring resonator drop port transmission spectra as a function of temperature and 
wavelength are correlated with an HCN absorption spectrum using Equation 9. The spectral products at 
𝑆𝑑 are then integrated using Equation 10 to produce the correlation signal, as shown in Fig. 2a. We use 
the ring resonators parameters shown in Table 1. We choose a=0.9 as it is a typical silicon-on-insulator 
single round trip amplitude transmission coefficient in fabricated ring resonators.  The values for r1 and r2 
are chosen to approximate a moderate coupling strength to the ring resonator. 

Table 1. Simulation Parameters 

Parameter
Value

𝑎
0.9

𝑟1
0.9

𝑟2
0.9

Quality factor
19,000

ng
4.30

ne
2.37

Finesse
8.5

Ideal ring round trip length
705 μm

FWHM of gas lines
30 pm
(38 GHz)

Bandpass filter
0.75-6 nm
(95 GHz-760 GHz)

 
The bounds of the integral in Equation 10 are finite since not the ring resonances cannot 

simultaneously overlap with all the absorption lines of HCN.  The bandpass is practically limited to 
roughly 6 nm (760 GHz), but is reduced with high quality factors (sharper ring resonances).  Beyond a 6 
nm bandpass, additional absorption lines cannot overlap simultaneously and will only serve to broaden, 
and eventually reduce, the amplitude of the correlation function with a spectral shift of the ring 
transmission spectrum [35]. Therefore, we impose an external bandpass filter in our simulations. These 
calculations were repeated for bandpass widths (Δ𝜆𝑏 = 𝜆2 − 𝜆1)  from 0.75 nm to 6 nm (95 GHz to 
760 GHz). At a ring round trip length of 705 μm, with bandpass filter widths of 1.5 nm (190 GHz) and 
larger, the modulation amplitude reaches a maximum similar to our original estimate of 709 μm. As the 
bandpass filter width increases, the signal contrast between aligned and misaligned conditions (correlation 
amplitude) around 705 μm increases. This arises from the simultaneous overlap of multiple ring 
resonances with multiple gas absorption lines and a corresponding higher sensor sensitivity.  Other ring 
lengths also display weaker correlation features in modulation amplitude, such as at 470 μm and 1060 
μm, when the ring resonances overlap a subset of the ring resonances in the bandpass. 

 


6 

 

 

Fig. 2. (a) Simulated correlation amplitude as a function of ring round trip length and bandpass 
filter showing an optimal ring length of 705 μm for HCN detection. (b) Simulated correlation 
signal as a function of HCN absorption line depth for a bandpass of 6 nm (760 GHz). (c) 
Simulated correlation signal as a function of bandpass filter width. (d) Normalized C2H2 and 
HCN absorption spectrum over a 3.75 nm (450 GHz) bandpass. (e) Simulated correlation signal 
for C2H2 and HCN over a 3.75 nm (450 GHz) bandpass. The temperature offsets and spectral 
modulation regions that can be used obtaining specificity between C2H2 and HCN are 
highlighted. 

 
With HCN absorption features present in the input spectrum, simulated correlation signal minima are 

observed every 11°C in temperature change, or a shift of approximately 0.77 nm (97.5 GHz) of the ring 
transmission spectrum. In Fig. 2b, we show the correlation signal as a function of temperature change for 
various HCN absorption depths with a bandpass of 6 nm (760 GHz). The values of the minima in the 
correlation signal decrease since deeper absorption lines from HCN increasingly block more light at the 
drop port of the ring, showing that the sensor can distinguish relative HCN column density in the beam 
path. We also investigate the effect of the external bandpass filter width, which allows for more gas lines 
to contribute the signal. The correlation signal is plotted as a function of temperature at different bandpass 
widths in Fig. 2c, showing increasing signal contrast with larger bandpasses up to 6 nm (760 GHz). This 
is due to the simultaneous overlapping of additional absorption lines with ring resonances, resulting in an 
increase in the absolute correlation signal amplitude. The signal is also broadened due to imperfect overlap 
of the gas lines with the ring resonances. As the gas lines are asymmetrically distributed, a slightly 
asymmetrical shape to the correlation signal is visible at the large bandpass filter widths.  

We also investigate the molecular specificity of our sensor, since multiple gases can have absorption 

features in the bandpass. In the case of acetylene (C2H2) present with HCN, we now have two additional 
non-periodic strong absorption lines which complicate our spectrum, as shown in Fig. 2d. The correlation 
of the C2H2 spectrum with the ring drop port transmission reveals a new correlation signal pattern. Fig. 2e 


7 

 

shows that correlation features occur at different temperatures, one corresponding to C2H2, and the other 
to HCN. As in this case, it is possible to judiciously choose a filter centre wavelength to ensure non-
overlapping spectral features from different molecular species. The resulting correlation features that 
occur at unique ring temperatures, providing greater molecular specificity without acquiring a spectrum.  

The arrows in Fig. 2e indicate possible temperature modulation offsets such that the same sensor can 

independently detect either C2H2 or HCN. We expect this molecular specificity feature to be upheld for 
other gases if the strongest absorption lines of both gases do not overlap. Otherwise, molecular specificity 
can also be achieved by observing the change in the correlation signal with increasing bandpass, since the 
correlation signal from C2H2 arises from only two absorption lines and a mismatched ring FSR. 

The performance of the sensor depends on the ring resonator coupling coefficients a, r1 and r2.  Higher 

values of the single-pass amplitude transmission (a>0.95) correspond to less loss (e.g. less waveguide 
sidewall roughness) in the fabricated ring resonator, and generally leads to more light coupled into the 
drop port. However, obtaining high spectral contrast of the ring resonator filter relies on being near the 
critical coupling condition which total ring round trip loss including drop port coupling is equal to the 
through port coupling.  The r1 and r2 parameters are set based on the coupling section lengths and coupling 
gaps (higher r1 and r2 values enable higher quality factors) and produce critical coupling conditions if 
r1=r2a. We have plotted the correlation signal as a function of temperature for a range of quality factors 
under critical coupling conditions in Fig. 3a.  The correlation amplitude will depend on the gas absorption 
line and ring resonance overlap across the sampled spectral passband. In an ideal correlation filter, the gas 
spectrum and filter spectrum should match exactly, but this is not possible using a simple ring filter. Since 
the gas line spacings and ring transmission line spacings are not exactly commensurate, the optimal choice 
of ring resonance linewidth therefore depends on the difference in gas and ring line spacings, the spectral 
linewidths, and the sampled spectral bandwidth.  

The peak-to-peak modulation of the correlation signal is maximized at r1=0.67 with r2=0.7 as shown 

in Fig. 3b for a 6 nm bandpass window. This corresponds to a quality factor for the sensor of ~9000 with 
a=0.95.  With even lower quality factors, the resonance peak-to-minimum transmission contrast is 
reduced.   At higher quality factors, the ring resonances are sharper and overlap with gas absorption lines 
is less leading to reduced peak-to-peak correlation signal amplitudes.  For high pressure, high temperature 
target gases, even lower quality factors are better suited to accommodate the broadened spectral features.

 

Fig. 3. (a) Simulated correlation signal as a function of temperature change for a bandpass 
spectral width of 6 nm (760 GHz). The single pass amplitude transmission parameter is fixed at 
a = 0.95 and coupling coefficients r1 and r2 are varied while maintaining the critical coupling 
condition (r1 = r2a).  (b) Simulated correlation signal amplitude (peak-to-peak) for ring quality 
factors corresponding to the ring parameters given in Fig 3a.   


8 

 

 

3. Fabrication and experimental setup 

 
The silicon ring resonator devices are fabricated on the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform using a 

JEOL JBX-8100FS E-beam lithography tool through Applied Nanotools. The ring resonator consists of 
a silicon waveguide formed into a racetrack loop. The entire chip with input and output coupling fibres is 
shown in Fig. 4a, with the ring resonator coupling section shown in detail in Fig. 4b, respectively. The 
buried oxide layer is 2 µm thick with a 220 nm thick silicon layer. Devices are fully etched to the buried 
oxide and have waveguide dimensions of 450 nm wide and 220 nm high. The waveguides are clad with 
a 2.2 µm thick oxide layer. TiW microheaters are patterned atop the SiO2 cladding to provide local heating 
to the waveguides. All heaters are covered in 300 nm of SiO2 and provide a tuning rate of approximately 
0.6 °C/mA at low currents with a heater resistance of ~100 Ω. The heaters are kept short due to the high 
resistivity of TiW and to support sufficient heating at low voltages. Light input and output are achieved 
through subwavelength edge couplers designed for adiabatic, low-loss broadband light coupling from a 
tapered fibre to the waveguide around 1550 nm (~193 THz)  [36,37]. A deep trench etch at the chip edges 
through the entire wafer thickness is used create provide smooth input and output waveguide facets. 
Devices are designed for TE polarization to increase the thermo-optic coefficient of the waveguides which 
is proportional to the mode overlap ratio between silicon and SiO2. Coupling between the input waveguide 
and the racetrack ring resonator is accomplished using directional couplers with a closest coupling gap of 
200 nm. A tapered waveguide is used in the drop output waveguide to reduce back-reflections from 
counter-propagating modes. The direction couplers were optimized with 5.4 µm and 6 µm parallel 
sections for the drop and through coupling sections, respectively.  The asymmetric coupling length is 
designed to accommodate for some expected loss in the add-drop ring to better approach the critical 
coupling condition [30]. The coupling lengths were designed to produce a ring resonator with a low 
quality factor while still providing a reasonable transmission contrast between off- and on-resonance light. 
Other devices with symmetric coupling configurations produced resonances with less resonance 
transmission contrast. The racetrack ring bend radii are fixed at 20 µm to ensure bend losses in the ring 
are negligible. The propagation loss of the TE mode in the waveguides was ~1.3 dB/cm, which leads to 
an estimated intrinsic ring resonator quality factor of 680,000.  Different rings lengths were patterned to 
accommodate for variations in fabrication. A ring length a 737 µm led to the best overlap with the HCN 
lines. This length differs slightly from the optimal length of 709 µm found in the previous section, 
presumably due to differences between the fabricated and the designed waveguide geometry and material 
constants. 

 


9 

 

 

Fig. 4. (a) Plan-view optical photograph of the fabricated photonic chip with tapered fibre input and output 
couplers and two electrical probes contacting the electrical pads.  (b) Optical micrograph of a fabricated 
racetrack ring resonator (dark), microheater (red), and contact pads (light green area to the right). (c) 
Illustration of the experimental optical characterization setup. 

 
The chips are placed on a temperature controlled copper stage as shown in Figs. 4a and 4c. The 

temperature of the stage is held constant while varying the current through the microheaters to modulate 
the drop port output spectrum. Polarization maintaining fibres are used for light input and output coupling 
to ensure the light entering the ring resonators are TE polarized. The contact pads of the microheater are 
contacted with needle probes connected to a current source. The coupling section of the racetrack ring 
resonator is shown with microheaters after fabrication in Fig. 4b. A schematic of the optical 
characterization system is shown in Fig. 4c. The transmission spectra of the ring and gas cell are acquired 
using a tunable laser source and photodiode. The light polarization is controlled using a polarization 
controller that is adjusted to couple only TE polarized light to the chip.  An H12C14N gas cell at a pressure 
of 10 Torr with a path length of 5.5 cm is used to produce absorption line features. 

The optical set-up is also alternatively configured with a broadband light source, a superluminescent 

diode system centred at 1555 nm (192.79 THz). In this case, the input light is passed through a tunable 
bandpass filter, enabling tuning of the centre wavelength and spectral width of the bandpass. In this 
configuration, the photodiode measures the total light power exiting the drop port. This configuration 
involves incoherent light, and enables the direct measurement the correlation signal, and therefore better 
represents more typical operating characteristics and conditions of the sensor. 

 
 

4. Results  


10 

 

A. Detection using a tunable laser 

 
The racetrack ring resonators were first characterized from 1534 nm to 1543 nm (195.43 to 194.29 

THz) at the through and drop ports using the tunable laser. The transmission characteristics of the drop 
outputs for a 737 µm long ring are shown in Fig. 5a. The FWHM of the drop port resonances are found 
to be ~110 pm (~14 GHz) from Fig. 5b. Resonance depths are about -13 dB, corresponding to a quality 
factor of about 14,000 with a finesse of ~6.8 for the ring resonator.  The simulated ring finesse in the 
previous section was ~9.5, which is a slightly less ideal ring coupling condition when compared to the 
fabricated ring resonator.  The HCN gas cell produces very sharp absorption line features with linewidths 
of ~8 pm (~1 GHz) at full-width at half minimum (FWHM).  Broader linewidths for the gas lines would 
have contributed to a stronger correlation signal amplitude. 

While the correlation technique can be applied either using the through or drop ports (or potentially 

both simultaneously), the drop port signal provides a higher signal to background ratio since the integrated 
power is less susceptible to interference and other spurious effects across the chip and measurement 
system. However, in a more complex two output configuration, both drop and through port signals can 
be used to provide intensity normalization.  The gas cell is removed from the fibre-optic system when 
obtaining the reference correlation signals shown in Fig. 5c.  With the HCN gas cell inserted into the light 
path, absorption features are overlaid upon the drop port transmission spectrum of the ring resonator. For 
these experiments, the stage temperature is maintained at 20 °C.  The drop port transmission spectrum is 
red-shifted by increasing the current through the microheater as shown in Fig. 5a and 5b. The resonances 
shift by the full free spectral range of the ring approximately every 11°C.  The temperature dependent 
transmission spectrum of a single drop port resonance mode as it crosses a single HCN absorption line at 
1539.7 nm (194.7084 THz) is shown in Fig. 5b. At a microheater current of around 15-18 mA, the ring 
is heated to ~6 °C above the stage temperature and the resonances are aligned with the HCN absorption 
lines. The narrow width of the HCN line leaves a sharp drop in transmitted power at specific wavelengths. 

In order to emulate the sensor operation using background broadband illumination, we integrate 

(using Equation 10) the tunable laser transmission spectra through the ring drop port across the desired 
passband where the gas lines are strongest and best match the drop port resonances. The measurements 
were repeated when the gas cell was removed, providing a reference spectrum representing the reference 
zero-gas correlation as a function of microheater current.  The correlation signals without the gas cell (ring 
only), shown in Fig. 5c, are normalized for direct comparison at bandpass values from 0.75 nm to 6 nm 
(95 GHz to 760 GHz), spanning 1 to 8 HCN absorption lines. 

With increasing bandpass widths, the correlation feature at 18 mA is more apparent and becomes 

broader. As is evident from Fig. 5d, the contributions from multiple ring resonances overlapping with 
multiple gas lines leads to an improvement in the detection.  The broadening of the correlation signal 
minimum is a result of the mismatch in aperiodicity of the gas lines and the ring resonances.  

 


11 

 

 

Fig. 5. (a) Experimental ring resonator drop port transmission spectrum with HCN gas 
absorption features as measured by a scanning tunable laser source as a function of ring 
temperature. The change in colour indicates the change in ring temperature. (b) High resolution 
ring resonator drop port transmission spectrum of a single resonance and gas absorption line.  
(c) Integrated tunable laser spectra through the ring drop port without an HCN gas cell, and (d) 
with an HCN gas cell with varying bandpass filter widths. (e) Transmission spectra through the 
HCN gas cell at different bandpass filter widths. (f) Difference between correlation signals with 
and without the HCN gas cell at the ring resonator drop port as a function of microheater current 
using the broadband LED source. 

 

B. Demonstration using broadband light 

 
We then demonstrate sensing using a weak broadband background provided by a superluminescent 

LED. The spectral power density detected at the photodiode is around 30 pW/nm (0.2 pW/GHz), or 
approximately >200,000 weaker than the tunable laser. This source better represents a dim target typically 
encountered in astronomical observations. Different bandpass widths and centre wavelengths are selected 
using a tunable external bandpass filter to accommodate 1 to 8 gas lines. The normalized transmission 
spectra through the filter and the gas cell for varying bandpass widths are measured using a tunable laser 


12 

 

sweep and are shown in Fig. 5e. The microheater current is increased from 11 mA to 25 mA as before, 
allowing the ring resonances to simultaneously align (and misalign) with the gas lines. The power at the 
photodiode, which inherently integrates the output spectrum, is measured as a function of microheater 
current with a fixed stage temperature. The difference between the correlation signal with and without the 
gas cell in the light path is shown in Fig. 5f. When the HCN gas cell is connected, a clear dip by about 8% 
in the correlation signal is seen centred at ~17-18 mA of microheater current, similar to what is seen by 
integrating the tunable laser spectra, representing the presence of HCN. The signal-to-noise ratio is 
estimated at ~250, which is significantly lower due to the weak spectral power density of the SLED source 
as well as from additional insertion losses from the tunable bandpass filter. When the ring resonances are 
misaligned with respect to the absorption lines of HCN (below 14 mA and above 22 mA), the output 
power is at the nominal value corresponding to no gas detection. The correlation signal is similarly 
broadened and deeper as the bandpass filter width is increased. The overlap of multiple absorption lines 
is inferred from the deepening of the minimum at 17-18 mA with increasing bandpass filter widths. At 
wider bandpass filter widths, simultaneous overlap of all ring resonances and gas lines in the bandpass is 
not possible, and partial overlaps occurs. This effect broadens the signal and results in a limit to the 
sensitivity when using nearly equally spaced ring resonances.    

 

5. Discussion 

 
We describe an integrated photonic remote gas sensor using correlation-based detection and 

identification of absorption features of a gas contained within a broadband background light. By 
engineering a silicon waveguide ring resonator with appropriate length and group index, a integrated 
correlation filter is matched to gases with quasi-periodic absorption features over a bandpass of a few 
nanometres. We show that the overlap of the ring resonator drop port with the absorption lines of HCN 
produces a unique modulation pattern that identifies HCN based on the phase of the modulated correlation 
signal. We additionally demonstrate HCN detection with a weak broadband source. While demonstrated 
with HCN, many other gases with similar periodic absorption features such as CO2 and CO can be 
detected similarly with different ring lengths. We also show by simulation that the sensor can operate in 
the presence of C2H2 and should distinguish other gases with non-overlapping absorption features in the 
same bandpass. The sensor performs best with a bandpass filter of 6 nm (760 GHz) where up to 8 
resonances contribute to the sensor response, with smaller bandpass filters leading to lower response.  
Simulations with larger bandpasses reveal negligible gain in signal amplitude with corresponding loss of 
contrast. In the case of saturated absorption lines, the sensor can still detect the presence of the gas if there 
is still some light in the bandpass, however, the saturation will decrease our ability to recover the relative 
column depth for saturated lines. 

Integrated correlation gas sensing has multiple advantages over dispersive spectroscopy regarding 

sensitivity for astronomy and remote sensing.  Firstly, in a dispersive spectrometer, the light is divided by 
wavelength onto multiple pixels, reducing the photon flux per pixel. Whereas in our integrated correlation 
sensor, we collect all photons into a single detection element (or pixel).  In the shot noise dominated 
condition, the signal-to-noise ratio is related to the photon count (𝑁𝑝ℎ) by 

 

𝑆𝑁𝑅 = √𝑁𝑝ℎ. 

 
To resolve the HCN absorption lines over 6 nm of spectral bandwidth for HCN, a dispersive 

spectrometer would realistically require at least ~30 pixels, reducing the SNR by a factor of ~5 when 
compared to the integrated correlation ring resonator.  Considering the modulation of the ring spectrum 
across the absorption lines reduces the signal by a factor of ~2, the SNR at the photodiode is still a factor 
of ~3.5 higher than that of dispersive spectrometers. 

Secondly, the use of a single channel allows for the use of larger, higher performance detectors which 

can be optimized for higher quantum efficiencies, lower cost, lower dark currents, and no pixel cross-talk.  


13 

 

Finally, the rapid modulation of the microheater current allows for lock-in amplification of the 

resulting signal that is not practically achieved for a highly multichannel detector arrays.  A silicon 
waveguide ring filter transmission can be modulated at several kHz using thermal tuning as in this work, 
or at up to MHz frequencies and higher rates using carrier-based modulation [38]. The phase sensitive 
lock-in detection eliminates any source of noise outside of a narrow measurement bandwidth centred at 
the modulation frequency, including atmospheric fluctuations. Using lock-in techniques, signals many 
orders of magnitude smaller than the noise background can be routinely acquired, unlike in dispersive 
spectroscopy.  Long time constants for the lock-in detection can be used for signal extraction with 
extremely low signal-to-noise ratios since detector response time is not usually a priority for astronomical 
observations.  The integrated aspect of this correlation sensor allows for low-cost, compact and 
mechanical stability not found in bulk optic FP-based implementations [29]. 

The minimum sensitivity for the ring resonator correlation sensor can be related to the minimum HCN 

absorption depth detectable with lock-in amplification.  We calculate this in the same manner as Vargas-
Rodríguez et al.  [29] where 

𝑆𝑁𝑅 = 1 =
𝐴𝑀𝑅𝑀𝑆

𝑉

(𝑁𝐸𝑉 + 𝑁𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘)√Δ𝑓

 . 

 
We can calculate the minimum lock-in detection signal for a Zurich Instruments MFLI lock-in amplifier 
with an input noise amplitude of 𝑁𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘= 40 nV/√Hz at 1 Hz, and assume a reasonable noise equivalent 
voltage (NEV) of 100 nV/√Hz at 1 Hz.  As in [29], we assume the noise equivalent bandwidth is Δ𝑓 ≈
1/(4𝜏𝑐), where the 𝜏𝑐 is the time constant of the lock-in amplifier. For extremely faint object astronomy, 
time constants as long as several minutes can be used.  Using a lock-in detection simulation for varying 
optical depths of HCN, we achieve a detection efficiency of ~5 x 10-4 V per percent optical depth. With 
𝜏𝑐=10 seconds and incorporating the input noise, we have a minimum detectable absorption depth on the 
order of 10-6 %.  This can be lowered through the use of longer time constants and the use of ultra-low 
noise detectors. As our proposed optical detection strategy relies on a distant, natural continuum source 
with intervening gas, we define our lower detection limit in regard to the absorption depth rather than the 
gas concentration in the column. 

In practice, the single TE-optimized ring resonator remote photonic sensor will only be able to operate 

using half of the incoming incoherent light.  Therefore an additional ring designed for TM polarization in 
a similar fashion should be used in parallel.  A polarizing beam splitter implanted on-chip can divide 
incoming light into both ring resonators appropriately. This also enables polarization sensitivity of the 
incoming light if the output channels are separate.  Another consideration involves the coupling light into 
a single mode fibre.  Efficiently coupling light into a single mode fibre generally requires adaptive 
optics [39] or space-based diffraction-limited operation.  When diffraction-limited performance is not 
available, one can use a photonic lantern to convert light from a multi-mode fibre that more efficiently 
couples light into multiple parallel ring resonators.  

The primary disadvantage to this technique is the lack of spectral information.  It is possible that false 

positives can be introduced with absorption line combinations from different gases. With higher 
specificity sensors (e.g. multiple rings or custom Bragg filters), signal contributions from such possible 
combinations can be suppressed.  Simulations under a wide array of absorption line contributions can be 
used to anticipate these effects. 

Another possibility for improved sensitivity and specificity is through dispersion engineering of the 

ring resonator such that the overlap between resonances and absorption lines is possible over a larger 
bandpass.  Unfortunately, it is difficult to achieve the required extremely high group velocity dispersions 
to match most gas absorption line distributions.  Such dispersion could potentially be engineered through 
photonic crystal structures operating near the photonic band edge, but in practice this leads to prohibitively 
high propagation losses. 

 
In this work, ring resonators have been used as convenient device to generate a quasi-periodic comb 

filter. It also possible to create much more complex waveguide filters based on gratings to precisely match 


14 

 

more complex gas spectra over wider spectral ranges, for example using layer peeling methods for Bragg 
gratings on the silicon nitride platform  [40,41]. The precise matching of filter transmission to gas spectra 
should further increase the specificity and signal to noise of the correlation method at the cost of chip area 
and more power consumption for thermal modulation.  

Our correlation technique reduces the detection requirement from a 1D photodetector array of typical 

dispersive spectrometer to a single channel, which introduces cost and sensitivity advantages while 
maintaining molecular specificity as used in full spectrum acquisitions. In extremely low signal 
applications, avalanche photodiodes or photomultiplier tubes can be used. The multiplexed advantage of 
using a single channel for multi-gas sensing can also pave the way towards a form of 2D gas mapping 
where arrays of ring resonators can process light from individual pixels as a form of hyperspectral 
imaging. Possible applications range from low-cost remote monitoring of gas emissions to enabling 
astronomical observations of extremely weak absorption features such as exoplanet atmospheres during 
transits.  This strategy can be employed on many other gases which exhibit unique correlation signals 
with a suitable integrated resonant cavity. Future work includes investigating devices which operate in the 
mid-infrared where device sensitivity can be significantly higher due to stronger absorption features. 

 

Disclosures 

 
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

 

References 

1.  
 B. Galle, J. Samuelsson, B. H. Svensson, and G. Börjesson, "Measurements of Methane Emissions from 
Landfills Using a Time Correlation Tracer Method Based on FTIR Absorption Spectroscopy," Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 35, 21–25 (2001). 

2.  
 H.-J. Park, J.-S. Park, S.-W. Kim, H. Chong, H. Lee, H. Kim, J.-Y. Ahn, D.-G. Kim, J. Kim, and S. S. Park, 
"Retrieval of NO2 Column Amounts from Ground-Based Hyperspectral Imaging Sensor Measurements," 
Remote Sensing 11, 24 (2019). 

3.  
 Z. Lee and K. L. Carder, "Absorption spectrum of phytoplankton pigments derived from hyperspectral 
remote-sensing reflectance," Remote Sensing of Environment 89, 361–368 (2004). 

4.  
 M. A. Cordiner, S. N. Milam, N. Biver, D. Bockelée-Morvan, N. X. Roth, E. A. Bergin, E. Jehin, A. J. 
Remijan, S. B. Charnley, M. J. Mumma, J. Boissier, J. Crovisier, L. Paganini, Y.-J. Kuan, and D. C. Lis, 
"Unusually high CO abundance of the first active interstellar comet," Nature Astronomy (2020). 

5.  
 Y. J. Pendleton, S. A. Sandford, L. J. Allamandola, A. G. G. M. Tielens, and K. Sellgren, "Near-Infrared 
Absorption Spectroscopy of Interstellar Hydrocarbon Grains," The Astrophysical Journal 437, 683 (1994). 

6.  
 I. Coddington, N. Newbury, and W. Swann, "Dual-comb spectroscopy," Optica 3, 414–426 (2016). 

7.  
 I. Coddington, W. C. Swann, and N. R. Newbury, "Coherent dual-comb spectroscopy at high signal-to-noise 
ratio," Physical Review A 82, 043817 (2010). 

8.  
 T. Ideguchi, A. Poisson, G. Guelachvili, N. Picqué, and T. W. Hänsch, "Adaptive real-time dual-comb 
spectroscopy," Nature communications 5, 3375 (2014). 

9.  
 M. Yu, Y. Okawachi, A. G. Griffith, N. Picqué, M. Lipson, and A. L. Gaeta, "Silicon-chip-based mid-
infrared dual-comb spectroscopy," Nature communications 9, 1–6 (2018). 

10.  
 N. Picqué and T. W. Hänsch, "Frequency comb spectroscopy," Nature Photonics 13, 146–157 (2019). 

11.  
 K. C. Cossel, E. M. Waxman, I. A. Finneran, G. A. Blake, J. Ye, and N. R. Newbury, "Gas-phase broadband 
spectroscopy using active sources: progress, status, and applications [Invited]," J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 34, 104–
129 (2017). 

12.  
 D. S. Rupke, S. Veilleux, and D. Sanders, "Keck absorption-line spectroscopy of galactic winds in 
ultraluminous infrared galaxies," The Astrophysical Journal 570, 588 (2002). 

13.  
 M. Pu, L. Liu, W. Xue, Y. Ding, L. H. Frandsen, H. Ou, K. Yvind, and J. M. Hvam, "Tunable microwave 
phase shifter based on silicon-on-insulator microring resonator," IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 22, 
869–871 (2010). 

14.  
 D.-X. Xu, M. Vachon, A. Densmore, R. Ma, A. Delâge, S. Janz, J. Lapointe, Y. Li, G. Lopinski, and D. 
Zhang, "Label-free biosensor array based on silicon-on-insulator ring resonators addressed using a WDM 
approach," Optics letters 35, 2771–2773 (2010). 

15.  
 T. Claes, J. G. Molera, K. De Vos, E. Schacht, R. Baets, and P. Bienstman, "Label-free biosensing with a 
slot-waveguide-based ring resonator in silicon on insulator," IEEE Photonics journal 1, 197–204 (2009). 


15 

 

16.  
 S. Janz, A. Balakrishnan, S. Charbonneau, P. Cheben, M. Cloutier, A. Delâge, K. Dossou, L. Erickson, M. 
Gao, and P. A. Krug, "Planar waveguide echelle gratings in silica-on-silicon," IEEE Photonics technology 
letters 16, 503–505 (2004). 

17.  
 P. Cheben, J. H. Schmid, A. Delâge, A. Densmore, S. Janz, B. Lamontagne, J. Lapointe, E. Post, P. Waldron, 
and D.-X. Xu, "A high-resolution silicon-on-insulator arrayed waveguide grating microspectrometer with 
sub-micrometer aperture waveguides," Optics express 15, 2299–2306 (2007). 

18.  
 H. Takahashi, S. Suzuki, K. Kato, and I. Nishi, "Arrayed-waveguide grating for wavelength division 
multi/demultiplexer with nanometre resolution," Electronics letters 26, 87–88 (1990). 

19.  
 D. M. Kita, B. Miranda, D. Favela, D. Bono, J. Michon, H. Lin, T. Gu, and J. Hu, "High-performance and 
scalable on-chip digital Fourier transform spectroscopy," Nature communications 9, 1–7 (2018). 

20.  
 K. Okamoto, H. Aoyagi, and K. Takada, "Fabrication of Fourier-transform, integrated-optic spatial 
heterodyne spectrometer on silica-based planar waveguide," Optics letters 35, 2103–2105 (2010). 

21.  
 H. Podmore, A. Scott, P. Cheben, A. V. Velasco, J. H. Schmid, M. Vachon, and R. Lee, "Demonstration of a 
compressive-sensing Fourier-transform on-chip spectrometer," Optics letters 42, 1440–1443 (2017). 

22.  
 H. Kosaka, T. Kawashima, A. Tomita, M. Notomi, T. Tamamura, T. Sato, and S. Kawakami, "Superprism 
phenomena in photonic crystals," Physical review B 58, R10096 (1998). 

23.  
 T. H. Stievater, M. W. Pruessner, D. Park, W. S. Rabinovich, R. A. McGill, D. A. Kozak, R. Furstenberg, S. 
A. Holmstrom, and J. B. Khurgin, "Trace gas absorption spectroscopy using functionalized microring 
resonators," Opt. Lett. 39, 969–972 (2014). 

24.  
 G. Mi, C. Horvath, and V. Van, "Silicon photonic dual-gas sensor for H2 and CO2 detection," Opt. Express 
25, 16250–16259 (2017). 

25.  
 A. Hänsel and M. J. R. Heck, "Opportunities for photonic integrated circuits in optical gas sensors," Journal 
of Physics: Photonics 2, 012002 (2020). 

26.  
 J. Hodgkinson and R. P. Tatam, "Optical gas sensing: a review," Measurement Science and Technology 24, 
012004 (2012). 

27.  
 J. J. Barrett and S. A. Myers, "New Interferometric Method for Studying Periodic Spectra Using a Fabry–
Perot Interferometer*," J. Opt. Soc. Am. 61, 1246–1251 (1971). 

28.  
 J. Kuhn, U. Platt, N. Bobrowski, and T. Wagner, "Towards imaging of atmospheric trace gases using Fabry–
Pérot interferometer correlation spectroscopy in the UV and visible spectral range," Atmos. Meas. Tech. 12, 
735–747 (2019). 

29.  
 E. Vargas-Rodríguez and H. N. Rutt, "Design of CO, CO2 and CH4 gas sensors based on correlation 
spectroscopy using a Fabry–Perot interferometer," Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 137, 410–419 (2009). 

30.  
 J. Kuhn, N. Bobrowski, P. Lübcke, L. Vogel, and U. Platt, "A Fabry–Perot interferometer-based camera for 
two-dimensional mapping of SO2 distributions," Atmos. Meas. Tech. 7, 3705–3715 (2014). 

31.  
 Y. Qu, Z.-H. Kang, Y. Jiang, and J.-Y. Gao, "Multiline absorption spectroscopy for methane gas detection," 
Appl. Opt. 45, 8537–8540 (2006). 

32.  
 I. E. Gordon, L. S. Rothman, C. Hill, R. V. Kochanov, Y. Tan, P. F. Bernath, M. Birk, V. Boudon, A. 
Campargue, K. V. Chance, B. J. Drouin, J.-M. Flaud, R. R. Gamache, J. T. Hodges, D. Jacquemart, V. I. 
Perevalov, A. Perrin, K. P. Shine, M.-A. H. Smith, J. Tennyson, G. C. Toon, H. Tran, V. G. Tyuterev, A. 
Barbe, A. G. Császár, V. M. Devi, T. Furtenbacher, J. J. Harrison, J.-M. Hartmann, A. Jolly, T. J. Johnson, T. 
Karman, I. Kleiner, A. A. Kyuberis, J. Loos, O. M. Lyulin, S. T. Massie, S. N. Mikhailenko, N. Moazzen-
Ahmadi, H. S. P. Müller, O. V. Naumenko, A. V. Nikitin, O. L. Polyansky, M. Rey, M. Rotger, S. W. 
Sharpe, K. Sung, E. Starikova, S. A. Tashkun, J. V. Auwera, G. Wagner, J. Wilzewski, P. Wcisło, S. Yu, and 
E. J. Zak, "The HITRAN2016 molecular spectroscopic database," Journal of Quantitative Spectroscopy and 
Radiative Transfer 203, 3–69 (2017). 

33.  
 D.-X. Xu, A. Delâge, P. Verly, S. Janz, S. Wang, M. Vachon, P. Ma, J. Lapointe, D. Melati, P. Cheben, and 
J. H. Schmid, "Empirical model for the temperature dependence of silicon refractive index from O to C band 
based on waveguide measurements," Opt. Express 27, 27229–27241 (2019). 

34.  
 D.-X. Xu, A. Delâge, R. McKinnon, M. Vachon, R. Ma, J. Lapointe, A. Densmore, P. Cheben, S. Janz, and 
J. H. Schmid, "Archimedean spiral cavity ring resonators in silicon as ultra-compact optical comb filters," 
Optics express 18, 1937–1945 (2010). 

35.  
 E. Vargas-Rodríguez and H. N. Rutt, "Analytical method to find the optimal parameters for gas detectors 
based on correlation spectroscopy using a Fabry–Perot interferometer," Appl. Opt. 46, 4625–4632 (2007). 

36.  
 P. Cheben, R. Halir, J. H. Schmid, H. A. Atwater, and D. R. Smith, "Subwavelength integrated photonics," 
Nature 560, 565–572 (2018). 

37.  
 P. Cheben, D.-X. Xu, S. Janz, and A. Densmore, "Subwavelength waveguide grating for mode conversion 
and light coupling in integrated optics," Opt. Express 14, 4695–4702 (2006). 

38.  
 J. Witzens, "High-Speed Silicon Photonics Modulators," Proceedings of the IEEE 106, 2158–2182 (2018). 

39.  
 N. Jovanovic, C. Schwab, O. Guyon, J. Lozi, N. Cvetojevic, F. Martinache, S. Leon-Saval, B. Norris, S. 
Gross, D. Doughty, T. Currie, and N. Takato, "Efficient injection from large telescopes into single-mode 
fibres: Enabling the era of ultra-precision astronomy," A&A 604, A122 (2017). 

40.  
 T. Zhu, Y. Hu, P. Gatkine, S. Veilleux, J. Bland-Hawthorn, and M. Dagenais, "Arbitrary on-chip optical 
filter using complex waveguide Bragg gratings," Appl. Phys. Lett. 108, 101104 (2016). 

41.  
 Y. Hu, S. Xie, J. Zhan, Y. Zhang, S. Veilleux, and M. Dagenais, "Integrated Arbitrary Filter With Spiral 
Gratings: Design and Characterization," Journal of Lightwave Technology 38, 4454–4461 (2020). 


16 

 

 


