Efficient Solar-driven Steam Generation Enabled
by An Ultra-black Paint

XIAOJIE LIU,1 YANPEI TIAN,1 FANGQI CHEN,1 RALPH AHLGREN,2

YITING ZHENG,3 MING SU,3 GANG XIAO,4 AND YI ZHENG1,*

1Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2Soleeva Energy, Inc. San Jose, CA 95131, USA
3Department of Chemical Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
4Department of Physics, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA
*opex@osa.org

Abstract: Solar-driven interfacial steam generation for desalination has attracted broad attention.
However, a significant challenge still remains for achieving a higher evaporation rate and high
water quality, together with a cost-effective and easy-to-manufacture device to provide a feasible
solar-driven steam generation system. In this study, a novel ultra-black paint, Black 3.0, serving
as a perfect solar absorber is introduced into the hot-pressed melamine foam networks, allowing
us to construct an ultra-black (99% absorptance in the solar region) and self-floating evaporation
device. The high performing features of effective solar absorptance and salt-rejection capability
contribute to a high-to-date evaporation rate of freshwater at 2.48 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun
(1 kW m−2). This interfacial solar evaporator has a daily drinkable water yield of 2.8 kg m−2

even in cloudy winter weather and maintains stability in water with a wide range of acidity and
alkalinity (pH 1~14). These features will enable the construction of a facilely fabricated, robust,
highly-efficient, and cost-effective solar steam generation system for freshwater production.

© 2020 Optical Society of America under the terms of the OSA Open Access Publishing Agreement

1.
Introduction

Access to freshwater is of pivotal importance to humanities. Fast population growth and climate
change demand increasing supply of freshwater. Water scarcity has become a threat to the
sustainable development of human society [1,2]. This motivates the development of utilizing
saline waters from the oceans and other brackish water sources and the processes that convert
saltwater into freshwater. Solar energy is now emerging as one of the most promising sustainable
energy sources, as it is clean and can be supplied without any environmental pollution compared
with other forms of energy [3]. And the abundant solar energy makes the solar-driven evaporation
one of the promising approaches for water desalination and purification.
In a conventional solar-driven evaporation system, bulk water is heated to a high temperature to
generate water vapor, resulting in a slow response to sunlight and heat loss to the bulk water or the
external environment [4–8]. In 2011, Wang et al., were among the first to demonstrate the floating
interfacial solar-driven evaporation structure into desalination area, which does not require
significant capital investment in high-cost permanent construction and/or land use [9]. Compared
with bulk water-heating method which heats the entire body of water, the interfacial solar-driven
evaporation approach mainly localizes the heat generation at the water-air interface. This method
avoids heating a large volume of water, e.g., the ocean, which serves as a low-temperature sink.
The interfacial evaporation has an ultra-fast response to sunlight and is endowed with a much
higher systematic thermal efficiency [10,11]. Furthermore, the technique can be easily applied
by floating an absorber sheet on the water surface without complex pressure control or other
bulky infrastructure. Owing to all these advantages, scientists have made great efforts to develop
the interfacial solar-driven evaporation.
To yield a remarkable photothermal performance, the development of interfacial evaporation

arXiv:2005.14280v3  [physics.app-ph]  29 Jun 2020


structure should center around the following four key factors. (1) The ideal solar absorber
should possess outstanding absorptance in the range of visible and near-infrared regions [12] to
convert the solar radiation into heat to be used for water vapor generation; (2) It is crucial for the
interfacial evaporation to feature a low thermal conductivity, thereby reducing the heat loss from
the absorber to the bulk water and localizing the heat at the air/water evaporative interface; (3)
High hydrophilicity and porous framework are necessary for sufficient water transport from the
bulk water to the heated area; and (4) Self-floating ability is required to avoid land use and/or
permanent infrastructure construction. Even with intensive efforts so far, it remains as a huge
challenge to develop an approach that can satisfy these four criteria simultaneously.
To obtain a high efficiency, a multilayered structure is proposed to take into account these pivotal
factors and it provides us with more options to choose alternative appropriate materials [13–17].
Ghasemi et al., first demonstrated the double-layered structure consisting of a carbon foam layer
supporting an exfoliated graphite layer [15]. The bottom layer serves as a heat barrier to minimize
the heat loss to the bulk water, and its porous structure is used to transport water to the heated
area, and meanwhile it supports the top layer to make it possible for self-floating. The top porous
layer serves as the absorber for the vapor transport.
Recently, many similar double-layered evaporation structures have been widely adopted. In
most cases, such as air-laid paper [18], polystyrene foam [13], woodblock [19–21], polyurethane
sponge [22], macroporous silica substrate [23], and bacterial nanocellulose aerogel [24], the
bottom layer serves both as a heat barrier and a water transport medium. Under a steady working
condition, when water is transported to the top photothermal area through the bottom layer, almost
all of the macropores inside the heat barrier are filled with water which typically is more thermally
conductive than the heat barrier. This process renders the heat barrier less effective. To avoid heat
loss, a new multilayer consisting of photothermal material, closed-pore thermal insulator, and
external hydrophilic materials has generated much interest. The closed-pore thermal insulator
serves as a real heat barrier layer and the air inside the insulator reduces heat conduction. For
example, polystyrene foam [16,17,25–28] is a good and inexpensive thermal insulator with low
thermal conductivity. External hydrophilic materials, wrapping or passing through the insulator
foam, act as a capillary-driven pump with a one-/two-dimensional water path [17,29]. By and
large, this modified multilayered evaporation structure has become a favorable way to further
minimize heat conduction losses and improve energy conversion efficiency.
An efficient solar steam generation depends highly on the photothermal conversion materials
with broadband absorptance and high photothermal properties [30, 31]. On the basis of a
multilayered structure, the diverse photothermal materials with wide light absorbance have been
extensively studied including carbon-based materials [9,15,32,33], metals [34–37], and metal
oxides [38–41]. Carbon-based absorbers, such as carbon black [42], graphene [43], graphene
oxide [17,24,44] and carbon nanotube [21,23], offer great advantages of high solar absorbance
and thermal stability. They have become the largely approving choices, however, the utilization
of elaborate technologies and the high-associated cost limit their field applications to large-scale
desalination [6, 17, 45]. Although the metal-based (e.g., gold nanoparticles) materials have
attracted tremendous attention due to their unique optical and photothermal properties [18,46,47],
their industrial applications are limited because of their inferior chemical and thermal stabilities,
exorbitant cost, and complex fabrication processes.
With the aim to further explore novel techniques and materials in improving evaporation
efficiency and reducing cost for desalination, we have applied the blackest paint, called Black 3.0
Paint®, to the floating interfacial solar-driven evaporation device serving as the photothermal
conversion material combined with a sheet of melamine foam (MF). Herein, a sheet of hot-pressed
MF plays an ideal elastic skeleton material sprayed with Black 3.0 paint, serving on top as a
perfect solar absorber to efficiently absorb and convert the solar radiation into heat. To achieve
a perfect evaporation performance and high solar-thermal energy conversion efficiency, we


Fig. 1.
Preparation process and characterizations of the black-sprayed hot-pressed
melamine foam (MF) based absorber layer. (a) Schematic illustration of the fab
processes of an absorber layer in the evaporation device. (b) UV-Visible-Near-infrared
absorptivity spectra of the absorber layer, the hot-pressed MF, and the normalized
spectral solar irradiance density of air mass 1.5 (AM 1.5 G) global tilt solar spectrum.
(c) The temperature of the absorber sheet over time under 1 sun.

demonstrate a self-floating three-layer evaporation structure with a two-dimensional water path to
localize solar-thermal heat generation to the air/water interface. This entire device is made from
the commercially available and low-cost materials: solar absorber uses a sheet of hot-pressed MF
combined with Black 3.0 paint; two-dimensional water path is provided by the highly absorbent
Webril all-cotton wipes, and thermal barrier uses the Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) foam. Under 1 sun
illumination without solar concentration, this evaporation device yields an excellent evaporation
rate of freshwater as high as 2.48 kg m−2 h−1 and a highlighted evaporation efficiency of 172.5%.
Based on this multilayered evaporation structure, the novel Black 3.0 paint demonstrates a superb
performance with cost-effectiveness, operability, and durability, which can be regarded as one
of the indispensable choices of the solar-absorbing materials in the future development of the
solar-driven evaporation process.

2.
Results and Discussions

The schematic of the synthesis process of the absorber layer is shown in Fig. 1a. The fabrication
process is simple and scalable, which is summarized as three steps: hot-pressing, spraying, and
drying. In this study, the MF with the dimension of 10 cm × 6 cm × 2 cm is selected as an elastic
skeleton for immobilization of the Black 3.0 paint spray. MF is a commercially available low-cost
polymer material, and its high porosity, low density, excellent hydrophilicity, and elasticity render
it highly applicable for the solar steam generation devices [45,48]. Hot-pressing treatment of
the MF with a compression ratio of 4 has been experimentally confirmed to be advantageous to


Fig. 2.
Microscope images of (a) pristine MF, (b) pressed MF, (c) one-layer paint
coated MF, and (d) three-layer paint coated MF (a-d, insets are the photographs of
the pristine/hot-pressed, one-/three-layer paint coated MFs). (e) The UV-Visible-
Near-infrared absorptivity spectra measurement and the chemical stability tests of the
absorber layer under different harsh environments. The inset shows the absorber layer
is immersed in an alkaline solution (pH ~14) and acidic solution (pH ~1) for 24 hours
in the sealed bottles.

increase its elasticity and fatigue resistance. More importantly, the compressed three-dimensional
network of the foam can dramatically increase its density to effectively increase the ability of
water absorption. In laboratory experiments, the pressed MF is cut into a 1 mm-thick circle with
a diameter of 47 mm, fitting the size of a 100 ml beaker.
The inexpensive Black 3.0 paint has gained great attention in creative art and as an superb solar
photothermal material. As the blackest and most matte acrylic paint, Black 3.0 paint exhibits
nearly perfect solar absorption at up to 99% of visible light. The paint can be easily applied via
brushing or spraying onto most surfaces, such as wood, paper, canvas, and plastic. Last but not


the least, the paint is light in density and very suitable to the desalination process.
Figure S2 shows the transmittance spectrum of the Black 3.0 paint hydraulic pressed with
KBr powder showing corresponding wavenumber of functional groups. Then the diluted paint is
sprayed on the pressed MF sheet using a spray gun. The distance between the spray head and the
MF sheet is about 25 cm. Considering the porous surface of the pressed MF sheet surface, it
turns out that a couple of thin coating layers are better than one the thick layer. Between each
coating process, drying it thoroughly with hot air is necessary at 190◦C for 5 minutes. After
thoroughly drying, the Black 3.0 paint-coated MF sheet is rinsed in deionized (DI) water for
several times to remove the residual impurities. Hereafter, keep this sheet in the oven at 60◦C
for drying and then use it as the solar absorber layer in the evaporation device. The absorber
layer can be easily prepared requiring no complex process or expensive equipment, and therefore,
most suitable for volume production. As shown in Fig. 1b, the absorber sheet exhibits a superb
absorption ranging from 95% to 99% at the wavelength from 0.2 µm to 2.5 µm, indicating that
it acts as an efficient broadband solar radiation absorber, whereas the pure pressed MF shows
poor absorptivity. Besides, this absorber also exhibits an angular-independent hemispherical
absorptivity (Fig. S1). Figure 1c shows the surface temperature of the absorber sheet in the
air under 1 sun for an hour. The time-dependent temperature changes and images are captured
by an infrared camera at room temperature, displaying the maximum temperature of the sheet
over time. In taking the temperature measurement, the tested absorber sample is placed on a
PVC foam plate to minimize the heat exchange with the base below. Upon light illumination, the
surface temperature of the absorber sheet rises sharply to an equilibrium temperature around
100◦C within the initial 2.5 minutes and then floats slightly around this temperature afterward,
indicating an excellent photothermal performance of the absorber sheet. The inset of Fig. 1c
demonstrates the change in surface temperature more clearly in the initial 4 minutes.
Figures 2a - 2d show the microscopic structures of the absorber. The pristine MF has polygon
networks with a size of about 200 µm and the diameter of the fibers is around 7 µm (Fig. 2a).
While the geometric shape of the networks collapses with the reduced network size (Fig. 2b),
it retains its porous structure, enabling the transportation of water. One-layer Black 3.0 paint
coating forms the beads along the fibers (Fig. 2c), and the three-layer coating causes an increase
in the fiber diameter from 7 µm to 50 µm (Fig. 2d) and fully-covered Black 3.0 paint coated MF
presents nearly unity absorptivity in solar irradiance region. The fully covered MF still keeps a
highly-porous structure facilitating the water transport and vapor release, which results in the
high water evaporation rate. To evaluate the stability of the absorber sheet, the absorber layers
undergo severe tests, kept in the boiling water (around 90◦C) for 1 hours and immersed in the
alkaline solution (pH ~14) and acidic solution (pH ~1) for 24 hours in the closed bottles. After
this harsh thermal and chemical stability test, no obvious changes in the appearance are observed
and their absorption spectra are basically consistent with the original one (Fig. 2e).
Localizing the heat converted from solar energy to the air/water interface is the critical step to
achieve high evaporation performance. Figure 3a demonstrates a self-floating evaporation device
structure which is composed of three layers. The top layer is a solar absorber layer made of the
MF sheet combined with Black 3.0 paint and it plays an essential role in an efficient absorption
of the solar radiation. Beneath the absorber layer is a two-dimensional water path enabled by a
cotton wipe that is cut into the shape of a circle with 4 extended strips. The round area of the
cotton wipe is kept the same as the absorber area, and the bottom edges of 4 strips are in direct
contact with the bulk water, which decreased the contact area between the evaporation surface
and the bulk water. The cotton wipe is used to transport water due to its strong capillary force
and to reduce the direct contact between the bulk water and the absorber layer. Simultaneously
ensuring the efficient water supply to the solar heating area and minimizing the heat dissipation
to the bulk water is crucial to achieve the high-efficiency interfacial evaporation. The interlocked
fibers of cotton wipe do not come apart when soaked in water for a long time, that contributes


to the durability and stability of the device. In the working process, the cotton wipe pumps the
bulk water towards the heating surface through the 4 strips around the floating foam relying on
its strong capillary wicking effect. The bottom layer is the thermal insulation wrapped with the
cotton water path. The thermal insulation is made from PVC foam with only closed pores which
are impermeable to water, and its low thermal conductivity (~0.03 W m−1 K−1) almost reduces
the downward thermal dissipation from the evaporation surface. Thanks to the low density of the
thermal insulation and the simple structure of the whole device, the evaporation device can be
placed on the water and move together with the waving water surface achieving self-floating for
continuous operation.
The surface wettability of the evaporation device also plays an important role in the steam
generation process. As shown in Fig. 3b, the evaporation device is placed in a beaker filled
with DI water at the initial temperature of 21◦C, and its wetting process is recorded from the top
view. It is obvious that the water immediately reaches the surface of the absorber layer from
the regional edge (the enclosed areas in the blue dashed), and then the wet area quickly expands
to the central area until it covers the entire evaporation surface. The surface wettability owes
much to forceful hydrophilicity of the two-dimensional water path of the cotton and the porous
structure of the absorber layer, which assures ample water supply to the evaporation surface.
Avoiding salt accumulating in the evaporation device remains a significant character for a
self-floating solar evaporation structure utilizing heat localization [16]. Figure 3c shows the
progression of salt dissolution which demonstrates the salt rejection ability of the three-layer
device. In this experiment, a three-layer structure with a diameter of 47 mm floated in a 100
ml beaker of 132g 3.5 wt% NaCl solution with 21◦C initial temperature, and 1.7g of additional
solid NaCl is placed directly on the top of the absorber surface. Upon contact with water, the
solid NaCl on top starts to dissolve due to the movement and exchange of solution inside the
absorber layer and two-dimensional water path between the device surface and the bulk water
below the insulation. After approximately 65 minutes, the three-layer device fully rejects the salt,
that indicates its good salt rejection ability.
The steam generation ability of the evaporation device at a laboratory scale is tested combining
an irradiation system to simulate the solar radiation, a weighing system monitoring the mass
change of water in a beaker during a certain period of irradiation, and an infrared camera
monitoring the real-time temperature. Both 3.5 wt% NaCl solution and DI water are prepared
to keep the initial temperature at 21◦C in the 100 ml beakers. The evaporation device floated
on water in the beaker filled with 127g of water, beneath the beaker is an electronic balance
connected to the computer, and the simulated solar radiation was provided by a solar simulator.
When the illumination began, the solar steam generation is determined by the balance, and
the real-time temperature of the absorber sheet and water surface are monitored by an infrared
camera. The laboratory temperature and humidity are kept at about 22◦C and 21%, respectively.
Figure 4 compares the surface temperatures of pure water and 3.5 wt% NaCl solution with
and without the evaporation device under 1 sun illumination. The temperature data and images
are captured by an infrared camera. Figure 4a shows the surface temperature distribution of the
beaker filled with water without the evaporation device over the irradiation time. The surface
temperature rises slowly under irradiation owing to the poor light harvesting efficiency and its
maximum temperature profile shown in Fig. 4d slopes gently from the initial temperature of
21◦C to 32◦C for an hour. In contrast, upon light illumination, the temperature of the absorber
layer rises sharply to an equilibrium temperature around 50◦C, indicating good photothermal
performance. As shown in Fig. 4c, for the water only experiment, the steam generation rate
is measured to be 0.41 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun irradiation (1 kW m−2). In contrast, the steam
generation rate of evaporation device in DI water reaches up to 2.48 kg m−2 h−1 under the same
experimental conditions, 6.04 times higher than that of pure water. Most significantly, when the
evaporation device floats on 3.5 wt% NaCl solution, it sports a comparable steam generation rate


Fig. 3. The self-floating evaporation device with surface wettability and salt rejection
ability tests. (a) Photographs of the three-layer evaporation device placed in a beaker
filled with freshwater. (b) Wetting process of the evaporation device placed on the
surface of the water. The blue-dash enclosed regions exhibit the wetting areas. (c) The
salt rejection progress of the evaporation device. The evaporation device is placed in a
beaker filled with 3.5 wt% NaCl solution, and NaCl is originally stacked on the top
surface of the absorber.

of 2.32 kg m−2 h−1, 5.65 times higher than that of pure water. Evaporation efficiency, ηevap =
�mhf g/Qs, is an important parameter to evaluate the steam generation performance, where �m is
the water evaporation rate (kg m−2 h−1), Qs is the power density of irradiation (kW m−2), and hf g
is the total enthalpy of vaporization of water (kJ kg−1). In particular, hf g is regarded as the sum
of the sensible heat (121.26 kJ kg−1) and the temperature-dependent enthalpy of vaporization
(2382.7 kJ kg−1) in this text. Thus, we obtain ηevap = 172.5% under 1 sun illumination. More
detailed calculation of the evaporation efficiency and the photothermal efficiency are provided in
the supplementary materials.

3.
Field Test

We have performed field test of this evaporation device to demonstrate the feasibility of
scalable production of freshwater. We constructed a prototype of the evaporation system with
a condensation chamber and an evaporation device of a large area of the absorber (24 cm ×
24 cm ) inside, as shown in Figs. 5a and S3. The condensation chamber made of Polymethyl
methacrylate (PMMA) board surrounds the entire evaporation device to capture condensate of
the evaporated steam. According to the transmission spectrum of the PMMA board, shown
in Fig. S4, the condensation structure is well transparent in the solar spectrum to allow the
solar irradiance to reach the evaporation device, while it is opaque in the mid-infrared region


Fig. 4.
(a) Left: Infrared (IR) thermal images of the top surface of a water-only
beaker under 1 sun illumination over exposure time. Middle: IR thermal image and
the photograph of the beaker filled with DI water only under 1 sun after one hour.
Right: The photograph of the beaker filled with water only placed on an electrical
balance under 1 sun illumination. (b) Left: IR thermal images of the evaporation device
under 1 sun illumination in the initial 5 minutes. Middle: IR thermal image of the
evaporation device floated on water in the beaker under 1 sun illumination after one
hour. Right: The photograph of the beaker with the evaporation device placed on an
electrical balance under 1 sun illumination. (c) The change of mass of water over time
of DI water only and with the evaporation device placed at the interfaces of the DI
water, and 3.5 wt% NaCl solution. (d) The maximum temperature profiles of the pure
water surface and the absorber layer under 1 sun illumination over exposure time. The
inset is a visible steam flow generated under 1 sun irradiation.

to confine the infrared emission of the evaporation device inside the chamber to contribute to
maintaining a relatively higher evaporation temperature. As shown in Fig. 5b, the tilted angle
of the condensation cover in the dimension of 30 cm × 30 cm is fixed to be 32◦ considering
the latitude of Boston city, allowing the solar flux to reach the evaporator without refraction.


Fig. 5. Rooftop experiments with the evaporation system under natural sunlight in
January 2020 in Boston, MA, USA. (a) Three-dimensional model of the evaporation
system with a PMMA condensation cover in the dimension of 30 cm × 30 cm for
desalination. (b) Schematic illustration of the solar desalination system. (c) Photograph
of the evaporation system placed on a utility cart (left) and the dense condensed water
droplets on the interior surface of the condensation cover and sidewall (right) during
the experiment. (d) The contrast experiment with an evaporation device (left inset)
and without (right inset) on the Day 5. The blue and red curves show the change of
ambient temperature (left y-axis) and the solar intensity (right y-axis). Two bottles
inset show the weight of the collected water from the contrast experiment. (e) The
averaged outdoor steam generation rates of the 3.5 wt% NaCl solutions for 5 days in
January 2020.

The photograph of Fig. 5c shows the prototype is placed on the polystyrene foam with a low
thermal conductivity to reduce the thermal flux between the bottom of the prototype and the
utility cart, and the condensed water is observed on the condensation cover (Fig. S5). The
condensed water droplets fall to the collection tank and eventually flow to a chemical storage
bottle. It has been confirmed that the sodium concentration of the desalinated water is 5 mg
l−1, that is much lower than the standard of the drinkable water specified by the World Health
Organization (WHO) [49]. The validated prototype is tested on the roof of Snell Engineering
Center at Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA, and water collections are measured over 5
days in January 2020. The specific experiment dates, instantaneous incident sunlight, ambient
temperature, wind speed, and humidity are recorded and provided in the supplementary materials.
The 3.5 wt% NaCl solution, which simulates the average salinity of seawater all over the world,
is used during the field test and the seawater holder is filled up through the water injection tube
after the daily use.
The average evaporation rate of drinkable freshwater, shown in Fig. 5e, varies from 0.32 kg m−2

h−1 to 0.47 kg m−2 h−1 under various solar intensity and ambient temperature. The experiment
data and detailed weather condition data are provided in Figs. S6 and S7. To demonstrate


the promising solar steam generation ability of this evaporation system, the prototype, and the
control group, the same condensation chamber without a three-layer evaporation device inside
is conducted for a contrast experiment on day 5 (Fig. 5d). At the end of the experiment, 164g
of water is collected from the prototype, while the control group collects nearly zero water in
the same-day operation. In the rooftop experiments, it is well noted that the weight of collected
freshwater refers to the weight of water in the chemical storage bottle, not exactly the weight of
condensed water produced. The inset of Fig. 5d shows the end state of the contrast experiment.
Obviously in the control group, dense condensed water droplets can be observed on the cover
without forming the water dripping flow (Fig. S8). In day 4, the daily condensate rate (2.83 kg
m−2 d−1) in winter produced from the evaporation device of the area of 0.0576 m−2 is comparable
to a previous work (2.81 kg m−2 d−1) in the summer [16], which proves a reliable and scalable
production of freshwater using our design in four seasons.

4.
Conclusions

We have demonstrated a high-performance, low cost, and simple interfacial three-layer steam
generation device based on the novel commercial Black 3.0 paint, which is first applied to the
solar steam generation as a promising candidate for the photothermal materials. Black 3.0 paint
sprayed on a sheet of MF serves as the top solar absorber layer that can widely absorb the solar
radiation and efficiently convert it into heat. The absorber layer which is placed on a PVC
foam plane under 1 sun irradiation shows a significant temperature gradient and reaches up to
100◦C of equilibrium temperature. The absorber is shown to sport strong thermal and chemical
stabilities under harsh environment, and it exhibits a remarkable salt rejection ability. All these
performance contribute to the long-term durable steam generation process. In the laboratory
experiments, enabled by the assistance of the low thermal conductivity PVC foam to reduce the
heat loss and the cotton wipe to provide sufficient water through two-dimensional water path
to the heating region, the evaporation device has reached a striking steam generation rate of
2.48 kg m−2 h−1, 6 times higher than the natural evaporation, and a highlighted evaporation
efficiency of 172.5% under 1 sun irradiation at the room temperature, surpassing most of the
reported works. Even in the rooftop experiments during a cloudy winter day in Boston, MA with
the maximum environment temperature of 4◦C, 2.83 kg m−2 d−1 of water can be collected. This
simple, low cost, and easy to manufacture evaporation device is highly beneficial to large scale
water desalination and purification applications.

5.
Experimental section

5.1.
Materials

The commercial MF is purchased from South Street Designs company (UPC: 089902974060)
with the dimension of 10 cm × 6 cm × 2 cm ($0.3/piece). Black 3.0 paint is purchased on the
Culture Hustle ($0.146/ml). Webril pure cotton wipe is in the size of 0.2 m × 0.2 m ($2.99/m2).
The PVC foam insulator sheet is purchased from the McMaster-Carr with the dimension of 813
mm × 1219 mm × 13 mm ($58.7/m2).

5.2.
Sample preparation

Solar absorber layer is fabricated as follows: pristine MF is thoroughly washed several times
with ethanol and deionized (DI) water and then put in an oven kept at 60◦C in preparation for the
hot-pressing treatment. After it is totally dried, the MF is pressed at 200◦C for 6 minutes with a
compression ratio of 4, which is the height ratio of pristine MF to hot-pressed one. Serving as
the skeleton of the absorber, hot-pressed MF is cut into the desired shape with a thickness of
about 1 mm. Black 3.0 paint is thinned with DI water under vigorous stirring for 5 minutes with
a paintbrush, which helps to get a homogeneous mixture. The mass ratio of DI water to Black


3.0 paint is kept in the range of 0.35 ∼ 0.4 in the dilution process. Subsequently, the diluted
Black 3.0 paint is sprayed onto the MF sheet by a touch-up spray gun (Paasche Airbrush, USA)
with a 0.8 mm spray head at the pressure of 70 psi. The distance between the spray head and the
MF sheet is about 25 cm. The golden rule is that 3 or 4 thin layers is much better than a single
thick layer. And then dry it between each spraying with the hot air blower (Yihua Electronic
Equipment Co., Ltd, Guangzhou, China) at a temperature of 190◦C for 5 minutes. It’s worth
noting that this drying time is suitable for the specific dimension of the sample in this work.
A piece of PVC foam (47 mm in diameter and 13 mm in thickness) is utilized as the thermal
insulator. Webril pure cotton wipe is cut into a 47 mm circle with four extended strips of 30 mm
in width and 20 mm in length. The hydrophilic cotton wipe wrapped around the PVC foam with
the four strips tip soaking in the bulk water ensures that the water reaches the upper circular area
due to capillary force. Then, the MF sheet is placed over the circular area of the cotton wipe.

5.3.
Solar steam generation experiments

The steam generation experiments in the lab are carried out under a solar simulator (Newport,
94081A, class ABB) which supplies solar flux of 1 kW m−2 with an optical filter for the standard
AM 1.5 G spectrum. 127g of DI water and seawater (3.5 wt% NaCl) are prepared at the same
initial temperature of 21◦C and placed in the 100 ml beakers with a mouth diameter of 50 mm.
The steam generation device is floated on the solution surface and the mass of water is accurately
monitored by an electric balance (RADWAG, PS 1000.X2.NTEP) connected to a computer for
recording the real-time mass change. The real-time temperature is monitored by an infrared
radiation camera (FLIR, A655sc).

5.4.
Materials characterizations

The microscope images are obtained by using Metallurgical Microscope (AmScope, ME520TC-
18M3) in the darkfield mode. The reflectivity spectra (UV-Visible-Near-infrared range: 200
nm ∼ 2500 nm) are measured by the Jasco V770 spectrophotometer at an incident angle of
6◦ with the ISN-923 60 mm BaSO4 based integrating sphere equipped with PMT and PbS
detectors. The reflectivity spectra are normalized by a PTFE based reflectance standard. The
transmittance spectra (Mid-infrared region: 2.5 µm ∼ 20 µm) are measured by the Jasco FTIR
6600 spectrometer at a normal incident angle with reference to the background spectrum of a
hydraulic pressed KBr film (20 psi). The Extech EC400 ExStik salinity meter is utilized to
characterized the water quality of the collected water samples.

Acknowledgements

This project is supported partly by the Soleeva Energy Innovation Award and the National Science
Foundation through grant numbers CBET-1941743.


References
1.
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, “Four billion people facing severe water scarcity,” Sci. advances 2, e1500323
(2016).

2.
J. H. Reif and W. Alhalabi, “Solar-thermal powered desalination: Its significant challenges and potential,” Renew.
Sustain. Energy Rev. 48, 152–165 (2015).

3.
S. A. Kalogirou, “Solar thermal collectors and applications,” Prog. energy combustion science 30, 231–295 (2004).

4.
A. Kabeel and S. El-Agouz, “Review of researches and developments on solar stills,” Desalination 276, 1–12 (2011).

5.
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander, and N. J. Halas, “Solar vapor generation enabled by
nanoparticles,” ACS nano 7, 42–49 (2012).

6.
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen, and T. Deng, “Solar-driven interfacial evaporation,” Nat.
energy 3, 1031–1041 (2018).

7.
A. Lenert and E. N. Wang, “Optimization of nanofluid volumetric receivers for solar thermal energy conversion,” Sol.
Energy 86, 253–265 (2012).

8.
N. J. Hogan, A. S. Urban, C. Ayala-Orozco, A. Pimpinelli, P. Nordlander, and N. J. Halas, “Nanoparticles heat
through light localization,” Nano letters 14, 4640–4645 (2014).

9.
Y. Zeng, J. Yao, B. A. Horri, K. Wang, Y. Wu, D. Li, and H. Wang, “Solar evaporation enhancement using floating
light-absorbing magnetic particles,” Energy & Environ. Sci. 4, 4074–4078 (2011).

10. P. Wang, “Emerging investigator series: the rise of nano-enabled photothermal materials for water evaporation and
clean water production by sunlight,” Environ. Sci. Nano 5, 1078–1089 (2018).

11. Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Tao, Q. Shen, N. Yi, F. Zhang, Q. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhang, W. Shang et al., “Bio-inspired
evaporation through plasmonic film of nanoparticles at the air–water interface,” Small 10, 3234–3239 (2014).

12. P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao, and L. Qu, “Vertically aligned graphene sheets membrane for highly efficient solar
thermal generation of clean water,” Acs Nano 11, 5087–5093 (2017).

13. L. Shi, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, and P. Wang, “Rational design of a bi-layered reduced graphene oxide film on polystyrene
foam for solar-driven interfacial water evaporation,” J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 16212–16219 (2017).

14. J. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Zhao, C. Song, J. Wu, N. Dasgupta, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Tao et al., “Bioinspired
multifunctional paper-based rgo composites for solar-driven clean water generation,” ACS applied materials &
interfaces 8, 14628–14636 (2016).

15. H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic, and G. Chen, “Solar steam generation by
heat localization,” Nat. communications 5, 4449 (2014).

16. G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper, and G. Chen, “A salt-rejecting floating solar still for
low-cost desalination,” Energy & Environ. Sci. 11, 1510–1519 (2018).

17. X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu, and J. Zhu, “Graphene oxide-based efficient and scalable solar
desalination under one sun with a confined 2d water path,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 113, 13953–13958 (2016).

18. Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song et al., “A bioinspired,
reusable, paper-based system for high-performance large-scale evaporation,” Adv. Mater. 27, 2768–2774 (2015).

19. K. Kim, S. Yu, C. An, S.-W. Kim, and J.-H. Jang, “Mesoporous three-dimensional graphene networks for highly
efficient solar desalination under 1 sun illumination,” ACS applied materials & interfaces 10, 15602–15608 (2018).

20. Q. Jiang and S. Singamaneni, “Water from wood: Pouring through pores,” Joule 1, 429–430 (2017).
21. C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Zhu et al., “Highly flexible and
efficient solar steam generation device,” Adv. materials 29, 1701756 (2017).

22. Z. Zhang, P. Mu, J. He, Z. Zhu, H. Sun, H. Wei, W. Liang, and A. Li, “Facile and scalable fabrication of
surface-modified sponge for efficient solar steam generation,” ChemSusChem 12, 426–433 (2019).

23. Y. Wang, L. Zhang, and P. Wang, “Self-floating carbon nanotube membrane on macroporous silica substrate for
highly efficient solar-driven interfacial water evaporation,” ACS Sustain. Chem. & Eng. 4, 1223–1230 (2016).

24. Q. Jiang, L. Tian, K.-K. Liu, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik, and S. Singamaneni, “Bilayered biofoam
for highly efficient solar steam generation,” Adv. Mater. 28, 9400–9407 (2016).

25. G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. Zhang, and G. Chen, “Steam generation under one sun enabled by a
floating structure with thermal concentration,” Nat. Energy 1, 16126 (2016).

26. X. Li, R. Lin, G. Ni, N. Xu, X. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Lv, J. Li, S. Zhu, and J. Zhu, “Three-dimensional artificial transpiration
for efficient solar waste-water treatment,” Natl. Sci. Rev. 5, 70–77 (2017).

27. N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, and J. Zhu, “Mushrooms as efficient solar steam-generation devices,”
Adv. Mater. 29, 1606762 (2017).

28. Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Q. Huang, X. Liang, X. Zhou, H. Fu, Q. Wu, J. Zhang, and W. Xie, “A high-absorption and self-driven
salt-resistant black gold nanoparticle-deposited sponge for highly efficient, salt-free, and long-term durable solar
desalination,” J. Mater. Chem. A 7, 2581–2588 (2019).

29. H. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Hong, Z. Pu, Q. Yao, J. Shi, G. Yang, B. Mi, B. Yang, X. Liu et al., “A bioinspired capillary-driven
pump for solar vapor generation,” Nano Energy 42, 115–121 (2017).

30. L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, and G. W. Ho, “Solar-driven photothermal nanostructured materials designs and
prerequisites for evaporation and catalysis applications,” Mater. Horizons 5, 323–343 (2018).

31. M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh, and G. W. Ho, “Solar absorber material and system designs for photothermal water
vaporization towards clean water and energy production,” Energy & Environ. Sci. 12, 841–864 (2019).

32. X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu, and J. Zhu, “Tailoring graphene oxide-based aerogels for efficient


solar steam generation under one sun,” Adv. materials 29, 1604031 (2017).

33. J. Zhou, Z. Sun, M. Chen, J. Wang, W. Qiao, D. Long, and L. Ling, “Macroscopic and mechanically robust
hollow carbon spheres with superior oil adsorption and light-to-heat evaporation properties,” Adv. Funct. Mater. 26,
5368–5375 (2016).

34. M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas, and P. Nordlander, “Plasmon-induced hot carrier science and technology,” Nat.
nanotechnology 10, 25 (2015).

35. H. H. Richardson, M. T. Carlson, P. J. Tandler, P. Hernandez, and A. O. Govorov, “Experimental and theoretical
studies of light-to-heat conversion and collective heating effects in metal nanoparticle solutions,” Nano letters 9,
1139–1146 (2009).

36. G. Liu, J. Xu, and K. Wang, “Solar water evaporation by black photothermal sheets,” Nano Energy 41, 269–284
(2017).

37. L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu, and J. Zhu, “3d self-assembly of aluminium nanoparticles
for plasmon-enhanced solar desalination,” Nat. Photonics 10, 393–398 (2016).

38. G. Zhu, J. Xu, W. Zhao, and F. Huang, “Constructing black titania with unique nanocage structure for solar
desalination,” ACS applied materials & interfaces 8, 31716–31721 (2016).

39. M. Ye, J. Jia, Z. Wu, C. Qian, R. Chen, P. G. O’Brien, W. Sun, Y. Dong, and G. A. Ozin, “Synthesis of black tiox
nanoparticles by mg reduction of tio2 nanocrystals and their application for solar water evaporation,” Adv. Energy
Mater. 7, 1601811 (2017).

40. J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen, and T. Wu, “High-performance
photothermal conversion of narrow-bandgap ti2o3 nanoparticles,” Adv. Mater. 29, 1603730 (2017).

41. D. Ding, W. Huang, C. Song, M. Yan, C. Guo, and S. Liu, “Non-stoichiometric moo 3- x quantum dots as a
light-harvesting material for interfacial water evaporation,” Chem. Commun. 53, 6744–6747 (2017).

42. Y. Liu, J. Chen, D. Guo, M. Cao, and L. Jiang, “Floatable, self-cleaning, and carbon-black-based superhydrophobic
gauze for the solar evaporation enhancement at the air–water interface,” ACS applied materials & interfaces 7,
13645–13652 (2015).

43. Y. Yang, R. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Zhao, P. Xiao, Y. Ma, P. M. Ajayan, G. Shi, and Y. Chen, “Graphene-based standalone
solar energy converter for water desalination and purification,” ACS nano 12, 829–835 (2018).

44. Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu et al., “3d-printed, all-in-one
evaporator for high-efficiency solar steam generation under 1 sun illumination,” Adv. materials 29, 1700981 (2017).

45. X. Lin, J. Chen, Z. Yuan, M. Yang, G. Chen, D. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Hong, and X. Chen, “Integrative solar absorbers
for highly efficient solar steam generation,” J. Mater. Chem. A 6, 4642–4648 (2018).

46. S. Loeb, C. Li, and J.-H. Kim, “Solar photothermal disinfection using broadband-light absorbing gold nanoparticles
and carbon black,” Environ. science & technology 52, 205–213 (2017).

47. L. Zhou, S. Zhuang, C. He, Y. Tan, Z. Wang, and J. Zhu, “Self-assembled spectrum selective plasmonic absorbers
with tunable bandwidth for solar energy conversion,” Nano Energy 32, 195–200 (2017).

48. C. Li, D. Jiang, B. Huo, M. Ding, C. Huang, D. Jia, H. Li, C.-Y. Liu, and J. Liu, “Scalable and robust bilayer polymer
foams for highly efficient and stable solar desalination,” Nano Energy 60, 841–849 (2019).

49. W. H. Organization et al., “Safe drinking-water from desalination,” Tech. rep., World Health Organization (2011).


