1

Modulation of anisotropic magnetoresistance by anomalous Hall signal 

and its application to real-time domain wall velocity measurement

Ramesh Chandra Bhatt,1,2 Yo-Yu Cheng,1,2 Lin-Xiu Ye,1,2 Ngo Trong Hai,3 Jong-Ching Wu,3

and Te-ho Wu,1,2,a)

1Graduate School of Materials Science, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Douliu, Yunlin 

640 Taiwan ROC

2Taiwan SPIN Research Center, National Yunlin University of Science and Technology, Douliu, Yunlin 640, 

Taiwan ROC

3Department of Physics, National Changhua University of Education, Changhua 500, Taiwan ROC

a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: wuth@yuntech.edu.tw

ABSTRACT

We present here a way to modulate the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) by anomalous Hall signal and thus

measure the domain wall (DW) motion velocity at near-coercivity. We study the magnetization relaxation at the 

constant field in the longitudinal (Rxx) Hall geometry. We observed asymmetric Rxx peaks that appear at the DW

pinning fields. This unusual magnetoresistance behavior is explained by considering the AMR modulation by the 

anomalous Hall voltage. In the proposed method, using the magnetization relaxation, the real-time DW velocity 

measurement is much easier in comparison to the other microscopy methods. Moreover, the additional signal from 

anomalous Hall voltage makes this technique simpler and sensitive for DW velocity measurements, which can be 

useful for various spintronic sensing applications.

INTRODUCTION

The materials with low magnetization such as antiferromagnets and ferrimagnets seem promising for the next 

generation fast and compact spintronic devices where stray field and limited switching speed, as in the case of

ferromagnets, can be avoided. Among various ferrimagnets, the rare earth (RE) - transition metal (TM) alloys have 

been attracted much attention due to their large perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). The RE-TM 

ferrimagnetic alloys possess strong antiferromagnetic exchange between the RE and TM magnetic sublattices, 

therefore, by changing the content of RE or TM the dominance of these magnetic sublattices can be altered, which 

at certain composition gives the compensation of magnetization i.e. Mnet=01–4. Moreover, at compensation 

temperature (TComp), which can be tuned to room temperature, the coercivity (HC) diverges with vanishing Mnet. 

The non-zero spin polarization and zero magnetic moment at compensation in RE-TM ferrimagnets have the 

advantages over the antiferromagnets where the magnetic moment, as well as spin polarization, is zero. The easy 

sensing of magnetization state in these alloys have been investigated for the antiferromagnetic-like ultrafast 

spintronics applications5,6.

Recently, the domain wall (DW) motion has been investigated in the thin film of these alloys7, especially with 

low current density in TbFeCo strips 8–11. The DW velocity measurement has been carried out with the help of 


2

imaging techniques like the Magneto-optic Kerr effect (MOKE) microscopy and magnetic force microscopy12 etc.

It has been noticed that the DW velocity is measured by the ratio of DW displacement to the current pulse duration5. 

The current pulse may trigger the DW motion but the pulse duration not necessarily be the real-time taken by the 

DW to travel the distance over the strip, which could give a false large value of DW velocity. An alternate method

for DW velocity measurement from anomalous Hall measurements has also been applied, where the DW is created

by an additional transverse writing current pulse in addition to the out-of-plane field in Co/Ni films13. In another 

study, Hayashi et al. studied the current influence on field-driven DW motion through anisotropic 

magnetoresistance in permalloy nanowire14. There, an in-plane driving field is applied opposite to the current 

direction and a current pulse is applied in one pickup line to start the DW propagation. The resistance change due 

to AMR is too low to sense the change in the magnetization state (ΔR ~ 0.2 Ω) concerning the overall resistance 

of nanowire (~ 470 Ω) therein, which needs additional arrangements. We apply a rather different approach for 

measuring the DW velocity, which combines the anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) and anomalous Hall effect

(AHE) in perpendicular magnetic anisotropic TbFeCo. Therefore, we get an enlarged signal from the modulation 

of AMR by AHE voltage without any additional arrangements. Here, the DW velocity is defined as the real-time 

propagation of domain wall in the Hall bar during the magnetization switching from one antiparallel state to another.

In the present study, the domain wall propagates at fixed pinning fields whereas in other studies the current pulse

with a magnitude of critical value or magnetic field larger than the coercivity is applied that gives higher DW 

velocity or faster magnetization switching 7.

Here we measure the domain wall velocity in the TbFeCo Hall bar pattern from the magnetization relaxation 

in the longitudinal Hall geometry. In transverse Hall geometry, the measured resistance is perpendicular to the 

current direction known as anomalous Hall resistance (Rxy), whereas, in longitudinal Hall geometry, resistance is 

measured parallel to the current direction which typically originates due to the anisotropic magneto-resistance 

(AMR) and here denoted as Rxx. A constant and perpendicular DW depinning field is applied and then change in 

longitudinal resistance is measured as a function of time. The origin of asymmetric magneto-resistance in 

longitudinal Hall geometry is explained and the domain wall motion velocities have been estimated from the 

magnetization relaxation curves at different magnetic fields. We present here a simple and unique method to obtain 

the domain wall motion velocity and its distribution over the Hall bar channel.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The TbFeCo amorphous alloy film with structure Hf(4nm)/TbFeCo(10nm)/MgO(2nm)/Ta(2nm) was deposited 

on thermally oxidized Si-substrates using magnetron sputtering (base pressure 2.2 x 10-7 Torr). The TbFeCo was 

co-sputtered from the Tb and Fe80Co20 targets so that the composition of the alloys can be changed by changing the 

Tb target power. The magnetic properties of the deposited film were measured using an Alternating-Gradient 

Magnetometer (PMC AGM) at room temperature. The Hall bar device for the anomalous Hall measurements was

fabricated by electron-beam lithography and Ar-ion milling. The anomalous Hall measurements were carried out 

using an electromagnet-equipped four-probe station at room temperature.


3

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS

The schematic of multilayer structures and device connections are shown in Fig. 1(a). The Hall voltage pickup 

line widths are 5 and 1 µm and the current channel width is 5 µm in the Hall bar device. The in-plane and out-of-

plane magnetic hysteresis loops for blanket-film which were measured by an AGM are shown in Fig 1(b). The 

saturation magnetization and the coercivity of the blanket film are measured to be 94 emu/cc and 770 Oe, 

respectively. The hysteresis loops show the perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in the multilayer structure. As 

shown in Fig. 1(c), both up and downward Rxx peaks coincide with the Rxy coercivity. The lower value of coercivity 

i.e. 567 Oe for the device is possible due to the patterning process. In general,  Rxx peaks appear symmetric 

irrespective of the sweeping field polarity with magneto-resistance (ΔR/R) of 10-2-10-4 order, which is known as 

anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR) 15. However, in the present case, the change in Rxx is much larger and the 

peaks appear asymmetric with respect to the sweeping field polarity. This unusual magnetoresistance will be 

discussed in the later section of this manuscript. Here we performed the magnetization relaxation for Rxx

configuration and analyzed the magnetization relaxation dynamics therein.

For performing magnetization relaxation first a perpendicular saturating field of 1 kOe is applied for a while 

to generate a single domain state. A perpendicular depinning field in the opposite direction is then applied across 

the Hall bar. The moment when the depinning field reached to desired value the longitudinal resistance (Rxx) is 

measured between the two voltage pickup lines by applying a 100 µA dc sensing current along the current channel

as shown in Fig. 1(a). All measurements were carried out at room temperature. The Rxx vs Hz plot, where the Rxx is 

measured between the two pickup lines, is shown in Fig. 2(a). The magnetization relaxation curves measured in

various fields are shown in Fig. 2(b). The valley of the magnetization curve shifts to lower time with an increase 

in the pinning field. The width of the curve also decreases with an increase in the pinning field, which indicates 

faster switching. To interpret the domain wall motion in the device each magnetization curve has been analyzed in 

detail.

The longitudinally measured magnetization relaxation curve for Hz= 485 Oe is shown in Fig. 3, where the 

distance traveled by domain wall and the DW velocity distribution over time is also shown. As we described before, 

the asymmetric peaks coincide with the coercivity, therefore, we measured Rxx as a function of time at a constant 

driving field to take advantage of large signals from the change in Rxx. Usually, the MR peaks appear symmetric

(i.e. both peaks up), the origin of asymmetric (i.e. up and down) magnetoresistance peaks in the present case needs

to be explained to better understand the DW motion.

The magnetoresistance anomaly has been observed before in the DyFeCo thin films where the magnetic 

moment canting between the sublattices and the magnetization divergence at the edges has been accounted for its 

origin16. The origin of asymmetric magnetoresistance behavior is explained by a schematic of domain wall motion

as shown in Figs. 3(f-h). Initially as shown in Fig. 3(f), when the device is saturated in either direction the voltage 

pickup lines are at the same potential and the resistance change is according to the anisotropic magnetoresistance 

(AMR). However, when the magnetic field is enough to start domain wall motion, the DW moves from the left 

end to the right end of the voltage pickup line A and the voltage at this pickup line reverses from the initial value

as shown in Fig. 3(g), therefore, there exists a maximum change in the potential between A and B pick up lines.


4

When DW propagates by the driving field it crosses the pickup line B and the voltage at pickup line B is reversed 

from the initial value in Fig. 3(h), therefore, again both the pickup line A and B are switched to the same potential 

and the resistance returns to the initial value. The initiation of DW propagation from the left edge could be due to 

the inhomogeneity, which allows nucleation at much lower driving fields. One can think about the possibility of 

multiple domain propagation in the device, however, it has been observed from the MOKE imaging that the 

TbFeCo sheet film exhibits single domain propagation on increasing the driving field. Moreover, the presence of 

multiple domains would have shown different shapes in the Rxx-Hz curve, however, the repetitive measurements 

at different fields show the same curve shape and the signal strength as well, rule out the multiple domain 

possibility.  

The AMR is extremely small in comparison to the anomalous Hall resistance and is always symmetric i.e. the 

AMR peaks are always positive. Therefore, a slight difference in the height of the positive and negative peaks 

appearing in Rxx vs field or time plot can be seen which is equal to the (Rxy + ∆RAMR) and (-Rxy + ∆RAMR), where, 

∆RAMR is the change in resistance due to the AMR. The difference in the height of the peaks for different sensing 

currents can also be seen in Fig. 4 (a). The Rxx curve-peaks for 3 mA current are shifted to lower coercivity and a 

vertical shift in Rxx at zero field is noticed, which is possible due to the Joule heating effect from the large current. 

Now, for crossing the pickup line B, DW needs to travel the distance between A and B plus the width of B, which 

is larger than the distance traveled by DW crossing the width A. Therefore, DW takes more time to cross the width 

B, which is evident from the magnetization relaxation curves.

For analysis of the magnetization relaxation curves, the relaxation time curve can be divided into two parts by 

a verticle line passing trough the Rxx minima as shown in Fig. 3(c). These two parts left-side and right-side are 

related to the two voltage pickup lines A (width 5 µm) and B (width 1 µm), respectively. The microscopic image 

and schematic of the Hall bar pattern are shown in the panel of Fig. 3(c). For DW velocity measurement, the 

resistance was converted to the equivalent distance traveled by the DW.
In Fig. 3(a), distance 0 to 5 µm 

corresponds to the width of pickup line “A” with the origin at the left end of the pickup line “A”. In Fig. 3(b), 

distance 0 to 31 µm corresponds to the sum of the distance between pickup lines and the width “B” (i.e. 30 µm + 

1 µm) with the origin at the right end of the pickup line “A”. The second half corresponds to the distance 31 µm 

as the magnetization is relaxed completely to the initial magnetization/resistance value. The Rxx around 622 Ω 

corresponds to the initiation of domain wall propagation at the left end of line “A” whereas the Rxx around 618 Ω 

corresponds to the right end of line “A” where reversal of Hall voltage takes place by the propagation of domain 

wall. Similarly, in the left dissected part 618 Ω and 622 Ω correspond, respectively, to the right end of line “A” 

and right end of the line “B”. In the left dissected part the time is considered up to the point where the relaxation 

curve saturates. The initial (at 0 times) or final position of the relaxation curve has been normalized to the 

corresponding distance. The velocity vs time plot is obtained by taking the first derivative of distance vs time plot.

Such distance vs time plots for the two halves of the magnetization relaxation curve is shown in Fig. 3(a) and 3(b), 

respectively. The first derivative of these plots gives the DW velocity distribution which is also shown in Fig. 3(d) 

and 3(e). The average DW velocity is estimated by the slope of the linear fit to the distance vs time plot. The 

estimated average DW velocities are 0.33 µm/s and 1.77 µm/s when crossing the pickup line A and B, respectively.


5

The DW velocity distribution indicates the maximum velocity peaks of ~ 0.84 µm/s and ~ 3 µm/s for pickup lines

A and B, respectively. It is evident from the velocity distribution curves that the full width at half maximum 

(FWHM) is larger for the domain motion in the left channel.

The distribution of the peak value of domain wall motion velocities with applied perpendicular fields is shown 

in Fig. 4(b). The DW velocity increases with the field for DW crossing the pickup line B, however, for DW crossing 

pickup line A the velocity does not influence much by increasing the magnetic field. The DW velocities at line A 

are much smaller than the velocities when DW crossing line B. We think that this difference could be due to the 

slow initiation of the DW at pickup line A, where the width of the pickup line is 5 times larger than the width of 

line B. The difference in pickup line areas allow detouring of DW at line A, which limits the DW velocity. This 

effect is small at line B. Further, the detouring of DW and inhomogeneity at the left edge could be the possible 

reason for the unchanged velocity on increasing the field at line A.

CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we studied the magnetization switching in the longitudinal i.e. Rxx Hall bar geometry in 

Hf/TbFeCo Hall bar device. We observed that the asymmetric peaks in Rxx vs field curve appear at the coercivity

of anomalous Hall loop. We measured the domain wall motion velocity at various DW pinning fields through 

the magnetization relaxation while measuring the Rxx. The unusual magnetoresistance behavior is explained as 

a combined effect of the anomalous Hall effect and the anisotropic magnetoresistance. The peak velocity 

reached a maximum value of around 13 µm/s in the device. The smaller domain wall motion velocity (~ 10

µm/s) in comparison to the reported large values (~ 10 m/s) attributes to the domain wall propagation at small 

DW pinning fields and real-time duration taken for the magnetization switching in the present case. This study 

demonstrates an easy way to measure domain wall motion velocity from the magnetization relaxation in 

comparison to the other complex methods which could be useful in spintronic sensing applications particularly 

where MOKE imaging is not possible.

This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) Taiwan ROC (Grant Nos. 

MOST 105-2112-M-224-002 and MOST 107-2112-M-224-001-MY2) and the Feng-Tay foundation Taiwan 

ROC. The author RCB would like to acknowledge the Feng-Tay foundation Taiwan ROC for funding his post-

doctoral research.

REFERENCES

1 J. Finley and L. Liu, Phys. Rev. Appl. 6, 1 (2016).

2 R. Mishra, J. Yu, X. Qiu, M. Motapothula, T. Venkatesan, and H. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 167201 (2017).

3 N. Roschewsky, C.-H. Lambert, and S. Salahuddin, Phys. Rev. B 96, 064406 (2017).

4 R.C. Bhatt, L.-X. Ye, Y.-C. Luo, and T. Wu, J. Appl. Phys. 125, 113902 (2019).


6

5 L. Caretta, M. Mann, F. Büttner, K. Ueda, B. Pfau, C.M. Günther, P. Hessing, A. Churikova, C. Klose, M. 

Schneider, D. Engel, C. Marcus, D. Bono, K. Bagschik, S. Eisebitt, and G.S.D. Beach, Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 

1154 (2018).

6 J. Kim, D. Lee, K.-J. Lee, B.-K. Ju, H.C. Koo, B.-C. Min, and O. Lee, Sci. Rep. 8, 6017 (2018).

7 K. Cai, Z. Zhu, J.M. Lee, R. Mishra, L. Ren, S.D. Pollard, P. He, G. Liang, K.L. Teo, and H. Yang, Nat. 

Electron. 3, 37 (2020).

8 S. Li, H. Nakamura, T. Kanazawa, X. Liu, and A. Morisako, J. Magn. Soc. Japan 34, 333 (2010).

9 S. Li, X. Liu, and A. Morisako, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 12, 7550 (2012).

10 T. Koyama, K. Ueda, K.-J. Kim, Y. Yoshimura, D. Chiba, K. Yamada, J.-P. Jamet, A. Mougin, A. Thiaville, S. 

Mizukami, S. Fukami, N. Ishiwata, Y. Nakatani, H. Kohno, K. Kobayashi, and T. Ono, Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 635 

(2012).

11 H. Awano, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 383, 50 (2015).

12 A. Yamaguchi, T. Ono, S. Nasu, K. Miyake, K. Mibu, and T. Shinjo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 077205 (2004).

13 K.-J. Kim, Y. Yoshimura, T. Okuno, T. Moriyama, S.-W. Lee, K.-J. Lee, Y. Nakatani, and T. Ono, APL Mater. 

4, 032504 (2016).

14 M. Hayashi, L. Thomas, Y.B. Bazaliy, C. Rettner, R. Moriya, X. Jiang, and S.S.P. Parkin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 

197207 (2006).

15 R.A. Hajjar and M. Mansuripur, J. Appl. Phys. 72, 1528 (1992).

16 J.C. Wu, C.S. Wu, T.H. Wu, B.M. Chen, and H.P.D. Shieh, J. Appl. Phys. 89, 7209 (2001).


7

FIG. 1. (a) Represents the schematic (not to scale) of thin film multilayer structure and electrical connections of 

the device. The Vxy voltage pickup line widths are 5 and 1 µm and the current channel width is 5 µm. (b) Shows 

the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic hysteresis loops measured for the blanket film. Panel (c) represents the 

longitudinal (Rxx) and transverse (anomalous Hall resistance Rxy) resistance as a function of perpendicular field 

for the Hall bar device. The peaks in Rxx curve coincide with Rxy coercivity.


8

FIG. 2. (a) The longitudinal resistance (Rxx) measurement with field scanning and magnified view of the MR 

peak for positive field scanning. (b) Magnetization relaxation curves in longitudinal Hall geometry at various 

perpendicular fields. The magnetization relaxation curve as a function of time mimics the Rxx vs field curve 

indicates the domain wall motion with time.


9

FIG. 3. Domain wall motion velocity from the magnetization relaxation in longitudinal Hall geometry at constant 

perpendicular field. (a) and (b) show the distance traveled by domain as a function of time for left and right-side 

part of Rxx-curve shown in panel (c), respectively. The top panel (c) figure shows magnetization relaxation at 

drive field 485 Oe, where the curve has been dissected vertically into two parts at curve minima. The bottom 

panel (c) figures show Hall bar pattern and corresponding pickup lines width and distance between them.  (d) 

and (e) show domain wall motion velocity distribution as a function of relaxation time for (a) and (b), respectively. 

The red solid line represents the linear and nonlinear curve fitting. Representation of domain wall motion in Hall 

bar device is shown in (f-h). (f) Initiation of DW motion, (g) DW crossing the voltage pick-up line A and (h) DW 

crossing the second voltage pick-up line B.


10

FIG. 4. (a) Asymmetric magnetoresistance for different sensing currents. For 3 mA sensing current, the peak 

appears at lower field is due to the Joule heating effect. The change in resistance ∆R is larger at R+ peaks than 

the R-. (b) Peak domain wall motion velocity (vmax) from the magnetization relaxation at various perpendicular 

fields. The relaxation curve was divided in two parts; the first part represents 5 µm distance, whereas, the 

second part represents the 31 µm distance.


