1

Ferroelectric quantum criticality and enhanced superconductivity in 

plastically deformed strontium titanate

S. Hameed1,*, D. Pelc2,1*,#, Z. W. Anderson1, A. Klein3,1 , R. J. Spieker1, L. Yue4, B. Das5, J. 
Ramberger5, M. Lukas6, Y. Liu7, M. J. Krogstad8, R. Osborn8, Y. Li4, C. Leighton5, R. M. 
Fernandes1 and M. Greven1,#

1School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA

2Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Croatia

3Department of Physics, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Ariel University, Israel

4International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, China

5Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN, USA

6Faculty of Mechanical Engineering and Naval Architecture, University of Zagreb, Croatia

7Neutron Scattering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA

8Materials Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL, USA

*these authors contributed equally

#correspondence to: dpelc@umn.edu, greven@umn.edu

The properties of quantum materials are commonly tuned using experimental variables such 

as pressure, magnetic field and doping. Here we explore a different approach: irreversible, 

plastic deformation of single crystals. We show for the superconductor SrTiO3 that

compressive plastic deformation induces low-dimensional superconductivity significantly 

above the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) of undeformed samples, with

evidence of superconducting correlations at temperatures two orders of magnitude above 

the bulk Tc. The superconductivity enhancement is correlated with the appearance of self-

organized dislocation structures, as revealed by diffuse neutron and X-ray scattering. We 

also observe signatures of deformation-induced quantum-critical ferroelectric fluctuations 


2

and inhomogeneous ferroelectric order via Raman scattering. These results suggest that the 

strain surrounding the self-organized dislocation structures induces local ferroelectricity 

and quantum-critical dynamics that strongly influence Tc, consistent with a theory of 

superconductivity enhanced by soft polar fluctuations. More broadly, our results 

demonstrate the promise of plastic deformation and dislocation engineering as tools to 

manipulate electronic properties of quantum materials.

Introduction. The application of reversible, elastic uniaxial strain has emerged as a powerful 

means to study and manipulate quantum materials1-4. The effects of uniaxial stress beyond the 

elastic regime, however, are not widely studied in single-crystalline materials. The resultant plastic 

deformation fundamentally differs from elastic strain, as it creates extended defects – typically 

dislocations – and can induce their self-organization into structures spanning broad length scales5. 

The local atomic arrangement near dislocation cores is very different from the bulk and

significantly modifies nearby electronic properties6-9. Such effects are amplified when dislocations 

assemble into larger-scale structures10.

Here we use electron-doped strontium titanate, SrTiO3 (STO), as a model system to study the 

effects of significant plastic deformation on electronic properties. We show that superconductivity 

in STO is considerably enhanced by plastic deformation, and that self-organized dislocation 

structures play a crucial role. Although superconductivity in the cubic perovskite STO has been 

known for decades11, its origin remains poorly understood and cannot be explained by the standard 

electron-phonon pairing mechanism, as it prevails to extremely low charge-carrier densities, where 

the Debye frequency is much larger than the Fermi energy12-14. Like in other unconventional 

materials, superconductivity appears in a dome-shaped region of the temperature-doping phase 

diagram. Moreover, STO is based on the perovskite crystal structure, similar to other 


3

superconducting materials of high interest, including bismuthates, ruthenates, and high-Tc

cuprates15.  

Perhaps less widely appreciated, STO also has remarkable mechanical properties for a ceramic 

material. Single crystals can be plastically deformed to a high degree in compression, without 

macroscopic cracking, even at ambient temperature16. Although the microscopic origin of the 

extended plastic regime in STO is debated17, it is known that plastic deformation occurs via the 

creation, dissociation and glide of dislocations in {110} planes of the cubic structure16,17. At 

elevated stresses, these dislocations coalesce into bundles, which leads to work hardening16 (see 

Figs. 1a, S1). We find that atomic substitution (at least at the levels relevant to electronic doping) 

does not significantly influence ductility. STO therefore provides an ideal opportunity to 

investigate effects of extensive plastic deformation on the electronic properties of a model quantum 

material. 

Structure and dynamics of plastically deformed STO. Using specially designed uniaxial 

pressure cells (Fig. 1a), we have routinely been able to deform STO crystals up to engineering 

strains ε ~ 8% in compression at 300 K (e.g., Fig. 1a, Fig. S1). Macroscopically, deformation 

induces streaks at the crystal surfaces, perpendicular to the stress (Fig. S2), indicative of a highly 

inhomogeneous strain distribution on the 1-10 μm scale. To further investigate the structural 

effects of deformation, we performed neutron and X-ray diffuse scattering measurements. As 

expected, undeformed samples show sharp Bragg peaks (Fig. S3). In contrast, deformation induces 

pronounced azimuthal elongation of the Bragg peaks in planes perpendicular to the surface streaks 

(Fig. 1b), but not in other planes (Fig. S3d). Similar features, known as asterisms, are observed in 

deformed metals18 and are due to tilts of mesoscopic, relatively defect-poor crystalline regions 

bounded by dislocation structures,19,20 as illustrated schematically in Fig. 1c. Importantly, 


4

asterisms only appear above ~0.5% deformation (Fig. S4), with little associated change in 

dislocation density (Fig. 1d). Also, deformation does not considerably influence the low-

temperature tetragonal structure21; the usual tetragonal superstructure peaks are observed at low 

temperatures, and exhibit asterisms.

Away from the Bragg peaks, we observe features that are not present in undeformed samples, most

prominently cross-like diffuse patterns (Figs. 2a,b, S5). The orientation of the streaks in these 

patterns is consistent with the presence of {110} slip planes, and their small width and grainy 

substructure indicates long-range dislocation correlations. This, along with the presence of 

asterisms, implies that the diffuse scattering originates from dislocations that self-organize into 

planar structures – walls – that act as low-angle tilt boundaries (Fig. 1c, 2e). We obtain good 

agreement with experiment by calculating the scattering pattern associated with the strain field of 

dislocation walls with {110} slip planes (Fig. 2c,d). The strain fields from such remarkable self-

organization of dislocations play an important role in determining local electronic properties, e.g.,

ferroelectricity4,22,23,24. Recent piezo-force-microscopy and nonlinear optical investigations indeed 

show that individual dislocation structures have local polarization8,25, while the polar 

displacements are not significantly affected by electron doping26. Furthermore, modeling suggests 

that local electric polarization is enhanced in extended dislocation structures10. 

We find clear evidence of deformation-induced ferroelectricity in Raman scattering experiments

on undoped and Nb-doped samples (Fig. 3a-d). Two main effects are observed in deformed 

samples: the appearance of hard transverse optical (TO) modes related to inversion-symmetry 

breaking (see also Fig. S7), and a large, broad feature at low energies that increases sharply upon

cooling. The presence of the TO2 and TO4 polar modes confirms that inversion symmetry is 

locally broken. Furthermore, the low-energy spectral-weight build-up is a direct signature of 


5

quantum-critical ferroelectric fluctuations that are present in both undoped and doped samples.

This is most clearly seen in the real part of the static Raman susceptibility χ’(0) (Fig. 3e), which is 

obtained from the measured frequency-dependent imaginary-part χ’’(ω) via Kramers-Kronig 

transformation, analogous to, e.g., studies of nematic fluctuations in iron-based superconductors27

(see also Methods). The susceptibility χ’(0) follows a simple Curie-Weiss temperature dependence 

that does not saturate at the lowest measured temperatures, indicative of the quantum-critical 

nature of the fluctuations. Moreover, the dynamic susceptibility shows a broad peak that represents 

a characteristic fluctuation energy scale that softens on cooling (Fig. 3a-d,f). This signal is the 

well-known softening of the TO1 mode in STO. The dislocation-induced Raman signature is thus 

direct evidence of quantum-critical dynamic fluctuations in STO, accompanied by local 

ferroelectric order. Importantly, these fluctuations are only accessible to the inversion-symmetric 

Raman probe due to the presence of locally-broken inversion symmetry, which is a direct 

consequence of deformation-induced dislocation structures and inhomogeneity. In contrast, the 

TO1 elastic scattering in STO remains narrow down to low temperatures28. This highlights the fact 

that deformed STO is fundamentally different from the uniformly strained material. As we argue 

below, the Raman results imply the existence of regions with dynamic ferroelectric fluctuations 

that are enhanced beyond the bulk value and lead to local superconductivity enhancement.

Enhancement of superconductivity. Figure 4 shows low-temperature resistivity and magnetic 

susceptibility data for several deformation and Nb doping levels. A strongly anisotropic 

superconducting state appears in deformed samples, with typical midpoint transition temperatures 

of 0.6-0.7 K, well above the optimal resistive Tc in undeformed Nb-doped bulk STO12,13,29 (Fig. 

4a). For a sample with 0.2% Nb, for example, the Hall electron density is about 3·1019 cm-3, the 

bulk Tc without deformation is <0.35 K (Fig. S8), and a 5-6% deformation induces a Tc


6

enhancement of roughly a factor of two (Fig. 4a,b). The resistive transition is first observed in the 

resistance perpendicular to the stress (R | ), whereas in the parallel direction, the resistance (R||) first 

increases before decreasing again on cooling (Fig. 4b-d). Similar resistivity peaks have been 

observed around Tc in doped STO films upon application of magnetic fields and at EuO/KTaO3

interfaces30,31. Such anisotropic resistivity is expected in an inhomogeneous superconductor when

resistances are measured in a van der Pauw geometry32. In our case, the lower resistivity is always 

R | , which, when taken with the scattering data, indicates low-dimensional transport along the 

dislocation structures. In some samples, two or three distinct resistivity steps can be discerned 

(e.g., Fig. 4c), also consistent with inhomogeneous superconductivity. In samples with 0.2% Nb 

doping, which we studied at several deformation levels (Fig. S8), the superconductivity 

enhancement roughly correlates with the appearance of asterisms in diffuse scattering (Fig. S4). 

This suggests that the self-organized dislocation structures play a major role in the Tc enhancement. 

The decrease in the perpendicular resistivity channel matches well with signatures in the 

diamagnetic response and with the onset of nonzero nonlinear susceptibility (Fig. 4f), leaving no 

doubt that this is a superconducting transition. The diamagnetic response is also strongly 

anisotropic, and the critical fields differ along and perpendicular to the stress direction (Fig. 4e).

We also measured several deformed samples that were oxygen-vacancy-doped (OVD), with Hall 

electron concentrations up to 1019 cm-3; no resistive transition was detected down to 360 mK.

In addition to the clear enhancement of superconductivity below 1 K, deformed STO samples show 

intriguing transport and magnetic properties at much higher temperatures. First, we note that a 

small diamagnetic response is present in the ac susceptibility up to at least 1.5 K (Fig. 4f). 

Furthermore, resistivity anisotropy develops already at around 30-50 K, and R | falls below the 

robust normal-state T2 dependence characteristic of undeformed samples33. This is observed in 


7

both OVD and Nb-doped samples (Figs. 5a,b, S9, S10), but is more pronounced in OVD crystals 

with low electron densities. There, we observe a resistivity anisotropy of two orders of magnitude 

(Fig. 5a, S7), with R | roughly one order of magnitude below R0, the value in undeformed samples.

The difference is even larger if we consider the increase of the normal-state residual resistivity due 

to deformation (Fig. S9). We see no significant dependence of the resistivity downturn on the type 

of dopant, since the downturns are similar in OVD and Nb-doped samples (Fig. S10). Along with 

the resistivity decrease, we find significant nonlinear resistivity in the same temperature range, as 

well as nonlinear current-voltage characteristics at low temperatures (Fig. 5c). Most likely, these 

effects do not result from sample heating (see Methods).

We expect the deformation effect on the resistivity to consist of an increase due to added

dislocations and a decrease related to superconducting correlations. To disentangle these 

contributions, we extract, for a set of 0.2% Nb-doped samples, both the measured residual 

resistivity ratio (RRR) and an RRR determined by fitting the high-temperature resistivity data to a

𝑇2 form (Fig. 5d, inset). The increase of the extrapolated residual resistivities with strain (Fig. 5d)

is consistent with a factor of ~2 increase of dislocation density between 0% and 1% deformation34

(Fig. 1d); it is also isotropic (see Supplementary Material). However, comparison of measured and

extrapolated RRR values indicates a roughly threefold reduction of the resistivity (Fig. 5d). In 

addition, applied magnetic fields increase the low-temperature resistivity more than expected from 

previously established magnetoresistance values29,35 (Fig. S11), while the carrier concentration is 

unaffected by deformation: the Hall number shows little temperature dependence and is roughly 

consistent with the carrier density expected from the Nb concentration29,35 (Fig. S12). Importantly, 

the Hall coefficient does not depend on the current direction, which is strong evidence that the 


8

deformation does not induce carrier-density changes or anisotropic dislocation scattering that 

might affect the resistivity anisotropy.

Our analysis suggests that superconducting correlations appear in deformed STO at temperatures 

as high as 30-50 K. We attempted to search for a corresponding diamagnetic signal, without 

conclusive results. The main issue is the presence of weak defect-induced magnetism36 in both 

deformed and undeformed samples. In any case, if the superconductivity is low-dimensional, as 

might be inferred from the strong resistance anisotropy and high critical field scale, no appreciable 

diamagnetic shielding would be expected37. We note that the emergence of high-temperature 

superconducting correlations is not the only possible explanation for the observed behaviour, 

which could be the result of, e.g., shielding of point defects within regions of large dislocation 

densities, strain-induced hardening of phonon modes, or the formation of a low-dimensional 

ordered state (such as a charge-density wave) on dislocation bundles. Undoped STO also enters 

the quantum paraelectric regime12 between 30 and 40 K, which could influence transport and 

magnetic properties in the presence of dislocation structures. However, the presence of quantum-

critical fluctuations should lead to a resistivity increase due to the large available phase space for 

low-frequency scattering, except if the fluctuations lead to superconducting pairing. We also note 

that possible signatures of superconductivity at ~5 K were previously observed in undoped STO 

subjected to dielectric breakdown38, which might also induce extended defects. Further 

experiments focusing on local properties, such as the local density of states or the local 

diamagnetism, are needed to firmly establish the presence of higher Tc superconducting regions.

Ferroelectric fluctuations and superconductivity. We now propose a simple scenario to connect 

the existence of self-organized dislocation structures observed by diffuse scattering, the onset of 

inhomogeneous ferroelectric order and enhanced ferroelectric fluctuations observed by Raman 


9

scattering, and the local enhancement of Tc observed by transport measurements. STO is a quantum 

paraelectric with an anomalously high dielectric constant thought to result from fluctuations of a 

soft polar TO phonon. Application of strain or “negative” pressure39,40 can further soften the TO 

mode, tuning STO across a ferroelectric quantum critical point (QCP)4,22 . Although the precise 

mechanism is debated, standard arguments imply that the soft-phonon contribution to Tc is

enhanced near the QCP41,42,43,44, as indeed observed experimentally1,26,45. Since dislocations induce 

long-range strain fields, their presence induces a local modification of the TO mode frequency. 

This modification has two effects. First, the strong local strain at the dislocation structures induces

anisotropic ferroelectric order in their vicinity at temperatures far above 𝑇𝑐. The static order breaks 

inversion symmetry, and therefore the inversion-even Raman probe directly couples to the 

inversion-odd ferroelectric fluctuations. Second, due to the long-range strain decay, there 

necessarily exist regions in which the TO-mode frequency is suppressed to zero, at least within a 

mean-field picture. If we assume that Tc increases with the softening of the TO mode, such regions 

will show a local Tc enhancement. We analyze this effect via the Ginzburg-Landau free energy of 

the TO mode coupled to the strain field, which we assume to vary slowly over distances 𝐫 much 

larger than a lattice constant,

𝐹(𝐫) ∝ (𝜔𝑇

2 + 𝑐𝑇

2𝑞2)(𝛿𝑖𝑗 − 𝑞̂𝑖𝑞̂𝑗)𝑢𝑖(𝐫, 𝐪)𝑢𝑗(𝐫, 𝐪) + 𝑔𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙𝑢𝑖(𝐫, 𝐪)𝑢𝑗(𝐫, 𝐪)𝜀𝑘𝑙(𝐫) + ⋯
(1)

Here, 𝑢𝑖 are components of the TO displacement field with wavevector 𝐪, 𝜔𝑇

2 ≈ (2𝑚𝑒𝑉)2 is the 

soft transverse phonon frequency, 𝛿𝑖𝑗 − 𝑞̂𝑖𝑞̂𝑗 projects onto the transverse component, 𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝐫) is the 

slowly varying strain field generated by the dislocation structure, 𝑔𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 is a coupling term, and we 

sum over repeated indices46 (see Methods). Cubic symmetry is assumed for simplicity. The effect 

of the strain field is twofold: it splits the triply degenerate 𝜔𝑇 mode, and makes it inhomogeneous. 

Close to the dislocation core, the generated strain field, which can be calculated using standard 


10

elasticity theory (see Methods), is very large and induces ferroelectric order. While Eq. (1) is not 

justified in this regime, as it neglects dynamics and higher-order terms, the ferroelectric order near 

the core is nevertheless expected to suppress superconductivity26. Farther from the core, where Eq. 

(1) is valid, we find wide regions where the TO mode is significantly softened. In Fig. 6a, we plot 

the local dimensionless quantity 𝑟min = 𝜔min

2
/𝜔𝑇

2, where 𝜔min denotes the smallest TO mode,

around a single dislocation core. This quantity measures the distance to the ferroelectric transition, 

with 𝑟min > 0 denoting the disordered phase (𝑟min = 1 being the value for the undeformed sample) 

and 𝑟min < 0 the ferroelectric state (where 𝜔min is imaginary). The shaded region is the area, of 

order 106𝑎2 with 𝑎 denoting the lattice constant, where 𝑟min is suppressed by a factor of 2 or more

with respect to its value in the undeformed sample (see Methods). For the experimentally relevant

case of the dislocation wall shown in Fig. 2e, interference cancels out the long-range strain and 

leaves an enhancement region of area 𝐴 ∼ 𝐿𝑎, where 𝐿 is the length of the dislocation wall, as 

shown in Fig. 6b. In the three-dimensional material, this structure results in a sheet-like region 

with suppressed 𝑟min. While the functional dependence of Tc on 𝑟min is complicated and not known 

near vanishing frequencies, it is well established that Tc increases with decreasing 𝑟min in an 

exponential fashion not too close to the QCP41,42,43. Our calculations therefore demonstrate the

tremendous potential for targeted strain-engineering of superconductivity in STO and other 

materials.

Discussion. Our work shows that plastic-deformation-induced dislocation structures enhance

ferroelectric fluctuations and superconductivity in STO. This has wide-ranging implications for 

both the superconducting pairing mechanism in STO and similar materials, as well as for diverse 

material systems where plastic deformation, and dislocation engineering more generally, could be 

used to tune local electronic ordering. Superconducting pairing in STO has been attributed to 


11

electron-phonon interactions, plasmons, ferroelectric quantum critical fluctuations, local modes,

and oxygen-vacancy negative-U centres13. All of these might be strongly affected by plastic 

deformation. Even for undeformed STO it was recently found that intrinsic structural 

inhomogeneity influences superconducting correlations47. Moreover, tetragonal structural domain 

walls, which might be affected by deformation (although we do not see evidence for that in diffuse 

scattering), may also be important for pairing13,48. We also note that there is a precedent for pairing 

at domain walls37 in WO3. However, our calculations, which demonstrate that Tc is enhanced by 

incipient strain-induced ferroelectricity, suggest that this mechanism plays a pivotal role in the 

effects observed here. Although our Raman scattering results provide unequivocal evidence for 

deformation-induced inhomogeneous fluctuations, further studies of local modes and phonon 

spectrum modifications in deformed STO and related quantum paraelectrics will be of great 

interest. Furthermore, considering that the Fermi-liquid-like normal-state T2 resistivity itself is not 

understood, more detailed studies could help unravel the physics behind this puzzling 

phenomenon33,49. 

More broadly, plastic deformation and dislocation engineering can be used to manipulate any 

properties of quantum materials that couple to strain. A necessary prerequisite for this is to reach 

the plastic deformation regime; STO is a model system because of its remarkable ambient-

temperature ductility, but most materials become ductile close to their melting temperature or 

under high strain rates. In particular, we expect that dramatic superconductivity enhancement is 

possible in other materials that are close to a ferroelectric instability, such as PbTe50 and 

KTaO331,51, as well as other nearly cubic perovskites like the high-Tc bismuthates52. Cuprate high-

Tc superconductors also share important structural and superconducting features with STO47, and

their Tc changes rapidly with strain53. Dislocation engineering could thus be a route to significantly


12

enhance cuprate superconductivity. Dislocations have also recently been suggested to play an 

important role in the unconventional superconductor strontium ruthenate9. Other electronic 

ordering tendencies are influenced by dislocations as well; e.g., ferromagnetic dislocations have 

been found6 in antiferromagnetic NiO, and multiferroicity has been predicted7 for dislocations in 

ferroelectric PbTiO3. Dislocation engineering could therefore lead to a broad range of novel 

functional materials.

Methods

Samples. Single crystals of undoped and Nb-doped STO were sourced commercially (MTI Corp.) 

and polished to have parallel and perpendicular faces for uniaxial pressure experiments. Oxygen-

vacancy doping (OVD) of Nb-free STO was achieved through annealing in a high vacuum of 10-

5 mbar with a titanium getter at 800°C for 2 h. Samples for transport measurements were 0.5 mm 

thick and typically ~1-2 mm laterally, while the neutron scattering samples were 1 mm thick and 

5-6 mm laterally.

Uniaxial pressure. Two different custom-built uniaxial pressure cells were used to deform STO 

single crystals for transport, magnetometry and neutron scattering measurements. Both cells use 

the same operating principle: the force on the sample is supplied by the piston of a pneumatic 

cylinder, and the sample deformation is measured using a linear variable transformer (i.e., a set of 

two coaxial coils). Such a design is scalable and enables the application of very high forces, while 

stress-strain diagrams can be easily measured, since the displacement is determined independently. 

The pressure cell used for smaller samples has a maximum force of 350 N and uses two coaxial 

sapphire rods as anvils for sample compression. Our large sample cell has a maximum force of 


13

5000 N, and sintered carbide plates are used as anvils. Both systems are operated with the same 

high-precision pressure regulator, with a maximum operating gas pressure of 10 bar. The high 

ductility of STO at ambient temperature makes it very convenient for plastic deformation studies, 

since it is not necessary to perform the deformation at high temperatures. The sample is always 

compressed along the [010] direction. Out of the six possible {110} slip planes, four are found to 

be active under plastic deformation for the applied stress direction. However, experimentally, we 

find that only two out of these four slip planes are active, as shown in Fig. 2e, most likely due to 

sample geometry.

Diffuse neutron scattering. These experiments were performed on the CORELLI54 spectrometer 

of the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA, in a closed-cycle 

refrigerator with a base temperature of 6 K. The sample masses were ~300 mg, with counting times 

of 9 h per temperature. The Mantid package was used for data reduction, including Lorentz and 

spectral corrections55. Several crystals with different deformation levels were annealed ex situ in 

vacuum under the same conditions as the transport samples. 

Diffuse X-ray scattering. The experiments were performed on Beamline 6ID-D of the Advanced 

Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, USA. The beamline employs a superconducting 

magnet undulator and double-crystal monochromator to produce a high-energy monochromatic X-

ray beam. For our experiments, the X-ray energy was 87 keV. A Pilatus 2M CdTe detector, whose 

sensor layer is optimized for high energies, was used to collect frames at 0.1 s exposure while 

samples were continuously rotated at 1°/s about a horizontal axis. Three sets of rotations were 

performed in each measurement between which (i) the detector was translated by 5mm in both the 

horizontal and vertical directions in order to cover gaps in the scattering between detector chips, 

and (ii) the sample rotation axis was offset by ±15° from perpendicular to the beam in order to 


14

allow artifacts caused by scattering in the detector sensor layer to be masked. The counting time 

at each temperature setting was 20 minutes. See the Supplementary Material in [56] for more 

details. The data covering a range of ~±15 Å−1 in all directions, were collected down to 30 K using 

an Oxford N-Helix helium cryocooler, and transformed to S(Q) using the software package CCTW 

(https://sourceforge.net/projects/cctw/).

Raman scattering. For Raman scattering measurements we used a Horiba Jobin Yvon LabRAM 

HR Evolution spectrometer with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled CCD detector and 1800 gr/mm grating. 

The measurements were done in the confocal backscattering geometry. The BragGrate notch filters 

were used to acquire data at low energies, down to around 10 cm-1. The He-Ne laser line 

wavelength was 632.8 nm. The sample was held in a liquid-helium-flow cryostat. The focused 

laser beam spot was about 10-μm-diameter on the sample surface.

To obtain the imaginary part of the Raman susceptibility, 𝜒′′(𝜔), the raw intensities were divided 

by the Bose factor. The static real part is calculated from the frequency-dependent imaginary part 

using the Kramers-Kronig relation

𝜒′(0) = 2

𝜋 ∫ 𝑑𝜔𝜒′′(𝜔)/𝜔

∞

0

To obtain the integrals, the imaginary part of the Raman conductivity 𝜒′′(𝜔)/𝜔 was fit to a 

Lorentzian curve up to 140 cm-1 and the area under the curve was calculated after subtraction of a 

constant offset.

Transport and magnetization measurements. For low-temperature measurements we used a home-

built 3He evaporation refrigerator with external gas handling and a commercial sorption-pumped 

system. AC susceptibility was measured with the sample mounted in a conventional three-coil 


15

system, using a lock-in amplifier, both to provide the excitation current and to measure the induced 

voltages. We typically used excitation field amplitudes of ~1 Oe, frequencies of ~2 kHz, and a 

transformer preamplifier. Third-order magnetization was measured by detecting the induced 

voltage at the third harmonic of the fundamental excitation frequency, similar to previous work47. 

Transport measurements were performed using a high-throughput dipstick probe that was directly 

inserted into the 3He pot in the case of the home-built 3He system and in vacuum for the 

commercial 3He system. We used a van der Pauw contact geometry, ac excitation currents of 1 

mA RMS at 13.4 Hz, with the signal detected using an AC resistance bridge or a lock-in equipped

with a low-noise bipolar preamplifier. The temperature dependence of the measured voltages did 

not depend on precise contact placement, indicating that the samples are macroscopically 

homogeneous. For transport measurements above 2 K, we used a Quantum Design, Inc. MPMS 

system with a home-built AC resistivity probe employing a balanced source and lock-in amplifier, 

and a Quantum Design, Inc. PPMS, where DC currents (and current reversal) were used. Currents 

were typically between 1 mA and 10 mA, with higher currents used for samples with lower 

resistances. Contacts were made by wire-bonding aluminium or gold wires to sputtered gold pads, 

or by bonding Al wire directly to the sample surface. Contact resistances were typically a few 

Ohms at ambient temperature, and no nonlinearities were seen in our temperature and current range 

(except the intrinsic low-temperature effects, Fig. 5c). For measurements of the third-order 

nonlinear response in OVD samples, we employed a current of 2 mA RMS at 827 Hz. Voltage 

was detected at the third-harmonic frequency of the fundamental, and the phase was adjusted to 

three times the first harmonic phase to obtain correct separation of real and imaginary parts57. With 

this procedure, the imaginary part was negligible over the entire temperature range, as expected 

for nonlinear resistance. The sample resistance was below 10 mΩ at the relevant temperatures, 


16

which led to a heating power of less than 1 μW even at the highest applied currents. More 

importantly, we employed the high-frequency current for the measurement of third-order nonlinear 

response to eliminate sample temperature changes within one current oscillation. The Hall voltage 

was measured with a Hall bar contact configuration using the 7 T MPMS and 9 T PPMS magnets, 

with field and current reversal (and AC current in the MPMS). From the dependence of the Hall 

voltage on thickness and contact placement/size, we estimate that the corrections due to geometry 

and contact shorting are below 20%. 

Theory of the local ferroelectricity, the 𝑇𝑐 enhancement and the diffuse scattering pattern. For 

simplicity, we assume a cubic system and neglect lattice distortions and the antiferrodistortive 

transition in STO. The susceptibility of a polar optical mode can be written as42,43

𝜒𝑖𝑗

−1(𝐪, Ω)

𝐸𝑇

= −Ω2𝛿𝑖𝑗 + (𝜔𝐿

2 + 𝑐𝐿

2𝑞2)𝑞̂𝑖𝑞̂𝑗 + (𝜔𝑇

2 + 𝑐𝑇

2𝑞2)(𝛿𝑖𝑗 − 𝑞̂𝑖𝑞̂𝑗) + Λ𝑖𝑗
(2)

Here, 𝜔𝑇 and 𝑐𝑇(𝜔𝐿 𝑎𝑛𝑑 𝑐𝐿) denote the frequency and velocity of the transverse (longitudinal) 

component of the mode, and 𝐸𝑇 is an unimportant overall scale. We assume that 𝜔𝑇 ≪ 𝜔𝐿 so that 

the longitudinal mode can be safely integrated out. The coupling to the strain is given by Λ𝑖𝑗 =

𝜆1(3𝜀0)𝛿𝑖𝑗 +

3

2 𝜆2(𝜀𝑖𝑖𝛿𝑖𝑗 − 𝜀0𝛿𝑖𝑗) + 𝜆3(𝜀𝑖𝑗 − 𝜀𝑖𝑖𝛿𝑖𝑗), where the strain tensor elements have been 

decomposed in the 𝐴1𝑔, 𝐸𝑔 and 𝑇2𝑔 irreducible representations of the cubic group, with 𝜀0 =

1

3 ∑
𝑖=1..3 𝜀𝑖𝑖
denoting a volume change.

To simplify what follows, we neglect the effects of Λ𝑖𝑗 on the irrelevant longitudinal mode and set 

the coupling to the shear strain to zero (i.e., 𝜆3 = 0). Then, the matrix Λ𝑖𝑗 is diagonal, and the 

effect of the strain field is to lift the degeneracy of the modes in the transverse sector 𝜔𝑇

2𝛿𝑖𝑗 →

𝜔𝑖

2𝛿𝑖𝑗 = (𝜔𝑇

2 + Λ𝑖𝑖)𝛿𝑖𝑗. To find the strain field we solve the textbook problem of an edge 


17

dislocation along the c-axis58. In complex notation, where 𝑢 = 𝑢𝑥 + 𝑖𝑢𝑦 is the displacement and 

𝑏 = 𝑏𝑥 + 𝑖𝑏𝑦 is the Burgers vector in the plane normal to the c-axis, the solution for a dislocation 

at position 𝑧0 = 𝑥0 + 𝑖𝑦0 is, up to an unimportant constant, given by 𝑢(𝑏, 𝑧 − 𝑧0), where

𝑢(𝑏, 𝑧) = −𝑖𝑏

2𝜋 log 𝑧 +
1

4(1 − 𝜎) (𝑖𝑏

2𝜋 log 𝑧𝑧̅ − 𝑖𝑏̅

2𝜋

𝑧
𝑧̅).
(3)

Here, an overline denotes complex conjugation. Using Eq. (3), the strain fields are obtained 

according to, 𝜀 ∝

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑧 ,

𝜕𝑢

𝜕𝑧̅. In the case of the infinite wall discussed in the main text, the resultant

strain is obtained exactly by summing up a relevant series of pairs of dislocations at positions 𝑧𝑛 =

𝑖

ℎ

2 + 2𝑖ℎ𝑛, 𝑧𝑛

′ = −

𝑖ℎ

2 + 2𝑖ℎ𝑛 where ℎ is the distance between two dislocations with the same 

Burgers vector, and 𝑏 = 1 + 𝑖, 𝑏′ = 1 − 𝑖. 

We calculate the diffuse scattering from the dislocation wall by a direct numerical evaluation of 

the kinetic scattering sum using the displacements in Eq. (3) on a square lattice. The results in Fig. 

2c,d were obtained on a 400  400 lattice, using |𝑏| = |𝑏′| = 2√2 (assuming a dislocation 

bunching factor of two, i.e., pairs of dislocations) and nominal h = 32 lattice units. For the larger 

bunching factor calculations (Fig. S5), an 800  800 lattice was used, as well as h = 64 lattice units 

to obtain the same dislocation density per unit wall length. Scatterings from a horizontal and a 

vertical wall were summed incoherently (addition of intensities). For a more realistic comparison 

with experiment, we introduced noise by randomly shifting each dislocation by 0 or 1 lattice units

along the wall direction. This also gives an average h increased by 0.5 lattice units, decreases 

finite-size artifacts, and limits the length of the cross-shaped features in reciprocal space.

By substituting the position-dependent 𝜀𝑖𝑗(𝑧) in Λ𝑖𝑗, we obtain a set of three frequencies, 𝜔𝑖

2(𝑧) =

𝜔𝑇

2 + Λ𝑖𝑖(𝑧), which in turn define an inhomogeneous dimensionless parameter 𝑟𝑖(𝑧) = 𝜔𝑖

2(𝑧)/𝜔𝑇

2


18

that sets the distance to the putative ferroelectric QCP for a transverse mode polarized along the 𝑖

axis (with 𝑟𝑖 < 0 denoting the ordered state and 𝑟𝑖 > 0 denoting the disordered state). We note that

the main difference between a single dislocation and a wall is that the strain decays polynomially 

for the former, 𝜀 ∼

|𝑏|

𝑟 , and exponentially for the latter, 𝜀 ∼ 𝑒−𝑟/|𝑏|. To produce Fig. 5, we plot 

𝑟min = min 𝑟𝑖. Recall that the dimensionless parameter 𝑟 = 1 for bulk undeformed STO and 𝑟 =

0 at the putative QCP. From DFT calculations46, we estimate 𝜆1 ≈ −5 × 103meV2 and 𝜆2 =

−2 × 104meV2. We set the polar mode frequency to 𝜔𝑇

2 = (2 meV)2 for definitiveness. Upon

examining Eq. (2), it is clear that very close to the dislocation core, where the strain 𝜀 ∼ 1, the 

physics is dominated by the strain terms, since |𝜆1| and |𝜆2| are very large compared to the soft 

mode. However, there will be a region around any dislocation where 𝜔min will be reduced and 

thus 𝑟min will become smaller than 1. In this region, 𝑇𝑐 will be enhanced, as proximity to the 

ferroelectric QCP is known, both experimentally26,45 and theoretically41,42,43 , to enhance 𝑇𝑐. We 

did not attempt a quantitative estimate of the effect of the softening on 𝑇𝑐, as this is model 

dependent and not known at the QCP41,42,43. However, one can expect a significant change in 𝑇𝑐 if 

𝑟 changes by a quantity of order one. Thus, the shaded regions in Fig. 6 correspond to 0 < 𝑟min ≤

1/2.

We note that the real material will also have wall intersection points, which act like strain 

multipoles and should have an associated long-range strain component. However, from the fact 

that we do not observe appreciable Bragg peak broadening, we conclude that their volume fraction 

must be very small; this is in line with the TEM observation16 of a characteristic dislocation bundle 

distance in the micrometre range.


19

Acknowledgements

We thank L. J. Thompson and Z. Jiang for help with sample preparation, S. L. Griffitt and A. Najev 

for assistance with the design and manufacturing of polishing rigs, C. N. Irfan Habeeb for help 

with figures, D. Robinson and S. Rosenkranz for assistance with X-ray scattering experiments, and 

B. I. Shklovskii, Y. Ayino, V. Pribiag, B. Kalisky and J. Ruhman for discussions and comments.

The work at the University of Minnesota was funded by the U.S. Department of Energy through 

the University of Minnesota Center for Quantum Materials, under Grant No. DE-SC-0016371. The 

work at Argonne was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic 

Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division. A portion of this research used 

resources at the Spallation Neutron Source, a DOE Office of Science User Facility operated by the 

Oak Ridge National Laboratory. This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a 

U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office 

of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. DP 

acknowledges support from the Croatian Science Foundation through grant no. UIP-2020-02-

9494. Sputtering and contacting of samples was conducted in the Minnesota Nano Center, which 

is supported by the National Science Foundation through the National Nano Coordinated 

Infrastructure Network, Award Number NNCI -1542202. 

Author Contributions

DP and MG conceived the research; SH, RJS, DP, BD and JR performed transport and 

susceptibility measurements; SH, ZWA, DP and YL performed neutron scattering experiments 

and analysed data; ZWA, RJS, DP, MJK and RO performed X-ray scattering experiments and 

analysed data; LY and YL performed Raman scattering experiments; SH, LY, DP and YL analysed 

Raman data; AK and RMF performed calculations; CL provided and characterized samples; CL 


20

and DP oversaw transport measurements by SH, BD and JR; ML and DP designed and 

manufactured the pressure cells; DP, AK and MG wrote the paper, with input from all authors. 

Data and materials availability 

All data and materials are available from corresponding authors upon reasonable request.


21

Fig. 1 | Structure of plastically deformed STO. (a) Representative engineering stress-strain 
curve for a 0.2% Nb-doped STO crystal at 300 K, with compressive uniaxial stress along one of 
the cubic principal axes. The orange lines indicate the elastic regime with Young’s modulus ~270 
GPa. An extended plastic region is seen, with work hardening at high strain, similar to undoped 
STO16. The inset is a schematic of the high-force uniaxial pressure cell, which uses a piston and 
gas pressure to apply stress on a polished sample. A linear variable transformer (LVT) is used to 
measure sample deformation. (b) Diffuse neutron scattering for an oxygen-vacancy-doped (OVD) 
STO sample with compressive deformation (engineering strain) ε = 4.2%, at 10 K. The sample 
was deformed ex situ at 300 K, with stress along [010]. The HK0 plane, which contains the stress 
direction, displays Bragg-peak elongations (asterisms) that are absent in other planes (Fig. S3). (c) 
Simplified cross-section schematic of a plastically deformed crystal that would show surface steps
(Fig. S2) and asterisms. Crossed lines represent [110] and [1-10] crystallographic planes, which 
are the dominant dislocation slip planes. The differently shaded blue regions are homogeneously 
tilted by +2° and -2°, and red lines represent dislocation structures (walls) with high dislocation 
density. In a real material, there is a distribution of tilts and sizes of the regions. (d) Comparison 
of diffuse X-ray scattering profiles around the 716 Bragg peak for 0.2% Nb samples with ε = 0%,
0.5% and 3%, at 30 K. Stress is along [010], and the feature around q = -0.1 in the ε = 0% sample 
is from a detector artefact. The tails of the peaks are likely dominated by dislocation scattering34, 
and show 2-3 times higher intensity in the deformed samples. The ε = 0.5% sample does not show 
asterisms, whereas the ε = 3% sample does (Fig. S4), but the scattering appears similar, suggesting 
that the dislocation density does not significantly change with increasing strain above ε = 0.5%.


22

Fig. 2 | Local structure of deformed STO from diffuse neutron scattering. (a) Quasi-elastic 
diffuse neutron scattering around the -200 (a) and 220 (b) Bragg peaks of an OVD sample with ε 
= 4.2% (same sample as in Fig. 1b). The faint rings are background scattering from the sample 
holder. Several cross-like patterns are observed, with a grainy substructure, indicating long-range 
dislocation correlations. Other Brillouin zones are shown in Fig. S5. (c),(d) Calculated diffuse 
scattering from a dislocation wall of the form depicted in (e), with {110} slip planes. Scattering 
from horizontal and vertical domain walls is superimposed with equal weight. Streaks similar to 
the experimental features are found, and the correct Bragg peak splitting is obtained for a 
dislocation distance of 16 unit cells. The best agreement with experiment is obtained when each 
dislocation in (e) has a Burgers vector amplitude corresponding to two unit cells (see Methods and 
Fig. S6 for other values). The resolution-limited width of the diffuse streaks indicates a wall length 
of at least ~100 unit cells. Only two out of four possible slip planes are active (see Methods).


23

Fig. 3 | Inversion-symmetry breaking and ferroelectric fluctuations in deformed STO. (a-c) 
Polarized Raman scattering in two undoped STO crystals: undeformed (grey lines) and with ε = 
5.6% deformation (coloured lines), measured at 15 K, 40 K and 120 K, respectively. Two 
deformation-induced features are seen: hard TO2 and TO4 modes indicative of inversion-
symmetry breaking (see Fig. S7 for TO4), and a strong, broad feature at low energies that 
corresponds to polar fluctuations. (d) Difference between the imaginary parts of the Raman 
susceptibility, Δχ’’, of an undeformed and a deformed sample with 0.2% Nb reveals essentially 
the same features as in the undoped case (a-c). The sharp dip around 10 cm-1 is an artifact of the 
subtraction of the signal from the undeformed sample. (e) Zero-frequency (static) real part of the 
Raman susceptibility obtained from the data in (a-d), showing the divergence of the broad low-
energy feature upon cooling. The line is a 1/T Curie dependence, indicative of quantum critical 
fluctuations. (f) Characteristic frequency of the broad peak, marked by arrows in (a-d), as a 
function of temperature. A strong softening of the characteristic fluctuation scale is observed. Due 
to the phonon peak around 50 cm-1, the broad peak position could not be unambiguously 
determined above 40 K for the undoped sample.


24

Fig. 4 | Low-temperature superconducting properties of plastically deformed STO. (a) 
Superconducting phase diagram of undeformed STO, showing the midpoints of resistive 
transitions for OVD (brown line) and Nb-doped (grey line) samples, based on [29]. Vertical lines: 
doping levels at which additional bands cross the Fermi level29. Stars: midpoints of the resistive 
transitions in the channel perpendicular to the stress direction (R | , see sketch); colours correspond 
to those in (b-d) and indicate the deformation level. (b) Resistance for 0.2% Nb and ε = 6%, 
measured parallel and perpendicular to the stress direction, normalized to the respective value (Rn) 
at 0.8 K. The bulk Tc of undeformed STO at this doping level is about12 0.3 K, below the base 
temperature of our 3He refrigerator. (c,d) Same measurement as in (b) for 1% Nb and ε = 2%, and 
1.4% Nb and ε = 8.7%, respectively. (e) Anisotropy of the superconducting response of a sample 
with 1% Nb and ε = 5.6%: the critical magnetic field Hc, obtained from resistivity measurements, 
is substantially different for field orientations along and perpendicular to the stress direction. Inset:
ac susceptibility of a 0.2% Nb, ε = 7.5% sample, with two orientations of the applied magnetic 
field, also showing a strong anisotropy. (f) Magnetic measurements of 0.2% Nb samples. Main 
panel: linear ac susceptibility at three deformation levels. The onset of significant diamagnetism 
corresponds to the resistivity downturn temperatures, and there is a small diamagnetic contribution 
at even higher temperatures. The feature around 1.2 K is due to the aluminium foil in the coil 
holder. Inset: third-order nonlinear susceptibility χ3 shows an onset temperature similar to that seen 
in the resistivity.


25

Fig. 5 | Evidence for high-temperature superconducting correlations in plastically deformed 
STO. (a) Resistivity of an OVD sample, with carrier density ~ 4·1017 cm-3 and ε = 6%, measured 
parallel and perpendicular to deformation, normalized to values at 40 K. A dramatic anisotropy 
develops below ~30 K, similar to the superconducting behaviour in Fig. 3, and R | falls roughly an 
order of magnitude below the resistance of an undeformed sample (R0, dashed line). Inset: ratio of 
measured ρ | to extrapolated normal-state resistivity ρn = ρ0 + a2 T2, as observed for an undeformed 
OVD sample, an OVD sample with ε = 6%, and a sample with 0.2% Nb and ε = 6% (b) R | and R||
for 0.2% Nb and ε = 6%: a significant anisotropy develops already at temperatures much higher 
than the resistive Tc. (c) Third-order nonlinear response of an OVD sample with ε = 6% (same as 
in (a)), plotted as the ratio between third-harmonic and first-harmonic voltage. Inset: effective 
resistance (voltage-to-current ratio), normalized to the low-current values, versus applied current 
for the same sample. A strong nonlinearity develops at low temperatures, consistent with the third-
harmonic measurement. (d) Inverse residual resistivity ratios (RRR-1) defined as R | (5 K)/R | (90 
K) for samples with 0.2% Nb, as a function of deformation. Open squares: measured RRR-1 values. 
Circles: values extrapolated from a pure T2 dependence. Inset: T2-extrapolated (green arrow) and 
measured (orange arrow) residual resistivities, with data scaled to the respective values at 90 K 
(𝑅̃), for a sample with ε = 6%. All samples were cut from the same crystal before deformation.


26

Fig. 6 | Local 𝑻𝒄 enhancement due to ferroelectric fluctuations enhanced by dislocation-
induced strain. (a) Inhomogeneous dimensionless parameter 𝑟min = 𝜔min

2
/𝜔𝑇

2, which measures 

the distance to the ferroelectric phase transition. 𝑟min = 1: bulk undeformed sample. 𝑟min < 0: 
ferroelectric order. 𝑟min(𝑥, 𝑦) is calculated from the strain field generated by a single dislocation 
with Burgers vector along [110] and magnitude 𝑏 = 𝑎, where 𝑎 = 3.9 Å is the lattice constant. 
The white shaded area corresponds to 0 < 𝑟min < 1/2, where an enhancement of 𝑇𝑐 of the order 
1 is expected. For added clarity, the contour 𝑟min = 0 (where the system is at the QCP) is indicated 
as a thick black line. Deeper toward the center of the image, i.e., approaching the dislocation core, 
strain is so strong that ferroelectricity sets in. Outside the shaded region, i.e., farther from the 
dislocation core, strain is weak and 𝑇c enhancement is weak. (b) Similar 𝑟min(𝑥, 𝑦) map for a 
dislocation wall of the type shown in Fig. 2e. Note that here the width of the white area is 
comparable to 𝑎, a result of the rapid decay of the strain away from the wall. Whereas at small 
distances from the dislocation there is a microscopic substructure (the “blips” at x/a ~ ±15 
essentially arise from the fact that 𝑟min tracks the lowest of the three TO mode frequencies, which 
induces an effective nonlinearity), in the region where 𝑇𝑐 is enhanced, this structure is essentially 
gone, again due to the rapid decay. This implies that the 𝑇𝑐 enhancement is largely independent of 
the details of the wall structure. Note that the figure depicts a two-dimensional cut of the three-
dimensional system, i.e., the shaded area is a cross section of a thin sheet of enhanced 𝑇c.


27

References

1 Pfeiffer, E. R. & Schooley, J. F. Effect of stress on the superconductive transition temperature 
of strontium titanate. Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 783-785 (1967).

2 Chu, J.-H. et al., In-plane resistivity anisotropy in an underdoped iron arsenide superconductor. 
Science 329, 824-826 (2010).

3 Steppke, A. et al. Strong peak in Tc of Sr2RuO4 under uniaxial pressure. Science 335¸ eaaf9398 
(2017).

4 Herrera, C. et al. Strain-engineered interaction of quantum polar and superconducting phases. 
Phys. Rev. Materials 3, 124801 (2019).

5 Jakobsen, B. et al. Formation and subdivision of deformation structures during plastic 
deformation. Science 321, 889-892 (2006).

6 Sugiyama, I., Shibata, N., Wang, Z., Kobayashi, S. Yamamoto, T. & Ikuhara, Y. Ferromagnetic 
dislocations in antiferromagnetic NiO. Nat. Nanotech. 8, 266-270 (2013).

7 Shimada, T., Xu, T., Araki, Y. Wang, J. & Kitamura, T. Multiferroic dislocations in 
ferroelectric PbTiO3. Nano Lett. 17, 2674-2680 (2017).

8 Kolhatkar, G. et al. Second harmonic generation investigation of symmetry breaking and 
flexoelectricity induced by nanoindentations in SrTiO3. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1901266 (2019). 

9 Willa, R., Hecker, M., Fernandes, R. M. & Schmalian, J. Inhomogeneous time-reversal 
symmetry breaking in Sr2RuO4. arxiv:2011.01941 (2020).

10 Masuda, K., Lich, L. V., Shimada, T. & Kitamura, T. Periodically-arrayed ferroelectric 
nanostructures induced by dislocation structures in strontium titanate. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
21, 22756-22762 (2019).

11 Schooley, J. F., Hosler, W. R. & Cohen, M. L. Superconductivity in semiconducting SrTiO3. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 474-475 (1964).

12 Collignon, C., Lin, X., Rischau, C. W., Fauqué, B. & Behnia, K. Metallicity and 
superconductivity in doped strontium titanate. Annu. Rev. Cond. Matt. Phys. 10, 25-44 (2019).

13 Gastiasoro, M. N., Ruhman, J. & Fernandes, R. Superconductivity in dilute SrTiO3: a review. 
Ann. Phys. 417, 168107 (2020).

14 Swartz, A. G. et al. Polaronic behaviour in a weak-coupling superconductor. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. USA 115, 1475-1480 (2018).

15 Cava, R. J. Oxide superconductors. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 83, 5-28 (2000).

16 Gumbsch, P., Taeri-Baghbadrani, S., Brunner, D., Sigle, W. & Rühle, M. Plasticity and 
inverse brittle-to-ductile transition in strontium titanate. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 085505 (2001).

17 Hirel, P., Carrez, P. & Cordier, P. From glissile to sessile: effect of temperature on <110> 
dislocations in perovskite materials. Scripta Materialia 120, 67-70 (2016).

18 Gay, P. & Honeycombe, R. W. K. X-ray asterisms from deformed crystals. Proc. Phys. Soc. A
64, 844-845 (1951).


28

19 Lewis, D. X-ray microbeam study of deformation bands in aluminium. Brit. J. Appl. Phys. 11, 
162-164 (1960).

20 Barabash, R. I. & Klimanek, P. X-ray scattering by crystals with local lattice rotation fields. J. 
Appl. Cryst. 32, 1050-1059 (1999).

21 Cowley, R. A. The phase transition of strontium titanate. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 354, 
2799-2814 (1996).

22 Haeni, J. H. et al. Room-temperature ferroelectricity in strained SrTiO3. Nature 430, 758-761 
(2004).

23 Burke, W. J. & Pressley, R. J. Stress induced ferroelectricity in SrTiO3. Solid State 
Communications 9, 191 (1971).
24 M. J. Coak, C. R. S. Haines, C. Liu, G. G. Guzmán-Verri, and S. S. Saxena. Pressure 
dependence of ferroelectric quantum critical fluctuations. Phys. Rev. B. 100, 214111 (2019).
25 Gao, P. et al., Atomic-scale measurement of flexoelectric polarization at SrTiO3 dislocations. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 267601 (2018).

26 Rischau, C. W. et al. A ferroelectric quantum phase transition inside the superconducting 
dome of Sr1-xCaxTiO3-δ. Nat. Phys. 13, 643-648 (2017).

27 Gallais, Y. et al., Observation of incipient charge nematicity in Ba(Fe1-xCox)2As2. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 111, 267001 (2013).

28 Van Mechelen, J. L. M. et al. Electron-phonon interaction and charge carrier mass 
enhancement in SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 226403 (2008).

29 Lin, X. et al. Critical doping for onset of two-band superconductivity in SrTiO3-δ. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 112, 207002 (2014).

30 Ayino, Y., Yue, J., Wang, T., Jalan, B. & Pribiag, V. S. Evidence for multi-band 
superconductivity above the Pauli limit in NdxSr1-xTiO3. arXiv:1812.02875 (2018).

31 Liu, C. et al. Two-dimensional superconductivity and anisotropic transport at KTaO3 (111) 
interfaces. Science 371, 716-721 (2021).

32 Vagli, R., Attanasio, C., Maritato, L. & Ruosi, A. Explanation of the resistance-peak anomaly 
in nonhomogeneous superconductors. Phys. Rev. B 47, 15302-15303 (1993).

33 Lin, X., Fauqué, B. & Behnia, K. Scalable T2 resistivity in a small single-component Fermi 
surface. Science 349, 945-948 (2015).

34 Patterson, E. A. et al. Temperature-dependent deformation and dislocation density in SrTiO3
(001) single crystals. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 99, 3411-3420 (2016).

35 Spinelli, A., Torija, M. A., Liu, C., Jan, C. & Leighton, C. Electronic transport in doped 
SrTiO3: conduction mechanisms and potential applications. Phys. Rev. B 81, 155110 (2010).

36 Coey, J. M. D., Venkatesan, M. & Stamenov, P. J. Surface magnetism of strontium titanate. J. 
Phys.: Condens. Matter 28, 485001 (2016).

37 Aird, A. & Salje, E. K. H. Sheet superconductivity in twin walls: experimental evidence of 
WO3-x. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 10, L377-L380 (1998).


29

38 Lin, Y.-H., Chen, Y. & Goldman, A. M. Indications of superconductivity at somewhat 
elevated temperatures in strontium titanate subjected to high electric fields. Phys. Rev. B 82, 
172507 (2010).

39 Uwe, H. & Sakudo, T. Stress-induced ferroelectricity and soft phonon modes in SrTiO3. Phys. 
Rev. B 13, 271-286 (1976).

40 Rowley, S. et al. Superconductivity in the vicinity of a ferroelectric quantum phase transition. 
arXiv:1801.08121 (2018).

41 Edge, J. M., Kedem, Y., Aschauer, U., Spaldin, N. A. & Balatsky. A. V. Quantum critical 
origin of the superconducting dome in SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 247002 (2015).

42 Kozii, V., Bi, Z. & Ruhman, J. Superconductivity near a ferroelectric quantum critical point in 
ultralow-density Dirac materials. Phys. Rev. X 9, 031046 (2019).

43 Gastiasoro, M. N., Trevisan, T. V. & Fernandes, R. M. Anisotropic superconductivity 
mediated by ferroelectric fluctuations in cubic systems with spin-orbit coupling. Phys. Rev. B
101, 174501 (2020).

44 van der Marel, D., Barantani, F. & Rischau, C. W. Possible mechanism for superconductivity 
in doped SrTiO3. Phys. Rev. Research 1, 013003 (2019).

45 Ahadi, K. et al. Enhancing superconductivity in SrTiO3 films with strain. Sci. Adv. 5, 
eaaw0120 (2019).

46 K. Dunnett, A. Narayan, N. A. Spaldin, and A. V. Balatsky. Strain and ferroelectric soft mode 
induced superconductivity in strontium titanate. Phys. Rev. B 97, 144506 (2018).

47 Pelc, D., Anderson, Z., Yu, B., Leighton, C. & Greven, M. Universal superconducting 
precursor in three classes of unconventional superconductors. Nat. Commun. 10, 2729 (2019).

48 Pai, Y.-Y. et al. One-dimensional nature of superconductivity at the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 147001 (2018).

49 McCalla, E., Gastiasoro, M. N., Cassuto, G., Fernandes, R. M. & Leighton, C. Low-
temperature specific heat of doped SrTiO3: doping dependence of the effective mass and 
Kadowaki-Woods scaling violation. Phys. Rev. Materials 3, 022001(R) (2019).

50 Jiang, M. P. et al. The origin of incipient ferroelectricity in lead telluride. Nat. Commun. 7, 
12291 (2016).

51 Aktas, O., Crossley, S., Carpenter, M. A. & Salje, E. K. H. Polar correlations and defect-
induced ferroelectricity in cryogenic KTaO3. Phys. Rev. B 90, 165309 (2014).

52 Sleight, A. W. Bismuthates: BaBiO3 and related superconducting phases. Physica C 514, 152-
165 (2015).

53 Schilling, J. S., High pressure effects, in Handbook of High-temperature Superconductivity, 
eds. J. R. Schrieffer, J. S. Brooks (Springer, Berlin, 2007).

54 Ye, F., Liu, Y., Whitfield, R., Osborn, R. & Rosenkranz, S. Implementation of cross 
correlation for energy discrimination on the time-of-flight spectrometer CORELLI. J. Appl. 
Cryst. 51, 315-322 (2018).


30

55 Michels-Clark, T. M., Savici, A. T., Lynch, V. E., Wang, X. & Hoffmann, C. M. Expanding 
Lorentz and spectrum corrections to large volumes of reciprocal space for single-crystal time-of-
flight neutron diffraction. J. Appl. Cryst. 49, 497-506 (2016).

56 Krogstad, M. J. et al. Reciprocal space imaging of ionic correlations in intercalation 
compounds. Nat. Mater. 19, 63–68 (2020).

57 Drobac, Đ., Marohnić, Ž., Živković, I. & Prester, M. The role of lock-in phase setting in ac 
susceptibility measurements. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 84, 054708 (2013).

58 Landau, L. D. & Lifshitz, E. M. Theory of elasticity (Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1986)


1

Supplementary Material for

Ferroelectric quantum criticality and enhanced superconductivity in 

plastically deformed strontium titanate

S. Hameed, D. Pelc, Z. W. Anderson, A. Klein, R. J. Spieker, L. Yue, B. Das, J. Ramberger, M. 
Lukas, Y. Liu, M. J. Krogstad, R. Osborn, Y. Li, C. Leighton, R. M. Fernandes, and M. Greven


2

Supplementary Text

Dislocation scattering. The observed resistivity anisotropy that sets in below 30-50 K in deformed 
samples is striking, especially in OVD crystals (Fig. 5a). However, it is important to discuss its 
possible origins in dislocation scattering mechanisms that have been known to be active in other 
semiconductors such as GaN [1,2]. We argue here that the dislocations induced by plastic 
deformation cause a simple residual resistivity increase that is roughly the same for current flow 
along and perpendicular to the stress direction. Experimentally, this is seen from Fig. S9b: the two 
resistance channels R|| and R | for a sample with 0.2% Nb and ε = 6% show similar residual 
resistivities extrapolated from the T2 temperature dependence. We note that a similar analysis is 
not feasible for OVD samples with very low carrier density, given the limited temperature range 
of the T2 dependence (especially in R||), but Fig. S9a nevertheless indicates that an increase in 
dislocation density also influences the residual resistivity there. In semiconductors such as GaN, 
charged-dislocation scattering is also visible in the temperature dependence of the Hall number
[2]. Yet the Hall number of deformed STO is temperature-independent and does not depend on the 
current direction (Fig. S12). It therefore is unlikely that the nontrivial temperature dependence of
R | results from dislocation-induced changes of carrier density.

Anisotropic mobility is in principle expected for scattering from a single dislocation in a metal [3].
However, the slip planes in STO are {110}, and multiple slip systems are active for stress along 
[100]. This likely averages out the anisotropy and leads to a simple homogeneous residual 
resistivity increase. It is not clear how dislocation scattering could lead to a decrease of R | with 
deformation, as seen most clearly in OVD samples (Figs. 5a and S9a). The weak dependence of 
the measured RRR in the perpendicular channel on strain (Fig. 5d) is thus probably accidental and
originates from the compensation of two effects: an increase of the extrapolated residual resistivity 
due to dislocations, and a decrease due to possible superconducting correlations that do not 
percolate.


3

Fig. S1 | Stress-strain diagram of doped strontium titanate. Engineering stress-strain curve for 
a 2% Nb-doped STO crystal at 300 K, compressed along [010] to a high strain of ~8.7%. The 
elastic and work-hardening regimes are indicated.


4

Fig. S2 | Stress-induced surface deformation. Photograph of the surface of a Nb-doped sample 
deformed to 7% in compression (the applied force direction is horizontal and along [010]), 
showing lines/ridges in a direction perpendicular to the stress. The incident angle of the light is 
roughly 45° with respect to the surface, and the scale bar is 100 μm.


5

Undeformed
Deformed

Fig. S3 | Neutron scattering in undeformed and deformed STO. Reciprocal space maps of (a,b) 
OVD undeformed and (c,d) 4.2% deformed STO single crystals in the HK0 and H0L planes, 
measured at 10 K. Sharp Bragg peaks and a slight mosaicity (visible in high Brillouin zones) are 
observed in the undeformed sample. For the deformed sample, asterisms (same as Fig. 1b) are seen 
in the HK0 plane which contains the stress direction. In contrast, the Bragg peaks remain sharp in 
other planes, as exemplified in (d) for H0L. Note that the usual superstructure peaks at half-integer 
positions are observed below the cubic-to-tetragonal phase transition of ~100 K, and that they also 
show asterisms whose intersections with the H0L plane are visible in higher zones in (d).


6

Fig. S4 | Diffuse X-ray scattering in deformed STO. Diffuse X-ray scattering at 30 K for samples
with 0.2% Nb and (a) ε = 0.5% and (b) ε = 3%. The HK6 plane is shown, and the white box in (a) 
marks the integration region used to obtain Fig. 1d. The black areas are masked detector artifacts
(see Methods). Strong asterisms similar to the OVD sample with ε = 4.2% (Fig. 1b) are observed
for the sample with high deformation in (b), while the sample with low deformation shows almost 
no asterisms. 


7

Fig. S5 | Diffuse neutron scattering in deformed STO. Bragg peaks and diffuse scattering in an 
OVD sample with ε = 4.2% (same as in Fig. 3), in different Brillouin zones near the: (a) 040 Bragg 
peak, (b) 020 Bragg peak, (c) 220 Bragg peak, (d) -200 Bragg peak, (e) reciprocal space origin, 
and (f) 220 Bragg peak (same as Fig. 3b). Cross-like patterns (highlighted in Fig. 3b) are most 
clearly seen in (d) and (f), with additional horizontal lines through the centres of the asterisms; the 
220 zone shows diagonal streaks, while secondary diffuse peaks are visible in the higher-order 040 
zone. The streaks around the origin in (e) are most likely from double Bragg scattering, but could 
include other contributions from long-range correlated dislocation structure.


8

Fig. S6 | Diffuse scattering from a dislocation wall. (a,b) Calculated scattering from a dislocation 
wall as depicted in Fig. 2e, but without dislocation bunching (single dislocations), around the -200 
and 220 Bragg positions, respectively. (c,d) Calculated scattering from a dislocation wall with four
dislocations per bunch, same Bragg positions as above. The bunching clearly influences the 
periodicity of the diffuse scattering streak structures, and walls with significant bunching also 
show a sizable intensity on the line that joins the two split Bragg peaks.


9

Fig. S7 | Hard polar mode in deformed STO. (a) Raman intensity difference between two 
undoped STO samples, with ε = 0% and ε = 2%. The hard polar TO4 mode appears in the deformed 
sample, giving direct evidence of local inversion-symmetry breaking, similar to the TO2 mode in 
Fig. 4. (b) comparison of the integrated intensities of the TO4 mode and low-energy broad feature 
deformed undoped STO. The TO4 intensity clearly decays much slower compared to the Curie-
Weiss-like dependence of the broad feature.


10

Fig. S8 | Strain dependence of Tc in a Nb-doped STO crystal. Resistance data in the 
perpendicular channel for samples with 0.2% Nb and different deformation levels. A strong 
enhancement of the resistive Tc with increasing deformation is observed.


11

Fig. S9 | Change of residual resistivity with deformation. (a) Comparison of resistivities of 
deformed and undeformed OVD samples. The full green line is the resistivity perpendicular to the 
stress in a 4.2% deformed crystal, normalized to the value at 40 K; the grey line is the resistivity 
of an undeformed crystal annealed under the same conditions and normalized in the same way. A 
more meaningful comparison is obtained if we adjust for the fact that the residual resistivity at T
= 0 increases with deformation (purple line). To do this, we shift the undeformed sample resistivity
up by a constant offset and subsequently normalize the shifted curve to the value at 40 K, so as to 
match the slopes of the T2 dependences in the two samples (in the limited temperature range where 
this is possible). In this way, the extrapolated normal-state resistivities overlap. (b) Resistivities 
parallel and perpendicular to the stress direction for a sample with 0.2% Nb and ε = 6% (same data 
as in Fig. 5b, normalized in such a way that they overlap within the T2 regime above ~50 K). The 
residual resistivities extrapolated from a T 2 temperature dependence (dashed line) are similar for 
both directions, indicating that the increase in dislocation density upon plastic deformation leads 
to a simple direction-independent residual resistivity increase.


12

Fig. S10 | Resistivity downturns in deformed STO in dependence on doping. Normalized 
perpendicular resistances of two oxygen-vacancy-doped samples ((a) and (b)) and a sample with 
0.2% Nb (c) plotted versus T2. All samples are deformed to 6% in compression. The sample in (b) 
is the same as in (a), additionally annealed at 900°C for 1 h. A clear downward deviation in the 
resistance develops below the temperatures marked by arrows. Carrier densities are from Hall 
number measurements at 50 K. The samples in (b) and (c) have similar carrier densities, which 
indicates that the effect does not substantially depend on the type of dopant.


13

Fig. S11 | Magnetic field effect on the perpendicular resistance. (a) OVD sample, ε = 4.2%,
and (b) 0.2% Nb sample, ε = 2%. Due to the low carrier concentration, the OVD sample has a 
large positive normal-state magnetoresistance, which enhances the relative resistivity decrease on 
cooling; the resistance still reaches very low values in a 7 T field. For the Nb-doped sample, the 
expected low-temperature magnetoresistance is ~20% at this doping level and field4,5, whereas the 
observed value is roughly 100%. The dashed line is an extrapolation of the high-temperature T2

behavior. The magnetic field is applied parallel to the shortest sample axis, perpendicular to both 
the stress and current directions.


14

Fig. S12 | Carrier density in deformed STO samples. Electron density derived from Hall effect 
measurements in a 9 T field, for samples with 0.2% Nb, ε = 2% (blue symbols) and 1.4% Nb, ε = 
2% (green symbols). There is no strong temperature dependence in either the direction parallel or 
perpendicular to stress. The density for the 0.2% Nb sample is about 0.7 times the expected density 
if every Nb dopant is substitutional and ionized. This difference is most likely due to acceptor 
impurities, and it is consistent with previous measurements on similar samples5. The density for 
the 1.4% Nb sample is slightly higher than expected, which could be related to current contact size 
corrections in Hall voltage measurements.

0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140

Temperature (K)

1019

1020

1021

Carrier density (cm-3)

n , x = 0.014
n||,  x = 0.014

n , x = 0.002

n||,  x = 0.002


15

Supplementary References

1 Weimann, N. G. & Eastman, L. F. Scattering of electrons at threading dislocations in GaN. J. 
Appl. Phys. 83, 3656 (1998)

2 Look, D. C. & Sizelove, J. R. Dislocation scattering in GaN. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1237 (1999)

3 Dexter, D. L. Scattering of electrons in metals by dislocations. Phys. Rev. 86, 770 (1952)

4 Lin, X. et al. Critical doping for onset of two-band superconductivity in SrTiO3-δ. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 112, 207002 (2014)

5 Spinelli, A., Torija, M. A., Liu, C., Jan, C. & Leighton, C. Electronic transport in doped SrTiO3: 
conduction mechanisms and potential applications. Phys. Rev. B 81, 155110 (2010)


