1 
 

Fluid Guided CVD Growth for Large-scale Monolayer Two-dimensional 

Materials  

Dong Zhou a,b,#, Ji Langa,c,#, Nicholas Yoob,d, Raymond R. Unocice, Qianhong Wua,c,*, Bo Lia,b,* 

aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Villanova University, Villanova, PA, 19085, United States 

bHybrid Nano-Architectures and Advanced Manufacturing Laboratory, Villanova University, Villanova, 

PA, 19085, United States  

cCellular Biomechanics and Sports Science Laboratory, Villanova University, Villanova, PA, 19085, 

United States 

dDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Villanova University, Villanova, PA, 19085, 

United States 

eCenter for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 

37831, United States 

ABSTRACT: Atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD) has been used extensively 

for synthesizing two-dimensional (2D) materials, due to its low cost and promise for high-quality 

monolayer crystal synthesis. However, the understanding of the reaction mechanism and the key 

parameters affecting the APCVD processes is still in its embryonic stage. Hence, the scalability of the 

APCVD method in achieving large scale continuous film remains very poor. Here, we use MoSe2 as a 

model system and present a fluid guided growth strategy for understanding and controlling the growth 

of 2D materials. Through the integration of experiment and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 

analysis in the full-reactor scale, we identified three key parameters: precursor mixing, fluid velocity 

and shear stress, which play a critical role in the APCVD process. By modifying the geometry of the 

growth setup, to enhance precursor mixing and decrease nearby velocity shear rate and adjusting flow 

direction, we have successfully obtained inch-scale monolayer MoSe2. This unprecedented success of 

achieving scalable 2D materials through fluidic design lays the foundation for designing new CVD 

systems to achieve the scalable synthesis of nanomaterials.  


2 
 

KEYWORDS: two-dimensional materials, atmospheric pressure chemical deposition, computational 

fluid dynamics, fluid guided, precursor mixing, fluid velocity, shear stress 

INTRODUCTION 

Two-dimensional (2D) materials have tremendous potential in revolutionizing a wide range of 

industries, including but not limited to energy storage1,2, health care3,4, sensors5, and 

actuators6,7. However, low-cost and scalable synthesis of high-quality 2D materials is a grand 

challenge for its commercialization. Among various synthetic methods for 2D materials, such 

as exfoliation 8-10, physical vapor deposition (PVD)11-13, atomic layer deposition14,15, metal-

oxide chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD)16, low-pressure chemical vapor deposition 

(LPCVD)17-19, and atmospheric pressure chemical vapor deposition (APCVD)20-22,  APCVD 

shows the promise in providing high-quality and monolayer crystals using a simple and low-

cost experimental setup. However, compared with the chemical process with self-limiting 

reaction mechanisms, e.g., growth of graphene on copper foil under low pressure23,24, or those 

with a series of rigorously controlled sequences to deposit, remove and mix precursors, e.g., 

atomic layer deposition, the APCVD involves mixing multiple precursors under atmospheric 

pressure and thus cannot achieve controllable and scalable growth of nanomaterials. In the past 

decade, many studies have been dedicated to improving the control of the growth process, by 

adjusting the growth temperature25-27, growth time27, amount of precursor28, precursor 

species29,30, hydrogen content31, substrate treatment18,32, substrate species33-35, and other 

factors36. Still, the multi-precursor APCVD process remains a black box where the reaction 

mechanism and knowledge of the controlling factors are not clear.  

One of the key reasons behind the uncertainty of the APCVD process is that it involves 

chemical reactions coupled with complex fluid mixing where the transfer of momentum, heat, 

and mass significantly affects the reaction process and thereafter the final product37. Some 

preliminary theoretical and computational studies tried to correlate growth parameters with 


3 
 

resultant 2D materials.  For example, Xuan et al. developed a multiscale model for MOCVD 

at low pressure (200 Torr), where heat and mass transport equations at the reactor-scale were 

coupled with the mesoscale phase-field equations, to correlate the growth parameters with the 

distribution of synthesized WSe238. Fauzi et al. investigated the single precursor (CH4) reaction 

model for the LPCVD process of graphene growth, where computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 

analysis was performed to obtain the temperature and velocity profiles during the deposition 

process39. However, these efforts, to the best of our knowledge, are mainly focused on 

explaining the experimental results. No active control mechanism has been achieved to tailor 

the growth of 2D materials, especially for the APCVD processes. In the paper, we, for the first 

time, develop a fluid guided growth (FGG) approach and use MoSe2 as a demo system to 

understand and design the APCVD process. We have integrated chemical reaction with CFD 

analysis to simulate the mixing and reaction of precursors. The simulation, along with the 

experimental results, allows us to examine the role of the precursor mixing, the shear stress, 

and the fluid velocity in the outcome of the APCVD process, leading to the optimization of the 

growth crucible to achieve inch-scale monolayer film.  

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The schematic of the experimental setup and corresponding computer model for the MoSe2 

growth are presented in Figure 1a. Briefly, the samples are grown with solid MoO3 and Se 

precursors using Ar/H2 (85/15) as the carrier gas. The distance between the Se crucible and 

MoO3 crucible is 7.5 in, and the growth temperature is set to be 760°C. In the growth process, 

the carrier gas enters the reaction tube from the inlet and carries the sublimated Se to react with 

MoO3 and generate MoSe2 crystals. The exhaust gas then leaves the tube via the outlet. The 

full reactor scale flow field, as well as the reaction process in the reaction quartz tube, is 

simulated by Ansys CFX®. A representative result of fluid velocity distribution in the quartz 

tube is shown in Figure 1b. We found that the structure and the position of crucibles can 


4 
 

significantly change the fluid velocity distribution and hence influence the shear stress 

distribution, the concentration of the reactants and the corresponding chemical reaction, and 

thereafter affect the deposition process. Two traditional setups, namely standard APCVD 

(Figure 1c) and flipped APCVD (Figure 1d), were first used to elucidate the fundamental 

mechanisms governing the growth process. Correspondingly, two distinctive growth patterns 

have been observed experimentally, as shown in Figure 1f for standard APCVD and Figure 1g 

for flipped APCVD. The standard APCVD growth shows a vast empty region (lighter color) 

in the middle with little MoSe2 deposition and a dense deposition (stripe purple color) close to 

the edge of the crucible. The flipped APCVD shows a more uniform deposition of MoSe2 with 

some deposition along the centerline, but a more continuous deposition towards the edge of the 

substrate. The normalized cumulated MoSe2 concentrations on the deposition substrates (the 

integration of the MoSe2 concentration) solved by CFD are shown in Figure 1i for standard 

APCVD and Figure 1j for flipped APCVD. The color code of the figures is for the comparison 

of deposition magnitude for each of the figure itself. There is no correlation between the same 

color code for different figures. The simulation results are consistent with the experimental 

observation.  Through the experimental and numerical study for standard and flipped APCVD, 

one finds that the mixing of the precursors, the fluid shear stress and velocity (including both 

magnitude and direction) near the substrate, are the essential factors for the synthesis of large-

scale monolayer MoSe2. This lesson was then applied to an evolved APCVD (Figure 1e) where 

we actively designed the APCVD setup, by creating controlled precursor mixing environment, 

decreasing shearing velocity, decreasing flow deviation to the substrate, and lowering shear 

stress over the growth substrate, to achieve the deposition of an inch-scale monolayer film 

(Figure 1h). The CFD simulation, demonstrating a uniform deposition over the substrate 

(Figure 1k), is consistent with the experimental observation. Overall, the CFD analysis can 


5 
 

effectively reveal the mechanism of the growth process, and the modification of the flow field 

(or growth setup) can dramatically influence the deposition pattern. 

 

Figure 1. Fluid directed APCVD of MoSe2 growth. (a) The structural model for CFD simulation 

in the full reactor length (left) and the schematic illustration of the experimental setup (right). 

(b) A representative figure is showing the velocity distribution in the reactor tube. (c)-(e) The 

growth setups for standard APCVD, flipped APCVD, and the evolved APCVD, respectively. 

(f)-(h) Real pictures of experimental samples using standard APCVD, flipped APCVD, and 

evolved APCVD, respectively. (i)-(k) CFD simulation of the cumulated concentration of 

MoSe2 distribution, normalized with respect to the highest cumulated concentration over the 

corresponding substrate.  

Figure 2 shows the experimental and numerical study for the standard APCVD process. For 

this setup, a silicon chip is placed on the MoO3 crucible, with the polished thermal oxide (SiO2) 


6 
 

side facing the MoO3 crucible. The silicon chip is 10 mm shorter than the length of the crucible, 

leaving two 5-mm openings at the two ends of the crucible for the carrier gas to flow into and 

out, Figure 2a. The Se enters the MoO3 crucible and reacts with MoO3 to form MoSe2. 

Deposition, thereafter, appears on the bottom surface of the substrate, as shown in Figure 2a 

(right). The distribution of MoSe2 on the substrate is observed using optical microscopy. 

Considering the symmetry of the growth setup, only half of the substrate is shown for both 

morphology observation and simulation. In Figure 2b, very few tiny triangular MoSe2 crystals 

have been found along the central line (y = 0 cm). With y increases, we can see the increase in 

the deposition concentration and crystal size. The more detailed morphology distribution can 

be found in Figure S1. We can also notice that the growth morphology changes from truncated 

triangles with straight edges to equilateral triangles with straight edges from the center to the 

edge. It suggests that the decreased concentration of Mo and increased concentration of Se 

from the center to the edge40. To make sure the triangular domains verified using optical images 

are indeed monolayer MoSe2, we characterize them using TEM and Raman, 

photoluminescence (PL), and atomic force microscope (AFM), as shown in Figures S2-S4. 

From the TEM image and diffraction pattern (Figure S2a), we can clearly distinguish the 

monolayer character. Figure S2b shows a representative atomic resolution scanning 

transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image of the monolayer MoSe2 synthesized by the 

standard APCVD.  In Figure S3a, Raman vibration modes A1g can be seen at 241 cm-1, which 

can be ascribed to the monolayer MoSe241. A prominent emission peak in the PL spectrum is 

located at 802 nm, which also confirms the direct bandgap of monolayer MoSe2 at 1.55 eV 

(Figure S3b)41. The AFM morphology also confirms the monolayer of MoSe2 with a thickness 

of 0.71 nm. 

We numerically simulated the entire process that happens in the reaction tube. Figures 2c-2f 

present a snapshot (t = 0.04 s) of the simulation results during the reaction. The velocity 


7 
 

distribution in the cross-section of the crucible, y = 0 cm, is shown in Figure 2c. The lower 

velocity under the substrate indicates that most of the carrier gas does not enter the crucible. It 

suggests that the sublimation of MoO3 impeded Se from entering the crucible, and hence only 

a little amount of Se could join the reaction. Figure 2d presents the shear stress distribution 

over the deposition substrate, showing a lower shear stress region at the edge and a higher shear 

stress region at the center. Shear stress, the velocity gradient on the substrate that reflects the 

sweeping effect of the fluid flow, would drag the products to leave the substrate. Therefore, the 

lower shear stress distribution at the edge region favors the deposition process, which is 

consistent with the experimental result shown in Figure 2b. The MoSe2 distribution over the 

substrate and in the cross-section of the crucible at y = 0 cm, are shown in Figures 2e and 2f, 

respectively.  Before the sublimation of MoO3, the MoO3 crucible is filled with Se due to the 

continuous flow of the carrier gas. Once the sublimation of MoO3 happens, the Se flow through 

the inner side of MoO3 crucible is impeded, as demonstrated in Figure 2c for the velocity 

distribution, Figure S5 for the time-dependent propagation of Se, and Figure S6 for the time-

dependent propagation of MoO3. After the sublimation, the interrupted Se flow through the 

crucible is resumed, It enters the crucible, meeting and reacting with the remaining MoO3. This 

explained why the concentration of MoSe2 shows a non-uniform distribution with a narrow 

band in Figures 2e-f and Figure S7.  The time-integration of the concentration field leads to the 

cumulated MoSe2 concentration and is previously presented in Figure 1i. Intuitively, A higher 

cumulated concentration of MoSe2 favors the growth locally, which is the reason why one 

observes a higher growth rate near the edge of the substrate, as shown in Figure 2b. Overall, 

the non-uniform distribution of the shear stress and the cumulated MoSe2 concentration impede 

the growth of a continuous and uniform 2D film. 


8 
 

 

Figure 2. The standard APCVD growth. (a) Structural schematic of growth setup (left) and 

corresponding flow pathways for Se, MoO3, and MoSe2 (right). (b) Optical images of the 

morphology distribution over the growth substrate with 50 µm scale bar, the values shown in 

the images represent the corresponding coordinates over the substrate. (c) The velocity 

distribution and velocity vectors over the growth substrate at t = 0.04 s. (d) the shear stress 

distribution over the growth substrate at t = 0.04 s. (e) top view snapshot of MoSe2 

concentration distribution during the growth process at t = 0.04 s. (f) cross-section view of 

MoSe2 concentration at t = 0.04 s. For (b)-(e), only half of the substrate is shown because of 

the symmetry of the growth setup. 

Figure 3 shows the experimental and numerical study for the flipped APCVD process, where 

the silicon chip shown in Figure 2a is flipped upside down, with the polished thermal oxide 

(SiO2) facing the outside of the MoO3 crucible, as shown in Figure 3a. The silicon chip, 9 cm 

long and 4 cm wide, covered the right part of MoO3 crucible, leaving a 5mm opening near the 

left edge as the outlet of the sublimated MoO3. In this scenario, the inner space of the crucible 

serves as a Mo source. The Se, coming from the upstream, reacts with sublimated MoO3 to 


9 
 

form MoSe2 outside of MoO3 crucible. Deposition, thereafter, appears on the top surface of the 

substrate, as shown in Figure 3a (right). Similar to Figure 2, only half of the substrate is shown 

for both morphology observation and simulation. As shown in Figure 3b, along the central line 

(y = 0 cm), the products change from scattered particles (x = 0 cm to 2 cm), to small, sharp, 

straight-edge triangles (x = 2 cm to 6 cm), and to large irregulars (x = 6 cm to 9 cm) with hackly 

edges along the centerline, which reflects improved growth. With y increases, significantly 

improved continuity of the deposited MoSe2 can be found. The bare growth nearby the point 

at (9.0, 2.0) is caused by the degradation of a continuous MoSe2 film, which is out of our 

discussion in this paper42. A more detailed distribution can be found in Figure S8. The energy-

dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX: Figure S9) mapping is used to determine the composition 

of the scattered particles. The mapping analysis shows that the atom ratio of Mo to Se is 10:1, 

which implies that little Se is involved in the reaction.   

Figures 3c-3f present a snapshot (t = 0.04 s) of the simulation results during the reaction. The 

velocity distribution in the cross-section of the crucible, y = 0 cm, Figure 3c, indicates that the 

carrier gas encounters the jet of sublimated MoO3. The mixture first flows away from the 

substrate due to the join of the MoO3 and then gradually flows towards the substrate as the 

distance from the front edge increases. Therefore, it would be difficult for the products to attach 

to the substrate near the front edge of the substrate, which is the reason why there is almost no 

growth at locations (1.0, 0,0) and (1.0, 1.0) in Figure 3b, and why the growth at the center 

region improves along the flow direction, as shown in Figure 3b. Figure 3d presents the shear 

stress distribution over the deposition substrate. Two regions with lower shear stress are 

observed, one at the center near the front edge caused by the deviation of the fluid flow away 

from the substrate, and another near the rear edge and close to the tube wall where fluid velocity 

is low. As the flow deviation near the edge of the substrate was not severe as compared to the 

center, due to the constraint of the tube, the shear stress was relatively small, and the growth is 


10 
 

better in the region, Figure 3b. The MoSe2 distribution over the substrate and in the cross-

section of the crucible at y = 0 cm, are shown in Figures 3e and 3f, respectively. In the flipped 

APCVD, the sublimated MoO3 directly mixes with the Se, obtaining a better mixing, which is 

the reason why the MoSe2 has a much larger area of higher concentration near the substrate 

(Figure 3e), as compared to the standard APCVD shown in Figures 2e and 2f. Figures S10, 

S11, and S12 show the time-dependent propagation of Se, MoO3, and MoSe2, respectively. The 

cumulated MoSe2 concentration shown previously in Figure 1j, obtained from the time-

integration of the concentration field, suggests a more uniform and slightly higher MoSe2 

concentration near the edge of the substrate. Hence, one observes a higher growth rate near the 

edge, consistent with the experimental result shown in Figure 3b. Overall, the distribution of 

the shear stress and the cumulated MoSe2 concentration are much more uniform in the flipped 

APCVD, but, the flow deviation impeded the growth in the center region. 

 

Figure 3. The flipped APCVD growth. (a) Structural schematic of growth set up (left) and 

corresponding flow pathways for Se, MoO3, and MoSe2 (right). (b) Optical images of the 

morphology distribution over the growth substrate with 50 µm scale bar, the values shown in 


11 
 

the images represent the corresponding coordinates over the substrate. (c) The velocity 

distribution and velocity vectors over the growth substrate at t = 0.04 s. (d) the shear stress 

distribution over the growth substrate at t = 0.04 s. (e) top view snapshot of MoSe2 

concentration distribution during the growth process at t = 0.04 s. (f) cross-section view of 

MoSe2 concentration at t = 0.04 s. For (b)-(e), only half of the substrate is shown because of 

the symmetry of the growth setup. 

Lessons learned from the standard APCVD (Figure 2), and the flipped APCVD (Figure 3) 

suggest that, in order to achieve better growth, one needs to control the flow condition to 

achieve lower shear stress, better mixing, and preferred flow direction. This has inspired us to 

develop an evolved APCVD system, as shown in Figure 4. The deposition silicon chip was 

lifted by 1 cm from the crucible by attaching two side baffles (the blue colored components in 

Figures 1e and 4a) to have a larger inlet for the carrier gas to enter, and hence allowing direct 

mixing of Se and MoO3. Another baffle is attached to the rear wall of the crucible (the blue 

colored component in Figures 1e and 4a) to create a narrow gap of 2 mm height as the gas 

outlet, which extends the precursors’ dwell time under the substrate. The polished thermal 

oxide (SiO2) side faces the MoO3 crucible to avoid flow deviation from the substrate, as shown 

in Figure 4a (right). In Figure 4b, a continuous monolayer MoSe2 film in the inch-scale is 

formed over the substrate in most regions except for a multilayer region near the point of (1.5, 

0.0) and some scattered empty patches and add-on layers, e.g., (3.5, 0.0). The monolayer 

quality also has been proved using the Raman and PL, as shown in Figure S13. Near the edge, 

one can clearly see decreased grain size along the flow direction, which changes from hundreds 

of µm to tens of µm. As y increases, the continuity increases, reflecting an increased deposition. 

More detailed distributions can be seen in Figure S14.  

Similarly, Figures 4c-4f present a snapshot (t = 0.04 s) of the simulation results during the 

reaction. The velocity distribution in the cross-section of the crucible, y = 0 cm, as shown in 


12 
 

Figure 4c, suggests that carrier gas encounters the sublimated MoO3 jet under the substrate. 

The mixture first flows towards the substrate, then becomes parallel to it, and subsequently 

deviates from the substrate when the gas flow approaches the exit between the substrate and 

the crucible. The exit acts as a throttle, near which the gas first flows towards the small gap, 

and then deviates from the substrate after it flows out of the crucible. At the center and close 

to the front edge, the straight flush to the substrate makes it easier for the products to attach to 

the substrate, consistent with the multilayer structure observed in Figure 4b at the location (1.5, 

0.0). The deviation beyond the outlet was adverse for the deposition, which is the reason why 

there was almost no growth after the outlet, as shown in Figure 1h. The shear stress distribution 

over the deposition substrate, Figure 4d, indicates a lower shear stress region at the straight 

flush region, favoring growth in this region. The shear stress distribution is both low and 

uniform in all other regions except the one near the narrow outlet. The MoSe2 distribution over 

the substrate and in the cross-section of the crucible at y = 0 cm, are shown in Figures 4e and 

4f, respectively. For the evolved APCVD, Se enters the chamber between the crucible and the 

substrate, mixing and reacting with MoO3. The mixing effect, including the high MoSe2 

concentration area, is between that of standard APCVD and flipped APCVD. Figures S15- S17 

show the time-dependent propagation of Se, MoO3, and MoSe2, respectively. Overall, the well-

controlled flow direction that is in parallel with the deposition substrate, the low and uniform 

shear stress in most of the region, and the reasonably good mixing of Se and MoO3 in the 

evolved APCVD, lead to an improved cumulated MoSe2 concentration as shown in Figure 1k, 

with a uniform concentration distribution in the center and a thin, higher cumulated 

concentration near the edge. Better growth is obtained as a result, as shown in Figure 4b. A 

continuous film is successfully obtained. 


13 
 

 

Figure 4. The evolved APCVD growth. (a) Structural schematic of growth set up (left) and 

corresponding flow pathways for Se, MoO3, and MoSe2 (right). (b) Optical images of the 

morphology distribution over the growth substrate with 50 µm scale bar, the values shown in 

the images represent the corresponding coordinates over the substrate. (c) The velocity 

distribution and velocity vectors over the growth substrate at t = 0.04 s. (d) the shear stress 

distribution over the growth substrate at t = 0.04 s. (e) top view snapshot of MoSe2 

concentration distribution during the growth process at t = 0.04 s. (f) cross-section view of 

MoSe2 concentration at t = 0.04 s. For (b)-(e), only half of the substrate is shown because of 

the symmetry of the growth setup. 

CONCLUSIONS 

In summary, we have achieved the growth of inch scale continuous monolayer MoSe2 using an 

evolved APCVD by the design of the experimental setup to achieve optimal control of fluid 

flow.  The CFD simulation analysis elucidates the mechanism involved in the APCVD process 

and guides the structure design and optimization. Our study shows that under the same 

experimental parameters, the change of the growth setup can significantly influence the 


14 
 

evolution of the flow field and hence change the growth behavior. The factors that influence 

the APCVD process include but not limited to the precursor concentration distribution, fluid 

velocity (magnitude and direction), fluid shear stress over the substrate, as well as the mixing 

of Se and MoO3.  The higher and uniform concentration of precursors, low shear stress, and 

small flow deviation to the substrate can create a stable growth environment for large-scale 

monolayer 2D materials. We believe the improvement of APCVD to achieve high-quality 

growth should consider how to control the flow field. We anticipate that this principle is 

applicable for other 2D materials’ growth, but to obtain controlled growth, the optimization 

should be made according to the properties of the specific precursors (e.g., density, diffusivity, 

and reaction rate) and geometry of the growth setup.   

EXPERIMENTAL SECTION  

MoSe2 growth. The samples were grown by CVD with solid MoO3 and Se precursors and 

using Ar/H2 (85/15) as the carrier gas. All the reactions happened in a 2-inch diameter quartz 

tube under atmospheric pressure. The length of the quartz tube is about 47 inches. Growth 

substrates were Si with a 285 nm layer of SiO2 and cleaned by using N2. After being cleaned, 

one rectangular substrate was placed above the designed setup containing 15 mg of 

molybdenum oxide (MoO3) powder (99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich). The MoO3 crucibles for the three 

types of setups are the same, and the dimension and structure are shown in Figure S17. The 

exact location of the MoO3 powder is directly close to the left end of the crucible. Another 

ceramic boat containing Se powder was placed at the upstream of the tube furnace at 300 oC. 

The distance between the Se boat and the MoO3 boat was about 7.5 inches. The heating rate of 

all reactions was 50 oC·min-1. After 10 min growth, the temperature was cooled down to room 

temperature naturally.  


15 
 

CFD simulation. To reveal the process that happened during the experiment, we use the 

commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software package, Ansys-CFX®, to conduct 

the numerical simulation. The computational domain is shown in Figure 1a, which is as same 

as the real experimental setup. The time-dependent model is used to simulate the dynamic 

process of the CVD growth, and the total simulation time is 4 s. As the flow rate is low, the 

Reynolds number is under 100, and the flow is laminar. Besides, the growth process involves 

heat transfer. Therefore, the laminar flow and the total energy model are used in the simulation. 

The reaction among MoO3, Se, and H2 are simplified and simulated as a single-step, irreversible 

gas-phase reaction: 

Se+3H2+ MoO3→MoSe2+3H2O 

In our simulation, we use MoSe2 to represent the product produced in the gas phase and study 

how the concentration distribution, velocity, and shear stress can affect the deposition of the 

product. These principles also applicable if we use the intermediate phase MoO3-xSex (multi-

step reaction)42 to represent the product produced in the gas phase. Therefore, we simplify the 

whole reaction process to one equation and use MoSe2 concentration for discussing. The 

reaction rate was assumed to be proportional to the minimal mol concentration of the reagent. 

The carrier gas, Ar/H2 (85/15), is injected through the inlet with a constant flow rate of 0.0536 

g·m-3, which is the same as the experimental condition; MoO3 and Se are injected from two 

crucibles downstream, respectively. In the experiment, Se, with a larger amount of 700 mg, 

began to sublimate at a lower temperature, and MoO3, with a smaller amount of 15 mg, joined 

the reaction at a higher temperature. Therefore, in the simulation, it is assumed that, before the 

sublimation of MoO3, the sublimation of Se has reached a steady state, which is the initial 

condition of the simulation. The sublimation of Se has a constant speed of 0.5 mg·s-1 all through 

the simulation. On the other hand, the sublimation of MoO3 has a constant speed of 15 mg·s-1 

only during the first 1s of the simulation, and MoO3 stops sublimating in the remaining time. 


16 
 

These numbers are intended to provide physical insight and should not be considered as the 

exact number in the real case. The exhaust leaves the reaction tube through the outlet. For the 

remaining boundary conditions, the no-slip boundary condition is used for all the solid surfaces; 

all the walls in the heating zone are set to be 750 ℃; all other walls are set to be 25 ℃. 

Sample preparation and characterization. The TEM sample was prepared using PMMA 

assisted method. Briefly, the PMMA solution was spin-coated on the surface of the as-grown 

monolayer MoSe2 on a Si/SiO2 substrate at 4000 rpm for 1 min. Then, the sample was baked 

at 120 oC for 5 min.  After that, the SiO2 layer was etched by the KOH solution (0.1 g/ml), and 

the detached PMMA/MoSe2 film was transferred into the deionized water to remove residual 

KOH. The PMMA/MoSe2 film was transferred to a TEM grid, and the PMMA was removed 

by the acetone and cleaned using isopropanol. The TEM image and selective area electron 

diffraction were obtained using a Hitachi H-7600 under the operation voltage of 100 kV. The 

annular dark-field STEM image was performed using an aberration-corrected Nion 

UltraSTEM100 operating at 60 kV. The morphology and distribution of as-grown MoSe2 were 

characterized using optical microscopy (BX51M, Olympus CO., JAPAN). The EDX was 

conducted using the scanning electron microscopy (Hitachi S-4800). The thickness is 

characterized using atomic force microscopy (Agilent 5500). Raman spectroscopy and 

photoluminescence were conducted using a Renishaw instrument with an excitation 

wavelength of 532 nm.  

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Supporting Information 

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website.  

AUTHOR INFORMATION 

Corresponding Author 


17 
 

qianhong.wu@villanova.edu (Q.W.) 

bo.li@villanova.edu (B. L.). 

Author Contributions 

#D.Z. and J.L contributed equally to this work. 

ORCID 

Dong Zhou: 0000-0002-7387-2411 

Ji Lang: 0000-0002-8886-1766 

Nicholas Yoo: 0000-0002-3930-8606 

Raymond R. Unocic: 0000-0002-1777-8228 

Qianhong Wu: 0000-0002-6216-5674 

Bo Li: 0000-0001-9766-7925 

Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interests.  

Acknowledgments  

The experimental study was supported by the startup fund of B. L.. Q. W. and J. L. were partially 

supported by the National Science Foundation CBET Fluid Dynamics Program under Award #1511096. 

D. Z., N.Y., and B. L. were partially supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, 

Office of Workforce Development for Teachers and Scientists (WDTS) under the Visiting Faculty 

Program (VFP). A portion of this research was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials 

Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility.  

References 

1 
Voiry, D.; Fullon, R.; Yang, J.; e Silva, C. d. C. C.; Kappera, R.; Bozkurt, I.; Kaplan, D.; Lagos, 
M. J.; Batson, P. E.; Gupta, G. The Role of Electronic Coupling Between Substrate and 2D 
MoS2 Nanosheets in Electrocatalytic Production of Hydrogen. Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 1003-1009. 


18 
 

2 
Zhang, J.; Wu, J.; Zou, X.; Hackenberg, K.; Zhou, W.; Chen, W.; Yuan, J.; Keyshar, K.; Gupta, 
G.; Mohite, A. Discovering Superior Basal Plane Active Two-Dimensional Catalysts for 
Hydrogen Evolution. Mater. Today, 2019, 25, 28-34. 

3 
Bolotsky, A.; Butler, D.; Dong, C.; Gerace, K.; Glavin, N. R.; Muratore, C.; Robinson, J. A.; 
Ebrahimi, A. Two-Dimensional Materials in Biosensing and Healthcare: from in Vitro 
Diagnostics to Optogenetics and Beyond. ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9781-9810. 

4 
Mannoor, M. S.; Tao, H.; Clayton, J. D.; Sengupta, A.; Kaplan, D. L.; Naik, R. R.; Verma, N.; 
Omenetto, F. G.; McAlpine, M. C. Graphene-Based Wireless Bacteria Detection on Tooth 
Enamel. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3, 763. 

5 
Lv, R.; Chen, G.; Li, Q.; McCreary, A.; Botello-Méndez, A.; Morozov, S.; Liang, L.; Declerck, 
X.; Perea-López, N.; Cullen, D. A. Ultrasensitive Gas Detection of Large-Area Boron-Doped 
Graphene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2015, 112, 14527-14532. 

6 
Wu, W.; Wang, L.; Li, Y.; Zhang, F.; Lin, L.; Niu, S.; Chenet, D.; Zhang, X.; Hao, Y.; Heinz, 
T. F. Piezoelectricity of Single-Atomic-Layer MoS2 for Energy Conversion and Piezotronics. 
Nature, 2014, 514, 470-474. 

7 
Kim, S. K.; Bhatia, R.; Kim, T.-H.; Seol, D.; Kim, J. H.; Kim, H.; Seung, W.; Kim, Y.; Lee, Y. 
H.; Kim, S.-W. Directional Dependent Piezoelectric Effect in CVD Grown Monolayer MoS2 
for Flexible Piezoelectric Nanogenerators. Nano Energy 2016, 22, 483-489. 

8 
Nicolosi, V.; Chhowalla, M.; Kanatzidis, M. G.; Strano, M. S.; Coleman, J. N. Liquid 
Exfoliation of Layered Materials. Science 2013, 340, 1226419. 

9 
Li, H.; Lu, G.; Wang, Y.; Yin, Z.; Cong, C.; He, Q.; Wang, L.; Ding, F.; Yu, T.; Zhang, H. 
Mechanical Exfoliation and Characterization of Single‐and Few‐Layer Nanosheets of WSe2, 
TaS2, and TaSe2. Small 2016, 9, 1974-1981. 

10 
Backes, C.; Berner, N. C.; Chen, X.; Lafargue, P.; LaPlace, P.; Freeley, M.; Duesberg, G. S.; 
Coleman, J. N.; McDonald, A. R. Functionalization of Liquid‐Exfoliated Two‐Dimensional 
2H‐MoS2. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 2638-2642. 

11 
Feng, Q.; Mao, N.; Wu, J.; Xu, H.; Wang, C.; Zhang, J.; Xie, L . Growth of MoS2(1–x)Se2x (x=0.41–

1.00) Monolayer Alloys with Controlled Morphology by Physical Vapor Deposition. ACS Nano 
2015, 9, 7450-7455. 

12 
Huang, J. H.; Deng, K. Y.; Liu, P. S.; Wu, C. T.; Chou, C. T.; Chang, W. H.; Lee, Y. J.; Hou, 
T. H . Large‐Area 2D Layered MoTe2 by Physical Vapor Deposition and Solid‐Phase 
Crystallization in a Tellurium‐Free Atmosphere. Adv. Mater. Interfaces. 2017, 4, 1700157. 

13 
Lin, H.; Zhu, Q.; Shu, D.; Lin, D.; Xu, J.; Huang, X.; Shi, W.; Xi, X.; Wang, J.; Gao, L. Growth 
of Environmentally Stable Transition Metal Selenide Films. Nat. Mater. 2019, 18, 602. 

14 
Song, J.-G.; Park, J.; Lee, W.; Choi, T.; Jung, H.; Lee, C. W.; Hwang, S.-H.; Myoung, J. M.; 
Jung, J.-H.; Kim, S.-H. Layer-Controlled, Wafer-Scale, and Conformal Synthesis of Tungsten 
Disulfide Nanosheets using Atomic Layer Deposition. ACS Nano 2013, 7, 11333-11340. 

15 
Hao, W.; Marichy, C.; Journet, C. Atomic Layer Deposition of Stable 2D Materials. 2D Mater. 
2018, 6, 012001. 

16 
Kang, K.; Xie, S.; Huang, L.; Han, Y.; Huang, P. Y.; Mak, K. F.; Kim, C.-J.; Muller, D.; Park, 
J . High-Mobility Three-Atom-Thick Semiconducting Films with Wafer-Scale Homogeneity. 
Nature 2015, 520, 656-660. 

17 
Kang, K. N.; Godin, K.; Yang, E.-H. The Growth Scale and Kinetics of WS2 Monolayers under 
Varying H2 Concentration. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 1-9. 

18 
Kim, H. J.; Kim, H.; Yang, S.; Kwon, J. Y. Grains in Selectively Grown MoS2 Thin Films. 
Small 2017, 13, 1702256. 

19 
Chen, W.; Zhao, J.; Zhang, J.; Gu, L.; Yang, Z.; Li, X.; Yu, H.; Zhu, X.; Yang, R.; Shi, D. 
Oxygen-Assisted Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of Large Single-Crystal and High-
Quality Monolayer MoS2. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 15632-15635. 

20 
Lee, Y. H.; Zhang, X. Q.; Zhang, W.; Chang, M. T.; Lin, C. T.; Chang, K. D.; Yu, Y. C.; Wang, 
J. T. W.; Chang, C. S.; Li, L. J . Synthesis of Large‐Area MoS2 Atomic Layers with Chemical 
Vapor Deposition. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, 2320-2325. 


19 
 

21 
Van Der Zande, A. M.; Huang, P. Y.; Chenet, D. A.; Berkelbach, T. C.; You, Y.; Lee, G.-H.; 
Heinz, T. F.; Reichman, D. R.; Muller, D. A.; Hone, J. C . Grains and Grain Boundaries in 
Highly Crystalline Monolayer Molybdenum Disulphide. Nat. Mater. 2013, 12, 554-561. 

22 
Okada, M.; Sawazaki, T.; Watanabe, K.; Taniguch, T.; Hibino, H.; Shinohara, H.; Kitaura, R. 
Direct Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of WS2 Atomic Layers on Hexagonal Boron Nitride. 
ACS Nano 2014, 8, 8273-8277. 

23 
Zhao, P.; Kumamoto, A.; Kim, S.; Chen, X.; Hou, B.; Chiashi, S.; Einarsson, E.; Ikuhara, Y.; 
Maruyama, S. Self-Limiting Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of Monolayer Graphene 
From Ethanol. J. Phys. Chem. C.  2013, 117, 10755-10763. 

24 
Li, X.; Magnuson, C. W.; Venugopal, A.; Tromp, R. M.; Hannon, J. B.; Vogel, E. M.; Colombo, 
L.; Ruoff, R. S. Large-Area Graphene Single Crystals Grown by Low-Pressure Chemical Vapor 
Deposition of Methane on Copper. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 2816-2819. 

25 
Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Ji, Q.; Ju, J.; Yuan, H.; Shi, J.; Gao, T.; Ma, D.; Liu, M.; Chen, Y. 
Controlled Growth of High-Quality Monolayer WS2 Layers on Sapphire and Imaging its Grain 
Boundary. ACS Nano 2013, 7, 8963-8971. 

26 
Liu, B.; Fathi, M.; Chen, L.; Abbas, A.; Ma, Y.; Zhou, C. Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth 
Of Monolayer WSe2 with Tunable Device Characteristics and Growth Mechanism Study. ACS 
Nano 2015, 9, 6119-6127. 

27 
Chen, F.; Su, W . The Effect of the Experimental Parameters on the Growth of MoS2 Flakes. 
CrystEngComm 2018, 20, 4823-4830. 

28 
Özden, A.; Ay, F.; Sevik, C.; Perkgöz, N. K. CVD Growth of Monolayer MoS2: Role of Growth 
Zone Configuration and Precursors Ratio. Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2017, 56, 06GG05. 

29 
Zhou, J.; Lin, J.; Huang, X.; Zhou, Y.; Chen, Y.; Xia, J.; Wang, H.; Xie, Y.; Yu, H.; Lei, J . A 
Library of Atomically Thin Metal Chalcogenides. Nature 2018, 556, 355-359. 

30 
Li, S.; Wang, S.; Tang, D.-M.; Zhao, W.; Xu, H.; Chu, L.; Bando, Y.; Golberg, D.; Eda, G. . 
Halide-Assisted Atmospheric Pressure Growth of Large WSe2 and WS2 Monolayer Crystals. 
Appl. Mater. Today 2015, 1, 60-66. 

31 
Huang, J.; Liu, H.; Jin, B.; Liu, M.; Zhang, Q.; Luo, L.; Chu, S.; Chu, S.; Peng, R . Large-Area 
Snow-Like MoSe2 Monolayers: Synthesis, Growth Mechanism, and Efficient Electrocatalyst 
Application. Nanotechnology 2017, 28, 275704. 

32 
Chen, F.; Ding, S.; Su, W . A Feasible Approach to Fabricate Two-Dimensional WS2 Flakes: 
From Monolayer to Multilayer. Ceram. Int. 2018, 44, 22108-22112. 

33 
Chang, Y.-H.; Zhang, W.; Zhu, Y.; Han, Y.; Pu, J.; Chang, J.-K.; Hsu, W.-T.; Huang, J.-K.; 
Hsu, C.-L.; Chiu, M.-H. Monolayer MoSe2 Grown by Chemical Vapor Deposition for Fast 
Photodetection. ACS Nano 2014, 8, 8582-8590. 

34 
Vlassiouk, I. V.; Stehle, Y.; Pudasaini, P. R.; Unocic, R. R.; Rack, P. D.; Baddorf, A. P.; Ivanov, 
I. N.; Lavrik, N. V.; List, F.; Gupta, N. Evolutionary Selection Growth of Two-Dimensional 
Materials on Polycrystalline Substrates. Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 318-322. 

35 
Wang, H.; Xue, X.; Jiang, Q.; Wang, Y.; Geng, D.; Cai, L.; Wang, L.; Xu, Z.; Yu, G. Primary 
Nucleation-Dominated Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth for Uniform Graphene Monolayers 
on Dielectric Substrate. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  2019, 141, 11004-11008. 

36 
Li, Y.; Zhang, K.; Wang, F.; Feng, Y.; Li, Y.; Han, Y.; Tang, D.; Zhang, B. Scalable Synthesis 
of Highly Crystalline MoSe2 and Its Ambipolar Behavior. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces  2017, 
9, 36009-36016. 

37 
Momeni, K.; Ji, Y.; Zhang, K.; Robinson, J. A.; Chen, L.-Q . Multiscale Framework for 
Simulation-Guided Growth of 2D Materials. NPJ 2D Mater. Appl. 2018, 2, 1-7. 

38 
Xuan, Y.; Jain, A.; Zafar, S.; Lotfi, R.; Nayir, N.; Wang, Y.; Choudhury, T. H.; Wright, S.; 
Feraca, J.; Rosenbaum, L. Multi-Scale Modeling of Gas-Phase Reactions in Metal-Organic 
Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of WSe2. J. Cryst. Growth  2019, 527, 125247. 

39 
Fauzi, F. B.; Ismail, E.; Osman, M. N.; Rosli, M. S.; Ismail, A. F.; Mohamed, M. A.; Bakar, S. 
N. S. A.; Ani, M. H. Influence of Mixed Convection in Atmospheric Pressure Chemical Vapor 
Deposition of Graphene Growth. Mater. Today: Proceedings 2019, 7, 638-645. 

40 
Wang, S.; Rong, Y.; Fan, Y.; Pacios, M.; Bhaskaran, H.; He, K.; Warner, J. H. Shape Evolution 
of Monolayer MoS2 Crystals Grown by Chemical Vapor Deposition. Chem. Mater. 2014, 26, 
6371-6379. 


20 
 

41 
Shaw, J. C.; Zhou, H.; Chen, Y.; Weiss, N. O.; Liu, Y.; Huang, Y.; Duan, X. Chemical Vapor 
Deposition Growth of Monolayer MoSe2 Nanosheets. Nano Res. 2014, 7, 511-517. 

42 
Li, B.; Gong, Y.; Hu, Z.; Brunetto, G.; Yang, Y.; Ye, G.; Zhang, Z.; Lei, S.; Jin, Z.; Bianco, E . 
Solid–Vapor Reaction Growth of Transition‐Metal Dichalcogenide Monolayers. Angew. Chem. 
128, 10814-10819 (2016). 

 

 
 


21 
 

Table of contents 

 


