Title: Negative refraction of ultra-squeezed in-plane hyperbolic designer polaritons 
 
Qiaolu Chen, Yihao Yang,* Li Zhang, Jialin Chen, Xiao Lin, Rujiang Li, Zuojia Wang, 
Baile Zhang,* Hongsheng Chen* 
 
Qiaolu Chen, Li Zhang, Jialin Chen, Prof. Zuojia Wang, Prof. Hongsheng Chen 
Interdisciplinary Center for Quantum Information, State Key Laboratory of Modern 
Optical Instrumentation, College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. 
E-mail: hansomchen@zju.edu.cn 
 
Qiaolu Chen, Li Zhang, Jialin Chen, Prof. Zuojia Wang, Prof. Hongsheng Chen 
ZJU-Hangzhou Global Science and Technology Innovation Center, Key Lab. of 
Advanced Micro/Nano Electronic Devices & Smart Systems of Zhejiang, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou 310027, China. 
E-mail: hansomchen@zju.edu.cn 
 
Dr. Yihao Yang, Dr. Xiao Lin, Dr. Rujiang Li, Prof. Baile Zhang 
Division of Physics and Applied Physics, School of Physical and Mathematical 
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. 
E-mail: yang.yihao@ntu.edu.sg, blzhang@ntu.edu.sg 
 
 
Dr. Yihao Yang, Dr. Rujiang Li, Prof. Baile Zhang 
Centre for Disruptive Photonic Technologies, The Photonics Institute, Nanyang 
Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. 
E-mail: yang.yihao@ntu.edu.sg, blzhang@ntu.edu.sg 
 
Keywords: hyperbolic metasurfaces, negative refraction, hyperbolic polaritons 
 

Abstract: 

The in-plane negative refraction of high-momentum (i.e., high-k) photonic modes could 

enable many applications such as imaging and hyperlensing in a planar platform at 

deep-subwavelength scales. However, its practical implementation in experiments 

remains elusive so far. Here we propose a class of hyperbolic metasurfaces, which is 

characterized by an anisotropic magnetic sheet conductivity and can support the in-

plane ultrahigh-k magnetic designer polaritons. Based on such metasurfaces, we report 


the first experimental observation of the all-angle negative refraction of designer 

polaritons at extremely deep-subwavelength scales. Moreover, we directly visualize the 

designer polaritons with hyperbolic dispersions. Importantly, for these hyperbolic 

polaritons, we find that their squeezing factor is ultra-large and, to be specific, it can be 

up to 129 in the experiments, a record-breaking value exceeding those in naturally 

hyperbolic materials. The present scheme for the achievement of negative refraction is 

also applicable to other natural materials and may enable intriguing applications in 

nanophotonics. Besides, the proposed metasurfaces are readily tailorable in space and 

frequency, which could serve as a versatile platform to explore the extremely high 

confinement and unusual propagation of hyperbolic polaritons.  

 

Introduction: 

Three-dimensional (3D) hyperbolic media are characterized by the anisotropic 

permittivity or permeability tensor with a principal component being opposite in sign 

to the other two principal components.[1]-[4] One of the most important properties of 

hyperbolic media is that they support photonic modes with high momentum (one order 

larger than photons’ momentum in free space (denoted as k0)), allowing for confining 

photons at deep-subwavelength scales or even the extreme nanoscales. The high-

momentum or high-k modes play a key role in many applications of hyperbolic 

media,[1],[3] such as low-threshold Cherenkov radiation,[5]-[6] enhanced spontaneous 

emission,[7]-[8] super-Planckian thermal emission,[9]-[10] ultra-sensitive sensors,[11] 

subwavelength imaging,[12] and enhanced photon extraction.[13] Recent researches have 


revealed that such high-k modes also exist in ultrathin hyperbolic media, or two-

dimensional (2D) hyperbolic media, such as hyperbolic metasurfaces (e.g., 

nanostructured 
van 
der Waals 
(vdW) 
materials,[14] 
designed 
metal-based 

metasurfaces),[15]-[21] and slabs of naturally hyperbolic materials[22]-[23] (e.g., the 

uniaxial boron nitride (BN),[24]-[27] the biaxial vdW crystal α-MoO3).[28]-[29]  

Realization of in-plane negative refraction of high-k modes is of great significance 

and interest, due to its unique applications such as sub-diffraction imaging/focusing, 

hyperlensing, and waveguiding in a planar platform at deep-subwavelength 

scales.[15],[30]-[33] Such a goal has become a possibility, thanks to the advent of artificial 

hyperbolic metasurfaces and naturally hyperbolic materials. Though the negative 

refraction of hyperbolic surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) was previously 

experimentally demonstrated at an interface between a hyperbolic metasurface and a 

flat silver film, both the SPPs on the silver film and hyperbolic metasurface are 

relatively weakly confined (their wavevectors are usually less than 3k0).[17] This 

approach cannot directly apply to the high-k modes, as the high-k surface-wave modes 

are usually strongly reflected or scattered when coupling to low-k modes (such as SPPs 

on the silver film), owing to the large in-plane and out-of-plane momentum 

mismatching.[34] Therefore, to achieve in-plane negative refraction of high-k modes, the 

dispersions in both regions need to be precisely engineered. One straightforward way 

to do so is to employ two materials/structures supporting high-k modes with opposite 

group velocities. For example, graphene supports high-k plasmon polaritons with 

positive group velocity and BN supports high-k phonon polaritons with negative group 


velocity in its first Reststrahlen band.[32] Moreover, by judiciously tuning the chemical 

potential of graphene and the thickness of BN, it is possible to flexibly flip the sign of 

the group velocity of the hybrid polaritons in graphene-BN heterostructures. As such, 

graphene-BN heterostructures can be a versatile platform to support the in-plane 

negative refraction of high-k modes. However, the operational frequency bandwidth of 

negative refraction in graphene-BN heterostructures is within the first Reststrahlen 

band of BN and is thus very narrow. Such a strict requirement is then experimentally 

unfavorable and challenging. Recently, Jiang et al. proposed to realize the broadband 

all-angle negative refraction of high-k hyperbolic plasmon polaritons at an interface 

constructed by two identical nanostructured graphene metasurfaces with different 

rotation angles.[33] However, both fabrication and experimental characterization of such 

graphene metasurfaces are quite challenging. In short, although there are some 

theoretical proposals of in-plane negative refraction of high-k modes, their practical 

realization in experiments has not been reported so far. 

To overcome the above challenges, we propose, design, and fabricate a class of 

hyperbolic metasurfaces characterized by an anisotropic magnetic sheet conductivity 

(denoted as σm),[35]-[36] which supports in-plane ultrahigh-k magnetic designer 

polaritons. Based on such metasurfaces, all-angle negative refraction of ultrahigh-k 

designer polaritons is observed in the experiments. Moreover, our microwave 

measurements directly show that the designer polaritons indeed exhibit in-plane 

hyperbolic dispersions and have ultra-squeezed wavelength down to 129 times smaller 

than the free-space photons’ wavelength (denoted as λ0). Such a record-breaking 


squeezing factor (defined as λ0/λp, where λp is the designer polaritons’ wavelength) 

exceeds those in naturally in-plane hyperbolic materials demonstrated previously 

(usually less than 60 in the experiments).[28]-[29] Our work provides a distinctive way to 

achieve in-plane negative refraction of ultrahigh-k modes, which could apply to optical 

in-plane hyperbolic materials, enabling many applications in nanophotonics. 

Additionally, our metasurfaces are readily tailorable in frequency and space, which 

form a highly variable platform for exploring the extremely high confinement and 

unusual propagation of in-plane hyperbolic polaritons. 


Results: 

The proposed anisotropic-σm hyperbolic metasurface is composed of arrays of 

coiling copper wires patterned on dielectric substrates, as illustrated in Figure 1a. An 

enlarged view of a unit cell is shown in Figure 1b, where the grey region denotes the 

dielectric substrate with relative permittivity 
rε = 3.5+0.001i and thickness t = 2 mm, 

and the orange region represents a 35-μm coiling copper wire with inner radius r = 2 

mm, width w = 0.2 mm, gap g = 0.2 mm, and number of coil turns N = 14. The lattice 

constants are a = 15.2 mm (x axis) and b = 9 mm (y axis), respectively. 

 

Figure 1. Anisotropic-σm hyperbolic metasurface. a) Photograph of the fabricated 
sample. The sample is composed of arrays of coiling copper wires patterned on 
dielectric substrates. b) Details of a unit cell. Here, a = 15.2 mm, b = 9 mm, r = 2 mm, 
t = 2 mm, w = 0.2 mm, and g = 0.2 mm. The relative permittivity of substrate is 
3.5+0.001i. The thickness of copper wires is 0.035 mm. Number of coil turns is 14. c) 
Numerically-calculated Im(σm) of the metasurface. Blue (red) solid line represents 
values of Im(σxx) (Im(σyy)). Black dashed line denotes value of zero. d) Iso-frequency 
contours of the hyperbolic metasurface in the first Brillouin zone. The frequency values 
are presented in the unit of gigahertz. 


 

We then numerically calculate the iso-frequency contours (IFCs) of the fundamental 

mode of the proposed hyperbolic metasurface in the first Brillouin zone (FBZ) by 

employing eigenvalue module of a commercial software Computer Simulation 

Technology (CST) Microwave Studio, as shown in Figure 1d. One can see that, the 

IFCs are open hyperbolas from 0.145 to 0.175 GHz. Note that the magnetic field is 

highly confined in both vertical and horizontal directions, indicating the surface-wave 

nature of the eigenmodes (see the Supporting Information). Besides, the operational 

wavelength is around 2×103 mm, which is much larger than the thickness of 

metasurface (i.e., 15.2 mm).  

To understand the behaviors of the designer polaritons over the metasurface, we 

model the proposed hyperbolic metasurface as a 2D magnetic sheet conductivity layer 

surrounded by two vacuum half-spaces.[37] Here we consider the hyperbolic 

metasurface as a lossless medium, because ohmic losses of the substrate and copper are 

negligible in the microwave region. Then, by adopting a standard retrieval method,[35] 

we extract the magnetic sheet conductivity of the metasurface 

0
.
0

xx
m
yy

σ
σ
σ


= 




                      (1) 

The resulting σm plot is shown in Figure 1c, where Im(σxx) and Im(σyy) are opposite in 

sign from 0.145 to 0.175 GHz, indicating a hyperbolic frequency band. Note that, TM 

modes here are barely confined on the metasurface, thus we mainly focus on TE modes 

in our case, and the corresponding dispersion relation of the designer polaritons is 

 
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
0
0
2
0

1 (
) (
+
)
4
(
)
0,
xx
x
yy
y
x
y
x
y
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
σ
σ
η
+
−
+
+
=
  
(2) 


where kx,y are the in-plane wavevectors, and 
0
η   is the characteristic impedance of 

vacuum.[37]-[38] Comparing the analytical and simulated dispersions, we find a good 

agreement between them (see the Supporting Information). 

In the following, we carry out experiments to characterize the proposed hyperbolic 

metasurface. The experimental sample consists of 20 by 32 unit cells, taking up an area 

of 304 mm by 288 mm. To excite the designer polaritons efficiently, a port of the vector 

network analyzer (VNA) is directly connected to a coil unit cell at the edge of the 

metasurface. Another port of the VNA is connected to a detector that is a compact coil 

with a magnetic resonance around 0.159 GHz. The coil-like detector that oriented in 

the z direction, is fixed at a robotic arm of a movement platform and moves on the xy 

plane 3 mm above the metasurface. By scanning the sample, the complex magnetic 

patterns of Hz field (including phase and amplitude) are recorded. The size of the 

scanning region is approximately 250 mm by 250 mm, with a resolution of 15.2 mm by 

9 mm. See the details of the experimental set-up in the Supporting Information. 

 The measured field patterns are shown in Figure 2a. One can directly observe the 

significant feature of hyperbolic designer polaritons, that is, concave polariton 

wavefronts. For further proof of in-plane hyperbolic dispersions, we extract the IFCs in 

the momentum space by applying spatial Fourier transform to the corresponding 

complex field patterns (see Figure 2b). One can see that the measured IFCs are indeed 

hyperbola-like curves, thus experimentally corroborating the simulated IFCs (Figure 

1d). Note that there is a bright spot at the center of the FBZ at each frequency, which 

attributes to the radiation noise.[21] 


 

Figure 2. Measured magnetic field distributions and iso-frequency contours. a) 
Measured magnetic patterns of Hz field in the real space on the xy plane 3 mm over the 
hyperbolic metasurface at 0.151, 0.159, 0.167, and 0.174 GHz, respectively. The yellow 
star indicates the source position. The colorbar measures the real part of Hz. b) Iso-
frequency contours in the momentum space obtained by applying spatial Fourier 
transform to the corresponding complex Hz field. The colorbar measures the energy 
intensity. 

 

Next, we retrieve the squeezing factors of the hyperbolic designer polaritons, which 

are determined by the largest polaritons’ wavevector in the FBZ at each frequency. As 

shown in Figure 3a, the squeezing factors of the in-plane polaritons are remarkably 

large, with a maximum value of 129 in both experiments and simulations, revealing the 

ultrahigh-k nature of the hyperbolic designer polaritons. Note that, compared with the 

squeezing factors in the previous in-plane hyperbolic metasurfaces or naturally in-plane 

hyperbolic materials such as vdW crystal α-MoO3, which are usually less than 60,[28]-

[29] the maximum squeezing factor achieved in our experiments is a record-breaking 

high value. Figure 3b depicts the IFC directly obtained by applying spatial Fourier 

transform to the corresponding complex field pattern of Hz at 0.150 GHz (Figure 3c) 


where the squeezing factor is maximal. 

 

Figure 3. Achieving a record-breaking high squeezing factor in our hyperbolic 
metasurface. a) Retrieved squeezing factors of the designer polaritons from simulated 
and experimental results. A record-breaking high squeezing factor of 129 at 0.150 GHz 
is observed. b) Measured iso-frequency contour at 0.150 GHz. The colorbar measures 
the energy intensity. c) Measured Hz field on the xy plane 3 mm over the hyperbolic 
metasurface at 0.150 GHz. The excitation is marked as a yellow star. The colorbar 
measures the real part of Hz. 
 

 


Figure 4. Experimental validation of all-angle in-plane negative refraction of ultrahigh-
k designer polaritons. a) Schematic view of in-plane negative refraction. The hyperbolic 
metasurface in the right region is rotated by 90°, comparing with the left one. The black 
arrows indicate the power flow. b) Measured Hz field on the xy plane 3 mm above the 
hyperbolic metasurface at 0.148 GHz. The vertical black dashed line denotes the 
interface. The horizontal black dashed lines are normals. The excitation is marked as a 
yellow star. The yellow arrows represent the directions of the power flow. The colorbar 
measures the real part of Hz. c) Iso-frequency contours of the hyperbolic metasurfaces 
in the left and right regions at 0.148 GHz, respectively. The white arrows indicate the 
directions of group velocities (power flow). The colorbar measures the energy intensity. 
d) Measured Hz field at 0.145, 0.151, 0.153 GHz, respectively.  

 

Finally, we realize the in-plane negative refraction of the designer polaritons, based 

on the present anisotropic-σm hyperbolic metasurface. We first construct an interface 

consisting of two identical metasurfaces apart from a 90° rotation (see the schematic in 

Figure 4a). A point source is placed at the center of the left region and hyperbolic 

designer polaritons with concave wavefronts are launched. Remarkably, the designer 

polaritons negatively refract at the interface, with the incident and refracted beams at 

the same side of the normal, as shown in Figure 4b. This intriguing phenomenon can 

be explained by the measured IFCs of both regions, as illustrated in Figure 4c. One can 

see that the directions of y-component of group velocities (parallel to the interface) are 

opposite for incident and refracted polaritons, according to the conservation law where 

the tangential components of the wavevectors in left and right regions should be 

matched. As the group velocity determines the direction of power flow, negative 

refraction of designer polaritons occurs at the interface.[33] Note that, since the 

polaritons’ momentum is much larger than k0, negligible energy leaks into the air at the 

interface. However, for low-k surface-wave modes, to prevent the leakage, the out-of-

plane wavevectors in two regions should be carefully matched.[34] 


Additionally, the negative refraction also occurs at other frequencies, e.g., 0.145, 

0.151, and 0.153 GHz, as shown in Figure 4d, which indicate the relatively broad 

operational bandwidth. We would like to mention that for any designer polaritons 

launched in the left/right region, the negative refraction always happens at the interface 

regardless of the incidence angle. Therefore, we denote such a phenomenon as all-angle 

in-plane negative refraction.[32]-[33],[39]-[41] 

 

Discussion: 

We have identified a class of anisotropic-σm hyperbolic metasurfaces, which 

supports ultrahigh-k in-plane magnetic designer polaritons featured with hyperbolic 

dispersions. Based on the proposed metasurface, all-angle in-plane negative refraction 

of the ultra-squeezed designer polaritons is observed experimentally. Remarkably, a 

record-breaking squeezing factor of 129 is achieved in the experiments, which exceeds 

those in the naturally or artificially in-plane hyperbolic materials demonstrated 

previously. The all-angle in-plane negative refraction of ultrahigh-k hyperbolic designer 

polaritons proposed here could also be applicable to the optical hyperbolic 

materials,[14],[28]-[29] enabling novel applications in nanophotonics. Besides, the present 

metasurfaces with highly squeezing factors and tunability, could serve as an excellent 

platform to explore the applications and physics of in-plane hyperbolic polaritons. 

Finally, by scaling down the unit cell, our design could apply to higher frequencies (see 

a design in the Supporting Information), such as terahertz and far-infrared frequencies, 

and may find many applications in flatland optics,[31] e.g., waveguiding, imaging, giant 


thermal emission, and enhanced spontaneous emission. 

 

Supporting Information 
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Q.C. and Y.Y. contributed equally to this work. The work at Zhejiang University was 
sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NNSFC) under Grants 
No. 61625502, No.11961141010, and No. 61975176, the Top-Notch Young Talents 
Program of China, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities. This 
work at Nanyang Technological University was sponsored by Singapore Ministry of 
Education under Grant Nos. MOE2018-T2-1-022 (S), MOE2015-T2-1-070, 
MOE2016-T3-1-006, and Tier 1 RG174/16 (S).  
 

Received: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 
Revised: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 
Published online: ((will be filled in by the editorial staff)) 

 

References: 
1. 
Y. Guo, W. Newman, C. L. Cortes & Z. Jacob, Applications of hyperbolic 
metamaterial substrates, Adv. Opt. Electron. 2012, 2012, 452502. 

2. 
A. Poddubny, I. Iorsh, P. Belov & Y. Kivshar, Hyperbolic metamaterials, Nat. 
Photon. 2013, 7, 948. 

3. 
L. Ferrari, C. Wu, D. Lepage, X. Zhang & Z. Liu, Hyperbolic metamaterials and 
their applications, Prog. Quantum Electron. 2015, 40, 1. 

4. 
P. Huo, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, Y. Lu & T. Xu, Hyperbolic Metamaterials and 
Metasurfaces: Fundamentals and Applications, Adv. Opt. Mater. 2019, 7, 
1801616. 

5. 
F. Liu, L. Xiao, Y. Ye, M. Wang, K. Cui, X. Feng, W. Zhang & Y. Huang, 
Integrated Cherenkov radiation emitter eliminating the electron velocity 
threshold, Nat. Photon. 2017, 11, 289. 

6. 
H. Hu, X. Lin, J. Zhang, D. Liu, P. Genevet, B. Zhang, Y. Luo, Controlling 
Cherenkov threshold with nonlocality, arXiv:2002.04252. 

7. 
H. N. S. Krishnamoorthy, Z. Jacob, E. Narimanov, I. Kretzschmar, V. M. Menon, 
Topological transitions in metamaterials, Science 2012, 336, 205. 

8. 
D. Lu, J. J. Kan, E. E. Fullerton & Z. Liu, Enhancing spontaneous emission rates 
of molecules using nanopatterned multilayer hyperbolic metamaterials, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 48. 

9. 
Y. Guo, C. L. Cortes, S. Molesky, and Z. Jacoba, Broadband super-Planckian 
thermal emission from hyperbolic metamaterials, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 101, 
131106. 


10. 
S.-A. Biehs, M. Tschikin, R. Messina, and P. B.-Abdallah, Super-Planckian 
near-field thermal emission with phonon-polaritonic hyperbolic metamaterials, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, 131106. 

11. 
K. V. Sreekanth, Y. Alapan, M. ElKabbash, E. Ilker, M. Hinczewski, U. A. 
Gurkan, A. D. Luca & G. Strangi, Extreme sensitivity biosensing platform based 
on hyperbolic metamaterials, Nat. Mater. 2016, 15, 621. 

12. 
Z. Liu, H. Lee, Y. Xiong, C. Sun & X. Zhang, Far-field optical hyperlens 
magnifying sub-diffraction-limited objects, Science 2007, 315, 1686. 

13. 
L. Shen, X. Lin, M. Shalaginov, T. Low, X. Zhang, B. Zhang, H. Chen, 
Broadband Enhancement of On-chip Single Photon Extraction via Tilted 
Hyperbolic Metamaterials, arXiv:2003.12727. 

14. 
P. Li, I. Dolado, F. J. A.-Mozaz, F. Casanova, L. E. Hueso, S. Liu, J. H. Edgar, 
A. Y. Nikitin, S. Vélez, R. Hillenbrand, Infrared hyperbolic metasurface based 
on nanostructured van der Waals materials, Science 2018, 359, 892. 

15. 
A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva, V. M. Shalaev, Planar photonics with 
metasurfaces, Science 2013, 339, 1232009. 

16. 
Y. Liu & X. Zhang, Metasurfaces for manipulating surface plasmons, Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 2013, 103, 141101. 

17. 
A. A. High, R. C. Devlin, A. Dibos, M. Polking, D. S. Wild, J. Perczel, N. P. de 
Leon, M. D. Lukin & H. Park, Visible-frequency hyperbolic metasurface, 
Nature 2015, 522, 192. 

18. 
J. Smalley, F. Vallini, S. Montoya, L. Ferrari, S. Shahin, C. Riley, B. Kanté, E. 
Fullerton, Z. Liu & Y. Fainman, Luminescent hyperbolic metasurfaces, Nat. 
Commun. 2017, 8, 13793. 

19. 
Y. Yang, L. Jing, L. Shen, Z. Wang, B. Zheng, H. Wang, E. Li, N.-H. Shen, T. 
Koschny, C. M Soukoulis & H. Chen, Hyperbolic spoof plasmonic metasurfaces, 
NPG Asia Mater. 2017, 9, 428. 

20. 
Y. Yang, P. Qin, B. Zheng, L. Shen, H. Wang, Z. Wang, E. Li, R. Singh, and H. 
Chen, Magnetic Hyperbolic Metasurface: Concept, Design, and Applications, 
Adv. Sci. 2018, 5, 1801495. 

21. 
Y. Yang, P. Qin, X. Lin, E. Li, Z. Wang, B. Zhang & H. Chen, Type-I hyperbolic 
metasurfaces for highly squeezed designer polaritons with negative group 
velocity, Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 2002. 

22. 
D. N. Basov, M. M. Fogler & F. J. García de Abajo, Polaritons in van der Waals 
materials, Science 2016, 354, aag1992. 

23. 
T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, 
F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno & F. Koppens, Polaritons in layered two-
dimensional materials, Nat. Mater. 2017, 16, 182. 

24. 
S. Dai, Z. Fei, Q. Ma, A. S. Rodin, M. Wagner, A. S. Mcleod, M. K. Liu, W. 
Gannett, W. Regan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, G. Dominguez, 
A. H. C. Neto, A. Zettl, F. Keilmann, P. J.-Herrero, M. M. Fogler, D. N. Basov, 
Tunable phonon polaritons in atomically thin van der Waals crystals of boron 
nitride, Science 2014, 343, 1125. 

25. 
S. Dai, Q. Ma, M. K. Liu, T. Andersen, Z. Fei, M. D. Goldflam, M. Wagner, K. 


Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, F. Keilmann, G. C. A. M. Janssen, S-E. 
Zhu, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler & D. N. Basov, Graphene on hexagonal 
boron nitride as a tunable hyperbolic metamaterial, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 
682. 

26. 
P. Li, M. Lewin, A. V. Kretinin, J. D. Caldwell, K. S. Novoselov, T. Taniguchi, 
K. Watanabe, F. Gaussmann & T. Taubner, Hyperbolic phonon-polaritons in 
boron nitride for near-field optical imaging and focusing, Nat. Commun. 2015, 
6, 7507. 

27. 
A. J. Giles, S. Dai, I. Vurgaftman, T. Hoffman, S. Liu, L. Lindsay, C. T. Ellis, 
N. Assefa, I. Chatzakis, T. L. Reinecke, J. G. Tischler, M. M. Fogler, J. H. Edgar, 
D. N. Basov & J. D. Caldwell, Ultralow-loss polaritons in isotopically pure 
boron nitride, Nat. Mater. 2018, 17, 134. 

28. 
W. Ma, P. A.-González, S. Li, A. Y. Nikitin, J. Yuan, J. M.-Sánchez, J. T.-
Gutiérrez, I. Amenabar, P. Li, S. Vélez, C. Tollan, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, S. Sriram, 
K. K.-Zadeh, S.-T. Lee, R. Hillenbrand & Q. Bao, In-plane anisotropic and 
ultra-low-loss polaritons in a natural van der Waals crystal, Nature 2018, 562, 
557. 

29. 
Z. Zheng, N. Xu, S. L. Oscurato, M. Tamagnone, F. Sun, Y. Jiang, Y. Ke, J. Chen, 
W. Huang, W. L. Wilson, A. Ambrosio, S. Deng and H. Chen, A mid-infrared 
biaxial hyperbolic van der Waals crystal, Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaav8690. 

30. 
E. Forati, G. W. Hanson, A. B. Yakovlev & A. Alù, Planar hyperlens based on a 
modulated graphene monolayer, Phys. Rev. B 2014, 89, 081410. 

31. 
J. S. Gomez-Diaz & A. Alù, Flatland Optics with Hyperbolic Metasurfaces, ACS 
Photonics 2016, 3, 2211. 

32. 
X. Lin, Y. Yang, N. Rivera, J. J. López, Y. Shen, I. Kaminer, H. Chen, B. Zhang, 
J. D. Joannopoulos, and M. Soljačić, All-angle negative refraction of highly 
squeezed plasmon and phonon polaritons in graphene–boron nitride 
heterostructures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017, 114 (26), 6717. 

33. 
J. Jiang, X. Lin, and B. Zhang, Broadband negative refraction of highly 
squeezed hyperbolic polaritons in 2D materials, Research 2018, 2018, 2532819. 

34. 
J. Elser & V. A. Podolskiy, Scattering-free plasmonic optics with anisotropic 
metamaterials, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 066402. 

35. 
P. Tassin, T. Koschny, C. M. Soukoulis, Effective material parameter retrieval 
for thin sheets: Theory and application to graphene, thin silver films, and single-
layer metamaterials, Physica B 2012, 407, 4062. 

36. 
M. Albooyeh, D.-H. Kwon, F. Capolino, and S. A. Tretyakov, Equivalent 
realizations of reciprocal metasurfaces: Role of tangential and normal 
polarization, Phys. Rev. B 2017, 95, 115435. 

37. 
J. S. G.-Diaz, M. Tymchenko, A. Alù, Hyperbolic plasmons and topological 
transitions over uniaxial metasurfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015, 114, 233901. 

38. 
A. Nemilentsau, T. Low & G. Hanson, Anisotropic 2D Materials for Tunable 
Hyperbolic Plasmonics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 066804. 

39. 
C. Luo, S. G. Johnson, J. Joannopoulos & J. Pendry, All-angle negative 
refraction without negative effective index, Phys. Rev. B 2002, 65, 201104. 


40. 
H. Shin and S. Fan, All-angle negative refraction for surface plasmon waves 
using a metal-dielectric-metal structure, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96, 073907. 

41. 
H. J. Lezec, J. A. Dionne, and H. A. Atwater, Negative refraction at visible 
frequencies, Science 2007, 316, 430. 

 


