1

Nitrogen Doping and Infusion in SRF 

Cavities: A Review

Pashupati Dhakal*

Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, VA 23606, USA

Abstract

Advances in SRF technology over the last 40 years allowed achieving accelerating 
gradients ~ 50 MV/m corresponding to peak surface magnetic fields close to the 
theoretical limit of niobium. However, the quality factor decreases significantly 
with increasing accelerating gradient. This decrease is expected since increasing 
the rf field increases the number of quasiparticles and therefore the rf losses. 
Recently, a new phenomenon of increase in quality factor with the accelerating 
gradient has been observed when SRF cavities are doped with certain non-magnetic 
impurities. In particular, the diffusion of nitrogen into the niobium cavities’ inner 
surface has been successfully implemented into the commercialization of SRF 
technology. The quest is still ongoing towards process development to achieve high 
accelerating gradient SRF structures with high-quality factors for future high 
energy accelerators. Here, we present the review of the research on process
development to this date via nitrogen diffusion, material analysis, and present the 
summary of current theoretical understanding behind high Q0 SRF cavities.

I.
Introduction

Superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) technology is being used not only for the basic 

fundamental nuclear physics research but also for applications that have benefited society [1]. 
Modern particle accelerating machines rely on SRF technology, few  examples of current and 
future projects are continuous wave (CW) free-electron lasers, x-ray laser oscillators, light sources, 
electrons and ions colliders, accelerator-driven systems for medical isotope production and nuclear 
waste transmutation.  SRF technology which is based on the superconducting hollow structures 
(cavities) with high duty factor provides the required accelerating gradient to accelerate the 
charged particles close to the velocity of light.

The superiority of superconducting cavities over the normal metal cavities is their ability 

to store a large amount of energy with much lower power dissipation. The performance of the SRF 
cavities is measured in terms of the quality factor Q0=G/Rs, where G is the geometric factor which 
depends on the cavity geometry and Rs is the surface resistance, as a function of accelerating 
gradient, Eacc. For typical cavities of resonating frequency 0.5–3 GHz operating at a temperature 
~2.0 K the quality factor is in the 1010–1011 range. In the last four decades, much research work 
has been focused on improving the accelerating gradient and quality factor of these SRF cavities. 

* Email: dhakal@jlab.org


2

Considerable effort has gone into pushing the quality factor to higher values as well. Higher Q0
for the reduction of cryogenic losses, requiring liquid helium cryogenic plants with lower cooling 
capacity, and higher Eacc to achieve higher beam energy and smaller footprint are desired. Some 
of Eacc and Q0 requirements for some current and future SRF based accelerator is shown in Fig. 1. 
Typically, different accelerators have different specifications for the gradient and the quality 
factor. Machines such as the International Linear Collider and the European X-ray Free Electron 
Laser XFEL are designed to  operate in pulsed mode whereas the upgrade of the Linear Coherent 
Light Source (LCLS-II), accelerator-drives systems (ADS), and Energy Recovery Linacs are 
designed to operate in CW mode [2,3]. For CW applications, the minimization of the overall AC 
plug power limits the optimal gradient to 20 MV/m [4]. Continuous research and development 
has already pushed the achievable accelerating gradient towards the fundamental limit of Nb, 
although not in a reproducible way [5].

Figure 1. Schematic showing the requirements for cavity performances for different 

current and future SRF based accelerators

The current and future accelerators would highly benefit from cavities with higher quality 

factor and accelerating gradient. A high quality factor can be achieved by minimizing the surface 
resistance of SRF cavities. The surface resistance in superconducting materials is the sum of the 
temperature-independent residual resistance (Rres) and temperature-dependent Bardeen-Cooper-
Schrieffer (BCS) resistance (RBCS) [6,7]. The sources of the Rres are trapped magnetic flux during 
the cavity cool down, impurities, hydrides and oxides, imperfections, and surface contamination. 
The BCS surface resistance results from the interaction between the rf electric field within the 
penetration depth and thermally activated quasi-particles in the superconductor. The BCS surface 
resistance depends on superconducting material parameters which may vary strongly due to the 
presence of the impurities within the rf penetration depth. 


3

In the past decade, the development of high-quality factor SRF cavities via material 

diffusion in a thin layer at the inner surface of the cavities has been achieved. It was first realized 
by serendipitous titanium doping during annealing at high temperature (~1400 °C) without any 
post-annealing chemistry [8,9] and later by serendipitous nitrogen doping at 800 °C, followed by 
electropolishing [10]. The impurity diffusion process not only resulted in an increase in quality 
factor at low rf field but also an increase in quality factor with increasing accelerating gradient, 
contrary to the previously observed Q-slope. However, it was also found that the maximum 
accelerating gradient was reduced on average by ~30 % as a result of the doping process.

Figure 2. Final process flow for nitrogen doping (left) and nitrogen infusion (right).

Most recently, efforts have been made to preserve high accelerating gradients while also 

increasing the quality factor of SRF cavities. In these new nitrogen “infusion” cavity processing 
recipes, cavities were heat-treated at high temperature (>800 °C), then the furnace temperature is 
reduced to 120–200 °C, and nitrogen was introduced into the furnace at a partial pressure of ∼25 

High temperature degassing 
800 oC (~ 3hours) in UHV

Nitrogen injection at the end of 
process (~ 25 mTorr) hold for 'x' 

mins

Evacuate furnace and temperature 

hold  for 'y' mins

Furnace cooldown to room 

temperature in UHV

Electropolishing (5-10 mm)

High Pressure Rinse (HPR), clean 

room asselbly and rf test

HPR and Nb caps installed in 

clean room

High temperature degassing 
800 oC (~ 3hours) in UHV

Furnace cooldown to (120-

200 oC) in UHV

Nitrogen injection ~ 25 mTorr

hold for 24-48 hours

Furnace cooldown to room 

temperature in UHV

High Pressure Rinse (HPR), 
clean room asselbly and rf test


4

mTorr for several hours. This process has shown an improvement in Q0 over the baseline 
measurements, without the need for post-annealing chemical removal of material from the inner 
surface [11,12,13]. Even though the diffusion of the nitrogen into the bulk of the SRF cavity is 
limited in-depth at these low temperatures, the introduction of nitrogen is sufficient to modify the 
cavity surface within the rf penetration depth as seen from rf results, which are similar to those 
previously reported for high-temperature nitrogen-doped cavities. Furthermore, while post-doping 
electropolishing is required to remove coarse lossy nitrides from the surface, no further processing 
is required for the low-temperature infusion recipe showing a clear benefit in reducing processing 
steps as well as keeping higher gradient with high Q0 values. Figure 2 shows the typical final cavity 
processing steps during the nitrogen doping and infusion process. The nitrogen doping recipe with 
x= 2 mins and y=6 mins was rapidly implemented into the industrialization of the technology as 
the processing recipe of SRF cavities for LCLS-II cryomodules production.

The historical development of SRF technology over the last four decades can be found in 

Ref. [14] and several conferences and workshop proceedings [15]. This paper is organized as 
follows. In section II, we present the invention of the nitrogen doping recipe. In section III, we 
present the recipe developments related to furnace requirements, nitrogen diffusion time, and post 
doping electropolishing. In section IV, we comment on the industrialization efforts related to the 
LCLS-II cavity production. In section V, we present the recent development on recipe modification 
towards the high gradient, high quality factor SRF cavities. In section VI, we present the sample 
studies to understand the mechanism behind the improvement in SRF cavity performances. In 
section VII, we present some theoretical models that explain the high Q and high gradient cavity 
performance. Section VIII presents the summary and future outlooks. 

II.
The invention of Nitrogen Doping

Over the last several decades, several attempts were made to increase the quality factor of 

SRF cavities. The Nb surface is covered by a few nanometer-thick oxide structure and higher 
concentration of interstitials at the metal-oxide interface. Work was done to passivate the Nb 
surface with a less-defective oxide [16] or with a thin nitride layer nitrides [17,18] to prevent a 
high concentration of the surface hydrogen leading to the formation of Nb-H phase which can 
result in a degraded cavity performance [19].The surface oxidation experiments were carried out 
at high temperature and showed the enhanced Q0 [16]. In 2012, it was serendipitously discovered 
that the diffusion of a small amount of titanium during the high-temperature heat treatment of a 
Nb cavity was found to be related to to the increase in quality factor with the accelerating gradient,
as shown in Fig. 3(a) [8,9]. 

An exploration similar to that of Ref. [18] was carried out at Fermi Lab in 2013 in an 

attempt to form niobium nitride on the inner surface of the SRF cavity by reacting bulk niobium 
cavities with nitrogen in a high-temperature UHV furnace [10].  The process resulted in the 
formation of lossy, metallic NbN phases on the surface, but it was discovered that by successfully 
removing thin layers of material by electropolishing an increase in quality factor with accelerating 
gradient, as that shown in Fig. 3(b), was obtained was obtained after removing ~5-7 mm of material. 
The Q0(Eacc) curves in Fig. 3 show similar anti-Q-slope indicating that the interstitial diffusion of 
the non-magnetic impurities (Ti and N) indeed enhance the quality factor by decreasing the BCS 
surface resistance as the accelerating gradient increases up to 10-15 MV/m. The advantage of 
nitrogen doping over the Ti doping is that nitrogen being gaseous, it is easier to control the partial 


5

pressure in a high-temperature environment and nitrogen diffusion takes place at a lower 
temperature compared to titanium, which required a temperature higher than 1250 C [8].

Figure 3. The first demonstration of an increase in quality factor with rf field with (a) titanium 
doping on 1.5 GHz single-cell cavity made from large grain Nb at 2.0 K [8] and (b) nitrogen doping 
followed by electropolishing on 1.3 GHz cavities at 2.0K [10].

III.
Nitrogen Doping Recipe Development 

After the demonstration of an exceptionally high quality factor on nitrogen-doped SRF 

single-cell cavities, the focus quickly shifted to the application of nitrogen-doped cavities in multi-
cell cavities and eventually in a superconducting linear accelerator. Around the same time, the 
LCLS-II project quickly adopted nitrogen-doping as part of the treatment processes for the SRF 
cavities to be installed in cryomodules [20]. The LCLS-II baseline design required 1.3 GHz 9-cell
TESLA shaped cavities [21] with an average intrinsic quality factor Q0 ~ 2.7×1010 at an
accelerating gradient of 16 MV/m at 2.0 K [22]. Joint R&D efforts among different laboratories 
towards achieving the high quality factor were started with aiming towards the development of the 
cavity processing technique that can be commercially produced in large numbers [23]. Three 
partner labs to LCLS-II projects: Fermi Lab, Jefferson Lab, and Cornell University rapidly 
developed separate recipes with nitrogen doping on single-cell cavities and they were successfully 
applied to 9-cell cavities [24,25,26,27].

A. Doping Heat Treatment
Generally, most of the SRF facilities are equipped with a vacuum furnace capable of reaching 

a temperature of 1250 C with resistive heaters. The SRF facilities at Fermi Lab [28], Jefferson 
Lab [29] and Cornell University [30] used a furnace manufactured by TM Vacuum Products, Inc.
[31]. These furnaces are equipped with dry roughing pumps, cryopumps, residual gas analyzers, 
vacuum gauges, and gas delivery systems. The high purity nitrogen (> 99.9999%) was used during 


6

the doping process with the flow controlled by a mass flow controller. Typically, the temperature 
of the furnace is ramped up to the desired temperature (800-1000 ºC) at the rate of 3-5 ºC/min and 
hold for few hours (~3 hours), mainly for hydrogen degassing. At the end of the degassing cycle, 
high purity nitrogen gas is injected for some time (2-30 min), also called soaking time, with the 
specified partial pressure of nitrogen (~25 mTorr). During the early stage of the recipe 
development, the gas was turned off, the furnace was evacuated and the furnace was naturally cool 
down to the room temperature. Later, the recipe was modified in such a way that after the soaking 
time, the furnace was evacuated and the cavity was further annealed before cooling down to room 
temperature. A typical nitrogen doping temperature and pressure profile is shown in Fig. 4. 
Generally, the high Q was observed with all of the doping recipe, however, a research group at
KEK initially was not able to reproduce the doping results [32] which they eventually did after 
improving the furnace pumping system [33]. Surface contamination for example by hydrocarbons 
and residual metallic particles in furnaces was found to be detrimental to the cavity's rf
performance. 

Figure. 4 Typical temperature and pressure profile with residual gas analyzer during the nitrogen 
doping at Jefferson Lab. The nitrogen was injected into the furnace at 800 C for 2 mins and the 
cavity was further annealed in UHV for 6 mins before cooldown to room temperature. 

B. Nitrogen Diffusion

Thermal diffusion of nitrogen into Nb is a method that had been used in the past to produce 

NbN films [34,35,36], with higher superconducting transition temperature than Nb. Earlier 
attempts to produce the nitride phase for surface passivation in SRF cavities didn’t result in the Q-
rise phenomenon, however, the overall increase in quality factor was observed at all accelerating 


7

gradients when the SRF cavities were heat-treated in a nitrogen environment at temperature ~400 
C with the partial pressure of ~ 10-5 mTorr [18]. The study suggested that the temperature and 
partial pressure of nitrogen were insufficient to diffuse into the niobium or to formation of any 
nitride phase.

Historically, the Nb-N system is interesting because of the superconducting behavior of the 

-NbN1-x phase [37]. Several multi-phase regions exist in the equilibrium phase diagram of Nb-N 
depending on N: Nb ratio as shown in Fig. 5. In the low N concentration regime below 10 at % of 
N, the main phase is that of nitrogen as an interstitial in Nb, and as the concentration increases 
there is form a two-phase mixture of α-Nb(N), where N is an interstitial and a stoichiometric β-
Nb2N phase [38]. From the phase diagram, the phase of the nitride on niobium is determined by 
the concentration of the nitrogen and temperature of the niobium substrate [39,40]. The apparent 
activation energy during the nitrogen diffusion decreases with increasing temperature up to about 
650 °C. Then it stays constant up to 1300 °C, above which it increases to a new value of 50
kcal/mol [41]. Most of the diffusion data available in the literature is done at a higher temperature 
with atmospheric nitrogen pressure on sample coupons as shown in Fig. 6.

Figure 5. Nb-N Phase diagram, adapted from Ref. [37]

With the first demonstration of N-doping in SRF cavities, more attention towards the 

diffusion mechanism of nitrogen into niobium was given. The diffusion of the nitrogen in niobium 
usually starts with the formation of the stoichiometric nitride phase on the surface and diffusion of 
the nitrogen in the bulk takes place. Depending on the temperature and amount of nitrogen being 


8

introduced on the surface of niobium, the diffusion depth of nitrogen can be few to a hundred 
micrometers [42, 43, 44, 45]. The nitride features are visible on the surface of niobium and those 

are identified as Nb2N by TEM analysis [46] as well as XPS measurements [47, 48] consistent 
with earlier observations of sub nitride having a composition of hexagonal Nb2N [49]. Tetragonal, 
a face-centered cubic, and two hexagonal nitrides having compositions of NbN0.75 to NbN were 
also observed in earlier studies when nitrogen diffusion was done at atmospheric pressure and 
higher temperature [50]. At the temperature of interest for SRF cavities, a very small amount of 
nitrogen will diffuse to the bulk of the Nb, and most forms nitride layers on the surface starting at 
a temperature as low as 400 ºC [51]. 

Figure 6. (a) Reaction rate of nitrogen in atmospheric pressure [49]. (b) Nitrogen diffusion 
coefficient as a function from temperature [39].

Very limited work has been done on the dependence of nitrogen diffusion on crystal

orientation in high-purity SRF niobium [41, 52]. Since niobium is a body-centered cubic structure, 
it should not exhibit a diffusion profile based on the crystal orientation. The doping study 
performed on cavities made from large grain niobium also showed the improved Q as good as in 
cavities made from fine grain niobium, if not better [10, 44,53,54]. In SRF cavities with large 
surface areas, the diffusion of nitrogen along the grain boundaries and dislocations networks is 
possible. No performance enhancement was observed on a cavity made from low purity niobium, 
probably due to the higher concentration of impurities preventing the optimal diffusion of nitrogen 
in the bulk [44]. However, more systematic studies are still needed to understand the mechanism 
of diffusion of nitrogen in niobium to the temperature, partial pressure of nitrogen, duration of 
nitrogen exposure, and the metallurgical state of niobium.

C. Post-Doping Electropolishing

One of the required steps after the nitrogen doping to achieve high quality factor is 

controlled electropolishing of the inner surface of the cavity. A recent study on a single cell cavity 
also showed an encouraging result when the post doping material removal was done by buffered
chemical polishing (BCP) [55]. Historically, the EP process is applied to achieve a smoother cavity 


9

surface and it was found to be superior to the BCP process. The standard EP acid mixture contains 
nine-volume parts of sulphuric acid H2SO4 (96%) and 1 part of hydrofluoric acid HF (48%). EP is 
a surface finishing process whereby the anodization of Nb by H2SO4 forces the growth of Nb2O5
and F− dissolves Nb2O5. A lot of progress has been made in optimizing the electropolishing 
technique over the years [[56, 57, 58,59,60]. The typical horizontal electropolishing systems 
consist of the cathode-anode set up with the cavity being anode and an aluminum tube being the
cathode inserted along the cavity axis as shown in Fig. 7. The I-V characteristics, the temperature
of the acid mixture, the temperature of the cavity surface play a significant role in etching or 
polishing of the niobium surface. The details on process development can be found in Ref. 61.

Figure 7. Schematic of a cavity electropolishing system [56].

The effect of the amount of material removal on the performance of nitrogen-doped cavities 

was studied in details [23-30]. It was found that the accelerating gradient increases while 
decreasing the overall quality factors as more material was removed from the cavity’s inner 
surface, especially in heavily doped SRF cavities, as shown in Fig. 8. This confirms that some 
optimal nitrogen concentration is needed for high Q0, however, the gradient is limited to the lower 
values. Questions persist on the relationship between material removal and Q0(Eacc). How much 
material removal is necessary for optimal performance? It is believed that the early cavity quenches 
are due to the large segregation of nitrogen on a localized site, driving the region into a normal 
conducting state. Further removal of material may reduce the localized site but the overall 
concentration of nitrogen is lower and the superconducting properties approach the clean limit.


10

Figure 8. The effect of successive EP on a single cell cavity (Bp/Eacc = 4.23 mT/(MV/m) after 
nitrogen doping [53]. The accelerating gradient increase with increasing the EP removal, while 
decreasing the overall quality factor. 

IV.
Industrialization of Nitrogen Doping

The initial research and development on nitrogen doping were limited to Fermi Lab, 

Jefferson Lab, and Cornell University. The research groups working closely started developing a 
“optimum” recipe on single-cell cavities by changing the nitrogen diffusion time†. Some details of 
the recipe development are already mentioned in section III, A. Several trials were done on the 
exposure and annealing time to identify the best recipe that met the LCLS-II cavity performance 
specifications. A recipe 2N6 (2 minutes nitrogen exposure followed by 6 minutes of annealing in 
UHV environment) was chosen to be used for the project and technology was transferred to the 
cavity manufacturers Research Instruments, Germany and Zanon in Italy. The electropolishing 
process had already been implemented by the cavity vendors for E-XFEL process but it was refined 
by Jefferson Lab, mainly cavity temperature, acid flow rate and cathode optimization.

The niobium for cavity fabrication was obtained from Tokyo Denkai, Japan and Ningxia, 

China, with similar material specifications as for E-XFEL project [62]. A total of 373 cavities were 
ordered and tested at Jefferson Lab and Fermi Lab and showed an excellent performance with 
average accelerating gradient 22.0 ± 3.6 MV/m with quality factor (3.1±0.5)×1010 as shown in Fig. 
9 [63,64]. The successful production of several hundred cavities with nitrogen doping proved the 
reproducibility of the process within a short time. Even though the nitrogen doping was 
successfully applied to several multi-cell cavities in mass production, several recipe modifications 

† In literature, the recipe is usually defined as xNy, where x (1-30 mins) represents the nitrogen 
diffusion time and y (0-60 mins) represent the annealing time in minutes in UHV environment. 


11

were made during the production [64]. Among them are; issues with electropolishing and 
annealing process of cavities before the nitrogen doping. The electropolishing issue was mitigated 
by improved cathode design and parameters with the help of Jefferson lab researchers [63]. 

Figure 9. Summary of performance of 9-cell LCLS-II cavities (~373 cavities) in vertical test on 
cavities commercially produced at two different vendor sites, from raw Nb materials from two 
different vendors. The cavities were doped with 2N6 recipe followed by 5-7 mm EP at vendor sites
[63].

To achieve the high quality factor in SRF cavities, one has to minimize the trapped residual 

magnetic field during the cooldown of SRF cavities. It was found that the high-temperature 
gradient along the cavity axis is needed during the cooldown when the cavity surface temperature 
transition from normal conducting to the superconducting state (~9.2 K). This is needed to expel 
the residual magnetic field from the SRF cavities due to Meissner effect, leading to the lower 
residual resistance due to trapped magnetic field [65,66,67,68]. It was found that doped cavities 
are more vulnerable to flux pinning, therefore extra care is needed to minimize any intrinsic source 
of pinning centers. During the production of LCLS-II cavities, several cavities’ quality factor was 
limited by the poor flux expulsion. Even though the material specification was the same, the 
performance of the cavities made from the two vendors showed different flux expulsion
characteristics. In the middle of the production, additional R&D was done to maximize flux 
expulsion by increasing the annealing temperature before the nitrogen injection process. The 
cavities annealed at a higher temperature (900-975 ºC) showed much better flux expulsion 
compared to cavities annealed at 800 ºC [64, 69]. The study also showed that the grain size may 
also play a significant role in flux expulsion [69].

The rapid progress on the development of SRF cavities with nitrogen doping was mainly

due to the requirements for the LCLS-II project. As a part of R&D and possible use in future 
accelerator projects, nitrogen doping work was carried out in other parts of the world, KEK in 
Japan [33, 70], IHEP [71] and PKU in China [72,73]. Currently, the nitrogen doping technology 
is considered to be used in the Shanghai Coherent Light Facility (SHINE) linac similar to the 
LCLS-II project.


12

V.
Towards High Q0 and High Gradient

The nitrogen doping provided an avenue for the operations of the future accelerators with 

reduced power consumption due to cavities with high quality factors, particularly CW accelerators 
which are operated with an accelerating gradient of  25 MV/m. Coincidently, most of the
nitrogen doped cavities are limited to an accelerating gradient  25 MV/m, significantly lower 
than that without doping. For example, the average accelerating gradient of 743 cavities used in 
XFEL projects was 31.4 ± 6.8 MV/m [74,75] with conventional (pre doping era) cavity processing 
recipe.  During the LCLS-II cavity production, the average accelerating gradient of ~373 cavities 
was 22.0±3.6 MV/m [64]. This shows ~ 30% reduction on an achievable maximum accelerating 
gradient. However, the higher Q0 at accelerating gradient Eacc ~ 16 MV/m, clearly shows the 
benefit of using doped cavities in CW machine. Future accelerators such as International Linear 
Collider (ILC) will require a high gradient but it will benefit from SRF cavities with higher Q0
[76]. Moreover, the proposed upgrade of LCLS-HE program is also increasing its operational 
specification to a Q0 of >2.7×1010 at 20.8 MV/m, 2 K, requiring further R&D studies. 

A. High-Temperature Nitrogen Doping

One of the routes to increase the accelerating gradient currently being pursued is to use a 

modified nitrogen doping recipe by varying the nitrogen diffusion and annealing time. Once again 
LCLS-HE project-driven R&D is being conducted independently at Jefferson Lab and Fermi Lab 
pursuing different doping recipes. Jefferson Lab is exploring the doping recipe where the nitrogen 
is introduced in the furnace for a short time (2-3 minutes) followed by a longer annealing time 
(~60 mins). The hypothesis behind this recipe is that the nitrogen will diffuse deeper into the bulk 
with uniform concentration, leading to a high accelerating gradient. Recipe applied to single-cell 
cavities reached ~35 MV/m, however with the high field Q-slope [77]. Further optimization on 
doping infrastructure with niobium foil caps installed on cavities opening, smoother pre-doping 
surface, and colder post doping electropolishing led to initial results on 9-cell cavities of an 
accelerating gradient closer to 30 MV/m [64, 69].

Figure 10. Q0(Eacc) of single-cell cavities with a modified recipe (a) 2N0 and (b) 3N60, to 
achieve high Q0, high gradient SRF cavities aim for LCLS-II-HE project [63].


13

Fermi Lab is exploring a recipe that includes the short nitrogen diffusion time (~2 mins) 

with no post-annealing time. The preliminary results on a single cell showed the accelerating 
gradient above 25 MV/m with high field Q-slope, similar to that which has been observed with 
Jefferson Lab 3N60 recipe, as shown in Fig. 10. With available 9-cell cavity test results, using 2N0 
recipe, there is a small increase in accelerating gradient (~ 3 MV/m) over the earlier 2N6 recipe
[78]. Further R&D is planned to increase the accelerating with high Q0 in doped cavities for the 
realization of the LCLS high energy upgrade [79].

B. Recipe Development at Low Temperature

An alternative to the nitrogen doping at high temperature followed by the electropolishing 

to control the optimal nitrogen concentration within the rf penetration depth was realized by adding 
nitrogen to the low-temperature baking used to mitigate the high-field Q-slope [11]. In these new 
so-called nitrogen "infusion" processing recipes, the cavities are heat-treated at 800 °C for 
~3 hours then the furnace is allowed to cool to 120-300 °C. The nitrogen is introduced into the 
furnace at a partial pressure of ~ 25 mTorr for several hours (24-96 hours) in the temperature range 
of 120-200 ºC. This process has shown an improvement in Q0 over the baseline measurements, 
without the need for post-furnace electropolishing [11, 12, 13, 80, 81,82,83,84]. 

Figure 11. Typical temperature and pressure profile during nitrogen infusion run at Jefferson Lab. 
The nitrogen was injected into the furnace at elevated temperatures [85]. 

In particular, at Jefferson Lab, a benefit to the cavity performance similar to that achieved 

by nitrogen doping followed by EP was observed when the nitrogen gas was introduced into the 
furnace at elevated temperature (~ 250-300 ºC) and let the cavity cool down to lower temperature 
(120-200 C) and hold at that temperature for an extended period of time (24 - 48 hours) [13, 85].
Typical temperature and pressure profile during nitrogen infusion at Jefferson Lab are shown in 
Fig. 11. Even though the diffusion of the nitrogen into the bulk of the SRF cavity is limited at these 
low temperatures (120-200 °C), the introduction of nitrogen is sufficient to modify the cavity 
surface within the rf penetration depth as seen from cavities’ test results, which are similar to those 
previously reported for high-temperature nitrogen-doped cavities. The nitridation and diffusion of 


14

nitrogen into the bulk are expected when the Nb surface is free of Nb2O5 which occurs  >300 C 
[86,87], but the infusion was done when the cavity was fully annealed at 800 C/3h and cooled
down to the desired temperature under UHV conditions before injecting nitrogen into the furnace. 
While post-doping electropolishing is required to remove coarse nitrides from the surfaces of high-
temperature nitrogen-doped cavities, no further processing is required for the low-temperature 
"infusion" recipe showing a clear benefit in reducing processing steps as well as keeping higher 
gradient with high Q0 values. In some cases, the increase in accelerating gradient over the baseline 
was also reported, although the actual mechanism isn’t fully understood [11, 88]. One of the critical 
requirement for these low-temperature recipes is that special cleaning and preparation is needed 
before loading the cavity into the furnace. The cavity is high pressure rinsed (HPR) and then dried 
in an ISO 4/5 cleanroom. While in the cleanroom, special caps made from niobium foils were 
placed to cover the cavity flange openings. The cavity was then transported to the furnace inside a 
clean, sealed plastic bag. To this date, the recipe was successfully applied to single-cell cavities by
several research groups, but no clear advantage was demonstrated in multi-cell cavities. The 
summary of the single-cell cavity results is shown in Fig. 12.

In the quest for high gradient, high quality factor SRF cavities, a two-step low-temperature 

baking process showed an increase in accelerating gradient as well as quality factor well above 40 
MV/m [89,90,91] in single-cell cavities. Furthermore, the medium temperature baking also 
showed the improved quality factor with a high accelerating gradient [92]. Future accelerating 
projects need continuous R&D towards high gradient, high quality factor of SRF cavities that can 
be reliably produced in large numbers. 

Figure 12. The quality factor of single-cell SRF cavities with nitrogen infusion, at (a) Fermi Lab 
[11], (b) Cornell University [12], (c) Jefferson Lab [13] and (d) KEK [83].


15

VI.
Sample Coupon Studies on Doping and Infusion

Sample coupons treated along with SRF cavities provide very useful information about the 

mechanism behind the rf performance of nitrogen-doped and infused SRF cavities. Several surface 
sensitive techniques are: Scanning electron microscope, Electron diffraction X-ray, Transmission 
electron microscopy, secondary ion mass spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy,
Magnetometry, and Tunneling.

A. Surface Morphology

Surface imaging with SEMs along with EDX allowed looking into the surface of niobium 

after the nitrogen doping. Almost all high-temperature doping recipes produce triangular or star-
like shaped structures on the surfaces of niobium (Fig. 13). These structures are identified as 
normal conducting nitride, mainly -Nb2N [46] consistent with the phase diagram shown in Fig. 
5. These normal conducting nitrides are removed by electropolishing to achieve the high Q0 in 
SRF cavities. It was found that the density and size of the normal conducting niobium nitrides 
depend on the temperature, duration of nitrogen doping, and grain orientation of niobium [93].

Figure 13. (a) SEM image of Nb surface after nitrogen doped with 2N6 recipe at 800 C [55], (b) 
SEM and EDX image (inset) elemental map for NK of nitrogen doped (20N30) sample [47] and 
(c) TEM image of nitrogen doped (20N0) Nb sample with nano electron diffraction image of Nb, 
[113] zone axis (upper) and of Nb2N close to [310] zone axis (lower) [46].

B. Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS)

SIMS has been an excellent tool to measure elemental concentration on the surface of the 

nitrogen-doped Nb samples. Ions beams, primarily 16O2+, 16O-, 133Cs+, or Bnm+ (n=1-5, m=1,2) are
used to bombard the sample surface at an energy that is enough to eject secondary ions from the 
surface of the Nb. The ejected ions are detected and analyzed by the mass spectrometers to infer 
the composition of the sample [94]. The concentration of nitrogen as a function of depth profiles 
and other impurities such as oxygen, hydrogen, carbon dioxides, and carbon monoxides are 
typically measured during the SIMS study depending on the detection limit of the instrumentation.
It is to be remembered that the quality factor of SRF cavities depends on the elemental 
compositions (impurities) within the rf penetration depth. The additional rf losses can be 
anticipated due to the large segregation of impurities even deeper than the rf penetration depth 
since those sites act as effective pinning centers for the residual magnetic field and thereby 
contributing to the vortex related rf loss [95]. The concentration profiles measured on nitrogen-


16

doped Nb samples typically follow the simulation results using Fick’s laws [44]. As expected, the 
variation on nitrogen concentration is observed depending on the nitrogen partial pressure [45], 
the temperature of diffusion [52], and the duration of nitrogen doping [63] as shown in Fig. 14.

Figure 14. Diffusion depth profile of nitrogen to the (a) partial pressure of nitrogen [45], (b) 
temperature of nitrogen exposure [52], and (c) duration of nitrogen exposure [63].

SIMS measurements were also carried out samples treated in nitrogen environments at low 

temperatures and also with titanium doped samples [96]. The diffusion of nitrogen within the rf
penetration depth (~50 nm) was observed when the baking temperature was kept 150-200 ºC [11,
13, 47,97]. SIMS measurements shown the increased concentration of carbon and oxygen in
nitrogen infused niobium sample [98]. Higher concentrations of oxygen were observed as a result 
of heat treatment of Nb samples above 120 ºC even in the UHV environment as oxygen diffuse 
much deeper than nitrogen or carbon in niobium [12, 55, 70, 96, 99].

C. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)

XPS studies are done to identity the near-surface composition on SRF niobium. 

Historically there have been several XPS studies done to understand the loss mechanism of SRF 
cavities on EP, BCP and Low temperature baked SRF niobium [100,101]. XPS studies on those 
treatments reveal a complex oxide substructure (Nb2O5, NbO, NbO2, NbN1-xOx) within the rf 
penetration depth (~10 nm), as shown in Fig. 15, which can be responsible for the rf performance 
of SRF cavities [13, 47, 55, 71].


17

Figure 15. (a) Nb 3d XPS spectra (takeoff angle of 75°) of N-doped (2N6) at 800 C Nb samples 
before and after the ∼6 μm surface removal with EP [55]. (b) Deconvoluted Nb 3d lines measured 
for Nb samples after nitridation at 800 C [47]. (c) Background subtracted XPS spectra on sample 
F9 (800 °C/3 hrs, no doping) and F11 (800 °C=3 hrs +140 °C/48 hrs at 25 mTorr N2) at 45° takeoff 
angle. And, (d) Angle-resolved XPS on sample F11 (low-temperature nitrogen infusion sample)
shows the complex NbN1-xOx within the first 10 nm of the Nb surface [13].

D. DC Magnetization and AC Susceptibility

The superconducting properties such as the transition temperature and critical fields can be 

extracted from the dc magnetization and susceptibility measurements. In particular, dc 
magnetization can be used to estimate the field of first flux penetration (Hffp), which is believed to 
be one of the causes of cavity quench. The measurement showed that Hffp is lowered by ~ 15% due 
to the nitrogen doping (Fig. 16 (a)) [102, 103,104] with no significant change in the bulk 
superconducting properties, confirming that the doping volume is smaller compared to the sample 
size.


18

Figure 16. Isothermal dc magnetic hysteresis of samples after (a) several surface treatments 
including nitrogen doping and followed by EP [103]. (b) Sample with nitrogen infusion at low 
temperature [13]. About a 15% reduction in first flux penetration was observed after nitrogen-
doped samples, whereas no significant change in Hffp was observed in low-temperature nitrogen-
infused samples.  

Figure 17. Imaginary part, χ ́ ́, of dc magnetic field-swept-mode ac susceptibilities of a nitrogen-
doped sample with initial surface (a) EP, (b) BCP, followed by EP [103]. And (c) the surface 
critical field of clean Nb (solid line), nitrogen-doped Nb followed by EP and low-temperature 
nitrogen-infused Nb samples [105].

The ac susceptibility measurement technique has been used to study the pinning and vortex 

motion in many superconductors. The real part of the susceptibility is the result of the diamagnetic 
shielding of the magnetic field whereas the imaginary part gives information about the loss 
mechanism. The external magnetic field dependence of the ac susceptibility can be used to extract 
the surface critical fields Hc1 and Hc2 as shown in Fig. 17. In some geometrical conditions, when 
the external magnetic field is parallel to the sample surface, the nucleation of the superconducting 
phase in a thin surface sheath was first discovered by Saint-James and de Gennes [106] up to the 
surface critical field Hc3. The ratio Hc3/Hc2 was estimated to be ~1.7 using Ginsburg-Landau 


19

theory.  It has been previously reported that the experimentally measured ratio is higher than the 
theoretical number for several Nb samples [107,108] and the ratio increases with decreasing the 
electronic mean free path.  The ratio for nitrogen-doped niobium was found to be closer to the 
theoretical limit [101,103], even though, the electronic mean free path was reduced as a result of 
nitrogen diffusion into the Nb surface.

E. Tunneling Measurements

The BCS surface resistance depends on many superconducting parameters and among them 

are the superconducting gap and density of states (DOS) of the quasi-particles at the Fermi level. 
The tunneling spectroscopy such as point contact tunneling (PCT) and scanning tunneling 
microscope (STM) is particularly useful in determining the local DOS of quasi-particles and
superconducting gap as well as imaging vortices. PCT measurements done on nitrogen-doped Nb 
showed a more homogeneous distribution of the superconducting gap compared to non- doped 
samples and also favorable surface oxidation states on the surface [109]. The oxide structure is 
related to rf losses related to two-level systems [110]. Recent STM measurements on cut out 
samples from nitrogen-doped cavities showed the homogeneity of the superconducting gap with 
broadening of DOS [111] predicted for dirty superconductors [112]. Furthermore, the vortex 
imaging with STM showed a slightly reduced but homogenous superconducting gap and lower 
coherence length compared to the traditionally prepared niobium cavities.

Figure 18. (a) Temperature dependence of ∆ typical tunnel junction measured using point contact 
tunneling (PCT) shown in the insert [109]. (b) Scanning tunneling spectrum (dots) and BCS-Dynes 
fit (red line) acquired on Nb and N-doped Nb cavity cutout samples, respectively, at T=1.5 K 
[111].

VII. Theoretical Models

As mentioned earlier, the increase in quality factor can be realized by minimizing the 

surface resistance, either residual or BCS, or both. Statistically, it was found that the residual 
resistance of doped SRF cavities is lower than the non-doped counterpart when rf tested in the low 
residual magnetic field environment. It is to be noted that the residual magnetic field has a severe 
effect on doped cavities compared to non-doped cavities [68,113,114,115]. Historically, it is 


20

believed that the hydrogen in niobium is responsible for higher residual resistance due to the 
precipitation of hydrogen forming normal conducting hydrides within the rf penetration depth 
[116,117,118,119]. Some improvement in quality factor at the low accelerating gradient and a
significant improvement in quality factor with increased accelerating gradient was observed when 
cavities were baked at low temperature. Even though no unanimous theory or model exists at this 
time, evidence shows that the impurities (O and H), as well as their interactions with vacancies, 
play a role in minimizing rf losses in SRF cavities by the low-temperature baking
[120,121,122,123,124]. The presence of nitrogen (or even titanium) traps the hydrogen, preventing 
the formation of lossy hydrides probably leading to the lower residual resistance in doped SRF 
cavities [125,126,127, 128, 129,130].

One of the peculiar observations in the doped cavity is the increase in quality factor as a 

function of the microwave field tangential to the inner surface of the cavity. This means that the 
surface resistance decreases with the rf field, contrary to the perception that the microwave field 
suppressed the superconductivity leading to the decrease in quality factor Q0 with accelerating 
gradient Eacc Hrf [131]. The quality factor of doped SRF cavities increases with the increase in rf 
field up to Hrf ~ 100 mT and is then limited by either quenching or by the high field Q-slope, 
typically observed in non-doped BCP or EP cavities. 

The original BCS theory was developed without taking into account the amplitude of the 

rf field and the theory explains well the temperature dependence of surface resistance at low rf 
field [132,133]. The theory was extended to explain the high field Q-slope in SRF cavities, which 
may be related to the non-linear BCS resistance [134,135]. Soon after the first demonstration of 
Q-rise phenomena after the titanium doping in SRF cavities [9], the BCS theory was extended 
taking into account the motion Cooper pairs in the presence of rf field [136]. The calculation 
reproduced the rf field dependence surface resistance of titanium doped cavity and similarly, 
nitrogen-doped cavities [137]. 

Gurevich [112] proposed that microwave suppression of surface resistance comes from the 

current-induced broadening of the quasiparticle density of states. The BCS surface resistance takes 
a logarithmic dependence on the amplitude of the rf field in the dirty limit, as experimentally 
observed in Ti [138] and nitrogen-doped cavities [53,139,140,141]. The microwave suppression 
of surface resistance was also previously observed in thin films and explained due to the non-
equilibrium quasi-particle distribution function leading to the enhancement in supercurrent [142].
A theoretical model in which the surface resistance of a superconductor coated with a thin normal 
metal was recently presented and showed that the Rs(Bp) behavior observed in SRF cavities 
following different surface preparations can be explained by changes in the thickness of the normal 
layer and of the interface boundary resistance [143]. A recent theoretical model proposed by 
Gurevich extends the zero-field BCS surface resistance to high rf fields, in the dirty limit [144].
Such a model calculates Rs(H) from the nonlinear quasiparticle conductivity σ1(H), which requires 
knowledge of the quasiparticles’ distribution function. The calculation was done for two cases, 
one which assumes the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution function and one for a non-
equilibrium frozen density of quasiparticles. A non-equilibrium distribution function is appropriate 
when the rf period is shorter than the quasiparticles’ relaxation time. Rs(H) was calculated 
numerically for these two cases and it depends on a single parameter, α, which is related to the 
heat transfer across the cavity wall, the Nb-He interface, and between quasiparticles and phonons.
The calculation based on this model qualitatively reproduces the microwave surface resistance in 
cavities with low-temperature nitrogen infusion [13].


21

Figure 19. Normalized surface resistance as a function of peak surface magnetic field on cavity 
surface (a) Ti-doped cavity [112] and (b) nitrogen-infused SRF cavities [13], the solid lines are 
calculated using the model described in refs. 112 and 144. 

Several other models were reported to understand the microwave resistance in SRF cavities 

extending the theory to clean, dirty, equilibrium, and non- equilibrium superconductors [145,146,
147,148]. The nitrogen doping and infusion studies were also extended to cavities with resonant 
frequency other than 1.3 and 1.5 GHz [149,150], showing that the frequency might play the role 
in the field dependence of microwave surface resistance [146]. Also, two-fluid models taking into 
account surface impurities on SRF cavities were extended to fit the field-dependent surface 
resistance and the model was used to extract the superconducting parameters responsible for the 
reduced rf loss in nitrogen-doped SRF cavities [151,152]. 

VIII. Summary and Future Outlook

Engineering the niobium surface with impurity doping within the rf penetration depth in 

SRF cavities has been extremely beneficial to achieve high quality factor, potentially cost-saving 
on current and future SRF based accelerators. SRF cavities with high quality factor (Q0>3×1010) 
at 2.0 K and accelerating gradient ~ 20 MV/m have been successfully produced commercially and 
are in the process of installation at SLAC for the LCLS-II project. Efforts are being made to extend
high quality factors towards higher accelerating gradient with modification of existing recipes as 
well as exploring new recipes. High Q0 and high gradient SRF cavities would be of great interest 
for lowering the cryogenic heat load of future high-energy accelerators.

High quality factor SRF cavities are also drawing interest in several other applications. For 

example, quantum computing with microwave resonators [153,154,155] and axion dark matter 
research [156]. An extremely high quality factor with a decay time of the order of few seconds 
was measured in SRF cavities in the quantum temperature limit [157]. In addition to Nb cavities, 
alternative materials Nb3Sn are being explored to achieve high quality factor at higher temperature, 
however, so far the accelerating gradient is limited to below 20 MV/m [158,159,160]. Nb3Sn 
cavities are fabricated using thermal diffusion of Sn on Nb cavities and also have the potential for 
industrial applications [161,162,163].  For high accelerating gradient cavities, multilayers of 


22

superconductors are being considered [164,165] as a solution to the low Hc1 in strong type-II 
superconductors, such as Nb3Sn.

IX.
Acknowledgments

We would like to acknowledge Dr. G. Ciovati, Dr. R. Geng, Dr. A. Palczewski, and Dr. 

Robert Rimmer from Jefferson Lab for helpful discussions. We would like to acknowledge Dr. S. 
Balachandran from Applied Superconductivity Center, NHMFL with fruitful discussions. This 
manuscript has been authored by Jefferson Science Associates, LLC under U.S. DOE Contract 
No. DE-AC05-06OR23177.

References

1. Accelerator for America, http://www.acceleratorsamerica.org/index.html.
2. C. E. Reece and G. Ciovati, Superconducting RF technology R&D for future accelerator Applications, Rev. of Accel. 

Sci. and Technol., 5, 285-312 (2012).

3. H. Padamsee, Future prospects of superconducting RF for accelerator applications, Rev. of Accel. Sci. and Technol., 

10, 125-156 (2019).

4. M. Liepe and J. Knobloch, Superconducting RF for energy-recovery linacs, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in 

Physics Research A 557, 354–369 (2006).

5. H. Padamsee, History of gradient advances in SRF, arXiv: 2004.06720 (2020).
6. J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, Theory of superconductivity, Phys.  Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).
7. D. C. Mattis and J. Bardeen, Theory of the anomalous skin effect in normal and superconducting metals, Phys. Rev. 

111, 412 (1958).

8. P. Dhakal, G. Ciovati, and G. R. Myneni, A path to higher Q0 with large grain niobium cavities, in Proc. of IPAC 

2012, New Orleans, USA (2012). www.jacow.org.

9. P Dhakal, et al., Effect of high-temperature heat treatments on the quality factor of a large-grain superconducting 

radio-frequency niobium cavity, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams16, 042001. (2013).

10. A Grassellino et al., Nitrogen and argon doping of niobium for superconducting radiofrequency cavities: a pathway 

to highly efficient accelerating structures, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, 102001 (2013).

11. A. Grassellino et al., Unprecedented quality factors at accelerating gradients up to 45 MVm−1 in niobium 

superconducting resonators via low-temperature nitrogen infusion, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 094004 (2017).

12. P.N. Koufalis, F. Furuta, M. Ge, D. Gonnella, J.J. Kaufman, M. Liepe, J.T. Maniscalco, R.D. Porter, Low 

temperature nitrogen baking of a Q0 SRF cavities, In Proc. of LINAC2016, East Lansing MI, USA, (2016). 
www.jacow.org.

13. P. Dhakal, S. Chetri, S. Balachandran, P. J. Lee, and G. Ciovati, Effect of low temperature baking in nitrogen on 

the performance of a niobium superconducting radio frequency cavity, Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 21 032001 
(2018).

14. H. Padamsee, J. Knobloch, and T. Hays, RF Superconductivity for Accelerators, Wiley-VCH, 2nd edition (2008).
15.  www. Jacow.org
16. R. Ballantini, A. Dacca`, G. Gemme, R. Parodi, and L.Mattera, Improvement of the maximum field of accelerating 

cavities by dry oxidization,  in Proc. of the 9th Workshop on RF Superconductivity, Santa Fe, NM (1999). www. 
Jacow.org

17. E. W. Hoyt, Niobium surfaces for RF superconductors, SLAC Technical Note No. SLAC-PUB-977, 1971.
18. G. Ciovati, G. Myneni, F. Stevie, P. Maheshwari, and D. Griffis, High field Q slope and the baking effect: Review 

of recent experimental results and new data on Nb heat treatments, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams 13, 022002 
(2010).

19. S. Isagawa, Influence of hydrogen on superconducting niobium cavities, J. Appl. Phys. 51, 6010 (1980).
20. J. Stohr, Linac Coherent Light Source II (LCLS-II) Conceptual Design Report. United States: (2011). 
21. B. Aune et al., Superconducting TESLA cavities, Phys. Rev. ST Accel. and Beams 3, 092001 (2000).
22 J. N. Galayda, The Linac Coherent Light Source-II project, in Proc. IPAC2014, Dresden, Germany, (2014). www. 

Jacow.org


23

23. M. Liepe et al., The joint high Q0 R&D program for LCLS-II, in Proc. 5th Int. Particle Accelerator Conf. 

(IPAC'14), Dresden, Germany (2014). www. Jacow.org.

24. C. E. Reece, High-Q development plan and choice of Q, JLab Tech note 14-015.
25. P. Bishop et al., LCLS-II SRF cavity processing protocol development and baseline cavity performance 

demonstration, in Proc. of SRF2015, Whistler, BC, Canada (2015). www.jacow.org.

26. M. Ge, R. Eichhorn, B. Elmore, F. Furuta, D. Gonnella, Performance of nitrogen-doped 9-cell srf cavities in 

vertical tests at Cornell University, in Proc. of SRF2015, Whistler, BC, Canada (2015). www.jacow.org.

27. A. D. Palczewski, G. Eremeev, R. L. Geng, and C. E. Reece, Quench studies of high-temperature nitrogen-doped 

9 cell cavities for use in the LCLS-II baseline prototype cryomodule at Jefferson laboratory, in Proc. of IPAC2015, 
Richmond, VA, USA. www.jacow.org.

28. M. Merio, A.C. Crawford, A. Grassellino, A. Rowe, M. Wong, M. Checchin, M. Martinello, Furnace N2 doping 

treatments at Fermi Lab, In Proc. of SRF2015, Whistler, Bc, Canada (2015). www.jacow.org.

29. A. D. Palczewski, R. L. Geng, and C. E. Reece, Analysis of new high-Q0 srf cavity test by nitrogen gas doping at 

Jefferson lab, in Proc. of LINAC2014, Geneva, Switzerland (2014). www.jacow.org.

30. F. Furuta, B. Bullock, R. Eichhorn, A. Ganshin, M. Ge, G. Hoffstaetter, J. Kaufman, M. Liepe, J. Sears, TM 

Furnace qualification at  Cornell, in Proc. of SRF2013, Paris, France (2013). www.jacow.org.

31. TM Vacuum Products Inc, http://www.tmvacuum.com.
32. K. Umemori, et al., Vertical test results of nitrogen-doped srf cavities at KEK, in Proc. of IPAC2016, Busan, 

Korea (2016). www.jacow.org.

33. T. Okada et al., Improvement of cavity performance by nitrogen doping at KEK, in Proc. of LINAC2018, Beijing, 

China (2018). www.jacow.org.

34. C. Benvenuti, L. Chiggiato, L. Parrini, R. Russo, Reactive diffusion produced niobium nitride films for 

superconducting cavity applications, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 336, 16-22 (1993).

35. R. Musenich, P. Fabbricatore, G. Gemme, R. Parodi, M. Viviani, B. Zhang, Growth of niobium nitrides by 

nitrogen-niobium reaction at high temperature, J. of Alloys and Compounds 209, 319 (1994).

36. Y. Ufuktepe, A. H. Farha, S. Kimura, T. Hajiri, F. Karadağ, M. A. Al Mamun, A. A. Elmustafa, G. Myneni, and 

H. E.Elsayed-Ali, Structural, electronic, and mechanical properties of niobium nitride prepared by thermal 
diffusion in nitrogen, Mater. Chem. Phys.141, 393 (2013).

37. W. Mayr, W. Lengauer, V. Buscaglia, J. Bauer, M. Bohn, and M. Fialin, Nitridation of Ti/Nb alloys and solid-

state properties of δ-(Ti,Nb)N, J. of Alloys and Compounds 262, 521 (1997).

38. N. Cansever, M. Danışman, and K. Kazmanli, The effect of nitrogen pressure on cathodic arc deposited NbN thin 

films, Surface and Coatings Technology 202, 5919 (2008).

39. C. Y. Ang, Activation energies and diffusion coefficients of oxygen and nitrogen in niobium and tantalum, Acta 

Metall.1, 123–125 (1953

40. J. Keinonen, J. Raisanen, and A. Anttila, Diffusion of nitrogen in vanadium and niobium, Appl. Phys. A, Materials 

Science & Processing, 34, 49-56 (1984).

41. T. Ogurtani and E. M. Uygur, Diffusion of Nitrogen in Niobium with Special Reference to Temperature 

Dependence of the Activation Energy, Trans. Japan Inst. of Metals, 13(6), 396, (1972).

42. C. J. Clenny and C. R. Rosa, Nitridation kinetics of niobium in the temperature range of 873 to 1273 K, Met. 

Trans. A 11, 1385 (1980).

43. A. D. Palczewski, C. E Reece, M.J. Kelly, J. Tuggle, Investigation of nitrogen absorption rate and nitride growth 

on SRF cavity grade RRR niobium as a function of furnace temperature, in Proc. of LINAC2016, East Lansing, 
MI, USA (2018)

44. D. Gonnella, R.G. Eichhorn, F. Furuta, G. M. Ge, T. Gruber, G. H. Hoffstaetter, J. J. Kaufman, P. N. Koufalis, M. 

Liepe, J.T. Maniscalco, Improved N-doping protocols for SRF cavities, in Proc. of IPAC2016, Busan, Korea 
(2016). www.jacow.org.

45. P. Dhakal, G. Ciovati, P. Kneisel, and G. R. Myneni, Enhancement in quality factor of SRF niobium cavities by

material diffusion, IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 25, 1 (2014).

46. Y. Trenikhina, A. Grassellino, O. S. Melnychuk, A. Romanenko, Characterization of nitrogen doping recipes for 

the Nb SRF cavities, in Proc. of SRF2015, Whistler, BA, Canada (2015). www.jacow.org

47. A. Dangwal Pandey, G. Dalla Lana Semione, A. Prudnikava, T. F. Keller, H. Noei, V. Vonk, Y. Tamashevich, E. 

Elsen, B. Foster, and A. Stierle, Surface characterization of nitrogen-doped Nb (100) large-grain superconducting 
RF cavity material, J. Mater. Sci. 53, 10411 (2018).

48. Z. Yang, X. Lu, W. Tan, J. Zhao, D. Yang, Y. Yang, Y. He, K. Zhou, XPS studies of nitrogen doping niobium 

used for accelerator applications, Appl. Surface Science 439, 1119 (2018).

49. G. Brauer, Nitrides, carbonitride, and oxynitrides of niobium, J. of Less Com. Met. 2, 131 (1960).


24

50. W. M. Albrecht and W. D. Goode, Reaction of nitrogen with niobium, BMI 1360 (1959).
51. J. K. Spradlin, A. D. Palczewski, H. Tian, and C. E. Reece, Analysis of surface nitrides created during doping heat 

treatments of niobium, in Proc. of the SRF 19 Dresden Germany, (2019). www.jacow.org.

52. J. Tuggle, U. Pudasaini, F. A. Stevie, M. J. Kelley, A. D. Palczewski, and C. E. Reece, Secondary ion mass 

spectrometry for superconducting radiofrequency cavity materials, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B36, 052907 (2018).

53. P. Dhakal, J. Makita, G. Ciovati, P. Kneisel, and G. R. Myneni, Nitrogen doping study in ingot niobium cavities, 

in Proc. of IPAC2015, Richmond, VA, USA (2015). www.jacow.org.

54. J. Makita, P. Dhakal, and G. Ciovati, Temperature mapping of nitrogen-doped niobium superconducting 

radiofrequency cavities, in Proc. of IPAC2015, Richmond, VA, USA (2015). www.jacow.org.

55. P. Dhakal, S. Chetri, S. Balachandran, U. Pudasaini, P. J. Lee, and G. Ciovati, Surface characterization of nitrogen-

doped high purity niobium coupons compared with superconducting rf cavity performance, Phys. Rev. Accel. 
Beams 22, 122002 (2019).

56. M. P. Kelly, and T. Reid, Surface processing for bulk niobium superconducting radiofrequency cavities, 

Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 043001 (2017).

57. H. Tian, C. E. Reece, M. J. Kelley, S. Wang, L. Plucinski, K. E. Smith, and M. M. Nowell, Surface studies of 

niobium chemically polished under conditions for superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) cavity production, 
Appl. Surf. Sci. 253, 1236 (2006).

58. C. E. Reece, A. C. Crawford and R. L. Geng, Improved performance of JLAB 7-cell cavities by electropolishing, 

in Proc. of PAC2009, Vancouver, BC, Canada (2009). www.jacow.org.

59. F. Marhauser, J. Follkie, C. E. Reece, Investigation of differential surface removal due to electropolishing at JLAB, 

in Proc. of IPAC2015, Richmond, VA USA (2015).www.jacow.org.

60. A. C. Crawford, Extreme diffusion-limited electropolishing of niobium radiofrequency cavities, Nucl. Instrum. 

Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A 849, 5 (2017).

61. C. E. Reece, F. Marhauser, and A. D. Palczewski, The transfer of improved cavity processing protocols to industry 

for LCLS-II: N-doping and electropolishing, in Proc. of SRF2015, Whistler, BC, Canada (2015). www.jacow.org.

62. W. Singer, X. Singer, A. Brinkmann, J. Iversen, A. Matheisen, A. Navitski, Y. Tamashevich, P. Michelato, and L. 

Monaco, Superconducting cavity material for the European XFEL, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 28, 085014 (2015).

63. D. Gonnella et al., Industrial cavity production: Lessons learned to push the boundaries of nitrogen-doping, in 

Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). www.jacow.org

64. D. Gonnella, Statistical analysis of nitrogen-doped cavity production for LCLS-II, in presentation TTC 2020, 

Geneva, Switzerland (2020). 

65. A. Romanenko, A. Grassellino, O. Melnychuk, and D. A.Sergatskov, Dependence of the residual surface resistance 

of superconducting radiofrequency cavities on the cooling dynamics around Tc, J. Appl. Phys.115, 184903 
(2014).

66. D. Gonnella et al., Nitrogen-doped 9-cell cavity performance in a test cryomodule for LCLS-II, J. Appl. Phys.117, 

023908 (2015).

67. T. Kubo, Flux trapping in superconducting accelerating cavities during cooling down with a spatial temperature 

gradient, Prog. Theor. Exp. Phys. 053G01 (2016).

68. P. Dhakal, G. Ciovati, and A. Gurevich, Flux expulsion in niobium superconducting radio-frequency cavities of 

different purity and essential contributions to the flux sensitivity, Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 23,023102 (2020)

69. A. D. Palczewski, O. S.Melnychuk, D. A. Sergatskov, and D. Gonnella, Study of flux trapping variability between 

batches of Tokyo Denkai niobium used for the LCLS project and subsequent 9-cell RF loss distribution between 
the batches, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.

70. T. Konomi, T. Dohmae, Y. Hori, E. Kakopresenter, T. Kubo, G.-T. Park, H. Sakai, K. Umemori, J. Kamiya, K. 

Takeishi, T. Nagata, Trial of nitrogen infusion and nitrogen doping by using J-PARC furnace, in Proc. of 
SRF2017, Lanzhou, China (2017). www.jacow.org.

71. P. Sha, J. P. Dai, and F. Jiao, Research of nitrogen doping in IHEP, in Proc. of IPAC2016, Busan, Korea (2016). 

www.jacow.org.

72. S. Chen, et al., Successful nitrogen doping of 1.3GHz single-cell superconducting radio-frequency cavities, Chin. 

Phys. Lett. 35 037401 (2018).

73. S. Chen, M. Chen, L.W. Feng, J.K. Hao, L. Lin, K.X. Liu, S.W. Quan, F. Wang, F. Zhu, Nitrogen doping studies 

of superconducting cavities at Peking University, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). 
www.jacow.org.

74. W. Singer et al., Production of superconducting 1.3-GHz cavities for the European X-ray free-electron laser, Phys. 

Rev. Accel. Beams 19, 092001 (2016).


25

75. D. Reschke, Performance of superconducting cavities for the European XFEL, in Proc. of IPAC2016, Busan, 

Korea (2016). www.jacow.org.

76. L. Evans and S. Michizano, The international linear collider machine staging report 2017, arXiv:1711.00568

(2017).

77. A. D. Palczewski, Development of a qualitative model for N-doping effects on Nb SRF cavities, in the presentation 

of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). paper TUFUA3.

78. D. Gonnella, The LCLS-II HE high Q, and gradient R&D program, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany 

(2019). www.jacow.org.

79. D. Bafia, A.Grassellino, A. Romanenko, M. Checchin, O. S. Melnychuk, D. A. Sergatskov J. Zasadzinski, New 

Insights on Nitrogen Doping, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.

80. M. Ge, P. N. Koufalis, G. Kulina, M. Liepe, J. T. Maniscalco, Low-temperature baking and infusion studies for 

high-gradient ILC SRF cavities, in Proc. of LINAC2018, Beijing, China (2018). www.jacow.org.

81. T. Konomi et al., Trial of nitrogen infusion and nitrogen doping by using J-PARC furnace, in Proc. of SRF2017, 

Lanzhou, China (2017). www.jacow.org.

82. K. Umemori et al., Study on nitrogen infusion for 1.3 GHz SRF cavities using J-PARC furnace, in Proc. of 

LINAC2018, Beijing, China (2018). www.jacow.org.

83. K. Umemori, E. Kako, T. Konomi, S. Michizono, H. Sakai, J. Tamura, and T. Okada, Study on nitrogen infusion 

using KEK new furnace, in Proc. of SRF 2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.

84. M. Wenskat, A. Prudnikava, D. Reschke, and J. Schaffran, Nitrogen Infusion R&D on single cell cavities at DESY, 

in Proc. of SRF2017, Lanzhou, China (2017). www.jacow.org.

85. P. Dhakal, Recent development on nitrogen infusion work towards high Q and high gradient, in Proc. of SRF2019, 

Dresden, Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.

86. G. D. L. Semione, A. Dangwal Pandey, S. Tober, J. Pfrommer, A. Poulain, J. Drnec, G. Schütz, T. F. Keller, H. 

Noei, V. Vonk, B. Foster, and A. Stierle, Niobium near-surface composition during nitrogen infusion relevant for 
superconducting radio-frequency cavities, Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 22, 103102 (2019).

87. A. Bose, P. Mondal, G. M. Bhalerao, S. V. Kokil, S. Raghavendra, S. C. Joshi, A. K. Srivastava, R. Tewari, 

Evolution of surface oxides and impurities in high vacuum heat treated Nb: A TEM and TOF-SIMS in-situ study, 
mechanism, and repercussions on SRF cavity applications, Applied Surface Science 510, 145464 (2020).

88. K. Umemori, New results of KEK N-infusion and mid-T bake, in a presentation at TTC meeting 4-7 Feb 2020, 

CERN Switzerland, (2020).

89. A. Grassellino et al., Accelerating fields up to 49 MV/m in TESLA-shape superconducting RF niobium cavities 

via 75C vacuum bake” arXiv:1806.09824, (2018).

90. M. Wenskat et al., A Cross-Lab Qualification of Modified 120 C Baked Cavities, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, 

Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.

91. D. Bafia, A. Grassellino, Z. Sung, A. Romanenko, O. S. Melnychuk, and J. F. Zasadzinski, Gradient of 50 MV/m 

in TESLA shaped cavities via modified low-temperature bake, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). 
www.jacow.org.

92. S. Posen, A. Romanenko, A. Grassellino, O.S. Melnychuk, and D.A. Sergatskov, Ultralow surface resistance via 

vacuum heat treatment of superconducting radiofrequency cavities, Phys. Rev. Applied 13, 014024 (2020).

93 J. K. Spradlin, A. D. Palczewski, H. Tian, and C. E. Reece, Analysis of surface nitrides created during doping heat 

treatments of niobium, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.

94. R. G. Wilson, F. A. Stevie, and C. W. Magee, Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry: A Practical Handbook for Depth 

Profiling and Bulk Impurity Analysis, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1989.

95. G. Ciovati and A. Gurevich, Evidence of high-field radio-frequency hot spots due to trapped vortices in niobium 

cavities, Phys.Rev.ST Accel. Beams 11, 122001 (2008).

96.  P. Maheshwari, F. A. Stevie, G. R. Myneni, G. Ciovati, J. M. Rigsbee, P. Dhakal, and D. P. Griffis, SIMS analysis 

of high-performance accelerator niobium, Surf. Interface Anal. 46, 288 (2014)

97. C. Bate et al., Nitrogen Infusion sample R&D at DESY, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). 

www.jacow.org.

98. P. N. Koufalis, J. T. Maniscalco, M. Ge, and M. Liepe, Effect of low-temperature infusion heat treatments and 2/0 

doping on superconducting cavity performance, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.

99. A.S. Romanenko, A. Grassellino, M. Martinello, Y. Trenikhina, D. Bafia, First direct imaging and profiling TOF-

SIMS studies on cutouts from cavities prepared by state-of-the-art treatments, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, 
Germany (2019). www.jacow.org.


26

100. H. Tian, C. E.Reece, M. J.Kelley, S. Wang, L. Plucinski, K. E.Smith, M. M.Nowell, Surface studies of niobium 

chemically polished under conditions for superconducting radiofrequency (SRF) cavity production, Applied 
Surface Science 253, 1236 (2006).

101. N. Singh, M. N. Deo, M. Nand, S. N. Jha, and S. B. Roy, Raman and photoelectron spectroscopic investigation 

of high-purity niobium materials: Oxides, hydrides, and hydrocarbons, J. Appl. Phys. 120, 114902 (2016).

102. A. Vostrikov, Y.-K. Kim, A. Grassellino, A. Romanenko, Modifications of superconducting properties of 

niobium caused by nitrogen doping recipes for high Q cavities, in Proc. of IPAC2015, Richmond, VA USA 
(2015). www.jacow.org

103. S. Chetri, D. C. Larbalestier, Z-H. Sung, P. Dhakal, and P. J. Lee, Determination of bulk and surface 

superconducting properties of N2-doped cold worked, heat-treated and electropolished SRF grade niobium, in 
Proc. of SRF2015, Whistler, BC, Canada (2015). www.jacow.org.

104. Z. Yang, X. Lu, Y. He, W. Tan, S. Huang, and H. Guo, Magnetic properties and hydrides precipitation 

observation of nitrogen doping niobium used for accelerator applications, Results in Physics 12, 2155 (2019).

105. S. Chetri et al., in preparation.
106. D. Saint-James and P. de Gennes, Onset of superconductivity in decreasing fields, Phys. Lett.7, 306 (1963).
107. S. Casalbuoni, E. A. Knabbe, J. Kotzler, L. Lilje, L. von Sawilski, P. Schmuser, and B. Steffen, Nucl. Instrum. 

MethodsPhys. Res. A 538, 45–64 (2005).

108. A. S. Dhavale, P. Dhakal, A. A. Polyanskii, and G. Ciovati, Flux pinning characteristics in cylindrical niobium 

samples used for superconducting radiofrequency cavity fabrication, Supercond. Sci. Technol.25, 065014 (2012).

109. N. R. Groll, G. Ciovati, A. Grassellino, A. Romanenko, J. F. Zasadzinski, T. Proslier, Insight into bulk niobium 

superconducting RF cavities performances by tunneling spectroscopy, arXiv:1805.06359 (2018).

110. J. M. Martinis et al., Decoherence in Josephson qubits from dielectric loss, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 210503–210506 

(2005).

111. E. M. Lechner, B. D. Oli, J. Makita, G. Ciovati, A. Gurevich, and M. Iavarone, Electron tunneling and X-Ray 

photoelectron spectroscopy studies of the superconducting properties of nitrogen-doped niobium resonator 
cavities, Phys. Rev. Applied 13, 044044 (2020).

112. A. Gurevich, Reduction of dissipative nonlinear conductivity of superconductors by static and Microwave 

Magnetic Fields, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 087001 (2014).

113. D. Gonnella, J. Kaufman, and M. Liepe, Impact of nitrogen doping of niobium superconducting cavities on the 

sensitivity of surface resistance to trapped magnetic flux, J. Appl. Phys. 119, 073904 (2016).

114. M. Martinello, A. Grassellino, M. Checchin, A. Romanenko, O. Melnychuk, D. A. Sergatskov, S. Posen, and J. 

F. Zasadzinski, Effect of interstitial impurities on the field-dependent microwave surface resistance of niobium, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 109, 062601 (2016).

115. S. Huang, T. Kubo, and R. L. Geng, Dependence of trapped-flux-induced surface resistance of a large-grain Nb 

superconducting radio-frequency cavity on spatial temperature gradient during cooldown through Tc, Phys. Rev. 
Accel. Beams 19, 082001 (2016).

116. B. Aune, et al., Degradation of niobium superconducting rf cavities during cooling times, in Proc. of Linac 

Conference, Albuquerque, NM, 253-255 (1990).

117. B. Bonin and R. R ̈oth, Q Degradation of niobium cavities due to hydrogen contamination, Particle Accelerators

40, 59-83 (1992).

118. R. E. Ricker and G. R. Myneni G, Evaluation of the propensity of niobium to absorb hydrogen during fabrication 

of superconducting radiofrequency cavities for particle accelerators, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol.115, 353 
(2010).

119. D. C. Ford, L. D. Cooley, and D. N. Seidman, First-principles calculations of niobium hydride formation in 

superconducting radio-frequency cavities, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, 095002 (2013).

120. G. Ciovati, Effect of low-temperature baking on the radio-frequency properties of niobium superconducting 

cavities for particle accelerators, J. of Appl. Phys. 96, 1591 (2004).

121. G. Ciovati, Improved oxygen diffusion model to explain the effect of low-temperature baking on high field losses 

in niobium superconducting cavities, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 022507(2006).

122. B. Visentin, M. F. Barthe, V. Moineau, and P. Desgardin, Involvement of hydrogen-vacancy complexes in the 

bak-ing effect of niobium cavities. Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 13, 052002 (2010).

123.A. Romanenko, F. Barkov, L. D. Cooley, and A. Grassellino, Proximity breakdown of hydrides in 

superconducting niobium cavities. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 26, 035003(2013).

124. M. Wenskat, J. Cizek, M. Oskar Liedke, M. Butterling, C. Bate, P. Hausild, E. Hirschmann, A. Wagner, H. 

Weise, Vacancy-hydrogen interaction in niobium during low-temperature baking, Scientific Reports 10, 8300 
(2020)).


27

125. D. Richter, R. J. Rush, and J. M. Rowe, Localized modes and hydrogen trapping in niobium with substitutional 

impurities, Phys. Rev. B, Condens. Matter 27, 6227 (1983).

126. G. Pfeifer and H. Wipf, The trapping of hydrogen in niobium by nitrogen interstitials, J. Phys. F, Metal Phys. 6, 

167 (1976).

127. P. Garg, S. Balachandran, I. Adlakha, P. J. Lee, T. R. Bieler, and K. N. Solanki, Role of nitrogen on hydride 

nucleation in pure niobium by first-principles calculations, in Proc. of SRF2017, Lanzhou, China (2017). 
www.jacow.org.

128. S. Balachandran, P. J. Lee, S. Chetri, D. C. Larbalestier, and P. Dhakal, Hydrogen distribution and hydride 

precipitation in SRF Nb revealed by metallographic techniques, presented at SRF2017, Lanzhou, China 
(2017).Paper ID TUXBA05, www.jacow.org.

129. P Garg, S. Balachandran, I. Adlakha, P. J. Lee, T. R. Bieler, and K. N. Solanki, Revealing the role of nitrogen on 

hydride nucleation and stability in pure niobium using first-principles calculations, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 31, 
115007 (2018).

130. N. Sitaraman, T. Arias, R. G. Farber, S. J. Sibener, R. D.Veit, J. T. Maniscalco, and M. Liepe, Ab initio 

calculations on impurity-doped niobium and niobium surfaces, in Proc. of SRF2019, Dresden, Germany (2019). 
www.jacow.org.

131. B. I. Ivlev, S. G. Lisitsyn, and G.M. Eliashberg, Nonequilibrium excitations in superconductors in high-frequency 

fields, J. Low Temp. Phys.10, 449 (1973).

132. J. Halbritter, Comparison between measured and calculated RF losses in the superconducting state, Zeitschrift 

für Physik 238, 466 (1970)

133. K. Saito and P. Kneisel, the Temperature dependence of surface resistance of niobium at 1300 MHz-comparison 

to BCS theory, in Proc. of SRF1999, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA (1999). www.jacow.org.

134. A. Gurevich, Multiscale mechanisms of SRF breakdown, Physica C 441, 38 (2006).
135. P. Bauer, N. Solyak, G. Ciovati, G. Eremeev, A. Gurevich, L. Lilje, and B. Visentin, Evidence of non-linear BCS 

resistance in SRF cavities, Physica C 441 51 (2006).

136. B.P. Xiao, C. E. Reece, M.J. Kelley, Superconducting surface impedance under radiofrequency field, Physica C

490, 26 (2013).

137. C. E. Reece, A. D. Palczewski, B. P. Xiao, An analysis of the temperature and field dependence of the RF surface 

resistance of nitrogen-doped niobium SRF cavities to existing theoretical models, in Proc. of IPAC2015, 
Richmond VA USA (2015). www.jacow.org.

138. G. Ciovati, P. Dhakal, A. Gurevich, Decrease of the surface resistance in superconducting niobium resonator 

cavities by the microwave field, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 092601 (2014).

139. D. Gonnella, M. Ge, F. Furuta, and M. Liepe, Nitrogen treated cavity testing at Cornell, in Proc. of LINAC2014, 

Geneva, Switzerland (2014). www.jacow.org.

140. J. T. Maniscalco, D. Gonnella, and M. Liepe, The importance of the electron mean free path for superconducting 

radio-frequency cavities, J. Appl. Phys. 121, 043910 (2017).

141. D. Gonnella, F. Furuta, M. Ge, J. Kaufman, P.N. Koufalis, M. Liepe, and J.T. Maniscalco, Dependence of surface 

resistance of N-doping level, in Proc. of IPAC2016, Busan, Korea (2016). www.jacow.org.

142. S. Sridhar and J. E. Mercereau, Non-equilibrium dynamics of quasiparticles in superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 34, 

203 (1986).

143. A. Gurevich and T. Kubo, Surface impedance and optimum surface resistance of a superconductor with an 

imperfect surface, Phys. Rev. B 96, 184515 (2017).

144. A. Gurevich, Theory of rf superconductivity for resonant cavities, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 30, 034004 (2017).
145. T. Kubo, Physics and challenges of superconducting cavities for particle accelerators and theoretical implication 

towards higher performance, J. Cryo. Soc. Jpn. 54, 275 (2019)

146. T. Kubo, and A. Gurevich, Field-dependent nonlinear surface resistance and its optimization by surface 

nanostructuring in superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 100 064522 (2019)

147. W. P. M. R. Pathirana, and A. Gurevich, Nonlinear dynamics and dissipation of a curvilinear vortex driven by a 

strong time-dependent Meissner current, Phys. Rev. B 101 064504 (2020).

148. T. Kubo, Weak-field dissipative conductivity of a dirty superconductor with Dynes subgap states under a dc bias 

current up to the depairing current density, Phys. Rev. Research 2 013302 (2020)

149. M. Martinello, M. Checchin, A. Romanenko, A. Grassellino, S. Aderhold, S. K. Chandrasekeran, O. Melnychuk, 

S. Posen, and D. A. Sergatskov, Field enhanced superconductivity in high frequency niobium cavities, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 121, 224801 (2018).

150. P. Dhakal, Status of infusion studies at Jlab, in a presentation at TTC2020, Feb 4-7, 2020, Geneva, Switzerland.


28

151. R. Eichhorn, D. Gonnella, G. Hoffstaetter, M. Liepe, W. Weingarten, On superconducting niobium accelerating 

cavities fired under N2-gas exposure, preprint arXiv:1407.3220 (2014).

152. M. Ge, F. Furuta, M. Liepe, G. H. Hoffstaetter, Field dependent surface resistance of a superconducting RF cavity 

caused by surface impurity, arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.08704 (2015).

153. A. Blais, R-S. Huang, A. Wallraff, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Cavity quantum electrodynamics for 

superconducting electrical circuits: An architecture for quantum computation, Phys. Rev. A 69, 062320 (2004). 

154. R. J. Schoelkopf and S. M. Girvin, Wiring up quantum systems, Nature 451, 664 (2008).
155. H. Paik et al., Observation of high coherence in Josephson junction qubits measured in a three-dimensional circuit 

QED architecture, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 240501 (2011).

156. R. Janish, V. Narayan, S. Rajendran, and P. Riggins, Axion production and detection with superconducting rf 

cavities, Phys. Rev. D 100, 015036 (2019).

157. A. Romanenko, R. Pilipenko, S. Zorzetti, D. Frolov, M. Awida, S. Belomestnykh, S. Posen, and A. Grassellino, 

Three-dimensional superconducting resonators at T<20 mK with Photon Lifetimes up to τ=2 s, Phys. Rev. Applied
13, 034032 (2020).

158. S. Posen, and M. Liepe, Advances in the development of Nb3Sn superconducting radiofrequency cavities, Phys. 

Rev. ST Accel, Beams 17, 112001 (2014).

159. S. Posen, M. Liepe, and D. L. Hall, Proof-of-principle demonstration of Nb3Sn superconducting radiofrequency 

cavities for high Q0 applications, Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, 082601 (2015).

160. G. Eremeev, W. Clemens, K. Macha, C.E. Reece, A.M. Valente-Feliciano, S. Williams, U. Pudasaini, M. Kelley, 

Nb3Sn multicell cavity coating system at JLAB, in arXiv preprint,  arXiv:2001.03823 (2020).

161. R. C. Dhuley, S. Posen, M. I. Geelhoed, O. Prokofiev, and J. C. T. Thangaraj, First demonstration of a cryocooler

conduction cooled superconducting radiofrequency cavity operating at practical CW accelerating gradients 
Supercond. Sci. Technol. 33, 06LT01 (2020).

162. G. Ciovati, G. Cheng, U. Pudasaini, and R. A. Rimmer, Multi-metallic conduction cooled superconducting 

radio-frequency cavity with high thermal stability, Supercond. Sci. Technol. 33, 07LT01 (2020).

163. G. Ciovati et al., Design of a CW, low-energy, high-power superconducting linac for environmental applications, 

Phys. Rev. Accel. Beams 21,091601 (2018).

164. A. Gurevich, Enhancement of rf breakdown field of superconductors by multilayer coating, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 

012511 (2006).

165. A. Gurevich, Maximum screening fields of superconducting multilayer structures, AIP Advances 5, 017112 

(2015).


