 

Microstructure and Water Absorption of Ancient Concrete from Pompeii: An Integrated Synchrotron 

Microtomography and Neutron Radiography Characterization 

 

Ke Xu a,b,*, Anton S. Tremsin c, Jiaqi Li a,*, Daniela M. Ushizima b,d, Catherine A. Davy e, Amine Bouterf f, Ying 

Tsun Su a, Milena Marroccoli g, Anna Maria Mauro h, Massimo Osanna i, Antonio Telesca g, Paulo J. M. Monteiro a 

 

a Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA 

b Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA 

c Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA 

d Berkeley Institute of Data Science, University of California, Berkeley, CA, 94720, USA 

e Univ. Lille, CNRS, Centrale Lille, ENSCL, Univ. Artois, UMR 8181 - UCCS - Unité de Catalyse et de Chimie du 
Solide, Lille F-59000, France 

f Laboratoire de Mécanique et Technologie (LMT), ENS Paris-Saclay, CNRS Université Paris-Saclay, Cachan Cedex, 
94235, France 

g School of Engineering, University of Basilicata, Potenza 85100, Italy 

h Head of research and innovation area of Archeological Park of Pompeii, via Plinio 4, Pompeii, NA, 80045, Italy 

i General Director of Archeological Park of Pompeii, via Plinio 4, Pompeii, NA, 80045, Italy 

* Corresponding authors. 

E-mail addresses: 

Ke Xu: ke_xu@berkeley.edu 

Jiaqi Li: jiaqi.li@berkeley.edu 

 


 
 

2

Abstract 

 

There is renewed interest in using advanced techniques to characterize ancient Roman concrete due to its 

exceptional durability and low-carbon footprint. In the present work, samples were drilled from the “Hospitium” 

in Pompeii and were analyzed by synchrotron microtomography (μCT) and neutron radiography to study how 

the microstructure, including the presence of induced cracks, affects their water adsorption. The water 

distribution and absorptivity were quantified by neutron radiography. The 3D crack propagation, pore size 

distribution and orientation, tortuosity, and connectivity were analyzed from μCT results using advanced 

imaging methods. Porosity was also measured by mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) as a reference. Ductile 

fracture patterns were observed once cracks were introduced. Compared to Portland cement mortar/concrete, the 

Pompeii samples had relatively high porosity, low connectivity, and a similar coefficient of capillary penetration. 

In addition, permeability was predicted from models based on percolation theory and pore structure data to 

evaluate the fluid transport properties. Understanding the microstructure of ancient Pompeii concrete is 

important because it could inspire the development of modern concrete with high durability. 

 

Key Words 

 

Roman concrete; Neutron radiography; Synchrotron microtomography; Image analysis (B); Fracture; Pore 

structure; Transport Properties (C) 

 

1. Introduction 

 

The desire to extend the life cycle of modern concrete infrastructure and to reduce its lifespan carbon footprint 

has instigated renewed interest in determining the reasons for the long-term durability of ancient Roman concrete. 

The production of ancient Roman concrete, which was made of volcanic ash, lime, water and volcanic rocks, 

has a lower carbon footprint than the production of Portland cement concrete, which is responsible for ~5% of 

global anthropogenic CO2 emissions [1]. Moreover, the fact that some of the Roman marine concrete structures, 


 
 

3

including seawalls and harbor piers, have remained in good condition for 2,000 years, either fully immersed in 

seawater or partially immersed in shoreline environments, attests to the remarkable durability of ancient Roman 

concrete [2, 3]. Thus, the composition and microstructure of ancient Roman concrete can inspire the development 

of modern concrete with a low carbon footprint and high durability. 

 

State-of-the-art techniques that were developed to study high-performance materials have recently been used to 

characterize the composition and microstructure of various ancient Roman concrete samples. Synchrotron 

radiation methods have been especially successful in providing new insights into the complex micro- and nano-

structure of ancient Roman concrete. The use of high-pressure X-ray diffraction has provided information about 

the mechanical behavior of Al-tobermorite, which forms in ancient Roman seawater concrete, while soft X-ray 

nanotomography has allowed for mathematical morphology quantification of the clusters of Al-tobermorite 

nanocrystals [4, 5]. Jackson et al. [3] produced seminal work on the formation of phillipsite and Al-tobermorite 

using X-ray microdiffraction. Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy (STXM) has proven to be a powerful 

tool for understanding the nanoscale bonding environments of Al and Si in Al-tobermorite and C-A-S-H [6]. 

Using synchrotron high-resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD), Vanorio and Kanitpanyacharoen [7] formulated a 

ground-breaking hypothesis that the caprock of the Campi Flegrei Caldera has a fibrous microstructure that is 

similar to the existing ancient Roman concrete formed by lime-pozzolanic reactions. Recently, Palomo et al. [8] 

published a critical evaluation of the current developments in the characterization of ancient Roman concrete 

and how it can contribute to the new generation of green hybrid cement. Moreover, there is a strong motivation 

to study the effect of time on modern hybrid cement/concrete based on the understanding of ancient Roman 

concrete. 

 

There is a consensus that the lack of concrete durability is associated with the penetration of water, and concrete 

often contains deleterious species. This deterioration is exacerbated by the presence of cracks, which provide a 

faster pathway for the ingress of water. Jackson et al. [9] studied crack resistance and resilience in Imperial 

Roman architectural mortar, but further information on the effect of the microstructure is still needed, especially 

the effects of cracks on concrete water ingress. Therefore, one of the purposes of the present work is to provide 


 
 

4

quantitative data on the dynamics of water absorption by uncracked and cracked samples from Pompeii using 

neutron radiography and to provide 3D microstructural data of uncracked and cracked samples with synchrotron 

microtomography. The integration of X-ray microtomography and neutron imaging, implemented in this study, 

allowed a systematic investigation of how concrete microstructure affects the dynamics of water penetration in 

Pompeii concrete samples. The unique capability of neutron imaging to map water distributions within concrete 

samples is enabled by the relatively high neutron attenuation cross-section by hydrogen [10, 11], which has 

relatively low absorption by the concrete itself. Synchrotron X-ray microtomography (μCT) can determine the 

complex topology of the phases that exist in ancient Roman concrete. The extracted samples from Pompeii did 

not show any cracks, and thus, after the μCT scans, cracks were introduced by loading, and the samples were 

retested to measure the influence of cracks on the fluid flow. Due to the complexity of the microstructure, it was 

necessary to improve the existing segmentation methods for 3D tomographic images. While a separate 

publication describes the intricacies of the proposed methodology [12], a short description appears in section 2 

for the benefit of the interested reader. 

 

2. Samples and experimental methods 

 

Currently, approximately 49 of the 66 hectares of Pompeii have been excavated. In 1858, the Archeologist 

Giuseppe Fiorelli [13] divided the city into “regions” (neighborhoods) and “insulae” (blocks) (see Fig. 1). The 

present work studies the Hospitium building (Fig. 2a) located at Stabiana street n.3 (Fig. 2b) near the Stabiae 

gate in insula 1 of Regio I (Fig. 2b). On the eastern side of Stabiana street, with the exception of very few 

accommodations, there was an almost uninterrupted series of tabernae hospitia, cauponae, stabula and officinae. 

The Hospitium building, excavated in 1872, has an area of approximately 600 square meters and is delimited to 

the North by a shop (street n.4), to the South by an old “popina” (Roman wine bar/tavern frequented by the lower 

classes and slaves, where a limited menu of simple foods and wines was available, street n. 2), to the East by 

“Via Stabiana” and to the West by a nonpaved alley. The ground floor had a large stable and spacious “latrina”; 

the first floor, most likely accessible through a staircase, was covered and composed of only bedrooms. 

 


 
 

5

 

Figure 1. Plan of Pompeii with the location of the sample extraction. 

 

All mortar samples were carefully collected at a depth of approximately 50 mm on both lateral sides of the 

building walls and pillars to avoid weathering of any type. A small core drill was employed for extracting larger 

samples from the walls of the house, and both a hammer and a small chisel were used for collecting the bedding 

mortars between bricks. 

 

 
 

Figure 2. Photographs of (a) Hospitium entrance and (b) Via Stabiana. 

 

(a)
(b)


 
 

6

 

Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the experimental workflow for the study of ancient concrete from Pompeii. 

 

A series of experiments (see Fig. 3) was conducted to systematically investigate the microstructure and water 

transport mechanism in the mortar samples. The numbers indicate the sequence of the experiments, and detailed 

information about each experiment is described in the following sections. 

 

Three mortar fragments were investigated with mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP). The porosity 

measurements were performed using a Thermo-Finnigan Pascal 240 Series Mercury Porosimeter (maximum 

pressure, 200 MPa) equipped with a low-pressure unit (140 Series) that could generate a high vacuum level (10 

Pa) and operate between 100 and 400 kPa. With increasing pressure, mercury is gradually able to penetrate the 

bulk sample volume. If the pore system is composed of an interconnected network of capillary pores in 

communication with the outside of the sample, mercury enters the smallest pore neck at the corresponding 

pressure value. If the pore system is discontinuous, mercury could penetrate the sample volume provided that its 

pressure is sufficient to break through the pore walls. In any case, the pore width related to the highest rate of 

mercury intrusion per change in pressure is known as the ‘‘critical’’ or ‘‘threshold’’ pore width [11], which 

represents the lowest width of pore necks that connect a continuous system. A unimodal or multimodal pore size 

distribution can be obtained, depending on the occurrence of one or more peaks in the derivative volume plot. 

 

2.1 Neutron radiography and water (capillary) absorption experiments 

 

Mortar

fragments

Archeological
site (Hospitium)

(1) Neutron
radiography

& (2) μCT

MIP

Air-dry

Wet Pompeii

sample

（uncracked）

Dry Pompeii

sample

（uncracked）

Wet Pompeii

samples

（cracked）

Dry Pompeii

samples

（cracked）

Introduce
cracks

Drill Seal

(3) μCT &
(4) Neutron
radiography


 
 

7

 
 
 
 

Figure 4. Geometry and dimensions of two samples: (a) uncracked DP, (b) uncracked WP, (c) cracked DP, (d) 
cracked WP. 
 

Two concrete samples from the same location in Hospitium, Pompeii, with dimensions of 23.5x27.6x27.6 mm3 

and 17.8x23.0x27.5 mm3, were studied. The dry Pompeii sample (DP) was air-dried after drilling from 

Hospitium, which is located along Via Stabiana, Pompeii, while the wet Pompeii sample (WP) was originally 

wet and sealed after drilling to analyze the original water distribution in ancient Roman concrete. For air-drying 

conditions, the sample was kept under a vacuum in a desiccator that contained silica gel and soda lime to ensure 

protection against H2O and CO2. First, both samples (Fig. 4 a and b) were scanned using neutron radiography 

and synchrotron microtomography to analyze the water distribution, water absorption, and microstructure at the 

original state (uncracked state). After these measurements, cracks were introduced into both samples by applying 

uniaxial compressive stresses. Finally, both cracked samples (Fig. 4 c and d) were scanned again using neutron 

radiography and synchrotron microtomography to compare the water distribution, water absorption, and 

microstructure measured at the original state with the measurements obtained at the cracked state. 

 

Neutron imaging experiments were performed at the Materials and Life Sciences (MLF) Facility at the Japan 

Proton Accelerator Research Complex J-PARC. The pulsed neutron beam at this spallation neutron source 

operated at 25 Hz neutron pulse frequency and allowed the measurement of neutron transmission spectra in every 

pixel of the images. More than 250,000 transmission spectra were measured in the experiments simultaneously, 

each within 55 µm pixels of the 512x512 neutron counting detector. A fast neutron counting detector with 

microchannel plates (MCPs) and Timepix readout with an active area of 28x28 mm2, built at the University of 

California at Berkeley in collaboration with Nova Scientific, was used for the energy-resolved neutron 

radiography measurements [14-16]. 

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)


 
 

8

 

 

Figure 5. Schematic experimental setup of the neutron energy-resolved imaging used for mapping the water 
distribution and dynamics of water penetration. 

 

The neutron time of flight (ToF) method was used to reconstruct the energy of each detected neutron, allowing 

transmission spectra to be measured simultaneously in a wide range of energies from epithermal (~eV energy) 

neutrons to cold neutrons (meV energies). All of the measured spectra were normalized by the spectrum taken 

with no sample present in the beam to correct for the spectral features of the interrogating beam and the spatial 

nonuniformity of both the detector response and the neutron beam itself. 

 

The analysis of these neutron transmission spectra allowed quantitative mapping of the water distribution in as-

extracted concrete samples as well as investigation of the dynamics of water penetration in as-extracted and 

cracked samples. More details on the reconstruction of water concentration in concrete samples are described in 

[15, 17]. The samples were placed 5-6 cm from the active area of the detector, which resulted in only a small 

fraction (<2.5%) of neutrons to be scattered by water to reach the detector, and it introduced unwanted 

background signals. Because of the small contribution of scattered neutrons, no scatter rejection techniques were 

implemented in the present study. The accuracy of the water concentration mapping was verified with a 

calibration step wedge sample where the known thickness of water was reconstructed from the measured neutron 

transmission data [17]. 

 

Pulsed Neutron 
source (25 Hz)

Detector
at ~14 m

X,Y,T

Concrete 
sample

Neutron energy

Time of flight

Transmission spectra measured 

in various sample positions

0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

1

0
5

Transmission

Neutron wavelength (Å)

Region 4
Region 3
Region 2
Region 1


 
 

9

The dynamics of water penetration were determined with a white spectrum beam to map the location of water 

in the sample on a subsecond time scale. Measurements of neutron transmission spectra in each pixel of the data 

set require relatively long integration (tens of minutes) to acquire sufficient statistics, while the dynamics of 

water absorption were studied with multiple images acquired per second. Water was introduced into the bottom 

part of an aluminum container, in which the concrete samples were placed in front of the detector, and 

consecutive transmission images were acquired multiple times per second. Thus, the location of the waterfront 

driven up into the sample by capillary forces was visualized as a sharp drop in the sample transmission at the 

boundary of wetted and dry concrete samples. 

 

2.2 Synchrotron X-ray microtomography experiments 

 

Synchrotron μCT was performed at beamline 8.3.2 at the Advanced Light Source (ALS) of the Lawrence 

Berkeley National Laboratory [18]. A white beam was used in the experiment, where the X-ray beam needs to 

go through the concrete samples. The beam energy was set to 35 keV with a constant beam current of 500 mA. 

During a scan, the sample was mounted on the circular holder and was rotated about an axis perpendicular to the 

horizontal plane over 180°, and 1969 2D radiographs in total were obtained. Each projection was acquired on a 

2560 px CCD camera (PCO edge) equipped with an 8.3 mm field of view and a 1x Mitutoyo magnification 

optical objective lens with a spatial resolution of 9.5 μm. To improve the phase contrast and achieve better image 

quality, an exposure time of 15 ms per projection was used to keep the transmission ratio of the beam below 

40% based on the Beamline 8.3.2 Manual. After each scan, a 3D data volume (tomogram) was reconstructed 

from the 2D radiographs using the filtered back projection algorithm on TomoPy [19, 20]. For each sample, two 

stacks of tomograms (uncracked and cracked states) with dimensions of 2560*2560*2324 voxels3 (32-bit 56.7 

GB for each stack) were obtained for analysis. 

 

2.3 Preprocessing, visualization and segmentation of tomography images 

 


 
 

10

 

Figure 6. Schematic diagram showing the stages of computer vision and statistical analysis for tomography 
images 
 

To conduct a systematic investigation of the sample microstructure and combine neutron radiography images, 

we built a new pipeline (Fig. 6) for autonomous and accurate μCT image analysis. This pipeline contained two 

parts: computer vision and statistical analysis. In the computer vision analysis, preprocessed μCT images were 

segmented into different phases using machine learning algorithms. The edge-preserving filters, mathematical 

morphology and an assortment of supervised machine learning algorithms, such as random forest[12], improved 

the segmentation accuracy when compared to the traditional grayscale threshold segmentation method. At the 

same time, advanced digital volume correlation (DVC) algorithms were performed on the preprocessed μCT 

images of reference samples and deformed samples to calculate the displacement map and strain field. Both 

segmented 3D pore phase images and 3D principal strain fields revealed cracking propagation. The DVC results 

also allowed us to qualitatively verify the accuracy of the phase segmentation. Then, qualitative and quantitative 

analysis was conducted based on 3D segmented phase images and strain fields. In addition, a comprehensive 

microstructure investigation was conducted that combined neutron radiography and segmented images. 

 

Image preprocessing was performed on Fiji [21], and this stage involves the following: a) transforming the slice 

images from 32-bit to 8-bit, b) removing the overlap (20 was set during the tile mode scans) of images between 


 
 

11

image stacks, c) removing the partial background and cropping out the region of interest (ROI), d) eliminating 

noise and ring artifacts from the images through 3D bilateral filtering [22], and e) improving the contrast with a 

saturated pixel of 0.35. For DP and WP, two stacks of images could have different 3D rendering orientations 

and positions since the uncracked and cracked samples were scanned separately. The image volume registration 

method was applied to transform two stacks of images into one coordinate system for one sample. Translation 

transformation was used to preserve the same coordinates for the rotation centers of two stacks. Then, the cracked 

stack was rotated to keep the orientation of the bottom image slice consistent with that of the uncracked stack, 

which reduced the rotation artifacts between scans. In this study, Tomviz [23] was used to visualize the 

reconstructed 3D μCT images, segmented 3D μCT images of different phases, and 3D crack evolutions from 

DVC. Dragonfly (Object Research Systems (ORS) Inc.) was used to visualize the 3D connectivity of pore 

networks. 

 

Image segmentation is the most crucial step for the quantitative analysis of 3D μCT. To obtain the morphological 

representation of specific phase systems (e.g., the porous system in concrete) and conduct further statistical 

analysis (e.g., pore size distribution), a segmentation process is commonly implemented to separate images into 

discrete phases (e.g., pore phase, aggregate phase, and matrix phase in concrete). Local and global grayscale 

thresholding are the most commonly applied approaches for CT of concrete [24, 25]. The major drawback of 

these methods is to utilize one feature (i.e., the grayscale in the images), and their accuracy and robustness are 

limited by the quality of the tomographic images [26, 27]. The segmentation results are unstable for tomographic 

images, with low phase contrast, noise points, background regions, or attenuation problems. 

 

Recently, machine learning (ML) algorithms have been successfully applied to the segmentation of structures 

with X-ray μCT images of mineralogical samples. Shipman et al. [28] extracted quantitative mineralogical 

information with regard to the composition, porosity, and particle size of chromite ore samples. Camalan et al. 

[29] estimated the 2D mineral map and its associated liberation spectrum of a particular chromite sample by 

using random forest classification. These ML classifiers are robust, automatic, and multifeature based. For the 

combination of extracting multiple image features from the raw data and applying ML image segmentation 


 
 

12

algorithms, the Trainable Weka Segmentation Tool [21, 30] was used in this study. Considering both the image 

segmentation accuracy and computing time, grayscale, mean, median, minimum, maximum, Gaussian blur, 

Hessian, anisotropic diffusion, and difference of Gaussian were selected as the features for segmentation. At the 

same time, a small number of images was randomly selected from the whole data set as the training images. 

After the feature selection, different regions (the most obvious objects that corresponded to the target phases) in 

the training images were annotated as target phases, which constructed the training data set. 

 

Five phases were separated from each other in the μCT of concrete: background, supporting stage for the test, 

aggregate, matrix, and pore. Cracks were included in the pore phases. Different classifiers were trained using 

the selected features and training data set as a preliminary step. Based on the initial segmentation results on the 

training data set, more annotations were added to the misclassified regions, and the classifiers were retrained and 

tuned until satisfactory segmentation results (testing pixel accuracy above 90% for each phase) were obtained. 

After evaluating the trained models, the most suitable ML classifier was selected based on the segmentation 

results. The random forest classifier, proposed by Tin Kam Ho [31], proved to have better performance when 

compared with other ML classifiers (e.g., linear perceptron classifier, SVM classifier, and Gaussian discriminant 

classifier) on our data set. In addition, the random forest algorithm has been one of the most accurate learning 

algorithms for μCT segmentation, and it produces a highly accurate classifier for many CT image data sets [32]. 

Therefore, the random forest classifier was selected and applied to the μCT dataset of DP and WP. Fig. 7 shows 

the segmentation procedures from a μCT image to the segmented mask of the pore phase using the random forest 

classifier. Table 1 shows the confusion matrices that highlight the accuracy in pixel classification results of the 

applied random forest model with inputs obtained from manually segmented samples (manual annotations). Note 

that both supporting phase and background phase were regarded as background phase in the construction of 

confusion matrices. Ushizima et al. [12] described several of these algorithms in detail using Python scripts to 

characterize the microstructure based on μCT image segmentation from similar ancient Roman concrete samples. 

 


 
 

13

 
 

 
 

Figure 7. (a) Initial image, (b) feature selection and image annotations, (c) final classified image (Red phase: 
background, Green phase: supporting stage, Yellow phase: aggregate, Purple phase: matrix, Blue phase: pores), 
(d) segmentation of pores. 
 

Table 1. Confusion matrix of the testing dataset with random forest classification. 

%
Background
Aggregate
Matrix
Pore

Background
97.52
0
0
2.48

Aggregate
0
96.82 
3.18
0

Matrix
0.01
0.17
98.43
1.39

Pore
0
0
5.21
94.79

 

2.4 Digital volume correlation 

 

Separating intrinsic voids and introduced cracks from 3D μCT with high accuracy depends upon image 

segmentation algorithms [33-35] and data resolution. DVC is an image processing method that is often applied 

in the analysis of crack propagation without the distraction of intrinsic voids for the microtomography test. Roux 

et al. [36] calculated the displacement fields and evaluated the accuracy of the algorithm based on the analysis 

of an in-situ uniaxial compression CT test on a solid polypropylene foam. Bouterf et al. [37] analyzed the crack 

(a)


 
 

14

propagation and degradation mechanisms of lightweight plasterboard via a nail pull test conducted in-situ in 

laboratory microtomography. DVC techniques calculate the displacement field by minimizing the correlation 

residuals, i.e., the sum of squared grayscale differences between the reference volume and the deformed volume 

corrected by the calculated displacement field [37], under the hypothesis of conservation of the grayscale of the 

analyzed microstructure of images. Then, the strain fields can be calculated from the displacement fields, and 

the crack propagation can be visualized and quantified [38, 39]. 

 

In this study, the displacement fields were measured when discretized over a finite element mesh made of 8-

node cubes (C8) [36]. Since the strains were relatively small, a mechanical regularized approach was used [40, 

41]. A steep displacement gradient indicated the presence of a crack, and the maximum equivalent strain was a 

measure of the crack opening displacement magnitude, which revealed that a complex pattern of cracking was 

more sensitive than the segmented pore images. The C8R developed in MATLAB by Bouterf [42, 43], which 

used the regularized C8 element, was selected to conduct the DVC analysis for both DP and WP. Due to the 

limited storage of MATLAB, the original reconstructed μCT stacks (2560*2560*2324 voxels3) were rescaled to 

1280*1280*1162 voxels3. For the mesh generation, the element size, which is comparable to the zone of interest 

(ZOI) size of classical digital image correlation codes, was optimized to be 20*20*20 voxels3 for global DVC 

to reduce the computational complexity and uncertainty while still being able to capture complex displacements 

and microcracks [40, 41]. The regularized lengths were set to be equal or larger than the element size in such a 

way that the high-frequency displacement fluctuations, which are not mechanically admissible, are filtered out. 

 

2.5 Pore morphology and statistical analysis 

 

3D pore network information is essential to assess the physicochemical properties of concrete, such as 

mechanical strength and permeability. 3D pore morphology and statistical analysis were conducted on 

segmented pore phase images (binary images). More accurately, the pore size distribution, porosity, pore area 

distribution along the Z-axis, aspect ratio, pore connectivity, connectivity density, and tortuosity were 

characterized based on 3D segmented images of the pore phase. 


 
 

15

 

The 3D discrete pore size distribution (DPSD) and continuous pore size distribution (CPSD) were computed 

similarly to the work by Münch et al. for pore analysis [44]. DPSD is a simple measurement, where each pore 

object is considered to be a sphere with the same volume as the original pore. DPSP is the relative pore volume 

as a function of the equivalent sphere diameter [44-46]. In comparison, the CPSD is based on the assumption 

that the pore network is a continuum and can be invaded by fluid as in MIP [44]. In the CPSD measurement, the 

pore objects (defined as spheres of identical volumes) are invaded from the largest pores to the smallest pores 

without the “ink bottle effect”. CPSD is defined as the relative volume of invaded spheres as a function of the 

sphere size [44]. In this paper, 3D DPSD and CPSD were performed by using the Xlib plugin [44] in Fiji. 

 

Porosity is defined as the percentage of pore voxels in the volume of interest (VOI). The cross-sectional areas 

of the pores and cracks along the height (Z-axis) were calculated from 3D binary images of the pore phase to 

associate the water absorption results from neutron radiography. Voxel connectivity analysis was performed 

based on a 6-connected voxel criterion, which means voxels are considered connected to form the “cluster/object” 

when the voxels share a common face with each other (pores are usually made of at least two voxels). Then, the 

pore objects (clusters) were used to characterize the aspect ratio, pore connectivity, and connectivity density. 

 

To describe the morphology of pore objects in 3D, the aspect ratio (elongation) of each individual 3D pore object 

is defined as the ratio between the smallest eigenvalue and the largest eigenvalue for the inertia eigenvectors, 

where inertia eigenvalues and eigenvectors are calculated from the inertia tensor (equivalent ellipsoid) of the 3D 

pore object. Therefore, the aspect ratio ranges between 0 and 1, where a value of 1 corresponds to a sphere. Both 

pore connectivity and connectivity density indicate the degree of connectivity in the pore network, but their 

definitions are different. Pore connectivity (expressed in %) is defined as the number of void voxels in the largest 

percolating pore object (cluster) divided by the total number of voxels attributed to pores in the VOI [47, 48]; it 

is a fraction of the porosity and is equal to 100% when all of the pores in the system are percolating. For 

uncracked samples, no percolating pore system is obtained for the whole image stack. In such an instance, the 

pore connectivity is the measurement of the percolating pore object limited to the lower half-height of the sample. 


 
 

16

In comparison, the measurement of connectivity density required further computations with the BoneJ plugin 

[49-51] in Fiji. The pore object (network) was first skeletonized with a topology-preserving medial axis 

algorithm that allowed branch (i.e., trabecule) and junction analysis [52]. Then, the number of connected 

trabecules in the VOI was measured, and the connectivity density (expressed in um-3) was defined as the number 

of trabecules divided by the VOI [50, 51]. The tortuosity was quantified by generating random walkers within 

the skeletonized pore network and recording their traveled free distance with the AnalyzeSkeleton [53] plugins 

in Fiji. The tortuosity is defined as the mean free distance divided by the Euclidean distance from the start point 

to the end point [53-55]. In this paper, VOI refers to the whole sample volume since a global analysis was 

conducted. 

 

3. Results and discussion 

 

3.1 Porosity Measured by Mercury Intrusion Porosimetry 

 

The reproducibility of mercury porosimetry measurements among the three replicates was successful; in fact, 

the greatest total porosity value was 36.2%, while the lowest was 34.5%, which corresponds to a total cumulative 

intruded Hg volume equal to 248.4 and 217.7 mm3/g, respectively. As an example, Fig. 8 reports the cumulative 

and derivative Hg volume for one of the three inspected samples; it can be noted that there was a very sharp 

unimodal pore size distribution centered on a threshold pore radius equal to 0.79 µm (a value related to the other 

two mortar fragments, which were 0.77 and 0.86 µm). According to the MIP results from Herculaneum-Roman 

mortars [56], the examined samples belong to the “medium degree of porosity (20-40%)” group. Notably, the 

measured pore sizes in these mortars are more than one order of magnitude larger than the usual pore sizes of 

the percolating pore system of modern Portland cements (C-A-S-H pores), and the latter are reputed to be in a 

10-40 nm range [57-59]. Such small pores are present in non-negligible amounts in the pore size distribution 

(PSD) given in Fig. 11, although they do not correspond to the peak size. The peak pore sizes of 0.77-0.86 µm 

can be attributed to paste damage due to Hg pressure or to sample damage during its preparation for Hg 

porosimetry. 


 
 

17

 

Figure 8. Cumulative (left) and derivative (right) Hg volume vs. pore radius for the mortar from the pillar. 
 

3.2 Microtomography results 

 

3.2.1 Microstructure analysis of dry Pompeii sample before and after introducing cracks 

 

The direct 3D renderings of reconstructed tomograms (Fig. 9 a and b) often generate views that occlude the 

complicated 3D cracking patterns in concrete, especially the internal cracks. The segmented pore phases (Fig. 9 

e and f) were rendered to reveal the differences between the pore networks. In the region {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍: 12.5 mm≤

𝑋 ≤ 20 mm, 0.1 mm≤ 𝑌 ≤ 10 mm, 3 mm≤ 𝑍 ≤ 25 mm }, new pore phases (white voxels) emerged due to the 

propagation of multiple cracks and formed a triangular fracture plane after the mechanical compression test. By 

comparing the cracked pore phase and aggregate phase, most cracks propagated along the edges of aggregates. 

This result suggests that the interface transition zones (ITZs) in DP were the weak zones where crack initiation 

and propagation occurred. Further segmentation could be performed to visualize the introduced cracks without 

the initial pores, but it is very challenging to further separate them due to the similarities of their gray level, 

particle size, spatial shape, and spatial distribution. 

 

Pore radius, nm

1
10
100
1000
10000

Cumulative volume, mm3/g

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Pore radius, nm

1
10
100
1000
10000

DV/Dlog(R)

0

20

40

60

80

100


 
 

18

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Figure 9. 3D rendering of reconstructed tomography and segmentation results for DP: (a) uncracked DP, (b) 
cracked DP, (c) aggregate phase of uncracked DP, (d) aggregate phase of cracked DP, (e) pore phase of 

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)

(g)
(h)


 
 

19

uncracked DP, (f) pore phase of cracked DP, (g) matrix phase of uncracked DP, (h) matrix phase of cracked DP. 
Note that all of the scale bars represent the grayscale, and the segmented phase images are binary. 
 

DVC analysis provides both a qualitative understanding of the complex 3D fracture patterns and a quantitative 

evaluation of the damage. The 3D displacement maps, major principal strain field, and residual error field (Fig. 

10) were calculated using C8R DVC as described in the digital volume correlation section. For the color bar, the 

bright value indicates a high residual error, displacement, or strain. There are few residual errors, and the 

maximum error is under 0.1, which indicates a high accuracy of the DVC calculation. In the displacement maps, 

a steep strain gradient indicates the presence of a crack. In the principal strain field, the maximum principal strain 

is a measure of the crack opening displacement magnitude. 

 

From the visualization of the 3D fracture pattern (Fig. 10), sample DP presents a ductile fracture pattern and 

consumes more energy than the brittle fracture pattern. In ordinary Portland cement concrete, crack paths 

preferentially develop in the porous ITZ zone between the fine-grained cement paste and the largely inert sand 

and gravel aggregate; crack paths usually have only a few microcracks and one macrocrack, and the sample 

presents a brittle fracture mechanism. However, the fracture behavior of DP, similar to the Type 5 failure of a 

typical cylindrical concrete during uniaxial compression (ASTM C39) [60], introduced extensive microcrack 

and macrocrack propagation. Type 5 fractures occurred due to the unbonded caps during the loading, and the 

ultimate capacity of the specimen might not have been attained. The multiple micro/macro crack propagations 

and the wider dispersion of cracks caused a load redistribution. Additional energy was absorbed by the diffuse 

networks of microcracks and macrocracks compared to the standard Type 5 fracture with a single localized 

macrocrack. By comparing Fig. 10 f and Fig. 9 f, the 3D fracture pattern from DVC analysis and the newly 

emerged pore phases provided similar results on the crack paths. The macrocrack propagations appeared in the 

top corner region {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍: 12.5 mm≤ 𝑋 ≤ 20 mm, 0.1 mm≤ 𝑌 ≤ 10 mm, 3 mm≤ 𝑍 ≤ 25 mm} of DP. The 

morphology of the macrocracking networks formed a triangular fracture plane. In addition, the calculated normal 

directions of the fracture plane from the two methods were the same. The above results verified the accuracy of 

both the image segmentation and the DVC analysis. 

 


 
 

20

 
 

 
 

 
 

Figure 10. 3D renderings of (a) residual error field, (b) displacement Ux, (c) displacement Uy, (d) displacement 
Uz, (e) major principal strain εeq, and (f) visualization of cracking propagation in DP. The difference between 
(e) and (f) is that the strain fields below 1% were ignored in (f) to visualize the crack network and eliminate the 
noise. 
 

3.2.2 Microstructure analysis of wet Pompeii sample before and after introducing cracks 

 

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)


 
 

21

 
 

 
 

 
 

Figure 11. 3D rendering of reconstructed tomography, segmentation and DVC results for WP sample 
(a) Uncracked WP sample, (b) cracked WP sample, (c) pore phase of uncracked WP sample, (d) pore phase of 
cracked WP sample, (e) major principal strain εeq, (f) visualization of cracking propagation. The difference 
between (e) and (f) is that the strain fields below 1% were ignored in (f) to visualize the crack network and 
eliminate the noise. 
 
 

Using the same segmentation, DVC analysis and visualization procedures were applied on the WP dataset (Fig. 

11). The pore phase at both the uncracked and cracked states was rendered to reveal the microstructure of the 

WP sample. Similar to the DP sample dataset, the segmentation results of region {𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍: 2.5 mm≤ 𝑋 ≤ 22.5 

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

(e)
(f)


 
 

22

mm, 0.1 mm≤ 𝑌 ≤ 19.9 mm, 0 mm≤ 𝑍 ≤ 25 mm} in the original coordinate system (Fig. 11 a and b) were 

rendered to avoid the misclassified background phase and stage phase. The WP sample also preserved the same 

aggregate size distribution after introducing the cracks. There is no obvious deformation or relative displacement 

of aggregate particles, which is the same as the DP sample. When comparing the pore phase in the uncracked 

WP sample and cracked WP sample, new pore spaces (white voxel) emerged in the region {X, Y, Z: 0 mm ≤ X 

≤ 10 mm, 0 mm ≤ Y ≤ 10 mm, 0 mm ≤ Z ≤ 25 mm} where multiple cracks propagated. The cracking pattern of 

the WP sample is similar to that of the DP sample, but the WP has wider macrocrack propagation, and its cracks 

formed a large connected porosity network. In general, the wet Pompeii sample and dry Pompeii sample have 

similar fracture patterns. By comparing Fig. 11 f and Fig. 11 d, the 3D fracture pattern from DVC analysis and 

the newly emerged pore phases showed similar results for the crack paths. The macrocrack propagations 

occurred in the side corner region {X, Y, Z: 0 mm ≤ X ≤ 10 mm, 0 mm ≤ Y ≤ 10 mm, 0 mm ≤ Z ≤ 24 mm} of 

the WP sample, which corresponds to the porosity distribution in Fig. 11 d. The above results again verified the 

accuracy of the image segmentation. The multiple microcrack and macrocrack propagations and the broader 

dispersion of cracks in the WP sample are similar to the ductile cracking propagation and fracture pattern in the 

DP sample. Our previous paper extensively discussed how needle-like and fiber-like phases contribute to the 

mechanical resistance and durability [4, 6, 9, 61] of concrete. 

 

3.2.3 3D statistical analysis 

 

A more detailed cracking pattern analysis is conducted through 3D connectivity calculations for the pores and 

cracks. The segmented images of the pore phase were imported as ROI files into Dragonfly. Object analysis 

statistics were performed to calculate the volume, volume diameter, porosity, and pore (network) connectivity, 

as shown in Table 2. Note that the porosity of uncracked samples from μCT is much lower than the porosity 

obtained by MIP on the uncracked mortar fragments because μCT characterized only a fraction of the total 

porosity measured by MIP. According to the measurements from μCT alone, there is no percolating pore network 

in the whole volume of the uncracked samples obtained. This finding means that the fully percolating pore 

network in the uncracked Pompeii samples is below the resolution of μCT (below 9.5 x 2=19 μm), and hence, 


 
 

23

the fluid permeability is due to the pores that are smaller than 19 μm; using a typical 1D Katz-Thompson model 

for fluid permeability (with a porosity of 8.68 or 13.48%, a critical pore size of 19 μm, and a tortuosity of 1) 

[62], the model’s result means that the permeability is smaller than 1-2x10-13 m2. The comparison of pore 

structures between ancient Pompeii concrete and modern Portland cement paste/concrete is discussed in section 

3.4. After introducing cracks, both DP and WP samples have only a minor increase (< 0.5%) in porosity and a 

minor decrease in tortuosity but a significant increase (~10%) in pore connectivity. Because of the low pore 

connectivity without the largest pore cluster in cracked samples, this result suggests that the volume of the 

introduced cracks is small. Note that percolating pore networks are observed only after introducing cracks, which 

suggests that the detected percolating pore networks in the cracked samples are composed of both initial large 

pores and, most importantly, introduced cracks. 

 

Table 2. Porosity and pore connectivity of samples DP and WP before and after cracking, as given by μCT. 

Concrete 
Total 
porosity

Connectivity 
Connectivity density 
(um^-3)

Tortuosity 
(Mean ± Standard deviation)

uncracked 
DP 

8.68% 
0% 
(9.37% at half 
height)

2.30E-09 
1.32 ± 0.43 

 cracked DP 
9.04% 
21.22% 
3.73E-08 
1.30 ± 0.41 

 uncracked 
WP 

13.48% 
0% 
(26.74% 
at 

half height)

8.50E-09 
1.26 ± 0.37 

cracked WP
13.68%
39.40%
9.05E-08
1.25 ± 0.38

 

 

(a)
(b)


 
 

24

 

Figure 12. 3D rendering of connected objects for the pore phase in the order of increasing volume: (a) uncracked 
DP sample, (b) cracked DP sample, (c) uncracked WP sample, (d) cracked WP sample. 
 

Fig. 12 presents visualizations of the 3D pore connectivity of both DP and WP and shows similar cracking 

patterns. Only one major macrocrack is observed at the side corners of the DP sample by comparing (b) and (a). 

Multiple pores that range from 0 to 30 mm3 (i.e., 0 to 1.9 mm if the pores are assumed to be perfectly spherical) 

within this area are connected by this macrocrack, which significantly increases the connectivity of the pores 

(from 9.37% to 21.22% for DP) and the water penetration rate within this area. However, the majority of large 

pore objects outside this area preserve their volume, and the connectivity is weak because the pore connectivity 

without the largest pore for the cracked DP sample is very low (only 13.3% of the total porosity). This result 

means that the water penetration rate outside the fracture zone would not vary significantly when the cracks are 

introduced. Similar results can be observed for the WP sample when comparing (d) and (c). The difference 

between DP and WP is that the major macrocrack of WP has a larger volume and connects more pores than that 

in DP. Therefore, the water penetration in cracked WP should be faster than in cracked DP. Figs. 23 and 25 attest 

to the deductions related to the water penetration experiments. 

 

The discrete pore size histograms in DP and WP for both uncracked and cracked states are statistically shown in 

Fig. 13, where the number of pore objects in the samples in different size ranges is plotted against the volume 

diameter. For both DP and WP, the cumulative number of pores with a diameter range of 100 μm - 3 mm 

decreased when the cracks were introduced. In the diameter range 4 – 10 mm, the cracked samples contain more 

pores than the uncracked samples. The largest pores (diameter > 4 mm) that were originally in the uncracked 

(c)
(d)


 
 

25

samples disappeared as individual objects and were replaced by much larger pores (diameter > 6 mm). The 

visualization results in Fig. 12 and Table 2 suggest that the major macrocrack is likely to originate mainly from 

the largest pores and that these cracks connect to pores that were originally disconnected. 

 

 

 

Figure 13. Discrete pore size histograms of DP sample (a, b) and WP sample (c, d). For (a) and (c) plots, the 
diameter range is from 100 μm to 1000 μm. For (b) and (d) plots, the diameter range is from 1 mm to 1000 mm. 
The left plots characterize the small pores, while the right plots characterize the large pores. 
 

The 3D PSDs were computed by the DPSD (Fig. 14 a and b) and CPSD (Fig. 14 c and d) methods. The 3D PSD 

is sensitive to the measurement method [44]. For both DP and WP, 3D DPSD provides a broad distribution of 

pore diameters from 36 μm to 8712 μm. The distribution increases significantly for diameters larger than 3000 

μm, and these large pore objects describe a large cumulative pore volume fraction. The comparison between the 

dashed curves (the cracked sample) and solid curves (the uncracked sample) shows that the pore volume fractions 

for diameters larger than 3000 μm increased significantly after introducing cracks. In comparison, the pore 

volume fractions for diameters smaller than 300 μm decreased, which is similar to the results from Figs. 12 and 

13. However, with the DPSD method, any pore volume is represented by a single sphere even if the pore volume 

is composed of multiple connected pores and throats. Therefore, the DPSD is not a reliable method for providing 

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)


 
 

26

the PSD and usually exaggerates the diameter of the pore volume, especially the large connected pore volume, 

yet it provides insight on pore volume repartition as a first approach. 

 

 
 

 
 

Figure 14. Combination of pore size distribution (PSD) of 3D segmented pore volumes, as obtained by (a) 3D 
relative discrete PSD, (b) 3D cumulative discrete PSD, (c) 3D relative continuous PSD, (b) 3D cumulative 
continuous PSD. 
 

The 3D CPSD accounts for the ability of a fluid to access a complex pore shape of a given size and avoids the 

“ink bottle effect”, as with MIP [63, 64]. For both Pompeii samples with complex elongated pores, 3D CPSD 

gives a more reliable PSD and peak pore size. From Fig. 14 c and d, the 3D CPSD provides a small distribution 

of pore diameters from 36 μm to 2400 μm, with a peak diameter at 50-100 μm. The distribution decreases for 

diameters that are larger than 100 μm. Comparing the CPSDs of cracked samples and uncracked samples, the 

pore volume fractions of pore diameters from 100 μm to 170 μm increased slightly after introducing cracks into 

the DP. For WP, the increments in the pore volume fractions after cracking occurred at pore diameters from 170 

μm to 400 μm. Note that the diameter corresponding to the increment essentially indicates the width of the 

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)


 
 

27

introduced crack in the cracked DP and WP since the pore size in CPSD is quantified by the Euclidean distance 

to the nearest boundary. Therefore, the widths of introduced cracks in the ancient Pompeii samples ranged from 

approximately 100 μm to 400 μm. 

 

When comparing the total number of pores, the porosity, and the pore size distribution in the uncracked WP and 

uncracked DP, it is interesting to note that the uncracked WP has a larger porosity and a greater number of pores 

within any range from 100 μm to 3 mm. Moreover, the introduced cracks in the WP are wider than those in the 

DP. The difference can be attributed to the variability from one sample to the other and/or to small cracks induced 

by capillary effects during the air-drying of the DP sample. 

 

 
 

Figure 15. Distributions of the 3D aspect ratio (elongation): (a) aspect ratio versus frequency; (b) aspect ratio 
versus relative pore volume fraction. 
 

Fig. 15 shows the aspect ratio distributions, which statistically describe the shapes of pores in different samples 

when they are modeled as ellipses. From Fig. 15 a, the peak aspect ratio for both DP and WP samples ranges 

from 0.2 to 0.4, which corresponds to rather elongated pores (the smallest ellipse eigenvalue is 0.2 to 0.4 smaller 

than the largest eigenvalue). The difference between the curves of the uncracked and cracked samples is small, 

which suggests that the introduced cracks affect only the shape of a very small number of pores. However, Fig. 

15 b shows that this small number of pores accounts for the majority of the volume fraction. For sample WP, the 

peak aspect ratio that corresponds to the pore objects of ~6% volume fraction (~46% of total porosity) decreased 

from 0.6 to 0.3 after introducing the cracks. Similar results are obtained for DP. After introducing the cracks, the 

(a)
(b)


 
 

28

volume fraction of the elongated pores with a peak aspect ratio of 0.4 increased from ~2% (23% of the total 

porosity) to ~3% (35% of the total porosity). The volume fractions of pores that have aspect ratios close to 1 

decreased after introducing cracks into both DP and WP. The above results indicate that the pores become 

connected by the introduced cracks and merge into more elongated pore networks, considering the small variance 

in the porosity. 

 

3.3 Neutron radiography results 

 

3.3.1 Water distribution in the originally wet Pompeii sample 

 

 
 

Figure 16. Photograph of uncracked sample WP (a) and white spectrum neutron transmission image (b) of 
uncracked WP measured in its original wet conditions (the sample was not dried intentionally after extraction 
from the location site). The contrast in (b) is due to attenuation by both concrete and water. 
 

Sample WP was maintained wet since its extraction from the structure. The white spectrum neutron transmission 

image in Fig. 16 b shows the water distribution in the uncracked WP. Water is evenly distributed throughout the 

WP, except for minor bright regions. The neutron image (Fig. 16 b) is similar to the 2D porosity density image 

(Fig. 17 a). The bright regions in Fig. 16 b with high neutron transmission values correspond to the highlighted 

zones in Fig. 17 a, which have high porosity density (>0.5). The results indicate that the original wet Pompeii 

sample might have dried out sometime between the time of the sample extraction and the neutron radiography 

experiment, since it was not sealed in a leak-free container. Indeed, water in the large pores exposed to the air is 

bound to evaporate first. 

 

(a)
(b)


 
 

29

 

Figure 17. 2D porosity projection (XZ plane) of the porosity density in (a) uncracked WP sample, (b) cracked 
WP sample, (c) uncracked DP sample, and (d) cracked DP sample. The porosity density value at each pixel is 
defined as the number of pore voxels divided by the total number of voxels along the Y-axis during the projection. 
 

3.3.2 Quantitative map of the water distribution 

 

 

Figure 18. Example of step-by-step neutron radiography data analysis: (a) Photograph of the cracked dry 
concrete sample from Pompeii used in the experiment, (b) The same sample after absorption of water by capillary 
action (the sample was partially immersed in water at the bottom), (c) White beam neutron transmission of the 
dry sample, (d) Neutron transmission image of water only (the wet image was normalized by the image of the 
dry sample). The grayscale bar in (c), (d) indicates the measured transmission values. The numbers in image (d) 
indicate the areas of 2x2 mm2 for which the measured transmission is shown in Fig. 18. 
 

An example of step-by-step neutron transmission spectral analysis and quantitative mapping of the water 

distribution is shown in Fig. 18 in the case of cracked DP. The same sample was imaged using μCT. After 

imaging the dry sample for 17 minutes in the beam, water was added to the base aluminum container. Water was 

absorbed by the sample due to capillary forces over an ~20-minute period, during which white-spectrum 

transmission images were acquired to study the dynamics of the water penetration (next section). Then, a set of 


 
 

30

energy-resolved images of the sample fully saturated by water were subsequently acquired with ~16 minutes of 

integration. Figure 18 (d) shows the neutron transmission image of the water within the concrete sample, 

integrated over all energies. In this image, the contribution of the concrete is removed by normalization of the 

wet image by the image obtained with the same sample in a dry state, taken at the beginning of the experiment 

(Fig. 18.c). 

 

 

Figure 19. Measured (solid lines) and fitted (dashed lines) neutron transmission spectra within the five regions 
of wet Pompeii concrete sample indicated by the numbers in Fig. 18. 
 

Transmission spectra of the five regions marked in Fig. 18.d are shown in Fig. 19, together with the fitted 

theoretical transmission based on tabulated cross-sections [65]. The result of this analysis is a water distribution 

map within the concrete sample, shown in the image of Fig. 20.a, where different colors depict the amount of 

water integrated through the entire sample thickness. The bottom part of the sample was immersed in water and 

had no meaning in this reconstruction (white area of the image). The upper right corner did not fully saturate 

over the 20-minute experiment duration and had the smallest amount of water. The nonuniformity of the water 

absorption in this particular sample was due to the presence of a diagonal crack, which was intentionally 

produced by the applied compressive stress load before the neutron imaging experiment. 

 


 
 

31

 

Figure 20. (a) Map of the effective water thickness in the dry Pompeii concrete sample reconstructed from the 
measured neutron transmission spectra. The color bar indicates the water thickness in mm. No data was 
reconstructed for the bottom part of the sample, which was immersed in water. The right top corner was not 
saturated with water over the 20-minute test. (b) Water thickness reconstructed from transmission measured at 
different wavelengths for the five areas of 2x2 mm2 shown by the numbers in Fig. 18. 
 

The range of neutron energies that can be used for water quantification is checked by analyzing narrow-

wavelength spectra individually (instead of fitting the entire transmission spectrum). Such an analysis, in most 

cases, cannot be conducted for each individual pixel because neutron statistics per pixel per narrow wavelength 

range are rather limited. However, to check the linearity of water quantification, the pixels are grouped within a 

given region, as was done over the ~2x2 mm2 areas for the results shown in Fig. 20.b. The reconstructed water 

thickness has a reasonably linear dependence on the neutron wavelength, although some reduction in the water 

thickness is observed for both short (1-2 Å) and long (7-8 Å) wavelength ranges. These two ends of the neutron 

spectrum are the most sensitive to the accuracy of background calibration because the neutron flux at these 

wavelengths was the smallest at the MLF facility in J-PARC. A more accurate background and scatter calibration 

can improve the linearity of these curves and thus improve the accuracy of the reconstructed water thickness. 

 

3.3.3 Dynamics of water absorption in dry Pompeii sample before and after introducing cracks 

 

Neutron images were taken at constant interval times (typically multiple times per second) from the beginning 

of the water absorption experiments; thus, the process of water absorption of the DP sample before (Fig. 21) and 

after (Fig. 22) introducing cracks can be visualized. This process provided the flexibility of using different time 

scales during the data analysis. The neutron images clearly present both the rise in the water level (Z-axis) and 


 
 

32

the water penetration along the horizontal direction (X-axis). For the uncracked DP, the water level rose 

relatively evenly on the horizontal line, as shown in Fig. 21, although the pores are not evenly distributed along 

the horizontal direction, as shown in Fig. 17 (a). 

 

 

Figure 21. Neutron transmission images of uncracked DP during water absorption due to capillary forces. Only 
attenuation by water is shown (the contribution of concrete is removed by normalization by the image taken with 
the dry sample). Consecutive images taken with an interval time of 208 s are shown (integration time per image 
104 sec). The image at 1064 s is absent due to the interruption in the neutron beam production. The color bar 
indicates the measured neutron transmission ratio. 
 

Fig. 22 shows the uptake of water in the cracked DP. Because multiple macrocracks and microcracks have been 

introduced by compression, the uptake of water in the cracked DP is faster than in the uncracked DP. Instead of 

rising evenly on the horizontal line, the water level in the cracked DP rose much faster in the regions where 

cracks propagated and formed fracture planes (Fig. 9 f and Fig. 10 f) than in the regions without cracks. 

Considering the 3D rendering of connected porosity in the cracked DP sample, this result indicates that the rate 

of water uptake is strongly correlated with the connected pore/crack networks rather than the isolated pores. 

 

104 s                               208 s
312 s                              416 s

524 s                               632 s
740 s                              848 s

956 s                               
1172 s                           1280 s

10 mm


 
 

33

 

Figure 22. Neutron images and water distributions of cracked DP with an interval time of 77 s. The integration 
time per image is 38.5 sec. The color bar indicates the measured neutron transmission of water only. 
 

From the perspective of a qualitative understanding of the images, previous discussions indicate that the 

connected pore network plays an important role in the rate of water uptake. Here, Fig. 23 quantitatively evaluates 

the relationship between the water uptake rate and the cross-sectional area of pores along with the sample height, 

as follows. Water levels during the water absorption experiments were manually measured using Fiji. For Fig. 

23 (d), the total areas of the pore phase along the height are calculated based on the μCT image segmentation 

results. The water level (absorption depth) h, as a function of time t, can be predicted for ideal capillary 

absorption by means of Eq. 1. (Note the limitation for h: at a certain height, the water column gravity will 

equalize the capillary force, and the water level will stop rising). 

ℎ(𝑡) = 𝐵𝑡!/#
(1) 

where B is the coefficient of capillary penetration (sorptivity). In Fig. 23 b and c, linear regression and segmented 

regression (four segments) fit the dataset (t1/2, h) well, with a coefficient of determination of over 95%. Therefore, 

the coefficient of capillary penetration B can be approximated as the slope of each curve segment (t1/2, h). 

 

77 s                               154 s
231 s                              308 s

385 s                               462 s
539 s  
616 s

693 s                                770 s
924 s  
10 mm


 
 

34

 

Figure 23. Correlation between the rate of water uptake and the cross-sectional area of pores along the height. 
The water level versus the sqrt of water absorption time is shown in (b) and (c). (a) Shows the locations of the 
areas along which the dynamics of water absorption are shown in graphs (b) and (c), with (b) uncracked DP, and 
(c) cracked DP. (d) Total cross section area of the pores given by μCT along the height of sample DP. 
 

For the uncracked sample, the slope of the curve was almost constant during the whole experiment, even though 

the area of the pores varied along the height. However, the introduced cracks critically influenced the gradients 

of the segmented curves. As shown in Fig. 23.c, the gradient coefficient B of Uptake1 curve (h < 5 mm) was 

similar to the gradient of the uncracked sample. When the water level rose to 3 mm, B dramatically increased 

from 0.26 mm/√𝑠 to 1.91 mm/√𝑠 due to reaching the region of cracks. The areas of newly introduced cracks 

were less than 25% of the areas of original pores. This quantitative analysis again indicates that the connected 

pore/crack networks rather than the isolated pores play an important role in determining the rate of water uptake. 

 


 
 

35

3.3.4 Dynamics of water absorption in dry Pompeii sample after introducing cracks 

 

The dynamic water absorption experiment on the uncracked WP was not conducted since the sample was 

originally wet. After a first neutron radiography test (to obtain a reference state), the uncracked WP was scanned 

using μCT and dried out. Then, cracks were introduced into the WP sample. The dynamic water absorption 

experiment was conducted on an initially dry cracked WP. 

 

 

Figure 24. Neutron images of the water distribution within the cracked WP taken with an interval time of 86 s. 
The color bar indicates the measured neutron transmission ratio. 
 

Fig. 24 shows the uptake of water in the cracked WP sample. The uptake of water on the left-hand side was 

faster than that on the right-hand side. The water level in the cracked DP sample rose much faster in the region 

{𝑋, 𝑍: 0 mm≤ 𝑋 ≤ 10 mm, 0 mm≤ 𝑍 ≤ 25 mm } (where cracks propagated and formed fracture planes (Fig. 

11 d and Fig. 11 f)) than in the regions without cracks. Considering the 3D rendering of the connected porosity 

in the cracked WP sample (Fig. 12 d), this result confirms that the rate of water uptake is more strongly correlated 

with the connected pore/crack networks than with the isolated pores. 

 

86 s                               172 s
258 s                              344 s

430 s                               516 s
602 s                                688 s

774 s                            860 s
946 s  
10 mm


 
 

36

 

Figure 25. Correlation between the rate of water uptake and the cross-sectional area of pores along the height 
of the cracked WP sample. The water level versus the sqrt of water absorption time is shown in (b) and (c). (a) 
Location of areas along which the dynamics of water absorption are shown in graphs (b) and (c) for regions 2 
and 1, respectively. Note that the water levels in (b) and (c) start at ~10 mm above the sample bottom. (d) Total 
cross-sectional area of pores along the height of the sample WP. 
 

Similar to DP, Fig. 25 provides a quantitative evaluation of the relations between the water uptake rate and the 

cross-sectional area of pores along the sample height for the cracked WP sample. For the water uptake on the 

left-hand side (region 1), the coefficient of capillary penetration (B) is 2.19 mm/√𝑠 at first (h < 5 mm) due to the 

introduced macrocracks and the connected large pore network at the bottom of Region 1. However, B is 0.39 

mm/√𝑠 at the bottom of Region 2 for the same WP sample. This finding is close to the value of the uncracked 

DP, which means that this part of the water flux is controlled by similar pore systems. Because of the 3D 

rendering of the connected objects for the pore phase in Fig. 12 and the significant difference in the pore area 


 
 

37

below 5 mm in Fig. 25 d, the results indicate that both the connectivity and the volume at the bottom of Region 

1 increased after cracking, while the pores in Region 2 preserve their connectivity and size. The macrocracks 

only initiated and propagated in Region 1 of the WP. 

 

In summary, the local microstructural information, such as the presence of cracks and the increase in the regional 

pore connectivity, has a significant influence on the water uptake rate. This fact increases the local coefficient 

of capillary penetration in ancient Pompeii samples. Between the cracked and uncracked regions, the local 

coefficient of capillary penetration B is different by one order of magnitude. Since this coefficient is proportional 

to the critical pore size (Eq. 2), through which water penetrates by capillary suction, the order of magnitude 

difference means that the pore size, which controls the water uptake, is possibly one order of magnitude smaller 

in uncracked concrete compared to cracked material (Table 6). 

 

3.4 Comparison of the results 

 

3.4.1 Porosity and connectivity 

 

X-ray microtomography [66] has been broadly applied to characterize the 3D structures of paste and concrete, 

for example, enabling the calculation of porosity and connectivity, which vary as a function of mixture design, 

voxel resolution, segmentation method, and other minor factors. Using 3D µCT of cement paste with different 

resolutions, Gallucci et al. [67] reported that an increase in the voxel size (i.e., a decrease in the resolution) (from 

0.67 to 1.34, 2 and 2.67 μm) induces a decrease in the calculated porosity (from 18.60 to 11.48, 6.63, and 5.03%, 

respectively) and in calculated pore connectivity (from 95% to 82, 66 and 0). Table 3 lists the porosity and pore 

connectivity of typical cementitious materials calculated from microtomography data. Voxel sizes range from 1 

µm to 15 µm, and gray level threshold methods were applied for phase segmentation. 

 

The porosity of the paste alone for the ancient Pompeii sample was calculated from segmented μCT images. The 

porosity of ancient Pompeii paste was defined as the volume of pores surrounded by paste (matrix) divided by 


 
 

38

the sum of the paste (matrix) volume and the volume of pores surrounded by paste (matrix). On the other hand, 

the aggregate phase and pore phase within the aggregates were not counted for the calculation of paste porosity. 

To separate the aggregates and pores within the aggregates from the objects of other phases (matrix and pore 

connected to matrix), the voxels of pores surrounded by the aggregates merged into the voxels of surrounding 

aggregates using the hole-filling algorithm in Fiji. Then, the voxels of the merged aggregated phase were deleted 

from the whole segmented dataset, and only the voxels of the paste (matrix) phase and the voxels of the pore 

connected to the paste (matrix) phase were left to calculate the porosity in the paste. 

 

Table 3. A comparison of porosity for different concretes from microtomography (PC: Portland cement, SHCC: 

strain hardening cement composites). 

Material 
Cement paste volume 

(% total volume)

Porosity 
Pore connectivity (% of 

total porosity)

Voxel size 

(um)

uncracked DP 
concrete

79 
8.68% 
0% (9.37%) 
9.5 

uncracked DP paste
100
9.51%
-
9.5

uncracked WP 
concrete

62 
13.48% 
0% (31.48%) 
9.5 

uncracked WP paste
100
16.74%
-
9.5

PC paste 
(W/C=0.25) [68]

100 
1.36% [68] 
- 
5.0 [68] 

PC paste (W/C=0.5) 
[67] [47]

100 [67], 100 [47] 
1.28% [67], 
1.8% [47]

-, 14% [47] 
5.0 [67], 
1.8 [47]

PC concrete 
(W/C=0.35) [69]

~ 51 [69] 
2.87% [69] 
- 
15.2 [69] 

PC concrete 
(W/C=0.5) [70]

~ 46 [70] 
6.50% [70] 
- 
6.18 [70] 

PC SHCC [71]
77-87 [71]
2.4% - 3% [71]
-
4.8 [71]

 

As shown in Table 3, the ancient Pompeii samples have much larger porosities when compared with other typical 

Portland cement materials even if the voxel size of the ancient Pompeii samples is relatively large. The porosities 

of ancient Pompeii paste and concrete are a magnitude greater than the porosities of paste and concrete with low 

W/C. Note that the pore network connectivity of the DP sample is lower than that of PC paste with a w/c ratio 

of 0.5, although the DP sample shows much higher porosity. 

 


 
 

39

Both MIP and microtomography were used to measure the porosity values in this research, but they are not 

comparable. MIP measured pores with sizes of 4 nm – 10 microns, while microtomography characterized pores 

with diameters larger than 19 microns (voxel size of 9.5 microns). From the MIP results, the total porosity of 

ancient Pompeii samples ranged from 34.5% to 36.2%. In comparison, the porosity of the DP sample from 

microtomography is 8.86%. This result is consistent with other studies in that microtomography provides only 

partial quantification of the pore system of concrete [47, 72]. For future study, 3D FIB/SEM is capable of 

reaching pores down to tens of nm [59], and in the case of modern HPC, pores of tens of nm percolate 

significantly through the paste. 

 

3.4.2 Coefficient of capillary penetration 

 

Table 4. A comparison of the capillary penetration coefficient (B) for different concretes from neutron 

radiography (unit: mm/min1/2). 

Material 
Cement paste volume (% 
total volume)

B of uncracked 
sample

B of cracked sample 

DP concrete
79
1.67
2.03 – 14.80

WP concrete
62
3.02
3.48 – 16.92

PC mortar (W/C=0.36)
35 [73]
1.57 [73]
-

PC mortar (W/C=0.4)
27 [74]
0.39-0.61 [74]
-

PC mortar (W/C=0.42)
35 [73]
2.24 [73]
-

PC mortar (W/C=0.5)
35 [73]
2.38 [73]
-

PC mortar (W/C=0.6)
30 [74]
1.16 [74]
-

PC concrete (W/C=0.4)
24 [75]
0.89 [75]
-

PC concrete (W/C=0.6)
24 [75]
1.43 [75]
-

PC SHCC
63 [76]
1.14 [76]
-

 

When comparing the capillary penetration coefficient B of ancient Pompeii samples and conventional cement 

materials in Table 4, it is interesting to see that the capillary penetration coefficient of DP and WP are similar to 

modern Portland-based reference cement materials, although the porosity of the ancient Pompeii sample is much 

higher. Therefore, the porous ancient Pompeii mortar/concrete has a comparable capillary penetration rate to 

modern Portland cement materials, and the capillary penetration rate is key to the resistance to long-term erosion 

of water and to improved durability. Similar water penetration rates also mean that the percolating pore systems 


 
 

40

of both ancient Pompeii and modern Portland cement-based materials have similar pore sizes, and these are the 

pores that control fluid ingress, permeability, and durability. 

 

3.4.3 Permeability prediction 

 

The capillary penetration coefficient B is related to a critical pore size 𝑑$ by the Washburn equation: 

𝐵 = 8𝛾𝑑$ cos (𝜙)

4𝜂
 
(2) 

where 𝛾 is the interface surface tension, 𝜂 is the dynamic viscosity, and 𝜙 is the contact angle. For undamaged 

ancient Pompeii concrete, critical pore sizes 𝑑$, which correspond to the measured penetration coefficients B, 

are on the order of 2.6-8.2 nm (Table 5). 

 

Table 5. Prediction of critical pore sizes using the Washburn equation along the Z-axis (vertical) direction. 

Assuming that at room temperature (25 ℃), the water/cement/air interface surface tension γ is 66 mN/m [77], 

the dynamic viscosity 𝜂 of water is 0.89 mPa.s, and cos (𝜙) is 1 (water is a perfectly wetting fluid) [78]. 

Sample 
B (mm/√𝑠)
𝑑$ (nm) 

uncracked DP sample
0.22
2.6

cracked DP sample
0.26-1.91
3.8-196.8

cracked WP sample
0.39-2.19
8.2-258

 

These values are consistent with the typical pore sizes of modern Portland cement paste hydrates (C-A-S-H) 

[57]. They also describe the main channels for water flow, i.e., they describe a percolating pore system. 

 

In a first approach, a 1D Katz-Thompson equation [62] can describe the fluid permeability K as a function of a 

critical pore size 𝑑$, which is characteristic of fluid percolation, as follows: 

𝐾 = 𝑑$

#𝜙%&'$()*+,-.

226𝜏
 
(3) 

This formula yields the values in Table 6 for K, which are on the order of 10-20-10-19 m2 for ancient Pompeii 

concrete with the 𝑑$ from Table 5. Such values correspond to those of highly durable modern Portland concretes 


 
 

41

[59, 79], which explains the actual durability of ancient Pompeii concrete. In addition, the predicted K varied 

with 𝑑$ from different measurements. Further experiments for the permeability measurement are required. 

 

For cracked Pompeii concrete, however, Poiseuille’s law (Eq. 4, where ℎ/,- is the minimum width of the 

percolating pore/crack) [80] is more adaptable (see Table 7). This approach yields permeability values that are 

greater by several orders of magnitude than those of undamaged concrete. 

𝐾 = ℎ/,-

#

12  
(4) 

 

Table 6. Prediction of the fluid permeability using the Katz-Thompson equation along the Z-axis (vertical) 

direction for the uncracked Pompeii sample. 

Sample
Porosity
𝑑$ (nm)
Tortuosity
𝐾 (m2)

uncracked Pompeii 
mortar fragments

 
34.5%-36.2% 
(MIP) 

770-860 (MIP)
 
1.25-1.32 
(μCT) 

6.9-9.5 e-16

20-40 (modern PC)
4.6 e-18-2.1 e-17

uncracked DP sample
2.6 (neutron)
1.0-1.2 e-20

cracked DP sample
3.8-196.8 (neutron)
1.9 e-20-4.9 e-17

cracked WP sample
8.2-258 (neutron)
7.8 e-20-8.5 e-17

 

Table 7. Prediction of fluid permeability using Poiseuille’s law, along the Z-axis (vertical) direction, for the 

cracked Pompeii sample. 

Sample
ℎ/,- (μm)
𝐾 (m2)

cracked Pompeii concrete
19-100 (μCT)
3.0 e-11-8.3 e-10

 

4. Conclusions 

 

Integrated synchrotron X-ray μCT and neutron radiography with computer vision analysis is a powerful 

nondestructive testing method for conducting a systematic investigation of the complex concrete microstructure 

and the dynamics of water penetration. Synchrotron X-ray microtomography provides high-resolution 3D 

microtomography images with a broad field of view. After the reconstruction of the μCT image, machine 

learning-based image segmentation methods and DVC analysis acquired both qualitative and quantitative 

microstructural information from the ancient Pompeii concrete samples. An innovative pipeline was developed 


 
 

42

to process the associated large datasets autonomously and accurately. Segmented pore and aggregate phases 

were visualized in 3D rendering. Multiple microcrack and macrocrack propagations, and a wider dispersion of 

cracks in both dry and wet Pompeii samples were observed, which presented a stable and ductile fracture pattern. 

3D morphological and statistical microstructure analysis from the accurate segmented microtomography image 

provided 3D pore network information, such as porosity, pore size distribution, and pore connectivity, which 

explain the differences in the water uptake rates at different mesostructural regions in dynamic neutron 

radiography experiments. 

 

The experimental results show that the water penetration rate depends highly on the local microstructure, such 

as the regional pore connectivity, and the presence of cracks, while it depends less on global microstructural 

information, such as global porosity. For uncracked ancient Pompeii samples, the water capillary penetration 

coefficients (1.67 and 3.02 mm/min1/2) in the dry and wet samples, respectively, are both comparable to modern 

PC paste/concrete (which range from 0.39 to 2.38 mm/min1/2). At the same time, ancient Pompeii concrete (8.86% 

and 18.22% for dry and wet samples, respectively, based on microtomography and a range of 34.5% to 36.2% 

based on MIP) is more porous than modern PC paste/concrete (W/C = 0.5, with a range from 1.28% to 6.50% 

based on microtomography and a range from 27% to 31% based on MIP [72, 81]). Note that the porosity 

calculated from microtomography here ignored the smallest pores, which represent ~ 75% of the whole pore 

volume. After introducing cracks, the global porosity for both samples is almost the same, but the pore 

connectivity increases. The pores become connected by the introduced cracks and merge into more elongated 

pore networks. Instead of being a constant, the water uptake rate and capillary penetration coefficient varied 

depending on the local microstructure. The capillary penetration coefficient in regions with crack propagations 

increased significantly (>10 mm/min1/2), while the capillary penetration coefficient in the uncracked regions 

remained similar. Although further experiments for permeability measurements are required, the predicted 

permeability of uncracked Pompeii samples based on the 1D Katz-Thompson model and Washburn equation 

ranges from 10-20 to 10-19 m2, which corresponds to that of highly durable modern Portland concretes. 

 


 
 

43

The high durability of porous ancient Pompeii concrete benefits from the ductile fracture pattern and low 

connectivity in the pore network. Integrated synchrotron X-ray microtomography and neutron radiography with 

computer vision analysis is a step forward in the understanding of the durability of ancient Pompeii concrete and 

other complex cement materials. 

 

Acknowledgments 
 
This work was supported by the SusChEM program, Grant No. DMR-1410557, and the Division of Materials 
Research Ceramics Program, DMR-CER, Grant No.1935604 of National Science Foundation. This research 
used resources (Beamline 8.3.2) of the Advanced Light Source, a U.S. DOE Office of Science User Facility 
under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The authors thank Dilworth Parkinson for assistance with the μCT 
experiments. We also acknowledge access to the neutron imaging facility at J-PARC and the great help of our 
colleagues Dr. T. Shinohara and K. Oikawa with the neutron imaging experiments. These neutron experiments 
at the Materials and Life Science Experimental Facility of J-PARC were performed under a user program 
(Proposal No. 2016B0183). 
 
References 
 
[1] P.J. Monteiro, S.A. Miller, A. Horvath, Towards sustainable concrete, Nature materials, 16 (2017) 698-699. 
[2] M.D. Jackson, G. Vola, D. Všianský, J.P. Oleson, B.E. Scheetz, C. Brandon, R.L. Hohlfelder, Cement 
microstructures and durability in ancient Roman seawater concretes,  Historic mortars, Springer2012, pp. 49-76. 
[3] M.D. Jackson, S.R. Mulcahy, H. Chen, Y. Li, Q. Li, P. Cappelletti, H.-R. Wenk, Phillipsite and Al-tobermorite 
mineral cements produced through low-temperature water-rock reactions in Roman marine concrete, American 
Mineralogist, 102 (2017) 1435-1450. 
[4] M.D. Jackson, J. Moon, E. Gotti, R. Taylor, S.R. Chae, M. Kunz, A.H. Emwas, C. Meral, P. Guttmann, P. 
Levitz, Material and elastic properties of Al‐tobermorite in ancient Roman seawater concrete, Journal of the 
American Ceramic Society, 96 (2013) 2598-2606. 
[5] J. Li, W. Zhang, K. Garbev, G. Beuchle, P.J. Monteiro, Influences of cross-linking and Al incorporation on the 
intrinsic mechanical properties of tobermorite, Cement and Concrete Research, 136 (2020) 106170. 
[6] M.D. Jackson, S.R. Chae, S.R. Mulcahy, C. Meral, R. Taylor, P. Li, A.-H. Emwas, J. Moon, S. Yoon, G. Vola, 
Unlocking the secrets of Al-tobermorite in Roman seawater concrete, American Mineralogist, 98 (2013) 1669-1687. 
[7] T. Vanorio, W. Kanitpanyacharoen, Rock physics of fibrous rocks akin to Roman concrete explains uplifts at 
Campi Flegrei Caldera, Science, 349 (2015) 617-621. 
[8] A. Palomo, P. Monteiro, P. Martauz, V. Bílek, A. Fernandez-Jimenez, Hybrid binders: A journey from the past 
to a sustainable future (opus caementicium futurum), Cement and Concrete Research, 124 (2019) 105829. 
[9] M.D. Jackson, E.N. Landis, P.F. Brune, M. Vitti, H. Chen, Q. Li, M. Kunz, H.-R. Wenk, P.J. Monteiro, A.R. 
Ingraffea, Mechanical resilience and cementitious processes in Imperial Roman architectural mortar, Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 111 (2014) 18484-18489. 
[10] P. Trtik, B. Münch, W.J. Weiss, A. Kaestner, I. Jerjen, L. Josic, E. Lehmann, P. Lura, Release of internal curing 
water from lightweight aggregates in cement paste investigated by neutron and X-ray tomography, Nuclear 
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated 
Equipment, 651 (2011) 244-249. 
[11] P. Zhang, F.H. Wittmann, P. Lura, H.S. Müller, S. Han, T. Zhao, Application of neutron imaging to investigate 
fundamental aspects of durability of cement-based materials: A review, Cement and Concrete Research, 108 (2018) 
152-166. 
[12] D. Ushizima, K. Xu, P.J. Monteiro, Materials Data Science for Microstructural Characterization of 
Archaeological Concrete, MRS Advances,  1-14. 
[13] T. Pescatore, M.R. Senatore, G. Capretto, G. Lerro, Holocene coastal environments near Pompeii before the 
AD 79 eruption of Mount Vesuvius, Italy, Quaternary Research, 55 (2001) 77-85. 


 
 

44

[14] A. Tremsin, High resolution neutron counting detectors with microchannel plates and their applications in 
neutron radiography, diffraction and resonance absorption imaging, Neutron News, 23 (2012) 35-38. 
[15] A. Tremsin, J. Vallerga, J. McPhate, O. Siegmund, Optimization of high count rate event counting detector with 
Microchannel Plates and quad Timepix readout, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: 
Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 787 (2015) 20-25. 
[16] A. Tremsin, J. Vallerga, Unique capabilities and applications of Microchannel Plates detectors with 
Medipix/Timepix readout, Radiation Measurements, (2019) 106228. 
[17] A. Tremsin, T. Shinohara, K. Oikawa, J. Li, P. Monteiro, Non-destructive mapping of water distribution 
through white-beam and energy-resolved neutron imaging, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research 
Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 927 (2019) 174-183. 
[18] A. MacDowell, D. Parkinson, A. Haboub, E. Schaible, J. Nasiatka, C. Yee, J. Jameson, J. Ajo-Franklin, C. 
Brodersen, A. McElrone, X-ray micro-tomography at the Advanced Light Source,  Developments in X-Ray 
Tomography VIII, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2012, pp. 850618. 
[19] D. Gürsoy, F. De Carlo, X. Xiao, C. Jacobsen, TomoPy: a framework for the analysis of synchrotron 
tomographic data, Journal of synchrotron radiation, 21 (2014) 1188-1193. 
[20] W. Kanitpanyacharoen, D.Y. Parkinson, F. De Carlo, F. Marone, M. Stampanoni, R. Mokso, A. MacDowell, 
H.-R. Wenk, A comparative study of X-ray tomographic microscopy on shales at different synchrotron facilities: 
ALS, APS and SLS, Journal of synchrotron radiation, 20 (2013) 172-180. 
[21] J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. Rueden, S. 
Saalfeld, B. Schmid, Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis, Nature methods, 9 (2012) 676-682. 
[22] D. Ushizima, D. Parkinson, P. Nico, J. Ajo-Franklin, A. MacDowell, B. Kocar, W. Bethel, J. Sethian, Statistical 
segmentation and porosity quantification of 3d x-ray microtomography,  Applications of Digital Image Processing 
XXXIV, International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2011, pp. 813502. 
[23] B.D. Levin, Y. Jiang, E. Padgett, S. Waldon, C. Quammen, C. Harris, U. Ayachit, M. Hanwell, P. Ercius, D.A. 
Muller, Tutorial on the visualization of volumetric data using tomviz, Microscopy Today, 26 (2018) 12-17. 
[24] Z. Yang, W. Ren, R. Sharma, S. McDonald, M. Mostafavi, Y. Vertyagina, T. Marrow, In-situ X-ray computed 
tomography characterisation of 3D fracture evolution and image-based numerical homogenisation of concrete, 
Cement and Concrete Composites, 75 (2017) 74-83. 
[25] H. Zelelew, A. Papagiannakis, A volumetrics thresholding algorithm for processing asphalt concrete X-ray CT 
images, International journal of pavement engineering, 12 (2011) 543-551. 
[26] W.D. Carlson, Three-dimensional imaging of earth and planetary materials, Earth and Planetary Science 
Letters, 249 (2006) 133-147. 
[27] D. Meyer, H.-K. Man, J.G. van Mier, Fracture of foamed cementitious materials: a combined experimental and 
numerical study,  IUTAM Symposium on Mechanical Properties of Cellular Materials, Springer, 2009, pp. 115-123. 
[28] W.J. Shipman, A.L. Nel, D. Chetty, J.D. Miller, C.-L. Lin, The application of machine learning to the problem 
of classifying voxels in X-ray microtomographic scans of mineralogical samples,  2013 IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), IEEE, 2013, pp. 1184-1189. 
[29] M. Camalan, M. Çavur, Ç. Hoşten, Assessment of chromite liberation spectrum on microscopic images by 
means of a supervised image classification, Powder Technology, 322 (2017) 214-225. 
[30] I. Arganda-Carreras, V. Kaynig, C. Rueden, K.W. Eliceiri, J. Schindelin, A. Cardona, H. Sebastian Seung, 
Trainable Weka Segmentation: a machine learning tool for microscopy pixel classification, Bioinformatics, 33 
(2017) 2424-2426. 
[31] T.K. Ho, Random decision forests,  Proceedings of 3rd international conference on document analysis and 
recognition, IEEE, 1995, pp. 278-282. 
[32] R. Caruana, N. Karampatziakis, A. Yessenalina, An empirical evaluation of supervised learning in high 
dimensions,  Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine learning, 2008, pp. 96-103. 
[33] F.D.E. Latief, S. Feranie, Three-dimensional visualization and characterization of cracks in geothermal 
reservoir rock using image analysis of reconstructed μCT images: A preliminary study,  AIP Conference 
Proceedings, American Institute of Physics, 2014, pp. 120-123. 
[34] C.M. Loeffler, Y. Qiu, B. Martin, W. Heard, B. Williams, X. Nie, Detection and segmentation of mechanical 
damage in concrete with X-Ray microtomography, Materials Characterization, 142 (2018) 515-522. 
[35] J. Schock, S. Liebl, K. Achterhold, F. Pfeiffer, Obtaining the spacing factor of microporous concrete using 
high-resolution Dual Energy X-ray Micro CT, Cement and Concrete Research, 89 (2016) 200-205. 
[36] S. Roux, F. Hild, P. Viot, D. Bernard, Three-dimensional image correlation from X-ray computed tomography 
of solid foam, Composites Part A: Applied science and manufacturing, 39 (2008) 1253-1265. 


 
 

45

[37] C.J. Brandon, R.L. Hohlfelder, M.D. Jackson, J.P. Oleson, Building for eternity: the history and technology of 
Roman concrete engineering in the sea, Oxbow books2014. 
[38] B.K. Bay, Methods and applications of digital volume correlation, The Journal of Strain Analysis for 
Engineering Design, 43 (2008) 745-760. 
[39] B.K. Bay, T.S. Smith, D.P. Fyhrie, M. Saad, Digital volume correlation: three-dimensional strain mapping 
using X-ray tomography, Experimental mechanics, 39 (1999) 217-226. 
[40] H. Leclerc, J.-N. Périé, F. Hild, S. Roux, Digital volume correlation: what are the limits to the spatial 
resolution?, Mechanics & Industry, 13 (2012) 361-371. 
[41] T. Taillandier-Thomas, S. Roux, T.F. Morgeneyer, F. Hild, Localized strain field measurement on 
laminography data with mechanical regularization, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section 
B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms, 324 (2014) 70-79. 
[42] A. Bouterf, J. Adrien, E. Maire, X. Brajer, F. Hild, S. Roux, Failure mechanisms of plasterboard in nail pull test 
determined by x-ray microtomography and digital volume correlation, Experimental Mechanics, 56 (2016) 1427-
1437. 
[43] A. Bouterf, S. Roux, F. Hild, J. Adrien, E. Maire, S. Meille, Digital Volume Correlation Applied to X‐ray 
Tomography Images from Spherical Indentation Tests on Lightweight Gypsum, Strain, 50 (2014) 444-453. 
[44] B. Münch, L. Holzer, Contradicting geometrical concepts in pore size analysis attained with electron 
microscopy and mercury intrusion, Journal of the American Ceramic Society, 91 (2008) 4059-4067. 
[45] K.L. Scrivener, Backscattered electron imaging of cementitious microstructures: understanding and 
quantification, Cement and concrete Composites, 26 (2004) 935-945. 
[46] K.L. Willis, A.B. Abell, D.A. Lange, Image-based characterization of cement pore structure using wood’s 
metal intrusion, Cement and Concrete Research, 28 (1998) 1695-1705. 
[47] N. Bossa, P. Chaurand, J. Vicente, D. Borschneck, C. Levard, O. Aguerre-Chariol, J. Rose, Micro-and nano-X-
ray computed-tomography: A step forward in the characterization of the pore network of a leached cement paste, 
Cement and Concrete Research, 67 (2015) 138-147. 
[48] T. Sugiyama, M. Promentilla, T. Hitomi, N. Takeda, Application of synchrotron microtomography for pore 
structure characterization of deteriorated cementitious materials due to leaching, Cement and Concrete Research, 40 
(2010) 1265-1270. 
[49] M. Doube, M.M. Kłosowski, I. Arganda-Carreras, F.P. Cordelières, R.P. Dougherty, J.S. Jackson, B. Schmid, 
J.R. Hutchinson, S.J. Shefelbine, BoneJ: free and extensible bone image analysis in ImageJ, Bone, 47 (2010) 1076-
1079. 
[50] O.A. HJG, Gundersen, Quantification of connectivity in cancellous bone, with special emphasis on 3-d 
reconstruction, Bone, 14 (1993) 173-182. 
[51] J. Toriwaki, T. Yonekura, Euler number and connectivity indexes of a three dimensional digital picture, 
FORMA-TOKYO-, 17 (2002) 183-209. 
[52] T.-C. Lee, R.L. Kashyap, C.-N. Chu, Building skeleton models via 3-D medial surface axis thinning algorithms, 
CVGIP: Graphical Models and Image Processing, 56 (1994) 462-478. 
[53] I. Arganda‐Carreras, R. Fernández‐González, A. Muñoz‐Barrutia, C. Ortiz‐De‐Solorzano, 3D reconstruction of 
histological sections: Application to mammary gland tissue, Microscopy research and technique, 73 (2010) 1019-
1029. 
[54] N.R. Backeberg, F. Iacoviello, M. Rittner, T.M. Mitchell, A.P. Jones, R. Day, J. Wheeler, P.R. Shearing, P. 
Vermeesch, A. Striolo, Quantifying the anisotropy and tortuosity of permeable pathways in clay-rich mudstones 
using models based on X-ray tomography, Scientific reports, 7 (2017) 1-12. 
[55] H. Loosveldt, Z. Lafhaj, F. Skoczylas, Experimental study of gas and liquid permeability of a mortar, Cement 
and concrete research, 32 (2002) 1357-1363. 
[56] G. Leone, A. De Vita, A. Magnani, C. Rossi, Characterization of archaeological mortars from Herculaneum, 
Thermochimica Acta, 624 (2016) 86-94. 
[57] P.J. McDonald, V. Rodin, A. Valori, Characterisation of intra-and inter-C–S–H gel pore water in white cement 
based on an analysis of NMR signal amplitudes as a function of water content, Cement and Concrete Research, 40 
(2010) 1656-1663. 
[58] K.L. Scrivener, A. Nonat, Hydration of cementitious materials, present and future, Cement and concrete 
research, 41 (2011) 651-665. 
[59] Y. Song, C. Davy, D. Troadec, X. Bourbon, Pore network of cement hydrates in a high performance concrete 
by 3D FIB/SEM—implications for macroscopic fluid transport, Cement and Concrete Research, 115 (2019) 308-
326. 


 
 

46

[60] A. ASTM, ASTM C39/C39M-18: Standard test method for compressive strength of cylindrical concrete 
specimens, ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA. ASTM, AI (2018)." ASTM C, 192 (2018). 
[61] J. Li, W. Zhang, K. Xu, P.J. Monteiro, Fibrillar calcium silicate hydrate seeds from hydrated tricalcium silicate 
lower cement demand, Cement and Concrete Research, 137 (2020) 106195. 
[62] G.W. Scherer, J.J. Valenza II, G. Simmons, New methods to measure liquid permeability in porous materials, 
Cement and concrete research, 37 (2007) 386-397. 
[63] S. Diamond, Mercury porosimetry: an inappropriate method for the measurement of pore size distributions in 
cement-based materials, Cement and concrete research, 30 (2000) 1517-1525. 
[64] K. Xu, J.-f. Daian, D. Quenard, Multiscale structures to describe porous media part I: theoretical background 
and invasion by fluids, Transport in porous media, 26 (1997) 51-73. 
[65] A. Tremsin, T. Shinohara, T. Kai, M. Ooi, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kiyanagi, Y. Shiota, J. McPhate, J. Vallerga, O. 
Siegmund, Neutron resonance transmission spectroscopy with high spatial and energy resolution at the J-PARC 
pulsed neutron source, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, 
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 746 (2014) 47-58. 
[66] S. Brisard, M. Serdar, P.J. Monteiro, Multiscale X-ray tomography of cementitious materials: A review, 
Cement and Concrete Research, 128 (2020) 105824. 
[67] E. Gallucci, K. Scrivener, A. Groso, M. Stampanoni, G. Margaritondo, 3D experimental investigation of the 
microstructure of cement pastes using synchrotron X-ray microtomography (μCT), Cement and Concrete Research, 
37 (2007) 360-368. 
[68] U. Rattanasak, K. Kendall, Pore structure of cement/pozzolan composites by X-ray microtomography, Cement 
and concrete research, 35 (2005) 637-640. 
[69] Y.-S. Wang, J.-G. Dai, X-ray computed tomography for pore-related characterization and simulation of cement 
mortar matrix, NDT & E International, 86 (2017) 28-35. 
[70] K.Y. Kim, T.S. Yun, K.P. Park, Evaluation of pore structures and cracking in cement paste exposed to elevated 
temperatures by X-ray computed tomography, Cement and Concrete Research, 50 (2013) 34-40. 
[71] R. Lorenzoni, I. Curosu, S. Paciornik, V. Mechtcherine, M. Oppermann, F. Silva, Semantic segmentation of the 
micro-structure of strain-hardening cement-based composites (SHCC) by applying deep learning on micro-
computed tomography scans, Cement and Concrete Composites, 108 (2020) 103551. 
[72] R.A. Cook, K.C. Hover, Mercury porosimetry of hardened cement pastes, Cement and Concrete research, 29 
(1999) 933-943. 
[73] C.L. Lucero, R.P. Spragg, D.P. Bentz, D.S. Hussey, D.L. Jacobson, W.J. Weiss, Neutron radiography 
measurement of salt solution absorption in mortar, ACI materials journal, 114 (2017) 149. 
[74] P. Zhang, F. Wittmann, M. Haist, H. Müller, P. Vontobel, T. Zhao, Water penetration into micro-cracks in 
reinforced concrete, Restoration of Buildings and Monuments, 20 (2014) 85-94. 
[75] P. Zhang, F.H. Wittmann, T.-j. Zhao, E.H. Lehmann, P. Vontobel, Neutron radiography, a powerful method to 
determine time-dependent moisture distributions in concrete, Nuclear Engineering and Design, 241 (2011) 4758-
4766. 
[76] P. Zhang, F. Wittmann, T. Zhao, E. Lehmann, L. Tian, P. Vontobel, Observation and quantification of water 
penetration into strain hardening cement-based composites (SHCC) with multiple cracks by means of neutron 
radiography, Nuclear instruments and methods in physics research section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors 
and Associated Equipment, 620 (2010) 414-420. 
[77] Y. Şahin, Y. Akkaya, F. Boylu, M. Taşdemir, Characterization of air entraining admixtures in concrete using 
surface tension measurements, Cement and Concrete Composites, 82 (2017) 95-104. 
[78] N.S. Martys, C.F. Ferraris, Capillary transport in mortars and concrete, Cement and concrete research, 27 
(1997) 747-760. 
[79] W. Chen, J. Liu, F. Brue, F. Skoczylas, C.A. Davy, X. Bourbon, J. Talandier, Water retention and gas relative 
permeability of two industrial concretes, Cement and Concrete Research, 42 (2012) 1001-1013. 
[80] F.A. Dullien, Porous media: fluid transport and pore structure, Academic press2012. 
[81] C. Gallé, Effect of drying on cement-based materials pore structure as identified by mercury intrusion 
porosimetry: a comparative study between oven-, vacuum-, and freeze-drying, Cement and concrete research, 31 
(2001) 1467-1477. 
 


