Experimental Full-field Analysis of Size Effects in Miniaturized
Cellular Elastomeric Metamaterials$

S. Maraghechia, J.P.M. Hoefnagelsa,∗, R.H.J. Peerlingsa, O. Rokoˇsa, M.G.D. Geersa

aMechanics of Materials, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology,
P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands

Abstract

Cellular elastomeric metamaterials are interesting for various applications, e.g. soft robotics,
as they may exhibit multiple microstructural pattern transformations, each with its charac-
teristic mechanical behavior. Numerical literature studies revealed that pattern formation
is restricted in (thick) boundary layers causing significant mechanical size effects.
This
paper aims to experimentally validate these findings on miniaturized specimens, relevant
for real applications, and to investigate the effect of increased geometrical and material
imperfections resulting from specimen miniaturization. To this end, miniaturized cellular
metamaterial specimens are manufactured with different scale ratios, subjected to in-situ
micro-compression tests combined with digital image correlation yielding full-field kinemat-
ics, and compared to complementary numerical simulations. The specimens global behavior
agrees well with the numerical predictions, in terms of pre-buckling stiffness, buckling strain
and post-buckling stress. Their local behavior, i.e. pattern transformation and boundary
layer formation, is also consistent between experiments and simulations.
Comparison of
these results with idealized numerical studies from literature reveals the influence of the
boundary conditions in real cellular metamaterial applications, e.g. lateral confinement, on
the mechanical response in terms of size effects and boundary layer formation.

Keywords:
Cellular Elastomeric Materials, Metamaterials, Digital Image Correlation, Size
Effects, In-situ testing, Microstructural Buckling

1. Introduction

Cellular soft materials have proven to be useful in a variety of applications, and thus have
attracted many studies in the past decade (Yu et al., 2018; Wu et al., 2019; Jia et al., 2019).
The behaviour of such materials significantly depends on their microstructural geometry,
where buckling of the microstructure entails a non-local effective behaviour, exhibiting one

$The post-print version of this article is published in Mater. Des., 10.1016/j.matdes.2020.108684
∗Corresponding author.
Email addresses: S.Maraghechi@tue.nl (S. Maraghechi), J.P.M.Hoefnagels@tue.nl
(J.P.M. Hoefnagels), R.H.J.Peerlings@tue.nl (R.H.J. Peerlings), O.Rokos@tue.nl (O. Rokoˇs),
M.G.D.Geers@tue.nl (M.G.D. Geers)

Preprint submitted to Mater. Des.
May 13, 2020

arXiv:2005.05922v1  [cond-mat.soft]  12 May 2020


or multiple emerging patterns, e.g. the pattern of Fig. 1b showing the deformed state with
respect to the reference state of Fig. 1a. Since these materials typically reveal a distinctly
different mechanical behaviour beyond their buckling point compared to before, e.g. a transi-
tion from non-auxetic to auxetic behaviour (Bertoldi et al., 2010; Yang and Ma, 2018; Mizzi
et al., 2018), they are commonly categorized as metamaterials.

Whereas the majority of detailed experimental studies on cellular elastomeric metama-
terials has been conducted on large specimens, most of the real applications of such meta-
materials require a smaller characteristic size of the microstructure. See e.g. (Yang et al.,
2015; Mirzaali et al., 2018b), where small structures for handling delicate objects are envi-
sioned as a promising application in soft robotics. In such examples, the overall size of the
structure is typically small as well, i.e. consisting of a few microstructural unit cells, making
its mechanical response sensitive to the applied boundary conditions. In cellular elastomeric
metamaterials, the pattern transformation is strongly affected by the boundary conditions
that may locally confine the patterning. Kinematic restrictions lead to the formation of
boundary layers resulting in a significant dependence of the effective mechanical response
on the ratio of the specimen size to hole size, i.e. the so-called “size effect”. In a recent
study, Ameen et al. (2018) numerically investigated the size effect in cellular elastomers.
They showed a considerable influence of size on the global behaviour of such materials and
a characteristic boundary layer size in specimens with scale ratios ranging from 4 to 128,
where scale ratio is the ratio of the specimen length to the length of a unit cell of the mi-
crostructure. They reported an increasing trend in the boundary layer thickness with an
asymptote of approximately three unit cells and an asymptotic trend of global stress with
more than 40% decrease over the range of scale ratios. This trend is most considerable for
smaller scale ratios, i.e. 29% decrease for scale ratio of 12.

The goal of this paper is to experimentally verify the numerically observed size effects
for miniaturized cellular metamaterial specimens suitable for realistic applications.
The
challenges in manufacturing of miniaturized metamaterial specimens lead to imperfections
in the material, thus making it important to verify the numerically observed size effects on
such specimens and not only on large scale ones, as typically found in the literature.
For instance, Coulais et al. (2018) investigated size effects in cellular metamaterials under
inhomogeneous loadings. Zhang et al. (2019) studied the size-dependence of soliton number
and wavelength in metamaterials. Dunn and Wheel (2020) investigated the size effects in
3D metamaterials under bending and torsion. However, all of these studies focus on large
specimens, typically with unit cells of centimetre scale. There are some studies in the lit-
erature on mico-scale metamaterials such as: pattern transformations in porous materials
during the processing (Singamaneni et al., 2009b,a; Singamaneni and Tsukruk, 2010); study
of recoverable pattern transformations in cellular membranes made of shape memory poly-
mers (Li et al., 2012); analysis of different patterns induced by swelling in cellular hydrogel
membranes (Wu et al., 2014); and microfabrication of sub-millimetre metamaterials (Dong
et al., 2018). These examples have in comon that they do not study the kinematics nor
size effects of cellular metamaterials in detail. Genovese et al. (2017) studied miniaturized
additively manufactured porous biomaterials by analysing strain maps obtained from Digital

2


5000 Pm

(a) Undeformed microstructure

5000 Pm

(b) Deformed microstructure

Figure 1: A cellular elastomeric metamaterial (a) before, and (b) after the onset of buckling in the mi-
crostructure due to compression in the horizontal direction, leading to the emergence of an anti-symmetric
pattern.

Image correlation (DIC). Other studies utilized DIC for experimental analysis of metamate-
rials (Slann et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2015; Xu and Pasini, 2016; Carta et al., 2016; Ganzosch
et al., 2018; Hedayati et al., 2018; Easey et al., 2019; DellIsola et al., 2019a,b; Francesconi
et al., 2020), which again focused only on large-scale specimens.
There are also many studies in the literature that focused on other aspects of cellu-
lar metamaterials such as applications (Krishnan and Johnson, 2009; Florijn et al., 2014;
Francesconi et al., 2019), 3D printed metamaterials (Mirzaali et al., 2018a; Bodaghi et al.,
2017; Wang et al., 2015), 3D cellular structures (Javid et al., 2016; Yuan et al., 2017; He-
dayati et al., 2019) and effects of microstructure geometry (Bertoldi et al., 2008; Overvelde
et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2013; Overvelde and Bertoldi, 2014; Mizzi et al., 2018), etc.
In order to study size effects in miniaturized cellular elastomeric metamaterials, and
to learn whether size effects observed on large-scale specimens and in numerical simulations
occur also at small scales, different specimens with millimetre sized holes and various numbers
of unit cells in loading direction were processed using custom-made moulds. In-situ micro
compression tests with optical microscopy in combination with DIC are employed to measure
high resolution full-field displacement maps of the specimens with different scale ratios. Such
a detailed kinematic assessment is essential in identifying the local boundary layers, and to
enable accurate validation of the size effects in the global behaviour of such metamaterials.
The novelty of this contribution is therefore in combining (1) a study of size effects on
(2) miniaturized cellular elastomeric metamaterials with (3) high kinematic accuracy using
DIC. This combined analysis provides a good understanding and predictive capability of the
mechanical behaviour of small scale cellular elastomeric metamaterials and a useful tool for
better design for dedicated applications.

The current experimental study was inspired by the numerical investigation of Ameen
et al. (2018), in the experiments we, however, had to deviate from the problem studied
numerically on two aspects. The numerical specimens were infinite in the transverse di-
rection due to the use of periodic boundary conditions. And the boundary layer analysis

3


was done on a homogenized solution obtained by ensemble averaging of many realizations
of the microstructure inside the specimen. These conditions are not feasible experimentally.
Thus, new Finite Element (FE) simulations, replicating the experiments, are conducted with
which the experimental findings can be objectively compared. To this end, bulk material
parameters are identified by fitting a hyper-elastic Ogden model to tensile tests done on
bulk samples of the base material. A good match is achieved between the experimental and
Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) results in both global and local behaviour of the cellular
elastomeric metamaterial specimens. The trend in the global stress is of the same order of
magnitude as the one reported by (Ameen et al., 2018). It is shown that the size and emer-
gence of boundary layers strongly depend on the lateral confinement of the metamaterial,
which has direct consequences for its optimal design. These findings indicate the influence of
the boundary conditions relevant to real applications of cellular elastomeric metamaterials
on their mechanical response beyond the pattern transformation, which was not addressed
in idealized numerical studies in the literature.

2. Methodology

2.1. Specimen preparation
Thick cellular elastomeric metamaterial specimens with millimetric circular holes have
been processed with customised moulds with a rectangular stacking and micrometric spac-
ings. It is important to make thick specimens, and small spacings with respect to the hole
diameter to induce local buckling, rather than global buckling, during the in-situ micro-
compression tests. Note that no out-of-plane constraints can be applied to the surface of the
specimens due to the DIC speckle pattern applied on the specimen surface. All specimens
have 1.5 mm hole diameter, 1.9 mm center to centre spacing and are 22.5 mm thick, cf.
Fig. 2a. Bulk edges of 1.9 mm and 0.9 mm are present in the axial and transverse directions,
respectively. The size of each unit cell is denoted l, whereas the length of the specimen
(excluding the bulk edges) is denoted L, see Fig. 2a. The scale ratio of each specimen, L/l,
is equal to the number of holes in the loading direction. Specimens with scale ratios of 4,
6, 8, 10 and 12, all with 10 holes in the transverse direction, have been manufactured. Two
specimens for the scale ratios 8, 10 and 12, and a single specimen for the scale ratios 4
and 6 were made. Based on the study of Ameen et al. (2018), the scale ratio of 12 should
be sufficient to allow for a completely developed boundary layer. Aluminium cubic moulds
with perforated bottom surface, removable steel pins, and perforated brass cover plates are
utilized, cf. Fig. 2b. Sylgard 184 with 1:10 mixing ratio was degassed for 30 minutes, then
slowly poured into the moulds with inserted pins and degassed for 2 hours. Finally, the per-
forated cover plates are placed to close the mould from the top and the specimens are cured
for 15 hours at 70℃. Degassing of the filled moulds should be very slow due to the small area
between the pins and the high surface tension of the Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mixture.
Thus the bulk material edges are included in the specimen design to provide an outlet for
the air bubbles and achieve complete degassing before the mixture viscosity increases too
much during the curing process. Note that the long curing time at an elevated temperature

4


is necessary for thick specimens to ensure proper and homogeneous curing. Each specimen
is finalized by removing all pins, and then the cover plate.
A speckle pattern was applied on the specimens to generate a contrast as required for
DIC. Since Sylgard 184 is translucent and light reflecting, the speckle pattern consists of
two layers; first a white powder (HELLING Standard-Check developer Medium Nr. 3) was
sprayed to make a fine-grained background, then black India ink was sprayed using an air
brush. Spraying at an inclined angle through a short tube, to create a spiral flow, filters out
the big particles, resulting in speckles measuring roughly 30 to 80 µm, corresponding to 3
to 8 pixels as shown in Fig. 2c.

2.2. In-situ micro-compression tests
Micro-compression tests are conducted on the patterned specimens using a Kammrath
& Weiss micro tensile/compression stage with a 50 N load cell. Two aluminium T-shaped
clamps are used to apply the compression uniformly in the axial direction, cf. Fig. 2d. A
Zeiss Discovery.V20 stereo microscope with a PlanApo S 0.63× objective and an Axiocam 506
mono camera with 2751 × 2207 pixels resolution are used to acquire images during the tests.
A 7.6× magnification is used to cover the whole area of the largest specimen. The test is
interrupted to record images at displacements corresponding to 1.4% global strain increments
up to 7% strain, followed by 0.2% global strain increments up to 12% strain for all specimens.
The global strain for defining the load increments is calculated as the displacement readings
of the Linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) of the compression stage, divided by
the initial length of each specimen. The test on each specimen is repeated four times. During
the first and last test, images are acquired at 8.8×10−5s−1 global strain rate. The other two
tests are uninterrupted and performed at 3.3 × 10−4s−1 global strain rate. Unloading during
all tests is done with 3.3 × 10−4s−1 global strain rate.

2.3. Full-field displacement measurement
The images taken during the in-situ tests are used for local DIC to extract the kinematic
fields. Images are typically affected by optical distortions of the objective lens. These spatial
distortions are measured using the method proposed by Maraghechi et al. (2018, 2019). The
measured distortion field is used to correct the images taken during the in-situ tests, which is
necessary because the magnitude of the distortions is roughly 10% of the actual displacements
in the metamaterial specimens. The kinematic fields are then determined using the VIC-2D
local DIC package with 19 pixel subset and 1 pixel step size. The displacement fields are
used to evaluate local rotation fields using the module available in VIC-2D and a smoothing
filter size of 51 pixels.

2.4. Numerical Methodology

A plane strain finite element model is made for each specimen size, using an in-house non-
linear finite element code developed in the MATLAB® environment. The code employs the
Total Lagrangian formulation (De Borst et al., 2012), and, using the gmsh mesh generator
(Geuzaine and Remacle, 2009), discretizes the specimen domain with quadratic triangular
elements having three Gauss integration points. A standard Newton algorithm with a direct

5


l (1.9 mm)

L 
1.9 mm

0.9 mm

Loading 
Direction

 1.5 mm 

φ

(varying for each specimen)

(a) Specimen design

Perforated Cover Plate

Mould

Pins

(b) Mould

(c) Speckle Pattern
(d) Test setup

Figure 2: Experimental set-up for in-situ testing. (a) Schematic of a 10 × 10 holes specimen (scale ratio of
10) indicating the total length of the specimen excluding the bulk side edges (L: the large dashed square),
the size of the unit cells (l = 1.9 mm: small dashed square), the diameter of the holes (1.5 mm), the size of
the bulk edges and the loading direction. The red squares of 20 × 20 pixels depict the position where the
local rotation of the islands (cross-shaped parts in the center of each four holes) are probed for quantifying
the boundary layer size. (b) The aluminium mould, with inserted pins, used for making the 10 × 8 holes
specimens, along with the brass perforated cover plate. (c) Zoomed view of the speckle pattern applied on
the specimens for DIC. (d) Test setup showing the micro compression stage, with 50 N load cell, underneath
the microscope’s objective with LED ring light mounted.

6


LDLT solver for the solution of the resulting system of linear equations is used to equilibrate
internal forces at each load increment. Since no initial geometric nor material imperfections
have been adopted, after each time increment all diagonal elements of the diagonal matrix
D of the decomposed current iterative stiffness matrix are checked to indicate an unstable
equilibrium configuration (cf.
Section 7.1.2 Wriggers, 2008). When a non-positive entry is
encountered, the eigenvector corresponding to the lowest eigenvalue of the iterative stiffness
matrix is computed and used as a perturbation of the Newton solver at a given load incre-
ment. The magnitude of the perturbation is increased from initially a very small value until
a stable configuration is reached. If the perturbation was successful, the algorithm proceeds
with a stable buckled configuration, otherwise the load increment is halved and the entire
procedure is repeated. Dirichlet boundary conditions are applied on the two vertical edges
perpendicular to the loading direction, whereas the two remaining edges are left free. PDMS
is modeled with a hyper-elastic Ogden material model. Considering the range of different
material properties reported in the literature (Liu et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2011; Gerratt et al.,
2013; Johnston et al., 2014), tensile tests are performed to characterize the bulk mechanical
properties of the PDMS used. The Ogden model material parameters are identified from
these tensile tests as c1 = 0.0892 MPa, c2 = 1.2537 MPa, m1 = 10.0959, m2 = 0.0036 and
κ = 29.6716 MPa. More details on the material characterization are given in Appendix A.

3. Results and Discussion

Local rotation fields are obtained from displacement fields obtained by local DIC, as
described in Section 2.3, and are shown in Fig. 3 in the deformed configuration for one
specimen of each scale ratio at 1.3% global strain after buckling.

3.1. Global Response
In order to accurately measure the applied displacement on the specimens, and thus the
nominal strains, the DIC data are used. In order to properly quantify the displacement to
achieve the same global strain for specimens of different scale ratios, the exact geometry of
the specimens has to be accounted for. To this end, the global displacement is determined
at the outside of the first and the last unit cells (i.e. excluding the bulk edges), where the
applied displacement on each side is averaged over the width of the specimen. The global
nominal strain is then calculated as the ratio of the relative displacement between the two
sides and the initial distance, L. The global nominal stress is computed as the ratio of the
global compressive force and the initial cross sectional area of each specimen. This approach
is used for both experimental and numerical analyses.
Fig. 4a depicts the global stress-strain curves of different specimens for both the ex-
periments and the numerical simulations. The results of all tests for each scale ratio are
depicted in the same color for the sake of readability. Optical inspection of the specimens
under the microscope showed variations of approximately 3 % in hole diameter. Therefore
extra simulations were conducted considering ±3 % variation in the diameter of the holes.
Variations of the hole diameters are taken as an example representing different parameters
contributing to the uncertainties in the experimental results, such as positional tolerance of

7


4 × 10
6 × 10
8 × 10

10 × 10
12 × 10

Figure 3: Local rotation fields inside a specimen for each scale ratio, at 1.3% global strain after local buckling,
plotted on the deformed configuration. The displacement fields used for calculating the deformations and
the local rotations are obtained by local digital image correlation.

8


0
0.05
0.1
0.15
Global Nominal Strain

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

0.14

Global Nominal Stress [MPa]

Experiments:4x10
Experiments:6x10
Experiments:8x10
Experiments:10x10
Experiments:12x10
DNS:4x10
DNS:6x10
DNS:8x10
DNS:10x10
DNS:12x10

(a) Stress–strain curves

4
6
8
10
12
Scale ratio (L=l)

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

Buckling strain ("b)

Average of experiments
DNS

Experiment

DNS (variations due to uncertanities)

(b) Buckling strain

4
6
8
10
12
Scale ratio (L=l)

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

Post-Buckling stress [Mpa]

Experiment
DNS

(c) Post-Buckling stress

Figure 4: Global response of specimens of different scale ratios, comparing experimental and Direct Numerical
Simulation (DNS) results. (a) Global nominal stress–strain curve. Results of all tests for each scale ratio
are depicted in the same color and the error bars reflect the uncertainties in the simulations, resulting from
the geometrical variations. (b) Buckling strains, calculated as the strain at which the maximum curvature
occurs in the stress–strain curves. (c) Post-buckling stresses determined at a global strain of 10.7% (maximum
strain before global buckling of the largest specimen). The error bars on the experimental data in (b) and
(c) reflect the variability in all tests done, while the error bars on numerical data reflect the uncertainties in
the simulations, resulting from the geometrical variations. The small black dots in (b) and (c) represent the
results of each individual test, while the blue stars the average for each scale ratio.

9


the holes, material and loading imperfections, etc. The error bars at three different strain
levels in Fig. 4a depict the range of stresses observed in these simulations. Note that the
somewhat higher stiffness observed in the experiments is in line with the optical inspection
of the specimens pointing to smaller holes than the design value. The pre-buckling stiffness
values of different specimens agree well, as expected for cellular metamaterials, for which the
pre-buckling stiffness should be independent of the scale ratio. There is, however, a small
systematic variation in the initial stiffness due to the bulk edges on the transverse sides,
which was confirmed in numerical simulations with and without these side bulk edges.

The onset of the local buckling, resulting in the pattern transformation, is found based
on the maximum curvature of the stress-strain curves of Fig. 4a for both the experimental
and numerical results. Fig. 4b shows the global strain at which microstructural buckling
occurs in each specimen, which is denoted by εb. The average buckling strain for all tested
specimens of a certain scale ratio are depicted in this curve, and the error bars are attained
as follows. The differences between the buckling strains for all 16 tests and the average of the
corresponding scale ratio are calculated. The standard deviation of these disparities gives
a global measure of the uncertainty in the buckling strain measurements, and is therefore
used as the error bar. Based on the observed geometrical variations, the error bars on the
numerical results are based on two sets of simulations considering ±3 % variation of the
hole diameters. The buckling strains match well between the experimental and numerical
results (Fig. 4b). Note that a small variation in the geometry of the specimens results in
a large shift in buckling strains. The asymptotically decreasing trend, however, remains
uninfluenced. The maximum relative error is 7.2% while the minimum relative error range
indicated by the error bars of the DNS results is 19.0%.

Fig. 4c depicts the post-buckling stress against the scale ratio, taken from both the
experimental and numerical results. The stress is determined at 10.7% of applied global
strain for all specimens. This is the maximum strain at which all specimens exhibit the local
buckling pattern while none of them has yet gone through global buckling, i.e. the maximum
strain prior to the global buckling of the largest specimen with scale ratio 12.
The error
bars are obtained as in Fig. 4b. A nearly constant trend is observed in the upper bound
of the error bars due to the fact that the simulation of the two smallest specimens with
a 3% smaller hole diameter did not yet reveal local buckling at the imposed 10.7% global
strain.
Taking this into account, the numerical and experimental results show a similar
asymptotically decreasing trend. The maximum relative error is 11.6% while the minimum
relative error range indicated by the error bars of the DNS results is 20.0%. The larger size
effect in the experiments is due to the fact that the onset of global buckling in the larger
specimens is more gradual, influencing the stresses at the considered strain.

The global post-buckling stress in the current study shows a 19% decrease from scale
ratio 4 to 12. This value is ower than the 29% observed in the idealized numerical study of
Ameen et al. (2018). The difference is due to the relative size of the holes with respect to
the unit cell as well as different boundary conditions; recall that no free boundaries nor bulk
edges are present in the infinitely wide specimens considered in the work of Ameen et al.
(2018).

10


3.2. Local Behaviour
The boundary conditions applied to the cellular elastomeric metamaterial specimens
obviously influence the buckling-induced pattern close to the edges, which in turn result
in the size effects discussed above. Ameen et al. (2018) studied this effect by numerically
identifying the boundary layer in which the normal strain in the loading direction is affected
by the edge, using a homogenized solution. This homogenized solution was calculated from
an ensemble average of many realizations of the same periodic microstructure, where the
microstructure was shifted relative to the specimen geometry. Since it is impossible to use
the same procedure for experimental results (for which only one realization is measured),
a different approach for characterising the boundary layer thickness is proposed here. The
local buckling of the ligaments between the holes results in rotation of the islands, leading
to the patterns shown in Fig. 3. When the specimen is loaded beyond the buckling point, a
significant increase in the rotation of the islands results in a pronounced pattern. This also
applies to the spatial variation of the pattern at each global strain state, i.e. the rotation of
the islands is larger in the specimen center, where the pattern is more developed.
Therefore, in order to quantify the size of the boundary layer, the rotation of the islands
is exploited as the quantity of interest. To avoid the influence of the free side edges, only the
two central unit cell rows are taken into consideration, see Fig. 2a. A unique rotation angle is
determined for each island by averaging the local rotations in a window of 20×20 pixels in the
center of each island. The little red squares in Fig. 2a indicate the positions where the local
rotations are probed. The absolute values of the rotation angles of the islands are averaged
over each column (i.e. in the transverse direction) and plotted against the row number (i.e.
normalized axial coordinate) in Fig. 5a for the experimental and Fig. 5b for the numerical
data. Each curve is evaluated at a relative global strain increment of 0.013 after the onset
of local buckling at the corresponding scale ratio (εb + 0.013). The curves in Fig. 5a and b
are plotted by mirroring the rotation angles with respect to the central island and averaging
the values on both sides. By these means the small variations in the rotation angles, due to
the antisymmetry of the buckling pattern, are averaged out and smooth symmetric curves
are attained. Values corresponding to non-integer number of holes/scale ratios are based
on linear interpolation of the local rotation of islands to give a quasi-continuous measure
for quantifying the boundary layer thickness. Each curve in Figs. 5a and 5b is probed at
70% of its dynamic range and the x coordinate of each intersection defines the size of the
boundary layer. The reason behind the choice of this threshold is explained below. The
resulting boundary layer size is plotted against the scale ratio in Fig. 5c. The experimental
and numerical results match adequately, although the trend is not yet converged for the
specimens with scale ratio 12. Note that it is experimentally challenging to perform the tests
on specimens with larger scale ratio, due to the necessity of thicker specimens to prevent
global buckling making the specimen processing infeasible. And also due to the difficulty
of attaining high spatial resolution of the displacement and thus rotation fields inside the
islands, while capturing the complete surface of the specimens within the field of view.
Three more numerical simulations are conducted to analyse larger specimens. At a scale
ratio of 18, the boundary layer size almost levels out, showing an asymptotic trend cor-

11


-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6

Normalized x coordinate (x/l)

0.5

1

2

5

10

20

50

Mean Rotation Angle [Deg]

4x10
6x10
8x10
10x10
12x10

(a) Experimental mean rotation angle

-10
-5
0
5
10

Normalized x coordinate (x/l)

0.5

1

2

5

10

20

50

Mean Rotation Angle [Deg]

4x10
6x10
8x10
10x10
12x10
14x10
16x10
18x10

(b) DNS mean rotation angle

4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18

Scale ratio (L=l)

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

Boundary Layer (No. of Unit Cells)

Experiment
DNS
Simulations: No Side Edges
Simulations: Periodic B.C.
Ameen et al.

(c) Boundary layer size

Figure 5: Local behaviour of specimens of different scale ratios based on experimental and Direct Numerical
Simulation (DNS) results. Rotation angles averaged over the two central unit cells against the horizontal
coordinate for (a) experimental results, where results of all the tests for each scale ratio are depicted in the
same color, and (b) numerical results, at a relative global strain of εb + 0.013. The stars are depicting 70%
of the dynamic range of each curve for quantification of the boundary layer size. Graphs in (a) and (b) are
plotted on logarithmic vertical scales to better visualize the boundary layers. (c) Size of the boundary layer,
in terms of the number of unit cells, determined from the rotation of the islands, for the experimental and
numerical data as well as for the simulations by Ameen et al. (2018). The simulations are extended to a
scale ratio of 18 to reveal the converged size of the boundary layer.

12


responding to a boundary layer size of roughly 4 unit cells. Extending the simulations to
bigger scale ratios is infeasible since global buckling occurs almost immediately after local
buckling, preventing analysis of the rotation fields before global buckling. Note that the
presented results are all determined at εb + 0.013, which guarantees that all specimens up to
scale ratio 18 are not globally buckled.
Results of two additional sets of numerical simulations with different lateral constraints
are included in Fig. 5c as well. In both cases the bulk side edges in the loading direction
and 10 unit cells over the specimen width are employed. First, specimens with different
scale ratios but no bulk side edges are analysed, which imposes no lateral constraint on
the metamaterial. Second, infinitely wide specimens are computed by means of periodic
boundary conditions, which applies a high level of lateral constraint on the metamaterial.
Note that these are the exact same boundary conditions as in Ameen et al. (2018), thus
providing a suitable reference for choosing a proper threshold for probing the boundary
layer thickness. As long as the applied boundary conditions are the same, it is expected that
the saturated boundary layer thickness for large scale ratios is the same, regardless of the
definition and method chosen for its evaluation. Accordingly the 70% threshold, mentioned
above, is chosen, to have the boundary layer thickness of these numerical simulations to
match those of Ameen et al. (2018), for large scale ratios. Note, however, that they used a
different measure, i.e. maximum curvature of the axial component of deformation gradient
tensor, to assess the boundary layer size in contrast to this study. The boundary layer size
in the study of Ameen et al. (2018) is evaluated from a homogenized solution based on
many shifted realizations of the microstructure, in many of which the holes cut through the
edges. For small scale ratios, this results in a different boundary layer thickness evaluated
based on one single realization (no microstructural shift) and the thickness assessed from
the homogenized solution. Moreover, in their study, the boundary layer thickness is chosen
to be half the specimen thickness for scale ratios upto 6, which is not translatable to the
definition of boundary layer chosen in the current study. These points explain the difference
between the simulations of the current study with periodic boundary conditions and results
of Ameen et al. (2018).

It is observed that the different levels of lateral confinement directly influence the scale
ratio at which the boundary layer size converges, see Fig. 5c. The experimental specimens of
the current study are in between these two limit cases of lateral confinement, which explains
why the boundary layer size was not fully converged in the experimental data.
The presented results demonstrate that relatively large boundary layers emerge in cellular
elastomeric metamaterials, which result in considerable size effects in specimens of finite
size. These effects are tunable to a certain degree by changing the constraints put on the
specimens in the transverse direction, which can be exploited for customized designs of these
metamaterials in various engineering applications.

4. Summary and Conclusions

Cellular elastomeric materials exhibit pattern transformations beyond a critical load, en-
tailing internal buckling of their microstructure, which dramatically influences their global

13


mechanical response. Potential applications of cellular elastomers, such as soft robotics, typ-
ically require small specimens (millimetre sized microstructural features) and comparable
macroscopic sizes, which make them sensitive to the applied boundary conditions, exhibit-
ing considerable size effects. To experimentally analyse the size effects in such materials,
as previously observed in a numerical study of Ameen et al. (2018), a systematic study
has been conducted in this contribution. To remain consistent with potential applications
of cellular elastomers, specimens with millimetre sized holes have been manufactured using
custom-made moulds. The size of the specimen with respect to hole size, i.e. “scale ratio”,
was varied while keeping the hole size fixed. In-situ micro compression tests in conjunc-
tion with optical microscopy and digital image correlation have been conducted to attain
full-field kinematic measurements. Such measurements are essential to accurately assess the
global stress–strain behaviour of the specimens and to evaluate the local kinematics dur-
ing pattern transformation, which allows to extract the boundary layer thickness. Unlike
done in the numerical study mentioned above, real specimens are by definition finite in size
and ensemble-average homogenized solutions are not applicable, making a direct comparison
challenging. To overcome this difficulty, finite element simulations of finite sized specimens
have been conductedd and analysed in parallel to the experiments. Tensile tests have been
performed to characterize the bulk material, allowing to identify the Ogden hyper-elastic ma-
terial parameters. The experimentally observed geometrical variations within the specimens
have been incorporated to assess the uncertainties characterising the real specimens.
The global stress–strain behaviour, local buckling strain and post-buckling stress for
different scale ratios adequately agree between numerical and experimental results, taking
into account the specimen variations and uncertainties. The global stress shows a trend of the
same order of magnitude as the one reported by Ameen et al. (2018), while the difference is
mainly due to the very different boundary conditions in the two studies. In order to determine
the size of the boundary layer, the spatial variation of the rotation angle of cross-islands inside
each specimen was studied. The numerical and experimental results agree well, although the
boundary layer size did not yet converge to an asymptotic value for the maximum scale
ratio used in the experiments. The numerical results indicate convergence of the boundary
layer size towards approximately 4 unit cells. Additional numerical investigations, where
the lateral constraint acting on the specimens was varied, reveal that the level of lateral
confinement of the cellular elastomeric metamaterials strongly influences the boundary layer
and its convergence to a saturated value. Relaxation of the lateral constraints results in larger
boundary layers and larger scale ratios for which the boundary layer size has converged.
These novel insights are instrumental for controlling the boundary layer size and size effects
in designs based on cellular metamaterials.

Acknowledgements

The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Research
Council under the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013)/ERC
grant agreement № [339392].

14


Appendix A. Material Characterization

Dog-bone specimens, with a gauge length of 12 mm and a width of 2.2 mm, are punched
out of PDMS slabs, which are processed along with the manufacturing of the metamaterial
specimens. The thickness of these dog-bone specimens varies between 1.0 to 1.5 mm for
different batches. The specimens are made to resemble those of the ASTM D412-C stan-
dard, but with smaller dimensions. A similar speckle pattern as described in Section 2.3 is
applied on the dog-bone samples, and in-situ tensile tests are performed. Loads are mea-
sured with a 50 N load cell. Global DIC, in which the displacement field is parametrized
with linear polynomials, is used to measure the strains inside the specimens. Note that since
the strains are measured using DIC, small deviations from the ASTM standard introduce
no inaccuracies in the measurements. Tensile tests are repeated on five specimens produced
from three different batches of PDMS processing. Two of the specimens are tested twice.
The results of all the seven tests are shown in Fig. A.6, where engineering stress is plotted
against engineering strain, exhibiting the good repeatability of the tensile tests, as well as
the repeatability of the PDMS processing.
Adopting the hyper-elastic Ogden material model, the material parameters are identified
by minimizing the difference between the reaction force of a finite element model in a uniform
state of deformation subjected to uniaxial tension and the experimentally measured forces
of one of the tensile tests. The strain energy density function is given by:

W = 1

2κ (J − 1)2 +

N
�

k=1

ck
m2
k
(λmk
1
+ λmk
2
+ λmk
3
− 3 − mk ln J) ,
(A.1)

where λi are the principal stretches, J = det(F ) is the volume change ratio, F the defor-
mation gradient tensor, κ is the bulk modulus, and ck and mk are the material parameters,
with N taken equal to 2 in this study (Vossen et al., 2015). The principal stresses, σi, are
given as:

σi = κ (J − 1) +

N
�

k=1

1
J
ck
mk
(λmk
i
− 1) ,
(A.2)

The initial values for ck and λk as well as the bulk modulus are chosen from Gerratt
et al. (2013), due to the similar PDMS processing utilized in that study. Considering the
variety of values reported in the literature for the bulk modulus of Sylgard 184, varying from
20 to 1200 MPa (Vossen et al., 2015; Gerratt et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2011), it was decided
to perform confined compression tests on circular samples of 5 mm diameter punched from
PDMS slabs to evaluate the bulk modulus. An average of 415 MPa and standard deviation
of 125 MPa was found for bulk modulus over ten tests. The low average is due to air bubbles
observed under optical microscope, while the large standard deviation is due to the non-
uniform distribution of the air bubbles. It is realized, however, that the degassing process
in the metamaterial specimens is less effective, considering their thickness and complicated
design, which will for sure leave more bubbles in these metamaterial specimens than for the
flat compression specimens and thus results in a lower bulk modulus. Therefore, the low

15


Figure A.6: Engineering stress plotted against engineering strain for seven tensile tests performed on dog-
bone specimens of PDMS. Tests repeated on the same sample are plotted in the same color.

initial guess for the bulk modulus obtained from Ref. (Gerratt et al., 2013), i.e. 29.15 MPa,
seems to be a reasonable value to use as initial guess.
A staggered approach is used to identify all five material parameters.
First, ck are
optimized for strains up to 2%, then ck and mk are optimized for the entire strain range,
i.e. up to 60%. The bulk modulus is finally found for the whole strain range while keeping
the optimized values of ck and mk constant. This approach results in optimized values of
κ = 29.6716 MPa, c1 = 0.0892 MPa, c2 = 1.2537 MPa, m1 = 10.0959 and m2 = 0.0036.
Note that a separate numerical investigation revealed only 2% change in initial mechanical
response of metamaterial specimens for a change of bulk modulus from 30 to 1000 MPa, thus
revealing a very small sensitivity to this material parameter.

Data availability

The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings can not yet be shared at
this time as the data forms part of an ongoing study.

References

Ameen, M. M., Rokoˇs, O., Peerlings, R. H. J., Geers, M. G. D., 2018. Size effects in nonlinear
periodic materials exhibiting reversible pattern transformations. Mechanics of Materials
124 (June), 55–70.

Bertoldi, K., Boyce, M. C., Deschanel, S., Prange, S. M., Mullin, T., 2008. Mechanics
of deformation-triggered pattern transformations and superelastic behavior in periodic
elastomeric structures. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 56 (8), 2642–2668.

Bertoldi, K., Reis, P. M., Willshaw, S., Mullin, T., 2010. Negative Poisson’s ratio behavior
induced by an elastic instability. Advanced Materials 22 (3), 361–366.

16


Bodaghi, M., Damanpack, A. R., Hu, G. F., Liao, W. H., 2017. Large deformations of soft
metamaterials fabricated by 3d printing. Materials and Design 131, 81–91.

Carta, G., Brun, M., Baldi, A., 2016. Design of a porous material with isotropic negative
poissons ratio. Mechanics of Materials 97, 67–75.

Coulais, C., Kettenis, C., van Hecke, M., 2018. A characteristic length scale causes anomalous
size effects and boundary programmability in mechanical metamaterials. Nature Physics
14 (1), 40–44.

De Borst, R., Crisfield, M. A., Remmers, J. J., Verhoosel, C. V., 2012. Nonlinear finite
element analysis of solids and structures. John Wiley & Sons.

DellIsola, F., Seppecher, P., Alibert, J. J., Lekszycki, T., Grygoruk, R., Pawlikowski, M.,
Steigmann, D., Giorgio, I., Andreaus, U., Turco, E., et al., 2019a. Pantographic metama-
terials: an example of mathematically driven design and of its technological challenges.
Continuum Mechanics and Thermodynamics 31 (4), 851–884.

DellIsola, F., Seppecher, P., Spagnuolo, M., Barchiesi, E., Hild, F., Lekszycki, T., Giorgio, I.,
Placidi, L., Andreaus, U., Cuomo, M., et al., 2019b. Advances in pantographic structures:
design, manufacturing, models, experiments and image analyses. Continuum Mechanics
and Thermodynamics 31 (4), 1231–1282.

Dong, L., King, W. P., Raleigh, M., Wadley, H. N. G., 2018. A microfabrication approach
for making metallic mechanical metamaterials. Materials and Design 160, 147–168.

Dunn, M., Wheel, M., 2020. Size effect anomalies in the behaviour of loaded 3d mechanical
metamaterials. Philosophical Magazine 100 (2), 139–156.

Easey, N., Chuprynyuk, D., Musa, W. W., Banks, A., Dobah, Y., Shterenlikht, A., Scarpa,
F., 2019. Dome-shape auxetic cellular metamaterials: manufacturing, modelling and test-
ing. Frontiers in Materials 6, 86.

Florijn, B., Coulais, C., Van Hecke, M., 2014. Programmable mechanical metamaterials.
Physical Review Letters 113 (17), 1–5.

Francesconi, L., Baldi, A., Dominguez, G., Taylor, M., 2020. An investigation of the en-
hanced fatigue performance of low-porosity auxetic metamaterials. Experimental Mechan-
ics 60 (1), 93–107.

Francesconi, L., Baldi, A., Liang, X., Aymerich, F., Taylor, M., 2019. Variable Poisson’s
ratio materials for globally stable static and dynamic compression resistance. Extreme
Mechanics Letters 26, 1–7.

Ganzosch, G., Hoschke, K., Lekszycki, T., Giorgio, I., Turco, E., M¨uller, W., 2018. 3d-
measurements of 3d-deformations of pantographic structures. Technische Mechanik 38 (3),
233–245.

17


Genovese, K., Leeflang, S., Zadpoor, A. A., 2017. Microscopic full-field three-dimensional
strain measurement during the mechanical testing of additively manufactured porous bio-
materials. Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical materials 69, 327–341.

Gerratt, A. P., Penskiy, I., Bergbreiter, S., 2013. In situ characterization of PDMS in SOI-
MEMS. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering 23 (4).

Geuzaine, C., Remacle, J.-F., 2009. Gmsh: A 3-d finite element mesh generator with built-in
pre-and post-processing facilities. International journal for numerical methods in engineer-
ing 79 (11), 1309–1331.

Hedayati, R., Jedari Salami, S., Li, Y., Sadighi, M., Zadpoor, A. A., 2019. Semianalytical
geometry-property relationships for some generalized classes of pentamodelike additively
manufactured mechanical metamaterials. Physical Review Applied 11 (3).

Hedayati, R., Mirzaali, M., Vergani, L., Zadpoor, A., 2018. Action-at-a-distance metama-
terials: Distributed local actuation through far-field global forces. APL Materials 6 (3),
036101.

Hu, J., He, Y., Lei, J., Liu, Z., 2013. Novel mechanical behavior of periodic structure with
the pattern transformation. Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters 3 (5), 054007.

Javid, F., Liu, J., Shim, J., Weaver, J. C., Shanian, A., Bertoldi, K., 2016. Mechanics of
instability-induced pattern transformations in elastomeric porous cylinders. Journal of the
Mechanics and Physics of Solids 96, 1–17.

Jia, Z., Yu, Y., Wang, L., 2019. Learning from nature: Use material architecture to break
the performance tradeoffs. Materials and Design 168.

Johnston, I. D., McCluskey, D. K., Tan, C. K. L., Tracey, M. C., 2014. Mechanical charac-
terization of bulk Sylgard 184 for microfluidics and microengineering. Journal of Microme-
chanics and Microengineering 24 (3).

Kim, T. K., Kim, J. K., Jeong, O. C., 2011. Measurement of nonlinear mechanical properties
of PDMS elastomer. Microelectronic Engineering 88 (8), 1982–1985.

Krishnan, D., Johnson, H. T., 2009. Optical properties of two-dimensional polymer photonic
crystals after deformation-induced pattern transformations. Journal of the Mechanics and
Physics of Solids 57 (9), 1500–1513.

Li, J., Shim, J., Deng, J., Overvelde, J. T., Zhu, X., Bertoldi, K., Yang, S., 2012. Switching
periodic membranes via pattern transformation and shape memory effect. Soft Matter
8 (40), 10322–10328.

Liu, M., Sun, J., Chen, Q., 2009. Influences of heating temperature on mechanical properties
of polydimethylsiloxane. Sensors and Actuators, A: Physical 151 (1), 42–45.

18


Maraghechi, S., Hoefnagels, J. P. M., Peerlings, R. H. J., Geers, M. G. D., 2018. Correction
of scan line shift artifacts in scanning electron microscopy: An extended digital image
correlation framework. Ultramicroscopy 187, 144–163.

Maraghechi, S., Hoefnagels, J. P. M., Peerlings, R. H. J., Rokoˇs, O., Geers, M. G. D.,
2019. Correction of scanning electron microscope imaging artifacts in a novel digital image
correlation framework. Experimental Mechanics.

Mirzaali, M. J., Caracciolo, A., Pahlavani, H., Janbaz, S., Vergani, L., Zadpoor, A. A.,
2018a. Multi-material 3D printed mechanical metamaterials: Rational design of elastic
properties through spatial distribution of hard and soft phases. Applied Physics Letters
113 (24).

Mirzaali, M. J., Janbaz, S., Strano, M., Vergani, L., Zadpoor, A. A., 2018b. Shape-matching
soft mechanical metamaterials. Scientific Reports 8 (1), 1–7.

Mizzi, L., Mahdi, E. M., Titov, K., Gatt, R., Attard, D., Evans, K. E., Grima, J. N., Tan,
J.-C., 2018. Mechanical metamaterials with star-shaped pores exhibiting negative and zero
poisson’s ratio. Materials and Design 146, 28–37.

Overvelde, J. T. B., Bertoldi, K., 2014. Relating pore shape to the non-linear response of
periodic elastomeric structures. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 64 (1),
351–366.

Overvelde, J. T. B., Shan, S., Bertoldi, K., 2012. Compaction through buckling in 2D pe-
riodic, soft and porous structures: Effect of pore shape. Advanced Materials 24 (17),
2337–2342.

Singamaneni, S., Bertoldi, K., Chang, S., Jang, J. H., Thomas, E. L., Boyce, M. C., Tsukruk,
V. V., 2009a. Instabilities and pattern transformation in periodic, porous elastoplastic solid
coatings. ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces 1 (1), 42–47.

Singamaneni, S., Bertoldi, K., Chang, S., Jang, J. H., Young, S. L., Thomas, E. L., Boyce,
M. C., Tsukruk, V. V., 2009b. Bifurcated mechanical behavior of deformed periodic porous
solids. Advanced Functional Materials 19 (9), 1426–1436.

Singamaneni, S., Tsukruk, V. V., 2010. Buckling instabilities in periodic composite polymeric
materials. Soft Matter 6 (22), 5681–5692.

Slann, A., White, W., Scarpa, F., Boba, K., Farrow, I., 2015. Cellular plates with auxetic
rectangular perforations. Physica Status Solidi (b) 252 (7), 1533–1539.

Tang, Y., Lin, G., Han, L., Qiu, S., Yang, S., Yin, J., 2015. Design of hierarchically cut
hinges for highly stretchable and reconfigurable metamaterials with enhanced strength.
Advanced Materials 27 (44), 7181–7190.

19


Vossen, B. G., Van der Sluis, O., Schreurs, P. J. G., Geers, M. G. D., Neggers, J., Hoefnagels,
J. P. M., 2015. On the role of fibril mechanics in the work of separation of fibrillating
interfaces. Mechanics of Materials 88, 1–11.

Wang, K., Chang, Y.-H., Chen, Y., Zhang, C., Wang, B., 2015. Designable dual-material
auxetic metamaterials using three-dimensional printing. Materials and Design 67, 159–164.

Wriggers, P., 2008. Nonlinear Finite Element Methods. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.

Wu, G., Xia, Y., Yang, S., 2014. Buckling, symmetry breaking, and cavitation in periodically
micro-structured hydrogel membranes. Soft Matter 10 (9), 1392–1399.

Wu, W., Hu, W., Qian, G., Liao, H., Xu, X., Berto, F., 2019. Mechanical design and
multifunctional applications of chiral mechanical metamaterials: A review. Materials and
Design 180.

Xu, H., Pasini, D., 2016. Structurally efficient three-dimensional metamaterials with con-
trollable thermal expansion. Scientific reports 6, 34924.

Yang, D., Mosadegh, B., Ainla, A., Lee, B., Khashai, F., Suo, Z., Bertoldi, K., White-
sides, G. M., 2015. Buckling of Elastomeric Beams Enables Actuation of Soft Machines.
Advanced Materials 27 (41), 6323–6327.

Yang, H., Ma, L., 2018. Multi-stable mechanical metamaterials with shape-reconfiguration
and zero poisson’s ratio. Materials and Design 152, 181–190.

Yu, X., Zhou, J., Liang, H., Jiang, Z., Wu, L., 2018. Mechanical metamaterials associated
with stiffness, rigidity and compressibility: A brief review. Progress in Materials Science
94, 114–173.

Yuan, S., Shen, F., Bai, J., Chua, C. K., Wei, J., Zhou, K., 2017. 3d soft auxetic lattice
structures fabricated by selective laser sintering: Tpu powder evaluation and process op-
timization. Materials and Design 120, 317–327.

Zhang, Y., Li, B., Zheng, Q., Genin, G. M., Chen, C., 2019. Programmable and robust static
topological solitons in mechanical metamaterials. Nature Communications 10 (1), 1–8.

20


