Diagnostics and characterization of photonic

circuits by wide-field spatio-temporal imaging

Dmitry Nuzhdin,∗,†,‡,∥ Lorenzo Pattelli,†,¶ Sara Nocentini,†,¶ and Diederik

Wiersma∗,†,§,¶

†European Laboratory for Non-linear Spectroscopy (LENS), University of Florence, 50019

Sesto Fiorentino, Italy

‡Institute of Applied Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76128 Karlsruhe,

Germany

¶Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRiM), 10135 Torino, Italy

§Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Nazionale di Ottica, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino,

Italy

∥Current address: Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, Centrale Marseille, Institut Fresnel,

F-13013 Marseille, France

E-mail: nuzhdin@fresnel.fr; wiersma@lens.unifi.it

Phone: +33 (0)4 91 28 83 28; +39 (0) 05 54 57 25 17. Fax: +33 (0)4 91 28 80 67 ; +39 (0)

05 54 57 49 32

Abstract

The growing diffusion of integrated photonic technologies requires fast and non-

invasive quality control techniques for mass-production. We present a general diag-

nostic technique for sub-ps imaging of photonic circuits combining wide-field optical

microscopy and optical gating. The simultaneous access to multiple parameters of a

photonic structure enables an unprecedented characterization of its functional design

1

arXiv:2005.04392v1  [physics.optics]  9 May 2020


as opposed to typical single-domain techniques such as frequency or time domain re-

flectometry and near-field microscopy. The non-contact and non-perturbative nature

of the technique makes it relevant for both planar and three-dimensional circuits, as

well as for silicon, polymeric or hybrid platforms. We apply our technique to different

photonic chip components fabricated by Direct Laser Writing, revealing the spatial and

temporal hallmarks of fabrication imperfections causing losses or deviations from the

intended device behavior. At the same time, the technique allows in situ probing of key

properties of photonic devices as the local propagation constants of guided modes or

the quality factor of resonant elements. Our method is relevant for both the scientific

and the industrial communities as it lends itself to be scaled up to in-line quality control

thanks to its non-scanning nature.

This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was sub-

sequently accepted for publication in ACS Photonics, copyright ©American Chemical

Society after peer review. The final edited and published work is available at
DOI:

10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00271.

Introduction

Rapid progress in lithographic techniques and hybrid material integration is leading to com-

plex on-a-chip platforms with thousands of elements miniaturized into integrated photonic

circuits. Nowadays, photonic circuits are widening their applicability thanks to their com-

petitive performances, replacing conventional microelectronics in specific fields ranging from

signal processing1–4 to machine learning5–7 as they represent the convenient platform both

at the microscale and towards a world-wide all-optical communication system.8 However,

the field still suffers from the lack of adequate diagnostics tools for the functional testing

of fabricated devices. Despite the high resolution of well-established lithographic techniques

enabling high-fidelity fabrication of designed photonic structures, minor deviations or fabri-

2


cation defects are inevitable and can strongly affect light propagation even with no apparent

deviation from the intended design. At the same time, due to their small scale and irregular

geometry, these deviations are both difficult to model and to inspect.9–11

In traditional fiber optics technology, high-precision quality control over long propaga-

tion distances is obtained through several well-established techniques, which include optical

frequency domain reflectometry (OFDR),12 optical time domain reflectometry (OTDR)13

and their variants.14–18 These approaches allow to investigate the quality of single mode

fibers with defect positioning precision of tens of µm over tens of meters of total fiber

length.12 A coherent frequency domain reflectometry was also implemented to study in-

tegrated waveguides19–21 setting the current state-of-the-art in defect positioning resolution

slightly above 5 µm, which however remains insufficient to probe photonic structures char-

acterized by sub-wavelength features. Another drawback of reflectometry techniques is the

ambiguity in location of defect’s position in case of parallel or branching light pathways as

in beam splitters or Mach-Zehnder interferometers,13 as well as the impossibility to distin-

guish multiple time-coincident reflection peaks. Similarly, more complex systems including,

e.g., coupled resonator waveguides,9,22 add-drop filters,23 complex waveguide networks5 or

multimode interference devices,24,25 require more sophisticated investigation techniques to

uniquely attribute reflection peaks to a single position in a multi-branched photonic circuit

configuration. Moreover, if more complex integrated system are taken in analysis, the re-

flection at the different ports or in presence of defects can create intermixing terms that

introduce an ambiguity in the defect mapping.20,26

Among possible approaches to monitor on-chip photonic platforms, far-field and near-

field techniques offer a diverse insight into the sample. Far-field methods typically consist

of simple widefield microscopy of the investigated sample exploiting for instance, far-field

scattering microscopy (FScM) applied to grated waveguides27 or to photonic crystal struc-

tures.28 Herein, the main limitation is provided by the fact that a static characterization

cannot reveal the occurrence of multiple signals or revivals repeating at different times in

3


the same location. Additionally, a crucial aspect is the out-coupled light intensity that must

be high enough to be detected over the background signal. On the other hand, near-field

methods allow sub-wavelength imaging of a photonic device by collecting the evanescent

field through a scanning tip, but the perturbation introduced by the probe tip and the long

scanning times29 hinder a widespread adoption of near-field techniques for circuit characteri-

zation in mass production processes.30–32 Additionally, scanning near-field optical microscopy

(SNOM) techniques are limited to the study of planar or quasi-2D structures due to their

near-field detection, while 3D photonic circuits with stacked components are increasingly

gaining momentum.33,34 As an alternative to near-field microscopy, ultrafast photomodula-

tion spectroscopy has also been recently proposed.35 In this case, the spatial mapping of the

mode distribution of the device under test is achieved by a point-by-point optical pumping

that locally perturbs the refractive index of silicon structures. By monitoring the trans-

mission through the device, a space and time dependent photomodulation map in silicon

photonic circuits can be retrieved. However, this method is material-specific and it still

requires to scan a pump beam over the sample area.

In this paper, we present a multi-domain approach for the diagnostic of integrated pho-

tonic circuits. By combining principles of time-resolved optical gating and wide-field mi-

croscopy, we demonstrate far-field temporally and spatially resolved signal tracing with sub-

picosecond temporal resolution and ∼µm spatial resolution. The high temporal resolution

allows to detect not only geometrical defects but also functional deviations with respect to

the desired operation of photonic structures (e.g., due to density inhomogeneities). It is

interesting to comment in more detail on the similarities and differences between the pro-

posed method and other established reflectometry techniques such as OFDR. In an OFDR

measurement, even in the simplest single arm geometry, the presence of multiple reflections

can often lead to additional intermixing terms that do not correspond to real reflections,

introducing an ambiguity in the interpretation of the resulting spectrum.20,26 In contrast,

ultra-fast imaging of PICs allows to decouple in space even two or more events occurring at

4


the same delay in the time domain. Additionally, examining a multiport device with OFDR,

one must address individually each combination of output and input ports, which are in-

stead interrogated in parallel in our multi-domain approach. Finally, on a practical level,

any broadband OFDR approach is inherently limited by the need of robust group velocity

dispersion compensation36,37 or by the need of additional arms in the device under test as in

the case of sweep-wavelength homodyne interferometric detection.21 Arguably, these factors

are the reason why the highest defect positioning resolution reported so far is limited to

5.3±1.7 µm36 and more typically in the 10 ∼µm range.12,21,37 This value is still far from the

diffraction limited resolution for the given set of optics and wavelength for widefield imaging,

which is used in the proposed approach. When complemented with subpicosecond tempo-

ral resolution of the system, this allows to identify always and unambiguously the origin of

each peak, even temporally coincident ones, free of any spurious intermixing terms. On the

other hand, when it comes to simpler circuits, OFDR has the advantage of providing both

amplitude and phase information, as well as a simpler setup with no moving parts.

Nonetheless, our proposed approach does not rely on specific material characteristics

which makes it equally suitable to study dielectric, semiconductor or polymer devices. The

spatio-temporal imaging enables also a quantitative characterization of the optical properties

of different photonic devices, as we illustratively show for single-mode polymeric waveguides

assisted by Bragg-couplers, whispering gallery-mode (WGM) ring resonators vertically cou-

pled to a bus waveguide and complex inter-coupled waveguide-based networks.

Results and discussion

Principles of ultra-fast spatio-temporal imaging

The apparatus developed for ultrafast imaging of photonic circuits is reported in Figure

1. It is based on the principle of optical gating:38 two synchronous femtosecond pulses are

made to overlap temporally and spatially in the volume of a nonlinear medium to generate a

5


sum-frequency signal when the phase matching condition is satisfied. The pulses are labeled

probe and gate, since the former interacts with the sample while the latter arrives to the

nonlinear medium with a preset time delay, defined by a motorized delay line. Any probe

signal light reaching the non-linear medium with the same delay of the gate beam results

in an upconverted signal at the sum frequency with an intensity proportional to their cross-

convolutions, which can then be integrated with a slow detector.

Figure 1: (a) Experimental setup of the apparatus (O1 - excitation objective, S - sample,
O2 - collection objective, T - tube lens, D - dichroic mirror, NLC - nonlinear crystal, PMT
- photomultiplier tube, CCD - charge coupled device). (b) Time resolution retrieved by
cross-convolution of the probe and pump beams.
(c) Upconverted image of the spatial
resolution target USAF 1951, shown at different magnifications, reaching a spatial resolution
of 228 lp/mm with a 100× objective.

The setup is based on a previously developed optical gating system39 but improves signif-

icantly on its spatial resolution, exceeding a value of 228 lp/mm required to resolve features

with a characteristic size of about 1 µm (see Figure 1c). On the other hand, temporal res-

olution depends on the duration of the pulses that are cross-convoluted (in the order of

∼100 fs), but still allows to detect relative time differences in the fs scale thanks to the

6


combined spatio-temporal detection scheme.

Single mode waveguide characterization

At first, the setup has been tested to characterize single mode waveguides. The photonic

structures presented in this work have been designed for operation at telecom wavelengths

and fabricated in a polymeric matrix by 3D lithographic technique of Direct Laser Writing

(DLW). Free-space beam propagation is converted into an on-chip guided mode by grating

couplers optimized to work at perpendicular incidence for a selected polarization. Assuming

a negligible dispersion in the wavelength range of interest, the effective refractive index of our

single-mode waveguide can be estimated by measuring the time delay acquired by the pulse

propagating along a waveguide of known length. Characterization of waveguides of various

configuration is summarized in Figure 2. Figure 2a shows the time-resolved transmission

profile through a single-mode waveguide as collected from the input and output couplers. The

signal passing through the input coupler directly into the camera sets a zero-time reference

for the light pulse that propagates in the photonic circuit. Based on the waveguide length,

the measured pulse time delay at the output coupler of ∆t = 1.376 ps allows us to retrieve

an effective refractive index of neff = 1.49, in good agreement with the result of numerical

calculations.

Looking more closely at the late time range of a different waveguide configuration (see

Figure 2b), a second peak at the input coupler is clearly visible at a delay that is the double

of the time spent propagating along the waveguide, showing that the setup can be operated

also in an ODTR configuration. Furthermore, it is interesting to observe the light dynamics

at the output grating coupler (grating pitch Λ = 1050 nm) tracking its time evolution inside

the structure (Figure 2e-h). The acquired spatio-temporal images show that the extinction

length inside the output coupler is shorter than the grating size, confirming the effectiveness

of its design.

This first example shows basic diagnostic steps to evaluate the effective refractive index

7


Figure 2: Ultra-fast imaging of a single-mode waveguide without defects. The time-resolved
characterization reported in panels a and b is referred to two waveguides with different length.
(a) Time traces collected from input (black) and output (magenta) couplers. Blue notches
correspond to the time instants at which panels e-h have been recorded. (b) Comparison
between signals collected from the input and output couplers: at the input coupler (black
curve) reflection from the waveguide end is detected at a time delay that is exactly twice the
time the pulse needed to propagate forward in the waveguide (image shown in the inset).
The magenta curve indicates the time trace from the output coupler with a peak indicating
the pulse arrived at one waveguide end. Orange line shows the reference signal taken from
substrate without any photonic structure. (c) SEM image of the output grating. (d) Results
of finite element method (FEM) based calculation. (e)-(h) Time-resolved images of light
propagating inside the output grating coupler. All scale bars are 10 µm

.

of the mode and track light dynamics at the grating coupler in a simple circuit with no

defects. However, different types of imperfections may be introduced accidentally during

fabrication.
For example, using DLW lithographic patterning, photonic components can

be affected by scattering defects due to incidental polymer burning or deviations from the

designed geometry because of positioning errors. Similar problems may occur with other

fabrication techniques as e-beam lithography.
To investigate such issues, a single mode

waveguide with two defects was analyzed (Figure 3). One defect is a small indentation on the

8


top of the waveguide (Figure 3b, inset), which was intentionally introduced to slightly perturb

the mode. The second defect is an accidental polymer burning occurred during fabrication.

As we show in Figure 3, thanks to the combination of spatial and temporal imaging, the

technique allows to discriminate and investigate separately the two scattering events even

though they are separated by just ∼50 µm, corresponding to a time separation of ∼250 fs.

While the short separation between the two events makes them unresolvable in the time

Figure 3: Analysis of defects in single mode waveguides with ultra-fast imaging technique.
(a) Time-resolved transmission through the waveguide with two defects. The peak at t = 0
corresponds to the pulse impinging into the structure, the second peak is mainly due to
scattering from the first defect and the last peak is the power outcoupled from the waveguide.
It is important to note that although scattering from the second defect is not distinguishable
in time domain, it can be clearly resolved in spatio-temporal domain (panel e). Blue notches
correspond to the images c-f. (b) SEM image of the waveguide under investigation; the inset
shows the designed indentation. (c)-(f) Images (see Methods) taken at successive time delays
showing the evolution of the light pulse in the waveguide. All scale bars are 50 µm.

domain, the imaging acquisition allows to selectively monitor either defect allowing to address

individual time traces. On the other hand, temporal resolution allows to effectively filter out

the impinging light pulse which would otherwise dominate over the weak signal scattered by

the defects by several orders of magnitude. This example illustrates the complementarity of

9


spatio-temporal information, which cannot be reduced to the sum of spatial and temporal

measurements performed separately.

Whispering gallery mode resonator characterization

In order to show the applicability of the method to more complex circuits, we study a

whispering gallery mode resonator vertically coupled (Figure 4a) to a single-mode waveguide

designed for telecommunication C-band. Within this structure, light propagation dynamics

Figure 4: Study of vertically coupled whispering gallery mode resonator. (a) SEM image
of typical waveguide-resonator photonic circuit. Inset shows the vertical coupling geometry
of the structure. (b) Time traces recorded at the output coupler. Black curve corresponds
to the case when there is no WGM resonator. The first peak at t ≃ 1 ps corresponds to
the fraction of light propagating in the bus waveguide (not coupled into the resonator). The
peak at t ≃ 1.75 ps is a reflection artifact from the substrate (verified by imaging at this time
delay). The pulses recorded after t ≃ 2 ps correspond to the light coupled into the resonator
that made several round trips. Magenta and orange curves correspond to different resonators
with different quality factors (Q1 = 1000, Q2 = 1600). Inset shows the exponential decays
of the intensity used to extrapolate the photon lifetime.

is governed by multiple factors. The probe pulse is coupled into the waveguide through a

10


grating coupler and propagates through the waveguide reaching the resonator. Depending

on waveguide-to-cavity coupling coefficient and the resonant wavelength, a certain fraction of

the guided light is coupled into the resonator, while the rest keeps propagating through the

waveguide.40 The electromagnetic field that is coupled into the resonator starts to circulate.

At each round trip, the resonant cavity mode loses a fraction of power back into the bus

waveguide, which depends on the same coupling coefficient (insertion losses), and into free

space, which instead depends on the intrinsic quality factor of the cavity.41 Light returning to

the waveguide carries information about the total quality factor (the sum of the intrinsic and

the external ones) of the whispering gallery mode resonator. This results in exponentially

decaying, time-equidistant peaks in the time-resolved transmission profile.
Compared to

traditional cavity ringdown measurement, the high temporal resolution of this setup allows

to identify each cavity round trip instead of just the exponential intensity decay.42 The

exponential decay of the peak intensity is connected to the photon lifetime, characterizing

the energy dissipation rate (Figure 4b, inset).

Multiple port waveguide network characterization

Photonic circuits employed in commercial devices usually include multiple waveguides to

interconnect and manipulate optical signals.
Coupling among parallel light pathways is

achieved by directional couplers whose intensity ratio splitting is determined by the cou-

pling length.43 These highly interconnected circuits represent a promising platform for an

array of applications including all-optical computation and artificial intelligence.5 A typical

system consists of several input and output ports wired through waveguides connected via

directional couplers. As directional couplers are extremely sensitive to fabrication imper-

fections, a structure containing nominally identical parts might still result in an undesired

transmission profile even without any visible defect. Analysis of such devices using tradi-

tional reflectometry techniques is impractical due to the high number of input-output port

combinations that must be addressed individually and the impossibility to uniquely identify

11


branches of the same waveguide. Here we apply our time-resolved imaging technique to an

exemplary waveguide network, consisting of two input couplers, three directional couplers

and four Y-connectors resulting in eight output ports (Figure 5). The output ports can be

organized into two groups according to their nominal path length to the output coupler.

Additionally, each pulse experiences at least one event of partial power transfer through a

directional coupler and one power split though a Y-connector. It is interesting to follow the

light dynamics through the paths that are nominally identical by design (e.g., output port

1 and 2). Thanks to the far-field imaging nature of our technique, the circuit analysis does

not require any scanning process and the whole structure can be monitored at once in a

wide field acquisition. As we collect a set of time-resolved images of the entire structure,

individual transmission curves are retrieved for each output port by spatially integrating the

signal in their corresponding regions.

Figure 5b depicts time-resolved transmission profiles of all output couplers showing the

sensitivity of the method to the intensity distribution at the directional couplers and Y beam

splitters. Looking at the normalized time traces (Figure 5c) of light pulses that propagated

through nominally equal optical paths (output ports n. 1, 2, 5, and 6), we observe an

asynchrony in the arrival times. In the inset, we show that light that is out-coupled from

grating 5 and 6, arrives exactly at the same time (within 3 fs accuracy), while light that

comes out from couplers 1 and 2 differs both from the lower branch and among themselves,

highlighting the presence of unintentional imperfections that would be otherwise difficult

to identify. Furthermore, a quantitative characterization of the performances of the circuit

components can be performed by integrating in time the outcoupled intensities.
In the

case of the waveguide network, it is interesting to calculate the splitting ratio of the three

directional couplers that are responsible for the signal propagation through the structure.

For the investigated device, the performance of the splitters does differ significantly (90:10,

82:18 and 97:3 for the leftmost, the upper and the lower splitter, respectively) despite their

nominally identical design.

12


Figure 5: Interconnected waveguide network analysis. (a) A wide-field image of the multi-
channel inter-coupled waveguide network.
Colors and numbers identify different output
ports. (b) Time-intensity distribution of the signal from different output ports. Peaks forms
two groups depending on the path length. (c) Temporal signal distribution of the four pulses
with a time delay of about 1.75 ps (1st, 2nd, 5th and 6th output ports). Insets shows the
zoom of the four peak centers, illustrating the temporal mismatch of nominally equal paths
differing due to fabrication imperfections.

13


Methods

Experimental apparatus

Ultrafast imaging was performed using femtosecond pulses produced by a Ti:Sapphire mode-

locked infrared laser (Tsunami, Spectra Physics, central wavelength λgate = 820 nm, FWHM =

9 nm), and an optical parametric oscillator (OPO Opal, Spectra Physics, central wavelength

λprobe = 1550 nm, FWHM = 15 nm). At the phase-matching condition, sum-frequency gen-

eration occurs in a 0.5 mm thick bismuth borate (BiBO) crystal. The gate pulse path is tuned

by a linear motorized stage (ThorLabs Inc., ODL300, 300 mm Travel), which can be moved

with precision up to 0.5 µm (corresponding to a round-trip delay of ∼3 fs). Sum-frequency

signal with λsignal = 536 nm is recorded by a photomultiplier tube (ET Enterprises) or low

noise CCD camera (Andor iKon M912). Light emerging from the sample is collected by

a set of collection optics imaging the spatial distribution of light on the nonlinear crystal

facet. The same facet of the crystal is illuminated with an expanded gate beam providing

a uniform illumination over its surface to ensure flat upconversion efficiency all over the

image. Polarization of the gate pulse is tuned by a half-wave plate in order to achieve maxi-

mal in-coupling. This allows in turn to select the polarization of collected light through the

upconversion process by rotating the non-linear crystal.

Image acquisition

Time-resolved images reported in the paper are overlaid to wide-field illumination images

for the sake of clarity. The probe beam is focused (Mitutoyo NIR 10× NA 0.26) on a target

input coupler and the output signal is collected by an infinity-corrected collection objective

(Mitutoyo NIR 20× NA 0.4, 50× NA 0.42 or 100× NA 0.5).
Images at different delay

values (shown in color) are recorded for different positions of the translation stage, and

superimposed to a zero-delay (grayscale) image recorded with a collimated probe beam illu-

mination. This allows to see the structure through the same set of imaging optics (including

14


the nonlinear crystal) and identify the structural features corresponding to each signal.

Sample fabrication

Investigated devices have been fabricated using a commercial 3D Direct Laser Writing plat-

form (NanoScribe GmbH) based on two-photon polymerization employing a commercial pho-

toresist (Ip-Dip from Nanoscribe GmbH, n = 1.5344). The final polymeric structures are not

limited to planar geometries but can be patterned in the whole 3D space in a point-by-point

polymerization process whose resolution is determined by the voxel dimension, which has an

ellipsoidal shape with a minor axis length of 120 nm and a major axis of 250 nm). Using a

glass substrate with a refractive index (fused silica n = 1.444 at 1550 nm) that is lower than

that of the photoresist, a ridge waveguide configuration provides good mode confinement in

single mode waveguides. Light coupling into the waveguide is enabled by grating couplers

that convert a free-space propagating probe pulse to an on-chip guided mode.34

Numerical modeling

Finite element based calculations were performed using a commercial software (Comsol 4.3),

to optimize and evaluate the mode propagation inside the photonic structures. Mode analysis

calculation was performed to evaluate the effective refractive index of the guided mode

within the single mode waveguide while grating coupler design has been optimized in order

to maximize free-space to on-chip light propagation (frequency domain calculation).

Conclusions

We described a novel technique for functional photonic circuit diagnostics and quality con-

trol. This technique merges complementary approaches enabling a detailed characterization

of photonic components. Notably, spatio-temporal characterization of photonic circuits gives

access to device linear and non-linear characteristics. Although the technique is demon-

15


strated for the common C-band wavelength region, its basic working principle is that of

optical gating which can be readily extended to other frequency regions. Measurements are

performed in a non-contact, far-field fashion making this method compatible with 3D or ver-

tically stacked structures that would not be suitable for a scanning near-field investigation.

Besides, the technique can be generalized to work in reflection mode, lifting the require-

ment for transparent substrate. Finally, the technique does not rely on any specific material

characteristics, and is therefore applicable also to silicon, hybrid or polymer photonic plat-

forms.In this respect, our proposed technique fills the lack of available diagnostics approaches

for complex multi-branched integrated circuits, while at the same time offering a defect po-

sitioning resolution that is significantly superior to the state-of-the-art demonstrated so far

over linear waveguides using OFDR.

Remarkably, the diagnostics potential of our technique extends not just to geometrical

defects close to the optical diffraction limit, but it can detect also slight variations from the

intended design of investigated photonic circuits. Indeed, there can be imperfections that

are undetectable even under scanning electron microscopy inspection (e.g., regarding the

material density or the presence of buried defects) and yet affect the functionality of the

photonic device. On the other hand, devices exhibiting slight geometrical deviations might

still perform as intended, in ways that are impossible to predict or model beforehand and

that can only be assessed using in situ, functional diagnostic techniques.

Funding

This research was supported by Erasmus Mundus Doctorate Program Europhotonics (Grant

No. 159224-1-2009-1-FR-ERA MUNDUS-EMJD) and ERC Advanced Grant n. 291349.

16


Acknowledgements

We thank Simone Zanotto for fruitful discussions and Jeroen van den Brink for technical

assistance during construction of the apparatus.

Disclosures

The Authors declare financial competing interests related to a pending patent: Italian pri-

ority n. 102018000008647 co-owned by Università degli Studi di Firenze and Laboratorio

Europeo di Spettroscopia Non-Lineare (P).

See Supplement 1 for supporting content.

References

(1) Marin-Palomo, P.; Kemal, J. N.; Karpov, M.; Kordts, A.; Pfeifle, J.; Pfeiffer, M. H.;

Trocha, P.; Wolf, S.; Brasch, V.; Anderson, M. H.; Rosenberger, R.; Vijayan, K.;

Freude, W.; Kippenberg, T. J.; Koos, C. Microresonator-based solitons for massively

parallel coherent optical communications. Nature 2017, 546, 274–279.

(2) Willner, A. E.; Khaleghi, S.; Chitgarha, M. R.; Yilmaz, O. F. All-optical signal pro-

cessing. Journal of Lightwave Technology 2014, 32, 660–680.

(3) Tanabe, T.; Notomi, M.; Mitsugi, S.; Shinya, A.; Kuramochi, E. All-optical switches

on a silicon chip realized using photonic crystal nanocavities. Applied Physics Letters

2005, 87, 1–3.

(4) Koos, C.; Vorreau, P.; Vallaitis, T.; Dumon, P.; Bogaerts, W.; Baets, R.; Esembeson, B.;

Biaggio, I.; Michinobu, T.; Diederich, F.; Freude, W.; Leuthold, J. All-optical high-

17


speed signal processing with silicon-organic hybrid slot waveguides. Nature Photonics

2009, 3, 216–219.

(5) Shen, Y.; Harris, N. C.; Skirlo, S.; Prabhu, M.; Baehr-Jones, T.; Hochberg, M.;

Sun, X.; Zhao, S.; Larochelle, H.; Englund, D.; Soljačić, M. Deep learning with co-

herent nanophotonic circuits. Nature Photonics 2017, 11, 441–446.

(6) Harris, N. C.; Steinbrecher, G. R.; Prabhu, M.; Lahini, Y.; Mower, J.; Bunandar, D.;

Chen, C.; Wong, F. N. C.; Baehr-Jones, T.; Hochberg, M.; Lloyd, S.; Englund, D.

Quantum transport simulations in a programmable nanophotonic processor. Nature

Photonics 2017, 11, 447–452.

(7) Tait, A. N.; De Lima, T. F.; Zhou, E.; Wu, A. X.; Nahmias, M. A.; Shastri, B. J.;

Prucnal, P. R. Neuromorphic photonic networks using silicon photonic weight banks.

Scientific Reports 2017, 7, 7430.

(8) Moughames, J.; Porte, X.; Thiel, M.; Ulliac, G.; Jacquot, M.; Larger, L.; Kadic, M.;

Brunner, D. Three dimensional waveguide-interconnects for scalable integration of pho-

tonic neural networks. 2020, https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.08203v2.

(9) Ferrari, C.; Morichetti, F.; Melloni, A. Disorder in coupled-resonator optical waveg-

uides. Journal of the Optical Society of America B 2009, 26, 858.

(10) Melati, D.; Melloni, A.; Morichetti, F. Real photonic waveguides: guiding light through

imperfections. Advances in Optics and Photonics 2014, 6, 156.

(11) Faggiani, R.; Baron, A.; Zang, X.; Lalouat, L.; Schulz, S. A.; O’Regan, B.; Vynck, K.;

Cluzel, B.; De Fornel, F.; Krauss, T. F.; Lalanne, P. Lower bound for the spatial extent

of localized modes in photonic-crystal waveguides with small random imperfections.

Scientific Reports 2016, 6, 27037.

18


(12) Soller, B. J.; Gifford, D. K.; Wolfe, M. S.; Froggatt, M. E. High resolution optical fre-

quency domain reflectometry for characterization of components and assemblies. Optics

Express 2005, 13, 666–674.

(13) Barnoski, M. K.; Rourke, M. D.; Jensen, S. M.; Melville, R. T. Optical time domain

reflectometer. Applied Optics 1977, 16, 2375.

(14) Rogers, A. J. Polarization-optical time domain reflectometry: a technique for the mea-

surement of field distributions. Applied Optics 1981, 20, 1060–1074.

(15) Ahn, T.-J.; Lee, J. Y.; Kim, D. Y. Suppression of nonlinear frequency sweep in an optical

frequency-domain reflectometer by use of Hilbert transformation. Applied Optics 2006,

44, 7630–7634.

(16) Von Der Weid, J. P.; Passy, R.; Mussi, G.; Gisin, N. On the characterization of opti-

cal fiber network components with optical frequency domain reflectometry. Journal of

Lightwave Technology 1997, 15, 1131–1141.

(17) Golubovic, B.; Bouma, B. E.; Tearney, G. J.; Fujimoto, J. G. Optical frequency-domain

reflectometry using rapid wavelength tuning of a Crˆ4+:forsterite laser. Optics Letters

1997, 22, 1704–1706.

(18) Husdi, I. R.; Nakamura, K.; Ueha, S. Sensing characteristics of plastic optical fibres

measured by optical time-domain reflectometry. Measurement Science and Technology

2004, 15, 1553–1559.

(19) Glombitza, U.; Brinkmeyer, E. Coherent Frequency-Domain Reflectometry for Char-

acterization of Single-mode integrated-optical Waveguides. Journal of Lightwave Tech-

nology 1993, 11, 1377–1384.

(20) Yuksel, K.; Wuilpart, M.; Moeyaert, V.; Mégret, P. Optical frequency domain reflec-

19


tometry : A review Optical Frequency Domain Reflectometry : A Review. 2009 11th

International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks 2009, 1–5.

(21) Bru, L. A.; Pastor, D.; Muñoz, P. Integrated optical frequency domain reflectome-

try device for characterization of complex integrated devices. Opt. Express 2018, 26,

30000–30008.

(22) Melloni, A.; Morichetti, F.; Martinelli, M. Linear and nonlinear pulse propagation in

coupled resonator slow-wave optical structures. Optical and Quantum Electronics 2003,

35, 365–379.

(23) Schwelb, O. Transmission, group delay, and dispersion in single-ring optical resonators

and add/drop filters - A tutorial overview. Journal of Lightwave Technology 2004, 22,

1380–1394.

(24) Besse, P. A.; Bachmann, M.; Melchior, H.; Soldano, L. B.; Smit, M. K. Optical Band-

width and Fabrication Tolerances of Multimode Interference Couplers. Journal of Light-

wave Technology 1994, 12, 1004–1009.

(25) Soldano, L. B.; Pennings, E. C. Optical Multi-Mode Interference Devices Based on

Self-Imaging: Principles and Applications. Journal of Lightwave Technology 1995, 13,

615–627.

(26) Muñoz, P.; Micó, G.; Bru, L. A.; Pastor, D.; Pérez, D.; Doménech, J. D.; Fernán-

dez, J.; Baños, R.; Gargallo, B.; Alemany, R.; Sánchez, A. M.; Cirera, J. M.; Mas, R.;

Domínguez, C. Silicon nitride photonic integration platforms for visible, near-infrared

and mid-infrared applications. Sensors (Switzerland) 2017, 17, 1–25.

(27) Hopman, W. C. L.; Hoekstra, H. J. W. M.; Dekker, R.; Zhuang, L.; de Ridder, R. M.

Far-field scattering microscopy applied to analysis of slow light, power enhancement,

and delay times in uniform Bragg waveguide gratings. Optics Express 2007, 15, 1851–

1870.

20


(28) Lončar, M.; Nedeljković, D.; Pearsall, T. P.; Vučković, J.; Scherer, A.; Kuchinsky, S.;

Allan, D. C. Experimental and theoretical confirmation of Bloch-mode light propagation

in planar photonic crystal waveguides. Applied Physics Letters 2002, 80, 1689–1691.

(29) Burresi, M.; van Oosten, D.; Song, B. S.; Noda, S.; Kuipers, L. Ultrafast reciprocal

space investigation of cavity-waveguide coupling. Optics Letters 2011, 36, 1827–1829.

(30) Balistreri, M. L. M.; Klunder, D. J. W.; Blom, F. C.; Driessen, A.; Hoekstra, H. W.

J. M.; Korterik, J. P.; Kuipers, L.; van Hulst, N. F. Visualizing the whispering gallery

modes in a cylindrical optical microcavity. Optics Letters 1999, 24, 1829–1831.

(31) Balistreri, M. L.; Gersen, H.; Korterik, J. P.; Kuipers, L.; Van Hulst, N. F. Tracking

femtosecond laser pulses in space and time. Science 2001, 294, 1080–1082.

(32) Gersen, H.; Klunder, D. J. W.; Korterik, J. P.; Driessen, A.; van Hulst, N. F.;

Kuipers, L. Propagation of a femtosecond pulse in a microresonator visualized in time.

Optics Letters 2004, 29, 1291–1293.

(33) Nesic, A.; Blaicher, M.; Hoose, T.; Hofmann, A.; Lauermann, M.; Kutuvantavida, Y.;

Nöllenburg, M.; Randel, S.; Freude, W.; Koos, C. Photonic-integrated circuits with non-

planar topologies realized by 3D-printed waveguide overpasses. Optics Express 2019,

27, 17402.

(34) Nocentini, S.; Riboli, F.; Burresi, M.; Martella, D.; Parmeggiani, C.; Wiersma, D. S.

Three-Dimensional Photonic Circuits in Rigid and Soft Polymers Tunable by Light.

ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 3222–3230.

(35) Bruck, R.;
Mills, B.;
Troia, B.;
Thomson, D. J.;
Gardes, F. Y.;
Hu, Y.;

Mashanovich, G. Z.; Passaro, V. M.; Reed, G. T.; Muskens, O. L. Device-level charac-

terization of the flow of light in integrated photonic circuits using ultrafast photomod-

ulation spectroscopy. Nature Photonics 2014, 9, 54–60.

21


(36) Zhao, D.; Pustakhod, D.; Williams, K.; Leijtens, X. High resolution optical frequency

domain reflectometry for measurement of waveguide group refractive index. IEEE PHO-

TONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS 2017, 29, 1379–1382.

(37) Melati, D.; Alippi, A.; Melloni, A. Waveguide-based technique for wafer-level measure-

ment of phase and group effective refractive indices. Journal of Lightwave Technology

2016, 34, 1293–1299.

(38) Trebino, R.; DeLong, K. W.; Fittinghoff, D. N.; Sweetser, J. N.; Krumbügel, M. A.;

Richman, B. A.; Kane, D. J. Measuring ultrashort laser pulses in the time-frequency

domain using frequency-resolved optical gating. 1997.

(39) Pattelli, L.; Savo, R.; Burresi, M.; Wiersma, D. S. Spatio-temporal visualization of light

transport in complex photonic structures. Light: Science and Applications 2016, 5.

(40) Ghulinyan, M.; Ramiro-Manzano, F.; Prtljaga, N.; Guider, R.; Carusotto, I.; Pi-

tanti, A.; Pucker, G.; Pavesi, L. Oscillatory vertical coupling between a whispering-

gallery resonator and a bus waveguide. Physical Review Letters 2013, 110, 163901.

(41) Kippenberg, T. J.; Spillane, S. M.; Armani, D. K.; Vahala, K. J. Fabrication and

coupling to planar high-Q silica disk microcavities. Applied Physics Letters 2003, 83,

797–799.

(42) Armani, D. K.; Kippenberg, T. J.; Spillane, S. M.; Vahala, K. J. Ultra-high-Q toroid

microcavity on a chip. Nature 2003, 421, 925–928.

(43) Kiyat, I.; Aydinli, A.; Dagli, N. A compact silicon-on-insulator polarization splitter.

IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 2005, 17, 100–102.

(44) Gissibl, T.; Wagner, S.; Sykora, J.; Schmid, M.; Giessen, H. Refractive index mea-

surements of photo-resists for three-dimensional direct laser writing. Optical Materials

Express 2017, 7, 2293–2298.

22


Diagnostics and characterization of photonic

circuits by wide-field spatio-temporal imaging:

supplementary material

Dmitry Nuzhdin,∗,†,‡,∥ Lorenzo Pattelli,†,¶ Sara Nocentini,†,¶ and Diederik

Wiersma∗,†,§,¶

†European Laboratory for Non-linear Spectroscopy (LENS), University of Florence, 50019

Sesto Fiorentino, Italy

‡Institute of Applied Physics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), 76128 Karlsruhe,

Germany

¶Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica (INRiM), 10135 Torino, Italy

§Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Istituto Nazionale di Ottica, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino,

Italy

∥Current address: Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, Centrale Marseille, Institut Fresnel,

F-13013 Marseille, France

E-mail: nuzhdin@fresnel.fr; wiersma@lens.unifi.it

Phone: +33 (0)4 91 28 83 28; +39 (0) 05 54 57 25 17. Fax: +33 (0)4 91 28 80 67 ; +39 (0)

05 54 57 49 32

Abstract

This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was sub-

sequently accepted for publication in ACS Photonics, copyright ©American Chemical

Society after peer review. The final edited and published work is available at
DOI:

10.1021/acsphotonics.0c00271.

1

arXiv:2005.04392v1  [physics.optics]  9 May 2020


Calculation of quality factors

Quality factor of the resonator was estimated by measuring the time-resolved transmission

through the waveguide coupled to the resonator. This allows to resolve in time each round-

trip of a pulse inside the resonator and thus calculate Q-factors similarly to what is done in

cavity-ringdown spectroscopy. Each single peak that corresponds to the effect of the WGM

resonator is approximated with a Gaussian fit to calculate the area below it. Then using

this information together with the peak delays, a single exponential decay fit is performed.

I = C + I0e−t/τ
(1)

where I is the intensity registered by detector, C is a fitting constant, I0 is the peak

intensity, t is time and τ is the photon cavity lifetime.

Since the energy stored in the resonator is decaying to approach zero, the C parameter

is set to zero. The decay time and quality factor Q is therefore estimated as

Q = 2πcτ

λ
(2)

where c is the speed of light and λ is the wavelength for which the calculation is performed.

Numerical simulation

The calculation of the effective refractive indices of guided modes was performed with Finite

Element Method (FEM) software Comsol 4.3 (mode solver). The electric field distribution

for one of the designed waveguide modes is shown in 1.

The value of the effective refractive index is used further for modeling electric field dis-

tribution in Bragg couplers. Moreover, setting the source as boundary mode port (Figure

2d) in 2D geometry requires knowledge of the effective refractive index of the mode.

2


Figure 1: Electric field distribution in a single mode waveguide modelled with mode solver.
Effective refractive index of the mode is 1.486. The scale bar is 1 µm.

3


