 
 

1 
 

Orientation-Controlled Construction of Superstructures of Atomically-Flat 
Nanocrystals: Pushing the Limits of Ultra-Thin Colloidal Gain Media 
 
Onur Erdem1, Sina Foroutan1, Negar Gheshlaghi1, Burak Guzelturk2, Yemliha Altintas1,3, and 
Hilmi Volkan Demir1,4* 

 
1Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Department of Physics, UNAM – 
Institute of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Bilkent University, Ankara 06800, Turkey 
 
2Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA 60439 
 
3Department of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Abdullah Gul University, Kayseri 
38080, Turkey 
 
4LUMINOUS! Centre of Excellence for Semiconductor Lighting and Displays, The Photonics 
Institute, School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, School of Physical and 
Mathematical Sciences, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang 
Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore 
*E-mail: hvdemir@ntu.edu.sg 
 
Keywords: liquid interface self-assembly, colloidal nanoplatelets, planar waveguides, optical 
gain, amplified spontaneous emission 
 
We propose and demonstrate a method for the construction of highly uniform, 
multilayered, orientation-controlled superstructures of CdSe/CdZnS core/shell colloidal 
nanoplatelets (NPLs) using bi-phase liquid interface. These atomically-flat nanocrystals 
are sequentially deposited, all face-down onto a solid substrate, into slabs having 
monolayer-precise thickness and excellent homogeneity over several tens of cm2 areas. 
Owing to the near-unity surface coverage and film uniformity of this deposition 
technique, 
amplified 
spontaneous 
emission 
(ASE) 
is 
observed 
from 
an 

uncharacteristically thin colloidal film having only 6 layers of NPLs, which corresponds 
to a mere 42 nm thickness. Furthermore, systematic studies of optical gain properties of 
these NPL superstructures constructed having precise numbers of NPL layers tuned 
from 6 to 15 revealed the reduction in the gain threshold with the increasing number of 
NPL monolayers, along with a continuous spectral shift in the position of the ASE peak 
(by ~18 nm). These observations can be well explained by the variation of the optical 
field confinement factor with the NPL waveguide thickness and propagation wavelength. 
This work demonstrates the possibility of fabricating thickness-tunable, large-area 
three-dimensional superstructures made of NPL building blocks, which can be 
additively constructed one monolayer at a time. The proposed technique can also be 
extended to build hybrid NPL films of mixed orientations and allow for precise large-
area device engineering. 
 


 
 

2 
 

 

 
1. Introduction 

Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs) have been thoroughly investigated for the past 

two decades as optical gain material, largely owing to their favorable properties including 

wide color tunability, high quantum yield and strong optical abrosption. NCs of different 

dimensionalities, including quasi-0-dimensional quantum dots, 1-dimensional nanorods (NRs) 

and 2-dimensional colloidal quantum wells each have thus far been characterized widely in 

terms of their optical gain performance for their potential use as optical gain media in NC 

lasers.[1–5] Colloidal quantum wells, also commonly nicknamed as nanoplatelets (NPLs), are 

the most recent class of these colloidal semiconductor NCs, which offer favorable properties 

for lasing, including narrow emission linewidth due to their atomically-flat lateral surfaces 

and enhanced oscillator strength.[6] Soon after their introduction, NPLs have been shown to be 

an excellent family of nanoemitters for lasing as they feature suppressed inhomogeneous 

broadening,[6,7] reduced gain thresholds[4,8,9] and escalated gain coefficients.[10] Since then, 

NPLs have been extensively studied for optical gain and lasing.[4,11–14] 

Solid films of nanoemitters typically require a minimum thickness to display optical 

gain.[15–18] To assure their films have sufficient thickness, they are commonly prepared via 

spin-coating or drop-casting of a concentrated NC solution onto the substrate. However, drop-

casting technique commonly leads to nonuniform films with possibly large variance in 

thickness across large area films. Although spin-coating generally produces uniform films 

with a well-defined thickness, controlling the film thickness via experimental parameters such 


 
 

3 
 

as rotation speed of the spinner and amount and concentration of NCs is challenging in terms 

of precision and reproducibility, particularly in the case of anisotropic NCs (i.e., NRs and 

NPLs) that can exhibit distinct in-film orientations.[19,20] As a result, creating thickness-

tunable NPL films and studying and understanding their optical gain as a function of the film 

thickness with high enough precision is cumbersome. 

To address these issues, we propose and demonstrate the construction of superstructures 

of NPLs, all oriented face-down, with a precise number of complete monolayers of these 

NPLs using a thin film deposition technique which we have developed to create large-scale 

(several tens of cm2) and thickness-controlled (1- to 15-monolayered) films of NPLs. In this 

strategy, densely-packed single layers of NPLs are deposited on substrates repetitively via this 

self-assembly deposition, yielding excellent homogeneity throughout the film. This sequential 

deposition of NPLs enables controlling the thickness of the resulting films precisely and 

creating large-area slabs of NPLs with a desired thickness, which can be in principle utilized 

as optically active structures. 

In our previous work,[21] we showed the technique of assembling a single monolayer of 

NPLs in a distinct orientation of our choice, face-down or edge-up. Here we extend this 

technique to its successive application with the modification of subphase and the additional 

configuration of tilted phase transfer to build up layered NPL superstructures, adding one 

monolayer at a time, until reaching the desired thickness. These are the vertical repetitive 

structures of self-assembled monolayers of NPLs sitting laterally side by side in close packing. 

In contrast to the widely studied layer-by-layer deposition technique based on dipping into 

alternating solutions of positively and negatively charged polymers and/or colloidal 

nanoparticles (e.g. charged semiconductor NCs),[22,23] linker molecules between NC layers are 

not required in our approach. 

Here, we systematically studied the optical gain properties of these multilayered NPL 

superstructures while decreasing the number of NPL layers. Thicker NPL films lead to gain 


 
 

4 
 

easily at reduced gain thresholds. However, as making the film thinner and thinner, it 

becomes progressively difficult to observe gain. The dense packing and high uniformity of 

our deposited NPL superstructures on fused silica, on the other hand, enable the observation 

of optical gain down to 6 layers of such NPL constructs, which is altogether as thin as 42 nm. 

This film thickness is much smaller than the previously reported thicknesses typically of few 

100s nm for the NC films displaying optical gain,[3,10,24,25] and to the best of our knowledge, 

the thinnest ever reported optical gain media without using any optical feedback on a bare 

substrate. Moreover, we find that thinner than a critical thickness (depending on material 

parameters and conditions), it is not possible to induce gain no matter how hard pumped. 

Therefore, the observation of optical gain is limited to the critical thickness, below which no 

waveguiding mode within the NPL slab exists. Below this critical thickness, which is thus a 

cut-off thickness for waveguiding of the NPL slab, the resulting confinement factor is 

practically zero. Right above the critical thickness, however, there is a sudden major jump of 

4 orders of magnitude in the confinement factor. By increasing the number of NPL layers in 

the film further beyond the critical thickness, we were able to observe gradual decrease in the 

gain threshold, which can be explained by progressively increasing field confinement factor 

within the NPL slab. 

In this work, equipped with the ability of large-scale bottom-up construction of highly 

uniform NPL waveguides, we demonstrate the first account of optical gain in only few NPL 

layers where the film thickness is precisely controlled. Our results show that NPLs as well as 

other types of NCs can benefit from this sequential liquid-air interface deposition technique 

for creation of two- or three-dimensional (3D) pure or hybrid NC superstructures. In the case 

of anisotropic NCs such as NPLs, the particle orientation can also be used in principle as an 

additional degree of freedom to choose and control in each layer during their 3D construction. 

 
 


 
 

5 
 

2. Results and Discussion 

2.1. Multilayered Self-Assembly of NPLs 

In this work, CdSe NPLs of 4.5 monolayer (ML) atomic thickness (having 5 Cd and 4 Se 

crystal planes alternatingly) were synthesized according to the previous literature.[6,7] Also, 

CdSe/Cd0.25Zn0.75S core/alloyed-shell NPLs were synthesized via hot-injection technique, as 

previously reported by our group (see Experimental Section),[9,26] and were dispersed in 

hexane. Figure 1a displays their transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. The NPLs 

have square-like lateral shape with a side length of 17.8 ± 1.5 nm and a thickness of ~4.1 nm 

as determined from TEM imaging (see Figure S1). The absorbance and photoluminescence 

(PL) spectra of these NPLs are presented in Figure 1b. The first and second excitonic peaks 

reside at 631 and 573 nm, respectively, whereas the PL peak is at 642 nm. 

To deposit these NPLs into thickness-controlled thin films, we modified our original self-

assembly procedure, which we previously reported,[21] and applied it with the modifications 

sequentially as many times as needed to reach a certain targeted number of NPL layers in the 

construction. The modified technique is schematically illustrated in Figure 2a: Starting with 

precleaned blank substrates treated with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane (see 

Experimental Section) or continuing with previously deposited substrates, we fully immerse 

the substrates into diethylene glycol (DEG), which functions as the subphase. The hexane 

solution of NPLs is then dropped onto DEG, resulting in the liquid interface being almost 

fully covered with a membrane of NPLs after hexane is fully evaporated. To create and 

maintain a compact membrane, we adopted using silicone oil as a suspension material to 

create surface pressure, which helps compress the deposited nanoparticles, yielding a close-

packed NPL film, as was previously used for preparing a close-packed film of NCs.[27] In our 

case, we dropped carefully the silicone oil dissolved in hexane from one edge to compress the 

membrane (see Experimental Section). Afterwards, the subphase is slowly drained with the 

help of a peristaltic pump at a rate of 50 μL/min, corresponding to ~260 nm descent of liquid 


 
 

6 
 

level per s in the teflon dish of 64 mm in diameter used for the deposition. As the subphase is 

taken out, the membrane of NPLs eventually sinks onto the substrates while DEG is drawn 

away from the substrates. The surface treatment, which renders the substrates hydrophobic, as 

well as the tilted placement of the substrates help facilitating the repulsion of the subphase 

during the transfer of the NPL membrane onto the substrate. After the draining is complete, 

the residual DEG, if any, on the substrates is evaporated under vacuum at room temperature. 

At the end of this procedure, one full monolayer of NPLs is deposited onto multiple 

substrates, as seen in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of one of the substrates 

shown in Figure 2b (also see Figure S2c). The NPLs form a compact monolayer with 

excellent uniformity, with no visible multilayers or aggregation. Furthermore, owing to the 

compression by silicone oil, the deposited NPLs are densely packed, yielding near-unity 

surface coverage. Without the assistance of silicone oil, only a fraction of the NPLs on the 

membrane sticks to the surface during the transfer process, resulting in sub-monolayer 

coverage (see Figure S2). To further demonstrate the applicability of this technique to cover 

arbitrarily large areas, we deposited a single monolayer of NPLs onto a 4-inch fused silica 

wafer. The photograph in Figure 2c displays the luminescence across the wafer under UV 

excitation, where an area of about 80 cm2 is uniformly deposited with a monolayer of NPLs. 

In order to create thicker films with multiple NPL layers, this self-assembly procedure is 

repeated on the same previously deposited substrate as many times as desired. The resulting 

films are robust and maintain their strong emission and high uniformity. A cross-sectional 

TEM image taken from an exemplary case of 11 NPL layers, seen in Figure 2d, reveals that 

the NPL layers remain intact and do not introduce roughness as they build up. As can be 

clearly seen in the image, all of the NPL layers are distinctly visible, separated by their 

surface ligands. The uniformity of these layers continues to persist even over large areas (see 

Figure S3). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging shows that the roughness of these 

multilayer films is limited to at most a few nm’s even for the thickest NPL films (Figure S4b). 


 
 

7 
 

In addition, ellipsometric measurements on the thicknesses of multilayered NPL films 

having different numbers of layers verify the linear trend between the film thickness and the 

number of NPL layers as seen in Figure S4a. We extracted from the slope of the linear fit that 

each deposited monolayer adds up 7.0 nm to the film thickness. Since the thickness of the 

core/shell NPL structure is ~4.1 nm, the ligand brush between the NPL layers is deduced to be 

~2.9 nm thick, which indicates a minor interdigitation between the ligand brushes of oleic 

acid/oleylamine. This interdigitation would allow the NPLs to stick together via van der 

Waals interaction, without having to deposit an oppositely charged linker molecule between 

the monolayers, as is commonly employed for layer-by-layer NC deposition.[28–31] Not having 

to rely on the deposition of oppositely charged particles adds up to the versatility of our 

multilayer deposition technique as the thickness of such oppositely charged bilayers can be 

altered by the ambient conditions,[32] or by unintentional diffusion of charged particles into 

the previously deposited inner layers during dipping steps, which leads to superlinear 

thickness growth.[33] Our self-assembly technique thus presents an alternative, robust 

approach to the existing methods of NC self-assembly at liquid interface,[34–37] while 

maintaining large-area uniformity and precision in film thickness. 

2.2. Optical Gain Measurements 

To characterize the NPL planar slabs in terms of their optical gain performance, we deposited 

NPL multilayers through the aforementioned construction procedure onto fused silica 

substrates with a varying number (n) of NPL layers up to n = 15. We were able to observe 

amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) from these films with n = 6 and above, whereas no 

ASE has been observed for n ≤ 5. We therefore present our results for the films ranging from 

n = 6 (42 nm thick) to n = 15 (105 nm thick). We use a stripe excitation configuration for the 

ASE measurements, where the optical pump is normally incident on the specimen and the PL 

emission is collected from the side (see Experimental Section).[38] Our incident pump has 400 

nm wavelength with 1 kHz pulse rate and ~110 fs pulse width. The PL emission of the NPL 


 
 

8 
 

planar waveguide is collected from the side of the substrate with the help of an optical fiber 

while the pump fluence is varied. 

The PL spectra were collected at various pump fluences for each n. These spectra are 

shown in Figure 3a for n = 6, 9 and 15. ASE is evident in all three cases from the emergence 

of the second emission feature beyond a threshold intensity, as well as the superlinear increase 

of the integrated emission intensity (Figure 3b). The per-pulse gain thresholds for these three 

cases have been determined to be 31.3, 12.8 and 7.5 μJ cm-2 for n = 6, 9 and 15, respectively. 

The tendency of the gain threshold to drop with increasing n is also seen in Figure 3c, where 

the thresholds for the films of all the thicknesses from n = 6 to 15 are plotted. The gradual 

drop of the gain threshold continues up to n = 15, for which it is 7.5 μJ cm-2. This value is also 

on par with the reported gain thresholds of CdSe-based core/shell NPLs synthesized with hot-

injection technique.[9,39–41] 

Another notable observation is the evolution of the spectral position of the ASE peak 

with respect to the spontaneous emission for varied n. In Figure 3d is plotted one PL spectrum 

for each n at pump intensities that are slightly above the respective gain thresholds. For the 

thinnest slabs the ASE peak displays little or no shift with respect to the spontaneous emission 

peak. As n keeps increasing beyond 9, however, a gradual increase in the red shift of this peak 

is observed until n = 15 (see Figure 3d), where the ASE peak saturates at around 664 nm (see 

Figure 3d and Table S1) and its red shift is determined to be 18.2 nm. Similar change in the 

shift of ASE peak with film thickness has previously been observed with the thin films 

composed of other types of emitters, and was attributed to the change in the critical 

wavelength of propagation in the planar waveguides as the film thickness is varied.[17,18] In 

our case, this shift of the ASE peak allows for fine tuning of the optical gain wavelength 

across a 17 nm wide spectral band (see Table S1) simply by precisely adjusting the NPL 

waveguide thickness, which is controlled by the sequential NPL deposition. 

 
 


 
 

9 
 

2.3. Mode Analysis on NPL Planar Waveguides 

To elaborate on the observed characteristics of the NPL slabs, we employed a numerical 

analysis of guided modes within the NPL layer. Approximating the NPL multilayer as a 

homogeneous medium, our structure can be modeled as an asymmetric planar waveguide 

confined between semi-infinite fused silica and air (Figure 4a). As the refractive index of the 

NPL layer, which is measured as n2 = 1.96 via ellipsometry, is greater than those of air (n1 = 

1) and fused silica (n3 = 1.45), this configuration will allow propagation of the supported 

modes through the NPL layer via total internal reflection. However, the existence of these 

modes requires a minimum thickness of the slab waveguide, which can be calculated using 

the well-established planar waveguide formalism. Accordingly, the minimum thickness tc 

(critical thickness) of the waveguide necessary for the mth order transverse electric mode 

(TEm) is given by 

𝑡𝑐 =
𝜆

2𝜋 𝑛2

2 − 𝑛3

2

 𝑚𝜋 + 𝑡𝑎𝑛−1   𝑛3

2 − 𝑛1

2

𝑛2

2 − 𝑛3

2 

1/2

  
(1)

where λ is the wavelength of the mode in free space.[42] For λ = 650 nm, Equation 1 reveals 

that the minimum thickness required for the TE0 mode is 52.7 nm, which is in close proximity 

to the experimental onset of ASE in our multilayered NPLs observed with 6 layers (thickness 

of 42 nm). The slight discrepancy between the experimental critical thickness and the 

calculated minimum thickness at which ASE is observed could be due to the effective 

refractive index of the NPL medium being modified under hard pumping conditions. The fact 

that optical gain is observed at 42 nm shows that the actual refractive index of the NPL film is 

greater than 1.96 and nonzero modal confinement is possible at this thickness. For numerical 

convenience, we therefore take n2 = 2.10 for mode calculations that will follow. This 

refractive index is not far off from the one measured by ellipsometry (n2 = 1.96), and 

numerically yields tc = 41.2 nm. 


 
 

10 
 

The calculated mode intensity profile of TE0 mode is also plotted in Figure 4a for 6-

layered NPL waveguide. Due to the ultra-thin NPL film, only a small portion of the 

propagating field is confined within the actual gain medium. The field confinement factor, Γ, 

is calculated as 6.3×10-3 for n = 6. This factor monotonously increases with additional NPL 

layers deposited, as seen in Figure 4b. More notably, it undergoes a significant jump of 4 

orders of magnitude from n = 5 to n = 6, which is in accordance with the onset of optical gain. 

By increasing the thickness of the gain medium even further, the optical gain is facilitated by 

the stronger confinement of the optical mode into the NPL slab, hence the reduction in the 

gain threshold. 

To account for the spectral shifting of the ASE peak with film thickness, we consider the 

variance of the mode confinement with mode wavelength. Previously, observing a similar 

trend in the ASE peak of optically pumped polystyrene films, Calzado et al. argued 

qualitatively that each vibronic mode experiences a different loss at different film thicknesses. 

As a result, the propagation losses for the modes having longer wavelengths are enhanced 

compared to those supported at shorter wavelengths, which explains the blue-shift of the ASE 

peak at thinner polystyrene films.[18] A similar argument can be made for our NPL constructs 

as well, since the mode confinement near the critical thickness is highly sensitive to the 

wavelength, as seen in Figure 4c. Furthermore, NPLs as well as other classes of NCs provide 

a certain gain bandwidth, which determines the spectral range of gain that can be observed 

from the material. In the generic case, this gain band is not flat, i.e. the material gain 

coefficient G is a function of λ. The total unsaturated gain coefficient will then be given by 

g0(λ) = G0(λ)Γ(λ), neglecting the losses. When the gain is saturated, only the modes around 

the maximum of g0(λ) will survive and contribute to the gain. Therefore, the ASE peak at the 

gain saturation can be estimated by calculating the maximum of G0(λ)Γ(λ). 

To test if this simple formalism can explain the observed ASE shift, we model the 

unsaturated material gain as a generalized Gaussian function: 


 
 

11 
 

𝐺0 𝜆 = 𝐺0𝑐𝑒

−  𝜆−𝜆𝑐 

𝛼
 

𝛽

(2)

where G0c is the unsaturated gain coefficient at the peak wavelength λc, and β and α are 

parameters related to the shape and width of the distribution, respectively. λc is fixed at 665 

nm since it is the peak of the most red-shifted ASE feature among all the tested multilayered 

films. The parameters β and α are swept to find the parameter couple that minimizes the 

difference between the experimentally determined ASE peaks and the calculated ones. The 

optimum parameters found this way are β = 2.0 and α = 64, for which Equation 2 is plotted in 

Figure 4c. The calculated ASE peaks are plotted in Figure 4d, along with the experimentally 

determined peaks. We see that, apart from the ASE peak for n = 6, the assumed G0(λ) can 

estimate the trend in the ASE peak shift fairly well. The discrepancy at n = 6 is most likely 

due to the actual G0(λ) having a finite range that does not include 630 nm. Therefore, the blue 

shift of the ASE peak at thinner films is limited by the finite gain band of the material. It is 

also worth noting that, because for very thick films Γ(λ) ≈ 1 throughout the gain band, this 

model can readily predict that with increasing thickness, the ASE peak will converge to λc. 

Indeed, the experimental ASE peaks seem to be saturating towards a definite red shift around 

λ = 665 nm. Although this type of red shift is expected for NCs having type-I band 

alignment[43], here we show that it is possible to obtain non-shifting ASE from type-I NCs by 

using their ultra-thin films.   

3. Conclusion 

In summary, we have created planar waveguides made out of the superstructures of our NPLs 

laid in face-down orientation by a sequentially-repeated liquid interface self-assembly 

technique, which is applicable to large scales. The multilayered NPL films prepared with this 

technique have close packing and excellent uniformity over many tens of cm2 large areas. 

These NPL constructs can work as optical slab waveguides, of which optical confinement is 

revealed as a function of the number of NPL layers, or equivalently, their film thickness, at a 

monolayer precision. Our findings show that these self-assembled NPL slabs can also be used 


 
 

12 
 

as optically active planar waveguides with precise thickness-controlled gain, which can find 

applications in on-chip active photonic devices requiring in-plane waveguided light. The 

gradually decreasing gain threshold observed with increasing number of layers is revealed to 

result from the optical confinement increasing with the deposited NPL layers. 

In the case of electrically-driven NC films, the organic surfactants in NC films act as 

insulating barriers that impede charge or heat transfer, limiting their use in electroluminescent 

devices. The ultimate thickness of our NPL film inducing optical gain is as small as ~40 nm, 

with only 6 layers of NPLs, may result in significant reduction of organic barriers that should 

be overcome by the electric current in the vertical direction. This work may therefore serve as 

a foundation for developing the optically active media of electrically-driven NPL lasers 

without having to switch to inorganic ligands. The technique presented in this work can be 

readily extended to other types of NCs to create large-area hybrid NC supertructures, which 

can be useful for device fabrication. In addition, the anisotropy of the non-spherical NCs can 

also be used as a degree of freedom to create NC multilayers having different orientations in 

different layers. Therefore, this multilayered self-assembly technique paves the way for 

exploration of a rich variety of large-area bottom-up NC superstructure construction. 

4. Experimental Section  

Synthesis of CdSe/Cd0.25Zn0.75S core/shell NPLs. CdSe/CdZnS core/alloyed-shell NPLs have 

been synthesized with some modifications by using the hot-injection shell synthesis recipe 

reported in our recent works.[9,26] Cd-acetate (17.25 mg), Zn-acetate (41.25 mg), 1-octadecene 

(ODE, 7 mL), oleic acid (0.70 mL) and 4.5 ML CdSe core in hexane (1 mL, having 

absorbance of 1.5 at 350 nm along 1 cm-long optical path) have been loaded in quartz flask 

(50 mL) and stirred for 90 min at room temperature, for 30 min at 85 °C under vacuum 

environment. Then, oleylamine (0.7 mL) has been injected into the flask at 90 °C under argon 

gas and the temperature of the solution has been increased to 300 °C. The injection of ODE-

octanethiol mixture that is prepared in glovebox using ODE (4 mL) and octanethiol (105 µL) 


 
 

13 
 

have been started at 165 °C using 10 mL h-1 rate of syringe pump until the temperature 

reached 280 °C, and then the rate has been decreased to 4 mL h-1. Before cooling to room 

temperature with cold water, the solution is kept for an hour at 300°C. Hexane (5 mL) is 

added at room temperature and the solution is cleaned four times with absolute ethanol. 

Finally, the precipitated NPLs is dissolved in hexane.      

Multi-layered self-assembly of CdSe/Cd0.25Zn0.75S: Precleaned fused silica substrates having 

13×13 mm2 size or silicon substrates with 10×10 mm2 size are treated with the vapor of 

1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltriethoxysilane at 200 °C under nitrogen environment for 30 

minutes in order to render their surfaces hydrophobic.[44] Treated substrates are rinsed first in 

hexane, then acetone and isopropanol, and next attached to a stage tilted by ~10° and finally 

immersed into diethylene glycol (DEG) (Merck) contained in a teflon dish. One end of the 

tubing of a peristaltic pump is inserted into DEG. NPL solution of hexane is dropped onto the 

DEG interface, which quickly spreads across the surface and evaporates in a few seconds. 

After the NPL solution is fully evaporated, one drop of silicone oil (silicone elastomer, 

Sylgard 184) dissolved in hexane (2 mg/mL) is dropped from close to the edge of the DEG 

interface, which compresses the NPL membrane. As the peristaltic pump slowly drains the 

DEG, the NPL membrane on the interface eventually settles onto the substrates. Any residual 

DEG on the substrates is dried under vacuum at room temperature. For multilayered 

deposition, the same substrates are submerged back into DEG for another deposition cycle. 

The number of depositions carried out on a substrate determines the number of NPL layers on 

it. 

Optical gain measurements: Multilayered NPLs deposited on fused silica have been placed in 

front of a pulsed laser beam at normal incidence, whose intensity is adjusted with a neutral 

density filter on the optical path. A Ti:Sapphire laser amplifier (Spitfire Pro) generates laser 

pulses at 800 nm with a pulse width of ~110 fs and a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The wavelength 

of these pulses is converted to 400 nm with a frequency-doubling barium borate crystal. The 


 
 

14 
 

residual 800 nm light is filtered out with a short pass filter. The 400 nm beam is focused along 

one dimension onto the sample with a cylindrical lens to obtain a stripe excitation having a 

width of ~150 μm. The emission of the sample is collected from the side with an optical fiber. 

The spectra are recorded with an optical spectrometer (Maya 2000, Ocean Optics). 

Mode profile calculations: The modal analyses were carried out using a commercially 

available mode solution software package (Lumerical FDTD) with two-dimensional layout. 

The refractive indices of CQW and fused silica used in the simulations were 2.10 and 1.45, 

respectively. The confinement factor was calculated based on the ratio of the fundamental 

transverse electric mode energy confined within the active NPL film to the total mode energy. 

Supporting Information  
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the author. 
 

Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Singapore National Research 
Foundation under the program NRF-NRFI2016-08 and in part from TUBITAK 115E679. The 
authors thank Mr. Mustafa Guler for TEM imaging of the as-synthesized NPLs and 
preparation of the TEM cross-sectional sample, Mr. Semih Bozkurt for his support on the 
AFM characterization, Dr. Gokce Celik for her help on the ellipsometric measurements, Mr. 
Emre Unal for his assistance in photography of the large-area sample, and Dr. Kivanc Gungor 
for fruitful discussions. O.E. acknowledges TUBITAK for the financial support through 
BIDEB 2211 program. H.V.D. gratefully acknowledges support from TÜBA. 
 
References 

[1] 
V. I. Klimov, A. A. Mikhailovsky, S. Xu, A. Malko, J. A. Hollingsworth, C. A. 

Leatherdale, H. J. Eisler, M. G. Bawendi, Science 2000, 290, 314. 

[2] 
H. Htoon, J. A. Hollingworth, A. V. Malko, R. Dickerson, V. I. Klimov, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 2003, 82, 4776. 

[3] 
C. Dang, J. Lee, C. Breen, J. S. Steckel, S. Coe-Sullivan, A. Nurmikko, Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 335. 

[4] 
C. She, I. Fedin, D. S. Dolzhnikov, A. Demortière, R. D. Schaller, M. Pelton, D. V. 

Talapin, Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 2772. 

[5] 
B. Guzelturk, Y. Kelestemur, K. Gungor, A. Yeltik, M. Z. Akgul, Y. Wang, R. Chen, C. 


 
 

15 
 

Dang, H. Sun, H. V. Demir, Adv. Mater. 2015, 27, 2741. 

[6] 
S. Ithurria, M. D. Tessier, B. Mahler, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret, A. L. Efros, Nat. 

Mater. 2011, 10, 936. 

[7] 
M. D. Tessier, C. Javaux, I. Maksimovic, V. Loriette, B. Dubertret, ACS Nano 2012, 6, 

6751. 

[8] 
B. T. Diroll, D. V. Talapin, R. D. Schaller, ACS Photonics 2017, 4, 576. 

[9] 
Y. Altintas, K. Gungor, Y. Gao, M. Sak, U. Quliyeva, G. Bappi, E. Mutlugun, E. H. 

Sargent, H. V. Demir, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 10662. 

[10] B. Guzelturk, M. Pelton, M. Olutas, H. V. Demir, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 277. 

[11] B. Guzelturk, Y. Kelestemur, M. Olutas, S. Delikanli, H. V. Demir, ACS Nano 2014, 8, 

6599. 

[12] C. She, I. Fedin, D. S. Dolzhnikov, P. D. Dahlberg, G. S. Engel, R. D. Schaller, D. V. 

Talapin, ACS Nano 2015, 9, 9475. 

[13] Q. Li, Q. Liu, R. D. Schaller, T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10, 1624. 

[14] M. Sak, N. Taghipour, S. Delikanli, S. Shendre, I. Tanriover, S. Foroutan, Y. Gao, J. 

Yu, Z. Yanyan, S. Yoo, C. Dang, H. V. Demir, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 1907417. 

[15] G. J. Denton, N. Tessler, M. A. Stevens, R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater. 1997, 9, 547. 

[16] X. Long, M. Grell, A. Malinowski, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo, Opt. 

Mater. (Amst). 1998, 9, 70. 

[17] A. K. Sheridan, G. A. Turnbull, A. N. Safonov, I. D. W. Samuel, Phys. Rev. B - 

Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2000, 62, 929. 

[18] E. M. Calzado, J. M. Villalvilla, P. G. Boj, J. A. Quintana, M. A. Díaz-García, J. Appl. 

Phys. 2005, 97, 093103. 

[19] B. T. Diroll, N. J. Greybush, C. R. Kagan, C. B. Murray, Chem. Mater. 2015, 27, 2998. 

[20] F. Feng, L. T. Nguyen, M. Nasilowski, B. Nadal, B. Dubertret, A. Maître, L. Coolen, 

ACS Photonics 2018, 5, 1994. 


 
 

16 
 

[21] O. Erdem, K. Gungor, B. Guzelturk, I. Tanriover, M. Sak, M. Olutas, D. Dede, Y. 

Kelestemur, H. V. Demir, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 4297. 

[22] T. Franzl, T. A. Klar, S. Schietinger, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann, Nano Lett. 2004, 4, 

1599. 

[23] T. Ozel, S. Nizamoglu, M. A. Sefunc, O. Samarskaya, I. O. Ozel, E. Mutlugun, V. 

Lesnyak, N. Gaponik, A. Eychmuller, S. V. Gaponenko, H. V. Demir, ACS Nano 2011, 

5, 1328. 

[24] Y. Chan, J. M. Caruge, P. T. Snee, M. G. Bawendi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2004, 85, 2460. 

[25] J. Roh, Y. S. Park, J. Lim, V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 271. 

[26] B. Liu, Y. Altintas, L. Wang, S. Shendre, M. Sharma, H. Sun, E. Mutlugun, H. V. 

Demir, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 1. 

[27] H. Min, J. Zhou, X. Bai, L. Li, K. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Jiao, X. Qi, Y. 

Fu, Langmuir 2017, 33, 6732. 

[28] G. Decher, Science 1997, 277, 1232. 

[29] J. Roither, S. Pichler, M. V. Kovalenko, W. Heiss, P. Feychuk, O. Panchuk, J. Allam, 

B. N. Murdin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 89, 1. 

[30] T. Ozel, P. L. Hernandez-Martinez, E. Mutlugun, O. Akin, S. Nizamoglu, I. O. Ozel, Q. 

Zhang, Q. Xiong, H. V. Demir, Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 3065. 

[31] I. Suarez, R. Munoz, V. Chirvony, J. P. Martinez-Pastor, M. Artemyev, A. Prudnikau, 

A. Antanovich, A. Mikhailov, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 2017, 23, 1. 

[32] T. J. Halthur, P. M. Claesson, U. M. Elofsson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 17009. 

[33] P. T. Hammond, AIChE J. 2011, 57, 2928. 

[34] A. Dong, J. Chen, P. M. Vora, J. M. Kikkawa, C. B. Murray, Nature 2010, 466, 474. 

[35] K. Lambert, R. K. Čapek, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, D. Van Thourhout, W. 

Heiss, Z. Hens, Langmuir 2010, 26, 7732. 

[36] N. Vogel, L. De Viguerie, U. Jonas, C. K. Weiss, K. Landfester, Adv. Funct. Mater. 


 
 

17 
 

2011, 21, 3064. 

[37] T. Paik, D. K. Ko, T. R. Gordon, V. Doan-Nguyen, C. B. Murray, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 

8322. 

[38] K. L. Shaklee, R. E. Nahory, R. F. Leheny, J. Lumin. 1973, 7, 284. 

[39] Y. Altintas, U. Quliyeva, K. Gungor, O. Erdem, Y. Kelestemur, E. Mutlugun, M. V. 

Kovalenko, H. V. Demir, Small 2019, 15, 1. 

[40] A. A. Rossinelli, H. Rojo, A. S. Mule, M. Aellen, A. Cocina, E. De Leo, R. Schäublin, 

D. J. Norris, Chem. Mater. 2019, 31, 9567. 

[41] L. Zhang, H. Yang, B. Yu, Y. Tang, C. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Xiao, Y. Cui, J. Zhang, 

Adv. Opt. Mater. 2020, 8, 1. 

[42] A. Yariv, P. Yeh, Photonics: Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, Oxford 

University Press, New York, NY, USA, 2007. 

[43] V. I. Klimov, S. A. Ivanov, J. Nanda, M. Achermann, I. Bezel, J. A. McGuire, A. 

Piryatinski, Nature 2007, 447, 441. 

[44] M. Beck, M. Graczyk, I. Maximov, E. L. Sarwe, T. G. I. Ling, M. Keil, L. Montelius, 

Microelectron. Eng. 2002, 61–62, 441. 

 

 
 


 
 

18 
 

 

Figure 1. (a) Transmission electron micrographs of square-shaped CdSe/Cd0.25Zn0.75S 
core/shell NPLs. (b) Absorbance and photoluminescence spectra for the CdSe/Cd0.25Zn0.75S 
NPLs. 
 

 

Figure 2. (a) Schematic demonstration of liquid-air interface self-assembly of the NPLs.  
Blank or predeposited substrates are inserted into a subphase of diethylene glycol. The NPL 
solution is dropped onto the subphase and quickly spreads across the liquid-air interface. 
Dropped silicone oil compresses the NPL membrane. After the subphase is drained, all the 
substrates are deposited with one additional layer of NPLs. (b) Scanning electron micrograph 
of one monolayer of NPLs deposited through liquid-air interface self-assembly. (c) 
Photograph of one monolayer of NPLs deposited onto 4-inch fused silica illuminated under 
UV light. Scale bar in the inset is 2 cm. (d) Cross-sectional TEM image of the 11 NPL 
monolayers sequentially deposited onto silicon. All the NPL layers are distinctly visible, 
separated by their surface ligands. 
 


 
 

19 
 

 

Figure 3. (a) Emission spectra of the NPL films having different number n of layers excited 
with a pulsed laser at 400 nm: left, n = 6, center, n = 9 and right, n = 15. Colorbar at the 
bottom is common for all three plots. (b) Integrated intensity as a function of the pump 
fluence for all the NPL films from n = 6 to n = 15. (c) Evolution of the optical gain threshold 
with the number of layers n as deduced from the data in panel b. (d) Shifting of the ASE peak 
with respect to the spontaneous emission for different n. Inset shows the difference between 
ASE and spontaneous emission peaks. The color coding is identical in panels b-d. 
 


 
 

20 
 

 

Figure 4. (a) Electric field profile of the fundamental TE mode numerically calculated for the 
NPL slab with n = 6. (b) Optical confinement factor Γ calculated at 650 nm for different 
number of NPL layers (and slab thickness). Dashed line indicates the critical thickness of 41.2 
nm for the existence of propagating modes within the slab. (c) Left axis: Variation of the 
confinement factor Γ with wavelength for different numbers of layers. Right axis: Unsaturated 
gain spectrum g(λ) for our NPLs estimated using the measured ASE peaks at different film 
thicknesses, modeled as a Gaussian centered at 665 nm with a FWHM of 106.6 nm (blue) (d) 
ASE peaks calculated as the maximum of Γ(λ)×g(λ) for each n (red stars), together with the 
experimentally measured ASE peaks (blue squares). 
 
 
 


 
 

21 
 

Supporting Information  
 
 
Orientation-Controlled Construction of Self-Assembled Superstructures of Atomically-
Flat Nanocrystals: Pushing the Limits of Ultra-Thin Colloidal Gain Media 
 
Onur Erdem, Sina Foroutan, Negar Gheslaghi, Burak Guzelturk, Yemliha Altintas and Hilmi 
Volkan Demir* 
 

Figure S1. High-resolution transmission electron micrographs of CdSe/Cd0.25Zn0.75S 
core/alloyed-shell NPLs that are vertically oriented. (a) The thickness of a single NPL is 
measured as ~4.1 nm. (b) Measurements on chains of vertically oriented NPLs reveal a 
center-to-center distance of ~7.0 nm, in accordance with the ellipsometric measurements (see 
Figure S4a) 
 


 
 

22 
 

 

Figure S2. Scanning electron micrographs of self-assembled NPLs (a, b) without and (c, d) 
with silicone oil. In all panels, dark areas are void. 

 

 

Figure S3. Cross-sectional transmission electron micrograph of 11-layered NPLs at lower 
magnification. 
 


 
 

23 
 

 

Figure S4. (a) Measurement of film thickness for the multilayered NPL constructs having 
different numbers of layers. The linear fit confirms 7.0 nm of thickness per NPL layer. (b) 
Surface roughness measurements of multilayer NPL films taken with atomic force 
microscopy over 5 different regions having an area of 2×2 μm2. Dashed line shows the 
roughness of the bare fused silica substrate (~0.2 nm). 
 
Table S1. Gaussian fitting parameters for the ASE spectra presented in Figure 2d. Peak and 
FWHM values for spontaneous emission (SE) and ASE features. 

# NPL 
layers

SE peak 

(nm)

SE width 

(nm)

ASE peak 

(nm)

ASE width 

(nm)

6
647.6
31.8
650.2
7.2

7
648.8
32.6
647.4
7.4

8
650.3
29.1
653.7
5.9

9
647.8
30.3
652.7
7.6

10
651.3
35.0
657.1
6.2

11
649.7
35.5
660.8
5.9

12
648.0
34.0
661.9
5.7

13
647.7
32.3
663.0
5.5

14
647.7
33.0
664.8
5.5

15
645.9
31.1
664.1
7.2

 


