Photo memtransistor based on CMOS flash memory technology on
Graphene with neuromorphic applications

Christian Frydendahl1,†,∗, S.R.K. Chaitanya Indukuri1,†, Meir Grajower1,2, Noa Mazurski1, Joseph Shappir1,
and Uriel Levy1,∗

1Department of Applied Physics, The Faculty of Science, The Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.
2Thomas J. Watson Laboratory of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

†These authors contributed equally to this work
*christia.frydendahl1@mail.huji.ac.il and ulevy@mail.huji.ac.il

Graphene holds a great promise for a number of diverse future applications, in particular related to
its easily tunable doping and Fermi level by electrostatic gating. However, as of today, most imple-
mentations rely on electrical doping via the application of continuous large voltages to maintain the
desired doping. We show here how graphene can be implemented with conventional semiconductor
flash memory technology in order to make programmable doping possible, simply by the application
of short gate pulses. We also demonstrate how this approach can be used for a memory device, and
also show potential neuromorphic capabilities of the device. Finally, we show that the overall per-
formance can be significantly enhanced by illuminating the device with UV radiation. Our approach
may pave the way for integrating graphene in CMOS technology memory applications, and our device
design could also be suitable for large scale neuromorphic computing structures.

Introduction

Graphene, a one atom thick layer of carbon, is promising a future revolution in electronics due to its ex-
traordinary properties. many graphene based devices have already been realized, such as field effect transis-
tors1, photodetectors2–4, photovoltaic solar cells5, memory devices6–8 etc, while technologies such as touch
screens9 and batteries are already seeing commercialization10.

While significant attention in recent years has been paid towards making ’next-generation’ devices consist-
ing of purely 2D materials in the race for superior performance3,6–8, it is still critical to find implementations
of graphene/2D materials based on traditional Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) tech-
nology11. CMOS is by far the most mature and widespread platform currently available, and it stands to
reason that if graphene is to fully make the leap from the laboratory to consumer grade devices, it may first
have to be through CMOS related fabrication processes and devices.

Motivated by this reasoning, we present here a method for integrating graphene with conventional flash
memory technology to enable programmable doping of graphene by electrical gate pulses in a memory
transitor (memtransitor) configuration. Furthermore, we show how the efficiency of the charge trapping
process responsible for the doping can be increased significantly by the application of ultraviolet (UV) light,
and how UV can be used to erase the memory state as well. Graphene based flash memory devices were
previously proposed based on photon doping by purely 2D material stacks12,13, trapping and detrapping of
charge carries between graphene and oxide interfaces14, and more recently by the trapping of charges in
low-high band gap dielectric interfaces15. However, due to a lack of control over the surface trap states, the
low degree of reproducibility of these types of devices pose significant challenges for their integration as a
large number of memory cells together in a combined device16.

1

arXiv:2005.06861v2  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  4 May 2021


a

b

Drain

c

C N O SiPt

6nm

4nm

6nm

G

VG

up
down 4V
down 6V
down 10V
down 8V

2.0

Source

Drain

Gate

Oxide
Nitride

Oxide
Silicon
Grapene

UV-light

IDS

UV flashlight

S
D

Figure 1: a) Schematic of the investigated graphene memory device. b) STEM dark field image and x-ray
elemental composition image showing the ONO stack and its elemental composition. The graphene layer
is faintly visible on the top oxide layer. The platinum layer on top of the stack is needed during the FIB
process to cut out the sample for STEM imaging, and is not related to the real device geometry. Both scale
bars are 5 nm. c) Sequential Ids vs Vg sweeps. Sweeping from -6 V to Vmax (up) and then from Vmax to -6 V
(down), with Vmax = 4, 6, 8, 10 V. A clear hysteresis in Ids is seen between up and down, and the hysteresis
grows for increasing values of Vmax. Insert shows the electrical configuration used during measurements.

Finally, multi-terminal memtransitors are becoming an important building block in future neuromorphic
computing architectures17–19. Neuromorphic computing has many promising future prospects, chief among
them is performing low power consumption and high speed computational tasks, in particular image and
speech recognition. Training a neural algorithm for speech recognition on standard computing hardware
can consume in excess of 1000 kWh of energy, which is enough to power a human brain for up to six years
for all of its general tasks19. There is thus a great interest in developing computing architectures that try to
emulate the actual functioning of a biological brain. Our approach has the potential to be adopted for such
applications.

Hereby, we report a controlled electrostatic and optical doping of graphene by integrating it with well-
established CMOS compatible MONOS (Metal-Oxide-Nitride-Oxide-Silicon) non-volatile flash memory
technology, and we also investigate briefly how our device performs as an artificial neuron and test its
synaptic plasticity. Our device is expected to be useful as a CMOS compatible building block in a potential
large scale neural network, or in general for devices that exploit controlled long-term doping of graphene
for a multitude of optical or electrical applications, i.e. analog or digital memory devices.

Results

Device design and fabrication: Our device design is as follows: A graphene sheet made using a standard
mechanical exfoliation process is dry transferred on top of a layered heterostructure of silicon oxide, silicon
nitride, and silicon oxide (ONO) by a standard viscoelastic polymer transfer method20. The bottom substrate

2


is p-type silicon. The top oxide layer of the ONO has a thickness of 6 nm, the middle nitride layer is 4 nm,
and the bottom oxide layer is 6 nm. Three electrical terminals are attached to allow for electrostatic gating
perpendicular to the graphene layer, as well as to measure a current in parallel through the graphene sheet.
Our design thus follows a standard backgated graphene transistor1, with the exception of the additional
nitride layer in between the two oxide layers. The nitride layer is used for charge trapping, acting as a
floating gate. A schematic of the device can be seen in Fig. 1.a.

To allow for numerous memory cells to be created, we used the local oxidation of silicon (LOCOS) method
to planarize the surface beneath the graphene. This process results in a thick (∼270 nm) and planar oxide
layer formed between any two neighboring devices. This reduces cross talk between the close memory cells
and allows for integration of a large number of cells. The full fabrication flow is described in the methods
section below.

While the top and bottom oxides are of similar thicknesses, the bottom oxide is created by dry thermal
oxidation of silicon, while the top oxide is made by a wet oxidation of the nitride. The result is that the
bottom oxide is a stronger insulator, and thus the majority of charge carrier exchange happens between the
graphene layer and the nitride through the top oxide layer.

V > 0
g

V < 0
g

Si
Ox Ni Ox grph.

UV

a
b

c

2.00

III

II

I

Figure 2: a) Schematic of the tunneling and charge trapping process. For positive gate voltages, electrons
are trapped from the graphene into the nitride. This causes p-doping of the graphene. For negative gate
potentials, electrons are detrapped from the nitride into the graphene, causing n-doping of the graphene. b)
Schematic of how UV light can detrap electrons in the nitride. A carrier with too little energy to escape will
be reflected by the interface (I), but if it absorbs a UV photon its energy is increased, allowing the carrier to
escape the nitride either by tunneling (II) or directly emission over the barrier (III). c) Optical detrapping of
charges from the nitride. A positive gate potential is applied causing an initial rise in the graphene channel’s
conductivity, but sustained UV illumination on the sample slowly permits the trapped charges in the nitride
to escape again.

Following their fabrication, the devices were measured electrically using a micro-mechanical probe system,
see methods below. By applying a positive or negative voltage across the source and gate terminals, Vg,
we can modify the conductivity of the graphene sheet taking advantage of the field effect1,21. As a result,
the current measured across the source and drain terminals, Ids will be changed as well. Fig. 1.c shows the
measured Ids for sweeping Vg up from -6 V to Vmax = 4, 6, 8, 10 V, and then down from the respective Vmax

3


to -6 V. Ids is measured by applying a constant voltage, Vds, of 0.1 V across the source and drain terminals.
The results show a clear hysteresis in the device operation, with the charge neutrality point of the graphene
being significantly shifted for the downward sweep compared to the upward sweep (the minimum of the
curve), and we can also observe that the hysteresis grows for increasing values of Vmax. We see generally
that after the first up/down sweep, the device stabilizes into reproducible results. This is most likely because
of releasing of trapped charge states/defects in the ONO layer’s ’initial state’, and is commonly seen for
such devices22.

The hysteresis seen in the Ids vs Vg characteristics serves as evidence of charge trapping into vacant states in
the nitride layer in the ONO stack23. We confirm this by fabricating a control device with 25 nm silicon oxide
separating the graphene and the silicon, in which we see a much smaller hysteresis. This small hysteresis is
attributed to the vacancy between the graphene-oxide interface. Some charge trapping will always occur in
oxide layers, but the presence of the silicon nitride in our main device enhances this charge trapping effect
significantly23.

By applying a vertical bias across the graphene and ONO layer, charges can tunnel into vacant states in the
nitride layer23. Here these charges will accumulate and exert a continuous electric field on the graphene
layer, resulting in a change in the graphene’s Fermi level/charge carrier density, thus changing its con-
ductivity. A similar technique was recently exploited for post-fabrication tuning of silicon photonic ring
resonators24. When a positive bias is applied on the gate electrode, electrons will tunnel from the graphene
into the nitride layer. The result is p-doping of the graphene, seen in the top half of the schematic in Fig. 2.a.
Likewise, when a negative bias is applied, electrons from the nitride will detrap to the graphene, resulting in
n-doping of the graphene as shown in the bottom of Fig. 2.a.

Furthermore, it is also possible to detrap trapped electrons by using ultraviolet (UV) light. A schematic of
the concept can be seen in Fig. 2.b. By sending a short positive gate pulse and keeping the device under
constant UV illumination (Fig. 2.c, showing the measured current), we can see how the conductivity initially
goes up instantaneously after the application of the pulse, but then drops off back gradually to the initial level
before the trapping event.

We can now fully explain the behavior of the hysteresis of the Ids vs Vg measurement. If we refer to Fig. 3.b,
we can see that initially in point I before starting the Vg sweep, the graphene is intrinsically only slightly
p-doped, but the strong negative bias results in a total doping which makes the graphene strongly p-doped.
As the bias now shifts to positive values in point II, we see that the nitride now starts to accumulate charge,
making the internal field doping tend more towards p-type, while the positive gate bias is now beginning to
move the total field doping of the graphene towards n-doping. The internal field created by the charges in the
nitride and how it relates to the externally applied field can be seen in Fig. 3.c. In point III we have reached
charge neutrality, and we see that the internal field doping has gone more towards p-type again because of the
positive applied gate, and as a result a positive bias is needed to counteract it to see charge neutrality. As we
increase the positive gate through points IV and V, we see that the internal doping progressively gets pushed
more towards p-type due to continued charge accumulation, while the larger applied gates overpowers it and
make the graphene solidly n-type. As we now start to decrease the gate again through points 1, 2 and 3, we
see that the number of charges stored in the nitride does not change much, as the charges already present
will screen out additional charges being added, as the lower gate potentials do not add sufficient energy to
add more charges to the nitride. Because of the additional charges stored in the nitride, we also see the
charge neutrality point at an even large positive bias than for point III (i.e. more n-doping must be applied to
counteract the internal p-doping). This is also why we see a greater shift to p-type for larger values of Vmax
in Fig. 1 (as a larger Vmax results in more charge accumulated in the nitride). When we then cross over to

4


1.0

2.0

3.0

4.0

up
down

I

II

III

IV

V 1

2

3

4
5

detrapping

trapping

I
II
III
IV
V

1
2
3
4
5

Eext
Eint Eext
Eint

a
b

c

internal field doping
total field doping

Figure 3: a) Hysteresis of Ids vs Vg. b) Graphene band structure for the discrete points in a. Roman numerals
refer to the upward portion of the sweep, and the arabic numerals refer to points on the downward portion
of the sweep. We distinguish here between the total field effect doping, and the doping effect coming purely
from the charges trapped in the nitride. See main text for full explanation. c) Schematic of how the charges
trapped in the the nitride contributes to an internal field that dopes the graphene in addition to the externally
applied gate bias.

negative bias in point 4, we see that now the nitride begins to discharge rapidly, and when arriving at point
5 we have returned more or less to the initial state of the device.

Graphene flash memory: To investigate how this charge trapping can further be exploited for memory
applications (as well as memory based graphene doping), we analyze our device by applying pulsed gates
for 2 s alternating between 15 V and -10 V, see Fig. 4.

We can now define the higher conductive state after the negative gate pulse as the ’on’ state, while the lower
conductive state after the positive gate pulse is defined as the ’off’ state. We can define the On/Off ratio of
the device as a figure of merit:

On/Off = Ion

Ioff
,
(1)

with Ion and Ioff being the high and low current levels read halfway after and before the next gate pulse.
From Fig. 4 we see that an On/Off ratio of ∼ 1.8 is achieved.

Neuromorphic applications: Finally, due to the memory effect associated with our device, we investigate
if the fabricated memtransistor could become relevant for neuromorphic computing applications. By ’neu-
romorphic’ it is generally understood that the transistor should behave as an organic neuron, i.e. it should
exhibit ’synaptic/neural plasticity’, or in other words, its conductivity should change with its usage17,18,25,26.
Synaptic plasticity is generally categorized in the categories of short- and long term plasticity, with the
difference being between the timescales of the induced change.

Short term plasticity refers to changes induced in the device’s conductivity for periods of fractions of a
second to minutes, and in a real brain is related to the encoding of temporal information in auditory/visual
signal processing. This is relevant in associative learning, information processing, pattern recognition, and
sound-source localization25. Long term plasticity refers to more or less permanent changes in the synaptic

5


Figure 4: Ids as a function of pulsed Vg, here using 2 s long pulses. The ’off’ state is defined as the low
conductive state, and the ’on’ state as the high conductive state. The large spikes in the current relate to
when the gate pulses are engaged, and are caused by the much larger total field exerted on the sample than
just the internal field from the nitride after the pulse.

strength/device conductivity. In a real brain, memories are generally understood to be stored as long term
modifications of synaptic strength in the network of neurons, and as such long term plasticity is generally
believed to be important for long term memory and learning25.

We characterize the short- and long term plasticity of the device as follows. The short term plasticity is
studied by sending a series of gate potential pulses, or in the terminology of neuroscience ’presynaptic
spikes’, with 1 s between them. The resulting Ids, or ’postsynaptic current’, can be seen in Fig. 5.a. We send
first 100 positive spikes to increase the device conductivity (potentiation), followed by 100 negative spikes
to lower the device conductivity (depression). To characterize the long term plasticity, we send just a single
potential spike, and monitor how the postsynaptic current evolves with time afterwards, see Fig. 5.b.

We repeated both the short- and long term measurements with UV illumination on the sample. For both cases
we see significant improvement in on/off ratio. For the short term measurements, we see significantly more
distinctive current levels associated with each pulse, i.e. the slope of the Ids vs. time curve is significantly
larger. Because of this, each of the 100 pulses can be uniquely distinguished by the current level in the UV
case. For the long term case, we see a large improvement in the current level after the spike when UV is
applied. For the non-UV case the postsynaptic current on/off ratio is ∼1.01. While when the memtransistor
is under UV illumination, this on/off ratio becomes ∼1.05. However, in terms of long term stability, we
see that the potentiation is only temporary while under continuous UV illumination, due to the discharging
caused by the UV light. Ideally the UV should only be applied at the same time as the gate pulse. This
synchronization between UV light and gate voltage will be studied in more details in a follow up work.

Finally, we can estimate the energy used for our potentiation/depression (write/erase) of the artificial neuron.
Using the 3 V gate spikes as above, estimating the active device area as ∼ 5 × 5 µm2 and using the standard
equation for energy charged in capacitor:

Uc = ϵrϵ0AV 2
g

2d
,
(2)

6


a
b

Potentiation
Depression

Figure 5: a) Short term potentiation and depression of the graphene memtransistor. The device is spiked in
groups of 100 positive, followed by 100 negative spikes. Here shown just a single period of the full sequence.
b) Long term potentiation and depression of the same memtransistor by applying a single spike (positive
spike on the left panels, negative spike on the right panels), and monitor the resulting Ids without and with
UV light over time. For both the short- and long term experiments, 2s gate spikes of 3/-3 V were used. As
in previous measurements Vds = 0.1 V. Both experiments were done with and without UV illumination.

where ϵr is the relative permittivity of the gate oxide between the graphene and the nitride and ϵ0 is the
vacuum permittivity. A is the device area and d is the distance between the graphene and the nitride.
Assuming a 6 nm silicon dioxide gate we get a write/erase energy of ∼ 215 fJ. Here we have used the
external voltage of 3 V, however, based on the amount of charges stored in the nitride this voltage will be
partially screened, so this number is only an upper estimate of energy used in the spiking of the neuron.

The exact power consumption for the read operation will vary based on the exact conductivity of the
graphene channel, but we can estimate it as roughly ∼ 2 − 4 µW if using the 0.1 V drain-source voltage
as above.

Discussion

We see generally that applying a negative gate bias results in a much stronger and faster change in the
graphene’s conductivity. Breakdown of the tunnel oxide is also much more likely to occur for larger nega-
tive biases. It is for this reason that for the memory experiment we apply asymmetric (in terms of magnitude)
pulses of -5 V and 8 V, as even applying bias in excess of -15 V was observed to lead to a dielectric break-
down, while breakdown for the positive bias is usually observed only above 24 V.

We have here only studied the electronic read-out of the memory state, but as the doping level of graphene
has critical influence on its optical properties21, a similar device with patterned graphene would allow for
optical readout by the shift of a graphene plasmon resonance21, or alternatively the graphene layer could be
integrated with a waveguide to modify the transmission coefficient of the waveguide27.

For the neuropmorhic measurements, we are required to use relatively large and long gate pulses/spikes
in order to see clear shifts in the postsynaptic current. However, by how generally every aspect of the

7


measurement is improved during UV illumination, we are optimistic that further optimization of the oxide
thicknesses in the ONO stack could lead to much improved device performance. This is because the UV
light effectively serves the role to artificially lower the tunneling barrier in the ONO stack, which could also
be achieved by more careful device design. Secondly, the length of the applied pulses are largely a limitation
of our custom built measurement system, where we cannot perform measurements with much greater than
500 ms time resolution. However, tunneling processes can normally occur within a few picoseconds, and
therefore it is expected that a device such as this could operate at MHz or GHz switching rates.

For power consumption, minimizing the surface area of the graphene/ONO stack could serve to further
reduce the energy needed for spiking the articifical neuron to less than the ∼ 215 fJ we reported here, as the
main contribution for the

Conclusion

We have demonstrated here how graphene can be integrated with conventional flash memory technology re-
lying on charge trapping in an ONO stack. We have also shown how this integration results in programmable
doping of the graphene. i.e., by applying a gate pulse the graphene’s conductivity can be set to either a higher
or a lower conductive state. Furthermore, we have demonstrated how the doping change has a great deal of
control and have shown ∼100 uniquely different conductive states of the graphene channel in a short term
neuroplastic measurement. In a long term measurement, we have also shown how these conductive changes
remain for several minutes, and they are expected to be near-permanent - corresponding to the nitride layer’s
capability to retain stored charge (conventional flash memory has nominal charge loss over several years24).

By the application of UV we have shown how the efficiency of the charge trapping process can be increased,
resulting in larger total doping changes of the graphene with the same gate potential and gate duration in the
neuromorphic measurements.

Finally, we have also shown that the nitride can be discharged via long-term UV illumination. This can
offer a kind of ’factory reset’ for a neural network, which allows for a complete reset of all the neurons to
their initial state. This could have applications in small neural circuits that need to be quickly be repurposed
for several different tasks, or could also be used in studies of how a neural network learns, by resetting the
network and observing the learning process several times on the same hardware.

While the demonstrated device has immediate applications as an electronic memory device, it could also be
exploited in combination with many other emerging graphene based technologies, such as tunable graphene
plasmonics21, graphene based light modulators27, and molecular sensors21,28. Additionally, the device ar-
chitecture presented here, due to its ease of scalability, should also be highly suitable for large neuromorphic
computing structures featuring a network of multiple neurons17,18.

Methods

Sample fabrication: The base substrate for our fabrication is 2” p-type Si wafers (0.02 - 0.04 Ωcm resis-
tivity). The first step is to define the individual device areas, where the ONO stack will be confined within.
This is done by a standard lithography process using n-LOF 2020 resist and a laser writer system.

Next, the ONO stack is fabricated. The bottom silicon oxide layer is grown by thermal dry oxidation in a
920 ◦C furnace. Then silicon nitride is grown using PECVD at 300 ◦C for 1 min. The sample is then cleaned
in piranha (H2SO4:H2O2 ; 3:1), and the nitride layer is wet oxidized at 1000 ◦C to form the top oxide layer.
The final stack has 6 nm bottom oxide, 4 nm middle nitride, and 6 nm top oxide.

8


An aluminum backgate electrode is then sputtered on the back side of the wafer, and alloyed to the silicon
to form an Ohmic contact by heating the device to 460 ◦C in N2 atmosphere. Gold contacts are defined by a
lithography step on the top surface to form the source and drain electrodes.

Finally, the graphene layer which has been prepared by exfoliation from natural bulk graphite crystals (NGS
Naturgraphit), is dry transferred by picking it up with an exfoliated layer of bulk hexagonal boron nitride
(hBN, HQ graphene) using a viscoelastic polymer transfer method20. The graphene/hBN stack is then
placed so that it straddles the source and drain electrodes across the ONO channel.

Measurement: The devices were measured electrically using a micro-mechanical probe system. Tungsten
probes were mechanically pressed against the gold electrodes on the top of the device using XYZ 500MIM
3D stages (Quater Research & Development), and the backgate electrode was shorted to the sample stage
and electrically connected. The sample was attached to the stage using vacuum to ensure a good connection.
The gate bias was applied using a Keysight B2901A source meter, while the Ids current was monitored
using a Keithley 2400 source meter, applying a constant bias of 0.1 V between the source and drain. All
the measurements were performed in air at room temperature. The two source meters were controlled
simultaneously by a custom MATLAB script using the Instrument Control Toolbox via a GBIP connection.

UV light was achieved by illuminating the entire sample with a 3 W LightFe UV301D Flashlight, with peak
emission at 365 nm.

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge funding from the Israeli Ministry of Science and Technology and The
Air Force Office of Scientific Research. C.F. is supported by the Carlsberg Foundation as an International-
isation Fellow. The authors would like to thank Dr. Devidas Taget Raghavendran, Ayelet Zalic and Prof.
Hadar Steinberg from the Racah institute of Physics at HUJI. We also acknowledge Atzmon Vakahi and
Dr. Sergei Remennik from Harvey M. Kruger Family Center of Nanoscience and Technology for assistance
with the STEM imaging and FIB sample preparation.

Conflicts of interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.

Correspondence: General correspondence should be addressed to: stiaram.indukuri@mail.huji.ac.il or
ulevy@mail.huji.ac.il

References

1. Schwierz, F. Graphene transistors. Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 487 (2010).

2. Bonaccorso, F., Sun, Z., Hasan, T. & Ferrari, A. Graphene photonics and optoelectronics. Nat. Photonics 4, 611 (2010).

3. Koppens, F. et al. Photodetectors based on graphene, other two-dimensional materials and hybrid systems. Nat. Nanotechnol.
9, 780 (2014).

4. Goykhman, I. et al.
On-chip integrated, silicon–graphene plasmonic Schottky photodetector with high responsivity and
avalanche photogain. Nano Lett. 16, 3005–3013 (2016).

5. Yin, Z. et al. Graphene-based materials for solar cell applications. Adv. Energy Mater. 4, 1300574 (2014).

6. Hong, A. J. et al. Graphene flash memory. ACS Nano 5, 7812–7817 (2011).

7. Choi, M. S. et al. Controlled charge trapping by molybdenum disulphide and graphene in ultrathin heterostructured memory
devices. Nat. Commun. 4, 1624 (2013).

8. Vu, Q. A. et al.
Two-terminal floating-gate memory with van der Waals heterostructures for ultrahigh on/off ratio.

Nat. Commun. 7, 12725 (2016).

9. Bae, S. et al. Roll-to-roll production of 30-inch graphene films for transparent electrodes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 5, 574 (2010).

10. Kong, W. et al. Path towards graphene commercialization from lab to market. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 927–938 (2019).

9


11. Indukuri, S. C., Frydendahl, C., Bar-David, J., Mazurski, N. & Levy, U. WS2 monolayers coupled to hyperbolic metamaterial
nanoantennas: Broad implications for light-matter-interaction applications. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. (2020).

12. Lei, S. et al. Optoelectronic memory using two-dimensional materials. Nano Lett. 15, 259–265 (2014).

13. Bertolazzi, S., Krasnozhon, D. & Kis, A. Nonvolatile memory cells based on MoS2/graphene heterostructures. ACS Nano 7,
3246–3252 (2013).

14. Meng, J. et al. Ultraviolet irradiation-controlled memory effect in graphene field-effect transistors. Small 9, 2240–2244 (2013).

15. Choi, H. H. et al. Photoelectric memory effect in graphene heterostructure field-effect transistors based on dual dielectrics.

ACS Photonics 5, 329–336 (2017).

16. Cao, W., Kang, J., Bertolazzi, S., Kis, A. & Banerjee, K. Can 2D-nanocrystals extend the lifetime of floating-gate transistor
based nonvolatile memory? IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 61, 3456–3464 (2014).

17. Sangwan, V. K. et al. Multi-terminal memtransistors from polycrystalline monolayer molybdenum disulfide. Nature 554,
500–504 (2018).

18. Sangwan, V. K. & Hersam, M. C. Neuromorphic nanoelectronic materials. Nat. Nanotechnol. 1–12 (2020).

19. Markovic, D., Mizrahi, A., Querlioz, D. & Grollier, J. Physics for neuromorphic computing. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2, 499–510
(2020).

20. Pizzocchero, F. et al. The hot pick-up technique for batch assembly of van der Waals heterostructures. Nat. Commun. 7, 1–10
(2016).

21. Xiao, S., Zhu, X., Li, B.-H. & Mortensen, N. A. Graphene-plasmon polaritons: From fundamental properties to potential
applications. Front. Phys. 11, 117801 (2016).

22. Emboras, A. et al. Nanoscale plasmonic memristor with optical readout functionality. Nano Lett. 13, 6151–6155 (2013).

23. Pavan, P., Bez, R., Olivo, P. & Zanoni, E. Flash memory cells-an overview. Proc. IEEE 85, 1248–1271 (1997).

24. Grajower, M., Mazurski, N., Shappir, J. & Levy, U. Non-volatile silicon photonics using nanoscale flash memory technology.

Laser Photonics Rev. 12, 1700190 (2018).

25. Xu, W., Min, S.-Y., Hwang, H. & Lee, T.-W. Organic core-sheath nanowire artificial synapses with femtojoule energy con-
sumption. Sci. Adv. 2, e1501326 (2016).

26. van de Burgt, Y. et al. A non-volatile organic electrochemical device as a low-voltage artificial synapse for neuromorphic
computing. Nat. Mater. 16, 414–418 (2017).

27. Ansell, D. et al. Hybrid graphene plasmonic waveguide modulators. Nat. Commun. 6, 8846 (2015).

28. Rodrigo, D. et al. Mid-infrared plasmonic biosensing with graphene. Science 349, 165–168 (2015).

10


