Total internal reflection based super-resolution
imaging for sub-IR frequencies

LAUREN E BARR,1,*,+ PETER KARLSEN,1,+ SAMUEL M HORNETT,1

IAN R HOOPER,1 MICHAL MRNKA,1 CHRISTOPHER R LAWRENCE,2

DAVID B PHILLIPS,1 AND EUAN HENDRY1

1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK
2QinetiQ, Cody Technology Park, Ively Road, Farnborough, GU14 0LX, UK
+ These authors contributed equally to the work
*l.barr@exeter.ac.uk

Abstract: For measurements designed to accurately determine layer thickness, there is a natural
trade-off between sensitivity to optical thickness and lateral resolution due to the angular ray
distribution required for a focused beam. We demonstrate a near-field imaging approach that
enables both sub-wavelength lateral resolution and optical thickness sensitivity. We illuminate a
sample in a total internal reflection geometry, with a photo-activated spatial modulator in the
near-field, which allows optical thickness images to be computationally reconstructed in a few
seconds. We demonstrate our approach at 140 GHz (wavelength 2.15 mm), where images are
normally severely limited in spatial resolution, and demonstrate mapping of optical thickness
variation in inhomogeneous biological tissues.

© 2020 Optical Society of America

1.
Introduction

Long wavelength measurements such as Terahertz (THz) time domain spectroscopy are often
used as a route to film thickness determination of visibly opaque materials, either using time
of flight approaches [1, 2] or through spectral analysis [3, 4]. These techniques can achieve
optical thickness measurements of exceptionally high accuracy, sometimes approaching micron
scale [2,3]. However, to achieve good sensitivity to optical thickness conventionally requires
illumination with near-collimated beams (i.e. only weakly focused beams with a narrow angular
spectrum). This requirement limits the lateral spatial resolution of these methods, as high
thickness sensitivity is not compatible with the strong focusing usually necessary to achieve high
lateral resolution. This trade-off is also inherent in total internal reflection imaging techniques
that have been demonstrated to date [5,6]. The compromise between optical thickness sensitivity
and lateral spatial resolution means that time domain techniques have been most successfully
employed to investigate homogeneous samples such as polymer films [7] or crystalline pallets [8].
Malleable and inhomogeneous materials, such as biological tissues, are particularly difficult to
characterise by conventional means [9]. Mechanical measurements of thickness are unreliable
when the sample can be compressed, and time consuming if a map of varying thickness is required.
Fully characterising a sample made of opaque layers of different properties and thicknesses
poses an even greater challenge. Often, cross-sections of such samples are taken and studied
by eye. However this is destructive, and does not give the three-dimensional full picture of an
inhomogeneous sample. Imaging in the THz and mm-wave bands offers a promising alternative
for imaging the structure of inhomogeneous, and particularly biological materials, where water
absorption leads to a natural contrast mechanism [10]. In addition, THz radiation is non-ionising,
and hence is of particular interest for medical imaging. Recent examples of biological and
medical THz imaging include the study of cartilage from the knee [11], observation of the healing
process of scar tissue [12], measuring the hydration of corneas [13] and imaging water-dense

arXiv:2006.02091v2  [physics.app-ph]  9 Oct 2020


cancers in breast tissue [14–16]. However, due to the low resolution associated with diffraction
limited imaging in these bands, the inherent sample inhomogeneity on sub-wavelength scales is a
major challenge when imaging biological tissues [9]. To overcome this limitation, THz images
of sub-wavelength surface features have been captured using near-field scanning techniques.
However, weak signals typically emanating from scanning probe tips, which are sub-diffraction
limited in scale, coupled with noisy detectors, results in lengthy measurement times [17–19].
Moreover, the sensitivity of detectors in the THz and mm-wave spectral bands is poor, as the low
energies carried by photons makes their control and detection extremely demanding. The most
sensitive detectors require deep cryogenic cooling, which is problematic for the development
cameras consisting of multi-sensor arrays, as the individual signals from thousands of detectors
must be acquired per frame.
Emerging computational imaging techniques offer a potential way forward by redefining our
understanding of how images can be recorded. Such systems do not form an image directly,
but offload aspects of the image formation process to a computer. ‘Single-pixel’ computational
imaging systems circumvent the need for detector arrays, and boost the magnitude of near-field
measurements by recording signals from many locations at once. These systems encode spatial
information in the temporal dimension, enabling operation at wavelengths where multi-pixel
sensors are challenging to fabricate, prohibitively expensive, or simply do not exist [20]. Images
are reconstructed from measurements using a single-element detector, which itself records only
the total incident intensity, in conjunction with a spatial light modulator (SLM). The SLM
spatially modulates (i.e. varies) the intensity of light, and so enables sequential illumination of
the target object with a series of patterned light fields, each of which probes a different subset of
the spatial information in the scene. Recently there have been several demonstrations of deeply
sub-wavelength single-pixel transmission imaging at THz frequencies [21–24].
In this work we demonstrate a new form of millimetre-wave computational imaging which
enables the determination of overlayer optical thickness with significantly sub-wavelength
precision, while also retaining sub-wavelength lateral resolution. We refer to our approach as
a type of total internal reflection (TIR) imaging: in the absence of sample-induced loss we
anticipate perfect reflection of the illuminating beam, while lossy samples reduce reflection in a
spatially varying way, producing sample dependent image contrast. Using mm-wave radiation in
a TIR geometry, rather than optical frequencies as previously studied [25], means the evanescent
fields can probe millimetric distances into samples - distances relevant, for example, to the
determination of the thickness of structural tissue changes found in cancerous samples [26],
or the study of the layered structure of the skin [27]. Our imaging approach is based upon a
bespoke optically addressed mm-wave spatial modulator, integrated with a dove prism in a TIR
geometry. This allows dynamic patterning of the evanescent mm-wave field probing the underside
of potentially non-transmissive objects [28], granting access to a range of new types of sample,
including biological tissues. This approach can capture images with sub-wavelength resolution
for any sub-IR frequency, with an upper frequency determined by the plasma frequency of the
modulator (∼ 1 × 1012 Hz). We show that the near-field placement of the modulator decouples
the thickness sensitivity from lateral resolution, subverting the trade-off which normally limits
far field imaging approaches. As a result, and in contrast to previous single-pixel THz imaging
systems, which typically produce an absorption image of a thin sample in transmission mode, our
total internal reflection geometry gives access to a richer vein of information about the sample:
the reflected signal is highly sensitive to both material properties and sample thickness. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first time a near-field imaging approach has been combined with
total internal reflection, yielding the best of both worlds: the high lateral resolution of near-field
imaging, with the good thickness sensitivity of a TIR geometry.
Critical to the performance of our imaging system is the mm-wave spatial modulator, and we
describe in detail how this has been tuned for use at mm-wavelengths. This optimisation balances


the resolution, frame-rate and contrast of the modulator. Due to the TIR geometry, the resulting
modulator is highly efficient, circumventing the requirement for high intensity femtosecond-pulse
optical pump beams [29, 30], vastly simplifying the experimental set-up in comparison with
earlier work [31–33], removing unwanted heating of sensitive samples, and reducing optical
noise. We show that our TIR based imaging system offers a new way forward to simultaneously
image and measure the thickness of biological samples. To interpret our images throughout
our study, we compare them with a transfer matrix based model describing expected levels of
reflection as a function of frequency, incident angle and material parameters of the sample. We
investigate the effect of the sample characteristics on image formation, and experimentally show
that the measured signal encodes information about both the material and the film thickness. In
our proof-of-principle experiments, we show that TIR mm-wave images reveal regions of fat
and protein in porcine tissue samples, highlighting the system as a good candidate for imaging
water-dense samples such as cancer tumours. We also demonstrate that it is possible to detect
objects embedded within a thick optically-opaque material, by imaging a metal target on the far
side of a fatty layer of tissue. While at present we have implemented this technique for mm-wave
imaging, the principles described here could be broadly applied from GHz through to THz
frequencies.

2.
Designing a mm-wave TIR imaging system

Our TIR imaging system is based on all-optical modulation (known as photo-modulation), where a
visible or near-IR light source is used to change the transparency of a photo-active medium to low
frequency radiation. This approach is often chosen because it is relatively simple to implement,
can be very fast and can operate over a broad range of mm-wave and THz frequencies [34,35].
Figure 1(a) shows a schematic of our TIR imaging system. An IMPATT (IMPact ionization
Avalanche Transit-Time) diode source (TeraSense, power 30 mW) produces a continuous wave
with a frequency of 140 GHz ± 1 MHz (a wavelength of around 2.15 mm). This passes through
a dove prism made of a polymer, TPX (polymethylpentene) [36], which is transparent to both
optical and GHz/THz radiation, with a refractive index of 1.58 and low loss (a tangent of 8×10−4)
at 140 GHz. The mm-wave spatial modulator is formed from a 390 µm thick photo-active silicon
wafer, placed on top of the prism, with a thin layer of immersion oil (refractive index of 1.513)
between the wafer and prism to prevent air-gaps. The sample is then placed on top of the
silicon wafer: its proximity to the mm-wave modulator means we can pattern the mm-wave on
a sub-wavelength scale, as the fields at the surface of the silicon do not diffract. The specular
mm-wave component that is totally internally reflected at the silicon-air interface is detected in
the far field by a detector (TeraSense).
Before photo-activation, the silicon wafer is largely transparent to mm-wave radiation. When
mm-waves are incident at an angle greater than the critical angle, they are totally internally
reflected from the silicon-air interface. Upon illumination of the silicon wafer with visible light,
electron-hole pair photo-excitation increases the mm-wave absorption and so reduces mm-wave
reflection. Therefore, by projecting optical binary intensity patterns at normal incidence onto
the silicon wafer using light from a LED pump beam (Thorlabs SOLIS, wavelength 623 ± 5 nm,
power 4.7 W) patterned with a digital micro-mirror device (DMD, Vialux), we are able to spatially
control which areas of the modulator are more reflective to mm-wave radiation. In this way, the
pattern in the optical pump beam is dynamically imprinted onto the mm-wave field bathing the
sample, enabling single-pixel imaging to be performed. The projected optical binary patterns
are drawn from the Hadamard basis. This basis yields reconstructed images with significantly
higher signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) compared to simple raster scanning of a transparent (or
absorbing) window, and the SNR is uniformly distributed over the reconstructed image as the
set is orthogonal [37,38]. Detail of the image reconstruction can be found in section 3.1 of the
supplementary material. Our data acquisition rate is nominally 2 kHz, limited by the lifetime


Fig. 1. The mm-wave imaging system. (a) Schematic showing mm-wave modulator
using total internal reflection. (b) Calculated penetration length of evanescent fields,
L, at the silicon-air interface for a range of frequencies and angles of incidence. The
390 µm thick silicon wafer has a permittivity of 11.7 + 0.003𝑖, and the prism medium
has a permittivity of 2.49. The white dashed line shows the critical angle, below which
there are no evanescent fields, and the red circle denotes the selected experimental
parameters.

of the charge carriers in the silicon wafer. For 64 × 64 = 4096 pixels, we obtain images with
sufficient signal to observe features in the samples in around 4 seconds. To allow for low noise
image analysis, the images presented below have been averaged for several minutes (see section
supplementary for a full analysis), which equates to 1 minute 22 seconds of exposure when
omitting programming wait times.
The penetration length of the evanescent field in air, L (eqn. (S1) in the supplementary
material), depends on both the incident angle of the mm-wave beam and its frequency, as shown
in Fig. 1(b). L is maximised for low frequencies (i.e. longer wavelengths) and angles very close
to the critical angle (white dotted line). These dependencies allow L to be tuned to match the
sample characteristics. In this work we elected to image at a frequency of 140 GHz and incident
angle of 49◦ (denoted by the red circle in Fig. 1 (b)), giving a penetration depth in air of ∼300 µm.


Fig. 2. Determining the thickness of a sample. (a) Calculated 𝛿𝑟 when a sample of
permittivity 3.5 + 0.53𝑖 is present on top of the silicon wafer, as a function of sample
thickness and incident angle of the mm-wave beam. The inset shows a slice through
the plot at 50◦ incidence. Results are calculated at 140 GHz frequency, and an incident
photoexcitation wavelength of 623 nm and power of 220 Wm−2 when illuminated, and
0 Wm−2 when dark. The silicon wafer has a thickness of 390 µm and a charge carrier
lifetime of 75 µs. The critical angle is marked by the dotted black line. The red and
white (inset: grey) circles (1) and (2) denote the parameters corresponding to the image
in (b). (b) Optical (left) and mm-wave (right) images of a polymer sample with regions
of two different thicknesses.


3.
Responsivity to sample thickness

When a layer of material is placed on top of the silicon wafer, the intensity of the mm-wave
beam reflected back into the detector depends upon both the complex refractive index and
thickness of the layer. If the refractive index of the material is less than that of the prism, one
expects evanescent fields at the silicon-sample boundary that are sensitive to the properties of
the sample [28]. If the sample has an index higher than the prism, one breaks the total internal
reflection condition at the silicon-sample interface, allowing a propagating wave to interrogate
the sample layer.
To study these effects we image a step in a polymer sample of known height and permittivity
(3.5 + 0.53i), and compare the image to the modulation predicted using the transfer matrix
approach, as described in reference [39]. The sample under investigation is created by layering
cellulose from tape to create films of different thicknesses. Reconstructed images are spatial
maps of 𝛿𝑟(𝑥, 𝑦), which is the difference in reflected signal at each spatial location (𝑥, 𝑦), as the
mm-wave modulator is switched from its Off (dark) to On (i.e. photo-activated) state. Figure 2(a)
shows the predicted level of mm-wave modulation 𝛿𝑟 as a function of incident angle and sample
thicknesses. Circles (1) and (2) indicate the expected signals at thicknesses of 350 ± 10 µm and
570 ± 10 µm. Figure 2(b) shows experimentally obtained visible (left panel) and mm-wave (right
panel) images of the polymer step.
One intriguing feature of Fig. 2 is that the sign of 𝛿𝑟 changes as a function of thickness. 𝛿𝑟 > 0
indicates a decrease in reflection of mm-wave radiation on photo-excitation of the silicon wafer,
while 𝛿𝑟 < 0 indicates an increase. 𝛿𝑟 < 0 is somewhat unexpected: why would an introduction
of absorption into the silicon layer lead to an increase in the level of reflected radiation? This
surprising effect arises due to an optimal matching condition between the absorption and radiative
loss channels of the system, which defines critical coupling conditions [40]. This is similar to an
effect observed for plasmonic cavities [41,42], and arises here due to a Fabry-Perot resonance
present in the sample itself. It is clear that the change in sign of 𝛿𝑟 is both predicted in our wave
modelling (Fig. 2(a)) and observed in experiment (Fig. 2(b)). However, the negative signals
measured in experiment have a larger magnitude than those predicted from our modelling: we
suspect this arises due to small air gaps in between cellulose layers changing the matching
condition. Nevertheless, as demonstrated, an image contrast (𝛿𝑟) which varies in sign upon a
change in sample thickness of an order of magnitude smaller than the wavelength, has significant
measurement potential, especially for challenging samples made from malleable and soft materials.
Furthermore, we show, in section 4.5 of the supplementary material, that if we could take several
images at different angles of incidence, it is possible to simultaneously extract both the thickness
and complex refractive index of a sample using our technique. This is only possible due to
the well defined incident angle in our measurement approach and is not usually possible in
high resolution imaging, as the angular distribution required for a focused spot is incompatible
with well defined angle dependencies. This issue is also often faced by e.g. time-of-flight
measurements, where the delay of pulses depends on the optical path length, and it is not possible
to separate this into contributions from the sample thickness and refractive index.

4.
Imaging biological tissue

We now demonstrate imaging of inhomogeneous biological tissues using our mm-wave TIR
imaging system. The sample is a 750 ± 250 µm thick piece of sliced porcine tissue, which
exhibits strong spatial variation in properties, varying from fatty to protein rich regions. While
one can expect a high degree of variation in the complex permittivities of biological tissues (see
section 4.4 of the supplementary material) [15, 26, 43, 44], for now in our model we assume
protein rich and fatty are described by 𝜖fat = 2.89 + 0.64𝑖 and 𝜖protein = 8.63 + 11.20𝑖, taken from
reference [45]. Using these values, Fig. 3(a) shows modelling of reflected mm-wave signal when


Fig. 3. Imaging biological tissue. (a) Calculated reflection of a TE polarised mm-wave
at 140 GHz when various biological tissues are placed on top of the silicon wafer, when
the silicon is dark (solid lines) or illuminated (dashed lines) with a photoexcitation
beam of 220 Wm−2 at 623 nm wavelength. The silicon wafer has a thickness of 390 µm
and a charge carrier lifetime of 75 µs. The critical angle (𝜃crit, black vertical line)
and the range of angles where the modulation is of opposite sign for the two different
thicknesses of fat (grey shaded area) are marked on the plot. (b) and (c) images of
porcine tissue samples at visible (left) and 140 GHz (right) frequencies. (b) shows a
large fatty region well separated from the protein, and (c) shows thin filaments of fat
embedded in protein, while the regions of fat and protein are clearly distinguishable in
both. The 64 × 64 pixel mm-wave images are an average of 100 images taken with
TE polarisation, where each took 4.1 seconds to collect (images collected over shorter
times can be found in section 3.3 of the supplementary material).


a layer of fat or protein is placed on top of the wafer, as a function of incident angle, for both
photo-activated (220 Wm−2) and dark silicon. We show modelling results for three different
thicknesses of material within the experimentally measured range.
Our model indicates that materials with high losses, such as protein, do not exhibit strong
variation in 𝛿𝑟 as sample thickness changes, due to the strong absorption of the mm-wave beam.
We show the dependency of reflection on incident angle for a single thickness of protein tissue
(700 µm, blue plot) in Fig. 3(a). We also see that the difference in predictions for an illuminated
and non-illuminated modulator is very small (i.e. 𝛿𝑟 is expected to be small) for protein tissue.
There are two factors which determine this: firstly the absorption of the mm-wave is higher in
protein than in fat, due to its higher water content; secondly, the real part of the refractive index of
protein is close to that of silicon, and therefore a significant drop in the reflection is expected in
this case. Fatty tissue, on the other hand, has a much lower water content, and hence absorption
is lower. We predict fatty tissue will exhibit a strong variation of 𝛿𝑟 on sample thickness. This is
shown in the red and yellow plots in Fig. 3(a), which show reflection as a function of incident
angle for two thicknesses (680 µm, yellow plot, and 810 µm, red plot). Here we see that 𝛿𝑟, the
difference between dashed and solid lines, is expected to change sign when passing through the
minimum in reflection at around 50◦ (60◦) for a thickness of 680 µm (810 µm). We therefore see
a range of angles, marked by the grey region, were we expect the signal to be completely opposite
in sign for a thickness difference of just 130 µm (i.e. just 5% of the mm-wave wavelength).
In Figs. 3(b) and (c) we present mm-wave images of two different samples of porcine tissue:
one with a large region of fat well separated from the protein rich region (b), and one with
filaments of fat on the scale of the imaging wavelength running through (c). In both images, the
regions of fat and protein are clearly distinguishable, as seen by comparison to the optical images
on the left. As predicted, 𝛿𝑟 is close to zero within regions of protein in both Figs. 3(b) and (c).
Approximate measurements using a set of Vernier Calipers gave the thickness of fatty regions
in Fig. 3(b) to be 810 ± 200 µm, while the thickness of the fat in Fig. 3(c) was estimated to be
680 ± 150 µm. As predicted by our model, the measured 𝛿𝑟 of fatty tissue regions in each image
have opposite sign. We present further simulations in section 4.3 of the supplementary material
that illustrate this sensitivity to permittivity and sample thickness.
The low absorption of fat also allows us to image objects behind layers of fatty tissue. This is
shown experimentally in section 4.6 of the supplementary material, and demonstrates imaging
through visibly opaque fatty tissues to yield information on the structure of a sample that would
not otherwise be known.

5.
Exploring physical limitations of the system

There are several inter-related factors that determine the performance of our TIR computational
imaging system. Conventional diffraction limited imaging systems can reach resolutions of
∼ 𝜆/2NA, where NA is the numerical aperture defined by the distribution of incident rays. To
achieve high depth sensitivity one requires illumination with near-collimated mm-waves: our
system has a mm-wave NA = 0.06, similar to NAs used in both time of flight systems [1, 2]
and previous TIR imaging systems [5,6]. An NA = 0.06 corresponds to an expected diffraction
limited resolution ∼1.8 cm for 140 GHz - this demonstrates the trade off between lateral and depth
resolution normally inherent to both time of flight and TIR approaches. However, in our design,
the in-plane lateral resolution of images is determined by the local modulation of the incident
mm-wave by our photomodulator. As shown in the supplementary information section 4.1, due to
the low NA of our detector, our modulation signals are dominated by the specular reflection from
the sample, which maintains the low angular dispersion of the measurement. Yet the specular
reflection is still affected by local photomodulation, as can be seen by the small spatial features
evident in some of our images. In this case, the image resolution will be determined by the
optical pump beam, and subsequent charge carrier diffusion within the silicon wafer (i.e. how far


Fig. 4. Investigating design parameters. (a) Calculated diffusion length of carriers
(left, black axis) and modulation (right, red axis) as a function of effective charge carrier
lifetime for a mm-wave beam incident at 50◦ through the prism material onto a 390 µm
thick wafer. The grey line shows the lifetime of the wafer used in experiment. (b) TE
polarised modulation of a mm-wave signal as function of angle of incidence in the
prism material and silicon wafer thickness, assuming a charge carrier lifetime of 75 µs.
Inset shows the reflection for dark and illuminated states for a 390 µm thick wafer. All
results are calculated at 140 GHz mm-wave frequency, and an incident photoexcitation
wavelength of 623 nm and power of 220 Wm−2 when illuminated, and 0 Wm−2 when
dark. The red circles show the experimental parameters.


the charge carriers drift, thus blurring the optical pump pattern), rather than the wavelength of
the mm-wave beam, meaning sub-diffraction limited imaging is possible. Fig. 4(a) shows how
the diffusion of charge carriers in the silicon depends on their effective lifetime. Reconstructed
images inherit the same level of blurring as the patterning of the mm-wave field has undergone,
due to drift of charge carriers. In this case the point spread function of the system is governed
by the drift-induced long-range correlations in the mm-wave field patterns used to probe the
object [46]. The lifetime of the wafer chosen for our experiments is 75 µs (float zone silicon
bought from Siltronix, dark resistivity = 5 kΩ, thickness = 390 µm, 120 nm of SiO2 passivation;
see section 2.4 of the supplementary material for more information). A lifetime of 75 µs leads
to a diffusion length of 350 µm, and a lateral resolution of twice this value i.e. 700 µm, which
agrees with the resolutions observed in our images.
There is also scope to achieve lateral resolutions far below our experimental limit by reducing
the effective carrier lifetime of the modulator [39]. However Fig. 4(a) also shows that, for a
given optical pump power, decreasing the carrier lifetime simultaneously decreases the reflection
modulation depth, MD = 𝑅dark − 𝑅illum, which depends on the reflected intensity of the mm-wave
when the silicon is dark, 𝑅dark, and illuminated, 𝑅illum. Ultimately, MD is a function of carrier
lifetime, as one can achieve a higher photoconductivity for longer lifetimes (see section 2.5 of the
supplementary material). For our experiment, a lifetime of 75 µs provided a reasonable trade
off between resolution and MD, while higher MD comes at a cost of lower imaging resolution.
Conversely, for applications where long imaging times and averaging are possible, one could
trade SNR in return for significantly higher imaging resolution.
There are other parameters we can tune to ensure that MD is maximised without compromising
on the speed and resolution of imaging - namely the incident angle, wafer thickness and frequency.
In Fig. 4(b) we show the numerically calculated MD as a function of incident angle and silicon
wafer thickness, on a TPX-silicon-air stack (calculated here for TE polarisation and 140 GHz with
an excitation intensity of 220 Wm−2 and excitation wavelength of 623 nm for a silicon wafer with
effective charge carrier lifetime 𝜏eff = 75 µs). The inset shows the reflected mm-wave intensity
(for dark and illuminated states), for a 390 µm thick wafer. For a stack of TPX-silicon-air we
predict the onset of TIR for a critical angle of 𝜃crit = 39.3◦. For angles beyond 𝜃crit the modulation
is around an order of magnitude larger than that achieved at normal incidence. The incident
angle that provides the largest modulation is near grazing incidence. However, as discussed
earlier, angles closer to the critical angle give evanescent fields which penetrate further into low
index samples (see Fig. 1(b)), so we opt for an angle of 49◦, marked by the red circle, where the
penetration length of the field is around 300 µm in air.
It is also clear from Fig. 4(b) that the modulation is dependent on the thickness of the silicon
wafer. This arises due to a cavity resonance in the wafer, as reported in [39], which gives
an increased modulation when the wafer thickness is equal to a half-integer multiple of the
wavelength in silicon. For a mm-wave frequency of 140 GHz, we choose a wafer that is 390 µm
thick; close to the resonance but limited by commercially available silicon wafers.

6.
Conclusions

In conclusion, we have demonstrated the first computational imaging system in a total internal re-
flection geometry. This unique combination allows images of sample structure to be reconstructed
with sub-wavelength lateral resolution and sub-wavelength optical depth sensitivity, which is not
possible with other techniques [3,5,30]. In comparison with previously demonstrated THz and
mm-wave computational imaging systems [4,5,31], our design exhibits a high pixels-per-second
rate of several kHz, which gives a resolution-dependent frame rate of a few seconds. Our TIR
system is also cheaper and more compact than previous work, as it circumvents the need for
femtosecond-pulsed lasers.
The penetration depth of the illuminating field is dependent on both incident angle and


mm-wave frequency, pointing to an intriguing avenue for future development of the system:
by capturing several images at a range of incident angles and frequencies, there is potential to
decouple material parameters from layer thickness, and so independently recover these sample
properties simultaneously. Section 4.5 of the supplementary material details modelling that
demonstrates this principle for some simple cases. In the future it may be possible to extend this
approach to recover TIR-based tomographic images of more complex samples that exhibit strong
inhomogeneity in all three dimensions. Together, we believe these features point towards many
potential applications of mm-wave computational TIR imaging for interrogation of the structure
of optically opaque samples in, for example, the medical, art conservation and food industries.

Funding

L.E.B and I.R.H. acknowledge financial support from the Engineering and Physical Sciences
Research Council of the United Kingdom (EPSRC UK) and QinetiQ Ltd. via the TEAM-A
Prosperity Partnership (Grant No. EP/R004781/1). D.B.P acknowledges financial support from
the Royal Academy of Engineering (UK) and the European Research Council (Grant No. 804626).
E.H. and M.M acknowledge financial support from the EPSRC UK (Grant No. EP/S036466/1).
E.H. and D.B.P also acknowledge financial support from the EPSRC UK (Grant No. QuantIC
EP/M01326X/1).

Acknowledgements

QinetiQ Ltd patent applications relating to a method and apparatus for imaging an object
comprising biological material are GB1908140.5 filed 7th June 2019 and GB2003820.4 filed
17th March 2020.

Disclosures

L.E.B.: QinetiQ Ltd (F,P), P.K.: QinetiQ Ltd (P), I.R.H.: QinetiQ Ltd (F), S.M.H.: QinetiQ Ltd
(P), C.R.L.: QinetiQ Ltd (E,P), E.H.: QinetiQ Ltd (P)

References
1.
H. Zhong, J. Xu, X. Xie, T. Yuan, R. Reightler, E. Madaras, and X. C. Zhang, “Nondestructive defect identification
with terahertz time-of-flight tomography,” IEEE Sensors J. 5, 203–207 (2005).

2.
E. Abraham, A. Younus, J. C. Delagnes, and P. Mounaix, “Non-invasive investigation of art paintings by terahertz
imaging,” Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process. 100, 585–590 (2010).

3.
J. L. Johnson, T. D. Dorney, and D. M. Mittleman, “Enhanced depth resolution in terahertz imaging using phase-shift
interferometry,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 78, 835–837 (2001).

4.
T. Nagatsuma, T. Ikeo, and H. Nishii, “Terahertz imaging based on optical coherence tomography,” ICECom 2013 -
Conf. Proceedings: 21st Int. Conf. on Appl. Electromagn. Commun. 2, 64–69 (2013).

5.
A. Wojdyla and G. Gallot, “Attenuated internal reflection terahertz imaging,” Opt. Lett. 38, 112–114 (2013).

6.
M. Grognot and G. Gallot, “Quantitative measurement of permeabilization of living cells by terahertz attenuated
total reflection,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 103702 (2015).

7.
L. Chen, Y. Ge, X. Zang, J. Xie, L. DIng, A. V. Balakin, A. P. Shkurinov, and Y. Zhu, “Tunable Phase Transition via
Radiative Loss Controlling in a Terahertz Attenuated Total Reflection-Based Metasurface,” IEEE Transactions on
Terahertz Sci. Technol. 9, 643–650 (2019).

8.
D. G. A. Ibrahim, S. K. Khalil, H. H. Sherif, and M. M. Eloker, “Multilayer film thickness measurement using
ultrafast terahertz pulsed imaging,” J. Phys. Commun. 3, 035013 (2019).

9.
T. C. Bowman, M. El-Shenawee, and L. K. Campbell, “Terahertz Imaging of Excised Breast Tumor Tissue on Paraffin
Sections,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas Propag. 63, 2088–2097 (2015).

10. Y. He, K. Liu, C. Au, Q. Sun, E. P. Parrott, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, “Determination of terahertz permittivity of
dehydrated biological samples,” Phys. Medicine Biol. 62, 8882–8893 (2017).

11. R. I. Stantchev, J. C. Mansfield, R. S. Edginton, P. Hobson, F. Palombo, and E. Hendry, “Subwavelength hyperspectral
THz studies of articular cartilage,” Sci. Reports 8, 1–8 (2018).

12. S. Fan, B. S. Ung, E. P. Parrott, V. P. Wallace, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, “In vivo terahertz reflection imaging of
human scars during and after the healing process,” J. Biophotonics 10, 1143–1151 (2017).


13. Z. D. Taylor, J. Garritano, S. Sung, N. Bajwa, D. B. Bennet, B. Nowroozi, P. Tewari, J. W. Sayre, and J.-P. Hubschman,
“THz and mm-Wave Sensing of Corneal Tissue Water Content: In Vivo Sensing and Imaging Results,” HPS Public
Access 20, 48–55 (2017).

14. C. Yu, S. Fan, Y. Sun, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, “The potential of terahertz imaging for cancer diagnosis: A
review of investigations to date,” Quatitative Imaging Medicine Surg. 2, 33–45 (2012).

15. P. C. Ashworth, E. Pickwell-MacPherson, E. Provenzano, S. E. Pinder, A. D. Purushotham, M. Pepper, and V. P.
Wallace, “Terahertz pulsed spectroscopy of freshly excised human breast cancer,” Opt. Express 17, 12444 (2009).

16. A. J. Fitzgerald, E. Pickwell-MacPherson, and V. P. Wallace, “Use of finite difference time domain simulations and
debye theory for modelling the terahertz reflection response of normal and tumour breast tissue,” PLoS ONE 9, 1–9
(2014).

17. J. Zhao, W. Chu, L. Guo, Z. Wang, J. Yang, W. Liu, Y. Cheng, and Z. Xu, “Terahertz imaging with sub-wavelength
resolution by femtosecond laser filament in air,” Sci. Reports 4, 1–7 (2014).

18. M. Eisele, T. L. Cocker, M. A. Huber, M. Plankl, L. Viti, D. Ercolani, L. Sorba, M. S. Vitiello, and R. Huber,
“Ultrafast multi-terahertz nano-spectroscopy with sub-cycle temporal resolution,” Nat. Photonics 8, 841–845 (2014).

19. F. Blanchard, A. Doi, T. Tanaka, H. Hirori, H. Tanaka, and Y. Kadoya, “Real-time terahertz near-field microscope,”
Opt. Express 19, 3523–3525 (2011).

20. E. Hack, L. Valzania, G. Gäumann, M. Shalaby, C. P. Hauri, and P. Zolliker, “Comparison of thermal detector arrays
for off-axis THz holography and real-time THz imaging,” Sensors (Switzerland) 16, 1–11 (2016).

21. W. L. Chan, J. Deibel, and D. M. Mittleman, “Imaging with terahertz radiation,” Reports on Prog. Phys. 70,
1325–1379 (2007).

22. D. Shrekenhamer, C. M. Watts, and W. J. Padilla, “Terahertz single pixel imaging with an optically controlled
dynamic spatial light modulator,” Opt. Express 21, 12507 (2013).

23. S. A. N. Saqueb and K. Sertel, “Phase-sensitive THz imaging using single-pixel intensity-only measurements,” 2016
IEEE Antennas Propag. Soc. Int. Symp. APSURSI 2016 - Proc. 6, 1065–1066 (2016).

24. S. M. Hornett, R. I. Stantchev, M. Z. Vardaki, C. Beckerleg, and E. Hendry, “Subwavelength Terahertz Imaging of
Graphene Photoconductivity,” Nano Lett. 16, 7019–7024 (2016).

25. D. Axelrod, “Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Microscopy,” Encycl. Cell Biol. 2, 62–69 (2016).
26. T. Bowman, M. El-Shenawee, and L. K. Campbell, “Terahertz transmission vs reflection imaging and model-based
characterization for excised breast carcinomas,” Biomed. Opt. Express 7, 3756 (2016).

27. E. Pickwell, B. E. Cole, A. J. Fitzgerald, M. Pepper, and V. P. Wallace, “In vivo study of human skin using pulsed
terahertz radiation,” Phys. Medicine Biol. 49, 1595–1607 (2004).

28. M. L. Martin-Fernandez, C. J. Tynan, and S. E. D. Webb, “A ’pocket guide’ to total internal reflection fluorescence,”
J. Microsc. 252, 16–22 (2013).

29. X. Liu, E. P. Parrott, B. S. Ung, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, “Exploiting total internal reflection geometry for
efficient optical modulation of terahertz light,” APL Photonics 1, 076103 (2016).

30. R. I. Stantchev, X. Yu, T. Blu, and E. Pickwell-macpherson, “Real-time terahertz imaging with a single-pixel detector,”
Nat. Commun. 1, 2535 (2020).

31. R. I. Stantchev, B. Sun, S. M. Hornett, P. A. Hobson, G. M. Gibson, M. J. Padgett, and E. Hendry, “Noninvasive,
near-field terahertz imaging of hidden objects using a single-pixel detector,” Sci. Adv. 2, 1600190 (2016).

32. T. Nozokido, H. Minamide, and K. Mizuno, “Modulation of Submillimeter Wave Radiation by Laser-Produced Free
Carriers in Semiconductors,” Electron. Commun. Jpn. 80, 259–266 (1997).

33. T. Okada and K. Tanaka, “Photo-designed terahertz devices,” Sci. Reports 1, 1–5 (2011).
34. Y. Bai, T. Bu, K. Chen, and S. Zhuang, “Review about the Optical-Controlled Terahertz Waves Modulator,” Appl.
Spectrosc. Rev. 50, 707–727 (2015).

35. M. Rahm, J. S. Li, and W. J. Padilla, “THz wave modulators: A brief review on different modulation techniques,” J.
Infrared, Millimeter, Terahertz Waves 34, 1–27 (2013).

36. C. M. A. Inc, “TPX Datasheet,” (2019).
37. N. J. Sloane and M. Harwit, “Masks for Hadamard transform optics, and weighing designs.” Appl. optics 15, 107–114
(1976).

38. J. A. Decker, “Hadamard–Transform Image Scanning,” Appl. Opt. 9, 1392 (1970).
39. I. R. Hooper, N. E. Grant, L. E. Barr, S. M. Hornett, J. D. Murphy, and E. Hendry, “High efficiency photomodulators
for millimeter wave and THz radiation,” Sci. Reports 9, 1–10 (2019).

40. H. A. Haus, Waves and fields in optoelectronics (Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, New Jersey, 1984).
41. S. Herminghaus, M. Klopfleisch, and H. J. Schmidt, “Attenuated total reflectance as a quantum interference
phenomenon,” Opt. Lett. 19, 293 (1994).

42. H. Raether, Surface Plasmons on Smooth and Rough Surfaces and on Gratings (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988), 1st
ed.

43. Y. Sun, B. M. Fischer, and E. Pickwell-MacPherson, “Effects of formalin fixing on the terahertz properties of
biological tissues,” J. Biomed. Opt. 14, 064017 (2009).

44. Y. Sun, “A promising diagnostic method: Terahertz pulsed imaging and spectroscopy,” World J. Radiol. 3, 55 (2011).
45. C. Gabriel, “Compilation of the Dielectric Properties of Body Tissues at RF and Microwave Frequencies.” Tech. rep.
(1996).

46. D. B. Phillips, R. He, Q. Chen, G. M. Gibson, and M. J. Padgett, “Non-diffractive computational ghost imaging,” Opt.


Express 24, 14172 (2016).


