Absence of Spin Hall Magnetoresistance in Pt/(CoNi)n multilayers

Yongwei Cui,1 Xiaoyu Feng,1 Qihan Zhang,1 Hengan Zhou,2 Wanjun Jiang,2 Jiangwei Cao, 1

Desheng Xue,1 and Xiaolong Fan1*

1Key Laboratory for Magnetism and Magnetic Materials of the Ministry of Education, Lanzhou 
University, Lanzhou 730000, People’s Republic of China

2State Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Quantum Physics and Department of Physics, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing 100084, China

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to:
*fanxiaolong@lzu.edu.cn

Abstract

We systematically studied the magnetoresistance effect in a Pt/(CoNi)n multilayer 

system with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and the fcc (111) texture. The angular 
dependence of magnetoresistance, including high-order cosine terms, was observed in 
a plane perpendicular to the electrical current; this was attributed to the geometrical-
size effects caused by crystal symmetry, the ordered arrangement of grains, and the 
anisotropic interface magnetoresistance effect caused by the breaking of the symmetry 
at interfaces. Based on the accuracy of our experimental results, the magnitude of spin 
Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) in Pt/(CoNi)n was expected to be below 1×10-4.
However, on evaluating the spin Hall angle of  0.07 for Pt using spin-torque 
ferromagnetic resonance measurements, the theoretical magnitude of SMR in our 
samples was estimated to exceed 7×10-4. This absence of SMR in the experimental 
results can be explained by the Elliott-Yafet spin relaxation of itinerant electrons in the 
ferromagnetic metal, which indicates that the boundary conditions of the spin current 
in the heavy metal/ferromagnetic insulator may not be applicable to all-metallic 
heterostructures.

I. INTRODUCTION

Spin Hall magnetoresistance (SMR) refers to the anisotropic absorption of spin 

currents in heavy metals (HMs); this absorption is determined by the direction of 
magnetization in the adjacent ferromagnetic layer (FML) and represented by a change 
in the HM resistance along the direction of magnetization [1-3]. The SMR essentially 
reflects the interaction between spin currents and the local magnetic moment based on 
the conversion between spin and charge currents in a heterostructure; therefore, it is a 
powerful index for evaluating the spin-orbit coupling in heterogeneous structures. In 
particular, it can be used to determine the spin Hall angle, spin diffusion length in HMs, 
and interface spin mixing conductance [2-5]. Furthermore, interface spin-orbit coupling 
can be studied using spin-orbit MR (SOMR) [6]. In addition, SMR can be used to study 
the magnetization in magnetic insulators and monitor the directions of the Néel order 
in antiferromagnetic materials through highly sensitive electrical measurements [7-9].


Therefore, SMR plays a critical role in spintronics research.

A model for the SMR in the heterostructures of HMs and ferromagnetic insulators 

(FMI) has been proposed [2, 10, 11] for analyzing spin-dependent transport behaviors 
in all-metallic heterostructures [4, 12]. Compared with that in HM/FMI, the SMR effect 
in HM/ferromagnetic metals (FMs) is more complicated owing to the influence of 
interface spin-orbit coupling on conducting electrons and the conversion of charge and 
spin currents in FMs. Therefore, based on previous theoretical research, the absorption 
of the longitudinal spin current by the FM layer [4], spin current generated by the FM 
layer [13], and anomalous Hall effect of the FM layer [5, 14, 15] should be considered.
More importantly, although the appearance of the magnetoresistance effect in the plane 
perpendicular to the charge current (i.e., the yz-plane) is a feature that distinguishes 
SMR from the traditional anisotropic magnetoresistance (AMR), the ordered 
arrangement of grains in FMs and the breaking of symmetry at interfaces also generates 
magnetoresistance in that plane [16-18]. For instance, Kobs et. al. observed a distinct 
magnetoresistance in the yz-plane for a Pt/Ni/Pt system; however, the contribution of 
SMR was negligible [19]. Hence, it is necessary to determine the primary contribution 
of the yz-plane to the magnetoresistance in all-metallic heterostructures and re-estimate 
the magnitude of SMR. For this purpose, we studied the Pt/(CoNi)n multilayer system,
which is a magnetic heterostructure with a tunable perpendicular magnetic anisotropy
(PMA), high spin polarization, and low Gilbert damping [20-22]; this system has been 
studied extensively in the field of spintronics. We found that the magnitude of SMR in 
this structure is significantly lower than the theoretically predicted value.

II. THIN-FILM DEPOSITION AND STRUCTURAL CHARACTERIZATION 

In this work, Ta (3)/Pt (10)/[Co (0.3) Ni (0.4)]n/Ta (3) was deposited on a naturally 

oxidized monocrystalline silicon substrate via magnetron sputtering at room 
temperature. The numbers in brackets represent the thickness of each layer in 
nanometer units, and n=2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 12, which are the number of 
repetitions of the magnetic double-layer. Ta in the upper layers forms a buffer, whereas 
that in the lower layer forms protective layers; this reduces the influence of substrate 
roughness and prevents oxidation of the film. During sputtering, the base vacuum is 
lower than 5×10-8 Torr, and the Ar pressure is maintained at 3×10-3 Torr. The static 
magnetic properties of all the samples were determined using vibrating-sample 
magnetometry, and the crystal structures were characterized via high-resolution x-ray 
diffractometry (HR-XRD) measurements. Furthermore, magnetoresistance was 
characterized using the physical property measurement system (PPMS; Quantum 
Design in SandieDo, USA), and a self-built system was employed for the ST-FMR test.

First, we determined the crystal structure and orientation of all samples by using 

HR-XRD with a Cu 𝐾𝛼 radiation source. Figure 1(a) presents the 𝜃 − 2𝜃 x-ray 
diffraction spectra of the samples with different repetition numbers; in this figure, the 
dashed lines at 39.7° and 44.5° represent the expected positions of the Pt (111) and 
CoNi (111) peaks, respectively, in unstrained lattices [23]. For the n=2 sample, only the 
Pt (111) peak is observed in the range of 34°–50°. Several clear secondary diffraction 
peaks generated by Laue oscillations are noted around this peak, indicating that Pt has 


high crystallinity in the (111) orientation and low interface roughness. When n > 4, a 
relatively weak peak appears at 42°–44°. With an increase in n, the strength of this peak 
gradually increases, and the peak position approaches 44.5°. The full width at half 
maximum of the rocking curves around the Pt (111) and CoNi (111) reflections are 
determined as 5.7° and 4.9°, respectively, using Gaussian fitting, as shown in Fig. 1(b–
c). This indicates that the Pt and CoNi in the samples have (111) textures parallel to the 
normal direction of the film. To verify that the number of repetitions in this series of 
samples was precisely controlled, the dependence of the ratio of the intensity of CoNi 
(111) and Pt (111) on n was analyzed, as shown in Fig. 1(d). From this figure, it is 
evident that a straight line passing through the origin coincides with the experimental 
results (denoted as open circles). Therefore, assuming that the thickness of Pt remains 
unchanged, altering the number of repetitions increases the number of crystal surfaces 
participating in Bragg reflection; however, it does not affect the crystal structure of each 
CoNi layer.

To further validate that the CoNi repetition was accurately regulated, we evaluated 

the dependence of PMA on n. As shown in Fig. 2 (a) and (b), an abnormal Hall 
resistance curve was observed for n=8 when a magnetic field was applied along the 
normal direction of the film and parallel to the film. It can be deduced that the square-
shaped anomalous Hall effect (AHE), as shown in Fig. 2(a), exhibits PMA [24]. Based 
on the field-in-plane loop, the effective perpendicular anisotropy field (𝐻𝑘

eff) can be 

estimated to be approximately 10 kOe. To determine the precise value of 𝐻𝑘

eff, we use 

the following formula:

𝜌xy(𝐻x)

𝜌xy(0) = √1 − (

𝐻x
𝐻𝑘

eff)2
(1)

Thus, the AHE curve was fitted in the range of 1–6 kOe, as shown in the inset of Fig. 
2(b) [25]. The fitting result of 𝐻𝑘

eff is 7.6 ± 0.1 kOe. Thereafter, we can obtain the 

relationship between 𝐻𝑘

eff and n according to this fitting method, as shown in Fig. 2(c). 

The solid line depicted in this figure represents the fitting curve of A/n+B; this line 
proves that the PMA can be primarily attributed to the interface effect. This result is 
consistent with previous reports [23]. Using the analytical method proposed by You et 
al. [26] and neglecting the volume anisotropy energies of Co and Ni, the average 
perpendicular anisotropic energy per unit area for each CoNi layer can be expressed as

𝐾eff𝐷 + 2π𝐷𝑀𝑠

2 = 𝐾𝑠

Co Ni
⁄
+ 𝐾𝑠

Ni Co
⁄
+ （ 1 𝑛
⁄ ）（𝐾𝑠

Pt Co
⁄
+ 𝐾𝑠

Ni Ta
⁄
− 𝐾𝑠

Ni Co
⁄
） (2)

In this equation, the effective perpendicular anisotropy can be obtained using 𝐾eff =

𝐻𝑘

eff𝑀𝑠

2
 ; D=0.7 nm is the bilayer thickness; 𝐾𝑠

Co Ni
⁄
, 𝐾𝑠

Ni Co
⁄
, 𝐾𝑠

Pt Co
⁄
, 𝐾𝑠

Ni Ta
⁄
are the 

interface anisotropy energies of the Co/Ni, Ni/Co, Pt/Co, and Ni/Ta interfaces, 
respectively; and the second term on the left-hand side is the demagnetizing energy, 
where 𝑀𝑠 = (𝑀𝑠

Co𝑡Co + 𝑀𝑠

Ni𝑡Ni)/𝐷 =614.3 emu·cm-3. As shown in Fig. 2(d), there

exists a linear relationship between this energy and 1/n. Considering 𝐾𝑠

Co Ni
⁄
= 𝐾𝑠

Ni Co
⁄

and neglecting the term 𝐾𝑠

Ni Ta
⁄
 , 𝐾𝑠

Co Ni
⁄
= 0.14 ± 0.01 (erg · cm−2) and 𝐾𝑠

Pt Co
⁄
=


0.57 ± 0.04 (erg · cm−2) are obtained from Eq. (2). These values are similar to those 
reported by previous studies [26, 27]. Thus, based on the abovementioned analysis of 
interface anisotropy, it can be concluded that the samples in this study exhibit clear 
periodic structures and Co/Pt and Co/Ni interfaces.

III. ANGLE DEPENDENCE OF MAGNETORESISTANCE

It is generally believed that the presence of cos^2 symmetric magnetoresistance in 

the HM/FM structure in the plane perpendicular to the direction of current [i.e., the yz-
plane, as defined in Fig. 3(a)] is a sign of the SMR effect [1]. However, in order to 
strictly separate the contributions of SMR from the geometrical-size effect (GSE) [28, 
29] and anisotropic interface magnetoresistance (AIMR) [16, 17], it is necessary to 
determine the dependence of magnetoresistance on thickness for the xy- and yz-planes; 
the results for both these planes need to be analyzed simultaneously.

As shown in Fig. 3, we measure the angle-dependent magnetoresistance in the xy-

and yz-planes. A magnetic field of 9 T is applied during the experiment to ensure that 
the magnetic moment of the FM is parallel to the magnetic field. α and β denote the 
angles of the magnetic field direction measured from the x-axis in the xy-plane and the 
z-axis in the yz-plane, respectively. The experimental results for three typical samples 
are shown in Fig. 3(b). As shown in this figure, the cos2𝛼 behavior is observed for all 
CoNi thicknesses (denoted by black circles), which is consistent with the behavior of 
conventional AMR. However, the magnetoresistance curve in the yz-plane includes a 
higher-order cosine term, and the contribution of this higher-order term increases with 
n. The polar diagram can be used to further highlight the symmetry of 
magnetoresistance in the yz-plane with the changes in n, as shown in Fig. 3(d). 
Subsequently, the magnetoresistance curve for the xy-plane is fitted using the 
conventional AMR equation [30]:

𝜌(𝛼) = 𝜌0 + ∆𝜌𝑥𝑦cos2𝛼
(3)

where 𝜌0 refers to the resistivity of the sample when the magnetic field direction is 
perpendicular to the direction of current, and ∆𝜌𝑥𝑦 refers to the change in resistivity 
when the magnetic field coincides with the x- and y-axes, respectively. Results of the 
Fourier analysis reveal that the orders of cos2𝑛𝛽 need to be considered in order to 
appropriately describe the magnetoresistance curve for the yz-plane [19], according to 
the following equation :

𝜌(𝛽) = 𝜌0 + ∑
∆𝜌𝑦𝑧

(2𝑛)
3
𝑛=1
cos2𝑛𝛽
(4)

This adequately fits the experimental data, as shown in Fig. 3(c). Thereafter, we obtain 
the contribution of the second-order (cos2𝛽 ), fourth-order (cos4𝛽 ), and sixth-order 
(cos6𝛽) terms based on the magnetoresistance of the yz-plane. For all the samples, the 
sixth order is considerably smaller than the other two terms; therefore, it is omitted from 
subsequent discussions.

It can be concluded that all the magnetoresistance effects in the sample are caused 

by a single magnetic layer, and the relationship between magnetoresistance and the 
thickness of the magnetic layer (𝑡CoNi) can be analyzed [16, 17, 19]. In this model, the 


SMR effect, which should have appeared in the Pt layer, is ascribed to an interfacial 
magnetoresistance effect that is inversely proportional to the FM thickness. Based on 
this approach, we first consider the shunt effect, as follows: 

∆𝜌CoNi
𝜌CoNi =

∆𝜌

𝜌 ×

𝑑Pt𝜌CoNi+𝑡CoNi𝜌Pt

𝑡CoNi𝜌Pt
(5)

where 

∆𝜌

𝜌
is the total magnetoresistance observed during the experiment, and 

𝜌CoNi=1.8×10-7 Ω·m and 𝜌Pt=2×10-7 Ω·m represent the resistivities of CoNi and Pt, 
respectively. In addition, considering the presence of magnetic dead layers at the 
interface between CoNi and the non-magnetic layer, we employed the effective 
thickness of the magnetic layer (𝑡CoNi,corr = 𝑡CoNi − 0.65 nm), as shown in Fig. 4.

The SMR effect is derived through the absorption and reflection of the interface 

spin current in the Pt layer, which is related to the direction of FM magnetization and 
is reflected as magnetoresistance under the combined effects of spin Hall effect (SHE)
and inverse SHE. There are three basic characteristics of this effect. First, the variation 
in magnetoresistance depends on the angle between magnetization and spin polarization 
(y-axis); hence, it can be observed in both the yz- and xy-planes. Second, according to 
a previous theory, there is only one cos^2 term [1-3]. Finally, when SMR is caused by 
the magnetoresistance of the CoNi layer, it exhibits an inverse relationship with the 
thickness of the CoNi layer. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the magnetoresistance ratio in the 

xy-plane (∆𝜌xy,CoNi/𝜌CoNi) is linearly dependent on the thickness of 𝑡CoNi,corr and is 

not inversely proportional to the thickness as expected. This result indicates that the 
samples may not possess SMR. Nevertheless, magnetoresistance is observed in the yz-
plane, which is typically the basis for identifying the presence of SMR. Therefore, the 
magnetoresistance observed in the yz-plane needs to be further analyzed. 

Figure 4(b) indicates a non-monotonic change between the magnetoresistance 

ratios in the yz-plane (∆𝜌yz,CoNi

(2)
/𝜌CoNi ) and 𝑡CoNi,corr . When 𝑡CoNi,corr<4 nm, the 

magnetoresistance ratio decreases with the increase in thickness, thereby confirming 

the existence of an interface contribution.
When 𝑡CoNi,corr ≥ 4 nm,
the 

magnetoresistance ratio tends to increase with the thickness. Therefore, we analyze and 
fit the dependence of the magnetoresistance ratio on thickness, using the following 
empirical formula:

∆𝜌yz,CoNi

(2n)

𝜌CoNi
=

𝐴

𝑡CoNi + 𝐵 · 𝑡CoNi + 𝐶
(6)

This formula introduces three undetermined parameters: A, B, and C. A describes the 
contribution of the interface, B represents the contribution of the linear relationship with 
thickness, and C represents the contribution of magnetoresistance independent of 
thickness. As indicated by the black curve in Fig. 4(b), the fitting formula is in good 
agreement with the experimental data; the fitting results are A = 0.025 nm, B = 0.012 
nm-1, and C = -0.0006. Assuming that A entirely comprises SMR contributions, a small 
percent change in magnetoresistance should have been observed. However, as shown 


in Fig. 4(a), when the thickness is less than 2 nm, the magnetoresistance is below 1%,
which further proves that the contribution of SMR in A can be neglected. 

Three primary factors contribute toward the magnetoresistance in the yz-plane.

First, AIMR arises because of the anisotropic interfacial scattering of conductive 
electrons, which mainly presents when magnetization in the yz-plane varies with high-
order cosine terms, as indicated by the red dashed line in Fig. 4(b). Second, the negative 
constant term in the second-order term can be attributed to the GSE effect, which is 
caused by crystallinity and consequently the anisotropic orientation of grains [16, 19]. 
This is associated with C in the fitting formula. Third, the part where there is a linear 
relationship with the thickness appears in the second- and fourth-order terms; the case 
of this phenomenon is currently under investigation. In summary, based on the 
abovementioned detailed analyses, we proved that SMR was not evident in the samples. 
Moreover, we also reveal that the presence of the cos^2 symmetric magnetoresistance 
in the yz-plane is not the only criterion for determining the existence of SMR. 

IV. THEORETICAL PREDICTION OF SMR AMPLITUDE 

To further investigate this absence of SMR, based on the analysis results depicted 

in Fig. 4, the theoretical value of SMR in the sample needs to be determined. When the 
Pt layer thickness is significantly larger than its spin diffusion length, the spin Hall 
angle (𝜃SH) is the only parameter that influences SMR [5]. Therefore, using the ST-
FMR method, we introduce a microwave signal with a GHz frequency in the Pt/(CoNi)n
microstrip. The typical measured ST-FMR spectrum is shown in Fig. 5(a); the
experimental conditions are 18.5 GHz, 25 dBm, and 𝛼=45°. The spectrum can be well 
fitted using a general line-shape equation, as follows:

𝑉𝑑𝑐 = 𝑈s

∆𝐻2

∆𝐻2+(𝐻−𝐻0)2 + 𝑈a

∆𝐻(𝐻−𝐻0)

∆𝐻2+(𝐻−𝐻0)2
(7)

where 𝑈s
and 𝑈a
are the voltage amplitudes of the symmetric Lorentz and 

antisymmetric dispersive line-shapes, respectively; Sankey et al. reported that these 
line-shapes are a result of the damping-like torque caused by the SHE of the Pt layer 
and the torque generated by the Oersted field [31]. ΔH and 𝐻0 are the linewidth and 
resonance field, respectively. To accurately determine the spin Hall angle, we first 
obtained the angular dependence of 𝑈s and 𝑈a , as shown in Fig. 5(b). These 
dependences satisfy the theoretical angle dependence relationship of sin2𝛼cos𝛼 ,
which implies that the ratio between 𝑈s and 𝑈a is independent of the angle. In 
addition, we measured the 𝑈s/𝑈a ratio of samples with different CoNi thicknesses at 
18 GHz and fitted them according to Ref. [32]:

𝑈s
𝑈𝑎 [1 + (

4𝜋𝑀eff

𝐻0 )]

1
2 = 𝜃SH

ℏ

𝑒𝜇0𝑀s𝑡CoNi𝑑Pt
(8)

Based on the reciprocal relationship with 𝑡CoNi, the spin Hall angle of Pt in the sample 
was determined to be 0.07. It should be noted that the interface was considered to be 
transparent to the spin current generated in Pt. If the transparency of the Pt/Co interface 
T=0.65±0.06 is considered, according to Ref. [33], the spin current density of Pt 
flowing to the Co/Pt interface is greater than that flowing to the CoNi layer. Thus, the 
spin Hall angle in our system is estimated to be larger than 0.07. In addition, SMR was 


estimated to be larger than 7.3×10-4 using the following equation: 

∆𝜌𝑆𝑀𝑅

𝜌Pt ~ 𝜃𝑆𝐻

2
𝜆Pt
𝑑Pt tanh (

𝑑Pt
2𝜆Pt) [1 −

1

cosh(𝑑Pt

𝜆Pt)]
(9)

where 𝜆Pt=1.5 nm is the spin diffusion length of Pt [3]. 

To directly compare the theoretical value of SMR with the experimental results, 

the theoretical SMR value is attributed to the magnetoresistance of the CoNi layer 
through shunt treatment; this resulted in a contribution that is inversely proportional to 
the thickness of the CoNi layer in the xy- and yz-planes, corresponding to 
ASMR≈6.57×10-3 nm in Eq. (6). To facilitate comparison, the theoretical prediction of 
SMR, second-order contribution of AIMR in experimental data, and experimental 
results of magnetoresistance in the xy-plane are all included in Fig. 5(d). It is evident 
that the theoretical SMR is higher than the experimental value, when the thickness of 
the CoNi layer is less than 2 nm. This indicates that the accuracy of these experimental 
results can fully characterize the SMR effect predicted theoretically. However, the 
results did not show a contribution in inverse proportion to the thickness. Further 
estimates based on our experimental accuracy suggest that the order of magnitude of 
SMR in our system should be less than 1×10-4. This value is considerably lower than 
previously reported SMR values for metallic systems with Pt = 10 nm [4, 12]. In 
addition, the magnitude of AIMR is 4 times greater than that of SMR. Therefore, 
although SMR was noted, the magnetoresistance in the yz-plane is dominated by the 
contribution of AIMR.

V. DISCUSSION

The results of the ST-FMR experiment indicate that the spin current torque 

generated in the Pt layer affects the magnetization of CoNi,; however, the absorption of 
these spin currents was not evidenced by an apparent SMR effect. Based on the spin 

diffusion equation, the spin current density 𝒋𝒔

(𝐅) at the magnetic interface is [1]

𝑒𝒋𝒔

(𝐅)(𝑴) = 𝐺𝑟𝑴 × (𝑴 × 𝝁𝒔) + 𝐺𝑖(𝑴 × 𝝁𝒔)
(10)

where 𝐺𝑟(𝐺𝑖) is the real(imaginary) component of the spin mixing conductance, and 
𝝁𝒔 is the accumulation of spin at the interface. The spin current flowing into the FM 
through the interface and the reflected spin current are uniquely influenced by the 
direction of magnetization, which eventually leads to the SMR effect. Therefore, 
starting from the interface effect, we consider the effect of spin memory loss (SML) on 
the spin transport of the Pt/Co interface [34, 35]. SML implies that the spin current 
flowing into the CoNi layer is significantly lower than that flowing into the Pt/Co 
interface in Pt. This type of interfacial absorption of the spin current is independent of 
the M of the CoNi layer. However, SML is equivalent to inserting a spin sink layer 
(SSL) with a specific thickness and spin diffusion length between the FM and the HM. 
Therefore, the spin boundary conditions between SSL and FM are similar to Eq. (10), 
and the Pt layer and SSL can be combined to form an equivalent HM with a smaller 
𝜃SH. As the spin current acting on M in the FM can be detected using ST-FMR, 𝜃SH =
0.07, which neglects the interface effect, is lower than previously reported experimental 


values [33]. However, the magnitude of SMR estimated using 𝜃SH = 0.07 is still 
within the range of our experimental accuracy. Therefore, only considering the SML
does not reasonably explain our experimental results.

As SMR was first confirmed and systematically studied in HM/YIG, we believe 

that the SMR effect in HM/FMI and HM/FM is significantly different due to the 
different carriers of spin current and the corresponding scattering mechanisms in FMI 
and FMs. In general, spin current can only be absorbed by FMI through the spin-
angular-momentum exchange between the localized magnetization M in FMI and the 
conduction-electron spin polarization σ in HMs, i.e., the spin-orbit torque (SOT). 
However, in FMs, the spin relaxation of itinerant electrons needs to be considered. In 
2011, Berger extended Elliott’s theory of spin relaxation in metals and semiconductors 
to include metallic ferromagnets [36]. He found that the spin relaxation in FMs arises 
from the spin-orbital interaction associated with the crystalline periodical potential and 
the random potential caused by scatters; this is proportional to the spin down resistivity 
for materials whose spin-up fermi levels are located above the top of the 3d band, such 
as Ni and Co. Further experimental results confirmed this theory; for instance, Sagasta 
et.al. reported that the Elliott–Yafet mechanism is the dominant spin relaxation 
mechanism in permalloys [37].

With regard to the absence of SMR observed during our experiment, we consider

two mechanisms that absorbed the injected spin current in FMs: SOT (M-dependent, 
interfacial effect) and spin relaxation (less M-independent, bulk effect). The absorption 
of spin currents using SOT is dominant when M is perpendicular to σ. Contrarily, when 
M is parallel to σ, SOT is not applicable; however, most of the spin currents would be 
relaxed in FMs. In general, most of the spin currents flowing into FMs will be absorbed, 
resulting in a spin boundary condition for the FM/HM, which is independent of (or less
dependent on) the direction of magnetization. Therefore, although SOT in the Pt/CoNi 
system was evident, a corresponding magnitude of SMR does not appears. In 
conclusion, we believe that, when considering different mechanisms for the spin current 
absorption in FMs and FMI, boundary conditions of the spin current in the HM/FMI 
may not be applicable to the HM/FM interface; thus, SMR performance would be 
significantly different. 

VI. CONCLUSIONS

In summary, we systematically investigated the magnetoresistance effect in a 

Pt/(CoNi)n system with strong PMA and a (111) texture. By ascribing all the 
magnetoresistance to the CoNi layer, the contribution of the magnetoresistance with 
interface characteristics was emphasized. By comparing the magnetoresistance 
characteristics of the yz and xy planes, we determined that the magnetoresistance with 
interface characteristics in the yz plane could be primarily attributed to AIMR, and no 
obvious contribution of SMR was found in the experimental results. However, we 
obtained the 𝜃SH of Pt through an ST-FMR experiment, and the magnitude predicted 
by the SMR theory was higher than our experimental accuracy. Consequently, the 
appearance of cos2𝛽 terms in the plane perpendicular to the current cannot be used as 
an indicator of SMR in metallic magnetic heterostructures. The separation of the 


magnetoresistance in the yz plane introduced by the symmetry breaking of the interface 
is a necessary prerequisite for the study of the SMR effect in metallic magnetic 
heterostructures. 

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by NSFC (Nos 11429401, 91963201

and 51471081), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team 
in University (No IRT-16R35), the Creative Project of Key Laboratory for Magnetism 
and Magnetic Materials of the Ministry of Education, and the 111 Project under Grant 
No. B20063. We would like to thank Editage (www.editage.cn) for English language 
editing.

Reference:
[1] Y.T. Chen, S. Takahashi, H. Nakayama, M. Althammer, S.T.B. Goennenwein, E. Saitoh, G.E.W. Bauer, 

Theory of spin Hall magnetoresistance, Physical Review B, 87, 144411 (2013).

[2] H. Nakayama, M. Althammer, Y.T. Chen, K. Uchida, Y. Kajiwara, D. Kikuchi, T. Ohtani, S. Geprags, 

M. Opel, S. Takahashi, R. Gross, G.E. Bauer, S.T. Goennenwein, E. Saitoh, Spin Hall magnetoresistance 

induced by a nonequilibrium proximity effect, Phys Rev Lett, 110, 206601 (2013).

[3] M. Althammer, S. Meyer, H. Nakayama, M. Schreier, S. Altmannshofer, M. Weiler, H. Huebl, S. 

Geprags, M. Opel, R. Gross, D. Meier, C. Klewe, T. Kuschel, J.M. Schmalhorst, G. Reiss, L.M. Shen, A. 

Gupta, Y.T. Chen, G.E.W. Bauer, E. Saitoh, S.T.B. Goennenwein, Quantitative study of the spin Hall 

magnetoresistance in ferromagnetic insulator/normal metal hybrids, Physical Review B, 87, 224401

(2013).

[4] J. Kim, P. Sheng, S. Takahashi, S. Mitani, M. Hayashi, Spin Hall Magnetoresistance in Metallic 

Bilayers, Phys Rev Lett, 116, 097201 (2016).

[5] M. Kawaguchi, D. Towa, Y.C. Lau, S. Takahashi, M. Hayashi, Anomalous spin Hall 

magnetoresistance in Pt/Co bilayers, Applied Physics Letters, 112, 202405 (2018).

[6] L. Zhou, H. Song, K. Liu, Z. Luan, P. Wang, L. Sun, S. Jiang, H. Xiang, Y. Chen, J. Du, H. Ding, K. 

Xia, J. Xiao, D. Wu, Observation of spin-orbit magnetoresistance in metallic thin films on magnetic 

insulators, Sci Adv, 4.eaao3318(2018).

[7] X.Z. Chen, R. Zarzuela, J. Zhang, C. Song, X.F. Zhou, G.Y. Shi, F. Li, H.A. Zhou, W.J. Jiang, F. Pan, 

Y. Tserkovnyak, Antidamping-Torque-Induced Switching in Biaxial Antiferromagnetic Insulators, Phys 

Rev Lett, 120, 207204 (2018).

[8] J. Fischer, M. Althammer, N. Vlietstra, H. Huebl, S.T.B. Goennenwein, R. Gross, S. Geprägs, M. 

Opel, Large Spin Hall Magnetoresistance in Antiferromagnetic α−Fe2O3/Pt Heterostructures, Physical 

Review Applied, 13, 014019 (2020).

[9] J. Fischer, O. Gomonay, R. Schlitz, K. Ganzhorn, N. Vlietstra, M. Althammer, H. Huebl, M. Opel, R. 

Gross, S.T.B. Goennenwein, S. Geprags, Spin Hall magnetoresistance in antiferromagnet/heavy-metal 

heterostructures, Physical Review B, 97, 014417 (2018).

[10] S.Y. Huang, X. Fan, D. Qu, Y.P. Chen, W.G. Wang, J. Wu, T.Y. Chen, J.Q. Xiao, C.L. Chien, 

Transport magnetic proximity effects in platinum, Phys Rev Lett, 109, 107204 (2012).

[11] C. Hahn, G. de Loubens, O. Klein, M. Viret, V.V. Naletov, J. Ben Youssef, Comparative 


measurements of inverse spin Hall effects and magnetoresistance in YIG/Pt and YIG/Ta, Physical 

Review B, 87, 174417 (2013).

[12] J.G. Choi, J.W. Lee, B.G. Park, Spin Hall magnetoresistance in heavy-metal/metallic-ferromagnet 

multilayer structures, Physical Review B, 96,174412 (2017).

[13] W.L. Yang, J.W. Wei, C.H. Wan, Y.W. Xing, Z.R. Yan, X. Wang, C. Fang, C.Y. Guo, G.Q. Yu, X.F. 

Han, Determining spin-torque efficiency in ferromagnetic metals via spin-torque ferromagnetic 

resonance, Physical Review B, 101, 064412 (2020).

[14] Y. Yang, Z. Luo, H. Wu, Y. Xu, R.W. Li, S.J. Pennycook, S. Zhang, Y. Wu, Anomalous Hall 

magnetoresistance in a ferromagnet, Nat Commun, 10.1038/s41467-018-04712-9 (2018).

[15] T. Taniguchi, Magnetoresistance generated from charge-spin conversion by anomalous Hall effect 

in metallic ferromagnetic/nonmagnetic bilayers, Physical Review B, 94, 174440 (2016).

[16] A. Kobs, S. Hesse, W. Kreuzpaintner, G. Winkler, D. Lott, P. Weinberger, A. Schreyer, H.P. Oepen, 

Anisotropic interface magnetoresistance in Pt/Co/Pt sandwiches, Phys Rev Lett, 106, 217207 (2011).

[17] A. Kobs, H.P. Oepen, Disentangling interface and bulk contributions to the anisotropic 

magnetoresistance in Pt/Co/Pt sandwiches, Physical Review B, 93, 014426 (2016).

[18] L.K. Zou, Y. Zhang, L. Gu, J.W. Cai, L. Sun, Tunable angular-dependent magnetoresistance 

correlations in magnetic films and their implications for spin Hall magnetoresistance analysis, Physical 

Review B, 93,075309 (2016).

[19] A. Philippi-Kobs, A. Farhadi, L. Matheis, D. Lott, A. Chuvilin, H.P. Oepen, Impact of Symmetry on 

Anisotropic Magnetoresistance in Textured Ferromagnetic Thin Films, Phys Rev Lett, 123, 137201

(2019) .

[20] M. Haertinger, C.H. Back, S.H. Yang, S.S.P. Parkin, G. Woltersdorf, Properties of Ni/Co multilayers 

as a function of the number of multilayer repetitions, J. Phys. D-Appl. Phys, 46, 175001 (2013).

[21] S. Mizukami, X.M. Zhang, T. Kubota, H. Naganuma, M. Oogane, Y. Ando, T. Miyazaki, Gilbert 

Damping in Ni/Co Multilayer Films Exhibiting Large Perpendicular Anisotropy, Applied Physics 

Express, 4, 013005 (2011).

[22] H.S. Song, K.D. Lee, J.W. Sohn, S.H. Yang, S.S.P. Parkin, C.Y. You, S.C. Shin, Observation of the 

intrinsic Gilbert damping constant in Co/Ni multilayers independent of the stack number with 

perpendicular anisotropy, Applied Physics Letters, 102, 102401 (2013).

[23] M. Arora, R. Hubner, D. Suess, B. Heinrich, E. Girt, Origin of perpendicular magnetic anisotropy 

in Co/Ni multilayers, Physical Review B, 96, 024401 (2017).

[24] P. Zhang, K. Xie, W. Lin, D. Wu, H. Sang, Anomalous Hall effect in Co/Ni multilayers with 

perpendicular magnetic anisotropy, Applied Physics Letters, 104, 082404 (2014).

[25] Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, J. Jia, Y. Zheng, Y. Wang, X. Fan, J. Cao, Tuning Slonczewski-like torque and 

Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction by inserting a Pt spacer layer in Ta/CoFeB/MgO structures, Applied 

Physics Letters, 112, 232402 (2018).

[26] L. You, R.C. Sousa, S. Bandiera, B. Rodmacq, B. Dieny, Co/Ni multilayers with perpendicular 

anisotropy for spintronic device applications, Applied Physics Letters, 100, 172411 (2012).

[27] P. Ruiz-Diaz, T.R. Dasa, V.S. Stepanyuk, Tuning magnetic anisotropy in metallic multilayers by 

surface charging: an ab initio study, Phys Rev Lett, 110, 267203 (2013).

[28] W. Gil, D. Gorlitz, M. Horisberger, J. Kotzler, Magnetoresistance anisotropy of polycrystalline 

cobalt films: Geometrical-size and domain effects, Physical Review B, 72, 134401 (2005).

[29] T.T. Chen, V.A. Marsocci, Transverse Magnetoresistivity Anisotropy Measurements and the 

Geometrical Size Effect in Nickel Thin Films, Journal of Applied Physics, 43, 1554-1558 (1972).


[30] T.R.M.A.R.I. POTTER, Anisotropic Magnetoresistance in Ferromagnetic 3d Alloys, IEEE Trans. 

Magn. 11, 1018 (1975). 

[31] J.C. Sankey, Y.-T. Cui, J.Z. Sun, J.C. Slonczewski, R.A. Buhrman, D.C. Ralph, Measurement of the 

spin-transfer-torque vector in magnetic tunnel junctions, Nature Physics, 4, 67-71 (2007).

[32] L. Liu, T. Moriyama, D.C. Ralph, R.A. Buhrman, Spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance induced by 

the spin Hall effect, Phys Rev Lett, 106, 036601 (2011).

[33] W. Zhang, W. Han, X. Jiang, S.-H. Yang, S. S. P. Parkin, Role of transparency of platinum–

ferromagnet interfaces in determining the intrinsic magnitude of the spin Hall effect, Nature Physics, 11, 

496-502 (2015).

[34] K. Gupta, R.J.H. Wesselink, R. Liu, Z. Yuan, P.J. Kelly, Disorder Dependence of Interface Spin 

Memory Loss, Phys Rev Lett, 124, 087702 (2020).

[35] H.-J. Drouhin, J.-E. Wegrowe, M. Razeghi, J.C. Rojas-Sánchez, N. Reyren, P. Laczkowski, W. 

Savero, J.P. Attané, C. Deranlot, S. Gambarelli, M. Jamet, J.M. George, L. Vila, H. Jaffrès, Spin pumping 

and inverse spin Hall effect in platinum and other 5dmetals: the essential role of spin-memory loss and 

spin-current discontinuities at interfaces, Spintronics VII, (2014).

[36] X.G. Wang, Z.W. Zhou, Y.Z. Nie, Q.L. Xia, G.H. Guo, Self-consistent study of local and nonlocal 

magnetoresistance in a YIG/Pt bilayer, Physical Review B, 97, 094401 (2018).

[37] X.G. Wang, Z.X. Li, Z.W. Zhou, Y.Z. Nie, Q.L. Xia, Z.M. Zeng, L. Chotorlishvili, J. Berakdar, G.H. 

Guo, Conversion of electronic to magnonic spin current at a heavy-metal magnetic-insulator interface, 

Physical Review B, 95, 020414 (2017).

[38] S. Zhang, Z. Li, Roles of nonequilibrium conduction electrons on the magnetization dynamics of 

ferromagnets, Phys Rev Lett, 93, 127204 (2004).

[39] L. Berger, Spin relaxation in metallic ferromagnets, Physical Review B, 83, 054410 (2011).

[40] E. Sagasta, Y. Omori, M. Isasa, Y. Otani, L.E. Hueso, F. Casanova, Spin diffusion length of 

Permalloy using spin absorption in lateral spin valves, Applied Physics Letters, 111, 082407 (2017).


Fig. 1. (a) Out-of-plane x-ray measurement of as-deposited Ta(3)/Pt(10)/[Co(0.3)
/Ni(0.4)]n/Ta(3) for n ranging from 2 to 12. Dashed lines at 39.7° and 44.5° r
epresent the expected positions of unstrained Pt(111) and Co/Ni(111) peaks, res
pectively. (b,c) Rocking curves around Pt (111) and CoNi (111) with a reflecti
on of n=12. (d) Blue data points indicate the dependence of the peak intensity 
ratio of CoNi and Pt on the number of repetitions n; as indicated, the straight 
black line, which was fitted to the experimental results, passes through the orig
in. 


Fig. 2 (a,b) Loops of Hall resistance when a magnetic field was applied along the film 
normal and plane of n=8. (c) Black circles represent the dependence of the effective 
perpendicular anisotropy field on the repetition number, which is well fitted by A/n+B
(A and B are constants), as indicated by the curve. (d) Triangle represents the 
perpendicular anisotropy energy per unit area, and the red line denotes the linear fitting. 
The inset in (b) depicts local enlarged data from 1–6 kOe, and the curve is the result of 
fitting using Eq. (1).


Fig. 3. MR behavior of Pt/[Co/Ni]n structures. (a) Illustration of the Ta/Pt/[Co/Ni]n/Ta 
sample structure and coordinate system of the experiment. (b) Resistivity ρ with respect 
to the magnetization orientation for three samples with different repetitions. The 
rotation of magnetization M is performed in the film plane (β=90°, denoted as black 
dots) and in the plane perpendicular to current j (α=90°, denoted as red dots). ρ(α, β=90°) 
exhibits the conventional AMR behavior for all samples (cos2α fits), and the functional 
dependence of ρ(α=90°, β) varies with n. (c) Individual cos2nβ contributions to ρ(α=90°,
β) for n=12. (d) Polar plot of ρ(α=90°, β) for the three samples.


Fig. 4. Thickness-dependent magnetoresistance after corrections. (a) ∆𝜌xy,CoNi/ρCoNi, 

(b) ∆ρyz,CoNi

(2)
/ρCoNi, and (c) ∆ρyz,CoNi

(4)
/ρCoNi as a function of the thickness of CoNi. 

The symbols denote experimental data, whereas the solid black lines represent fitting 
lines. The dashed lines (dotted lines) represent the contribution of AIMR (this 
contribution increases linearly with thickness). The GSE contribution is a constant that 
is independent of thickness; it is indicated by a thinner solid straight line in (b).


Fig. 5. (a) ST-FMR spectrum of for the n = 7 sample measured at 45° in-plane,
presenting antisymmetric (blue curve) and Lorentz symmetric (red curve) line-shapes. 
(b) Angular dependence of 𝑈s and 𝑈a at the same frequency in the xy-plane. (c) 
Fitting of the spin Hall angle (𝜃SH) according to Eq. (8). (d) Dependence of xy-plane 
magnetoresistance, theoretical value of SMR, and experimental value of AIMR on the 
thickness of CoNi.


