Tunable band-gap and isotropic light absorption from bismuth-containing
GaAs core−shell and multi−shell nanowires
Muhammad Usman∗,†,‡

†School of Computing and Information Systems, Melbourne School of Engineering, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, 3010, Victoria, Australia.
‡School of Physics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010, Victoria, Australia.
Received June 23, 2020; E-mail: musman@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract: Semiconductor core−shell nanowires based on the GaAs substrate are building blocks of many photonic, photovoltaic and
electronic devices, thanks to the associated direct band-gap and the highly tunable optoelectronic properties. The selection of a
suitable material system is crucial for custom designed nanowires tailored for optimised device performance. The bismuth containing
GaAs materials are an imminent class of semiconductors which not only enable an exquisite control over the alloy strain and electronic
structure but also offer the possibility to suppress internal loss mechanisms in photonic devices. Whilst the experimental efforts
to incorporate GaBixAs1−x alloys in the nanowire active region are still in primitive stage, the theoretical understanding of the
optoelectronic properties of such nanowires is only rudimentary. This work elucidates and quantifies the role of nanowire physical
attributes such as its geometry parameters and bismuth incorporation in designing light absorption wavelength and polarisation
response. Based on multi-million atom tight-binding simulations of the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs core−shell and GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
multi−shell nanowires, our results predict a large tuning of the absorption wavelength, ranging from 0.9 µm to 1.6 µm, which
can be controlled by engineering either Bi composition or nanowire diameter. The analysis of the strain profiles indicates a tensile
character leading to significant light-hole mixing in the valence band states. This offers a possibility to achieve polarisation-insensitive
light interaction, which is desirable for several photonic devices involving amplification and modulation of light. Furthermore, at
low Bi compositions, the carrier confinement is quasi type-II, which further broadens the suitability of these nanowires for myriad
applications demanding large carrier separations. The presented results provide a systematic and comprehensive understanding of
the GaBixAs1−x nanowire properties and highlight new possibilities for future technologies in photonics, quantum optics and solar
energy harvesting.

Semiconductor nanowires are versatile nanostructures which
provide access to a unique set of electronic and optical
characteristics suitable for many photonic applications. 1,2

The recent advancements in the growth techniques have al-
lowed an exquisite control of nanowire morphologies, lead-
ing to engineered properties tailored for device function-
alities.
This has opened up tremendous opportunities for
application of nanowires in the realization of a wide range
of high-performance optoelectronic devices, including solar
cells, photodetectors, light sensors, optical modulators, opti-
cal amplifiers and solid-state light sources. 3–8 More recently,
there are proposals for novel applications of nanowires in
cross-disciplinary fields such as medical imaging and solar to
fuel conversion. Consequently, in the last few years, semi-
conductor nanowires have been a topic of major research
efforts on both experimental and theoretical fronts, where
the focus has been to optimise nanowire parameters such as
its geometry dimensions and composition to enable directed
applications in next generation technologies.
For nanowire growth and design, a large number of ma-
terial systems have been investigated in the literature in-
cluding III-Vs (such as GaAs, GaNAs, InGaP, GaPAs), 3–8

SiGe, 9 and ZnO, 10 among several others.
The nanowires
made up of GaAs based III-V materials have been of particu-
lar interest due to highly promising optoelectronic character-
istics, possibilities of dislocation free epitaxial growth, and
monolithic integration with a large number of substrates in-
cluding technologically relevant silicon 4,11 and graphene. 12

One particular class of nanowires is known as core−shell
nanowires, where the core and shell regions are made up
of different III-V materials such as GaAs and InGaAs. 13

There has also been studies for designing nanowires with
multi−shell structures where each shell is grown with a
different alloy composition to allow engineered carrier con-
finement and light interactions. 14 The core−shell nanowires
have been shown to offer excellent tuning of optoelectronic
properties because the strain and electronic confinement can
be controlled by designing the size of the core and shell re-
gions as well as the alloy compositions.
The nanowires formed by the conventional GaAs alloy
materials such as InGaAs, InGaP, and AlGaAs have been
around for many years and their optoelectronic properties
are well studied in the literature. 11,15–18 However, very
recently, the focus has been shifted towards incorporat-
ing highly-mismatched bismuth containing GaAs materials
such as GaBixAs1−x in the active region of core−shell
nanowires. 19–26
The
GaBixAs1−x
materials
which
are
formed by adding dilute concentration of bismuth (Bi)
in the GaAs material offer unique electronic properties
which are not readily accessible from traditional III-V al-
loys.
It has been shown that the band-gap energy of the
GaBixAs1−x material decreases dramatically with increas-
ing Bi composition. 27–32 This implies that the band-gap
energy can be tuned to a wide spectral range, encompassing
near, mid and far infra-red bands (1-10 µm).
The spec-
troscopic ellipsometry study has shown that the refractive
index for the GaBixAs1−x material increases with Bi frac-
tion and is slightly larger than that of the GaAs material. 33

Another highly promising property of the GaBixAs1−x ma-
terial system originates from very large spin-orbit coupling
associated with the GaBi material (≈2.3 eV), which leads
to a spin-orbit splitting energy being greater than the band-

1

arXiv:2006.12108v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  22 Jun 2020


gap energy in the telecommunication spectral range (1550
nm) − a property which is not available from other GaAs
based materials. The spin-orbit splitting energy larger than
the band-gap energy is highly desirable for the suppression
of internal loss mechanisms such as inter-valence band ab-
sorption (IVBA) and CHSH Auger recombination processes
which plague the efficiency of many photonic devices. 29,34–37

Therefore, a systematic and comprehensive understanding
of the GaBixAs1−x core−shell and multi−shell nanowires
such as presented in this work is expected to play an im-
portant role towards exploiting the unique characteristics
of this imminent material system for the next generation
photonic devices.
The interest in the GaBixAs1−x nanowires is at its prim-
itive stage and the first few experimental studies have
been reported in the literature during the last three to
four years. 19–26 Theoretically, GaBixAs1−x core−shell and
multi−shell nanowires have not been studied in much de-
tail.
Recently, GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires were theo-
retically investigated where the core region was made up
of the GaBixAs1−x material surrounded by a GaAs shell
region. 38 Here, in this work the focus is on GaBixAs1−x
nanowires where the core region is made up of GaAs region
and the GaBixAs1−x alloys is present in the shell region.
Such nanowires are highly relevant to many experimental
studies on the III-V core−shell nanowires where a tertiary
or quaternary alloy is typically present in the shell region
and the core region is a binary material. As the experimen-
tal research on GaBixAs1−x nanowires is rapidly advancing,
there are several open questions regarding incorporation of
Bi in the nanowire active region, such as the band-gap de-
pendence on the Bi fraction, the charge carrier confinements
and the sensitivity to the light polarisation. The answers
to these questions are crucial to target nanowire parame-
ters tailored for photonic applications. This work aims to
provide a timely guidance for future experiments and will
contribute significantly in the advancement of an emerging
area of research.
This work is based on the state-of-the-art atomistic tight-
binding simulations, which have been carried out on 4 to 8
million atoms to understand the optoelectronic properties of
GaBixAs1−x nanowires with realistic geometry parameters.
The accuracy of the tight-binding model was verified against
the available experimental data sets in a number published
studies including on band-gap variation of the GaBixAs1−x
bulk material as a function of Bi composition with 39 and
without 29 strain, and GaBiAs/GaAs quantum well struc-
tures. 40 Subsequent studies based on DFT model 41–43 and
experimental measurements 29,39,44–49 demonstrated a good
agreement with the simulated results, which again affirmed
the high-level accuracy of our atomistic techniques. We also
note that in contrast to the simplified models used in the lit-
erature such band anti-crossing method, effective-mass and
k · p models 37,50,50,51 which have been quite successful to
qualitatively model GaBixAs1−x based photonic devices, the
atomistic tight-binding simulations employed here explicitly
represent the nanowire geometries with atomic resolution.
This allows to incorporate the impact of additional effects
such as alloy randomness and interface roughness, which
have been shown to play an important role in the investi-
gation of electronic and optical properties of GaBixAs1−x
materials 39,52 and more generally for several other nanos-
tructures. 53,54 Therefore, this work is expected to provide a
highly reliable quantitative understanding of the optoelec-

tronic properties of the investigated GaBixAs1−x core−shell
nanowires, which will be directly relevant to the ongoing
experimental efforts.
The reported results have uncovered novel properties of
the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires which further motivates
interest in this material system and highlight opportuni-
ties for a wide range of applications.
We show that the
inter-band absorption wavelength is highly sensitive to the
nanowire diameter and Bi fraction of the shell region, and
can be tuned from 0.9 µm to 1.6 µm.
This provides a
two-way knob to control light absorption/emission energies.
Another interesting property of the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires reported in this work is the transition from quasi
type-II carrier confinement to type-I carrier confinement,
which occurs at low Bi fractions (≈3%).
This property
is useful for designing a variety of devices where large
carrier separation or strong light absorption is the param-
eter of interest. Finally, our results demonstrate that the
GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires provide a strong light-hole
absorption, which couples to TM polarisation mode. This
is in contrast to usual III-V nanostructures where typically
TE mode absorption is dominant. We also show the possi-
bility of isotropic light polarisation at 1.55 µm wavelength
which is important for many optical devices such as semi-
conductor optical amplifiers and modulators. Overall, our
results indicate that GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires can be
custom designed to target desired properties and hence are
expected to find myriad applications in nanophotonic and
nanoelectronic technologies.

Results and Discussions

In this work, we have investigated two types of core−shell
nanowires as shown by the schematic diagrams in Figure 1.
Both types of nanowire consist of a GaAs core region with
a core diameter (DC) of 20 nm.
The GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowire in Figure 1 (a) has a single outer shell made up
of GaBixAs1−x material with a shell diameter (DS) varying
from 25 nm to 40 nm. The Bi composition of the shell re-
gion is varied from 3% to 15%. The second type of nanowire
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs studied in this work consists of
two shell regions: an inner shell made up of GaBixAs1−x ma-
terial with diameter DIS and an outer shell made up of GaAs
material with diameter DOS. Such nanowire structures are
also referred to as quantum well nanowires in the litera-
ture 55 and provide an extra degree of freedom to engineer
nanowire properties.
The diameter DIS is varied from 25
nm to 40 nm as for the previous case of GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires. The thickness of the outer shell in all cases is
selected as 5 nm, therefore DOS varies from 30 nm to 45
nm. The nanowires are constructed atomistically, where the
GaBixAs1−x shell region contains Bi atoms randomly replac-
ing As atoms. The length of nanowires is selected as 80 nm,
however the previous study has shown that the electronic
band-gap energy is relatively independent of the nanowire
length. The largest dimension of the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs and
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires consists of roughly 6.3
million and 8 million atoms respectively, in the simulation
domain. The number of Bi atoms in the active region for
15% Bi composition are around 0.47 million. The nanowires
structures are relaxed by valence force field (VFF) model
and the internal strain is computed from the relaxed atom
positions. The electronic structure is computed by solving
a ten-band sp3s∗ tight-binding Hamiltonian which explicitly

2


Figure 1.
Band-gap tuning. (a) Schematic illustration of the investigated GaBixAs1−x/GaAs core−shell nanowire is shown. The
nanowire consists of a GaBixAs1−x shell with diameter DS and a GaAs core region with diameter DC. The length of the nanowire
is L along the [001] direction. We note that the shell diameter of nanowire is same as the overall diameter of the nanowire structure.
(b) Band edge diagram is schematically shown to indicate the effect of increasing Bi fraction and nanowire diameter on the conduction
band and valence band edge energies. The direction of the arrows indicates the increase/decrease in the band edge energies when the
Bi fraction or nanowire diameter is increased. (c) The ground-state inter-band absorption band-gap energy/wavelength is plotted as a
function of the Bi fraction (x) in the nanowire shell region for various geometry parameters. (d) The plots of band-gap energy/wavelength
are shown as a function of the nanowire shell diameter (DS) for various values of Bi fraction. (e) Schematic diagram is shown for the
investigated GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs core−shell nanowire.
The core region is made up of GaAs material with diameter DC.
The
nanowire consists of two shell regions, an inner GaBixAs1−x shell with diameter DIS and an outer GaAs shell with diameter DOS. (f)
Same plot as in (b) but for a GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowire. (g) The plots of the ground-state inter-band absorption band-gap
energy/wavelength are shown for various nanowire geometry parameters when the Bi fraction is varied from 0 to 15%. (h) The plots of
band-gap energy/wavelength are shown as a function of the nanowire outer shell diameter (DOS) for various values of Bi fraction.

includes spin-orbit coupling.
The lowest electron and the
highest hole energies are computed at the Γ point. Further
details of the methods are provided in the Methods section.

Band-gap Tuning
Figure 1 (a) shows the schematic diagram of the studied
GaBixAs1−x/GaAs core−shell nanowires.
The band-gap
energy of the nanowire is investigated by varying two pa-
rameters: the Bi fraction (x) in the GaBixAs1−x shell region
and the diameter (DS) of the shell region. The changes in
the conduction and valence band edges are schematically
indicated in Figure 1 (b) when x and DS are increased.
The increase in the Bi fraction reduces the conduction band
edge energy and increases the valence band edge energy, in
agreement with the previous studies on GaBixAs1−x bulk
and quantum well systems. 29,39,40 We find the same trend
when the shell diameter of the nanowire is increased. Conse-
quently, the band-gap energy decreases as a function of both
Bi fraction and shell diameter. The band-gap dependence
on the Bi fraction is plotted in Figure 1 (c) for various shell
diameters. Our calculations show that by increasing the Bi
fraction from 3% to 15%, the band-gap energy can be tuned
from ≈1.38 eV to ≈0.78 eV (corresponding to a change of
900 nm to 1600 nm in the optical absorption wavelength).
Likewise, a reduction in the band-gap energy is computed
with an increase in shell diameter, which is stronger at larger
Bi compositions. We compute a red shift of about 36 meV
and 40 meV per % increase in the Bi fraction at DS = 25 nm
and 40 nm, respectively. Figure 1 (d) shows the dependence

of the band-gap energy on the nanowire shell diameter when
the Bi faction is kept constant. The decrease(increase) in
the band-gap energy(wavelength) is stronger at 15% Bi frac-
tion when compared to the 3% Bi composition. Overall, we
find that the band-gap energy is highly sensitive to both Bi
composition and the nanowire diameter, and can be tuned
in the telecommunication spectra.
In experimental studies, often multi−shell nanowires, also
known as quantum well nanowires, are investigated where
the nanowires are made up of two or more shell regions.
In such nanowires, for example the outer shell and core
regions can be made up of the same material composition
whereas the inner shell designed with an alloy forming the
active region of the nanowire for charge carrier confinements
and/or transport. In this work, we also investigate the ef-
fect of GaAs outer shell forming GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires as shown in Figure 1 (e). The band edge changes
for such nanowires are schematically illustrated in Figure 1
(f), where the core and outer shell regions correspond to
the larger band-gap GaAs material and the inner shell re-
gion is small band-gap GaBixAs1−x material which provides
carrier confinement. The dependence of the band-gap en-
ergy (optical wavelength) on the Bi fraction inside the inner
shell region is shown in Figure 1 (g), which exhibits a very
similar trend as reported above for the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires. We calculate approximately 29 meV and 36 meV
reductions in the band-gap energies per % Bi increase for
DIS = 25 nm and 40 nm, respectively. These changes are
slightly smaller than computed for the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs

3


Figure 2.
Strain profile analysis. (a) The plots of the hydrostatic (ϵH = ϵxx + ϵyy + ϵzz) and biaxial (ϵB = ϵxx + ϵyy − 2ϵzz) strain
components are plotted with black and red colors respectively as a function of the distance along the [001] axis through the center of the
nanowire region. The arrows mark the direction of increasing bismuth fraction as 3%, 9% and 15%. The vertical dotted lines indicate
the boundaries of the GaAs and GaBixAs1−x regions. The nanowire geometry parameters are DS = 25 nm and DC = 20 nm. (b) Same
plots as (a) but for the nanowire geometry parameter as DS = 40 nm and DC = 20 nm. (c) The impact of the hydrostatic and biaxial
strain components is schematically indicated on the lowest conduction band and the highest two valence band (heavy-hole and light-hole)
edges is shown. The direction of the arrows indicates increase/decrease in the band edge energies due to increasing/decreasing magnitude
in the strain component. The black(red) color of the arrows refers to hydrostatic(biaxial) component effect. (d, e) Same plots as in (a)
and (b) but for GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires with geometry parameters DOS = 30 nm, DIS = 25 nm and DC = 20 nm in (d),
and DOS = 45 nm, DIS = 40 nm and DC = 20 nm in (e). (f) The same plot as in (c) but for a GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowire.

nanowires reported above. We also note that the reduction
in the band-gap energy per % increase in Bi composition
for the investigated nanowires is significantly lower than the
previously computed ≈90 meV reduction per % Bi increase
for the bulk GaBixAs1−x alloy. This can be attributed to
the fact that for bulk GaBixAs1−x alloys, the incorporation
of Bi strongly effect the band edge energies, in particular
the valence band edge energy due to the band anti-crossing
effect. However, for nanostrucures such as nanowires this
band anti-crossing effect is modulated by other factors such
as quantum confinement and internal strain which all con-
tributes to the net reduction of the band-gap energy.
Figure 1 (h) plots the dependence of the band-gap energy
(optical transition wavelength) for GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires as a function of nanowire diameter DOS by keep-
ing the Bi fraction constant in the inner shell region. In-
terestingly, we compute a strong impact of the GaAs outer
shell on the band-gap energy reduction when compared to
the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires.
The band-gap energy
decreases as a function of the DOS diameter but the rate of
decrease is noticeably slower. In particular, the band-gap
energy becomes relatively flat at higher Bi fractions (12%

and 15%). This implies that for GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires, the increase in the nanowire diameter DOS will
only negligibly shift the band-gap energy for Bi fractions
above 12%. This non-trivial behaviour of nanowire band-
gap reduction is a direct consequence of the internal strain
modulation by the GaAs outer shell region, which will be
discussed in the next strain analysis section.
We
want
to
conclude
this
section
by
summaris-
ing
that
a
large
tunable
band-gap
energy
(optical
transition
wavelength)
is
accessible
from
the
investi-
agted
GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
and
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires, which can be controlled by engineering geometry
parameters (i.e. nanowire diameters and/or Bi fractions).
Importantly, we find that for Bi fractions around 15%, the
optical transition wavelength is in the spectral range of in-
terest for telecommunication devices (1550 nm) which will
be desirable for a variety of photonic devices.

Strain Analysis
In order to understand the band-gap energy shifts discussed
in the previous section, it is imperative to analyse strain
profiles which directly affect the electron and hole energies

4


and wave functions. 56 The nanowires studied in this work
are made up of GaAs and GaBixAs1−x materials which have
very different lattice constants – 0.56532 nm for GaAs com-
pared to 0.6328 nm for GaBi. The large lattice mismatch
between these two materials gives rise to atomic bond de-
formations at the heterostructure interface, leading to an
internal strain which penetrates deep in both GaAs core
and GaBixAs1−x shell regions. The strain is responsible for
shifting conduction and valence band edges, 56 leading to
the variations in the band-gap energies. In this work, we
have relaxed the atomistic structure of nanowires by using
atomistic valence force field method, 29,57 and the strain is
computed from the relaxed atomic positions. 58

The impact of the strain on the conduction and valence
band edges can be understood by plotting and analysing hy-
drostatic and biaxial strain components, where the hydro-
static strain component is computed as ϵH = ϵxx + ϵyy + ϵzz
and the biaxial strain component is computed from ϵB =
ϵxx + ϵyy − 2ϵzz. 59 We first investigate the hydrostatic and
biaxial strain profiles in GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires by
plotting strain graphs along the [100] direction through the
center of the nanowires region. Figures 2 (a) and (b) shows
the plots of the ϵH and ϵB profiles for two nanowire diame-
ters, 25 nm and 40 nm, respectively. In each case, the strain
profiles are plotted for three Bi fractions: 3%, 9% and 15%
as indicated by arrows. In general, we compute that the ϵH
and ϵB strain profiles exhibit opposite signs both inside the
core as well as inside the shell regions. This trend is con-
sistent for all of the investigated nanowires and independent
of the nanowire diameters and the Bi fractions.
We also
find the long-range penetration of the strain inside the core
region which is heavily strained.
Generally, the strain character at the interface of a small
and large lattice constant materials is such that the larger
lattice constant material is heavily compressed whereas the
smaller lattice constant material is stretched. This results in
compressive (negative) ϵH and ϵB within the larger lattice
constant material and tensile (positive) ϵH and ϵB inside the
smaller lattice constant material. This has been reported in
many previous studies on quantum wells and quantum dots,
for example GaAs/InAs quantum dots 56 and quantum dot
molecules. 60 From the strain profiles plotted in Figures 2
(a) and (b), we find that the calculated ϵH strain is ten-
sile inside the GaAs core region and it is compressive in the
GaBixAs1−x shell region.
The character of the ϵB strain
is opposite to that of the ϵH strain. We also note a cou-
ple of interesting properties from the plotted strain profiles:
first, the ϵH strain is of equal magnitude to the ϵB strain
when the nanowire diameter is 25 nm, which is not the case
for nanowire diameter of 40 nm where the strain is rela-
tively asymmetric and the biaxial strain is much smaller
than the hydrostatic strain.
Secondly, the magnitude of
strain is much stronger in the GaBixAs1−x shell region when
nanowire diameter is small, whereas at 40 nm diameter, the
shell region is nearly strain free.
This character of strain
will have direct consequence for the confinement of electron
and hole wave functions which will be discussed in the next
section. The strain profiles also show that by varying the di-
ameter of the nanowire in the growth process, the strain can
be controlled which has a direct consequence for the electron
hole energies and confinements.
The impact of strain on the nanowire electronic structure
is schematically shown in Figure 2 (c), where we have plotted
the lowest conduction band edge and the highest two valence

band edges, namely the heavy-hole (HH) and light-hole (LH)
bands. The effect of the strain character (compressive or ten-
sile) is shown on the corresponding band edges by indicating
arrow directions, where the black arrows indicate the effect
of ϵH strain and the red arrows show the impact of ϵB strain.
The direction of the arrows indicates an increase or decrease
in the corresponding band edge energy. Based on the strain
profiles, the ϵH strain will generally increase the carrier con-
finement in the GaBixAs1−x shell region. The ϵB strain, on
the other hand, only impacts the valence band states.
It
is important to note that for small diameter nanowires, the
roughly equal magnitude of ϵB and ϵH implies that hole en-
ergies will experience a relatively small strain induced shift.
On the other hand, for large diameter nanowires, ϵB is much
smaller than ϵH, and therefore the net impact of strain on
hole energies is stronger. This is reflected in the band-gap
energy shifts plotted in Figure 1 (d) where the red shift of
the band-gap energy is relatively strong at larger nanowire
diameters compared to the small diameters of nanowires.
Another important effect of strain is related to light po-
larisation.
Inside the GaBixAs1−x shell region where the
carriers are confined, we compute that the presence of the
tensile biaxial strain will enhance the mixing of LH charac-
ter in the topmost valence band states. This is similar to
large stacks of the quantum dots, where a very strong in-
terdot coupling leads to a tensile strain which increases LH
contribution of valence band states. 61 As we will show in the
later section, this enhanced LH mixing in the valence states
has strong impact on the polarisation sensitivity of the inter-
band light absorption which is an important parameter for
many optoelectronic devices.
In what follows, we investigate the impact of the GaAs
outer shell by plotting ϵH
and ϵB
strain profiles for
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires in Figures 2 (d) and
(e). To enable a direct comparison with GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
strain profiles, we have again selected the same Bi fractions
and the same GaBixAs1−x shell diameters. Overall, we find
that the strain magnitude is reduced when GaAs outer shell
is present in the nanowire region.
Other than that, the
general trend and the tensile/compressive character of the
ϵH and ϵB strain profiles remain same in different regions
of the nanowires and therefore the insights gained above
for GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires are largely applicable for
multi−shell nanowires as well. The similar character of the
ϵB and ϵH strain profiles mean their impact on the conduc-
tion and valence band edges is also same as schematically
shown in Figure 2 (f).
An important difference between
the two nanowires is to note that the ϵB strain magnitude
is relatively larger in GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires
at 45 nm diameter when compared to GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires at 40 nm diameter. This implies that hole ener-
gies will experience a relatively small shift in energy for the
multi−shell nanowires, which is responsible for the band-
gap wavelength becomes flat as a function of the nanowire
diameter in Figure 1 (h).
Overall, we conclude that the
presence of the GaAs outer shell region induces a small
quantitative effect on the internal strain of the nanowires.

Charge Carrier Confinements
The inter-band optical absorption strength depends on the
spatial profiles of the confined electron and hole charge
carriers in the nanowire region. Figure 3 (a) and (b) plots
the spatial distribution of the lowest electron and the high-
est hole states through a [001] plane at the center of the

5


Figure
3.
Wave
function
confinement.
(a) The spatial distribution of the lowest electron wave function confined in
GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowire is visualised in a (001) plane passing through the maxima.
The blue color in the plots indicates low
change density and the bright colors indicate high regions of charge density.
The dotted circles are plotted to indicate the bound-
aries of the GaAs core regions.
(b) Same as (a) but for the highest hole charge densities.
(c,d) Same as (a) and (b) but for the
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires.

GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowire region. The dashed white cir-
cles indicate the boundary of the GaAs core region. Notably,
our calculations show that at 3% Bi composition and small
nanowire diameters (25 nm), the electron wave function is
confined inside the GaAs core region and the hole wave
function is confined in the GaBixAs1−x shell region, leading
to a quasi type-II confinement. This is attributed to a very
small hydrostatic strain as shown in the Figure 2 (a), which
leads to a negligibly small potential barrier for the elec-
trons and therefore a significant leakage of the electron wave
function in the GaAs region is computed. Overall, the cal-
culations indicate that at 3% Bi fraction, the electron wave
function is distributed inside the large part of the nanowire
region but becomes highly confined at larger Bi fractions.
This can be understood from the strain profiles plotted in
Figure 3 (a) and (b).
For small nanowire diameters, the
hydrostatic strain inside the GaAs core region is relatively
small compared to GaBixAs1−x shell region. Therefore, the
electron wave functions experience a small potential bar-
rier at the GaAs and GaBixAs1−x interface and some wave
function leakage is expected in the core region. However,
when the nanowire diameter is increased, the magnitude
of the hydrostatic strain drastically increases in the GaAs
core region, leading to a very large potential barrier which
prohibits any electron wave function leakage inside the core
region.
Therefore, the electron wave functions are much
more confined inside the shell region.
In comparison to the electron wave functions, the hole

wave functions are impacted by both strain and alloy com-
position (pairs and clusters of Bi atoms). 52 Previous studies
on bismuth-containing nanowires 38 and quantum wells 40,62

have shown that the effect of alloy composition is stronger
than the strain effect and therefore, the hole wave functions
are heavily confined in the regions of Bi related clusters. In
Figure 3 (b), we observe the same trend and the results show
highly confined hole wave functions inside the GaBixAs1−x
shell regions.
The effect of the GaAs outer shell region on charge
carrier confinements is shown in Figures 3 (c) and (d),
where we plot the lowest electron and the highest hole
wave functions in the [001] plane through the center of the
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires for various diameters
and Bi compositions. Overall, the effect of the GaAs outer
shell is weak and the confinement of the electron and holes
wave functions exhibit a very similar trend as noted earlier
for the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires.
Again, for 3% Bi
fraction and 30 nm nanowire diameter, we compute a type-
II confinement where the electron wave function is inside
the GaAs core region and the hole wave function is confined
inside the GaBixAs1−x shell region.
As the diameter of
nanowire is increased with fixed Bi composition, the elec-
tron wave function gradually becomes more confined inside
the GaBixAs1−x shell region and the nanowire exhibits a
type-I confinement. For the highest Bi composition (15%),
we find a strong electron wave function confinement inside
the GaBixAs1−x shell region irrespective of nanowire diame-

6


Figure 4.
Polarisation-sensitive light absorption. (a) The GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowire geometry is illustrated in the [001] plane.
To compute the polarisation-dependent optical transition strengths, the direction of the incident light is assumed to be along the [110] axis.
The polarisation-dependent optical transition strengths are computed by varying the angle θ between the [001] and [110] directions. The
inter-band transition strength at θ=0(90o) corresponds to TM(TE) mode. (b) The normalized polar plot is shown for the investigated
nanowire with geometry parameters DC = 20 nm, DS = 40 nm and Bi=3%. The red color arrows indicate the TE and TM mode
intensities. (c) The same plot as in (b) but for the nanowire geometry parameters DC = 20 nm, DS = 40 nm, Bi=15%. (d) The
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowire geometery is illustrated in the [001] plane with the direction of incident light and polarisation angle
θ marked as in (a). (e) The same plot as in (b) but for the nanowire with parameters DC = 20 nm, DIS = 40 nm, DOS = 45 nm, and
Bi=3%. (f) The polar plot as in (c) but for the nanowire parameters DC = 20 nm, DIS = 40 nm, DOS = 45 nm and Bi=15%. In each
case, the polar plots are based on the cumulative sum of the optical transition strengths between the lowest conduction band state and
the highest three valence band states.

ter. The hole wave functions are again dominated by the Bi
clustering effect and therefore exhibit a strong confinement
inside the GaBixAs1−x shell region at all of the investigated
diameters and compositions.

Polarisation-sensitive Light Absorption
The polarisation sensitivity of the inter-band optical tran-
sitions is an important parameter of interest for many
photonic devices.
In the past studies, this parameter
has been investigated for many nanostructures, includ-
ing quantum dots, 63 quantum dot molecules, 60 quantum
dot stacks, 61,64,65 nanowires, 66,67 and nanorods. 68,69 The
polarisation response of a nanostructure is characterised in
terms of polarisation ratio or degree of polarization (DOP)
which is defined as T E−T M

T E+T M , where TE is transverse electric
mode and TM is traverse magnetic mode of the incident
polarised light.
Generally, for a lattice mismatched nanostructure where a
large lattice constant material such as InAs is surrounded by
a small lattice constant material such as GaAs, the strong
compressive biaxial strain leads to high sensitivity of the
light absorption towards TE mode polarisation, 64,70 result-
ing in DOP values closer to 1. This is because the highly
compressive biaxial strain shifts HH band towards higher en-
ergies and the LH band towards the lower energies, leading
to the top-most valence band states dominated by HH char-
acter, which only couples to the TE mode. For polarisation-
insensitive light interaction (i.e. DOP=0), nanostructures
are engineered to achieve tensile biaxial strain such that the

LH mixing of the valence band increases TM mode coupling.
This, for example, has been done in the past for large quan-
tum dot stacks, 61,64,65 where DOP values close to zero are
reported both from experimental measurements and theoret-
ical simulations. Here, in this work, we have shown that the
biaxial strain is tensile inside the GaBixAs1−x shell region
which naturally increases the LH character of the top-most
hole states. As a result, a much larger TM mode coupling is
expected for the investigated nanowires.
Figure 4 plots the polarisation dependent optical tran-
sition strengths for a selected set of nanowires with 15%
Bi composition, which are relevant for telecommunication
wavelength photonic devices. The incident light direction is
assumed along the [110] direction, and the polarisation angle
is varied between the [001] and [110] directions, where 0 an-
gle indicates TM mode strength and 90 angle indicates TE
mode strength. In all cases, we find a very strong TM mode
strength which is a direct consequence of the LH mixing
in the valence band states. Interestingly, we discover that
for 15% Bi composition, the GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowire
with 40 nm diameter exhibits a polarisation-insensitive light
absorption (TE ∼ TM). This is very promising as the same
nanowire has band-gap wavelength of 1550 nm which is
directly relevant for the telecommunication wavelength de-
vices. We also note that overall the polarisation response of
GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires is more isotropic compared
to the polarisation response of GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
nanowires, the latter being more dominated by TM mode.
This is due to the biaxial strain profile studied earlier in

7


Figures 2 (b) and (e), where the tensile biaxial strain is rela-
tively stronger for the GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs nanowires
which will result in higher mixing of LH band in the highest
valence band states.

Summary and Outlook

In
summary,
this
work
has
investigated
the
op-
toelectronic
properties
of
GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
and
GaAs/GaBixAs1−x/GaAs core−shell nanowires by carry-
ing out a systematic set of multi-million atom tight-binding
calculations. The results show a highly tunable band-gap
energy which can be engineered by either controlling the
nanowire diameter or by adjusting the Bi composition in
the shell region.
Due to highly mismatched lattice pa-
rameters of GaAs and GaBixAs1−x materials, the strain is
expected to have an impact comparable to quantum con-
finement, provided the interface remains relatively defect
free and coherent. Remarkably, the detailed analysis of the
internal strain profiles reveals a peculiar character which is
found to profoundly impact the charge carrier confinements
and sensitivity to light polarisation. The controllability of
strain magnitude by Bi fractions and nanowire diameters
allows modification of carrier confinements from a quasi
type II to highly confined type I character, which broadens
the scope of the investigated nanowires for myriad applica-
tions involving large carrier separations or strong inter-band
optical transition strengths. A polarisation-dependent op-
tical spectrum is computed which exhibits high TM mode
coupling due to highly tensile strain character inside the
GaBixAs1−x shell region.
We also report the possibil-
ity of realising isotropic polarisation response at 1550 nm
wavelength, which is highly desirable for many photonics
devices such as optical amplifiers.
Overall, our analysis
uncovers important physical factors which impact the opto-
electronic character of core−shell nanowires for investigated
constituent materials and geometries, which can aid in the
advancement of ongoing experimental efforts to incorporate
GaBixAs1−x materials in the active region of nanowires.
The idea of including GaBixAs1−x material in nanowires
is relatively new, with the first experimental study pub-
lished only recently. 19 However, there is rapidly growing
research interest in this novel material system as demon-
strated by the subsequent experimental studies in the last
few years showing promising progress. 20–26 One of the crit-
ical challenges in the next few years will be to incorporate
large Bi fractions in the active region of nanowire to achieve
optical wavelengths to target photonic devices working in
the near to mid and far infra-red regimes. For example as
predicted in this work, the photonic devices aimed at the
telecommunication applications would require Bi fractions
in the range of 10 to 15%. In the first experimental effort,
about 2% Bi was reported 19 but recently upto 10% Bi has
been incorporated in the nanowire structure. 23 We hope
this study will further inspire and instigate experimental
efforts to achieve larger Bi fractions.
In short term with
low Bi compositions (≤ 3%), these nanowires could also be
explored for devices requiring quasi type II carrier confine-
ments. We also note that there are other highly-mismatched
bismuth-containing alloys such as GaSbBi, GaBiNAs, and
InGaBiAs, which have been investigated in the literature
and have shown very similar properties as observed for the
GaBiAs alloy. 30,40,71–73 Although this work is focused only
on the GaBixAs1−x material, it would be interesting to ex-

plore the optoelectronic properties of core−shell nanowires
for a range of bismide materials in conjunction with experi-
mental efforts.

Methods

The electronic structure atomistic simulations performed
in this work are based on a well-benchmarked tight-binding
model, 29 which have been verified against a number of exper-
imental studies. The subsequent density functional theory
calculations and experimental studies have also confirmed
the accuracy of our tight-binding model. The tight-binding
Hamiltonian is based on ten-band sp3s∗ model including
spin orbit coupling and is implemented within the frame-
work of nanoelectronic modeling tool NEMO3D. 53 The
diagonalisation of the tight-binding Hamiltonian at the Γ
point provides electron and hole energies and wave functions
which are plotted in Figures 1 and 3.
Due to the lattice
mismatch between GaAs and GaBixAs1−x materials, the
atoms are displaced from their original lattice and lead to
strain inside the nanostructure. The computation of strain
is based on atomistic valence force field relaxation scheme, 57

where we have employed the experimentally reported bulk
lattice constants and elastic coefficients for the GaAs and
GaBi materials. 29 The corresponding strain profiles are
plotted in the Figure 2. The inter-band optical transition
strengths between the electron and hole wave functions
are computed by using the Fermi’s golden rule as follows:
first we calculated squared absolute values of the momen-
tum matrix elements summed over spin degenerate states,
TEi→Hi = |⟨Ei|[−→
n , H]|Hi⟩|2 where H is the single particle
tight binding Hamiltonian in the sp3s∗ basis, Ei and Hi
are the electron and hole energy states respectively, and −→
n
is a vector along the polarization direction. The polariza-
tion dependent polar plots are computed by rotating the
polarization vector −→
n = (−→
x + −→y ) cos φ sin θ + −→z cos θ to
the appropriate direction in the polar coordinates: φ = 135o

and θ is varied from 0 to 360o.

Acknowledgement Computational resources are ac-
knowledged from the National Computational Infrastructure
(NCI) and Pawsey Supercomputer Center under the Na-
tional Computational Merit based Allocation Scheme (NC-
MAS).

References

(1)
Dasgupta, N.; Sun, J.; Liu, C.; Brittman, S.; Andrews, S.;
Lim, J.; Gao, H.; Yan, R.; Yang, P. 25th Anniversary Article:
Semiconductor Nanowires Synthesis, Characterization, and Ap-
plications. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 2137.

(2)
Zhuang,
X.;
Ning,
C.;
Pan,
A.
Composition
and
Bandgap−Graded
Semiconductor
Alloy
Nanowires.
Adv.
Mater. 2011, 24, 13.

(3)
Yao, J.; Yan, H.; Lieber, C. A nanoscale combing technique
for the large-scale assembly of highly aligned nanowires. Nature
Nanotechnology 2013, 8, 329.

(4)
Tomioka, K.; Yoshimura, M.; Fukui, T. A III−V nanowire chan-
nel on silicon for high-performance vertical transistors. Nature
2012, 488, 189.

(5)
Chen, R.; Tran, T.-T.; Ng, K.; Ko, W.; Chuang, L.; Sedg-
wick, F.; C.-Hasnain, C. Nanolasers grown on silicon. Nature
Photonics 2011, 5, 170.

(6)
Wang, D.; Song, J.; Mu, Y.; Lieber, C.; Whang, M.; Jin, S.;
Wu, Y.;
Lieber, M. Large-scale hierarchical organisation of
nanowire arrays for integrated nanosystems. Nano Lett. 2003,
3, 1255.

(7)
Yan, R.; Gargas, D.; Yang, P. Nanowire Photonics. Nature Pho-
tonics 2009, 3, 569.

(8)
Eaton, S.; Fu, A.; Wong, A.; Ning, C.-Z.; Yang, P. Semiconduc-
tor nanowire lasers. Nature Reviews Materials 2016, 1, 16028.

(9)
Cartoixa, X.; Palummo, M.; Hauge, H. T.; Bakkers, E. P. A. M.;
Rurali, R. Optical Emission in Hexagonal SiGe Nanowires. Nano
Lett. 2017, 17, 4753.

8


(10)
Zhao, X.; Nagashima, K.; Zhang, G.; Hosomi, T.; Yoshida, H.;
Akihiro, Y.; Kanai, M.; Mizukami, W.; Zhu, Z.; Takahashi, T.;
Suzuki, M.; Samransuksamer, B.; Meng, G.; Yasui, T.; Aoki, Y.
Synthesis of Monodispersedly Sized ZnO Nanowires from Ran-
domly Sized Seeds. Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 599.

(11)
Dimakis,
E.;
Jahn,
U.;
Ramsteiner,
M.;
Tahraoui,
A.;
Grandal,
J.;
Kong,
X.;
Marquardt,
O.;
Trampert,
A.;
Riechert, H.; Geelhaar, L. Coaxial Multishell (In,Ga)As/GaAs
Nanowires for Near-Infrared Emission on Si Substrates. Nano
Lett. 2014, 14, 2604.

(12)
Munshi,
A.;
Dheeraj,
D.;
Fauske,
V.;
Kim,
D.-C.;
van
Helvoort, A.; Fimland, B.-O.; Weman, H. Vertically Aligned
GaAs Nanowires on Graphite and Few-Layer Graphene: Generic
Model and Epitaxial Growth. Nano Lett. 2012, 12, 4570.

(13)
Royo, M.; Luca, M.; Rurali, R.; Zardo, I. A review on IIIV
coremultishell nanowires: growth, properties, and applications.
J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2017, 50, 143001.

(14)
Balagula,
R.;
Jansson,
M.;
Yukimune,
M.;
Stehr,
J.;
Ishikawa,
F.;
Chen,
W.;
Buyanova,
I.
Effects
of
ther-
mal annealing on localization and strain in core/ multishell
GaAs/GaNAs/GaAs nanowires. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 8216.

(15)
Kim,
Y.;
Joyce,
H.;
Gao,
Q.;
Tan,
H.;
Jagadish,
C.;
Paladugu, M.; Zou, J.; Suvorova, A. Influence of Nanowire Den-
sity on the Shape and Optical Properties of Ternary InGaAs
Nanowires. Nano Lett. 2006, 6, 599.

(16)
Ren, P.; Hu, W.; Zhang, Q.; Zhu, X.; Zhuang, X.; Ma, L.;
Fan, X.; Liao, H.; Duan, X.; Pan, A. Band−Selective Infrared
Photodetectors with Complete−Composition−Range InAsxP1x
Alloy Nanowires. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 7444.

(17)
Ma, L.; Hu, W.; Zhang, Q.; Ren, P.; Zhuang, X.; Zhou, H.;
Xu, J.; Li, H.; Shan, Z.; Wang, X.; Liao, L.; Xu, H.; Pan, A.
Room-Temperature Near-Infrared Photodetectors Based on Sin-
gle Heterojunction Nanowires. Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 694.

(18)
Dai, X.; Zhang, S.; Wang, Z.; Adamo, G.; Liu, H.; Huang, Y.;
Couteau, C.; Soci, C. GaAs/AlGaAs Nanowire Photodetector.
Nano Lett. 2014, 14, 2688.

(19)
Ishikawa,
F.;
Akamatsu,
Y.;
Watanabe,
K.;
Uesugi,
F.;
Asahina,
S.;
Jahn,
U.;
Shimomura,
S.
Metamorphic
GaAs/GaAsBi
Heterostructured
Nanowires.
Nano
Letters
2015, 15, 7265.

(20)
Steele,
J.
A.;
Lewis,
R.
A.;
Horvat,
J.;
Nancarrow,
M.
J. B.; Henini, M.; Fan, D.; Mazur, Y. I.; Schmidbauer, M.;
Ware, M. E.; Yu, S.-Q.; Salamo, G. J. Surface effects of vapour-
liquid-solid driven Bi surface droplets formed during molecular-
beam-epitaxy of GaAsBi. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 28860.

(21)
Zelewski, S.; Kopaczek, J.; Linhart, W. M.; Ishikawa, F.; Shimo-
mura, S.; Kudrawiec, R. Photoacoustic spectroscopy of absorp-
tion edge for GaAsBi/GaAs nanowires grown on Si substrate.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2016, 109, 182106.

(22)
Wang, P.; Pan, W.; Wu, X.; Cao, C.; Wang, S.; Gong, Q. Het-
eroepitaxy growth of GaAsBi on Ge(100) substrate by gas source
molecular beam epitaxy. Appl. Phys. Express 2016, 9, 045502.

(23)
Oliva, M.; Gao, G.; Luna, E.; Geelhaar, L.; Lewis, R. Axial
GaAs/Ga(As,Bi) Nanowire Heterostructures. Nanotechnology
2019, 30, 425601.

(24)
Zhang, B.; Huang, Y.; Stehr, J. E.; Chen, P.-P.; Wang, X.-
J.; Lu, W.; Chen, W. M.; Buyanova, I. A. Band Structure of
Wurtzite GaBiAs Nanowires. Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 6454.

(25)
Matsuda,
T.;
Takada,
K.;
Yano,
K.;
Tsutsumi,
R.;
Yoshikawa, K.; Shimomura, S.; Shimizu, Y.; Nagashima, K.;
Yanagida, T.; Ishikawa, F. Controlling Bi-Provoked Nanostruc-
ture Formation in GaAs/GaAsBi Core-Shell Nanowires. Nano
Lett. 2019, 19, 8510.

(26)
Matsuda, T.; Takada, K.; Yano, K.; Shimomura, S.; Ishikawa, F.
Strain deformation in GaAs/GaAsBi core-shell nanowire het-
erostructures. J. Appl. Phys. 2019, 125, 194301.

(27)
Janotti, A.; Wei, S.-H.; Zhang, S. B. Theoretical study of the
effects of isovalent coalloying of Bi and N in GaAs. Phys. Rev. B
2002, 65, 115203.

(28)
Zhang, Y.; Mascarenhas, A.; Wang, L.-W. Similar and dissimilar
aspects of III−V semiconductors containing Bi versus N. Phys.
Rev. B 2005, 71, 155201.

(29)
Usman, M.; Broderick, C. A.; Lindsay, A.; O’Reilly, E. P. Tight-
binding analysis of the electronic structure of dilute bismide
alloys of GaP and GaAs. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84, 245202.

(30)
Li,
H.,
Wang,
Z.,
Eds.
Bismuth-Containing
Compounds;
Springer-Verlag New York, 2013.

(31)
Broderick, C. A.; Marko, I. P.; O’Reilly, E. P.; Sweeney, S. J.
“Dilute Bismide Alloys”, Chapter 10 – Handbook of Opto-
electronic Device Modeling and Simulation (Vol. 1), in press
2017,

(32)
Fluegel,
B.;
Francoeur,
S.;
Mascarenhas,
A.;
Tixier,
S.;
Young, E.; Tiedje, T. Giant Spin-Orbit Bowing in GaAs1−xBix.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 067205.

(33)
Tumenas, S.; Karpus, V.; Bertulis, K.; Arwin, H. Dielectric
function and refractive index of GaBixAs1x (x = 0.035, 0.052,
0.075). Phys. Status Solidi c 2012, 9, 1633.

(34)
Batool, Z.; Hild, K.; Hosea, T. J. C.; Lu, X.; Tiedje, T.;
Sweeney, S. J. The electronic band structure of GaBiAs/GaAs
layers: Influence of strain and band anti-crossing. J. Appl. Phys.
2012, 111, 113108.

(35)
Phillips, A. F.; Sweeney, S. J.; Adams, A. R.; Thijs, P. J. A.
The temperature dependence of 1.3- and 1.5-µm compres-
sively strained InGaAs(P) MQW semiconductor lasers. IEEE

J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 1999, 5, 401.

(36)
Sweeney, S. J.; Adams, A. R.; Silver, M.; O’Reilly, E. P.;
Watling, J. R.; Walker, A. B.; Thijs, P. J. A. Dependence of
threshold current on QW position and on pressure in 1.5 µm
InGaAs(P) lasers. Phys. Status Solidi B 1999, 211, 525.

(37)
Broderick, C. A.; Usman, M.; Sweeney, S. J.; O’Reilly, E. P.
Band engineering in dilute nitride and bismide semiconductor
lasers. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 2012, 27, 094011.

(38)
Usman,
M.
Towards
low-loss
telecom-wavelength
photonic
devices
by
designing
GaBiAs/GaAs
core-shell
nanowires.
Nanoscale 2019, 11, 20133.

(39)
Usman, M.; Broderick, C. A.; Batool, Z.; Hild, K.; Hosea, T.
J. C.; Sweeney, S. J.; O’Reilly, E. P. Impact of alloy disorder
on the band structure of compressively strained GaBixAs1−x.
Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 115104.

(40)
Usman, M.; Broderick, C. A.; O’Reilly, E. P. Impact of disorder
on the optoelectronic properties of GaNyAs1−x−yBix alloys and
heterostructures. Phys. Rev. Applied 2018, 10, 044024.

(41)
Kudrawiec,
R.;
Kopaczek,
J.;
Polak,
M.;
Scharoch,
P.;
Gladysiewicz, M.; Misiewicz, J.; Richards, R.; Bastiman, F.;
David, J. J. Appl. Phys. 2014, 116, 233508.

(42)
Polak, M. P.; Scharoch, P.; Kudrawiec, R. Semicond. Sci. Tech-
nol. 2015, 30, 094001.

(43)
Bannow, L. C.; Rubel, O.; Badescu, S.; Rosenow, P.; Hader, J.;
Moloney, J.; Tonner, R.; Koch, S. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 93,
205202.

(44)
Donmez, O.; Erol, A.; Arikan, M.; Makhloufi, H.; Arnoult, A.;
Fontaine, C. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 2015, 30, 094016.

(45)
Balanta, M. A. G.; Gordo, V. O.; Carvalho, A. R. H.; Pu-
ustinen, J.; Alghamdi, H. M.; Henini, M.; Galeti, H. V. A.;
Guina, M.; Gobato, Y. G. Polarization resolved photolumines-
cence in GaAs1-xBix/GaAs quantum wells. J. of Luminescence
2017, 182, 49–52.

(46)
Zhang, B.; Qiu, W.-Y.; Chen, P.-P.; Wang, X.-J. J. Appl. Phys.
2018, 123, 035702.

(47)
Dybala, F.; Kopaczek, J.; Gladysiewicz, M.; Pavelescu, E.-M.;
Romanitan, C.; Ligor, O.; Arnoult, A.; Fontaine, C.; Kudraw-
iec, R. J. of Appl. Phys. 2017, 111, 192104.

(48)
Collar, K.; Li, J.; Jiao, W.; Guan, Y.; Losurdo, M.; Humlicek, J.;
Brown, A. S. AIP Advances 2017, 7, 075016.

(49)
Broderick, C. A.;
Mazzucato, S.;
Carrère, H.;
Amand, T.;
Makhloufi, H.; Arnoult, A.; Fontaine, C.; Donmez, O.; Erol, A.;
Usman, M.; O’Reilly, E. P.; Marie, X. Anisotropic electron g fac-
tor as a probe of the electronic structure of GaBixAs1−x/GaAs
epilayers. Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90, 195301.

(50)
Broderick, C. A.; Usman, M.; O’Reilly, E. P. Derivation of 12
and 14-band k·p Hamiltonians for dilute bismide and bismide-
nitride alloys. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 2013, 28, 125025.

(51)
Broderick, C. A.; Harnedy, P. E.; Ludewig, P.; Bushell, Z. L.;
Volz, K.; Manning, R. J.; O’Reilly, E. P. Determination of type-I
band offsets in GaBixAs1−x quantum wells using polarisation-
resolved photovoltage measurements and 12-band k·p calcula-
tions. Semicond. Sci. Technol. 2015, 30, 094009.

(52)
Usman, M.;
O’Reilly, E. P. Atomistic tight-binding study
of electronic structure and interband optical transitions in
GaBiAs/GaAs quantum wells. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 104,
071103.

(53)
Klimeck, G.; Ahmed, S. S.; Kharche, N.; Korkusinski, M.; Us-
man, M.; Prada, M.; Boykin, T. Atomistic simulation of realisti-
cally sized nanodevices using NEMO 3-D – part I: applications.
IEEE Trans. Electron. Dev. 2007, 54, 2090.

(54)
Ahmed, S. et al. In Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems
Science; Meyers, R. A., Ed.; Springer New York: New York,
NY, 2009; pp 5745–5783.

(55)
Qian, F.; Li, Y.; Gradecak, S.; Park, H.-G.; Dong, Y.; Ding, Y.;
Wang, Z. L.;
Lieber, C. Multi-quantum-well nanowire het-
erostructures for wavelength-controlled lasers. Nature Materials
2008, 7, 701.

(56)
Usman, M.; Ryu, H.; Woo, I.; Ebert, D.; Klimeck, G. Moving to-
ward nano-TCAD through multimillion-atom quantum-dot sim-
ulations matching experimental data. IEEE Trans. Nanotech.
2009, 8, 330.

(57)
Keating, P. N. Effect of invariance requirements on the elastic
strain energy of crystals with application to the diamond struc-
ture. Phys. Rev. 1966, 145, 637.

(58)
Lee, S.;
Lazarenkova, O. L.;
von Allmen, P.;
Oyafuso, F.;
Klimeck, G. Effect of wetting layers on the strain and electronic
structure of InAs self-assembled quantum dots. Phys. Rev. B
2004, 70, 125307.

(59)
Singh, J. Role of interface roughness and alloy disorder in photo-
luminescence in quantum-well structures. J. Appl. Phys. 1985,
57, 5433.

(60)
Usman, M.; Heck, S.; Clarke, E.; Spencer, P.; Ryu, H.; Mur-
ray, R.; Klimeck, G. Experimental and theoretical study of
polarization-dependent optical transitions in InAs quantum dots
at telecommunication-wavelengths (1300-1500 nm). J. Appl.
Phys. 2011, 109, 104510.

(61)
Usman, M.; Inoue, T.; Harda, Y.; Klimeck, G.; Kita, T. Experi-
mental and atomistic theoretical study of degree of polarization
from multilayer InAs/GaAs quantum dot stacks. Phys. Rev. B
2011, 84, 115321.

(62)
Usman, M. Large-scale atomistic simulations demonstrate dom-
inant alloy disorder effects in GaBiAs/GaAs multiple quantum
wells. Phys. Rev. Materials 2018, 2, 044602.

9


(63)
Usman, M. Atomistic theoretical study of electronic and polar-
ization properties of single and vertically stacked elliptical InAs
quantum dots. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 86, 155444.

(64)
Greif, L.; Jagsch, S.; Wagner, M.; Schliwa, A. Tuning the Emis-
sion Directionality of Stacked Quantum Dots. ACS Photonics
2018, 5, 12.

(65)
Inoue, T.;
Asada, M.;
Yasuoka, N.;
Kojima, O.;
Kita, T.;
Wada, O. . Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 96, 211906.

(66)
Wang, J.; Gudiksen, M.; Duan, X.; Cui, Y.; Lieber, C. Highly
Polarized Photoluminescence and Photodetection from Single
Indium Phosphide Nanowires. Phys. Rev. B 2001, 293, 1455.

(67)
Casadei, A.; Llado, E. A.; Amaduzzi, F.; Russo-Averchi, E.;
Ruffer, D.; Heiss, M.; Negro, L. D.; Morral, A. F. Polarization
response of nanowires. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 7651.

(68)
Hadar, I.; Hitin, G.; Sitt, A.; Faust, A.; Banin, U. Polarization
Properties of Semiconductor Nanorod Heterostructures: From
Single Particles to the Ensemble. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013,
3, 502.

(69)
Zhi, T.; Tao, T.; Liu, B.; Zhuang, Z.; Dai, J.; Li, Y.; Zhang, G.;
Xie, Z.;
Chen, P.;
Zhang, R. Polarized Emission From In-
GaN/GaN Single Nanorod Light-Emitting Diode. IEEE Pho-
tonics Technology Letters 2016, 28, 721.

(70)
Usman, M. In-plane polarization anisotropy of ground state
optical intensity in InAs/GaAs quantum dots. J. Appl. Phys.
2011, 110, 094512.

(71)
Broderick, C.; Usman, M.; O’Reilly, E. 12-band k.p model for
dilute bismide alloys of (In)GaAs derived from supercell calcu-
lations. Physica Status Solidi (b) 2013, 250, 733.

(72)
Rajpalke, M. K.; Linhart, W. M.; Birkett, M.; Yu, K. M.;
Scanlon, D. O.; Buckeridge, J.; Jones, T. S.; Ashwin, M. J.;
Veal, T. D. Growth and properties of GaSbBi alloys. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 2013, 103, 142106.

(73)
Bushell, Z.; Broderick, C.; Nattermann, L.; Joseph, R.; Ked-
die, J.; Rorison, J.; Volz, K.; Sweeney, S. Giant bowing of the
band gap and spin-orbit splitting energy in GaP1xBix dilute
bismide alloys. Scientific Reports 2019, 9, 6835.

10


