Controlling and Phase-Locking 

a THz Quantum Cascade Laser Frequency Comb 

by Small Optical Frequency Tuning

  

L. Consolino,1,2,* A. Campa,1 M. De Regis,1 F. Cappelli,1 G. Scalari,3

J. Faist,3 M. Beck,3 M. Roesch,3 S. Bartalini1,4 and P. De Natale1 

1CNR- Istituto Nazionale di Ottica e LENS, Via Nello Carrara 1, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy 

2Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università degli Studi di Firenze, I-50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy 

3Institute for Quantum Electronics, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

4ppqSense Srl, Via Gattinella 20, I-50013 Campi Bisenzio FI, Italy

*luigi.consolino@ino.it

Abstract: Full phase control of THz emitting quantum cascade laser (QCL) combs has

recently  been  demonstrated,  opening  new  perspectives  for  even  the  most  demanding

applications. In this framework, simplifying the set-ups for control of these devices will help

to accelerate their spreading in many fields. We report a new way to control the emission

frequencies of a THz QCL comb by small optical frequency tuning (SOFT), using a very

simple experimental setup, exploiting the incoherent emission of an ordinary white light

emitting diode. The slightly perturbative regime accessible in these condition allows tweaking

the complex refractive index of the semiconductor without destabilizing the broadband laser

gain. The SOFT actuator is characterized and compared to another actuator, the QCL driving

current.  The  suitability  of  this  additional  degree  of  freedom  for  frequency  and  phase

stabilization of a THz QCL comb is shown and perspectives are discussed.


1.
Introduction

In the field of frequency metrology a paradigmatic shift has occurred with the invention of

optical Frequency Combs [1–3] (FCs, commonly fs-pulse mode-locked lasers). These provide

a frequency ruler for any laser emitting within their broad spectral range [4], and can enhance

the performances of environmental sensing setups [5], thanks to the combination of the broad

spectral coverage with the selectivity and sensitivity of laser-based spectrometers. In fact, a

FC is a superposition of a series of monochromatic electromagnetic waves (the FC modes,

that  can  be fully controlled  with two global  parameters,  i.e.  repetition rate  and  offset

frequency), coherently spreading along a broad spectral range. 

This technology is particularly important in the mid-infrared and terahertz (THz) regions,

where many chemical species have characteristic absorption transitions, and where sensing

and  high-precision  spectroscopy  on  molecular  compounds  have  gained  great  scientific

importance. In particular, a different approach to broadband THz frequency metrology relies

on the recent extension of FCs to the far infrared domain. In fact, in the THz region, the

generation of pulses by optical rectification of fs-lasers dates back 15 years [6], and already

contained all the constituents of a zero-offset FC. However, the comb nature of such emission

has  been  unveiled  only  several  years  later  [7],  and  its  application  to  high-precision

spectroscopy was later on reported as frequency reference [8]. With the aim of replicating the

operating principles of a FC in a very compact solid-state THz source, great efforts have been

devoted to study and pursue mode-locked emission regime in THz quantum cascade laser

frequency combs (QCL-combs) [9,10]. 

Indeed, the development of active regions with engineered optical dispersion allows for

the simultaneous emission on a large number of equally-spaced longitudinal modes emitted

by this kind of devices. Moreover, high third-order nonlinearities in the QCLs active region

enable  very  fast  four-wave  mixing (FWM)  processes that  induce  mode  locking of the

emission modes, with a high level of coherence [11]. THz QCL-comb coherence has been

deeply analyzed with  Shifted Wave Interference Fourier-Transform  (SWIFT) spectroscopy

[12] and Fourier-transform Analysis of Comb Emission (FACE) technique [13], proving the

high degree of coherence of these sources, as well as their long term stability. Very recently,

full phase-stabilization of a QCL-comb at a metrological level has been demonstrated [14],

proving that this technology is suited for challenging metrological grade applications. In this

latest report, the spacing among the modes and offset frequency of the QCL-comb are

stabilized through only one actuator, the device driving current, by exploring two very

different frequency ranges. Finally, free running THz QCL-combs have been used as laser

sources for dual comb spectrometers [15,16], already providing state-of-the-art resolution in


the determination of transitions line centers, when properly referenced to a primary frequency

standard [17].

THz  QCLs  frequency  tuning  is  usually  obtained  by  driving  current  or  heat-sink

temperature control, but, recently, a new approach has been followed for single-mode devices.

Initially demonstrated for mid-infrared devices  [18,19], it has shown how a focused near-

infrared excitation of the semiconductor substrate just below the THz QCL active medium

allows a frequency coverage exceeding ten times the tuning by current (usually around

4 GHz) [20]. This laser induce frequency tuning (LIFT) mechanism relies on the generation

of a non-thermal electron-hole plasma in the vicinity of the back facet of edge-emitting

single-plasmon waveguide devices, which changes the optical cavity length and consequently

the mode frequency. Application to high-resolution molecular spectroscopy has also been

demonstrated [20], and, more importantly, LIFT has also allowed simultaneous frequency and

power stabilization of a single mode THz QCL [21].

In this work, we aim to apply the advantages of tuning through electromagnetic radiation

to a THz QCL-comb, showing how light influences the device multi-mode emission. In

particular, we focus on QCLs based on double-metal waveguides. For these devices there is

no optical mode extending in the semiconductor substrate, and we therefore directly excite the

laser active region. This condition was discarded in previous works, due to instabilities

induced in the QCL emission by the high intensity of the near-infrared laser used for tuning

[20]. For this reason, instead of employing intense and focused laser radiation, we use a

broadband white light emitting diode (LED) placed outside but close to the cryostat window,

realizing a simple, cost effective, robust and low power consumption setup. Clearly, the

amount of light coupled to the QCL facet will be much smaller than the focused laser case.

For this reason, we are able to operate in a slightly perturbative regime, affecting the laser

gain, but  not  destabilizing it. This  new  control  technique  will  be  called  small  optical

frequency tuning (SOFT), in order to differentiate it from the huge tuning ranges allowed by

LIFT. Nevertheless, here attention is rather posed on the possibility of exploiting these small

tunings for exact frequency and phase control. In fact, our data and analysis confirm the

possibility of using SOFT as external actuator on the QCL-comb degrees of freedom (mode

spacing and frequency offset), and we show that SOFT can actually induce full phase control

of one of these parameters, phase-locking it to the primary frequency standard. Finally, we

study the similarities of this new actuator with respect to driving current, in order to envision

a full frequency comb phase locking.  


2.
Experimental Setup

The experimental setup realized for this work is schematically sketched in fig. 1a. The

white LED used in this work for the QCL-comb SOFT is mounted in front of the cryostat

quartz window, and it is voltage driven by a Agilent 33250A function generator, that delivers

the voltage bias and allows modulation of the device.  

A detailed description of the QCL-comb device used in this work can be found in [13], it

is a heterogeneous cascade laser device emitting in the 2.5–3.1 THz spectral region. It is

based on a double-metal ridge waveguide, defined via dry etching, of length 2 mm and width

60 Dm, with lateral side absorbers for enhanced transverse mode suppression [22,23]. It is

mounted on the cold finger of a helium flux cryostat, and it is driven in continuous wave

(CW) mode by a low noise current driver (ppqSense QubeCL-P05). A fast bias tee (Marki

Microwave BT-0024SMG) is mounted inside the QCL cryostat, as close as possible to the

laser device, and allows electrical retrieval of the QCL-comb inter-mode beatnote frequency

(fIBN), corresponding to the spacing among the modes of the QCL-comb. In the current range

305–335 mA, the device displays a single IBN signal at around fIBN = 19.8 GHz, with a

spectral width in the order of few tens of kHz. 

Fig 1: a) Sketch of the experimental setup. The OR-comb and QCL-comb are spatially

superimposed and mixed on a hot-electron bolometer (HEB) detector. At the same time, a

white LED placed outside the QCL cryostat window allows SOFT of the device. b) Sample

spectrum of the down-converted radio frequency optical beatnotes (OBNs) acquired at around

246 MHz. 6 most intense OBNs are distinguishable, and their mode order has been retrieved

by dividing the absolute THz frequencies by their frequency spacing (fIBN).


The QCL-comb emission is superimposed to the radiation of a fully-stabilized free-

standing THz frequency comb, generated via optical rectification (OR-comb) in a lithium

niobate single mode waveguide [7]. The absolute frequencies of the modes of the OR-comb

are known with a 10-13 accuracy (depending on the frequency standard employed in our

laboratory, i.e. a GPS-Rb-Quartz frequency chain), and are fixed by tight phase stabilization

of the pumping telecom femtosecond laser repetition rate (Menlo Systems FC1500). The two

beams are mixed onto a fast hot electron bolometer detector (HEB - Scontel RS0.3-3T1). The

resulting multi-heterodyne  detection, with  a  close-to-integer  Vernier  ratio, allows  down

conversion of the QCL-comb emission into a series of equally spaced, optically detected

beatnotes  (OBNs)  in  the  radio  frequency  domain  (RF-comb).  These  OBNs  carry  full

information on the parenting modes and, since the OR-comb modes frequencies are known,

they can be used to retrieve the absolute frequencies of the QCL-comb modes, with the

technique thoroughly described in  [24]. In this way, thanks to the absolute frequencies

retrieval, by dividing them by the intermode beating frequency and rounding up to the nearest

integer, the QCL-comb mode order has been extracted, and labeled in fig. 1b. 

Moreover, the OBNs allow monitoring the QCL-comb modes frequencies, tracking their

evolution in time. To this purpose, the acquisition of the OBN frequencies is performed by

means of a real-time spectrum analyzer (Tektronix RSA5106A). In the operating conditions

used for this work (QCL heat-sink temperature ~20 K and driving current in the range 305–

335 mA), the spectrum of the QCL shows 11 intense modes, while the other emitting modes

have an intensity more than 10 times lower [13]. In the analysis presented in this work we

have preferred faster yet less sensitive acquisition scans, and therefore only the 6 most intense

modes can be retrieved and will  be considered. A sample acquisition of the RF-comb

spectrum in these conditions is shown in fig. 1b. 


3.
Results and Discussion

SOFT Characterization

The QCL-comb emitted modes have frequencies that can be parametrized as:

f N=N⋅ f IBN+f off
 eq. 1

where N is the order of the mode considered and foff is the QCL-comb frequency offset. By

simply deriving this equation, it is possible to retrieve the contribution of IBN and offset

tuning  on  the  emitted  comb  frequencies.  Moreover,  by  keeping  the  OR-comb  modes’

frequencies fixed, these variations are transferred to the acquired RF-comb modes:

Δf N
Δ k =Δ f OBN

Δk
=±N Δ f IBN

Δk
± Δ f off

Δk

 eq. 2

where  k is one tuning parameter, i.e. driving current, heat-sink temperature or LED light

intensity. The sign uncertainties are lifted once the directions of the IBN and offset tunings are

retrieved, knowing that they can depend on the actuator used.

In fact, thanks to the developed experimental setup, down-converting the IBN to RF

frequencies by mixing it with a proper synthesized frequency, it is possible to acquire both the

IBN and the OBNs simultaneously on the same spectrum analyzer, and trace their frequency

shifts while tuning the device parameters. Therefore, using equation 2, it is possible to

discriminate the spacing and offset tunings for all actuators. Table 1 summarizes how the two

comb parameters drift with respect to driving current, heat-sink temperature, and LED light

intensity. It is interesting to note that the signs of temperature and LED tunings are not

compatible with each other, confirming that the effect of the SOFT is not merely a thermal

effect. Moreover, quite obviously, the temperature tuning is a slow mechanism, that is neither

suited  for  a  fast  control  of the  comb  parameters,  nor  for  a  tight  phase  control. As  a

consequence, in the following we will focus the attention on current and LED tunings, and, in

order to study the effect of a modulation applied to these two actuators, we acquire the time

evolution of the intermodal frequency shift as well as of the optical beatnotes.  

Increment of
IBN frequency
Offset frequency

Driving current
+
-

Heat-sink temperature
-
-

LED light intensity
-
+

Table 1: Frequency tuning shifting direction for an increment of the three actuators:

driving current, heat-sink temperature and light emitting diode (LED) light intensity. 


Fig. 2 shows the effect of applying a modulation on the QCL-comb through SOFT. The

LED is biased with a 8 V voltage, and is modulated sinusoidally with a 1 V amplitude at

30 Hz. The time evolution of the six, simultaneously acquired, OBNs and IBN is reported in

fig. 2a. From these data we can extract an IBN frequency shift (ΔffIBN) of 107.0(3) kHz,

leading to a tuning coefficient of -107.0(3) kHz/V. Moreover, the individual OBN frequency

shifts (ΔffOBN) are retrieved, and their overall dependence on the mode order is shown in

fig. 2b. This linear dependence is the result of the modulation on the IBN and propagating

along the comb modes. Combining eq. 2 with the tuning directions reported in table 1, we can

calculate the offset frequency shift (Δffoff) corresponding to the 1 V LED bias modulation,

leading to a mean value of 15.98(5) MHz/V. All the details of these analysis are reported in

supplementary materials section. 

Fig. 2: SOFT modulation. a) The time evolution of the optical beatnotes (OBNs) and

intermode beatnote (IBN) is recorded while the device is SOFT modulated at 30 Hz. The

frequency shift of each OBN is measured and reported in panel b). The linear dependence on

the mode order is due to IBN frequency modulation spreading along the comb modes.


Fig. 3: Driving current modulation. a) The time evolution of the optical beatnotes (OBNs)

and intermode beatnote (IBN) is recorded while the device current is modulated at 30 Hz. The

width of each OBN is measured and reported in panel b). The linear dependence on the mode

order is due to IBN frequency modulation spreading along the comb modes.

The same procedure is applied to the device driving current modulation, and the results

are shown in fig. 3. The device is driven at 320 mA, and the amplitude of the modulation

(50 DA at 30 Hz) is chosen to result in an  IBN amplitude modulation close to the previous

case. For the current modulation an IBN shift of 110.3(3) kHz leads to a tuning coefficient of

2.206(6) MHz/mA. Figure 3a shows the OBNs and IBN time evolution, while the OBNs

frequency shift amplitude linear dependence on the mode order is shown in fig. 3b. The offset

modulation coefficient is retrieved as in the previous case, leading to -347.8(2.2) MHz/mA,

while all the details of the analysis are reported in supplementary materials section. 

Actuator
Δfoff /Δk
ΔfIBN/Δk
Δfoff/ΔfIBN

SOFT
+15.98(5) MHz/V
-0.1070(3) MHz/V
-149.3

Driving current
-347.8(2.2) MHz/mA
+2.206(6) MHz/mA
-157.7

Table 2: Frequency offset and intermode beatnote frequency tuning coefficients for both

SOFT and driving current actuator. The ratio between the two coefficients is a good parameter

to compare the tuning characteristics of the two actuators on the device. 


All the previous results, related to SOFT and current tunings have been summarized in

table 2. The driving current tuning coefficients are reported, while the  moduli of the two

SOFT tuning coefficients depend also on other non-device-related parameters, such as the

LED optical power effectively impinging on the QCL (depending mainly on the distance

between the LED and the QCL, and the cryostat window transmittivity). For this reason, in

order to compare the actuators, we can calculate the ratio between the two coefficients, shown

in the last column of table 2. It is clear that, while the two actuators have indeed similar effect

on the QCL-comb, they do not act exactly in the same way. 

The LED illumination creates an electron-hole plasma in a thin slice (1-2 Dm) close to the

laser cavity edges. Depending on the intensity, the amount of the photogenerated electrons

will change more or less significantly the complex refractive index of the semiconductor.

From the experimental geometry and the laser dimension we can estimate that the power

illuminating the laser edge is 10-4 of the LED power, that is around 13 mW overall. From the

LED power coupled to the laser (about 1.5 DW) we would expect then a tuning of the laser

lines 10-5 times lower than what observed for the laser case of Ref. [20]. As already stated

above, in the case of our experiment the refractive index change is happening in the active

region of the laser where the electrons are confined in the multiquantum well heterostructure

and not in the bulk semiconductor (as in Ref. [20]).

The broadband nature of the LED illumination leads to a non-selective injection of

carriers in the active region populating also higher levels in the subbands. The photoexcited

electrons will relax via intraband scattering in the lower subbands changing the effective

temperature distribution of the electrons in the lasing levels (see also Ref. [19] for a similar

discussion) and locally perturbing the gain. This is different with respect to the selective

carrier population change achieved by varying the current and the population of the upper

lasing  state  through  proper  resonant  tunneling  injection.  So  the  two  actuators  impact

differently the electron distribution and dynamics in the laser active region. 

In order to confirm and quantify this difference, two tests have been performed. First, we

can measure the two different fixed points for the two actuators. A frequency comb fixed

point is the only frequency that remains stationary while the comb expands or contracts

around it, due to a frequency tuning. Therefore the fixed points can be extracted from eq. 2

and eq. 1, by simply considering:

Δf fix
Δk =N Δ f IBN

Δ k + Δ f off

Δk =0
 eq. 3


Where the sign ambiguity of eq. 2 has been lifted by the measurements.

Finally:

f fix=f off− Δf off

Δ f IBN

f IBN
eq. 4

Dialing  in  the  numbers  we  calculate  ffix = 2.922 THz  for  the  SOFT  actuator,  and

ffix = 3.060 THz for the driving current. The two fixed points are outside the detected emission

bandwidth of the comb, and despite being close (138 GHz), they are clearly distinguished

thus allowing, in principle, an independent control of the comb degrees of freedom.

The second test that proves the difference between the two actuators is to stabilize the

frequency of one comb degree of freedom by simultaneously applying modulations through

the driving current and the LED light, with ad-hoc amplitudes and a fixed phase difference. In

fact, if the two actuators were the same, there would be no linear combination of the two

modulations minimizing only one degree of freedom. Fig. 4 shows the effect of the two

modulations at 30 Hz, employed to stabilize the frequency of the intermode beatnote, by

finely tuning the ratio of the amplitudes and the relative phase. As in the previous cases,

fig. 4a shows the time evolution of the OBNs but, in this case, the width of their frequency

shifts is constant throughout the detected comb emission (fig. 4b). This effect is due to

negligible contribution of the stabilized fIBN parameter on the width of the OBNs. 

Fig. 4: SOFT and Driving current modulation. a) The time evolution of the optical

beatnotes  (OBNs)  is  recorded  while  the  SOFT  and  driving  current  modulations  are

simultaneously applied onto the device. The amplitudes and relative phases are tuned in order

to minimize the intermode beatnote (IBN) width. b) Width of each retrieved OBN. The

absence of dependence on the mode order is due to negligible IBN frequency modulation. 


IBN Phase control through SOFT

One intriguing possibility is to use the SOFT actuator to obtain full phase control on the

QCL-comb emission, by controlling one comb degree of freedom with SOFT and the other

with the driving current. With respect to the driving current, the LED actuator is expected to

be a smaller bandwidth control, and, as a consequence, it has been chosen to phase lock the

comb mode spacing, showing a characteristic width in the order of few tens of kHz. To this

purpose, the IBN signal is isolated, down converted to RF frequencies, and compared to a

local oscillator on a standard phase detector unit. The phase detector output signal is properly

elaborated by a proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller, and fed back to the LED

driving unit, closing a simple feedback loop acting on the SOFT actuator. Once all the

parameters are optimized, we achieve a stable phase-locking loop (PLL) on the IBN signal.

Fig. 5 compares the IBN free-running spectrum (fig. 5a), the SOFT phase-locked one (fig. 5b)

and the same IBN, phase-locked through driving current (fig. 5c). The SOFT PLL (PLL1) has

an electronic bandwidth of 15 kHz but, clearly, the locking figure-of-merit is not as good as in

the driving current case. The effect of this non-perfect phase lock can be evidenced by

applying a modulation on the device driving current, while leaving the IBN free-running or

phase-locked with through SOFT. This comparison is shown in fig. 5d. While it is clear that

the activation of the SOFT PLL1 reduces the effect of the current modulation, the OBNs

frequency  shifts  show  a  residual  linear  dependence  on  the  comb  mode  order  (slope

0.0045±0.0018), due to a non-perfect locking loop. 

In order to attempt complete phase control of the comb emission, we activate the PLL on

the  comb  mode  spacing  through  SOFT and  simultaneously  stabilize  the  comb  offset.

Following the work done in  [14], this latter stabilization is pursued by phase locking one

selected OBN to the optically rectified THz comb through the device driving current (PLL2).

Fig. 6 show the two PLL error signals, simultaneously acquired. Unfortunately, the two

locking loops cannot operate simultaneously, in fact, every time PLL2 locks one selected

OBN, PLL1 is interrupted, and starts working again when PLL2 is interrupted. The reasons

for the mutual exclusivity of the two loops is the non-orthogonality of the two actuators. In

fact, every time one of the two loops is active, the phase noise affecting the locked degree of

freedom is transferred to the free-running one, broadening the relative beatnote signal, and

disturbing the locking loop.


Fig. 5: Intermode beatnote (IBN) phase locking. a) the free-running spectrum of the IBN,

down-converted to RF frequencies and acquired with a resolution bandwidth (RBW) of 300

Hz.  b)  IBN  phase-locked  using  the  SOFT  actuator  to  a  local  oscillator  at  frequency

fLO =150 MHz. c) IBN phase locked through driving current actuator. Both b) and c) have

been acquired at RBW = 300 Hz. d) Normalized frequency shifts of the optical beatnotes

(OBNs) while applying a current modulation and with a free running (blue) and phase locked

IBN through SOFT (olive). 


Fig. 6: The time evolution of phase-locking loop (PLL) on the itermode beatnote (IBN)

through SOFT (PLL1 - grey) and  PLL of one optical beatnote (OBN) through driving current

(PPL2 – green) signals are shown. The attempts to simultaneously run the two loops fail, due

to the non-orthogonality of the two used actuators.


4.
Conclusions

In this work we have demonstrated how LED illumination can be used to tune the

emission of a THz QCL-comb, entering a new regime of control with small optical frequency

tuning (SOFT). We have reported on how the SOFT actuator compares with the device

driving current, showing that the two actuators are similar but distinguishable. Finally, tight

phase locking of the QCL IBN to a primary frequency standard is demonstrated, thus enabling

phase control on the free spectral range of the THz QCL-comb emitter. It has to be noted that

ambient laboratory light can have an impact on the laser emission frequencies and also on

their stability. For this reason all the measurements reported in this paper were performed in

the dark. In cases where light perturbation can affect the device performances particular filters

in the cryostat window can be adopted, in order to filter out the ambiet light.

The additional SOFT actuator, with respect to current, temperature and RF injection

locking, significantly widens perspectives of full control  of THz comb emission in an

increasing number of scenarios. In particular, for future wireless communication networks,

such LED control of QCLs can enable practical Optical-to-THz multichannel encoding of

information, recently demonstrated  for single THz frequencies by photomixing telecom

frequencies [25]. Indeed, THz carrier frequencies can carry more information than microwave

range carriers, while propagation in scattering atmosphere is much more favourable than

telecom wavelengths. Of course, in-field deployment of such optical-to-THz converters will

depend on reliable close to room temperature operation of THz QCL-combs [28]. Moreover,

similarly to classical encoding of information, transduction of quantum information could be

envisaged  from  telecom/visible  lasers  to  THz  QCL  combs  once,  for  these  latter,

squeezing/entanglement properties will be demonstrated [in preparation].

Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge financial support from ERC grant CHIC

(724344) the Qombs Project, EU-H2020-FET Flagship on Quantum Technologies grant no.

820419,  the  Italian  ESFRI  Roadmap  (Extreme  Light  Infrastructure-ELI),  EC–H2020

Laserlab-Europe grant agreement 654148, the EC Project 665158 (ULTRAQCL). 

Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability:  The data supporting the findings of this study are available from the

corresponding author upon reasonable request.


References

 

1. 
S. A. Diddams, D. J. Jones, J. Ye, S. T. Cundiff, J. L. Hall, J. K. Ranka, R. S. 
Windeler, R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, "Direct link between microwave
and optical frequencies with a 300 THz femtosecond laser comb," Phys. Rev. Lett. 
84(22), 5102–5105 (2000).

2. 
R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, T. W. Hänsch, J. C. Knight, W. J. Wadsworth, and P. S. J. 
Russell, "Optical frequency synthesizer for precision spectroscopy," Phys. Rev. Lett. 
85(11), 2264–2267 (2000).

3. 
T. Udem, R. Holzwarth, and T. W. Hänsch, "Optical frequency metrology," Nature 
416(6877), 233–237 (2002).

4. 
J. Reichert, R. Holzwarth, T. Udem, and T. W. Hänsch, "Measuring the frequency of 
light with mode-locked lasers," Opt. Commun. 172(1), 59–68 (1999).

5. 
S. A. Diddams, "The evolving optical frequency comb [Invited]," J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 
27(11), B51 (2010).

6. 
T. Yasui, Y. Kabetani, E. Saneyoshi, S. Yokoyama, and T. Araki, "Terahertz frequency
comb by multifrequency-heterodyning photoconductivedetection for high-accuracy, 
high-resolution terahertz spectroscopy," Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 241104 (2006).

7. 
L. Consolino, A. Taschin, P. Bartolini, S. Bartalini, P. Cancio, A. Tredicucci, H. E. 
Beere, D. A. Ritchie, R. Torre, M. S. Vitiello, and P. de Natale, "Phase-locking to a 
free-space terahertz comb for metrological-grade terahertz lasers," Nat. Commun. 3, 
1040 (2012).

8. 
S. Bartalini, L. Consolino, P. Cancio, P. de Natale, P. Bartolini, A. Taschin, M. De Pas,
H. Beere, D. Ritchie, M. S. Vitiello, and R. Torre, "Frequency-comb-assisted terahertz
quantum cascade laser spectroscopy," Phys. Rev. X 4(2), 21006 (2014).

9. 
S. Barbieri, M. Ravaro, P. Gellie, G. Santarelli, C. Manquest, C. Sirtori, S. P. Khanna, 
E. H. Linfield, and A. G. Davies, "Coherent sampling of active mode-locked terahertz
quantum cascade lasers and frequency synthesis," Nat. Photonics 5(5), 306–313 
(2011).

10. 
F. Wang, H. Nong, T. Fobbe, V. Pistore, S. Houver, S. Markmann, N. Jukam, M. 
Amanti, C. Sirtori, S. Moumdji, R. Colombelli, L. Li, E. Linfield, G. Davies, J. 
Mangeney, J. Tignon, and S. Dhillon, "Short Terahertz Pulse Generation from a 
Dispersion Compensated Modelocked Semiconductor Laser," Laser Photonics Rev. 
11(4), 1–9 (2017).

11. 
D. Burghoff, T. Y. Kao, N. Han, C. W. I. Chan, X. Cai, Y. Yang, D. J. Hayton, J. R. 
Gao, J. L. Reno, and Q. Hu, "Terahertz laser frequency combs," Nat. Photonics 8(6), 
462–467 (2014).


12. 
D. Burghoff, Y. Yang, D. J. Hayton, J.-R. Gao, J. L. Reno, and Q. Hu, "Evaluating the 
coherence and time-domain profile of quantum cascade laser frequency combs," Opt. 
Express 23(2), 1190 (2015).

13. 
F. Cappelli, L. Consolino, G. Campo, I. Galli, D. Mazzotti, A. Campa, M. Siciliani de 
Cumis, P. Cancio Pastor, R. Eramo, M. Rösch, M. Beck, G. Scalari, J. Faist, P. De 
Natale, and S. Bartalini, "Retrieval of phase relation and emission profile of quantum 
cascade laser frequency combs," Nat. Photonics 13, 562–568 (2019).

14. 
L. Consolino, M. Nafa, F. Cappelli, K. Garrasi, F. P. Mezzapesa, L. Li, A. G. Davies, 
E. H. Linfield, M. S. Vitiello, P. De Natale, and S. Bartalini, "Fully phase-stabilized 
quantum cascade laser frequency comb," Nat. Commun. 10(1), (2019).

15. 
L. A. Sterczewski, J. Westberg, Y. Yang, D. Burghoff, J. Reno, Q. Hu, and G. 
Wysocki, "Terahertz hyperspectral imaging with dual chip-scale combs," Optica 6(6), 
766 (2019).

16. 
H. Li, Z. Li, W. Wan, K. Zhou, X. Liao, S. Yang, C. Wang, J. C. Cao, and H. Zeng, 
"Toward Compact and Real-Time Terahertz Dual-Comb Spectroscopy Employing a 
Self-Detection Scheme," ACS Photonics 7(1), 49–56 (2020).

17. 
L. Consolino, M. Nafa, M. De Regis, F. Cappelli, K. Garrasi, F. P. Mezzapesa, L. Li, 
A. G. Davies, E. H. Linfield, M. S. Vitiello, S. Bartalini, and P. De Natale, "Quantum 
cascade laser based hybrid dual comb spectrometer," Commun. Phys. in press (2020).

18. 
C. Zervos, M. D. Frogley, C. C. Phillips, D. O. Kundys, L. R. Wilson, M. Hopkinson, 
and M. S. Skolnick, "All-optical switching in quantum cascade lasers," Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 90(5), 053505 (2007).

19. 
G. Chen, C. G. Bethea, R. Martini, P. D. Grant, R. Dudek, and H. C. Liu, "High-speed
all-optical modulation of a standard quantum cascade laser by front facet 
illumination," Appl. Phys. Lett. 95(10), 101104 (2009).

20. 
T. Alam, M. Wienold, X. Lü, K. Biermann, L. Schrottke, H. T. Grahn, and H.-W. 
Hübers, "Wideband, high-resolution terahertz spectroscopy by light-induced 
frequency tuning of quantum-cascade lasers," Opt. Express 27(4), 5420 (2019).

21. 
T. Alam, M. Wienold, X. Lü, K. Biermann, L. Schrottke, H. T. Grahn, and H.-W. 
Hübers, "Frequency and power stabilization of a terahertz quantum-cascade laser 
using near-infrared optical excitation," Opt. Express 27(25), 36846–36854 (2019).

22. 
M. Rösch, G. Scalari, M. Beck, and J. Faist, "Octave-spanning semiconductor laser," 
Nat. Photonics 9(1), 42–47 (2014).

23. 
D. Bachmann, M. Rösch, M. J. Süess, M. Beck, K. Unterrainer, J. Darmo, J. Faist, 
and G. Scalari, "Short pulse generation and mode control of broadband terahertz 
quantum cascade lasers," Optica 3(10), 1087 (2016).


24. 
L. Consolino, S. Jung, A. Campa, M. De Regis, S. Pal, J. H. Kim, K. Fujita, A. Ito, M.
Hitaka, S. Bartalini, P. De Natale, M. A. Belkin, and M. S. Vitiello, "Spectral purity 
and tunability of terahertz quantum cascade laser sources based on intracavity 
difference-frequency generation," Sci. Adv. 3(9), e1603317 (2017).

25. 
S. Ummethala, T. Harter, K. Koehnle, Z. Li, S. Muehlbrandt, Y. Kutuvantavida, J. 
Kemal, P. Marin-Palomo, J. Schaefer, A. Tessmann, S. K. Garlapati, A. Bacher, L. 
Hahn, M. Walther, T. Zwick, S. Randel, W. Freude, and C. Koos, "THz-to-optical 
conversion in wireless communications using an ultra-broadband plasmonic 
modulator," Nat. Photonics 13(8), 519–524 (2019).

26. 
L. Bosco, M. Franckié, G. Scalari, M. Beck, A. Wacker, and J. Faist, 
"Thermoelectrically cooled THz quantum cascade laser operating up to 210 K," 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 115(1), (2019).

  


