MEMS Heat Flux Sensor

Antti Immonen
LUT University
Lappeenranta, Finland
antti.immonen@lut.fi

Saku Levikari
LUT University
Lappeenranta, Finland
saku.levikari@lut.fi

Feng Gao
VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland
Espoo, Finland
feng.gao@vtt.fi

Mikko Kuisma
LUT University
Lappeenranta, Finland
mikko.kuisma@lut.fi

Pertti Silventoinen
LUT University
Lappeenranta, Finland
pertti.silventoinen@lut.fi

Abstract—Heat flux sensors have potential in enabling appli-
cations that require tracking of direct and instantaneous thermal
energy transfer. To facilitate their use, the sensors have to
be robust and feasible to implement, while maintaining high
sensitivity and a fast response time. However, most commercially
available heat flux sensors are expensive to manufacture and
have insufficient temporal responses. In this paper, a novel
microelectromechanical heat flux sensor structure is proposed.
The electrical performance of the prototype sensors is compared
with commercially available heat flux sensors. Preliminary results
show that our sensors have similar sensitivity and faster response
compared to commercial sensors.
Index Terms—Heat flux sensor, MEMS, vertical, thermopile

I. INTRODUCTION

Heat flux sensors (HFS) are used in a growing number
of applications requiring direct measurement of transferred
thermal energy, where the use of commonplace temperature
measurement is not practical or sufficient [1], [2]. Most
notably, heat flux sensors enable direct measurement of the
flow of heat even in the presence of changing heat coupling
mechanisms, and in addition, facilitate measurement of sub-
microsecond heat transients [1], [3]. The sensors can also
be used for differential temperature measurement across the
sensor itself, resolving differential temperatures on the order
of microkelvins [2], [4].
Despite the potential benefits of heat flux measurement,
HFSs are employed relatively rarely in the industry, and
instead, the transfer rate of heat is calculated based on multiple
temperature measurements [1]. According to [1], the low
popularity of discrete HFSs is most likely a result of the
relatively high cost and challenging manufacturability, as well
as low awareness of the capabilities of the technology.
Recently, increasing attention has focused on employing
thermoelectric transducers in IoT applications for both sensing
and power generation purposes, which predicts an increasing
demand for cost-effective and robust thermoelectric elements
[5]–[7]. An example of such an application is the use of
thermoelectric elements in direct skin contact with the human
body, where the sensor needs to have a high sensitivity while

©2020 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

being mechanically durable [8]. However, from the manu-
facturing and electromechanical viewpoints, such applications
are not easy to implement with the currently available heat
flux sensor technology [1]. Thus, feasible and cost-effective
manufacturing methods are needed. In the present paper,
a novel 3D microelectromechanical (MEMS) semiconductor
sensor stucture is proposed. The preliminary findings related
to an improved vertical 3D MEMS sensor structure and the
performance of the sensor are presented.

II. SENSOR DESIGN

Discrete heat flux sensors are most commonly implemented
as passive sensor elements that generate a voltage output in
response to an imposed temperature gradient [2]. While a num-
ber of widespread transducer technologies can be regarded as
heat flux sensors, this paper focuses on contact-type thermopile
sensors in the form factor of a plate, see Fig. 1.
Heat flux sensors are typically based on the Seebeck effect
which generates a voltage output [1]. The voltage signal of
a thermopile heat flux sensor results from a electromotive
force induced along the length of an electric conductor by
the thermal gradient applied. A conventional thermopile is
built by alternating two different types of thermoelectric legs,
connected electrically in series and thermally in parallel, to
sum up the generated voltages of individual legs into a useful
amplitude [2], [6]. The operation and main component parts
of a traditional thermopile heat flux sensor are illustrated in
Fig. 1.
In addition to the classic plate-type heat flux sensors, heat
transfer measurement can be achieved with several other
transducer technologies based on the conversion of heat into
electricity, including thermopile infrared (IR) sensors, Peltier
elements, and thermoelectric generators (TEGs). While both
TEGs and IR sensors are widespread in the industry and have
low manufacturing costs [5], [6], neither of the technologies
is well-suited for surface heat flux measurements owing to
their insufficient mechanical robustness or thermoelectric per-
formance.
Manufacturing a mechanically robust contact-type heat flux
sensor with fast temporal response is difficult [1]. An example
of a mechanically durable sensor structure is the gradient
heat flux sensor (GHFS), which incorporates an anisotropic
active sensing layer based on a skewed multilayer structure
[3]. Such a structure can be mechanically robust in a very

arXiv:2006.02808v1  [physics.app-ph]  4 Jun 2020


Fig. 1.
Thermopile HFS, composed of multiple thermocouple legs (1 and
2) in series. Voltage output corresponds to the heat flux q conducted through
the heat resistance of the sensor active layer 3. In practical constructions, the
sensors often include heat spreader support plates 4 and 5.

wide range of environmental conditions without the need for
applied protective cover plates, while achieving a significantly
higher fill rate of the active layer volume than traditional
thermopile structures [1], [3]. However, sensors incorporating
such structures are currently limited to low manufacturing
volumes, as there are no commonly used mass production
techniques available.
The use of MEMS manufacturing methods has been found
to offer a number of benefits for achieving a high density of
thermoelectric junctions in IR sensors [6]. However, owing
to the lateral arrangement of the thermoelectric legs, the IR
sensors have an uneven lateral heat distribution by design,
which complicates their use in conductive heat flux measure-
ments. Additionally, the suspended thin film devices are fragile
[9], making them impractical for conductive heat flux mea-
surement. To overcome these challenges, vertically configured
3D thermopile sensor structures have been proposed [9], [10].
Such designs typically have a higher mechanical durability
and a more uniform lateral heat distribution than conventional
membrane-type sensors.

A. Design optimization

A common approach to improve the thermoelectric perfor-
mance of a heat flux sensor is to employ materials with a
high thermoelectric figure of merit zT [6]. The performance
of a heat flux sensor can also be improved by optimizing
the construction topology of the sensor [6], [9]. To achieve
an acceptable sensitivity while preserving a low series resis-
tance, the number and packing density of the series-connected
thermoelectric legs should be maximized. At the same time,
optimal material properties should be maintained, that is,
high conductivity and Seebeck coefficient, and low thermal
conductivity [2]. In addition, a high volumetric fill rate of the
sensing layer with thermoelectrically contributing materials is
desired [3].
In [9], anisotropic wet etching was used to form a series of
trenches, on top of which alternating metallization layers of
Ni and Au were deposited to form a thermopile. The design
removes the need for including both hot and cold junctions of
the devices on the same plane, thus increasing the sensing
area. Further improvements on the sensitivity of vertically
configured MEMS devices may be attained by exploiting the
structure forming the thermopile to a greater degree. The
etched structures used to create a thermal resistance layer,

such as the design of [9], can be incorporated as a part of
the thermopile, when fabricated onto a SOI device layer. By
making use of these structures, the density of thermoelectric
legs can be increased, while simultaneously exploiting the
higher Seebeck coefficient of silicon compared with that of
metals. Further, employing thick crystalline silicon legs for
the construction of the thermopile contributes to keeping the
electrical resistance of the device low, and facilitates a fast
response time.

B. Sensor prototype manufactured in the study

A prototype batch of heat flux sensors was manufactured
onto 6 inch SOI silicon wafers, Fig. 2, with a 50 µm thick
device layer. The process comprised of anisotropic etching
of the single crystal SOI active layer to form an array of
mesa structures and depositing and patterning a polysilicon
and aluminum inter-layer on top of the mesa-structure to
form a vertically configured 3D thermopile. In addition, the
sensor surface was passivated with SiO2 and the aluminum
contact pads were revealed by etching a window through the
passivation oxide. The structure of the developed sensor is
illustrated in Fig. 3.

Fig. 2.
Processed silicon wafer in the test setup. The measurement system
was built around a wafer probing station, with the wafer thermal chuck and
the probe card holder (not shown) acting as thermal excitation source.

Fig. 3.
Cross-section of the fabricated sensor. a) Sensor structure, b)
micrograpgh of the sensor.

The manufactured sensor operates similarly to a conven-
tional thermopile. The measured temperature gradient of inter-
est is imposed across the SOI active layer, which incorporates
electrically series-connected thermoelectric legs of p- and n-
type silicon for transducing the signal. An array of mesa
structures of n-doped single crystalline silicon are connected in


series with p-type polysilicon films deposited on the slanting
sidewalls of the mesa structures by a pattern of aluminum
metallization. In such a configuration, in addition to forming
the heat resistance layer, the device layer silicon bulk material
contributes to the voltage response of the sensor.

III. MEASUREMENTS

Electrical measurements of the sensors were obtained during
preliminary electrothermal characterization as described in
[11]. A stacked structure incorporating the device under test
(DUT) and a calibrated commercial sensor around a wafer
probing station was constructed, with the DUT sensors located
adjacent to one another on the SOI wafer to ensure as equal
thermal conditions as possible.
Relative characterization was performed by conducting a
heat flux through the structure periodically in both directions
during a 12 min test sequence. The reference heat flux was
induced as a combination of conductive and radiative excita-
tion by a combination of a thermal wafer chuck and a black
body probe card assembly. During the excitation sequence, the
transient and quasi-steady-state heat flux signals of both the
DUTs and references, as well as several temperatures around
the setting were recorded.
All the tested sensors produced a waveform similar to that
of the reference sensor, with a slightly different transient
response owing to differing thermal properties and contacts of
the sensors. The waveforms obtained from the test are shown
in Fig. 4.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Based on the preliminary measurements of the prototype
sensors, the sensors were found to exhibit comparable sensi-
tivities when compared with commercial sensors of similar
size. The response time of the sensors was approximately
42 µs, which suggests a significantly faster response time as
compared with the commercial sensors with response times
of approximately 0.7 s [4]. In addition, a relatively low series
resistance in the range of 400 to 700 ohm was measured. To
further validate the operation of the proposed sensor, additional
tests should be conducted, and new test batches fabricated.
Successfully implemented vertical sensor designs have the
potential to ease the construction process of thermoelectric
devices in both sensing and thermoelectric generator solutions.
In cases where several current TEG designs have vertical-to-
lateral heat guide structures and thermally and electrically in-
sulating heater materials included, such as [7], the introduction
of a successful vertical thermopile structure can significantly
reduce the volumetric proportion of the filler materials and
render the heat guide structures unnecessary. Moreover, if
the same device structure is replicated on a smaller scale,
the design has the potential for facilitating higher density
of thermoelectric legs in direct contact with a measurement
surface in comparison with the conventional lateral sensor
designs.

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (minutes)

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

DUT signal (V)

10-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

Average reference heat flux signal (V)

10-4

DUT1
DUT2
DUT3
DUT4
REF1

Fig. 4. Output signals of the tested sensors (DUTs 1–4) recorded during a
sequence of bidirectional thermal excitation, compared with a reference heat
flux signal from calibrated sensor REF 1 placed under the DUTs.

V. CONCLUSIONS

A MEMS-compatible conductive heat flux sensor was suc-
cessfully fabricated and tested. The promising early results
show that the developed sensors possess a sensitivity com-
parable with their commercially available sensors, approx.
1 Vmm2/W, and a faster response time of under 50 µs.
The proposed fabrication method is compatible with MEMS
processes, and thus facilitates cost-effective mass production
of the sensors. Further, owing to the implemented vertical
structure, the sensor is mechanically durable. These advantages
facilitate the use of heat flux sensors in several new fields and
applications, such as wearable electronics and IoT.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank greenTEG AG for providing
the calibrated reference sensors. This work was supported by
Business Finland through the project Q-Health.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Z. Sapozhnikov, V. Y. Mityakov, and A. V. Mityakov, Heatmetry: The
Science and Practice of Heat Flux Measurement.
Springer, 2020.

[2] P. R. Childs, Practical temperature measurement.
Elsevier, 2001.

[3] A. V. Mityakov, S. Z. Sapozhnikov, V. Y. Mityakov, A. A. Snarskii, M. I.
Zhenirovsky, and J. J. Pyrh¨onen, “Gradient heat flux sensors for high
temperature environments,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 176,
pp. 1–9, 2012.

[4] GreenTEG, Heat flux sensor gSKIN® series datasheet, 2020, retrieved
March 9, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://shop.greenteg.com/heat-
flux-measurement-heat-flux-sensor-gskin-xm/

[5] M. Haras and T. Skotnicki, “Thermoelectricity for IoT – A review,”
Nano Energy, vol. 54, pp. 461–476, 2018.

[6] D. Xu, Y. Wang, B. Xiong, and T. Li, “MEMS-based thermoelectric in-
frared sensors: A review,” Frontiers of Mechanical Engineering, vol. 12,
no. 4, pp. 557–566, 2017.

[7] T. N. Huu, T. N. Van, and O. Takahito, “Flexible thermoelectric
power generator with Y-type structure using electrochemical deposition
process,” Applied Energy, vol. 210, pp. 467–476, 2018.

[8] V. Leonov, Y. van Andel, Z. Wang, R. J. Vullers, and C. Van Hoof,
“Micromachined polycrystalline Si thermopiles in a T-shirt,” Sensors &
Transducers, vol. 127, no. 4, p. 15, 2011.

[9] T. P. Huynh, Y. Zhang, and C. Yehuda, “Fabrication and characterization
of a multichannel 3D thermopile for chip calorimeter applications,”
Sensors, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 3351–3361, 2015.


[10] M. Lindeberg, H. Yousef, H. R¨odjeg˚ard, H. Martin, and K. Hjort,
“A PCB-like process for vertically configured thermopiles,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 18, no. 6, p. 065021, 2008.

[11] A. Immonen, “A Heat Flux Sensor Test Setup,” Master’s thesis,
Lappeenranta University of Technology, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://urn.fi/URN:NBN:fi-fe2019090927472


