arXiv:2006.09456v1  [cond-mat.mes-hall]  16 Jun 2020

Crystallographic orientation errors in mechanical exfoliation

Y. Kolumbus,1 A. Zalic,1 N. Fardian-Melamed,2 Z.

Barkay,3 D. Rotem,2 D. Porath,2, 4 and H. Steinberg1, 4

1Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 9190401 Israel

2Physical Chemistry Department, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel

3Wolfson Applied Materials Research Center,

Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, 6997801, Israel.

4Center for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel

We evaluate the effect of mechanical exfoliation of van der Waals materials on

crystallographic orientations of the resulting flakes. Flakes originating from a single

crystal of graphite, whose orientation is confirmed using STM, are studied using

facet orientations and electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD). While facets exhibit

a wide distribution of angles after a single round of exfoliation (σ ∼ 5◦), EBSD shows

that the true crystallographic orientations are more narrowly distributed (σ ∼ 1.5◦),

and facets have an approximately 3◦ error from the true orientation. Furthermore,

we find that the majority of graphite fractures are along armchair lines, and that

the cleavage process results in an increase of the zigzag lines portion. Our results

place values on the rotation caused by a single round of the exfoliation process, and

suggest that when a 1-2 degree precision is necessary, the orientation of a flake can

be gauged by the orientation of the macroscopic single crystal from which it was

exfoliated.

I.
INTRODUCTION

The advent of the van der Waals transfer method [1] has made it possible to fabricate

a plethora of hybrid structures consisting of mechanically placed exfoliated layers [2]. This

method allows for non-epitaxial stacks, with freedom of orientation of the constituent flakes

- enabling the investigation of relative crystallographic orientations. It is important to con-


2

trol this inter-layer orientation, also called twist-angle, as it is a determinant factor in many

types of devices: When graphene is stacked over hBN, small twist-angles result in long-range

superlattice effects which break the graphene band into minibands [3]; The twisted bilayer

graphene (tBLG) system exhibits non-trivial effects at small twist angles [4–6] and, remark-

ably, the emergence of a Mott insulator phase [7] and unconventional superconductivity [8]

at the “magic-angle” of 1.1◦.

The interface between graphene and other conductors is also of great interest. When

placed at proximity to a topological insulator such as Bi2Se3, commensurate orientation

conditions are expected to result in strong inter-band hybridization [9]. Experiments on

such hybrids have shown that aligning the flakes results in the emergence of a highly-doped

hole Fermi surface at the interface [10].

One possible and widely used approach for fabricating orientation-sensitive devices is

identifying orientations according to apparent crystallographic facets of flakes [11]. This

approach, however, severely limits the choice of flakes for fabrication, which also have other

stringent requirements, such as size, geometry and quality, while most graphene sheets do

not have straight facet lines; in addition, there is no guarantee that a clear facet line, once

found, is indeed parallel to the crystallographic orientation. In fact, facet lines observed in

scales of a few nanometers or more may be composed of any sequence of the 6 orientations,

and thus may have any apparent shape and direction; however, it has been shown for

suspended graphene [12] and for thin anisotropic sheets in the continuum regime [13], that

lines parallel or close to symmetry orientations are more likely to occur since such tears have

a lower energetic cost.

When fabricating devices consisting of a single material, this problem can be circum-

vented.
For example, exquisite orientation control can be reached in tBLG devices by

tearing a single graphene flake and re-stacking the torn pieces [7, 8]. The relative orienta-

tion of the two pieces is then known since they have originated from a single crystal. Given

that many vdW devices are fabricated by exfoliation from an original bulk single crystal,

one may expect flakes exfoliated by a single scotch-tape exfoliation step to retain the orig-

inal orientation of the bulk single crystal [14]. However, when considering hybrid devices,

consisting of different materials, such methods cannot be applied, and fabrication usually

relies on microscopically visible facets. The relation between these facets and the actual

crystallographic orientation is, as of today, unknown, posing an impediment on the study of


3

angle dependent effects in hybrid 2D systems.

In this work we collect statistical data of graphite and WSe2 flake orientation using

facet and fracture lines and electron back-scatter diffraction (EBSD). Given that graphene

tearing dynamics is to date an open question [13, 15], and that no clear theoretical model for

facet orientation prediction is available, we take a phenomenological approach and measure

the effects of single-generation mechanical cleavage followed by deposition on SiO2 on the

orientation distribution of the resulting graphite flakes.

We measure the orientation of the flakes using optical microscopy and EBSD, and find

that when graphite flakes are exfoliated from a single crystal bulk piece, their facets exhibit

a rather wide distribution, with σ ≈ 5◦.
Facets are, however, a poor proxy for exact

crystallographic orientation, and indeed, by mapping such flakes using EBSD, we find that

the true crystallographic orientations have a narrower distribution – with σ ≈ 1.5◦. The

difference is made up by the mismatch between the true crystallographic orientation and

the visible straight facets. We hence conclude that any two flakes exfoliated by a single step

from a single-crystal bulk are likely to be relatively oriented within 1.5◦. In addition, we

find that in exfoliated graphite, most of the facets are closer to the armchair orientation.

This was seen both in HOPG and natural graphite.

II.
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS

A.
STM Measurements

To find the exact crystallographic orientation prior to exfoliation, we carry out STM

measurements of natural graphite and HOPG samples. These crystallographic orientations

are later compared to the angular distributions of existing fractures on the surface of the un-

exfoliated sample, and to angular distributions of facet lines after exfoliation. The materials

used in the experiments are from commercially available sources (HQ graphene and Mikro-

Masch for natural graphite and HOPG respectively). The natural graphite is characterized

by the vendor using XRD as single crystal, and the HOPG with a mosaic spread is 0.2◦.

The surface areas of the natural graphite and of the HOPG samples were 25 mm2 and 100

mm2, respectively. The bulk crystals were fixed with silver paste to SiO2 wafers (we used

NOVA silicon with 285 nm thermal oxide) and the top layer of each sample was connected


4

FIG. 1: (a) Left: Distances on the hexagon unit; the covalent bond distance is 0.142 nm, zigzag

length unit is 0.256 nm (yellow line) and the armchair length unit is 0.426 nm. Right: Illustration

of the two fracture types on the lattice, zigzag in yellow (vertical) and armchair in red (Horizontal).

(b) STM scan of the HOPG sample. Note that only half of the atoms are seen as bright spots

due to the AB stacking. The blue line is a profile along the zigzag orientation. (c) Periodicity

measurement of tunneling current along the zigzag profile. (d) 1D Fourier transform of panel (c).

The result of 1/k = 0.25±0.01 nm corresponds to the zigzag spacing. (e) Two dimensional Fourier

transform of image b. This method gives a direct measurement of both the zigzag and armchair

orientations.

directly to the STM drain. All STM measurements were performed at room temperature at

ultra-high vacuum conditions (∽ 5 ∗ 10−11 mbar), using an Omicron LT-STM system. The

scans were carried out at constant height mode, with Vbias = 0.7 V and Iset = 1 nA for the

graphite, and Vbias = 0.02 V and Iset = 7 nA for the HOPG. Figure 1 shows the orientation

results for the HOPG sample, analyzed using two methods: (i) By measuring periodicity

along profile lines parallel to the hexagons, we found a periodicity of 0.25 ± 0.01 nm, which

corresponds to the zigzag line spacing of
√

3∗0.142 nm (Figure 1(b-d)). (ii) By using the 2D

Fourier transform (Figure 1(e)). Both methods yielded the same crystallographic orientation

also when analyzed on multiple locations of each sample. The different locations, about 1

mm apart, were scanned by retracting and moving the STM tip, all along preserving the

sample orientation as the sample was fixated, where at each spot an area of 5×5 microns was

scanned. The crystallographic orientations inferred from the STM scans confirm that both


5

the HOPG and the natural graphite samples are mm-scale single crystals or polycrystals at

perfect registry.

B.
Fracture Statistics

We now turn to measuring the distribution of fracture orientations.
For the natural

graphite we also compare the fracture statistics before and after exfoliation, while in the

HOPG case there were almost no fractures on the surface before exfoliation. Measurements

are performed using optic micrograph mapping of the entire surface of each sample. We use

a BX-51 Olympus microscope with ×10 magnification at the ocular and ×100 objective,

yielding ×1000 total magnification. Then, facet lines are identified and angles are measured

as positive angles in the range [0◦, 180◦] with respect to a set reference angle on the SiO2.

Total angle measurement error is less than 0.3◦, resulting mainly from image resolution and

focus limitations.

Natural graphite before exfoliation: Figure 2(a) shows the fracture statistics of bulk

graphite facet orientations. The left panel depicts the raw angular distribution and the right

panel is the same data modulo 60◦, according to the lattice symmetry. Red lines are Gaussian

distribution fits to the data, with a sample size of 141 fracture lines. The distribution is

centered at an armchair direction as obtained from the STM scans (both STM and fracture

angles were measured in respect to the same fixed reference angle on the silicon chip).

Fracture lengths were also measured and no correlation was found between fracture length

and its distance from the mean orientation (Pearson correlation test: ρ = 0.0175, p = 0.75).

In view of the different fracture energies between armchair and zigzag, we expect to

find a higher occurrence of one type of fracture (though theoretically it is not clear which

fracture type should be more frequent). Indeed, in the case of the natural graphite bulk

(before exfoliation), 92% of the fractures are found close to the armchair orientation, and

exhibit a narrow distribution (σ = 1.13◦).
The remaining 8% are scattered around the

zigzag orientation. This finding is consistent with [16] where armchair fracture surfaces were

calculated to be more stable than zigzag, and with [12] who found in tearing experiments

of suspended graphene that armchair lines were twice as frequent as zigzag lines. This is

different than the result of [17] for the case of hole formation in suspended graphene, where

zigzag lines were more prominent (see [18, 19] for reviews on graphene edges).


6

Natural graphite after exfoliation: Next, we turn to measure the effect of exfoliation

on the distribution of facet angles. Exfoliation is carried out in the following procedure:

Adhesive tape is applied to the sample to pull off a thin layer of graphite while keeping the

tape connected to a fixed reference; then the tape with the graphite is pressed on to a silicon

chip which is aligned with the reference to obtain the reference angle on the new chip, and

finally, the tape is removed and the remaining adhered flakes on the chip are examined.

We call this method “first-generation exfoliation” (where the first generation of exfoliated

material from the bulk is applied directly to the target substrate). The same procedure

is used also for HOPG and for WSe2 (see Section II C). Most of the flakes created by this

first-generation procedure are estimated to be between 10 and 100 nm thick.

Fracture statistics of the exfoliated graphite are shown in Figure 2(b). The left panel

depicts the raw angular distribution while the right panel shows the data modulo 60◦. We

find that some information of the initial fracture profile is lost in the exfoliation process –

new fractures are created and possibly some of the fractures move; i.e., exfoliation is not

completely angle preserving, also when no angle manipulations are attempted. A number

of processes might cause flake rotations and creation of new tearing surfaces. These include

metric changes of the flexible tape during exfoliation due to stretching; fluid motion of the

tape glue in the initial adhesion stage and local forces which act during separation of the tape

from the substrate surface. In addition to the increase in the spread of facet orientations, we

also find an increase in the portion of zigzag lines. One generation of exfoliation increased

this portion from 8% of the facets observed before exfoliation to 25% on the exfoliated

sample. The reason for this phenomenon is unknown – and can be the subject of a future

investigation, which may probe if it persists with further exfoliation steps. We note that

predicting the prevalence of each facet type following exfoliation remains an open question

– connecting nonlinear tearing mechanics with solid state – yet is beyond the scope of the

present study (seminal works in the field include [12, 15, 16, 20] and of [13]).

C.
Exfoliated WSe2

To test whether the facet orientation distribution is material specific, we have repeated

the experiment with the TMD WSe2, which is used ubiquitously in photonic devices [21] and

is also useful as a tunnel barrier [22]. We used standard p-type single crystal WSe2 from a


7

FIG. 2: Graphite fracture orientations. Left panels are the raw angular distributions, right panels

are the same data modulo 60◦.
(a) Natural graphite before exfoliation; 92% of the lines are

distributed around armchair orientations. Red curves are Gaussian fits with standard deviations

of (left to right): 1.20◦, 1.16◦, 1.19◦. Standard deviation around the armchair angle (right panel)

is 1.13◦. Sample size: 141 lines. (b) Fractures of the same graphite after exfoliation; 75% of the

lines are distributed near armchair directions with standard deviations of 4.1◦, 4.5◦, 7.1◦. Standard

deviation around the armchair orientation is 5.1◦. Sample size: 315 lines. (c) Orientations of

exfoliated HOPG; 64% of the lines are distributed near armchair directions with standard deviations

of 4.3◦, 3.6◦, 6.5◦. Standard deviation around the armchair orientation is 5.4◦. Sample size: 183

lines. Results for exfoliated HOPG are similar to those of exfoliated natural graphite.

commercially available source (HQ graphene) and measure fracture orientations in exfoliated

WSe2 using the same procedure as in graphite. Here we did not carry out STM scans of the


8

FIG. 3: a: Orientations with respect to a reference angle in exfoliated WSe2 after one generation

of exfoliation. 70% of the lines are distributed near the crystallographic breaking orientations. Red

curves are Gaussian fits with standard deviations of (left to right): 7.4◦, 3.3◦, 3.2◦. b: the same

data modulo 60◦. The standard deviation is 5.0◦; Sample size: 314 facets. Results here are similar

to the natural graphite and HOPG distributions around the armchair lines, demonstrating that the

wide angle distribution is a consequence of the exfoliation process, that is not specific for graphite.

original crystal and the distribution center was taken as zero. Figure 3 depicts the angular

distribution of facet orientations for first-generation exfoliation in WSe2.
The observed

fracture statistics are strikingly similar to those of natural graphite and HOPG, with a

similar standard deviation of 5◦ (sample size here was 314 facet lines). This similar facet

statistics for different materials implies that the orientation distribution is an outcome of the

exfoliation process. The distribution does exhibit a possible secondary fracture orientation

with a 30◦ shift from the main orientation.

D.
False Facets and Local Rotations

The observed orientation distribution width can either be associated with flake-specific

rotations occurring during exfoliation, or with false facets – lines that are not aligned with

the crystal. These may appear to be straight but actually consist of short crystallographic

segments.
In graphene, specifically, these consist of armchair (zigzag) and small zigzag

(armchair) transitions [23]. The transition between straight segments may include 5-7 re-

constructions [15].


9

FIG. 4: False facets: AFM phase images of a graphite flake. The two seemingly straight facets

have a 2.4◦ ± 0.3◦ angle between them.

STM results indicate that the original flakes before exfoliation are with a single crystal-

lographic orientation, and hence the distribution seen in Figure 2(a) consists of such false

facets, while the distributions after exfoliation (Figure 2(b,c)) are a combination of the two

effects. In addition, the theoretical results of [13] imply that the angle deflection of false

facets should be limited, since creation of tearing surfaces with large angle deviations from

the orientation is less likely to occur and less likely to create straight lines.

Examples of false facets may be seen in atomic force microscopy scans (AFM) of the

exfoliated graphite sample. In Figure 4 we show that two facet lines on the same flake, which

seem parallel at first sight, actually have a 2.4◦±0.3◦ angle between them. We note that

using AFM data alone, it is not clear which line is closer to the crystallographic orientation.

This phenomenon, together with the STM results that show no crystallographic orien-

tation variation at different locations on the sample, imply that false facets are the origin

of the distribution width measured on the graphite sample before exfoliation (Figure 1(a)).

This observation actually places a lower bound on the possible error when trying to esti-

mate graphite orientations based on optically observed lines. That is – a straight line is not

necessarily aligned with the crystallographic orientation.

To differentiate between false-faceting, and actual crystallographic orientation errors in-


10

FIG. 5: Graphite fracture statistics in comparison to EBSD measure of crystallographic orientation.

(a) Crystallographic orientations of 99 flakes as measured by EBSD, with the average angle of the

distribution defined as zero. In red, a Gaussian fit giving a standard deviation of 1.5◦. (b) Relative

orientations of 219 facets with respect to the EBSD measured orientation of their respective flake.

A Gaussian fit to the main peak around 30◦ gives a standard deviation of 3◦. Inset: an example

of a graphite flake with three perfectly oriented facets with respect to EBSD measurement.

curred upon exfoliation, we utilize EBSD measurements, which allow for a local evaluation

of crystallographic orientations with a precision better than 1◦. The preparation of the sam-

ples follows the same procedure described in Section II B. We use an Oxford Instruments

NORDLYS II EBSD detector, installed in a FEI Quanta 200FEG ESEM, and measurements

are taken at two to three points on each flake, with an area map obtained on several sam-

ple flakes . The total sample size is 219 flakes (see the supplementary material for further

details). EBSD measurements of exfoliated graphite are presented in Figure 5. We thus de-

termine that the true crystallographic orientation distribution width (panel (a)) is σ =1.5◦.

We can then assess the distribution of false facets – this is done by comparing facet angles

with EBSD-derived angles (panel (b)). This error is found to be approximately 3◦. The total

observed facet angular distribution is thus associated with both the contribution of actual

rotations and with the false-facet angular distribution. The distributions we find indicate

that when a 1-2–degree precision is required, the orientation of a flake can be estimated by

the orientation of the macroscopic single crystal from which it was exfoliated, and that this

method has an advantage over the standard method which relies on facets.


11

III.
CONCLUSION

We have demonstrated that upon a single exfoliation step, flakes accumulate a typical

1.5◦ rotation. Facets misrepresent the true crystallographic orientation with typical errors

of ≈3◦. This poses a challenge for the fabrication of hybrid heterostructures, where existing

angle control methods are not applicable (e.g., the methods used in [3–8]). Specifically, a

hybrid heterosctructure fabricated using facets alone for gauging the orientation will yield

a typical relative orientation greater than 3◦. Alternatively, it may be possible to improve

orientation retention upon the exfoliation process: The 1.5◦ rotation we find could be related

to either of: 1. minor stretching of the tape, 2. fluid motion of the glue during adhesion, 3.

strong local torques during exfoliation. Improving any of these processes could ultimately

yield highly oriented flakes, which reflect the orientation of the original bulk.

It is also interesting to test these effects under multiple exfoliation generations and to

check correlation to flake thickness. In graphite, we found that the majority of facets are

close to the armchair orientation. This distribution may change after additional generations

of exfoliation, or after exfoliation in different chemical conditions. It is a challenge for future

work to theoretically explain and predict the occurrence frequency of each facet type as a

result of exfoliation.

Acknowledgments

We thank Prof. Eran Sharon, Prof. Eytan Katzav, Dr. Inna Popov, Prof. Jay Fineberg,

Prof. Oded Millo and Tom Dvir, for fruitful discussions and for sharing your advice and

knowledge. Funding for our research is provided by ERC-2014-STG Grant No. 637298 and

ISF Grant 1363/15. D.P. acknowledge the Israel Science Foundation (ISF grant 1589/14)

and the Minerva Centre for bio-hybrid complex systems. D.P. also thanks the Etta and Paul

Schankerman Chair of Molecular Biomedicine.

[1] C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi,

P. Kim, K. Shepard, et al., Nature nanotechnology 5, 722 (2010).

[2] A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature 499, 419 (2013).


12

[3] B. Hunt, J. Sanchez-Yamagishi, A. Young, M. Yankowitz, B. J. LeRoy, K. Watanabe,

T. Taniguchi, P. Moon, M. Koshino, P. Jarillo-Herrero, et al., Science 340, 1427 (2013).

[4] H. Schmidt, J. C. Rode, D. Smirnov, and R. J. Haug, Nature Communications 5, 5742 (2014).

[5] J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, T. Taychatanapat, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. Yacoby, and

P. Jarillo-Herrero, Physical Review Letters 108, 076601 (2012).

[6] Y. Cao, J. Luo, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, J. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi,

E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Physical Review Letters 117, 116804 (2016).

[7] Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi,

K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, et al., Nature 556, 80 (2018).

[8] Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero,

Nature 556, 43 (2018).

[9] J. Zhang, C. Triola, and E. Rossi, Physical review letters 112, 096802 (2014).

[10] A. Zalic, T. Dvir, H. Steinberg , Physical Review B 96 (2017).

[11] A. Mishchenko, J. Tu, Y. Cao, R. Gorbachev, J. Wallbank, M. Greenaway, V. Morozov,

S. Morozov, M. Zhu, S. Wong, et al., Nature nanotechnology 9, 808 (2014).

[12] K. Kim, V. I. Artyukhov, W. Regan, Y. Liu, M. Crommie, B. I. Yakobson, and A. Zettl, Nano

letters 12, 293 (2011).

[13] A. Takei, B. Roman, J. Bico, E. Hamm, and F. Melo, Physical review letters 110, 144301

(2013).

[14] S. Park, H. C. Floresca, Y. Suh, and M. J. Kim, Carbon 48, 797 (2010).

[15] D. Sen, K. S. Novoselov, P. M. Reis, and M. J. Buehler, Small 6, 1108 (2010).

[16] A. Incze, A. Pasturel, and C. Chatillon, Applied surface science 177, 221 (2001).

[17] C¸. ¨O. Girit, J. C. Meyer, R. Erni, M. D. Rossell, C. Kisielowski, L. Yang, C.-H. Park, M. F.

Crommie, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie, et al., Science 323, 1705 (2009).

[18] M. Acik and Y. J. Chabal, Japanese Journal of Applied Physics 50, 070101 (2011).

[19] X. Zhang, J. Xin, and F. Ding, Nanoscale 5, 2556 (2013).

[20] Y. Liu, A. Dobrinsky, and B. I. Yakobson, Physical Review Letters 105, 235502 (2010).

[21] C.-H. Lee, G.-H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe,

C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, et al., Nature Nanotechnology 9, 676 (2014), ISSN 1748-3395.

[22] T. Dvir, F. Massee, L. Attias, M. Khodas, M. Aprili, C. H. L. Quay, and H. Steinberg, Nature

Communications 9, 598 (2018).


13

[23] L. Li, R. Liu, Z. Chen, Q. Wang, M. Ma, Q. Jing, G. Li, and Y. Tian, Carbon 44, 1544

(2006).


