1

Transient Work Function Gating: 
A New Photoemission Regime  

S. Carbajo1,§ 

1SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory and Stanford University, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

§corresponding author: scarbajo@stanford.edu

(Dated: 2 June 2020) 
We present the theoretical basis for a new photoemission regime, transient work function 
gating (TWFG), that temporally and energetically gates photoemission and produces near-
threshold photoelectrons with thermally limited emittance, percent-level quantum efficiency, 
and control over temporal coherence. The technique consists of actively gating the work 
function of a generalized photocathode using non-ionizing long-wavelength optical field to 
produce an adiabatic modulation of the carrier density at their surface. We examine TWFG as 
a means to circumvent the long-standing trade-off between low emittance and high quantum 
efficiency, untethered to particle source or photocathode specifics. TWFG promises new 
opportunities in photoemission physics for next generation electron and accelerator-based x-
ray photon sources. 

1.
INTRODUCTION

Today’s electron sources underpin transformational scientific instrumentation, most notably colliders[1], and
ultrafast electron[2] and X-ray free electron lasers (XFEL)[3]. The latter have enabled myriad scientific
discoveries in physical chemistry[4–6] and biology[7–9] with insurmountable societal impact. Their advent
has revolutionized the paradigm for atomically resolving ultrafast dynamics in a broad spectrum of
scientific research[10]. But increasing these scientific instruments’ capabilities is paramount to advancing
exploration of fundamental atomic and molecular dynamics in uncharted waters. The operational
capacity of these scientific instruments is largely dictated by the electron beam brightness and emittance, and
in particular from the photoemission processes that generates and accelerates the initial electron beam in
vacuum, namely the photoinjector.

Traditional photoinjectors are used to produce photoelectrons using first laser pulses with photon energies above the 
photocathode work function, typically in the ultraviolet (UV) and up to the visible range. The photoelectrons are 
then quickly accelerated by radiofrequency (RF) fields to generate electron beams in vacuum. There are two
established strategies to increase the photoinjector brightness: increasing the gun accelerating gradient to 
increase the extractable charge density and reducing the transverse electron energy spread[11,12]. On the 
latter, the most salient quantity to characterize the transverse energy spread is the intrinsic—also named 
thermal—emittance (𝜖𝑖,𝑥) of the photocathode. The intrinsic emittance imposes a lower limit for the 
normalized emittance that can be generated by a photoinjector, and by association, the upper limit for the 
brightness of any source that cascades from the photoinjector, such as storage rings, linear accelerators and X-
ray free electron lasers (XFEL). There are multiple challenges associated with achieving bright electrons 
already from the photoemission process itself. In general, the intrinsic emittance—or mean transverse energy 
(MTE) of an electron beam—is proportional to the difference between photocathode work-function (𝜙𝑤) and 
photon energy (ℎ𝜐) of the laser used to produce photoelectrons. In the current photoemission paradigm, there 
is a competition between emittance and charge yield. Minimizing (ℎ𝜐 − 𝜙𝑤) to near-threshold emission 
provides arbitrarily low MTE values per the Fermi-Dirac (F-D) distribution. But near-threshold emission also 
results in low quantum efficiencies (QE), a quantity that represents the number of electrons that exit the 
photocathode into vacuum per absorbed photon. Practically, low QEs demand proportionately high laser 
powers for the any given charge yield, which can cause detrimental heating and nonlinear effects[13]. These in 
turn may cause localized heating and multi-photon absorption, which are bound to spread the F-D distribution 
and thus the beam MTE and emittance.  

The phase-space distribution of an electron beam from a photoinjector is also contingent on the spatio-
temporal distribution of the photoexcitation laser. Uniformly-filled ellipsoidal charge distributions are known 
to best mitigate space-charge induced phase-space dilution because they produce space-charge fields with 
linear dependence on position within the distribution[14,15]. They are also less prone to halo formation, 
which is particularly attractive for kW-level XFELs[16]. But temporally shaping of photoexcitation lasers 
suited for 


2

high average power XFEL operation, particularly in the ultraviolet (UV) as it is the case in conventional 
photocathode materials, is also a complex task undertaken under various linear and nonlinear optics 
efforts[17].  

2. NEW PHOTOEMISSION REGIME
The main premise of transient work function gating (TWFG) is that a non-ionizing strong field can 
energetically and temporally control the carrier dynamics and adiabatically modulate the energy bands of a 
generalized photocathode. This process can be intuitively understood as a short-lived abrupt Schottky barrier 
that temporarily reduces the photocathode work-function before it is restored to its original state of 
equilibrium. Gated photoemission in this regime could be implemented, for example, with a monochromatic 
laser pulse with photon energy below the photoemission threshold in combination with synchronous far 
infrared (FIR) or terahertz (THz) E-field transient as a gate, such that the monochromatic pulse will only 
cause photoemission during the transient state. The most prominent feature of this technique is that 
ultralow intrinsic emittances at moderate to high QEs can be achieved through the interplay between the 
Schottky barrier strength and the photon energy of the photo-excitation laser. The gating fields will lead to 
oscillatory non-thermal electron transitions and modify the Fermi energy (EF). This disturbance will cause 
the energy bands to change alongside EF, thereby enabling near threshold emission (i.e. with thermally 
limited emittance) without paying the customary QE penalty.

Today, efficient long-wavelength nonlinear optical generation techniques[18–20] are sufficiently mature to 
render accelerator concepts and demonstration in lieu of conventional radio-frequency (RF) accelerators[21–
23]. In this frequency range, the field emission threshold for surface electric field and breakdown limit 
increases beyond the GV/m for THz and well into the TV/m for FIR depending on the peak and average power 
loads[24].  TWFG capitalizes on this particular advantage to create abrupt Schottky barriers without 
inducing material breakdown. In the next two sections, we present the theoretical basis for TWFG and 
a case study relevant for linear accelerators and XFELs as an exercise of future experimental 
applicability. 

3.
BASICS OF TRANSIENT WORKFUNCTION GATING

We use the three-step model for photoemission[25] as the baseline for the TWFG model. The three-step model
is physical representation that accurately describes photoemission in both metallic and semiconductor
photocathodes[26] where (i) a photon with energy ℎ𝜐 is absorbed within a few-atomic layers of the
photocathode, (ii) a photoelectron scatters and migrates to the surface, and (iii) finally the electron escapes 
above the barrier to vacuum from the Schottky effect and change in angle. In this formalism, we consider the
photocathode work function 𝜙𝑤 to be an intrinsic yet adaptable property. In this section, we extend the three-
step model to include TWFG, describe the ultrafast modification of the Schottky barrier and the abrupt change
in electron angle across the photocathode-vacuum interface, and derive expressions for the intrinsic emittance
and quantum efficiency.

Let us begin with the F-D distribution in the photocathode. The electron density of occupied states and the 
electric potentials experienced by a single electron immediately outside the cathode are shown in Figure 1. The 
Schottky barrier is the sum of the image charge field, naturally arising from the occupied density of states, and 
an externally applied field (𝐹𝑎). The Schottky work function, 𝜙𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑘𝑦, is defined as the peak value of the 
Schottky barrier and represents the photoemission threshold potential that is located a few nanometers away 
from the photocathode-vacuum interface. A non-zero 𝐹𝑎 field will reduce the photoemission threshold 
potential and shift the zero-field vacuum state downward, as shown in green, thus increasing the quantum yield 
for a given photon energy. Thus, the effective work function, 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓, in the presence of the Schottky barrier is

(Eq. 1) 
𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 𝜙𝑤 − 𝜙𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑘𝑦 

and for a static applied field, 𝐹𝑎, where the material response is much faster than the field period 

𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 𝜙𝑤 − 𝑒√ 𝑒𝐹𝑎
4𝜋𝜀0 = 𝜙𝑤 − 0.037947√𝐹𝑎 (MV
m ) [eV] 
(Eq. 2) 


3

where 𝑒 is the elementary charge and 𝜀0is the vacuum permittivity. The static 𝐹𝑎 field approximation in (Eq. 2) 
is generally applicable regardless of the frequency so long as the material response time is faster than the field. Let 
us provide a few examples in current technologies to illustrate the concept of effective work function. Note that
direct current (DC) guns, for instance, can only allow relatively low static accelerating gradients because of 
breakdown limits. In the case of high-gradient electron guns, such as superconducting radio frequency (SRF) 
guns, the applied field is in the order of few tens of MV/m at most and durations of several tens of ns or longer, 
that is, orders of magnitude longer than the material response times, thus practically static in comparison to 
photoemission timescales where 𝜙𝑆𝑐ℎ𝑜𝑡𝑡𝑘𝑦 is a long-lived barrier at ~100 meV energy. To take Cu as an 
example, 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓 is reduced from 4.31 eV to 4.14 eV with a 20 MV/m field, which is why many photoinjectors 
today operate at ~266 nm  wavelength photoexcitation (4.66 eV), corresponding to the third-harmonic of 
Ti:Sapphire laser systems. But substantially higher field strengths are accessible with long-wavelength optical 
fields in the FIR and up to the THz region. To follow on the previous simple example, at 1 GV/m peak field, 
which is well below material breakdown for FIR pulses, yields 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓 = 3.1 eV, now a significant Schottky 
barrier reduction.  

We will further describe the ability to generate an abrupt work function modulation from long-wavelength 
gating fields with the following added considerations to the three-step model: 

i.
The material response is no longer negligibly small compared to the field period and thus must be
considered not only in computing 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓 but also in the TWFG model
ii.
The field emission and breakdown limit can be extended approximately to the single-digit GV/m for THz 
frequencies and up to the TV/m range in the case of FIR frequencies, depending on the specific material, pulse
duration, and average power conditions[27–29], which can reduce 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓 by > 1 eV and enable visible range
photoexcitation in conventional photocathodes. 
iii.
The gating fields create a transient state of the intrinsic optical and electronic properties of the material 
arising from a field-dependent adiabatic carrier concentration modulation.

Let us examine the long-wavelength field induced carrier dynamics. We denote 𝐸𝐹  as the highest energy 
occupied by electrons. Figure 1 shows an initial Fermi surface in thermodynamic equilibrium (S0). When an 
external (gating) electric field is applied, 𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒 , with its vector aligned along 𝑥, the original Fermi surface S0 
will be displaced in momentum k-space from its original state (f0) by δ𝑘 along 𝑥 to a modified transient Fermi 
surface (S), in which the state density will change, and so will 𝐸𝐹. That is, when an external field is present, the 
Fermi distribution (𝑓) shifts to higher occupation states until it vanishes, the point at which the Fermi surface 
relaxes back to the equilibrium distribution by means of electron scattering from the temporarily occupied 
states (+δ𝑛) to the unoccupied states (−δ𝑛). For a finite 𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒, this shift (δ𝑛) will be proportional to the field 
strength. In essence, the new Fermi distribution exists only while the external field is on. Following Drude 
Theory[30], we calculate the momentum displacement as 

where 𝜏 is the relaxation time constant of the material. Note that the typical velocity of electrons is very large, 
and that for a metal scattering lengths are about 100 Å at room temperature and ~1 mm at low temperature.  

In energy space, this Fermi shift equates to  

Figure 1: effect of gating field on momentum space 
and Fermi distribution displacement 

𝛿𝑘 = − 𝑒𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒𝜏
ℏ
(Eq. 3) 


4

Now that we have defined the momentum displacement of the Fermi distribution, let us focus on the 
application of this shift to near-threshold photoemission (NTP),  that is, where ℎ𝜈 − 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓 ≲ 300 meV. Extensive 
studies of the three-step model[25,31–35] demonstrate that in this regime the photon absorption conserves 
energy but not momentum. Here, electrons can be considered as non-interacting fermions that occupy states 
as given by the gated F-D distribution and the QE can be expressed as[33] 

𝑄𝐸(𝜔, 𝛿𝐸) =
1 − 𝑅(𝜔)

1 + 𝜆𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝜔)

𝜆𝑒−𝑒(𝜔)
⁄

(𝐸𝐹 + 𝛿𝐸 + ℎ𝜈)

2ℎ𝜈
[1 − √𝐸𝐹 + 𝛿𝐸 + 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝐸𝐹 + 𝛿𝐸 + ℎ𝜈 ]

2

(Eq. 5)

where 𝑅(𝜔) is the photocathode optical reflectivity as a function of optical frequency, 𝜔; 𝜆𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝜔) is the photon 
absorption length; and 𝜆𝑒−𝑒(𝜔) is the electron-electron mean-free path. In NTP, because of a relatively small 
energy range, 𝜆𝑒−𝑒(𝜔) is nearly constant and its average value, 𝜆̂𝑒−𝑒, can be used. Likewise, because of the 
narrow bandwidth of monochromatic photoexcitation pulses centered at optical frequency 𝜔0, 𝑅(𝜔) and 
𝜆𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝜔) can also be reduced to their nominal values, 𝑅(𝜔0) and 𝜆𝑜𝑝𝑡(𝜔0), respectively. Eq. 5 is a valid 
representation of the QE both under ungated (normal) and gated conditions. Note that we do not apply a Taylor 
series reduction approximation of Eq. 5, as it is customary in estimating QE, since we must solve for the full 
equation in NTP. 

Figure 2 shows two QE maps as a function of peak gating field and photoexcitation photon energy for the gated 
and ungated QE model based on Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 using a Cu photocathode as an example. The effects of transient 
work-function gating are palpable by a two order of magnitude increase in achievable QEs. In Figure 2.a, the 
ungated QE reaches up to 1.8 ⋅ 10−3 at the highest photon energy and highest peak gating field, as expected. 
This is because the traditional model only considers the difference between photoexcitation energy and a static 
field. By using Eq. 5, which incorporates transient Fermi displacement, we see the interplay between a few 
interesting mechanisms in Figure 2.b. Just like for the ungated case, there’s a moderate E-field level below 

𝛿𝐸 = − (𝑒𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒𝜏)

2

2 𝑚𝑒

(Eq. 4)

Figure 2: QE projections for a Cu photocathode under a) 
normal and b) three-step photoemission model that includes 
transient gating as a function of peak gating field and 
photoexcitation energy. Colormaps have different scales.


5

which no photoemission is possible, at least in the linear absorption regime. The gating onset becomes apparent 
when sufficiently strong fields are present—in this example above ~260 MV/m—where the Fermi 
displacement contribution becomes strong enough to access the NTP region. Foreseeably, the onset takes place 
approximately when ℎ𝜈 ≈ 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓. Above the onset, the gated QE asymptotically approaches its maximum level, 
in this case 0.19, although it is consistently >10% for peak gating fields ranging from about 500 to 600 MV/m. 
More generally, the gated QE is maximized in the NTP region when the net Fermi displacement and the photon 
energy are comparable, that is, when |𝐸𝐹 + 𝛿𝐸| ≈ ℎ𝑣. 

The interplay between scattering and optical effects yield a wider region of high gated QEs as the 
photoexcitation energy increases. Continuing on above the gated NTP region, in this case above ~600 MV/m, 
the fields can be detrimental to effective extraction of charge by creating a sufficient population reversal that 
shields electrons from exiting the material. This carrier population reversal causes the QEs to be slightly lower 
compared than those projected in the ungated model. Continually increasing the field strength towards a 
significant fraction of a TV/m or above, depending on the specific mechanical and optoelectronic properties of 
the material, sustained strong gating fields could begin to cause permanent material breakdown.

It is important reiterating that the %-level QEs are only valid in gated NTP. That is, if the photon energy were 
to be extended to levels significantly above threshold, the gated QE would then equate the ungated QE, since at 
that point 𝛿𝐸 is small compared to |ℎ𝜈 − 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓|. It is also worth noting that the optimal cooperation between 
the Fermi displacement and the QE depends on the intrinsic material optoelectronic properties and conditions, 
including temperature and lattice structure, where applicable. But the primary conclusion from this example 
is that the QE levels for standard materials like Cu are dramatically increased by remaining in the gated NTP 
region depicted in Figure 2.b.

Let us now continue on with the benefits of this new photoemission process by focusing on emittance. The 
intrinsic emittance, 𝜖𝑖,𝑥, is by definition a measure of the transverse momentum of the electrons that are 
emitted, which is related to the mean transverse energy (MTE) by the following expression:

𝜖𝑖,𝑥 = 𝜎𝑥√𝑀𝑇𝐸

𝑚𝑐2
(Eq. 6)

where 𝜎𝑥 is the initial rms size of the beam along a transverse Cartesian coordinate 𝑥 and 𝑚𝑐2 is the electron 
rest energy. The MTE is analogous to the temperature of the photoemitted electrons. For photon energies much 
larger than the work function, ℎ𝜈 ≫ 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓, we can approximate 𝑀𝑇𝐸 = (ℎ𝜈 − 𝜙𝑤)/3 because of a relatively 
constant density of states in the portion of the conduction band accessible by a photon of a given energy[36]. 
However, in the case of NTP, this approximation is no longer valid because photoemission can still occur from 
below-Fermi occupation states or from impurity states within the band gap in the case of semiconductors[25]. 
One way of reducing emission from these states is to decrease the photon energy and cathode temperature. By 
doing so, the MTE and QE resembles that of what is expected from the tail of the F-D distribution and the NTP 
MTE can be expressed as[37]

MTE = 𝑘𝑇 (Li3 (− exp (ℎ𝜈 − 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑘𝑇
))
Li2 (−exp (ℎ𝜈 − 𝜙𝑒𝑓𝑓

𝑘𝑇
))
⁄
)
(Eq. 7)

where Lis is the polylogarithm function of order s, 𝑇 is the photocathode temperature, and 𝑘 is the Boltzmann 
constant. It is important to note that as |ℎ𝑣 − 𝜙| ⟶ 0, that is, very close to the photoemission threshold, MTE =
𝑘𝑇. That is, if electrons are shifted from the Fermi energy towards the minimum possible emission energy by, 
for instance, lowering a small band gap photocathode temperature, and photoemission occurs nearly at 
threshold, the intrinsic emittance could be reduced to near the F-D distribution limit (single-digit meV) since 
the emitted electrons have less available transverse momentum. This is showcased in Figure 3 for two NTP 
photoexcitation energies where thermally limited emittances are possible at above-10% QEs. It is important to 
note once again that without the cooperative interplay between the transient Fermi displacement (𝛿𝐸) caused 
by the gate and photoexcitation in NTP this would not be possible. This is precisely why traditional (i.e. ungated) 
NTP operation yields very low charges with QE < 10-5, as shown in the ungated (dashed) QE projection.


6

4. CASE STUDY: HIGH-BRIGHTNESS GUNS FOR LINEAR ACCELERATORS AND XFELs
The primary objective of this section is to employ the framework described above to exercise a few
quantifiable�metrics for its application in high-brightness electron guns for linear accelerators and XFELs, 
that is, at practically high charge levels.

Let us focus on ultrafast work-function gating for generating electron beams—single bunch and trains—with 
ultralow emittance. Here, we employ a regular Cu photocathode cooled at cryogenic temperatures. We consider 
the material response and employ higher frequency higher strength gating fields with two representative 
waveform shapes as possible gating field candidates: single-cycle (Figure 4.a) and multi-cycle (Figure 4.b). 
All other relevant simulation parameters are listed in Table 1.  

We present the single-cycle and multi-cycle fields because they represent two interesting emission scenarios. 
The single-cycle regime resembles a more traditional electron bunch generation scheme, where only one 
electron bunch will be emitted per pulse. In the multi-cycle scenario, a train of electron bunches spaced by the 
period of the gating field will be emitted even when using a single photoexcitation laser pulse, thereby enabling 
the generation of longitudinally bunched electron beams. This temporally shaped emission of the electron 
bunches could be ideally suited for serial ultrafast electron diffraction (UED), where multiple scattering events 
could be acquired within one exposure as an equivalent to serial femtosecond crystallography. It could also be 
exploited for X-ray generation via inverse Compton scattering or bunched to increase a single peak brightness 
for colliders, for instance.  

Figure 4-a and -b show the longitudinal charge distribution emitting off the surface of the photocathode from of 
a single-cycle and multi-cycle gating waveform with fixed peak amplitude, respectively, for photoexcitation 
energies from 3.5 to 3.7 eV. All figures show the time-evolution of projected emittances remaining at the few 
10s of nm rms with enhanced QEs ranging from 2-11% depending on the exact photoexcitation laser photon 
energy. Both photoexcitation and gating pulses are assumed to be time-overlapped, where the photoexcitation 
pulse width is arbitrarily longer than the gate pulse width.  

There are a few noteworthy points specific to this example. First, ultralow intrinsic emittances with %-level 
QEs would not be possible without the transient gate fields, which is why pC charges are generated with few-nJ 
photoexcitation energies at NTP. The photoexcitation wavelengths are now easier to produce and handle 
(~350 nm) than the deeper UV that Cu would require to use without gating (< 275 nm). For example, if we 
were to consider a lower work-function photocathode such as Cs2Te ( 𝜙𝑤 = 3.8 eV) , the equivalent 
photoexcitation wavelengths with transient gates would actually shift to the blue-green spectrum (440-480 
nm). Longitudinally shaped charge distributions are accessible because photoemission is longitudinally shaped 
by the gating fields (and not intensity), thereby bringing new alternative solutions to longitudinal shaping of 
electron bunches directly off the photocathode complementary to UV[38] or laser heater shaping[39] 
techniques. Note that generating single- or multi-cycle gating fields with tunable waveforms in the TWFG 

Figure 3: ungated (dashed) and gated (solid) QEs for two NTP energies a) ℎ𝑣 = 3.5 and b) 3.7 eV in Cu (T=70K) 
and the corresponding intrinsic emittance as a function of  peak gating field (𝜎𝑥 = 100 μm)


7

regime is currently possible via optical rectification and waveform shaping in nonlinear[40] and quasi-phase 
matched[19] crystals. As a result, many other longitudinal photoemission distributions are possible beyond 
these two examples. 

5.
FINAL REMARKS

The potential impact of a new photoemission regime as profound as it is foundational. First, emitting thermally
limited electron bunches at practically high QEs and charges cannot be achieved under the current 
photoemission paradigm and circumventing this trade-off could transform the production of electron beams 
with increased average flux and peak brightness as well as scaling the brightness of accelerator-based light 
sources, especially XFELs. 

To take the LCLS-II gun as an example, we estimate that this new technique could provide normalized 
emittances as low as ~0.1-0.15 μm rms with 200-300 pC charges, which is orders of magnitude lower than 
currently projected. Practical operation of XFELs with such low emittances would enable proportionately 
higher extension of their brightness to even harder X-rays or a significant reduction of undulator lengths for 
the same X-ray photon energy. XFELs operating in the harder X-ray regime are technically demanding and to 
achieve laser saturation the undulator must be 100s of m long. Reducing emittance makes the FEL process 
more efficient because it achieves gain saturation quicker, thereby requiring a shorter undulator and reducing 
cost. Temporally controlling photoemission can also enable much greater operational capacity of XFELs by 
providing orders of magnitude higher temporal coherence approaching the Fourier-transform limit for high-
resolution spectroscopies, such as (resonant) inelastic X-ray scattering, or by providing high brightness multi-
beam mode operation for multi-color X-ray experiments at harder X-rays or for self-seeded operation with 
improved coherence and monochromaticity. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the U.S. Department of Energy and Laboratory Directed Research and 
Development program at SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, under Contract No. DEAC02-76SF00515. 

DATA AVAILABILITY
The data that supports the findings of this study are available within the article. 

Figure 4:  time-evolution of gated emittances and charge from Cu (T=70 K) using single-cycle (a) and multi-
cycle (b) fields for various photoexcitation energies.


8

REFERENCES

1. 
C. Bernardini, "AdA: The first electron-positron collider," Phys. Perspect. 6(2), 156–183 (2004).

2. 
J. B. Hastings, F. M. Rudakov, D. H. Dowell, J. F. Schmerge, J. D. Cardoza, J. M. Castro, S. M. Gierman, H. Loos, and P. M. 
Weber, "Ultrafast time-resolved electron diffraction with megavolt electron beams," Appl. Phys. Lett. 89(18), 184109 
(2006).

3. 
P. Emma, R. Akre, J. Arthur, R. Bionta, C. Bostedt, J. Bozek, A. Brachmann, P. Bucksbaum, R. Coffee, F.-J. Decker, Y. Ding, 
D. Dowell, S. Edstrom, A. Fisher, J. Frisch, S. Gilevich, J. Hastings, G. Hays, P. Hering, Z. Huang, R. Iverson, H. Loos, M. 
Messerschmidt, A. Miahnahri, S. Moeller, H.-D. Nuhn, G. Pile, D. Ratner, J. Rzepiela, D. Schultz, T. Smith, P. Stefan, H. 
Tompkins, J. Turner, J. Welch, W. White, J. Wu, G. Yocky, and J. Galayda, "First lasing and operation of an ångstrom-
wavelength free-electron laser," Nat. Photonics 4, 641 (2010).

4. 
A. H. Zewail, "4D ULTRAFAST ELECTRON DIFFRACTION, CRYSTALLOGRAPHY, AND MICROSCOPY," Annu. Rev. Phys. 
Chem. 57(1), 65–103 (2006).

5. 
R. J. D. Miller, "Femtosecond crystallography with ultrabright electrons and x-rays: Capturing chemistry in action," 
Science (80-. ). 343(6175), 1108–1116 (2014).

6. 
B. Stankus, H. Yong, N. Zotev, J. M. Ruddock, D. Bellshaw, T. J. Lane, M. Liang, S. Boutet, S. Carbajo, J. S. Robinson, W. 
Du, N. Goff, Y. Chang, J. E. Koglin, M. P. Minitti, A. Kirrander, and P. M. Weber, "Ultrafast X-ray scattering reveals 
vibrational coherence following Rydberg excitation," Nat. Chem. (2019).

7. 
J. Kern, R. Chatterjee, I. D. Young, F. D. Fuller, L. Lassalle, M. Ibrahim, S. Gul, T. Fransson, A. S. Brewster, and R. Alonso-
Mori, "Structures of the intermediates of Kok’s photosynthetic water oxidation clock," Nature 563(7731), 421 
(2018).

8. 
G. Nass Kovacs, J.-P. Colletier, M. L. Grünbein, Y. Yang, T. Stensitzki, A. Batyuk, S. Carbajo, R. B. Doak, D. Ehrenberg, L. 
Foucar, R. Gasper, A. Gorel, M. Hilpert, M. Kloos, J. E. Koglin, J. Reinstein, C. M. Roome, R. Schlesinger, M. Seaberg, R. L.
Shoeman, M. Stricker, S. Boutet, S. Haacke, J. Heberle, K. Heyne, T. Domratcheva, T. R. M. Barends, and I. Schlichting, 
"Three-dimensional view of ultrafast dynamics in photoexcited bacteriorhodopsin," Nat. Commun. 10(1), 3177 
(2019).

9. 
P. Nogly, T. Weinert, D. James, S. Carbajo, D. Ozerov, A. Furrer, D. Gashi, V. Borin, P. Skopintsev, K. Jaeger, K. Nass, P. 
Båth, R. Bosman, J. Koglin, M. Seaberg, T. Lane, D. Kekilli, S. Brünle, T. Tanaka, W. Wu, C. Milne, T. White, A. Barty, U. 
Weierstall, V. Panneels, E. Nango, S. Iwata, M. Hunter, I. Schapiro, G. Schertler, R. Neutze, and J. Standfuss, "Retinal 
isomerization in bacteriorhodopsin captured by a femtosecond x-ray laser," Science (80-. ). 361(6398), eaat0094 
(2018).

10. G. Sciaini and R. J. D. Miller, "Femtosecond electron diffraction: heralding the era of atomically resolved dynamics," 

Reports Prog. Phys. 74(9), 96101 (2011).

11. I. V Bazarov, B. M. Dunham, and C. K. Sinclair, "Maximum Achievable Beam Brightness from Photoinjectors," Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 102(10), 104801 (2009).

12. D. Filippetto, P. Musumeci, M. Zolotorev, and G. Stupakov, "Maximum current density and beam brightness achievable 

by laser-driven electron sources," Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. - Accel. Beams 17(2), 24201 (2014).

13. J. Maxson, P. Musumeci, L. Cultrera, S. Karkare, and H. Padmore, "Ultrafast laser pulse heating of metallic 

photocathodes and its contribution to intrinsic emittance," Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. 
Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 865, 99–104 (2017).

14. O. D. Kellogg, Foundations of Potential Theory (Courier Corporation, 1953), 31.
15. O. J. Luiten, S. B. Van der Geer, M. J. De Loos, F. B. Kiewiet, and M. J. Van Der Wiel, "How to realize uniform three-

dimensional ellipsoidal electron bunches," Phys. Rev. Lett. 93(9), 94802 (2004).

16. G. R. Neil, C. L. Bohn, S. V Benson, G. Biallas, D. Douglas, H. F. Dylla, R. Evans, J. Fugitt, A. Grippo, J. Gubeli, R. Hill, K. 

Jordan, R. Li, L. Merminga, P. Piot, J. Preble, M. Shinn, T. Siggins, R. Walker, and B. Yunn, "Sustained Kilowatt Lasing in 
a Free-Electron Laser with Same-Cell Energy Recovery," Phys. Rev. Lett. 84(4), 662–665 (2000).

17. T. Xu, C. Jing, A. Kanareykin, P. Piot, and J. Power, "Spatio-Temporal Shaping of the Photocathode Laser Pulse for Low-

Emittance Shaped Electron Bunches," in 10th Int. Partile Accelerator Conf.(IPAC’19), Melbourne, Australia, 19-24 May 
2019 (JACOW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland, 2019), pp. 2163–2166.

18. M. C. Hoffmann and J. A. Fülöp, "Intense ultrashort terahertz pulses: generation and applications," J. Phys. D. Appl. 

Phys. 44(8), 83001 (2011).

19. S. Carbajo, J. Schulte, X. Wu, K. Ravi, D. N. Schimpf, and F. X. Kärtner, "Efficient narrowband terahertz generation in 

cryogenically cooled periodically poled lithium niobate," Opt. Lett. 40(24), 5762–5765 (2015).

20. F. Ahr, S. W. Jolly, N. H. Matlis, S. Carbajo, T. Kroh, K. Ravi, D. N. Schimpf, J. Schulte, H. Ishizuki, T. Taira, A. R. Maier, 

and F. X. Kärtner, "Narrowband terahertz generation with chirped-and-delayed laser pulses in periodically poled 
lithium niobate," Opt. Lett. 42(11), (2017).

21. F. X. Kartner, F. Ahr, A.-L. Calendron, H. Cankaya, S. Carbajo, G. Chang, G. Cirmi, K. Darner, U. Dorda, A. Fallahi, A. 

Hartin, M. Hemmer, R. Hobbs, Y. Hua, W. R. Huang, R. Letrun, N. Matlis, V. Mazalova, O. D. Muecke, E. Nanni, W. 
Putnam, K. Ravi, F. Reichert, I. Sarrou, X. Wu, A. Yahaghi, H. Ye, L. Zapata, D. Zhang, C. Zhou, R. J. D. Miller, K. K. 
Berggren, H. Graafsma, A. Meents, R. W. Assmann, H. N. Chapman, and P. Fromme, "AXSIS: Exploring the frontiers in 
attosecond X-ray science, imaging and spectroscopy," Nucl. Instruments Methods Phys. Res. Sect. A Accel. 


9

Spectrometers, Detect. Assoc. Equip. 829, (2016).

22. D. Zhang, M. Fakhari, H. Cankaya, A.-L. Calendron, N. H. Matlis, and F. X. Kärtner, "Cascaded Multicycle Terahertz-

Driven Ultrafast Electron Acceleration and Manipulation," Phys. Rev. X 10(1), 11067 (2020).

23. D. Zhang, A. Fallahi, M. Hemmer, X. Wu, M. Fakhari, Y. Hua, H. Cankaya, A.-L. Calendron, L. E. Zapata, N. H. Matlis, and 

F. X. Kärtner, "Segmented terahertz electron accelerator and manipulator (STEAM)," Nat. Photonics 12(6), 336–342 
(2018).

24. G. H. and L. W. and C. Ropers, "Field emission at terahertz frequencies: AC-tunneling and ultrafast carrier dynamics," 

New J. Phys. 16(12), 123005 (2014).

25. W. E. Spicer, "Photoemissive, Photoconductive, and Optical Absorption Studies of Alkali-Antimony Compounds," 

Phys. Rev. 112(1), 114–122 (1958).

26. L. J. Brillson, "The structure and properties of metal-semiconductor interfaces," Surf. Sci. Rep. 2(2), 123–326 (1982).
27. J. M. Meek and J. D. Craggs, "Electrical breakdown of gases," (1978).
28. A. Descoeudres, Y. Levinsen, S. Calatroni, M. Taborelli, and W. Wuensch, "Investigation of the dc vacuum breakdown 

mechanism," Phys. Rev. Spec. Top. Beams 12(9), 92001 (2009).

29. M. D. Karetnikov, "An origin of RF breakdown in vacuum," Part. Accel. 57(PRINT-00-005), 189–214 (1997).
30. S. H. Simon, The Oxford Solid State Basics (OUP Oxford, 2013).
31. R. L. Bell and W. E. Spicer, "3-5 compound photocathodes: A new family of photoemitters with greatly improved 

performance," Proc. IEEE 58(11), 1788–1802 (1970).

32. K. Flöttmann, Note on the Thermal Emittance of Electrons Emitted by Cesium Telluride Photo Cathodes (SCAN-

9708052, 1997).

33. D. H. Dowell and J. F. Schmerge, "Quantum efficiency and thermal emittance of metal photocathodes," Phys. Rev. Spec. 

Top. Beams 12(7), 74201 (2009).

34. W. E. Spicer and A. Herrera-Gomez, "Modern theory and applications of photocathodes," in Photodetectors and Power 

Meters (International Society for Optics and Photonics, 1993), 2022, pp. 18–36.

35. C. N. Berglund and W. E. Spicer, "Photoemission studies of copper and silver: theory," Phys. Rev. 136(4A), A1030 

(1964).

36. L. Cultrera, S. Karkare, B. Lillard, A. Bartnik, I. Bazarov, B. Dunham, W. Schaff, and K. Smolenski, "Growth and 

characterization of rugged sodium potassium antimonide photocathodes for high brilliance photoinjector," Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 103(10), 103504 (2013).

37. T. Vecchione, D. Dowell, W. Wan, J. Feng, and H. A. Padmore, "Quantum efficiency and transverse momentum from 

metals," Proc. FEL2013,(Geneva, Switz. JACoW, 2013) 424 (2013).

38. G. Penco, M. Danailov, A. Demidovich, E. Allaria, G. De Ninno, S. Di Mitri, W. M. Fawley, E. Ferrari, L. Giannessi, and M. 

Trovò, "Experimental demonstration of electron longitudinal-phase-space linearization by shaping the photoinjector 
laser pulse," Phys. Rev. Lett. 112(4), 44801 (2014).

39. T. Jingyi, L. Randy, L. Wei, V. Sharon, M. Timothy, D. Franz-Josef, L. Alberto, K. Jacek, G. Marcus, M. Stefan, H. Zhirong, 

R. Daniel, and C. Sergio, "Laguerre-Gaussian Mode Laser Heater for Microbunching Instability Suppression in Free 
Electron Lasers," Phys. Rev. Lett. accepted (n.d.).

40. X. Wu, S. Carbajo, K. Ravi, F. Ahr, G. Cirmi, Y. Zhou, O. D. Mücke, and F. X. Kärtner, "Terahertz generation in lithium 

niobate driven by Ti:sapphire laser pulses and its limitations," Opt. Lett. 39(18), 5403–5406 (2014).


10

Methods 

Table 1: Simulation parameters

Photocathode material
Cu

Temperature (K)
𝑇
70

Fermi Energy (eV)
𝐸𝐹
7

Workfunction (eV)
𝜙𝑤
4.31

electron mean free path (nm)
𝜆̂𝑒−𝑒
2.2

Photon mean free path (nm)
𝜆𝑜𝑝𝑡
28.6

Photoex. energy (eV)
ℏ𝜔0
3.5-3.7

Photoex. pulse energy (nJ)
𝐸ℎ𝜈
5 

Transverse spot size (μm)
𝜎𝑥
80

Gate peak field (GV/m)
𝐸𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑒
0.5


