An experimental design for the control and assembly of magnetic microwheels  

E.J. Roth,1 C.J. Zimmermann,2 D. Disharoon,2 T.O. Tasci,3 D.W.M. Marr,2 K.B. Neeves1,4 

1Department of Bioengineering, University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus 

2Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Colorado School of Mines 

3Center for Bioengineering in Medicine, BioMEMS Resource Center, Harvard Medical School 

4Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus 

 

 
 


 
1

ABSTRACT 

Superparamagnetic colloidal particles can be reversibly assembled into wheel-like structures 

called microwheels (µwheels) which roll on surfaces due to friction and can be driven at user-

controlled speeds and directions using rotating magnetic fields. Here, we describe the hardware 

and software to create and control the magnetic fields that assemble and direct µwheel motion 

and the optics to visualize them. Motivated by portability, adaptability and low-cost, an extruded 

aluminum heat dissipating frame incorporating open optics and audio speaker coils outfitted with 

high magnetic permeability cores was constructed. Open-source software was developed to 

define the magnitude, frequency, and orientation of the magnetic field, allowing for real time 

joystick control of µwheels through two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) fluidic 

environments. With this combination of hardware and software, µwheels translate at speeds up to 

50 µm/s through sample sizes up to 5 cm x 5 cm x 5 cm using 0.75-2.5 mT magnetic fields with 

rotation frequencies of 5-40 Hz. Heat dissipation by aluminum coil clamps maintained sample 

temperatures within 3 ˚C of ambient temperature, a range conducive for biological applications. 

With this design, µwheels can be manipulated and imaged in 2D and 3D networks at length 

scales of micrometers to centimeters. 

 
 


 
2

I. INTRODUCTION 

 
Microscale bots have potential for targeted cargo delivery in biological systems [1-3]; 

however, motile efficiency of microbots in complex environments is a challenge. Given their 

small size, these microbots require propulsion strategies that can overcome the constraints of low 

Reynolds number fluid mechanics where viscous forces dominate and translation is only possible 

by symmetry breaking [4, 5]. Successful strategies include bio-inspired swimmers with helical 

features or flexible oars [6, 7], catalytic particles that use chemical reactions to create thrust [5], 

and rod-like walkers, wheels, and lassos [3, 8, 9] that break symmetry by their interaction with 

surfaces. To assemble, power, and direct such microbots, externally applied magnetic fields [9-

11] can be used and here we describe an apparatus for magnetic field control of rolling microbots 

called µwheels [12]. 

 
µWheels are assembled bottom-up 

from superparamagnetic colloids that, upon 

application of a rotating magnetic field, 

form close-packed, spinning aggregates due 

to attractive induced dipole interactions 

(Fig. 1). They propel themselves by rolling 

via friction along available surfaces [12]. 

Their speed is controlled by the magnetic 

field rotation frequency with maximum 

velocities determined by field magnitude 

and slip at the wall. Speed can be enhanced 

by applying external loads via DC magnetic 

 

FIG. 1. (a) A Bx-By magnetic field acting only 
in the x-y plane causes µwheels to sit and spin. 
(b) Adding a Bz component causes µwheels to 
stand and roll. The camber angle, qc, defines 
the µwheel tilt relative to the normal.  


 
3

fields that draw the assemblies closer to the surface thereby reducing slip [13]. µWheels are 

readily steered in any direction by changing the orientation of the magnetic field used to 

assemble and rotate them (Fig. 1). µWheels functionalized with biological molecules can do both 

biochemical and biomechanical work, for example in the ablation of blood clots using 

immobilized fibrinolytic enzymes [14]. Since the individual particles from are 

superparamagnetic, µwheels disassemble when the magnetic field is turned off. As such, 

µwheels can be assembled, directed to perform a task, and then disassembled for ready removal 

in confined geometries. 

To use µwheels in complex environments such as the mammalian vasculature, it is 

necessary to design an apparatus to develop and test µwheel driving strategies in tortuous three-

dimensional environments. The apparatus described in this article builds upon our prior work 

[12, 13], with improvements in imaging, heat dissipation and control software. The imaging 

stage has improved capabilities including a 10 cm × 10 cm × 10 cm test section large enough to 

accommodate a mouse. The design includes an extruded aluminum heat dissipating frame, open 

optics, and speaker coils with high magnetic permeability cores. The apparatus provides a 

magnetic field strength of 2.5 mT at the center of the sample, enabling µwheels to travel up to 50 

µm/s while keeping sample temperature within a few degrees Celsius of ambient temperature. 

Removeable ferrite plugs placed in the center of the coils can increase the field strength in a 3 cm 

× 3 cm × 3 cm test section. Open source software was developed and used to define the 

magnitude, frequency, and orientation of the magnetic fields. The apparatus was tested by 

driving µwheels on a planar surface and through a helical channel.  

 
 


 
4

II. METHODS 

A. Apparatus Summary 

To create suitable magnetic field strengths over larger samples, field amplitudes were increased 

using designs that included ferrite cores within copper wound coils with higher magnetic 

permeability than the air-cores used in prior work [3, 12-14]. To allow for positioning of large 

samples within the test section, a sample holder with three-dimensional translation capabilities 

was built. Two interchangeable microscopes were designed, one for imaging within large 

samples using an f-theta lens with a long working distance and the other using short focal 

distance objectives for high resolution images on planar samples. Resistive heating in the coils 

can cause substantial heating of samples and reduce the continuous operation time of the 

apparatus, and thereby limiting the amount of current that can be used. Heat dissipation 

components were therefore integrated into the coil holders and apparatus frame to reduce sample 

heating and prolong experiment run time. The apparatus was designed with a modular rail 

system made from extruded aluminum which can be modified in a piecewise fashion as 

experimental needs change using easily sourced, relatively low-cost materials (Table S1). An 

open-source software package used to create the waveforms necessary to drive the µwheels was 

developed and is available online [15]. 

B. Apparatus Frame 

 
A custom frame with an open architecture was built to house the apparatus components 

(Fig. 2a). The 3 ft wide × 2 ft deep × 4.5 ft tall frame was built from modular extruded aluminum 

sections (Tnutz, 10-Series, Champlain, NY) (Fig. 2b). A benefit of this construction is the 

absence of solid planar boundaries, allowing components to protrude in any direction, 


 
5

unencumbered by immovable apparatus walls. The extruded aluminum was used to build 

integrated mounts for the imaging system, coil mounts (see Sec. II.E), and other minor 

 

FIG. 2. (a) µWheel manipulation bench and equipment rack. (b) Schematic of coil holders with 
exploded view of the z-coil holder and a cross-section of the extruded aluminum framing, (c) 
circuit diagram for current measurement system, (d) schematic of imaging components, 
including the short focal distance, high resolution optics train in the inset, (e) schematic of 
translational stage. 


 
6

components. The frame includes eight low-durometer vibration-dampening feet (McMaster Carr, 

part# 60855K72, Chicago, IL) that enhance image quality. A removeable sub-frame with castors 

slides under the bottom of the bench and allows the system to be easily moved. Amplifiers, 

computer, monitor, and auxiliary components were housed separately on a mobile equipment 

rack (Samson, SRK-21, Hicksville, NY) to isolate the µwheel driving and imaging components 

from heat and vibration (Fig. 2a).  

C. Magnetic Field Generation: Hardware 

 
A rotating magnetic field assembles superparamagnetic particles (e.g. 4.5 μm, Life 

Technologies, Dynabeads M-450 Epoxy, Carlsbad, CA) into µwheels and drives them along 

surfaces (Fig. 1). The rotating magnetic field is created with five coils (Fig. 2b). Two pairs of 

coils with custom-made cores were mounted in the x-y plane and a fifth coil was oriented 

orthogonally, in the z-direction. Assembly and rotation in the x-y plane were achieved by two 

sine waves with a 90° phase shift controlled by home built software (Sec. II.H), conditioned with 

an analog output card (NI-9263, National Instruments, Austin, TX), amplified (EP2000, 

Behringer, Willich, Germany), and sent to each pair of coils. The fifth coil is supplied with its 

own phase-shifted AC signal by an additional amplifier and independent sine wave. With the 

five coil system, µwheels can be set to any camber angle, qc, from 0° to 90 using a 3D rotating 

magnetic field.  

 
A 1 Ω resistor in series with each coil (Fig. 2c) was used to monitor the current and 

associated voltage drop by a DAQ board (NI-USB-6009, National Instruments, Austin, TX). 

Each amplifier outputs to two channels and can supply 650 WRMS of power per 2 Ω channel. 

Each coil assembly, with winding layers wired in parallel (Sec. II.D), has a resistance of 2.2 Ω. 


 
7

Each coil circuit, including the 1 Ω resistor and 

associated wiring, has a resistance of 3.3 Ω. 

With this loading, the amplifiers can provide 43 

VRMS at a current of 13 ARMS per channel; 

however, the DAQ card has a maximum input 

voltage of 8.5 VRMS, limiting the maximum 

current supplied to each coil to 8.5 ARMS.  

 D. Electromagnetic Coils and Cores 

Voice coils used for audio speakers 

(Springfield Speaker, 2” Kicker Voice Coils 4 

Ω, Springfield, MO) were used to generate the 

magnetic fields. Each coil is 53 mm in diameter 

by 40 mm long and is comprised of four 

winding layers, with 84 windings per layer, 

giving 336 total windings of 26 awg round 

aluminum wire. Ferrous cores were incorporated 

into the coils to increase the magnetic field 

amplitude while preserving optical access 

through the center (Fig. 3a). Three type-61 

ferrite toroids (AnaTek Instruments, Type 61 

Ferrite Toroid, Santa Clara, CA) were stacked to 

form a 38 mm long cylinder with an inner 

diameter of 28 mm and outer diameter of 36 

 

FIG. 3. Schematic of coils and cores. (a) 
Typical coil and core used for x, y, and z 
coils, (b) ferrite plug which can be inserted 
within the ferrite toroid void space within 
each coil core, (c) spacing of coils around 
the test section with no ferrite plugs, (d) 
coil spacing around the test section with 
flush mounted ferrite plugs, (e) coil 
spacing with extended ferrite plugs, 
making a smaller test section. 


 
8

mm. The stack of toroids was centered within the coil and a mixture of 75% iron oxide (by 

volume) ferrous epoxy material was poured between the coil former and the toroids. The ferrous 

epoxy was made by mixing iron oxide powder (Alpha Chemicals, Natural Black Iron Oxide, 

Missouri) with clear epoxy resin (East Coast Resin, Crystal Clear Epoxy Resin).  

 
For the x-y coils where optical access is not needed, optional ferrite plugs were designed 

to fit within the open area of the toroids (Fig. 3b). These plugs were made from ferrite rods 

(AnaTek Instruments, Type 61 Ferrite Rod, Santa Clara, CA), with 75% iron in epoxy ferrous 

material molded around the rods to make the geometry match that of the toroid void space. These 

plugs could be inserted in either a coil-face flush orientation to preserve the large test section 

volume (Fig. 3d) or with the ferrite rod protruding into the test section (Fig. 3e), creating a higher 

field strength for smaller samples.  

E. Coil Heat Management 

 
The magnetic field produced by a coil decreases as the coil temperature increases. If 

resistive heating of the coil becomes severe, the wire windings can melt, disrupting the circuit 

and causing coil failure. To lengthen the operating time and maintain steady-state within the 

magnetic field generation system, a coil cooling system was integrated within the apparatus 

design (Fig. 2b); 54 mm holes were bored through 100 mm lengths of the aluminum extrusion to 

house the magnetic coils. These sections were cut into four pieces, such that the 54 mm hole was 

in quarters. The four pieces could then be clamped around the coil, providing a solid mounting 

connection while also giving more direct contact between the heat producing coil and conductive 

coil holder (Fig. 2b). 

F. Imaging 


 
9

 
Two interchangeable optics trains were built to allow for visualization of different sample 

types. The long working distance train was designed to image large 3D samples using an f-theta 

lens (Fig. 2d). The short focal distance train was designed to capture high-resolution images on 

planar samples using a standard microscope objective (Fig. 2d). The long working distance 

optics train was designed to provide imaging at any point within a 10 cm cube. It incorporates an 

f-theta lens (Thorlabs, LSM05-BB, Newton, NJ) with an effective working distance of 11 cm, in 

conjunction with a pair of microscope objectives, one of which (Olympus, UPlan Apo 4x/0.16, 

Tokyo, Japan) is reversed to collimate the image coming through the other objective (Labromed, 

LW Ph Plan 40x/0.60, Los Angeles, CA). Images are captured with a CMOS camera with a 1280 

pixel × 1024 pixel resolution (Thorlabs, DCC1645C, Newton, NJ) and logged using software 

(ThorCam version 3.3.1) supplied with the camera. To adjust focus, the camera and optical 

components are mounted to an extruded aluminum section coupled to a z-axis translational stage 

(Newport, M423, Irvine, CA) that is mounted to the apparatus frame. The interchangeable high 

resolution, short focal distance optics train for planar samples includes a 20X objective 

(Olympus, LUCPLanFLN 20x/0.45 RC2, Tokyo, Japan) mounted to one end of a lens tube 

(Thorlabs, SM1L40, Newton, NJ), which is coupled to the CMOS camera with cage plates 

(Thorlabs, CP02, Newton, NJ) and additional lens tubes. The working distance of this optics 

train is 7.8 mm. The cage plates are attached to brackets that can be easily installed on the same 

extruded aluminum section used by the long focal distance train, allowing focus via the z-axis 

translational stage.  

 
Illumination is provided by a 50 watt LED chip (Chanzon, 1DGL-JC-50W-NW, 

Huaqiang, China) coupled to an aluminum heat sink (TX, H&PC-73411, FXT Technologies, 

Shenzhen, China). To dissipate heat emanating from the light source, the heat sink is mounted to 


 
10

the aluminum apparatus frame and fit with a small fan (Fig. 2d). Light is sent through a diffuser, 

focusing lens, an iris for intensity adjustment, reflected by a mirror, and then refocused to 

intercept the imaging path. A custom sample holder was constructed from a vertical actuator 

(Link CNC, 4080U, Jinan, China) affixed to an x-y translational stage (AmScope, GT100 X-Y 

Gliding Table, Irvine, CA) which holds a specifically built riser and glass sample holder. The 

geometry of the riser and sample holder were designed to accommodate the geometry of both 

imaging and magnetic field generation components while simultaneously allowing translation of 

the sample (Fig. 2e). The lower riser section was designed to straddle the long working distance 

optics train, allowing 5 cm of stage movement in all three-dimensions. The top riser was 

designed to fit inside the coils, allowing 5 cm of sample holder movement in all three-

dimensions without contacting coils or coil holders. To eliminate vibrations due to the rotating 

magnetic field, all stage components proximal to the magnetic fields are made of non-magnetic 

materials including aluminum (riser legs), glass (sample holder), and nylon (posts to affix glass 

sample holder to riser legs). 

G. Test Sections 

For µwheel driving tests on planar surfaces, a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS; Sylgard 

184, Krayden, Denver, CO) test section was fabricated [21]. The PDMS base and catalyst were 

thoroughly mixed at a 10:1 ratio. This mixture was poured into a rectangular, 25 mm x 30 mm x 

3 mm mold, producing a 3 mm thick sheet of PDMS. The mold was then placed in a vacuum 

chamber for several hours to remove any entrapped air in the PDMS, then moved to an 80 ˚C 

oven overnight to fully cure. Once cured, the PDMS was removed from the mold and three 3 mm 

diameter holes were punched (Integra, Miltex 3332P/25, Princeton, NJ) through the sheet of 

PDMS to create three evenly spaced wells and placed on a clean glass slide. Each well was filled 


 
11

with a 0.1% Dynabead® suspension of 4 x 105 particles/mL in deionized (DI) water with 1.4% 

sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, CAS 151-21-3, Fisher Bioreagents, Pittsburg, PA). A cover slip 

was then placed over the wells.  

 
For µwheel driving tests in 3D, a helical tube with elevation change in the z-direction 

was fabricated using a spring with a circular 2 mm diameter cross section, 21 mm coil diameter, 

and a 9˚ pitch. The spring was secured inside a rectangular Petri dish, creating a mold with 

planar sides. PDMS was poured into the mold, filling the volume surrounding the spring. To 

track µwheels within the test section, alternating colors of candle wax dye (Candlewic, 

Doylestown, PA) were injected into the PDMS, providing visual cues for location within the 

helical channel. The mold was degassed and cured using the same procedure as the planar test 

section. Once cured, the spring and Petri dish molds were removed from the PDMS and the test 

section was trimmed to remove excess material. The helical tube was saturated with 1.4% SDS 

in DI water from the bottom elevation up using a hypodermic needle. Then, a 50 µL bolus of 

0.5% Dynabead suspension of 2 x 106 particles/mL in DI water with 1.4% sodium dodecyl 

sulfate was injected into the bottom elevation of the tube. Finally, the top elevation of the 

channel was plugged with a modified pipette tip.  

H. Magnetic Field Generation: Software  

A multithreaded open-source Python application, MuControl [15], was written for the 

generation, control, and monitoring of signals in the coils required to drive µwheels. 

Visualizations and live plots within the application allow for confirmation of the status of the 

magnetic field during use. Calibration tools enable simple output waveforms for testing and 

measurement of each individual coil set. MuControl is packaged and compiled into a self-


 
12

contained executable file, allowing for compatibility with most computer hardware, eliminating 

the need for up to date Python distributions or coding experience. The user interface was 

designed using Python PyQt5 [16] and pyqtgraph [17] packages and provides the user with a live 

signal plot, a visualization of the shape of the magnetic field, and controls for both rolling and 

calibration signals (Fig. 4).  

The application interfaces with an analog 

output card (National Instruments, NI-9263) and an 

analog input data acquisition card (National 

Instruments, NI-USB-6009) using the Python 

nidaqmx library [18]. This program is written based 

on the software created in our earlier work [12] with 

improvements such as open-source application, self-

contained executable file and a user interface 

allowing easier setting of the input parameters. 

Concurrent processing threads monitor these tasks 

and forward data to the user interface. Given the 

desired rolling direction, frequency, magnitude, qc 

supplied by the user, three AC signals are calculated 

and output. The magnetic fields from the three coil axes superimpose in the working volume, 

forming the desired three-dimensional rotating magnetic field to control and direct the µwheels. 

The amplitude, frequency, and phase of these waves can be confirmed in the live signal plot. The 

signal parameters are controlled in the user interface using a keyboard, gamepad, or joystick, 

FIG. 4. MuControl user interface, 
consisting of (a) a real-time signal plot 
and (b) 3D parametric view of the 
output coil voltages. 


 
13

functionality implemented using the XInput-Python library [19]. The default signal refresh rate 

of 10 Hz allows for manipulation of µwheels in real-time with no observable input lag.  

A settings window (Fig. S1) with common parameters is available for modification of 

signal generation and read rate, output card type, and number of channels to complement the 

modular design of the entire system. The application does not require recompiling for changes in 

equipment type or number of coils, a feature that allows MuControl to work for many different 

coil systems. The live plotting frequency can be adjusted to decrease the number of lines written 

to the screen per second if high frequency monitoring of the signal is not required. A Python 

plotting library, PyQtGraph, is used to decrease the impact on the target CPU [16]. Calculation, 

manipulation, and storage of signals are performed using the NumPy Python package [17]. It is 

packaged as a self-contained executable using the fbs library [20]. 

I. Quantification methods 

1. Magnetic field generation 

 
Magnetic fields were measured for the five coil system for toroid cores with no ferrite 

plugs (Fig. 3c), for toroid-cores with flush mounted ferrite plugs in the x-y coils (Fig. 3d), and 

for toroid-cores with the extended ferrite plugs in the x-y coils (Fig. 3e). Coils were powered 

using an AC current with a peak magnitude of 4 A (4 Ap)  and a frequency of 40 Hz. Field 

measurements were made with a Gaussmeter (Latnex, MF-30K, Ontario, Canada), with the 

probe attached to a precision guide, making measurements at 1 cm increments over a 10 cm × 10 

cm grid for the x-y plane and over a 10 cm × 5 cm grid for the x-z plane. Centerline 

measurements of field strength were taken in the x-direction at z = 0 at 1 cm increments for air-

cored and toroid-core coils with and without ferrite plugs in the configurations shown in Figs. 


 
14

3c-d. Centerline measurements of field strength were taken in the x-direction at z = 0 at 0.5 cm 

increments for toroid-core coils with extended ferrite plugs (Fig. 3e).  

2. Heat generation 

 
Heat generation tests were performed at an AC current of 4 AP and frequency of 40 Hz to 

determine the temperature of the windings of a single coil. Measurements were taken for air-

cored coils with no holder, air-cored coils with the heat-dissipating holder, and toroid-core coils 

with no ferrite plug with the heat-dissipating holder. Temperature measurements were also taken 

at the center of the test section for the five-coil system to measure sample heating. System 

measurements were taken for toroid-core coils with either x-y coils only or x-z coils only housed 

in heat-dissipating coil holders and air-cored x-y coils with no heat-dissipating coil holders. 

Temperature was measured using a thermistor (Cole-Parmer, Digi-sense 20250-93, Vernon Hills, 

IL) placed in direct contact with the top of the coil for single coil tests and in the center of the 

test section for five-coil system tests. To allow coils to reach temperature steady state, 

measurement durations were in excess of 1 hr.  

3. µWheel driving 

 
To test µwheel translation on planar surfaces, hexagonal µwheels consisting to seven 

particles were driven on a planar surface at frequencies of 10 Hz, 20 Hz, and 30 Hz, at qc = 30˚. 

Images were captured using the short focal distance optics train. To test µwheel driving in a 3D 

environment, a swarm of µwheels were driven through a helical channel at a frequency of 40 Hz 

at qc = 20˚. Images were captured using the long working distance optics train.  In both 

experiments, the toroid-core coils with no ferrite plugs were used (Fig. 3c). A current of 4 AP 


 
15

was used for coils in the x-y plane and to match field strength with the single z-coil, 8 AP for the 

z-plane.  

For the planar surface, µwheel velocity was calculated as the average of two 

measurements of wheel translation distance over time, using the same 7-mer wheel traveling in 

opposite directions for each measurement. For all measurements used to study the effect of 

varied frequencies, the same 7-mer µwheel was driven over an identical planar surface. For the 

helical channel, images were taken of each section of the channel to record particle 

concentration. A bolus of particles was first injected into the bottom of a spiral channel, the field 

was turned on, and wheels were allowed to drive up the spiral for 3.7 min. The field was then 

removed and channel images were captured. An identical magnetic field was then applied for 

another 3.3 min with no additional user input. After removing the field and acquiring images, the 

field was reapplied at qc = 20˚ with a single heading-correction of 90˚ to accommodate a change 

in direction dictated by the helical channel 

geometry. µWheels were then allowed to translate 

for another 4.5 min.  

J. Simulations 

1. Finite element method simulations of 

magnetic fields and heat transfer 

The magnetic field and heat generation were 

simulated using COMSOL Multiphysics 5.4.  A 

3D geometry was created wherein five coils were 

defined within a spherical domain of radius 0.5 m 

FIG. 5. Top-down view of COMSOL 
geometry with optional plugs inserted in x 
and y coils in the “flush” position. Materials 
are aluminum (silver), copper (copper), 
ferrite (gold), and iron oxide epoxy (black). 


 
16

and housed within aluminum scaffolding according to the design specifications and dimensions 

in Sec. II.C (Fig. 5). The built-in material properties for 26 AWG aluminum were used for the 

coils, 6063 aluminum alloy for the coil holders, and air for the spherical domain. Custom 

material definitions were created for the iron oxide epoxy and ferrite (see Sec. II.J.2).   

The COMSOL magnetic field (.mf) module was used to estimate the magnetic flux as a 

function of position using an input of 4 A of current at 40 Hz for each coil to match experimental 

conditions. For all coils, the direction of current flow was defined around the inner edge. The 

electrical currents (.ec) and heat transfer in solids (.ht) modules were coupled to calculate the 

joule heating for each coil. Heat transfer simulations were accomplished using the heat transfer 

in solids and fluids module (.htsf) by treating the coil surfaces as heat sources with an output 

equal to their Joule heating. In this, all solid-solid and solid-fluid contacts are conductive 

boundaries. A Dirichlet boundary condition is used at the edge of the spherical air domain, where 

the temperature is fixed at 20-25 °C to match experimental room temperature. The size of the 

spherical domain did not significantly affect results at r > 0.15 m. For simulations with natural 

convection, a heat loss of 𝑞̇ = h(Tc-Ta) was integrated for the coils, where 𝑞̇ is the heat dissipated 

per unit area, h the natural convection heat transfer coefficient (12.45 W/m2), Tc the temperature 

of the coil surface and Ta the temperature of the surrounding air.  

A free tetrahedral mesh was defined with a maximum element size of 0.1 cm, a minimum 

element size of 0.02 cm, a maximum element growth rate of 1.6, a curvature factor of 0.7, and a 

narrow resolution of 0.4. Convergence tolerance was 10-4. The residual root mean square error 

was of order 10-31, and parameter imbalances across the domain were <10-6 % after double the 

required iterations to converge, indicating mesh independence of the study. The solution used a 


 
17

domain consisting of 1.5 × 106 elements and did not significantly change when using a finer (4.3 

× 106 elements) or coarser (1.5 × 105 elements) mesh (Fig. S2). 

TABLE 1: Custom material parameters for COMSOL model 

μ 
σ 

ε 
(W/m*K)

ρ 
(kg/m3) 

CP 
(J/kg*K) 

Epoxy 
1.7
0.5
10.2
3960
1000

Ferrite 
125
0.01
4
5000
750

 

2. Physical properties of epoxy and ferrite  

To compute the electromagnetic and heat transfer physics for the geometry, five parameters were 

required for each material: relative permeability µ, relative permittivity σ, density ρ, heat 

capacity CP, and thermal conductivity k (Table 1). Relative permeability and relative permittivity 

were measured using a magnetometer (MPMS3, Quantum Design, San Diego, CA) at 25 °C 

from -1 to 1 T. The density of ferrite is reported to be ~5000 kg/m3 by the manufacturer 

(AnaTek, Santa Clara, CA) and the density of iron oxide epoxy was approximated using a 

weighted average of the densities of iron oxide and epoxy. Heat capacity was measured using 

calorimetry where a sample of ferrite or iron oxide epoxy was massed and suspended by sewing 

thread within a water bath at 90 °C for 2 hr. Thermal conductivity, ε, for the iron oxide epoxy 

was determined by measuring the temperature difference between the top and bottom of an 

insulated iron oxide epoxy cylinder with heat supplied at constant power to the bottom of the 

cylinder.  

III. RESULTS 

A. Magnetic field generation 


 
18

 
Two-dimensional representations of the magnetic field in the x-y plane with toroid-cores 

and no ferrite plugs indicate that the field is symmetrical, with field magnitudes near 2 mT at the 

center point and increasing field strength with proximity to the coil (Fig. 6). An exception exists 

at regions very near the center of the coil where the void within the toroid core creates a lower 

field magnitude (Fig. 6a). The z-coil field representation also shows a symmetrical field, with 

approximately 1 mT at the sample (Fig. 6b) with an applied current of 4 AP. The lower field 

strength compared to the x-y plane is due to the use of a single coil rather than a coil pair along 

the z axis. COMSOL simulation results are in agreement with experimental measurements (Fig. 

6d-e). The x-y plane measurements and simulations both exhibit slight asymmetry across 

FIG. 6. Measured and simulated magnetic field magnitudes for (a,c) x-y plane coils and (b,d) z-
plane field measurements for toroid-cored coils. Data in (a, c) were collected or (c,d) simulated 
using 4 Ap of AC current at 40 Hz. e) Measurements (symbols) and simulations (lines) at y = 0 
for toroid-cored coils, toroid-cored coils with flush mounted ferrite plug, toroid-cored coils with 
extended ferrite plug, and air-cored coils. 


 
19

quadrants. Asymmetries between the Northwest/Southeast vs. Northeast/Southwest quadrant 

pairs are attributable to the magnetic interactions between coils and the direction of current flow 

within those coils.  

Centerline measurements show how different coil configurations can be used to enhance 

field strength (Fig. 6e). Toroid-core coils 

with flush mounted ferrite plugs gives the 

largest fields compared to toroid-core coils 

with no ferrite plug and air-cored coils. 

Toroid-core coils with extended plugs 

yield the overall greatest field strength in a 

more focal volume owing to the ability of 

the plugs to act as a more efficient conduit 

for magnetic force than air.  

B. Heat generation results  

 
Securing coils in aluminum clamps 

showed improved heat dissipation 

compared to clamps where most of the coil 

surface area is exposed to air (Fig. 7). For 

single coil tests, the air-cored coil with no 

heat-dissipation reached a maximum 

temperature of 83.6 ˚C while those in 

aluminum clamps reached 56.6 ˚C. The 

 

FIG. 7. Coil heat generation with time. (a) Data 
(symbols) and simulations (lines) of temperature 
of a single coil for an air-cored coil with no coil 
holder, air-cored coil with aluminum holder, and 
a coil with the iron oxide epoxy and type 61 
toroid ferrite core housed in an aluminum 
holder. (b) Data (symbols) and simulations 
(lines) of temperature at sample for an air-cored 
x-y coils with no coil holders, and x-y and x-z 
ferrite-cored coils with aluminum coil holders. 
All data collected at 4 Ap of AC current at 40 
Hz. 


 
20

toroid-core coil had an even lower temperature of 46.4 ˚C due to the higher conductivity of the 

ferrite compared to air. All single coil tests were performed at 4 Ap of AC current at 40 Hz.  

 
To measure the temperature at the sample, either x-y pairs or x-z pairs were tested with 

and without the heat dissipating aluminum coil holders (Fig. 7b). Toroid-core coils with heat-

dissipating holders stayed within 3 ˚C of the ambient temperature at the sample. Air-core coils 

without heat-dissipating clamps showed a 9.9 ˚C rise in temperature above ambient at the 

sample.  

  
COMSOL simulations show good agreement with experimental results. For coil 

temperatures, simulations are within 3 °C of experimental measurements at steady state (Fig. 7a). 

Coil temperature can be used as a predictor for coil failure. Due to impurities in the aluminum 

wire or irregularities in electrical connections, failure temperature varies. Consequently, 

simulations that are within a few degrees of the actual temperature serve as a useful model for 

experimental design. For sample temperatures, simulations are within 1 °C of experimental 

measurements at steady state (Fig. 7b). Sample temperature is important for biological samples. 

In this case, simulations that are within a degree of actual temperature serve as a useful model for 

experimental design.  

 
 


 
21

C. µWheel driving  

 
Fig. 8 shows the velocity of hexagonal 

µwheels consisting of seven particles driven on a 

planar surface. In agreement with field strength 

measurements, toroid-core coils with ferrite plugs 

led to the fastest µwheel speeds followed by the 

toroid-core coils without ferrite plugs, and then 

air-cored coils.  Similar results were found for 

various frequencies between 5 Hz and 40 Hz and 

for 30˚ < qc < 90˚ (Fig. S3).  

 
µWheel driving was tested in a 3D helical 

tube where a bolus of particles was injected into 

the bottom of the tube (Fig. 9a-b). The rotating 

magnetic field was then applied at a current of 4 

AP for coils in the x-y plane and 8 AP for the z-

plane at 40 Hz. µWheels were visualized with the long working distance optics train (Fig. 9c).  

During translation, µwheel sizes ranged from single monomers to large aggregates of hundreds 

of particles. Aggregate sizes tend to increase with time as µwheels collide and combine with 

each other. Fig. 9d shows the distribution of µwheels at various times as the swarm translated 

upwards and along the tube, with wheels traveling 37 mm around the helix and reaching a 

vertical distance of 5.7 mm. Note that, due to the curvature of the channel cross-section, only 

particles in the center portion of the channel are visible. Therefore, the data presented in Fig. 9d 

 

FIG. 8. µWheel driving on a planar 
surface. Images of a µwheel consisting 
of seven particles with a magnetic field 
turned off (a), in a x-y magnetic field 
causing it to spin (b), in x-y-z with θc = 
30º. Scale bar = 20 µm. (d) Velocity as a 
function of field frequency with θc =  30º 
with magnetic fields generated with air-
cored coils, toroid-core coils, and toroid-
core coils with the ferrite plug. 


 
22

is normalized as N/NVIS, where N is the number of particles within the bin and NVIS is the total 

number of particles visible throughout the channel at the specified time.  

IV. SUMMARY 

Here we present a scaled up design for a microbot manipulation apparatus allowing 

acceptance of larger, 3D samples than previous studies [12-14]. With this design, µwheels can be 

assembled, controlled, and imaged in 2D and 3D networks in real-time. This apparatus is capable 

of minimizing coil heat generation, with sample temperatures residing within a few degrees 

Celsius of ambient for continuous experimental run times in excess of one hour. Rotating 

magnetic fields on the order of a few milli-Tesla are capable of assembling and driving wheels in 

centimeter scale 2D and 3D samples. This low-cost apparatus, built from off-the-shelf 

components can be used to investigate µwheel use in a variety of applications including drug 

delivery and cargo transport . 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  

 

FIG. 9. µWheel driving through a helical channel. (a) Top view of the PDMS helical channel 
and overlay of radial locations in degrees. (b) Side view helical channel schematic showing 
the circular channel with dimensions and pitch. (c) Representative images of µwheels in the 
5º-10º, 55º-60º, 80º-85º, and 165º-170º arcs of the helix. Scale bar = 50 µm. (c) Distribution of 
particles within the helical channel at different locations and times normalized by the total 
number of visible particles within the channel at each time. 


 
23

The authors acknowledge support from the National Institutes of Health under grants 

R21AI138214, R01NS102465, and T32HL072738 (E.J.R.). D.D. was supported by an American 

Heart Association Predoctoral Fellowship Award 18PRE34070076.  

REFERENCES 

1. 
Jeon, S., et al., Magnetically actuated microrobots as a platform for stem cell 
transplantation. Science Robotics, 2019. 4(30): p. eaav4317. 

2. 
Mellal, L., et al. Magnetic microbot design framework for antiangiogenic tumor therapy. 
in 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). 
2015. IEEE. 

3. 
Yang, T., et al., Magnetic microlassos for reversible cargo capture, transport, and 
release. Langmuir, 2017. 33(23): p. 5932-5937. 

4. 
Guasto, J.S., R. Rusconi, and R. Stocker, Fluid mechanics of planktonic microorganisms. 
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, 2012. 44: p. 373-400. 

5. 
Abbott, J.J., et al., Robotics in the Small, Part I: Microbotics. IEEE Robotics & 
Automation Magazine, 2007. 14(2): p. 92-103. 

6. 
Chen, X.-Z., et al., Recent developments in magnetically driven micro- and nanorobots. 
Applied Materials Today, 2017. 9: p. 37-48. 

7. 
Hwang, G., et al., Note: On-chip multifunctional fluorescent-magnetic Janus helical 
microswimmers. Review of Scientific Instruments, 2016. 87(3): p. 036104. 

8. 
Zhang, L., et al., Controlled propulsion and cargo transport of rotating nickel nanowires 
near a patterned solid surface. ACS nano, 2010. 4(10): p. 6228-6234. 

9. 
Gong, D., et al., Controlled propulsion of wheel-shape flaky microswimmers under 
rotating magnetic fields. Applied Physics Letters, 2019. 114(12): p. 123701. 

10. 
Kummer, M.P., et al., OctoMag: An Electromagnetic System for 5-DOF Wireless 
Micromanipulation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2010. 26(6): p. 1006-1017. 

11. 
Jiang, C., et al., Electromagnetic tweezers with independent force and torque control. 
Review of Scientific Instruments, 2016. 87(8): p. 084304. 

12. 
Tasci, T.O., et al., Surface-enabled propulsion and control of colloidal microwheels. 
Nature Communications, 2016. 7: p. 10225. 

13. 
Disharoon, D., K.B. Neeves, and D.W. Marr, AC/DC Magnetic Fields for Enhanced 
Translation of Colloidal Microwheels. Langmuir, 2019. 

14. 
Tasci, T.O., et al., Enhanced Fibrinolysis with Magnetically Powered Colloidal 
Microwheels. Small, 2017. 13(36): p. 1700954. 

15. 
Zimmermann, C.J., czimm79/MuControl-release. 2019: GitHub. 

16. 
What is PyQt? 2019, Riverbank Software. 

17. 
PyQtGraph, in Scientific Graphics and GUI Library for Python. 2019. 

18. 
ni/nidaqmx-python. 2019, National Instruments. 

19. 
Zuzu-Typ/XInput-Python. 2019: GitHub. 

20. 
Herrmann, M., mherrmann/fbs. 2019: GitHub 

21. 
Duffy, D.C., et al., Rapid prototyping of microfluidic systems in poly (dimethylsiloxane). 
Analytical chemistry, 1998. 70(23): p. 4974-4984. 


 
24

SUPPORTING INFORMATION 

Table S1. Apparatus parts and supplies 

Part Description 
Part Designation 
Supplier 

Extruded aluminum 
10 series extrusion and 
components 

Tnutz, Champlain, NY 

Vibration dampening feet 
part# 60855K72 
McMaster Carr, Chicago, IL 

Equipment rack 
SRK-21 
Samson, Hicksville, NY 

Superparamagnetic beads 
Dynabeads M-450 Epoxy 
Life Technologies, Carlsbad, 
CA 

Analog output card 
NI-9263 
National Instruments, Austin, 
TX 

DAQ board 
NI-USB-6009 
National Instruments, Austin, 
TX 

Amplifiers (x3) 
EP2000 
Behringer, Willich, Germany 

Voice coils (x5) 
2” Kicker Voice Coils 4 Ω 
Springfield Speaker, 
Springfield, MO 

Type 61 ferrite toroids (x15) 
Type 61 Ferrite Toroid 
AnaTek Instruments, Santa 
Clara, CA 

Type 61 ferrite rods (x4) 
Type 61 Ferrite Rod 
AnaTek Instruments, Santa 
Clara, CA 

Epoxy resin 
Crystal Clear Epoxy Resin 
East Coast Resin 

Iron oxide powder 
Natural Black Iron Oxide 
Alpha Chemicals, Missouri 

F-theta lens 
LSM05-BB 
Thorlabs, Newton, NJ 

4x objective lens 
UPlan Apo 4x/0.16 
Olympus, Tokyo, Japan 

40x objective lens 
LW Ph Plan 40x/0.60 
Labromed, Los Angeles, CA 

Camera 
Thorcam color CMOS 
camera, part #DCC1645C

Thorlabs, Newton, NJ 

Single axis translational stage 
M423 
Newport, Irvine, CA 

20x objective lens 
LUCPLanFLN 20x/0.45 RC2 
Olympus, Tokyo, Japan 


 
25

Lens tube 
SM1L40 
Thorlabs, Newton, NJ 

Cage plates 
CP02 
Thorlabs, Newton, NJ 

50W LED chip 
1DGL-JC-50W-NW 
Chanzon, Huaqiang, China 

Heat sink 
H&PC-73411 
FXT Technologies, 
Shenzhen, China 

Vertical Actuator 
4080U 
Link CNC, Jinan, China 

Two axis translational stage 
GT100 X-Y Gliding Table 
AmScope, Irvine, CA 

PDMS 
Sylgard 184 
 Krayden, Denver, CO 

Candle wax dye 
Candle wax dye 
Candlewic, Doylestown, PA 

SDS 
CAS 151-21-3 
Fisher Bioreagents, Pittsburg, 
PA 

Gaussmeter 
MF-30K 
Latnex, Ontario, Canada 

Thermistor 
Digi-sense 20250-93 
Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, 
IL 

 


 
26

 

Fig. S1. MuControl settings window. 

 
 


 
27

 

FIG. S2. (a) Simulated magnetic field profile along the x-axis for toroid-cored coils using 4 A of 
AC current at 40 Hz.  We compare the solution for the mesh size used in our studies (black) to 
finer (red) and coarser (cyan) meshes. Our solution across the domain is on average <0.0002% 
different from the solution generated using the finer mesh and <1% different from that generated 
with the coarser mesh, indicating that our solution is mesh-independent. (b) Number of domains 
in each type of mesh. 

 

 

FIG. S3. Microwheel driving velocities on a planar surface at various field strengths, 
frequencies, and qc. 


