Monitored wet-etch removal of individual dielectric
layers from high-finesse Bragg mirrors

Simon Bernard∗, Thomas J. Clark∗, Vincent Dumont, Jiaxing Ma, Jack
C. Sankey†

McGill University Department of Physics
3600 rue University, Montr´eal QC, H3A 2T8, Canada

June 23, 2020

Abstract

It is prohibitively expensive to deposit customized dielectric coatings on in-
dividual optics. One solution is to batch-coat many optics with extra dielectric
layers, then remove layers from individual optics as needed.
Here we present
a low-cost, single-step, monitored wet etch technique for reliably removing (or
partially removing) individual SiO2 and Ta2O5 dielectric layers, in this case from
a high-reflectivity fiber mirror. By immersing in acid and monitoring off-band
reflected light, we show it is straightforward to iteratively (or continuously) re-
move six bilayers. At each stage, we characterize the coating performance with
a Fabry-P´erot cavity, observing the expected stepwise decrease in finesse from
92, 000 ± 3, 000 to 3, 950 ± 50, finding no evidence of added optical losses. The
etch also removes the fiber’s sidewall coating after a single bilayer, and, after six
bilayers, confines the remaining coating to a ∼50-µm-diameter pedestal at the
center of the fiber tip. Vapor etching above the solution produces a tapered “pool
cue” cladding profile, reducing the fiber diameter (nominally 125 µm) to ∼100 µm
at an angle of ∼0.3◦ near the tip. Finally, we note that the data generated by
this technique provides a sensitive estimate of the layers’ optical depths. This
technique could be readily adapted to free-space optics and other coatings.

1
Introduction

Dielectric optical coatings represent a ubiquitous enabling technology throughout the
field of optics [1], helping manage surface reflections, filter light, adjust polarization,
and split or combine beams. In particular, the lowest-loss mirror surfaces are realized

∗These authors contributed equally
†jack.sankey@mcgill.ca

1

arXiv:2006.12303v1  [physics.app-ph]  22 Jun 2020


with dielectric Bragg stacks, allowing for the creation of etalons and other Fabry-P´erot
resonators useful as narrowband filters, wavemeters, spectrometers, and laser cavities
used throughout science and engineering. These have proven invaluable for enhancing
light-matter interactions, performing spectroscopy, and filtering light within the fields of
cavity quantum electrodynamics [2], quantum information [3] (including solid-state sys-
tems, e.g. [4]), optomechanics [5], optical-wavelength astronomy [6], and gravitational
wave detection [7].
Within these (and other) contexts, one routinely wishes to choose a specific mirror
reflectivity, for example to make a trade-off between the storage time of a cavity and
collection efficiency. Currently, however, it is expensive to deposit a customized, high-
quality coating on a small number of optics, as this requires a dedicated deposition
chamber. An alternative approach is to deposit more dielectric layers than are required
upon many substrates, and then remove them as needed to tune the coating properties.
There exists a great body of knowledge about different etch processes and materials [8],
but when it comes to high-finesse mirror coatings, it is not known how these will intro-
duce additional optical losses through surface roughness and contamination. Low-loss
removal of dielectric mirror coatings has been achieved using plasma etching [9, 10],
however, this technique relies on a cumbersome reactive ion etching machine, careful
control over electric field and gas distribution within the chamber, and periodically re-
calibrated etch rates. Also, typical chambers introduce complications when attempting
to etch a substrate (e.g., a fiber mirror [11]) having a geometry significantly different
from that of a silicon wafer .
Here, we present a simple, monitored wet-etch technique for removing (or partially
removing) dielectric layers from a high-reflectivity, low-loss SiO2/Ta2O5 Bragg mirror.
We show that it is straightforward to iteratively remove 6 bilayers, and, importantly,
find no evidence of additional optical losses associated with the process in a finesse-
50,000 Fabry-P´erot cavity. The studied mirror coatings reside at the tips of cleaved,
laser-machined optical fibers [11], but the etch technique should work just as well with
free space optics and other SiO2/Ta2O5 coatings.

2
Monitored Dielectric Etch & Characterization

Figure 1(a) shows the apparatus used to reliably remove dielectric layers from our
optical coatings (Laseroptik GmbH). In this case, a high-reflectivity, low-loss Bragg
mirror comprising fifteen Ta2O5/SiO2 bilayers (terminated with Ta2O5) on the end of a
cleaved, laser-ablated [11] Corning SMF-28 fiber is immersed in Tantalum Etchant 111
(Transene Co.; NHO3 25-40% by weight, HF 5-15%, deionized water 35-70%), which, as
we estimate here, provides a convenient 20:1 etch rate ratio for SiO2:Ta2O5. Our stack’s
stopband nominally spans 1420-1710 nm and the power reflectivity |r|2 ≈ 0.99997 at
1550 nm. Figure 1(b) shows an image from a low-cost USB microscope, highlighting
the visible meniscus that appears the moment the tip is immersed and etching begins.
During the etch process, we monitor “off-band” (1310 nm) light reflected from the
coating, which provides a high-contrast interferometric signal (blue data in Fig. 1(c)) ex-
hibiting distinctive features associated with each layer. During Ta2O5 etches (40 nm/min),

2


Immersed
Fiber Tip

125 μm

(b)

Reflection 
PDs

WDM

50:50 
Splitter

Reference 
PDs

Acid 
Beaker

Fiber 
Mirror

1310 nm

1550 nm

(a)

WDM

WDM

(c)

 
Immerse
Rinse
 

Nominal

Adjusted

Meniscus

Reflected Power Fraction

1310 nm
Reflected
Image

Time (min)

Figure 1: Etch technique. (a) Optical circuit. “Off-band” light (1310 nm, blue)
and stopband light (1550 nm, red) is combined with a wavelength division mul-
tiplexer (WDM) and split (50:50) between “reference” photodiodes (PD) and the
fiber mirror. The mirror is immersed in acid (Transene Co. Tantalum Etchant 111
NHO3 25-40% by weight, HF 5-15%, deionized water 35-70%), and reflected 1310-
nm light provides an interferometric record of the etch. (b) Fiber mirror touching
the solution. A meniscus indicates the moment of contact. (c) Measured reflected
off-band power, normalized by the 10 mW incident on the fiber mirror (blue) during
a continuous etch. Small oscillations prior to immersion at 6.5 min arise from inter-
ference with the liquid surface. Once immersed, etching of the Ta2O5 layer begins
at a rate of ∼ 40 nm/min, evidenced by a slowly evolving segment of a sinusoid
until 12 min. The SiO2 layer then etches ∼ 20 times faster, appearing as a rapidly
evolving sinusoid, and the process repeats, shaded regions highlight Ta2O5 etching.
Fluctuations after 38 min correspond to interference from rinsing the fiber. A total
of six bilayers are etched. The green dashed curve shows the predicted behavior us-
ing the coating company specifications and refractive indices 2.0893 for Ta2O5 and
1.4662 for SiO2 at 1310 nm [12] (via refractiveindex.info), and the orange dashed
curve shows the prediction when these are increased by 0.7% and 1.2%, respectively.
Note the raw data are vertically scaled by 1.12 to match the model, consistent with
the ∼ 10% uncertainty in our circuit’s overall optical losses.

we observe a slowly evolving fringe (e.g., minutes 7-12), and during the SiO2 etch
(800 nm/min), we observe a rapidly evolving fringe (e.g., the cusp near minute 12).
Between layers, the sudden change in the etch rate appears as a discontinuity in the
fringe slope. We also observe comparatively small fringes from interference between
reflections from the fiber tip and liquid surface before and after immersion. To stop
the etch, we withdraw the fiber tip while running deionized water down its length; and
then (without allowing it to dry) immerse it in DI water, and finish with an isopropyl
rinse (this produces additional “noise” in our monitor).
In Figure
1(c) we also compare our measurements to a one-dimensional transfer
matrix model [13]. Using layer parameters specified by the coating company (dashed
green), the agreement is poor, but if we increase the optical depths of Ta2O5 and
SiO2 by 0.7% and 1.2% respectively, the model prediction changes dramatically, and
the agreement is compelling. In addition to building confidence in our interpretation,
this exercise provides a refined model of our coating for other experiments involving
these mirrors.

3


As shown in Fig. 1(a), we simultaneously monitor reflected stopband light, which
provides an indication that the mirror is still intact. Mostly this is a relic from initial
attempts with HF solutions that destroyed the fibers before etching the first Ta2O5 layer;
if the coating falls off, this signal suddenly drops to few percent of its original value, an
event that is not as obvious in the monitored off-band light.

125 μm

50:50 
Splitter
Flat 
Mirror
Fiber 
Mirror
1515 nm

1550 nm

(a)

Cavity 
Reflection PD

Monitor PD

Circulator

L

(b)

1550 nm

Normalized Reflection

Figure 2: Fabry-P´erot characterization. (a) “Vernier” optical circuit used to repro-
ducibly position a fiber mirror near a flat mirror and measure cavity finesse. Light
from 1550 nm and 1515 nm sources is combined at a 50:50 splitter and sent through
a circulator to the mirror. Fiber paddles (not shown) between the splitter and cir-
culator select a single polarization mode of the cavity. Reflected light collected by
a photodiode (PD) exhibits a dip (see (b)) when the cavity length is swept through
resonance with either wavelength.
The cavity is resonant with both wavelengths
when L = 33.3 µm, and from that location we count 1550 nm resonances until
L = 6.2 µm, where the finesse saturates. The inset shows an unetched fiber (and its
reflection). (b) Reflected power at 1550 nm (symbols) normalized by the off-resonant
value (0.86 mW incident on the fiber mirror, 0.43 mW collected) and fit to a Fano
function (solid curve) [14] used to extract a resonance linewidth of 8.3 ± 0.5 pm,
corresponding to finesse of 93, 400±500; statistical errors here are limited by sweep-
to-sweep variations due to stage vibrations. Repeatedly mounting the fiber mirror
causes the measured finesse to vary by ±3000, likely due to the cavity mode probing
different regions of the flat mirror [15].

We characterize the mirror performance by measuring the finesse of a Fabry-P´erot
cavity comprising the etched fiber mirror and a flat mirror having the same (unetched)
coating. Our fiber dimples have radius of curvature ∼ 300 µm, and effective mirror
diameters ∼ 30 µm, causing detrimental “clipping” losses when the cavity mode diam-
eter is too large at the fiber mirror surface [16]. For the cavity finesse to be limited
by coating properties, the cavity length L should be smaller than 10 µm in our case.
To achieve this, we employ a dual-wavelength “Vernier” system (Fig. 2(a)) capable of
repeatably creating microns-long cavities of known L. We shine two lasers having dif-
ferent wavelengths (1550 nm and 1515 nm) within the coating stopband, and monitor
the reflected power while varying cavity length. When the cavity is resonant with either
wavelength, we observe a dip (“typical” sweep in Fig. 2(b)). Both lasers are resonant
when L = 33.3 µm (overlapping dips), and from there we reduce L while counting
1550 nm resonances to achieve the desired length. Throughout this process, L is con-
tinuously swept using the flat mirror’s mount (POLARIS-K1S3P), which has integrated

4


piezoelectric actuators; we recommend a sinusoidal waveform (∼ 20 Hz for us), which
minimizes impulse-driven vibrations.
The fiber mirror resides in a clamp mounted upon a rigid single-axis stage (Luminos
model I1000). Once the desired cavity length (L = 6.2 µm) is achieved, we tune the
flat mirror angle by hand to maximize the finesse. After each adjustment, which also
changes the cavity length, L is returned to 6.2 µm using the fiber mirror’s stage. It is
critical to iteratively repeat this procedure until the maximum finesse is achieved, or
else the results are neither reproducible nor well-matched with theory [17].
Ultimately, we find a nominal cavity finesse of 92, 000 ± 3, 000 at L = 6.2 µm,
consistent with the coating company’s specified 25 ppm transmission and 10 ppm losses.

3
Iteratively Tuned Coating

We now show it is straightforward to iteratively remove multiple bilayers without in-
troducing significant optical losses.
Figure 3(a) shows the reflected off-band power
measured over the course of six separate bilayer etches, with the time axis roughly
corresponding to the total time in or near the etchant. Within seconds of finishing a
SiO2 layer, we stop the etch in order to measure finesse.
The teal symbols in Fig. 3(b) show the finesse measured after each etch. They do
not lie exactly on integer numbers of bilayers removed (x-axis) because we erred on the
side of slightly over-etching somewhat into the Ta2O5 layer. Under certain conditions
(e.g., between bilayers 5 and 6) it is more difficult to identify the transition to a new
material; if this is an important issue, it can be mitigated with a second off-band monitor
wavelength. The uncertainties associated with our estimates of layer transition points,
etch rates, and finesse are smaller than the symbols in Fig. 3(b). The violet curve
shows the finesse predicted using a 1D transfer matrix model, assuming 10 ppm losses
(modeled as a loss layer at the mirror surface [18]) and layer thicknesses specified by
the coating company; in this case, modifying the optical depths by a few percent does
not significantly impact this result.
Inset optical images in Fig. 3(b) show the fiber tip at each stage. Initially, the
fiber diameter is 125 µm, plus a few microns of “candy” coating originally deposited
on the sidewall. The first bilayer etch fully removes it, and the useful mirror surface
is confined to a ∼100-µm-wide pedestal. As more bilayers are removed, the pedestal
becomes narrower and taller (an eventual limit on the number of bilayers that can
be removed from a fiber mirror), while the cladding diameter shrinks due to sidewall
etching from the solution and vapor above it. After six bilayers are removed, the fiber
exhibits a tapered profile, widening from 95 µm at the tip to its nominal value over a
scale of millimeters. The bottom electron microscope image shows the final fiber end in
more detail. The surface appears approximately flat with no obvious edge bur, allowing
for the creation of microns-long cavities.

5


Reflected Fraction

1
2
3
4
6

5

0

Fiber 
Leaves
Acid
Fiber 
Enters
Acid 
 

 

30 μm

(i)(ii)
(iii)

(c)

(b)

(a)

(iv)

QS

Lab

0
1
2

3

4
5
6

Figure 3: Iteratively tuning finesse. (a) Normalized reflected off-band power for six
bilayer etches. Each etch is stopped shortly after the SiO2 layer is removed. Integers
(0-6) indicate the number of bilayers removed. Inset shows the “typical” interference
associated with removing, rinsing, and submerging the fiber. (b) Measured (teal)
and predicted (violet) finesse as a function of bilayers removed. Uncertainties are
smaller than the symbols, but all measurements lie within two standard deviations
of the model, which includes no losses introduced by the etch. Inset images show
the fiber tip at each stage. Initially, the diameter (white arrowheads in image 0) is
125 µm plus a few microns of “candy” coating on the sidewall that is completely
removed with the first bilayer etch. Etching further narrows the fiber and confines
the mirror surface to a pedestal of reduced diameter. (c) Electron microscope image
of fiber tip (left) after the sixth bilayer is removed. Right-hand image shows the
tapered etch profile resulting from vapor etching above the solution, with diameters
(i) 95 µm, (ii) 98.5 µm after 75 µm, and (iii) 105 µm a distance 1.35 mm from the
tip. At the expense of achievable cavity finesse, chalk (iv) may be optionally applied
to increase tip traction during impact.
Shaded regions in (a) and (b) highlight
Ta2O5 etching.

4
Conclusions

We presented a simple, cost-effective etching technique for removing individual dielectric
layers from a Ta2O5/SiO2 dielectric coating. Importantly, this technique introduces no
observable optical losses to a fiber mirror, as measured in a Fabry-P´erot cavity up to
finesse ∼50,000. For the specific case of fiber mirrors, vapor etching above the solution
produces a “pool cue” profile that we suspect can be tuned with a combination of

6


References

surfactants (e.g., 3M Novec 4200 Electronic Surfactant), controlled gas flow, and / or
protective layers applied to the cladding. Additionally, we find that a single bilayer
etch eliminates the unwanted sidewall coating, which may facilitate their use in tight-
tolerance ferrules.
We find that etchants involving only HF destroy the cladding before the first
Ta2O5 layer is removed, but, due to this high selectivity, these solutions could be used
as a finishing step to precisely end the etch at the Ta2O5 surface, as in Ref. [10]. We
furthermore expect one can achieve selectivities between this extreme and the 1:20 by
diluting the Ta etchant with an HF solution.
The above measurement system is sufficient for our needs, but we can suggest a few
improvements. First, multiple off-band wavelengths (in the ultimate limit, white light
illumination with a spectrometer) would improve the ability to detect layer transitions.
Second, we note that lasers are not strictly required, especially for coatings having only
a few layers; a reasonably coherent LED source may suffice.
Finally, we reiterate the sensitivity of the off-band fringes to small changes in the
optical depths of the layers, as shown in Fig. 1(c), and suggest that performing this
simple etch on a sacrificial optic may also serve to provide valuable calibration data for
a given coating run.

Funding

NSERC (RGPIN 2018-05635); CFI (228130,36423); CRC (235060); INTRIQ; Centre
for the Physics of Materials at McGill.

Acknowledgments

We thank Zhao Lu and Alireza H. Mesgar for useful discussions regarding etchants and
safety protocols. SB and VD acknowledge support from FRQNT-B2 scholarships.

Disclosures

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References

[1] H. A. Macleod, Thin-Film Optical Filters, Fifth Edition (CRC Press, 2017).

[2] H. Walther, B. T. H. Varcoe, B.-G. Englert,
and T. Becker, “Cavity quantum
electrodynamics,” Rep. Prog. in Phys. 69, 1325 (2006).

[3] A. Reiserer and G. Rempe, “Cavity-based quantum networks with single atoms
and optical photons,” Rev. Modern Phys. 87, 1379 (2015).

[4] D. Riedel, I. S¨ollner, B. J. Shields, S. Starosielec, P. Appel, E. Neu, P. Maletinsky,
and R. J. Warburton, “Deterministic enhancement of coherent photon generation

7


References

from a nitrogen-vacancy center in ultrapure diamond,” Phys. Rev. X 7, 031040
(2017).

[5] M. Aspelmeyer, T. J. Kippenberg, and F. Marquardt, “Cavity optomechanics,”

Rev. Modern Phys. 86, 1391 (2014).

[6] L. M. Haffner, R. J. Dettmar, J. E. Beckman, K. Wood, J. D. Slavin, C. Gi-
ammanco, G. J. Madsen, A. Zurita,
and R. J. Reynolds, “The warm ionized
medium in spiral galaxies,” Rev. Modern Phys. 81, 969 (2009).

[7] B. Abbott and LIGO-collaboration, “Observation of Gravitational Waves from a
Binary Black Hole Merger,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 061102 (2016).

[8] K. R. Williams, K. Gupta,
and M. Wasilik, “Etch rates for micromachining
processing-Part II,” Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems 12, 761 (2003).

[9] T. Purdy and D. Stamper-Kurn, “Integrating cavity quantum electrodynamics
and ultracold-atom chips with on-chip dielectric mirrors and temperature stabi-
lization,” Appl. Phys. B 90, 401 (2008).

[10] T. Purdy, Cavity QED with Ultracold Atoms on an Atom Chip, Ph.D. thesis, Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley (2009).

[11] D. Hunger, T. Steinmetz, Y. Colombe, C. Deutsch, T. W. H¨ansch, and J. Reichel,
“A fiber Fabry-Perot cavity with high finesse,” New J. Phys. 12, 65038 (2010).

[12] L. Gao, F. Lemarchand,
and M. Lequime, “Exploitation of multiple incidences
spectrometric measurements for thin film reverse engineering,” Optics Express 20,
15734 (2012).

[13] C. Reinhardt, Ultralow-Noise Silicon Nitride Trampoline Resonators for Sensing
and Optomechanics, Ph.D. thesis, McGill University (2017).

[14] E. Janitz, M. Ruf, M. Dimock, A. Bourassa, J. Sankey, and L. Childress, “Fabry-
Perot microcavity for diamond-based photonics,” Phys. Rev. A 92, 043844 (2015).

[15] J. Benedikter, T. Moosmayer, M. Mader, T. HÃĳmmer,
and D. Hunger,
“Transverse-mode coupling effects in scanning cavity microscopy,” New Journal
of Physics 21, 103029 (2019).

[16] J. Benedikter, T. H¨ummer, M. Mader, B. Schlederer, J. Reichel, T. W. H¨ansch,
and D. Hunger, “Transverse-mode coupling and diffraction loss in tunable Fabry-
P´erot microcavities,” New J. Phys. 17, 053051 (2015).

[17] We suggest incorporating a real-time peak fitter into the acquisition system
(Python code available upon request).

[18] C. Stambaugh, H. Xu, U. Kemiktarak, J. Taylor, and J. Lawall, “From membrane-
in-the-middle to mirror-in-the-middle with a high-reflectivity sub-wavelength grat-
ing,” Annalen der Physik 527, 81 (2015).

8


