1

Charged particle guiding and beam splitting with auto-ponderomotive potentials on a chip

Robert Zimmermann1, Michael Seidling1, Peter Hommelhoff1

1Department Physik, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Staudtstraße 1, 91058 Erlangen, Germany

We report guiding and manipulation of charged particle beams by means of electrostatic optics based on a principle similar to the electrodynamic 
Paul trap. We use hundreds of electrodes fabricated on planar substrates and supplied with static voltages to create a ponderomotive potential 
for charged particles in motion. Shape and strength of the potential can be locally tailored by the electrodes’ layout and the applied voltages, 
enabling the control of charged particle beams within precisely engineered effective potentials. We demonstrate guiding of electrons and ions for 
a large range of energies (from 20 to 5000 eV) and masses (5 ⋅ 10−4 to 131 atomic mass units) as well as electron beam splitting as a proof-of-
concept for more complex beam manipulation. Simultaneous confinement of charged particles with different masses is possible, as well as guiding 
of electrons with energies in the keV regime, and the creation of highly customizable potential landscapes, which is all hard to impossible with 
conventional electrodynamic Paul traps.

FIG. 1. Principle of auto-ponderomotive guiding. (a) When a 
beam of charged particles with velocity 𝑣𝑧 (green arrow) is injected 
into a structure consisting of electrostatic electrodes with spatially 
periodic voltages, the charged particle beam will be subjected to the 
equivalent transverse restoring force as charged particles in a linear 
electrodynamic trap with the same geometry but with unsegmented 
electrodes as shown in (b). This is because the spatially periodic 
electrostatic quadrupole field with period length LP leads to an alter-
nating field with the periodicity 𝑇𝑃 = 𝐿𝑃/𝑣𝑧 in the rest frame of the 
moving particles (c). Like in a linear Paul trap, the charged particles 
experience a time-averaged harmonic pseudopotential, the pondero-
motive potential, resulting in a restoring force towards the center-
line. (d) The pseudopotential Ψ of both linear trap realizations 
shown in (a) and (b) can be made identical. R represents the elec-
trodes’ minimal distance from the guide’s center.

The invention of radio frequency ion traps – Paul traps – 70 
years ago set the foundation for precision mass spectrometry, 
ion trapping and cooling, and ion-based quantum computing
[1-5]. These electrodynamic traps are based on the confining 
time-averaged forces exerted on charged particles by alternat-
ing electric fields [6]. In the following, we describe the elec-
trostatic version of the electrodynamic Paul trap that dramat-
ically expands the range of trapping parameters while main-
taining the same operation principle. These devices can (un-
like conventional electrodynamic Paul traps) simultaneously 
confine charged particles with vastly different masses in 
highly customizable potential landscapes. Importantly, the 
applicable electron energies for these new structures are high 
enough that they can be used in combination with a standard 
electron microscope as demonstrated in the electron beam 
splitting experiment below.

FIG. 2. Auto-ponderomotive S-curved guide. (a) A beam of 
charged particles with charge 𝑄 and velocity 𝑣𝑧 is injected into a 
guiding structure consisting of two planar chips facing each other 
with a separation of 1 mm. The chips hold electrodes to which elec-
trostatic potentials +𝑈𝐷𝐶 (blue) and −𝑈𝐷𝐶 (red) are applied. Their 
polarity varies periodically along the structure with the period length
𝐿𝑃 leading to the creation of the guiding pseudopotential for propa-
gating electrons. (b) Simulation of the ponderomotive potential in a 
cut-plane transverse to the beam for electrons with 𝑈𝐷𝐶 = 100 V 
and 𝑈𝐴 = 1 kV. The small ellipticity is due to the broken circular 
symmetry of the planar chips. (c) The electrodes on the chips define 
an S-curve that guides the particles so that they are laterally dis-
placed. The particles are detected by a microchannel plate (MCP) 
detector 1 cm behind the structure. For illustration, only the bottom 
chip 1 is shown in full detail. Chip 2 has the mirrored electrode lay-
out but with inverted polarity as shown in (a). The detector signal of 
guided particles is highlighted by a dashed purple circle. A picture 
of the front and back of the upper chip is displayed in the Supple-
mentary Material in Fig. S2 on page 5.

In our experiment, a charged particle beam with well-defined 
forward velocity is created and injected into a structure con-
sisting of segmented electrodes with spatially alternating DC 
(direct current) voltages, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Like for mag-
netic undulators or strong focusing structures in particle ac-
celerators [7], the electrostatic potential is transformed into 
an alternating potential in the rest frame of the moving parti-
cles and, thus, the particles are subjected to the same restoring 
transverse force as they are in a conventional linear Paul trap 
with AC voltages on non-segmented electrodes.


2

FIG. 3. Auto-ponderomotive guiding of various species of charged particles. (a), (b) Detector images of unguided electron (a) and helium ion 
(b) beams with electrodes grounded (𝑈𝐷𝐶 = 0 V).  (c), (d) With charged electrodes (𝑈𝐷𝐶 = 580 V), both beams are guided and are measured at x = 
5.9 mm (electrons) and x = 6.1 mm (He-ions), almost exactly at the expected position of x = 5.8 mm. The barely visible curl structure results from 
spiraling trajectories of off-centrally injected particles. The detector signal of helium ions is expected to be the vertically mirrored image of the 
electron signal, due to the opposite sign of their charge, which can just be discerned. (e), (g) Guiding stability: normalized intensity of guided 
electrons (e) and helium ions (g) on the MCP detector. For each acceleration voltage 𝑈𝐴, the applied electrode voltage 𝑈𝐷𝐶 was scanned from 0-1 
kV and the guiding signal of each scan was normalized to its maximum value. For comparison with electrodynamic traps, the corresponding 
driving frequency and AC power (impedance of 50 Ω) are given on the secondary axes (blue). Black lines corresponding to operation at 𝑞 = 0.4 
and 𝑞 = 0.9 are drawn in (e) and (g) as a guide to the eye. Even though their masses differ by more than five orders of magnitude, guiding starts 
for all particles at 𝑞 = 0.4 and no guiding is observed for 𝑞-values above 0.9, perfectly matching our particle tracking results. Because not all 
kinetic energies were possible to realize due to the source, some regions are left white. (f) Magnified image of a part of (e) showing that electrons 
are guided for kinetic energies as low as 20 eV, which was the lowest energy we could achieve with our source.

Since the driving frequency generating this ponderomotive 
force originates from the particles’ forward velocity, we call 
the resulting effective potential “auto-ponderomotive”. The 
resulting transverse forces are identical to those in a linear 
Paul trap. Hence, the stability of the trajectories of the 
charged particles is described by the two well-known dimen-
sionless stability parameters 𝑎 and 𝑞 [1]. For non-relativistic 
particles, these parameters depend only on the amplitude of
the applied voltages, the particle acceleration voltage 𝑈𝐴 and 
the guide’s geometry. Yet, in stark contrast to electrodynamic 
traps, the stability parameters are independent of the charge-
to-mass ratio here (the derivation is shown in the Supplemen-
tary Material on page 5). As a proof of concept, we present 
two auto-ponderomotive structures: One to show auto-pon-
deromotive guiding over a curved path and another one for 
auto-ponderomotive beam splitting.

Fig. 2 shows the design of a guiding structure and the simu-
lation of the auto-ponderomotive potential Ψ. 84 electrodes 
are printed on each of the two chips and define an S-curve 
with a radius of curvature of 𝑅𝐾= 0.535 m, such that the out-
put of the guide is laterally displaced by 5.8 mm with respect 
to its input. Static voltages +𝑈𝐷𝐶 (blue) and -𝑈𝐷𝐶 (red) are 

applied on the electrodes forming a system of quadrupole 
lenses with spatially periodic polarity (period length 𝐿𝑃=5.6 
mm). This guide represents the electrostatic equivalent to the 
curved version of a conventional linear Paul trap with just an 
alternating potential applied (𝑎 = 0) [8]. The stability is there-

fore only determined by the parameter 𝑞 =

η⋅𝐿𝑃

2 ⋅𝑈𝐷𝐶

2π2⋅𝑅2⋅|𝑈𝐴| (the 

derivation is shown in the Supplementary Material on page 
5). The geometric factor 𝜂 = 0.61 accounts for deviations 
from the ideal hyperbolic electrode geometry and from the 
perfectly sinusoidal form of the electric field [9]. 𝑅 = 0.5 mm 
is the distance from the ponderomotive potential minimum to 
the chip surface. 

The charged particle beams are unguided when the electrodes 
are grounded, as shown in the detector images for electrons 
in Fig. 3(a) and for helium ions in Fig. 3(b). When voltages 
are applied to the electrodes, guiding is observed for electrons
[Fig. 3(c)], as well as helium ions [Fig. 3(d)], evidenced by a 
shifted detector signal at the expected guide exit position. In 
contrast to the unguided beams, the position of the guided
beams on the detector remains unchanged even when magnets 
(~ 1 mT) are brought close to the vacuum chamber. 


3

FIG. 4. Auto-ponderomotive beam splitting on chip. (a) The electrode layout is chosen such that the minimum of the ponderomotive potential 
is continuously split into two minima separated by 2.3 mm at the chip end. To illustrate this splitting, we plot the isopotential surface of Ψ = 1 eV 
for an electron beam with 𝑈𝐴 = 800 V and 𝑈𝐷𝐶 = 210 V (transparent blue region). Simulated ponderomotive potential at the splitter’s input (1), 
center (2) and output (3) are shown in the green dashed boxes. Clearly, the initially single central minimum splits continuously into two central 
minima as the particle propagates down the structure. The splitter consists of two chips facing each other with a separation of 1 mm. For illustration, 
only the lower chip is shown. The upper chip 2 has the same electrode layout but with inverted polarity. (b) Detector image of an unguided electron 
beam (𝑈𝐷𝐶 = 0V). (c) Detector image of a split electron beam. Two spots are visible with a faint signal of lost electrons in between. The spot 
distance of 4.2 mm is expected given the opening angle of the split isopotential channels and the detector distance of 2.4 cm. (d) Top view of the 
beam splitter chip. The layout consists of three rows of electrodes. The width of the central electrodes widens along the chip from 0.3 to 2.2 mm 
(not to scale for illustration, see Fig. S3 in the Supplementary Material for a picture of the chip).

To characterize the guiding stability, we measure the guided
number of particles for a range of particle beam energies and 
electrode voltages. For each 𝑈𝐴, the applied 𝑈𝐷𝐶 was scanned 
from 0-1 kV. We observe guiding for a large energy range 
from 20 eV to 4000 eV for electrons [Fig. 3(e) and 3(f)] and 
from 800 eV to 5000 eV for helium ions [Fig. 3(g)]. Even 
though there are five orders of magnitude difference in the 
masses, guiding is observed for the same ratios of the applied 
voltages 𝑈𝐷𝐶/|𝑈𝐴|, corresponding to 𝑞 values between 0.4 
and 0.9. The lower border in 𝑞 is due to the curvature of the 
guide. Since the restoring force of this potential depends on 𝑞, 
a finite value of 𝑞 ≥ 0.39 is needed to compensate the cen-
trifugal force resulting from the curves (see the Supplemen-
tary Material), matching perfectly the experimentally ob-
served minimum 𝑞 ≅ 0.4. The upper border corresponds sim-
ilarly well to the maximum 𝑞 value of 0.91 in the first stabil-
ity region of linear Paul traps [1]. The measurement was re-
peated for other noble gas ions (neon, argon, krypton, xenon) 
yielding similar results (displayed in the Supplementary Ma-
terial in Fig. S4 on page 6). For comparison with radio fre-
quency Paul traps, the corresponding driving frequencies and 
AC powers are given on the secondary axes in Fig. 3(c) and 
3(e). Using electrons, the auto-ponderomotive design easily 
generates an apparent alternating field with driving frequen-
cies in the gigahertz range with tens of kilowatts of AC 
power, which is virtually impossible to feed or maintain on 
an electrodynamic chip for thermal load reasons [8,10].

Next to this most versatile guiding demonstration, we now 
show that more complex potential landscapes can be realized 
based on the auto-ponderomotive principle. As an example, 
we show the design of an auto-ponderomotive beam splitter 
in Fig. 4. Here, the electrode layout of each chip consists of 
270 electrodes forming three rows. Electrostatic voltages 
+𝑈𝐷𝐶 (blue) and -𝑈𝐷𝐶 (red) are applied, forming a system of 
multipolar lenses with spatially periodic polarity with a 

period length 𝐿𝑃 = 2.4 mm. Moving along 𝑧, the width of the 
central electrodes widens (top view of the electrode layout is 
shown in Fig. 4(d). This splits the initial central minimum of 
the ponderomotive potential into two minima, separated by 
2.3 mm. A charged particle beam fed into the single central 
minimum at the structure input splits transversely into two 
beams following smoothly the auto-ponderomotive potential. 
This is shown in Fig. 4(c) for an electron beam (of a scanning 
electron microscope) as two distinct beam spots [unguided 
beam displayed in Fig. 4(b)]. A more detailed investigation 
of the beam splitter will be subject to forthcoming work. 

The S-curved guide and the beam splitter presented here rep-
resent examples of what we call auto-ponderomotive engi-
neering: A powerful method to create a custom-made pon-
deromotive potential landscape controlled by the geometry 
and arrangement of lithographically produced electrodes on a 
chip. It is noteworthy that the measured energy range for 
guided electrons from 20 to 4000 eV was limited by magnetic 
stray fields in the source for small beam energies and by 
sparking between the electrodes for large energies; we expect 
to expand the range from ~1 to at least 10 000 eV by shielding 
environmental magnetic fields and by using an optimized 
electrode layout for higher breakdown voltage. Because these 
structures work independently of the specific charge and mass 
of ions, any ion may be guided, hence simultaneous transport 
and trapping of various species of charged particles at well-
defined velocities is possible, which might open up new pos-
sibilities to cold and collision chemistry [11-13]. Since the 
sensitivity of the charge-to-mass ratio in their electrodynamic 
counterparts is exchanged by a sensitivity on acceleration 
voltage, these structures work as energy filters when operated 
in analogy to a mass spectrometer [1]. Furthermore, we find 
from particle tracking simulations that the addition of 
(switchable) electron mirrors at both guide ends will allow the 
stable confinement of particles in three dimensions.


4

FIG. S1. Picture of the electron-optical bench and charged particle gun. The top chip has been removed for illustration purposes. All compo-
nents are attached to the electron-optical bench with titanium clamps. The last aperture before the chip with a diameter of 400 µm limits the size 
and the divergence of the beam. The ruby balls on the chip ensure proper alignment of the two chips.

With the electrodes of the shown structures miniaturized to 
the micrometer scale, driving frequencies close to the te-
rahertz (1012 Hz) range can be achieved for electrons (see the 
Supplementary Material on page 7). This not only enters a 
new frequency range bridging the gap between microwave 
and optical frequencies, for which ponderomotive forces have 
been utilized [14-17], but it also facilitates extremely large 
trapping frequencies that may herald a new arena for quan-
tum optics experiments and state-selective applications 
[18] with free electrons.

Supplementary Material

1. Charged particle gun, electron-optical bench and de-
tector

A compact system consisting of a tungsten needle tip, ex-
tractor, four deflectors and two grounded apertures serves as 
a source of charged particles. The final aperture with a di-
ameter of 400 µm limits the size and the divergence of the 
beam. The strong fields between the tungsten needle tip and 
the extractor allow electron field emission [19] as well as
ionization of gas molecules [20], depending on the polarity 
of the applied acceleration voltage. Tips of varying sharp-
ness and distance to extractor were used to realize particle 
beams of various energies. For the electron beam splitting 
experiment, a scanning electron microscope (Philips XL30 
SEM), which illuminated a spot (<1 µm) at the input, is used 
as the electron source. All components are pre-aligned and 
fixed rigidly onto a 25 cm long electron-optical bench con-
sisting of two straight ceramic rods. A picture of the setup is 
displayed in Fig. S1. The setup was placed into a vacuum 
chamber and the charged particles are detected with a micro-
channel plate (MCP) detector, which is placed 1 cm behind 
the S-curved guide (2.4 cm after the beam splitter). For the 
auto-ponderomotive guiding experiment, the measured 

intensity within a 1 mm wide square at point 𝑥 = 5.8 mm 
and 𝑦 = 0 mm on the detector is taken as the signal of the 
guided charged particles.

2. Layout of the S-curved guide

The S-curved guide consists of two planar chips facing each 
other with a separation of 1 mm. They are fabricated by a 
standard printed circuit board process on FR4 substrates 
with electrodes made from gold-plated copper. The chips 
have a total length of 11.3 cm and each chip consists of 84 
electrodes. The electrodes define an S-curve with a radius of 
curvature of 𝑅𝐾 = 0.535 m, such that the output of the guide 
is laterally displaced by 5.8 mm with respect to its input. 
The electrodes have a length of 1.3 mm and are 1.4 mm 
wide. The gap between the electrodes is 100 µm wide. The 
electrode layout of one of the two chips is displayed in Fig.
2 in the main text. The other chip has the mirrored electrode 
layout but with opposite polarity. Both chips have counter-
sinks for ruby balls which serve to align the chips. The depth 
of the countersinks and the diameter of the ruby balls are 
chosen such that the chips are separated by 1 mm. The S-
curved guide can be fixed and aligned to the electron-optical 
bench with a holder. A picture of the upper chip’s front and 
back are shown in Fig. S2.

3. Layout of the beam splitter

The beam splitter consists of two planar chips facing each 
other with a separation of 1 mm. They are fabricated by a 
standard printed circuit board process on FR4 substrates 
with electrodes made from gold-plated copper. The chips 
have a total length of 11.3 cm and each chip consists of 270 
electrodes arranged in three rows. The electrodes have a 
length of 0.55 mm and the gap between the electrodes is 50 
µm wide. 


5

FIG. S2. Front (a) and back (b) of the S-curved guide’s upper chip. Meandering electrodes on the back contact the electrodes on the front with 
plated through-holes (vias) resulting in spatially periodic voltages. The upper chip is placed above the lower chip such that their front sides are
facing each other. Countersinks for ruby balls and holes for screws are drilled for alignment and fixation.

The outer electrodes have a width of 1.4 mm, while the 
width of the inner electrodes changes along the splitter from 
0.3 mm to 2.2 mm. A picture of the electrode layout of one 
of the two chips is displayed in Fig. S3. The other chip has 
the mirrored electrode layout but with opposite polarity. 
Alignment and mounting of the chips are done as for the S-
curved guides described above. 

4. Derivation of the non-relativistic and auto-pondero-
motive formula of the parameter 𝒒

The stability parameter 𝑞 for a linear Paul trap (with Φ1 =
𝑈𝐴𝐶 cos Ω𝑡 and Φ2 = −Φ1 applied to adjacent rod elec-
trodes) is given by 𝑞 =

2𝑄⋅2⋅𝑈𝐴𝐶
𝑀⋅𝑅2Ω2 with 

𝑄

𝑀 the charge-to-mass 

ratio of the charged particles, 𝑅 the minimal electrodes’ dis-
tance to the guide center, 𝑈𝐴𝐶 the amplitude of the 

alternating potential and Ω the driving angular frequency [1].
To derive the expression of 𝑞 for auto-ponderomotive 
guides, one replaces the driving frequency Ω with 2π ⋅

𝑣𝑧
𝐿𝑝. 

Here, 𝑣𝑧 is the velocity of the charged particles in the beam 
and 𝐿𝑃 the period length of the auto-ponderomotive struc-
ture. The velocity depends on the acceleration voltage 𝑈𝐴 as 
𝑣𝑧 = √2 ⋅ 𝑄𝑈𝐴/𝑀. In our case, 𝑈𝐴𝐶 must be replaced by 

𝑈𝐷𝐶. Hence, 𝑞 =

𝐿𝑃

2 ⋅𝑈𝐷𝐶

2π2⋅𝑅2⋅𝑈𝐴. Because we use planar elec-

trodes, a geometric factor η needs to be included to describe 
the effective quadrupole strength of the used geometry [9]. 

Thus, the stability parameter is corrected to 𝑞 =

η⋅ 𝐿P

2⋅𝑈𝐷𝐶

2π2⋅𝑅2⋅𝑈𝐴

and is valid for non-relativistic particles (𝑣𝑧 ≪ speed of light 
c). The sign of 𝑞 has no effect on the stability, therefore we 
only calculate the absolute value. An extension for relativ-
istic velocities can be derived by including length contrac-
tion of 𝐿𝑃 and the Lorentz transformation of the electric 
field, but resulting expression is only independent of the 

particle’s charge 𝑄 and rest mass 𝑀0 in the limiting cases of 
relativistically slow and fast particles.

5. Calculating 𝛈 and the harmonic region of the auto-
ponderomotive potential

The ponderomotive potential is calculated as Ψ =

𝑄2〈𝐸2〉

4 𝑀 Ω2

with 〈𝐸2〉 the time-averaged squared electric field. For auto-
ponderomotive structures, 〈𝐸2〉 is calculated by the average 
of the electric field squared along the guide over the period 
length 𝐿𝑃. Compared to the ideal case of hyperbolic elec-
trodes, the field strength of the quadrupole component is re-
duced by a geometric factor η and is attained by a best fit 
from simulation. We obtain η ≈ 0.61 for the guiding struc-
ture presented in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 in the main text. Like in 
any harmonic approximation, the best fit is only valid close 
to the center. The discrepancy is less than 5% for displace-
ments Δ𝑥 ≤ 80 µm from the guiding center and increases 
strongly for larger Δ𝑥.

6. Derivation of the minimum value of 𝒒 for the S-curved 
guiding structure

The harmonic force of the ponderomotive potential 𝐹𝐻 must 
compensate the centrifugal force 𝐹𝑍 to guide the particles in 
a curve with curvature 𝑅𝐾. Stable trajectories are limited to 
the harmonic region of the guide, where the restoring force 
𝐹𝐻 = −∇Ψ = −∇(

1

2 ω2𝑀Δ𝑥2) reads 𝐹𝐻 = ω2𝑀 Δ𝑥 with 

the trapping frequency ω =

𝑞

√8 Ω. The centrifugal force is 

given by the curvature 𝑅𝐾 and the particle’s velocity 𝑣𝑧. De-
manding that 𝐹𝐻 ≥ 𝐹𝑍 leads to the guiding condition 𝑞 ≥

𝐿𝑃⋅√2

π⋅√𝑅𝐾⋅Δ𝑥 resulting in a minimum value of 𝑞 = 0.39 for a 

guiding structure with the geometry presented in this work, 
in excellent agreement with the experimentally observed 
𝑞𝑚𝑖𝑛 for all guided species (see Fig. 3 in the main text and
Fig. S4).


6

FIG. S3. Front of the beam splitter’s chip. 270 electrodes arranged in three rows. The width of the inner electrodes changes along the splitter 
from 0.3 mm to 2.2 mm, while the width of the outer electrodes is 1.4 mm. Countersinks for ruby balls and holes for screws are drilled for alignment 
and fixation. Additional smaller holes are used to ensure good vacuum.

FIG. S4. Auto-ponderomotive guiding of various species of charged particles. (a), (b) The maximum and minimum 𝑞 values (defined as 𝑞 at 
1/e the maximum intensity) for electrons and all used noble gas ions calculated from the detector intensity of the guided charged particles obtained 
by voltage scans (as discussed in the main text around Figure 3). As the guiding signal, the intensity within a 1 mm wide square at point 𝑥 = 5.8
mm and 𝑦 = 0 mm on the detector is taken. Note that the mass and charge-to-mass ratio varies over more than a factor of 200 000, clearly 
demonstrating that auto-ponderomotive potential engineering works independently of them. The measured maximum values of 𝑞 vary stronger 
than the minimum values because guiding becomes more sensitive to imperfect injection for high 𝑞 as the acceptance phase-space for coupling 
the beam into the guide decreases. 


7

7. Miniaturization leads to higher trapping frequency 𝛚

If the geometry of an auto-ponderomotive structure is scaled 
down by a factor of 𝑐𝑔, the period length 𝐿𝑃 and electrode’s 

distance to the centerline 𝑅 are reduced to 𝐿𝑃

′ =

𝐿𝑃
𝑐𝑔 and 𝑅′ =

𝑅

𝑐𝑔. The driving frequency 2π ⋅

𝑣𝑧
𝐿𝑝 increases accordingly to 

Ω′ = Ω ⋅ 𝑐𝑔. Since the stability parameter 𝑞 ∝ 𝐿𝑃

2 /𝑅2 is in-

dependent of 𝑐𝑔, guiding is attained for the same applied 
voltage ratios for all scaling factors 𝑐𝑔 and the trapping fre-
quency ω =

𝑞

√8 Ω increases to ω′ = ω ⋅ 𝑐𝑔. Thus, an elec-

trode layout on the micrometer scale leads to much higher 
trapping frequencies if operated at the same stability param-
eter 𝑞. For example, using a guide with a period length 𝐿𝑃 of 
56 µm (𝑐𝑔~100) (which is straightforward to manufacture)
and an electron beam with a kinetic energy of 1 kV results in 
a driving frequency of Ω = 2π ⋅ 0.33 THz. Operating the 
guide at 𝑞 = 0.3 (𝑈𝐷𝐶 = 77.4 V, well below the breakdown 
voltage of high vacuum) leads to a trapping frequency of 
ω = 2π ⋅ 36 GHz.

8. Extended Data: Auto-ponderomotive guiding for elec-
trons and noble gas ions

Fig. S4 displays the result for all used noble gas ions as dis-
cussed around Fig. 3 in the main text.

References

[1]
W. Paul, in Reviews of modern physics1990), p. 531.

[2]
K. Blaum, Physics Reports 425, 1 (2006).

[3]
D. J. Wineland, in Reviews of Modern Physics2013), p. 
1103.

[4]
E. A. Martinez et al., Nature 534, 516 (2016).

[5]
C. Figgatt, A. Ostrander, N. M. Linke, K. A. 
Landsman, D. Zhu, D. Maslov, and C. Monroe, Nature 
572, 368 (2019).

[6]
L. Landau and E. Lifshitz, in Mechanics. Vol. 1 of: 
Course of Theoretical Physics (Pergamon Press, 
Oxford, 1960), pp. 93.

[7]
E. D. Courant, M. S. Livingston, and H. S. Snyder, 
Physical Review 88, 1190 (1952).

[8]
J. Hoffrogge, R. Fröhlich, M. A. Kasevich, and P. 
Hommelhoff, Physical review letters 106, 193001 
(2011).

[9]
J. H. Wesenberg, Physical Review A 78, 063410 
(2008).

[10] J. Hoffrogge and P. Hommelhoff, New Journal of 

Physics 13, 095012 (2011).

[11] S. Chakrabarty, M. Holz, E. K. Campbell, A. Banerjee, 

D. Gerlich, and J. P. Maier, The journal of physical 
chemistry letters 4, 4051 (2013).

[12] Y.-P. Chang, K. Długołęcki, J. Küpper, D. Rösch, D. 

Wild, and S. Willitsch, Science 342, 98 (2013).

[13] E. K. Campbell, M. Holz, D. Gerlich, and J. P. Maier, 

Nature 523, 322 (2015).

[14] A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. Bjorkholm, and S. Chu, 

Optics letters 11, 288 (1986).

[15] I. Bloch, Nature physics 1, 23 (2005).

[16] A. L’Huillier and P. Balcou, Physical Review Letters 

70, 774 (1993).

[17] O. Schwartz, J. J. Axelrod, S. L. Campbell, C. 

Turnbaugh, R. M. Glaeser, and H. Müller, Nature 
Methods 16, 1016 (2019).

[18] D. Leibfried, R. Blatt, C. Monroe, and D. Wineland, 

Rev. Modern Phys 75, 281 (2003).

[19] A. Crewe, D. Eggenberger, J. Wall, and L. Welter, 

Review of Scientific Instruments 39, 576 (1968).

[20] E. W. Müller, Advances in electronics and electron 

physics 13, 83 (1960).


