Micro-transfer printing high-efficiency GaAs photovoltaic cells onto silicon for wireless 

power applications

Ian Mathews1,*, David Quinn1,*, John Justice1, Agnieszka Gocalinska1, Emanuele Pelucchi1, 

Ruggero Loi1, James O’Callaghan1, and Brian Corbett1,^

1Tyndall National Institute, Lee Maltings, University College Cork, Ireland

* Equal contribution

^ Corresponding author (brian.corbett@tyndall.ie) 

Abstract

Here we report the development of high-efficiency microscale GaAs laser power converters, and 

their successful transfer printing onto silicon substrates, presenting a unique, high power, low-cost 

and integrated power supply solution for implantable electronics, autonomous systems and internet 

of things applications. We present 300 μm diameter single-junction GaAs laser power converters 

and successfully demonstrate the transfer printing of these devices to silicon using a PDMS stamp, 

achieving optical power conversion efficiencies of 48% and 49% under 35 and 71 W/cm2 808 nm 

laser illumination respectively. The transferred devices are coated with ITO to increase current 

spreading and are shown to be capable of handling very high short-circuit current densities up to 

70 A/cm2 under 141 W/cm2 illumination intensity (~1400 Suns), while their open circuit voltage 

reaches 1235 mV, exceeding the values of pre-transfer devices indicating the presence of photon-

recycling. These optical power sources could deliver Watts of power to sensors and systems in

locations where wired power is not an option, while using a massively parallel, scalable, and low-

cost fabrication method for the integration of dissimilar materials and devices. 

Introduction

Micro-transfer printing (μTP) provides a means of monolithically integrating dissimilar materials 

and components on non-native substrates that is scalable, massively parallel and potentially low-

cost [1]. The transfer print process, by combining diverse optical, electronic and other functional 

materials, opens up an enormous range of possibilities for new devices with embedded 

functionality leading to more compact chips and systems for a variety of applications, such as 


telecommunications, smart sensing, biomedical sensing and data storage. For III-V materials and 

devices, anywhere from 1 to 10,000’s of components can be removed from their growth substrates 

and printed systematically and simultaneously on to a chosen substrate, e.g. silicon, with 

automated micron-scale alignment [2]. Micro-transfer printing presents a compelling alternative 

to address the challenge of integrating non-compatible components in large volumes at the 

semiconductor wafer level, providing many advantages over current photovoltaic integration 

processes such as wire-bonding, wafer-bonding and direct growth [3], [4].

There are a wide range of embedded systems, with examples provided in Figure 1, that benefit 

from the integration of dissimilar materials and devices but operate in difficult environments where 

providing electrical power through wiring or batteries is a challenge such as implantable 

biomedical sensors and devices [5], 5G networks [6], where voltage isolation is required such as

for lightning safe wind turbine blade monitoring [7], underwater robotics [8] and many military 

applications including airborne or submerged vehicle charging and satellite or sensor charging in 

hazardous locations [9]. Energy harvesting solutions such as implantable piezo-electrics [10], 

photovoltaics for wireless sensors [11], [12] or subdermal systems [13], [14] and radio-frequency

harvesting [15] have all been demonstrated as power sources for autonomous systems and sensors. 

Optical power transfer is an alternative technology that rather than relying on energy harvested 

from the immediate environment, uses a photonic source such as a laser to send optical power 

either through free space or over an optical fiber to remotely powered autonomous systems. Micro-

transfer printing laser power converters offers many advantages over environmental energy 

harvesting systems including the ability to directly integrate the device with silicon electronics, 

miniaturization of the power supply for microscale systems [16], and the utilization of only the 

few micron thick essential layers of the photovoltaic device and the re-use of the growth substrate 

to reduce cost, as was previously demonstrated for GaAs photovoltaics through epitaxial lift-off  

[17]. In addition, the power supplied by environmental energy harvesters is typically restricted to 

the micro-watt range, limiting the functionality of the autonomous system whereas mm-scale laser 

power converters are capable of supplying Watts of power. Transfer printing micro-PV cells for 

high intensity optical power conversion has been successfully demonstrated for multi-junction 

solar cells under concentrated sunlight where the final microcells had a conversion efficiency of 

43.9% at concentrations exceeding 1,000 Suns (100 W/cm2) [18]. 


Figure 1: A schematic summary of the fabrication and micro transfer printing of on-chip III-V optical power sources 

and the potential applications of the technology including power-over-fiber and free space optical charging.

GaAs photovoltaic cells have been widely studied as laser power converters and currently hold the 

record conversion efficiency of 66.3%, under 150 W/cm2 illumination at a wavelength of 837 nm, 

using a monolithic lattice-matched device with 20 GaAs junctions vertically stacked in series [19]. 

Fafard et al. [19] and Masson et al. [20] have developed these vertical epitaxial heterostructure 

architectures (VESHA) consisting of many thin n-on-p GaAs photovoltaic junctions engineered to 

optimize absorption and current matching between the junctions. This approach requires precise 

epitaxial growth as the junctions are grown in a single crystal with, e.g., the utilization of InGaP 

lattice matched window and back surface field layers. Khvostikov et al. [21] hold the current 

record conversion efficiency for a single junction GaAs based PV converter. They describe a p-

on-n structure with an AlGaAs window and back surface field layers where their final devices 

achieved 60% at a photocurrent density of 5.9 A/cm2 under 809 nm monochromatic illumination

with a fill factor of 83.9% and a Voc of 1.19 V. 

In the rest of this paper, we present the first transfer printing of GaAs photovoltaic 

microcells to silicon for laser power conversion applications. We begin by introducing our micro-

transfer printing process and describe the fabrication of high-efficiency single-junction GaAs laser 

power converters. Transfer printing of these devices is successfully demonstrated using PDMS 


stamps after the release of the device coupons using photoresist tethers and an undercut etch 

process. We then compare the performance of these devices before and after transfer-printing onto 

silicon substrates, with the devices on silicon maintaining higher power conversions at high 

incident power, while their open circuit voltage exceeds the values of pre-transfer devices 

indicating the presence of photon-recycling [22]. Next, using electroluminescence measurements

we describe how coating the transferred devices with an indium-tin oxide lateral conduction layer

increases current spreading and enables them to be capable of handling very high short-circuit 

current densities up to 70 A/cm2. In the final section we describe our optimized optoelectronic 

devices on silicon where the use of an ITO spreading layer requires the optical properties of the 

transferred device stack to be further improved by the addition of an optimized SiN anti-reflection 

coating leading to 5% reflectance at 800 nm, with a peak EQE of 89% at 808 nm, the operating 

wavelength. The devices open circuit voltage reaches 1235 mV and absolute power conversion 

efficiencies of 49%, 48% and 44% are measured under 35, 71 and 141 W/cm2 808 nm laser 

illumination respectively, post transfer printing to silicon.

Results and discussion

Previously, to integrate many materials and components from various substrates onto a single 

platform, serial pick and place assembly operations were considered the primary option. There are 

many potential flaws with these systems. Standard pick and place assembly struggles with small 

(<100 μm edge) and thin-film devices. Modern pick and place assemblies can operate at high rates, 

but with the penalty of a reduction in placement accuracy of components making it a less viable 

option for the integration of state-of-the-art devices as they reduce in size. Micro-transfer printing 

provides a powerful means to heterogeneously integrate many components onto a single target 

wafer. 

For III-V materials, an elastomer stamp is used to pick the few microns thick essential layers of a 

device and print them to a target substrate. An etch release layer is incorporated into the epi-

structure of the device between the substrate and the active epitaxial layers. The release layer is 

designed to be selectively etched with a wet chemical etchant while lithographically defined 

photoresist tethers anchor the active material to the substrate and keep the device suspended above 

the substrate. A computer-controlled elastomer stamp is then used to pick the suspended device 


from the host substrate causing the tethers to fracture at specifically engineered points allowing 

the devices to be printed to a target substrate of choice.

The device fabrication is summarized here and in Figure 2. In this work, a GaAs based PV 

converter was grown on a GaAs wafer by metal organic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) in an 

Aixtron 200 horizontal MOVPE reactor [23] with a p-on-n epi-structure consisting of a thin GaAs 

emitter and thick GaAs base with AlGaAs top and rear current spreading layers – the complete 

layer structure is provided in Table 2 in the Experimental Methods Section. The first step is to 

form the device mesa and front and back electrical contacts as shown in Figure 3 (a). A 500 nm 

thick AlInP etch release layer is provided as the first layer in the epi-structure to allow the undercut 

of the devices with a HCl:H2O 1:1 etch. To enable the systematic release and transfer of the 

devices, a photoresist tethering system was used that allows the etch of the release layer while the 

devices are suspended and held in their original location once undercut. This allows registered pick 

and the print of the devices on to the target silicon substrate with a PDMS elastomer stamp. In 

Figure 3 (b), the remaining ‘broken’ tethers on the GaAs substrate are clearly visible post-transfer 

printing. 

The increased resistance due to the micro-transfer print process must be addressed if the potential 

benefits of transfer printing for PV devices are to be utilized. The resistive non-ohmic path at the 

rear of the devices prevents the current from utilizing the substrate for lateral conduction. In order 

to reduce electrical resistance in this direction, gold germanium nickel (AuGeNi) was evaporated 

on to the rear of the devices during the transfer print process. Devices were picked using a PDMS 

stamp (Figure 3 (c)), the entire PDMS stamp was then placed into a Temescal FC2000 Electron 

Beam evaporator where a thin-film AuGeNi layer was then evaporated onto the rear of the picked 

devices. AuGeNi is known to provide an ohmic contact to n-type GaAs while it allows rapid heat 

dissipation from the device due to gold’s large thermal conductivity (200 W/mK for a 100 nm thin 

film on Si). The devices were then printed on to gold coated silicon with the aid of a hot plate. The 

photoresist was stripped and the printed devices were annealed in a furnace at 350 °C for 15 

minutes. To further remedy the current crowding effects, a 100 nm Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) 

transparent conduction layer was evaporated on the front surface of some devices before transfer 

printing. ITO was chosen at it has low resistivity while also having high transmission in the

infrared wavelength regime (i.e. 808 nm). The undercut, pick, and printing of the GaAs PV cells


was successfully applied to ~500 μm x 500 μm coupons with an array of transferred devices with 

multiple front-contacting schemes shown in Figure 3 (d).

Figure 2: Schematic summary of the device fabrication and micro-transfer printing process including; (a) the initial 

III-V photovoltaic structure grown by metal-organic vapor phase expitaxy on a GaAs substrate, (b) the device mesas 

are formed and the front and back contacts deposited before a photoresist tether system and etch release used to remove 

the AlInP release layer, (c) the devices held by the tethers are released from the growth substrate by mechanically 

picking them with a PDMS stamp and, (d) the devices are printed onto a gold-coated silicon substrate after the device 

back surface is also coated with a Au layer that aids the printing process and reduces lateral resistance in the devices. 

Figure 3: Images of the fabrication and micro-transfer printing process including (a) a fabricated device including 

front and back contacts pre-transfer printing, (b) scanning electron microscopy image of the ‘broken’ resist tethers on 


the GaAs substrate post-device release, (c) the underside of a PDMS stamp with coupons attached post-removal from 

the native GaAs substrate and, (d) a number of laser power converters micro-transfer printed onto silicon.

In this section we compare the illuminated current-voltage characterization of laser power 

converters on-chip (pre-transfer print), on-chip with an ITO current spreading layer, and post-

transfer print to silicon. Given the difference in the optical and electrical structures of these devices 

we compare the normalized fill factor and efficiency versus light intensity in order to analyze 

trends rather than compare results directly – for each device the measurements are normalized to 

the measurements taken at the lowest incident power intensity of 14 W/cm2. 

A fiber-coupled 808 nm multimode laser was used to illuminate the PV devices where the exit 

aperture of the fiber was 200 μm in diameter with a numerical aperture of 0.2. On-chip 

performance with and without an ITO spreading layer are compared to devices with an ITO 

spreading layer and have been transfer printed to gold-coated silicon as outlined in Figure 4. Figure

4 (b) presents the fill factor of each device versus light intensity and shows how standard on-chip 

devices suffer from a significant drop as the limited current spreading in the devices leads to higher 

series resistance at high currents and a steep decline in FF. To address this current spreading issue, 

a 100 nm ITO spreading layer was coated on the top of the devices as described above. The FF

and PCE, shown in Figure 4 (b) & (c), of these on-chip devices now sustain higher performance 

to larger incident power levels maintaining values between 70% – 80% of the 14 W/cm2 value in 

the 30 – 150 W/cm2 range, and FFs above 90% of the 14 W/cm2 value. The Jsc of the devices 

(not-shown), however, is lower than the on-chip devices without ITO owing to the increased 

reflectance and parasitic absorbance caused by the addition of the thin-film layer. Finally, the 

performance of the micro-transfer printed devices was measured and was shown to maintain the 

PCE across the range of light intensities. The FF of the devices drops more than the ITO-coated 

on-chip devices, owing to an increase in resistance, but the boost in Voc observed (Figure 4(d))

leads to higher PCEs across the light intensity range. The transferred devices include the front 

surface ITO and a rear surface AuNiGe spreading layers. The AuNiGe spreading layer also acts as 

a partial rear reflector and increases photon absorption in the devices. This increased carrier 

concentration leads to a subsequent increase in open-circuit voltage due to photon-recycling, and 

results in an exceptionally high open-circuit voltage of 1230 mV measured under 141 W/cm2

illumination, 25 mV and 40 mV above the values measured for the on-chip devices with and 


without ITO respectively, and greater than the highest performing GaAs laser power converters in 

the literature as described in Table 1. 

Figure 4: (a) Schematic outline of the layer structures of the three device types compared, (b) normalized fill factor, 

(c) normalized PCE, and (d) open-circuit voltage, all versus incident power density of the optical source.

The results of the illuminated current-voltage measurements showed the benefits of the current 

spreading layers under high incident power densities. To further analyze current crowding effects 

in the devices and the impact of the front surface ITO spreading layer only, electroluminescence 

emission profile measurements were taken on devices with and without this layer as in Figure 5. 

Figures 5 (b) & (c) present the EL emission profiles of 300 μm diameter on-chip devices with and 

without the ITO current spreading layer respectively. Initially, under a low current density 

injection of 10 mA (14 A/cm2) the emission profile of both devices showed homogeneous light 

emission from the mesa (not shown). As the injection current density was increased to 150 mA, 


the emission becomes less homogeneous for both devices but this current crowding effect is much 

more apparent in the device without the ITO current spreading layer where the current is crowding 

towards the ‘left’ of the devices where the devices are probed. The metal grid lines do not 

contribute to the current spreading. Figures 5 (b) & (c) also show the emission profile with a 

horizontal line scan with relative emission intensity along the red line. These line scans further 

demonstrate the effectiveness of ITO as a current spreading layer. 

Figure 5: (a) Optical microscope image of a 300 μm diameter device during EL measurements, (b) EL measurements 

for the on-chip devices for an applied current of 150 mA with an ITO spreading layer, and (c) without an ITO spreading 

layer.


Following the fabrication and comparison of the on-chip and transfer printed devices, an optimized 

optical coating scheme was designed to reduce reflectance from the final device that considers the 

combined interference effects of the ITO and SiN layers on performance and coated on the transfer 

printed devices. The front surface reflection of the stack was reduced to 5% at 800 nm by 

depositing a 140 nm of Si3N4 layer. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) and illuminated 

current-voltage characteristics of these devices were then measured under varying incident optical 

power densities and are presented in Figure 6. 

The EQE of the GaAs epi-structure was measured on large solar cell structures to enable full light 

collection, and is presented in Figure 6 (c). The devices reach a peak EQE of 91% at 785 nm and 

89% at 808 nm, the operating wavelength of the illuminating laser. The EQE differs from that 

expected for typical solar cells where a much broader response is desired owing to the larger range 

of wavelengths that are present in the solar spectrum. The measured EQE here has a narrow peak 

due to the optimization of the anti-reflection coating for 808 nm wavelength, and the absorption 

of shorter wavelengths in the AlGaAs current spreading layer (The bandgap of Al0.1Ga0.9As is 

1.565 eV which corresponds to a wavelength of 792 nm). 

The 300 μm diameter single-junction GaAs laser power converters were successfully transfer 

printed to silicon using a PDMS stamp, achieving optical power conversion efficiencies of 47.8% 

and 49.4% under 35 and 71 W/cm2 808 nm laser illumination respectively as shown in Figures 6 

(b), (c) & (d). The optimized design of the whole stack for resistance and optical considerations 

leading to very high efficiency photovoltaic cells on silicon and FFs of 85% – 75% across the 

measurement range. The transferred devices were coated with ITO to increase current spreading 

and are shown to be capable of handling very high short-circuit current densities up to 70 A/cm2, 

(Figure 6 (e)) under 141 W/cm2 illumination intensity (~1400 suns equivalent). For devices 

transferred to silicon, the rear back mirror of AuNiGe resulted in photon recycling, thus increasing 

carrier confinement and enabled large open circuit voltages exceeding the values of pre-transfer 

devices, and reaching as high as 1235 mV in the final optimized design.


Figure 6: (a) Outline of the final device structure, (b) illuminated current-voltage measurements at three different 

incident power densities of 35, 71 and 141 W/cm2, (c) the measured photovoltaic conversion efficiency, PCE, and 

open-circuit voltage, Voc, and (d) the short-circuit current density, Jsc and fill factor, FF, of the final devices all 

versus incident power density of the optical source.

Table 1: A summary of the best performing devices produced in this work and their comparison with the start of the 

art in GaAs laser power converters.

Material
Pin

(W cm-2)

PCE

(%)

Voc/Junction

(mV)

Lambda (nm)
FF

(%)

Reference

GaAs
150
66.3
1.16
837
-
[19]

GaAs
100
60
1.18
809
83.9
[21]

GaAs/Si - μTP
71
48
1220
808
83
This work


Conclusions

We reported the fabrication of high-efficiency microscale GaAs laser power converters, and their 

successful transfer printing onto silicon substrates. The 300 μm diameter single-junction GaAs 

laser power converters were successfully transfer printed to silicon using a PDMS stamp, 

achieving optical power conversion efficiencies of 48% and 49% under 35 and 71 W/cm2 808 nm 

laser illumination respectively. The optimized design of the whole stack for resistance and optical 

considerations leading to very high efficiency photovoltaic cells on silicon. The transferred devices 

were coated with ITO to increase current spreading and are shown to be capable of handling very 

high short-circuit current densities up to 70 A/cm2 under 141 W/cm2 illumination intensity (~1400 

suns equivalent). For devices transferred to silicon, the rear back mirror of AuNiGe resulted in 

photon recycling, thus increasing carrier confinement and enabled large open circuit voltages 

exceeding the values of pre-transfer devices, and reaching as high as 1235 mV in the final 

optimized design. Overall, these optical power sources could deliver Watts of power to remote 

autonomous sensors and systems, without the need for electrical wiring, and using a massively 

parallel, scalable, and low-cost fabrication method for integrated devices. 

Acknowledgements

The authors acknowledge the sources of funding for this work. I.M. has received funding from the 

European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Skłodowska-

Curie grant agreement No. 746516. The work was also supported by Science Foundation Ireland 

under Grant Nos. 12/RC/2276, 12/RC/2276-P2, 15/IA/2864 and by the H2020 project TOPHIT.

References

[1]
M. A. Meitl et al., “Transfer printing by kinetic control of adhesion to an elastomeric stamp,” Nat. 

Mater., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 33–38, Jan. 2006.

[2]
J. Justice, C. Bower, M. Meitl, M. B. Mooney, M. A. Gubbins, and B. Corbett, “Wafer-scale 

integration of group III-V lasers on silicon using transfer printing of epitaxial layers,” Nat. 

Photonics, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 610–614, Sep. 2012.

[3]
I. Mathews, D. O’Mahony, K. Thomas, E. Pelucchi, B. Corbett, and A. P. Morrison, “Adhesive 

bonding for mechanically stacked solar cells,” Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1080–

1090, Sep. 2015.


[4]
F. Dimroth et al., “Comparison of Direct Growth and Wafer Bonding for the Fabrication of 

GaInP/GaAs Dual-Junction Solar Cells on Silicon,” IEEE J. Photovolt., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 620–625, 

Mar. 2014.

[5]
M. Mujeeb-U-Rahman, D. Adalian, C.-F. Chang, and A. Scherer, “Optical power transfer and 

communication methods for wireless implantable sensing platforms,” J. Biomed. Opt., vol. 20, no. 

9, p. 095012, Sep. 2015.

[6]
Q. Wu, G. Y. Li, W. Chen, D. W. K. Ng, and R. Schober, “An Overview of Sustainable Green 5G 

Networks,” IEEE Wirel. Commun., vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 72–80, Aug. 2017.

[7]
K. Worms et al., “Reliable and lightning-safe monitoring of wind turbine rotor blades using 

optically powered sensors,” Wind Energy, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 345–360, 2017.

[8]
J. I. de O. Filho, A. Trichili, B. S. Ooi, M.-S. Alouini, and K. N. Salama, “Towards Self-Powered 

Internet of Underwater Things Devices,” ArXiv190711652 Eess, Jul. 2019.

[9]
P. Sprangle, B. Hafizi, A. Ting, and R. Fischer, “High-power lasers for directed-energy 

applications,” Appl. Opt., vol. 54, no. 31, pp. F201–F209, Nov. 2015.

[10] C. Dagdeviren et al., “Conformal piezoelectric energy harvesting and storage from motions of the 

heart, lung, and diaphragm,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 111, no. 5, pp. 1927–1932, Feb. 2014.

[11] I. Mathews et al., “Self-Powered Sensors Enabled by Wide-Bandgap Perovskite Indoor Photovoltaic 

Cells,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 29, no. 42, p. 1904072, 2019.

[12] S. N. R. Kantareddy, I. Mathews, R. Bhattacharyya, I. M. Peters, T. Buonassisi, and S. E. Sarma, 

“Long Range Battery-Less PV-Powered RFID Tag Sensors,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 6, no. 4, 

pp. 6989–6996, Aug. 2019.

[13] K. Song et al., “Subdermal Flexible Solar Cell Arrays for Powering Medical Electronic Implants,” 

Adv. Healthc. Mater., vol. 5, no. 13, pp. 1572–1580, 2016.

[14] L. Lu et al., “Biodegradable Monocrystalline Silicon Photovoltaic Microcells as Power Supplies for 

Transient Biomedical Implants,” Adv. Energy Mater., vol. 8, no. 16, p. 1703035, 2018.

[15] C. M. Boutry et al., “Biodegradable and flexible arterial-pulse sensor for the wireless monitoring of 

blood flow,” Nat. Biomed. Eng., vol. 3, no. 1, p. 47, Jan. 2019.

[16] E. Moon, I. Lee, D. Blaauw, and J. D. Phillips, “High-efficiency photovoltaic modules on a chip for 

millimeter-scale energy harvesting,” Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 540–546, 2019.

[17] W. Choi et al., “A Repeatable Epitaxial Lift-Off Process from a Single GaAs Substrate for Low-

Cost and High-Efficiency III-V Solar Cells,” Adv. Energy Mater., vol. 4, no. 16, p. 1400589, 2014.

[18] X. Sheng et al., “Printing-based assembly of quadruple-junction four-terminal microscale solar cells 

and their use in high-efficiency modules,” Nat. Mater., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 593–598, Jun. 2014.


[19] S. Fafard et al., “High-photovoltage GaAs vertical epitaxial monolithic heterostructures with 20 thin 

p/n junctions and a conversion efficiency of 60%,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 109, no. 13, p. 131107, 

Sep. 2016.

[20] D. Masson, F. Proulx, and S. Fafard, “Pushing the limits of concentrated photovoltaic solar cell 

tunnel junctions in novel high-efficiency GaAs phototransducers based on a vertical epitaxial 

heterostructure architecture,” Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 1687–1696, 2015.

[21] V. P. Khvostikov et al., “Photovoltaic laser-power converter based on AlGaAs/GaAs 

heterostructures,” Semiconductors, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 1220–1224, Sep. 2016.

[22] X. Sheng et al., “Device Architectures for Enhanced Photon Recycling in Thin-Film Multijunction 

Solar Cells,” Adv. Energy Mater., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 1400919, 2015.

[23] V. Dimastrodonato, L. O. Mereni, R. J. Young, and E. Pelucchi, “AlGaAs/GaAs/AlGaAs quantum 

wells as a sensitive tool for the MOVPE reactor environment,” J. Cryst. Growth, vol. 312, no. 21, 

pp. 3057–3062, Oct. 2010.


Experimental procedures

PV device structure grown by MOVPE

Table 2: Layer structure of as-grown GaAs photovoltaic laser power converters.

EQE measurements

The EQE was measured in a Bentham PVE300 system. It uses two halogen light sources, Xenon and Quartz, 

through a monochromator to illuminate the device over a range of wavelengths. The light is optically 

chopped and the generated signal in the range of nanoamperes is recorded by a lock in amplifier.

Current-voltage measurements

The illuminated current-voltage setup used two probes, a source meter, a vacuum mount, a Keithley 2400 

source measuring unit and high-powered red laser. An optical fiber is used as a waveguide to focus the light 

on to the active region of the PV devices. The probes and laser mount are connected to two separate Keithley 

SMUs. The laser was controlled with a second Keithley 2400 SMU to supply the current to the laser in 

order to control the output power of the laser. A fiber-coupled Sheaumann 808 nm multimode laser was 

used to illuminate the PV devices. The beam width from the fiber was 200 μm. To align the setup, the laser 

was approximately aligned over the center of the device with the help of a camera. A low current just above 

the threshold current of the laser was supplied to the laser. The position of the optical fiber was adjusted 

using x-y probe manipulators to maximize the measured photocurrent from the specific device which was 

displayed on the front panel of Keithley SMU. Once the photocurrent was maximized the fiber was assumed 

to be correctly aligned. The output power of the light exiting the fiber itself was measured using a Thorlabs 


S415C thermopile photodetector. Once the optical fiber was aligned the SMU performed a voltage sweep 

while recording the photocurrent from the device. The voltage sweep was generally from -1V to 1.6V as 

the effect of the shunt resistance influenced the photocurrent up to -1V in the negative bias regime 

particularly for higher incident optical power densities. A voltage sweep was performed for varying incident 

power densities. 


