1

Refractive uses of layered and two-dimensional materials for integrated photonics
Akshay Singh1,*, Seong Soon Jo2, Yifei Li2, Changming Wu,3 Mo Li,3,4 R. Jaramillo2,*

1. Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
2. Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA
3. Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 
USA
4. Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
*Corresponding Authors

Abstract: The scientific community has witnessed tremendous expansion of research on layered 
(i.e. two-dimensional, 2D) materials, with increasing recent focus on applications to photonics. 
Layered materials are particularly exciting for manipulating light in the confined geometry of 
photonic integrated circuits, where key material properties include strong and controllable light-
matter interaction, and limited optical loss. Layered materials feature tunable optical properties, 
phases that are promising for electro-optics, and a panoply of polymorphs that suggest a rich design 
space for highly-nonperturbative photonic integrated devices based on phase-change functionality. 
All of these features are manifest in materials with band gap above the photonics-relevant near-
infrared (NIR) spectral band (~ 0.5 – 1 eV), meaning that they can be harnessed in refractive (i.e. 
non-absorptive) applications.

Keywords: below band-gap, optical properties, optical techniques, van der Waals materials, 
phase-change, material synthesis


2

Introduction: Materials needs for photonics

Figure 1: Materials needs for integrated photonics. (a-d) Making compact, low-loss optical phase 
modulators through materials innovation. (a) Commercial modulator based on LiNbO3. (b) Phase 
modulator with reduced footprint, realized by integrated processing on LiNbO3 wafer; reprinted
with permission from Springer Nature.1 (c) Integrated photonic switch enabled by phase-change 
materials; reprinted from ACS Photonics.2 (d) Future materials will enable integrated optical phase 
modulators with fast switching speed, low insertion loss, low power consumption, low fatigue, and 
excellent process compatibility; reprinted with permission from Springer Nature.3 (e-g) Future 
technologies enabled by materials innovations. (e) Quantum photonic integrated circuits; reprinted 
with permission from The Optical Society.4 (f) Neuromorphic processors; reprinted with 
permission from Springer Nature.5 (g) Beam steering for navigation and telecommunications; 
reprinted with permission from Springer Nature.6

Photonic integrated circuit technology has achieved a remarkable level of maturity. Recent 

highlights include quantum emitters, neuromorphic computing accelerators, and phased arrays for 
beam steering.4–6 However, in key respects we remain at an early stage of development. In 
particular, we have not yet developed materials to enable strong optical phase modulation with the 
speed, insertion loss, power consumption, endurance, and process compatibility needed for future, 
fully-integrated photonic circuits, processors, and sensors. For present-day mature photonics 
applications, devices such as switchable mirrors often remain discrete components. It is as one 
might imagine electronic integrated circuits without integrated diodes and transistors, with these 
essential devices remaining as discrete elements soldered to a circuit board. The analogy isn’t 
perfect, but it does well to illustrate the urgent needs for better active materials for optical phase 
modulation in photonic integrated devices, and the tremendous upside potential of developing 
better materials-based solutions.

The requirements of strong optical phase modulation, fast and low-power switching, low 

material fatigue and long device lifetime, low insertion loss, and process compatibility result in a 
daunting set of technical specifications for integrated photonics active materials. Present-day 


3

solutions often satisfy some of these requirements, but not all. Silicon-based electro-optic phase 
shifters can be fast and highly-reliable, but are also power-hungry and the underlying effects are 
weak.7,8 Optical phase shifters based on the Pockels effect in lithium niobate (LiNbO3) are fast and 
highly-reliable, with low insertion loss, but the weak modulation requires large interaction length, 
and the material is notoriously difficult to integrate.9 Optical modulators based on tunable 
plasmonic resonances can be fast and operate at low power, although optical loss remains a 
challenge.10–14 Optical phase shifters based on thermo-optic effects can be compact and reliable, 
with good modulation strength and low insertion loss, but are inherently slow and power-
hungry.5,15 Phase-change functionality in materials such as Ge2Sb2Te5 (in the Ge-Sb-Te (GST) 
system) enables strong optical phase modulation, and the materials are amenable to process 
integration and device size scaling, but suffers from high insertion loss and materials fatigue.16,17

Clever photonic device engineering can mitigate these downsides, but cannot resolve the 
underlying materials drawbacks.2

Here we review the prospects for materials with layered crystal structures as active, refractive 

materials for integrated photonics. Layered materials (LMs) often feature remarkable optical 
absorption, dominated by excitonic properties, for which research and applications have been 
reviewed elsewhere.18,19 Motivated by the need for devices with low insertion loss, we focus 
instead on the lesser-studied refractive properties, and light-matter interactions with photon energy 
below the band gap. This results in an emphasis on the NIR optical properties of materials with 
band gap above 1.5 eV. Layered chalcogenides have a large real part of refractive index (𝑛), which 
is needed for mode confinement and strong interactions in the confined geometry of integrated 
photonic waveguides and devices. Recent results illustrate that external perturbation can produce 
substantial refractive index and optical phase shifting without appreciable optical loss: large 𝛥𝑛
without large 𝑘 (imaginary part of refractive index).3 Work on phase-change properties of 
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) holds promise for highly-non-perturbative optical 
modulators.20–22 LMs also have intriguing electro-optic properties as well as phase-sensitive 
optical components, which we also review here. 


4

Figure 2: Role of materials offering strong optical phase modulation for photonic integrated 
devices, illustrated by simulated ring-resonator devices. (a) Schematic and key dimensions of 
simulated devices, showing location of the patch of active material that is laid on top of the Si3N4
waveguide.  (b-d) Transmission spectra for active materials Ge2Sb2Te5, MoS2, and WS2; see text 
for details. The axes titles report loss figures on-resonance. (d, inset) Transmission spectra for WS2
with interaction length increased to 8 𝜇m. (e-g) Loss spectra corresponding to panels (b-d). The 
loss data report loss (in dB) per length of active material (in cm). 

In Fig. 2 we illustrate the usefulness of materials that offer strong optical phase modulation for 

applications in photonic integrated devices. We use Lumerical software to simulate results for a 
prototypical Si3N4 ring resonator with a covering patch of active material, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. 
We consider three active materials, using 𝑛, 𝑘 data available in the literature: 10 nm-thick 
Ge2Sb2Te5, 10 nm-thick MoS2, and monolayer WS2.23–25 For GST and MoS2 we simulate a 
wavelength range in the NIR, below the band gap in the low-loss phase of each material. For WS2
we simulate results for visible light, at the tunable exciton absorption resonance. GST offers strong 
optical phase modulation when changing between amorphous and crystalline phases, due to the 
large 𝛥𝑛, and resulting in a substantial shift in the resonance position. However, the crystalline 
phase is optically lossy (large 𝑘), resulting in a broad resonance and substantial insertion loss. 
MoS2 also offers strong optical phase modulation when it changes between crystalline phases (i.e. 
the 2H and 1T polymorphs). Compared to GST, MoS2 has reduced loss and a sharper resonance 
in the lossy phase (crystalline for GST, 1T for MoS2). Monolayer WS2 has a much weaker effect 
on the simulated device performance, due to the small interaction volume. The resonance is sharp, 
but barely shifts even for a very large electrostatic gate bias. If the interaction volume is increased 
with a longer interaction length, then the resonance becomes less sharp due to the strong absorption 
at the exciton resonance (Fig. 2d, inset). These simulations - and recent experimental results on 
WS2 optical phase shifters (see Fig. 10 and ref. 3) - motivate continued research on refractive 
applications of TMDs for photonic integrated devices, and the focus on phase-change 
functionality.

𝑘 is a critical parameter for refractive materials for integrated photonics, but is difficult to 

measure in the below-band gap spectral range. Experimental measurements usually depend on 
discerning a small signal from a large background. Furthermore, 𝑘 below-band gap is highly-
dependent on materials processing (much more so than 𝑛), and therefore may have a large range 
of reported values for a given material. This is appreciated in traditional photonics, for which 
materials processing for low loss is essential; examples include MultiSpectral (TM) ZnS ceramics, 
processed for low-loss by reducing sulfur vacancy concentration, and chalcogenide glass fibers 
processed for low-loss by reducing oxygen contamination.26,27 Similar efforts will be required to 
limit loss in below-band gap, refractive applications of LMs, but the materials science is at an early 
stage. We discuss techniques for measuring the optical constants and anisotropy of LMs, essential 
for materials qualification and selection. We discuss pros and cons of each technique, and motivate 
use of certain lesser-used but effective techniques. 

We also devote attention to materials processing, with an emphasis on large-area coating 

methods appropriate for planar device fabrication, because even a spectacular material isn’t viable 
for 
commercialization 
without 
process-compatibility. 
This 
review 
primarily 
covers 

monochalcogenides and dichalcogenides, with chemical formulae MX and MX2, respectively (M-


5

metal, X- chalcogen); we also discuss black phosphorus (bP), due to structural and functional 
similarities with some monochalcogenides. 

We close this introduction with a brief discussion of the word “phase”. In optics, the phase of 

light describes a relative position in a cyclic waveform. In materials science, the phase of a material 
is defined by its composition and structure, and determines its properties. Optical phase modulators
change the phase of light relative to a reference beam. However, “phase change” may also imply 
functionality deriving from a materials phase transformation, such as crystalline-amorphous 
transformations in GST, or martensitic transformations in TMDs. In an attempt to reduce 
confusion, throughout this review, we use the term“optical phase” to refer to the phase of light, 
and “phase-change” everywhere we refer to a materials phase transformation.
Optical properties of layered materials
Introduction to layered materials

LMs are studied widely due to their diverse physical properties, which become particularly 

rich in the two-dimensional (2D) limit of individual monolayers. LMs typically have weak van der 
Waals (vdW) bonding between layers, and strong bonding within layers, resulting in highly-
anisotropic optical and electronic properties. In Fig. 3 we illustrate representative crystal structures 
for the LMs discussed here: dichalcogenides (MX2), monochalcogenides (MX), and bP. All LMs 
are strongly biaxial (i.e. birefringent) due to their layered structure. Many also feature in-plane 
anisotropy, making them triaxial. LMs can often be prepared with varying layer count, all the way 
down to individual monolayers. The electronic structure can vary strongly with layer count; a well-
known example is that of 2H-MoS2, which as a bulk crystal has an indirect band gap with energy 
(𝐸𝑔) of 1.3 eV, but as a 2D monolayer has a direct band gap of 𝐸𝑔= 1.8 eV.28 LMs usually feature 
strong exciton absorption resonances and large exciton binding energy, which result from the weak 
dielectric screening for out-of-plane electric fields, which in turn follows from layered crystal 
structure. LMs also feature notable mechanical properties such as high flexibility and facile inter-
layer sliding; MoS2 is widely used as a dry lubricant (e.g. trademarks MOLY-MIST and Never-
Seez Blue Moly). Their structure and opto-electronic properties can be controlled by chemical 
doping, surface modification, the underlying substrate, and by stimuli such as electric fields and 
mechanical strain.18 Many LMs have 𝐸𝑔 in the range of 1 - 2 eV, making them attractive for 
refractive NIR applications.29,30

Figure 3: Representative crystal structures of the LMs discussed in this review: LMs with band 
gap in the NIR-VIS and strong light-matter interaction. (a) Side view of a monolayer in the trigonal 
prismatic (so-called 2H) phase common to many TMDs with stoichiometry MX2. (b) Top-views 
(top row) and side views (bottom row) of common TMD polymorphs: 2H, 1T (tetragonal 
coordination), and 1T’ (distorted 1T). (c) Monochalcogenides MX generally form as puckered 
layers with substantial in-plane anisotropy; here we show two layers of SnSe. (d) bP also adopts a 


6

puckered structure with high in-plane anisotropy; ziz-zag (ZZ) and armchair (AC) directions are 
indicated. The structure diagrams were generated using VESTA 3 software.31

Materials
Crystal structures
Anisotropy
Refractive index (n), in-plane 

(IP) and out-of-plane (OP)

MoS2, MoSe2,

WSe2, WS2

P63/mmc; known as 2H; trigonal, 

prismatic coordination
Biaxial
2-4 (IP)24, 1-2 (OP, calculated)

ZrS2,ZrSe2;
TiS2, TiSe2

P-3m1; known as 1T, or the 

Cd(OH)2 structure type; tetragonal 

coordination

Biaxial
3~3.5 (IP)32;
TiS2 3.9~4.924

GeS, GeSe;
SnS, SnSe
Pnma
Triaxial
GeS 3.3~3.933 ;
SnS 3.7-4.634

bP
Cmce
Triaxial
bP 2~435

Table 1: Crystal structure, anisotropy and linear optical properties for materials discussed in this 
review. The crystal structure is related to the anisotropy, which relates to the different optical 
properties for in-plane (IP) and out-of-plane (OP) directions.

LMs feature band gap (𝐸𝑔) ranging from 0 eV (metallic or semi-metallic, such as graphene and 

TiS2) to 6 eV (hexagonal BN, hBN). We illustrate this distribution in Fig. 4. For some materials, 
we also illustrate the range of 𝐸𝑔 achievable by varying the layer count. Several trends are apparent 
in the data. For a given metal element, 𝐸𝑔 increases as the chalcogen varies from Te, to Se, to S. 
The band gap often changes from indirect to direct with decreasing layer count. Chemical alloying 
can tune 𝐸𝑔, traversing the difference between pure phases; examples include the HfSe2-HfS2, the 
SnS2-SnSe2, and the ZrS2-ZrSe2 systems.32,36,37


7

Figure 4: Distribution of experimentally measured band gap (𝐸𝑔) for LMs discussed here. For 
some materials, we also present the variation of 𝐸𝑔 with layer count between the bulk and 
monolayer limits. For some materials the data reported are the exciton absorption resonances, 
because the fundamental band gap is difficult to determine experimentally. The labels are colored 
according to the nature of the gap: green = direct, black = indirect, light blue = metallic/semi-
metallic. We also illustrate (in red) the NIR spectral range 0.75 – 1 eV relevant to 
telecommunications. Further details and data citations are presented in Table 1. 

Complex refractive index of layered materials

The complex refractive index (𝑛 − 𝑖𝑘) is related to the dielectric permittivity 𝜖 by 𝑛 =

𝑅𝑒(√𝜖) and 𝑘 = −𝐼𝑚(√𝜖), and 𝑘 is related to absorption coefficient 𝛼 by 𝛼 = 4𝜋𝑘/𝜆. For 
integrated photonics, materials with large 𝑛 are preferred to improve optical confinement and 
reduce mode leakage. There exists an extensive body of work measuring 𝑛 for LMs, dating back 
decades, focused mainly on spectral reflectivity and transmission in the visible range from basal 
faces of bulk LM crystals.32,38,39 Measurements of (𝑛, 𝑘) in the visible and NIR of few- and 
monolayer samples have appeared more recently, and reveal notable differences from bulk 
properties.24,40–42 Optical properties can also be tuned with alloying, which greatly expands the 
materials design space. In Fig. 5 we show two examples of optical properties tuning with 
alloying.36,37

Figure 5: Alloying LMs provides remarkable control over sub-band gap optical properties. (a-b) 
Variation of 𝑛, 𝑘 with alloying in ZrSxSe2-x alloys.36 𝑛 and 𝑘 both reduce with increasing sulfur 
content (𝑥) in the NIR, due to the blue-shift of the exciton absorption resonance. (c-d) Variation 
of absorption spectra (c) and band gap (d) of SnS2xSe2(1-x) alloys; reprinted with permission from 
the Royal Society of Chemistry.37

Here we report selected values of 𝑘 for LMs, but we caution the reader that these are contingent 

on measurement artifacts, and depend strongly on materials processing.24,39 In our own research, 
we have found that value of 𝑘 that we determine for MoS2 in the NIR band varies between 0.05 


8

and 0.2, depending on materials processing and measurement technique (see section 2.6 for 
discussion of measurement techniques); the theoretically-predicted value is 0.01-0.02, suggesting 
that advances in materials processing will yield further improvements.24 Going forward, a general 
rule for selecting new materials with acceptably-low 𝑘 for optical phase modulators for NIR 
integrated photonics is that the energetically-lowest absorption resonance (exciton or band gap) 
should be higher than 1.5 eV. 
Excitons and electron-hole screening

Excitons are correlated electron-hole pairs bound by the Coulomb interaction. The electron-

hole Coulomb interaction is screened by the dielectric constant of the material, and in most 
semiconductors the exciton binding energy is less than 0.1% of a Rydberg. The layered structure 
and vdW bonding of LMs decreases the screening effect and confines the electron and hole 
wavefunctions (see Fig. 6a), resulting in intra-layer excitons with large binding energy, even up 
to 1 eV. 43,44 These effects are most pronounced in 2D monolayers, but remain significant for bulk 
crystals. The large binding energy means that excitons in LMs tend to be stable at room 
temperature and often dominate the optical spectra. Excitons account for optical absorption 
resonances at energy (𝐸𝑋) below the band gap (𝐸𝑔), and strongly-enhanced light-matter 
interactions; the absorption coefficient (𝛼) on-resonance can exceed 105 cm-1.28,41

For refractive applications, strong exciton resonances can be a significant source of optical 

loss. The large exciton binding energy means that optical loss can be substantial even for photon 
energy well below 𝐸𝑔and a defect-free material. This is illustrated by the theoretically-predicted 
optical properties of SnSe, calculated with and without exciton effects, presented in Fig. 6b.30 The 
theoretical data show a substantial red-shift of the loss spectra, with clear implications for low-loss 
NIR photonics. However, the experimental challenge of measuring 𝐸𝑔 in the presence of strong 
exciton effects means that values reported as 𝐸𝑔 are often in fact 𝐸𝑋. As usual, in selecting materials 
it is advised to rely on the best available measurements.

Modulating exciton resonances can have a strong effect on the refractive index. Yu et al. 

reported that the refractive index of monolayer TMDs MoS2, WS2 and WSe2 can be strongly 
modulated by electrostatic gating, with ∆𝑛 ∼ ∆𝑘 ∼ 1 in the vicinity of exciton absorption
resonances (Fig. 6c-e).25 This large tunability was attributed to broadening the linewidth of 
excitonic interband transitions due to neutral-charged exciton interconversion. Klein et al.
demonstrated ultra-fast control of surface plasmon polariton (SPP) transmission on a gold 
waveguide by optically pumping the exciton resonance of an adjacent WS2 monolayer.10

Additionally, Liu et al. demonstrated field-effect tuning of a polariton resonance in a hybrid WS2-
plasmonic lattice.11


9

Figure 6: Exciton resonances have large effects on optical absorption, and must be treated properly 
when calculating the optical properties of layered materials. (a) Schematic showing the reduced 
dielectric screening in monolayers compared to bulk crystals; reprinted with permission from the 
American Physical Society.43 (b) Calculated optical properties of SnSe with and without excitons; 
reprinted from Nano Letters.30 The absorption onset is red-shifted for both bulk and monolayer 
materials. The effect of in-plane crystal anisotropy is apparent in the different optical spectra for 
electric field polarized along the zigzag (ZZ) and armchair (AC) directions. Field-effect tuning in 
the visible range (c-e); reprinted from Nano Letters.25 (c) Reflectance change with gate voltage 
(line series); inset shows measurement geometry. (d) Change in the complex refractive index with 
gate voltage, illustrating the close correspondence between electro-refraction and electro-
absorption near an exciton absorption resonance. (e) Dependence of the complex refractive index 
at-resonance on carrier density.

LMs can also be vertically integrated by mechanical stacking to create heterostructures. Such 

stacking can shift the band-gap due to changes in dielectric environment, and modify optical loss 
in NIR.45 Sub-bandgap absorption can also result from inter-layer excitons, where electron and 
holes are separated and delocalized over two or more layers. These inter-layer excitons usually 
have low absorption and low binding energies, and therefore have lesser effects on optical loss, 


10

but could be a source of long-lived states which can interfere with fast modulation methods.46,47

Dicke superradiance effects can also modify optical absorption in few layer TMDs; these effects 
are relatively well understood.48

Bi- and tri-refringence

The layered crystal structure of LMs leads to large birefringence. In Fig. 7 we present 

experimental data for three LMs: hBN, SnS and bP.34,49,50 For hBN, the birefringence in the VIS-
UV has been measured to be 𝛥𝑛 = 𝑛𝑜−𝑛𝑒 ≲ 1 (𝑛𝑜 and 𝑛𝑒 are the ordinary and extraordinary 
indices, respectively).49 The band gap of hBN is very large (𝐸𝑔= 6 eV, indirect), meaning that 
optical loss is low in the visible, and the large 𝛥𝑛 can be used for refractive applications. For SnS, 
𝛥𝑛 ≈0.5 has been measured in the NIR. SnS has a rather low band gap (𝐸𝑔 = 1.3 eV, indirect), but 
due to the indirect nature of the gap, the optical loss remains low for photon energy below 1 eV.34

Experimental measurements of birefringence of TMDs are scarce (infra vide), but our theoretical 
calculations predict that 𝛥𝑛 ≈1.7, 2.1, and 1.2 in the NIR for MoS2, TiS2, and ZrS2, respectively.24

Many LMs have low in-plane symmetry due to ferroelastic distortions, making them triaxial. 

Examples include SnSe, SnS, GaS, and bP. The triaxial nature of SnS is apparent in the (𝑛, 𝑘) data 
presented in Fig. 7b. Mechanical strain can also be used to lower in-plane symmetry and induce 
triaxial properties in LMs.51 Bi- and tri-refringence can be exploited for polarization- and phase-
sensitive photonic components. Fig. 7c shows an example of in-plane anisotropy in bP exploited 
to generate elliptical polarization.50


11

Figure 7: Measurement and uses of biaxial and triaxial properties of LMs. (a) Measurement of 
birefringence of hBN; reprinted with permission from the American Physical Society.49 (b) 
Measurement of triaxial SnS.34 (c-d) Using the in-plane anisotropy of triaxial bP to modulate light 
polarization; reprinted from ACS Photonics.50 The experimental setup is shown in (c). The 
accumulated phase is shown in (d) and is proportional to the thickness of bP.

Electro-optics

So far we have discussed the linear optical properties of LMs. The linear electro-optic (EO, or 

Pockels) effect is a non-linear property that can be exploited for electrically-driven optical phase 

modulators.  The change in refractive index due to applied electric field is ∆𝑛 = −

𝑛3

2 𝑟ℎ𝑘𝐸𝑘, where 

𝑟ℎ𝑘 are EO coefficients. This 𝑛3-dependence of the EO effect, combined with linear-in-𝑛
dependence of mode confinement, results in device size that can be scaled down with 𝑛4 for a 
fixed supply voltage. 

EO coefficients follow from crystal symmetry, and may be zero for some light propagation 

directions. For a large number of centro-symmetric LMs (for example, 2H-WS2), the EO effect is 
not present for even layer numbers, and is small for odd layer numbers  greater than unity. For 
monolayers, the modulation depth (for below-band gap light) is very small due to low light-matter 
interaction (owing to ultra-small thickness), but can be enhanced by device design such as in the 
travelling-wave Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) geometry described in section concerning 
experimental techniques.  

The linear EO effect is present in certain LMs with reduced symmetry.52,53 The theoretically-

predicted EO coefficients are fairly low (see Table 2), for example 𝑟12 = 2.9 pm/V for GaTe.52–54

However, LMs could offer useful EO optical phase modulation  due to the large refractive index 
(e.g. 𝑛𝐺𝑎𝑇𝑒 ∼3); for a given applied electric field, 𝛥𝑛𝐺𝑎𝑇𝑒/𝛥𝑛𝐿𝑖𝑁𝑏𝑂3 ∼1/3.53,55 EO effects can be 
enhanced beyond the intrinsic material properties by breaking symmetry with artificial layer 
stacking. In recent experimental work, layers of inversion-symmetric 2H-MoSe2 were stacked in 
AA geometry, resulting in enhanced nonlinear properties.56 Alloys may feature EO coefficients 
that are enhanced relative to the pure components, such as MoSSe that is predicted to have EO 
coefficient five times larger than either MoS2 or MoSe2; EO and nonlinear effects may also be 
enhanced by Janus phases.57,58

Material and stacking
𝒏𝒙
Band gap (eV)
EO coefficient 𝑟 (pm/V)
𝒓 ∗ (𝒏𝒙)𝟑

β-GaS monolayer
2.7
2.5
2.4 (theory53)
46

β-GaTe monolayer
3.1
1.6
2.9 (theory53)
85

MoS2 monolayer
3.9
1.8
1.1 (theory54)
66

MoSSe
4.1
1.6
6.7 (theory57)
454

WS2
3.8
1.9
1.3 (theory54)
66

LiNbO3
2.3
4
20 (exp55)
243

Table 2: Calculated EO coefficients, 𝑛, band gap, and EO figure of merit 𝑟 ∗ (𝑛𝑥)3 for LMs. 

Strong optical phase modulation: Phase transformations and ferroelastic domain switching


12

Figure 8: (a-c) Schematic illustrations of material transformations enabling strong optical phase 
modulation. (a) Order (crystalline) – disorder (amorphous) switching, as in the GST system. (b) 
Martensitic, order-order transformation between TMD polymorphs. (c) Ferroelastic domain 
switching in GeS-type LMs with low in-plane symmetry. (d-f) Change in real (𝑛) and imaginary 
(𝑘) refractive index across functionally-useful material structure transformations. (d) Order-
disorder transformation between crystalline and amorphous phases of Ge2Sb2Te5.23 (e) Order-
order transformation between 1T’ and 2H phases of bulk MoTe2.29 (f) Ferroelastic domain 
switching in monolayer SnSe.15 The structure diagrams were generated using VESTA 3 software.31

Mature technologies for optical phase-shifters - such as carrier injection in silicon, or the 

Pockels effect in LiNbO3 - are based on perturbative changes to the refractive index. In nearly all 
cases, the refractive index modulation 𝛥𝑛 is ∼ 0.01 or smaller, equivalent to an absolute change 
of 0.1 - 0.5%.7–9 In this section we consider materials that can provide strong, non-perturbative 
optical phase modulation. We first introduce the well-known phase-change materials (PCMs), such 
as GST, that provide 𝛥𝑛 ∼ 1 by virtue of order-disorder transformations. We then consider the 
outlook for LMs to combine strong optical phase modulation with other desirable attributes 
including low optical loss and fast, low-energy switching. 

PCMs are based on order-disorder transformations (Fig. 8a,d) in chalcogenides.16,23 PCMs 

have a long history of development for optical and electrical data storage, and processing for device 
integration is mature.17 The phase-change functionality is based on time-temperature processes, 
and can be triggered electrically and optically. PCMs also have drawbacks that may limit their 
application as active optical phase shifters in photonic integrated circuits. The ordered state is often 
semi-metallic, and the disordered state is a low band gap semiconductor (𝐸𝑔 ∼0.5 - 1 eV). As a 
result PCMs have substantial optical loss, with 𝑘 ≳1 in one or both phases throughout the NIR, 
although clever device design can mitigate the loss.2 Switching is based on melt-quench and 


13

thermal recrystallization processes, which limit operation to sub-GHz frequencies and are 
inherently energy-intensive.17 Nanoscale device and materials engineering may extend the 
frequency range and lower the energy consumption of PCMs.59 PCMs also suffer from fatigue, 
which limits device life cycles; even state-of-the-art PCMs for electrical memory are limited to 
~109 switching events, which may be sufficient for memory applications (including photonic 
neural networks), but is grossly insufficient for telecommunications.17

Although the term “phase-change materials” usually refers to chalcogenides such as GST with 

functionally-useful order-disorder transformations, any material phase transformation may 
provide strong modulation of optical properties, including order-order transformations in LMs. In 
materials science, collective atomic displacements that convert between two ordered crystal 
structures are called martensitic transformations. TMDs feature a panoply of polymorphs (Figs. 3, 
8b) with contrasting electrical and optical properties, and in recent years there has been sustained 
interest in using martensitic transformations for device technology.20,60 These transformations can 
be triggered by electrical fields, charge injection, and strain - these non-thermal mechanisms are 
exciting for fast and low-power switching.21,22,60 The small and collective atomic displacements 
during switching, facilitated by the layered crystal structure, suggest that material fatigue may be 
lower and device life cycles may be much longer than for PCMs based on order-disorder 
transitions.21 Most of the literature on this topic has focused on transformations between low- and 
high-conductivity states for electronics and computation.22 Here we focus instead on proposed 
applications in photonic integrated devices. In Fig. 8e we present the difference in refractive index 
between the 1T’ and 2H phases of MoTe2, which has been shown to support fast, non-thermal 
switching.22,29

The diversity of TMD compositions and phases provides a rich materials design space. For a 

given transition metal, the energy required for switching between polymorphs tends to decrease 
with heavier chalcogen, from S, to Se, to Te (Fig. 9a).60 Fast, repeatable, electrically-driven 
switching at room temperature has been demonstrated in transition metal ditellurides, whereas 
switching in MoS2 requires elevated temperature to overcome energetic barriers.16,17 However, for 
semiconducting phases the band gap also decreases with heavier chalcogen, resulting in 
substantially higher optical loss for ditellurides than for disulfides and diselenides.24,29

Furthermore, many TMD phases are metallic or semi-metallic, which also implies high optical 
loss. In this landscape of material attributes and trade-offs, alloy design may be a powerful strategy 
to identify materials with optimal combinations of refractive index contrast, optical loss, switching 
energy, and switching speed for TMD-based optical phase modulators.24 In Fig. 9b we show an 
example of a theoretically-predicted free energy-composition diagram that guides research on 
design of transition metal disulfide alloys.24 Such diagrams indicate compositions that may feature 
martensitic transformations with vanishingly low switching energy, and advise on materials 
processing methods. For instance, the diagram shown in Fig. 9b predicts that the free energy for 


14

switching between 2H and 1T polymorphs will vanish near composition (MoS2)0.5(TiS2)0.5, and 
that low-temperature processing methods should be employed to avoid spinodal decomposition. 

Figure 9: The energy required for martensitic transformations varies with material composition; 
understanding these thermodynamic trends guides materials selection for strong optical phase 
modulation. (a) Calculated energy differences between polymorphs for Mo- and W-based TMD 
monolayer TMDs; reprinted with permission from Springer Nature.60 (b) Theoretically-predicted 
Gibbs free energy-composition diagram at 300 K for the MoS2-TiS2 binary alloy system; results 
are for bulk materials; reprinted with permission from American Institute of Physics.24

Electrostatic gating can modulate the optical properties of TMDs even without inducing a 

phase transformation. These effects have been studied primarily for absorptive/emissive 
applications, such as light emitting diodes, but recent results show promise for refractive 
applications.3,25 Useful field-effect modulation has been demonstrated in WS2 and MoS2 integrated 
with micro-ring resonator devices operating near 𝜆 =1570 nm, well below the band gap (Fig. 10a-
b).3 In the NIR, far from exciton absorption resonances, the optical loss is reduced and high cavity 
𝑄 ≈120,000 can be maintained during switching. Field-effect switching can be enhanced by 
designing materials that are thermodynamically-adjacent to a polymorphic phase transformation, 
amplifying the effects of electrostatic gating through non-thermal, collective atomic 
displacements. 

Figure 10: Field-effect tuning in the NIR.3 (a) Tuning the transmission of a micro-ring resonator 
with gate voltage (line series) applied across a WS2 monolayer partially covering the Si3N4
waveguide; inset shows an optical micrograph of the device. (b) Change in the complex refractive 


15

index with gate-tuned carrier density in WS2. Images reprinted with permission from Springer 
Nature.3

Materials with substantial optical and dielectric anisotropy also present opportunities for non-

thermal switching between domain orientations, rather than between phases. Crystallographic 
domain orientation can be switched by an applied electric field, and the optical anisotropy can be 
used for devices such as mode converters or polarizers. A well-known example of non-thermal, 
electric field-driven structural change is ferroelectric domain switching, which is driven by an 
energy term linear in applied field. Ferroelastic (FE) domain switching is a newer concept that is 
based on anisotropy in dielectric susceptibility, and is driven by an energy term that varies 
quadratically with applied field.20,61 LMs in the GeS structure-type (Fig. 3c), have two FE domain 
variants related by a 90° rotation. Due to dielectric anisotropy 𝜀𝑥𝑥 ≠ 𝜀𝑦𝑦, it is predicted that a 
sufficiently-strong electric field from a pulsed laser can produce barrier-less conversion between 
FE domains with substantial optical contrast. In Fig. 8f we reproduce the calculated NIR optical 
contrast between FE domains in monolayer SnSe; the predicted 𝛥𝑛 >1 and 𝑘 <0.2 compares 
favorably to phase-change materials.15

Measuring the optical properties of layered materials

In this section we review techniques available to measure the optical properties of LMs. Optical 

property measurements of LMs are frequently complicated by the large out-of-plane birefringence, 
and the difficulty in preparing crystals with optically-smooth faces with orientation other than the 
basal plane. Measurements of materials for integrated photonics are also complicated by the 
differences between reference samples (e.g. bulk single crystals), and the active material in 
photonic integrated circuits (e.g. thin films, often with spatially-inhomogeneous grain structure). 
We summarize the techniques discussed in Table 3.

Method
Experimental 

Schematic
Pros
Cons

Ellipsometry
independent measurement of 

n & k

highly-sensitive to surface 

conditions

Normal reflection
simple geometry; high 

spatial resolution

n & k not independently 

determined

Transmission
good for measuring k below-

band gap

requires flat, parallel 

surfaces; sample thickness 

must be known; sample 
thinning may be required

Polarized light 
transmission

measure birefringence of 

LM
same as transmission


16

Waveguide /

device integration

prediction of performance in 
intended devices, including 
processing-dependent effects

results may not reflect 

intrinsic material properties

Photo-thermal 

deflection 

spectroscopy

good for measuring very 

small k

knowledge of thermal 

properties needed for data 

analysis

Table 3: Summary of optical properties measurement techniques. Black arrows indicate the optical 
electric field polarization, red arrows indicate the direction of light propagation, blue arrow (for 
photo-thermal deflection spectroscopy) indicates a heating beam.

Reflection-geometry optical techniques: Ellipsometry, normal-incidence reflectometry, and 
photothermal deflection spectroscopy

In ellipsometry we measure the ratio 𝜌 = 𝑟𝑃/𝑟𝑆 of the amplitude reflection Fresnel 

coefficients.62 For a simple sample/air interface, this data can be used to directly calculate n and k
on a wavelength-by-wavelength basis, without relying on modeling or Kramers–Kronig (KK) 
transformations. For more complicated structures with thin layers, such as a native oxide, model-
based data analysis is required. Since the measurement relies on optical polarization, and uses 
rather large angles of incidence  (𝜃 =50 - 80°, see Fig. 11), samples with large, mirror-like faces 
are required; the required sample face size is typically at least 1 mm on a side, although with 
focusing optics smaller faces (down to ≈ 200 𝜇m) may be used. Ellipsometry is extremely 
sensitive to surface layers, and can give misleading results if an inaccurate model is used to analyze 
the data. 

Figure 11: Schematic of the ellipsometry technique. The optical elements are, in order: broadband 
white light source, polarizer, rotating compensator, micro-spot objective, sample, analyzer, and 
detector.

Normal and near-normal reflectivity measurements are more convenient and more commonly 

used than ellipsometry. The method can be implemented in a variety of geometries, including 
confocal microscopy with diffraction-limited spot size under 1 𝜇m. For normal incidence the 

Fresnel reflection intensity coefficient is 𝑅 =

(𝑛−1)2+𝑘2

(𝑛+1)2+𝑘2 ; since the experiment yields one measured 

value (R) at each wavelength, modeling and/or KK transformations are required to estimate both 
𝑛 and 𝑘. Relying on KK transformations can lead to substantial systematic error, especially near 
the perimeters of the measured data range due to the form of the KK transformation integrand.

Both ellipsometry and reflectivity can be adapted to measure optical anisotropy. For normal-

incidence reflectivity, in-plane optical anisotropy can be estimated from polar reflectivity plots 


17

using linearly-polarized light. Spectroscopic ellipsometry can in principle measure the full optical 
response tensor of a material, using an approach called generalized ellipsometry.62 However, 
materials with large 𝑛 (such as the LMs discussed here) strongly refract incident light towards the 
surface normal, making out-of-plane optical property measurements prohibitively difficult using 
only exposed basal surfaces.24 Measurements on polished, non-basal plane surfaces (i.e. prismatic 
faces) have been reported, but the sample preparation is challenging, as it requires an unusually 
thick crystal, and mechanical polishing risks inadvertent layer folding (imagine grinding and 
polishing the edge of a stack of paper).34 As a result, out-of-plane optical property measurements 
on LMs are rare. Recent work combining ellipsometry and near-field optical measurements may 
be useful to measure out-of-plane anisotropy.63,64

Reflection-geometry methods often present difficulties in measuring the optical properties of 

materials with low loss, such as semiconductors below the band gap. Coherent reflections from 
the front and back surfaces of films and crystals - so-called etalon effects - result in intensity 
oscillations that must be carefully modelled to extract material optical properties.29 Photo-thermal 
deflection spectroscopy is a method that excels at measuring optical loss in low-loss materials; this 
less-common technique may be particularly useful for quantifying optical loss in LMs intended 
for refractive applications, although it requires understanding of thermal properties that may not 
be available for all materials.65

Transmission-geometry optical techniques

Transmission-geometry measurements are well-suited for measuring the optical properties of 

materials in the low-loss spectral region, such as accurate measurement of 𝑘 below-band gap, and 
quantification of defect-assisted absorption. Transmission-geometry measurements of LMs can be 
found in the older literature, but seem to have gone out of favor.32,38,39 Measurement of interference 
fringes in the transmission of highly-convergent, polarized light can quantify birefringence𝛥𝑛 in 
LMs; this method has been been used to determine 𝛥𝑛~1 for MoS2 between 1 - 1.5 𝜇m.38 Recent 
work used multiple angle of incidence transmission technique for measuring large out-of-plane 
anisotropy in hBN (also shown in Fig. 7a), suggesting use of these LMs in anisotropic 
components.49

The challenges of thinning and polishing samples may inhibit the widespread use of 

transmission-geometry optical techniques for LMs. Another challenge is inaccurate measurements 
of sample thickness, which can result in inaccurate estimates of 𝑘. Thickness can be estimated by 
counting interference peaks, but this method works only for samples thicker than ∼ 0.1 𝜇m; for 
thinner samples, it is difficult to estimate thickness.38 Advances in the synthesis of LM films, 
including large-area, single crystal 2D monolayers, may warrant a revival of transmission-
geometry optical techniques. 
Using integrated photonic devices for materials characterization

The reflection and transmission methods described above are typically intended to measure the 

“bulk” optical properties of a material; even for thin films, these experiments and their 
interpretation report thickness-averaged properties. However, optical fields in photonic integrated 
circuits are highly non-uniform, and the optical properties - and particularly the loss - of a given 
material in a photonic integrated device may depend strongly on the exact geometry of the device, 
the material microstructure, and the presence of interface regions. These are processing- and 
geometry-dependent details that can-not be anticipated by bulk optical property measurements. 
We therefore emphasize the role of using integrated photonic devices for material 
characterization.66,67 In Fig. 12a we show an example of the optical loss in MoS2 measured by 


18

integration in a micro-ring resonator.67 By measuring transmission spectrum before and after MoS2
transfer on the ring-resonator (Fig. 12b), and calculating change in quality factors (Q), the optical 
loss can be determined. Measurements of cavity properties are combined with modeling of the 
mode profile and overlap to estimate optical loss. The optical loss measured in such a resonator 
(at 633 nm) is 850 dB/cm compared to simulated loss of 1390 dB/cm. The difference between 
measured and simulated loss suggests that device based measurements are important to 
complement reference crystal measurements.

Figure 12: Using photonic integrated circuits to measure the optical properties of LMs and guide 
materials selection. (a, b) Measuring optical loss in MoS2 using a ring resonator; reprinted with 
permission from American Institute of Physics.67 (a) Device schematics and optical micrograph 
showing a MoS2 flake subtending angle ϕ. (b) Transmission spectrum of the resonator before 
(cyan) and after (blue-red) MoS2 coverage. Quality factors (Q) are extracted from Lorentzian fits 
to the resonances. (c) Schematic of Mach-Zehnder interferometer (MZI) device for measuring EO 
coefficients of LMs.

Electro-optics

For measuring the EO coefficients, a crystal can be processed in a Pockels cell geometry. By 

modifying the positioning of the crystal with respect to the optical field and applied electric field 


19

in the Pockels cell, the EO tensor can be measured. For on-chip integrated photonic-device 
measurements, the traveling wave MZI geometry may be used, where the electric modulation field 
co-propagates with the signal light field in two separate arms (Fig. 12c). The phase difference is 
equal and opposite over the two arms, and accumulates over the length of the device.9

Pockels effect measurements require large bulk crystals, or thin films on transparent substrates. 

Further, MZI measurements necessarily require device fabrication. Thus methods to measure EO 
coefficients in an optical, non-device framework are sorely lacking. However, EO coefficients can 
be indirectly determined from measurements of the second-order nonlinear susceptibility, since 
the EO and second order processes are related.68

Synthesis and processing

Using LMs in photonic integrated circuits will require reliable methods to make and pattern 

uniform, wafer-scale thin films. Wafer-scale photonic integrated circuitry will be built on 
established material platforms, including Si, Si3N4, and InP, using planar processing methods, and 
it is important to be able to insert LMs into these process flows. In this section we review synthesis 
methods for LMs, with emphasis on wafer-scale processing.

Processing temperature is an important consideration for integration. Si photonic integrated 

circuit wafers with passive waveguides patterned from SiO2 or Si3N4 can withstand at least 800 °C 
without degradation, which is sufficient for most LM film processing methods. If CMOS devices 
(such as doped modulators or detectors) are present on the wafer, then the processing temperature 
should be lower than 600 °C; this may be a challenge for many LMs. Layer transfer methods can 
decouple the LM film processing temperature from the photonic integrated circuit wafer thermal 
history.

Thin-film synthesis methods can be grouped according to the phase relation at the surface of 

the forming film. Here we focus on vapor-phase methods, for which the desired film grows at a 
vapor-solid interface. Upon close inspection, some vapor-phase methods may be related to liquid-
or solid-phase growth, such as the case of conversion of a metal film to a chalcogenide LM. Such 
distinctions hold interest for materials science, but are not discussed here. Liquid-phase methods 
capable of coating large areas at relatively low cost are intriguing, but also are not discussed here.
Solid-source chemical vapor deposition (ssCVD): In this process, solid precursors vaporize and 
react on a substrate to grow a film. This is the most common method for making LM films - the 
archetypical process is growth of MoS2 films from powder MoO3 and S sources - and is usually 
referred to simply as CVD.69 However, it is useful to distinguish between gas- and solid-source 
CVD. Traditionally, CVD implies that sources are delivered to the reactor as gases, which holds 
important benefits for wafer-scale and reliable deposition. The use of solid sources means that 
ssCVD is more difficult to scale.19

A great many LMs can be synthesized by ssCVD. The list includes TMDs with transition 

metals Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Mo, W, Re, Pt, Pd, and Fe, and chalcogens S, Se, and Te;70 main-
group metal chalcogenides GeS and GeSe;71,72 bP.73

Gas-source CVD and metal-organic CVD (MOCVD): In gas-source CVD and its variant, metal-
organic CVD (MOCVD), gas-phase precursors react on a substrate to grow a film. Of all the LM 
thin film synthesis methods demonstrated to-date, MOCVD offers the best combination of process 
uniformity and scale, layer number control, and material quality.66,67 CVD and MOCVD are 
versatile, but the requirement of gas-source precursors has limited the range of materials made to 
date, compared to ssCVD. Materials made by CVD and MOCVD include MoS2, WS2, WSe2, TiS2, 
SnS, and SnSe.74–78


20

A variation on CVD and ssCVD is to use a chalcogen source (e.g. H2S or solid S) to convert a 

metal thin film to a LM compound thin film.79–81 These are two-step processes, first involving 
deposition of the precursor thin film, often by evaporation or sputtering, followed by conversion 
in a CVD reactor. These two-step methods are scalable and reliable, but offer inferior layer number 
control and material quality than ssCVD, CVD, or MOCVD.
Atomic layer deposition (ALD): ALD is a variation on MOCVD in which the film growth is 
kinetically limited by a precursor delivery sequence. ALD growth of LMs MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, 
WSe2, ZrS2, HfS2, TiS2，SnS, SnSe, GeS, and GeSe have been reported 82–89. ALD offers 
excellent control over film morphology and layer number. However, the kinetic control inherent 
to ALD dictates rather low reaction temperature, and high-temperature post-deposition annealing 
is often required to improve film material quality.
Physical vapor deposition (PVD): PVD covers a number of vacuum deposition methods including 
thermal evaporation, electron-beam evaporation, sputtering, and pulsed laser deposition (PLD). 
Chalcogenide films deposited by PVD are often anion-deficient, due to the differential re-
evaporation of metals and chalcogens. To compensate, an additional chalcogen source may be 
introduced during film growth, resulting in reactive PVD. PVD is less-widely used for LM film 
synthesis than ssCVD, CVD, and MOCVD. A number of main-group metal monochalcogenides 
that evaporate congruently and that have fairly high vapor pressure have been synthesized as thin 
films by PVD, including SnS, SnSe, GeS and GeSe.90–93 bP and TMD thin films have been 
synthesized by PLD and sputtering.94–96

Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE): MBE is a variant of PVD that emphasizes epitaxy and precise 
control over film thickness and morphology. MBE growth of many LMs is challenged by the 
vastly-different thermodynamic properties of transition metals and chalcogens.97 Taking for 
instance MoS2, the high melting point of Mo (2623 °C) means that ad-atom mobility is negligible 
at substrate temperatures of 800 °C or below. At the same time, the saturation vapor pressure of 
condensed sulfur at a substrate temperature of 800 °C is well over 1 atm; this implies that the time 
during which sulfur resides on the heated substrate and may react with the metal is vanishingly 
short. Despite these challenges, there has been impressive progress such as the growth of 
monolayer and high-quality MoSe2 on hBN, and the growth of multilayer WSe2 with grain size ≈
1 μm.98,99 Taking a cue from the history of complex oxide MBE, and lessons learned from 
MOCVD growth of LMs, it seems promising to revisit MBE growth of LMs using metal-organic 
precursors.100,101

ssCVD
CVD/

MOCVD

ALD
PVD
MBE

Scalability
Low
High
High
High
High

Range of materials
High
Medium
Low
High
Low

Crystal quality and chemical purity
Medium
High
Low
Medium
High

Synthesis Technique

Photonics relevant metric


21

Film layer number control/smoothness
Medium
High
High
Medium
High

Conformal coating
Medium
Medium
High
Medium
Low

Cost (equipment and operation)
Low
Medium
High
Low
High

Table 4: Summary of synthesis methods and trade-offs available for making LM thin films for use 
in photonic integrated circuits.

Layer transfer

LM monolayer or few-layer sheets can be mechanically exfoliated, from thicker crystals or 

growth substrates, and transferred to different substrates. Layer transfer can be used to make 
heterostructures, and allows LM synthesis to be decoupled from device integration: LMs can be 
synthesized at high temperature and in chemically-aggressive conditions, before being transferred 
to a wafer in mild conditions.67,102 This approach holds great promise for expanding the materials 
set available for photonic integrated circuits. However, wafer-scale synthesis and layer transfer 
has only been demonstrated for a small set of LMs.102 The methods need to be optimized for 
adhesion, interface cleanliness, and selection of sacrificial layers, and the processing-properties 
relationships relevant for photonics remain to be explored.
Air Stability

Air stability is a key consideration for any material to be deployed widely in technology. 

Uncontrolled oxidation can ruin a device, while controlled and self-limited oxidation can imbue 
functional properties such as surface passivation.103,104 For chalcogenides of a particular metal, 
susceptibility to oxidation by oxygen increases as the chalcogen element varies from S, to Se, to 
Te.103,105 For TMDs, air stability also varies with the transition metal.106 Edges and atomic defects 
accelerate oxidation by providing thermodynamic local minima for oxygen chemisorption, and by 
reducing the kinetic energy barriers to oxide growth.107–109 bP is likewise unstable and degrades 
rapidly upon air exposure.110
Monolayer and few-layer films are especially susceptible to 

oxidation due to extreme surface area-to-volume ratios. For instance, monolayer WTe2 degrades 
even during the exfoliation process and characteristic Raman peaks disappear minutes after 
exfoliation.111 The correlation between crystal defects and oxidation complicate the interpretation 
of such experiments; controlled studies of oxidation of LM films with varying thickness, 
morphology and defect concentrations would be most useful.

Synthesis 
Technique

Main group (group 

14) 

monochalcogenides

Group 6 TMDs
Group 4 TMDs
bP

ssCVD
GeS71,GeSe72
MX2 (M = Mo, W,  X = 

S, Se, Te)70

MX2 (M = Ti, Zr, Hf, X = 

S, Se, Te)70
bP73

CVD/MOCVD
SnS75, SnSe76
MoS2 and WS274, 

WSe277
TiS278


22

ALD
SnS and GeS83, 
SnSe84, GeSe85

MoS2 and WSe286,

MoSe282, WS287
TiS288, ZrS2 and HfS289

PVD
SnS93, SnSe90, GeS92, 

GeSe91
MoS2 95
ZrS296
bP94

MBE
SnS112
MoSe299, WSe298
TiSe2113, ZrSe2114, 

HfSe2115
bP116

Table 5: Representative publications reporting synthesis of LM films.

Summary and outlook

The anisotropic crystal structures of LMs lead to opto-electronic properties that may be 

especially useful for photonic integrated circuits. Here we have highlighted refractive properties 
of LMs, and proposed uses of LMs as optical phase modulators and switches. Developing these 
applications requires a fresh emphasis on knowing and controlling the complex optical properties 
of LMs, particularly in the below-band gap, low-loss spectral regions. This will require focused 
efforts in materials characterization and processing, building on but somewhat distinct from the 
tremendous recent advances in LM research. The processing-properties relationships relevant to 
refractive uses of LMs in photonic integrated devices remain largely unknown, and are likely to 
be distinct from those most relevant to uses in other domains such as microelectronics. For 
instance, how do grain boundaries contribute to optical loss, and how do they affect the 
performance of strong optical phase modulators based on material phase transformations? Such 
questions frame an exciting future for research on LMs for integrated photonics. 

We’ve reviewed techniques for measuring the optical properties of LMs, and highlighted the 

challenges of measuring the complex refractive index below-band gap in highly-anisotropic 
semiconductors. Certain methods developed decades ago may be primed for revival, motivated by 
new applications, and enabled by advances in film processing; examples include transmission 
ellipsometry and photo-thermal deflection spectroscopy, useful to quantify optical loss due to in-
gap defects. We encourage the measurement of in- and out-of-plane optical anisotropy (i.e. biaxial, 
triaxial), and the development of new device concepts taking advantage of these sizable effects in 
LMs. We also encourage increased research on electro-optic properties of LMs and ensuing 
applications. 

Using LMs in photonic integrated circuits will be enabled by advances in materials processing. 

Looking ahead to photonic circuit integration, we’ve reviewed processing methods with emphasis 
on wafer-scale film synthesis. Recent developments in CVD methods, including MOCVD, are 
promising for future device integration. Two topics particularly relevant to LMs are layer transfer 
and air stability. Layer transfer may greatly expand the set of materials available for photonic 
integrated circuits by decoupling materials synthesis and integration, but will require concerted 
development for each LM, film synthesis method, and integration process flow. Air stability 
remains a critical issue for many LMs: few LMs are air-insensitive, some form self-limiting native 
oxides in air, and some suffer from unimpeded oxidation. The field would benefit from continued, 
focused study of oxidation processes, and on the functional properties of native oxides (or even 
chemisorbed oxygen molecules). 


23

The diversity of LM polymorphs with distinct opto-electronic properties motivates research on 

functional material phase transformations. LMs present opportunities to surpass the performance 
of established phase-change materials, by using order-order transformations that can be switched 
by non-thermal stimuli, rather than those based on thermal switching between ordered and 
disordered phases. Here we’ve emphasized order-order (i.e. martensitic) transformations for strong 
optical phase modulation. The requirements of strong optical phase modulation, fast and low-
power switching, low material fatigue and long device lifetime, low insertion loss, and process 
compatibility add up to a daunting set of material specifications; we suggest that alloy design may 
be an effective strategy to balance these demands. 

The use of LMs for refractive applications in photonic integrated circuits is at a crossroads. 

The material properties are certainly intriguing, and key device concepts have been demonstrated. 
However, it’s still far from clear that LMs will be better than established options for strong optical 
phase modulation, all things considered. The opportunities for collaborations between the 
materials science and photonics engineering communities are focused and exciting.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an Office of Naval Research MURI through grant #N00014-17-1-
2661. This work was supported by Indian Institute of Science start-up grant.
Bibliography
(1) Wang, C.; Zhang, M.; Chen, X.; Bertrand, M.; Shams-Ansari, A.; Chandrasekhar, S.; 

Winzer, P.; Lončar, M. Integrated Lithium Niobate Electro-Optic Modulators Operating at 
CMOS-Compatible Voltages. Nature 2018, 562 (7725), 101–104. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0551-y.

(2) Wu, C.; Yu, H.; Li, H.; Zhang, X.; Takeuchi, I.; Li, M. Low-Loss Integrated Photonic 

Switch Using Subwavelength Patterned Phase Change Material. ACS Photonics 2019, 6 (1), 
87–92. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.8b01516.

(3) Datta, I.; Chae, S. H.; Bhatt, G. R.; Tadayon, M. A.; Li, B.; Yu, Y.; Park, C.; Park, J.; Cao, 

L.; Basov, D. N.; Hone, J.; Lipson, M. Low-Loss Composite Photonic Platform Based on 
2D Semiconductor Monolayers. Nat. Photonics 2020, 14 (4), 256–262. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41566-020-0590-4.

(4) Kim, J.-H.; Aghaeimeibodi, S.; Carolan, J.; Englund, D.; Waks, E. Hybrid Integration 

Methods for On-Chip Quantum Photonics. Optica, OPTICA 2020, 7 (4), 291–308. 
https://doi.org/10.1364/OPTICA.384118.

(5) Shen, Y.; Harris, N. C.; Skirlo, S.; Prabhu, M.; Baehr-Jones, T.; Hochberg, M.; Sun, X.; 

Zhao, S.; Larochelle, H.; Englund, D.; Soljačić, M. Deep Learning with Coherent 
Nanophotonic Circuits. Nat Photon 2017, 11, 441–446. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2017.93.

(6) Sun, J.; Timurdogan, E.; Yaacobi, A.; Hosseini, E. S.; Watts, M. R. Large-Scale 

Nanophotonic Phased Array. Nature 2013, 493 (7431), 195–199. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11727.

(7) Reed, G. T.; Mashanovich, G.; Gardes, F. Y.; Thomson, D. J. Silicon Optical Modulators. 

Nature Photonics 2010, 4 (8), 518–526. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2010.179.

(8) Soref, R.; Bennett, B. Electrooptical Effects in Silicon. IEEE Journal of Quantum 

Electronics 1987, 23 (1), 123–129. https://doi.org/10.1109/JQE.1987.1073206.

(9) Janner, D.; Tulli, D.; García‐Granda, M.; Belmonte, M.; Pruneri, V. Micro-Structured 

Integrated Electro-Optic LiNbO3 Modulators. Laser & Photonics Reviews 2009, 3 (3), 


24

301–313. https://doi.org/10.1002/lpor.200810073.

(10) Klein, M.; Badada, B. H.; Binder, R.; Alfrey, A.; McKie, M.; Koehler, M. R.; Mandrus, D. 

G.; Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; LeRoy, B. J.; Schaibley, J. R. 2D Semiconductor 
Nonlinear Plasmonic Modulators. Nat Commun 2019, 10 (1), 3264. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11186-w.

(11) Liu, W.; Wang, Y.; Zheng, B.; Hwang, M.; Ji, Z.; Liu, G.; Li, Z.; Sorger, V. J.; Pan, A.; 

Agarwal, R. Observation and Active Control of a Collective Polariton Mode and Polaritonic 
Band Gap in Few-Layer WS 2 Strongly Coupled with Plasmonic Lattices. Nano Lett. 2020, 
20 (1), 790–798. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b05056.

(12) Ye, C.; Liu, K.; Soref, R. A.; Sorger, V. J. A Compact Plasmonic MOS-Based 2×2 Electro-

Optic Switch. Nanophotonics 2015, 4 (3), 261–268. https://doi.org/10.1515/nanoph-2015-
0010.

(13) Haffner, C.; Heni, W.; Fedoryshyn, Y.; Niegemann, J.; Melikyan, A.; Elder, D. L.; 

Baeuerle, B.; Salamin, Y.; Josten, A.; Koch, U.; Hoessbacher, C.; Ducry, F.; Juchli, L.; 
Emboras, A.; Hillerkuss, D.; Kohl, M.; Dalton, L. R.; Hafner, C.; Leuthold, J. All-
Plasmonic Mach–Zehnder Modulator Enabling Optical High-Speed Communication at the 
Microscale. Nature Photon 2015, 9 (8), 525–528. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2015.127.

(14) Melikyan, A.; Alloatti, L.; Muslija, A.; Hillerkuss, D.; Schindler, P. C.; Li, J.; Palmer, R.; 

Korn, D.; Muehlbrandt, S.; Van Thourhout, D.; Chen, B.; Dinu, R.; Sommer, M.; Koos, C.; 
Kohl, M.; Freude, W.; Leuthold, J. High-Speed Plasmonic Phase Modulators. Nature 
Photon 2014, 8 (3), 229–233. https://doi.org/10.1038/nphoton.2014.9.

(15) Li, J.; Li, J.; Huang, Y.; Huang, Y.; Song, Y.; Li, L.; Li, L.; Zheng, H.; Wang, H.; Gu, T.; 

Richardson, K.; Kong, J.; Hu, J.; Lin, H. High-Performance Graphene-Integrated Thermo-
Optic Switch: Design and Experimental Validation [Invited]. Opt. Mater. Express, OME 
2020, 10 (2), 387–396. https://doi.org/10.1364/OME.382856.

(16) Wuttig, M.; Yamada, N. Phase-Change Materials for Rewriteable Data Storage. Nature 

Materials 2007, 6 (11), 824–832. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmat2009.

(17) Le Gallo, M.; Sebastian, A. An Overview of Phase-Change Memory Device Physics. J. 

Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2020, 53 (21), 213002. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6463/ab7794.

(18) Butler, S. Z.; Hollen, S. M.; Cao, L. Y.; Cui, Y.; Gupta, J. A.; Gutierrez, H. R.; Heinz, T. 

F.; Hong, S. S.; Huang, J. X.; Ismach, A. F.; Johnston-Halperin, E.; Kuno, M.; Plashnitsa, 
V. V.; Robinson, R. D.; Ruoff, R. S.; Salahuddin, S.; Shan, J.; Shi, L.; Spencer, M. G.; 
Terrones, M.; Windl, W.; Goldberger, J. E. Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities in 
Two-Dimensional Materials Beyond Graphene. ACS nano 2013, 7 (4), 2898–2926. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn400280c.

(19) Bhimanapati, G. R.; Lin, Z.; Meunier, V.; Jung, Y.; Cha, J.; Das, S.; Xiao, D.; Son, Y.; 

Strano, M. S.; Cooper, V. R.; Liang, L.; Louie, S. G.; Ringe, E.; Zhou, W.; Kim, S. S.; 
Naik, R. R.; Sumpter, B. G.; Terrones, H.; Xia, F.; Wang, Y.; Zhu, J.; Akinwande, D.; 
Alem, N.; Schuller, J. A.; Schaak, R. E.; Terrones, M.; Robinson, J. A. Recent Advances in 
Two-Dimensional Materials beyond Graphene. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (12), 11509–11539. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.5b05556.

(20) Zhou, J.; Xu, H.; Li, Y.; Jaramillo, R.; Li, J. Opto-Mechanics Driven Fast Martensitic 

Transition in Two-Dimensional Materials. Nano Lett. 2018, 18 (12), 7794–7800. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b03559.

(21) Yung-Chang Lin; Dumitru O. Dumcenco; Ying-Sheng Huang; Kazu Suenaga. Atomic 


25

Mechanism of the Semiconducting-to-Metallic Phase Transition in Single-Layered MoS2. 
Nature Nanotechnology 2014, 9 (5), 391. https://doi.org/10.1038/nnano.2014.64.

(22) Zhang, F.; Zhang, H.; Krylyuk, S.; Milligan, C. A.; Zhu, Y.; Zemlyanov, D. Y.; Bendersky, 

L. A.; Burton, B. P.; Davydov, A. V.; Appenzeller, J. Electric-Field Induced Structural 
Transition in Vertical MoTe2- and Mo1–XWxTe2-Based Resistive Memories. Nature 
Materials 2019, 18 (1), 55–61. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-018-0234-y.

(23) Wang, N.; Zhang, H.; Zhou, L.; Lu, L.; Chen, J.; Rahman, B. M. A. Design of Ultra-

Compact Optical Memristive Switches with GST as the Active Material. Micromachines 
2019, 10 (7), 453. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi10070453.

(24) Singh, A.; Li, Y.; Fodor, B.; Makai, L.; Zhou, J.; Xu, H.; Akey, A.; Li, J.; Jaramillo, R. 

Near-Infrared Optical Properties and Proposed Phase-Change Usefulness of Transition 
Metal Disulfides. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2019, 115 (16), 161902. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5124224.

(25) Yu, Y.; Yu, Y.; Huang, L.; Peng, H.; Xiong, L.; Cao, L. Giant Gating Tunability of Optical 

Refractive Index in Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Monolayers. Nano Lett. 2017, 17 (6), 
3613–3618. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00768.

(26) Hewak, D. W.; Brady, D.; Curry, R. J.; Elliott, G.; Huang, C. C.; Hughes, M.; Knight, K.; 

Mairaj, A.; Petrovich, M. N.; Simpson, R. E.; Sproat, C. Chalcogenide Glasses for 
Photonics Device Applications. In Photonic Glasses and Glass-Ceramics; Murugan, G. S., 
Ed.; Research Signpost, 2010; pp 29–102.

(27) Blodgett, D. W.; Thomas, M. E.; Hahn, D. V.; Kaplan, S. G. Longwave Infrared Absorption 

and Scatter Properties of ZnS and ZnSe; Tustison, R. W., Ed.; Orlando, FL, 2003; p 137. 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.487874.

(28) Mak, K. F.; Lee, C.; Hone, J.; Shan, J.; Heinz, T. F. Atomically Thin MoS2: A New Direct-

Gap Semiconductor. Phys Rev Lett 2010, 105 (13), 136805. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.105.136805.

(29) Li, Y.; Singh, A.; Krylyuk, S.; Davydov, A.; Jaramillo, R. Near-Infrared Photonic Phase-

Change Properties of Transition Metal Ditellurides. In Low-Dimensional Materials and 
Devices 2019; Kobayashi, N. P., Talin, A. A., Davydov, A. V., Eds.; SPIE: San Diego, 
United States, 2019; p 28. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2532602.

(30) Shi, G.; Kioupakis, E. Anisotropic Spin Transport and Strong Visible-Light Absorbance in 

Few-Layer SnSe and GeSe. Nano Lett. 2015, 15 (10), 6926–6931. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b02861.

(31) Momma, K. and Izumi, F. VESTA 3 for three-dimensional visualization of crystal, 

volumetric and morphology data. J. Appl. Cryst. 2011, 44 (6), 1272-1276. 
https://doi.org/10.1107/S0021889811038970.

(32) Greenaway, D. L.; Nitsche, R. Preparation and Optical Properties of Group IV–VI2 

Chalcogenides Having the CdI2 Structure. Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 
1965, 26 (9), 1445–1458. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3697(65)90043-0.

(33) Gregora, I.; Velickýa, B.; Závětová, M. Refractive Index of Crystalline and Amorphous 

GeS. phys. stat. sol. (b) 1981, 104 (2), K95–K100. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pssb.2221040249.

(34) R. E. Banai; L. A. Burton; S.G. Choi; F. Hofherr; T. Sorgenfrei; A. Walsh; B. To; A. Croll; 

J.R.S. Brownson. Ellipsometric Characterization and Density-Functional Theory Analysis 
of Anisotropic Optical Properties of Single-Crystal α-SnS: Journal of Applied Physics: Vol 
116, No 1. 2019, 013511. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4886915.


26

(35) Wang, X.; Lan, S. Optical Properties of Black Phosphorus. Adv. Opt. Photon. 2016, 8 (4), 

618. https://doi.org/10.1364/AOP.8.000618.

(36) Oliver, S. M.; Fox, J. J.; Hashemi, A.; Singh, A.; Cavalero, R. L.; Yee, S.; Snyder, D. W.; 

Jaramillo, R.; Komsa, H.-P.; Vora, P. M. Phonons and Excitons in ZrSe2 –ZrS2 Alloys. J. 
Mater. Chem. C 2020, 8, 5732–5743. https://doi.org/10.1039/D0TC00731E.

(37) Wang, Y.; Le Huang, L. H.; Li, B.; Shang, J.; Xia, C.; Fan, C.; Deng, H.-X.; Wei, Z.; Li, J. 

Composition-Tunable 2D SnSe 2(1−x) S 2x Alloys towards Efficient Bandgap Engineering 
and High Performance (Opto)Electronics. J. Mater. Chem. C 2017, 5 (1), 84–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C6TC03751H.

(38) Evans, B. L.; Young, P. A. Optical Absorption and Dispersion in Molybdenum Disulphide. 

Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 
1965, 284 (1398), 402–422. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.1965.0071.

(39) Wilson, J. A.; Yoffe, A. D. The Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Discussion and 

Interpretation of the Observed Optical, Electrical and Structural Properties. Advances in 
Physics 1969, 18 (73), 193–335. https://doi.org/10.1080/00018736900101307.

(40) Liu, H.-L.; Shen, C.-C.; Su, S.-H.; Hsu, C.-L.; Li, M.-Y.; Li, L.-J. Optical Properties of 

Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides Probed by Spectroscopic Ellipsometry. 
Applied Physics Letters 2014, 105 (20), 201905. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4901836.

(41) Li, Y.; Chernikov, A.; Zhang, X.; Rigosi, A.; Hill, H. M.; van der Zande, A. M.; Chenet, D. 

A.; Shih, E.-M.; Hone, J.; Heinz, T. F. Measurement of the Optical Dielectric Function of 
Monolayer Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides: MoS 2 , Mo S e 2 , WS 2 , and WS e 2. 
Phys. Rev. B 2014, 90 (20), 205422. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.90.205422.

(42) Funke, S.; Miller, B.; Parzinger, E.; Thiesen, P.; Holleitner, A. W.; Wurstbauer, U. Imaging 

Spectroscopic Ellipsometry of MoS2. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 2016, 28 (38), 
385301. https://doi.org/10.1088/0953-8984/28/38/385301.

(43) Chernikov, A.; Berkelbach, T. C.; Hill, H. M.; Rigosi, A.; Li, Y.; Aslan, O. B.; Reichman, 

D. R.; Hybertsen, M. S.; Heinz, T. F. Exciton Binding Energy and Nonhydrogenic Rydberg 
Series in Monolayer WS2. Phys Rev Lett 2014, 113 (7), 076802. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/Physrevlett.113.076802.

(44) Singh, A.; Moody, G.; Wu, S.; Wu, Y.; Ghimire, N. J.; Yan, J.; Mandrus, D. G.; Xu, X.; Li, 

X. Coherent Electronic Coupling in Atomically Thin MoSe2. Phys Rev Lett 2014, 112 (21), 
216804. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.112.216804.

(45) Yu, Y.; Hu, S.; Su, L.; Huang, L.; Liu, Y.; Jin, Z.; Purezky, A. A.; Geohegan, D. B.; Kim, 

K. W.; Zhang, Y.; Cao, L. Equally Efficient Interlayer Exciton Relaxation and Improved 
Absorption in Epitaxial and Nonepitaxial MoS 2 /WS 2 Heterostructures. Nano Lett. 2015, 
15 (1), 486–491. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl5038177.

(46) Ovesen, S.; Brem, S.; Linderälv, C.; Kuisma, M.; Korn, T.; Erhart, P.; Selig, M.; Malic, E. 

Interlayer Exciton Dynamics in van Der Waals Heterostructures. Commun Phys 2019, 2 (1), 
23. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42005-019-0122-z.

(47) Arora, A.; Drüppel, M.; Schmidt, R.; Deilmann, T.; Schneider, R.; Molas, M. R.; Marauhn, 

P.; Michaelis de Vasconcellos, S.; Potemski, M.; Rohlfing, M.; Bratschitsch, R. Interlayer 
Excitons in a Bulk van Der Waals Semiconductor. Nat Commun 2017, 8 (1), 639. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00691-5.

(48) Stevens, C. E.; Stroucken, T.; Stier, A. V.; Paul, J.; Zhang, H.; Dey, P.; Crooker, S. A.; 

Koch, S. W.; Karaiskaj, D. Superradiant Coupling Effects in Transition-Metal 
Dichalcogenides. Optica 2018, 5 (6), 749. https://doi.org/10.1364/OPTICA.5.000749.


27

(49) Segura, A.; Artús, L.; Cuscó, R.; Taniguchi, T.; Cassabois, G.; Gil, B. Natural Optical 

Anisotropy of H-BN: Highest Giant Birefringence in a Bulk Crystal through the Mid-
Infrared to Ultraviolet Range. Phys. Rev. Materials 2018, 2 (2), 024001. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.024001.

(50) Yang, H.; Jussila, H.; Autere, A.; Komsa, H.-P.; Ye, G.; Chen, X.; Hasan, T.; Sun, Z. 

Optical Waveplates Based on Birefringence of Anisotropic Two-Dimensional Layered 
Materials. ACS Photonics 2017, 4 (12), 3023–3030. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsphotonics.7b00507.

(51) Tong, L.; Duan, X.; Song, L.; Liu, T.; Ye, L.; Huang, X.; Wang, P.; Sun, Y.; He, X.; Zhang, 

L.; Xu, K.; Hu, W.; Xu, J.-B.; Zang, J.; Cheng, G. J. Artificial Control of In-Plane 
Anisotropic Photoelectricity in Monolayer MoS2. Applied Materials Today 2019, 15, 203–
211. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2019.02.001.

(52) Shi, J.; Yu, P.; Liu, F.; He, P.; Wang, R.; Qin, L.; Zhou, J.; Li, X.; Zhou, J.; Sui, X.; Zhang, 

S.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Sum, T. C.; Qiu, X.; Liu, Z.; Liu, X. 3R MoS2 with Broken 
Inversion Symmetry: A Promising Ultrathin Nonlinear Optical Device. Adv. Mater. 2017, 
29 (30), 1701486. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201701486.

(53) Hu, L.; Huang, X.; Wei, D. Layer-Independent and Layer-Dependent Nonlinear Optical 

Properties of Two-Dimensional GaX (X = S, Se, Te) Nanosheets. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 
2017, 19 (18), 11131–11141. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7CP00578D.

(54) Wang, C.-Y.; Guo, G.-Y. Nonlinear Optical Properties of Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide 

MX 2 (M = Mo, W; X = S, Se) Monolayers and Trilayers from First-Principles 
Calculations. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119 (23), 13268–13276. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5b01866.

(55) Abarkan, M.; Salvestrini, J. P.; Fontana, M. D.; Aillerie, M. Frequency and Wavelength 

Dependences of Electro-Optic Coefficients in Inorganic Crystals. Applied Physics B: 
Lasers and Optics 2003, 76 (7), 765–769. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00340-003-1196-5.

(56) Liu, F.; Wu, W.; Bai, Y.; Chae, S. H.; Li, Q.; Wang, J.; Hone, J.; Zhu, X.-Y. Disassembling 

2D van Der Waals Crystals into Macroscopic Monolayers and Reassembling into Artificial 
Lattices. Science 2020, 367 (6480), 903–906. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aba1416.

(57) Asadi, Y.; Nourbakhsh, Z. Structural, Electronic, Mechanical, Thermodynamic, and Linear 

and Nonlinear Optical Properties of MoS2, MoSe2, and Their MoS2xSe2(1−x) Alloys: Ab 
Initio Calculations. Journal of Elec Materials 2019, 48 (12), 7977–7990. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11664-019-07611-x.

(58) Wei, Y.; Xu, X.; Wang, S.; Li, W.; Jiang, Y. Second Harmonic Generation in Janus MoSSe 

a Monolayer and Stacked Bulk with Vertical Asymmetry. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2019, 
21 (37), 21022–21029. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9CP03395E.

(59) Nukala, P.; Lin, C.-C.; Composto, R.; Agarwal, R. Ultralow-Power Switching via Defect 

Engineering in Germanium Telluride Phase-Change Memory Devices. Nat Commun 2016, 
7 (1), 10482. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10482.

(60) Duerloo, K.-A. N.; Li, Y.; Reed, E. J. Structural Phase Transitions in Two-Dimensional 

Mo- and W-Dichalcogenide Monolayers. Nat Commun 2014, 5 (1), 4214. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms5214.

(61) Xu, H.; Zhou, J.; Li, Y.; Jaramillo, R.; Li, J. Optomechanical Control of Stacking Patterns 

of H-BN Bilayer. Nano Res. 2019, 12 (10), 2634–2639. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12274-
019-2500-y.

(62) Fujiwara, H. Spectroscopic Ellipsometry: Principles and Applications; 2007.


28

(63) Hu, D.; Yang, X.; Li, C.; Liu, R.; Yao, Z.; Hu, H.; Corder, S. N. G.; Chen, J.; Sun, Z.; Liu, 

M.; Dai, Q. Probing Optical Anisotropy of Nanometer-Thin van Der Waals Microcrystals 
by near-Field Imaging. Nat Commun 2017, 8 (1), 1471. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
017-01580-7.

(64) Ermolaev, G. A.; Grudinin, D. V.; Stebunov, Y. V.; Kravets, V. G.; Duan, J.; Tselikov, G. 

I.; Voronin, K. V.; Yakubovsky, D. I.; Novikov, S. M.; Baranov, D. G.; Nikitin, A. Y.; 
Shegai, T.; Alonso-Gonzalez, P.; Grigorenko, A. N.; Arsenin, A. V.; Novoselov, K. S.; 
Volkov, V. S. Giant Optical Anisotropy in Transition Metal Dichalcogenides for Next-
Generation Photonics. arXiv:2006.00884 [cond-mat, physics:physics] 2020.

(65) Roxlo, C. B.; Chianelli, R. R.; Deckman, H. W.; Ruppert, A. F.; Wong, P. P. Bulk and 

Surface Optical Absorption in Molybdenum Disulfide. Journal of Vacuum Science & 
Technology A 1987, 5 (4), 555–557. https://doi.org/10.1116/1.574671.

(66) Maiti, R.; Hemnani, R. A.; Amin, R.; Ma, Z.; Tahersima, M. H.; Empante, T. A.; Dalir, H.; 

Agarwal, R.; Bartels, L.; Sorger, V. J. A Semi-Empirical Integrated Microring Cavity 
Approach for 2D Material Optical Index Identification at 1.55 Μm. Nanophotonics 2019, 8
(3), 435–441. https://doi.org/10.1515/nanoph-2018-0197.

(67) Wei, G.; Stanev, T. K.; Czaplewski, D. A.; Jung, I. W.; Stern, N. P. Silicon-Nitride 

Photonic Circuits Interfaced with Monolayer MoS2. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2015, 107 (9), 
091112. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4929779.

(68) Wang, F. Calculation of the Electro-Optical and Nonlinear Optical Coefficients of 

Ferroelectric Materials from Their Linear Properties. Phys. Rev. B 1999, 59 (15), 9733–
9736. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.59.9733.

(69) Zhang, J.; Yu, H.; Chen, W.; Tian, X.; Liu, D.; Cheng, M.; Xie, G.; Yang, W.; Yang, R.; 

Bai, X.; Shi, D.; Zhang, G. Scalable Growth of High-Quality Polycrystalline MoS 2
Monolayers on SiO 2 with Tunable Grain Sizes. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (6), 6024–6030. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn5020819.

(70) Zhou, J.; Lin, J.; Huang, X.; Zhou, Y.; Chen, Y.; Xia, J.; Wang, H.; Xie, Y.; Yu, H.; Lei, J.; 

Wu, D.; Liu, F.; Fu, Q.; Zeng, Q.; Hsu, C.-H.; Yang, C.; Lu, L.; Yu, T.; Shen, Z.; Lin, H.; 
Yakobson, B. I.; Liu, Q.; Suenaga, K.; Liu, G.; Liu, Z. A Library of Atomically Thin Metal 
Chalcogenides. Nature 2018, 556 (7701), 355–359. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-
0008-3.

(71) Sutter, E.; Zhang, B.; Sun, M.; Sutter, P. Few-Layer to Multilayer Germanium(II) Sulfide: 

Synthesis, Structure, Stability, and Optoelectronics. ACS Nano 2019, 13 (8), 9352–9362. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.9b03986.

(72) Xue, D.-J.; Liu, S.-C.; Dai, C.-M.; Chen, S.; He, C.; Zhao, L.; Hu, J.-S.; Wan, L.-J. GeSe 

Thin-Film Solar Cells Fabricated by Self-Regulated Rapid Thermal Sublimation. Journal of 
the American Chemical Society 2017, 139 (2), 958–965. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/jacs.6b11705.

(73) Xu, Y.; Shi, X.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, Q.; Huang, Z.; Xu, X.; Guo, J.; Zhang, H.; 

Sun, L.; Zeng, Z.; Pan, A.; Zhang, K. Epitaxial Nucleation and Lateral Growth of High-
Crystalline Black Phosphorus Films on Silicon. Nature Communications 2020, 11 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-14902-z.

(74) Kang, K.; Xie, S.; Huang, L.; Han, Y.; Huang, P. Y.; Mak, K. F.; Kim, C.-J.; Muller, D.; 

Park, J. High-Mobility Three-Atom-Thick Semiconducting Films with Wafer-Scale 
Homogeneity. Nature 2015, 520 (7549), 656–660. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14417.

(75) Bade, B. P.; Garje, S. S.; Niwate, Y. S.; Afzaal, M.; O’Brien, P. Tribenzyltin(IV)Chloride 


29

Thiosemicarbazones: Novel Single Source Precursors for Growth of SnS Thin Films. 
Chemical Vapor Deposition 2008, 14 (9–10), 292–295. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/cvde.200806687.

(76) Boscher, N. D.; Carmalt, C. J.; Palgrave, R. G.; Parkin, I. P. Atmospheric Pressure 

Chemical Vapour Deposition of SnSe and SnSe2 Thin Films on Glass. Thin Solid Films 
2008, 516 (15), 4750–4757. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tsf.2007.08.100.

(77) Eichfeld, S. M.; Hossain, L.; Lin, Y.-C.; Piasecki, A. F.; Kupp, B.; Birdwell, A. G.; Burke, 

R. A.; Lu, N.; Peng, X.; Li, J.; Azcatl, A.; McDonnell, S.; Wallace, R. M.; Kim, M. J.; 
Mayer, T. S.; Redwing, J. M.; Robinson, J. A. Highly Scalable, Atomically Thin WSe 2
Grown via Metal–Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (2), 2080–2087. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn5073286.

(78) Chang, H. S. W.; Schleich, D. M. TiS2 and TiS3 Thin Films Prepared by MOCVD. Journal 

of Solid State Chemistry 1992, 100 (1), 62–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-
4596(92)90156-P.

(79) Tarasov, A.; Campbell, P. M.; Tsai, M.-Y.; Hesabi, Z. R.; Feirer, J.; Graham, S.; Ready, W. 

J.; Vogel, E. M. Highly Uniform Trilayer Molybdenum Disulfide for Wafer-Scale Device 
Fabrication. Advanced Functional Materials 2014, 24 (40), 6389–6400. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201401389.

(80) Jo, S. S.; Li, Y.; Singh, A.; Kumar, A.; Frisone, S.; LeBeau, J. M.; Jaramillo, R. Formation 

of Large-Area MoS2 Thin Films by Oxygen-Catalyzed Sulfurization of Mo Thin Films. 
Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A 2019, 38 (1), 013405. 
https://doi.org/10.1116/1.5132748.

(81) Li, Y.; Singh, A.; Reidy, K.; Jo, S. S.; Ross, F. M.; Jaramillo, R. Making Large-Area 

Titanium Disulfide Films at Reduced Temperature by Balancing the Kinetics of 
Sulfurization and Roughening. Advanced Functional Materials n/a (n/a), 2003617. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202003617.

(82) Krbal, M.; Prikryl, J.; Zazpe, R.; Dvorak, F.; Bures, F.; Macak, J. M. 2D MoSe 2 Structures 

Prepared by Atomic Layer Deposition. physica status solidi (RRL) - Rapid Research Letters 
2018, 12 (5), 1800023. https://doi.org/10.1002/pssr.201800023.

(83) Kim, S. B.; Sinsermsuksakul, P.; Hock, A. S.; Pike, R. D.; Gordon, R. G. Synthesis of N-

Heterocyclic Stannylene (Sn(II)) and Germylene (Ge(II)) and a Sn(II) Amidinate and Their 
Application as Precursors for Atomic Layer Deposition. Chemistry of Materials 2014, 26
(10), 3065–3073. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm403901y.

(84) Drozd, V. E.; Nikiforova, I. O.; Bogevolnov, V. B.; Yafyasov, A. M.; Filatova, E. O.; 

Papazoglou, D. ALD Synthesis of SnSe Layers and Nanostructures. Journal of Physics D: 
Applied Physics 2009, 42 (12), 125306. https://doi.org/10.1088/0022-3727/42/12/125306.

(85) Kim, W.; Yoo, S.; Yoo, C.; Park, E.-S.; Jeon, J.; Kwon, Y. J.; Woo, K. S.; Kim, H. J.; Lee, 

Y. K.; Hwang, C. S. Atomic Layer Deposition of GeSe Films Using HGeCl 3 and [(CH 3 ) 3
Si] 2 Se with the Discrete Feeding Method for the Ovonic Threshold Switch. 
Nanotechnology 2018, 29 (36), 365202. https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6528/aacda0.

(86) Nam, T.; Kim, H. Atomic Layer Deposition for Nonconventional Nanomaterials and Their 

Applications. Journal of Materials Research 2020, 35 (7), 656–680. 
https://doi.org/10.1557/jmr.2019.347.

(87) Yeo, S.; Nandi, D. K.; Rahul, R.; Kim, T. H.; Shong, B.; Jang, Y.; Bae, J.-S.; Han, J. W.; 

Kim, S.-H.; Kim, H. Low-Temperature Direct Synthesis of High Quality WS2 Thin Films 
by Plasma-Enhanced Atomic Layer Deposition for Energy Related Applications. Applied 


30

Surface Science 2018, 459, 596–605. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2018.07.210.

(88) Basuvalingam, S. B.; Zhang, Y.; Bloodgood, M. A.; Godiksen, R. H.; Curto, A. G.; 

Hofmann, J. P.; Verheijen, M. A.; Kessels, W. M. M.; Bol, A. A. Low-Temperature Phase-
Controlled Synthesis of Titanium Di- and Tri-Sulfide by Atomic Layer Deposition. 
Chemistry of Materials 2019, 31 (22), 9354–9362. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b02895.

(89) Mattinen, M.; King, P. J.; Popov, G.; Hämäläinen, J.; Heikkilä, M. J.; Leskelä, M.; Ritala, 

M. Van Der Waals Epitaxy of Continuous Thin Films of 2D Materials Using Atomic Layer 
Deposition in Low Temperature and Low Vacuum Conditions. 2D Materials 2019, 7 (1), 
011003. https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1583/ab4c09.

(90) Indirajith, R.; Srinivasan, T. P.; Ramamurthi, K.; Gopalakrishnan, R. Synthesis, Deposition 

and Characterization of Tin Selenide Thin Films by Thermal Evaporation Technique. 
Current Applied Physics 2010, 10 (6), 1402–1406. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cap.2010.05.002.

(91) Liu, S.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, X.; Huang, L.; Sun, J.; Guan, B.; Li, X.; Xue, D.; Hu, J. Tuning 

the Optical Absorption Property of GeSe Thin Films by Annealing Treatment. physica 
status solidi (RRL) – Rapid Research Letters 2018, 12 (12), 1800370. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pssr.201800370.

(92) Patel, S.; Aparimita, A.; Sripan, C.; Ganesan, R.; Naik, R. Thermal Annealing Induced Ag 

Diffusion into GeS Thin Film: Structural and Optical Property Study; Hisar, Haryana, 
India, 2019; p 030276. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5113115.

(93) Bashkirov, S. A.; Gremenok, V. F.; Ivanov, V. A. Physical Properties of SnS Thin Films 

Fabricated by Hot Wall Deposition. Semiconductors 2011, 45 (6), 749–752. 
https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063782611060030.

(94) Yang, Z.; Hao, J.; Yuan, S.; Lin, S.; Yau, H. M.; Dai, J.; Lau, S. P. Field-Effect Transistors 

Based on Amorphous Black Phosphorus Ultrathin Films by Pulsed Laser Deposition. 
Advanced Materials 2015, 27 (25), 3748–3754. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201500990.

(95) Serna, M. I.; Yoo, S. H.; Moreno, S.; Xi, Y.; Oviedo, J. P.; Choi, H.; Alshareef, H. N.; Kim, 

M. J.; Minary-Jolandan, M.; Quevedo-Lopez, M. A. Large-Area Deposition of MoS 2 by 
Pulsed Laser Deposition with In Situ Thickness Control. ACS Nano 2016, 10 (6), 6054–
6061. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b01636.

(96) Hamada, M.; Matsuura, K.; Sakamoto, T.; Muneta, I.; Hoshii, T.; Kakushima, K.; Tsutsui, 

K.; Wakabayashi, H. High Hall-Effect Mobility of Large-Area Atomic-Layered 
Polycrystalline ZrS 2 Film Using UHV RF Magnetron Sputtering and Sulfurization. IEEE 
Journal of the Electron Devices Society 2019, 7, 1258–1263. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JEDS.2019.2943609.

(97) Rajan, A.; Underwood, K.; Mazzola, F.; King, P. D. C. Morphology Control of Epitaxial 

Monolayer Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Materials 2020, 4 (1), 014003. 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.4.014003.

(98) Yue, R.; Nie, Y.; Walsh, L. A.; Addou, R.; Liang, C.; Lu, N.; Barton, A. T.; Zhu, H.; Che, 

Z.; Barrera, D.; Cheng, L.; Cha, P.-R.; Chabal, Y. J.; Hsu, J. W. P.; Kim, J.; Kim, M. J.; 
Colombo, L.; Wallace, R. M.; Cho, K.; Hinkle, C. L. Nucleation and Growth of WSe 2 : 
Enabling Large Grain Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. 2D Materials 2017, 4 (4), 045019. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/2053-1583/aa8ab5.

(99) Pacuski, W.; Grzeszczyk, M.; Nogajewski, K.; Bogucki, A.; Oreszczuk, K.; Kucharek, J.; 

Połczyńska, K. E.; Seredyński, B.; Rodek, A.; Bożek, R.; Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; 


31

Kret, S.; Sadowski, J.; Kazimierczuk, T.; Potemski, M.; Kossacki, P. Narrow Excitonic 
Lines and Large-Scale Homogeneity of Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide Monolayers 
Grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy on Hexagonal Boron Nitride. Nano Lett. 2020, 20 (5), 
3058–3066. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.9b04998.

(100) Engel-Herbert, R. Molecular Beam Epitaxy of Complex Oxides. In Molecular Beam 

Epitaxy: From Research to Mass Production; Henini, M., Ed.; Elsevier, 2012; pp 417–449.

(101) Tiefenbacher, S.; Sehnert, H.; Pettenkofer, C.; Jaegermann, W. Epitaxial Films of WS2 

by Metal Organic van Der Waals Epitaxy (MO-VDWE). Surface Science 1994, 318 (1), 
L1161–L1164. https://doi.org/10.1016/0039-6028(94)90331-X.

(102) Kang, K.; Lee, K.-H.; Han, Y.; Gao, H.; Xie, S.; Muller, D. A.; Park, J. Layer-by-Layer 

Assembly of Two-Dimensional Materials into Wafer-Scale Heterostructures. Nature 2017, 
550 (7675), 229–233. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature23905.

(103)
Mleczko, M. J.; Zhang, C.; Lee, H. R.; Kuo, H.-H.; Magyari-Köpe, B.; Moore, R. G.; 

Shen, Z.-X.; Fisher, I. R.; Nishi, Y.; Pop, E. HfSe2 and ZrSe2: Two-Dimensional 
Semiconductors with Native High-κ Oxides. Science Advances 2017, 3 (8), e1700481. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700481.

(104) Jaramillo, R.; Sher, M.-J.; Ofori-Okai, B. K.; Steinmann, V.; Yang, C.; Hartman, K.; 

Nelson, K. A.; Lindenberg, A. M.; Gordon, R. G.; Buonassisi, T. Transient Terahertz 
Photoconductivity Measurements of Minority-Carrier Lifetime in Tin Sulfide Thin Films: 
Advanced Metrology for an Early Stage Photovoltaic Material. Journal of Applied Physics 
2016, 119 (3), 035101. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4940157.

(105) Mirabelli, G.; McGeough, C.; Schmidt, M.; McCarthy, E. K.; Monaghan, S.; Povey, I. 

M.; McCarthy, M.; Gity, F.; Nagle, R.; Hughes, G.; Cafolla, A.; Hurley, P. K.; Duffy, R. 
Air Sensitivity of MoS 2 , MoSe 2 , MoTe 2 , HfS 2 , and HfSe 2. Journal of Applied Physics 
2016, 120 (12), 125102. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4963290.

(106) Jo, S. S.; Singh, A.; Yang, L.; Tiwari, S. C.; Hong, S.; Krishnamoorthy, A.; Sales, M. G.; 

Oliver, S. M.; Fox, J.; Cavalero, R. L.; Snyder, D. W.; Vora, P. M.; McDonnell, S. J.; 
Vashishta, P.; Kalia, R. K.; Nakano, A.; Jaramillo, R. Tape-Time Processing: Kinetics and 
Mechanisms of Native Oxidation of Transition Metal Dichalcogenides ZrS$_x$Se$_{2-
X}$ and MoS$_2$. arXiv:2007.00117 [cond-mat] 2020.

(107) Liu, H.; Han, N.; Zhao, J. Atomistic Insight into the Oxidation of Monolayer Transition 

Metal Dichalcogenides: From Structures to Electronic Properties. RSC Adv. 2015, 5 (23), 
17572–17581. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4RA17320A.

(108) Kc, S.; Longo, R. C.; Wallace, R. M.; Cho, K. Surface Oxidation Energetics and Kinetics 

on MoS 2 Monolayer. Journal of Applied Physics 2015, 117 (13), 135301. 
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4916536.

(109) Li, Q.; Zhou, Q.; Shi, L.; Chen, Q.; Wang, J. Recent Advances in Oxidation and 

Degradation Mechanisms of Ultrathin 2D Materials under Ambient Conditions and Their 
Passivation Strategies. J. Mater. Chem. A 2019, 7 (9), 4291–4312. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C8TA10306B.

(110) Castellanos-Gomez, A. Black Phosphorus: Narrow Gap, Wide Applications. J. Phys. 

Chem. Lett. 2015, 6 (21), 4280–4291. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b01686.

(111) Ye, F.; Lee, J.; Hu, J.; Mao, Z.; Wei, J.; Feng, P. X.-L. Environmental Instability and 

Degradation of Single- and Few-Layer WTe 2 Nanosheets in Ambient Conditions. Small 
2016, 12 (42), 5802–5808. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201601207.

(112) Nozaki, H.; Onoda, M.; Sekita, M.; Kosuda, K.; Wada, T. Variation of Lattice 


32

Dimensions in Epitaxial SnS Films on MgO(001). Journal of Solid State Chemistry 2005, 
178 (1), 245–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jssc.2004.11.031.

(113) Peng, J.-P.; Guan, J.-Q.; Zhang, H.-M.; Song, C.-L.; Wang, L.; He, K.; Xue, Q.-K.; Ma, 

X.-C. Molecular Beam Epitaxy Growth and Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Study of TiSe 
2 Ultrathin Films. Physical Review B 2015, 91 (12). 
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.91.121113.

(114) Tsipas, P.; Tsoutsou, D.; Marquez-Velasco, J.; Aretouli, K. E.; Xenogiannopoulou, E.; 

Vassalou, E.; Kordas, G.; Dimoulas, A. Epitaxial ZrSe2/MoSe2 Semiconductor v.d. Waals 
Heterostructures on Wide Band Gap AlN Substrates. Microelectronic Engineering 2015, 
147, 269–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2015.04.113.

(115) Barton, A. T.; Yue, R.; Anwar, S.; Zhu, H.; Peng, X.; McDonnell, S.; Lu, N.; Addou, R.; 

Colombo, L.; Kim, M. J.; Wallace, R. M.; Hinkle, C. L. Transition Metal Dichalcogenide 
and Hexagonal Boron Nitride Heterostructures Grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy. 
Microelectronic Engineering 2015, 147, 306–309. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee.2015.04.105.

(116) Xu, H.; Han, X.; Li, Z.; Liu, W.; Li, X.; Wu, J.; Guo, Z.; Liu, H. Epitaxial Growth of 

Few-Layer Black Phosphorene Quantum Dots on Si Substrates. Advanced Materials 
Interfaces 2018, 5 (21), 1801048. https://doi.org/10.1002/admi.201801048.


