1

Title: On-the-fly Closed-loop Autonomous Materials Discovery via Bayesian 

Active Learning

Authors: A. Gilad Kusne‡,1,2,*, Heshan Yu‡,2, Changming Wu3, Huairuo Zhang4,5, Jason 

Hattrick-Simpers1, Brian DeCost1, Suchismita Sarker6, Corey Oses7, Cormac Toher7, Stefano 
Curtarolo7,  Albert V. Davydov4, Ritesh Agarwal8, Leonid A. Bendersky4,5, Mo Li3, Apurva 

Mehta6, Ichiro Takeuchi2,9,*

Affiliations:
1 Materials Measurement Science Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899, US
2 Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 
20742, US
3 Electrical & Computer Engineering Department, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
US
4 Materials Science and Engineering Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899, US
5 Theiss Research, Inc., La Jolla, CA 92037, US
6 Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo 
Park, CA 94025, US
7 Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science Department and Center for Autonomous 
Materials Design, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, US
8 Materials Science and Engineering Department, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, US
9 Maryland Quantum Materials Center, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, US  

* Emails: aaron.kusne@nist.gov; takeuchi@umd.edu

‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract: Active learning – the field of machine learning (ML) dedicated to optimal experiment 
design, has played a part in science as far back as the 18th century when Laplace used it to guide 
his discovery of celestial mechanics1. In this work we focus a closed-loop, active learning-driven 
autonomous system on another major challenge, the discovery of advanced materials against the 
exceedingly complex synthesis-processes-structure-property landscape. We demonstrate 
autonomous research methodology (i.e. autonomous hypothesis definition and evaluation) that 
can place complex, advanced materials in reach, allowing scientists to fail smarter, learn faster, 
and spend less resources in their studies, while simultaneously improving trust in scientific 
results and machine learning tools. Additionally, this robot science enables science-over-the-
network, reducing the economic impact of scientists being physically separated from their labs. 
We used the real-time closed-loop, autonomous system for materials exploration and 
optimization (CAMEO) at the synchrotron beamline to accelerate the fundamentally 
interconnected tasks of rapid phase mapping and property optimization, with each cycle taking 
seconds to minutes, resulting in the discovery of a novel epitaxial nanocomposite phase-change 
memory material.


2

Main Text:
Technologies drive the perpetual search for novel and improved functional materials, 
necessitating the exploration of increasingly complex multi-component materials2. With each 
new component or materials parameter, the space of candidate experiments grows exponentially. 
For example, if investigating the impact of a new parameter (e.g. introducing doping) involves 
approximately ten experiments over the parameter range, N parameters will require on the order 
of 10N+ possible experiments. High-throughput synthesis and characterization techniques offer a 
partial solution: with each new parameter, the number of candidate experiments rapidly escapes 
the feasibility of exhaustive exploration. The search is further confounded by the diversity and 
complexity of materials composition-structure-property (CSP) relationships including materials-
processing parameters and atomic disorder3. Coupled with the sparsity of optimal materials, 
these challenges threaten to impede innovation and industrial advancement.

Structural phase maps, which describe the dependence of materials structure on composition, 
serve as blueprints in the design of functional and structural materials, as most materials 
properties are tied to crystal-structure prototypes. For example, property extrema tend to occur 
within specific phase regions (e.g. magnetism and superconductivity) or along phase boundaries 
(e.g. caloric-cooling materials and morphotropic phase-boundary piezoelectrics). Structural 
phase maps, and more specifically equilibrium phase diagrams, were traditionally generated over 
years with point-by-point Edisonian approaches involving iterative materials synthesis, 
diffraction-based structure characterization, and crystallographic refinement. 

Machine learning (ML) is transforming materials research before our eyes4, and yet direct 
coupling of ML with experiments remains a formidable challenge. Closed-loop Autonomous 
System for Materials Exploration and Optimization (CAMEO) offers a new materials research 
paradigm to truly harness the accelerating potential of ML, setting the stage for the 21st-century 
paradigm of materials research  – the autonomous materials research lab run under the 
supervision of a robot scientist or artificial scientist5.

Active learning6 – the ML field dedicated to optimal experiment design (i.e. adaptive design), is 
key to this new paradigm. Active learning provides a systematic approach to identify the best 
experiments to perform next to achieve user-defined objectives. Bayesian optimization (BO) 
active learning techniques have been used more recently to guide experimentalists in the lab to 
optimize unknown functions7–12. BO methods balance the use of experiments to explore the 
unknown function with experiments that exploit prior knowledge to identify extrema. However, 
these past studies only advised researchers on the next experiment to perform, leaving 
experiment planning, execution, and analysis to the researcher. More recently, autonomous 
systems have been demonstrated for process optimization13, 14 and sample characterization15. 
Taking another step and placing active learning in real-time control of solid-state materials 
exploration labs promises to accelerate materials discovery while also rapidly and efficiently 
illuminating complex materials-property relationships.


3

We demonstrate CAMEO in real-time control of X-ray diffraction measurement experiments 
over composition spreads at the synchrotron beamline and in the lab. The algorithm accelerates 
phase mapping and materials discovery of a novel solid-state material, with a 10-fold reduction 
in required experiments, each iteration taking tens of seconds to tens of minutes depending on 
the experimental task. It uses an active-learning campaign that exploits physics knowledge (e.g. 
Gibbs phase rule) and combines the joint objectives of maximizing knowledge of the phase map 
𝑃(𝑥) with hunting for materials 𝑥∗ that correspond to property 𝐹(𝑥) extrema, while also 
exploiting the shared information across these tasks via function 𝑔 (See Eq 1). Here 𝑥 ∈ ℝ𝑑 is 
the set of 𝑑 materials-composition parameters. This allows CAMEO to target its search in 
specific phase regions or to search near phase boundaries, thus exploiting the dependence of 
materials property on structure. We demonstrate that this physics-informed approach accelerates 
materials optimization compared to general optimization methodologies that focus on directly 
charting the high dimensional, complex property function. 

𝑥∗ = argmax𝑥[𝑔(𝐹(𝑥), 𝑃(𝑥))]
𝐸𝑞𝑛 (1)

Here, we explored the Ge-Sb-Te ternary system to identify an optimal phase-change memory 
(PCM) material for photonic switching devices16. PCM materials can be switched between the 
amorphous and crystalline states with an associated change in resistance and optical contrast 
which can be accessed on the nanosecond scale or shorter. Various Ge-Sb-Te based PCMs, 
especially Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST225), have been used in DVD-RAM and nonvolatile phase-change 
random-access memory. We have implemented our strategy for identifying the optimal 
composition within the ternary for high-performance photonic switching with an eye toward 
neuromorphic memory applications17. Our goal was to find a compound with the highest optical 
contrast between amorphous and crystalline states in order to realize multi-level optical 
switching with a high signal-to-noise ratio. The composition range mapped was selected based 
on the lack of detailed phase distribution and optical property information near known PCM 
phases. We tasked CAMEO to find the composition with the largest difference in the optical 
bandgap Δ𝐸𝑔 and hence optical contrast between amorphous and crystalline states. We have 
discovered a naturally-forming stable epitaxial nanocomposite at a phase boundary between the 
distorted face-centered cubic Ge-Sb-Te structure (which we refer to as FCC-Ge-Sb-Te or simply 
GST) phase region and phase co-existing region of GST and Sb-Te whose optical contrast is 
superior to the well-known GST225 or other compounds within the Ge-Sb-Te ternary.

CAMEO satisfies many attributes of a robot scientist, as diagrammed in Figure 1. The modular 
algorithm has ‘at its fingertips’ a collection of information - knowledge of past experiments both 
physical and computational, materials theory, and measurement-instrumentation science. The 
algorithm uses this knowledge to make informed decisions on the next experiment to perform in 
the pursuit of optimizing a materials property and/or maximizing knowledge of a materials 
system. For example, at each iteration the set of possible phase maps are identified and ranked by 
Bayesian likelihood, given analysis results of the measured materials. Phase map and functional 


4

property likelihoods establish scientific hypotheses and drive further phase mapping and 
materials optimization and are also presented to the human-in-the-loop who can then (optionally) 
provide guidance. Specifics are presented in Methods. CAMEO controls lab-based 
characterization equipment in real-time to orchestrate its own experiments, update its knowledge, 
and continue its exploration. The more specific implementation of Eqn 1 is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 1. Closed-loop Autonomous Materials Exploration and Optimization (CAMEO). The autonomous cycle begins with 
loading data from databases including composition data for the materials on the composition spread and computed materials 
data from the AFLOW.org18 density functional theory database. The collected data is then used to begin analysis of the data 
using physics-informed Bayesian machine learning. This process extends knowledge of structure and functional property from 
materials with data to those without, predicting their estimated structure and functional property, along with prediction 
uncertainty. Physics-informed active learning is then used to identify the most informative next material to study to achieve user-
defined objectives. For this work, active learning can select the next sample to characterize through autonomous control of the 
high-throughput X-ray diffraction system at a synchrotron beamline or it can (optionally) request specific input from the human-
in-the-loop. Future implementations will include autonomous materials synthesis and simulation. The data collected from 
measurements and from human input are added to the database and used for the next autonomous loop. For more information, 
see Methods.

Simulate / 
Download
Bayesian 
Manifold 
Learning w/ 
Physics

Analyze

Decide

Execute

Active Learning 
w/Physics

Make

Measure

Ask an Expert

Database (Internal 
/ External)

1 cycle in seconds to 10s of minutes


5

Figure 2. Comparison of materials optimization schemes. a) Simple optimization seeks to identify the property optimum with a 
mixture of exploration and exploitation without knowledge of the composition-structure-property (CSP) relationship. These 
methods are more likely to get caught in local optima. b) The phase-map-informed optimization scheme exploits CSP relationship 
by recognizing that the property is dependent on phase, thus including phase mapping in the search for the optimum. i) Phase-
mapping steps and ii) materials optimization step that exploits knowledge of the phase boundaries. This allows a search for 
phase region dependent optima. c) The Ge-Sb-Te CAMEO workflow began with incorporating raw ellipsometry data as a phase-
mapping prior. On each iteration CAMEO selects a material to measure for X-ray diffraction and concurrently requests an 
expert to calculate 𝛥𝐸𝑔 for that material. Each cycle takes 20-25 minutes.

Figure 3. Discovery of Ge4Sb6Te7 (GST467). a) Optimization of the Ge-Sb-Te system, with the objective of identifying the 
material with the largest 𝛥𝐸𝑔, bandgap difference between amorphous and crystalline states. Performance is shown for: the 
CAMEO live run (black) with GST467 discovered on iteration 19 (black star); for the mean and 95% confidence interval of 100 
CAMEO runs computed post data collection (blue), 100 runs of Gaussian Process – Upper Confidence Bounds (GP-UBC, 
magenta), and random sampling (red). b) Left: Structural phase map for the crystalline Ge-Sb-Te composition spread. Complete 
phase map constructed after all the diffraction measurements (beyond the live CAMEO run described in a)) is shown. Structural

Composition

Local Optimum!

Target 

Property

Composition

a Simple Optimization

No phase boundary knowledge

b CAMEO

Phase Boundary

First find phase map

Then use phase map to 
find global optimum

Region 1
Region 2

Composition

Global

Optimum!

Local Optima

CAMEO

Synchrotron 
diffraction

Calculation
of Eg

Raw ellipsometry 

data as prior

20-25 minutes per cycle

Remote operated

Human-in-the-loop

c

a

Iteration Number

Random Mean

GP-UCB
Mean
Avg

CAMEO
Mean

Maximizing Δ𝐸𝑔: Ge-Sb-Te

Deviation from Optimal [%]

100

10

1
0 %

b
Phase Map and Δ𝐸𝑔 for Ge-Sb-Te

CAMEO
Live Run


6

phase regions are color-coded as single-phase FCC-Ge-Sb-Te (GST) structure region (red, GST), single-phase Sb-Te region 
(blue), and region where GST and Sb-Te phases co-exist (orange). The materials measured during the live CAMEO run are 
indicated in black. Right: Complete mapping of 𝛥𝐸𝑔 following analysis of entire ellipsometry data (beyond the live CAMEO run). 
The discovered GST467 and GST225 are indicated in both maps.

CAMEO is based on the fundamental precept that in navigating compositional phase diagrams, 
enhancement in most functional properties is inherently tied to the presence of particular 
structural phases and/or phase boundaries. The strategy is therefore broadly applicable to a 
variety of topics with disparate physical properties. The method was first benchmarked and its 
hyperparameters tuned using a previously characterized composition spread where an entirely 
different physical property was optimized (See Methods). It was then successfully used to 
discover a new photonic PCM composition whose Δ𝐸𝑔 (between crystalline and amorphous 
states) is up to 3 times larger than that of the well-known Ge2Sb2Te5.

For this task, scanning ellipsometry measurements were performed on the spread wafer with 
films in amorphous (initial) and crystalline states ahead of the CAMEO run, and the raw 
ellipsometric spectra data were incorporated as a phase-mapping prior (See Methods).  Thus, the 
algorithm makes use of information regarding phase distribution across the spread that is 
“hidden” in the unreduced complex spectroscopic data, which vary non-trivially across the 
spread. At each iteration, CAMEO identifies the next material to query, indicates the material to 
the experimentalist (human-in-the-loop) who performs the intensive task of processing the raw 
optical data to extract Δ𝐸𝑔. In parallel, CAMEO remotely controls scanning of the synchrotron 
beam to collect X-ray diffraction data from the spread wafer with films in the crystalline state. 
CAMEO first seeks knowledge of the phase map until 80% convergence, and then switches to 
material optimization (See Methods section M1). This procedure identified the material with the
largest Δ𝐸𝑔 over 19 iterations taking approximately 10 hours, compared to over 90 continuous 
hours for the full set of 177 composition spots. CAMEO provides an approximate maximum 
average 20-iteration lead over the best alternative Gaussian Process – Upper Confidence Bounds 
(GP-UCB) focusing on Δ𝐸𝑔 optimization in the composition space, and random sampling, both 
common benchmarks in BO.

As seen in Fig. 3(c), the optimal composition identified here lies at the boundary between the 
FCC-Ge-Sb-Te (GST) phase region and the region where there is co-existence of GST and Sb-Te 
phases. The average composition of the region is Ge4Sb6Te7, and henceforth we refer to the 
region as GST467. Its Δ𝐸𝑔 is found to be 0.76 ± 0.03 eV, which is nearly 3 times that of GST225 
(0.23 ± 0.03 eV). To investigate the origin of the enhanced Δ𝐸𝑔 of GST467 at the phase 
boundary, we have performed high-resolution transmission microscopy of this composition (Fig. 
4(a)) which revealed a complex nanocomposite structure consisting of GST and Sb-Te phases. 
As seen in the figure, the phases have grown coherently with the relationship GST Fm-3m 
(111)//SbTe (001). (See Methods for details.)  


7

This boost in Δ𝐸𝑔 indeed directly leads to large enhancement in optical contrast as captured in 
Δ𝑘 = 𝑘𝑐 − 𝑘𝑎, the difference in the extinction coefficient (between amorphous (𝑘𝑎) and 
crystalline states (𝑘𝑐)) extracted from the ellipsometry data at different wavelengths (Fig. 4(b)). 
Δ𝑘 for GST467 is 60 to 125 % larger than that of GST225 in the 1000 – 1500 nm wavelength 
range. The superior physical properties of GST467 shown here were reproduced on multiple 
composition spread wafers. 

We have fabricated photonic switching PCM devices based on the discovered GST467 
nanocomposite. With a sequence of laser pulses (energy and pulse width) with varying amplitude 
sent through the device, the material can be switched between the crystalline and amorphous 
phases (Fig. 4(b)). The device made of the nanocomposite GST467 thin film was found to be 
stable up to at least 30,000 cycles indicating the high reversibility of the crystallization and 
quenching processes of the coherent nanocomposite. The one-to-one comparison between the 
devices fabricated with our GST225 and GST467 films here (Fig. 4(d)) shows that GST467 
device exhibits a much-enhanced switching contrast resulting in up to 50% more in the number 
of interval states, important for photonic memory and neuromorphic devices19, 20.

Recent reports of nanostructured PCM materials including multilayer and superlattice thin films 
have highlighted the crucial roles interfaces and defects play in their switching mechanisms 
leading to faster switching speed and lower switching energies21, 22. Our finding of GST467 
exhibiting significant boost in Δ𝐸𝑔, and consequently larger optical contrast, underscores the 
effectiveness of naturally-forming nanocomposites as another approach to enhancing 
performance of PCM materials, especially for optical switching devices. It is the presence of 
epitaxial nano-pockets of the SbTe phase in GST467 which is locally modifying the resonant 
bonding in the GST matrix resulting in the lowered optical bandgap in the crystalline state, 
which in turn leads to the larger Δ𝐸𝑔.

The discovery of a novel PCM material demonstrate that systems similar to CAMEO will fulfill 
the primary goals of materials design by accelerating the discovery and collection of materials 
knowledge, streamlining the experiment cycle, improving control over experimental variability, 
and improving reproducibility, thus improving trust in scientific results. They will also generate 
reference and benchmark datasets – automatically processed, analyzed, and converted to 
actionable knowledge with all associated metadata, for developing and improving trust in 
machine learning tools. Further benefits include automatic knowledge capture to maintain 
institutional knowledge, maximizing information gain, and reducing use of consumable 
resources such as expert time, freeing up experts to work on higher level challenges. Research at 
the synchrotron exemplifies these resource demands and limitations, where obtaining scientist 
and equipment time is difficult or expensive. And potentially most impactful, placing labs under 
the control of AI may greatly reduce the technical expertise needed to perform experiments, 


8

resulting in a greater ‘democratization’ of science23. In turn, this may facilitate a more 

distributed approach to science, as advocated by the materials collaboratory concept24.

Figure 4. Nanostructure and device performance of (Ge4Sb6Te7) GST467. Newly identified phase-change memory material 
GST467 shows large optical contrast ideal for photonic-switching device applications such as neuromorphic computing. (a) High 
resolution transmission electron microscopy image reveals formation of coherent nanocomposite of GST structure matrix and 
SbTe. The dotted lines denote the atomically sharp interface. The FFT (inset) of this region indicates structural similarity of the 
adjacent phases; (b) endurance of the GST467: it is stable over 30,000 cycles indicating the robustness of the nanocomposite 
structure defined by local composition variation. The dotted lines indicate the range of each state in relative optical transmission 
𝛥𝑇/𝑇𝑜 at 1500 nm. Laser pulses were 50 ns with 183 pJ for quenching and 500 ns with 3.3 nJ for crystallization. The fluctuations 
in 𝛥𝑇/𝑇𝑜 are due to thermal fluctuation of the device measurement set up; (c) comparison of the optical contrast here indicated 
by difference in the extinction coefficient k between crystalline and amorphous phases(kc-ka) for the wavelength range of 1000 to 
1500 nm for various compositions within Ge-Sb-Te system. GST225 and GST467 data are from this work. The GeTe data are 
from Ref. 25. GST467 shows higher extinction difference over other known compositions; (d) one-to-one comparison of GST225 
(left) and GST467 (right) for multi-level switching in optical transmission at 1500 nm (𝛥𝑇/𝑇𝑜) using 500 ns, 6 pJ pulses : 
GST467 having larger optical contrast results in substantially more states than GST225. Device fabrication and characterization 
details are in Methods.     

a
b

c
d


9

References:

1. Jaynes, E. T. Bayesian Methods: General Background. (1986).

2. “Materials Genome Initiative for Global Competitiveness” National Science and Technology 

Council, White House, (2011).

3. Toher, C., et al., Unavoidable disorder and entropy in multi-component systems. Npj 

Comput. Mater. 5, 1–3 (2019).

4. Hattrick-Simpers, J. R., et al., Perspective: Composition–structure–property mapping in 

high-throughput experiments: Turning data into knowledge. APL Mater. 4, 053211 (2016).

5. Shapiro, E., et al. “Toward 2020 Science” Microsoft, (2006).

6. Settles, B., Active learning literature survey. Univ. Wis. Madison. 52, 11 (2010).

7. Xue, D., et al., Accelerated search for materials with targeted properties by adaptive design. 

Nat. Commun. 7, 11241 (2016).

8. Yuan, R., et al., Accelerated Discovery of Large Electrostrains in BaTiO3-Based 

Piezoelectrics Using Active Learning. Adv. Mater. 30, 1702884 (2018).

9. Balachandran, P.V., et al., Experimental search for high-temperature ferroelectric 

perovskites guided by two-step machine learning. Nat. Commun. 9, 1668 (2018).

10. Meredig, B., et al., Can machine learning identify the next high-temperature superconductor? 

Examining extrapolation performance for materials discovery. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 3, 819–

825 (2018).

11. Zhou, Z., et al., Optimization of Molecules via Deep Reinforcement Learning. Sci. Rep. 9, 

1–10 (2019).

12. Korovina, K., et al., ChemBO: Bayesian Optimization of Small Organic Molecules with 

Synthesizable Recommendations. ArXiv190801425 Phys. Stat (2019).


10

13. Nikolaev, P., et al., Autonomy in materials research: a case study in carbon nanotube growth. 

Npj Comput. Mater. 2, 16031 (2016).

14. Roch, L. M., et al., ChemOS: orchestrating autonomous experimentation. Sci. Robot. 3, 

eaat5559 (2018).

15. Noack, M. M., et al., A kriging-based approach to autonomous experimentation with 

applications to x-ray scattering. Sci. Rep. 9, 1–19 (2019).

16. Kolobov, A.V., et al., in Springer Handbook of Electronic and Photonic Materials, S. Kasap, 

P. Capper, Eds. (Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017).

17. Burr, G. W., et al. Neuromorphic computing using non-volatile memory. Adv. Phys. X 2, 89-

124 (2016).

18. Curtarolo, S., et al., AFLOWLIB.ORG: A distributed materials properties repository from 

high-throughput ab initio calculations. Comput. Mater. Sci. 58, 227–235 (2012).

19. Li, X., et al., Fast and reliable storage using a 5 bit, nonvolatile photonic memory cell. 

Optica. 6, 1–6 (2019).

20. Giannopoulos, I., et al., 8-bit precision in-memory multiplication with projected phase-

change memory, IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2018, pp. 27.7.1-

27.7.4.

21. Simpson, R. E., et al., Interfacial phase-change memory. Nat. Nanotechnol. 6, 501–505 

(2011).

22. Ding, K., et al., Phase-change heterostructure enables ultralow noise and drift for memory 

operation, Science 366, 210-215 (2019).


11

23. Kusne, A. G., “Materials Genome Initiative & Artificial Intelligence at NIST”, DOE AMO 

Workshop on Artificial Intelligence Applied to Materials Discovery and Design, Pittsburgh, 

PA (2017).

24. High-Throughput Experimental Materials Collaboratory | NIST Materials Genome Initiative, 

(available at https://mgi.nist.gov/htemc).

25. Wuttig, M., et al., Phase-change materials for non-volatile photonic applications. Nat. 

Photonics. 11, 465 (2017).

Methods

A description of the closed-loop, autonomous system for materials exploration and optimization
(CAMEO) scheme can be found in M1 beginning with a detailed description of results and a 
description of materials and device synthesis and characterization in section M2.  The description 
of CAMEO is broken down into the subsections: M1a Detailed results, M1b Initialization and 
data preprocessing, M1c Phase mapping, M1d Knowledge propagation, M1e Active learning, 
M1f Statistics and performance measures. The materials and device section is broken down into 
the subsections: M2a Sample fabrication, M2b Mapping of phase-change temperature, M2c 
Structural Mapping, M2d High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron 
microscopy (HAADF-STEM) of Ge4Sb6Te7 (GST467) , M2e Modeling and calculation of the 
ellipsometry spectra, M2f ST467 photonic device fabrication and measurement.

M1 CAMEO
CAMEO’s methodology follows the diagrams of Figure 1 and 2c (main text), where active 
learning drives measurement and expert input. Active-learning-driven synthesis and simulation 
are excluded for this work. The materials are pre-synthesized as a composition spread and the 
AFLOW.org density functional theory (DFT) simulations are run prior to CAMEO’s control of 
the X-ray diffraction measurement. The combinatorial library is physically loaded into the high-
throughput X-ray diffraction system, and any data captured from external or internal databases is 
automatically imported into CAMEO. All preliminary data is analyzed to build the first 
estimated phase map along with uncertainty quantifications. This kicks off the iterative 
autonomous process where the phase map and material property estimate and estimate 
uncertainty are used to inform the active-learning-driven selection of the material to query next. 
At each iteration, CAMEO selects a material to study and requests and obtains structure and 
functional property data for the query material, with automatic X-ray diffraction pre-processing. 
In parallel, results and predictions are presented to the expert user and pertinent knowledge is 


12

captured from the expert. All gathered knowledge is then stored in a database. A description of 
the capabilities of CAMEO are presented in Table M1.

CAMEO’s specific implementation of Eqn 1 is shown in Eqn M1:

𝑔(𝑥) = {
𝑃(𝑥),
𝑐 < 80 %

𝐹(𝑥𝑟) = 𝜇(𝑥𝑟) + 𝛽𝜎(𝑥𝑟) + 𝛾𝑑(𝑥𝑟),
𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑒
𝐸𝑞𝑛 (𝑀1)

The first set of iterations maximize phase map knowledge until the estimated phase map 
convergences to the user defined threshold 𝑐, at which point the system switches to materials 
property optimization. A separate Gaussian Process is fit to each individual phase region for the 
functional property, allowing for phase region dependent hyperparameter optimization. This 
exploits the CSP relationship to improve functional property prediction accuracy, accelerate 
materials optimization, and provide potential computational resource savings. The phase regions 
are then ranked by the maximum expected functional property value and the top R regions are 
selected for optimization, with R a user defined variable. Here R is set to 1. Optimization 
balances exploitation and exploration through the mean 𝜇(𝑥𝑟) and weighted variance 𝛽𝜎(𝑥𝑟)
(the iteration dependent 𝛽 follows [27] and is described below). The optimization acquisition 
function also allows the user to target points closer or further from phase boundaries via 𝛾𝑑(𝑥𝑟), 
where 𝑑(𝑥𝑟) is the distance from point 𝑥𝑟 to the nearest phase boundary and 𝛾 is a user defined 
parameter – negative (positive) to emphasize points near the edge (center) of the phase region. 
Here the value is set to 10. Myopia to particular phase regions can be removed with an additional 
exploration policy.

Pre-synthesized (pseudo) ternary combinatorial spreads are used to provide a pool of hundreds of 
materials to investigate. While for this demonstration the autonomous system must select 
samples from the given pool of pre-synthesized samples, this is only a limit of the current 
physical experimental system and not a limit of the presented ML methodology.

M1a CAMEO Detailed results
CAMEO was benchmarked on a material system previously extensively studied by the authors28. 
Efficacy was compared to a range of alternative methods as shown in Fig. M1 with phase 
mapping performance measured with the Fowlkes-Mallows Index (FMI) and Bayesian 
optimization performance measured by minimum percent deviation from optimal. The mean 
performance and 95% confidence intervals over 100 iterations are plotted in Fig. M1. The 
algorithm provides significant accuracy improvement and lower variance in phase mapping. 
Additionally, each level of increased physical knowledge further accelerates phase mapping. The 
benchmark optimization challenge was to maximize a functional property that is a simple 
function of composition with one broad, dominant peak. For this simple challenge, CAMEO 
provides improved performance compared to the next best optimization scheme – Gaussian 
Process Upper Confidence Bounds (GP-UCB). For more information about the benchmarking 
process see Section 3.


13

Once tuned, CAMEO was placed in active control over the high-throughput X-ray diffraction 
system at SLAC and a commercial in-house diffraction system. Here, the material optimization 
goal was to identify an optimal phase change material in the Ge-Sb-Te system, characterized by 
maximizing Δ𝐸𝑔 – the difference between the amorphous and crystalline optical bandgap. 
Scanning ellipsometry measurements were performed on the spread wafer in amorphous and 
crystalline states ahead of the CAMEO run, and we fed the unprocessed ellipsometric spectra as 
a prior for building the phase map model.  At each iteration, the query material was indicated to 
the experimentalist (human-in-the-loop) who then performed the intensive task of processing the 
raw optical data to obtain Δ𝐸𝑔 and provided this data to CAMEO (See section M2e for full 
description). This procedure identified the material with the largest Δ𝐸𝑔 over 19 iterations taking 
approximately 10 hours, compared to 90 hours for the full set of 177 materials. A post-analysis is 
shown in Fig. 4 (main text), where 100 runs are performed comparing CAMEO to alternative 
methods. CAMEO provides an approximate maximum average 30-iteration lead over GP-UCB.
More importantly, the algorithm is able to mine and make use of information regarding phase 
distribution across the spread hidden in the complex raw spectroscopic data. 

M1b System Initialization and Data Pre-processing
Physical system initialization
The system is initialized by loading the composition spread into the X-ray diffraction system, 
either the Bruker D8 or the SSRL diffraction synchrotron beamline endstation. For the SSRL 
system, a network connection is used for sending commands to the X-ray diffraction system via 
the SPEC interface29. Exposure time for each point measurement was 15 seconds.

Importing external data: ICSD and AFLOW.org
The user first indicates the material system of interest. A database of known stable phases, 
derived from past phase diagrams, is then used to automatically identify pertinent phases. 
Structure data is then automatically assembled for these phases from the Inorganic Crystal 
Structure Database (ICSD) – a database of critically evaluated experimental structures, and the 
AFLOW.org16 density functional theory database. All retrieved structures are then used to 
generate simulated diffraction patterns through a call to Bruker’s Topas*,30. After data is 
collected from the databases, the pool of material samples is updated to contain both the samples 
on the composition spread and those derived from databases. Previously it was shown that 
external structure data improved phase mapping performance in the case of exhaustive data 
collection30. For this work, the AFLOW.org computed ternary energy hull is imported and 
converted to region labels which are used as phase region (i.e. cluster) priors, see Fig. M2.

Initialize phase mapping
Phase mapping is initialized with a user-selected expected number of phase regions for the 
material system, 5 for Fe-Ga-Pd and 10 for Ge-Sb-Te. While this number is used to initialize the 


14

phase map model, the phase mapping technique will converge to either a larger or smaller 
number of phase regions as described in the GRENDEL (graph-based endmember extraction and 
labeling) section. All other phase mapping hyperparameters were optimized on the benchmark 
system, and these values were used without modification for the Ge-Sb-Te system. Other default 
parameters include: graph distance multiplier is 1.2 and max number of iterations is 100. 

Selection of first sample to seed processes
If prior material structure data is imported, such as data from AFLOW.org, that knowledge is 
used to initialize phase mapping (see Incorporating Prior), with the active learning criterion used 
to select the most informative material to query next. However, if no such prior data is used, the 
first sample queried can be selected randomly or using some other informative process. For 
benchmarking, the initial material was selected at random with uniform probability. For the live 
application to the Ge-Sb-Te system, the first sample was selected to be the one at the 
composition center of the materials on the composition spread. This sample was selected as it is 
potentially the most informative, given no other knowledge of the samples. The live run for the 
Ge-Sb-Te system completed after all the materials were measured, allowing for later analysis of 
active learning methodologies. To compare these methods, the initial material was again selected 
at random with a uniform prior.

Measurement and Data Pre-processing: Collection, integration, background subtraction
Once the next query material has been identified, the system then measures the query material 
for X-ray diffraction using a programmatically generated script via SPEC for the SLAC high-
throughput system or a GADDS script for the Bruker system. For the Bruker system, the 
diffraction image is integrated into a diffraction pattern automatically, and for the SLAC system, 
integration is performed31. The background signal is then automatically identified and subtracted.

The background signal from sample to sample can vary significantly, requiring a background 
subtraction method capable of handling these variations. For both the SLAC and Bruker 
diffraction measurements, Matlab’s envelope function with the ‘peak’ setting and the parameter 
value of 50 was used to identify and remove the background curve.

M1c Phase Mapping
Main method: GRENDEL – List of Physical constraints.
Phase mapping was performed using the physics-informed phase region and constituent phase 
identification method described in [32]. This method represents the material composition space 
as a graph, where each material is represented by a vertex that is connected by edges to 
neighboring materials in composition space (or wafer x-y coordinate). Neighboring materials are 
defined by Voronoi tessellating the composition space32. Mathematically, 𝐺 = {𝑉, 𝐸}, where 𝑉 is 
the set of vertices, 𝐸 is the set of edges with all edge weights set to 1. 𝐺 is used to define a 


15

Markov Random Field33 where materials identified with the same vertex label belong to the same 
phase region, and each phase region is described by a set of constituent phases. This method 
encodes a list of physical constraints through the methods listed in Error! Reference source not 
found.:

This method identifies a phase map for hundreds of samples in tens of seconds, on the same 
order of X-ray diffraction measurements at SSRL which typically takes 30 seconds, and 
measurements on the Bruker D-8* which takes over 10 minutes.

GRENDEL hyperparameters include the MRF segmentation (i.e. graph cut) weight and the 
balance between the material-phase region matrix based on clustering and that based on phase 
mixture32. As the graph cut weight is increased, a greater number of clusters becomes possible, 
increasing the phase mapping performance using the measured described in the text, while also 
increasing cluster complexity. For the Fe-Ga-Pd a graph cut weight of 𝑤𝑔𝑐 = 100 ∗ 𝑛3/53 was 
found to output the desired number of clusters 𝑛. The full set of phase mapping parameters are 
provided in Table M1.

During the GRENDEL process, if the number of clusters drops below 90 % of the number of 
clusters used when starting the process, GRENDEL is terminated and the computed phase map 
labels and constituent phases from the previous internal GRENDEL iteration are output.

Comparison method: HCA
Phase mapping performance of GRENDEL is compared to phase labels identified with 
Agglomerative Hierarchical Cluster Analysis, where samples of similar diffraction patterns are 
grouped together into clusters which are then associated with the underlying phase regions.  A 
user defined number of phase regions (i.e. clusters) is used as well as the cosine metric and the 
average method for computing cluster-cluster dissimilarity.

Phase mapping prior
Material property data is incorporated into the MRF model as a prior through the edge weights of 
the composition graph 𝐺, where the original edge weights of 𝐺 are modified by a functional 
property graph 𝐺𝑝 with edge weights of 0 (disconnected) or 1 (connected) and 𝑓: 𝐸, 𝐸𝑝 → 𝐸. If 
𝑒 ∈ 𝐸 ∩ 𝐸𝑝 then 𝑒 = 1 + Δe else 𝑒 = 1 − Δe. The value of Δ𝑒 was varied for the benchmark 
material system and the value of Δe = 0.5 selected as it demonstrates clear improved phase 
mapping performance during the first active learning selected measurements and worse 
performance near the end of the run. This is to be expected as prior knowledge can benefit initial 
analysis but can overwhelm knowledge gained from data if the prior is weighted too heavily. A 
smaller (larger) value of Δe demonstrates a smaller (larger), similar effect.

For the benchmark system an AFLOW.org based phase map prior was used, as shown in Figure 
M2, where the AFLOW.org tie-lines are used to define regions. Points that fall in the same 


16

region are given the same label, resulting in a prior for phase mapping. For materials that share a 
graph edge and a clustering label, the edge weight in 𝐸𝑝 is set to 1, otherwise the edge 
connecting them is removed from 𝐸𝑝.

For the Ge-Sb-Te material system, the prior was determined based on optical data collected. For 
each material, the complex reflectance ratio amplitude 𝜓 and phase difference Δ for the 
amorphous and crystalline phases were collected for the set of angles 𝜃 =
{50°, 55°, 60°, 65°, 70°} relative to the laser’s plane of incidence, creating 20 spectral 
measurements for each material consisting of different measurement types 𝑚 ∈
{𝜓𝑐𝑟𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒, 𝜓𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠, Δ𝑐𝑟𝑦𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒, Δ𝑎𝑚𝑜𝑟𝑝ℎ𝑜𝑢𝑠}. Example optical data used for the prior is 
shown in Fig. M3.

To define a prior for the phase diagram, the set of all spectra are reduced into a set of similarity 
weights defining a similarity of 0 or 1 for each pair of samples, which can then be used to 
evaluate 𝐸𝑝. The following equations are used for mapping of spectra to similarity values. First 
the Euclidean difference between each set of materials (𝑖, 𝑗) is computed for each spectral 
measurement type and angle {𝑚, 𝜃}. These differences are then averaged for each pair of 
samples (𝑖, 𝑗) over the set of angles 𝜃 and then normalized to between 0 and 1 for each 
measurement type 𝑚. These values are then averaged again over measurements 𝑚, resulting in a 
final dissimilarity value for each pair (𝑖, 𝑗). A threshold is then used to convert the continuous 
dissimilarity values to 0 or 1, defining whether an edge between (𝑖, 𝑗) exists (1) or does not (0). 
The threshold of 𝐷𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑 = 0.07 was selected to achieve a ratio of |𝐸𝑝|/|𝐸| = 0.49 ≈ 0.5, i.e. 
the prior removes approximately half the edges from the initial graph.

𝐷𝑖,𝑗

𝑚 = mean

𝜃
[𝑑𝐸𝑢𝑐𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑛(𝑚𝑖,𝜃, 𝑚𝑗,𝜃)]

𝐷′𝑖,𝑗

𝑚 = [𝐷𝑖,𝑗

𝑚 − min𝐷𝑖,𝑗

𝑚] / [max 𝐷𝑖,𝑗

𝑚 − min𝐷𝑖,𝑗

𝑚]

𝐷̅𝑖,𝑗 = mean

𝑚
[𝐷′𝑖,𝑗

𝑚]

𝐺𝑝 = 𝐷̅𝑖,𝑗 < 𝐷𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑

M1d Knowledge Propagation
Phase Mapping Knowledge Propagation
Once the phase map has been identified for the given data, the phase region labels must be 
propagated to the materials that have yet to be measured for structure. To exploit the graph-
described data manifold, the semi-supervised learning technique Gaussian random field 
harmonic energy minimization35 (HEM) is used. HEM computes the likelihood of each material 
belonging to each phase region and then assigns each material to the phase region with the 
greatest likelihood, thus defining the most likely phase map for the full set of materials on the 
composition spread. The edge weights 𝐸𝑝 define the similarity matrix used to define the graph 


17

Laplacian.

Phase Mapping Knowledge Propagation - Comparison method: Nearest Neighbor (NN)
The phase mapping knowledge propagation harmonic energy minimization method is compared 
to the use of 1-nearest neighbor, where any material without a phase region label takes on the 
label of its 1st nearest neighbor with a label. First nearest neighbor was implemented using 
MATLAB’s knnsearch function with default parameters. 

Functional property Knowledge Propagation: Gaussian Process Regression
GPR was implemented using MATLAB’s ‘fitrgp’ function with default parameters.

M1e Active Learning
In the Bayesian optimization36 literature, the following formalism is used:

𝑦 = 𝑓(𝑥) + 𝜖

𝑥∗ = argmax𝑥(𝑓(𝑥))

where 𝑦 is the target property to be maximized, 𝑥 𝜖 ℝ𝑑 is the set of material synthesis and 
processing parameters to be searched over, 𝑓(𝑥) is the function to optimize, 𝜖 is typically 
independent stochastic measurement noise, and 𝑥∗ defines the material synthesis and processing 
parameters that result in the maximal material property (for the minimum, replace argmax with 
argmin). When 𝑓(𝑥) is unknown, a surrogate model is used to approximate it based on given 
data. The surrogate function is then used to identify the best next material to study. Each 
subsequent material is selected to identify the optimal material 𝑥∗in the smallest number of 
experiments possible. Identifying extrema of a function involves a balance between exploiting
prior data to identify nearby extrema and exploring to identify extrema far from prior data. An 
alternative active learning objective is to select experiments that will best improve the overall 
prediction accuracy of the surrogate model, or in other words, select experiments to most 
efficiently learn the unknown function 𝑓(𝑥). Such a campaign learns the general trends of 𝑓(𝑥), 
which is highly useful when attempting to quantify anomalous behavior of novel materials.

Active Learning for Phase Mapping: Risk minimization
The active learning method used to select the next material to query for phase mapping is based 
on risk minimization35. HEM propagates phase region labels to unmeasured material and 
identifies the likelihood of each material belonging to each phase region. These likelihoods can 
be aggregated to define the set of potential phase diagrams and their associated likelihoods. The 
set of potential phase diagrams form a hypothesis space of phase diagrams. Risk minimization 
seeks to identify the optimal material to query next for its structure that will most rapidly whittle 


18

down the hypothesis set and most rapidly hone-in on the optimal phase map for the full set of 
materials, i.e. minimize expected total phase region label misclassification error and equivalently 
maximize knowledge of the phase map. 

Active Learning Comparison Methods: Random, Sequential, and 10 % Sampling
The risk minimization method is compared to 1) random sampling – selecting each subsequent 
material at random from the wafer, with a uniform prior, 2) sequential sampling – where each 
sample is selected in the order it appears on the wafer, and 3) where 10 % of the materials are 
selected in a pre-determined design. Random sampling is expected to provide increasingly poor 
performance relative to active learning as the search space increases in dimension due to the 
curse of dimensionality37. The pre-determined 10 % selection of materials in (3) are chosen to 
provide maximal coverage of the composition space. However, the use of 10 % is not a 
generalizable benchmark. For a given number of data points, the density of data points decreases 
as the dimensionality of the composition space increases, with each point describing a larger 
volume. The optimal number of benchmark materials is thus dependent on the expected size of 
phase regions. If smaller phase regions are expected, a larger number of materials will be 
required to identify the phase regions.

The Fe-Ga-Pd composition spread contains 278 samples. For the 10 % sampling, the 28 samples 
are indicated in Fig. M4(a). They were selected to provide uniform coverage of the composition 
space described by the spread. For the sequential sampling, the order of samples is shown in Fig. 
M4(b).

Active Learning - Materials Optimization: Gaussian Process Upper Confidence Bounds
For CAMEO and GP-UCB the iteration dependent weight parameter 𝛽 is used27. 

𝛽 = 2 log(𝐷𝐼2𝜋2/6𝜆)

Where 𝐷 is the total number of samples, 𝐼 is the current iteration number, and 𝜆 = 0.1.

Active Learning – CAMEO: Phase Mapping Convergence
The phase maps identified at each iteration 𝑖 is compared to the iteration (𝑖 − 4) using the FMI 
performance measure. Convergence is defined as FMI >= 80 %.

Active Learning – Materials Optimization: Benchmark System
The target optimization for the benchmark system is maximizing remnant magnetization.
One modification was made to the remnant magnetization signal: The signal saturates over a 
large range of the composition spread. For BO benchmarking, it is preferred that one material is 
identified as the optimum. As such, the saturated values were modified with a squared 
exponential function, in effect “hallucinating” the remnant magnetization values as if sensor 


19

saturation had not occurred, converting the signal from Fig. M5(a) to Fig. M5(b). The squared 
exponential function used to modify the voltage was defined in cartesian space. For the ternary 
composition (𝑎𝐹𝑒, 𝑏𝐺𝑎, 𝑐𝑃𝑑):

𝑥 = (𝑏/100) + (𝑐/100) ∗ sin(30°) ,
𝑦 = (𝑐/100) ∗ sin(60°)

𝑁𝑥𝑦(𝜇
= (0.19, 0.05), 𝜎2 = 0.001)

Mapping to ternary space gives 𝜇
= 𝐹𝑒78𝐺𝑎16𝑃𝑑6.

M1f Statistics and Performance Metrics
Confidence Interval
The 95 % confidence interval was computed for the variable of interest over 100 experiments at 
the given iteration with:

( 𝜎

√𝑛

) 𝐹−1(𝑝, 𝜈)

Where 𝐹−1 is the inverse of the Student’s t cumulative distribution function, 𝜎 is the standard 
deviation, 𝑛 = 100 is the number of experiments, 𝑝 = {2.5 %, 97.5 %}, and 𝜈 = 99 is the 
degrees of freedom.

Phase mapping
Phase mapping performance is evaluated by comparing phase region labels determined by 
experts with those estimated by CAMEO for the entire phase map (after the knowledge 
propagation step). To evaluate system performance, the Fowlkes-Mallows Index (FMI) is used, 
which compares two sets of cluster labels. The equations are presented below for the expert 
labels 𝑙 ∈ 𝐿 and the ML estimated labels 𝑙̂ ∈ 𝐿̂, where the labels are enumerated 𝐿 → ℕ and 𝐿̂ →
ℕ.

If the number of phase regions is taken to be too large by either the user or the ML algorithm 
while the phase mapping is correct, some phase regions will be segmented into sub-regions with 
the dominant phase boundaries preserved. For example, peak shifting can induce phase region 
segmentation30. To ensure that the performance measures ignore such sub-region segmentation, 
each estimated phase region is assigned to the expert labeled phase region that shares the greatest 
number of samples. The number of phase regions is monitored to ensure that increases in model 
accuracy are not driven by increases in model complexity.

Fowlkes-Mallows Index: 𝐹𝑀𝐼 = 𝑇𝑃 √(𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃)(𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁)
⁄

TP

1
2 ∑ ∑ (𝑙𝑖 = 𝑙𝑗 & 𝑙̂𝑖 = 𝑙̂𝑗)

𝑗
𝑖

FP

1
2 ∑ ∑ (𝑙𝑖 ≠ 𝑙𝑗 & 𝑙̂𝑖 = 𝑙̂𝑗)

𝑗
𝑖


20

FN

1
2 ∑ ∑ (𝑙𝑖 = 𝑙𝑗 & 𝑙̂𝑖 ≠ 𝑙̂𝑗)

𝑗
𝑖

TN

1
2 ∑ ∑ (𝑙𝑖 ≠ 𝑙𝑗 & 𝑙̂𝑖 ≠ 𝑙̂𝑗)

𝑗
𝑖

Bayesian Optimization
Bayesian optimization performance is measured with minimum percent deviation from optimal, 
related to simple regret. 

Minimum percent deviation from optimal = 100 % ∗ min

𝑖 (𝑝𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 − 𝑝𝑖)/𝑝𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡

Simple Regret = min

𝑖 (𝑝𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡 − 𝑝𝑖)

M2 Materials Synthesis and Characterization
M2a Sample fabrication
Amorphous thin-film composition spreads encompassing a region of the Ge-Sb-Te ternary 
(separated into 177 samples using a gridded physical shadow mask) were fabricated on 3-inch 
silicon wafers with SiO2 layers (2 m) by co-sputtering Ge, Sb, and Te targets at room 
temperature. Different (average) thickness composition spreads (covering the same composition 
range) were fabricated for different measurements: they were 20 nm, 100 nm, 200 nm, and 500 
nm for optical, structural, resistance, and composition mapping, respectively. To obtain a 
crystalline state, some of the wafers were annealed at 300 oC for 10 min following their 
characterization in the amorphous state. 

The composition mapping of the spreads is measured using the wavelength dispersion 
spectroscopy. For every separated sample region on a spread, three random spots are measured, 
and the average composition value is used for the actual stoichiometry mapping in Fig. M6.

M2b Mapping of phase-change temperature
Upon increasing the temperature, a phase-change memory material undergoes a structural 
transition from amorphous to crystalline states with up to four orders of magnitude in the change 
of resistance. The temperature at which the resistance drop takes place can be taken as the phase-
change temperature, Tcp (Fig. M6). The entire spreads were measured in a scanning four-probe 
station combined with a Keithley 2400 from room temperature up to 300 oC. TCP of GST467 was 
found to be approximately 200 oC, which is much higher than that of GST225 (≈140 oC). The 
higher TCP of GST467 indicates higher stability of the amorphous state of GST467 compared to 
GST225.   

M2c Structural Mapping


21

Synchrotron diffraction on crystallized spreads was carried out at Beamline 10-2 at SLAC. In 
addition to the remote-controlled CAMEO run, we have also carried out diffraction of entire 
spreads in order to obtain the complete structural phase mapping of the probed Ge-Sb-Te region 
and to verify the accuracy of the phase diagram determined by CAMEO. Fig. M7 shows an 
example set of diffraction patterns taken across the spread. Along the marked line in the 
composition map, the evolution of diffraction patterns indicates phases going from the distorted 
FCC-Ge-Sb-Te (GST) structure region to the phase co-existence region (GST and Sb-Te) to the 
Sb-Te region. 

SbTe (𝑅3̅𝑚), Sb2Te2 (𝑃3̅𝑚), and Sb2Te3 (𝑅3̅𝑚) all have very similar diffraction patterns and 
atomic projections of the [100] zone-axis, except for different lattice periods along the [001] 
direction. These three phases are present across the Sb-Te region depending on the local 
composition on our spread. The predominant Sb-Te phase in GST467 is SbTe (below).

M2d HAADF-STEM of GST467 
We have performed cross-sectional High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron 
microscopy (HAADF-STEM) measurements on the GST467 thin film and found that there are 
nanometer-sized SbTe regions grown coherently inside the distorted cubic GST matrix as shown 
in Fig. 4(a) of the main text. To distinguish between similar phases (SbTe, Sb2Te2, and Sb2Te3), 
analysis of electron diffraction rings was carried out (not shown here), and Sb-Te phase in the 
GST467 was identified to be Sb1Te1.

M2e Modeling and calculation of the ellipsometry spectra
The experimental ellipsometry data (J. A. Woollam company) of the combinatorial Gs-Sb-Te 
spread was analyzed in the range from 200 to 1000 nm using the CompleteEASE software. The 
dielectric function ε(ω) used in the model contains38 (1) a constant, (2) a Drude-type contribution 
for free carriers in the case of crystalline state, and (3) a Tauc-Lorentz oscillator to describe the 
onset of optical transition:

amorphous state:  ε (ω) = εconst + εTauc-Lorentz(ω),

crystalline state:   ε (ω) = εconst + εDrude(ω) + εTauc-Lorentz(ω).

For the Drude model:

𝜀𝐷𝑟𝑢𝑑𝑒(𝜔) = 𝜀1(𝜔) + 𝑖 ⋅ 𝜀2(𝜔) = 1 (𝜀(∞)) −
𝜔𝑝

2

𝜔2 + Γ2 + 𝑖 ⋅
𝜔𝑝

2 ⋅ Γ

𝜔 ⋅ (𝜔2 + Γ2)

where 𝜔𝑝 = √

𝑁⋅𝑒2

𝑚⋅𝜀0, and 𝜔𝑝 is the plasma frequency, 𝛤 is the collision frequency.

For the Tauc-Lorentz model:


22

𝜀𝑇𝑎𝑢𝑐−𝐿𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑧(𝜔) = 𝜀1(𝜔) + 𝑖 ⋅ 𝜀2(𝜔)

= 𝜀1(∞) + 2

𝜋 𝑃 ∫
𝜉𝜀2(𝐸)
𝜉2 − 𝐸2 𝑑𝜉

∞

𝐸𝑔

+ 𝑖 ⋅
𝐴𝐸0Γ(𝐸 − 𝐸𝑔)

2

𝐸[(𝐸2 − 𝐸𝑜2)2 + Γ2𝐸2] Θ(𝐸 − 𝐸𝑔)

Where A is the prefactor, 𝐸𝑜 is the peak in the joint density of the state, 𝐸𝑔is the optical bandgap, 
and 𝛤 is the broadening parameter.

The optical parameters, e.g. refractive index n and extinction coefficient k, as well as the optical 
bandgap, can be extracted from these models. In order to confirm the accuracy of the optical 
parameters, one needs to check if the fitting curves as well as a set of fitting parameters, e.g. 
thickness, carrier density, and surface roughness, can be used to analyze the experimental data of 
the samples for the entire spread wafer. Typically, a fitting procedure requires repeated steps in 
order to fine-tune the parameters manually to optimize the results, and some samples require 
more manual fitting steps for setting the range and the starting values of the parameters than 
others. 

For the CAMEO run, the unprocessed raw ellipsometry data taken at each composition spot (for 
crystalline and amorphous states) are used as the prior. Once a spot is identified as a possible 
composition with enhanced Δ𝐸𝑔 (the difference in the optical bandgap between the amorphous 
and crystalline state), the fitting procedure above is carried out on the raw data, and the value of 
Δ𝐸𝑔 is computed, the process of which includes manual inspection of fitting parameters. 
Depending on the number of repeated steps, each computation can take up to 20 min. at a 
composition spot, and the Δ𝐸𝑔 value is then fed back to the CAMEO algorithm.          

The complete mapping of the optical bandgap of amorphous and crystalline states measured and 
calculated from one spread are shown in Fig. M8. In the amorphous state, the Ge-Sb-Te based 
compounds are effectively covalently-bonded semiconductors with large optical bandgaps39, 40. 
With changing composition, there is variation in bonding leading to slight shift in the optical 
bandgap shown in Fig. M8. In the crystalline state, the resonantly-bonded p orbitals can 
delocalize the carriers resulting in the reduced bandgap38, 41–43, leading to the large contrast 
between the amorphous and crystalline states. In the distorted cubic phase (i.e. GST), with 
changing composition, the local distortion (i.e. Peierls distortion) due to vacancies25, 41, 44 would 
modify the resonant bonding shifting the optical bandgap. In the Sb-Te phase, the optical 
bandgap also varies with the changing composition in Fig. M8. When the epitaxial 
nanocomposite with the SbTe phase are coherently and homogeneously grown in the GST matrix 
as shown in Fig. 4(a), the nano SbTe phase can act as the impurity dopant phase in the GST 
matrix. 

M2f Ge4Sb6Te7 photonic device fabrication and measurement


23

Photonic switching devices were fabricated out of GST467 films (Fig. M9). The 30 nm thick 
nanocomposite GST467 thin film was sputtered on a 330 nm thick Si3N4 layer on an oxidized 
silicon wafer. A 10 nm thick SiO2 protection layer was then coated on the top of the GST467 
thin film. Using e-beam lithography and inductively coupled plasma etching, a 1.2 µm wide 
photonic waveguide was fabricated. Then the GST467 thin film was patterned into disk shaped 
features 500 nm in diameter on the top of the waveguide, and they were encapsulated with a 200 
nm thick Al2O3 layer as shown in the inset of Fig. M9.

A symmetric multi-level switching of the photonic device was investigated as shown in Fig. M9. 
In order to provide and precisely control the pump pulses to quench or anneal the GST467 thin 
film in steps, pulses from a CW pump laser were first modulated by an electro-optic modulator 
and then sent into an erbium-doped fiber amplifier followed by a variable optical attenuator. The 
output of the optical signal was collected with a photodetector. During the annealing process, a 
sequence of pump pulse (50 ns, 2 mW) train was applied to the photonic device. In the 
quenching process, a sequence of 50 ns pump pulses with gradually increased amplitude was 
sent into the waveguide.

NIST disclaimer

* Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in this report in order to 
specify the experimental procedure adequately.  Such identification is not intended to imply 
recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it 
intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for 
the purpose.

References

26. Gregoire, J. M., et al., High-throughput synchrotron X-ray diffraction for combinatorial 

phase mapping. J. Synchrotron Radiat. 21, 1262–1268 (2014).

27. Srinivas, N., et al., Information-theoretic regret bounds for gaussian process optimization in 

the bandit setting. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory. 58, 3250–3265 (2012).

28. Long, C., et al., Rapid structural mapping of ternary metallic alloy systems using the 

combinatorial approach and cluster analysis. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 78, 072217–072217 (2007).

29. spec Software for Diffraction, Certified Scientific Software, (available at 

https://certif.com/spec.html).


24

30. Kusne, A. G., et al., On-the-fly machine-learning for high-throughput experiments: search 

for rare-earth-free permanent magnets. Sci. Rep. 4 (2014), doi:10.1038/srep06367.

31. Ren, F., et al., On-the-Fly Data Assessment for High-Throughput X-ray Diffraction 

Measurements, ACS Combi. Sci. 19, 377-385 (2017).

32. Kusne, A. G., et al., High-throughput determination of structural phase diagram and 

constituent phases using GRENDEL. Nanotechnology. 26, 444002 (2015).

33. Dobruschin, P. L., The description of a random field by means of conditional probabilities 

and conditions of its regularity. Theory Probab. Its Appl. 13, 197–224 (1968).

34. Kuhn, H. W., et al., Nonlinear Programming, Traces and emergence of nonlinear 

programming (Springer, 2014), pp. 247–258.

35. Zhu, X., et al., Semi-supervised learning using gaussian fields and harmonic functions. 

Proceedings of the 20th International conference on Machine learning (ICML-03). (2003).

36. Brochu, E. et al., A tutorial on Bayesian optimization of expensive cost functions, with 

application to active user modeling and hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv1012.2599 

(2010).

37. Hastie, T., et al., The elements of statistical learning 2nd Ed. (Springer, 2009).

38. Shportko, K., et al., Resonant bonding in crystalline phase-change materials. Nat. Mater. 7, 

653–658 (2008).

39. Rao, F., et al., Reducing the stochasticity of crystal nucleation to enable subnanosecond 

memory writing. Science. 358, 1423–1427 (2017).

40. Zhu, M., et al., One order of magnitude faster phase change at reduced power in Ti-Sb-Te. 

Nat. Commun. 5, 1–6 (2014).


25

41. Deringer, V. L., et al., Bonding nature of local structural motifs in amorphous GeTe. Angew. 

Chem. Int. Ed. 53, 10817–10820 (2014).

42. Wuttig, M. et al., Phase-change materials for rewriteable data storage. Nat. Mater. 6, 824–

832 (2007).

43. Lencer, D., et al., A map for phase-change materials. Nat. Mater. 7, 972–977 (2008).

44. Pries, J., et al., Phase-change materials: Empowered by an unconventional bonding 

mechanism. MRS Bull. 44, 699–704 (2019).

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge Xiaohang Zhang for assistance with thin film 
characterization and Fang Ren and Doug Van Campen for assistance in diffraction experiments 
at SLAC. We also acknowledge Valentin Stanev, Gaurav Modi, and Daniel Samarov for 
discussions. Funding: This work was supported by ONR MURI N00014-17-1-2661, ONR 
N00014-13-1-0635, and ONR N00014-15-2-222. The work at the University of Maryland was 
partially supported by the Center for Innovative Materials for Accelerated Compute 
Technologies (IMPACT), one of the centers in nCORE, a Semiconductor Research Corporation 
(SRC) program. Diffraction performed at SLAC is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, 
Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515. 
H.Z. and L.A.B. acknowledge support from the US Department of Commerce, NIST under 
financial assistance award 70NANB17H249. A.V.D. acknowledges support from Materials 
Genome Initiative funding allocated to NIST. Author contributions: A.G.K. and I.T. initiated 
and supervised the research. A.G.K. developed and implemented CAMEO algorithm with 
guidance from I.T., B.D. helped refine the phase mapping prior algorithm. H.Y. fabricated the 
Ge-Sb-Te composition spreads and thin films and coordinated their characterization. A.M. and 
S.S. developed and carried out the high-throughput synchrotron diffraction. C.W. and M.L. 
characterized the optical properties of Ge-Sb-Te composition spreads and fabricated and 
performed measurements on photonic devices. H.Z. conducted the transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM), and A.D. and L.B. helped analyze the TEM results. J.H.S. performed some 
of the ellipsometry measurements. R.A. discussed the bandgap behavior of GST. C.O., C.T., and 
S.C. developed the AFLOW framework which was used for some of the phase diagram analysis. 
A.G.K., I.T., and H.Y. wrote the paper with substantial input from other authors. All authors 
contributed to the discussion of the results. Competing interests: Authors declare no competing 
financial interest. Data and materials availability: Data are available in the manuscript. Other 


26

data that support other findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.

Extended Data

Table M1. Knowledge and Control implemented in CAMEO.

Knowledge and Control
CAMEO

Knowledge: Past experiments both physical and 
computational

Automated access to experimental and density functional 
theory materials structure databases. Includes Inorganic 
Crystal Structure Database and AFLOW.org.

Knowledge: Materials physics theory
Phase mapping and structure theory including Gibbs phase 
rule via constraint programming

Knowledge: Materials synthesis and processing
NA

Knowledge: Measurement science
X-ray diffraction simulation capability using structure data as 
input

Control: Synthesis control
NA

Control: Characterization
X-ray diffraction: high-throughput X-ray diffraction system26
at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL) 
and Bruker D-8*

Control: Communication
GUI for user interface; Interface to databases to store and 
share knowledge with experts and other AIs; Network 
interface for instrument control

Table M2. List of physical constraints in [(32)] method and associated encoding methods.

Physical Constraint
Encoding Method

Phase regions are cohesive and phase boundaries are 
continuous

1. If two or more set of vertices share the same phase 
region label but are not connected by vertex neighbors, 
differing labels are assigned to the disconnected sets. 
2. The Markov Random Field smoothness constraint

Materials of similar synthesis and processing 
parameters have similar properties

1. Markov Random Field smoothness constraint
2. Harmonic Energy Minimization for label 
propagation

Abundances of phases is non-negative
Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions34

X-ray diffraction intensity is non-negative
Karush–Kuhn–Tucker conditions34

Soft Gibbs Phase Rule - Upper bound limit on number 
of constituent phases

Upper limit on number of endmember limits allowed in 
each phase region

Identified endmembers should be physically realizable
Volume constraint on identified / predicted 
endmembers


27

Figure M1. Benchmarking performance. a) Main figure: Phase mapping performance demonstrating that CAMEO provides a 
significant advantage over the three alternatives: random sampling, sequential sampling, and measuring 10% of the samples well 
distributed over the composition space. Subset figure: Material optimization performance. The benchmark materials optimization 
challenge is highly simple with a very prominent, broad peak – a challenge that Bayesian optimization schemes excel at. 
Nevertheless, CAMEO provides improved results over the next best alternative, GP-UCB. Of note is CAMEO’s initial lag in 
performance due to its initial goal of maximizing phase mapping performance. Once phase mapping performance converges, it 
then switches to materials optimization and shows faster performance than GP-UCB. b) The number of clusters for the 
benchmark dataset was initialized to 5 and while this number on average increased during CAMEO’s phase mapping, it 
converged to 5. Demonstrating that improved performance was not due to increased complexity defined by a larger number of 
clusters.

Figure M2. Color coded phase map prior derived from AFLOW.org computed tie-lines (black lines) for the benchmark Fe-Ga-Pd 
material system.

Random

Sequence 

10%

Benchmarked Phase Mapping and Materials Optimization

Iteration Number

0.1 %

1 %

10 %

100 %

CAMEO

CAMEO

GP-UCB

Random

15 20
5 10
25

Iteration Number

CAMEO

a
b

Phase Mapping Performance [%]

Number of Clusters

Fe
Fe40Ga60

Fe40Pd60

Fe3Ga


28

Figure M3. Example Ge-Sb-Te optical data used for phase mapping prior.

Figure M4. a) For the 10 % material selection out of the 278 materials in the composition spread, the selected 28 materials are 
indicated with black filled circles. b) The order of materials measured during sequential measurement. 

wavelength [nm]
wavelength [nm]

wavelength [nm]
wavelength [nm]

Amorphous 𝜓

Crystalline 𝜓

Amorphous Δ

Crystalline Δ

Reflectance ratio 𝜓
Reflectance ratio 𝜓

Phase difference Δ [deg]
Phase difference Δ [deg]

Fe
Fe40Ga60

Fe40Pd60

Fe
Fe40Ga60

Fe40Pd60
a
b


29

Figure M5. Modifications made to the Fe-Ga-Pd remnant magnetization voltage signal. a) Red circles indicate the samples with 
saturated voltage of 10 V, b) Modified voltage by enhancing main voltage peak at 𝜇
= 𝐹𝑒78𝐺𝑎16𝑃𝑑6 and the maximum 

indicated with a red circle.

Figure M6. Phase-change temperature mapping of the combinatorial Ge-Sb-Te spread.

a
b

Voltage ∝

Remnant Magnetization [V]

Voltage ∝

Remnant Magnetization [V]


30

Figure M7. Structural evolution FCC-Ge-Sb-Te (GST) structure (top) to the Sb-Te structure (bottom) across the line 
of composition marked in the phase diagram on the right. Peak indices are denoted. 

Figure M8. The optical bandgap of amorphous (left) and crystalline (right) states for a combinatorial Ge-Sb-Te 
spread.

Figure M9. The performance of the photonic device fabricated by the new nanocomposite PCM, GST467. The 
symmetric multi-level switching is realized. The inset is the top view of the photonic device used for multi-level 
switching, endurance test and comparison between Ge4Sb6Te7 and Ge2Sb2Te5.


