arXiv:2006.11351v1  [eess.IV]  19 Jun 2020

Neural-network-assisted in situ processing monitoring by speckle

pattern observation

Shuntaro Tani,∗ Yutsuki Aoyagi, and Yohei Kobayashi

Institute for Solid State Physics, The University of Tokyo

(Dated: June 23, 2020)

Abstract

We propose a method to monitor the progress of laser processing using laser speckle patterns.

Laser grooving and percussion drilling were performed using femtosecond laser pulses. The speckle

patterns from a processing point were monitored with a high-speed camera and analyzed with a

deep neural network. The deep neural network enabled us to extract multiple information from the

speckle pattern without a need for analytical formulation. The trained neural network was able to

predict the ablation depth with an uncertainty of 2 µm, as well as the material under processing,

which will be useful for composite material processing.

∗ stani@issp.u-tokyo.ac.jp

1


I.
INTRODUCTION

Laser-based micro-structuring is a powerful tool for precision manufacturing and is con-

sidered a key element for future automized manufacturing. The main physical phenomenon

behind laser-based micro-structuring is laser ablation: the process of surface material re-

moval by rapid energy injection with laser pulses [1, 2]. In particular, the use of ultrashort

pulses enables material removal with negligible heat degradation. As such, much research

has been devoted to properly control and understand this process.

An important parameter in laser ablation is the rate of material removal, or the ablation

rate. The ablation rate depends on various factors, such as material properties, surface

morphology, pulse energy, and the laser repetition rate [3–7]. For precision manufacturing

and automized process optimization, real-time monitoring of this processing rate is of great

importance. Specifically, the monitoring of the cumulative ablation rate, or the processed

depth or volume, is important for hole drilling or groove processing.

Various methods have been developed to monitor the processing status in a non-contact

way, including acoustic and plasma detection [8–11]. Specifically, laser interferometry is a

powerful technique to quantify the progress of laser processing. In laser interferometry, a

monitoring beam is divided into two paths: one for the actual monitoring, and another as a

reference. The monitoring laser beam is projected onto a processing point, and the reflec-

tion of this light is directed back into an interferometer. The interference signal between

this beam and the reference is measured, where the signal strength depends on the rela-

tionship between the optical path lengths of the two beams. By properly tracking changes

in this signal during processing, it is possible to extract real-time processed depth informa-

tion. Intensive studies have been performed to increase the precision and acquisition rate

of laser interferometry setups, as well as to make the overall system convenient to install.

Currently, there are two major implementations, differentiated by their choice of reference

beam path: cross-interferometry and self-mixing. In cross-interferometry, a separate ref-

erence arm is placed in the interferometer, which enables the determination of absolute

distance in exchange for a comparatively large installation footprint [12–16]. In self-mixing-

interferometry, the intact surface outside the ablation region is used for the reference path

[17–19].
Although the self-interferometry method does not require a reference arm, the

counting of net oscillation is necessary to quantify the total ablated depth, limiting its uses

2


FIG. 1. Process monitoring using laser speckle with a deep neural network.

to situations with gradual depth changes, such as percussion drilling.

As an alternative method to optically monitor the laser processing status, we focus on uti-

lizing the spatial coherence of a probe light source instead of only the temporal coherence as

in the aforementioned interferometry techniques. When spatially coherent light is scattered

by a rough surface and projected onto a screen, the scattered light on the screen exhibits

a highly irregular intensity profile, known as a laser speckle pattern. The speckle pattern

arises from interference of wavefronts scattered at different positions of the surface. As such,

the speckle pattern carries a trove of information on the material surface condition. It has

been used for various measurement and diagnostic applications, such as in surface roughness

measurements [20], flow measurements[21, 22], and strain measurements[23]. Furthermore,

techniques for three-dimensional reconstruction from the speckle pattern have been devel-

oped, realizing sub-millimeter precision [24, 25]. As speckle-pattern analysis only requires

illumination and an observation camera, it should be straightforward to implement into laser

processing setups. Moreover, the two-dimensional nature of the speckle pattern observation

should provide additional information compared to conventional one-point interferometric

measurements. The major challenge here then becomes extracting meaningful physical char-

acteristics from the complex speckle pattern.

In this study, we demonstrated the successful extraction of multiple information from

three sequential frames of speckle patterns measured in situ during laser processing. Figure

1 shows the concept of our method. We illuminate the processed surface with a coherent

3


FIG. 2. Experimental setup. The abbreviations are as follows: PH: pinhole, DG: delay generator,

MS: mechanical shutter, DM: dichroic mirror, MC: micro-computer, HC: high-speed camera, and

SPF: short pass filter.

light source, and observe the reflected speckle pattern with a high-speed camera. Tradi-

tionally, the quantification of speckle patterns required a formulation for application- and

measurement- specific analysis. Here, we utilize neural networks to practically overcome

this difficulty. Deep learning are emerging technology to ties multi-dimensional vectors to

other multi-dimensional vectors with the neural networks using a number of datasets [26–32]

. We use a number of experimental datasets to train a neural network to approximate the

complex nonlinear functions required to extract meaningful physical values from a speckle

image. We show that a deep neural network can use speckle patterns to extract multiple

information regarding the processing status during laser processing, such as ablated material

type, depth, and volume. The simple setup should be a great candidate for next-generation

process monitoring technology.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 2. We used plates of aluminum, copper, and

nickel for the sample. The roughness Ra of the plates before the processing was measured

to be typically around 1 µm. The sample was placed on a two-axis stage, which moved

at a constant velocity during groove processing. Laser pulses for rapid surface engraving

were provided by a Ti: Sapphire regenerative amplifier with a wavelength of 800 nm, pulse

4


duration of 35 fs, and a repetition rate of 1 kHz. The pulse energy of the laser pulses was

adjusted by a motor-driven half-wave plate and a polarizing beam splitter. The laser pulses

were then focused onto the sample surface through a lens with a focal length of 150 mm; the

spot size on the target was approximately 15 µm. A mechanical shutter was used to switch

on and off the laser irradiation. A laser beam for monitoring was provided from a laser

diode with a wavelength of 633 nm. The monitoring beam was spatially filtered through

a 50-µmpinhole, and then coaxially merged with the femtosecond laser pulses through a

dichroic mirror. The spot size on the target was 20 µm, which was 1.5 times larger than

that of the processing beam. Laser speckle patterns from the target surface were recorded

with a high-speed camera through a collector lens with a focal length of 50 mm. The lens

was placed between the target and the high-speed camera to match the Fourier plane of

the lens with the detector plane.
A laser line filter at the wavelength of 632.8 nm was

inserted in between the lens and the camera.
The high-speed camera was synchronized

with a 1-kHz TTL signal from the regenerative amplifier. The high-speed camera was also

synchronized with the mechanical shutter, first nine frames without laser irradiation due to

a delayed response of the mechanical shutter. The exposure time was set to 500 µs; this

exposure was also synchronized with the monitoring laser diode. The acquired image frames

were sent to the computer in real time through CoaXPress cables. The pulse energies were

varied from 10 to 60 µJ, and the scan speeds were varied from 1.0 to 3.5 mm/s. The depth

profiles of the grooves were measured using a confocal 3D microscope with a 50x objective

lens.
A typical depth profile is shown in Fig. 3 (a), where the laser pulses were swept

along the horizontal axis. The cross-section of the depth profile along the laser trace is

shown in Fig. 3(b). When illuminated by the monitoring diode, the macroscopic groove

shape and the microscopic groove surface roughness combine to form the total laser speckle

pattern. Figure 3(c) shows typical sequential images of the observed speckle patterns. As

the processing proceeds, the changes in the surface structure and the monitoring position

induce changes in the laser speckle patterns. The diffraction angles for the left and right

edge of the images are 30 and 60 degrees, respectively.

5


FIG. 3. (a) Three-dimensional depth profile of a laser processed groove. (b) Cross-sectional of the

depth profile. (c) Typical laser speckle images.

III.
DATA PREPARATION AND TRAINING

The resolution of the acquired images was 4080 x 480 pixels, which was reduced down to

255 x 25 pixels by box averaging and cropping. The brightness and contrast of each image

were normalized between 0 and 1. Due to this normalization, only spatial patterns of the

images were taken into account in the following analysis. The neural network consisted of two

convolutional layers, five residual convolutional layers, and a max-pooling layer followed by

two convolutional layers. The last two-dimensional layer was then flattened and connected

to two fully connected layers. The rectified linear unit was used for the activation function.

6


FIG. 4. Predicted ablation depth vs. measured ablation depth for aluminum, copper, and nickel.

Three sequential image frames were used as input data, and the measurement value and

material vectors were used as label data. Here the material vector was represented by a one-

hot vector of material species. The loss function was composed from the root mean square

of the ablated depth and the cross-entropy of the material vector. The neural network was

trained with 13,000 datasets which included all three materials. The batch size was 256,

and the Adam algorithm was used for optimization.

IV.
RESULTS

Upon three-sequential image input, the trained neural network predicts the ablation depth

and the target material. Figure 4 shows the validation results of the trained neural network.

Validation data were obtained separately from the training data. The 32-34 combination of

pulse energies and scan speed for the three materials resulted in 98 datasets. Each dataset

consisted of 10 three-sequential images. The net 980 datasets were used for the validation.

The estimated ablation depth by the neural network was plotted as a function of the experi-

mentally measured ablation depth. Good correspondence was found between estimated and

measured values, with less than 2 µmuncertainty and without material dependence. Most

of the dataset showed less than 1 µmuncertainty below an ablation depth of 5 µm. We note

that the prediction took 0.09 ms using a standard commercially available GPU; this figure

shows that with proper configuration of the camera data acquisition board and GPU mem-

ory, real-time feedback of the laser processing should be possible. In addition, the speckle

patterns can simultaneously predict the material type being processed. Figure 5 shows the

7


FIG. 5. Logits magnitude for various input frames for aluminum, copper, and nickel.

predicted logits of materials, where the logit is defined as log p log(1-p), where the p is the

probability of being the material. A high logits value output indicates a high probability

of the input being a certain material, and vice-versa for a low value. The horizontal axis

indicates the indices of the validation datasets, where the correct material type for a par-

ticular index range is indicated by the overlaid horizontal arrows. As shown in the figure,

the predicted material vector shows good agreement with the material under processing.

Almost 10 dB separation between the most probable material and the others shows that

we can accurately predict the material under processing. The good material separation for

various ablation depths suggests the existence of material-specific surface morphology for

each groove, that this information is imprinted in the speckle pattern, and that the deep

neural network can successfully extract this information. Our method can also be applied

for hole drilling. Figure 6 shows the predicted ablation volume as a function of measured

ablation volume in percussion drilling. In this experiment, we used polished plates of sili-

con as a target material. The same experimental setup was used without moving the stage

during laser irradiation. Holes were drilled with various combinations of pulse energy and

the number of pulses. The number of pulses ranged from 50 to 300 with a step size of 50,

which was controlled by the mechanical shutter. The pulse energies were varied from 1 to 10

µJ. Ablated volumes of the drilled holes were measured using the 3D confocal microscope.

8


FIG. 6. Deep-neural-network based prediction of ablation volume from laser speckle pattern during

percussion drilling.

We prepared the label data by interpolating the ablated volume as a function of pulse en-

ergy and the irradiated number of pulses. The image frames for the training and validation

were prepared independently. Almost 100,000 datasets were used for the training and 1,000

datasets were used for the validation. The good correspondence between the predicted value

and the actual value suggests that our method is also applicable for drilling.

V.
CONCLUSION

We developed a method to extract the progress of laser processing by in situ speckle

pattern analysis using a neural network. The neural network can predict the ablation depth

of a groove with an accuracy of 2 µm. Our method is easy to install compared to traditional

interferometric monitoring techniques. We also show that as the speckle information utilizes

the full surface information, it can predict other properties of the processed material as well,

for example, the processed material type. This would be especially useful for composite

material processing.
Moreover, the prediction time of less than 0.1 ms is promising for

real-time feedback for complex processing procedures. Altogether, the simplicity, versatility,

and overall accuracy of the method should make it a strong candidate for future integrated

monitoring systems.

9


FUNDING

A part of this word is supported by a TACMI project (NEDO).

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author would like to thank Dr. Haruyuki Sakurai for constructive criticism of the

manuscript.

REFERENCES

[1] B. N. Chichkov, C. Momma, S. Nolte, F. von Alvensleben,
and A. Tunnermann, Applied

Physics A 63, 109 (1996).

[2] B. Y. Mueller and B. Rethfeld, Applied Surface Science 302, 24 (2014).

[3] S. Nolte, C. Momma, H. Jacobs, A. Tunnermann, B. N. Chichkov, B. Wellegehausen,
and

H. Welling, JOSA B 14, 2716 (1997).

[4] M. Hashida, A. F. Semerok, O. Gobert, G. Petite, Y. Izawa,
and J. F. Wagner, Applied

Surface Science 197-198, 862 (2002).

[5] A. Ancona, F. R¨oser, K. Rademaker, J. Limpert, S. Nolte,
and A. Tunnermann, Optics

Express 16, 8958 (2008).

[6] S. Tani and Y. Kobayashi, Applied Physics A 124, 265 (2018).

[7] H. Mustafa, D. T. A. Matthews, and G. R. B. E. R¨omer, Journal of Laser Applications 32,

022015 (2020).

[8] C. E. Yeack, R. L. Melcher, and H. E. Klauser, Applied Physics Letters 41, 1043 (1998).

[9] A. Sun, E. Kannatey-Asibu Jr, and M. Gartner, Journal of Laser Applications 11, 153 (1999).

[10] A. Stournaras and G. Chryssolouris, The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing

Technology 46, 611 (2010).

[11] A. Stournaras, K. Salonitis,
and G. Chryssolouris, The International Journal of Advanced

Manufacturing Technology 46, 589 (2010).

10


[12] P. J. L. Webster, L. G. Wright, K. D. Mortimer, B. Y. Leung, J. X. Z. Yu, and J. M. Fraser,

Journal of Laser Applications 23, 022001 (2011).

[13] P. J. L. Webster, L. G. Wright, Y. Ji, C. M. Galbraith, A. W. Kinross, C. Van Vlack, and

J. M. Fraser, Optics Letters 39, 6217 (2014).

[14] J. J. Blecher, C. M. Galbraith, C. Van Vlack, T. A. Palmer, J. M. Fraser, P. J. L. Webster,

and T. DebRoy, Science and Technology of Welding and Joining 19, 560 (2014).

[15] Y. Ji, A. W. Grindal, P. J. L. Webster,
and J. M. Fraser, Journal of Physics D: Applied

Physics 48, 155301 (2015).

[16] C. Stadter, M. Schmoeller, L. von Rhein, and M. F. Zaeh, Journal of Laser Applications 32,

022046 (2020).

[17] F. P. Mezzapesa, V. Spagnolo, A. Ancona, and G. Scamarcio, Applied Physics Letters 101,

171107 (2012).

[18] F. P. Mezzapesa, T. Sibillano, F. Di Niso, A. Ancona, P. M. Lugar`a, M. Dabbicco,
and

G. Scamarcio, Optics Express 20, 663 (2012).

[19] A. G. Demir, B. Previtali, A. Magnani, A. Pesatori, and M. Norgia, Journal of Laser Appli-

cations 27, S28005 (2015).

[20] D. L´eger, E. Mathieu, and J. C. Perrin, Applied Optics 14, 872 (1975).

[21] T. D. DUDDERAR and P. G. SIMPKINS, Nature 270, 45 (1977).

[22] A. K. Dunn, H. Bolay, M. A. Moskowitz, and D. A. Boas, Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &

Metabolism 21, 195 (2016).

[23] I. Yamaguchi, Journal of Physics E: Scientific Instruments 14, 1270 (1981).

[24] H. Yamamoto and M. Takeda, Applied Optics 33, 7829 (1994).

[25] M. Dekiff, P. Berssenbr¨ugge, B. Kemper, C. Denz, and D. Dirksen, Applied Physics B: Lasers

and Optics 99, 449 (2010).

[26] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, in Advances in Neural Information Processing

Systems (2012) pp. 1090–1098.

[27] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, Nature 521, 436 (2015).

[28] L. Tian, Y. Xue, and Y. Li, Optica 5, 1181 (2018).

[29] A. Turpin, I. Vishniakou, and J. d. Seelig, Optics Express 26, 30911 (2018).

[30] O. L. Muskens, P. R. Wiecha, R. French, and U. K¨ur¨um, Optics Express 27, 20965 (2019).

[31] A. Ozcan, G. Barbastathis, and G. Situ, Optica 6, 921 (2019).

11


[32] F. Kalichman, O. Levitas, R. Jacobson, Z. Kalyzhner, and Z. Zalevsky, Optics Express 27,

36002 (2019).

12


