Impact of Graphene Thickness on EM Modelling of Antenna 

Sasmita Dash1,a, Christos Liaskos2,b, Ian F. Akyildiz3,c  and Andreas 

Pitsillides1,d  

1Computer Science Department, University of Cyprus, Cyprus,  

2Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas (FORTH), Greece,  

3School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA  

asdash001@ucy.ac.cy, bcliaskos@ics.forth.gr, cian@ece.gatech.edu, 

dandreas.pitsillides@ucy.ac.cy  

Keywords: Graphene, antenna, THz, electromagnetic modelling, simulation, 2D sheet, and 3D 
slab.  

Abstract. This paper presents illustrative electromagnetic modelling and simulation of graphene 
antenna using a two-dimensional graphene sheet of zero thickness and a three-dimensional 
graphene slab of finite thickness. The properties of the antenna are analyzed in terms of the S11 
parameter, input impedance, VSWR, radiation pattern, and frequency reconfiguration using the full-
wave electromagnetic simulator. Furthermore, this work numerically studies the modelling of 
graphene antenna using a three-dimensional graphene thin slab and the impact of graphene slab 
thickness on the performance of graphene antenna. 

Introduction  

The world's first two-dimensional (2D) material graphene gained momentum for the realization of 
effective new devices in various fields due to its extraordinary electrical, mechanical and optical 
properties. Owing to unique electromagnetic (EM) properties such as tunable conductivity and 
slow-wave propagation, graphene attracted more attention for EM applications in a wide frequency 
range from microwave to X-rays. Indeed, graphene is capable of the surface plasmon polariton 
(SPP) propagation at terahertz (THz) frequency range [1]. Graphene plasmons enable the design of 
graphene plasmonic nanoantennas at THz frequency band [2-5]. However, EM simulation is an 
integral part of numerous research fields. A numerical simulation yields a correct and meaningful 
result when it implements the accurate theoretical prediction for the material properties in EM 
simulation. Particularly, this is the most significant concern for the modelling of graphene in 
computational EM simulator.  Several numerical techniques can be used for graphene simulation 
such as finite-difference time-domain method (FDTD), finite element method (FEM), and method 
of moment (MoM). Based on these techniques, several commercial software packages CST, HFSS, 
COMSOL, and FEKO are available to model graphene antenna. Graphene can be modelled as a 2D 
sheet or three dimensional (3D) thin slab in commercial EM simulators.   

This paper illustrates the EM modelling and simulation of the graphene 2D sheet and 3D slab 

antenna. Section 2 explains briefly the EM modelling and simulation of graphene using 2D sheet 
and 3D slab by means of computational EM simulators. Section 3 presents the EM modelling and 
analysis of graphene antenna using graphene as 2D graphene sheet of zero thickness and 3D 
graphene thin slab of non-zero thickness. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in section 4. 

Electromagnetic Modelling of Graphene 

Graphene is a single layer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms packed in a hexagonal (honeycomb) lattice. 
The extraordinary electronic, optical and mechanical properties of graphene stimulated great 
research interest in numerous fields in the past few years. Graphene is a zero-overlap semimetal or 
zero-gap semiconductor with very high electrical conductivity. Graphene has very high electron 
mobility, which can theoretically reach 200,000 cm2/Vs at room temperature, the current density is 


in the order of 109 A/cm, and the velocity of fermion (electron) is the order of 106 m/s, which is 300 
times smaller than the velocity of light [6]. The inherent strength of graphene is another excellent 
property. Graphene is the strongest and lightest material ever discovered. Despite this, graphene is 
only 1 atom thick; it is almost transparent. 

In an EM simulator, graphene is modelled as a thin conductive sheet. The graphene surface 

conductivity σs contains contributions from intraband and interband transitions. The intraband 
conductivity is dominant over the interband term in the THz frequency regime. The intraband 
conductivity of graphene contributes a large imaginary part of conductivity, which in turn, leads to 
plasmonic behaviour. The intraband conductivity of graphene can be approximated by the Kubo 
formula [7]: 














 



1
ln
2

)
(

, , )
,
(
1
2

2

int

T

B

c
B

c
ra

c B
e
T
j
T
e
j
T











  



                          

(1) 

where e is the electron charge, ω is angular frequency, KB is the Boltzmann’s constant, ħ is the 

reduced Planck’s constant, T is temperature, μc is the chemical potential, scattering rate Γ is the 
electron-phonon scattering due to the carrier intraband scattering related to plasmonic loss = 1/2τ, 
and τ is the relaxation time related to impurities and defects in graphene. 

                     
 

                                         (a)                                                       (b) 

Figure 1. (a)  Graphene sheet with its honeycomb lattice structure,  and (b) Graphene sheet in the 

2D grid. 

 

Fig. 1 (a) shows the graphene sheet with its honeycomb lattice structure and Fig. 1 (b) shows the 

graphene sheet in a 2D rectangular grid, on which we have graphene as a conductive sheet with 

)
(
ˆ
2
1
int
T
T
ra
H
H
n
E




                                                                                                  (2) 

 

In most of the EM simulators, graphene is modeled as a 2D graphene sheet. The 2D graphene 

sheet can also be approximated by a 3D thin slab in the EM simulators. The 3D conductivity of 
graphene can be evaluated as    

t

s

D




3

                                                                                                                                           

(3) 

where t is the thickness of the graphene layer. The conductivity of graphene reduces when the 

graphene thickness increases [8]. Thus, the accuracy of the 3D model degrades as graphene 
thickness increases. To analyze the electromagnetic properties of the graphene antenna, several 
numerical techniques such as FDTD, FEM, and MOM can be used. Several graphene antennas have 
been modeled using several EM simulators based on these numerical techniques [9-15]. 


Modelling and Simulation of Graphene Antenna 

In this section, we illustrate aspects of the modelling of graphene antenna using a 2D graphene 
sheet of zero thickness and 3D graphene thin slab of non-zero thickness.  

The dispersion relation allows the derivation of the resonant frequency of the graphene antenna 

by means of the resonance condition 

SPP

SPP

m K
m
L




2
                                                                                                                    (4)                  

where L is the length of the graphene antenna, λSPP is the SPP wavelength, and m is an integer 

which determines the order of the resonance. 

We modelled a graphene dipole antenna at 1 THz frequency. The proposed antenna structure is 

simulated using FEM solver Ansys HFSS 17. Fig. 2 shows the top view and cross-sectional view of 
the designed structure of the graphene dipole antenna. The graphene dipole antenna was modelled 
as a planar structure of the 2D graphene conductive sheet. The proposed antenna consists of a 
rectangular graphene sheet of width (W) = 10 µm and length (L) = 52 µm.  We chose graphene with 
relaxation time τ =1 ps and temperature T = 300 K. Graphene sheet transferred on the silicon 
substrate. Dimension of substrate is chosen as length (Ls) = 60 µm, width (Ws) = 20 µm and height 
(h) = 4 µm. The source was placed in the center of the dipole antenna to excite the structure. 

 

                                    
 

                                                                          (a) 

                                     
 

                                                                           (b) 

Figure 2. Proposed graphene dipole antenna (a) Top view and (b) Cross-sectional view. 

 

Results and Discussion 

At 1 THz frequency, the SPP wavelength of the graphene dipole antenna is nearly equal to one-third 
of free-space wavelength (λSPP ≈ λ0/3). It can be seen that the graphene antenna enables high 
miniaturization and radiates at sub-wavelength scale. S (1, 1) parameters, input impedance, VSWR 
and radiation pattern of the graphene dipole antenna are shown in figure 3 (a), (b) (c) and (d) 
respectively. The input impedance of the antenna is nearly equal to 50 ohms. The proposed 
graphene antenna provides good impedance matching. VSWR value of antenna at 1 THz is equal to 
unity, which indicates no mismatch loss. The radiation pattern of graphene dipole antenna at 1 THz 
is omnidirectional in nature, similar to the metallic dipole antenna. 


     
 

(a)                                                               (b) 

   
 

(c)                                                                    (d) 

Figure 3. Performance of graphene dipole antenna (a) S11 parameter, (b) Input impedance, (c) 

VSWR and (d) Radiation pattern at 1 THz. 

 

 

Figure 4. Frequency reconfiguration of graphene antenna. 

 

Furthermore, frequency reconfiguration is easily achieved by varying the chemical potential 

parameter in the EM simulator. The conductivity of graphene increases with the increase of 
chemical potential, which in turn tunes the surface electromagnetic properties of graphene. 
Practically, the chemical potential of graphene was dynamically controlled over a wide range by 
applying an external gate voltage between two graphene patches of the graphene dipole antenna. In 
this work, Frequency reconfiguration is achieved in a frequency range 1.0 -1.75 THz with the 
increase of the chemical potential (μc) of graphene from 0.1 eV to 0.4 eV (Fig. 4). 


 

(a)                                                    (b)                                                    (c)  

Figure 5. (a) Input impedance of graphene antenna with graphene thickness (a) 1 nm, (b) 2 nm, and  

(c) 3 nm. 

 

(a) 
                                         (b)                                               (c)  

Figure 6.  VSWR of graphene antenna with graphene thickness. (a) 1 nm, (b) 2 nm, and (c) 3 nm. 

 

To illustrate the 3D aspect, the proposed antenna has been modeled using 3D graphene thin slab 

of variable thickness t = 1 nm, 2 nm, and 3 nm.  Graphene conductivity decreases with an increase 
of thickness of 3D graphene slab, which in turn, reduces the current in the antenna. Thus, an 
antenna impedance mismatch occurs. The input impedance of proposed graphene antennas with 3D 
graphene slab with variable thickness is depicted in Fig.5. From these plots, it can be observed that 
the real part of the input impedance of the antenna at resonance 1 THz is high and for all cases, it is 
more than 200 ohm, whereas graphene antennas using 2D graphene sheet of zero thickness has 50-
ohm input impedance. Also, the imaginary part of the input impedance of the graphene antenna 
using the 3D graphene slab is not zero at 1 THz. This is zero at 1.03 THz, 1.05 THz, and 1.55 THz 
for the thickness of 1 nm, 2nm, and 3 nm respectively. Due to impedance mismatch, VSWR of 
antennas for variable thickness 3D graphene slab is more than 5 at the resonant frequency 1 THz, 
which is shown in Fig.6. The higher value of VSWR indicates more mismatch loss. 

Conclusion 

EM modelling and simulation analysis of graphene dipole antenna using as 2D graphene sheet and 
3D graphene slab has been carried out. Antenna design using a 2D conductive graphene sheet of 
zero thickness provided good impedance matching and no mismatch loss was found. The EM 
modelling and simulation of the 3D graphene slab is dependent on its thickness. The conductivity of 
graphene reduces when the thickness of the 3D graphene slab increases, which leads to a decrease 
in current density in the antenna structure and impedance mismatch. Given the illustrative 
simulative results, our message for the users is to take care of the selection of graphene thickness 
for modelling graphene antennas in the EM simulator.  

 

 


Acknowledgments 

This research is supported by the European Union via the Horizon 2020: Future Emerging Topics - 
Research and Innovation Action call (FETOPEN-RIA), grant EU736876, Project VISORSURF 
(http://www.visorsurf.eu). 

References 

[1]      Koppens F, Chang D and Abajo F 2011 Nano Lett. 11 3370 

[2]    Tamagnone M, Gómez-Díaz J, Mosig J and Perruisseau-Carrier J 2012 Journal of Applied 

Physics 112 114915 

[3]      Dash S, Patnaik A and Kaushik B 2019 IET Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation 13 7 

[4]      Jornet J and Akyildiz I 2013 IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 31 685 

[5]      Dash S and Patnaik A 2018 Plasmonics 13 2353 

[6]      Geim A and Novoselov K 2007 Nature Materials 6 183 

[7]      Gusynin V, Sharapov S and Carbotte J 2006 J. Phys.: Cond. Matter 19 026 222 

[8]      Fang X et. al. 2015 Physics Letters A 379 2245 

[9]      Carrasco E and Perruisseau-Carrier J 2013 IEEE Antennas and Wireless Propagation Letters 

12 253 

[10]  Cabellos-Aparicio A, Llatser I, Alarcon E, Hsu A and Palacios T IEEE Trans. on 

Nanotechnology 14 390  

[11]    Dash S and Patnaik A 2019 Materials Today: Proceedings 18 1336 

[12]   Prakash S, Dash S and Patnaik A 2018 IEEE Indian Conference on Antennas and 

Propagation (Hyderabad: IEEE) 

[13]    Xu Z, Dong X and Bornemann J 2014 IEEE Transactions on Terahertz Science and 

Technology 4 609  

[14]    Dash S and Patnaik A 2018 IEEE 24th National Conference on Communications 

(Hyderabad: IEEE) 

[15]   Correas-Serrano D, Gomez-Diaz J, Alù A and Melcón A 2015 IEEE Transactions on 

Terahertz Science and Technology  5 951  


