1 

 

Functional surfaces of laser-microstructured silicon coated 

with thermoresponsive PS/PNIPAM polymer blends: switching 

reversibly between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity  

Maria Kanidia,b, Aristeidis Papagiannopoulosa, Andreea Mateic, Maria Dinescuc, Stergios 

Pispasa, and Maria Kandylaa, * 

aTheoretical and Physical Chemistry Institute, National Hellenic Research Foundation, 48 

Vasileos Constantinou Avenue, 11635 Athens, Greece 

bDepartment of Material Science, University of Patras, University Campus, 26504 Rio, 

Greece 

cNational Institute for Lasers, Plasma and Radiation Physics, 409 Atomistilor, 077125 

Magurele-Bucharest, Romania 

Abstract 

We developed functional surfaces of laser-microstructured silicon coated with blends of 

polystyrene (PS) and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and we study their 

switching wetting behavior between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. Large areas of 

silicon are processed with reproducible surface micromorphology and spin-coated with 

PS/PNIPAM blends of two blend ratios. The wetting behavior of the surfaces is modified 

by the combination of surface topography and surface chemistry effects. PS/PNIPAM 

films are casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates with or without a native 

SiO2 layer. All films respond to the stimulus of temperature and films casted on 

microstructured silicon substrates with a native SiO2 layer show the highest 

 

* Corresponding author: kandyla@eie.gr 


2 

 

thermoresponsiveness presumably because they adopt a more favorable structure. 

Microstructuring provides a large specific area that extends the contact of PNIPAM 

chains with water molecules according to the Wenzel model, and thus increasing the film 

thermoresponsiveness, resulting in a reversible transition from hydrophilicity to 

hydrophobicity upon heating. The absence of the native SiO2 layer from the silicon 

substrates affects the PS and PNIPAM arrangement in the films, increasing the water 

contact angle both below and above the lower critical solution temperature of PNIPAM 

and decreasing their thermoresponsiveness.  

Keywords: laser-microstructured silicon, PNIPAM, thermoresponsive polymers, 

wettability, blends, spin coating 

 

1. Introduction 

Control and switching of the wettability of a solid surface pose a challenge for 

several applications in the fields of industry and technology, such as waterproof textiles, 

coatings for boats, self-cleaning surfaces for solar energy panels, metal refining, 

microfluidics, as well as in the field of biology, such as drug delivery systems, cell 

encapsulation, immunoassays and biosensors, among others [1-5]. To this end, much 

attention is devoted to smart materials, which undergo switching of their wetting 

behavior between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity by an external stimulus, such as 

temperature or pH treatment, light irradiation, electrical potential, mechanical 

manipulation, etc. [5]. Surface chemistry and topographic structure determine the surface 

wettability, which is measured by the water contact angle θ between the surface and 

water [6].  The wettability presents mainly two states, hydrophilicity (θ = 10°‒90°) and 


3 

 

hydrophobicity (θ = 90°‒150°), and their extreme counterparts, superhydrophilicity (θ = 

0°‒10°) and superhydrophobicity (θ = 150°‒180°) [6]. Stimuli-responsive surfaces enable 

the reversible control of wettability. Such surfaces can be developed by either chemical 

modification with polymer films, brushes, and self-assembled monolayers [7], or 

micro/nanostructuring of their topography [8, 9], or the combination of both [10-12].  

One way to modify the surface chemistry is the deposition/attachment of 

functional polymer films. A widely known stimuli responsive polymer is poly(N-

isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM), which exhibits a reversible phase transition at the 

lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of 32oC. Below the LCST, the PNIPAM 

chains are able to form intermolecular hydrogen bonds with water molecules in aqueous 

solutions, displaying hydrophilicity. Heating above the LCST is accompanied by a 

compact and collapsed conformational change in the polymer chains, obstructing the 

interaction of water with the hydrophilic groups C=O and N‒H of PNIPAM and resulting 

in a less hydrophilic behavior of the material [13]. Because switching of PNIPAM 

wettability occurs at 32oC, which is close to human body temperature, PNIPAM in 

hydrogel systems is widely used for biological applications [14]. Additionally, PNIPAM 

is used for the development of stimuli responsive surfaces with a controllable wetting 

behavior via grafting techniques. Specifically, PNIPAM is grafted on surfaces alone or in 

combination with other polymers (polystyrene (PS), poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA), 

poly(N-dimethylacrylamide) (PDMA), pentamethyl diethylenetriamine (PMDETA), and 

polyacrylic acid (PAA)) via reactions of free radical polymerization, surface-initiated 

atom transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP), and plasma-induced grafting 

polymerization [3, 13, 15-20]. A significant advantage of grafting techniques is that they 


4 

 

offer precise localization of the polymeric chain on the surface and accurate control of the 

chain arrangement within the polymeric film [21]. Additionally, grafting techniques 

allow the formation of stable layers of (co)polymers with various compositions, 

functionalities, and controlled topography [21]. On the other hand, such techniques 

require elaborate equipment and metal catalysts, constituting costly and complicated 

approaches, partially due to the removal of catalysts at the end of the polymerization 

process.  

Besides the chemical composition of a surface, another factor that affects 

wettability is surface topography. The angle of contact between water and a surface is 

affected by inducing roughness on the surface [22]. Two models, Wenzel and Cassie-

Baxter, describe the wetting behavior of a liquid on a rough surface [23]. According to 

the Wenzel model, the liquid conforms to the topography of the surface and the surface 

roughness can enhance both hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. Specifically, when 

roughness is induced, a hydrophilic surface can become more hydrophilic and a 

hydrophobic surface can become more hydrophobic [24]. According to the Cassie-Baxter 

model, the liquid conforms only to the top of corrugations due to air trapping underneath, 

thus roughness contributes significantly to hydrophobicity enhancement [23, 24]. The 

model that describes the wetting behavior of a rough surface, and thus the increase or 

decrease of contact angles, depends strongly on the corrugation shape and size [22]. The 

synergy of the surface chemical composition and topography is critical to generate 

functional surfaces with tailored wettability, inducing advanced properties, such as water 

repellency, anti-adhesion, anisotropic dewetting, etc. [1]. To modify the surface 

topography and induce micro- and nanopatterning, there are several methods, such as 


5 

 

lithography [25], electrochemistry [26], plasma and wet etching [27, 28], among others. 

Laser processing is a complementary, cost-effective, and simple method for tailoring 

micro- and nanostructures over large areas on metals, semiconductors, glasses, polymers, 

and other materials [29-31]. 

In this work, we develop functional surfaces of laser-microstructured silicon 

coated with PS/PNIPAM polymer blends and we study their switching wetting behavior 

between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity upon heating. Based on our previous work on 

the wettability of PS/PNIPAM blend systems casted on flat silicon substrates, which 

showed a tunable, thermoresponsive wetting behavior [32], we take advantage of the 

large specific area of microstructured silicon to enhance the PS/PNIPAM film 

thermoresponsiveness. Silicon surfaces are microstructured via laser processing, inducing 

roughness on the surface, and spin-coated with PS/PNIPAM thin films of two blend 

ratios. Blending the thermoresponsive PNIPAM with PS provides mechanical stability to 

the films, because PS is in the solid state at room temperature since it has a high glass 

transition temperature (Tg ~100 oC), above which it flows, which makes PS suitable for 

high-quality surface coatings. In order to study the combined effect of micromorphology 

and surface chemistry of the silicon substrate, PS/PNIPAM films are casted on flat and 

microstructured silicon substrates with or without a native SiO2 layer. All PS/PNIPAM 

films respond to the stimulus of temperature, however the degree of response depends on 

the underlying substrate. Films casted onto microstructured silicon substrates demonstrate 

increased water contact angles, compared to films on flat silicon, already at room 

temperature and switch reversibly from hydrophilic to hydrophobic upon heating. On the 

other hand, even though films on flat silicon also show an increase in the water contact 


6 

 

angle upon heating, they remain hydrophilic and do not demonstrate a transition of their 

wetting state.  The absence of the native SiO2 layer from silicon substrates results in 

increased 
water 
contact 
angles 
of 
PS/PNIPAM 
films 
and 
decreased 

thermoresponsiveness. Laser processing is a single-step, maskless, tabletop method that 

allows quasi-uniform and controllable patterning of silicon surfaces [33, 34]. 

Additionally, spin coating is a simple and reproducible technique for film development, 

offering control of the process and avoiding the drawbacks of grafting techniques, such as 

the use of elaborate equipment [21, 35]. The combination of thermoresponsive polymer 

systems with reversibly switchable wettability and micro-patterned surfaces paves the 

way for the development of smart surfaces, able to extend and enhance traditional wetting 

applications by simple and cost-effective processes. 

 

2. Materials and Methods 

2.1 Materials. Polystyrene (PS1488) homopolymer (Mw=155,000, Mw/Mn=1.05) was 

synthesized by anionic polymerization and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM265) 

homopolymer (Mw=30,000, Mw/Mn=1.16) was synthesized by RAFT polymerization. 

THF solvent of analytical grade (Sigma-Aldrich) was used without further purification. 

For contact angle measurements, we used freshly distilled water from an all-glass 

distillation apparatus. 

2.2 Microstructured silicon substrates. Silicon wafers ((100), thickness 500 ± 25 μm) 

were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of acetone and methanol for 15 min before laser 

microstructuring. Microstructured silicon substrates were fabricated by nanosecond laser 

processing in a gas environment of sulfur hexafluoride (SF6). A pulsed Q-switched 


7 

 

Nd:YAG laser system was used with 1064 nm wavelength, 5 ns pulse duration, and 10 

Hz repetition rate. A silicon wafer was placed in a vacuum chamber, which was filled 

with 0.6 bar SF6. The laser beam was focused on the silicon surface through a quartz 

window using a lens of 200 mm focal length and the vacuum chamber was raster scanned 

using a computer-controlled set of xy translation stages. The scanning speed was set so 

that each spot on the silicon surface was irradiated by 1000 laser pulses. The average 

fluence was ~1 J/cm2 on the silicon surface. For the removal of the native silicon oxide 

(SiO2) layer from silicon surfaces, flat and microstructured silicon substrates were 

immersed for 5 minutes in an aqueous solution of 5% hydrofluoric acid (HF). After HF 

etching, silicon surfaces were cleaned with distilled water and methanol and were dried in 

nitrogen (N2) gas flow.  

2.3 Polymer film preparation. Blends of PS1488/PNIPAM265 were prepared in 75/25 and 

50/50 blend weight ratios dissolved in THF, consisting of 5 wt% polymer solution, and 

stayed overnight. Blend films were spin-casted onto clean flat and microstructured silicon 

substrates, with or without a native SiO2 layer, at 3000 rpm for 30 sec. After spin coating, 

the films were dried in ambient conditions at room temperature for one hour. In order to 

optimize the film quality, we tried other blend ratios as well. PS/PNIPAM films with a 

lower PNIPAM ratio did not present repeatable thermoresponsivity. Οn the other hand, 

films with a higher PNIPAM ratio were not mechanically stable, due to the water 

solubility of PNIPAM. The PS/PNIPAM ratio should be adjusted to provide films with 

mechanical stability, induced by PS, and a repeatable wetting behavior. Therefore, we 

choose the 75/25 and 50/50 blend ratios in order to obtain high-quality films with reliable 

wettability. All films were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a 


8 

 

field emission microscope, energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), micro-Raman 

spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Also, the film thickness on 

flat silicon substrates was measured by profilometry and films of 75/25 and 50/50 

PS/PNIPAM are 700 ‒ 800 and 500 ‒ 600 nm thick, respectively.  

2.4 Micro-Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectra were acquired with a Renishaw inVia 

Reflex Raman microscope, equipped with a Peltier-cooled charge coupled device (CCD) 

and a motorized xyz microscope stage with a lens of magnification ×100, in a 

backscattering geometry. The 514.5 nm line of an argon laser was used for excitation. 

Together with the rest of the system configuration (grating, slit width, CCD partition) this 

results in a spectral resolution of ~1 cm-1. The laser beam was focused on the sample to a 

spot diameter 1–2 μm and the excitation laser power was 0.10 mW. 

2.5 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was 

performed using an ESCALAB™ XI+ spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) with a 

monochromatic Al Kα source at 1486.6 eV. The XPS survey spectra were recorded with 

a step size of 1 eV and a pass energy of 50 eV, as a result of 5 scans. The high-resolution 

spectra for the C1s were recorded with 0.1 eV energy step size and 10.0 eV pass energy. 

For C1s, 10 scans were acquired. For depth profile analysis that we used in order to 

investigate the ratio PNIPAM/PS towards the bottom of the film, between 20 and 25 

layers were analyzed, the etching was made using a 300 atoms cluster gun, working at 

2000 eV. Each level was etched for 300 seconds.  

2.6 Contact angle measurements. A water drop of 5 μL was deposited on the surface of 

each film to measure the contact angle at room temperature (25oC) and at 45oC, using a 

constant temperature control base. Images of water drops on the surface were obtained by 


9 

 

a 2.0MP 500x USB Digital Microscope and analyzed by standard MATLAB functions. In 

detail, the images were transformed to grayscale and subsequently the drop edge profile 

was determined. The profile was numerically analyzed in polar coordinates (r, θ). The 

origin of the coordinates was chosen on the intersection between the apparent 

perpendicular axis of symmetry of the drop and the solid/liquid interface. The profiles 

r(θ) obtained this way vary smoothly with θ and were easily modeled by fourth-order 

polynomials. The contact angles were extracted from the derivatives (transformed back to 

Cartesian coordinates) on the left and right-side contacts of the drop with the surface. 

Typically, the deviation between left and right contact angles was less than 2º. The 

average of the two values is reported as the measured contact angle. For each film, water 

contact angles were measured three times. 

 

3. Results and Discussion 

SEM micrographs of microstructured silicon surfaces with a native SiO2 layer and 

without it are presented in Figs. 1a and b, respectively. In both Figs., the silicon surface is 

covered by a quasi-ordered array of conical microstructures with a mean half-height 

diameter of 15 ± 2 μm, a mean height of 65 ± 5 μm, and a mean distance between 

neighboring microstructures 16 ± 3 μm center-to-center. Comparing Fig. 1a with Fig. 1b, 

we observe that the removal of the native SiO2 layer does not affect the morphology of 

silicon microstructures. Using laser microstructuring, we are able to process large areas 

of silicon with quasi-uniform micromorphology. The formation of such microstructures is 

the result of melting and interference effects that occur upon nanosecond laser irradiation 

of silicon in SF6 environment [36, 37]. Laser processing allows the control of surface 


10 

 

morphology by tuning the fabrication parameters, such as wavelength, pulse duration, the 

gas or liquid environment, pressure of gas environment, laser fluence (J/cm2), and 

number of incident laser pulses [30, 38, 39].  

After laser processing, microstructured silicon substrates are coated with 

PS/PNIPAM blends of 75/25 and 50/50 blend ratios. In Figs. 2a and b, SEM micrographs 

show a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted onto a microstructured silicon substrate, filling the 

valleys between microstructures. Figure 2b shows a film area of high magnification 

where it is not clear whether the film covers entirely the microstructures or it is only 

concentrated in the valleys between them. A layered image from EDS elemental analysis 

shows the spatial distribution of the chemical elements that constitute the surface (Fig. 

3a). Mapping analysis shows the detected elements (silicon, carbon, oxygen, and 

nitrogen) and the distribution of silicon, carbon, and nitrogen on the surface (Fig. 3b). 

The elements of carbon and nitrogen correspond to the PS/PNIPAM film coating and 

they are detected spatially on the entire surface, verifying that the film covers the silicon 

microstructures, as well as the valleys between them. Similar results were observed for a 

75/25 PS/PNIPAM film casted onto a microstructured silicon substrate (not shown here).  

To investigate the topography of the PS/PNIPAM blend films we perform micro-

Raman spectroscopy on films casted on microstructured silicon substrates at ~25 oC 

(below the LCST of PNIPAM). For both blend ratios, Raman spectra on three different 

locations of the same film show peaks that correspond to the vibrational modes of C-H 

for PS and PNIPAM chains in the spectral range 2800‒3200 cm-1 (Figs. 4a and b). The 

vibrational mode of C-H for PS chains appears at 2852 cm-1, 2907 cm-1, 2976 cm-1, 2999 

cm-1, and 3054 cm-1, and  the vibrational mode of C-H for PNIPAM chains appears at 


11 

 

2874 cm-1, 2921 cm-1, 2935 cm-1, and 2976 cm-1, verified by Raman spectroscopy on 

solid PS and PNIPAM [32]. Previous studies have shown these PNIPAM Raman peaks 

down-shift to lower wavenumbers when heating above the PNIPAM LCST, as a result of 

the PNIPAM phase transition to a compact and collapsed conformational state, which 

also induces the hydrophobic behavior of the material [40-42]. Comparing the three 

Raman spectra shown in Fig. 4a, spectrum # 1 presents peaks that correspond only to PS, 

indicating the absence of PNIPAM in this area, in contrast with spectra #2 and #3 that 

present peaks that correspond to both polymers. The absence of PNIPAM peaks in 

spectrum #1 is due to macrophase separation, that occurs between the components of the 

homopolymer blend [32, 43]. Additionally, the low ratio of PNIPAM in the blend of Fig. 

4a (25%) results in the detection of low intensity PNIPAM Raman peaks compared to the 

intensity of PS Raman peaks. In case of the 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film (Fig. 4b), spectrum 

#1 presents peaks that correspond only to PS, spectrum #2 presents peaks that correspond 

to both PS and PNIPAM, and spectrum #3 presents peaks that correspond only to 

PNIPAM. Similar to the 75/25 PS/PNIPAM film, the 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film presents 

macrophase separation and the high PNIPAM ratio in the blend (50%) allows the 

detection of areas corresponding to each homopolymer separately in addition to areas 

corresponding to both. Phase separation can determine the surface topography, due to the 

formation of micro- and nano-domains on the film surface, creating a complex 

morphology [32]. In case of blend films casted on microstructured silicon substrates, we 

do not observe micro- and nano-domains on the film surface in Figs. 2a and b due to the 

micromorphology of the substrate. 


12 

 

Water contact angle measurements of PS/PNIPAM films casted on flat and 

microstructured silicon surfaces, with or without a native SiO2 layer, are presented in Fig. 

5. All water contact angles are measured at room temperature (~25oC) in order to study 

the effect of the substrate micromorphology and chemistry on the wetting behavior of 

PS/PNIPAM films. For reference, we also measured water contact angles on bare flat and 

microstructured silicon surfaces, with or without a native SiO2 layer. Both flat and 

microstructured silicon surfaces with a native SiO2 layer present a similar hydrophilic 

wetting behavior with a water contact angle of ~55o. However, the removal of the native 

SiO2 layer affects significantly their wetting behavior. Specifically, the flat silicon 

surface shows an increase in water contact angle by ~26o upon the removal of the native 

SiO2 layer, still displaying hydrophilicity albeit decreased, while the microstructured 

silicon surface shows an increase in water contact angle by ~67o upon the removal of the 

native SiO2 layer, which renders it hydrophobic. The removal of the native SiO2 layer 

from the microstructured silicon surface reveals the effect of micromorphology on its 

wetting behavior, enhancing the water contact angle due to air trapping between the 

rough surface and water [23]. Films of 75/25 and 50/50 PS/PNIPAM blends casted on 

flat silicon substrates without a native SiO2 layer present an increase in their water 

contact angle by ~3o and ~9o, respectively, compared to that with a native SiO2 layer. 

Similarly, films of 75/25 and 50/50 PS/PNIPAM blends casted on microstructured silicon 

substrates without a native SiO2 layer show an increase in their water contact angle by 

~20o and ~15o, respectively, compared to that with a native SiO2 layer. As we show 

below, the absence of the native SiO2 layer from silicon substrates results in PS 

enrichment of the top part of PS/PNIPAM films, which is hydrophobic, increasing their 


13 

 

water contact angle. Comparing the wetting behavior of 75/25 and 50/50 PS/PNIPAM 

films casted on flat silicon substrates with or without a native SiO2 layer, we observe that 

films with a higher PS ratio (75%) present higher contact angles than films with lower PS 

ratio (50%), because PS is hydrophobic with a water contact angle  of ~100o [32]. On the 

other hand, we observe that films of both blend ratios, casted on microstructured silicon 

substrates with or without a native SiO2 layer, present a similar wetting behavior 

regardless of the blend ratio. In the case of films casted on flat silicon substrates, the 

wetting behavior is determined by the chemical composition of the film, while the 

wetting behavior of the films casted on microstructured silicon substrates is determined 

by the substrate micromorphology. 

Figure 6a shows water contact angle measurements on PS/PNIPAM films of both 

blend ratios casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates with a native SiO2 layer 

at 25oC and 45oC. Upon heating, films of 75/25 blend ratio show an increase in their 

water contact angle by ~15o (on flat silicon) and ~22o (on microstructured silicon). An 

increase in the water contact angle by ~18o and ~34o between 25oC and 45oC is observed 

for films of 50/50 blend ratio casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates, 

respectively, which is higher compared to the increase of films of 75/25 blend ratio. All 

PS/PNIPAM films casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates respond to the 

stimulus of temperature and their thermoresponsiveness is correlated with the blend ratio. 

Specifically, films with a higher ratio of PNIPAM (50%) present higher responsiveness 

compared to those with a lower ratio of PNIPAM (25%). Films casted on microstructured 

silicon substrates present such a high increase of water contact angle upon heating, that 

their wetting behavior switches from hydrophilic to hydrophobic.  Microstructuring of 


14 

 

silicon substrates enhances the film thermoresponsiveness due to their large specific area. 

Indeed, the micromorphology of these silicon substrates allows extended contact between 

water and the PS/PNIPAM film surface, which contains the thermoresponsive PNIPAM 

chains. The wetting behavior of PS/PNIPAM films casted on microstructured silicon 

substrates 
is 
described 
by 
the 
Wenzel 
model 
since 
films 
show 
high 

thermoresponsiveness, which is attributed to the effective interaction between water and 

PNIPAM chains as the water droplet conforms to the surface topography.  

Figure 6b shows the effect of the absence of SiO2 from the silicon substrates on 

the wetting behavior of 75/25 and 50/50 PS/PNIPAM films upon heating. All films 

preserve their thermoresponsiveness, depending on the percentage of PNIPAM in the 

blend ratio, and the wetting behavior of the films casted on microstructured silicon 

substrates switches, becoming hydrophobic upon heating, similar to the films casted on 

substrates with a native SiO2 layer (Fig. 6a). In Fig. 6b, we observe that films casted on 

microstructured silicon substrates present higher thermoresponsiveness than those casted 

on flat silicon substrates, due to the extended contact between water and PNIPAM chains, 

provided by the large specific area of the microstructures, according to the Wenzel 

model. Comparing the water contact angle measurements of Fig. 6a with Fig. 6b, the 

removal of the native SiO2 layer from silicon substrates results in higher water contact 

angles of PS/PNIPAM films both below and above 32oC. Also, the thermoresponsiveness 

of films casted on silicon substrates with a native SiO2 layer is higher than that of films 

casted on substrates without a native SiO2 layer. We attribute this fact to the arrangement 

of PS and PNIPAM in the film, depending on the presence or absence of the native SiO2 

layer on the underlying silicon substrate, as shown below by XPS measurements.  


15 

 

Figure 7a shows an image of a water droplet on a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted 

on microstructured silicon with a native SiO2 layer below and above 32oC. Upon heating, 

the 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film shows an increase in water contact angle by ~34o and 

switches from hydrophilic to hydrophobic, presenting the highest thermoresponsiveness 

of all films. Additionally, Figure 7b shows the reversible switching behavior of the 50/50 

PS/PNIPAM film on microstructured silicon, demonstrating the transition between 

hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity for seven cycles of heating/cooling. 

To better understand the effect of surface chemistry of the silicon substrate on the 

arrangement of PS and PNIPAM in the films and hence their wetting behavior, we used 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The elemental quantification (%) of 50/50 

PS/PNIPAM films, casted on flat silicon substrates with or without a native SiO2 layer, is 

presented as a function of etching layers in Fig. 8. An example of an XPS depth profile 

survey is presented in supplementary material, Fig. S1. The percentage of carbon is 

attributed to both polymers of the blend film, the percentage of nitrogen is attributed to 

PNIPAM, and the percentage of oxygen is attributed to PNIPAM and the native SiO2 

layer on the substrate, thus the percentage of oxygen is lower in case of the film casted on 

silicon without a native SiO2 layer (Fig. 8b). In Fig. 8a, we observe that the percentage of 

nitrogen is higher in the upper etching layers and lower in the bottom film layers, for 

films casted on silicon with native SiO2. On the other hand, in Fig. 8b we observe that the 

percentage of nitrogen remains constant regardless of the etching layer. These results 

indicate that in the presence of native SiO2, PNIPAM is distributed mainly in the upper 

film layers, while in the absence of native SiO2, PNIPAM is distributed uniformly 

throughout the film.  


16 

 

Figure 9 shows the variation of the relative amount of N-C=O and the shake-up π-

π* transition populations attributed to PNIPAM and PS, respectively, in a 50/50 

PS/PNIPAM film casted on a flat silicon substrate with a native SiO2 layer (Figs. 9a and 

b) and without it (Figs. 9c and d), as a function of etching layer number, calculated by the 

area fitting of the C1s peak from spectra acquired by XPS. We describe how we calculate 

the ratios of PNIPAM and PS in supplementary material, Fig. S2 and Table S1.  In the 

case of the silicon substrate with native SiO2, we observe higher values of PNIPAM ratio 

in the upper film layers, due to more effective enrichment of PNIPAM in the upper part 

of the film (interfacing the air), compared to the bottom part of the film (interfacing SiO2) 

(Fig. 9a). In Fig. 9b, we observe higher values of PS ratio in the bottom film layers, close 

to the silicon/SiO2 substrate, resulting in more effective enrichment of PS in the bottom 

part of the film. Comparing Fig. 9a with Fig. 9c, we observe that the decrease rate of the 

PNIPAM ratio towards the bottom of the film is higher in the case of the film casted on 

silicon with SiO2 than without SiO2, as shown by the slope of the fitting lines. 

Furthermore, the slope of the fitting line of the PS ratio is higher in Fig. 9b than in Fig. 

9d, indicating that the increase rate of the PS ratio towards the bottom of the film is 

higher in case of the film casted on silicon with SiO2 than without SiO2. Therefore, in the 

presence of native SiO2, the bottom part of the films is more enriched with PS than in the 

absence of native SiO2. On the other hand, PNIPAM is arranged preferentially in the top 

part of the films in the presence of native SiO2, while the absence of native SiO2 results in 

a decrease of PNIPAM in the upper part of the films. Consequently, the higher relative 

amount of PNIPAM in the upper part of the films on silicon with SiO2 results in higher 


17 

 

thermoresponsiveness of these films, compared to those casted on silicon without SiO2, 

as shown in Fig. 6.  

In summary, all PS/PNIPAM films, casted on microstructured and flat silicon 

substrates with or without a native SiO2 layer, respond to the stimulus of temperature. 

The observed thermoresponsiveness is attributed to the presence of PNIPAM and films 

with a higher PNIPAM ratio present higher thermoresponsiveness, regardless of the 

morphology and surface chemistry of the silicon substrate. The removal of SiO2 from the 

silicon substrates, either flat or microstructured, increases the room temperature water 

contact angle of the overlying films but does not enhance their thermoresponsiveness. On 

the contrary, the presence of the native SiO2 layer on silicon results in PNIPAM 

enrichment of the top part of the films (interfacing with air and the water droplet), 

resulting in higher film thermoresponsiveness. In the presence of the native SiO2 layer, 

we observe that films casted on microstructured silicon substrates exhibit high 

thermoresponsiveness, measuring up to ~34o increase in water contact angle upon 

heating, and switch reversibly between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity, while films 

casted on flat silicon substrates do not undergo switching of their wetting behavior, even 

though they respond to the stimulus of temperature, measuring up to ~18o increase in 

water contact angle upon heating. The latter case agrees with our previous study on spin-

casted PS/PNIPAM blend films on flat silicon [32] and with other studies, which graft 

PNIPAM on flat silicon surfaces, which showed an increase of the water contact angle 

upon film heating without switching between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity [3, 13, 

16, 17, 19, 20]. However, grafted PNIPAM films on non-planar substrates, such as 

silicon nanowires and microgrooves, show a transition of their wetting behavior by 


18 

 

varying the micro/nanostructure size and spacing [11, 13]. Microstructuring induces 

roughness on the surface, which constitutes a crucial parameter for wettability, depending 

on the morphological characteristics of the microstructure [13, 22, 44]. Using grafting 

techniques, a PS layer can be grafted on a silicon substrate and a PNIPAM layer can be 

grafted above the PS layer on the upper part of the film. Grafting PNIPAM preferably on 

the upper part of the film, the PNIPAM chains are localized on the film-air interface, 

being able to interact with water molecules and respond effectively upon heating. 

Nevertheless, 
chain 
grafting 
can 
induce 
constrains 
to 
polymer 
chain 

rearrangement/relocalization and conformational changes, which may in turn hinder the 

response of the formed film to the external stimulus of temperature. In contrast to 

grafting techniques, the polymer arrangement in blend films deposited by spin coating 

cannot be controlled, because polymers adopt their thermodynamically favored structure. 

In this work, we demonstrate that spin-casted PS/PNIPAM films on laser-microstructured 

silicon substrates with native SiO2 adopt a favorable structure and present significantly 

enhanced reversible thermoresponsiveness, which switches their wetting behavior 

between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity. 

 

4. Conclusions 

We developed laser-microstructured silicon substrates coated with PS/PNIPAM 

blend films and we studied their thermoresponsive wetting behavior as a function of 

substrate micromorphology and surface chemistry. Taking advantage of the scalability 

that the laser patterning method offers, we can process large areas of silicon with 

reproducible surface micromorphology in order to use them as substrates for film casting, 


19 

 

inducing 3D topography to the casted films and tuning their wetting behavior. 

PS/PNIPAM films of 75/25 and 50/50 blend ratios were spin-casted on microstructured 

silicon substrates with or without a native SiO2 layer. We take advantage of the large 

specific area of the silicon substrates in order to enhance the film thermoresponsiveness. 

All films show an increase in water contact angle as they respond to the stimulus of 

temperature, 
but 
films 
with 
a 
higher 
ratio 
of 
PNIPAM 
exhibit 
higher 

thermoresponsiveness. The absence of the native SiO2 layer results in higher water 

contact angles at 25oC and 45oC but the PS/PNIPAM films present lower 

thermoresponsiveness, compared to the films casted on silicon substrates with a native 

SiO2 layer. This is because the presence of the native SiO2 layer results in PNIPAM 

enrichment in the top part of the film, which comes into contact with water. Comparing 

the wetting behavior of films casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates, we 

note that microstructuring provides a large specific area that extends the contact of 

PNIPAM chains with water molecules according to the Wenzel model. This enhances the 

film thermoresponsiveness to achieve switching from hydrophilicity to hydrophobicity. 

We also demonstrate that the transition is reversible and lasts for several heating/cooling 

cycles. Using simple, rapid, and cost-effective techniques, such as spin coating and laser 

processing, we combine thermoresponsive polymer systems with micro-patterned 

substrates for the development of smart functional surfaces with reversibly switchable 

wettability, able to extend and improve traditional wetting applications. 

Acknowledgements 

We acknowledge support of this work by the project “Advanced Materials and Devices” 

(MIS 5002409) which is implemented under the “Action for the Strategic Development 


20 

 

on the Research and Technological Sector”, funded by the Operational Programme 

"Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation" (NSRF 2014-2020) and co-financed 

by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund). M. Kanidi 

acknowledges support through a Ph.D. fellowship by the General Secretariat for Research 

and Technology (GSRT) and the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation 

(HFRI). We also thank Dr. C. Chochos for his help with SEM and EDS measurements. 

 

References 

1. M. Ma, M. R. Hill, Superhydrophobic surfaces, Current Opinion in Colloid & 

Interface Science, 11, 2006, 193-202. 

2. F. Xia, Y. Zhu, L. Feng, L. Jiang, Smart responsive surfaces switching reversibly 

between super-hydrophobicity and super-hydrophilicity, Soft Matter, 5, 2009, 

275-281. 

3. F. Zhou, T. S. W. Huck, Surface grafted polymer brushes as ideal building blocks 

for “smart” surfaces, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 8, 2006, 3815-3823. 

4. G. Demirel, Z. Rzaev, S. Patir, E. Piskin, Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) Layers on 

Silicon Wafers as Smart DNA-Sensor Platforms, Journal of Nanoscience and 

Nanotechnology, 9, 2009, 1865-1871. 

5. F. Guo, Z. Guo, Inspired smart materials with external stimuli responsive 

wettability: A review, RSC Advances, 6, 2016, 36623-36641. 

6. T. Sun, L. Feng, X. Gao, L. Jiang, Bioinspired surfaces with special wettability, 

Accounts of Chemical Research, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2005, 644-652. 


21 

 

7. Y. Liu, L. Mu, B. Liu, J. Kong, Controlled switchable surface, Chemistry A 

European Journal, 11, 2005, 2622-2631. 

8. Z. Zheng, O. Azzaroni, F. Zhou, T. S. W. Huck, Topography printing to locally 

control wettability, Journal of American Chemistry Society, Vol. 128, 24, 2006, 

7730-7731.  

9. V. Krokos, G. Pashos, N. A. Spyropoulos, G. Kokkoris, G. A., Papathanasiou G. 

A. 
Boudouvis, 
Optimization 
of 
patterned 
surfaces 
for 
improved 

superhydrophobicity through cost-effective large-scale computations, Langmuir, 

35, 2019, 6793-6802. 

10. Y. C. Kuo, C. Gau, Control of superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity of a 

superwetting silicon nanowire surface, Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 

Vol. 157, 9, 2010, K201-K205. 

11. Q. Yu, X. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Yan, T. Zhao, H. Chen, The synergistic effects of 

stimuli-responsive polymers with nano-structured surfaces: wettability and 

protein adsorption, RSC Advances, 1, 2011, 262-269.  

12. Q. Fu, G. V. R. Rao, B. S. Basame, J. D. Keller, K. Artyushkova, E. J. Fulghum, 

P. G. Lopez, Reversible control of free energy and topography of nanostructured 

surfaces, Journal of American Chemistry Society, 126, 2004, 8904-8905. 

13. T. Sun, G. Wang, L. Feng, B. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, Reversible switching 

between superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity, Angewandte Chemie 

International Edition, 43, 2004, 357-360. 

14. T. C. Schwall, A. I. Banerjee, Micro- and nanoscale hydrogel systems for drug 

delivery and tissue engineering, Materials, 2009, 2, 577-612. 


22 

 

15. L. Li, Y. Zhu, B. Li, C. Gao, Fabrication of thermoresponsive polymer gradients 

for study of cell adhesion and detachment, Langmuir, 24, 2008, 13632-13639. 

16. D. M. Kurkuri, R. M. Nussio, A. Deslandes, H. N. Voelcker, Thermoresponsive 

copolymer coatings with enhanced wettability switching, Langmuir, 24, 2008, 

4238-4244. 

17. T. Sun, W. Song, L. Jiang, Control over the responsive wettability of poly(N-

isopropylacrylamide) film in a large extent by introducing an irresponsive 

molecule, Chemical Communications, 2005, 1723-1725. 

18. S. Kumar, L. Y. Dory, M. Lepage, Y. Zhao, Surface-Grafted Stimuli-Responsive 

Block Copolymer Brushes for the Thermo-, Photo- and pH-Sensitive Release of 

Dye Molecules, Macromolecules, 44, 2011, 7385-7393. 

19. K. J. Chen, H. J. Wang, K. S. Fan, Chang Y. J., Reversible 

hydrophobic/hydrophilic adhesive of PS-b-PNIPAAm copolymer brush nanopillar 

arrays for mimicking the climbing aptitude of geckos, The Journal of Physical 

Chemistry C, 116, 2012, 6980-6992. 

20. Q. Yu, Y. Zhang, H. Chen, F. Zhou, Z. Wu, H. Huang, L. J., Brash Protein 

adsorption and cell adhesion/detachment behavior on dual-responsive silicon 

surfaces 
modified 
with 
poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-block-polystyrene 

copolymer, Langmuir, Vol. 26, 11, 2010, 8582-8588. 

21. E. Stamm, Polymer Surfaces and Interfaces, Characterization, Modification and 

Applications, Springer, 2008. 

22. Q. Zheng, C. LV, P. Hao, J. Sheridan, Small is beautiful, and dry, Science China, 

Physics, Mechanics &Astronomy, 53, 2010, 2245-2259. 


23 

 

23. D. Quere, Wetting and Roughness, Annual Review of Materials Research, 38, 

2008, 71-79. 

24. M. Callies, D. Quere, On water repellency, Soft Matter, 1, 55-61, 2005. 

25. A. Pimpin, W. Srituravanich, Review on micro- and nanolithography techniques 

and their applications, Engineering Journal, Vol. 16, 1, 2012, 37-55. 

26. F. M. Wang, N. Raghunathan, B. Ziaie, A non-lithographic top-down 

electrochemical 
approach 
for 
creating 
hierarchical 
(micro-nano) 

superhydrophobic silicon surfaces, Langmuir, 23, 2007, 2300-2303. 

27. Y. Kwon, N. Patankar, J. Choi, J. Lee, Design of surface hierarchy for extreme 

hydrophobicity, Langmuir, Vol. 25, 11, 2009, 6129-6136. 

28. Y. Xiu, L. Zhu, W. D. Hess, P. C. Wong, Hierarchical silicon etched structures for 

controlled hydrophobicity/superhydrophobicity, Nano Letters, Vol. 7, 11, 2007, 

3388-3393. 

29. Y. A. Vorobyev, C. Guo, Direct femtosecond laser surface nano/microstructuring 

and its applications, Laser Photonics Reviews, 7, No. 3, 2013, 385-407. 

30. G. D. Kotsifaki, M. Kandyla, G. P. Lagoudakis, Near-field enhanced optical 

tweezers utilizing femtosecond-laser nanostructured substrates, Applied Physics 

Letters, 107, 2015, 211111. 

31. R. R. Gattass, E. Mazur, Femtosecond laser micromachining in transparent 

materials, Nature Photonics, 2, 2008, 219-225. 

32. M. Kanidi, A. Papagiannopoulos, A. Skandalis, M. Kandyla, S. Pispas, Thin films 

of PS/PS-b-PNIPAM and PS/PNIPAM polymer blends with tunable wettability, 

Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics, Vol. 57, 11, 2019, 670-679. 


24 

 

33. G. D. Kotsifaki, M. Kandyla, G. P. Lagoudakis, Plasmon enhanced optical 

tweezers with gold-coated black silicon, Scientific Reports, 6, 2016, 26275. 

34. M. Kanidi, A. Dagkli, N. Kelaidis, D. Palles, S. Aminalragia-Giamini, J. 

Marquez-Velasco, A. Colli, A. Dimoulas, E. Lidorikis, M. Kandyla, I. E. 

Kamitsos, Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy of graphene integrated in 

plasmonic silicon platforms with a three-dimensional nanotopography, Journal of 

Physical Chemistry C, 123 (5), 2019, 3076-3087. 

35. K. Norrman, A. Ghanbari-Siahkali, B. N. Larsen, 6 Studies of spin-coated 

polymer films, Annual Report Progress in Chemistry, Section C: Physical 

Chemistry, 101, 2005, 174-201. 

36. H. C. Crouch, E. J. Carey, M. J. Warrender, J. M. Aziz, E. Mazur, Comparison of 

structure and properties of femtosecond and nanosecond laser-structures silicon, 

Applied Physics Letters, 84, 2004, 1820. 

37.  H. D. Lowndes, D. J. Fowlkes, J. A. Pedraza, Early stages of pulsed-laser growth 

of silicon microcolumns and microcones in air and SF6, Applied Surface Science, 

154-155, 2000, 647-658. 

38. R. B. Tull, E. J. Carey, E. Mazur, P. J. McDonald, M. S. Yalisove, Silicon surface 

morphologies after femtosecond laser irradiation, MRS Bulletin, 31, 2006, 626-

633. 

39. G. Amoako, Femtosecond laser structuring of materials: a review, Applied 

Physics Research, Vol. 11, 3, 2019, 1-11. 


25 

 

40. T. Y. Wu, A. B. Zrimsek, S. V. Bykov, R. S. Jakubek, S. A. Asher, Hydrophobic 

collapse initiates the poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) volume phase transition 

reaction coordinate, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 122, 2018, 3008-3014. 

41. M. Xia, S. Pan, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, Z. Fang, P. He, J. Fu, Y. Zhang, Dehydration 

behaviours of isopropyl group initiate the surface wettability transition of 

temperature sensitive poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel, Material Research 

Express, 6, 2019, 095704. 

42. J. Dybal, M. Trchova, P. Schmidt, The role of water in structural changes of 

poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) and poly(N-isopropylmethacrylamide) studied by 

FTIR, Raman spectroscopy and quantum chemical calculation, Vibrational 

Spectroscopy, 51, 2009, 44-51. 

43. S. F. Bates, Polymer-polymer phase behavior, Science, 251, 1991, 898-905. 

44. Y. He, C. Jiang, H. Yin, W. Yuan, Tailoring the wettability of patterned silicon 

surfaces with dual-scale pillars: From hydrophilicity to superhydrophobicity, 

Applied Surface Science, 257, 2011, 7689-7692. 

 
Figure captions  

Figure 1: Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of microstructured silicon surfaces (a) 

with a native SiO2 layer and (b) without it.  

Figure 2: (a) Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted 

on a microstructured silicon substrate (without SiO2). (b) Higher magnification. 

Figure 3: (a) Layered EDS image of a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted on a 

microstructured silicon substrate (without SiO2) and (b) mapping distribution of 

elements. 


26 

 

Figure 4: Raman spectra, measured with 514 nm excitation wavelength, of (a) a 75/25 

PS/PNIPAM film casted on a microstructured silicon substrate (with SiO2) and (b) a 

50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted on a microstructured silicon substrate (with SiO2). For 

clarity, Raman spectra have been vertically shifted in Fig. 4a. Each spectrum in Figs. 4a 

and b corresponds to a different location on the film surface. 

Figure 5: Water contact angle measurements on flat and microstructured silicon surfaces 

and on films of PS/PNIPAM blends, casted on flat and microstructured silicon substrates 

with or without a native SiO2 layer, at 25oC. 

Figure 6: Water contact angle measurements on PS/PNIPAM films casted on flat and 

microstructured silicon substrates (a) with a native SiO2 layer and (b) without it, at 25oC 

and 45oC.  

Figure 7: (a) Image of a water droplet on a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film, casted on a 

microstructured silicon substrate with a native SiO2 layer, at 25oC and 45oC. (b) Water 

contact angle measurements for a similar film/substrate combination for seven cycles of 

heating/cooling at 45oC and 25oC. Dashed lines are guides to the eye for the trend of the 

contact angles at 25oC (blue color) and 45oC (red color). 

Figure 8: Elemental quantification (%) of a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted on flat silicon 

(a) with a native SiO2 layer and (b) without it, as a function of number of etching layers, 

using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 

Figure 9: (a) Ratio of PNIPAM, calculated by the variation of the relative amount of N-

C=O population and (b) ratio of PS, calculated by the relative amount of the shake-up π-

π* transition population, in a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted on flat silicon with a native 

SiO2 layer. (c) Ratio of PNIPAM, calculated by the variation of the relative amount of N-


27 

 

C=O population and (d) ratio of PS, calculated by the variation of the relative amount of 

the shake-up π-π* transition population, in a 50/50 PS/PNIPAM film casted on flat 

silicon without a native SiO2 layer. Details about the calculations are presented in 

supplementary material. Red lines indicate least squares fit to the data. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


28 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 

 

 

Figure 1a  

  

Figure 1b  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


29 

 

Figure 2 

 
 

Figure 2a  

 

Figure 2 

Figure 3  

  

Figure 3a  

 


30 

 

 

Figure 3b 

 

Figure 4 

 

Figure 4a  

 

Figure 4b  

 


31 

 

Figure 5 

 

Figure 6 

 

Figure 6a 


32 

 

 

Figure 6b 

Figure 7 

 

Figure 7a 

 

Figure 7b 


33 

 

Figure 8 

  

Figure 8a 

  

Figure 8b 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


34 

 

Figure 9 

 
 

Figure 9a 

 

Figure 9b 


35 

 

 

Figure 9c 

 

Figure 9d 

 


