1 
 

Electrospun nanodiamond-silk fibroin membranes: a multifunctional platform 
for biosensing and wound healing applications 

Asma Khalid1,2*, Dongbi Bai1, Amanda N. Abraham1,2, Amit Jadhav3, Denver Linklater1, Alex 
Matusica4, Duy Nguyen1, Billy James Murdoch1, Nadia Zakhartchouk1, Chaitali Dekiwadia1, Philipp 
Reineck1,5, David Simpson6, Achini K. Vidanapathirana2,5,7, Shadi Houshyar8, Christina A. Bursill2,5,7, 

Elena Ivanova1, and Brant Gibson1,2.  

1. School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
2. Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics 
(CNBP)  

3. School of Fashion and Design, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
4. School of Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics, Flinders University, Clovelly 
Park SA, Australia  

5. Vascular Research centre, Lifelong Health, South Australian Health and Medical Research 
Institute (SAHMRI), Adelaide, SA, Australia 

6. School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
7. Adelaide Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia 

8. School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 

*asma.khalid@rmit.edu.au  

Abstract: Next generation wound care technology capable of diagnosing wound parameters, 
promoting healthy cell growth and reducing pathogenic infections noninvasively would provide 
patients with an improved standard of care and an accelerated wound repair mechanism. Temperature 
is one of the indicating biomarkers specific to chronic wounds. This work reports a hybrid, 
multifunctional optical material platform - nanodiamond-silk membranes as bioinspired dressings 
capable of temperature sensing and wound healing. The hybrid structure was fabricated through 
electrospinning and formed 3D sub-micron fibrous membranes with high porosity. The silk fibres are 
capable of compensating for the lack of extracellular matrix at the wound site, supporting the wound 
healing process. The negatively charged nitrogen vacancy (NV-) color centres in nanodiamonds (NDs) 
exhibit optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) properties and act as fluorescent nanoscale 
thermometers, capable of sensing temperature variations associated to the presence of infection or 
inflammation in a wound, without physically removing the dressing. Our results show that the 
presence of NDs in the hybrid ND-silk membranes improve the thermal stability of silk fibres.  The 
NV- color centres in NDs embedded in silk fibres exhibit well-retained fluorescent and ODMR 
properties.  Using the NV- centres as fluorescent nanoscale thermometers, we achieved temperature 
sensing at a range of temperatures, including the biologically relevant temperature window, on cell-
cultured ND-silk membranes. An enhancement in the temperature sensitivity of the NV- centres was 
observed for the hybrid materials. The hybrid membranes were further tested in vivo in a murine 
wound healing model and demonstrated biocompatibility and equivalent wound closure rates as the 
control wounds. Additionally, the hybrid ND-silk membranes showed selective antifouling and 
biocidal propensity toward Gram-negative Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli, while no 
effect was observed on Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus. 

 

1. Introduction 

A biodegradable dressing capable of both wound healing and monitoring represents a next level 
multifunctional platform for improved current wound care technologies. Electrospinning of polymers 
generates a 2D or 3D structure of nano and sub-micron sized fibres, in the form of membranes, with 
high porosity and high surface area, mimicking the extracellular matrix needed for healing. These 
fibrous membranes are highly suitable as wound dressings to protect the wound from bacteria while 
keeping the flow of oxygen and nutrients through them 1-2. 


2 
 

However, the human body can be extremely selective regarding implants, and in many cases will 
quickly reject or react poorly to most polymers used as electrospun membranes 1. Even the highly 
biocompatible polymers are not always suitable. Some dressings require constant maintenance, while 
others need to be replaced every few days which is labour intensive, may disrupt healing or may cause 
pain and discomfort 3. Regenerated silk protein solution4-5 obtained from Bombyx mori silk cocoons 
possesses good biocompatibility, excellent optical properties and flexibility to functionalize with a 
wide variety of optically active nanoparticles, therapeutic agents and biochemical markers6-8. The 
optically transparent silk solution can be transformed into fibres, films, gels and scaffolds 9 that are 
elastic 10, biodegrade and are easily metabolized in the body11. This regenerated silk fibroin can also 
be electrospun into biocompatible fibrous membranes and scaffolds for implantable devices12. 

While it is important to keep the wound protected during healing, the diagnosis of any infection and 
inflammation are equally crucial. Traditional methods involve a check for the presence of redness, 
heat detected by palpation and swelling 13. These visual signs appear when inflammation and infection 
have advanced too far making therapies or interventions substantially more challenging. 

Realizing a new technology that can aid clinicians to detect infections non-invasively would be 
beneficial and cost effective without the painful procedure of dressing removal. A chronically infected 
wound has a specific elevated thermal gradient range of +4 ºC to 5 ºC, compared to the normal tissue 
13-14. Nanodiamonds (NDs) with photostable negatively charged nitrogen vacancy (NV-) centres, 
shown in Figure 1(a), provide a possible avenue towards highly localised, non-invasive optical 
detection of temperature changes 15-17. The electron spin energy levels of the NV- centre in diamond 
are influenced by temperature T, as shown in Figure 1(a) and (b). This enables the zero-field splitting 
parameter D as a function of temperature: D(T) = D0 - αT, with D0 ~ 2.87 GHz at room temperature 
and α = 74  kHz/°C [4]. The D parameter can be initialized and readout via optically detected magnetic 
resonance (ODMR) technique with relative ease-of-operation [5,7], leading to NV-based thermometry 
in a temperature changing range of -150°C up to 400 °C 17. Hence the NV- centre can measure the 
local thermal environment at a spatial resolution down to sub-micron scale making it an attractive tool 
for high resolution spatial thermometry in infection monitoring applications 18-21. Moreover, the NV- 
centres record the temperature measurement of the area in thermal equilibrium with the ND19 which 
minimizes the effects of environmental changes19. 

 

 

Figure 1: (a) Structure of NV color centre in a diamond crystal lattice. (b) Simplified energy levels of the excited and 
ground states of the NV- centre, showing optical and MW transitions. (c) Energy diagram of the NV centre’s ground spin 
level as a function of temperature. Electron spin energy levels are influenced by temperature T. The zero-field splitting, 
D0 ~ 2.87 GHz for single crystal diamond at room temperature varies depending on temperature; D(T) = D0 - αT, where 
α = 74  kHz/°C 15.  

 

Here we present the combination of two unique optical materials: NDs and silk, electrospun into 
membranes as a multifunctional platform for biosensing and wound healing applications. 


3 
 

Electrospinning of silk generated sub-micron thick fibres with high porosity essential for breathable 
wound dressings. The fluorescent and spin properties of the NV- centre in NDs allow high-precision 
microscopic thermometry for wound sensing. Silk enables the attachment and growth of healthy cells 
inside the scaffold, while promoting wound healing.  

In Section 2.1, we introduce the fabrication of hybrid ND-silk membranes. All samples produced for 
this work contained ~85% silk-fibroin and 15% polyethylene oxide (PEO) polymer by weight. Since 
the PEO concentration is the same for all the samples, we will refer to them as silk only (without NDs) 
and ND-silk (with NDs) membranes instead of silk-PEO blend membranes in the rest of the 
manuscript. Moreover, regenerated silk fibroin is stated as silk in the rest of the manuscript. We have 
discussed the structural and fluorescence properties as well as thermal stability of ND-silk membranes 
relative to the silk only membranes (without NDs) in Sections 2.2 and 2.3. We demonstrate the 
application of ND-silk hybrid membranes for temperature sensing in an in vitro assay in Section 2.4. 
The in vivo compatibility of the ND-silk hybrid membranes is presented in a murine model of wound 
healing in Section 2.5. Finally, the antibacterial resistance and bactericidal efficiency of the 
membranes against common pathogenic bacteria are reported in Section 2.6. Our results indicate a 
cost-effective combination of materials that can aid clinicians to detect infections remotely without 
the painful procedure of dressing removal. 

 

2. Results and discussion 

2.1 Electrospun hybrid fibres 

Regenerated silk fibroin was extracted from Bombyx mori silk cocoons, and the protein purification 
was performed using the molecular cut off method as reported in literature 6, 9, yielding a pure silk 
fibroin aqueous solution with a concentration of 65 mg/mL. A higher viscosity and concentration of 
the polymer is generally required for electrospinning in order for the polymer molecules to entangle 
and form a jet. Hence, small volume of polyethylene oxide (PEO) in water was mixed with silk 
aqueous solution for this protocol, to promote fibre formation by increasing the overall polymer 
concentration. As also reported in earlier studies22, the addition of PEO as a backbone carrier polymer 
reduces the repulsion of the biopolymer chains due to the formation of hydrogen bonds between the -
OH bond of the PEO and the water molecules. This ultimately reduces the polyelectric effect in 
biopolymers (like silk), allowing for continuous and stable fiber production22. A solution of 50 mg/mL 
PEO in water was added to the as prepared silk solution (65 mg/mL) to generate an aqueous solution 
of 87% silk and 13% PEO by weight in the final mixture.  

To compare the properties of ND-silk hybrid membranes with the silk only samples, we produced two 
different mixtures by PEO to (i) silk only and with (ii) 0.5 mg/mL NDs and silk. The schematic of the 
setup of the electrospinning process is illustrated in Figure 1S of the supporting information. The fibres 
were collected until a desired thickness of ~ 300 µm was achieved. The membranes deposited on glass 
cover slips were then left in a 90 v/v% methanol/water solvent for 10 min to induce crystallization of 
β-sheets, resulting in water insoluble membranes. The membranes were finally washed and dried for 
following characterizations.  

X-ray photon spectroscopy 

An X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the silk and ND-silk membranes was performed to 
estimate the surface composition of the membranes before and after methanol treatment step. The XPS 
spectra with C, N, and O peaks is shown in Figure S2(a) of the supplementary information. The 
chemical assignment for the resultant high resolution C1s peaks for silk, ND-silk before and after 
methanol treatment are shown in Figure S2(b-e). The peak fitting results for the Silk (with PEO) & 
ND-Silk (with PEO) samples before/after methanol treatment are displayed in Table 1.  

The peak positions in the XPS data (Figure S2) are characterized based on the binding energies of C–
C(sp2)/C–H (284.8 eV), C–N (285.9 eV) and C=O (287.9 eV) from the literature 23. Compared with 
the carbon peaks of the silk and ND-silk membranes, the chemical bonds of the methanol treated 


4 
 

membranes varied in peak intensities, as clearly visible in Figure S2 and Table 1. The bonds of C=O, 
C-C(sp2) and C-H strengthened after methanol treatment, while the C-N bond was reduced noticeably. 
The C-N bonds mainly exist in the protein of the silk fibres and the reduction is likely caused by the 
lack of solubility of silk fibroin in methanol. As a result, it is expected that the PEO migrates to the 
surface of the membranes, increasing the C-C, C-H and C=O content on the surface.  

The XPS spectroscopy revealed that both silk and ND-silk membranes demonstrated similar surface 
composition. The relative increase in sp2/C-H bonding at the surface after the treatment indicates some 
extra methanol residues. Other than that, no additional impurities were found, and the methanol 
treatment contributes to enhancing PEO content on the surface. 

Table 1: Peak fitting results for the silk & ND-silk blend membranes before and after methanol treatment. The C-H peak 
is close enough to the sp2 peak to be considered indistinguishable. 

Sample 
Peak 
Position (eV) 
Conc. (%) 

ND-Silk (before)
C-N
286.25
38.23

C=O
287.87
23.2

C-C (sp3)
285.72
15.06

C-C (sp2) / C-H
284.7
23.51

ND-Silk (after)
C-N
286.14
24.15

C=O
287.88
28.26

C-C (sp3)
285.7
18.1

C-C (sp2) / C-H
284.67
29.49

Silk (before)
C-N
286.16
35.87

C=O
287.81
22.83

C-C (sp3)
285.75
16.93

C-C (sp2) / C-H
284.7
24.37

Silk (after)
C-N
286.19
27.9

C=O
287.96
26.46

C-C (sp3)
285.73
15.15

C-C (sp2) / C-H
284.78
30.5

 

2.2 Structural and fluorescence analysis 

The morphology of the electrospun membranes as well as their fluorescence properties, were 
examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and confocal fluorescence microscopy as 
demonstrated in Figure 2. The figure compares the structural and fluorescence properties of ND-silk 
with silk only membranes. As demonstrated by the quantitative analysis of the SEM images of Figure 
2(a), (c) via MATLAB, both samples consisted of randomly oriented fibres with diameters in the range 
of 500-800 nm, making highly porous membranes with a pore size of 0.8-1 µm. The inter-fibre spacing 
or porosity was measured to vary from 230-800 nm.  

The addition of NDs had no noticeable difference in the fibre dimeter or membrane pore size, as 
indicated by SEM images. However, the confocal microscopic images of Figure 2(b), (d) showed 
significant difference in the fluorescence characteristics for the ND-silk and silk membranes.  


5 
 

 

Figure 2: (a) SEM and (b) 50×50 µm2 confocal fluorescence map of post-methanol treated ND-silk membrane deposited 
on glass cover slip. (c) SEM and (d) confocal fluorescence for silk only membranes. The SEM and confocal images show 
different areas of the same sample. The insets inside the dashed white boxes shows higher magnification scans of the 
samples both for SEM and confocal images.  

Upon excitation with 532 nm and a pump power of only 10 µW, the ND-silk sample showed bright 
fluorescent from the embedded NV- emitters typically show photocounts of 500k-2 M counts/s. The 
inset of the figure (inside the dotted white box) shows a zoomed in area with bright red and yellow 
fluorescence from the NDs. In contrast, the autofluorescence of the silk fibres are three order of 
magnitude weaker (20-50 k counts/s) under the same laser illumination power, as shown in the 
confocal map of Figure 2(d). The inset of the Figure 2(d) inside the dotted white box shows 
significantly low silk autofluorescence in the absence of NDs. Hence the NDs can brightly fluoresce 
inside the silk fibres and can be optically imaged with low excitation power. 

2.3 Optical characterization and temperature sensing 

We performed temperature sensing with the hybrid ND-silk materials in an in vitro assay. Human skin 
keratinocytes (HaCaT) were grown on the surface of the ND-silk membranes (on glass coverslips) for 
48 hours. The growth of healthy cells on the surface of the ND-silk membranes indicates the in vitro 
compatibility and potential of the membranes for cell regeneration, as indicated in Figure 3(a).  
(Details on cell viability are provided in supplementary information, Figure S3). After 48 hour growth, 
the cells were fixed, and the hybrid membranes, as cell scaffolds, were examined via a custom-built 
scanning fluorescence confocal microscope. A schematic of the confocal setup is shown in Figure 
3(b). We used a continuous-wave 532 nm laser as the excitation light. The pump power was measured 
to be 10 µW. As a result, a 100×100 µm2 fluorescence map of the cell cultured ND-silk is shown in 
Figure 3(c), which is collected through a 532 nm dichroic mirror and a 532 nm notch filter to separate 
the NV’s fluorescence from the excitation laser. The fluorescence map of the figure shows a fixed 
keratinocyte cell growing in the pores of the membrane incorporated with emitting ND spots. The 
typical photoluminescence spectrum from the ND emitters is shown in Figure 3(c). A characteristic 
NV- spectrum was obtained with the zero-phonon line (ZPL) at 638 nm and a broad phonon sideband 


6 
 

emission with a maximum around 690 nm. The neutral NV0 centres with ZPL at ~576 nm was also 
measurable from our optical analysis.  

 

 

Figure 3: (a) Scanning electron microscope images of HaCaT cells grown on ND-silk fibrous membranes after 48 h cell 
culture. (b) Schematic of the setup used for optical excitation of NV- centres and temperature detection in NDs, embedded 
in silk. MW field is introduced with an omega chip resonator and the temperature is varied with a thermoelectric Peltier 
heater. (c) A 100×100 µm2 fluorescence map of the cell cultured ND-silk membranes on glass cover slip. The central 
rounded region is one of the fixed cell growing on the hybrid membrane. The solid straight lines represent the silk fibres 
with embedding NDs. The dashed boxes show two representative NDs and the inset inside the solid outlined box presents 
a magnified 10×10 µm2 scan of the selected area of interest. (d) The fluorescence spectrum obtained from emitting NDs, 
confirming the presence of NV centres.  

The temperature sensing capability of NDs inside the cell-cultured silk-ND membranes was examined 
by subjecting the emitting NDs to scanning microwave (MW) frequency while monitoring the 
fluorescence intensity change. MW radiation for spin manipulation was applied by using an omega-
shape resonator. A Peltier stage was used to test an extended range of temperatures from 20-50 °C that 
includes the biologically relevant range of 36-42°C24. The wider temperature range was applied to 
examine and verify the larger dD/dT shift for NV temperature sensing in the hybrid ND-silk material.  
A portable thermocouple was clamped with the membrane to track the temperature variation with a 
resolution of 0.4 °C. The measurement results are shown in Figure 4(a) where the blue data shows the 
ODMR spectrum detected from the ensemble NV- centres inside the silk fibres at room temperature 
(22 °C). The measured ODMR data was fitted by a single Lorentzian. A clear dip at ~2871 MHz is 
observed for the fluorescence in ms = 0 to ms = -1 and +1 transitions of NV- centre in diamond, which 
reveals the value of zero field splitting parameter D at room temperature 16. With increase in 
temperature, the zero field splitting energy shifts towards lower frequencies, bringing the dip in the 
ODMR spectrum to lower frequencies. The red data in Figure 4(a) indicates a lower D value of ~2866 
MHz at 55 °C.   The dip shift in the NV- fluorescence thus enables a convenient optical readout for 
local temperature changes.  

 


7 
 

 

Figure 4: (a) ODMR spectra recorded from NV- centres embedded in cell-cultured ND-silk membranes. Fluorescence 
emission intensity from NV centres were measured as a function of MW frequency at an ambient temperature of 22°C 
(blue) and increased temperature of 55 °C (red). The dot points are the experimentally obtained data, the solid curves 
represent the Lorentzian fit to the data of the corresponding colour. The zero filed splitting parameter D in the ODMR 
spectrum shifts with temperature. Black arrow points out the fluorescence dip at 22 and 55 ºC, respectively. (b) The D 
values plotted as a function of temperature for ND particles on their own (blue) and ND particles inside silk membranes 
(black). Circles and triangles show the experimental data and the solid line corresponds to the linear fit.  At each 
temperature point, 3-5 readings were recorded and the average central frequency and the error in the mean value is plotted 
with red triangles.  

 

We carried out temperature sensing in the window of 22 °C to 55 °C by using different NV- emitting 
spots inside silk fibres. Black triangles and their linear fit in Figure 4(b) show the calibration for one 
typical NV emitting spot. The resonant frequencies extracted from the series of ODMR spectra 
obtained at elevated temperatures formed a linear function, offering a reliable calibration for 
temperature measurements. For this representative NV emitting spot embedded in cell-cultured silk 
membrane, the frequency shift per degree rise in temperature (dD/dT) revealed a value of −120±15 
kHz/°C. We further examined different NV emitting spots in the ND-silk membranes and recorded 
the dD/dT parameter in the value between 87 kHz/°C and 162 kHz/°C, with an average of 118±25 
kHz/°C. Additional temperature sensing data for NDs embedded in cell-cultured silk fibres is 
presented in Figure S4 in supplementary information. We point out that this parameter is larger than 
the typical temperature dependence of zero field spitting D for NV- centres 15. As a comparative study, 
we characterized the frequency response of hothe NDs only sample by directly testing the 100 nm 
diamond particles without silk coating. The calibration data revealed a 𝑑𝑑D/𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 values of −75±3 kHz/°C, 
which agrees with the typical frequency shift of NV centres in diamond as reported in literature 15-17. 
Blue circles and their linear fit in Figure 4(b) illustrate the temperature sensing data from ND-only 
sample.  

The higher dD/dT value presented of NV- centre in hybrid membrane is an added benefit as it enables 
more pronounced frequency shift in the detected fluorescence spectrum, making temperature testing 
and tracking easier for biological measurements.  Our hypothesis on the enhanced dD/dT value is that 
by changing the surrounding temperature, silk will spatially interfere with the diamond lattice of the 
embedded NDs, increasing the surface pressure. This surface pressure, induced by movement of silk 
fibres during heating, possibly affects the spin properties of nitrogen-vacancy centres in diamond25, 
and therefore induces larger than average frequency change in the detected ODMR spectra. However 
future experimental and theoretical work is required to reveal the fundamental physics behind this 
experimentally observed phenomenon.  

We determined the temperature sensitivity in  our hybrid ND-silk membrane by ƞ≈∆ν/C�IPL ∙(𝑑𝑑D/𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑) 
-1 21, where ∆ν is the linewidth of ODMR transition, C is the optical contrast of  ODMR dip, and IPL is 
the  NV- fluorescence emission rate, 𝑑𝑑D/𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 is the temperature dependence of zero field splitting. As 
a result, the experimental data shown in Figure 4 demonstrated a temperature sensitivity of ~1 K/√Hz 
for localized NV-spin characterization for the ND-silk hybrid membranes. The temperature sensitivity 


8 
 

can be further enhanced by applying pulsed laser excitation during sensing process 16, 26. Larger size 
diamonds particles 27 with increased NV- centre density 28 can be studied for higher sensitivity and 
brighter temperature sensing. Additionally, we have demonstrated that widefield ODMR spectroscopy 
and temperature sensing is also feasible with the ND-silk membranes (Figure S6 in supplementary 
information), which paves the way for new-generation, non-invasive temperature sensing in cell 
environment without the limitation of confocal settings. Our optical characterization also confirmed 
that the excitation laser does not induce additional heating effects for the NV- centres in ND-silk 
membranes (supplementary information, Figure S5).   

2.4 Thermal stability 

Prior to wound testing, the thermal properties of the hybrid ND-silk hybrid membranes were 
investigated to examine their thermal stability. This was performed using differential scanning 
calorimetry (DSC) as presented in Figure 5. DSC is a technique used to study the thermal transition 
of a polymer or hybrid polymer scaffolds on heating 29.  

We performed the DSC analysis to check the thermal stability of silk and ND-silk membranes. The 
silk sample (red) was thermally stable up to 45 ºC while ND-silk hybrid (dotted blue) was stable in 
the whole biologically relevant window of 20-50 °C as shown in the first heating cycle of Figure 5(a).  

 

Figure 5: DSC curves for silk and SF-ND electrospun membranes. The specific heat capacity as a function of 
temperature during the (a) first and (b) second heating cycles for the same set of samples. 

Hence the presence of NDs added to the stability of the membranes. The first endothermic peak was 
observed between 45-60 °C for the silk and 50-60 °C for the ND-silk membranes, which is 
representative of the melting of PEO in the samples 30. A low-intensity DSC signal from 110-160 °C 
is attributed to the moisture content trapped in the regenerated fibroin 31. The water content is variable 
for these materials, and there are two types of water exist in the sample; intermolecular water and free 
water 32-33. The peaks below 110 °C is mostly related to the water loss, of free water present in the 
samples, and the sharp spike peaks in the range 130°C to 160 °C represent the water loss of 
intermolecular/bound water to silk. To be able to identify the water removal behaviour from silk 
materials, the sealed pan was not used in this study. Therefore, the evaporated water could escape and 
results in a series of small sharp spike peaks in the curve, instead of broad peak around this area, 140 
- 155 °C. The second main and sharp endothermic peak was appeared at the glass transition 
temperature of silk, which involves the denaturation of the silk and resulted in the β-sheets formation 
31-33. The glass transition of the silk is water-dependent and can change based on the amount of water 
that exists in the sample. The water in the silk can act as the plasticizer and promote β-sheets 
crystallization via helix-helix interaction. This endothermic peak is just above 150 °C for silk only 
sample in compared with SF-ND at ~ 177 °C, which has moved to a higher temperature, due to the 
presence of ND and PEO in the sample 32-33. Another reason would be due to the hydroscopic nature 
of PEO and ND, which attracts the water away from the silk and results in higher denaturation 
temperature since water assists denaturation process. 
Furthermore, the data for this second peak also illustrates that significantly more energy required for 
denaturisation of silk fibroin in ND-silk (blue) in comparison with silk alone (red), due to presence of 
NDs. Hence NDs, due to their high thermal conductivity and nucleation effect, contribute to better 


9 
 

thermal stability of the hybrid membranes in the biologically relevant window as well as at higher 
temperatures.  The denaturation of silk fibroin polymer (between 150-180 °C) is irreversible, hence 
no endothermic peaks appeared in second heating cycle for both silk and ND-silk, as indicated in 
Figure 6(b).  

2.5 Wound closure and healing 

Silk and ND-silk hybrid membranes were tested in an established murine model of wound healing34  
for ten days. No significant differences in weight, food consumption or behaviour were noted between 
mice with silk or ND-silk membranes placed on their wounds. We observed that the silk membranes 
degraded faster (~6 days post wound surgery) than the ND-silk (~8 days post-wound surgery), which 
is consistent with the findings of the previous section where NDs are found to provide reinforcement 
to the silk fibres. There were no differences in wound healing rates in the early stages of wound healing 
up to day 6 post-wounding (Figure 6 (a,b). The wounds with silk healed relatively faster at day 7 (18.0 
± 9.51%) and day 8 (14.75± 10.02 %), when compared to phosphate buffer saline (PBS) treated control 
wounds as shown in Figure 6(a). When considering the area under curve (AUC, inset Figure 6 (a), this 
overall positive effect on the rate of wound healing with silk is consistent with previous studies 
reporting compatible, improved outcome of silk-based wound dressings 35-36. However, there were no 
significant differences in wound closure between the ND-silk membrane treated wounds and their PBS 
controls at early, late or for the overall stages of wound healing, as shown in Figure 6(b). This 
difference and particularly the absence of the positive wound healing effect of silk in the ND-silk 
group can be attributed to earlier degradation of silk compared to ND-silk, biological variability of the 
two groups studied and the possibility that NDs mount a minor inflammatory response. It is important 
to note that the presence of NDs does not negatively affect the wound healing process, compared to 
the PBS control.  

Laser Doppler imaging was used to determine wound blood flow perfusion, a marker of wound 
angiogenesis that is essential for healing. Overall, no differences were observed in wound blood flow 
perfusion between silk or ND-silk membrane treated wounds, when compared to their respective PBS 
controls as indicated by Figure 6(c) and (d), further supporting the suitability of ND-silk for sensing 
applications in wound dressings.  

The wound cellular infiltrate in the granulation site of the wounds was measured using the histological 
sections represented in Figure 6 (e-g) and reflects inflammatory-driven recruitment of cells to the 
wounds. There were no significant differences in the cellular infiltrate between wounds with silk 
membranes and PBS control wounds as demonstrated in Figure 6(h). However, a non-significant 
increase in the cellular infiltrate was observed in the ND-silk treated wounds, compared to saline 
controls (p=0.07, Figure 6(i)). We observe this as an expected physiological response to the application 
of a nanoparticle such as NDs, an external agent that is likely to cause the infiltration of immune cells. 
However, this response is minimal with ND-silk and, overall, does not negatively affect wound 
healing.  


10 
 

 

Figure 6: Compatibility testing of silk and ND-silk hybrid platforms in a murine wound healing model. Wound closure 
from day 0-10 of post wounding as a percentage of the wound on day 0 in (a) PBS vs silk membranes and (b) PBS vs ND-
silk hybrid membranes. The bar graph insets represent means of the area under curve (AUC) for each wound in each 
mouse. The p values were derived from a paired t test for a and b. The wound blood flow perfusion measured using laser 
Doppler imaging on day 3 and day 7 of post-wounding in mice with (c) PBS vs silk and (d) PBS vs ND-silk hybrid 
membranes. The representative images from perfusion studies for day 3 and 7 for PBS vs silk treated wounds and PBS vs 
ND-silk covered wounds are shown inside dashed boxes. The scale bar indicates the range of perfusion from low (dark 
blue) to high (red) blood flow.  Representative histological cross sections from the wounds stained with Haematoxylin and 
Eosin for (e) PBS, (f) silk membrane and (g) ND-silk membrane treated wounds, on day 10 post-wounding.  The wound 
cellular infiltrate calculated for each wound as a percentage of the total wound granulation area; (h) PBS vs silk membranes 


11 
 

and (i) PBS vs ND-silk membranes. The p values were derived from an unpaired t-test for (h) and (i). All data are presented 
as mean ± SEM (standard error of the mean) with n=3-4 mice. 

2.6 Antibacterial activity  

To assess the antibacterial properties of the silk and ND-silk hybrid scaffolds, we fabricated 
electrospun silk fibroin fibres containing low (0.25 mg/mL) and high (0.5 mg/mL) concentrations of 
NDs. The two ND-silk membranes are denoted as ND0.25-silk and ND0.5-silk, respectively. The results 
are shown in Figure 8. 

   

Figure 7: Antibacterial activity of ND-silk membranes. P. aeruginosa, E. coli and S. aureus cell morphology on the (a, d, 
g) silk only, (b, e, h) ND0.25-silk and (c, f, i) ND0.5-silk membranes. The bacteria are highlighted by red (non-viable) and 
green (viable) colours. A very low number (red) of P. aeruginosa and E. coli can be seen on the membranes in (a)-(f). In 
contrast a large numer (green) of viable S. aureus bacteria were observed to adhere and proliferate on the silk-ND fibrous 
membranes. Confocal laser scanning (CLSM) microscope images of P. aeruginosa, attached onto (a’) Silk only, (b’) 
ND0.25-silk and (c’) ND0.50-silk.  CLSM images of E. coli incubated with (d’) Silk only, (e’) ND0.25-silk and (f’) ND0.50-silk. 
CLSM images of S. aureus bacteria incubated with (g’) silk only, (h’) ND0.25-silk and (i’) ND0.50-silk. Fluorescing round 
green objects indicate viable bacteria and fluorescing red colour indicates. (j) Antibacterial activity of silk-ND samples. 
High levels of P. aeruginosa and E. coli cell death were observed across all samples. No significant differences were 
observed between the antibacterial activity of silk only and ND-silk hybrid membranes towards both Gram-negative 
bacterial strains. Very low levels of cell death were observed for the S. aureus incubated with silk and ND-silk membranes.  

The antibacterial properties of the silk membranes with and without NDs were tested against three 
pathogenic bacteria of clinical relevance, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli and 
Staphylococcus aureus. These bacteria represent the two major prokaryotic taxa, Gram-negative and 
Gram-positive, respectively, and are major players in skin wound infections37. Silk, ND0.25-silk and 
ND0.5-silk membranes were incubated with suspensions of bacteria for 24 h, after which, the 
membranes were washed to remove non-adherent bacteria. Bacterial cell attachment and viability were 
assessed using SEM and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM), respectively.  

Analysis of the SEM micrographs in Figure 8 confirm that P. aeruginosa and E. coli were unable to 
attach to the membranes in great numbers, and their cellular morphology appeared flattened and 


12 
 

damaged (Figure 8(j)-(k) and indicated by the bacteria false-coloured red in SEM micrographs). High 
magnification SEM micrographs of P. aeruginosa and E. coli on ND-silk membranes are shown in 
Figure S9 of the Supporting Information, to show their damaged cell morphology. The attachment of 
both Gram-negative strains of bacteria to the silk membranes was less than 1000 cells/mm2 quantified 
per sample. In particular, the attachment of E. coli to silk and ND-silk membranes was below detection 
limit (less than 200 cells/mm2).  

In contrast, S. aureus cells appeared to exhibit a healthy morphology and even displayed 3-
dimensional growth (Figure 8(g)-(i), cells false-coloured in green). The attachment propensity of S. 
aureus bacterial cells to the membranes was much higher than P. aeruginosa and E. coli bacterial 
cells, as shown in SEM images of Figure 8(g)-(i). Interestingly, S. aureus attachment decreased as the 
proportion of NDs in the silk membrane samples was increased. This may also be due to the surface 
topography change. S. aureus are known to require a certain degree of surface roughness in order to 
successfully colonise a surface 38.   

For CLSM, the fluorescence labelling of bacteria with propidium iodide and Syto 9® revealed non-
viable bacteria by a red fluorescent signal and healthy, viable bacteria by a green fluorescent signal as 
shown in Figure 8(a’)-(i’). Silk fibres are also auto-fluorescent in green when excited with the 488 nm 
laser. CLSM imaging confirmed that all three silk, ND0.25-silk and ND0.5-silk membranes were highly 
biocidal towards both P. aeruginosa and E. coli cells (Figure 8(j)).  Statistically, very small differences 
in antibacterial activity were determined across silk-only and silk-ND hybrid materials with increasing 
concentrations of ND content as shown in Figure 8(a)-(f) left to right. The ND-silk membranes 
achieved an average bactericidal efficiency of ~99% against P. aeruginosa and ~95% against E. coli. 
The incredibly high rates of bacterial death hence may be attributed to the surface PEO content of the 
silk membranes, as discussed in Section 2.1, which is reported to be selectively antibacterial towards 
Gram-negative bacteria 39-40.  

In sharp contrast to the extremely high antibacterial efficiency towards Gram-negative bacteria, the 
silk and ND-silk hybrid membranes did not display antibacterial activity towards Gram-positive S. 
aureus bacteria, as exhibited in Figure 8(g)-(i). Almost all attaching cells were viable with only 1-4 % 
of bacteria identified as non-viable on any of the silk membrane samples. These findings are consistent 
with previous studies that showed Gram-positive bacteria, such as S. aureus, survive  significantly 
better in the presence of PEO solutions than Gram-negative bacteria 41.  

Although Staphylococcus (Gram-Positive bacteria) are responsible for 40-60 % of skin wound 
infections, however, P. aeruginosa are alarmingly causing multi-drug resistant infections specially in 
hospital settings42. Gram-negative bacteria, such as P. aeruginosa cause ~20% of skin infections. In 
an additional 20% cases, P. aeruginosa can appear as a pathogen in a mixed microbial infection. 
Moreover these bacteria are much harder to treat with antibiotics, because of the low permeability of 
its cell wall and its ability to acquire and express multiple resistance mechanisms 43. 

 

3. Conclusions  

In conclusion, the current work reports hybrid ND-silk membranes as multifunctional wound dressings 
capable of in situ temperature monitoring (as a vital wound biomarker), healthy cell growth and 
selective antibacterial resistance while providing wound closure and healing. Electrospinning yielded 
highly porous hybrid ND embedded silk membranes. The NDs were able to fluoresce brightly inside 
silk fibres and added thermal stability to the silk. The in vitro test revealed that the surface of the 
hybrid membranes enables eukaryotic cells attachment and promote the growth of healthy cell. Inside 
silk fibres, the NV- centre in NDs provided a greater shift in the zero field splitting 120±20 kHz/K as 
compared to NDs. This increased frequency shift will lead to enhanced temperature resolution and 
sensitivity for biological measurements. When applied to an in vivo model of wound healing, the ND-
silk hybrid membranes enabled wound healing and the presence of NDs as foreign agents did not cause 
any adverse effects on wound healing and closure. Moreover, the addition of NDs elongated the 
biodegradation of silk by 3-4 days. Both silk only and ND-silk membranes were found to be highly 


13 
 

biocidal towards major skin wound infecting bacteria, P. aeruginosa and E. coli, (~91 % non-viable 
cells on silk-only membranes and ~97% non-viable cells on ND-silk membranes). However, the 
antibacterial efficacy towards S. aureus bacteria was negligible. In conclusion, hybrid ND-silk can be 
used as a multifunctional platform for biosensing as well as provide a network of fibres that supports 
a healthy wound healing process. 

A variety of other sensing and therapeutic agents can be embedded in the membranes for future 
research for a therapeutic closed loop system with the potential to provide patients with an improved 
wound treatment alternative. These smart membranes have a number of advantages over the visual 
assessment approach that is currently used in clinical practice. Firstly, continual measurement of 
wound temperature is an accurate way to monitor wound quality, compared to visual assessments that 
can be highly subjective. Secondly, smart membranes also allow for the detection of early signs of 
wound inflammation and infection. The advantage of early detection is that wound therapies will be 
more effective. Furthermore, this can be done without the need to remove the dressing and will 
continually inform wound care specialists about the need to change dressings earlier or later, more 
frequently or less frequently. Further work and progresses in fibre optics will allow a successful ND-
silk wound monitoring device that will have strong potential in chronic wound diagnosis and 
treatment.  

 

4. Experimental 

4.1Materials: Hydroxylated 100 nm NDs irradiated with NV- centre were obtained from ADAMAS 
as received. 

4.2 Preparation of PEO blend silk fibres: B. mori silk fibroin solution was prepared according to the 
reported method [4]. Silk/PEO blends in water were prepared. A 5 w/v% PEO (900,000 g/mol) 
solution was mixed with 6.5 w/v% silk solution and 0.05-0.1 w/v% NDs. The weight per volume ratio 
for dry silk fibroin to PEO in the mixture was 6.5:1. To compare the properties of ND-silk hybrid 
membranes with the silk only samples, we produced two different mixtures by adding 300 µL (13% 
of the total weight) of PEO in each of (i) 1.5 mL (87% of the total weight) silk with 0.5 mg/mL 
concentration of NDs and (ii) 1.5 mL silk only.  The blended solution was slowly stirred overnight at 
4 °C to obtain a homogenous solution. The solutions are then subjected to electrospinning for the 
formation of silk only and ND-silk hybrid membranes.  

4.3 Electrospinning: The silk and PEO blends with or without NDs were transferred to 5 ml syringes. 
The syringe was connected to an 18-gauge needle and mounted on a motor-controlled syringe pump 
inside a protected chamber at 25 °C. A high positive voltage was applied to the needle through an 
alligator clip and a collection surface was placed at 12 cm from the tip of the needle. A conductive 
aluminium collection plate was used which was electrically grounded. Each of the three mixtures silk, 
ND0.25-silk and ND0.5-silk were pumped out of the needle with a flow rate of 0.03 mL/min. An electric 
potential of 12 kV was applied between the needle and the collection plate to obtain a stable jet. The 
charged jet travels towards the collection plate and deposits in the form of fibrous membranes. The 
fibres were collected until a desired thickness of ~ 300 µm was achieved. The membranes deposited 
on glass cover slips were then left in a 90 v/v% methanol/water solvent for 10 min to induce 
crystallization of β-sheets, resulting in water insoluble membranes. The membranes were finally 
washed with Milli-Q water and dried in a fume hood for further characterization.  

4.4 Confocal microscopy and ODMR: The presence of NDs inside the cell-cultured silk-ND 
membranes was optically examined via a custom-built scanning fluorescence confocal microscope. A 
100× air objective (NA = 0.9) was used to deliver continuous‐wave 532 nm laser (Laser Quantum, 
gem 532) to illuminate the sample. Fluorescence generated from silk embedded NV- centres was 
collected through a 532 nm dichroic mirror and a 532 nm notch filter to separate the NV fluorescence 
and the excitation laser, and then coupled into a multimode fibre beam splitter for signal readouts.  
The collected fluorescence signal was detected by avalanche photo diode (APD, SPCM ‐AQRH ‐14) 
for imaging and temperature sensing.  The spectral analysis was implemented through a commercial 


14 
 

spectrometer (Princeton Instruments, SpectraPro with a PIXIS CCD camera) 44. MW radiation for spin 
manipulation was generated using a MW generator (Rohde & Schwarz) and amplifier and send to an 
omega-shape resonator. A Peltier stage was used to induce temperature changes in the hybrid 
membrane within the window of 20-50 °C. 

4.5 Cell culture & in-vitro cell viability: Human skin keratinocyte (HaCaT) cell line was used. Cells 
were maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Media (DMEM), supplemented with 10% foetal 
bovine serum and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Cells were grown at 37 °C, in a humidified atmosphere 
of 95% relative humidity and 5% CO2. For cell viability studies, 1 x 105 cells/well were seeded on to 
the electrospun membranes on glass cover slips contained in 6 well plates. Bare cover slips, without 
any silk were used as controls. Cells were allowed to grow for 48 h and then treated with a final 
concentration of 0.05mg/mL of resazurin solution in dye-free DMEM and incubated at 37 °C for 15 
minutes. The fluorescence was then measured on a microplate reader by exciting at a wavelength of 
560 nm and collecting the emission at 590 nm. For confocal imaging, the cells were grown at the same 
seeding density, followed by fixing in 4% paraformaldehyde solution in phosphate buffered saline for 
10 minutes. 

4.6 SEM: The Thermo Scientific™ Verios G4 SEM was used at an accelerating voltage of 3 kV to 
perform the structural analysis of the membranes. Prior to scanning, the samples were sputter coated 
with ~5 nm Pt layer. 

4.7 Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC): DSC was performed on about 5 mg of material in an 
open crucible using a TA2920 calorimeter (TA Instrument) under flushing nitrogen (100 ml/min) in 
the range 20–250 °C. Heating the samples for DSC from 20.00°C to 250.00°C was performed at 
10.00°C/min 

4.8 In vivo implantation in wound: All animal care and handling procedures were performed in 
accordance with the Australian Code for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes (2013), 
as approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the South Australian Health and Medical Research 
Institute (SAHMRI), Australia.  The C57BL6 mice were bred in-house at the SAHMRI Bio-resources 
animal facility, fed on a chow diet and water provided ad libitum.  The biocompatibility of the silk 
and silk-nanodiamond scaffolds on wound healing were tested on 8-10-week-old mice, using a 
previously described murine model of wound healing 34.  In summary, the operative region was 
prepared under general anaesthesia (with 5% isoflurane) by shaving the skin between the two shoulder 
blades up to the base of the neck, cleaned with alcohol and povidone iodine.  Two circular full 
thickness wounds were created on either side of the midline using a sterile biopsy punch (6 mm in 
diameter) and removing the skin. The right wound was covered with a circular (4 mm in diameter) 
silk or silk-nanodiamond scaffold with 10 µL Phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The left wound was 
covered with 10 µL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) as the vehicle control. A silicone splint, 
supported by adhesive and nylon sutures, was applied to both wounds. Both wounds were covered 
with a transparent occlusive dressing (OpsiteTM). The mice were monitored daily for weight loss and 
pain relief was provided with subcutaneous buprenorphine (0.1mg/kg/day). Mice were followed for 
10 days post-wounding and the wound area was calculated daily using the mean diameter from X, Y 
and Z axes measurements. Blood perfusion in each wound was determined using laser Doppler 
imaging (moorLDI2-IR, Moor Instruments, Devon, UK) on day 3 and 7 post-wounding. On day 10 
post-wounding, the mice were humanely killed using isoflurane overdose. Wounds were excised and 
processed for histological analysis as described previously 34. Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) stain 
was used to identify the wound infiltrate in wound cross-sections (5μm). The inflammatory wound 
cellular infiltrate was calculated as the percentage of positively stained cell nuclei in the granulation 
tissue area using Image-Pro Premier 9.2 (Media Cybernetics, MD, USA) software. 

4.9 Antibacterial properties: Bacterial suspensions of Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 9721, 
Escherichia coli ATCC 11775 and Staphylococcus aureus CIP 68.5T with an optical density (OD600) 
of 0.1 in nutrient broth (Oxoid) were made up by diluting 1 loopful of freshly subcultured bacteria 
(grown overnight on nutrient agar from stock at 37 °C). Silk and silk-ND membrane samples were cut 
to size (~1×1 cm2) and incubated in 1 mL (enough to submerge the samples) of bacterial suspension 


15 
 

in sterile 24-well plates for 18 h at 25 °C in dark and static conditions. Samples were then washed 
gently with distilled water, stained with LIVE/DEAD Baclight containing a mixture of Syto 9® and 
propidium iodide for 30 min and viewed under confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) using an 
Olympus FV3000 instrument. Syto 9® and propidium iodide are membrane permeable and non-
membrane permeable, respectively, nucleic acid stains that differentiate between viable (green) and 
non-viable (red) cells. Counts of live and dead cells were quantified using Matlab software, CellC. 

SEM was performed to assess bacterial cell attachment and morphology on silk and silk-ND 
membranes. Samples were incubated with bacterial suspensions of P. aeruginosa, E. coli and S. 
aureus, as above. Samples were washed briefly with MilliQ H2O and fixed with 2.5 % glutaraldehyde 
for 30 min before dehydrating in an ethanol series of 30, 50, 70, 90, 95 and 100% concentration for 
10 min each. Finally, the samples were sputtered with gold and imaged using the SEM capabilities of 
a Raith150 Two machine (Raith, GmbH).  

 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through the Centre of Excellence 
for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CE140100003) and LIEF grant (LE140100131). The SEM and XPS 
analysis of samples were performed at the RMIT’s microscopic and microanalysis facility (RMMF) 
with Dr Edwin Mayes and Billy Murdoch. The cell culture work was performed at the RMIT Micro 
Nano Research Facility (MNRF) in the Victorian Node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility 
(ANFF). The optical characterization and diamond thermometry measurements were performed 
within the ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics Laboratories at RMIT. The in vivo 
studies were performed at South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI). Cell 
culture for section 2.4 was assisted by Suneela Pyreddy. The authors acknowledge productive 
discussions with Prof Andrew Greentree, Dr Ravi Shukla, Dr Marco Capelli, Dr Matthew Field and 
Dr Snjezana Tomljenovic-Hanic. A.K and P.R. acknowledges funding through the RMIT Vice-
Chancellor’s Research Fellowship. 

 

References 

1. 
Liu, Y.; Zhou, S.; Gao, Y.; Zhai, Y., Electrospun nanofibers as a wound dressing for treating diabetic 
foot ulcer. Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 2019, 14 (2), 130-143. 
2. 
Brown, M. S.; Ashley, B.; Koh, A., Wearable Technology for Chronic Wound Monitoring: Current 
Dressings, Advancements, and Future Prospects. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 2018, 6, 47-47. 
3. 
Agarwal, S.; Wendorff, J. H.; Greiner, A., Use of electrospinning technique for biomedical 
applications. Polymer 2008, 49 (26), 5603-5621. 
4. 
Jin, H.-J.; Park, J.; Valluzzi, R.; Cebe, P.; Kaplan, D. L., Biomaterial Films of Bombyx Mori Silk 
Fibroin with Poly(ethylene oxide). Biomacromolecules 2004, 5 (3), 711-717. 
5. 
Vepari, C.; Kaplan, D. L., Silk as a Biomaterial. Prog Polym Sci 2007, 32 (8-9), 991-1007. 

6. 
Khalid, A.; Lodin, R.; Domachuk, P.; Tao, H.; Moreau, J. E.; Kaplan, D. L.; Omenetto, F. G.; Gibson, 
B. C.; Tomljenovic-Hanic, S., Synthesis and characterization of biocompatible nanodiamond-silk hybrid 
material. Biomedical optics express 2014, 5 (2), 596-608. 
7. 
Khalid, A.; Mitropoulos, A. N.; Marelli, B.; Simpson, D. A.; Tran, P. A.; Omenetto, F. G.; 
Tomljenovic-Hanic, S., Fluorescent Nanodiamond Silk Fibroin Spheres: Advanced Nanoscale Bioimaging 
Tool. ACS Biomaterials Science & Engineering 2015, 1 (11), 1104-1113. 
8. 
Khalid, A.; Mitropoulos, A. N.; Marelli, B.; Tomljenovic-Hanic, S.; Omenetto, F. G., Doxorubicin 
loaded nanodiamond-silk spheres for fluorescence tracking and controlled drug release. Biomedical Optics 
Express 2016, 7 (1), 132-147. 
9. 
Rockwood, D. N.; Preda, R. C.; Yücel, T.; Wang, X.; Lovett, M. L.; Kaplan, D. L., Materials 
Fabrication from Bombyx mori Silk Fibroin. Nature protocols 2011, 6 (10), 10.1038/nprot.2011.379. 
10. 
Rnjak-Kovacina, J.; Wray, L. S.; Burke, K. A.; Torregrosa, T.; Golinski, J. M.; Huang, W.; Kaplan, 
D. L., Lyophilized Silk Sponges: A Versatile Biomaterial Platform for Soft Tissue Engineering. ACS 
biomaterials science & engineering 2015, 1 (4), 260-270. 


16 
 

11. 
Tao, H.; Hwang, S.-W.; Marelli, B.; An, B.; Moreau, J. E.; Yang, M.; Brenckle, M. A.; Kim, S.; 
Kaplan, D. L.; Rogers, J. A.; Omenetto, F. G., Silk-based resorbable electronic devices for remotely 
controlled therapy and in vivo infection abatement. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2014, 
111 (49), 17385-17389. 
12. 
Yi, B.; Zhang, H.; Yu, Z.; Yuan, H.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y., Fabrication of high performance silk 
fibroin fibers via stable jet electrospinning for potential use in anisotropic tissue regeneration. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry B 2018, 6 (23), 3934-3945. 
13. 
Chanmugam, A.; Langemo, D.; Thomason, K.; Haan, J.; Altenburger, E. A.; Tippett, A.; Henderson, 
L.; Zortman, T. A., Relative Temperature Maximum in Wound Infection and Inflammation as Compared with 
a Control Subject Using Long-Wave Infrared Thermography. Advances in Skin & Wound Care 2017, 30 (9), 
406-414. 
14. 
Chanmugam, A.; Langemo, D.; Thomason, K.; Haan, J.; Altenburger, E. A.; Tippett, A.; Henderson, 
L.; Zortman, T. A., Relative Temperature Maximum in Wound Infection and Inflammation as Compared with 
a Control Subject Using Long-Wave Infrared Thermography. Advances in Skin & Wound Care 2017, 30 (9). 
15. 
Acosta, V. M.; Bauch, E.; Ledbetter, M. P.; Waxman, A.; Bouchard, L. S.; Budker, D., Temperature 
Dependence of the Nitrogen-Vacancy Magnetic Resonance in Diamond. Physical Review Letters 2010, 104 
(7), 070801. 
16. 
Doherty, M. W.; Manson, N. B.; Delaney, P.; Jelezko, F.; Wrachtrup, J.; Hollenberg, L. C. L., The 
nitrogen-vacancy colour centre in diamond. Physics Reports 2013, 528 (1), 1-45. 
17. 
Simpson, D. A.; Morrisroe, E.; McCoey, J. M.; Lombard, A. H.; Mendis, D. C.; Treussart, F.; Hall, L. 
T.; Petrou, S.; Hollenberg, L. C. L., Non-Neurotoxic Nanodiamond Probes for Intraneuronal Temperature 
Mapping. ACS Nano 2017, 11 (12), 12077-12086. 
18. 
Choe, S.; Yoon, J.; Lee, M.; Oh, J.; Lee, D.; Kang, H.; Lee, C.-H.; Lee, D., Precise temperature 
sensing with nanoscale thermal sensors based on diamond NV centers. Current Applied Physics 2018, 18 (9), 
1066-1070. 
19. 
Kucsko, G.; Maurer, P. C.; Yao, N. Y.; Kubo, M.; Noh, H. J.; Lo, P. K.; Park, H.; Lukin, M. D., 
Nanometre-scale thermometry in a living cell. Nature 2013, 500 (7460), 54-58. 
20. 
Price, J. C.; Levett, S. J.; Radu, V.; Simpson, D. A.; Barcons, A. M.; Adams, C. F.; Mather, M. L., 
Quantum Sensing in a Physiological-Like Cell Niche Using Fluorescent Nanodiamonds Embedded in 
Electrospun Polymer Nanofibers. Small 2019, 15 (22), 1900455. 
21. 
Schirhagl, R.; Chang, K.; Loretz, M.; Degen, C. L., Nitrogen-vacancy centers in diamond: nanoscale 
sensors for physics and biology. Annual review of physical chemistry 2014, 65, 83-105. 
22. 
Keirouz, A.; Radacsi, N.; Ren, Q.; Dommann, A.; Beldi, G.; Maniura-Weber, K.; Rossi, R. M.; 
Fortunato, G., Nylon-6/chitosan core/shell antimicrobial nanofibers for the prevention of mesh-associated 
surgical site infection. Journal of Nanobiotechnology 2020, 18 (1), 51. 
23. 
Zhang, R.; Yu, J.-s.; Huang, J.; Chen, G.-l.; Liu, X.; Chen, W.; Wang, X.-q.; Li, C.-r., Sterilization of 
mycete attached on the unearthed silk fabrics by an atmospheric pressure plasma jet. Chinese Physics B 2018, 
27 (5), 055207. 
24. 
Chanmugam, A.; Langemo, D.; Thomason, K.; Haan, J.; Altenburger, E. A.; Tippett, A.; Henderson, 
L.; Zortman, T. A., Relative Temperature Maximum in Wound Infection and Inflammation as Compared with 
a Control Subject Using Long-Wave Infrared Thermography. Adv Skin Wound Care 2017, 30 (9), 406-414. 
25. 
Doherty, M. W.; Struzhkin, V. V.; Simpson, D. A.; McGuinness, L. P.; Meng, Y.; Stacey, A.; Karle, 
T. J.; Hemley, R. J.; Manson, N. B.; Hollenberg, L. C. L.; Prawer, S., Electronic Properties and Metrology 
Applications of the Diamond ${\mathrm{NV}}^{\ensuremath{-}}$ Center under Pressure. Physical Review 
Letters 2014, 112 (4), 047601. 
26. 
Wolf, T.; Neumann, P.; Nakamura, K.; Sumiya, H.; Ohshima, T.; Isoya, J.; Wrachtrup, J., 
Subpicotesla Diamond Magnetometry. Physical Review X 2015, 5 (4), 041001. 
27. 
Reineck, P.; Trindade, L. F.; Havlik, J.; Stursa, J.; Heffernan, A.; Elbourne, A.; Orth, A.; Capelli, M.; 
Cigler, P.; Simpson, D. A.; Gibson, B. C., Not All Fluorescent Nanodiamonds Are Created Equal: A 
Comparative Study. Particle & Particle Systems Characterization 2019, 36 (3), 1900009. 
28. 
Capelli, M.; Heffernan, A. H.; Ohshima, T.; Abe, H.; Jeske, J.; Hope, A.; Greentree, A. D.; Reineck, 
P.; Gibson, B. C., Increased nitrogen-vacancy centre creation yield in diamond through electron beam 
irradiation at high temperature. Carbon 2019, 143, 714-719. 
29. 
Groenewoud, W. M., CHAPTER 1 - DIFFERENTIAL SCANNING CALORIMETRY. In 
Characterisation of Polymers by Thermal Analysis, Groenewoud, W. M., Ed. Elsevier Science B.V.: 
Amsterdam, 2001; pp 10-60. 


17 
 

30. 
Pielichowski, K.; Flejtuch, K., Phase Behavior of Poly(Ethylene Oxide) Studied by Modulated‐
Temperature DSC—Influence of the Molecular Weight. Journal of Macromolecular Science, Part B 2004, 43 
(2), 459-470. 
31. 
Motta, A.; Fambri, L.; Migliaresi, C., Regenerated silk fibroin films: Thermal and dynamic 
mechanical analysis. Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 2002, 203 (10‐11), 1658-1665. 
32. 
Hu, X.; Kaplan, D.; Cebe, P., Effect of water on the thermal properties of silk fibroin. Thermochimica 
Acta 2007, 461 (1), 137-144. 
33. 
Yazawa, K.; Ishida, K.; Masunaga, H.; Hikima, T.; Numata, K., Influence of Water Content on the β-
Sheet Formation, Thermal Stability, Water Removal, and Mechanical Properties of Silk Materials. 
Biomacromolecules 2016, 17 (3), 1057-1066. 
34. 
Dunn, L.; Prosser, H. C.; Tan, J. T.; Vanags, L. Z.; Ng, M. K.; Bursill, C. A., Murine model of wound 
healing. Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE 2013,  (75), e50265. 
35. 
Farokhi, M.; Mottaghitalab, F.; Fatahi, Y.; Khademhosseini, A.; Kaplan, D. L., Overview of Silk 
Fibroin Use in Wound Dressings. Trends in biotechnology 2018, 36 (9), 907-922. 
36. 
Gil, E. S.; Panilaitis, B.; Bellas, E.; Kaplan, D. L., Functionalized silk biomaterials for wound 
healing. Advanced healthcare materials 2013, 2 (1), 206-17. 
37. 
Bessa, L. J.; Fazii, P.; Di Giulio, M.; Cellini, L., Bacterial isolates from infected wounds and their 
antibiotic susceptibility pattern: some remarks about wound infection. International wound journal 2015, 12 
(1), 47-52. 
38. 
Ivanova, E. P.; Truong, V. K.; Webb, H. K.; Baulin, V. A.; Wang, J. Y.; Mohammodi, N.; Wang, F.; 
Fluke, C.; Crawford, R. J., Differential attraction and repulsion of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa on molecularly smooth titanium films. Sci. Rep. 2011, 1, 165. 
39. 
Nalawade, T.; Sogi, S. P.; Bhat, K., Bactericidal activity of propylene glycol, glycerine, polyethylene 
glycol 400, and polyethylene glycol 1000 against selected microorganisms. Journal of International Society 
of Preventive and Community Dentistry 2015, 5 (2), 114. 
40. 
Moghayedi, M.; Ahmadzadeh, H.; Ghazvini, K.; Goharshadi, E. K., Neglected antibacterial activity 
of ethylene glycol as a common solvent. Microbial Pathogenesis 2017, 107, 457-461. 
41. 
Chirife, J.; Herszage, L.; Joseph, A.; Bozzini, J. P.; Leardini, N.; Kohn, E. S., In vitro antibacterial 
activity of concentrated polyethylene glycol 400 solutions. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1983, 24 (3), 409-
412. 
42. 
Hirsch, E. B.; Tam, V. H., Impact of multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection on patient 
outcomes. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 2010, 10 (4), 441-451. 
43. 
Nathwani, D.; Raman, G.; Sulham, K.; Gavaghan, M.; Menon, V., Clinical and economic 
consequences of hospital-acquired resistant and multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Antimicrobial Resistance and Infection Control 2014, 3 (1), 32. 
44. 
Bai, D.; Capelli, M.; Huynh, H.; Ebendorff‐Heidepriem, H.; Foster, S.; Greentree, A. D.; Gibson, B. 
C. In Hybrid Diamond-Glass Optical Fibres for Magnetic Sensing, 26th International Conference on Optical 
Fiber Sensors, Lausanne, 2018/09/24; Optical Society of America: Lausanne, 2018; p WD3. 

 


1 
 

Supporting Information  

Electrospun nanodiamond-silk fibroin membranes: a multifunctional platform for 
biosensing and wound healing applications 

 

Asma Khalid1,2*, Dongbi Bai1, Amanda N. Abraham1,2, Amit Jadhav3, Denver Linklater1, Alex Matusica4, Duy 
Nguyen1, Billy James Murdoch1, Nadia Zakhartchouk1, Chaitali Dekiwadia1, Philipp Reineck1,5, David 
Simpson6, Achini K. Vidanapathirana2,5,7, Shadi Houshyar8, Christina A. Bursill2,5,7, Elena Ivanova1, and Brant 
Gibson1,2.  

1. School of Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
2. Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics (CNBP)  
3. School of Fashion and Design, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
4. School of Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics, Flinders University, Clovelly Park SA, 
Australia  

5. Vascular Research centre, Lifelong Health, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute 
(SAHMRI), Adelaide, SA, Australia 

6. School of Physics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
7. Adelaide Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Adelaide, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia 

8. School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 

*asma.khalid@rmit.edu.au  

 
Section 1: Electrospinning 

The setup used for electrospinning hybrid ND-silk membranes is shown in Figure S1 below. 

 

Figure S1: Depiction of the experimental setup. (a) NDs mixed with silk aqueous solution and electrospun as fibrous membranes. 
(b) A 0.2×0.2 mm2 microscopic image of the collected fibres on the glass coverslip. 
 
Section 2: X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) analysis 
An X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of the silk and ND-silk membranes was performed to estimate 
the surface composition of the membranes before and after methanol treatment step. Figure S1 (a) presents 
the broad XPS spectrum with C, N, and O forming the surface of silk and ND-silk surfaces before and after 
methanol treatment. No significant impurities were detected on the surface of the membranes. Figure S1(b) 
demonstrates the high-resolution C1s profile of the four samples. The binding energies of C–C/C–H (284.8 
eV), C–N (285.9 eV), C=O (287.9 eV) are according to reference paper 14 in the main context1. 


2 
 

 

Figure S2: (a) The XPS survey for silk/ND-silk samples before & after methanol treatment. High resolution C1s XPS for (b) Silk 
before and (c) after methanol treatment, and (d) ND-silk before and (e) after methanol treatment. The C-N bonds (~286 eV) are 
reduced relative to the C=O (288 eV) & C-H/C-C (sp2) peaks (~285 eV) after methanol treatment. 

 

The results in the above table (Table 1 of the manuscript) also demonstrate that the concentration of each peak 
is the same with/without NDs to within 3%. It is assumed that the concentration of NDs at the surface is low 
enough to be negligible for calculation of the PEO concentration. As the remainder of the C-C sp3 content in 
the samples corresponds to PEO1, a rough estimate can be obtained by observing the sp3 content in the ND-
silk sample pre and post-methanol treatment. An increase of about 17% is hence observed for ND-silk 
membranes post-methanol treatment for the C-C sp3. This value is in qualitative agreement with the literature2. 
For silk, only membranes, a 22% decrease in silk content (C-N bods) was observed on the surface, as C-N 
represents the proteins. However, as C-O & C=O bonding is indistinguishable from the C-N peak and the C-
H peak is close enough to the sp2 peak to be considered indistinguishable, an accurate measurement cannot be 
made by XPS. 

 
Section 3: Cell growth on hybrid membranes  
Human skin keratinocytes (HaCaT) were grown on the surface of the membranes for 48 hours before testing 
viability using resazurin assay. Bare coverslips with no silk were used as the controls. The SEM results in 
Figure S3(a) and (b) reveal that the cells attach well to the surface of the membranes with no adverse changes 
to morphology between cells grown on silk or on ND-silk membranes. Figure S3(c) indicates that there is no 
significant difference in viability between the control (no sample and silk membrane) and ND-silk hybrid, 
despite the presence of the NDs.  
In both cases, the cells have spread, with filopodia attaching to silk fibres, which suggests that the silk fibres 
do not hinder cell attachment nor has the presence of NDs inside the silk fibres affected the cell growth.  
 


3 
 

 

Figure S3: HaCaT cells grown on (a) Silk only (b) ND-silk-diamond (right) fibrous membranes. Scanning electron microscope 
images of the cells (a) growing on a layer of ND0.5-silk fibres. The inset in the white box provides a magnified image of cells. The 
ND-silk fibrous membrane is approximately 300 μm thick. (c) Cell viability of HaCaT cells grown on the surface of glass coverslip 
(control), silk, ND0.25-silk and ND0.5-silk membranes after 48 hours of culture. 
 

Confluency of the cells may be observed from the SEM images after 48 h of cell growth. Within an SEM area 
of about 200 µm2, we observed a similar density of cells growing on both silk and ND-silk membranes, as 
shown in the Figure S4 (a) and (b), respectively. This suggests that the cell growth on both these samples were 
similar to each other. We also provide an overview of a larger area of the sample in Figure S4 (c), where it 
can be observed that cell confluency is > 90%.  

Additionally, cell viability (Figure S3) was determined by resazurin assay. Only viable cells can metabolise 
the resazurin to the fluorescent resorufin product, which is the analyte measured to determing cell viability 3. 
Therefore, it can be inferred that the confluency of viable cells on silk and ND-silk membrance were equivalent 
to the confluency of cells grown on the control (glass cover slips).  

This suggests that silk provides a good matrix for wound dressing applications. While other polymers such as 
poly-capralactone (PCL) fibres may offer low cytotoxicity4, they offer low biodegradation rates 5 that limit 
their long term applications in tissue engineering applications. In contrast silk undergoes enzymatic 
degradation in the body and the resulting amino acids may be metabolised by the surrounding cells 6. 

 


4 
 

 

Figure S4: SEM images 200×100 µm2 showing a similar confluency for both (a) silk only and (b) ND-silk membranes after 48 h 
incubation. (c) A larger zoomed out area on the sample where the ND-silk membrane is widely covered by cells except the 
highlighted areas. 

 
Section 4: Temperature sensing with ND-silk membranes 
To confirm the value of dD/dT 
 parameter for silk embedded NV- centres, the zero filed splitting D of 6 additional centres was tracked as a 
function of temperature in a window of 20 °C to ~50 °C. Figure S3(a) and (b) show the calibration curves of 
the additional six NV- centres inside ND-silk fibres. The six centres showed resonant frequency shifts of 87 
kHz/°C (black circles), 96 kHz/°C (green circles), 113 kHz/°C (magenta dots), 118 kHz/°C (black triangles), 
136 kHz/°C (red circles) and 162 kHz/°C (red dots) as shown in Figure S3 (a)-(b). The equations of the straight 
lines fitted to the experimental data are -0.12T+2872.8 (black), -0.16T+2874 (red) and -0.096T+2871.5 
(green) in Figure S3(a). The equations of the straight lines fitted to the experimental data are of Figure S3(b) 
are -0.09T+2872.5 (black), -0.14T+2873.2 (red) and -0.11T+2872.4 (magenta). The variation in the dD/dT 
parameter could possibly be due to agglomeration of NDs, different number of NV- centres in each detecting 
spot and varying z-heights for NDs inside the silk fibres that correspond to variation in the fluorescence of 
NDs 7-8. Moreover, different ND emitting spots have a varying height from the heat source, which generates 
a difference in the temperature they detect. 


5 
 

   

Figure S5: (a), (b) ODMR central frequency D plotted as a function of temperature for 6 different NDs inside silk fibres. The data 
points are represented by asterisk, triangles, circles and dots while lines of the same colour correspond to the linear fit.  At each 
temperature point, 3-5 readings were recorded, and the average central frequency and the error in the mean values are plotted. 
 

Section 5: Effect of laser power on zero-field splitting frequency  
The effect of increasing laser power on the zero-field splitting D was measured, as presented in Figure S4. We 
experimentally changed the laser excitation power from 1 µW to 40 µW while monitoring the ODMR 
spectrum from one individual ND emitting spot. The laser power did not induce additional heating effects for 
the NV- centres in ND-silk membranes. 

 

Figure S6: Effect of increasing laser power on the value of zero-field parameter D of NV- centres inside the ND-silk membrane. 
 
Section 6: Widefield ODMR spectroscopy 
The widefield microscopy was performed on the hybrid ND-silk membranes as shown by the ~100 µm2 image 
shown in Figure S5(a). The image shows a brightfield (white light) image of the fibrous ND-silk membrane 
superimposed on its fluorescence image. The silk fibres can be seen as dark grey threads in the brightfield 
scan while the fluorescence from NDs (excited with 532 nm) is evident with bright red distinct dots in the 
overlaying fluorescence map. The ODMR data on one of the NDs, Figure S5(b) demonstrate that multisite 
ODMR can also be performed for temperature monitoring on a biologically active area.  
Figure S7(b) shows a widefield ODMR for one of the representatives NDs (shown inside the square in a) at a 
temperature of 25 °C (blue data) and 37 °C (red data). A zero-field splitting D25=2870 MHz was observed at 
room temperature while a D37=2868 MHz shifted frequency was observed at body temperature. Hence the 
widefield ODMR with these materials is possible and can be explored further for non-invasive temperature 
sensing.  
 

0
10
20
30
40

Laser power (
W)

2868

2868.5

2869

2869.5

2870

D (MHz)


6 
 

 

Figure S7: (a) An overlay of Bright field (white light) microscopic and widefield fluorescence images for ND-silk membranes. 
Fluorescence images were excited with 532 nm laser via a 100× oil objective and a beam expander. (b) ODMR spectra for one of 
the representative NDs at room and body temperatures, showing a resonant frequency difference of ΔD ~ 160 kHz/°C. 
 
Section 7: Murine model of wound healing 
Silk and ND-silk hybrid scaffolds were tested for biocompatibility in an established murine model of wound 
healing, in comparison to the PBS control. Mice were followed for 10 days post-wounding, and the wound 
area was calculated daily. The splints and the sutures when replaced when required.  

 

Figure S8: (a) The operative region was prepared under general anaesthesia by shaving the skin between the two shoulder blades up 
to the base of the neck, and two circular full-thickness wounds were created on either side of the midline using a sterile biopsy 
punch. (b) The right wound was covered with a circular (4 mm in diameter) silk or ND-silk scaffold with 10 µL Phosphate buffered 
saline (PBS). The left wound was covered with 10 µL of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) as the vehicle control. (c) A silicone 
splint, supported by adhesive and nylon sutures, was applied to both wounds. (d) Both wounds were covered with a transparent 
occlusive dressing (OpsiteTM). Representative images from the wounds on each day of wound healing (d1-10) (f) from mice treated 
with PBS and silk and (f) from mice treated with PBS and ND-silk.  
 

 

Section 8: Antibacterial properties 
High magnification SEM micrographs of P. aeruginosa and E. coli on ND-silk membranes are shown in 
Figure S9, to show their damaged cell morphology. 


7 
 

 

Figure S9: High-magnification SEM micrographs of the compromised cellular morphology for (a) P. aeruginosa and (b) E. coli. 
The bacteria are shown in false orange colour.  
 
References 
(1) Zhang, R.; Yu, J.-s.; Huang, J.; Chen, G.-l.; Liu, X.; Chen, W.; Wang, X.-q.; Li, C.-r. Sterilization of mycete 
attached on the unearthed silk fabrics by an atmospheric pressure plasma jet. Chinese Physics B 2018, 27 (5), 055207, 
DOI: 10.1088/1674-1056/27/5/055207. 
(2) Jin, H.-J.; Fridrikh, S. V.; Rutledge, G. C.; Kaplan, D. L. Electrospinning Bombyx mori Silk with Poly(ethylene 
oxide). Biomacromolecules 2002, 3 (6), 1233-1239, DOI: 10.1021/bm025581u. 
(3) Riss, T. L.; Moravec, R. A.; Niles, A. L.; Duellman, S.; Benink, H. A.; Worzella, T. J.; Minor, L. Cell Viability 
Assays. In Assay Guidance Manual; Sittampalam, G. S.; Grossman, A.; Brimacombe, K.; Arkin, M.; Auld, D.; Austin, 
C. P.; Baell, J.; Bejcek, B.; Caaveiro, J. M. M.; Chung, T. D. Y.; Coussens, N. P.; Dahlin, J. L.; Devanaryan, V.; 
Foley, T. L.; Glicksman, M.; Hall, M. D.; Haas, J. V.; Hoare, S. R. J.; Inglese, J.; Iversen, P. W.; Kahl, S. D.; Kales, S. 
C.; Kirshner, S.; Lal-Nag, M.; Li, Z.; McGee, J.; McManus, O.; Riss, T.; Saradjian, P.; Trask, O. J., Jr.; Weidner, J. 
R.; Wildey, M. J.; Xia, M.; Xu, X., Eds.; Eli Lilly & Company and the National Center for Advancing Translational 
Sciences: Bethesda (MD), 2004. 
(4) Houshyar, S.; Kumar, G. S.; Rifai, A.; Tran, N.; Nayak, R.; Shanks, R. A.; Padhye, R.; Fox, K.; Bhattacharyya, A. 
Nanodiamond/poly-ε-caprolactone nanofibrous scaffold for wound management. Materials Science and Engineering: 
C 2019, 100, 378-387, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2019.02.110. 
(5) Zhou, X.; Pan, Y.; Liu, R.; Luo, X.; Zeng, X.; Zhi, D.; Li, J.; Cheng, Q.; Huang, Z.; Zhang, H.; Wang, K. 
Biocompatibility and biodegradation properties of polycaprolactone/polydioxanone composite scaffolds prepared by 
blend or co-electrospinning. Journal of Bioactive and Compatible Polymers 2019, 34 (2), 115-130, DOI: 
10.1177/0883911519835569. 
(6) Cao, Y.; Wang, B. Biodegradation of silk biomaterials. International journal of molecular sciences 2009, 10 (4), 
1514-1524, DOI: 10.3390/ijms10041514. 
(7) Khalid, A.; Lodin, R.; Domachuk, P.; Tao, H.; Moreau, J. E.; Kaplan, D. L.; Omenetto, F. G.; Gibson, B. C.; 
Tomljenovic-Hanic, S. Synthesis and characterization of biocompatible nanodiamond-silk hybrid material. Biomedical 
optics express 2014, 5 (2), 596-608, DOI: 10.1364/BOE.5.000596. 
(8) Khalid, A.; Mitropoulos, A. N.; Marelli, B.; Simpson, D. A.; Tran, P. A.; Omenetto, F. G.; Tomljenovic-Hanic, S. 
Fluorescent Nanodiamond Silk Fibroin Spheres: Advanced Nanoscale Bioimaging Tool. ACS Biomaterials Science & 
Engineering 2015, 1 (11), 1104-1113, DOI: 10.1021/acsbiomaterials.5b00220. 

 


