Science Advances
Manuscript Template                                                                                           Page 1 of 36

Flexible complementary logic circuit built from two identical organic electrochemical transistors

L. Travaglini1,2, A. P. Micolich3,* C. Cazorla1, E. Zeglio1,2,4, A. Lauto5, D. Mawad1,2,5*

1School of Materials Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, 
Australia

2Centre for Advanced Macromolecular Design, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia 

3School of Physics, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia

4Division of Micro and Nanosystems, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden 

5School of Science, Western Sydney University, Locked Bag 1797, Penrith, NSW 2751, Australia

6Australian Centre for Nano Medicine and ARC Centre of Excellence in Convergent Bio-Nano Science 
and Technology, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia

*Corresponding Authors:
A. P. Micolich
Email: adam.micolich@nanoelectronics.physics.unsw.edu.au
D. Mawad
Email: damia.mawad@unsw.edu.au

Abstract 

The organic electrochemical transistor (OECT) with a conjugated polymer as the active material is the 

elementary unit of organic bioelectronic devices. Increased functionalities, such as low power 

consumption, can be achieved by building complementary circuits featuring two or more OECTs. 

Complementary circuits commonly combine both p- and n-type transistors to reduce power draw. While 

p-type OECTs are readily available, n-type OECTs are less common mainly due to poor stability of the 

n-type active channel material in aqueous electrolyte. Additionally, an OECT based complementary 

circuit requires well matched transport properties in the p- and n-type materials. Here, a complementary 

circuit is made using a pair of OECTs having polyaniline (PANI) as the channel material in both 

transistors. PANI is chosen due to its unique behaviour exhibiting a peak in current versus gate voltage 


Page 2 of 36

when used as an active channel in an OECT. The PANI based circuit is shown to have excellent 

performance with gain of ~ 7 and could be transferred on a flexible biocompatible chitosan substrate with 

demonstrated operation in aqueous electrolyte. This study extends the capabilities of conjugated polymer 

based OECTs.  

Introduction

Organic and flexible bioelectronic devices are envisioned to impact future medical applications [1] in 

clinical diagnostics and therapeutics [2–4]. The organic electrochemical transistor (OECT) is the elementary 

unit of these devices, with advanced functionality including high signal-to-noise ratio recording or signal 

amplification [5,6]. Further applications are achieved by building integrated circuits that feature more than 

one OECT. The simplest example is a complementary logic circuit, which normally features p-type (hole 

majority) and n-type (electron majority) transistors in series with their gates connected (Fig. 1A). The 

operating gate input range is chosen such that when one transistor is ‘on’ the other is ‘off’, and vice versa. 

This makes the output swing between the drive voltage VDD (p-transistor on / n-transistor off – p-slope in 

Fig. 1A) and ground (p-transistor off / n-transistor on – n-slope in Fig. 1A). The advantage to the 

complementary architecture is that power draw is reduced by having one of the two devices always in its 

off state. Complementary circuits are thus widely used in electronics applications with demanding energy 

supply/dissipation requirements. Both requirements are relevant to bioelectronics, where circuits can 

require long operation on limited battery supply, e.g., implants, and minimal heat dissipation to prevent 

tissue/cell damage and device degradation [7]. The complementary circuit described above uses a pair of 

unipolar devices [8–10]. A more exotic alternative involves a pair of ambipolar devices, where both carrier 

types can be accessed within the available gate voltage VG range, typically with some span of insulating 

behaviour between the p-like and n-like conduction regions [10,11].


Page 3 of 36

Both unipolar and ambipolar designs pose serious challenges for conjugated polymer

semiconductors. Conjugated polymers are predominantly p-type materials; the n-type polymeric

semiconductors synthesized to date have relatively lower carrier mobility than p-type [12,13], largely due to 

intrinsic conformational distortion in the polymer backbone [14].This mobility mismatch has a detrimental 

effect on circuit performance. 

An additional consideration for bioelectronics is the need for the n-type polymer to have an 

operational electrochemical window compatible with aqueous electrolyte [13]. This further limits the 

availability of n-type materials, with only two reported to date [12,13]. Indeed, only one OECT-based 

complementary circuit using n-type and p-type conjugated polymers has been reported so far [12].

The ambipolar design also requires well matched charge transport properties in the p- and n-type 

regions [11]. This again limits material choice because in many ambipolar materials the electron and hole 

transport mobilities differ due to charge-disorder effects [10]. Furthermore, current synthetic techniques are 

complex and purification of the polymer is very challenging with trace metals occasionally detected in the 

product [15,16]. Thus, a major quest in the field of bioelectronics has been to find either high performing n-

type or ambipolar OECT materials with well-matched charge transport, ideally with streamlined synthesis 

and favourable device processing properties, to further develop OECT-based circuits for applications in 

neural sensing [17], ion-logic and ‘iontronics’[18], and biosymbiotic systems, e.g., electronic plants [19].Here, 

we demonstrate the design of OECT-based complementary circuits made using a pair of transistors 

containing the same channel material (Fig. 1B), which we ultimately engineered to operate on a flexible 

biocompatible chitosan substrate [20–24] in aqueous electrolyte. As the channel material, we use the well-

established conjugated polymer polyaniline (PANI), one of the first organic semiconductors tested in 

transistors [25].


Page 4 of 36

Fig. 1: Two identical OECT-based flexible complementary circuit. A) Schematic presentation of a 
conventional unipolar complementary logic circuit. B) Schematic presentation of our PANI OECT based 
complementary logic circuit. C) Digital image of the complementary logic circuit built on a flexible 
chitosan substrate (top), and chemical structures of PANI in its different oxidation states (bottom). The 
inset is an optical micrograph of the gold contacts of an individual transistor (scale bar 500 μm).

Our complementary circuit design exploits a known but previously unutilized feature of PANI 

discovered by Paul et al. [25] in 1985. There PANI gave a peak in current versus VG when used as an OECT 

channel, in contrast to the monotonic increase/decrease obtained for a conventional unipolar transistor [10].

Circuits designed to cleverly exploit this conductivity peak were not explored at the time; we address this 

gap here. Our complementary circuit consists of two identical PANI OECTs connected in series between 

a VDD and ground, as usual. The PANI OECT closest to VDD is operated on the p-slope side of the 

conductance peak (between 1 and 2 in Fig. 1B) by directly applying the input voltage Vin to its gate 

electrode. The PANI OECT closest to ground is operated on the n-slope side (between 1’ and 2’ in Fig. 

1B) by using a DC adder to shift the input to its gate electrode by a fixed offset Vshift = −0.4 V. This 


Page 5 of 36

arrangement is chosen such that one PANI transistor is ‘on’ while the other is ‘off’ enabling 

complementary circuit performance. We determined the value of Vshift from the transfer characteristics as 

discussed later. A crucial point to note is that polyaniline is not a traditional ambipolar material in this 

sense – conduction is via hole majority transport across the entire operating range [26,27], and the p-like and 

n-like slopes are on opposite sides of a conductivity peak rather than a conductivity valley (i.e., 

polyaniline = n-peak-p, traditional ambipolar = p-valley-n). The peak’s symmetry means that the two 

OECTs in our circuit, operated on opposite sides of the peak, have intrinsically matched characteristics 

that afford strong potential for complementary circuit use. Using a pair of identical PANI OECTs

eliminates the need to develop a second material with matching performance for the small cost of adding 

a voltage shift apparatus into our input circuit, thereby overcoming a major roadblock to making OECT-

based circuits. We also demonstrate that the technology can be transferred onto a flexible biocompatible 

chitosan substrate operating in an aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 1C), thus paving the way towards the 

realization of complementary logic circuits based on two identical OECTs for potential applications in 

organic bioelectronics.

Results 

Characterization of our PANI-based OECTs

For initial studies, PANI OECTs were fabricated on interdigitated gold microelectrodes (IDME) patterned 

on a glass substrate (PANI-on-IDME OECT). The IDME’s serpentine structure gives a channel length of

10 μm and channel width of 50 cm. The PANI film was produced using an oxidative polymerization 

process with phytic acid as the dopant [28]. The successful deposition of a homogeneous polymer film 

(thickness 150 nm) was confirmed by atomic force microscopy (fig. S1). The transfer (drain current 

ID vs VG) and output (ID vs source-drain bias VDS) characteristics presented in Figs. 2A and 2B were 


Page 6 of 36

obtained using the ionic liquid 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate as the electrolyte and a 

non-aqueous Ag/Ag+ as the gate electrode.

Fig. 2: PANI-on-IDME OECT as building block for complementary circuit. A) ID vs VG at 
VDS = +0.1 V. Black lines represent the leakage current. B) ID vs VDS for VG from −0.6 V to 0 V (blue) and 
+0.1 V to +0.7 V (red). Data on the n-slope and p-slope sides of the conductivity peak are presented in 
red/blue for both A) and B). C) Voltage-transfer characteristic (VTC) for our inverter circuit made using 
a pair of PANI-on-IDME OECTs connected by external wiring and operating with ionic liquid electrolyte. 
Green lines represent the VTC adjusted by an offset of −0.19 V. D) Corresponding voltage gain of the 
inverter. Positive and negative sweeps are presented by solid and dashed lines respectively.

The transfer characteristic sweeping from negative to positive VG in Fig. 2A (solid line) shows a clear, 

symmetric peak in ID versus VG, with a maximum current of 2.43  0.25 mA at VG = 0 V and VDS = +0.1 V, 

corresponding to a channel conductivity of 32.3  0.3 mS cm−1. We divide this peak into two regions. The 


Page 7 of 36

first region (blue) extends from −0.8 V to 0 V, and is where n-like behavior is observed, i.e., more positive 

VG increases the conductivity. The second region (red) extends from 0 V to +0.5 V, and is where p-like 

behavior is observed, i.e., more positive VG decreases the conductivity. We observe the same two regions

as we sweep towards more negative VG, however with the peak current shifted by − mV. This 

hysteresis correlates with the hysteresis observed in the cyclic voltammetry (fig. S2) and is in agreement 

with the literature [29–31]. The hysteresis has been described for conjugated polymer-based devices, in 

which the polymer has been highly oxidized without causing its degradation [29,30]. The hysteresis is 

attributed to the transition between different electronic states and the charge density of the oxidized 

polymer. Of note, recent designs have introduced hysteresis in conjugated polymer OECT devices to 

enable their application in memory devices [32–34]. The output characteristics in Fig. 2B show behavior

consistent with the transfer characteristics in Fig. 2A. We repeated these measurements for our PANI-on-

IDME OECT at VDS = −0.1 V (fig. S3A and S3B). Similarly, a current peak is observed as VG is increased 

towards positive potential.

Characterization of PANI-based OECT complementary logic circuits

We set out to investigate whether a single-material complementary circuit can be built using two identical 

OECTs, i.e., featuring the same active channel material PANI, based on the n-like and p-like behavior we 

have obtained from our PANI-based OECT. Figure 2C shows the voltage-transfer characteristic (VTC) 

for our inverter circuit (Fig. 1B) with VDD = +0.2 V and offset voltage Vshift = −0.4 V applied to the OECT 

closest to ground. We determined the value of Vshift from the transfer curves of the single OECTs used in 

the circuit, such that we obtain one OECT in its ‘on’ state and the other in its ‘off’ state (fig. S4). There is 

a slight offset between the sweep from negative Vin to positive Vin (solid line) and sweep back from positive 

Vin to negative Vin (dashed line), consistent with the hysteresis previously shown in Fig. 2A. Fig. 2D shows 


Page 8 of 36

the DC gain Vout/Vin versus Vin with a peak gain of 7.2 obtained at the switching threshold VM = +0.36 V. 

Our inverter gain is  1, meeting an essential functional criterion of an inverter [10]. It also has higher gain

compared to the only conjugated polymer OECT based complementary circuit reported to date (~ 4) and 

measured at the same VDD [12]. The ideal switching threshold for well optimized complementary inverter 

circuits is VDD/2, and deviation of our inverter from this could be for two key reasons. First, the switching 

thresholds are not symmetric about 0 V, i.e., VTh,n  −VTh,p, where VTh,n and VTh,p are the n-type and p-type 

switching thresholds (fig. S4C), respectively. Second, the quantity k = C(Z/L), where  is mobility, C is 

gate capacitance, Z is channel width and L is channel length, is not perfectly balanced for the two 

transistors [10], as indicated by the different magnitude in saturation currents exhibited by each device (fig.

S4C). Our PANI OECT-based complementary logic circuit can also function as an amplifier circuit when 

operated at a negative VDD = −0.2 V as shown in Figures S2C and S2D. Although there is some room for 

improved performance through optimization, our work here represents the first proof-of-concept for an 

inverter circuit built from two OECTs featuring identical active channel material. 

Simultaneous transistor, electrochemical and optical characterization of our OECTs

PANI is a p-doped semiconductor in the presence of phytic acid. The origin of the transition between the 

n-like and p-like behavior we observe here is electrochemically driven. We show this by investigating the 

electrochemical and optical properties of PANI using an in-house built apparatus (Fig. 3A and fig. S5)

that enables simultaneous transistor, CV and UV-Vis measurements of a PANI-on-IDME as used in our 

OECT. The set-up is described in the supplementary information. The intent here is not to replace properly 

engineered CV and UV-Vis instruments but to augment them – we use the data obtained from this set-up 

to ensure that measurements taken using our CV and UV-Vis systems are correctly aligned in gate 

potential with the transistor characteristics.


Page 9 of 36

Fig. 3: In situ monitoring of the redox changes in PANI OECT during operation. A) Schematic (top) 
and photograph (bottom) of the apparatus used for near-simultaneous measurements of transfer 
characteristics, cyclic voltammetry and UV-visible absorption. B) Plots of (top) ID at VDS = −0.1 V, 
(middle) IWE working electrode (WE) current and (bottom) photodiode current under 428 nm illumination 
versus VG swept at 50 mVs-1. C) In situ spectroelectrochemistry of PANI film on ITO-coated glass as a 
function of applied potential between −0.8 and +0.8 V.

Figure 3B presents measurements of ID (top), working electrode current IWE (middle) and 

photodiode current (bottom) versus VG. The PANI clearly exhibits different characteristics defined by 

three distinct regions of potential: Region I (−0.8 to −0.1 V), Region II (−0.1 to +0.7 V), and Region III 


Page 10 of 36

(+0.7 to +1.0 V). The cyclic voltammogram (middle) shows typical redox process in which PANI changes 

oxidation states between leucoemeraldine (non-conductive and fully reduced – Region I), emeraldine 

(conductive – Region II) and pernigraniline (non-conductive and fully oxidised – Region III) [35,36]. In 

Regions I and III, the Faradaic current is negligible, corresponding to the off states of the PANI OECT in 

the transfer characteristic. In contrast, the Faradaic current is significantly higher in Region II, indicating 

that the PANI is in the conductive form. The on state of the OECT coincides directly with Region II.

We concurrently measured the optical transmission via the photodiode current (Fig. 3B bottom) 

since absorption spectroscopy enables the oxidation states of PANI (Fig. 1C) to be identified [36]. Reduced 

photodiode current in Fig. 3B corresponding to enhanced absorption. When PANI is in its leucoemeraldine 

state, only the 320 nm peak is observed. The emeraldine acid shows a peak at 430 nm accompanied by a 

broad shoulder centred at > 800 nm. A blue shift of the polaron region to ~ 650 nm or lower identifies the 

emeraldine base and pernigraniline states. Since the emeraldine acid is the most electrically conductive 

form of PANI, we chose to focus on the absorption at 428 nm (Fig. 3B) and 850 nm (fig. S6). In Fig. 3B, 

the photodiode current remains constant and at maximal value for VG < −0.22 V. We observed a sharp 

decrease in photodiode current at the boundary between Regions I and II. We attribute this sharp increase 

in absorption to protonation of the leucoemeraldine state to form the emeraldine acid state. We confirm 

this process with separate spectroelectrochemistry measurements shown in Fig. 3C. As we move from 

Region I to Region II, we observe the weakening of the 320 nm peak corresponding to the 

leucoemeraldine state and strengthening of the 430 nm peak corresponding to the emeraldine acid state, 

indicating a transition between the two oxidation states. We observe fluctuations in the photodiode current

with further increase in VG (Regions II and III; Fig. 3B), but it remains low compared to its initial value 

at VG < −0.22 V. The fluctuations indicate further chemical change in the film; the emeraldine acid co-

exists with the emeraldine base in Region II and converts to the pernigraniline state in Region III. The 


Page 11 of 36

blue shift in the polaron region and decrease in 430 nm peak in Fig. 3C further support this conclusion. 

Combining optical transmission with cyclic voltammetry while the OECT was operating enabled us to 

identify with certainty that the non-conductive leucoemeraldine and pernigraniline states are the dominant 

species in Regions I and III respectively, where the OECT was in the off state, whilst the emeraldine state 

was dominant in Region II, where the OECT is in the on state.

Density functional theory study of conduction states in our PANI OECTs

We performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations for PANI in different oxidation states to 

further understand Regions I-III. In previous studies [37,38], analysis of the electronic states was performed 

for isolated PANI polymers, i.e., PANI surrounded by vacuum. Here, we explicitly simulate and analyze 

PANI in its different oxidation states while in contact with the Au electrode, an integral component in the 

OECT device. This is an original aspect of our simulations in comparison to the literature. To perform this 

type of simulation properly, we have carried out very intensive DFT+D calculations for a large system 

composed of 128 Au atoms, 52 organic ions and a large vacuum region of 30 Å of length. We reveal, that 

in the absence of any defects, PANI was physisorbed on the gold substrate via hydrogen bonds of the 

Au···H-X type (fig. S7) [39]. The main interactions between the PANI polymer and the Au substrate are 

long-range dispersion-like with no considerable effect on the electronic band structure of the polymer.

We find that the leucoemeraldine base is strongly insulating owing to a wide band gap of 2.15 eV and 

a Fermi energy just above the valence band edge (fig. S7A) in agreement with the experiments. For the 

emeraldine acid state, we find empty electronic states at ~ 0.1 eV above the valence band edge. These 

arise from polaron formation upon protonation of the leucoemeraldine polymer backbone. These empty 

states are sufficiently close to the valence band edge so that charge carriers can be excited upon application 

of a small electric bias making PANI an effective conductor (fig. S7B). For the pernigraniline base, we 


Page 12 of 36

find that the density of polaron states just above the valence band edge is increased as compared to the 

emeraldine state (fig. S7C). Upon application of an appropriate electric field, it is possible to fill up such 

unoccupied electronic states and attain an insulator state characterized by an energy band gap of 1.55 eV. 

Overall, these calculations compare well with others in the literature [37,38,40], and support the argument 

that the redox changes occurring in PANI lead to the conductance peak in the transfer characteristics.

Monolithic PANI-OECT complementary circuits on flexible biocompatible substrates operating in 

aqueous electrolyte

Low operating voltage is a vital property for building bioelectronic circuits, which inevitably need to 

operate in an aqueous electrolyte environment. An attractive aspect of PANI is that its electrochemical 

activity is within an ideal range for this purpose (< 1 V) (fig. S2). We have also previously shown that 

phytic-acid-doped PANI can be polymerized on a flexible biocompatible chitosan substrate to form an 

electronically and mechanically stable conductive patch, which we developed for electrically bridging 

infarcted cardiac tissue [28]. That put us in an ideal position to directly transfer our PANI OECT 

complementary circuits from non-monolithic glass IDMEs, i.e., separate glass IDME chips wired in an 

external circuit, to fully monolithic integrated on flexible biocompatible chitosan substrates [41–43] and 

actuated by aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 4A). We show the transfer characteristics in Fig. 4B for a single 

PANI-on-chitosan OECT obtained using 0.1 M NaCl aqueous electrolyte with an Ag/AgCl electrode as 

the reference electrode for supplying VG. The conductance peak is shifted to slightly lower VG (−0.08 V) 

compared to our devices on glass (Fig. 2A), which may simply arise from differences in substrate charge 

between glass and chitosan. The peak current (0.63 mA) is lower for the same VDS, which is more related 

to the change in transistor geometry than an intrinsic change in PANI properties.


Page 13 of 36

Fig. 4: A flexible PANI-on-chitosan OECTs complementary circuit. A) Schematic of the oxidative 
polymerization of PANI doped with phytic acid on a chitosan film with patterned Au electrodes on the 
surface. B) ID vs VG at VDS = +0.1 V. Black lines represent the leakage current. C) VTC for inverter circuit
made on flexible chitosan film operating with aqueous NaCl electrolyte. D) Corresponding voltage gain 
of the inverter. Positive and negative sweeps are presented by solid and dashed lines respectively.

Fig. 4C and 4D show VTC and corresponding gain for our PANI-on-chitosan inverter circuit (Fig. 

1C) with VDD = +0.2 V and offset voltage Vshift = −0.4 V applied to the OECT closest to ground. We 

observe hysteresis similar to our PANI-on-IDME inverter and in agreement with the hysteresis recorded 

for the single PANI-on-chitosan OECT (Fig. 4B). We obtain a peak gain of 2.4, lower than for our PANI-

on-IDME circuit, which could arise either from a less optimal transistor geometry or trapping of electrolyte 


Page 14 of 36

ions in the positively charged chitosan. Transfer, output and VTC characteristics of the PANI-on-chitosan 

circuit operating at a negative VDD = −0.2 V are shown in fig. S9.

Discussion

Introducing electronic circuits into bioelectronic devices will enable new and improved biomedical 

functionalities. Conjugated polymer based OECTs have demonstrated superior performance at the 

biointerface, in comparison to other transistor architectures such as the organic field-effect transistor 

(OFET) or the electrolyte-gated OFET [44]. This is due to the mixed electronic and ionic transport that 

OECT displays. Despite the fact that transistors are rarely used alone and often built into integrated circuits 

for higher function, OECTs have been largely explored as single devices. Few attempts have been recently 

made towards modifying or using the OECT as an elementary unit in building advanced electronic circuits

[44–47], with only one example reporting a conjugated polymer based complementary circuit [12]. We 

speculate that the lack of advancement in developing complementary circuits based on conjugated 

polymers is due to the limited choice of materials. Conjugated polymers are mostly p-type with very few 

n-type materials readily available [14]. Here, we overcome this limitation by taking a radical new approach 

towards building a complementary circuit. We demonstrate that a single material complementary circuit 

can be built from two identical PANI-based OECTs, eliminating the need for an n-type conjugated 

polymer. We achieve this by arranging the two identical OECTs in an inverter circuit and applying a small 

additional voltage to offset the operating point of one OECT relative to the other, thereby giving dc gain 

as high as 7.2. We transfer the technology on a chitosan substrate to build a flexible inverter with 

demonstrated functionality in aqueous electrolytes. As a proof-of-concept with unique characteristics, 

further work is required to optimize the performance of our device. Dedicated studies maybe performed 

to probe whether the observed hysteresis can be minimized by controlling the charge density on the 


Page 15 of 36

oxidized polymer (degree of doping). Our PANI-based OECT was fabricated by chemically polymerizing

aniline on the electrode surface, accounting for slight variations in device geometry. The fabrication 

process can be improved by using photolithography or electropolymerization that will enable control over 

the film thickness [48]. Minimizing variations in the geometry of devices will achieve equivalent saturation 

currents and shift the inverter response to ideal behavior. 

Our work’s key novelty is the application of the conductance peak in PANI OECT transfer 

characteristics to realize OECT-based complementary circuits using only a single common channel 

material. This was made possible because of the finite electrochemical window of PANI that is within a 

potential range suited for operation in water ( 0.9 V). The conductance peak we observe in our PANI 

OECTs is consistent with literature [25,27,30,49], and similar behavior has been shown for other conjugated 

polymers such as polypyrrole and polythiophenes, though for potentials > 1 V [29,50,51]. However, this is 

the first time this feature has been exploited for novel complementary circuit design featuring two OECTs 

with identical channel composition. Furthermore, our design approach to integrate the inverter circuit in 

a flexible biocompatible substrate enabled its operation in aqueous electrolyte. We have previously shown 

that a conductive patch made from PANI-on-chitosan electrocouples with damaged cardiac tissue 

increasing conduction velocity (~ 25%), and is not pro-arrythmogenic following in vivo implantation [28]. 

Our work set the foundation for the flexible complementary logic circuit we here developed for in vivo

operation at the biointerface. The next step will be to test the capability of the circuit to process signals of 

physiological frequencies, towards its use as a real-time processing unit at the biointerface [52]. The flexible 

inverter can also have applications in memory and neuromorphic devices [6,32,53], exploiting the hysteresis 

shown in our PANI OECT devices. The present work sheds a new light on conjugated polymers, extending 

their capabilities beyond use in a single OECT device but towards single material channels in 

complementary logic circuits.


Page 16 of 36

Experimental Methods

Materials.

All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without any further purification. Any water 

used was deionized to 18 MΩ.cm using a Millipore (Milli-DI) pro system unless otherwise specified.

PANI-on-IDME.

OECTs were fabricated on interdigitated microelectrode (IDME) structures purchased from Micrux 

Technologies (ED-IDE1-Au). PANI films were obtained by oxidative polymerization of aniline directly 

on the IDME as described previously [28,54]. Briefly, Solution 1 was prepared by mixing 470 μL phytic 

acid and 230 μL aniline in 1 mL of water. Solution 2 was prepared by dissolving 143 mg ammonium 

persulfate in 0.5 mL of water. Then, 7.7 μL of Solution 1 and 2.3 μL of Solution 2 were mixed in an 

Eppendorf tube and immediately transferred onto the IDME. The IDME was left for 3 hours to allow for 

PANI polymerization. The reaction was quenched by rinsing with water until no PANI flaked off the 

surface. 

PANI-on-chitosan OECT.

Chitosan substrates (20 μm thick) were prepared by dropcasting 1.6 mL of chitosan solution (1.5wt% 

chitosan in 2wt% acetic acid aqueous solution) on a microscope slide (76 mm x 25 mm).[55] Electrodes 

were deposited using a PVD75 vacuum thermal evaporator system with a shadow mask. The metallization 

was 5 nm Ti and 100 nm Au, with the Ti used to ensure good metal adhesion to the chitosan. The transistor 

channel had width 20 μm and length 2 mm. PANI was chemically polymerised in the conductive channel 

using the method previously described. This resulted in strong adhesion of PANI on the substrate due to 


Page 17 of 36

the strong chelation between the negatively charged phytic acid and the positively charged PANI and 

chitosan.

Atomic force microscopy.

IDME topography before and after PANI deposition was acquired using a JPK Instruments atomic force 

microscope with NanoWizard II software. The microscope was operated in contact mode in air using 

silicon cantilevers (AppNano ACT-50; Length 125 μm, width 30 μm, tip radius <10 nm) with 36 Nm-1 

nominal spring constant and 200-400 kHz resonant frequency. Scanning rate was 1 Hz with pixel 

resolution 1024 x 1024.

In-situ UV-Vis spectroelectrochemistry.

PANI was polymerized on ITO slides (60 mm x 8 mm) to serve as the working electrode and put into a 3 

mL cuvette containing 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid. A platinum wire and 

Ag/AgCl electrode in 0.1 M AgNO3 (CHI Instruments) were immersed in the ionic liquid as counter and 

reference electrodes, with potential applied and current measured using an Ivium Vertex 100 mA 

potentiostat. The absorption spectra were obtained with a PerkinElmer Lambda 900 UV-Vis spectrometer 

over the 300 nm to 900 nm wavelength with 5 nm steps. 

Electrical characterization of the OECT.

Transistor characteristics were measured using a pair of Keithley 2401 Source Measure Units (SMUs) and 

a Keithley 6517A electrometer. The first SMU supplies the drain-source voltage VDS and measures 

source current IS, and the second SMU supplies the gate voltage VG and measures gate leakage current 

IG (via Ag/AgCl in 0.1 M AgNO3 electrode; CHI Instruments). The electrometer measures the drain 

current ID flowing to virtual ground. Voltage sweeps were performed with a step of 1 mV. The electrical 

characteristics of the device on IDME and chitosan substrate were obtained using 1-butyl-3-


Page 18 of 36

methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid and 0.1 M NaCl solution respectively. Conductivity of 

the channel (σ) was calculated using the following formula:

σ=  w/(R∙L∙t)

where R is the resistance, L and w are the length and width of the channel respectively, and t is the 

thickness of the PANI film. 

Electrical characterization of the OECT-based complementary circuit.

The inverter supply voltage VDD, DC input voltage Vin and shift voltage Vshift were applied using three 

Keithley 2401 source-measure units. The output voltage Vout was acquired using a Keithley 2000 

Multimeter. For AC measurements, a bias of VDD was applied using a Keithley 2401 source measure 

unit. The AC input voltage Vin was applied using a signal generator DS345 (Stanford Research System) 

and measured via the USB-6216 Acquisition Device. The output signal Vout was measured and recorded 

using a preamplifier Femto DLPVA and a National Instruments USB-6216 Data Acquisition Device. An 

Ag/AgCl in 0.1 M AgNO3 electrode immersed in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate was 

used for the logic circuit with PANI-on-IDME transistors and an Ag/AgCl in 0.1 M AgNO3 electrode 

immersed in 0.1 M NaCl solution was used for the chitosan-based logic circuit.

Concurrent measurements of optical and electrochemical properties.

CV and UV-visible absorption spectroscopy (UV-Vis) are generally used to investigate the 

electrochemical and optical properties of PANI films. These are commonly performed on separate 

films/substrates under different experimental conditions using different instruments, making comparative 

analysis more challenging. To address this, we built an apparatus (shown in Fig. 3A) that enables 

transistor, CV and UV-Vis measurements to be obtained from our PANI-on-IDME in exactly the form 

they are used in our OECT under identical conditions and nearly simultaneously. The apparatus consists 

of a box with a transparent upper window containing a 15 mm2 Si photodiode (Centronic OSD15-5T) 


Page 19 of 36

mounted directly underneath the 3.5 mm diameter active region of the glass IDME chip and used to 

measure transmitted light, which is proportional to induced photocurrent. The IDME was illuminated 

obliquely from above by an LED with wavelength 428 nm or 850 nm to accommodate the Ag/AgCl 

microelectrode contacting the ionic liquid electrolyte. The transistor and CV measurements were obtained 

with a hybrid set-up consisting of an Ivium Vertex potentiostat, a Keithley 6517A electrometer and a 

Keithley 2401 source-measure unit. For conventional CV measurements, the source and drain would be 

both connected to the working electrode, with the reference (Ag/AgCl) and counter (Pt) electrodes 

immersed in the ionic liquid sitting on the PANI transistor channel. Our set-up in Fig. 3A differs in two 

ways from this. First, only the drain electrode remains connected to the working electrode input for the 

potentiostat; the source electrode is instead connected to the Keithley 2401 to enable a source-drain bias 

VSD to be applied. Second, a floating Keithley 6517A is put into the counter electrode line. This enabled 

us to measure the corresponding gate leakage current IG flowing via the counter electrode when a gate 

voltage VG is applied on the reference electrode. Note that this VG is identical to the voltage (V) applied 

in cyclic voltammetry, and the gate leakage current IG is equivalent to the current measured at the working 

electrode IWE in a typical three electrode set-up. The cyclic voltammetry presented in Fig. 3A was obtained 

by plotting IWE versus VG. The potentiostat working electrode measures drain current ID and the Keithley 

2401 enables us to also measure source current IS whilst sourcing VSD, giving us full details for transistor 

characterization. For a pure CV trace, we would run VSD = 0 V, with IG = IS + ID giving us the current I

conventionally measured in this technique. We have confirmed this combination of instruments does not 

adversely affect outcomes of either characterization, i.e., it gives transistor characteristics matching those 

we obtained in our normal transistor characterization circuit and likewise for CV compared to the Ivium 

used alone.

Density functional theory calculations.


Page 20 of 36

First-principles calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) [56] were done with the VASP code

[57], using the generalized gradient approximation to the exchange-correlation energy developed by Perdew 

et al. [58]. Possible dispersion interactions in the system were captured with the D3 correction scheme 

developed by Grimme et al. [59]. The projector-augmented-wave method was used to represent the ionic 

cores and the following electronic states were considered as valence: Au 5d-6s, C 2s-2p, O 2s-2p, and H 

1s. Wave functions were represented in a plane-wave basis truncated at 750 eV and a force tolerance of 

0.01 eV Å-1 was imposed in the geometry optimizations. The energies of the optimized systems converged 

to within 2 meV per atom using the parameters above and a k-point grid of 1 x 2 x 2 for integration within 

the Brillouin zone. Large simulation boxes typically containing 180 atoms were employed to simulate the 

Au substrate/PANI systems (128 atoms for the gold substrate and 52 for the PANI). Periodic boundary 

conditions were applied along the three Cartesian directions and a vacuum region of ~ 30 Å was considered 

in the simulation cell to avoid spurious interactions with the neighboring image systems (fig. S7). We 

checked that our simulation DFT results were appropriately converged with respect to the adopted PANI 

length of four carbon aromatic rings by carrying out additional calculations for longer polymers containing 

six monomer units.

References

[1]
J. A. Rogers, JAMA 2015, 313, 561.

[2]
D.-H. Kim, R. Ghaffari, N. Lu, J. A. Rogers, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2012, 14, 113.

[3]
T. Someya, Z. Bao, G. G. Malliaras, Nature 2016, 540, 379.

[4]
D. T. Simon, E. O. Gabrielsson, K. Tybrandt, M. Berggren, Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 13009.

[5]
X. Strakosas, M. Bongo, R. M. Owens, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2015, 132, 1.


Page 21 of 36

[6]
J. Rivnay, S. Inal, A. Salleo, R. M. Owens, M. Berggren, G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018, 

3, 17086.

[7]
D.-H. Kim, S. Richardson-Burns, L. Povlich, M. R. Abidian, S. Spanninga, J. L. Hendricks, D. C. 

Martin, in Indwelling Neural Implant. Strateg. Contend. with Vivo Environ. Boca (Ed.:  editor. 

Reichert WM), Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, 2008.

[8]
S. H. Kim, K. Hong, W. Xie, K. H. Lee, S. Zhang, T. P. Lodge, C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater. 2013, 

25, 1822.

[9]
K. J. Baeg, D. Khim, D. Y. Kim, S. W. Jung, J. B. Koo, I. K. You, H. Yan, A. Facchetti, Y. Y. 

Noh, J. Polym. Sci. Part B Polym. Phys. 2011, 49, 62.

[10]
K. J. Baeg, M. Caironi, Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 4210.

[11]
E. J. Meijer, D. M. De Leeuw, S. Setayesh, E. Van Veenendaal, B. H. Huisman, P. W. M. Blom, 

J. C. Hummelen, U. Scherf, T. M. Klapwijk, Nat. Mater. 2003, 2, 678.

[12]
H. Sun, M. Vagin, S. Wang, X. Crispin, R. Forchheimer, M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, Adv. Mater.

2018, 30, 1704916.

[13]
A. Giovannitti, C. B. Nielsen, D. T. Sbircea, S. Inal, M. Donahue, M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, A. 

Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 1.

[14]
H. Sun, J. Gerasimov, M. Berggren, S. Fabiano, J. Mater. Chem. C 2018, 6, 11778.

[15]
M. Bourgeaux, W. G. Skene, Macromolecules 2007, 40, 1792.


Page 22 of 36

[16]
J. T. Blaskovits, M. Leclerc, Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2019, 40, 1800512.

[17]
D. Khodagholy, J. Rivnay, M. Sessolo, M. Gurfinkel, P. Leleux, L. H. Jimison, E. Stavrinidou, T. 

Herve, S. Sanaur, R. M. Owens, G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2133.

[18]
S. Z. Bisri, S. Shimizu, M. Nakano, Y. Iwasa, Adv. Mater. 2017, 29, 1607054.

[19]
E. Stavrinidou, R. Gabrielsson, E. Gomez, X. Crispin, O. Nilsson, D. T. Simon, M. Berggren, Sci. 

Adv. 2015, 1, e1501136.

[20]
A. Sliow, Z. Ma, G. Gargiulo, D. Mahns, D. Mawad, P. Breen, M. Stoodley, J. Houang, R. 

Kuchel, G. C. Tettamanzi, R. D. Tilley, S. J. Frost, J. Morley, L. Longo, A. Lauto, Adv. Sci. 2019, 

6, 1801212.

[21]
H. Ruprai, S. Romanazzo, J. Ireland, K. Kilian, D. Mawad, L. George, R. Wuhrer, J. Houang, D. 

Ta, S. Myers, A. Lauto, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 32613.

[22]
D. Mawad, C. Warren, M. Barton, D. Mahns, J. Morley, B. T. T. Pham, N. T. H. Pham, S. Kueh, 

A. Lauto, Carbohydr. Polym. 2015, 121, 56.

[23]
M. J. Barton, J. W. Morley, M. A. Stoodley, S. Shaikh, D. A. Mahns, A. Lauto, J. Biophotonics

2015, 8, 196.

[24]
M. Barton, J. W. Morley, M. A. Stoodley, K. S. Ng, S. C. Piller, H. Duong, D. Mawad, D. A. 

Mahns, A. Lauto, J. Biophotonics 2013, 6, 938.

[25]
E. W. Paul, A. J. Ricco, M. S. Wrighton, J. Phys. Chem. 1985, 89, 1441.


Page 23 of 36

[26]
J. C. Chiang, A. G. MacDiarmid, Synth. Met. 1986, 13, 193.

[27]
S. Chao, M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1987, 109, 6627.

[28]
D. Mawad, C. Mansfield, A. Lauto, F. Perbellini, G. W. Nelson, J. Tonkin, S. O. Bello, D. J. 

Carrad, A. P. Micolich, M. M. Mahat, J. Furman, D. Payne, A. R. Lyon, J. J. Gooding, S. E. 

Harding, C. M. Terracciano, M. M. Stevens, Sci. Adv. 2016, 2, e1601007.

[29]
D. Ofer, L. Y. Park, R. R. Schrock, M. S. Wrighton, Chem. Mater. 1991, 3, 573.

[30]
C. H. McCoy, M. S. Wrighton, Chem. Mater. 1993, 5, 914.

[31]
S. Y. Lee, G. R. Choi, H. Lim, K. M. Lee, S. K. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 95, 23.

[32]
B. Winther-Jensen, B. Kolodziejczyk, O. Winther-Jensen, APL Mater. 2015, 3, DOI 

10.1063/1.4900889.

[33]
G. Tarabella, P. D’Angelo, A. Cifarelli, A. Dimonte, A. Romeo, T. Berzina, V. Erokhin, S. 

Iannotta, Chem. Sci. 2015, 6, 2859.

[34]
A. V. Emelyanov, D. A. Lapkin, V. A. Demin, V. V. Erokhin, S. Battistoni, G. Baldi, A. 

Dimonte, A. N. Korovin, S. Iannotta, P. K. Kashkarov, M. V. Kovalchuk, AIP Adv. 2016, 6.

[35]
Y. Wang, K. Levon, Macromol. Symp. 2012, 317–318, 240.

[36]
J. E. Yoo, Y.-L. Loo, T. J. Dennes, J. Tarver, J. Schwartz, Chem. Mater. 2008, 21, 280.

[37]
A. Varela-Álvarez, J. A. Sordo, G. E. Scuseria, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 11318.


Page 24 of 36

[38]
X. P. Chen, J. K. Jiang, Q. H. Liang, N. Yang, H. Y. Ye, M. Cai, L. Shen, D. G. Yang, T. L. Ren, 

Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 1.

[39]
H. Schmidbaur, H. G. Raubenheimer, L. Dobrzańska, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 345.

[40]
K. M. Molapo, P. M. Ndangili, R. F. Ajayi, G. Mbambisa, S. M. Mailu, N. Njomo, M. Masikini, 

P. Baker, E. I. Iwuoha, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 2012, 7, 11859.

[41]
C. Cui, N. Faraji, A. Lauto, L. Travaglini, J. Tonkin, D. Mahns, E. Humphrey, C. Terracciano, J. 

J. Gooding, J. Seidel, D. Mawad, Biomater. Sci. 2018, 6, 493.

[42]
A. Lauto, M. Stoodley, M. Barton, J. W. Morley, D. A. Mahns, L. Longo, D. Mawad, J. Vis. Exp.

2012, 1.

[43]
S. J. Frost, D. Mawad, M. J. Higgins, H. Ruprai, R. Kuchel, R. D. Tilley, S. Myers, J. M. Hook, 

A. Lauto, NPG Asia Mater. 2016, 8, e280.

[44]
G. D. Spyropoulos, J. N. Gelinas, D. Khodagholy, Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaau7378.

[45]
J. Fan, S. S. Rezaie, M. Facchini-Rakovich, D. Gudi, C. Montemagno, M. Gupta, Org. Electron. 

physics, Mater. Appl. 2019, 66, 148.

[46]
S. Fabiano, N. Sani, J. Kawahara, L. Kergoat, J. Nissa, I. Engquist, X. Crispin, M. Berggren, 

2017, 1.

[47]
W. Lee, D. Kim, N. Matsuhisa, M. Nagase, M. Sekino, G. G. Malliaras, T. Yokota, T. Someya, 

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2017, 114, 10554.


Page 25 of 36

[48]
A. Guiseppi-Elie, S. R. Pradhan, A. M. Wilson, D. L. Allara, P. Zhang, R. W. Collins, Y. T. Kim, 

Chem. Mater. 1993, 5, 1474.

[49]
D. Ofer, R. M. Crooks, M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1990, 112, 7869.

[50]
H. S. White, G. P. Kittlesen, M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1984, 106, 5375.

[51]
J. W. Thackeray, H. S. White, M. S. Wrighton, J. Phys. Chem. 1985, 89, 5133.

[52]
C. Cea, G. D. Spyropoulos, P. Jastrzebska-Perfect, J. J. Ferrero, J. N. Gelinas, D. Khodagholy, 

Nat. Mater. 2020, 19.

[53]
Y. Van De Burgt, A. Melianas, S. T. Keene, G. Malliaras, A. Salleo, Nat. Electron. 2018, 1, 386.

[54]
A. P. Hoang, H. Ruprai, K. Fidanovski, M. Eslami, A. Lauto, J. Daniels, D. Mawad, Appl. Mater. 

Today 2019, 15, 315.

[55]
C. Cui, N. Faraji, A. Lauto, L. Travaglini, J. Tonkin, D. Mahns, E. Humphrey, C. Terracciano, J. 

J. Gooding, J. Seidel, D. Mawad, Biomater. Sci. 2018, 6, 493.

[56]
C. Cazorla, J. Boronat, Rev. Mod. Phys. 2017, 89, 1.

[57]
G. Kresse, J. Furthmüller, Y. J. Li, Y. J. Chen, J. C. Walmsley, R. H. Mathinsen, S. Dumoulin, H. 

J. Roven, S. Yip, T. Supervisor, S. Chen, Phys. Rev. B 2000, 62, 11169.

[58]
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 3865.

[59]
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich, H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys. 2010, 132, 154104.


Page 26 of 36

Acknowledgements

The work was performed in part using the NSW node of the Australian National Fabrication Facility at 

UNSW Sydney. E.Z. thanks the Swedish Research Council (VR International Postdoc Grant #2017-

06381) and the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (Kungl. Vetenskapsakademiens stiftelser, #LN2017-

0035) for funding.

Funding: This work was funded by the Australian Research Council under DP170104024 and 

DP190102560.

Author contributions: D.M. and A.M. conceived the research with L.T. help. L.T. performed all the 

experiments. C.C. performed the DFT calculations. A.L. supervised the AFM measurements. L.T., A.M. 

and D.M. performed the data analysis and data interpretation. All authors contributed to the manuscript 

writing. 

Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 

Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in 

the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Data can be obtained upon request from the authors.


Page 27 of 36

Supplementary Materials for

Flexible complementary logic circuit built from two identical organic electrochemical transistors

Lorenzo Travaglini, Adam P. Micolich, Claudio Cazorla Silva, Erica Zeglio, Antonio Lauto, Damia Mawad


Page 28 of 36

Fig. S1. AFM surface topography of PANI-on-IDME. AFM images of bare electrodes (A), and 
electrodes with an electroactive PANI film on the surface, 50 x 50 μm (B) and 2 x 2 μm (C). D-E-F) 3D 
rendered AFM topography of the same areas. AFM image of the edge of PANI film (G) and its relative 
thickness profile (H).


Page 29 of 36

Fig. S2. Cyclic voltammogram (CV) of PANI on IDME. Three cycles were recorded in ionic liquid at 
a scan rate of 50 mV.s-1. The counter electrode was a Pt plate and the reference was Ag/Ag+ electrode. 
The black arrow and grey box highlight hysteresis as we sweep the potential back from positive to 
negative, in correlation with the hysteresis observed in the transfer curves. The yellow regions indicate 
the edges of the finite electrochemical window of PANI that does not exceed 1 V. 


Page 30 of 36

Fig. S3. Electrical characteristics of PANI-on-IDME OECT. A) Drain current ID vs gate voltage VG at 
drain-source voltage VDS = −0.1 V. Black lines represent the leakage current. B) ID vs VDS for VG from 
−0.8 V to −0.3 V (blue) and −0.2 V to +0.5 V (red). Data on the n-slope and p-slope sides of the 
conductivity peak are presented in red/blue for both A) and B). C) Voltage-transfer characteristic (VTC) 
for amplifier circuit made using a pair of PANI-on-IDME OECTs connected by external wiring and 
operating with ionic liquid electrolyte. D) Corresponding voltage gain of the amplifier. 


Page 31 of 36

Fig S4. Applying a Vshift to enable complementary circuit performance. A and B) Transfer curves of 
the two PANI-based OECTs used to build the inverter circuit. Regions highlighted in yellow are the 
“active regions” we use in the circuit. The orange and green part of the curves are the “inactive regions”. 
C) ID of each single OECT device plotted versus the input voltage Vin applied in the complementary circuit. 
The threshold voltages, VTh,n =  V and VTh,p =  V, were found to be centred about 0.20 V. The 
scheme in (C) represents the circuit featuring two identical PANI OECTs but with a Vshift applied to the n-
like device. We label the device close to ground as the n-like device and the one close to VDD as the p-like 
device. For the devices to operate in a complementary circuit, one device has to switch from ‘on’ to ‘off’ 
(p-like) and one device from ‘off’ to ‘on’ (n-like). However, the devices have the same electronic state 
initially because they are both made from PANI. To obtain one device operating as n-like and the other as 
p-like (regions highlighted in yellow in A and B), we apply a Vshift = −0.4 V on the n-like device in the 
complementary circuit. At Vin = 0 V, the n-like device is at V = −0.4 V and it is in the ‘off’ state, whereas
the p-like device is at V =  V and it is in the ‘on’ state. 


Page 32 of 36

Fig S5. In-house built apparatus for simultaneous electronic and optical characterisation of our 
OECT. Ivium potentiostat (2) and Keithley 6517A electrometer (4) were used for measuring cyclic 
voltammetry. SMU Keithley 2401 (3) was used for applying VDS and measuring ID. SMU Keithley 2401 
(1) was used to measure the photodiode current. WE: working electrode; RE: reference electrode; CE: 
counter electrode. 


Page 33 of 36

Fig. S6. Changes in the photodiode current recorded as function of potential and related to the 
optical transmittance of the PANI film. The measurement were performed under LED illumination 
using as a source LED with λ = 850 nm. Positive and negative sweeps are presented by solid and dashed 
lines respectively. The blue lines define the three distinct regions of potential: Region I (−0.8 to −0.1 V), 
Region II (−0.1 to +0.7 V), and Region III (+0.7 to +1.0 V).


Page 34 of 36

Fig. S7. Details of the density functional theory simulations performed for Au substrate/PANI 
systems. Different views of the polymers and simulation cell considered in the simulations are provided. 
The dominant interactions between the PANI and gold surface are hydrogen bonds of the Au···H-X type, 
as it is shown by the equilibrium geometry that renders lowest energy. 


Page 35 of 36

Fig. S8. First-principles calculations of the electronic band structure of PANI. The leucoemeraldine 
base is found to be insulator due to a wide band gap of 2.15 eV and position of the energy Fermi level just 
above the valence band edge. The emeraldine base is likely to be conductor under small electric bias due 
to the appearance of unoccupied electronic states at only ~0.1 eV above the valence band edge. The 
pernigraniline base is likely to be insulator under large enough electric bias due to the presence of a band 
gap of 1.55 eV just below the conduction band edge. 


Page 36 of 36

Fig. S9. A flexible PANI-on-chitosan OECTs complementary circuit. A) Drain current ID vs gate 
voltage VG at drain-source voltage VDS = −0.1 V. Black lines represent the leakage current. B) Voltage-
transfer characteristic for amplifier circuit made on flexible chitosan film operating with aqueous NaCl 
electrolyte. C) Corresponding voltage gain of the inverter.


