1

Probing Electrified Liquid-Solid Interfaces with 

Scanning Electron Microscopy

Hongxuan Guo,1,2,3† Alexander Yulaev,2, 3† Evgheni Strelcov,2, 3 Alexander Tselev,4 Christopher 

Arble2, Andras E. Vladar,2 John S. Villarrubia,2 and Andrei Kolmakov2*

1SEU-FEI Nano-Pico Center, Key Laboratory of MEMS of Ministry of Education, Southeast 

University, Nanjing 210096, P. R. China

2Physical Measurement Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 

Gaithersburg, MD 20899, USA

3Maryland Nanocenter, University of Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA

4Department of Physics and CICECO – Aveiro Institute of Materials, University of Aveiro, 

3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal

ABSTRACT

Electrical double layers play a key role in a variety of electrochemical systems. The mean free path 

of secondary electrons in aqueous solutions is on the order of a nanometer, making them suitable 

for probing of ultrathin electrical double layers at solid-liquid electrolyte interfaces. Employing 


2

graphene as an electron-transparent electrode in a two-electrode electrochemical system, we show

that the secondary electron yield of the graphene-liquid interface depends on the ionic strength and 

concentration of electrolyte and applied bias at the remote counter electrode. These observations 

have been related to polarization-induced changes in the potential distribution within the electrical 

double layer and demonstrate the feasibility of using scanning electron microscopy to examine and 

map electrified liquid-solid interfaces.

KEYWORDS: electrical double layer, scanning electron microscopy, graphene electrode, 

electrochemistry, polarization, liquid cell, electrolyte, electrified interfaces, secondary electron 

emission

INTRODUCTION

The processes related to the formation and dynamics of the electrical double layers (EDLs) at 

the solid-liquid electrolyte interfaces are crucial to the operation of electrochemical devices,1

biomedical applications,2 semiconductor industry processes,3 electro-kinetic phenomena,4 (nano-) 

microfluidics,5 corrosion, etc. Significant progress has been made in the last two decades both in 

theoretical understanding and experimental characterization of the structure and properties of the 

EDLs (see recent review 6 and references therein). A shortage, however, still exists in the 

experimental analytical tools capable of probing the concentration, composition, and potential 

profiles within nanometers thin EDLs with sufficient depth and spatial resolution. Of the few 

existing techniques, scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has demonstrated the ability to interrogate 

the molecular-level structure of EDL at the interface between the ionic liquid and Au, graphite, or

graphene (Gr).7-9 This method, however, lacks chemical specificity, and molecular dynamics (MD) 

simulations are usually invoked to facilitate the chemical structure determination. The combination 


3

of force curve measurements in atomic force microscopy with infrared10, 11 or tip-enhanced Raman 

spectroscopy12, 13 can be used to resolve this challenge. 

The application of traditional surface-sensitive methods such as X-ray photoelectron 

spectroscopy, atomic emission spectroscopy, near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure

spectroscopy etc., that use electrons to probe electroactive liquid interfaces started in the early 

80s14 with the development of differentially pumped electron energy analyzers and has progressed 

recently through application of synchrotron radiation15, 16 and novel sample delivery systems.17-19

These methods take advantage of the nanometer-scale inelastic mean free path of low-energy 

photoelectrons in liquids,20 which is on the same length scale as the thickness of the Stern layer in 

moderately concentrated electrolytes.21 With the help of these techniques, the variations in 

composition and electrical potential in EDL of liquid electrolytes has been demonstrated.21-23

Imaging of such interfaces with low-energy electrons became possible after the introduction of 2D 

materials as electron-transparent membranes
separating the liquid from
the vacuum 

environment.24-26 In this communication, we are extending the latter approach and demonstrate 

that standard scanning electron microscopy (SEM) can likewise be used to probe and spatially map 

changes in the EDL in aqueous electrolytes. The principle of this method is depicted in Figure 1a, 

b. A low keV electron beam penetrates through the ultrathin bilayer graphene membrane electrode

and creates a cascade of electronic excitations and ionization events in the liquid electrolyte close 

to the electrified interface. Low-energy secondary electrons (SEs) with kinetic energies in the 

range 0 eV to 50 eV have the escape depths in nanometers in the low single digits20, so those that

escape into the vacuum must originate from the membrane itself or neighboring liquid layers 

within the EDL (Fig. 1a). Taking advantage of the short escape depth of SEs and the sensitivity 

of the electron emission yield of the graphene-electrolyte stack to the local potential in the 


4

electrolyte (Fig. 1b), we demonstrate the ability of SEM to probe in situ the dynamics of the EDL 

during polarization with high spatial, depth, and temporal resolutions. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Graphene-capped microchannel arrays (MCA) filled with liquid electrolytes have been used in 

this study.27 The MCA design considerations for electron spectro-microscopy on liquid 

electrolytes are reported in 28 and Supplemental Information (SI). To conduct comparative studies 

of polar and non-polar liquids and electrolytes, we used deionized water (conductivity ca. 109

Ω·m), aqueous 102 mol/m3 CuSO4 solution (buffered with 10 mol/m3 H2SO4), and toluene.

Figure 1. A schematic of probing the electrolyte-solid electrified interface with a focused 

electron beam through a bilayer graphene (Gr) electrode. a) Primary electrons create a cascade of 

secondary electrons (SE) inside the sample. SEs can escape from the graphene and a thin layer at 

the graphene-electrolyte interface; b) Biasing the bottom electrode creates an electric double layer 

(EDL) at the graphene-electrolyte interface which impedes (or promotes) electron emission from 

the interface. Due to incomplete screening by the graphene, the electrostatic field partially 

penetrates the vacuum and reduces (or enhances) SE collection efficiency by the electron detector. 


5

c) Cross-sectional SEM image of MCA showing channels inner structure. d) SEM image and 

wiring diagram of the individual graphene-capped cell filled with electrolyte. e) Experimental 

setup for SEM imaging during electrochemical cycling. A through-the-lens secondary electron 

detector (TTL SED) with energy filter is used to discriminate electrons with high kinetic energies

and collect only low-energy SE.

A two-electrode MCA electrochemical cell filled with electrolyte (Fig. 1 c, d) was transferred to

the SEM chamber (base pressure ca. 10-4 Pa). The cell bias range used for polarization studies was 

restricted to ca. 1 V to avoid water splitting or Cu plating reactions, which manifest themselves as 

gas bubbles or Cu deposit formation under the graphene. Pt was also selected as a counter electrode 

to widen the non-Faradaic window. To minimize the effect of the bias on SE trajectories to the 

detector, the MCA’s front Gr reference electrode was grounded, and a polarization bias was

applied to the bottom Pt electrode instead (Fig. 1d, e). The magnification, scanning rate, and 

electron beam current were selected such that several identical channels could be observable in the 

same field-of-view to improve the data statistics and to avoid radiation damage to the electrolyte. 

The microscope contrast and brightness settings were kept fixed throughout SEM imaging to 

ensure reliable comparative analysis. A through-the-lens secondary electron detector with

acceptance half angle of ca. 19 and an energy filter were employed to collect electrons with 

energies predominantly between 0 eV and 50 eV (Fig. 1e). Two types of SEM imaging have been 

used for polarization studies: (i) acquisition of high-resolution individual frames before and after 

step-like application of the bias across the electrolyte, and (ii) SEM video recording.  In both cases, 

grayscale values of the objects in SEM images, which are proportional to the local secondary 

electron yield, were analyzed as a function of the bias potential at the bottom electrode and/or time.


6

To verify the experimental finding, the SE yields were simulated using the JMONSEL (Java 

Monte Carlo Simulation of Secondary Electrons) simulator (see Methods and SI).29 We used finite-

elements (FE) modeling to perform calculations of distributions of electrical potential and ionic 

concentration in the microchannels and in the immediate vicinity of the graphene membrane for 

different electrolyte strengths (see details in SI). In the numerical model, the graphene membrane 

was modeled as two uncoupled and undoped graphene layers. To calculate the electric screening 

by the membrane, we used the model developed by Kuroda et al.30

Figure 2a depicts a typical SEM field-of-view used for these measurements. It contains water-

filled MCA channel and one empty reference channel. The bright background with the highest SE 

yield and corresponding largest signal intensity value SAu is due to the high SE yield of the 

graphene-covered gold top electrode. The lowest signal SG originates from graphene which covers

an empty (or vapor filled) channel. The channels filled with water can be identified by their 

intermediate grayscale values due to appreciable (ca. 30 %, see discussion below) contribution to 

the SE yield by the liquid. To make SEM images quantification independent of the 

instrument/detector specific contrast and brightness settings, we define the effective contrast value

C for the graphene covered electrolyte as: 

𝐶(𝑉) =

𝑆𝑆(𝑉)−𝑆𝐺
𝑆𝐴𝑢−𝑆𝐺 .
(1)

Under this definition, the channels’ contrast value depends exclusively on the polarization-

induced electron yield variations of the electrolyte (and graphene membrane) and is free of the 

influence of possibly varying image contrast/brightness, beam-induced carbonaceous 

contamination, etc. Figure 2b shows a sequence of SEM images of an individual graphene-covered 

channel filled with a 102 mol/m3 CuSO4 electrolyte during the application of -0.6 V, 0 V, and +0.6

V bias to the Pt back electrode.  The images reveal noticeable and reproducible alternations of the


7

SE signal from the liquid-filled cells upon cell polarization. To quantify the effect of the applied 

bias on the SEM contrast variation, we plot the difference between the contrast values with and 

without polarization ΔC(V) = C(V) – C(0) as a function of bias comparatively for aqueous 102

mol/m3 CuSO4 solution, pure water and toluene (Fig. 2c). The contrast difference, ΔC, decreases 

quasi-linearly with the electrical bias within the -0.8 V to +0.7 V potential window and becomes

non-linear at higher biases presumably due to the onset of Faradaic processes. The temporal SE 

signal evolution upon the bias onset shows a fast rise followed by saturation (Fig. 2d), which

corroborates the redox-free electrolyte polarization process within the selected bias window. 

Compared to apparent variations of ΔC for polar liquids, the contrast changes for nonpolar ones 

(toluene) are negligible (Fig. 2c). Moreover, it was found that toluene-filled cells exhibit a bias-

independent SE signal within the widest (-2 V to 2 V) electrochemical window used.

Figure 2. Variations of the SE signal acquired from the MCA sample. a) SEM image of an MCA 

liquid-filled sample with 3 different regions for quantitative analysis of the image contrast: SS - a 

liquid sample covered with a Gr membrane, SG - an empty cell capped with a Gr membrane, and 


8

SAu – an area of the Au top electrode covered with Gr. b) SEM images of a cell filled with 102

mol/m3 CuSO4 and capped with a double layer (2L) Gr under -0.6 V, 0 V, and +0.6 V bias applied 

to Pt counter electrode. All SEM parameters such as contrast/brightness/energy beam current etc. 

were kept fixed throughout image acquisitions. Graphene wrinkles arrear as dark fibrils. Insets are 

results of the corresponding image subtractions. c) Dependence of the differential SE contrast, ΔC, 

on an electrical potential on the back electrode for 102 mol/m3 CuSO4(two different samples shown 

to demonstrate reproducibility), distilled water, and toluene. Error bars are standard deviations

from three measurements on independent channels. d) Temporal evolution of the electrolyte-filled 

channel contrast upon ON/OFF bias onset.

We attribute the observed dependence of the SE signal of the electrical cell bias to the 

modulation of the electric potential within the EDL at the graphene-liquid interface, which, in turn,

affected the local secondary electron yield. More specifically, we base our conclusions on the 

following:

An EDL is formed at the graphene-electrolyte interface and the potential profile within the EDL 

depends on the type and concentration of the electrolyte, applied bias, and geometry of the liquid 

cell and electrodes (see description below). 

Despite the relatively large (ca. 200 nm) penetration depth of the primary 2 keV electrons, the 

SE signal SS originates from a very narrow, few nanometer thick top layer which includes the 

bilayer graphene and graphene-electrolyte interface and thus can be defined as SS=SG+SEL where 

SEL is the secondary electron signal from the electrolyte slab. One can exclude the “chemical” 

component in SEL due to adsorbed ions in our case, since their concentration is about two orders 

of magnitude lower than that of the solvent, even at a bias of -1 V (see discussion below). 

Therefore, SEL is determined by the SE yield of the solvent to a large extend.


9

The electrostatic field induced by electrolyte polarization can be non-zero inside the graphene 

and cannot be completely screened by bilayer graphene.30, 31 Based on our prior electron 

attenuation tests,26 the realistic bilayer graphene membrane is contaminated and contains

additional carbonaceous layer(s), in between and on top of individual graphene sheets and this has 

been taken into account in the simulations of the SE yield. 

The contrast change due to redox reaction like Cu plating is ruled out for the selected bias 

window since the SE modulations occur much faster (Fig. 2d) than diffusion-controlled Cu 

deposition and homogeneously over the entire membrane area without the characteristic formation 

of Cu nucleation centers (see also SI). 

To substantiate the above conclusions, we start with FE modeling of the potential distribution 

inside the electrochemical cell and in the vicinity of the electrified graphene-electrolyte interface 

as a function of liquid medium type, its concentration, and bottom electrode potential. Figure 3a 

shows a side-by-side comparison of the calculated distributions of electrical potential for toluene

(left half of the channel) and 10-3 mol/m3 CuSO4 (right half of the otherwise symmetrical channel)

under 1 V electrical bias applied to the bottom electrode relative to the grounded top electrode. 

With the non-conducting toluene, which does not form an EDL, the potential distribution along 

the channel is divided into three distinct parts: with the potential of the bottom electrode along the 

entire length of the inner channel coated with the metal deposit, the intermediate potential in the 

middle (defined by the floating potential of the Si matrix), and near zero (ground) potential at the 

very top of the channel (see magnified inset in Fig. 3a) down to the depth of the inner wall metal 

deposit film of 6 μm. Simulations indicate, therefore, that the graphene and the very top of the 

liquid at the interface with graphene are effectively at the potential of the top Au electrode, which

is zero, independently of the potential on the bottom electrode. This explains the observed 


10

independence of the SE contrast with the voltage bias at the bottom electrode for toluene shown 

in Figure 2c. 

In the case of diluted electrolytes and water with impurities (as our case is), the screening by 

EDLs is incomplete, as seen in the potential map in Figure 3a (right half of the cell) for a

concentration of 10-3 mol/m3, when the Debye length in CuSO4 is about 150 nm. Thus, the “neck” 

part of the channel is nearly equipotential up to the distance of ca. 3 μm below the graphene 

membrane (see zoomed inset in Fig. 3a) with a potential lower than the potential of the electrolyte 

bulk. In this range of concentrations, the electrolyte potential at the graphene membrane is closer 

to the potential of the top electrode. This situation corresponds also to the case of the DI water in 

the plots in Figure 2c, which is probably contaminated by ions and, therefore, behaves like a very 

diluted electrolyte.

With increasing ionic concentration, the Debye length of the electrolyte decreases, and the 

potentials of the silicon substrate and the deposited metal films become increasingly screened by 

the EDLs. At high salt concentrations, when the EDL thickness becomes on the order of 10 nm or 

less (for a concentration of 102 mol/m3, the Debye length in CuSO4 is about 0.5 nm), the electrode 

potentials are completely screened by the Debye layers in the electrolyte. In this case, the 

electrolyte potential is uniform across the whole electrolyte volume except the EDLs at its 

boundaries and is determined by the ratio of the EDL layer capacitances at the electrodes, which 

is equal to the ratio of the areas of the electrode deposited films in contact with the electrolyte.

Thus, with the ratio of the electrode areas equal to 

100 𝜇𝑚 × 30 𝜇𝑚

13 𝜇𝑚 ×6 𝜇𝑚 ≈ 40 (here the top and bottom 

channel circumferences and metal deposit depth are used), the electrolyte potential is 

approximately equal to the potential of the larger, bottom, electrode up to the EDL (Fig. 3c). As 

an example, in Figure 3b, the potential at the electrolyte-graphene interface is 0.6 V on the channel 


11

axis, while the electrolyte bulk is at about 0.95 V, which is nearly the potential of the bottom 

electrode.

Figure 3. FE numerical modeling of the potential distribution in the channels filled with different 

liquids. a) The comparison of the electrical potential maps inside diluted (10-3 mol/m3) CuSO4

electrolyte, and toluene under an electrical bias of 1 V at the bottom electrode. b) The same for a 

concentrated 102 mol/m3 CuSO4 electrolyte. c) The potential distributions at the graphene -102

mol/m3 CuSO4 electrolyte interface calculated along the cell central axis and as a function of 

polarization bias.  d) Cation concentration near the two-layer Gr electrode (red curve) compared 

to the molar concentration of water (blue dashed line) calculated for 102 mol/m3 CuSO4electrolyte 

with the bottom electrode biased at 1 V. z=0 nm corresponds to the Gr-electrolyte interface.

More precisely, the calculated electric potential distributions along the channel axis in the 

vicinity of the graphene membrane are shown in Figure 3c. Both the graphene membrane and the 

liquid layer at the interface have a non-zero potential, which depends on the bias of the bottom 


12

electrode. Moreover, due to the limited charge density in the double layer graphene, the 

electrostatic field of the EDL cannot be screened completely and creates a potential drop between 

the outer graphene layer and a grounded electron detector. Note that even for concentrated 

polarized electrolyte, the interfacial concentration of the solute ions is about two orders of 

magnitude lower than the water molecules concentration (Fig. 3d). Therefore, the observed 

polarization-dependent SE contrast modulations are due to the potential variations at the graphene 

and EDL and not chemical composition differences at the interface.    

We now discuss the influence of the potential at the liquid-solid interface and in the vacuum on

the SE emission signals recorded from the graphene-capped electrolytes. Details of the JMONSEL

simulation are provided in the SI. Here we note that bilayer graphene was modeled by an equal 

thickness graphite slab. Since the measured SEM contrast was defined according to Eq. 1, we 

normalized JMONSEL simulated SE yields similarly. To do so, we determined for each bias the 

simulated SE yields for electrons incident on the graphite-covered center of an empty 

electrochemical cell, on the center of a filled one, and on a gold region 2 µm outside of the edge 

of a cell (see modeling details in SI). The simulated yield for the 102 mol/m3 CuSO4 cell is shown 

in Figure 4a where it is compared to the measured values from Figure 2c, both plotted as fractional 

changes in the yield ΔC relative to the yield at null bias C(0). The simulation also analyses the 

effects of finite detector aperture (AP) and unscreened electrostatic field on the SEM contrast 

changes with the cell bias. Considering the detected SE yield as 𝛿 = 𝛿𝑡𝑝𝐷, where t is the 

transmitted yield (the fraction of electrons that emerge through the sample surface) and 𝑝𝐷 is the 

probability that an electron, once transmitted, will be detected. The presence and polarity of the 

electric field at the graphite and graphite-electrolyte interface affects t. In the case of the positive 

bias, the energy barrier is formed within the EDL (the potential energy difference between an 


13

electron inside the electrolyte and one outside, see also Fig. 3c) such that the SE that strike the 

barrier with insufficient energy are reflected back into the sample (Fig. 4c). With the negative bias, 

the potential change is negative over a mean free path, which increases the electron’s energy and 

hence the probability of transmission (Fig. 4d). Qualitatively, this mechanism should produce a 

negative slope in the yield vs. bias curve, as observed. Outside the sample, the electrostatic field

incompletely screened by graphene affects 𝑝𝐷. For example, in the extreme case of a positive 

surface potential, SE just outside the sample surface have negative potential energy. Those with a 

kinetic energy insufficient to overcome the potential difference between the surface and grounded 

detector will not be able to reach the detector. They return and are captured by the sample (Fig.

4c). This mechanism also produces a negative slope, but only for positive surface potential. If the 

potential is 0 V or less, all electrons escape. However, if the detector is above the sample (as ours 

is) and has a finite entrance aperture, electrons that would otherwise be emitted over 2 steradians 

are focused more tightly in the direction normal to the surface when the bottom electrode potential 

is negative (Fig. 4d). Thus, with a finite entrance aperture, the external field also is expected to 

produce an additional negative yield vs. bias slope, for negative biases, too. 

To evaluate the relative contribution of the aforementioned effects, the SE yield of the graphite-

water interface was simulated under different conditions as indicated in the legend of Figure 4a. 

The curves labeled with the “AP” suffix counted only electrons that hit the detector within a finite 

entrance aperture (19 half angle). The one without this suffix includes all SEs emitted within 2

steradians. The curve labeled with “𝐸⃗ = 0” was simulated with the graphite/vacuum interface 

above the cell artificially shifted to 0 V potential. (The potentials inside the cell were shifted by 

the same amount, thereby keeping all potential differences, i.e., the electric fields, the same inside 

the cell.) Thus, all 3 simulated curves have the same electric fields inside the sample, and all have 


14

negative slopes. The solid red simulated curve (marked 𝐴𝑃) includes the bias-induced electric field 

outside the sample and the finite detector aperture. It is the one that most closely agrees with the 

experimental data (EXP). The remaining two simulated curves neglect either the external field or 

the finite aperture contributions. They agree well with each other but differ more strongly from the 

measurement, especially at higher biases.

Figure 4. JMONSEL simulations of the SE yield. a) Simulated differential SE contrast, ΔC/C(0), 

as a function of the bottom electrode bias for 102 mol/m3 CuSO4 for the following conditions: 

unrestricted (2π radians); SE collection (blue curve); electrons collected with 19˚ angular aperture 

AP, (red curve);  electrons collected with 19˚ angular aperture under the conditions of complete 

electrostatic screening of the EDL potential (𝐸⃗ = 0, green curve). Black dots show the 

experimental data for comparison. b-d) Diagrams showing the effect of the unscreened 

electrostatic field on the electron collection efficiency (see details in the text). e) The fraction of 

the SE with the depth of origin deeper than Monte Carlo simulated via back-tracing 248 detected 

SEs (see details in the text).

Finally, we want to comment on the partitioning of the detected SE between the capping 

electrode and electrolyte and the overall escape depth of the collected SEs. For that, for every 


15

simulated detected SE, we determined the z coordinate corresponding to its deepest penetration 

into the sample. For this purpose, the part of its parent electron’s trajectory prior to its own 

generation is treated as though part of its own trajectory and likewise for earlier ancestors.  Electric 

fields below this z of deepest penetration can have had no influence on this electron’s fate. Fields 

between deepest penetration and the detector have influence but not always much. In particular, 

electrons at deep parts of this causal chain are likely to have been more energetic and therefore 

less sensitive to electric fields. For this reason, this metric should be treated as a bound.  Figure 4e 

depicts the fraction (as a function of z) of escaped SEs with origin deeper than z. Here, zero line is 

at the capping electrode-electrolyte interface and two-layer graphene (including contaminations) 

is represented as graphite with a thickness of 1.84 nm above it (see inset in the Fig. 4e). The 

modeling indicates that about 70 % of the detected SEs originate inside the graphene capping layer,

and the remaining 30 % of electrons have “ancestors” distributed along the long tail that extends 

as deep as 60 nm below the graphene/electrolyte interface. The calculated mean escape depth of 

such “electrolyte” SE is ca. 6.9 nm. Note that the electric field within the graphene is sensitive to 

the potential variation in the EDL just below it, so even SEs that originate in the graphene layer 

are sensitive to the applied bias. The method, therefore, is suitable for interrogation of the 

electrochemical systems with lateral potential gradients and lateral electrode structure 

inhomogeneities.

CONCLUSIONS

To summarize: we have used liquid electrochemical cells with an electron transparent two-layer 

graphene electrode to elucidate the effect of the electrolyte polarization at the graphene-liquid 

interface on the SE emission using SEM. We have found that the SE emission from such an 

interface is sensitive to the formation and re-structuring of the EDL and can be recorded using 


16

typical in-lens SE detector of the SEM. Finite element analysis modeling of the potential 

distribution near the interface coupled with Monte Carlo simulations explains the general trends 

of bias-dependent contrast and determines its values. The proposed method is most useful for

studying electrochemical systems where laterally heterogeneous interfaces are present and high-

resolution polarization mapping is required. As we have shown recently, care has to be taken in 

these cases to minimize the radiation damage of the electrolyte32 and damage-free quantification 

and mapping of the polarization potentials of radiation sensitive electrolytes can be also done using 

Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy.33

METHODS

Sample preparation

Fabrication of MCA include the following steps (see detailed procedure in Supporting 

Information): (i) Bottle-shaped microchannels were formed using reactive ion etching of 

lithographically defined Si wafer. (ii) 100 nm thick thermal oxide was grown on the Si surface. 

(iii) 200 nm Au on 10 nm Cr and 30 nm Pt electrodes were deposited onto the MCA’s front and 

back surfaces. (iv) Bilayer Gr was transferred using a PMMA sacrificial layer onto the Au 

electrode. (v) PMMA was dissolved in hot acetone. (vi) MCA was filled with a liquid electrolyte 

using a substitutional filling. (vii) Backside openings of the filled channels were sealed using a 

water immiscible epoxy cured by UV irradiation.

Monte Carlo simulations

To determine the SE yield, we simulated 1 million beam electrons incident on each relevant 

position (e.g., the center of the cell or the graphite-covered gold near the cell). Each electron’s 

trajectory consisted of a series of steps, each of which was undisturbed flight (corrected for the 

effect of the electric field determined by the finite-element model below) terminated by an “event.” 


17

The simulated events included elastic scattering (i.e., Mott scattering using mean free paths from 

34), SE generation using dielectric function theory, longitudinal optical phonon scattering, and 

refraction or reflection at material interfaces. SEs were tracked in the same way. Tracking ended 

when an electron’s energy fell below the amount required for it to escape the sample, or when it 

was detected at a distance 0.1 m from the sample. Each detected electron’s position, the direction 

of motion, and energy at detection were logged for subsequent analysis. Details of these models 

can be found in an earlier paper.29

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting information

The Supporting Information is available free of charge on the ACS Publications website at DOI: 

---. This includes details on sample preparation, JMONSEL simulator, and finite element modeling 

of potential distribution inside the channel filled with liquid electrolyte.  

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Author

*E-mail: andrei.kolmakov@nist.gov ORCID 0000-0001-5299-4121

†These authors contributed to the work equally.

Author Contributions

A.K. conceived the idea and directed the work. H.G. and A.Y. conducted the SEM polarization 

experiments and preliminary data analysis. E.S. and C.A. carried out electrochemical measurements. J.V.

and A.T. performed Monte Carlo and finite element simulations, correspondingly. A.V. contributed to the 


18

data interpretation. The manuscript was compiled by A.K. using contributions of all authors. All authors 

have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

H.G., A.Y., and E.S. acknowledge support under the Cooperative Research Agreement between 

the University of Maryland and the National Institute of Standards and Technology Center for 

Nanoscale Science and Technology, Award 70NANB14H209, through the University of 

Maryland. In part (A.T.), this work was developed within the scope of the project CICECO-Aveiro 

Institute of Materials, UIDB/50011/2020 and UIDP/50011/2020, financed by national funds 

through the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology/MCTES. MCA chips have been 

fabricated by Dr. Brian Hoskins (PML, NIST). High quality graphene was kindly provided by Ivan 

Vlassiouk (ORNL). 

ABBREVIATIONS

SEM, scanning electron microscope; SE, secondary electron; Gr, graphene; 2L, double-layer; 

TTL detector, through-the-lens detector; MD, molecular dynamics; EDL, electrical double layer; 

MCA, micro channel array; JMONSEL, Java Monte Carlo Simulation of Secondary Electrons; 

AFM, atomic force microscopy; SPM, scanning probe microscopy.

REFERENCES

(1) Simon, P.; Gogotsi, Y., Materials for Electrochemical Capacitors. In Nanoscience and 

Technology: A Collection of Reviews from Nature Journals, Rodgers, P., Ed. World Scientific: 

2010; pp 320-329.


19

(2) Bach, K., Electrical Double Layers in Biology. Springer Science & Business Media: New 

York, NY, USA, 2012.

(3) Walter, M. G.; Warren, E. L.; McKone, J. R.; Boettcher, S. W.; Mi, Q.; Santori, E. A.; Lewis, 

N. S., Solar Water Splitting Cells. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 6446-6473.

(4) Ramos, A.; Morgan, H.; Green, N. G.; Castellanos, A., Ac Electrokinetics: A Review of 

Forces in Microelectrode Structures. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 1998, 31, 2338.

(5) Schoch, R. B.; Han, J.; Renaud, P., Transport Phenomena in Nanofluidics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 

2008, 80, 839.

(6) Zaera, F., Probing Liquid/Solid Interfaces at the Molecular Level. Chem. Rev. 2012, 112, 

2920-2986.

(7) Hayes, R.; Borisenko, N.; Tam, M. K.; Howlett, P. C.; Endres, F.; Atkin, R., Double Layer 

Structure of Ionic Liquids at the Au (111) Electrode Interface: An Atomic Force Microscopy 

Investigation. J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115, 6855-6863.

(8) Black, J. M.; Walters, D.; Labuda, A.; Feng, G.; Hillesheim, P. C.; Dai, S.; Cummings, P. 

T.; Kalinin, S. V.; Proksch, R.; Balke, N., Bias-Dependent Molecular-Level Structure of Electrical 

Double Layer in Ionic Liquid on Graphite. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 5954-5960.

(9) Collins, L.; Kilpatrick, J. I.; Vlassiouk, I. V.; Tselev, A.; Weber, S. A.; Jesse, S.; Kalinin, S. 

V.; Rodriguez, B. J., Dual Harmonic Kelvin Probe Force Microscopy at the Graphene–Liquid 

Interface. APL 2014, 104, 133103.

(10) Dazzi, A.; Prater, C. B., AFM-Ir: Technology and Applications in Nanoscale Infrared 

Spectroscopy and Chemical Imaging. Chem. Rev. 2016, 117, 5146-5173.


20

(11) Lu, Y.-H.; Larson, J. M.; Baskin, A.; Zhao, X.; Ashby, P. D.; Prendergast, D.; Bechtel, H. 

A.; Kostecki, R.; Salmeron, M., Infrared Nanospectroscopy at the Graphene–Electrolyte Interface. 

Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 5388-5393.

(12) Stöckle, R. M.; Suh, Y. D.; Deckert, V.; Zenobi, R., Nanoscale Chemical Analysis by Tip-

Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2000, 318, 131-136.

(13) Kumar, N.; Su, W.; Veselý, M.; Weckhuysen, B. M.; Pollard, A. J.; Wain, A. J., Nanoscale 

Chemical Imaging of Solid–Liquid Interfaces Using Tip-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy. 

Nanoscale 2018, 10, 1815-1824.

(14) Siegbahn, H., Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis of Liquids and Solutions. J. 

Phys. Chem. 1985, 89, 897-909.

(15) Salmeron, M.; Schlögl, R., Ambient Pressure Photoelectron Spectroscopy: A New Tool for 

Surface Science and Nanotechnology. Surf. Sci. Rep. 2008, 63, 169-199.

(16) Frank Ogletree, D.; Bluhm, H.; Hebenstreit, E. D.; Salmeron, M., Photoelectron 

Spectroscopy under Ambient Pressure and Temperature Conditions. Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 2009,

601, 151-160.

(17) Winter, B.; Faubel, M., Photoemission from Liquid Aqueous Solutions. Chem. Rev. 2006,

106, 1176-1211.

(18) Starr, D. E.; Wong, E. K.; Worsnop, D. R.; Wilson, K. R.; Bluhm, H., A Combined Droplet 

Train and Ambient Pressure Photoemission Spectrometer for the Investigation of Liquid/Vapor 

Interfaces. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2008, 10, 3093-3098.


21

(19) Crumlin, E. J.; Liu, Z.; Bluhm, H.; Yang, W.; Guo, J.; Hussain, Z., X-Ray Spectroscopy of 

Energy Materials under in Situ/Operando Conditions. J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom. 2015,

200, 264-273.

(20) Thürmer, S.; Seidel, R.; Faubel, M.; Eberhardt, W.; Hemminger, J. C.; Bradforth, S. E.; 

Winter, B., Photoelectron Angular Distributions from Liquid Water: Effects of Electron Scattering. 

PRL 2013, 111, 173005.

(21) Brown, M. A.; Abbas, Z.; Kleibert, A.; Green, R. G.; Goel, A.; May, S.; Squires, T. M., 

Determination of Surface Potential and Electrical Double-Layer Structure at the Aqueous 

Electrolyte-Nanoparticle Interface. Phys. Rev. X 2016, 6, 011007.

(22) Favaro, M.; Jeong, B.; Ross, P. N.; Yano, J.; Hussain, Z.; Liu, Z.; Crumlin, E. J., 

Unravelling the Electrochemical Double Layer by Direct Probing of the Solid/Liquid Interface. 

Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 12695.

(23) Ali, H.; Golnak, R.; Seidel, R.; Winter, B.; Xiao, J., In-Situ X-Ray Spectroscopy of the 

Electric Double Layer around TiO2 Nanoparticles Dispersed in Aqueous Solution: Implications 

for H2 Generation. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 2019, 3, 264-273.

(24) Kolmakov, A.; Dikin, D. A.; Cote, L. J.; Huang, J.; Abyaneh, M. K.; Amati, M.; Gregoratti, 

L.; Günther, S.; Kiskinova, M., Graphene Oxide Windows for in Situ Environmental Cell 

Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2011, 6, 651.

(25) Stoll, J. D.; Kolmakov, A., Electron Transparent Graphene Windows for Environmental 

Scanning Electron Microscopy in Liquids and Dense Gases. Nanotechnol. 2012, 23, 505704.


22

(26) Guo, H.; Strelcov, E.; Yulaev, A.; Wang, J.; Appathurai, N.; Urquhart, S.; Vinson, J.; Sahu, 

S.; Zwolak, M.; Kolmakov, A., Enabling Photoemission Electron Microscopy in Liquids Via

Graphene-Capped Microchannel Arrays. Nano Lett. 2017, 17, 1034-1041.

(27) Yulaev, A.; Guo, H.; Strelcov, E.; Chen, L.; Vlassiouk, I.; Kolmakov, A., Graphene 

Microcapsule Arrays for Combinatorial Electron Microscopy and Spectroscopy in Liquids. ACS 

Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 26492-26502.

(28) Nemšák, S.; Strelcov, E.; Guo, H.; Hoskins, B. D.; Duchoň, T.; Mueller, D. N.; Yulaev, 

A.; Vlassiouk, I.; Tselev, A.; Schneider, C. M., In Aqua Electrochemistry Probed by XPEEM: 

Experimental Setup, Examples, and Challenges. Top. Catal. 2018, 61, 2195-2206.

(29) Villarrubia, J. S.; Vladár, A.; Ming, B.; Kline, R. J.; Sunday, D. F.; Chawla, J.; List, S., 

Scanning Electron Microscope Measurement of Width and Shape of 10 nm Patterned Lines Using 

a JMONSEL-Modeled Library. Ultramicroscopy 2015, 154, 15-28.

(30) Kuroda, M. A.; Tersoff, J.; Martyna, G. J., Nonlinear Screening in Multilayer Graphene 

Systems. PRL 2011, 106, 116804.

(31) Santos, E. J.; Kaxiras, E., Electric-Field Dependence of the Effective Dielectric Constant 

in Graphene. Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 898-902.

(32) Arble, C.; Guo, H.; Strelcov, E.; Hoskins, B.; Zeller, P.; Amati, M.; Gregoratti, L.; 

Kolmakov, A., Radiation Damage of Liquid Electrolyte During Focused X-Ray Beam 

Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Surf. Sci. Rep. 2020, 697, 121608.


23

(33) Strelcov, E.; Arble, C.; Guo, H.; Hoskins, B. D.; Yulaev, A.; Vlassiouk, I. V.; Zhitenev, N. 

B.; Tselev, A.; Kolmakov, A., Nanoscale Mapping of the Double Layer Potential at the Graphene–

Electrolyte Interface. Nano Lett. 2020, 20, 1336-1344.

(34) A. Jablonski; F. Salvat; C. J. Powell; Lee, A. Y., Nist Electron Elastic-Scattering Cross-

Section Database Version 4.0. National Institute of Standards and Technology: Gaithersburg MD, 

20899, 2016.

SYNOPSIS 

The nanometer range escape depth of secondary electrons in aqueous solutions makes SEM a 

suitable tool for probing ultrathin electrical double layers at the solid-liquid electrolyte interfaces

with high spatial and temporal resolutions.

TOC figure


