Hexagonal Perovskites as Quantum Materials

Loi T. Nguyen and R.J. Cava

Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton New Jersey 08544

ABSTRACT: Hexagonal oxide perovskites, in contrast to the more familiar perovskites, allow for face-sharing of metal-oxygen 
octahedra or trigonal prisms within their structural frameworks. This results in dimers, trimers, tetramers, or longer frag-
ments of chains of face-sharing octahedra in the crystal structures, and consequently in much shorter metal-metal distances 
and lower metal-oxygen-metal bond angles than are seen in the more familiar perovskites. The presence of the face-sharing 
octahedra can have a dramatic impact on magnetic properties of these compounds, and dimer-based materials, in particular, 
have been the subjects of many quantum-materials-directed studies in materials physics. Hexagonal oxide perovskites are of 
contemporary interest due to their potential for geometrical frustration of the ordering of magnetic moments or orbital oc-
cupancies at low temperatures, which is especially relevant to their significance as quantum materials. As such, several hex-
agonal oxide perovskites have been identified as potential candidates for hosting the quantum spin liquid state at low tem-
peratures. In our view, hexagonal oxide perovskites are fertile ground for finding new quantum materials. This review briefly
describes the solid state chemistry of many of these materials. 

CONTENTS

1.
Introduction ...........................................................................1

2.
Mixtures of cubic plus hexagonal packing ................3

3.
Dimers and trimers. Relation to classic double 

perovskites. ........................................................................................4

3.1.
Dimer-based hexagonal perovskites..................4

3.2.
Trimer-based hexagonal perovskites................9

3.3.
A structure based on both trimers and dimers
12

3.4.
12R structures based on trimers...................... 12

3.5.
A4-nA’nMM’2O12: Missing an octahedron in a 

trimer
13

3.6.
Tetramers.................................................................. 14

4.
Materials with MO4 tetrahedra in the framework
14

5.
Oxygen deficiency: vacancies both random and 

ordered..............................................................................................17
6.
Polymorphism....................................................................19

7.
Summary of some of the complex variations in 

stacking .............................................................................................19
8.
Hexagonal Perovskites with Ba-Cl or Ba-Br layers 

in addition to Ba-O layers..........................................................19
9.
Chains.....................................................................................20

10.
Some unusual derivatives of hexagonal perovskites
22

11.
Conclusions..........................................................................25

12.
Author contributions.......................................................25

13.
Notes.......................................................................................25

14.
Biographies..........................................................................25

15.
References............................................................................25

1.
Introduction

Halide perovskites have recently been widely studied by 

chemical researchers. They can be processed under relatively 
mild conditions compared to oxides and, as semiconductors, 
can sometimes have favorable optical and charge transport 
properties, making them suitable for study as materials with 
the potential for solar energy conversion. They are not cur-
rently widely studied in the materials physics community as 
quantum materials. These materials are variants of the familiar 
perovskite AMX3 formula, where the A atom or molecule (e.g. 
Cs or CH3NH3) is in the large cavity in the classic perovskite 
structure, and the MX6 octahedra, made from main group M 
ions, share corner X ions (here Cl, Br, or I) in a three-dimen-
sional framework. Such materials obey the familiar radius rules 
known for derivatives of cubic perovskites, with some potential 
refinements1–9. Many reviews of this type of perovskite can be 
found in the chemical literature, including in this journal10. 
They are not the subject of this review.

The classic oxide perovskites, with formulas AMO3, (where 

A = a larger ion, typically monovalent, divalent or trivalent, and 
M is a smaller metal ion) are well known in the solid state 
chemistry and materials physics communities and have been 
intensively studied for many decades11. This is due to their in-
teresting structural chemistry and often forefront magnetic 
and electronic properties. The interest in oxide perovskites as 
quantum materials often arises from the fact that the M ions 
can be members of the transition metal series, which can result 
in properties that can best be understood as quantum mechan-
ical in nature.

The familiar oxide perovskites are typically made from 

electropositive (non-molecular) A ions (e.g. Alkali, alkaline 
earth or rare earth ions) that reside somewhere in a perovskite 
cavity where they are ideally 12 coordinated to the surround-
ing oxygens, and MO6 octahedra sharing corners with each 
other to create a MO3 framework structure. The d orbitals on 


2

the M ions hybridize in different degrees with the oxygen p or-
bitals. The quantum-like properties can arise for dn ions (where 
the d states are partly filled, and n is between 1 and 9) and even 
for d0 or d10 ions (e.g. Ti4+ or Pb4+) in the octahedra in the MO3
framework.

Structurally, the octahedra are often considered as rigid 

entities that tilt around their shared corners to accommodate 
different size A site ions and an overall cell size that is also de-
termined by temperature or pressure. A rich set of symmetry 
variants is possible due to the tilting, and too many interesting 
combinations of atoms, physical properties and structural dis-
tortions have been studied to even list generally12,13. The tilting, 
from a chemical and quantum materials perspective, changes 
the degree of overlap between the oxygen p and metal d orbit-
als at the connections between the corner-sharing MO6 octahe-
dra in the perovskite framework, with a significant impact on 
the electronic and magnetic properties displayed. Even a rela-
tively simple oxide perovskite like SrTiO3 can display profound 
quantum mechanical properties such as superconductivity at 
sub-Kelvin temperatures when doped with a very small num-
ber of electrons14–16. Even though the tilt system in classical 
perovskites can sometimes yield a rhombohedral symmetry 
crystal structure, such materials are in general not the subjects 
of this review. Ruddlesden Popper and Dion Jacobsen series 
materials are celebrated layered oxide perovskites where dif-
ferent ratios and relative sizes of A to B site ions result in the 
break-up of the MO3 perovskite network into layers of different 
thicknesses. Electrons and magnetic moments, when confined 
to layers, or largely confined to layers, can display quite unex-
pected quantum-derived properties, such as superconductiv-
ity17–19. The structural break-up of the normally three-dimen-
sional MO3 array into layers can lead to dramatically different 
physical properties for some of these materials, which have 
also been the subjects of many reviews. Double perovskites in 
oxides are also well known and have been the subjects of re-
search in halide perovskites as well6,7,20–26. Perovskites are a 
well for research that never seems to run dry.

This review, however, is about a currently lesser known 

class of oxide perovskite quantum materials, based on hexago-
nal symmetry rather than cubic symmetry. These materials are 
also based on AMO3 stoichiometries but, in contrast to the more 
familiar perovskites, admit for face sharing of MO6 octahedra 
or A- or M- centered trigonal prisms in the structural frame-
work rather than the corner-sharing geometries found in the 
framework of conventional perovskites. This can result in di-
mers, trimers, tetramers or longer fragments of chains of face-
sharing octahedra in the structure. The face sharing of the oc-
tahedra within the dimers trimers tetramers and chains leads 
to much shorter metal-metal distances and lower metal-oxy-
gen-metal bond angles than are seen in more familiar perov-
skites. It has been argued that hexagonal perovskites can best 
happen for selected A site ions in oxides because their ionic ra-
dii and that of oxygen are such that it is possible for them to mix 
in an ordered arrangement to form a closest-packed plane. Ba2+
and O2- seem to be a perfect pair for engendering this kind of 
structural stability. A Ba2+ ion replacing one of the oxygen ions 
in a close packed oxygen plane appears to be happily sur-
rounded by the 6 near neighbor O2- ions that it acquires in the 
plane. The fact that face sharing is present has a dramatic im-
pact on the transition metal oxygen d orbital oxygen p orbital 
overlap and the direct d-d overlap of the transition metals, and, 
consequently on the quantum properties.

Symmetry matters when it comes to physical properties, 

and the 3 or 6 fold rotational symmetries of the structural com-
ponents in the hexagonal perovskites are of contemporary in-
terest due to the potential that such geometries have to engen-
der the geometrical frustration of the ordering of the magnetic 
moments or orbital occupancies of the framework ions into a 
single lowest energy state at low temperatures. Thus such ma-
terials are good candidates for the quantum-spin-liquid state, 
as described briefly here. (In quantum spin liquids, the spin 
state of the magnetic ions continues to fluctuate down to very 
low temperatures compared to the strength of the magnetic in-
teractions as measured by the Curie-Weiss temperature.) 

Figure 1. The different polymorphs of BaRuO3. Color: Ba (green), Ru (gray octahedra) and O (red). In the 6H drawing, the two kinds 
of Ru – blue in the dimers and yellow in the perovskite-like layers – are shown. BaRuO3 at ambient pressure is found in the 9R or 
4H structure types, SrRuO3 is found in a distortion of the 3C structure type, as is BaRuO3 prepared at high pressures.


3

Further, their properties frequently challenge our current un-
derstanding of when a chemistry (i.e. an orbital based) vs. a 
physics (i.e., a Fermi Surface based) description is most appro-
priate for interpretation and prediction of the properties of a 
material, which is good fun27–29 (see e.g. the review by D. 
Khomskii and S.V. Streltsov in this issue). Many hexagonal ox-
ide perovskites based on face-sharing of magnetic octahedra 
have been studied due to their potential for hosting the quan-
tum spin liquid state at low temperature.

As is found in the more familiar cubic-symmetry-based 

AMO3 perovskites, structural distortions, chemical disorder, 
and non-AMO3 stoichiometries are also found in the hexagonal 
perovskites. Structurally layered variants are also known. The 
basic crystal structures and, in some cases, the known struc-
tural complexities are the focus of this review. Although metal-
lic, semiconducting, and dielectric hexagonal perovskites are 
known, the physical properties of this class of materials have 
so far not turned out to be of as wide interest in the materials 
physics community as those of their cubic-symmetry-based 
cousins. The properties of the materials whose chemistry and 
structure are the primary focus of this review are also generally 
summarized here when known. 

This organization of this review is based on the solid state 

chemistry of the hexagonal perovskites, and is based primarily 
on their crystal structures. A reader particularly interested in 
the crystal structures of such materials can find alternative 
presentations in books on perovskites11–13. Our intention is to 
present a structural description of as many of them as we can, 
although some interesting materials may be omitted by acci-
dent. On the other hand, occasionally we may describe variants 
that are be considered by some researchers to be “not-really-
hexagonal-perovskites”, or better classified in a different way, 
and we apologize to people whose views are stricter than ours 
if our classification appears to include too many materials; we 
do not mean to exclude other classifications for such materials. 
In our view, hexagonal perovskites are fertile ground for find-
ing interesting quantum materials and we hope that the de-
scriptions presented in this review will be accessible to a wide 
range of scientists who may be interested in such things.

2.
Mixtures of cubic plus hexagonal packing

Let’s start with the SrRuO3-BaRuO3 perovskites as our ini-

tial example. SrRuO3 is a slightly distorted conventional cubic 
perovskite due to a small tilt of the RuO6 octahedra in the RuO3
framework, while, at conventional pressures, the Ba2+ ion is not 
a good fit for the cubic perovskite cavity. It is a better fit when 
inserted into a close packed plane of oxygen, however, and 
thus, the crystal structures of the ambient pressure BaRuO3
polymorphs are hexagonal perovskites.

For A site ions of size between Sr and Ba, the resulting 

crystal structure is an ordered mixture of cubic perovskite plus 
hexagonal perovskite. There is no electropositive divalent ion 
with a size intermediate between Sr and Ba, but as is often 
found in solid state chemistry, such an ion can be simulated by 
mixing Sr and Ba together. Although any individual position in 
one unit cell is occupied by either Ba or Sr, their average radius 
is what impacts the long range average crystal structure ob-
served. The (111) plane of conventional cubic perovskites has 
three fold rotational symmetry. When used as a building block 

a small section of the (111) plane is a layer of isolated MO6 oc-
tahedra lying on their faces in a triangular array. The A ions are 
found between these layers. When the (111) layers are in-
cluded in a structure, the octahedra share corners with others. 
When this layer is used as a structural building block in the cre-
ation of a new material and mixed with hexagonal symmetry 
AMO3 layers that consist of face-shared octahedra, then mate-
rials with overall hexagonal symmetry are the result.

The compounds in the SrRuO3-BaRuO3 system allow us to 

introduce the simple short-hand nomenclature that is used to 
describe hexagonal perovskites. In this nomenclature, a num-
ber is first, which indicates the number of structural layers 
within a unit cell. The designation then ends with a letter, an R, 
an H or a C, which indicates whether the material is based on 
rhombohedral, hexagonal or cubic layer stacking (like in all 
perovskites, small distortions are possible, typically due to oc-
tahedral tilting) Using this nomenclature, classic cubic-sym-
metry-based SrRuO3 has a 3C structure (three cubic layers per 
cell stacked along (111) and BaRuO3 has three polymorphs, one 
with a 4H structure, one with a 6H structure and one with a 9R 
structure30 (Figure 1). (In rhombohedral symmetry hexagonal 
perovskite crystal structures the number of layers is always a 
multiple of 3). At high pressures, BaRuO3 is stable in a different 
crystal structure, transforming to a conventional 3C perovskite 
(Figure 1). This cubic BaRuO3 perovskite is metallic and shows 
a ferromagnetic transition at Tc = 60 K, significantly lower than 
the Tc = 160 K of SrRuO3, as shown in Figure 2. A related des-
ignation is when a layer of MO6 octahedra is connected by cor-
ner sharing to the next layer, as is found in cubic perovskites, 
then that connection is designated by a lowercase c, when the 
octahedra are connected by sharing faces then that kind of con-
nection has 3 or 6 fold symmetry and is designated by a lower-
case h. Thus the structure of many 9-layer hexagonal perov-
skites may be designated as 9R or (chh)3.

Figure 2. The ferromagnetic transitions in (a) orthorhombic 
SrRuO3 31 and (b) cubic BaRuO3 conventional perovskites 30.


4

In the case of the Ba1-xSrxRuO3 solid solution, the resulting 

crystal structure is clearly determined by the average radius of 
the A site ions; an on-average-smaller A site ion yields a crystal 
structure with a larger fraction of cubic-like perovskite charac-
ter, while a larger A site ion yields a hexagonal-like perovskite 
structure32–34. The same may be the case for other (Ba1-

xSrx)MO3 perovskites where the Ba end member (x=0) is a hex-
agonal perovskite and the Sr end member (x=1) is a cubic per-
ovskite. In solid solutions of the type Ba1-xSrxRuO3, when in-
creasing the values of x, the nine-layer structure with stacking 
sequence (chh)3 (9R) transforms to the four-layer structure 
(ch)2 (4H) and finally to the classical perovskite type structure 
(c)3 (3C) at x is about 1/6 and 1/3, respectively33. The 4H and 
9R forms of BaRuO3 have substantially different electronic 
properties35, and even the Sr1-xCaxRuO3 perovskites in the more 
familiar cubic perovskite structure types are famously enig-
matic quantum materials36–38. In the event that readers are not 
familiar with magnetism we point out that the A ions in perov-
skites, with the exceptions of the rare earths, are not magnetic 
(i.e. Ba2+, Sr2+ and Ca2+) nor are the oxygen ions. 

Figure 3. The crystal structures of distorted monoclinic SrIrO3 
(left), the ambient pressure phase, and cubic SrIrO3, a stable 
high pressure phase (right). The former is a distorted variation 
of a 6H hexagonal perovskite.

Iridium oxides are of special interest in the study of quan-

tum materials because, for these materials, spin-orbit-coupling 
can have a dramatic effect on the energies of the valence elec-
trons associated with the M ions and consequently the materi-
als’ electronic and magnetic properties. The strong influence of 
spin-orbit-coupling can explain some of the properties of irida-
tes such as their widely insulating behavior. SrIrO3 and BaIrO3
are quantum materials closely related to the ruthenate perov-
skites. In this series, however, SrIrO3 and BaIrO3 are both mon-
oclinic C2/c distortions of the 6H-BaTiO3 hexagonal (chc)2
structure39,40 (former: a = 5.604 Å, b = 9.618 Å, c = 14.17 Å, beta 
= 93.26o). These structural distortions have not yet been theo-
retically modeled to our knowledge, but they may well be re-
lated to the influence of the strong spin orbit coupling in Ir, 
which is widely known to be influential in determining the 
magnetic and electrical properties of iridium oxide based quan-
tum materials41–47. The monoclinic and cubic crystal structures 

of SrIrO3 are shown in Figure 3. Both SrIrO3 and BaIrO3 are 
non-magnetic electrical insulators39,48,49 and adopt the ideal cu-
bic Pm-3m perovskite structure at high pressure. A substitution 
of Zn or Li for Ir in the 6H-SrIrO3 polymorph destabilizes the 
face-sharing octahedra, and hence SrIr1−xZnxO3 is found to be 
an orthorhombic distortion of the classical cubic perovskite for 
0.25 ≤ x ≤ 0.33 and SrIr1−xLixO3 has that type of crystal structure 
for x = 0.25 only50. The reason for the destabilization of the hex-
agonal perovskite structure for Zn and Li substitutions has not 
been proven theoretically.

3.
Dimers and trimers. Relation to classic double 
perovskites.

In classical double perovskites, there are two different “M 

type” ions in an ordered array or a partially ordered array 
within the MO3 framework. Double perovskites can be written 
in the form A2MM’O6, where M and M’ can be different ions such 
as in Sr2FeWO6, a material that has a particularly high magne-
toresistance51 or even the same M metal with different oxida-
tion states, such as is seen in BaBiO3 (Ba2Bi3+Bi5+O6 formally)52–

57, the basis for superconductivity in several perovskite ox-
ides58,59. Disordered and partially ordered M-M’ double perov-
skites are known. “Double perovskites” are also known for ra-
tios of M to M’ that are not 1:1, for example also 2:1, where the 
formula is A2M4/3M’2/3O6 i.e. A2{M[M1/3M’2/3]}O6, with M and 
M’ selected to yield charge neutrality. An example of this kind 
of double perovskite is Ca4Nb2O9 60,61. Of further interest are 
oxide double perovskites where one of the ions does not dis-
play octahedral coordination52,62.

Double hexagonal perovskites are also known – when 

there is more than one chemically distinct type of M site ion 
present. The materials can have ordered M-M’ or disordered M-
M’ structures. Many ordered materials and disordered materi-
als are known and briefly described in this review. Consider the 
6H structure shown in Figure 1 as the basis. There are two dis-
tinctly different octahedral sites for the M ions present. One 
(yellow in the figure) shares only corners with other octahedra, 
making a separate triangular plane (seen in the figure at levels 
0, ½, and 1 along the crystallographic c axis, and the other 
shares corners with one set of (M,M’)O6 octahedra but a face 
with another set (blue in the figure). When there are two octa-
hedra in the face sharing sub-structure, the basic formula is 
A3MM’2O9. Occasionally M and M’ can be the same ion (as in 
some of the polymorphs of BaRuO3) but much more frequently 
they are two distinctly different ions. While the M ions form tri-
angular planar lattices of potentially isolated MO6 octahedra, 
the M’ ions form a dimer array on a triangular lattice. When ei-
ther M or M’ has unpaired electrons, the magnetism can make 
these quite interesting quantum materials due to the triangular 
lattice and the localized vs. delocalized character of unpaired 
electrons in the dimers47. For consistency with more complex 
structures, we refer to these materials simply as dimer-based 
hexagonal perovskites. 

3.1.
Dimer-based hexagonal perovskites

Dimer-based hexagonal oxide perovskites are by far the 

most frequently studied quantum materials in this family. The 
most common dimer-based hexagonal double perovskite fam-
ily of quantum materials is found when the M’-site is occupied 
by Ru or Ir, making the formula Ba3MRu2O9 or Ba3MIr2O9. For 


5

purposes of organization in this group, which consists of many 
frequently studied materials, we consider the generic formula 
to be Ba3MM’2O9, and we classify the materials into subgroups 
that differ in the total number of electrons on the M’2O9 dimer. 
The formal oxidation state of M can range from 1+ to 4+ - as the 
formal charge on the M site ion increases, to maintain neutral-
ity, the formal oxidation state of the M’ ion, and thus the total 
number of electrons on the M’2O9 dimer, decreases. (For formal 
electron counts, the electropositive Ba ion is always taken to be 
Ba2+ and the oxygen ion is taken to be O2-.) As in many quantum 
materials, determination of the physical properties is not re-
lated in a trivial way to the formal electron count, as how the 
electrons are distributed on the M’2O9 dimers depends on some 
important chemical characteristics of how the orbitals on M’ 
and oxygen overlap, discussed in the review by Khomskii and 
Streltsov in this issue.

In Ba3MRu2O9, when M is a non-magnetic monovalent cat-

ion (eg. Li or Na), the total number of electrons donated by the 
Ru to the oxygens in a Ru2O9 dimer is 11 63–65. (The Ru can be 
considered formally as a 1:1 mixture of Ru5+ and Ru6+, but 
“where’s the charge, really?” is a good question that has been 
asked by some for decades for such highly charged transition 
metal ions in oxides.) Both of these compounds crystallize in 
the hexagonal space group P63/mmc. While the hexagonal 
structure of Ba3LiRu2O9 remains stable down to 100 K, 
Ba3NaRu2O9 undergoes a structural transition at 225 K to a 
lower symmetry space group, Cmcm, a simple dimensional dis-
tortion of the hexagonal perovskite. This has been attributed to 
a well-known phenomenon in materials physics and solid state 
chemistry known as charge ordering; in this case where the 
Ru5+ ions are said to occupy one of the sites in the dimer and 
the Ru6+ ions to occupy the other site in the dimer, in an or-
dered array. Ba3NaRu2O9, which, in contrast has not been 
shown to undergo charge ordering transition, has a negative 
Curie-Weiss temperature, indicating antiferromagnetic inter-
actions between the Ru spins, but remains paramagnetic down 
to 1.7 K. Its magnetic effective moment is calculated to be about 
0.91µB/mol-f.u, and the conductivity activation gap is about 0.1 
eV. Why the Li1+ material behaves so differently from the Na1+
material is a potentially interesting puzzle to address in future 
research. These are excellent examples of quantum materials. 

When M is clearly a divalent cation in Ba3MRu2O9, the hex-

agonal 6H crystal structure that we have been discussing has 
been reported for in the cases of Ni2+, Ca2+, Mg2+, and Zn2+. For 
these materials there would be 10 electrons donated to the 
Ru2O9 dimer by its constituent metal atoms, for a formal charge 
on both Ru of 5+. For the cases above when M is a transition 
metal (i.e. Ni2+, which is an S=1 ion), there must be an internal 
equilibrium within the compound between the formal valence 
of the M ion and the formal valence of the Ru in the dimers. 
Thus dimer-based hexagonal perovskites such as Ba3CoRu2O9
and Ba3FeRu2O9 would be interesting if studied in this context 
because Fe3+ or Co3+ may more likely be in equilibrium with a 
formally Ru4+-Ru5+ mixture than a Co2+ or Fe2+ mixture would 
be with Ru5+. Some of the divalent ions listed above are non-
magnetic (i.e. Ca, Mg and Zn), an important characteristic for M 
ions that results in the magnetism, and the resulting quantum 
properties, arising from transition metal ions in the dimers and 
their orbital overlap with the oxygens.  

Sb is a common 5+ ion in octahedral coordination in oxides 

and is an important constituent in some hexagonal perovskites. 
It is non-magnetic, so when it is present, the magnetism arises 
from the other ions present. The dimer-based hexagonal per-
ovskite which mixes Cu and Sb as the M and M’ ions is both im-
portant and unusual. An ordered 6H hexagonal perovskite 
crystal structure for Ba3CuSb2O9 was reported in 197866. This 
structure consists of ordered face-sharing of SbO6 octahedra 
and isolated CuO6 octahedra, in a normal hexagonal perovskite 
type structure as shown in Figure 4. If this is the crystal struc-
ture of the phase, then the Cu2+ spin ½ ions are in triangular 
layers, a nice ordered triangular plane spin ½ configuration, 
the canonical arrangement for a quantum material67–69. Recent 
powder and single crystal XRD structural analysis conforms 
that the material is hexagonal (the senior author wonders what 
happened to the Jahn-Teller distortion virtually always seen for 
Cu2+ in octahedral coordination), but that it is something more 
like an inverse spinel than an ordered 6H perovskite, with the 
Cu and Sb randomly occupying positions in the dimers and Sb 
found on the individual octahedral layers (Figure 4), a 
Ba3(Sb)(SbCu)O9 configuration in spite of the fact that the for-
mula suggests otherwise. In this structure, the magnetic spin ½ 
Cu2+ ion is disordered in the dimers with a nonmagnetic ion, 

Figure 4. The reported crystal structures of “Ba3CuSb2O9”.


6

Sb5+. This material has been proposed to be a quantum spin liq-
uid candidate with an S = ½ triangular lattice, tested by mag-
netic susceptibility and neutron scattering experiments down 
to 0.2 K. There is no magnetic ordering observed, while the Cu-
rie-Weiss temperature is calculated to be -55 K. The specific 
heat shows a T-linear dependence, and a relatively large Som-
merfeld constant was found, 43.4 mJ/mol-K2 below 1.4 K70, alt-
hough the material is insulating (which should lead to a Som-
merfeld constant near 0). A study of Ba3CuSb2O9 single crystals, 
which also have disordered Cu and Sb in the dimers, showed 
that the hexagonal symmetry and the presence of dynamical 
Jahn-Teller distortions remain down to 3.5 K. There is a very 
big investment in the “quantum materials” properties of this 
material by the materials physics community, a community 
that does not appear to be disturbed by the extensive Cu/Sb 
disorder present in the dimers. When the Sb/Cu ratio is slightly 
different from 2/1, a distorted orthorhombic structure is ob-
served. Further, the stoichiometry and symmetry of the phase 
appear to be dependent on the synthesis temperature71. A par-
ticularly interesting set of materials of this type are the 
Ba3CuOs2O9 double hexagonal perovskites, for which both the 
structural symmetry and the magnetic properties depend pro-
foundly on whether the material is prepared with an ordered 
M’M2 array or one where an inverse hexagonal perovskite of 
the type Ba3(Os)(CuOs)O9 is made72.  

In the same structural vein, we also have Ba3CoSb2O9, an-

other dimer-based quantum material that crystallizes in the 
hexagonal space group P63/mmc. That is, it is another classical 
dimer hexagonal perovskite, with the lattice parameters a = 
5.857 Å and c = 14.459 Å73–77. This material, nominally consist-
ing of Co2+ and Sb5+ in an ordered array is an ideal effective spin 
= ½ (that is, when the orbital and spin contributions to the mo-
ment are both considered, the effective spin of the Co2+ turns 
out to be ½, Co is unique among the 3d transition metals in that 
the orbital contribution to the magnetic moment is not 
quenched) triangular lattice antiferromagnet. The extensive 
continuum of available energies seen for the spin system above 
the spin wave excitations by neutron scattering, is claimed to 
be clear evidence that Ba3CoSb2O9 is close to the proximity of a 
quantum spin liquid state in a 2D triangular lattice system73–82. 
As for Ba3CuSb2O9, there is a big investment in this material by 
the materials physics community.

Much more obscure, but none-the-less chemically inter-

esting, with substantially different magnetic properties, are 
Ba3MoCr2O9 and Ba3WCr2O983. These materials are fun from a 
chemical perspective because Cr, Mo and W are in the same col-
umn in the periodic table and yet Cr is in a nominally 3+ state, 
while Mo and W are formally in a 6+ (d0) state. (Cr3+ is arguably 
the mother of all strongly Hund’s rule coupled ions, and is 
therefore quite stable, but when combined with Ba and O, Cr 
can be in more highly oxidized valence states. These materials 
appear to require an extremely reducing ambient for synthe-
sis). The crystal structures are classical dimerized hexagonal 
perovskites like we have been describing here, and while the W 
variant is argued to be chemically ordered with Cr in the di-
mers, displaying a “dimer like” magnetic susceptibility, the Mo 
variant is said to be disordered, with Cr in an oxidation state 
greater than 3+, displaying a classical Curie-Weiss magnetic be-
havior.  Further work on the chemistry, structures and proper-
ties of these materials would be of interest.

We now consider the group of compounds where the iso-

lated M octahedra are occupied by 3+ ions. The only distorted 
hexagonal perovskite having the M formal valence = 3 in the 6H 
family of ruthenates is monoclinic Ba3ScRu2O9. (Sc is an elec-
tropositive, non-magnetic, 3+ ion in oxides.) Some structures 
can also be stabilized in the orthorhombic space group Cmcm, 
such as Ba3CuRu2O9 or the low temperature phase of 
Ba3CoRu2O984–89, but the most studied 6H hexagonal perov-
skites are those where M is a rare earth element. Chemically, 
this is presumably because they are relatively easy to make, but 
from the point of view of magnetic properties they are interest-
ing because the rare earth ions are found in a triangular planar 
lattice, and all the rare earths behave magnetically differently 
due to their f electron count. The crystal structures adopt the 
usual hexagonal space group P63/mmc for all compounds in the 
series (M = Y, La to Lu). The magnetic ordering temperatures 
are summarized in Table 1. 

In the M = M3+ group, M = In3+ Ba3InRu2O9 is reported to 

be hexagonal. For this material, researchers claim that due to 
the strong hybridization of Ru and O orbitals, the Ru2O9 dimers 
are better explained as being molecular units, where an s = ½ 
moment is delocalized in the dimers. This kind of consideration 
- whether the face sharing units are best considered as “mole-
cules” with distinct molecular orbitals, or simply should be 
thought of as the sum of the electron configurations of the tran-
sition metals that often occupy them - is one of the fundamental 
interesting aspects of the hexagonal perovskites. A spin glass 
transition was observed at 3.5 K, which can either be due to ge-
ometric frustration or disorder on the magnetic lattice (i.e. 
some so-far undetected structural mixing of In and Ru the hex-
agonal perovskite M+M’ sites). In addition, the static magnetic 
“ground state” (Theoretically a T = 0 Kelvin state but from a 
practical perspective materials physicists mean the lowest 
temperature state that they can attain in their measurements.)  
in this material, studied by µSR, has been said by the research-
ers involved to indicate that Ba3InRu2O9 is more complicated 
than a conventional spin glass90–92. 

In the case of M4+ cations, there are several reported com-

pounds, such as Ba3BiRu2O9, Ba3TiRu2O9 and Ba3ZrRu2O9. 
Ba3BiRu2O9 is particularly unusual, in that although the aver-
age formal valence of Bi is claimed to be 4+, charge dispropor-
tionation of 2Bi4+ to Bi3+ + Bi5+ is said to be present, similar to 
what is seen in BaBiO3. The evidence for this exotic state (said 
to be a “negative U” state in materials physics) is Bi L3-edge X-
ray absorption near-edge (XANES) spectroscopy. This com-
pound also undergoes a spin gap opening at T*=176 K, meaning 
that above 176 K, Ba3BiRu2O9 is a S=1 magnetic dimer system, 
and a spin gap state (in other words that there is a distinct en-
ergy range of forbidden spin excitations, which are usually con-
tinuously available through “magnons”) emerges below 176 K. 
The effect on magnetoelastic transitions in Ba3BiRu2O9 by ex-
ternal physical or internal chemical pressure has also been 
studied. It is claimed to reduce the spin gap opening tempera-
ture93,94. Moreover, a small amount of La-doping (~10%) on 
the Bi-site suppresses the spin gap and also eliminates the 
sharp structural and magnetic transitions that accompany it, 
suggesting that the spin-gap behavior is strongly associated 
with the unstable charge of Bi4+ in this material95,96. (Ba3BiIr2O9
also shows the opening of a spin gap, at 74 K. Magnetoelastic 
transitions induced by external physical or internal chemical 
pressure reduce the gap opening temperature93,94). More con-
ventional in this group is Ba3TiRu2O9, which shows structural 


7

disorder between Ti and Ru in both the corner-sharing octahe-
dra and face-sharing dimers97,98. The system is magnetically 
disturbed by a substantial amount of Ti/Ru chemical disorder, 
with the Curie-Weiss temperature of −29.5 K and the effective 
magnetic moment of 1.82 μB/f.u. A bifurcation of the zero field 
cooled and field cooled magnetic susceptibility is observed be-
low 4.7 K, which, along with the structural disorder, indicates 
that Ba3TiRu2O9 is a compositionally-disordered spin-glass 
system. The material is a semiconductor with an activation en-
ergy for charge transport of approximately 0.14 eV98.

6H
hexagonal oxide perovskites are not the only 

Ba3MM’2O9 materials known in this family. Materials with di-
mers can also have rhombohedral (9R) rather than hexagonal 
(6H) stacking along c. Ba3MnRu2O9 (Mn has the formal valence 
of Mn2+, apparently) adopts a 9R structure while the majority 
of the Ba3MRu2O9 phases form the 6H structure. When the A 
site ion is too small, hexagonal perovskites are not stable, and 
Ca3MnRu2O9 for example adopts the standard Pbnm space 
group seen often for orthorhombically distorted conventional 
perovskites. In this material, Mn and Ru are randomly distrib-
uted over the M-sites. Ba3MnRu2O9, unsurprisingly due to its 
magnetic disorder, shows a short range spin glass transition at 
30 K while for the orthorhombically distorted conventional 
perovskite Ca3MnRu2O9 a glass transition is seen at 150 K 99
also a likely indication of Mn-Ru disorder. Similarly, 
Sr3CaRu2O9 and Sr3CaIr2O9 have monoclinic structures, distor-
tions of the conventional perovskite structure, with space 
group P21/c 100,101. 

Moving now to iridates, of particular interest as quantum 

materials due to the fact that Ir is a 5d ion and therefore its or-
bital energies are known to be influenced spin orbit coupling, 
the materials and crystal structures are similar to what is seen 
in the Ba3MRu2O9 system. Again, the oxidation state of M in the 
Ba3MIr2O9 series of dimer-based hexagonal perovskites can 
range from 1+ to 4+, resulting in the total number of electrons 
donated by Ir to the Ir2O9 dimer ranging from 11 to 8, respec-
tively. For monovalent M ions, both Ba3NaIr2O9 and Ba3LiIr2O9
compounds crystallize in the hexagonal space group P63/mmc, 
however, only Ba3NaIr2O9 undergoes a structural transition to 
a monoclinic of a hexagonal perovskite, space group C2/c, be-
low 100 K. For divalent M ions, hexagonal structures are stabi-
lized when M = Mg, Zn and Ni, and distorted monoclinic struc-
tures are observed in the cases of M = Ca and Sr. While all rare 
earth M elements result in structures in the hexagonal space 
group P63/mmc in the Ba3MRu2O9 ruthenates, the structural 
trends in the Ba3MIr2O9 system are quite different, in that the 
small rare earth ions (M = Sm-Lu) result in hexagonal struc-
tures, while the larger rare earth ions (eg. La and Nd) lead to 
structures in the distorted monoclinic space group C2/c. Fi-
nally, analogous to Ba3BiRu2O9, Ba3BiIr2O9 also adopts a mono-
clinic structure. This material displays a spin gap opening at a 
lower temperature of 74 K, as described briefly above.

In the Ir2O9 dimers, pure Ir5+ is expected to have a non-

magnetic ground state. For Ir4+ dimers, small the observed ef-
fective moments in a localized spin picture can be taken to in-
dicate the presence of strong AFM interactions between the Ir4+
ions within the dimers. For the case of the mix between Ir4+ and 
Ir5+, magnetic ordering of Ir4+ is reported to occur at 10 K in 
Ba3ScIr2O9 and Ba3InIr2O9102. Ba3MIr2O9 compounds with M = 
Rare Earth (RE)) adopt the usual ordered hexagonal perovskite 
P63/mmc space group, except for RE= La and Nd (which have 

the monoclinically distorted C2/c space group) as demon-
strated in Figure 5. Ba3MIr2O9 shows antiferromagnetic order-
ing at 4 K for M = Y, at 5.1 K for M = Lu and 2.0 K for M = Tb103. 
The fact that the 6H iridates are studied less frequently in the 
materials physics community than the 6H ruthenates are is 
very likely due to the difficulty in growing single crystals of eas-
ily accessible size for iridates. 

The Ba3InIr2O9 hexagonal perovskite has been proposed 

to be a quantum spin liquid, where the unpaired electrons are 
localized on a mixed valence state between Ir4+ and Ir5+ within 
the Ir2O9 dimers. The gapless ground state and persistent spin 
dynamics that remain active down to 20 mK, probed by mag-
netic susceptibility, heat capacity, neutron diffraction, NMR 
and µSR, are cited as evidence. As shown in Figure 6, no long 
range magnetic ordering or spin freezing down to 20mK is seen 
in this S = ½ dimer Ir2O9 compound104. 

Figure 5. The crystal structures of the Ba3LuIr2O9 and mono-
clinic Ba3LaIr2O9 “hexagonal perovskites”. The Ir2O9 dimers are 
shaded. The rare earth ions are shown by teal or blue balls.

Ba3IrTi2O9, where the magnetism comes from Ir4+, a spin 

½ ion, reportedly in the isolated triangular layers, (the Ti  4+ is 
non-magnetic) crystallizes in the hexagonal space group 
P63/mmc, has been proposed to be an embodiment of the tri-
angular Heisenberg-Kitaev model, and has been used to study 
the interplay between geometric and exchange frustra-
tion105,106. Materials physicists argue that Ba3IrTi2O9 is a spin ½ 
Mott insulator107 and that Kitaev exchange (Usually a weak 
kind of magnetic exchange that loses out to ordinary antiferro-
magnetic-exchange derived ordering. Materials physicists use 
the term Mott insulator to explain cases where the electrons 
are largely confined to their individual atomic orbitals, e.g. that 
they are localized in solids, rather freely from the perspective 
of the senior author of this paper, because such a classification 
seems to him to ignore the necessity for M-O-M orbital overlap 
extending through a whole network for the appearance of me-
tallic conductivity. He would not classify many double perov-
skites that physicists believe to be Mott insulators, as actually 
being Mott insulators for example. ) destabilizes the 120̊ order-
ing expected for Heisenberg spins on a triangular lattice, and 
thus leads to the formation of a Z2-vortex quantum spin liquid 
state, tested by spherical neutron polarimetry106–108. Magnetic 
susceptibility displays a very strong antiferromagnetic interac-
tion with the Curie-Weiss temperature of -130 K, but according 
to the researchers involved, no magnetic ordering is observed 


8

down to 23 mK. The frustration index is (= ϴCW/TM where ϴCW
is the Curie Weiss theta and TM is the temperature of the mag-
netic ordering. Materials are expected to magnetically order at 
a ratio between 1 and 10) therefore calculated to be larger than 
5000, strongly implying the presence of a quantum spin liquid 
ground state105–107,109–111. Although there may be Ir/Ti chemi-
cal disorder in both the MO6 octahedra and the M’2O9 dimers,
the researchers involved claim that the material is not a spin
glass due to the absence of spin freezing in magnetic suscepti-
bility measurements, heat capacity, and µSR measurements. 
Further, DFT calculation based researchers report that a Dirac-
type nodal line should be present along the A-L direction in k-
space (i.e. reciprocal space), and is “symmetry-protected”, 
meaning that it absolutely has to be there due to the material’s 
symmetry, suggesting the possible existence of emerging quan-
tum phenomena108,112 (i.e. a novel spin-orbital singlet state). 
The senior author of this paper believes none of this by the way, 
because such predications in complex materials are always 
“within the model calculated” in his view, although he is happy 
to defer to the views of the large number of researchers in-
volved in the study of this material.

The reader can easily see from what we summarize here 

that the dimer-based hexagonal perovskites are a mainstay of 
quantum materials research. Structural disorder is sometimes 
detected for these materials and sometimes not, and as fre-
quently is the case in materials physics, disorder is not univer-
sally believed to be a bad thing when it comes to quantum ma-
terials. It is only considered significant when its influence on 
the quantum properties can be clearly detected through phys-
ics characterization113–115.

We now briefly consider a few complex dimer-based hex-

agonal perovskites. The first of these is very highly structurally 
disordered, but in an interesting way. The complex disordered 
dimer material Ba3Fe1.56Ir1.44O9 116 adopts the hexagonal space 
group P3m1, with the lattice parameters a = 5.740 Å and c = 
14.160 Å as shown in Figure 7. Interestingly, the site disorder 
between the Fe and Ir occurs within the dimers, where the di-
merized sites are said to be unequally occupied by Fe and Ir, 
and in one of the triangular layers of octahedra but not the 
other. This kind of crazy uneven occupancy is what reduces the 
symmetry from the usual space group for 6H perovskites. The 

symmetry of this material is such that the complicated chemi-
cal disorder results in a non-centrosymmetric polar structure. 
The valence states of Fe3+ and Ir5+ were confirmed by X-ray ab-
sorption near edge spectroscopy (XANES). Ba3Fe1.56Ir1.44O9 is 
semiconducting and it has a near room temperature antiferro-
magnetic ordering transition of 270 K. 

Table 1. The magnetic ordering temperatures (in degrees Kel-
vin) of the Ba3MRu2O9 and Ba3MIr2O9 (M = Y, La-Lu) hexagonal 
perovskites. 47,84,117–121 PM: paramagnetic. 

M ions
TC  or TN of 
Ba3MRu2O9

TC  or TN of 
Ba3MIr2O9

Y
4.5
4

La
6.0
14.6

Ce
PM
PM

Pr
PM
PM

Nd
24.0
17.4

Sm
12.5
14.4

Eu
9.5
8.2

Gd
14.8
10.2

Tb
9.5
2.0

Dy
27.8
8.9

Ho
10.2
5.6

Er
6.0
6.0

Tm
8.3
5.5

Yb
4.5
5.3

Lu
9.5
5.1

The 6-layer hexagonal structure of Ba6Rh2.33Yb2Al1.67O15

122 is said to adopt the non-standard 6H space group P-6m2, 
with lattice parameters a = 5.854 Å and c = 14.660 Å, as dis-
played in Figure 8. Unlike the “usual” 6H hexagonal 

Figure 6. (a) Temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility in the Quantum Spin Liquid candidate Ba3InIr2O9 and (b) heat ca-
pacity measurements and magnetic entropy calculation in this Ba3InIr2O9 material 104.


9

perovskites, this material has three different types of M-M’ ions 
present. The crystal structure is slightly different from what is 
seen in the 6H-Ba3MRu2O9 family, in that the face-sharing 
Rh2O9 dimers, which are reported to contain only Rh, while a 
second dimerized layer is said to be occupied by a disordered 
mix of Al plus Rh. The YbO6 octahedra are confined to the iso-
lated octahedra. To balance the charge, there appear to be ox-
ygens missing in a random way in certain sites in the crystal 
structure. Given that some of the dimers are heavily Al-rich, the 
structure may be even more complex that this, with the missing 
oxygens associated with AlO4 tetrahedra. This is definitely a 
challenging structural problem to figure out.

Figure 7. The crystal structure of Ba3Fe1.56Ir1.44O9

Figure 9. The crystal structure of Ba6Rh2.33Yb2Al1.67Ox The 
Rh2O9 dimers are shown in light gray, the mixed (Al,Rh)2O9 di-
mers in dark gray and the YbO6 octahedra shown in light blue. 
The oxygens are shown in Red, with partially occupied sites 
shown as mixtures of red and white spheres. The Ba ions are 
shown in green.

3.2. Trimer-based hexagonal perovskites

When the ratio of M to M’ ions is 1:3 instead of 1:2 then 

variations of hexagonal double perovskites can form with for-
mulas A4MM’3O12. In these materials, there are three M’O6 octa-
hedra sharing faces with each other and corners with a trian-
gular lattice of MO6 octahedra. These trimer materials are much 
more rare than the hexagonal perovskite oxides based on di-
mers, and have been studied proportionally much less 

Figure 8. (a) Temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility of Ba4NbMn3O12, (b) The two magnetic models account for 
the observed magnetic moment of 4.82 µB/Mn3O12 per trimer, (c) Magnetic hysteresis loops above and below the ferrimag-
netic transition temperature T ≈ 42 K, and (d) The heat capacity measurement that shows the partial entropy released at 
the ordering temperature at T ≈ 42 K 126.


10

frequently. The site in the middle of the M’ trimer is crystallo-
graphically distinct from that of the two outer octahedra (The 
central octahedron shares only faces with other octahedra 
while the two peripheral ones share a face on one side and cor-
ners on the other side). Thus it is occasionally noted that the 
central octahedron can have a different ion in it, described fur-
ther below, making such materials hexagonal triple perovskites 
(A4MM’2M”O12).

From a property perspective, the trimer-based materials 

can be interesting magnetically, as the electrons in the trimer 
are either localized on the ions, as they are when M’ is a 3d ele-
ment, or confused about whether they are localized or delocal-
ized within the trimer, as has been proposed when M’ is a 4d or 
a 5d element47. This is particularly of interest to spectrosco-
pists, who have most frequently studied this issue in dimers123
and theorists (see the review by S.V. Streltsov and D. Khomskii 
in this journal). The “where are the electrons” question in these 
trimer perovskites can make them interesting as quantum ma-
terials.

In this section, we focus our attention mostly on the three 

trimer systems Ba4NbM3O12 (M = Mn, Ru, Ir), which have been 
investigated in the context of whether the unpaired electrons 
are localized or delocalized within the M3O12 trimer clusters 
and whether spin orbit coupling can play an important role in 
the magnetism of face-sharing hexagonal perovskites. There 
are only three Mn3O12 trimer compounds reported in the liter-
ature in this group so far, Ba4MMn3O12 (M = Nb, Ce and Pr), all 
of which crystallize in the hexagonal space group R-3m. The lat-
ter two materials were only structurally reported without any 
magnetic analysis. This can be due to the multi-valent states of 
Ce and Pr, causing complicated magnetic properties, or that the 
phases are not pure enough for the magnetic study. Ce is 4+ 
(with no d electrons an no f electrons) in the BaCeO3 conven-
tionalperovskite, so there may be no interference of rare earth 
magnetism in that case, but Pr is a notorious nightmare to deal 
with in the more familiar oxide perovskites121,124,125. Thus, we 
will discuss in detail the magnetic properties of Ba4NbMn3O12
instead, where the Nb is 5+ and non-magnetic126. There are two 
Mn3+ and one Mn4+ present. As shown in Figure 9a, 
Ba4NbMn3O12 shows an effective moment of 4.82 μB/Mn3O12
trimer and competing antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic 

interactions between Mn ions are inferred from the Curie-
Weiss temperature of −4 K and the ferrimagnetic ordering 
transition temperature of approximately 42 K. With the effec-
tive moment of 4.82 μB/Mn3O12, two potential magnetic order-
ing schemes for this material are displayed in Figure 9b. Neu-
tron diffraction is necessary in order to solve the magnetic 
structure and determine the actual magnetic spin configura-
tion. From this magnetic picture, we can see that the mag-
netism of the Mn3O12 trimer can be well explained by a local-
ized electron model, meaning that the unpaired electrons re-
side locally at each ion site, instead of being delocalized within 
the Mn3O12 trimer unit. The magnetic hysteresis loops above 
and below the transition temperature are shown in Figure 9c. 
Finally, the heat capacity measurement in Figure 9d demon-
strates the presence of an entropy loss at the around 42 K, how-
ever, only a small amount of the total magnetic entropy ex-
pected for an S = 2 Heisenberg system is recovered. So, it is fair 
to ask, where is the missing entropy?

Moving to a 4d transition metal based material, the 

Ba4MRu3O12
system 
for 
example, 
Ba4NbRu3O12
and 

Ba4TaRu3O12 are reported to adopt the hexagonal space group 
R-3m. The crystal structures consist of a trimer-based Ru3O12
cluster. The exchange interaction between Ru3+ and Ru4+ is 
claimed to be the origin of the magnetic ground state127,128. A 
few other compounds in this trimer family have been structur-
ally reported, but the magnetic properties are not yet investi-
gated. A comprehensive study of Ba4LnRu3O12 - type materials 
has been reported, however. In the case of non-magnetic rare 
earth ions (Ln = Y, La, Lu), the magnetism comes purely from 
the magnetic Ru3O12 trimers. But for other rare earth ions, the 
observed magnetic moments must arise from both the mag-
netic rare earth ions and the Ru3O12 trimers. The magnetic or-
dering temperatures of the Ba4LnRu3O12 series are summa-
rized in Table 2. If the trimers could be made fully nonmag-
netic, then these compounds would have nicely separated tri-
angular layers of rare earth ions, and be good candidates for 
low temperature quantum magnets.

The magnetic properties of isolated Ru3O12 trimers in 

Ba4NbRu3O12 have been compared with the combined mag-
netic moments of the magnetic rare earth Tb4+ and the Ru3O12
trimer in Ba4TbRu3O12. The temperature-dependent magnetic 

Figure 10. Temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility of (a) Ba4NbRu3O12 127and (b) Ba4TbRu3O12129.


11

susceptibilities of both compounds are shown in Figure 10. 
The Curie-Weiss fitting of the data from 200-400 K in 
Ba4TbRu3O12 results in a Curie-Weiss temperature of -57 K and 
an effective moment of 8.78 µB/f.u. This large magnetic mo-
ment has been attributed to the magnetic sum of Tb4+ (7.94 µB) 
plus three individual Ru4+ (S = 1, µeff = 2.83 µB), which should 
be about 9.33 µB/mol-f.u. The observed moment is argued to 
be within experimental error of the expected moments from lo-
calized spins. From neutron diffraction, the magnetic structure 
of Ba4TbRu3O12 was solved. It is displayed in Figure 11. 

Figure 11. The magnetic structure of Ba4TbRu3O12 at 2.5 K, 
solved from neutron diffraction129. Arrows show the directions 
of the ordered magnetic spins at low temperatures.

Table 2. The summary of the magnetic ordering temperatures 
in Ba4MRu3O12 and Ba4MIr3O12 129–131 (M = Y, La-Lu) systems. 
DM: diamagnetic, CW: Curie-Weiss, VV: Van-Vleck.

M 

ions

TC  or TN of 

Ba4MRu3O12

TC  or TN of 

Ba4MIr3O12

La
6.0
DM

Ce4+
CW
10.5

Pr4+
2.4
35

Nd
11.5
CW

Sm
3.5
VV

Eu
4.0
VV

Gd
2.5
CW

Tb4+
24
16

Dy
30
CW

Ho
8.5
CW

Er
8.0
CW

Tm
8.5
CW

Yb
13
CW

Lu
8.0
DM

In the case of Ba4NbRu3O12, since Nb5+ is non-magnetic, the 

only magnetic moments come from the isolated Ru3O12 trimer. 
Analysis of the magnetic susceptibility leads to a Curie-Weiss 
temperature of -155 K and an effective moment of 2.59 
µB/mol-f.u. This observed moment is between the value of spin 
½ (1.73 µB) and spin 1 (2.83 µB) per trimer, and cannot 

therefore be due to free-ion-like localized magnetic moments. 
The Curie-Weiss temperature is relatively large and negative, 
indicating the presence of strong antiferromagnetic interac-
tions between the Ru ions. A freezing temperature to a glassy 
state was observed at around 4 K. The corresponding frustra-
tion index is calculated to be larger than 30, implying that 
Ba4NbRu3O12 is a strongly frustrated magnet. A recent neutron 
study employing both elastic and inelastic neutron scattering 
(in preparation by T. Halloran et. al) shows that only 1/3 of the 
spins freeze below 4 K, with the remaining spins still fluctuat-
ing. Hence, Ba4NbRu3O12 is proposed to be a spin liquid or even 
a quantum spin liquid candidate. As shown in Figure 12, both 
the trimer energy level diagram, 1, and the molecular orbital 
diagram, 2, result in the overall spin ½ in each Ru3O12 trimer.

Spin-orbit coupling is the interaction of a non-zero elec-

tron spin with its orbital motion. This is a relativistic effect, and 
is proportional to the fourth power of the atomic number 
Z132,133. Thus, it has the strongest effect in 5d transition metals 
(eg. Ir) compared to 3d ions (e.g. Mn) and 4d ions (e.g. Ru). 
Ba4BiIr3O12, which crystalizes in the distorted monoclinic space 
group C2/c, has Ir3O12 trimers bridged by corner-sharing BiO6 
octahedra95,134. It contains an unusual Bi4+ formal oxidation 
state, but actually has charge disproportionation of the Bi4+ into 
Bi3+ and Bi5+. This material shows an anomaly at T* = 215 K. 
This transition is not seen at the spin gap opening temperature, 
as is seen in Ba3BiRu2O9 or Ba3BiIr2O9. The Curie-Weiss tem-
perature is found to be -15 K and the effective moment is 0.22 
µB/Ir. The relatively low effective moment comes from strong 
spin orbit coupling for the 5d Ir transition metal. Antiferromag-
netic interactions within the Ir3O12 trimer are claimed to lead 
to the formation of an S = ½ doublet. The change in the mag-
netic state at T* is claimed to result in a structural distortion to 
balance the amount of energy for the formation of the S = ½ 
doublet. The Ir-Ir distance within the trimers is relatively short, 
2.6 A, implying the possibility of direct metal-metal bond-
ing40,96,135,136. 

Figure 12. 1 The possible energy level diagram of a trimer137
and 2 the alternative molecular orbital diagram 47. The electron 
counting shown is taken from the example of Ba4NbRu3O12, 
which has a total of 13 electrons in each Ru3O12 trimer. Dia-
grams are redrawn from the references.

While Ba4RERu3O12 (RE3+) compounds show magnetic or-

dering at low temperatures, Ba4REIr3O12 compounds fre-
quently remain paramagnetic down to 1.8 K. The exception is 
the case where the RE is Ce4+. Ba4CeIr3O12 magnetically orders 
at 10.5 K, while Ba4CeRu3O12 is paramagnetic down to 1.8 
K131,138,139. The ordering temperature and effective magnetic 
moments of the two trimer-based series, Ba4RERu3O12 and 
Ba4REIr3O12 (RE3+), are summarized in Table 2. 


12

3.3. A structure based on both trimers and dimers

There is one example that we can find of a material that 

has both trimers and dimers in its hexagonal oxide perovskite 
structure. This material is 10H- Ba5Fe4NiO13.5, synthesized by 
the decomposition of nitrate salts, which crystallizes in the hex-
agonal space group P63/mmc with lattice parameters a = 5.771 
Å and c = 24.581 Å. The crystal structure consists of the stack-
ing of clusters of three face-sharing octahedra (trimers) cor-
ner-sharing with clusters of two face-sharing octahedra (di-
mers). Structural refinement shows that the Ni ions (in gray in 
Figure 13) preferentially occupy the central octahedron of the 
trimer and Fe ions (in brown in Figure 13) occupy the other 
sites. Fitting of the temperature-dependent magnetic suscepti-
bility results in a Curie-Weiss temperature of -255 K and an ef-
fective moment of 5.45 µB per formula unit. It is not known how 
the magnetic moments are distributed. The ordering of the Ni 
and Fe in different octahedral sites implies that new phases 
with this kind of unusual stacking might be stabilized for other 
transition metal combinations as well140. We note that if the ox-
ygen content of this material is really 13.5 per formula unit 
then it is quite oxygen deficient. The missing oxygen, which is 
on the order of 10% of the total, is either missing randomly in 
the structure, or the coordination in one or more of the layers 
of ions is not actually octahedral, which is definitely a possibil-
ity for Fe3+. More on this concept can be found in subsequent 
sections of this summary.

Figure 13. (a) The crystal structure of 10H- Ba5Fe4NiO13.5, (b) 
Inverse magnetic susceptibility of Ba5Fe4NiO13.5 under the ap-
plied magnetic field of 1 kOe 140. 

3.4. 12R structures based on trimers

An example of this kind of structure is Ba4Fe3NiO12. In this 

material the transition metals are ordered and there does not 
appear to be an issue with the oxygen content. While the two 
end members BaNiO3 and BaFeO3 crystallize in the 2H and 6H 
hexagonal perovskite structures, a composition in between, 
Ba4Fe3NiO12, adopts the 12R hexagonal structure, space group 
R-3m with lattice parameters a = 5.66564(7) Å and c = 
27.8416(3) Å)141. Similar to other trimers discussed above, the 
crystal structure of Ba4Fe3NiO12 consists of three face-sharing 
octahedra (the trimers) separated by a layer of single FeO6 oc-
tahedra, as shown in Figure 14a. A combination of synchrotron 
and neutron diffraction data refinements shows that the Fe3+
ions (in brown) occupy the layer of corner-sharing octahedra 
while Fe4+ (again in brown) and Ni4+ (in gray) occupy the face-
sharing octahedra. The Ni occupy the octahedron in the middle 

of the trimer. A small amount of oxygen vacancies (~5%) were 
found at the intersections of the corner-sharing octahedra only. 
The magnetic susceptibility is claimed to show a weak 
ferro/ferrimagnetic transition that couples Fe3+ and Fe4+ at 
around 200 K, confirmed by magnetic hysteresis loops, as 
shown in Figures 14b-c. 

Similar to Ba4Fe3NiO12, Ba4Ni2Ir2O12 also crystallizes in a 

hexagonal 12R perovskite structure, space group R-3m, with 
the lattice parameters a = 5.7309(2) Å and c = 28.6318(12) Å, 
as shown in Figure 15a. The crystal structure consists of face-
sharing Ir2NiO12 trimers and layers of single NiO6 octahedra. 
This material is claimed to have the unusual mix of Ni2+ and Ni4+
in its structure, according to XANES measurements142 (Figure 
15b). Fitting of the magnetic susceptibility data yields a Curie-
Weiss temperature of -33 K and the effective moment of 4.40 
µB/f.u, with data as shown in Figure 15c. This observed mag-
netic moment is consistent with the oxidation states of Ni seen 
in the XANES measurements, namely that the Ni2+ ions occupy 
the sites within the layer of single NiO6 octahedra while the 
Ir2NiO12 trimers consist of an alternating face-sharing Ir5+O6-
Ni4+O6-Ir5+O6 arrangement. Thus, the magnetism has been at-
tributed to the contributions of both the Ir2NiO12 trimer and the 
two unpaired electrons from the Ni2+ ions. 

Figure 14. (a) The crystal structure of 12R- Ba4Fe3NiO12, (b) 
Temperature-dependent FC/ZFC magnetic susceptibility of 
Ba4Fe3NiO12 under the applied magnetic field of 100 Oe, and (c) 
The field-dependent magnetic hysteresis loops of Ba4Fe3NiO12
at 300 K and 5 K 141. 

A polycrystalline sample of Ba4NbIr3O12 has been synthe-

sized by the solid state method. The material also has a 12R-
type structure. It crystalizes in the rhombohedral space group 
R-3m, with lattice parameters a = 5.7827(2) Å and c = 
28.7725(9) Å. The structure of Ba4NbIr3O12 is based on a trian-
gular planar geometry of Ir3O12 trimers. The material displays 
a very low effective moment of 0.80 µB/f.u, reported to be due 
to the strong spin-orbit coupling effect of the 5d Ir-ions. The 
Curie-Weiss temperature is -13 K, taken to indicate antiferro-
magnetic interactions between Ir ions. However, there is no 
magnetic ordering down to 0.35 K, confirmed by heat capacity 
measurements. The heat capacity of Ba4NbIr3O12 shows a linear 
upturn in Cp/T below 2 K under applied magnetic fields of 0 
and 1 T. The upturn is suppressed under 2 and 3 T, as previ-
ously observed in the reported spin liquid material 


13

H3LiIr2O6143. The heat capacity data for Ba4NbIr3O12 below 2 K 
fits the power law Cp(T) = kTα, where k = 0.1 and α ≈ ¾. The 
power being smaller than 1 is taken to suggest a possible spin 
liquid state in this material143. The crystal growth of this mate-
rial with slight off-stoichiometry and disorder has been re-
ported144,145. As shown in Figure 16, Ba4Nb0.8Ir3.2O12 experi-
ences site disorder between Nb and Ir in the isolated octahedra 
only. A recently reported crystal growth method produces 
large 3mm size crystals. Magnetic measurements on these sin-
gle crystals has been found to be consistent with a possible spin 
liquid state, and is also consistent with the report on the stoi-
chiometric polycrystalline samples. With the availability of 
large crystals, the potential quantum spin liquid state in this 
material can be studied by thermal conductivity, µSR, inelastic 
neutron scattering and heat capacity down to 50 mK.

Figure 15. (a) The crystal structure of 12R- Ba4Ni2Ir2O12, (b) 
XANES characterization of Ba4Ni2Ir2O12 and other standards, 
Ni, NiO, BaNiO3 employed to confirm the coexistence of Ni2+ and 
Ni4+in this material. (c) Temperature-dependent FC/ZFC mag-
netic susceptibility of Ba4Fe3NiO12 under the applied magnetic 
field of 1 T 142. 

Figure 16. (a) The rhombohedral crystal structure of 
Ba4Nb0.8Ir3.2O12 144. Ba are light green and oxygens are red. The 
brown trimers contain only Ir and the isolated octahedra con-
tain disordered mixtures of Nb and Ir. (b) Heat capacity data in 
Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17 under different magnetic fields. (c) Tempera-
ture-dependent magnetic susceptibility of Ba4Nb0.8Mn3.2O12
crystals. The inset shows the large size crystals up to 3mm. 

3.5. A4-nA’nMM’2O12: Missing an octahedron in a tri-

mer

This is a derivative of the Ba4MRu3O12 family. The crystal 

structure is very similar to the 12L-Ba4NbRu3O12 hexagonal 
perovskite, except that there is a missing M’O6 octahedron in 
the middle of the trimers. The crystal structure of Sr4CoRe2O12, 
an example of a material in this A4-nA’nMM’2O12 family,146,147 is 
shown in Figure 17a. (n can range from 0 to 2, with the differ-
ent A site ions chosen to accommodate the charge on the M,M’ 
sublattice.) The inverse DC magnetic susceptibility and the AC 
susceptibility for Sr4CoRe2O12 are displayed in Figures 17b-c. 
The magnetic ordering temperature, Curie-Weiss temperature 
and effective moment of a few compounds in this series are 
known; they are summarized in Table 3. Two general observa-
tions can be made about such phases: (1) the missing octahe-
dron results in a material that has only corner shared octahe-
dra and thus can also be considered as a layered oxide perov-
skite based on (111) cubic rather than (100) cubic layers, and 
(2) if the magnetism is really acting as described in the publi-
cation, then the Co2+ present is undergoing a spin state transi-
tion on cooling and in addition the magnetic ordering is not 
frustrated (TM and ϴCW are nearly equal).  

Figure 17. (a) The crystal structure of Sr4CoRe2O12, (b) Inverse 
DC magnetic susceptibility of Sr4CoRe2O12 under the applied 
field of 5 kOe, and (c) AC susceptibility of Sr4CoRe2O12 under 
the 2 Oe-excitation field146

Table 3. The magnetic ordering temperatures, Curie-Weiss 
temperature and effective magnetic moment per formula unit 
for some examples of materials in the A4-nA’nMM’2O12 series. 

Compounds
TM (K)
ΘCW (K)
µeff (µB)

Sr4CoRe2O12
1.0
1.0
3.91

Sr2La2CoW2O12
1.26
1.5
3.95

Ba2La2CoW2O12
1.28
1.6
4.01

Ba3LaCoReWO12
0.83
0.78
3.89

Ba4CoRe2O12
0.87
0.61
3.87

Ba2La2NiW2O12
6.2
25.5
3.19

Ba2La2MnW2O12
1.7
-10.7
5.73


14

3.6. Tetramers

Very few tetramer-based materials are known; we de-

scribe one here and another in a later section where we con-
sider the presence of tetrahedral in the crystal structures. The 
return of Sb5+ to our systems allows for the formation of Ba5Sb1-

xMn4+xO15-δ, which is a 10 layer, 10H-hexagonal perovskite 
based on tetramers. It crystallizes in the space group P63/mmc
with lattice parameters a = 5.7095(1) Å, and c = 23.4866(3) Å. 
It has different stacking from Ba5Fe4NiO13.5. The crystal struc-
ture of Ba5Sb1-xMn4+xO15-δ consists of four face-sharing MnO6
octahedra (tetramers) and a layer of corner-sharing disordered 
(Sb/Mn)O6 octahedra, as shown in Figure 18. The magnetic 
properties of Ba5Sb1-xMn4+xO15-δ (0.24 ≤ x ≤ 0.36) solid solu-
tions show two distinct magnetic transitions. For example, 
when x = 0.24, the upper transition at 129 K corresponds to the 
formation of ferro/ferrimagnetic interactions within the te-
tramers, and the lower transition at 13 K is the freezing tem-
perature of a glassy state, this latter transition evidenced by the 
bifurcation of FC/ZFC magnetic susceptibility at low applied 
magnetic field. This material has an antiferromagnetic Curie-
Weiss temperature of -133 K and an effective moment of 3.55 
µB/f.u148. 

4.
Materials with MO4 tetrahedra in the framework

The crystal structure of Ba5AlIr2O11 was first reported in 

1989, but its quantum magnetism has only recently been inves-
tigated. Ba5AlIr2O11 crystallizes in the orthorhombic space 
group Pnma, with the lattice parameters a = 18.8360 Å, b = 
5.7887 Å and c = 11.1030 Å, it is a distorted version of a hexag-
onal perovskite. The crystal structure consists of two face-shar-
ing IrO6 octahedra (Ir2O9 dimers), corner-sharing with AlO4 tet-
rahedra. However, within the Ir2O9 dimers, there are two in-
equivalent Ir sites, as shown in Figure 19a, one that could 

contain Ir4+ (5d5) and the other one containing Ir5+ (5d4). In 
contrast to this local charge picture, the formation of Ir2O9 di-
mer orbitals in this material has been detected by Resonant In-
elastic x-ray scattering (RIXS). Sharp excitations of electrons 
within the dimer orbitals were observed by this method, and 
analyzed by using Density Functional Theory (DFT) and theo-
retical simulations. The spin-orbit coupling present for the Ir-
5d transition metal is said to play an important role in the com-
peting interaction between intra-atomic exchange and covalent 
bonding in this material. The researchers involved argue that 
Ir-Ir metal-metal bonds are present, causing a substantial re-
duction of the magnetic moment. This material undergoes a 
structural phase transition at 210 K, which is supported by 
temperature-dependent electrical resistivity measurements 
(Figure 19b). The material is very highly resistive, so it is basi-
cally an insulator. A clear magnetic transition is at 4.5 K, ob-
served in the magnetic susceptibility, where a clear field de-
pendence to the susceptibility even above the ordering temper-
ature is seen. (Figure 19c) 149–153.

The 10L-Ba5In2Al2ZrO13 hexagonal perovskite is another 

example of a material with MO4 tetrahedra in the structural 
framework. The crystal structure is shown in Figure 20. It 
adopts the space group P63/mmc with lattice parameters a = 
5.8707(7) Å and c = 24.445(3) Å. In this case the hexagonal 
symmetry is maintained. A special feature in the crystal struc-
ture of this material is where AlO4 tetrahedra share corners 
with InO6 octahedra, separated by a triangular layer of ZrO6 oc-
tahedra. This remarkable crystal structure is the result of the 
intergrowth along the
c-axis of Ba2InAlO5 and BaZrO3

blocks.154,155 For this material, ALL ions are in their usually 
highest formal oxidation states and no unpaired d electrons are 
present, it is thus non-magnetic and therefore no quantum 
properties are expected. 

Figure 18. (a) The crystal structure of 10H- Ba5Sb1-xMn4+xO15-δ, (b) and (c) Two proposed magnetic structures for Ba5Sb1-

xMn4+xO15-δ 148. 


15

Figure 19. (a) The crystal structure of Ba5AlIr2O11, with the 
Ir2O9 dimers and AlO4 tetrahedra (blue polyhedra); (b) Resis-
tivity measurement to show a subtle structural transition at 
210 K, and (c) Temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility 
showing the magnetic transition at 4.5 K. The symmetry of the 
crystal structure is low compared to standard hexagonal per-
ovskites 149. 

Figure 20. The crystal structure of Ba5In2Al2ZrO13. Ba ions are 
green, oxygens are red, Al3+O4 tetrahedra are shown in blue, 
In3+ octahedra as purple and Zr4+ octahedra as orange.

In another structure type consisting of octahedra plus tet-

rahedra of M ions, 12H-Ba6Na2Ru2V2O17 crystalizes in a hexag-
onal structure, space group P63/mmc, with the lattice parame-
ters a = 5.8506(1) Å and c = 29.6241(4) Å. This crystal structure 
contains a Ru2O9 dimer, which is corner-sharing with layers of 
NaO6 octahedra, separated by double sheets of VO4 tetrahedra 
(Figure 21). This nominally complex Ba6Na2M2X2O17 structure 
type can be stabilized for many possible cation combinations, 
for example for M = Ru, Nb, Ta and Sb and X = V, Cr, Mn, P, and 

V 156. The magnetic properties of many of these materials re-
main unreported.

Recently, two additional compounds with this crystal 

structure have reported, with formulas Ba6R2Ti4O17 (R = Nd 
and Y)157. In these materials, the triangular layers of NaO6 octa-
hedra are replaced by octahedra of rare earth ions (Nd or Y). 
Furthermore, the Ti cations occupy both the TiO4 tetrahedra 
and the face-sharing Ti2O9 dimers. This is one of the very rare 
oxides where Ti cations adopt both tetrahedral and octahedral 
sites in the same structure. 

In this complex yet somehow flexible structure, we 

successfully synthesized the new compound Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17. In 
this material, the only magnetic ion is Rh4+ (4d5) in the Rh2O9
dimers, which helps simplify a potentially complex magnetic 
picture (Figure 22a). Preliminary magnetic analysis shows
that the material displays a small effective magnetic moment, 
which must arise from the Rh ions present, and a negative Cu-
rie-Weiss temperature. The transport band gap and optical 
band gaps are very similar, at 0.16(1) eV, and thus 
Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17 is a small band gap semiconductor. As shown in 
Figure 22, a large upturn in the heat capacity at temperatures 
below 1 K, suppressed by magnetic fields larger than 2 Tesla, is 
observed. A very large Sommerfeld-like T-linear term in the 
specific heat (γ=166 mJ/mol f.u-K2), as is often observed for 
Heavy Fermion metals, is seen although the material is highly 
insulating at low temperatures158. These results suggest the 
possibility that a spin liquid state exists at low temperatures in 
Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17.

Figure 21. The crystal structure of Ba6Na2Ru2V2O17. Ba = green 
spheres, oxygen = red spheres, AlO4 tetrahedra depicted in red, 
Ru2O9 dimers in brown and individual layers of NaO6 octahedra 
in yellow. 

For another example of a material with mixed tetrahedra 

and octahedra, 21R-Ba7Mn5Cr2O20 crystalizes in a rhombohe-
dral structure, space group R-3m, with the lattice parameters a
= 5.7401(1) Å and c = 50.597(1) Å. The c axis is large for this 


16

structure, which consists of three shifted structural blocks. In 
Figure 23a, the crystal structure is shown. It consists of an or-
dered array of CrO4 tetrahedra (when Cr is formally highly 
charged, then its radius is small), MnO6 octahedra and face-
sharing Mn3O12 trimers. Below 50 K, the material undergoes 2D 
magnetic ordering, attributed to ferromagnetic super-ex-
change between the “isolated” MnO6 octahedra and the Mn3O12
trimers159–161. Under moderate applied magnetic fields, the ma-
terial converts to 3D magnetic ordering. Magnetic susceptibil-
ity measurements reveal a Curie-Weiss temperature of 38 K 
and an effective moment of 9.69 µB/f.u., as shown in Figure 
23b. The presence of ferromagnetism at 5 K is confirmed by the 
presence of a magnetic hysteresis loop, seen in Figure 23c. 
However, the magnetic behavior in this material is quite com-
plex since it contains different magnetic ions with different ox-
idation states, such as Cr5+, Mn2+ and Mn4+. 

Finally, we end this section of this summary by describing 

one more multi-layered structure in the hexagonal perovskite 
family is 16L-Ba4Ca1-xMn3+xO12-δ (Figure 24a). This material 
crystallizes in the hexagonal space group P-6m2 with the lattice 
parameters a = 5.8003(3) Å and c = 38.958(1) Å, with the large 
c axis arising because there are 8 layers in each of two building 
blocks. . It is one of the very first hexagonal perovskites known 
that contains Mn in tetrahedral sites, with Mn charge dispro-
portionation. The crystal structure consists of Mn-tetramers (a 
cluster of four face-sharing MnO6 octahedra), corner-sharing 
with MnO6 octahedra and MnO4 tetrahedra. Infrared spectros-
copy study of Ba4Ca1-xMn3+xO12-δ, comparing the results with 
KMnO4 and BaMnO4 standards, has been said to confirm the 
possible coexistence of Mn6+ and Mn7+ ions in the structure, as 
shown Figure 24b. Temperature-dependent magnetic suscep-
tibility measurements do not show any magnetic ordering 
down to 10 K, and high temperature inverse magnetic suscep-
tibility fitting results in a Curie-Weiss temperature of -288 K 
and an effective moment of 6.7 µB/f.u (Figure 24c). The large 

negative Curie-Weiss temperature indicates the presence of 
strong antiferromagnetic interactions; however, the determi-
nation of Mn oxidation states and the magnetic configuration 
requires careful XANES and neutron diffraction study162. 

Figure 23. (a) The crystal structure of 21R-Ba7Mn5Cr2O20, (b) 
Temperature dependent FC/ZFC magnetic susceptibility of 
Ba7Mn5Cr2O20 and (c) Magnetic hysteresis loop at 5 K in 
Ba7Mn5Cr2O20 159. 

Figure 22. (a) The crystal structure of Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17, (b)Triangular layer of Rh4+(d5) along the c-axis, (c) The Rh-O, and Rh-Rh 
distances within the Rh2O9 dimer, (d) Temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility of Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17 under different applied 
magnetic fields, and (e) Heat capacity data in Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17 under different magnetic fields158.


17

Figure 24. (a) The crystal structure of 16L-Ba4Ca1-xMn3+xO12-δ, 
(b) FTIR spectrum of Ba4Ca1-xMn3+xO12-δ and the standards, 
KMnO4 and BaMnO4. (c) The inverse magnetic susceptibility of 
Ba4Ca1-xMn3+xO12-δ under the applied magnetic field of 3 kOe 162. 

5.
Oxygen deficiency: vacancies both random and 
ordered 

Nominally simple hexagonal oxide perovskites that actu-

ally have oxygen deficiency can form complex structures when 
the vacancies are ordered, especially for multi-valent transition 
3d metal cations such as Mn, Fe and Co. Even randomly distrib-
uted vacancies can lead to a wide variety of structures, presum-
ably to accommodate the different oxidation states if the M site 

metals. BaMnO3-x, for example, can adopt different types of 
structures depending on the fraction of oxygen vacancies pre-
sent. The published structures have randomly distributed oxy-
gen vacancies, although structural probes that are sensitive to 
the local structures of the ions may eventually reveal that the 
structures are more complex. A similar phenomenon is also ob-
served in BaFeO3-x and BaCoO3-x systems. In some cases, for ex-
ample for the Cobalt compound BaCoO2.6, the oxygens appear 
to be largely missing in an ordered fashion, resulting in the 
presence of CoO4 tetrahedra. This is also seen for some materi-
als in the BaFeO3-x system.

Different polytypes can be stabilized by the ionic size of 

the central atom and its valence state. Without the oxygen va-
cancy, BaCoO3, with a typical hexagonal perovskite formula, 
displays infinite linear chains of face-sharing CoO6 in the ideal 
hexagonal space group P63/mmc, with the lattice parameters a
= 5.645(3) Å and c = 4.752(3) Å163. When the oxygen content is 
less than 3 in a formula unit, a variety of octahedral stackings 
occur, and the crystal structures adopt different space groups 
as shown in Figure 25
164–169. In the 12H-BaCoO2.6 structure, 

the tetramers consisting of four face-sharing CoO6 octahedra 
are bridged by two layers of CoO4 tetrahedra. The presence of 
tetrahedral Co in the structure may come from the small ionic 
size of Co ions in the tetrahedra compared to those in the octa-
hedra. Curiously, it is reported that structures based on hexag-
onal perovskites convert to an ideal cubic perovskite for the 
very oxygen deficient material BaCoO2.23. The most reduced 
form of this structure type results in another hexagonal com-
pound, BaCoO2, a material where all the Co is in the formal 2+ 
state. However, the crystal structure of BaCoO2 consists of cor-
ner-sharing CoO4 tetrahedra instead of the CoO6 octahedra 
commonly found in the perovskite structures. Cobalt-oxide 
based perovskites have been intensively studied for many dec-
ades, by many different methods, and the issue of whether and 
how high-spin, intermediate-spin and low-spin in Co3+ ions 

Figure 25. Different types of BaCoO3-x polymorphs, containing CoO6 octahedra and CoO4 tetrahedra. The materials with oxygen 
contents between those of BaCoO3 and BaCoO2 as a rule display randomly distributed oxygen vacancies, even in the case where 
the oxygen efficiency compared to the ideal BaCoO3 formula is largely accommodated by CoO4 octahedra.


18

exist in the “simple” LaCoO3 perovskite as a function of temper-
ature is still controversial170–174. Similarly the spin state of Co2+
in oxides can also be enigmatic.

Similarly, BaFeO3-x also adopts different structures at dif-

ferent oxygen contents. This family of materials displayed in
Figure 26 . Although similar globally to the Co based materials, 
some interesting differences are reported. In 10H-BaFeO2.65, 
the appearance of FeO4 tetrahedra is similar to the case of 12H-
BaCoO2.6. Moreover, a further reduced form of BaFeO3-x leads 
to the transformation to the monoclinic structure BaFeO2.5, 
space group P21/c. In BaFeO2.5, the coordination of Fe ions 
ranges from 4 to 6, and the crystal structure is very highly dis-
torted. A unique feature of this structure is that within an indi-
vidual layer, both octahedra and tetrahedra are found.  

For the BaMnO3-x system, there is a systematic trend in the 

number of face-sharing MnO6 octahedra in the chains. The sys-
tem goes from an infinite chain of MnO6 octahedra in 2H-
BaMnO3 to a dimer consisting of two face-sharing MnO6 octa-
hedra in 4H-BaMnO2.59 as seen in Figure 27175–178. The crystal 
structure and the oxygen vacancies in BaMnO3-x are closely re-
lated to interesting properties in manganates, such as metal-
insulator transitions and colossal magnetoresistance179–182. 
Although there are a larger number of structures observed in 
this manganite system over a smaller range of oxygen defi-
ciency than is seen in the Co and Fe – based oxygen deficient 
double perovskite, in a sense their structures appear to be sim-
pler, and thus potentially easier to understand. To the senior 
author of this manuscript the oxygen deficient hexagonal per-
ovskites for the transition metals Co, Fe and Mn literally scream 

Figure 27. Different types of BaMnO3-x structures.

Figure 26. Different types of BaFeO3-x structures.


19

for analysis through local structural methods. It does not seem 
to be something for impatient people to tackle.

6.
Polymorphism

We briefly specifically point out that hexagonal perov-

skites, even at a fixed AMO3 formula, are not free from the kind 
of polymorphism that is seen in many other kinds of materials 
systems. Although this has been described previously in the 
case of BaRuO3, it is seen in other hexagonal perovskites as 
well. A nice example is shown in Figure 28, which shows two 
different polymorphs of BaFeO3. The first of these is a 3R 111-
type rhombohedral distortion of a classical cubic perovskite, 
while the second is a 6H hexagonal perovskite with Fe2O9 di-
mers and layers of isolated FeO6 octahedra. In the other way of 
looking at these materials, the first is (ccc)2 type and the second 
is a (cch)2 type. Pressure is a typical way of generating different 
polytypes, and he same is the case for hexagonal perovskites.  

Figure 29. Two different polymorphs of BaFeO3.

7.
Summary of some of the complex variations in 
stacking 

Figure 29 displays, in the form of a summary image, of 

some of the complex stacking sequences possible in hexagonal 
perovskites. In most structures, the sequences of face-sharing 
octahedra share corners with each other (4H, 8H and 9R) or are 
bridged by layers of single octahedra (5H, 6H, 10H, 12R and 
21R). Moreover, layers of tetrahedra in between the face-shar-
ing octahedral blocks are found in 12H, 16H and 21R struc-
tures. Although both form 12-layer structures, the 12H struc-
ture includes tetrahedra while the 12R structure only contains 
octahedra. The 21R structure is an interesting and complicated 
structure type that has both tetrahedral and octahedral layers 
in between trimer building blocks. There are many materials 
with chains of face sharing octahedra or octahedra and trian-
gular prisms. They are described briefly in a later section of this 
review.

8.
Hexagonal Perovskites with Ba-Cl or Ba-Br layers 
in addition to Ba-O layers

Oxyhalide perovskites have sometimes been found as 

new phases in the crystal growth of oxide perovskites in a hal-
ide flux. In these materials, in addition to the Ba-O layers, Ba-X 
(X = F, Cl, Br, I) layers can also be stabilized between the face-
sharing magnetic building blocks. Oxychlorides are the most 
frequently reported of this group. As shown in Figure 30, the 
crystal structure of Ba6Ru2PtO12Cl2 contains Ba-Cl layers sand-
wiched between (Ru2Pt)O12 trimers. With both suitable elec-
tronegativities and ionic radii, oxychloride and oxybromide 
perovskites are commonly reported. The space groups and lat-
tice parameters of some selected materials in this family are 
summarized in 

Table 4. Their magnetic properties have not yet been thor-

oughly studied, although they are likely to be as interesting as 

Figure 28. Schematic representation of some of the crystal structures of materials with complex stacking in hexagonal perovskites.


20

those of the purely oxide hexagonal perovskites. Their poten-
tial applications as photocatalysts and cathode materials have, 
however, recently been investigated183–188.  When materials 
physicists figure out that some of them can be grown as nice 
single crystals, then more detailed studies can be expected. 

Table 4. Summary of the space groups and lattice parameters 
of some of the hexagonal perovskites with Ba-Cl layers in addi-
tion to Ba-O layers.

Compounds
Space 
group

Lattice param-

eters

Ref-
er-
ence

Ba2Co4O7Cl
R-3m
a =  5.716 Å
c = 45.010 Å

189

Ba6Ru2PtO12Cl2
P-3m1
a =  5.805 Å
c =15.006 Å

190

Ba6Ru3O12Cl2
P-3m1
a =  5.815Å
c = 14.915 Å

191

Ba6Co6O15.5Cl
P-6m2
a =  5.6738 Å
c = 14.5237 Å

192

Ba7Ru4O15Cl2

(and Br analog)

R-3m
a = 5.7785 Å
c = 51.6730 Å

193

Ba5Ru2O9Cl2

(and Br analog)

Pnma
a = 15.310 Å
b =  5.945 Å
c = 14.197Å

194

Ba5Co5O13Cl
P63/mmc
a =  5.669 Å
c = 24.304 Å

195

Ba5(MnO4)3Cl
P63/m
a = 10.469 Å
c = 7.760 Å

196

KBa2V2O7Cl
P63/mmc
a =  5.7688 Å
c = 15.0762 Å

197

BaZn2(SeO3)2Cl2
R-3m
a =  5.5156 Å
c = 24.5840 Å

198

Ba8Co2Mn6O22Cl
P-6m2
a =  5.7207 Å
c = 19.4099 Å

199

Ba8Ru3.33Ta1.67O18Cl2
R-3m
a =  5.947 Å
c = 59.760 Å

200

Ba10Fe8Pt2Cl2O25
P63/mmc
a =  5.8034 Å
c = 24.9970 Å

201

Figure 30. The crystal structure of Ba6(Ru2PtO12)Cl2 190.

9.
Chains

One of the very nice structural aspects of hexagonal per-

ovskites is that chain fragments of different lengths can be 
formed from face centered transition metal octahedra. These 
chains can be interrupted by face sharing with triangular 
prisms, which have some leeway along their prismatic lengths 
to shrink or stretch to accommodate ions of different preferred 
M-O bond lengths. This leads to some very interesting com-
pounds. In a hexagonal perovskite structure type, materials of 
the type Sr4MO6 (M = Pt, Rh, and Ir), for example, crystallize in 
a rhombohedral structure, space group R-3c, as shown in Fig-
ure 31. Along the c-axis, the magnetic MO6 octahedra are linked 
by non-magnetic SrO6 trigonal prisms to form 1D-chains, 
where the magnetic octahedra and non-magnetic triangular 
prisms alternate. In some of these materials, the Sr4MO6 202,203
formula (Sr4MO6 = Sr3(SrM)O6), because it results in a non- 1:1 
A site to Chain site ratio, can lead to incommensurability of the 
chain periodicity and the A site periodicity. 

From the quantum materials perspective, a few materials 

of this type have been studied. The analysis of magnetic suscep-
tibility in Sr4RhO6204 results in an effective moment of 2.03 
µB/f.u and a Curie-Weiss temperature of -10 K. The authors of 
that study argue that Sr4RhO6 is the first clear example of a 
magnetically ordered Rh4+ compound. The antiferromagnetic 
ordering temperatures of Sr4RhO6 and the related Sr4IrO6 chain 
compounds are 7 K and 12 K, respectively, which has been in-
terpreted as reflecting a greater degree of covalency in the 
Ir5d-O than the Rh 4d-O system204,205. Although in this review 
we have encountered several compounds in which “Rh4+” dis-
plays a magnetic moment, that is by far not the usual case in 
oxides, which, when based on the 4d transition metal Rh, are 
generally non-magnetic.

In this K4CdCl6-type structure, a series of 2H-related per-

ovskites (A3-xNax)NaBO6 (A = La, Pr, Nd; B = Rh, Pt) has also 
been reported, made through synthesis by carbonate and hy-
droxide flux techniques. These materials are different in that 
the ions on the A site are mixed to yield charge neutrality. All of 
the materials crystallize in the rhombohedral space group R-3c. 
The temperature dependent magnetic susceptibility of a se-
lected material in this family, (Nd2Na)NaPtO6 shows no mag-
netic ordering down to 2 K. The observed effective moment is 
found to be 5.06 µB/f.u, which agrees well with the expected 
moment of non-interacting Nd3+ ions, 5.12 µB/f.u.206. In fact 
many rare earth oxides do not magnetically order above 2K, 
and thus with Pt4+ and Na+ being non-magnetic ions, these hex-
agonal perovskite materials can be considered as rare-earth-
based paramagnets. Further study may or may not reveal mag-
netic ordering of the rare earth moments in these materials at 
lower temperatures. 

In the same A3n+3mA′nB3m+nO9m+6n family, the compound 

Sr6Rh5O15207 with m = 1 and n = 1, grown by a molten K2CO3 flux 
technique, has been reported. It crystallizes in the hexagonal 
space group R32, with the lattice parameters a = 9.6517(5) Å 
and c = 13.0480(5) Å. The crystal structure consists of 1D-
chains parallel to the c-axis of four face-sharing RhO6 octahedra 
a single RhO6 trigonal prism. This material differs from the ones 
we have described so far because the atom in the triangular 
prism is the same as the atom in the octahedra. Magnetic sus-
ceptibility 
measurements 
shows 
an 
antiferromagnetic 


21

transition at 11 K, and thus that this material is another exam-
ple of a magnetic Rh-based hexagonal oxide perovskite. The 
material is reported to have a large magnetic anisotropy, with 
the magnetic susceptibility when the applied field is parallel to 
the crystal’s c-axis being many orders of magnitude larger than 
the case when the applied field is perpendicular to the crystal’s 
c-axis. 

Figure 31. The crystal structure of Sr4MO6 (M = Pt, Rh, Ir).

Another example of a chain-structure variation is found 

for Sr4CuIr2O9, whose crystal structure consists of Ir2O9 dimers 
face-sharing with CuO6 trigonal prisms, to form 1 D chains 
along the c-axis (Figure 32). An alternative view is that the 
continuous chains are made of IrO6 octahedra interrupted after 
only two share faces by sharing faces with a Cu triangular prism 
or a vacant prism. The crystal structure of this material, which 
has Cu/Ir ordering in the M site chains, is very sensitive to the 
conditions of synthesis: prolonged heating of a commensu-
rately ordered trigonal material leads to the transformation to 
an incommensurate structure, which can be described as a mix-
ture of two substructures with the same lattice parameter a, 
but with different lattice parameters c1 and c2 (c~2c1~3c2)208. 
The incommensurability, as is seen in this type of compound 
and for other materials in the hexagonal perovskite family, 
comes from the difference in periodicities of the A-site and M-
site chains, from which one can infer that the atoms in the 
chains are more strongly interacting along their lengths than 
with other chains.  In contrast, in the Ba6CuIr4O15 crystal struc-
ture, a disordered distribution of Cu and Ir, rather than an or-
dered distribution, is seen in both the trigonal prismatic and 
the octahedral sites. The incommensurate structure of this ma-
terial can be considered as a combination of trigonal and rhom-
bohedral substructures, similarly to the incommensurate hex-
agonal perovskites SrMn1-xCoxO3-y209,210. 

Along the same line of study is a material where Cu and Ir 

are mixed in triangular prisms but there are three octahedra 
before the chains are interrupted by a triangular prism. The 
crystal structure of Ba5CuIr3O12 was determined by a combina-
tion of both X-ray and neutron diffraction in 1999 211. As shown 
in Figure 33, its structure consists of three face-sharing IrO6
octahedra forming a quasi 1D chain along the c-axis. DFT calcu-
lations for this material show that the localized j = ½ picture 
cannot fully explain the electronic and magnetic properties of 
Ba5CuIr3O12, attributed by the authors of that study to strong 

covalency among the atoms that is not captured by the calcula-
tions. In other words, the very short Ir-Ir distance present 
within the Ir3O12 trimers results in strong uncaptured metal-
metal interactions that may lead to the formation of molecular 
orbitals212. Recently, a spin liquid ground state in Ba5CuIr3O12
has been tested by thermodynamic and high magnetic field 
measurements. Although weak antiferromagnetic interactions 
were seen in the magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity 
measurements, the magnetization did not saturate, even up to 
a 59 T applied magnetic field. This implies the existence of a 
random single state, which can fully explain the experimental 
data213. 

Figure 32. The crystal structure of Sr4CuIr2O9.

Figure 33. The crystal structure of Ba5CuIr3O12.


22

In contrast to the other materials described here, the crys-

tal structure of Ca2IrO4214 displays a pure 1D chain of edge-
sharing (not face-sharing) IrO6 octahedra, but nonetheless has 
hexagonal symmetry,  as shown in Figure 34. DFT calculations 
have been performed for this material and they argue that the 
material should be an antiferromagnetic insulator with a band 
gap of 0.64 eV and an effective moment of 0.68 µB/f.u. The band 
gap has been attributed to the long range antiferromagnetic in-
teractions of Ir4+ spins. Moreover, attributed to the inherent, 
strong spin orbit coupling present for the 5d Ir transition metal, 
large magnetic anisotropy has been observed in this system. 
The crystal structure of a more traditional hexagonal perov-
skite based on chains, 2H BaCoO3, is shown in the figure for 
comparison. The Co-Co bond length in 2H-BaCoO3 is even 
shorter than that in the metal; the distances being 2.38 Å and 
2.50 Å along the chain, respectively170. 

Figure 34. The crystal structure of Ca2IrO4 and 2H-BaCoO3.

Sticking with continuous chains of octahedra for the mo-

ment, a continuous 1D chain of face-sharing IrO6 octahedra has 
been observed recently reported material, K3Ir2O6 215. This ma-
terial is an electrical insulator, but DFT calculations show no 
band gap near the Fermi level. This has been interpreted to in-
dicate that K3Ir2O6 is a Mott insulator. More interestingly, “flat 
bands” (that is, electronic bands that show no dispersion of 
electron energy versus electron wave vector) along the Γ-F di-
rection in the Brillouin zone in the electronic band structure 
suggest that the electrons are localized along certain momen-
tum vectors in the unit call. This material may also prove to be 
of interest from the quantum materials perspective on further 
study. 

A few more crystal structures of materials with 1D chains 

are outlined in Figure 35. They are obviously complex struc-
tures, because the chain fragments are quite long and have dif-
ferent lengths. RhO6 octahedra seem to be a fertile constituent 
of such systems. Ba9Rh8O24216 crystallizes in the hexagonal 
space group R-3c with the lattice parameters a = 10.0899(4) Å, 
and c = 41.462(2) Å. A chain of seven face-sharing RhO6 octa-
hedra is sandwiched by RhO6 trigonal prisms in this material. 
The directional magnetic susceptibility shows divergence be-
low 100 K, implying the onset of the magnetic anisotropy in this 
material. Its high temperature magnetic susceptibility does not 
follow the Curie-Weiss law, and it is too complex to allow the 
assignment of the oxidation states of Rh ions along the chain. 
The next two materials, Ba11Rh10O30 and Ba32Rh29O87 217, both 
crystallize in the hexagonal space group R-3m. Ba11Rh10O30
contains chains of nine face-sharing RhO6 octahedra while 
Ba32Rh29O87 has eight repeated face-sharing RhO6 octahedra 
followed by a RhO6 trigonal prism. The longest chain of face-

sharing octahedra is seen in 12R-Ba12Rh9.25Ir1.75O33218, for 
which Ir is mixed with the Rh in a disordered fashion The chain 
consists of ten face-sharing (Rh/Ir)O6 octahedra, connected to 
single (Rh/Ir)O6 trigonal prism. This material adopts a hexago-
nal structure, space group R32, with lattice parameters a = 
10.0492(2) Å and c = 28.386(3) Å. Magnetic susceptibility 
measurements yield a Curie-Weiss temperature of -1 K, and a 
very low effective moment of 1.08 µB/f.u. This very low ob-
served effective moment has been attributed to a strong spin 
orbit coupling effect in both the Rh and Ir ions and strong 
metal-metal interactions along the chains. The continuous se-
quence of face-sharing octahedra displays very short metal-
metal bond lengths (2.5-2.6 Å) in this material, which indicates 
the presence of direct metal-metal bonding along the 1D chain. 
This apparent bonding would not lead to a preference of one 
type of magnetic model over any other. If these compounds 
could be made in quantities sufficient for detailed study, or as 
large enough single crystals, then they would certainly chal-
lenge theorist’s understanding of quantum materials

10. Some unusual derivatives of hexagonal perov-

skites

But the crystal structures can sometimes be even more 

complex than these. Pb3Rh7O15 219 for example crystallizes in a 
hexagonal structure, space group P63/mmc with lattice param-
eters a = 10.3537(2) Å and c = 13.2837(5) Å. The crystal struc-
ture of Pb3Rh7O15 is shown in Figure 36a. It is a variant of a 
“dimer” type hexagonal perovskite. The electrical resistivity is 
low and isotropic, about 1mΩcm at room temperature. As seen 
in Figures 36b-c, there exists a clear transition at 185 K in both 
magnetic susceptibility and heat capacity measurements. This 
comes from a structural phase transition at 185 K that has been 
attributed to the charge modulation of Rh3+ and Rh4+. The sub-
stitution of Bi for Pb leads to the disappearance of the struc-
tural transition at 185 K, which the authors argue confirms that 
the transition in Pb3Rh7O15 is due to Rh3+-Rh4+ charge modula-
tion. 

The crystal structure of a recently described rhodate 

Bi1.4CuORh5O10 220 is shown in Figure 37. This material crystal-
lizes in a monoclinic space group, C2/m, with the lattice param-
eters a = 17.310(3) Å, b = 3.0775(9) Å, c = 16.009(3) Å and β = 
95.903(15)̊, with a more severe distortion of a hexagonal per-
ovskite structure then the Pb rhodate described above. The 
crystal structure contains undulating layers of both edge-shar-
ing and corner-sharing RhO6 octahedra, with Cu ions occupying 
square planar coordinate sites. This type of octahedral frame-
work with channels is commonly known in rhodates, such as 
rutile RhO2, hollandite Ba1.72Rh8O16, and todorokite Bi6Rh12O29.

As shown in Figure 38, Sr7Mn4O15 221 is a distorted dimer-

based perovskite. Studied by neutron diffraction, this material 
crystallizes in the monoclinic space group, P21/c, with the lat-
tice parameters a = 6.81825(9) Å, b = 9.6228(1) Å, c = 
10.3801(1) Å, and β = 91.8771(9)̊ . The crystal structure con-
sists of dimers of face-sharing MnO6 octahedra that are then 
corner shared with other dimers, but the crystal structure is 
highly distorted, with an unusual ratio of seven Sr2+ ions to four 
Mn ions, which in the end remarkably yields a uniform formal 
charge state of Mn4+, a 3d3 electron configuration to accompany 
the highly distorted crystal structure that accommodates the
7:4 metal ion ratio.  Magnetic susceptibility measurements 


23

show the presence of three different magnetically ordered 
states in this material as a function of temperature at ambient 
temperature and below. Above 150 K, intradimer ordering is 
observed. 2D-magnetic clusters are formed in the temperature 
range of 150-75 K, and finally, full 3D antiferromagnetic order-
ing among the Mn4+ spins is established below 75 K. The mag-
netic structure of Sr7Mn4O15, determined by using neutron dif-
fraction, was interpreted as showing the presence of those 
three different magnetic phases. Mn seems to be highest among 
royalty in its ability to couple lattice and electronic and mag-
netic states in oxides.

Figure 36. (a) The crystal structure of Pb3Rh7O15, (b) Tempera-
ture dependent magnetic susceptibility and (c) Heat capacity of 
Pb3Rh7O15 219.

The ternary Ba-Ru-O and Ba-Ir-O hexagonal perovskite 

chemical systems display many unusual derivatives, largely 
based on different Ba:M ratios, with interesting quantum prop-
erties. First of all, Ba5Ru2O10 222 crystallizes in the hexagonal 
space group P63/mmc, and its crystal structure shown in Fig-
ure 39 consists of two face-sharing RuO6 octahedra forming 
Ru2O9 dimers. The Ru-Ru distance in the dimer is 2.071 Å, and 
the Ru in this material has a formal charge of 5+. The magnetic 
susceptibility of Ba5Ru2O10 has a large maximum at around 280 
K, which has been ascribed to the antiferromagnetic interac-
tions of the Ru moments within the Ru2O9 dimers, and the cou-
pling exchange is calculated to be -116 K. With the same syn-
thesis conditions in an O2 rich environment, Ba5Ru2O11 is 
formed instead. The only difference in the crystal structures be-
tween Ba5Ru2O10 and Ba5Ru2O11 is that peroxide groups O22- are 
stabilized in the Ba2O2 layers in Ba5Ru2O11 while only isolated 
oxygen ions are found in the unit cell in Ba5Ru2O10. The high 
stability of the peroxide O22- group has been said to limit re-
versible electrochemical reactions of the O22-/O2- redox couples 
used in oxygen evolution reaction catalysts and Li-ion battery 
materials223. In the mind of the senior author of this manu-
script, the fact that peroxide ions are actually observed in the 
crystal structure of Ba5Ru2O11 really raises the question of how 
to think about the distribution of electrons in materials like 
these that have high rations of electropositive ions (i.e. Ba2+) to 
highly oxidized transition elements (i.e. Ru); he realizes of 
course that people who do DFT calculations will say that they 
know where the charges are, but for his generation at least, 
proposed charge distributions are best determined experimen-
tally not through DFT calculations. A famous case of this is 
found in cuprate superconductors such as La2-xSrxCuO4. As Sr is 
substituted for La, do the electrons come out of Cu orbitals, 
making the actual number of electrons that can be associated 
with the Cu go down, or is the charge actually removed from 
oxygen p states? Much of the observed phenomenology is not 
sensitive to this. Ba5Ru2O10 by the way appears to be a simple 
example of relatively isolated Ru2O9 dimers on a layered hex-
agonal lattice.  

Figure 35. The crystal structures of Ba9Rh8O24, Ba11Rh10O30, Ba32Rh29O87 and Ba12Rh9.25Ir1.75O33.


24

Figure 37. The crystal structure of Bi1.4CuORh5O10.

Figure 38. (a) The crystal structure of Sr7Mn4O15, (b) FC/ZFC 
magnetic susceptibility of Sr7Mn4O15 under the applied mag-
netic field of 100 Oe 221. 

Ba4Ru3O10224 is a distorted monoclinic material based on 

the 9R-BaRuO3 hexagonal perovskite. It crystallizes in the 
space group P21/a with the lattice parameters a = 5.776 Å, b = 
13.076 Å, c = 7.234 Å, and β = 113.53̊. Its crystal structure, as 
shown in Figure 40, consists of three face-sharing RuO6 octa-
hedra making Ru3O12 trimers, corner-sharing with each other 
to form zig-zag layers parallel to the (001) plane. The crystal 
structure is skewed away from simple hexagonal symmetry by 
the presence of the 4:3 Ba to Ru ratio and the trimer formation. 
The intra-atomic Ru-Ru distance within a trimer is shorter than 
that in Ru metal, 2.57 Å compared to 2.65 Å, which the authors 

interpret as implying the presence of strong metal-metal 
bonds, as commonly seen in face-sharing octahedra. The tem-
perature dependent magnetic susceptibility of Ba4Ru3O10 dis-
plays a broad peak at 200 K, taken by the authors to be charac-
teristic of a 2D-antiferromagentic transition. Further, the effec-
tive moment was calculated to be 3.0 µB/ f.u, which would yield 
an S =1 for every Ru4+-based trimer in Ba4Ru3O10. The DFT-
based calculations that the authors performed on Ba4Ru3O10
were interpreted as indicating the presence of a nonmagnetic 
ground state for one-third of the Ru4+ ions and a different 
charge distribution between different Ru sites in the trimer and 
molecular orbital formation in the trimer.225 Readers inter-
ested in the question of “where’s the charge” in this and other 
materials in the hexagonal perovskite family are referred to the 
theoretical contribution in this issue by Streltsov and 
Khomskii.

Continuing along this line of structural complexity, 

Ba5Ru3O12 226 adopts the orthorhombic space group Pnma with 
lattice parameters a = 10.862 Å, b = 5.893 Å, and c = 19.790 Å. 
As shown in Figure 39, the crystal structure also contains the 
Ru3O12 trimers, similar to the case of Ba4Ru3O10. However, for 
this material, the trimers are isolated from each other and sep-
arated by Ba atoms. In Ba5Ru3O12, there exists a formal mix of 
Ru4+ and Ru5+ in a 1 to 2 ratio. The material displays antiferro-
magnetic ordering at 60 K. Fitting of the high temperature mag-
netic susceptibility results in a Curie-Weiss temperature of -
320 K, indicating a relatively strong antiferromagnetic interac-
tion between Ru ions.

Figure 39. The crystal structures of Ba5Ru2O10 and Ba5Ru3O12.

We move on now to barium iridates. Quantum spin liquids 

are often found in strongly frustrated magnetic systems. Typi-
cally, the magnetic ions are arranged in simple triangular, hon-
eycomb, and kagome lattices. Ba4Ir3O10 is proposed to be a 
quantum spin liquid candidate, but has the Ir ions arranged in 
a nominally unfrustrated lattice due to its structural complex-
ity, which is based on zig-zag corner-sharing of Ru3O12 trimers 
Figure 40. The temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibil-
ity has been interpreted as yielding a very large negative Curie-
Weiss temperature of -766 K, which would indicate the pres-
ence of very strong antiferromagnetic interactions in this 


25

material. The authors report that no magnetic ordering is ob-
served down to 0.2 K in this material, interpreted as meaning 
that a quantum spin liquid state exists down to that tempera-
ture. The authors further report that only 2% doping of Sr on 
the Ba sites kills the QSL state and uncovers antiferromagnetic 
ordering at 130 K. Further, although there is strong intra-tri-
mer magnetic exchange present due to short the Ir-Ir distances 
present, inter-trimer coupling also plays an important role in 
fully explaining the low temperature magnetic properties in 
this quantum magnet. 

Ba7Ir6O19 227 adopts a distorted monoclinic structure in 

space group C2/m with the lattice parameters a = 14.913 Å, b = 
5.778 Å, c = 10.979 Å and β = 99.58̊. As shown in Figure 40, the 
crystal structure consists of three-face-sharing IrO6 octahedra, 
forming Ir3O12 trimers, corner-shared to each other. Its mag-
netic properties have not yet been investigated. 

Figure 40. The crystal structures of Ba4Ir3O10 (left) and 
Ba7Ir6O19 (right).

11. Conclusions

In a way, the hexagonal oxide perovskites and their 

distorted derivatives are much richer materials than the cubic 
perovskites and their derivatives because the crystal struc-
tures are more widely varied. Their properties are not studied 
as much because the hexagonal perovskites are not as jaw-
dropping when considered as quantum materials as the classi-
cal perovskites are. There are no known superconductors in 
this family for example. Growing crystals by the optical floating 
zone method for the simple ones is not often done, presumably 
due to the volatility of the constituents and relatively little mo-
tivation by the physical properties. However, the study of quan-
tum spin liquids is a topic of considerable interest nowadays, 
especially in the neutron scattering community, and thus single 
crystals of some of the dimer-based materials have been stud-
ied extensively. Quite a few hexagonal-perovskite-based mate-
rials have been identified as potential candidates for the quan-
tum spin liquid state at low temperatures (i.e. Ba3CuSb2O9, 
Ba3CoSb2O9, Ba3InIr2O9, Ba3IrTi2O9, Ba4NbIr3O12, Ba4Ir3O10 and 
Ba2Y2Rh2Ti2O17), but so far the field remains “dynamic”; and at 
the time of this writing there appears to be no community-wide 
accepted hexagonal perovskite quantum spin liquid, although 
as described above there are many candidates. Perhaps the 
problem is that there are too many contenders and different re-
searchers have different favorites among them. Several ferro-
magnetic hexagonal perovskites have recently been reported, 
such as Ba4NdRu3O12 ordering at 11.5 K or Ba4NbMn3O12 order-
ing at 42 K. There may be worth further study.

Most of the hexagonal perovskite derivatives are materials 

in the Ba3MM’2O9 family (based on dimers) and next the 
Ba4MM’3O12 family (based on trimers). The ferroelectric and di-
electric properties of these materials have not generally been 
reported, though Ba6Nd2Ti4O17, a material that includes layers 
of both tetrahedra and octahedra, is a well-known dielectric. In 
the near future, in our view, comprehensive studies will reveal 
more interesting quantum properties in the hexagonal oxide 
perovskite family. The family does seem to have an excellent 
chance for hosting the exotic quantum spin liquid state, and 
that may turn out after several more years of study, to be its 
primary “claim to fame”. 

12. Acknowledgments 

The authors’ research on hexagonal oxide perovskites and 

geometric magnetic frustration has been supported by the Gor-
don and Betty Moore Foundation, grant GBMF-4412, and by the 
Basic Energy Sciences Division of the Department of Energy, 
grant number DE-FG02-08ER46544 to the Institute of Quan-
tum Matter, which continues as an Energy Frontier Research 
Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Sci-
ence, Basic Energy Sciences under Award No. DE-SC0019331. 
The magnetic data presented in this review has been extracted 
and plotted through use of the program Origin. Similarly, the 
crystal structures presented have been imaged though use of 
the program Vesta, using information available on the Interna-
tional Crystal Structure Database or in the published literature.

13. Author contributions

This review article was written through equal contribu-

tions of both authors, Loi Nguyen and Robert Cava. 

14. Notes 

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

15. Biographies

Loi T. Nguyen graduated from the California State Univer-

sity, Fullerton (CSUF) in 2017, where his solid state chemistry 
research was on unconventional oxide perovskites. He is cur-
rently a third year graduate student in the Department of 
Chemistry at Princeton University. His research focuses on the 
synthesis and magnetic properties of hexagonal perovskites. 
He has discovered several new face-sharing hexagonal perov-
skites, several of which potentially host a quantum spin liquid 
state. 

Robert J. Cava is the Russell Wellman Moore Professor and 

former chair of the Chemistry Department at Princeton Univer-
sity. He received his Ph.D. in Ceramics from MIT in 1978, after 
which he was an NRC Postdoctoral Fellow at the National Bu-
reau of Standards. He then eventually became a Distinguished 
Member of Technical Staff at Bell Laboratories, where he 
worked for 17 years. He is a member of the US National Acad-
emy of Sciences and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society of 
London. 

16. References 

(1) 
Elbaz, G. A.; Straus, D. B.; Semonin, O. E.; Hull, T. D.; 


26

Paley, D. W.; Kim, P.; Owen, J. S.; Kagan, C. R.; Roy, X. 
Unbalanced Hole and Electron Diffusion in Lead 
Bromide Perovskites. Nano Lett
2017, 17 DOI: 

10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b05022.

(2) 
Dong, Q.; Fang, Y.; Shao, Y.; Mulligan, P.; Qiu, J.; Cao, L.; 
Huang, J. Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths > 175 Μm in 
Solution-Grown CH3NH3PbI3 Single Crystals. Science 
(80-. 
).
2015, 
347
(6225), 
967–970 
DOI: 

10.1126/science.aaa5760.

(3) 
Shi, D.; Adinolfi, V.; Comin, R.; Yuan, M.; Alarousu, E.; 
Buin, A.; Chen, Y.; Hoogland, S.; Rothenberger, A.; 
Katsiev, K.; Losovyj, Y.; Zhang, X.; Dowben, P. A.; 
Mohammed, O. F.; Sargent, E. H.; Bakr, O. M. Low Trap-
State Density and Long Carrier Diffusion in Organolead 
Trihalide Perovskite Single Crystals. Science (80-. ).
2015, 
347
(6221), 
519–522 
DOI: 

10.1126/science.aaa2725.

(4) 
Bi, Y.; Hutter, E. M.; Fang, Y.; Dong, Q.; Huang, J.; 
Savenije, T. J. Charge Carrier Lifetimes Exceeding 15 
Μs in Methylammonium Lead Iodide Single Crystals. J. 
Phys. 
Chem. 
Lett
2016, 
7, 
16 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b00269.

(5) 
Straus, D. B.; Guo, S.; Cava, R. J. Kinetically Stable Single 
Crystals of Perovskite-Phase CsPbI 3. 2019 DOI: 
10.1021/jacs.9b06055.

(6) 
Linaburg, M. R.; McClure, E. T.; Majher, J. D.; 
Woodward, P. M. Cs1-XRbxPbCl3 and Cs1-XRbxPbBr3 
Solid Solutions: Understanding Octahedral Tilting in 
Lead Halide Perovskites. Chem. Mater. 2017, 29 (8), 
3507–3514 DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b05372.

(7) 
McClure, E. T.; Ball, M. R.; Windl, W.; Woodward, P. M. 
Cs2AgBiX6 (X = Br, Cl): New Visible Light Absorbing, 
Lead-Free Halide Perovskite Semiconductors. Chem. 
Mater.
2016, 
28
(5), 
1348–1354 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b04231.

(8) 
Majher, J. D.; Gray, M. B.; Strom, T. A.; Woodward, P. M. 
Cs 2 NaBiCl 6 :Mn 2+ - A New Orange-Red Halide 
Double Perovskite Phosphor. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31
(5), 
1738–1744 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05280.

(9) 
Fabini, D. H.; Hogan, T.; Evans, H. A.; Stoumpos, C. C.; 
Kanatzidis, M. G.; Seshadri, R. Dielectric and 
Thermodynamic Signatures of Low-Temperature 
Glassy 
Dynamics 
in 
the 
Hybrid 
Perovskites 

CH3NH3PbI3 and HC(NH2)2PbI3. J. Phys. Chem. Lett.
2016, 
7
(3), 
376–381 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b02821.

(10) 
Green, M. A.; Ho-Baillie, A. Perovskite Solar Cells: The 
Birth of a New Era in Photovoltaics. ACS Energy Lett.
2017, 
2
(4), 
822–830 
DOI: 

10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00137.

(11) 
Galasso, F. S. (2013). Structure, properties and 
preparation 
of 
perovskite-type 
compounds: 

international series of monographs in solid state 

physics (Vol. 5). Elsevier.

(12) 
Mitchell, R. H. (2002). Perovskites: Modern and 
Ancient (Vol. 7). Thunder Bay: Almaz Press.

(13) 
Tilley, R. J. (2016). Perovskites: structure-property 
relationships. John Wiley & Sons.

(14) 
Kerman, K.; Ramanathan, S.; Baniecki, J. D.; Ishii, M.; 
Kotaka, Y.; Aso, H.; Kurihara, K.; Schafranek, R.; 
Vailionis, A. Thermopower in Quantum Confined La-
Doped SrTiO 3 Epitaxial Heterostructures. Appl. Phys. 
Lett.
2013, 
103
(17), 
173904 
DOI: 

10.1063/1.4826098.

(15) 
Takada, Y. Theory of Superconductivity in Polar 
Semiconductors and Its Application to N-Type 
Semiconducting SrTiO 3. J. Phys. Soc. Japan 1980, 49
(4), 1267–1275 DOI: 10.1143/JPSJ.49.1267.

(16) 
Luo, W.; Duan, W.; Louie, S. G.; Cohen, M. L. Structural 
and Electronic Properties of N-Doped and p-Doped 
SrTiO 3. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.
2004, 
70
(21), 
1–8 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.70.214109.

(17) 
Dai, P.; Hu, J.; Dagotto, E. Magnetism and Its 
Microscopic Origin in Iron-Based High-Temperature 
Superconductors. 
Nat. 
Phys.
2012
DOI: 

10.1038/NPHYS2438.

(18) 
Keimer, B.; Kivelson, S. A.; Norman, M. R.; Uchida, S.; 
Zaanen, J. From Quantum Matter to High-Temperature 
Superconductivity in Copper Oxides. Nature 2014, 518
DOI: 10.1038/nature14165.

(19) 
Coronado, E.; Martí-Gastaldo, C.; Navarro-Moratalla, E.; 
Ribera, A.; Blundell, S. J.; Baker, P. J. Coexistence of 
Superconductivity and Magnetism by Chemical Design. 
2010 DOI: 10.1038/NCHEM.898.

(20) 
Slavney, A. H.; Hu, T.; Lindenberg, A. M.; Karunadasa, H. 
I. A Bismuth-Halide Double Perovskite with Long 
Carrier Recombination Lifetime for Photovoltaic 
Applications. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138 (7), 2138–
2141 DOI: 10.1021/jacs.5b13294.

(21) 
Connor, B. A.; Leppert, L.; Smith, M. D.; Neaton, J. B.; 
Karunadasa, H. I. Layered Halide Double Perovskites: 
Dimensional Reduction of Cs2AgBiBr6. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc.
2018, 
140
(15), 
5235–5240 
DOI: 

10.1021/jacs.8b01543.

(22) 
Majher, J. D.; Gray, M. B.; Strom, T. A.; Woodward, P. M. 
Cs 2 NaBiCl 6 :Mn 2+ - A New Orange-Red Halide 
Double Perovskite Phosphor. Chem. Mater. 2019, 31
(5), 
1738–1744 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b05280.

(23) 
Tran, T. T.; Panella, J. R.; Chamorro, J. R.; Morey, J. R.; 
McQueen, T. M. Designing Indirect-Direct Bandgap 
Transitions in Double Perovskites. Mater. Horizons
2017, 4 (4), 688–693 DOI: 10.1039/c7mh00239d.


27

(24) 
Smith, A. E.; Sleight, A. W.; Subramanian, M. A. 
Electrical and Magnetic Properties of New Rhodium 
Perovskites: La2MRhO6, M = Cr, Fe, Cu. Mater. Res. Bull.
2010, 
45
(4), 
460–463 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.materresbull.2009.11.008.

(25) 
Mao, L.; Teicher, S. M. L.; Stoumpos, C. C.; Kennard, R. 
M.; Decrescent, R. A.; Wu, G.; Schuller, J. A.; Chabinyc, 
M. L.; Cheetham, A. K.; Seshadri, R. Chemical and 
Structural Diversity of Hybrid Layered Double 
Perovskite Halides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141 (48), 
19099–19109 DOI: 10.1021/jacs.9b09945.

(26) 
Vishnoi, P.; Zuo, J. L.; Strom, T. A.; Wu, G.; Wilson, S. D.; 
Seshadri, R.; Cheetham, A. K. Structural Diversity and 
Magnetic Properties of Hybrid Ruthenium Halide 
Perovskites and Related Compounds. Angew. Chemie
2020, 
ange.202003095 
DOI: 

10.1002/ange.202003095.

(27) 
Khomskii, D. I.; Sawatzky, G. A. Interplay between Spin, 
Charge and Orbital Degrees of Freedom in Magnetic 
Oxides. Solid State Commun. 1997, 102 (2–3), 87–99 
DOI: 10.1016/S0038-1098(96)00717-X.

(28) 
Khomskii, D. (2014). Transition Metal Compounds. 
Cambridge University Press.

(29) 
Khomskii, D. I. (2010). Basic Aspects of the Quantum 
Theory of Solids: Order and Elementary Excitations. 
Cambridge University Press.

(30) 
Jin, C.-Q. Q.; Zhou, J.-S. S.; Goodenough, J. B.; Liu, Q. Q.; 
Zhao, J. G.; Yang, L. X.; Yu, Y.; Yu, R. C.; Katsura, T.; 
Shatskiy, A.; Ito, E. High-Pressure Synthesis of the 
Cubic 
Perovskite 
BaRuO3 
and 
Evolution 
of 

Ferromagnetism in ARuO3 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba) Ruthenates. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2008, 105 (20), 7115–7119 
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0710928105.

(31) 
Itoh, S.; Endoh, Y.; Yokoo, T.; Ibuka, S.; Park, J. G.; 
Kaneko, Y.; Takahashi, K. S.; Tokura, Y.; Nagaosa, N. 
Weyl Fermions and Spin Dynamics of Metallic 
Ferromagnet SrRuO 3. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 1–8 DOI: 
10.1038/ncomms11788.

(32) 
Zhao, J. G.; Yang, L.; Yu, Y.; Li, F.; Yu, R.; Jin, C. Q. 
Structural and Electrical Properties Evolution in Ba1-
XSrxRuO3 Synthesized under High Pressure. J. Solid 
State Chem.
2009, 182
(6), 1524–1528 DOI: 

10.1016/j.jssc.2009.03.007.

(33) 
Donohue, P. C.; Katz, L.; Ward, R. The Modification of 
Structures of Ternary Oxides by Cation Substitution. I. 
Substitution of Strontium for Barium in Barium 
Ruthenium Oxide and in Barium Iridium Oxide. Inorg. 
Chem.
1966, 
5
(3), 
335–338 
DOI: 

10.1021/ic50037a001.

(34) 
Santoro, A.; Sora, I. N.; Huang, Q. Bond-Valence 
Analysis of the Structure of (Ba0.875Sr0.125)RuO3. J. 
Solid State Chem.
1999, 143
(1), 69–73 DOI: 

10.1006/jssc.1998.8080.

(35) 
Ying, Y. A.; Liu, Y.; He, T.; Cava, R. J. Magnetotransport 
Properties of BaRuO 3 : Observation of Two Scattering 
Rates. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84 (4), 233104–233105 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.84.233104.

(36) 
Vojta, T. Strong-Disorder Magnetic Quantum Phase 
Transitions: Status and New Developments. J. Phys. 
Conf. Ser. 2014, 529 (1), 012016 DOI: 10.1088/1742-
6596/529/1/012016.

(37) 
Gat-Malureanu, I. M.; Carlo, J. P.; Goko, T.; Fukaya, A.; 
Ito, T.; Kyriakou, P. P.; Larkin, M. I.; Luke, G. M.; Russo, 
P. L.; Savici, A. T.; Wiebe, C. R.; Yoshimura, K.; Uemura, 
Y. J. Muon Spin Relaxation and Susceptibility 
Measurements of an Itinerant-Electron System Sr 1-
XCa XRuO 3: Quantum Evolution from Ferromagnet to 
Paramagnet. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.
2011, 
84
(22), 
224415 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.84.224415.

(38) 
Zarzycki, A.; Rams, M.; Goerlich, E. A.; Tomala, K. 
Investigation of Anomalous Thermodynamic and 
Transport Properties of Sr1−xCaxRuO3 (x ≥ 0.8). 
2018.

(39) 
Longo, J. M.; Kafalas, J. A.; Arnott, R. J. Structure and 
Properties of the High and Low Pressure Forms of 
SrIrO3. J. Solid State Chem. 1971, 3 (2), 174–179 DOI: 
10.1016/0022-4596(71)90022-3.

(40) 
Cheng, J. G.; Alonso, J. A.; Suard, E.; Zhou, J. S.; 
Goodenough, J. B. A New Perovskite Polytype in the 
High-Pressure Sequence of BaIrO 3. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2009, 131 (21), 7461–7469 DOI: 10.1021/ja901829e.

(41) 
Nguyen, L. T.; Cava, R. J. Trimer-Based Spin Liquid 
Candidate B A4NbI R3 O12. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2019, 3
(1) DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.3.014412.

(42) 
Phelan, B. F.; Krizan, J.; Xie, W.; Gibson, Q.; Cava, R. J. 
New Material for Probing Spin-Orbit Coupling in 
Iridates. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.
2015, 
91
(15), 
1–29 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.91.155117.

(43) 
Jackeli, G.; Khaliullin, G. Mott Insulators in the Strong 
Spin-Orbit Coupling Limit: From Heisenberg to a 
Quantum Compass and Kitaev Models. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2009, 102 (1) DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.102.017205.

(44) 
Kim, B. J.; Jin, H.; Moon, S. J.; Kim, J. Y.; Park, B. G.; Leem, 
C. S.; Yu, J.; Noh, T. W.; Kim, C.; Oh, S. J.; Park, J. H.; 
Durairaj, V.; Cao, G.; Rotenberg, E. Novel Jeff=1/2 Mott 
State Induced by Relativistic Spin-Orbit Coupling in 
Sr2IrO4. Phys. Rev. Lett.
2008, 101
(7) DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.076402.

(45) 
Pesin, D.; Balents, L. Mott Physics and Band Topology 
in Materials with Strong Spin-Orbit Interaction. Nat. 
Phys. 2010, 6 (5), 376–381 DOI: 10.1038/nphys1606.

(46) 
Kim, J.; Said, A. H.; Casa, D.; Upton, M. H.; Gog, T.; 
Daghofer, M.; Jackeli, G.; Van Den Brink, J.; Khaliullin, 
G.; Kim, B. J.; Brink, J. Van Den; Khaliullin, G.; Kim, B. J.; 


28

Van Den Brink, J.; Khaliullin, G.; Kim, B. J. Large Spin-
Wave Energy Gap in the Bilayer Iridate Sr 3 Ir 2 O 7 : 
Evidence for Enhanced Dipolar Interactions Near the 
Mott Metal-Insulator Transition. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 
157402
(October), 
1–5 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.157402.

(47) 
Hinatsu, Y. Diverse Structures of Mixed-Metal Oxides 
Containing Rare Earths and Their Magnetic Properties. 
Nippon 
Seramikkusu 
Kyokai 
Gakujutsu 

Ronbunshi/Journal Ceram. Soc. Japan
2015, 123

(1441), 845–852 DOI: 10.2109/jcersj2.123.845.

(48) 
Singh, V.; Pulikkotil, J. J. Theoretical Study of Coulomb 
Correlations and Spin-Orbit Coupling in SrIrO3. In AIP 
Conference Proceedings; American Institute of Physics 
Inc., 2015; Vol. 1665, p 090034.

(49) 
Zhao, J.; Yang, L.; Yu, Y.; Li, F.; Yu, R.; Jin, C. Structural 
and Physical Properties of the 6M BaIrO3: A New 
Metallic Lridate Synthesized under High Pressure. 
Inorg. Chem.
2009, 48
(10), 4290–4294 DOI: 

10.1021/ic801707m.

(50) 
Bremholm, M.; Yim, C. K.; Hirai, D.; Climent-Pascual, E.; 
Xu, Q.; Zandbergen, H. W.; Ali, M. N.; Cava, R. J. 
Destabilization of the 6H-SrIrO3 Polymorph through 
Partial Substitution of Zinc and Lithium. J. Mater. Chem.
2012, 
22
(32), 
16431–16436 
DOI: 

10.1039/c2jm32558f.

(51) 
Okuda, T.; Kobayashi, K. I.; Tomioka, Y.; Tokura, Y. 
Anomalous Low-Temperature Specific Heat around 
the Metal-Insulator Transition in Ordered Double-
Perovskite Alloys Sr2Fe(Mo1-YWy)O6 (0<˜y<˜1). Phys. 
Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2003, 68 (14), 
144407 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.68.144407.

(52) 
King, G.; Abakumov, A. M.; Hadermann, J.; Alekseeva, A. 
M.; Rozova, M. G.; Perkisas, T.; Woodward, P. M.; Van 
Tendeloo, G.; Antipov, E. V. Crystal Structure and Phase 
Transitions in Sr3WO6. Inorg. Chem. 2010, 49 (13), 
6058–6065 DOI: 10.1021/ic100598v.

(53)
Sinha, M.; Pearson, T. J.; Reeder, T. R.; Vivanco, H. K.; 
Freedman, D. E.; Phelan, W. A.; McQueen, T. M. 
Introduction of Spin Centers in Single Crystals of B 
A2CaW O6-δ. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2019, 3 (12), 125002 
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.3.125002.

(54) 
Barnes, P. W.; Lufaso, M. W.; Woodward, P. M. 
Structure 
Determination 
of 
A2M3+TaO6 
and 

A2M3+NbO6 Ordered Perovskites: Octahedral Tilting 
and Pseudosymmetry. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. B Struct. 
Sci.
2006, 
62
(3), 
384–396 
DOI: 

10.1107/S0108768106002448.

(55) 
Yamamura, K.; Wakeshima, M.; Hinatsu, Y. Structural 
Phase Transition and Magnetic Properties of Double 
Perovskites Ba2CaMO6 (M=W, Re, Os). J. Solid State 
Chem.
2006, 
179
(3), 
605–612 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jssc.2005.10.003.

(56) 
Nguyen, L. T.; Cava, R. J.; Fry-Petit, A. M. Low 

Temperature Structural Phase Transition in the 
Ba2CaMoO6 Perovskite. J. Solid State Chem. 2019, 277
(June), 415–421 DOI: 10.1016/j.jssc.2019.06.037.

(57) 
Morrow, R.; McGuire, M. A.; Yan, J.; Woodward, P. M.
The Crystal Structure and Magnetic Behavior of 
Quinary Osmate and Ruthenate Double Perovskites La 
ABB ′o6 (A = Ca, Sr; B = Co, Ni; B ′ = Ru, Os). Inorg. Chem.
2018, 
57
(6), 
2989–3001 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.inorgchem.7b02282.

(58) 
Yan, B.; Jansen, M.; Felser, C. A Large-Energy-Gap Oxide 
Topological Insulator Based on the Superconductor 
BaBiO 3. Nat. Phys. 2013, 9 (11), 709–711 DOI: 
10.1038/nphys2762.

(59) 
Schoop, L. M.; Müchler, L.; Felser, C.; Cava, R. J. Lone 
Pair Effect, Structural Distortions, and Potential for 
Superconductivity in Tl Perovskites. Inorg. Chem.
2013, 52 (9), 5479–5483 DOI: 10.1021/ic400381g.

(60) 
Levin, I.; Chan, J. Y.; Geyer, R. G.; Maslar, J. E.; Vanderah, 
T. A. Cation Ordering Types and Dielectric Properties 
in the Complex Perovskite Ca(Ca1/3Nb2/3)O3. J. Solid 
State 
Chem.
2001, 
156
(1), 
122–134 
DOI: 

10.1006/jssc.2000.8971.

(61) 
Levin, I.; Bendersky, L. A.; Cline, J. P.; Roth, R. S.; 
Vanderah, T. A. Octahedral Tilting and Cation Ordering 
in Perovskite-Like Ca4Nb2O9=3•Ca(Ca1/3Nb2/3)O3 
Polymorphs. J. Solid State Chem. 2000, 150 (1), 43–61 
DOI: 10.1006/jssc.1999.8547.

(62) 
Fry, A. M.; Woodward, P. M. Structures of α-K3MoO3F3 
and α-Rb3MoO3F3: Ferroelectricity from Anion 
Ordering and Noncooperative Octahedral Tilting. 
Cryst. Growth Des. 2013, 13 (12), 5404–5410 DOI: 
10.1021/cg401342q.

(63) 
Arevalo-Lopez, A. M.; Senn, M. S.; Skedd, L.; Attfield, J. 
P. High Pressure Synthesis of the Cation-Ordered 
Perovskite 3C1:2-Ba3NaRu2O9. Zeitschrift für Anorg. 
und Allg. Chemie 2014, 640 (6), 1164–1167 DOI: 
10.1002/zaac.201300549.

(64) 
Stitzer, K. E.; Smith, M. D.; Gemmill, W. R.; Zur Loye, H. 
C. Novel Mixed-Valent (V/VI) Triple Perovskite 
Ruthenates: 
Observation 
of 
a 
Complex 
Low-

Temperature Structural and Magnetic Transition. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2002, 124 (46), 13877–13885 DOI: 
10.1021/ja0271781.

(65) 
Samata, H.; Kai, M.; Uchida, T.; Ohtsuka, M.; Tanaka, G.; 
Sawada, S.; Taniguchi, T.; Nagata, Y. Synthesis and 
Properties of Ba3NaRu2O9-δ and Ba3(Na, R)Ru2O9-δ 
(R=rare Earth) Crystals. J. Alloys Compd. 2003, 350 (1–
2), 77–85 DOI: 10.1016/S0925-8388(02)00990-8.

(66) 
Køuhl, P. Die Kristallstruktur Der Hexagonalen 
Verbindungen Ba3IIMeIISb2VO9. II. Ba3CuSb2O9. 
Zeitschrift für Anorg. und Allg. Chemie 1978, 442 (1), 
280–288 DOI: 10.1002/zaac.19784420136.

(67) 
Anderson, P. W. Resonating Valence Bonds: A New 


29

Kind of Insulator? Mater. Res. Bull. 1973, 8 (2), 153–
160 DOI: 10.1016/0025-5408(73)90167-0.

(68) 
Anderson, P. W.; Baskaran, G.; Zou, Z.; Hsu, T. 
Resonating Valence-Bond Theory of Phase Transitions 
and Superconductivity in La2CuO4-Based Compounds. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 1987, 58 (26), 2790–2793 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevLett.58.2790.

(69) 
Baskaran, G.; Zou, Z.; Anderson, P. W. The Resonating 
Valence Bond State and High-Tc Superconductivity - A 
Mean Field Theory. Solid State Commun. 1987, 63 (11), 
973–976 DOI: 10.1016/0038-1098(87)90642-9.

(70) 
Zhou, H. D.; Choi, E. S.; Li, G.; Balicas, L.; Wiebe, C. R.; 
Qiu, Y.; Copley, J. R. D.; Gardner, J. S. Spin Liquid State 
in the S=1/2 Triangular Lattice Ba3CuSb 2O9. Phys. 
Rev. 
Lett.
2011, 
106
(14) 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.147204.

(71) 
Katayama, N.; Kimura, K.; Han, Y.; Nasu, J.; Drichko, N.; 
Nakanishi, Y.; Halim, M.; Ishiguro, Y.; Satake, R.; 
Nishibori, E.; Yoshizawa, M.; Nakano, T.; Nozue, Y.; 
Wakabayashi, Y.; Ishihara, S.; Hagiwara, M.; Sawa, H.; 
Nakatsuji, S.  Absence of Jahn−Teller Transition in the 
Hexagonal Ba 3 CuSb 2 O 9 Single Crystal . Proc. Natl. 
Acad. 
Sci.
2015, 
112
(30), 
9305–9309 
DOI: 

10.1073/pnas.1508941112.

(72) 
Chen, J.; Feng, H. L.; Matsushita, Y.; Belik, A. A.; 
Tsujimoto, Y.; Katsuya, Y.; Tanaka, M.; Wu, M.; Li, M. R.; 
Zhou, R.; Zhou, W.; Liang, H.; Zheng, L.; Jansen, M.; 
Yamaura, 
K. 
High-Pressure 
Synthesis, 
Crystal 

Structure, and Magnetic Properties of Hexagonal Ba 3 
CuOs 2 O 9. J. Solid State Chem. 2019, 272 (January), 
182–188 DOI: 10.1016/j.jssc.2019.02.003.

(73) 
Prabhakaran, D.; Boothroyd, A. T. Crystal Growth of the 
Triangular-Lattice Antiferromagnet Ba 3 CoSb 2 O 9. J. 
Cryst. 
Growth
2017, 
468, 
345–348 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jcrysgro.2016.10.075.

(74) 
Koutroulakis, G.; Zhou, T.; Kamiya, Y.; Thompson, J. D.; 
Zhou, H. D.; Batista, C. D.; Brown, S. E. Quantum Phase 
Diagram 
of 
the 
S 
= 
1 
2 
Triangular-Lattice 

Antiferromagnet Ba 3 CoSb 2 O 9. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 91, 
24410 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.91.024410.

(75) 
Ghioldi, E. A.; Mezio, A.; Manuel, L. O.; Singh, R. R. P.; 
Oitmaa, J.; Trumper, A. E. Magnons and Excitation 
Continuum in XXZ Triangular Antiferromagnetic 
Model: Application to Ba 3 CoSb 2 O 9. Phys. Rev. B
2015, 91, 134423 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.91.134423.

(76) 
Quirion, G.; Lapointe-Major, M.; Poirier, M.; Quilliam, J. 
A.; Dun, Z. L.; Zhou, H. D. Magnetic Phase Diagram of Ba 
3 CoSb 2 O 9 as Determined by Ultrasound Velocity 
Measurements. Phys. Rev. B 2015, 92, 14414 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.92.014414.

(77) 
Antiferromagnet Ba, H.; Susuki, T.; Kurita, N.; Tanaka, 
T.; Nojiri, H.; Matsuo, A.; Kindo, K.; Tanaka, H. 
Magnetization Process and Collective Excitations in 
the 
S 
¼ 
1=2 
Triangular-Lattice. 
2013
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.267201.

(78) 
Li, M.; Zelenskiy, A.; Quilliam, J. A.; Dun, Z. L.; Zhou, H. 
D.; Plumer, M. L.; Quirion, G. Magnetoelastic Coupling 
and the Magnetization Plateau in Ba3CoSb2O9. Phys. 
Rev. B 2019, 99 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.99.094408.

(79) 
Sera, A.; Kousaka, Y.; Akimitsu, J.; Sera, M.; Kawamata, 
T.; Koike, Y.; Inoue, K. S = 1 2 Triangular-Lattice 
Antiferromagnets Ba 3 CoSb 2 O 9 and CsCuCl 3 : Role 
of Spin-Orbit Coupling, Crystalline Electric Field Effect, 
and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction. Phys. Rev. B
2016, 94, 214408 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.94.214408.

(80) 
Ba, A.; Ma, J.; Kamiya, Y.; Hong, T.; Cao, H. B.; Ehlers, G.; 
Tian, W.; Batista, C. D.; Dun, Z. L.; Zhou, H. D.; Matsuda, 
M. Static and Dynamical Properties of the Spin-1=2 
Equilateral 
Triangular-Lattice. 
2016
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevLett.116.087201.

(81) 
Clauss, C.; Dressel, M.; Scheffler, M. Thermal 
Conductivity 
in 
the 
Triangular-Lattice 

Antiferromagnet Ba3CoSb2O9. J. Phys. Conf. Ser 2014, 
568, 42014 DOI: 10.1088/1742-6596/568/4/042014.

(82) 
Zhou, H. D.; Xu, C.; Hallas, A. M.; Silverstein, H. J.; Wiebe, 
C. R.; Umegaki, I.; Yan, J. Q.; Murphy, T. P.; Park, J. H.; 
Qiu, Y.; Copley, J. R. D.; Gardner, J. S.; Takano, Y. 
Successive Phase Transitions and Extended Spin-
Excitation Continuum in the S=12 Triangular-Lattice 
Antiferromagnet Ba3CoSb2O 9. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012, 
109 (26) DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.267206.

(83) 
Shikano, M.; Ishiyama, O.; Inaguma, Y.; Nakamura, T.; 
Itoh, M. Structure and Magnetic Properties of 6-
Layered Hexagonal Oxides Ba3Cr2MO9 (M = Mo and 
W). J. Solid State Chem. 1995, 120 (2), 238–243 DOI: 
10.1006/jssc.1995.1404.

(84) 
Rijssenbeek, J. T.; Huang, Q.; Erwin, R. W.; Zandbergen, 
H. W.; Cava, R. J. The Crystal Structure of Ba3CuRu2O9 
and Comparison to Ba3MRu2O9 (M=In, Co, Ni, and Fe). 
J. Solid State Chem. 1999, 146 (1), 65–72 DOI: 
10.1006/jssc.1999.8309.

(85) 
Wilkens, 
J.; 
Müller-Buschbaum, 
H. 

Einkristalluntersuchung an Ba3CaRu2O9. J. Alloys 
Compd. 1991, 177 (2), L31–L33 DOI: 10.1016/0925-
8388(91)90071-3.

(86) 
Beran, P.; Ivanov, S. A.; Nordblad, P.; Middey, S.; Nag, A.; 
Sarma, D. D.; Ray, S.; Mathieu, R. Neutron Powder 
Diffraction Study of Ba3ZnRu2-XIrxO9 (x = 0, 1, 2) with 
6H-Type Perovskite Structure. Solid State Sci. 2015, 
50, 
58–64 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.solidstatesciences.2015.10.011.

(87) 
Treiber, 
U.; 
Kemmler-Sack, 
S.; 
Ehmann, 
A. 

Edelmetallhaltige Sauerstoffperowskite Vom Typ 
Ba3BM2O9 Mit B=Mg, Fe, Co, Ni, Zn, Cd; M=Ru, Ir. 
Zeitschrift für Anorg. und Allg. Chemie 1982, 487 (1), 
189–198 DOI: 10.1002/zaac.19824870117.

(88) 
Lightfoot, P.; Battle, P. D. The Crystal and Magnetic 


30

Structures 
of 
Ba3NiRu2O9, 
Ba3CoRu2O9, 
and 

Ba3ZnRu2O9. J. Solid State Chem. 1990, 89 (1), 174–
183 DOI: 10.1016/0022-4596(90)90309-L.

(89) 
Zandbergen, H. W.; IJdo, D. J. W. Tribarium Strontium 
Diruthenate(V), Ba3SrRu2O9, a Rietveld Refinement of 
Neutron Powder Diffraction Data. Acta Crystallogr. 
Sect. C Cryst. Struct. Commun. 1984, 40 (6), 919–922 
DOI: 10.1107/S0108270184006272.

(90) 
Shlyk, L.; Kryukov, S.; Durairaj, V.; Parkin, S.; Cao, G.; De 
Long, L. E. Magnetic, and Electronic Properties of a 
Ba3InRu2O9 Single Crystal. J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
2007, 
319
(1–2), 
64–68 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jmmm.2007.04.033.

(91) 
Ziat, D.; Aczel, A. A.; Sinclair, R.; Chen, Q.; Zhou, H. D.; 
Williams, T. J.; Stone, M. B.; Verrier, A.; Quilliam, J. A. 
Frustrated Spin-1 2 Molecular Magnetism in the 
Mixed-Valence Antiferromagnets Ba 3 MRu 2 O 9 (M = 
In, Y, Lu). Phys. Rev. B 2017, 95, 184424 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.95.184424.

(92) 
Schaller, H.-U.; Kemmler-sack, S. Uber Ruthenium-
Perowskite Vom Typ Ba,BRuO, Und Ba,BRu,O, Mit B = 
Indium, Rhodium. Zeitschrift für Anorg. und Allg. 
Chemie
1981, 
473
(2), 
178–188 
DOI: 

10.1002/zaac.19814730220.

(93) 
Huang, Z.; Avdeev, M.; Kennedy, B. J.; Knight, K. S.; 
Zhou, Q.; Ling, C. D. Tuning the Giant Magnetoelastic 
Transition in Ba 3 BiIr 2 O 9 and Ba 3 BiRu 2 O 9. J. Phys. 
Condens. Matter
2014, 26
(27), 276003 DOI: 

10.1088/0953-8984/26/27/276003.

(94) 
Miiller, W.; Avdeev, M.; Zhou, Q.; Studer, A. J.; Kennedy, 
B. J.; Kearley, G. J.; Ling, C. D. Spin-Gap Opening 
Accompanied by a Strong Magnetoelastic Response in 
the S=1 Magnetic Dimer System Ba 3BiRu 2O 9. Phys. 
Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2011, 84 (22), 4–
7 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.84.220406.

(95) 
Blanchard, P. E. R.; Chapman, K. W.; Heald, S. M.; Zbiri, 
M.; Johnson, M. R.; Kennedy, B. J.; Ling, C. D. Direct 
Observation of Pressure-Driven Valence Electron 
Transfer 
in 
Ba3BiRu2O9, 
Ba3BiIr2O9, 
and 

Ba4BiIr3O12. Inorg. Chem. 2016, 55 (11), 5649–5654 
DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.6b00718.

(96) 
Blanchard, P. E. R.; Huang, Z.; Kennedy, B. J.; Liu, S.; 
Miiller, W.; Reynolds, E.; Zhou, Q.; Avdeev, M.; Zhang, 
Z.; Aitken, J. B.; Cowie, B. C. C.; Jang, L. Y.; Tan, T. T.; Li, 
S.; Ling, C. D. Key Role of Bismuth in the Magnetoelastic 
Transitions of Ba 3BiIr2O9 and Ba3BiRu 2O9 as 
Revealed by Chemical Doping. Inorg. Chem. 2014, 53
(2), 952–960 DOI: 10.1021/ic4023745.

(97) 
Verdoes, D.; Zandbergen, H. W.; IJdo, D. J. W. Tribarium 
Titanium(IV) Diruthenate(IV), Ba3TiRu2O9, a Rietveld 
Refinement of Neutron Powder Diffraction Data. Acta 
Crystallogr. Sect. C Cryst. Struct. Commun. 1985, 41 (2), 
170–173 DOI: 10.1107/S0108270185003201.

(98) 
Nguyen, L. T.; Cava, R. J. A Spin Glass State in 

Ba3TiRu2O9. J. Magn. Magn. Mater.
2019, 476

(December 
2018), 
334–336 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jmmm.2018.12.087.

(99) 
Gönen, Z. S.; Gopalakrishnan, J.; Eichhorn, B. W.; 
Greene, R. L. Structurally Modulated Magnetic 
Properties in the A3MnRu2O9 Phases (A = Ba, Ca): The 
Role of Metal-Metal Bonding in Perovskite-Related 
Oxides. Inorg. Chem. 2001, 40 (19), 4996–5000 DOI: 
10.1021/ic0013431.

(100) 
Rijssenbeek, J. T.; Malo, S.; Caignaert, V.; Poeppelmeier, 
K. R. Site and Oxidation-State Specificity Yielding 
Dimensional Control in Perovskite Ruthenates. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc.
2002, 124
(10), 2090–2091 DOI: 

10.1021/ja017586p.

(101) 
Wallace, D. C.; McQueen, T. M. New Honeycomb 
Iridium(v) Oxides: NaIrO3 and Sr3CaIr2O9. Dalt.
Trans.
2015, 
44
(47), 
20344–20351 
DOI: 

10.1039/c5dt03188e.

(102) 
Sakamoto, T.; Doi, Y.; Hinatsu, Y. Crystal Structures and 
Magnetic Properties of 6H-Perovskite-Type Oxides 
Ba3MIr2O9 (M=Mg, Ca, Sc, Ti, Zn, Sr, Zr, Cd and In). J. 
Solid State Chem. 2006, 179 (8), 2595–2601 DOI: 
10.1016/j.jssc.2006.04.055.

(103) 
Doi, Y.; Hinatsu, Y. The Structural and Magnetic 
Characterization 
of 
6H-Perovskite-Type 
Oxides 

Ba3LnIr2O9 (Ln = Y, Lanthanides). J. Phys. Condens. 
Matter 2004, 16 (16), 2849–2860 DOI: 10.1088/0953-
8984/16/16/009.

(104) 
Dey, T.; Majumder, M.; Orain, J. C.; Senyshyn, A.; Prinz-
Zwick, M.; Bachus, S.; Tokiwa, Y.; Bert, F.; Khuntia, P.; 
Büttgen, N.; Tsirlin, A. A.; Gegenwart, P. Persistent 
Low-Temperature Spin Dynamics in the Mixed-
Valence Iridate Ba 3 InIr 2 O 9. Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 
174411 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.96.174411.

(105) 
Kumar, R.; Sheptyakov, D.; Khuntia, P.; Rolfs, K.; 
Freeman, P. G.; Rønnow, H. M.; Dey, T.; Baenitz, M.; 
Mahajan, A. V. Ba 3 M x Ti 3−x O 9 (M = Ir, Rh): A Family 
of 5d/4d-Based Diluted Quantum Spin Liquids. Phys. 
Rev. 
B
2016, 
94, 
174410 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.94.174410.

(106) 
Catuneanu, A.; Rau, J. G.; Kim, H.-S.; Kee, H.-Y. Magnetic 
Orders Proximal to the Kitaev Limit in Frustrated 
Triangular Systems: Application to Ba 3 IrTi 2 O 9. 
Phys. 
Rev. 
B
2015, 
92, 
165108 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.92.165108.

(107) 
Becker, M.; Hermanns, M.; Bauer, B.; Garst, M.; Trebst, 
S. Spin-Orbit Physics of J= 12 Mott Insulators on the 
Triangular Lattice. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. 
Phys.
2015, 
91, 
155135 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.91.155135.

(108) 
Bhowal, S.; Ganguly, S.; Dasgupta, I. Spin–Orbit 
Coupling Driven Novel Magnetism in d 5 6H-
Perovskite Iridates Ba 3 IrTi 2 O 9 and Ba 3 TiIr 2 O 9. 
J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2019, 31 (18), 185802 DOI: 


31

10.1088/1361-648X/ab048c.

(109) 
Byrne, R. C.; Moeller, C. W. Magnetic Interactions of 
Ruthenium, Rhodium, and Iridium in the Hexagonal 
Barium Titanate Structure. J. Solid State Chem. 1970, 2
(2), 228–235 DOI: 10.1016/0022-4596(70)90075-7.

(110) 
Dey, T.; Mahajan, A. V; Khuntia, P.; Baenitz, M.; 
Koteswararao, B.; Chou, F. C. Spin-Liquid Behavior in J 
Eff = 1 2 Triangular Lattice Compound Ba 3 IrTi 2 O 9. 
RAPID Commun. Phys. Rev. B 2012, 86, 140405 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.86.140405.

(111) 
Lee, W.-J.; Do, S.-H.; Yoon, S.; Lee, S.; Choi, Y. S.; Jang, D. 
J.; Brando, M.; Lee, M.; Choi, E. S.; Ji, S.; Jang, Z. H.; Suh, 
B. J.; Choi, K.-Y. Putative Spin Liquid in the Triangle-
Based Iridate Ba 3 IrTi 2 O 9. Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96, 
14432 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.96.014432.

(112) 
Bhowal, S.; Satpathy, S. Dirac Nodal Lines and Large 
Spin Hall Effect in the 6H-Perovskite Iridate 
Ba3TiIr2O9. Phys. Rev. B 2019, 100 (11), 115101 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.100.115101.

(113) 
Paddison, J. A. M.; Daum, M.; Dun, Z.; Ehlers, G.; Liu, Y.; 
Stone, M. B.; Zhou, H.; Mourigal, M. Continuous 
Excitations of the Triangular-Lattice Quantum Spin 
Liquid YbMgGaO 4. Nat. Phys. 2017, 13 (2), 117–122 
DOI: 10.1038/nphys3971.

(114) 
Zhang, X.; Mahmood, F.; Daum, M.; Dun, Z.; Paddison, J. 
A. M.; Laurita, N. J.; Hong, T.; Zhou, H.; Armitage, N. P.; 
Mourigal, M. Hierarchy of Exchange Interactions in the 
Triangular-Lattice Spin Liquid YbMgGaO4. Phys. Rev. X
2018, 
8
(3), 
031001 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevX.8.031001.

(115) 
Zhu, Z.; Maksimov, P. A.; White, S. R.; Chernyshev, A. L. 
Disorder-Induced Mimicry of a Spin Liquid in 
YbMgGaO4. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 119 (15), 157201 
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.119.157201.

(116) 
Ferreira, T.; Carone, D.; Huon, A.; Herklotz, A.; Stoian, S. 
A.; Heald, S. M.; Morrison, G.; Smith, M. D.; Loye, H. C. 
Zur. Ba3Fe1.56Ir1.44O9: A Polar Semiconducting 
Triple Perovskite with Near Room Temperature 
Magnetic Ordering. Inorg. Chem. 2018, 57 (12), 7362–
7371 DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b01015.

(117) 
Doi, Y.; Matsuhira, K.; Hinatsu, Y. Crystal Structures and 
Magnetic Properties of 6H-Perovskites Ba3MRu2O9 
(M = Y, In, La, Sm, Eu, and Lu). J. Solid State Chem. 2002, 
165 (2), 317–323 DOI: 10.1006/jssc.2002.9538.

(118) 
Doi, Y.; Wakeshima, M.; Hinatsu, Y.; Tobo, A.; Ohoyama, 
K.; Yamaguchi, Y. Magnetic and Calorimetric Studies on 
6H-Perovskite Ba3TbRu2O9. J. Alloys Compd. 2002, 
344
(1–2), 
166–169 
DOI: 
10.1016/S0925-

8388(02)00333-X.

(119) 
Chen, Q.; Fan, S.; Taddei, K. M.; Stone, M. B.; Kolesnikov, 
A. I.; Cheng, J.; Musfeldt, J. L.; Zhou, H.; Aczel, A. A. Large 
Positive Zero-Field Splitting in the Cluster Magnet 
Ba3CeRu2O9. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141 (25), 9928–

9936 DOI: 10.1021/jacs.9b03389.

(120) 
Hinatsu, Y.; Oyama, S.; Doi, Y. The Magnetic 
Susceptibilities and Electron Paramagnetic Resonance 
Spectra of 6H-Perovskites Ba3PrM2O9 (M = Ir, Ru). 
Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 2004, 77 (8), 1479–1483 DOI: 
10.1246/bcsj.77.1479.

(121) 
Doi, Y.; Wakeshima, M.; Hinatsu, Y.; Tobo, A.; Ohoyama, 
K.; Yamaguchi, Y. Crystal Structures and Magnetic 
Properties of the 6H-Perovskites Ba3LnRu2O9 (Ln = 
Ce, Pr and Tb). J. Mater. Chem. 2001, 11 (12), 3135–
3140 DOI: 10.1039/b105134m.

(122) 
Chemie, A. Weitere Verbindungen Mit Verwandtschaft 
Zum 
α-Ba2ScAlO5-Typ: 
Ba6Rh2,33Yb2Al1,67O15, 

Ba5,5Ca0,5Rh2Y2Al2O15 Und Ba6Rh4Al2O15. J. Alloys 
Compd. 1993, 197, 51–55.

(123) 
Revelli, A.; Moretti Sala, M.; Monaco, G.; Becker, P.; 
Bohatý, L.; Hermanns, M.; Koethe, T. C.; Fröhlich, T.; 
Warzanowski, P.; Lorenz, T.; Streltsov, S. V; van 
Loosdrecht, P. H. M.; Khomskii, D. I.; van den Brink, J.; 
Grüninger, M. Resonant Inelastic X-Ray Incarnation of 
Young’s Double-Slit Experiment. Sci. Adv. 2019, 5 (1), 
eaav4020 DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aav4020.

(124) 
Mukhin, A. A.; Ivanov, V. Y.; Travkin, V. D.; Balbashov, 
A. M. Magnetic Anisotropy and Ground State of the 
Rare-Earth Ions in PrMnO3 and NdMnO3. J. Magn. 
Magn. Mater. 2001, 226–230 (PART II), 1139 DOI: 
10.1016/s0304-8853(00)00710-1.

(125) 
Lufaso, M. W.; Zur Loye, H. C. Crystal Structures and 
Magnetic Properties of Mixed Iridium-Ruthenium 
Triple Perovskites. 1. Ba3MRuIrO9 (M = Lanthanide, 
Y). Inorg. Chem. 2005, 44 (25), 9143–9153 DOI: 
10.1021/ic051344z.

(126) 
Nguyen, L. T.; Kong, T.; Cava, R. J. Trimers of MnO 6 
Octahedra and Magnetic Ordering in Ba 4 NbMn 3 O 12. 
2019, 1–18.

(127) 
Nguyen, L. T.; Halloran, T.; Xie, W.; Kong, T.; Broholm, 
C. L.; Cava, R. J. Geometrically Frustrated Trimer-Based 
Mott Insulator. Phys. Rev. Mater. 2018, 2 (5), 054414 
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevMaterials.2.054414.

(128) 
Drillon, M.; Darriet, J.; Hagenmuller, P.; Georges, R. 
Etude d’un Groupement (Ru3O12)13− En Presence de 
Degenerescence Orbitale et de Couplage Spin-Orbite. J. 
Phys. Chem. Solids 1980, 41 (5), 507–515 DOI: 
10.1016/0022-3697(80)90182-1.

(129) 
Shimoda, Y.; Doi, Y.; Hinatsu, Y.; Ohoyama, K. Synthesis, 
Crystal Structures, and Magnetic Properties of New 
12L-Perovskites Ba 4 LnRu 3 O 12 (Ln = Lanthanides). 
Chem. Mater.
2008, 20
(13), 4512–4518 DOI: 

10.1021/cm800708g.

(130) 
Shimoda, Y.; Doi, Y.; Wakeshima, M.; Hinatsu, Y. 
Magnetic 
Properties 
of 
Quadruple 
Perovskites 

Ba4LnRu3O12 (Ln=La, Nd, Sm-Gd, Dy-Lu). J. Solid State 
Chem.
2010, 
183
(1), 
33–40 
DOI: 


32

10.1016/j.jssc.2009.10.007.

(131) 
Shimoda, Y.; Doi, Y.; Wakeshima, M.; Hinatsu, Y. 
Synthesis and Magnetic Properties of 12L-Perovskites 
Ba4LnIr3O12 (Ln=lanthanides). J. Solid State Chem.
2009, 
182
(10), 
2873–2879 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jssc.2009.07.056.

(132) 
Landau, L. D., & Lifshitz, E. M. (2013). Quantum 
mechanics: non-relativistic theory (Vol. 3). Elsevier.

(133) 
Rashba, E. I. Spin–Orbit Coupling Goes Global. J. Phys. 
Condens. Matter
2016, 28
(42), 421004 DOI: 

10.1088/0953-8984/28/42/421004.

(134) 
Miiller, W.; Dunstan, M. T.; Huang, Z.; Mohamed, Z.; 
Kennedy, B. J.; Avdeev, M.; Ling, C. D. Complex 5d 
Magnetism in a Novel S = 1/2 Trimer System, the 12L 
Hexagonal Perovskite Ba 4 BiIr 3 O 12. Inorg. Chem.
2013, 
52
(21), 
12461–12467 
DOI: 

10.1021/ic4014619.

(135) 
Miiller, W.; Avdeev, M.; Zhou, Q.; Kennedy, B. J.; 
Sharma, N.; Kutteh, R.; Kearley, G. J.; Schmid, S.; Knight, 
K. S.; Blanchard, P. E. R.; Ling, C. D. Giant 
Magnetoelastic Effect at the Opening of a Spin-Gap in 
Ba 3BiIr 2O 9. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 (6), 3265–
3270 DOI: 10.1021/ja211517h.

(136) 
Colabello, D. M.; Sobalvarro, E. M.; Sheckelton, J. P.; 
Neuefeind, J. C.; Mcqueen, T. M.; Khalifah, P. G. 
Observation of Vacancies, Faults, and Superstructures 
in Ln 5 Mo 2 O 12 (Ln = La, Y, and Lu) Compounds with 
Direct Mo−Mo Bonding. Inorg. Chem 2017, 56, 12866–
12880 DOI: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.6b02531.

(137) 
Streltsov, S. V; Khomskii, D. I. Cluster Magnetism of Ba 
4 NbMn 3 O 12 : Localized Electrons or Molecular 
Orbitals? 1. JETP Lett. 2018, 108 (10), 686–690 DOI: 
10.1134/S0021364018220071.

(138) 
Shimoda, Y.; Doi, Y.; Wakeshima, M.; Hinatsu, Y. 
Magnetic and Electrical Properties of Quadruple 
Perovskites with 12 Layer Structures Ba4LnM3O12 
(Ln=rare Earths; M=Ru, Ir): The Role of Metal–Metal 
Bonding in Perovskite-Related Oxides. J. Solid State 
Chem.
2010, 
183
(9), 
1962–1969 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jssc.2010.06.023.

(139)
Shimoda, Y.; Doi, Y.; Wakeshima, M.; Hinatsu, Y. Crystal 
Structures and Characterizations of Mixed Valence 12 
L-Perovskites Ba4EuM3O12 (M = Ru and Ir). Inorg. 
Chem.
2009, 
48
(20), 
9952–9957 
DOI: 

10.1021/ic9009652.

(140) 
Takizawa, H.; Steinfink, H. Preparation and the Crystal 
Structure of Ten-Layer Ba5Fe4NiO13.5. J. Solid State 
Chem.
1996, 
121
(1), 
133–137 
DOI: 

10.1006/jssc.1996.0019.

(141) 
Tan, Z.; Saito, T.; Denis Romero, F.; Amano Patino, M.; 
Goto, M.; Chen, W. T.; Chuang, Y. C.; Sheu, H. S.; 
Shimakawa, Y. Hexagonal Perovskite Ba4Fe3NiO12 
Containing Tetravalent Fe and Ni Ions. Inorg. Chem.

2018, 
57
(16), 
10410–10415 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b01618.

(142) 
Ferreira, T.; Heald, S. M.; Smith, M. D.; zur Loye, H.-C. C. 
Unusual Coexistence of Nickel(II) and Nickel(IV) in the 
Quadruple Perovskite Ba 4 Ni 2 Ir 2 O 12 Containing Ir 
2 NiO 12 Mixed-Metal-Cation Trimers. Inorg. Chem.
2018, 
57
(6), 
2973–2976 
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b00249.

(143) 
Kitagawa, K.; Takayama, T.; Matsumoto, Y.; Kato, A.; 
Takano, R.; Kishimoto, Y.; Bette, S.; Dinnebier, R.; 
Jackeli, G.; Takagi, H. A Spin-Orbital-Entangled 
Quantum Liquid on a Honeycomb Lattice. Nature
2018, 
554
(7692), 
341–345 
DOI: 

10.1038/nature25482.

(144) 
Wilkens, J.; Müller-Buschbaum, H. Ba12Ir12-XNbxO36 
(x = 2,4) - Eine Neue Verbindung Mit 12R-Perowskit-
Stapelvariante. J. Alloys Compd. 1991, 176 (1), 141–
146 DOI: 10.1016/0925-8388(91)90019-R.

(145) 
Thakur, 
G. 
S.; 
Chattopadhyay, 
S.; 
Doert, 
T.; 

Herrmannsdörfer, T.; Felser, C. Crystal Growth of Spin-
Frustrated Ba 4 Nb 0.8 Ir 3.2 O 12 : A Possible Spin 
Liquid Material. Cryst. Growth Des.
2020
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.cgd.0c00262.

(146) 
Rawl, R.; Lee, M.; Choi, E. S.; Li, G.; Chen, K. W.; 
Baumbach, R.; Dela Cruz, C. R.; Ma, J.; Zhou, H. D. 
Magnetic Properties of the Triangular Lattice Magnets 
A4B′B2 O12 (A=Ba, Sr, La; B′=Co, Ni, Mn; B= W, Re). 
Phys. 
Rev. 
B
2017, 
95
(17) 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.95.174438.

(147) 
Doi, Y.; Wakeshima, M.; Tezuka, K.; Shan, Y. J.; 
Ohoyama, K.; Lee, S.; Torii, S.; Kamiyama, T.; Hinatsu, Y. 
Crystal Structures, Magnetic Properties, and DFT 
Calculation of B-Site Defected 12L-Perovskites Ba 2 La 
2 MW 2 O 12 (M = Mn, Co, Ni, Zn). J. Phys. Condens. 
Matter 2017, 29 (36), 365802 DOI: 10.1088/1361-
648X/aa7c9b.

(148) 
Yin, C.; Li, G.; Kockelmann, W. A.; Liao, F.; Attfield, J. P.; 
Lin, J. Frustrated and Unfrustrated Magnetic Orders in 
the 10H Perovskite Ba 5Sb1-XMn4+xO15-δ. Chem. 
Mater.
2010, 
22
(10), 
3269–3276 
DOI: 

10.1021/cm100578u.

(149) 
Terzic, J.; Wang, J. C.; Ye, F.; Song, W. H.; Yuan, S. J.; 
Aswartham, S.; Delong, L. E.; Streltsov, S. V.; Khomskii, 
D. I.; Cao, G. Coexisting Charge and Magnetic Orders in 
the Dimer-Chain Iridate B A5AlI R2 O11. Phys. Rev. B -
Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2015, 91 (23), 6–11 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.91.235147.

(150) 
Streltsov, S. V.; Khomskii, D. I. Covalent Bonds against 
Magnetism in Transition Metal Compounds. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2016, 113 (38), 10491–10496 DOI: 
10.1073/pnas.1606367113.

(151) 
Streltsov, S. V.; Cao, G.; Khomskii, D. I. Suppression of 
Magnetism in Ba5AlIr2 O11: Interplay of Hund’s 
Coupling, 
Molecular 
Orbitals, 
and 
Spin-Orbit 


33

Interaction. Phys. Rev. B 2017, 96 (1), 014434 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.96.014434.

(152) 
Wang, Y.; Wang, R.; Kim, J.; Upton, M. H.; Casa, D.; Gog, 
T.; Cao, G.; Kotliar, G.; Dean, M. P. M.; Liu, X. Direct 
Detection of Dimer Orbitals in Ba 5 AlIr 2 O 11. 2019
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.122.106401.

(153) 
Muller-Buschbaum, H.; Lang, C. Ba5AlIr2O11: Eine 
Neue Verbindung Mit Iridium(IV, V). Zeitschrift für 
Anorg. und Allg. Chemie 1989, 568 (1), 29–34 DOI: 
10.1002/zaac.19895680105.

(154) 
Shpanchenko, R. V.; Abakumov, A. M.; Antipov, E. V.; 
Kovba, L. M. Crystal Structure of Ba5In2Al2ZrO13. J. 
Alloys Compd.
1994, 
206
(2), 
185–188 
DOI: 

10.1016/0925-8388(94)90033-7.

(155) 
Shpanchenko, R. V.; Abakumov, A. M.; Antipov, E. V.; 
Nistor, L.; Van Tendeloo, G.; Amelinckx, S. Structural 
Study of the New Complex Oxides Ba5-YSryR2-
XAl2Zr1+xO13+x/2 (R = Gd-Lu, Y, Sc). J. Solid State 
Chem.
1995, 
118
(1), 
180–192 
DOI: 

10.1006/jssc.1995.1329.

(156) 
Quarez, E.; Abraham, F.; Mentré, O. Synthesis, Crystal 
Structure and Characterization of New 12H Hexagonal 
Perovskite-Related Oxides Ba6M2Na2X 2O17 (M=Ru, 
Nb, Ta, Sb; X=V, Cr, Mn, P, As). J. Solid State Chem. 2003, 
176
(1), 
137–150 
DOI: 
10.1016/S0022-

4596(03)00379-7.

(157) 
Kuang, X.; Jing, X.; Loong, C. K.; Lachowski, E. E.; Skakle, 
J. M. S.; West, A. R. A New Hexagonal 12-Layer 
Perovskite-Related Structure: Ba6R2Ti4O17 (R = Nd 
and Y). Chem. Mater. 2002, 14 (10), 4359–4363 DOI: 
10.1021/cm020374m.

(158) 
Nguyen, L. T.; Cava, R. J. Structure and Magnetism of 
the Ba6Y2Rh2Ti2O17 Hexagonal Perovskite. arXiv 
Prepr. arXivXXXX.YYYYY.

(159) 
Clark, J. H.; Hayward, M. A. Structure, Magnetism, and 
Substitutional 
Chemistry 
of 
Cation-Ordered 

(Ba/Sr)5+nMn3+nCr2O3n+14 Phases. Chem. Mater.
2008, 20 (14), 4612–4618 DOI: 10.1021/cm8005138.

(160) 
Floros, N.; Michel, C.; Hervieu, M.; Raveau, B. The N=2 
Member of the New Layered Structural Family 
Ba5+nCa2Mn3+nO3n+14 Derived from the Hexagonal 
Perovskite: Ba7Ca2Mn5O20. J. Solid State Chem. 2002, 
168 (1), 11–17 DOI: 10.1006/jssc.2002.9667.

(161) 
Kuang, X.; Allix, M.; Ibberson, R. M.; Claridge, J. B.; Niu, 
H.; Rosseinsky, M. J. Oxygen Vacancy Ordering 
Phenomena in the Mixed-Conducting Hexagonal 
Perovskite Ba7y2Mn3Ti2O20. Chem. Mater. 2007, 19
(11), 2884–2893 DOI: 10.1021/cm0626740.

(162) 
Floros, N.; Michel, C.; Hervieu, M.; Raveau, B. A New 
Hexagonal 
16L 
Perovskite-Related 
Structure: 

Ba4Ca(1-x)Mn(3+x)O(12-δ). Chem. Mater. 2000, 12
(10), 3197–3201 DOI: 10.1021/cm000277y.

(163) 
Taguchi, H.; Takeda, Y.; Kanamaru, F.; Shimada, M.; 
Koizumi, M. Barium Cobalt Trioxide; 1977; Vol. 33.

(164) 
Parras, M.; Varela, A.; Seehofer, H.; González-Calbet, J. 
M. HREM Study of the BaCoO3-y System: Evidence for 
a New 5H Phase. J. Solid State Chem. 1995, 120 (2), 
327–331 DOI: 10.1006/jssc.1995.1416.

(165) 
von Helmolt, R.; Wecker, J.; Holzapfel, B.; Schultz, L.; 
Samwer, K. Giant Negative Magnetoresistance in 
Perovskitelike La 2 / 3 Ba 1 / 3 MnO x Ferromagnetic 
Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 71 (14), 2331–2333 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.2331.

(166) 
Gushee, B. E.; Katz, L.; Ward, R. The Preparation of a 
Barium Cobalt Oxide and Other Phases with Similar 
Structures. 
J. 
Am. 
Chem. 
Soc.
1957
DOI: 

10.1021/ja01578a004.

(167) 
Jacobson, A. J.; Hutchison, J. L. An Investigation of the 
Structure of 12HBaCoO2.6 by Electron Microscopy and 
Powder Neutron Diffraction. J. Solid State Chem. 1980, 
35 (3), 334–340 DOI: 10.1016/0022-4596(80)90530-
7.

(168) 
Mihaela, I.; Marielle, H.; Renaut, N. BaCoO2.22: The 
Most Oxygen-Deficient Certified Cubic Perovskite. 
Dalt. Trans. 2015 DOI: 10.1039/c4dt03874f.

(169) 
de la Calle, C.; Alonso, J. A.; Fernández-Díaz, M. T. 
Polymorphism of Ba1–XSrxCoO3–δ (0≤ X≤ 1) 
Perovskites: A Thermal and Structural Study by 
Neutron Diffraction. Zeitschrift für Naturforsch. B
2008, 63 (6), 647–654 DOI: 10.1515/znb-2008-0609.

(170) 
Felser, C.; Yamaura, K.; Cava, R. J. The Electronic 
Structure of Hexagonal BaCoO3. J. Solid State Chem.
1999, 146 (2), 411–417 DOI: 10.1006/jssc.1999.8382.

(171) 
Yamaura, K.; Cava, R. J. Magnetic, Electric and 
Thermoelectric Properties of the Quasi-1D Cobalt 
Oxides Ba1-XLaxCoO3 (x = 0, 0.2). Solid State Commun.
2000, 115
(6), 301–305 DOI: 10.1016/S0038-

1098(00)00188-5.

(172) 
Botta, P. M.; Pardo, V.; de la Calle, C.; Baldomir, D.; 
Alonso, J. A.; Rivas, J. Ferromagnetic Clusters in 
Polycrystalline BaCoO3. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 2007, 
316
(2 
SPEC. 
ISS.), 
e670–e673 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jmmm.2007.03.058.

(173) 
Pardo, V.; Rivas, J.; Baldomir, D.; Iglesias, M.; Blaha, P.; 
Schwarz, K.; Arias, J. E. Evidence for Magnetic Clusters 
in BaCoO3. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys.
2004, 
70
(21), 
1–4 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.70.212404.

(174) 
Pardo, V.; Blaha, P.; Iglesias, M.; Schwarz, K.; Baldomir, 
D.; Arias, J. E. Magnetic Structure and Orbital Ordering 
in BaCoO3 from First-Principles Calculations. Phys. 
Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2004, 70 (14) DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.70.144422.

(175) 
Adkin, J. J.; Hayward, M. A. BaMnO3-x Revisited: A 


34

Structural and Magnetic Study. Chem. Mater. 2007, 19
(4), 755–762 DOI: 10.1021/cm062055r.

(176) 
Negas, T.; Roth, R. S. Phase Equilibria and Structural 
Relations in the System BaMnO3-X. J. Solid State Chem.
1971, 
3
(3), 
323–339 
DOI: 
10.1016/0022-

4596(71)90068-5.

(177) 
Adkin, J. J.; Hayward, M. A. Structure and Magnetism of 
4H-BaMnO3-x (0≤x≤0.35) and 4H-Ba0.5Sr0.5MnO3-x 
(0≤x≤0.21). J. Solid State Chem. 2006, 179 (1), 70–76 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jssc.2005.09.046.

(178) 
Cussen, E. J.; Battle, P. D. Crystal and Magnetic 
Structures of 2H BaMnO3. Chem. Mater. 2000, 12 (3), 
831–838 DOI: 10.1021/cm991144j.

(179) 
Rusydi, A.; Rauer, R.; Neuber, G.; Bastjan, M.; Mahns, I.; 
Müller, S.; Saichu, P.; Schulz, B.; Singer, S. G.; 
Lichtenstein, A. I.; Qi, D.; Gao, X.; Yu, X.; Wee, A. T. S.; 
Stryganyuk, G.; Dörr, K.; Sawatzky, G. A.; Cooper, S. L.; 
Rübhausen, 
M. 
Metal-Insulator 
Transition 
in 

Manganites: Changes in Optical Conductivity up to 22 
EV. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2008, 78
(12) DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.78.125110.

(180) 
Von Helmolt, R.; Wecker, J.; Holzapfel, B.; Schultz, L.; 
Samwer, K. Giant Negative Magnetoresistance in 
Perovskitelike 
La2/3Ba1/3MnOx 
Ferromagnetic 

Films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1993, 71 (14), 2331–2333 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevLett.71.2331.

(181) 
Levy, P. M. Giant Magnetoresistance in Magnetic 
Layered and Granular Materials. Science (80-. ). 1992, 
256
(5059), 
972–973 
DOI: 

10.1126/science.256.5059.972.

(182) 
Álvarez-Serrano, I.; López, M. L.; Pico, C.; Veiga, M. L. 
CMR in a Manganite with 50% of Ti in the Mn Sites. 
Solid 
State 
Sci.
2006, 
8
(1), 
37–43 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.solidstatesciences.2005.10.015.

(183) 
Fujito, H.; Kunioku, H.; Kato, D.; Suzuki, H.; Higashi, M.; 
Kageyama, H.; Abe, R. Layered Perovskite Oxychloride 
Bi4NbO8Cl: A Stable Visible Light Responsive 
Photocatalyst for Water Splitting. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2016, 
138
(7), 
2082–2085 
DOI: 

10.1021/jacs.5b11191.

(184) 
Zhang, L.; Yang, S.; Zhang, S. A Novel Perovskite 
Oxychloride as a High Performance Cathode for 
Protonic Ceramic Fuel Cells. J. Power Sources 2019, 
440, 227125 DOI: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2019.227125.

(185) 
Zhou, X.; Dong, H. Density Functional Studies on 
Layered 
Perovskite 
Oxyhalide 
Bi4MO8X 

Photocatalysts (M = Nb and Ta, X = Cl, Br, and I). J. Phys. 
Chem. C
2017, 121
(38), 20662–20672 DOI: 

10.1021/acs.jpcc.7b06576.

(186) 
Dixon, E.; Hayward, M. A. The Topotactic Reduction of 
Sr3Fe2O 5Cl2-Square Planar Fe(II) in an Extended 
Oxyhalide. Inorg. Chem. 2010, 49 (20), 9649–9654 
DOI: 10.1021/ic101371z.

(187) 
Fry, A. M.; Seibel, H. A.; Lokuhewa, I. N.; Woodward, P. 
M. Na 1.5Ag 1.5MO 3F 3 (M = Mo, W): An Ordered 
Oxyfluoride Derivative of the LiNbO 3 Structure. J. Am. 
Chem. 
Soc.
2012, 
134
(5), 
2621–2625 
DOI: 

10.1021/ja208587e.

(188) 
Kirsch, J. E.; Izumi, H. K.; Stern, C. L.; Poeppelmeier, K. 
R. Synthesis and Characterization of the Face-Sharing 
Bioctahedral [Mo 2 O 6 F 3 ] 3-Anion. 2005 DOI: 
10.1021/ic0502877.

(189) 
Kauffmann, M.; Tancret, N.; Abraham, F.; Roussel, P. 
New Cobaltite Materials Containing CdI2-Type Layers: 
Synthesis 
and 
Structures 
of 
Ba2Co4ClO7 
and 

Ba2Co4BrO7. Solid State Sci. 2007, 9 (10), 885–894 
DOI: 10.1016/j.solidstatesciences.2007.06.012.

(190) 
Neubacher, M.; Muller-Buschbaum, H. Zur Kenntnis 
von Ba6Ru2PtO12Cl2. Zeitschrift fur Anorg. und Allg. 
Chemie
1992, 
609
(3), 
59–62 
DOI: 

10.1002/zaac.19926090311.

(191) 
Tancret, N.; Roussel, P.; Abraham, F. Layered 
Perovskite-Related Ruthenium Oxychlorides: Crystal 
Structure of Two New Compounds Ba5Ru2Cl2O9 and 
Ba6Ru3Cl2O12. J. Solid State Chem. 2004, 177 (3), 
806–816 DOI: 10.1016/j.jssc.2003.09.014.

(192) 
Kauffmann, M.; Mentré, O.; Legris, A.; Tancret, N.; 
Abraham, F.; Roussel, P. 3D-Magnetic Ordering of Co4+ 
Dimers in a New Co3+,4+ Oxychloride: Neutron 
Diffraction Analysis and DFT Calculations. Chem. Phys. 
Lett.
2006, 
432
(1–3), 
88–93 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.cplett.2006.10.064.

(193) 
Wilkens, J.; Müller-Buschbaum, H. Single-Crystal 
Investigation of a New Ruthenium Chloride Oxide, 
Ba7Ru4O15Cl2. Acta Chem. Scand. 1991, 45, 812–815 
DOI: 10.3891/acta.chem.scand.45-0812.

(194) 
Lang, C.; Müller-Buschbaum, H. Ein Neuer Strukturtyp 
Eines 
Neuen 
Ruthenium(V)-Oxidchlorids: 

Ba5Ru2O9Cl2. ZAAC ‐ J. Inorg. Gen. Chem. 1990, 587
(1), 39–46 DOI: 10.1002/zaac.19905870106.

(195) 
Tancret, N.; Roussel, P.; Abraham, F. New Ba5M5-
XPtxClO13 (M=Fe, Co) Oxychlorides with Layered 
Perovskite-Related Structure. J. Solid State Chem.
2004, 
177
(3), 
1023–1031 
DOI: 

10.1016/j.jssc.2003.10.007.

(196) 
Reinen, D.; Lachwa, H.; Allmann, R. Farbe Und 
Konstitution 
Bei 
Mnv 
in 
Tetraedrischer 

Sauerstoffkoordination. 
I. 
EPR- 
Und 

Ligandenfeldspektroskopische Untersuchungen an 
MnV-haltigen Apatiten Sowie Die Struktur von 
Ba5(MnO4)3Cl. ZAAC ‐ J. Inorg. Gen. Chem. 1986, 542
(11), 71–88 DOI: 10.1002/zaac.19865421112.

(197) 
Martin, F.-D.; Müller-Buschbaum, H. Zur Kenntnis von 
KBa2V2O7Cl / On KBa2V2O7Cl. Zeitschrift für 
Naturforsch. B
1994, 49
(8), 1141–1144 DOI: 

10.1515/znb-1994-0820.


35

(198) 
Li, Q.; Geng, L.; Lu, H. Y.; Dai, K.; Cheng, W. D. Crystal 
Structures and Characterizations of Two New Selenite 
Chlorides: 
1D 
Ba2Zn(SeO3)2Cl2 
and 
2D 

BaZn2(SeO3)2Cl2. J. Solid State Chem. 2018, 265, 117–
122 DOI: 10.1016/j.jssc.2018.05.035.

(199) 
Iorgulescu, M.; Kabbour, H.; Tancret, N.; Mentré, O.; 
Roussel, P. Ba8Co2Mn6ClO22, a Quasi-1D Hexagonal 
Perovskite Polytype Containing New 8H-Blocks. Chem. 
Commun.
2010, 
46
(29), 
5271–5273 
DOI: 

10.1039/c0cc00294a.

(200) 
Wilkens, J.; Müller-Buschbaum, H. Darstellung Und 
Strukturaufklärung von Ba8Ru3,33Ta1,67O18Cl2. J. 
Alloys Compd.
1992, 
184
(2), 
195–201 
DOI: 

10.1016/0925-8388(92)90493-S.

(201) 
Leib, W.; Muller-Buschbaum, H. Zur Kenntnis von 
Ba10Fe8Pt2Cl2O25. Zeitschrift für Anorg. und Allg. 
Chemie
1987, 
551
(8), 
7–12 
DOI: 

10.1002/zaac.19875510802.

(202) 
Randall Jnr, J. J.; Katz, L. The Crystal Structure of 
Sr4PtO6 
and 
Two 
Related 
Compounds. 
Acta 

Crystallogr.
1959, 
12
(7), 
519–521 
DOI: 

10.1107/S0365110X59001566.

(203) 
Powell, A. V; Battle, P. D.; Gore, J. G. Structure of 
Sr4IrO6 
by 
Time-of-Flight 
Neutron 
Powder 

Diffraction. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. C Cryst. Struct. 
Commun.
1993, 
49
(5), 
852–854 
DOI: 

10.1107/S0108270192012721.

(204) 
Vente, J. F.; Lear, J. K.; Battle, P. D. Sr 4 –x Ca x RhO 6 : A 
Magnetically Ordered Rh IV Compound. J. Mater. Chem.
1995, 
5
(11), 
1785–1789 
DOI: 

10.1039/JM9950501785.

(205) 
Powell, A. V.; Gore, J. G.; Battle, P. D. The Magnetic 
Properties of Iridium in Mixed-Metal Oxides. J. Alloys 
Compd. 1993, 201 (1–2), 73–84 DOI: 10.1016/0925-
8388(93)90864-J.

(206) 
Macquart, R. B.; Gemmill, W. R.; Davis, M. J.; Smith, M. 
D.; Zur Loye, H. C. Single-Crystal Structure of the 2H-
Related Perovskites (A3-XNax)NaBO6(A = La, Pr, Nd; B 
= Rh, Pt). Inorg. Chem. 2006, 45 (11), 4391–4395 DOI: 
10.1021/ic060105o.

(207) 
Stitzer, K. E.; El Abed, A.; Darriet, J.; Zur Loye, H. C. 
Growth of Sr6Rh5O15 Single Crystals from High-
Temperature Solutions: Structure Determination 
Using the Traditional 3-D and the 4-D Superspace 
Group Methods and Magnetic Measurements on 
Oriented Single Crystals. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2001, 123
(36), 8790–8796 DOI: 10.1021/ja011071g.

(208) 
Battle, P. D.; Blake, G. R.; Sloan, J.; Vente, J. F. 
Commensurate and Incommensurate Phases in the 
SystemA4A′Ir2O9(A=Sr, Ba;A′=Cu, Zn). J. Solid State 
Chem.
1998, 
136
(1), 
103–114 
DOI: 

10.1006/jssc.1997.7666.

(209) 
Battle, P. D.; Blake, G. R.; Darriet, J.; Gore, J. G.; Weill, F. 

Modulated Structure of Ba6ZnIr4O15; a Comparison 
with Ba6CuIr4O15 and SrMn1-XCoxO3-Y. J. Mater. 
Chem.
1997, 
7
(8), 
1559–1564 
DOI: 

10.1039/a700964j.

(210) 
Battle, P. D.; Gibb, T. C.; Strange, R. A Study of a New 
Incommensurate Phase in the System SrMn1-XCoxO3-
Y. J. Solid State Chem. 1989, 81 (2), 217–229 DOI: 
10.1016/0022-4596(89)90009-1.

(211) 
Blake, G. R.; Battle, P. D.; Sloan, J.; Vente, J. F.; Darriet, J.; 
Weill, F. Neutron Diffraction Study of the Structures of 
Ba 5 CuIr 3 O 12 and Ba 16 Cu 3 Ir 10 O 39. 1999 DOI: 
10.1021/cm9807844.

(212) 
Ye, M.; Kim, H.-S.; Kim, J.-W.; Won, C.-J.; Haule, K.; 
Vanderbilt, D.; Cheong, S.-W.; Blumberg, G. Covalency-
Driven Collapse of Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling in Face-
Sharing Iridium Octahedra. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 98, 
201105 DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.98.201105.

(213) 
Volkov, P. A.; Won, C.-J.; Gorbunov, D. I.; Kim, J.; Ye, M.; 
Kim, H.-S.; Pixley, J. H.; Cheong, S.-W.; Blumberg, G. 
Random Singlet State in Ba5CuIr3O12 Single Crystals. 
Phys. 
Rev. 
B
2020,
101
(2), 
020406 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.101.020406.

(214) 
Babel, D.; Rüdorff, W.; Tschöpp, R. Ternäre Oxide Der 
Übergangsmetalle. 
VI. 
Erdalkaliiridium(IV)-oxide: 

Struktur von Dicalciumiridium(IV)-oxid, Ca2IrO4. 
ZAAC ‐ J. Inorg. Gen. Chem. 1966, 347 (5–6), 282–288 
DOI: 10.1002/zaac.19663470509.

(215) 
Guo, S.; Zhong, R.; Wang, W.; Tao, J.; Ni, D.; Cava, R. J. 
K3Ir2O6 and K16.3Ir8O30, Low-Dimensional Iridates 
with Infinite IrO6 Chains. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2020, 142
(11), 5389–5395 DOI: 10.1021/jacs.0c00849.

(216) 
Stitzer, K. E.; Smith, M. D.; Darriet, J.; Loye, H. C. zu. 
Crystal 
Growth, 
Structure 
Determination 
and 

Magnetism of a New Hexagonal Rhodate: Ba9Rh8O24. 
Chem. 
Commun.
2001, 
17, 
1680–1681 
DOI: 

10.1039/b104513j.

(217) 
Stitzer, K. E.; El Abed, A.; Darriet, J.; Zur Loye, H. C. 
Crystal Growth and Structure Determination of 
Barium Rhodates: Stepping Stones toward 2H-
BaRhO3. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126 (3), 856–864 DOI: 
10.1021/ja0374271.

(218) 
Stitzer, K. E.; El Abed, A.; Darriet, J.; Zur Loye, H. C. 
Crystal 
Growth, 
Structure 
Determination 
and 

Magnetism of a New M=3 , N=1 Member of the 
A3n+3mA′nB3m+nO 9m+6n Family of Oxides: 12R-
Ba12Rh9.25Ir 1.75O33. J. Solid State Chem. 2004, 177
(4–5), 1405–1411 DOI: 10.1016/j.jssc.2003.11.021.

(219) 
Mizoguchi, H.; Ramirez, A. P.; Siegrist, T.; Zakharov, L. 
N.; Sleight, A. W.; Subramanian, M. A. Possible Verwey-
Type Transition in Pb3Rh7O15. Chem. Mater. 2009, 21
(11), 2300–2305 DOI: 10.1021/cm900697s.

(220) 
Mizoguchi, H.; Michiue, Y.; Sleight, A. W.; Subramanian, 
M. A. Undulating Layers in a New Rhodate Network: 


36

Structure of Bi1.4CuORh5O10. Inorg. Chem. 2011, 50
(20), 10397–10401 DOI: 10.1021/ic201481d.

(221) 
Vente, J. F.; Kamenev, K. V; Sokolov, D. A. Structural and 
Magnetic Properties of Layered Sr7Mn4O15. Phys. Rev. 
B
2001, 
64
(21), 
214403 
DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.64.214403.

(222) 
Grasset, F.; Zakhour, M.; Darriet, J. Synthesis, Crystal 
Structure and Magnetic Properties of Ba5Ru2O9(O2), 
Ba5Nb2O9(O2) and Ba5Ru2O10 Related to the 
Perovskite-Type 
Structure, 
and 
Structural 

Relationships with Corresponding Sulfides. J. Alloys 
Compd. 1999 DOI: 10.1016/S0925-8388(99)00036-5.

(223) 
Grimaud, A.; Iadecola, A.; Batuk, D.; Saubanè, M.; 
Abakumov, A. M.; Freeland, J. W.; Cabana, J.; Li, H.; 
Doublet, M.-L.; Gwenaë Lle Rousse, ∥; Tarascon, J.-M. 
Chemical Activity of the Peroxide/Oxide Redox Couple: 
Case Study of Ba 5 Ru 2 O 11 in Aqueous and Organic 
Solvents. 
2018
DOI: 

10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b01372.

(224) 
Klein, Y.; Rousse, G.; Damay, F.; Porcher, F.; André, G.; 
Terasaki, 
I. 
Antiferromagnetic 
Order 
and 

Consequences on the Transport Properties of 
Ba4Ru3O10. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 84 (5), 054439 DOI: 
10.1103/PhysRevB.84.054439.

(225) 
Streltsov, S. V.; Khomskii, D. I. Unconventional 
Magnetism 
as a 
Consequence 
of 
the 
Charge 

Disproportionation 
and 
the 
Molecular 
Orbital 

Formation in Ba 4Ru 3O 10. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. 
Matter Mater. Phys.
2012, 86
(6), 3–7 DOI: 

10.1103/PhysRevB.86.064429.

(226) 
Dussarrat, C.; Grasset, F.; Bontchev, R.; Darriet, J. 
Crystal Structures and Magnetic Properties of 
Ba4Ru3O10 and Ba5Ru3O12. J. Alloys Compd. 1996
DOI: 10.1016/0925-8388(96)80029-6.

(227) 
Lang, C.; Müller-Buschbaum, H. Über Ein Neues 
Oxoiridat(IV): Ba7Ir6O19. Monatshefte für Chemie 
Chem. Mon.
1989, 120
(8–9), 705–710 DOI: 

10.1007/BF00809961.


