 

1 

 

 

Predicting the propensity for thermally activated  

β events in metallic glasses via interpretable  

machine learning 

Qi Wang1*, Jun Ding2*, Evan Ma1 

1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 

Maryland 21218, United States 

2 Center for Advancing Materials Performance from the Nanoscale (CAMP-Nano), State Key 

Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China 

* Correspondence to qiwang.mse@gmail.com (Q. W.), dingsn@xjtu.edu.cn (J. D.) 

 

 
 


 

2 

 

ABSTRACT 

The elementary excitations in metallic glasses (MGs), i.e., β processes that involve hopping 

between nearby sub-basins, underlie many unusual properties of the amorphous alloys. A high-

efficacy prediction of the propensity for those activated processes from solely the atomic 

positions, however, has remained a daunting challenge. Recently, employing well-designed site 

environment descriptors and machine learning (ML), notable progress has been made in 

predicting the propensity for stress-activated β processes (i.e., shear transformations) from the 

static structure. However, the complex tensorial stress field and direction-dependent activation 

could induce non-trivial noises in the data, limiting the accuracy of the structure-property 

mapping learned. Here, we focus on the thermally activated elementary excitations and generate 

high-quality data in several Cu-Zr MGs, allowing quantitative mapping of the potential energy 

landscape. After fingerprinting the atomic environment with short- and medium-range interstice 

distribution, ML can identify the atoms with strong resistance or high compliance to thermal 

activation, at an unprecedented accuracy over ML models for stress-driven activation events. 

Interestingly, a quantitative “between-task” transferring test reveals that our learnt model can 

also generalize to predict the propensity of shear transformation. Our dataset is potentially useful 

for benchmarking future ML models on structure-property relationships in MGs. 

 

 
 


 

3 

 

INTRODUCTION 

Metallic glasses (MGs), as a unique class of amorphous materials, exhibit a high atomic 

packing density with pronounced topological and chemical short-to-medium range order1–4. The 

complex local structures have been demonstrated to have a profound influence on the properties 

of MGs5. In essence, many properties of MGs can be depicted in terms of excursions in the 

potential energy landscape (PEL)6–8, which is a multidimensional configurational space with 

corresponding local energy minima separated by barriers. In the PEL picture, elementary 

excitations upon external stimuli (e.g., thermal or mechanical) are associated with the β processes, 

which correspond to the hopping between nearby local minima, i.e., sub-basins inside a deep PEL 

megabasin9. Elementary excitations have been correlated with many properties10-12, including 

local plastic deformation13,14, diffusion mediated by atomic hopping15, as well as structural 

relaxation (local energy minimization in the direction towards the bottom of the basin) or 

rejuvenation (to a higher-energy local minimum)16. 

It remains as a long-standing challenge to unravel the role of static structure in controlling 

the elementary excitations in MGs: is there a structural indicator that can be tapped into to 

predict how resistant or compliant different local regions are to externally stimulated activation? 

Over the past several decades, many efforts have been devoted to addressing this critical question. 

Recently, the emerging machine learning (ML) technique, based on well-crafted representations 

of atomic environment, has been proven to be promising for establishing atomic-level structure-

property relationships in liquids and glasses17–24. For example, Schoenholz et al.17 studied L-J 

model liquids and utilized ML to derive a structural parameter called “softness”, which was found 

to correlate well with the particle’s propensity for hopping, reflecting its susceptibility to β 

relaxation of liquids10. Below the glass transition temperature, however, metallic liquids become 

frozen into glass solids and the timescale of the glass dynamics becomes very long, well beyond 

the capability of atomistic (e.g. molecular dynamics) simulations. We therefore have to resort to 

local perturbation methods, to activate the local group of atoms into excited states by stress or 

thermal stimulus, as a probe into the susceptibility to elementary excitations. Several recent ML 

studies have focused on quantitatively gauging how local environment influences the propensity 

for stress-activated β processes (i.e., shear transformations) in MGs18-20. For example, pioneering 

works of Cubuk et al.18 performed ML on disordered materials such as L-J glasses and granular 

systems and showed that radial and bond-angle distribution information can be used to identify 

atoms with high propensity to shear transformation. Wang et al.19 developed interstice 

distribution as a new local structural representation for MGs, which is proven to be robust in 


 

4 

 

predicting plastic sites of several MGs and has advantages in generalizing between compositions 

even chemical systems. However, the accuracy achieved in these attempts is not yet sufficiently 

high, and the reported scoring metric, e.g. recall or area under receiver operating characteristic 

curve (AUC-ROC), is typically below 80%. One reason for this is that the elementary excitations 

upon shear transformations are complicated by the non-uniform tensorial stress field in the solid 

under deformation, as well as the dependence of activation on loading conditions (e.g., loading 

mode and direction)25,26. If not properly dealt with, these would introduce non-trivial noises in 

the accrued data and influence adversely the quality of the learnt structure-property relations.  

This problem, however, subsides when dealing with the thermally induced elementary 

excitations in MGs. For instance, here we use activation-relaxation technique (ART)27,28 to probe 

the propensity for thermal activation of each atom in MGs (see schematic description in Fig. 1a, 

will be discussed later). These activated processes are not subject to internal non-uniform 

stresses, and can be well converged by averaging over a considerable number of activation 

pathways, significantly reducing data noises. Meanwhile, the Gaussian-like distribution of thermal 

activation energetics (to be shown later) can well identify atoms at both the hard and soft ends, 

corresponding to locally favored and unfavored motifs, respectively. This avoids the problem 

associated with common stress activation indicator (e.g., non-affine displacement or von Mises 

strain), which often exhibits a skewed “long-tail” distribution29 and the resolution at the hard end 

is much lower than that on the soft side. Moreover, thermally activated events are comparable in 

their energetics, at least for some MGs that are based on some common (or similar) elements, 

even when they are of different composition or processing history; as such these multiple 

“datasets” can be combined to facilitate the ML identification of the structural underpinning in 

more general terms. 

In this work, we develop ML models to predict the propensity of thermally activated 

elementary excitation, from the atomic environment of the static MG structure. We systematically 

probe the activation energies in six MGs, including Cu64Zr36 prepared using different quenching 

rates, as well as Cu50Zr50 and Cu80Zr20, using ART27,28. The activation energy around each atom is 

calculated, and ensemble-averaged over 50 activation trials, to indicate its susceptibility to 

excitation. We then combine the data from the six MGs into a wider activation energy spectrum 

(Fig. 1b) and use ML to identify those atoms with strong resistance or high compliance to 

activation. By fingerprinting the atomic site environment with a recently proposed interstice 

distribution representation19, we find that ML can reliably identify atoms with the highest 5% and 

lowest 5% activation energy, reaching an area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-


 

5 

 

ROC) of 0.942 and 0.888, respectively. Such accuracies are considerably better than that in 

previous ML prediction of the propensity for stress-driven shear transformations18,19. We also 

identify descriptors that are critical to ML decision, and interestingly, most of them turn out to be 

medium-range order features. Finally, we conduct quantitative “between-task” transferring tests 

and show that our learnt model can be used to predict the propensity for shear transformation 

as well. This ML work highlights the predictive power of local static structure to quantitatively 

connect with β processes in MGs.  

 

RESULTS 

Energy barriers for thermally activated β processes  

We employ molecular dynamics (MD) simulation to prepare six Cu-Zr model MG samples: i) 

different compositions yet with the same cooling rate (Cu50Zr50, Cu64Zr36, Cu80Zr20 quenched from 

liquid at 1010 K/s), and ii) same composition but with different cooling rates (Cu64Zr36 MGs with 

the quenching rates of 109 to 1012 K/s) (see Methods for simulation details). We then apply ART 

to probe the energy barrier for thermally-activated events27,28. Around each atom in those MGs, 

we initiate 50 independent activation events along random activation pathways (illustrated by 

the dashed red lines in Fig. 1a, see Methods for more details). The ensemble-averaged activation 

energy, Eact, can then be defined as the average energy difference between the saddle point and 

the initial state, 

                             (1) 

The average value of 50 independent activations around each atom are sufficient to achieve a 

converged Eact, which contains key statistical information for thermal excitations on each local 

region (including center atom and its neighbors).  

Figure 1b shows the distribution of Eact in the six MGs. The dashed vertical line denotes the 

percentile 50% (median) of Eact in each MG. The wide spread of Eact signifies a large degree of 

structural and property heterogeneity in each glass. As mentioned in Introduction, the Gaussian-

like distribution of Eact observed is very different from that for stress-activated event, where a 

“long-tail” distribution is often observed in the stress activation indicator (e.g., non-affine 

displacement or von Mises strain)29. The Eact spectrum clearly depends on the MG composition 

or quenching rate. Next, we merge the Eact data of the six MGs into a more comprehensive Eact 

spectrum (Fig. 1b). The combined spectrum markedly increases the variety of local environments 

Eact = Esaddle −Einitial


 

6 

 

surveyed, far beyond what is present in a single MG. Later, we will feed this combined dataset to 

ML and test if ML is capable of mapping out the characteristic atoms at both the high Eact (hard) 

and low Eact (soft) ends of these Cu-Zr MGs.  

 

 

Figure 1 | Thermally activated events in Cu-Zr metallic glasses. (a) Schematic description of the β-process 
in the context of potential energy landscape (PEL). Red dashes illustrate several activated pathways from 
a local minimum. In practice, we initiate 50 independent events around each atom along random 
activation pathways using ART and extract an ensemble-averaged activation energy Eact for the atom. (b) 
Distribution of Eact in the six model glasses as well as their combined Eact spectrum. The median (quantile 
50%) and quantiles 5% and 95% are marked as vertical dashed lines in the combined Eact spectrum, and 
the median (quantile 50%) is marked in the spectrum of each model glass. 


 

7 

 

Connecting activation barriers with local atomic environment  

We make use of a set of interstice distribution descriptors to represent the local atomic 

environment19. The basic fingerprinting procedure is to extract groups of bonds, facets and 

tetrahedra from the coordination polyhedron of an atom, and then featurize the distribution of 

interstitial spaces present in these bond, facet and tetrahedron groups. A simple treatment of 

representing a distribution is to derive typical statistics (such as minimum, mean, maximum and 

standard-deviation) of the interstitial spaces present. The characterization of bond, facet and 

tetrahedron interstices can include 2-body, 3-body and 4-fold correlations, respectively, in the 

nearest-neighbor short-range-order (SRO) signatures. The SRO signatures will be further “coarse-

grained” to derive statistics among their neighbors. Such “coarse-grained” signatures are a 

representation of medium-range-order (MRO), with a length scale of ~4 – 6 Å, which is the next-

level structural organization beyond the SRO. Upon implementation, the interstice representation 

contains 80 descriptors, 16 SRO and 64 MRO. The codes for this representation can be publicly 

accessed 
in 
amlearn19 
(https://github.com/Qi-max/amlearn) 
and 
matminer30 

(https://github.com/hackingmaterials/matminer). This representation has been demonstrated to 

be highly predictive, interpretable and generalizable in a range of MGs19. 

After featurizing all atoms in the six MGs, we feed the data to a scalable tree boosting ML 

algorithm, XGBOOST31. XGBOOST implements a parallel tree boosting algorithm that is proven to 

be very efficient and robust in various cases. We train two sets of XGBOOST classifiers to identify 

the highest 5% and the lowest 5% Eact atoms, respectively, in the combined dataset merged from 

six MGs (Fig. 1b). We have tested that varying the threshold from 3% to 10% gives similar results, 

and in general, the smaller the fraction, the better the ML score (i.e., the easier for ML to identify). 

As we are dealing with an imbalanced dataset, we do random equal undersampling three times 

to create three data samples, each with 3,000 positive class atoms (the highest or lowest Eact 

atoms) and 3,000 negative class atoms. We then perform 5-fold cross-validation on each of the 

data samples, and average the predictions on the test sets (i.e. averaged over 5 × 3 = 15 test sets). 

The repeated undersampling procedure is very useful for reducing the variance introduced by 

data undersampling.  

We use the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC) as the scoring 

metric of the classifiers. The ROC curve characterizes the tradeoff between the true positive rate 

(TPR) and negative positive rate (FPR)32. TPR is also known as recall or sensitivity: TPR = TP / (TP 

+ FN), where TP and FN are short for true positive and false negative, respectively. FPR is the false-

alarm rate: FPR = FP / (FP + TN), where FP and TN stand for false positive and true negative, 


 

8 

 

respectively. AUC-ROC, measuring the area underneath the ROC curve, is a widely used metric to 

evaluate a classifier32. By definition, an AUC-ROC of 0.5 indicates a random chance level, 1.0 

signifies perfect classification accuracy, and the higher the AUC-ROC, the better the model is at 

distinguishing the classes. Figure 2a presents the ROC curve and its AUC in classifying the highest 

and lowest 5% Eact atoms, respectively. For simplicity, these two ML problems are referred to as 

“H-Eact” and “L-Eact” hereafter. We see that the XGBOOST model trained from interstice 

distribution can well distinguish the high Eact atoms from the rest of the glass, reaching a very high 

AUC-ROC of 0.942. These high Eact atoms are particularly resistant to thermal activation and “pin” 

the local rearrangement. While there is an increased ambiguity in classifying the lowest Eact atoms, 

the AUC-ROC is also high (0.888), indicating there is also significant structural contrast at the soft 

end. One can directly observe from the ROC curve the TPR and FPR values at various probability 

thresholds for designating the classes. 

Besides outputting a “label” (0 or 1) to predict whether an atom belongs to a class or not, 

XGBOOST (and many other ML algorithms) can also give continuous probability estimates, in the 

range of [0, 1], to reveal the confidence level of predictions. The probabilities can reveal the 

uncertainty of prediction, allow some flexibility in using the model, and provide a more nuanced 

way to assess the model. However, raw class probabilities from nonlinear ML algorithms are often 

not well calibrated and should be carefully checked before interpretation. Specifically, if the 

predicted probabilities match the “real” class probabilities, such probabilities are referred to as 

calibrated. For instance, when the positive class probability of some data points is 0.70, ideally 

these points should indeed have a probability of 0.70 to be positive. This ideal calibration occasion 

is illustrated by the diagonal line in Fig. 2b. In this work, we employ a post-training calibration 

method called isotonic regression33 to improve the calibration performance of our probability 

estimates. As seen in Fig. 2b, the calibration curves of ph and pl, i.e. the probability estimates from 

models obtained in the “H-Eact” and “L-Eact” ML problem, respectively, are both demonstrated to 

be close to perfect calibration. The area between the calibration curve and perfect calibration line, 

as a measure of miscalibration, is very low in both cases (Fig. 2b). Thus, our machine-learnt 

probability estimates can well reflect the real class probabilities and warrant further 

interpretation.  


 

9 

 

 

Figure 2 | Predicting the heterogeneity of thermally activated events. (a) Receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curve and area under curve (AUC) in classifying atoms showing the highest 5% (H-Eact 
problem) or lowest 5% activation energy (L-Eact problem). The dashed line marks random case. (b) Near-
perfect calibration of the ML-evaluated class probability estimates, that is, ph from H-Eact and pl from L-Eact.  

 

We proceed to look more into the distributions of the ML-evaluated class probability 

estimates, that is, ph from H-Eact and pl from L-Eact. Figure 3a and 3b present the overall ph and pl 

distributions in the six MGs as well as the variation of Eact with ph and pl. A wide distribution of ph 

and pl is observed, suggesting a large degree of heterogeneity inside the MGs. ph has a larger 

proportion of atoms close to 0 and 1, again indicating that ML is more confident at distinguishing 

the high Eact atoms. A strong dependence of Eact on ph and pl is observed, that is, positively 

correlated with ph and negatively correlated with pl, demonstrating the feasibility of ph and pl 

serving as indicators of the thermal activation propensity (Fig. 3b). We further visualize the 

distribution of Eact, ph and pl in a model Cu64Zr36 glass to allow atomic-scale scrutinization (Fig. 3c). 

For simplicity, only atoms with ph or pl > 0.50 are highlighted in the ph and pl maps: ML predicts 

that the probability of these atoms having highest 5% Eact or lowest 5% Eact is greater than 0.50; 

If setting a class threshold as 0.50, these ph or pl > 0.50 atoms would be classified as the high or 

low Eact class, respectively. A good correspondence can be seen between the high Eact atoms and 

high ph atoms, as well as between the low Eact atoms and high pl atoms. As reflected by the 

relatively lower prediction score in the L-Eact task, there are more false positive atoms (high pl yet 

high Eact) and false negative atoms (low pl yet low Eact) in predicting the low Eact atoms, but still 

the prediction quality is sufficiently good. These results reveal that a solid relationship between 

local structure and thermal activation propensity can be established by combining interstice 

features and ML. 


 

10 

 

 

Figure 3 | ML-evaluated class probability. (a) Probability density distribution f(p) of ph and pl in the 
combined MG dataset. (b) Strong dependence of activation energy Eact on ph and pl. (c) Distribution of Eact, 
ph and pl in a Cu64Zr36 - 109 K/s MG. For simplicity, only the atoms with ph or pl > 0.50 are highlighted in (c). 
The high and low Eact atoms correspond well to the high ph and high pl atoms predicted by ML.  
 
 
Comparison with ML models employing other feature representations 

Next, we compare our ML results based on interstice features with those fitted from several 

other representations. Here we consider a total of five pure structural representations and three 

physical signatures for comparison (Table 1). To guarantee a fair comparison, training is 

performed on the same data samples and same cross-validation splits. We train XGBOOST31 and 

SVM34 models with various hyperparameters and extract the best scores for each representation. 

Most of the presented scores are from XGBOOST, while the best scores of the radial symmetry 

functions are from SVM (Table 1). The detailed ROC curves can be found in Supplementary Figs. 

1-8. Besides, an additional feature indicating whether the atom is Cu (0) or Zr (1) is added to each 

representation to help ML decisions. This is very helpful for representations that cannot well 

distinguish the atom types from the features themselves. 

 


 

11 

 

Table 1 | ML results in classifying the highest 5% (denoted as H-Eact problem) and lowest 5% Eact atoms (L-
Eact problem) of the combined Eact spectrum merged from six MGs (Fig. 1b) using different feature 
representations. The area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC-ROC) on the test set is used 
as the scoring metric. The reported AUC-ROC is averaged from three times of undersampling and fivefold 
cross-validation on each sampled data. 
 

Representation 
Feature 
number* 
H-Eact 
L-Eact 

Interstice distribution 
80 
0.942 
0.888 

<0,0,12,0,0> + <0,0,12,4,0> (baseline 1) 
2 
0.673 
0.557 

Voronoi index (baseline 2) 
5 
0.750 
0.628 

A group of SRO features 
18 
0.807 
0.634 

SRO + MRO features 
72 
0.908 
0.801 

Radial symmetry functions 
70 
0.909 
0.774 

Flexibility volume, Vflex 
1 
0.845 
0.784 

Atomic shear moduli, G 
1 
0.690 
0.629 

Coarse-grained G 
1 
0.736 
0.674 

* Except for Interstice distribution, an additional feature indicating whether the atom is Cu (0) or Zr (1) is 

added to each representation to help ML decisions, so technically the feature number should be added 
with 1. This is very helpful for representations that cannot well distinguish the atom types from the 
features themselves.  

 

We start with two “baseline” models built with: i) two one-hot-encoded (0 or 1) variables  

designating whether the nearest-neighbors around an atom form a <0, 0, 12, 0, 0> (<0, 0, 12, 0> 

if omitting occasional facets with >6 edges) or <0, 0, 12, 4, 0> Voronoi polyhedron or not; ii) five 

integer Voronoi indices (n3, n4, n5, n6, and n>6), where nx represents the number of x-edged facets 

in the Voronoi polyhedron35. Many studies revealed that the Cu-centered <0, 0, 12, 0, 0> 

icosahedra and Zr-centered <0, 0, 12, 4, 0> polyhedra are among the most stable motifs in Cu-

rich Cu-Zr MGs36,37. In this work, ~21.4% Cu atoms of the six MGs are surrounded by icosahedra 

and 6.0% Zr atoms are <0, 0, 12, 4, 0>. A baseline model can then be simply predicting the 

icosahedra and <0, 0, 12, 4, 0> atoms as high Eact atoms and those not as low Eact. We find that 

the AUC-ROC achieved by such baseline model is not very satisfactory, i.e., 0.673 and 0.557 in the 

H-Eact and L-Eact task, respectively (Table 1). As seen in the Supplementary Fig. 1a, the TPR (recall) 

of this baseline model in classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms is ~0.48, indicating that indeed only 

~0.48 of the highest Eact atoms are among the icosahedra and <0, 0, 12, 4, 0> atoms. Not 

surprisingly, this heuristic model works worse in classifying the lowest Eact atoms, as icosahedra 


 

12 

 

and <0, 0, 12, 4, 0> are aimed at prototyping the most stable motifs and not forming those motifs 

does not necessarily mean that this atom is soft. This results in a large FPR and ultimately a small 

AUC-ROC of 0.557 in the L-Eact task (Supplementary Fig. 1b). As to the second baseline model 

trained from the Voronoi indices, the prediction is better, with AUC-ROC of 0.750 and 0.628, 

respectively (Table 1, the ROC curves are presented in Supplementary Fig. 2). We see that by 

allowing the model to decide from the detailed Voronoi indices instead of several predefined 

motifs only, the model can capture more subtle structural information and make better decisions 

in both tasks. These two sets of models are basically based on the well-established Voronoi 

indices and are relatively simple to set up, forming the baseline models in our tasks, and ideally, 

any proposed ML models should well outperform the baseline models.  

Next, we combine a group of SRO features as the third structural representation, including 

characteristic motif signatures and Voronoi indices35 as used in the baseline models, coordination 

number (CN) within a cutoff distance (4.0 Å) or in a Voronoi polyhedron, Voronoi volume, and 

bond-orientational order parameters (ql and wl, where l = 4, 6, 8 and 10)38. This representation 

achieves an AUC-ROC of 0.807 in the H-Eact task and 0.634 in the L-Eact task (Table 1, see 

Supplementary Fig. 3 for ROC curves). The inclusion of bond-orientational order features accounts 

for the increase of AUC-ROC compared with baseline model 2. The L-Eact task remains to be a 

harder task than the H-Eact for the structural representation to predict. Beyond SRO, interestingly, 

if we further augment the SRO features with the coarse-grained MRO features (taking statistics 

between nearest neighbors19, as applied in the interstice representation), the predictive ability is 

greatly enhanced (Table 1, see Supplementary Fig. 4 for ROC curves). This suggests that it is quite 

important to include MRO for predicting the thermal activation propensity (the importance of 

MRO will be discussed in more detail later).  

As the last pure structural representation, we derive a set of radial symmetry 

functions17,18,20,22-24,39,40 to represent the local environment. Radial symmetry functions are part 

of a structural representation first proposed to fit ML interatomic potential39,40, and later 

successfully employed to represent the atomic environment in disordered materials17,18,20,22-24. 

For an atom i, the radial symmetry functions are described as, 

                             (2) 

where α represents an atom specie in the system (Cu or Zr). rij is the distance between atoms i 

and j. r is a variable constant and σ is set as 0.2 Å. The sums are taken over all atom j whose 

distance to i is within a cutoff Rc (6.5 Å). This set of features can be considered as the Gaussian-

Gα(i;r)=
e−(rij−r)2 2σ 2

j∈α∑


 

13 

 

smoothed partial pair correlation functions at different r values. Here, we vary r from 1.0 to 8.0 Å 

with a bin size of 0.2 Å (35 bins), generating 35 features for i – Cu and i – Zr, respectively. We then 

use the 70 features as input to train ML models on the same data and cross-validation splits to 

classify the high Eact and low Eact atoms. Results are summarized in Table 1 and ROC curves are 

shown in Supplementary Fig. 5. We see that this representation can well predict the high Eact 

atoms (0.909), yet the score in predicting low Eact atoms is relatively lower (0.774). In previous 

studies, Schoenholz et al.17 used this radial symmetry function representation to classify atoms 

with high propensity for hopping (soft end) in L-J liquids and achieved a very high recall of ~90%. 

The relatively lower accuracy in the current L-Eact task (also corresponds to soft end) suggests that 

identifying atoms susceptible to β relaxation in the solid-state MGs could be harder than that for 

the parent supercooled liquids, as manifested by that the same set of features achieve a lower 

score in the former problem. Other possible factors are i) the natural prediction accuracy 

difference between Cu-Zr MGs described by EAM potential and supercooled liquids described by 

pairwise L-J potential and ii) the combination of different composition, different quenching rate 

in a single dataset may increase the ambiguity for the radial symmetry functions.  

Finally, we compare the results of pure structural representations with the results of three 

physical signatures, namely flexibility volume Vflex41, atomic and coarse-grained shear moduli G42 

(see Methods for details). Table 1 summarizes their prediction scores and the ROC curves are 

presented in Supplementary Figs. 6-8. These signatures require detailed knowledge of 

interatomic potentials to calculate and thus are not pure structural representations. Among the 

physical descriptors, Vflex fares much better than atomic or coarse-grained G in correlating with 

Eact. We find that the pure structural representations (interstice, SRO + coarse-grained MRO, and 

radial symmetry functions) are still very competitive compared with these physical signatures 

(Table 1), further advocating the use of proper structural representation, with the aid of ML, to 

establish the structure-property relationship in MGs. The interstice distribution features achieve 

the highest prediction score in both the H-Eact and L-Eact tasks. Such quantitative benchmarks are 

important for obtaining a clear picture of the structure-property relations proposed in MGs. We 

also note that, strictly speaking, the relative performance of each representation is specific to a 

task. Thus, for a future task of interest, we recommend to conduct some rigorous benchmarking 

tests to locate the best representation for maximal ML performance. 

 

Impact of medium-range environment on activated events  

Thus far, we demonstrate that our ML model, employing the interstice features that start 


 

14 

 

from static atomic positions only, can well predict the heterogeneity of thermal-activated 

elementary excitations in Cu-Zr MGs. We next look into how the ML models make decisions based 

on the input features. 

ML algorithms such as XGBOOST allow quantification of feature importance, which evaluates 

how each descriptor improves the performance measure, e.g., Gini index for XGBOOST, and thus 

can be particularly useful for model interpretation. For ease of interpretation, we first remove 

some highly-linearly-correlated features (Pearson correlation coefficient > 0.70) and then reduce 

the feature number to 10 by a brute-force recursive feature-elimination procedure: i) train a 

model with N features and derive the ML performance; ii) iteratively eliminate each of the N 

features, retrain a ML model with the remaining N - 1 features and calculate the performance loss 

compared to the original model (if any); iii) eliminate the feature with the least performance loss. 

This is based on that basically, dropping unimportant features should not degrade performance 

significantly. We recursively repeat the above procedure until the feature dimension is reduced 

to 10.  

 

 

Figure 4 | Interpreting the ML models. (a) Pearson correlation coefficient of the ten features that survived 
the feature reduction. The coefficient value is encoded in the color while the circle radius encodes the 
absolute coefficient value. Vis, ais and dis represent the volume, area and distance interstices, respectively, 
and the symbol before brackets, i.e. Std, Mean, Std, Min, denotes the statistics of these interstices in the 
nearest-neighbor (SRO) environment; if there is MROstat in the feature name, this means that the SRO 
feature has been coarse-grained among neighbors, i.e. taking the statistics, as denoted by the subscript of 
MRO, among neighbors. (b) Feature importance of the ML models trained in the H-Eact and L-Eact tasks. The 
feature importance is averaged over models obtained from the three times of undersampling and five-fold 
cross-validation in each data sample. 


 

15 

 

Figure 4a visualizes the ultimate 10 features and their Pearson correlation matrix. We 

abbreviate the subscript “interstice” as “is”; and for several distance interstice features, the 

subscript “dist” in dis-dist indicates that the nearest-neighbors are determined by a cutoff distance 

rather than by the default Voronoi tessellation. The 10 features exhibit low Pearson correlation 

coefficient (the maximum is 0.63, Fig. 4a). Interestingly, we find that 9 out of the 10 survived 

features are describing interstice distribution in the medium-range (i.e. with “MRO” in the feature 

name). This again suggests that MRO contributes greatly to the decision making. According to the 

feature importance, MROmean Std(Vis) and MROmean Std(dis-dist) are the most important features in 

the L-Eact and H-Eact tasks, respectively (Fig. 4b). These two metrics are evaluating the average 

variation of the tetrahedron volume interstice and bond distance interstice at the medium-range 

around an atom. This emphasizes the importance of local structure anisotropy, persisting to the 

medium-range, to the glass property. For the L-Eact task, MROmean Std(Vis) stands out with a very 

high importance, and for the H-Eact task, the feature importances distribute more evenly. 

We then select typical hard and soft Cu (Zr) atoms and show the distribution of tetrahedron 

volume interstice, Vis, and bond distance interstice, dis-dist, in their local environment to 

demonstrate the inherent structural contrast between the hard and soft atoms. Typical atoms 

with high Eact (~2.9 eV) and low Eact (~0.7 eV) are selected, and the red and purple histograms 

show the spread of interstices, Vis and dis-dist, present in the coordination polyhedron (SRO) and 

in the neighboring clusters (MRO), respectively (Fig. 5a and 5b). We find that the Vis and dis-dist 

distributions in the SRO of the high Eact atoms (Fig. 5a) are distinctly more centered than that in 

the low Eact ones (Fig. 5b). For the low Eact atoms, there often exist some tetrahedra or bond 

segments that have very low or high content of interstice. This would lower the stability of local 

environment and propel the atom to respond to thermal excitation. Remarkably, this trend 

persists to the medium-range (purple histograms). As quantified by Fig. 4b, the MRO interstice 

distribution is even more important than the SRO ones. The sharp contrast in the interstice 

distribution illustrates the foundation of our ML success in distinguishing the characteristic atoms. 

Next, we use principal component analysis (PCA)43 to project the information in the high-

dimensional feature space (R10, ten features in Fig. 4) into a low-dimensional space (R2) to 

visualize the inherent data structure of the site environment features (Fig. 5c). PCA is a 

dimensionality reduction method that uses orthogonal transformation to reduce possibly 

correlated features to uncorrelated variables with key information preserved, and is totally 

unsupervised (with no use of class labels and does not need training)43. From Fig. 5c, we see that 

the high Eact and low Eact atoms do tend to reside in very different regions. Back to the above 


 

16 

 

supervised ML results, strong structural contrast in both the hard and soft ends is also revealed 

(Figs. 2 and 3). Here, both supervised and unsupervised analyses suggest a highly inhomogeneous 

MG structure, with distinctive hard (or say solid-like) and soft (liquid-like) atoms dissolved inside.  

 

 

Figure 5 | Structural contrast between the high and low Eact atoms. (a) Distribution of tetrahedron volume 
interstice Vis and bond distance interstice dis-dist of representative Cu and Zr atoms with high Eact = ~2.95 eV. 
The red and purple histogram shows the spread of interstices in the coordination cluster (SRO) and that in 
the neighboring clusters (MRO), respectively. The SRO coordination clusters are also visualized in the inset, 
with the larger blue spheres for Zr and smaller orange spheres for Cu. (b) Distribution of Vis and dis-dist of 
representative Cu and Zr atoms with low Eact = ~0.71 eV. (c) Unsupervised principal component analysis 
(PCA) to reduce the original high-dimensional interstice feature space to a two-dimensional space. 


 

17 

 

Transferability to identifying shear transformation propensity 

As mentioned earlier, in addition to thermally activated events, another important type of 

elementary excitation is the local shear transformation activated by stress44-49. The low-stress-

resistance units are usually referred to as shear transformation zones (STZs). As discussed in the 

Introduction, the thermal- and stress-activated excitations can both be interpreted in the 

framework of β processes, however, the atomic-specific response can vary, due to the different 

characteristics of stimulus source (uniform vs non-uniform, protocol-independent vs dependent). 

This prompts us to ask: how would our ML models trained for predicting the thermal excitation 

propensity perform, when they are used to identify STZs? Is it possible for the models to work 

well when transferring to such a different task? 

This “between-task” test is challenging in several ways: i) STZs and Eact are basically different 

properties, stimulated by different stimuli and thus yielding different data; ii) the features 

considered important for predicting Eact may not be optimal for identifying STZs. The ii) point is 

very likely, as in a previous work using the interstice features to identify STZs in MGs, only ~50% 

of the most important features were MRO features19, much lower than the ~90% in the Eact case 

(Fig. 4). Driven by this question, we simulate athermal quasi-static (AQS) shear deformation of a 

typical Cu64Zr36 – 109 K/s glass (Methods). We calculate the interstice features of each atom and 

apply the model trained from the L-Eact problem (which focuses on the soft end) to derive the 

probability estimate pl of each atom. Intuitively, as pl is in positive correlation with the tendency 

of an atom to be easily activated by the thermal stimulus (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3), it may positively 

correlate with the susceptibility of atom to be activated by stress as well.  

We calculate the non-affine displacement (D2min) relative to undeformed state, at 4.0% shear 

strain, as an indicator of the plastic susceptibility of each atom. The correlation between D2min 

and pl is presented in Fig. 6a. Given the “long-tail” distribution of D2min, box plots are used to 

present the correlation. Box plots are useful in such skewed distributions, with the median (a line 

in the interior of box), 25% and 75% quantile (lower and upper ends of box), 1.5 times the inter-

quartile range (whiskers extending outside box) as well as outliers (points outside the whiskers) 

cleared marked. The left figure in Fig. 6a shows the complete box plot, and some outliers extend 

so widely that the box section is squeezed. We then highlight the squeezed section, which 

constitutes the vast majority of data, in the right figure of Fig. 6a. A positive correlation between 

pl and D2min is clearly observed, evidencing our assumption that these two types of activations 

could have some similar structural origins. As another quantitative test, we use pl to try classifying 

STZs with the largest 5% D2min from the rest of the glass, similar to the setting of the L-Eact task. 


 

18 

 

We vary the threshold of pl in designating the positive/negative classes in this STZ task, calculate 

the TPRs and FPRs and derive the ROC curve in Fig. 6b. The area under the ROC curve, AUC-ROC, 

is 0.810, which is a very reasonable score for such a transferring test. This quantitative test 

provides additional support to the feasibility of this “between-task” generalization.  

 

 

Figure 6 | Transferring ML model to identifying STZs. (a) Correlation between the probability estimates, 
pl, from the L-Eact model and the non-affine displacement (D2min) at strain 4.0% of a Cu64Zr36 – 109 K/s glass. 
In the box plots, ends of box spans from 25 to 75% percentile, black line in box represents median, whiskers 
show 1.5 times the inter-quartile range, and points outside the whiskers show outliers. Outliers are marked 
in the left plot and are removed in the right plot for clarity. (b) Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
curve and area under curve (AUC) if using the pl to identify STZs with the largest 5% D2min.  

 

As discussed in the Introduction, the accuracy of STZ recognition (for example, Ref. 18 and 19) 

is usually lower than that of identifying the thermally activated atoms (Ref. 17 and this work), 

especially when using the same feature representation (namely radial symmetry functions17,18 or 

interstice distribution features19). There are several factors that can cause this performance 

difference. One is the increased internal data noise of the STZ data, if the data is collected from a 

single loading condition. As discussed in the Introduction, stress-activated plastic heterogeneity 

is quite sensitive to the loading conditions such as loading mode and direction25,26; thus, if using 

data from a single loading condition, non-trivial noise would be introduced in the collected data. 

For the thermal activation data, as used in this work, the absence of non-uniform stress eliminates 

the loading-related noises, and probing sufficient elementary ART events can guarantee a well-

converged Eact to indicate the susceptibility to thermal excitation. In addition, upon deformation, 

the activation of STZ proceeds in a progressive way, that is, not all soft atoms will move in a strain 

step; therefore, it usually requires a relatively large strain to collect sufficient plastic events. 

However, this can introduce more cascade activation events to reduce the controllability of the 


 

19 

 

initial undeformed structure, and the existence of long-range elastic field in the process of 

deformation would also increase the length scale of plastic heterogeneity, making it beyond the 

scope of SRO and MRO that can be described by the structural representation.  

 

DISCUSSION 

 For the ML exploration of atomic-level structure-property relationships in amorphous alloys, 

a goal of common pursuit is developing novel structural representation and machine learning 

scheme. This paper, instead, focuses on another important aspect – finding of a suitable target 

property, with minimized data noises, to convincingly test the power of ML in correlating the 

structure with the property. Through what has been presented above, we have demonstrated 

that the thermally activated elementary excitation is an excellent choice in this regard. Compared 

with previous ML models on shear transformations in glasses, the merits of our present success 

on thermally activated events in MGs are multifold: 

i) We reached an unprecedentedly high accuracy for ML prediction of elementary excitation 

in MGs. In this work, ML can accurately identify atoms with the highest 5% and lowest 5% thermal 

activation energy in a dataset merged from six different MGs, reaching an AUC-ROC of 0.942 and 

0.888, respectively. These scores are significantly higher than that achieved in predicting the 

propensity of shear transformation. As discussed, this is mainly because the thermal activation 

does not suffer from the effect of non-uniform, oriented stress25,26, and can reduce the data 

noises by well-converged exploration of elementary excitations. The importance of noise 

reduction also has implications for constructing high-fidelity glass datasets in the future. 

ii) Our ML model is able to link with both local favored and unfavored structural motifs, rather 

than only identifying the latter as in previous ML literature17-21. This is aided by the explicit and 

sufficient ART perturbation tests around each atom, and the Gaussian-like distribution of thermal 

activation energetics that gives sufficient resolution to both the soft and hard ends.  

iii) We have demonstrated that the data from multiple compositions or processing histories 

can be combined to connect with underlying structural signatures. This results from the 

comparable magnitude/range of activation barriers, for different compositions and processing 

histories in the same MG system. Such treatment can notably increase the variety of local 

environments surveyed, and allows for structure-property relation mining in more general terms. 

iv) Our analysis provides a repertoire of descriptors that are essential to the ML decision. We 

demonstrate how the ML models make decisions based on the interstice features and interpret 


 

20 

 

why these features work in representing the inherent structural contrast in MGs. Our data-centric 

results also highlight the importance of MRO features in determining the activation heterogeneity 

that has implications on the underlying glass physics.  

v) We have conducted a quantitative “between-task” transferring test that successfully 

transfers the model fitted for pinpointing the low thermal activation energy atoms to identifying 

STZs upon AQS shear deformation. This success points to some common structural origins of the 

thermal-activated and stress-activated β processes. 

 Taken together, these advances underscore the structural impact on the β processes and 

their heterogeneity, and the insights shed light on the role of β processes as a basic unit event 

underlying a variety of properties of MGs10-12, including local plastic deformation13,14, atomic 

hoping mediating diffusion15, and structural relaxation/rejuvenation16. Our discovery, enabled by 

the well-designed site environment representation and dedicated ML models, is very useful and 

important as a step forward in establishing a concrete structure-property relationship for MGs. 

We have made our MG configurations and thermal activation energy data public in figshare with 

the DOI of https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12485795, which could serve as a valuable 

benchmark for future ML studies in MG research.  

 

METHODS 

MG samples preparation by MD simulation 

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations using LAMMPS50 have been employed to prepare and 

analyze the Cu-Zr metallic glass models, using a set of optimized embedded-atom-method (EAM) 

potentials51. Cu64Zr36, Cu50Zr50 and Cu80Zr20 samples containing 10,000 or 5,000 atoms (if 5,000, we 

will prepare two different samples at the same processing condition) were quenched to room 

temperature (300 K) from equilibrium liquids above the corresponding melting points. The 

quenching was performed at a rate of 109 – 1012 K/s, as marked in Fig. 1b, using a Nose-Hoover 

thermostat with zero external pressure. Periodic boundary conditions (PBC) were applied in all 

three directions during MD simulation52. The timestep is 1 fs. 

 

Activation-relaxation technique (ART) 

Initial perturbations in ART were introduced by applying random displacement on a small group 

of atoms (an atom and its nearest-neighbors)27,28. The magnitude of the displacement was fixed, 


 

21 

 

while the direction was randomly chosen. When the curvature of the PEL was found to overcome 

the chosen threshold, the system was pushed towards the saddle point using the Lanczos 

algorithm. The saddle point is considered to be found when the overall force of the total system 

is below 0.01 eV/Å. The corresponding activation energy is thus the difference between the 

saddle point energy and the initial state energy. The search is performed using ART nouveau 

package27,28,53. For each group of atoms, we employed ~50 successful ART searches with different 

random perturbation directions. 

 

Flexibility volume and atomic shear moduli 

The flexibility volume 
 of atom i is defined as41: 

                             (3) 

where 
 and 
 are the equilibrium position and instantaneous position at time t of the 

atom i, and Vi is the corresponding atomic volume. The calculation was obtained on short time 

scales when the mean square displacement is flat with time and contains the vibrational but not 

the diffusional contribution. Each sample was kept at equilibrium under a microcanonical 

ensemble (NVE) at room temperature for the calculation, which was taken over 100 independent 

runs, all starting from the same configuration but with momenta assigned randomly from the 

appropriate Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.  

Atomic shear moduli at room temperature were evaluated using the fluctuation method. For 

a canonical (NVT) ensemble, elastic constants can be calculated as the sum of three contributions:  

                        
 
 
(4) 

where the superscript I, II and III represents the fluctuation, kinetic contribution and the Born 

term, respectively (see Ref. 42 for more details). To reduce the statistical error in our simulated 

samples, the average atomic shear modulus (G) was evaluated as  

                    
 
 
 
(5) 

The local elastic moduli tensor is computed at the coarse-grained scale using the average 

atomic shear moduli of center atom and its nearest neighbors. 

 

 

Vflex,i

Vflex,i =
(xi(t)− xi
)

2 ×Vi

1/3

xi
xi(t)

Cijkl

T = Cijkl

I +Cijkl

II +Cijkl

III

G = C44 +C55 +C66

3


 

22 

 

Athermal quasi-static (AQS) simulation 

We employ the athermal quasi-static (AQS) mode to simulate the shear deformation of the glass54. 

On each deformation step, an affine strain of 10-4 is imposed along the +xy direction, followed by 

an energy minimization using the conjugate-gradient method. Initial configuration is the inherent 

structure of the equilibrated glass sample. The simulations were conducted using LAMMPS50 and 

periodic boundary conditions (PBC) were applied in all three directions. The plastic events were 

monitored using the non-affine displacement (D2min)45. This is done by tracking the atomic strain 

of each atom during deformation, and dissociating the strain into the best affine fit and the non-

affine residue. 

 

DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY 

The datasets used in this work have been made public in figshare with the DOI of 

https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.12485795. The codes for the interstice representation can 

be publicly accessed in amlearn19 (https://github.com/Qi-max/amlearn) and matminer30 

(https://github.com/hackingmaterials/matminer). 

 

 

REFERENCES 

1. Greer, A. L. Metallic Glasses. in Physical Metallurgy: Fifth Edition 305–385 (Elsevier, 2014).  

2. Schroers, J. Bulk metallic glasses. Phys. Today. 66, 32-37 (2013). 

3. Egami, T. Atomic level stresses. Prog. Mater. Sci. 56, 637-653 (2011). 

4. Hirata, A. et al. Direct observation of local atomic order in a metallic glass. Nat. Mater. 10, 

28–33 (2011). 

5. Cheng, Y. Q. & Ma, E. Atomic-level structure and structure-property relationship in metallic 

glasses. Prog. Mater. Sci. 56, 379–473 (2011). 

6. Goldstein, M. Viscous Liquids and the Glass Transition: A Potential Energy Barrier Picture. J. 

Chem. Phys. 51, 3728–3739 (1969). 

7. Debenedetti, P. G. & Stillinger, F. H. Supercooled liquids and the glass transition. Nature 410, 

259–267 (2001). 


 

23 

 

8. Wales, D. J. A Microscopic Basis for the Global Appearance of Energy Landscapes. Science  

293, 2067– 2070 (2001). 

9. Johari, G. P. & Goldstein, M. Viscous Liquids and the Glass Transition. II. Secondary Relaxations 

in Glasses of Rigid Molecules. J. Chem. Phys. 53, 2372–2388 (1970). 

10. Yu, H.-B., Wang, W.-H. & Samwer, K. The β relaxation in metallic glasses: an overview. Mater. 

Today 16, 183–191 (2013). 

11. Qiao, J. C. & Pelletier, J. M. Dynamic Mechanical Relaxation in Bulk Metallic Glasses: A Review. 

J. Mat. Sci. Technol. 30, 523-545 (2014). 

12. Yu, H.-B., Richert, R. & Samwer, K. Structural rearrangements governing Johari-Goldstein 

relaxations in metallic glasses. Sci. Adv. 3, e1701577 (2017). 

13. Fan, Y., Iwashita, T. & Egami, T. How thermally activated deformation starts in metallic glass, 

Nat. Commun., 5, 5083 (2014). 

14. Wang, Z., Sun, B. A., Bai, H. Y. & Wang, W. H. Evolution of hidden localized flow during glass-

to-liquid transition in metallic glass. Nat. Commun. 5, 5823 (2014). 

15. Yu, H. B., Samwer, K., Wu, Y. & Wang, W. H. Correlation between β relaxation and self-

diffusion of the smallest consituting atoms in metalllic glasses. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 095508 

(2012). 

16. Zhu, F. et al. Intrinsic correlation between β-relaxation and spatial heterogeneity in a metallic 

glass. Nat. Commun. 7, 11516 (2016). 

17. Schoenholz, S. S., Cubuk, E. D., Sussman, D. M., Kaxiras, E. & Liu, A. J. A structural approach 

to relaxation in glassy liquids. Nat. Phys. 12, 469–471 (2016). 

18. Cubuk, E. D. et al. Identifying structural flow defects in disordered solids using machine-

learning methods. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 108001 (2015). 

19. Wang, Q. & Jain, A. A transferable machine-learning framework linking interstice distribution 

and plastic heterogeneity in metallic glasses. Nat. Commun. 10, 5537 (2019). 

20. Cubuk, E. D. et al. Structure-property relationships from universal signatures of plasticity in 

disordered solids. Science. 358, 1033-1037 (2017). 

21. Harrington, M., Liu, A. J. & Durian, D. J. Machine learning characterization of structural 

defects in amorphous packings of dimers and ellipses. Phys. Rev. E. 99, 022903 (2019). 


 

24 

 

22. Sussman, D. M., Schoenholz, S. S., Cubuk, E. D. & Liu, A. J. Disconnecting structure and 

dynamics in glassy thin films. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 114, 10601–10605 (2017). 

23. Ma, Xiaoguang et al. Heterogeneous Activation, Local Structure, and Softness in Supercooled 

Colloidal Liquids. Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 28001 (2019). 

24. Landes, F. P et al. Attractive versus truncated repulsive supercooled liquids: The dynamics is 

encoded in the pair correlation function. Phys. Rev. E 101, 010602 (2020). 

25. Barbot, A. et al. Local yield stress statistics in model amorphous solids. Phys. Rev. E. 97, 33001 

(2018). 

26. Schwartzman-Nowik, Z., Lerner, E. & Bouchbinder, E. Anisotropic structural predictor in glassy 

materials. Phys. Rev. E. 99, 60601 (2019). 

27. Barkema, G. T. & Mousseau, N. Event-Based Relaxation of Continuous Disordered Systems. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 4358–4361 (1996). 

28. Rodney, D. & Schuh, C. Distribution of Thermally Activated Plastic Events in a Flowing Glass. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 235503 (2009). 

29. Lee, M., Lee, C. M., Lee, K. R., Ma, E. & Lee, J. C. Networked interpenetrating connections of 

icosahedra: Effects on shear transformations in metallic glass. Acta Mater. 59, 159–170 

(2011). 

30. Ward, L. et al. Matminer: An open source toolkit for materials data mining. Comput. Mater. 

Sci. 152, 60–69 (2018). 

31. Chen, T. & Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. in Proceedings of the 22nd 

ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 785–794 

(Association for Computing Machinery, 2016). doi:10.1145/2939672.2939785 

32. Bradley, A. P. The use of the area under the ROC curve in the evaluation of machine learning 

algorithms. Pattern Recognit. 30, 1145–1159 (1997). 

33. Zadrozny, B. & Elkan, C. Obtaining calibrated probability estimates from decision trees and 

naive Bayesian classifiers. in Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Machine 

Learning (2001). 

34. Cortes, C. & Vapnik, V. Support-vector networks. Mach. Learn. 20, 273–297 (1995). 

35. Okabe, A., Boots, B., Sugihara, K. & Chiu, S. N. Spatial Tesselations. Concepts and Applications 

of Voronoi Diagrams (2009). doi:10.1002/0471721182.scard 


 

25 

 

36. Ding, J., Patinet, S., Falk, M. L., Cheng, Y. & Ma, E. Soft spots and their structural signature in 

a metallic glass. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111, 14052--14056 (2014). 

37. Ding, J., Cheng, Y. Q. & Ma, E. Full icosahedra dominate local order in Cu64Zr34 metallic glass 

and supercooled liquid. Acta Mater. 69, 343–354 (2014)25.  

38. Steinhardt, P. J., Nelson, D. R. & Ronchetti, M. Bond-orientational order in liquids and glasses. 

Phys. Rev. B 28, 784–805 (1983). 

39. Behler, J. & Parrinello, M. Generalized Neural-Network Representation of High-Dimensional 

Potential-Energy Surfaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 146401 (2007). 

40. Bartók, A. P., Kondor, R. & Csányi, G. On representing chemical environments. Phys. Rev. B 87, 

184115 (2013). 

41. Ding, J. et al. Universal structural parameter to quantitatively predict metallic glass properties. 

Nat. Commun. 7, 13733 (2016). 

42. Cheng, Y. Q. & Ma, E. Configurational dependence of elastic modulus of metallic glass. Phys. 

Rev. B 80, 64104 (2009). 

43. Tipping, M. E. & Bishop, C. M. Probabilistic Principal Component Analysis. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. 

B (Statistical Methodol. 61, 611–622 (1999). 

44. Argon AS. Plastic deformation in metallic glasses, Acta Metall. 27, 47 (1979) 

45. Falk, M. L. & Langer, J. S. Dynamics of viscoplastic deformation in amorphous solids. Phys. Rev. 

E. 57, 7192–7205 (1998). 

46. Tsamados, M., Tanguy, A., Goldenberg, C. & Barrat, J.L. Local elasticity map and plasticity in a 

model Lennard-Jones glass, Phys. Rev. E 80, 026112 (2009). 

47. Greer, A. L., Cheng, Y. Q. & Ma, E. Shear bands in metallic glasses. Mater. Sci. Eng. R Reports 

74, 71–132 (2013). 

48. Hufnagel, T. C., Schuh, C. A. & Falk, M. L. Deformation of metallic glasses: Recent 

developments in theory, simulations, and experiments. Acta Mater. 109, 375–393 (2016). 

49. Wisitsorasak, A. & Wolynes, P. G. Dynamical theory of shear bands in structural glasses. Proc. 

Natl. Acad. Sci. 114, 1287–1292 (2017). 

50. Plimpton, S. Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics. J. Comput. Phys. 

117, 1–19 (1995). 


 

26 

 

51. Cheng, Y. Q., Ma, E. & Sheng, H. W. Atomic Level Structure in Multicomponent Bulk Metallic 

Glass. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 245501 (2009). 

52. Allen, M.P. & Tildesley, D.J. Computer Simulation of liquids (Clarendon Press, Oxford) (1987) 

53. Marinica, M.C., Willaime, F. & Mousseau, N. Energy landscape of small clusters of self-

interstitial dumbbells in iron. Phys. Rev. B. 83, 9, (2011). 

54. Maloney, C. E., & Lemaître, A. Amorphous systems in athermal, quasistatic shear. Phys. Rev. 

E. 74, 016118 (2006). 

 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Q.W. and E.M. are supported at JHU by U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), DOE-BES-DMSE, under 

grant DE-FG02-19ER46056. J.D. acknowledges the Young Talent Startup Program of Xi’an Jiaotong 

University. 

 

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 

Q.W. and J.D. initiated the plan for this study. Q.W. designed and analyzed the machine learning 

models. J.D. conducted the ART simulations and the flexibility volume and shear moduli analyses. 

Q.W., J.D. and E.M. discussed the results and wrote the manuscript. 

 

COMPETING INTERESTS 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

 

 

 
 


 

27 

 

 

Supplementary Materials of 

Predicting the propensity for thermally activated  

β events in metallic glasses via interpretable  

machine learning 

Qi Wang1*, Jun Ding2*, Evan Ma1 

1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 

Maryland 21218, United States 

2 Center for Advancing Materials Performance from the Nanoscale (CAMP-Nano), State Key 

Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China 

* Correspondence to qiwang.mse@gmail.com (Q. W.), dingsn@xjtu.edu.cn (J. D.) 

 

 

1. ML performance employing other feature representations 

1) <0,0,12,0,0> + <0,0,12,4,0> (baseline 1) 

 

Supplementary Fig. 1 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of baseline model 1 fitted from 
features indicating whether the nearest-neighbors of an atom form a <0,0,12,0,0> or <0,0,12,4,0> Voronoi 
polyhedron or not. (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset merged from six MGs 
(Fig. 1b); (b) Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset. 


 

28 

 

2) Voronoi index (baseline 2) 

 

Supplementary Fig. 2 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of baseline model 2 fitted from the 
five integer Voronoi indices (n3, n4, n5, n6, and n>6), where nx represents the number of x-edged facets in 
the Voronoi polyhedron. (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset merged from 
six MGs (Fig. 1b); (b) Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset. 

 

 

3) A group of SRO features 

 

Supplementary Fig. 3 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the ML model fitted from a group 
of SRO features (see Table 1 and related content for details). (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of 
the combined dataset merged from six MGs (Fig. 1b); (b) Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the 
combined dataset. 
 


 

29 

 

4) SRO + MRO features 

 

Supplementary Fig. 4 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the ML model fitted from SRO 
features and coarse-grained MRO features derived by tasking statistics of SRO features in the neighboring 
shell. (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset merged from six MGs (Fig. 1b); (b) 
Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset. 
 

 

5) Radial symmetry functions 

 

Supplementary Fig. 5 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the ML model fitted from a set of 
radial symmetry functions. (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset merged from 
six MGs (Fig. 1b); (b) Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset. 
 


 

30 

 

6) Flexibility volume, Vflex 

 

Supplementary Fig. 6 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the ML model fitted from the 
flexibility volume, Vflex. (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset merged from six 
MGs (Fig. 1b); (b) Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset. 
 

 

7) Atomic shear moduli, G 

 

Supplementary Fig. 7 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the ML model fitted from the 
atomic shear moduli, G. (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset merged from six 
MGs (Fig. 1b); (b) Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset. 
 

 


 

31 

 

8) Coarse-grained G 

 

Supplementary Fig. 8 | Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of the ML model fitted from the 
coarse-grained atomic shear moduli, G. (a) Classifying the highest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset 
merged from six MGs (Fig. 1b); (b) Classifying the lowest 5% Eact atoms of the combined dataset. 
 

 


