 
 

A liquid nitrogen cooled superconducting transition edge sensor 
with ultra-high responsivity and GHz operation speeds 
 
Paul Seifert1†, José Ramón Durán Retamal1†, Rafael Luque Merino1, Hanan Herzig Sheinfux1, John N. 
Moore1, Mohammed Ali Aamir1, Takashi Taniguchi2, Kenji Wantanabe3, Kazuo Kadowaki4, Massimo 
Artiglia5, Marco Romagnoli5 and Dmitri K. Efetov1* 
 
1. 
ICFO - Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 
Castelldefels, Barcelona, 08860, Spain 

2. 
International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science,  
1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 

3. 
Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, 
Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 

4. 
Algae Biomass and Energy System (ABES) Research & Development Center & Institute of 
Materials Science University of Tsukuba 1-1-1, Tennodai, Tsukuba-shi, 305-8572, Japan 

5. 
CNIT - National Interuniversity Consortium for Telecommunications, TeCIP -Institute of Com-
munication, Information and Perception Technologies - Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna via Mo-
ruzzi, 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy 

 
* E-mail: dmitri.efetov@icfo.eu, † equal contribution      
 
Photodetectors based on nano-structured superconducting thin films are currently some 
of the most sensitive quantum sensors and are key enabling technologies in such broad 
areas as quantum information, quantum computation and radio-astronomy. However, 
their broader use is held back by the low operation temperatures which require expensive 
cryostats. Here, we demonstrate a nitrogen cooled superconducting transition edge sen-
sor, which shows orders of magnitude improved performance characteristics of any su-
perconducting detector operated above 77K, with a responsivity of 9.61∙104 V/W, noise 
equivalent power of 15.9 fW/Hz-1/2 and operation speeds up to GHz frequencies. It is 
based on van der Waals heterostructures of the high temperature superconductor 
Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ, which are shaped into nano-wires with ultra-small form factor. To 
highlight the versatility of the detector we demonstrate its fabrication and operation on a 
telecom grade SiN waveguide chip. Our detector significantly relaxes the demands of 
practical applications of superconducting detectors and displays its huge potential for 
photonics based quantum applications. 

 
Because of their high detection efficiencies, low dark count rates and small noise equiv-

alent powers (NEP), photo-detectors based on thin film superconductors (SCs) are crucial com-
ponents in the development of revolutionary quantum communication protocols, such as quan-
tum key distribution and the Bell inequality test1–5. Such outstanding performance is made pos-
sible by engineering superconducting nanostructures with ultra-low heat capacity, which use 
the steep SC transition edge to induce large resistance jumps by the heat generated from ab-
sorbed photons1,2,6. However, a broader use of SC detectors is held back by the low operation 
temperatures, which require expensive cryostats, and the highly disordered growth methods, 
which set an upper limit to the SC film thickness and impose strict restrictions to the employed 
SC materials and substrates. A breakthrough in this field would lie in the creation of ever thin-
ner materials with ever higher superconducting transition temperatures (Tc), which would ulti-
mately reach values beyond the boiling point of liquid nitrogen T > 77K.  


 
 

On this path, cuprate high temperature superconductors (high-Tc), with their record-

high Tc > 100K7–9, are extremely promising. While their chemical sensitivity10,11 and the diffi-
culty in thin film preparation strongly limited the performance of previous cuprate based photo-
detectors9,12–16, recent breakthroughs in fabrication protocols allowed the preparation of single 
crystals of the optimally doped cuprate compound Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ (BSCCO), down to half a 
unit cell thick layers with thickness of d ~ 1.5nm and a Tc ~ 91K17,18. Belonging to the class of 
layered two-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials in which SC is confined to 2D 
planes18, BSCCO can be mechanically exfoliated and non-invasively transferred onto any sub-
strate. These entirely new capabilities also open previously unimaginable prospects for SC de-
tectors, as BSCCO based detectors can be deterministically integrated into silicon photonics 
platforms.  

 
Here we demonstrate a telecom wavelength high-Tc superconducting transition edge 

sensor (TES) that can be operated above liquid nitrogen temperatures, with record responsivity 
and operation speeds, which are comparable to state-of-the-art commercial detectors, such as 
InGaAs photodiodes9,12–16,19. The detector is made from superconducting BSCCO and is ena-
bled by a novel inert nanofabrication, which allows unprecedentedly small detector dimensions 
as compared to most previous high-Tc detectors, with thickness d ~ 15nm and width w ~ 100nm 
(Figs. 1a-c). To highlight the material's versatility and integrability, we demonstrate operation 
of the BSCCO TES on a telecom grade SiN waveguide chip, which is laser illuminated through 
a grating coupler (Fig.1e and f). The photodetection principle of the BSCCO nano-wire is based 
on the sharp temperature dependent resistance at the superconducting transition edge, and tem-
perature increase upon absorption of radiation, as is illustrated in Fig. 1d. The temperature 
increase upon absorption of radiation, locally drives the BSCCO into a resistive state which is 
stabilized via Joule self-heating and leads to a voltage spike across the device. At the same 
time, the superconducting surrounding of the nano-wire suppresses an electronic out-diffusion 
of heat, which is trapped at the thinnest part of the nano-structure5. 

 
The devices are prepared in inert argon atmosphere to avoid instantaneous oxidation of 

the BSCCO surface in air (SI Fig. S1). Few layer BSCCO sheets with thicknesses between 5 
and 9 unit cells are mechanically exfoliated from bulk single crystals. These are then transferred 
onto the target substrate and encapsulated with thin sheets of insulating hexagonal boron-ni-
tride layers (hBN), which prohibits further environmental degradation of the BSCCO. Electri-
cal contacts to the BSCCO layer with contact resistances in the order of Rc ~ 0.1-1k is estab-
lished by overlapping BSCCO with pre-patterned gold electrodes on the target substrate (SI). 
Without destroying the hermetic seal of the hBN layer, the BSCCO crystals are then locally 
subjected to focused helium ion beam irradiation (He-FIB) (SI), which modifies metallic 
BSCCO regions into insulating ones, by means of defect formation and amorphization20. The 
scan ability of the He-FIB and the ultra-high definition of the so-created insulating BSCCO 
regions down to 10nm allow to create homogeneous superconducting BSCCO nano-wires and 
circuits with conducting channel widths of only w ~ 100nm (SI Fig. S3-S5).   

 
Fig. 2a shows the temperature dependent resistance measurements R of a 7 unit cell thin 

BSCCO crystal before (gray) and after (blue) nano-wire fabrication with w ~ 100nm. Strik-
ingly, after FIB shaping the device shows a robust SC state, with an onset of superconductivity 
at T ~ 90K. However, the SC transition becomes broadened by inhomogeneities and doping 
induced by the FIB treatment, with the zero-resistance state setting in only at around T ~ 40K. 
Fig. 2b shows the two-terminal differential resistance dV/dI measurements as a function of bias 
current Ibias and temperature T. We find a sharp superconducting transition at the critical current 


 
 

Ic ~ 435µA at T = 15K, which is monotonically decreasing when T is increased. In the super-
conducting state, contact resistance at the gold/BSCCO interface gives rise to a reproducible 
residual resistance with a peak around zero bias. Depending on the sweeping direction, Ic de-
velops a strongly pronounced hysteresis below T ~ 30K which can be explained by Joule self-
heating in the resistive state when the current is swept down (Fig. 2c and SI Fig. S9). Connect-
ing the nano-wire in parallel to a 1kΩ resistor during photo-detection measurements (Fig. 1b), 
prohibits its latching into a self-heated resistive state after absorption of radiation. 

 
We probe the photo response of the Ibias ~ 0.1mA biased device with a telecom laser 

with wavelength λ = 1550nm. Fig. 3a displays photo response maps, obtained by scanning the 
normally incident laser spot across the device, as well as across the grating coupler of the SiN 
waveguide. The responsivity of the detector is defined as the measured photo-voltage divided 
by the incident laser power Vphoto/Plaser. It exhibits a pronounced maximum when the laser is 
focused directly onto the nano-wire itself. For Vphoto/Plaser under free space coupling we assume 
full absorption of the laser power Plaser, which is incident on the metallic BSCCO nano-wire. 
Alternatively, the laser light can be injected into the waveguide, which then couples to the 
device through its evanescent mode and gives a sizeable photo-voltage response. Non-opti-
mized grating coupling and propagation losses, result in a reduced overall efficiency (SI Fig. 
S11). However, recent studies of 2D materials on optimized photonic structures like wave-
guides21,22 photonic crystals23–25, ring resonators26 and Fabry-Pérot microcavities27, have 
demonstrated that light absorption can be enhanced to almost 100%.  
 

We highlight the strong dependence of Vphoto on the superconducting transition edge, 

which shows a pronounced maximum at Ic. Fig. 3b compares the temperature dependent I/V 
characteristics (bottom) with the normalized photo-response Vphoto/Vmax (top) under laser illu-
mination with Plaser = 100pW (top), where Vmax is the maximal response at Ic. The SC transition 
edge is sharply defined at low temperatures and gives rise to a large and sharp Vphoto. As tem-
perature is increased, both gradually broaden, but strikingly even above T = 77K, supercon-
ductivity is well formed and Vphoto shows a pronounced maximum and remains high. Fig. 3c 
shows the extracted maximum responsivity Vphoto/Plaser (blue) and the corresponding NEP 
(pink) as a function of device temperature T, where the NEP is obtained from the ratio of the 
theoretical thermal noise dominated voltage noise spectral density and Vphoto28. At T =15K, the 
detector performance reaches an ultra-high responsivity of Vphoto/Plaser = 2.33∙107 V/W result-
ing in an ultra-low NEP = 55.2 aW/Hz-1/2. Most strikingly however, at T = 77K, the detector 
shows record performance for any SC detector, with a responsivity of Vphoto/Plaser = 9.61∙104 
V/W and a NEP = 15.9 fW/Hz-1/2. 

 
Finally, we investigate the intrinsic speed limits of the detector, by measuring its AC 

relaxation time τ. To this end we employ a continuous wave photo-mixing technique, which 
was previously used to investigate the thermal relaxation in graphene (compare supporting in-
formation S12)29. The BSCCO nano-wire is irradiated with two interfering, frequency-detuned 
lasers, which form an optical beating pattern with oscillation frequency Δf - the frequency dif-
ference of the two lasers29. Measurements of the AC photo-voltage Vmix as a function of Δf 
reveal a Lorentzian peak, which corresponds to an exponential decay in the time domain, and 
hence determines the detectors relaxation time τ (Fig. 4a). We extract two time scales, one 
ultra-fast component τ1 ~ 220ps and a slower component τ2 ~ 2ns, which show only slight 
dependence on the sample temperature (Fig. 4b). These are longer than the thermal relaxation 
times found in bulk BSCCO crystals30, and may correspond to suppressed heat diffusion mech-
anisms in these thin and nano-patterned devices. We show that these time-scales set the speed 
limits of the detector. At T = 77K it can operate at frequencies up to f ~ 100MHz without any 


 
 

sacrifice in responsivity, and can be even read out at GHz frequencies with a slightly reduced 
responsivity (Fig. 4c). Such ultra-fast operation speeds are absolutely unprecedented for a su-
perconducting transition edge sensor, being many orders of magnitude faster than any previ-
ously reported TES31,32. 

 
Our study presents a breakthrough in the development of high-performance supercon-

ducting detectors and paves the way towards cheap, liquid nitrogen cooled quantum sensors. 
The presented unoptimized detector concept already shows record high performance charac-
teristics, but it is feasible to push it to the ultimate limit of half a unit cell thickness. Alongside 
with the creation of more homogeneous nano-wire edges, this advancement will allow ever 
sharper SC transitions, and lead to the creation of liquid nitrogen cooled superconducting nano-
wire single photon detectors (SNSPD) - a long standing goal in the field. The ease of integration 
into photonic circuits, will make such detectors a promising building block for the development 
of photonic quantum circuits. 

 

References 
1. 
Andrews, D. H., Brucksch, W. F., Ziegler, W. T. & Blanchard, E. R. Attenuated 
Superconductors I. For Measuring Infra‐Red Radiation. Rev. Sci. Instrum. 13, 281–292 (1942). 

2. 
Irwin, K. D. & Hilton, G. C. Transition-Edge Sensors. in Cryogenic Particle Detection, Topics 
in Applied Physics, vol 99 63–150 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005). 

3. 
Eisaman, M. D., Fan, J., Migdall, A. & Polyakov, S. V. Single-photon sources and detectors. 
Rev. Sci. Instrum. 82, 071101 (2011). 

4. 
Semenov, A. D., Gol’tsman, G. N. & Korneev, A. A. Quantum detection by current carrying 
superconducting film. Phys. C Supercond. 351, 349–356 (2001). 

5. 
Wei, J. et al. Ultrasensitive hot-electron nanobolometers for terahertz astrophysics. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 3, 496–500 (2008). 

6. 
Irwin, K. D. An application of electrothermal feedback for high resolution cryogenic particle 
detection. Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 1998–2000 (1995). 

7. 
Bednorz, J. G. & Müller, K. A. Possible high Tc superconductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-O system. 
Zeitschrift für Phys. B Condens. Matter 64, 189–193 (1986). 

8. 
Kruse, P. W. Physics and applications of high-Tc superconductors for infrared detectors. 
Semicond. Sci. Technol. 5, (1990). 

9. 
Kreisler, A. J. & Gaugue, A. Recent progress in high-temperature superconductor bolometric 
detectors: From the mid-infrared to the far-infrared (THz) range. Supercond. Sci. Technol. 13, 
1235–1245 (2000). 

10. 
Routbort, J. L. & Rothman, S. J. Oxygen diffusion in cuprate superconductors. J. Appl. Phys. 
76, 5615–5628 (1994). 

11. 
Zhou, J. P. et al. Environmental reactivity characteristics of copper-oxide superconductors. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 63, 548–550 (1993). 

12. 
Berkowitz, S. J., Hirahara, A. S., Char, K. & Grossman, E. N. Low noise high-temperature 
superconducting bolometers for infrared imaging. Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 2125–2127 (1996). 

13. 
Li, K., Johnson, J. E. & Aker, B. W. High responsivity YBa2Cu3O7-x microbolometers with 
fast response times. J. Appl. Phys. 73, 1531–1533 (1993). 

14. 
Kakehi, Y. et al. Infrared Radiation Detector with YBa 2 Cu 3 O X Thin Film. Jpn. J. Appl. 
Phys. 37, 4774–4781 (1998). 

15. 
Méchin, L., Villégier, J. C. & Bloyet, D. Suspended epitaxial YBaCuO microbolometers 
fabricated by silicon micromachining: Modeling and measurements. J. Appl. Phys. 81, 7039–
7047 (1997). 

16. 
Johnson, B. R. et al. Yba2Cu3O7 Superconductor Microbolometer Arrays Fabricated By 
Silicon Micromachining. IEEE Transactions on Applied Superconductivity 3, 2856–2859 
(1993). 

17. 
Geim, A. K. & Grigorieva, I. V. Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 499, 419–425 (2013). 

18. 
Yu, Y. et al. High-temperature superconductivity in monolayer Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ. Nature 


 
 

575, 156–163 (2019). 

19. 
Photodiodes. Available at: 
https://www.thorlabs.com/newgrouppage9.cfm?objectgroup_id=285. (Accessed: 26th 
February 2020) 

20. 
Cybart, S. A. et al. Nano Josephson superconducting tunnel junctions in YBa2Cu3O7-δ 
directly patterned with a focused helium ion beam. Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 598–602 (2015). 

21. 
Flöry, N. et al. Waveguide-integrated van der Waals heterostructure photodetector at telecom 
wavelengths with high speed and high responsivity. Nat. Nanotechnol. 15, 118–124 (2020). 

22. 
Gonzalez Marin, J. F., Unuchek, D., Watanabe, K., Taniguchi, T. & Kis, A. MoS2 
photodetectors integrated with photonic circuits. npj 2D Mater. Appl. 3, 1–6 (2019). 

23. 
Ju, L. et al. Perfect Absorption in One-Dimensional Photonic Crystal with Graphene-Dielectric 
Hyperbolic Metamaterials. Phys. status solidi 256, 1800382 (2019). 

24. 
Efetov, D. K. et al. Fast thermal relaxation in cavity-coupled graphene bolometers with a 
Johnson noise read-out. Nat. Nanotechnol. 13, 797–801 (2018). 

25. 
Gan, X. et al. Strong Enhancement of Light–Matter Interaction in Graphene Coupled to a 
Photonic Crystal Nanocavity. Nano Lett. 12, 5626–5631 (2012). 

26. 
Wang, J., Cheng, Z., Shu, C. & Tsang, H. K. Optical Absorption in Graphene-on-Silicon 
Nitride Microring Resonators. IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett. 27, 1765–1767 (2015). 

27. 
Furchi, M. et al. Microcavity-Integrated Graphene Photodetector. Nano Lett. 12, 2773–2777 
(2012). 

28. 
Mather, J. C. Bolometer noise: nonequilibrium theory. Appl. Opt. 21, 1125 (1982). 

29. 
Jadidi, M. M. et al. Tunable Ultrafast Thermal Relaxation in Graphene Measured by 
Continuous-Wave Photomixing. Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, (2016). 

30. 
Parham, S. et al. Ultrafast gap dynamics and electronic interactions in a photoexcited cuprate 
superconductor. Phys. Rev. X 7, 041013 (2017). 

31. 
Fukuda, D. et al. Photon number resolving detection with high speed and high quantum 
efficiency. Metrologia 46, S288 (2009). 

32. 
Fukuda, D. et al. High speed photon number resolving detector with titanium transition edge 
sensor. J. Low Temp. Phys. 151, 100–105 (2008). 

 
Acknowledgements: 
We are grateful for fruitful discussions with A. Montanaro, A. Santamato, M.A. Giambra and V. So-
rianello and F .H. L. Koppens, and for technical support by J. Osmond. D.K.E. acknowledges support 
from the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of Spain through the “Severo Ochoa” program for 
Centres of Excellence in R&D (SE5-0522), Fundació Privada Cellex, Fundació Privada Mir-Puig, the 
Generalitat de Catalunya through the CERCA program, the H2020 Programme under grant agreement 
n° 820378, Project: 2D·SIPC and the La Caixa Foundation. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from 
the Elemental Strategy Initiative conducted by the MEXT, Japan, Grant Number JPMXP0112101001, 
JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP20H00354 and the CREST(JPMJCR15F3), JST. P. S acknowledges 
support from the Alexander-von-Humboldt Foundation and the German Federal Ministry for Education 
and Research through the Feodor-Lynen program. 
 
Author contributions: 
D.K.E. and P.S. conceived and designed the experiments; P.S., J.R.D. and R.L. performed the experi-
ments; J.R.D., R.L.M. and P.S. fabricated the devices; P.S. and D.K.E. analyzed the data; P.S. and 
J.N.M. performed the theoretical modeling; H.H.S and M.A.A. provided technical support; K.K., T.T., 
K.W. contributed materials and M.A., M.R. contributed wave-guides; D.K.E. supported the experi-
ments: D.K.E and P.S. wrote the paper.  
 
Supplementary Information is available for this paper. 
 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to D.K.E. 
 
Competing financial and non-Financial interests: 
The authors declare no competing financial and non-financial interests. 


 
 

 

 
FIG. 1. Detector concept. a and b, Cross-section and schematic of the SiN waveguide coupled 
BSCCO superconducting transition edge sensor. An exfoliated 5-9 unit cell thin BSCCO crys-
tal is transferred onto a SiN waveguide and pre-patterned gold electrodes, and covered with 
hexagonal boron nitride to prevent degradation. A nano-wire is patterned into the BSCCO at 
the position of the waveguide using focused helium ion beam lithography. c, AFM topography 
of the hBN/BSCCO nanowire. d, Sheet resistance of a pristine BSCCO device as a function of 
temperature with a Tc = 91K, above the boiling point of liquid nitrogen T = 77K. e and f, Optical 
image of the SiN waveguide integrated device and the grating coupler. g, Summary of respon-
sivity, noise equivalent power (NEP) and operation frequency 1/ of the superconducting 
BSCCO detector at T = 77 K (pink bar) and T = 15 K (blue bar). For comparison the gray 
columns depict the performance of selected previous thermal detectors made from high-Tc ma-
terials, including micro-bridges12-14 and meander shaped devices15,16. For an extensive review 
on previous work we refer to9. 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 

 

FIG. 2. Electronic device properties. a, Device resistance of the BSCCO before (gray) and 
after He-FIB nano-fabrication into wires of width w ~ 100nm (blue). The nano-wire shows a 
robust SC state with a broadened Sc transition. b, Differential resistance dV/dI of the nano-wire 
device as a function of bias current Ibias and temperature T, shows a sharp SC transition with Ic 
~ 435µA (15K) and Tc ~ 91K. The black line depicts a line cut at T = 15K. c, The current 
voltage characteristic I/V of the nano-wire exhibit an open, temperature dependent (inset) hys-
teresis loop between up (Ic) and down (re-trapping current) swept Ibias.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 

 
FIG. 3. Optical response characteristics a, Spatial map of the nanowire’s optical responsivity 
under focused laser scanning at the position of the nanowire and at the position of the grating 
coupler at T = 23K (compare positions in Fig. 1e and f). b, Normalized photo-response Vphoto/ 
Vmax (top) and current-voltage characteristic I/V (bottom) a function of bias current Ibias, meas-
ured at different temperatures T. c, Photo-voltage Vphoto/Plaser (blue) and calculated noise equiv-
alent power (NEP, pink) as a function of device temperature T.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 

 

FIG. 4. Frequency domain response from optical mixing. a, AC photo-mixing voltage re-
sponse Vmix of the BSCCO nano-wire as a function of the difference frequency f of the two 
interfering lasers at T = 77K. The fit (solid black line) is a double Lorentzian peak comprising 
a slow (dashed blue line) and a fast contribution (dash-dotted pink line) of width 1/ corre-
sponding to an exponential decay with relaxation time . b, Extracted relaxation times 1 and 
2 of the detector response as a function of device temperature. c, Normalized AC voltage re-
sponse of the BSCCO detector at T = 77K at the difference frequency f.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

Methods: 
 
Materials and fabrication. 
The hBN/BSCCO devices are assembled from micro-mechanically exfoliated crystals using a 
van der Waals assembly technique. BSCCO and hBN flakes are exfoliated onto a PDMS film 
on a glass substrate. We transfer the BSCCO onto pre-patterned Ti/Au electrodes on the 
SiN/SiO2 chip to make electrical contact. We subsequently cover the BSCCO flake with a 
suitable hBN crystal in order to avoid device degradation. The whole device fabrication is per-
formed inside a glovebox under inert argon atmosphere.  
 
For the fabrication of nano-wires, we locally irradiate the device with a 30keV helium-ion beam 
in a Zeiss Orion NanoFab. For patterning the structures we irradiate the BSCCO/hBN structure 
with ion doses between 10 and 100 pC/m2 following the dose testing procedure as specified 
in supporting information note 3. 
 
Transport and photovoltage experiments. 
The measurements of temperature- and bias dependent resistivity are carried out in an AttoDry 
closed-cycle cryostat. Standard low-frequency lock-in techniques (Stanford Research Systems 
860) and DC biasing (Yokogawa GS200 and Keithley 2400 SourceMeter) were used to meas-
ure the resistance and to bias the device. For the photovoltage experiments, a fixed frequency 
1550nm laser was used to locally excite the device with a spatial resolution of ~2m. Scanning 
mirrors and xyz-Piezo scanners were used to position the device and to scan the laser-spot 
across the device. The laser was modulated with an optical chopper and the photovoltage was 
measured with a lock-in detection on the chopper frequency. The incident laser power was 
adjusted using a variable optical attenuator (JGR OA5 l). 
 
Continuous wave photomixing. 
A fixed-frequency laser at 1550nm (193THz) and a tunable laser with 1528nm-1566nm 
(193THz+f) (ThorLabs C-band) are modulated at different chopping frequencies with a twin-
slot chopper wheel (supporting information 8). The beams overlap in a beam splitter, which 
creates a sinusoidal optical beating at the difference frequency f. The sinusoidal detector re-
sponse is detected with a lock-in amplifier (Stanford Research Systems 860) as a function of 
the difference frequency f while demodulating at the difference frequency of the chopping 
frequencies. 
 
 


Supporting Information: A liquid nitrogen cooled superconducting 
transition edge sensor with ultra-high responsivity and GHz operation 
speeds 
 
Paul Seifert1†, José Ramón Durán Retamal1†, Rafael Luque Merino1, Hanan Herzig Sheinfux1, John N. 
Moore1, Mohammed Ali Aamir1, Takashi Taniguchi2, Kenji Wantanabe3, Kazuo Kadowaki4, Massimo 
Artiglia5, Marco Romagnoli5 and Dmitri K. Efetov1* 
 
1. 
ICFO - Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 
Castelldefels, Barcelona, 08860, Spain 

2. 
International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science,  
1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 

3. 
Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, 
Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 

4. 
Algae Biomass and Energy System (ABES) Research & Development Center & Institute of 
Materials Science University of Tsukuba 1-1-1, Tennodai, Tsukuba-shi, 305-8572, Japan 

5. 
CNIT - National Interuniversity Consortium for Telecommunications, TeCIP -Institute of 
Communication, Information and Perception Technologies - Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna via 
Moruzzi, 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy 

 
* E-mail: dmitri.efetov@icfo.eu  
† equal contribution      
 

Contents: 

 

1. Van der Waals assembly of BSCCO nano-bolometer devices (S1) 

2. Contact engineering (S2) 

3. Focused helium ion nanofabrication:  

1. Dose testing (S3)  

2. Impact of ion irradiation and resolution (S4-S6) 

4. Overview of BSCCO nano-bolometer devices and different bolometer designs (S7) 

5. Channel homogeneity and notes on different bolometer designs (S8) 

6. Hysteretic current-voltage relation as a function of temperature (S9) 

7. Environmental stability of the BSCCO devices (S10) 

8. Coupling efficiency at the grating coupler (S11) 

9. Schematic of the continuous wave photomixing experiment (S12) 

 


1. Van der Waals assembly of BSCCO nano-bolometer devices 

 

 

 

 

Fig. S1. Schematic of the van der Waals assembly and helium 
FIB nano-fabrication. a, Starting point is a SiO2/SiN waveguide 
chip with pre-patterned electrodes close to the waveguide. b, A 
thin BSCCO crystal, which was micro-mechanically exfoliated 
via the scotch tape technique is transferred onto the waveguide and 
electrodes using a viscoelastic PDMS stamp on a glass substrate. 
c, In order to avoid degradation of the BSCCO, the flake is fully 
encapsulated with a thin crystal of h-BN, using the same process 
as for the BSCCO in (b). All exfoliation and van der Waals 
assembly steps are performed under inert Argon atmosphere inside 
a glovebox. d, A nanowire channel is patterned into the BSCCO 
on top of the SiN waveguide using focused helium ion beam 
irradiation. 

 

 

 

2. Contact engineering 

Fig. S2. BSCCO layer structure and linear 
contact resistance. a, Crystal structure - the 
outer bismuth oxide layers are considered to 
be insulating and the center layers of Sr and 
CuO2 are described as a N-S-S-N structure (N 
– normal conductor, S - superconductor) b, 
Linear resistance in the normal state at 100K 
demonstrating a good electric contact through 
the insulating bismuth oxide layers. 

Contact engineering in BSCCO devices: Figure S2 (a) depicts the layered structure of one BSCCO 
layer (half unit cell). The outermost bismuth oxide layers are considered to be insulating1. The strontium 
and copper oxide layers present a N-S-S-N structure where N denotes a normal conductor and S denotes 
a superconducting layer1. In order to make a reliable electrical contact to the superconducting layers in 
BSCCO one has to achieve a conducting path through the insulating BiO layer. This has been achieved 
in the past e.g. via in-situ selective ion etching through the top layer before metal evaporation2 or via 
cold welding with diffusive metals e.g. indium3. The first approach is not promising for few unit cell 
sample thicknesses, because the BSCCO is subject to ambient conditions during nanofabrication. Cold-
welding under inert atmosphere on the other hand gives good results even for half unit cell BSCCO 


layers. Here the electrical contact is obtained by contacting the bulk part of a BSCCO crystal which 
exhibits a monolayer thin region with indium3. Then, the bulk part of the BSCCO crystal can be patterned 
with a sharp AFM tip in order to isolate the monolayer region as the active area of the device3. The 
presence of the bulk flake however makes it difficult to encapsulate the whole BSCCO flake e.g. with h-
BN to make it stable under ambient conditions. Hence, while this approach allows the study of monolayer 
BSCCO in fundamental science experiments, cold welding is not a favorable approach to reliably 
fabricate bolometer devices which need to withstand ambient conditions and multiple cooling cycles. For 
our nano-bolometer devices, we electrically contact the BSCCO crystals via a bottom contact using pre-
fabricated gold electrodes. This allows us to fully encapsulate the BSCCO crystal with h-BN in order to 
make it stable under ambient conditions. In particular, we obtain the electrical contact to the 
superconducting layer by maximizing the effective contact interface between the BSCCO crystal and the 
electrodes. We find that for a contact interface > 200 m2 we get a reliable contact to the BSCCO crystal. 
While gold is not a diffusive metal as e.g. indium, the big contact interface makes it statistically favorable 
to contact the crystal via defects in the BiO plane or via diffusion of metal atoms. Figure S2 (b) shows a 
typical current-voltage relation of our devices after nano-fabrication of the BSCCO channel in the normal 
state (100 K). We find a good electrical contact to the device and a linear current-voltage characteristic. 
We note, that this method of contacting BSCCO is susceptible to a loss of electrical contact at low 
temperatures where roughly every second device loses contact to one of the electrodes during the first 
cooling cycle. However, this can be easily countered by the use of additional electrodes, as we find that 
electrodes which do not lose contact during the first cooling cycle are not likely to lose contact in 
subsequent cooling cycles. Overall, the possibility to make the devices environmentally stable makes our 
approach favorable for the use of few-layer BSCCO in applications. 

3. Focused helium ion nanofabrication 

3.1 Dose testing  

Dose testing for Helium ion nanofabrication: In order to obtain the optimum helium ion dose for 
patterning nano-structures into BSCCO without a physical milling we utilize the following procedure: 
We irradiate an array of triangular shapes as indicated in Figure S3 with increasing dose on the 
BSCCO/h-BN stack. The triangle shapes are then imaged via the secondary electron generation from 
Helium ion imaging. In contrast to electron microscopy the secondary electrons are generated by 
positively charged Helium ions, which leads to an accumulation of positive charge on the sample. The 
BSCCO flake is grounded and hence allows for a depletion of the positive charge. For increasing ion 
dose of the patterned triangle shape, the BSCCO turns insulating which electrically isolates the pristine 
center of the BSCCO triangle from the surrounding grounded BSCCO. The accumulated positive charge 

cannot deplete from the isolated triangle anymore and the 
secondary electrons get trapped on the positively charged 
BSCCO which leads to a darkening of the isolated BSCCO in 
Helium ion imaging. The corresponding dose is used for 
patterning the nano-channel of the bolometer on the same 
flake. 

Fig. S3. Helium ion dose testing. a, Schematic illustration of 
the procedure for in-situ dose testing. The blue shaded 
triangular area is irradiated via a focused Helium ion beam. 
b-d, Secondary electron images from helium ion imaging of 
exposed BSCCO areas for increasing irradiation doses of 20 
pC/µm2, 40 pC/µm2 and 60 pC/µm2. 


3.2 Impact of ion irradiation and resolution 

Fig. S4. Resolution of He irradiation. a, Secondary 
electron image from helium ion imaging of an 
exposed triangle with an ion dose of 40 pC/µm2. b, 
Secondary electron imaging contrast along the red 
line in (a). c, Secondary electron imaging contrast 
along the blue line in (a) for irradiation doses of 20 
pC/µm2 , 40 pC/µm2 and 60 pC/µm2. 

Resolution of nanofabrication and impact of helium ion irradiation: Figure S4 (a) shows a secondary 
electron image from helium ion imaging of an exposed triangle with an ion dose of 40 pC/m2. From 
the line cut of the optical contrast along the red line (Fig. S4 (b)) we obtain a step edge between irradiated 
and non-irradiated area of ~10 nm. The step edge from the imaging contrast is a convolution of the step 
edge resolution and the imaging resolution from helium ion imaging. We estimate the nanofabrication to 
have a resolution of ~5 nm, which can be further improved via a more laborious alignment of the helium 
beam before patterning. Figure S4 (c) shows imaging contrast line cuts along the blue line in figure S4 
(a) for different radiation doses. In addition to the direct radiation damage, we observe an indirect contrast 
change of the surrounding area with an extension of roughly 100 nm, which can also be seen as the 
darkened area around the exposed triangle in figure S4 (a). We attribute this to indirect irradiation damage 
as a result of backscattered helium ions which also expose the surrounding area with a reduced dose. 
Figure S5 shows the AFM topography of the patterned triangle as in Figs. S3 and S4. The helium ion 
irradiation can be associated with a height increase of the irradiated area, as observed in the topography 
map. The height increase of 1 nm in Fig. S5 (b) can be attributed to the accumulation of helium in the 
substrate during helium ion exposure which leads to the formation of helium bubbles 4,5(see also 
following discussion on the simulated interaction of helium ions with an h-BN/BSCCO/SiO2 device). As 
both the device topography and the imaging contrast in FIB are much sharper than the indirect irradiation 
damage, which we attribute to backscattered ions, the latter is the limiting factor in our nanofabrication. 
For the patterning of the BSCCO nano-wires, we try to account for the indirect irradiation damage and 
choose a width that leaves us with a channel of pristine BSCCO without radiation damage in the center, 
e.g. by choosing a channel width of 300nm to obtain a nominal ~100 nm wide channel of pristine 
BSCCO. We will later show, that this strategy works for short channels on the order of ~1m, whereas 
the statistical occurrence of disorder/defects/bubbles imposes additional limitations on long nanowires. 
We note, that in future experiments, the damage from backscattered ions as well as the topography change 
can be addressed by the use of free-standing devices. 

Fig. S5. Sample topography after irradiation 
AFM 
measurements 
on 
helium 
irradiated 

BSCCO/hBN flakes. a, b AFM topography map of 
the triangle shaped dose test in Fig S2. The helium 
ion irradiation leads to a height increase of the 
irradiated area as compared to the non-irradiated 
part. b, Line cut across the 200 nm wide pattern 
along the black line in (a). The height is increased by 
~1nm.  

Simulation of helium ion interaction: Figure S6 shows a Monte-Carlo simulation of the interaction of 
30 keV helium ions with a typical device consisting of 20 nm h-BN / 9 nm BSCCO / 295 nm SiO2 /Si. 
The simulation is performed using SRIM (Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter). Figure S6 (a) displays 


the ion trajectories of 103 helium ions which enter perpendicularly at a single point into the device. The 
profile of the helium beam is almost unchanged after transmission through the hBN. After entering the 
SiO2, the helium beam is increasingly deflected and the ion trajectory forms a pear shape below the point 
of entry. Figures S6 (b) and (c) show a cross section of the irradiation induced atomic displacement (b) 
and the distribution of stopped helium ions in the device after interaction of 104 He ions (c). We find that 
the number of atomic displacements, which lead to defect formation and amorphization, concentrates in 
the BSCCO layer with a very sharp distribution in lateral dimensions. For increasing penetration depth 
the total number of atomic displacements increases but significantly broadens in close correspondence 
to the ion trajectories in figure S6 (a). Importantly, after primary interaction with the BSCCO device, 
most of the helium atoms accumulate in the SiO2 substrate with an average ion range of 234 nm where 
the helium leads to a bubble formation and subsequent topography changes in our device.  

 

Fig. S6. Simulation of helium ion interaction. Monte-Carlo simulation of the interaction of helium ions 
with a h-BN/BSCCO/SiO2 device using SRIM. a, Ion trajectories of 103 helium ions with 30 keV which 
enter a typical stack of 20 nm h-BN / 9 nm BSCCO / 295 nm SiO2 /Si. b, Displacement of atoms due to 
the interaction with 104 helium ions. c, Distribution of stopped helium ions in the device after interacting 
with the stack. The average range of helium ions is 234 nm. 

4. Overview of BSCCO nano-bolometer devices and different bolometer designs 
 

 

Fig. S7. Overview of BSCCO nano-bolometer 
devices and different bolometer designs. Overview of 
BSCCO 
nano-bolometer 
devices 
and 
different 

bolometer designs. The data in each column 
corresponds to one bolometer device. a-d, Optical 
microscopy images of BSCCO bolometer devices with 
different nano-constriction designs, as indicated by the 
colored lines. e-h, Bolometer designs and AFM profile 
of the bolometer devices. i-m, Two-terminal differential 
resistance dV/dI of the devices as a function of bias 
current and device temperature. n-p, Current-voltage 
characteristic IV of the bolometer devices at device 
temperatures of (n-10K, o-15K, p-15K, q-14K). r-u, 
Two-terminal differential resistance dV/dI of the 
devices as a function of bias current at device 
temperatures of (r-10K, s-15K, t-15K, u-14K). v-y, 
Voltage responsivity of the bolometer devices as a 
function of bias current at device temperatures of (v-
10K, w-15K, x-15K, y-14K). 


 

5. Channel homogeneity and notes on different bolometer designs 

Fig. S8. Channel homogeneity of the 
BSCCO nano-wires. a, Optical image 
of the BSCCO nano-wire as in Fig. S7c 
comprising a 15µm long 200nm wide 
channel. b, Contrast enhanced optical 
microscopy image of the same device. 
Due to the stacking process of BSCCO 
and hBN bubbles are trapped at the 
position of the channel. c, Photo- 
response of the device along the channel 
as a function of the bias current. The 
response is inhomogeneous along the 
channel. d, Current of maximum 
photoresponse as a function of position 
in the nano-channel. We observe 
variations in the current of up to ~30%. 

Different BSCCO nano-bolometers and designs: Figure S7 shows an overview of different BSCCO 
nano-bolometer devices and different bolometer designs on a Si/SiO2 substrate. The data in each column 
corresponds to one bolometer device. The devices exhibit a BSCCO thickness between 5 and 9 unit cells. 
For the bolometer designs we chose both round channels, defined between two circle-shaped FIB lines 
((a) and (b)) as well as straight nanowire like channels ((c) and (d)). All devices show superconducting 
behavior and a bolometric response. While devices (a), (c) and (d) showed only a small hysteresis in the 
current voltage relation (IV), indicative of a small contribution from self-heating, device (b) showed a 
very pronounced hysteresis loop (see also Fig. S9) and a detector latching up to 30 K. Correspondingly, 
the bolometric response is measured across a 1kΩ shunt resistor to avoid the latching in device (b). We 
observe, that the superconductivity, as visible in the differential resistance vs temperature (Fig. S7 (i)-
(m)), is much sharper defined for the devices with a round nano-constriction ((a) and (b)) and enter 
superconductivity at a higher temperature as compared to the straight channel devices ((c) and (d)). This 
behavior is also reflected in the sharpness of the voltage response vs bias current (Fig. S7 (v)-(y)) and 
can be explained by the presence of disorder and/or bubbles in the BSCCO/h-BN devices. Figure S8 
shows a corresponding analysis of device (c) comprising a 15 m long 200nm wide nano-channel. In 
particular, this channel is much longer than the size of our laser-spot (~2-3 m) and thus allows us to 
extract spatial information from the channel. In the contrast enhanced microscope image (b) one can 
already observe the occurrence of bubbles in the BSCCO/h-BN stack, which are distributed over the 
whole device and are also present at the position of the nano-channel. Figure S8 (c) shows the 
photovoltage response of the device along the channel as a function of the bias current. We observe, that 
the response occurs inhomogeneously along the channel and the maximum photoresponse occurs at 
different bias currents.  Figure S8 (d) shows the corresponding current of maximum photoresponse along 
the channel. We observe variations in the current of up to ~30% as function of position in the nano-
channel. We explain this by the occurrence of strain and disorder due to the bubble formation close to 
the channel. In addition, the presence of bubbles most likely influences the resolution and spatial 
homogeneity of the nanofabrication via helium ion beam irradiation. Devices comprising a round nano-
channel have a well-defined weak link at the thinnest position of the channel. In this case, the presence 
of such inhomogeneity will lead to a different effective electronic width of the channel (compare critical 


current in devices as in Fig. S7 (a) and (b)). However, this will not smear out the superconducting 
transition as for a long channel (Fig. S7 (c) and (d)), where multiple superconducting transitions with 
different critical temperature and critical current can occur along the length of the channel. 

6. Hysteretic current-voltage relation as a function of temperature 

Fig. S9. Hysteretic current-voltage relation. 
Hysteresis of the superconducting transition in a 
nominal 100 nm nano-constriction (Fig. S7 (b)) 
as a function of temperature. a, Amplitude of the 
voltage difference between current sweeping 
directions as a function of bias current and 
temperature. b, Sign of the voltage difference 
between current sweeping directions as a 
function of bias current and temperature. 

7.  Environmental stability of the BSCCO devices 

In previous work, the chemical instability of BSCCO, attributed to surface degradation and oxygen out-
diffusion in ambient conditions and during thermocycling, was considered a bottleneck for the 
applicability of thin nanoscale high-Tc compounds in applications3,6,7. In order to avoid such degradation 
issues, we perform our device fabrication under inert argon atmosphere inside a glovebox. In particular, 
we fully encapsulte the BSCCO flakes with h-BN during our fabrication before we remove the devices 
from the glovebox for further fabrication. In addition, we utilize nanofabrication via focused helium ion 
beam irradiation to fabricate nanostructures in the BSCCO without a physical milling of the device such 
that the BSCCO stays protected from the environment via the h-BN encapsulation. Figure S10 shows the 
two-terminal differential resistance dV/dI and current voltage relation IV of two devices more that 30 and 
50 days after device fabrication after more than one cooling cycle. We see, that the superconducting 
properties of the devices stay almost unchanged over prolonged periods of time and over multiple cooling 
cycles. In particular, the devices were subject to ambient conditions on many occasions after fabrication 
e.g. for wire-bonding and transport between laboratories and in the case of the device (a) and (b) even 
overnight, with no significant impact on the device properties. 

Fig. S10. Environmental and thermocycling stability of 
the bolometer devices. a, Two-terminal differential 
resistance dV/dI of the device as in Fig. S7a as a function 
of bias current and device temperature after 38 days from 
fabrication in the 2nd cooling cycle. b, Two-terminal 
resistance dV/dI of the same device after 50 days in the 3rd 
cooling cycle. The device was subject to ambient 
conditions before and between the cooling cycles. c and d, 
Current voltage characteristic IV and differential 
resistance dV/dI as a function of bias current at T = 15 K 
for the device as in Fig. S7b with 1kΩ parallel resistance 
after 32 days in the 2nd cooling cycle (blue dashed line) 
and after 53 days in the 3rd cooling cycle (pink line). 

 

 


8. Coupling efficiency at the grating coupler 

 

Fig. S11. Simulation of coupling efficiency at the grating 
coupler. Numerical simulation of the grating coupler’s coupling 
efficiency into the SiN waveguide using our objective. The coupling 
efficiency exhibits a minimum at normal incidence, where we find a 
coupling efficiency of 0.08%.  

 

9. Schematic of the continuous wave photomixing experiment 

 

Fig. S12. Schematic of the continuous wave photomixing experiment. A fixed-frequency laser at 1550 
nm (193 THz, blue) and a tunable laser with 1528 nm-1566 nm (193THz+f, pink) are modulated at 
different chopping frequencies with a twin-slot chopper wheel. The beams overlap in a beam splitter, 
which creates a sinusoidal optical beating at the mixing frequency f. Using a scanning mirror, the 
oscillating laser is focused onto the device, which is located on a xyz-piezo stage inside an AttoDry 
closed cycle cryostat. The bolometer is biased close to the critical current using a DC-sourcemeter and 
the sinusoidal bolometer response is detected with a lock-in amplifier at the difference frequency of the 
chopping frequencies. For a ∆𝑓 ≤ 1/𝜏, the temperature can always follow the optical beating and the 
AC voltage response exhibits a maximum. For increasing mixing frequency ∆𝑓 ≥ 1/𝜏, the bolometric 
response cannot follow the optical beating and the voltage response drops. 

1. 
Shimaoka, K. et al. Tunneling Spectroscopy of Bi2Sr2CaCu2Ox Single Crystals and Analysis 
Using a Superlattice Model. in Advances in Superconductivity IV 891–894 (Springer Japan, 
1992). doi:10.1007/978-4-431-68195-3_194 

2. 
Jindal, A. et al. Growth of high-quality Bi2Sr2 CaCu2O8+δ whiskers and electrical properties of 
resulting exfoliated flakes. Sci. Rep. 7, (2017). 


3. 
Yu, Y. et al. High-temperature superconductivity in monolayer Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+δ. Nature 575, 
156–163 (2019). 

4. 
Hlawacek, G. & Gölzhäuser, A. Helium ion microscopy. (Springer International Publishing, 
2016). 

5. 
Gozar, A., Litombe, N. E., Hoffman, J. E. & Božović, I. Optical Nanoscopy of High Tc Cuprate 
Nanoconstriction Devices Patterned by Helium Ion Beams. Nano Lett. 17, 1582–1586 (2017). 

6. 
Routbort, J. L. & Rothman, S. J. Oxygen diffusion in cuprate superconductors. J. Appl. Phys. 76, 
5615–5628 (1994). 

7. 
Zhou, J. P. et al. Environmental reactivity characteristics of copper-oxide superconductors. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 63, 548–550 (1993). 


