Quasiparticles and Band Transport in Organized

Nanostructures of Donor-Acceptor Copolymers

Guorong Weng and Vojtˇech Vlˇcek∗

Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Barbara,

93106, U.S.A

E-mail: vlcek@ucsb.edu

1

arXiv:2006.00136v1  [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]  30 May 2020


Abstract

The performance of organic semiconductor devices is linked to highly-ordered nanos-

tructures of self-assembled molecules and polymers. We employ many-body perturba-

tion theory and study the excited states in bulk compolymers. We discover that accep-

tors in the polymer scaffold introduce a, hitherto unrecognized, conduction impurity

band. The donor units are surrounded by conjugated bands which are only mildly

perturbed by the presence of acceptors. Along the polymer axis, mutual interactions

among copolymer strands hinder efficient band transport, which is, however, strongly

enhanced across individual chains. We find that holes are most effectively transported

in the π − π stacking while electrons in the impurity band follow the edge-to-edge

directions. The copolymers exhibit regions with inverted transport polarity, in which

electrons and holes are efficiently transported in mutually orthogonal directions.

Graphical TOC Entry

Keywords

Organic semiconductor, quasiparticle excitations, donor-acceptor copolymer, impurity states,

band transport, many-body interactions

2


Donor-acceptor (D-A) semiconducting copolymers represent arguably the most vari-

able class of semiconducting materials in organic electronics.1–4 The wide range of possi-

ble donors and acceptors provides an unmatched tunability of the system’s electronic and

optical properties.5–7 Rational device-design is, however, hampered by the complicated re-

lationship between electronic properties and the arrangement of the molecular chains in

the condensed phase (e.g., in spin-coated thin-films).8,9 Experiments showed that highly-

ordered nanodomains, i.e., highly organized nm-scale regions, are widely present in solution-

processed thin films. The nanodomains are composed of nanowires,10 nanosheets,11 and

crystallites.12–15 Face-on (π-π) or edge-on stacking is the dominant arrangement of conju-

gated molecules leading to high charge mobilities and excellent device performance.10–15 The

nanodomains exhibit quasiparticle bands observed by angle-resolved photoemission.16 Hence,

the high hole mobilities are explained by band-like transport17,18 in the π-π direction.12,14,19

However, a detailed microscopic understanding of how the structure and composition of the

copolymers impact the electronic excitations is currently missing.

Answering these questions requires a theoretical investigation of the copolymers’ elec-

tronic structure in the condensed phase. In principle, such simulations need to capture the

non-local inter-molecular interactions20 of electrons delocalized along the π-conjugated back-

bone.16 The individual polymer chains are highly polarizable and held together by van der

Waals (vdW) forces. Even in the limit of ideally crystalline systems, quantitative theoretical

predictions of electronic excitations are prohibitive, and they have been limited to crystals

of small molecules.21–31 For polymers, the computational efforts have considered only iso-

lated32,33 oligomers or 1D periodic systems34–38 treated by mean-field approaches, which are

less expensive but do not take into account the non-local electronic correlations (governed

by polarization effects).39 Further, the geometries of the polymer strands are typically forced

to be planar, i.e., they disregard actual arrangements in the highly organized domains.33,37

Finally, the mean-field methods do not, in principle, provide access to quasiparticle (injected

electron and hole) energies and tend to underestimate excitation energies grossly.40

3


In this work, we overcome these limitations and apply state-of-the-art theoretical ap-

proaches to explain the key features of the electronic structure of D-A copolymers. Our cal-

culations employ many-body perturbation theory40 within the stochastic GW approach.41–44

The electron-electron interactions are computed for each excitation (i.e., no mean-field ap-

proximation is applied). In the GW approximation, the interaction term takes into account a

selected class of Feynman diagrams describing the electrodynamic screening, i.e., the induced

charge density fluctuations.
Electrons thus interact via a screened Coulomb interaction,

which is non-local and time-dependent. In practice, the GW method yields quasiparticle

(QP) excitation energies in excellent agreement with available experimental data.40,42,45

The electronic structure and QP energies of the condensed phase is determined by the

properties of the constituting moieties as well as by mutual interactions among individual

copolymer strands.
While these contributions are nontrivial, relations among a few key

parameters govern the system’s overall behavior. To illustrate this, we consider a prototypical

example: “FBT” and related D-A copolymers46–48 (see Supporting Information (SI) for

the geometry optimization).
Here, the fluorene moiety (F) acts as a “donor” (D), and

benzothiadiazole (BT) acts as an “acceptor” (A). The isolated molecules are illustrated in

the inset of Figure 1 and the SI. The D units are the source of delocalized electronic states.

In contrast, acceptors are typically chosen so that they have a higher electron affinity than

donors,49,50 acting as strong potential wells for electrons (see Figure ??). Hence, the A unit

is a source of localized electrons whose wave functions have a limited spatial extent.

In a single copolymer strand (i.e., 1D periodic system with repeated D and A subunits),

the quantum confinement is reduced in the direction of the polymer axis. Consequently,

the fundamental gap of the infinite chain decreases with the polymerization length; for an

infinite system, it is 4.08±0.04 eV, which is 1.48±0.05 eV less than for an isolated monomer

(Figure ??). In a condensed phase (either 2D slab or 3D bulk), the presence of neighboring

strands eliminates the quantum confinement in the directions orthogonal to the polymer

axis. Hence, the fundamental band gap further decreases (Figure ??b).

4


Figure 1: Quasiparticle band structures and orbitals of selected states of a fluorene (a, b)
and FBT (c, d) strands. The monomer units are shown in the inset of panels b and c. The
electronic states that are delocalized over the entire polymer backbone are denoted lower
and upper conjugated bands (LCB and UCB), for the highest valence and lowest conduction
band. The band-edge states in fluorene (a) are formed by LCB and UCB illustrated for the
Brillouin zone center, Γ, and its boundary, X. The corresponding bands are highlighted in
panel b. FBT is D-A copolymer, with the individual subunits labeled in the inset of panel
c. Due to the presence of A, the bandstructure contains an acceptor impurity band (AIB)
highlighted in red (c). Panel d depicts LCB, AIB, and UCB for two points in the Brillouin
zone; the AIB is strongly localized on the acceptor subunit. Red and blue colors distinguish
the wave function phase.

5


For quantitative predictions of the band gaps in the condensed phase, many-body meth-

ods turn out to be indispensable as dynamical electron-electron interactions are responsible

for the non-local (inter-chain) interactions. Indeed, the ionization potential for the 2D slab

computed with the sGW method is 5.48±0.02 eV (Figure ??a), in excellent agreement with

thin-film experiments that provide an estimate of 5.4-5.5 eV.47 The fundamental band gaps

of the surface and the bulk are 3.33 and 2.23 eV (Figure ??b), and the latter is in good

agreement with the experimental value of 2.32-2.44 eV.47

The periodic copolymer arrangement supports the formation of band structures (observed

experimentally, as discussed above). To characterize the principal features of the electronic

states, we start with the 1D system shown in Figure 1c. The crystal momentum is imprinted

on the individual wavefunctions (Figure 1d), which, however, retain much of their molecular

character (Figure ??). It is thus possible to separate the contributions of D and A to the

highest valence and lowest conduction bands responsible for the charge transport.

The donor behavior dominates the highest valence state; it has conjugated character

and delocalized π orbitals (see more details in Figure ??). The top valence band is broad

(its bandwidth is 0.86 ± 0.04 eV) with a parabolic dispersion near the extrema that occur

at the critical points of the Brillouin zone. The near-band-edge character, together with

the large bandwidth, translates to a low effective mass of ∼ 0.22m∗
e. Such a low value is

consistent with experimental results for similar (semi)conducting copolymers.16 We denote

the highest conduction band and the lower conjugated band (LCB). The complementary

“upper” conjugated band (UCB) is formed from π∗ orbitals, and it has much higher energy

(Figure 1d). Both LCB and UCB are qualitatively analogous to the band edge states in a

pure fluorene chain (Figure 1a), i.e., the conjugated bands are only mildly perturbed by the

presence of acceptor subunits. The correspondence between the electronic structures of D-A

and pure donor polymers has not been noticed up to now.

In contrast, the lowest conduction band of the copolymer comprises states localized only

on the acceptors (Figure ??). The acceptor band has significantly reduced width (Figure 1c),

6


and it appears between LCB and UCB.

In calculations with distinct A molecules, we found that the exact energy separation

between the conjugated and localized states depends only a little on the choice of acceptors

(see Figure ?? for details). In FBT, the separation of the conduction states is 1.11 eV;

the oxygen- and selenium- substituted copolymers show slightly larger separations (1.38

eV and 1.16 eV, respectively – see Figure ??).
In all cases studied, the localized state

is characteristically inserted between the two conjugated bands. Based on the conceptual

analogy to charge-trapping “in-gap” states, we denote the lowest conduction states as the

acceptor impurity band (AIB). The formation of the localized and flat impurity band has not

been described previously. One of the key findings of this communication is the recognition

and distinction between the conjugated and impurity bands.

LCB, AIB, and UCB are present in the same order in 1D and in the condensed phases.

While the van der Waals forces only weakly bond the individual copolymer strands, the

inter-chain interactions change the band structures significantly. Besides the shift of the QP

gaps (discussed above), the charge transport is critically influenced by the changes in the

bandwidth. The dispersion of LCB and AIB determines the charge transport polarity. Fur-

ther, the bandwidth is directly related to the charge carrier effective mass. To investigate

the physical origin of the of the band structure changes, we will separate two main con-

tributions:(i) the one-body electronic interactions51 including the (classical) density-density

Coulomb repulsion (Table ??), and (ii) the electron-electron interactions, which represent

highly non-local and dynamical (time-dependent) quantum effects.

The first contribution mostly depends on the local52 properties of the copolymer. The

electronic structure (and charge transport) strongly depend on the bond arrangement be-

tween the donor and acceptor subunits.35 The existence of a single bond between adjacent

donors and acceptors implies large rotational freedom. In practice, the mutual orientation of

the A and D units depends on the environment. The rotational angle varies between 43◦ and

56◦ in the relaxed structures with 1D, 2D, or 3D topology (Figure ??). Other structural

7


variations are insignificant as the rest of the copolymer backbone is rigid, and we disregard

them in the analysis.

As noted above, AIB is composed of localized states centered on the acceptor subunits.

The corresponding wave function near the conduction edge does extent to the D-A joint

appreciably (Figure 1d).
Hence, AIB is practically insensitive to the torsion angle.
In

contrast, rotation away from the ideally planar geometry leads to the narrowing of conjugated

states (Figure 2b). Since the torsion angle is larger in the condensed phase than in a free-

standing polymer, the hole effective mass in LCB is thus increased in bulk compared to a

prediction from the 1D model.

The sensitivity of LCB is directly related to the character of the wave function near the D-

A bond. Going from the low energy part of the LCB (near the X point of the Brillouin zone)

to the band edge, the wavefunction develops a nodal plane across the D-A joint (Figure 2c).

The presence of the nodes is associated with increased QP kinetic energy. A close inspection

of various torsion angles reveals that the nodes across the D-A bond are suppressed when

going from 1D to 3D conformation. The band edge is kinetically stabilized (Figure 2a), while

the bottom LCB is insensitive to the rotation. As a result, the single-electron interactions

promote bandwidth reduction in the condensed phase.

While the local properties are clearly responsible for the electronic structure modification,

the non-local many-body effects are equally important and influence the excited states.

These electron-electron interactions are decomposed into two principal contributions: (i) non-

local exchange (due to the fermionic nature of the charge carriers), and (ii) time-dependent

correlations among electrons and holes (which include vdW interactions responsible for the

cohesive energy of the bulk). The significance of the many-body treatment is illustrated

by the fact that LCB and AIB widths increase by ∼ 25% and ∼ 46% if the non-local and

dynamic description is used instead of the common mean-field approach (e.g., in local and

static density functional theory – see Table ??).

We first inspect the behavior of the conjugated states. While the exchange interaction

8


Figure 2: The effect of the characteristic torsion angles between D and A subunits found in
various condensed phases of FBT: (a) The QP energies of LCB at the Brillouin zone center,
Γ, and its boundary, X as a function of the torsion angle. The QP energy of LCB is more
sensitive to torsion at Γ than that at X. (b) The QP valence bandwidth linearly decreases
with the torsion angle. (c) The LCB wavefunction at the donor (D) and the acceptor (A)
joint for Γ and X points of the Brillouin zone. Red and blue colors distinguish the wave
function phase. At Γ, the torsion gradually destroys a nodal plane between D and A, leading
to kinetic stabilization of the QP energy. Conversely, the “bridging character” of LCB at the
X point is little affected by the increased torsion. The error bars in panels a and b represent
the statistical error of the stochastic many-body calculation.

9


typically drives electron localization,53 it surprisingly enhances the dispersion of the delocal-

ized bands along the polymer axis. The energies of states near the valence band maximum

are stabilized much less than at the Brillouin zone boundary, i.e., the X-point (Figure ??a).

In the latter case, there is an increased spatial overlap with a large number of occupied

orbitals, and energy decrease is observed for states near the X-point. The exchange-driven

band widening is a signature of the conjugated bands, and it is not observed otherwise.

To document this, we provide complementary calculations for additional polymer strands

(polyacetylene and polyethylene, with and without conjugated bonds) in the SI (Table ??).

In general, this effect is dramatic for copolymer systems. In the absence of electronic

correlation (which reduces the exchange through dynamical screening), LCB would widen by

an additional 40%. This increase can be paralleled with a (spurious) infinite-range response

to hole localization observed for bare exchange interactions.54

The screening contribution thus changes the picture qualitatively.
It is governed by

the reducible polarizability which is directly related to charge density fluctuations.40 These

correlation effects are dominated by optical (plasmon) excitation that shifts to lower energy

as the crystal momentum increases (Figure ??). The states away from the band edge (i.e.,

closer to the Brillouin zone boundary) have energies approaching the resonant frequency of

the collective charge density oscillations. For the corresponding quasiparticle excitations,

the exchange interaction is strongly attenuated and becomes short range; the QP energies

shift up, and the LCB consequently narrows (Figure ??b).

In the condensed systems, the LCB and UCB remain delocalized only along the polymer,

not across the individual strands (illustrated in Figure 3c). As a result, the conjugated

bands can further flatten. Along the edge-to-edge direction (Γ →Z Figure 3a), both LCB

and UCB are extremely narrow and effectively “molecular” in nature. Neither non-local

exchange nor correlation effects contribute significantly to the quasiparticle energies in this

case. In practice, any band-transport of holes in LCB is significantly hampered along the

edge-to-edge stacking direction.

10


Figure 3: Quasiparticle band structure of FBT in a 3D crystalline domain with relative
contributions of electronic (a) exchange and (b) correlation energies for LCB and AIB. The
contributions are given by the color code and are plotted relative to the band average. The
Γ → Y branch corresponds to the band in the π-π stacking direction; the Γ → X and
Γ → Z branches correspond to the intra-chain and edge-on stacking directions. The inverted
polarity regime is in the Γ → Z, where the band dispersion of AIB is much higher than for the
conjugated bands. (c) Local wave function character is of the selected states at two distinct
points in the Brillouin zone along the Γ → Z direction. The two molecules are depicted in
the edge-on stacking. Both LCB and UCB remain localized on individual strands, but AIB
bridges the polymer chains. Red and blue colors distinguish the wave function phase.

11


However, the localization does not imply that the conjugated bands behave as those in an

isolated strand. Here, the band dispersion is reduced by as much as 60% along the polymer

axis compared to a free-standing copolymer. The flattening is most prominent in the 2D

case (Table ??). Non-local interchain correlations govern the decrease of the LCB width;

they are almost twice as big as the effect of torsion between the D and A subunits. In slabs,

the strong polarization effects lead to the formation of local maxima in LCB and dispersion

narrowing near the Γ point (Figure ??b). This indicates that in near-surface regions, the

valence band-edge may not be characterized by a single crystal momentum vector, and the

fundamental band-gap is likely indirect.

In contrast, cooperative interchain interactions appear along the π − π stacking (Γ →Y

in Figure 3). As a result, the LCB dispersion is the largest along this face-on direction (up to

710 meV). Significant bandwidth suggests a high propensity for efficient band-like transport

of holes within LCB. The reason for the increased bandwidth (despite the strong on-chain

localization) is twofold: first, the packing of chains in bulk is tighter; second, the high

efficient screening allows greater delocalization of the π (and π∗) orbitals above and below

the conjugated framework. Both effects lead to improved interchain “communication”, which

leads to an enlarged bandwidth. In the 3D condensed phase, the LCB width is largest along

the π − π stacking compared to any other direction (Figures 3a and 3b) and indicates an

efficient band-transport of holes.

The lowest conduction band is very different. The impurity states are strongly localized

along the copolymer axis. As a result, local and non-local interactions are insensitive to

crystal momentum, and the band is narrow. Further, there are no increased interactions

along the π − π stacking, and the AIB electronic states thus appear to be molecule-like.

Hence, the acceptor band is flat along Γ → Y as well. There is thus a low likelihood of

electron band-transport in the face-on or polymer axis directions.

AIB, however, unexpectedly exhibits cooperative effects along the edge-to-edge stacking

(Figure 3c). For states near the band minimum (i.e., near Γ), the impurity wavefunction

12


delocalizes across individual copolymer chains. In contrast, a nodal plane appears between

every adjacent polymer for higher crystal momenta due to the increase of the kinetic energy

towards the Brillouin zone boundary (i.e., near Z). The associated QP energy variation leads

to a relatively wide55 dispersion of ∼300 meV in the Γ →Z direction. Besides the kinetic

contribution, the band widening is also driven by a large variation of the exchange energy.

Along Γ →Z, the AIB thus behaves like the conjugated states in the polymer axis. These

properties indicate that AIB can sustain electron transport along the edge-to-edge stacking

direction.

In summary, we investigated a prototypical example of D-A copolymers, FBT, and ex-

plained its electronic structure and the propensity to band transport in the condensed phase.

Our many-body calculations are in excellent agreement with available experimental data and,

for the first time, they provide insight into the quasiparticle (added hole and electron) states

of bulk copolymers. The results show that acceptors, which typically act as strong potential

wells for electrons, form a previously unrecognized “impurity” band. In contrast, the donors

groups are responsible for delocalized lower (valence) and upper (conduction) conjugated

bands. The delocalized states and they surround the acceptor band, but they only mildly

affect each other.

The intra-chain transport is negatively impacted by the condensed phase stacking, which

affects the rotation between the donor and acceptors. On the other hand, electronic states

delocalize across the copolymer strands and form wide bands that likely support efficient

transport. Electronic correlations (responsible for the cohesive van der Waals forces) uni-

versally suppresses band dispersion, but non-local exchange interactions drive it in selected

directions.

The large width of valence bands along the π − π stacking indicates that hole trans-

port is possible in the face-on direction. Surprisingly, we observe a strong propensity for

electron transport along the edge-on stacking within the acceptor impurity band. Hence,

D-A copolymers exhibit an orthogonal ambipolar transport network, which has been so far

13


reported only in heterogeneous mixtures of p-type polymer and a small n-type molecule.56,57

Our results suggest that orthogonal transport of electrons and holes can be achieved in pure

D-A copolymers merely through molecular packing.

Supporting Information Available

The following files are available free of charge.
The Supporting Information provides

additional texts, figures and tables listed below.

Texts: computational methods and details.

Figures: 1D, 2D, and 3D supercells in computations, QP energy diagrams of molecular

and periodic systems, hybridization of FBT frontier orbitals, selected orbitals of UCB, AIB,

and LCB in the 1D system, Comparison of band structures of D-A copolymers with different

acceptors, QP band structures with exchange and correlation energy as functions of the

momentum, graphical solutions to the QP and correlation energies, represnetaion of the

D-A torsion angle.

Tables: parameters in DFT and MBPT calculations, measurements of geometrical con-

stants for different polymers, decomposition of the contribution to the valence bandwidth,

bandwidths of the LCB and AIB, exchange contribution to the valence bandwidth, measure-

ments of torsion angle for FBT strands, convergence of the IP, EA, and gap to the supercell’s

size.

Acknowledgement

The authors want to acknowledge Prof. Thuc-Quyen Nguyen and Prof. Guillermo Bazan for

fruitful discussions. This work was supported by the NSF CAREER award through Grant

No. DMR-1945098. The calculations were performed as part of the XSEDE computational

Project No. TG-CHE180051. Use was made of computational facilities purchased with funds

from the National Science Foundation (CNS-1725797) and administered by the Center for

14


Scientific Computing (CSC). The CSC is supported by the California NanoSystems Institute

and the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC; NSF DMR 1720256)

at UC Santa Barbara.

References

(1) G¨unes, S.; Neugebauer, H.; Sariciftci, N. S. Conjugated Polymer-Based Organic Solar

Cells. Chemical Reviews 2007, 107, 1324–1338.

(2) Heeger, A. J. Semiconducting polymers: the Third Generation. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010,

39, 2354–2371.

(3) Facchetti, A. π-Conjugated Polymers for Organic Electronics and Photovoltaic Cell

Applications. Chemistry of Materials 2011, 23, 733–758.

(4) Wang, C.; Dong, H.; Hu, W.; Liu, Y.; Zhu, D. Semiconducting π-Conjugated Systems in

Field-Effect Transistors: A Material Odyssey of Organic Electronics. Chemical Reviews

2012, 112, 2208–2267.

(5) Yuen, J. D.; Fan, J.; Seifter, J.; Lim, B.; Hufschmid, R.; Heeger, A. J.; Wudl, F. High

Performance Weak Donor-Acceptor Polymers in Thin Film Transistors: Effect of the

Acceptor on Electronic Properties, Ambipolar Conductivity, Mobility, and Thermal

Stability. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2011, 133, 20799–20807.

(6) Li, Y. Molecular Design of Photovoltaic Materials for Polymer Solar Cells: Toward Suit-

able Electronic Energy Levels and Broad Absorption. Accounts of Chemical Research

2012, 45, 723–733.

(7) Zhang, X.; Bronstein, H.; Kronemeijer, A. J.; Smith, J.; Kim, Y.; Kline, R. J.;

Richter, L. J.; Anthopoulos, T. D.; Sirringhaus, H.; Song, K. et al. Molecular ori-

15


gin of high field-effect mobility in an indacenodithiophene-benzothiadiazole copolymer.

Nature Communications 2013, 4, 2238.

(8) Schwartz, B. J. Conjugated Polymers as Molecular Materials: How Chain Conformation

and Film Morphology Influence Energy Transfer and Interchain Interactions. Annual

Review of Physical Chemistry 2003, 54, 141–172, PMID: 12524429.

(9) Noriega, R.; Rivnay, J.; Vandewal, K.; Koch, F. P. V.; Stingelin, N.; Smith, P.;

Toney, M. F.; Salleo, A. A general relationship between disorder, aggregation and

charge transport in conjugated polymers. Nature Materials 2013, 12, 1038–1044.

(10) Oh, J. H.; Lee, H. W.; Mannsfeld, S.; Stoltenberg, R. M.; Jung, E.; Jin, Y. W.;

Kim, J. M.; Yoo, J.-B.; Bao, Z. Solution-processed, high-performance n-channel or-

ganic microwire transistors. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2009,

106, 6065–6070.

(11) Barzegar, H. R.; Larsen, C.; Boulanger, N.; Zettl, A.; Edman, L.; W˚agberg, T. Self-

Assembled PCBM Nanosheets:
A Facile Route to Electronic Layer-on-Layer Het-

erostructures. Nano Letters 2018, 18, 1442–1447.

(12) Sirringhaus, H.; Brown, P. J.; Friend, R. H.; Nielsen, M. M.; Bechgaard, K.; Langeveld-

Voss, B. M. W.; Spiering, A. J. H.; Janssen, R. A. J.; Meijer, E. W.; Herwig, P.

et al. Two-dimensional charge transport in self-organized, high-mobility conjugated

polymers. Nature 1999, 401, 685–688.

(13) Venkateshvaran, D.; Nikolka, M.; Sadhanala, A.; Lemaur, V.; Zelazny, M.; Kepa, M.;

Hurhangee, M.; Kronemeijer, A. J.; Pecunia, V.; Nasrallah, I. et al. Approaching

disorder-free transport in high-mobility conjugated polymers. Nature 2014, 515, 384–

388.

(14) Luo, C.; Kyaw, A. K. K.; Perez, L. A.; Patel, S.; Wang, M.; Grimm, B.; Bazan, G. C.;

Kramer, E. J.; Heeger, A. J. General Strategy for Self-Assembly of Highly Oriented

16


Nanocrystalline Semiconducting Polymers with High Mobility. Nano Letters 2014, 14,

2764–2771.

(15) Li, M.; An, C.; Marszalek, T.; Baumgarten, M.; Yan, H.; M¨ullen, K.; Pisula, W.

Controlling the Surface Organization of Conjugated Donor-Acceptor Polymers by their

Aggregation in Solution. Advanced Materials 2016, 28, 9430–9438.

(16) Hsu, B. B.-Y.; Cheng, C.-M.; Luo, C.; Patel, S. N.; Zhong, C.; Sun, H.; Sherman, J.;

Lee, B. H.; Ying, L.; Wang, M. et al. The Density of States and the Transport Effective

Mass in a Highly Oriented Semiconducting Polymer: Electronic Delocalization in 1D.

Advanced Materials 2015, 27, 7759–7765.

(17) Sakanoue, T.; Sirringhaus, H. Band-like temperature dependence of mobility in a

solution-processed organic semiconductor. Nature Materials 2010, 9, 736–740.

(18) Yamashita, Y.; Tsurumi, J.; Hinkel, F.; Okada, Y.; Soeda, J.; Zajaczkowski, W.; Baum-

garten, M.; Pisula, W.; Matsui, H.; M¨ullen, K. et al. Transition Between Band and

Hopping Transport in Polymer Field-Effect Transistors. Advanced Materials 2014, 26,

8169–8173.

(19) Kim, G.; Kang, S.-J.; Dutta, G. K.; Han, Y.-K.; Shin, T. J.; Noh, Y.-Y.; Yang, C. A

Thienoisoindigo-Naphthalene Polymer with Ultrahigh Mobility of 14.4 cm2/V·s That

Substantially Exceeds Benchmark Values for Amorphous Silicon Semiconductors. Jour-

nal of the American Chemical Society 2014, 136, 9477–9483.

(20) Sutton, C.; Risko, C.; Br´edas, J.-L. Noncovalent Intermolecular Interactions in Organic

Electronic Materials: Implications for the Molecular Packing vs Electronic Properties

of Acenes. Chemistry of Materials 2016, 28, 3–16.

(21) Norton, J. E.; Br´edas, J.-L. Polarization Energies in Oligoacene Semiconductor Crys-

tals. Journal of the American Chemical Society 2008, 130, 12377–12384.

17


(22) Nayak, P. K.; Periasamy, N. Calculation of electron affinity, ionization potential, trans-

port gap, optical band gap and exciton binding energy of organic solids using solvation

model and DFT. Organic Electronics 2009, 10, 1396–1400.

(23) Difley, S.; Wang, L.-P.; Yeganeh, S.; Yost, S. R.; Voorhis, T. V. Electronic Properties

of Disordered Organic Semiconductors via QM/MM Simulations. Accounts of Chemical

Research 2010, 43, 995–1004.

(24) Ryno, S. M.; Lee, S. R.; Sears, J. S.; Risko, C.; Br´edas, J.-L. Electronic Polarization

Effects upon Charge Injection in Oligoacene Molecular Crystals: Description via a

Polarizable Force Field. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 2013, 117, 13853–13860.

(25) Refaely-Abramson, S.; Sharifzadeh, S.; Jain, M.; Baer, R.; Neaton, J. B.; Kronik, L.

Gap renormalization of molecular crystals from density-functional theory. Physical Re-

view B 2013, 88, 081204.

(26) Poelking, C.;
Tietze, M.;
Elschner, C.;
Olthof, S.;
Hertel, D.;
Baumeier, B.;

W¨urthner, F.; Meerholz, K.; Leo, K.; Andrienko, D. Impact of mesoscale order on

open-circuit voltage in organic solar cells. Nature Materials 2015, 14, 434–439.

(27) Kang, Y.; Jeon, S. H.; Cho, Y.; Han, S. Ab initio calculation of ionization potential and

electron affinity in solid-state organic semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B 2016, 93, 035131.

(28) Li, J.; D’Avino, G.; Duchemin, I.; Beljonne, D.; Blase, X. Combining the Many-Body

GW Formalism with Classical Polarizable Models: Insights on the Electronic Structure

of Molecular Solids. The Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters 2016, 7, 2814–2820.

(29) Sun, H.; Ryno, S.; Zhong, C.; Ravva, M. K.; Sun, Z.; K¨orzd¨orfer, T.; Br´edas, J.-L.

Ionization Energies, Electron Affinities, and Polarization Energies of Organic Molecu-

lar Crystals: Quantitative Estimations from a Polarizable Continuum Model (PCM)-

Tuned Range-Separated Density Functional Approach. Journal of Chemical Theory and

Computation 2016, 12, 2906–2916.

18


(30) Li, J.; D’Avino, G.; Duchemin, I.; Beljonne, D.; Blase, X. Accurate description of

charged excitations in molecular solids from embedded many-body perturbation theory.

Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97, 035108.

(31) Bhandari, S.; Cheung, M. S.; Geva, E.; Kronik, L.; Dunietz, B. D. Fundamental Gaps

of Condensed-Phase Organic Semiconductors from Single-Molecule Calculations using

Polarization-Consistent Optimally Tuned Screened Range-Separated Hybrid Function-

als. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2018, 14, 6287–6294.

(32) Halls, J. J. M.; Cornil, J.; dos Santos, D. A.; Silbey, R.; Hwang, D.-H.; Holmes, A. B.;

Br´edas, J. L.; Friend, R. H. Charge- and energy-transfer processes at polymer/polymer

interfaces: A joint experimental and theoretical study. Phys. Rev. B 1999, 60, 5721–

5727.

(33) Cornil, J.; Gueli, I.; Dkhissi, A.; Sancho-Garcia, J. C.; Hennebicq, E.; Calbert, J. P.;

Lemaur, V.; Beljonne, D.; Br´edas, J. L. Electronic and optical properties of polyfluorene

and fluorene-based copolymers: A quantum-chemical characterization. The Journal of

Chemical Physics 2003, 118, 6615–6623.

(34) Br´edas, J. L.; Th´emans, B.; Fripiat, J. G.; Andr´e, J. M.; Chance, R. R. Highly conduct-

ing polyparaphenylene, polypyrrole, and polythiophene chains: An ab initio study of

the geometry and electronic-structure modifications upon doping. Phys. Rev. B 1984,

29, 6761–6773.

(35) Br´edas, J. L.; Street, G. B.; Th´emans, B.; Andr´e, J. M. Organic polymers based on

aromatic rings (polyparaphenylene, polypyrrole, polythiophene): Evolution of the elec-

tronic properties as a function of the torsion angle between adjacent rings. The Journal

of Chemical Physics 1985, 83, 1323–1329.

(36) Cheng, C.; Geng, H.; Yi, Y.; Shuai, Z. Super-exchange-induced high performance charge

19


transport in donor-acceptor copolymers. Journal of Materials Chemistry C 2017, 5,

3247–3253.

(37) He, F.; Cheng, C.; Geng, H.; Yi, Y.; Shuai, Z. Effect of donor length on electronic

structures and charge transport polarity for DTDPP-based D-A copolymers: a com-

putational study based on a super-exchange model. Journal of Materials Chemistry A

2018, 6, 11985–11993.

(38) Br´edas, J.-L.; Li, Y.; Sun, H.; Zhong, C. Why Can High Charge-Carrier Mobilities

be Achieved Along p-Conjugated Polymer Chains with Alternating Donor-Acceptor

Moieties? Advanced Theory and Simulations 2018, 1, 1800016.

(39) Woods, L. M.;
Dalvit, D. A. R.;
Tkatchenko, A.;
Rodriguez-Lopez, P.;
Ro-

driguez, A. W.; Podgornik, R. Materials perspective on Casimir and van der Waals

interactions. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2016, 88, 045003.

(40) Martin, R. M.; Reining, L.; Ceperley, D. M. Interacting Electrons: Theory and Com-

putational Approaches; Cambridge University Press, 2016.

(41) Neuhauser, D.; Gao, Y.; Arntsen, C.; Karshenas, C.; Rabani, E.; Baer, R. Breaking the

Theoretical Scaling Limit for Predicting Quasiparticle Energies: The Stochastic GW

Approach. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014, 113, 076402.

(42) Vlˇcek, V.; Rabani, E.; Neuhauser, D.; Baer, R. Stochastic GW Calculations for

Molecules. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2017, 13, 4997–5003, PMID:

28876912.

(43) Vlˇcek, V.; Li, W.; Baer, R.; Rabani, E.; Neuhauser, D. Swift GW beyond 10,000

electrons using sparse stochastic compression. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 98, 075107.

(44) Vlˇcek, V. Stochastic Vertex Corrections: Linear Scaling Methods for Accurate Quasi-

particle Energies. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 2019, 15, 6254–6266.

20


(45) Blase, X.; Attaccalite, C.; Olevano, V. First-principles GW calculations for fullerenes,

porphyrins, phtalocyanine, and other molecules of interest for organic photovoltaic

applications. Phys. Rev. B 2011, 83, 115103.

(46) Mai, C.-K.; Zhou, H.; Zhang, Y.; Henson, Z. B.; Nguyen, T.-Q.; Heeger, A. J.;

Bazan, G. C. Facile Doping of Anionic Narrow-Band-Gap Conjugated Polyelectrolytes

During Dialysis. Angewandte Chemie International Edition 2013, 52, 12874–12878.

(47) Mai, C.-K.; Russ, B.; Fronk, S. L.; Hu, N.; Chan-Park, M. B.; Urban, J. J.; Segal-

man, R. A.; Chabinyc, M. L.; Bazan, G. C. Varying the ionic functionalities of con-

jugated polyelectrolytes leads to both p- and n-type carbon nanotube composites for

flexible thermoelectrics. Energy & Environmental Science 2015, 8, 2341–2346.

(48) Cui, Q.; Bazan, G. C. Narrow Band Gap Conjugated Polyelectrolytes. Accounts of

Chemical Research 2018, 51, 202–211.

(49) Zhou, H.; Yang, L.; You, W. Rational Design of High Performance Conjugated Polymers

for Organic Solar Cells. Macromolecules 2012, 45, 607–632.

(50) Duan, C.; Huang, F.; Cao, Y. Recent development of push-pull conjugated polymers

for bulk-heterojunction photovoltaics: rational design and fine tailoring of molecular

structures. Journal of Materials Chemistry 2012, 22, 10416–10434.

(51) The one-body terms include the single particle non-interacting kinetic energy and ex-

ternal as well as the Hartree potential energies.

(52) The external and Hartree potentials are manifestedly local; the non-interacting kinetic

energy is determined purely by a Kohn-Sham map using a local potential. Note that

the many-body calculations use a perturbative correction with the Kohn-Sham results

as a starting point. The non-local contributions are included in the self-energy term,

i.e., it is part of the electron-electron interaction.

21


(53) Mori-S´anchez, P.; Cohen, A. J.; Yang, W. Localization and Delocalization Errors in

Density Functional Theory and Implications for Band-Gap Prediction. Phys. Rev. Lett.

2008, 100, 146401.

(54) Vlˇcek, V.; Eisenberg, H. R.; Steinle-Neumann, G.; Neuhauser, D.; Rabani, E.; Baer, R.

Spontaneous Charge Carrier Localization in Extended One-Dimensional Systems. Phys.

Rev. Lett. 2016, 116, 186401.

(55) For comparison, this value is practically identical to the dispersion of the conjugated

bands along the polymer chain in the 2D system (c.f., Figure ??).

(56) Huang, W.; Markwart, J. C.; Briseno, A. L.; Hayward, R. C. Orthogonal Ambipolar

Semiconductor Nanostructures for Complementary Logic Gates. ACS Nano 2016, 10,

8610–8619.

(57) Huang, W.; Hayward, R. C. Orthogonal Ambipolar Semiconductors with Inherently

Multi-Dimensional Responses for the Discriminative Sensing of Chemical Vapors. ACS

Applied Materials & Interfaces 2018, 10, 33353–33359.

22


