1 

 

A semi-analytical model for the scale-dependent friction of nanosized 

asperity 

 

Jian Wang, Weike Yuan, Jianjun Bian and Gangfeng Wang* 

Department of Engineering Mechanics, SVL, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, 

P. R. China. 

*E-mail: wanggf@mail.xjtu.edu.cn 

 

Abstract 

The friction of a nanosized sphere in commensurate contact with a flat substrate 

is investigated by performing molecular dynamics simulations. Particular focus is on 

the distribution of shear stress within the contact region. It is noticed that within the 

slip zone, the local friction coefficient defined by the ratio of shear stress to normal 

pressure declines monotonically as the distance to contact center increases. With the 

lateral force increasing, the slip zone expands inwards from the contact edge. At the 

same time, the local friction coefficient at the contact edge decreases continuously, 

while at the dividing between the slip and stick zones keeps nearly invariant. These 

characteristics are distinctly different from the prediction of the conventional 

Cattaneo-Mindlin model assuming a constant local friction coefficient within the slip 

zone. An analytical model is advanced in view of such new features and generalized 

based on numerous atomic simulations. This model not only accurately characterizes 

the interfacial shear stress, but also explains the size-dependence of static friction of 

single nanosized asperity.  

 

Keywords: Single-asperity friction; Shear stress; Slip zone; Scale-dependent friction.  

 
 


2 

 

1. Introduction 

For the macroscopic dry friction between two sliding solids, the classical 

Amontons-Coulomb’s law is still the most important understanding to date. This 

phenomenological friction theory states that the lateral friction force is always 

proportional to the normal load by a constant friction coefficient, which is 

independent of the contact area, surface roughness and sliding velocity [1]. Although 

such linear characteristic was originally summarized from a global aspect, it has been 

widely employed to correlate the local shear stress with the corresponding contact 

pressure at local slipping spots [2]. 

In the framework of the well-known Cattaneo-Mindlin (CM) model, relative 

motion occurs at the point of contacting interface where the shear stress exceeds the 

local strength equaling the normal pressure times a constant local coefficient of 

friction [2],[3]. This classical model predicts a continuous transition from partial slip 

contact to overall sliding. When the entire contact region comes into slipping stage, 

the lateral friction force acting on the sliding body reaches maximum. Moreover, the 

maximum friction force equals the normal load multiplied with a global coefficient of 

friction, which is consistent with the local one. On the other hand, for the adhesive 

contact problem, the assumption of pressure independent shear stress is commonly 

adopted in the slip zone [7][9]. In this case, the friction force is equal to the real 

contact area times a constant shear strength. These analytical models have been 

applied to characterize the friction process of some single asperity experiments 

[10][13]. 

When the contact scale comes to nanometers, the aforementioned continuum 

analyses always break down because some unconventional features have not been 

involved, e.g., the repeatedly reported scale-dependent frictional behavior [14][20]. 

To study the scale effects in single asperity friction, Hurtado and Kim [16] proposed a 

dislocation gliding model to calculate the friction force. It was shown that when the 

contact area is smaller than a critical value, the interfacial slip is concurrent with a 

constant friction stress. However, for larger contact size, overall sliding advances 


3 

 

when a dislocation loop sweeps through the contact region, and the friction stress 

would decrease with the contact area increasing. By using the Peierls-Nabarro model 

of interface dislocation field, Gao presented the size dependence of single asperity 

friction that evolves from homogeneous slip mode to dislocation-slip-like 

inhomogeneous slip mode [18]. Recently, for the non-adhesive commensurate contact 

between a rigid sphere and a flat elastic substrate, Sharp et al. calculated the friction 

force as a function of contact scale by using a Green’s function molecular dynamics 

method [19]. Their results revealed that the static friction coefficient is dependent on 

the contact area, which is constant at small contact size and fits to a −2/3 power law 

relation at larger contact size.  

In this work, the frictional behavior of single spherical asperity in commensurate 

contact with a flat substrate is simulated by using complete molecular dynamics (MD) 

with purely repulsive tip-substrate interaction. Scale-dependent frictional behavior as 

displayed in the previous study [19] is confirmed. More importantly, details of the 

distribution of shear stress within the contact region are examined carefully. It is 

found that in the slip zone, the local friction coefficient defined by the ratio of shear 

stress to normal pressure essentially decreases with the distance to contact center 

increasing, quite different from the existing frictional models using constant local 

friction coefficient [2][3]. Such new characteristic of the local shear stress is 

generalized based on atomic simulation results, which gives rise to an accurate 

analytical model for the scale-dependent friction of single asperity at nanoscale.   

 

2. Simulation Method 

Fig. 1 depicts the model used in present study. The substrate is made of single 

crystal copper with the dimension of 222211 nm3. Substrates with larger size are 

also examined, and no significant difference is observed in the simulation results. To 

lower the computational burden, this sized substrate is adopted for all the following 

simulations. The lattice orientations along the x-, y- and z-directions are [110], [001] 

and [11̅0], respectively. A rigid spherical tip with radius R is created by bending a 


4 

 

thin atomic layer with the same lattice orientations as the substrate. Thus, the 

contacting surfaces are specified as [001], and commensurate contact can be 

achieved between the tip and substrate. Periodic boundary conditions are applied 

along both x- and z-directions, and the 0.5 nm-height atom layer at the bottom of the 

substrate is fixed in perfect lattice. 

The embedded atom method (EAM) [21] is utilized to describe the atomic 

interactions in the substrate. Based on EAM, for an atomic system containing N 

atoms, the energy of the i-th atom is given by 

𝐸𝑖 = 𝐹(𝜌̅𝑖) +

1

2 ∑
𝜙(𝑟𝑖𝑗)
𝑁
𝑖≠𝑗
,  
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 

where F(𝜌̅𝑖) is the embedded energy related to the electron density 𝜌̅𝑖 at the position 

of the i-th atom, (rij) is the pair potential interaction, and rij represents the distance 

between atom pair i and j. A potential of copper parameterized by Mishin et al. [22] 

is adopted here, which has been widely used to investigate mechanical properties and 

deformation mechanisms of various nanostructures [23]. 

To implement the non-adhesive contact, the atomic interaction between two 

opposing contact surfaces is described through a repulsive Lennard-Jones potential, 

𝐸 = 4𝜀 [(

𝜎

𝑟𝑖𝑗)

12

− (

𝜎

𝑟𝑖𝑗)

6
] + 𝜀,   𝑟𝑖𝑗 < 21/6𝜎,  
(2) 

where  governs the interaction intensity, and  is the equilibrium spacing. The 

values are calculated based on the cohesive energy and the lattice structure of single 

crystal copper, which yields  = 0.423 eV and  = 2.325 Å. 

The large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulation package, 

LAMMPS, is adopted to conduct the simulations [24], and the time evolution of the 

atomic system is implemented within the fra mework of canonical ensemble (NVT). 

After the construction of the atomic model, energy relaxation is first performed based 

on a conjugate gradient algorithm to get an energy-favorable initial state. To exclude 

the thermal effects, temperature in the simulations is set as 0.001 K. After the static 

energy relaxation, the atomic system is dynamically equilibrated at 0.001 K for 50 ps. 

Then, a loading scheme similar as in [25] is implemented to simulate the contact and 


5 

 

friction process. A small vertical displacement uy is gradually exerted on the tip 

resulting in a circular contact region with radius a. The corresponding normal load P 

is computed by summing up the normal pressure within the contact area. In the 

following friction stage, the tip is further pulled along the x-direction with a constant 

speed of 0.01 Å/ps.  

To analyze the friction process at atomic scale, the force state of each atom in 

the substrate is traced. For the tangential force exerted on every single atom, we only 

consider the component along the sliding direction (x-direction). It should be pointed 

out that even only normal load is applied, there is some local shear stress on the 

contact surface. This initial atomic force state before the tip being pulled laterally is 

chosen as a reference. When a specified lateral displacement ux is applied on the tip, 

the incremental portion of the tangential force of each atom is defined as the atomic 

friction force. Summing up the atomic friction force over all contacting atoms yields 

the total lateral force on the tip F. Accordingly, the local shear stress at a specific 

atom site is obtained by dividing the atomic friction force with the average contact 

area of a single atom. At each site, the ratio of the local shear stress to the local 

normal pressure defines the local friction coefficient. In addition, the relative 

tangential displacements between the contacting surfaces of the tip and substrate are 

examined. The contact area is divided into a central stick zone and a surrounding slip 

zone according to whether the relative displacement is zero or not. 

 

3. Results and discussions 

Fig. 2 displays the variation of the lateral force on the tip with radius R = 200 nm, 

normalized by the corresponding normal load, as a function of lateral displacement. 

For a given normal load, the lateral force first increases monotonically as the tip 

moves along the x-direction. By examining the atomic displacements on the contact 

surface, it is found that in the initial stage the slip zone broadens continuously with 

the lateral displacement increasing, while the inner stick zone shrinks inwards. After 

reaching a peak, the lateral force drops gradually till to a minimum with further tip 


6 

 

lateral displacement. The peak lateral force is defined as the static friction force of the 

single asperity. Dividing the static friction force by the relevant normal load derives 

the static friction coefficient. Notably, it is found that the static friction coefficient, i.e., 

the peaks of the curves in Fig. 2, declines with the increasing of normal load. In 

addition, the appearance of the peak lateral force is also postponed. Such load- or 

scale-dependency of static friction was analyzed based on the assumption of a 

constant local friction coefficient in the slip zone [19].  

Fig. 3a displays the distribution of local shear stress on the contact surface under 

normal load P = 1.2 keV/Å. A rotationally symmetric feature is observed. To get more 

quantitative analysis, the local shear stress along five directions ( = 0°, 45°, 90°, 

135°, 180°) is plotted in Fig. 3b. The well reserved rotation symmetry could be used 

as a simplification in the following discussion. It is seen that in the central stick zone, 

the shear stress steadily increases with the distance to contact center increasing and 

reaches to a peak at the boundary between the stick and slip zones. In the slip zone, 

the stress declines gradually with the distance away from the center. 

For comparison, the shear stress based on CM model under the same normal and 

lateral force is also plotted in Fig. 3b, which has the following expression, 

 
𝜏(𝑟) = {

𝜇𝑚𝑝0 (1 −

𝑟2

𝑎2)

1/2

− 𝜇𝑚𝑝0

𝑐

𝑎 (1 −

𝑟2

𝑐2)

1/2

, 𝑟 ≤ 𝑐

𝜇𝑚𝑝0 (1 −

𝑟2

𝑎2)

1/2

, 𝑐 < 𝑟 ≤ 𝑎

, 
(3) 

where r is the distance to the contact center, m is a constant local friction coefficient 

and here takes the value of 0.7 as in [19], p0 is the normal pressure in the center of the 

contact, a is the contact radius, and c is the radius of the stick zone.  

In the CM model, the normal pressure in the contact region is assumed to obey 

the Hertzian theory. In MD simulations, the normal pressure also agrees well with the 

distribution of Hertzian pressure. Thus, the contact radius is determined by a = 

(3PR/4E*)1/3 when the normal load P, tip radius R and indentation modulus E* are 

specified, and p0 = 3P/(2a2). Moreover, the radius ratio of the stick zone and contact 

region is given by c/a = [1F/(mP)]1/3 with F being the lateral force. It is shown in 

Fig. 3b that CM model is unable to accurately describe the distribution of local shear 


7 

 

stress. Under the same normal and lateral loading, CM model overestimates the size 

of stick zone. More importantly, the drop tendency of shear stress of CM model in the 

slip zone is remarkably different from that of MD simulations.  

To advance the characterization of local shear stress, we further examine the 

local friction coefficient, i.e. the ratio of local shear stress to local normal pressure 

within the contact region. For a given normal load P = 1.2 keV/Å, we plot the local 

friction coefficient along the path  = 0° in Fig. 4. It is shown that in the slip zone, the 

local friction coefficient declines with the increasing of the distance to contact center, 

rather than being constant. At the dividing boundary between stick and slip zones 

appears the maximum local friction coefficient, which approximately equals to the 

coefficient of static friction for a single atom [19]. As the lateral displacement 

increases, the maximum value of local friction coefficient within the slip zone keeps 

nearly unchanged, while the local friction coefficient at the contact periphery 

decreases gradually. Once the local friction coefficient at the contact edge reduces to 

zero, a dislocation will nuclear here and sweep across the whole contact surface 

rapidly, inducing a burst overall sliding.  

Based on above characteristics, we find the local friction coefficient in the slip 

zone can be well described by, 

 
𝜇𝑙(𝑟) =

𝜏(𝑟)

𝑝(𝑟) = 𝜇𝑚 + 𝛽𝜇𝑚 [(1 −

𝑟2

𝑎2)

3
2 − (1 −

𝑐2

𝑎2)

3
2] , 𝑐 < 𝑟 ≤ 𝑎, 
(4) 

where p(r) is the local normal pressure following the Hertzian prediction, μm is the 

maximum of local frictional coefficient and takes 0.7, and β is a dimensionless 

parameter related to the normal load, the tip radius and the material properties. From 

Eq. (4), the local friction coefficient at the edge of contact region is derived as, 

 
1 −

𝜇𝑙(𝑎)

𝜇𝑚 = 𝛽 (1 −

𝑐2

𝑎2)

3/2

.  
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 

By implementing a series of atomic simulations for the indenter with radius R = 

200 nm, the local friction coefficients at the contact edge under different normal load 

are captured. As shown in Fig. 5, good linear relationship between 1l(a)/m and 

(1c2/a2)3/2 is observed, which means  is independent of the lateral force. Next, we 


8 

 

will attempt to derive the explicit expression of the parameter , which is the key of 

accurate characterization of shear stress. 

In existing study, it has been shown that the scale-/load-dependent frictional 

behavior can be uniquely determined by a dimensionless parameter defined by the 

ratio of contact radius to the minimum core width of the dislocation slipping across 

the contact interface [19]. Using the normal contact pressure predicted by Hertzian 

theory, the dimensionless parameter is expressed by  

𝑎

𝑏 = (

9𝐸∗𝑃2

2𝑅 )

1
3 𝜇𝑚

𝜋𝐺𝑑, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 

where b is the core width of interface dislocation, G is shear modulus, and d is the 

minimum lattice period along the sliding direction. In Fig. 6, the value of  is plotted 

against the characteristic ratio a/b. The simulation results of indenters with radius R = 

100 nm and 150 nm are added. It is found that β is approximately proportional to the 

ratio a/b. Direct linear fitting gives 

        𝛽 = 0.6 ∙ 𝑎/𝑏 = 0.6 ∙ (

9𝐸∗𝑃2

2𝑅 )

1
3 𝜇𝑚

𝜋𝐺𝑑.  
 
 
 
 
 
(7)   

Now, with Eqs. (4) and (7), the local shear stress in the slip zone can be well 

characterized in a general and explicit manner. In the stick zone, we employ the 

expression in the same form as CM model to describe the distribution of shear stress. 

As a result, the shear stress in the whole contact area is expressed as 

 
𝜏(𝑟) = {

𝜇𝑚𝑝0 (1 −

𝑟2

𝑎2)

1/2

− 𝜇𝑚𝑝0

𝑐

𝑎 (1 −

𝑟2

𝑐2)

1/2

, 𝑟 ≤ 𝑐

𝜇𝑙(𝑟)𝑝0 (1 −

𝑟2

𝑎2)

1/2

, 𝑐 < 𝑟 ≤ 𝑎

, 
(8) 

where 𝜇𝑙(𝑟) is given by Eqs. (4) and (7).  

Compared with our MD simulation results shown in Fig. 3, this modified shear 

stress distribution shows great accuracy in both stick zone and slip zone. When the tip 

radius is much larger or the normal force is much smaller, β is negligible and the 

present model reduces to CM model. However, when the tip radius is relatively small 

and thus β is appreciable, the present model will give a noticeable correction to the 

shear stress.  

The total lateral force acting on the tip can be obtained by integrating the local 


9 

 

shear stress over the entire contact region,  

 
𝐹 = 𝜇𝑚𝑃 [1 −

𝑐3

𝑎3 −

𝛽

2 (1 −

𝑐2

𝑎2)

3
], 
(9) 

where the third term in the bracket is the correction arising from the scale effects. Fig. 

7 plots the normalized lateral force F/(mP) against the normalized width of the slip 

zone 1c/a. All of our MD simulation results are in good agreement with the 

prediction of the scale-dependent model given by Eq. (9).  

According to Eq. (9), the radius of stick zone associated with the maximum 

lateral force should be determined by (F/mP)/(c/a) = 0, which yields 

𝛽 (1 −

𝑐2

𝑎2)

2

−

𝑐

𝑎 = 0.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) 

On the other hand, we must bear in mind that when the local friction coefficient 

at the contact edge decreases to zero, the overall sliding would start. At this critical 

point, the radius of the stick zone satisfies 

𝑐

𝑎 = √1 − 𝛽−2/3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 

To predict the maximum static friction force 𝐹𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐, these two critical conditions 

Eq. (10) and (11) are compared in Fig. 8. There are two regimes for the determination 

of maximum static friction force. In regime I where β < 2.83, as the lateral 

displacement increases, the width of slip zone 1c/a first reaches the red dash line 

given by Eq. (10). Thus, the maximum static friction force should be the maximum of 

Eq. (9). In contrast, in regime II where β > 2.83, the width of slip zone 1c/a would 

stop at the blue dot-dash line given by Eq. (11). At this moment, the overall contacting 

sliding would initiate. The lateral force on the tip will not continue to increase any 

more. Thus, the maximum static friction force should be just the value of Eq. (9) with 

the radius of stick zone given by Eq. (11).  

From Fig. 8, we can also recognize two different sliding modes. For β < 1, the 

local friction coefficient at contact edge is always positive since Eq. (11) will never be 

reached. Only when the stick zone shrinks to zero, does the overall sliding happens. 

On the other hand, for β > 1, overall sliding takes place once the local coefficient at 

contact age decreases to zero.  


10 

 

For β > 2.83 (i.e., in the regime II), based on the critical radius of stick zone from 

Eq. (11), the coefficient of global static friction is derived as 

/𝜇𝑚 = 𝐹𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑐/𝑃 = 1 − (1 − 𝛽−2/3)

3/2 −

1

2𝛽,  
 
 
 
(12) 

which is dependent only on the scale parameter . By eliminating the high order terms, 

it gives 

/𝜇𝑚 ≈

3

2 𝛽−2/3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) 

In Fig. 9, the static friction coefficients of single asperities with different radius 

(R = 100, 150, 200 nm) under different normal load are displayed. Note that the scale 

of our complete atomic simulations is limited by the computation capacity. For further 

testifying our model, we also present the results of Sharp et al. [19]. It is found that 

the prediction of our scale-dependent model agrees well with the simulations results. 

For  < 0.1, the static friction coefficient  is nearly constant and equals to the 

maximum local friction coefficient. For  > 10,  varies as the 2/3 power of  as 

described by Eq. (13), which is consistent with the scaling results in [19]. In addition, 

the transition between these two regimes is successfully characterized. It should be 

pointed out that Sharp et al. [19] also calculated the friction of the cases involving 

multi-dislocation motion. This complicated regime is out of our model and needs to 

be explored in the future. 

 

4. Conclusion 

In summary, this paper presented a semi-analytical model for the 

scale-dependent friction of a spherical tip sliding on a flat substrate. As contrast to the 

classical CM model, our MD simulation results demonstrate that the local friction 

coefficient in the slip zone is not a constant, but declines from a maximum at the 

stick/slip zone boundary till the contact edge. By introducing a dimensionless scale 

parameter , a modified model is proposed to describe the contact shear stress in both 

the stick and slip zones. Based on this model, the global static friction coefficient is a 

constant when  is smaller than 0.1, and decreases when  increases further. For the 


11 

 

asperity of small size with  larger than 10, the static friction coefficient varies as the 

2/3 power of . By comparing with the numerical simulation results, it is found this 

model has successfully captured the unconventional features of shear stress 

distribution as well as the size dependency of static friction coefficient at nanoscale.  

 

Acknowledgement 

Support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 

11525209) is acknowledged. 

 

 
 


12 

 

Reference 

[1] Dowson D. History of tribology. Longman Inc New York 1998. 

[2] Popov VL. Contact mechanics and friction. Springer Berlin 2010. 

[3] Johnson KL. Contact Mechanics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1985. 

[4] Jäger J. A new principle in contact mechanics. ASME J. Tribol. 1998; 120: 

677-684. 

[5] Ciavarella M. The generalized Cattaneo partial slip plane contact problem. 

I-theory. Int. J. Solids Struct. 1998; 35: 2349–2362. 

[6] Ciavarella M. Transition from stick to slip in Hertzian contact with "Griffith" 

friction: The Cattaneo-Mindlin problem revisited. J. Mech. Phys. Solids. 2015; 

84: 313-324. 

[7] Johnson KL. Adhesion and friction between a smooth elastic spherical asperity 

and a plane surface. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A. 1997; 453: 163-179. 

[8] Sari OT, Adams GG, Müftü S. Nano-scale effects in the sliding and rolling of a 

cylinder on a substrate. ASME J. Appl. Mech. 2005; 72: 633-640. 

[9] Adams GG. Stick, partial slip and sliding in the plane strain micro contacts of 

two elastic bodies. R. Soc. Open Sci. 2014; 1: 140363. 

[10] Berman A, Drummond C, Israelachvili JN. Amonton’s law at the molecular 

level. Tribol. Letter. 1998; 4: 95-101. 

[11] Homola AM, Israelachvili JN, McGuiggan PM, and Gee ML. Fundamental 

experimental studies in tribology: The transition from “interfacial” friction of 

undamaged molecularly smooth surfaces to “normal” friction with wear. Wear. 

1990; 136: 65-83. 

[12] Lantz MA, O'Shea SJ, Welland ME, and Johnson KL. Atomic-force-microscope 

study of contact area and friction on NbSe2. Phys. Rev. B. 1997; 55: 

10776-10785. 

[13] Schwarz UD, Zwörner O, Köster P, and Wiesendanger R. Quantitative analysis 

of the frictional properties of solid materials at low loads. I. Carbon compounds. 

Phys. Rev. B. 1997; 56: 6987-6996. 

[14] Riedo E, Gnecco E, Bennewitz R, Meyer E, and Brune H. Interaction potential 

and hopping dynamics governing sliding friction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003; 91: 

084502. 

[15] Socoliuc A, Bennewitz R, Gnecco E, and Meyer E. Transition from stick–slip to 


13 

 

continuous sliding in atomic friction: entering a new regime of ultra low friction. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004; 92: 134301. 

[16] Hurtado JA, Kim KS. Scale effects in friction of single-asperity contacts. I. From 

concurrent slip to single-dislocation-assisted slip. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A. 1999; 

455: 3363-3384.  

[17] Zhang LC, Johnson KL, Cheong WCD. Molecular dynamics study of scale 

effects on the friction of single-asperity contacts. Tribol. Lett. 2001; 10(1–2): 

23–28. 

[18] Gao YF. A Peierls perspective on mechanisms of atomic friction. J. Mech. Phys. 

Solids. 2010; 58: 2023–2032. 

[19] Sharp TA, Pastewka L, Ligneres VL, Robbins MO. Scale- and load-dependent 

friction in commensurate sphere-on-flat contacts. Phys. Rev. B. 2012; 96(15): 

155436. 

[20] Li QY, Kim KS. Micromechanics of friction: effects of nanometre-scale 

roughness. Proc. R. Soc. A 2008; 464: 1319-1343. 

[21] Daw MS, Baskes MI. Embedded-atom method: derivation and application to 

impurities, surfaces, and other defects in metals. Phys. Rev. B. 1984; 29(12): 

6443. 

[22] Mishin Y, Mehl MJ, Papaconstantopoulos DA, Voter AF, Kress JD. Structural 

stability and lattice defects in copper: ab initio, tight-binding, and 

embedded-atom calculations. Phys. Rev. B. 2001; 63(22): 224106. 

[23] Tao W, Cao P, Park HS. Atomistic simulation of the rate-dependent 

ductile-to-brittle failure transition in bicrystalline metal nanowires. Nano Lett. 

2018, 18(2): 1296-1304. 

[24] Plimpton S. Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics. J. 

Comput. Phys. 1995; 117(1): 1–19. 

[25] Sun XY, Qi YZ, Ouyang W, Feng XQ, Li QY. Energy corrugation in 

atomic-scale friction on graphite revisited by molecular dynamics simulations. 

Acta Mech. Sin. 2016; 32(4): 604-610. 

 

 
 
 


14 

 

Figure captions: 

Fig. 1 Schematic of the simulation model. P, uy, F, ux, and 2a indicate the normal 

load, the normal displacement, the lateral force, the lateral displacement of the tip, 

and the diameter of the contact area, respectively. 

 

Fig. 2 The ratio of the lateral force to the normal, F/P, varies with the lateral 

displacement of the tip. 

 

Fig. 3 (a) Distribution of local shear stress on contact surface, and (b) Variation of 

shear stress along five paths. 

 

Fig. 4 Distribution of the local shear stress normalized by the local normal pressure 

along the path  = 0° under different lateral displacement.   

 

Fig. 5 Dependence of 1μl(a)/μm on (1c2/a2)3/2 under different normal load. 

 

Fig. 6 Dependence of β on the dimensionless ratio a/b. 

 

Fig. 7 Variation of the resultant lateral force with respect to the width of slip zone.  

 

Fig. 8 Determination of the critical width of slip zone for different scale parameter β. 
 

Fig. 9 Static friction coefficient varies with the dimensionless parameter β.  

 
 


15 

 

 

Fig. 1 Schematic of the simulation model. P, uy, F, ux, and 2a indicate the normal 

load, the normal displacement, the lateral force, the lateral displacement of the tip, 

and the diameter of the contact area, respectively. 

 
 


16 

 

 

Fig. 2 The ratio of the lateral force to the normal, F/P, varies with the lateral 

displacement of the tip. 

 
 


17 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 (a) Distribution of local shear stress on contact surface, and (b) Variation of 

shear stress along five paths. 

 
 


18 

 

 

Fig. 4 Distribution of the local shear stress normalized by the local normal pressure 

along the path  = 0° under different lateral displacement.  

 
 


19 

 

 

Fig. 5 Dependence of 1μl(a)/μm on (1c2/a2)3/2 under different normal load. 

 
 


20 

 

 

Fig. 6 Dependence of β on the dimensionless ratio a/b. 

 
 


21 

 

  

Fig. 7 Variation of the resultant lateral force with respect to the width of slip zone. 

 
 


22 

 

 
 

Fig. 8 Determination of the critical width of slip zone for different scale parameter β. 

 

 
 


23 

 

 
 

Fig. 9 Static friction coefficient varies with the dimensionless parameter β.  

 

 

 

 

 

 


