1

Exciton Mott Transition in Two-Dimensional Semiconductors

Yiling Yu1, Guoqing Li1, Linyou Cao1,2,3*

1Department of Materials Science and Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
North Carolina, 27695, United States; 2Department of Physics, North Carolina State University, 

Raleigh, North Carolina, 27695, United States; 3Department of Electrical and Computer 

Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, 27695, United States

Abstract

Exciton many-body interaction bear great implication for application in advanced photonic devices

and quantum science and technology such as quantum computing, but the fundamental 

understanding about exciton many-body interaction is very limited. Here we provide numerous 

new insights into the fundamentals of exciton Mott transition (EMT), a manifestation of exciton 

many-body interaction evidenced by the ionization of excitons into a plasma of unbound electrons 

and holes, i.e. electron-hole plasma (EHP), by taking advantage of the unique properties of two-

dimensional (2D) semiconductors like monolayer MoS2. We clarify long-standing controversies

on the continuousness and criteria of EMT, quantify the charge carrier distribution among the co-

existing exciton and EHP phases, establish correlation between the emission features and charge 

densities of EHP, and elucidate the physical state of EHP charge carriers as nanoscale electron-

hole complex rather than individually free charges.  These results lay down a foundation for 

furthering the studies of exciton many-body interaction and also for utilizing the interaction in 

quantum science/technology and the development of advanced optoelectronic devices.  

* Correspondence should be addressed to:  linyoucao@gmail.com


2

The many body interaction of quantum particles or quasi-particles such as electrons, phonons, 

excitons, and spins is one of the most exciting topical research areas of modern physical science 

and engineering, as it underlies many major scientific discoveries and technological breakthroughs, 

such as superconductivity1, Bose-Einstein condensation2, topological insulator3, quantum 

entanglement4,  and quantum computing5. The many-body interaction of excitons, which consist 

of pair-wise electrons and holes bound by Coulomb attraction, is particularly intriguing.6,7 Unlike 

other basic particles or quasi-particles such as electrons or phonons, which are inherent to matters, 

excitons can only exist with the presence of external excitation, either optical or electrical. This

dependence on external excitation offers opportunities to externally control quantum many-body 

interactions that are difficult with other particles. 

Exciton many-body interaction may be best manifested by the phase transition of 

excitons.8-13 Intuitively, excitons at a low density behave like free gas molecules due to little 

exciton-exciton interaction and hence are also referred as free excitons (FEs).  With the density 

increasing, the exciton many-body interaction becomes prominent to screen the pair-wise 

Coulomb attraction, which may eventually enable exciton Mott transition (EMT) with excitons

ionized into a plasma of unbound electrons and holes, i.e. electron-hole plasma (EHP).14-18 At the 

highest density, even stronger exciton many-body interaction can cause EHP or excitons to 

undergo a gas-liquid phase transition into a liquid-like state, i.e. electron-hole liquid 

(EHL).9,11,16,19-21 Despite the well-recognized intuitive picture, quantitatively understanding for 

the evolution of exciton phases with increase of exciton density, in particular for EMT,  has 

remained limited. Long-standing controversy or ambiguity remains for even the most fundamental 

issues of EMT. For instance, is the EMT an abrupt or continuous process? What is the criteria for

the onset of EMT?  How do the photo-generated charge carriers distribute among the co-existing 


3

exciton and EHP phases?  What are the spectroscopic features of EHP and how the emission 

feature could be quantitatively correlated to the charge density? How is the EHP different from 

the unbound charges resulting from the regular entropy-driven exciton ionization?  The key 

challenge for quantitatively understanding EMT lies in the difficulty to deterministically 

distinguish the signals from co-existing excitons and EHP.14,16,22 The emission of these species in 

conventional semiconductors are very close in energy with difference usually less than 5 meV and

thus difficult to separate.16,22 Additionally, the external excitation (such as laser) required to enable 

EMT often induces inhomogeneity inside semiconductors due to the materials’ non-trivial

dimension, which can broaden the spectral distribution of emission from excitonic species and

makes the differentiation more difficult. 

Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors provide an ideal platform for the fundamental

studies of EMT due to unique properties.23 The extraordinary binding energy of 2D semiconductor 

can enable larger energy separation between excitons and EHP, and the atomically thin dimension 

minimizes laser-induced inhomogeneity. Indeed, EMT have been recently reported at 2D 

semiconductors.15,17,18 In this work, we focus on acquiring new insight into the fundamentals of

EMT by taking advantages of 2D semiconductors. More specifically, we clarify the long-standing 

controversy and ambiguity on many critical issues, such as the continuousness and criteria of EMT, 

the distribution of charge carriers among co-existing exciton and EHP phases, the physical state 

of charge carriers in EHP, and the correlation between PL spectral features and charge density of 

EHP. 

Without losing generality, we focus on MoS2, more specifically, suspended single 

crystalline monolayer MoS2 flakes. The suspension is to eliminate substrate effects for the 

simplicity of data interpretation as the presence of substrates can complicate the dynamics of 


4

excitons.24,25 The single crystalline flakes were synthesized using well-established chemical vapor 

deposition (CVD) process,26,27 and then transferred onto quartz substrates with pre-patterned holes

in size of several micrometers as illustrated in Fig. 1b inset. We confirmed the composition and 

high crystalline quality of the flakes through the preparation process as how we did in previously 

studies.11,28 Photoluminescence presents a powerful tool for the studies of exciton phase transition.

We previously demonstrated significant changes in the PL of suspended monolayer MoS2 upon 

the phase transition of excitons.11 Fig. 1 shows the PL’s spatial and spectral features collected from 

suspended MoS2 monolayer with different incident power densities. The result is similar to what 

we reported previously.11 Both the PL’s spectral and spatial features vary with the incident laser 

power.
Most notably, we can find two critical incident powers (turnpoints) at which the PL 

features substantially change, one at around 8.0 kW/cm2 and the other at around 20.0 kW/cm2.  

The high-power turnpoint at 20.0 kW/cm2 features a substantial shrinking of the luminescence area

(see  the images of 19.9 kW/cm2 and 21.2 kW/cm2 in Fig. 1a as well as blue area of Fig.1c), a 

sharp increase in the PL intensity (see the orange (18.4 kW/cm2) and grey (21.7 kW/cm2) curves 

in Fig. 1b as well as blue area of Fig.1d), and a change of the PL width and peak position to be 

power independent (blue area of Fig.1e).  According to the previous studies,11 these changes in 

PL can be correlated to the formation of EHL due to the gas-liquid phase transition of excitons. In 

contrast, the low-power turnpoint at 8.0 kW/cm2 features an expansion of the luminescence area 

(see  the images of 6.51 kW/cm2 and 8.01 kW/cm2 in Fig. 1a and yellow area of Fig.1c), a change 

of the PL intensity from power-dependent to power-independent  (yellow area of Fig.1d), and a 

larger broadening of the PL spectral width with increase of the incident power (yellow area of 

Fig.1e).  We have correlated the low-power turnpoint to EMT in the previous studies,11 and now 


5

focus on providing more detailed studies to further support the correlation and, more importantly,

to illustrate the fundamentals of the EMT in this work.  

Figure 1. Experimental evidence for exciton phase transition in suspended monolayer MoS2. 
(a) Representative spatial PL imaging collected from a suspended CVD-grown monolayer MoS2
flake (in radius of 4.0 m). The white number indicates the incident power density with a unit of 
kW/cm2. (b) As-measured (top panel) and normalized (bottom panel) PL spectra collected from 
the luminescence center of monolayer MoS2 under different incident power densities. Inset is an 
optical image for suspended monolayer MoS2.  (c) The size of the luminescence area (spatial full 
width at half magnitude), (d) the PL intensity, (e) the PL’s peak position (red) and spectral full 
width half magnitude (FWHM, blue) as a function of the incident power density, which are 
extracted from the results in (a) and (b). The areas with different colors in (a) and (c-e) indicate 
the different physical states of excitons, including free excitons (FEs), electron-hole plasma (EHP), 
and electron-hole liquid (EHP). Error bars are not plotted for the datapoints whose measurement 
error is smaller than the size of the dot.

Evidence for exciton Mott transition

To further support the correlation of the turnpoint at 8.0 kW/cm2 to EMT, we examine and  

exclude out other possible factors being the major reason for the change of PL.  These include 

laser-induced defects, temperature increase, and the increase of trions or biexcitons. First, the 

photothermal effect of incident laser can give rise to temperature increase at the monolayer, which 


6

may induce oxidation of the materials and generate defects if the temperature increase is high

enough, and the presence of defects can affect the PL. However, we carefully controlled the 

measurement condition to minimize defect generation in experiment. The PL measurement was 

performed in Ar protected environment  (see Methods) and the laser power utilized was mild, no 

more than 0.3 mW at the power density of 8.0 kW/cm2 (the radius of the focused laser is 1.1m ), 

which induces a temperature increase of no more than 140°C at the monolayer (Fig. 2a). 

According to our previous studies on suspended monolayer MoS2,11,24,25 such experimental 

conditions cannot generate observable defects at the monolayer. This is indeed supported by 

similar Raman/PL features of the monolayer before and after the power-dependent PL 

measurement (Fig. S1). Additionally, the change of PL at 8.0 kW/cm2 is reversible, as the PL

resumes the original low-power features when the laser power is lowered back (Fig. S2).  This 

further supports that the change of PL at 8.0 kW/cm2 is not caused by laser-induced defects, 

because the effect of defects, if any, are irreversible and can persist even after the laser power is 

lowered according to our previous studies.29

Second, the temperature increase of the monolayer induced by the incident laser can cause

the PL to redshift and broaden, but we can exclude out the temperature increase being the 

mechanism for the change of PL at 8.0 kW/cm2 as well on basis of quantitative analysis. Based on 

our previous studies on the thermal conduction of suspended monolayer MoS2,30 we can estimate

the temperature increase of the monolayer induced by the incident laser as shown in Fig. 2a.  With

the information of the temperature increase, we can further estimate temperature-induced redshift 

and broadening of the PL by multiplying the temperature increase with a temperature-dependent 

redshift (0.317 meV/K) and broadening coefficient (0.19 meV/K) that we  measured and plot in 

Fig. 2b-c. We plot the temperature-induced redshift and broadening along with the experiment 


7

observation in Fig. 2d-e.  The result indicates that the temperature increase indeed accounts for 

the broadening and redshift of the PL at < 8.0 kW/cm2, but cannot explain the PL’s broadening 

and redshift at > 8.0  kW/cm2, indicating that the laser-induced temperature increase is not the 

driving force for the change of PL at  8.0  kW/cm2.

Figure 2. Laser-induced temperature increase and its effect on PL. (a) Calculated temperature
increase at the monolayer as a function of incident lase power density. The lower inset is a 
schematic illustration for the illumination configuration. The upper inset is the calculated 
temperature profile of the monolayer at the incident power of 8.0 kW/cm2, and the dashed line 
indicates the average temperature by weighting the spatial distribution of temperature as reported 
in Ref. 11. (b) Peak position and (c) spectral width of the emission of suspended monolaer MoS2
measured at different temperatures. Measured (dots) and calculated (dashed line) (d) peak position 
and (e) spectra width as a function of incident power density.

Third, the PL of monolayer MoS2 involves contribution from excitons and trions (charged 

excitons) even at low incident powers, and we can reasonably separate the contribution of the 

different excitonic species via fitting as shown in Fig. 3a. The fitting indicates that excitons play 

a dominant role in the PL.  In principle, the increase of incident power may induce the formation 

of more trions or even bi-excitons, which can cause PL to obviously broaden and redshift when 

the emission intensity of trions or bi-excitons is comparable to or dominate over exciton

emission.31-33 However, we can exclude out the increase of trions or bi-excitons being the major 

reason for the PL change at 8.0 kW/cm2.  The PL intensity is pretty much independent of the 

incident power at > 8.0 kW/cm2. This does not match the exponential power-dependent increase 

in intensity usually observed at trion or biexciton emission,34 indicating that trions or biexcitons

still do not play a major role in the PL at > 8.0 kW/cm2.  This conclusion is further supported by 


8

quantitative analysis of the PL spectra. Unlike the PL spectra at low incident powers, which 

features a sharp peak (Fig. 3a), the PL spectra at > 8.0 kW/cm2 often involve a main peak 

accompanied by a weak but visible shoulder peak (Fig. 3b).  Guided by the visible peaks, we can 

fit the PL spectra at the incident power 8.0-20.0 kW/cm2 to a narrow peak at 1.86-1.87 eV (peak 

1) and a broad peak at lower energies (peak 2) as shown in Fig. 3c. The narrow peak at 1.86-1.87 

eV matches the exciton emission at the incident power right below 8.0 kW/cm2 (see Fig. 2d) and 

can thus be ascribed to exciton emission.  Interestingly, the broad emission shows distinct power 

dependence from the exciton emission (Fig. 3d-f).  It shows substantial redshift (Fig. 3d), intensity 

increase (Fig. 3e), and broadening (Fig. 3f) with the incident power increasing, while the exciton 

emission shows decrease in intensity (Fig. 3e) and negligible change in peak position (Fig. 3d) 

and spectral width (Fig. 3f).  The distinct power dependence from that of exciton emission

indicates that the broad emission does not originate from trions or bi-excitons, because the 

emission of trions or bi-excitons is usually pinned with exciton emission,31,34 including a constant 

energy difference in the peak positions and a similar trend (either power-dependent increase or 

decrease) in term of the dependence on incident power.  In brief, while trions or bi-excitons are 

involved in our measurement, they do not play a major role in driving the change of PL at 8.0 

kW/cm2.


9

Figure 3. Exclusion of the major role of trion/bi-exciton in the PL change at 8.0 kW/cm2. (a)
measured (blue solid curves) and fitted (dashed line) PL collected from monolayer MoS2 at the 
incident power 1.0 kW/cm2. The fitting involves both contribution of excitons (red dashed curve) 
and trions (blue dashed curve). (b) Representative PL spectra collected from the monolayer at the 
incident power beyond 8.0 kW/cm2. The arrows point towards shoulder peaks in the PL spectra. 
(c) PL spectra collected with different incident powers beyond 8.0 kW/cm2 (as indicated by the 
given number with a unit of kW/cm2) and corresponding fitting. The spectra are fitted as 
combination of one narrow peak at 1.86-1.87 eV (peak 1) and another broader one at lower 
energies (peak 2). The dashed lines illustrate the shift of the positions of peak 1 and peak 2. (d)
Intensity, (e) peak position, and (f) spectral width of the fitted peaks (blue, peak 1; red, peak 2) as 
a function of the incident power.  

Instead, the correlation of  the PL change at 8.0 kW/cm2 to exciton Mott transition (EMT)

can reasonably account for all the experimental observation. Intuitively, the density of 

photogenerated charge carriers increases with the incident power increasing, and this enables 

increasingly screening for the pair-wise Coulomb attraction of excitons, which can eventually lead 

to the ionization of excitons into a plasma of unbound electrons and holes, i.e. electron-hole plasma 

(EHP).  The correlation to EMT can account for the broad emission and its power dependence 

shown in Fig. 3d-f, as EHP is known featuring a broad emission at energies lower than exciton 

emission that substantially redshifts and broadens with increase of charge density. 8,11,15,17,35 The 

correlation may also account for the anomalous power-dependence observed at the exciton 

emission (Fig. 3d-f). The unbound charge carriers in EHP can screen the pair-wise Coulomb 


10

attraction of co-existing excitons, and this may lead to an increasing reduction in exciton binding 

energy and exciton emission efficiency with increase of the incident power, which gives rise to the 

observed decrease in exciton emission (Fig. 3f). The observed negligible redshift and broadening 

of the exciton emission with increase of the incident power (Fig. 3e), which is in stark contrast to 

the substantial thermally-induced redshift and broadening at lower incident powers (see Fig. 2d),

can also be ascribed to the presence of EHP. The negligible redshift indicates that the bandgap 

renormalization and binding energy reduction induced by the Coulomb screening of the unbound 

charge carriers in EHP offset the photothermal effect on the peak position of exciton emission. 

The unbound charge carriers of EHP may also screen electron-phonon coupling, 36,37 which is a 

major mechanism for the thermally induced broadening in emission, and this can make the spectral 

width of exciton emission less sensitive to temperature increase and leads to the negligible 

broadening.

Figure 4.
Quantification of charge densities in co-existing EHP and exciton phases. (a)

Schematic illustration for the charge dynamics involved in exciton Mott transition. The process 
involves 1) photogeneration of charge carriers, 2) relaxing to band edges,  3) exciton recombination, 
4) exciton ionization into EHP, 5) de-ionization of EHP to excitons, and 6) EHP recombination. 
(b) Measured (orange dots) and calculated charge densities in EHP (blue line) and excitons (red
line) as a function of incident power. The measured charge densities are obtained on basis of the 
measured spectral width of EHP emission as shown in Fig.3e. (c) The calculated ratio of charge 
densities in the EHP and co-existing excitons (blue line) and the measured intensity ratio of  EHP 
and exciton emission (red dots) as a function of incident power.
The measurement result is 

obtained from the data shown in Fig. 3f.


11

Quantification of the charge carrier distribution in EHP and excitons

EHP and excitons co-exist upon the onset of EMT, and it is important to understand how 

the photo-generated charge carriers distribute among the two phases. But this information has 

remained elusive to date due to the difficulty in deterministically distinguishing the signals from

different excitonic species in previous studies.16,22 We explore to quantify the distribution of 

charge carriers among EHP and co-existing excitons by taking advantage of the reasonable

separation of EHP and exciton emissions as shown in Fig.3d-f . 

To do that, we examine the charge dynamic involved in EMT from intuitive perspective as

illustrated in Fig. 4a. Excitons are generated upon photoexcitation (step 1), followed by a fast 

thermalization process (step 2) relaxing to the band edges. After that, the excitons decay through

linear and nonlinear (exciton-exciton annihilation, EEA) recombination
(step 3) as well as 

ionization into EHP (step 4). The resulting EHP decays via a de-ionization process back to 

excitons (step 5) and recombination (step 6). This dynamic process is complicated, but can be 

reasonably simplified on basis of a long-established fact that exciton recombination is much faster 

than exciton ionization as observed by us 8,24 as well as references22,38-40. We previously

demonstrated that the lifetime of excitons in suspended monolayer MoS2 is around 1 ns24 and the 

ionization of excitons and  the de-ionization of EHP are at the time scale of 100-300 ns.8 Exciton 

ionization in other semiconductors such Si and quantum wells have also been demonstrated taking

time as long as 150 ns.22,38-40
As the recombination of excitons is much faster than the 

ionization/de-ionization process, it is reasonable to consider a two-stage model decoupling the 

dynamics of excitons and EHP in time. Upon photoexcitation, a steady state of excitons is reached 

first, then the excitons undergo a slow ionization process to build up charge carriers in EHP until 

a quasi-equilibrium between the excitons and EHP as X  e- + h+ is reached, and the steady-


12

state exciton density maintains unchanged during the ionization We can evaluate the steady-state 

exciton density without considering the ionization process as what we previously did for the 

scenario of low incident powers 41

−

𝑛𝑋
𝜏𝑋 − 𝑘𝑛𝑋

2 + 𝐷∇2𝑛𝑋 + 𝑞∇. (𝜇𝑛𝑋∇E) + 𝛼𝐼0 exp (−

2𝑟2

𝑤2) = 0 …(1)

The first two items represent the linear and nonlinear exciton recombination with X being the 

linear recombination time and k the EEA rate constant. The third term is exciton diffusion governed 

by exciton concentration gradient nX and diffusion coefficient D. The fourth term results from 

exciton funneling under the bandgap gradient induced by the photothermal effect of the incident 

laser, in which µ is exciton mobility, q is the charge carried by single electrons, andE is the 

photothermally induced bandgap gradient. α is the absorption efficiency of the monolayer for the 

incident laser, w is the radius of the incident laser, and I0 is the incident power density.   

We estimate the steady-state exciton density as a function of incident power with eq. (1) 

using the parameters we measured in experiment ( α = 0.065,42 k = 0.04 cm2/s,24,43  = 1.0 ns,24

D = 22.5 cm2/s,, and µ depends on local temperature and the size of incident laser as reported 

previously41). The calculation result is plotted in Fig. 4b (red line).   With the information of 

exciton density, we can estimate the charge density of the co-existing EHP with Saha equation, 

which has been extensively used to describe plasma ionization under thermal equilibrium.44 We 

derive the Saha equation governing the ionization of excitons X  e- + h+ in 2D materials as

𝑛𝑋
𝑛𝑃

2 =

ℎ2

2𝜋𝑘𝐵𝑇

𝑚𝑋

𝑚𝑒𝑚ℎ

𝑔𝑋

𝑔𝑒𝑔ℎ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (

𝐹𝑋−𝐹𝑒−𝐹ℎ

𝑘𝐵𝑇
) ……(2)

mi, gi, and Fi represent the effective mass, valley degeneracy, and free energy of excitons (i = X ), 

free electrons (i = e ), and free holes (i = h ), respectively. ℎ is the Planck’s constant, and kB is the 

Boltzmann constant. T is the local temperature of the monolayer. Most of the parameters in eq (2) 


13

are available in references (mX = 0.26 m0, me = 0.47 m0, and mh = 0.60 m0,45 m0 is the mass of static 

electrons; gX = ge = gh = 2; the free energy of excitons 𝐹𝑋 is equal to the exciton binding energy Eb

(Eb = 0.42 eV42) but has an opposite sign.  We can find out the local temperature T of the monolayer

following the result of our previous studies as illustrated at Fig. 2a.30 We can also calculate the 

free energy of charge carriers with a well-established model for the free energy of electron-hole 

systems (see S1 for details of the model).46 Based on that, we can find out the charge density np of 

EHP with eq. (2) and  plot the result in Fig. 4b (blue curve).  The results indicate that the charge 

density in EHP rapidly increases by 10 folds from 1.0 1012 cm-2 to 1.0 1013 cm-2 in the incident 

power range of 8.0 - 20.0 kW/cm2, while the charge density in the co-existing excitons only 

increases by 2 times from ~ 2.0 1011 cm-2 to ~ 4.0 1011 cm-2. 

The quantitative estimate for charge carrier density in the co-existing exciton and EHP 

phases is reasonable, as it is consistent with well-accepted common sense, experimental 

observation, and theoretical prediction. First, the density of unbound charges carriers in EHP

increases by 10 folds from 1.0 1012 cm-2 at the onset of EMT (~8.0 kW/cm2) to 1.0 1013 cm-2

at the gas-liquid phase transition (~ 20.0 kW/cm2).  This is consistent with the common sense that 

the critical charge density for the onset of EMT is usually one order of magnitude lower than that 

for the gas-liquid phase transition.16,22 Second, the estimated charge density in EHP is reasonably 

consistent with the charge density derived from experimental measurement (orange dots in Fig. 

4b). As discussed later in Fig.7, the charge density of EHP can be derived from the spectral width 

of EHP emission (see Fig. 3e). Additionally, the ratio of the estimated charge densities in EHP 

and excitons reasonably matches the ratio of the measured PL intensities of EHP and excitons (see 

Fig.3f) as shown in Fig. 4c.  Third, the estimated charge densities are consistent with theoretical

prediction for the onset of EMT and exciton gas-liquid phase transition. Theoretical models 


14

predict that EMT starts when the Debye-Hückel screening length Ls is comparable to the Bohr 

radius a.22,47 The Debye-Hückel screening length of the unbound electrons and holes of  EHP can 

be written as  Ls = 2kBT/e2(2np).48  is the dielectric constant of the monolayer ( = 2.85 as derived 

from the Bohr radius a (0.60 nm) and binding energy Eb (0.42 eV) 42). By taking into account the 

photothermal effect of the incident laser, we estimate the local average temperature T = 414 K at 

the incident power of 8.0 kW/cm2 (as indicated by the dashed line in Fig. 3a). Therefore, the critical 

charge density to enable EMT in monolayer MoS2 is predicted to be 0.94 1012 cm-2, which is 

consistent with the estimated charge density 1.0 1012 cm-2 for the EHP at 8.0 kW/cm2.

Additionally, the gas-liquid phase transition is predicted to occur when the chemical potentials of 

EHP and EHL are equal. Theoretical analysis further predicts that the critical charge density of 

EHP to enable the gas-liquid phase is indeed 1.0 1013 cm-2 49, nicely matching the estimated 

charge density in EHP at 20.0 kW/cm2 at which we observe the gas-liquid phase transition (see 

Fig. 1) .

We can get more insight into the charge carrier distribution among excitons and EHP by 

further examining the two-stage model from intuitive perspective. The two-stage model is 

developed on basis of experimental observation that exciton ionization is two orders of magnitude 

slower than exciton recombination. It considers that a steady state of excitons is formed first, 

followed by ionization of the excitons to build up unbound charges in EHP until a quasi-

equilibrium between the excitons and EHP is reached.  It also assumes that the steady-state exciton 

density does not change during the ionization process.  The assumption is reasonable given the 

consistence of the calculation results with common sense, experimental observation, and 

theoretical prediction as discussed above.  Intuitively, we can consider that the loss of excitons due 

to the ionization may be well compensated by the injection of new excitons via photoexcitation. 


15

The correlation of excitons with EHP is similar to the correlation of excitons with trions, the former

governed by the thermodynamics of exciton ionization X  e- + h+ and the latter by the 

thermodynamics of exciton-charge combination X + e (h)  X – (+). However, unlike EHP,  the 

formation of trions can substantially affect the density of excitons, because the dynamics of trion

formation cannot be decoupled from the dynamics of excitons as the exciton-charge combination

rate is comparable to the rate of exciton recombination.50

Clarification for the controversy/ambiguity of EMT: continuousness and criteria

Our experimental results provide clarification for two long-standing controversies about 

EMT, whether it is continuous or abrupt and the critical charge density for the onset of EMT. The 

results in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3 show that the EHP emission continuously evolves with the incident 

power increasing up to around 20.0 kW/cm2 at which the exciton gas-liquid phase transition starts.  

This indicates that the EMT in monolayer MoS2 is a continuous process. As schematically 

illustrated in Fig. 4a, the EMT starts at the incident power of around 8.0 kW/cm2, continuously 

evolves with further increase of the incident power, and terminates by transiting into the gas-liquid 

phase transition at around 20.0 kW/cm2. In contrast to the continuous nature of the EMT, the gas-

liquid phase transition in monolayer MoS2 is demonstrated to be a first-order, abrupt process.11 As 

illustrated in Fig.1a., the major change of PL associated with the gas-liquid phase transition 

finishes within a range of 2.0 kW/cm2, and this range is actually dictated by the spatial/spectral

resolution of the characterization technique rather than the nature of the gas-liquid phase transition. 

The continuous nature of EMT generally holds for other semiconductors as reported in 

many references. Whereas some previous studies did argue that EMT is a first-order, abrupt 

transition,51 this might due to mistakenly considering exciton gas-liquid phase transition to be

EMT.  We find that the changes in PL ascribed to EMT in those studies51 are actually very similar 


16

to the well-recognized spectral features associated with exciton gas-liquid phase transition, for 

instance, the PL peak position and spectral width showing no change with increase of incident 

power.46 The mistaken consideration of exciton gas-liquid phase transtion to be EMT is not 

uncommon at all.  For instance, there is a widely contracted mistake in references that uses the 

physical touch of neighboring excitons as a criteria for the onset of EMT, such as n2a = 1 (or 1/4) 

for 2D materials and n3a = 1 (or 1/8 or 0.26) for 3D materials or similar equations,52 but the 

physical touch of neighboring excitons is actually a well-established criteria for exciton gas-liquid 

phase transition as reported in other references.46 For instance, we demonstrated that the excitons 

in monolayer MoS2 reasonably touch each other upon the gas-liquid phase transition, as the charge 

density  and exciton Bohr radius bear a relationship of  n2a = (1/2.6)2.11

Figure 5.
Continuousness and criteria of EMT. (a) Schematic illustration for the 

continuousness of exciton Mott transition, starting at 8.0 kW/cm2, evolving with increase in 
incident power, and terminating by merging into the gas-liquid phase transition at 20.0 kW/cm2.
(b) Calculated (solid curve) and measured (black dots) critical exciton density for the onset of 
EMT in monolayer MoS2 at different temperatures of the monolayer.  The temperature is a sum of 
the environment temperature plus laser-induced temperature increase.  (c) Calculated critical 
density (red lines) of unbound charges for the onset of EMT in Si (top) and GaAs (bottom) at 
different temperatures. The dashed curves are the calculated ratio of the densities of excitons and 
unbound charges (nX/np)at the onset of EMT. The result of Si is for unbound charges np, but that 
of GaAs is for total charges nX + np, which is for convenience to compare with the experimental 
results in references53,54.


17

Our experimental results also clarify the long-standing ambiguity in the criteria for the 

onset of EMT.  EMT has been well recognized to start when the Debye-Hückel screening length 

Ls is comparable to the Bohr radius a,16,47 but it has never been specified which species should be 

counted in the evaluation of screening length, either excitons or unbound charges. Previous studies 

often do not explicitly specify if the charges are unbound charges or excitons or both during the 

evaluation of critical charge density. This ambiguity is one major source for the inconsistence in 

references regarding the critical charge density for the onset of EMT. Our result shows that the 

density of unbound charges at the onset of EMT derived from experimental measurement is 

consistent with the critical charge density predicted by the Debye-Hückel screening length.  This 

indicates that the screening effect of unbound charges play a dominant role in driving the ionization 

of excitons, which is intuitively understandable because unbound charges are known able to 

provide stronger Coulomb screening than excitons and the equation of Debye-Hückel screening 

length is developed specifically for the screening of free charges.  

On basis of the clarification, we develop an approach to find out the proper experimental 

conditions to enable EMT. We first estimate the critical density of unbound charges for the onset 

of EMT with  np  kBT/e2a according to the criteria of Debye-Hückel screening. Since the control

of exciton density is more straightforward in experiment, we find out the density of excitons under 

quasi-equilibrium with the critical density of unbound charges using Saha equation as shown in 

eq.(2). From the perspective of thermodynamic equilibrium, the free energies of excitons and 

unbound charges are comparable as FX  Fe + Fh upon the onset of EMT. Without losing 

generality, we take into account thermal energy, which may facilitate exciton ionization, and set 

the energy difference FX - Fe - Fh at the onset of EMT to be comparable to the thermal energy as

FX - Fe - Fh = kBT (certain variation of this value won’t qualitatively change our conclusion). Then 


18

we can have the exciton density under quasi-equilibrium with the critical density of unbound 

charges, which is referred as critical exciton density

𝑛𝑋 = (

𝜀ℎ

2𝜋𝑒2𝑎)

2 2𝜋𝑘𝐵𝑚𝑋𝑔𝑋

𝑚𝑒𝑚ℎ𝑔𝑒𝑔ℎ 𝑇exp (−1) …… (3)

Fig. 5b shows the calculated critical exciton density for the onset of EMT in monolayer MoS2 as 

a function of temperature. To validate the calculation result, we performed power-dependent PL 

measurement at suspended monolayer MoS2 under different environment temperatures, and 

estimated the exciton density with eq. (1) as well as the laser-induced temperature increase of the 

monolayer at the onset of EMT as what we did in Fig. 2 and Fig. 4.  We plot the exciton density 

and local temperature of the monolayer derived from experimental measurement in Fig.5b. The 

experimental results show reasonable consistent with the theoretical calculation.

The approach can also be applied to estimating the critical charge densities for the onset of 

EMT in conventional three-dimensional (3D) semiconductors. Using the Debye-Hückel screening 

and Saha equation for 3D materials, we can have the critical densities of unbound charges and 

excitons as

np  kBT/2e2a2. …… (4)

𝑛𝑋 = 𝑛𝑝

2
ℎ3

(2𝜋𝑘𝐵𝑇)1.5 (

𝑚𝑋

𝑚𝑒𝑚ℎ)

1.5
𝑔𝑋

𝑔𝑒𝑔ℎ exp (−1) …… (5)

We performed the evaluation for Si and GaAs with parameters available in references (for Si, a =

4.4 nm,   = 11.4, me = 0.49 mo, mh = 0.19 mo; for GaAs, a = 11.6 nm,   = 12.9, me = 0.067 mo, mh

= 0.082 mo; mX = (1/me + 1/mh)-1)55. Fig. 5c shows calculated critical charge density (solid lines)

as well as the ratio of the critical densities of excitons and unbound charges (nX/np, dashed curves)

as a function of temperature. The calculations results are reasonable consistent with the critical 


19

charge density measured in experiments (black circles in Fig. 5c).53,54 For instance, for Si at 30 

K np = 3.9 1016 cm-3 (experimental), np = 3.4 1016 cm-3 (calculation); for GaAs at 16 K, np + nX

= 8.7 1015 cm-3 (experimental, 2.0 1010 cm-2 quantum wells divided by the thickness of 23 nm), 

np + nX = 7.8 1015 cm-3 (calculation). 

Physical state of the charge carriers in EHP: individually unbound or complex? 

The unbound charge carriers in EHP are usually believed existing individually without 

much inter-charge interactions, similar to free charges.  However, our experimental results indicate 

that the charge carriers in EHP exist in format of electron-hole complex in nanometer-scale size

instead, which we refer as EHP bubble.  This is evidenced by different spatial distributions in the 

PL intensity and spectral features (peak position and spectral width) of EHP. Without losing 

generality, we use the result collected at 18.4 kW/cm2 as an example to illustrate this notion. Figure 

6a shows two-dimensional (2D) spatial-spectral images collected from monolayer MoS2. To 

illustrate the spatial distribution of the spectral features, we normalize the PL spectrum at every 

location with respect to the corresponding peak intensity and plot the normalized spatial-spectral 

image at the right panel of Fig. 6a.  The PL emission involves contribution from both EHP and 

excitons as discussed in Fig.3.  We can separate the emission from EHP and excitons via fitting 

that follows the guidance of visible peaks, as illustrated in Fig. 6b.  The fitting results, including 

PL intensity, spectral width, and peak position of the EHP and exciton emissions are plotted as a 

function of the distance away from the luminescence center in Fig. 6c.  Significantly, the PL 

intensity of EHP substantially decreases by 5 folds with increase of the distance (top panel of Fig. 

6c), but the peak position and spectral width only shows very mild variation of < 20 meV (middle 

and bottom panels of Fig. 6c). To intuitively illustrate the mild spatial variation of the spectral 

features of EHP, we plot normalized PL spectra at different locations in the top panel of Fig.6d.


20

We find the low energy tails of all the PL spectra, which is mainly contributed by EHP emission, 

nicely overlap as indicated by the horizonal dashed line. As a comparison, we re-plot all the PL 

spectra collected from the luminescence center with different incident powers (originally plot in 

Fig.3c) at the bottom panel of Fig.6d. The low energy tails of these spectra are well separated due 

to the blueshift and narrowing of EHP emission in these spectra as illustrated in Fig. 3d-f.

The different spatial distributions of the PL intensity and spectral features of EHP is 

counter intuitive, as they point out contradictory spatial distribution of the charge density. The 5-

fold decrease in intensity suggests a substantial decrease in the charge density with the distance 

increasing, but the minor change in peak position and spectral width suggests only a mild variation

in the charge density over the same distance.  This conflict can be conciliated by considering that 

the charge carriers in EHP exists in format of small clusters (referred as EHP bubble) rather than 

individual free charges, as illustrated in Fig. 6e. The PL intensity is determined by the total number 

of charge carriers, which is equal to the number of the bubbles multiplying the charge density in 

each bubble, while the spectral width and peak position are only dictated by the charge density in 

each bubble.  The experimental observation indicates that the total number of charge carriers in

EHP decreases by 5 folds across the luminescence area, but the charge density in each bubble does 

not change much.  Additionally, the similar charge density in all the EHP bubbles across the 

luminescence area indicates that the EHP bubbles are generated at the luminescence center and 

then diffuse over the luminescence area.  


21

Figure 6.
Evidence for EHP bubbles. (a)  As-measured (left) and normalized (right) two-

dimensional spectral-spatial PL image of monolayer MoS2 collected at the incident power of 18.4
kW/cm2.  In the normalized result, the PL spectrum at each position is normalized with respect to 
the local maximum intensity. Horizontal dashed lines indicate the location of the four 
representative spectra given in (b).
(b)Measured and fitted PL spectra collected at different 

locations as indicated by the dashed horizontal lines in (a). The dashed lines connect the peak 
positions of the EHP and exciton emission. (c) Fitted intensity, position, and spectral width of the 
exciton emission (black) and EHP emission (red). (d) Comparison of the PL spectra collect from
different locations at 18.4 kW/cm2 (top) and the PL spectra from the luminescence center at 
different incident powers (bottom). The legend in the top panel indicates the distance of each 
spectra away from the center and corresponding local incident power density. The dashed 
horizonal lines indicate the low energy tails of the spectra. (e) Schematic illustration for individual 
unbound charges and EHP bubbles.

We can roughly estimate the size of EHP bubbles on basis of diffusion coefficient as what 

reported previously.56 Again, we use the result collected at 18.4 kW/cm2 as an example to illustrate 

this notion.  From Fig. 6c, we can roughly estimate the diffusion length LEHP of the EHP bubbles

to be around 1.2 µm. We previously demonstrated that the lifetime EHP of  EHP under comparable 

conditions is around 100 ns.8 Therefore, the diffusion coefficient DEHP of the EHP bubble can be 

estimated to be around 0.15 cm2/s on basis of DEHP = LEHP2/EHP. On the other hand, we find the 

diffusion coefficient of excitons to be 22.5 cm2/s with the presence of EHP.36
Because the 


22

diffusion coefficient is inversely proportional to the mass M, we can estimate the number of 

electron-hole pairs in the EHP bubble to be around 150, which corresponds to a size of around 50

nm at the charge density of 0.881013 cm-2 at 18.4 kW/cm2 (see Fig. 4b). This likely over-estimates

the charge number and size of the bubble due to the simplicity of the estimate approach. 

Nevertheless it provides useful insight into the physical state of EHP charges. We also expect the

size and number of charges in EHP bubbles to vary with incident power, which would need more 

studies for better understanding.

Correlation of the emission spectral feature and charge density of EHP 

One barrier that prevents the quantitative studies of EMT lies in the lack of quantitative 

correlation between the PL spectral features and charge density of EHP, although it has been

qualitatively understood that the PL spectral features of EHP is associated with charge density.

The lack of the correlation makes it difficult to quantitatively evaluate the charge density of EHP, 

which is critical for the studies of EHP. This is in stark contrast with EHL, whose emission

lineshape is well recognized to be the convolution of the occupied electron and hole density of

states at the conduction and valence bands, respectively.16,22 Previous studies also tried to assume

the emission profile of EHP to be the convolution of the occupied electron and hole density of

states as well, but the result is not consistent with experimental observation.16,22

We find that EHP emission can be well fit with a Lorentzian oscillator (/2)2/[(E-E0)2+ (/2)2]

as illustrated in Fig. 3c and Fig. 6b, where E0 is the peak position and /2 is a broadening term that 

dictates the FWHM (full width at half magnitude)  of the emission peak. We also find that the

broadening of the EHP emission (/2)EHP is reasonably equal to a sum of the broadening of the 

exciton emission (/2)ex and the Fermi energies of the EHP as (/2)EHP = (/2)ex + EF,e + EF,h. Fig. 


23

7b plots the measured difference in spectral broadening between the EHP emission and the exciton 

emission (/2)EHP - (/2)ex (extracted from Fig. 3f). Also plotted is the Fermi energy of the EHP 

as EF,e + EF,h = nπℏ2/2mX calculated on basis of the charge density of EHP given in Fig. 4b. The 

calculated Fermi energy shows reasonable consistence with the measured difference in spectral 

broadening.  Additionally, we find that the peak position E0 of EHP is determined by the electronic 

bandgap EeBG of monolayer MoS2 and EHP’s free energy FEHP, E0= EeBG + FEHP. As schematically

illustrated in Fig. 7a, this is similar to exciton emission, whose peak position is dictated by the 

electronic bandgap EeBG (2.31 eV42) and exciton binding energy Eb, the latter of which is equal to 

excitons’ free energy FX but has an opposite sign Eb = - FX.  We calculate the free energy of EHP 

using the well-established model for the free energy of electron-hold systems,46 which involves 

Fermi energy, bandgap renormalization, and entropy associated with the charges (see S1 for details 

of the model). Fig.7c shows the measured and calculated peak position E0 of the EHP emission. 

The calculation reasonably reproduces the measured peak position and its trend of redshifting with 

the incident power increasing.  The non-trivial deviation at relatively low incident powers is rooted 

in the intrinsic imperfection of the model, which involves calculation of entropy on basis of statistic 

thermodynamics that works the best for high charge densities (see S1 for details of the model).

Figure 7. Correlation of the PL spectral features and charge density of EHP. (a) Schematic 
illustration for the free energy and Fermi energy of EHP as well as its correlation with the emission 
peak position. The correlation between the peak position and the free energy of excitons (which is 


24

equal to the exciton binding energy) is also illustrated. (b) The calculated Fermi energy of EHP 
(black) and the measured difference in the broadening (half of the spectral width) of EHP emission 
and exciton emission (red) as a function of incident power. (c) The calculated (black) and the 
measured (red) peak position of EHP emission as a function of incident power. The calculated 
peak position is equal to the sum of the electronic bandgap (2.31 eV) and EHP’s free energy (EeBG
+ FEHP, the free energy is negative). Inset, schematic illustration for the emission of EHP bubble.

The quantitative correlation of the spectral features and charge density of EHP provides a 

useful way to evaluate the charge density of EHP from PL spectral features. It also provides further 

insight into the physical state of the charge carriers in EHP.
The reasonable fitting of EHP 

emission with a Lorentzian oscillator indicates that the EHP emits like an electron-hole complex

as illustrated in Fig. 7c inset. The transition occurs at the energy level defined by the free energy 

of the EHP, and the large number of charges in EHP, which occupy multiple energy levels, simply 

increases the uncertainty in the transition energy to broaden the emission spectra. The observed 

emission lineshape is different from that expected from the emission of individually free charges, 

like the emission of EHL, which would show an asymmetric and narrower lineshape matching the 

convolution of the occupied electron and hole density of states.46 This further support that the 

charge carriers in EHP do not exist as individual free charges, but as electron-hole complex instead. 

Given that the charge carriers in EHP emit like electron-hole complex rather than a plasma of 

completely free charges, we believe that exciton plasma (EP) is a better term to describe the 

excitonic phase resulting from EMT than electron-hole plasma (EHP).

Conclusion

In conclusion, we have elucidated new numerous insights into the fundamentals of EMT 

by taking advantage of monolayer MoS2. These include clarification for the controversy on the

continuous nature and criteria of EMT, quantification for the charge carrier distribution among the 

co-existing exciton and EHP phase, discovery of the physical state of charge carriers in EHP as 


25

nanoscale electron-hole complex (referred as EHP bubbles),  and correlation between the emission 

profile and charge density of EHP.  The result lays down a foundation to use EMT in quantum 

science and to development devices with broad implication in lasers, LEDs, imaging sensors, and 

optical interconnects.

Methods

Synthesis and transfer of monolayer MoS2: The monolayer was grown on SiO2/Si substrates using 

a chemical vapor deposition process,26 and then was transferred onto the quartz substrates with 

pre-patterned holes in size of 4m using a surface-energy-assisted transfer approach.28 The holes 

were fabricated using standard photolithography and dry etching processes.  In a typical transfer 

process, 9 g of polystyrene (PS, MW=280 kg/mol) was dissolved in 100 mL of toluene.  The PS 

solution was spin-coated (3000 rpm for 60 s) on the as-grown monolayer. This was followed with 

85° C baking for 1 hr.  A water droplet was then dropped to assist the lift off of the PS-monolayer 

assembly. The polymer-monolayer assembly was then transferred to the quartz substrate. The 

sample was baked for 30 minuets at 150° C. The PS was removed by rinsing with toluene and 

followed by bake at 80° C for 30 minuets.

PL measurement: PL measurements were performed using a focused 532 nm laser in radius of

1.10m.  PL was collected by a long distance 50× objective and imaged through a long-pass filter

with laser reflection light filtered out onto the entrance slit of a spectrometer.  The spectrometer 

output was recorded with a PIXIS CCD camera.  The PL imaging was recorded by moving the 

grating to the 0th order mode. In this collection mode, the spatial PL intensity distribution will be 

imaged onto the CCD camera at once. The PL spectrum was recorded by moving the grating to 


26

the 1st order diffraction mode. All the PL measurements were done with the samples placed in a 

chamber flown with Ar gas. 

Supplementary Materials:

Figures S1-S3

S1. Calculation of Fermi energy and free energy of charge carriers 

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under a grant of EFMA 1741693.

Author contributions

Y. Y. and L.C. conceived the idea, Y. Y. performed the measurement, Y. Y. and L.C. designed the 

experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. and analyzed the data. G. L. helped with 

the synthesis and transfer of the samples. All the authors were involved in reviewing the 

manuscript. 

Competing financial interests

The authors declare no competing financial interests.

References

1.
Tinkham, M. Introductiion to Superconductivity, (Dova Publication Inc., Mineola, New 
York).

2.
Griffin, A., Snoke, D.W. & Stringari, S. (eds.). Bose Einstein Condensation, (Cambridge 
University Press, New York, 1996).

3.
Mott, N.F. Metal-Insulator Transition. Rev Mod Phys 40, 677-& (1968).

4.
Horodecki, R., Horodecki, P., Horodecki, M. & Horodecki, K. Quantum entanglement. 
Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 865 (2009).


27

5.
O'Brien, J.L. Optical Quantum Computing. Science 318, 1567-1570 (2007).

6.
Byrnes, T., Kim, N.Y. & Yamamoto, Y. Exciton–polariton condensates. Nat. Phys. 10, 
803-813 (2014).

7.
Kasprzak, J., et al. Bose–Einstein condensation of exciton polaritons. Nature 443, 409-
414 (2006).

8.
Bataller, A.W., et al. Dense Electron–Hole Plasma Formation and Ultralong Charge 
Lifetime in Monolayer MoS2 via Material Tuning. Nano Letters 19, 1104-1111 (2019).

9.
Keldysh, L.V. & Lebdev, P.N. The electron-hole liquid in semiconductors. Contemp. 
Phys. 27, 395 (1986).

10.
Almand-Hunter, A.E., et al. Quantum droplets of electrons and holes. Nature 506, 471-
475 (2014).

11.
Yu, Y., et al. Room-Temperature Electron-Hole Liquid in Monolayer MoS2 Acs Nano
13, 10351-10358 (2019).

12.
Kogar, A., et al. Signatures of exciton condensation in a transition metal dichalcogenide. 
Science 358, 1314-1317 (2017).

13.
Wang, Z., et al. Evidence of high-temperature exciton condensation in two-dimensional 
atomic double layers. Nature 574, 76-80 (2019).

14.
Kappei, L., Szczytko, J., Morier-Genoud, F. & Deveaud, B. Direct Observation of the 
Mott Transition in an Optically Excited Semiconductor Quantum Well. Phys. Rev. Lett.
94 147403 (2005).

15.
A. Steinhoff, M.F., M. Rösner, G. Schönhoff, T.O. Wehling, F. Jahnke. Exciton fission in 
monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide semiconductors. Nat. Commun. 8, 1166 
(2018).

16.
Shah, J., Combescot, M. & Dayem, A.H. Investigation of Exciton-Plasma Mott 
Transition in Si. Physical Review Letters 38, 1497-1500 (1977).

17.
E. J. Sie, A.S., C. Gies, C. H. Lui, Q. Ma, M. Rösner, G. Schönhoff, F. Jahnke, & T. O. 
Wehling, Y.-H.L., J. Kong,  P. Jarillo-Herrero, and N. Gedik. Observation of exciton 
redshift-blueshift crossover in monolayer WS2. Nano Lett. 17, 4210-4216 (2017).

18.
Wang, J., et al. Optical generation of high carrier densities in 2D semiconductor 
heterobilayers. Sci. Adv. 5, eaax0145 (2019).

19.
Stern, M., Umansky, V. & Bar-Joseph, I. Exciton Liquid in Coupled Quantum Wells. 
Science 343, 55-57 (2014).

20.
Trevor B. Arp, D.P., Vivek Aji & Nathaniel M. Gabor. Electron–hole liquid in a van der 
Waals heterostructure photocell at room temperature. Nat.  Photon. 13, 245-250 (2019).

21.
Simon, A.H., Kirch, S.J. & Wolfe, J.P. Excitonic phase diagram in unstressed Ge. Phys. 
Rev. B 46, 10098 (1992).

22.
Smith, L.M. & Wolfe, J.P. Time-Resolved Study of Electron-Hole Plasmas near the 
Liquid-Gas Critical-Point in Si - Evidence for a 2nd Condensed-Phase. Physical Review 
B 51, 7521-7543 (1995).

23.
Cao, L. Two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenide materials: Toward an age of 
atomic-scale photonics. MRS Bulletin 40, 592-599 (2015).

24.
Yu, Y., et al. Fundamental limits of exciton-exciton annihilation for light emission in 
transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers. Phys. Rev. B 93, 201111(R) (2016).

25.
Yu, Y.F., et al. Engineering Substrate Interactions for High Luminescence Efficiency of 
Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide Monolayers. Adv Funct Mater 26, 4733-4739 (2016).


28

26.
Yu, Y., et al. Equally Efficient Interlayer Exciton Relaxation and Improved Absorption in 
Epitaxial and Nonepitaxial MoS2/WS2 Heterostructures. Nano Lett. 15, 486 (2014).

27.
Yu, Y.F., et al. Enhancing Multifunctionalities of Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide 
Monolayers via Cation Intercalation. Acs Nano 11, 9390-9396 (2017).

28.
Gurarslan, A., et al. Surface-Energy-Assisted Perfect Transfer of Centimeter-Scale Mono 
layer and Few-Layer MoS2 Films onto Arbitrary Substrates. Acs Nano 8, 11522-11528 
(2014).

29.
Ardekani, H., Younts, R., Yu, Y., Cao, L. & Gundogdu, K. Reversible 
Photoluminescence Tuning by Defect Passivation via Laser Irradiation on Aged 
Monolayer MoS2. ACS Appl. Mater. & Interface 11, 38240-38246 (2019).

30.
Yu, Y., Minhaj, T., Huang, L., Yu, Y. & Cao, L. In-Plane and Interfacial Thermal 
Conduction of Two-Dimensional Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Applied
13, 034059 (2020).

31.
You, Y.M., et al. Observation of biexcitons in monolayer WSe2. Nat Phys 11, 477-U138 
(2015).

32.
Mak, K.F., et al. Tightly bound trions in monolayer MoS2. Nat Mater 12, 207-211 
(2013).

33.
Harats, M.G., Kirchhof, J.N., Qiao, M., Greben, K. & ✉, K.I.B. Dynamics and efficient 
conversion of excitons to trions in non-uniformly strained monolayer WS2. Nat.  Photon.
14, 324-349 (2020).

34.
Lee, H.S., Kim, M.S., Kim, H. & Lee, Y.H. Identifying multiexcitons in MoS2 
monolayers at room temperature. Phys. Rev. B 93, 140409(R) (2016).

35.
Chernikov, A., Ruppert, C., Hill, H.M., Rigosi, A.F. & Heinz, T.F. Population inversion 
and giant bandgap renormalization in atomically thin WS2 layers. Nat Photonics 9, 466-
U469 (2015).

36.
Yu, Y., Yu, Y., Li, G. & Cao, L. Giant Enhancement of Exciton Diffusivity in Two-
Dimensional Semiconductors submitted (2020).

37.
Miller, B., et al. Tuning the Fröhlich exciton-phonon scattering in monolayer MoS2. 
Nature Communications 10, 807 (2019).

38.
Amo, A., Martín, M.D., Viña, L., Toropov, A.I. & Zhuravlev, K.S. Interplay of exciton 
and electron-hole plasma recombination on the photoluminescence

dynamics in bulk GaAs. Phys. Rev. B 73, 035205 (2006).
39.
Steinleitner, P., et al. Direct Observation of Ultrafast Exciton Formation in a Monolayer 
of WSe2. Nano Lett. 17, 1455−1460 (2017).

40.
Suzuki, T. & Shimano, R. Time-Resolved Formation of Excitons and Electron-Hole 
Droplets in Si Studied Using Terahertz Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 057401 
(2009).

41.
Yu, Y., Li, G. & Cao, L. Room Temperature Ballistic Exciton Transport in Two-
Dimensional Semiconductors. submitted (2020).

42.
Yu, Y., et al. Exciton-dominated Dielectric Function of Atomically Thin MoS2 Films. 
Scientific Reports 5, 16996 (2015).

43.
Sun, D., et al. Observation of Rapid Exciton–Exciton Annihilation in Monolayer 
Molybdenum Disulfide. Nano Lett. 14, 5625-5629 (2014).

44.
Ebeling, W., Kraeft, W.-D. & Kremp, D. Theory of Bound States and Ionization 
Equilibrium in Plasmas and Solids, (Akademie-Verlag, Berlin, 1976).


29

45.
Cheiwchanchamnangij, T. & Lambrecht, W.R.L. Quasiparticle band structure calculation 
of monolayer, bilayer, and bulk MoS2. Physical Review B 85(2012).

46.
Jeferies, C.D. & Keldysh, L.V. Electron-Hole Droplets in Semiconductors, (North-
Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1983).

47.
Rogers, F.J., H. C. Graboske, J. & Harmood, D.J. Bound Eigenstates of the Static 
Screened Coulomb Potential*. Phys. Rev. A 1, 1577-1586 (1970).

48.
Ghatak, K.P. & Bhattacharya, S. Debye Screening Length: Effects of Nanostructured 
Materials, (Springer, Switzerland, 2014).

49.
Yu, Y., Li, G. & Cao, L. Electron-Hole Nano-Droplet and Exciton Phase Diagram in 
Two-Dimensional Semiconductors submitted (2020).

50.
Singh, A., et al. Trion formation dynamics in monolayer transition metal 
dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. B 93, 041401(R) (2016).

51.
Stern, M., Garmider, V., Umansky, V. & Bar-Joseph, I. Mott Transition of Excitons in 
Coupled QuantumWells. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 256402 (2008).

52.
Klingshirn, C. Semiconductor Optics, (Springer, Berlin, 2005).

53.
Suzuki, T. & Shimano, R. Exciton Mott Transition in Si Revealed by Terahertz 
Spectroscopy. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 046402 (2012).

54.
Kirsansk, G., et al. Observation of the exciton Mott transition in the photoluminescence 
of coupled quantum wells. Phys. Rev. B 94, 155438 (2016).

55.
Wolfe, J.P. Thermodynamics of excitons in semiconductors. Phys. Today 35, 46-54 
(1982).

56.
Pokrovskii, Y. Condensation of non‐equilibrium charge carriers in semiconductors. Phys. 
Stat. Sol. 11, 385 (1972).


