High Entropy Alloys as a new metaphor in
sociophysics

Pawel Sobkowicz

November 3, 2021

Abstract

Most of the opinion dynamics models in sociophysics have their his-
toric origin in studies two-dimensional magnetization phenomena. This
metaphor has proven quite useful, as it allowed to use well known tech-
niques, relating individual behaviours of single spins and their interac-
tions, to large scale properties, such as magnetization or magnetic do-
mains creation. These physical properties were then “mapped” to social
concepts: spin orientation to a person’s views on a specific issue, mag-
netization to global opinion on the issue, etc. During the past 20 years,
the models were significantly expanded, using more complex individual
agent characteristics and even more complex types of the interactions,
but the power of the metaphor remained unchanged. In the current pa-
per we propose to use a new physical system as the basis for new ideas
in sociophysics. We shall argue that the concepts and tools devoted to
studies of High Entropy Alloys (HEAs) could significantly broaden the
range of social concepts “addressable” by sociophysics, by focusing on a
wider range of global phenomena, arising from atomic properties, interac-
tions and arrangements. We illustrate the new idea by calculating a few
characteristics of a simple HEA system and their possible “mapping” into
social concepts.

1
Introduction

The idea to use the concepts and rigour of physics to describe social phenomena
dates back as far as 18th century.
Marquis de Condorcet, based on his ex-
tensive knowledge of mathematics, introduced a concept of social arithmetics,
“la science qui a pour objet l’application du calcul aux sciences politiques et
morales” in 1794. Some decades later, August Comte proposed physique so-
ciale (social physics) as a new science in 1839, in the fourth tome of his Cours
de philosophie positive, arguing from the point of view of promoting progress
through better understanding of social phenomena, by applying to social sci-
ences the samerequirements as to physics or chemistry. These ideas were shared
by Adolphe Quetelet, who, a few years earlier (1835) published Sur l’homme
et le dveloppement de ses facults, ou Essai de physique sociale. His ambition

1

arXiv:2007.02154v1  [physics.soc-ph]  4 Jul 2020


was to include social sciences into the mainstream composed of mathematics,
physics, chemistry and biology.
Have these early attempts at connecting mathematical foundations typical
for physics with the importance of understanding our societies been successful?
In certain aspects, the answer is a decisive yes. Most of social sciences today use
highly developed statistical tools and models to derive the main characteristics
of social systems and to provide mathematical strength to the reasoning or to
better understand the data. This application of statistical methods (although in
many cases imperfect due to small sample sizes) has allowed sociologists to move
beyond the anecdotal and speculative “just so stories” stage. On the other hand,
for many research questions, the complexity of the human behaviour overwhelms
the statistical and mathematical models. The latter situation is present espe-
cially when the amount of unknowns and uncertainties (typical for the complex
social situations) is so large as to allow multiple, mutually incongruent models
to be created and used. The appeal of the high status of physics among soci-
ologists and psychologists (sometimes dubbed “physics envy”) has even led to
abuses, recognized as early as 1970’s [Andreski, 1972].
In the context of our work, it is important to remember that the ubiquitous
use of mathematics is not the only source of the strength of physics. Another
obvious reason for its success is the constant interplay between theory and ex-
periment, challenging and driving each other. But there is yet another aspect,
often forgotten: it is the ability to pick the right level of abstraction for the
studied problems. For example, in studying the physics of gases we “forget”,
for the most part, the internal complexity of atoms, their nuclei, the quark-gluon
interactions – replacing them with a simple elastic-ball approximation. Using
a two parameter Lennard-Jones potential, chosen for its mathematical simplic-
ity leads to many important results and ideas, even though we know that this
potential is not “true”. Finding the right balance between the complexity of
concepts used to build a model and the simplicity required for the model to be
useful ind insightful is still a grand challenge of social sciences.
During the past 30–40 years, with the advances in statistical physics of
complex systems and, especially, with the appearance and ubiquity of computers
and computing tools, the ideas of social physics begun to be part of mainstream
research. Modernized name of sociophysics denotes today a broad range of cases
where analogies with certain physical systems are used to improve understanding
of social systems and human behaviours. We are now able to use these ideas to
study many static and dynamic processes, sometimes with quite important and
illuminating results.
The current work is mainly devoted to a branch of sociophysics (one of the
oldest ones), namely the studies of opinion changes in societies and societal
reactions to media, propaganda, rumours etc. The paper will start with a short
introduction of the history and current status of such models, moving on to the
challenges faced by the research field (Section 2). The main part is concerned
with a proposal to use a relatively novel class of physical systems, High Entropy
Alloys, as the base for sociophysical models. This could allow us to describe a
broader range of social phenomena than the current approach (Section 3). A

2


simple example of such model is presented in Section 4, to illustrate the potential
of the approach.

2
Spinsons and their interactions

The attempts to describe the dynamics of social opinions using the analogies
derived from the physics of magnetic materials have a respectable history dat-
ing back more than 40 years. The foundation of such approach rests on three
“mappings”: a person is equated to an atom; the person’s opinion to the orien-
tation of the atomic spin; and the social influences are modelled by interatomic
interactions. This simplification of human behaviour has led to coining of a
notion of spinson (spin-person, Nyczka and Sznajd-Weron [2013]).
There are more correspondences in such approach. The topology of social
contacts was typically one of three variants: fully connected network, in which
any person could communicate with any other person; a regular grid (typically
two-dimensional square lattice, the easiest one for graphical presentation of re-
sults), where the agents could interact with their neighbours (either only the
closest neighbourhood or a suitably chosen extended one); a random network of
a given density of links. Somewhat later on, the growing popularity of network
science has led to models based on more realistic interaction connections, in-
cluding the scale free topology. Volatility of individual opinions corresponds, in
some models to temperature. Additionally, external influences (such as exerted
by media or propaganda) were mapped to external magnetic field.
The last component of the models was the interaction mechanism – describ-
ing the influence of one agent on others. This could take the form of one-to-one
interactions (one agent trying to convince the other, or two agents sharing a
discussion and trying to convince each other, for example the voter model [Cox
and Griffeath, 1986, Ben-Naim et al., 1996, Galam et al., 2002, Castellano et al.,
2003], the bounded confidence model [Deffuant et al., 2000, 2002, Weisbuch,
2004, Weisbuch et al., 2003]) or many-to-one group influence models (where
a suitably averaged opinion of a group “surrounding” an agent influences its
opinion, for example the social impact model [Nowak et al., 1990, Nowak and
Lewenstein, 1996, Holyst et al., 2001, Kacperski and Holyst, 2000, 1999], the
Hegselmann-Krause model [Hegselmann and Krause, 2002]) or the Sznajd model
[Sznajd-Weron and Sznajd, 2000, Stauffer, 2001, Stauffer and de Oliveira, 2002,
Stauffer, 2002, Slanina and Lavicka, 2003, Sabatelli and Richmond, 2004, 2003,
Bernardes et al., 2001]. The specific conditions required for an agent to keep
or to change its opinion varied between the models, leading to different process
dynamics. There was, however, an assumption which was used in most of the
early models: any interaction between two agents with differing opinions would
diminish the difference or, at worst, leave it unchanged. Similarly, a group influ-
ence would tend to bring the agent’s opinion closer to the group one. This basic
individual dynamics, in the absence of constraints, should eventually lead to a
convergence of opinions. In fact, many of the early works considered the dynam-
ics of the appearance of such consensus, seemingly without taking into account

3


the observation that societies very seldom reach the state of global agreement
of views.
Another characteristic feature of the spinson and related models was the use
of “high temperature state” as the initial point. In the studies of spontaneous
(or induced) magnetization, preparing the sample at high temperature results in
a random orientation of spins. When the temperature is lowered, magnetization
may appear, either globally or in domains. It is tacitly assumed that the specific
initial random configuration is irrelevant for the final results. Unfortunately,
social systems are very seldom in such randomized state. The evolution might
crucially depend on even minor correlations within the initial state. For this
reason, the starting conditions for most models were largely unrealistic.
The early sociophysical works were later developed to include many con-
straints, inhibiting this trivial path to consensus. Among the most widely rec-
ognized was the bounded confidence model, which assumed that the opinions
of the two interacting agents could get closer to each other only if the initial
difference was suitably small, below the tolerance threshold. Depending of the
tolerance level, this could lead to consensus (if the tolerance was high and most
agents would be able to “talk” to each other). For small enough tolerances,
a stable coexistence of two or more groups would appear. Each group having
a locally convergent opinion, separated from other groups in a way effectively
blocking intergroup communication.
It should be noted that in the standard formulation of the bounded confi-
dence model, the split opinions were always within the spectrum postulated in
the initial configuration. Thus the basic bounded confidence model could not
explain growing polarization. The bounded confidence model itself has been
developed to cover many variants, some of them including repulsion of suitably
different opinions, considerations of multidimensional opinion spaces, presence
of minority groups holding fast to their opinions and many others. Eventually,
some of these extensions have allowed to reproduce widening of gaps between
social groups.
The evolution of the bounded confidence model is but one example of the
changes to the initial palette of approaches. The initial interaction terms, bor-
rowed directly from spin theory of magnetism were expanded, additional classes
of agents (extremists, contrarians, inflexibles, leaders) were added. New models
included dynamic networks, in which topology of links evolved in parallel to the
opinions. The field is active and flourishing.

2.1
Problems, limitations and current solutions

One could ask why should we consider new analogy between physics and social
sciences if the current approach is so active?
There are basically two answers to this question. The first is based on the ob-
servation that a certain fraction of sociophysical research stopped even pretend-
ing to be part of the multidisciplinary effort. Sobkowicz [2009] has called for a
closer link of models with reality (not just to prove the usefulness of the models in
social contexts, but also to provide the necessary theory-experiment/observation

4


loop). Indeed, some authors have heeded the call, and the number of papers
aimed at using sociophysics to understand real social systems is growing. These
approaches often steer away from the direct reference to physical counterparts,
and are more accurately classified as Agent Based Models rather than socio-
physical ones. The agents are in some aspects more human-like, more complex
in their individual behaviours, for example incorporating emotions, biases, mo-
tivated reasoning. Also the interactions between the agents become much more
complex and non-linear.
Still, there is a large number of papers which, in our opinion, use the ex-
cuse of social modelling, but should be more accurately described as “physics of
non-physical systems”. The range of properties, arrangements and interactions
between actual atoms in magnetic systems is limited. Once the barrier requiring
that a model should correspond to a real system is broken, one can include what-
ever comes to mind: multiple “spins” and other degrees of freedom per atom,
adjustable interaction networks, multiple layers of such networks etc.
Then
one can apply the same methods, concepts and variables as are used for real
physical systems and – quite often – derive results not present in real physical
systems for obvious reasons, and unusual enough to warrant a publication. If,
as is often the case, there’s no corresponding social system, the work represents,
unfortunately, modelling for modelling’s sake.
The second reason for the potential usefulness of looking for a broadened
physical base of social studies analogy is more fundamental. Most of the previous
work focused on the effects of putting together large numbers of agents and
examining how the interactions change their behaviours. Would the individual
reactions to external stimuli become ordered/coordinated? Can a small group
of people convince larger groups to their views (and what are the conditions
necessary for this to happen)?
Can opposing views coexist – or even grow
apart, even when people have, potentially, access to the same information?
These are important questions, no doubt. But there are others, which are
more difficult to address in using the current metaphor. They deal with be-
haviours of groups and societies as complex entities themselves. Focused on
sociology rather than social psychology.
Can our societies survive increased
polarisation and function effectively? What would be the effects of technolog-
ical and cultural changes?
is the pace of such changes an important factor,
and if yes, in what way? What will be the effects of the growing strain be-
tween the super-rich and low-income populations? What would result from the
clash of societies in a global market and global inequalities between countries
and communities? These issues are reminiscent of looking at the macroscale
properties of materials: their hardness, plasticity, corrosion resistance, melting
temperatures, thermal and electrical conductance, resistance to radiation etc.,
etc. Of course, ultimately, these large scale characteristics have their origin in
micro- and nanoscale composition and arrangement of the constituent atoms.
Our paper comes directly from the idea of such correspondence between ideas
of materials science and sociology.

5


3
Need for a richer metaphor

It is not the goal of the current paper present a ready solution or a fully de-
veloped model, describing and predicting the behaviour of some social system.
We aim at suggesting a possibility of using a different domain from
physical research as the source of inspiration. The motivation is partially
described in the previous sections: to allow creative and imaginative multidis-
ciplinary cross-polination of ideas, and to rejuvenate sociophysics.
The inspiration for the particular choice of the of the High Entropy Alloys
(HEAs) as the physical system to be used as the foundation of the model was
actually the complexity of social systems. Spinson-based models (especially in
their original two-dimensional versions) are obviously too simplistic to corre-
spond to most of the real social situations.
We need to include much more
complex interactions and combinations of constituents, to be able to describe
system long term as well as short term temporal behaviours and to focus on a
richer set of global characteristics than magnetization alone.
We should note here that the magnetic system analogy is not the only one
used in models of opinion dynamics.
Other physical processes were consid-
ered, for example percolation theory [Chandra, 2012, Yang and Huang, 2015] or
kinetic models [Biswas, 2011, Boudin and Salvarani, 2016, Toscani, 2006, Lal-
louache et al., 2010]. In this context, the breadth of physical phenomena and
tools developed to understand them allows to focus on different aspects of the
social systems for which the models are used.
High Entropy Alloy studies are faced with similar challenges as social sci-
ences. These include the presence of many chemical elements, each characterised
by multiple different properties and possibilities of widely varying spatial organ-
isation, changeable under environmental changes. The tools and concepts that
could provide insights into the HEA-related problems could become useful in the
social contexts. Moreover, we already know that specific chemical compositions
and preparation processes of high entropy alloys can lead to a wide variety of
macroscopic characteristics. Thus the link between the nano- and micro-scales
and global properties is quite fruitful in terms of designing materials capable
of withstanding external forces and preserving desired functionality.
At the
same time, the path from nano-scale composition to the macro-scale behaviour
is challenging to discover and describe.
It is our hope that an eventual “mapping” of various physical characteris-
tics of HEAs to their social systems equivalents could enhance our capacity to
understand, human societies, arguably the most complex systems we know of.

3.1
High Entropy Alloys – brief introduction

Compared to the microscopic studies magnetic phenomena in physics, which
are now over 100 years old (or even to the sociophysical spinson-based opin-
ion dynamics models, in their mid-forties), the field of High Entropy Alloys
is very young. Miracle and Senkov [2017] place its birth at 2004. Gao [2016]
notes that the interest in alloys composed of near-equal ratios of various ele-

6


ments predates these first publications by more than a decade. Nevertheless,
the past sixteen years were extremely active, mainly due to the combination of
interesting science (including many unexpected results and fundamental discus-
sions) and significant potential applications – materials with designed properties
(functional materials) can become crucial in many applications.
The literature on specific properties and applications of HEAs is already
very broad. For an the introduction, in addition to the two general reviews
mentioned above, recent reviews providing good starting points are Pickering
and Jones [2016], George et al. [2019], George et al. [2020].
To present the concepts related to the high entropy alloys, we chose to fo-
cus on these properties that could, in our opinion, provide bridges to interesting
social phenomena, in the hope that such mapping would indicate that the poten-
tial offered by the HEA modelling toolset extends beyond that of the classical,
spinson-based analogy.

3.2
HEAs as social metaphor

As noted above, it is definitely too early to describe in detail how the specific
aspects of HEAs physics can be used to describe social phenomena. The list
presented below offers suggestions of HEA characteristic features and their po-
tential relevance in social modelling context. Note that there is no particular
importance order in the list.

• HEAs, as their name suggests, derive much of their properties and com-
plex thermodynamics from the high entropy, especially configurational
entropy. The presence of many different atomic species (elements) and
multiple ways they can be arranged locally is directly reminiscent of hu-
man societies. This similarity promises that some tools and techniques
developed for HEAs could be used to describe societal characteristics.

• In contrast to the spinson models, where the dynamics of the whole
system resulted from the combination of individual changes of a single
atom changeable characteristic (its spin), the many properties of the con-
stituents of HEAs are “fixed” (in the sense of atomic properties) while oth-
ers are flexible (e.g. spin, type of chemical bonds). The presence and role
of the fixed atomic properties suggests that the focus of research should
shift from the individual to group dynamics. In fact, the interest in HEAs
is in their global properties, for example mechanical ones (hardness, stress-
strain properties, brittleness, ductility) or thermal or electrical properties
(e.g. electric and thermal conduction). These describe the behaviour of
the alloys under external influences, which would suggest similar appli-
cation of the HEA based models in sociophyscis, focusing on the societal
reaction to environment and external forces and influences, in particular
the resilience or lack of it.

• One of the features of HEAs is the presence of so-called ‘cocktail effects’
– unexpected synergies resulting from mixtures of different atoms. These

7


could result in exceptional structural properties, for example increased
hardness, fatigue resistance, ductility etc. Such “cocktail effects” are ob-
viously present in human societies, where various characteristics and roles
of individual people combine to create specific groups and contribute to
their characteristics.

• HEAs exhibit rich processing dependence: instead of the simple influence
of temperature (characteristic for magnetic systems), the properties of
the alloys heavily depend on the history of treatment, rate of temperature
changes, mechanical treatment, irradiation etc., etc. Again, this shows
significant similarity to the complexity and history effects in human soci-
eties.

• Another, related similarity, results from the possibility that specific al-
loys may be treated as systems away from thermodynamic equilibrium.
For example, one often studies HEAs in “as-cast” conditions, where non-
equilibrium or metastable phases are common. It leads to an interesting
question whether sociophysics should treat societies as systems at equilib-
rium (as most of the spinson models do) or as non-equilibrium ones. HEA
modelling toolset is ready to handle these issues.

• Both HEAs and social systems exhibit mixtures of slow and fast phenom-
ena, combining in complex ways. The physical examples may be provided
by relatively slow atomic diffusion and fast effects of ionizing radiation.
One could imagine corresponding social phenomena, for example global
economic trends and associated cultural changes and local effects of spe-
cific events. The use of tools developed to understand HEAs, could be an
interesting opportunity in these contexts.

• Mechanical studies of the behaviour under stress offer an interesting ex-
ample of physical/social analogy. Application of slow, gradual changes
in stress load may lead to abrupt and unpredictable changes in mate-
rial structure: avalanches of dislocation movements and serrated (jerky)
strain-stress curves. These processes often exhibit power-law behaviour.
Their presence is similar to certain stress-relieving social phenomena, such
as appearance of social protests. Moreover, the power-law dependence is
quite ubiquitous in our social life [Newman, 2005].

• In addition to the complexity brought by the presence of many differ-
ent elements, HEAs behaviour is further complicated by the potential
co-existence of various atomic arrangements. A specific sample may crys-
talline or amorphous phases, the former corresponding to different struc-
tures (FCC, BCC, HCP. . . ). Depending on their preparation, the alloys
may exhibit non-random arrangements: presence of single element pre-
cipitates, nanocrystals, condensates along grain boundaries, etc.
This
allows us to look for correspondences in social systems, differentiating or-
ganized and dis-organized social networks as consequences of the societal
history (“preparation”) and natural processes: assortative grouping and

8


other locally non-random configurations and their effects on the overall
characteristics of the society.

• In certain circumstances, the multi-component alloys may exhibit spin-
odal decomposition, leading to the appearance of local pockets composed
of single elements – which could be compared to assortative matching and
spontaneous segregation in social systems. In fact, as Pickering and Jones
[2016] notes, the experimental evidence indicates that only very few HEAs
are stable as solid solutions. Most of them, under certain conditions de-
compose into multiple phases of differing chemical composition. This cor-
responds to observation that majority of human societies exhibit division
into classes and groups, segregated by different individual characteristics.

• A similar example of non-uniform distribution of atoms of different kinds
is called the Contrell clouds – in which solute atoms gather around dis-
locations. And as dislocations represent imperfections in the “organized”
single crystal structure, this could provide an analogy to increased assor-
tative gathering of certain minorities where the social structure is less rigid
and controlled.

As shown by these examples, the field of HEA research offers quite large
number of potential “matchings” to social studies. Moreover, in the context of
modelling, there are multiple ready tools which can be used in specific situations.
In fact, there is a similar “grand challenge” facing HEA theoretical studies, as
the one faced by sociology. This is often referred to as the “Holy Grail of mul-
tiscale modelling”: creating a continuous set of tools and methods, spanning
the range from first-principles, quantum mechanical descriptions at nanoscale
level, through various approaches valid for the intermediate scales (hundreds,
millions, billions of atoms) to the prediction of macroscopic behaviour of an
alloy under specific treatment and conditions. This corresponds to the chal-
lenge of social systems description. We do not have a universal understanding
spanning the scale starting from psychological characteristics of individual peo-
ple and their histories and environments, through description of interpersonal
interactions ans small group behaviour to large scale societies.
What is especially interesting are the transitions between tools used at differ-
ent scales: quantum mechanical calculations, Monte Carlo simulations, Molecu-
lar Dynamics, finite element methods. While a large number of highly developed
tools and programs exists in each of these fields, construction of a consistent
and usable “modelling factory”, with proper validation and feedback, is still a
challenging task for materials sciences. This is mainly due to the difficulty of
choice of the simplifications necessary to move from one “resolution scale” to
the next one. But finding such bridging solution might suggest a path to be
followed by social sciences which face similar problems related to complexity
and disorder.

9


4
A simple example

To illustrate the potential of the HEA metaphor for sociophyscis we will present
below some results for a simple toy model of an alloy (technically not even a
proper HEA, as it is composed from just 3 elements). The goal was to show how
specific properties of the alloy may depend on its preparation, and to suggest
possible social “interpretations” for these properties.

4.1
System description

The system used in this work is an alloy of three metallic elements: Ag, Al and
Au. This choice was motivated by several factors: atoms of the elements have
significantly different masses, but their pure elemental crystal structures are the
same (FCC) and show very similar lattice constants (4.09˚A for silver, 4.05˚A for
aluminum and 4.08˚A for gold). Moreover, despite the differences in masses, the
atomic radii are also quite similar (1.447˚A for Ag, 1.432˚A for Al, 144.2˚A for
Au). This has allowed to construct an alloy in which the competition between
different “native” crystalline structures would ba absent, as well as the size and
lattice distortion effects.
The system has been constructed using the Atomsk package [Hirel, 2015]. It
consisted of a periodically repeated box with 200˚A × 200˚A × 200˚A dimensions,
with a total of 472 805 atoms. Initially, the elements were placed in 12 randomly
located, sized and crystallographically oriented domains (four for each element).
The resulting numbers of atoms of each element were: 186 601 for Ag, 135 142
for Al and 151 062 for Au. As the initial box was unphysically “glued together”
from these domains it was not in thermodynamic equilibrium.
The process has allowed to create an input file for the popular Molecular Dy-
namics simulation engine LAMMPS (Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively
Parallel Simulator, see http://lammps.sandia.gov), adopted to the use of
Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) [Brown et al., 2011, 2012, Brown and Masako,
2013, Nguyen and Plimpton, 2015, Nguyen, 2017]. All subsequent simulations
were run using LAMMPS. Interatomic forces were calculated using the embed-
ded atom method (EAM) alloy setfl potential files [Johnson, 1989, Zhou et al.,
2004]
The final atomic configurations were visualized and analysed (for example in
the context of finding the local crystalline structure) using the OVITO package
[Stukowski, 2009, 2012].

4.2
Polycrystal, mixed crystal and glassy samples

The initial, artificially constructed configuration, glued together from unequi-
librated chunks of pure metals, was allowed to thermodynamically equilibrate
at 300K at zero pressure. This resulted in slight change of the box volume (in-
creased by about 1%) and some diffusion of atoms across boundaries separating
different elements. The resulting multicomponent polycrystal is visualized in
Figure 1.

10


Figure 1:
Three component polycrystalline box with approximately 200˚A
×200˚A ×200˚A dimensions (due to thermal expansion the actual size is depen-
dent on the sample temperature), composed of slightly intermixed domains of
pure elements Ag (colour red), Al (blue) and Au (yellow). The configuration re-
sults from long time equilibration at 300K of a structure artificially constructed
by “glueing together” pure elemental grains of differing sizes and crystal (FCC
structure) orientation. The elemental domains largely preserved these differing
crystal structure orientations, so in addition to boundaries between elements
the sample contains grain boundaries within the single element domains.

11


FCC
HCP
No structure

Polycrystal
55.7%
19.7%
24.6%

Glassy configuration
2%
1.6%
96.4%

Mixed crystal
56.3%
14.9%
28.8%

Table 1: Ratio of atoms (regardless of their elemental type) classified by the
OVITO analysis package as located in a specific local crystal structure, for the
three initial configurations.

The resulting structure was highly segregated and non-uniform. Because of
the large scale of the domains, the resulting distribution differed with respect to
the main axes. For example the domains composed of Ag and Al atoms formed
continuous regions spanning the sample in the Z direction. For this reason we
might expect that, in certain aspects, the material would behave differently
with respect to directional influences along different axes. A majority of atoms
were located in domains with well defined crystal structures (see Table 1). In the
following part of the paper we shall refer to this configuration as polycrystalline.
To produce the two other comparison configurations, the equilibrated poly-
crystal sample was heated to 2500K at zero pressure, resulting in a melted state,
characterised by atomic composition disorder and lack of crystalline state.
The melted state was then processed in two ways. In the first, it was cooled
down to 300K at a very rapid pace, resulting in creation in a quenched disorder
structure, with randomized locations of the atoms of the three elements and
practically no crystal structures. Figure 2 presents a general view of the resulting
randomized simulation box. This configuration will be called glassy or quenched
disorder.
In the second approach, the melted sample was allowed to cool down to
300K more slowly, with extensive time spent at 700K to 500K range. This has
resulted in the atoms rearranging to form local crystalline regions – yet still to
preserve the randomness of the elemental arrangements. This configuration will
be called a mixed crystal.
In a certain sense, the mixed crystal configuration may be considered to lie
“in between” the glassy one and the polycrystal. It shares the atom type ran-
domness with the quenched disorder system, and, at the same time, it shares
the presence of locally ordered crystalline structures with the polycrystal (al-
though we have to remember that these crystalline grains are now composed
from a mixture of elements). Moreover, the mixed crystal turns out to contain
several domains of different crystallographic orientations, separated by grain
boundaries, resembling the domains in the original polycrystal. The sizes of
these grains are somewhat smaller than in the original polycrystal sample.
The goal of preparation of three starting configurations was to look for mean-
ingful mappings between the physical characteristics of the system used for MD
simulations and potential social counterparts, through studies of dynamical phe-
nomena. In particular, we hoped to observe the effects which could be mapped

12


Figure 2: Comparison of the distribution of atoms of the three chemical ele-
ments between the glassy configuration (left panel) and the mixed crystal one
(right panel). Glassy sample was created by melting and rapid quenching of the
polycrystalline sample shown in Figure 1. Rapid cooling down resulted not only
in preservation of random distribution of the elemental atoms from the melted
state, but also in almost total lack of crystallized grains. The mixed crystal was
obtained from the same melted state, but through a slow cooling, with long time
spent in the 700K-500K temperature range. The atomic type (Ag, Al, Au) are
coded by the same colours as in Figure 1. The large scale spatial distribution or
atomic type for the two configurations is very similar. The difference becomes
visible when one considers of the crystalline structure rather than the chemical
distribution (see Figure 3).

to different types of social ordering and diversity at a local level.
All configurations (polycrystalline, mixed crystal and glassy) were subse-
quently used to simulate system responses to various influences. It should be
noted that our choice of three metallic elements results not only in significantly
different atoms’ masses (and thus separate distribution of velocities at a given
temperature), but also in different forms of interatomic forces. Indeed, the prop-
erties of the crystalline forms of pure elements are quite different: their melting
temperatures of gold and aluminum differ by more than 40%, there are signifi-
cant differences in tensile strength and Young modulus etc. In consequence, we
could expect that even though the base crystalline structure for all elements is
the same (FCC) and their lattice constants are similar, there would be differ-
ences between the segregated, polycrystal structure, the mixed crystal and the
quenched disorder one.
In the context of social applications the goal was to show if a homogenized
society (in which people with differing characteristics are not segregated but
thoroughly mixed) would be significantly different from a system with domi-

13


Figure 3: Comparison of the local crystalline structure for the glassy (quenched
disorder, left panel) and slowly cooled mixed crystal (right panel) configurations.
Green: atoms identified as embedded in the FCC structure; red: HCP structure;
gray: no crystal structure. The underlying atomic type distributions are very
similar (see Figure 2), but the local spatial ordering is radically different.

nant segregation. Moreover, one could look for a potential mapping between
crystalline and glassy configurations (even for a single atomic type) and suit-
able social characteristics.
The role of the mixed crystal would be to see if
local positional structure (disregarding the atom types) could have an impact
on the global properties and would have any significance in the sociophysics
context. To provide a dynamical context we studied the behaviour of the three
sample configurations with respect to two types of phenomena. The first was
reaction to external forces, in a form typical for materials science, i.e. the study
of the strain-stress curve. The second test was the calculation of lattice thermal
conductivity.

4.3
Response to external forces: strain-stress curve

The first test involves measuring the system response to external forces. The
total configuration consisted of creation of “nanowires” by periodic repetition
of the basic boxed along one of the orthogonal axes (X, Y or Z) and applying
strain along this direction.
The nanowires of (initially) square cross-section
were created by repeating the basic simulation cube along the strain direction
and separating it from others by adding empty space in the two perpendicular
directions. The LAMMPS software allowed to simulate the system reaction to
such strain at the level of atoms and to calculate the stress corresponding to a
given strain.
Figure 4 shows the resulting stress-strain curves for the polycrystalline,

14


glassy and mixed crystal structures. The stress-strain approach may be con-
sidered a macroscopic way of characterizing response to external forces. For
small values of strain (below 0.05) we observe a linear behaviour, typical for
reversible, elastic regime. This could be interpreted in social terms as small
adjustments to external drivers, which do not change the social structure. For
strain above 0.1 we observe the plastic, irreversible deformation regime, in which
mere reversal of strain does not return the sample to the original configuration.
Here again an intuitive correspondence exists. For large enough external influ-
ences faced by a society (economic crisis, pandemic, war, internal conflict but
also certain examples of technological change) the very structure of society may
become changed. Specific institutions or social links may become broken and ei-
ther be replaced by different ones, or vanish entirely. With increasing strain, the
sample (and its social analogue) may “stretch”, exhibiting increasing internal
changes, until the point at which it would break.
As expected, the differences observed for strain in different directions for
the configuration with quenched disorder were relatively small. Figures 5 and 6
show atomic composition and crystalline structure cut-outs for strain in the X
and Z directions. While there are differences in specific atomic arrangements,
the general behaviour is quite similar (and leads to similar strain-stress curves).
The Molecular Dynamics model and results described above could provide
the ground for an attempt of a “mapping” into the language of social phe-
nomena. We shall present such mapping in a tabular form, stressing certain
similarities. However, it should be borne in mind, that the “mapping” is on
a very crude and qualitative level, corresponding to the stage of the spinson
models when spontaneous magnetic ordering below the Curie temperature was
equated to social consensus.
In addition to the correspondences shown in Tables 2 and 3 one could also
think of looking into a potential social interpretation of the microscopic con-
cepts and phenomena occurring under stress: creation and mobility of disloca-
tions, slip planes, twin boundaries, avalanches of local stress release and others.
Other areas for model and interpretation development might cover the differ-
ences brought by macroscopic types of stress: in addition to the tension (as
presented in out toy model), one could study the effects of compression, shear
or torsion, leading to different types of nanoscale behaviours, and corresponding
to different societal pressures and challenges.
In a similar vein, not related to the simulations presented in this paper,
one could exploit the analogy between the influence of minor components of
traditional alloys used to improve the characteristics of the material (such as
relatively small additions to iron used to create dedicated steels) and the role
of specific minorities in strengthening societies.

4.4
Energy transmission: heat conductivity

Another global characteristic of societies is their capacity to transmit “some-
thing” between remote parts through interactions between people. This “some-
thing” might be a material entity (various goods, or even carriers of infectious

15


Figure 4: Stress-strain relationship for the three types of structures and strain
applied along nanowires in three orthogonal directions.
The nanowires were
constructed by repeating the basic box in a given direction (X, Y or Z) and
separating the boxes in the two other directions. Configurations starting from
high proportion of crystalline domains (polycrystal and mixed crystal) show
higher values of the yield stress point, indicating higher resistance in the elastic
regime. They show, however, quite different behaviours in the plastic regime:
there is much less directional dependence for both mixed crystal and glassy
configurations, than for the original polycrystal. In the latter case, the presence
of continuous domains of Ag and Al along the Z axis results in a radically greater
ductility in this direction.

16


Figure 5: Microscopic view of the effect of 1.6 strain along X axis (total X direc-
tion length equal to 2.6 of the original) for the quenched disorder configuration.
Top figure: overall view of atomic elements. Bottom view: slice of the sample
by Y=100˚A plane, showing internal crystal structure.
Due to strain effects,
part of the sample, previously in disordered state (grey), has transitioned to
crystal inclusions (green corresponds to FCC, red to HCP), composed of atoms
of various types.

17


Figure 6:
Microscopic view of the effect of 1.6 strain along Z axis for the
quenched disorder configuration. Top figure: overall view of atomic elements.
Bottom view: slice of the sample by Y=100˚A plane, showing internal crystal
structure. Due to strain effects, part of the sample, previously in disordered
state, has transitioned to crystal inclusions (green corresponds to FCC, red to
HCP), composed of atoms of various types.

18


Figure 7: Microscopic view of the effect of 1.6 strain along X axis for the poly-
crystalline configuration. Top figure: overall view of atomic elements. Bottom
view: slice of the sample by Y=100˚A plane, showing internal crystal structure.
At this strain in the X direction, the sample is close to the breaking point.

19


Figure 8: Microscopic view of the effect of 1.6 strain along Y axis for the poly-
crystalline configuration. Top figure: overall view of atomic elements. Bottom
view: slice of the sample by X=100˚A plane, showing internal crystal structure.
As in the case of the strain in X direction (Figure 7) the sample is close to the
breaking point.

20


Figure 9: Microscopic view of the effect of 1.6 strain along Z axis (the same
value as for the X and Y strain directions shown in the previous figures) for the
quenched disorder configuration. Top figure: overall view of atomic elements.
Bottom view: slice of the sample by Y=100˚A plane, showing internal crystal
structure. Due to the presence of continuous domains of Ag and Al atoms along
the Z direction of the sample, its resilience to tensile strain in this direction
was much greater than for the X or Y directions. The breaking point strain is
almost twice the value for the X and Y directions (Figure 4).

21


MD model concept
Social correspondence

Concepts and characteristics

Atom chemical type and the associated
properties driving interactions with other
atoms.

Specific individual personality traits (e.g.
Big Five categories:
openness,
consci-
entiousness,
extraversion,
agreeableness,
neuroticism,
Furnham
et
al.
[2009]);
moral foundations (e.g.
dichotomies be-
tween care/harm, fairness/cheating, loy-
alty/betrayal,
authority/subversion
and
sanctity/degradation, [Haidt and Joseph,
2007, Haidt, 2007, Graham et al., 2013]);
behavioural patterns, education and cul-
tural heritage – driving individual be-
haviours and responses.

Differences in interactions forces between
pairs of atoms or larger groups, depending
on atomic type, distances, spatial orienta-
tion etc.

Differences in interactions between individ-
uals of differing personality traits, moral
foundations, behavioural patterns, educa-
tion and cultural heritage, further compli-
cated by the nature of their relationships.

Local and mid-range spatial order (crys-
talline structure); partial deviation from
such order (defects,
dislocations,
grain
boundaries, twinning planes . . . ); disor-
dered structures (e.g.
glassy state or
quenched disorder).

Presence of organized social structure, fix-
ing “positions” and relationships between
individuals through institutions and pro-
cesses. Examples of partial deviations from
fully institutionally organized society could
be given by local disregard for certain laws
or processes, local absence or inactivity of
certain social institutions or services. The
fully disordered state could correspond to
societies in transition or anarchist societies,
where little or no institutional social order
exists.

Local order in chemical composition (for
example the existence of segregation of
atoms of different elements into separate
volumes), precipitation of certain atoms
close to crystal defects, nano-inclusions.
On the opposite scale, the existence of a
fully mixed solutions and alloys.

Existence of local communities of individu-
als sharing most/some of their characteris-
tics, either by design or due to assortative
matching. Societies based on segregation.
Creation of local minority enclaves. On the
opposite scale: societies with high levels of
diversity and no segregation.

External stress and sample strain; existence
of elastic (reversible) deformation regime
and plastic regime; notion of maximum
strain (breakdown of the sample).

Effects of external influences on society’s
or societal fragment structure (external
political pressures, technological changes,
environmental changes. . . ).
Small and
reversible responses,
preserving societal
structure and relative positions of individ-
uals; irreversible changes in social struc-
ture re-modelling it to new circumstances;
breakdown of society as a unified whole.

Table 2: Mapping of concepts of the strain-stress Molecular Dynamics simula-
tion onto the social systems

22


MD model result
Potential social interpretation

Simulation results

Large
difference
between
the
breaking
point strain values observed for the poly-
crystal (elemental segregation) and the
mixed crystal and glassy samples (chemi-
cal disorder). Similarity of results for the
mixed crystal and glassy samples – low im-
pact of crystalline order in plastic deforma-
tion regime.

Dominant role of diversity in response to
very large social stress and changes (when
the local social structure changes irre-
versibly).

Higher Young modulus for configurations
with crystalline ordering (polycrystal and
mixed crystal samples) than for the disor-
dered case.

Effect of local organisational and institu-
tional ordering, enhancing the resilience of
the society to external forces below the
breakdown of the institutional order (re-
versible regime: when external forces dis-
appear the society can revert to the status
quo ante.)

Directional
dependence
in
the
plastic
regime behaviour for the polycrystal sam-
ple, large differences in breaking point for
different strain directions; small directional
differences for chemically disordered sam-
ples.

Highly segregated societies might exhibit
widely different reactions to external forces,
depending on the nature of the stress (cor-
responding in model case to physical direc-
tions). The society might be more resilient
to certain stresses thanks to the high co-
hesion of the segregated groups – if these
groups “span” the whole society. In other
cases, the separation between different seg-
regated groups might actually weaken the
resilience of the society, causing breakdown
much earlier. Fully diverse society would
show similar resilience to a broader range
of forces.

Appearance of local spatial ordering (crys-
talline structures) in disordered (glassy)
sample under high strain.

May
be
interpreted
as
local
self-
organization under high levels of societal
change and challenges, even if these insti-
tutions and ordering were absent in the
original, “relaxed” state.

Table 3: Mapping of results of the strain-stress Molecular Dynamics simulation
onto the social systems

23


diseases) or not (rumours, ideas, innovations, emotions). Once could thus look
for physical equivalents of such transmission processes, for example electrical
conduction or heat transport in material samples. The analogy is limited by
the fact that the range of the individual interactions between society members
is not necessarily local. In this aspect, the use of Molecular Dynamics to “map”
social phenomena where long range or one-to-many communication is dominant
(e.g. information spreading) might not be suitable. Quantum ab initio or Kohn-
Sham calculations of electronic band structure could provide a better tool for
such comprehensive calculations. On the other hand, we could look for examples
where the social transmission model is largely local in nature. In such cases the
proposed approach might provide important contribution. Examples may be
provided by the already mentioned epidemic transmission in local communities,
spread of rumours via word-of-mouth or panic effects in crowds with visibility
limited to near neighbours.
Our choice of the toy-model alloy, while providing such advantages as the
similarity of lattice constants, atomic sizes and crystal structures of the com-
posing elements, has one disadvantage with respect to thermal conductivity. All
component metals have heat transmission which is dominated by the contribu-
tion of electrons. At 300K only about 1% of the thermal conductivity κ is due to
lattice vibrations [Jain and McGaughey, 2016, Wang et al., 2016]. In addition,
it is quite a challenge to separate the two processes, as the electron-phonon scat-
tering may also play a role for specific materials. As our model disregards the
electronic contribution, the absolute values of the thermal conductivity would
be incomparable with the measured values. Instead, we’d use, as a reference,
the relative phonon (lattice) components, normalized to the value for gold. Jain
and McGaughey [2016] provide values of κp of 2.6 for Au, 5.2 for Ag and 5.8
for Al, while Wang et al. [2016] estimates the values as 2 for Au, 4 for Ag and
6 for Al. The ratios (normalized to the gold value) are then about 2 for silver
and between 2.2 and 3 for aluminum.
Before we move to the discussion of the lattice based thermal conductivity,
let us note that the electronic contribution to the heat conduction may also
find some analogy in social systems. Because the conduction band electrons in
metals are delocalized, their contribution might be compared to long range (or
even global) communication patterns (such as media). The varying relations
between lattice and electronic contributions for various materials could allow
modelling of various social circumstances.
The adjustment of the lattice component of the heat conduction in advanced
materials is an active research subject in physics. It is important for selecting
materials with low conductivity, leading to higher resistance to radiation damage
[Caro et al., 2015] or for semiconductor materials, such as Si-Ge compounds and
devices [Abs da Cruz et al., 2013, Hahn et al., 2014, Baker and Norris, 2015, Lee
et al., 2016]. These studies have looked at the combination of effects of chemical
order/disorder as well as positional ordering (crystalline, large and nano-grains
and amorphous phases, but also artificially constructed arrangements, such as
superlattices [Mizuno et al., 2015, Wang et al., 2015]). At the theoretical level,
many of these works have used the same toolsets (e.g. LAMMPS codes) as our

24


Material
Configuration
Thermal
con-
ductivity
κp,
relative to gold

Au
Mixed crystal with all atoms
replaced by Au

1 (by definition)

Ag
Mixed crystal with all atoms
replaced by Ag

1.54

Al
Mixed crystal with all atoms
replaced by Al

2.18

AgAuAl alloy
Polycrystal, X direction
1.20

AgAuAl alloy
Polycrystal, Y direction
1.20

AgAuAl alloy
Polycrystal, Z direction
1.44

AgAuAl alloy
Mixed crystal
0.68

AgAuAl alloy
Glassy (quenched disorder)
0.64

Table 4: Thermal conductivity of various configurations.

current model.
Our question in this part of the paper was quite similar to the actual : which
characteristic feature of the three configuration influences thermal conduction
the most? Is it the elemental separation (polycrystal) versus chemical disorder
(mixed crystal and glassy state), or is it the presence of a local ordering in form
of lattice structure (polycrystal and mixed crystal) vs. the quenched disorder
configuration?
In contrast to Caro et al. [2015], we have used the same interatomic potentials
from the EAM model, rather than the simplified Lennard-Jones ones.
The
simulations of the heat transfer were based on the Langevin model included in
the LAMMPS system.
In addition to the three alloy configurations used in the strain-stress studies,
we have also used the mixed crystal geometry to provide the baseline single-
element heat conductivity. To do so, we have replaced in the mixed crystal
configuration all atoms with single species: Au, Ag or Al. This has allowed
us to calculate thermal conductivity of pure materials, for comparison with the
previously reported results.
In the case of pure elements we observe the expected order of the thermal
conductivity values. The Al/Au and Ag/Au ratios are, however, smaller than
those estimated by Jain and McGaughey [2016] and Wang et al. [2016]. One of
the reasons might be that even if our mixed crystal sample is made chemically
uniform, it still contains differently oriented grains of a size of a few tens to
a hundred Angstrom. Such structure has been already indicated as a source
of decrease of phonon mean free path by Hahn et al. [2014]. This geometric
disorder is the same for all pure element configurations, which would add a
scattering mechanism to all of them in a similar way.
As expected, the glassy and mixed crystal have much smaller heat conduc-

25


tivity than pure materials or the polycrystalline configuration. The reason is
that in the two configurations the dominant chemical disorder (and resulting
disorder of the masses of atoms) is present. The mass distribution disorder has
been noted as the primary source of phonon scattering in SiGe [Hahn et al.,
2014, Baker and Norris, 2015, Lee et al., 2016] and in NiFe and NiCo alloys
[Caro et al., 2015].
The κp values for the glassy and mixed crystal systems
were independent on the direction of the heat flow. A small, but significant
decrease of κp in the quenched disorder case comes from additional contribution
of phonon scattering due to lack of crystalline order.
The polycrystal configuration, where the atoms of various types are largely
separated and the mean free path of phonons is longer, exhibits much higher
values of thermal conductivity. Moreover, the conductivity in the Z direction
is greater than that in X and Y directions. As in the case of greater resilience,
this can be explained by the asymmetry of the initial domains distribution, and
the presence of continuous domains of Ag and Al atoms in Z direction.
Assignment of social meaning to the above results is less intuitive than in the
case of resistance to destructive forces. Still, if we take into account that people
sharing the same characteristics (cultural heritage, political views, nationality,
language) communicate more often and with greater ease and depth we could
attempt to create such mapping. Phonons may be compared to messages, heat
transfer to information flow; all scattering mechanisms (mass disorder, differ-
ences in forces between atoms, and positional disorder) decreasing the mean
free path of the phonon to limits of local person-to-person communication, the
message range; the ratios of various communication inhibitions (who speaks to
whom and how often) would correspond to the hierarchy of the scattering mech-
anisms. A similar reasoning could be applied to communicative diseases, where
a similarity of lifestyles and more frequent contacts among people sharing the
same characteristics could drive higher disease communication rates. Table 5
presents suggestions for the mapping between physical and social phenomena in
this context.

5
Conclusions

The current paper is focused on a simple idea of broadening the physical base
of sociophysics applications. Whether the idea will lead to successful, creative
applications remains to be seen. There are certain advantages which it offers:
large number of interesting phenomena present in High Entropy Alloys offers
potentially a wider range of social mappings. The fact that HEA research field
is growing very fast provides a source of ideas and comparisons. Lastly, there
are several well developed modelling techniques and associated software systems
which can be used immediately. In addition to Molecular Dynamics (exempli-
fied by LAMMPS used in this work to provide an example), one could point out
that the similarity of challenges faced by social studies and the physics of com-
plex condensed matter results provides interesting opportunities.
The study
of human societies spans a range from individual behaviours (including their

26


MD model
Social interpretation

Model concepts

Vibrational (phonon-based) heat conduc-
tivity

Transmission of information vial local and
small group interactions.

Model results

The heat conductivity for pure elements is
higher than for alloys.

Societies composed of agents sharing simi-
lar personality traits, moral foundations or
cultural heritage have higher rates of shar-
ing and transmission and acceptance of in-
formation, due to higher trust, confirma-
tion bias and other psychological effects.

Polycrystal
conductivity
significantly
higher
than
for
the
chemically
disor-
dered cases (mixed crystal and quenched
disorder).

The presence of large socially uniform do-
mains (large scale segregation) enhances
the transmission within these domains.
The transmission is slowed-down only at
the boundaries between different social
groups, due to mistrust, echo chamber and
selective attention effects.

Little difference between conductivity in
sample with crystalline order but chemical
disorder and fully random glassy state.

The presence of organized structures may
be less important then diversity of indi-
vidual characteristics for local information
transmission. (Institutional ordering might
become dominant for other forms of infor-
mation transmission.)

Table 5: Mapping of concepts and results of the heat conductivity Molecular
Dynamics simulation onto the social systems

biological and evolutionary roots, psychology, education); influences of imme-
diate environments (family, workplace) which can be studied using small scale
experimental psychology; up to sociology of large, diverse and complex social
groups and whole societies. Not only the scope and type of relationships may
vary significantly, but also the timescales of changes may span the range from
“immediate” reactions (such as decisions based on heuristics or stereotyping,
often on the scale below 1 second), through scale of hours or days for cogni-
tive and communication functions, to lifelong evolution of both individual and
social profile of a person, ultimately to historical perspective of the changes in
societies. Thus, even within a single topic, one may be forced to combine a
multidisciplinary portfolio of methods and tools, and to combine them into a
coherent whole.
The same situation exists in studies of HEAs (in general, in materials stud-
ies). The description has to span the range from picoseconds and single atoms
to years and “samples” (such as construction elements) measuring many me-
ters. Just as it is not possible to “reduce” sociology to psychology effectively,
it is practically impossible to use the fundamental, ab initio calculations for
the whole scope of materials science. In materials science we use a “ladder”
of somewhat overlapping techniques, starting from quantum mechanical calcu-

27


lations on the fundamental level, through density functional theory, Molecular
Dynamics, kinetic Monte Carlo, continuum mechanics, constitutive equations,
fracture mechanics to finite element analysis to name some of the available ele-
ments of the tool-chain. Each of these methods introduces specific concepts and
simplifications, which allow it to be applied to larger structures and to look at
phenomena at longer times.
As in the psychology-sociology spectrum, the continuity of transitions be-
tween different levels of description and methods mentioned above still requires
a lot of work. The choice of the simplifications leading from one “scale” to the
next one needs to be validated. In our opinion, the fact that both disciplines
undergo significant progress and face active challenges is not a weakness but a
strength of the proposal presented in this work. Answers to the questions link-
ing tools used for different system and time scales of physical systems – or even
the acknowledgement that such links are needed – might provide interesting in-
sights for sociophysical applications, and, perhaps, add value to the traditional
social studies as well.
Lastly, the proposed expansion of the physical basis for social studies to
HEAs would provide an additional, technical advantage. The use of well de-
veloped, actively maintained open source programming, modelling and analysis
tools would enhance the capacity to cross-check the model results, using stan-
dardized packages and input formats. To provide an example: the LAMMPS
package used here has been recently used to study selected human behaviour
related phenomena, for example urban interactions [Park and Schmidt, 2019] or
crowd movements using the social force model [Cornes et al., 2019, Sticco et al.,
2020].
The key element of the idea presented in our paper is, however, not
the programming toolset, but the potential similarities between highly complex
material systems, such as HEAs and certain aspects of human societies.

References

C. Abs da Cruz, N. A. Katcho, N. Mingo, and R. G. Veiga. Thermal conductivity
of nanocrystalline SiGe alloys using molecular dynamics simulations. Journal
of Applied Physics, 114(16):164310, 2013.

S. Andreski. Social Sciences as Sorcery. Andr´e Deutsch, 1972.

C. H. Baker and P. M. Norris. Effect of long-and short-range order on SiGe
alloy thermal conductivity: molecular dynamics simulation. Physical Review
B, 91(18):180302, 2015.

E. Ben-Naim, L. Frachebourg, and P. L. Krapivsky. Coarsening and persistence
in the voter model. Physical Review E, 53(4):3078–3087, 1996.

A. T. Bernardes, U. M. S. Costa, A. D. Araujo, and D. Stauffer.
Damage
spreading, coarsening dynamics and distribution of political votes in Sznajd
model on square lattice. International Journal of Modern Physics C, 12(2):
159–168, 2001.

28


S. Biswas. Mean-field solutions of kinetic-exchange opinion models. Physical
Review E, 84(5):056106, 2011.

L. Boudin and F. Salvarani. Opinion dynamics: kinetic modelling with mass
media, application to the scottish independence referendum. Physica A: Sta-
tistical Mechanics and its Applications, 444:448–457, 2016.

W. M. Brown and Y. Masako. Implementing molecular dynamics on hybrid
high performance computers – three-body potentials. Comp. Phys. Comm.,
184:2785–2793, 2013.

W. M. Brown, P. Wang, S. J. Plimpton, and A. N. Tharrington. Implementing
molecular dynamics on hybrid high performance computers – short range
forces. Comp. Phys. Comm., 182:898–911, 2011.

W. M. Brown, A. Kohlmeyer, S. J. Plimpton, and A. N. Tharrington.
Im-
plementing molecular dynamics on hybrid high performance computers –
particle-particle particle-mesh. Comp. Phys. Comm., 183:449–459, 2012.

M. Caro, L. K. B´eland, G. D. Samolyuk, R. E. Stoller, and A. Caro.
Lat-
tice thermal conductivity of multi-component alloys. Journal of Alloys and
Compounds, 648:408–413, 2015.

C. Castellano, D. Vilone, and A. Vespignani. Incomplete ordering of the voter
model on small-world networks. EPL (Europhysics Letters), 63:153, 2003.

A. K. Chandra.
Percolation in a kinetic opinion exchange model.
Physical
Review E, 85(2):021149, 2012.

F. Cornes, G. Frank, and C. Dorso. Fear propagation and the evacuation dy-
namics. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, 95:112–133, 2019.

J. Cox and D. Griffeath. Diffusive clustering in the two dimensional voter model.
The Annals of Probability, 14(2):347–370, 1986.

G. Deffuant, D. Neau, F. Amblard, and G. Weisbuch. Mixing beliefs among
interacting agents. Advances in Complex Systems, 3:87–98, 2000.

G. Deffuant, F. Amblard, G. Weisbuch, and T. Faure.
How can extremism
prevail? A study based on the relative agreement interaction model. Journal
of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 5(4), 2002.

A. Furnham, A. Eracleous, and T. Chamorro-Premuzic. Personality, motivation
and job satisfaction: Hertzberg meets the big five. Journal of managerial
psychology, 24(8):765–779, 2009.

S. Galam, B. Chopard, and M. Droz. Killer geometries in competing species
dynamics. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 314(1):256–
263, 2002.

29


M. C. Gao.
High-Entropy Alloys Fundamentals and Applications.
Springer
International, 2016. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-27013-5.

E. George, W. Curtin, and C. Tasan. High entropy alloys: A focused review
of mechanical properties and deformation mechanisms. Acta Materialia, 188:
435–474, 2020.

E. P. George, D. Raabe, and R. O. Ritchie. High-entropy alloys. Nature Reviews
Materials, 4(8):515–534, 2019.

J. Graham, J. Haidt, S. Koleva, M. Motyl, R. Iyer, S. Wojcik, and P. H. Ditto.
Moral foundations theory: The pragmatic validity of moral pluralism. Ad-
vances in experimental social psychology, 47:55–130, 2013.

K. Hahn, C. Melis, and L. Colombo. Effect of structural features on the thermal
conductivity of SiGe-based materials. The European Physical Journal B, 87:
150, 2014.

J. Haidt. The new synthesis in moral psychology. science, 316(5827):998–1002,
2007.

J. Haidt and C. Joseph. The moral mind: How five sets of innate intuitions
guide the development of many culture-specific virtues, and perhaps even
modules. In P. Carruthers, S. Laurence, and S. Stich, editors, The innate
mind, volume 3, pages 367–391. Oxford University Press New York, NY,
2007.

R. Hegselmann and U. Krause.
Opinion dynamics and bounded confidence
models, analysis, and simulation. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
Simulation (JASSS) vol, 5(3), 2002.

P. Hirel. Atomsk: a tool for manipulating and converting atomic data files.
Computer Physics Communications, 197:212–219, 2015.

J. Holyst, K. Kacperski, and F. Schweitzer. Social impact models of opinion
dynamics. Annual Review of Comput. Phys., IX:253–273, 2001. doi: 10.1142/
9789812811578.

A. Jain and A. J. McGaughey. Thermal transport by phonons and electrons
in aluminum, silver, and gold from first principles. Physical Review B, 93(8):
081206, 2016.

R. Johnson. Alloy models with the embedded-atom method. Physical Review
B, 39(17):12554, 1989.

K. Kacperski and J. Holyst. Opinion formation model with strong leader and
external impact: a mean field approach. Physica A, 269:511–526, 1999.

K. Kacperski and J. Holyst. Phase transitions as a persistent feature of groups
with leaders in models of opinion formation. Physica A, 287:631–643, 2000.

30


M. Lallouache, A. Chakrabarti, A. Chakraborti, and B. Chakrabarti. Opin-
ion formation in kinetic exchange models: Spontaneous symmetry-breaking
transition. Physical Review E, 82(5):056112, 2010.

Y. Lee, A. J. Pak, and G. S. Hwang. What is the thermal conductivity limit
of silicon germanium alloys? Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 18(29):
19544–19548, 2016.

D. B. Miracle and O. N. Senkov. A critical review of high entropy alloys and
related concepts. Acta Materialia, 122:448–511, 2017.

H. Mizuno, S. Mossa, and J.-L. Barrat. Beating the amorphous limit in thermal
conductivity by superlattices design. Scientific reports, 5:14116, 2015.

M. E. J. Newman. Power laws, Pareto distributions and Zipf’s law. Contempo-
rary Physics, 46:323–351, 2005.

T. D. Nguyen. Gpu-accelerated Tersoff potentials for massively parallel molec-
ular dynamics simulations. Comp. Phys. Comm., 212:113–122, 2017.

T. D. Nguyen and S. J. Plimpton. Accelerating dissipative particle dynamics
simulations for soft matter systems. Comput. Mater. Sci., 100:173–180, 2015.

A. Nowak and M. Lewenstein. Modeling social change with cellular automata.
In R. Hegselmann, U. Mueller, and K. G. Troitzsch, editors, Modelling and
Simulation in the Social Sciences From A Philosophy of Science Point of
View, pages 249–285. Kluver, Dordrecht, 1996. URL

A. Nowak, J. Szamrej, and B. Latan´e. From private attitude to public opinion:
A dynamic theory of social impact.
Psychological Review, 97(3):362–376,
1990.

P. Nyczka and K. Sznajd-Weron. Anticonformity or independence? – insights
from statistical physics. Journal of Statistical Physics, 151:174–202, 2013.

S. Y. Park and A. Schmidt. Nonequilibrium dynamics of multiple urban inter-
actions coupled to a thermal environment. In American Geophysical Union,
Fall Meeting 2019, volume 2019, pages H13J–1829, 2019.

E. Pickering and N. Jones. High-entropy alloys: a critical assessment of their
founding principles and future prospects. International Materials Reviews, 61
(3):183–202, 2016.

L. Sabatelli and P. Richmond. Phase transitions, memory and frustration in
a Sznajd-like model with synchronous updating.
International Journal of
Modern Physics C, 14:1223–1229, 2003.

L. Sabatelli and P. Richmond. Non-monotonic spontaneous magnetization in a
Sznajd-like consensus model. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Appli-
cations, 334(1):274–280, 2004.

31


F. Slanina and H. Lavicka. Analytical results for the Sznajd model of opinion
formation. European Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter, 35(2):279 –
288, 2003.

P. Sobkowicz. Modelling opinion formation with physics tools: call for closer
link with reality. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation, 12(1):
11, 2009.

D. Stauffer. Monte Carlo simulations of Sznajd models. Journal of Artificial
Societies and Social Simulation, 5(1), 2001.

D. Stauffer. Sociophysics: the Sznajd model and its applications. Computer
physics communications, 146(1):93–98, 2002.

D. Stauffer and P. M. C. de Oliveira.
Persistence of opinion in the Sznajd
consensus model: computer simulation. The European Physical Journal B-
Condensed Matter, 30(4):587–592, 2002.

I. Sticco, G. Frank, F. Cornes, and C. Dorso. A re-examination of the role of
friction in the original social force model. Safety science, 121:42–53, 2020.

A. Stukowski.
Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with
ovito–the open visualization tool.
Modelling and Simulation in Materials
Science and Engineering, 18(1):015012, 2009.

A. Stukowski.
Structure identification methods for atomistic simulations of
crystalline materials.
Modelling and Simulation in Materials Science and
Engineering, 20(4):045021, 2012.

K. Sznajd-Weron and J. Sznajd. Opinion evolution in closed community. Int.
J. Mod. Phys. C, 11:1157–1166, 2000.

G. Toscani. Kinetic models of opinion formation. Commun. Math. Sci, 4(3):
481–496, 2006.

Y. Wang, C. Gu, and X. Ruan. Optimization of the random multilayer structure
to break the random-alloy limit of thermal conductivity.
Applied Physics
Letters, 106(7):073104, 2015.

Y. Wang, Z. Lu, and X. Ruan. First principles calculation of lattice thermal
conductivity of metals considering phonon-phonon and phonon-electron scat-
tering. Journal of applied Physics, 119(22):225109, 2016.

G. Weisbuch. Bounded confidence and social networks. The European Physical
Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, 38(2):339–343, 2004.

G. Weisbuch, G. Deffuant, F. Amblard, and J.-P. Nadal. Interacting agents
and continuous opinions dynamics.
In R. Cowan and N. Jonard, editors,
Heterogenous Agents, Interactions and Economic Performance, volume 521
of Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems, pages 225–242.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2003. ISBN 978-3-642-55651-7.

32


H.-X. Yang and L. Huang. Opinion percolation in structured population. Com-
puter Physics Communications, 2015.

X. W. Zhou, R. A. Johnson, and H. N. G. Wadley. Misfit-energy-increasing
dislocations in vapor-deposited CoFe/NiFe multilayers. Physical Review B,
69:144113, 2004.

33


