1

Understanding the Synthetic Pathway to Large Area, High Quality
[AgSePh]∞ Nanocrystal Films

Lorenzo Maserati†§*, Stefano Pecorario†‡, Mirko Prato¶ and Mario Caironi†*

† Center for Nano Science and Technology @PoliMi, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 20133 Milan, Italy. 

§ The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.

‡ Micro and Nanostructured Materials Lab, Department of Energy, Politecnico di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.

¶ Materials Characterization Facility, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 16163 Genova, Italy.
KEYWORDS: Nanocrystal synthesis, 2D metallorganic, multiple hybrid quantum wells, optoelectronics.

ABSTRACT: Silver benzeneselenolate [AgSePh]∞ is a coordination polymer that hosts a hybrid quantum well structure. The recent 
advancements in the study of its tightly bound excitons (~300 meV) and photoconductive properties (recently employed in UV pho-
todetection) makes it an interesting representative of a material platform that is an environmentally stable alternative to 2D metal 
halide perovskites in terms of optoelectronic properties. To this aim, several challenges are to be addressed, among which the lack of 
control over the metal-organic reaction process in the reported synthesis of the [AgSePh]∞ nanocrystal film (NC). This issue contrib-
uted to cast doubts over the origin of its intra-bandgap electronic states. In this article we study all the steps to obtain phase pure 
[AgSePh]∞ NC films, from thin silver films through its oxidation and reaction via a chemical vapor-solid with benzeneselenol, by 
means of UV-vis, XRD, SEM, and AFM. Raman and FTIR spectroscopy are also employed to provide vibrational peaks assignment, 
for the first time on this polymer. Our analysis supports an acid-base reaction scheme based on an acid attacking the metal oxide 
precursor, generating water as byproduct of the polymeric synthesis, speeding up the reaction by solvating the PhSeH. The reaction 
readily goes to completion within 30 min in a supersaturated PhSeH / N2 atmosphere at 90 °C. Our analysis suggests the absence of 
precursor’s leftovers or oxidized species that could contribute to the intra-gap states. By tuning the reaction parameters, we gained
control on film morphology to obtain substrate-parallel oriented micro-crystals showing different excitonic absorption intensities. 
Finally, centimeters size high quality [AgSePh]∞ NC films could be obtained, enabling exploitation of their optoelectronic properties, 
such as UV photodetection, in large-area applications. 

Introduction

Low dimensional electronic materials are of wide interest 

for their strong light-matter interaction,1 tunable absorp-
tion/emission,2 and for their versatility as building blocks for 
assembling artificial excitonic devices.3,4 In the last decade, 
two-dimensional (2D)
transition metal dichalcogenides 

(TMDs) studies demonstrated a huge potential of this material’s 
platform for both advancing solid state physics understanding 
and for envisioning new concepts in optoelectronic devices.5,6

In parallel, 2D hybrid metal-halide perovskites rose as high per-
formance photodetectors and solar cells.7 Beyond perovskites, 
covalently bonded confined-in-bulk materials showing higher 
air-stability were put forward by the supramolecular chemistry 
community.8 Among these hybrid quantum wells materials, the 
metal organic chalcogenide [AgSePh]∞ has recently emerged as 
a representative of a potential room-temperature excitonic plat-
form for studying many-body physics,9 holding at the same time
promise in light harvesting and importantly, in UV detection, as 
we have very recently demonstrated.10 The silver benzene-
selenolate [AgSePh]∞ is part of a metal-organic chalcogenide 
(MOC) family where silver and chalcogen atoms form 2D inor-
ganic planes separated by pairs of phenyl rings held together in 
the out-of-plane direction by Van der Waals forces (see Figure 
1a for the extended molecular structure), providing effective 
quantum confinement along the [001] crystal direction.9 The 
first synthesis of [AgSePh]∞ reported by Cuthbert et al.11 was 
obtained by reacting lithium phenylselenolate, generated in situ
from the reductive cleavage of PhSe-SiMe3 with alkyl lithium 
reagents, with triphenylphosphine solubilized AgCl, yielding
the extended structure [Ag(SePh)]∞. The crystals were used to 

refine the crystal structure, but no spectroscopic data were pre-
sented (although a “broad absorption” is reported to be peaked
at  = 435 nm).


2

Figure 1. a, [AgSePh]∞ layered nanostructure represented at a mo-
lecular level. b, Synthetic approach used to yield continuous nano-
crystal [AgSePh]∞ films. c, Photographs of the NC films resulting 
from the corresponding synthetic steps illustrated in (b). Scale bars, 
1 cm.

Fifteen years later Hohman and co-workers obtained the same 
polymer by a completely different route, based on a single-step 
biphasic immiscible interface method, where silver nitrate and 
diphenyl diselenide (DPSe) were put in contact at liquid-liquid 
interface generating micron-size polymer crystals.12 The same 
group also introduced, shortly thereafter, a third synthetic path-
way to achieve the same material, based on a 3 days in situ acid-
base reaction of metallic silver thin films with vapor of DPSe at 
80° C.13 In the same report, they also suggested a similar ap-
proach based on bulk Ag2O reacted with liquid benzeneselenol
(PhSeH) at 80 °C, also yielding [AgSePh]∞ micro-crystals. 
Starting from these works, a first attempt to make continuous 
large area films to enable spectroscopic experiments has been 
recently reported by using silver thin films oxidized by UV 
ozone lamp, subsequently reacted with vapor benzeneselenol.9

This reaction reportedly yielded square centimeters-size areas 
covered by nanocrystal films. Nevertheless, the control over the 
reaction parameters and the understanding of the reaction path-
way has been so far missing. Such lack of control prevented also
the possibility to study the origin of intra-bandgap states con-
tributing to visible light absorption at energies below the exci-
tonic resonances in such films. Here we provide insights in the 
aforementioned chemical process and we provide detailed 
methods for achieving full control over the reaction evolution.
By applying vibrational spectroscopies, we unveil unique ma-
terial’s signatures that can help tracing [AgSePh]∞ growth. We 
show that silver oxide plays a crucial role, even in its native 
form on top of metallic silver films, in the crystal nucleation 
process during the PhSeH-Ag reaction. Indeed, experimental 
evidences suggest that ultra-thin (<5 nm) silver oxide layers re-
act with PhSeH to yield oriented and separated micron-size 
crystals. Given the highly anisotropic nature of the excitons, 
this crystal positioning causes a different absorption line shape
due to different exciton polarization in the in-plane versus out-
of-plane direction. Instead, thicker silver oxide films exposed to
the organoseleniun at high temperature turns into homogenous
and continuous and large scale [AgSePh]∞ nanocrystal (NC) 
films (Figure 1b,c) that can be used for optoelectronic devices
that require charge transport over centimeters squares areas.

Methods
Materials
Silicon oxide (200 nm) / doped silicon substrates were purchased 
from Alpha Nanotech. Alkali-free boro-aluminosilicate glass were 
purchased from Präzisions Glas & Optik GmbH. Ag 99.99% was 
purchased from Testbourne LTD. Benzeneselenol 97% was pur-
chased from Sigma. 

Synthesis
Thermal evaporation. Corning glass and SiO2/Si++ substrates were 
sonicated for 5 min in acetone, then 5 min in isopropyl alcohol, then 
blow-dried and O2 plasma for 5 min. The 99.99% silver wire was 
cut and loaded into a tungsten boat for thermal evaporation, at 2*10-

6 mbar, in a vacuum chamber, inside a glovebox. 5 nm, 20 nm, 50 
nm nominal thicknesses were deposited on the chosen substrates 
with a rate of 0.3 Å/s. 

O2 plasma treatment. A Diener Electronic Femto Plasma asher was 
used to oxidize the silver films. Molecular oxygen was injected in 
the chamber at pressure of 40 mbar with a flux of 0.5 sccm and the 

plasma with a nominal power of 100 W was regulated with forward 
and reflected power in terms of percentages. The forward power 
plasma power was varied from 10% to 100%, keeping the back-
ward zero, with exposure times ranging from 1 to 5 min.

Metallorganic reaction. In a nitrogen glovebox, 30 l of liquid ben-
zeneselenol were pipetted in a Teflon-lined 22 ml vial next to the 
pre-inserted AgO covered substrate. The sealed vial was transferred 
in a pre-heated oven at 90 °C. The reaction yielded pure [AgSePh]∞
phase in about 30 min based on experiments timed from 2 min up 
to 24 hours. We found important to seal well the vial, not allowing 
external oxygen to flow-in, possibly oxidizing the benzeneselenol 
and producing a color change in the reagent toward darker yellow. 
At the time-stop, the vial was then extracted from the oven and 
opened under a fume hood. The sample was rinsed in acetone then 
isopropyl alcohol to remove the unreacted organo-chalcogen rea-
gent, and blow-dried.

Characterization
X-ray diffraction. Spectra were obtained with a BRUKER D8 
ADVANCE diffractometer with Bragg-Brentano geometry 
equipped with a Cu K1 ( = 1.5440 Å) anode and operating at 40 
kV and 40 mA. All the diffraction patterns were collected at room 
temperature with a grazing angle of 2° and an  acquisition range 
(2) between 5 and 80°;  Measurements on [AgSePh]∞ NC films 
were performed using an angular step of 0.02° with 12 s acquisition 
time, whereas for the silver oxide analysis a step of 0.05° with 6 s 
acquisition time. 

UV-vis. Absorption spectra were obtain by measuring transmission 
spectra on a PerkinElmer Lambda 1050 UV/Vis/NIR spectrometer.

Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. An FTIR Bruker Vertex 
70 was used in transmission mode. Silicon substrate signal was sub-
tracted as baseline reference. The baseline was recorded prior to 
sample spectra acquisition.

Raman spectroscopy. A micro-Raman confocal microscope (inVia 
Raman Microscope Renishaw) using a 50× objective and an exci-
tation wavelength of 532 nm at 0.037 mW incident power. The de-
tection was optics-limited at 50 cm-1.

Scanning electron microscopy. Scanning electron microscopy im-
ages were collected with a JCM-6010LV, JEOL, with a secondary 
electron detector and at an accelerating voltage of 2 keV for the 
electron beam.

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Analyzes have been carried out 
using a Kratos Axis UltraDLD spectrometer. Data have been ac-
quired using a monochromatic Al Kα source, operated at 20 mA 
and 15 kV. High resolution spectra have been acquired at pass en-
ergy of 10 eV, energy step of 0.1 eV and take-off angle of 0 degrees 
with respect to sample normal direction. Analysis area: 300 x 700 
microns. Energy scale calibrated on C 1s at 284.8 eV

Films topography and thickness. The surface topography of the 
films was measured with a Keysight 5600LS Atomic Force Mi-
croscope operated in the Acoustic Mode. The thicknesses of the 
films were measured with a KLA Tencor P-17 Surface Profiler.

Results and Discussion

We make use of a molecular self-assembly method for 

the synthesis of [AgSePh]∞ NC films based on the reaction of 
silver ions with organic benzeneselenol. The optimized reac-
tion parameters for this process are obtained through the expo-
sure of a 40 nm thick AgO film, obtained by mild O2 plasma 
oxidation of a 20 nm silver film, to
a supersaturated 

(PhSeH)/N2 atmosphere at 90 °C. Considered previous studies 
and based on the evidence presented hereafter, we describe the 
reaction in terms of the following chemical equation:


3

4 AgO(s) + 4 PhSeH(l) → 4 [AgSePh]∞(s) + 2 H2O(l) +  O2(g)
(1)

The silver oxide phase AgO is a 1:1 molar mixture of silver(I) 
oxide, Ag2O, and silver(III) oxide, Ag2O3.14,15 It is therefore 
possible to deconstruct the equation into two steps: first, the 
mixed phase AgO undergoes thermal decomposition at high 
temperature to its lower energy state, Ag2O. Second, the Ag2O 
reacts with benzeneselenol to give silver benzeneselenolate. Eq. 
(1) can be broken down to Eq. (2) and (3):

Ag2O3(s) → Ag2O(s) + O2(g)
(2)

2 Ag2O(s) + 4 PhSeH(l) → 4 [AgSePh]∞(s) + 2 H2O(l)
(3)

Equation (2) is supported by thermal analysis studies performed 
by Hoflund et al. who demonstrated that the kinetically unsta-
ble AgO phase decomposes to Ag2O at 100 °C.5,6 Equation (3) 
was already put forward13 as leading acid-base reaction mecha-
nism for converting Ag2O to [AgSePh]∞. The generation of the 
reactive Ag2O in situ from oxidized Ag by heating in the pres-
ence of a benzeneselenol vapor, simplifies our reaction param-
eters to only: 1) Ag deposition thickness; 2) Ag plasma oxida-
tion extent (power, duration, O2 pressure); 3) reaction tempera-
ture; and 4) reaction time. In comparison to previous methods 
for synthesizing this hybrid semiconducting crystal, we can pro-
duce defect-free, few tens of nanometers-size crystals, covering 
centimeters squares areas, adequate for the study of its excitonic 
and transport properties using common techniques. This syn-
thetic method improves upon early generation growth proce-
dures by eliminating variables like water and organoselenide 
powder reactants to control the rate of the reaction. Our study
shows that the morphology and the thickness of the silver and 
silver oxide films have a crucial impact on the characteristics of 
the final [AgSePh]∞ NC film.

Figure 2. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (a) and UV-vis spectra
(b) of Ag (light grey lines), AgO (dark grey lines), and [AgSePh]∞
(orange lines – experimental, dark orange bars – calculated from 
ref. 11). The silver was thermally deposited onto glass, it underwent 
a mild O2 plasma oxidation and this AgO was reacted with ben-
zeneselenol for 30 min.

X-ray diffraction (XRD) is used to monitor the reaction pre-

cursors and products in terms of crystallinity (Figure 2a). The 
starting 20 nm thick silver film is completely oxidized by a mild 
O2 plasma treatment (1 min 10 W, pure O2 atmosphere at 40 
mTorr), and no detectable traces of the silver oxide phase is left 
after 30 min reaction with PhSeH (the AgO phase is assigned 
by XRD analysis and corroborated by X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy (XPS) results, Supporting Figure S1). In parallel, 
UV-Vis spectroscopy (Figure 2b) shows a deep change in the 
silver optical response after O2 plasma and a further change 
upon exposure to PhSeH (reported as [AgSePh]∞, orange line). 
To provide a quantitative assessment regarding the products pu-
rity we performed XPS on the materials thin films. Having ex-
cluded 20% of the oxygen bound to carbon species already ob-
served on the starting Ag film (Figure 3a), we observe silver 
oxidation upon O2 plasma leading to 1.4 oxygen to silver ratio 
(Figure 3b). Following the PhSeH exposure, the oxygen is com-
pletely removed from the film (Figure 3c); this observation 
comes with the caveat that the thickness, measured by mechan-
ical profilometry, shows an increase up to 250 nm in the final 
NC film. Although XPS is a surface sensitive technique, usually 
not suitable to identify potential “bulk” impurities, the NC film 
is not compact and we assume that the reported XPS signal 
fairly represents the atomic content of the analyzed material. By 
taking a closer look at the XPS peaks (Figure S1), we see that 
the thermally deposited silver film is indeed composed of 
Ag(0), with Ag 3d peaks characterized by the asymmetric line 
shape and peak position in agreement with reports in the litera-
ture.16 Upon mild plasma oxidation, multiple contributions sum 
up at the silver peaks energies. The best fit is obtained by con-
sidering a mixed AgO-Ag2O phase following recent literature 
insights.16 The oxygen-silver ratio calculated by integrating the 
XPS peaks due to silver oxides is close to 0.7, supporting the 
mixed composition of the surface phase, not observed by XRD
because of the different techniques probing depth. We under-
stand this discrepancy in terms of higher environmental stability 
of Ag2O compared to AgO when exposed to air, causing a sur-
face stabilization of the first.


4

Figure 3. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of Ag (light 
grey line), AgO (dark grey line), and [AgSePh]∞ (orange line), to-
gether with the spectrum obtained from selenium powder (99.99% 
purity, Sigma-Aldrich) reference (red line). The main peaks are la-
belled and used for elemental analysis. The presence of oxygen in 
the silver sample is due to signal from the SiO2 substrate that van-
ishes in the double-thickness silver oxide sample and in the much 
thicker [AgSePh]∞ NC film. The latest shows no oxygen, and the 
carbon peak is solely related to phenyls. All the peaks not assigned 
to Ag, C and O in the [AgSePh]∞ NC film are clearly due to sele-
nium.

To gain insights in possible metallic silver or oxygen con-

tamination inside the [AgSePh]∞ NC film, Fourier transform in-
frared spectroscopy (FTIR) and Raman spectroscopy were ap-
plied for the first time on this polymer. For the analysis, thicker 
samples obtained from 50 nm silver films are reported in the 
main text for clarity purposes (thinner samples show weaker but 
analogous peaks, see later discussion on different films thick-
nesses comparison). Spectroscopic results on the final product 

are reported in Figure 4 showing the C-C stretches and C-H 
stretches and bending observed by FTIR (panel a) and Raman
(panel b). Highlighted peaks are ascribed to non-centro-sym-
metric atomic displacements as they are active to both spectros-
copies. These peaks are related to the phenyl groups of the ben-
zeneselenol (as it can be seen in Supporting Figure S2) and they 
dominate the vibrational spectra. The absence of the (SeH)
stretching mode at 2305 cm-1 in the infrared spectrum of 
[AgSePh]∞ (Figure 4a) exclude a measurable presence of unre-
acted/unbound benzeneselenol species.17,18 In Supporting Fig-
ure S2 a direct comparison of the [AgSePh]∞ NC film with a 
reported benzeneselenol IR spectra19 is shown. Moreover, we 
also note that no detectable Ag or AgO are present: Ag peaks at 
444 cm-1 and 667 cm-1 and AgO peaks at 458 cm-1 and 669 cm-

1 are missing in the [AgSePh]∞ IR spectrum (Supporting Figure 
S3a) and the 426 cm-1 AgO peak is missing in the Raman spec-
trum (Supporting Figure S3b).

Then we compare the Raman signatures of [AgSePh]∞ (Fig-

ure 4b) with the surface enhanced Raman scattering data de-
scribed by K. Kim and coworkers for absorbed benzeneselenol 
on silver powder.20 Similarly to what they reported,20,21 and in 
agreement with what we have already observed in the IR spec-
trum, we note the absence of the (SeH) stretching mode at 
2301 cm-1 and the (CSeH) scissoring mode at 796 cm-1 found 
in the neat benzeneselenol Raman spectrum. This absence is 
again indicative of only silver-bounded, deprotonated PhSe spe-
cies. Then, we use the assignment Table S1 for benzeneselenol 
monolayer on silver to single out additional peaks present in the 
[AgSePh]∞ NC film. We therefore label all the resonances ex-
cept for three (195 cm-1, 97 cm-1 and 58 cm-1) unrelated to the 
phenyl vibration or pure Ag-Se vibrations, which are therefore 
tentatively assigned to intrinsic [AgSePh]∞ modes. We con-
clude that no additional molecular species different from 
[AgSePh]∞ could be found by means of FTIR and Raman spec-
troscopy in the analyzed samples. The same claim holds for 
thinner films that underwent the reaction for one hour or longer 
under all tested oxidation conditions (see later discussion in the 
text). 


5

Figure 4. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) (a) and Raman spectroscopy (b) plots of [AgSePh]∞ nanocrystal films. No traces 
of silver and silver oxide in the [AgSePh]∞ are found. Shaded areas highlight corresponding peaks in the two spectroscopic techniques, 
enabled by a non-centrosymmetric unit cell. Distinctive peaks characterize the [AgSePh]∞ coordination polymer, mainly associated with the 
phenyl groups (ref. 22, Supporting Table S1) except for the peaks at 58 cm-1, 97 cm-1 and 195 cm-1 assigned to be intrinsic [AgSePh]∞ modes, 
and the 522* cm-1 peak coming from the silicon substrate. FTIR signal below 450 cm-1 is not considered in the analysis due to the instrumental 
noise, which also affects the measurement in the 1450 – 1800 cm-1 range.

Since the oxidation of silver is a critical step in the synthesis 

of the [AgSePh]∞ NC film, details regarding O2 plasma reaction
are important. Indeed, considering the extreme case, without 
oxidation, a 20 nm thin metallic silver film promotes the growth 
of flat, sparsely arranged, micron-scale [AgSePh]∞ crystals over 
the 4 h reaction (Figure S4a). The UV-vis spectrum of such 
sample shows a small excitonic bump (Figure S4c), interest-
ingly different from the exciton spectral shape of Figure 2b. 
This is an effect of the anisotropic excitonic resonances and 
indicative of the different in-plane versus out-of-plane contri-
butions, as reported elsewhere.9 Instead, even just a mild O2
plasma oxidation of the silver film leads to a completely differ-
ent result (after 30 min PhSeH reaction), characterized by a 
nanocrystalline morphology and a characteristic excitonic reso-
nance (Figure S4b,d, respectively). Oxygen plasma was chosen 
for achieving a higher control over the silver oxidation homo-
geneity compared to the UV ozone lamp used in previous stud-
ies.9 The silver film nominal thickness was held fixed at 20 nm, 
while different O2 plasma power and times (see Experimental 
Section) were tested. Figure 5a,b illustrates the evolution of the 
silver to silver oxide crystallinity (a) and light absorption (b). 
Upon short plasma exposure, the silver film oxidizes com-
pletely leaving no detectable metallic silver. As the oxidation 
proceeds, the newly formed silver oxide evolves through differ-
ent crystal phases. While the variation is clearly visible from 
Figure 5a, the assignment of such phases is more subtle and it 

is detailed in Supporting Figures S5,6. The tetragonal AgO 
seems to be the favored crystal phase forming under prolonged 
O2 plasma exposure, while for mild plasma treatment a mixture 
of multiple phases is observed. Considering also the XPS results 
(Supporting Figure S1), a very thin Ag2O layer (not detected by 
XRD) could be present at the surface after air exposure, as this 
is the most stable coordination.

Figure 5. X-rays diffraction (XRD) patterns (a) and UV-vis spec-
troscopy (b) of Ag (grey line) oxidation into AgO (darker grey lines 
corresponding to mild, medium and hard oxidation) due to increas-
ingly more aggressive O2 plasma treatments.

Although all different silver oxides phases lead to [AgSePh]∞
NCs upon benzeneselenol reaction (see Supporting Figure S7), 
the most crucial aspect of O2 plasma appeared to be the mor-
phology change in the silver film, which in turn influences the 


6

morphology at large scale of the [AgSePh]∞ film. In fact, by 
observing the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of the 
silver films before and after different oxidation intensities (Fig-
ure 6), a substantial variation of film roughness emerges. Con-
sidering a 20 nm thin silver film (Figure 6a), only a mild oxida-
tion preserves a root mean square (RMS) roughness (reported 
for a 2 x 2 m area, it does not change significantly up to 10 x 
10 m inspected area) of the same order of magnitude of the 
starting silver film (~2 nm), while harsher plasma conditions
(Figure 6c,d) lead to silver oxide films with much bigger grain 
size, spanning tens of nanometers (~20 nm to ~40 nm RMS
roughness).

Figure 6. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) of a 20 nm silver film, 
before and after different O2 plasma treatments. a, Ag as thermally 
deposited. b, Ag thin film after 1 min O2 plasma 10 W (mild treat-
ment). c, Ag thin film after 1 min O2 plasma 100 W (medium treat-
ment). d, silver thin film after 5 min O2 plasma 100 W power (hard 
treatment). Scale bars, 500 nm.

As a result, the final [AgSePh]∞ films show increased roughness 
on the hundreds of nanometers scale. This has an obvious im-
pact on the UV-vis spectra of the film that show increased light 
scattering at all wavelengths (Figure 7a). Figure 7b-d reports 
SEM images at low magnification of the NC films obtained by 
different AgO film at increased O2 plasma conditions: the 
harder the plasma treatment, the wavier the [AgSePh]∞ NC film.

Figure 7. a, Ag oxidation influence on [AgSePh]∞ film light ab-
sorption. b-d, SEM of the [AgSePh]∞ films obtained from silver 
films that underwent different O2 plasma treatments. From mild O2
plasma (b) medium O2 plasma (c), and hard O2 plasma (d). Scale 
bars, 5 m.

Then we turn our focus on the [AgSePh]∞ growth time. At 

time zero, different sealed vials, containing the silver oxide film 
and the liquid benzeneselenol, are placed in a static oven at 90 
°C. We extract vials from the oven at different times, leaving 
the samples to cool down before proceeding to the rinsing step.
In Figure 8a, UV-vis spectra show a complete disappearance of 
the AgO broad feature after 30 min reaction. The excitonic 
peaks show only a little increase as the reaction proceeds past 
30 min, indeed the profilometer-measured thickness of the films
increases from: 80 nm of the 10 min reaction sample, to about 
300 nm of the 30 min reaction sample and then it stays about 
constant. Nevertheless, the morphology of the film has pro-
nounced variations (Figure 8b-f). The [AgSePh]∞ NCs are al-
ready well-shaped after 30 min reaction, but at the 4 h time-
stamp, something has changed. The crystals appear more clus-
tered, the AFM imaging is more difficult as the surface appears 
sticky (Supporting Figure S9), possibly indicative of unbound 
molecular species that are moving on the surface, causing the 
coalescence of smaller NC into bigger ones, then observed after 
24 h growth (Figure 8f). Indeed no silver oxide precursor is left 
after 30 min (as corroborated by XRD and Raman spectra, Sup-
porting Figure S8) and the possible evolution of NC must then 
come from a rearrangement of the polymer that seems to be ra-
ther mobile at this temperature (90 °C) and conditions (satu-
rated PhSeH atmosphere).

Figure 8. Reaction time effect on [AgSePh]∞ film light absorption 
(a) and film morphology (b-f). After 30 min reaction the silver ox-
ide is no longer detected by UV-vis, and the NCs are already 
formed (d). As the film is left in the reaction environment, the 
PhSeH acts on the NCs by favoring partial decomposition (e), and 


7

subsequent coalescence (f) resulting in better-defined, larger NCs. 
Scale bars, 500 nm.

Finally, the impact of silver film thickness on the growth of 

the NC film morphology, crystallinity, and optical properties is 
assessed. Different silver films thicknesses result in silver oxide 
films having different morphologies and roughness (see AFM 
in Figure 6b and Supporting Figure S10a,b). The minimum 
RMS roughness (2.5 nm) is obtained for the 20 nm Ag thin film, 
which upon mild oxidation double its thickness, while the 5 nm 
and the 50 nm silver thin films show a little higher RMS rough-
ness (6.4 nm and 8.1 nm, respectively). The thinnest silver film
oxidizes resulting in AgO or Ag2O cubic phases (maybe due to 
higher surface to volume ratio, pushing the oxidation toward the 
most stable oxide phase when exposed to air). Thicker Ag films 
lead to AgO tetragonal phase, with complete silver oxidation, 
even upon mild O2 plasma (see XRD in Supporting Figure
S10c). As previously discussed, this silver oxide phase variation 
does not lead to a substantial difference in the products in terms 
of crystallinity. Nevertheless, the oxidized 5 nm silver thin film 
promotes the growth of peculiar micron-size [AgSePh]∞ crys-
tals, well aligned parallel to the substrate (Figure 9b). The sam-
ple surface is homogenously covered by oriented crystals that 
give rise to a particular light absorption bump, contributed by 3 
excitonic peaks. The latter is very similar to the case of the not 
purposely oxidized metallic 20 nm silver film (see the discus-
sion in the Supporting Figure S4), which after 4 h of reaction, 
showed sparse, flat and well surface-aligned [AgSePh]∞ crys-
tals. This parallel observations lead us to the conclusion that sil-
ver oxide ultra-thin films (as it is the case for a native AgO/Ag) 
promote the reaction of ordered, micron size, silver benzene-
selenolate crystals that could be interesting for polarized light 
detection exploiting the high excitonic anisotropicity (in-plane 
versus out-of-plane) of this material.9 Thicker Ag films produce 
instead [AgSePh]∞ NCs, as already discussed. Based on the 
SEM images of Figure 9b,d, we note that thicker Ag films lead 
to larger NCs at fixed oxidation power and reaction time. We 
speculate that this is a direct consequence of the larger amount 
of precursors available close to the nucleation spot where the 
single NC spurs and grows. Moreover it is important to notice 
that even the 50 nm thick silver film (100 nm AgO after plasma
treatment) is completely reacted, leaving no traces of unreacted 
precursors, while all the peak positions are unchanged respect 
to different Ag film thicknesses (see XRD, FTIR and Raman 
spectra reported in Supporting Figure S11).

Figure 9. Silver film thickness effect on the [AgSePh]∞ film light 
absorption (a) and morphology (b-d). Different Ag thicknesses are
tested: 5 nm (b), 20 nm (c), 50 nm (d). The silver is mildly oxidized 
before the PhSeH reaction and the growth time is held fixed at 4 h. 
5 nm thin silver film leads to sparkly different result in the final 
film, characterized by micron-size flat crystals. Thicker AgO films 
instead convert to [AgSePh]∞ films with randomly oriented nano-
crystals that influence the excitonic resonances relative weights in 
the UV-vis experiment (a), inset. Scale bars in (b-d), 500 nm.

This observation has an impact on the understanding of the 

low energy absorption tail revealed by optical spectroscopy on 
every sample hereby presented. In fact, presence of AgO and 
Ag leftovers could indeed affect the optical absorption spectra 
by adding broad features to the sharp excitonic peaks. Which 
were not revealed by a systematic investigation on the silver 
oxidation effect, benzeneselenol reaction time, and silver film 
thickness. On the other hand, the scattering contribution to the 
optical spectra was controlled by changing surface roughness 
while the distinct low energy tail remained unchanged. Conse-
quently, our analysis suggests a more intrinsic nature this fea-
ture to be related to localized in-gap states whose presence 
seems independent from the many reaction parameters explored 
in this article. 

Conclusions

While the metallorganic chalcogenides coordination poly-

mers are still in an early development stage, very appealing op-
toelectronic properties have already been demonstrated. These 
materials offer the possibility of bridging the gap between ionic 
lattices of 2D perovskites and the covalent bonds of 2D transi-
tion metal dichalcogenides. Despite some earlier works on the 
synthesis have been produced in the last 20 years, the system-
atic spectroscopic and electronic investigation of metallorganic 
chalcogenides polymers have been so far limited by samples 
morphology. We approached the material’s synthesis with a 
strong focus on the deployment of the polymer [AgSePh]∞ to 
optoelectronic devices that typically require contactable contin-
uous films. We demonstrate to reach full control over the reac-
tion process, enabled by a quick in in-situ acid-base reaction, 
leading to homogenous and continuous nanocrystal films. The 
first vibrational modes assignment for [AgSePh]∞ is introduced,
and FTIR and Raman spectroscopies used for samples purity 
assessment over possible unreacted precursors. These are ex-
cluded by a concerted spectroscopic analysis at X-ray and in-
frared light. Such observation places a constraint on the origin 
of the light absorption low-energy tail, important for photolu-
minescence applications. Our analysis suggests that this intra-
gap states are not related with the material’s chemical purity and 
reinforce the idea that local disorder in the crystal structure, pre-
viously observe by TEM in-situ experiments, could play a ma-
jor role in this.9 The O2 plasma oxidation of silver films is dis-
cussed, highlighting the formation of the unstable, mixed va-
lence silver oxide AgO. While the oxide phase is shown not to 
play a significant role in the reaction process carried out by ben-
zeneselenol, the morphology of the silver oxide film is im-
portant. Mild silver oxidations are shown to result in smoother 
AgO films leading to low-scattering [AgSePh]∞ NC films. 
Time-depended reactions experiments showed a quick reagent
evolution within tens of minutes. A coalescence phenomenon 
has been observed on fully reacted [AgSePh]∞ NC films, driven
by PhSeH saturated atmosphere at high temperature. Finally, 
different silver oxide film thickness were shown to lead to dif-
ferent final product morphologies:
micron-size substrate 

aligned crystals can be of interest as polarized detectors given 


8

the strong in- versus out-of- plane exciton anisotropicity. On the 
other hand, we recently just shown that larger area, homogenous 
NC films can be used as semiconducting films for photodetec-
tion10 with tunable thickness. Being the silver benzeneseleno-
late representative of a potentially wide metal organic chalco-
genide polymer class, we expect this strategy to be considered 
for the development of similar materials to develop large-area 
self-assembled NC films for optoelectronic applications. 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT

The Supporting Information is available free of charge via the In-
ternet at http://pubs.acs.org.

High resolution XPS and detailed spectroscopic (Raman, 
FTIR) comparison of precursors and products; AgO XRD 
peaks labelling, and silver oxidation effect on the metallor-
ganic reaction; Silver oxidation XRD, SEM, AFM and UV-
vis analysis; Reaction time assessment by XRD, Raman and 
AFM; Film thickness variation analysis; Vibrational spec-
troscopy peaks assignment table.

AUTHORS INFORMATION

Corresponding Authors

* lorenzo.maserati@iit.it, mario.caironi@iit.it

Author Contributions

L.M. and M.C. conceived the project. L.M. performed the synthe-
sis, UV-Vis, Raman, FTIR spectrometry, and SEM. M.P. per-
formed the XPS experiments. S.P. performed the X-ray diffraction 
and topography experiments. The manuscript was written through 
contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the 
final version of the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

L.M. acknowledges the CNST technical staff for their support. 
L.M. thanks Giorgio Giuffredi for the help in the Raman and FTIR 
measurements, and Mary S. Collins for the very useful discussions
on the reaction chemistry. This work was in part carried out at Poli-
fab, the micro- and nanotechnology center of the Politecnico di Mi-
lano.
Work at the CNST was partially financially supported by the Euro-
pean Research Council under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation program “HEROIC”, grant agreement 
638059. The work involving the Molecular Foundry was partially 
supported by the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Research and Innova-
tion Staff Exchange (RISE) project “SONAR”, grant agreement 
734690.

ABBREVIATIONS

PhSeH, benzeneselenol; [AgSePh]∞, silver benzeneselenolate co-
ordination polymer; NC, nanocrystal.

REFERENCES

(1) 
Schneider, C.; Glazov, M. M.; Korn, T.; Höfling, S.; Ur-
baszek, B. Two-Dimensional Semiconductors in the Re-
gime of Strong Light-Matter Coupling. Nature Communica-
tions 2018, 9, 2695.

(2) 
Alivisatos, A. P. Semiconductor Clusters, Nanocrystals, and 
Quantum Dots. Science 1996, 271, 933.

(3) 
Geim, A. K.; Grigorieva, I. V. Van Der Waals Heterostruc-
tures. Nature 2013, 499, 419–425.

(4) 
Mueller, T.; Malic, E. Exciton Physics and Device Applica-
tion of Two-Dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenide 

Semiconductors. npj 2D Materials and Applications 2018, 
2, 29. 

(5) 
Manzeli, S.; Ovchinnikov, D.; Pasquier, D.; Yazyev, O. V.; 
Kis, A. 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Nature Re-
views Materials 2017, 2, 17033. 

(6) 
Mak, K. F.; Shan, J. Photonics and Optoelectronics of 2D 
Semiconductor Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Nature 
Photonics 2016, 10, 216–226.

(7) 
Tian, W.; Zhou, H.; Li, L. Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Per-
ovskite Photodetectors. Small 2017, 13, 1702107.

(8) 
Veselska, O.; Demessence, A. D10 Coinage Metal Organic 
Chalcogenolates: From Oligomers to Coordination Poly-
mers. Coordination Chemistry Reviews 2018, 355, 240–
270.

(9) 
Maserati, L.; Refaely-Abramson, S.; Kastl, C.; Chen, C. T.; 
Borys, N.; Eisler, C. N.; Collins, M. S.; Smidt, T. E.; Bar-
nard, E. S.; Strasbourg, M. et al. Anisotropic 2D Excitons 
Unveiled in Organic-Inorganic Quantum Wells. Mater. 
Horiz. 2020.

(10) 
Maserati, L.; Prato, M.; Pecorario, S.; Passarella, B.; Peri-
not, A.; Thomas, A. A.; Melloni, F.; Natali, D.; Caironi, M. 
Photo-Electrical Properties of 2D Quantum Confined Metal 
Organic 
Chalcogenides 
Nanocrystal 
Films; 
2020.

https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15513; Under review.

(11) 
Cuthbert, H. L.; Wallbank, A. I.; Taylor, N. J.; Corrigan, J. 
F. 
Synthesis 
and 
Structural 
Characterization 
of 

[Cu20Se4(Μ3-SePh)12(PPh3)6] 
and 
[Ag(SePh)]∞. 

Zeitschrift für anorganische und allgemeine Chemie 2002, 
628, 2483–2488.

(12) 
Schriber, E. A.; Popple, D. C.; Yeung, M.; Brady, M. A.; 
Corlett, S. A.; Hohman, J. N. Mithrene Is a Self-Assembling 
Robustly Blue Luminescent Metal–Organic Chalcogenolate 
Assembly for 2D Optoelectronic Applications. ACS Appl. 
Nano Mater. 2018, 1, 3498–3508.

(13) 
Trang, B.; Yeung, M.; Popple, D. C.; Schriber, E. A.; Brady, 
M. A.; Kuykendall, T. R.; Hohman, J. N. Tarnishing Silver 
Metal into Mithrene. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 13892–
13903. 

(14) 
Wells, A. F. Structural Inorganic Chemistry, 1984.

(15) 
Tudela, D. Silver(II) Oxide or Silver(I,III) Oxide? J. Chem. 
Educ. 2008, 85, 863.

(16) 
Ferraria, A. M.; Carapeto, A. P.; Botelho do Rego, A. M. X-
Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy: Silver Salts Revisited. 
Vacuum 2012, 86, 1988–1991.

(17) 
Klayman, D. L.; Günther, W. H. H. Organic Selenium Com-
pounds: Their Chemistry and Biology; Chemistry of organ-
ometallic compounds; Wiley-Interscience, 1973.

(18) 
Sato, Y.; Mizutani, F. Formation and Characterization of 
Aromatic Selenol and Thiol Monolayers on Gold: In-Situ IR 
Studies and Electrochemical Measurements. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 2004, 6, 1328–1331.

(19) 
Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. SpectraBase; SpectraBase Com-
pound 
ID=P01CQt2hVy 
SpectraBase 
Spectrum 

ID=IUERLoQKr3Z 
http://spectrabase.com/spec-

trum/IUERLoQKr3Z?a=SPECTRUM_IUERLoQKr3Z.
(retrieved July 10, 2020).

(20) 
Han, S. W.; Lee, S. J.; Kim, K. Self-Assembled Monolayers 
of Aromatic Thiol and Selenol on Silver:  Comparative 
Study of Adsorptivity and Stability. Langmuir 2001, 17, 
6981–6987. 

(21) 
Han, S. W.; Kim, K. Self-Assembled Monolayers of Orga-
noselenium Compounds on Gold: Surface-Enhanced Raman 
Scattering Study. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science
2001, 240, 492–497.

(22) 
Huang, F. K.; Horton, R. C.; Myles, D. C.; Garrell, R. L. 
Selenolates as Alternatives to Thiolates for Self-Assembled 
Monolayers:  A SERS Study. Langmuir 1998, 14, 4802–
4808.


9

TOC Graphic


