Amorphous state of sp2 solid carbon 
 
E. F. Sheka *1, Ye. A. Golubev 2, N. A. Popova 1 
 
1 Peoples’ Friendship University (RUDN University) of Russia, Miklukho-Maklay, 6, 117198 

Moscow, Russia 

2 Yushkin’s Institute of Geology, Komi Science Center, Ural Branch of RAS, Pervomayskaya, 54, 
167982, Syktyvkar, Russia 
 
*Corresponding authors:  e-mail: sheka@icp.ac.ru (Elena Sheka) 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT. Two-mode valence electron configuration of carbon atoms lays the foundation of 
the unique two-mode amorphous state of the monoatomic carbon solid. From the fundamentals of 
solid-state physics, sp3 and sp2 amorphous carbons are two different amorphous species 
characterized by conceptually different short-range orders, namely, groups of tetrahedrally bonded 
sp3 configured atoms and nanoscale size-restricted sp2 graphene domains framed with heteroatom 
necklaces.  Molecular character of sp2 amorphics is coherent with the reaction mechanism of the 
solid amorphicity in due course of the enforced fragmentation.  
 
KEYWORDS: sp2 and sp3 amorphous carbons; sp2 amorphics with molecular structure; graphene 
domains; heteroatom necklace; enforced fragmentation 
 
 
I. NEW GRAPHENE STORY OF OLD AMORPHOUS CARBON 
 

Recent purposeful studies [1–4] have completed the gradually nascent change in the view 

of sp2 amorphous carbon as a well-known, familiar physicochemical subject, the beginning of 
which was laid back in 1941 [5], transferring it to the rank of high-tech material of modern 
nanotechnology. We are talking about material known to humankind since the first decomposed 
bonfire, which left behind black soot and charcoal. Today, this applies to billions (anthracite coal) 
- millions (shungite carbon) - thousands (anthraxolite and blackcarbon coatings, which are present 
everywhere and accompany almost all minerals in nature) tons of only discovered natural deposits 
and hundreds of millions of tons of synthetic black carbon produced industrially. All this black 
carbon wealth is amorphous carbon, or a monoatomic solid without long-range order, the atoms 
of which form sp2 configured valence bonds with each other. Because of scrupulous studies [1-4], 
it was finally established that the black carbon richness described above has a unique common 
basis, namely, nano-micro-scale molecular compositions of hexagonal honeycomb structures of 
carbon atoms (graphene domains) framed by various heteroatom necklaces formed by oxygen, 
hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur, halogen and other atoms. These framed graphene molecules are basic 
structural elements (BSUs), varying in size and shape, as well as differing in the chemical 
composition of the necklaces depending on the history or method of origin and/or production of 
the black carbon described above. The discovered and experimentally confirmed, graphene nature 
of this black gold leads to a revolutionary revision of the theory, modeling and interpretation of 
the experiment related to this class of solids, which concerns:  

Experiment: multilevel fractal structure, accompanied by pronounced porosity; BSU 

graphene domains; heteroatom framing necklaces - the nature of their occurrences and functions; 

Theory: class of amorphous solids - amorphics with a molecular structure; BSU of variable 

size as a carrier of size-sensitive effects; molecular-crystalline dualism with respect to the spectra 
of electronic and vibrational states; molecular and solid-state quasiparticle approximations as 
research methods; 


Modeling: nanoscale framed graphene molecules (real BSUs) as objects of modeling; the 

radical nature of BSU; size-kinetic nature of stabilization of BSU molecular radicals; manifestation 
of the radical nature of BSU; 

Practical applications based on spin chemistry, carbocatalysis, spin tribology, spin 

geochemistry, and spin medicine of sp2 graphenous amorphous carbons.  

All the issues present the modern content of the current material science of the sp2 

amorphous carbons and many successful results can be found in literature related to each of them 
to construct the building of this peculiar material. However, there are still some unanswered 
fundamental questions which prevent from the construction and those are the following: (i) what 
is amorphous state of the solid carbon from the standpoint of general solid-state concepts; and (ii) 
what is the place and role of sp2 amorphous carbons in the total picture of the carbon amorphicity. 
The current paper is aimed at answering these questions.  
 
 
II. TODAY’S PRESENTATION OF AMORPHOUS CARBON  
 

Amorphous carbons (ACs) are widely common and present a big allotropic class of bodies, 

both natural and synthetic. Natural amorphics are products of the activity of the Nature’s laboratory 
during geological billion-million-year time. Exhausted geological examinations allowed 
suggesting a few classification schemes of carbon species (see [6-11] but a few), one of which, to 
whose updated form geologists are returning today, slightly changed with respect to original [6], 
is schematically shown in Fig. 1a. The scheme presents a continuous evolution of pristine 
carbonaceous masses into ordered crystalline graphite thus exhibiting the main stream of carbon 
life in the Nature. The evolution is presented as increasing carbonization rank of intermediate 
products. As seen in the figure, a general picture can be split into two gloves, the left of which 
starts with plants and sediments of different kinds and proceeds through sapropels to brown coals 
and later to convenient coals and anthracite. The endpoint on the way is graphite. As for the right 
glove, it covers carbonization of pristine gas and distillate oil and proceeds through petroleum and 
naphthoids to asphalts and then to kerites, anthraxolites, and shungites. As in the previous case, 
graphite is the endpoint. Certainly, the division is not exactly rigid, due to which a mixture of the 
two fluxes, particularly, at early stages of carbonization, actually occurs. This scheme is related to 
sp2 amorphous carbon that actually dominates in the Nature. Natural sp3 amorphous carbon is not 
so largely distributed, due to which diamond-like natural ACs have become top issues of the 
carbon mineralogy [12, 13] only recently.  

The family of synthetic amorphous carbons is quite large, covering species different by not 

only the carbonization rank, but also a mixture of sp2 and sp3 components. Analogously to natural 
species, synthetic amorphics were classified as well [14, 15] and the relevant classification scheme 
is presented in Fig. 1b. Previously ternary, in the current study, it is completed to a rhombic one 
to take into account oxygen as one other important ingredient, which is caused by large 
development of modern techniques of the ACs production. Comparing schemes presented in Figs. 
1a and 1b, it becomes evident that those are related to fully different communities of substances. 
If natural amorphics belong to sp2 carbon family and are rank-characterized with respect to the 
stage of their metamorphism and carbonization, synthetic amorphics are mainly characterized by 
sp3-configured solid carbon. sp2 Group of the synthetic species takes only small place, marked by 
oval, in the total family, characterized by the highest carbonization. Because of a small amount of 
sp3 solid amorphous carbon in nature, special technologies to produce t-C, t-CH (t means 
tetragonal), and sputtered sp2& sp3 mixed -C:H products were developed. It is necessary to 
complement this part of carbon solids by graphene oxide which, in ideal case, corresponds to sp3 
configured carbon only and to about 30 wt % of oxygen and which cannot be presented on the 
considered planar classification scheme. As for sp2 synthetic amorphics, for a long time they were 
presented by multi-tonnage industrial production of glassy (covering graphitic, black, activated 
and other highly carbonized) carbon [16]. However, the graphene era called to life a new high-


tech material – technical graphenes [17] which are the final product of either oxidation-reduction 
[18] or oxidation-thermally-shocked exfoliation [19] of nanosize graphite. Two new members of 
this community are on the way – that are laser-induced graphene (LIG) manufactured by multiple 
lasing on cloth, paper, and food [20] and extreme quality flash graphene (FG) [21], closest in 
ordering to graphite.  

 

Figure 1. a. The path of carbon life in the Nature: Amorphous carbons based on the Uspenskiy’s 
classification [6]. b. Rhombic phase diagram of synthetic amorphous carbon-hydrogen-oxygen 
system.  
 

Therefore, sp2 ACs constitute the main part of amorphous carbon. Despite they have been 

the object of study and practical use for hundreds of years, until now they have not been considered 
from the general concept of the solid-state physics. The amorphicity of solids was widely studied 
and the main concepts are accumulated in monograph [22]. The first conceptual issue concerns a 
considerable degree of amorphous solid ordering that is subdivided into short-range (local) and 
medium range ones, the boundary between which passes around a few nm. The second issue is 
related to the direct interconnection of the solids properties and their local ordering due to which 
establishing a local structure has always been the main goal of studying. The peak development of 
this solid state physics was reached in the third quarter of the previous century. Historically, the 
most attention has been given to monoatomic Si and Ge, which, it would seem, is quite conducive 
to our study, because carbon, silicon, and germanium form a common tetrel family so that a similar 
behavior could be expected to all the members. As was found, tetrahedrally bonded sp3 configured 
atoms form the short-range order of Si and Ge amorphous solids. However, in the case of carbon, 
as seen in Fig. 1b, similar amorphous compositions of carbon are concentrated near sp3 corner and 
are related to t-C phase. The main part of the pure C-amorphics is presented by sp2-configured 

(b)
(a)


solids, which do not exist in the case of Si and Ge. We believe that this feature is on line with other 
exclusivenesses related to the tetrel family, such as the absence of both aromatic families of Si and 
Ge chemical compounds including fullerenic species, on the one hand, and freestanding 
honeycomb monolayer silicene and germanene similar to graphene, on the other. The feature is 
caused by an extreme radicalization of the elongated double covalent bonds X=X (X= Si, Ge) [23, 
24], which makes the bodies chemically unstable under ambient conditions. Therefore, from the 
standpoint of general concepts of the solids amorphicity, monoatomic solid carbon has the unique 
ability to form amorphous (as well as crystalline) states of two types, characterized by 
fundamentally different short-range orders presented by either tetrahedral sp3 groups of bonded 
atoms  or an sp2 honeycomb network of benzenoid units, thus differentiating sp3 and sp2 
amorphous carbon.  The short-range order of the first group amorphics is rather simple and similar 
to that one widely studied for Si and Ge [16]. In contrast, the case of sp2 amorphics is quite peculiar 
and must be considered in details.  

Recent comparative studies [1-4] together with a large pool of individual data have shown 

that these amorphics form a particular class of solids. As turned out, the general architecture of 
both natural and synthetic species is common and can be characterized as multilevel fractal 
structure [25, 26], albeit differing in details at each level. The amorphics’s structure of the first 
level is well similar in all the cases and is presented by basic structure units (BSUs). As mentioned 
above, the units are framed graphene molecules and/or graphene domains. The framing plays a 
decisive role, ensuring the formation and stability of short-range order, on the one hand, and 
preventing crystallization, on the other [27, 28], thus allowing attributing the origination of sp2 
ACs to the reaction amorphization [22]. The second level structure is provided with nano-thick 
BSUs stacks, which confidently recorded by X-ray and neutron diffraction structural studies of sp2 
ACs of all types [2]. The third-level structure of the amorphics reliably follows from the porous 
structure evidently observed experimentally [26, 29. It is constructed from the BSUs stacks but the 
final compositions depends on the stacks lateral dimension. When the latter is at the first nanometer 
level, the composition presents globules of ~10 nm in size, which corresponds to pores, size of 
which is first nanometers as well [30]. Further aggregation of globules leads to the formation of 
micro-nanosize agglomerates with pores of tens nm [26]. Such a structure is typical to natural ACs 
such as shungite carbon, anthraxolite, anthracite as well as black carbon coating of diamonds [31], 
mixed carbon-silica  spherical ‘sweets’ [32], black carbon in meteorites [33] and metamorphosed 
polymictic sandstones [34] and none of the exclusions has been known so far. Figure 2 presents 
schematically the evolution of amorphic structure of this kind from a single BSU to macroscopic 
powder. A schematic structure of a globule, shown in the figure, is designed on the basis of data 
related to shungite carbon. Molecule C66O4H6 constitutes one of possible models of the specie 
BSUs based on the graphene domain C66. The model is commensurate by size with real BSU and 
its heteroatom necklace is composed basing on chemical data of the species established in [2]. 
Combined into four-, five-, and six-layer stacks in relation with the structural data [1-3], the 
molecules create a visible picture of the nanoscale globules, further agglomeration of which 
provides the final nanostructured view of the species presented by 3D AFM image in the figure. 
In contrast to natural bodies, synthetic amorphics are characterized by a large dispersion of BSUs 
size from units to tens and/over first hundreds of nanometers. At the low-limit end of the 
dispersion, the amorphic structure is similar to that of natural species described above. At the high-
limit end, the BSUs size does not prevent from BSUs packing in nanosize-thick stacks while the 
latter laterally extended are further packed in a paper-like structure exemplified for technical 
graphenes in Fig. 3.  
The above concept concerning sp2 ACs structure is based on planar BSUs. The latter are indeed 
characteristic of the real structure and are numerous. However, sometimes the images of natural 
ACs also contain bent fragments, and some of them form smoothly bent ribbons up to first tens 
nanometers in size. Since interplanar spacing d for these arched structural fragments is usually 
0.34–0.38 nm, the bending cannot be connected with a chemical modification of BSU within its 
basal plane that might curve the graphene domains. It is reasonable to relate the bending of BSUs 


to the copresence of various mineral inclusions in deposites, which usually accompany ACs 
formation, thus, for example, from silica micro- and nanoparticles to metal nanoparticles in the 
case of shungite carbon [17].  
 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Schematic transformation from a single BSU molecule (one of the BSU models C66O4H6 
for shungite carbon [3]) to powdered solid amorphous carbon via BSU stacks and globule(s). The 
stacks consist of a number of BSU layers from 4 to 7, differently oriented to each other. Planar 
view on a model globule composed of different stacks, with total linear dimensions of ~ 6 nm.  
Dark gray, red and blue balls depict carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms, respectively. 𝐿𝐶𝑆𝑅

𝑎
 and 

𝐿𝐶𝑆𝑅

𝑐
 are linear size of BSU and BSU stack thickness of 2.0 nm and 2.1 nm, respectively; 𝑑 is 

interlayer distance of 0.348 nm [2]. 3D AFM image of globular structure of shungite carbon 
powder obtained with NTEGRA Prima, NT-MDT. The size distribution of the observed nanoscale 
motives is peaked at 25 nm. 

 


 

Figure 3. SEM images of technical graphene Ak-rGO [35] and TE-rGO [36]. Adabted from Ref. 
[3].  
 
 
III. ENFORCED FRAGMENTATION AS THE AMORPHICITY TYPE OF sp2 SOLID 
CARBON 

 

 Continuing the discussion of the general view of the sp2 carbon amorphicity, we should dwell on 
one more distinctive feature. Evidently, the molecular nature of BSUs makes it possible to reliably 
attribute sp2 ACs to amorphics with a molecular structure. However, in contrast to typical 
representatives of this class of solids, which are based on molecules of a stable standard structure 
[38, 39], BSUs of sp2 ACs are not standard neither structurally nor atomically, so that their 
structural and chemical-content data, such as obtained in [1-3], represent only statistically 
averaged quantities. For example, the positions of hydrogen and oxygen atoms in the BUS 
heteroatom necklace, shown in Fig. 2, can markedly vary. The same concerns the molecule shape 
and exact size. Besides, in the case of ACs, the transition from disordered amorphous structure to 
ordered one occurs quite differently. In ordinary amorphics, the ordering proceeds as a gradual 
accommodation of the positions of constituent molecules with respect to each other via a sequence 
of mesomorphic transformation thus aligning translational periodicity (see details in [39]). In 
contrast, the crystallization, better to say, graphitization of sp2 ACs occurs due to increasing the 
BSU size, as is shown schematically in Fig. 4. To trace processing, we have fixed the atomic 
C:O:H relative content by the data related to shungite carbon [2] and have simulated the 
intermediate transition by growing the graphene domain. Certainly, the size-increasing of 
individual BSUs is accompanied with bridging of both BSUs themselves and stacks of them. For 
many years, this bridging was considered as a main process of sequential ordering of the primary 
block-mosaic structure of natural ACs [40-43]. Obviously, the priority of one of the two processes 
depends on the environment. Nevertheless, not depending on whichever process dominates in 
practice, we should come to a conclusion that sp2 amorphous solid state can not be attributed to 
any of the known types of disorder characteristic for monoatomic solids [22]. What is observed 
empirically in the case of ACs, in terms of solid-state physics can be attributed to enforced 
fragmentation of graphite and/or graphene crystals. Obviously, the fragmented solid can be 
obtained from both the top and bottom. In the first case, it concerns the disintegration of pristine 
graphite and/or graphene crystal while in the second case it concerns stopping the graphitization 
of pristine graphene lamellas. 
 
 


 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4. BSU models for sequential graphitization of amorphous carbon like shungite carbon. 
Graphene domains top down: (5,5)NGr (nanographene), (9,9)NGr, (11,11)NGr, (15,12)NGr of 
lateral dimensions 1.2 nm, 2.2 nm, 2.7 nm, and 3.3 nm, respectively. Dark gray, red and blue balls 
depict carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms. The chemical composition of the species is described 


by an average per one benzenoid formula C6O0.36H0.55 in accordance with chemical content 
determined in [2].    
 

There might be various reasons for fragmentation, including mechanical impact, chemical 

reaction, temperature shock, exposure to hard radiation, etc., which can be easily traced by the 
history of the production of the ACs samples. The fragments ensure the short-range order of the 
solids and are characterized by large variety with respect to not only different classes of ACs 
provided by different history and/or technology of their production, but the same class as well. 
The variety concerns the BSUs size, shape, variation of chemical content, and, which is the most 
important, the distribution of heteroatoms in the BSU framing area (chemical necklace) at fixed 
atomic percentage in average. Thus, models presented in Fig. 4, are only ‘one snapshot’ of 
communities related to possible permutations of hydrogen and oxygen atoms in the framing area 
that have no number.  

Another distinctive feature of sp2 ACs lies in the radical nature of their BSU fragments. As 

shown [2, 3], BSUs of ~ 2nm in size are molecular radicals whose chemical activity is concentrated 
at non-terminated edge carbon atoms (these atoms are clearly seen on the top of Fig. 2) [2]. 
However, as can be seen from the figure, increasing the molecule size leads to decreasing edge 
atoms number due to which, at a fixed atomic composition C: O: H, the number of non-terminated 
atoms and the degree of the associated radicalization decrease. The weakening of the radicalization 
of BSU as its size grows, in particular, explains the well-known empirical fact that enforced 
additional fragmentation leading to nanostructuring of initial synthetic sp2 ACs significantly 
enhances the yield of the reaction when these amorphics are used as carbocatalysts [44, 45].  
 
IV. CONCLUSION 
 
Structural and analytical studies of sp2 amorphous carbons were analyzed from the general 
concepts of the solid-state amorphicity, due to which they can be attributed to molecular amorphics 
of a new type. The solids are not characterized by structurally and atomically standard molecules 
but their basic structure units present graphene domains framed with heteroatom necklaces.  The 
domains are resulted from the graphite and/or graphene fragmentation, which itself becomes a 
distinguished feature of the sp2 carbon amorphization, which can be called enforced fragmentation 
of honeycomb canvas. Chemical reactions occurred at the graphene domain edges are suggested 
to be one of the most important causes of the fragmentation stabilization. Thus originated 
fragments, becoming the basic structural units (BSUs) of AC, are of particular kind presenting 
size-restricted graphene domains in the halo of heteroatom necklaces. The weak wdW interaction 
between the BUSs makes them the main defendants for the numerous properties of the sp2 
amorphous carbon solids.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The study was performed as a part of research topics of the Institute of Geology of Komi Science 
Center of the Ural Branch of RAS (No. AAAA-A17-117121270036-7). The publication has been 
prepared with the support of the “RUDN University Program 5-100”.   
 
References 
 

1. Sheka, E.F.; Hołderna-Natkaniec, K.; Natkaniec, I.; Krawczyk, J. X.; Golubev, Ye.A.; 

Rozhkova, N.N.; Kim, V.V. ; Popova, N.A.; Popova, V.A. Computationally supported 
neutron scattering study of natural and synthetic amorphous carbons. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2019, 123, 15841-15850. 

2. Golubev, Ye. A.; Rozhkova, N. N.; Kabachkov, E. N.; Shul'ga, Y. M.; Natkaniec-

Hołderna, K.; Natkaniec, I.; Antonets, I. V.; Makeev, B. A.; Popova, N. A.; Popova, V. 


A.; Sheka, E. F. sp2 Amorphous carbons in view of multianalytical consideration: 
normal, expeсted and new. J. Non-Cryst. Solids 2019, 524, 119608. 

3. Sheka, E. F.; Natkaniec, I.; Ipatova, E. U.; Golubev, Ye. A.; Kabachkov, E. N.; 

Popova, V. A. Heteroatom necklaces of sp2 amorphous carbons. XPS supported INS 
and DRIFT spectroscopy. FNCN, DOI: 10.1080/1536383X.2020.1794849, 2020. 

4. Sheka, E.F.; Golubev, Ye.A.; Popova, N.A. Graphene domain signature of Raman 

spectra of sp2 amorphous carbons. arXiv:2007.06532 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci], 2020. 

5. Warren, B.E. X-ray diffraction in random layer lattices. Phys. Rev. B. 1941, 59, 639–

643.  

6. Uspensky, V. A.; Radchenko, O. A.; Glebovskaya, E. A. Basics of Genetic 

Classification of Bitumen; Nedra: Leningrad, 1964 (in Russian). 

7. Cornelius, C.D., Classification of natural bitumen: a physical and chemical approach. 

In Exploration for Heavy Crude Oil fnd Natural Bitumen: AAPG Studies in Geology. 
Ed. Meyer, R.F. 1987, 25, 165–174. 

8.  Jakob, H. Nomenclature, classification, characterization and genesis of natural solid 

bitumen (Migrabitumen) In Bitumen in Ore Deposits. Eds. Parnell, J.; Kucha, H.; 
Landais, P. 1993. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 11–27.  

9. Mossman, D.J.; Nagy, B. Solid bitumens: an assessment of their characteristic, genesis, 

and role in geological processes. Terra Nova, 1996, 8, 114–128. 

10. Pen’kov, V.F. Genetic Mineralogy of Carbonaceous Substances. Moscow: Nedra; 

1996.  

11. Mossman, D. J. Carbonaceous substances in mineral deposits: implications of 

geochemical explorations. J. Geochem. Expl. 1999, 66, 241–247. 

12. Shumilova, T. G. Mineralogy of Native Carbon; Ural Dept RAS: Yekaterinburg, 2003 

(in Russian). 

13. Shumilova, T. G.; Isaenko, S. I.; Divaev, F. K. Mineralogical features of diamond, 

amorphous diamond like carbon and graphite from Chagatay carbonatites 
(Uzbekistan). Mineralogical  Journal (Ukraine) 2013, 35, 81-89. 

14. Robertson, J. Diamond-like amorphous carbon. Mater. Sci. Eng. R Rep. 2002, 37, 129-

281. 

15. Zhang, L.; Wei, X.; Lin, Y.; Wang, F. A ternary phase diagram for amorphous carbon. 

Carbon 2015, 94, 202–213. 

16. Harris, P. J. F. New perspectives on the structure of graphitic carbons. Crit. Rev. Solid 

State Mat. Sci. 2005, 30, 235–253. 

17. Sheka, E. F.; Golubev, E. A. Technical graphene (reduced graphene oxide) and its 

natural analog (schungite). Technical Physics 2016, 61, 1032–1038. 

18. Chua, C. K.; Pumera, M. Chemical reduction of graphene oxide: a synthetic chemistry 

viewpoint. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 291-312. 

19. Krishnan, D.; Kim, F.; Luo, J.; Cruz-Silva, R.; Cote, L. J.; Jang, H. D.; Huang, J. 

Energetic graphene oxide: challenges and opportunities. Nanotoday 2012, 7, 137-152. 

20. Chyan, Y.; Ye, R.; Li, Y.; Singh, S. P.; Arnusch, C. J.; Tour, J. M. Laser-induced 

graphene by multiple lasing: toward electronics on cloth, paper, and food. ACS Nano 
2018, 12, 2176-2183.  

21. Luong, D. X.; Bets, K. V.; Algozeeb, W. A.; Stanford, M. G.; Kittrell, C.; Chen, W.; 

Salvatierra, R. V.; Ren, M.; McHugh, E. A.; Advincula, P. A.; Wang, Z.; Bhatt, M.; 
Guo, H.; Mancevski, V.; Shahsavari, R.; Yakobson, B. I.; Tour. J. M. Gram-scale 
bottom-up flash graphene synthesis. Nature 2020, 577, 647–651.  

22. Elliot, S.R. Physics of Amorphous Materials; Longman: London, New York, 1983. 
23. Sheka, E. F.  Stretching and breaking of chemical bonds, correlation of electrons, and 

radical properties of covalent species. Adv. Quant. Chem. 2015, 70, 111-161. 


24. Sheka, E. F. Silicene is a phantom material. Nanosyst. Phys. Chem. Math. 2016, 7, 983-

1001. 

25. Razbirin, B. S.; Rozhkova, N. N.; Sheka, E. F.; Nelson, D. K.; Starukhin, A. N. Fractals 

of graphene quantum dots in photoluminescence of shungite. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 2014, 
5, 838-850. 

26. Avdeev, M. V.; Tropin, T. V.; Aksenov, V. L.; Rosta, L.; Garamus, V. M.; Rozhkova, 

N. N. Pore structures in shungites as revealed by small-angle neutron scattering. 
Carbon 2006, 44, 954-961. 

27. Sheka, E. F.; Rozhkova, N. N. Shungite as the natural pantry of nanoscale reduced 

graphene oxide. Int. J. Smart Nano Mat. 2014, 5, 1-16.  

28. Hoffmann, R. Small but strong lessons from chemistry for nanoscience. Angew Chem. 

Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 93-103. 

29. Golubev, Ye.A.; Ulyashev, V.V.; Veligzhanin, A.A. Porosity and structural parameters 

of Karelian shungites according to the data of small-angle synchrotron radiation 
scattering and microscopy. Crystallgr. Rep. 2016, 61, 66-77. 

30. Rozhkova, N. N. Aggregation and stabilization of shungite carbon nanoparticles. Ecol. 

Chem., 2012, 4, 240-251. 

31. Duan, X.; Ao, Z.; Zhang, H.; Saunders, M.; Sun, H.; Shao, Z.; Wang, S. Nanodiamonds 

in sp2 /sp3 configuration for radical to nonradical oxidation: Core-shell layer 
dependence. Appl. Cat. B: Envirom. 2018, 222, 176-181. 

32. Sadovnichii, R.V.; Rozhkov, S.S.; Rozhkova, N.N. The use of shungite processing 

products in nanotechnology: Geological and Mineralogical Justification. Smart 
Nanocomp. 2016, 7, 111-119.  

33. Garvie, L.A.J.; Buseck, P.R. Carbonaceous materials in the acid residue from the 

Orgueil carbonaceous chondrite meteorite. Meteor. Planet. Sci. 2006, 41, 633–642.  

34. Povarennykh, M.Yu.; Matvienko, E.N.; Knot.ko, A.V.; Shatalova, T.B. Сharacteristic 

of natural carbon nanominerals and their aggregates from the Dzhaharduk area 
(Uzbekistan). Mineral. 2018, 4, 85–97. 

35. Tkachev, S.V.; Buslaeva, E.Yu.; Naumkin, A.V.; Kotova, S. L.; Laure S.V.; Gubin, 

S.P. Reduced graphene oxide. Inorg. Mat. 2012, 48, 796-802.  

36. Sheka, E. F.; Natkaniec, I.; Mel’nikov, V.; Druzbicki, K. Neutron scattering from 

graphene oxide paper and thermally exfoliated reduced graphene oxide. Nanosystems: 
Phys. Chem. Math. 2015, 6, 378-393. 

37. Kovalevskii, V.V. Carbon Substance of Schungite Rocks: Structure, Genesis, 

Classification. Doctoral Dissertation (geology and mineralogy) Syktyvkar, 2007. 

38. Broude, V. L.; Klimusheva, G. V.; Prikhotjko, A. F.; Sheka, E. F.; Yatcenko, L. P. 

Absorption Spectra of Molecular Crystals; Polysubstituted Benzene Compounds; 
Naukova Dumka: Kiev, 1972 (in Russian). 

39. Sheka, E. F. Spectroscopy of amorphous substances with molecular structure. 

Sov. Phys. Usp. 1990, 33, 147–166. 

40. Franklin, R. E. Crystallite growth in graphitizing and non-graphitizing carbons. Proc. 

R. Soc. Lond. A Mat.Phys. Sci. 1951, 209, 196-218. 

41. Beyssac, O.; Rouzaud, J.-N.; Goffé, B.; Brunet, F.; Chopin, C. Graphitization in a high-

pressure, low-temperature metamorphic gradient: a Raman microspectroscopy and 
HRTEM study. Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 2002, 143, 19–31. 

42. Buseck, P. R.; Huang, B.-J. Conversion of carbonaceous material to graphite during 

metamorphism. Geochim.Cosmochim. Acta 1985, 49, 2003–2016. 

43. Kovalevski, V. V.; Buseck, P. R.; Cowley, J. M. Comparison of carbon in shungite 

rocks to other natural carbons: an X-ray and TEM study. Carbon 2001, 39, 243–256.  

44. Sheka, E. F. Graphene oxyhydride catalysts in view of spin radical chemistry. 

Materials 2020, 13, 565. 


45. Deng, D.; Yu, L.; Pan, X.; Wang, S.; Chen, X.; Hu, P.; Sunb, L.; Bao, X. Size effect of 

graphene on electrocatalytic activation of oxygen. ChemComm 2011, 47, 10016–
10018. 

 

 
 

 


