Accepted manuscript
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006

* Corresponding author.
© 2020

† These authors contributed equally to this work
This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

‡ These authors contributed equally to this work
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Assembling patchy plasmonic nanoparticles with aggregation-
dependent antibacterial activity

Francesco Brasili,†a,b Angela Capocefalo,†a Damiano Palmieri,a,b Francesco Capitani,c Ester Chiessi,b Gaio Paradossi,b
Federico Bordi ‡a,d,e and Fabio Domenici *‡b

a Dipartimento di Fisica, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

b Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Chimiche, Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca Scientifica, 00133 Rome, Italy.

c Synchrotron SOLEIL, L'Orme des Merisiers, Saint-Aubin, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

d CNR-ISC UOS Roma, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.
e CNIS Nanotechnology Research Center Applied to Engineering, Sapienza Università di Roma, Piazzale Aldo Moro 5, 00185 Rome, 
Italy.

Abstract

We realise an antibacterial nanomaterial based on the self-limited assembly of patchy plasmonic colloids, 
obtained by adsorption of lysozyme to gold nanoparticles. The possibility of selecting the size of the 
assemblies within several hundred nanometres allows for tuning their optical response in a wide range of 
frequencies from visible to near infrared. We also demonstrate an aggregation-dependent modulation of the 
catalytic activity, which results in an enhancement of the antibacterial performances for assemblies of the 
proper size. The gained overall control on structure, optical properties and biological activity of such 
nanomaterial paves the way for the development of novel antibacterial nanozymes with promising 
applications in treating multi drug resistant bacteria.

Introduction

The ability of handling materials at the nanoscale allows for 
developing multi-functional systems with highly programmable 
properties for a wide range of applications including biotechnology 
and nanomedicine [1-3]. Of particular relevance are novel artificial 
nanomaterials with enzyme-like properties, namely nanozymes, 
that demonstrated an intrinsic antibacterial activity [4-6] as well as 
the capability of enhancing or triggering the action of other agents 
[5]. Such systems are proving to be very effective as self-
therapeutic systems in treating multi drug resistant bacteria [7,8].
The antibacterial activity of nanozymes based on inorganic
materials typically relies on the release of metal ions or reactive 
oxygen species [9-11], which interfere with different biological 
processes including cell metabolism and alter cell membrane 
stability. For these reasons, these species could have toxic effects 
also on the cells of the host organism and induce undesired side 
effects [12-14]. Moreover, it has been recently demonstrated that 
different bacteria species can develop resistance to silver
nanoparticles [15]. These drawbacks can be easily overcome by 
employing as active component of the nanozyme biomolecules such 
as proteins, which combine intrinsic biocompatibility with highly 
selective and specific recognition properties, nearly impossible to 
achieve using synthetic materials [9].
Among the different scaffolds that could be employed for 
assembling multi-functional materials, gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) 
offer several advantages. They are inert and stable under most 
environmental conditions and exhibit low toxicity [14]. In addition, 
they allow for easy manipulation and surface conjugation, by both 
covalent and noncovalent interactions, with functional agents [16-
18].
On top of this, AuNPs provide further antibacterial 

mechanisms, arising from their versatile optical and photothermal 
properties [13]. These are determined by the excitation of collective 
electronic oscillations at the metal surface, namely the localised 

surface plasmons, whose resonance frequency can be tailored by 
the nanoparticles size, shape and spatial organisation, as well as by 
the dielectric properties of the surrounding media [18-20]. The 
efficient conversion of the absorbed light into heat allows for 
designing photothermal vectors capable to burst bacteria [21]. 
Moreover, the possibility of tuning the optical properties in a wide 
range of frequencies, spreading from visible to infrared, opens for 
the in vivo application of these plasmonic devices, taking advantage 
of the transparency of blood and tissues in near infrared (NIR) [22]. 
A key issue in designing versatile nanoparticle-based materials is to 
reach a strict control on the assembly process underlying the spatial 
arrangement of AuNPs. An effective strategy adopted for 
controlling the organisation in solution relies on interfacing AuNPs 
with 
biomolecules, 
whose 
programmable 
intermolecular 

interactions provide the opportunity of assembling hybrid systems 
with the desired structure and functionality [23-25]. In addition, 
their responsiveness to external stimuli such as temperature, pH and 
incident light supplies further degrees of freedom in controlling the 
properties and the assembly of the whole system [26]. Thus, in 
order to take full advantage of such potentialities, it is essential to 
gain a fine control not only on the guided assembly, but also on the 
effects prompted by the environmental conditions. In this respect, 
several studies report on the protein-induced aggregation of AuNPs 
[27-30], but a comprehensive explanation of all the mechanisms 
involved is still lacking. In particular, how the adsorption of 
molecules affects the colloids surface properties and triggers the 
aggregates formation is far from being fully elucidated.
In this work, we developed a novel plasmonic nanozyme with 
tunable antibacterial properties based on the assembly of patchy 
AuNPs. Colloids with inhomogeneous surface charge were 
obtained by adsorption of lysozyme to anionic AuNPs. The arising 
charge-patch interactions allow for driving their self-limited 
aggregation into stable clusters with selected finite size [31,32]. We 
chose lysozyme (Lyz), an antimicrobial enzyme with size of 3 nm, 


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

for its stable globular folding and positive net charge at 
physiological pH due to the high isoelectric point at pH 11.3. 
We performed a thorough analysis of the assembly of Lyz-
decorated AuNPs (Lyz-AuNPs)
as a function of all the 

experimental parameters involved in the process to gain a close
control on the fabrication of Lyz-AuNPs assemblies. We therefore 
focused on the antibacterial function of the system, in terms of both 
plasmonic and catalytic properties, in relation to the colloidal 
assembly with the aim of highlighting their strict integration and 
interplay and realising a nanozyme with a high level of tunability.

Materials and methods

Materials
Citrate-stabilised AuNPs with nominal size of 100 nm and 60 nm 
were provided by Ted Pella Inc. The concentrations of the stock 
solutions were 9.3 pM and 43 pM, respectively. Chicken egg white 
lysozyme 
powder
(purity 
≥ 
90%)
and 
(3-

Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APTES, purity ≥ 98.5%) were 
provided by Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium citrate buffers at pH 6.5 and 
pH 4.0 were provided by Merk Millipore. The components of the 
system were characterised by Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS)
measurements, in terms of ζ-potential and hydrodynamic diameter
distributions, and UV-Visible absorption spectroscopy in the pH 
conditions employed for the experiments. The centre values of ζ-
potential and hydrodynamic diameter (2RH) distributions are 
reported in Table 1 together with the centre wavelength of the
Localised Surface Plasmon Resonance (LSPR) of AuNPs. For the 
characterisation, lysozyme stock solutions were prepared at the 
concentration of 70 µM.

Sample preparation
Samples were prepared at room temperature. At first, lysozyme was 
dissolved in 20 mM sodium citrate buffer to obtain solutions with 
different concentrations at controlled pH. Lyz-AuNPs colloids were 
therefore prepared at different protein-AuNP molar ratios x by 
adding to each protein solution the same volume of AuNPs stock 
solution and incubating for 2 minutes at room temperature. The 
final concentration of citrate buffer is therefore of 10 mM in all 
samples.
Preliminary control experiments have been performed by UV-
Visible absorption spectroscopy to determine the optimal citrate 
buffer concentration that maintains the pH at the selected value
without altering the AuNPs capping (i.e., without inducing shifts in
the LSPR). 
Measurements as a function of pH were performed according to the 
following protocol. Lyz-AuNPs solutions were prepared at pH 4. 
The pH of each solution was then changed to pH 6.5 by adding 
NaOH. The pH was brought back to 4 by adding HCl.

Table 1. DLS and UV-Visible characterisation of AuNPs and of lysozyme in the two 
pH conditions employed for the experiments. Each reported value is obtained by three 
measurements.

Dynamic Light Scattering
For DLS measurements we employed a NanoZetaSizer apparatus 
(Malvern Instruments LTD), equipped with a 5 mW He-Ne laser
(633 nm wavelength). Experiments were performed at 25°C. To 
obtain the intensity weighted distributions of the hydrodynamic 
diameter (i.e., the diameter of a sphere with the same diffusion 
coefficient of the particle), the intensity autocorrelation functions 
were acquired at an angle of 173°. Correlograms were analysed 
with the CONTIN algorithm to extrapolate the associated decay 
times (Section S1 of ESI). Decay times are used to determine the 
distribution of the diffusion coefficients D of the particles, which in 
turn are converted in a distribution of hydrodynamic diameters 2RH
using the Stokes-Einstein relationship RH = kBT/6πηD, where kBT is 
the thermal energy and η the solvent viscosity.
The ζ-potential was obtained by combining laser Doppler 
velocimetry and phase analysis light scattering to accurately 
determine the average electrophoretic mobility µe
and its 

distribution. The measured values were converted into the ζ-
potential using the Smoluchowski relation:

𝜁 =

𝜇𝑒𝜂

𝜀
(1)

where ε is the solvent permittivity.
The data analyses performed to extrapolate hydrodynamic diameter
and ζ-potential distributions were performed using the Zetasizer 
software provided together with the instrument. The reported values 
are obtained by averaging the centre values of at least three 
distributions measured independently. The associated error is the 
corresponding standard deviation.

Absorption Spectroscopy
For UV-Visible-NIR absorption spectroscopy we employed a v-570 
double ray spectrophotometer (Jasco), with a resolution of 0.1 nm
in the UV-Visible region and 0.5 nm in the NIR region. The 
spectrophotometer is equipped with a Peltier thermostat ETC-505T
(Jasco) to keep the sample temperature at 25°C. The reported 
extinction spectra are normalised to the absorbance at 400 nm. At 
this wavelength the absorption coefficient is proportional to the 
molar concentration of Au(0) in the sample and is assumed to be 
independent on the AuNPs size [30].
Spectra analysis was performed by a band fitting procedure with 
two Gaussian curves to disentangle the contribution to each 
extinction spectrum of the LSPR of single AuNPs from that of the 
inter-particle plasmonic modes due to AuNPs aggregation. 
The LSPR wavelength of the non-aggregated Lyz-AuNPs was 
obtained by fitting the resonance to a Gaussian line shape to 
determine the peak position. Each LSPR wavelength value is the 
average on three independent measurements and the associated 
error is the corresponding standard deviation.
All the analyses were performed with Origin 8.1 software.

Atomic Force Microscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy
Samples for near-field microscopy imaging were prepared at room 
temperature, by incubating 50 µL of sample solution for 10 minutes 
onto a silicon substrate previously functionalised with APTES. The 
deposition procedure based on the substrate derivatisation was 
chosen and accurately optimised with respect to deposition time in 
order to minimise possible modification of the aggregates structure 
during adhesion to the silicon surface [33].

System 
component

pH
ζ-potential
(mV)

2RH
(nm)

resonance wavelength
(nm)

AuNPs 100 nm 6.5
-54 ± 2
102 ± 2
572.2 ± 0.1

AuNPs 60 nm
6.5
-42 ± 3
63 ± 2
536.3 ± 0.1

Lysozyme
6.5
+4.0 ± 0.3
2.9 ± 0.2 --

AuNPs 100 nm 4.0
-48 ± 2
102 ± 2
572.2 ± 0.1

Lysozyme
4.0
+14 ± 1
2.9 ± 0.2 --


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) images were recorded using a 
Dimension Icon Bruker microscope in tapping mode, with a scan 
rate of 0.5 Hz. A cantilever with a spring constant of 42 N/m and a 
tip with a nominal radius of curvature of 2 nm was employed. AFM 
images were analysed by Gwyddion software, version 2.52.
Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images were recorded using 
a Zeiss Auriga 405 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. 
For the evaluation of the inter-particle distances in the deposited 
Lyz-AuNPs clusters, whose details are reported in ESI, SEM 
images have been analysed by ImageJ software, version 1.48v.

Synchrotron Radiation FTIR microspectroscopy
Synchrotron Radiation FTIR microspectroscopy (SR-microFTIR) 
was performed at the SMIS beamline of SOLEIL Synchrotron 
facility (Saint-Aubin, France). Lyz-AuNPs samples for SR-
microFTIR measurements were separated from non-adsorbed 
lysozyme by centrifugation, deposited by drop-casting procedure 
onto a double-polished silicon substrate and dried at room 
temperature.
IR spectra of selected areas were measured in transmission with a 
Continuum XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) IR microscope equipped 
with a liquid nitrogen cooled MCT detector, a 32× Schwarzschild 
objective, a motorized aperture and stage. The microscope was 
coupled to a Nicolet 5700 FTIR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific).
We used an aperture of 8 μm × 8 μm, a spectral resolution of 4 cm-

1 and 200 scans for each acquisition. A background spectrum was 
collected for every batch of spectra through a clean area of the 
silicon substrate. Spectra reported in the present paper are the 
average of at least 5 acquisitions and are presented after baseline 
subtraction, smoothing procedure by the Savitzky-Golay algorithm
(2nd order polynomial, 8 data points) and normalisation to the 
maximum absorbance value. Spectral analysis was performed using 
Origin 8.1 software.

Antibacterial activity assay
The antibacterial activity of samples was assayed at pH 6.5 and 
25°C by employing a commercial kit (Sigma Aldrich). A cell 
suspension was prepared by dissolving lyophilised Micrococcus 
lysodeikticus bacteria in a potassium phosphate buffer at 0.01 % 
(w/v). For each experiment, 30 μL of the sample were added to 800 
μL of bacteria suspension. A turbidimetric assay was performed to 
evaluate the lytic activity ϱ by recording the decrease in time of the 
absorbance at 450 nm A450 with the Jasco v-570 double ray 
spectrophotometer. Typically, kinetic runs were followed for 15 
minutes. The activity rate was determined by the slope dA450/dt of 
the initial linear region of the absorbance trend, according to the 
formula [34]:

𝜚 =

𝑑𝐴450

𝑑𝑡
|
𝑠𝑎𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒−

𝑑𝐴450

𝑑𝑡 |

𝑏𝑙𝑎𝑛𝑘

𝑑𝐴450

𝑑𝑡 |

𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡

(2)

where 

𝑑𝐴450

𝑑𝑡 |

𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑡 = 3×10-5 abs. unit/min is the slope induced in the 

absorbance at 450 nm by one unit of active lysozyme, rescaled to 
the actual volume employed in the experiments (30 μL).
To evaluate the lysis efficiency of the proteins confined in AuNPs 
clusters, the samples were centrifuged to separate non-adsorbed 
protein (supernatant) from the Lyz-AuNPs complexes. We then 
performed independent turbidimetric assays on the Lyz-AuNPs 
overall sample, on the supernatant and on the free protein at the 

same concentration employed to prepare the sample. We therefore 
calculated the normalised activity ϱnorm of the lysozyme confined 
within clusters by the formula:

𝜚𝑛𝑜𝑟𝑚 =

𝜚𝐿𝑦𝑧−𝐴𝑢𝑁𝑃𝑠−𝜚𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡
𝜚𝑓𝑟𝑒𝑒 𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑖𝑛−𝜚𝑠𝑢𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡
(3)

where ϱLyz-AuNPs, ϱsupernatant and ϱfree protein are the activities of the 
Lyz-AuNPs overall sample, of the non-adsorbed proteins and of the 
free protein, respectively.
The reported values are obtained by averaging at least three 
measurements. The associated error is the corresponding standard 
deviation. Data analysis was performed with Origin 8.1 software.

Theoretical background

It is well known (see for example ref. [32] and the literature cited 
therein) that a non-uniformly distributed electric charge at the 
surface of colloidal particles in aqueous solution results in an inter-
particle potential that, even if the net charges on the two particles 
have the same sign, may show a significant attractive component. 
Intuitively such attraction originates from the interplay of short 
range, local interactions between oppositely charged patches on the 
approaching particles and the overall screening due to the ionic 
strength of the solution. In this section, we briefly recall the 
theoretical model for charge-patch interactions developed by 
Velegol and Thwar [31], and we derive an analytical expression for 
the standard deviation σ of the surface potential that accounts for 
the surface charge inhomogeneity.

Interaction potential between charge-patched colloids
The theory of Velegol and Thwar for charge-patch interactions is 
based on the Derjaguin approximation [31]. In this approximation, 
the interaction force F(h) between two spherical particles can be 
expressed as a function of the separation h between their surfaces 
as:

𝐹(ℎ) ∝

𝑎1𝑎2
𝑎1+𝑎2 𝑊(ℎ)
(4)

where a1 and a2 are the two radii of curvature of the particles, and 
W(h) is the interaction potential between two flat surfaces at the 
same distance. This expression highlights that the particles sizes 
contribute only through a scaling factor and do not affect the 
functional form.
To calculate the pair interaction potential V(h), which reduces to 
W(h) for flat surfaces (i.e., for infinite radii of curvature a1, a2 → 
∞), the theory assumes a random distribution of the charge patches 
on the colloids surfaces. In the case of identical particles (a1 = a2 = 
a), V(h) can be expressed in terms of their average surface potential 
ζ and of the corresponding standard deviation σ:

𝑉(ℎ) = 𝜋𝜀𝑎 [(𝜁2 + 𝜎2)ln(1 − 𝑒−2𝜅ℎ) + 𝜁2ln (coth

1

2𝜅ℎ)]
(5)

where ε is the permittivity of the dispersing medium and κ-1 is the 
Debye screening length. The interaction potential combines two 
terms: a repulsive monopole and an attractive multipole, which 
depend on ζ and σ, respectively [32]. Having different interaction 
ranges, the two terms give rise to a potential barrier that the particles 
must overcome to stick together, whose height Vmax is given by:

𝑉𝑚𝑎𝑥 = 𝜋𝜀𝑎 {(𝜁2 + 𝜎2)ln [1 − (
𝜁2

𝜁2+𝜎2)

2
] + 𝜁2ln (2𝜁2+𝜎2

𝜎2
)}
(6)


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

In our case, the spherical particles are the Lyz-AuNPs, whose 
average surface potential has been evaluated by ζ-potential 
measurements. The non-uniformity of the surface charge 
distribution is due to the adsorption of lysozyme, which sparsely 
decorates the colloids surface. If the net charge carried by each 
protein is higher than that of the portion of the AuNP surface on 
which the molecule adsorbs, the resulting patches bear a net charge 
which is opposite in sign to that of the bare particle surface.

Standard deviation of the surface potential in charge-patched 
colloids
The standard deviation of the surface potential is defined as:

𝜎 = √(𝜁0 − 𝜁)2(1 − Φ) + (𝜁𝑐𝑜𝑣 − 𝜁)2Φ
(7)

where Φ is the surface coverage of the colloids (i.e., the portion of 
the AuNPs surface covered by the adsorbed proteins), while ζ0 and 
ζcov are the values of the surface potential in correspondence of the 
non-covered and covered portions of the particles surface, 
respectively. Thus, assuming that the surface charge density of the 
non-covered regions is not affected by the protein adsorption, ζ0 can 
be evaluated by the ζ-potential of the bare colloids and the variation 
Δζ of the average surface potential is proportional to Φ:

Δ𝜁 = 𝜁 − 𝜁0 = (𝜁𝑐𝑜𝑣 − 𝜁0)Φ
(8)

Combining equation 7 and 8 and defining Δζmax = ζcov – ζ0 the two 
equivalent analytical expressions for σ are obtained:

𝜎 = Δ𝜁𝑚𝑎𝑥√Φ(1 − Φ) = (𝜁 − 𝜁0)√

1−Φ

Φ
(9)

The first expression is equivalent to that previously reported [35], 
as discussed in Section S2 of ESI. It identifies two distinct 
contributions to the surface charge inhomogeneity: an electrical 
one, Δζmax, which is determined by the net charge transported by 
each adsorbate molecule and a geometrical one, arising from Φ,
which is the product of the total number of adsorbed molecules by
the area ratio between the fingerprint of a single adsorbed molecule 
and thetotal surface of the colloidal particle. The second expression 

allows for calculating σ by combining the measured ζ-potential 
values with an estimate of the surface coverage as discussed in ESI.

Results and discussion

The assembly of citrate-stabilised AuNPs upon mixing with a 
lysozyme solution was studied with the aim of gaining a fine control 
on the different features (optical response and catalytic activity) 
involved in the antibacterial activity of the resulting system. A 
scheme of the assembling strategy adopted and of the investigation 
performed is reported in Figure 1. The aggregation in solution is the 
pivotal mechanism, thus a detailed characterisation of the process 
was performed as a function of the different parameters involved, 
in the framework of the charge-patch interactions. Such 
phenomenology, whose theory is briefly recalled in Theoretical 
background, is characterised by a self-limited assembly into fractal-
like clusters with tunable size. DLS, near field microscopies and 
absorption spectroscopy measurements were combined in order to 
directly relate the plasmonic response of the Lyz-AuNPs complexes 
to their structural and electrostatic features. The activity rate of the 
complexes in bursting bacteria cells was assayed in order to identify 
the experimental
parameters that provide a more efficient 

antibacterial action.

Charge-patch interactions towards a controlled aggregation
The colloidal aggregation of AuNPs upon adsorption of lysozyme 
was studied at varying the different experimental parameters 
affecting the inhomogeneity σ of the surface potential, which gives 
rise to the attractive component of the interaction potential of 
equation 5. Focusing on the geometrical contributions to σ (see 
equation 9), we varied the AuNPs surface coverage Φ by acting on 
the number of adsorbed molecules through the molar ratio x

Figure 2. DLS measurements (hydrodynamic diameter, 2RH, and ζ-potential trends) on
Lyz-AuNPs as a function of the lysozyme-AuNPs molar ratio, using AuNPs of 100 nm 
(A) and 60 nm (B). Each reported value is obtained by three measurements.

Figure 1. Schetches illustrating the strategy adopted for synthesising Lyz-AuNPs and 
the experimental plan. (A) Formation of charge-patched colloids by electrostatic 
adsorption of positively charged proteins onto anionic AuNPs and consequent 
aggregation into clusters with finite size.  (B) Optical characterisation of the solution 
containing Lyz-AuNPs complexes. (C) Assay of the catalytic activity of complexes 
performed on the gram-positive Micrococcus lysodeikticus bacteria. 


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

between proteins and colloids, and on the area ratio between the 
fingerprint of a single adsorbed lysozyme molecule and the total 
surface of each colloid by using two sizes for AuNPs, 100 nm and 
60 nm. It is worth nothing that the colloids size also affects the 
scaling factor of the interaction potential. In both cases the AuNPs 
size is one order of magnitude higher as compared to the protein 
allowing for finely tuning the charge inhomogeneity on the colloids 
surface.
The hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential trends of Lyz-AuNPs
as a function of x are reported in Figure 2. The experiments point 
out a self-limited aggregation of colloids into assemblies whose size 
is determined by the lysozyme-AuNP molar ratio, consistently with 
a charge-patch driven aggregation [35,36]. This type of process is
characterised by the formation of fractal assemblies [37,38].
Hydrodynamic diameter is commonly employed as reliable 
indicator of size evolution trends for fractal systems [39,40], 
nevertheless it should be taken into account that the measured 
values could result in an underestimation of the actual maximum 
extension of such objects. The cluster stability has been evaluated 
by the steadiness of the hydrodynamic diameter distributions after 
repeated measurements (see Section S1 of ESI).
Three different stages of the aggregation phenomenology can be 
recognised. At low molar ratios (x ≤ 2000 for 100 nm AuNPs, panel 
A, and x ≤ 1000 for 60 nm AuNPs, panel B) hydrodynamic diameter 
values remain stable around the size of single AuNPs, while slight 
variations occur in the ζ-potential of colloids. This points out that 
few proteins adsorb to AuNPs and consequently the long-range 
electrostatic repulsion remains the predominant component of the 
interaction between AuNPs (equation 5), preventing aggregation.
For higher molar ratios, starting from the threshold values of x100 ≈ 
2500 ± 500 for 100 nm AuNPs and x60 ≈ 1100 ± 100 for 60 nm 
AuNPs, a steeper variation of the ζ-potential is observed, 
concomitant to the formation of aggregates. In this stage, the 
surface charge inhomogeneity originated by adsorbed lysozyme 
molecules induces a significant short-range attraction. Note that the 
amount of lysozyme adsorbed to AuNPs is only a portion of that 
one present in solution. In fact, the aggregation process into clusters 
of growing size proceeds even for molar ratios extremely higher 
than the number Nmax of proteins corresponding to the full coverage 
of the AuNPs surface (which can be evaluated by geometrical 
considerations to ∼ 4900 for 100 nm AuNPs and ∼ 1800 for 60 nm 
AuNPs [41]).
When the ζ-potential values approach zero, the hydrodynamic 
diameter distributions show the tendency to become broader and 
unstable. Correspondingly, aggregates reach the maximum values 
of the hydrodynamic diameter of 640 ± 30 nm for 100 nm AuNPs 
and 760 ± 60 nm for 60 nm AuNPs. 
For the highest molar ratios (starting from x ≈ 500000 for 100 nm 
AuNPs and from x ≈ 100000 for 60 nm AuNPs) a slight 
overcharging, that is the inversion of the complexes charge sign 
with respect to that of the bare colloids, is also observed, with 
positive ζ-potential values always lower than 10 mV. In this range, 
both the hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-potential distributions do not 
evolve anymore at increasing the molar ratio. This could be 
explained by the hindering of the adsorption of more lysozyme 
molecules onto the AuNPs due to both steric hindrance and/or 
electrostatic repulsion between the approaching lysozyme 
molecules and those already adsorbed.

Comparing the two AuNPs sizes investigated, it can be noticed that 
the onset of the aggregation occurs for similar values of the 
potential barrier Vmax. In fact, the threshold ζ-potential values are ζ
= -33.5 ± 1.5 mV for 100 nm AuNPs and ζ = -30 ± 2 mV for 60 nm 
AuNPs. The repulsive contribution to the interaction energy 
between colloids is therefore of the same order of magnitude. The 
attractive contribution is also similar in the two cases. In fact, the 
ratio x100/x60 = 2.3 ± 0.5 is consistent with the ratio between the 
surface areas of the two colloids (equal to 2.8). Assuming that the 
number of adsorbed molecules only depends on the protein 
concentration in solution (i.e., the adsorption of a molecule is not 
affected by the presence of other molecules onto the gold surface), 
the inhomogeneity degree on the colloids surfaces (i.e., the portion 
of the surface covered with proteins) is roughly the same at the 
aggregation onset.
A second point regards the maximum 

hydrodynamic diameter, which is slightly larger in the case of the 
smaller AuNPs. This finding is consistent with the theoretical
models (see equations 4 and 6), noting that the limiting size above 
which two approaching clusters do not aggregate anymore is 
reached faster when the primary particles are larger.
A quantitative analysis of the aggregation phenomenology can be 
carried out from the ζ-potential values measured on the non-
aggregated Lyz-AuNPs, as discussed in Section S2 of ESI. We 
derived the number Nlyz of proteins adsorbed to each AuNP, the 
surface coverage Φ, the standard deviation σ of the surface ζ-
potential, and the height Vmax of the potential barrier.  Notably, for 
both AuNPs sizes, at the onset of the aggregation process the 
surface coverage is lower than 5%, while the calculated values of 
Vmax approach the thermal energy (∼ 25 meV at 25°C), as 
highlighted in Figure S3 of ESI.
To gain more insight on the morphology of the Lyz-AuNPs, AFM
measurements were performed on clusters deposited and dried on 
silicon substrates. Representative images are reported in Figure 3. 
Consistently with the DLS results, the size of the aggregates 
measured by AFM increases with the lysozyme-AuNP molar ratio 
x. Clusters with low coordination number (Figures 3A and 3C), 
observed just above the aggregation threshold, appear compact, 

Figure 3. Representative AFM images acquired on clusters corresponding to x = 3000 
(A) and x = 10000 (B) for 100 nm AuNPs and to x = 1200 (C) and x = 5000 (D) for 60 
nm AuNP. The corresponding height profiles are reported in the insets.


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

while at higher molar ratios (Figure 3B and 3D) they became less 
regular and more branched. In this fractal-like organisation, 
resulting upon the two-dimensional rearrangement, the aggregates 
are mainly composed by one stack of AuNPs (superimposed AuNPs 
are rarely observed), suggesting a branched and sparse three-
dimensional conformation. Consistently, preliminary Small Angle 
X-ray Scattering (SAXS) analysis reported in Section S3 of ESI 
highlights the low fractal dimension, always lower than 2, of the 
dispersed clusters.
To further assess charge-patch interactions as the driving 
mechanism for the aggregation phenomenology, we studied the 
process in a solution with pH 4, focusing on 100 nm AuNPs. In such 
conditions we would expect variations in the aggregation 
behaviour, due to the pH-dependent charge of both proteins and 
AuNPs. Below the isoelectric point, in fact, the overall protein 
charge shows a clear dependence on the pH [42], becoming 
markedly positive in acidic environment. Specifically, the 
measured ζ-potential shifts from 4 mV at pH 6.5 to 14 mV at pH 4 
(see Table 1). With reference to equation 9, this directly affects 
Δζmax, and therefore allows for inducing high inhomogeneity in the 
surface potential already at low surface coverage, that is at low 
molar ratios. In addition, the protonation of some carboxylic groups 
of the citrate molecules capping the AuNPs, occurring at pH 4, 
induces a slight shift in the ζ-potential of the bare 100 nm AuNPs. 
We measured a ζ-potential of -48 mV at pH 4 and of -54 mV at pH 
6.5 (Table 1). This lowers the contribution of the repulsive 
component of the interaction potential of equation 5.
The ζ-potential and hydrodynamic diameter as a function of the 
lysozyme-AuNP molar ratio measured at pH 4 are compared with 
the corresponding quantities measured at pH 6.5 in Figure S9 of 
ESI. While the overall experimental trends appear similar for both 
pH conditions, at the lower pH AuNPs aggregation is triggered at 
lower lysozyme concentrations (x ≈ 500), and at the same molar 
ratio larger clusters are observed. The calculated height Vmax of the 
potential barrier at the onset of the aggregation is of the same order 
of magnitude of the thermal energy kBT, as highlighted in Figure 
S10. The isoelectric point of the complexes is reached at x = 10000, 
one order of magnitude lower than that at pH 6.5. Correspondingly, 
the maximum size of the Lyz-AuNPs is of ∼ 700 nm. For higher 
lysozyme concentrations (x ≥ 25000), a marked overcharging is 
observed, and the formed aggregates have a reduced size. This 
phenomenon, known as re-entrant condensation [32], occurs when 
the amount of proteins adsorbed onto the colloids surface is higher 
than that needed to completely neutralise the ζ-potential, inducing 
a significant overcharging. The dependence of the aggregation 
process on the pH of the solution, and thus on the net charge of the 
system components, clearly assesses the role of the electrostatic 
interactions in the cluster formation and stability, and confirms that 
acting on their strength it is possible to control the cluster formation.

Tailoring the plasmonic response of the nano-assemblies
In the previous Section we demonstrated that the protein-mediated 
assembly of AuNPs represents an efficient route for the fabrication 
of clusters with controllable finite size. Proceeding from this, we 
investigated in detail the optical response of the obtained aggregates 
aiming at tailoring their plasmonic response (i.e., the LSPR), which 
is directly involved in the intrinsic antibacterial function of AuNPs 
[13,21]. To this end, we measured the extinction spectra of Lyz-
AuNPs complexes assembled at selected values of the molar ratio 

x, according to the aggregation trends of Figure 2. Representative 
spectra are reported in Figure 4 for 100 nm (panel A) and 60 nm 
(panel B) AuNPs.
For both the AuNP sizes the spectra show similar evolution, 
depending on the Lyz-AuNPs molar ratio. At low x values, the peak 
corresponding to the LSPR of AuNPs shows a progressive intensity 
quenching and a redshift compared to that of the stock solution. 
Starting from x ≈ 2500 for 100 nm AuNPs and from x ≈ 1100 for 
60 nm AuNPs, a shoulder at higher wavelengths appears in the 
plasmonic profiles, together with a further broadening and shift of 
the LSPR of the primary colloids. The spectral changes proceed at 
increasing the molar ratio with the rise of a wider band well-
extended into the NIR region, more extensively for 100 nm AuNPs, 
up to an asymptotic condition (starting from x ≈ 50000 for 100 nm 
AuNPs and from x ≈ 10000 for 60 nm AuNPs).
A strict correspondence can be recognised between the evolution of 
the Lyz-AuNPs extinction spectra and the stages of the colloidal 
aggregation discussed above. The initial redshift and quenching of 
the LSPR peak are consistent with changes in the dielectric 
environment at the AuNPs interface induced by the adsorption of 
lysozyme [43]. This is in accordance with the slight increase of the 
measured ζ-potential. The shoulder in the plasmonic profiles, which 
appears in correspondence of the onset of the aggregation process, 
originates from the rise of coupled inter-particle plasmonic modes 
due to the constructive interference between the electronic 
oscillation modes of the single AuNPs [44]. The redshift and 
broadening of the extinction band observed upon increasing the 
lysozyme concentration reflect the hydrodynamic diameter and ζ-
potential increasing trends of Figure 2. Analogously, further 

Figure 4. Representative extinction spectra acquired at different Lyz-AuNP molar 
ratios for 100 nm (A) and 60 nm (B) AuNPs. The spectra measured for the 
corresponding AuNPs stock solutions are also shown for comparison.


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

evolution of the optical response is not observed after the isoelectric 
point of the complexes. 
The modifications in the extinction spectra correlated to the 
presence of a specific molecule in solution have been widely 
exploited in the literature for developing ultrasensitive colorimetric 
assays [45]. In this framework, we established in Section S4 of ESI 
a quantitative correspondence between the spectra and the 
aggregation phenomenology by defining a parameter given by the 
ratio between the area underlying the band of the inter-particle 
plasmonic modes and the total area of each extinction spectrum. 
The trends as a function of the Lyz-AuNPs molar ratio obtained 
using the normalised area show a strict accordance with those of 
Figure 2. This result demonstrates that the normalised area 
represents a valuable experimental parameter allowing to follow the 
aggregation of Lyz-AuNPs directly from the extinction spectra.
By analysing the initial redshift of the plasmonic profiles, 
highlighted in Figure S6 of ESI, it is possible to extrapolate 
quantitative information on the lysozyme adsorption to AuNPs. 
Exploiting the dependence of the resonance wavelength on the 
effective refractive index at the nanoparticle interface, we derived 
an expression for the redshift induced in the LSPR by a non-
uniform adsorbate layer, as a function of the surface coverage Φ. 
The detailed calculation, reported in Section S5 of ESI, proceeds 
from the quasi-static approximation for the localised electric field 
[46] and modifies the expression for the polarizability of AuNPs 
[47] to account for retardation effects. The values of Φ, calculated 
for each sample, are reported as a function of the lysozyme 
concentration in the isotherm curves of Figure S7. Such values are 
consistent 
with 
those 
extrapolated 
from 
the 
ζ-potential 

measurements (see Tables S1 and S2). On the basis of these results, 
non-aggregated AuNPs emerge as an appealing sensor able to 
detect small amounts of protein molecules in solution, down to pM 
concentrations (3.7 pM for 100 nm AuNPs and 15.5 pM for 60 nm 
AuNPs). Moreover, a fit of the experimental trend by Langmuir 
isotherm model yields the apparent dissociation constant Kd for the 
protein adsorption to AuNPs. The values obtained are Kd = 13 ± 3 
pM for 100 nm AuNPs and Kd = 80 ± 20 pM for 60 nm AuNPs. 
These values are consistent with those reported in literature for the 
adsorption of proteins to nanoparticles [48-50]. The lower Kd
obtained for 100 nm AuNPs (∼ 6-fold) can be ascribed to the ζ-
potential, which is larger in modulus as compared to 60 nm AuNPs 
(Table 1). The larger radius of curvature may also contribute to 
strengthen the binding of adsorbing proteins, entailing that a wider 
portion of the nanoparticle surface is involved in the interaction.
Focusing on the spectra corresponding to the aggregation onset, the 
observed changes are ascribable to the formation of dimers and 
small aggregates [51,52]. The further redshift and broadening of the 
band at increasing the lysozyme amount point out a higher number 
of coupled plasmons due to the formation of larger aggregates, 
which absorb light in a wider range of wavelengths. Such optical 
behaviour is consistent with the plasmonic response of three-
dimensional fractal aggregates of AuNPs, characterised by the 
superposition of several inter-particle modes corresponding to 
different interaction strengths between plasmons [52,53]. To better 
investigate this aspect, we estimated the inter-particle distance 
distributions on SEM images of samples deposited and dried on 
silicon substrates using a protocol accurately optimised for 
minimising structural alterations of complexes during adhesion. 
The analysis of these images, reported in Section S7 of ESI, yielded 

separations of few nanometres, increasing for larger and more 
branched aggregates. This finding is consistent with the analysis of 
the SAXS structure factors reported in Table S3 of ESI. The wide, 
inhomogeneous distributions of the inter-particle distance for both 
the AuNPs sizes justify the observed non-sharp separation between 
longitudinal and transverse plasmonic modes. Actually, it would be 
interesting to analyse in detail this correspondence between 
structure and optical response of clusters by near-field 
electromagnetic simulations of the coupled plasmonic modes 
[52,53], 
for 
which 
the 
microscopic 
and 
spectroscopic 

characterisation herein reported would represent an important 
experimental basis.
The systematic study of the optical response of Lyz-AuNPs was 
conducted also on samples prepared at pH 4. Selected extinction
spectra are reported in Figure S11 of ESI. Also in this case the 
optical response of the samples strictly follows the aggregation 
trend (see Figure S12). Interestingly, it is even possible to recognise 
the re-entrant condensation from the extinction spectra, which 
correspondingly show a shrinkage and a blueshift of the inter-
particle plasmonic band together with an increase of the peak 
corresponding to the plasmonic modes of the primary colloids.
From the above analysis, a clear correspondence between the 
optical behaviour of the system and the size and the morphology of 
the Lyz-AuNPs clusters emerges, unveiling the potentiality of our 
route to synthesise in solution nanomaterials with the desired 
optical properties. Noteworthy, especially in the case of the larger 
AuNPs, the aggregation bands are very prominent in the NIR 
spectral region, making the system intriguing for in vivo
applications [21,22], due to the reduced absorption of biological 
tissues in this wavelength range. On this line, our further 
investigation was focused on the 100 nm AuNPs.
By exploiting the dependence of the aggregation process on the pH 
of the solution, we explored the possibility of employing this 
parameter to modulate the optical and structural properties of pre-
assembled clusters. A representative example is shown in Figure 5, 
where the extinction spectra (panel A) of the sample prepared at x
= 2000 are shown together with the corresponding hydrodynamic 
diameter (panel B) and ζ-potential (panel C) distributions. The 
images enlighten modification in both the optical response and the 
aggregation process, occurring when the pH of the solution is 
changed from 4 to 6.5 and back to 4. Specifically, when the pH 
increases the net charge transported by each protein lowers and the 
resulting surface charge distribution on the lysozyme-decorated 
AuNPs (ζ-potential shifted from -20 mV to -40 mV) can no longer 
maintain the AuNPs aggregated in the initial configuration. Their 
disaggregation is therefore observed with the mean hydrodynamic 

Figure 5. Modulation of the Lyz-AuNPs assembling and optical properties by acting 
on the pH of the solution: representative extinction spectra (A), hydrodynamic diameter 
(B) and ζ-potential (C) distributions of 100 nm Lyz-AuNPs prepared at x = 2000.


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

diameter of the aggregates decreased from 500 nm to 150 nm and 
the extinction spectrum showing the narrowing and blueshift of the 
plasmonic inter-particle band together with an intensity increase of 
the single particle LSPR. When the pH is lowered back, an opposite 
behaviour is observed, resulting in a re-aggregation of the Lyz-
AuNP complexes, as proved by the increase of the hydrodynamic 
diameter and the broadening of the inter-particle plasmonic band 
(light red curves), pointing out the reversibility of the phenomenon. 
The slight differences observed between the ζ-potential values 
measured at pH 4 before and after the modulation can be ascribed 
to the increased ionic strength in the solution, resulting from the 
addition of NaOH and HCl, and the consequent decrease of the 
effective range of the screened electrostatic forces that increases the 
importance of the attractive contribution of van der Waals 
interactions [32, 35].

Assaying the antibacterial activity on gram-positive bacteria
Lysozyme is an antimicrobial enzyme catalysing the cleavage of 
peptidoglycan, the major constituent of gram-positive bacterial cell 
wall [54]. The cutting of even a small number of these 
polysaccharide chains leads to the cell wall rupture and in turn to 
the bacteria cell burst as a result of the osmotic stress [55]. 
Therefore, Lyz-AuNPs complexes represent a promising specimen 
of nanozymes. In this framework, we analysed the electrostatic 
features of lysozyme and the SR-microFTIR spectra of Lyz-AuNPs, 
to investigate the orientation and folding of the proteins adsorbed 
to AuNPs, directly involved in the functionality of the complexes. 
The active site of the protein consists of two amino acids, Glu35 
and Asp52, which are negatively charged at pH 6.5 when the 
enzyme is active. This feature is highlighted in the electrostatic 
potential map of the lysozyme of Figure S13 as compared to the 
corresponding map at pH 4, where the active site loses the negative 
charge. The charge distribution at physiological pH suggests an 
orientation of the proteins adsorbed onto the anionic AuNPs with 
the active site exposed outwards due to electrostatic repulsion, in 
accordance with the study of Zhang et al. [56] which claims that the 
binding site of lysozyme with 90 nm AuNPs involves the residues 
Phe3, Cys6 and Cys127. In addition, this region of the protein 
contains a consistent number of positive residues [57], promoting 
the electrostatic attraction of the protein with the citrate ions on the 
AuNPs surface [16].
The spectroscopic analysis of the lysozyme folding was performed 
by comparing SR-microFTIR spectra of Lyz-AuNPs and free 
lysozyme as reported in Section S10 of ESI. The analysis of the 
Amide I band, based on the deconvolution of the spectral 
components associated to the different secondary structures of the 
protein [58], excludes serious denaturation when the protein 
molecules adsorb to AuNPs.
Proceeding from these considerations, the efficiency of the Lyz-
AuNPs complexes as nanozyme was tested by means of a 
turbidimetric 
activity 
assay 
performed 
on 
Micrococcus 

lysodeikticus bacteria. Briefly, we added aliquots of the sample to a 
bacterial suspension and monitored in time the subsequent decrease 
in the absorbance at 450 nm due to bacteria death, to derive the 
activity according to equation 2. In Figure 6A we report a 
representative example of the obtained absorbance trend, measured 
on the Lyz-AuNPs sample prepared at x = 5000, compared to that 
of free lysozyme proteins at the same concentration, together with 
the absorbance trends of the bacterial suspension and bare AuNPs 

as controls. A significant lysis capability of the Lyz-AuNPs samples 
in comparison to the bacteria control and to the bare AuNPs can be 
clearly recognised.
Moreover, the steeper slope in the absorbance trend of the Lyz-
AuNPs sample with respect to the free protein points out a faster 
activity rate related to the presence of the complexes.
To better investigate this aspect, we tested the enzymatic activity at 
varying the lysozyme-AuNP molar ratio. For each sample, we also 
measured the activity of non-adsorbed proteins, separated from the 
Lyz-AuNPs complexes by centrifugation, and that of free lysozyme 
at the same concentration used in the synthesis protocol.
Representative absorbance trends for all the samples are reported in 
Figure S15 of ESI. In all the analysed samples, the measured 
activity of non-adsorbed lysozyme resulted lower than both that of 
the full system and that of the free lysozyme at the same 
concentration used to prepare the samples. These findings highlight
the contribution of Lyz-AuNPs complexes, given by the difference 
between the activity of the sample and that of the supernatant. It is 
worth noting here that the concentration of lysozyme employed in 
the samples is of the order of magnitude of 0.1 μg/mL. This value 
is markedly low if compared to other antibacterial nanomaterials 
reported in the literature which use lysozyme as active component. 
In fact, employing nanoparticles of different materials, the 
lysozyme concentrations at which significant activity has been
observed are of the order of 1 μg/mL in the case of Ag [59], of 10 
μg/mL for ZnO and Se [60,61], up to 10 mg/mL in the case of SiO2
[62].
To quantify the antibacterial performances of Lyz-AuNPs in 
comparison to the free protein, we defined in equation 3 an 
experimental parameter, namely the normalised activity, as the ratio 
between the complexes activity and that of the same amount of free 

Figure 6. Lysozyme activity assay performed on the Lyz-AuNPs complexes 
made up of 100 nm AuNPs. (A) Representative analysis on the sample prepared 
at x = 5000: absorbance at 450 nm of the bacterial suspension as a function of 
time for Lyz-AuNPs complexes (light blue points), lysozyme proteins at the same 
concentration (pink diamonds); controls: bacteria suspension (empty circles) and 
bare 100 nm AuNPs (dark yellow points). (B) Normalised activity of the Lyz-
AuNPs complexes, calculated according to equation 3, as a function of their ζ-
potential. Each reported value is obtained by three measurements. Scheme of the 
hypothesised mechanisms of action in performing antibacterial activity depending 
on the ζ-potential of Lyz-AuNPs complexes: (C) single Lyz-AuNPs colloids, (D) 
small aggregates and (E) large aggregates.


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

lysozyme. The calculated values are reported in Figure 6B as a 
function of the ζ-potential of the complexes. Noteworthy, it is 
possible to extrapolate a correspondence between the surface 
charge of the aggregates and their lysis capability, identifying three 
different scenarios: i) at high absolute values of the ζ-potential the 
system does not show a significant activity; ii) at intermediate 
values, starting from the aggregation threshold, the efficiency in the 
lysis capability increases until reaching an enhancement of the 
activity with respect to free proteins; iii) at low values, the catalytic 
efficiency of the complexes decreases. This behaviour can be 
interpreted with reference to previous studies which report on the 
influence of the interfacial electrostatic potential of different 
bacteria on the interaction with nanoparticles [62-64]. In particular, 
the gram-positive bacteria employed in this study have a negative 
ζ-potential of -15.6 mV (see Figure S16 of ESI), consistent with the 
value reported in literature [65]. More in detail, at low molar ratios 
the highly negative ζ-potential of the single AuNPs prevents the 
interaction with bacteria (Figure 6C). At increasing the molar ratio, 
the electrostatic repulsion between the Lyz-AuNPs and the bacterial 
wall progressively decreases, and the system shows an increasing 
lysis capability. In particular, for ζ-potential values in the range 
between -27 mV and -24 mV, Lyz-AuNP complexes appear more 
efficient as compared to the free protein. The decrease of the ζ-
potential implies that the attractive specific interactions between the 
enzyme and its substrate progressively overcome the repulsive 
electrostatic ones, thus promoting the binding of the aggregates on 
the bacteria membrane. The huge concentration of protein confined 
onto the AuNPs results in the locally enhanced cleavage, with the 
hydrolysis of several polysaccharide chains in the same portion of 
the cell wall. This favours and accelerates the burst of bacteria, 
leading to a higher catalytic activity (Figure 6D).
When the hydrodynamic diameter of the Lyz-AuNPs complexes
rises to several hundred of nanometres their diffusivity decreases 
remarkably, thus clusters hit the bacteria wall with an extremely 
lowered rate when compared to the free protein. In addition, a 
relevant amount of proteins results hindered within clusters and 
does not have access to the bacteria wall, making the system less 
efficient in comparison to smaller clusters. This effect could explain 
the decreasing trend observed in the activity of samples with low 
absolute values of the ζ-potential (Figure 6E). 
The analysis herein reported points out that the antibacterial activity 
of the complexes can be tuned through their aggregation, witnessing 
the pivotal role of the controlled assembly provided by patchy 
interactions. In the perspective of developing an active bio-
plasmonic nanozyme system, the thermoplasmonic properties of 
AuNPs could be exploited to enhance the antimicrobial activity of 
the Lyz-AuNPs complexes.

Conclusions

We realised a plasmonic active nanozyme with antibacterial 
properties based on the controlled aggregation of lysozyme 
decorated gold nanoparticles (Lyz-AuNPs). We demonstrated the 
aggregation-dependent modulation of the antibacterial activity of 
the nanomaterial and highlighted the possibility of acting on the 
assembly process to reach the tunability of both the optical response 
and catalytic activity.
In this respect, we exploited the key role of charge-patch 
interactions in generating self-limiting clustering of the colloids for 

carrying on a detailed analysis and a comprehensive rationalisation 
of the synthesis of Lyz-AuNPs assemblies, that allowed us to obtain 
a dispersion of stable clusters with selectable size. We therefore 
focused on the antibacterial properties of the nanomaterial in 
relation to the assembly process. Specifically, the spectroscopic 
study of the extinction profiles assessed the strict correspondence 
between the clusters morphology and their plasmonic response, and 
pointed out the possibility of exploiting plasmon hybridisation to 
spread the extinction bands up to the near infrared, which is 
particularly suitable for in vivo application due to the high 
transmission of biological tissues in this spectral range. The 
catalytic efficiency of the system was investigated on living 
bacteria, pointing out its aggregation-dependent modulation and 
highlighting an enhancement of the performances for assemblies of 
the proper size. 
Our integrated study represents an important advancement in the 
synthesis of nanozymes as compared to currently published 
literature [13-15], providing pivotal insights on the role of the 
aggregation in determining the properties of the nanomaterial and 
its efficiency, and highlighting the possibility of controlling and 
optimising the features involved in the antibacterial function. We 
are confident that our findings represent a promising starting point 
for the development of novel antibacterial nanozymes with highly 
controllable activity and optical properties for effective application 
in treating multi drug resistant bacteria.
On the basis of the obtained results, future work will be aimed on 
one hand at further exploring the basic aspects of the clustering 
process of plasmonic nanoparticles by a detailed analysis of the 
morphology in correlation with the optical response to further 
improve our control on the antibacterial functionality, and on the 
other hand at investigating the interplay between the different 
antibacterial functions of Lyz-AuNPs with particular focus on the 
thermoplasmonic contribution in killing bacteria.

Acknowledgements

Authors acknowledge the Physics Department of Sapienza 
University of Rome for providing access to the Sapienza 
Nanoscience & Nanotechnology Laboratories (SNN-Lab) of the 
Research Center on Nanotechnology Applied to Engineering of 
Sapienza University (CNIS) for AFM and SEM measurements.
Authors acknowledge SOLEIL for providing synchrotron radiation 
facilities under proposal n. 20181452 at the SMIS beamline and 
under proposal n. 20180833 at the SWING beamline. Authors thank 
Thomas Bizien for assistance during the SAXS experiment. The 
research leading to SR-microFTIR and SAXS results has been 
supported by the project CALIPSOplus under the Grant Agreement 
730872 from the EU Framework Programme for Research and 
Innovation HORIZON 2020.
A.C. acknowledges Sapienza 

University of Rome for the grant “Progetti per Avvio alla Ricerca”, 
prot. n. AR11715C821B8F01.

Conflicts of interest

There are no conflicts to declare.


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

References

1.
R. Fang, M. Liu, L. Jiang, Advanced Functional Materials, 
2020, 30(2), 1903351.

2.
K. Ariga, D. T. Leong, T. Mori, Advanced Functional 
Materials, 2018, 28(27), 1702905.

3.
P. Makvandi, J. T. Gu, E. N. Zare, B. Ashtari, A. Moeini, F. R. 
Tay, L. N. Niu, Acta biomaterialia, 2020, 101, 69.

4.
P. V. Baptista, M. P. McCusker, A. Carvalho, D. A. Ferreira, 
N. M. Mohan, M. Martins, A. R. Fernandes, Frontiers in 
Microbiology, 2018, 9, 1441.

5.
X. Xiong, Y. Huang, C. Lin, X. Y. Liu, Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 
2019, 11, 22206.

6.
A. Harada, H. Ichimaru, T. Kawagoe, M. Tsushida, Y.
Niidome, H. Tsutsuki, T. Sawa, T. Niidome, Bulletin of the 
Chemical Society of Japan, 2019, 92(2), 297.

7.
Q. Xiong, Y. Lim, D. Li, K. Pu, L. Liang, H. Duan, Advanced 
Functional Materials, 2020, 30(2), 1903896.

8.
D. Jiang, D. Ni, Z. T. Rosenkrans, P. Huang, X. Yan, W. Cai, 
Chemical Society Reviews, 2019, 48(14), 3683.

9.
A. Gupta, S. Mumtaz, C. H. Li, I. Hussain, V. M. Rotello, 
Chemical Society Reviews, 2019, 48(2), 415.

10. M. Liang, X. Yan, Accounts of chemical research, 2019, 52(8), 

2190.

11. S. Singh, Frontiers in Chemistry, 2019, 7(46), 1.
12. A. M. Díez-Pascual, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 359.
13. G. V. Vimbela, S. M. Ngo, C. Fraze, L. Yang, D. A. Stout, 

International journal of nanomedicine, 2017, 12, 3941.

14. E. Sánchez-López, D. Gomes, G. Esteruelas, L. Bonilla, A. L. 

Lopez-Machado, R. Galindo, A. Cano, M. Espina, M. Ettcheto, 
A. Camins, A. M. Silva, A. Durazzo, A. Santini, M. L. Garcia, 
E. B. Souto, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10(2), 292.

15. A. Panáček, L. Kvítek, M. Smékalová, R. Večeřová, M. Kolář, 

M. Röderová, F. Dyčka, M. Šebela, R. Prucek, O. Tomanec, R. 
Zbořil, Nature Nanotechnology, 2018, 13(1), 65.

16. G. P. Szekeres, J. Kneipp, Analyst, 2018, 143(24), 6061.
17. C. Fasolato, S. Giantulli, A. Capocefalo, Y. Toumia, D. 

Notariello, F. Mazzarda, I. Silvestri, P. Postorino, F. Domenici, 
Nanoscale, 2019, 11(32), 15224.

18. A. Capocefalo, D. Mammucari, F. Brasili, C. Fasolato, F. Bordi, 

P. Postorino, F. Domenici, Frontiers in Chemistry, 2019, 7, 
413.

19. M. I. Stockman, K. Kneipp, S. I. Bozhevolnyi, S. Saha, A. 

Dutta, J. Ndukaife, N. Kinsey, H. Reddy, U. Guler, V. M. 
Shalaev, 
A. 
Boltasseva, 
B. 
Gholipour, 
H. 
N. 
S. 

Krishnamoorthy, K. F. MacDonald, C. Soci, N. I. Zheludev, V. 
Savinov, R. Singh, P. Groß, C. Lienau, M. Vadai, M. L. 
Solomon, D. R. Barton III, M. Lawrence, J. A. Dionne, S. V. 
Boriskina, R. Esteban, J. Aizpurua, X. Zhang, S. Yang, D. 
Wang, W. Wang, T. W. Odom, N. Accanto, P. M. de Roque, I. 
M. Hancu, L. Piatkowski, N. F. van Hulst, M. F. Kling, Journal 
of Optics, 2018, 20, 043001.

20. F. Domenici, C. Fasolato, E. Mazzi, L. De Angelis, F. Brasili, 

F. Mura, P. Postorino, F. Bordi, Colloids and surfaces A: 
Physicochemical and engineering aspects, 2016, 498, 168.

21. L. Mocan, F. A. Tabaran, T. Mocan, T. Pop, O. Mosteanu, L. 

Agoston-Coldea, C. T. Matea, D. Gonciar, C. Zdrehus, C. 
Iancu, International Journal of Nanomedicine, 2017, 12, 2255.

22. J. W. Xu, K. Yao, Z. K. Xu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(18), 8680.

23. M. B. Ross, C.A. Mirkin, C. Schatz, The Journal of Physical 

Chemistry C, 2016, 120, 816.

24. D. Caprara, F. Ripanti, A. Capocefalo, A. Sarra, F. Brasili, C. 

Petrillo, C. Fasolato, P. Postorino, Colloids and Surfaces A: 
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, 2020, 589, 124399.

25. C. Kuttner, M. Chanana, M. Karg, A. Fery, Macromolecular 

decoration of nanoparticles for guiding self-assembly in 2D and 
3D in Macromolecular Self-Assembly, L. Billon, O. Borisov 
Eds. 2016.

26. M. Grzelczak, L. M. Liz-Marzán, R. Klajn, Chemical Society 

Reviews, 2019, 48(5), 1342.

27. P. Sevilla, S. Sánchez-Cortés, J. V. Garcia-Ramos, A. Feis, The 

Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2014, 118(19), 5082.

28. S. T. Moerz, A. Kraegeloh, M. Chanana, T. Kraus, ACS Nano, 

2015, 9(7), 6696.

29. S. Kumar, I. Yadav, V. K. Aswal, J. Kohlbrecher, Langmuir, 

2018, 34(20), 5679.

30. R. P. Höller, M. Dulle, S. Thomä, M. Mayer, A. M. Steiner, S. 

Förster, A. Fery, C. Kuttner, M. Chanana, ACS Nano, 2016, 
10(6), 5740.

31. D. Velegol, P. K. Thwar, Langmuir, 2011, 17, 7687.
32. F. Bordi, S. Sennato, D. Truzzolillo, Journal of Physics: 

Condensed Matter, 2009, 21(20), 203102.

33. A. Japaridze, D. Vobornik, E. Lipiec, A. Cerreta, J. 

Szczerbinski, R. Zenobi, G. Dietler, Macromolecules, 2016, 
49(2), 643.

34. S. Chakraborti, T. Chatterjee, P. Joshi, A. Poddar, B. 

Bhattacharyya, S. P. Singh, V. Gupta, P. Chakrabarti, 
Langmuir, 2009, 26(5), 3506.

35. S. Sennato, D. Truzzolillo, F. Bordi, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 9384.
36. J. Hierrezuelo, A. Sadeghpour, I. Szilagyi, A. Vaccaro, M. 

Borkovec, Langmuir, 2010, 26(19), 15109.

37. F. Bordi, C. Cametti, S. Sennato, M. Diociaiuti, Biophysical 

Journal, 2006, 91, 1513.

38. S. Mossa, F. Sciortino, P. Tartaglia, E. Zaccarelli, Langmuir, 

2004, 20(24), 10756.

39. M. Lattuada, H. Wu, M. Morbidelli, Journal of colloid and 

interface science, 2003, 268(1), 96.

40. S. Lazzari, L. Nicoud, B. Jaquet, M. Lattuada, M. Morbidelli, 

Advances in colloid and interface science, 2016, 235, 1.

41. I. Delfino, S. Cannistraro, Biophysical Chemistry, 2009, 139, 1.
42. J. J. Bergers, M. H. Vingerhoeds, L. van Bloois, J. N. Herron, 

L. H. Janssen, M. J. Fischer, D. J. Crommelin, Biochemistry, 
1993, 32(17), 4641.

43. J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao, R. 

P. van Duyne, Nature Materials, 2008, 7, 442.

44. N. J. Halas, S. Lal, W. S. Chang, S. Link, P. Nordlander, 

Chemical Reviews, 2011, 111, 3913.

45. C. Kuttner, Plasmonics in sensing: from colorimetry to SERS 

analytics in Plasmonics, IntechOpen 2018.

46. H. Xu, M. Käll, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 2002, 

87(2), 244.

47. H. Kuwata, H. Tamaru, K. Esumi, K. Miyano, Applied Physics 

Letters, 2003, 83, 4625.

48. J. Hühn, C. Fedeli, Q. Zhang, A. Masood, P. del Pino, N. M. 

Khashab, E. Papini, W. J.  Parak, The international journal of 
biochemistry & cell biology, 2016, 75, 148.

49. J. E. Gagner, M. D. Lopez, J. S. Dordick, R. W. Siegel, 

Biomaterials, 2011, 32(29), 7241.


Accepted manuscript
© 2020. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2020.07.006
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

50. D. Prozeller, S. Morsbach, K. Landfester, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 

19265.

51. M. Loumaigne, C. Midelet, T. Doussineau, P. Dugourd, R. 

Antoine, M. Stamboul, A. Débarre, M. H. V. Werts, Nanoscale, 
2016, 8(12), 6555.

52. L. O. Herrmann, V. K. Valev, J. Aizpurua, J. J. Baumberg, 

Optics express, 2013, 21(26), 32377.

53. R. Esteban, R. W. Taylor, J. J. Baumberg, J. Aizpurua, 

Langmuir, 2012, 28(24), 8881.

54. D. J. Vocadlo, G. J. Davies, R. Laine, S. G. Withers, Nature, 

2001, 412, 835.

55. S. A. Ragland, A. K. Criss, PLoS pathogens, 2017, 13(9), 

e1006512.

56. D. Zhang, O. Neumann, H. Wang, V. M. Yuwono, A. 

Barhoumi, M. Perham, J. D. Hartgerink, P. Wittung-Stafshede, 
N. J. Halas, Nano Letters, 2009, 9, 666.

57. Y. Huang, U. Jeng, Y. Shiu, Y. Laia, Ya-Sen Sun, Journal of 

Applyed Crystallography, 2007, 40, s165.

58. F. Domenici, A. Capocefalo, F. Brasili, A. Bedini, C. Giliberti, 

R. Palomba, I. Silvestri, S. Scarpa, S. Morrone, G. Paradossi, 
M. D. Frogley, G. Cinque, Scientific Reports, 2019, 9, 11845.

59. D. M. Eby, N. M. Schaeublin, K. E. Farrington, S. M. Hussain, 

G. R. Johnson, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(4), 984.

60. N. Tripathy, R. Ahmad, S. H. Bang, J. Min, Y. B. Hahn, 

Chemical Communications, 2014, 50(66), 9298.

61. M. Vahdati, T. T. Moghadam, Scientific Reports, 2020, 10(1), 

1.

62. L. F. de Oliveira, K. de Almeida Gonçalves, F. H. Boreli, J. 

Kobarg, M. B. Cardoso, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 2012, 
22(43), 22851.

63. M. Arakha, M. Saleem, B. C. Mallick, S. Jha, Scientific 

Reports, 2015, 5, 9578.

64. S. S. Khan, A. Mukherjee, N. Chandrasekaran, Colloids and 

Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, 2011, 87, 129.

65. J. A. Price, R. Pethig, Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 1986, 

889(2), 128.


