Temperature-transferable coarse-graining of ionic liquids with dual graph
convolutional neural networks
Jurgis Ruza,1, 2 Wujie Wang,2 Daniel Schwalbe-Koda,2 Simon Axelrod,2, 3 William H. Harris,2 and Rafael
Gómez-Bombarelli2, a)

1)Materials Science and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland
2)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts
3)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts

Computer simulations can provide mechanistic insight into ionic liquids (ILs) and predict the properties of experimentally
unrealized ion combinations. However, ILs suffer from a particularly large disparity in the time scales of atomistic
and ensemble motion. Coarse-grained models are therefore used in place of costly all-atom simulations, accessing
longer time scales and larger systems. Nevertheless, constructing the many-body potential of mean force that defines
the structure and dynamics of a coarse-grained system can be complicated and computationally intensive. Machine
learning shows great promise for the linked challenges of dimensionality reduction and learning the potential of mean
force. To improve the coarse-graining of ILs, we present a neural network model trained on all-atom classical molecular
dynamics simulations. The potential of mean force is expressed as two jointly-trained neural network interatomic
potentials that learn the coupled short-range and many-body long range molecular interactions. These interatomic
potentials treat temperature as an explicit input variable to capture its influence on the potential of mean force. The
model reproduces structural quantities with high fidelity, outperforms the temperature-independent baseline at capturing
dynamics, generalizes to unseen temperatures, and incurs low simulation cost.

I.
INTRODUCTION

Ionic liquids (ILs) are room temperature liquids composed
of a molecular cation and anion. ILs have a wide variety of ap-
plications, including ion transport in batteries and catalysis1,2.
Because of the wide chemical diversity of molecular anions
and cations, and their many possible combinations, a vast de-
sign space for ILs exists. Molecular dynamics simulations can
characterize the structure and dynamics of ILs at the nanoscale,
and, to some degree, predict their properties before experimen-
tal realization. However, due to the complex intermolecular
forces in ILs, classical force fields need to be fine-tuned to
recover the correct kinetics and structure3,4. The properties of
ILs are governed by a variety of interactive forces, including
weak and isotropic forces such as van der Waals, solvophobic
and dispersion forces5,6, strong Coulombic forces, anisotropic
hydrogen bonding7, halogen bonding8, and magnetic dipole,
electron pair and dipole-dipole interactions9. Further compli-
cating simulation is the sluggish motion of the ensemble. This
leads to a large gap in the time scales of atomistic and ensemble
motion, limiting the size of the molecular system and the time
scales that can be accessed through simulation.
Coarse-graining (CG) can increase accessible simulation
sizes by reducing the dimensionality of the full atomistic model
to a pseudoparticle representation.10,11 A coarse-grained model
can be described by a potential energy surface, the many-body
potential of mean force (PMF). The PMF can be seen as the
configurational free energy in a reduced phase space and is
determined by the all-atom potential and the mapping operator
from a full to a coarse-grained resolution.12

a)Electronic mail: rafagb@mit.edu

However, constructing an accurate many-body PMF that can
faithfully capture the structure, thermodynamics and kinetics of
the coarse-grained system is not an easy task. This is because
reducing the representation and averaging out the fast atomic
motions introduces complex many-body correlations in the
PMF. Furthermore, the PMF is conditioned on the choice of
mapping from the all-atom to the compressed model and on the
temperature of the reference data. Typically, these mappings
are chosen based on chemical intuition and trial-and-error,
although there exist some methods for automatic and statistical
mapping algorithms.13–15

CG-IL models are particularly challenging because of the
different transport properties of the two components, which
further complicates the modeling of the many-body PMF.16–18
Many authors have developed CG-IL models, and while
each has achieved some success, none has been completely
satisfactory. For example, Refs.19–22 studied the 1-butyl-3-
methylimidazolium cation with different anions. In one case,
idealized models recovered the structural and energetic proper-
ties, but their transport properties were unreasonably slow.19

The model was improved upon by Merlet et al.21, and the trans-
port properties were recovered to a higher degree, but with
a loss of structural properties.21 Wang et al.20 described an
effective force coarse-graining applied to an IL system and
recovered structural (RDF) properties over a range of tempera-
tures, but they did not investigate dynamics. Ref.22 described
Newton Inversion and Iterative Boltzmann Inversion methods
for coarse-graining ILs, and the thermodynamic properties
were well recovered. However, the model underperformed
with respect to self-diffusivity, both in proximity to experimen-
tal data and in temperature scaling.22 Moreover, ILs exist as
liquids over a wide range of temperatures, and many of their
desired applications involve temperature swings, but none of
the CG approaches mentioned above are temperature transfer-
able. Although energy renormalization has been applied23 for

arXiv:2007.14144v2  [physics.comp-ph]  8 Nov 2020


2

temperature-transferable CG focused on recovering structure
of ILs, work on temperature transferability is lacking.
Each of the methods above achieved success in many, but
not all, aspects of coarse graining. Moreover, each method
required user expertise to create CG models that were not trans-
ferable to other ionic liquids. An alternative approach is to
use machine learning (ML). ML approaches can achieve di-
mensionality reduction in a variety of domains15,24 and learn
complex functions such as the CG many-body PMF.15,25–27
Neural coarse graining has been shown to recover ensemble
quantities of liquid-phase alkanes with high accuracy, and with-
out expert user input.15 Here we expand on this bottom-up ap-
proach to learn the encoding function and the associated PMF
for an 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate system,
with two key extensions. First, we condition the PMF on the
temperature, achieving temperature-transferable dynamics at
temperatures between two extremes. Second, in order to cap-
ture the complex many-body intermolecular forces acting on
CG ILs, we utilize two separate neural network models to learn
the coupled intra- and inter-molecular PMF. These two key
features allow coarse-graining more complex condensed phase
systems like ILs and offer a reliable, automated alternative to
expert-based IL coarse graining.

FIG. 1. Model framework of the coarse-grained auto-encoder. a - The
encoder-decoder architecture is optimized by minimizing the sum of
the reconstruction and force regularization losses (Equation 1). b -
To achieve discrete mapping, the computational graph is optimized
using the Gubmel-softmax reparametrization, with weights randomly
initiated as atom-wise vectors. c - Example of the training scheme
with the convergence to an atom-wise mapping, the x-axis represents
each heavy atom in the cation and the y-axis the contribution to each
bead.

II.
METHODS

A.
Auto-encoder coarse-graining

The general schematic of auto-encoder coarse graining is
shown in Fig. 1. The model is an autoencoder, consisting of an
encoder that maps the atomistic data to a coarse-grained latent
representation, and a decoder that maps the latent representa-
tion back to the atomistic representation. To train the model
we minimize the autoencoder loss, LAE, which was introduced
in Ref.15 as:

LAE = 1

N Ex∼P(x)[(D(E(x,g,τ))−x)2 +ρFinst(E(x))2]. (1)

The first term in Eq. 1 is a reconstruction loss, where D is the
decoder mapping operator from the coarse-grained variables to
the all atom representation, E is the encoder mapping operator
from the all atom representation to the coarse-grained beads, x
is the observed atomistic samples from all-atom MD snapshots
(atomic number and cartesian coordinates of every atom in the
all-atom MD snapshot). N is the number of coarse grained
beads. g is sampled from a Gumbel distribution and is used
for learning the categorical, discrete coarse-grained weights
for each atom using Gumbel-softmax reparametrization.28 τ
is a temperature-like variable that decreases along training to
achieve discrete encoding in the coarse-grained mapping E.
The second term is an instantaneous force regularization, min-
imizing of it produces less noisy mapped forces (Finst) of a
therefore smoother coarse-grained energy landscape. Finst is
the instantaneous mapped force acting on the CG beads, and is
calculated from the encoding function and the atomic forces on
a given all-atom MD frame, Finst(z) = −b∇V(x). The recon-
struction loss statistically minimizes the loss of geometrical
information that occurs when going through the latent space,
and the force regularization is used to minimize the fluctua-
tions in the mean force of the encoded space. By choosing
the CG mapping that minimizes force fluctuations, a smoother
energy landscape is achieved and more intuitive mappings are
obtained. A weight parameter ρ is introduced as a heuristic to
adjust the balance between the two terms.

B.
Temperature-dependent graph neural network potentials

Once a mapping E was chosen, a matching PMF was fit-
ted through a graph convolutional neural network based on
the SchNet model.29 In the SchNet model the geometry is
transformed into a set of atomic fingerprints (the “convolution”
component), and a fully connected network transforms the
fingerprints into an output (the “readout” component). The
convolution blocks consist of a message step and update step
to systematically gather information from neighboring atoms.
A neighbor is defined as an atom within a fixed distance cutoff
(discussed further below). Defining v as index for each atom
and its neighbors as N(v), the tth graph convolution updates
the atomic feature vectors hv by aggregating “messages” from


3

their connected atoms v and their edge features euv, through30:

ht
v = ht−1
v
+ ∑
u∈N(v)
messaget(hu,euv)
(2)

The initial feature vector h0 is generated from a learnable
embedding of atomic numbers. By performing the convolution
operations several times, a many body correlation function can
be parametrized to represent the many body potential of mean
force of the coarse-grained ionic liquid complex. In the case of
SchNet, the update function is simply a sum over the atomic
embeddings. The message function is parameterized by

messaget(euv,hv) = MLP3(MLP1(euv)◦MLP1(hv)),
(3)

where MLP denotes a multi-layer perceptron and ◦ is the con-
catenation operation. The readout consists of a sum over MLPs
acting on each of the N atomic embedding at the final (T th)
convolution:

Energy =
N
∑
v
MLP(hT
v ).
(4)

Further details of the original model can be found in Ref.29.
Figure 2 shows the neural network architecture for fitting a
coarse-grained potential. The model is based on the SchNet
architecture, but uses graph convolutions performed at two
scales through two separate networks [as defined in Eq. (2)].
Specifically, an intramolecular embedding (hv, intra) is calcu-
lated by performing graph convolutions only among atoms
belonging to the same molecule and within an intramolecular
distance threshold (dintra). A second intermolecular embedding
(hv, inter) is calculated by performing graph convolutions among
atoms non belonging to the same molecule, and within an in-
termolecular distance threshold (dinter). dintra and dinter are
hyperparameters chosen through hyperparameter optimization,
typically with dinter > dintra. The parallel graph convolution
passes create two embeddings for each CG bead. These embed-
dings are summed and the single resulting fingerprint then fed
into a multi-layer perceptron for atomic energy parametriza-
tion. The per-atom energies are summed into a total energy,
and its derivative fitted through stochastic force matching. The
purpose of this restrictive design was to differentiate the atomic
environment after coarse-graining: the convolution procedure
can differentiate its CG bead neighbor by inter-molecular in-
teractions and intra-molecular interactions. This is necessary
because intra- and inter-molecular distances in CG systems
are closer than in all-atom simulations, but have distinct and
complicated functional forms. For example, covalently linked
beads in the cation interact through different mechanisms than
non-bonded ion pairing regardless of distance. Even point
charge interactions become complex anisotropic functions in
the PMF landscape, yet occur over distances comparable to
intramolecular interactions.
A classical bond prior with fixed bond lengths between
the cation pseudoparticles to achieve better learning of the
intramolecular interactions,

Fbond = k(ri −rj)2,
(5)

FIG. 2. Overview of the neural network architecture, which is based
on the SchNet model29. Instead of having a single interaction block,
two are used to model the inter- and intra-molecular interactions of
the coarse-grained atoms. Temperature learning and classical priors
in the forms of excluded volume and bond length are also used.

where k is a spring constant hyperparameter, and ri, rj are
the positions of neighboring particles. Furthermore, an ex-
cluded volume prior was added to obtain better intermolecular
interactions:

Fex =
�
||
1

ri −rj
||σex

�nex
,
(6)

with σex and nex hyperparameters related to the excluded vol-
ume.
We further included temperature as a neural network input to
parameterize a temperature-dependent potential of mean force.
We considered that temperature induces fluctuations and biases
in the mean forces and thereby affects structural correlation.
To this end, we transformed the inverted temperature T into
an embedding to be combined with the convolution operations,
thereby modifying the structural representation. In particular,
we generated a thermodynamic embedding γ according to

γ = ˜MT −1,
(7)

where ˜M is a linear matrix of size 1×Nbasis that maps the tem-
perature dependence into the same size as the atomic embed-


4

ding and T is the thermostat temperature of the all-atom NPT
simulation. After the convolution layers, the intramolecular
embedding was summed with the intermolecular embedding;
the dot product of the atomic and thermodynamic embeddings
was taken. A shallow, 2-layer MLP was used as readout layer
to map individual embeddings into atomic energies as in Eq.
(4).

Energy =
N
∑
v
MLP((hT
v, intra +hT
v, inter)·γ)+Fex +Fbond
(8)

C.
Stochastic force matching

The force-matching approach for parameterizing force fields
was proposed in Ref.10 to reproduce structural correlation func-
tions. Given an atomistic potential energy function V(x) with
the partition function Z, the probabilistic distribution of atom-
istic configurations is:

P(x) = 1

Z e−βV(x).
(9)

The distribution function of coarse-grained variables PCG(z)
and the corresponding many-body potential of mean force
A(z) is the log-likelihood of the distribution of coarse-grained
variables. It is a free energy obtained from marginalizing over
micro-states that are mapped to the coarse-grained coordinates,

A(z) = − 1

β lnPCG(z).
(10)

The mean force of the coarse-grained variables is the average of
instantaneous forces conditioned on the mapping bx = z31,32:

− dA

dz = F(z) = ⟨−b∇V(x)⟩E(x)=z
(11)

where b corresponds to the mapping assignment from the all-
atom to the coarse-grained representation. Force matching
requires the minimization of the loss function:

min
θ L = min
θ E[(F(z)+∇zVCG(z))2]
(12)

where θ are the parameters in VCG and ∇VCG represents the
“coarse-grained forces” which can be obtained from automatic
differentiation. As proposed in Zhang et al., if Ez[Finst] =
F(z) is assumed, the loss function can be reformulated as the
following minimization target:

min
θ Linst = min
θ E[Finst(z)+∇VCG(z))2].
(13)

This minimization target has also been used in several works
with stochastic gradient descent.15,26 Instead of matching mean
forces that need to be obtained from constrained dynamics,
the model minimizes Linst with respect to VCG(z) and E(x).
This target provides a data-driven target for optimizing coarse-
grained force fields.

FIG. 3. Radial distribution functions of the ionic liquid system with
300 cation and anion molecules. GT denotes the ground truth and
T-NFF is the temperature transferable neural force field. Results are
shown at temperatures of a) 300 K, b) 400 K (out of sample), c) 500
K.

III.
RESULTS

The model was trained on molecular dynamics simulations
performed with the Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively
Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) engine33, with a publicly avail-
able custom force field for ionic liquids3,4. The simulation box
was created with a size of 300 ion pairs with PACKMOL34. A 1
ns NPT simulation with a Nosé-Hoover thermostat and barostat
was run to equilibrate the box followed by a 10 ns simulation
performed at different temperatures, each repeated 3 times
with different randomly initiated starting velocities to obtain
larger space sampling. A subsample of the dataset was used
for training: out of the 30,000 timesteps, 6,000 were evenly
sampled and used further. The model was then trained on data
from 300, 350, 450 and 500 K simulations, with hyperparam-
eters chosen using Bayesian hyperparameter optimization as
detailed in the Supplementary Information section. New CG
molecular dynamics simulations with the trained models were
run at 300-500 K in 50 K increments, thus including exper-
iments at 400 K, outside of the training data. The new CG


5

FIG. 4. Transport properties of the coarse-grained ionic liquid. a)
Mean squared displacement (MSD) over 1 ns long range at 300 K. b)
Diffusivity across a temperature range from 300 K to 500 K.

simulations were run at NVT ensamble with the Nose-Hoover
thermostat at a timestep of 1fs. The structure and dynamics of
CG simulations was then compared with the all-atom ground
truth.
In keeping with the convention in the field, we utilized 1
bead to represent the anion. The choice of number and mapping
of beads to represent the cation is less settled. Here, we tested
two representations of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium through
either 2 or 4 pseudoparticles (CG3 and CG5 respectively, when
counting anion bead).
Figure 1 a shows the mapping and average reconstruction
of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium. As expected, the 4-bead
model led to good reconstruction, since it captures the ori-
entation of the alkyl chain. The assignment learned by the
auto-encoder structure agrees with prior intuition: one bead
for the side methyl group and two ring atoms, one bead for the
two following carbon atoms in the ring, one bead for the other
imidazolium nitrogen and two connected linear carbons (Fig.
6), and a final bead for the terminal ethyl group. Because the
model only learns to reconstruct average positions, rotationally
equivalent atoms were typically reconstructed near their center
of gyration.
Figure 3 shows the radial distribution functions (RDF) of the
CG5 model (4-bead cation plus tetrafluoroborate anion). The
ground truth reference data is the result of applying the CG
mapping to held out all-atom frames. The RDFs are in close
agreement with the ground truth data. Both the cation-anion
and anion-anion interactions have been reproduced to a high
degree. Additionally, the cation-cation interactions and the
positions of all peaks have been accurately recovered, but their
intensities show some deviations from the ground truth. The
difference between the second and third cation-cation peaks
further decrease at higher temperatures.
The RDF at 400 K shown in Fig. 3b shows that the model
produces stable dynamics at temperatures outside the train-
ing set, and can recover structural properties of systems with
similar accuracy as at reference temperatures. Bond distance
distribution comparisons can be found in the Supplementary
Information.
Transport properties such as self-diffusivity are very relevant
to the use of ILs as ionic conductors, and effective CG simula-
tions should ideally recover dynamic properties to the best de-
gree possible. Experiments have shown that the self-diffusivity

Ea
(kJ mol-1)
Molecule
GT
T-NFF
NFF
CG3

Cation
20.7±1.5 14.3±1.6 10.4±0.6 9.4±0.7
Anion
21.6±2.9 16.7±1.8 12.2±0.5 8.7±0.6

TABLE I. Activation energy for diffusivity of the ground truth and
CG neural force field for the tested cases. T-NFF and NFF are with
the 5 pseudoparticle representation, and CG3 is trained on the T-NFF
model with 3 pseudoparticle representation.

of the 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic
liquid exhibits Arrhenius behavior17,18. Figure 4a shows the
mean-squared displacement calculated by the Einstein relation
at 300 K:

Dself = 1

2 lim
τ→∞
⟨[ri(t +τ)−ri(t)]2⟩

τ
.
(14)

The evolution of CG T-NFF displacement is about an or-
der of magnitude faster than the ground truth all-atom system.
This is because in the CG model, the small, fast movements
of hydrogen atoms are averaged out, thus reducing the overall
friction of the system and speeding up the dynamics, more dis-
cussion change of dynamics in the supplementary information.
Fig. 4b shows the self-diffusivity across a temperature range
from 300 K to 500 K, including out-of-sample simulations
at 400 K. Both the ground truth and the T-NFF show similar
relations between the cation and the anion. At lower temper-
atures, the cation has strictly faster dynamics than the anion,
but at higher temperatures this difference shrinks. The T-NFF
shows the same relation at lower temperatures, but at higher
temperatures the difference shrinks faster than for the ground
truth.
Figure 5b shows the Arrhenius-type relation of the coarse-
grained anion and cation. The Pearson correlation coefficient
between for the linear fit is -0.981 and -0.982 for cations and
anions respectively. The cation and anion curves intersect in the
high temperature range as in the ground truth simulation (Table
I), although the intersection occurs at a higher temperature.
Figure 5 weighs the impact of the temperature embedding in
the model by comparing the outcome of CG simulations from
a temperature-independent model (NFF) with the temperature-
dependent T-NFF results. Both models were trained on the
same data from all-atom simulations at 300, 350, 450 and 500
K and have the same hyperparameters. Figure 5 shows the
RDFs and Arrhenius relations between the ground truth and
the models. The two models reproduce the structural properties
to a similar degree and the Arrhenius relation of the system is
similarly linear. However, as seen from the slopes in Fig. 5b
and activation energies in Table I, the temperature-averaged
NFF has not learned the temperature effect on dynamics as well
as its counterpart and produces a much lower activation energy
in addition to accelerated dynamics. It also underestimates the
temperature at which cation and anion diffusivities cross.
Figure 6 compares the performance the CG3 model (2-bead
cation) to the CG5 model. In Fig. 6a, it can be seen that
both the 3 and 5 bead models recover structural properties at
a temperature that has not been included in the training data.


6

FIG. 5. Comparison of a model trained without the temperature
embedding layer (NFF) and the temperature transferable model (T-
NFF). a) RDF of the ground truth, temperature transferable model
and neural force field without the temperature transferability, ran at
400 K. b) Arrhenius plot comparison of the models.

Nevertheless, significant differences are seen in the dynami-
cal properties derived from the Arrhenius relation. Both the
models have recovered the linear relation, including the 400K
out-of-sample trajectory, but the CG3 model grossly underesti-
mates the activation energy (Table I).

IV.
DISCUSSION

We have introduced a novel extension of graph convolu-
tional neural networks to learn many body PMFs by separating
short-range intramolecular and longer-range many-body inter-
molecular terms, and incorporated a temperature transferable
embedding to learn the temperature dependence of a many-
body PMF. The model has been trained on all-atom simula-
tions of a ionic liquid system, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate, whose PMF is known to be difficult to con-
struct. The reconstruction of the structural properties has been
achieved to a high degree. Furthermore, the Arrhenius relation
for self-diffusivity has been obtained with the neural force
field, but with faster dynamics. The fast dynamics arise due
to the averaging of fast motions in the system, which in turn
decrease the overall friction of the system. If dynamics cannot
be reconstructed exactly, it is preferable that the activation
energy for diffusion remain constant between all-atom to CG
simulations, and a simple scaling of the dynamics is observed.
Other strategies based on spectral matching25 or differentiable
simulations35 could be utilized to further condition the encod-

FIG. 6. Comparison of models trained on a 3 bead representation (2
cation and 1 anion, CG3) and on a 5 bead representation (4 cation and
1 anion, CG5). Both models use the temperature transferable model
(T-NFF). a) RDF of the ground truth, temperature transferable model
with 3 and 5 bead representations, ran at 400 K. b) Arrhenius plot
comparison of the models.

ing function and PMF to reproduce system dynamics.
Results from a single graph convolutional neural network
with a single interaction block for both inter- and intra-
molecular interaction have not been included in this work for
comparison with the novel dual graph convolutional neural net-
work. This is because no stable simulations could be performed
with the simpler model. No choice of hyperparameters led to
a model that could run coarse-grained IL molecular dynamics
simulations without the system collapsing on itself. This is
likely because in a coarse-grained model the distances between
the beads of a single molecule are on a much larger scale than
those of atoms in the same molecule. These intramolecular
distances are then closer to intermolecular distances, and as
such it becomes harder for a single interaction layer to separate
them and learn the structural and dynamics properties of the
system. This highlights the key contribution of the dual graph
convolutions introduced in this work.
A comparison in performance was made between the tem-
perature dependent neural force field (T-NFF) and the neural
force field without the temperature learning embedding layer
(NFF) (see Fig. 5). Both models overestimated the dynam-
ics at lower temperatures equally, but at higher temperatures
NFF was significantly slower. The T-NFF showed more ho-
mogeneous acceleration of dynamics across the temperature
range and as such reproduced the Arrhenius-like temperature
dependence much better, largely scaling the overall kinetics
by a constant factor of 3-6 at all temperatures. Interestingly,
the T-NFF model faithfully captured the loss of linearity in the


7

Arrhenius plot at the lowest temperature that is present in the
all-atom simulation and may be related to the system getting
trapped in a glassy state. Previous works on on coarse-grained
ILs, such as Roy et al.19 and Moradzadeh et al.36, heavily
underestimated dynamics. The model of Roy et al. was im-
proved by Merlet et al. to attain an agreement of diffusivity21,
although at the cost of accuracy of structural properties.
Different cation representations were also compared. Both
3- and 5-bead models recovered the structural properties to a
similar degree, but the 5 bead model led to better learning of
the dynamic temperature relation, despite the overestimation of
the rate of the self-diffusion in both cases. The model described
in this work can accurately learn the many-body PMF of a CG
model for a complicated system, is accurate and transferable
over a range of temperatures, requires little user input and can
to be applied to other condensed-phase systems, leading to
easier, more accurate, and more generalizable CG simulations
of complex condensed-phase systems.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Includes description of training details and hyperparameter
selection, further description of parameters of Eq. 1, bond dis-
tance distribution comparisons for the 5 pseudoparticle model,
RDF and bond distance distribution comparisons of the 3 pseu-
doparticle model. Finally, mean squared displacement compar-
isons by shifting timescale or temperature are also showed.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors thank the MIT Energy Initiative (MITEI),
Toyota Research Institute, MIT-IBM and DARPA (Award
HR00111920025) for financial support The computations in
this paper were executed at the Massachusetts Green High-
Performance Computing Center with support from MIT Re-
search Computing..

CREDIT

This article may be downloaded for personal use
only.
Any other use requires prior permission of the au-
thor and AIP Publishing.
This article appeared in the
AIP Journal of Chemical Physics and may be found at
https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0022431.

DATA AND CODE AVAILABLITY

The computer code use and training all-atom tra-
jectories
used
to
train
the
models
are
available
at
https://github.com/learningmatter-mit/T-NFF

REFERENCES

1Jairton Dupont, Roberto F. De Souza, and Paulo A.Z. Suarez.
Ionic
liquid (molten salt) phase organometallic catalysis. Chemical Reviews,
102(10):3667–3692, 10 2002.
2Meng Chang Lin, Ming Gong, Bingan Lu, Yingpeng Wu, Di Yan Wang,
Mingyun Guan, Michael Angell, Changxin Chen, Jiang Yang, Bing Joe
Hwang, and Hongjie Dai. An ultrafast rechargeable aluminium-ion battery.
Nature, 520(7547):325–328, 4 2015.

3José N. Canongia Lopes and Agílio A.H. Pádua. Molecular force field
for ionic liquids III: Imidazolium, pyridinium, and phosphonium cations;
chloride, bromide, and dicyanamide anions. Journal of Physical Chemistry
B, 110(39):19586–19592, 10 2006.

4José N. Canongia Lopes, Johnny Deschamps, and Agílio A. H. Pádua.
Modeling Ionic Liquids Using a Systematic All-Atom Force Field. The
Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 108(6):2038–2047, 2 2004.

5Tamar L. Greaves and Calum J. Drummond. Solvent nanostructure, the
solvophobic effect and amphiphile self-assembly in ionic liquids. Chemical
Society Reviews, 42(3):1096–1120, 2 2013.

6Ekaterina I. Izgorodina, Dorothea Golze, Radha Maganti, Vanessa Armel,
Maria Taige, Thomas J.S. Schubert, and Douglas R. Macfarlane. Importance
of dispersion forces for prediction of thermodynamic and transport properties
of some common ionic liquids. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics,
16(16):7209–7221, 4 2014.
7Koichi Fumino and Ralf Ludwig. Analyzing the interaction energies between
cation and anion in ionic liquids: The subtle balance between Coulomb
forces and hydrogen bonding. Journal of Molecular Liquids, 192:94–102, 4
2014.

8Tomohiro Mukai and Keiko Nishikawa. 4,5-Dihaloimidazolium-based ionic
liquids: Effects of halogen-bonding on crystal structures and ionic conduc-
tivity. RSC Advances, 3(43):19952–19955, 11 2013.

9Hemant K. Kashyap and Ranjit Biswas. Solvation dynamics of dipolar
probes in dipolar room temperature Ionic liquids: Separation of Ion - Dipole
and Dipole - Dipole interaction contributions. Journal of Physical Chemistry
B, 114(1):254–268, 1 2010.

10Sergei Izvekov and Gregory A. Voth. A multiscale coarse-graining method
for biomolecular systems. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 109(7):2469–
2473, 2 2005.

11W. G. Noid, Jhih Wei Chu, Gary S. Ayton, Vinod Krishna, Sergei Izvekov,
Gregory A. Voth, Avisek Das, and Hans C. Andersen. The multiscale coarse-
graining method. I. A rigorous bridge between atomistic and coarse-grained
models. Journal of Chemical Physics, 128(24):244114, 6 2008.

12W. G. Noid. Perspective: Coarse-grained models for biomolecular systems.
Journal of Chemical Physics, 139(9):090901, 9 2013.

13Li-Jun Chen, Hu-Jun Qian, Zhong-Yuan Lu, Ze-Sheng Li, and Chia-
Chung Sun. An Automatic Coarse-Graining and Fine-Graining Simulation
Method: Application on Polyethylene. The Journal of Physical Chemistry
B, 110(47):24093–24100, 11 2006.

14Leandro E. Lombardi, Marcelo A. Martí, and Luciana Capece. CG2AA:
backmapping protein coarse-grained structures. Bioinformatics, 32(8):1235–
1237, 4 2016.

15Wujie Wang and Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli. Coarse-graining auto-encoders
for molecular dynamics. npj Computational Materials, 5(1):125, 12 2019.

16M. H. Kowsari, Saman Alavi, Mahmud Ashrafizaadeh, and Bijan Na-
jafi. Molecular dynamics simulation of imidazolium-based ionic liquids.
I. Dynamics and diffusion coefficient.
Journal of Chemical Physics,
129(22):224508, 12 2008.

17Tatsuya Umecky, Mitsuhiro Kanakubo, and Yutaka Ikushima. Self-diffusion
coefficients of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate with
pulsed-field gradient spin-echo NMR technique. In Fluid Phase Equilibria,
volume 228-229, pages 329–333. Elsevier, 2 2005.

18J. Sangoro, C. Iacob, A. Serghei, S. Naumov, P. Galvosas, J. Kärger,
C. Wespe, F. Bordusa, A. Stoppa, J. Hunger, R. Buchner, and F. Kre-
mer. Electrical conductivity and translational diffusion in the 1-butyl-3-
methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ionic liquid. The Journal of Chemical
Physics, 128(21):214509, 6 2008.

19Durba Roy, Nikhil Patel, Sean Conte, and Mark Maroncelli. Dynamics in an
idealized ionic liquid model. Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 114(25):8410–
8424, 7 2010.


8

20Yanting Wang, Shulu Feng, and Gregory A. Voth. Transferable coarse-
grained models for ionic liquids. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computa-
tion, 5(4):1091–1098, 4 2009.

21Céline Merlet, Mathieu Salanne, and Benjamin Rotenberg. New coarse-
grained models of imidazolium ionic liquids for bulk and interfacial molec-
ular simulations. Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 116(14):7687–7693, 4
2012.

22Yong Lei Wang, Alexander Lyubartsev, Zhong Yuan Lu, and Aatto Laakso-
nen. Multiscale coarse-grained simulations of ionic liquids: Comparison of
three approaches to derive effective potentials. Physical Chemistry Chemical
Physics, 15(20):7701–7712, 5 2013.

23Wenjie Xia, Jake Song, Cheol Jeong, David D. Hsu, Frederick R. Phelan,
Jack F. Douglas, and Sinan Keten. Energy-Renormalization for Achieving
Temperature Transferable Coarse-Graining of Polymer Dynamics. Macro-
molecules, 50(21):8787–8796, 11 2017.

24Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli, Jennifer N. Wei, David Duvenaud, José Miguel
Hernández-Lobato, Benjamín Sánchez-Lengeling, Dennis Sheberla, Jorge
Aguilera-Iparraguirre, Timothy D. Hirzel, Ryan P. Adams, and Alán Aspuru-
Guzik. Automatic Chemical Design Using a Data-Driven Continuous Rep-
resentation of Molecules. ACS Central Science, 4(2):268–276, 2 2018.

25Feliks Nüske, Lorenzo Boninsegna, and Cecilia Clementi. Coarse-graining
molecular systems by spectral matching. Journal of Chemical Physics,
151(4):044116, jul 2019.

26Jiang Wang, Simon Olsson, Christoph Wehmeyer, Adrià Pérez, Nicholas E.
Charron, Gianni De Fabritiis, Frank Noé, and Cecilia Clementi. Machine
Learning of Coarse-Grained Molecular Dynamics Force Fields. ACS Central
Science, 5(5):755–767, 5 2019.

27Jiang Wang, Stefan Chmiela, Klaus-Robert Müller, Frank Noé, and Ce-
cilia Clementi. Ensemble learning of coarse-grained molecular dynamics
force fields with a kernel approach. The Journal of Chemical Physics,
152(19):194106, may 2020.

28Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with
gumbel-softmax. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.

29K. T. Schütt, H. E. Sauceda, P. J. Kindermans, A. Tkatchenko, and K. R.
Müller. SchNet - A deep learning architecture for molecules and materials.
Journal of Chemical Physics, 148(24):241722, 6 2018.

30Justin Gilmer, Samuel S. Schoenholz, Patrick F. Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and
George E. Dahl. Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. In 34th
International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, volume 3,
pages 2053–2070, 4 2017.

31Evangelia Kalligiannaki, Vagelis Harmandaris, Markos A. Katsoulakis, and
Petr Plecháˇc. The geometry of generalized force matching and related
information metrics in coarse-graining of molecular systems. The Journal
of Chemical Physics, 143(8):084105, 8 2015.

32Eric Darve.
Numerical methods for calculating the potential of mean
force. In New Algorithms for Macromolecular Simulation, pages 213–249.
Springer, 2006.

33Steve Plimpton. Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics.
Journal of Computational Physics, 117(1):1–19, 5 1995.

34L. Martinez, R. Andrade, E. G. Birgin, and J. M. Martínez. PACKMOL: A
package for building initial configurations for molecular dynamics simula-
tions. Journal of Computational Chemistry, 30(13):2157–2164, 10 2009.

35Wujie Wang, Simon Axelrod, and Rafael Gómez-Bombarelli. Differentiable
Molecular Simulations for Control and Learning. arXiv:2003.00868, 2020.

36Alireza Moradzadeh, Mohammad H. Motevaselian, Sikandar Y. Mashayak,
and Narayana R. Aluru. Coarse-Grained Force Field for Imidazolium-Based
Ionic Liquids. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation, 14(6):3252–
3261, 6 2018.

37Ruben Martinez-Cantin, Kevin Tee, and Michael McCourt.
Practical
bayesian optimization in the presence of outliers. In Amos Storkey and
Fernando Perez-Cruz, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-First Interna-
tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, volume 84 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, page 1722–1731, Playa Blanca,
Lanzarote, Canary Islands, 09–11 Apr 2018. PMLR.

38Siewert J Marrink, Alex H De Vries, and Alan E Mark. Coarse grained model
for semiquantitative lipid simulations. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B,
108(2):750–760, 2004.

39Riccardo Baron, Alex H De Vries, Philippe H Hünenberger, and Wilfred F
van Gunsteren. Configurational entropies of lipids in pure and mixed bilayers
from atomic-level and coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations. The

Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 110(31):15602–15614, 2006.

40Siewert J Marrink, H Jelger Risselada, Serge Yefimov, D Peter Tieleman, and
Alex H De Vries. The martini force field: coarse grained model for biomolec-
ular simulations. The journal of physical chemistry B, 111(27):7812–7824,
2007.


1

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

Training details

Figure 7 shows the train and test validation for the two mod-
els reported in the main text of the paper (T-NFF and NFF).
Hyperparameter optimization was done via SigOpt - Bayesian
hyperparameter optimization tool.37 While optimizing the hy-
perparameters on SigOpt, the optimization goal was the MAE
of the RDF from the NFF model to the ground truth. An
overview of this optimization routine is the following: the
hyperparameters are selected, the model is trained and a 100
ps-long MD simulation with the NFF model is run. Then,
the MAE between the RDF from this simulation is compared
against the ground truth and new hyperparameters are selected
based on this criteria. In the scope of the neural network
training, the hyperparameters (with their respective values in
brackets) that were optimized include: dinter(8) and dintra(7) as
the neighbor-list distance cutoffs, natombasis(240), nfilters(256)
and ngaussians(80) as convolution layer parameters, ninterconv(2)
and nintraconv(3) as the number of convolutions for the inter-
and intramolecular interaction blocks, σex(7.730579) and
nex(7) as the excluded volume parameters and k(11.286249)
as the bond prior hyperparameter.
Selected hyperparam-
eters and the trained model for T-NFF can be found on
the
https://github.com/learningmatter-mit/T-NFF
repository.

FIG. 7. Training and test loss for the model with the temperature
transferable embedding (T-NFF) and the one without (NFF)

The selection of the weight parameter ρ from equation 1
(main text), is based on the reconstruction loss and the per-
formance of the CG model according to structural metrics.
Generally, low ρ implies high importance given to atomistic
reconstruction, which will favor high-resolution CG models
with many beads so loss of structural information is minimized.
High ρ implies high importance given to minimizing instan-
taneous fluctuations in the CG forces and will favor low reso-
lution models with few CG beads which lose more structural
information but result in a smoother PMF.
In the case of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluorobo-
rate, at high ρ values, the coarse-grained mapping converges

to a mapping with 2 beads, even if the model was created with
4 beads (Figure 8 a). The minimization of the mean force
fluctuation does not take into account the number of mapping
dimensions and as such converges to the mapping with the
smallest mean forces, ignoring the excess dimensions that had
been made available to the model. Having fewer coarse-grained
beads to be mapped to leads to more atoms mapped to the same
bead, thus averaging out the forces in different directions and
as such leading to a smaller mean force value. When the pa-
rameter ρ is smaller, the model converges to mappings with
larger reconstruction loss (loss .241 (Figure 8 c) compared to
that of 0.221 of the Figure 8 b).

Simulation details and results

Figure 9 shows the learned bond distributions of the temper-
ature transferable graph convolutional neural network at 300
K. The model has properly learned the complex multivariate
distributions of the interatomic distances to a high degree.

FIG. 8. The learned coarse-grained assignments for different ρ pa-
rameters. Colors indicate the relative contribution of each atom to the
coarse-grained particle.

Figure 10 shows the RDFs across a temperature range for
the 2 pseudoparticle representation of the cation as well as the
recovered bond distribution. It can be seen from Fig. 10b that
the model has performed reasonably well in recovering the
structural properties at 400 K even when this temperature has
not been included in the training data.
Figure 11 shows the mean squared displacement compared
of the T-NFF and the ground truth with different scaling fac-
tors applied to the ground truth data to obtain overlap of the
data. Across the three temperatures (400, 450, 500) the scal-
ing factors vary between 6 and 3. The scaling factor is not
exactly constant across the temperatures and ranges for 6 to 3,
as the relation between temperature with dynamic properties
is not linear. Previous research has outlined a reasoning that
coarse-grained simulations generally have some scaling factor
regarding the time scale of the simulation. For example in
the MARTINI force field, among other works on lipids there
are reported scaling factors in the margins from 2-10 from the
atomistic simulations,38–40 in keeping with the scaling found
here. Given the value of the activation energy of self-diffusion


2

FIG. 9. Bond distributions in the coarse-grained cation at 300K. a) The distribution between the first and second pseudoparticle, b) between the
second and third pseudoparticle, c) between the third and fourth pseudoparticle. d) the overlay of the auto-encoder generated coarse-grained
mapping and positions of pseudoparticles on top of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium.

the acceleration factor is somewhat equivalent to increasing
the temperature by 100K.
On the other hand, previous ionic liquid research mention the
time-scale shift in the coarse-grained models as a temperature

shift19. In figure 12 this is investigated by comparing the T-
NFF and the ground truth at a 100K increase. It can be noted
that in the temperature range after the 100K increase there is a
noticeable agreement between the ground truth and the model.


3

FIG. 10. Radial distribution functions and bond distributions of the ionic liquid system with 300 cation and anion molecules, where the cation is
represented with 2 pseudoparticles. a) At 300 K, b) at 400 K, and c) at 500K. d) Recovered bond distribution at 300 K of the 2 bead cation
representation.

FIG. 11. Mean squared displacement comparison of the T-NFF model and the ground truth at the same temperature, but timescale has been
shifted by various degrees to have dynamics alignment. a) Both at 400K temperature, but the ground truth time has been scaled by a factor of 6,
b) both at 450K temperature, but the ground truth time has been scaled by a factor of 4 and c) both at 500K temperature, but the ground truth
time has been scaled by a factor of 3

FIG. 12. Mean squared displacement comparison of the T-NFF model and the ground truth at 100K higher than the T-NFF simulation. a) T-NFF
at 300K and ground truth at 400K, b) T-NFF at 350K and ground truth at 450K and 3) T-NFF at 400K and ground truth at 500K


