1

A substrateless, flexible, and water-resistant organic light-emitting diode

Changmin Keum1, Caroline Murawski1,+, Emily Archer1, Seonil Kwon1, Andreas Mischok1, 

Malte C. Gather1,2*

1 Organic Semiconductor Centre, SUPA, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St 
Andrews, United Kingdom

2 Centre for Nanobiophotonics, Department of Chemistry, University of Cologne, Germany

+ present address: Kurt-Schwabe-Institut für Mess- und Sensortechnik Meinsberg e.V., 
Germany

* corresponding author: mcg6@st-andrews.ac.uk

Despite widespread interest, ultrathin and highly flexible light-emitting devices that can 

be seamlessly integrated and used for flexible displays, wearables, and as bioimplants 

remain elusive. Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) with µm-scale thickness and 

exceptional flexibility have been demonstrated but show insufficient stability in air and 

moist environments due to a lack of suitable encapsulation barriers. Here, we 

demonstrate an efficient and stable OLED with a total thickness of ≈12 µm that can be 

fully immersed in water or cell nutrient media for weeks without suffering substantial 

degradation. The active layers of the device are embedded between conformal barriers 

formed by alternating layers of parylene-C and metal oxides that are deposited through 

a low temperature chemical vapour process. These barriers also confer stability of the 

OLED to repeated bending and to extensive postprocessing, e.g. via reactive gas plasmas, 

organic solvents, and photolithography. This unprecedented robustness opens up a wide 

range of novel possibilities for ultrathin OLEDs. 


2

The unique properties of organic semiconductors – in particular their amorphous and 

mechanically pliable nature – have enabled a wide range of flexible optoelectronic devices, 

including organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)1-3, organic solar cells4-6, organic sensors7, 

electronic skin8, and neural devices9,10. The development of mechanically flexible OLEDs has 

inspired smartphones and TVs with curved displays and first products with simple foldable 

displays are now entering the market. Beyond their use in displays, flexible OLEDs enable a 

multitude of promising new applications in which conformal integration or resilience against 

mechanical deformation are essential, e.g. for wearable and bio-medical devices11-13. In all 

these cases, an ultrathin form factor is highly desirable to reduce weight and volume, enable 

ultimate mechanical flexibility and conformability, and importantly, minimize mechanical 

strain in the device upon bending and folding. 

Ultrathin OLEDs with impressive flexibility have been reported11,14-19, but stable 

operation under ambient or even aqueous conditions has not been achieved, with lifetimes in 

air still only in the range of tens of hours typically. The main challenge in manufacturing

reliable flexible OLEDs is the extreme sensitivity of organic semiconductors to moisture and 

oxygen. To prevent rapid device degradation, a thin-film encapsulation (TFE) is required that 

is flexible yet provides a robust hermetic seal. Microscopic pinholes or micro-cracks that may 

form during deposition of the TFE or when bending the device result in rapid device failure. 

The situation is particularly challenging for future biomedical uses of OLEDs as these 

applications frequently require bio-implantation and thus resistance to aqueous environments. 

Early studies demonstrated TFEs based on inorganic thin films20,21, often formed by

atomic layer deposition (ALD), which allows the deposition of conformal, densely packed and 

hence pin-hole free metal oxide films22,23. Nanolaminates formed by alternating ultrathin layers 

of two different inorganic materials were found to improve encapsulation performance 


3

further24-26. As an extension of this concept and to improve compatibility with flexible 

substrates, inorganic-polymer multilayer structures have been proposed as TFE barriers27,28 and 

such structures were indeed found to show promising barrier properties29-33. However, the 

flexible OLEDs reported in the literature so far either show poor stability under ambient 

conditions due to weak or non-existent TFE, or used relatively thick plastic substrates with 

embedded barriers, which limited mechanical flexibility and added to the weight and form 

factor. 

In this work, we demonstrate ultrathin, flexible, and efficient OLEDs that are resistant 

to air, water, various solvents, and reactive gas plasmas. The active layers of our OLEDs are 

sandwiched between two identical hybrid TFE barriers consisting of inorganic nanolaminates

and parylene-C. As there is no need for a substrate, this approach leads to a total device 

thickness of ≈12 µm – similar to the typical thickness of cling film for food packaging. The 

symmetric, sandwich-like structure ensures that the active layers of the device are located in 

the neutral plane of the device where they can flex without exposure to tensile or compressive 

stresses34. Parylene-C is an FDA-approved material with excellent biocompatibility that is 

widely used to coat bio-medical devices8,9,11,35. Recently, parylene-C has been tested as TFE 

for OLEDs10,16,36, but its moisture permeability is far too high37 to provide effective protection 

for OLEDs when used on its own. In contrast, OLEDs protected by our flexible hybrid TFE

barrier show no degradation in performance after more than 70 days in ambient air, are stable 

in water and cell culture media for at least two weeks, and tolerate repeated folding (e.g., 5,000 

cycles to a bending radius of 1.5 mm). Optical modelling of the active layers and the TFE

barrier is used to enhance the light extraction efficiency. Optimized red-emitting OLEDs reach 

over 17% external quantum efficiency and over 40 lm W-1 luminous efficacy. Additionally, we 

demonstrate that the TFE barrier can be tuned to function as a light scattering structure to

further improve the light extraction efficiency. 


4

Device structure and characterization of flexible barriers

Our flexible OLEDs are composed of two ≈6 µm thick TFE barrier films sandwiching the 

actual device, which consists of a semi-transparent metal anode, the active organic layers, and 

a highly reflective metal cathode (Fig. 1a). During processing, a carrier substrate is used, but 

the final device has no further components and thus is thin, bendable, and light weight (Fig. 

1b). Each TFE barrier film consists of two pairs of Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminates (N, 50 nm thick, 

deposited by ALD) and a parylene-C layer (P, 3 µm thick, deposited by chemical vapor 

deposition, CVD). For the active organic layers, we adopted a red phosphorescent p-i-n 

architecture as our testbed, but the concept described here should be compatible with most 

other state-of-the-art OLED stacks and was also tested for blue fluorescent OLEDs 

(Supplementary Fig. 1, Supplementary Movie 1). Although our device is nominally a bottom-

emitting design, the vertical symmetry of the thin, free-standing OLEDs means it can equally

be used in top-emission by simply flipping the device around. 

Figure 1. Flexible, substrateless OLEDs with water-resistant, hybrid TFE barriers. a, Schematic illustration 
of stack architecture with active layers in neutral plane (middle). Structure of the red-emitting p-i-n OLED stack 


5

used (left). Layer composition of TFE barriers (right). Barriers consist of parylene-C (P), Al2O3 (A), and a 
nanolaminate of alternating Al2O3 and ZrO2 layers each with a nominal thickness of 3 nm (N). b, Photograph of 
a flexible OLED with P/N/P/N lower TFE barrier, top-right pixel operated. c, AFM topography images of the bare 
top surface of different lower TFE barrier layers and of display-grade glass (top row) and of the same samples
after depositing a 20 nm-thick semi-transparent silver anode (bottom row). Rq, root-mean-square roughness across 
each image. d, Transmittance spectra for each of the three lower TFE barriers. 

To investigate the encapsulation performance and optical properties of the TFE barrier, 

we tested three different configurations of the lower barrier by either i) removing the 

nanolaminate on the side facing the OLED (P/N/P), ii) replacing the nanolaminate with 50 nm 

of Al2O3 (P/N/P/A), or iii) keeping the 50 nm Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminate as described above 

(P/N/P/N). Figure 1c shows atomic force microscopy (AFM) of the surface of each of the three 

tested lower barrier layers and of a bare display-grade glass substrate. Compared with display 

glass, the parylene-C surface of the P/N/P barrier was relatively rough, but deposition of the 

Al2O3 layer or the Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminate onto the parylene-C smoothened the surface (see 

Fig. 1c for root-mean-square roughness, Rq, of each sample). While the bare display glass was

nearly 10-fold flatter than the bare parylene-C, deposition of the silver bottom electrode led to 

a significant increase in roughness on glass, most likely due to an island-like film growth. By 

comparison, the increase in roughness upon silver deposition was much less for the other 

samples, possibly due to better adhesion and reduced diffusion of metal atoms on their surface. 

All three tested barriers were highly transparent; their mean transmittance across the 400 –

800 nm range was 94.4%, 95.0%, and 92.0% for the P/N/P, P/N/P/A, and P/N/P/N sample, 

respectively. Due to the low thickness of the barrier layer and the refractive index contrast 

between the organic and inorganic layers, the transmission spectra showed pronounced thin-

film interference (Fig. 1d; for refractive indices of used materials, Supplementary Fig. 2). 

Device efficiency and spectral characterization

Optical modelling of the entire device stack was used to optimize the thickness of the charge 

transport layers in the OLED for maximum light outcoupling efficiency (Supplementary Fig. 3).


6

The model predicts a series of efficiency maxima for the different orders of the optical micro-

cavity that is formed by the device electrodes. Devices with first and second order cavities were 

fabricated and, in line with predictions of the model, first order devices reached the highest 

efficiency. However, statistical analysis showed that second order devices were significantly 

more stable electrically, with 10 to 100-fold lower leakage currents (defined as current at 1 V, 

Supplementary Fig. 4). Here, the thicker transport layers were presumably more effective in

compensating the roughness of the underlying metal electrode and barrier layer. While the 

roughness of the TFE barrier can likely be reduced by further optimization of the deposition 

process, for this study we focused on second order devices to minimize leakage current and 

obtain electrically stable devices. 

Due to the micro-cavity effect discussed above and the additional thin-film interference 

from the TFE barrier, the electroluminescence (EL) spectra and angular emission 

characteristics of our devices were more complex than for conventional bottom-emitting 

OLEDs with glass substrates of millimetre-thickness. Compared with a reference OLED (same 

micro-cavity OLED stack deposited on a glass substrate with the top TFE barrier), the EL 

spectra of our flexible devices exhibited pronounced oscillations with wavelength (Fig. 2a, 

Supplementary Fig. 5), in line with the transmittance spectra of the TFE barrier layers discussed 

above. However, these spectral oscillations occurred across a narrow wavelength range and 

therefore did not impact colour quality and visual perception. In addition, as expected for a 

micro-cavity device architecture, the peak emission wavelength blue-shifted with increasing 

viewing angle. Interestingly, the peak shift was least pronounced in the device with a P/N/P/N 

lower barrier because the high-refractive index nanolaminate affects the phase change upon 

reflection at the silver bottom electrode. The micro-cavity architecture also led to a substantial 

deviation of the angular distribution of emission intensity from the ideal Lambertian

distribution (Supplementary Fig. 5). Again, the P/N/P/N device differed from the others; it 


7

emitted the highest radiant intensity in forward direction, whereas the maximum occurred at a 

viewing angle of 20 – 25° for the other OLEDs. Comparing all four devices, the transition from 

a super-Lambertian to a sub-Lambertian profile occurs at 32°, 47°, 50°, and 52° for P/N/P/N, 

P/N/P/A, P/N/P, and glass-based OLEDs, respectively. 

Figure 2. Angle-resolved EL spectra and efficiency characterization. a, 2D map of normalized, angle-resolved 
EL spectra of substrateless OLEDs with different lower TFE barriers and for a rigid reference device on display-
grade glass. Recorded at constant current density of 7.5, 7.0, 6.2, and 3.1 mA cm-2 for the glass, P/N/P, P/N/P/A, 
and P/N/P/N devices, respectively. b, Current density (solid lines) and luminance (dashed lines) versus voltage 
for same devices. c, External quantum efficiency and d, power efficacy of OLEDs, calculated assuming a 
Lambertian emission profile (open symbols) and corrected for the actual angular emission profile (closed symbols). 

Figure 2b shows the current density-voltage-luminance (j-V-L) characteristics of the 

P/N/P, P/N/P/A and P/N/P/N devices and the glass reference OLED. In agreement with the 

differences in the angular emission distribution, the P/N/P/N OLED showed the highest 

luminance in forward direction, exceeding 5,000 cd m-2 at 4 V. Likewise, when computing the 

external quantum efficiency (EQE) from the j-V-L characteristics and assuming Lambertian 

distribution of emission intensity, the P/N/P/N structure reached substantially higher values 

than the other devices (Fig. 2c). However, when taking the angular emission characteristics of 


8

each device into account in the calculation, the EQE of all devices was relatively similar. The 

power efficacy of the devices was substantially larger when considering the actual angular 

emission characteristics than when assuming Lambertian distribution (Fig. 2d). We attribute 

this to the blueshift in EL with increasing viewing angle which led to a substantial increase in 

luminous intensity at higher angles due to increased overlap with the photopic response of the 

eye (luminous intensity distribution, Supplementary Fig. 5). 

Overall, we found that OLEDs deposited on and encapsulated by the hybrid TFE 

barriers developed here showed j-V-L characteristics and efficiency that were comparable to 

reference devices produced on display grade glass. Furthermore, the absolute values of EQE 

and luminous efficacy were in line with earlier reports for similar phosphorescent p-i-n OLED 

stacks38,39.

Long-term stability

Despite its hydrophobic nature, parylene-C alone is not able to prevent penetration of oxygen 

and moisture. OLEDs fabricated on lower barrier layers formed solely by parylene-C showed 

good performance while still on the glass carrier substrate, but they stopped functioning almost 

immediately after peeling them from the carrier (Supplementary Fig. 6). On the other hand, 

Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminates provided some barrier function in air, even when used on their 

own26. However, when immersed into a liquid, e.g. cell culture medium, the bare Al2O3/ZrO2

nanolaminate failed rapidly, which resulted in the detachment of the entire OLED from the 

substrate (Supplementary Fig. 7), thus illustrating the requirement for a hybrid approach. 

Figure 3a shows the luminance-voltage characteristics of OLEDs with the three 

different lower TFE barriers after storage in air for different lengths of time. After 70 days in 

air, the luminance reached at 4 V reduced by 21.5% and 20.6% for the devices with P/N/P and 

P/N/P/A barrier, respectively. By contrast, the P/N/P/N device exhibited almost identical 


9

performance after 40 days and only showed a very moderate decrease in luminance (<10%, at 

4 V) after 70 days of storage in air. This difference is further illustrated by the appearance of 

dark spots in the active pixel area of the P/N/P and P/N/P/A devices after extended storage in 

air while the P/N/P/N devices showed homogenous EL across the entire area even after 70 days 

(Fig. 3b). The operational lifetime of the flexible OLEDs under constant current driving 

(Supplementary Fig. 8) was consistent with the stability reported in the literature for the same 

emitter material and a similar p-i-n OLED stack40.

Figure 3. Stability of flexible OLEDs in air and under aqueous environments. a, Luminance-voltage 
characteristics of flexible OLEDs with different TFE barriers after storage in air for different lengths of time. Data 
normalized to initial luminance at 4 V for each device. b, Photographs of operated pixels on flexible OLEDs after 
70 days in air (pixel size, 2 mm  2 mm; voltage, 2.5 V). c, Photograph of P/N/P/N device operated in deionized 
water. d, Change in luminance over time at fixed voltage (3.5 V) for flexible OLEDs with different TFE barriers 
stored and operated in deionized water. e, Change in current density at fixed voltage (3.5 V) for P/N/P/N devices
in 1 PBS solution (at room temperature) and in cell culture medium (at 37 °C and under an atmosphere of 5% 
CO2 and 99% relative humidity).

We found that the flexible hybrid TFE barrier not only allowed extended storage of our 

devices in air, but also provided sufficient protection to store and operate the devices in 


10

deionized water, cell culture media and mild organic solvents like acetone and to expose them 

to conventional photoresists (Fig. 3c, Supplementary Fig. 9, Supplementary Movies 2 and 3). 

Here, the difference between the three different barrier structures was even stronger than in air

(Fig. 3d). The luminance of the P/N/P device decreased to about 50% of its initial value after 

150 h in deionized water. The P/N/P/A device remained relatively stable over the first 150 h 

but began to decay rapidly from this time onwards. By contrast, OLEDs with P/N/P/N barrier 

showed no significant loss in luminance when immersed into water for more than two weeks

(350 h). We also tested the stability of OLEDs with the P/N/P/N barrier under 1 phosphate-

buffered saline (PBS) solution, which is a frequently used buffer in cell and tissue culture 

applications, and under a cell culture medium (Fig. 3e, Supplementary Fig. 10). The PBS 

sample was kept at room temperature while the latter sample was additionally transferred into 

a cell culture incubator held at 37 °C. After two weeks, no degradation was observed for the 

device in contact with PBS and the current density decreased by only 10% for the sample under 

culture medium. These results illustrate that the flexible OLEDs developed here can be useful

as bio-implantable devices. 

Bending stability

To test the mechanical stability of our devices, we carried out a series of bending tests. First, 

the devices were bent with different radii of curvature, down to rb = 1 mm, in both outward and 

inward direction (defined relative to the direction of light-emission as sketched in Fig. 4a). The 

current passing through the devices at a fixed voltage after 1 min of bending did not differ from 

its original value, regardless of the composition of the bottom TFE barrier (Fig. 4a). Figure 4b 

shows a photograph of a more extreme case, in which an OLED is operated while being folded 

around the back of a razor blade (rb ≈ 0.2 mm). Supplementary Movies 4 and 5 show further 

demonstrations of device bending and twisting. The resilience of our devices to these extreme 


11

bending events is largely the result of their thin form factor; even for rb = 0.2 mm, the strain at 

the surface of the TFE barrier is only ε = T/2rb = 3% (where T is the total device thickness). 

The symmetric design of our devices places the active layers and the adjacent nanolaminates 

in the neutral plane of the structure where bending causes neither compressive nor tensile 

stress34.

Figure 4. Stability of OLED performance under bending. a, Current density at 3.3 V after bending to 
increasingly smaller bending radii rb. Inset illustrates definition of outward and inward bending with respect to 
the direction of light emission. b, Photograph of flexible OLED folded around a razor blade. c, Current density 
and luminance versus voltage for a P/N/P/N device, as fabricated and after thousands of repeated bending cycles. 
d, Current density and luminance at 3.3 V versus number of applied bending cycles (bending radius of 1.5 mm).

Next, long-term mechanical stability was tested by 5,000 repeated bending cycles at 

rb = 1.5 mm using a device with a P/N/P/N barrier. The j-V-L characteristics of the device 

remained unchanged during the entire test; in particular, there was no increase in leakage 

current (Fig. 4c). If present, such an increase would indicate the formation of micro-defects. At 

a fixed operating voltage of 3.3 V (corresponding to a luminance > 700 cd m-2, higher than the 


12

typical requirement for commercial displays), the variation in current density and luminance 

over the course of the bending cycle test was less than 6% (Fig. 4d). These results confirm that 

OLEDs with the hybrid TFE barrier proposed here can provide stable and bright emission under 

extensive and frequent bending. 

In situ plasma etching of light outcoupling structures

Optical simulations show that the relatively high refractive index of parylene-C (n = 1.64) and 

the nanolaminate (n = 1.87) has a two-fold consequence for light outcoupling in our flexible 

OLEDs (Supplementary Fig. 11). First, due to increased Fresnel reflection at the air-device 

interface, outcoupling efficiency is reduced by about 5% relative to a reference device with a 

glass substrate. However, due to the low contrast in refractive index between the active layers 

of the OLED and the TFE barrier, waveguided modes that are mostly confined to the active 

layers in OLEDs with a glass substrate extend significantly into the TFE barrier. This leads to 

an approximately three-fold higher optical power in the TFE barrier of the flexible OLEDs than 

in the glass substrate of a reference device. 

A wide range of light outcoupling structures have been described in the literature41,42, 

including multiple light scattering schemes. For these structures to extract the light confined in 

waveguided modes, which in typical second-order OLEDs amounts to 30 – 50% of the total 

optical power generated43, they usually have to be integrated close to the active layers, which 

can have a negative effect on electrical stability. However, in our case, because the waveguided 

modes extend into the TFE barrier, light outcoupling structures located at the device-air 

interface – and thus away from the active layers – could be used to access the waveguided 

modes. Our model predicts that if all light were extracted from the TFE barrier, the outcoupling 

efficiency would increase by around 60%. 


13

The high stability and strong protection of our TFE barrier allowed us to trial a unique 

in situ method to create a light outcoupling structure directly within the outermost parylene-C 

layer of our flexible OLEDs. This was tested using a top-emitting OLED architecture (Fig. 5a). 

After depositing the upper barrier on the OLED stack, we exposed the top parylene-C layer to 

a series of O2/SF6 gas plasma treatments using a reactive ion etching (RIE) system. This led to 

substantial roughening of the previously smooth surface, with the formation of deep pores with 

sub-µm diameters (Fig. 5b,c) but which importantly did not affect the electrical characteristics 

of the OLED (Fig. 5d). In addition, RIE treated OLEDs operated without issue for at least 900 h,

exhibiting a slow and smooth decay in luminance over time, which indicates the absence of 

extrinsic sources of degradation (Supplementary Fig. 12). 

Figure 5. Roughening of the TFE barrier by plasma etching and effect on light outcoupling. a, Stack 
architecture of flexible top-emitting OLED with TFE barriers. b, AFM topography image of a pristine parylene-
C surface. c, Topography of same surface after roughening by RIE on the same scale as in b. d, Current density 
versus voltage characteristics of pristine OLED and after RIE treatment. e, 2D map of normalized, angle-resolved 
EL spectra for pristine OLED. f, Same for RIE treated OLED. g, Comparison of power efficacy between OLEDs 
with pristine and RIE treated TFE layers.

As with the bottom-emitting OLEDs discussed above (Fig. 2a), the EL spectrum of a 

top-emitting OLED with pristine barrier showed strong oscillations and shifted to the blue with 

increasing viewing angle (Fig. 5e). By contrast, RIE treatment of the barrier removed the 


14

spectral oscillations and led to an angle independent EL spectrum, which we attribute to the 

presence of substantial surface scattering (Fig. 5f, Supplementary Fig. 12). In addition, the 

angular distribution of emission intensity was broadened compared to the pristine device and 

more closely resembled a Lambertian pattern (Supplementary Fig. 12). The power efficacy of 

the OLED with an RIE roughened outer surface was 13% higher than for the pristine device 

(at 1 mA cm-2, Fig. 5g). As the current-voltage characteristics were not affected by the RIE 

treatment, we conclude that this increase is due to improved light outcoupling. While the 

increase is smaller than the maximum possible value estimated by optical modelling, we expect 

that further optimization of the scattering strength will allow for a greater increase in light 

outcoupling efficiency. 

Discussion

Organic semiconductors degrade in the presence of hard radiation, high energy particles and 

high process temperatures. This makes the use of common high-throughput physical vapour 

and plasma-assisted deposition processes on top of OLED stacks problematic and thus renders 

them less preferable for the manufacture of TFE barriers on OLEDs. In addition, for a TFE 

barrier to be efficient, it has to be free of pinholes, and thus it should be tolerant to 

inhomogeneities in the topography of the underlying layer, e.g. from particle contamination. 

Through the use of metal oxide ALD and CVD of parylene-C, we combined two low-

temperature, chemically driven deposition modalities that both have highly conformal coating 

characteristics. The majority of the barrier consists of parylene-C, which is widely used in the 

electronics industry and can be deposited at low cost and with high throughput. The in situ

polymerization of the para-xylylene derivative that yields the parylene-C polymer film is 

thermally initiated, does not require a solvent or crosslinker, and generally forms no by-


15

products, thus rendering it ideally suited for the deposition on highly sensitive organic 

electronics. Likewise, the reaction of metal oxide ALD precursors proceeds in a quantitative 

and highly controlled manner and forms very dense films. In the past, ALD has been associated 

with limited throughput because each deposition cycle only yields a single atomic layer and

takes of order 10 s to complete in a lab-scale reactor. However, through reactor optimization, 

cycle times have been reduced to the sub-second scale, and emerging modalities such as spatial 

ALD have demonstrated even 100-fold improvements in speed over conventional ALD, thus 

largely invalidating these concerns44. 

The robustness, extreme form factor and mechanical flexibility of the substrateless 

OLEDs reported here opens up possibilities for a number of future uses. For instance, they 

might be laminated or affixed onto or into work surfaces, packaging and clothing, where they 

could be used as self-emissive indicators and labels that do not add significant weight and 

volume to the product. The stability of our devices under high humidity and in water makes 

them suited for wearable applications requiring skin-contact and for use as implants in 

biomedical research; for the latter we have a particular interest in using them for targeted photo-

stimulation and optical recording of neuronal activity via optogenetics45,46. Finally, the 

robustness of the TFE barrier to harsh process conditions, including reactive gas plasmas, 

photoresists, and organic solvents, is unprecedented for ultrathin OLEDs. It provides new 

opportunities for post-processing, e.g. defining microstructures on OLEDs via dry-etching into 

their surface or performing lithographic patterning of additional layers deposited onto the 

device. 


16

Methods

Fabrication and characterization of flexible TFE barriers. Display grade glass substrates 

(Eagle XG, Corning) were thoroughly cleaned in acetone, isopropanol, and oxygen plasma.

Parylene-C (diX C, KISCO) and thin-film oxide layers were deposited using a parylene coater 

(Labcoater 2, SCS) and an ALD reactor (Savannah S200, Ultratech), respectively, with both 

coaters connected to a common nitrogen filled glovebox. Nanolaminate layers of alternating 

Al2O3 and ZrO2 sublayers were deposited following the recipes described in our previous 

report26. In brief, 20 cycles of a 15 ms Trimethylaluminum (TMA) pulse / 10 s N2 purge / 15 ms 

H2O pulse / 10 s N2 purge and 28 cycles of a 300 ms tetrakis(dimethylamino)zirconium 

(TDMAZr) pulse / 7 s N2 purge / 30 ms H2O pulse / 7 s N2 purge were performed to produce 

3 nm thick Al2O3 and ZrO2 sublayers, respectively. The TDMAZr precursor was heated to 

75 °C; the TMA and H2O cylinders were maintained at room temperature. The process 

temperature and base pressure of the ALD reactor were 80 °C and 0.1 Torr, respectively. 

AFM topography maps were acquired under ambient conditions using contact mode 

AFM (FlexAFM system, Nanosurf) using tipped cantilevers (ContAl-G) and a force set point 

of 10 nN. Transmittance spectra were recorded for samples prepared on quartz discs using a 

UV−vis spectrophotometer (Cary 300, Varian).

Device fabrication. Red p-i-n OLEDs were fabricated via thermal evaporation at a base 

pressure lower than 3 × 10−7 mbar (EvoVac, Angstrom Engineering). The layer sequence from 

bottom to top was Ag (20 nm) as anode / Spiro-TTB doped with F6-TCNNQ at 4 wt% (50 nm 

for first order cavity, 220 nm for second order) as hole transport layer (HTL) / NPB (10 nm) as 

electron blocking layer (EBL) / NBP doped with Ir(MDQ)2(acac) at 10 wt% (20 nm) as 

emissive layer (EML) / BAlq (10 nm) as hole blocking layer (HBL) / NBPhen doped with 

3 wt% of Cs (60 nm for the first order, 80 nm for second order) as electron transport layer 

(ETL) / Al (100 nm) as cathode. For top-emitting OLEDs, a multi-layered stack of Al (40 nm), 


17

Ag (60 nm) and MoO3 (1 nm) was used as anode, Spiro-TTB doped with 4 wt% F6-TCNNQ 

(190 nm) as HTL, BPhen doped with 3 wt% Cs (70 nm) as ETL, and Ag (20 nm) as cathode. 

The other layers were unchanged from the bottom-emitting configuration. All organic materials 

were purchased from Lumtec. An active pixel area of 2 mm × 2 mm was defined by shadow 

masking of the anode and cathode contact, with in situ mask exchange under high vacuum. 

After deposition of the OLED stack, devices were immediately protected by the upper TFE 

barrier. Devices were transferred to the ALD reactor through a nitrogen filled glovebox. 

The acronyms of the materials used in the OLED stacks are as follows. Spiro-TTB: 

2,2’,7,7’-tetrakis-(N,N-di-methylphenylamino)-9,9’-spiro-bifluorene, 
F6-TCNNQ: 
2,2’-

(perfluoronaphthalene-2,6-diylidene)dimalononitrile, NPB: N,N’-bis(naphthalen-1-yl)-N,N’-

bis(phenyl)-benzidine, Ir(MDQ)2(acac): (2-methyldibenzo[f,h]quinoxaline)(acetylacetonate)

iridium(III), BAlq: bis(2-methyl-8-quinolinolate)-4-(phenylphenolato) aluminum, NBPhen: 

2,9-dinaphthalen-2-yl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline, 
BPhen: 
4,7-diphenyl-1,10-

phenanthroline.

OLED characterization. j-V-L characteristics were recorded using a source-measurement unit 

(2400 SourceMeter, Keithley Instruments) and a calibrated silicon photodiode. Angle-resolved 

EL spectra were acquired in steps of 1° using a custom-built automated goniometer setup

equipped with a fibre-coupled spectrometer (Maya LSL, OceanOptics) operating the OLEDs 

in constant current mode. Efficiencies were calculated by both assuming a Lambertian emission 

profile and by taking the measured angular emission profiles into account. Variations in device 

performance in air or aqueous environments were measured by monitoring the relative 

luminance and current over time at a specific voltage using a source-measurement unit (2450

SourceMeter, Keithley Instruments) and a silicon photodetector (PDA100A2, ThorLabs).

Operational lifetime was measured under constant current operation (M6000, McScience). For 

bending tests, devices were repeatedly flexed around fixed circular metal rods of different radii. 


18

A removable custom-built supporting frame was used for some of the electrical 

characterization to avoid damage to contact pads (Supplementary Fig. 13). 

Plasma etching of light outcoupling structures. The outmost parylene-C layer of complete 

top-emitting OLEDs was roughened by exposure to an O2 and SF6 gas plasma in a custom-

built RIE system. Under the process conditions used (power 150 W, O2 gas flow rate 50 sccm, 

SF6 gas flow rate 5 sccm) the etch rate was 350 nm min-1. After etching away 2.5 µm of 

parylene-C, a further nanolaminate layer (30 nm) and another parylene-C layer (0.5 µm) were 

deposited, and a further 0.35 µm of parylene-C were etched. This protocol was found to 

maximize the light scattering effect, but further optimizations can likely be made. 

Optical simulations. Optical simulations were based on the transfer matrix formalism 

described in Ref. 47. Optical constants used in the simulation were measured by variable angle 

spectroscopic ellipsometry (M-2000DI, J.A. Woollam Co.) with each thin film layer deposited 

on silicon substrates. The multi-layered oxide nanolaminate was approximated as a monolithic 

layer and its effective refractive index was measured to be an intermediate between Al2O3 and 

ZrO2. This approximation was in good agreement with calculations for the actual multilayer 

nanolaminate structure (Supplementary Fig. 14).


19

References

1
Gustafsson, G. et al. Flexible light-emitting-diodes made from soluble conducting polymers. Nature 357, 
477-479 (1992).

2
Han, T.-H. et al. Extremely efficient flexible organic light-emitting diodes with modified graphene anode. 
Nat. Photonics 6, 105-110 (2012).

3
Liang, J., Li, L., Niu, X., Yu, Z. & Pei, Q. Elastomeric polymer light-emitting devices and displays. Nat. 
Photonics 7, 817-824 (2013).

4
Kim, T. et al. Flexible, highly efficient all-polymer solar cells. Nat. Commun. 6, 8547 (2015).

5
Li, Y. et al. High-efficiency robust perovskite solar cells on ultrathin flexible substrates. Nat. Commun.
7, 10214 (2016).

6
Park, S. et al. Self-powered ultra-flexible electronics via nano-grating-patterned organic photovoltaics. 
Nature 561, 516-521 (2018).

7
Sekitani, T., Zschieschang, U., Klauk, H. & Someya, T. Flexible organic transistors and circuits with 
extreme bending stability. Nat. Mater. 9, 1015-1022 (2010).

8
Yokota, T. et al. Ultraflexible organic photonic skin. Sci. Adv. 2, e1501856 (2016).

9
Khodagholy, D. et al. NeuroGrid: recording action potentials from the surface of the brain. Nat. Neurosci.
18, 310-315 (2015).

10
Kim, Y. et al. An ultra thin implantable system for cerebral blood volume monitoring using flexible 
OLED and OPD. 2015 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 29.6.1-29.6.4 (2015).

11
Koo, J. H. et al. Wearable electrocardiogram monitor using carbon nanotube electronics and color-
tunable organic light-emitting diodes. ACS Nano 11, 10032-10041 (2017).

12
Wang, C. et al. User-interactive electronic skin for instantaneous pressure visualization. Nat. Mater. 12, 
899-904 (2013).

13
Lee, H. et al. Toward all-day wearable health monitoring: An ultralow-power, reflective organic pulse 
oximetry sensing patch. Sci. Adv. 4, eaas9530 (2018).

14
White, M. S. et al. Ultrathin, highly flexible and stretchable PLEDs. Nat. Photonics 7, 811-816 (2013).

15
Yin, D. et al. Efficient and mechanically robust stretchable organic light-emitting devices by a laser-
programmable buckling process. Nat. Commun. 7, 11573 (2016).

16
Huang, X. H., Qu, Y., Fan, D. J., Kim, J. & Forrest, S. R. Ultrathin, lightweight and flexible organic 
light-emitting devices with a high light outcoupling efficiency. Org. Electron. 69, 297-300 (2019).

17
Jeong, E. G., Jeon, Y., Cho, S. H. & Choi, K. C. Textile-based washable polymer solar cells for 
optoelectronic modules: toward self-powered smart clothing. Energy Environ. Sci. 12, 1878-1889 (2019).

18
Kim, E. et al. Design of ultrathin OLEDs having oxide-based transparent electrodes and encapsulation 
with sub-mm bending radius. Org. Electron. 82, 105704 (2020).

19
Song, Y. J. et al. Fibertronic organic light-emitting diodes toward fully addressable, environmentally 
robust, wearable displays. ACS Nano 14, 1133-1140 (2020).

20
da Silva Sobrinho, A. S., Czeremuszkin, G., Latrèche, M. & Wertheimer, M. R. Defect-permeation 
correlation for ultrathin transparent barrier coatings on polymers. J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A 18, 149-157 
(2000).

21
Erlat, A. G. et al. Characterisation of aluminium oxynitride gas barrier films. Thin Solid Films 388, 78-
86 (2001).

22
Groner, M. D., George, S. M., McLean, R. S. & Carcia, P. F. Gas diffusion barriers on polymers using 
Al2O3 atomic layer deposition. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 051907 (2006).

23
Carcia, P. F., McLean, R. S. & Reilly, M. H. Permeation measurements and modeling of highly defective 
Al2O3 thin films grown by atomic layer deposition on polymers. Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 221901 (2010).

24
Meyer, J. et al. Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminates as ultrahigh gas-diffusion barriers-A strategy for reliable 
encapsulation of organic electronics. Adv. Mater. 21, 1845-1849 (2009).

25
Carcia, P. F., McLean, R. S., Li, Z. G., Reilly, M. H. & Marshall, W. J. Permeability and corrosion in 
ZrO2/Al2O3 nanolaminate and Al2O3 thin films grown by atomic layer deposition on polymers. J. Vac. 
Sci. Technol. A 30, 041515 (2012).

26
Keum, C. M. et al. The role of metallic dopants in improving the thermal stability of the electron transport 
layer in organic light-emitting diodes. Adv. Opt. Mater. 6, 1800496 (2018).

27
Park, J.-S., Chae, H., Chung, H. K. & Lee, S. I. Thin film encapsulation for flexible AM-OLED: a review. 
Semicond. Sci. Technol. 26, 034001 (2011).

28
Lee, S.-M., Kwon, J. H., Kwon, S. & Choi, K. C. A review of flexible OLEDs toward highly durable 
unusual displays. IEEE T. Electron. Dev. 64, 1922-1931 (2017).

29
Burrows, P. E. et al. Ultra barrier flexible substrates for flat panel displays. Displays 22, 65-69 (2001).

30
Chwang, A. B. et al. Thin film encapsulated flexible organic electroluminescent displays. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 83, 413-415 (2003).


20

31
Han, Y. C. et al. The encapsulation of an organic light-emitting diode using organic-inorganic hybrid 
materials and MgO. Org. Electron. 12, 609-613 (2011).

32
Nehm, F. et al. Breakdown and protection of ALD moisture barrier thin films. ACS Appl. Mater. Inter.
7, 22121-22127 (2015).

33
Jeong, E. G., Han, Y. C., Im, H.-G., Bae, B.-S. & Choi, K. C. Highly reliable hybrid nano-stratified 
moisture barrier for encapsulating flexible OLEDs. Org. Electron. 33, 150-155 (2016).

34
Beer, F. P., Johnston, E. R. & DeWolf, J. T. Mechanics of Materials.  (McGraw-Hill, 2001).

35
Khodagholy, D. et al. In vivo recordings of brain activity using organic transistors. Nat. Commun. 4, 
1575 (2013).

36
Wu, J. et al. Efficient multi-barrier thin film encapsulation of OLED using alternating Al2O3 and polymer 
layers. RSC Adv. 8, 5721-5727 (2018).

37
SCS Parylene properties, Available online: https://scscoatings.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/02-
SCS-Parylene-Properties-1016.pdf (2017).

38
Murawski, C., Fuchs, C., Hofmann, S., Leo, K. & Gather, M. C. Alternative p-doped hole transport 
material for low operating voltage and high efficiency organic light-emitting diodes. Appl. Phys. Lett.
105, 113303 (2014).

39
Krotkus, S. et al. Photo‐patterning of highly efficient state‐of‐the‐art phosphorescent OLEDs using 
orthogonal hydrofluoroethers. Adv. Opt. Mater. 2, 1043-1048 (2014).

40
Meerheim, R. et al. Influence of charge balance and exciton distribution on efficiency and lifetime of 
phosphorescent organic light-emitting devices. J. Appl. Phys. 104, 014510 (2008).

41
Salehi, A., Fu, X., Shin, D. H. & So, F. Recent advances in OLED optical design. Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 
1808803 (2019).

42
Gather, M. C. & Reineke, S. Recent advances in light outcoupling from white organic light-emitting 
diodes. J. Photon. Energy 5, 057607 (2015).

43
Meerheim, R., Furno, M., Hofmann, S., Lüssem, B. & Leo, K. Quantification of energy loss mechanisms 
in organic light-emitting diodes. Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 275 (2010).

44
Muñoz-Rojas, D. et al. Speeding up the unique assets of atomic layer deposition. Mater. Today Chem.
12, 96-120 (2019).

45
Morton, A. et al. Photostimulation for in vitro optogenetics with high‐power blue organic light‐emitting 
diodes. Adv. Biosyst. 3, 1800290 (2019).

46
Murawski, C. et al. Narrowband organic light‐emitting diodes for fluorescence microscopy and calcium 
imaging. Adv. Mater. 31, 1903599 (2019).

47
Furno, M., Meerheim, R., Hofmann, S., Lüssem, B. & Leo, K. Efficiency and rate of spontaneous 
emission in organic electroluminescent devices. Phys. Rev. B 85, 115205 (2012).


21

Acknowledgments

This research was financially supported from the Leverhulme Trust (RPG-2017-231), the 

EPSRC NSF-CBET lead agency agreement (EP/R010595/1, 1706207), the DARPA NESD 

programme (N66001-17-C-4012) and the RS Macdonald Charitable Trust. C.K. acknowledges 

support from the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation 

of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2017R1A6A3A03012331). C.M. 

acknowledges funding from the European Commission through a Marie Skłodowska Curie 

individual fellowship (703387). A.M. acknowledges funding through an individual fellowship 

of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (404587082). M.C.G. acknowledges funding from 

the Alexander von Humboldt Stiftung (Humboldt-Professorship).

Author contributions

C.K. and M.C.G. initiated the project, designed the experiments, and prepared the manuscript. 

C.K. fabricated and characterized the thin-films and OLED devices, performed AFM 

measurements, and analysed all data. C.M. and C.K. performed stability tests. E.A. and C.K. 

designed and built the goniometer measurement setup and measured angle-resolved spectra. 

S.K. and C.K. performed dry-etching and the related measurements. A.M. and C.K. performed 

optical simulations. All authors discussed the data and contributed to the manuscript.

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.


1

Supplementary Information

Supplementary Figure 1. Flexible, water-resistant fluorescent blue OLEDs. Photographs of a flexible blue 
OLED a, on a finger, b, wrapped around a screwdriver, and c, immersed in deionized water.

Supplementary Figure 2. Spectrally resolved refractive index of materials forming the flexible barriers. 
The refractive indices of parylene-C, Al2O3, ZrO2, and the Al2O3/ZrO2 nanolaminate were measured by variable 
angle spectroscopic ellipsometry. The nanolaminate shows an intermediate refractive index between Al2O3 and 
ZrO2. 

Supplementary Figure 3. Optical modelling of outcoupling efficiency as function of charge transport layer 
thickness. Outcoupling efficiency of OLEDs on a P/N/P lower barrier as function of HTL and ETL thicknesses,
calculated using transfer matrix-based optical simulations. The 1st order maximum is reached for HTL and ETL 
thickness of 50 nm and 60 nm, respectively. A 2nd order maximum occurs at 220 nm (HTL) and 80 nm (ETL).


2

Supplementary Figure 4. Comparison of OLEDs with first and second order cavities. a, Current density 
(solid lines) and luminance (dashed lines) versus voltage for first and second order OLEDs with P/N/P lower 
barrier layer. b, External quantum efficiency for same devices, assuming Lambertian emission characteristics. c, 
Comparison of leakage current density of OLEDs with first and second cavity. Data points and error bars represent 
the average and standard deviation of five OLED pixels for each device type. Leakage current density is defined 
as the current density measured at 1 V. 

Supplementary Figure 5. Angle-resolved EL spectra and emission intensity. a, Angle-resolved EL spectra of 
OLEDs with different lower barrier layers and of the reference OLED on glass, each for a set of angles (cf. Fig. 2
in the main manuscript). b, Normalized radiant intensity (left) and luminous intensity (right) distributions for same 
set of devices, calculated from the angle-resolved measurements of EL spectra.

Supplementary Figure 6. Instability of OLEDs built on lower barrier layers formed solely by parylene-C. 
j-V-L characteristics for an OLED deposited on a 10 µm-thick parylene-C film before and after peeling the device 
from the glass carrier substrate. After removal from carrier, no light emission is observed and current density 
increases rapidly with voltage, with no diode behaviour observed. This indicates that on its own parylene-C is not 
able to protect OLEDs sufficiently. 


3

Supplementary Figure 7. Comparing barrier stability in aqueous environment for the nanolaminate on its 
own versus the hybrid barrier. OLEDs with a top encapsulation layer of nanolaminate (left; total thickness,
150 nm) and hybrid barrier of nanolaminate and parylene-C layers (right) were exposed to cell culture medium 
(NeurobasalTM-A). The former delaminated immediately when immersed into the liquid (the original position of 
the two delaminated OLED pixels is indicated by dashed yellow lines) while the latter showed no visual change 
over time. For the nanolaminate-only device, a silicone chamber (ibidi) was attached to confine the culture 
medium to the OLED pixel area and protect the contact pads but this additional measure did not prevent rapid 
delamination. 

Supplementary Figure 8. Operational lifetime of flexible OLED under constant current. Decay in luminance 
over time measured under constant current driving (J = 8.4 mA cm-2) for an OLED with a P/N/P/N lower barrier 
layer. At the current density used for this test, the initial luminance of the device was 2,600 cd m-2. 

Supplementary Figure 9. Stability of flexible OLEDs to coating with a photoresist. a, Photographs of a 
flexible OLED attached to a supporting frame after spin-coating a film of photoresist (S1818, MicropositTM) onto 
the device (with a water droplet on top). b, Same device after removing the photoresist by immersion in acetone. 
c, Photograph of OLED after deposition and subsequent removal of photoresist, with an OLED pixel operated. d,
Comparison of j-V-L characteristics for the same OLED pixel before spin-coating the photoresist and after 
removing it by immersion in acetone. 


4

Supplementary Figure 10. Stability test under exposure to cell culture medium. Photograph of an OLED with 
TFE barrier and a silicone chamber (ibidi) attached that confines culture medium to OLED pixel area and avoids 
interference of the liquid with the electrical contacts. 

Supplementary Figure 11. Optical simulations for OLEDs on glass and on the flexible TFE barrier. a, c,
Calculated total power dissipation spectra as function of emission wavelength and the in-plane component of the 
normalized wavevector. b, d, Calculated power dissipation spectra at a wavelength of 650 nm as function of the 
in-plane component of the normalized wavevector. The four regions distinguished by the dashed lines indicate 
different optical modes, i.e., outcoupled light, substrate confined light (subs), waveguided light (wg), and 
evanescent modes. The panels in the top row (a,b) show results for an OLED on a conventional glass substrate. 
The bottom row (c,d) summarizes the result for a lower barrier layer with the P/N/P/N structure and thickness 
described in the main text. In d the substrate confined light refers to light confined in the lower barrier layer. 


5

Supplementary Figure 12. Tuning light outcoupling with scattering structure. a, Angle-resolved EL spectra 
of top-emitting OLEDs with pristine upper TFE barrier. b, Angle-resolved EL spectra of top-emitting OLED after 
roughening upper barrier by RIE. c, Comparison of normalized radiant intensity for devices in a and b as calculated 
from the angle-resolved spectra. d, Change in luminance over time under constant current driving (J = 4.38 mA 
cm-2) for an OLED with an RIE treated upper barrier layer. 

Supplementary Figure 13. Supporting frame. Photographs showing a flexible OLED sample attached to a 
custom-made supporting frame (left) and the process of detaching a sample from the frame (right). 


6

Supplementary Figure 14. Single layer approximation of nanolaminate layers. Comparison of power 
dissipation spectra simulated with the multilayer model representing the actual experimental structure (red line) 
and with the single layer approximation described in Methods (blue line).


