 Impact of Trap Filling on Carrier Diffusion in MAPbBr3 Single Crystals 

N. Ganesh1, Anaranya Ghorai1, Shrreya Krishnamurthy2, Suman Banerjee1, 

K.L.Narasimhan3, Satishchandra B. Ogale2, K.S.Narayan1* 

1 Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit (CPMU), Jawaharlal Nehru Center for Advanced 

Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bengaluru, India – 560064 

2 Department of Physics and Center for Energy Sciences, Indian Institute of Science 

Education and Research, Pune – 411008 

3Center for Nano Science and Engineering (CENSE), Indian Institute of Science Bengaluru, 

560012 

 

Abstract 

We present experimental evidence showing that the effective carrier diffusion length (Ld) and 

lifetime (τ) depend on the carrier density in MAPbBr3 single crystals. Independent 

measurements reveal that both Ld and τ decrease with an increase in photo-carrier density. 

Scanning photocurrent microscopy is used to extract the characteristic photocurrent Iph decay-

length parameter, Ld, which is a measure of effective carrier diffusion. The Ld magnitudes for 

electrons and holes were determined to be ~13.3 µm and ~13.8 µm respectively. A marginal 

increase in uniform light bias (≤ 5 × 1015 photons/cm2) increases the modulated photocurrent 

magnitude and reduces the Ld parameter by a factor of two and three for electrons and holes 

respectively, indicating that the recombination is not monomolecular. The Ld variations were 

correlated to the features in photoluminescence lifetime studies. Analysis of lifetime variation 

shows intensity-dependent monomolecular and bimolecular recombination trends with 

recombination constants determined to be ~ 9.3 x 106 s-1 and ~ 1.4 x 10-9 cm3s-1 respectively. 

Based on the trends of Ld and lifetime, it is inferred that the sub-band-gap trap recombination 

influences carrier transport in the low-intensity excitation regime, while bimolecular 

recombination and transport dominate at high intensity.


Hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites (HOIP) have demonstrated unprecedented potential for 

device applications such as solar cells, photodetectors, LEDs, and lasing[1-5]. Record high 

efficiencies, reaching 25 % [1,6,7] in HOIP single-junction solar cells can be explained due to 

properties such as high absorption coefficient, long diffusion lengths, decent mobility, and 

long-lived carrier lifetimes [8-10]. Long diffusion length (Ldiff) in HOIP has been attributed 

to processes such as photon recycling, Rashba splitting, high bi-molecular recombination rates, 

and defect tolerance [11-15]. Ldiff estimates in the range of 100 nm – 3 mm, spanning across 

four orders of magnitude have been reported [8,16,17]. This difference is partly due to different 

techniques such as transient photoluminescence (TRPL), transient photo-voltage (TPV), 

transient absorption, impedance spectroscopy and transient microwave conductivity (TRMC) 

to determine  [8,9,18-20]. Additionally, techniques such as space charge limited current, time 

of flight, Hall Effect, TRMC, and terahertz conductivity are employed to determine carrier 

mobility  [8,10,17,19,21]. Determination of diffusion length (Ldiff), a parameter indicative of 

efficient carrier transport, relies on twin measurements of  and . Long Ldiff are characteristic 

of good quality films with large grain size. Recombination at the grain-boundaries limits the 

Ldiff to grain size length-scales [22]. To overcome grain size effects on Ldiff studies, sizable (2-

3 mm), Methylammonium Lead Bromide (MAPbBr3) single crystals (MSC) were utilized. 

Hybrid perovskite single crystals are evolving as suitable solar cell candidates due to low trap 

density, high Ldiff, and high sub-bandgap absorption, reaching efficiencies of 21 % [21,23,24]. 

Applications based on their emission and optoelectronic properties are also emerging [25].  

In the first part of the paper, we present the direct spatial estimation of effective diffusion length 

(Ld) measurements on single crystals as a function of light bias intensity using scanning 

photocurrent microscopy (SPCM). We then report and analyze the emission characteristics 

using TRPL recombination lifetime techniques. These emission studies enable understanding 

of the processes and the role of dc light bias on the measured Ld. 


 

Sample Details 

In this study, large MSCs (~ few mm) were prepared using the technique of inverse temperature 

crystallization (details in Supplemental Material) [19]. The sharp XRD peaks in Fig. S1 is a 

measure of the crystal quality. SPCM studies were carried out on MSC devices. For efficient 

collection of photogenerated carriers, selective contact layers were deposited: poly(N,N'-bis-

4-butylphenyl-N,N'-bisphenyl)benzidine (Poly-TPD) and phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl 

ester (PC71BM) with Au and Ag electrodes for hole and electron extraction respectively, 

schematically shown in the band diagram, Fig. 1(a).  

Results 

Scanning Photocurrent Microscopy (SPCM) 

Fig. 1(b) is a schematic of the set up used for SPCM (Experimental details in Supplemental 

Material). In this experiment, ~ 3 µm spot size, (Fig. S2) intensity-modulated 405 nm (~ 27 

mW/cm2) laser beam which is incident normally on MSC, is translated laterally between the 

two contacts. The modulated short-circuit photocurrent Iph(x) shown in Fig. 1(c) is measured 

using a lock-in amplifier at different positions of the incident beam between the two electrodes. 

The maxima in Iph(x) corresponds to the electrode-positions at either end. The contact 

resistance at the electrodes is estimated and verified to be negligible due to charge-selective 

interfacial layers, with the built-in voltage (Vbi) falling entirely along the inter-electrode length. 

In the present case of undoped sizable MSC (d ~ 1-2 mm, inset Fig. 1(c)), the built-in electric-

field, Ebi = Vbi/d is negligible (< 6 V/cm) resulting in a dominant diffusion contribution to the 

observed Iph. 


 

Fig. 1: (a) Band alignment diagram depicting MSC-device used in SPCM experiments. (b) Schematic 

of Scanning Photocurrent Microscopy (SPCM) used for effective diffusion length measurement. The 

incident chopped probe-beam position is varied by translating the sample. The lock-in profile Iph(x) is 

utilized to estimate Ld. (c) Iph(x) shows Iph-peak at the interface. Single exponential fit to the Iph decay 

profile corresponds to the Ld of the corresponding carrier. The inset shows the image of the bulk single 

crystal. 

The determination of effective diffusion length, Ld from the Iph(x) measurement can be arrived 

at by solving the drift-diffusion equation. In the simplified case of single-carrier 1-D transport, 

minority excess carrier, δn is given as [26]: 

𝜕𝛿𝑛
𝜕𝑡 =  𝐷 𝜕2𝛿𝑛

𝜕𝑥2 +  𝜇𝐸 𝜕𝛿𝑛

𝜕𝑥 + 𝐺 − 𝛿𝑛

𝜏                 (𝟏)  

The generation rate G is given by delta function, G = G0.(x-x0) where x = x0 is the position of 

illumination. Under conditions of steady-state illumination (dδn/dt = 0), negligible electric field 

and x  x0, the diffusion current can be expressed as (derivation in Section 11, Supplemental 

Material):  

𝐼𝑝ℎ(𝑥) = 𝐼0 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− 𝑥

𝐿𝑑

)                   (𝟐) 

where the effective diffusion length, Ld corresponds to the Iph(x) decay. It must be noted that 

effective diffusion length, Ld is different from minority carrier diffusion length, Ldiff. Ldiff is the 

microscopic quantity related to the diffusion coefficient (D) and expressed as (Dτ)1/2, where τ 


is the carrier lifetime. In disordered or amorphous systems, owing to the dispersive nature of 

transport, Ld and Ldiff can differ appreciably [27,28]. However, Ld has been shown to be a 

representative of the long-lived carriers corresponding to states in the tail distribution, in 

organic and polymeric semiconductors [28,29]. The Ld parameter in the present case of HOIP 

single crystals, is expected to be a closer representation of Ldiff owing to dominant band 

transport [30]. In the present case of SPCM on MSC devices, it has to be noted that the Ld 

parameter is obtained upon fitting over the entire decay range and accounts for additional 

factors such as finite beam spot, 3D carrier diffusion and ambipolar transport away from the 

electrodes. 

The Iph(x) response in Fig. 1(b) can be qualitatively described as follows: Photo-excitation 

results in a point spread of electrons and holes via 3D diffusion – a fraction of which diffuse 

towards the electrodes. When the excitation is at a distance equivalent to many diffusion-

lengths from the contacts, the diffusing photo-carriers get (i) trapped in shallow states and also 

(ii) recombine, resulting in a low-current. When the excitation beam is within Ld from the 

electrode, the current increases exponentially with the probe distance (Eq. (2)) enabling one of 

the carriers to be extracted leaving the other carrier in the perovskite to transit to the other 

electrode. The extraction of one carrier and the long lifetime associated with the displacement 

of the counter carrier, renders the extracted carrier as minority, with excitation close (x ≤ Ld) 

to the extraction electrode. Transient Iph measurements (Fig. S3), indicating longer transit for 

excitation near the electrodes compared to a distant region, confirms this viewpoint. Previous 

reports of SPCM have determined the “minority carrier diffusion length” using doped crystals 

and charge selective Schottky barrier [17,31]. In the present case of MSCs, Ld corresponds to 

the selectivity of the extraction layer in undoped single crystal devices. 

Using Eq. (2), Ld for electrons and holes was determined to be 13.3 ± 0.6 µm and 13.8 ± 0.5 

µm respectively. Intensity dependent studies reveal that the carrier Ldiff varies with excitation 


density similar to TPV studies, where Ldiff ~ 3 mm, at low-intensity excitation [8,10]. These 

studies of Ldiff determination relied on indirect estimation. To investigate the effect of intensity 

dependence on directly measured spatial Ld, intensity-dependent SPCM studies are carried out 

by (i) varying the intensity of the probe beam (ii) superposing a uniform background 

illumination or light-bias using a 390 nm LED with the probe beam. (The optical absorption 

depth (~ 125 nm) of the 390 nm light is similar to the 405 nm probe beam [32].) 

Fig. S4(a) shows Iph(x) upon probe-intensity variation in the SPCM measurement. The excess 

generated probe-photo carriers, δnprobe diffuse away from the point of generation and decays as 

𝛿𝑛 (𝑥) =  𝛿𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒(0). exp (

−𝑥

𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓). The corresponding Ld values in Fig. S4(b) as a function of probe 

beam intensity shows that Ld is independent of probe beam intensity. The invariance of Ld can 

be understood since the photo-carriers decay to background carrier concentration within ~ 

3Ldiff. The addition of light bias, on the other hand, maintains uniform charge generation across 

the transport length of the probe-carrier. It was ensured that the effects of light-induced halide 

redistribution and phase segregation are minimal by maintaining the MSC-device in dark under 

short-circuit conditions after each measurement, under a positive pressure of the inert 

atmosphere [33,34]. Fig. S5 provides evidence of the sample “self-recovering” as the ions 

equilibrate, confirmed by the increase in the magnitude of Iph(x). It must be noted that we have 

not carried any measurements under applied bias, where one expects a sizeable ionic 

contribution. 

 


 

Fig. 2: (a) Iph(x) variation on both end of the MSC device with a 405 nm probe beam and 390 nm light 

bias. (b) Normalized Iph(x) profiles indicating sharp decay at higher light bias (c)  Ld extracted with the 

exponential fitting of Iph(x)-decay as a function of light bias. 

 

Fig. 2(a) depicts the Iph(x) profile at different dc light bias (additional plots and details in Fig. 

S6). The Iph magnitude increases with the light bias as indicated in Iph(x) maxima at the 

electrodes. Fig. 2(b) shows the normalized Iph(x) decay at either end of the MSC-electrode 

interface. The steep decay of Iph away from the electrode is evident under high light bias 

conditions. The Ld parameter is extracted by fitting the decay profile to Eq. (2). The estimated 

Ld (values of Ld given in Table S1) as a function of light bias-photon flux, presented in Fig. 

2(c) reveals the decrease of Ld with dc light-bias intensity. The extracted Ld parameter 

decreases by a factor of 3 for holes and a factor of ~ 2 for electrons upon increasing the light 

bias from zero to ~ 5×1015 photons/cm2. To investigate the effects of surface recombination, 

the probe λex was changed to 532 nm in the presence of 532 nm light bias (corresponding to 

absorption depth ~10 µm) [32,35] as shown in Fig. S7. Qualitatively similar results were 

observed for λprobe ≈ 532 nm. For both the cases of 405 nm and 532 nm excitation, beyond a 

certain high-intensity light bias, the Iph magnitude reduces as shown in Fig. S6(c) and S7(d) 

respectively. This reduction is attributed to the effects of light-soaking [36]. 


The decrease of the Ld at high dc-light bias suggests that the recombination kinetics of the 

excess carriers is not monomolecular [35]. This was verified by photophysical studies using 

intensity and time-dependent Photoluminescence (PL) measurements. 

PL measurements 

MAPbBr3 is characterized by absorption, largely in the UV-Vis spectral range (Fig. S8). Photo-

thermal deflection spectroscopy and light transmission experiments have shown the presence 

of sub-bandgap states extending to ~ 2.0 eV [32,37]. Fig. 3(a) is the plot of PL spectra for 3 

eV (405 nm) excitation in reflection and transmission geometry. In reflection mode, the PL 

spectra exhibit a peak at 2.27 eV (545 nm) with a shoulder at 2.15 eV (575 nm). In transmission 

mode, the 2.27 eV peak is masked due to self-absorption. The 2.27 eV peak is identified and 

attributed to the band-to-band transition (free carrier recombination). The 2.15 eV peak has 

been attributed to different mechanisms viz. radiative recombination from a defect level or to 

bound exciton recombination[37,38]. The 2.15 eV is observed exclusively in crystals and not 

in MAPbBr3 thin films (Fig. S9). Photo-induced absorption studies at different T of samples 

with different degrees of crystallinity can be used to attribute the 2.15 eV feature, in the present 

case, to long-range dipole-dipole interactions of defects in the bulk of single crystals [35,39]. 

Without loss of generality and for simplicity of modeling and analysis, we identify the 2.15 eV 

(575 nm) emission as trap mediated radiative emission in the bulk of MSC. This is shown 

schematically in Fig. 3(d). 


 

Fig. 3: (a) PL data depicts 545 nm and 575 nm peak corresponding to PL measured in the reflection 

and transmission geometry respectively. (b) Plot shows the increase in E-PLQE at higher excitation 

fluence. (c) Emission intensity exhibits linear and quadratic dependence on excitation for 545 nm and 

linear variation for the 575 nm emission. (d) Schematic showing an illustration of band-to-band 

recombination and trap emission.  

 

Fig. 3(b) shows the intensity dependence on External PL Quantum Efficiency (E-PLQE). E-

PLQE increases with an increase in the excitation intensity. Fig. 3(c) (and also Fig. S10) shows 

that the intensity dependence of emission on the excitation density for the 545 nm and 575 nm 

emission follows a power law: <IPL> = <Iex>x and is in agreement with previous observations 

[37,40]. For the 545 nm peak (2.27eV), x ≈ 1 at low intensity (blue shaded region) and ≈ 2 at 

high intensity. In contrast, the 575nm (2.15 eV) emission peak reveals a linear x ≈ 1 response 


throughout. These results can be understood from a simple physical model where the effective 

excess carrier lifetime (eff) is expressed as 

1

𝜏𝑒𝑓𝑓 =

1

𝜏𝑆𝑅𝐻 +

1

𝜏𝑅 where, SRH is the trap mediated 

non-radiative recombination lifetime and R is the radiative recombination time. The auger 

recombination component which becomes prominent at high excitation fluence (> 1017 

photons/cm2) is neglected. 1/R can then be expressed as  

1

𝜏𝑅 = 𝐵 (𝑁𝐴 +  𝛿𝑛) 𝑎𝑛𝑑 

1

𝜏𝑆𝑅𝐻 = 𝑅𝑆𝑅𝐻. 𝑁𝑇                (𝟑)           

where, δn is the excess carrier density, B the radiative constant, and NA the background doping 

concentration, RSRH is the non-radiative constant, and NT is the trap density. The radiative 

recombination rate is given as: 

𝛿𝑛
𝜏𝑅

= 𝐴𝑅𝛿𝑛 + 𝐵 (𝛿𝑛)2           (𝟒) 

where, AR = B.NA.  

At low fluence, the radiative recombination rate increases linearly with the excitation and 

quadratically with fluence at a higher intensity. This explains the excitation dependence of the 

545 nm peak. The 575 nm peak arises due to recombination from a shallow trap. If δn is smaller 

than the trap concentration, the emission rate is linearly dependent on the excitation intensity - 

in agreement with the observation in Fig. 3(b). This basic model satisfactorily accounts for the 

PL observations. 

 
Fig. 4(a) shows the time-resolved emission spectra upon pulsed 405 nm excitation (19 

mW/cm2) on MSC. From the decay trends of the two peaks (Fig. 4(b)), it can be observed that 

545 nm is characterized by a faster decay lifetime in comparison to the trap emission at 575 

nm.  


 

Fig. 4: (a) Time-resolved emission spectra on MSC upon pulsed excitation with a 405 nm source. (b) 

TRPL at 545 nm and 575 nm shows a shorter band-recombination lifetime at 545 nm. 

 

The PL-lifetimes were studied by varying the excitation intensity. Fig. 5(a) and 5(b) show the 

luminescence decay for both the 545 nm and the 575 nm respectively as a function of excitation 

power. The lifetime of the 545 nm emission decreases with an increase in excitation power. 

The results are summarized in Fig. 5(c). The lifetime measured in the TRPL corresponds to τeff 

which is given as: 

𝛿𝑛
𝜏𝑒𝑓𝑓

= 𝐴𝛿𝑛 + 𝐵 (𝛿𝑛)2           (𝟓) 

 where, A = B.NA + RSRH. NT.  

 


 

Fig. 5: (a) TRPL depicting the decrease in the PL lifetime at high fluence illumination (545 nm) (b) 

TRPL for 575 nm depicts the constancy of lifetime for the range of excitation intensities. (c) 

Compilation of intensity-dependent lifetimes for 545 nm and 575 nm emission. For 545 nm emission, 

the lifetime is constant in the lower intensity (< 1015 photons/cm2) and reduces at a higher intensity (> 

1015 photons/cm2). For the 575 nm emission, a uniform lifetime in the entire intensity regime. 


The effective PL lifetime corresponding to 545 nm emission, marginally varies up to a fluence 

of 1015 photons/cm2 and at higher fluence, decreases as τR ∝ 1/Bδn. In contrast, for trap-

emission at 575 nm, observed eff is independent of excitation intensity, implying 

monomolecular emission. Using Eq. (5) and the trends observed in Fig. 5(c), the coefficients 

A and B for 545 nm emission were determined to be (9.3 ± 0.2) x106 s-1 and (1.4 ± 0.2) x10-9 

cm3s-1 respectively (details in Section 12, Supplemental Material). These values are in good 

agreement with recombination rate constants for direct band-gap semiconductors [32,41]. 

Since the E-PLQE  eff / R , for a fluence > 1015/cm2, R decreases with increasing fluence. 

The E-PLQE increases with increasing fluence as shown in Fig. 3(b).  

Discussion 

We now correlate Ld to the PL-lifetime. In the absence of light bias, the tightly-focused probe 

beam (405 nm, 5×1016 photons/cm2) in the SPCM studies generate a high concentration of 

electron-hole pairs and correspondingly the excess carrier lifetime observed from PL studies 

(Fig. 5(c)) is small (< 28 ns). The excess carriers diffuse outside the illuminated zone and 

recombine gradually and the corresponding carrier lifetimes at these levels of concentration 

increase as observed in PL lifetime studies (545 nm, Fig. 5(c)). As the modulated probe-carriers 

diffuse to the electrodes, they are also trapped in deep trapping states effectively reducing the 

photocurrent. When the probe beam is within a couple of diffusion lengths away from the 

electrode, an increasing number of carriers (for instance, electrons at the ETL contact) are 

collected and the holes diffuse to the HTL contact setting up a current in the external circuit. 

When the carrier concentration reduces sufficiently, the excess carrier lifetime converges to ~ 

125 ns, and Ldiff assumes the low-intensity value. The addition of dc light bias in the SPCM 

studies results in two effects: 1) DC light bias establishes a new dc equilibrium by populating 

the deep trapping states. This results in suppression of trapping along the pathway for the 

carriers generated by the modulated probe beam. The reduced trapping accounts for Iph increase 


with light bias, explaining features in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. S6(c). 2) The magnitude of the dc light 

bias determines the lateral excess-carrier concentration. The excess carrier lifetime decreases 

to a limit which is set by the dc-light bias magnitude. This scenario explains the decrease of Ld 

with increasing light bias. 

The light-bias feature elicits the trap-assisted recombination processes[42]. Monomolecular 

recombination lifetime depends on radiative rate, SRH recombination rate, and trap density as 

shown in Eq. (5). An estimated trap density of ~ 1015 traps/cm3 [32,35] significantly influences 

band recombination and lifetimes. Loss of charge carriers to traps is reduced in the presence of 

bias light presumably since traps occupancy increases with bias light. Under light bias, a higher 

fraction of the probe carriers bi-molecularly recombine resulting in shorter τ and Ld.  

 

Fig. 6: (a) The schematic describes the simulation of the SPCM experiment using the finite element 

method. The probe excitation (at x=0) is assumed to be a point source in addition to uniform dc light 

bias on MSC sample. The blue line at x=0 in all the plots indicates probe excitation. (b) Plot of spatial 


carrier decay profile considering 1-D diffusion of probe-carriers. The decay profile changes with 

different intensities of light bias. (c) Shows the excess carrier lifetime at different dc light bias. The 

excess carrier lifetime depends on the background carrier density (shown in (b)). Dashed line indicates 

lifetime of light bias generated carriers. As excess probe-carriers diffuse in space and recombine, the 

excess carrier density decreases resulting in an increased excess-carrier lifetime. This results in a spatial 

dependence of the excess carrier lifetime. (d) Shows the effective diffusion length decreases with 

increasing light bias. Dashed line indicates Ldiff of light bias generated carriers. Since the lifetime 

increases as the excess carriers diffuse away from x = 0, the effective diffusion length also increases. 

 

To understand the microscopic carrier diffusion dynamics, simulation of SPCM using the finite 

element method, incorporating 1-D carrier diffusion was carried out, results of which are 

presented in Fig. 6 (simulation details in Section 13, Supplemental Material). A probe 

excitation is introduced at x = 0 in addition to uniform dc-light bias on the MSC sample, as 

shown in the schematic Fig. 6(a). The excess carrier concentration at x is given as:  

𝑛𝑡𝑜𝑡 (𝑥) =  𝛿𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒(0). exp ( −𝑥

𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓

) + 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑐 (𝐿. 𝐵)                (𝟔) 

The first term on the right side of Eq. (6) represents the diffusion of probe carriers and the 

second term corresponds to excess carrier generation due to the light bias. The plot of ntot(x) 

for different light bias conditions is given in Fig. 6(b).The photogenerated carriers diffuse from 

x=0 and also simultaneously recombine with lifetime τ which depends on excess carrier 

concentration (Fig. 5(c) and Fig. S12(b)). As the excess probe-carriers diffuse away from x=0 

the carrier density reduces, increasing . However, the effective  reduces with increasing light 

bias as shown in Fig. 6(c). A similar trend is observed for the Ldiff, as shown in Fig. 6(d). As 

the probe carriers diffuse from x=0, the increase in lifetime (Fig. 5(c)) results in an increased 

value of Ldiff. The effective Ldiff reduces with increased light bias. The simulation results 

capture the observed trend of decreasing Ld (Fig. 2(c)). 


The other parameter, apart from lifetime, that determines Ld is the diffusion coefficient. Ščajev 

et.al has shown that the balancing effects of phonon scattering at low intensity and carrier 

scattering at high intensity was observed to have marginal effect on D[30]. Therefore, the 

intensity dependent factor that influences diffusion dynamics is determined largely by . 

Photon recycling in perovskites is an additional factor that contributes to the transport length 

in perovskite based systems and devices [12,43]. In Section 14 of Supplemental Material, we 

have presented a discussion which shows the simulated excess-carrier density accounting for 

photon recycling. Considering sizable reabsorbed carriers (nα = 0.54, [44]) and an upper limit 

on the photon propagation length (Lα =1/α ~ 10 µm for 545 nm), Fig. S13 shows that the 

changes in ntot, τ and Ldiff is marginal upon inclusion of photon recycling. 

Conclusion 

An elegant consistency is observed from the measurements of Iph(x) and PL studies. Ld was 

observed to decrease as a function of light bias in HOIP single crystals. This observation was 

correlated with PL lifetime studies which revealed the contribution of trap recombination 

dynamics in addition to free carrier dynamics. These results provide an insight into the 

contribution of free carrier and trap emission dynamics to Ld. The sizable Ld in systems where 

carrier transport is trap mediated points to the defect-tolerant capability of HOIP based device 

structures.  

Acknowledgements 

The authors acknowledge Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, 

EPSRC-UKRI Global Challenge Research Fund project, SUNRISE (EP/P032591/1) for the 

financial assistance.  

 


Conflict of Interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

References 

[1] 
Q. Jiang et al., Nature Photonics 13, 460 (2019). 

[2] 
J. Ding et al., Joule 3, 402 (2019). 

[3] 
Y. Wang et al., Advanced Materials 29, 1603995 (2017). 

[4] 
Y. Wu, X. Li, and H. Zeng, ACS Energy Letters 4, 673 (2019). 

[5] 
Y. Jia, R. A. Kerner, A. J. Grede, B. P. Rand, and N. C. Giebink, Nature Photonics 11, 

784 (2017). 

[6] 
W. S. Yang et al., Science 356, 1376 (2017). 

[7] 
N. R. E. Laboratory,  (NREL Golden, CO, 2019). 

[8] 
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao, and J. Huang, Science 347, 

967 (2015). 

[9] 
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. 

M. Herz, A. Petrozza, and H. J. Snaith, Science 342, 341 (2013). 

[10] 
Y. Chen et al., Nature communications 7, 1 (2016). 

[11] 
T. Etienne, E. Mosconi, and F. De Angelis, The journal of physical chemistry letters 7, 

1638 (2016). 

[12] 
L. M. Pazos-Outón et al., Science 351, 1430 (2016). 

[13] 
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith, and L. M. Herz, 

Advanced materials 26, 1584 (2014). 

[14] 
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu, and J. J. Berry, 

ACS Energy Letters 1, 360 (2016). 


[15] 
H. Huang, M. I. Bodnarchuk, S. V. Kershaw, M. V. Kovalenko, and A. L. Rogach, ACS 

energy letters 2, 2071 (2017). 

[16] 
G. W. Adhyaksa, L. W. Veldhuizen, Y. Kuang, S. Brittman, R. E. Schropp, and E. C. 

Garnett, Chemistry of Materials 28, 5259 (2016). 

[17] 
O. E. Semonin et al., The journal of physical chemistry letters 7, 3510 (2016). 

[18] 
N. r. F. Montcada, J. M. Marín-Beloqui, W. Cambarau, J. s. Jiménez-López, L. Cabau, 

K. T. Cho, M. K. Nazeeruddin, and E. Palomares, ACS Energy Letters 2, 182 (2017). 

[19] 
M. I. Saidaminov et al., Nature communications 6, 1 (2015). 

[20] 
Y. Bi, E. M. Hutter, Y. Fang, Q. Dong, J. Huang, and T. J. Savenije, The journal of 

physical chemistry letters 7, 923 (2016). 

[21] 
D. Shi et al., Science 347, 519 (2015). 

[22] 
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, and J. Huang, Advanced Materials 26, 6503 

(2014). 

[23] 
Z. Chen et al., Nature communications 8, 1 (2017). 

[24] 
Z. Chen, B. Turedi, A. Y. Alsalloum, C. Yang, X. Zheng, I. Gereige, A. AlSaggaf, O. 

F. Mohammed, and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Letters 4, 1258 (2019). 

[25] 
Y. Fang, Q. Dong, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, and J. Huang, Nature Photonics 9, 679 (2015). 

[26] 
D. A. Neamen, Semiconductor physics and devices: basic principles (New York, NY: 

McGraw-Hill, 2012). 

[27] 
H. Scher and E. W. Montroll, Physical Review B 12, 2455 (1975). 

[28] 
D. Kabra, S. Shriram, N. Vidhyadhiraja, and K. Narayan, Journal of applied physics 

101, 064510 (2007). 

[29] 
D. Kabra and K. Narayan, Advanced Materials 19, 1465 (2007). 


[30] 
P. Ščajev, R. n. Aleksieju̅ nas, S. Miasojedovas, S. Nargelas, M. Inoue, C. Qin, T. 

Matsushima, C. Adachi, and S. Juršėnas, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 121, 21600 

(2017). 

[31] 
G. A. Elbaz, D. B. Straus, O. E. Semonin, T. D. Hull, D. W. Paley, P. Kim, J. S. Owen, 

C. R. Kagan, and X. Roy, Nano letters 17, 1727 (2017). 

[32] 
B. Wenger, P. K. Nayak, X. Wen, S. V. Kesava, N. K. Noel, and H. J. Snaith, Nature 

communications 8, 1 (2017). 

[33] 
D. W. DeQuilettes et al., Nature communications 7, 1 (2016). 

[34] 
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa, and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Letters 1, 1199 

(2016). 

[35] 
B. Wu, H. T. Nguyen, Z. Ku, G. Han, D. Giovanni, N. Mathews, H. J. Fan, and T. C. 

Sum, Advanced Energy Materials 6, 1600551 (2016). 

[36] 
W. Nie et al., Nature communications 7, 1 (2016). 

[37] 
H. He et al., Nature communications 7, 1 (2016). 

[38] 
J. Shi, H. Zhang, Y. Li, J. J. Jasieniak, Y. Li, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li, and Q. Meng, 

Energy & Environmental Science 11, 1460 (2018). 

[39] 
G. Grancini et al., Nature photonics 9, 695 (2015). 

[40] 
T. Schmidt, K. Lischka, and W. Zulehner, Physical Review B 45, 8989 (1992). 

[41] 
J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Nature Photonics 8, 737 (2014). 

[42] 
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely, and H. J. Snaith, 

Physical Review Applied 2, 034007 (2014). 

[43] 
C. Cho, B. Zhao, G. D. Tainter, J.-Y. Lee, R. H. Friend, D. Di, F. Deschler, and N. C. 

Greenham, Nature Communications 11, 1 (2020). 

[44] 
T. Yamada, Y. Yamada, Y. Nakaike, A. Wakamiya, and Y. Kanemitsu, Physical 

Review Applied 7, 014001 (2017). 


Supplemental Material 

Impact of Trap Filling on Carrier Diffusion in MAPbBr3 Single Crystals 

N. Ganesh, Anaranya Ghorai, Shrreya Krishnamurthy, Suman Banerjee, K.L.Narasimhan, 

Satishchandra B Ogale, K.S.Narayan* 

 

List of contents: 

1. Powder XRD data on MAPbBr3 single crystals 

2. Beam spot size 

3. Position dependent Transient photocurrent on single crystal device 

4. Invariance of Ld with probe beam excitation intensity. 

5. Effect of recovery time on Iph(x) scan. 

6. Additional plots for 390 nm light bias and maximum Iph under different light bias 

intensity. 

7. SPCM scans with 532 nm excitation and light bias. 

8. Absorption spectra 

9. PL of thin films and single crystals 

10. PL variation with intensity. 

11. Drift diffusion formalism 

12. Calculation of A and B coefficients 

13. Simulation of SPCM 

14. Effect of Photon recycling on excess carrier density, lifetime and diffusion length 

15. Table S1: Ld values from SPCM experiment 

16. Experimental section  

 

 

 


1. Powder XRD on MAPbBr3 single crystals. 

 

Fig. S1: (a) Powder XRD on MAPbBr3 single crystals. Sharp peak indicate long range crystallinity in 

these samples. The powder XRD data collected on crushed crystals were compared with the simulated 

pattern obtained from the single crystal XRD analysis. The comparison of the two patterns conclusively 

affirmed that the phase of the as synthesized single crystals were the same.  

 

2. Knife edge method for spot size determination 

In this method of measuring the beam profile, a knife edge is translated across the focused 

beam in the line of the light incident on the detector. As the knife edge translates the intensity 

of light on the detector varies as Fig. S2(a). Differential of the intensity gives the beam 

profile shown in Fig. S2(b). 

 

Fig. S2: (a) The intensity profile as the knife edge is translated across the diameter of the focused beam 

spot. (b) Differential of the intensity profile gives the spot profile and the FWHM of the beam spot. 


3. Position dependent Transient Photocurrent on single crystal device 

 

Fig. S3: (a) Schematic of the position dependent TPC on the MSC device. The 355 nm pulsed laser, 1 

ns pulse, 60 nJ/pulse was for excitation close to the interface and at the center of the crystal. (b) The 

TPC decay time shows longer decay time for excitation close to electrode when compared to excitation 

in the central region far from the electrodes. The long decay times reflect on the transit time of the un-

extracted counter carrier.  

4. Invariance of Ld with probe beam excitation intensity. 

We have varied the probe intensity by a factor of ~ 3, since the probe intensity is within the 

bimolecular regime of excitation, corresponding to which the lifetime variation is expected to 

be drastic. We also note that, at very low probe beam intensity (< 1 mW/cm2), the Iph magnitude 

reduces to background current levels, resulting in the absence of the observed Iph(x) features. 

 

Fig. S4: (a) Plot of Iph(x) with variation in the 405 nm probe beam intensity in the absence of light bias. 

Solid lines indicate single exponential fits to obtain Ld. (b) Normalized plot of Iph(x) for different probe 


beam intensities with SPCM across the Ag/PCBM-MSC interface. (c) Plot of Ld with respect to probe 

beam intensity indicates that Ld remains invariant with change in probe-beam intensity.   

5. Effect of Recovery time on Iph(x) scan 

 

 

Fig. S5: The effect of recovery time on MSC devices were seen on the Iph(x) scan across the MSC-

electrode (PolyTPD-Au) interface. Each of the experiments were carried out with 405 nm probe beam 

and 390 nm light bias at ~ 2 mW/cm2. Each of the Iph scans is performed after exposure to light bias. At 

the end of 40 min, the system was in recovery condition: in the dark at short circuit condition with a 

positive pressure of inert atmosphere for 15 min. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


6. Additional plots for 390 nm light bias and maximum Iph under different light bias 

intensity. 

 

Fig. S6: (a) Plot of Iph(x) profiles obtained from SPCM experiments using 405 nm probe excitation and 

390 nm light bias. The Iph(x) variation is seen for different intensities of light bias. (b) Normalized Iph(x) 

plot in semi-log scale showing sharp Iph decay for the case of higher light bias. (c) Plot of variation of 

max. Iph close to the electrode as a function of light bias intensity for 390 nm. The dashed horizontal 

lines correspond to max. Iph without the light bias. (d) Normalized Iph plots (with electrode interface 

considered as the origin) with mono-exponential decay fits for SPCM scans across the Au/PolyTPD-

MSC (e) Ag/PCBM-MSC interface respectively. 


 

7. SPCM scans with 532 nm probe excitation and light bias.  

 

Fig. S7: (a) Iph(x) variation on either ends of the MSC device with 532 nm probe beam and 532 nm 

light bias. (b) Normalized Iph(x) profiles indicating sharp decay at higher light bias. (c) Ld extracted 

with exponential fitting of the Iph(x) decreases as a function of light bias-photon flux. (d) Plot of 

variation of max. Iph close to the electrode as a function of light bias intensity for 532 nm. The dashed 

horizontal lines correspond to max. Iph without the light bias. 

 

 

 

 


8. Absorption spectra of MAPbBr3 single crystals 

 

Fig. S8: Normalized absorption spectra of MAPbBr3 single crystal. 

 

9. PL of thin films and single crystals. 

 

Fig. S9: PL spectrum of MAPbBr3 thin film and single crystals. The emission peak at 2.15 eV (575 

nm) corresponding to bulk trap emission is absent in thin films. 

 

 

 

 


10. Intensity dependent PL variation. 

 

Fig. S10: Intensity dependent PL spectrum centered at (a) 545 nm, with PL measured in the reflection 

geometry and (b) 575nm, with PL measured in the transmission geometry on single crystals.  

 

11.  Drift diffusion formalism for Iph(x) from SPCM 

To extract the diffusion length of the carrier from the SPCM, we need to establish the relation 

of the diffusion length on the observed Iph decay. The drift diffusion equation for a single type 

of excess carrier is given as: 

𝜕𝛿𝑛

𝜕𝑡 =  𝐷

𝜕2𝛿𝑛

𝜕𝑥2 +  𝜇𝐸

𝜕𝛿𝑛

𝜕𝑥 + 𝐺 −

𝛿𝑛

𝜏              (S1) 

The generation rate G is given by delta function, G = G0 (x-x0) where x=x0 is the region of 

illumination. Under the conditions of steady state illumination (dδn/dt = 0), negligibly small 

electric field (E = 0) and xx0 the diffusion equation can be written as:  

 𝐷 𝜕2𝛿𝑛

𝜕𝑥2 = 𝛿𝑛

𝜏  

With the diffusion length defined as Ldiff = √(Dτ), by solving the above equation we obtain, 

𝛿𝑛(𝑥) = 𝛿𝑛0 exp(−
𝑥

𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓

) 


For x > 0, is the distance between the collection electrode and the point of generation. 𝛿no is 

the generation density at the point excitation.  

The obtained Iph as a result of diffusion is given as: 

𝐼𝑝ℎ(𝑥) = −𝑒𝐷 ∂𝛿n

∂x  

Since Ldiff is not a constant and has a dependence on δn(x), the Iph(x) can be expressed as: 

𝑰𝒑𝒉(𝒙) = 𝑰𝟎 𝐞𝐱𝐩(−

𝒙

𝑳𝒅)             (S2) 

Where Ld is the effective diffusion length and Ld ∝ Ldiff (x) = (kTµτ/e)1/2, here τ depends on 

excess carrier density.  

12. Calculation of A and B coefficients. 

The dependence of A and B on the recombination rate is given in Eq. (5). We observe that at 

low intensities, τ = 1/A at low intensity and at high intensities, τ = 1/Bδn.  

No of carriers generated is given as =  𝛼𝐺′ , where G’ corresponds to generation rate per pulse. 

From the integrated generation rate G indicated in Fig. 5(c), G’ = G/ (rep. rate), where rep. 

rate is the repetition rate of the pulsed illumination (800 KHz).  

With the τ values given in Fig. 5(c), the recombination rate is given as: δn/τ. To determine A  

and B, Eq. (5) was fit to a parabolic equation as shown in Fig. S11. The values of A and B were 

determined to be (9.3 ± 0.27) x106 s-1 and (1.4 ± 0.21) x10-9 cm3s-1 respectively. 


 

Fig. S11: Plot of recombination rate vs excess carrier density. The plot was fit to a quadratic equation 

to obtain A and B coefficients. 

 

13. Simulation of SPCM with light bias. 

We simulated the SPCM experiment with light bias conditions and correlated with PL lifetime 

values to obtain the Iph(x) profile using the finite element method. We computed at each point 

the semiconductor characteristics such as: ntot, τ, Ldiff and Iph. For simplicity, we have assumed 

point illumination of the probe excitation and considered 1-D carrier diffusion.  

Fig. S12(a) shows the schematic of the sample and illumination profile. The probe generation 

(405 nm, 30 mW/cm2) is at x=0 in addition to dc-uniform light bias on the MSC sample. The 

probe point excitation consisted of G (0) = 5 x 1016 photons/cm2. Upon probe photo-excitation, 

the generation of excess carrier concentration δnprobe is given as: 

𝛿𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒 =  𝛼𝐺0𝜏 

α = 8 x 104 cm-1 is the absorption coefficient [1]. The lifetime for a given carrier density is 

obtained from the linear dependence of 1/τ on excess carrier density, Fig. S12(b). This plot 

was obtained from lifetime dependence on generation density parameter shown in Fig. 5(c). 


The excess carrier concentration, ntot, due to both probe carrier diffusion and light bias 

generation, at each point is: 

𝑛𝑡𝑜𝑡 (𝑥) =  𝛿𝑛𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑏𝑒(0) exp (

−𝑥

𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓) + 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑐 (𝐿. 𝐵)           (S3) 

The first term on the RHS refers to probe carrier diffusion with the diffusion length Ldiff = 

(kTµτ/e)1/2, where µ = 115 cm2/Vs is the charge carrier mobility [2]. The second term 

corresponds to the excess carrier generated due to light bias such that, nexc (L.B) = ατGL.B, where 

GL.B is the generation density of the light bias. 

Fig. S12(c) shows the plot of excess-carrier decay profile considering Eq. (S3). It is observed 

that the decay profile changes with the intensity of light bias. As excess probe-carriers diffuse 

in space and recombine, the excess carrier density decreases resulting in an increased excess-

carrier lifetime. This results in a spatial dependence of the excess carrier lifetime. This trend is 

observed in Fig. S12(d). Dashed lines in figure indicate the carrier lifetimes of the background-

light bias carriers. By comparing the lifetime variation, it can be seen that the effective lifetime 

reduces with increased light bias. As a consequence of lifetime variation, the Ldiff parameter 

show similar trend in Fig. S12(e). Dashed line indicates the Ldiff for background light-bias 

carriers. As the probe carriers diffuse from x=0, the increase in lifetime results in increased 

value of Ldiff. The effective Ldiff reduces with increased light bias. Effect of light bias-modified 

Ldiff on probe-excess carriers is shown in the Fig. S12(f). The decay length is seen to reduce at 

high intensity of light bias. These above mentioned simulation results qualitatively explains the 

observation of decreasing Ld shown in Fig. 3(d).  


 

Fig. S12: (a) The schematic describes the simulation of SPCM experiment using finite element 

method. The probe excitation (at x=0) is assumed to be a point source in addition to uniform dc light 

bias on MSC sample. Blue line at x=0 in all the plots indicates probe excitation. (b) Linear fit to the 

plot of PL 1/τ vs excess carrier density. Inset shows the plot in semi-log scale (c) Plot of spatial carrier 

decay profile considering 1-D diffusion of probe-carriers. The decay profile changes with different 

intensities of light bias. (d) Shows the excess carrier lifetime at different dc light bias. The excess carrier 

lifetime depends on the background carrier density (shown in b). Dashed line indicates lifetime of light 

bias generated carriers. As excess probe-carriers diffuse in space and recombine, the excess carrier 


density decreases resulting in an increased excess-carrier lifetime. This results in a spatial dependence 

of the excess carrier lifetime. (e) Shows the effective diffusion length decreases with increasing light 

bias. Dashed line indicates Ldiff of light bias generated carriers. Since the excess carrier lifetime 

increases as the excess carriers diffuse away from x = 0, the effective diffusion length also increases. 

(f) Effect on probe carrier diffusion due to change in the Ldiff (seen in e) due to light bias. The decay 

length is smaller in the case of high intensity light bias. 

 

 

 

14. Effect of Photon recycling on excess carrier density, lifetime and diffusion length. 

The excess carrier diffusion and photon propagation upon point illumination at x=0 was 

simulated with finite element method using the coupled equations: 

𝑛(𝑥) = 𝑛0𝑒𝑥𝑝 (−

𝑥

𝐿𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓) + 𝛾𝑝𝑝(𝑥). 𝑛𝛼. 𝜏         (S4),   and  

𝛾(𝑥) =

𝑛(𝑥).𝜑𝑃𝐿

𝜏
+ 𝛾𝑝𝑝(𝑥)(1 − 𝑛𝛼)         (S5) 

Where n(x) and g(x) is the excess carrier density and photon density at point x respectively. nα 

is the ratio of reabsorbed photons of the total emitted photons. We consider the value = 0.54 as 

given in the reference[3]. fPL is the internal luminescence efficiency of the sample and is given 

by Yamada et. al as[3]:  

 

𝜑𝑃𝐿 = 

𝜏∞−𝜏0

𝜏∞−𝑛𝛼.𝜏0             (S6) 

Where τ∞ can be attributed to the monomolecular lifetime (~ 125 ns) and τ0 is the lifetime under 

consideration for a given carrier density. Considering probe illumination at x=0, the excess 

density is highest at x=0 and then decays further away (shown in black solid line in Fig. 


S12(c)). Since the lifetime τ0 is small for high carrier density, the fPL value is higher. Fig. 

S13(a) shows the plot of fPL as a function of distance away from the point of excitation. In 

proportional to the carrier density, fPL reduces away from the x=0. The photon recycling (PR) 

efficiency[3] given as hPR = nα.fPL follows the same trend as fPL (shown in Fig. S13(a)) 

gPP(x) is the photon density as a result of photon propagation from a previous emissive event. 

It can be written as: 

𝛾𝑃𝑃(𝑥) =  𝛾(𝑥𝑛−1). exp (−𝑥

𝐿𝛼

) . 𝑓(𝜃) 

Where g(xn-1) is the photon density from the previous iterative determination. Lα = 1/α is the 

photon propagation length. We consider an upper limit of Lα = 10 µm for the case of 545 

nm[1]. f(θ) is an additional angular function that indicates the fraction of isotropically emitted 

photons towards 1-D carrier diffusion. Here θ = tan-1(Lα/x) is the angle subtended by the 

emission point, which is x distance away from the collection electrode. In finite element 

method given the small inter-iterative distance (~ 0.1 µm), i.e., x<<Lα, f(θ) ~ 0.5. This means, 

in a small distance, half the emitted photons propagate in one direction and the rest in the 

opposite direction. Additionally, g(0) = αG0 and n0 = αG0τ. 

The simulated plot of excess carrier density with and without photon recycling is shown in Fig. 

S13(b). It can be observed that the change in the carrier density is marginal, and close to the 

illumination point. Similarly, as shown in Fig. S13(c) and Fig. S13(d) the change in lifetime 

and Ldiff values is marginal. However, we note that the effective lifetime and associated Ldiff 

reduces as a consequence of photon recycling, an observation reported preciously.   

 


 

Fig. S13: (a) Plot of fPL (internal luminescence efficiency) which depends on the background carrier 

density. Blue vertical lines in all the plots indicate point of excitation. As the carriers diffuse away from 

x=0, the carrier density reduces resulting in reduction of lifetime (shown in Fig. S12(c)). From Eq. 

(S6), fPL is high when carrier lifetime is smaller. (b) Plot of excess carrier density profile shows 

marginal increase considering PR. Consequently, due to the relative increase in the excess carrier 

density, the lifetime and diffusion length parameter show a marginal reduction as shown in (c) and (d) 

respectively. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


15. Table S1: Ld values from the SPCM experiment. The values were obtained upon fitting 

Eq. (2) to the Iph(x) profiles in Fig. 3(b). 

Light bias (photons/cm2)

Ld (µm)

Ag/PCBM
Au/Poly-TPD

w/o light bias
13.3 ± 0.6
13.8 ± 0.5

6.12 x 1011
13.0 ± 0.6
11.9 ± 0.4

4.59 x 1012
12.1 ± 0.5
9.9 ± 0.3

3.27 x 1013
9.4 ± 0.3
9.3 ± 0.4

5.41 x 1014
8.9 ± 0.5
7.0 ± 0.2

4.59 x 1015
6.9 ± 0.2

6.12 x 1015
4.6 ± 0.1

 

 

16. Experimental Section 

Preparation of single crystals and crystal device: 

The crystals were prepared by inverse temperature crystallization technique as reported earlier 

by Bakr et.al [4]. A 5ml vial was used for the crystal growth containing 1M solution of PbBr2 

(98%, Aldrich, mol.wt. 367gm/mol) and MABr (Sigma Aldrich, mol.wt. 111.97gm/mol), using 

DMF (anhydrous 98.9%, Sigma Aldrich, mol.wt: 73.09gm/mol) as the solvent. The ratio of 

PbBr2: MABr used was 1:1. The solution was kept in an oil bath wherein the temperature was 

gradually increased till inverse temperature of crystallization (~80°C) was reached. The seeds 

(MAPbBr3) formed were further transferred to a new solution for larger crystal growth and the 

process was repeated to achieve crystals of desired size. 

The crystal device was prepared by drop-casting PC71BM (Lumtec Corp.) and Poly-TPD 

(Lumtec Corp.) on opposite sides of the bulk single crystal. 3 mg/ml solution of PCBM and 

Poly-TPD in anhyd. Chlorobenzene (Sigma Aldrich) were drop-cast in a controlled manner 

with a micro-pipette. After each drop-cast, the layer was left to anneal by placing the coated 

crystal on hot-plate at 60° C for 30 min. This was followed by coating Ag (~ 150 nm) on the 

PCBM layer and Au (~ 40 nm) on the Poly-TPD layer by thermal evaporation. 


 

Absorption on single crystals. 

The steady state absorption was collected on the MAPbBr3 single crystals using UV-Vis Helios 

Ultrafast Systems spectrophotometer and integrating sphere. The single crystal was mounted 

between grooved quartz plates and the spectrum was recorded in reflectance mode. 

 

PL on single crystals 

The PL on the single crystals were carried out both in the reflection as well as the transmission 

geometry. A 405 nm diode laser was used to excite the single crystal. In the reflection 

geometry, using a lens, the light, after passing through a 450 nm long pass filter was collected 

into the fiber coupled Mini Spectrometer (Hamamatsu, C10083CA).  

In the transmission geometry, maintaining the angled incidence of the excitation light, PL was 

measured with the help of suitable collection optics.  

PL Quantum Efficiency: 

PL measurements were carried out with sample placed in the integrating sphere to determine 

Ext. PLQE. A 405 nm laser with calibrated intensity was used as the illumination source and 

fiber coupled mini-spectrometer (Hamamatsu, C10083CA) was used to collect the excitation 

and emission spectrum. Measurements were carried out with the both the reference slide (glass) 

and the bulk single crystal placed on the glass slide. Suitable optics was utilized to collimate 

the beam with spot size smaller than the crystal size. The obtained spectrum was normalized 

with the responsivity of the detector and the integrated intensity of the excitation (Iexc) and 

emission range (Iem) was used to determine: 

   

𝐸𝑥𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑃𝐿𝑄𝐸 = 𝐼𝑒𝑚(crystal) − 𝐼𝑒𝑚(ref)

𝐼𝑒𝑥𝑐(ref) − 𝐼𝑒𝑥𝑐(crystal) 


 

Scanning Photocurrent Microscopy (SPCM): 

 

Fig. S14: Schematic of SPCM experimental setup 

 

The schematic explaining the SPCM scanning setup is given in the above Figure. A modulated 

laser light (119 Hz) is focused using a microscope objective (50x, 0.7 NA) on the MSC device. 

As the device translates, the short circuit Iph is measured using an amplifier (SRS 830), locked-

in to the modulating frequency of the laser driver. Additionally, the light bias is introduced by 

an LED ring-illumination to have uniform constant illumination. The intensity of the light bias 

was controlled by varying the current sourced to the LEDs. The intensity of the light bias were 

verified using a calibrated photodiode. The experiments were carried out using a GPIB-USB 

interfaced program. 

To consider the effects of light bias on the probe beam spot size, we model the Gaussian probe 

beam and check for the change in the spot-size in the presence of light bias. Fig. S15 shows the 

comparison of the probe-beam with and without the introduction of light bias. We observe that 

the beam profile and the FWHM remain mostly unaffected by the introduction of light bias. 


We, therefore, conclude that the reduction of Ld with the light bias is due to the effect of light 

bias on the probe beam.  

 

Fig. S15: Simulated probe beam profiles (FWHM = 3.8 µm and average power of ~ 30 mW/cm2) with 

and without light bias. The effect of light bias has a marginal effect on the beam spot size.  

 

Time resolved Photoluminescence (TRPL) 

Time Resolved Photoluminescence measurements were carried out using a custom built Time 

Correlated Single Photon Counting (TCSPC) instrument with a temporal resolution of ~250 

ps. A Picoquant LDH-P-C-405M laser source with centre wavelength 405 nm and pulse width 

90 ps was driven a Picoquant PDL 800-B laser diode driver to excite the crystal. A Tektronix 

AFG1024 arbitrary Function Generator was used to control the repitation rate and the laser was 

driven at 800KHz. The emission profile was recorded using a single photon counter (Picoquant 

PMA-C-192-M) coupled to Zolix Omni 1300 monochromator. Time tagging of the data was 

done using Picoquant TimeHarp 260 data acquisition card. The time resolved decay profiles 

were obtained for the wavelength range 500 nm to 700 nm. The time resolved emission 

spectrum (TRES) was derived from the decay profiles using MATLAB. 


 

References. 

 

[1] 
B. Wenger, P. K. Nayak, X. Wen, S. V. Kesava, N. K. Noel, and H. J. Snaith, Nature 

communications 8, 1 (2017). 

[2] 
D. Shi et al., Science 347, 519 (2015). 

[3] 
T. Yamada, Y. Yamada, Y. Nakaike, A. Wakamiya, and Y. Kanemitsu, Physical 

Review Applied 7, 014001 (2017). 

[4] 
M. I. Saidaminov et al., Nature communications 6, 1 (2015). 

 


