𝜶-In2Se3 based Ferroelectric-Semiconductor Metal Junction for Non-
Volatile Memories

Atanu K. Saha1, Mengwei Si1,2, Peide Ye1,2, Sumeet K. Gupta1

1School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, US

2Birck Nanotechnology Center, West Lafayette, IN 47907, US

In this work, we theoretically and experimentally investigate the working principle and non-volatile memory 
(NVM) functionality of 2D α-In2Se3 based ferroelectric-semiconductor-metal-junction (FeSMJ). First, we analyze
the semiconducting and ferroelectric properties of α-In2Se3 van-der-Waals (vdW) stack via experimental 
characterization and first-principle simulations. Then, we develop a FeSMJ device simulation framework by self-
consistently solving Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) equation, Poisson’s equation, and charge-transport
equations. Based on the extracted FeS parameters, our simulation results show good agreement with the 
experimental characteristics of our fabricated α-In2Se3 based FeSMJ. Our analysis suggests that the vdW gap 
between the metal and FeS plays a key role to provide FeS polarization-dependent modulation of Schottky barrier 
heights. Further, we show that the thickness scaling of FeS leads to a reduction in read/write voltage and an 
increase in distinguishability. Array-level analysis of FeSMJ NVM suggests a 5.47x increase in sense margin, 
18.18x reduction in area and lower read-write power with respect to Fe insulator tunnel junction (FTJ).

Ferroelectric (Fe) materials have gained an immense research interest for their applications in electronic1-3

and optoelectronic4 devices due to their electrically switchable spontaneous polarization and hysteretic 

characteristics. Fe materials with high bandgap, called Fe-insulators, have been extensively investigated for 

versatile non-volatile memory (NVM) devices, such as Fe-random-access memory (Fe-RAM)5, Fe-field-effect-

transistor (Fe-FET)6-7, Fe-tunnel-Junction (FTJ)8-10, etc. Unlike Fe-RAM and Fe-FET, where the Fe layer acts as 

a capacitive element, the FTJ functionality depends on the tunneling current through the Fe layer. In the FTJ, the 

Fe layer is sandwiched by two different metal electrodes. Due to the different properties (e.g. the screening length) 

of the metal electrodes, the tunneling barrier height at the metal-Fe interface of FTJ depends on the polarization 

direction. Thus, FTJ can exhibit polarization-dependent tunneling-resistance that facilitates the sensing of its 

polarization, leading to the design of a two-terminal NVM element8. However, as the dominant transport 

mechanism of FTJ is direct tunneling, to obtain a desired current density for sufficient operational speed, the Fe-

insulator thickness needs to be significantly low (<3nm for HZO9). Unfortunately, with thickness scaling, the 

polarization of the Fe-insulator decreases9, which reduces the ratio of the tunneling-resistance9. Therefore, the 

distinguishability of the FTJ memory states decreases with the thickness scaling. In addition, most of the Fe-

insulators (BTO, BFO, doped-HfO2) comprise of oxygen atoms and the dynamic change in oxygen vacancies can 

play a major role in its ferroelectric characteristics11. Therefore, a decrease in ferroelectricity with scaling and 

issues related to oxygen vacancies lead to significant challenges in the design and implementation of FTJ-based

NVMs.


Similar to Fe-insulator, Fe material with low bandgap called Fe-semiconductor (FeS) also exhibit 

spontaneous polarization which is switchable via applied electric-field12-16. Among different FeS materials, the

van-der-Waals (vdW) stack of α-In2Se3 has recently been discovered as a 2D FeS material that can retain the 

ferroelectric and semiconducting properties even for a monolayer thickness12-16. This suggests a remarkable 

possibility for thickness scaling. In addition, as α-In2Se3 is not an oxide, the issues related to oxygen vacancies in 

oxide Fe-insulator are expected to be non-existent in this FeS material. Recently, similar to FTJ, a metal-FeS-

metal junction device (called FeSMJ) has been demonstrated to exhibit polarization-dependent resistance states17. 

Unlike FTJ, FeSMJ can provide significant current density even with a high FeS thickness and it does not require 

asymmetric metal electrodes for NVM functionalities17. To understand such unique working principle of FeSMJ

devices and to enable their device-level optimization, a detailed analysis of the material properties α-In2Se3 as 

well as the device characteristics of FeSMJ, is needed. To address this need, in this work, we experimentally and 

theoretically analyze α-In2Se3based FeSMJ devices and examine their thickness scalability. Our analysis is based 

on experimental characterization and first-principle simulations of α-In2Se3 vdW stack, and experimental 

measurement and self-consistent device simulation of the FeSMJ devices. Finally, we investigate the thickness 

scalability of FeSMJ and compare it with FTJ at the device and array levels to analyze its potential for NVM 

applications.

To begin with, we first discuss the material properties of α-In2Se3. Unit cells of the α-In2Se3 monolayer 

are shown in Fig.1(a-d) indicating non-centrosymmetric crystal structure, where the central Selenium (Se) atom 

is spontaneously displaced from the centrosymmetric position. As a result, α-In2Se3 exhibits both in-plane (Fig. 

1(a-b)) and out-of-plane (Fig. 1(c-d)) spontaneous polarization (PXY and PZ, respectively). The arrangement of 𝛼-

In2Se3 layers in a vdW stack is shown in Fig. 1(e) where each layer is separated by ~0.3nm of vdW gap (vacuum 

region)12-14. Employing the vdW stack of 𝛼-In2Se3as the FeS layer in a metal-FeS-metal configuration, the FeSMJ

structure is shown in Fig. 1(f). Now, to characterize its semiconducting and ferroelectric properties, 𝛼-In2Se3vdW 

stack was grown by the melt method with a layered non-centrosymmetric rhombohedral R3m structure16. The 

details of the fabrication process can be found in our previous work ref. 16. The high-angle annular dark-field

STEM (HAADF-STEM) image of thin α-In2Se3 flake is shown in Fig. 1(g) that signifies a high-quality single-

crystalline hexagonal structure. The photoluminescence measurement (Fig. 1(h)) of bulk α-In2Se3 suggests a 

direct optical/direct bandgap of ~1.39eV. To analyze the semiconducting properties further, we conduct first-

principle simulations (based on density function theory (DFT)) in Quantum Espresso (QE) 18-19 with hybrid orbital 

(HSE) functional correction20. Unlike previous simulation-based studies of mono-layer or a stack with a few

numbers of layers12, we consider bulk α-In2Se3 vdW stack by taking a super-cell of three In2Se3 layers (Fig. 1(i))

periodically repeated in all three directions (along x, y and z-axis). Note that the thickness of our experimental 

sample is 120nm (that approximately exhibits 120 layers), therefore, we investigate the bulk properties, rather 

than a few-layer system. The simulated energy-dispersion (E-k) relation is shown in Fig. 1(j) that illustrates a 

direct optical gap of ~1.4eV (consistent with experiments) and an indirect bandgap of ~1.3eV. Similarly, the 

density of states, D(E) is shown in Fig. 1(k) that suggests a lower density of conduction state compared to the 

valence states. Hence, the equilibrium Fermi level (EF) (for an undoped α-In2Se3) is closer to the conduction band 


minima (EC) compared to the valence band maxima (EV). We utilize this D(E) characteristics in our FeSMJ device 

simulation for the calculation of mobile carrier concentration in the FeS layers, as discussed subsequently.  

Next, we analyze the ferroelectric properties of the α-In2Se3 vdW stack. Fig. 2(a) shows the 

piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) phase versus applied voltage hysteresis loop of a 120 nm thick α-In2Se3

stack that suggests a ferroelectric polarization switching with a coercive voltage of ~2V. However, due to the 

semiconducting properties of α-In2Se3, a direct measurement of spontaneous polarization through conventional 

measurement of polarization-voltage characteristics is not possible16. Hence, we perform the Berry phase analysis

(based on the modern theory of polarization)21 on the DFT wave-functions of α-In2Se3 in QE. Our analysis

suggests an out-of-plane remanent polarization (PR) of ~7.68𝜇C/cm2. Note that, due to the periodic nature of the 

bulk vdW stacks, the calculated PR for bulk α-In2Se3 (by the Berry phase method) is higher in magnitude 

compared to the previously calculated PR (by dipole correction method) for a few-layer system12. To further 

understand the ferroelectric properties of α-In2Se3, the microscopic potential energy (averaged across the x-y

plane) along the FeS thickness (z-axis) obtained from the DFT simulation is shown in Fig. 2(b). The extracted 

macroscopic potential (Fig. 2(c)) suggests an opposite electric-field in FeS layers and vdW gaps. Now, the 

electrostatic condition that needs to be satisfied at the interface of FeS and vdW gap can be written as,

𝜖0𝐸𝑣𝑑𝑊 = 𝜖0𝜖𝑟𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑆 + 𝑃
(1)

Here, 𝐸𝑣𝑑𝑊 and 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑆 are the E-fields in the vdW gap and FeS layer, respectively; 𝜖𝑟 is the relative background 

permittivity of the FeS layer, 𝜖0 is the vacuum permittivity and P is the spontaneous polarization. The above 

equation suggests that, 𝐸𝑣𝑑𝑊 and 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑆 can be non-zero and hold the opposite sign if and only if the P is non-zero. 

Therefore, the opposite electric-field in FeS layers and vdW gaps confirms the existence of spontaneous 

polarization in the FeS layer. Using the calculated value of P, 𝐸𝑣𝑑𝑊 and 𝐸𝐹𝑒𝑆, we obtain 𝜖𝑟=~7 for the FeS layer

from Eqn. (1). Further, we calculate the total energy with respect to the change in P based on the nudge-elastic-

band (NEB)22 method in QE. The change in P is captured by sweeping the position of the central Se atom 

gradually from one stable position to another stable position as shown in Fig. 2(d) followed by performing Berry 

phase calculation for P in each of the intermediate states. To capture the finite temperature effect in total energy

(u), we have considered phonon-energy correction23 for 300K temperature. The resultant u-P characteristics are 

shown in Fig. 2(d) signifying a double-well energy landscape with a barrier between the two stable polarization 

states. We fit the simulated u-P characteristics with Landau’s free energy polynomial24 as shown in Fig. 2(d) 

based on the following equation.

𝑢 =

1

2 𝛼𝑃2 +

1

4 𝛽𝑃4 +

1

6 𝛾𝑃6 +

1

8 𝛿𝑃8
(2)

The obtained Landau coefficients (𝛼, 𝛽, 𝛾 and 𝛿) are shown in the inset of Fig. 3(d). Here, a non-zero 

coefficient for the 8th order term (𝛿) is required to capture the flattened shape of the energy barrier. Based on the 

extracted parameters that correspond to the ferroelectric and semiconducting properties of 𝛼-In2Se3, we self-

consistently solve Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) equation3, Poisson’s equation and semiconductor charge 

equations for the FeSMJ structure. Then, we use the potential profile in a NEGF framework to calculate the 


current in the FeSMJ assuming ballistic transport in the thickness direction. The simulation flow is presented in 

Fig. 3(a) showing the utilization of the extracted parameters for the device simulation. In our simulation, we 

consider the vdW gap of 3.3Å between the subsequent FeS layers (obtained from DFT simulation with structural 

relaxation) along with a vdW gap of 1.65Å between the metal and FeS layer as shown in Fig. 3(b). We utilize this 

simulation framework along with the experimental results to investigate the FeSMJ device characteristics.

The top-view of the fabricated FeSMJ device is shown as a false-color SEM image in Fig. 4(a). Here, 

the FeS thickness (TFeS) is 120nm and the same metal (Nickel (Ni)) is used as the top and bottom metal contacts. 

The measured current (I) vs voltage (V) characteristics (Fig. 4(b)) exhibit a counter-clockwise hysteresis due to 

which the FeSMJ shows two different conductive or resistive states. Let us define the current at low-resistance 

state (LRS) and high-resistance state (HRS) as ILRS and IHRS, respectively. Here, one noticeable thing is that the 

characteristics are asymmetric with respect to the voltage polarity. For example, the hysteresis window, currents 

(ILRS and IHRS), and their ratio (ILRS/IHRS) are unequal for positive and negative applied voltages. To understand the 

possible origin of asymmetry as well as the device operation, we perform device-level simulation. The simulated 

I-V curve considering TFeS=120nm and Ni as metal contacts is shown in Fig. 4(b) indicating a good agreement 

with the experimental results. Due to a Schottky barrier at the metal-FeS interface (Fig. 3(b)), the observed current 

in the FeSMJ is due to the electron injection from the metal to FeS via Schottky tunneling along with direct 

tunneling through the vdW gaps.

Now, to understand the working principle of FeSMJ, the equilibrium band diagram of the device (along 

the z-axis i.e FeS thickness) is shown in Fig. 4(c)-i. Note, the band diagram is for an undoped α-In2Se3, in which 

the Fermi level (EF) is closer to the conduction band, as discussed before.  Without any loss of generality, let us

assume that initially, all the FeS layers are -z directed polarization (-P). Let us call the left electrode M1 and right 

electrode M2. Now, the polarization-induced negative (positive) bound charges appear in the FeS near the M1

(M2) interface. The bound charges and the work-function difference between the metal and FeS induce an E-field 

within the vdW gap and the FeS layers. As a result, holes (electrons) appear at FeS-M1(M2) interface to partially 

compensate the negative (positive) bound charges. At the same time, a built-in potential with opposite polarity

appears across the two FeS-M junctions, yielding different Schottky barrier height (𝜙𝐵) for the mobile carriers

(electrons/holes). For example, in Fig. 4(c)-i, 𝜙𝐵 at the FeS-M1 interface is higher than the FeS-M2 interface due 

to the negative and positive voltage across the respective vdW gaps, which corresponds to positive and negative 

bound charges, respectively. Depending on whether the electron-injecting barrier exhibits low or high 𝜙𝐵, FeSMJ

operates in LRS or HRS. Moreover, voltage-driven polarization switching can enable transitioning between LRS 

and HRS, and vice versa. To understand this, let us consider a positive bias at M2. Hence, the electron injection 

takes place from M1 to FeS. As the corresponding 𝜙𝐵 is high, FeSMJ operates in HRS. At the same time, hole 

(electron) concentration at the FeS-M1 (M2) interface increases. As the hole DOS is higher compared to the 

electron DOS, the increase in hole concentration is higher compared to the electron concentration (Fig. 4(c)-ii). 

This leads to a higher electric-field near the FeS-M1 interface compared to the FeS-M2 interface. At sufficiently 

high positive voltages (~2V in Fig. 5d-ii), the E-field near the FeS-M1 increases beyond the coercive field. Hence, 


a few layers near the M1 interface switch to +P (+z directed) as shown in Fig. 4(c)-iii. Consequently, 𝜙𝐵 at the 

FeS-M1 interface significantly decreases, leading to an abrupt increase in the current (LRS). The LRS operation 

continues even when the voltage is reduced to 0 due to P retention. Now, when a negative voltage is applied at 

M2, electron injects from M2 to FeS (Fig. 4(c)-iv). As the corresponding 𝜙𝐵 is low, the FeSMJ continues to 

operate in LRS. With further increase in the negative polarity voltage, the electric-field near the M1-FeS interface

(which is higher in magnitude than M2-FeS, as explained before) switches the polarization back to –P (Fig. 4(c)-

vi). This significantly reduces the E-field near the M1-FeS interface, the effect of which penetrates throughout

the FeS including near the electron injecting electrode (FeS-M2 interface). This reduces the current. However, 

unlike V>0V, where switching from HRS to LRS is abrupt, here the change in current is gradual. This is because 

for V>0V, the change in 𝜙𝐵 of the electron injecting junction (FeS-M1) is large due to P-switching near that 

interface. On the other hand, for V<0V, 𝜙𝐵 of the electron injecting electrode (FeS-M2) does not change 

significantly as P-switching occurs on the other electrode. Therefore, the voltage hysteresis, currents (ILRS and 

IHRS) and their ratio (ILRS/IHRS) are asymmetric with respect to the voltage polarity (i.e. lower for V<0 than for V

>0). To complete the discussion, if the initial P is opposite (+P for all the FeS layers), the I-V characteristics 

would be the opposite of what we discussed so far, i.e. a gradual HRS-to-LRS switching for V>0V (for +P to -P

switching near the FeS-M2 interface causing a non-significant change in the electron injecting 𝜙𝐵) and an abrupt 

LRS-to-HRS switching for V<0V (due to -P to +P switching near the FeS-M2 interface causing a change in the 

electron injecting 𝜙𝐵). In summary, the appearance of mobile carriers leads to a non-uniform electric field in the 

FeS layers that leads to partial (and non-homogeneous) P-switching in the FeS yielding asymmetric I-V

characteristics in FeSMJ.

So far, we have discussed the FeSMJ characteristics for TFeS = 120nm. Interestingly, in scaled FeSMJ

(i.e. TFeS = 60nm), the coercive field can be achieved at a lower voltage and before the appearance of a significant 

density of mobile carriers. Due to low mobile carrier concentrations, the electric-field in FeS layers becomes less 

non-uniform (compared to TFeS = 120nm) and that leads to a complete polarization switching along with the FeS 

thickness. Therefore, the resultant I-V characteristics for TFeS = 60nm show significantly less asymmetric behavior 

(Fig. 5(a)) in terms of hysteresis, current magnitude (ILRS and IHRS) and their ratio (ILRS/IHRS). Such a unique FeS 

thickness scaling behavior now brings us to the analysis of the effect of FeS thickness scaling on the FeSMJ I-V

characteristics, which offers useful insights into the device optimization in the context of NVM applications.

The simulated I-V characteristics of FeSMJ with different TFeS are shown in Fig. 5(a). With thickness 

scaling, the coercive field can be achieved at a lower applied voltage, therefore, the required voltage to switch the 

resistance state (called write voltage, Vwrite) decreases as shown in Fig. 5(b). At the same time, a decrease in TFeS

leads to an increase in electric-field (for the same applied voltage) yielding an increase in both ILRS and IHRS as 

shown in Fig. 5(a). Recall that the mobile carrier concentration in FeS tends to (partially) compensate for the 

effect of polarization-induced bound charge. As the mobile-carrier concentration decreases with the decrease in 

TFeS (as discussed above), therefore, the effect of polarization-induced bound charge becomes more prominent.

Hence, the polarization-dependent modulation in 𝛷𝐵 increases with the decreases in TFeS, which leads to an 


increase in ILRS/IHRS (Fig. 5(b)). Consequently, improved distinguishability (ILRS/IHRS) along with low voltage 

NVM operation can be achieved by scaling down the FeS thickness.

Next, we evaluate the FeSMJ NVM performance in comparison with FTJ.  In an array, each NVM cell 

is comprised of a FeSMJ/FTJ connected in series with an access transistor (Fig. 5(c)). In this analysis, we assume 

a 10nm finfet (with 4 fins) as the access transistor. For FeSMJ, we consider TFeS=60nm and for FTJ, we consider 

a HfO2/SiO2 (4nm/0.4nm) based device with Al and doped-Si as contacts from ref. 9. The device-level comparison 

(Fig. 5(d)) suggests that the FeSMJ has a key advantage of higher current density than FTJ (due to Schottky 

transport in the former as opposed to direct tunneling in the latter), while the distinguishability between the states 

(ILRS/IHRS ~103) are similar for both. This enables more aggressive area scaling in FeSMJ compared to FTJ. 

Considering a layout design by following ref. 25 for an array size of 1MB, our analysis suggests a 0.87x lower 

read power, 0.94x lower write power and 5x higher sense margin with an 18.18x less area for FeSMJ compared 

to FTJ (Fig. 5(e)). Due to such remarkable benefit of FeSMJ over FTJ for NVM application, further exploration 

of FeSMJ is required to investigate its retention characteristics in addition to its correlation with scaling.

In summary, we show that the spontaneous FeS polarization induces a built-in potential across the vdW 

gap between FeS and metal contact leading to a polarization-dependent Schottky barrier for electron injection.

By switching the polarization via applied voltage, the Schottky barrier height can be modulated, which leads to 

transitions between HRS and LRS in FeSMJ. Further, we show that in FeSMJ with high FeS thickness, the 

appearance of mobile carriers can lead to a partial polarization switching in FeS yielding asymmetric I-V

characteristics. However, with thickness scaling, the asymmetry reduces due to complete polarization switching 

and at the same time ILRS/IHRS increases. Most importantly, FeSMJ exhibits a significantly higher current density 

due to Schottky tunneling compared to FTJ. Due to such appealing characteristics of FeSMJ and fundamental 

differences in the transport mechanisms compared to FTJ, FeSMJ NVM array exhibits significantly higher energy 

efficiency and integration density than FTJ NVM.

References:

1 H. Mulaosmanovic, E. Chicca, M. Bertele, T. Mikolajickac, and S. Slesazecka, Nanoscale 10, 21755 (2018)

2 H. Mulaosmanovic, J. Ocker, S. Müller, M. Noack, J. Müller, P. Polakowski, T. Mikolajick, and S. Slesazeck, 

in 2017 Symposium on VLSI Technology (2017), pp. T176-T177.

3 A. K. Saha, and S. K. Gupta, Scientific Reports 10 (10207), 2020.

4 M. Park, Y. Lee, T. Mikolajick, U. Schroeder, and C. Hwang, MRS Communications, 8(3), 795 (2018). 

5 K. Chatterjee, S. Kim, G. Karbasian, A. J. Tan, A. K. Yadav, A. I. Khan, C. Hu, and S. Salahuddin, IEEE

Electron Device Lett. 38, 1379 (2017).

6 P. Sharma, K. Tapily, A. K. Saha, J. Zhang, A. Shaughnessy, A. Aziz, G. L. Snider, S. Gupta, R. D. Clark, 

and S. Datta, in 2017 Symposium on VLSI Technology (2017), pp. T154–T155.

7 W. Ding, et al. Prediction of intrinsic two-dimensional ferroelectrics in In2Se3 and other III2-VI3 van der 

Waals materials. Nature Communication, 8, 14956 (2017).

8 V. Garcia, and M. Bibes, Nature Communications 5, 4289 (2014).


9 F. Mo, Y. Tagawa, T. Saraya, T. Hiramoto and M. Kobayashi, in IEEE International Electron Device 

Meeting (IEDM) (2018), pp. 16.3.1-16.3.4. 

10 H. Ryu, H. Wu, F. Rao, and W. Zhu, Scientific Reports 9, 20383 (2019).

11 D. Z. Gao, J. Strand, M. S. Munde, and A. L. Shluger, Front. Phys. 7, 43 (2019).

12 W. Ding, J. Jhu, Z. Wang, Y. Gao, D. Xiao, Y. Gu, Z. Zhang, and W. Zhu, Nature Communications, 8 14956 

(2017)

13 C. Zheng, L. Yu, L. Zhu, J. L. Collins, D. Kim, Y. Lou, C. Xu, M. Li, Z. Wei, Y. Zhang, M. T. Edmonds, S.

Li, J. Seidel, Y. Zhu, J. Z. Liu, W. Tang, and M. S. Fuhrer, Science Advances 4, 7 (2018).

14 C. Cui, W. Hu, X. Yan, C. Addiego, W. Gao, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Li, Y. Cheng, P. Li, X. Zhang, H. N. 

Alshareef, T. Wu, W. Zhu, X. Pan, and L. Li, Nano Letters 18, 1253 (2018).

15 S. Wan, Y. Li, W. Li, X. Mao, W. Zhu, and H. Zeng, Nanoscale 10, 14885 (2018).

16 M. Si, A. K. Saha, S. Gao et al. A ferroelectric semiconductor field-effect transistor. Nature Electronics 2, 

580 (2019).

17 M. Si, et al., A Novel Scalable Energy-Efficient Synaptic Device: Crossbar Ferroelectric Semiconductor 

Junction, IEEE International Electron Device Meeting (IEDM), 2019. 

18 P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. 

Cococcioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, S. de Gironcoli, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. 

Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. 

Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, R. 

M. Wentzcovitch, J.Phys.:Condens.Matter 21, 395502 (2009).

19 P Giannozzi, O Andreussi, T Brumme, O Bunau, M Buongiorno Nardelli, M Calandra, R Car, C Cavazzoni, 

D Ceresoli, M Cococcioni, N Colonna, I Carnimeo, A Dal Corso, S de Gironcoli, P Delugas, R A DiStasio Jr, 

A Ferretti, A Floris, G Fratesi, G Fugallo, R Gebauer, U Gerstmann, F Giustino, T Gorni, J Jia, M Kawamura, 

H-Y Ko, A Kokalj, E Küçükbenli, M Lazzeri, M Marsili, N Marzari, F Mauri, N L Nguyen, H-V Nguyen, A 

Otero-de-la-Roza, L Paulatto, S Poncé, D Rocca, R Sabatini, B Santra, M Schlipf, A P Seitsonen, A 

Smogunov, I Timrov, T Thonhauser, P Umari, N Vast, X Wu and S Baroni, J.Phys.:Condens.Matter 29, 

465901 (2017).

20 A. V. Krukau, O. A. Vydrov, A. F. Izmaylov, and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys. 125, 224106 (2006).

21 R. D. King-Smith, and D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 47, 1651 (1993).

22 G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga, and H. A. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 9901 (2000).

23 D. S. Sholl, and J. A. Steckel, Density Functional Theory: A Practical Introduction, Wiley (2009), pp 113-

130.

24 Lev D. Landau, Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 7, 19 (1937).

25 A. Aziz, W. Cane-Wissing, M. S. Kim, S. Datta, V. Narayanan, S. K. Gupta, in 2015 IEEE Computer Society 

Annual Symposium on VLSI, (2015), pp.333-338.


Fig. 1: Unit cell of 𝛼-In2Se3 crystal (a-b) top view and (c-d) side view showing different in-plane and out-of-plane 

polarization directions, respectively. (e) van-der-Waals (vdW) stack of 𝛼-In2Se3 ferroelectric semiconductor 

(FeS) and (f) FeSMJ device structure. (g) STEM image of the fabricated bulk 𝛼-In2Se3 surface. (h) Measured 

photoluminescence (PL) spectrum showing a direct optical/direct bandgap of ~1.39eV. (i) supercell of bulk 𝛼-

In2Se3 vdW stack. (j) Energy-dispersion (E-k) relation and (k) density of states (D(E)) of 𝛼-In2Se3 vdW stack from 

DFT simulation.

Selenium: Se


Fig. 2: (a) Measured PFM phase response of FeS with TFeS=120nm. (b) Local electrostatic potential and (c) 

macroscopic potential profile in 𝛼-In2Se3 vdW stack (along the z-axis) showing the opposite E-field profile in the 

vdW gap (vacuum) and In2Se3 layers. (d) Polarization (P) vs energy (u) landscape of 𝛼-In2Se3 from DFT+NEB 

(nudget-elastic-band) simulation.


Fig. 3: (a) Self-consistent simulation flow (Poisson + Charge + LGD) and equations used for FeSMJ device 

simulation and table showing parameters used in the simulation. (b) Band alignment of M-FeS-M structure before 

equilibrium.


Fig. 4: (a) (a) SEM image of the fabricated FeSMJ. (b) Measured and simulated I-V characteristics of FeSMJ 

with FeS thickness, TFeS=120nm. (c) Band diagram of FeSMJ that corresponds to the different points marked in

(b). Here, EC and EV are taken at the center of each FeS layers and the vdW regions within the FeS layers are 

not shown for the clarity. 


Fig. 5: (a) I-V characteristics, (b) write voltage (VWrite), read voltage (VRead) and ILRS/IHRS of FeSMJ for different 

FeS thickness. (c) FeSMJ/FTJ memory cell (1T-1R). (d) device and (e) array level comparison between FeSMJ 

and FTJ.


