1

Material Platforms for Defect Qubits and Single Photon 

Emitters

Gang Zhang1, Yuan Cheng1, Jyh-Pin Chou2,3,*, Adam Gali4,5,*

1 Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, 1 Fusionopolis Way, Singapore 138632, Singapore.
2 Department of Physics, National Changhua University of Education, Changhua 50007, Taiwan.

3 Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Hong Kong 

SAR 999077, China.

4 Institute for Solid State Physics and Optics, Wigner Research Centre for Physics, P.O. Box 49, H-1525 

Budapest, Hungary.

5 Department of Atomic Physics, Budapest University of Technology and Economics, Budafoki út 8, H-

1111 Budapest, Hungary.

Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: jpchou@cc.ncue.edu.tw (Jyh-Pin Chou) and 
agali@eik.bme.hu (Adam Gali)

Abstract

Quantum technology has grown out of quantum information theory and now provides a valuable tool 
that researchers from numerous fields can add to their toolbox of research methods. To date, various 
systems have been exploited to promote the application of quantum information processing. The systems 
that can be used for quantum technology include superconducting circuits, ultra-cold atoms, trapped ions, 
semiconductor quantum dots, and solid-state spins and emitters. In this review, we will discuss the state
of the art on material platforms for spin-based quantum technology, with a focus on the progress in solid-
state spins and emitters in several leading host materials, including diamond, silicon carbide, boron 
nitride, silicon, two-dimensional semiconductors, and other materials. We will highlight how first-
principles calculations can serve as an exceptionally robust tool for finding the novel defect qubits and 
single photon emitters in solids, through detailed predictions of the electronic, magnetic and optical 
properties.


2

1. Introduction

Quantum technology is a platform that exploits the basic rules of quantum mechanics to realize 

certain techniques and functionality more efficiently than classic technologies1. The development of 
quantum technology opens new arenas of previously-impossible technologies due to the nature of 
quantum mechanics. In recent years, the interest in quantum technology has grown rapidly2. Quantum 
technology has been flourished from quantum information theory which relies on controllable quantum 
bits (qubits) as the most elementary unit of quantum information3. Quantum information theory 
predicted to solve such complex problems by algorithms based on qubits that are otherwise intractable 
by classic digital computers 3–8 as well as led to the foundation of inherently secure communication based 
on the no-clone theorem of quantum states9. The latter is the fundament of quantum communication 
applications that are now spreading commercially, in particular, by the use of quantum key distribution10.
The simulation of quantum systems and quantum computation is still its infancy but quantum 
computers11 are now publicly available with producing the first important results12. The key of the 
development of reliable quantum devices is to realize physical qubits that have sufficiently long coherence 
times for doing quantum operations on them with high fidelities. In practice, the fidelity of the operation 
with physical qubits is not perfect and quantum error correction is necessary; this correction can be 
realized by multiple physical qubits for each logical qubit of the quantum algorithm. An exception would 
be the physical realization of the Majorana qubit13–16, which is intrinsically a logical qubit.

One may distinguish two types of physical qubits in terms of their role in quantum information 

processing: local qubits are the units for quantum operations at the quantum nodes whereas the quantum 
information is delivered by flying qubits between the distant quantum nodes. A natural physical 
realization of the flying qubits are the photons that can connect the nodes. However, photons are not able 
to store quantum information at a given site, thus local qubits are typically realized on materials basis
with sufficiently long coherence times of the quantum state. In this review, we focus on the physical 
realization of materials qubits. We note that the quantum nodes may be connected to each other by 
realizing an interface between the materials qubit and the photon.

The materials platforms of local physical qubits are numerous such as atoms in optical lattices17, 

trapped ions18,19, nuclear spin20–22, superconducting circuits23–28, spins in semiconductor quantum dots29–

35, and atomic sized defects in solids36–38 (see Fig. 1). Innovative areas of device application will arise once 
the physical properties of these materials are fully understood. From a physical perspective, materials 
with highly controllable quantum states will help to improve the key performance regarding the 
dynamical properties of quantum devices in general. Practical quantum devices will likely exploit 
different real materials for certain purpose. For example, a solid-state spin qubit36 may be used in a 
quantum memory because of the long coherence time, while a superconducting Josephson junction23–25
has an advantage as a computational qubit due to the fast processing capability. Since quantum 
technology is a subject of interest to a broad audience, the literature on this topic is now sizable. 
Obviously, given the breadth of the topics touched by quantum technology and defects in solids, not all 
technical details can be provided in one article. Interested readers are directed to the relevant references. 
For a brief overview of quantum simulators, they can refer to Ref.39; for specialized reviews on trapped 
atoms and ions, they can refer to Refs.40–43. For reviews on superconducting circuits, they should refer to 
Ref.26. This review attempts to provide a self-contained description of the current status of research on 
materials development for solid state defect quantum technologies.

A key representative of solid state defect qubits is the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond, 

which is a paramagnetic color center44,45. The electron spin of single defect centers can be initialized and 
read out through spin-dependent luminescent measurement by optical pumping (see Section 3.1).
Importantly, the electron spin state can be coherently manipulated with an alternating magnetic field. In 
addition, the electron spin of the defect center exhibits long coherence times (~ms) even at room 
temperature46,47, which makes it promising for room-temperature quantum information processing. The 
single defect manipulation can be achieved by using a confocal microscopy setup for excitation and 
optical readout of the spin state in such diamond samples where the defect concentration is sufficiently 
low to excite a single defect within the confocal spot. The NV center then acts as a single photon emitter 


3

which can be the source of quantum communication protocols or may be applied as fluorescent agent in 
biomarker and other applications. We note that the nuclear spin of the nitrogen and 13C isotopes around 
the NV defect may be applied as qubits to realize quantum memory47–49, quantum error correction 
protocols50, and bear a great potential in quantum simulation and quantum computation applications. 
The magneto-optical parameters and the electron spin coherence time of the NV center in diamond are 
relatively sensitive to the environment inside the diamond lattice or external to diamond, in particular, 
for NV centers residing close to the diamond surface. The sensitive dependence of spin to strain51, 
magnetic52,53, electric54, and temperature fields55–57 combined with its atomic-scale resolution make the 
defect center in a solid a versatile quantum sensor. These excellent and versatile properties make the 
defect in a solid a promising candidate for use in a wide range of applications, including quantum 
information processing and quantum sensing of biological systems58–64 (see Fig. 2).

Figure 1. The illustration of five pursuable quantum technologies and the corresponding manufacture materials, 
including quantum dots of Si65, InSb66, and GaAs67; trapped ions/ultracold atoms of 9Be+68 and 40Ca+69; topological 
qubits of Bi2Te315 and FeTe0.55Se0.4516with realizing Majorana bound states; superconducting circuits of Al70 and C71; 
and solid-state spins/defects of diamond (C)72, SiC73, ZnO74, and BN75. These materials can be applied to quantum 
computers, quantum communication, and quantum sensing. This review focuses on (spin) defects in solids. The 
famous Chinese symbol in the center, "Tai Chi", is represented by a circle divided into light and dark, or “Yang” and 
“Yin”, just as is the case with the components of qubits of S = ±1/2.


4

Figure 2. The major applications of defects in solids include single photon sources, qubits, and quantum sensors
due to the coupling of spin to strain, magnetic, electric fields, and temperature. For each application, diverse 
magneto-optical parameters are expected for the defect center. For details, please refer to the main text.

One advantage in the solid-state qubit is its capability of being integrated into the traditional 

microelectronic structures that have revolutionized our world once already. Diamond has favorable 
optical properties with room temperature defect qubit but it is difficult to grow diamond at wafer scale 
and fabricate a semiconductor device from diamond. This was one motivation to seek alternative 
materials and potential atomic-scale defects that are both robust and easily controlled, similarly to the 
favorable coherence and readout properties of the diamond NV center. These conditions pose restrictions 
on the choice of host materials and defect states as explained in detail in Ref.61. We briefly emphasize here 
that optical readout and the need of well-confined atomic-scale defect states favor wide band gap 
materials as hosts, nevertheless, moderate or small band gap materials can also have great potential, in 
particular, with low-temperature operation.

The list of possible applications of defect qubits in Fig. 2 already hints that a single defect qubit 

cannot cover the diverging criteria of various quantum applications. This is another reason to search for 
alternative solid state defect qubits. We briefly demonstrate this issue on the most successful defect qubit 
again. The diamond NV center has very broad phonon-assisted fluorescence in the region of 637–900 nm
under green laser illumination, where the contribution of the zero-phonon-line (ZPL) emission to the 
total emission is only ~3%, which is called the Debye–Waller (DW) factor. The electron spin resonance 
(ESR) occurs typically in the microwave region (~3 GHz) when no external magnetic field is applied; i.e., 
ESR resonance at the zero-field-splitting (ZFS)76. Biological studies need room temperature operation 
that diamond NV center satisfies. On the other hand, in vivo biological applications also favor near-
infrared (NIR) optical excitation and emission where the absorption and the auto-fluorescence of the 
living cells is minimal (see the definition of biological windows in Fig. 9 in the Summary and Outlook 
section). Furthermore, it is favorable to avoid the use of intense microwave spin excitation at 2–3 GHz in 
biological systems because the latter can heat the organism. As a consequence, alternative room 
temperature defect qubits with these magneto-optical properties are in the focus of intense research. On 
the other hand, room temperature operation for quantum communication application is not demanding 
but rather the optical properties should suit to the technicalities of the present communication 
technologies. The dominant and bright emission should come at the ZPL with coherent photons, and the 
ZPL should be stable against the stray electric fields to avoid spectral diffusion77. Furthermore, the ZPL 
wavelength should ideally be in the region of 1300–1550 nm to be compatible with the maximum 
transmission of current optical fibers available nowadays (see Fig. 9). Thus, it is evident that new solid-
state defect qubits should be found with these favorable magneto-optical properties.

These issues drive the field in searching for new solid-state qubits that operate akin to the NV center 

in terms of initialization and readout61,78 but have the aforementioned magneto-optical properties for 
quantum sensing and communication. It is very difficult to experimentally perform systematic studies on 
various point defects embedded in numerous host materials. The search for new candidates can be 
seriously accelerated by highly predictive ab initio studies that can first identify the target defect that can 
be realized experimentally. Alternatively, experimentation might find a new, prospective quantum 
emitter by chance, but the interpretation of the signals and improvement on the quantum protocols is 
hindered by the fact that the microscopic origin of the quantum emitters is unknown. Often, it is very 
difficult to obtain knowledge about the nature of the quantum emitters by experimental methods, in 
particular, for such emitters that rarely occur in the host material. Again, ab initio modeling can be 
extremely powerful in the identification of quantum emitters and qubits. As a consequence, this review 
summarizes the recent efforts and results from ab initio atomistic simulations, i.e. theoretical 
spectroscopy, and experiments hand-in-hand. We will provide a brief overview about the ab initio
modeling and show the physical concept of the key magneto-optical parameters of solid state defect 
qubits in Sec. 2.


5

We here review the most fundamental magneto-optical properties of the observed defect qubits and 

single photon sources with focusing on wide band gap materials that can host room temperature qubits 
but moderate or small band gap materials are also briefly discussed in Sec. 6.2. We attempt to provide a 
full coverage of the already identified qubits or single photon sources. We note that other review papers 
have been appeared related to this topic, and probably numerous review papers have been written 
parallel to this work or are now being in the preparation phase. We realized that previous review papers 
either specific to a given material like diamond79,80, silicon carbide (SiC)81,82, or the hexagonal boron 
nitride (h-BN)83,84, or only focusing on the issues of specific quantum applications of selected color 
centers (e.g., Ref.85). Our review is not limited either to specific materials or applications. The full list of 
the fundamental magneto-optical properties of the already observed single photon sources in various 
three-dimensional and low dimensional materials orients the readers to pick up those qubits or single 
photon emitters in their research that might suit the target quantum application. We will discuss briefly 
the ongoing research associated with the given qubits or the host materials in this regard. Accordingly, 
we show the physical concept of the key magneto-optical parameters of solid state defect qubits and its 
intimate connection to the theoretical spectroscopy from ab initio modeling in Sec. 2. In sections III−IV, 
we will discuss shortly the defect qubits and single photon emitters in diamond, SiC, cubic BN, gallium 
nitride (GaN), aluminum nitride (AlN), zinc oxide (ZnO), zinc sulfide (ZnS), titanium dioxide (TiO2), silicon 
(Si), wide band gap materials hosting rare-earth ions and two-dimensional materials such as h-BN and 
low-dimensional materials including carbon nanotubes. Finally, we conclude this review paper in the last 
section.

2. Defect qubits with various magneto-optical parameters

In the example of diamond NV center, we already listed the key magneto-optical parameters of qubits in 
the Introduction. These parameters and their sensitivity on external effects (electric and magnetic fields, 
strain, temperature, etc.) determine their applicability for a given quantum application. The physical 
concept of these parameters will be discussed in Sec. 2.1, also in the context of ab initio calculations. In a 
recent review45, a full coverage of ab initio methods was provided for the diamond NV center. These ab 
initio methods heavily rely on the application of Kohn-Sham density functional theory plane wave 
supercell calculation to defects in solids where the basic equations and advanced functionals were 
summarized in an earlier general review paper86 and other recent review papers focused on specific 
defect qubits87. We therefore describe the basic first principles methods very briefly in Sec. 2.1, in order 
to make a connection between the theoretical and experimental spectroscopy without extensively 
deferring the readers from the context of the present review. We then describe in Sec. 2.2 how these 
parameters are determined in the experiments, and provide a very comprehensive list of the magneto-
optical properties of the known single defect qubits in various wide band gap materials in Table I which 
is a central point of this review paper.

2.1 Basic first principles methods in a nutshell and theoretical spectroscopy

Characterization of point defects in solids is the key task for identification candidates for qubits. 

Computation of the electronic structure of the point defects is the first inevitable step to this end. Having 
the electronic structure in hand, the key magneto-optical properties can be calculated which may be 
called theoretical spectroscopy of point defects in solids. We briefly summarize the typical ab initio
methods employed to this end.

Born–Oppenheimer approximation is usually applied for the electron-nuclei system of point defects, 

in which the ions are treated as charged particles with atomic masses, and the electrons move fast in the 
adiabatic potential created by the ions. The total energy of the electronic states should be calculated as a 
function of coordinates of ions of the system so that the adiabatic potential energy surface (APES) of the 
system can be mapped. The global energy minimum of the APES for a given electronic configuration can 
be found by minimizing the quantum mechanical forces acting on the ions. The quasi-harmonic vibration 
modes can also be calculated by interpolating a parabola around the global minimum by moving the ions 
out of the equilibrium positions and solving the Hessian equation. To this end, the total energy of the 
electronic system should be determined. Two widespread basic methods can be used: (1) quantum 


6

chemistry codes with linear combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO) and Gaussian-type orbital (GTO) 
based molecular clusters; and (2) density functional theory (DFT) supercell methods. Quantum chemistry 
codes with coupled cluster or configuration interaction (CI) methods can treat highly correlated orbitals,
but only small systems can be calculated, which is problematic when the band edges converge slowly to 
the infinite cluster’s values because of the quantum confinement effect, which opens the gap between 
empty and occupied defect levels. DFT supercell methods are often applied together with a plane waves 
basis set, as it is a natural basis for periodic boundary conditions (nevertheless, it can also be a GTO basis) 
which requires pseudopotentials88 or projected augmented wave (PAW)89 methods. The charged defects 
in the supercell methods can be calculated by neutralizing the supercell with an opposite charge 
delocalized in the entire supercell, which results in artificial interaction between the periodic images of 
these charges. This can be compensated for usually by Lany–Zunger correction90 based on the Makov–
Payne theory91 or Freysoldt correction92 in 3D materials. For 2D materials, new schemes that should be 
applied have been developed [93,94], but doing so can be painstaking. The application of charge 
correction or donor-acceptor pair models is highly important, for the value of the charge correction could 
go beyond 1 eV in 2D materials. We mention another method to treat charged 2D systems. We note here 
that Kaviani and co-workers transferred this troublesome problem of charged slab supercell calculation
into another but readily solvable problem95: A neutral diamond surface model is used for the negatively 
charged NV defect, NV(−), at the expense of a substitutional, positively charged nitrogen defect NS
entering the diamond slab. Due to the valence electron of a nitrogen atom being one more than that of a 
carbon atom, this NS donor will naturally donate its additional electron to the neutral NV acceptor defect 
by creating a pair comprising an NV center and a positively charged NS. If this defect pair are placed into 
the same layer of the slab and the slab has a cubic-like shape, then the dipole–dipole interaction between 
the periodic images of the defect pairs can be minimized (also see Ref.96).

In most of the defect calculations, the charged defects are embedded in the supercell models. By 

using the correction energy (𝐸corr) for charged defective supercells, one can calculate the formation 
energy (𝐸𝑞

𝑓[𝑑]) of a given point defect (d) in a charged state q, which provides thermodynamic properties. 

For a binary compound material (XY), this can be written as97

𝐸𝑞

𝑓[𝑑] = 𝐸tot[𝑑] − 𝑛𝑋𝜇𝑋 − 𝑛𝑌𝜇𝑌 − 𝑛𝑑𝜇𝑑 + 𝑞(𝐸𝐹 + 𝐸𝑉) + 𝐸corr (1)

where 𝜇𝑖 are the chemical potential of ion (i) with 𝑛𝑖 number in the supercell, and 𝐸𝐹 is the Fermi-energy 
with respect to the calculated valence band maximum 𝐸𝑉, which is usually aligned to zero energy in the 
corresponding band diagrams, and then 𝐸𝐹 varies between zero and the fundamental bandgap (Eg) of the 
host material. The adiabatic charge transition levels between the q and q+1 charged states can be 
calculated as

𝐸(𝑞|𝑞 + 1) = (𝐸tot

𝑞+1[𝑑] + 𝐸corr

𝑞+1) − (𝐸tot

𝑞 [𝑑] + 𝐸corr

𝑞
) + 𝐸𝑉
(2)

which defines the position of the Fermi-level where the defect adiabatically switches between the q and 
q+1 charge states with respect to 𝐸𝑉 . The calculated charge transition levels provide the ionization 
thresholds of the defect qubit as explained in Fig. 3a. These quantities are very important to understand 
the photostability of the qubit. Photoexcitation of the defect above the ionization threshold leads to 
temporary or complete loss of the qubit that are often called dark state in the literature (no fluorescence 
from the defect qubit). If the qubit defect was photoionized then the qubit state may be restored by 
photoexcitation of the dark state. The photoionization threshold needed to restore the qubit can be larger 
than the ionization threshold of the qubit (see divacancy defect qubit in 4H-SiC98,99).


7

Figure 3. Illustrations of key magneto-optical parameters. (a) Ionization threshold. The defect has a deep acceptor 
level in the band gap. Assuming that the negatively charged defect is the qubit one can see that E1 energy is needed 
to neutralize the defect by photo-excitation of the electron from the defect to the conduction band edge, whereas E2
energy is needed to restore the qubit by ionizing the defect from the valence band. (b) Theory of emission spectrum. 
Adiabatic potential energy surface (APES) of the ground state and excited state along the configuration coordinate. 
In the Huang-Rhys approximation it is assumed that the APES of the excited state has the same shape as that of the 
ground state. The thin lines in the APES represent the energy levels of the effective phonon. In reality, many phonons 
may contribute to the optical transition which may result in a broad phonon sideband. (c) Illustration of typical 
optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) spectrum. The intensity of the emission changes as microwave 
frequency sweeps that is the signature of electron spin transition. At B=0 zero magnetic field the position of the dip 
is the ZFS parameter.

We note that the given charge and electronic configuration should be calculated as a function of the 

spin state too, and the lowest energy spin configuration belongs to the ground state spin of the system at 
a given charge state. This is highly important, for the qubit state is often associated with the high-spin 
ground state. The spin levels may split due to spin–orbit or dipolar spin–spin interactions at zero 
magnetic field that previously called ZFS, which can be calculated from first principles (see Ref.100). The 
ZFS can be measured by either alternating magnetic fields (microwave transition to rotate the spin state) 
or resonant optical transitions (see Fig. 3c). 

The calculation of the key optical quantities, such as the ZPL and DW factors, requires the 

computation of the optically allowed excited state and the vibration modes. In the Huang–Rhys
approximation of the optical transition, it is sufficient to calculate the vibration modes only in the ground 
state101. Nevertheless, the calculation of the ZPL energy requires computing the excited state and finding 
the global minimum of the APES in this electronic configuration; i.e., computation of the quantum 
mechanical forces acting on the ions. The calculation of the total energy in the excited state is not trivial 
for Kohn–Sham DFT. Nevertheless, it may work by constraint occupation of Kohn–Sham states, also 
known as the SCF method (see application to the NV center in diamond in Ref.102). We will discuss below 


8

situations when this simple formalism fails and the possible methods to calculate this quantity. By 
combining these calculations, the DW factor (w) can be derived as 𝑆 = −𝑙𝑛 𝑤, where S is the Huang–Rhys
factor obtained in the ab initio calculations103,104 (see Fig. 3b).

2.2 List of defect qubits in semiconductors and wide band gap materials

Over the past decades, qubits have been implemented in a wide range of materials, including 

atoms105, superconductors106, semiconductors36, and rare-earth materials107. Among these possible 
candidates, point defects in semiconductors and wide band gap materials, also called “color centers”, 
show a rich spin and optoelectronic physics that can be exploited to fabricate quantum information 
devices, including qubits for quantum computing and quantum sensing technology and single-photon 
emitters in both quantum communication and quantum computation. Color centers are point defects in 
a semiconductor or insulator that bind electrons to an extremely localized region on the scale of Å. Thus, 
color centers behave as atoms embedded in the host crystal. These atom-like states make the color 
centers ideal candidates for solid-state qubits, for many deep centers exhibit a nonzero spin magnetic 
moment in the ground state and might be optically polarized, manipulated into energetically excited 
states by illumination and radiation of microwave fields.

At a low concentration of point defects in a solid, the photo-excitation source can be focused on the 

target point defect with a simultaneously induced ESR transition by sweeping alternating magnetic fields. 
If the fluorescence intensity is spin dependent, then the electron spin resonance can be observed by 
monitoring the fluorescence intensity as a function of the microwave frequency. This technique is called 
optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) measurement108. The spin resonance may be detected at 
zero magnetic field for non-isotropic defects where the low symmetry crystal field will split the spin 
levels known as ZFS. Here, we list these most basic key optical (ZPL, DW) and magnetic properties (ZFS 
in the ground and excited states at the given spin state) for the materials of prominent qubits and single 
photon emitters that have been experimentally identified to date, including three-dimensional materials 
such as diamond, SiC polymorphs (4H, 3C, and 6H), ZnO, GaN, cubic BN (c-BN), 2H-MoS2, yttrium 
aluminum garnet (Y3Al5O12 or YAG), yttrium orthosilicate (Y2SiO5 or YSO), and yttrium orthovanadate
(YVO4 or YVO); and two-dimensional materials such as hexagonal BN (h-BN) and transition metal 
dichalcogenides (WSe2 and WS2). In sections III−IV, we will discuss these materials in detail.


9

Table I. Summary of the key parameters in experiment, such as zero-phonon-line (ZPL), zero-field-splitting (ZFS), 
and the Debye–Waller (DW) factor, for emerging quantum-coherent materials. The ZPL weight, DW factor, and the 
electron–phonon coupling parameter, the Huang–Rhys (HR) factor, are deduced from the relationship w = e−S, 
where w is the DW factor and S is the HR factor. DAP labels donor-acceptor pair defect and REI for rare-earth ions.
V(4+) represent vanadium impurity substituting Si in the SiC lattice that should not be read as a vacancy. Most of 
the listed defects were observed as single photon emitters; PbV(−) in diamond, Cr(4+) in 4H SiC and GaN, VB(−) in 
h-BN, all the defects in c-BN, all the defects in ZnO except for VZn were observed as ensembles.

ZPL (eV)
ZFS (GHz)
DW

Diamond

NV(0) 2.156109
NV(−) 1.945110
SiV(0) 1.310111
SiV(−) 1.681112
GeV(−) 2.06113
SnV(−) 2.00114
NiN4 1.546115

PbV(−) 2.385116

ST1 2.255117

NV(−) 2A2, 2.8876, 3E, 1.43118

SiV(0) 1.00119

SiV(−) 2Eg, 50120, 2Eu, 260120

GeV(−) 2Eg, 181113, 2Eu, 1120113
SnV(−) 2Eg, 850114, 2Eu, 3000114

ST1 1.274±0.139117

NV(0) 0.14121
NV(−) 0.0462

SiV(0) 0.90±0.10122
SiV(−) 0.75–0.79123

GeV(−) 0.61113
SnV(−) 0.41114

ST1 <0.1117

4H-SiC

VSi-VC(0) 1.094–1.150124

PL5 divacancy 1.190125
PL6 divacancy 1.193125

VSi-NC(−) 0.99–1.06126–128

VSi(V1) 1.438129
VSi(V2) 1.352129

Cr(4+) 1.158, 1.190130
V(4+) 0.970, 0.929131

VSi-VC(0) 3A2, 1.22–1.34124

PL5 divacancy 1.353125
PL6 divacancy 1.365125

VSi-NC(−)3A2, 1.282–1.331128

VSi(V1) 4A2, 0.004129
VSi(V2) 4A2, 0.035129
Cr(4+) 3A2, 1–6.46130
V(4+) 2E, 529, 43131

VSi-VC(0) ~0.05132

VSi(V1) 0.08133
VSi(V2) 0.09133
Cr(4+) 0.75130

V(4+) 0.25, 0.5131

3C-SiC

VSi-VC(0) 1.121132
VSi-NC(−) 0.845134

1.27a135

VSi-VC(0) 3A2, 1.336132
VSi-NC(−) 3A2, 1.303134

VSi-VC(0) ~0.05132

6H-SiC

VSi-VC(0) 1.094–1.134136
VSi-NC(−) 0.960–1.000127

VSi(V1) 1.433129
VSi(V2) 1.398129
VSi(V3) 1.366129

V(4+) 0.948, 0.917, 0.893131

VSi-VC(0) 3A2, 1.236–1.347124

VSi(V1) 4A2, 0.028137
VSi(V2) 4A2, 0.128137
VSi(V3) 4A2, 0.028137

V(4+) 2E, 524, 25, 16131
V(4+) <0.5 131

h-BN

nanotube

1.941138

2.172 and 2.179139

h-BN
~ 2.0d, 4.1e, 5.3f

VB(−) ~1.6g140
VB(−) 3A2g, 3.4140

0.8275, 0.59141

~0.030g

WSe2
0.936142

WS2
VS 1.72 and 1.98143
0.30 and 0.50143

2H-MoS2
1.174144

c-BN

ON-VB ~1.63145

Bi 3.3146

Bi-VN 3.57146

CN 4.09147

Si impurity 4.94148

Bi-VN 0.017148

Si impurity 0.007148

ZnO

VZn 2.331149

CuZn 2.859150

VZn-ClO 2.365151

DAP 3.333152

CuZn 0.0015153

DAP 0.996154

GaN

0.855a155

3.33b, 2.594c, 1.82d

Cr(4+) 1.193130

0.71156

0.63c

Cr(4+) 0.73130

Silicon
G-centre CiCs 0.969157

Er(3+) 0.805h158

G-centre CiCs 0.30159

REI

YAG:Pr(3+) 4.122160

Ce(3+) 2.536161

YSO: Er(3+) 0.807162
YVO:Yb(3+) 1.280163
LaFe3:Pr(3+) 2.594164

YAG:Ce(3+) 0.002165

a The possible candidates are CNONHi166, CN-Hi166, or CN-SiGa167.


10

b Theoretical studies predicted that the possible candidates are CN168 or other complexes169, such as VGa-3H or VGaON-2H. 
Experimental studies proposed that the possible candidates are CN-ON170,171 and CN-SiGa171. 
c Point defects near cubic inclusions within hexagonal lattice of GaN were proposed 172.
d Theoretical study predicted CB-VN173 and experimental study proposed NB-VN75.
e DAP174 and CN175 were proposed originally but a recent theoretical study predicts CN-CB dimer defect75.
f Theoretical study predicted ON176, and experimental studies proposed VNB177 and DAP178.
g As the reported measurements140 were performed at room temperature with no observable ZPL energy, we show the 

estimated value from ab initio calculations for ZPL and DW factor179. 

h Co-doping oxygen with erbium in silicon has been reported to enhance emission and improve luminescence at high 

temperature180.

3. Diamond-hosted qubits

Diamond has a band gap of about 5.5 eV, thus it can host numerous color centers with emission 

wavelengths in a wide region from NIR through visible to UV181. Diamond has strong and short carbon-
carbon bonds which makes it a dense and hard material. This may be considered as disadvantageous 
from doping point of view but also results in high frequency phonon modes. It is worth emphasizing that 
phonons play critically important roles in quantum information182,183. The phonon, the quantized 
excitation of lattice vibrational modes in crystals, can carry heat and information, which has broad 
applications for heat energy control and management. Unlike in bulk materials, in low-dimensional nano 
structures, the confined phonon mode changes the nature of phonon transport, leading to anomalous 
thermal conductivity and heat energy diffusion184,185. In addition to the key role in thermal conductivity 
of solid state systems186–188, the interactions of phonons with other carriers, such as electrons and 
photons, also have important influences on the performance of nano electronics189, optoelectronic 
devices190, and thermoelectric devices191. In particular, phonons affect significantly the coherence time of 
defect spins. For example, the spin coherence time of an NV center can be about a few seconds at 
cryogenic temperatures but is remarkably reduced to 1.8 ms at room temperature46,47,192. We note here 
that many magneto-optical properties of NV centers depend on the phonon density of states, which 
highlights the advantage of diamond as a host material; i.e., its high Debye temperature of ~2200 K. Hence, 
room temperature can be considered as a relatively low temperature for diamond, which results in a 
relatively low phonon population even under ambient conditions that generally suppresses the 
possibility of spin–lattice relaxation. Therefore, other materials with high Debye temperatures may also 
be promising for hosting defects with long spin–lattice relaxation times, such as boron-based 
materials193,194.

3.1 NV center 

Among the many color centers in diamond, the NV center stands out because of its desirable spin 

coherence and readout properties195,196,100. The NV center is particularly attractive due to its ability to 
interface with a variety of external degrees of freedom. While different charge states of the NV defect
have been reported, the negatively-charged NV defect (NV(−) center) has the most attractive quantum 
properties and is usually denoted as the NV center. Structurally, the NV center is a point defect in diamond 
in which a substitutional nitrogen atom is adjacent to a vacancy (Fig. 4a), which can capture an extra 
electron to form an NV(−) defect. A simplified schematic of the electronic structure of an NV center is 
shown in Fig. 4a. It is clear that the ground state is a spin triplet (3A2), the excited state is also a spin triplet 
state (3E), and two metastable singlet spin states lie between them (1A1 and 1E).


11

Figure 4. (a) Structure of an NV center in diamond and its energy level diagram in an optical polarization cycle. The 
green arrows represent spin-conserving absorption and emission, and the grey dotted and red straight arrows 
represent the weak and efficient intersystem crossings, respectively, and the cyan dotted arrow represents a weak 
near infrared emission competing with the direct non-radiative decay. The excited state level diagram is simplified 
to the case of elevated temperatures. (b) The ground state of single particle NV defect energy levels in the 
fundamental bandgap of diamond. Filled and empty arrows depict occupied (electron) and unoccupied (hole) states, 
respectively, as found in spin-polarized density functional theory calculations.

The working mechanism of a diamond NV center as a qubit is shown in Fig. 4a. First, a spin-

conserving optical excitation is applied between the spin triplet ground state (3A2) and spin triplet excited 
state (3E), with an excitation energy of 1.945 eV (637 nm) when no phonons participate in the optical 
transition 195,196,100. At low temperatures (< 20 K), a fine structure emerges in the 3E manifold because of 
spin–orbit and spin–spin interactions (not shown). At room temperature, electron–phonon interactions 
will rapidly mix the orbital levels, leading to an effective orbital singlet with a fine structure that strongly 
resembles the ground state195,196,100, as shown in Fig. 4a. The radiative decay from the triplet excited state
to the ground state is spin-conserving. In addition, an efficient nonradiative decay pathway via 
intermediate dark states 1A1 and 1E exists between the mS = ±1 sublevels of the triplet excited state and
the mS = 0 sublevel of the triplet ground state, respectively, which is called intersystem crossing. Rogers 
et al.197 applied uniaxial stress to demonstrate the ZPL of the infrared transition between these two 
singlet states that was found at 1.19 eV. The energy gap between 3E and 1A1 was estimated at around 0.4 
eV from the simulation and measurement of the intersystem crossing rate198,199. The combination of 
radiative and spin selective nonradiative pathways makes the NV center optically polarized into the 
ground state upon illumination. Once initialized, the ground state spin can then be coherently 
manipulated by microwave radiation, and its state can be read out by the observed fluorescence intensity 
upon illumination. 

The electronic structure of the NV center is shown in Fig. 4b. The bound states of this deep center 

are multiparticle states composed of six electrons, which come from the four dangling bonds surrounding 
the vacancy (five electrons) and one electron from the environment. The double degenerate e (ex, ey)
states are completely occupied in the spin majority channel and are empty in the spin minority channel,
whereas the a1 orbital is fully occupied in the electronic ground state. The spin-conserving optical
excitation from the 3A2 to the 3E excited triplet can be described as promoting an electron from the a1
state to the empty ex/ey state in the defect level diagram200. We note that the 1A1 state is a strongly 
correlated state that can only be described by multireference methods beyond the Kohn–Sham DFT 
methods201–203.

At room temperature, extremely long spin coherence times of up to 1.8 ms are reported for the 

ground state of the NV center 46, which is close to the regime needed for quantum error correction. To 
realize the long electron spin coherence time, the deep center should reside in a wide bandgap host 
material that allows large energy spacing between adjacent bound states, and it should have small spin–


12

orbit coupling. The remarkable features of the NV center are largely afforded by the host material, 
diamond. Therefore, the electronic bound states of the NV center can reside deep within the bandgap, 
resulting in weak interaction with states in the valence and conduction bands. This may imply that wide 
band gap materials are suitable hosts for color centers akin to the NV center in diamond. It is worth noting 
that due to the quantum confinement effect, the semiconductor bandgap increases with reductions the 
dimensions of the crystals204,205. Therefore, for some narrow bandgap semiconductors, despite their not 
being ideal to host deep centers, their nano-sized counterparts may become promising candidates for 
elevated temperature operation.

The temperature dependence of the optical transition linewidth and excited states relaxation of a 

single NV center was associated with strong electron–phonon coupling206. It was shown that, at low 
temperature, the electron–phonon coupling caused by the dynamic Jahn–Teller effect in the 3E excited 
state is the dominant mechanism for the optical dephasing. The Jahn–Teller effect was first reported in 
1937 by Hermann Arthur Jahn and Edward Teller207. It states that a system with a spatially degenerate 
electronic state will undergo a spontaneous geometrical distortion, resulting in symmetry breaking, 
because the removal of degeneracy can lower the overall energy of the system. Using a combination of 
first-principles calculations and the Jahn–Teller type of electron–phonon interaction model analysis, 
Abtew et al. studied the dynamic Jahn–Teller effect in the 3E excited state of a diamond NV(−) center208.
To understand the Jahn–Teller effect, the APES was obtained by carrying out constrained DFT 
calculations. For the NV center, there are six symmetrized displacements with two A1 and two E
vibrations induced by the motion of the immediate neighbor atoms of the vacancy. The totally symmetric 
A1 vibrational modes do not lower the symmetry, but the E vibrational modes will lower the symmetry 
and split the defect levels. The combination of theoretical modelling208 and experimental measurement206
clearly suggested that the dephasing of the ZPL of the NV center is dominated by the coupling between 
the double degenerate E state and the E phonon modes. This results in a T5 dependence of the ZPL 
linewidth. First principles calculations from Thiering and Gali have shown that the strong electron–
phonon coupling, i.e., the dynamic Jahn–Teller effect, with higher energy phonons plays a crucial role in 
determining the fine structure of the
3E excited state at cryogenic temperatures and affects the 

intersystem crossing rate and the shape of the PL spectrum209,210.

Recent advances in quantum technology make it possible to create proximate qubits that form a 

quantum network in solids. Via electron spin–spin interaction, the proximate qubits might interact with 
each other. It was found that in diamond with extremely high concentrations of NV centers (about 45 
ppm), the electron spin coherence time was significantly reduced to about 67 μs211, in striking contrast 
to the 1.8 ms coherence time of the isolated NV centers46. The decoherence is caused by the charge 
fluctuation between neighboring NV(−) and NV(0) defects. To obtain deep knowledge about the 
underlying physical mechanism, very recently, Chou et al., using first principles calculations, explored the 
tunneling-mediated charge diffusion between point defects in diamond212. Based on the quantum 
mechanical tunneling of the electron of NV(−) and a proximate acceptor defect in diamond, they proposed 
a physical model for the source of decoherence in NV qubits. Although the wave functions decay fast and 
the electron probability is only about 0.1% at a distance of 1 nm away from the center of the defect, strong 
interaction and charge transfer still exist even when the distance between neighboring NV(−) and NV(0) 
centers is up to 4.4 nm. Importantly, Chou et al. theoretically suggested that, to maintain the coherence 
time (1 ms) of the isolated NV qubit, a distance of 9 nm between the NV sensor and the acceptor defect 
is required. This is of high importance for both quantum network and quantum sensor applications of the 
solid-state qubits213,214,85.

The most promising area of application of the NV center is the ultrasensitive nanoscale 

sensors95,215,216. The spin levels and coherence time of the NV center is sensitive to external fields, such as 
an electromagnetic field, pressure and temperature, making it an atomic-scale quantum sensor capable 
of detecting changes in the surrounding environment, and in particular, it is very attractive for biological 
or biomolecule sensing applications. In sensor applications, the NV centers should be engineered 
relatively close to the surface of the diamond. However, compared to that of deeply buried NV centers in 
diamond, the coherence time of near-surface NV centers is significantly reduced. One possible approach 


13

to improvement is proper surface functionalization with different molecule/atom groups95,216,217. So far,
not all the possible sources of the noise causing this effect are fully understood, and the foundation of a 
precise strategy to keep the long coherence time as well as high sensitivity is still under intense research.

We note that diamond NV center has a great potential to realize room temperature quantum 

computing, in strike contrast to the present ultralow temperature operation of superconductor based 
quantum computers. It has been recently shown that single diamond NV center can coherently address 
27 13C nuclear spins218. Furthermore, a high fidelity of >99% has been demonstrated for the gate 
operation for single- (99.99%) and two-qubit gates (99.2%)50,219. By combination of present advances in 
the formation and activation of NV centers by high precision ion implantation (e.g., Ref.220 and references 
therein), the photocurrent based spin readout technique with going below the diffraction limit in the 
readout process221,222, an array of NV centers can be envisioned with addressing ~30 qubits around each 
NV center with sufficiently close distance between NV centers to produce a scalable room temperature 
quantum processor unit. Ab initio theory can provide a great asset to locate the individual 13C spins 
around the NV center223,224 but further theoretical efforts are needed to explore the complex spin-spin 
interactions between the cluster of 13C spins and the central electron spin, in terms of optimizing the 
quantum control and maintaining the favorable coherence time of the NV electron spin.

3.2 Silicon-vacancy center 

Recently, the silicon-vacancy (SiV) defect in diamond, which forms a structure with inversion 

symmetry, has been of great interest123. The inversion symmetry of defects is one strategy to suppress 
the influence of local electric field noise to signal; i.e., the spectral diffusion. In particular, near transform-
limited photons could be generated by the negatively charged SiV(−) centers because of the strong ZPL
emission225–227. The SiV defect consists of an interstitial silicon atom in a split-vacancy configuration 
belonging to symmetry group of D3d, which gives rise to an electronic level structure consisting of ground 
(2Eg) and excited (2Eu) states that both have double orbital degeneracy120,228,229. In the SiV(−) center of 
diamond, these degenerate orbitals are occupied by a single hole with spin S = 1/2, leading to both orbital 
and spin degrees of freedom. Thus, spin projection and orbital angular momentum are good quantum 
numbers for this system. The energy spacing between the spin levels in the electronic ground and excited 
state is caused by the spin–orbit coupling reduced by the electron–phonon interaction79, which are about 
50 GHz and 250 GHz, respectively. The interaction of the external magnetic field and strain to the spin 
and electronic orbitals was developed based on group theory principles120 and later combined with 
extended theory of the Jahn–Teller effect from first principles calculations79.

By employing group theory and an advanced ab initio method with a realistic band gap of bulk 

diamond, Gali and Maze determined the electronic structure of the SiV defect in diamond229. In this 
structure, the Si atom goes automatically into a bond center position between two adjacent vacancies, i.e.,
split-vacancy configuration, which is the inversion center of the diamond lattice. Thus, this defect is also 
called the V-Si-V defect in the literature, but the SiV label is common in the quantum optics community, 
and we will use this label in this context. Since carbon atoms are more electronegative than silicon atoms, 
the charge is transferred from the silicon atom to the nearby carbon atoms. The Si-related four sp3 states 
should form a1g, eu, and a2u orbitals, while the carbon dangling bonds form a1g, a2u, eu, and eg orbitals, and 
all of them form the defect states in diamond. For the neutral SiV defect, only the eg orbital occurs in the 
bandgap, with 0.3 eV above the valence-band maximum (VBM). Unlike the positively charged state, the 
neutral and negatively charged states are found to be stable in a large range of Fermi levels. In the SiV(−)
center, the ground state electron configuration is 𝑒𝑢4𝑒𝑔3, where the excited state can be described as 
promoting an electron from the eu to the eg level. The calculated ZPL energy is 1.72 eV without spin–orbit
interaction, which agrees well with the experimental data (1.682 eV230). It is worth noting that the ground 
(2Eg) and excited (2Eu) states have similar charge densities; therefore, only small charge redistribution 
occurs upon optical excitation of the SiV(−) center, explaining the relatively large Debye–Waller factor of 
about 0.7 or 70%. This is quite different from the case of the NV(−) center, where the charge densities of 
the ground state and excited state significantly differ, and results in a large motion of ions upon 


14

illumination102. The relatively sharp and stable ZPL emission with tiny spectral diffusion made it possible 
to demonstrate indistinguishable photon production from two single SiV(−) centers without any external 
tuning231.

Figure 5. (a) The SiV center consists of a silicon atom centered between two neighboring vacant lattice sites (red 
small balls). Si ion sits in the inversion center of the diamond lattice which makes the optical transition less 
dependent against the stray electric fields than that for NV center in diamond. (b) Line width of the SiV center for 
different temperatures. The green curve corresponds to cubic scaling in the high temperature range (70 K). At low 
temperatures ( 20 K), the pink line represents linear scaling, as shown in the inset. Reproduced with permission 
from Jahnke et al., New J. Phys. 17, 043011 (2015). Copyright 2015 license under a Creative Commons Attribution 
3.0 (CC BY 3.0) International License.

We note that both the ground 2Eg and excited 2Eu states are subject to the Jahn–Teller effect. As a 

consequence, the electron–phonon interactions have a significant impact on the photon emission. Fig. 5
shows the full width at half maximum line widths for the single SiV(−) center227. It is obvious that the line 
width increases with temperature, but with different scaling laws at different ranges of temperature. 
From 70K to 350K, the line width scales as the cube of the temperature. However, at low temperature (
20K), there is linear dependence. Temperature can introduce vibronic coupling between different 
orbitals due to the dynamic Jahn–Teller effect, resulting in population mixture.

Jahnke et al. developed a microscopic model of the electron–phonon processes within the ground 

and excited electronic levels to describe the observed temperature dependent optical line width of the
SiV(−) center 227. In this model, the electron–phonon coupling is a consequence of the linear Jahn–Teller 
interaction between the E-symmetric electronic states and corresponding acoustic phonon modes. At low 
temperature, the first-order transition between the orbital states involves the absorption or emission of 
a single phonon. The frequency of the phonon is resonant with the spin–orbit splitting energy ℏΔ. Within 
the frame of time-dependent perturbation, the transition rates are approximately described as:

𝛾 ≈

2𝜋
ℏ 𝜒𝜌Δ2𝑘𝐵𝑇
(3)

where χ is the interaction frequency for phonons, ρ is the proportionality constant, and T is temperature. 
Hence the single phonon mediated transition results in the relaxation of the population between the 
ground and excited states as well as the dephasing of the states. At low temperature, it leads to a linear 
dependence.

On the other side, at high temperature, the line broadening deviates from the linear relationship with 

temperature, suggesting the involvement of higher order phonon coupling in the relaxation process. It is 
worth emphasizing that for NV(−) centers, the inelastic Raman-type scattering process dominates; 
however, for SiV(−) centers, the inelastic Raman scattering is suppressed and the elastic Raman-type 
scattering process is dominated. Thus, the two-phonon elastic scattering dominated transition rate is:


15

𝛾 ≈

2𝜋3

3ℏ 𝜒2𝜌2Δ2𝑘𝐵

3𝑇3 (4)

Therefore, the two-phonon scattering dominates the dephasing of the orbital states at high 

temperature, which agrees well with the experimental results.

Understanding the electronic structure and coherence properties of the SiV(−) center contributed to 

the development of a coherent population trapping experiment225,226 wherein the spin state of the center 
could be optically addressed by applying resonant lasers at cryogenic temperatures. However, SiV(−) has 
short coherence times of about 100 ns at cryogenic temperatures because of the inelastic Raman 
processes232. By cooling the system down to the millikelvin region, the phonon density of states can be 
reduced and millisecond coherence times can be achieved233,234. In special diamond structures at 
millikelvin temperatures, coupling of identical SiV(−) spins has been achieved235,236 and coherent 
manipulation of a single SiV(−) center spin by acoustic phonons has been recently demonstrated237.

We note a recent breakthrough on creating stable and individual neutral SiV defects122 in which the 

zero-phonon line is at 946 nm (see Table I) and the spin state is S = 1. Unlike in the SiV(−) center, the 
ground state spin does not strongly couple to phonons similarly to the case of the NV(−) ground state, so 
it has a long spin-relaxation time and presumably long coherence times at cryogenic temperatures. 
Optical spin polarization of SiV(0) was achieved122 that could be partially understood from the known 
electronic structure of the defect111,119,229,238–241. Very recently, ODMR signal from single SiV(0) has been 
reported242, which is, in particular, spectacular because it has been achieved via excitation of the Rydberg 
states. The Rydberg excited states have been analyzed by the combination of group theory and ab initio
calculations242, where Rydberg excited states are bound exciton states in which the valence band hole is 
attracted by Coulomb forces of the negatively charged defect. Interestingly, similar charge correction is 
required for the description of the Rydberg excited states like for the fully ionized defect up to a certain 
cutoff radius from the center of the defect that is associated with the Bohr radius of the Rydberg excited 
state242. The underlying mechanism of the ODMR contrast has not yet been fully understood, and further 
research is required for optimizing the corresponding signal. Nevertheless, SiV(0) certainly opens a novel
avenue for quantum telecommunication applications.

3.3 Other types of split-vacancy complex color centers

The inversion-symmetry based group-IV vacancy color centers XV(−), where X = Si, Ge, Sn, and Pb, 

in diamond are fast emerging qubits that can be harnessed in quantum communication and sensor 
applications79. As mentioned above, SiV(−) possesses several advantages, such as a narrow 
inhomogeneous linewidth243, negligible spectra diffusion235, and immunity to electric field noise to first 
order235; however, it suffers from low quantum efficiencies of ~10%244 and short coherence times at 
cryogenic temperatures232. These limitations urged researchers to seek alternative quantum emitters
that potentially have larger spin–orbit splitting that may raise the spin-coherence times. The heavier 
group-IV vacancy centers of GeV, SnV, and PbV are characterized by similar geometric structures and 
optical properties but have increased energy spacing between the spin levels because of the expected 
larger spin–orbit coupling. Indeed, these centers could be formed in diamond. The GeV(−) center has a 
strong photoluminescence band with a zero-phonon line at 602 nm113,245–247. Siyushev et al. used two 
optical excitation wavelengths with resonant matching with the different electronic transitions between 
the ground and excited states, and they observed coherent population trapping247. This demonstrates 
that the GeV color center in diamond has excellent optical spectral stability and controllable spin states. 
The SnV(−) center revealed a narrow emission linewidth of ~232 MHz248 and 17-fold greater ground 
state splitting of ∼ 850 GHz79, implying it has potential for a long spin coherence time. It has also been 
found to have large quantum efficiency (∼ 80%) and a long ZPL wavelength of 2.0 eV114. Novel color 
centers have been associated with PbV centers. Cryogenic photoluminescence measurements revealed 
several transitions, including a prominent doublet near 520 nm, and the ground state splitting of 5.7 THz 
far exceeds that reported for other group-IV split-vacancy centers249,116. We emphasize that the 
degenerate orbital in the ground and excited states result in strong Jahn-Teller interaction for these 
defects, i.e., a strong electron-phonon coupling well beyond the Born-Oppenheimer approximation79, 


16

therefore the electron-phonon or vibronic spectrum should be determined in ab initio calculations. It is 
spectacular that theory predicted similar order of magnitude the strength of electron-phonon coupling 
and spin-orbit coupling for the PbV(−) center which results in an effective phonon-spin coupling79. 
Although, similar effect has been demonstrated for SiV(−) center at ultralow temperatures with the use 
of complex materials engineering to produce acoustic waves in diamond237 but the significantly enlarged 
energy spacing between the spin sublevel of PbV(−) center should enable to demonstrate this coupling 
at elevated temperatures with laser excitation of high energy acoustic phonons, thus the complex 
materials processing can be avoided. Pb is a huge ion, thus it may create many unwanted defects after ion 
implantation. Presently, the optical250 and spin properties248,251 of SnV(−) center is rather under intense 
research to apply as a convenient alternative to SiV(−) center in terms of operation temperature, where 
high temperature annealing or chemical vapor deposition (CVD) after-growth of diamond after Sn 
implantation resulted in high quality diamond250,252. Very recently, GeV(−) and SnV(−) centers have been 
grown into diamond via microwave plasma CVD process253 as alternative methods for smooth 
introduction of dopants. This has the advantage of high quality diamond crystal but the positioning of the 
individual color centers is not controlled.

We note that the sister defects of SiV(0) were studied by first principles calculations240, where the 

complex nature of the triplet excited states, i.e., a product of the Jahn–Teller effect, was studied in detail.
We note here that the three triplet excited states are strongly coupled by phonons much well beyond the 
Born-Oppenheimer approximation. The three triplet excited states are separated due to the exchange 
interaction between electrons which cannot be accurately described by Kohn-Sham DFT, and multi-
reference electronic structure calculations are required. Nevertheless, deep insight to the nature of the 
exchange interaction makes it feasible to have a fair estimate for the energy splitting between the triplet 
excited states by using Kohn-Sham DFT240. It is predicted that GeV(0), SnV(0), and PbV(0) have ZPL 
transitions at around 1.80 eV, 1.82 eV, and 2.21 eV, respectively240. The corresponding optical centers 
have not yet been reported, although it is likely that they could appear in diamond beside their negatively 
charged counterparts because they do not require high p-type doping, in contrast to the case of SiV(0) 
defects79. It is likely that GeV(0) and SnV(0) centers will be observed in diamond in the near future that 
can be prospective as visible emitter alternative to the NIR emitter SiV(0).

3.4 Other selected single color centers

Two other color centers in diamond were selected and listed in Table I which were observed as quantum 
emitters. The NiN4 defect has NIR emission with inversion symmetry, therefore it is an interesting 
alternative to other color centers in diamond. However, after the early observation of its quantum 
emission115 no progress has be reported so far. Further exploration of this color center may be difficult 
because its controlled formation (clustering of nitrogen atoms around Ni impurity) is a very challenging 
task. The ST1 color center was also picked up because it has a unique property: the optical emission 
occurs between the singlet states whereas the qubit state is a metastable S=1 state117. The defect exhibits 
a high room temperature readout contrast at 45%. The electron spin could be coherently coupled to 
proximate 13C nuclear spins. It was demonstrated that nuclei coupled to single metastable electron spins 
are useful quantum systems with long memory times, in spite of electronic relaxation processes117. This 
qubit has not yet fully exploited as the microscopic origin is yet unknown which makes its controlled 
formation difficult. Ab initio calculations are needed for identification of this solid state defect qubit which 
may boost the quantum memory application of this qubit. Identification of the microscopic structure 
would help to do symmetry analysis on the excited state and metastable state which can principally lead 
to the optimization of the quantum optics protocol.

4. Defect centers in SiC

Inspired by the color centers in diamond, deep color centers have been considered in other host 

crystals78,254. Weber et al. proposed a list of physical criteria that a candidate color center and its host
material should meet61, and silicon carbide (SiC) was identified as a potential candidate because of its 


17

large band gap and low concentration of nuclear spins, which was in line with a previous theoretical study 
that proposed, in particular, a divacancy defect in SiC as an alternative to the NV center in diamond254.
SiC is a wide bandgap semiconductor with extensive applications. High quality 4-inch wafers are available,
and this availability contributes to the success of SiC in industrial applications. Defect centers in SiC have 
emerged as promising candidates for quantum technology applications due to their lower cost, the 
availability of mature microfabrication technologies, and their favorable optical properties. SiC is 
composed of silicon and carbon atoms in a hexagonal lattice arrangement in the plane, which can be 
stacked as quasihexagonal (h) or quasicubic (k) Si-C bilayers in the sequence. Resulting from the stacking 
of these bilayers, over 200 polytypes exist in SiC, including 3C, 4H and 6H phases in Ramsdell notation
with band gaps of 2.4 eV, 3.2 eV, and 3.0 eV, respectively, where C and H refer to cubic and hexagonal 
crystals, respectively, and the number represents the instances of Si-C bilayers in the unit cell. Among 
these polytypes or polymorphs of SiC, 4H-SiC is commonly used as everyday semiconductors for 
electronic devices, which makes this material a unique platform for the integration of classical 
semiconductor technology with quantum technology. In 4H-SiC, h and k bilayers alter each other, creating
two distinct configurations for monovacancy defects and four different configurations for pair-like 
defects such as two adjacent vacancies, called divacancies. This multiplies the complexity of the 
identification of defects in this material but also provides opportunities to produce multiple qubits with 
distinct but similar properties at the same time.

As a compound semiconductor, SiC contains intrinsic defects of carbon vacancies (VC), silicon 

vacancies (VSi), anti-site type defects (SiC and CSi), the carbon antisite-vacancy pair defect (CSi-VC), and 
divacancy (VSi-VC). The identification of the microscopic configuration of point defects is a key step in the 
advance of quantum information materials. First-principles calculation combined with magneto-optical 
spectra were widely employed to study the electronic and spin properties of these defect centers in SiC
(e.g., recent ab initio results about native defects in 4H-SiC in Ref.255 and a previous result in Ref.256). It 
was expected that the optically active native point defects might act as single color centers and qubits in 
well-engineered SiC materials.

Indeed, one of the brightest solid state quantum emitters in the visible region (ZPLs around 600 nm)

was reported in 4H-SiC, and it was identified by ab initio calculations as configurations of the positively 
charged CSi-VC defect, which has an S=1/2 electron spin257. The manipulation of the spin state of these 
emitters has not yet been reported.

Using optical and microwave techniques similar to those used with diamond qubits, Koehl et al.

demonstrated that several point defects in 4H-SiC are optically active and coherently controlled with a 
range of temperature from 20 K to room temperature125. They were mostly identified as divacancy 
configurations256, which they called PL1-4 centers. Neutral divacancies in 4H-SiC have S = 1 ground state 
spin and ZPL of around 1.1 eV with a DW factor of about 0.03. The coherence times of VSi-VC are 1.2 ms 
with ODMR readout contrast of 15% in 4H-SiC and 0.9 ms in 3C-SiC132. Compared to the NV center in 
diamond, the divacancy with correlated states in SiC can provide competitive advantages, such as that 
the emission wavelength in the NIR region would suit biological studies because it can effectively 
penetrate organic tissue, the ODMR and ZPL signals can be resolved at room temperature, and ZFS is at 
lower frequencies (~1.3 GHz) than that of the NV center in diamond, which is also preferential for 
biological systems 258–260. Beside PL1-4 centers, other ODMR centers with similar ZPL and ZFS energies
were also found and called PL5-6 centers. Very recently, these centers have been identified as neutral 
divacancies inside the stacking faults of 4H-SiC260, which shows the principle that stacking faults or short 
polytype inclusions may generate atomic-scale defect qubits distinct from the configurations in the bulk 
counterpart. These defect spins could be fabricated and manipulated at the single defect level132,261.
Recently, the ability to control the specific charge states of divacancy spin defects in 4H-SiC has been 
realized experimentally, providing enhanced spin-dependent readout and long-term charge stability99. 

The divacancy spin levels and coherence times are sensitive to the presence of strain73,262,263, electric 

fields73, magnetic field264, and temperature136 and can potentially be harnessed in sensor applications or 
used to drive the electron spins mechanically265 or electrically259,266. The variety of divacancy qubits and 
the Stark-shift tuning of the optical and spin levels makes possible the production of interference 


18

between different types of divacancy qubits in a controlled fashion when engineered into SiC electronic 
devices267. It was experimentally proven that the spin polarization can be efficiently transferred from the 
electron spin toward nearby nuclear spins in the SiC lattice136, which was understood by combined ab 
initio and effective spin Hamiltonian study268, with prediction of the flipping of nuclear spins by optical 
means and small constant magnetic fields269. 

Silicon-vacancy related ODMR centers were well known in hexagonal SiC polytypes and even in a 

rhombohedral SiC polytype. These centers were labeled as V1 and V2 in 4H-SiC270,271 and as V1, V2, and 
V3 in 6H-SiC272, where the corresponding emission comes at the near infrared region (see Table I) with a 
broad phonon sideband. Very recently, the DW factor was found to be around 6%133,273. The 
corresponding electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) signals showed S=3/2 spin states with a relatively 
small ZFS in the ground state between the sublevels caused by the crystal field of the hexagonal crystal,
which slightly deviates from the quasi-tetrahedral symmetry and results in C3v symmetry272. The origin 
of these ODMR emitters was debated in the literature. Soltamov and co-workers interpreted the observed 
hyperfine signatures for a V2 center so that the V2 center should be a complex of VSi near a second or 
farther neighbor VC along the crystal axis274. Using first-principles calculations and electron spin 
resonance measurements, Ivády et al. have studied the isolated silicon vacancies, the negatively charged 
silicon vacancy, and a proximate neutral carbon vacancy [VSi(−) + VC(0)], as shown in Fig. 6271. The 
calculated DFT energies indicated that the pair vacancy [VSi(−) + VC(0)] is a metastable configuration. 
Furthermore, ZPL energy and hyperfine tensor were calculated via the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE06) 
hybrid exchange-correlation functional275,276, and the zero-field splitting calculations were conducted 
using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional277. These high-precision first-principles 
calculations showed that the pair vacancy [VSi(−) + VC(0)] has a spin-1/2 ground state without any zero-
field splitting. By theoretical simulations and high-resolution EPR measurements, Ivády et al.
demonstrated that the isolated silicon-vacancy [VSi(−)] accounts for the majority of the experimentally 
observed magneto-optical properties. The molecular orbitals of the isolated silicon-vacancy are 
constructed from symmetry-adapted linear combinations of the three equivalent sp3-orbitals from the 
basal-plane carbons and the sp3-orbital belonging to the carbon atom on the crystalline c-axis278; thus, it 
is not a part of a nearby carbon-vacancy, as was proposed by Soltamov et al. The conclusion is that these 
ODMR centers are the configurations of isolated VSi(−) defects, where V1(h) and V2(k) in 4H-SiC and 
V1(h), V2(k2), V3(k1) in 6H-SiC were identified by first principles calculations278–280 which can be 
engineered as single photon emitters281. An individual VSi(−) qubit at room temperature was coherently 
controlled with a coherence time of about 1.5 ms282. The ODMR contrast does not exceed 1% for any 
configuration. VSi(−) qubits could be engineered into SiC electronic devices, where the charge state of 
single defect qubits could be stabilized283 and electroluminescence from ensemble VSi(−) qubits could be 
observed284 with a potential to produce masers285. 


19

Figure 6. Models of silicon-vacancy related qubits in 4H-SiC. (a) Isolated Si-vacancy model and the alignment of V1-
V2 centers to different silicon-vacancy configurations in 4H-SiC; (b) vacancy pair model of V2 center in 4H-SiC. Here, 
the red lines highlight the stacking of the SiC double layers to identify the different configurations of silicon and 
carbon vacancies. The highlighted orange lobes demonstrate the spin density of the defects. It can be seen that, 
based on the calculations shown in [Ivády et al. Phy. Rev. B 96, 161114 (2017)], the isolated vacancy model in (b) 
is assigned to the V1 and V2 centers in 4H-SiC. Reprinted figure with permission from Ivády et al. Phy. Rev. B 96, 
161114 (2017). Copyright 2017 American Physical Society.

Group theory considerations together with first principles calculations have already revealed the 

basic electronic structure of VSi(−) qubits, and the corresponding selection rules in the optical excitation 
of these defects286,287: The four carbon dangling bonds (see Fig. 6a) create an a1 and t2 orbital in a1(2)t2(3)
electronic configuration in the negatively charged state in 3C SiC, where the t2 orbital splits to a1 and e
orbitals in the hexagonal SiC polytypes. The lowest excited state may be described as promoting an 
electron from the lower a1 level to the upper a1 level with forming 4A2 ground and excited states. Soykal 
et al. further elaborated the group theory by revealing the fine spin level structures and states for both 
the optically active spin quartet states and the dark spin doublet states278. First principles calculations 
revealed that a strong Jahn–Teller effect appears in the excited state, causing the appearance of a 
polaronic V1’ level in the PL spectrum and the temperature dependence of the spin dephasing133. In 
addition, the V1 center shows negligible spectral diffusion288 because of the small change in the charge 
density between the quartet lowest energy excited state and the ground state289. The favorable magneto-
optical properties of VSi(−) qubits could be harnessed to realize spin-controlled generation of 
indistinguishable and distinguishable photons from silicon vacancy centers in 4H-SiC290. 

Nitrogen-vacancy pair defects (NCVSi) have recently been observed in N-doped 3C, 4H, and 6H-SiC 

polytype crystals128,291. The negatively charged NCVSi show broad photoluminescence spectra and NIR
emission arising from the transition between the 3E excited and 3A2 ground states, both of which exhibit 
S = 1 spin states292,293. The ODMR measurement of the single nitrogen-vacancy centers in 4H-SiC at room 
temperature has been very recently achieved in N-doped SiC294, which presumably shows similar 
properties to their NV counterpart in diamond. The photoluminescence signals from transition metal 
point defects were also observed in SiC, e.g., chromium, vanadium, niobium, and molybdenum, which 
possess relatively high DW factors. Chromium defects in hexagonal SiC have about 0.73 DW factor and S
= 1 spin ground state, which could be spin polarized upon illumination at the ensemble level130. The 
emission wavelength is at 1.158 eV with long optical decay rates of ~100 μs, where the latter is due to 
the intra-configurational spin-flip transition between the spin singlet excited and spin triplet ground 
states295. The neutral vanadium defects have two configurations in 4H-SiC with optical emission at 0.969 
(α) and 0.929 (β) eV296, and three centers with similar NIR emission were found in 6H-SiC297. Individual 
vanadium centers created by vanadium implantation were observed in 4H- and 6H-SiC, in which the 
observed coherence time was roughly 1 μs at cryogenic temperatures131. The high-quality molybdenum 
doped SiC (ZPL is at 1.106 eV and 1.152 eV in 6H and 4H polytypes, respectively) resulted in a coherence 
time of 0.32 μs for the S = ½ electron spin at cryogenic temperatures, behaving as doublets with highly 
anisotropic Landé g-factor298 largely deviated from the value of the free electron, which implies a 
contribution of the spin–orbit interaction and should result in a relatively large zero-field splitting. In 
these defects, the d orbitals play a crucial role by carrying angular momentum and can interact with the 
external magnetic fields. However, these systems are also Jahn–Teller active, and the electron–phonon
coupling will significantly affect the strength of interaction of the system with external magnetic fields,
explaining the observations on vanadium and molybdenum qubits299.

Overall, SiC has obvious advantages in applications of quantum technology. High quality 4-inch 4H-

SiC wafer is widely exploited in semiconductor industry with well controlled doping technologies, which
is promising to reduce the production cost of the future SiC based quantum devices. Indeed, single 
divacancy256 and Si-vacancy spins300 have been integrated and controlled in SiC diode structures (see Fig. 
7). Furthermore, single SiC spins could be integrated into photonics structures which is a promising route 
towards future quantum optoelectronics devices300. 4H-SiC has a smaller than diamond’s but still 
considerably large band gap at 3.3 eV which can host mostly NIR quantum emitters. NIR emission is 


20

generally favorable for quantum sensors for biology and quantum communication. On the other hand, 
the relatively low small energy spacing between the defect levels and about twice smaller Debye 
temperature of 4H-SiC (about 1000K)301 than diamond’s make the defect qubits’ key magneto-optical 
properties sensitive to temperature. For instance, the ODMR readout contrast of single divacancy spins 
upon off-resonant excitation is well above 10% close to cryogenic temperatures but significantly reduces 
at room temperature. We refrain here that the room temperature ODMR readout contrast of Si-vacancy 
V2 center is around 1%. Compared to the ~30% room temperature ODMR readout contrast of diamond 
NV center, the low ODMR contrast of 4H-SiC spins is disappointing as the high readout contrast is an
important factor in the overall sensitivity and temporal resolution of quantum sensors. Very recently, a 
breakthrough has been achieved in 4H-SiC302, where ~20% off-resonant room temperature ODMR 
readout contrast is demonstrated for single PL6 spins. Theory implies that the ODMR readout contrast 
starts to decline at about 150 K for divacancy defect qubits in 4H-SiC302, in contrast to diamond NV 
center’s data at around 600 K303 because of the smaller energy spacing between the defect levels in 4H-
SiC with respect to those of NV diamond302. Nevertheless, PL6 divacancy qubit’s room temperature ODMR 
contrast still persists at relatively high value. This opens the door for SiC quantum technology in the field 
of room temperature quantum NMR measurements and other biology applications. The tight control of 
the surface and interface of SiC and silicon dioxide (SiO2) is far from being solved (e.g., Ref.304) which will 
be the next important task in the development of sensitive quantum sensors from SiC.

Figure 7. As discussed here, SiC offers certain advantages in applications in quantum technology. High quality 4-
inch 4H-SiC wafer is exploited widely in semiconductor industry with well controlled doping technologies, which 
can reduce the production cost of future SiC-based quantum devices. Single divacancy and Si-vacancy spins have 
been integrated and controlled in SiC diode structures. (a) Si-vacancy and divacancy structures in 4H-SiC. (b) Defect 
qubits integrated into SiC diodes. (c) Defect qubits integrated into SiC photonics structures. 

5. Defect centers hosted in 2D materials

Two-dimensional (2D) materials have been attracting extensive research interest in the last few 

decades. Recently, room-temperature quantum emitters have been reported in two-dimensional (2D) 
wide bandgap materials75,305–308, creating great interest on quantum emitters and potential quantum bits 
in 2D materials. The big advantage of 2D materials is that the creation of the defects can be well controlled 
with the present experimental techniques with the almost deterministic localization of the defects that is 
needed for scaling-up quantum bits for quantum computers. In addition, strain and electric fields can be 
engineered on these 2D materials, and optical cavities can be formed around them309. Another 
playground for 2D materials is the stacking of different 2D materials on top of each other, and one might 


21

imagine sandwiching an atom or molecule between these 2D layers as qubits. Beside quantum computing 
and quantum communication purposes, it is noted that 2D materials are surfaces per se, so they can be 
good hosts for quantum sensing. The single-layer MoS2 layers, delta-doped diamond slabs, and Si thin 
slabs were predicted as promising hosts for spin qubits310. Isotopic purification is much more effective in 
2D materials that leading to an exceptionally long spin coherence time of the order of 30 ms. Apparently, 
there is great potential for using 2D materials for quantum technology. However, the first quantum 
emitters found in hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) have not been unambiguously identified, and the origin 
of these emitters is still under intense research307,75,311,173,312–314,176,148,315,316. For instance, some quantum 
emitters have been tentatively assigned to specific native point defects in h-BN176. If these quantum 
emitters are identified and then engineered into a nanocavity (e.g., for WSe2 in Ref.317), then room-
temperature photon blockades, which are an ultimate demonstration of nonlinearity at a single photon 
level, might be realized for the first time at room temperature.

5.1 Hexagonal boron nitride

Hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) is one representative 2D material. It is a wide-bandgap (∼6 eV) 2D 

material with the potential to host color centers that are promising candidates for quantum technology. 
Many emitters in h-BN are bright with narrow linewidths, are tunable, and have high stability75,306,318,319.
In 2016, room-temperature, polarized and ultrabright single-photon emission from color centers in 2D 
h-BN was first experimentally demonstrated75. These advantages have sparked strong research interest 
in h-BN defects75,173,306,312,313,318–324.

Figure 8. Atomic defects in in h-BN. (a) High resolution transmission electron microscope image showing lattice 
defects in h-BN such as single vacancies and larger vacancies respectively. These can be seen as triangle shapes with 
the same orientation. The scalebar in this figure is 1 nm. Figure has been reprinted with permission from Jin et al.
Phy. Rev. Lett. 102, 195505 (2009)325. Copyright 2009 American Physical Society. (b) Typical visible and ultraviolet 
PL spectra from quantum emitters. The photon correlation spectrum (g2) reveals the quantum nature of the 
emitters. (c) Geometry of various possible defects in h-BN responsible for the quantum emitters, including V𝐵, V𝑁, 
O𝑁, C𝐵, C𝑁, V𝑁N𝐵, V𝑁O𝐵, V𝑁C𝐵, C𝑁V𝐵, V𝐵3H, V𝐵2O, and C𝑁C𝐵 defects.

In h-BN, a narrow emission band has been observed experimentally with a ZPL transition at a range 

of 1.6 eV to 2.2 eV75,306, but h-BN has also shown luminescence with a ZPL at 4.1 eV174 and 5.3 eV177. Tran 


22

et al.75 experimentally demonstrated room-temperature and ultrabright emission from h-BN with ZPL 
energy at 1.95 eV. A plasma-treatment of h-BN removes this emitter and produces another emitter with 
ZPL emission at ~1.7 eV that was associated with the presence of oxygen in the quantum emitters 314. 
Observations suggest that some emitters may absorb at and emit from distinct electronic states319. The 
origin of these emitters is still unclear. A broad spectral distribution, spanning ~1 eV of the group of 2-
eV ZPL emitters also observed in h-BN, implies that a number of distinct defect structures may exist, and 
they are tentatively attributed to the structural composition variations307, the defect charge states 
uncertainty326, as well as the local strain and dielectric environment variations308. The broad window of 
ZPLs that are generated by numerous color centers makes the identification of these quantum emitters 
very challenging. Indeed, it has been shown that Stark-shift on the order of 10 nm can be observed upon 
1 GV/m electric field on the ZPL energy of single emitters in h-BN327, which demonstrates the strong 
coupling of these emitters to external fields.

Inspired by the similar phenomenon in NV centers in diamond, it is naturally suggested that the 

origin of these quantum emitters is the combination of substitutional and vacancy defects. h-BN has a 
wide variety of possible intrinsic defects, antisite defects, and unintentional impurities (such as H, O, C, 
and Si) in its lattice structure. Several DFT computational works have attributed these emissions to 
charge neutral native and substitutional defects with deep bandgap states173,312,313,176,322. The plausible
defect structures proposed by theoretical studies and experimental observations are shown in Fig. 8,
including boron vacancy V𝐵140,325, nitrogen vacancy V𝑁325, carbon substitutional C𝐵 and C𝑁328,329, oxygen 
substituting for nitrogen O𝑁328, silicon substituting for boron Si𝐵330; a vacancy next to a substitutional 
atom, e.g., nitrogen V𝑁N𝐵75,313, oxygen V𝑁O𝐵327, carbon V𝑁C𝐵313,331 and C𝑁V𝐵322; boron vacancy passivated 
by oxygen V𝐵2O314 and hydrogen V𝐵3H176,311; and a double substitutional carbon defect C𝑁C𝐵332.

The intrinsic defects V𝐵 and V𝑁 in a freestanding h-BN have been observed in a TEM experiment 325.

The defect V𝑁 possesses D3h symmetry, which has two defect orbitals in the bandgap that enable optical 
excitation below the band gap energy. The negatively charged V𝑁 shows a closed-shell singlet ground 
state, which is excluded as the source of the observed EPR signal322. Room-temperature EPR and ODMR 
observations demonstrated a triplet ground state in electron irradiated and annealed h-BN crystal and 
exfoliated flakes140, which was identified as the negatively charged V𝐵 313,179. Substitutional impurity
defects such as O𝑁, C𝑁, C𝐵, and C𝑁C𝐵 carbon pairs were directly observed by annular dark-field imaging 
in a STEM328; that study demonstrated that substitutional carbon atoms may occur mostly in pair-form. 
The 4.1 and 5.3 eV ZPLs were plausibly attributed to the deep donor C𝐵 and deep acceptor C𝑁329, which
has not yet been confirmed either from experiment or theory, though these defects have indeed low 
formation energies in h-BN176. Recent experiments have recorded ODMR signals on single or a few defects 
at room temperature for color centers in h-BN 140,333 that were tentatively assigned to C𝑁 defects based 
on the detected hyperfine signatures compared to the calculated ones322. On the other hand, the 
calculated ZPL energy of C𝑁 defects do not agree with the observed ones176, thus further investigations 
are needed to identify the origin of the close-to-single ODMR centers. McDougall et al.311 combined a X-
ray Absorption Near-Edge Structures (XANES) experiment and DFT calculation on the shift of the core 
levels of the host atoms to investigate the nature of point defects in h-BN. They were able to identify the 
presence of O𝑁 and V𝐵3H defects, where the latter was a boron vacancy with three hydrogen atoms 
saturating the dangling bonds. As the h-BN samples exhibited 4.1 eV emission, this was tentatively 
assigned to the V𝐵3H defect based on DFT calculations that underestimated the band gap by about 1.5 eV.
Recent theoretical investigations indicated that, based on the calculated ZPL energy, the lifetime of the 
excited state and DW factor334 of carbon pair defect gives rise to a relatively narrow luminescence band,
which can be associated with the 4.1-eV emitter. Mark et al.335 found by first principles calculations that 
the internal transition from the boron dangling bonds to a boron pz state has a ZPL at 2.06 eV and emission 
with a Huang–Rhys factor of 2.3, which was suggested for the origin of the group of 2-eV quantum 
emitters in h-BN. In this model, the boron dangling bond was accompanied by hydrogen atoms saturating 
the other dangling bonds of the vacancies335, but the presence of hydrogen has not yet been proven in 
experiments. In addition, the calculated ionization threshold of the negatively charged dangling bond was 
smaller in energy than the calculated ZPL energy at 2.06 eV335, which makes this proposition tentative at 
the moment.


23

Advanced first-principles calculations in combination with group theory analyses would be a 

powerful approach to analyze the defects’ magneto-optical properties, as shown in Ref.313. Abdi et al.
predicted that VB(−) can exist and produce an S = 1 ground state313, and this phenomenon was later 
observed by ODMR140. On the other hand, prediction of the excited states from DFT calculations has 
limitations for the highly correlated orbitals or multireference states that typically appear in vacancy-
type defects. As an example, Cheng et al. predicted that a V𝑁C𝐵 defect has an S = 1 ground state in the 
neutral charge state, which is stable in a relatively wide range of Fermi levels312. The estimated ZPL 
energy between the triplet states is about 1.6 eV where emitters with such ZPL energy are often observed 
in h-BN samples. In contrast to this result, Sajid and co-authors found that the ground state of V𝑁C𝐵 is 1A1
singlet with C2v symmetry. They predicted 2.08 eV ZPL energy for the emission, where the phonon 
sideband should be broad173. This may explain the observed 1.95 eV emitters in h-BN75. If the intersystem 
crossing is very fast from the singlet excited state towards the triplet state, then the predicted ZPL energy 
is about 1.58 eV between the triplets322, which basically agrees with the previous DFT result in Ref.312.

A multireference character of the closed-shell and open-shell ground states of the defect-induced 

strong electron correlation effect would be another challenge in computational methods to accurately 
describe the energy levels of point defects336. As an example of V𝑁C𝐵 defects in h-BN, hybrid functionals 
such as HSE06 work very well for excitations within the triplet manifold of the defects; however, they 
underestimate significantly the triplet-state energies by about 1 eV. The estimation of the inaccuracy was 
based on an h-BN flake cluster model of a few tens of atoms terminated by hydrogen atoms by comparing 
the DFT results with Hartree–Fock based multireference methods. The estimated DFT error might be 
overestimated in Ref.336 because of the limitations of the small models. Recently, a multireference method 
was applied on a supercell model of about 200 atoms for the calculation of the V𝐵(−) states in h-BN based 
on a density matrix renormalization group algorithm, and the error in HSE06 DFT was not so severe179.

It is worth noting that phonons play a critical role in determining the magneto-optical properties of 

the quantum emitters in h-BN. Strong electron–phonon interaction activates the emission of V𝑁N𝐵
defects337, which also causes a strong coupling of strain to the ZPL emission. In this particular case, the 
out-of-plane or membrane phonon modes are coupled strongly to the defect, which moves the atoms out 
of the plane. Experiments combined with first principles calculations imply that this motion of ions can 
explain the polarization of the emitted photons from such emitters327. The strong electron–phonon
coupling, manifested as the Jahn–Teller effect in the excited state, is responsible for the weakly allowed 
optical transition in VB(−) states in h-BN, and membrane phonons may play a crucial role in the 
intersystem crossing responsible for the ODMR contrast179.

5.2 Transition metal dichalcogenides

The family of two-dimensional materials, including graphene, h-BN, transition metal dichalcogenides 

(TMDs) (e.g., MoS2, WS2, etc.), and phosphorene, have attracted much attention due to their extraordinary 
physical, chemical and mechanical properties, as well as their promising applications in nano electronics, 
thermoelectric devices, wearable electronics, flexible displays and smart health diagnostics338–347. In 
addition to h-BN, TMDs have semiconducting characteristics, with direct bandgaps in their monolayer 
structures. For a MoS2 monolayer, there exist several types of intrinsic defects348,349. The defect based 
single-photon sources were realized in WSe2350–358. The potential advantage of a 2D single-photon source 
is obvious, for it offers the possibility of integrating single-photon sources with van der Waals 
heterostructures. Most observed optical emission from WSe2 in the band between 1.63 eV and 1.72 eV, 
with narrow linewidths of 120–130 μeV, and strong photon anti-bunching was reported, unambiguously 
establishing the single-photon nature350–353. This feature is attributed to spatially localized exciton states 
and the electron–hole interaction in the presence of anisotropy. The photon emission properties can be 
controlled via the application of external electric and magnetic fields. The decay time of these emissions 
is around 10 ns, which is ten-fold longer than that of the broad localized excitons. This reveals that the 
exciton bound to deep-level defects is the underlying mechanism for the observed single photon 
emissions356. In 2017, large-scale deterministic creation of quantum emitters was demonstrated 
experimentally357,358. Although research on defect centers in TMDs is currently intensifying, this is a new 
field that addresses many open questions, such the major defects dominating the single-photon emission, 


24

their atomic configurations and electronic structures, which still need to be determined. Manipulating 
desired point defects at a predetermined set of locations lies at the heart of 2D quantum sensing 
engineering, and it can be technically realized359.

6. Other materials as hosts 

6.1. Other wide bandgap materials

Similar to the aforementioned host materials, other wide bandgap materials also host optically active 
defects that can principally emit single photons. Compared with NV center in diamond, the research of 
color centers in these wide band gap materials is still in its infancy. Preliminary results show a great 
advance in these materials, however, further efforts are still required to obtain a comprehensive 
understanding, such as the correlation between defect orbitals with the pristine orbitals of host material, 
the effects of strain and phonon coupling on electron coherence. For the completeness of this review 
article, here we briefly introduce the basic properties, performance and open questions of these wide 
bandgap semiconductors for application in quantum information technology. 

6.1.1. Zinc oxide

Point defects in ZnO were explored for potential application as single-photon sources149,360,361. 

Numerous theoretical and experimental studies have investigated the electrical and optical properties of 
ZnO with a band gap of around 3.4 eV, and the role of defects, including oxygen vacancies (VO), zinc 
vacancies (VZn), the zinc interstitials (Zni), and the oxygen interstitials (Oi)362. Using hybrid density 
functional calculations, the native vacancies, interstitials, and dangling bonds in ZnO have been 
investigated363. The oxygen vacancy (VO) was found to be a neutral defect, and the highest-energy 
photoluminescence peak associated with VO is at 0.62 eV. Under realistic growth conditions, the zinc 
vacancy (VZn) is the lowest-energy native defect in n-type ZnO, acting as an acceptor. VZn gives rise to 
multiple transition levels and emission between 1 and 2 eV. Compared with isolated VZn, hydrogen atoms 
form highly stable complexes with VZn, shifting the acceptor levels closer to the valence band edge. 
Hydrogenated VZn has optical transitions similar to those of isolated VZn, both in good agreement with 
recent experimental results, supporting them as the source of photon emission. It is suggested that Zn
dangling bonds-related emission may be an intrinsic source of green luminescence in ZnO. The first 
report on the room temperature quantum emitters with broad phonon sideband (see Table I) was 
associated with the different charge states of the Zn-vacancy149. Room temperature single photon 
emission was also found in ZnO nanoparticles364,365. The application of ZnO in quantum technology would 
benefit from detailed knowledge of its optical properties that should be further explored. We note that 
the exchange interaction between the bands of Zn d orbitals and O p orbitals makes the accurate DFT 
calculation of pristine ZnO and defective ZnO complicated with respect to the case of other semiconductor 
materials. Hybrid DFT functionals resulted in a great advance as listed above, however, further efforts 
are required to study the localized and correlated orbitals of the vacancies and related defects. 

6.1.2. Zinc sulfide

A room temperature quantum emitter was also observed in cubic ZnS particles of ~100 nm in 

diameter366. The zinc blende ZnS exhibits a room temperature band gap of ~3.6 eV which is somewhat 
larger than that of ZnO. The fluorescence intensity of the quantum emitter emerges at 600 nm, it has a 
maximum at around 640 nm, and it decays to zero at around 750 nm upon 532-nm excitation. The ZPL 
peak is not visible at room temperature. The observed lifetime is at ~2.2 ns. Since the emitter was 
observed without any treatment it was tentatively associated with an intrinsic defect, the Zn-vacancy. Ab 
initio predicts for ZPL energy of about 2.4 eV (516 nm) for Zn-vacancy367, which is a bit far from the 
observed shortest wavelength of the emission. Further efforts are needed for identification of this single 
photon emitter. High quality ZnS material with large band gap has a good potential in hosting visible 
quantum emitters. 

6.1.3. Titanium oxide


25

Recently, defects in TiO2 thin films and nanopowders exhibited single-photon emission have been 

found368. The excited-state and non-radiative lifetimes were found to be within the range of several 
nanoseconds and tens of nanoseconds, respectively. The fluorescence occurred in the red emission band. 
The three types of room temperature quantum emitters show relatively broad luminescence with some 
peaks between 600 and 700 nm. Low temperature measurements for optical characterization and ab 
initio calculations may reveal the origin of these single photon emitters in this prospective material with 
a band gap at ~3.0 eV.

6.1.4. Gallium nitride 

Room temperature quantum emitters in gallium nitride (GaN) were reported to exhibit narrowband 

luminescence172. In semiconductor quantum dots, because of the high densities of defects and charge 
traps, the rapid charging/de-charging can result in an obvious broadening of the emission linewidth. To 
overcome this issue, interface fluctuation GaN quantum dots have been developed369. In the interface-
fluctuation quantum dots, because the formation of charge localization centers is located at positions of 
thickness fluctuation in quantum wells, they emit in the near ultraviolet at wavelength of ~350 nm and 
exhibit narrow linewidths as compared to typical QDs369–371. Recently, near-infrared emitters in GaN have 
been found; they exhibit both excellent photon purity and a record-high brightness exceeding 106
counts/sec155. The origin of the emitter remains unknown. The substitutional chromium (Cr4+) impurity
is a qubit candidate in GaN that possesses small phonon sidebands, so most of the fluorescence can be 
harnessed for quantum communication130.

6.1.5. Cubic BN and hexagonal BN nanotube 

In addition to h-BN 2D crystals, the zinc-blende allotropic form of boron nitride, so-called cubic 

boron nitride (c-BN), has shown important application as a wide-band-gap semiconductor. Recently, 
Tararan et al.148 provided a literature survey and systematically investigated the optical properties of c-
BN, including the optical gap and the luminescence of intragap defects. Using EELS, a large optical gap 
exceeding 10 eV was reported. A number of defect luminescence centers were demonstrated in the visible 
and UV spectral range. In the UV spectral range, possible single-photon emission was observed148, which 
may motivate further investigation on this material. 

Another possible form of BN is the hexagonal boron nitride nanotubes (h-BNNT). Unlike carbon 

nanotubes, the polarized B-N bonds create a large band gap of ~6 eV independent from the chirality of 
the nanotube. The first room temperature quantum emitters were reported in about 5-nm-diameter h-
BNNT138. Recently, two similar room temperature quantum emitters have been observed in 50-nm 
diameter h-BNNT139. The peaks for the two emitters are found at 571 nm and 569 nm, respectively, 
presumably attributed to ZPL of the defects. Both emitters have broad features and asymmetric line 
shapes in the spectra. Similar quantum emitters in the visible wavelength region were reported in 2D h-
BN75. For comparison, they also conducted experiments on BNNT samples with an average diameter of 
about 5 nm under the same condition, on different substrates139. It is much more difficult to find a 
quantum emitter and the emissions are very unstable under the 532 nm illumination. Most of them bleach 
within 10 seconds. This is consistent with former results138 and is likely due to a much larger curvature 
in 5-nm-diameter BNNTs.

6.1.6. Wurtzite aluminum nitride 

The wurtzite phase of aluminum nitride (w-AlN) has C6v symmetry. It is a wide band gap (6.03−6.12 

eV) semiconductor that has many applications372. The very large band gap can suppresses coupling 
between band gap levels and bulk states. Moreover, small spin-orbit splitting of 19 meV was reported373, 
which can enhance qubit-state lifetime. These two unique advantages make AlN an attractive host 
material for scalable solid-state qubits analogous to diamond and SiC. Furthermore, growth of high-
quality crystal w-AlN has been reported374. The spin states of neutral nitrogen vacancy in AlN has been 
experimentally detected using electron paramagnetic resonance375.


26

AlN has large band gap, this meets the criteria for a host material for addressable single photon 

emitter. However, in AlN, the defect levels induced by anion vacancy are too close to the band edge, 
results in strong resonance with the bulk band edges. This hinders the application of AlN in scalable
quantum technologies. To overcome this issue, Varley et al. proposed that alloying AlN with transition-
metal dopants can push the defect levels deeper into the band gap376. For example, Ti and Zr atoms 
substitute on the Al site can lead to the formation of desired electronic and spin states. 

Seo et al. proposed an alternative by applying strain377.  It was found that in the stress-free negatively 

charged nitrogen vacancy (𝑉𝑁

−), the  S = 1 state is slightly higher in energy than the S = 0 state, reveals 

that the two spin states are approximately degenerate in energy. On the other side, these two spin states 
are associated with two distinct Jahn-Teller distortions configurations. This suggests that these two spin 
states can be separated in energy by applying strain. Their DFT calculation results demonstrate this 
expectation, i.e., even at a small compressive strain of −3% along the [1120] direction,  the S = 1 state is 
significantly lower by about 250 meV than the S = 0 state. In addition to the difference between energy of 
these two spin states, the hyperfine tensors are also sensitive to loading strain.

Very recently, Xue et al. have observed numerous room temperature single photon emitters in w-

AlN films378. At low temperatures, the PL spectra exhibit relatively narrow and strong ZPL peaks with 
positions varying from the visible (543 nm) till the NIR (~980 nm) region. The full PL spectra thus the 
corresponding Debye-Waller factors have not reported. They also applied DFT calculations with such 
functionals that do not well reproduce the band gap or not well tested, and only the vertical excitation
energies were determined378.
Based on these calculations they concluded that some NIR quantum 

emitters in the AlN film originate from the antisite nitrogen vacancy complexes (NAlVN) and divacancy 
complexes (VAlVN). Further characterization is required at both the theoretical and experimental fronts 
in this highly prospective host material.

6.1.7. Rare-earth ions in garnets, silicate and vanadate

Rare-earth ions (REI) embedded into solid state matrix are prospective building blocks for quantum 

memory and quantum communication applications379. In particular, it has been demonstrated for an 
ensemble of europium doped into Y2SiO5 or YSO that the quantum information can be stored for six 
hours380. In REI systems, the 4f electrons split in the low symmetry crystal field, and the optical transition 
basically originates from these split atomic states. The atomic-like states have the advantage of producing 
narrow optical emission lines, and the large ion has relatively large hyperfine fine structure in the ground 
state with the long coherence time. However, the disadvantage is the long optical lifetimes because of the 
optical transition dipole between the atomic states is often forbidden in the first order. This limitation 
has been partly circumvented in the case of Pr3+ doped Y3Al5O12 or YAG by using a upconversion process 
that has the mutual benefits of accessing a short-lived excited state and providing background-free 
optical images160, which was the first demonstration of REI quantum emission at He flow temperatures.
Quantum emission of Pr3+ doped LaF3 at 1.5 K was also demonstrated in a following study164. Later, spin-
to-photon interface and single spin readout were observed in Ce3+ doped YAG161,381, where the optical 
transition occurs between the 5d excited state and 4f ground state. 4f states the spin is highly mixed with 
the orbital momentum. This enables spin-flip optical transitions between the 4f and the 5d levels with an 
optical lifetime of ~60 ns. Under dynamic decoupling, spin coherence lifetime reaches T2 = 2 ms and is 
almost limited by the measured spin-lattice relaxation time T1 = 4.5 ms. Another possibility to circumvent 
the intrinsically low emission of REI is to engineer them near high-quality optical resonator which can 
significantly increase the rate of spontaneous emission selectively at the resonator mode by harnessing 
the Purcell-effect. This has been recently achieved in Er3+ doped YSO382 and ytterbium doped YVO4 or 
YVO383 that made possible to detect single photon emission from these ions. Furthermore, by careful 
choice of the direction of an external constant magnetic field, the enhancement of the emission has been 
tuned towards the spin-conserving excitation only with well-distinguishable optical transitions for the 
different spin states382,383. If the laser and the cavity mode were tuned only one of the spin-conserving 
excitation energies then emission is expected only for the resonant bright spin state and no emission is 
expected for the off-resonant dark spin state. During the optical cycles a spontaneous decay from the 
bright spin state to the dark state can occur with some low probability that remains dark. Thus, the 


27

observation of the emission is correlated to the spin state of the REI in its ground state. Beside the optical 
readout of the REI spin state, spin dephasing and the spin dephasing limits in YVO have been observed383.

Theory here faces with several challenges: highly correlated atomic like orbitals, large spin-orbit 

interaction and possibly non-negligible electron-phonon interaction for the case of quasi degenerate 
orbitals. One obvious choice is to apply post Hartree-Fock based methods where the correlation energy 
between the orbitals can be systematically taken into account by raising the complexity of the approach 
including relativistic effects (c.f. a review in Ref.384). The crystals are modeled by finite small clusters (10s 
of atoms like ultrasmall quantum dots) in the post Hartree-Fock based methods. To our knowledge, no 
systematic theoretical study has been conducted how the size of the clusters would affect the results. 
Alternatively, Kohn-Sham DFT theory may be used but it may fail due to the complex correlation effects 
of the atomic like orbitals. Recently, a computationally tractable solution has been developed that 
combines the HSE hybrid density functional theory with orbital dependent exchange interaction that was 
demonstrated for cerium dioxide385. Another solution can be to embed CI methods into DFT203 or to very 
efficiently calculate the CI method in medium size clusters with periodic boundary conditions by means 
of density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) algorithms179.

6.1.8. Lithium fluoride

Using time-dependent density functional theory embedded-cluster simulations, the electronic and 

optical properties of two adjacent singlet-coupled F color centers (anion-vacancy) in lithium fluoride (LiF)
were investigated386, where LiF has extremely large band gap over 10 eV. It was found that to accurately 
simulate the entangled-defect system, it is necessary to consider the dynamical correlations between the 
defect electrons and the adjacent ionic lattice. To our knowledge, no single photon emitter has been 
observed so far in this insulator.

6.2. Potential moderate/small bandgap semiconductors

Diamond is already proven to be a promising host material for quantum information technology that 
builds up from carbon atoms. The graphite, including the single sheet of graphite, i.e., graphene, is a zero-
gap semiconductor, therefore it cannot host color centers. However, some forms of carbon nanotubes 
with relatively small diameter can introduce small band gap which opens the door for{Citation} hosting 
NIR emitters. By considering small band gap materials for hosting qubits, silicon crystal is an obvious 
choice which is an elementary semiconductor. Silicon is the most used semiconductor for integrated 
circuits which has a band gap at 1.17 eV at cryogenic temperatures. Beside using dopant atoms for 
realizing qubits, i.e. Kane quantum computer (see below), NIR color centers have been introduced for 
quantum optics studies (see Table I). Considering its ideal interface compatibility with conventional Si-
based technology, the application of silicon in quantum information technology has attracted a great 
attention in recent years. In this sub-section, we discuss the characteristic, performance and perspective 
of these two promising materials for quantum information technology. 

6.2.1. Carbon nanotube 

The development of a solid state photon source based on carbon-related nano materials has received 

a lot of attention387,388. The photoluminescence of semiconducting single-wall carbon nanotubes was first 
observed in 2002389. The bandgap of carbon nanotubes can vary from zero to 2 eV, depending 
significantly on the tube chirality. The advantages of carbon nanotubes include the straightforward 
tuning of the emission wavelength, between 850 nm and 2 μm, by changing the chiral species. 
Unfortunately, in principle, single-photon emission requires a quantum mechanical quasi-two-level 
system, yet the one-dimensional (1D) band structure of carbon nanotubes conflicts with this major 
requirement.

One scheme towards a single photon source is the strong exciton–exciton interaction in 1D 

systems390. Via this strong exciton–exciton interaction, the multiple excitons created in a carbon 


28

nanotube can be annihilated until only a single exciton remains to emit a single photon, namely, the 
exciton–exciton annihilation effect. As it does not rely on exciton localization, room temperature single 
photon generation is possible. In 2015, room-temperature partial single-photon emission with purity of 
about 50% was observed391.

Another strategy for obtaining reliable single-photon emission from carbon nanotubes relies on 

exciton localization. Deep potential trapping (much greater than kBT) is required for localization at room 
temperature. However, because the trapping potential in a pristine carbon nanotube is very shallow,
single photon emission in a pristine carbon nanotube is limited to cryogenic temperatures. Chemical 
functionalization of carbon nanotubes provides one way to strengthen the exciton localization and 
generate localized excitons with well depths of 100 meV or greater, which are higher than kBT at room 
temperature392–395. The physical mechanism is the strong exciton trapping at the sp3 defect 
centers393,396,397. The zero-dimensional nature of trapped excitons also brings novel physical 
phenomenon, such as the interaction of 1D excitons with the 1D phonon modes in carbon nanotubes396,397.
Furthermore, exciton localization can lead to significantly longer decay times, and with diameter 
decreases of (7, 5) to (5, 4) of the nanotubes, the decay time increases from 75 ps to 600 ps, demonstrating 
strong chirality dependence398.

6.2.2. Silicon – Kane quantum computer 

A completely different approach towards building quantum computers was proposed by Bruce Kane 

in 1998399, which is based on the combination of classical semiconductor technology and electron-nuclear 
magnetic resonance techniques.  As the most successful material applied in semiconductor device
technology, silicon (Si) has an indirect bandgap of about 1.17 eV at cryogenic temperatures that reduces 
to about 1.12 eV at room temperature. The isotopically pure 28Si has a nuclear spin of 0 that can be a 
perfect host for defect qubit spins. When the silicon substrate is doped with isotopically pure 31P
(phosphorus), with providing a donor electron with an electron spin and also nuclear spin of ½, the 
nuclear spin of the phosphorous donors can realize the function to encode qubits with extremely long 
coherence times and low error rates, because the donors are extremely separated from environment. 
This design combining the advantage of tunable quantum well for localizing the donor electron using gate 
electrodes – called quantum dots400 – and nuclear magnetic resonance has the advantage of scalability399. 
In this system, also named the Kane quantum computer, the nuclear spins of the phosphorous donors 
perform single-qubit operations. Two nuclear spins can interact mediated by the extended electron wave 
packet. As the electron wave packet is sensitive to external electric field, the nuclear spin interaction can 
be controlled by gate voltage, which is essential for realizing the operation of quantum computation. With 
an array of such donors embedded beneath the surface of a pure silicon wafer, a silicon-based nuclear 
spin quantum computer was expected. Indeed, using electron-nuclear double resonance technique the 
electron spin could be successfully encoded into the nuclear spin of 31P with an overall store-readout 
fidelity of 90 per cent. The coherence lifetime of the quantum memory element at 5.5 K exceeded 1 s in 

28Si enriched Si401.

The idea of Kane quantum computer faces at least two challenges: i) efficient readout of single qubits; 

ii) precise alignment of the donor atoms in Si. By engineering the P donors between two electrodes, i.e. 
field-effect transistor (FET) configuration, the electrical detection of single P donor electron spins was 
demonstrated via spin-selective recombination between a deep paramagnetic defect acting as a trap for 
the P donor electron at the silicon and SiO2 interface. This result was published402 after 6 years of Kane’s 
publication399. The mechanism can be described as a spin-to-charge conversion where the high purity of 
Si material makes possible to detect single electrons in the FET device. With using pulsed electrical 
detected magnetic resonance, the Rabi nutation of single P donor electrons (the coherent state) was 
observed in the Si FET device with using the same mechanism403. The disadvantage of this method is that 
the spin-to-charge conversion probability between the states of the deep defect (presumably a Si 
dangling bond at the Si/SiO2 interface) and the P donor heavily depends on their locations, and it is 
extremely complicated to control the formation and location of the deep defect. A breakthrough in the 
single-shot readout of P donors was achieved in a single electron transistor (SET) architecture with using 
1.5 Tesla magnetic field for efficient Zeeman splitting at 40 mK temperature, in order to achieve a spin-


29

selective tunneling of the P donor electron from the SET region towards the electrodes404,405. Morello at 
al. observed a spin lifetime of 6 seconds at a magnetic field of 1.5 tesla, and achieved a spin readout fidelity 
better than 90 per cent405. Although, this method operates at ultralow temperatures compared to the 
spin-to-charge readout mechanism but here only the location of the P donor should be precisely 
controlled. Later, a top-gated nanostructure, fabricated on an isotopically engineered 28Si substrate, was 
used to increase the electron spin readout contrast to about 97 per cent and 31P nuclear spin readout 
contrast to 99.995 per cent406. Although, the control fidelity approached 99.99 per cent406, the coherence 
time of the 31P nuclear spin can be much extended by removing the donor electron spin by illumination, 
i.e., charging the donor. It was demonstrated that the coherence time of the 31P nuclear spin is 39 minutes 
at room temperature and 3 hours at cryogenic temperatures407. We note that the control and readout of 
the qubit still occurs at low temperatures. These favorable qubit properties make feasible to study the 
scalability of the qubits and their interaction408. To this end, the tight control on the formation and 
placement of the donors is required.

A breakthrough in the precise alignment of P donors was achieved by a combination of scanning 

tunneling microscopy (STM) and hydrogen-resist lithography409. Simmons group demonstrated a single-
atom transistor in which an individual phosphorus dopant atom was deterministically placed with a 
spatial accuracy of one lattice site in SET. The SET operated at liquid helium temperatures, and millikelvin
electron transport measurements confirmed the presence of discrete quantum levels in the energy 
spectrum of the P atom409. Furthermore, the coherent control of single P donor qubit was 
demonstrated410. This technology has been recently applied to fabricate the two-qubit exchange gate 
between phosphorus donor electron spin qubits in silicon using independent single-shot spin readout 
with a readout fidelity of about 94 per cent which operates very fast (about 800 picosecond) 411. In the 
two-qubit exchange mechanism the precise alignment of the two P donors was inevitable. This is a crucial 
step with respect to the previous breakthroughs achieved in the demonstration of various two-qubit 
gates in Si411–415. 

In addition to phosphorous dopant, arsenic in silicon is another attractive platform for quantum 

computing, since arsenic dopants have many advantages over phosphorus, include a higher solid 
solubility in bulk silicon and a lower diffusivity than phosphorus. Moreover, atomic spin−orbit interaction 
strength of arsenic is twice of that of phosphorus, and triple times of nuclear spin value416. The high 
nuclear spin value present opportunities for simplifications in physical implementations of quantum gate 
structures. Very recently, using a scanning tunneling microscope tip, Stock et al. reported the successful 
fabrication of atomic-precision of arsenic in silicon417. Obviously, further studies on the quantum 
properties of the arsenic in silicon are desired. Arsenic has an advantage of the relatively large 
quadrupole of the nuclear spins that can be harnessed to control the nuclear spin states of the ionized 
arsenic donors via strain418. Obviously, further studies on the qubit properties of the arsenic in silicon are 
desired. A very interesting donor alternative in Si is bismuth (Bi). Although, Bi has much lower solubility 
than P in Si but 209Bi offers a 20-dimensional Hilbert space rather than a 4-dimensional Hilbert space of 

31P which has a great potential in quantum operations. It was experimentally demonstrated that Bi donor 
has similar coherence times like P donor’s, and the nuclear spins can be coherently manipulated419. 
Notably, group-III shallow acceptors in silicon, e.g., boron, which have strong spin-orbit coupling, exhibit 
ultra-long coherence times of 10 ms that can rival the best electron-spin qubits420. The large spin-orbit 
coupling may help to manipulate the qubit with electric fields instead of magnetic fields which is 
technologically much friendlier.

We note that it was a common belief that the relatively shallow donors and acceptors in Si can be 

well understood by using the effective mass theory with some fitting parameters for the central cell 
correction and related empirical tight binding theory421,422. In particular, the electrostatic tuning the 
hyperfine interaction between the electron spin and the P donor nuclear spin in an FET423 or the large 
valley-orbit splitting in a silicon gated nanowire device424 could be well understood with this picture. Ab 
initio theory predicted that the former effect can be even significantly greater in a silicon nanowire where 
the physical dimension of the silicon nanowire is reduced to the quantum confinement regime425 where 
the strain acting on the qubit depends on the diameter and surface termination of the Si nanowire. 


30

Recently, strain was applied to various donors in Si to tune the hyperfine coupling between the 
corresponding nuclear spin and the donor spin426. Although, empirical tight binding theory seemed to 
mostly reproduce the experimental data but ab initio theory may be needed for accurate prediction, in 
particular, for the large donor ions. The challenge for ab initio periodic cluster calculations is to 
accommodate the defect (wavefunction) in a sufficiently large supercell, or to apply the appropriate 
scaling method to approach the isolated donor limit.     

The spin-to-photon interface to create flying qubits in Si may be realized by deep donors like 

chalcogen donors427. For the prototypical 77Se+ donor, lower bounds on the transition dipole moment and 
excited-state lifetime were measured with long-lived spin at cryogenic temperatures, enabling access to 
the strong coupling limit of cavity quantum electrodynamics using known silicon photonic resonator 
technology and integrated silicon photonics428,429. 

Another approach is to use deep fluorescent centers in Si to realize quantum emitters. Erbium in Si 

emits light in the telecom wavelength which is a REI impurity in Si with optical transition between the 
split 4f orbitals (e.g., Ref.107). A hybrid approach was demonstrated for the readout of the electron spin in 
which optical excitation is used to change the charge state (conditional on its spin state) of an erbium 
defect center in a SET, and this change is then detected electrically430. Recently, ensembles of G-centers 
and G-center-related single photon emitters were created in silicon by carbon implantation and 
annealing159,431. A G-center mostly emits at 1280 nm (0.97 eV) wavelength in the near infrared region, as 
shown in Fig. 9, making it very compelling for quantum telecommunication432. The G-center has a known 
ODMR signal with an S = 1 metastable state with singlet ground and excited states (see Ref.433 and 
references therein); thus, this quantum emitter may act as a qubit or quantum memory. A combined deep 
level transient spectroscopy, PL, EPR and ODMR spectroscopies study strongly argued that G-center is a 
bistable form of two carbon atoms sharing one Si site in the lattice433, however, previous and recent ab 
initio calculations did not reach any satisfying consensus and conclusion about the microscopic origin of 
the center434–437. Additional ab initio studies are required for unambiguous identification and further 
characterization of the G-center in silicon. We note that the ZPL wavelength of C-center and W-center in 
silicon438 are also very promising for quantum communication purposes (see Fig. 9). Further theoretical 
and experimental efforts are needed to harness these color centers in quantum technology applications.


31

Figure 9. The plots of quantum-coherent materials versus zero-phonon line emission (unit in nm). In the region of 
near-infrared light (700 ~ 2500 nm), there are two windows presented as pink color (first biological window: 650 
~ 950 nm) and grey color (second biological window: 1000 ~ 1350 nm), that are important for in vivo imaging
applications439. The three telecommunication operating wavelengths for fiber optic communication, namely O-band 
(original), E-band (extended), and S-band (short), are presented as green, blue, and orange colors, respectively. The 
ZPL values with unit in eV are shown in Table I. The color centers with unknown origin are not labeled. The symbol 
codes are the followings: 1D color center—purple square; 2D color center—purple triangle; 3D color center—
yellow circle; coherent ensemble spins control—circle with blue arrows; coherent single spin control—circle with 
a single green arrow. In silicon, an oxygen related center, C-center, has a ZPL at 1570 nm and the corresponding DW 
factor is 0.100438 beside a self-interstitials related color center, W-center, which has a ZPL energy at 1220 nm and 
the corresponding DW factor is ~0.40157. C-center and W-center in silicon were reported in neutron irradiated and 
annealed samples as ensembles157, thus are not listed in Table I.

7. Summary and outlook

In this review, we have focused on color centers in solids, the emerging material platforms for 

quantum information technology with distinctly promising properties. A summary of the key parameters 
in experimental measurement for these promising materials, e.g., diamond, 4H-SiC, 3C-SiC, 6H-SiC, ZnO, 
GaN, c-BN, 2H-MoS2, and for 2D materials, e.g., h-BN, WSe2, WS2, is given in Table I. Over the last decade, 
scientists have tried various materials, such as diamond, h-BN, SiC, and other wide bandgap 
semiconductors, for constructing the basic elements for quantum information processing devices440.
Some startup companies have already begun to commercialize solid-state quantum systems, such as 
diamond NV centers, for quantum sensing 441. Diamond NV center has a great potential to realize quantum 
computers operating at elevated temperatures when the technology is developed to imprint the qubits
in a scalable 2D array arrangement. However, obviously, many challenges for industry-level application 
remain in any platform. Within the next few decades, one may expect that traditional and quantum 
computers will coexist, for each type has its own advantages442, as predicted by Turing Award laureate 
Andrew Chi-Chih Yao. In 2016, The Quantum Manifesto443 called upon Member States and the European 
Commission to launch a €1 billion Flagship-scale Initiative in Quantum Technology. Two years later, the 
National Science Foundation (USA) invested funds of up to $25 million in a new program, called Enabling 
Quantum Leap: Convergent Accelerated Discovery Foundries for Quantum Materials Science, 


32

Engineering, and Information (Q-AMASE-i), to establish foundries with “mid-scale infrastructure for 
rapid prototyping and development of quantum materials and devices,” according to the program
solicitation444. Obviously, the above shows that the quantum computer will have a prominent part in the 
future. Although quantum computers may not supersede traditional computers in tasks for which 
traditional computers are already proven to be highly efficient, quantum computers could excel in many 
tasks, such as the design of new materials for health, energy storage and production, high temperature 
superconductors and new catalysts.

We briefly mentioned the challenges in this road in the paper that we perpetuate here. At limited 

temperature, the excitation of phonon will induce atoms in the solids displacing from their equilibrium 
positions. As a result, the electron/spin energy level have significant broadening because of the 
fluctuation of the atoms, leading to finite relaxation time for spin states. For example, significant 
reduction in spin coherence time was reported in isolated NV center at room temperature with respect 
to low temperature46,195. Furthermore, the excitation of phonons also may break time-reversal symmetry, 
result in a net magnetization in non-magnetic system445. In addition to its influence on spin coherence 
time, physicists also figured out how quantum computers can operate using coherent phonons446–448. In 
light of the aforementioned facts, therefore, we suggest that a better knowledge of spin-phonon coupling 
is highly important not only for understanding the fundamental physics, but also for the application of 
quantum technologies. The complex interplay between the phonons and spins can be monitored in such 
defect qubits in which the electron-phonon coupling and spin-orbit coupling are in the same order of 
magnitude79. Theory predicts that SnV and PbV defects in diamond are ideal platforms to this end79.

Beside quantum computation, the development of quantum sensing and quantum communication 

devices is also a driving force in the field. In quantum sensor applications, the room temperature 
operation is a must for in vivo biological and medical studies, thus the search for room temperature defect 
qubits is of high importance in this context. Furthermore, the temperature dependence of materials 
properties such as high-temperature superconductivity can be only monitored by such quantum sensors 
that can operate in a broad range of temperatures. The use of light either in the manipulation or readout 
of the room temperature qubits poses restrictions on the wavelength region for biological studies. Two 
NIR wavelength regions are defined in the context where the absorption is minimal by typical biological 
systems (see NIR-I and NIR-II in Fig. 9 and Ref.439). Ideally, the color centers should be photo-excited and 
emit in the NIR-I region or rather in the NIR-II region to this end. We note that the phonon sideband of 
the emission may fall to the desired region which have longer wavelength than the marked ZPL 
wavelength in Fig. 9, as the optical readout of many color centers with low DW factor are carried out in 
the phonon sideband. The quest for the design of the optical emission is also evident for quantum 
communication applications. The efficiency of the quantum communication can be significantly increased 
if the critical ZPL emission of the color centers fall into the present telecommunication bands of the 
optical fibers (see Fig. 9), so it does not require any wavelength conversion that always leads to a loss of 
the signal intensity. The list of the presently observed single photon emitters and qubits in the context of 
technologically relevant wavelength regions are summarized in Fig. 9. It is obvious that the search for 
qubits with given fluorescence properties is required for optimization and efficient implementation of 
quantum technologies.  

We note that the search of point defects for a given ZPL wavelength is an insufficient condition in the 

optimization of defect qubits. The interaction and coupling between different particles and quasi-
particles in solids, including electrons, phonons, photons and spin, are important physical process in 
nature, and have direct impacts on performance of quantum devices. Considering the complex multi-
particles interaction, it is still challenging in computational design of new material platform for quantum 
technology. Recently, with big data generated by theory and experiments, high-throughput calculation, 
screening and machine learning methodologies have been adopted to materials genome initiatives and 
materials informatics449–451. These methodologies have been exploited in discovery of various functional 
materials, including valleytronics materials452, thermoelectric materials453, thin film solar cell454, organic-
inorganic perovskites455, and topological electronic materials456. Very recently, candidate materials for 
hosting defect qubits have been identified with the principles of constituting of the crystal by low-spin 


33

isotopes for securing long coherence times and of possessing >2 eV bandgap for robust optical control by 
means of machine learning techniques457. However, quantum-coherent materials are realized by point 
defects in the host that should be also identified. The first steps were taken to conduct this type of 
research to seek solid state defect qubit candidates458 which is based on the computation of the key 
magneto-optical properties of the defects as list in Table I, i.e., database of defect properties based on the 
theoretical spectroscopy. Therefore, it is also expected that machine learning methodology can provide 
new insights and facilitate the development of new material platforms for quantum technology. A crucial 
issue that may stem to employ machine learning methodology to this end is the accuracy of the 
computation methods, in particular, for the excited states, which is critical in the credibility of the 
resulting database. The combination of the advantages of the density functional theory and configuration 
interaction seems to provide a good balance in terms of the tractable system size and the relatively good 
accuracy (about 0.1 eV) for highly correlated excited states203.

It is exciting to note that, due to the enormous potential of quantum computers in the design of new 

materials and the importance of new material platforms for building scalable quantum computer 
networks with much better performance, the birth of the usable quantum computer will definitely speed 
up the development of new material platforms, resulting in “self-accelerating” progress in quantum 
information technology. The initial step has been recently taken in this direction459. In this context, 
theoretical simulation of experimental characterization is expected to play a more important role in 
future research.

Finally, we allude here an important point from Ref.45. We note that the full description of quantum 

bit cannot be separated from the description of the environment. The environment often is a source of 
noise for the qubits causing decoherence. This is clearly disadvantageous for quantum computer 
application but can be harnessed in quantum sensor protocols. We briefly mentioned some key quantities 
of the qubits such as readout contrasts, the longitudinal spin relaxation time, and the coherence time 
which are dependent on the environment such as strain, electric and magnetic fields, and temperature. 
By computing the coupling of the defect qubits properties to these key quantities, the sensitivity of 
quantum sensing protocols and optimization of quantum control can be designed and may guide future 
experimental studies. Only this comprehensive approach makes the ab initio search for alternative solid-
state defect quantum bits reliable and powerful that might be superior for a given quantum technology 
application. One possible route along this direction is to combine the ab initio calculations and effective 
spin Hamiltonian approach to compute the readout contrasts, the longitudinal spin relaxation time, the 
coherence time, and other key quantities. A recent study has taken the first steps into this direction460
which has been successfully applied to understand the optical response of qubits in a real environment461. 
Again, the usable quantum computer may result in a “self-accelerating” process by directly simulating the 
evolution of spin states of the defect qubit in the bath of external spins.

All-in-all, the future of color centers qubits looks bright in the joint effort of ab initio simulations –

theoretical spectroscopy and qubit control – and experiments.

Acknowledgements

A.G. acknowledges the support from the National Office of Research, Development and Innovation in 

Hungary for Quantum Technology Program (Grant No. 2017-1.2.1-NKP-2017-00001) and National 
Excellence Program (Grant No. KKP129866), and from the European Commission for the QuanTELCO 
project (Grant No. 862721). G.Z. and J.C. thank Dr. M. Sun for discussion and data collection.

Data availability statement

Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

References
1 R.P. Feynman, International Journal of Theoretical Physics 21, 467 (1982).
2 A. Acín, I. Bloch, H. Buhrman, T. Calarco, C. Eichler, J. Eisert, D. Esteve, N. Gisin, S.J. Glaser, F. Jelezko, 
S. Kuhr, M. Lewenstein, M.F. Riedel, P.O. Schmidt, R. Thew, A. Wallraff, I. Walmsley, and F.K. Wilhelm, 
New J. Phys. 20, 080201 (2018).


34

3 D.P. DiVincenzo, Science 270, 255 (1995).
4 S. Lloyd, Science 273, 1073 (1996).
5 J.I. Cirac and P. Zoller, Science 301, 176 (2003).
6 L.-M. Duan and G.-C. Guo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1953 (1997).
7 J.-W. Pan, Z.-B. Chen, C.-Y. Lu, H. Weinfurter, A. Zeilinger, and M. Żukowski, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 777 
(2012).
8 X. Rong, D. Lu, X. Kong, J. Geng, Y. Wang, F. Shi, C.-K. Duan, and J. Du, Advances in Physics: X 2, 125 
(2017).
9 W.K. Wootters and W.H. Zurek, Nature 299, 802 (1982).
10 N. Gisin and R. Thew, Nature Photonics 1, 165 (2007).
11 D. Castelvecchi, Nature News 543, 159 (2017).
12 F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J.C. Bardin, R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F.G.S.L. Brandao, 
D.A. Buell, B. Burkett, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, R. Collins, W. Courtney, A. Dunsworth, E. Farhi, B. 
Foxen, A. Fowler, C. Gidney, M. Giustina, R. Graff, K. Guerin, S. Habegger, M.P. Harrigan, M.J. Hartmann, 
A. Ho, M. Hoffmann, T. Huang, T.S. Humble, S.V. Isakov, E. Jeffrey, Z. Jiang, D. Kafri, K. Kechedzhi, J. 
Kelly, P.V. Klimov, S. Knysh, A. Korotkov, F. Kostritsa, D. Landhuis, M. Lindmark, E. Lucero, D. Lyakh, S. 
Mandrà, J.R. McClean, M. McEwen, A. Megrant, X. Mi, K. Michielsen, M. Mohseni, J. Mutus, O. Naaman, 
M. Neeley, C. Neill, M.Y. Niu, E. Ostby, A. Petukhov, J.C. Platt, C. Quintana, E.G. Rieffel, P. Roushan, N.C. 
Rubin, D. Sank, K.J. Satzinger, V. Smelyanskiy, K.J. Sung, M.D. Trevithick, A. Vainsencher, B. Villalonga, 
T. White, Z.J. Yao, P. Yeh, A. Zalcman, H. Neven, and J.M. Martinis, Nature 574, 505 (2019).
13 M. Freedman, A. Kitaev, M. Larsen, and Z. Wang, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 40, 31 (2003).
14 B. Field and T. Simula, Quantum Science and Technology 3, 045004 (2018).
15 S. Charpentier, L. Galletti, G. Kunakova, R. Arpaia, Y. Song, R. Baghdadi, S.M. Wang, A. Kalaboukhov, 
E. Olsson, F. Tafuri, D. Golubev, J. Linder, T. Bauch, and F. Lombardi, Nature Communications 8, (2017).
16 P. Zhang, K. Yaji, T. Hashimoto, Y. Ota, T. Kondo, K. Okazaki, Z. Wang, J. Wen, G.D. Gu, H. Ding, and 
S. Shin, Science 360, 182 (2018).
17 M. Greiner and S. Fölling, Nature 453, 736 (2008).
18 D. Hanneke, J.P. Home, J.D. Jost, J.M. Amini, D. Leibfried, and D.J. Wineland, Nature Physics 6, 13 
(2010).
19 B.P. Lanyon, C. Hempel, D. Nigg, M. Muller, R. Gerritsma, F. Zahringer, P. Schindler, J.T. Barreiro, M. 
Rambach, G. Kirchmair, M. Hennrich, P. Zoller, R. Blatt, and C.F. Roos, Science 334, 57 (2011).
20 X. Peng, J. Zhang, J. Du, and D. Suter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 140501 (2009).
21 X. Peng and D. Suter, Front. Phys. China 5, 1 (2010).
22 Z. Li, M.-H. Yung, H. Chen, D. Lu, J.D. Whitfield, X. Peng, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and J. Du, Scientific 
Reports 1, 88 (2011).
23 J.Q. You and F. Nori, Physics Today 58, 42 (2005).
24 J. Clarke and F.K. Wilhelm, Nature 453, 1031 (2008).
25 J.Q. You and F. Nori, Nature 474, 589 (2011).
26 A.A. Houck, H.E. Türeci, and J. Koch, Nature Physics 8, 292 (2012).
27 P.I. Bunyk, E.M. Hoskinson, M.W. Johnson, E. Tolkacheva, F. Altomare, A.J. Berkley, R. Harris, J.P. 
Hilton, T. Lanting, A.J. Przybysz, and J. Whittaker, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond. 24, 1 (2014).
28 T.F. Rønnow, Z. Wang, J. Job, S. Boixo, S.V. Isakov, D. Wecker, J.M. Martinis, D.A. Lidar, and M. 
Troyer, Science 345, 420 (2014).
29 M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T.W. Hänsch, and I. Bloch, Nature 415, 39 (2002).
30 D. Leibfried, B. DeMarco, V. Meyer, M. Rowe, A. Ben-Kish, J. Britton, W.M. Itano, B. Jelenković, C. 
Langer, T. Rosenband, and D.J. Wineland, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 247901 (2002).
31 A. Friedenauer, H. Schmitz, J.T. Glueckert, D. Porras, and T. Schaetz, Nature Physics 4, 757 (2008).
32 M. Neeley, M. Ansmann, R.C. Bialczak, M. Hofheinz, E. Lucero, A.D. O’Connell, D. Sank, H. Wang, J. 
Wenner, A.N. Cleland, M.R. Geller, and J.M. Martinis, Science 325, 722 (2009).
33 R. Gerritsma, G. Kirchmair, F. Zähringer, E. Solano, R. Blatt, and C.F. Roos, Nature 463, 68 (2010).
34 K. Kim, M.-S. Chang, S. Korenblit, R. Islam, E.E. Edwards, J.K. Freericks, G.-D. Lin, L.-M. Duan, and C. 
Monroe, Nature 465, 590 (2010).
35 B.P. Lanyon, J.D. Whitfield, G.G. Gillett, M.E. Goggin, M.P. Almeida, I. Kassal, J.D. Biamonte, M. 
Mohseni, B.J. Powell, M. Barbieri, A. Aspuru-Guzik, and A.G. White, Nature Chemistry 2, 106 (2010).
36 R. Hanson and D.D. Awschalom, Nature 453, 1043 (2008).


35

37 T.D. Ladd, F. Jelezko, R. Laflamme, Y. Nakamura, C. Monroe, and J.L. O’Brien, Nature 464, 45 (2010).
38 I. Buluta, S. Ashhab, and F. Nori, Rep. Prog. Phys. 74, 104401 (2011).
39 I. Buluta and F. Nori, Science 326, 108 (2009).
40 D. Jaksch and P. Zoller, Annals of Physics 315, 52 (2005).
41 I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, and S. Nascimbène, Nature Physics 8, 267 (2012).
42 R. Blatt and C.F. Roos, Nature Physics 8, 277 (2012).
43 C. Schneider, D. Porras, and T. Schaetz, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 024401 (2012).
44 M.W. Doherty, N.B. Manson, P. Delaney, F. Jelezko, J. Wrachtrup, and L.C.L. Hollenberg, Physics Reports 
528, 1 (2013).
45 Á. Gali, Nanophotonics 8, 2192 (2019).
46 G. Balasubramanian, P. Neumann, D. Twitchen, M. Markham, R. Kolesov, N. Mizuochi, J. Isoya, J. 
Achard, J. Beck, J. Tissler, V. Jacques, P.R. Hemmer, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, Nat Mater 8, 383 (2009).
47 P.C. Maurer, G. Kucsko, C. Latta, L. Jiang, N.Y. Yao, S.D. Bennett, F. Pastawski, D. Hunger, N. Chisholm, 
M. Markham, D.J. Twitchen, J.I. Cirac, and M.D. Lukin, Science 336, 1283 (2012).
48 G.D. Fuchs, G. Burkard, P.V. Klimov, and D.D. Awschalom, Nature Physics 7, 789 (2011).
49 S. Yang, Y. Wang, D.D.B. Rao, T. Hien Tran, A.S. Momenzadeh, M. Markham, D.J. Twitchen, P. Wang, 
W. Yang, R. Stöhr, P. Neumann, H. Kosaka, and J. Wrachtrup, Nature Photonics 10, 507 (2016).
50 G. Waldherr, Y. Wang, S. Zaiser, M. Jamali, T. Schulte-Herbrüggen, H. Abe, T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, J.F. Du, 
P. Neumann, and J. Wrachtrup, Nature 506, 204 (2014).
51 P. Ovartchaiyapong, K.W. Lee, B.A. Myers, and A.C.B. Jayich, Nature Communications 5, 4429 (2014).
52 J.M. Taylor, P. Cappellaro, L. Childress, L. Jiang, D. Budker, P.R. Hemmer, A. Yacoby, R. Walsworth, and 
M.D. Lukin, Nat Phys 4, 810 (2008).
53 J.R. Maze, P.L. Stanwix, J.S. Hodges, S. Hong, J.M. Taylor, P. Cappellaro, L. Jiang, M.V.G. Dutt, E. 
Togan, A.S. Zibrov, A. Yacoby, R.L. Walsworth, and M.D. Lukin, Nature 455, 644 (2008).
54 F. Dolde, H. Fedder, M.W. Doherty, T. Nöbauer, F. Rempp, G. Balasubramanian, T. Wolf, F. Reinhard, 
L.C.L. Hollenberg, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, Nature Physics 7, 459 (2011).
55 D.M. Toyli, C.F. de las Casas, D.J. Christle, V.V. Dobrovitski, and D.D. Awschalom, PNAS 110, 8417 
(2013).
56 V.M. Acosta, E. Bauch, M.P. Ledbetter, A. Waxman, L.-S. Bouchard, and D. Budker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 
070801 (2010).
57 P. Neumann, I. Jakobi, F. Dolde, C. Burk, R. Reuter, G. Waldherr, J. Honert, T. Wolf, A. Brunner, J.H. 
Shim, D. Suter, H. Sumiya, J. Isoya, and J. Wrachtrup, Nano Letters 13, 2738 (2013).
58 F. Jelezko, T. Gaebel, I. Popa, M. Domhan, A. Gruber, and J. Wrachtrup, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 130501 
(2004).
59 F. Jelezko and J. Wrachtrup, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 16, R1089 (2004).
60 F. Jelezko and J. Wrachtrup, Phys. Stat. Sol. (a) 203, 3207 (2006).
61 J.R. Weber, W.F. Koehl, J.B. Varley, A. Janotti, B.B. Buckley, C.G.V. de Walle, and D.D. Awschalom, 
PNAS 107, 8513 (2010).
62 I. Aharonovich, S. Castelletto, D.A. Simpson, C.-H. Su, A.D. Greentree, and S. Prawer, Rep. Prog. Phys. 
74, 076501 (2011).
63 L. Childress, R. Walsworth, and M. Lukin, Physics Today 67, 38 (2014).
64 L. Rondin, J.-P. Tetienne, T. Hingant, J.-F. Roch, P. Maletinsky, and V. Jacques, Rep. Prog. Phys. 77, 
056503 (2014).
65 B.M. Maune, M.G. Borselli, B. Huang, T.D. Ladd, P.W. Deelman, K.S. Holabird, A.A. Kiselev, I. 
Alvarado-Rodriguez, R.S. Ross, A.E. Schmitz, M. Sokolich, C.A. Watson, M.F. Gyure, and A.T. Hunter, 
Nature 481, 344 (2012).
66 D.B. Szombati, S. Nadj-Perge, D. Car, S.R. Plissard, E.P. a. M. Bakkers, and L.P. Kouwenhoven, Nature 
Physics 12, 568 (2016).
67 H. Bluhm, S. Foletti, I. Neder, M. Rudner, D. Mahalu, V. Umansky, and A. Yacoby, Nature Physics 7, 109 
(2011).
68 J.W. Britton, B.C. Sawyer, A.C. Keith, C.-C.J. Wang, J.K. Freericks, H. Uys, M.J. Biercuk, and J.J. 
Bollinger, Nature 484, 489 (2012).
69 J. Benhelm, G. Kirchmair, C.F. Roos, and R. Blatt, Nature Physics 4, 463 (2008).
70 A. Das, Y. Ronen, M. Heiblum, D. Mahalu, A.V. Kretinin, and H. Shtrikman, Nature Communications 3, 
(2012).


36

71 L.G. Herrmann, F. Portier, P. Roche, A.L. Yeyati, T. Kontos, and C. Strunk, Physical Review Letters 104, 
(2010).
72 E. Togan, Y. Chu, A.S. Trifonov, L. Jiang, J. Maze, L. Childress, M.V.G. Dutt, A.S. Sørensen, P.R. 
Hemmer, A.S. Zibrov, and M.D. Lukin, Nature 466, 730 (2010).
73 A.L. Falk, P.V. Klimov, B.B. Buckley, V. Ivády, I.A. Abrikosov, G. Calusine, W.F. Koehl, Á. Gali, and 
D.D. Awschalom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 187601 (2014).
74 H. Zheng, A. Weismann, and R. Berndt, Nature Communications 5, (2014).
75 T.T. Tran, K. Bray, M.J. Ford, M. Toth, and I. Aharonovich, Nature Nanotechnology 11, 37 (2016).
76 J.H.N. Loubser and J.A. van Wyk, Rep. Prog. Phys. 41, 1201 (1978).
77 P. Siyushev, H. Pinto, M. Vörös, A. Gali, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 167402 
(2013).
78 A. Gali, Physica Status Solidi (b) 248, 1337 (2011).
79 G. Thiering and A. Gali, Physical Review X 8, 021063 (2018).
80 P. Narang, C.J. Ciccarino, J. Flick, and D. Englund, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29, 1904557 (2019).
81 N.T. Son, C.P. Anderson, A. Bourassa, K.C. Miao, C. Babin, M. Widmann, M. Niethammer, J. Ul Hassan, 
N. Morioka, I.G. Ivanov, F. Kaiser, J. Wrachtrup, and D.D. Awschalom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 116, 190501 
(2020).
82 S. Castelletto and A. Boretti, J. Phys. Photonics 2, 022001 (2020).
83 A. Sajid, M.J. Ford, and J.R. Reimers, Rep. Prog. Phys. 83, 044501 (2020).
84 S. Castelletto, F.A. Inam, S. Sato, and A. Boretti, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 11, 740 (2020).
85 D.D. Awschalom, R. Hanson, J. Wrachtrup, and B.B. Zhou, Nature Photonics 12, 516 (2018).
86 C. Freysoldt, B. Grabowski, T. Hickel, J. Neugebauer, G. Kresse, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle, Rev. 
Mod. Phys. 86, 253 (2014).
87 C.E. Dreyer, A. Alkauskas, J.L. Lyons, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle, Annual Review of Materials 
Research 48, 1 (2018).
88 J.C. Phillips, Phys. Rev. 112, 685 (1958).
89 P.E. Blöchl, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994).
90 S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B 78, 235104 (2008).
91 G. Makov and M.C. Payne, Phys. Rev. B 51, 4014 (1995).
92 C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, and C.G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 016402 (2009).
93 H.-P. Komsa, N. Berseneva, A.V. Krasheninnikov, and R.M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. X 4, 031044 (2014).
94 D. Wang, D. Han, X.-B. Li, S.-Y. Xie, N.-K. Chen, W.Q. Tian, D. West, H.-B. Sun, and S.B. Zhang, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 114, 196801 (2015).
95 M. Kaviani, P. Deák, B. Aradi, T. Frauenheim, J.-P. Chou, and A. Gali, Nano Lett. 14, 4772 (2014).
96 J.-P. Chou and A. Gali, MRS Communications 7, 551 (2017).
97 S.B. Zhang and J.E. Northrup, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 2339 (1991).
98 L. Gordon, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B 92, 045208 (2015).
99 G. Wolfowicz, C.P. Anderson, A.L. Yeats, S.J. Whiteley, J. Niklas, O.G. Poluektov, F.J. Heremans, and 
D.D. Awschalom, Nature Communications 8, 1876 (2017).
100 V. Ivády, I.A. Abrikosov, and A. Gali, Npj Comput Mater 4, 76 (2018).
101 Huang Kun, Rhys Avril, and Mott Nevill Francis, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. 
Mathematical and Physical Sciences 204, 406 (1950).
102 A. Gali, E. Janzén, P. Deák, G. Kresse, and E. Kaxiras, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 186404 (2009).
103 A. Alkauskas, B.B. Buckley, D.D. Awschalom, and C.G.V. de Walle, New J. Phys. 16, 073026 (2014).
104 A. Gali, T. Demján, M. Vörös, G. Thiering, E. Cannuccia, and A. Marini, Nature Communications 7, 
11327 (2016).
105 C. Monroe, Nature 416, 238 (2002).
106 M.H. Devoret and J.M. Martinis, in Experimental Aspects of Quantum Computing, edited by H.O. Everitt 
(Springer US, Boston, MA, 2005), pp. 163–203.
107 S. Bertaina, S. Gambarelli, A. Tkachuk, I.N. Kurkin, B. Malkin, A. Stepanov, and B. Barbara, Nature 
Nanotechnology 2, 39 (2007).
108 A. Gruber, A. Dräbenstedt, C. Tietz, L. Fleury, J. Wrachtrup, and C. von Borczyskowski, Science 276, 
2012 (1997).
109 G. Davies, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 12, 2551 (1979).


37

110 Davies G., Hamer M. F., and Price William Charles, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. A. 
Mathematical and Physical Sciences 348, 285 (1976).
111 U.F.S. D’Haenens-Johansson, A.M. Edmonds, B.L. Green, M.E. Newton, G. Davies, P.M. Martineau, 
R.U.A. Khan, and D.J. Twitchen, Phys. Rev. B 84, 245208 (2011).
112 T. Feng and B.D. Schwartz, Journal of Applied Physics 73, 1415 (1993).
113 Y.N. Palyanov, I.N. Kupriyanov, Y.M. Borzdov, and N.V. Surovtsev, Scientific Reports 5, 14789 (2015).
114 T. Iwasaki, Y. Miyamoto, T. Taniguchi, P. Siyushev, M.H. Metsch, F. Jelezko, and M. Hatano, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 119, 253601 (2017).
115 J. Wrachtrup and F. Jelezko, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 18, S807 (2006).
116 M.E. Trusheim, N.H. Wan, K.C. Chen, C.J. Ciccarino, J. Flick, R. Sundararaman, G. Malladi, E. Bersin, 
M. Walsh, B. Lienhard, H. Bakhru, P. Narang, and D. Englund, Phys. Rev. B 99, 075430 (2019).
117 S.-Y. Lee, M. Widmann, T. Rendler, M.W. Doherty, T.M. Babinec, S. Yang, M. Eyer, P. Siyushev, B.J.M. 
Hausmann, M. Loncar, Z. Bodrog, A. Gali, N.B. Manson, H. Fedder, and J. Wrachtrup, Nat Nano 8, 487 
(2013).
118 G.D. Fuchs, V.V. Dobrovitski, R. Hanson, A. Batra, C.D. Weis, T. Schenkel, and D.D. Awschalom, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 101, 117601 (2008).
119 A.M. Edmonds, M.E. Newton, P.M. Martineau, D.J. Twitchen, and S.D. Williams, Phys. Rev. B 77, 
245205 (2008).
120 C. Hepp, T. Müller, V. Waselowski, J.N. Becker, B. Pingault, H. Sternschulte, D. Steinmüller-Nethl, A. 
Gali, J.R. Maze, M. Atatüre, and C. Becher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 036405 (2014).
121 G. Davies, Rep. Prog. Phys. 44, 787 (1981).
122 B.C. Rose, D. Huang, Z.-H. Zhang, P. Stevenson, A.M. Tyryshkin, S. Sangtawesin, S. Srinivasan, L. 
Loudin, M.L. Markham, A.M. Edmonds, D.J. Twitchen, S.A. Lyon, and N.P. de Leon, Science 361, 60 
(2018).
123 E. Neu, D. Steinmetz, J. Riedrich-Möller, S. Gsell, M. Fischer, M. Schreck, and C. Becher, New J. Phys. 
13, 025012 (2011).
124 A.L. Falk, B.B. Buckley, G. Calusine, W.F. Koehl, V.V. Dobrovitski, A. Politi, C.A. Zorman, P.X.-L. 
Feng, and D.D. Awschalom, Nature Communications 4, 1819 (2013).
125 W.F. Koehl, B.B. Buckley, F.J. Heremans, G. Calusine, and D.D. Awschalom, Nature 479, 84 (2011).
126 S.A. Zargaleh, B. Eble, S. Hameau, J.-L. Cantin, L. Legrand, M. Bernard, F. Margaillan, J.-S. Lauret, J.-F. 
Roch, H.J. von Bardeleben, E. Rauls, U. Gerstmann, and F. Treussart, Phys. Rev. B 94, 060102 (2016).
127 H.J. von Bardeleben, J.L. Cantin, A. Csóré, A. Gali, E. Rauls, and U. Gerstmann, Phys. Rev. B 94, 121202 
(2016).
128 A. Csóré, H.J. von Bardeleben, J.L. Cantin, and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. B 96, 085204 (2017).
129 E. Sörman, N.T. Son, W.M. Chen, O. Kordina, C. Hallin, and E. Janzén, Phys. Rev. B 61, 2613 (2000).
130 W.F. Koehl, B. Diler, S.J. Whiteley, A. Bourassa, N.T. Son, E. Janzén, and D.D. Awschalom, Phys. Rev. B 
95, 035207 (2017).
131 G. Wolfowicz, C.P. Anderson, B. Diler, O.G. Poluektov, F.J. Heremans, and D.D. Awschalom, Science 
Advances 6, eaaz1192 (2020).
132 D.J. Christle, P.V. Klimov, C.F. de las Casas, K. Szász, V. Ivády, V. Jokubavicius, J. Ul Hassan, M. 
Syväjärvi, W.F. Koehl, T. Ohshima, N.T. Son, E. Janzén, Á. Gali, and D.D. Awschalom, Physical Review X 
7, (2017).
133 P. Udvarhelyi, G. Thiering, N. Morioka, C. Babin, F. Kaiser, D. Lukin, T. Ohshima, J. Ul-Hassan, N.T. 
Son, J. Vučković, J. Wrachtrup, and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. Applied 13, 054017 (2020).
134 S.A. Zargaleh, S. Hameau, B. Eble, F. Margaillan, H.J. von Bardeleben, J.L. Cantin, and W. Gao, Phys. 
Rev. B 98, 165203 (2018).
135 J. Wang, Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, A. Rasmita, J. Yang, X. Li, H.J. von Bardeleben, and W. Gao, Nature 
Communications 9, 4106 (2018).
136 A.L. Falk, P.V. Klimov, V. Ivády, K. Szász, D.J. Christle, W.F. Koehl, Á. Gali, and D.D. Awschalom, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 247603 (2015).
137 H. Kraus, V.A. Soltamov, F. Fuchs, D. Simin, A. Sperlich, P.G. Baranov, G.V. Astakhov, and V. 
Dyakonov, Scientific Reports 4, 5303 (2014).
138 N. Chejanovsky, Y. Kim, A. Zappe, B. Stuhlhofer, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, D. Dasari, A. Finkler, J.H. 
Smet, and J. Wrachtrup, Scientific Reports 7, (2017).
139 J. Ahn, Z. Xu, J. Bang, A.E.L. Allcca, Y.P. Chen, and T. Li, Opt. Lett. 43, 3778 (2018).


38

140 A. Gottscholl, M. Kianinia, V. Soltamov, S. Orlinskii, G. Mamin, C. Bradac, C. Kasper, K. Krambrock, A. 
Sperlich, M. Toth, I. Aharonovich, and V. Dyakonov, Nature Materials 19, 540 (2020).
141 O. Ari, V. Fırat, N. Polat, O. Cakir, and S. Ates, in Quantum Information and Measurement (QIM) V: 
Quantum Technologies (OSA, Rome, 2019), p. S4A.2.
142 S. Kumar, M. Brotóns-Gisbert, R. Al-Khuzheyri, A. Branny, G. Ballesteros-Garcia, J.F. Sánchez-Royo, 
and B.D. Gerardot, Optica 3, 882 (2016).
143 B. Schuler, D.Y. Qiu, S. Refaely-Abramson, C. Kastl, C.T. Chen, S. Barja, R.J. Koch, D.F. Ogletree, S. 
Aloni, A.M. Schwartzberg, J.B. Neaton, S.G. Louie, and A. Weber-Bargioni, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 076801 
(2019).
144 L. Kulyuk, L. Charron, and E. Fortin, Phys. Rev. B 68, 075314 (2003).
145 V.D. Tkachev, V.B. Shepilo, and A.M. Zaitsev, Physica Status Solidi (b) 127, K65 (1985).
146 E.M. Shishonok and J.W. Steeds, Diamond and Related Materials 11, 1774 (2002).
147 E.M. Shishonok, J Appl Spectrosc 74, 272 (2007).
148 A. Tararan, S. di Sabatino, M. Gatti, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. Reining, L.H.G. Tizei, M. Kociak, and 
A. Zobelli, Physical Review B 98, (2018).
149 A.J. Morfa, B.C. Gibson, M. Karg, T.J. Karle, A.D. Greentree, P. Mulvaney, and S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, 
Nano Letters 12, 949 (2012).
150 R. Dingle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 579 (1969).
151 D.C. Reynolds, D.C. Look, B. Jogai, J.E. Van Nostrand, R. Jones, and J. Jenny, Solid State 
Communications 106, 701 (1998).
152 B.K. Meyer, H. Alves, D.M. Hofmann, W. Kriegseis, D. Forster, F. Bertram, J. Christen, A. Hoffmann, M. 
Straßburg, M. Dworzak, U. Haboeck, and A.V. Rodina, Physica Status Solidi (b) 241, 231 (2004).
153 R. Kuhnert and R. Helbig, Journal of Luminescence 26, 203 (1981).
154 M.R. Wagner, G. Callsen, J.S. Reparaz, J.-H. Schulze, R. Kirste, M. Cobet, I.A. Ostapenko, S. Rodt, C. 
Nenstiel, M. Kaiser, A. Hoffmann, A.V. Rodina, M.R. Phillips, S. Lautenschläger, S. Eisermann, and B.K. 
Meyer, Physical Review B 84, (2011).
155 Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, A. Rasmita, S. Kim, A. Berhane, Z. Bodrog, G. Adamo, A. Gali, I. Aharonovich, and 
W. Gao, Science Advances 4, eaar3580 (2018).
156 A. Kazimirov, N. Faleev, H. Temkin, M.J. Bedzyk, V. Dmitriev, and Yu. Melnik, Journal of Applied 
Physics 89, 6092 (2001).
157 G. Davies, Physics Reports 176, 83 (1989).
158 B. Zheng, J. Michel, F.Y.G. Ren, L.C. Kimerling, D.C. Jacobson, and J.M. Poate, Appl. Phys. Lett. 64, 
2842 (1994).
159 W. Redjem, A. Durand, T. Herzig, A. Benali, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, A.Y. Kuznetsov, H.S. Nguyen, S. 
Cueff, J.-M. Gérard, I. Robert-Philip, B. Gil, D. Caliste, P. Pochet, M. Abbarchi, V. Jacques, A. Dréau, and G. 
Cassabois, ArXiv:2001.02136 [Cond-Mat, Physics:Physics, Physics:Quant-Ph] (2020).
160 R. Kolesov, K. Xia, R. Reuter, R. Stöhr, A. Zappe, J. Meijer, P.R. Hemmer, and J. Wrachtrup, Nat 
Commun 3, 1 (2012).
161 P. Siyushev, K. Xia, R. Reuter, M. Jamali, N. Zhao, N. Yang, C. Duan, N. Kukharchyk, A.D. Wieck, R. 
Kolesov, and J. Wrachtrup, Nature Communications 5, 1 (2014).
162 B. Car, L. Veissier, A. Louchet-Chauvet, J.-L. Le Gouët, and T. Chanelière, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 197401 
(2018).
163 M. De Vido, A. Wojtusiak, and K. Ertel, Opt. Mater. Express 10, 717 (2020).
164 I. Nakamura, T. Yoshihiro, H. Inagawa, S. Fujiyoshi, and M. Matsushita, Scientific Reports 4, 7364 
(2014).
165 V. Bachmann, C. Ronda, and A. Meijerink, Chem. Mater. 21, 2077 (2009).
166 D.O. Demchenko, I.C. Diallo, and M.A. Reshchikov, Journal of Applied Physics 119, 035702 (2016).
167 M.A. Reshchikov, M. Vorobiov, D.O. Demchenko, Ü. Özgür, H. Morkoç, A. Lesnik, M.P. Hoffmann, F. 
Hörich, A. Dadgar, and A. Strittmatter, Phys. Rev. B 98, 125207 (2018).
168 J.L. Lyons, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 152108 (2010).
169 J.L. Lyons, A. Alkauskas, A. Janotti, and C.G.V. de Walle, Physica Status Solidi (b) 252, 900 (2015).
170 D.O. Demchenko, I.C. Diallo, and M.A. Reshchikov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 087404 (2013).
171 M.A. Reshchikov, J.D. McNamara, F. Zhang, M. Monavarian, A. Usikov, H. Helava, Yu. Makarov, and H. 
Morkoç, Physical Review B 94, (2016).


39

172 A.M. Berhane, K.-Y. Jeong, Z. Bodrog, S. Fiedler, T. Schröder, N.V. Triviño, T. Palacios, A. Gali, M. 
Toth, D. Englund, and I. Aharonovich, Advanced Materials 29, 1605092 (2017).
173 S.A. Tawfik, S. Ali, M. Fronzi, M. Kianinia, T.T. Tran, C. Stampfl, I. Aharonovich, M. Toth, and M.J. 
Ford, Nanoscale 9, 13575 (2017).
174 X.Z. Du, J. Li, J.Y. Lin, and H.X. Jiang, Applied Physics Letters 106, 021110 (2015).
175 A. Katzir, J.T. Suss, A. Zunger, and A. Halperin, Physical Review B 11, 2370 (1975).
176 L. Weston, D. Wickramaratne, M. Mackoit, A. Alkauskas, and C.G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B 97, 
214104 (2018).
177 G. Cassabois, P. Valvin, and B. Gil, Phys. Rev. B 93, 035207 (2016).
178 X.Z. Du, M.R. Uddin, J. Li, J.Y. Lin, and H.X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 092102 (2017).
179 V. Ivády, G. Barcza, G. Thiering, S. Li, H. Hamdi, J.-P. Chou, Ö. Legeza, and A. Gali, Npj Computational 
Materials 6, 1 (2020).
180 M.A. Lourenço, M.M. Milošević, A. Gorin, R.M. Gwilliam, and K.P. Homewood, Scientific Reports 6, 
37501 (2016).
181 A.M. Zaitsev, Optical Properties of Diamond (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2001).
182 M.D. Anderson, S. Tarrago Velez, K. Seibold, H. Flayac, V. Savona, N. Sangouard, and C. Galland, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 120, 233601 (2018).
183 M.-A. Lemonde, S. Meesala, A. Sipahigil, M.J.A. Schuetz, M.D. Lukin, M. Loncar, and P. Rabl, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 120, 213603 (2018).
184 G. Zhang and B. Li, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 114714 (2005).
185 G. Zhang and B. Li, J. Chem. Phys. 123, 014705 (2005).
186 G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Physica Status Solidi (RRL) – Rapid Research Letters 7, 754 (2013).
187 G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Chinese Phys. B 26, 034401 (2017).
188 H. Bao, J. Chen, X. Gu, and B. Cao, ES Energy & Environment (2018).
189 X. Wang, Z.-Z. Li, M.-P. Zhuo, Y. Wu, S. Chen, J. Yao, and H. Fu, Advanced Functional Materials 27, 
1703470 (2017).
190 Q. Zheng, W.A. Saidi, Y. Xie, Z. Lan, O.V. Prezhdo, H. Petek, and J. Zhao, Nano Lett. 17, 6435 (2017).
191 G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Mechanics of Materials 91, 382 (2015).
192 W.L. Yang, Z.Q. Yin, Z.Y. Xu, M. Feng, and J.F. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 241113 (2010).
193 H. Zhou, Y. Cai, G. Zhang, and Y.-W. Zhang, Npj 2D Materials and Applications 1, 14 (2017).
194 D. Li, J. He, G. Ding, Q. Tang, Y. Ying, J. He, C. Zhong, Y. Liu, C. Feng, Q. Sun, H. Zhou, P. Zhou, and 
G. Zhang, Advanced Functional Materials 28, 1801685 (2018).
195 I. Aharonovich, D. Englund, and M. Toth, Nature Photonics 10, 631 (2016).
196 W.F. Koehl, H. Seo, G. Galli, and D.D. Awschalom, MRS Bulletin 40, 1146 (2015).
197 L.J. Rogers, S. Armstrong, M.J. Sellars, and N.B. Manson, New J. Phys. 10, 103024 (2008).
198 M.L. Goldman, A. Sipahigil, M.W. Doherty, N.Y. Yao, S.D. Bennett, M. Markham, D.J. Twitchen, N.B. 
Manson, A. Kubanek, and M.D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 145502 (2015).
199 J.A. Larsson and P. Delaney, Phys. Rev. B 77, 165201 (2008).
200 S. Choi, M. Jain, and S.G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B 86, 041202 (2012).
201 A. Ranjbar, M. Babamoradi, M. Heidari Saani, M.A. Vesaghi, K. Esfarjani, and Y. Kawazoe, Phys. Rev. B 
84, 165212 (2011).
202 J. Lischner, J. Deslippe, M. Jain, and S.G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 036406 (2012).
203 M. Bockstedte, F. Schütz, T. Garratt, V. Ivády, and A. Gali, Npj Quantum Materials 3, (2018).
204 L. Shi, D. Yao, G. Zhang, and B. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett. 96, 173108 (2010).
205 W. Li, X. Dai, J. Morrone, G. Zhang, and R. Zhou, Nanoscale 9, 12025 (2017).
206 K.-M.C. Fu, C. Santori, P.E. Barclay, L.J. Rogers, N.B. Manson, and R.G. Beausoleil, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
103, 256404 (2009).
207 H.A. Jahn, E. Teller, and F.G. Donnan, Proc. R. Soc. A 161, 220 (1937).
208 T.A. Abtew, Y.Y. Sun, B.-C. Shih, P. Dev, S.B. Zhang, and P. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 146403 
(2011).
209 G. Thiering and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. B 96, 081115 (2017).
210 G. Thiering and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. B 98, 085207 (2018).
211 J. Choi, S. Choi, G. Kucsko, P.C. Maurer, B.J. Shields, H. Sumiya, S. Onoda, J. Isoya, E. Demler, F. 
Jelezko, N.Y. Yao, and M.D. Lukin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 093601 (2017).
212 J.-P. Chou, Z. Bodrog, and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 136401 (2018).


40

213 P. Kómár, E.M. Kessler, M. Bishof, L. Jiang, A.S. Sørensen, J. Ye, and M.D. Lukin, Nature Physics 10, 
582 (2014).
214 N. Kalb, A.A. Reiserer, P.C. Humphreys, J.J.W. Bakermans, S.J. Kamerling, N.H. Nickerson, S.C. 
Benjamin, D.J. Twitchen, M. Markham, and R. Hanson, Science 356, 928 (2017).
215 J.-P. Chou, A. Retzker, and A. Gali, Nano Lett. 17, 2294−2298 (2017).
216 A. Stacey, K.M. O’Donnell, J.-P. Chou, A. Schenk, A. Tadich, N. Dontschuk, J. Cervenka, C. Pakes, A. 
Gali, A. Hoffman, and S. Prawer, Adv. Mater. Interfaces 2, 1500079 (2015).
217 S. Sangtawesin, B.L. Dwyer, S. Srinivasan, J.J. Allred, L.V.H. Rodgers, K. De Greve, A. Stacey, N. 
Dontschuk, K.M. O’Donnell, D. Hu, D.A. Evans, C. Jaye, D.A. Fischer, M.L. Markham, D.J. Twitchen, H. 
Park, M.D. Lukin, and N.P. de Leon, Phys. Rev. X 9, 031052 (2019).
218 M.H. Abobeih, J. Randall, C.E. Bradley, H.P. Bartling, M.A. Bakker, M.J. Degen, M. Markham, D.J. 
Twitchen, and T.H. Taminiau, Nature 576, 411 (2019).
219 C.E. Bradley, J. Randall, M.H. Abobeih, R.C. Berrevoets, M.J. Degen, M.A. Bakker, M. Markham, D.J. 
Twitchen, and T.H. Taminiau, Phys. Rev. X 9, 031045 (2019).
220 T. Lühmann, R. John, R. Wunderlich, J. Meijer, and S. Pezzagna, Nature Communications 10, 1 (2019).
221 E. Bourgeois, A. Jarmola, P. Siyushev, M. Gulka, J. Hruby, F. Jelezko, D. Budker, and M. Nesladek, 
Nature Communications 6, 8577 (2015).
222 P. Siyushev, M. Nesladek, E. Bourgeois, M. Gulka, J. Hruby, T. Yamamoto, M. Trupke, T. Teraji, J. Isoya, 
and F. Jelezko, Science 363, 728 (2019).
223 B. Smeltzer, L. Childress, and A. Gali, New J. Phys. 13, 025021 (2011).
224 A.P. Nizovtsev, S.Y. Kilin, A.L. Pushkarchuk, V.A. Pushkarchuk, S.A. Kuten, O.A. Zhikol, S. Schmitt, T. 
Unden, and F. Jelezko, New J. Phys. 20, 023022 (2018).
225 L.J. Rogers, K.D. Jahnke, M.H. Metsch, A. Sipahigil, J.M. Binder, T. Teraji, H. Sumiya, J. Isoya, M.D. 
Lukin, P. Hemmer, and F. Jelezko, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 263602 (2014).
226 B. Pingault, J.N. Becker, C.H.H. Schulte, C. Arend, C. Hepp, T. Godde, A.I. Tartakovskii, M. Markham, 
C. Becher, and M. Atatüre, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 263601 (2014).
227 K.D. Jahnke, A. Sipahigil, J.M. Binder, M.W. Doherty, M. Metsch, L.J. Rogers, N.B. Manson, M.D. 
Lukin, and F. Jelezko, New J. Phys. 17, 043011 (2015).
228 L.J. Rogers, K.D. Jahnke, M.W. Doherty, A. Dietrich, L.P. McGuinness, C. Müller, T. Teraji, H. Sumiya, 
J. Isoya, N.B. Manson, and F. Jelezko, Physical Review B 89, (2014).
229 A. Gali and J.R. Maze, Phys. Rev. B 88, 235205 (2013).
230 C.D. Clark, H. Kanda, I. Kiflawi, and G. Sittas, Phys. Rev. B 51, 16681 (1995).
231 L.J. Rogers, K.D. Jahnke, T. Teraji, L. Marseglia, C. Müller, B. Naydenov, H. Schauffert, C. Kranz, J. 
Isoya, L.P. McGuinness, and F. Jelezko, Nature Communications 5, 1 (2014).
232 B. Pingault, D.-D. Jarausch, C. Hepp, L. Klintberg, J.N. Becker, M. Markham, C. Becher, and M. Atatüre, 
Nature Communications 8, 15579 (2017).
233 D.D. Sukachev, A. Sipahigil, C.T. Nguyen, M.K. Bhaskar, R.E. Evans, F. Jelezko, and M.D. Lukin, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 119, 223602 (2017).
234 J.N. Becker, B. Pingault, D. Groß, M. Gündoğan, N. Kukharchyk, M. Markham, A. Edmonds, M. Atatüre, 
P. Bushev, and C. Becher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 053603 (2018).
235 A. Sipahigil, K.D. Jahnke, L.J. Rogers, T. Teraji, J. Isoya, A.S. Zibrov, F. Jelezko, and M.D. Lukin, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 113, 113602 (2014).
236 A. Sipahigil, R.E. Evans, D.D. Sukachev, M.J. Burek, J. Borregaard, M.K. Bhaskar, C.T. Nguyen, J.L. 
Pacheco, H.A. Atikian, C. Meuwly, R.M. Camacho, F. Jelezko, E. Bielejec, H. Park, M. Lončar, and M.D. 
Lukin, Science 354, 847 (2016).
237 S. Maity, L. Shao, S. Bogdanović, S. Meesala, Y.-I. Sohn, N. Sinclair, B. Pingault, M. Chalupnik, C. Chia, 
L. Zheng, K. Lai, and M. Lončar, Nat Commun 11, (2020).
238 B.L. Green, S. Mottishaw, B.G. Breeze, A.M. Edmonds, U.F.S. D’Haenens-Johansson, M.W. Doherty, 
S.D. Williams, D.J. Twitchen, and M.E. Newton, Physical Review Letters 119, 096402 (2017).
239 B.C. Rose, G. Thiering, A.M. Tyryshkin, A.M. Edmonds, M.L. Markham, A. Gali, S.A. Lyon, and N.P. de 
Leon, Phys. Rev. B 98, 235140 (2018).
240 G. Thiering and A. Gali, Npj Comput Mater 5, 18 (2019).
241 B.L. Green, M.W. Doherty, E. Nako, N.B. Manson, U.F.S. D’Haenens-Johansson, S.D. Williams, D.J. 
Twitchen, and M.E. Newton, Phys. Rev. B 99, 161112 (2019).


41

242 Z.-H. Zhang, P. Stevenson, G. Thiering, B.C. Rose, D. Huang, A.M. Edmonds, M.L. Markham, S.A. Lyon, 
A. Gali, and N.P. de Leon, ArXiv:2004.12544 [Cond-Mat, Physics:Quant-Ph] (2020).
243 A. Dietrich, K.D. Jahnke, J.M. Binder, T. Teraji, J. Isoya, L.J. Rogers, and F. Jelezko, New J. Phys. 16, 
113019 (2014).
244 A. Szenes, B. Bánhelyi, L.Z. Szabó, G. Szabó, T. Csendes, and M. Csete, Scientific Reports 7, 13845 
(2017).
245 T. Iwasaki, F. Ishibashi, Y. Miyamoto, Y. Doi, S. Kobayashi, T. Miyazaki, K. Tahara, K.D. Jahnke, L.J. 
Rogers, B. Naydenov, F. Jelezko, S. Yamasaki, S. Nagamachi, T. Inubushi, N. Mizuochi, and M. Hatano, 
Scientific Reports 5, 12882 (2015).
246 J.P. Goss, P.R. Briddon, M.J. Rayson, S.J. Sque, and R. Jones, Phys. Rev. B 72, 035214 (2005).
247 P. Siyushev, M.H. Metsch, A. Ijaz, J.M. Binder, M.K. Bhaskar, D.D. Sukachev, A. Sipahigil, R.E. Evans, 
C.T. Nguyen, M.D. Lukin, P.R. Hemmer, Y.N. Palyanov, I.N. Kupriyanov, Y.M. Borzdov, L.J. Rogers, and 
F. Jelezko, Phys. Rev. B 96, 081201 (2017).
248 A.E. Rugar, C. Dory, S. Sun, and J. Vučković, Phys. Rev. B 99, 205417 (2019).
249 S. Ditalia Tchernij, T. Lühmann, T. Herzig, J. Küpper, A. Damin, S. Santonocito, M. Signorile, P. Traina, 
E. Moreva, F. Celegato, S. Pezzagna, I.P. Degiovanni, P. Olivero, M. Jakšić, J. Meijer, P.M. Genovese, and J. 
Forneris, ACS Photonics 5, 4864 (2018).
250 J. Görlitz, D. Herrmann, G. Thiering, P. Fuchs, M. Gandil, T. Iwasaki, T. Taniguchi, M. Kieschnick, J. 
Meijer, M. Hatano, A. Gali, and C. Becher, New J. Phys. 22, 013048 (2020).
251 M.E. Trusheim, B. Pingault, N.H. Wan, M. Gündoğan, L. De Santis, R. Debroux, D. Gangloff, C. Purser, 
K.C. Chen, M. Walsh, J.J. Rose, J.N. Becker, B. Lienhard, E. Bersin, I. Paradeisanos, G. Wang, D. Lyzwa, 
A.R.-P. Montblanch, G. Malladi, H. Bakhru, A.C. Ferrari, I.A. Walmsley, M. Atatüre, and D. Englund, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 124, 023602 (2020).
252 A.E. Rugar, H. Lu, C. Dory, S. Sun, P.J. McQuade, Z.-X. Shen, N.A. Melosh, and J. Vučković, Nano Lett. 
20, 1614 (2020).
253 M.T. Westerhausen, A.T. Trycz, C. Stewart, M. Nonahal, B. Regan, M. Kianinia, and I. Aharonovich, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 29700 (2020).
254 A. Gali, Materials Science Forum 679–680, 225 (2011).
255 K. Szász, V. Ivády, I.A. Abrikosov, E. Janzén, M. Bockstedte, and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. B 91, 121201 
(2015).
256 N.T. Son, P. Carlsson, J. ul Hassan, E. Janzén, T. Umeda, J. Isoya, A. Gali, M. Bockstedte, N. Morishita, 
T. Ohshima, and H. Itoh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 055501 (2006).
257 S. Castelletto, B.C. Johnson, V. Ivády, N. Stavrias, T. Umeda, A. Gali, and T. Ohshima, Nature Materials 
13, 151 (2014).
258 A. Lohrmann, B.C. Johnson, J.C. McCallum, and S. Castelletto, Reports on Progress in Physics 80, 034502 
(2017).
259 K.C. Miao, A. Bourassa, C.P. Anderson, S.J. Whiteley, A.L. Crook, S.L. Bayliss, G. Wolfowicz, G. 
Thiering, P. Udvarhelyi, V. Ivády, H. Abe, T. Ohshima, Á. Gali, and D.D. Awschalom, Science Advances 5, 
eaay0527 (2019).
260 V. Ivády, J. Davidsson, N. Delegan, A.L. Falk, P.V. Klimov, S.J. Whiteley, S.O. Hruszkewycz, M.V. Holt, 
F.J. Heremans, N.T. Son, D.D. Awschalom, I.A. Abrikosov, and A. Gali, Nature Communications 10, 1 
(2019).
261 D.J. Christle, A.L. Falk, P. Andrich, P.V. Klimov, J.U. Hassan, N.T. Son, E. Janzén, T. Ohshima, and D.D. 
Awschalom, Nature Materials 14, 160 (2015).
262 G. Calusine, A. Politi, and D.D. Awschalom, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 011123 (2014).
263 P. Udvarhelyi and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. Applied 10, 054010 (2018).
264 H. Seo, A.L. Falk, P.V. Klimov, K.C. Miao, G. Galli, and D.D. Awschalom, Nature Communications 7, 
12935 (2016).
265 S.J. Whiteley, G. Wolfowicz, C.P. Anderson, A. Bourassa, H. Ma, M. Ye, G. Koolstra, K.J. Satzinger, 
M.V. Holt, F.J. Heremans, A.N. Cleland, D.I. Schuster, G. Galli, and D.D. Awschalom, Nature Physics 15, 
490 (2019).
266 P.V. Klimov, A.L. Falk, B.B. Buckley, and D.D. Awschalom, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 087601 (2014).
267 C.P. Anderson, A. Bourassa, K.C. Miao, G. Wolfowicz, P.J. Mintun, A.L. Crook, H. Abe, J.U. Hassan, 
N.T. Son, T. Ohshima, and D.D. Awschalom, Science 366, 1225 (2019).


42

268 V. Ivády, K. Szász, A.L. Falk, P.V. Klimov, D.J. Christle, E. Janzén, I.A. Abrikosov, D.D. Awschalom, 
and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. B 92, 115206 (2015).
269 V. Ivády, P.V. Klimov, K.C. Miao, A.L. Falk, D.J. Christle, K. Szász, I.A. Abrikosov, D.D. Awschalom, 
and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 220503 (2016).
270 Mt. Wagner, B. Magnusson, W.M. Chen, E. Janzén, E. Sörman, C. Hallin, and J.L. Lindström, Phys. Rev. 
B 62, 16555 (2000).
271 V. Ivády, J. Davidsson, N.T. Son, T. Ohshima, I.A. Abrikosov, and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. B 96, 161114 
(2017).
272 N. Mizuochi, S. Yamasaki, H. Takizawa, N. Morishita, T. Ohshima, H. Itoh, and J. Isoya, Phys. Rev. B 68, 
165206 (2003).
273 Z. Shang, A. Hashemi, Y. Berencén, H.-P. Komsa, P. Erhart, S. Zhou, M. Helm, A.V. Krasheninnikov, and 
G.V. Astakhov, Phys. Rev. B 101, 144109 (2020).
274 V.A. Soltamov, B.V. Yavkin, D.O. Tolmachev, R.A. Babunts, A.G. Badalyan, V.Yu. Davydov, E.N. 
Mokhov, I.I. Proskuryakov, S.B. Orlinskii, and P.G. Baranov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 247602 (2015).
275 J. Heyd, G.E. Scuseria, and M. Ernzerhof, The Journal of Chemical Physics 118, 8207 (2003).
276 J. Heyd, G.E. Scuseria, and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 219906 (2006).
277 J.P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996).
278 Ö.O. Soykal, P. Dev, and S.E. Economou, Phys. Rev. B 93, 081207 (2016).
279 T. Biktagirov, W.G. Schmidt, U. Gerstmann, B. Yavkin, S. Orlinskii, P. Baranov, V. Dyakonov, and V. 
Soltamov, Phys. Rev. B 98, 195204 (2018).
280 J. Davidsson, V. Ivády, R. Armiento, T. Ohshima, N.T. Son, A. Gali, and I.A. Abrikosov, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
114, 112107 (2019).
281 F. Fuchs, B. Stender, M. Trupke, D. Simin, J. Pflaum, V. Dyakonov, and G.V. Astakhov, Nature 
Communications 6, 7578 (2015).
282 M. Widmann, S.-Y. Lee, T. Rendler, N.T. Son, H. Fedder, S. Paik, L.-P. Yang, N. Zhao, S. Yang, I. 
Booker, A. Denisenko, M. Jamali, S.A. Momenzadeh, I. Gerhardt, T. Ohshima, A. Gali, E. Janzén, and J. 
Wrachtrup, Nat Mater 14, 164 (2015).
283 M. Niethammer, M. Widmann, T. Rendler, N. Morioka, Y.-C. Chen, R. Stöhr, J.U. Hassan, S. Onoda, T. 
Ohshima, S.-Y. Lee, A. Mukherjee, J. Isoya, N.T. Son, and J. Wrachtrup, Nature Communications 10, 1 
(2019).
284 F. Fuchs, V.A. Soltamov, S. Väth, P.G. Baranov, E.N. Mokhov, G.V. Astakhov, and V. Dyakonov, 
Scientific Reports 3, 1 (2013).
285 H. Kraus, V.A. Soltamov, D. Riedel, S. Väth, F. Fuchs, A. Sperlich, P.G. Baranov, V. Dyakonov, and G.V. 
Astakhov, Nature Physics 10, 157 (2014).
286 E. Janzén, A. Gali, P. Carlsson, A. Gällström, B. Magnusson, and N.T. Son, Physica B: Condensed Matter 
404, 4354 (2009).
287 A. Gali, Journal of Materials Research 27, 897 (2012).
288 R. Nagy, M. Niethammer, M. Widmann, Y.-C. Chen, P. Udvarhelyi, C. Bonato, J.U. Hassan, R. Karhu, 
I.G. Ivanov, N.T. Son, J.R. Maze, T. Ohshima, Ö.O. Soykal, Á. Gali, S.-Y. Lee, F. Kaiser, and J. Wrachtrup, 
Nature Communications 10, 1 (2019).
289 P. Udvarhelyi, R. Nagy, F. Kaiser, S.-Y. Lee, J. Wrachtrup, and A. Gali, Phys. Rev. Applied 11, 044022 
(2019).
290 N. Morioka, C. Babin, R. Nagy, I. Gediz, E. Hesselmeier, D. Liu, M. Joliffe, M. Niethammer, D. Dasari, V. 
Vorobyov, R. Kolesov, R. Stöhr, J. Ul-Hassan, N.T. Son, T. Ohshima, P. Udvarhelyi, G. Thiering, A. Gali, J. 
Wrachtrup, and F. Kaiser, Nature Communications 11, 2516 (2020).
291 H. Ozawa, K. Tahara, H. Ishiwata, M. Hatano, and T. Iwasaki, Appl. Phys. Express 10, 045501 (2017).
292 F. Pan, M. Zhao, and L. Mei, Journal of Applied Physics 108, 043917 (2010).
293 J.R. Weber, W.F. Koehl, J.B. Varley, A. Janotti, B.B. Buckley, C.G. Van de Walle, and D.D. Awschalom, 
Journal of Applied Physics 109, 102417 (2011).
294 J.-F. Wang, F.-F. Yan, Q. Li, Z.-H. Liu, H. Liu, G.-P. Guo, L.-P. Guo, X. Zhou, J.-M. Cui, J. Wang, Z.-Q. 
Zhou, X.-Y. Xu, J.-S. Xu, C.-F. Li, and G.-C. Guo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 223601 (2020).
295 N.T. Son, A. Ellison, B. Magnusson, M.F. MacMillan, W.M. Chen, B. Monemar, and E. Janzén, Journal of 
Applied Physics 86, 4348 (1999).
296 L. Spindlberger, A. Csóré, G. Thiering, S. Putz, R. Karhu, J.U. Hassan, N.T. Son, T. Fromherz, A. Gali, 
and M. Trupke, Phys. Rev. Applied 12, 014015 (2019).


43

297 B. Kaufmann, A. Dörnen, and F.S. Ham, in Volume 196–201, Materials Science Forum (1995), pp. 707–
712.
298 T. Bosma, G.J.J. Lof, C.M. Gilardoni, O.V. Zwier, F. Hendriks, B. Magnusson, A. Ellison, A. Gällström, 
I.G. Ivanov, N.T. Son, R.W.A. Havenith, and C.H. van der Wal, Npj Quantum Information 4, 1 (2018).
299 A. Csóré and A. Gali, ArXiv:1909.11587 [Cond-Mat, Physics:Quant-Ph] (2019).
300 M. Widmann, M. Niethammer, D.Yu. Fedyanin, I.A. Khramtsov, T. Rendler, I.D. Booker, J. Ul Hassan, N. 
Morioka, Y.-C. Chen, I.G. Ivanov, N.T. Son, T. Ohshima, M. Bockstedte, A. Gali, C. Bonato, S.-Y. Lee, and 
J. Wrachtrup, Nano Lett. 19, 7173 (2019).
301 M.E. Levinshteĭn, S.L. Rumyantsev, and M. Shur, Properties of Advanced Semiconductor Materials: GaN, 
AlN, InN, BN, SiC, SiGe (Wiley, New York, 2001).
302 Q. Li, J.-F. Wang, F.-F. Yan, J.-Y. Zhou, H.-F. Wang, H. Liu, L.-P. Guo, X. Zhou, A. Gali, Z.-H. Liu, Z.-
Q. Wang, K. Sun, G.-P. Guo, J.-S. Tang, J.-S. Xu, C.-F. Li, and G.-C. Guo, ArXiv:2005.07876 [Cond-Mat, 
Physics:Quant-Ph] (2020).
303 D.M. Toyli, D.J. Christle, A. Alkauskas, B.B. Buckley, C.G. Van de Walle, and D.D. Awschalom, Phys. 
Rev. X 2, 031001 (2012).
304 B.C. Johnson, J. Woerle, D. Haasmann, C.T.-K. Lew, R.A. Parker, H. Knowles, B. Pingault, M. Atature, 
A. Gali, S. Dimitrijev, M. Camarda, and J.C. McCallum, Phys. Rev. Applied 12, 044024 (2019).
305 T.T. Tran, C. Zachreson, A.M. Berhane, K. Bray, R.G. Sandstrom, L.H. Li, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, I. 
Aharonovich, and M. Toth, Phys. Rev. Applied 5, 034005 (2016).
306 N.R. Jungwirth, B. Calderon, Y. Ji, M.G. Spencer, M.E. Flatté, and G.D. Fuchs, Nano Letters 16, 6052 
(2016).
307 N. Chejanovsky, M. Rezai, F. Paolucci, Y. Kim, T. Rendler, W. Rouabeh, F. Fávaro de Oliveira, P. 
Herlinger, A. Denisenko, S. Yang, I. Gerhardt, A. Finkler, J.H. Smet, and J. Wrachtrup, Nano Letters 16, 7037 
(2016).
308 T.T. Tran, C. Elbadawi, D. Totonjian, C.J. Lobo, G. Grosso, H. Moon, D.R. Englund, M.J. Ford, I. 
Aharonovich, and M. Toth, ACS Nano 10, 7331 (2016).
309 N.V. Proscia, Z. Shotan, H. Jayakumar, P. Reddy, C. Cohen, M. Dollar, A. Alkauskas, M. Doherty, C.A. 
Meriles, and V.M. Menon, Optica 5, 1128 (2018).
310 M. Ye, H. Seo, and G. Galli, Npj Computational Materials 5, 44 (2019).
311 N.L. McDougall, J.G. Partridge, R.J. Nicholls, S.P. Russo, and D.G. McCulloch, Physical Review B 96, 
(2017).
312 G.D. Cheng, Y.G. Zhang, L. Yan, H.F. Huang, Q. Huang, Y.X. Song, Y. Chen, and Z. Tang, 
Computational Materials Science 129, 247 (2017).
313 M. Abdi, J.-P. Chou, A. Gali, and M.B. Plenio, ACS Photonics 5, 1967 (2018).
314 Z.-Q. Xu, C. Elbadawi, T.T. Tran, M. Kianinia, X. Li, D. Liu, T.B. Hoffman, M. Nguyen, S. Kim, J.H. 
Edgar, X. Wu, L. Song, S. Ali, M. Ford, M. Toth, and I. Aharonovich, Nanoscale 10, 7957 (2018).
315 F. Karsai, M. Humer, E. Flage-Larsen, P. Blaha, and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B 98, 235205 (2018).
316 M.A. Feldman, A. Puretzky, L. Lindsay, E. Tucker, D.P. Briggs, P.G. Evans, R.F. Haglund, and B.J. 
Lawrie, Phys. Rev. B 99, 020101 (2019).
317 Y. Luo, N. Liu, X. Li, J.C. Hone, and S. Strauf, 2D Mater. 6, 035017 (2019).
318 M. Kianinia, B. Regan, S.A. Tawfik, T.T. Tran, M.J. Ford, I. Aharonovich, and M. Toth, ACS Photonics 4, 
768 (2017).
319 N.R. Jungwirth and G.D. Fuchs, Physical Review Letters 119, 057401 (2017).
320 T.T. Tran, D. Wang, Z.-Q. Xu, A. Yang, M. Toth, T.W. Odom, and I. Aharonovich, Nano Lett. 17, 2634 
(2017).
321 R. Bourrellier, S. Meuret, A. Tararan, O. Stéphan, M. Kociak, L.H.G. Tizei, and A. Zobelli, Nano Lett. 16, 
4317 (2016).
322 A. Sajid, J.R. Reimers, and M.J. Ford, Phys. Rev. B 97, 064101 (2018).
323 F. Wu, A. Galatas, R. Sundararaman, D. Rocca, and Y. Ping, Physical Review Materials 1, (2017).
324 M. Toth and I. Aharonovich, Annual Review of Physical Chemistry 70, 123 (2019).
325 C. Jin, F. Lin, K. Suenaga, and S. Iijima, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 195505 (2009).
326 L.J. Martínez, T. Pelini, V. Waselowski, J.R. Maze, B. Gil, G. Cassabois, and V. Jacques, Phys. Rev. B 94, 
121405 (2016).
327 G. Noh, D. Choi, J.-H. Kim, D.-G. Im, Y.-H. Kim, H. Seo, and J. Lee, Nano Lett. 18, 4710 (2018).


44

328 O.L. Krivanek, M.F. Chisholm, V. Nicolosi, T.J. Pennycook, G.J. Corbin, N. Dellby, M.F. Murfitt, C.S. 
Own, Z.S. Szilagyi, M.P. Oxley, S.T. Pantelides, and S.J. Pennycook, Nature 464, 571 (2010).
329 M.R. Uddin, J. Li, J.Y. Lin, and H.X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 110, 182107 (2017).
330 M.R. Ahmadpour Monazam, U. Ludacka, H.-P. Komsa, and J. Kotakoski, Appl. Phys. Lett. 115, 071604 
(2019).
331 F. Wu, A. Galatas, R. Sundararaman, D. Rocca, and Y. Ping, Phys. Rev. Materials 1, 071001 (2017).
332 T. Korona and M. Chojecki, Int J Quantum Chem 119, e25925 (2019).
333 N. Chejanovsky, A. Mukherjee, Y. Kim, A. Denisenko, A. Finkler, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, D.B.R. 
Dasari, J.H. Smet, and J. Wrachtrup, ArXiv:1906.05903 [Cond-Mat, Physics:Physics] (2019).
334 M. Mackoit-Sinkevičienė, M. Maciaszek, C.G. Van de Walle, and A. Alkauskas, Appl. Phys. Lett. 115, 
212101 (2019).
335 M.E. Turiansky, A. Alkauskas, L.C. Bassett, and C.G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 127401 (2019).
336 J.R. Reimers, A. Sajid, R. Kobayashi, and M.J. Ford, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 14, 
1602 (2018).
337 S. Li, J.-P. Chou, A. Hu, M.B. Plenio, P. Udvarhelyi, G. Thiering, M. Abdi, and A. Gali, arXiv:2001.02749 
(2020).
338 Z. Yu, Y. Pan, Y. Shen, Z. Wang, Z.-Y. Ong, T. Xu, R. Xin, L. Pan, B. Wang, L. Sun, J. Wang, G. Zhang, 
Y.W. Zhang, Y. Shi, and X. Wang, Nature Communications 5, 5290 (2014).
339 W. Li, G. Zhang, M. Guo, and Y.-W. Zhang, Nano Res. 7, 518 (2014).
340 Y. Liu, H. Wu, H.-C. Cheng, S. Yang, E. Zhu, Q. He, M. Ding, D. Li, J. Guo, N.O. Weiss, Y. Huang, and 
X. Duan, Nano Lett. 15, 3030 (2015).
341 Y. Cui, R. Xin, Z. Yu, Y. Pan, Z.-Y. Ong, X. Wei, J. Wang, H. Nan, Z. Ni, Y. Wu, T. Chen, Y. Shi, B. 
Wang, G. Zhang, Y.-W. Zhang, and X. Wang, Advanced Materials 27, 5230 (2015).
342 Y. Cheng, L.-D. Koh, D. Li, B. Ji, Y. Zhang, J. Yeo, G. Guan, M.-Y. Han, and Y.-W. Zhang, ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 7, 21787 (2015).
343 Y. Cheng, G. Zhang, Y. Zhang, T. Chang, Q.-X. Pei, Y. Cai, and Y.-W. Zhang, Nanoscale 10, 1660 
(2018).
344 G. Chen, N. Matsuhisa, Z. Liu, D. Qi, P. Cai, Y. Jiang, C. Wan, Y. Cui, W.R. Leow, Z. Liu, S. Gong, K.-Q. 
Zhang, Y. Cheng, and X. Chen, Advanced Materials 30, 1800129 (2018).
345 G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Journal of Materials Chemistry C 5, 7684 (2017).
346 Y.-Y. Zhang, Q.-X. Pei, C.-M. Wang, Y. Cheng, and Y.-W. Zhang, Journal of Applied Physics 114, 
073504 (2013).
347 Y. Jiang, Z. Liu, N. Matsuhisa, D. Qi, W.R. Leow, H. Yang, J. Yu, G. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Wan, Z. Liu, and 
X. Chen, Advanced Materials 30, 1706589 (2018).
348 W. Zhou, X. Zou, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Shi, J. Kong, J. Lou, P.M. Ajayan, B.I. Yakobson, and J.-C. 
Idrobo, Nano Letters 13, 2615 (2013).
349 W. Li, Y. Yang, J.K. Weber, G. Zhang, and R. Zhou, ACS Nano 10, 1829 (2016).
350 M. Koperski, K. Nogajewski, A. Arora, V. Cherkez, P. Mallet, J.-Y. Veuillen, J. Marcus, P. Kossacki, and 
M. Potemski, Nature Nanotechnology 10, 503 (2015).
351 Y.-M. He, G. Clark, J.R. Schaibley, Y. He, M.-C. Chen, Y.-J. Wei, X. Ding, Q. Zhang, W. Yao, X. Xu, C.-
Y. Lu, and J.-W. Pan, Nature Nanotechnology 10, 497 (2015).
352 C. Chakraborty, L. Kinnischtzke, K.M. Goodfellow, R. Beams, and A.N. Vamivakas, Nature 
Nanotechnology 10, 507 (2015).
353 A. Srivastava, M. Sidler, A.V. Allain, D.S. Lembke, A. Kis, and A. Imamoğlu, Nature Nanotechnology 10, 
491 (2015).
354 P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, R. Schneider, J. Kern, M. Buscema, G.A. Steele, A. Castellanos-Gomez, H.S.J. 
van der Zant, S.M. de Vasconcellos, and R. Bratschitsch, Optica, OPTICA 2, 347 (2015).
355 Y.-M. He, O. Iff, N. Lundt, V. Baumann, M. Davanco, K. Srinivasan, S. Höfling, and C. Schneider, Nature 
Communications 7, 13409 (2016).
356 Y. Ye, X. Dou, K. Ding, Y. Chen, D. Jiang, F. Yang, and B. Sun, Phys. Rev. B 95, 245313 (2017).
357 A. Branny, S. Kumar, R. Proux, and B.D. Gerardot, Nature Communications 8, 15053 (2017).
358 C. Palacios-Berraquero, D.M. Kara, A.R.-P. Montblanch, M. Barbone, P. Latawiec, D. Yoon, A.K. Ott, M. 
Loncar, A.C. Ferrari, and M. Atatüre, Nature Communications 8, 15093 (2017).
359 C. Su, M. Tripathi, Q.-B. Yan, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang, C. Hofer, H. Wang, L. Basile, G. Su, M. Dong, J.C. 
Meyer, J. Kotakoski, J. Kong, J.-C. Idrobo, T. Susi, and J. Li, Science Advances 5, eaav2252 (2019).


45

360 H. Zeng, G. Duan, Y. Li, S. Yang, X. Xu, and W. Cai, Advanced Functional Materials 20, 561 (2010).
361 N.R. Jungwirth, H.-S. Chang, M. Jiang, and G.D. Fuchs, ACS Nano 10, 1210 (2016).
362 A. Janotti and C.G.V. de Walle, Rep. Prog. Phys. 72, 126501 (2009).
363 J.L. Lyons, J.B. Varley, D. Steiauf, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle, Journal of Applied Physics 122, 
035704 (2017).
364 S. Choi, B.C. Johnson, S. Castelletto, C. Ton-That, M.R. Phillips, and I. Aharonovich, Appl. Phys. Lett. 
104, 261101 (2014).
365 K. Chung, T.J. Karle, A. Khalid, A.N. Abraham, R. Shukla, B.C. Gibson, D.A. Simpson, A.B. Djurišic, H. 
Amekura, and S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, Nanophotonics 6, 269 (2017).
366 C. Stewart, M. Kianinia, R. Previdi, T.T. Tran, I. Aharonovich, C. Bradac, and C. Bradac, Opt. Lett., OL 
44, 4873 (2019).
367 J.B. Varley and V. Lordi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 103, 102103 (2013).
368 K. Chung, Y.H. Leung, C.H. To, A.B. Djurišić, and S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 9, 
1085 (2018).
369 F.L. Roux, K. Gao, M. Holmes, S. Kako, M. Arita, and Y. Arakawa, Scientific Reports 7, 16107 (2017).
370 D. Gammon, E.S. Snow, B.V. Shanabrook, D.S. Katzer, and D. Park, Science 273, 87 (1996).
371 M. Arita, F. Le Roux, M.J. Holmes, S. Kako, and Y. Arakawa, Nano Letters 17, 2902 (2017).
372 A. Szállás, K. Szász, X.T. Trinh, N.T. Son, E. Janzén, and A. Gali, Journal of Applied Physics 116, 113702 
(2014).
373 S. Wei and A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 2719 (1996).
374 H. Okumura, T. Kimoto, and J. Suda, Appl. Phys. Express 4, 025502 (2011).
375 N.T. Son, A. Gali, Á. Szabó, M. Bickermann, T. Ohshima, J. Isoya, and E. Janzén, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 
242116 (2011).
376 J.B. Varley, A. Janotti, and C.G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B 93, 161201 (2016).
377 H. Seo, H. Ma, M. Govoni, and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. Materials 1, 075002 (2017).
378 Y. Xue, H. Wang, N. Xie, Q. Yang, F. Xu, B. Shen, J. Shi, D. Jiang, X. Dou, T. Yu, and B. Sun, J. Phys. 
Chem. Lett. 11, 2689 (2020).
379 M. Afzelius, N. Gisin, and H. de Riedmatten, Physics Today 68, 42 (2015).
380 M. Zhong, M.P. Hedges, R.L. Ahlefeldt, J.G. Bartholomew, S.E. Beavan, S.M. Wittig, J.J. Longdell, and 
M.J. Sellars, Nature 517, 177 (2015).
381 R. Kolesov, K. Xia, R. Reuter, M. Jamali, R. Stöhr, T. Inal, P. Siyushev, and J. Wrachtrup, Phys. Rev. Lett. 
111, 120502 (2013).
382 M. Raha, S. Chen, C.M. Phenicie, S. Ourari, A.M. Dibos, and J.D. Thompson, Nature Communications 11, 
1605 (2020).
383 J.M. Kindem, A. Ruskuc, J.G. Bartholomew, J. Rochman, Y.Q. Huan, and A. Faraon, Nature 580, 201 
(2020).
384 J. Luzon and R. Sessoli, Dalton Trans. 41, 13556 (2012).
385 V. Ivády, A. Gali, and I.A. Abrikosov, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 29, 454002 (2017).
386 B.G. Janesko, Phys. Rev. B 97, 085138 (2018).
387 H.S. Knowles, D.M. Kara, and M. Atatüre, Nat Mater 13, 21 (2014).
388 X. He, H. Htoon, S.K. Doorn, W.H.P. Pernice, F. Pyatkov, R. Krupke, A. Jeantet, Y. Chassagneux, and C. 
Voisin, Nature Materials 17, 663 (2018).
389 M.J. O’Connell, S.M. Bachilo, C.B. Huffman, V.C. Moore, M.S. Strano, E.H. Haroz, K.L. Rialon, P.J. 
Boul, W.H. Noon, C. Kittrell, J. Ma, R.H. Hauge, R.B. Weisman, and R.E. Smalley, Science 297, 593 (2002).
390 A. Högele, C. Galland, M. Winger, and A. Imamoğlu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 217401 (2008).
391 X. Ma, O. Roslyak, J.G. Duque, X. Pang, S.K. Doorn, A. Piryatinski, D.H. Dunlap, and H. Htoon, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 115, 017401 (2015).
392 S. Ghosh, S.M. Bachilo, R.A. Simonette, K.M. Beckingham, and R.B. Weisman, Science 330, 1656
(2010).
393 Y. Piao, B. Meany, L.R. Powell, N. Valley, H. Kwon, G.C. Schatz, and Y. Wang, Nature Chemistry 5, 840 
(2013).
394 X. Ma, N.F. Hartmann, J.K.S. Baldwin, S.K. Doorn, and H. Htoon, Nature Nanotechnology 10, 671 
(2015).
395 X. He, N.F. Hartmann, X. Ma, Y. Kim, R. Ihly, J.L. Blackburn, W. Gao, J. Kono, Y. Yomogida, A. Hirano, 
T. Tanaka, H. Kataura, H. Htoon, and S.K. Doorn, Nature Photonics 11, 577 (2017).


46

396 C. Galland, A. Högele, H.E. Türeci, and A. Imamoğlu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 067402 (2008).
397 X. Ma, L. Adamska, H. Yamaguchi, S.E. Yalcin, S. Tretiak, S.K. Doorn, and H. Htoon, ACS Nano 8, 
10782 (2014).
398 N.F. Hartmann, K.A. Velizhanin, E.H. Haroz, M. Kim, X. Ma, Y. Wang, H. Htoon, and S.K. Doorn, ACS 
Nano 10, 8355 (2016).
399 B.E. Kane, Nature 393, 133 (1998).
400 S.J. Angus, A.J. Ferguson, A.S. Dzurak, and R.G. Clark, Nano Lett. 7, 2051 (2007).
401 J.J.L. Morton, A.M. Tyryshkin, R.M. Brown, S. Shankar, B.W. Lovett, A. Ardavan, T. Schenkel, E.E. 
Haller, J.W. Ager, and S.A. Lyon, Nature 455, 1085 (2008).
402 M. Xiao, I. Martin, E. Yablonovitch, and H.W. Jiang, Nature 430, 435 (2004).
403 A.R. Stegner, C. Boehme, H. Huebl, M. Stutzmann, K. Lips, and M.S. Brandt, Nature Physics 2, 835 
(2006).
404 A. Morello, C.C. Escott, H. Huebl, L.H. Willems van Beveren, L.C.L. Hollenberg, D.N. Jamieson, A.S. 
Dzurak, and R.G. Clark, Phys. Rev. B 80, 081307 (2009).
405 A. Morello, J.J. Pla, F.A. Zwanenburg, K.W. Chan, K.Y. Tan, H. Huebl, M. Möttönen, C.D. Nugroho, C. 
Yang, J.A. van Donkelaar, A.D.C. Alves, D.N. Jamieson, C.C. Escott, L.C.L. Hollenberg, R.G. Clark, and 
A.S. Dzurak, Nature 467, 687 (2010).
406 J.T. Muhonen, J.P. Dehollain, A. Laucht, F.E. Hudson, R. Kalra, T. Sekiguchi, K.M. Itoh, D.N. Jamieson, 
J.C. McCallum, A.S. Dzurak, and A. Morello, Nature Nanotechnology 9, 986 (2014).
407 K. Saeedi, S. Simmons, J.Z. Salvail, P. Dluhy, H. Riemann, N.V. Abrosimov, P. Becker, H.-J. Pohl, J.J.L. 
Morton, and M.L.W. Thewalt, Science 342, 830 (2013).
408 S. Simmons, R.M. Brown, H. Riemann, N.V. Abrosimov, P. Becker, H.-J. Pohl, M.L.W. Thewalt, K.M. 
Itoh, and J.J.L. Morton, Nature 470, 69 (2011).
409 M. Fuechsle, J.A. Miwa, S. Mahapatra, H. Ryu, S. Lee, O. Warschkow, L.C.L. Hollenberg, G. Klimeck, 
and M.Y. Simmons, Nature Nanotechnology 7, 242 (2012).
410 J.J. Pla, K.Y. Tan, J.P. Dehollain, W.H. Lim, J.J.L. Morton, D.N. Jamieson, A.S. Dzurak, and A. Morello, 
Nature 489, 541 (2012).
411 Y. He, S.K. Gorman, D. Keith, L. Kranz, J.G. Keizer, and M.Y. Simmons, Nature 571, 371 (2019).
412 M. Veldhorst, C.H. Yang, J.C.C. Hwang, W. Huang, J.P. Dehollain, J.T. Muhonen, S. Simmons, A. 
Laucht, F.E. Hudson, K.M. Itoh, A. Morello, and A.S. Dzurak, Nature 526, 410 (2015).
413 T.F. Watson, S.G.J. Philips, E. Kawakami, D.R. Ward, P. Scarlino, M. Veldhorst, D.E. Savage, M.G. 
Lagally, M. Friesen, S.N. Coppersmith, M.A. Eriksson, and L.M.K. Vandersypen, Nature 555, 633 (2018).
414 D.M. Zajac, A.J. Sigillito, M. Russ, F. Borjans, J.M. Taylor, G. Burkard, and J.R. Petta, Science 359, 439 
(2018).
415 W. Huang, C.H. Yang, K.W. Chan, T. Tanttu, B. Hensen, R.C.C. Leon, M.A. Fogarty, J.C.C. Hwang, F.E. 
Hudson, K.M. Itoh, A. Morello, A. Laucht, and A.S. Dzurak, Nature 569, 532 (2019).
416 R. Lo Nardo, G. Wolfowicz, S. Simmons, A.M. Tyryshkin, H. Riemann, N.V. Abrosimov, P. Becker, H.-J. 
Pohl, M. Steger, S.A. Lyon, M.L.W. Thewalt, and J.J.L. Morton, Phys. Rev. B 92, 165201 (2015).
417 T.J.Z. Stock, O. Warschkow, P.C. Constantinou, J. Li, S. Fearn, E. Crane, E.V.S. Hofmann, A. Kölker, 
D.R. McKenzie, S.R. Schofield, and N.J. Curson, ACS Nano 14, 3316 (2020).
418 D.P. Franke, F.M. Hrubesch, M. Künzl, H.-W. Becker, K.M. Itoh, M. Stutzmann, F. Hoehne, L. Dreher, 
and M.S. Brandt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 057601 (2015).
419 G.W. Morley, M. Warner, A.M. Stoneham, P.T. Greenland, J. van Tol, C.W.M. Kay, and G. Aeppli, 
Nature Materials 9, 725 (2010).
420 T. Kobayashi, J. Salfi, C. Chua, J. van der Heijden, M.G. House, D. Culcer, W.D. Hutchison, B.C. 
Johnson, J.C. McCallum, H. Riemann, N.V. Abrosimov, P. Becker, H.-J. Pohl, M.Y. Simmons, and S. Rogge, 
Nat. Mater. (2020).
421 Y.M. Niquet, D. Rideau, C. Tavernier, H. Jaouen, and X. Blase, Phys. Rev. B 79, 245201 (2009).
422 M. Usman, R. Rahman, J. Salfi, J. Bocquel, B. Voisin, S. Rogge, G. Klimeck, and L.L.C. Hollenberg, J. 
Phys.: Condens. Matter 27, 154207 (2015).
423 L. Dreher, T.A. Hilker, A. Brandlmaier, S.T.B. Goennenwein, H. Huebl, M. Stutzmann, and M.S. Brandt, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 037601 (2011).
424 B. Roche, E. Dupont-Ferrier, B. Voisin, M. Cobian, X. Jehl, R. Wacquez, M. Vinet, Y.-M. Niquet, and M. 
Sanquer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 206812 (2012).
425 B. Yan, R. Rurali, and Á. Gali, Nano Lett. 12, 3460 (2012).


47

426 J. Mansir, P. Conti, Z. Zeng, J.J. Pla, P. Bertet, M.W. Swift, C.G. Van de Walle, M.L.W. Thewalt, B. 
Sklenard, Y.M. Niquet, and J.J.L. Morton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 167701 (2018).
427 M. Steger, A. Yang, M.L.W. Thewalt, M. Cardona, H. Riemann, N.V. Abrosimov, M.F. Churbanov, A.V. 
Gusev, A.D. Bulanov, I.D. Kovalev, A.K. Kaliteevskii, O.N. Godisov, P. Becker, H.-J. Pohl, E.E. Haller, and 
J.W. Ager, Physical Review B 80, (2009).
428 K.J. Morse, R.J.S. Abraham, A. DeAbreu, C. Bowness, T.S. Richards, H. Riemann, N.V. Abrosimov, P. 
Becker, H.-J. Pohl, M.L.W. Thewalt, and S. Simmons, Science Advances 3, e1700930 (2017).
429 A. DeAbreu, C. Bowness, R.J.S. Abraham, A. Medvedova, K.J. Morse, H. Riemann, N.V. Abrosimov, P. 
Becker, H.-J. Pohl, M.L.W. Thewalt, and S. Simmons, Phys. Rev. Applied 11, 044036 (2019).
430 C. Yin, M. Rancic, G.G. de Boo, N. Stavrias, J.C. McCallum, M.J. Sellars, and S. Rogge, Nature 497, 91 
(2013).
431 M. Hollenbach, Y. Berencén, U. Kentsch, M. Helm, and G.V. Astakhov, Opt. Express, OE 28, 26111 
(2020).
432 C. Beaufils, W. Redjem, E. Rousseau, V. Jacques, A.Yu. Kuznetsov, C. Raynaud, C. Voisin, A. Benali, T. 
Herzig, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, M. Abbarchi, and G. Cassabois, Phys. Rev. B 97, 035303 (2018).
433 L.W. Song, X.D. Zhan, B.W. Benson, and G.D. Watkins, Phys. Rev. B 42, 5765 (1990).
434 A. Mattoni, F. Bernardini, and L. Colombo, Phys. Rev. B 66, 195214 (2002).
435 A. Docaj and S.K. Estreicher, Physica B: Condensed Matter 407, 2981 (2012).
436 H. Wang, A. Chroneos, C.A. Londos, E.N. Sgourou, and U. Schwingenschlögl, Journal of Applied Physics 
115, 183509 (2014).
437 D. Timerkaeva, C. Attaccalite, G. Brenet, D. Caliste, and P. Pochet, Journal of Applied Physics 123, 
161421 (2018).
438 C.E. Jones and W.D. Compton, Radiation Effects 9, 83 (1971).
439 A.M. Smith, M.C. Mancini, and S. Nie, Nature Nanotech 4, 710 (2009).
440 M. Atatüre, D. Englund, N. Vamivakas, S.-Y. Lee, and J. Wrachtrup, Nature Reviews Materials 3, 38 
(2018).
441 J. Palmer, The Economist, https://www.economist.com/technology-quarterly/2017-03-09/quantum-devices 
(2017).
442 M. Poo and L. Wang, Natl Sci Rev 5, 598 (2018).
443 See http://qurope.eu/manifesto for the full of Quantum Manifesto and the list of the endorses, (2016).
444 See https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2018/nsf18578/nsf18578.htm for more details of the program solicitation of 
the National Science Foundation 2018, (2018).
445 D. Shin, H. Hübener, U. De Giovannini, H. Jin, A. Rubio, and N. Park, Nat Commun 9, 638 (2018).
446 R. Ruskov and C. Tahan, Phys. Rev. B 88, 064308 (2013).
447 C.M. Reinke and I. El-Kady, AIP Advances 6, 122002 (2016).
448 A. Macridin, P. Spentzouris, J. Amundson, and R. Harnik, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 110504 (2018).
449 R. Ramprasad, R. Batra, G. Pilania, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, and C. Kim, Npj Computational Materials 
3, 1 (2017).
450 K.T. Butler, D.W. Davies, H. Cartwright, O. Isayev, and A. Walsh, Nature 559, 547 (2018).
451 T. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Snoussi, and G. Zhang, Advanced Functional Materials 30, 1906041 (2020).
452 K. Tanaka, K. Hachiya, W. Zhang, K. Matsuda, and Y. Miyauchi, ACS Nano 13, 12687 (2019).
453 L. Xi, S. Pan, X. Li, Y. Xu, J. Ni, X. Sun, J. Yang, J. Luo, J. Xi, W. Zhu, X. Li, D. Jiang, R. Dronskowski, 
X. Shi, G.J. Snyder, and W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 10785 (2018).
454 N. Majeed, M. Saladina, M. Krompiec, S. Greedy, C. Deibel, and R.C.I. MacKenzie, Advanced Functional 
Materials 30, 1907259 (2020).
455 S. Lu, Q. Zhou, Y. Ouyang, Y. Guo, Q. Li, and J. Wang, Nature Communications 9, 1 (2018).
456 T. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Song, H. Huang, Y. He, Z. Fang, H. Weng, and C. Fang, Nature 566, 475 (2019).
457 A.M. Ferrenti, N.P. de Leon, J.D. Thompson, and R.J. Cava, Npj Computational Materials 6, 1 (2020).
458 J. Davidsson, V. Ivády, R. Armiento, N.T. Son, A. Gali, and I.A. Abrikosov, New J. Phys. 20, 023035 
(2018).
459 H. Ma, M. Govoni, and G. Galli, Npj Comput Mater 6, 85 (2020).
460 V. Ivády, Phys. Rev. B 101, 155203 (2020).
461 V. Ivády, H. Zheng, A. Wickenbrock, L. Bougas, G. Chatzidrosos, K. Nakamura, H. Sumiya, T. Ohshima, 
J. Isoya, D. Budker, I.A. Abrikosov, and A. Gali, ArXiv:2006.05085 [Cond-Mat] (2020).


