Evolution of ion track morphology in a-SiNx:H by dynamic

electronic energy loss

R K Bommali,1, a) S Ghosh,2, b) Harsh Gupta,2 Rafael Perez Casero,3 and P Srivastava2

1)Department of Physics, St. Xaviers College Ranchi

2)Department of Physics,Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

3)Department of Applied Physics, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid

(Dated: 11 November 2021)

Amorphous hydrogenated silicon nitride (a-SiNx:H) thin films irradiated with 100

MeV Ni7+ results in the formation of continuous ion track structures at the lower

fluence of 5 × 1012 ions/cm2 whereas at higher fluence of 1 × 1014 ions/cm2 the track

structures fragment into discontinuous ion track like structures . The observation of

the discontinuous ion track like structures at the high fluence of 1 × 1014 ions/cm2

shows clearly that higher fluence irradiation may not always lead to dissolution of

the microstructure formed at lower fluence. The results are understood on the basis

of a dynamic electronic energy loss (Se) in the course of irradiation resulting from

the out-diffusion of hydrogen from the films and a continuous increase in density of

a-SiNx:H films

a)Electronic mail: ravibommali06@gmail.com

b)Electronic mail: santanu1@physics.iitd.ac.in

1

arXiv:2008.04119v2  [physics.app-ph]  15 Aug 2020


I.
INTRODUCTION

Amorphous hydrogenated silicon nitride (a-SiNx:H) deposited by PECVD is a precursor

material to obtain Si quantum dots (QDs) embedded in a silicon nitride matrix.
Con-

ventionally, Si rich films are subjected to various post deposition treatments viz. furnace

annealing, flash lamp annealing, irradiation with swift heavy ions etc., to effect the phase

separation of the Si and the silicon nitride phase. Among the above post treatments swift

heavy ion (SHI) irradiation of a-SiNx:H thin films is of potential interest to achieve the

much desired control over the size and spatial distribution of the embedded quantum dots.

The localized and transient energy deposition mechanism inherent in SHI irradiation1,2,3,

within a small cylindrical volume around the ion path raises the possibility of controlling

the size and spatial distribution of QDs. The growth of QDs along the ion track walls has

been demonstrated in the past by Antonova et al. for Si rich silicon oxide system4. Further,

in our previous work5 we have reported formation of discontinuous ion tracks in a-SiNx:H,

wherein by an excitation dependent photoluminescence study the formation of amorphous

Si QDs is reported. The aforementioned control of size and spatial distribution of QDs is

not possible with conventional post-treatments. Another reported approach of controlling

the size and spatial distribution of QDs by growing superlattices of Si/ Si3N4 to achieve size

control was found to lead to the formation of multiple parallel interfaces6 that make the

extraction of the QD luminescence from the films difficult.

SHI irradiation promises a reproducible and effective approach to achieve the aforemen-

tioned objectives. For example the size of the QDs can be potentially controlled by ion

velocity7 and type, which determines the cylindrical volume of affected region around the

ion trajectory8, known as the ion track.
The irradiation induced defects on track walls

may provide nucleation sites4 for the growth of QDs, so that the irradiation fluence may

determine the separation between adjacent QDs. However, the technique can be beneficially

used for the particular case of a-SiNx:H, only if the interaction of SHIs with it and the

concomitant processes are fully understood. Recently, the interest in silicon nitride based

materials9,10,11 has surged and they are being investigated for track formation, as silicon ni-

tride offers a higher density contrast12 in the over-dense and under-dense regions of the ion

tracks as compared to SiO2. Coming to the case of hydrogenated silicon nitride (a-SiNx:H),

it must be understood that a-SiNx:H is quite different from the materials being dealt with

2


in the vast majority of the reports13,14 studying ion track formation/ion matter interaction

in the SHI regime. The hydrogen incorporated in a-SiNx:H, imparts it a structural metasta-

bility, namely, that these films undergo large compaction15 (10-20 %) in their thickness in

the course of irradiation. The compaction results from an out-diffusion of molecular hydro-

gen. As a result of which the film density and microstructure are continually evolving with

irradiation fluence. In other words, the fundamental parameter, electronic energy loss (Se)

which determines the nature of ion matter interactions changes continuously in the course

of irradiation. This kind of continuous evolution deviates from the standard understanding

of the sequence of ion matter interaction, which starts with damage creation resulting in ion

track formation followed by overlap of the cylindrical damaged zones or ion tracks as the

fluence exceeds a certain critical fluence. In contrast, in the present case the formation of

ion tracks in the track overlap regime (at fluence of 1 × 1014 ions/cm2) is evidenced. In the

present work we therefore attempt to understand the processes that determine the ion track

evolution in a-SiNx:H films.

II.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

a-SiNx:H thin film was deposited on, p-type Si (100), using PECVD (SAMCO PD-2S)

technique which uses rf (13.56 MHz) power to maintain a glow discharge and produce ionised

species necessary for thin film growth. Silane (SiH4) (4% in Ar) and ammonia (NH3) were

used as precursor gases. During deposition the substrate temperature, chamber pressure and

plasma power were maintained at 200 ◦C, 1.7 mbar and 25 W, respectively. a-SiNx:H thin

films having dimension 10×10 mm2 were irradiated in a direction normal to the film surface

with 100 MeV Ni7+ ions using a 15 UD Pelletron accelerator at the Inter University Accelera-

tor Centre, New Delhi, India. The films were irradiated at room temperature under a cham-

ber pressure less than 10−7 mbar. The beam was magnetically scanned in order to irradiate

the film surface uniformly with fluences of 5×1012 ions/cm2 and 1×1014 ions/cm2. The film

compositions were determined using Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS). Cross-

Sectional Transmission Electron Microscopy (XTEM) measurements were carried out using

a Philips CM-200 microscope, operating at 200 kV, to examine formation of microstructures

in the as-deposited and irradiated films.
XTEM samples were prepared using the stan-

dard procedure involving mechanical polishing and ion milling. The experimental details of

3


TABLE I. The composition, density and hydrogen concentration with irradiation fluence of a-

SiNx:H thin films.
The percentage compaction (∆t%) of the films at the fluence of 1 × 1014

ions/cm2 relative to as-deposited thickness (t) is also depicted. The sample labeled B is the sample

considered in the present work, while R and G are films reported previously5

as-deposited
H-Concentration (atoms/nm3)

sample
(N/Si)
(Density

gm/cc)

as-

deposited

5 × 1012

(ions/cm2

1 × 1014)

(ions/cm2)

t
∆ t %

B
1.4
2.2
44
35
14
253
15

G
1.0
2.1
33
...
...
115
9.4

R
0.9
1.9
24
...
...
109
17

photoluminescence (PL) and elastic recoil detection analysis (ERDA) are similar to those

provided elsewhere16. RBS was carried out using 2.3 MeV He4+ ions at a backscattering

angle of 170◦. The detector solid angle was 2.5 milli-steradians and its resolution was 23

keV.

III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The stoichiometry ratio (N/Si), H content and the compaction of a-SiNx:H thin films

before and after irradiation at 5 × 1012 and 1 × 1014 ions/cm2 are listed in Table I. The thin

film labelled B is in consideration in the present paper. Compositions of films R and G,

from our past publication are also depicted for comparison of the initial hydrogen content

and resulting percentage compaction (∆ t %) after irradiation. It must be noted that the

compactions have been only determined after the irradiation at 1 × 1014 as the compaction

after the low fluence irradiation of 5 × 1012 ions/cm2 is insignificant17.

The composition of the as-deposited film has been determined by RBS. The N/Si ratio of

1.44, indicates a nitrogen rich film under consideration. Further, if we normalise15 the areal

densities obtained from RBS and ERDA according to the thickness of the films, we obtain

the atomic concentration of Si, N and H as 27, 39 and 44 atoms/nm3 respectively. The high

concentration of hydrogen for the present nitrogen rich film is consistent with our earlier

findings16. Further, assuming that the N and Si content of the films remain constant in the

4


FIG. 1. (a) RBS spectra for the as-deposited and irradiated film showing negligible composition

changes in the films during irradiation (b) ERDA data showing the hydrogen content in the film

for as-deposited and films irradiated at 5 × 1012 and 1 × 1014 ions/cm2 .

course of irradiation, so that the densification of the films can be ascribed to the compaction

due to hydrogen out-diffusion only. This insignificant change in composition of the films is

corroborated by the RBS spectra depicted in figure 1a for the as-deposited and irradiated

film at 1 × 1013 ions/cm2.

Figure 1b shows the thickness normalised hydrogen concentration for the as-deposited

and irradiated films. Under the aforementioned assumption the atomic concentrations of

Si, N and H the films at each stage of irradiation can be combined with the corresponding

thickness of the film to determine the evolution of the film density with fluence. The den-

sities calculated in this way are presented in Table II. Also, for these specific densities and

compositions, the Se values are calculated using TRIM and depicted in Table II. Further,

the general dependence of Se on the composition is understood from TRIM simulation de-

picted in figure 2a. In obtaining the above data from TRIM the target composition has been

varied while keeping the density fixed at the density of the as-deposited film B. Further, in

a similar way in figure 2b the variation of the Se with the film density is obtained from

TRIM, this time by keeping the composition fixed at the composition of as-deposited film

B . Thus as figure 2 shows the electronic energy deposition in the target film is expected

to increase monotonically with increasing N/Si ratio, and with increase in density of the

film. Thus, it is quite clear that the electronic energy loss for a-SiNx:H films is not constant

5


FIG. 2. Dependence of the electronic energy loss on the (a) Si/N ratio and (b) the film density as

obtained from TRIM.

but rather increases in the course of irradiation. Figure 3 shows the post-irradiation XTEM

micrographs obtained for the thin film B. In order to interpret the results, we carry the

discussion further with the understanding that the brighter regions represent sparse density,

and are therefore understood to be the ion track core. The identification of the less dense

regions with the core is in agreement with previous reports on a-SiNx:H and Si3N49,10,11,12

wherein in the case of silicon nitride the ion tracks have an under-dense core and an over-

dense shell. Similarly, the regions of dark contrast are regions of higher density and hence

understood to indicate the track walls. The following points may be noted: Figure 3a shows

TABLE II. Evolution of film density and the electronic energy loss (Se) with irradiation fluence.

The Se values are determined from TRIM for the composition and density of a given thin film. The

sample labelled B is the sample considered in the present work, while R and G are films reported

previously5. *Note that for R and G the contribution of the Hydrogen concentration to density

has been ignored due unavailaibility of ERDA data for the irradiated films of this series (see Table

I)

Fluence
Density (gm/cc)
Electronic energy loss Se,(KeV/nm)

(ions/cm2)
B
G
R
B
G
R

0
2.24
2.21
1.9
8.2
7.32
6.51

5 × 1012
2.19
2.15
1.87
8
7.17
6.21

1 × 1014
2.45
2.33
2.27
8.6
7.77
7.54

6


FIG. 3. The XTEM images of a-SiNx:H thin film irradiated with 100 MeV Ni ions showing the

formation of ion tracks (a) continuous ion tracks at the fluence of 5 × 1012 ions/cm2 and (b) track

discontinuities forming at the higher fluence of 1 × 1014 ions/cm2.

the formation of continuous ion tracks at the fluence of 5 × 1012 ions/cm2. The average core

width of these ion tracks was measured to be 1.6 nm across in diameter. Further irradia-

tion to higher fluences of 5 × 1012 ions/cm2 leads to enhanced contrast between the denser

and the sparser regions and visibly increased discontinuities at the ion track walls. Also

visible is the widening of the track core to an average width of 2.2 nm. The appearance of

fragmented ion tracks at 1 × 1014 ions/cm2 is compatible with recent reports10 on polycrys-

talline Si3N4. Considering only the present thin film B (i.e. of fixed composition N/Si), we

arrive at the following understanding of the microstructural evolution. As the irradiation

advances the film continuously lose hydrogen, resulting in continuous densification of the

film. The increasing density in turn leads to increased Se (Figure 2b), and the consequence

of which in this case, appears as an increase in the track core diameter. The result is in

agreement with reports of Vlasukova et al.18 and Kitayama et al.11, wherein the track core

width is found to increase with the Se for monoatomic ion species for irradiation. Similarly,

in the past Meftah et al.19 have also estimated the effective track radius to increase with

increasing Se. Further, they also studied the effect of ion velocity, wherein they found that

at a given energy loss value high velocity ions lead to continuous ion tracks, lower velocity

ions on the other hand lead to discontinuous ion tracks. One may therefore attribute the

discontinuous ion track structures, evidenced in the present work, to decreased ion velocity

7


FIG. 4. Experimentally observed track sizes for different electronic energy loss values. Data points

presented in blue correspond to present work, those in red and green correspond to R and G

thin films from our previous publication. The track widths above 2 nm are observed at 1 × 1014

ions/cm2. Track widths below 2 nm are observed at 5 × 1012 ions/cm2. The highlighted region

represents the track overlap regime. In order to overlap, the track-cores are assumed to be at least

twice as wide as the smallest ion track thickness evidenced in this figure.

in the densified medium at high fluence. Thus going by these foregoing observations, one

then anticipates the tracks to widen further to dissolve/overlap, with increase in fluence.

The dissolution of the ion tracks at 1 × 1014 ions/cm2 has been evidenced previously for the

films5 R and G . Figure 4 depicts the track core widths with the Se of the films (Table II)

at various fluence values. The red and green data points in figure 4 correspond to R and

G films respectively from our previous work and the data in blue corresponds to the film B

in the present work. It must be noted that the track widths less than 2 nm in figure 4 are

obtained at 5 × 1012 ions/cm2 and those above 2 nm are obtained at 1× 1014 ions/cm2. The

points at the track size of 3 nm (yellow highlight) are assumed to be the minimum tracks

widths required for complete dissolution of the tracks observed in our previous work. This

minimum track overlap width is taken to be as the twice of the smallest track width (1.5

nm) evidenced in previous work. This figure clearly shows that for a given film the core

width increases with Se, further the core widths do not show any systematic dependence

as one moves from films R to B. These differences show that the track core width is not a

simple function of the energy loss (Se) only, and hints towards a role of other factors. The

8


possible factors determining track morphology are understood by noting that, the ion track

morphology is dependent on how the deposited energy (Se) is distributed radially outward20

from the ions path in matter. The distribution of energy determines the energy density

reached in a certain region, and consequently its morphological evolution. A higher energy

density, for example, would result in a greater damage, to the extent of local melting or

vaporization of the medium. Now, it is easily appreciated that the lattice/electronic ther-

mal conductivities and electron phonon coupling of the medium, are the factors that would

determine the distribution of the deposited energy. The interplay of these aforementioned

factors determine how quickly the deposited energy is dissipated from the ion axis. A slower

dissipation of deposited energy leads to higher energy density confined to a narrower volume

and thus resulting in a wider track core10. Conversely, if deposited energy is dissipated too

quickly to a wider volume, it would result in less energy density and hence less damage or a

narrower core. Thus the morphological evolution of films of different compositions may be

determined by material constants for the given composition [Ref]. A quantitative discussion

of the dependence of the ion track morphology on these material constants in R, G and

B is beyond the scope of the present work. Thus, one arrives at the following mechanism

FIG. 5. Mechanism of ion irradiation induced morphological evolution with fluence in a-SiNx:H

thin films.

(see figure 5) for the morphological evolution within a-SiNx:H film of a given stoichiometry

as irradiation progresses. Irradiation leads to out-diffusion of hydrogen and a concomitant

increase in density of film, as a consequence of which the energy deposition increases due

to an increase in the energy loss Se is increased. The increased energy deposition leads to

widening of the track cores. This processes progresses until there is coarsening of the track

9


walls and after a threshold of electronic energy loss is reached the tracks overlap leading to

dissolution. A detailed study is under progress to see the nanotrack evolution at different

initial Se and various ion fluences.

IV.
CONCLUSIONS

The SHI induced morphological evolution with fluence of a-SiNx:H is explained with the

dynamic nature of the electronic energy loss (Se). The continuous out-diffusion of hydrogen

from the films, and the concomitant densification are responsible for the dynamic Se. The

dynamic Se is typical to the case a-SiNx:H and results in the formation of a discontinuous

ion track morphology in the overlapping regime of 1×1014 ions/cm2. A composition specific

model for morphological evolution is proposed. The different response of compositionally

different films is attributed to the composition specific constants like thermal and lattice

conductivities and electron phonon coupling constant.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank the personnel at RRCAT for the XTEM measurements. Personnel at IUAC

New Delhi are thanked for the ERDA measurements.

REFERENCES

1M. Toulemonde, C. Dufour, A. Meftah, and E. Paumier, Nuclear Instruments and Methods

in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 166, 903

(2000).

2M. Toulemonde, W. J. Weber, G. Li, V. Shutthanandan, P. Kluth, T. Yang, Y. Wang,

and Y. Zhang, Physical Review B 83, 054106 (2011).

3F. Agull´o-L´opez, A. Climent-Font, ´A. Mu˜noz-Mart´ın, J. Olivares,
and A. Zucchiatti,

Progress in Materials Science 76, 1 (2016).

4I. Antonova, A. Cherkov, V. Skuratov, M. Kagan, J. Jedrzejewski, and I. Balberg, Nan-

otechnology 20, 185401 (2009).

5R. Bommali, S. Ghosh, G. V. Prakash, D. Kanjilal, P. Mondal, A. Srivastava, and P. Sri-

vastava, Materials Research Express 2, 046204 (2015).

10


6A. Zelenina, S. A. Dyakov, D. Hiller, S. Gutsch, V. Trouillet, M. Bruns, S. Mirabella,

P. L¨oper, L. L´opez-Conesa, J. L´opez-Vidrier, et al., Journal of Applied Physics 114, 184311

(2013).

7A. Meftah, F. Brisard, J. Costantini, E. Dooryhee, M. Hage-Ali, M. Hervieu, J. Stoquert,

F. Studer, and M. Toulemonde, Physical Review B 49, 12457 (1994).

8M. C. Ridgway, F. Djurabekova, and K. Nordlund, Current Opinion in Solid State and

Materials Science 19, 29 (2015).

9D. Murzalinov, A. Akilbekov, A. Dauletbekova, L. Vlasukova, M. Makhavikov,
and

M. Zdorovets, Materials Research Express 5, 035035 (2018).

10A. J. van Vuuren, A. Ibrayeva, V. Skuratov, and M. Zdorovets, Ceramics International

46, 7155 (2020).

11T. Kitayama, Y. Morita, K. Nakajima, K. Narumi, Y. Saitoh, M. Matsuda, M. Sataka,

M. Tsujimoto, S. Isoda, M. Toulemonde, et al., Nuclear Instruments and Methods in

Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 356, 22 (2015).

12P. Mota-Santiago, H. Vazquez, T. Bierschenk, F. Kremer, A. Nadzri, D. Schauries,

F. Djurabekova, K. Nordlund, C. Trautmann, S. Mudie, et al., Nanotechnology 29, 144004

(2018).

13M. C. Ridgway, T. Bierschenk, R. Giulian, B. Afra, M. Rodriguez, L. L. Ara´ujo, A. Byrne,

N. Kirby, O. Pakarinen, F. Djurabekova, et al., Physical Review Letters 110, 245502

(2013).

14P. Kluth, J. Sullivan, W. Li, R. Weed, C. S. Schnohr, R. Giulian, L. L. Ara´ujo, W. Lei,

M. Rodriguez, B. Afra, et al., Applied Physics Letters 104, 023105 (2014).

15R. Bommali, S. Ghosh, S. Khan, and P. Srivastava, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in

Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions with Materials and Atoms 423, 16 (2018).

16R. Bommali, S. Ghosh, G. Vijaya Prakash, K. Gao, S. Zhou, S. Khan, and P. Srivastava,

Journal of Applied Physics 115, 053525 (2014).

17R. Bommali, S. Ghosh,
and P. Srivastava, AIP Conference Proceedings, 1832, 080088

(2017).

18L. Vlasukova, F. Komarov, V. Yuvchenko, W. Wesch, E. Wendler, A. Y. Didyk, V. Sku-

ratov, and S. Kislitsin, Vacuum 105, 107 (2014).

19A. Meftah, F. Brisard, J. Costantini, M. Hage-Ali, J. Stoquert, F. Studer, and M. Toule-

monde, Physical Review B 48, 920 (1993).

11


20A. Kamarou, W. Wesch, E. Wendler, A. Undisz, and M. Rettenmayr, Physical Review B

73, 184107 (2006).

12


