1

Insights from Device Modeling of Perovskite Solar 

Cells

Nir Tesslerǂ* and Yana Vaynzof ɠ*

ǂ Sara and Moshe Zisapel Nano-Electronic Center, Department of Electrical Engineering, 

Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel

ɠ Integrated Centre for Applied Physics and Photonic Materials and Centre for Advancing 

Electronics Dresden (cfaed), Technical University of Dresden, Nöthnitzer Straße 61, 01187 

Dresden, Germany

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Corresponding Authors

* E-mail: nir@technion.ac.il

* E-mail: yana.vaynzof@tu-dresden.de


2

ABSTRACT 

In this perspective, we explore the insights into the device physics of perovskite solar cells gained 

from modeling and simulation of these devices. We discuss a range of factors that influence the 

modeling of perovskite solar cells, including the role of ions, dielectric constant, density of states,

and spatial distribution of recombination losses. By focusing on the effect of non-ideal energetic 

alignment in perovskite photovoltaic devices, we demonstrate a unique feature in low 

recombination perovskite materials – the formation of an interfacial, primarily electronic, self-

induced dipole that results in a significant increase in the built-in potential and device open-circuit 

voltage. Finally, we discuss the future directions of device modeling in the field of perovskite 

photovoltaics, describing some of the outstanding open questions in which device simulations can 

serve as a particularly powerful tool for future advancements in the field.

TOC GRAPHICS


3

MAIN TEXT 

Device modeling and simulation are powerful tools that have furthered the development of many 

electronic technologies.1-5 They provide significant insights that can be used to complement 

experimental results, but are not always directly available from empirical studies. Experimentally, 

the implications of changing a single parameter in the device structure or fabrication procedure are 

often complex and even unpredictable, such that assigning the changes in device performance to a 

single source is challenging and sometimes impossible, a limitation that simulations do not 

possess. It is this interplay between material properties and device parameters in determining the 

device performance that makes modeling and simulation of devices so attractive to material 

scientists, physicists, and engineers.

In the field of emerging photovoltaic technologies based on organic materials, device modeling 

has been extensively used to not only develop a deeper understanding of the physical principles 

governing the device function,6-8 but also as a tool for optimizing the device structure in order to 

enhance its performance.9-10 Similarly, albeit to a lesser degree, device simulations have also been 

applied to colloidal quantum dot photovoltaics.11

Since the advent of perovskite photovoltaics, significant experimental efforts have been devoted 

to enhancing the device power conversion efficiency (PCE), reaching remarkable improvements 

in just a decade.12 This continuous improvement in PCE is a result of optimization in perovskite 

film composition,13-14 deposition procedures,15-16 device architecture,17 charge extraction 18-20 and

charge blocking layers.21-22 Accompanying this remarkable experimental success are somewhat 

limited efforts in device modeling and simulation. The vast majority of these efforts have been 

dedicated to developing an understanding of the hysteresis effects23-26 and the transient behavior 


4

observed in perovskite-based solar cells.27-28 The key difference between these simulations and 

those developed earlier for organic or quantum dot photovoltaic devices is the inclusion of ions as 

species that can move upon the application of an electric field. This means that an additional set 

of drift-diffusion equations for cations and anions has to be added and solved numerically. 

Similarly, the Poisson equation also needs to be modified to account for the ions’ charge. This 

additional complexity might deter researchers from attempting to develop a comprehensive device 

model for perovskite solar cells. In the following, we will discuss the role of ions within the device 

simulation and identify in which cases they must, or should, be included and when they can be left 

out from the simulations entirely.

Another aspect of device structure that has been addressed by simulation is the effect of the 

perovskite’s energetic alignment with the charge extracting layers of the device.29-34 These 

energetic barriers influence the boundary conditions for electrons and holes in the simulation and 

are of interest experimentally due to the wealth of charge extraction materials used in devices. We 

will focus on energetic misalignment as an example, which allows us to explore a range of 

simulation parameters and identify key factors that must be taken into account. 

The effects of the lateral35 and vertical36 distribution of grains and grain boundaries has also been 

simulated, however a far deeper investigation of their role is needed, especially in light of recent

experimental observations that ‘grains’, as observed by scanning electron microscopy, do not 

always correctly correspond to the crystallographic grains within the perovskite film. Imaging of 

crystallographic perovskite grains by electron backscatter diffraction suggests that previous reports 

might have overestimated the grain size of perovskite films.37 This and other conflicting reports 

concerning the influence of grain sizes and grain boundaries on the properties and performance of 

perovskite solar cells underline that the their role remains under debate.38 Finally, minor effort has 


5

been devoted to simulation of device stability39-41 – another challenge in which device modeling

can be a major source of insight. 

In this perspective, we would like to introduce the basics of device modeling and highlight the key 

parameters that must be taken into account for such simulations to be particularly useful to the 

perovskite community. Our goal is to motivate the application of device modelling as a powerful 

tool to complement experimental efforts to understand the device physics of perovskite solar cells 

and further enhance their performance.

The basic principles of device modelling

To model perovskite-based photovoltaic devices, the following set of drift-diffusion equations has 

to be solved numerically:

(1)

where:

ne, nh, nc, na are the densities (cm-3) of electrons, holes, cations and anions, respectively. 

D, µ, and E are the diffusivity, mobility and electric field. 

B is the bimolecular recombination coefficient

( , )
(
)
( , )

( , )
(
)
( , )

( , )
(
)

( , )
(
)

e
e
e
e
e
e
e
h

h
h
h
h
h
h
e
h

c
c
c
c
c
c

a
a
a
a
a
a

n z t
D n
n
n E
Bn n
G z t
t
z
z

n z t
D n
n
n E
Bn n
G z t
t
z
z

n z t
D n
n
n E
t
z
z

n z t
D n
n
n E
t
z
z











 

















 

















 














 

















6

αG is the generation rate, where α accounts for not all photons converting into free charges. One 

may add traps and trap assisted recombination either in the bulk or at the interfaces; these will be 

discussed in more detail later. The numerical scheme to include the generalized Einstein relation 

can be found in ref 42.

The above drift-diffusion equations are coupled to the Poisson equation, which accounts also for 

the ions’ charge:

(2)

The boundary conditions for electrons and holes at the contacts are:

(3)

Here:

and 
are the effective density of states for electrons and holes, respectively.

∆e and ∆h are the energy separation between the LUMO level and the contacts’ Fermi level at the 

cathode and anode, respectively. 

Eg1 and Eg3 are the energy gaps of the semiconductor layers next to the cathode and anode, 

respectively. For the ions, the boundary conditions at the perovskite interface are taken to be 

blocking. When implementing the above equations one needs to account for discontinuities and in 

the present context one needs to also pay attention to the density of states43 and the dielectric 

constant.44-45

0
0

1
3

0
0

(0)
exp
;
(L)
exp

(0)
exp
;
( )
exp

e
h

e
e
e
e

g
e
g
h

h
h
h
h

n
N
n
N
kT
kT

E
E
n
N
n L
N
kT
kT






















 
 




















Ne0
Nh0


7

Beyond the computational challenge of solving these equations, it is clear that the choice of certain 

parameters will greatly influence the outcome of the simulation. In the following, we will discuss 

some of these influences and motivate the choice of certain parameters for perovskite device 

simulation. To consistently demonstrate the influence of certain parameters, we will perform all 

the simulations shown in this prospective, rather than attempt to compare previous simulation 

results performed by other groups, which use different sets of parameters and are thus not directly

comparable. The parameters used here are listed in Table 1.

Table 1. Material properties used in the simulations (unless stated otherwise)

Active layer
Blocking layers

Electron/hole mobility (cm2v-1s-1)
2
0.01

Bimolecular recombination (cm3s-1)
10-10
Langevin

NC (cm-3)
7x1018
1021

NV (cm-3)
2.5x1018
1021


50
3

Anion diffusivity
-----
-----

Cation diffusivity (cm2s-1)
10-12
-----

Ion density (cm-3)
1018
0

Thickness (nm)
250
50

Role of ions - in or out?

The mixed conductor nature of perovskite materials suggests that both ions and charges are moving 

upon the application of an electric field.46 The densities and dynamics of ions are different to those 

of charges, suggesting that their migration and electrostatic interaction will influence both the 


8

temporal evolution and the steady-state current in the device. It is also noteworthy that theoretical 

and experimental measurements suggest that the stark difference in diffusion coefficients of the 

cations and anions47-49 in perovskite materials effectively means that only one species is moving, 

which at first glance should introduce a significant asymmetry into the device.

While it is clear that modeling of transient phenomena must include the movement of ionic species, 

numerical simulation of solar cell current-voltage characteristics, especially in the absence of 

hysteresis, can in principle be performed either with or without the inclusion of ions. It is known 

that even in the absence of hysteresis the ions are still moving and affecting the charge distribution 

across the device.50 Hence, it is not clear if simulating experimental data using a model that 

excludes ions is capable of reproducing the correct physical picture (e.g. the type of recombination 

processes and/or their spatial location/distribution). We chose to answer this question while 

examining the relationship between the built-in and open-circuit voltages in perovskite solar cells. 

This relation has been under debate and despite extensive numerical studies of perovskites 

cells,29,51-52 this specific issue hasn’t been addressed in detail.

Generally, the built-in voltage (VBI) of a solar cell will depend on the energetic difference between 

the Fermi level positions of the cathode and the anode. In the presence of charge extraction layers, 

these levels are typically pinned within the gap of the extraction layers: a few 100 meV above the 

hole transport level or below the electron transport level for the anode and cathode, respectively. 

This means that for the ideal case of perfect energetic alignment between the charge transport 

levels of the extraction layers to those of the perovskite active layer, the built-in voltage is still 

lower than the optical gap of the active layer. Additionally, in reality, there are often energetic 

offsets between the charge transport levels of the extraction layers and those of the perovskite, 

decreasing the built-in voltage even further. Conflicting results regarding the importance of these 


9

energetic offsets have been reported in literature. Several studies showed that by increasing the 

ionization potential of the hole-transporting layer, a higher open-circuit voltage (VOC) can be 

attained due to a more optimal alignment with the perovskite valence band.53-55 On the other hand, 

some publications show very little correlation between these two values.56-57 Similar 

inconsistencies exist in relation to the energetic offset with the electron extraction layer.58-59

To investigate numerically the impact of such energetic offsets and verify if excluding the ions 

still allows to correctly reproduce the internal mechanisms, we perform two sets of simulations. 

We use identical sets of device and material parameters and run the simulations with and without 

the inclusion of ions. For the case where ions are included, we simulate a hysteresis measurement 

at a scan speed of 50 mV/s, which when normalized to the ion diffusivity, results in 5x1013 mVcm-

2. When one performs a hysteresis loop measurement one may miss capturing the hysteresis by 

either scanning very slow such that the ions closely follow the voltage change or very fast such 

that the ions do not move during the forward and reverse voltage sweep. To avoid the latter issue,

we separate the loop into two scans. First, the cell is kept at low bias long enough to allow the ions 

reach steady state and then a forward scan is performed. For the reverse direction the device is 

held at a high bias voltage, long enough for the ions to reach steady state, followed by a backward

voltage sweep. Using this methodology implies that faster scan rates are more likely to lead to the 

observation of hysteresis. For the current simulations, the stabilization bias for the forward and 

reverse scans are -0.15 V and 1.25 V, respectively. The energy level diagram for both scenarios, 

of with and without ions, is shown in Figure 1a. For simplicity, we use a 1.6 eV bandgap for the 

perovskite active layer as well as anode and cathode fermi levels, which are pinned 0.2 eV 

below/above the electron/hole transport levels. Such a configuration means that in the case of 

perfect energetic alignment between the extraction layers and the perovskite active layer, the 


10

maximum built-in voltage is 1.2 V. We now introduce an energetic offset, ∆, between the valence 

band of the perovskite layer and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the hole 

extracting layer, while maintaining perfect alignment with the electron extracting layer. 

Correspondingly, the built-in potential in the device is lowered by ∆, making it 1.2-∆ eV. The 

relationship between the simulated open-circuit voltage and this built-in voltage, with and without 

including ions, is shown in Figure 1b and leads to several fascinating observations. First, for any 

energetic offset, VOC always surpasses VBI. Interestingly, in the case of optimal alignment (i.e. 

∆=0 eV), a VOC of 1.23 V is predicted, which is only 0.03 V higher than the built-in potential. 

However, in the case of misalignment the VOC is ~0.35 V higher than the built-in potential, which 

shows the remarkable recovery of VOC in perovskite solar cells even in the case of large energetic 

offsets. Secondly, very strikingly, simulations performed without the contribution of ions show 

near identical results. In fact, the J-V curves of both the forward and the reverse scans overlap not 

only with each other, but also with the J-V obtained when no ions are included. 

To understand the origin of the VOC recovery, we turn our attention to the charge density 

distributions at V ≈ VOC for the case of ∆ = 0.3 eV, shown in Figure 1c and d. Figure 1c shows the 

charge distribution for forward (dashed line) and reverse (solid line) scans when ions are included, 

while Figure 1d is for ions being excluded. While the distributions for these three scenarios are 

markedly different, they do share a common feature – the formation of a dipole at the 

perovskite/HTL interface. This interfacial dipole is a result of an excitation generated high density 

of electrons and holes on the perovskite and HTL sides, respectively. In the results presented 

above, the inclusion of ions has only a minimal effect: while they help create the dipole, it is 

primarily electronic in nature. Such a self-induced dipole is made possible by the very low losses 

in perovskite semiconductors, and as such is a unique feature of perovskites among other emerging 


11

semiconductors. The resulting energy level diagrams for the case where ions are included (reverse 

scan) and the no-ions case are shown in Figure 1e and 1f. This dipole reduces the effective energy 

offset and thus significantly enhances the effective built-in potential of the device, explaining the 

high values of the simulated VOCs even for large energetic offsets.

The fact that the two simulations (with and without ions) employ the same physical parameters 

and result in the same J-V characteristics supports the idea that neglecting the ions still allows to 

capture the correct physics (for devices with no hysteresis). This, however, could be associated 

with the relatively simple physical picture used in this example and one could argue that 

accounting for additional mechanisms would invalidate such a conclusion. Such an argument is 

potentially supported by the observation that unlike the similar densities of electrons and holes at 

the perovskite/HTL interface, the distribution of charges in the bulk of the perovskite active layer 

is very different depending on scan direction or whether ions are included or not. For the reverse 

scan the ions were stabilized at 1.25V which is close to VOC and hence they almost completely 

suppress the electric field in the bulk, generating an effective ‘flat band’ state. This results in the 

density of both charge carriers being nearly constant throughout the bulk of the perovskite layer. 

Upon illumination an interfacial, primarily electronic, dipole is formed in perovskite solar 

cells with non-ideal energetic alignment. This self-induced dipole strongly increases the 

built-in potential and device open-circuit voltage, suppressing the losses introduced by the 

misalignment and is a unique feature of low recombination perovskite semiconductors.


12

In the forward scan, the scan speed does not allow the ions to fully screen the electric fields at VOC

and naturally, without ions there is no screening at all. In the absence of ion-screening, the 

distributions of electrons and holes vary greatly in the bulk of the active layer. Similarly, at the 

perovskite/ETL interface, up to one order of magnitude difference in the density of charges occurs 

between the different scenarios. The stark difference between the charge carrier distribution curves 

(solid lines in Figure 1c and 1d) might challenge the notion that excluding the ions is justified 

regardless of the existing internal mechanisms or their spatial distribution. We argue, however,

that this concern is alleviated by comparing the charge carrier density distributions for the forward 

and reverse scans in the case ions are included. As Figure 1c shows, these charge density

distributions are similarly different, and yet they did not result in different current densities (no 

hysteresis), confirming that the processes taking place in the device are not sensitive to the charge 

density distribution. Thus, it is justified to use a model that does not account for ions to simulate

the internal mechanisms of a device that does not exhibit hysteresis despite the presence of ions.

To sum up the above observations: if one scans the J-V at a normalized speed of at least 5x1013

mVcm-2 (or 50 mV/s for ion diffusivity of 10-12 cm2/s), the ions are mobile enough to significantly 

alter the charge density distribution between the forward and reverse scans (note the unique scan 

procedure established above). If this is not accompanied by (noticeable) hysteresis in the J-V 

curve, then modeling the device with or without the inclusion of ions yields (almost) identical 

results. This conclusion does not require that there will not be hysteresis at any scan speed, and it 

may indeed appear at scan speeds of volts per second. However, the scan speed should not be too 

slow, which is why we provided a reference value of 50 mV/s. Consequently, modeling of device 

characteristics, which do not exhibit a clear signature of ions (e.g. hysteresis) can be done without 

the inclusion of ions with near identical results. Moreover, the fact that only one species of ions is 


13

moving does not affect the device symmetry – an accumulation of ions of one type at a certain 

interface is always accompanied by the formation of a deficiency at the other interface. This

accumulation and deficiency will be of opposite charge signs, meaning that movement of neither 

anions nor cations nor both will introduce asymmetry into the device.

The results of the numerical simulations show that small energetic offsets (∆ ≤ 0.3 eV) introduce 

nearly no losses in VOC since the self-induced dipole can effectively compensate for this non-

ideality. Larger offsets negatively impact the VOC, but their effect is mitigated by the self-induced 

dipole by approximately 0.35 V. This observation is of critical importance for real life devices, 

since it significantly broadens the range of extraction layers that can be employed in perovskite 

photovoltaics, at least with respect to the requirements of their energetic alignment to the 

perovskite active layer. 

When considering these results in light of the reported inconsistencies in literature regarding the 

role of energetic alignment in determining the device open-circuit voltage, one has to remember 

that experimentally changing the extraction layer varies not only the energetic alignment with the 

perovskite layer, but also many other factors. For example, it has been shown that the charge carrier

mobility of the extraction layer,60-61 the interfacial recombination losses,62 and the energetic 

Simulation of J-V characteristics that show no signs of hysteresis can be performed without 

including ions in the device model and still reproduce the same material and device 

parameters.


14

disorder within the extraction layer63 can all influence the photovoltaic performance. Moreover, 

comparing charge extraction layers on top of which the perovskite layer is deposited is further 

complicated by changes in the microstructure and defect density of the perovskite depending on 

the surface energy, roughness, and other properties of the underlying extraction layer.19,64 In fact, 

in the simulations presented herein, we chose a mobility of 10-2 cm2V-1s-1, such that under no 

circumstances would transport within the EEL and HEL limit charge extraction, thus ensuring that 

the only barrier imposed on the system is introduced by the energetic misalignment. We note that 

we chose to use undoped charge blocking layers, which become increasingly common due to the 

potential benefit to device stability.26,65


15

Figure 1: (a) Energy level diagram used for modeling of the effect of energetic offset at the hole-
extracting layer (HEL). (b) Simulated open-circuit voltage as a function of the built-in potential. 
Charge density distribution at V ≈ VOC for ∆ = 0.3 eV (c) with and (d) without the inclusion of 
ions. In (c) dashed and solid lines are for forward and revers scans (50 mV/s), respectively. Energy 
level diagrams at V≈VOC for ∆ = 0.3 eV (e) with ions and in reverse scan and (f) without the 
contribution of ions.


16

Role of the dielectric constant

Regardless of whether one chooses to include the ions or not, the dielectric constant of the 

perovskite active layer is a key material parameter that needs to be known in order to solve the 

Poisson equation (see equation 2) and has been shown to affect simulations of device 

performance.23 Despite a decade of research, little agreement exists regarding this value for a range 

of perovskite materials. Theoretical calculations and various experimental measurements have 

resulted in values that vary across an order of magnitude both among different perovskite 

compositions and even for the same composition.66

To exemplify the influence of the dielectric constant on the simulated device performance, we 

continue the example presented above (Figure 1), in which we examine the effect of an energetic 

offset on photovoltaics characteristics of a solar cell. Following literature reports on the possible 

values of the dielectric constant, we chose either ε = 6 or ε = 50, with all other model parameters 

kept unchanged (Figure 2). For the ideal case of perfect alignment between the active layer’s and 

extraction layers’ transport levels, i.e. ∆ = 0 eV, a change in the dielectric constant has no effect 

on the J-V characteristics. With no losses in VBI to overcome, only the balance between generation 

and recombination dictates the photovoltaic performance, which are not influenced by the 

dielectric constant (the potential effect on exciton dissociation through its binding is not 

addressed). However, when an energetic offset is present, the value of the dielectric constant plays 

a major role: low ε leads to significantly better photovoltaic performance with particularly high 

VOCs. For example, for the highest energetic offset of ∆ = 0.6 eV, a VOC of 1.17 V is obtained, 

which corresponds to a remarkable recovery by 0.57 V. The reason for this is evident in the 

Poisson equation itself – for low values of ε the effect of charges on the energy bands is 

significantly enhanced.


17

These results have two key implications: first, they show that the choice of ε for device modeling 

studies is of crucial importance, but far more importantly, it provides a critical insight into the 

device physics of perovskite solar cells, demonstrating the astonishing and surprising advantage 

of engineering perovskite materials with lower dielectric coefficients. It is generally considered 

that high dielectric coefficient values are desirable in order to lower the exciton binding energy in 

the photoactive material, however our results indicate that in the case of a non-ideal device 

structure, this can also lower the photovoltaic performance. With the ability to modify the 

dielectric properties of perovskites by varying their composition, it should be possible to balance 

the two effects and develop perovskites with sufficiently low exciton binding energy (i.e. 

comparable to kT), but also sufficiently low dielectric constants such that high photovoltaic 

performance can be obtained for a broad range of non-ideal device architectures. 

The exact value of the perovskite dielectric constant is critically important for device 

simulations. A low dielectric constant enhances the effect of the self-induced dipole, resulting 

in better photovoltaic performance for a broader range of energetic misalignments.   


18

Figure 2: J-V characteristics for varying HEL offsets (∆ = 0, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6 eV) for dielectric 
coefficient of (a) 6 and (b) 50.

Role of the density of states

While often neglected from discussion, the density of states plays an important role in determining 

the photovoltaic performance of materials. The effective density of states at the band edges, Ne0

and Nh0 in equation set (3), will dictate how close the Fermi level will approach the band when 

populated with a certain density of charges. Correspondingly, and perhaps counter intuitively, a 

lower effective density of states results in a higher VOC (Figure 3a,b). This important result was 

reported by Zhou et al,67 but has gone largely unnoticed by the perovskite community. It is 

noteworthy that experimental studies indeed suggest that the density of states at the band edges of 

commonly used perovskites are rather low.68 As discussed in ref 67, the effective density of states 

at the band edge represents the entire density of states distribution function as a single parameter 

that allows to reproduce the charge density dependence on the Fermi level position using the 

Boltzmann approximation (where such approximation is valid). The specific values reported in 67


19

make use of the fact that for parabolic bands one can derive a relation between the charge effective 

mass and the effective density of states.

The population of the electronic states is also important. Most commonly, Boltzmann statistics are 

used to determine this population, but similarly to organic semiconductors,69 one has to consider 

whether Boltzmann statistics is valid or whether the full Fermi-Dirac (FD) statistics should be 

applied. FD statistics are often implemented with the aid of the Generalized Einstein Relation 

(GER), which is given by:

𝐷

𝜇 =

𝑝

𝑞𝜕𝑝

𝜕𝜂

(4)

Where p is the particle concentration and η is the chemical potential. 

Figure 3: (a) Simulated J-V characteristics for Ne0 of 1019 and 1021 cm-3 and ∆ = 0 eV. (b) 
Simulated J-V characteristics with and without GER (in this example only, the simulations were 
run in the slow scan limit where ions are allowed to reach the steady state at each bias).

Continuing with the example given above, we explore how neglecting the GER (i.e. using 

Boltzmann instead of Fermi-Dirac) influences the photovoltaic characteristics of simulated

perovskite devices. Figure 3b shows that neglecting the GER, which removes the effective density 


20

of states limitation on the charge density, results in higher interfacial charge carrier densities and 

larger self-induced dipoles, thus fully recovering the VOC. This of course is a highly unrealistic 

scenario, indicating that FD statistics, implemented using GER, cannot be ignored when 

considering density of state population in perovskite semiconductors for non-ideal device 

structures. 

The observation that the GER or FD statistics must be employed for simulations of perovskite 

solar cells is related to their low effective density of states at the band edge, mentioned above. At 

VOC, the formation of the self-induced dipole at the perovskite/HEL interface results in a high 

density of electrons (Figure 1c, d), that in combination with the low effective density of states

places the quasi Fermi level very close to the band edge. This effectively degenerate state of the 

perovskite semiconductor at the interface renders Boltzmann statistics no longer valid, making it 

necessary to include GER (i.e. FD statistics) into the simulations. 

Role of bulk and interface recombination

While it is generally agreed upon that recombination losses in perovskite materials are far lower 

than in other emerging semiconductors, the effects of bulk and interfacial recombination on the 

performance of perovskite photovoltaics are of great interest to the scientific community.70

Modeling is an excellent tool to investigate the effects of recombination,23,28 since both its nature 

The full Fermi-Dirac statistics, or Generalized Einstein Relation, must be considered when 

simulating perovskite based solar cells.


21

and physical location in the device can be chosen at will. We follow up on our example from 

Figure 1, but this time increase the bulk recombination by two orders of magnitude (Figure 4a).

Several critical observations can be made. As expected, the VOC of the device with an ideal 

energetic alignment (∆ = 0 eV) is significantly decreased compared to the prior case of low bulk 

recombination, and is now comparable to what previously was attained for ∆ = 0.4 eV. 

Interestingly, this means that the introduction of an energetic offset of up to ∆ = 0.4 eV no longer 

has an effect on the VOC, but has a tremendous negative effect on the fill factor of the device, 

manifesting itself as an ‘S-shape’ in the J-V characteristics. Moreover, the presence of high bulk 

recombination results in the appearance of hysteresis, which is particularly enhanced in non-ideally 

aligned devices. 

Figure 4b shows the results obtained when the recombination is restricted to the interface between 

the perovskite and the two extraction layers, with the bimolecular recombination coefficient being 

increased to result in the same VOC for the ∆ = 0 eV case as in Figure 4a. Namely, we only probe

the effect of the spatial distribution of the losses, without altering the effective loss amount or the 

loss mechanism. Due to the relatively high mobility of the charge carriers, the spatial distribution 

of the losses has almost no effect on the charge density distribution across the device, resulting in 

very similar J-V curves for both the bulk and interfacial recombination cases. While the spatial 

distribution may slightly alter the shape of the J-V curves, it does not determine the presence of 

hysteresis.71 We note that interfacial recombination would have a significant effect on device 

hysteresis in cases where it serves as an additional loss mechanism or is associated with a high 

trap density.23 As has been reported for some memory devices,72 the filling of the traps may form 

a space charge that would diminish the free charge density in their vicinity, and thus limit or delay 

the current flow. It is also noteworthy that while the resulting VOCs are generally smaller than in 


22

the case of low recombination (Figure 1), they still surpass the built-in potential, suggesting that 

the self-induced dipole still compensates for some of the losses. In this case, however, it is expected 

that the contribution of ions to the dipole becomes more important, since the high recombination 

rate lowers the density of charges developed at that interface. This is examplified by simulations 

for  = 0.6 eV which exclude the ions (Figre 4a, dotted line). As expected, the Voc is indeed lower 

than when ions are taken into account, confirming their contribution to the interfacial dipole. 

However, this contribution is relatively small, suggesting that the dipole remains primarily 

electronic in nature even in the case of high recombination losses. It is particularly important to 

note that excluding the ions does not result in J-V curves that resemble the average between 

forward and reverse scans. This epitomizes that attempting to reconstruct the J-V characteristics 

of a device with hysteresis using a simulation that excludes ions will inevitably lead to inaccurate 

interpratation of the internal device.

Figure 4: J-V characteristics for varying HEL offsets (∆ = 0, 0.3, 0.4, 0.6 eV) for increased (a) 
bulk and (b) interfacial recombination. Dashed lines represent the forward scan. Scan speed was 
50 mV/s and the stabilized voltages were -0.15 V and 1.25 V for the forward and reverse scan, 
respectively. The dotted line in (a) was computed when neglecting the presence of ions for the case 
∆ = 0.6 eV.


23

Simulating interfacial engineering for VOC enhancement

With the formation of a self-induced dipole largely suppressing the limitations imposed by the 

non-ideal energetics and low built-in potential, one could consider that the introduction of 

additional dipoles in the solar cell by interfacial engineering might be of benefit for VOC

enhancement. Indeed, we and others have demonstrated that introducing dipoles into device 

architectures can significantly enhance its VOC.21,73-75 Device simulation incorporating external 

dipoles into the device structure showed that increasing the dipole strength up to 0.4 eV results in 

a linear increase in the VOC which is proportional to the dipole strength. Experimental studies show 

that such dipoles can result in an increase in VOC of up to 120-130 mV without any effect on the 

JSC or FF of the device, resulting in an overall enhancement in the PCE on the order of ~10%.

Increased recombination losses, either bulk or interfacial, result in S-shaped current-voltage

characteristics, a loss in VOC and FF, and the appearance of hysteresis. To reproduce the 

internal mechanisms, devices in which large recombination losses are present must be 

simulated with the contribution of ions taken into account.


24

Future Directions of Perovskite Solar Cell Modelling

In this perspective we describe the consequences of selecting certain aspects and parameters for 

perovskite device simulation, such as inclusion/exclusion of ions or the type of occupation 

statistics. We would like to emphasize that it is not categorically “wrong” to use Boltzmann instead 

of Fermi-Dirac statistics just as it is not “wrong” to not include ions. We demonstrated that under 

certain scenarios such a choice might be warranted. For example, we provide the presence of

hysteresis as the criterion for when neglecting the ions may lead to an erroneous physical picture.

Opting to use Boltzmann statistics in cases where the simulation predicts charge densities close to, 

or above, the effective density of states would also lead to inaccurate results. These issues, 

highlighted in this work, signify the early stage of perovskite device modeling where efficient 

codes that can handle mixed electronic-ionic conduction are not widely available. On the other 

hand, there are many other potential mechanisms that have not been fully addressed yet,76-77 partly 

because they are not understood well enough to be included. For example, how to account for the

coupling between the ion accumulation/deficiency and electronic traps28,39 - would these be 

efficient recombination traps?78 Should light activation of ionic transport79-80 be incorporated into 

the device model, namely would the light excitation profile within the device affect the ionic 

distribution in a manner reminiscent of the effects of thermal gradients on electronic transport? 

How should one describe the grain boundaries? Can they be considered as only affecting the 

electrical properties of the grain, or does one have to use 2D modeling so that the boundaries are 

treated separately? For stability studies,81 current models are clearly missing ionic transport 

through the blocking layers82 and any potential electrochemistry at the contacts.83-84 Furthermore, 

it has been suggested that perovskite materials may exhibit self-healing processes85-86 - how would 


25

such processes affect the ionic and electronic landscape? Is a certain amount of disorder needed 

due to the interplay between degradation and self-healing? 

All of the above questions, and others that will emerge as more information becomes available 

about the physics and chemistry of perovskite materials, are important open questions in the field.

Some of these questions will only be answered through the use of device models to help separate 

the effects of various processes and suggest which description of a given physical mechanism is 

more accurate in terms of allowing the device model to reproduce experimental device data. Future 

studies of the missing mechanisms, and their translation into a set of equations that can be 

incorporated into a device model, would make a significant difference in the future progress of the 

field of perovskite photovoltaics.

Efficient, flexible and open source code models will enable not only the development of 

fundamental understanding of device physics of perovskite solar cells, but would also serve as 

device design guidelines to enhance the performance and stability of devices, reducing the current 

‘trial and error’ experimental approach for advancing the field towards industrial application.

AUTHOR INFORMATION

Notes

The authors declare no competing financial interest.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This project has also received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the 

European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (ERC Grant Agreement n° 

714067, ENERGYMAPS). N.T. acknowledges support by the Israel Science Foundation (grant 


26

no. 488/16), the Adelis Foundation for renewable energy research within the framework of the 

Grand Technion Energy Program (GTEP), and the Technion Ollendorff Minerva Center.

REFERENCES

[1] Sze, S. M., Physics of Semiconductor Devices; Wiley: New York, 1981.

[2] Street, R. A., Technology and Applications of Amorphous Silicon; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, 

1999.

[3] Selberherr, S., Analysis and Simulation of Semiconductor Devices; Springer-Verlag: Vien, 

1984.

[4] Snowden, C. M., Introduction to Semiconductor Device Modelling; World Scientific, 1998.

[5] Kao, K. C.; Hwang, W., Electrical Transport in Solids; Pergamon press: New York, 1981; 

Vol. 14.

[6] Tessler, N.; Rappaport, N., Excitation Density Dependence of Photocurrent Efficiency in 

Low Mobility Semiconductors. J. Appl. Phys. 2004, 96, 1083-1087.

[7] Koster, L. J. A.; Smits, E. C. P.; Mihailetchi, V. D.; Blom, P. W. M., Device Model for the 

Operation of Polymer/Fullerene Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells. Phys. Rev. B 2005, 72, 

085205.

[8] Kirchartz, T.; Nelson, J., Device Modelling of Organic Bulk Heterojunction Solar Cells. Top. 

Curr. Chem. 2013, 352, 279. 

[9] Tessler, N., Adding 0.2 V to the Open Circuit Voltage of Organic Solar Cells by Enhancing 

the Built-in Potential. J. Appl. Phys. 2015, 118, 215501. 


27

[10] Tan, J.-K.; Png, R.-Q.; Zhao, C.; Ho, P. K. H., Ohmic Transition at Contacts Key to 

Maximizing Fill Factor and Performance of Organic Solar Cells. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 3269.

[11] Solomeshch, O.; Kigel, A.; Saschiuk, A.; Medvedev, V.; Aharoni, A.; Razin, A.; Eichen, Y.; 

Banin, U.; Lifshitz, E.; Tessler, N., Optoelectronic Properties of Polymer-Nanocrystal

Composites Active at near-Infrared Wavelengths. J. Appl. Phys. 2005, 98, 074310.

[12] NREL, Best research-cell efficiencies. Accessed on 05/12/2019.

[13] Saliba, M.; Matsui, T.; Seo, J.-Y.; Domanski, K.; Correa-Baena, J.-P.; Khaja Nazeeruddin,

M.; Zakeeruddin, S. M.; Tress, W. R.; Abate, A.; Hagfeldt, A.; et al. Cesium-containing triple 

cation perovskite solar cells: improved stability, reproducibility and high efficiency. Energy 

Environ. Sci. 2016, 9, 1989-1997.

[14] Saliba, M.; Matsui, T.; Domanski, K.; Seo, J.-Y.; Ummadisingu, A.; Zakeeruddin, S. M.;

Correa-Baena, J.-P.; Tress, W. R.; Abate, A.; Hagfeldt, A.; et al. Incorporation of rubidium cations 

into perovskite solar cells improves photovoltaic performance. Science 2016, 354, 206-209.

[15] Guo, F.; Qiu, S.; Hu, J.; Wang, H.; Cai, B.; Li, J.; Yuan, X.; Liu, X.; Forberich, K.; Brabec, 

C. J.; et al. A Generalized Crystallization Protocol for Scalable Deposition of High‐Quality 

Perovskite Thin Films for Photovoltaic Applications. Sci. Adv. 2019, 6, 1901067.

[16] Eggers, H.; Schackmar, F.; Abzieher, T.; Sun, Q.; Lemmer, U.; Vaynzof, Y.; Richards, B. S.; 

Hernandez-Sosa, G.; Paetzold, U. W. Inkjet-Printed Micrometer-Thick Perovskite Solar Cells with 

Large Columnar Grains. Adv. Energy Mater. 2019, Early view.

[17] Liu, T.; Chen, K.; Hu, Q.; Zhu, R.; Gong, Q. Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells: Progresses and 

Perspectives, Adv. Energy Mater. 2016, 6, 1600457.

[18] Le Corre, V. M.; Stolterfoht, M.; Perdigon Toro, L.; Feuerstein, M.; Wolff, C.; Gil-Escrig, 

L.; Bolink, H. J.; Neher, D.; Koster, L. J. A. Charge Transport Layers Limiting the Efficiency of 


28

Perovskite Solar Cells: How To Optimize Conductivity, Doping, and Thickness. ACS Appl. Energy 

Mater. 2019, 2, 9, 6280-6287.

[19] An, Q.; Fassl, P.; Hofstetter, Y. J.; Becker-Koch, D.; Bausch, A.; Hopkinson, P. E.; Vaynzof,

Y.; Nano Energy 2017, 39, 400.

[20] Fagiolari, L.; Bella, F. Carbon-based materials for stable, cheaper and large-scale processable 

perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 3437-3472

[21] Wang, Q.; Shao, Y.; Dong, Q.; Xiao, Z.; Yuan, Y.; Huang, J. Large fill-factor bilayer iodine 

perovskite solar cells fabricated by a low-temperature solution-process. Energy Environ. Sci. 2014, 

7, 2359.

[22] An, Q.; Sun, Q.; Weu, A.; Becker-Koch, D.; Paulus, F.; Arndt, S.; Stuck, F.; Hashmi, A. S. 

K.; Tessler, N.; Vaynzof, Y. Enhancing the Open-Circuit Voltage of Perovskite Solar Cells by up 

to 120 mV using π-Extended Phosphoniumfluorene Electrolytes as Hole Blocking Layers. Adv. 

Energy Mater. 2019, 9, 1901257.

[23] van Reenen, S.; Kemerink, M.; Snaith, H. J. Modeling Anomalous Hysteresis in Perovskite 

Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6, 19, 3808-3814.

[24] Jacobs, D. A.; Wu, Y.; Shen, H.; Barugkin, C.; Beck, F. J.; White, T. P.; Weber, K.; Catchpole, 

K. R. Hysteresis phenomena in perovskite solar cells: the many and varied effects of ionic 

accumulation. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2017, 19, 3094-3103.

[25] Richardson, G.; O'Kane, S. E. J.; Niemann, R; G.; Peltola, T. A.; Foster, J. M.; Cameron, P. 

J.; Walker, A. B.  Can slow-moving ions explain hysteresis in the current–voltage curves of 

perovskite solar cells? Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9, 1476-1485. 

[26] Tessler, N.; Vaynzof, Y. Preventing Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells by Undoped Charge 

Blocking Layers. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 2018, 1, 2, 676-683.


29

[27] O'Kane, S. E. J.; Richardson, G.; Pockett, A.; Niemann, R. G.; Cave, J. M.; Sakai, N.; Eperon, 

G. E.; Snaith, H. J.; Foster, J. M.; Cameron, P. J.; Walker, A. B. Measurement and modelling of 

dark current decay transients in perovskite solar cells. J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 452-462.    

[28] Walter, D.; Fell, A.; Wu, Y.; Duong, T.; Barugkin, C.; Wu, N.; White, T.; Weber, K. Transient 

Photovoltage in Perovskite Solar Cells: Interaction of Trap-Mediated Recombination and 

Migration of Multiple Ionic Species. J. Phys. Chem. C 2018, 122, 21, 11270-11281. 

[29] Scherkar, T. S.; Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Bolink, H. J.; Koster, L. J. A. Improving 

Perovskite Solar Cells: Insights From a Validated Device Model, Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7, 

1602432.

[30] Xu, L.; Imenabadi, R. M.; Vandenberghe, W. G.; Hsu, J. W. P. Minimizing performance 

degradation induced by interfacial recombination in perovskite solar cells through tailoring of the 

transport layer electronic properties, APL Mater. 2018, 6, 036104.

[31] Wu, N.; Wu, Y.; Walter, D.; Shen, H.; Duong, T.; Grant, D.; Barugkin, C.; Fu, X.; Peng, J.; 

White, T.; et al. Identifying the Cause of Voltage and Fill Factor Losses in Perovskite Solar Cells 

by Using Luminescence Measurements, Energy Tech. 2017, 5, 1827-1835.

[32] Baig, F.; Khattak, Y. H.; Mari, B.; Beg, S.; Ahmed, A.; Kahn K. Efficiency Enhancement of 

CH3NH3SnI3 Solar Cells by Device Modeling. J. Electron. Mater. 2018, 47, 5275-5282.

[33] Sajid, S.; Elseman, A. M.; Ji, J.; Dou, S.; Wei, S.; Huang, H.; Cui, P.; Xi, W.; Chu, L.; Li Y.; 

et al. Computational Study of Ternary Devices: Stable, Low-Cost, and Efficient Planar Perovskite 

Solar Cells. Nano Micro Lett. 2018, 10, 51. 

[34] Zhou, Q.; Jiao, D.; Fu, K.; Wu, X.; Chen, Y.; Lu, J.; Yang, S.-e. Two-dimensional device 

modeling of CH3NH3PbI3 based planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Solar Energy 2016, 

123, 51-56.


30

[35] Olyaeefar, B.; Ahmadi-Kandjani, S.; Asgari, A. Classical modelling of grain size and 

boundary effects in polycrystalline perovskite solar cells. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 2018, 180, 

76-82. 

[36] Sherkar, T. S.; Momblona, C.; Gil-Escrig, L.; Ávila, J.; Sessolo, M.; Bolink, H. J. Koster, J. 

A. Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells: Significance of Grain Boundaries, Interface Traps, 

and Defect Ions, ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 5, 1214-1222.

[37] Jariwala, S.; Sun, H.; Adhyaksa, G. W. P.; Lof, A.; Muscarella, L. A.; Ehler, B.; Garnett, E. 

C.; Ginger, D. S.  Local Crystal Misorientation Influences Non-radiative Recombination in Halide 

Perovskites. Joule 2019, in press.

[38] Wang, F.; Bai, S.; Tress, W.; Hagfeldt, A.; Gao, F. Defects engineering for high-performance 

perovskite solar cells, npj Flexible Electron. 2018, 2, 22.  

[39]
Darvishzadeh, P.; Babanezhad, M.; Ahmadi, R.; Gorji, N. E. Modeling the 

degradation/recovery of open-circuit voltage in perovskite and thin film solar cells. Mater. Des.

2017, 113, 339-344.

[40] Darvishzadeh, P.; Redzwan, G.; Ahmadi, R.; Gorji, N. E. Modeling the degradation/recovery 

of short-circuit current density in perovskite and thin film photovoltaics. Org. Electron. 2017, 43, 

247-252. 

[41] Sohrabpoor, H.; Puccetti, G.; Gorji, N. E. Modeling the degradation and recovery of 

perovskite solar cells. RCS Advances 2016, 6, 49328-49334.

[42] Farrell, P.; Rotundo, N.; Doan, D. H.; Kantner, M.; Fuhrmann, J.; Koprucki, T., Chaper 50 

Drift-Diffusion Models. In Handbook of Optoelectronic Device Modeling and Simulation, Piprek, 

J., Ed. CRC Press: Boca Raton, 2017. 


31

[43] Zhou, Y.; Long, G., Low Density of Conduction and Valence Band States Contribute to the 

High Open-Circuit Voltage in Perovskite Solar Cells. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 1455-1462. 

[44] Anusca, I.; Balčiūnas, S.; Gemeiner, P.; Svirskas, Š.; Sanlialp, M.; Lackner, G.; Fettkenhauer, 

C.; Belovickis, J.; Samulionis, V.; Ivanov, M.; Dkhil, B.; Banys, J.; Shvartsman, V. V.; Lupascu, 

D. C., Dielectric Response: Answer to Many Questions in the Methylammonium Lead Halide 

Solar Cell Absorbers. Adv. Energy Mater. 2017, 7, 1700600.

[45] Onoda-Yamamuro, N.; Matsuo, T.; Suga, H., Dielectric Study of CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, 

I). J. Phys. Chem. Solids 1992, 53, 935-939.

[46] Lee, J.-W.; Kim, S.-G.; Yang, J.-M.; Yang, Y.; Park, N.-G. Verification and mitigation of ion 

migration in perovskite solar cells, APL Mater. 2019, 7, 041111.

[47] Eames, C. ; Frost, J. M.; Barnes, P. R.; O’regan, B. C.; Walsh, A.; Islam, M. S. Ionic transport 

in hybrid lead iodide perovskite solar cells. Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 7497.

[48] Yang, T. Y.; Gregori, G.; Pellet, N.; Grätzel, M.; Maier, J. The Significance of Ion Conduction 

in a Hybrid Organic–Inorganic Lead‐Iodide‐Based Perovskite Photosensitizer. Angew. Chem.

2015, 127, 8016.

[49] Li, C.; Tscheuschner, S.; Paulus, F.; Hopkinson, P.E.; Kießling, J.; Köhler, A.; Vaynzof, Y.; 

Huettner, S. Iodine Migration and its Effect on Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells. Adv. Mater. 

2016, 28, 2446.

[50] Calado, P.; Telford, A. M.; Bryant, D.; Li, X.;, Nelson, J.; O’Regan, B. C.; Barnes, P. R. F. 

Evidence for Ion Migration in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells with Minimal Hysteresis. Nat. 

Commun. 2016, 7, 13831.


32

[51] Courtier, N. E.; Cave, J. M.; Foster, J. M.; Walker, A. B.; Richardson, G., How Transport 

Layer Properties Affect Perovskite Solar Cell Performance: Insights from a Coupled Charge 

Transport/Ion Migration Model. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 396-409.

[52] Moia, D.; Gelmetti, I.; Calado, P.; Fisher, W.; Stringer, M.; Game, O.; Hu, Y.; Docampo, P.; 

Lidzey, D.; Palomares, E.; Nelson, J.; Barnes, P. R. F., Ionic-to-Electronic Current Amplification 

in Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells: Ionically Gated Transistor-Interface Circuit Model Explains 

Hysteresis and Impedance of Mixed Conducting Devices. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12, 1296-

1308.

[53] Ryu, S.; Noh, J. H.; Jeon, N. J.; Kim, Y. C.; Yang, W. S.; Seo, J.; Il Seok, S. Voltage output 

of efficient perovskite solar cells with high open-circuit voltage and fill factor, Energy Environ. 

Sci. 2014, 7 , 2614-2618.

[54] Polander, L. E.; Pahner, P.; Schwarze, M.; Saalfrank, M.; Koerner, C.; Leo, K. Hole-transport 

material variation in fully vacuum deposited perovskite solar cells. APL Mater. 2014, 2, 081503.

[55] Kulbak, M.; Cahen, D.; Hodes, G. How Important Is the Organic Part of Lead Halide 

Perovskite Photovoltaic Cells? Efficient CsPbBr3 Cells. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2015, 6 , 2452-2456.

[56] Belisle, R. A.; Jain, P.; Prasanna, R.; Leijtens, T.; McGehee, M. D. Minimal Effect of the 

Hole-Transport Material Ionization Potential on the Open-Circuit Voltage of Perovskite Solar 

Cells, ACS Energy Lett. 2016, 1, 556-560.

[57] Dänekamp, B.; Droseros, N.; Tsokkou, D.; Brehm, V.; Boix, P. P.; Sessolo, M.; Banerji, N.;

Bolink, H. J. Influence of hole transport material ionization energy on the performance of 

perovskite solar cells. J. Mater. Chem. C 2019, 7, 523-527.  

[58] Chen, S.; Hou, Y.; Chen, H.; Richter, M.; Guo, F.; Kahmann, S.; Tang, X.; Stubhan, T.; 

Zhang, H.; Li, N.; Gasparini, N.; Ramirez Quiroz, C. O.; Khanzada, L. S.; Matt, G. J.; Osvet, A.;


33

Brabec, C.J. Exploring the Limiting Open‐Circuit Voltage and the Voltage Loss Mechanism in 

Planar CH3NH3PbBr3 Perovskite Solar Cells. Adv. Energy Mater. 2016 6, 1600132.

[59] Ravishankar, S.; Gharibzadeh, S.; Roldán-Carmona, C.; Grancini, G.; Lee, Y.; Ralaiarisoa, 

M.; Asiri, A. M.; Koch, N.; Bisquert, J.; Nazeeruddin, M. K. Influence of Charge Transport Layers 

on Open-Circuit Voltage and Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells. Joule 2018, 2, 788-798.

[60] Shao, S.; Chen, Z.; Fang, H.-H.; ten Brink, G. H.; Bartesaghi, D.; Adjokatse, S.; Koster, L. J. 

A.; Kooi, B. J.; Facchetti, A.; Loi, M. A. N-type polymers as electron extraction layers inhybrid 

perovskite solar cells with improved ambient stability. J. Mater. Chem. A 2016, 4, 2419.

[61] Le Corre, V. M.; Stolterfoht, M.; Perdigon Toro, L.; Feuerstein, M.; Wolff, C.; Gil-Escrig, 

L.; Bolink, H. J.; Neher, D.; Koster, L. J. A. Charge transport layers limiting the efficiency of 

perovskite solar cells: how to optimize conductivity, doping and thickness. ACS Appl. Energy 

Mater. 2019, 2, 6280-6287.

[62] Wolff, C. M.; Caprioglio, P.; Stolterfoht, M.; Neher, D. Nonradiative Recombination in 

Perovskite Solar Cells: The Role of Interfaces. Adv. Mater. 2019, DOI: 10.1002/adma.201902762.

[63] Shao, Y.; Yuan, Y.; Huang, J. Correlation of energy disorder and open-circuit voltage in 

hybrid perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy 2016, 1, 15001.

[64] Bi, C.; Wang, Q.; Shao, Y.; Yuan, Y.; Xiao, Z.; Huang, J. Non-wetting surface-driven high-

aspect-ratio crystalline grain growth for efficient hybrid perovskite solar cells. Nat. Commun. 

2015, 6, 7747.

[65] Zhang, L.; Wu, J.; Li, D.; Li, W.; Meng, Q.; Bo, Z.  Ladder-like conjugated polymers used as 

hole-transporting materials for high-efficiency perovskite solar cells. J. Mater. Chem. A 2019, 7, 

14473-14477.


34

[66] Pazokiand, M.; Edvinsson, T. Metal replacement in perovskite solar cellmaterials: chemical 

bonding effects andoptoelectronic properties. Sustain. Energy Fuels 2018, 2, 1430-1445.

[67] Zhou, Y; Long, G. Low Density of Conduction and Valence Band States Contribute to the 

High Open-Circuit Voltage in Perovskite Solar Cells. J. Phys. Chem. C 2017, 121, 1455-1462.

[68] Endres, J.; Egger, D. A.; Kulbak, M.; Kerner, R. A.; Zhao, L.;Silver, S. H.; Hodes, G.; Rand, 

B. P.; Cahen, D.; Kronik, L.; et al. Valence and Conduction Band Densities of States of Metal 

Halide Perovskites: A Combined Experimental-Theoretical Study. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2016, 7, 

2722-2729.

[69] Roichman, Y.; Tessler, N., Generalized Einstein Relation for Disordered Semiconductors -

Implications for Device Performance. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002, 80, 1948-1950.

[70] Stranks, S. D. ACS Energy Lett. 2017, 2, 1515.

[71] Neukom, M. T.; Schiller, A.; Züfle, S.; Knapp, E.; Ávila, J.; Pérez-del-Rey, D.; Dreessen, C.; 

Zanoni, K. P. S.; Sessolo, M.; Bolink, H. J.; Ruhstaller, B., Consistent Device Simulation Model 

Describing Perovskite Solar Cells in Steady-State, Transient, and Frequency Domain. ACS Appl. 

Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 23320-23328.

[72] Rozenberg, M. J.; Inoue, I. H.; Sánchez, M. J., Nonvolatile Memory with Multilevel 

Switching: A Basic Model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 178302.

[73] Butscher, J. F.; Intorp, S.; Kress, J.; An, Q.; Hofstetter, Y. J.; Hippchen, N.; Paulus, F.; Bunz, 

U.H.F.; Tessler, N.; Vaynzof, Y. Enhancing the Open-Circuit Voltage of Perovskite Solar Cells 

by Embedding Molecular Dipoles within Their Hole-Blocking Layer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 

2019, in press https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b18757.


35

[74] Lee, J.-H.; Kim, J.; Kim, G.; Shin, D.; Jeong, S. Y.; Lee, J.; Hong, S.; Choi, J. W.; Lee, C.-

L.; Kim, H.; Yi, Y.; Lee, K.  Introducing paired electric dipole layers for efficient and reproducible 

perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11, 1742-1751.

[75] Butscher, J. F.; Sun, Q.; Wu, Y.; Stuck, F.; Hoffmann, M.; Dreuw, A.; Paulus, F.; Hashmi, A. 

S. K.; Tessler, N.; Vaynzof, Y. Dipolar Hole-Blocking Layers for Inverted Perovskite Solar Cells: 

Effects of Aggregation and Electron Transport Levels, J. Phys. Mater. 2020, 3, 025002.

[76] Egger, D. A.; Bera, A.; Cahen, D.; Hodes, G.; Kirchartz, T.; Kronik, L.; Lovrincic, R.; Rappe, 

A. M.; Reichman, D. R.; Yaffe, O., What Remains Unexplained About the Properties of Halide 

Perovskites? Adv. Mater. 2018, 30, 11.

[77] Lopez-Varo, P.; Jiménez-Tejada Juan, A.; García-Rosell, M.; Ravishankar, S.; Garcia-

Belmonte, G.; Bisquert, J.; Almora, O., Device Physics of Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells: Theory 

and Experiment. Adv. Energy Mater. 2018, 8, 1702772.

[78] Li, C.; Guerrero, A.; Zhong, Y.; Gräser, A.; Luna, C. A. M.; Köhler, J.; Bisquert, J.; Hildner, 

R.; Huettner, S., Real-Time Observation of Iodide Ion Migration in Methylammonium Lead 

Halide Perovskites. Small 2017, 13, 1701711

[79] deQuilettes, D.W.; Zhang, W.; Burlakov, V. M.; Graham, D. J.; Leijtens, T.; Osherov, A.;

Bulović, V.; Snaith, H. J.; Ginger, D. S.; Stranks, S. D. Photo-induced halide redistribution in 

organic–inorganic perovskite films. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11683.

[80] Walsh, A.; Stranks, S. D., Taking Control of Ion Transport in Halide Perovskite Solar Cells. 

ACS Energy Lett. 2018, 3, 1983-1990.

[81] Xu, L.; Molaei Imenabadi, R.; Vandenberghe, W. G.; Hsu, J. W. P., Minimizing Performance 

Degradation Induced by Interfacial Recombination in Perovskite Solar Cells through Tailoring of 

the Transport Layer Electronic Properties. APL Materials 2018, 6, 036104.


36

[82] Galatopoulos, F.; Papadas, I. T.; Armatas, G. S.; Choulis, S. A., Long Thermal Stability of 

Inverted Perovskite Photovoltaics Incorporating Fullerene-Based Diffusion Blocking Layer. Adv. 

Mater. Interfaces 2018, 5, 1800280. 

[83] Wu, S.; Chen. R.; Zhang, S.; Babu, B. H.; Yue, Y.; Zhu, H.; Yang, Z.; Chen, C.; Chen, W.; 

Huang, Y.; Fang, S.; Liu, T.; Han, L,; Chen, W.; A chemically inert bismuth interlayer enhances 

long-term stability of inverted perovskite solar cells. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1161. 

[84] Papadas, I.T.; Galatopoulos, F.; Armatas, G.S.; Tessler, N.; Choulis, S.A. Nanoparticulate 

Metal Oxide Top Electrode Interface Modification Improves the Thermal Stability of Inverted 

Perovskite Photovoltaics. Nanomaterials 2019, 9, 1616. 

[85] Nan, G.; Zhang, X.; Lu, G. Self-Healing of Photocurrent Degradation in Perovskite Solar 

Cells: The Role of Defect-Trapped Excitons. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2019, 10, 24, 7774-7780.

[86] Ceratti, D. R.; Rakita, Y.; Cremonesi, L.; Tenne, R.; Kalchenko, V.; Elbaum, M.; Oron, D.; 

Potenza, M. A. C.; Hodes, G.; Cahen, D. Self-healing inside APbBr3 Halide Perovskite Crystals. 

Adv. Mater. 2019, 30 (10), 1706273.


