Optical Valley Hall Effect of 2D Excitons in 

Hyperbolic Metamaterial 

Sriram Guddala1, Mandeep Khatoniar1,2, Nicholas Yama1, W. Liu3,#, G. S. Agarwal3, and 

Vinod M. Menon1,2, *

1Department of Physics, City College of New York, City University of New York, New York 
10031, United States 

2Department of Physics, The Graduate Center, City University of New York, New York 10016, 
United States

3Institute for Quantum Science and Engineering, and Department of Biological and Agricultural 
Engineering ; Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA

The
robust spin and momentum valley locking of electrons in two-dimensional 

semiconductors makes the valley degree of freedom of great utility for functional 

optoelectronic devices. Owing to the difference in optical selection rules for the different 

valleys, these valley electrons can be addressed optically. The electrons and excitons in these 

materials exhibit valley Hall effect, where the carriers from specific valleys are directed to 

different directions under electrical or thermal bias. Here we report optical valley Hall effect 

where the light emission from the valley polarized excitons in monolayer WS2 propagates in 

different directions owing to the preferential coupling of excitonic emission to the high 

momentum states of the hyperbolic metamaterial. The experimentally observed effects are 

corroborated with theoretical modeling of excitonic emission in the near field of hyperbolic 

media. The demonstration of optical valley Hall effect using a bulk artificial photonic media 

without the need for nanostructuring opens the possibility of realizing valley based excitonic 

circuits operating at room temperature. 

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

* Corresponding Author: vmenon@ccny.cuny.edu

# Current Affiliation: Shaanxi Province Key Laboratory for Quantum Information and 
Quantum Optoelectronic Devices, and Department of Applied Physics, Xi’an Jiaotong 
University, Xi’an 710049, China


I.
Introduction

In the monolayer limit, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as WS2, WSe2, MoSe2, and 
MoS2 are direct-bandgap semiconductor materials with broken inversion symmetry1–3. These 
materials exhibit very strong interaction with light absorbing greater than 10% light at the 
monolayer limit close to the excitonic resonances. The excitons in these materials have unusually 
large binding energies (0.1- 0.5 eV), can be developed into functional optoelectronic devices such 
as light emitting diodes and detectors4–6, and even demonstrate strong coupling to cavity photons 
at room temperature7,8.  The direct bandgap in these materials occurs at the K point in the 
momentum space in the monolayer limit. An intriguing property that arises from the broken 
inversion symmetry and the strong spin-orbit interaction arising from the heavy transition atoms 
is valley polarization - quantum mechanically distinct valleys K and K’ which can be selectively 
addressed by right handed and left handed circularly polarized light as shown schematically in Fig. 
1a. Valley polarization has been studied extensively in these systems and has been touted as a path 
to encode and manipulate information9–11 resulting in the emerging field of valleytronics12,13. 
Limiting factors for practical applications of valley degree of freedom arises from the intervalley 
scattering and disorder induced depolarization. Enhancement of valley polarization via strong 
coupling to cavity photons as well as their routing using nanophotonic structures has recently 
garnered much attention and promise for realization of functional valleytronic devices14–18. In all
these demonstrations, the enhancement of valley degree of freedom was achieved via optical 
cavities or very specific resonant plasmonic and dielectric nanostructures. More recently the 
optical valley Hall effect was demonstrated in the context of strongly coupled exciton polaritons19. 
The optical valley Hall effect can be thought of as an optical analog of the conventional Hall effect 
which in the context of valley degree of freedom is termed as valley Hall effect, which results in 
directional propagation of carriers under electric field20,21. Excitonic valley Hall effect using 
thermal gradient produced by an excitation laser was also recently demonstrated 22.

Here we report the use of hyperbolic media to realize optical valley Hall effect where the 2D TMD 
does not have to be placed inside cavities or on any nanostructured medium. Instead the near field 
coupling of the valley polarized excitonic emission to high-k states of the hyperbolic media 
facilities the optical valley Hall effect resulting in directional propagation of the emission. This 
optical valley Hall effect in hyperbolic media arises due to the nature of light propagation inside 
such medium and has previously been used to demonstrate optical spin Hall effect in the 
microwave23. While we do find weak optical valley Hall effect even with a simple metallic film, 
the observed valley polarization contrast is much stronger and has higher contrast in the case of 
the multilayered hyperbolic metamaterial (HMM). We use momentum and helicity resolved 
spectroscopic techniques to demonstrate the optical valley Hall effect where we observe valley 
selective routing of excitonic emission in 2D WS2 integrated with HMM. The observed 
phenomena are modeled using both numerical and analytical techniques and agrees with the 
experimental observation. The HMM essentially acts as an extremely broadband valley-beam 


splitter for circularly polarized valley exciton emission and a route to develop valley filters or 
valley-based signal processing circuits.

II. Results

Figure 1: Optical valley Hall effect demonstration in HMM. a) schematic of Valley polarization 
in WS2 monolayer, where K and K’ valleys can be populated independently with σ + and σ -

polarizations respectively. (b) Schematic of the seven periods HMM composed of Ag∕Al2O3 shows 
a monolayer of WS2 transferred to its surface layer. Electric field intensity distribution of the high 
k-modes for the dipole radiating in the near field of HMM surface for (c) linear polarization and 
(d) and (e) are right- and left-handed circular polarizations respectively. 

The artificial optical media was designed to have type II hyperbolic (single sheet hyperbola) iso-
frequency dispersion in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum24. A schematic 
illustration of the HMM is shown in Fig .1b. The structure consisted of alternating layers of Ag 
and Al2O3 layers and the thickness of each layer was optimized to be 10 nm. The effective 
dielectric constants of the HMM simulated using effective medium theory is shown in the 
Supplementary Materials (Fig. S1(a)). Such HMMs have been previously used to enhance 
spontaneous emission from emitters owing to the enhanced local photonic density of states.25–29


Finite element method simulations were performed to investigate near field coupling of linear and 
circular polarization emissions to plasmon modes of the HMM. The HMM is taken to have
effective dielectric permittivity values of 𝜖𝑥 = 𝜖𝑦= -6.246+i1.081 and 𝜖𝑧 = 7.76+i0.2624 at 
wavelength of 620 nm as obtained from effective medium theory calculations. As shown in Figure 
1(c), a linear dipole with dipole moment P2D= p[1, 0] with unit polarization p along the x-axis 
shows characteristic high-k mode propagation in the HMM medium with symmetric electric field 
distribution in the xy-plane with symmetry about the y-axis. For right- and left-handed circular 
polarizations, two linear dipoles were assumed about the origin one in xy plane and another in xz
plane with phase difference of ±90o. The sign of the phase difference defines the right and left 
handedness of the generated circular polarization. A right-handed circularly polarized dipole (σ -) 

with, P2D= p(x-iz) /√2 is initially assumed in the xz plane and swept for all azimuthal rotations 
about the z-axis and the resultant electric field distribution from all azimuthal rotations is plotted 
in Fig. 1(d). The high-k mode electric field distribution is found to be asymmetric and strictly 
unidirectional in the -x direction as shown in Figure 1(d). Similarly, this high-k mode dispersion 
is towards +x direction for left-handed circular polarization (σ +) with, P2D= p(x+iz) /√2 as shown 
in Fig. 1(e). The fundamental principle behind the unidirectional excitation of surface plasmon 
mode and high-k modes is governed by the selective vectorial excitation of the electric field 
associated with these modes. The handedness dependent unidirectional coupling of chiral fields to 
the HMM can be thought of as the photonic analogue of spin-Hall like effect for photons which 
was previously demonstrated in pioneering experiments for surface plasmons in the metals23,30–32

and RF hyperbolic metamaterials and more recently shown theoretically for chiral emitters33. 
TMDs
owing to their strong
valley polarization property emits circular
polarized

photoluminescence (PL) when excited with the same handedness owing to the valley specific 
excitation (K or K’). Thus, an HMM-TMD integrated system naturally lends itself to demonstrate 
optical analogue of valley-Hall like effect for valley polarized emission of the excitons in TMDs 
and provides a path towards integrated valleytronics.

To study the problem of chiral emission through HMM, we assume a two-dimensional electric 
dipole source located on the upper surface of a multilayer structure. The electric field density in 
the lower half-space can be calculated by the simplified expression 𝐸𝑥 ∝ (𝛼 + 𝛽𝑘𝑥/|𝑘𝑧|). Here, 
kx and kz are the x and z components of the wavevectors and  = ± are constants that define 
the electric dipole polarization. Note that the expression for electric field includes the contribution 

of the propagating [√𝑘𝑥2 + 𝑘𝑦2 < 𝑘0] and evanescent [√𝑘𝑥2 + 𝑘𝑦2 > 𝑘0] modes as shown by us 
previously33. The latter term is responsible for near field interference effects which is central to 
the chiral selectivity observed in HMMs as discussed below. 

If α > 0 and β > 0, the spectral amplitude with kx < −k0 add up destructively, whereas for kx > k0
constructive interference occurs. Therefore, the near-field interference effect lies at the heart of the
selective directional excitation of guided modes illuminated by an elliptically polarized dipole. 
When an elliptically polarized dipole illuminates a multilayered structure, the inversion symmetry 
is broken, and the high-k modes can be excited. The high-k evanescent modes carry transverse spin


angular momentum31,32,34. Therefore, the best coupling is achieved when the evanescent mode with 
transverse spin matches the same spin (helicity) of the incident/emitted field. By tuning the 
polarization of the dipole, the excitation and guidance of electromagnetic modes in a nanostructure 
can be controlled.  

Figure 2: Vectorial field of high-k modes in HMM. Mode spectrum calculated from TMM 
simulations for circular dipoles with opposite helicities in the xz plane of a) 7P HMM sample and 
b) one unit HMM. The magnetic field Hy component intensity distribution in the HMM for linear 
dipole with polarization orientation along: (c) horizontal P = 𝑥̂ and (d) vertical P = 𝑧̂ . (e) Left-
handed circularly polarized dipole P= (𝑥̂+𝑖𝑧̂)/√2 and (f) right-handed circularly polarized dipole 
P= (𝑥̂-𝑖𝑧̂)/√2. These simulations were carried out at the emission wavelength of the exciton (620 
nm).


Using this theoretical model and finite element method simulations we show how to control the 
excitation direction of electric field by tuning the polarization of the dipole emitter. The unit 
vectors for the horizontally and vertically polarized dipoles are px = x and pz = z, respectively. For 
circularly polarized dipoles, we have unit vectors p± = (α x + iβz)/ √2 with α = 1 and β = ±1.
HMMs support two kinds of modes namely the surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) at the interfaces 
with the claddings and the high-k modes confined to the bulk of the layered material28,29,35. The 
SPP modes in HMM behave fundamentally different than in a single thin metallic film due to fact 
that these modes are resultant of mutual repulsion of SPP modes at each metal-dielectric interface.
The large values of model index for the SPPs (called long and short range plasmon polaritons) in 
HMM medium results in higher field confinement in comparison SPPs in single metallic film35. 
As a result, the SPP modes in layered medium show much reduced line widths than the surface 
modes of a thin film as shown in Fig.2a. For a linear dipole located at the top surface of the HMM 
is well-known to show SPPs and high-k wavevector modes28,29,35. The TMM simulations for our 
seven period HMM show a symmetric dispersion of mode spectrum (supporting information Fig. 
S2). Whereas the circular polarizations show asymmetric dispersion as shown in Fig. 2a for σ +

(red) and σ - (blue). For a thin metallic film with a dielectric corresponding to one-unit cell of the 
HMM, a broad SPP mode is observed (Fig. 2b). The asymmetric dispersion for SPP mode (at kx= 
±1.057) in HMM is found to have almost similar contrast as one unit HMM with unidirectional 
optical routing for specific chirality. Whereas the contrast supported by a low quality-factor SPP 
mode in thin metallic layer is experimentally found to be indistinguishable. The electric field 
patterns for linear and circular polarizations are shown in Fig.2. Distinct asymmetric field pattern 
is observed for a circular dipole (Fig. 2e and 2f) in comparison to the horizontal (Fig.2c) and 
vertical (Fig.2d) dipoles. Since a circular dipole is a linear combination of horizontal and vertical 
dipoles, the electric field pattern for the circular dipole can be interpreted as linear combination of 
the linear dipoles. It can be noticed from the phase relations of the fields generated by the 
horizontal and vertical dipoles that these fields can be summed up, and the qualitative result can 
be immediately inferred to observe the unidirectional propagation of the modes of the HMM for 
circular polarization dipole excitation. Finite element simulations were also carried out for one-
unit cell of the HMM consisting of a thin silver film with a dielectric layer. Fig. S3 shows + and 
 - circular dipole emissions for the one-unit cell of the HMM. It is clear from these simulations 
that for the same circular dipole emission, HMM shows more well-defined unidirectional coupling 
in comparison to the one period HMM. 


Figure 3: Fourier space imaging of optical Valley- Hall effect in HMM. Fourier space images 
of valley emissions under helicity resolved condition show the asymmetric intensity distribution 
for both a) σ+ and (b) σ -. (c) and (d) are the line cut profiles along the kx showing the asymmetric 
intensity for both σ+ (a) and σ - (b) respectively. (e) and (f) show simulated Fourier space images 
for both σ+ and σ - excitations respectively. 

To demonstrate optical valley Hall effect of WS2 monolayer, two energy degenerate K and K’
valley emissions need to be directed in two opposite directions. Since the K and K’ Valleys of the 
WS2 emit light with specific handedness, the near field interaction of K and K’ valley emissions 
with high-k and SPP modes of HMM can be selectively routed to +x and -x directions, respectively. 
Thus, the optical valley Hall effect in monolayers can be mediated through the robust optical spin 
Hall effect supported by the modes of the HMM. Since the optical spin Hall effect in HMM is 
broadband, the optical valley Hall effect in the HMM also can be broadband over its broad 
hyperbolic regime unlike the earlier studies using resonant nanostructured media 15–18.

For the experimental verification of optical valley Hall effect, we fabricated a 140nm thick seven 
period HMM structure on 120m thick glass slide through sequential depositions of Ag and Al2O3
thin films each of 10 nm thickness with 1 nm thick Ge wetting layer for each Ag layer using 
electron beam evaporation. A TMD monolayer of WS2 was exfoliated to PDMS stamp and 
transferred to the HMM surface following our earlier reported process18,36. Helicity resolved k-
space measurements were performed in transmission configuration using a home-built microscope 
set up (Fig. S4). The polarization of the incident laser was set to circular polarization using a 
combination of linear polarizer and quarter waveplate. The collection path polarization was 


resolved into + and - helicities using another set of quarter waveplate and linear polarizer. The 
monolayer was excited at exciton resonance wavelength of 620 nm from the top of the HMM 
surface with + and - polarizations using 10X microscopic objective with 0.25 NA. The emission 
from the bottom surface of the HMM is collected by using an oil immersion objective of 100X 
magnification with 1.4 numerical aperture. The back focal plane of the 100X objective is imaged 
by using Fourier space lens onto the CCD camera as shown in the experimental set up (Supporting 
information). The exciton emission was resolved to + and - emissions prior to Fourier space lens 
and finally imaged to the CCD camera. From Fig.3, it can be noticed that under σ - excitation, the 
σ - emission corresponding to K’ valley excitons is found to be in the - kx direction. Whereas, σ +

emission from K valley for σ + excitation is in +kx direction. A complete set of helicities resolved 
measurements are shown in the supporting information Fig. S5. These asymmetric intensity 
distributions in the k-space images can also be noticed from the line cuts made along the kx
direction in the k-space images for σ + and σ – emissions in Fig. 3(c) and 3(d) respectively. The 
experimentally observed directional coupling of K and K’ valley emissions to SPP are similar to 
the mode spectrums shown in Fig.2a. The simulated Fourier space images for σ + and σ - excitations 
in Fig. 3(e) and 3(f) were obtained by performing the Fourier transform over the field distributions 
at the bottom plane of the HMM medium from TMM simulations for chiral dipoles. The 
experimental observations agree with simulated results and indicates the routing of emission from 
the WS2 excitons using HMMs. Additionally, the PL emission is observed only at SPP mode owing 
to the experimentally permitted modes of the HMM by the available oil immersion objective for 
the visible region. However, this asymmetric dispersion is true for both SPPs and high-k modes as 
shown in the simulations in Fig. 2. The phenomenon of unidirectional routing for σ + and σ - is 
same for both SPP and high-k modes, however, only the experimentally accessible (kmax ~1.4) SPP
modes were measured in this study. 

A  plasmonic thin film is also known for directional coupling of SPP wave for the incident chiral 
electromagnetic wave34,37. To compare the HMM to a planar silver film, we investigated the effect 
of directional coupling of WS2 emission on one-unit cell of the HMM (10 nm silver film covered 
with 10nm Al2O3 film) and subsequently a monolayer of WS2 transferred to its surface.  Figure 4 
shows helicity resolved k-space images for thin silver film sample for both  - and + helicities. 
Thin silver film helicity resolved valley polarization measurements show (Fig. 4) much lower 
selectivity of valley polarized emissions compared to the 7 period HMM (Fig. 3). The helicity 
resolved valley emission measurements for one-unit cell HMM sample are shown in Fig. S6. The
line cuts for both σ+ and σ - excitations are shown in Fig. 4c and 4d respectively. The central spot 
at 𝑘𝑥/𝑘0 = 𝑘𝑦/𝑘0 = 0 is due to the incident laser intensity transmission through the thinner one-
unit cell HMM sample. This is hardly observed in the case of seven period sample owing to the 
low direct transmission at k=0 and removed to show similarity to the simulation results. The valley 
specific emission directionality is less visible in the one-unit cell HMM sample. It is evident that 
seven period HMM shows (Fig. 3) promising valley contrast in comparison to thin film sample 
(Fig. 4a). The low contrast valley directionality is due to the fact that one-unit cell HMM supports 


low contrast mode confinement in the one-unit cell HMM simulations. It can also be understood 
by analyzing the simulated mode spectrum by using the electric field expression for chiral dipole 
located at surface of thin film sample. The mode spectrum of one-unit cell shows broad SPP modes 
as shown in Fig. 2b in comparison to the seven period HMM in Fig.2a. The broad line width in 
one-unit cell thick HMM is due to the low model index value of SPP in comparison to the seven 
period HMM medium SPPs model index value35. These factors could be the reason to support fast 
decaying SPP mode and hence lesser contrasting valley resolved directionality.

Figure 4: (a) and (b) show valley resolved k-space maps for one-unit cell HMM sample for both 
 + and  - helicities respectively. (c) and (d) show line cuts along the kx directions corresponding 
to + and  - helicities respectively. 

These experimental observations demonstrate that the K and K’ valley excitonic emissions 
unidirectionally couple to the SPP mode of the HMM analogous to photonic spin-Hall effect.23,34

The contrast between the intensity along -kx and +kx for both σ + ( and σ - ) is found to be more than 
20%. This contrast for selective valley directional guiding is found to be significantly higher in 
comparison to the one layer of silver film. 

In summary, we demonstrate efficient routing of valley exciton emission using hyperbolic media 
by exploiting the high-k states and the higher Q factor SPP modes in them. This effect relies on 
the photonic spin Hall effect in HMMs. The experimental demonstration is found to be in very 


good agreement with theoretical calculations. Through Fourier space imaging we are able to 
establish the valley dependent routing of emission from monolayer WS2 placed in the near field of 
the HMM. While nanostructured photonic systems can be used to realize similar effects, the use 
of a bulk substrate to realize such valley polarized routing presents a simple and broadband 
approach for practical realization of valley dependent optoelectronics. 

Methods

Simulations

Finite element method simulations were performed by using COMSOL Multiphysics RF module. 
The HMM is designed with effective medium parameters of 𝜀𝑥 = 𝜀𝑦 = −6.246 + 𝑖1.081 and 
𝜀𝑥 = 7.76 + 𝑖0.2624 for Ag/Al2O3 multilayers volume fraction of 50%. The multilayered HMM 
is also designed with Ag/Al2O3 multilayers in the XY plane with periods extending in the z-
direction. Simulations model the quantum emitter as a circular electric dipole oriented in the XZ 
plane perpendicular to the metal-dielectric layers of the HMM with an emission spectrum at 620
nm. The dielectric constant for the Ag is obtained from the previous report of Palik et al,38. The 
dielectric constant for the Al2O3 layer is considered as 𝜀𝐴𝑙2𝑂3 = 1.67. Transfer matrix method 
simulations were implemented to obtain HMM and one-unit HMM samples mode dispersions for 
both linear and circular dipole excitations.

Sample fabrication. Seven periods HMM substrate and one period control sample with Ag and 
Al2O3 multilayers were grown by a Kurt Lesker PVD 75 electron beam evaporation system on top 
of precleaned 120 μm thick glass substrates with surface roughness<1 nm. The pressure inside the 
vacuum chamber was kept to ∼2× 10−6 torr throughout the process. 1- 2 nm Ge seed layer was 
grown prior to each Ag layer to ensure good uniform distribution of Ag thin layer on Al2O3 layer. 
The top surface of HMM was terminated with Al2O3 layer to avoid top Ag layer oxidation as well 
as the WS2 monolayer exciton emission quenching.

A monolayer of WS2 TMD material (HQ Graphene) was exfoliated onto a thick PDMS stamp and 
transferred to the HMM surface by home build transfer stage. 

k-space photoluminescence measurements. 

The WS2 monolayer on the HMM surface was excited from the top with a 0.25 NA, 10X 
microscope objective with excitation wavelength of 620 nm from Toptica Photonics® laser source 
with repetition rate of 80 MHz and pulse width of 1ps. The polarization of the laser was set to 
circular polarization by using the combination of a linear polarizer and quarter wave plate. The 
near field PL below the HMM surface was collected by using Olympus PLN 100X Oil Immersion 
Objective with 1.4 NA. The whole back focal plane of the microscope objective was imaged onto 


the Princeton Instruments CCD camera operating at -700C. For the helicity resolved 
measurements, the PL signal was resolved into helicity angles by using the combination of another 
quarter wave plate and a linear polarizer.

Data availability

Data that are not already included in the paper and/or in the Supplementary Information are 
available on request from the authors.

Acknowledgements

The work at CUNY was supported by the Army Research Office through grant # W911NF-16-1-
0256, and National Science Foundation through grant # DMR-1709996. GSA thanks support from 
the R. A. WELCH foundation award no A-1943. S.G and V.M.M acknowledge useful discussions 
with Prof. E. Narimanov.

Author contributions

S.G., M. K., V.M.M., conceived the experiments. S.G., M.K., N.Y., fabricated the devices and 
performed the measurements. S.G., M.K., performed data analysis. S.G., W.L., G.S.A, carried out 
the theoretical analysis. All authors contributed to write the manuscript and discuss the results.

Author Information 

The authors declare no competing interests. Correspondence and requests for materials should be 
addressed to Vinod M. Menon (vmenon@ccny.cuny.edu) .

References

1.
Mak, K. F., Lee, C., Hone, J., Shan, J. & Heinz, T. F. Atomically thin MoS2: A new 
direct-gap semiconductor. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 136805 (2010).

2.
Splendiani, A. et al. Emerging Photoluminescence in Monolayer MoS 2. Nano Lett. 10, 
1271–1275 (2010).

3.
Novoselov, K. S. et al. Two-dimensional atomic crystals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
102, 10451–3 (2005).

4.
Lopez-Sanchez, O., Lembke, D., Kayci, M., Radenovic, A. & Kis, A. Ultrasensitive 
photodetectors based on monolayer MoS2. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 497–501 (2013).

5.
Sundaram, R. S. et al. Electroluminescence in Single Layer MoS 2. Nano Lett. 13, 1416–
1421 (2013).


6.
Wang, Q. H., Kalantar-Zadeh, K., Kis, A., Coleman, J. N. & Strano, M. S. Electronics and 
optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 
699–712 (2012).

7.
Liu, X. et al. Strong light–matter coupling in two-dimensional atomic crystals. Nat. 
Photonics 9, 30–34 (2015).

8.
DufferwielS. et al. Valley-addressable polaritons in atomically thin semiconductors. Nat 
Phot. 11, 497–501 (2017).

9.
Cao, T. et al. Valley-selective circular dichroism of monolayer molybdenum disulphide. 
Nat. Commun. 3, 885–887 (2012).

10.
Mak, K. F., He, K., Shan, J. & Heinz, T. F. Control of valley polarization in monolayer 
MoS2by optical helicity. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 494–498 (2012).

11.
Zeng, H., Dai, J., Yao, W., Xiao, D. & Cui, X. Valley polarization in MoS 2 monolayers 
by optical pumping. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 490–493 (2012).

12.
Yao, W., Xiao, D. & Niu, Q. Valley-dependent optoelectronics from inversion symmetry 
breaking. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 77, 1–7 (2008).

13.
Xiao, D., Liu, G. Bin, Feng, W., Xu, X. & Yao, W. Coupled spin and valley physics in 
monolayers of MoS 2 and other group-VI dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 1–5 
(2012).

14.
Sun, Z. et al. Optical control of room-temperature valley polaritons. Nat. Photonics 11, 
491–496 (2017).

15.
Gong, S. H., Alpeggiani, F., Sciacca, B., Garnett, E. C. & Kuipers, L. Nanoscale chiral 
valley-photon interface through optical spin-orbit coupling. Science (80-. ). 359, 443–447 
(2018).

16.
Chervy, T. et al. Room Temperature Chiral Coupling of Valley Excitons with Spin-
Momentum Locked Surface Plasmons. ACS Photonics 5, 1281–1287 (2018).

17.
Sun, L. et al. Separation of valley excitons in a MoS2 monolayer using a subwavelength 
asymmetric groove array. Nat. Photonics 13, 180–184 (2019).

18.
Guddala, S., Bushati, R., Li, M., Khanikaev, A. B. & Menon, V. M. Valley selective 
optical control of excitons in 2D semiconductors using a chiral metasurface. Opt. Mater. 
Express 9, 536 (2019).

19.
Bleu, O., Solnyshkov, D. D. & Malpuech, G. Optical valley Hall effect based on 
transitional metal dichalcogenide cavity polaritons. Phys. Rev. B 96, 1–6 (2017).

20.
Mak, K. F., McGill, K. L., Park, J. & McEuen, P. L. The valley Hall effect in MoS2 
transistors. Science (80-. ). 344, 1489–1492 (2014).

21.
Lee, J., Mak, K. F. & Shan, J. Electrical control of the valley Hall effect in bilayer MoS 2 
transistors. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 421–425 (2016).

22.
Onga, M., Zhang, Y., Ideue, T. & Iwasa, Y. Exciton Hall effect in monolayer MoS 2. Nat. 


Mater. 16, 1193–1197 (2017).

23.
Kapitanova, P. V. et al. Photonic spin Hall effect in hyperbolic metamaterials for 
polarization-controlled routing of subwavelength modes. Nat. Commun. 5, (2014).

24.
Cortes, C. L., Newman, W., Molesky, S. & Jacob, Z. Quantum nanophotonics using 
hyperbolic metamaterials. J. Opt. 14, 063001 (2012).

25.
Galfsky, T. et al. Active hyperbolic metamaterials: enhanced spontaneous emission and 
light extraction. Optica 2, 62 (2015).

26.
Noginov, M. A. et al. Controlling spontaneous emission with metamaterials. Opt. Lett. 35, 
1863 (2010).

27.
Tumkur, T. et al. Control of spontaneous emission in a volume of functionalized 
hyperbolic metamaterial. Appl. Phys. Lett. 99, 151115 (2011).

28.
Shekhar, P., Atkinson, J. & Jacob, Z. Hyperbolic metamaterials : fundamentals and 
applications. Nano Converg. 1, 1–17 (2014).

29.
Kim, J. et al. Improving the radiative decay rate for dye molecules with hyperbolic 
metamaterials. Opt. Express 20, 8100 (2012).

30.
Bliokh, K. Y., Smirnova, D. & Nori, F. Quantum spin hall effect of light. Science (80-. ).
348, 1448–1451 (2015).

31.
Bliokh, K. Y., Bekshaev, A. Y. & Nori, F. Extraordinary momentum and spin in 
evanescent waves. Nat. Commun. 5, 1–8 (2014).

32.
Bliokh, K. Y., Rodríguez-Fortuño, F. J., Nori, F. & Zayats, A. V. Spin-orbit interactions 
of light. Nature Photonics vol. 9 796–808 (2015).

33.
Liu, W., Menon, V. M., Gao, S. & Agarwal, G. S. Chiral emission of electric dipoles 
coupled to optical hyperbolic materials. Phys. Rev. B 100, 245428 (2019).

34.
Rodríguez-fortuño, F. J., Martínez, A., Wurtz, G. a & Zayats, A. V. Electromagnetic 
Guided Modes. Science (80-. ). 328, 328–331 (2013).

35.
Avrutsky, I., Salakhutdinov, I., Elser, J. & Podolskiy, V. Highly confined optical modes in 
nanoscale metal-dielectric multilayers. Phys. Rev. B 75, 241402 (2007).

36.
Galfsky, T. et al. Broadband Enhancement of Spontaneous Emission in Two- Dimensional 
Semiconductors Using Photonic Hypercrystals. Nano Lett. 16, 4940–4945 (2016).

37.
Van Mechelen, T. & Jacob, Z. Universal spin-momentum locking of evanescent waves: 
supplemental document. Optica 3, 1–10 (2016).

38.
Palik, E. D. Handbook of Optical Constants of Solids, Five-Volume Set : Handbook of 
Thermo-Optic Coefficients of Optical Materials with Applications. (Elsevier Science, 
1997).



